古文：○宁宗二嘉泰元年春正月戊午，申严福建科盐之禁。
现代文：嘉泰元年春正月初七，申严福建科盐的禁令。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Jia Tai, the ban on Fujian Kesalt came into effect.

古文：壬戌，谢深甫等荐士三十有五人，诏籍名中书，以待选擢。
现代文：初九，谢深甫等推荐士人三十五名，下诏将姓名登记上报中书，以待选用。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, 35 recommended scholars, including Xie Shenfu, will have their names registered in the Chinese version to be selected.

古文：丁卯，命路钤按阅诸州兵士，毋受馈遗及擅招军。违者置诸法。
现代文：十四日，命令各路铃辖教阅各州士兵，不得接受馈赠和擅自招军，违反者依法论处。
English: On the 14th, it was ordered that the soldiers of each state should be taught and read by each bell ringer, and they should not accept gifts or recruit troops without authorization, and violators would be dealt with according to law.

古文：庚午，以葛邲配飨光宗庙庭。
现代文：十七日，以葛哪配享光宗庙庭。
English: On the 17th, they enjoyed the temple garden of the Guangzong Dynasty.

古文：丙子，金遣完颜充来吊祭。
现代文：二十三日，金国派遣完颜充来吊祭。
English: On the 23rd, Kim Guo dispatched Yan Cheng to bring the hanging ceremony.

古文：二月戊子，诏求明历之士，壬辰，开资善堂。
现代文：二月初七，诏令寻求通晓历法的人。十一日，开资善堂。
English: On the 7th day of the 2nd lunar month, the Emperor issued an edict to those seeking to understand the calendar. On the 11th day of the 2nd lunar month, a fund-raising hall was opened.

古文：遣俞烈使金报谢。
现代文：派遣俞烈回访金国。
English: He was dispatched to pay a return visit to the DPRK.

古文：癸巳，监察御史施康年劾少傅、观文殿大学士致仕周必大首倡伪学，私植党与，诏降为少保。
现代文：十二日，监察御史施康年弹勃少傅、观文殿大学士退休的周必大首倡伪学，私植党羽。下诏降为少保。
English: On the 12th, Zhou Bida, who had been inspector general of the Shikang Year of the Dragon, promoted pseudoscience, and planted party wings. He was demoted to junior guard.

古文：修《光宗实录》。
现代文：修撰《光宗实录》。
English: Compiled "The True Record of Guangzong."

古文：乙未，续修《吏部七司法》。
现代文：十四日，续修使部七司汾。
English: On the 14th, the renewal of the Envoy Department of the Seventh Division began.

古文：己亥，初置教官试于四川。
现代文：十八日，在四川初置教官试。二十日，降土。
English: On the 18th, the first instructors were placed in Sichuan. On the 20th, the soil was lowered.

古文：辛丑，雨土。
现代文：三月十六日，降冰雹。
English: On March 16, hail fell.

古文：三月丙寅，雨雹。
现代文：十八日，又降冰雹。
English: On the 18th, hail fell again.

古文：戊辰，复雨雹。颁《庆元宽恤诏令》、《役法撮要》。
现代文：颁布庆元宽恤诏令、没法撮要。
English: There is no way to summarize the proclamation of the Qingyuan pardon decree.

古文：己巳，雨雹。
现代文：十九日，降冰雹。
English: On the 19th, hail fell.

古文：戊寅，临安大火，四日乃灭。
现代文：二十八日，临安发生大火，四天才扑灭。
English: On the 28th, a large fire broke out in Lin'an, which took four days to put out.

古文：夏四月辛巳，诏有司振恤被灾居民，死者给钱瘗之。
现代文：夏四月初二，下诏有关部门贩济抚恤遭灾居民，死者给钱埋葬。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the relevant departments issued a decree to sell subsidies to residents affected by the disaster, and the dead were buried with money.

古文：壬午，下诏自责。
现代文：初三，下诏自责。
English: On the third day of junior high school, I began to beat myself up.

古文：诏枢密院核禁卫班直及诸军营栅焚毁之数。
现代文：诏令枢密院考核禁卫班直和诸军营栅焚烧毁坏的数量。
English: He ordered the Privy Council to assess the number of barracks and barracks destroyed by fire.

古文：癸未，避正殿，减膳。
现代文：初四，不到正殿，减少饮食。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, if you do not go to the main hall, reduce your diet.

古文：甲申，命临安府察奸民纵火者，治以军法。
现代文：初五，命令临安府查出奸民纵火者，以军法处置。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Lin'an Prefecture was ordered to find the traitors and arsonists and deal with them according to military law.

古文：内降钱十六万缗，米六万五千余石，振被灾死亡之家。
现代文：内降络钱十六万、米六万五千多石，贩济遭灾死亡之家。
English: 160,000 yuan and more than 65,000 U.S. dollars were lost, and the trafficker's home was destroyed by the disaster.

古文：辛卯，龙州蕃部寇边，遣官军讨之。
现代文：十二日，龙州蕃部攻打边境，派遣官军讨伐。
English: On the 12th, Longzhou and Hebei attacked the border and dispatched the official army to fight.

古文：诏以风俗侈靡，灾后官军营造，务遵法制。
现代文：下诏因风俗侈靡，灾后官军营造房舍，务必遵照有关法制规定。
English: According to the following edict, due to the custom of extravagance, the construction of buildings by the government and the military after the disaster must comply with the relevant legal provisions.

古文：内出销金铺翠，焚之通衢，禁民无或服用。
现代文：内出销金饰物，在街道上焚烧，禁止百姓不得服用。
English: Gold ornaments were sold inside and burned in the streets, and it was forbidden for the common people to take them.

古文：丁酉，御正殿，复膳。
现代文：十八日，到正殿，恢复饮食。
English: On the 18th, he went to the main hall to resume his diet.

古文：戊戌，以潜邸为开元宫。
现代文：十九日，以潜邸为开元宫。
English: On the 19th, the hidden mansion was used as the Kaigen-gu.

古文：丙午，诏文武臣无寓居州任厘务官，著为令。
现代文：二十七日，诏令文武臣不要在寓居州担任专管财务的官，著为令。
English: On the 27th, he issued an edict ordering Wenwu not to serve as the official in charge of finance in the state where he lived.

古文：五月戊午，以旱，祷于天地、宗庙、社稷，诏大理、三衙、临安府、两浙州县决系囚。
现代文：五月初九，因早灾向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷，诏令大理寺、三衙、临安府、两浙州县审理在押囚犯。
English: On the 9th day of the 5th month, due to the early disaster, he prayed to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community, and ordered the trial of prisoners in custody in Dali Temple, Samye, Lin'an Prefecture, and two counties in Zhejiang Province.

古文：癸亥，释诸路杖以下囚，除茶盐赏钱。
现代文：十四日，释放各路杖刑以下囚犯。废除茶盐赏钱。
English: On the 14th, all prisoners below the cane sentence were released. The reward money for tea and salt was abolished.

古文：丁卯，命有司举行宽恤之政十有六条。
现代文：十八日，命令有关部门实行宽恤之政共有十六条。
English: On the 18th, the relevant departments were ordered to implement a policy of leniency with a total of 16 articles.

古文：乙亥，监太平惠民局夏允中请用文彦博故事，以韩侂胄平章军国重事。
现代文：二十六日，监太平惠民局夏允中请用文彦博故事，任命韩青为平章军国重事。
English: On the 26th, Xia Yunzhong, supervisor of the Taiping Huimin Bureau, used the story of Wen Yanbo to appoint Han Qing as a military and national important matter.

古文：韩侂胄上疏请致仕，不许。
现代文：韩青上疏请求退休，没允准。
English: Han Qing Shangsuo's request to retire was not approved.

古文：免允中官。
现代文：免除夏允中官职。
English: Xia Yun was relieved of his post as vice-premier.

古文：丙子，雨。
现代文：二十七日，降雨。
English: On the 27th, it rained.

古文：丁丑，雨雹。
现代文：二十八日，降冰雹。
English: On the 28th, hail fell.

古文：六月辛巳，遣陈宗召贺金主生辰。
现代文：六月初三，派遣陈宗召祝贺金主生日。
English: On the third day of the sixth lunar month, Chen Zongzhao was dispatched to congratulate Jin on his birthday.

古文：丙午，太白经天。
现代文：二十八日，太白星显现一天。
English: On the 28th, the white star appeared for one day.

古文：八月己卯，减奏荐恩。
现代文：秋七月初七，何澹被罢免。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month.

古文：甲申，张釜罢，以陈自强兼知枢密院事，给事中张岩参知政事，右谏议大夫程松同知枢密院事。
现代文：初九，因早灾向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷。十四日，释放大理寺、三衙、临安府和各路缺雨州县杖刑以下囚犯。十五日，降冰雹。十六日，任命陈自强兼知枢密院事，给事中张岩为参知政事，右谏议大夫程松为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, due to the early disaster, he prayed to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community. On the 14th day, he released the prisoners of Dali Temple, Samye, Lin'an Prefecture, and all the roads in Shuozhou County. On the 15th day, the hail fell. On the 16th day, he appointed Chen Ziqiang as the Privy Councillor, Zhang Yan as the Councillor, and Cheng Song, the Right Reviewer, as the Privy Councillor.

古文：丙戌，复诏侍从、台谏、两省集议沿江八州行铁钱利害。
现代文：八月初九，重新下诏侍从官、台谏官、两省官一起讨论沿江八州实行铁钱利害。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, officials from the Imperial Household Agency, the Taiwan Provincial Government, and the two provincial governments met again to discuss the implementation of the Iron Money System in the eight provinces along the Yangtze River.

古文：九月辛亥，遣朝臣二人决浙西围田。
现代文：九月初四，派遣朝臣二人审理浙西围田。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, two courtiers were sent to investigate the western Zhejiang fields.

古文：己未，雨土。
现代文：十二日，降土。
English: On the 30th, the earth fell.

古文：辛未，遣李景和使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十四日，派遣李景和出使金国祝贺新春。
English: On the 24th, Li Jing and Jin Guo were sent to congratulate the Spring Festival.

古文：甲戌，令礼官纂集孝宗一朝典礼。
现代文：二十七日，命令礼官编集孝宗一朝典礼。
English: On the 27th, he ordered the etiquette official to compile a list of the ceremonies for the reign of Emperor Xiaozong.

古文：冬十月甲申，诏免瑞庆节诸道入贡。
现代文：冬十月初七，下诏免除瑞庆节各地进贡。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of winter, the imperial edict exempted all regions from paying tribute on the Day of the Dead.

古文：丙戌，起居郎王容请以韩侂胄定策事迹付史馆，从之。
现代文：初九，起居郎王容请求把韩青定策事迹交给史馆，宁宗同意。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Wang Rong, the kijiro, requested that the record of Han Qing's decision-making be handed over to the history museum, and Ning Zong agreed.

古文：甲午，金遣徒单怀忠来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣徒单怀忠来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 17th, the State of Kim dispatched a group of soldiers to congratulate the Ruiqing Festival.

古文：甲辰，编《光宗御集》。
现代文：二十七日，编撰光宗御臭。
English: On the 27th, the compilation of the Gwangjong Imperial Odor began.

古文：十一月庚申，蠲潭州民旧输黄河铁缆钱。
现代文：十一月十三日，免除潭州百姓原输纳的黄河铁缆钱。
English: On November 13th, the people of Tanzhou were exempted from paying the Yellow River iron cable fee.

古文：丙寅，太白昼见。
现代文：十九日，太白星白天出现。
English: He Yin, Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：十二月己卯，太白经天。
现代文：十二月初三，太白星显现一天。
English: On the third day of the twelfth lunar month, the white star appeared for one day.

古文：庚寅，复免临安府民身丁钱三年，辛丑，雨土。
现代文：十四日，又免除临安府百姓身丁钱。二十五日，降土。
English: On the 14th, the people of Lin'an were exempted from paying the fine. On the 25th, the soil was lowered.

古文：癸卯，金遣纥石烈真来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣给石烈真来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Jin Guo sent Shi Letzhen to congratulate next year's Spring Festival.

古文：是岁，浙西、江东、两淮、利州路旱，振之，仍蠲其赋。
现代文：这一年，浙西、江东、两淮、利州路早灾，贩济灾民，并免除他们的赋税。
English: In this year, West Zhejiang, East Jiangsu, Zhuhai, and Lizhou provinces were hit by natural disasters, and the merchants helped the victims and exempted them from paying taxes.

古文：真里富国献驯象二。
现代文：真里富国贡献二只驯象。
English: Mari Fukoku donated two tamed elephants.

古文：二年春正月癸亥，以知阁门事苏师旦兼枢密都承旨。
现代文：嘉泰二年春正月十七日，任命知间门事苏师旦兼枢密都承旨。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the second year of the Jia Tai Dynasty, Su Shitan, the gatekeeper of the imperial court and the privy councillor, was appointed.

古文：丁卯，陈自强等上《高宗实录》。
现代文：二十一日，陈自强等呈上滴宗实录。
English: On the twenty-first day, Chen Ziqiang and others presented a live recording of the drops.

古文：二月甲申，追复赵汝愚资政殿学士。
现代文：二月初九，追复赵汝愚为资政殿学士。
English: On February 9th, Zhao Ruwu was reinstated as a scholar of the Academy of Governance.

古文：丁亥，修《高宗正史》、《宝训》。
现代文：十二日，修撰滴宗正史、崖训》。
English: On the 12th, the official history of the Didi sect and the teachings of the cliff were compiled.

古文：戊子，颁《治县十二事》以风厉县令。
现代文：十三日，颁布始县十二事，用以激励感化县令。
English: On the 13th, the 12 matters of the first county were promulgated to encourage the implementation of the county ordinance.

古文：癸巳，禁行私史。
现代文：十八日，禁止流传私史。
English: On the 18th, it was forbidden to circulate personal histories.

古文：三月辛亥，诏宰执各举可守边郡者二三人。
现代文：三月初六，下诏宰执各自举荐可以担任边郡职守者二至三人。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the year, two to three people can be appointed as the duty keepers of the border county according to the recommendation of the deputy heads.

古文：己未，初命诸路提刑以五月按部理囚。
现代文：十四日，初命各路提刑官每年五月视察辖境审理囚犯情况。
English: On the 14th, the newly-appointed criminal justice officials of various provinces inspected the situation of prisoners under their jurisdiction in May every year.

古文：己巳，诏诸路帅臣、总领、监司举任将帅者与本军主帅列上之。
现代文：二十四日，下诏各路帅臣、总领、留司举荐担任将帅者与本军主帅名字一起上报。
English: On the 24th, the commanders-in-chief, commanders-in-chief, and commanders-in-residence who were recommended to serve as commanders-in-chief were reported together with the names of the commanders-in-chief of the army.

古文：夏四月庚寅，雨雹。
现代文：夏四月十六日，降冰雹。
English: On the 16th day of the 4th month of summer, hail fell.

古文：五月甲辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一，日食。
English: First of May, solar eclipse.

古文：己巳，赐礼部进士傅行简以下四百九十有七人及第、出身。
现代文：二十六日，赐礼部进士傅行简等四百九十七人及第、出身。
English: On the 26th, the Ministry of Ceremonies awarded 497 people, including Fu Xingjian and others, with their ranks and origins.

古文：六月丙子，遣赵不艰贺金主生辰。
现代文：六月初三，派遣赵不艰祝贺金主生日。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, Zhao Hongya was dispatched to congratulate Jin on his birthday.

古文：己卯，临安火。
现代文：初六，临安府发生火灾。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, a fire broke out in Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：壬午，浚浙西运河。
现代文：初九，疏浚浙西运河。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the West Zhejiang Canal was dredged.

古文：辛卯，禁都民以火说相惊者。
现代文：十八日，禁止京城百姓以火说互相惊扰。
English: On the 18th, the people of Beijing were prohibited from disturbing each other with fireworks.

古文：庚子，大雨雹。
现代文：二十七日，降大冰雹。
English: On the 27th, large hailstones began to fall.

古文：秋七月辛亥，封子觌为安定郡王。
现代文：秋七月初九，封赵子规为安定郡王。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Zhao Zigui was crowned the king of the County of Ding'an.

古文：癸亥，以旱，释诸路杖以下囚。
现代文：二十一日，因早灾释放各路杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 21st, due to the early disaster, all prisoners under the sentence of caning were released.

古文：己巳，命有司举行宽恤之政七条。
现代文：二十七日，命令有关部门实行七条宽恤措施。
English: On the 27th, the relevant departments were ordered to implement seven leniency measures.

古文：庚午，祷于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：二十八日，向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷。
English: On the 28th, they prayed to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：复行宽恤四事。
现代文：又实行四条宽恤措施。
English: In addition, four measures of leniency were implemented.

古文：八月丙子，以吏部尚书袁说友同知枢密院事。
现代文：八月初五，任命吏部尚书袁说友为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, Shangshu Yuan, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：癸未，建宝谟阁，以藏《光宗御集》。
现代文：十二日，建造宝漠阁藏优宗御臭。十八日，下诏建造寿慈宫。
English: On the 12th, the construction of the Hohangak Pavilion of Emperor Xuanzong began. On the 18th, the construction of the Shouci Palace began.

古文：己丑，诏作寿慈宫，请太皇太后还内。
现代文：请太皇太后回宫。
English: Please return to the palace, Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：甲午，谢深甫等上《庆元条法事类》。
现代文：二十三日，谢深甫等呈上扶元条法事势。
English: On the 23rd, Xie Shenfu and others presented the situation of the Fuyuan Law.

古文：九月己酉，朝寿慈宫。
现代文：九月初八，朝拜寿慈宫。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, the worship of Shou Ci Palace began.

古文：甲寅，修《皇帝会要》。
现代文：十三日，修撰徨帝会要。
English: On the thirteenth day, the Emperor requested that it be revised.

古文：壬戌，奉安光宗皇帝、慈懿皇后神御于景灵宫、万寿观。
现代文：二十一日，恭敬安置光宗皇帝、慈爵皇后神主于景灵宫、万寿观。
English: On the 21st, Emperor Guangzong and Empress Dowager Jinushi were respectfully placed in Jingling Palace and Wanshou Temple.

古文：丙寅，嗣秀王伯圭薨，追封崇王，谥曰宪靖。
现代文：二十五日，嗣秀王赵伯圭去世，追封为崇王，溢号为宪靖。
English: On the 25th, Zhao Bokei, the successor of King Xiu, passed away. He was posthumously named King Chong and his posthumous name was Xianjing.

古文：庚午，临安府野蚕成茧。
现代文：二十九日，临安府野蚕成茧。
English: On the 29th, Lin'an's wild silkworms became cocoons.

古文：冬十月乙亥，上寿成惠慈太皇太后尊号曰寿成惠圣慈祐太皇太后。
现代文：冬十月初四，上寿成惠慈太皇太后尊号为寿成惠圣慈太皇太后。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of the winter, Her Imperial Highness the Dowager Empress Dowager Shoucheng Hui Ci was enthroned as Her Imperial Highness the Dowager Empress Dowager Shoucheng Hui Sheng Ci.

古文：戊子，金遣完颜瑭来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣完颜塘来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 17th, Kim Guo sent Yan Tang to congratulate Ruiqing Festival.

古文：乙未，遣鲁使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十四日，派遣鲁皇自出使金国祝贺新春。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Lu sent an envoy to congratulate the Chinese New Year.

古文：是月，追复朱熹焕章阁待制致仕。
现代文：这个月，追复朱熹焕章阁待制退休。
English: This month, Zhu Ronghuan retired.

古文：十一月甲辰，始御正殿。
现代文：十一月初三，开始到正殿处理政事。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, he began to go to the main hall to deal with political affairs.

古文：乙巳，重修《吏部七司法》。
现代文：初四，重修吏部七司念。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, the seven divisions of the cadre department were reorganized.

古文：庚戌，以陈自强知枢密院事，前同知枢密院事许及之参知政事。
现代文：初九，任命陈自强为知枢密院事，前任同知枢密院事许及之为参知政事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Chen Ziqiang was appointed as a member of the Privy Council, and his predecessor, Tongzhi, was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：丁巳，右文殿楹生芝。
现代文：十六日，右文殿前柱出生芝草。
English: On the 16th, the front pillar of the Right Hall was covered with turf grass.

古文：十二月甲戌，日中有黑子。
现代文：十二月初四，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the fourth day of the twelfth month, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：率群臣奉上寿成惠圣慈祐太皇太后册宝于寿慈宫。
现代文：宁宗率领大臣到寿慈宫奉上寿成惠圣慈太皇太后册宝。
English: Ningzong led the ministers to Shouci Palace to present the treasure to the Dowager Empress Dowager Shouchenghui.

古文：甲申，立贵妃杨氏为皇后。
现代文：十四日，立贵妃杨氏为皇后。
English: On the 14th, Guifei Yang became the empress.

古文：加韩侂胄太师。
现代文：加韩青为太师。
English: Add Han Qing as Grand Master.

古文：庚寅，大阅。
现代文：二十日，举行大阅军队仪式。
English: On the 17th, a large-scale inspection of the army began.

古文：闰月丁未，诏讲官有当开释者，随事开陈。
现代文：闰十二月初七，下诏讲官有应当发挥解释的地方，根据具体事件予以发挥解释。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th lunar month, the next preacher should play an explanatory role, and explain according to specific events.

古文：乙卯，以福州观察使严为威武军节度使，封卫国公。
现代文：十五日，任命福州观察使赵严为威武军节度使，封为卫国公。
English: On the 15th, Fuzhou Observer Zhao Yan was appointed as the festival envoy of the mighty armed forces, and was named the patron of the country.

古文：丁卯，金遣徒单公弼来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣徒单公弼来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, Kim Jong-un sent a single official delegation to congratulate the upcoming Spring Festival.

古文：是月，复周必大少傅、观文殿大学士。
现代文：这个月，恢复周必大为少傅、观文殿大学士。
English: This month, Zhou Bida was reinstated as a junior professor and a scholar of the Guanwenden University.

古文：是冬，子坰生，未逾月薨，追封华王，谥冲穆。
现代文：这年冬，子赵糠出生。没有满月即去世，追封为华王，溢号冲穆。
English: In the winter of that year, his son Zhao Jun was born. He died before the full moon, and was posthumously crowned King of China.

古文：是岁，建宁府、福、汀、南剑、泸四州水，邵州旱，振之。
现代文：这年，建宁府和福、汀、南剑、沪州水灾，郡州早灾，贩济这些地区的灾民。
English: This year, Jianningfu and Fu, Ting, Nanjian, Huzhou floods, and Guizhou early disasters, and the victims of these areas.

古文：三年春正月庚辰，谢深甫罢。
现代文：嘉泰三年春正月初十，谢深甫被罢免。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Jia Tai, Xie Shenfu was dismissed.

古文：壬午，置湖南溪洞总首。
现代文：十二日，设置湖南溪酮总首。
English: On the 12th, the general manager of Hunan Xi Ketone was set up.

古文：戊子，龙州蕃部复寇边，遣官军讨之。
现代文：十八日，龙州蕃部又攻打边境，派遣官军讨伐。
English: On the 18th, Longzhou and Hebei attacked the border again, sending government troops to fight.

古文：甲午，张岩罢。
现代文：二十四日，张岩被罢免。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Yan was removed from office.

古文：丙申，以陈自强兼参知政事。
现代文：二十六日，任命陈自强兼参知政事。
English: On the 26th, Chen Ziqiang was appointed as the new leader and a member of the Council of State.

古文：戊戌，幸太学，谒大成殿，御化原堂，命国子祭酒李寅仲讲《尚书·周官》篇。
现代文：二十八日，到太学，朝拜大成殿，到化原堂，命令国子祭酒李寅仲讲解《尚书&;;周官篇＞。
English: On the 28th, he went to Taigaku, paid homage to the Dacheng Hall, and went to Kawaramoto-do Hall, where he ordered Li Yinzhong, the son of the state, to give a lecture on "Shang Shu&; Zhou Guan Hen."

古文：遂幸武学，谒武成殿。
现代文：于是到武学，朝拜武成殿。
English: So he went to study martial arts and pay homage to Buzenden.

古文：监学官进秩一级，诸生推恩、赐帛有差。
现代文：监学官进秩一级，诸生推恩赐帛不等。
English: The supervisor of the school will be promoted to the first rank, and all sentient beings will be promoted to the next rank.

古文：以袁说友参知政事，权翰林学士、知制诰傅伯寿签书枢密院事，伯寿辞不拜。
现代文：任命袁说友为参知政事，代理翰林学士、知制浩傅伯寿为签书枢密院事，傅伯寿推辞不就任。
English: Yuan Laiyou was appointed as a political advisor to the president, and Hanlin Biao, acting as president, and Zhizhi Hao Fu Bozhou was appointed as a privy councillor to sign the document. Fu Bozhou refused to take office.

古文：二月乙巳，御文德殿册皇后。
现代文：二月初六，到文德殿册封皇后。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, she was enthroned as empress at the Winter Palace.

古文：以吏部尚书费士寅签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命吏部尚书费士寅为签书枢密院事。
English: Appointed the clerk, Shang Shu Fei Shi Yin, as the signing privy councillor.

古文：三月丁丑，以久雨，诏大理、三衙、临安府决系囚。
现代文：三月初八，因久雨不晴，下诏大理寺、三衙、临安府审理在押囚犯。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month of the year, due to persistent rain and cloudy weather, trials of prisoners in custody were held at Dali Temple, Samcheok and Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：乙酉，幸聚景园。
现代文：十六日，到聚景园。
English: On the 16th, they gathered at the scenic garden.

古文：夏四月己亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。初四，福州瑞麦结实。
English: On the first day of summer in April, the sun will be eclipsed. On the fourth day of the month, Fuzhou Ruimai will grow strong.

古文：壬寅，福州瑞麦生。丙午，出封桩库两淮交子一百万，命转运司收民间铁钱。
现代文：初八，拿出封桩库两淮交子一百万络，命令转运司回收民间铁钱。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he took out one million rupees from the sealed pile bank and ordered the Transportation Department to recover the private iron money.

古文：乙卯，陈自强等上《徽宗玉牒》、孝宗、光宗《实录》。
现代文：十七日，陈自强等呈上撇宗玉牌、孝宗光宗实录。
English: On the 17th, Chen Ziqiang and others presented a jade card of the Abandoned Sect and a true record of the Filial Sect.

古文：辛酉，诏宰执、台谏子孙毋就试。
现代文：二十三日，下诏宰执、台谏官的子孙不得就试。
English: On the 23rd, the descendants of the next Zhao Zaixi and Taiwan eunuchs were not allowed to try.

古文：五月戊寅，以陈自强为右丞相，许及之知枢密院事，仍兼参知政事。
现代文：五月十一日，任命陈自强为右承相，许及之为知枢密院事，仍兼参知政事。
English: On May 11th, Chen Ziqiang was appointed as the Minister of the Right, although he was still a member of the Privy Council.

古文：庚辰，以旱，诏大理、三衙、临安府释杖以下囚。
现代文：十三日，因早灾，诏令大理寺、三衙、临安府释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 13th, due to the early disaster, the Emperor ordered Dali Temple, Samcheok and Lin'an Prefecture to release prisoners sentenced to the cane or less.

古文：癸未，命有司搜访旧闻，修三朝正史，以书来上者赏之。
现代文：十六日，命令有关部门搜访旧闻，修撰三朝正史，呈上史书者予以赏赐。
English: On the 16th, the relevant departments were ordered to search for old news, compile the official history of the Three Dynasties, and reward those who submitted the history books.

古文：是月，以苏师旦为定江军承宣使。
现代文：这个月，任命苏师旦为定江军承宣使。
English: This month, Su Shitan was appointed as the ambassador of the Dingjiang Army.

古文：六月壬寅，遣刘甲贺金主生辰。
现代文：六月初五，派遣刘甲祝贺金主生日。
English: On the fifth day of June, Liu Jia was sent to congratulate Jin on his birthday.

古文：己酉，减大理、三衙、临安府囚罪一等，释杖以下。
现代文：十二日，减轻大理寺、三衙、临安府囚犯罪刑一等，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 12th, the first-class criminal sentences of the prisoners in Dali Temple, Sanlu and Lin'an were reduced, and the prisoners below the cane sentence were released.

古文：癸亥，太白经天。
现代文：二十六日，太白星显现一天。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Venus passes through the sky.

古文：秋七月辛未，颁《庆元条法事类》。命殿前司造战舰。
现代文：秋七月初五，颁布咬元条法事势。命令殿前司打造战船。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the Emperor issued the Edict of Succession, ordering the forefathers to build a warship.

古文：壬午，权罢同安、汉阳、蕲春三监铸钱。
现代文：十六日，暂罢同安、汉阳、薪春三个铸钱监。
English: On the 16th, the three supervisors of minting money, An, Hanyang and Qiuchun, were temporarily suspended.

古文：白虹贯日。
现代文：一道白虹遮蔽太阳。
English: A white rainbow streaked across the sky.

古文：癸未，禁江、浙州县抑纳逃赋。
现代文：二十六日，禁止江、浙州县强制配纳逃税。
English: On the 26th, Jiangsu and Zhejiang counties banned forced allocation and tax evasion.

古文：乙未，加光宗皇帝谥曰循道宪仁明功茂德温文顺武圣哲慈孝皇帝。
现代文：二十八日，加光宗皇帝溢号为循道宪仁明功茂德温文顺武圣哲慈孝皇帝。
English: On the 28th, Emperor Jia Guangzong was given the posthumous title of Emperor Jianzhong of the Methodist Church.

古文：八月壬寅，增置襄阳骑军。
现代文：八月初七，增置襄阳骑军。
English: On the seventh day of the eighth month, the Xiangyang cavalry was added.

古文：戊申，置四川提举茶马二员，分治茶、马事。
现代文：十三日，设置四川提举茶马二名，分别治理茶马事。
English: On the 13th, Sichuan was set up to raise two tea horses, and the tea horses were managed separately.

古文：丙辰，陈自强等上《皇帝会要》。
现代文：二十一日，陈自强等呈上东皇帝会要。
English: On the twenty-first day, Chen Ziqiang and others presented themselves to the Shangdong Emperor.

古文：甲子，诏刑部岁终比较诸路瘐死之数，以为殿最。
现代文：二十九日，下诏刑部年终比较各路死于狱中囚犯的数目，作为考核官员治绩好坏的依据。
English: On the 29th, the Criminal Law Department issued a year-end comparison of the number of prisoners who died in prison, as a basis for assessing the performance of officials.

古文：九月庚午，袁说友罢。
现代文：九月初五，袁说友被罢免。
English: On the 5th of September, Yuan Sayu was dismissed.

古文：壬申，以宗子希璂为庄文太子嗣，更名搢，授右千牛卫将军。
现代文：初七，以宗子赵希碎为庄文太子后代，改名措，授为右千牛卫将军。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he changed his name to Zhao Xicheng, who was the descendant of Prince Zhuangwen, and was awarded the title of General of the Right Thousand Niuwei.

古文：癸酉，命坑冶铁冶司毋得毁私钱改铸。
现代文：初八，命令坑冶铁冶司不得毁坏私钱改铸铜钱。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, ordered the pit and iron smelting division not to destroy the private money to change it into copper money.

古文：己丑，诏南郊加祀感生帝，太子、庶子星，宋星。
现代文：二十四日，下诏南郊祭祀时加祀感生帝和太子星、庶子星、宋星。
English: On the 24th, during the Southern Suburbs Festival, the worship of Emperor Kang Sheng and Prince Xing, Prince Xing and Song Xing was added.

古文：遣张孝曾使金贺正旦。
现代文：派遣张孝曾出使金国祝贺正旦。
English: Zhang Xiao once sent an envoy to China to congratulate Zheng Dan.

古文：冬十月庚子，诏宥吕祖泰。
现代文：冬十月初五，下诏宽肴吕祖泰。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of October in winter, Lyu Zu Tai, the next emperor, was enthroned.

古文：癸卯，以费士寅参知政事，华文阁学士、知镇江府张孝伯同知枢密院事。
现代文：初八，任命费士寅为参知政事，华文阁学士、知镇江府张孝伯为同知枢密院事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Fei Shi Yin was appointed as a member of the Privy Council, and Zhang Xiao Bo, a bachelor of Chinese literature and a scholar of Zhenzhenjiang Prefecture, was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：丙午，命两淮诸州以仲冬教阅民兵万弩手。
现代文：十一日，命令两淮各州在农历十一月训练民兵万弩手。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the two Huai states were ordered to train the militia in the lunar month of November.

古文：丁未，大风。
现代文：十二日，刮大风。
English: On the 12th, it was blowing a gale.

古文：戊申，龙州蕃部出降。
现代文：十三日，龙州蕃部投降。
English: On the 13th, Longzhou and Hebe surrendered.

古文：甲戌，朝飨于太庙。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣完颜奕来祝贺瑞庆节。十一月初八，到太庙上光宗册宝。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Jin Guo sent Yan Yi to congratulate the Ruiqing Festival. On the eighth day of the first month of November, he went to the Great Temple to see the treasures of the Zongzhuang.

古文：乙亥，祀天地于圜丘，大赦。
现代文：初九，祭祀景灵宫。初十，祭祀太庙。十一日，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦。
English: On the 9th day of the new year, there will be a sacrifice at Jingling Palace. On the 10th day of the new year, there will be a sacrifice at the Grand Temple. On the 11th day of the new year, there will be a sacrifice at the Round Mound.

古文：癸未，大风。
现代文：十九日，刮大风。
English: On the 19th, it was blowing a gale.

古文：己丑，安定郡王子觌薨。
现代文：二十五日，安定郡王赵子规逝世。
English: On the 25th, Zhao Zigui, the Prince of Ding'an County, passed away.

古文：更定选人荐举改官法。
现代文：更定选人荐举改官法。
English: Amendment to the Law on the Election of Officials.

古文：庚寅，复置福田、居养院，命诸路提举常平司主之。
现代文：二十六日，重新设置福田院、居养院，命令各路提举常平司主管。
English: On the 26th, Fukuda-in and Juyo-in were re-established, and each ward was ordered to nominate a director of the Jōhei-ji.

古文：十二月丙辰，命四川提举茶马通治茶马事。
现代文：十二月二十二日，命令四川提举茶马通治茶马事。
English: On December 22nd, he ordered Sichuan to raise the tea horse to cure the tea horse.

古文：辛酉，下诏戒敕将帅掊克。
现代文：二十七日，下诏整治将帅拮克士兵。
English: On the 27th, the next order to rectify the situation will be issued to the soldiers of Shuaiyuan.

古文：金遣独吉思忠来贺明年正旦。
现代文：金国派遣独吉思忠来祝贺明年新春。
English: The People's Republic of China has sent Doji Sizhong to congratulate the upcoming Chinese New Year.

古文：是冬，金国多难，惧朝廷乘其隙，沿边聚粮增戍，且禁襄阳榷场。
现代文：这年冬，金国多难，怕朝廷乘虚而人，在沿边聚粮增兵，而且禁绝襄阳榷场。
English: In the winter of that year, the country of Jin was in a difficult situation, and fearing that the imperial court would take advantage of the situation, they gathered grain along the border to increase the number of soldiers, and banned the Xiangyang stampede.

古文：边衅之开，盖自此始。
现代文：边祸之开端，就从此开始。
English: This was the beginning of the troubles.

古文：四年春正月乙亥，大风。
现代文：嘉泰四年春正月十一日，刮大风。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of spring in the fourth year of the Jia Tai Dynasty, a strong wind blew.

古文：浚天长县濠。
现代文：疏浚天长县壕城。
English: Dredging of Trencheng, Tianchang County.

古文：癸未，日中有黑子。
现代文：十九日，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the 19th, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：壬辰，雨雹。
现代文：二十日，降冰雹。
English: On the 20th, hail fell.

古文：琼州西浮洞逃军作乱，寇掠文昌县，遣兵讨平之。
现代文：琼州西浮洞逃军作乱，攻打劫掠文昌县，派遣军队讨平。
English: Qiongzhou Xifuidong fleeing troops rioted, attacked and looted Wenchang County, and sent troops to settle the score.

古文：二月丁酉，置庄文太子府小学教授。
现代文：二月初三，设置庄文太子府小学教授。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, he was appointed as a professor at Zhuangwen Taizi Primary School.

古文：辛亥，命内外诸军射铁帖转资。
现代文：十七日，命令内外各军射铁贴转资。
English: On the 17th, he ordered all the armies at home and abroad to transfer funds.

古文：壬子，蠲临安府逋负酒税。
现代文：十八日，免除临安府拖欠酒税。
English: On the 18th, Lin'an was exempted from liquor tax arrears.

古文：己未，立《试刑法避亲格》。
现代文：二十五日，立试刑法避亲格。
English: On the 25th, the Criminal Law of Avoiding Kinship was enacted.

古文：庚申，夜有赤气亘天。
现代文：二十六日，夜晚有赤气横贯天空。
English: On the 26th, a red aura streaked across the sky at night.

古文：三月丁卯，临安大火，迫太庙，权奉神主于景灵宫。
现代文：三月初四，临安大火，逼近太庙，暂置神主于景灵宫。
English: On the fourth day of the third month of the year, the Lin'an fire approached the Imperial Temple, temporarily placing the deity in the Jingling Palace.

古文：己巳，避正殿。
现代文：初六，不上正殿处理政事。
English: Junior sixth, do not go to the main hall to deal with politics.

古文：庚午，命临安府振焚室。
现代文：初七，命令临安府贩济焚烧者家。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he ordered the Lin'an prefectural merchants to burn down the homes of the victims.

古文：辛未，诏修太庙。
现代文：初八，下诏修造太庙。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, the emperor issued an edict to rebuild the Great Temple.

古文：甲戌，下诏罪己。
现代文：十一日，下诏罪己。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he issued the following edict.

古文：乙亥，诏百官疏陈时政阙失。
现代文：十二日，诏令文武百官上疏陈述时政缺失。
English: On the 12th, the Emperor issued an edict ordering all officials to declare that the current political system was flawed.

古文：庚寅，复御正殿。
现代文：二十七日，又到正殿。
English: On the 27th, I went to the main hall again.

古文：夏四月甲午朔，立韩世忠庙于镇江府。命内外诸军详度纯队法。
现代文：夏四月初一，在镇江府立韩世忠庙。命令内外诸军详细审度纯队法。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of summer, Han Shizhong Temple was established in Zhenjiang Prefecture. The troops at home and abroad were ordered to carry out a detailed examination of the pure team method.

古文：甲辰，许及之罢。
现代文：十一日，许及之被罢免。
English: On the 11th, Xu Hezhi was dismissed.

古文：振恤江西水旱州县。
现代文：贩济抚恤江西水早州县。
English: Jiangxi Suizhou Wuzhou County.

古文：乙巳，以费士寅兼知枢密院事，张孝伯参知政事，吏部尚书钱象祖赐出身，同知枢密院事。
现代文：十二日，任命费士寅兼知枢密院事，张孝伯为参知政事，吏部尚书钱象祖赐给出身，授为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 12th, he appointed Fei Yin Kanchi as Privy Councillor, Zhang Xiaobo as Councillor of State, and Shang Shuxuxian as Tongchi Privy Councillor.

古文：丙辰，诏革选举之弊。
现代文：二十三日，下诏革除选举之弊。
English: On the 23rd, the following edict removed the drawbacks of the election.

古文：五月乙亥，诏诸军主帅各举部内将材三人，不如所举者坐之。
现代文：五月十三日，下诏各军主帅分别举荐部内将才三人，其才能不像所推举的那样，举主要连坐治罪。
English: On May 13th, the commanders-in-chief of each army separately recommended only three generals in the department, whose talents were not the same as those recommended.

古文：癸未，追封岳飞为鄂王。
现代文：二十一日，追封岳飞为鄂王。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yuefei was crowned King of Hubei.

古文：六月癸巳，遣张嗣古贺金主生辰。
现代文：六月初二，派遣张嗣古祝贺金主生日。
English: On the second day of June, Zhang Zigou was dispatched to congratulate Jin on his birthday.

古文：丙申，置诸军帐前雄校，以军官子孙补之。
现代文：初五，设置各军帐前雄效，以军官子孙补之。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the military accounts of each army were set up, supplemented by the descendants of officers.

古文：壬寅，诏侍从、台谏、两省集议裁抑滥赏。
现代文：十一日，下诏侍从、台谏、两省一起讨论裁抑滥赏。
English: On the 11th day of the following month, the Emperor's attendants, the Taiwans, and the two provinces began to discuss the reduction and suppression of abuse.

古文：壬子，诏诸路监司核实诸州桩积钱米。沿江、四川军帅简练军实。
现代文：二十一日，下诏各路监司考核查实各州桩积钱米，沿江、四川军帅简练军实。
English: On the 21st, it was announced that the inspectors of each road would examine and verify the piled-up rice in each state, and the military commanders along the river and in Sichuan would conduct a brief military practice.

古文：丁巳，增庐州强勇军为千人。
现代文：二十六日，增庐州强勇军为千人。
English: On the 26th, the number of soldiers of the Zengzhou Strong and Valiant Army reached 1,000.

古文：秋七月甲子，以旱，诏大理、三衙、临安府、两浙及诸路决系囚。
现代文：秋七月初三，因早灾诏令大理寺、三衙、临安府、两浙和各路审理在押囚犯。
English: On the third day of the seventh month of autumn, because of the early disaster, the prefectural government ordered the trials of prisoners in custody in Dali Temple, Samye, Lin'an Prefecture, two Zhejiang provinces and various provinces.

古文：戊辰，祷于天地、宗庙，社稷。
现代文：初七，向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, pray to heaven and earth, ancestral temples, and shrines.

古文：己巳，命诸路提刑从宜断疑狱。
现代文：初八，命令各路提刑可不上奏自行决定处断疑难案件。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, it was ordered that each side could decide on its own whether to impose punishment or not.

古文：蠲内外诸军逋负营运息钱。
现代文：免除内外各军拖欠营运息钱。
English: exempt domestic and foreign armed forces from the payment of arrears of operating interest.

古文：辛未，蠲两浙阙雨州县逋租。
现代文：初十，免除两浙缺雨州县拖欠租税。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the tax arrears of two counties in Zhejiang and Yuzhou were exempted.

古文：戊子，命诸路提刑、提举司措置保伍法。
现代文：二十七日，命令各路提刑、提举司措置保伍法。
English: On the 27th, it ordered all departments to raise the punishment, raise the disciplinary measures, and remove the law on the protection of cadres.

古文：八月己亥，陈自强等上《皇帝玉牒》。
现代文：八月初九，陈自强等呈上东皇帝玉牌。
English: On August 9, Chen Ziqiang and others presented the Shangdong Emperor's Jade Plate.

古文：癸丑，诏自今以恩赏进秩，岁毋过二官。
现代文：二十三日，下诏从今以后恩赏升官，每年不能超过二官。
English: On the 23rd, it was decreed that from now on, no more than two officials could be promoted each year.

古文：蠲绍兴府攒宫所在民身丁钱绢绵盐。
现代文：免除绍兴府殡宫所在百姓身丁钱绢绵盐。
English: The people at the Shaoxing Funeral Home were exempted from rubbing salt on their bodies.

古文：丙辰，除静江府、昭州折布钱。
现代文：二十六日，免除静江府、昭州折布钱。
English: On the 26th, it exempted Jingjiang Prefecture and Zhaozhou from folding money.

古文：戊午，张孝伯罢。
现代文：二十八日，张孝伯被罢免。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Xiaobo was dismissed.

古文：九月乙丑，得四圭，有邸玉一，诏藏于太常。
现代文：九月初六，获得礼器四圭，有一邸玉，下诏藏于太常寺。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month of the year, he was given four sets of ceremonial objects, including a gem, which he hid in Taizho-ji Temple.

古文：壬午，遣邓友龙使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十三日，派遣邓友龙出使金国祝贺正旦。
English: On the 23rd, Deng Youlong sent an envoy to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：丙戌，戒饬两淮州县遵守宽恤旧法。
现代文：二十七日，告诫两淮州县遵守宽恤旧法。
English: On the 27th, it admonished the two counties of Huai Zhou to abide by the old law of leniency.

古文：冬十月庚子，以资政殿大学士、淮东安抚使张岩参知政事。
现代文：冬十月十一日，任命资政殿大学士、淮东安抚使张岩为参知政事。
English: In winter, on October 11th, Zhang Yan, a member of the Shiseido Imperial Family and the pacifying envoy of Huaidong, was appointed as a political advisor.

古文：壬寅，金遣完颜昌来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：十三日，金国派遣完颜昌来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 13th, Jin Guo sent Yan Chang to congratulate Ruiqing Festival.

古文：十一月乙未朔，诏两淮、荆襄诸州值荒歉奏请不及者，听先发廪以闻。
现代文：十一月初一，下诏两淮、荆襄各州遇到荒歉来不及奏请者，允许先开仓贩济然后上报。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the two Huai and Jingyang prefectures issued the following edict: Those who are too late to submit an apology are allowed to open a warehouse and sell rice first and then report it.

古文：庚午，封伯栩为安定郡王。
现代文：十二日，封赵伯栩为安定郡王。
English: On the 12th, Zhao Bo Tu was named the king of the county.

古文：壬申，白气亘天。
现代文：十四日，白气贯穿天空。
English: On the 14th, a white haze permeated the sky.

古文：庚辰，修六合县城。
现代文：二十二日，修筑六合县城。
English: On the 22nd, the construction of the county seat of Liuhe was completed.

古文：十二月癸巳，诏总核内外财赋，以陈自强及兼国用使，费士寅、张岩同知国用事。
现代文：十二月初五，下诏全面考核内外财赋，任命陈自强兼国用使，费士寅、张岩同为知国用事。
English: On the 5th day of the 12th month of the year, he ordered a comprehensive assessment of domestic and foreign financial resources, and appointed Chen Ziqiang as the envoy of the state, and Fei Shihyin and Zhang Yan as the envoys of the state.

古文：己亥，诏改明年为开禧元年。
现代文：十一日，诏令改明年为开禧元年。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial edict changed the next year to the first year of the jubilee.

古文：壬寅，禁州县挟私籍没民产。
现代文：十四日，禁止州县挟私籍没民产。
English: On the 14th, it was forbidden for counties and prefectures to deprive people of their private property.

古文：甲辰，再蠲临安府民身丁钱三年。
现代文：十六日，再免临安府百姓身丁钱三年。
English: On the 16th, the people of Lin'an will be exempted from paying taxes for another three years.

古文：乙卯，金遣乌林答毅来贺明年正旦。
现代文：二十七日，金国派遣乌林答毅来祝贺明年新春。
English: On the 27th, the DPRK sent Ulin Tae-yi to congratulate the Chinese New Year.

古文：开禧元年春正月癸酉，初置澉浦水军。
现代文：开禧元年春正月十五日，初置橄浦水军。
English: On the 15th day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the 21st century, the Olive Branch Navy was first established.

古文：壬午，雨霾。
现代文：二十四日，降雨，天空阴晦。
English: On the 24th, it rained and the sky was overcast.

古文：二月癸巳，夺徐安国三官。
现代文：二月初五，削夺徐安国三官。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, the three officials of Xu'an Province were eliminated.

古文：癸卯，诏国用司立考核财赋之法。
现代文：十五日，下诏国用司立考核财赋之法。
English: On the fifteenth day of the following month, the state issued the law on the examination of financial endowment.

古文：丙午，蠲临安府逋负酒税。
现代文：十八日，免除临安府拖欠酒税。
English: On the 18th, Lin'an was exempted from liquor tax arrears.

古文：三月庚申，太白昼见。
现代文：三月初三，太白星白天出现。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：辛未，申严民间生子弃杀之禁，仍令有司月给钱米收养。
现代文：十四日，重新申明不许民间生子弃杀，并且命令有关部门每月给钱米收养。
English: On the 14th, it was reiterated that it is not allowed to abandon and kill civilian children, and ordered the relevant departments to adopt Qianmi every month.

古文：辛巳，以淮西安抚司所招军为强勇军。
现代文：二十四日，以淮西安抚司所招军为强勇军。
English: On the 24th, troops were recruited from the Huaixi Pacification Division as a strong army.

古文：癸未，费土寅罢。
现代文：二十六日，费士寅被罢免
English: On the 26th, Fei Shih-yin was removed from office

古文：夏四月戊子朔，以钱象祖参知政事兼同知枢密院事，吏部尚书刘德秀签书枢密院事。
现代文：夏四月初一，任命钱象祖为参知政事兼同知枢密院事，吏部尚书刘德秀为签书枢密院事。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Qian Xiangzu was appointed as a member of the Council of State and the Privy Council, and Liu Dexiu, the Secretary of the General Office, was appointed as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：辛卯，以江陵副都统李奕为镇江都统，皇甫斌为江陵副都统兼知襄阳府。
现代文：初四，任命江陵副都统李奕为镇江都统，皇甫斌为江陵副都统兼知襄阳府。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Li Yi, the deputy governor of Jiangling, was appointed as the governor of Zhenjiang, and Wang Fubin was appointed as the deputy governor of Jiangling and the governor of Zhiyang.

古文：戊戌，修《宪圣慈烈皇后圣德事迹》。
现代文：十一日，修撰瑰圣慈烈皇后圣德事迹。
English: On the 11th day of the month, we will write about the virtuous deeds of Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：辛丑，日中有黑子。
现代文：十四日，太阳中出现黑子。
English: On the 14th, a spot appeared in the sun.

古文：甲寅，武学生华岳上书，谏朝廷不宜用兵，恐启边衅。
现代文：二十七日，武学生华岳上书，劝谏朝廷不应该用兵，恐怕开启边祸。
English: On the 27th, the martial arts student Hua Yue submitted a letter, urging the imperial court not to use soldiers, which would probably start a border disaster.

古文：以忤韩侂胄，送建宁府编管。
现代文：因上书违背韩青的意思，送往建宁府编管。
English: Because the letter contradicted Han Qing's intention, it was sent to Jianning Prefecture.

古文：乙卯，大风。
现代文：二十八日，刮大风。
English: On the 28th, a strong wind blew.

古文：五月己巳，赐礼部进士毛自知以下四百三十有三人及第、出身。
现代文：五月十三日，赐礼部进士毛自知等四百三十三人及第、出身。
English: On May 13, four hundred and thirty-three people, including Mao Zhizhi, a member of the Ceremonial Department, were awarded their ranks and ranks.

古文：复淳熙荐举改官法。
现代文：恢复淳熙荐举改官法。
English: Revive the law on the promotion of officials recommended by Jun Xi.

古文：乙亥，诏以卫国公严为皇子，进封荣王。
现代文：十九日，下诏以卫国公赵严为皇子，进封荣王。
English: On the 19th, the imperial edict was issued naming Zhao Yan, the Prince of the Great Patriotic War, as the prince, and he was enthroned as the glorious king.

古文：甲申，镇江都统戚拱遣忠义人朱裕结弓手李全焚涟水县。
现代文：二十八日，镇江都统戚拱派遣忠义人朱裕联合弓手李全焚掠涟水县。
English: On the 28th, relatives from all over Zhenjiang sent Zhu Yu, a loyalist, and Li Quanqin, an archer, to plunder Yishui County.

古文：是月，金国以边民侵掠及增边戍来责渝盟。
现代文：这个月，金国因边民侵掠和增兵来责怪朝廷背弃盟约。
English: This month, Kim accused the imperial court of reneging on the treaty because of the invasion and pillage of the border people and the increase of troops.

古文：六月戊子，罢广东税场八十一墟。
现代文：六月初二，罢除广东税场八十一处。
English: On the second day of June, 81 tax offices in Guangdong were abolished.

古文：辛卯，诏内外诸军密为行军之计。
现代文：初五，下诏内外诸军秘密制定行军计划。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the armies at home and abroad secretly drew up their marching plans.

古文：戊戌，命诸路安抚司教阅禁军。
现代文：十二日，命令各路安抚司训练禁军。
English: On the 12th, he ordered all pacification departments to train the forbidden army.

古文：己亥，遣李壁贺金主生辰。
现代文：十三日，派遣李壁祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 13th, Li Qibai was sent to congratulate Jin on his birthday.

古文：庚子，进程松资政殿大学士，为四川制置使。
现代文：十四日，进升程松为资政殿大学士，担任四川制置使。
English: On the 14th, Jin Sheng Chengmong became a scholar of the College of Councillors, and served as a Sichuan envoy.

古文：辛丑，淮东安抚郑挺坐擅纳北人牛真及劫涟水军事败，夺二官罢。
现代文：十五日，淮东安抚郑挺因擅纳北人牛真和劫掠涟水军事情败露，削夺二官罢免。
English: On the 15th, Zheng Ting, the pacifier of Huaidong Province, was removed from his post after it was revealed that he had illegally recruited the northerner Niu Zhen and plundered the Yunnan Navy.

古文：壬寅，天鸣有声。
现代文：十六日，天鸣有声。
English: On the 16th, there was a ringing in the heavens.

古文：复同安、汉阳、蕲春三监。
现代文：恢复同安、汉阳、薪春三铸钱监。
English: Restore Tong'an, Hanyang, and Qiuchun three casting money supervisors.

古文：己巳，荧惑犯太微右执法。
现代文：己巳日，荧惑星侵犯太微右执法。
English: On the same day, the fluorescent planet encroached too far to the right of law enforcement.

古文：陈自强等上《新修淳熙以后吏部七司法》。
现代文：陈自强等呈上新修淳熙以后吏部七司念。
English: Chen Ziqiang and others presented the seven divisions of the cadre department after Xinxu Aung Hee.

古文：壬子，陈自强侍御史邓友龙等请用本朝故事，以韩侂胄平章军国事。
现代文：二十六日，陈自强和侍御史邓友龙等请用本朝故事，任命韩青为平章军国事。
English: On the 26th, Chen Ziqiang and the attendant Deng Youlong, etc. used the story of this morning to appoint Han Qing as the national affairs of the Pingzhang Army.

古文：减大理、三衙、临安府囚罪一等，释杖以下。
现代文：减轻大理寺、三衙、临安府囚犯罪刑一等，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: The first-class criminal sentences of prisoners in Dali Temple, Samcheok and Lin'an Prefecture will be reduced, and prisoners sentenced to caning or less will be released.

古文：秋七月庚申，诏韩侂胄平章军国事，立班丞相上，三日一朝，赴都堂治事。
现代文：秋七月初五，诏令韩青为平章军国事，班次立在承相之上，三日一朝，到都堂治事。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Han Qing was ordered by the emperor to be in charge of the national affairs of the Pingzhang Army, and the squadron stood on top of Shosho. On the morning of the 3rd day, he went to the capital to manage affairs.

古文：命兴元都统司增招战兵。
现代文：命令兴元都统司增招战兵。
English: He ordered the Xingyuan City Unification Department to recruit more soldiers.

古文：丙寅，以苏师旦为安远军节度使，领阁门事。
现代文：十一日，任命苏师旦为安远军节度使领阁门事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Su Shidan was appointed as the chief cabinet secretary of the Andong Army.

古文：丁卯，诏侍从、两省、台谏、在外待制、学士已上及内外文武官，各举将帅边守一二人。
现代文：十二日，诏令侍从官、两省官、台谏官、在外待制学士以上和内外文武官，各自举荐将帅边守一至二人。
English: On the 12th, the imperial edict ordered the attendants, the two provincial officials, the Taiwan eunuchs, the foreign students with a bachelor's degree or higher, and the domestic and foreign military attaches to each recommend one or two border guards.

古文：戊辰，赠赵汝愚少保。
现代文：十三日，贝曾赵汝愚为少保。
English: On the 13th, Baizeng Zhao Rugu was promoted to Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：己卯，韩侂胄等上《高宗御集》。
现代文：二十四日，韩青等呈上滴宗御集。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Han Qing and others presented the droplet collection.

古文：壬午，诏诸路提刑、提举司措置保甲。
现代文：二十七日，下诏各路提刑、提举司措置保甲。
English: On the 27th, it was announced that all roads would be penalized and disciplinary measures would be taken.

古文：癸未，以韩侂胄兼国用使。
现代文：二十八日，任命韩青兼国用使。
English: On the 28th, Han Qing was also appointed as a state envoy.

古文：以旱，诏大理、三衙、临安府、两浙州县及诸路决系囚。
现代文：因早灾诏令大理寺、三衙、临安府、两浙州县和各路审理在押囚犯。
English: Due to the early disaster, Dalian Temple, Samye, Lin'an, the two counties of Zhejiang and various roads were ordered to try the prisoners.

古文：八月丙戌朔，蠲两浙阙雨州县赃赏钱。
现代文：八月初一，免除两浙缺雨州县赃赏钱。
English: On the first day of August, the two counties of Zhejiang and Yuzhou were exempted from the reward money.

古文：丁亥，命湖北安抚司增招神劲军。
现代文：初二，命令湖北安抚司增招神劲军。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, he ordered the Hubei Pacification Department to recruit more soldiers.

古文：癸巳，雨。
现代文：初八，降雨。
English: It rained on the first day of the eighth month.

古文：乙巳，以殿前副都指挥使郭倪为镇江都统兼知扬州。
现代文：二十日，任命殿前副都指挥使郭倪为镇江都统兼知扬州。
English: On the 20th, Guo Ni, the former deputy commander of the palace, was appointed as the Zhenjiang Metropolitan and Yangzhou.

古文：是月，赠宇文虚中少保。追封刘光世为鄜王。
现代文：这个月，赠宁文虚中为少保，追封刘光世为王。
English: This month, Zhenning Wenqiu was promoted to the rank of Junior Guard, and Liu Guangye was promoted to the rank of King.

古文：闰月戊寅，韩侂胄等上《钦宗玉牒》、《宪圣慈烈皇后圣德事迹》。
现代文：闰八月二十四日，韩青等呈上欲宗玉牌、瑰圣慈烈皇后圣德事迹。
English: On the 24th day of the 8th month of the leap year, Han Qing and others presented the jade medal of Xizong and the saintly deeds of the Queen of the Holy Martyrs.

古文：九月丁亥，刘德秀罢。
现代文：九月初四，刘德秀被罢免。
English: On the fourth day of September, Liu Dexiu was dismissed.

古文：庚子，诏官吏犯赃追还所受如旧法。
现代文：十七日，下诏官吏犯赃追回受贿财物，如同旧法。
English: On the 17th, officials were ordered to recover bribe money, just like the old law.

古文：丁未，遣陈景俊使金贺正旦。
现代文：二十四日，派遣陈景俊出使金国祝贺正旦。
English: On the 24th, Chen Jingjun sent an envoy to China to congratulate Zhengdan.

古文：庚戌，大风。
现代文：二十七日，刮大风。
English: On the 27th, there was a strong wind.

古文：冬十月甲子，江州守臣陈铸以岁旱图献瑞禾，诏夺一官。
现代文：冬十月十一日，江州守臣陈铸因早灾图谋献瑞禾，下诏削夺一官。
English: On October 11th, winter, the governor of Jiangsu Province, Chen Shou, because of the early disaster, planned to offer Ruihe, and the next edict was cut to win a post.

古文：丙寅，升嘉定府为嘉庆军。
现代文：十三日，升嘉定府为嘉庆军。
English: On the 13th, Shengjia Dingfu was taken by the Jiaqing Army.

古文：庚午，金遣纥石烈子仁来贺瑞庆节。
现代文：十七日，金国派遣给石烈子仁来祝贺瑞庆节。
English: On the 17th, the State of Kim sent a delegation to congratulate the Ruiqing Festival.

古文：复置和州马监。
现代文：重新设置和州马监。
English: Re-establishment of the State Horse Inspector.

古文：十一月乙酉，置殿前司神武军五千人屯扬州。
现代文：十一月初三，设置殿前司神武军五千人驻屯扬州。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, 5,000 troops of the Imperial General Headquarters were stationed in Yangzhou.

古文：乙未，申严告讦之禁。
现代文：十三日，申严告奸之禁。
English: On the thirteenth day, I solemnly declared the prohibition of adultery.

古文：十二月癸丑朔，修孝宗、光宗《御集》。
现代文：十二月初一，修撰《孝宗、光宗御臭。
English: On the first day of December, he revised "Kozong, Guangzong's Odor.

古文：庚午，诏两淮京西监司、帅守讲行宽恤之政。
现代文：十八日，诏令两淮京西监司、帅守实行宽恤之政。
English: On the 18th, the two West Huaijing supervisors and the commander-in-chief were ordered to implement a lenient policy.

古文：增刺马军司弩手。
现代文：增刺马军司弩手。
English: Zeng Zeng Ma Junshi waved his hand.

古文：癸酉，诏永除两浙身丁钱绢。
现代文：二十一日，诏令永远废除两浙身丁钱绢。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the imperial edict permanently abolished the two Zhejiang body Ding money.

古文：戊寅，金遣赵之杰来贺明年正旦，入见，礼甚倨。
现代文：二十六日，金国派遣赵之杰来祝贺明年新春，朝见宁宗，行礼甚为傲慢。
English: On the 26th, Jin Guo sent Zhao Zhijie to congratulate next year's Spring Festival. When he met Ning Zong, he was very arrogant.

古文：韩侂胄请帝还内，诏使人更以正旦朝见。
现代文：韩青请宁宗回宫，下诏金使改在新春朝见。
English: Han Qing asked Ning Zong to return to the palace, but the envoy changed his mind and said he would see him in the morning of the New Year.

古文：著作郎朱质上书请斩金使，不报。
现代文：著作佐郎朱质上书请斩金国使臣，没得到回答。
English: Authored by Saro Zhu, the petition called for the execution of Kim's envoys, but received no response.

古文：是岁，真里富国献瑞象。
现代文：这一年，真里富国进献瑞象。
English: In this year, the real rich countries presented gifts to the poor countries.

古文：江浙、福建、二广诸州旱，两淮、京西、湖北诸州水，振之。
现代文：江浙、福建和二广各州早灾，两淮、京西、湖北各州水灾，进行贩济。
English: Early disasters in Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Fujian, and the two Guangzhou provinces, and floods in the two Huai, West Beijing, and Hubei provinces, led to economic trafficking.

古文：二年春正月癸未朔，蠲两浙路身丁绵。
现代文：开禧二年春正月初一，免除两浙路身丁绸绵。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the second year of the Spring Festival, exempt two Zhejiang road bodies from dingy.

古文：癸巳，再给军士雪寒钱。
现代文：十一日，再给军士雪寒钱。
English: On the 11th day, he gave Sergeant Xue cold money.

古文：发米振给贫民。
现代文：发米贩给贫民。
English: A rice vendor distributes rice to the poor.

古文：以金使悖慢，馆伴使、副以下夺官有差。
现代文：因金国使臣傲慢无礼，馆伴使、副使以下削夺官职不等。
English: As a result of the arrogance and rudeness of the envoys from Kim Guo, the official posts of the palace attendants, deputy envoys and below were reduced.

古文：乙未，增太学内舍生为百二十人。
现代文：十三日，增太学内舍生为一百二十人。
English: On the 13th, 120 students from Zengdai High School gave up their lives.

古文：辛丑，更名国用司曰国用参计所。
现代文：十九日，国用司改名为国用参计所。
English: On the 19th, the State Statistics Bureau changed its name to the State Statistics Institute.

古文：己酉，雷雨雹。
现代文：二十七日，打雷，降冰雹。
English: On the 27th, there was thunder and hail.

古文：辛亥，诏坑户毁钱为铜者不赦，仍籍其家，著为令。
现代文：二十九日，下诏坑户毁钱为铜者不赦免，并且籍没其家，著为令。
English: On the 29th, it was decreed that miners who destroyed money for copper would not be pardoned, and their homes would be confiscated.

古文：是月，雅州蛮高吟师寇边，遣官军讨之。
现代文：这个月，雅州蛮高吟师攻打边境，派遣官军讨伐。
English: This month, the Yazhou Brute Gao Yin Division attacked the border and dispatched the official army to fight.

古文：二月癸丑，寿慈宫火。
现代文：二月初二，寿慈宫火灾。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, a fire broke out in Shouci Palace.

古文：甲寅，太皇太后移居大内，车驾月四朝。
现代文：初三，太皇太后移居皇宫，宁宗每月朝拜四次。
English: On the third day of the new year, the empress dowager moved into the imperial palace, and Ning Zong began to worship four times a month.

古文：乙卯，以火灾，避正殿，彻乐。
现代文：初四，因火灾不上正殿，撤除用乐。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the year, due to a fire, the main hall was not used, and the music was removed.

古文：丁巳，以久雨，诏大理、三衙、临安府及诸路决系囚。
现代文：初六，因久雨不晴下诏大理寺、三衙、临安府和各路审理在押囚犯。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, because of the long rain and bad weather, the prisoners in detention in Dali Temple, Samcheok, Lin'an and other places were tried.

古文：己卯，复御正殿。
现代文：二十八日，又到正殿处理政事。
English: On the 28th, he returned to the main hall to deal with government affairs.

古文：三月癸巳，以程松为四川宣抚使，吴曦为宣抚副使。
现代文：三月十二日，任命程松为四川宣抚使，吴曦为宣抚副使。
English: On March 12, Cheng Song was appointed as the Sichuan envoy, and Wu Xi as the deputy envoy.

古文：甲午，颁《开禧重修七司法》。
现代文：十三日，颁布开禧重修七司念。
English: On the 13th, the re-establishment of the seven departments was announced.

古文：丁酉，诏诸路监司岁十一月按部理囚，如五月之制。
现代文：十六日，下诏各监司每年十一月视察辖区内案件审理情况，像五月之制一样。
English: On the 16th, it was announced that the supervisors would inspect the status of cases under their jurisdiction in November every year, just like the May system.

古文：己亥，从太皇太后幸聚景园。
现代文：十八日，随从太皇太后到聚景园。
English: On the 18th, he followed the Empress Dowager to the scenic park.

古文：乙巳，钱象祖罢，以张岩兼知枢密院事。
现代文：二十四日，钱象祖被罢免，任命张岩兼知枢密院事。
English: On the 24th, Qian Xiangzu was dismissed and Zhang Yan Kanechi was appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：丙午，以钱象祖怀奸避事，夺二官、信州居住，己酉，知处州徐邦宪入见，请立太子，因以肆赦弭兵，侍御史徐柟劾罢之。
现代文：二十五日，因钱象祖怀奸避事，削夺二官，信州居住。二十八日，处州知州徐邦宪朝见宁宗，请立太子，既而陈请赦囚犯和停止用兵，侍御史湘庵弹勃罢免他。
English: On the 25th, because of Qian Xianghuai's treachery and avoidance of affairs, he cut two officials and lived in Shinshu. On the 28th, when he was in Chizhou, Xu Bangxian met with Ning Zong and asked him to appoint a crown prince, and Chen asked him to pardon prisoners and stop using soldiers, and the attendant Shi Xiang'an dismissed him.

古文：夏四月己未，雅州蛮作乱，焚碉门砦，官军失利。
现代文：夏四月初八，雅州蛮叛乱，焚烧碉门寨，官军失利。
English: On the eighth day of the fourth month of the summer, Yazhou rebelled violently, burning Yamen Village, and the government army was defeated.

古文：庚申，四川宣抚司复调御前大军往讨之。
现代文：初九，四川宣抚司又调御前大军前往讨伐。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the Sichuan Procuratorate sent a large army to the front to fight.

古文：甲子，以薛叔似为兵部尚书、湖北京西宣抚使，邓友龙为御史中丞、两淮宣抚使。
现代文：十三日，任命薛叔似为兵部尚书和湖北京西宣抚使，邓友龙为御史中承、两淮宣抚使。
English: On the 13th, he appointed Xue Shuxiang as the military commander of Shangshu and West Lake Beijing, and Deng Yulong as the military commander of Gushizhong and the two provinces of Huaihai.

古文：下纳粟补官之令。
现代文：颁布纳粟补官之令。
English: Issued the order of appointing Nakao as an additional official.

古文：戊辰，以吴曦兼陕西、河东路招抚使。
现代文：十七日，任命吴曦兼陕西、河东路招抚使。
English: On the 17th, Wu Xi was appointed as the special envoy to Shaanxi and Hedong.

古文：己巳，调三衙兵增戍淮东。
现代文：十八日，调三衙兵增戍淮东。
English: On the 18th, the troops of the 3rd Division were sent to reinforce Huaidong.

古文：庚午，追夺秦桧王爵，命礼官改谥。
现代文：十九日，追夺秦桧王爵，命令礼官改溢。
English: On the 19th, he chased down Qin Yu Wang Jie and ordered the etiquette officials to reform.

古文：乙亥，以郭倪兼山东、京东路招抚使，鄂州都统赵淳兼京西北路招抚使，皇甫斌兼京西北路招抚副使，丁丑，吴曦遣其客姚淮源献关外四州于金，求封蜀王。
现代文：二十四日，任命郭倪兼山东、京东路招抚使，鄂州都统赵淳兼京西北路招抚使，皇甫斌兼京西北路招抚副使。二十六日，吴曦派遣他的宾客姚淮源向金国贡献关外四州，求封蜀王。
English: On the 24th, he appointed Guo Ni and Shandong and Beijing East Road as the Sending Envoys, Zhao Jun and Beijing Northwest Road as the Sending Envoys, and Wang Fubin and Beijing Northwest Road as the Sending Envoys. On the 26th, Wu Xi sent his guest Yao Huaiyuan to contribute Guanzhou and Guanzhou to Jin Guo and ask Shu Wang.

古文：镇江都统制陈孝庆复泗州，江州统制许进复新息县。
现代文：镇江都统制陈孝庆收复泅州，江州统制许进收复新息县。
English: Zhenjiang Metropolitan Chen Xiaoqing regained Zhangzhou, Jiangzhou Metropolitan Xu Jin regained Xinxi County.

古文：戊寅，光州忠义人孙成复褒信县。
现代文：二十七日，光州忠义人孙成收复褒信县。
English: On the 27th, Sun Cheng, a loyalist of Gwangju, recovered Posin County.

古文：五月辛巳朔，陈孝庆复虹县。
现代文：五月初一，陈孝庆收复虹县。
English: On the first day of May, Chen Xiaoqing arrived in Fanghong County.

古文：吴兴郡王抦薨，追封沂王，谥曰靖惠。
现代文：吴兴郡王赵摘逝世，追封为沂王，溢号为靖惠。
English: Zhao Zhan, the king of Wuxing County, died and was posthumously crowned as the King of Qi, and his posthumous name was Jing Hui.

古文：癸未，禁边郡官吏擅离职守。
现代文：初三，禁止边郡官吏擅离职守。
English: On the third day of the new year, officials of Bian County are prohibited from leaving the office without permission.

古文：丙戌，江州都统王大节引兵攻蔡州，不克，军大溃。
现代文：初六，江州都统王大节率兵攻打蔡州没有成功，军队大败。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, King Dajie, the ruler of Jiangzhou, led an army to attack Caizhou, but it was unsuccessful. The army was soundly defeated.

古文：丁亥，下诏伐金。
现代文：初七，下诏伐金。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the gold panning begins.

古文：癸巳，以伐金告于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：十三日，向天地、宗庙、社翟报告伐金。
English: On the 13th, the gold mining was reported to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：皇甫斌引兵攻唐州，败绩。
现代文：皇甫斌率兵攻打唐州，失败。
English: Emperor Fubin led an army to attack Tangzhou, but failed.

古文：兴元都统秦世辅出师至城固县，军大乱。
现代文：兴元都统秦世辅出兵到城固县，军队大乱。
English: Qin Shiyu, the ruler of the Xingyuan capital, sent troops to Chenggu County, and the army was in turmoil.

古文：甲午，赐宗室希瞿子名均，命为沂王抦后，补千牛卫将军。
现代文：十四日，赐宗室赵希瞿子名均，命令为沂王后代，补为千牛卫将军。
English: On the 14th, Zhao Xizhi, Zhao Xizhi's ancestral wife, was given the same name and ordered to be a descendant of King Zhaozong and a general of Qian Niuwei.

古文：以池州副都统郭倬、主管马军行司公事李汝翼会兵攻宿州，败绩。
现代文：任命池州副都统郭悼、主管马军行司公事李汝翼联合军队进攻宿州，失败。
English: The appointment of Guo Miao, deputy governor of Chizhou, and Li Ruyi, in charge of the horse army and the civil affairs department, led the joint army to attack Suzhou, but failed.

古文：壬寅，太白昼见。
现代文：二十二日，太白星白天显现。
English: On the 22nd, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：简荆襄、两淮田卒以备战兵。
现代文：精简荆襄、两淮田卒以备战兵。
English: Jingxiang and two Huai Tian were streamlined to prepare soldiers.

古文：癸卯，郭倬等还至蕲县，金人追而围之，倬执马军司统制田俊迈以与金人，乃得免。
现代文：二十三日，郭悼等回至薪县，金人追而围之，郭悼俘获马军司统制田俊迈送给金军，才得免身。
English: On the 23rd, Guo Wei and others returned to Zhixian County, and the Jin people chased and surrounded them. Guo Wei was captured by Tian Shunmei, the commander-in-chief of the Ma Army, and sent to the Jin Army, before he was able to escape.

古文：六月壬子，王大节除名、袁州安置，寻徙封州。
现代文：六月初二，王大节被除名，袁州安置，不久迁徙封州。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, Wang Dasi was removed from the list, resettled in Yuanzhou, and soon moved to Fuzhou.

古文：癸丑，建康都统李爽攻寿州，败绩。
现代文：初三，建康都统李爽进攻寿州，失败。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, Jiankang Dudong Li Shuang attacked Shoushou, but failed.

古文：甲寅，邓友龙罢。
现代文：初四，邓友龙被罢免。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Deng Youlong was dismissed.

古文：以江南东路安抚使丘崈为刑部尚书、两淮宣抚使。
现代文：任命江南东路安抚使丘击为刑部尚书、两淮宣抚使。
English: He appointed the pacifying envoy of Jiangnan East Road, Quchu, as the penal department's Shangshu, and the two Huai and Xuanfu envoys.

古文：乙卯，雅州蛮高吟师出降，官军杀之。
现代文：初五，雅州蛮高吟师投降，官军杀掉他。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Yazhou Brute Gao Jinshi surrendered, and the government army killed him.

古文：丁巳，减大理、三衙、临安府囚罪一等，释杖以下。
现代文：初七，减轻大理寺、三衙、临安府囚犯罪刑一等，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, the first-class criminal punishment of prisoners in Dali Temple, Samcheok and Lin'an Prefecture will be reduced, and prisoners sentenced to caning or less will be released.

古文：夺郭倬、李汝翼二官。
现代文：削夺郭悼、李汝翼三官。
English: Cutting Guo Wei, Li Ruyi three officials.

古文：辛酉，夺皇甫斌三官。
现代文：十一日，削夺皇甫斌三官。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Fubin was stripped of his three posts.

古文：甲子，李爽罢。
现代文：十四日，李爽被罢免。
English: On the 14th, Li Shuang was dismissed.

古文：丁卯，曲赦泗州，减杂犯死罪囚，余皆除之，蠲其租税三年。
现代文：十七日，赦免泅州，减轻杂犯死罪囚犯罪刑，其余都免去罪刑，免除泅州三年租税。
English: On the 17th, he pardoned Zhangzhou, mitigated the criminal punishment of the death penalty prisoners, exempted the rest from criminal punishment, and exempted Zhangzhou from three years of tax.

古文：建康副都统田琳复寿春府。
现代文：建康副都统田琳收复寿春府。
English: Jiankang vice-governor Tian Lin recovered Shoushunfu.

古文：戊辰，雅州蛮复寇边。
现代文：十八日，雅州蛮攻打边境。
English: On the 18th, Yazhou brutally attacked the border.

古文：甲戌，夺李爽三官、汀州居住。
现代文：二十四日，削夺李爽三官，汀州居住。
English: On the 24th, Li Shuang was stripped of his three posts and went to live in Dingzhou.

古文：再夺皇甫斌五官、南安军安置。
现代文：再次削夺皇甫斌五官，南安军安置。
English: Emperor Fubin's five officials were removed again, and the Nan'an Army was resettled.

古文：丙子，夺邓友龙三官、兴化军居住，戊寅，苏师旦罢。
现代文：二十六日，削夺邓友龙三官，兴化军居住。二十八日，苏师旦被罢免。
English: On the 26th, Deng Youlong was stripped of his three posts, and the Xinghua Army took up residence. On the 28th, Su Shidan was dismissed.

古文：是月，命丘崈至扬州部署诸将，悉三衙江上军分守江、淮要害。
现代文：这个月，命令丘击到扬州部署各将，把三衙江上所有军队分派驻守江、淮要害之地。
English: This month, the order was given to Yangzhou to deploy generals and assign all the troops on the Samye River to guard the critical areas of the Yangtze River and Huai River.

古文：金人封吴曦为蜀王。
现代文：金军封吴曦为蜀王。
English: The Golden Army crowned Wu Xi as the King of Shu.

古文：秋七月辛巳，复绍兴边郡赏。
现代文：秋七月初二，恢复绍兴时边郡赏赐。
English: On the second day of the first month of autumn in July, Shaoxing Jibei County was restored.

古文：夺苏师旦三官、衡州居住，仍籍其家。
现代文：削夺苏师旦三官，衡州居住，并且籍没其家。
English: He held three government posts in the Soviet Union, lived in Hengzhou, and lost his home.

古文：罢旱伤州军比较租赋一年。
现代文：废除早灾州军比较租赋一年。
English: The abolition of the early disaster state army comparative rent assignment is up to one year.

古文：诏侍从、台谏、两省、卿监、郎官、监司、郡守、前宰执侍从、各举人材二三人。
现代文：下诏侍从、台谏、两省、卿监、郎官、监司、郡守、前宰执侍从，各举荐人才二至三人。
English: There are two to three recommenders for each of the following ranks of attendants of the imperial edict, the Taiwu, the two provinces, the chancellor, the vassal, the superintendent, the county governor, and the former vice-governor.

古文：壬午，雅州蛮出降，庚子，苏师旦除名、韶州安置。
现代文：初三，雅州蛮出降。二十一日，苏师旦被除名，韶州安置。
English: On the third day of the junior high school year, Yazhou abruptly surrendered. On the 21st day, Su Shidan was expelled and relocated to Zhangzhou.

古文：癸卯，以张岩知枢密院事，礼部尚书李壁参知政事。
现代文：二十四日，任命张岩为知枢密院事，礼部尚书李壁为参知政事。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Zhang Yan was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council, and the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shangshu Li Qibai, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of State.

古文：乙巳，置沂王府小学教授。
现代文：二十六日，设置沂王府小学教授。
English: On the 26th, he was appointed as a professor at Gongwangfu Elementary School.

古文：八月丙寅，有司上《开禧刑名断例》。
现代文：八月十七日，有关部门呈上开禧刑名断外。
English: On August 17th, the relevant department submitted a request for the sentence to be suspended.

古文：斩郭倬丁镇江。戊辰，再夺李爽三官、南雄州安置。
现代文：在镇江斩杀郭悼。十九日，再次削夺李爽三官，南雄州安置。
English: On the 19th, Li Shuang was once again stripped of his three posts and resettled in Nanxiong Prefecture.

古文：辛未，诏诸州无证有佐之狱毋奏裁。
现代文：二十二日，下诏各州无证有佐之案件不用奏裁。
English: On the 22nd, the lower court ruled that cases with no supporting documents need not be reported to the court.

古文：壬申，以淮东安抚司所招军为御前强勇军。
现代文：二十三日，以淮东安抚司招军为御前强勇军。
English: On the 23rd, he summoned troops from the Huaidong Pacification Division as the imperial army.

古文：九月壬午，金兵攻夺和尚原。
现代文：九月初四，金兵攻夺和尚原。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, the gold soldiers captured Monchohara.

古文：己丑，朝献于景灵宫。
现代文：十一日，祭祀景灵宫。
English: On the 11th day, the ceremony was held at the Jingling Palace.

古文：庚寅，朝飨于太庙。
现代文：十二日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the twelfth day, the ritual was held at Taimiao.

古文：辛卯，合祭天地于明堂，大赦。
现代文：十三日，在明堂合祭天地，大赦。
English: On the 13th, in Myeongdong, the heavens and the earth will be united in a festival, and there will be a general amnesty.

古文：乙巳，赏复泗州功。
现代文：二十七日，奖赏收复泅州有功之人。
English: On the 27th, rewards were given to those who had made contributions to the recovery of Zhangzhou.

古文：冬十月戊申朔，诏内外军帅各举智勇可将帅者二人。
现代文：冬十月初一，下诏内外军师各自举荐智勇可以担任将帅者二人。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, the following edict was issued: two generals who were recommended by military officers at home and abroad could serve as generals.

古文：辛酉，以将士暴露，罢瑞庆节宴。
现代文：十四日，因将士暴露，废罢瑞庆节宴会。
English: On the 14th, the Ruiqing Festival banquet was cancelled due to the exposure of the generals.

古文：丙子，金人自清河口渡淮，遂围楚州。
现代文：二十九日，金军从清河口渡淮，于是围攻楚州。
English: On the 29th, the Chinese army crossed the Huai River from the mouth of the Qing River and besieged Chuzhou.

古文：十一月庚辰，命主管殿前司公事郭杲领兵驻真州以援两淮。
现代文：十一月初三，命令主管殿前司公事郭呆领兵驻真州以援两淮地区。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, he ordered Guo Dian, the head of the former Department of Public Affairs, to lead the troops stationed in Zhenzhou to assist the two Huai regions.

古文：辛巳，金人破枣阳军。
现代文：初四，金军攻破枣阳军。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the Golden Army defeated the Zaoyang Army.

古文：甲申，以丘崈签书枢密院事，督视江、淮军马。
现代文：初七，任命丘雷签书枢密院事，督视江淮军马。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he appointed Qiu Lei as the Privy Councillor to sign the document and supervise the military parade of Jianghuai.

古文：金人犯神马坡，江陵副都统魏友谅突围趋襄阳。
现代文：金军进犯神马坡，江陵副都统魏友谅突围赶往襄阳。
English: The Jin army invaded Shenma Po, and the deputy capital of Jiangling, Wei Youxuan, broke through the siege and rushed to Xiangyang.

古文：乙酉，赵淳焚樊城。
现代文：初八，赵淳焚烧樊城。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Zhao Jun set fire to Shicheng.

古文：戊子，金人犯庐州，田琳拒退之。
现代文：十一日，金军进犯庐州，田琳打退金军。
English: On the 11th day, the Chinese army invaded Bozhou, and Tianlin repulsed the Chinese army.

古文：丁酉，金人犯旧岷州，守将王喜遁去。
现代文：十六日，告诉天地、宗庙、社翟金军侵犯两淮地区。十八日，不上正殿处理政事，减少膳食。
English: On the 16th, he told heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community that the gold army had invaded the two Huai regions. On the 18th, he did not go to the main hall to deal with political affairs, and reduced meals.

古文：戊戌，金人围和州，守将周虎拒之。
现代文：任命湖广总领陈谦为湖北京西宣抚副使。十九日，金军离开庐州。二十日，金军围攻和州，守将周虎拒战。
English: The commander-in-chief of Hubei and Guangxi, Chen Qian, was appointed as the vice-envoy of Hubei and Beijing to the West. On the 19th, the Chinese army left Zhangzhou. On the 20th, the Chinese army besieged Hezhou, and the commander, Zhou Hu, refused to fight.

古文：金人破信阳军。
现代文：金军攻破信阳军。
English: The Jin army defeated the Xinyang army.

古文：辛丑，金人围襄阳。
现代文：二十四日，金军围攻襄阳。
English: On the 24th, the Chinese army besieged Yangyang.

古文：壬寅，金人破随州。
现代文：二十五日，金军攻破随州。
English: On the 25th, the Chinese army defeated Suizhou.

古文：癸丑，太皇太后赐钱一百万缗犒赏军士。
现代文：二十六日，太皇太后赐钱一百万络搞赏军士。
English: On the 26th, the empress dowager gave one million rupees to reward the soldiers.

古文：诏诸路招填禁军以待调遣。
现代文：下诏各路招填禁军以待调遣。
English: Issue the following call to fill all roads with forbidden troops to be dispatched.

古文：甲辰，金人犯真州。
现代文：二十七日，金军进犯真州。
English: On the 27th, the Chinese army invaded Zhenzhou.

古文：乙巳，金人破西和州。
现代文：二十八日，金军攻破西和州。
English: On the 28th, the Chinese army broke through Xihe Prefecture.

古文：是月，濠州、安丰军及边屯皆为金人所破。
现代文：这个月壕州、安丰军及边屯之地都被金军攻破。
English: This trench state, the Anfeng army and the outposts were all broken by the gold army.

古文：十二月戊申，金人围德安府，守将李师尹拒之。
现代文：十二月初二，金军围攻德安府，守将李师尹抵抗金军。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the Jin army besieged De'an Prefecture, and the commander Li Shiyin resisted the Jin army.

古文：庚戌，金人破成州，守臣辛之遁去。
现代文：初四，金军攻破成州，守臣辛肤之逃跑。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Chinese army invaded Chengdu, and Shoucheng reluctantly fled.

古文：吴曦焚河池县，退屯青野原。
现代文：吴曦焚河池县，退屯青野原。
English: Wu Xi retreated to Qingyuan in Tanhechi County.

古文：辛亥，释大理、三衙、临安府杖以下囚。
现代文：初五，释放大理寺、三衙、临安府杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, prisoners sentenced to the cane or less in Dali Temple, Samcheok and Lin'an were released.

古文：癸丑，金人去和州。
现代文：初七，金军离开和州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the gold army left Hezhou.

古文：甲寅，金人攻六合县，郭倪遣前军统制郭僎救之，遇于胥浦桥，大败，倪弃扬州走。
现代文：初八，金军进攻六合县，郭倪派遣前军统制郭撰救援，在青浦桥相遇，大败，郭倪放弃扬州逃走。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the Golden Army attacked Liuhe County, Guo Ni sent the former army to control Guo Zhen rescue, met in Qingpu Bridge, defeated, Guo Ni abandoned Yangzhou and fled.

古文：丁巳，金人破大散关。
现代文：十一日，金军攻破大散关。
English: On the 11th day, the Chinese army broke through the Great Sankuan Pass.

古文：戊午，荧惑守太微。
现代文：十二日，荧惑星侵犯太微垣。
English: On the 12th, the fluorescent planet encroached too close.

古文：癸亥，魏友谅军溃于花泉，走江陵。
现代文：十七日，魏友谅军在花泉溃败，逃走江陵。
English: On the 17th, the Wei You Yue army was defeated in Huayuan and fled to Jiangling.

古文：丁卯，金人犯七方关，兴州中军正将李好义拒却之。
现代文：二十一日，金军侵犯七方关，兴州中军正将李好义打退金军。
English: On the twenty-first day, the gold army invaded the seven-way pass, and the Chinese army in Xingzhou was driving Li Haoyi back.

古文：戊辰，吴曦还兴州。
现代文：二十二日，吴曦回兴州。
English: On the 22nd, Wu Xi returned to Xingzhou.

古文：金人自淮南退师，留一军据濠州。
现代文：金军从淮南退兵，留下一军占据壕州。
English: The Chinese army retreated from Huainan, leaving an army to occupy Heshou.

古文：己巳，罢郭倪，夺三官，责授果州团练副使、南康军安置。
现代文：二十三日，罢免郭倪，削夺三官，降贬为果州团练副使，南康军安置。
English: On the 23rd, Guo Ni was removed from office, stripped of his three posts, demoted to vice-envoy of the Guozhou Reunification Army, and transferred to the Nankang Army.

古文：庚午，薛叔似、陈谦罢。
现代文：二十四日，薛叔似、陈谦被罢免。
English: On the 24th, Xue Shuxiang and Chen Qian were dismissed.

古文：以荆湖北路安抚使吴猎为湖北、京西宣抚使。
现代文：任命荆湖北路安抚使吴猎为湖北、京西宣抚使。
English: The Jinghu North Road Pacifying Envoy Wu Han was appointed as the Hubei and West Beijing Pacifying Envoy.

古文：复两浙围田，募两淮流民耕种。
现代文：恢复两浙围田，招募两淮流民耕种。
English: Restore the two Zhejiang enclosing fields and recruit two Huaiyu people to cultivate.

古文：癸酉，吴曦始自称蜀王。
现代文：二十七日，吴曦开始自称蜀王。
English: On the 27th, Wu Xi began to call himself Shu Wang.

古文：甲戌，以镇江副都统毕再遇为镇江都统、权山东京东路招抚司公事。
现代文：二十八日，任命镇江副都统毕再遇为镇江都统、代理山东京东路招抚司公事。
English: On the 28th, Zhenjiang Deputy Municipal Party Committee was reappointed as Zhenjiang Municipal Party Committee, Acting Shandong-Tokyo East Road Publicity Department.

古文：乙亥，四川宣抚使程松遁。
现代文：二十九日，四川宣抚使程松逃跑。
English: On the 29th, Cheng Song was ordered to flee by the Sichuan Procuratorate.

古文：三年春正月丁丑朔，丘崈罢。
现代文：开禧三年春正月初一，丘击被罢免。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the third year of the Heian period, he was dismissed.

古文：己卯，命知枢密院事张岩督视江、淮军马。
现代文：初三，命令知枢密院事张岩督视江淮军马。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Zhang Yanzhong, the inspector of the Privy Council, was ordered to regard Jianghuai as a military horse.

古文：庚辰，以陈自强兼枢密使。
现代文：初四，任命陈自强兼枢密使。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school, Chen Ziqiang was appointed as a Privy Counsellor.

古文：癸未，金人破阶州。
现代文：初七，金军攻破阶州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Golden Army broke through Zhazhou.

古文：丁亥，子圻生。
现代文：十一日，子赵折出生。
English: On the 11th, his son Zhao Ori was born.

古文：庚寅，诏建康府给淮民装钱，遣归业。
现代文：十四日，下诏建康府给淮民装钱，遣其归业。
English: On the 14th, the Jiankang government sent Huai Min packing with money and sent him back to work.

古文：辛卯，吴曦招通判兴元府、权大安军事杨震仲，震仲不屈，死之。
现代文：十五日，吴曦招降通判兴元府、代理大安军事杨震仲，杨震仲不屈服，被杀。
English: On the fifteenth day, Wu Xi recruited Yang Zhenzhong, a military officer from Xingyuanfu and the deputy of Da'an Military Region, and Yang Zhenzhong refused to give in and was killed.

古文：癸巳，命两淮帅守、监司招集流民。
现代文：十七日，命令两淮帅守、监司招集流民。
English: On the 17th, he ordered two high-ranking generals and supervisors to summon the displaced people.

古文：甲午，吴曦僭位于兴州。
现代文：十八日，吴曦在兴州僧位。
English: On the 18th, Wu Xi became a monk in Xingzhou.

古文：甲辰，夺池州都统陈孝庆三官罢。
现代文：二十八日，削夺池州都统陈孝庆三官罢免。
English: On the 28th, Chen Xiaoqing, three officials of the Chizhou Metropolitan Government, were dismissed.

古文：二月壬子，以金师退，御正殿，复膳。
现代文：二月初六，因金军退，到正殿处理政事，恢复饮食。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, due to the retreat of the gold army, he went to the main hall to deal with political affairs and resume eating and drinking.

古文：甲寅，削夺福建路总管兼延祥水军统制商荣官爵、柳州安置。
现代文：初八，削夺福建路总管兼延样水军统制商荣官爵，柳州安置。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Shang Rong, the general manager of Fujian Road and the governor of the Yanshan Water Army, was removed and resettled in Liuzhou.

古文：己未，罢程松四川宣抚使，以成都府路安抚使杨辅为四川制置使，沿江制置使叶适兼江、淮制置使。
现代文：十三日，罢免程松四川宣抚使职务，任命成都府路安抚使杨辅为四川制置使，沿江制置使叶适兼江淮制置使。
English: On the 13th, Cheng Song was removed from the post of Sichuan Proclamation Envoy, and Yang Fu, Chengdu Prefectural Road Pacification Envoy, was appointed as Sichuan Proclamation Envoy, and Ye Shu and Jianghuai Proclamation Envoy were appointed as Riverside Proclamation Envoys.

古文：庚申，以旱，诏大理、三衙、临安府决系囚。
现代文：十四日，因早灾下诏大理寺、三衙、临安府审理在押囚犯。
English: On the 14th, prisoners held in Dali Temple, Sanlu and Lin'an were tried because of the early disaster.

古文：癸亥，子圻薨，追封顺王，谥冲怀。
现代文：十七日，子赵折去世，追封为顺王，溢号冲怀。
English: On the 17th, his son Zhao Er passed away, and he was posthumously crowned as Shun Wang.

古文：甲子，振给旱伤州县贫民。
现代文：十八日，贩给早灾州县贫民。
English: On the 18th, it was sold to the poor in the pre-disaster prefecture.

古文：命诸路提刑司从宜断疑狱。
现代文：命令各路提刑司根据案情自行处理疑难案件。
English: ordered all criminal investigation departments to handle difficult cases on their own according to the circumstances.

古文：丁卯，罢江、浙、荆湖、福建招军。
现代文：二十一日，废罢江、浙、荆湖、福建招军。
English: On the 21st, the recruitment of troops in Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Jinghu and Fujian was abolished.

古文：戊辰，子墌生。
现代文：二十二日，儿子赵燎出生。
English: On the 22nd, his son Zhao Yao was born.

古文：庚午，金人去襄阳。
现代文：二十四日，金军离开襄阳。
English: On the 24th, the Chinese army left Yangyang.

古文：辛未，以旱，祷于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：二十五日，因早灾向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷。
English: On the 25th, due to the early disaster, he prayed to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：命有司举行宽恤之政八条，蠲两淮被兵诸州今年租赋。
现代文：命令有关部门实行八条宽恤措施。免除两淮遭兵祸各州今年租赋。
English: The relevant departments were ordered to implement eight measures of leniency, exempting the two provinces that suffered military disasters from this year's rent.

古文：乙亥，释两浙路杖以下囚。
现代文：二十九日，释放两浙路杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 29th, two prisoners below the Zhejiang road cane sentence were released.

古文：四川宣抚副使司随军转运安丙及兴州中军正将李好义、监四川总领所兴州合江仓杨巨源等共诛吴曦，传首诣行在，献于庙社，枭三日，四川平。
现代文：四川宣抚副使司随军转运安丙和兴州中军正将李好义、监四少总领所兴州合江仓杨巨源等联合杀死吴曦，传首级到行在，献于庙社，示众三日，四川平定。
English: The vice-envoy of the Sichuan Provincial Department of Propaganda and Accompanying the army to transport An Xi and the Chinese army in Xingzhou jointly killed Wu Xi, Li Haoyi, the inspector of the Four Minorities General Consulate in Xingzhou, Hejiang Cang, Yang Jueyuan, and so on. The heads were sent to the line, dedicated to the temple, and demonstrated to the public on the third day. Sichuan was pacified.

古文：并诛曦妻子，家属徙岭南，夺其父挺官，迁吴璘子孙出蜀，存其庙祀，玠子孙免连坐。
现代文：一起诛杀的还有吴曦的妻子，家属迁徙岭南，削夺其父吴挺官职。吴瞒子孙迁出蜀，存其庙祀，吴子孙免连坐治罪。
English: Wu Xi's wife and family members also migrated to Lingnan, depriving his father Wu Ting of his official position. Wu Xi's descendants moved out of Shu, kept their temple worship, and Wu Xi's descendants were exempted from punishment.

古文：三月丙子朔，蠲两淮被兵州郡役钱。
现代文：三月初一，免除两淮遭兵祸州郡役钱。
English: On the first day of March, the two Huai were exempted from military service.

古文：丁丑，斩伪四川都转运使徐景望于利州。
现代文：初二，在利州斩杀伪四川都转运使徐景望。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Xu Jingwang, the pseudo-Sichuan capital transfer envoy, was killed in Lizhou.

古文：壬辰，兴州将刘昌国引兵至阶州，金人退去。
现代文：十七日，兴州将领刘昌国率兵至阶州，金军退去。
English: On the 17th, the Xingzhou general Liu Changguo led an army to Chaozhou, and the Chinese army retreated.

古文：癸巳，李好义复西和州。
现代文：十八日，李好义收复西和州。
English: On the 18th, Li Haoyi recaptured West Hezhou.

古文：丁酉，金人去成州。
现代文：二十二日，金军离开成州。
English: On the 22nd, the Chinese army left Chengdu.

古文：庚子，诏以杨辅为四川宣抚使，安丙为端明殿学士、四川宣抚副使，起居舍人许奕为四川宣谕使。
现代文：二十五日，下诏以杨辅为四川宣抚使，安丙为端明殿学士、四川宣抚副使，起居舍人许奕为四川宣谕使。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued, naming Yang Shuo as the Sichuan envoy, An Hien as the Duanming Palace scholar, Sichuan deputy envoy, and Xiu Yi as the Sichuan envoy.

古文：落程松资政殿大学士，夺六官、筠州安置。
现代文：免除程松资政殿大学士，削夺六官，箔州安置。
English: He exempted Cheng Song from being a member of the Politburo, stripped him of six government posts, and resettled him in Hualien.

古文：忠义统领张翼复凤州。
现代文：忠义军统领张翼收复凤州。
English: Zhang Ying, the leader of the loyalist army, recaptured Fengzhou.

古文：辛丑，曲赦四川，减杂犯死罪囚，释杖以下。
现代文：二十六日，特赦免四川，减轻杂犯死罪囚犯罪刑，释放杖刑以下囚犯。
English: On the 26th, he specially pardoned Sichuan, commuted the sentences of death-sentence prisoners and released prisoners who had been sentenced to caning.

古文：壬寅，责授程松顺昌军节度副使、澧州安置。
现代文：二十七日，降授程松为顺昌军节度副使，遭州安置。
English: On the 27th, Cheng Song was demoted to the vice-envoy of the Shunchang Army for the festival, and was resettled by the state.

古文：夏四月戊申，以吴猎兼四川宣谕使。
现代文：夏四月初三，任命吴猎兼四川宣谕使。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Wu Huan and the Sichuan envoy were appointed.

古文：子墌薨，追封申王，谥冲懿。
现代文：子赵氏去世，追封为申王，溢号冲爵。
English: Zhao's son passed away, and he was posthumously crowned King Shen and given the title of Duke.

古文：癸丑，赦两淮、湖北、京西被兵诸州，减杂犯死罪囚，释流以下。
现代文：初八，赦免两淮、湖北、京西遭兵祸各州，减轻杂犯死罪囚犯罪刑，释放流刑以下囚犯。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he pardoned the two Huai Provinces, Hubei Province, and West Beijing Provinces that suffered from military disasters, commuted the sentences of death-sentence prisoners, and released prisoners who had been exiled.

古文：蠲湖北、京西诸郡今年租赋。
现代文：免除湖北、京西各郡今年租赋。
English: The counties in Hubei and West Beijing will be exempted from the rent increase this year.

古文：四川忠义人复大散关。
现代文：四川忠义人收复大散关。
English: The loyal people of Sichuan have recovered the Great Sankan Pass.

古文：己未，奉使金国通谢、国信所参议官方信孺发行在。
现代文：十四日，奉使金国通谢国信所参义官方信孺从行在出发。
English: On the 14th, the official letterhead of the Jin Guotong Xie Guoxin Institute of the People's Republic of China was sent to Sanyi.

古文：庚申，以兵部尚书宇文绍节知江陵府，权湖北、京西宣抚使。
现代文：十五日，任命兵部尚书宁文绍节知江陵府，代理湖北、京西宣抚使。
English: On the 15th, the Ministry of Military Affairs appointed Shangshu Ningwen Shaoshi Zhijiangling Prefecture as acting envoy to Hubei and West Beijing.

古文：壬戌，诏吴猎与宣抚司议，分兴州都统司军之半屯利州。
现代文：十七日，下诏吴猎与宣抚司商议，分兴州都统司军的一半驻屯利州。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Wu Han and Xuan Fuzi discussed and agreed that half of the Xing Prefecture General Headquarters' army would be stationed in Tunli Prefecture.

古文：丁卯，召杨辅诣行在，以吴猎为四川制置使。
现代文：二十二日，召杨辅到行在，以吴猎为四川制置使。
English: On the 22nd, Yang Fu was summoned to Xingye, and Wu Han was appointed as the Sichuan envoy.

古文：戊辰，以资政殿学士钱象祖参知政事。
现代文：二十三日，任命资政殿学士钱象祖为参知政事。
English: On the 23rd, Qian Xiangzu, a scholar of the House of Councillors, was appointed as a member of the Council of State.

古文：己巳，改兴州为沔州。
现代文：二十四日，改兴州为洒州。
English: On the 24th, Changxing Prefecture was transformed into Suran Prefecture.

古文：庚午，赠杨震仲官，仍官其子一人。
现代文：二十五日，赠杨震仲官，并任其子一人为官。
English: On the 25th, Yang Zhen was given the post of vice-governor, and one of his sons was appointed to the post.

古文：癸酉，金人复破大散关。
现代文：二十八日，金军又攻破大散关。
English: On the 28th, the Chinese army broke through the Great Sankuan Pass.

古文：甲戌，赦西和、阶、成、凤四州。
现代文：二十九日，赦免西和、阶、成、凤四州。
English: On the 29th, Xihe, Zhu, Cheng and Feng were pardoned.

古文：五月丁丑，赏诛吴曦功。
现代文：五月初二，赏赐诛杀吴曦有功人员。
English: On the second day of the fifth lunar month, the meritorious personnel who fought and killed Wu Xi were rewarded.

古文：戊寅，用四川宣抚司奏，吴曦党人张伸之等一十六人除名，编配两广及湖南诸州。
现代文：初三，采纳四川宣抚司奏疏意见，吴曦党人张伸之等十六人被除名，编配两广和湖南各州。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, the opinions of the Sichuan Proclamation Division were adopted, and 16 people, including Wu Xi Party member Zhang Shinzhi, were removed from the list and assigned to the two Guangxi and Hunan provinces.

古文：己丑，以旱，祷于天地、宗庙、社稷。
现代文：十四日，因早灾向天地、宗庙、社翟祈祷。
English: On the 14th, due to the early disaster, he prayed to heaven and earth, the ancestral temple, and the community.

古文：辛卯，以太皇太后谢氏有疾，赦，是日崩。
现代文：十六日，因太皇太后谢氏有病，赦免囚犯，这天谢氏逝世。
English: On the 16th, because the Empress Dowager Xie was ill, she pardoned the prisoners, and Xie died that day.

古文：四川宣抚副使司参赞军事杨巨源与金人战于长桥，败绩。
现代文：四川宣抚副使司参赞军事杨巨源与金军在长桥交战，失败。
English: Yang Jiuyuan, the military counselor of the Vice-Minister of Sichuan Province, fought against the Chinese army at the Long Bridge, but failed.

古文：戊戌，诏四川宣抚、制置司分治兵民。
现代文：二十三日，下诏四川宣抚制置司分治兵民。
English: On the 23rd, the Sichuan Proclamation was issued, establishing the Division of Civil and Military Affairs.

古文：庚子，复置沔州副都统制，以李好义为之。
现代文：二十五日，重新设置洒州副都统制，任命李好义担任。
English: On the 25th, the vice-governor system of Surabaya was re-established, and Li Haoyi was appointed to the post.

古文：辛丑，李好义袭秦州，败还。
现代文：二十六日，李好义袭秦州，失败而回。
English: On the 26th, Li Haoyi attacked Qinzhou, but failed and returned.

古文：六月甲寅，赏守襄阳功。
现代文：六月初十，赏守卫襄阳有功人员。
English: On the 10th day of the 6th month, the meritorious personnel of the Yangyang Garrison were awarded.

古文：己未，李好义遇毒死。
现代文：十五日，李好义遇毒而死。
English: On the 15th, Li Haoyi died of poisoning.

古文：癸亥，以林拱辰为金国通谢使，遣富琯使金告哀，刘弥正贺金主生辰。
现代文：十九日，任命林拱辰为金国通谢使，派遣富出使金国告哀，刘弥正祝贺金主生日。
English: On the 19th, Lin Gongchen was appointed as Kim Guotong's special envoy of thanksgiving, Fude dispatched an envoy to mourn Kim Guo, and Liu Yizheng congratulated Kim Guotong on his birthday.

古文：癸酉，安丙杀其参议官杨巨源。
现代文：二十九日，安丙杀其参议官杨巨源。
English: On the 29th, An Hei killed his senator Yang Jiuyuan.

古文：秋七月己卯，命不俦为嗣濮王。
现代文：秋七月初五，任命赵不侍为嗣攫王。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Zhao Buxi was appointed as the heir to the throne.

古文：乙酉，以灾伤，下诏罪己。
现代文：十一日，因灾害下诏罪己。
English: On the 11th day, due to the disaster, he resigned.

古文：八月己巳，上大行太皇太后谥曰成肃皇后。
现代文：八月二十六日，上大行太皇太后溢号为成肃皇后。
English: On August 26th, the Dowager Empress Dowager Shangdai came to be known as the Empress Chengsu.

古文：九月丁丑，诏诸路帅臣申儆边备。
现代文：九月初四，下诏各路帅臣警惕边备。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month of the year, it was decreed that all officers and men should be on the alert.

古文：辛巳，召张岩诣行在。
现代文：初八，召张岩到行在。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Zhang Yan was summoned to the line.

古文：壬午，方信孺以忤韩侂胄，坐用私觌物擅作大臣馈遗金将，夺三官、临江军居住。
现代文：初九，方信孺因违背韩青意愿，用私规物擅作大臣馈遗金将，削夺三官，临江军居住。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Fang Xinyu, in violation of the wishes of Han Qing, used his private property to become a minister to give money to the deceased, cut down the three officials, and the Linjiang army lived.

古文：甲申，减极边官吏举主员。
现代文：十一日，减极边官吏举主人数。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the number of officials from the two sides was reduced.

古文：乙酉，权欑成肃皇后于永阜陵。
现代文：十二日，暂葬成肃皇后于永阜陵。
English: On the 12th, Empress Chengsu was temporarily buried in Yongfu Mausoleum.

古文：丙戌，命淮西转运司措置雄淮军。
现代文：十三日，命令淮西转运司措置雄淮军。
English: On the 13th, he ordered the Huaixi Transportation Department to take measures against the male Huai army.

古文：辛卯，以赵淳为殿前副都指挥使兼江、淮制置使。
现代文：十八日，任命赵淳为殿前副都指挥使兼江、淮制置使。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Jun was appointed as the former vice-commander of the palace, and the envoys of Jiang and Huai were appointed.

古文：乙未，张岩罢。
现代文：二十二日，张岩被罢免。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Yan was removed from office.

古文：辛丑，遣王冉持书赴金国都副元帅府。
现代文：二十八日，派遣咪手持书送到金国都副元师府。
English: On the 28th, I sent a handwritten letter to the vice-governor's office in the capital.

古文：壬寅，祔成肃皇后神主于太庙。
现代文：二十九日，在太庙附祭成肃皇后神主。
English: On the 29th, a memorial service was held for Empress Jingsu in the Great Temple.

古文：冬十月乙巳，减临安、绍兴二府囚罪一等，蠲民缘欑宫役者赋。
现代文：冬十月初三，减轻临安、绍兴二府囚犯罪刑一等，免除百姓因殡宫服役者赋税。
English: On the third day of October in winter, the criminal punishment of prisoners in two prefectures of Lin'an and Shaoxing was reduced to the first class, and the people who served as undertakers were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：丙午，更殿前司纯队法。
现代文：初四，改殿前司纯队法。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, it was changed to the pure team method.

古文：乙卯，复珍州遵义军。
现代文：十三日，恢复珍州遵义军。
English: On the 13th, the Zhenzhou Zunyi Army was restored.

古文：丙辰，诏以边事谕军民。
现代文：十四日，下诏以边事告谕军民。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued to the military and the people.

古文：十一月甲戌，诏：韩侂胄轻启兵端，罢平章军国事；陈自强阿附充位，罢右丞相。
现代文：十一月初二，下诏：韩青轻开兵祸，罢除平章军国事职；陈自强在位阿附，罢除右承相职。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, the following edict was issued: Han Qing made light of the military disaster and dismissed the Pingzhang Army from the state affairs post; Chen Ziqiang, who was in the position of A Zui, was dismissed from the position of the right successor.

古文：乙亥，礼部侍郎史弥远等以密旨命权主管殿前司公事夏震诛韩侂胄于玉津园。
现代文：初三，礼部侍郎史弥远等用密旨命令代理主管殿前司公事夏震在玉津园诛杀韩青。
English: On the third day of junior high school, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, Shi Yayuan, and others used a secret order to have the acting head of the palace, the former secretary of public affairs, Xia Zhen, kill Han Qing in Tamatsu Park.

古文：以钱象祖兼知枢密院事，李壁兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：任命钱象祖兼知枢密院事，李壁兼同知枢密院事。
English: Appointed Qian Xiangzu and Tongzhi Privy Councillors, Li Qibai and Tongzhi Privy Councillors.

古文：以诛韩侂胄诏天下。
现代文：以诛杀韩青诏告全国。
English: The assassination of Han Qing sent shockwaves throughout the country.

古文：丁丑，以夏震为福州观察使、主管殿前司公事，将士行赏有差。
现代文：初五，任命夏震为福州观察使、主管殿前司公事，将士奖赏不等。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Xia Zhen was appointed as the Fuzhou observation envoy, in charge of the former department of public affairs, and the rewards ranged from the highest to the lowest.

古文：夺陈自强三官、永州居住。
现代文：削夺陈自强三官，永州居住。
English: Chen Ziqiang was stripped of his three posts and resided in Yongzhou.

古文：戊寅，责授苏师旦武泰军节度副使、韶州安置；己卯，斩之。
现代文：初六，贬降苏师旦为武泰军节度副使，韶州安置。初七，斩杀陈自强。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Su Shitan was demoted to the vice-envoy of the Wu Tai Army, and was resettled in Zhangzhou. On the 7th day of the first month, Chen Ziqiang was killed.

古文：诏： 奸臣窜殛，当首开言路，以来忠谠。
现代文：下诏： 奸臣诛灭流窜，应当首先开通言路，从而招来忠诚正直之士的净言。
English: The following edict: In order to exterminate traitorous vassals, it is first necessary to open a channel of communication, and thereby invite the candid words of loyal and honest men.

古文：中外臣僚，各具所见以闻。 
现代文：中外臣僚，各自开列自己的见解奏上。 
English: Chinese and foreign ministers each set out their own views on the issue.

古文：辛巳，再夺邓友龙五官、南雄州安置，寻除名，徙循州。
现代文：初九，再次削夺邓友龙五官，南雄州安置，不久除名迁徙循州。
English: In the ninth month of the year, Deng Youlong was deprived of five officials again, resettled in Nanxiong Prefecture, and soon removed from the list and moved to Xuzhou.

古文：乙酉，置御前忠锐军。
现代文：十三日，设置御前忠义军。
English: On the 13th, the Imperial Loyalist Army was established.

古文：丙戌，以御史中丞卫泾签书枢密院事兼参知政事。
现代文：十四日，任命御史中承卫径为签书枢密院事兼参知政事。
English: On the 14th, Emperor Taizong appointed Zhongcheng Weijing as the Signing Privy Councillor and Co-premier.

古文：丁亥，诏立皇子荣王严为皇太子，更名懤。
现代文：十五日，下诏立皇子荣王赵严为皇太子，更名为涛。
English: On the 15th, the crown prince, Rongwang Zhao Yan, was enthroned as crown prince and renamed Tao.

古文：戊子，郭倪除名、梅州安置，郭僎除名，连州安置：仍籍其家。夺李壁三官、抚州居住。
现代文：十六日，郭倪被除名，梅州安置；郭撰被除名，连州安置；并且籍没其家，削夺李壁二官，抚州居住。
English: On the 16th, Guo Ni was removed from the list and resettled in Meizhou; Guo Zhan was removed from the list and resettled in Lianzhou; and he lost his home, deprived Li Bi of two officials, and lived in Fuzhou.

古文：癸巳，夺张岩二官、徽州居住。
现代文：二十一日，削夺张岩二官，徽州居住。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zhang Yan was stripped of his two posts and resided in Huizhou.

古文：己亥，以立皇太子，大赦。
现代文：二十七日，因立皇太子大赦。
English: On the 27th, the crown prince granted a general amnesty.

古文：十二月癸卯，以丘崈为江、淮制置大使。
现代文：十二月初二，任命丘击为江淮制置大使。
English: On the second day of December, he was appointed as the ambassador of Jianghuai Province.

古文：罢山东、京东招抚司。
现代文：废罢山东、京东招抚司。
English: Shandong and Jingdong Recruitment and Placement Departments abolished.

古文：以许奕为金国通问使。
现代文：任命许奕为金国通问使。
English: Appointed Xu Yi as the Chinese envoy to the DPRK.

古文：乙巳，太白昼见。
现代文：初四，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丁未，罢京西北路招抚司。
现代文：初六，废罢京西北路招抚司。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, the Beijing Northwest Road Recruitment Division was abolished.

古文：己酉，落叶适宝文阁待制。
现代文：初八，免除叶适宝文阁待制职务。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Ieshiba Bunkaku was exempted from the duty of being on standby.

古文：蠲两淮州军税一年。
现代文：免除两淮军税一年。
English: The two Huai armies were exempted from military tax for one year.

古文：庚戌，夺许及之二官、泉州居住。
现代文：初九，削夺许及之二官，泉州居住。
English: He is in his ninth year of junior high school and holds the second-highest rank after Xu Jia. He lives in Quanzhou.

古文：夺薛叔似二官、福州居住。
现代文：削夺薛叔似二官，福州居住。
English: Xue Shuxiu, who holds two government posts, lives in Fuzhou.

古文：再夺皇甫斌五官、英德府安置。
现代文：再次削夺皇甫斌五官，英德府安置。
English: Emperor Fubin's five officials were cut again, and he was resettled in Yingde Prefecture.

古文：癸丑，金人复破随州。
现代文：十二日，金人又攻破随州。
English: On the 12th, Jinren defeated Suizhou again.

古文：辛酉，以钱象祖为右丞相兼枢密使，卫泾及给事中雷孝友并参知政事，吏部尚书林大中签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十日，任命钱象祖为右承相兼枢密使，卫径和给事中雷孝友为参知政事，吏部尚书林大中为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 20th, Qian Xiangzu was appointed to the post of the Right Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Privy Envoy, Wei Jie and Lei Xiaoyu were appointed to the post of the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, and Shang Shulin, the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, was appointed to the post of the Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China.

古文：乙丑，以礼部尚书史弥远同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十四日，任命礼部尚书史弥远为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 24th, the head of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shang Shushi, appointed Ya Yuan as a member of the Tongzhi Privy Council.

古文：丙寅，赠吕祖俭朝奉郎、直秘阁，官其子一人。
现代文：二十五日，赠吕祖俭朝奉郎、直秘阁，任其子一人官职。
English: On the 25th, he bestowed Lv Zu Jian with the titles of Court Official and Privy Councillor, and appointed one of his sons to an official post.

古文：丁卯，诏改明年为嘉定元年。
现代文：二十六日，下诏改明年为嘉定元年。
English: On the 26th, the following edict changed the next year to the first year of Jiading.

古文：是岁，浙西旱蝗，沿江诸州水。
现代文：这一年，浙西早灾、蝗灾，沿江各州发生水灾。
English: In this year, the early disaster and the locust disaster occurred in western Zhejiang, and the floods occurred in the provinces along the river.

