古文：石显，孩懒水乌林荅部人。
现代文：石显，孩懒水乌林答部人。
English: Shi Xian, a member of the Ulin answering club.

古文：昭祖以条教约束诸部，石显陆梁不可制。
现代文：金昭祖用条教约束各部落，石显嚣张不受制约。
English: The founder of the Jin dynasty, Zhaozhu, used the doctrine of discipline to restrict the tribes, but Shi Xian's arrogance was not restricted.

古文：及昭祖没于逼刺纪村，部人以柩归，至孩懒水，石显与完颜部窝忽窝出邀于路，攻而夺之柩，扬言曰： 汝辈以石鲁为能而推尊之，吾今得之矣。 
现代文：当昭祖在逼刺纪村去世，部人送昭祖灵柩回归，到孩懒水的时候，石显与完颜部的窝忽窝相邀拦路，突然攻击护灵人而夺去了昭祖灵柩，并扬言说： 汝辈认为石鲁是能人而推尊他，我今天得到他了。 
English: When Zhaozhu passed away in the village of Ji after being stabbed, the members sent Zhaozhu's coffin back for him to return. When Zhaozhu came to the water, Shi Xian and Guanqian invited him to block the road. He suddenly attacked the guardian and took away Zhaozhu's coffin, and threatened him, saying, "You people think that Shi Lu is a capable person and you respect him. I got him today."

古文：昭祖之徒告于蒲马太弯，与马纪岭劾保村完颜部蒙葛巴土等募军追及之，与战，复得柩。
现代文：昭祖的门人向蒲马太弯告状，与马纪岭劾保村完颜部的蒙葛巴士等人招募军队追上了石显，并和他作战，才夺回了昭祖的灵柩。
English: The disciple of Zhaozhu complained to Puma Taiyuan, and recruited an army with Mengge Bus, who was in charge of the painting department of Ma Jiling and Bao Village, to catch up with Shi Xian and fight with him, only to win back Zhaozhu's coffin.

古文：众推景祖为诸部长，白山、耶悔、统门、耶懒、土骨论、五国皆从服。
现代文：当时众人推举乌古乃为诸部长，白山、耶悔、统门、耶懒、土骨论五国等都服从。
English: At that time, the people elected Ugunai as the ministers, and Baishan, Yecheng, Tongmen, Yelao, and the Five Kingdoms were all obedient.

古文：及辽使曷鲁林牙来索逋人，石显皆拒阻不听命，景祖攻之，不能克。
现代文：等到辽国使者曷鲁林牙来索要逃亡到石显这里的人，石显都予以拒绝阻拦不听命令，景祖带兵攻伐他，却不能取胜。
English: When the envoy of the Liao Dynasty, Jilu Lingya, came to ask for the fugitives who had fled to Shixian, Shixian refused to stop them and disobeyed the order. Jingzu led an army to fight him, but could not win.

古文：景祖自度不可以力取，遂以诡计取之。
现代文：景祖暗自思量：不能用武力攻取石显，就用谋略战胜他。
English: Jing Zu silently thought to himself: If I can't capture Shixian by force, I'll use strategy to defeat him.

古文：乃以石显阻绝海东路请于辽，辽帝使人让之曰： 汝何敢阻绝鹰路？
现代文：于是拿石显阻拦断绝海东路的事向辽国请示，辽国皇帝派人责备石显说： 你怎么敢阻绝鹰路？
English: Therefore, he took Shi Xian's blocking of the East Coastal Road to Liaoning Province for instructions. The Emperor of Liaoning Province sent someone to reproach Shi Xian and said: How dare you block the Eagle Road?

古文：审无他意，遣其酋长来。 
现代文：审查你并无别的意思，派你的酋长来一趟。 
English: I don't want to censor you. Send your chief.

古文：石显使其长子婆诸刊入朝，曰： 不敢违大国之命。 
现代文：石显则派他的长子婆诸刊到辽国入朝见君，说： 不敢违背大国的命令。 
English: Shi Xian, on the other hand, sent his eldest son and daughter-in-law to Liaoning Province to meet the emperor, saying, "Don't dare to disobey the order of a great power.

古文：辽人厚赐遣还，谓婆诸刊曰： 汝父信无他，宜身自入朝。 
现代文：辽人赐给婆诸刊丰厚的礼物让他回去，并对他说 ：你的父亲应该相信没有别的什么事，他应该亲自来朝。 
English: The Liao people gave her a rich gift to let him go back, and said to him: Your father should believe in nothing else, he should come to the DPRK in person.

古文：石显信之，明年入见于春搜，婆诸刊从。
现代文：石显相信了这些话，第二年在春搜入见辽主，婆诸刊跟随一起。
English: Shi Xian believed these words, and in the spring of the following year, he went to see Liao Zhen, and his mother followed him.

古文：辽主谓石显曰： 罪惟在汝，不在汝子。 
现代文：辽主对石显说： 罪只在你，不在你的儿子。 
English: The Lord of Liao said to Shi Xian, "The sin is only in you, not in your son.

古文：乃命婆诸刊还，而流石显于边地。
现代文：于是命令婆诸刊回去了，而把石显流放到边地。
English: So she ordered all the journals to go back, and banished Ishen to the outskirts.

古文：盖景祖以计除石显而欲抚有其子与部人也。
现代文：这是景祖施用计谋除掉石显而想安抚他的儿子和部人所做的事。
English: This was done by Jingzhu in order to appease his son and subordinates after he had plotted to get rid of Shixian.

古文：婆诸刊蓄怨未发，会活刺浑水纥石烈部腊醅、麻产起兵，婆诸刊往从之。
现代文：婆诸刊把怨恨积蓄在胸中，会合活剌浑水纥石烈部腊醅、麻产起兵，婆诸刊跟随部队行动。
English: All the newspapers stored their grudges in their chests and rallied to fight, and all the newspapers followed the troops into action.

古文：及败于暮棱水，麻产先遁去，婆诸刊与腊醅就擒，及其党与，皆献之辽主。
现代文：结果在幕棱水兵败，麻产先自逃跑而去，婆诸刊与腊醅却束手就擒，连同他们的党羽，一起被献给辽国君主。
English: As a result, the sailors were defeated at the edge of the curtain, and Asano ran away first. However, Banzhong and Lashan went to bed, and together with their followers, they were dedicated to the monarch of Liao.

古文：久之，世祖复使人言曰： 婆诸刊不还，则其部人自知罪重，因此恐惧，不肯归服。 
现代文：过了许久，世祖又差人前往辽国对辽主说： 婆诸刊不回去，他的部人自己知道罪重，因此恐惧，不肯归顺服从。 
English: After a long time, the ancestor sent someone to Liao and said to the lord of Liao, "Your vassals won't go back. His subordinates know the gravity of their sins, so they are afraid and won't submit and obey.

古文：辽主以为然，遂遣婆诸刊及前后所献罪人皆还之。
现代文：辽主以为真是这样，便差遣婆诸刊及在婆诸刊被擒前后所献来的罪人全部回归故里。
English: Believing this to be true, Lord Liao sent all the criminals who had offered sacrifices before and after the arrest of Grandmother Zhuan to return to their hometowns.

