古文：任峻字伯达，河南中牟人也。
现代文：任峻字伯达，河南郡中牟县人。
English: Ren Junzha Boda, a native of Zhongmou County, Henan County.

古文：汉末扰乱，关东皆震。
现代文：汉朝末年，天下动乱，关东地区也被震动。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, the whole country was in turmoil, and the Kanto region was also shaken.

古文：中牟令杨原愁恐，欲弃官走。
现代文：中牟县令杨原担忧惊恐，打算弃官逃走。
English: Zhongmou County made Yang Yuan worried and frightened, and he planned to resign and run away.

古文：峻说原曰： 董卓首乱，天下莫不侧目，然而未有先发者，非无其心也，势未敢耳。
现代文：任峻劝说杨原： 董卓为首犯上作乱，天下人没有不怨恨的，但还没有先呼吁讨伐他的人，不是他们没有这样的想法，而是局势让他们不敢行动。
English: Ren Jun advised Yang Yuan: There is no one in the world who does not hold a grudge against Dong Zhuo for being the first to start a riot, but those who have not yet called for a crusade against him, it is not that they do not have such an idea, but the situation has made them afraid to act.

古文：明府若能唱之，必有和者。 
现代文：您如果能发出倡议，一定会有附和的人。 
English: If you can make an initiative, there will certainly be people who agree with you.

古文：原曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：杨原说： 该怎么做呢？ 
English: Yang Yuan said: What should I do?

古文：峻曰： 今关东有十馀县，能胜兵者不减万人，若权行河南尹事，总而用之，无不济矣。 
现代文：任峻说： 现在关东地区有十几个县城，能上阵打仗的不少于一万人，如果您能暂代河南尹的职位，将这些人召集起来一起任用，没有不成功的。 
English: Ren Jun said: Now there are more than a dozen counties in the Kanto region, and no less than ten thousand people can go to war. If you can temporarily replace the position of Henan Yin and gather these people together for appointment, it will not be unsuccessful.

古文：原从其计，以峻为主簿。
现代文：杨原听从了他的计划，并让任峻担任主簿。
English: Yang Yuan obeyed his plan and let Ren Jun serve as the chief accountant.

古文：峻乃为原表行尹事，使诸县坚守，遂发兵。
现代文：任峻就为杨原上表请求行使河南尹的权力，让各县城坚守，就出兵了。
English: Ren Jun requested Yang Yuan to exercise the power of Henan Yin and let the counties and cities hold out, and sent troops.

古文：会太祖起关东，入中牟界，众不知所从，峻独与同郡张奋议，举郡以归太祖。
现代文：适逢太祖在关东起兵，大军进入中牟境内，当地百姓不知道该跟从谁，任峻单独和同郡的张奋商议，率郡中军队百姓归附太祖。
English: At the right time, Emperor Taizu raised an army in Kanto, and the large army entered the territory of Zhongmou. The local people did not know who to follow. Ren Jun alone negotiated with Zhang Fen of the same county, and led the army of the county to attach the people to Emperor Taizu.

古文：峻又别收宗族及宾客家兵数百人，愿从太祖。
现代文：任峻又另外召集数百人，都是自己族中的亲戚以及宾客和家丁，表示愿意跟随太祖。
English: Ren Jun also gathered hundreds of people, all of whom were relatives from his own tribe, as well as guests and family members, and expressed their willingness to follow the great ancestor.

古文：太祖大悦，表峻为骑都尉，妻以从妹，甚见亲信。
现代文：太祖很高兴，上表任命杨峻为骑都尉，并将自己的堂妹嫁给他，对他非常信任。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy, the upper table appointed Yang Jun as a cavalry captain, and married his cousin to him, and trusted him very much.

古文：太祖每征伐，峻常居守以给军。
现代文：太祖每次出军讨伐，任峻经常留守后方掌管部队的供应。
English: Every time Taizu went on a crusade, Renjun often stayed behind to supervise the supply of troops.

古文：是时岁饥旱，军食不足，羽林监颍川枣祗建置屯田，太祖以峻为典农中郎将，募百姓屯田於许下，得谷百万斛，郡国列置田官，数年中所在积粟，仓廪皆满。
现代文：这是后出现灾荒饥饿，军粮不够，朝廷羽林监颍川人枣祗设立屯田，太祖任命任峻为典农中郎将，招募百姓到许下帮助屯田，得到上百万斛谷物，各郡国都设置屯田官，几年间有屯田的地方储备的粮食都堆满了仓库。
English: This was followed by famine, famine, and shortage of grain for the army. The imperial forest warden, Chuchuanren Zaozhuang, set up the cantonments. The great-grandfather appointed Ren Jun as the cantonment farmer, recruited the people to help the cantonments, and obtained more than one million bushels of grain. Each county and state set up cantonment officials. For several years, the grain reserves of the cantonments were piled up in warehouses.

古文：官渡之战，太祖使峻典军器粮运。
现代文：官渡之战中，太祖派任峻主管军用器械和粮食的运输。
English: During the Battle of Guandu, Emperor Taizu assigned Renjun to be in charge of the transportation of military equipment and grain.

古文：贼数寇钞绝粮道，乃使千乘为一部，十道方行，为复陈以营卫之，贼不敢近。
现代文：敌军多次前来劫掠，还断绝运输粮食的道路，任峻就分一千辆粮车为一部，形成十路方正的队伍，又形成方阵守卫粮食，敌军不敢靠近。
English: The enemy army repeatedly came to loot and plunder, and also cut off the road for transporting grain. Ren Jun divided a thousand grain trucks into one part, forming a ten-way square team, and formed a square array to guard grain. The enemy army did not dare to approach.

古文：军国之饶，起於枣祗而成於峻。
现代文：军队国库粮食充足，刚开始依靠枣祗的屯田，最后是依靠任峻成功。
English: The army's treasury was well-stocked with grain. At first, they relied on the jujube harvest from the military cantonments, but eventually they were able to rely on Renjun for success.

古文：太祖以峻功高，乃表封为都亭侯，邑三百户，迁长水校尉。
现代文：太祖因为任峻功劳卓著，就上表请封他为都亭侯，食邑三百户，调任长水校尉。
English: The great-grandfather, because of Ren's outstanding achievements, asked the upper table to appoint him as the governor of the capital, 300 households in the food village, and transferred to the Changshui school captain.

古文：峻宽厚有度而见事理，每有所陈，太祖多善之。
现代文：任峻宽容厚道进退有度，明辨事理，每次有所陈述，太祖大多都赞同。
English: Renjun tolerance and benevolence have a degree of advancement and retreat, clearly distinguish matters, each time there is a statement, most of the ancestors agree.

古文：於饥荒之际，收恤朋友孤遗，中外贫宗，周急继乏，信义见称。
现代文：在饥荒时，他收养抚恤朋友的孤子遗孀，族中那些贫困的族人，他都会救济帮助有急难和贫乏的人，以信用义气为人称道。
English: In times of famine, he took in the orphans and widows of his friends who were on welfare. For those poor members of his tribe, he would provide relief and help those in dire straits and poverty. He was praised for his trustworthiness and loyalty.

古文：建安九年薨，太祖流涕者久之。
现代文：任峻在建安九年去世，太祖为此流泪了很久。
English: Ren Jun died in the ninth year of Jianan, and the great-grandfather shed tears for a long time.

古文：子先嗣。
现代文：任峻的儿子任先承袭爵位。
English: Renjun's son Renjun succeeded to the peerage first.

古文：先薨，无子，国除。
现代文：任先去世，他没有儿子，爵位就断绝了。
English: Ren died first, he had no son, and the peerage was cut off.

古文：文帝追录功臣，谥峻曰成侯。
现代文：文帝追记叙述功臣，封任峻的谥号为成侯。
English: Emperor Wen recorded and described the meritorious vassals, and the posthumous name of Emperor Renjun was Chenghou.

古文：复以峻中子览为关内侯。
现代文：又封任峻的第二个儿子任览为关内侯。
English: Renjun's second son, Renxiang, was also named Guanai marquis.

古文：苏则字文师，扶风武功人也。
现代文：苏则字文师，扶风郡武功县人。
English: Su Ze Zi, a writer of Chinese characters, from Wugong County, Fufeng County.

古文：少以学行闻，举孝廉茂才，辟公府，皆不就。
现代文：年少时就因为学问德行为人所知，被推举为孝廉茂才，又被朝廷征召，都没有赴任。
English: At a young age, he was known for his scholarly and moral conduct, was elected as a filial piety, and was called up by the imperial court, but did not take up the post.

古文：起家为酒泉太守，转安定、武都，所在有威名。
现代文：后来从家中担任酒泉太守，转任安定太守、武都太守，所治理的地方都有威望名声。
English: Later, he served as Jiuquan Taishu from home, and was transferred to the post of Stable Taishu and Wudu Taishu. The places he governed had prestige and fame.

古文：太祖征张鲁，过其郡，见则悦之，使为军导。
现代文：太祖征讨张鲁，经过苏则所在的郡，看到苏则很是高兴，让他担任军中向导。
English: After passing through the county where Su Ze was, he was very happy to see Su Ze, and let him serve as a guide in the army.

古文：鲁破，则绥定下辩诸氐，通河西道，徙为金城太守。
现代文：张鲁被攻破，苏则安抚平定住在下辩一带的各氐族部落，联通了河西地区的通道，被调任为金城太守。
English: Zhang Lu was defeated, Su pacified the various Yi tribes living in the area of Xie Ye, connected the channels in the west of the river, and was appointed as the governor of Jincheng.

古文：是时丧乱之后，吏民流散饥穷，户口损耗，则抚循之甚谨。
现代文：这是是战乱之后，官吏百姓都流离漂泊，饥饿困顿，人口数量下降，苏则安抚他们很是慎重。
English: This was after the turmoil of war, when officials and people were all wandering around, starving, and the population was declining. The Soviet Union was very careful to appease them.

古文：外招怀羌胡，得其牛羊，以养贫老。
现代文：对外招揽安抚羌人、氐人等部落，得到他们的牛羊，用来救济抚养贫穷的老人。
English: We will solicit foreign countries to appease the Shan and Shan people and other tribes, obtain their cattle and sheep, and use them to provide relief and support for the poor elderly.

古文：与民分粮而食，旬月之间，流民皆归，得数千家。
现代文：他和百姓平分粮食，一个月之内，流亡的百姓都回来了，增加了数千户人口。
English: He shared the grain equally with the people, and within a month, the exiled people all returned, increasing the population by thousands of households.

古文：乃明为禁令，有干犯者辄戮，其从教者必赏。
现代文：苏则还明确颁布禁令，有违犯的人死罪，那些听从教化的一定给予赏赐。
English: The Soviet Union also clearly issued a ban, with death penalty for violators, and those who obeyed the indoctrination must be rewarded.

古文：亲自教民耕种，其岁大丰收，由是归附者日多。
现代文：他还亲自教导百姓耕种，那一年粮食获得大丰收，因此前来依附的人越来越多。
English: He also personally taught the people how to farm, and that year the grain harvest was bountiful, so more and more people came to follow him.

古文：李越以陇西反，则率羌胡围越，越即请服。
现代文：李越依靠陇西反叛，苏则率领羌人、胡人包围了李越，李越立即请求归附。
English: Li Yue relied on the Shaanxi rebels, while the Soviet Union, led by the Xiongren and Hu people, surrounded Li Yue. Li Yue immediately requested annexation.

古文：太祖崩，西平麹演叛，称护羌校尉。
现代文：太祖驾崩后，西平郡的麴演反叛，称自己为护羌校尉。
English: After the death of his great-grandfather, Xiping County's Zou Ying rebelled, calling himself the captain of Zou Ying.

古文：则勒兵讨之。
现代文：苏则率兵征讨。
English: Su Ze led the conscription of soldiers.

古文：演恐，乞降。
现代文：麴演恐惧，请求投降。
English: Act scared, plead for surrender.

古文：文帝以其功，加则护羌校尉，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：文帝因为苏则的功劳，加封苏则为护羌校尉，赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: Because of Su Ze's merits, Emperor Wen conferred the title of Guan Nei Hou (Lord of Guan Nei) on Su Ze as well as the title of Guan Ye lieutenant.

古文：后演复结旁郡为乱，张掖张进执太守杜通，酒泉黄华不受太守辛机，进、华皆自称太守以应之。
现代文：后来麴演又勾结周围的州郡作乱，张掖的张进将太守杜通抓起来，酒泉的黄华不接受太守辛机的管理，张进、黄华都自称太守响应麴演。
English: Later, the performance colluded with the surrounding prefectures and counties to create turmoil. Zhang Jin of Zhangye arrested the eunuch Dutong, and Huanghua of Jiuquan did not accept the management of the eunuch. Zhang Jin and Huanghua both claimed to be the eunuch in response to the performance.

古文：又武威三种胡并寇钞，道路断绝。
现代文：又有武威郡的三类胡人一起加入劫掠，断绝了河西走廊的通道。
English: In addition, Wuwei County's three types of Hu people joined the looting and cut off the access to the Hexi Corridor.

古文：武威太守毌丘兴告急於则。
现代文：武威郡的太守毌丘兴向祖泽报告紧急情况。
English: The governor of Wuwei County, Gongqiu Xing, reported the emergency to Zuze.

古文：时雍、凉诸豪皆驱略羌胡以从进等，郡人咸以为进不可当。
现代文：当时雍州、凉州那些豪强都驱逐劫掠羌人、胡人以跟随张进等人，郡中百姓都认为张进不可抵挡。
English: At that time, those powerful people in Yongzhou and Liangzhou drove out the marauding Qiang people and Hu people to follow Zhang Jin, and the people in the county all thought that Zhang Jin was irresistible.

古文：又将军郝昭、魏平先是各屯守金城，亦受诏不得西度。
现代文：将军郝昭、魏平先前各自在金城驻军，也收到诏令不许往西前进。
English: Generals Zou Zhao and Wei Ping had previously garrisoned their troops in Jincheng, and had also received an imperial edict not to advance westward.

古文：则乃见郡中大吏及昭等与羌豪帅谋曰： 今贼虽盛，然皆新合，或有胁从，未必同心；因衅击之，善恶必离，离而归我，我增而彼损矣。
现代文：苏则就去拜见郡里大吏和郝昭等人，和羌人首领计划说： 现在贼人虽然气势正盛，但他们都是刚聚合起来，有的是被胁迫才跟随他们，不一定是齐心协力；利用他们的矛盾攻击他们，好的和坏的人就会离间了，我军的兵力增加，敌方的兵力就减少了。
English: Su then went to see the county magistrate and Zou Zhao and others, and planned to say to the leaders of the Xiang people: Although the bandits are now in full swing, they have just gathered together, and some were forced to follow them, not necessarily working together; using their contradictions to attack them, good and bad people will be separated, our army's strength will increase, and the enemy's strength will decrease.

古文：既获益众之实，且有倍气之势，率以进讨，破之必矣。
现代文：既能得到增加实力的好处，更能加倍增加气势，再率军征讨，一定能攻破他们。
English: Not only can we get the benefit of increasing strength, but we can also double the momentum and lead the army to conquer, and we will certainly be able to break them.

古文：若待大军，旷日持久，善人无归，必合於恶，善恶既合，势难卒离。
现代文：如果等待大军，持续时间很久，好的人没有地方归附，一定会跟恶人联合，好的坏的联合起来，一定很难突然间分离了。
English: If you wait for a large army for a long time, and the good people have no place to attach, they will definitely unite with the wicked, and the good and the bad will unite, and it will be difficult to suddenly separate.

古文：虽有诏命，违而合权，专之可也。 
现代文：虽然有朝廷诏令，但违背它而选择随机应变，我们自己做主也是可以的。 
English: Although there is a royal edict, it is also possible for us to make our own decisions by violating it and choosing random contingencies.

古文：於是昭等从之，乃发兵救武威，降其三种胡，与兴击进於张掖。
现代文：于是赫昭等人听从了他的话，就出兵援救武威郡，降服了其中的三类胡人，苏则和毋丘兴在张掖进攻张进。
English: As a result, He Zhao and others listened to his words, and sent troops to rescue Wuwei County, and subdued three types of Hu people, Su Zetian and Beyo Qiu Xing in Zhangye to attack Zhangjin.

古文：演闻之，将步骑三千迎则，辞来助军，而实欲为变。
现代文：麴演得知消息，率领三千步兵、骑兵迎接苏则，表面上说是来帮助军队，实际上是想要发动战乱。
English: When he learned the news, he led three thousand infantry and cavalry to meet the Soviets, ostensibly to help the army, but in fact he wanted to start a war.

古文：则诱与相见，因斩之，出以徇军，其党皆散走。
现代文：苏则引诱他前来相见，趁机将他斩杀了，并将尸首示众，他的党羽有溃散逃走。
English: Su, on the other hand, lured him to meet him, took the opportunity to kill him, and displayed his corpse to the public. His followers scattered and fled.

古文：则遂与诸军围张掖，破之，斩进及其支党，众皆降。
现代文：苏则就和各路人马围攻张掖，顺利攻破，将张进和他的党羽都斩杀了，剩下的人都投降。
English: Su then besieged Zhang Ye with all kinds of people and horses, successfully broke through, killed Zhang Jin and his followers, and the rest of the people surrendered.

古文：演军败，华惧，出所执乞降，河西平。
现代文：麴演兵败，黄华惊恐，交出了他所抓捕的人请求投降，河西地区被平定。
English: Huang Hua panicked and surrendered his captives, asking them to surrender. The Hexi region was pacified.

古文：乃还金城。
现代文：苏则才返回金城。
English: Su then returned to Jincheng.

古文：进封都亭侯，邑三百户。
现代文：被进封爵位为都亭侯，食邑三百户。
English: He was raised to the peerage as the Lord of Doting, with 300 households in Shokui.

古文：徵拜侍中，与董昭同寮。
现代文：曹婷征召苏则，任命他为侍中，和董昭同朝为官。
English: Cao Ting conscripted Su Ze, appointed him as an attendant, and made him an official of the same rank as Dong Zhao.

古文：昭尝枕则膝卧，则推下之，曰： 苏则之膝，非佞人之枕也。 
现代文：董昭曾经枕着苏则的膝盖睡觉，苏则将他退下来，说： 我的膝盖，不是奸邪小人的枕头。 
English: Dong Zhao used to sleep with Su Zexu's knee as a pillow. Su Zexu pulled him down and said, "My knee is not a pillow for a villain."

古文：初，则及临菑侯植闻魏氏代汉，皆发服悲哭，文帝闻植如此，而不闻则也。
现代文：当初，苏则和临菑侯曹植得知魏氏取代了汉朝，都穿上丧服悲痛哭泣，文帝得知曹植这样做，但没有知道苏则也是这样。
English: At first, when Su Zetian and Cao Zhi, the prince of Linyi, learned that the Wei Dynasty had replaced the Han Dynasty, they both put on mourning clothes and wept with grief. Emperor Wen learned that Cao Zetian had done so, but he did not know that Su Zetian had also done so.

古文：帝在洛阳，尝从容言曰： 吾应天而禅，而闻有哭者，何也？ 
现代文：文帝在洛阳，曾经平静地问到： 我承受天命接受禅让，却听说有人为汉朝哭泣，为什么呢？ 
English: In Luoyang, Emperor Wen once calmly asked: I have received the heavenly mandate to accept Zen Buddhism, but I have heard that some people are crying for the Han Dynasty. Why?

古文：则谓为见问，须髯悉张，欲正论以对。
现代文：苏则以为是质问他，胡须都竖起来了，正想要义正言辞地回答。
English: Su thought he was questioning him, his whiskers were standing up, and he was about to give a righteous answer.

古文：侍中傅巽掐则曰： 不谓卿也。 
现代文：侍中傅巽掐着苏则说： 不是在说您。 
English: The head waiter Fu waved his hand at Su and said, "I'm not talking about you.

古文：於是乃止。
现代文：于是苏则才没有说话。
English: So Su didn't say anything.

古文：文帝问则曰： 前破酒泉、张掖，西域通使，敦煌献径寸大珠，可复求市益得不？ 
现代文：文帝问苏则说： 之前攻破酒泉、张掖，和西域地区互通使者，敦煌郡进献直径有一寸的大珠，还能再从市场上买到吗？ 
English: Emperor Wen asked Emperor Su, "Before conquering Jiuquan, Zhangye, and the envoys of the Western Regions, Dunhuang County donated a large bead with a diameter of one inch. Can I still buy it from the market?

古文：则对曰： 若陛下化洽中国，德流沙漠，即不求自至；求而得之，不足贵也。 
现代文：苏则回答说： 如果陛下能使教化普及中原地区，德行能推广到沙漠地区，那这样的珍宝不用求取也会自己前来的；求取才能获得的，是不够珍贵的。 
English: Su replied, "If Your Majesty can spread enlightenment to the Central Plains and virtue to the deserts, then such a treasure will come without seeking; it is not precious enough to be obtained by seeking.

古文：帝默然。
现代文：文帝沉默没有说话。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：后则从行猎，槎桎拔，失鹿，帝大怒，踞胡床拔刀，悉收督吏，将斩之。
现代文：后来苏则跟随文帝外出狩猎，关猎物的牢笼不够牢固，打到的鹿逃走了，文帝大怒，踩着胡床将佩刀拔出来，将有关的督察官员都收押起来，要斩了他们。
English: Later, Su went out hunting with Emperor Wen. The cage used to keep the game was not strong enough, and the deer he hit ran away. Emperor Wen was furious, and pulled out his sword while stepping on his beard. He locked up all the inspectors and officials involved and wanted to behead them.

古文：则稽首曰： 臣闻古之圣王不以禽兽害人，今陛下方隆唐尧之化，而以猎戏多杀群吏，愚臣以为不可。
现代文：苏则磕头说： 臣听说古代圣明的君王不会因为禽兽而伤害人，现在陛下您刚施行唐尧的教化，却因为打猎的事情要杀害这么多官吏，愚臣认为这应不可行。
English: Su Zexu said, "Courtier, I have heard that the kings of the ancient Ming Dynasty would not harm people because of animals. Now, Your Majesty, you have just carried out the enlightenment of Don Juan, but you want to kill so many officials because of hunting. Foolish courtier thinks that this should not be feasible.

古文：敢以死请！ 
现代文：我以死相请！ 
English: I'll fight to the death!

古文：帝曰： 卿，直臣也。 
现代文：文帝说： 您，是正直的大臣。 
English: Wen Di said: You are an honest minister.

古文：遂皆赦之。
现代文：就将官员们都赦免了。
English: He pardoned all the officials.

古文：然以此见惮。
现代文：但苏则也因此被文帝忌惮。
English: But the Soviet Union was also shunned by Emperor Wen.

古文：黄初四年，左迁东平相。
现代文：黄初四年，苏则被降职为东平相。
English: In the fourth year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Su was demoted to the post of Dongping minister.

古文：未至，道病薨，谥曰刚侯。
现代文：他还没有到任，在途中就病死了，谥号为刚侯。
English: He had not yet arrived at his post, but died of illness on the way. His nickname was Goh.

古文：子怡嗣。
现代文：他的儿子苏怡承袭爵位。
English: His son Su Yi inherited the title.

古文：怡薨，无子，弟愉袭封。
现代文：苏怡去世，没有儿子，就由苏则的弟弟苏愉承袭封号。
English: When Su Yi died without a son, Su Zetian's younger brother Su Yu inherited the title.

古文：愉，咸熙中为尚书。
现代文：苏愉，咸熙年间曾担任尚书。
English: Su Yu, who served as Shang Shu during the reign of Emperor Han.

古文：杜畿字伯侯，京兆杜陵人也。
现代文：杜畿字伯侯，京兆杜陵县人。
English: Duke of Dugi, a native of Beijing-Shanghai-Duling County.

古文：少孤，继母苦之，以孝闻。
现代文：年幼时就成了孤儿，他的继母对待他很不好，按他却因为孝顺出名。
English: Orphaned at a young age and treated badly by his stepmother, he was known for his filial piety.

古文：年二十，为郡功曹，守郑县令。
现代文：二十岁的时候，成为郡中的功曹，又尝试做郑县县令。
English: When he was 20 years old, he became a meritorious person in the county and tried to be the county magistrate of Zheng County.

古文：县囚系数百人，畿亲临狱，裁其轻重，尽决遣之，虽未悉当，郡中奇其年少而有大意也。
现代文：县中收押的几百人，杜畿亲自到监狱中，给犯人裁定罪名的轻重，尽快判决执行，虽然不是全部适宜得当，但郡中人也对他年少却有才干感到惊奇。
English: Of the hundreds of people detained in the county, Dugui personally went to the prison, adjudicated the severity of the crime to the prisoner, and executed the sentence as soon as possible. Although not all of them were appropriate, the people in the county were also surprised at his young age but talented.

古文：举孝廉，除汉中府丞。
现代文：他被推举为孝廉，担任汉中府丞。
English: He was elected as a filial son, and served as the Vice-governor of Hanzhong.

古文：会天下乱，遂弃官客荆州，建安中乃还。
现代文：适逢天下动乱，杜畿就弃官客居荆州，建安中年才回来。
English: When the world was in turmoil, Dugui resigned from his post and lived as a guest in Jingzhou. Jianan did not return until he was middle-aged.

古文：荀彧进之太祖，太祖以畿为司空司直，迁护羌校尉，使持节，领西平太守。
现代文：荀彧向太祖举荐他，太祖任命他为司空司直，又提升为护羌校尉，持符节兼任西平太守。
English: Yao recommended him to the great-grandfather, who appointed him as the deputy of Kuo Sizhi, and promoted him to the lieutenant of the guard of Yao, and concurrently held the position of the governor of Xiping.

古文：太祖既定河北，而高幹举并州反。
现代文：太祖平定了河北，但高幹却依据并州造反。
English: Taizu pacified Hebei, but Gao Jian rebelled on the basis of annexation.

古文：时河东太守王邑被徵，河东人卫固、范先外以请邑为名，而内实与幹通谋。
现代文：当时河东太守王邑被朝廷征召，河东人卫固、范先对外以请求封地为名，但实际上和高幹勾结密谋。
English: At that time, Wangyi, the governor-general of Hedong, was summoned by the imperial court. The people of Hedong, Weigu and Fanxian, claimed to be requesting fiefdoms, but in fact they were colluding and plotting with high-ranking officials.

古文：太祖谓荀彧曰： 关西诸将，恃险与马，征必为乱。
现代文：太祖对荀彧说： 关西那些将领倚仗险要的地势和骑兵，征讨他们一定会作乱。
English: The great-grandfather said to the egret: Those generals in Kansai rely on the precarious situation of the battle and the cavalry, and they will certainly make a disturbance.

古文：张晟寇殽、渑间，南通刘表，固等因之，吾恐其为害深。
现代文：张晟侵扰崤山、淮水之间的地区，往南联通刘表，卫固等人效法他，我担心他们的危害会更严重。
English: Zhang Qian will invade the area between Lushan and Huai Shui, and Liu Biao, Weigu and others will follow him to the south. I am worried that their harm will be more serious.

古文：河东被山带河，四邻多变，当今天下之要地也。
现代文：河东地区依山傍水，周围的郡县进场发生变故，是现在天下的重要地区。
English: The Hedong area, with its mountains and rivers, and the changes in the surrounding counties, is now an important area in the world.

古文：君为我举萧何、寇恂以镇之。 
现代文：希望您为我举荐像萧何、寇恂那样的人来镇压叛贼。 
English: I hope you can recommend someone like Xiao He and Kou Ye to suppress the traitors.

古文：彧曰： 杜畿其人也。 
现代文：荀彧说： 杜畿就是这样的人。 
English: Zou said, "Dougi is such a person.

古文：於是追拜畿为河东太守。
现代文：于是太祖追加任命杜畿为和动态手。
English: As a result, the great-great-grandfather additionally appointed Dugi to be a peace activist.

古文：固等使兵数千人绝陕津，畿至不得渡。
现代文：卫固等人派数千兵马阻断了前往黄河渡口的路，杜畿等人到了渡口但无法渡河。
English: Weigu and others sent thousands of soldiers and horses to block the road to the Yellow River ferry, and Dugui and others arrived at the ferry but were unable to cross the river.

古文：太祖遣夏侯惇讨之，未至。
现代文：太祖派夏侯惇征讨卫固，但还没有到。
English: The great-grandfather sent Xia Houxuan to fight against Wei Gu, but he has not arrived yet.

古文：或谓畿曰： 宜须大兵。 
现代文：有人对杜畿说： 应该要大批军队。 
English: Someone said to Dugui: A large number of troops should be raised.

古文：畿曰： 河东有三万户，非皆欲为乱也。
现代文：杜畿说： 河东地区有三万户人口，不是都想作乱的。
English: Dugui said: "Hadong has a population of 30,000 households, and not all of them want to make trouble.

古文：今兵迫之急，欲为善者无主，必惧而听於固。
现代文：现在如果以军队压迫他们，那些想要向善的没有主君，一定会因为恐惧而听从卫固。
English: Now, if the army oppresses them, those who want to do good will have no master, and they will certainly obey Weigu out of fear.

古文：固等势专，必以死战。
现代文：卫固等人势力壮大，一定会合我们决一死战。
English: If the forces of Weigu and others grow stronger, they will definitely join us to fight to the death.

古文：讨之不胜，四邻应之，天下之变未息也；讨之而胜，是残一郡之民也。
现代文：征讨他们无法取得胜利，周围的郡县响应他们，那天下的动乱就不会停息了；讨伐他们如果取得胜利，那也是残害了一郡的百姓。
English: If they are defeated, the surrounding counties will respond to them, and the turmoil of the day will not stop; if they are defeated, it will also destroy the people of a county.

古文：且固等未显绝王命，外以请故君为名，必不害新君。
现代文：况且卫固等人没有显示出一定要抗拒朝廷诏令，对外是以延请原来的太守为名，一定不会伤害新太守。
English: Moreover, Weigu and others did not show that they must resist the imperial edict. To the outside world, it was in the name of delaying the original Taishou, and it would not hurt the new Taishou.

古文：吾单车直往，出其不意。固为人多计而无断，必伪受吾。
现代文：我趁他们没有防备的时候只身前往。卫固这个人计谋多变但不果断，一定会假装接受我。
English: I took advantage of their unpreparedness to go alone. Weigu, a man of changeable but indecisive tactics, would pretend to accept me.

古文：吾得居郡一月，以计縻之，足矣。 遂诡道从郖津度。
现代文：我在那里居住一个月，用计谋困住他，也足够了。 于是他从隐秘的小路到郖地渡口渡过黄河。
English: I lived there for a month, and it was enough to trap him with tricks, so he crossed the Yellow River from a secret path to the Loudi Ferry.

古文：范先欲杀畿以威众。
现代文：范先想要将杜畿杀了以威慑众人。
English: Fan Xian wanted to kill Dugi as a deterrent.

古文：且观畿去就，於门下斩杀主簿已下三十馀人，畿举动自若。
现代文：想先观察杜畿的去留动向，就在门前斩杀了三十多个主簿以下的吏役，杜畿的言行举止都泰然自若。
English: If you want to observe Dugi's movement, you should first kill more than thirty officials below the rank of chief clerk in front of the door. Dugi's words and deeds are calm and self-possessed.

古文：於是固曰： 杀之无损，徒有恶名；且制之在我。 
现代文：于是卫固说： 杀了他没有损失什么，只是给我们带来恶名；况且控制他的权力在我这里。 
English: So Weigu said, "We have lost nothing by killing him, but we have gained a bad name; moreover, I have the power to control him."

古文：遂奉之。
现代文：于是就承认他为太守。
English: So he recognized him as the governor-general.

古文：畿谓卫固、范先曰： 卫、范，河东之望也，吾仰成而已。
现代文：杜畿对卫固、范先说： 卫固、范先，两位是河东地区的希望，我只是仰赖你们的成就而已。
English: Dugui said to Weigu and Fan Xian: Weigu and Fan Xian are the hope of the Hedong region, I just rely on your achievements.

古文：然君臣有定义，成败同之，大事当共平议。 
现代文：但君臣之间的分际有规定，事情的成败也是一样，遇到大事我们应该一同商议。 
English: However, there are rules for the division of power between monarchs and ministers, and the same applies to the success or failure of a matter. In the event of a major event, we should discuss it together.

古文：以固为都督，行丞事，领功曹；将校吏兵三千馀人，皆范先督之。
现代文：就让卫固担任嘟嘟，行使郡丞的权利，兼任功曹；郡中的三千多将领吏役士兵，都由范先统率。
English: He asked Weigu to serve as magistrate, exercise the rights of county magistrate, and also serve as meritorious sergeant; more than three thousand generals and soldiers in the county were all led by Fan Xian.

古文：固等喜，虽阳事畿，不以为意。
现代文：卫固等很高兴，虽然假装侍奉杜畿，实际上没有将他放在心上。
English: Weigu and the others were very happy. Although they pretended to serve Dugui, they didn't really care about him.

古文：固欲大发兵，畿患之，说固曰： 夫欲为非常之事，不可动众心。
现代文：卫固想要触动大批军队，杜畿很忧虑，劝说卫固： 想要成就非凡的事业，就不能动摇众人的想法。
English: Weigu wanted to touch a large number of troops, Dugui was very worried, and persuaded Weigu: If you want to achieve extraordinary things, you can't shake people's thoughts.

古文：今大发兵，众必扰，不如徐以赀募兵。 
现代文：现在大举出兵，众人一定受到困扰，不如慢慢用钱招募士兵。 
English: It is better to use the money to recruit soldiers slowly, because if we send out soldiers en masse now, everyone will be troubled.

古文：固以为然，从之，遂为赀调发，数十日乃定，诸将贪多应募而少遣兵。
现代文：卫固认为很正确，听从了他的话，就用钱财来征调士兵，几十天之后才确定，众位将领都贪图钱财所以只招募了很少的士兵。
English: Weiguo thought it was very correct. He listened to his words and used money and resources to recruit soldiers. It took dozens of days before it was determined that all the generals were greedy for money, so only a few soldiers were recruited.

古文：又入喻固等曰： 人情顾家，诸将掾吏，可分遣休息，急缓召之不难。 
现代文：杜畿又去告诉卫固等人说： 人的想法，都是顾念家庭的，将领和掾吏们，可以分别让他们休息，情况紧急的时候在召他们回来也不难。 
English: Dugui also went to tell Weigu and others that: People's thoughts are all family-oriented. Generals and officials can be allowed to rest separately, and it is not difficult to call them back in an emergency.

古文：固等恶逆众心，又从之。
现代文：卫固等担心违背了众人的想法，又听从了杜畿的话。
English: Wei Gu and others were worried that they had gone against the will of the people and followed Dugui's words.

古文：於是善人在外，阴为己援；恶人分散，各还其家，则众离矣。
现代文：于是，好的人留在外面，暗中做为杜畿的援助；坏人分开各自回家，他们的队伍就分离了。
English: As a result, the good people stayed outside, secretly helping Duggi; the bad people went home separately, and their teams were separated.

古文：会白骑攻东垣，高幹入濩泽，上党诸县杀长吏，弘农执郡守，固等密调兵未至。
现代文：适逢张白骑进攻东垣，高幹的军队进入濩泽，上党郡各县将郡中长吏杀了，弘农郡将郡守抓捕起来，卫固等人暗中调动的部队还没有到。
English: When Zhang Baiji attacked Donggaki, high-ranking troops entered Heze. The counties of Shangdang County killed the county middle-level officials, Hongnong County arrested the county guards, and the troops secretly mobilized by Weigu and others had not yet arrived.

古文：畿知诸县附己，因出，单将数十骑，赴张辟拒守，吏民多举城助畿者，比数十日，得四千馀人。
现代文：杜畿知道各县都跟从自己，就出来单独率领几十名骑兵奔赴张城坚守，城中官吏百姓大多全力帮助杜畿，几十天之后，召集了四千多人。
English: Knowing that all counties would follow him, Dugui went out alone to lead dozens of cavalrymen to Zhangcheng to hold out. Most of the officials and people in the city did their best to help Dugui. After dozens of days, more than 4,000 people were gathered.

古文：固等与幹、晟共攻畿，不下，略诸县，无所得。
现代文：卫固等人和高幹、张晟共同攻打杜畿所在的张城，没有成功，就劫掠周围各县，但没有得到什么。
English: Weigu and others, together with Gao Gan and Zhang Ye, attacked Zhangcheng, where Dugi was located. They were not successful, so they plundered the surrounding counties, but nothing was gained.

古文：会大兵至，幹、晟败，固等伏诛，其馀党与皆赦之，使复其居业。
现代文：侍奉朝廷大军来到，高幹、张晟等人战败，卫固等人被诛杀，他的党羽都被赦免，让他们恢复从前的居住产业。
English: The imperial army came, Gao Gan, Zhang Ye and others were defeated, Weigu and others were killed, and his followers were pardoned, allowing them to restore their former residential properties.

古文：是时天下郡县皆残破，河东最先定，少耗减。
现代文：当时天下的郡县都残败破旧，河东郡最先平定，耗费也少。
English: At that time, all counties in the world were devastated and dilapidated. Hedong County was the first to be pacified, and the expenditure was also small.

古文：畿治之，崇宽惠，与民无为。
现代文：杜畿治理河东郡，崇尚宽厚恩惠，不动用百姓。
English: Dugui governed Hedong County, advocating leniency and benevolence, and did not use ordinary people.

古文：民尝辞讼，有相告者，畿亲见为陈大义，遣令归谛思之，若意有所不尽，更来诣府。
现代文：曾有百姓上诉，互相争讼，杜畿亲自面见他们，为他们陈述大义，让他们回家好好考虑，如果还有需要说的，再到府衙来找他。
English: There were people who appealed and litigated against each other. Dugui met with them in person and made a case for them. He told them to go home and think about it, and if there was anything else they needed to say, they should come to him in Fuchu.

古文：乡邑父老自相责怒曰： 有君如此，奈何不从其教？ 自是少有辞讼。
现代文：郡中的父老乡亲都各自职责自己那一方的人说： 有这样的太守，为什么不听从他的教诲？ 从此就很少有官司诉讼了。
English: The parents and fellow villagers in the county all have their own responsibilities, and people on their own side say: With such a governor, why not listen to his teachings? Since then, there have been few lawsuits.

古文：班下属县，举孝子、贞妇、顺孙，复其繇役，随时慰勉之。
现代文：河东郡下属的县邑，推举孝子、从一而终的妇女、孝顺孙子，杜畿免除这一家的徭役，并时不时对他们进行慰问勉励。
English: In the counties and towns under Hedong County, the filial sons, the devoted wives, and the dutiful grandsons were selected. Du Gui exempted this family from the corvee, and from time to time gave them condolences and encouragement.

古文：渐课民畜牸牛、草马，下逮鸡豚犬豕，皆有章程。
现代文：杜畿还慢慢勉励百姓蓄养牛和牝马，还有鸡、猪、狗，都有明确的规定。
English: Dugui is also slowly encouraging people to raise cattle and horses, as well as chickens, pigs, and dogs, all of which have clear regulations.

古文：百姓勤农，家家丰实。
现代文：百姓勤于农事，每一家都丰裕殷实。
English: The people are diligent in farming, and every family is rich and prosperous.

古文：畿乃曰： 民富矣，不可不教也。 
现代文：杜畿就说： 百姓富裕起来了，不能不教化他们。 
English: Dugui said: The people have become rich, we must educate them.

古文：於是冬月修戎讲武，又开学宫，亲自执经教授，郡中化之。
现代文：于是在冬天演习战事，讲解武事，又开办学宫，亲自讲授儒家经典，郡中渐渐受到教化。
English: So in the winter, they practiced warfare, explained martial arts, opened a school palace, and personally taught Confucian classics, and the county was gradually enlightened.

古文：韩遂、马超之叛也，弘农、冯翊多举县邑以应之。
现代文：韩遂、马超叛变的时候，弘农郡、冯翊郡的县邑大多都响应他们。
English: When Han Sui and Ma Chao mutinied, most of the counties and towns in Hongnong County and Fengyao County responded to them.

古文：河东虽与贼接，民无异心。
现代文：河东郡虽然和贼军相连，但百姓都没有二心。
English: Although Hedong County is connected to the Kleptocracy, the people have no second thoughts.

古文：太祖西征至蒲阪，与贼夹渭为军，军食一仰河东。
现代文：太祖西征到蒲阪，和敌军隔着渭水驻扎，军粮供应都仰赖河东郡。
English: Taizu West was conscripted to Busan, and stationed across Surabaya from the enemy army. The supply of military grain depended on Hedong County.

古文：及贼破，馀畜二十馀万斛。
现代文：等到贼军被攻破，储备的粮食还剩二十多万斛。
English: By the time the bandits were defeated, there were more than 200,000 cormorants left in the grain reserve.

古文：太祖下令曰： 河东太守杜畿，孔子所谓 禹，吾无间然矣 。
现代文：太祖下令说： 河东太守杜畿，就是孔子所说的 禹这个人,我找不到非议他的地方 。
English: The great-grandfather gave the order: "Dugui, the governor of Hedong, is what Confucius called Yu, and I can't find any fault with him.

古文：增秩中二千石。 
现代文：给他增加两千石俸禄。 
English: He was given an additional stipend of two thousand koku.

古文：太祖征汉中，遣五千人运，运者自率勉曰： 人生有一死，不可负我府君。 
现代文：太祖征讨汉中，派遣五千人运输物资，参与运输的人互相勉励说： 人生来总有一死，但不能辜负我们太守。 
English: The Great Ancestor conquered the Han Dynasty and sent five thousand people to transport materials. The people involved in the transportation encouraged each other, saying, "In life, there is always death, but we must not fail to live up to our duty."

古文：终无一人逃亡，其得人心如此。
现代文：最终都没有人逃走，杜畿得到百姓拥戴到这种程度。
English: In the end, no one escaped, and this is the extent to which Dugui has been embraced by the people.

古文：魏国既建，以畿为尚书。
现代文：魏国建立以后，太祖任命杜畿为尚书。
English: After the founding of the State of Wei, Emperor Taizu appointed Dugi as Shangshu.

古文：事平，更有令曰： 昔萧何定关中，寇恂平河内，卿有其功，间将授卿以纳言之职；顾念河东吾股肱郡，充实之所，足以制天下，故且烦卿卧镇之。 
现代文：天下事情平定后，朝廷又下令说： 从前萧何平定关中，寇恂平定河内，您也有一样的功绩，所以想要任命您为纳言；但考虑到河东郡是国家很重要，储备又充足的地方，足以依靠那里控制天下，所以还要劳烦您前去治理那里。 
English: After the country was pacified, the imperial court also issued an order saying, "You have the same achievements as Xiao He in pacifying Guanzhong and Guanzhong in pacifying Hanoi, so we would like to appoint you as Nagan; however, considering that Hedong County is an important place for the country, with sufficient reserves, it is enough to rely on it to control the country, so we still have to bother you to govern there.

古文：畿在河东十六年，常为天下最。
现代文：杜畿在河东郡任太守十六年，政绩经常是天下最好的。
English: Dugui served as the governor of Hedong County for 16 years, and his political performance was often the best in the world.

古文：文帝即王位，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：文帝继位魏王，赐封杜畿爵位为关内侯。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne of Wei, and conferred the title of Guan Nei Hou on Du Xi.

古文：徵为尚书。
现代文：又征召他为尚书。
English: He was also conscripted into the Imperial Guard.

古文：及践阼，进封丰乐亭侯。
现代文：等到文帝登基，又进封爵位为丰乐亭侯。
English: When Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, he was given the title of Lord of Fengle Pavilion.

古文：邑百户，守司隶校尉。
现代文：食邑一百户，担任司隶校尉。
English: 100 households in Shibuya, and served as the captain of Shibuya.

古文：帝征吴，以畿为尚书仆射，统留事。
现代文：文帝征讨吴国，让杜畿担任尚书仆射，统管留守事宜。
English: Emperor Wen conscripted Du Gui to serve as Shang Shuxu's aide-de-camp in charge of matters concerning the emperor's stay in Wu.

古文：其后帝幸许昌，畿复居守。
现代文：这之后文帝驾临许昌，杜畿又留守京城。
English: After that, Emperor Wen came to Xu Chang, and Dugui stayed in the capital.

古文：受诏作御楼船，於陶河试船，遇风没。
现代文：他收到诏令制造御楼船，在陶河尝试航行，遇上大风沉没。
English: He received a decree to build a golong ship, tried sailing on the Tao River, encountered a gale and sank.

古文：帝为之流涕。
现代文：文帝为此流泪。
English: For this, Emperor Wen shed tears.

古文：诏曰： 昔冥勤其官而水死，稷勤百谷而山死。
现代文：下诏说： 过去冥勤在官职上勤勉工作，最后在水里去世，后稷辛勤地耕种粮食最后死在山上。
English: The lower edict said: In the past, Myogong worked diligently in his official position and finally died in the water, while Houyi worked hard to grow grain and finally died in the mountains.

古文：故尚书仆射杜畿，於孟津试船，遂至覆没，忠之至也。
现代文：已故尚书仆射杜畿，在孟津试航，最后船只倾倒沉默，是极致的忠心了。
English: The late Shang Shuxu's servant, Zhaodugui, tried to sail in Mengjin, and finally the ships fell silent, which was the ultimate loyalty.

古文：朕甚愍焉。 
现代文：朕非常悲痛。 
English: I am very sad.

古文：追赠太仆，谥曰戴侯。
现代文：就追赠杜畿为太仆，谥号为戴侯。
English: He posthumously gave Dugi the title of Taimu, and his posthumous name was Daihou.

古文：子恕嗣。
现代文：他的儿子杜恕继承爵位。
English: His son Du Shum succeeded to the title.

古文：恕字务伯，太和中为散骑黄门侍郎。
现代文：杜恕字务伯，太和年间任散骑黄门侍郎。
English: Du Shizhong, also known as Wubo, was a horseback riding attendant of the Yellow Gate during the reign of the Empress Dowager.

古文：恕推诚以质，不治饰，少无名誉。
现代文：杜恕待人以诚，质朴有不善于表现自己，所以年少时也没有什么名声。
English: Du Shum treated people with sincerity, but he was not good at expressing himself, so he did not have a reputation when he was young.

古文：及在朝，不结交援，专心向公。
现代文：等到他入朝为官，也不结党营私，专心处理公事。
English: When he entered the imperial court and became an official, he did not engage in partisan politics, but concentrated on handling public affairs.

古文：每政有得失，常引纲维以正言，於是侍中辛毗等器重之。
现代文：每次朝政上有什么过失，他经常引用纲纪法度来劝谏，所以侍中辛毗等人很器重他。
English: Whenever there was any fault in the court politics, he would often use the rules and regulations to persuade the emperors, so the chamberlains, including Xin Pi, held him in high esteem.

古文：时公卿以下大议损益，恕以为 古之刺史，奉宣六条，以清静为名，威风著称，今可勿令领兵，以专民事。 俄而镇北将军吕昭又领冀州，乃上疏曰：
现代文：当时公卿以下的官员都在讨论制度的好坏，杜恕认为 古代的刺史，尊奉宣扬朝廷的六条法则，以清修宁静为名誉，以威严为人称道。现在可以不让刺史带兵，以便专心处理百姓事务。 不久镇北将军吕昭又兼任冀州刺史，杜恕就上疏说：
English: At that time, officials from court nobles and below were discussing the merits and demerits of the system. Du Shou thought that the ancient Jishi, revered for preaching the six rules of the imperial court, was honored for its purity and tranquility, and was praised for its majesty. Now, it is possible to not let the Jishi lead soldiers, in order to concentrate on dealing with people's affairs. Soon, Zhenbei General Lü Zhao also served as Jizhou Jishi, and Du Shou said to Shang Shou:

古文：帝王之道，莫尚乎安民；安民之术，在於丰财。
现代文： 君王治理天下的智慧，没有比安定百姓更好的了；安定百姓的办法，在于积累财富。
English: There is no better wisdom for a ruler to govern the world than to stabilize the people; the way to stabilize the people is to accumulate wealth.

古文：丰财者，务本而节用也。
现代文：积累财富的办法，在于致力于根本并且节俭用度。
English: The way to accumulate wealth is to work on the basics and be frugal.

古文：方今二贼未灭，戎车亟驾，此自熊虎之士展力之秋也。
现代文：现在吴、蜀两国还没有铲除，战车急需被驾驭出征，这是勇猛的人展示能力的机会。
English: Now that Wu and Shu have not been eradicated, the chariots are in urgent need of being driven out, which is an opportunity for brave people to show their abilities.

古文：然搢绅之儒，横加荣慕，搤腕抗论，以孙、吴为首。
现代文：但是在朝中为官的儒者，毫不讲理地崇尚武力，握着手腕激动地争论，其中以孙子、吴起为首。
English: However, the Confucians who held positions of authority in the court and government unreasonably advocated the use of force and argued passionately, with Sun Tzu and Wu Qi taking the lead.

古文：州郡牧守，咸共忽恤民之术，脩将率之事。
现代文：州郡的太守，都共同忽视抚恤百姓的办法，修习统兵的事情。
English: The governors-general of the prefectures and counties have all neglected the means of supporting the people and the training of generals.

古文：农桑之民，竞干戈之业，不可谓务本。
现代文：耕田种地的百姓，竞相学习行军打仗的事情，不能说是致力于根本。
English: The people who farm the fields and farm the land, competing to learn how to march and fight, cannot be said to be committed to the fundamentals.

古文：帑藏岁虚而制度岁广，民力岁衰而赋役岁兴，不可谓节用。
现代文：国库一年比一年空虚但制度却一年年推广开来，民力一年年衰减但赋税徭役一年年增加，不能说是节俭用度。
English: The state treasury is emptier year by year, but the system is expanding year by year. The people's strength is declining year by year, but the tax burden is increasing year by year. This cannot be said to be frugal use.

古文：今大魏奄有十州之地，而承丧乱之弊，计其户口不如往昔一州之民，然而二方僣逆，北虏未宾，三边遘难，绕天略匝；所以统一州之民，经营九州之地，其为艰难，譬策羸马以取道里，岂可不加意爱惜其力哉？
现代文：现在大魏朝有十个州的土地，但因为承接战乱之后的凋敝状态，统计人口，都比不上过去一个州的人数，但现在吴国、蜀国依然悖逆作乱，北面的胡人也没有臣服，有三个地方的边境遭遇动乱，全国各地都不安定；所以管理一个州人口的百姓，治理天下各地，还是很艰难的，就好像鞭策羸弱的马匹到很远的地方，怎么能不多注意爱惜马的力量呢？
English: At present, there are ten states in the Great Wei Dynasty, but because of the withered state inherited from the Warring States period, the total population is not comparable to the number of people in the past one state, but now Wu and Shu are still rebellious and turbulent, and the Hu people in the north have not surrendered. The borders of three places are in turmoil, and all parts of the country are unstable. Therefore, it is still very difficult to manage the population of a state, and to govern all parts of the world. It is like whipping a weak horse to a far away place. How can we not pay much attention to the strength of the horse?

古文：以武皇帝之节俭，府藏充实，犹不能十州拥兵；郡且二十也。
现代文：以过去武皇帝的借鉴，国库充实，尚且不能让十个州都拥有军队，有将近二十个郡。
English: Drawing on the example of Emperor Wu in the past, the national treasury has been enriched, but it is still not possible for ten states to have an army, and there are nearly twenty counties.

古文：今荆、扬、青、徐、幽、并、雍、凉缘边诸州皆有兵矣，其所恃内充府库外制四夷者，惟兖、豫、司、冀而已。
现代文：现在荆州、扬州、青州、徐州、幽州、并州、雍州、凉州这些边境地区的州郡都有君随，但其中能倚仗郡中府库充实而抵御外敌入侵的，只有兖州、豫州、司州、冀州而已。
English: At present, Jingzhou, Yangzhou, Qingzhou, Xuzhou, Yuzhou, Binzhou, Yongzhou, and Liangzhou, all of which are border regions, have counties and prefectures. However, only Ganzhou, Yuzhou, Jizhou, and Jizhou are able to resist the invasion of foreign enemies by relying on the abundant prefectural treasury.

古文：臣前以州郡典兵，则专心军功，不勤民事，宜别置将守，以尽治理之务；而陛下复以冀州宠秩吕昭。
现代文：臣之前在州郡里主持军武，就专注于建立军功，对农业并不勤勉，应该另外设立将军，以完成治理百姓的人物；但陛下又因为宠爱而将冀州封给吕昭。
English: Before the minister presided over the military in the county, he focused on building military merit, and was not diligent in agriculture. He should have set up another general to complete the role of governing the people. However, because of his favor, His Majesty gave Jizhou to Luchao.

古文：冀州户口最多，田多垦辟，又有桑枣之饶，国家徵求之府，诚不当复任以兵事也。
现代文：冀州人数最多，农田大多也开垦了，又拥有丰富的桑枣，朝廷征召郡中官员，实在不应该再将军事委任给他。
English: Jizhou has the largest number of people, most of the farmland has been reclaimed, and it has abundant mulberry jujube. The imperial court has conscripted county officials, and it is really not appropriate to give him a military commission.

古文：若以北方当须镇守，自可专置大将以镇安之。
现代文：如果是因为北方边境一定需要人镇守，自然可以设立专门的将军以镇压安抚。
English: If it is because the northern border must be guarded, it is natural to set up a special general to suppress and pacify.

古文：计所置吏士之费，与兼官无异。
现代文：统计朝廷设置官吏的费用，和兼任官职没有什么不同。
English: There is no difference between calculating the cost of setting up an official in the imperial court and holding an official post concurrently.

古文：然昭於人才尚复易；中朝苟乏人，兼才者势不独多。
现代文：虽然吕昭对于人才来说还是容易得到的，但如果朝廷中没有人才，那文武全才的人一定不会很多。
English: Although Lyu Zhao is still easy to get for talents, if there is no talent in the imperial court, then there will not be many people with literary and military talents.

古文：以此推之，知国家以人择官，不为官择人也。
现代文：由此推论，就知道国家是为人选择官职，而不是为官职选择合适的人了。
English: From this deduction, we know that the state chooses an official position for a person, but not the right person for an official position.

古文：官得其人，则政平讼理；政平故民富贵，讼理故囹圄空虚。
现代文：官职上有合适的人，就能政治平顺诉讼有理；政治平顺所以百姓能富裕，诉讼有理所以监狱空旷。
English: With the right person in office, politics can be smooth and lawsuits can be reasoned; with smooth politics, the people can be rich, and with reasoned lawsuits, prisons can be empty.

古文：陛下践阼，天下断狱百数十人，岁岁增多，至五百馀人矣。
现代文：陛下登基时，天下间断决案件的罪犯只有几十上百人，现在一年年在增加，已经有了五百多人。
English: When His Majesty ascended to the throne, there were only a few dozen to a hundred criminals whose cases were adjourned, but now there are more than five hundred, with the number increasing every year.

古文：民不益多，法不益峻。
现代文：百姓人口没有增加。律法没有更严峻。
English: The people did not grow more numerous, and the law did not become more severe.

古文：以此推之，非政教陵迟，牧守不称之明效欤？
现代文：由此推论，难道不是政治教化衰微，州郡的长官没有能治理出明显效果吗？
English: From this deduction, isn't it the case that political indoctrination is on the wane, and state and county governors haven't been able to govern to any significant effect?

古文：往年牛死，通率天下十能损二；麦不半收，秋种未下。
现代文：去年耕牛死去，按往常的情况天下间的粮食会损耗十分之二；麦子收成不到一半，秋天的种子还没有播下。
English: Cattle died last year, and as usual, two-tenths of the world's grain will be lost; the wheat harvest is less than half over, and autumn seeds have not yet been sown.

古文：若二贼游魂於疆埸，飞刍輓粟，千里不及。
现代文：如果吴、蜀两国像游魂般挑起战事，那就算我们迅速运送粮草，也因为远在千里之外而赶不及。
English: If the two countries of Wu and Shu provoke war like wandering souls, then even if we quickly transport grain and grass, we will not be able to catch up because we are thousands of miles away.

古文：究此之术，岂在强兵乎？
现代文：推究这个方法，难道在于使军队强大吗？
English: Is it to make the army strong?

古文：武士劲卒愈多，愈多愈病耳。
现代文：勇武士兵精锐部队越多，越多就越导致弊端罢了。
English: The more brave soldiers and elite troops there are, the more it will lead to bad things.

古文：夫天下犹人之体，腹心充实，四支虽病，终无大患；今兖、豫、司、冀亦天下之腹心也。是以愚臣慺慺，实愿四州之牧守，独脩务本之业，以堪四支之重。
现代文：天下就像人的躯体，如果心腹充实，就算四肢生病，那也不会有大的祸害；现在兖州、豫州、司州、冀州也是国家的心腹，所以我怀着恳切的心情，衷心希望这四个州的长官专心处理原本的事务，以承担四肢的重任。
English: The world is like a human body. If the heart and belly are full, even if the limbs are sick, it will not be a big disaster. Now Zhangzhou, Yuzhou, Jizhou and Jizhou are also the heart and belly of the country, so I sincerely hope that the governors of these four states will concentrate on dealing with the original affairs in order to bear the heavy responsibility of the limbs.

古文：然孤论难持，犯欲难成，众怨难积，疑似难分，故累载不为明主所察。
现代文：但只有我一个人的看法是难以坚持的，触犯了大家的利益也难以成功，众人的怨恨难以积累，是非对错难以区分，所以这么多年也没有被圣明的君主察觉。
English: But my opinion alone is difficult to uphold, it is difficult to succeed if it violates the interests of everyone, it is difficult to accumulate the resentment of many people, and it is difficult to distinguish between right and wrong, so it has not been noticed by the holy monarch for so many years.

古文：凡言此者，类皆疏贱；疏贱之言，实未易听。
现代文：凡是说这些话的，大多是关系疏远，地位低下的人；而这样的话也很难被采纳。
English: Most of those who say this are distant, low-status people, and it's hard to be taken seriously.

古文：若使善策必出於亲贵，亲贵固不犯四难以求忠爱，此古今之所常患也。
现代文：如果好的计策一定出自亲贵大臣，而他们本来也不需要冒着这四种困难来求取重新，这是古往今来的人常常忧患的。 
English: If a good strategy must come from a close minister, and they did not have to face these four difficulties to get a new one, this is something that people from ancient times to the present often worry about.

古文：时又大议考课之制，以考内外众官。
现代文：当时朝中又大规模议论官员的考核制度，以考察朝廷内外众多官员。
English: At that time, the assessment system of officials was widely discussed in the DPRK and China, and many officials inside and outside the imperial court were examined.

古文：恕以为用不尽其人，虽才且无益，所存非所务，所务非世要。
现代文：杜恕认为没有能完全任用人才，即使那个人有才干也没有什么用处，所保存下来的不是根本的东西，努力追求的事有不是现在最重要的。
English: Du Shum believes that if talent is not fully employed, even if that person has talent, it is of no use, what has been preserved is not the fundamental thing, and what is being pursued is not the most important thing now.

古文：上疏曰：
现代文：就上疏说：
English: Shang Zuo said:

古文：书称 明试以功，三考黜陟 ，诚帝王之盛制。
现代文： 《尚书》中说 明确地以功劳来考察，三次考察后才决定官职升降 ，实在是帝王的盛举啊。
English: "Shangshu" said, "Clearly, the examination is based on merit, and the promotion and demotion of officials are decided only after three examinations. This is really a grand gesture of the emperor."

古文：使有能者当其官，有功者受其禄，譬犹乌获之举千钧，良、乐之选骥足也。
现代文：如果有才干的人在他擅长的职位上，有功劳的人接受俸禄，就好像秦国的乌获能举起千斤，张良、伯乐选择千里马啊。
English: If a talented person is in a position that he is good at, and a person of merit receives a salary, it is as if Wu Guo of Qin can lift a thousand pounds, and Zhang Liang and Bo Le choose a thousand horses.

古文：虽历六代而考绩之法不著，关七圣而课试之文不垂，臣诚以为其法可粗依，其详难备举故也。
现代文：虽然历经六代但官吏考核的制度还没有确定，有关七圣但关于政绩考核的文章没有流传下来，臣认为这个办法可以大致节俭，其中的详细情况难以完全和古代一样。
English: Although after six generations, the official appraisal system has not yet been determined, and the articles about the seven saints and the performance appraisal have not been passed down. The minister believes that this method can be roughly economical, and the details are difficult to be completely the same as in ancient times.

古文：语曰： 世有乱人而无乱法。 
现代文：曾有话说： 世上只有作乱的人而没有混乱的法律。 
English: It was once said: There are only disorderly people in the world, but no disorderly laws.

古文：若使法可专任，则唐、虞可不须稷、契之佐，殷、周无贵伊、吕之辅矣。
现代文：如果让律法有专职官员，那唐尧、虞舜就可以不需要后稷、契的辅佐，殷朝、周朝就不会看重伊尹、吕望的辅佐。
English: If the law were to have full-time officials, then Tang Xi and Yu Xi would not need the assistance of Houyi and Qi, and the Yin and Zhou dynasties would not value the assistance of Yin and Lvang.

古文：今奏考功者，陈周、汉之法为，缀京房之本旨，可谓明考课之要矣。
现代文：现在考核官员工作成效，陈述周朝、汉朝的办法，再加上京房的要旨，可以说是明确考核制度的要点了。
English: Now, the assessment of the effectiveness of the work of officials, the presentation of the methods of the Zhou Dynasty and the Han Dynasty, together with the essence of the Beijing House, can be said to be the key points of the assessment system.

古文：於以崇揖让之风，兴济济之治，臣以为未尽善也。
现代文：推崇谦让的风气，推广众多的治理政策，臣认为还不是最好的。
English: It is not the best to promote the culture of modesty and concession, and to promote many governance policies, according to the minister.

古文：其欲使州郡考士，必由四科，皆有事效，然后察举，试辟公府，为亲民长吏，转以功次补郡守者，或就增秩赐爵，此最考课之急务也。
现代文：如果想要让州郡考核士人，一定经过儒家四科分类，都有实效之后，再推举到朝中，朝廷尝试征召，任命他们为亲近百姓的长吏，再按照功绩按顺序调任他们补充郡守的职位，有的就增加俸禄赐封爵位，这是考核官员最紧要的事了。
English: If you want to have county examiners, they must go through the Confucian four-subject classification, all of which are effective, and then be promoted to the central government. The court will try to recruit them, appoint them as officials who are close to the people, and then transfer them to the position of supplementary county governor in order of merit. Some will increase their salary and give them a knighthood. This is the most important thing for examiners.

古文：臣以为便当显其身，用其言，使具为课州郡之法，法具施行，立必信之赏，施必行之罚。
现代文：臣认为应该彰显他们的身份，采纳他们的建议，让他们制定详细的考核州郡官吏的办法，有制度就执行，该赏赐或惩罚都必须执行。
English: The minister believes that it is necessary to highlight their identity, adopt their suggestions, let them work out a detailed assessment method for state and county officials, implement the system, and the reward or punishment must be implemented.

古文：至於公卿及内职大臣，亦当俱以其职考课之也。
现代文：至于公卿大臣以及朝中官员，也应该共同按照官职来考核。 
English: As for the nobles and ministers, as well as the officials of the DPRK and China, they should also be jointly assessed according to their official positions.

古文：古之三公，坐而论道，内职大臣，纳言补阙，无善不纪，无过不举。
现代文： 古代的三公，坐着谈论道理，宫中掌权的大臣，接纳谏言弥补缺漏，没有善行不被记录，没有过失不被检举。
English: In ancient times, the three princes sat and talked about the truth, and the ministers who held power in the palace accepted criticism to make up for their shortcomings. No good deed went unrecorded, and no fault went unreported.

古文：且天下至大，万机至众，诚非一明所能遍照。
现代文：况且天下很大，各种事务非常多，实在不是一个圣明的人能完全观察到的。
English: Moreover, the world is so big and there are so many things to do that it is really impossible for a saintly person to observe everything.

古文：故君为元首，臣作股肱，明其一体相须而成也。
现代文：所以君王是领袖，大臣做为重要支柱，明确知道他们是要互相成就的。
English: Therefore, the king is the leader, and the minister is the important pillar, clearly knowing that they want to achieve mutual success.

古文：是以古人称廊庙之材，非一木之支；帝王之业，非一士之略。
现代文：所以古人说朝廷中的栋梁，不是一根木头能支撑的；帝王的伟业，不是只靠一个谋士的计策。
English: That is why the ancients said that the pillars of the imperial court could not be supported by a single piece of wood; the great cause of the emperor did not depend on the strategy of a single strategist.

古文：由是言之，焉有大臣守职辨课可以致雍熙者哉！
现代文：从这里说，那里有官员只坚守岗位就能带来天下太平呢！
English: From here, there are officials who can bring world peace just by sticking to their posts!

古文：且布衣之交，犹有务信誓而蹈水火，感知己而披肝胆，徇声名而立节义者；况於束带立朝，致位卿相，所务者非特匹夫之信，所感者非徒知己之惠，所徇者岂声名而已乎！
现代文：况且普通人之间的交往，尚且有坚守誓言而赴汤蹈火，有感于知己而愿意披肝沥胆，追求声明而树立节操义举的；更何况是佩着腰带立在朝中，位列公卿宰相的官员呢；他们所追求的不只是普通人的信义，所感动的不只是知己的恩惠，所追求的也不只是名声啊！ 
English: Moreover, in the interactions between ordinary people, there are still those who go through fire and water to stick to their vows, those who are moved by their friends and are willing to put their heart and soul into it, and those who pursue declarations and establish the principles of righteousness; what's more, there are officials who wear a sash and stand in the center of the court and are ranked as noblemen and prime ministers; they pursue not only the loyalty of ordinary people, they are moved not only by the favors of their friends, and they pursue not only fame!

古文：诸蒙宠禄受重任者，不徒欲举明主於唐、虞之上而已；身亦欲厕稷、契之列。
现代文： 那些蒙受恩宠俸禄而担任重要职务的人，不只是想要将圣明的君主推举到唐尧、虞舜之上；自己也想要跟后稷、契并列。
English: Those who have been favored with a salary and hold important positions not only want to promote the sacred monarchs to the top of Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan; they also want to be on a par with the latter.

古文：是以古人不患於念治之心不尽，患於自任之意不足，此诚人主使之然也。
现代文：所以古人不担心大臣在想要治理国家的事情上不尽心，而担心自己承担的责任不够，这确实是君王使得他们这样的。
English: So the ancients did not worry that the minister was not doing his best in the matter of wanting to govern the country, but worried that they were not taking enough responsibility, which is indeed what the king made them do.

古文：唐、虞之君，委任稷、契、夔、龙而责成功，及其罪也，殛鲧而放四凶。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜，委托重任给稷、契、夔、龙并要求一定要成功，等到他们有罪的时候，就将鲧杀了并亲近了那四个奸佞小人。
English: Tang Yao and Yu Yao entrusted the important task to Yao, Qi, Yao and Long and demanded that they must succeed. When they were guilty, they killed Yao and got close to the four villains.

古文：今大臣亲奉明诏，给事目下，其有夙夜在公，恪勤特立，当官不挠贵势，执平不阿所私，危言危行以处朝廷者，自明主所察也。
现代文：现在大臣亲自奉着明确的诏令，努力处理事务，其中有从早到晚，勤于公务，恭敬勤恳有坚定志向，在官职上不屈服于权贵势力，执政时不徇私枉法，谨言慎行地在朝中为官的，自然会被圣明的君主看到。
English: Now, the minister himself, in accordance with the clear edict of the imperial edict, is working hard to deal with affairs. Among them, those who are diligent in their official duties from morning to night, respectful and diligent, have firm aspirations, do not succumb to powerful and noble forces in their official duties, do not break the law when they are in power, and are prudent in their words and deeds in the government, will naturally be seen by the holy monarch.

古文：若尸禄以为高，拱默以为智，当官苟在於免负，立朝不忘於容身，絜行逊言以处朝廷者，亦明主所察也。
现代文：如果将尸位素餐看做高尚，将默默无为看做智慧，如果只追求免于担责，在朝为官不忘记保全自己，巧言令色，小心翼翼地在朝中为官的人，也会被明君看到。
English: If you regard a vegetarian diet as noble, if you regard doing nothing as wisdom, if you only seek to be free from responsibility, if you do not forget to protect yourself when serving as an official in the government, and if you are skillful and careful when serving as an official in the government, you will also be seen by Mingjun.

古文：诚使容身保位，无放退之辜，而尽节在公，抱见疑之势，公义不脩而私议成俗，虽仲尼为谋，犹不能尽一才，又况於世俗之人乎！
现代文：如果让他们保全自己的身份地位，没有被免职的过错，而为公家尽心竭力，抱着被怀疑的态度，不注重公众舆论而将个人看法当做百姓的看法，即使是仲尼为之谋划，尚且不能一个人的才能，更何况是普通人呢？
English: If they are allowed to preserve their status and position, without the fault of being removed from office, and work hard for the public, with a suspicious attitude, without paying attention to public opinion and taking personal views as the views of the people, even if it is planned by Zhongni, it is still not a person's talent, let alone an ordinary person?

古文：今之学者，师商、韩而上法术，竞以儒家为迂阔，不周世用，此最风俗之流弊，创业者之所致慎也。
现代文：现在研究学问的人，师从商鞅、韩非而崇尚法家之术，争相认为儒家是不切实际的，不符合现在的情况，这是现在流行的最大弊病，开创基业的人最谨慎的。
English: Nowadays, people who study culture, learn from Shangguan, Han and Africa, and advocate the art of legalists. They contend that Confucianism is impractical and does not conform to the current situation. This is the biggest malady that is currently prevalent. People who start a foundation are the most cautious.

古文：后考课竟不行。
现代文：最后考核制度没有实行。 
English: The final assessment system has not been implemented.

古文：乐安廉昭以才能拔擢，颇好言事。
现代文：乐安的廉昭因为才能突出而被提升，很喜欢讨论时事。
English: Le An's Ren Zhao, who was promoted because of his outstanding talent, likes to discuss current affairs.

古文：恕上疏极谏曰：
现代文：杜恕上疏极力劝谏说：
English: Du Shou Shang So tried his best to dissuade her, saying:

古文：伏见尚书郎廉昭奏左丞曹璠以罚当关不依诏，坐判问。
现代文： 我见尚书郎廉昭上奏说左丞曹璠应该为不依照诏令守卫关口而被责罚。
English: I saw Shang Shulang Liang Zhao's report that Zuo Cao should be punished for not guarding the pass in accordance with the imperial edict.

古文：又云 诸当坐者别奏 。
现代文：又说 那些应该被一同治罪的另外上奏 。
English: He also said that those who should be tried together should be tried separately.

古文：尚书令陈矫自奏不敢辞罚，亦不敢以处重为恭，意至恳恻。
现代文：尚书令陈矫自己上奏说不敢推辞责罚，也不敢严厉处罚以表示恭敬，意愿非常恳切。
English: Shang Shu ordered Chen Jiao to report that he did not dare to refuse punishment, nor did he dare to punish severely to show respect, and his intention was very sincere.

古文：臣窃悯然为朝廷惜之！
现代文：臣私下为朝廷怜惜他，心中悲悯！
English: Privately, the vassal pities him for the sake of the imperial court, and his heart is filled with compassion!

古文：夫圣人不择世而兴，不易民而治，然而生必有贤智之佐者，盖进之以道，率之以礼故也。
现代文：圣人不会选择好时代才出现，不会换一批百姓再治理，但是生下来就有贤能智慧的人辅佐，大概是因为按照道理前行，依照礼仪管理他们吧。
English: Saints do not choose a good era to appear, do not change a group of people and then govern, but they are born with the assistance of virtuous and wise people, probably because they go forward according to reason and manage them according to etiquette.

古文：古之帝王之所以能辅世长民者，莫不远得百姓之欢心，近尽群臣之智力。
现代文：古代的帝王之所以能治理天下管理百姓，没有不是因为远的方面得到百姓欢欣，近的方面是依靠朝臣们的智谋。
English: The reason why the ancient emperors were able to govern the world and manage the people was not because the distant aspects made the people happy, but because the near aspects relied on the wisdom of the courtiers.

古文：诚使今朝任职之臣皆天下之选，而不能尽其力，不可谓能使人；若非天下之选，亦不可谓能官人。
现代文：如果真的让现在朝中任职的官员都是天下人选拔出来的，却不能竭尽他们的才干，不能说是能任用人才；如果不是天下人选拔的，也不能说是会选才任官的。
English: If it is true that the officials currently serving in the DPRK are all selected by the people of the world, but they cannot make full use of their talents, it cannot be said that they can appoint talents; if they are not selected by the people of the world, it cannot be said that they will select talents to serve as officials.

古文：陛下忧劳万机，或亲灯火，而庶事不康，刑禁日弛，岂非股肱不称之明效欤？
现代文：陛下忧心劳神，日理万机，甚至晚上还在处理政事，但各种事情处理不好，刑罚禁令日渐废弛，难道不是重要的大臣不能做出明显的效果吗？
English: His Majesty is worried and overworked, he has to deal with everything day by day, he is still dealing with political affairs even in the evening, but all kinds of things are not handled well, the ban on criminal punishment is getting weaker and weaker, isn't it an important minister can't make a significant effect?

古文：原其所由，非独臣有不尽忠，亦主有不能使。
现代文：推究这种情况的由来，不是只有臣子不能尽忠职守，也有主上不能任用人才。
English: Inferring the origin of this situation, it is not only the vassals who cannot perform their duties faithfully, but also the masters who cannot appoint talent.

古文：百里奚愚於虞而智於秦，豫让苟容中行而著节智伯，斯则古人之明验矣。
现代文：百里奚在虞舜那里被认为愚陋但在秦国被认为有智谋，豫让对中行屈从附和而对智伯彰显节操，这些都是古人明确验证的。
English: The ancient people clearly verified that although the Baili Dragon was considered to be stupid by the Yuyao people, it was considered to be clever by the Qin people. The Yuyao people were submissive to the Zhongxing people and showed discipline to the Zhibo people.

古文：今臣言一朝皆不忠，是诬一朝也；然其事类，可推而得。
现代文：现在我说满朝官员都不尽忠职守，是污蔑的一整个朝廷；但其中的相似情况，可以通过推论得出来。
English: Now I say that all the officials of the dynasty are not loyal to their duties, and the whole court is slandered; but the similarity can be deduced by inference.

古文：陛下感帑藏之不充实，而军事未息，至乃断四时之赋衣，薄御府之私谷，帅由圣意，举朝称明，与闻政事密勿大臣，宁有恳恳忧此者乎？
现代文：陛下感叹国库不充实，但战事还没有平息，以至于断绝了四季服饰的更新，减少国库中私有的粮食，这些都是根据您的旨意执行的，整个朝廷都称赞圣明，那些一起参与政事的机要大臣，难道有恳切忧心这件事的吗？ 
English: Your Majesty laments that the treasury is not full, but the war has not yet subsided, so much so that the renewal of the four-season clothing has been cut off, and the private grain in the treasury has been reduced. These are all carried out according to your will. The entire court has praised Shengming. Those important ministers who are involved in politics together, are they seriously worried about this?

古文：骑都尉王才、幸乐人孟思所为不法，振动京都，而其罪状发於小吏，公卿大臣初无一言。
现代文： 骑都尉王才、幸乐人孟思做了不法之事，震动京城，而他们的罪状是被小吏揭发的，公卿大臣刚开始没有一个人上报。
English: The cavalry captain Wang Cai and the merrymaker Meng Siyu did illegal things, shaking the capital, and their crimes were exposed by petty officials. At first, none of the noble ministers reported them.

古文：自陛下践阼以来，司隶校尉、御史中丞宁有举纲维以督奸宄，使朝廷肃然者邪？
现代文：自从陛下登基以来，司隶校尉、御史中丞中难道有推举法度以监督奸佞小人，让朝廷风气肃然的吗？
English: Since His Majesty ascended to the throne, have there been any laws or regulations to supervise traitors and villains to make the Imperial Court more dignified?

古文：若陛下以为今世无良才，朝廷乏贤佐，岂可追望稷、契之遐踪，坐待来世之俊乂乎！
现代文：如果陛下认为现在世上没有贤才，朝廷缺乏贤能的辅佐，又怎么能追慕后稷、契等先贤的时机，等待后世才德出众的人呢？
English: If Your Majesty believes that there are no sages in the world today, and that the Imperial Court lacks the assistance of sages, how can you pursue the opportunity of sages such as Houyi and Qi, and wait for people of outstanding talent in future generations?

古文：今之所谓贤者，尽有大官而享厚禄矣，然而奉上之节未立，向公之心不一者，委任之责不专，而俗多忌讳故也。
现代文：现在所说的贤能的人，都是有很高的官职享受丰厚的俸禄，但侍奉主上的节操没有树立，为公家办事的心思不专一的原因，就是委派的职责不专一，而世俗大多忌讳的缘故。
English: The virtuous people we are talking about now all have high official positions and enjoy rich salaries, but they have not established the discipline of serving the Lord. The reason why they are not dedicated to public affairs is that the duties assigned are not specific, and most of them are taboo.

古文：臣以为忠臣不必亲，亲臣不必忠。
现代文：臣认为忠臣不需要是亲近的人，亲近的臣子不一定是忠臣。
English: The vassal believes that a loyal vassal does not need to be a close person, and a close vassal is not necessarily a loyal vassal.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：以其居无嫌之地而事得自尽也。
现代文：因为他们处在没有猜疑的位置并且事情都能自己解决。
English: Because they are in a position where there is no suspicion and things can sort themselves out.

古文：今有疏者毁人不实其所毁，而必曰私报所憎，誉人不实其所誉，而必曰私爱所亲，左右或因之以进憎爱之说。
现代文：现在有疏远的人诽谤他人，实际情况不符合诽谤的内容，那就一定是私自报复自己憎恨的人，赞誉他人也不按实际情况赞誉，那就一定是偏爱自己亲近的人，左右的人也许会趁机上奏厌恶和偏爱的说法。
English: Now there are estranged people slandering others, the actual situation does not meet the content of slander, then it must be a person who hates himself, praises others and does not praise according to the actual situation, then it must be a person who prefers to be close to himself, and people on both sides may take the opportunity to play disgust and preference.

古文：非独毁誉有之，政事损益，亦皆有嫌。
现代文：不是只有毁谤和赞美有这样的情况，政事上的得失，也有这样的嫌疑。
English: Not only slander and praise have such a situation, but political gains and losses also have such a suspicion.

古文：陛下当思所以阐广朝臣之心，笃厉有道之节，使之自同古人，望与竹帛耳。
现代文：陛下应该思虑如何阐明推广朝臣的想法，专心践行有道义的节操，使他们能和古人等同，期望能名传后世。
English: His Majesty should think about how to articulate the idea of promoting courtiers, and concentrate on practicing moral integrity, so that they can be equal to the ancients, and hope to pass on the name to future generations.

古文：反使如廉昭者扰乱其间，臣惧大臣遂将容身保位，坐观得失，为来世戒也！
现代文：如果反过来让廉昭这样的人在其中扰乱，臣担心大臣们会将只顾保全身份地位，坐着看朝政得失，成为后世的警戒啊！ 
English: If, on the other hand, people like Ren Zhao are allowed to interfere, the minister is worried that the ministers will only care about preserving their status, sit and watch the gains and losses of the government, and become a warning for future generations!

古文：昔周公戒鲁侯曰 无使大臣怨乎不以 ，不言贤愚，明皆当世用也。
现代文： 过去周公告诫鲁侯说 不要让大臣怨怼不止 ，没有说到贤能和愚陋，但是是当时就能采用的。
English: Last week's announcement admonished Lu Hou, saying, "Don't let the minister be full of bitterness." It didn't mention the words "virtue" and "foolishness," but it could have been used at the time.

古文：尧数舜之功，称去四凶，不言大小，有罪则去也。
现代文：唐尧历数虞舜的功绩，要除去四凶，不说他们的罪行大小，有罪就要铲除。
English: Tang Xuan enumerated the exploits of the four evil-doers, and the four evil-doers must be eliminated. No matter how big or small their crimes are, the guilty must be eradicated.

古文：今者朝臣不自以为不能，以陛下为不任也；不自以为不智，以陛下为不问也。
现代文：现在朝臣不认为自己不能胜任，是认为陛下没有任用；不认为自己没有智慧，是认为陛下没有询问到。
English: Now, courtiers do not think that they are not competent, they think that His Majesty has not appointed them; they do not think that they are not wise, they think that His Majesty has not asked them.

古文：陛下何不遵周公之所以用，大舜之所以去？
现代文：陛下为什么不遵循周公任用的缘由，大舜除去四凶的原因？
English: Your Majesty, why not follow the reason for Zhou Gong's appointment, the reason for the removal of the four evils?

古文：使侍中、尚书坐则侍帷幄，行则从华辇，亲对诏问，所陈必达，则群臣之行，能否皆可得而知；忠能者进，闇劣者退，谁敢依违而不自尽？
现代文：让侍中、尚书们无事的时候侍奉在您左右，有事情的时候就跟随在辇车旁边，亲自回答您的问话，所陈述的一定很详尽，那朝中官员的行为，是否能胜任就能知道了；忠诚的人就提升，愚昧低劣的人就罢免，谁敢尸位素餐而不竭尽自己的才能呢呢？
English: Let the attendants and courtiers serve around you when there is nothing to do, and when there is something to do, they will follow next to the carriage and answer your questions in person. The statement must be very detailed. Then you will know whether the behavior of the officials of the central government is competent; loyal people will be promoted, and stupid and inferior people will be dismissed. Who dares to eat a vegetarian meal without exhausting their talents?

古文：以陛下之圣明，亲与群臣论议政事，使群臣人得自尽，人自以为亲，人思所以报，贤愚能否，在陛下之所用。
现代文：以陛下的圣明，亲自和朝臣们谈论政事，使朝臣都能竭尽自己的才能。凭借这样的情况来处理政事，有什么是不能办成？
English: With the patronage of His Majesty, I personally discuss political affairs with the courtiers, so that the courtiers can do their best. With this situation to deal with political affairs, what can not be done?

古文：以此治事，何事不办？
现代文：凭借这个来建立功勋，有什么功勋不能建立？
English: With this to establish merit, what merit can not be established?

古文：以此建功，何功不成？每有军事，诏书常曰： 谁当忧此者邪？
现代文：每次有军事事宜，陛下的诏书常说： 还有谁会忧虑这件事呢？
English: Whenever there is a military matter, His Majesty's edict used to say: Who else will worry about it?

古文：吾当自忧耳。 
现代文：只有我自己忧虑罢了。 
English: I only have myself to worry about.

古文：近诏又曰： 忧公忘私者必不然，但先公后私即自办也。 
现代文：最近的诏书又说： 忧虑公事忘记私事的人一定不是这样，但将公事放在私事前面就会自己处理了。 
English: The recent edict also said: "This is definitely not the case for those who are worried about business and forget about personal affairs, but if they put business before personal affairs, they will deal with it themselves."

古文：伏读明诏，乃知圣思究尽下情，然亦怪陛下不治其本而忧其末也。
现代文：我恭敬拜读诏书，才知道陛下希望全部了解下层的情况，但也对陛下不处理根本情况却担忧微小的情况。
English: I respectfully read the edict to know that His Majesty wants to know everything about the situation of the lower class, but also that His Majesty does not deal with the fundamental situation but is worried about the minor situation.

古文：人之能否，实有本性，虽臣亦以为朝臣不尽称职也。
现代文：人的才干好不好，实在是有与生俱来的天性，虽然臣也认为朝臣们不是都能称职。
English: Whether a person's talent is good or not, it is really an innate nature, although the minister also believes that courtiers are not all competent.

古文：明主之用人也，使能者不敢遗其力，而不能者不得处非其任。
现代文：圣明的君主任用人才，让有才干的人不敢不竭尽全力，而没有才干的人不能处在不合适他的位置上。
English: The wise ruler uses talent, so that talented people dare not to do their best, and people without talent can not be in a position that is not suitable for him.

古文：选举非其人，未必为有罪也；举朝共容非其人，乃为怪耳。
现代文：选拔举荐的人不合适，不一定是有罪；整个朝廷都共同接纳这个不合适的人，才是奇怪的地方。
English: It is not necessarily a crime to select and recommend a person who is unsuitable; it would be strange if the entire court accepted this unsuitable person.

古文：陛下知其不尽力也，而代之忧其职，知其不能也，而教之治其事，岂徒主劳而臣逸哉？
现代文：陛下知道他们没有竭尽能力，而为他们担忧他们的职责，知道他们不能胜任，就教导他们处理事务，难道只是主君劳神而臣下安逸吗？
English: Your Majesty, knowing that they are not doing their best, worries about their duties for them, knowing that they are not competent, teaches them to deal with affairs, is it just that the master works hard and the subordinate is at ease?

古文：虽圣贤并世，终不能以此为治也。
现代文：即使是圣贤的人处于同一时代，最终也不能凭借这个治理天下。 
English: Even if sages and sages are in the same era, they ultimately cannot use this to govern the world.

古文：陛下又患台阁禁令之不密，人事请属之不绝，听伊尹作迎客出入之制，选司徒更恶吏以守寺门；威禁由之，实未得为禁之本也。
现代文： 陛下又担心宫中的禁令不够严密，通过关系请托的事情不断，听说伊尹确立迎宾客出入的制度，选取司徒取代凶暴奸佞的官吏以守卫寺门；禁令由他们来执行，实在是没有明确禁令的根本。
English: His majesty was also worried that the ban in the palace was not strict enough. Through the relationship, he heard that things were constantly happening. He heard that Yi Yin established a system for welcoming guests and selecting officials to guard the temple door. The ban was enforced by them, but there was really no clear basis for the ban.

古文：昔汉安帝时，少府窦嘉辟廷尉郭躬无罪之兄子，犹见举奏，章劾纷纷。
现代文：过去汉安帝时期，少府窦嘉征召廷尉郭躬的兄长没有罪行的儿子，尚且被举报上奏，弹劾的奏章接连不断。
English: In the past, during the Han Dynasty, the younger brother of the courtier Guo Mian, the younger brother of the courtier Dou Jia, was reported and impeached, even though he did not commit a crime.

古文：近司隶校尉孔羡辟大将军狂悖之弟，而有司嘿尔，望风希指，甚於受属。
现代文：近来有司隶校尉孔羡征召大将军狂悖犯上的弟弟，而相关官员都沉默无言，看着风向迎合上级的旨意，比接受请托更严重。
English: Recently, there was a case of a non-commissioned officer, Lieutenant Kong Qian, conscripting the younger brother of a general who had gone rogue, but the relevant officials were silent, watching the wind direction to cater to the superior's will, which is more serious than accepting the request.

古文：选举不以实，人事之大者也。
现代文：选拔举荐不依靠实际，是官员任免的大事。
English: Selection recommendation does not rely on reality, it is an important matter for the appointment and removal of officials.

古文：嘉有亲戚之宠，躬非社稷重臣，犹尚如此；以今况古，陛下自不督必行之罚以绝阿党之原耳。
现代文：因为有亲戚的恩宠而喜悦，郭躬不是朝廷重臣，尚且是这样子；用现在的情况和古代比较，陛下自然不监督一定要执行的刑罚以断绝结党营私的情况。
English: Guo Mian is not a high-ranking court official, even though he enjoys the favor of his relatives. Comparing the current situation with that of ancient times, it is natural that His Majesty does not supervise the punishment that must be carried out in order to cut off the situation of party and private interests.

古文：伊尹之制，与恶吏守门，非治世之具也。
现代文：伊尹的制度，和凶残的吏役守卫寺门，不是治理天下所具有的。
English: The system of Yi Yin, and the ferocious officials guarding the temple gate, are not what governs the world.

古文：使臣之言少蒙察纳，何患於奸不削灭，而养若昭等乎！
现代文：如果我的话能稍微被审察采纳，就不需要担心奸邪之人不能铲除，而培养像廉昭这样的人了！ 
English: If my words can be accepted by the court, there is no need to worry that the traitors cannot be eradicated, and people like Liang Zhao can be cultivated!

古文：夫纠擿奸宄，忠事也，然而世憎小人行之者，以其不顾道理而苟求容进也。
现代文： 检举揭发奸佞小人，是忠诚的事，但世人厌恶小人的行为，是因为他们不顾道义而只追求晋升。
English: It is a matter of loyalty to report and expose the villains, but the world abhors the behavior of villains because they only pursue promotion regardless of morality.

古文：若陛下不复考其终始，必以违众忤世为奉公，密行白人为尽节，焉有通人大才而更不能为此邪？
现代文：如果陛下不再考察他们始终的言行，他们一定将违背众意忤逆世人当做奉公守法，将压制百姓当做是尽忠职守，哪里有学识渊博，才能卓越的人不能做到这些事的呢？
English: If His Majesty no longer scrutinizes their words and deeds, they will surely regard going against the will of the people and defying the world as obeying the law, and suppressing the people as fulfilling their duties. Where are the learned and talented people who cannot do these things?

古文：诚顾道理而弗为耳。
现代文：只是他们顾及道义而不去做罢了。
English: It's just that they don't do it out of a sense of morality.

古文：使天下皆背道而趋利，则人主之所最病者，陛下将何乐焉，胡不绝其萌乎！
现代文：如果天下人都背弃道义而追逐利益，那就是为人君主最痛恨的了，陛下又怎能安乐呢，为什么不将这种情况断绝在萌芽中！
English: If the whole world abandons morality and pursues profit, that is what human monarchs hate the most. How can His Majesty be at ease? Why not nip this situation in the bud?

古文：夫先意承旨以求容美，率皆天下浅薄无行义者，其意务在於適人主之心而已，非欲治天下安百姓也。
现代文：那些揣摩人意，谄媚逢迎以追求得到上级的接纳和赞美的人，大多都是天下间浅薄无知又没有道义的人，他们的追求只在于顺从君王的想法罢了，不是想要治理天下安定百姓。
English: Those who try to please others and seek acceptance and praise from superiors are mostly shallow, ignorant and immoral people. Their pursuit is only to obey the king's idea, not to govern the world and stabilize the people.

古文：陛下何不试变业而示之，彼岂执其所守以违圣意哉？
现代文：陛下为什么不尝试着改变方法显示给他们看，他们又怎么会坚持现在的情况而违背圣意呢？
English: Why doesn't His Majesty try to show them a different way and show them how they are holding on to the status quo against the will of God?

古文：夫人臣得人主之心，安业也；处尊显之官，荣事也；食千锺之禄，厚实也。
现代文：为人臣子得到君王的赏识，就会安于本业；处在尊贵显赫的官位上，是光荣的是；享受千钟俸禄，已经非常优厚了。
English: For a courtier to be appreciated by the monarch, he will be satisfied with his work; to be in a distinguished official position, it is glorious; to enjoy a thousand-hour salary, it is already very generous.

古文：人臣虽愚，未有不乐此而喜干迕者也，迫於道，自强耳。
现代文：为人臣子虽然愚陋，但没有不喜欢这样而喜欢违逆的人，只是被世道逼迫，不得不自强罢了。
English: Although it is foolish to be a human retainer, there are no people who do not like this and like to rebel, but they are forced by the world and have to strengthen themselves.

古文：诚以为陛下当怜而佑之，少委任焉，如何反录昭等倾侧之意，而忽若人者乎？
现代文：我以为陛下会怜悯而护佑他们，减少委任奸邪小人，怎么又采纳了廉昭等人心思不正的意思，而忽视了这样的臣子呢？
English: I thought that Your Majesty would pity and protect them, reduce the appointment of traitors and villains, and how did you adopt the corrupt intentions of people such as Ren Zhao, while ignoring such courtiers?

古文：今者外有伺隙之寇，内有贫旷之民，陛下当大计天下之损益，政事之得失，诚不可以怠也。
现代文：现在国家外部有等待间隙伺机而动的敌寇，国中有贫苦困顿的百姓，陛下应该好好考虑天下大事的得失，政事上的得失，实在是不能懈怠啊。 
English: Now there is a waiting gap outside the country for the enemy invaders who are waiting for an opportunity, and there are poor and needy people in the country. Your Majesty should carefully consider the gains and losses of world events, and the gains and losses in political affairs. You really can't slack off.

古文：恕在朝八年，其论议亢直，皆此类也。
现代文：杜恕在朝为官八年，他的议论刚强正直，都是这样的情况。
English: In the eight years that Du Shou served as an official in the imperial court, this was the case with his strong and honest speech.

古文：出为弘农太守，数岁转赵相，以疾去官。
现代文：杜恕出京担任弘农太守，几年后转任赵相，因病辞官。
English: Du Shum went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Hongnong, and a few years later he was transferred to Zhao Xiang, but resigned due to illness.

古文：起家为河东太守，岁馀，迁淮北都督护军，复以疾去。
现代文：后来又从家中前往担任河东太守，一年多以后，升迁为淮北都督护军，又因病辞官。
English: Later, he went from home to serve as the governor of Hedong Province. More than a year later, he was promoted to the military escort of the governor of Huaibei Province, and then resigned due to illness.

古文：恕所在，务存大体而已，其树惠爱，益得百姓欢心，不及於畿。
现代文：杜恕所在的地方，都努力维护国家大体，他树立的恩惠仁爱，更加得到百姓拥戴，但比不上杜畿。
English: The places where Du Shum is located are all striving to safeguard the country as a whole, and the benevolence and benevolence he has established are more supported by the people, but they are not as good as Dugi.

古文：顷之，拜御史中丞。
现代文：不久，被任命为御史中丞。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to Goshi chujo.

古文：恕在朝廷，以不得当世之和，故屡在外任。
现代文：杜恕在朝中为官时，因为和官员们关系不和，所以多次在外地任职。
English: When Du Shum was an official in the DPRK and China, he served in the field many times because he had a bad relationship with the officials.

古文：复出为幽州刺史，加建威将军，使持节，护乌丸校尉。
现代文：又出京担任幽州刺史，加封建威将军，持符节保护乌丸校尉。
English: He also went to Beijing to serve as Yuzhou stabbing history, plus feudal Jianwei general, and held a sign festival to protect Wu Maru lieutenant.

古文：时征北将军程喜屯蓟，尚书袁侃等戒恕曰： 程申伯处先帝之世，倾田国让於青州。
现代文：当时征北将军程喜驻守在蓟县，尚书袁侃等人告诫杜恕说： 程申伯在先帝那时候，在青州排挤田国让。
English: At that time, the Northern Expeditionary General Cheng Xi was stationed in Handan County. Shangshu Yuan Kan and others admonished Du Shou, saying: At the time of the former emperor, Cheng Shunbo pushed out Tian Guozhan in Qingzhou.

古文：足下今俱杖节，使共屯一城，宜深有以待之。 
现代文：您现在杖节和符节都有，让你们在同一座城中驻守，应该好好考虑如何对待。 
English: You now have both the Rod Festival and the Sign Festival, so if you are stationed in the same city, you should carefully consider how to treat them.

古文：而恕不以为意。
现代文：但杜恕没有放在心上。
English: But Du Shou did not take it to heart.

古文：至官未期，有鲜卑大人儿，不由关塞，径将数十骑诣州，州斩所从来小子一人，无表言上。
现代文：他在官位上不到一个月，有鲜卑首领的儿子不经过关塞，带领着几十名骑兵径直来到幽州，州中将跟随来的一名随从斩杀了，没有报告上级。
English: He had been in office for less than a month, and the son of a lowly leader, Zhuang, did not go through customs, and led dozens of cavalry straight to Yuzhou. He killed an attendant who came with the lieutenant general, and did not report to his superiors.

古文：喜於是劾奏恕，下廷尉，当死。
现代文：程喜就上奏弹劾杜恕，杜恕被抓捕到廷尉审理，按律当判处死刑。
English: Cheng Xi filed an impeachment against Du Shou. Du Shou was arrested and tried by a court official. According to the law, he was sentenced to death.

古文：以父畿勤事水死，免为庶人，徙章武郡，是岁嘉平元年。
现代文：因为他父亲杜畿为国勤勉最后死在水中，最后被罢免官职，成为平民，他就搬迁到章武郡，这一年是嘉平元年。
English: He moved to Zhangwu County in the first year of Jiaping because his father, Dugi, worked hard for the country and finally died in the water. He was finally dismissed from his post and became a commoner.

古文：恕倜傥任意，而思不防患，终致此败。
现代文：杜恕为人洒脱，随心所欲，但不考虑防备他们，最后导致了这样的挫败。
English: Du Shou was a free-wheeling person, doing whatever he wanted, but he didn't think about protecting them, which eventually led to this setback.

古文：初，恕从赵郡还，陈留阮武亦从清河太守徵，俱自薄廷尉。
现代文：当初，杜恕从赵郡返回朝中，陈留郡的阮武也在清河太守的职位上被征召，两人都鄙薄廷尉。
English: At first, Du Shun returned to the imperial court from Zhao County, and Ruan Wu from Chenliu County was also conscripted in the position of the governor of Qinghe, both of whom were despised by Lieutenant Bo Ting.

古文：谓恕曰： 相观才性可以由公道而持之不厉，器能可以处大官而求之不顺，才学可以述古今而志之不一，此所谓有其才而无其用。
现代文：阮武对杜恕说： 我看您的才学性情可以经受公正之道，但坚持得不够坚定，您的才能可以担任高管但追求得不顺利，您的文采学问可以叙述古今但志向不专一，这就是通常说的有才能但没有得到合适的任用。
English: Nguyen Vu said to Du Xuan: I think that your talent can withstand the fair way, but it is not firm enough, your talent can serve as an executive but it is not well pursued, your literary knowledge can describe the past and the present, but the aspiration is not specific, which is commonly referred to as talented but did not get the right appointment.

古文：今向间暇，可试潜思，成一家言。 
现代文：现在如果有闲暇，可以好好考虑这个问题，形成自己的独立见解。 
English: Now, if you have leisure, you can think about this issue and form your own independent opinion.

古文：在章武，遂著体论八节。又著兴性论一篇，盖兴於为己也。
现代文：杜恕在章武郡时，就著写了《体论》八节，又写了一篇《兴性论》，都是讨论个人修养的。
English: When Du Shou was in Zhangwu County, he wrote eight sections of "On the Body" and another one of "On Personality," both of which discussed personal cultivation.

古文：四年，卒於徙所。
现代文：嘉平四年，杜恕在迁移的居所中去世。
English: In the fourth year of Jiaping, Du Shou passed away in the relocation residence.

古文：甘露二年，河东乐详年九十馀，上书讼畿之遗绩，朝廷感焉。诏封恕子预为丰乐亭侯，邑百户。
现代文：甘露二年，河东郡的乐祥九十多岁，向朝廷上疏记叙杜畿遗留下来的功绩，朝廷有感于此，下诏赐封杜恕的儿子杜预为丰乐亭侯，食邑一百户。
English: In the 2nd year of Kamloops, Le Xiang of Hedong County, who was over 90 years old, wrote to the imperial court about the merits left behind by Su Duqi. The imperial court was impressed by this and issued an imperial edict to appoint Du Yu's son Du Yu as the lord of Fengle Ting, with a hundred households.

古文：恕奏议论駮皆可观，掇其切世大事著于篇。
现代文：杜恕的奏疏议论都很值得一看，选取他切合当时大事的几篇记录在传记中。
English: Du Shou's sermons are well worth a look, and several of his biographies have been selected for their relevance to the events of the time.

古文：郑浑字文公，河南开封人也。
现代文：郑浑字文公，河南开封县人。
English: Zheng Hunzhi Wengong, from Kaifeng County, Henan Province.

古文：高祖父众，众父兴，皆为名儒。
现代文：他的高祖父郑众，郑众的父亲郑兴，都是有名的儒者。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Zheng Zhong, and Zheng Zhong's father, Zheng Xing, were both famous Confucians.

古文：浑兄泰，与荀攸等谋诛董卓，为扬州刺史，卒。
现代文：郑浑的兄长郑泰，和荀攸等人一同谋划诛杀董卓，担任扬州刺史时去世。
English: Zheng Hun's brother Zheng Tai, who plotted to kill Dong Zhuo together with Yu Yu and others, died while serving as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：浑将泰小子袤避难淮南，袁术宾礼甚厚。
现代文：郑浑带着郑泰的小儿子郑袤到淮南躲避战乱，袁术以宾客的礼节对待他，很是尊重。
English: Zheng Hun took Zheng Tai's youngest son, Zheng Huan, to Huainan to escape the war. Yuan Shu treated him with the courtesy of a guest, and with great respect.

古文：浑知术必败。
现代文：郑浑知道袁术一定会失败。
English: Zheng Hun knew that Yuan Shu would fail.

古文：时华歆为豫章太守，素与泰善，浑乃渡江投歆。
现代文：当时华歆担任豫章太守，向来和郑泰关系很好，郑浑就渡过长江投靠华歆。
English: At that time, Hua Tuo served as the governor of Yuzhang. He had always had a good relationship with Zheng Tai. Zheng Hun crossed the Yangtze River to support Hua Tuo.

古文：太祖闻其笃行，召为掾，复迁下蔡长、邵陵令。
现代文：太祖得知他行为忠厚，征召他为掾吏，又提升为下蔡县长、邵陵县令。
English: When the great-grandfather learned of his loyal behavior, he conscripted him as a magistrate, and promoted him to the next Cai County Governor and Shaoling County Commander.

古文：天下未定，民皆剽轻，不念产殖；其生子无以相活，率皆不举。
现代文：天下还没有安定，百姓都强悍轻捷，不考虑生产养殖；那些生了孩子没有办法养活的，全都不养育。
English: The world is not yet stable, the people are strong and nimble, and do not consider production and breeding; those who have children and cannot feed them, do not raise them at all.

古文：浑所在夺其渔猎之具，课使耕桑，又兼开稻田，重去子之法。
现代文：郑浑所在的地方，都将百姓的打鱼捕猎的工具收起来，勉励他们耕种养蚕，又一起开垦稻田，加重丢弃婴儿的刑罚。
English: In the area where Zheng Hun is located, all the people's fishing and hunting tools have been put away, encouraging them to cultivate and raise silkworms, and to cultivate rice fields together, increasing the penalty for abandoning babies.

古文：民初畏罪，后稍丰给，无不举赡；所育男女，多以郑为字。
现代文：百姓刚开始担心被判罪，后来生活渐渐富裕，没有不养育孩子的了；所养育的男女，大多都以郑为字。
English: At first, people were worried about being convicted of a crime. Later, life gradually became more affluent, and there was no reason not to raise children. Most of the men and women who raised children were named Zheng.

古文：辟为丞相掾属，迁左冯翊。
现代文：后来朝廷征召郑浑为丞相掾属，又调任为左冯翊。
English: Later, the imperial court conscripted Zheng Hun to be the chancellor of the imperial court, and he was also transferred to Zuo Feng Qi.

古文：时梁兴等略吏民五千馀家为寇钞，诸县不能御，皆恐惧，寄治郡下。
现代文：当时梁兴等人劫掠了五千多户百姓让他们一同烧杀抢劫，各县邑都不能低于，都很惊恐，将县衙转移到郡中。
English: At that time, Liang Xing and others looted more than five thousand households and let them burn, kill and rob together. All counties and towns could not be lower. They were very frightened and transferred the county government to the county.

古文：议者悉以为当移就险，浑曰： 兴等破散，窜在山阻。
现代文：商议的人文人应该转移到险要的地方，郑浑说： 梁兴等人残破分散，在山林间流窜。
English: Zheng Hun said: Liang Xing and others are scattered and scattered among the mountains and forests.

古文：虽有随者，率胁从耳。
现代文：即使有跟随的人，也是出于被胁迫才跟随的。
English: Even if there are followers, they are only following out of coercion.

古文：今当广开降路，宣喻恩信。
现代文：现在应该大开投降的门路，向他们明白宣告恩德信义。
English: Now is the time to open wide the door to surrender, and to declare their loyalty.

古文：而保险自守，此示弱也。 
现代文：但如果到转移到险要地势自我防守，只是向敌人示弱。 
English: But if it defends itself by moving to a precarious position, it only shows weakness to the enemy.

古文：乃聚敛吏民，治城郭，为守御之备。
现代文：就召集吏役百姓，修整城墙，做为防御的准备。
English: He summoned his officials and people to repair the city wall and prepare for defense.

古文：遂发民逐贼，明赏罚，与要誓，其所得获，十以七赏。
现代文：然后发动百姓追赶贼人，明确赏赐惩罚，约定盟誓，他们所缴获的物资，将其中的十分之七赏赐给他们。
English: Then the people set out in pursuit of the thieves, and the punishment was duly meted out, and it was agreed that seven-tenths of the booty should be given to them.

古文：百姓大悦，皆愿捕贼，多得妇女、财物。
现代文：百姓都很高兴，都愿意抓捕贼人，俘虏了很多妇女，收缴了很多钱财。
English: The people are very happy, they are willing to arrest thieves, many women have been captured, and a lot of money and property have been confiscated.

古文：贼之失妻子者，皆还求降。
现代文：敌军那些失去妻子孩子的，都回来请求投降。
English: The enemy soldiers, who had lost their wives and children, came back to ask for surrender.

古文：浑责其得他妇女，然后还其妻子，於是转相寇盗，党与离散。
现代文：郑浑令他们去寻找其他妇女，然后就将妻子孩子还给他们，于是这些人互相抢夺，梁兴的部众就四处离散。
English: Zheng Hun ordered them to look for other women, and then he returned their wives and children to them, so these people robbed each other, and Liang Xing's followers scattered everywhere.

古文：又遣吏民有恩信者，分布山谷告喻，出者相继。
现代文：郑浑又派有恩德信义的吏役百姓到山谷中宣告，里面出来投降的接连不断。
English: Zheng Hun also sent officials and commoners with the virtue of "Ende Xinyi" to the valley to announce that there was a continuous stream of people coming out to surrender.

古文：乃使诸县长吏各还本治以安集之。
现代文：郑浑就派各县的长吏各自回到原来治理的地方安抚百姓。
English: Zheng Hun sent the officials of each county to return to their original places of governance to appease the people.

古文：兴等惧，将馀众聚鄜城。
现代文：梁兴等人恐惧，率领剩下的队伍聚集在鄜城。
English: Liang Xing and others were afraid and led the rest of the team to gather in Lucheng.

古文：太祖使夏侯渊就助郡击之，浑率吏民前登，斩兴及其支党。
现代文：太祖派夏侯渊率队前来帮助郡中进攻敌军，郑浑率领百姓吏役首先登上城墙，将梁兴和他的党羽都斩杀了。
English: The great-grandfather sent Xia Houyuan to lead a team to help the county attack the enemy army. Zheng Hun led the people's officials to climb the city wall first, and killed Liang Xing and his followers.

古文：又贼靳富等，胁将夏阳长、邵陵令并其吏民入硙山，浑复讨击破富等，获二县长吏，将其所略还。
现代文：又有贼寇靳富等人挟持夏阳县长、邵陵县令和很多官吏百姓进入石岂山，郑浑又进攻并攻破了他们，解救了两个县邑的长吏，将他们所掳掠的百姓送回去。
English: Another group of thieves, including the bandit Qifu, took the governor of Xiayang County, the governor of Sholing County, and many officials and common people hostage and entered Shijiazhuang Mountain. Zheng Hun attacked and defeated them again, rescued the governors of two counties and towns, and sent back the people they had captured.

古文：及赵青龙者，杀左内史程休，浑闻，遣壮士就枭其首。
现代文：还有赵青龙，将左内史程休杀了，郑浑得知后，派遣装饰将赵青龙的首级斩下。
English: There was also Zhao Qinglong, who killed Zuo Nai Shicheng, and after Zheng Hun learned of this, he dispatched a decorator to cut off Zhao Qinglong's head.

古文：前后归附四千馀家，由是山贼皆平，民安产业。
现代文：前后归附郑浑的有四千多户人家，从此山贼被平定，百姓安心生产。
English: More than four thousand households have been annexed to Zhenghun. Since then, the bandits have been subdued, and the people can produce with peace of mind.

古文：转为上党太守。
现代文：后来郑浑转任上党太守。
English: Later, Zheng Hun was transferred to the post of the party's grand marshal.

古文：太祖征汉中，以浑为京兆尹。
现代文：太祖征讨汉中，任命郑浑为京兆尹。
English: Emperor Taizu conquered the Han Dynasty and appointed Zheng Hun as Emperor Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：浑以百姓新集，为制移居之法，使兼複者与单轻者相伍，温信者与孤老为比，勤稼穑，明禁令，以发奸者。
现代文：郑浑因为百姓刚刚聚集，为他们制定了移居的制度，让那些宗支多的家族和单弱的人家相互结成一伍，那些温和诚实的人和孤弱的老人成为邻居，勤于耕种，明确颁布禁令，以揭发奸邪之人。
English: Because the people had just gathered, Zheng Hun set up a system of migration for them, so that those families with many members and the single weak people's families joined each other, those gentle and honest people and the lonely old people became neighbors, diligently cultivated, and clearly issued a ban to expose the evil-doers.

古文：由是民安於农，而盗贼止息。
现代文：从此百姓安心农业生产，而盗贼也平息了。
English: Since then, the people have been able to carry out agricultural production with peace of mind, and the thieves have calmed down.

古文：及大军入汉中，运转军粮为最。
现代文：等到朝廷大军进入汉中，京兆地区运输的军粮最多。
English: By the time the imperial army entered Hanzhong, the largest amount of military grain was transported in the Beijing-Shanghai region.

古文：又遣民田汉中，无逃亡者。
现代文：郑浑又派遣百姓到汉中屯田，没有一个逃往的。
English: Zheng Hun also sent his people to the Han dynasty's military camps, but no one fled to them.

古文：太祖益嘉之，复入为丞相掾。
现代文：太祖更加赏识他，又让他入京担任丞相掾。
English: His great-grandfather appreciated him even more and had him enter the capital to serve as chancellor.

古文：文帝即位，为侍御史，加驸马都尉，迁阳平、沛郡二太守。
现代文：文帝继位魏王，任命郑浑为侍御史，加封驸马都尉，又转任阳平和沛郡两个郡的太守。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne of the Wei King, appointed Zheng Hun as the attendant of the imperial historian, added the title of captain of the horse, and was transferred to the governor of two counties in Yangping and Pei counties.

古文：郡界下湿，患水涝，百姓饥乏。
现代文：这两个郡地势低洼潮湿，经常有水涝灾害，百姓饥饿贫困。
English: These two counties are low-lying and wet, with frequent floods, and the people are hungry and poor.

古文：浑於萧、相二县界，兴陂遏，开稻田。
现代文：郑浑在萧、相两县的边界，修建池塘土堰，开垦稻田。
English: Zheng Hun built a pond weir and reclaimed rice fields on the border of Xiao and Xiang counties.

古文：郡人皆以为不便，浑曰： 地势洿下，宜溉灌，终有鱼稻经久之利，此丰民之本也。 
现代文：郡中百姓都认为不方便。郑浑说： 地势低洼，容易灌溉，最后会有渔业稻谷的长久获利，这是使百姓富裕的根本。 
English: The people in the county all think it is inconvenient. Zheng Hun said: The land is low-lying and easy to irrigate. In the end, there will be long-term profits from fishing and rice. This is the basis for making the people rich.

古文：遂躬率吏民，兴立功夫，一冬间皆成。
现代文：于是亲自带领吏役百姓，兴建水利，一个冬天的时间就修好了。
English: So he personally led the officials to serve the people and build water conservancy, and it was repaired in one winter.

古文：比年大收，顷亩岁增，租入倍常。
现代文：这之后每一年都获得大丰收，土地的产量年年增加，租税的收入也比往常成倍的增长。
English: After that, every year was a bumper harvest, the production of land increased year by year, and the income from taxes also increased more than usual.

古文：民赖其利，刻石颂之，号曰郑陂。
现代文：百姓感念得到的利益，给郑浑刻碑赞颂，并将他兴建的水利工程称为 郑陂 。
English: The people were so impressed with the benefits they received that they carved a monument in praise of Zheng Hun and called the water conservancy project he built "Zheng Huan."

古文：转为山阳、魏郡太守，其治放此。
现代文：后来郑浑又转任山阳、魏郡的太守，也是这样治理的。
English: Later, Zheng Hun was transferred to the position of the governor of Shanyang and Wei County, which was also governed in this way.

古文：又以郡下百姓，苦乏材木，乃课树榆为篱，并益树五果；榆皆成藩，五果丰实。
现代文：又因为郡中百姓因为缺少木材而苦恼，郑浑就鼓励他们种植榆树结成篱笆，又多种五种果树；榆树都长成藩篱，果树都得到丰收。
English: Also, because the people in the county were suffering from a lack of wood, Zheng Hun encouraged them to plant eucalyptus trees to make fences, and five kinds of fruit trees; the eucalyptus trees all grew into fences, and the fruit trees all had a good harvest.

古文：入魏郡界，村落齐整如一，民得财足用饶。
现代文：进入魏郡境内，能看到村落排列整齐划一，百姓富足丰饶。
English: Entering the territory of Wei County, you can see the villages lined up neatly, and the people are rich and plentiful.

古文：明帝闻之，下诏称述，布告天下，迁将作大匠。
现代文：明帝得知，颁布诏令褒扬，将他的事情宣告天下，提升他为大匠。
English: When Emperor Ming learned of this, he issued a decree praising him, proclaiming his achievements to the world and promoting him as a great craftsman.

古文：浑清素在公，妻子不免於饥寒。
现代文：郑浑为官的时候清正廉洁，家中妻子孩子经常忍饥挨饿。
English: When Zheng Hun became an official, he was upright and honest, but his wife and children often went hungry.

古文：及卒，以子崇为郎中。
现代文：等到郑浑去世，朝廷任命他的儿子郑崇为郎中。
English: After Zheng Hun's death, the imperial court appointed his son Zheng Chong as a vassal.

古文：仓慈字孝仁，淮南人也。
现代文：仓慈字孝仁，淮南人氏。
English: Cang Ci Zi Xiaoren, from the Huainan people.

古文：始为郡吏。
现代文：刚开始的时候在郡中担任小吏。
English: At the beginning, he worked as a minor official in the county.

古文：建安中，太祖开募屯田於淮南，以慈为绥集都尉。
现代文：建安年间，太祖在淮南招募士兵开垦屯田，让仓慈担任绥集都尉。
English: During the Jian'an period, Taizu recruited soldiers in Huainan to reclaim the Tunden, and made Cang Ci the commander of the Jianji.

古文：黄初末，为长安令，清约有方，吏民畏而爱之。
现代文：黄初末年，仓慈担任长安县令，他为官清廉俭约又治理有方，百姓对他既畏惧又敬爱。
English: At the end of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Cang Ci served as the magistrate of Chang'an County. He was a clean and frugal official and a good administrator. The people both feared and respected him.

古文：太和中，迁敦煌太守。
现代文：太和年间，仓慈被提升为敦煌太守。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizu, Cang Ci was promoted to the position of Dunhuang governor.

古文：郡在西陲，以丧乱隔绝，旷无太守二十岁。
现代文：敦煌郡在西北边境，因为战乱而与中原地区断绝往来，没有太守已经二十年之久。
English: Dunhuang County, on the northwest border, has been cut off from the Central Plains due to the war, and has not had a governor for twenty years.

古文：大姓雄张，遂以为俗。
现代文：那里的大家族张扬跋扈，成为一种习惯。
English: There, it is customary for large families to flaunt their wealth.

古文：前太守尹奉等，循故而已，无所匡革。
现代文：前任太守尹奉等人，只是按照过去的惯例治理，没有什么改革纠正。
English: The previous governor, Yin Bong, and others only governed in accordance with past practices, and there was no reform or correction.

古文：慈到，抑挫权右，抚恤贫羸，甚得其理。
现代文：仓慈到任后，抑制豪强势力，救济贫困羸弱的百姓，很符合做官的准则。
English: After Cang Ci took office, he restrained the strong and powerful forces and provided relief to the poor and weak people, which was very much in line with the official's standards.

古文：旧大族田地有馀，而小民无立锥之土；慈皆随口割赋，稍稍使毕其本直。
现代文：旧的大族有多余的土地，但弱小的百姓连立足的土地也没有；仓慈都按照人口数量减免赋税，让他们之缴纳符合土地价值的税款。
English: The old big clans have surplus land, but the weak people do not even have a foothold in the land; Cangzi has reduced and exempted taxes according to the number of population, and let them pay taxes according to the value of the land.

古文：先是属城狱讼众猥，县不能决，多集治下；慈躬往省阅，料简轻重，自非殊死，但鞭杖遣之，一岁决刑曾不满十人。
现代文：之前下属县城的诉讼案件很繁杂，县中不能判决，就都集中到郡一级来；仓慈亲自前去查阅资料，判决罪行轻重，如果不是被判处死刑的罪犯，都判处鞭刑，然后释放她们，一年中被判死罪的不到十个人。
English: Previously, the litigation cases under the county seat were very complicated, and if the county could not make a decision, they were all concentrated at the county level; Cang Ci personally went to check the data and decided the severity of the crime. If the criminals were not sentenced to death, they were sentenced to flogging and then released. Less than ten people were sentenced to death in one year.

古文：又常日西域杂胡欲来贡献，而诸豪族多逆断绝；既与贸迁，欺诈侮易，多不得分明。
现代文：又经常有西域的各族胡人想要来进献礼物，而郡中的豪强家族经常断然拒绝；即使和他们有贸易往来，也是欺骗侮辱，大多也得不到解决。
English: In addition, there are often Hu people of all ethnic groups in the western region who want to come and offer gifts, but the powerful families in the county often flatly refuse; even if there is trade with them, it is cheating and insulting, and most of them cannot be resolved.

古文：胡常怨望，慈皆劳之。
现代文：胡人经常怨怼，仓慈都慰劳他们。
English: Hu people often grudge, and Cang Ci always consoles them.

古文：欲诣洛者，为封过所，欲从郡还者，官为平取，辄以府见物与共交市，使吏民护送道路，由是民夷翕然称其德惠。
现代文：有想要到洛阳去的，仓慈帮他们处理好路上的通关文书，那些想要从郡城回国的，仓慈让官府按照公平的价格收取他们的货物，还用府库的物品和他们进行交易，让官吏百姓沿途护送他们，从那以后，百姓胡人都纷纷称赞他的仁德恩惠。
English: For those who wanted to go to Luoyang, Cang Ci helped them deal with the customs clearance documents on the way. For those who wanted to return home from the county seat, Cang Ci let the government collect their goods at a fair price, and also traded with them with the goods of the government treasury, and let the officials and the people escort them along the way. Since then, the people of Hu have praised his benevolence.

古文：数年卒官，吏民悲感如丧亲戚，图画其形，思其遗像。
现代文：几年之后仓慈在官任上去世，吏役百姓悲痛得就像是亲戚去世，并将他的形象画下来，寄托哀思。
English: A few years later, Cang Ci died in office, and the officials and people grieved as if a relative had passed away, and painted his image down to mourn.

古文：及西域诸胡闻慈死，悉共会聚於戊己校尉及长吏治下发哀，或有以刀画面，以明血诚，又为立祠，遥共祠之。
现代文：等到西域各族胡人得知仓慈去世，都聚集到戊己校尉和长吏那里表示哀痛，有人用刀划开自己的脸，以表示真诚的心意，又为他修建祠堂，能从远处祭奠。
English: When the Hu people of all ethnic groups in the western region learned that Cang Ci had passed away, they all gathered at the place of Captain Wu Ji and the officials to express their grief. Some people cut their faces with a knife to show their sincerity, and built a shrine for him, so that they could pay tribute to him from afar.

古文：自太祖迄于咸熙，魏郡太守陈国吴瓘、清河太守乐安任燠、京兆太守济北颜斐、弘农太守太原令狐邵、济南相鲁国孔乂，或哀矜折狱，或推诚惠爱，或治身清白，或擿奸发伏，咸为良二千石。
现代文：从太祖时期到元帝咸熙年间，魏郡太守有陈国的吴馞、清河太守乐安县的任燠、京兆太守济北的颜斐、弘农太守太原的令狐邵、济南相鲁国的孔乂，有的怀着怜悯判决案件，有的诚心待人心怀仁爱，有的修养自身清正廉洁，有的为民伸冤，都是俸禄二千石以上的好官。
English: From the time of Emperor Taizu to the time of Emperor Xianxi, the governors of Wei County included Wu Xi of Chen Province, Ren Zheng of Le'an County, the governor of Qinghe Province, Yan Fei of Jibei Province, Ling Fooshao of Taiyuan Province, the governor of Hongnong Province, and Kong Xi of Sanglu Province of Jinan Province. Some judged cases with compassion, some treated people with sincerity and benevolence, some cultivated themselves to be honest and upright, and some sought justice for the people. All of them were good officials with a salary of more than 2,000 koku.

古文：评曰：任峻始兴义兵，以归太祖，辟土殖谷，仓庾盈溢，庸绩致矣。
现代文：评曰：任峻起初发动义兵，并带领他们归附太祖，并开辟天地种植稻谷，仓库充实，建立了功绩。
English: Comment: At the beginning, Ren Jun mobilized volunteers and led them to join the great ancestor, and opened up the world to grow rice, stocked warehouses, and established achievements.

古文：苏则威以平乱，既政事之良，又矫矫刚直，风烈足称。
现代文：苏则依靠威势平定叛乱，既能妥善处理政事，又刚强正直，道德风尚足以为人称道。
English: The Soviet Union, on the other hand, relied on its might to quell the rebellion. It was not only able to properly handle political affairs, but also strong and upright, and its moral style was enough to be commended.

古文：杜畿宽猛克济，惠以康民。
现代文：杜畿处理政事将宽大和严厉相结合，对百姓有恩惠。
English: Dugui will combine leniency and severity in dealing with political affairs, which will be beneficial to the people.

古文：郑浑、仓慈，恤理有方。
现代文：郑浑、仓慈，抚恤调理百姓很有办法。
English: Zheng Hun, Cang Ci, and Fuxi have a good way of conditioning the people.

古文：抑皆魏代之名守乎！
现代文：这些都是魏朝著名的太守。
English: These are the famous emperors of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：恕屡陈时政，经论治体，盖有可观焉。
现代文：杜恕多次评述时政，陈述对于政治体制的意见，也很值得一看。
English: Du Shun repeatedly commented on current affairs, stating his views on the political system, which is also worth a look.

