古文：秦攻邯郸，十七月不下。庄谓王稽曰： 君何不赐军吏乎? 
现代文：秦兵攻打邯郸，经过个月的苦战也没攻下，秦国人佚庄对秦将王稽说： 您为什么不赏赐下级军官呢？ 
English: After a month of hard fighting, the Qin soldiers were unable to capture Shanzhuang. The Qin people of Shanzhuang said to the Qin general Wang Qi: Why don't you reward the lower-ranking officers?

古文：王稽曰： 吾与王也，不用人言。 
现代文：王稽说： 我和君王之间，彼此互相信赖，他人的进言起不了作用。 
English: Wang Qi said: Between me and the king, we trust each other, and the advice of others will not work.

古文：庄曰： 不然。父之于子也，令有必行者，必不行者。
现代文：佚庄反驳说： 我认为你不对，即使是父子关系，也有令在必行和不必行之分。
English: Zou Zhuang retorted, "I don't think you're right. Even if it's a father-son relationship, there is a distinction between what must be done and what must not be done.

古文：曰 去贵妻，卖爱妾 ，此令必行者也；因曰 毋敢思也 ，此令必不行者也。
现代文：假如说 丢掉娇妻，卖掉爱妾 ，这就是一道必行的命令，假如说 想也不想自己的妻妾 ，就是一道必然不能实行的命令。
English: If you say, "Throw away my wife," or "Sell my concubine," this is a mandatory order. If you say, "I don't want my wife or concubine," this is a mandatory order.

古文：宁闾妪曰， 其夕，某孺子内某士 。
现代文：看守大门的老太太曾说闲话： 那天晚上，那年轻媳妇召进一个野男人。 
English: The old lady guarding the gate once gossiped: That night, the young daughter-in-law called in a wild man.

古文：贵妻已去，爱妾已卖，而心不有。
现代文：对父子关系来说，娇妻已经走了，爱妾也已经卖了，而父亲不应该说不许有思念之情。
English: As far as the father-son relationship is concerned, the mistress has already left, the concubine has already been sold, and the father should not say that he is not allowed to miss her.

古文：欲教之者，人心固有。
现代文：对老妇的闲话而言，她要控告小媳妇通奸，而思淫之心人皆有之。
English: As far as the old woman's gossip is concerned, she wants to accuse her younger daughter-in-law of adultery, and everyone has a lustful heart.

古文：今君虽幸於王，不过父子之亲；军吏虽贱，不卑于守闾妪。
现代文：现在阁下虽然很得君王的宠信，但是君臣关系不能超过父子的骨肉至亲；而下级军官虽然身份微贱，总不会低于看门的老太婆。
English: Now, though your excellency is very much in the king's favour, the relation of prince and vassal cannot exceed that of father and son; and the lower-ranking officer, though of lowly status, will never be lower than the old woman who keeps the gate.

古文：且君擅主轻下之日久矣。
现代文：况且阁下仰仗君王的宠信，平日一直轻视属下。
English: Moreover, you rely on the king's favor, and you have always despised your subordinates.

古文：闻 三人成虎，十夫楺椎。众口所移，毋翼而飞 。
现代文：常言道： 三个人说有虎，大家就会相信有虎；十个人说大力士可以折弯铁椎，大家也会相信是事实；众口一词，就可以使事物迁移变化、不翼而飞。 
English: As the saying goes: If three people say that there is a tiger, everyone will believe that there is a tiger; if ten people say that Hercules can bend an iron spine, everyone will believe that it is true; if many people say the same thing, things will change and disappear.

古文：故曰，不如赐军吏而礼之。 
现代文：所以实在不如赏赐诸将加以优遇！ 
English: Therefore, it is really better to reward those who will be given preferential treatment!

古文：王稽不听。
现代文：可是王稽不肯采纳这项建议。
English: However, Wang Qi refused to accept this suggestion.

古文：军吏穷，果恶王稽、杜挚以反。 
现代文：不久诸将处在困境时，果然有人返回秦国，控告王稽和杜挚谋反。
English: Before long, when they were in a difficult situation, someone returned to Qin to accuse Wang Qin and Du Zhiyi of plotting a rebellion.

古文：秦王大怒，而欲兼诛范睢。
现代文：结果秦昭王大怒，严厉的制裁了王稽和杜挚，甚至要把范睢一起处死。
English: As a result, Qin Zhao Wang was furious and severely sanctioned Wang Qi and Du Zhi, and even wanted to put Fan Qi to death together.

古文：范睢曰： 臣，东鄙之贱人也，开罪于楚、魏，遁逃来奔。
现代文：范睢说： 臣只不过是东方乡间一草民，由于在楚魏犯了法，才逃到秦国来。
English: Fan Qi said, "The minister is just a villager in the eastern countryside. He only fled to Qin because he broke the law in Chu and Wei.

古文：臣无诸侯之援，亲习之故，王举臣于羁旅之中，使职事，天下皆闻臣之身与王之举也。
现代文：臣并没有诸侯的支援，同时也没有亲友在秦国朝中。可是大王即能在臣流浪时加以重用，托付以军国大任，天下的人都知道臣与大王的事。
English: The vassal did not have the support of the lords, nor did he have relatives and friends in the Qin Dynasty. However, the great king could make heavy use of the vassal when he wandered, entrusting him with the military and state affairs. People all over the world know about the vassal and the great king.

古文：今遇惑或与罪人同心，而王明诛之，是王过举显于天下，而为诸侯所议也。
现代文：如今臣遇到谗言，有人认为臣和罪人同心，而大王要杀臣，就等于说大王以前重用臣是错误的，必然会招致天下诸侯的议论。
English: Today, when a vassal encounters criticism, some people think that the vassal and the sinner are of the same mind, and the great king wants to kill the vassal, which is tantamount to saying that the great king was wrong to use the vassal in the past, which will inevitably lead to discussions among the princes of the world.

古文：臣愿请药赐死，而恩以相葬臣，王必不失臣之罪，而无过举之名。 王曰： 有之。 
现代文：所以臣愿意服毒自尽，并且恳请大王恩准以宰相之礼葬臣。这样，大王虽然处臣以死罪，也不会落得一个误用重臣之名。 秦昭王说： 有道理！ 
English: Therefore, the vassal was willing to take poison to commit suicide, and implored the great king Enjun to bury the vassal with the courtesy of the prime minister. In this way, although the great king sentenced the vassal to death, he would not fall into a misuse of the name of the senior vassal. Qin Zhao Wang said: That's right!

古文：遂弗杀而善遇之。
现代文：于是秦王没有杀范睢，而且仍然厚待他。
English: As a result, King Qin did not kill Fan Qi, and still treated him well.

