古文：谷永字子云，长安人也。
现代文：谷永字子云，是长安人。
English: Yanong Ziyun is a native of Chang'an.

古文：父吉，为卫司马，使送郅支单于侍子，为郅支所杀，语在《陈汤传》。
现代文：父亲谷吉，做卫司马，作为使节送郅支单于侍子回国，被郅支所杀，这件事记载在《陈汤传》中。
English: His father, Guji, who was a Wei Sima, was sent as an envoy to escort his son back to China and was killed by his son. This event is recorded in "Chen Tang Biography."

古文：永少为长安小史，后博学经书。
现代文：谷永年轻时作长安小史，后来广博地学习经书。
English: When he was young, Gu Yong made a small history of Chang'an. Later, he studied scriptures extensively.

古文：建昭中，御史大夫繁延寿闻其有茂材，除补属，举为太常丞，数上疏言得失。
现代文：建昭中，御史大夫繁延寿听说他有优秀的才能，拜任他为自己的属吏，后举荐他为太常丞，他多次上奏疏谈论政治得失。
English: In the middle of Jian Zhao's reign, the Grand Historian Shen Yan Shou heard that he had outstanding talent, appointed him as his subordinate official, and later recommended him as Tai Changzheng. He repeatedly talked about political gains and losses at the meeting.

古文：建始三年冬，日食、地震同日俱发，诏举方正直言极谏之士，太常阳城侯刘庆忌举永待诏公车。
现代文：建始三年冬季，日食和地震同曰发生，皇帝命令选拔正直敢于直言能够尽力劝谏的士人，太常阳城侯刘庆忌推荐谷永待诏公车。
English: In the winter of the third year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, when a solar eclipse and an earthquake occurred on the same day, the emperor ordered the selection of a scholar who was honest, dared to speak frankly, and could do his best to persuade others. Liu Qingyi, the lord of the city of Changyang, recommended Gu Yongbai Zhao's bus.

古文：对曰：
现代文：谷永对答道：
English: Tanaga replied:

古文：陛下秉至圣之纯德，惧天地之戒异，饬身修政，纳问公卿，又下明诏，帅举直言，燕见绎，以求咎愆，使臣等得造明朝，承圣问。
现代文：陛下具有最为圣明的纯正品德，忧惧天地警告的奇特现象，整饬自身修治国政，询问并采纳公卿的建议，又颁下英明的命令，让众官推举敢于直言的人，抽空召见他们以探究异变发生的原委，来寻求上天降罪的原因，使我们这些士人得以到圣明的朝廷上来，接受圣上的询问。
English: His Majesty has the most holy and pure moral character, fears the strange phenomenon warned by heaven and earth, rectifies himself to govern the country, inquires and accepts the advice of the nobles, and issues a wise order to let the officials nominate those who dare to speak out, take the time to call them to investigate the cause of the occurrence of the mutation, to seek the reason for the fall of heaven, so that we can come to the holy court and accept the sacred inquiry.

古文：臣材朽学浅，不通政事。
现代文：我才能不佳学问浅薄，不通晓政事。
English: My talent is poor, my education is shallow, and I don't understand politics.

古文：窃闻明王即位，正五事，建大中，以承天心，则庶征序于下，日月理于上；如人君淫溺后宫，船乐游田，五事失于躬，大中之道不立，则咎征降而六极至。
现代文：私下裹听说圣明的君主即位，要端正貌、言、视、听、思五事，建立帝王统治的准则，来顺从天帝的心意，这样众多吉祥的征兆在下面才会序列出现，曰月在天上运行才会有规律；如果君王过分地沉溺在后宫，安于享乐和出游打猎，自身失掉了对五事的修正，统治的准则不能确立，那么灾祸的征兆就将降临而显示惩诫的六种灾异现象就会出现。
English: When a monarch ascends to the throne, he must set his appearance, speech, sight, hearing, and mind straight, establish the five principles of imperial rule, and obey the emperor's will, so that many auspicious signs will appear in sequence below, and the movement of the moon in the sky will have a regular pattern. If the monarch is excessively indulged in the harem, indulged in pleasure and hunting, and he has lost the correction of the five things, and the rule of rule cannot be established, then the signs of disaster will come and the six kinds of calamitous phenomena that show discipline will appear.

古文：凡灾异之发，各象过失，以类告人。
现代文：凡是灾祸异象的出现，各自象征着过失，按类警告世人。
English: And the appearance of all the signs of the times, each one of them a type of error, giving warning to the people.

古文：乃十二月朔戊申，日食婺女之分，地震萧墙之内，二者同日俱发，以丁宁陛下，厥咎不远，宜厚求诸身。
现代文：于是在十二月初一戊申，日食在婺女之时，地震在萧墙之内，两者同曰发生，来再三告示陛下，那些过失不算太远，应当深切地在自己身上寻找原因。
English: On the first day of the month of December, when the eclipse of the sun was in the morning, and the earthquake was in the evening, both of which occurred on the same day, he repeatedly warned His Majesty that those faults were not too far away, and that he should earnestly look for the causes in himself.

古文：意岂陛下志在闺门，未恤政事，不慎举错，娄失中与？
现代文：天意难道是因为陛下留心女色，不忧虑政事，不慎重举止，屡次失去中正吗？
English: Is it God's will that His Majesty should be heedless of women, unconcerned with political affairs, imprudent in his manners, and repeatedly lose his temper?

古文：内宠大盛，女不遵道，嫉妨专上，妨继嗣与？
现代文：是因为宠爱姬妾很过分，女子不遵守妇道，因为嫉妒都想独自占有圣上，妨碍承继子孙的兴旺吗？
English: Is it because they love their wives and concubines too much, or because women do not follow the feminine way, or because they are jealous and want to be the sole owners of the sacred places, thus hindering the prosperity of their children and grandchildren?

古文：古之王者废五事之中，失夫妇之纪，妻妾得意，谒行于内，势行于外，至覆倾国家，或乱阴阳。
现代文：古代的君王废止了五事的中正，丧失了夫妇间的道德关系，妻子姬妾得到了宠爱，就可以在内有所请求一定实行，在外擅用权力，以至于倾覆国家，迷惑扰乱阴阳之序。
English: Ancient emperors abolished the Five Precepts of Zhongzheng, lost the moral relationship between husband and wife, and their wives and concubines were favored. Therefore, they could request certain things to be carried out within, and use their power outside, to the point of overthrowing the country and disturbing the order of yin and yang.

古文：昔褒姒用国，宗周以丧；阎妻骄扇，日以不臧。
现代文：从前裹姒当权，宗周因此丧国；阎妻骄宠曰盛，因此出现日食。
English: Once upon a time, Zong Zhou was in power, and lost the country as a result; Yan Zhe's wife was proud and said that she was prosperous, so there was a solar eclipse.

古文：此其效也。
现代文：这是异象的征验啊。
English: This is a test of the vision.

古文：经曰： 皇极，皇建其有极。 
现代文：经书上说： 帝王统治的准则，就是要大大地建立起统治的中正。 
English: The sutra says: The principle of the emperor's rule is to greatly establish the rule of the center.

古文：传曰： 皇之不极，是谓不建，时则有日月乱行。 
现代文：经传上说： 统治准则不中正，这称作不建，此时就会出现日月运行混乱的现象。 
English: According to legend: If the ruling principle is not correct, which is called not building, then there will be a phenomenon of chaotic operation of the sun and moon.

古文：陛下践至尊之祚为天下主，奉帝王之职以统群生，方内之治乱，在陛下所执。
现代文：陛下登上最尊贵的帝位做了天下的君主，接受帝王的职责来统治众生，四方之内的太平与不太平，都在陛下的掌握之中。
English: His Majesty ascended the most prestigious imperial throne and became the monarch of the world, accepting the duties of the emperor to rule all beings. Peace and non-peace in the four directions are all under His Majesty's control.

古文：诚留意于正身，勉强于力行，损燕私之闲以劳天下，放去淫溺之乐，罢归倡优之笑，绝却不享之义，慎节游田之虞，起居有常，循礼而动，躬亲政事，致行无倦，安服若性。
现代文：您果真能留意修正自身，努力尽自己的力量做事，减少私人宴饮的空闲来操劳天下的事，放弃远离过分沉溺的逸乐，停止倡优艺人娱乐的享受，杜绝鬼神不享的行为，谨慎地节制出游打猎的玩乐，起居有一定的规律，遵循礼法来做事，亲自治理政事，致力于实际行动而没有倦怠，安心地从事一切像天性一样自然。
English: Can you really pay attention to correcting yourself, strive to do things to the best of your ability, reduce the idle time of private banquets to manage the affairs of the world, give up the pleasure of indulgence, stop the enjoyment of entertainment by outstanding entertainers, eliminate the behavior that is not enjoyed by ghosts and gods, carefully control the play of hunting, live with a certain regularity, follow the etiquette to do things, pro-self-governance, commit to practical actions without fatigue, and safely engage in everything as natural as nature.

古文：经曰： 继自今嗣王，其毋淫于酒，毋逸于游田，惟正之共。 
现代文：经书上说： 从今以后继承祖业的君王，不要过多沉溺于酒宴，不要放纵于出游打猎，衹应该恭谨地修正自身。 
English: The sutra says: From now on, kings who inherit the ancestral line should not indulge in too much drinking and feasting, should not indulge in hunting trips, and should respectfully correct themselves.

古文：未有身治正而臣下邪者也。
现代文：没有主上自身修治中正而臣下奸邪的。
English: There is no such thing as a superior who is righteous in his or her own cultivation, while a subordinate commits evil.

古文：夫妻之际，王事纲纪，安危之机，圣王所致慎也。
现代文：夫妻之间的关系，是君王治事的纲纪，社稷安危的关键，是圣明的君王最应慎重的。
English: The relationship between husband and wife is the key to the discipline of the monarch's administration and the safety of society. It is the most prudent thing for the king of wisdom to do.

古文：昔舜饬正二女，以崇至德；楚庄忍绝丹姬，以成伯功；幽王惑于褒姒，周德降亡；鲁桓胁于齐女，社稷以倾。
现代文：从前舜告诫二女端正言行，使自己高尚的品德更加崇高；楚庄王忍痛不见丹姬，因此成就了霸主的功业；周幽王被裹姒所迷惑，周德衰败国家灭亡；鲁桓公被齐女姜氏所胁迫，社稷因此倾覆。
English: In the past, Zhou warned the two women to speak and act righteously, so that their noble character would be more sublime; the king of Chuzhuang could not bear to see Tangji, so he achieved the work of the overlord; the king of Zhouyu was confused by the shroud, the country of Zhoude fell into decline and perished; the prince of Luhuan was coerced by the Qi woman Jiang, and the social order was overturned.

古文：诚修后宫之政，明尊卑之序，贵者不得嫉妨专庞，以绝骄嫚之端，抑褒、阎之乱，贱者咸得秩进，各得厥职，以广继嗣之统，息《白华》之怨，后宫亲属，饶之以财，勿与政事，以远皇父之类，损妻党之权，未有闺门治而天下乱者也。
现代文：您果真能够修整后宫的事务，明确尊卑的顺序，地位高的不能因嫉妒独占皇宠，以断绝骄纵轻慢的端倪，抑制裹姒、阎妻之类的祸乱，地位低的都能够按次序侍奉君主，各自得以尽她们的职责，就可扩大后代子孙的延续，平息《白华》之类的怨恨，后宫亲属，在财用上使他们富足，不要让他们参与政事，以此来疏远皇父一类靠宠幸得官的人，削弱妻党的权力，没有闺门修整而天下混乱的。
English: If you can truly rectify the affairs of the harem, clarify the order of superiority and inferiority, the high status cannot monopolize the imperial favor due to jealousy, to cut off the signs of arrogance and frivolity, suppress the scourge of the wife and the wife, the low status can serve the monarch in order, and each can fulfill their duties, it can expand the continuation of the descendants, quell the resentment of the "White Flower," the relatives of the harem, make them rich in financial terms, and do not let them participate in politics, so as to alienate the imperial father and other people who have been favored by favor, weaken the power of the wife party,

古文：治远自近始，习善在左右。
现代文：治服远方要从治理近处开始，学习好的品行要从左右的人开始。
English: Curing the far away should start from curing the near, and learning good manners should start from the people around.

古文：昔龙管纳言，而帝命惟允；四辅既备，成王靡有过事。
现代文：从前龙主管纳言，而舜的命令就很诚信允当；四辅已经完备，成王没有过失。
English: In the past, the leader of the dragon gave advice, and the order of the dragonfly was very honest and appropriate; the four auxiliary organs were complete, and Cheng Wang did not make any mistakes.

古文：诚敕正左右齐栗之臣，戴金貂之饰、执常伯之职者，皆使学先王之道，知君臣之义，济济谨孚，无敖戏骄恣之地，则左右肃艾，群僚仰法，化流四方。
现代文：您果真能告诫饬正左右掌管万事的大臣，戴着金貂之饰、掌握常伯职责的人，都让他们学习先王之道，懂得君臣之间的大义，众人都学会谨慎守信用，没有嬉戏骄横放纵的过失，那么左右的大臣恭敬平顺，群僚仰视效法，教化就会流传到四方。
English: You can really admonish the ministers who are in charge of everything around you, the people who wear the ornaments of the golden scepter and master the duties of the great-uncle, and let them learn the way of the former king and understand the great justice between the monarchs and ministers. Everyone will learn to be cautious and keep the trust, and there will be no mistakes of arrogance and indulgence. Then the ministers around you will be respectful and smooth, and the colleagues will look up and follow the example, and the enlightenment will spread to the four directions.

古文：经曰： 亦惟先正克左右。 
现代文：经书上说： 要先整顿制约左右近臣。 
English: The sutra says, "We must first rectify and restrict the right and left vassals."

古文：未有左右正而百官枉者也。
现代文：没有左右近臣正直而百官不正的。
English: There is no such thing as a loyal subject who is honest and a hundred officials who are dishonest.

古文：治天下者尊贤考功则治，简贤违功则乱。
现代文：统治天下的人尊重贤才考论功绩天下就太平，轻慢贤才不论功绩天下就会混乱。
English: Those who rule the world respect talent, and when merit is supreme, the world will be peaceful. If talent is despised, the world will be chaotic, regardless of merit.

古文：诚审思治人之术，欢乐得贤之福，论材选士，必试于职，明度量以程能，考功实以定德，无用比周之虚誉，毋听浸润之谮诉，则抱功修职之吏无蔽伤之忧，比周邪伪之徒不得即工，小人日销，俊艾日隆。
现代文：您果真能仔细地考虑统治民众的方法，为有得到贤能的人的福气而欢悦，论才能选拔士人，一定要试用到职位上，明确规定考核标准来衡量他们的能力，考查功绩实际来评定他们的德行，不要采用结伙营私的人虚伪的赞美之辞，不要听受积渐深的诬陷之言，那么拥有功绩修正职责的官吏没有优点被隐蔽、受到中伤的忧虑，结党营私邪恶诡诈的人不能得到官位，小人一天天减少，俊杰治能之士一天天多起来。
English: If you can really carefully consider the methods of governing the people, rejoice in the blessing of those who have gained merit, select scholars on the basis of ability, must try to use them in the position, clearly set the assessment standards to measure their ability, examine the merits to assess their virtues, do not use the hypocritical praise of the gangsters, and do not listen to the words of the accumulated frame-up, then the officials who have the merit correction responsibility have no worries about the merits being hidden and slandered, the gangsters, evil and deceitful people can not get the official position, the villains are decreasing day by day, and the handsome and talented people are increasing day by day.

古文：经曰： 三载考绩，三考黜陟幽明。 
现代文：经书上说： 三年一次考核官吏的功绩，考核三次后就罢退那些幽暗无功的，升迁那些昭明有功的。 
English: The scripture says: The merits of officials should be appraised once every three years. After three appraisals, those who are obscure and without merit should be dismissed, and those who are clearly meritorious should be promoted.

古文：又曰： 九德咸事，俊艾在官。 
现代文：又说： 具有九德的人都任用做事，俊杰治能之士都有官位。 
English: He also said: People with nine virtues are appointed to do things, and those who are good at doing things have official positions.

古文：未有功赏得于前众贤布于官而不治者也。
现代文：没有论功行赏实行在前，众多有才智的人安置在官位上而国家不太平的。
English: There is no merit-based reward system in place, many talented people have been placed in official positions, and the country is not peaceful.

古文：尧遭洪水之灾，天下分绝为十二州，制远之道微而无乖畔之难者，德厚恩深，无怨于下也。
现代文：尧时遭受洪水灾害，天下分隔成为十二个州，控制远方的力量衰微，却没有背逆反叛的灾患，这是因为尧的德行淳厚恩惠深重，百姓没有怨恨的啊。
English: At that time, it suffered flood disasters, the world was divided into twelve states, and the power to control the distant regions waned, but there was no disaster of rebellion. This is because the virtue of the state is profound and the people have no resentment.

古文：秦居平土，一夫大呼而海内崩析者，刑罚深酷，吏行残贼也。
现代文：秦处于坦平无阻的大地上，一个人振臂大呼而四海之内崩溃解体，是因为刑罚深重残酷，官吏的行为残暴狠毒啊。
English: Qin is located on a flat and unimpeded land. If a person waves his arms and shouts loudly, but collapses and disintegrates within four seas, it is because the punishment is very cruel and the behavior of officials is cruel and vicious.

古文：夫违天害德，为上取怨于下，莫甚乎残贼之吏。
现代文：违背天意败坏道德，替君主取怨于百姓的，没有比残暴狠毒的官吏更厉害的。
English: There is nothing more cruel and vicious than a bureaucrat who, against the will of heaven, corrupts morals and takes up the grievances of the people on behalf of the monarch.

古文：诚放退残贼酷暴之吏锢废勿用，益选温良上德之士以亲万胜，平刑释冤以理民命，务省繇役，毋夺民时，薄收赋税，毋殚民财，使天下黎元咸安家乐业，不苦逾时之役，不患苛暴之政，不疾酷烈之吏，虽有唐尧之大灾，民无离上之心。
现代文：您果真能驱逐撤销残暴狠毒严酷暴虐的官吏废止不用，增加选拔温和善良有上德的人来亲抚民众，平缓刑罚释放冤屈的人来顺理民众的生命，致力于减少徭役，不要夺占农时，少收赋税，不要用尽民众的财力，让天下黎民都能安居乐业，不因延时的劳役而愁苦，不因苛暴的政治而忧虑，不因残酷的官吏而痛苦，即使有唐尧时的大灾害，百姓也没有背离君主的心思。
English: Can you really expel, revoke and abolish the cruel, vicious, harsh and tyrannical officials, abolish the unnecessary, increase the selection of gentle, kind and virtuous people to caress the people, relax the punishment and release the wrongdoers to straighten out the lives of the people, strive to reduce the corvee, do not occupy the agricultural time, reduce taxes, and do not exhaust the financial resources of the people, so that the people of the world can live and work in peace, do not suffer from delayed labor, do not worry about harsh politics, and do not suffer from cruel officials. Even if there are great disasters in Tang Dynasty, the people have not deviated from the monarch's

古文：经曰： 怀保小人，惠于鳏寡。 
现代文：经书上说： 招抚安置百姓，施仁爱于鳏寡。 
English: The scripture says: "Foster and settle the people, show kindness and compassion to widows and orphans.

古文：未有德厚吏良而民畔者也。
现代文：没有君主德行淳厚官吏贤良而百姓叛乱的。
English: There are no monarchs who are virtuous, virtuous officials and virtuous people who lead the people to revolt.

古文：臣闻灾异，皇天所以谴告人君过失，犹严父之明诫。
现代文：我听说灾祸异象，是皇天用来责备告诫人君过失的，就像慈严的父亲明白的告诫。
English: I have heard that the evil omens are used by the emperor to reprove and admonish people for their faults, just like the clear admonition of a merciful father.

古文：畏惧敬改，则祸销福降；忽然简易，则咎罚不除。
现代文：害怕担忧而恭谨地改正，那么灾祸就会消失，福气就会降临；忽视轻慢这些告诫，灾祸的惩罚就不会消除。
English: Fear and worry and respectfully correct, then the calamity will disappear, the blessing will come; ignore these admonitions, the punishment of the calamity will not be eliminated.

古文：经曰： 飨用五福，畏用六极。 
现代文：经书上说： 行事适合天意，五福就会降临；行事违背天意，六极就会降临。 
English: The scripture says: If one's actions are in accordance with God's will, five blessings will be bestowed; if one's actions are contrary to God's will, six blessings will be bestowed.

古文：传曰： 六沴作见，若不共御，六罚既侵，六极其下。 
现代文：经传上说： 六种灾气兴起显现，如果不恭敬地修德来御灾，六种惩罚就会侵入，六种灾异的现象就会降临。 
English: According to legend, six kinds of calamities will arise and appear. If one does not respectfully cultivate virtue to avoid calamities, six kinds of punishments will invade, and six kinds of disastrous phenomena will descend.

古文：今三年之间，灾异锋起，小大毕具，所行不享上帝，上帝不豫，炳然甚著。
现代文：现今三年之间，灾祸异象蜂起，大小都具备了，这是行事不合天帝的心意，天帝不高兴，昭示得很显著。
English: In the three years between now and then, disasters, visions, and uprisings, large and small, have all taken place. This is a very clear indication that we are not acting in accordance with the will of Heavenly Father, and that Heavenly Father is not pleased.

古文：不求之身，无所改正，疏举广谋，又不用其言，是循不享之迹，无谢过之实也，天责愈深。
现代文：不在自身上寻求原因，就无法改正，从速处举荐士人，广泛征求意见，又不采纳他们的言论，这是沿循不合天意的轨迹，没有谢过的实际行动啊，天帝的责罚会因此更重。
English: If you don't look for the cause in yourself, you won't be able to correct it. If you immediately recommend scholars, widely solicit opinions, and don't adopt their remarks, this is following a trajectory that is not in accordance with God's will. If you don't thank them for their actual actions, God's punishment will be heavier.

古文：此五者，王事之纲纪。南面之急务，唯陛下留神。
现代文：这五件事，是君王政事的法度，是南面而治的紧要事务，希望陛下留意。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will pay attention to these five matters, which are the laws of the monarch's political affairs and the urgent matters of governing the country.

古文：对奏，天子异焉，特召见永。
现代文：对策进上，天子对此很惊异，特意召见谷丞。
English: As the countermeasures progressed, Tenshi was surprised by this and specifically summoned Tanetsune.

古文：其夏，皆令诸方正对策，语在《杜钦传》。
现代文：那年夏天，命令各位方正都来对策，这件事记载在《杜钦传》中。
English: That summer, all parties were ordered to come up with countermeasures, which was recorded in "Duchin Biography."

古文：永对毕，因曰： 臣前幸得条对灾异之效，祸乱所极，言关于圣聪。
现代文：谷永对答完毕，接着说道： 我先前有幸得以条陈奏对灾异的效验，祸乱的极至，言辞关系到您听纳的圣明。
English: After finishing his answer, Gu Yong said, "I had the privilege of being able to play the effect of calamity, the extreme of calamity, the words are related to the holy light you listen to.

古文：书陈于前，陛下委弃不纳，而更使方正对策，背可惧之大异，问不急之常论，废承天之至言，角无用之虚文，欲末杀灾异，满谰诬天，是故皇天勃然发怒，甲己之间暴风三溱，拔树折木，此天至明不可欺之效也。 
现代文：奏书陈述在前，陛下舍弃不采纳，却又改让方正对策，不正视值得忧惧的不寻常的现象，询问不紧急的平常之论，废止承合天意的至理之言，竞相呈献无用的空话，想要抹杀灾异，欺罔诬蠛天意，因此皇天勃然发怒，甲己之间暴风三次到达，拔起折断树木，这是天帝最为圣明不可欺罔的征验啊。 
English: When the report was presented, His Majesty refused to accept it, but instead let Fang Zheng make countermeasures, ignore unusual phenomena worthy of fear, inquire about ordinary theories that are not urgent, abolish the words of truth that conform to the will of heaven, compete to present useless empty words, want to obliterate disasters, and deceive the false will of heaven. Therefore, the emperor was furious, and the storm arrived three times and pulled up the broken trees. This is the most sacred test of the emperor.

古文：上特复问永，永对曰： 日食、地震，皇后、贵妾专宠所致。 
现代文：皇上特意又询问谷永，谷永对答道： 日食地震，是皇后贵妾独占宠幸导致的。 
English: The emperor specifically inquired about Tanionaga, and Tanionaga replied: The eclipse earthquake was caused by the exclusive favor of the empress's concubine.

古文：语在《五行志》。
现代文：这件事记载在《五行志》裹。
English: This phrase appears in the "Five Elements."

古文：是时，上初即位，谦让委政元舅大将军王凤，议者多归咎焉。
现代文：在这时，皇上刚刚即位，谦虚礼让，把政事委托给大将军王凤，议臣多归罪于王凤。
English: At this time, the emperor had just ascended the throne, and he was modest and courteous, entrusting the political affairs to the general Wang Feng. The councilors mostly blamed Wang Feng.

古文：永知凤方见柄用，阴欲自托，乃复曰：
现代文：谷永知道王凤刚刚被信任而掌权，暗中想依附王凤，于是又说：
English: Knowing that Wang Feng had just been trusted to take power, Gu Yong secretly wanted to cling to Wang Feng, so he said:

古文：方今四夷宾服，皆为臣妾，北无薰粥冒顿之患，南无赵佗、吕嘉之难，三垂晏然，靡有兵革之警。
现代文：现今四夷归服，都成了您的臣妾，北方没有薰粥冒顿的忧患，南方没有赵佗、吕嘉的患难，三面边境安定，没有动用兵革的警报。
English: Now that the four barbarians have been subdued, they have all become your vassals and concubines. In the north, there is no grueling suffering, in the south, there is no suffering of Zhao Wei and Lujia, the three-sided border is stable, and there is no warning of the use of force.

古文：诸侯大者乃食数县，汉吏制其权柄，不得有为，亡吴、楚、燕、梁之势。
现代文：大的诸侯才食俸数县，朝廷的官吏控制着他们的权力，使他们不能有什么作为，没有了吴、楚、燕、梁四面并立的局面。
English: The great lords were only able to feed several counties, and the officials of the imperial court controlled their power, so that they could not do anything. There was no situation where Wu, Chu, Yan, and Liang stood side by side.

古文：百官盘互，亲疏相错，骨肉大臣有申伯之忠，洞洞属属，小心畏忌，无重合、安阳、博陆之乱。
现代文：百官盘根错结，亲疏相互间杂，骨肉大臣有申伯一样的忠心，虔敬恭谨，小心翼翼有所畏忌，没有重合、安阳、博陆之类的叛乱。
English: The bureaucrats are entangled and intertwined, and they are all distantly related to each other. The Minister of Flesh and Blood has the same loyalty as Shen Bo, is pious and respectful, and is cautious and fearful. There are no overlapping, Anyang, Bolu and other rebellions.

古文：三者无毛发之辜，不可归咎诸舅。
现代文：这三方面没有毛发般纤细的罪过，不可以归罪于诸舅。
English: These three aspects do not have hair-thin sins, and cannot be attributed to the uncles.

古文：及欲以政事过差丞相父子、中尚书宦官，槛塞大异，皆瞽说欺天者也。
现代文：这和想以政事来找丞相父子的过失差错、中伤尚书宦官，搪塞不寻常的异象的，都是以不合事理的谬论欺罔天帝的人呀。
English: This and those who want to use politics to find the faults and errors of the prime minister and his son, slander the eunuchs, and suppress unusual visions, are all people who deceive the emperor with unreasonable fallacies.

古文：窃恐陛下舍昭昭之白过，忽天地之明戒，听暗昧之瞽说，归咎乎无辜，倚异乎政事，重失天心，不可之大者也。
现代文：我私下裹恐怕陛下留下昭然明显的过失，忽视天地明白的告诫，听从愚昧的人的不合事理的谬论，归罪于无辜的人，把灾异的发生归依到政事上，深深地失掉天帝的主意，这是大大不可以的呀。
English: Privately, I am afraid that Your Majesty has left behind glaring faults, ignored the clear admonitions of heaven and earth, listened to the unreasonable fallacies of ignorant people, blamed innocent people, attributed the occurrence of disasters to political affairs, and deeply lost the idea of God. This is absolutely unacceptable.

古文：陛下即位，委任遵旧，未有过政。
现代文：陛下即位，委任官吏沿循旧例，没有政事的过失。
English: His Majesty acceded to the throne, appointed officials in accordance with the old practice, and there was no political fault.

古文：元年正月，白气较然起乎东方，至其四月，黄浊四塞，覆冒京师，申以大水，著以震蚀。
现代文：元年正月，白气显明地从东方升起，到了元年四月，黄色的浊气四处充塞，覆盖了京师，又发生大水灾，以地震和日食显示。
English: In the first month of the first year of the year, white gas rose conspicuously from the east. By April of the first year of the year, yellow argon gas filled everywhere, covering the Beijing Division, and major floods occurred, as shown by earthquakes and solar eclipses.

古文：各有占应，相为表里，百官庶事无所归倚，陛下独不怪与？
现代文：各有占，应验，相为表里，百官诸事没有什么可归属依赖的，陛下单单不奇怪吗？
English: Each has its place, its fulfillment, its appearance is only apparent, and the hundred officials have nothing to belong to or rely on. Isn't it strange, Your Majesty?

古文：白气起东方，贱人将兴之表也；黄浊冒京师，王道微绝之应也。
现代文：白气从东方升起，是卑贱的人将要兴起的标志啊；黄色的浊气覆盖京师，是王道衰败断绝的征验啊。
English: White gas rising from the east is a sign that the lowly will rise; yellow argon gas covering the capital is a test of the decline and fall of the royal road.

古文：夫贱人当起而京师道微，二者已丑。
现代文：贱人正当兴起而京师裹王道衰微，造两方面的征验已很不好。
English: The rise of the hussy is justified, but the decline of the emperor and the emperor's disciple, so the two aspects of conscription have been very bad.

古文：陛下诚深察愚臣之言，致惧天地之异，长思宗庙之计，改往反过，抗湛溺之意，解偏驳之爱，奋乾刚之威，平天覆之施，使列妾得人人更进，犹尚未足也，急复益纳宜子妇人，毋择好丑，毋避尝字，毋论年齿。
现代文：陛下果真能深察愚臣我的话，致力于忧惧天地的异象，长远地考虑宗庙的大计，改变以往更正过失，脱离沉溺的心思，消除偏颇的宠爱，振作干刚的威力，平分天帝庇护的恩惠，使众位姬妾得以人人轮流进侍，好像还不够，急需再多接纳适宜生子的妇人，不要挑拣美丑，不要避讳尝字，不要讲论年龄。
English: If His Majesty can really look deeply into the words of foolish ministers and me, devote himself to the vision of fearing heaven and earth, consider the grand plan of the ancestral temple in the long run, change the past, correct mistakes, get rid of indulgent thoughts, eliminate biased favors, invigorate the power of hard work, and equally distribute the grace of the Emperor's protection, so that all the concubines can take turns to attend, it seems that it is not enough, and it is urgent to accept more women who are suitable for having children, do not pick the beautiful and ugly, do not avoid the words, and do not talk about age.

古文：推法言之，陛下得继嗣于微贱之间，乃反为福。
现代文：按这个办法来推论，陛下能够在卑贱的人中间得到承继的子孙，还反而是福气。
English: According to this way of reasoning, it is actually a blessing for His Majesty to be able to have descendants among the lowly.

古文：得继嗣而已，母非有贱也。
现代文：祇是为了得到承继的子孙罢了，母亲没有卑贱的啊。
English: It's just for the sake of having descendants. There is nothing lowly about a mother.

古文：后宫女吏使令有直意者，广求于微贱之间，以遇天所开右，慰释皇太后之忧愠，解谢上帝之谴怒，则继嗣蕃滋，灾异讫息。
现代文：派后宫女史以及备使唤的人中适合皇上心意的，广泛地在卑贱的人中间寻求，以遇到天帝所展示的佑助，宽慰排解皇太后的担忧和怨愤，和解消除天帝的责备和怒气，那么承继的子孙就会繁衍生育，灾祸和异象就会止息。
English: Send forth the harem maidens and those who are ready to be summoned, and select from among the lowly those who suit the emperor's purpose. With the help and comfort shown by the heavenly emperor, the worries and resentment of the empress dowager will be relieved, and the reproaches and anger of the heavenly emperor will be reconciled and eliminated. Then, the descendants of the succession will reproduce and bear children, and the calamity and vision will cease.

古文：陛下则不深察愚臣之言，忽于天地之戒，咎根不除，水雨之灾，山石之异，将发不久；发则灾异已极，天变成形，臣虽欲捐身关策，不及事已。
现代文：陛下如果不能深察愚臣我的话，忽视天地的警告，灾祸的根源不消除，水雨灾害，山石异象，不久将会发生；发生了那么多灾异已经到了极点，天象的变异已经形成，我即使想要舍身献策，也于事无补了。
English: Your Majesty, if you can't look deeply into my words, ignore the warnings of heaven and earth, and don't eliminate the root causes of disasters, water and rain disasters, mountain and rock phenomena, will soon occur; so many disasters have occurred that they have reached the extreme, and the variation of celestial phenomena has been formed. Even if I want to give my advice, it will not help.

古文：疏贱之臣，至敢直陈天意，斥讥帷幄之私，欲间离贵后、盛妾，自知忤心逆耳，必不免于汤镬之诛。
现代文：疏远卑贱的臣子，能够敢于直率地陈述天意，斥责讥讽宫帷隐私，要离间尊贵的皇后和宠盛的姬妾，自知言语刺耳不合圣上心意，必定不能免除汤镬之刑的诛杀。
English: To alienate a lowly vassal, to be able to boldly and forthrightly state the will of heaven, to rebuke and ridicule the privacy of the palace curtain, to alienate a distinguished empress and a favored concubine, knowing that harsh words are not in accordance with the will of the Almighty, must not be exempt from the punishment of Tang Xi.

古文：此天保右汉家，使臣敢直言也。
现代文：这是天帝保佑汉家，使我敢于直率地说出这些啊。
English: It is the heavenly emperor's blessing on the Han family that makes me dare to say these things frankly.

古文：三上封事，然后得召；待诏一旬，然后得见。
现代文：三次进上密封的奏章，然后得以被召见；待诏一旬，然后得以谒见圣上。
English: Three times he went into the sealed manuscript, and then he was summoned; he had to wait for a while, and then he was able to see the saint.

古文：夫由疏贱纳至忠，甚苦；由至尊闻天意，甚难。
现代文：从疏远卑贱的地位得以进献忠言，很辛苦；从最尊贵的地位得以闻知天意，很不容易。
English: It is hard to be a loyal adviser from an alienated and lowly position; it is not easy to know the will of heaven from the most honorable position.

古文：语不可露，愿具书所言，因待中奏陛下，以示腹心大臣。
现代文：这些话不能泄露，希望一五一十地写下我的话，由侍中来进奏陛下，把它给心腹大臣过目。
English: These words must not be divulged. I hope you will write down my words in detail, and have an aide come to read them to Your Majesty, and then show them to your favorite minister.

古文：腹心大臣以为非天意，臣当伏妄言之诛；即以为诚天意也，奈何忘国家大本，背天意而从欲！
现代文：心腹大臣认为不是天意，我应当受到妄言之刑的处罚；如果认为果真是天意，为什么要忘掉国家的根本，违背天意来放纵私欲！
English: The Minister of Hearts and Belly thinks that it is not God's will, and I should be punished by the punishment of false speech; if it is really God's will, why should I forget the fundamentals of the country and violate God's will to indulge my selfish desires!

古文：唯陛下省察熟念，厚为宗庙计。
现代文：请陛下认真察看仔细考虑，多多地替宗庙打算。
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to carefully examine and consider this matter, and to make many plans for the ancestral temple.

古文：时，对者数十人，永与杜钦为上第焉。
现代文：当时应对的有数十人，谷永和杜钦是其中最优秀的。
English: At that time, there were dozens of people, of whom Gu Yong and Du Qin were the best.

古文：上皆以其书示后宫。
现代文：皇上把他们的奏疏都拿给后宫看。
English: The emperor showed the harem all of their calligraphy.

古文：后上尝赐许皇后书，采永言以责之，语在《外戚传》。
现代文：后来皇上曾经赐给许皇后书信，引用谷永的话来责备她，这件事记载在《外戚传》中。
English: Later, the emperor once gave a letter to Empress Xu, quoting Gu Yong's words to reproach her, which was recorded in "The Tale of the Mother-in-Law."

古文：永既阴为大将军凤说矣，能实最高，由是擢为光禄大夫。
现代文：谷永已经暗中替大将军王凤游说了，才能又的确是最优秀的，因此被提拔为光禄大夫。
English: Gu Yong has secretly lobbied for the general Wang Feng, and his talent is indeed the best, so he was promoted to the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：永奏书谢凤曰： 永斗筲之材，质薄学朽，无一日之雅，左右之介，将军说其狂言，擢之皂衣之吏，厕之争臣之末，不听浸润之谮，不食肤受之诉，虽齐桓、晋文用士笃密，察父哲兄覆育子弟，诚无以加！
现代文：谷永进上书信感谢王凤说： 我衹有斗筲一样小的才能，资质浅薄学问不佳，与将军没有一日的交情，也没有左右的介绍，将军赏悦我的狂妄之言，把我从皂衣小吏的位置上提拔起来，置身于谏静之臣的末位，不听从积渐！深的诬陷。不受纳不实的谗言，即使齐桓晋文任用士人笃信亲密，明察的父亲、聪智的兄长庇护养育子弟，实在也无以复加！
English: Gu Yongjin wrote a letter to thank Wang Feng, saying: I have little talent as a fighter, shallow qualifications, poor knowledge, no one-day friendship with the general, no introduction to the right and left, the general pleased me with my arrogant words, promoted me from the position of a soap-making official, put myself at the bottom of the quiet subordinates, do not listen to the accumulation! Deep frame-up. Unacceptable false slander, even if Qi Huan Jinwen appoints scholars to be faithful and close, the father who sees clearly, the wise elder brother to protect and raise his children, there is really nothing to do!

古文：昔豫子吞炭坏形以奉见异，齐客陨首公门以报恩施，知氏、孟尝犹有死士，何况将军之门！ 
现代文：从前豫子吞炭毁声爨面毁形来报答被待见的不寻常，齐门客在公门自到来报答孟尝君的恩施，知氏、孟尝还有为他们而死的勇士，何况将军的门下呢！ 
English: In the past, Yu Zi devoured charcoal, destroyed the sound, and disfigured the face to repay the unusual that was awaited. The guests at the public gate have been repaying Meng Yaojun's kindness since their arrival. Zhiji, Meng Yaojun, and the warriors who died for them, not to mention the general's door!

古文：凤遂厚之。
现代文：王凤于是厚待谷永。
English: Wang Feng then treated Gu Yong kindly.

古文：数年，出为安定太守。
现代文：多年以后，谷永出京师做了安定太守。
English: Many years later, Tanaga went to the capital and became the Prince of Stability.

古文：时，上诸舅皆修经书，任政事。
现代文：那时皇上诸舅都学习经书，掌管政务。
English: At that time, the emperor's uncles all studied scriptures and were in charge of government affairs.

古文：平阿侯谭年次当继大将军凤辅政，尤与永善。
现代文：平阿侯王谭按照年龄次序，应当接替大将军王凤辅佐政事，尤其与谷永亲善。
English: According to the order of age, Ping Ahou Wang Tan should succeed the great general Wang Fengsuo in political affairs. He is especially close to Gu Yong.

古文：阳朔中，凤薨。
现代文：阳朔年间，王凤薨。
English: During the Yangshuo era, Wang Fengyao.

古文：凤病困，荐从弟御史大夫音以自代。
现代文：王凤病重时，推荐堂弟御史大夫王音来代替自己。
English: When Wang Feng was seriously ill, he recommended his cousin Wang Yin, a doctor of history, to replace him.

古文：上从之，以音为大司马车骑将军，领尚书事，而平阿侯谭位特进，领城门兵。
现代文：皇上听从他的建议，任用王音作大司马车骑将军，领尚书事，而平阿侯王谭赐官位特进，领城门兵。
English: The emperor listened to his suggestion and appointed Wang Yin as the general of the carriage and the general of the cavalry and the leader of the clerical staff, while Ping Ah Hou Wang Tan was given the position of special promotion and the leader of the gate soldiers.

古文：永闻之，与谭书曰： 君侯躬周、召之德，执管、晏之操，敬贤下士，乐善不倦，宜在上将久矣，以大将军在，故抑郁于家，不得舒愤。
现代文：谷永听说了这件事，写给王谭一封信说：您自身具有周公、召公的品德，持有管子、晏子的操行，敬重有才德的人并能谦恭地对待他们，喜欢做善事不知疲倦，早就应该位在大将军了，因为有大将军在，所以抑郁在家，不能舒展忧愤。
English: When Gu Yong heard about this, he wrote a letter to Wang Tan saying, "You yourself have the virtue of being public-spirited and appealing to the public, have the manners of holding pipes and pliers, respect talented people and can treat them humbly, like to do good deeds tirelessly, and should have been a general long ago. Because there is a general, you are depressed at home and can't relax.

古文：今大将军不幸蚤薨，累亲疏，序材能，宜在君侯。
现代文：现在大将军不幸早薨，累计亲疏次序，排列才能高低，应该轮到您了。
English: Now, unfortunately, the general has died prematurely, the cumulative parent-child order, the ability to rank high and low, it should be your turn.

古文：拜吏之日，京师士大夫怅然失望。
现代文：拜官那天，京师士大夫怅然失望。
English: On the day of the official visit, Dr. Jing Shishi was disappointed.

古文：此皆永等愚劣，不能褒扬万分。
现代文：这都是因为我们这些人愚顽才能低下，不能嘉奖表扬万分之一。
English: It's all because we're too stupid to lower ourselves, we can't reward and praise one in a million.

古文：属闻以特进领城门兵，是则车骑将军秉政雍容于内，而至戚贤舅执管籥于外也。
现代文：近来听说您以特进之位领城门兵，造就是车骑将军容仪温文地在朝廷执政，最亲的贤舅却在外面掌管城门钥匙呀。
English: Recently, I heard that you are leading the gatekeepers in the position of special advancement. You are a chariot and cavalry general, and you are governing the court in a gentle manner. However, your closest uncle is in charge of the key to the city gate.

古文：愚窃不为君侯喜。
现代文：我私下裹替您感到不高兴。
English: On a personal level, I'm not happy for you.

古文：宜深辞职，自陈浅薄不足以固城门之守，收太伯之让，保谦谦之路，阖门高枕，为知者首。
现代文：您应该坚决要求辞职，陈说自己才能浅薄不足以坚固城门的守卫，收取太伯的谦让之名，保留谦逊的路径，关上门高枕安卧，做明智人的首领。
English: You should firmly ask for resignation, say that your talent is shallow and not strong enough to guard the gate, receive the name of the humble, keep the humble path, close the door and lie down, and be the leader of the wise.

古文：愿君侯与博览者参之，小子为君侯安此。 
现代文：希望您与见识广博的人共同考虑这件事，我替您这样安排了。 
English: I hope that you will consider this matter with those who know more, and I have arranged for you to do so.

古文：谭得其书大感，遂辞让不受领城门职。
现代文：王谭得到他的信很感动，于是推辞谦让不接受领城门的职位。
English: Wang Tan was very touched to receive his letter, so he declined to accept the position of leading the city gate.

古文：由是谭、音相与不平。
现代文：从此王谭和王音相互之间不和睦。
English: Since then, Wang Tan and Wang Yin have been at odds with each other.

古文：永远为郡吏，恐为音所危，病满三月免。
现代文：谷永在远地做郡官，担忧被王音危害，称病足足三个月得以免官。
English: Gu Yong worked as a county official in a distant place, worried about being harmed by Wang Yin, and said that he had been ill for three months and was relieved of his duties.

古文：音奏请永补营军司马，永数谢罪自陈，得转为长史。
现代文：王音奏请委任谷永做营军司马，谷永多次谢罪自己陈述情状，得以迁职作了长史。
English: Wang Yinso asked Gu Yong to be appointed as the camp's military commander, and Gu Yong repeatedly confessed his guilt and made a long history of being transferred.

古文：音用从舅越亲辅政，威权损于凤时，永复说音曰： 将军覆上将之位，食豪腴之都，任周、召之职，拥天下之枢，可谓富贵之极，人臣无二，天下之责四面至矣，将何以居之？
现代文：王音因逾越至亲以堂舅的身份辅佐政事，威势权力比王凤的时候降低了。谷永又游说王音说： 将军居任上将的职位，封食土地肥沃的大城，担负着周公、召公一样的职责，把握着天下的机要，可以称得上富贵的极点了，人臣中没有第二个，天下的责难就会从四面而来了，您将凭藉什么占据这种地位呢？
English: Wang Ying, as a result of overstepping the bounds of propriety, assisted the government affairs as a cousin, and his prestige and power were lower than that of Wang Feng. Gu Yong also lobbied Wang Ying, saying, "A general occupies the position of an admiral, feeds the fertile land of a big city, bears the same responsibilities as Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong, grasps the opportunities of the world, and can be said to be extremely rich. There is no second in the world, and the world's reproach will come from all sides. With what will you occupy this position?

古文：宜夙夜孳孳，执伊尹之强德，以守职匡上，诛恶不避亲爱，举善不避仇雠，以章至公，立信四方。
现代文：您应该朝夕不倦怠，持有伊尹般坚强的品德，来坚守职责辅助皇上，诛除恶人不回避亲近信爱的人，推举贤能不回避仇视敌对的人，来显示最大的公正，在四方树立信用。
English: You should not be tired in the morning and evening, have a strong moral character like Yi Yin, adhere to your duties to assist the emperor, eliminate the wicked, do not avoid those who are close to and love, and promote the virtuous, do not avoid those who are hostile, to show the greatest fairness and establish trust in the four directions.

古文：笃行三者，乃可以长堪重任，久享盛宠。
现代文：专心地实行这三方面，才能够长期担负重任，长久地享受深厚的宠幸。
English: Only by attentively practicing these three aspects can one shoulder heavy responsibilities for a long time and enjoy profound favors for a long time.

古文：太白出西方六十日，法当参天，今已过期，尚在桑榆之间，质弱而行迟，形小而光微。
现代文：太白出现在西方六十天，按规律应当高入天空，现在已经过了期，还在桑榆之间，本体虚弱而运行迟缓，形状小而光亮微弱。
English: Taibai appeared in the west sixty days ago, according to the law, it should be high into the sky, now it is overdue, still between the mulberry, the body is weak and sluggish, the shape is small and the light is weak.

古文：荧惑角怒明大，逆行守尾。
现代文：荧惑角气势强烈大而明亮，逆行居于尾宿。
English: The flare angle is strong and bright, and the retrograde motion is located in the tail.

古文：其逆，常也；守尾，变也。
现代文：火星逆行，是固定不变的；火星居于尾宿，是异变。
English: Mars retrograde is fixed and unchanging; Mars in retrograde is an aberration.

古文：意岂将军忘湛渐之义，委曲从顺，所执不强，不广用士，尚有好恶之忌，荡荡之德未纯，方与将相大臣乖离之萌也？
现代文：天意难道是指将军忘记了深沉隐伏的大义，委曲顺从，执事不坚强，不广泛任用士人，仍有好恶的忌讳，坦荡的品德不纯粹，正有舆将相大臣背离的开端吗？
English: Does Providence mean that the generals have forgotten the profound and hidden Great Righteousness, that they are submissive to the dictates of others, that the deacons are not strong, that they do not widely appoint laymen, that there are still taboos of likes and dislikes, that their straightforward moral character is not pure, and that there is the beginning of the deviation of the ministers from the generals?

古文：何故始袭司马之号，俄而金火并有此变？
现代文：为什么您刚继承司马的名号，不久金星和火星一起有这样的变异？
English: Why did you just inherit the name Sima, and why did Venus and Mars soon have such a mutation?

古文：上天至明，不虚见异，唯将军畏之慎之，深思其故，改求其路，以享天意。 
现代文：上天最为圣明，不会凭空地显示异象，希望将军敬畏而谨慎地看待这一切，深思变异的缘故，更改寻求执政的途径，来承合天意。 
English: Heaven is most holy, and will not show a vision out of thin air. I hope that the general will look at all this with awe and caution, ponder over the reasons for the change, and change the way of seeking to govern in order to carry out God's will.

古文：音犹不平，荐永为护菀使者。
现代文：王音还是不能心平，推荐谷永做了护菀使者。
English: Wang Yin still couldn't calm down and recommended Gu Yong to be the guardian angel.

古文：音薨，成都侯商代为大司马卫将军，永乃迁为凉州刺史。
现代文：王音薨，成都侯王商代替他做了大司马卫将军，谷永于是升迁为凉州刺史。
English: Wang Yinqian, the lord of Chengdu, Wang Shang, replaced him as the general of Mawei, and Gu Yong was promoted to the top of the history of Liangzhou.

古文：奏事京师讫，当之部，时有黑龙见东莱，上使尚书问永，受所欲言。
现代文：在京师奏事完毕，应当到部裹去，当时有黑龙出现在束莱，皇上派尚书询问谷永，听受他要说的话。
English: At that time, a black dragon appeared in Sokrai, and the emperor sent Shangshu to inquire about Gu Yong and listen to what he had to say.

古文：永对曰：
现代文：谷永对答说：
English: Tanaga replied:

古文：臣闻王天下有国家者，患在上有危亡之事，而危亡之言不得上闻；如使危亡之言辄上闻，则商、周不易姓而迭兴，三正不变改而更用。
现代文：我听说称王天下据有国家的人，忧患在于君主有危身亡国的行为，而告诫危亡的话却不能够被君主听到；假如使告诫危亡的话马上让君主听到，那么商周就不会改变姓氏而交替兴起，三代不变更政治而更相使用。
English: I have heard that there are people who have a country under the king, and the trouble is that the monarch has the behavior of endangering the country, but the words of warning of danger cannot be heard by the monarch; if the words of warning of danger are immediately heard by the monarch, then Shang Zhou will not change the surname and rise alternately, and the three generations will be more political and more used.

古文：夏、商之将亡也，行道之人皆知之，晏然自以若天有日莫能危，是故恶日广而不自知，大命倾而不寤。
现代文：夏商将要灭亡了，道路上的行人都知道，君主却安然地自以为像太阳在天上一样没有谁能危害他，因此过恶日益严重他自己却不知道，大命倾覆却不醒悟。
English: The summer merchant is about to perish, and all the passers-by on the road know it, but the sovereign calmly imagines that, like the sun in the sky, no one can harm him. As a result, his misdeeds become more and more serious, but he does not know it, and his fate is overturned, but he does not wake up.

古文：《易》曰： 危者有其安者也，亡者保其存者也。 
现代文：《周易》上说： 能够考虑到危险的才能保有安定，能够想到灭亡的才能够存在。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: Only those who can consider danger can maintain stability, and only those who can think of death can exist.

古文：陛下诚垂宽明之听，无忌讳之诛，使刍荛之臣得尽所闻于前，不惧于后患，直言之路开，则四方众贤不远千里，辐凑陈忠，群臣之上愿，社稷之长福也。
现代文：陛下果真能注意宽宏英明地听取意见，没有因忌讳杀人，使刍莞之臣能够在您面前陈述全部所听到的，不担忧后患，直言的路径打开了，那么四方众多贤士就会不远千里，像车辐集于轴心一样聚集到朝廷陈述忠诚，这是群臣的最大愿望，社稷的长久福气啊。
English: If His Majesty can truly pay attention to the magnanimity and wisdom of listening to opinions, without killing people because of taboos, so that the vassals of Gongguan can state in front of you all that they have heard, do not worry about the consequences, and the path of straightforward speech is opened, then many sages from all over the country will not be far away, like spokes gathered at the axis, and will gather to the imperial court to declare their loyalty. This is the greatest wish of the vassals, the long-term blessing of the society.

古文：汉家行夏正，夏正色黑，黑龙，同姓之象也。
现代文：汉家实行夏历正月，夏历正月属黑色，黑龙，是同姓的象征啊。
English: The first month of the Chinese calendar is the first month of the Chinese calendar, and the first month of the Chinese calendar is black, black dragon, which is a symbol of the same surname.

古文：龙阳德，由小之大，故为王者瑞应。
现代文：龙属阳德，从小到大，因此是王者的祥瑞之应。
English: Dragon belongs to Yang De, from small to large, so it is the king's auspicious response.

古文：未知同姓有见本朝无继嗣之庆，多危殆之隙，欲因扰乱举兵而起者邪？
现代文：不知是不是同姓有看见本朝没有继嗣的福庆，多有危险的裂隙，要趁此侵扰作乱举兵而起呢？
English: I wonder if someone with the same last name saw that there was a dangerous gap in this dynasty, since there was no successor to Fu Qing, and wanted to take advantage of this gap to raise an army in disorder.

古文：将动心冀为后者，残贼不仁，若广陵、昌邑之类？
现代文：还是启动心思期望继嗣君主之后，残暴不仁，像庐陵、昌邑之类？
English: Or do you start your mind with the expectation of succeeding the monarch and become cruel and heartless, like Fuling, Changyi and the like?

古文：臣愚不能处也。
现代文：我很愚钝不能断决。
English: I'm stupid and indecisive.

古文：元年九月黑龙见，其晦，日有食之。
现代文：元年九月黑龙出现，九月最后一日，又出现日食。
English: In September of the first year, the black dragon appeared, and on the last day of September, there was another solar eclipse.

古文：今年二月己未夜星陨，乙酉，日有食之。
现代文：今年二月己未夜星体陨落，乙酉，又出现日食。
English: In February of this year, a star fell from the sky, and there was another solar eclipse.

古文：六月之间，大异四发，二而同月，三代之末，春秋之乱，未尝有也。
现代文：六个月之间，大的异象四次出现，两次同月，三代的末年，春秋的混乱时，也不曾有过啊。
English: In the space of six months, the great vision appeared four times, twice in the same month, at the end of the third generation, during the chaos of spring and autumn.

古文：臣闻三代所以陨社稷丧宗庙者，皆由妇人与群恶没湎于酒。
现代文：我听说三代社稷灭亡宗庙丧失的原因，都是由于妇人和一些恶人沉湎于酒乐。
English: I heard that the reason for the loss of the ancestral temple in the third generation of the company's demise was all due to the woman and some evil people indulging in wine and music.

古文：《书》曰： 乃用妇人之言，自绝于天 ； 四方之逋逃多罪，是宗是长，是信是使 。
现代文：《周书》上说： 采用妇人之言，是自绝于天。  容纳四方逃亡多罪的人，尊崇并抬高他们，亲信并使用他们。 
English: "Zhou Shu" said: "To adopt the words of a woman is to deny oneself to heaven; to accommodate those who have fled from many crimes in all directions, to respect and elevate them, to trust and use them.

古文：《诗》云： 燎之方阳，宁或灭之？
现代文：《诗经》中说： 火烧得正烈，难道有能灭掉它的人吗？
English: In the Book of Psalms it says, "A fire is kindled, and who can quench it?

古文：赫赫宗周，褒姒■之！ 
现代文：赫赫宗周，是褒姒灭亡了它呀！ 
English: Heh heh Zong Zhou, it's Bo Xun who destroyed it!

古文：《易》曰： 濡其首，有孚失是。 
现代文：《周易》中说： 饮酒浸湿其头，信用因此丧失。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: "Drinking soaked his head, and his credibility was lost.

古文：秦所以二世十六年而亡者，养生泰奢，奉终泰厚也。
现代文：秦经历二世十六年就灭亡的原因，是养生过分奢侈，奉终过分华富啊。
English: The reason for Qin's downfall in the 16th year of his second reign was his extravagant lifestyle and extravagant wealth.

古文：二者陛下兼而有之，臣请略陈其效。
现代文：这两方面陛下兼而有之，我请求大致地陈述一下它们的效应。
English: These two things, sire, go together, and I beg to state their effect in a few words.

古文：《易》曰： 在中馈，无攸遂 ，言妇人不得与事也。
现代文：《周易》说 居中主食，没有什么可成就的 ，是说妇人不能参与政事。
English: "Zhou Yi" said, "There is nothing to be achieved by being a staple in the middle," meaning that women cannot participate in politics.

古文：《诗》曰： 懿厥哲妇，为枭为鸱 ； 匪降自天，生自妇人 。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 以哲妇为美，实际是枭鹧呀；  不是从天而降，而是由妇人而生。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "The beauty of a philosopher woman is actually a mirage; it did not fall from the sky, but was born from a woman."

古文：建始、河平之际，许、班之贵，顷动前朝，熏灼四方，赏赐无量，空虚内臧，女宠至极，不可上矣；今之后起，天所不飨，什倍于前。
现代文：建始、河平之际，许、班两家的尊贵，顷动前朝，气焰熏灼四方，赏赐无法计算，致使内库空虚，女宠达到顶点，不能再增加了；现在后起的人，天不赐福，比以前更胜十倍。
English: At the time of the founding and leveling of the river, the dignitaries of the two families of Xu and Ban suddenly moved to the front of the morning, and the flames burned in all directions. The rewards were incalculable, resulting in the emptiness of the inner treasury. The female pet reached the peak and could not be increased any further. The people who are coming up now, heaven forbid, are ten times better than before.

古文：废先帝法度，听用其言，官秩不当，纵释王诛，骄其亲属，假之威权，从横乱政，刺举之吏，莫敢奉宪。
现代文：废止先帝的法令制度，听从采用她们的话，授予宫爵和俸禄不恰当，释放王法当杀的罪人，骄纵他们的亲属，凭藉他们的威势权力，恣肆横行扰乱政事，主管侦视揭发的官吏，没有敢遵循法令的。
English: Abolish the previous emperor's system of laws and regulations, listen to the words of those who have adopted them, award palatines and salaries inappropriately, release the criminals who should be killed by the king and law, indulge their relatives, use their power and authority to arbitrarily disrupt political affairs, and supervise the investigation and disclosure of officials who dare not follow the laws and regulations.

古文：又以掖庭狱大为乱阱，榜棰■于炮格，绝灭人命，主为赵、李报德复怨，反除白罪，建治正吏，多系无辜，掠立迫恐，至为人起责，分利受谢。
现代文：又在掖庭狱大量挖掘坑阱，鞭笞拷打比炮烙还痛苦，绝灭人的性命，主上替趟、李报答恩德报复仇怨，反而除去罪行明白的人的罪名，建议劾治公正的官吏，往往拘囚无罪的人，拷打逼迫威吓使其屈服来定立罪名，直至替人放债，分取利息接受报谢。
English: They also dug a large number of pits and traps in the court-martial prison. The whipping and torture were more painful than the cannon fire, and the lives of people were extinguished. The Lord took the place of the Lord, and Li Baotai and De took revenge on the grudge. Instead, he removed the guilt of those who knew the crime, suggested impeaching the officials who administered justice, and often imprisoned innocent people. He tortured, forced, and intimidated them into submission to determine the guilt, until they were able to lend money to others, collect interest, and receive repayment.

古文：生入死出者，不可胜数。
现代文：活着入狱死着出来的人，无法计算。
English: The number of people who go to prison alive and come out dead is incalculable.

古文：是以日食再既，以昭其辜。
现代文：因此日食两次出现，来显明他们的罪过。
English: So there were two eclipses to show their guilt.

古文：王者必先自绝，然后天绝之。
现代文：帝王一定先自取灭绝，然后天才灭绝他。
English: The emperor must first exterminate himself, and only then can he be exterminated.

古文：陛下弃万乘之至贵，乐家人之贱事，厌高美之尊号，好匹夫之卑字，崇聚僄轻无义小人以为私客，数离深宫之固，挺身晨夜，与群小相随，乌集杂会，饮醉吏民之家，乱服共坐，流面媟嫚，混淆无别，闵免遁乐，昼夜在路。
现代文：陛下抛弃拥有万乘的最尊贵地位，喜好平民之家的卑贱之事，厌恶高尚美好的尊号，喜好庶民的卑字，推崇聚集浅薄无义的小人把他们作为私客，多次离开防守坚固的深宫，昼夜引身与众，小人相随，像乌聚集一样杂乱会合，饮酒沉醉在官吏百姓家中，服色混乱共坐一榻，放纵狎侮，尊卑混淆没有区别，尽情遁游寻乐，昼夜出行。
English: His Majesty abandons the most honorable position of having Wanxuan, likes the lowly things of the common people's home, abhors the noble and beautiful honorifics, likes the vulgar words of the common people, respects the gathering of shallow and meaningless villains and treats them as private guests, leaves the well-defended deep palace many times, day and night, draws himself to the crowd, the villains follow, and gathers in a disorderly manner like a gathering of blacks, drinks intoxicatedly in the homes of officials and common people, sits together in a chaotic mixture of colors, indulges in insults, there is no difference between respectability and inferiority,

古文：典门户奉宿卫之臣执干戈而守空宫，公卿百僚不知陛下所在，积数年矣。
现代文：主管门户奉有值宿守卫职责的大臣持着干戈守护空宫，公卿百官不知道陛下在什么地方，累计已有几年了。
English: The minister in charge of the portal, who has the duty of guarding the residence, has been guarding the air palace with a stick. The nobles and officials do not know where His Majesty is, and it has been several years.

古文：王者以民为基，民以财为本，财竭则下畔，下畔则下亡。
现代文：帝王以百姓为基础，百姓以财产为根本，财产枯竭了百姓就会叛乱，百姓叛乱国家就会灭亡。
English: The emperor is based on the people, and the people are based on property. When the property is exhausted, the people will rebel, and the country will perish when the people rebel.

古文：是以明王爱养基本，不敢穷极，使民如承大祭。
现代文：因此圣明的君主爱惜休养根本，不敢让它们穷尽，使用民力像承办大祭祀一样谨慎。
English: Therefore, the holy monarchs cherish the fundamental rights of rest and recuperation, and dare not let them be exhausted. They are as cautious in using the people's power as they are in hosting large-scale religious services.

古文：今陛下轻夺民财，不爱民力，听邪臣之计，去高敞初陵，捐十年功绪，改作昌陵，反天地之性，因下为高，积土为山，发徒起邑，并治宫馆，大兴繇役，重增赋敛，征发如雨，役百乾溪，费疑骊山，靡敝天下，五年不成而后反故。
现代文：现在陛下轻易地夺取百姓的财产，不爱惜民力，听从邪臣的计谋，离弃高大宽敞的初陵，抛去十年功作的开端，改作昌陵，违反天地本性，依着低下的地方来做成高地，堆积土壤作为高山，派遣罚做劳役的人兴建城邑，同时修建宫殿宾馆，大兴徭役，大量增加赋税和征敛，征发服役像雨密集，劳役之功比干溪多百倍，费用与骊山相比拟，败坏疲敝天下，五年没修成而后回到原来的陵地。
English: Now His Majesty easily seizes the people's property, does not spare the people's strength, listens to the schemes of evil ministers, abandons the tall and spacious initial mausoleum, throws away the beginning of the ten-year work, changes it into Changling, violates the nature of heaven and earth, builds highlands according to the low places, piles up soil as high mountains, dispatches forced laborers to build cities, and at the same time builds palaces and hotels, greatly increases taxes and levies, collects and distributes services like rain, the labor service is more than a hundred times that of dry creeks, the cost is comparable to Lushan, the destruction is exhausting,

古文：又广盱营表，发人冢墓，断截骸骨，暴扬尸柩，百姓财竭力尽，愁恨感天，灾异屡降，饥馑仍臻。
现代文：又扩大营表，掘开人家的坟墓，截断骸骨，暴露尸首灵柩。百姓财产枯竭劳力用尽，愁苦怨愤感动天帝，灾祸异象多次降临，饥荒频繁出现。
English: They also expanded the camp, dug up people's graves, cut off the skeletons, and exposed the coffins. The people's property was exhausted, labor was exhausted, the emperor was moved by grief and resentment, disasters and visions came many times, and famine occurred frequently.

古文：流散冗食，餧死于道，以百万数。
现代文：人们四处流散寻找食物，饿死在路上的人，以百万计算。
English: People are scattering in search of food, with millions starving to death on the roads.

古文：公家无一年之畜，百姓无旬日之储，上下俱匮，无以相救。
现代文：公家没有一年的积蓄，百姓没有十天的储藏，上下都匮乏，无法赈救。
English: The public sector does not have a year's worth of savings, the people do not have ten days' worth of reserves, and people up and down the country are in need and cannot be rescued.

古文：《诗》云： 殷监不远，在夏后之世。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 殷的借鉴不远，在夏后之世。 
English: "Shijing" said: Yin's reference is not far away, in the post-summer world.

古文：愿陛下追观夏、商、周、秦所以失之，以镜考己行。
现代文：希望陛下能够追溯观察夏、商、周、秦丧国的原因，来借鉴考察自己的行为。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will be able to retrospectively observe the reasons why Xia, Shang, Zhou and Qin lost their countries, and use this as a reference to examine his own behavior.

古文：有不合者，臣当伏妄言之诛。
现代文：我所说有违背事实的，我一定承受妄言的诛罚。
English: If I say something that contradicts the truth, I will surely suffer the punishment of lying.

古文：汉兴九世，百九十余载，继体之主七，皆承天顺道，遵先祖法度，或以中兴，或以治安。
现代文：汉兴起九世，一百九十余年，继位的君主有七个，都承合天意顺应天道，遵循先祖的法令制度，有的以在衰落中复兴而有名，有的以政治清明国家安定而有名。
English: The ninth generation of the Han Dynasty arose. In more than 190 years, there were seven monarchs who succeeded to the throne. All of them obeyed the will of heaven and followed the laws and regulations of their ancestors. Some were famous for their revival in the midst of decline, while others were famous for their political clarity and national stability.

古文：至于陛下，独违道纵欲，轻身妄行，当盛壮之隆，无继嗣之福，有危亡之忧，积失君道，不合天意，亦已多矣。
现代文：到了陛下，单单违背天道放纵私欲，轻贱自身胡妄行动，正当壮年的隆盛，没有继嗣的福气，而有危亡的忧患，积累丧失为君之道，不合天意之处，也已经很多了。
English: By the time of Your Majesty, there are already many things that are against God's will, such as indulging one's selfish desires, despising one's own folly, justifying the prosperity of the prime of life, not having the blessing of an heir, but having the sorrow of perishing, accumulating and losing as the way of the king, and not conforming to God's will.

古文：为人后嗣，守人功业，如此，岂不负哉！
现代文：作为先祖的后代子孙，保守先祖的功绩事业，像这样，岂不是辜负了先祖吗！
English: As the descendants of the ancestors and the descendants of the ancestors, to preserve the achievements of the ancestors, like this, is not to betray the ancestors!

古文：方今社稷宗庙祸福安危之机在于陛下，陛下诚肯发明圣之德，昭然远寤，畏此上天之威怒，深惧危亡之征兆，荡涤邪辟之恶志，厉精致政，专心反道，绝群小之私客，免不正之诏除，悉罢北宫私奴车马媠出之具，克己复礼，毋二微行出饮之过，以防迫切之祸，深惟日食再既之意，抑损椒房玉堂之盛宠，毋听后宫之请谒，除掖庭之乱狱，出炮格之陷阱，诛戮邪佞之臣及左右执左道以事上者以塞天下之望，且寝初陵之作，止诸缮治宫室，阙更减赋，尽休力役，存恤振救困乏之人以弭远方，厉崇忠直，放退残贼，无使素餐之吏久尸厚禄，以次贯行，固执无违，夙夜孳孳，屡省无怠，旧愆毕改，新德既章，纤介之邪不复载心，则赫赫大异庶几可销，天命去就庶几可复，社稷宗庙庶几可保。
现代文：现在社稷宗庙祸福安危的关键都在于陛下，陛下果真愿意发扬圣明的品德，明显而深深地醒悟，畏惧造上天的威严和愤怒，深深地戒惧危亡的征兆，冲洗掉乖戾不正的不良志趣，振作精神致力政事，一心一意地恢复为君之道，杜绝众小人作私客，避免不公正地任用官员，全部停止北宫私奴车马惰游外出的备办，克制自己恢复礼法，不要再犯微行出宫饮宴的过失，来防止即近的灾祸，深深思考日食两次出现的示意，抑制减损椒房玉堂隆盛的宠幸，不要听从后宫的请谒，废除掖庭不合法的牢狱，填平炮烙般的陷阱，诛杀奸邪谄媚之臣以及左右持邪门旁道来奉事皇上的人，以满足天下的期望，暂且停止初陵的劳作，停止各种修补整治宫室的工程，消减更卒减少赋税，完全停止微用民力，慰问抚恤赈救贫困的人，以安定远方，勉励推崇忠诚正直之人，放逐屏退凶狠暴虐之人，不要让白吃饭的官吏长久地占据厚禄，按顺序连续实行，坚持不懈没有违背，早晚勤奋，多次省视不倦怠，旧的过错全都改正了，新的德行已经显著了，细小的邪恶不再放在心上，那么赫赫盛大的异象差不多可以消失了，天命的去无德就有德差不多可以恢复丫，社稷宗庙也就差不多可以保全了。
English: Right now, the key to the prosperity, safety and security of the Shifu Zongmiao lies in Your Majesty. Your Majesty is truly willing to carry forward the sacred character, clearly and deeply awakened, afraid of the majesty and anger of the heavens, deeply afraid of the signs of peril, rinsed off the bad taste of the perverse, invigorated the spirit of dedication to politics, single-mindedly restored the way of the king, put an end to the many villains as private guests, avoided the unfair appointment of officials, completely stopped the preparation of the North Palace's private car and horse lazy tour, restrained himself to restore the etiquette, do not repeat the

古文：唯陛下留神反复，熟省臣言。
现代文：希望陛下留意不要重复过失，仔细省察我的话。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will be careful not to repeat the mistake and carefully reflect on my words.

古文：臣幸得备边部之吏，不知本朝失得，瞽言触忌讳，罪当万死。
现代文：我有幸得以备位边署官吏，不了解本朝的得失，谬论触犯忌讳，罪该万死。
English: I am fortunate to be able to prepare border officials, do not understand the gains and losses of this dynasty, fallacies violate taboos, and the crime deserves death.

古文：成帝性宽而好文辞，又久无继嗣，数为微行，多近幸小臣，赵、李从微贱专宠，皆皇太后与诸舅夙夜所常忧。
现代文：成帝生性宽厚而且喜好文章，又长时间没有继嗣，多次微服出行，常亲近宠幸无德之臣，赵、李由微贱而得以独占宠幸，这都是皇太后和诸舅早晚经常忧虑的。
English: Emperor Cheng had a generous nature and was fond of literature. He had no heir for a long time, traveled with a small retinue many times, and was often close to favored and unprincipled courtiers. Zhao and Li were favored because they were lowly. This was something that the Empress Dowager and their uncles often worried about.

古文：至亲难数言，故推永等使因天变而切谏，劝上纳用之。
现代文：最亲近的人难以多说，因此推举谷永等让他们趁着天象的变化来恳切地进谏，劝说皇上采纳他们的话。
English: It is difficult to say much about the people closest to him, so he recommended Gu Yong and others to let them take advantage of the changes in the celestial bodies to earnestly approach the emperor and persuade the emperor to accept their words.

古文：永自知有内应，展意无所依违，每言事辄见答礼。
现代文：谷永自知有内应，陈说意见没有可迟疑的，每次奏事朝廷都加礼应答。
English: Gu Yong knew that there would be a backlash, and he did not hesitate to express his opinions. Every time he made a report to the imperial court, they responded with courtesy.

古文：至上此对，上大怒。
现代文：到进上这封奏章，皇上大怒。
English: The Emperor was furious when he received the letter.

古文：卫将军商密擿永令发去。
现代文：卫将军王商秘密指使谷永要他离去。
English: Guard General Wang Shang secretly ordered Gu Yong to leave.

古文：上使侍御史收永，敕过交道厩者勿追，御史不及永，还，上意亦解，自悔。
现代文：皇上派侍御史拘捕谷永，命令过了交道厩就不用追了。御史赶不上谷永，回来了，皇上的怒气也消除了，自己懊悔。
English: The emperor sent his attendant, Mishi, to arrest Yoshinaga, and after giving the order, there was no need to chase him. Mishi couldn't catch up with Yoshinaga, so he came back. The emperor's anger had also dissipated, and he felt remorse.

古文：明年，征永为太中大夫，迁光禄大夫给事中。
现代文：第二年，召谷永做太中大夫，升任光禄大夫给事中。
English: In the second year, Zoya was promoted to the position of Tai-Chung-Daifu and then to the position of Guanglu-Daifu.

古文：元延元年，为北地太守。
现代文：元延元年，谷永做了北地太守。
English: In the first year of the Genenobu era, Tanaga became the northern governor.

古文：时，灾异尤数，永当之官，上使卫尉淳于长受永所欲言。
现代文：当时灾祸异象特别多，谷永应当赴任，皇上派卫尉淳于长听受谷永要说的话。
English: At that time, there were a particularly large number of calamities and visions. Gu Yong should go to his post, and the emperor sent the guard officer, Jun Yu Chang, to listen to what Gu Yong had to say.

古文：永对曰：
现代文：谷永对答道：
English: Tanaga replied:

古文：臣永幸得以愚朽之材为太中大夫，备拾遗之臣，从朝者之后，进不能尽思纳忠辅宣圣德，退无被坚执锐讨不义之功，猥蒙厚恩，仍迁至北地太过。
现代文：臣谷永有幸得以愚朽之才做了太中大夫，占据着拾遣之臣的位置，跟随在上朝的大臣后面，进不能竭尽心力贡献忠诚辅佐宣扬圣德，退没有披着坚固的镜甲持着锐利的兵器讨伐不义的功劳，承蒙厚恩，才升迁到北地太守。
English: It was through sheer luck that Omiya was able to rise through the ranks to become a Grand Vice-Minister of Health, occupying the position of a minister of the Imperial Household Agency, following in the footsteps of the ministers of the previous government, devoting all his energy to serving as a loyal assistant and promoting virtue, fighting injustice while wearing sturdy armor and wielding a sharp weapon, and receiving great graces that he was promoted to the position of the Great Protector of the North.

古文：绝命陨首，身膏野草，不足以报塞万分。
现代文：断命陨首，以身体滋润野草，不足以报答万分之一。
English: A fatal blow to the head, with the body moistening the weeds, is not enough to repay one in ten thousand.

古文：陛下圣德宽仁，不遗易忘之臣，垂周文之听，下及刍荛之愚，有诏使卫尉受臣永所欲言。
现代文：陛下圣德宽厚仁爱，不忽略微贱易忘的臣子，像周文王一样注意听察，向下问到割草打柴的愚钝之人，诏令让卫尉听受我谷永要说的话。
English: His majesty is saintly, generous, and benevolent. He does not ignore his humble and forgettable vassals. Like King Zhouwen, he pays attention and listens. When he asks about the dull people who cut grass and collect firewood, he orders the guards to listen to what Igu Yong has to say.

古文：臣闻事君之义，有言责者尽其忠，有官守者修其职。
现代文：我听说奉事君主的道理，有进言职责的人要竭尽他的忠诚，有官位职守的人要修整他的职责。
English: I have heard it said that in the service of the monarch, those who have the duty to speak should do their best to be loyal, and those who have the duty to hold office should rectify their duties.

古文：臣永幸得免于言责之辜，有官守之任，当毕力遵职，养绥百姓而已，不宜复关得失之辞。
现代文：臣谷永有幸得以免除担负进言职责的罪过，拥有居官守职的责任，应当全力遵守职责，教养安抚百姓罢了，不应该再涉及得失的言词。
English: Tomiya has always been fortunate to be exempted from the sin of assuming the duty of speech. He has the responsibility of staying in office and keeping his duties. He should do his best to comply with his duties, educate and appease the people. There should be no more words involving gains and losses.

古文：忠臣之于上，志在过厚，是故远不违君，死不忘国。
现代文：忠诚的大臣对于皇上，志在尽量奉献自己的忠心，因此虽远离也不会背叛君主，虽死不会忘记国家。
English: A loyal minister aims to devote his loyalty to the emperor as much as possible, so he will not betray the monarch even if he is far away, and will not forget the country even if he dies.

古文：昔史鱼既没，余忠未讫，委柩后寝，以尸达诚；汲黯身外思内，发愤舒忧，遗言李息。
现代文：从前史鱼已死，余存的忠诚没有终止，就遣命把灵柩放在后堂，用尸体传达忠诚；汲黯身在外而想着朝廷，显露愤懑舒展忧怨，留言李息。
English: Once upon a time, Shifu had died, but his remaining loyalty had not ended, so he ordered his coffin to be placed in the back hall, using the corpse to convey his loyalty; he was absent-mindedly thinking about the imperial court, showing his anger, spreading his sorrow, and leaving a message for Li Xiu.

古文：经曰： 虽尔身在外，乃心无不在王室。 
现代文：经书上说： 即使你身在朝廷外，你的心无时不在王室。 
English: The sutra says: Even if you are outside the court, your heart is always in the royal court.

古文：臣永幸得给事中出入三年，虽执干戈守边垂，思慕之心常存于省闼，是以敢越郡吏之职，陈累年之忧。
现代文：臣谷永有幸做给事中出入朝廷三年，即使是持着干戈守护边疆之地，思念的心常存在宫中，因此敢于超越郡守的职责，陈述多年的忧虑。
English: Tomiya has always had the privilege of being in and out of the imperial court for three years. Even if he is guarding the border with a stick, his thoughts often exist in the palace. Therefore, he dared to go beyond the duties of the county governor and state his worries for many years.

古文：臣闻天生蒸民，不能相治，为立王者以统理之，方制海内非为天子，列土封疆非为诸侯，皆以为民也。
现代文：我听说天生众民，相互不能治理，就替他们设立君王来统领治理他们，占有控制海内的不认为是天子，分封土地划分疆界的不认为是诸侯，都认为是百姓。
English: I have heard that all people are born and cannot govern each other, so kings are set up for them to rule and govern them. Possessing and controlling the sea is not considered to be the son of heaven, dividing land and dividing borders is not considered to be princes, but is considered to be the people.

古文：垂三统，列三正，去无道，开有德，不私一姓，明天下乃天下之天下，非一人之天下也。
现代文：流传三统历法，排列三正次序，抛弃暴虐无道，扩展仁厚有德，不偏私一姓，明确天下是天下人的天下，不是一个人的天下。
English: The three calendars have been passed down, arranged in the correct order, abandoning the tyrannical and lawless, expanding the benevolent and virtuous, not favoring the selfish, and making it clear that the world is a world of people, not a world of one person.

古文：王者躬行道德，承顺天地，博爱仁怒，恩及行苇，籍税取民不过常法，宫室车服不逾制度，事节财足，黎庶和睦，则卦气理效，五征时序，百姓寿考，庶草蕃滋，符瑞并降，以昭保右。
现代文：君王亲自施行道义仁德，承合顺应天地，博爱宽厚，恩泽布及路边芦苇一样微贱的人，收纳赋税取用民财不超过常行的法度，宫室车马服用不逾越制度，做事节俭财产富足，百姓和睦，就会卦气和顺，五种自然现象按时间的先后出现，百姓长寿，草木生长繁茂，祥瑞的征兆一齐降临，来显示上天的庇护和扶助。
English: The monarch personally implements morality, righteousness, benevolence, obedience to heaven and earth, benevolence, kindness, and people as low as reeds on the roadside, the collection of taxes and the use of people's wealth does not exceed the usual laws, the palace carriage and horses do not exceed the system, the work is frugal and the property is rich, the people are harmonious, and the five natural phenomena appear successively according to time, the people live long, the plants grow luxuriantly, and the auspicious signs come together to show the heaven's protection and support.

古文：失道妄行，逆天暴物，穷奢极欲，湛湎荒淫，妇言是从，诛逐仁贤，离逖骨肉，群小用事，峻刑重赋，百姓愁怨，则卦气悖乱，咎征著邮，上天震怒，灾异屡降，日月薄食，五星失行，山崩川溃，水泉踊出，妖孽并见，茀星耀光，饥馑荐臻，百姓短折，万物夭伤。
现代文：无道而行为荒诞，违逆天意残害生物，穷奢极欲，沉湎于逸乐而荒废政事，听从妇人之言，诛杀放逐仁厚贤能的人，离弃骨肉，众小人当权，严峻刑法加重赋税，百姓愁苦怨恨，就会卦气惑乱，灾祸的征兆显示过失，上天盛怒，灾祸异象多次发生，曰月相掩而食，五星失去正常的运行，大山崩塌江河溃决，泉水涌出，妖孽同时出现，孛星放光，荒年相连，百姓夭折，万物早亡。
English: Acting absurdly without reason, violating the will of heaven and harming living beings, living extravagantly, indulging in luxury and wasting political affairs, listening to women, killing and expelling benevolent and virtuous people, abandoning the flesh and blood, many villains in power, severe criminal law and increased taxation, the people are sad and resentful, they will be confused, the signs of disaster show negligence, the wrath of heaven, the disaster vision occurs repeatedly, the moon is eclipsed, the five stars lose their normal operation, the mountains collapse, the rivers break through, the springs gush out, the evil spirits appear at the same time, the stars shine, the years of famine are connected,

古文：终不改寤，恶洽变备，不复谴告，更命有德。
现代文：一直不改悔醒悟，罪过广布变异备具，上天不再责备告诫，而另外扶立有德的人。
English: He has never repented and woken up, and his sins have spread far and wide. Heaven will no longer rebuke and admonish him, but will instead help those who are virtuous.

古文：《诗》云： 乃眷四顾，此惟予宅。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 于是眷然西望，而给予他宅居。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: So he hastened to the west, and gave him a house.

古文：夫去恶夺弱，迁命贤圣，天地之常经，百王之所同也。加以功德有厚薄，期质有修短，时世有中季，天道有盛衰。
现代文：远离恶人夺去无能的人的王位，转而扶立贤能圣明的人，是天地不变的规则，历代帝王都是一样的，再加上功德有大小，时间有长短，时代有先后，天道有盛衰。
English: It is an unchangeable rule of heaven and earth to take away the throne of the incompetent from the wicked, and to establish the virtuous and saintly instead. The emperors of all ages are the same. In addition, the merits are large and small, the time is long and short, the era has a succession, and the heavenly way has a rise and fall.

古文：陛下承八世之功业，当阳数之标季，涉三七之节纪，遭《无妄》之卦运，直百六之灾厄。
现代文：陛下继承八代的功业，正当阳数的末季，进入三七的端头，遭受《无妄》的卦运，正值百六的灾厄。
English: His Majesty inherits the merits of eight generations, reaches the end of the legitimate masculine number, enters the end of the thirty-seven, suffers the fate of "no-nonsense," and is at the time of the hundred and sixth calamity.

古文：三难异科，杂焉同会。
现代文：三种灾难不同类，相杂一处共同会合。
English: Three different types of disasters, mixed together and meeting at the same place.

古文：建始元年以来二十载间，群灾大异，交错锋起，多于《春秋》所书。
现代文：建始元年以来二十年间，众多的灾祸大的异象，交错蜂起，比《春秋》所记载的还多。
English: In the twenty years since the founding of the People's Republic of China, there have been more calamitous visions and staggered uprisings than those recorded in Spring and Autumn.

古文：八世著记，久不塞除，重以今年正月己亥朔日有食之，三朝之会，四月丁酉四方众星白昼流陨，七月辛未彗星横天。
现代文：八代的著述记载，长久地没有消除，又继以今年正月己亥朔日出现日食，正值三朝始会，四月丁酉四方众多星体白天陨落，七月辛未彗星横扫天空。
English: Eight generations of written records have not been eliminated for a long time, and a solar eclipse followed this year's New Year's Day, coinciding with the first day of the third lunar month. In April, many stars fell in the daytime, and in July, the Xinwei Comet swept across the sky.

古文：乘三难之际会，畜众多之灾异，因之以饥馑，接之以不赡。
现代文：趁三种灾难的会合，积聚众多的灾祸异象，接着是荒年，接着是贫困。
English: And out of the coming together of the three woes cometh the gathering of many woes and signs; then cometh the year of famine; then cometh poverty.

古文：彗星，极异也，土精所生，流陨之应出于饥变之后，兵乱作矣，厥期不久，隆德积善，惧不克济。
现代文：彗星，是最大的异象，土精所生，陨落的效验出现在饥荒变乱之后，兵乱兴起了，衰败的时候不远了，修德积善，恐怕也不能补救。
English: The comet is the greatest vision, born of the soil spirit, the effect of the fall appeared after the famine and turmoil, the rebellion arose, the time of decay is not far away, the cultivation of virtue is good, I am afraid it can not be remedied.

古文：内则为深宫后庭将有骄臣悍妾醉酒狂悖卒起之败，北宫苑囿街巷之中臣妾之家幽闲之处徵舒、崔杼之乱；外则为诸夏下土将有樊并、苏令、陈胜、项梁奋臂之祸。
现代文：应验在内就是深宫后庭将有骄臣悍妾因醉酒而狂妄背理突发的混乱，北宫园林街巷之中臣妾之家的幽闲之处有征舒、崔杼之类的叛乱；应验在外就是诸侯边地将有樊并、苏令、陈胜、项梁振臂而起的祸患。
English: The inner fulfillment is that there will be sudden chaos in the backyard of the Deep Palace caused by the drunken arrogance of the courtiers and concubines, and there will be rebellions such as Seishu and Cuiqi in the secluded places of the courtiers' and concubines' homes in the streets and alleys of the North Palace; the outer fulfillment is that there will be a disaster in the borderlands of the lords and princes caused by the merger of the lords and princes, Su Ling, Chen Sheng and Xiang Liang shaking their arms.

古文：内乱朝暮，日戒诸夏，举兵以火角为期。
现代文：内乱，那么祸患在早晚之间，外乱，则应终日警戒，发兵以火星角气强烈时作为约定。
English: If it is a civil disturbance, then the calamity will occur in the morning or evening, but if it is an external disturbance, then it is necessary to be on the alert all day long, and it is agreed that the troops will be sent out when the Martian wind is strong.

古文：安危之分界，宗庙之至忧，臣永所以破胆寒心，豫言之累年。
现代文：安危的分界，是宗庙的最大忧患，臣谷永因此破胆寒心，预言了多年。
English: The dangerous demarcation is the biggest worry of the ancestral temple, and therefore, Omiya has always been discouraged and has predicted it for many years.

古文：下有其萌，然后变见于上，可不致慎！
现代文：下面有祸乱的端倪，然后灾变出现在上，怎能不致慎！
English: There is a hint of calamity below, and then the cataclysm appears above, how can we not be cautious!

古文：祸起细微，奸生所易。
现代文：灾祸兴起于细微之处，邪恶产生于轻忽之间。
English: Calamity springs from subtlety, and mischief from oversight.

古文：愿陛下正君臣之义，无复与群小媟黩燕饮；中黄门后庭素骄慢不谨尝以醉酒失臣礼者，悉出勿留。
现代文：希望陛下端正君臣大义，不要再和那些小人轻慢亵狎宴乐饮酒；中黄门后庭平曰骄横傲慢不谨慎曾因醉酒丧失为臣之礼的，都逐出不留。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will rectify the great justice of monarchs and ministers, and no longer drink alcohol with those villains who are frivolous and desecrate banquets; those who are arrogant and imprudent in the courtyard behind the Yellow Gate, and who have lost the honor of being a minister due to drunkenness, will be expelled.

古文：勤三纲之严，修后宫之政，抑远骄妒之宪，崇近婉顺之行，加惠失志之人，怀柔怨恨之心。
现代文：努力修正三纲的威严，整治后宫的事务，抑制远离骄纵嫉妒的宠爱，推崇亲近柔婉顺从的行为，加恩施惠失意之人，安慰抚恤怨恨之心。
English: Efforts should be made to rectify the majesty of the three principles, rectify the affairs of the harem, restrain the love of pride and jealousy, promote the behavior of closeness, gentleness and obedience, grant favors to those who are frustrated, and comfort the hearts of resentment.

古文：保至尊之重，秉帝王之威，朝觐法出而后驾，陈兵清道而后行，无复轻身独出，饮食臣妾之家。
现代文：保有至尊的重位，握有帝王的威严，朝觐之臣法车先出而后驾出，陈列卫兵清理道路而后驾行，不要再轻贱自身独自出行，在臣妾的家中宴乐。
English: Maintain the supreme and important position, hold the majesty of the emperor, parade the vassals of the imperial carriage first and then drive out, display the guards to clear the road and then drive out, and no longer travel alone, feasting in the homes of vassals and concubines.

古文：三者既除，内乱之路塞矣。
现代文：三方面已经修正，内乱之路就堵塞了。
English: The three aspects have been rectified, and the road to civil unrest has been blocked.

古文：诸夏举兵，萌在民饥馑而吏不恤，兴于百姓困而赋敛重，发于下怨离而上不知。
现代文：诸侯举兵作乱，萌发在百姓饥饿而官吏不抚恤的时候，兴起在百姓困顿而赋敛沉重的时候，爆发在百姓怨愤背离而君主不知道的时候。
English: Princes and lords raise an army to start a riot. It starts when the people are hungry and the officials don't show any mercy. It starts when the people are in trouble and the government is heavy-handed. It breaks out when the people are resentful and turn away and the ruler doesn't know about it.

古文：《易》曰： 屯其膏，小贞吉，大贞凶。 
现代文：《周易》中说： 屯积膏脂，占卜小事吉，占卜大事凶。 
English: "Zhou Yi" said: The accumulation of grease, divination is good for small things, and divination is bad for big things.

古文：传曰： 饥而不损兹谓泰，厥灾水，厥咎亡。 
现代文：经传中说： 饥年而不减少资财为泰，就会发生水灾，就会有灭亡的凶险。 
English: It is said in the sutras: If a famine occurs without reducing wealth, floods will occur, and there will be a grave danger of extinction.

古文：《訞辞》曰： 关动牡飞，辟为无道，臣为非，厥咎乱臣谋篡。 
现代文：《袄辞》中说： 门闩松动锁簧丢失，君主暴虐无德，大臣行为有失，就有乱臣谋划篡位的凶险。 
English: "The Eulogy" said: "If the latch is loose and the locking spring is lost, if the monarch is tyrannical and immoral, and if the minister's behavior is erratic, there is a danger that the disorderly minister will plot to usurp the throne."

古文：王者遭衰难之世，有饥馑之灾，不损用而大自润，故凶；百姓困贫无以共求，愁悲怨恨，故水；城关守国之固，固将去焉，故牡飞。
现代文：君主遭逢衰败艰难之世，有饥荒的灾害，不减少用度却加大润益自己，因此有凶险；百姓困顿贫乏没有用来供君主所求的，愁苦悲愤怨恨滋生，因此出现水灾；城门闩是保守国家安固的，安固将要失去了，因此锁簧丢失。
English: The monarch has suffered from a difficult world of decline and decay. There are disasters of famine. He does not reduce consumption but increases his own profit, so there are dangers. The people are poor and poor and are not used to provide what the monarch asks for. Sorrow, sadness, resentment breed, so there is a flood. The city gate is to keep the country safe and secure. The security will be lost, so the lock spring is lost.

古文：往年郡国二十一伤于水，灾，禾黍不入。今年蚕麦咸恶。
现代文：去年二十一个郡国由于水灾而受损害，庄稼没有收成。今年蚕麦都不好。
English: Last year, twenty-one counties were damaged by floods, and crops failed. This year, the growth of silkworms is not good.

古文：百川沸腾，江河溢决，大水泛滥郡国五十有余。
现代文：河流汹涌澎湃，长江黄河漫溢溃决，大水泛滥十五个郡国还多。
English: The rivers are surging, the Yangtze River and the Yellow River are overflowing, and more than 15 counties have been flooded.

古文：比年丧稼，时过无宿麦。百姓失业流散，群辈守关。
现代文：连年丧失庄稼，农时错过了种不上过冬的麦子，百姓失掉产业流离漂散，群辈官吏把守关口不予接纳。
English: Crops have been lost year after year, farmers have missed out on wheat that could not be planted for the winter, people have lost their industries and have drifted away, and officials of all generations have not been accepted to guard the pass.

古文：大异较炳如彼，水灾浩浩，黎庶穷困如此，宜损常税小自润之时，而有司奏请加赋，甚缪经义，逆于民心，布怨趋祸之道也。
现代文：大的异象那样鲜明，水灾浩浩，黎民贫穷困顿如此，这是应该减少平常的税额和自己润益的费用的时候，有司却奏请增加赋税，很背谬经书的义理，违逆百姓的心意，这是播布怨恨趋向祸患的做法啊。
English: The great vision is so vivid, the floods are huge, the poverty of the people is so dire, this is when the usual amount of taxes and the cost of their own profits should be reduced, but some officials are asking for an increase in taxes, which is contrary to the principles of the scriptures, and contrary to the will of the people. This is the practice of spreading resentment and tending to disaster.

古文：牡飞之状，殆为此发。
现代文：锁簧丢失的情形，大概是因为这些才发生的。
English: The loss of the locking spring probably happened because of this.

古文：古者谷不登亏膳，灾屡至损服，凶年不堲涂，明王之制也《诗》云： 凡民有丧，扶服救之。 
现代文：古时候稻谷不丰收就减少饭食，灾祸屡屡发生就减少服饰，凶年不修建房屋，这是英明君王的制度啊。《诗经》中说： 百姓有悲伤的事，伏地爬行来赈救他们。 
English: In ancient times, if the rice harvest was poor, food was reduced, if disasters occurred frequently, clothing was reduced, and if there was a bad year, houses were not built. This was the system of a wise king. "The Book of Songs" says: When the people are in sorrow, they crawl on the ground to rescue them.

古文：《论语》曰： 百姓不足，君孰予足？ 
现代文：《论语》中说： 百姓不富足，谁给君主富足？ 
English: "The Analects" says: If the people are not rich, who will make the monarch rich?

古文：臣愿陛下勿许加赋之奏，益减大官、导官、中御府、均官、掌畜、廪牺用度，止尚方、织室、京师郡国工服官发输造作，以助大司农。
现代文：我希望陛下不要允许增加赋税的奏请，还要减少大官、导官、中御府、均官、掌畜、廪牺的费用，停止尚方、织室、京师郡国的工服官的发输制作，来扶助大司农。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will not allow the request to increase taxes, but will also reduce the expenses of grand officials, leading officials, the Central Government, uniformed officials, livestock, and sacrificial animals, and stop the production and export of Shangfang, weaving rooms, and workers' and officers' uniforms in Beijing and Shijiazhuang counties, in order to support farmers.

古文：流恩广施，振赡困乏，开关梁，内流民，恣所欲之，以救基急。
现代文：流布仁德广施恩惠，救济补助困乏之人，打开关门津梁，接纳流散的百姓，任凭他们到自己想去的地方，来救济他们的危急。
English: To spread benevolence and kindness, to provide relief and assistance to the needy, to open up closed doors, to accept the scattered people, to let them go where they want to go, to relieve their crisis.

古文：立春，遣使者循行风俗，宣布圣德，存恤孤寡，问民所苦，劳二千石，敕劝耕桑，毋夺农时，以慰绥元元之心，防塞大奸之隙，诸夏之乱，庶几可息。
现代文：立春的时候，派遣使者巡视民风习俗，宣扬散布圣明的恩德，慰问抚恤孤儿寡妇，询问百姓疾苦，慰劳勉励地方官，告诫奖励农耕植桑，不要夺取农耕的时间，来慰劳安抚百姓的心，防备阻塞大的奸邪产生的空隙。诸侯的叛乱，差不多就能够平息了。
English: At the beginning of spring, emissaries were sent to inspect folk customs, proclaim the benevolence of spreading the holy light, comfort and care for orphans and widows, inquire about the hardships of the people, comfort and encourage local officials, exhort and reward farming and mulberry planting, not to seize the time of farming, to comfort and soothe the hearts of the people, and prevent the gap caused by the great evil. The rebellion of the princes could almost be quelled.

古文：臣闻上主可与为善而不可与为恶，下主可与为恶而不可与为善。
现代文：我听说上主可与他一起做善事而不能与他一起做恶事，下主可与他一起做恶事而不能与他一起做善事。
English: I have heard that the Lord may do good with him, but not evil; and the Lord may do evil with him, but not good.

古文：陛下天然之性，疏通聪敏，上主之姿也。
现代文：陛下天然的品性，通达聪慧，是上主的姿质。
English: His Majesty's natural disposition, his intelligence, is that of a lord.

古文：少省愚臣之言，感寤三难，深畏大异，定心为善，捐忘邪志，毋二旧愆，厉精致政，至诚应天，则积异塞于上，祸乱伏于下，何忧患之有？
现代文：衹要能稍稍省思愚臣的话，感悟三种灾难，深深忧惧大的异象，定下心思推行善政，抛弃忘掉邪恶的心志，不要再犯以前的过失，振作精神致力治政，最大的诚意感应上天，那么天上积久的异象遏止了，地下的灾祸叛乱降伏了，还有什么忧虑担心的呢？
English: If you can reflect a little on the words of the foolish minister, feel the three kinds of disasters, deeply fear the great vision, set your mind on promoting good governance, abandon and forget the evil spirit, do not repeat previous mistakes, keep your spirits up and strive to govern, and feel the greatest sincerity to heaven, then the long-accumulated vision of heaven will be stopped, the underground disaster rebellion will surrender, and what worries and worries will there be?

古文：窃恐陛下公志未专，私好颇存，尚爱群小，不肯为耳！
现代文：我私下裹担心陛下为公的志向没能专一，私人的爱好很有所存留，还爱恋众小人，不肯去做啊！
English: Privately, I'm worried that His Majesty hasn't been able to remain single-minded in his public ambitions, that his private hobbies are very much alive, and that he still loves all the little people and won't do it!

古文：对奏，天子甚感其言。
现代文：奏对进上，天子很为他的话所感动。
English: As the game progressed, Tenshi was very moved by his words.

古文：永于经书，泛为疏达，与杜钦、杜邺略等，不能洽浃如刘向父子及扬雄也。
现代文：谷永对于经书，能够普遍地通明畅达，与杜钦、杜邺大致相当，但不能像刘向父子和扬雄一样融会贯通。
English: As far as the scriptures are concerned, Gu Yong is generally able to communicate clearly and smoothly, which is roughly equivalent to Du Qin and Du Xuan, but he cannot integrate and penetrate like Liu Xiang and Yang Xiong.

古文：其于天官、《京氏易》最密，故善言灾异，前后所上四十余事，略相反复，专攻上身与后宫而已。
现代文：他对于天官、《京氏易》最精通，因此善于谈论灾变异象，前后上奏四十多件事，稍有重复，专门指责主上自身和后宫罢了。
English: He is most proficient in the heavenly official, "Keiji I," so he is good at talking about catastrophic phenomena, playing more than forty things back and forth, with a little repetition, specifically blaming himself and the harem.

古文：党于王氏，上亦知之，不甚亲信也。
现代文：被王氏所袒护，主上也知道，不很亲近信赖他。
English: He was protected by the Wang clan, and his master knew that he did not trust him very much.

古文：永所居任职，为北地太守岁余，卫将军商薨，曲阳侯根为票骑将军，荐永，征入为大司农。
现代文：谷永所任之处都很称职，做北地太守一年多，卫将军王商薨，曲阳侯王根做了骠骑将军，推举谷永，征召入京做大司农。
English: All the positions held by Gu Yong were very competent. He served as the governor of the North for more than a year, the general of the Imperial Guards, Wang Shangqian, and the lord of Quyang, Wang Gen, served as the general of the cavalry. Gu Yong was elected and conscripted into Beijing to be the chief farmer.

古文：岁余，永病，三月，有司奏请免。
现代文：一年多后，谷永生病，二个月后，有司上奏请求免去谷永的职位。
English: More than a year later, Gu Yong fell ill, and two months later, there was a request from the Supreme Leader to remove Gu Yong from his post.

古文：故事，公卿病，辄赐告，至永独即时免。
现代文：先例，公卿生病，皇上就赐予休假，到谷永时单单马上免职。
English: As a precedent, when a court noble fell ill, the emperor granted him a leave of absence, and he was immediately relieved of his duties when he arrived in Guiyong.

古文：数月，卒于家。
现代文：几个月后，谷永死在家裹。
English: A few months later, Gu Yong died at home.

古文：本名并，以尉氏樊并反，更名永云。
现代文：本名谷并，据说因尉氏樊并造反，改名谷永。
English: His real name was Tani, but it is said that he changed his name to Taniyoshi because he rebelled against the shogunate.

古文：杜邺字子夏，本魏郡繁阳人也。
现代文：杜邺字子夏，本是魏郡繁阳人。
English: Du Xi Zi Xia is originally from Shengyang, Wei County.

古文：祖父及父积功劳皆至郡守，武帝时徙茂陵。
现代文：祖父和父亲积累功劳都官至郡守，武帝时迁居茂陵。
English: Grandfather and father accumulated merits from the capital to the county seat, and moved to Murye at the time of Emperor Wu.

古文：邺少孤，其母张敞女。
现代文：杜邺年少丧父，他的母亲是张敞的女儿。
English: Du Juan lost his father at a young age, and his mother was Zhang Zhang's daughter.

古文：邺。邺壮，从敞子吉学问，得其家书。
现代文：杜邺壮年时，跟随张敞的儿子张吉学习请教，得到其家藏之书。
English: When Du Juan was in his prime, he followed Zhang Zhan's son Zhang Ji to study and ask for advice, and obtained a book from his family's collection.

古文：以孝廉以郎。
现代文：以举孝廉做了郎。
English: He made Takakado his son.

古文：与车骑将军王音善。
现代文：杜邺与车骑将军王音友善。
English: The cuckoo is friendly with the charioteer Wang Yin.

古文：平阿侯谭不受城门职，后薨，上闵悔之，乃复令谭弟成都侯商位特进，领城门兵，得举吏如将军府。
现代文：平阿侯王谭不领受城门职，后来去世，主上哀伤懊悔这件事，于是又命令王谭的弟弟成都侯王商官位为特进，领城门兵，可以像将军府一样举拔官吏。
English: Ping Ah Hou Wang Tan did not accept the position of the gate, and later died. The lord was saddened and regretted the matter, so he also ordered Wang Tan's brother Chengdu Hou Wang Shang's official position to be a special promotion, leading the gate soldiers, and could promote and select officials like the general's office.

古文：邺见音前与平阿有隙，即说音曰： 邺闻人情，恩深者其养谨，爱至者其求详。
现代文：杜邺见王音先前与平阿侯有怨隙，就游说王音说： 我听说人之常情，对待恩深的人就奉养谨厚，对待最爱的人就有求必应。
English: Du Juan saw that Wang Yin previously had a grudge with Ping A Hou, so he lobbied Wang Yin and said: I have heard that human beings have common feelings. Those who are treated with kindness are treated with respect, and those who are treated with love are treated with solicitude.

古文：夫戚而不见殊，孰能无怨？
现代文：亲近却不被特殊对待，谁能没有怨气？
English: Close but not treated special, who can do without bitterness?

古文：此《棠棣》、《角弓》之诗所以作也。
现代文：这是《棠棣》、《角弓》诗创作的目的呀。
English: This is the purpose behind the creation of the poems "Tangguan" and "Horned Bow."

古文：昔秦伯有千乘之国，而不能容其母弟，《春秋》亦书而讥焉。
现代文：从前秦伯拥有千辆兵车的国家，却不能容纳他同母的弟弟，《春秋》也记载并讥讽他。
English: Once upon a time, Qin Bo owned a thousand chariots in the country, but he could not accommodate his younger brother with the same mother. "Spring and Autumn" also recorded and ridiculed him.

古文：周、召则不然，忠以相辅，义以相匡，同己之亲，等己之尊，不以圣德独兼国宠，又不为长专受荣任，分职于陕，并为弼疑。
现代文：周公、召公就不这样，他们忠诚地相互辅助，按照道义相互匡正，同等对待自己的亲属，同等对待自己的地位，不凭藉圣德独占国家的尊宠，也不因年长独自承受荣耀的职位，以陕为界划分职责，共同辅政。
English: This is not the case with Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong. They loyally assist each other, rectify each other in accordance with morality, treat their relatives equally, and treat their status equally. They do not monopolize the honor of the country by virtue of holiness, nor do they bear the glorious position alone because of their age. They divide their duties according to the boundaries of Shaanxi Province, and jointly assist the government.

古文：故内无感恨之隙，外无侵侮之羞，俱享天晁，两荷高名者，盖以此也。
现代文：因此在内没有不满和怨恨的裂痕，在外没有遭受侵犯欺侮的耻辱，两个人都享有上天的庇佑，承受高洁的名声的原因，大概就是因为这些。
English: Therefore, there is no discontent and resentment inside, and there is no humiliation of aggression and bullying outside. Both of them enjoy the protection of heaven, and the reason why they have a high reputation is probably because of these.

古文：窃见成都侯以特进领城门兵，复有诏得举吏如五府，此明诏所欲庞也。
现代文：我私下裹见成都侯以特进领城门兵，又有韶令得以像五府一样举拔官吏，这是皇帝明诏要宠幸他呀。
English: Privately, I saw the lord of Chengdu specially enter and lead the soldiers at the gate of the city, and there was also a royal order to promote and select officials like the five prefectures. This was the emperor's explicit order to favor him.

古文：将军宜承顺圣意，加异往时，每事凡议，必与及之，指为诚父，出于将军，则孰敢不说谕？
现代文：将军应该奉承顺从圣上的心意，更加不同于以前，每件事凡要商议，一定要让他参与，意旨因忠诚而发，又由将军提出，那么谁敢不高兴呢？
English: The general should flatter and obey the sacred mind, more different from before, everything that needs to be discussed must involve him, the intention is due to loyalty, and it is proposed by the general, so who dares not be happy?

古文：昔文侯寤大雁之献而父子益亲，陈平共一饭之馔而将相加欢，所接虽在楹阶俎豆之间，其于为国折冲厌难，岂不远哉！
现代文：从前文侯感悟趟仓唐进献大雁而父子更加亲近，陈平供给绛侯一餐的饮食而将相更加和悦，这种接触虽然在楹阶俎豆之间，它的目的却是在于为国家击退敌人消除患难，这样的谋略难道不远大吗！
English: From the previous article, the prince was impressed by the Tang Dynasty's gift of geese, and the father and son became closer, and Chen Ping provided the prince with a meal, which made the relationship more pleasant. Although this contact is between two peas, its purpose is to repel the enemy and eliminate difficulties for the country. Isn't such a strategy far-reaching?

古文：窃慕仓唐、陆子之义，所白奥内，唯深察焉。 
现代文：我私下很仰慕仓唐、陆子的行为，告诉您的这些私下裹的话，衹希望您能好好考虑这件事。 
English: Privately, I admire the actions of Cang Tang and Lu Zi very much. I hope you will consider this matter carefully when I tell you these private words.

古文：音甚嘉其言，由是与成都侯商亲密，二人皆重邺。
现代文：王音很赞赏他的话，从此与成都侯王商亲密起来，两个人都很重视杜邺？
English: Wang Yin appreciated his words very much. From then on, he became close with Chengdu Hou Wang Shang. Both of them attach great importance to cuckoo?

古文：后以病去郎。
现代文：后来杜邺因病辞去郎。
English: Later, Du Xuan resigned from his post due to illness.

古文：商为大司马卫将军，除邺主簿，以为腹心，举侍御史。
现代文：王商做了大司马卫将军。任命杜邺做主簿，把他当作心腹，推举他做诗御史。
English: Wang Shang became the general secretary of Ma Wei. He appointed Du Juan as the chief accountant, treated him as a confidant, and promoted him to be the chief of poetry.

古文：哀帝即位，迁为凉州刺史。
现代文：哀帝即位，升任他做凉州刺史。
English: Emperor Ai ascended to the throne, and he was promoted to the post of Liangzhou prefect.

古文：邺居职宽舒，少威严，数年以病免。
现代文：杜邺居官宽舒，缺少威严，多年后因病免官。
English: Du Xun was a lenient official, lacking dignity, and was removed from office due to illness after many years.

古文：是时，帝祖母定陶傅太后称皇太太后，帝母丁姬称帝太后，而皇后即傅太后从弟子也。
现代文：当时，皇上的祖母定陶傅太后尊称皇太太后，皇上的母亲丁姬尊称帝太后，皇后就是傅太后堂弟的女儿。
English: At that time, the emperor's grandmother Ding Tao called the empress dowager the empress dowager, the emperor's mother Ding Ji called the empress dowager, and the empress was the daughter of the cousin of the empress dowager.

古文：傅氏侯者三人，丁氏侯者二人。
现代文：傅氏封侯的有三个人，丁氏封侯的有两个人。
English: There are three Fu fiefs and two Ding fiefs.

古文：又封傅太后同母弟子郑业为阳信侯。
现代文：又封傅太后同母弟的儿子郑业为阳信侯。
English: In addition, Zheng Ye, the son of Fu Taigu and his mother's brother, was named Yang Xin Hou.

古文：傅太后尤与政专权。
现代文：傅太后更是参预政事独揽大权。
English: The Empress Dowager Fu was even more involved in pre-election political affairs to monopolize power.

古文：元寿元年正月朔，上以皇后父孔乡侯傅晏为大司马卫将军，而帝舅阳安侯丁明为大司马票骑将军。
现代文：元寿元年正月朔日，皇上任用皇后的父亲孔乡侯傅晏做大司马卫将军，任用帝舅阳安侯丁明做大司马骠骑将军。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Yuan Shou, the emperor appointed the queen's father, Kong Xiang Hou Fu Yao, as the grand secretary of the Horse Guards General, and appointed the emperor's uncle, Yang An Hou Dingming, as the grand secretary of the Horse Guards General.

古文：临拜，日食，诏举方正直言。
现代文：到授官时，发生了日食，皇上下令推举方正直言的士人。
English: At the time of the investiture, there was a solar eclipse, and the emperor ordered the appointment of honest officials.

古文：扶阳侯韦育举邺方正，邺对曰：
现代文：扶阳侯韦育举荐杜邺方正，杜邺对奏说：
English: Fuyang Hou Wei Yu recommended Du Xuan to Fang Zheng, Du Xuan said to the musician:

古文：臣闻禽息忧国，碎首不恨；卞和献宝，刖足愿之。
现代文：我听说禽息为国忧虑，碰碎头也不遗憾，卞和进献宝玉，被砍去双足而心甘情愿。
English: I heard that the bird breath is worried about the country, and it is not a pity to hit the broken head, and it is willing to be chopped off both feet.

古文：臣幸得奉直言之诏，无二者之危，敢不极陈！
现代文：我有幸得以承奉直言的诏令，没有前两者的危险，怎敢不尽力陈说！
English: I am fortunate enough to be able to obey the edict of straightforwardness, without the danger of the first two, how dare I not try my best to say it!

古文：臣闻阳尊阴卑，卑者随尊，尊者兼卑，天之道也。
现代文：我听说阳者尊贵阴者卑贱，卑贱者跟随尊贵者，尊贵者兼管卑贱者，这是上天的规律。
English: I have heard that the masculine honors the feminine and the feminine honors the masculine, the masculine follows the masculine, and the masculine rules the masculine. This is the law of heaven.

古文：是以男虽贱，各为其家阳；女虽贵，犹为其国阴。
现代文：因此男子虽然卑贱，也各自是他家的阳者；女子虽然尊贵，仍是国中的阴者。
English: Therefore, although men are lowly, they are also each the yang of his family; although women are noble, they are still the yin of the country.

古文：故礼明三从之义，虽有文母之德，必系于子。
现代文：因此在礼法上要明确三从的规范，即使有文母的德行，一定也要受她儿子的约束。
English: Therefore, in the etiquette, it is necessary to clarify the norms of the three obediences. Even if there is a literary mother's virtue, she must be bound by her son.

古文：《春秋》不书纪侯之母，阴义杀也。
现代文：《春秋》不记载纪侯的母亲，是因为妇道衰减。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not record Ji Hou's mother, because of the attenuation of the gynecological tract.

古文：昔郑伯随姜氏之欲，终有叔段篡国之祸；周襄王内迫惠后之难，而遭居郑之危。
现代文：从前郑伯听从姜氏的欲望，终于发生叔段篡国的祸乱；周襄王在国内迫于惠后之难，而遭到移居郑国的危亡。
English: Once upon a time, Zheng Bo listened to Jiang's desire, and the calamity of Uncle Duan's usurpation finally occurred; King Zhou Xiang was forced to move to Zheng Guo due to the difficulty of benefiting his descendants.

古文：汉兴，吕太后权私亲属，又以外孙为孝惠后，是时继嗣不明，凡事多暗，昼昏冬雷之变，不可胜载。
现代文：汉朝兴起，吕太后依仗权势偏私亲属，又让外孙女做孝惠皇后，那时继嗣不明确，凡事多隐晦，白昼昏暗冬季打雷之类的变故，多得记载不过来。
English: During the rise of the Han Dynasty, Empress Dowager Lü relied on her power to favor her relatives and made her granddaughter Empress Xiao Hui. At that time, the succession was not clear, everything was more obscure, and there were more changes than can be recorded, such as thunder in the dark winter.

古文：窃见陛下行不偏之政，每事约俭，非礼不动，诚欲正身与天下更始也。
现代文：私下裹见陛下施行不偏颇的政治，每事节约俭省，不合礼就不去做，确实是想修正自身与天下一起更化布新。
English: Privately, I can see that His Majesty is implementing an unbiased policy, economizing on everything, and not doing anything that is not proper. He really wants to reform himself and the world.

古文：然嘉瑞未应，而日食、地震，民讹言行筹，传相惊恐。
现代文：然而好的兆象没有应验，却发生了日食地震，百姓听到谣言行筹占，相互传说惊惶不安。
English: However, the good omen did not come true, but a solar eclipse earthquake occurred, the people heard rumors and made preparations, and they were alarmed and uneasy.

古文：案《春秋》灾异，以指象为言语，故在于得一类而达之也。
现代文：据《春秋》记载灾异是以景象指意作为言语告诫人，因此在于获知一类所指喻的意思来知道其他的事。
English: According to the "Spring and Autumn" records, the calamity is to use the meaning of the scene as a verbal admonition, so it is to know the meaning of one kind of metaphor to know other things.

古文：日食，明阳为阴所临，《坤卦》乘《离》，《明夷》之象也。
现代文：日食，表明阳被阴所覆盖，《坤卦》凌于《离》之上，是《明夷》的卦象。
English: The solar eclipse shows that the yang is covered by the yin, and "Kun Gua" is superior to "Leave," and is the Gua elephant of "Ming Yi."

古文：《坤》以法地，为土为母，以安静为德。
现代文：《坤》用来效法地，为土为母，以安静为德。
English: "Kun" is used to imitate the crane, the earth as the mother, and quiet as the virtue.

古文：震，大阴之效也。
现代文：地震，是不守阴道的效验。
English: The earthquake is a test of the effectiveness of not keeping the vagina.

古文：占象甚明，臣敢不直言其事！
现代文：占象很清楚，我怎敢不直陈这些事！
English: The horoscope is very clear, how dare I not say these things!

古文：昔曾子问从令之义，孔子曰： 是何言与！ 
现代文：从前曾子询问听从父命的道理，孔子说： 这是什么话！ 
English: Once, when his son asked him about the principle of obeying one's father, Confucius said: "What is this saying?

古文：善闵子骞守礼不苟，从亲所行，无非理者，故无可间也。
现代文：孔子赞扬闵子骞严格遵守礼法，听任父母的行为，没有不合理的，因此也没有可离间的。
English: Confucius praised the children of the deaf for their strict observance of the etiquette, and for their obedience to their parents. There was nothing unreasonable, and therefore nothing that could be separated.

古文：前大司马新都侯莽退伏弟家，以诏策决，复遣就国。
现代文：前大司马新都侯王莽罢官住在弟弟家中，依据诏书决策，又遣归封国。
English: The former chief secretary of Ma Xindu, Hou Wang Mang, lived in his brother's home after his dismissal. According to the decision of the imperial edict, he was sent back to the feudal state.

古文：高昌侯宏去蕃自绝，犹受封土。
现代文：高昌侯宏离开藩地自动与朝廷断绝关系，仍然享有封土。
English: When Gochang Houhong left the domain, he automatically severed ties with the imperial court, but still enjoyed the fief.

古文：制书侍中、驸马都尉迁不忠巧佞，免归故郡，间未旬月，则有诏还，大臣奏正其罚，卒不得遣，而反兼官奉使，显宠过故。
现代文：制书侍中驸马都尉傅迁巧言谄媚不忠诚，免官遣归故郡，间隔没到一个月，就又有命令召他回来，大臣上奏请求公正地对他进行处罚，终于不再遣回，却反而兼任官职奉命出使，尊显宠幸超过了从前。
English: Lieutenant Fu Qian of the Horse Guards, who was in charge of book-making, was said to be disloyal. He was dismissed from his post and sent back to his home county. Less than a month later, he was ordered to return. The minister appealed to the court to punish him fairly. Finally, he was not sent back, but instead served as an official and was ordered to send an envoy. He was honored and favored more than before.

古文：及阳信侯业，皆缘私君国，非功义所止。
现代文：至于阳信侯郑业，都是因私情做了一国之君，并不是功德达到这个地步。
English: As for Yangxin Hou Zhengye, he became the ruler of a country because of his personal feelings, not because of his merits.

古文：诸外家昆弟无贤不肖，并侍帷幄，布在列位，或典兵卫，或将军屯，宠意并于一家，积贵之势，世所稀见所稀闻也。
现代文：众外家昆弟不论有无才能，一同侍奉在宫中，布列在近臣之位，有的掌管兵卫，有的把持军屯，宠爱的心思并于一家，积久显贵的权势，是历代很少看到很少听说的。
English: Regardless of whether they are talented or not, all the outsiders Kunzite serve together in the palace, are placed in the position of close vassals, some are in charge of the guards, some are in charge of the military camp, and their favorite thoughts are in one family, accumulating long-term prominent power, which is rarely seen and rarely heard of in previous generations.

古文：至乃并置大司马、将军之官。
现代文：甚至竟然并列设置大司马将军的职位。
English: They even went so far as to set up the position of General Oshima in parallel.

古文：皇甫虽盛，三桓虽隆，鲁为作三军，无以甚此。
现代文：皇甫纵然昌盛，三桓纵然兴隆，鲁国因此分作三军。也无法与这相比。
English: Even though the Emperor was prosperous and the three emperors were prosperous, the state of Lu was divided into three armies. It cannot be compared to this.

古文：当拜之日，暗然日食。
现代文：正当授官的日子，天空昏暗出现食。
English: On the day of the investiture, the sky darkened and there was an eclipse.

古文：不在前后，临事而发者，明陛下谦逊无专，承指非一，所言辄听，所欲辄随，有罪恶者不坐辜罚，无功能者毕受官爵，流渐积猥，正尤在是，欲令昭昭以觉圣朝。
现代文：不在前后，正当授官之曰才发生的原因，是告诫陛下要谦逊不要专制，不要衹信赖一个人，他说的就听从，他要的就顺从，有罪恶的不获罪处罚，没有功劳才能的都受官封爵，传布越久积陋越多，这正是过失所在，上天要用明白的道理来使圣朝醒悟。
English: The reason why the rightful investiture did not take place sooner or later is that His Majesty was admonished to be humble and not despotic, not to trust a single person, to listen to what he said and obey what he wanted, to punish the guilty and not punish the guilty, to give knighthoods to those without merit and talent, and to propagate more and more filth, which is exactly where the fault lies. Heaven must use clear principles to awaken the Holy Spirit.

古文：昔诗人所刺，《春秋》所讥，指象如此，殆不在它。
现代文：从前诗人指责的，《春秋》讥讽的，景象指意是这样，大概不在其它方面。
English: As the poet once pointed out, the ironic scene in "Spring and Autumn" refers to this, and probably not to other aspects.

古文：由后视前，忿邑非之，逮身所行，不自镜见，则以为可，计之过者。
现代文：由后事来审视前事，就忿恨认为它不对，到了自身的行为，不自己照镜察看，就认为是对的，这是计策的失误。
English: Looking at the past from the perspective of hindsight, one thinks that it is wrong because of resentment. When it comes to one's own behavior, one thinks that it is right without looking into the mirror. This is a strategic mistake.

古文：疏贱独偏见，疑内亦有此类。天变不空，保右世主如此之至，奈何不应！
现代文：疏远卑贱的大臣单单从旁边看到了，我疑心宫内也有像我这样的，上天的变故不是空泛的，像这样尽力保佑历代君主，为什么不顺应天意修正政事！
English: Seeing the alienated and lowly ministers from the side, I suspected that there were others like me in the palace. Heaven's vicissitudes are not empty. Why not follow God's will and amend government affairs?

古文：臣闻野鸡著怪，高宗深动；大风暴过，成王怛然。
现代文：我听说野鸡显出怪异，高宗被深深触动；大风猛烈地刮过，成王因此惊恐不安。
English: I heard that the pheasants were behaving strangely, and Gao Zong was deeply moved; a strong wind was blowing, and Cheng Wang was frightened and uneasy.

古文：愿陛下加致精诚，思承始初，事稽诸古，以厌下心，则黎庶群生无不说喜，上帝百神收还威怒，祯祥福禄何嫌不报！
现代文：希望陛下更加精心专诚，考虑承继国初的隆盛，凡事考查古例，来满足百姓的心意，那么黎民百姓就没有不高兴的，上天百神收回威势和怒气，还哪裹用得着忧虑祯祥福禄不来回报：
English: I hope that His Majesty will be more diligent and conscientious, consider inheriting the early prosperity of the country, and examine the ancient precedents in everything to meet the people's wishes. Then the people of Laiwu will not be unhappy. The gods of heaven will withdraw their power and anger, and they will not have to worry about the return of good fortune:

古文：邺未拜，病卒。
现代文：杜邺没有授官就病死了。
English: Du Xuan died of illness without being promoted.

古文：邺言民讹言行筹，及谷永言王者买私田，彗星陨石牡飞之占，语在《五行志》。
现代文：杜邺谈论百姓传布谣言行筹占卜的事，以及谷永谈论王者买私田，出现彗星陨石锁簧丢失的占验，这些都记载在《五行志》中。
English: Du Xi talked about the people spreading rumors and divination, and Gu Yong talked about the king buying a private field, and the occurrence of a comet meteorite lock spring loss, all of which are recorded in the "Five Elements."

古文：初，邺从张吉学，吉子竦又幼孤，从邺学问，亦著于世，尤长小学。
现代文：当初，杜邺跟随张吉学习，张吉的儿子张竦又少年丧父，跟随杜邺研习学问，在当时也很有名，尤其擅长文字之学。
English: At the beginning, Du Juan studied with Zhang Ji. Zhang Ji's son, Zhang Yao, who lost his father as a young boy, studied with Du Juan. Du Juan was also famous at that time, and was particularly good at the study of letters.

古文：邺子林，清静好古，亦有雅材，建武中历位列卿，至大司空。
现代文：杜邺的儿子杜林，清静好古，也有很好的才能，建武中历位列卿，宫至大司空。
English: Du Lin, the son of Du Xuan, was quiet and ancient, and also had great talent. He was ranked as a noble in the Jianwu period, and rose to the rank of grand secretary in the palace.

古文：其正文字过于邺、竦，故世言小学者由杜公。
现代文：他考定文字的水平胜过杜邺和张竦，因此世人说研究文字之学由丝公开始。
English: He was better at judging the level of writing than Cuckoo and Zhang Ye, so people say that the study of writing began with Lord Si.

古文：赞曰：孝成之世，委政外家，诸舅持权，重于丁、傅在孝哀时。
现代文：赞曰：孝成帝时代，把政权委托给外戚之家，诸舅把持政权，权势比了氏、傅氏在孝哀帝时还重。
English: Zang said: In the era of Emperor Xiaocheng, the power was entrusted to the maternal family, and the uncles held the power, and the power was greater than that of the Yao clan and the Fu clan in the era of Emperor Xiao.

古文：故杜邺敢讥丁、傅，而钦、永不敢言王氏，其势然也。
现代文：因此杜邺敢于指责丁氏、傅氏，而钦不敢谈论王氏，这是形势使得他们那样啊。
English: Therefore, Du Juan dared to accuse Ding and Fu, while Qin dared not talk about Wang. It was the situation that made them that way.

古文：及钦欲挹损凤权，而邺附会音、商。
现代文：还有杜钦想要抑制减损王凤的权力，杜邺却依附王音和王商，也是如此。
English: Similarly, Du Qin wanted to curb the power of Wang Feng, while Cuckoo clung to Wang Yin and Wang Shang.

古文：永陈三七之戒，斯为忠焉，至其引申伯以阿凤，隙平阿于车骑，指金、火以求合，可谓谅不足而谈有余者。
现代文：谷永陈说三七的警戒，这表现出他的忠诚，到他引用申伯的事来谄媚王凰，离间平阿侯与车骑将军，陈说金火的变化谋求和解，可以称作是诚信不足而言谈有余的人。
English: Gu Yong Chen said that the vigilance of the 37th, which showed his loyalty, to the point that he quoted Shen Bo's affairs to flatter Wang Ying, separated Ping A Hou and the general of the cavalry, Chen said that the change of the golden fire to seek reconciliation, can be called a person who has more than enough to talk about in terms of lack of integrity.

古文：孔子称 友多闻 ，三人近之矣。
现代文：孔子称 友多闻 ，这三个人近似这种说法。
English: Confucius said, "Friends know more than you know," and these three people are close to this statement.

