古文：黄帝曰：阴阳者，天地之道也，万物之纲纪，变化之父母，生杀之本始，神明之府也。
现代文：黄帝说道：阴阳，是天地宇宙的大道，是万事万物的纲领，是所有变化的来源，是生长和死亡的根本，是主宰万物生息的大本营。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "The yin and yang is the road of heaven and earth, the universe, the program of all things, the source of all changes, the root of growth and death, and the base camp that dominates the lives of all things.

古文：治病必求于本。
现代文：所以医治疾病，必须遵从阴阳变化的根本。
English: Therefore, to cure diseases, we must follow the principle of yin and yang changes.

古文：故积阳为天，积阴为地。
现代文：拿自然界变化来比喻，清阳之气聚于上而成为天，浊阴之气积于下而成为地。
English: Taking the changes in the natural world as an analogy, the qi of the Qingyang gathers at the top and becomes the sky, and the qi of the Yin accumulates at the bottom and becomes the earth.

古文：阴静阳燥；阳生阴长；阳杀阴藏；阳化气，阴成形。
现代文：阴主静，阳主动；阳主生发，阴主成长；阳主肃杀，阴主收藏；阳能化生气，阴能构成形体。
English: Yin dominates calm, yang initiates; yang dominates growth, yang dominates growth; yang dominates killing, yang dominates collecting; yang can transmute anger, and yin can form a body.

古文：寒极生热，热极生寒；寒气生浊，热气生清；清气在下，则生飧泄；浊气在上，则生䐜胀。
现代文：寒到极点会生热，热到极点会生寒；寒气能产生浊阴，热气能产生清阳；清阳之气居下而不升，就会发生飧泻之病；浊阴之气居上而不降，就会发生胀满之病。
English: Extreme cold will produce heat, extreme heat will produce cold; cold air can produce shade, hot air can produce sunshine; if the sunshine falls but does not rise, there will be diarrhea; if the shade rises but does not fall, there will be bloating.

古文：此阴阳反作，病之逆从也。
现代文：这就是阴阳的正常和反常变化，因此疾病也就有逆证和顺证的分别。
English: This is the normal and abnormal changes of yin and yang, so the disease also has the inverse and converse.

古文：故清阳为天，浊阴为地。
现代文：所以，大自然的清阳之气上升为天，浊阴之气下降为地。
English: Therefore, the nature's qingyang qi rises to the sky, and the qingyin qi falls to the ground.

古文：地气上为云，天气下为雨；雨出地气，云出天气。
现代文：地气蒸发上升为云，天气凝聚下降为雨；雨是地气上升水气转变而成的，云是由天气蒸发水气而成的。
English: Geothermal evaporation rises to form clouds, and weather condensation falls to form rain; rain is the result of geothermal rising to form water vapor, and clouds are the result of weather evaporating water vapor.

古文：故清阳出上窍，浊阴出下窍；清阳发腠理，浊阴走五脏；清阳实四肢，浊阴归六腑。
现代文：清阳之气出于上窍，浊阴之气出于下窍；清阳之气发泄于腠理，浊阴之气内注于五脏；清阳之气充实于四肢，浊阴之气内走于六腑。
English: The qi of the Qingyang emanates from the upper orifice, and the qi of the Yin emanates from the lower orifice; the qi of the Qingyang is released in the abdomen, and the qi of the Yin is infused in the five viscera; the qi of the Qingyang is enriched in the limbs, and the qi of the Yin travels in the six diaphragms.

古文：水为阴，火为阳，阳为气，阴为味。味归形，形归气，气归精，精归化。精食气，形食味，化生精，气生形。味伤形，气伤精，精化为气，气伤于味。
现代文：水性润下故为阴，火性炎上故为阳，天供给人属阳的五气，地供给人属阴的五味，五味入胃滋养形体，形体外现人的精气，人的精气滋养依靠水谷精微，水谷精微由五味化生，水谷精微滋养人的精气，人的形体由五味供养，人的精气由水谷精微化生，人的精气外化于形体。
English: Water-based lubrication is therefore yin, fire-based flame is therefore yang. Heaven supplies the five qi of yang to man, the earth supplies the five qi of yin to man, the five qi enter the stomach to nourish the body, the human essence appears outside the body, the human essence is nourished by the water valley, the water valley is born from the five qi, the water valley is nourished by the human essence, the human body is nourished by the five qi, the human essence is born from the water valley, and the human essence is externalized in the body.

古文：阴味出下窍；阳气出上窍。味厚者为阴，薄为阴之阳；气厚者为阳，薄为阳之阴。
现代文：如果饮食不节反能损伤形体，机能活动太过亦可以使人的精气耗伤，人的精气由水谷精微化生，水谷精微可以因为五味不周而受到损害。味属于阴所以趋向下窍，气属于阳所以趋向上窍。味厚的为阴中之阴，味薄的为阴中之阳；气厚的为阳中之阳，气薄的为阳中之阴。
English: If the diet is not regular, it can damage the body. Excessive functional activities can also deplete the person's essence. The person's essence is produced by the valley of refinement, and the valley of refinement can be damaged by the lack of taste. Taste belongs to the yin, so it tends to the lower ear, and the qi belongs to the yang, so it tends to the upper ear. The thick taste is the yin in the yin, and the thin taste is the yang in the yin; the thick taste is the yang in the yang, and the thin taste is the yin in the yang.

古文：味厚则泄，薄则通。
现代文：味厚的有泄下的作用，味薄的有通利的作用。
English: Thick taste has the effect of leaking, thin taste has the effect of permeability.

古文：气薄则发泄，厚则发热。
现代文：气薄的能向外发散，气厚的能助阳生热。
English: The thin gas can radiate outward, and the thick gas can help the sun generate heat.

古文：壮火之气衰，少火之气壮；壮火食气，气食少火；壮火散气，少火生气。
现代文：阳气太过能使正气衰弱，阳气正常能使正气旺盛；过度亢奋的阳气会损害正气，而正气却依赖正常的阳气供养；过度亢盛的阳气能耗散正气，正常的阳气能增强正气。
English: Too much yang can weaken the positive energy, and too much yang can make the positive energy strong. Over-excited yang can damage the positive energy, but the positive energy depends on the normal yang for support. Over-excited yang can dissipate the positive energy, and normal yang can enhance the positive energy.

古文：气味，辛甘发散为阳，酸苦涌泄为阴。
现代文：凡气味辛甘而有发散功用的，属于阳；气味酸苦而有通泄功用的，属于阴。
English: All sweet and sour odors that have the function of diffusion belong to yang; sour and bitter odors that have the function of discharge belong to yin.

古文：阴胜则阳病，阳胜则阴病。
现代文：阴气发生偏盛，则阳气受损而为病；阳气发生偏盛，则阴气耗损而为病。
English: When yin is overabundant, yang is damaged and becomes a disease; when yang is overabundant, yin is depleted and becomes a disease.

古文：阳胜则热，阴胜则寒。
现代文：阳偏盛则表现为热性病症，阴偏盛则表现为寒性病症。
English: The predominance of yang is manifested as a feverish disease, and the predominance of yin is manifested as a cold disease.

古文：重寒则热，重热则寒。
现代文：寒到极点会表现热象，热到极点会表现寒象。
English: Extreme cold will manifest as heat, and extreme heat will manifest as cold.

古文：寒伤形，热伤气。气伤痛，形伤肿。
现代文：寒邪能伤形体，热邪能伤气分，气分受伤可以产生形体疼痛，形体疼痛可产生肿胀。
English: Cold evil can hurt the body, hot evil can hurt the qi, qi injury can produce body pain, body pain can produce swelling.

古文：故先痛而后肿者，气伤形也，先肿而后痛者，形伤气也。
现代文：凡是先痛而后肿的，是气分先伤而后及于形体；先肿而后痛的，是形体先病后及于气分。
English: If there is pain before swelling, it is because the qi was injured before reaching the body; if there is swelling before pain, it is because the body was sick before reaching the qi.

古文：风胜则动，热胜则肿，燥胜则干，寒胜则浮，湿胜则濡泻。
现代文：风邪太过，则能发生痉挛动摇；热邪太过，则能发生红肿；燥气太过，则能发生干枯；寒气太过，则能发生浮肿；湿气太过，则能发生濡泻。
English: If the wind is too strong, it can cause shaking; if the heat is too strong, it can cause redness; if the dryness is too strong, it can cause dryness; if the cold is too strong, it can cause swelling; if the humidity is too strong, it can cause watery diarrhea.

古文：天有四时五行，以生长收藏，以生寒暑燥湿风。人有五脏化五气，以生喜怒悲忧恐。
现代文：大自然的变化，有春、夏、秋、冬四时的交替，有木、火、土、金、水五行的变化，因此，产生了寒、暑、燥、湿、风的气候，气候影响了自然界的万物，形成了生、长、收、藏的规律。人有肝、心、脾、肺、肾五脏，五脏之气化生五志，产生了喜、怒、悲、忧、恐五种不同的情志活动。
English: The changes in nature, with the alternation of spring, summer, autumn and winter, and the changes in the five elements of wood, fire, earth, metal and water, have produced cold, hot, dry, wet and windy climates. The climate has affected all things in the natural world, forming the laws of growth, growth, harvest and storage. People have the liver, heart, spleen, lungs, kidneys, and five organs, and the five organs are transformed into five aspirations, resulting in five different emotional activities of joy, anger, sorrow, worry and fear.

古文：故喜怒伤气，寒暑伤形。
现代文：喜怒等情志变化，可以伤气，寒暑外侵，可以伤形。
English: Emotions such as joy and anger can hurt, cold and heat can invade, and shape can be injured.

古文：暴怒伤阴，暴喜伤阳。
现代文：突然大怒，会损伤阴气，突然大喜，会损伤阳气。
English: Sudden anger will damage yin, and sudden joy will damage yang.

古文：厥气上行，满脉去形。
现代文：气逆上行，充满经脉，则神气浮越，离去形体。
English: When the qi goes up and down, filling the meridians, the divine qi floats up and away from the body.

古文：喜怒不节，寒暑过度，生乃不固。
现代文：所以喜怒不加以节制，寒暑不善于调适，生命就不能牢固。
English: Therefore, if you do not control your emotions, and are not good at adjusting to hot and cold weather, your life will not be stable.

古文：故重阴必阳，重阳必阴。
现代文：阴极可以转化为阳，阳极可以转化为阴。
English: The cathode can be converted into yang, and the anode can be converted into yin.

古文：故曰： 冬伤于寒，春必温病；春伤于风，夏生飧泄；夏伤于暑，秋必痎疟；秋伤于湿，冬生咳嗽。 
现代文：所以说： 冬季受了寒气的伤害，春天就容易发生温病；春天受了风气的伤害，夏季就容易发生飧泄；夏季受了暑气的伤害，秋天就容易发生疟疾；秋季受了湿气的伤害，冬天就容易发生咳嗽。 
English: Therefore, it is said that: if the winter is affected by cold weather, the spring will be prone to hypothermia; if the spring is affected by tradition, the summer will be prone to diarrhea; if the summer is affected by heat, the autumn will be prone to malaria; if the autumn is affected by humidity, the winter will be prone to cough.

古文：帝曰：余闻上古圣人，论理人形，列别脏腑；端络经脉，会通六合，各从其经；气穴所发，各有处名；溪谷属骨，皆有所起；分部逆从，各有条理；四时阴阳，尽有经纪；外内之应，皆有表里，其信然乎？
现代文：黄帝问道：我听说上古时代的圣人，研究人体的形态，分辨脏腑的阴阳；审察经脉的联系，把十二经脉分为阴阳表里相合的六对，并分辨各条经脉的走行路线；各条经脉上的穴位，都有明确的部位和名称；肌肉和骨骼连属的部位，各有起点和终点；经络系统中的皮部和浮络，虽然有上下左右不同，但都条理分明；四时阴阳的变化，有它一定的规律；外界环境与人体内部的脏腑、经络，相互对应，也都有表里相合的关系。
English: Huang Di asked: I heard that the sages of ancient times studied the human body shape and distinguished the yin and yang of the viscera; examined the connection of the meridians, divided the twelve meridians into six pairs that coincide in the yin and yang table, and distinguished the running routes of each meridian; the points on each meridian have clear parts and names; the parts of the muscle and bone families each have a starting point and end point; the skin and the meridians in the meridian system, although there are differences between the left and right, are well organized; the changes of yin and yang at 4 o'clock have a certain law; the external environment and the

古文：岐伯对曰：东方生风，风生木，木生酸，酸生肝，肝生筋，筋生心，肝主目。
现代文：以上这些说法是否都确实呢？歧伯回答说：东方对应春季，阳生而日暖风和，暖风生发草木，草木生发出酸味，酸味能滋养肝脏，肝脏能滋养筋腱，筋腱柔和则心血充盈，肝气关联于眼睛。
English: Are all of the above statements true? Dispel replied: The East corresponds to the spring, the sun shines and the day is warm, the warm wind produces herbs, the herbs produce sourness, the sourness can nourish the liver, the liver can nourish the tendons, the tendons are soft and full of blood, and the liver is associated with the eyes.

古文：其在天为玄，在人为道，在地为化。化生五味，道生智，玄生神。
现代文：五行，在天为深远微妙无穷，在人为自然界变化的道理，在地为生化万物，万物产生了五味，人能知道自然界变化的道理就能产生一切智慧，宇宙间的深远微妙是变化莫测的。
English: The five elements are profound, subtle and infinite in the heavens. They are the reason for man-made changes in the natural world. They are the reason for all living things on the earth. All things have produced the five tastes. If man can know the reason for changes in the natural world, he can produce all wisdom. The profound subtlety of the universe is unpredictable.

古文：神在天为风，在地为木，在体为筋，在脏为肝，在色为苍，在音为角，在声为呼，在变动为握，在窍为目，在味为酸，在志为怒。
现代文：五行东方的变化，在天为风气，在地为木气，在人体为筋，在五脏为肝，在五色为苍，在五音为角，在五声为呼，在病变的表现为握，在七窍为目，在五味为酸，在情志的变动为怒。
English: The changes of the five elements in the East are the customs in the heavens, the wood in the earth, the sinews in the human body, the liver in the five bowels, the sky in the five colors, the horns in the five tones, the call in the five voices, the grip in the manifestation of the lesions, the eyes in the seven acupoints, the sourness in the five tastes, and the anger in the changes of the emotions.

古文：怒伤肝，悲胜怒；风伤筋，燥胜风；酸伤筋，辛胜酸。
现代文：怒气能伤肝，悲能够抑制怒；风气能伤筋，燥能够抑制风；过食酸味能伤筋，辛味能抑制酸味。
English: Anger can hurt the liver, sadness can suppress anger; morale can hurt the muscles, dryness can suppress wind; overeating sour can hurt the muscles, spicy can suppress sour.

古文：南方生热，热生火，火生苦，苦生心，心生血，血生脾，心主舌。
现代文：南方应夏，阳气盛而生热，热甚则生火，火气能产生苦味，苦味能滋长心气，心气能化生血气，血气充足，则滋养脾脏，心气关联于舌。
English: In the south, it is summer. Yang qi is abundant and generates heat. When it is very hot, it generates fire. Fire qi can produce bitterness. Bitterness can nourish the heart. Heart qi can transform into blood qi. When blood qi is sufficient, it nourishes the spleen. Heart qi is related to the tongue.

古文：其在天为热，在地为火，在体为脉，在脏为心，在色为赤，在音为徵，在声为笑，在变动为忧，在窍为舌，在味为苦，在志为喜。
现代文：五行南方的变化，在天为热气，在地为火气，在人体为血脉，在五脏为心，在五色为赤，在五音为徵，在五声为笑，在病变的表现为说话吞吞吐吐，在七窍为舌，在五味为苦，在情志的变动为喜。
English: The changes of the five elements in the south are hot air in the sky, fire in the earth, blood in the human body, heart in the five viscera, red in the five colors, sign in the five tones, laughter in the five voices, stammering in speech in the manifestation of disease, tongue in the seven acupoints, pain in the five tastes, and joy in the change of emotions.

古文：喜伤心，恐胜喜；热伤气，寒胜热；苦伤气，咸胜苦。
现代文：喜能伤心，以恐惧抑制喜；热能伤气，以寒气抑制热；苦能伤气，咸味能抑制苦味。
English: Happiness can hurt, fear can suppress happiness; heat can hurt, cold can restrain heat; bitterness can hurt, salt can restrain bitterness.

古文：中央生湿，湿生土，土生甘，甘生脾，脾生肉，肉生肺，脾主口。
现代文：中央应长夏，长夏生湿，湿与土气相应，土气能产生甘味，甘味能滋养脾气，脾气能滋养肌肉，肌肉丰满，则又能养肺脏，脾气关联于口腔。
English: The center should be long summer, long summer is wet, wet and earthy correspondingly, earthy can produce sweetness, sweetness can nourish temper, temper can nourish muscle, muscle is plump, it can also nourish lungs, temper is related to the mouth.

古文：其在天为湿，在地为土，在体为肉，在脏为脾，在色为黄，在音为宫，在声为歌，在变动为哕，在窍为口，在味为甘，在志为思。
现代文：五行中央的变化，在天为湿气，在地为土气，在人体为肌肉，在五脏为脾，在五色为黄，在五音为宫，在五声为歌，在病变的表现为干呕，在七窍为口，在五味为甘，在情志的变动为思。
English: The changes in the middle of the five elements are moisture in the sky, rust in the earth, muscle in the human body, spleen in the five viscera, yellow in the five colors, palace in the five tones, song in the five voices, nausea in the lesions, mouth in the seven acupoints, sweetness in the five tastes, and thought in the changes of the emotions.

古文：思伤脾，怒胜思；湿伤肉，风胜湿；甘伤肉，酸胜甘。
现代文：思虑伤脾，以怒气抑制思虑；湿气能伤肌肉，以风气抑制湿气，甘味能伤肌肉，酸味能抑制甘味。
English: Thought injures the spleen, anger suppresses thought; humidity injures the muscles, tradition suppresses humidity, sweetness injures the muscles, sourness suppresses sweetness.

古文：西方生燥，燥生金，金生辛，辛生肺，肺生皮毛，皮毛生肾，肺主鼻。
现代文：西方应秋，秋天天气急而生燥，燥与金气相应，金能产生辛味，辛味能滋养肺气，肺气能滋养皮毛，皮毛润泽则又能养肾，肺气关联于鼻。
English: The West responds to autumn, the autumn weather is sudden and dry, and the dryness corresponds to the gold gas. Gold can produce pungent taste, pungent taste can nourish the lungs, lung gas can nourish the fur, moisturizing fur can nourish the kidneys, and lung gas is related to the nose.

古文：其在天为燥，在地为金，在体为皮毛，在脏为肺，在色为白，在音为商，在声为哭，在变动为咳，在窍为鼻，在味为辛，在志为忧。
现代文：五行西方的变化，在天为燥气，在地为金气，在人体为皮毛，在五脏为肺，在五色为白，在五音为商，在五声为哭，在病变的表现为咳，在七窍为鼻，在五味为辛，在情致的变动为忧。
English: The changes of the Western Five Elements are dryness in the sky, gold in the earth, fur in the human body, lungs in the five viscera, white in the five colors, business in the five tones, crying in the five tones, cough in the manifestation of the lesions, nose in the seven acupoints, pain in the five tastes, and anxiety in the change of emotions.

古文：忧伤肺，喜胜忧；热伤皮毛，寒胜热；辛伤皮毛，苦胜辛。
现代文：忧能伤肺，以喜抑制忧；热能伤皮毛，寒能抑制热；辛味能伤皮毛，苦味能抑制辛味。
English: Sorrow can hurt the lungs, joy can suppress sorrow; heat can hurt the fur, cold can restrain the heat; pungent can hurt the fur, bitter can restrain the pungent.

古文：北方生寒，寒生水，水生咸，咸生肾，肾生骨髓，髓生肝，肾主耳。
现代文：北方应冬，冬天生寒，寒气与水气相应，水气能产生咸味，咸味能滋养肾气，肾气能滋长骨髓，骨髓充实，则又能养肝，肾气关联于耳。
English: The north should be winter, winter is cold, cold gas corresponds to water gas, water gas can produce salty taste, salty taste can nourish kidney gas, kidney gas can nourish bone marrow, bone marrow is full, it can also nourish liver, kidney gas is related to ear.

古文：其在天为寒，在地为水，在体为骨，在脏为肾，在色为黑，在音为羽，在声为呻，在变动为栗，在窍为耳，在味为咸，在志为恐。
现代文：五行北方的变化，在天为寒气，在地为水气，在人体为骨髓，在五脏为肾，在五色为黑，在五音为羽，在五声为呻，在病变的表现为战栗，在七窍为耳，在五味为咸，在情致的变动为恐。
English: The changes of the five elements in the north are cold in the sky, moisture in the earth, bone marrow in the human body, kidney in the five viscera, black in the five colors, feather in the five tones, moan in the five tones, shudder in the manifestation of lesions, ear in the seven acupoints, salt in the five tastes, and fear in the change of emotions.

古文：恐伤肾，思胜恐；寒伤血，燥胜寒；咸伤血，甘胜咸。
现代文：恐能伤肾，思能够抑制恐；寒能伤骨，湿能够抑制寒；咸能伤血，甘味能抑制咸味。
English: Fear can hurt the kidneys, thought can suppress fear; cold can hurt the blood, dryness can restrain the cold; salty can hurt the blood, sweetness can restrain the salty.

古文：故曰： 天地者，万物之上下也；阴阳者，血气之男女也；左右者，阴阳之道路也；水火者，阴阳之征兆也；阴阳者，万物之能始也。 
现代文：所以说： 天地上下，使万物生化其间；阴阳在人，构成血气形体之男女；左右，为阴阳运行不息的道路；水火，是阴阳的象征；阴阳的变化，是万物生长的本源和开始。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Heaven and earth are above and below, causing all things to be biochemical; yin and yang are in people, constituting the male and female of the blood and gas body; left and right, the road for the incessant movement of yin and yang; water and fire are the symbols of yin and yang; the changes of yin and yang are the source and beginning of the growth of all things.

古文：故曰： 阴在内，阳之守也，阳在外，阴之使也。 
现代文：所以说： 阴阳是互相为用的，阴在内，为阳之镇守；阳在外，为阴之役使。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Yin and yang are used for each other. The yin inside is the guardian of the yang; the yang outside is the servant of the yin.

古文：帝曰：法阴阳奈何？
现代文：黄帝问道：如何效法阴阳以治病呢？
English: Emperor Huangdi asked: How can we follow the Yin and Yang to cure diseases?

古文：岐伯曰：阳盛则身热，腠理闭，喘粗为之俛仰，汗不出而热，齿干以烦冤，腹满,死，能冬不能夏。
现代文：歧伯回答说：如阳气太过，则身体发热，皮肤腠理紧闭，气粗喘促，呼吸困难，身体亦为之俯仰摆动，汗发不出来而燥热，齿间干燥，心脏感到烦闷，如果还有腹部胀满的症状，就是死症，这是属于阳盛的病，所以冬天尚能支撑，夏天就不能耐受了。
English: "If the yang qi is too strong, the body will be feverish, the skin will be tight, the breath will be thick and short, the breathing will be difficult, the body will also sway, the sweat will not come out and it will be hot, the teeth will be dry, the heart will be bored, and if there are symptoms of abdominal distension, it will be death. This is a yang qi disease, so it can still be supported in winter, but it can not be tolerated in summer.

古文：阴胜则身寒，汗出，身长清，数栗而寒，寒则厥，厥则腹满,死，能夏不能冬。
现代文：如阴气太过，则身体发寒，汗多，或身体常觉冷而不时战栗发寒，甚至手足厥逆，如果还有腹部胀满的症状，就是死症，这是属于阴盛的病，所以夏天尚能支撑持，冬天就不能耐受了。
English: If the yin qi is too much, the body will feel cold, sweat a lot, or the body often feels cold and shivers from time to time, and even the hands and feet will be cold. If there are also symptoms of a swollen abdomen, it is death. This is a Yin Sheng disease, so it can still be supported in summer, but it cannot be tolerated in winter.

古文：此阴阳更胜之变，病之形能也。
现代文：这就是阴阳互相胜负变化所表现的病态。
English: This is the pathology manifested by the alternation of yin and yang.

古文：帝曰：调此二者，奈何？
现代文：黄帝问道：有什么办法调摄阴阳呢？
English: Huangdi asked: What is the way to adjust the yin and yang?

古文：岐伯曰：能知七损八益，则二者可调，不知用此，则早衰之节也。
现代文：歧伯说：如果懂得了 七损八益 的养生之道，则人身的阴阳就可以调摄，如果不懂得 七损八益 的道理，就会发生早衰现象。
English: "If you understand the seven losses and eight gains way of health care, you can adjust the yin and yang of your body. If you do not understand the seven losses and eight gains principle, premature aging will occur.

古文：年四十，而阴气自半也，起居衰矣；年五十，体重，耳目不聪明矣；年六十，阴痿，气大衰，九窍不利，下虚上实，涕泣俱出矣。
现代文：一般的人，到了四十岁，肾气已经衰减了一半，起居动作亦渐渐衰退；到了五十岁，身体觉得沉重，耳不聪目不明；到了六十岁，阳痿，肾气大衰，九窍不能通利，出现下虚上实的现象，会常常流眼泪鼻涕。
English: For the average person, by the age of forty, the kidney qi has been reduced by half, and the movement of living has gradually declined; by the age of fifty, the body feels heavy, the ears are deaf and the eyes are not clear; by the age of sixty, impotence, kidney qi decline, the nine acupoints cannot be used for mutual benefit, the phenomenon of false and true appears, and tears and snot will often flow.

古文：故曰： 知之则强，不知则老。 
现代文：所以说： 知道调摄的人身体就强健，不知道调摄的人身体就容易衰老。 
English: Therefore, it is said that: Those who know how to adjust the camera are physically strong, and those who do not know how to adjust the camera are physically prone to aging.

古文：故同出而名异耳。
现代文：这就是原本同样的身体，结果却出现了强弱不同两种情况的道理。
English: This is the principle of the same body, but as a result, there are two different situations of strength and weakness.

古文：智者察同，愚者察异，愚者不足，智者有余，有余而耳目聪明，身体轻强，老者复壮，壮者益治。
现代文：聪慧的人能够从表面的差异找到本质的相同，愚笨的人只能看到个体的差异找不到内在的规律，因此愚笨的人常常感到难于应对，而聪慧的人则应对有余，有余则耳目聪明，身体轻便强壮，即使已经年老亦可以身体健壮，当然本来强壮的就更加强壮了。
English: Intelligent people can find the same essence from the surface differences. Stupid people can only see the individual differences and cannot find the internal laws. Therefore, stupid people often find it difficult to deal with, while intelligent people have more than enough to deal with. Others are smart, light and strong. Even if they are old, they can be physically strong. Of course, those who are strong are stronger.

古文：是以圣人为无为之事，乐恬憺之能，从欲快志于虚无之守，故寿命无穷，与天地终，此圣人之治身也。
现代文：所以，圣人不作勉强的事情，乐于保持恬淡的心态，有乐观愉快的旨趣，保持着宁静的生活，因此能够寿命无穷，尽享天年，这是圣人保养身体的方法。
English: Therefore, the sage does not do things reluctantly, is willing to maintain a light-hearted mentality, has an optimistic and pleasant taste, maintains a peaceful life, and therefore can live an endless life and enjoy the heavenly years. This is the sage's method of maintaining the body.

古文：天不足西北，故西北方阴也，而人右耳目不如左明也。地不满东南，故东南方阳也，而人左手足不如右强也。
现代文：天向西北方倾斜，所以西北方属阴，而人的右耳和右眼也不及左边的灵便；地向东南方倾斜，所以东南方属阳，而人的左手和左足也不及右边的强壮。
English: The sky is inclined to the northwest, so the northwest is yin, and the right ear and right eye of man are not as strong as the left. The earth is inclined to the southeast, so the southeast is yang, and the left hand and left foot of man are not as strong as the right.

古文：帝曰：何以然？
现代文：黄帝问道：这是什么道理呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Why?

古文：岐伯曰：东方阳也，阳者其精并于上，并于上则上明而下虚，故使耳目聪明而手足不便。
现代文：歧伯说：东方属阳，阳性向上，向上则上明而下虚，所以对应于人体则耳目聪明而手足不便利。
English: "The East is yang, and the yang is upward, and the upward is bright and the downward is empty, so the corresponding to the human body is that the ears and eyes are smart, but the hands and feet are not convenient.

古文：西方阴也，阴者其精并于下，并于下则下盛而上虚，故其耳目不聪明而手足便也。
现代文：西方属阴，阴性向下，向下则下盛而上虚，所以对应于人体则耳目不聪明而手足便利。
English: The West belongs to Yin, the negative is downward, and downward is downward and upward, so corresponding to the human body, the ears and eyes are not smart, but the hands and feet are convenient.

古文：故俱感于邪，其在上则右甚，在下则左甚，此天地阴阳所不能全也，故邪居之。
现代文：所以如果左右同样感受了外邪，但在上部则身体的右侧较重，在下部则身体的左侧较重，这是天地阴阳不平衡导致的，而人体左右阴阳的差异则导致外邪乘虚而居。
English: Therefore, if the left and right sides also feel the external evil, but the right side of the body is heavier in the upper part, and the left side of the body is heavier in the lower part, this is caused by the imbalance of yin and yang in heaven and earth, and the difference between the yin and yang of the left and right sides of the human body causes the external evil to take advantage of the void.

古文：故天有精，地有形，天有八纪，地有五理，故能为万物之父母。
现代文：所以天有精气，地有形状；天有八个节气的纲纪，地有五个方位的道理，因此天地是万物生长的根本。
English: Therefore, heaven has essence and earth has shape; heaven has eight solar terms and earth has five directions. Therefore, heaven and earth are fundamental to the growth of all things.

古文：清阳上天，浊阴归地，是故天地之动静，神明为之纲纪，故能以生长收藏，终而复始。
现代文：无形的清阳上升于天，有形的浊阴下归于地，这是天地的交互运动，构成阴阳变化的纲纪，而能使万物春生、夏长、秋收、冬藏周而复始。
English: The invisible Qingyang rises in the sky, and the tangible Haoyin descends to the earth. This is the interactive movement of heaven and earth, which constitutes the discipline of yin and yang changes, and can make all things spring, summer, autumn, winter and winter.

古文：惟贤人上配天以养头，下象地以养足，中傍人事以养五脏。
现代文：贤达的人，把人体上部比做天来养护头，人体下部比做地来养护足，人体中部比作人事以达到和谐保养五脏。
English: Wise people compare the upper part of the human body to the heavens to maintain the head, the lower part of the human body to the earth to maintain the feet, and the middle of the human body to the personnel to achieve harmony and maintain the internal organs.

古文：天气通于肺，地气通于嗌，风气通于肝，雷气通于心，谷气通于脾，雨气通于肾。
现代文：天的清气通达于肺脏，地的水谷之气通达于咽喉，风的木气通达于肝脏，雷的火气通达于心脏，山谷的土气通达于脾脏，雨的水气通达于肾脏。
English: The clear air of the sky reaches the lungs, the air of the water valley of the earth reaches the throat, the wood gas of the wind reaches the liver, the fire gas of the thunder reaches the heart, the earth gas of the valley reaches the spleen, and the rain water gas reaches the kidneys.

古文：六经为川，肠胃为海，九窍为水注之气。
现代文：六经流注不息犹如江河，肠胃受纳水谷犹如大海，九窍通清排浊犹如水流通畅。
English: The six meridians flow uninterruptedly like a river, the gastrointestinal receptive valley is like the sea, and the nine meridians flow smoothly like water.

古文：以天地为之阴阳，阳之汗，以天地之雨名之；阳之气，以天地之疾风名之。
现代文：如以天地来类比人体的阴阳，则阳气所发的汗，犹如天的下雨；人体的阳气，犹如天地的疾风。
English: If heaven and earth are compared to the yin and yang of the human body, then the sweat emitted by the yang is like the rain of heaven; the yang of the human body is like the wind of heaven and earth.

古文：暴气象雷，逆气象阳。
现代文：人的暴怒之气，犹如天空中的炸雷；浊气上逆，犹如骄阳之火。
English: The wrath of a man is as the thunder of the heavens, and as the flame of the sun when it goeth forth.

古文：故治不法天之纪，不用地之理，则灾害至矣。
现代文：所以调合身体的阴阳，如果不取法天之纪，如果不运用地之理，那么疾病就要发生了。
English: Therefore, if the yin and yang of the body are not adjusted, if the law and heaven are not taken, if the principle of the earth is not applied, then disease will occur.

古文：故邪风之至，疾如风雨，故善治者治皮毛，其次治肌肤，其次治筋脉，其次治六腑，其次治五脏。
现代文：所以外邪入侵人体，急如疾风暴雨。善于治病的医生，于外邪刚入侵的时候就给予治疗；技术稍差的医生，于外邪入侵已有表症的时候才治疗；技术较差的医生，于外邪到六腑的时候才治疗；技术更差的医生，于外邪到五脏的时候才治疗。
English: Therefore, when a foreign evil invades the human body, it is as sudden as a hurricane. A doctor who is good at treating diseases will treat the foreign evil as soon as it invades; a doctor with slightly poorer skills will only treat the foreign evil when it has symptoms; a doctor with poorer skills will only treat the foreign evil when it reaches the sixth eyelid; a doctor with poorer skills will only treat the foreign evil when it reaches the five viscera.

古文：治五脏者，半死半生也。
现代文：假如病邪进到五脏，就非常严重，这时治疗的效果，只有半死半生了。
English: If the disease gets into the five viscera, it is very serious. At this time, the effect of treatment is only half dead.

古文：故天之邪气，感则害人五脏；水谷之寒热，感则害于六腑；地之湿气，感则害皮肉筋脉。
现代文：所以，天上的风邪，进入到人体就会损害五脏；饮食中的寒热如果非时失宜，进入到人体就会损害六腑；地下的湿气，进入到人体就会损害皮肉筋脉。
English: Therefore, the heavenly wind, if it enters the human body, will damage the five viscera; if the cold and heat in the diet are inappropriate, if it enters the human body, it will damage the six viscera; if the underground moisture enters the human body, it will damage the dermis.

古文：故善用针者，从阴引阳，从阳引阴，以右治左，以左治右。
现代文：所以，善于运用针刺疗法的医生，对于病变在阳经的，从阴经以诱导之；病变在阴经的，从阳经以诱导之；取右边以治疗左边的病变；取左边以治疗右边的病变。
English: Therefore, doctors who are good at using acupuncture therapy, for lesions in the anus, induce from the anus; lesions in the anus, induce from the anus; take the right to treat the lesions on the left; take the left to treat the lesions on the right.

古文：以我知彼，以表知里，以观过与不及之理，见微得过，用之不殆。
现代文：以自己的正常状态来比较病人的异常状态，以表面显露的症状了解身体里面的病变，观察太过或不及的病理状态，通过以上方法就能在疾病初起的时候便知道病邪之所在，此时行针就不会给病人造成误诊的危害。
English: Using one's own normal state to compare the abnormal state of the patient, understanding the lesions inside the body from the symptoms that appear on the surface, observing the pathological state that is too much or not enough, through the above methods, it is possible to know the location of the disease at the onset of the disease. At this time, the injection will not cause the harm of misdiagnosis to the patient.

古文：善诊者，察色按脉，先别阴阳，审清浊而知部分；视喘息，听音声，而知所苦；观权衡规矩，而知病所主；按尺寸，观浮沉滑涩，而知病所生。
现代文：所以善于诊治的医生，通过诊察病人的面色和脉搏，先辨别病症的属阴属阳；审察五色的浮泽或重浊，而知道病的部位；观察呼吸，听病人发出的声音，可以得知所患的病苦；诊察四时色脉的正常与否，来分析脏腑所患何病，诊察手腕寸口处的脉象，从它的浮、沉、滑、涩，来了解疾病产生的原因。
English: Therefore, a doctor who is good at diagnosis and treatment, through the examination of the patient's complexion and pulse, first distinguishes the symptoms of yin and yang; examines the five-colored buoyancy or heaviness, and knows the part of the disease; observes the breath, listens to the sound emitted by the patient, and can know the suffering of the disease; examines the normal or not of the four-hour color pulse, to analyze the disease of the viscera, and examines the pulse at the wrist, from its floating, sinking, slippery, and astringent, to understand the cause of the disease.

古文：以治无过，以诊则不失矣。
现代文：这样在诊断上就不会有差错，治疗也没有过失了。
English: In this way, there will be no error in diagnosis, and there will be no fault in treatment.

古文：故曰：病之始起也，可刺而已，其盛，可待衰而已。
现代文：所以说：病在初起的时候，可用针刺的方法治疗；病势正盛的时候，必须待其稍微衰退后才能用针。
English: Therefore, it is said that at the beginning of the disease, acupuncture can be used to treat it; when the disease is in full swing, it must wait until it has declined slightly before using a needle.

古文：故因其轻而扬之，因其重而减之，因其衰而彰之。
现代文：对于病症轻的，使用发散轻扬之法治之；病症重的，使用消减之法治之；气血衰弱的，应用补益之法治之。
English: For mild illness, the rule of diffusion and lightening should be used; for severe illness, the rule of reduction should be used; for weak qi and blood, the rule of supplementation should be applied.

古文：形不足者，温之以气；精不足者，补之以味。
现代文：用药时，对于形体虚弱的，当以温补其气；精气不足的，当补之以厚味。
English: When taking medicine, for a weak body, it is best to supplement its qi with warmth; for a deficient qi, it is best to supplement it with a thick taste.

古文：其高者，因而越之；其下者，引而竭之；中满者，泻之于内；有邪者，渍形以为汗；其在皮者，汗而发之；其慓悍者，按而收之；其实者，散而泻之。
现代文：治病的方法，则是：病在上焦的，可用吐法；病在下焦的，可用疏导之法；病在中焦为胀满的，可用泻下之法；其邪在外表，可用汤药浸渍法以使出汗；邪在皮肤，可用发汗之法使其外泄；病势急暴的，立即按压揉掐急救穴位以稳住病势；实症，则用散法或泻法。
English: The methods of curing the disease are: if the disease is in the upper coke, it can be cured by vomiting; if the disease is in the lower coke, it can be cured by distraction; if the disease is full in the middle coke, it can be cured by laxation; if the disease is on the outside, it can be impregnated with decoction to make it sweat; if the disease is on the skin, it can be released by sweating; if the disease is acute, immediately press and rub the first aid point to stabilize the disease; if the disease is real, it can be cured by dispersion or laxation.

古文：审其阴阳，以别柔刚。阳病治阴，阴病治阳,定其血气，各守其乡，血实宜决之，气虚宜掣引之。
现代文：观察病证在阴在阳，以辨别其刚柔，阳病应当治阴，阴病应当治阳；确定病证在气在血，以防其血病再伤及气，气病再伤及血，所以血实病症适宜用泻血法，气虚病症适宜用导引法。
English: Observe the symptoms in yin and yang, to distinguish their hardness and softness, the yang disease should be treated with yin, and the yin disease should be treated with yang; determine the symptoms in qi and blood, to prevent the blood disease from re-injuring the qi, and the qi disease from re-injuring the blood, so the blood solid disease is suitable to use the method of blood ejaculation, and the qi deficiency disease is suitable to use the guidance method.

