古文：周洪谟，字尧弼，长宁人。
现代文：周洪谟，字尧弼，长宁人。
English: Zhou Hongmu, Zhaojun, Changning people.

古文：正统十年，进士及第。授编修。
现代文：正统十年，考中进士，授编修职。
English: After ten years of orthodoxy, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, and was awarded the post of editor.

古文：博闻强记，善文词，熟国朝典故，喜谈经济。
现代文：他见闻广博，强于记忆，文笔很漂亮，熟悉本朝典制和掌故，喜欢谈论经国济民的方略。
English: He is well-informed, has a strong memory, and writes beautifully. He is familiar with this dynasty's legal system and customs, and likes to talk about the strategy of benefiting the country and the people.

古文：景泰元年，疏劝帝亲经筵，勤听政，因陈时务十二事。
现代文：景泰元年，周洪谟上疏劝代宗参加御前讲席，勤于政务，并陈述有关时务的十二件事。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, Zhou Hongmu, the emperor's eldest son, persuaded the emperor's heir to attend the throne, to be diligent in government affairs, and to state twelve matters related to current affairs.

古文：再迁侍读。
现代文：又升为侍读。
English: He was also promoted to chauffeur.

古文：天顺二年掌南院事。
现代文：天顺二年，掌管南京翰林院事。
English: In the second year of Tianshun, he was in charge of the Nanjing Hanlin Academy.

古文：宪宗嗣位，复陈时务，言人君保国之道有三：曰力圣学，曰修内治，曰攘外侮。
现代文：宪宗即位，他又上疏陈述时务，说人君保国之道有三点：致力圣学、治理内政、抵御外寇。
English: When Emperor Kenzong ascended the throne, he made a brief statement on current affairs, saying that there were three ways to protect the country: to devote oneself to sacred learning, to govern domestic affairs, and to resist foreign invaders.

古文：力圣学之目一：曰正心。
现代文：致力圣学要做到一点就是端正意念。
English: One of the most important things to strive for in sacred studies is to have the right intention.

古文：修内治之目五：曰求真才，去不肖，旌忠良，罢冗职，恤漕运。
现代文：治理内政要做到有五点：征求真有才能之人去掉不肖之徒，表彰忠良削减冗职，妥善减轻漕运负担。
English: There are five points to be achieved in the governance of domestic affairs: to solicit truly talented people to get rid of unsavory ones, to commend the faithful to reduce redundancy, and to properly reduce the burden of transportation.

古文：攘外侮之目六：曰选将帅，练士卒，讲陈法，治兵器，足馈饷，靖边陲。
现代文：抵御外寇要做到六点：选拔将帅、训练士卒、研究旧有御敌方法、配备兵器、备足粮饷、平定边陲。
English: To resist foreign invaders, six points should be achieved: the selection of generals and officers, the training of soldiers, the study of the old methods of resisting the enemy, the equipping of weapons, the provision of sufficient food, and the pacification of border areas.

古文：帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：英宗对此予以夸奖并接纳了他的建议。
English: Emperor Wen approved and adopted his suggestion.

古文：成化改元，廷议讨四川山都掌蛮，洪谟上方略六事，诏付军帅行之。
现代文：宪宗即位，改 成化 为年号，朝廷商议征讨四川山都掌蛮，洪谟奏呈六条进兵方案，宪宗下诏交付军帅实行。
English: When Emperor Kenzong ascended the throne, the year was changed to the year of his enthronement. The imperial court discussed the recruitment of men to take charge of the capital of Sichuan, and Hong Mu submitted a six-point plan for the entry of troops. Emperor Kenzong then issued an edict to the military commanders to implement the plan.

古文：进学士。
现代文：洪谟升为学士。
English: Hong Mu was promoted to bachelor.

古文：寻为南京祭酒。
现代文：不久任南京祭酒。
English: It was soon named Nanjing Festival Liquor.

古文：上言南监有红板仓二十间，高皇后积粟以养监生妻孥者，宜修复。
现代文：上言称南监有红板仓二十间，是高皇后用来积盛粮食，供养监生家小的，应该修复。
English: The preamble said that the Southern Supervision Bureau had 20 red warehouses, which were used by Empress Gao to store grain and feed the small families of the supervisors. They should be repaired.

古文：帝允行之。
现代文：宪宗批准同意。
English: The approval and consent of the Constitutional Church has been obtained.

古文：母丧服阕，改北监。
现代文：后来他为母丧守服期满，改在北监任职。
English: Later, when his mother's mourning period was over, he was transferred to the Northern Supervision Bureau.

古文：十一年，言士风浇浮，请复洪武中学规。
现代文：十一年，他上言士风轻浮，请求恢复洪武年间的学规。
English: In the eleventh year, he became more frivolous and requested to restore the school regulations of the Hongwu era.

古文：帝嘉纳，命礼部榜谕。
现代文：宪宗赞许并接纳了他的意见。令礼部张贴告示。
English: The Kenzong approved and accepted his opinion and ordered the ritual department to post a notice.

古文：崇信伯费淮入监习礼，久不至。
现代文：崇信伯费淮应到国子监学习礼法，很久不到。
English: Chongxin Bo Feihuai should go to the State Children's Supervisor to learn the etiquette, it's been a long time coming.

古文：洪谟劾之，夺冠带，以儒巾赴监，停岁禄之半，学政肃然。
现代文：洪谟进行弹劾，费淮被收回官服，带着方巾去国子监，减去一年俸禄的一半，学校的教育行政为此整肃。
English: Hong Moo was impeached, Fei Huai was stripped of his official uniform and sent to the state nursery school with a handkerchief. He lost half of his annual salary, and the school's education administration was purged.

古文：先圣像用冕旒十二，而舞佾豆笾数不称，洪谟请备天子制。
现代文：先王画像皇冠垂有十二串玉珠，而旁边舞蹈的行列、食具豆和笾的数额不相符。为此洪谟请求按天子规格配备。
English: In the image of the late king, the crown has twelve strings of jade beads hanging from it, but the number of dancers, tableware beans and candies does not match. For this reason, Hong Mu requested that it be equipped according to Tianzi's specifications.

古文：又言： 古者鸣球琴瑟为堂上之乐，笙镛柷敔为堂下之乐，而干羽则舞于两阶。
现代文：他又说 ：古时玉磬、琴和瑟作为殿堂上的音乐，笙、大钟、木兄吾攵作为殿堂下的音乐，而舞蹈者在两边台阶起舞。
English: He also said, "In ancient times, the tambourine, the harp, and the psaltery were used as the music for the upper hall, and the gong, the great bell, and the wooden brother were used as the music for the lower hall, while dancers danced on both sides of the steps.

古文：今舞羽居上，乐器居下，非古制，当改。 
现代文：现在舞蹈的居上，操乐器居下，不合古制，应当改。 
English: Now the dance is at the top and the musical instruments are at the bottom, which is not in line with the old system and should be changed.

古文：尚书邹干驳止之，洪谟再疏争。
现代文：尚书邹干提出反驳意见，洪谟第二次上疏争辩。
English: Shang Shujian proposed a counter-argument, and Hong Mu entered the debate for the second time.

古文：帝竟俞其议。
现代文：宪宗最后同意洪谟的意见。
English: In the end, Kenzong agreed with Hong Mu's opinion.

古文：迁礼部右侍郎。久之，转左。
现代文：洪谟被升任礼部右侍郎，时间长了，又转为左侍郎。
English: Hong Mu was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department. After a long time, he was transferred to the Left Attendant.

古文：以蔡《传》所释璇玑玉衡，后人遵用其制，考验多不合，宜改制，帝即属洪谟。
现代文：按蔡沈《书集传》所解释的璇机玉衡观测仪，后人都按其规格制造，经验证很多地方不合，应该重新改做，宪宗立即交给洪谟负责。
English: According to Cai Shen's "Biography," the observation instrument of the milling machine Yuhang, later generations were made according to its specifications, and the experience proved that there were many inconsistencies, and it should be redone, and the founder of the Confucianism immediately handed over to Hong Mu.

古文：洪谟易以木，旬日而就。
现代文：他改用木头做，十天就造好了。
English: He switched to wood and finished it in ten days.

古文：十七年进尚书。
现代文：十七年，洪谟升任尚书。
English: In the seventeenth year, Hong Mu was promoted to Shang Shu.

古文：二十年加太子少保。
现代文：二十年，加封太子少保。
English: Twenty years later, he was given the additional title of Crown Prince and Minor Protector.

古文：二十一年，星变，有所条奏，帝多采纳。
现代文：二十一年，星相异变，他奏呈数事，宪宗大多予以采纳。
English: In the twenty-first year, when the constellations changed, he reported several things to the emperor, and most of the constitutions were adopted.

古文：弘治元年四月，天寿山震雷风雹，楼殿瓦兽多毁。
现代文：弘治元年四月，天寿山雷霆轰鸣，狂风大作，冰雹频下，楼殿的瓦大多被毁坏。
English: In April of the first year of the Hongzhi era, Tianshou Mountain thundered, the wind blew wildly, hail fell frequently, and most of the tiles of the building were destroyed.

古文：洪谟复力劝修省，帝深纳之。
现代文：洪谟又力劝修复，孝宗接纳其建议。
English: Hong Mu also urged the restoration, and Xiaozong accepted his suggestion.

古文：洪谟矜庄寡合，与万安同乡，安居政府时颇与之善。
现代文：洪谟端庄持重，与人极少交往，他与万安同乡，万安掌权时与洪谟关系很好。
English: Hong Mu was dignified and dignified. He rarely interacted with people. He was a fellow villager of Wan An. When Wan An was in power, he had a good relationship with Hong Mu.

古文：至是，言官先后论奏，致仕归。
现代文：这时，言官先后议论，并上奏章弹劾，洪谟辞官返乡。
English: At this time, the speech officer discussed successively, and the impeachment report was filed, and Hong Mu resigned and returned home.

古文：又三年卒，年七十二。谥文安。
现代文：过了三年洪谟去世，享年七十二岁，谥号文安。
English: Three years later, Hong Mu passed away at the age of seventy-two. His nickname was Wen An.

古文：洪谟尝言： 士人出仕，或去乡数千里，既昧土俗，亦拂人情，不若就近选除。
现代文：洪谟曾说： 士人出任官职，有的到故乡数千里外的地方任职，既不了解当地风俗，也违背人情，不如就近选任。
English: Hong Moo once said: When officials take up official posts, some of them go thousands of miles away from their hometowns to serve in places where they neither understand the local customs nor violate human feelings. It is better to choose a post nearby.

古文：王府官终身不迁，乖祖制，当稍变更。
现代文：王府的官终生不再升迁，与祖制相违背，应当逐渐加以变更。
English: The officials of the royal palace will not be promoted for life, which is contrary to the ancestral system, and should be gradually changed.

古文：都掌蛮及白罗罗羿子数叛，宜特设长官司，就择其人任之，庶无后患。 
现代文：都掌蛮及白罗罗羿子几次反叛，应该特设长官司，从都蛮和白罗中选择适宜的人任职，就可无后患。 
English: After several rebellions by the governor and the governor's son, there should be a special chief magistrate to choose the right person from the governor and the governor, and there would be no future problems.

古文：将殁，犹上安中国、定四裔十事。
现代文：洪谟临终前，还上奏陈述安定京师、平定边境等十件事。
English: Before Hong Mu passed away, he also made a report stating ten things such as the stabilization of Beijing and the pacification of the border.

古文：其好建白如此。
现代文：他就是如此喜好发表意见。
English: That's just how he likes to express himself.

古文：杨守陈，字维新，鄞人。
现代文：杨守陈，字维新，浙江鄞县人。
English: Yang Shou Chen, Zhewei Xin, from Min County, Zhejiang Province.

古文：祖范，有学行，尝诲守陈以精思实践之学。
现代文：祖父杨范学问操行俱佳，曾以精思实践之学教育杨守陈。
English: His grandfather, Yang Fan, was an excellent scholar, and he used to educate Yang Shou Chen with hard work and practice.

古文：举景泰二年进士，改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：杨守陈考中景泰二年进士任庶吉士，授编修职。
English: Yang Shou Chen Kao and Zhong Jingtai were promoted to the rank of second-ranked cadres in the second year, and were awarded the post of editor-in-chief.

古文：成化初，充经筵讲官，进侍讲。
现代文：成化初年，充任御前讲席的讲官，升为侍讲。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was appointed as a lecturer at the front desk, and was promoted to an assistant lecturer.

古文：《英宗实录》成，迁洗马。
现代文：《英宗实录》完成，守陈升为洗马。
English: "The True Record of the Yingzong" was completed, and the abbot Chen Sheng was appointed to wash the horse.

古文：寻进侍讲学士，同修《宋元通鉴纲目》。
现代文：不久升侍讲学士，参加修撰《宋元通鉴纲目》。
English: He was soon promoted to assistant lecturer and participated in the compilation of "Songyuan Tongjian Guanme."

古文：母忧服阕，起故官。
现代文：为母丧守服期满，仍起用任故官职。
English: He was still appointed to his former post after his mother's mourning period had expired.

古文：孝宗出阁，为东宫讲官。
现代文：太子出后宫就学，杨守陈任东宫讲官。
English: The prince went out of the harem to study, and Yang Shou Chen served as a lecturer at the East Palace.

古文：时编《文华大训》，事涉宦官者皆不录。
现代文：当时编纂《文华大训》，凡事涉宦官的都不收入。
English: At the time of the compilation of the "Minghua Daxun," there was no income from anything related to eunuchs.

古文：守陈以为非，备列其善恶得失。
现代文：守陈认为这样不对，他将涉及宦官的善恶得失一一列入。
English: Shou Chen thinks this is wrong. He will list the pros and cons of eunuchs one by one.

古文：书成，进少詹事。
现代文：书编纂成功，守陈被升为少詹事。
English: The book was successfully compiled, and Shou Chen was promoted to Shao Zhanji.

古文：孝宗嗣位，宫僚悉迁秩，执政拟守陈南京吏部右侍郎，帝举笔去 南京 字。
现代文：孝宗即位，太子属官都提升官职品级，执政初拟杨守陈任南京吏部右侍郎，孝宗举笔划掉 南京 。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended to the throne, all officials under the crown prince were promoted to higher ranks. At the beginning of his reign, Yang Shou Chen was appointed as the right hand man of the Nanjing cadre, and Emperor Xiaozong raised his pen to cross out Nanjing.

古文：左右言刘宣见为右侍郎，帝乃改宣左，而以守陈代之。
现代文：左右说刘宣已为右侍郎，孝宗于是改刘宣为左侍郎，而以守陈代任右侍郎。
English: Both sides said that Liu Xuan was already the right hand man, so Xiaozong changed Liu Xuan to the left hand man, and replaced the right hand man with Shou Chen.

古文：修《宪宗实录》，充副总裁。
现代文：守陈任《宪宗实录》副总裁。
English: Shou Chen was appointed vice president of the "Constitutional Record."

古文：弘治改元正月，上疏曰：
现代文：弘治元年正月，守陈上疏说：
English: In the first month of the first year of the Hongzhi era, guard Chen Shangso said:

古文：孟子言 我非尧舜之道不敢陈于王前。 
现代文： 孟子说 非尧、舜之道我不敢陈述于君王之前 。
English: Mencius said, "I would not dare to present the way of non-attachment and attachment before the king."

古文：夫尧舜之道何道？
现代文：尧、舜之道是什么道呢？
English: What's the way out of this?

古文：《书》曰： 人心惟危，道心惟微，惟精惟一，允执厥中 ，此尧、舜之得于内者深，而为出治之本也。
现代文：《尚书》说 人心在于守正，道心在于精微，精诚专一，实实在在地实行中正之道 。这是尧、舜在内心修养深厚的缘故，他们以此为治国之本。
English: "Shangshu" said that the human heart is to maintain righteousness, and the moral heart is to be refined, sincere and single-minded, and to truly implement the middle and correct way. This is because of the profound cultivation of the inner hearts of the two emperors, and they used this as the basis for governing the country.

古文：询四岳，辟四门，明四目，达四聪，此尧、舜之资于外者博，而为致治之纲也。
现代文：尧舜与四方诸侯君长谋划政事，打开明堂四门宣布政教，使四方见得明白真切，听得清楚全面。因此尧、舜对外部情况十分了解，这是治政的大纲。
English: He planned political affairs with the heads of the four parties of princes and princes, and opened the four doors of the hall to announce politics and religion, so that the four parties could see clearly and truthfully, and hear clearly and comprehensively. Therefore, he and Zou were well aware of the external situation, which was the outline of governance.

古文：臣昔忝宫僚，伏睹陛下朗读经书，未尝勤睿问以究圣贤奥旨。
现代文：臣以前在东宫充任属官，看见陛下朗读经书，未曾勤于探究圣贤要旨。
English: Before serving as a subordinate official in the East Palace, the minister saw His Majesty reading scriptures aloud, but he did not diligently explore the essence of the sages.

古文：儒臣略陈训诂，未尝进详说以极帝王要道。
现代文：儒臣大略讲解训诂，未曾详细地解说到帝王治政要道。
English: Ju Chen gave a general explanation of the precepts, but did not explain in detail the emperor's way of governing.

古文：是陛下得于内者未深也。今视朝，所接见者，大臣之丰采而已。
现代文：因此陛下内心修养不够深，现在上朝所看见的只是大臣的风度、神采而已。
English: As a result, His Majesty's inner cultivation is not deep enough, and now the Upper Court only sees the minister's demeanor and brilliance.

古文：君子、小人之情状，小臣、远臣之才行，何由识？
现代文：君子小人的情况、官级低的臣子、离得远的臣子的才行如何识别？
English: How can the situation of nobles and villains, low-ranking courtiers, and distant courtiers be identified?

古文：退朝所披阅者，百官之章奏而已。
现代文：陛下退朝所看的是百官的奏章而已。
English: What His Majesty saw when he retired to the palace was nothing more than the music of a hundred officials.

古文：诸司之典则，群吏之情弊，何由见？
现代文：各部门的典章规则、众吏的情况如何看得到？
English: How can the regulations and rules of each department and the situation of all officials be seen?

古文：宫中所听信者，内臣之语言而已。
现代文：宫中所听信的是内官的言语而已。
English: What was heard in the palace was nothing more than the words of a courtier.

古文：百官之正议，万姓之繁言，何由闻？
现代文：百官的正确意见、人民的意见如何听得到？
English: How can the correct opinions of officials and the opinions of the people be heard?

古文：恐陛下资于外者未博也。
现代文：只怕陛下对外面情况了解不够广博。
English: I'm afraid that His Majesty's knowledge of the external situation is not extensive enough.

古文：愿遵祖宗旧制，开大小经筵，日再御朝。
现代文： 希望皇上遵循祖宗旧制，开办大小御前讲席，一天上朝二次。
English: It is hoped that the emperor will follow the old system of the ancestors and open a lecture hall in front of the emperor, twice a day.

古文：大经筵及早朝，但如旧仪。
现代文：大的御前讲席及早朝，仍按旧仪式办。
English: Large lectures in front of the Imperial Throne in the early morning are still held according to the old ceremony.

古文：若小经筵，必择端方博雅之臣，更番进讲。
现代文：如开办小的御前座就必须选择端方博雅之臣轮流进讲。
English: If you start with a small audience, you must choose a noble and courteous person from the front to take turns to speak.

古文：凡所未明，辄赐清问。
现代文：凡是陛下未弄明白的，就请问清楚。
English: If Your Majesty does not understand something, please ask for clarification.

古文：凡圣贤经旨，帝王大道，以及人臣贤否，政事得失，民情休戚，必讲之明而无疑，乃可行之笃而无弊。
现代文：凡是圣贤的经书要义、帝王的统治方略，以及人臣贤否，政事得失，民情好坏，必须讲得明白无误，方可以实行而无弊病。
English: The essentials of the scriptures of the saints and sages, the strategy of the emperor's rule, as well as the merits and demerits of the ministers, the gains and losses of the political affairs, and the good and bad of the people, must be clearly explained before they can be implemented without any drawbacks.

古文：若夫前朝经籍，祖宗典训，百官章奏，皆当贮文华殿后，陛下退朝披览。
现代文：对于前朝经籍，祖宗典训，百官章奏都应当贮存于文华殿后面，供陛下退朝阅览。
English: For the former imperial sutras, the Ancestor's Classic, and the Centurion's Song, they should all be stored in the back of the Palace of Literature for His Majesty to read when he returns.

古文：日令内阁一人、讲官二人居前殿右厢，有疑则询，必洞晰而后已。
现代文：每天令内阁一人、讲官两人在前殿厢房，陛下如有疑问就询问他们，必须把问题弄得明白透晰为好。
English: Every day, one member of the cabinet and two lecturers should be present in the anteroom, and His Majesty should ask them if he has any questions. It is best to make the questions clear and understandable.

古文：一日之间，居文华殿之时多，处乾清宫之时少，则欲寡心清，临政不惑，得于内者深而出治之本立矣。
现代文：一天中，陛下在文华殿的时间多，在乾清宫的时间少，那么就会清心寡欲，处理政事时不被迷惑，这样内心修养深厚而治国之本就建立起来。
English: During the day, His Majesty spends more time in the Wenhua Hall and less time in the Qianqing Palace, so he will be clean-hearted and not be confused when dealing with political affairs. In this way, his inner cultivation will be deep and the foundation for governing the country will be established.

古文：午朝则御文华门，大臣台谏更番侍直。
现代文：午朝则驾幸文华门，大臣台谏轮流值班。
English: In the afternoon and morning, he will drive to Wenhua Gate, and the minister will take turns on duty.

古文：事已具疏者用揭帖，略节口奏，陛下详问而裁决之。在外文武官来觐，俾条列地方事，口陈大要，付诸司评议。
现代文：事情已经写进疏文的采用揭帖形式，简略地当面口奏，陛下详细地了解后进行裁决，在外的文武官来京朝见陛下，要他们将所奏之事一一逐条列在奏章里，向陛下口头陈述提要，交付各分管部评议。
English: The matter has been written down in an epistle in the form of a postcard. It was briefly read aloud in front of His Majesty. After His Majesty had a detailed understanding of the matter, he made a ruling. The foreign military attaché came to Beijing to see His Majesty. He asked them to list the matters that had been read aloud one by one in the transcript, to make a summary of the oral presentation to His Majesty, and to submit it to the relevant departments for deliberation.

古文：其陛辞赴任者，随其职任而戒谕之。有大政则御文华殿，使大臣各尽其谋，勿相推避。
现代文：对于那些辞别陛下前去赴任的，要根据他们出任职务的情况加以不同内容的告诫，遇到大事陛下则到文华殿，使大臣各尽其谋，不互相推避。
English: For those who leave His Majesty to take office, they should be warned with different contents according to the circumstances of their duties. In the event of a major event, His Majesty will go to the Palace of Literature, so that the ministers can do their best and do not avoid each other.

古文：不当则许言官驳正。
现代文：不当之处则允许言官驳正。
English: Where there is impropriety, the speaker is allowed to correct it.

古文：其他具疏进者，召阁臣面议可否，然后批答。
现代文：其他用疏文呈上的，召阁臣面议可否，然后批答。
English: For other matters submitted in absentia, the cabinet ministers should be summoned to discuss whether they can meet, and then approve the answer.

古文：而于奏事、辞朝诸臣，必降词色，详询博访，务竭下情，使贤才常接于目前，视听不偏于左右，合天下之耳目以为聪明，则资于外者博而致治之纲举矣。
现代文：而对于奏事、辞朝诸臣，必须和颜悦色，详细地询问，广泛地查访，务必了解下情，使贤才常常能出现在面前，使陛下的视听不受身边宠幸的人所左右，合天下的耳目使自己耳聪目明，对外部情况有了广泛了解，那么就抓住了治国之纲。
English: As for the report and the resignation of the ministers, they must be amiable, inquire in detail, visit extensively, and must understand the circumstances, so that the sages can often appear in front of them, so that His Majesty's audio-visual is not influenced by the favored people around him, so that the eyes of the world can make their ears bright, and they have a broad understanding of the external situation, then they have grasped the outline of governing the country.

古文：若如经筵、常朝只循故事，凡百章奏皆付内臣调旨批答，臣恐积弊未革，后患滋深。
现代文： 再如御前讲席，一般日子只遵循故事，凡百官章奏都交给内臣让皇上批答，臣担心积弊未革，后患越来越严重。
English: Another example is the lecture hall in front of the emperor. Generally, the daily routine only follows the story. All official documents are handed over to the vassal to be approved by the emperor. The vassal is worried about the accumulated defects, and the later problems are becoming more and more serious.

古文：且今积弊不可胜数。
现代文：而且现在积弊多得不可胜数。
English: And now the accumulated disadvantages are too numerous to count.

古文：官鲜廉耻之风，士多浮竞之习。教化凌夷，刑禁驰懈。
现代文：做官的少有廉耻之心，士人大多轻浮躁进，教化衰败，刑法禁令松懈。
English: There are few officials with a sense of integrity, most of the officials are frivolous, the education is decaying, and the criminal law prohibition is lax.

古文：俗侈而财滋乏，民困而盗日繁。
现代文：风俗侈靡而财物更加缺乏，人民穷困而使盗贼一天比一天多。
English: The customs are more extravagant and the goods are more scarce, the people are poor and the thieves are increasing day by day.

古文：列卫之城池不修，诸郡之仓库鲜积。
现代文：各卫的城墙和护城河不修，各郡的仓库很少有积储。
English: The ramparts and moats of the fortresses remain unrepaired, and the warehouses of the counties are rarely stocked.

古文：甲兵朽钝，行伍空虚。
现代文：铠甲和兵器朽坏锈钝，军队空虚。
English: The armor and weapons are rusted and worn, and the army is empty.

古文：将骄惰而不知兵，士疲弱而不习战。
现代文：将领骄傲懒惰而不知用兵，士兵疲惫衰弱而不操练。
English: Generals are proud and lazy and do not know how to use soldiers, soldiers are tired and weak and do not practice.

古文：一或有警，何以御之？
现代文：一旦有紧急情况，如何防御？
English: Once there is an emergency, how to defend?

古文：此臣所以朝夕忧思，至或废寝忘食者也。
现代文：这是臣因此朝夕忧虑的，以致有时废寝忘食。 
English: As a result, the vassal worried morning and evening, to the extent that he sometimes lost sleep and forgot to eat.

古文：帝深嘉纳。
现代文：孝宗深为赞许并接纳他的意见。
English: Takamune deeply appreciated and accepted his opinion.

古文：辽东镇守中官梁玘被劾，偕给事中往按，尽发其罪。
现代文：后来果然恢复午朝，召大臣面议政事，这些都是守陈疏中提到的事。不久守陈以史馆事务繁多，请求解除吏部事务。
English: Later, the afternoon and morning sessions were resumed, and the ministers were summoned to meet and discuss political affairs, all of which were mentioned in the Shou Chen Zuo. Soon, the Shou Chen Yi History Museum had many affairs, and requested to be relieved of the affairs of the Personnel Department.

古文：终四川按察使。张元祯，字廷祥，南昌人。
现代文：三次上章；孝宗乃命他以本官职兼任詹事府，专门负责史馆事务。弘治二年，杨守陈去世，谥号文懿，追赠礼部尚书。张元祯，字廷祥，南昌人。
English: He was the third-highest-ranking official; he was appointed by Emperor Xiaozong to serve concurrently as the head of the Janzhi Prefecture, specifically in charge of the history museum. In the second year of Hongzhi, Yang Shou Chen passed away, and his posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthum

古文：五岁能诗，宁靖王召见，命名元征。
现代文：五岁能作诗，宁靖王召见，为他起名元徵。
English: At the age of five, he was able to write poetry. King Ning Jing summoned him and named him Yuan Zheng.

古文：巡抚韩雍器之曰 人瑞也 ，乃易元祯。
现代文：巡抚韩雍很器重他，称之为： 吉祥之人。 于是改名为元祯。
English: The procurator Han Yong held him in high esteem, calling him a "lucky person," so he changed his name to Yuan Xuan.

古文：举天顺四年进士，改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：考中天顺四年进士，为庶吉士，授编修职。
English: Tianshun was promoted to a scholar in his fourth year of junior high school, and was awarded the post of editor-in-chief.

古文：宪宗嗣位，疏请行三年丧，不省。
现代文：宪宗即位，张元祯上疏请宪宗为英宗守三年之丧，宪宗不理。
English: When Emperor Kenzong ascended to the throne, Zhang Yuanxuan asked Emperor Kenzong to preside over the three-year funeral of Emperor Yingzong, but Emperor Kenzong ignored the request.

古文：其年五月，疏陈三事： 一，勤讲学。
现代文：这年五月，他又上疏陈述三件事： 一、勤讲学。
English: In May of this year, he went on to state three things: First, diligent lectures.

古文：愿不废寒暑，所讲必切于修德为治之实，不必以乱亡忌触为讳。
现代文：希望不分寒暑，所讲的必须切合修德理政的实际，不必对历代的衰乱亡国及忌惮之事隐讳。
English: It is hoped that regardless of whether it is hot or cold, what is said must be in line with the reality of building a moral and political system, and there is no need to hide the decline and fall of the country and the things to be afraid of in past generations.

古文：讲退，更凝神静味，验之于身心政化。
现代文：讲学完毕，要凝神静思，与自己身心及朝政的处理情况相验证。
English: After the lecture, you should meditate and verify with your own body and mind and the handling of the government.

古文：讲官，令大臣公举刚明正大之人，不拘官职大小。
现代文：讲官，要由大臣秉公推举刚直正派的人担任，不论官职大小。
English: Lecturers, regardless of the size of the post, should be appointed by the minister in a fair and just manner.

古文：一，公听政。
现代文：二、公开处理政务。
English: Second, handle government affairs openly.

古文：请日御文华殿，午前进讲，午后听政。
现代文：请陛下每天去文华殿，午前听讲官讲学，午后处理政务。
English: I would like to ask His Majesty to go to the Palace of Literature every day, listen to the lecturers in the morning, and deal with government affairs in the afternoon.

古文：天下章奏，命诸臣详议面陈可否，陛下亲临决其是非。
现代文：对所有奏章，命令诸臣详细讨论，当面陈述可否，陛下亲临决断是非。
English: For all the musical scores, he ordered his ministers to discuss them in detail, whether or not to present them in person, and His Majesty himself to decide whether or not to do so.

古文：暇则召五品以下官，随意问以时事得失利病，令下情得以毕达。
现代文：闲暇时则召五品以下官，任意询问有关时事的得失与利弊，使下面的情况得以尽数传达上来。
English: In his spare time, he would call up subordinate officers of the Fifth Division and inquire about the pros and cons of current affairs, so that the following situation could be conveyed as much as possible.

古文：一，广用贤。
现代文：三、广用贤。
English: Third, Guangyongxian.

古文：请命给事中、御史，各陈两京堂上官贤否。
现代文：请命给事中、御史分别陈述两京朝官是否称职。
English: In the course of giving the order, the court historian separately stated whether the two imperial officials in Beijing were competent.

古文：如有不尽，亦许在京五品官指陈之，以为进退。
现代文：如有未提到的，也允许在京的五品官指明陈述，以此决定官员的升降。
English: If there is anything not mentioned, the fifth-rank officials in Beijing are also allowed to make a specific statement to determine the promotion and demotion of officials.

古文：又令共荐有德望者，以代所去之位，则大臣皆得其人。
现代文：又令上述官员一起推荐有道德名望的人，以代替免职者空缺的职位，那样大臣都可得到适宜的人任职。
English: He also ordered the above-mentioned officials to jointly recommend persons of moral repute to replace the vacancies of those who were dismissed, so that the ministers could get the right people to serve.

古文：于是命之各言其所属及方面郡县官之贤否，付内阁吏部升黜之。
现代文：于是再令他们将所辖郡县官吏的考核情况呈报上来，作为内阁、吏部升降官员的依据。
English: As a result, they were further ordered to report the assessment status of the county and county officials under their jurisdiction, as a basis for the promotion and demotion of officials in the cabinet and the personnel department.

古文：中外群臣，有刚正改言者，举为台谏，不必论其言貌、官职、出身。
现代文：从朝廷内外大臣中选拔刚正不阿、又敢于直言的推举为御史，而不顾及其言谈举止、官职、出身。
English: From among the Imperial Court's ministers of the interior and foreign affairs, the most upright and outspoken were selected and promoted to the position of Imperial Historian, regardless of their speech, demeanor, official position, or background.

古文：但不宜委之堂上官，恐惮其刚方，而荐柔媚者以充数，所举之人感其推荐，不敢直斥其非。
现代文：但是推荐谏官的事不宜委托给朝臣，以防朝臣害怕谏官刚直，而推荐阿谀奉承者充数，被举荐的人对其怀有感恩之情，就不敢直接指责他的不是。
English: However, the matter of recommending a eunuch should not be entrusted to a courtier, in case the courtier is afraid of the eunuch's uprightness, and the number of recommending flatterers is sufficient, and the recommended person is grateful to him, and does not dare to directly accuse him.

古文：是以古者大臣不举台谏。 
现代文：因为古时大臣是不举荐御史的。 
English: Because in the old days, the minister would not recommend a historian.

古文：疏入，以言多窒碍难行，寝之。
现代文：疏文呈上，因为所说之事多，难以实行而止。
English: Because of the many things that have been said, it is difficult to implement and stop.

古文：预修《英宗实录》，与执政议不合，引疾家居，讲求性命之学。
现代文：参予撰写《英宗实录》，因与执政者意见不合，称病回家，研究性命之学。
English: He participated in the writing of "The True Record of the Yingzong," but because he disagreed with the rulers, he said he was sick and went home to study the science of life.

古文：阅二十年，中外交荐，皆不赴。
现代文：前后二十年，朝内外官员纷纷举荐他，他都不赴任。
English: For the past twenty years or so, officials inside and outside the imperial court have recommended him one after another, but he has never taken up his post.

古文：弘治初，召修《宪宗实录》，进左赞善。
现代文：弘治初年，孝宗召张元祯撰写《宪宗实录》，升为左赞善。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, Zhang Yuanzhang was summoned by Xiaozong to write the "Constitutional Church Record" and was promoted to Zuozanzhen.

古文：上言： 人君不以行王道为心，非大有为之主也。
现代文：他上言道 ：人君不以推行王道为信念，就不是大有作为的君主。
English: He said, "A ruler who does not believe in the promotion of the royal way is not a great ruler."

古文：陛下毓德青宫，已负大有为之望。
现代文：陛下养德东宫时就已经具有大有作为的希望。
English: When His Majesty was raising the East Palace, he already had the hope of great achievements.

古文：迩者颇崇异端，嬖近习，以蛊此心；殖货利，耽玩好，以荒此心；开幸门，塞言路，以昧此心。
现代文：近来陛下却颇推崇异端，宠爱亲近的人，以此蛊惑圣心；追求财利，沉迷于玩乐，以此荒废圣心；开权贵幸臣之门，堵塞言路，以此愚昧圣心。
English: Lately, however, His Majesty has been promoting heresy, favoring those who are close to him, in order to seduce the sacred heart; pursuing wealth and indulging in play, in order to waste the sacred heart; opening the door of power to the privileged, and blocking the path of speech, in order to fool the sacred heart.

古文：则不能大有为矣。
现代文：这样就不能有大的作为。
English: You can't do great things that way.

古文：愿定圣志，一圣学，广圣智。 
现代文：希望安定圣志，专心圣学，广增圣智。 
English: Hope to stabilize the holy mind, concentrate on the holy study, and increase the holy wisdom.

古文：疏反复累万言，帝颇纳之。
现代文：疏文前后共计万言，孝宗接纳了。
English: There were a total of 10,000 words before and after the epilogue, and Takamune accepted it.

古文：《实录》成，迁南京侍讲学士，以养母归。
现代文：《宪宗实录》完成，元祯升南京侍讲学士，因母亲年老需要赡养而回家。
English: After the completion of "The Record of the True History of the Jianzong Sect of Buddhism," Yuan Xuan was promoted to attendant lecturer in Nanjing and returned home because his mother was old and needed to be supported.

古文：久之，召为《会典》副总裁。
现代文：过了很久，朝廷召元祯任《会典》副总裁。
English: After a long time, the imperial court summoned Yuan Rong to serve as vice president of the "Society Code."

古文：至则进学士，充经筵日讲官，帝甚倾向。
现代文：到京就升为学士，担任御前讲席的讲官，孝宗对他很钦佩。
English: When he arrived in Beijing, he was promoted to bachelor and served as a lecturer in front of the throne. Xiaozong admired him very much.

古文：元祯体清癯，长不逾中人，帝特设低几听之。
现代文：元祯外貌清逸消瘦，身长比一般人矮，孝宗特地为他准备矮小的桌子使用。
English: Yuan Qi's appearance is clean and lean, and his height is shorter than the average person. Xiaozong specially prepared a short table for him to use.

古文：数月，以母忧去。
现代文：几个月后，因母亲去世而离去。
English: A few months later, her mother died and she left.

古文：服阕，迁南京太常卿。
现代文：服丧期满，升南京太常卿。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was promoted to Nanjing Taizongqing.

古文：已，修《通鉴纂要》，复召为副总裁。
现代文：不久，因朝廷编撰《通鉴纂要》，又召元祯为副总裁。
English: Soon, due to the fact that the Imperial Court was compiling the "Essential Compilation of General Studies," Geng Yao was also summoned as vice president.

古文：以故官兼学士，改掌詹事府。
现代文：以原先的官职兼任学士，同时掌管詹事府。
English: He concurrently served as a bachelor in his former official position, and at the same time he was in charge of Zhanji Prefecture.

古文：帝晚年德益进。
现代文：孝宗晚年德行更有长进。
English: In his later years, Takamune became more virtuous.

古文：元祯因请讲筵增讲《太极图》、《通书》、《西铭》诸书。
现代文：元祯就要求御前讲席增讲《太极图》、《通书》、《西铭》等书。
English: Yuan Xuan asked the audience to read "Taijiquan," "Zongshu" and "Ximing" and other books.

古文：帝亟取观之，喜曰： 天生斯人，以开朕也。 
现代文：孝宗立刻取来看，并高兴地说： 天生此人，以启发朕心。 
English: Takamune immediately took a look and said happily, "I was born this way to enlighten my heart."

古文：欲大用之，未几晏驾。
现代文：准备重用元祯，不久孝宗去世。
English: Preparations were made to reuse the original gong, but soon after, Takamune died.

古文：武宗立，擢吏部左侍郎兼学士入东阁，专典诰敕。
现代文：武宗即位，提升元祯为吏部左侍郎兼学士，进入东阁，专门主管官吏受封的敕书。
English: Emperor Wu Zong ascended to the throne, promoted Yuan Zheng to the left attendant and bachelor of the cadre department, entered the East Pavilion, and issued an imperial edict specifically for the officials in charge.

古文：元祯素有盛誉。
现代文：元祯向来名望很高。
English: Motobu has always had a high reputation.

古文：林居久，晚乃复出。
现代文：退隐居家很长时间，晚年才又出仕。
English: He lived at home in seclusion for a long time, and only returned to work in his later years.

古文：馆阁诸人悉后辈，见元祯言论意态，以为迂阔，多姗笑之。
现代文：馆阁中的人全是他的后辈，见元祯的言语议论、神情姿态，认为不切实情，大多讪笑他。
English: The people in the pavilion were all his juniors. Most of them laughed at him when they saw his words and gestures, and thought that he was not sincere.

古文：又名位相轧，遂腾谤议，言官交章劾元祯。
现代文：又因争名位互相倾轧，因此毁谤元祯的话到处流传，言官纷纷上奏章弹劾元祯。
English: Moreover, because of the rivalry for fame, the words defaming Yuan Shikai were circulated everywhere, and the speech officials successively wrote articles to impeach Yuan Shikai.

古文：元祯七疏乞休，刘健力保持之。
现代文：元祯接连七次上疏要求退休。刘健极力主张挽留他。
English: Yuan Xuan was asked to retire seven times in a row. Liu Jian strongly advocated to keep him.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：刘健走后，元祯也去世。
English: He died at home.

古文：吴宽，字原博，长洲人。
现代文：天启初年，追赠谥号文裕。吴宽，字原博，长洲人。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, he posthumously received the posthumous names of Wen Yu, Wu Kuan, Aza Hara Bo, and Chang Zhou Ren.

古文：以文行有声诸生间。
现代文：以文章品行闻名于诸生之中。
English: He is famous among all sentient beings for his writings and deeds.

古文：成化八年，会试、廷试皆第一，授修撰。侍孝宗东宫，秩满进右谕德。
现代文：成化八年，他在会试、殿试都考第一名，授修撰职，侍奉时为东宫太子的孝宗，任职期满升右谕德。
English: In the eighth year of Chenghua, he won the first place in the entrance examination and the palace examination, and was assigned to the post of teaching and writing. When he served, he was the prince of the East Palace, and after his term of office, he was promoted to the right.

古文：孝宗即位，以旧学迁左庶子，预修《宪宗实录》，进少詹事兼侍读学士。
现代文：孝宗即位，以旧日东宫学官升左庶子，预备编撰《宪宗实录》，升为詹事兼侍读学士。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong ascended to the throne, his son-in-law, who had been an academic official of the former Eastern Court, was promoted to the position of preparatory compiler of the "Constitutional Law Record" and was promoted to the post of attendant and bachelor.

古文：弘治八年擢吏部右侍郎。
现代文：弘治八年，吴宽被提升为吏部右侍郎。
English: In the eighth year of the Hongzhi era, Wu Guang was promoted to the position of the right hand man of the cadre department.

古文：丁继母忧，吏部员缺，命虚位待之。
现代文：时逢继母去世，吏部缺人，孝宗命留出官位等他就职。
English: At the time of his stepmother's death, there was a shortage of officials, and Takamune left the post open for him to take up.

古文：服满还任，转左，改掌詹事府，入东阁，专典诰敕，仍侍武宗东宫。
现代文：吴宽丧服满返回吏部任职，转任左侍郎，改为掌管詹事府，进入东阁，专门负责官吏受封的敕书，仍侍奉时为东宫太子的武宗。
English: After the funeral, Wu Guang returned to the cadre department, and was transferred to the left attendant, and was put in charge of Zhan's office, entered the East Cabinet, and was specifically responsible for the imperial edict for the appointment of officials. When he was still serving, he was the prince of the East Palace.

古文：宦竖多不欲太子近儒臣，数移事间讲读。
现代文：宦官大多不愿让太子接近儒臣，多次用他事间断讲读。
English: Most of the eunuchs were reluctant to let the prince get close to Confucius, and repeatedly used him to read from time to time.

古文：宽率其僚上疏曰： 东宫讲学，寒暑风雨则止，朔望令节则止，一年不过数月，一月不过数日，一日不过数刻。
现代文：吴宽率领其下官上疏说 ：东宫讲学，寒暑风雨天就停讲，农历每月初一、十五和节日停讲，讲学一年不过数月，一月不过数日，一日不过数刻。
English: Wu Guang led his subordinate Shang Zuo to say: Dongguan lectures, cold, hot, windy and rainy days will stop speaking, the first day of the month, the fifteenth day of the month and festivals will stop speaking, lectures a year but a few months, January but a few days, a day but a few hours.

古文：是进讲之时少，辍讲之日多，岂容复以他事妨诵读。
现代文：是进讲的时间少，停讲的日子多，岂容又借其他事妨碍讲学。
English: There is less time to continue the lecture, more days to stop the lecture, and it is not allowed to hinder the lecture by other things.

古文：古人八岁就傅，即居宿于外，欲离近习，亲正人耳。
现代文：古人八岁时就随师学习，居宿于外，是想他远离不好的环境亲近君子。
English: When the ancients were eight years old, they learned from their teachers and lived outside, in order to stay away from the bad environment and be closer to the gentleman.

古文：庶民且然，矧太子天下本哉？ 
现代文：百姓尚且如此，况且是天下之本的太子呢？ 
English: The people are still like this, and what about the prince who is the most important person in the world?

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：孝宗赞许并接纳了他的意见。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：十六年进礼部尚书，余如故。
现代文：十六年，吴宽升礼部尚书，其他职务如故。
English: Sixteen years later, Wu Kuan Sheng was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and his other duties remained the same.

古文：先是，孝庄钱太后崩，廷议孝肃周太后万岁后，并葬裕陵，祔睿庙，礼皆如适。
现代文：以前，孝庄钱太后去世，廷议将来孝肃周太后去世，与钱太后一样合葬到英宗的裕陵中，将灵位纎享到太庙中英宗庙室，与英宗正妻待遇相同。
English: In the past, when Empress Dowager Xiaozhuang Qian died, the imperial court decided that Empress Dowager Xiaoshu Zhou should be buried together with Empress Dowager Qian in Yingzong's Yuling Mausoleum, and that she should be given the same status as the legitimate wife of Yingzong.

古文：至是，孝肃崩，将祔庙，帝终以并祔为疑，下礼官集议。
现代文：这时孝肃周太后去世，准备纎享太庙，孝宗却认为将英宗周贵妃与英宗钱皇后一同礻付享太庙不合适，要礼官讨论。
English: At this time, Empress Dowager Zhou of Xiaoshu passed away and was preparing to enjoy the imperial temple. However, Emperor Xiaozong thought that it was inappropriate for Empress Zhou Guifei of Yingzong and Empress Qian of Yingzong to enjoy the imperial temple together, so he asked the etiquette officer to discuss it.

古文：宽言《鲁颂·閟宫》、《春秋》考仲子之宫皆别庙，汉、唐亦然。
现代文：吴宽说《鲁颂》中的《宫》、《春秋》记载的仲子之宫都是另建一神庙，汉、唐也是这样。
English: Wu Kuan said that the "palace" in "Song of Lu" and the palace of Chu Zi recorded in "Spring and Autumn" were both built as separate temples, and this was also the case in the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty.

古文：会大臣亦多主别庙，帝乃从之。
现代文：时逢大臣也大多主张周太后纎享别庙，孝宗同意了。
English: At the time, most of the ministers also advocated that Empress Dowager Zhou enjoy the farewell temple, and Xiaozong agreed.

古文：时词臣望重者，宽为最，谢迁次之。
现代文：吴宽是当时文学侍从之臣中声望最高的一位，谢迁次之。
English: Wu Kuan was the most prestigious of the literary courtiers at that time, followed by Xie Qian.

古文：迁既入阁，尝为刘健言，欲引宽共政，健固不从。
现代文：谢迁已经进入内阁，他曾经对刘健说要吴宽进入内阁共同处理政务，刘健坚决不同意。
English: Xie Qian has already entered the cabinet. He once told Liu Jian that he wanted Wu Guang to enter the cabinet to jointly handle government affairs. Liu Jian strongly disagreed.

古文：他日又曰： 吴公科第、年齿、闻望皆先于迁，迁实自愧，岂有私于吴公耶。 
现代文：有一天刘健又说 ：吴公科第、年岁、声望都超过谢迁，谢迁实际是自愧不如，哪会寄情于吴宽呢？ 
English: One day, Liu Jian also said, "Wu Gong's seniority, age, and reputation all exceed Xie Qian's. In fact, Xie Qian is not as good as he thinks he is. Who would have feelings for Wu Kuan?"

古文：及迁引退，举宽自代，亦不果用。
现代文：到谢迁引退，推荐吴宽代替自己，其建议仍未被采用。
English: When Xie Qian retired, he recommended Wu Guang to replace him, but his suggestion has not been adopted.

古文：中外皆为之惜，而宽甚安之，曰： 吾初望不及此也。 
现代文：朝内外都为吴宽惋惜，而吴宽很坦然，他说： 我一开始就没有进入内阁的念头。 
English: People at home and abroad felt sorry for Wu Kuan, but Wu Kuan was very calm, he said: I did not have the idea of entering the cabinet from the beginning.

古文：年七十，数引疾，辄慰留，竟卒于官。
现代文：吴宽七十岁时几次称病要退休，孝宗总是安慰挽留他，最后死在任上。
English: When Wu Guang was seventy years old, he said several times that he was ill and wanted to retire. Xiaozong always consoled him to stay, and finally died in office.

古文：赠太子太保，谥文定。
现代文：追赠太子太保，谥号文定。
English: He was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and his posthumous name was changed to Wending.

古文：授长子奭中书舍人，补次子奂国子生，异数也。
现代文：授他的长子吴为中书舍人，补任次子吴奂为国子生，是对吴宽特殊的礼遇。
English: It was a special courtesy to Wu Kuan that his eldest son, Wu, was awarded the title of Chinese Scholar and his second son, Wu Yao, the title of National Scholar.

古文：宽行履高洁，不为激矫，而自守以正。
现代文：吴宽操行高洁，不为外界毁誉所左右，而严格要求自己。
English: Wu Kuan conducts himself with a high standard of cleanliness, and does not allow himself to be swayed by the outside world's reputation. Instead, he sets strict standards for himself.

古文：抚、按以为言，诏荫其子中书舍人。
现代文：他对于书无所不读，诗文文雅而合规范，并且擅长书法。他有几顷田，曾用以救济亲友中的贫困者。
English: He read everything about books, his poetry was elegant and appropriate, and he was good at calligraphy. He had several hectares of land, which he used to help the poor among his relatives and friends.

古文：嘉靖元年录先朝守正大臣，追赠太子少保，谥文毅。刘春，字仁仲，巴人。
现代文：友人贺恩有病，吴宽将他迁到自己住所，日夜探视，贺恩死，吴宽为他穿白色丧服一月之久。刘春，字仁仲，四川人。
English: When his friend He En was ill, Wu Kuan moved him to his residence and visited him day and night. When He En died, Wu Kuan dressed him in white mourning clothes for a month. Liu Chun, alias Ren Zhong, from Sichuan.

古文：成化二十三年进士及第。
现代文：成化二十三年，考中进士。
English: He was 23 years old when he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：授编修，屡迁翰林学士。
现代文：授编修职，几次升迁之后，任翰林学士。
English: After several promotions, he was appointed as a Hanlin Scholar.

古文：正德六年擢吏部右侍郎，进左。
现代文：正德六年，提升为吏部右侍郎，又升左侍郎。
English: In the sixth year of Zhengde's reign, he was promoted to Right Attendant and Left Attendant.

古文：八年代傅珪为礼部尚书。
现代文：八年接替傅皀为礼部尚书。
English: Eight years later, he succeeded Fu Xi as the head of the etiquette department.

古文：淮王祐棨、郑王祐〈木睪〉皆由旁支袭封，而祐棨称其本生为考，祐〈木睪〉并欲追封入庙。
现代文：淮王蓕、郑王都是王族旁支，而承袭藩王封号，而蓕称他亲生的父亲为先考，并且要追封亲生父母，把亲生父母的神主放入祖庙。
English: Huai Wang Qian and Zheng Wang were both minor branches of the royal family, but inherited the title of the king of the clan, while Zou said that his own father was the first test, and he wanted to seal his own parents, and put the god of his own parents into the ancestral temple.

古文：交城王秉杋由镇国将军嗣爵，而进其妹为县主。
现代文：交城王秉木凡是由镇国将军继承爵位的，而将其妹封为县主。
English: King of Jiaocheng, Byungmufan, inherited the title of nobility from the general of the township, and made his sister the head of the county.

古文：春皆据礼驳之，遂著为例。
现代文：刘春都依据礼法予以驳斥。于是以此为成例。
English: Liu Chun both refuted it on the basis of etiquette, and this became a precedent.

古文：帝崇信西僧，常袭其衣服，演法内厂。
现代文：明武宗尊崇信任西藏僧人，常常穿着西藏僧人的衣服在内部演讲佛法。
English: Mingwu respected and trusted Tibetan monks, and often wore Tibetan monk's clothing to give internal lectures on Buddhism.

古文：有绰吉我些儿者，出入豹房，封大德法王。遣其徒二人还乌思藏，请给国师诰命如大乘法王例，岁时入贡，且得赍茶以行。
现代文：有个叫绰吉我些儿的西域僧人常出入豹房，被封为大德法王，他派遣二个徒弟回乌思藏，要求效法大乘法王的例子授予国师诰命，每年按时向朝廷入贡，朝廷送茶叶让其带回去。
English: There was a monk from the Western Regions named Zuo Jizhe, who often went to and from the Leopard Room. He was given the title of Daede Fa Wang, and he sent two disciples back to Wuxang to request that, following the example of the Mahayana Fa Wang, he be given the title of Guoshi, pay tribute to the imperial court on time every year, and have the imperial court send tea leaves for him to take back.

古文：春持不可。
现代文：刘春表示反对。
English: Liu Chun objected.

古文：帝命再议，春执奏曰： 乌思藏远在西方，性极顽犷。
现代文：武宗下令再议，刘春奏道： 乌思藏远在西方，极其愚昧蛮横。
English: Wu Zong ordered a second discussion, and Liu Chun replied, "Ushi is far away in the west, and he is extremely ignorant and arrogant.

古文：虽设四王抚化，其来贡必有节制，使不为边患。
现代文：虽然设四王安抚他们，但其入朝进贡必须有节制。使其不造成边患。
English: Although the Four Sovereigns were set up to pacify them, their entry into the court and tribute must be restrained so as not to cause border troubles.

古文：若许其赍茶，给之诰敕，万一假上旨以诱羌人，妄有请乞，不从失异俗心，从之则滋害。 
现代文：如果同意送他们茶叶，给以诰敕，万一他们假冒圣旨诱骗藏人，向朝廷提出不切实际的要求，朝廷不答应其要求藏人不满，答应其要求则滋生祸害。 
English: If they agree to send them tea leaves and money, in the unlikely event that they deceive Tibetans by pretending to have a sacred mission and present unrealistic demands to the imperial court, if the imperial court does not agree to their demands, Tibetans will be dissatisfied, and if it does agree to their demands, it will breed disaster.

古文：奏上，罢赍茶，卒与诰命。
现代文：奏章呈上，罢免他们携带茶叶的特权，但还是给予了诰敕。
English: They were reprimanded and deprived of the privilege of carrying tea, but they were still given a gong.

古文：春又奏： 西番俗信佛教，故祖宗承前代旧，设立乌思藏诸司，及陕西洮、岷，四川松潘诸寺，令化导番人，许之朝贡。
现代文：刘春又奏道 ：西番信奉佛教，因此祖宗承前代旧例，设立乌思藏诸司，以及在陕西洮州、岷州、四川松潘建立诸寺庙，用以教化引导番人，许其朝贡。
English: Liu Chun also said: Xifan believed in Buddhism, so the ancestors followed the precedent of the previous generation and established the Ussizang Division, as well as the temples in Luzhou, Luzhou, and Songpan, Sichuan, to enlighten and guide the guards and allow them to pay tribute.

古文：贡期、人数皆有定制。
现代文：贡期、人数都有定制。
English: The tribute period and the number of people are all customized.

古文：比缘诸番僻远，莫辨真伪。
现代文：近因诸番地处僻远，难辨真伪。
English: Recently, due to the remoteness of many of the sites, it is difficult to distinguish the true from the false.

古文：中国逃亡罪人，习其语言，窜身在内，又多创寺请额。
现代文：内地的逃亡罪人，学习番人语言，藏身在内，又多建寺庙请求僧人配额。
English: Fugitive criminals in the inland learn the language of the guards, hide among them, and build more temples to request a quota of monks.

古文：番贡日增，宴赏繁费，乞严其期限，酌定人数，每寺给勘合十道，缘边兵备存勘合底簿，比对相同，方许起送。
现代文：番人进贡的日益增多，宴请赏赐繁费。请求对上朝入贡的番人严格地限制日期，酌情限定人数，每座寺庙只给经核实的十道度牒，沿边军队备存经核实后的底本，人员与底本相符合，才允许起程。
English: It is requested that the number of guards who paid tribute to the previous dynasty be strictly limited in terms of the date and the number of guards, that each temple only be given a verified ten-way ultimatum, that the verified document be kept by the troops along the border, and that the personnel only be allowed to leave if they are in line with the document.

古文：并禁自后不得滥营寺宇。 报可。
现代文：禁止滥建寺庙。 武宗回答可以。
English: The indiscriminate construction of temples is prohibited.

古文：广东布政使罗荣等入觐，各言镇守内臣入贡之害。
现代文：广东布政使罗荣等朝见皇帝，各言镇守内臣入贡之害。
English: Guangdong Bu Zheng sent Luo Rong and others to the imperial court to see the emperor, and each of them suffered the harm of paying tribute.

古文：春列上累朝停革贡献诏旨，且言四方水旱盗贼，军民困苦状，乞罢诸镇守臣。不纳。
现代文：刘春一一列上累朝停革入贡上献的诏旨，并且说了四方水旱盗贼，军民困苦的情况，请求罢除诸镇守臣，意见未被接纳。
English: Liu Chun read out the imperial edict to stop looting and pay tribute to the emperor one after another, and said that there were thieves in all directions, droughts and floods, and the military and civilians were in distress. He also requested the removal of the town guards and retainers, but his opinion was not accepted.

古文：春掌礼三年，慎守彝典。
现代文：刘春掌管礼部三年，慎守法典。
English: Liu Chun has been in charge of the ritual department for three years, and has been careful to abide by the code.

古文：宗藩请封、请婚及文武大臣祭葬、赠谥，多所裁正。
现代文：对于受封的皇族要求赏赐，请求赐婚以及文武大臣的祭葬、赠谥，他都按礼制裁决。
English: For the royal family members who were appointed, he made decisions according to the rules of etiquette when they asked for rewards, marriage, funerals, and gifts from the Minister of Education and Culture.

古文：遭忧，服阕起南京吏部尚书。
现代文：回家里处理丧事，丧服期满，刘春被起用为南京吏部尚书。
English: After returning home to deal with the funeral, Liu Chun was appointed as the secretary of the Nanjing Personnel Department.

古文：寻以礼部尚书专典诰敕，掌詹事府事。
现代文：不久以礼部尚书的身份专门负责诰敕，掌管詹事府的事务。
English: Soon after, he was put in charge of the ceremonial affairs of Zhan Prefecture as the person in charge of the ceremonial affairs.

古文：十六年卒。赠太子太保，谥，文简。
现代文：十六年，去世，追赠太子太保，谥号文简。
English: Sixteen years later, he passed away and was posthumously given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：刘氏世以科第显。
现代文：刘氏世代以科举扬名。
English: Liu's generation has made a name for itself in science education.

古文：春父规，御史。弟台，云南参政。子彭年，巡抚贵州右副都御史。
现代文：刘春的父亲刘规是御史，弟弟刘台为云南参政，儿子刘彭年为贵州巡抚兼右副都御史。
English: Liu Chun's father, Liu Jian, was the governor of Guizhou, his brother, Liu Tai, was a politician in Yunnan, and his son, Liu Peng, was the governor of Guizhou and the deputy governor of Guizhou.

古文：彭年子起宗，辽东苑马寺卿。
现代文：刘彭年的儿子刘起宗为辽东苑马寺卿。
English: Liu Pengnian's son Liu Qizong is Liaodongyuan Majiqing.

古文：起宗子世赏，广东左布政使。
现代文：刘起宗的儿子刘世赏为广东左布政使。
English: Liu Qizong's son, Liu Shiyuan, became the political envoy of Guangdong Zuo Bu.

古文：台子鹤年，云南布政使，以清誉闻。
现代文：刘台的儿子刘鹤年为云南布政使，以清廉闻名。
English: Liu Tai's son, Liu He, was a political envoy to Yunnan Province. He was known for his incorruptibility.

古文：鹤年孙世曾，巡抚云南右副都御史，有征缅功。
现代文：刘鹤年的孙子刘世曾以右副都御史巡抚云南，出征缅甸有功。
English: Liu He's grandson, Liu Shih, once served as the right-hand deputy governor of Yunnan, and made a distinguished trip to Burma.

古文：皆由进士。
现代文：他们都是由进士进入仕途的。
English: All of them were promoted from junior officers.

