古文：○北狄
现代文：○契丹
English: ○ Khitan district

古文：但以其尸置于山树之上，经三年之后，乃收其骨而焚之。
现代文：契丹的祖先与库莫奚是一个民族的两个部落。这两个部落都被慕容氏打败，都逃窜到松江、漠河一带。后来稍稍强盛起来，居住在黄龙山北边数百里的地方。
English: The ancestors of the Khitan and the Kumo are two tribes of one people. Both tribes were defeated by the Murong and fled to the areas of Songjiang and Mohe. Later, they became slightly stronger and lived hundreds of miles north of Huanglong Mountain.

古文：因酹而祝曰： 冬月时，向阳食。
现代文：他们的风俗习惯与革末革曷族很相似：喜欢劫掠；因父母死了而悲哀哭泣的人，被看作是懦夫；只要按风俗将父母的尸体放在山巅树梢上，过三年后，才将尸骨收回来烧掉，烧时一边浇酒一边祷告说： 冬天，您们到向阳的地方吃供品吧。
English: Their customs and habits are very similar to those of the Qemuchi Qiang people: they like to loot; people who weep in sorrow because their parents have died are considered cowards; as long as the bodies of their parents are placed on the mountain treetops according to custom, after three years, the bones will be collected and burned. While pouring wine while burning, they pray and say: "In winter, you should go to a place facing the sun to eat offerings."

古文：若我射猎时，使我多得猪鹿。 
现代文：如果我打猎，就保佑我多多猎到野猪和鹿。 
English: If I hunt, please bless me with plenty of wild boar and deer.

古文：其无礼顽嚚，于诸夷最甚。
现代文：他们的顽劣礼义，在诸夷中最突出。
English: Their bad etiquette is the most prominent in Zhuyi.

古文：当后魏时，为高丽所侵，部落万余口求内附，止于白貔河。
现代文：在后魏时代，契丹被高丽侵扰，部落中万余人请求内附于魏，居住在白貔河一带。
English: In the post-Wei era, Khitan was invaded by Goryeo, and more than 10,000 people in the tribe requested to be annexed to Wei and lived in the vicinity of the Paekdu River.

古文：其后为突厥所逼，又以万家寄于高丽。
现代文：后来又被突厥逼迫，有万余家到高丽寄居。
English: Later, they were persecuted by the Turks, and more than 10,000 families came to live in Goryeo.

古文：开皇四年，率诸莫贺弗来谒。
现代文：开皇四年，契丹首领率领各部落头领莫贺弗晋见隋文帝。
English: In the fourth year of the emperor's reign, the Khitan leader led the leaders of various tribes, Moga Fu Jin, to see the Sui Emperor.

古文：五年，悉其众款塞，高祖纳之，听居其故地。
现代文：五年，又率领全体部落成员请求归附隋朝。
English: Five years later, he led all members of the tribe to request to be annexed to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：六年，其诸部相攻击，久不止，又与突厥相侵，高祖使使责让之。其国遣使诣阙，顿颡谢罪。
现代文：文帝接收了他们，让他们随便住到老地方。六年，契丹各部落互相攻打，战火很久不熄，又与突厥互相侵扰。隋文帝派使者责备契丹，契丹派使者到隋朝谢罪。
English: Emperor Wen received them and let them live in any old place. For six years, the Khitan tribes attacked each other, the war continued for a long time, and they also intruded on each other with the Turks. Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty sent an envoy to rebuke the Khitans, and the Khitans sent an envoy to the Sui Dynasty to apologize.

古文：其后契丹别部出伏等背高丽，率众内附。高祖纳之，安置于渴奚那颉之北。
现代文：后来，契丹出伏等部落背叛高丽，带领部落成员归附隋朝，高祖接收了他们，安置他们在渴奚那颉的北面居住。
English: Later, tribes such as the Khitan betrayed Goryeo and led members of the tribe to join the Sui Dynasty. Gaozu received them and settled them in the northern part of Thirunegala.

古文：开皇末，其别部四千余家背突厥来降。
现代文：开皇末年，契丹另一部落四千余户背叛突厥降归隋朝。
English: At the end of the emperor's reign, more than four thousand families of another tribe in Khitan rebelled against the Turks and returned to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：上方与突厥和好，重失远人之心，悉令给粮还本，敕突厥抚纳之。
现代文：文帝正与突厥和好，注重是否失去远民之心的问题，便下令给他们粮食，让他们全部回归本土，并下诏突厥安抚他们，接纳他们。
English: Emperor Wen, who was making peace with the Turks and was concerned about whether or not he had lost the hearts of his distant subjects, ordered that they be given grain so that they could all return to their homeland, and issued an edict to the Turks to appease them and accept them.

古文：固辞不去。
现代文：这四千余户坚决推辞，不肯回去。
English: He resolutely refused to go.

古文：部落渐众，遂北徙逐水草，当辽西正北二百里，依托纥臣水而居。东西亘五百里，南北三百里，分为十部。
现代文：此后契丹部落人口逐渐增多，于是向北追随水源迁移牧场，在辽西正北面二百里的地方，靠近讠乇纥臣水居住，东西连绵五百里，南北相连三百里，分为十个小部落。
English: After that, the population of the Qidan tribe gradually increased, so they followed the water source to the north to migrate pastures. They lived in a place 200 miles due north of West Liao, near the Jiaotong Water, stretching 500 miles from east to west and 300 miles from north to south, and were divided into ten small tribes.

古文：兵多者三千，少者千余，逐寒暑，随水草畜牧。
现代文：兵多的达到三千人，兵少的也有千余人，随气候水草变化而游牧。
English: The number of soldiers reaches three thousand, and there are also more than a thousand people with fewer soldiers, and they are nomadic as the climate, water and plants change.

古文：有征伐，则酋帅相与议之，兴兵动众合符契。
现代文：遇有征战，就各部落首领聚会决定，调动军队用兵符验证。
English: In the event of conscription, the leaders of each tribe will meet and decide to mobilize the army and verify it with military insignia.

古文：突厥沙钵略可汗遣吐屯潘垤统之。
现代文：突厥首领沙钵略可汗派吐屯潘垤总管他们。
English: The Turkic chieftain Shahr-ul-Khan sent Tuitun-Pan to be in charge of them.

古文：室韦，契丹之类也。
现代文：○室韦室韦是契丹族的一个部落，住在南部的叫契丹，住在北部的叫室韦。
English: ○ Murowe Murowe is a tribe of the Khitan people, living in the south is called Khitan, living in the north is called Murowe.

古文：其南者为契丹，在北者号室韦，分为五部，不相总一，所谓南室韦、北室韦、钵室韦、深末怛室韦、大室韦。并无君长，人民贫弱，突厥常以三吐屯总领之。
现代文：室韦又分为五个小部落，互不统一。这五个小部落是南室韦、北室韦、钵室韦、深末怛室韦、大室韦。五个部落都没有首领，人民贫穷，突厥常常派三吐屯总管他们。
English: Murowe is also divided into five small tribes, which are not unified with each other. These five small tribes are South Murowe, North Murowe, East Murowe, Deep West Murowe, and Great Murowe. The five tribes have no leader, the people are poor, and the Turks often send three Tutton leaders to manage them.

古文：南室韦在契丹北三千里，土地卑湿，至夏则移向西北贷勃、欠对二山，多草木，饶禽兽，又多蚊蚋，人皆巢居，以避其患。
现代文：南室韦在契丹北面三千里的地方，土地低凹潮湿，到了夏天，他们就向西北迁移到贷勃、欠对山一带，那里草木茂盛，禽兽多，但蚊蚋多，人民都筑巢而居，以避其害。
English: Nanmurowe is located 3,000 miles north of Khitan. The land is low and damp. In the summer, they migrate to the northwest to the Lienbo and Wengdaishan areas, where the vegetation is lush, there are many animals, but there are many mosquitoes, and people build nests to avoid their harm.

古文：渐分为二十五部，每部有余莫弗瞒咄，犹酋长也。
现代文：后来，南室韦又分裂为二十五个部落，每个部落有一个称为 条莫弗瞒咄 的，类似酋长。
English: Later, South Muroto was divided into twenty-five tribes, and each tribe had a so-called jomo, similar to a chief.

古文：死则子弟代立，嗣绝则择贤豪而立之。
现代文：他死后，由他的子弟继承他的位置；如果他没有后代，就在本部落中选择贤能豪壮的人继任。
English: When he dies, his younger son inherits his position; if he has no descendants, he selects a capable and strong person from his tribe to succeed him.

古文：其俗丈夫皆被发，妇人盘发，衣服与契丹同。乘牛车，籧篨为屋，如突厥氈车之状。
现代文：他们的风俗：男子都散发披肩，女人则把头发盘在头顶上；衣着与契丹相同；出门坐牛车，在上用粗竹席围成房屋形状，像突厥毡车形状。
English: Their customs: the men all wear shawls and the women wear their hair in a bun on top of their heads; they dress in the same way as the Khitans; when they go out, they ride in ox-drawn carts, on top of which they surround themselves with rough bamboo seats to form the shape of a house, like the shape of a Turkic cart.

古文：渡水则束薪为伐，或以皮为舟者。
现代文：渡水则捆柴薪作为筏子，也有用皮革做船的。
English: For crossing the water, bundles of firewood were used as rafts, and leather was also used to make boats.

古文：马则织草为鞯，结绳为辔。
现代文：乘马用草织成马鞍，用草搓成缰绳。
English: Horses are ridden with saddles woven from grass and bridles made from grass.

古文：寝则屈为屋，以籧篨覆上，移则载行。
现代文：睡觉则弯下树枝或竹枝作为房屋，用粗竹席盖在上面，迁移时，就收起竹席放到车上拉走。
English: When they sleep, they bend down a tree branch or a bamboo branch to use it as a house, and cover it with a coarse bamboo mat. When they move, they put the bamboo mat in the car and pull it away.

古文：以猪皮为席，编木为藉。妇女皆抱膝而坐。
现代文：他们用猪皮做坐垫，用木块排成坐垫；妇女们都抱膝而坐。
English: They made cushions from pig skin and lined them with blocks of wood; the women all sat with their knees together.

古文：气候多寒，田收甚薄，无羊，少马，多猪牛。
现代文：这里气候寒冷，田地收成很少，无羊少马，多有猪牛。
English: The climate here is cold, the field harvest is small, there are no sheep and few horses, and there are more pigs and cattle.

古文：造酒食啖，与靺鞨同俗。
现代文：酿酒饮食，与革末革曷风俗相同。
English: The brewing and eating habits are the same as those of leather and leather products.

古文：婚嫁之法，二家相许，婿辄盗妇将去，然后送牛马为娉，更将归家。
现代文：男女婚嫁的办法：双方家长同意后，男青年就将女朋友偷偷带回家中，然后给岳父家送牛马作为聘礼，又将女方送回娘家。
English: The way for men and women to get married: After the parents of both sides agree, the young man will secretly bring his girlfriend home, then send cattle and horses to his father-in-law's house as a betrothal gift, and send the woman back to her daughter's house.

古文：待有娠，乃相随还舍。
现代文：等到女方有了身孕，女子才随丈夫回到婆家。
English: It was not until the woman became pregnant that she returned to her in-laws' home with her husband.

古文：妇人不再嫁，以为死人之妻难以共居。
现代文：此地风俗，女性死了丈夫不能改嫁，认为死人的妻子不能共同生活。
English: According to local custom, a woman's dead husband cannot remarry, and it is believed that the dead man's wife cannot live with him.

古文：部落共为大棚，人死则置尸其上。
现代文：部落修建有公用的大棚。人死后，就将尸体放在棚顶上。
English: The tribe has built a communal shed, and when a person dies, the body is placed on the roof of the shed.

古文：居丧三年，年唯四哭。
现代文：守丧三年，一年哭祭四次。
English: The mourning period lasts for three years, and the wailing ceremony is held four times a year.

古文：其国无铁，取给于高丽。
现代文：他们的国家不产铁，铁器来自高丽。
English: Their country does not produce iron, ironware comes from Korea.

古文：多貂。南室韦北行十一日至北室韦，分为九部落，绕吐纥山而居。
现代文：从南室韦向北走十一天路程，就到了北室韦。北室韦分为九个部落，围绕吐纥山居住。
English: It takes 11 days to travel north from South Muroto to North Muroto. North Muroto is divided into nine tribes, which live around Mount Tubo.

古文：其部落渠帅号乞引莫贺咄，每部有莫何弗三人以贰之。
现代文：他们的部落首领称为 乞引莫贺咄 ，每部还有三个叫莫何绰的副头领辅佐他。
English: Their tribal leader is known as the Mogao Mogao, and each tribe has three Mogao deputy leaders to assist him.

古文：气候最寒，雪深没马。
现代文：这里气候最寒冷，积雪深厚，可以淹没高头大马。
English: The climate here is the coldest, and the snow is so deep that it can submerge tall horses.

古文：冬则入山，居土穴中，牛畜多冻死。
现代文：这里的人到冬天就进山，住进土洞中，牛马牲畜大多被冻死。
English: People here go into the mountains in winter and live in caves. Most of the cattle and horses freeze to death.

古文：饶麞鹿，射猎为务，食肉衣皮。
现代文：这一带獐鹿多，当地人主要以狩猎为生，吃野兽肉，穿野兽皮。
English: There are a lot of elk in this area, and the locals mainly live by hunting, eating animal meat and wearing animal skins.

古文：凿冰，没水中而网射鱼鳖。
现代文：凿开冰块，撒网沉入水中捕捞鱼鳖。
English: Chisel through the ice, sink the net into the water and catch the bait.

古文：地多积雪，惧陷坑阱，骑木而行。
现代文：因地积雪很深，怕陷入深坑中，出门便坐雪橇。
English: Because the snow was very deep, I was afraid of falling into a deep pit, so I went out on a sled.

古文：俗皆捕貂为业，冠以狐狢，衣以鱼皮。
现代文：人们以捕貂为业，用狐貉皮做帽子，用鱼皮裁制衣服。
English: People catch trout for a living, make hats out of fox pelts, and make clothes out of fish skins.

古文：又北行千里，至钵室韦，依胡布山而住，人众多北室韦，不知为几部落。
现代文：从北室韦继续向北走上千里，便是钵室韦。这里的人靠近胡布山居住，人口比北室韦要多，不知究竟分为多少个部落。
English: From Kitamurove, continue northward for a thousand miles and you will reach Nagamurove. The people here live near Mount Hubu, and the population is larger than that of Kitamurove. I don't know how many tribes they are divided into.

古文：用桦皮盖屋，其余同北室韦。
现代文：人们用桦树皮盖房子。其余风俗，与北室韦相同。
English: People use birch bark to build houses. The rest of the customs are the same as those in North Muroto.

古文：从钵室韦西南四日行，至深末怛室韦，因水为号也。
现代文：从钵室韦向西南走四天路程，就到了深末怛室韦。这个部落因水而得名。
English: It takes four days to walk southwest from Shimo-Murowe to arrive at the end of Shimo-Murowe. This tribe got its name from water.

古文：冬月穴居，以避太阴之气。
现代文：人们冬天住土洞，以躲避严寒。
English: People live in caves in winter to escape the cold.

古文：又西北数千里，至大室韦，径路险阻，语言不通。
现代文：从深末怛室韦又向西北走数千里，便到了大室韦。这一带道路艰险，语言不通。
English: I walked thousands of miles northwest from the end of Shinsui-Shimurove to reach Omurove. The roads in this area are difficult and the language is difficult.

古文：尤多貂及青鼠。
现代文：此地貂和青鼠特别多。
English: There are a lot of badgers and mice here.

古文：北室韦时遣使贡献，余无至者。
现代文：北室韦时常派使者到中原来进贡，其余部落没有来的。
English: North Muroto often sent emissaries to Zhongyuan to pay tribute, but the rest of the tribes did not come.

