古文：起屠维大荒落，尽阏逢阉茂，凡六年。
现代文：起，止，一共六年。
English: From start to finish, a total of six years.

古文：王莽中始建国元年
现代文：王莽始建国元年
English: Wang Mangshi in the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China

古文：春，正月，朔，莽帅公侯卿士奉皇太后玺韨上太皇太后，顺符命，去汉号焉。
现代文：春季，正月初一，王莽率领公侯卿士捧着新制的皇太后御玺，呈上太皇太后，遵从上天的符号命，去掉汉朝的名号。
English: In the spring, on the first day of the first month of the year, Wang Mang led the princes and noblemen to hold the newly-made empress dowager's imperial scepter and present it to the great empress dowager, obeying the sign of heaven and removing the name of the Han Dynasty.

古文：初，莽娶故丞相王訢孙宜春侯咸女为妻，立以为皇后；生四男，宇、获前诛死，安颇荒忽，乃以临为皇太子，安为新嘉辟。
现代文：当初，王莽娶了原丞相王的孙子宜春侯王咸的女儿为妻，如今立她作皇后。生有四个儿子，王宇、王获先前已被处死，王安又有点糊涂，便把王临立为皇太子，把王安封为新嘉辟。
English: At first, Wang Mang married the daughter of Yichun marquis Wang Ham, the grandson of the former prime minister Wang Ran, and now made her his empress. He had four sons, Wang Yu and Wang Guo, who had previously been executed, and Wang An, who was a bit confused, so he made Wang Lin the crown prince and Wang An the new crown prince.

古文：封宇子六人皆为公。
现代文：赐封王宇的儿子六人都为公。
English: All six of Wang Yu's sons were made princes.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：莽乃策命孺子为定安公，封以万户，地方百里；立汉祖宗之庙于其国，与周后并行其正朔、服色；以孝平皇后为定安太后。
现代文：王莽下策书命孺子为定安公，把居民一万户，土地纵横各一百里，赐封给他。在封国里建立汉朝祖宗的祠庙，与周朝的后代一样，都使用自己的历法和车马服饰的颜色。把孝平皇后立为定安太后。
English: Wang Mang made a plan to assign 10,000 households and 100 miles of land to Ding'an. He set up ancestral temples of the Han Dynasty in the fief. Like the descendants of the Zhou Dynasty, they all used their own calendars and the colors of their chariots and horses. He appointed Empress Xiaoping as the Empress Dowager of Ding'an.

古文：读策毕，莽亲执孺子手，流涕歔欷曰： 昔周公摄位，终得复子明辟；今予独迫皇天威命，不得如意！ 
现代文：宣读策书完毕，王莽亲自握着孺子的手，流着眼泪抽泣道： 从前周公代理王位，最后能够把明君的权力归还周成王；现在我偏偏迫于上天威严的命令，不能够如自己的意！ 
English: After the reading of the policy book, Wang Mang personally held the hand of the mule and sobbed with tears: Previously, Zhou Gong was acting as the throne, and finally I was able to return the power of Ming Jun to Zhou Cheng Wang; now I am forced by the command of the majesty of heaven, and I cannot do as I please!

古文：哀叹良久。
现代文：悲伤叹息很久。
English: Sorrow sighs for a long time.

古文：中傅将孺子下殿，北面而称臣。
现代文：中傅带着孺子下殿，向着北面自称臣下。
English: Nakafu went down to the hall of fame with his mule and headed north, calling himself a vassal.

古文：百僚陪位，莫不感动。
现代文：百官陪在旁边，没有人不受感动。
English: Accompanied by hundreds of officials, no one could fail to be moved.

古文：又按金匮封拜辅臣：以太傅、左辅王舜为太师，封安新公；大司徒平晏为太傅，就新公；少阿、羲和刘秀为国师，嘉新公；广汉梓潼哀章为国将，美新公；是为四辅，位上公。
现代文：王莽又按照金匮图书的说明，对辅政大臣举行授任仪式：任命太傅、左辅王舜为太师，赐封安新公；大司徒平晏为太傅，赐封就新公；少阿、羲和、刘秀为国师，赐封嘉新公；广汉郡梓潼县人哀章为国将，赐封美新公。这是四辅，位列上公。
English: Wang Mang also held an investiture ceremony for the Vice-Minister of State in accordance with the description of Jin Qiao's book: the appointment of Taifu and Zuo Fu Wang Qian as Taishi, and the conferment of the title of An Xin Gong; Daishi Tutu Ping Qian as Taifu, and the conferment of the title of Xin Gong; Shaoa, Xinghe, and Liu Xiu as Guoshi, and the conferment of the title of Jia Xin Gong; Guanghan County Zizhi County People's Lamentation as the national general, and the conferment of the title of Mei Xin Gong. This is the four auxiliary, ranked

古文：太保、后承甄邯为大司马，承新公；丕进侯王寻为大司徒，章新公；步兵将军王邑为大司空，隆新公；是为三公。
现代文：太保、后承甄邯为大司马，赐封承新公；丕进侯王寻为大司徒，赐封章新公；步兵将军王邑为大司空，赐封隆新公。这是三公。
English: Taiho and Houcheng Zhenyao were given the title of grand steward and Fucheng Shinkong; Shijin Houwangxu was given the title of grand steward and Fucheng Shinkong; Infantry General Wangyi was given the title of grand steward and Fucheng Longjing was given the title of grand steward and Fucheng Longjing was given the title of grand steward and Fucheng Shinkong. These are the three kings.

古文：太阿、右拂、大司空甄丰为更始将军，广新公；京兆王兴为卫将军，奉新公；轻车将军孙建为立国将军，成新公；京兆王盛为前将军，崇新公；是为四将。
现代文：太阿、右拂、大司空甄丰为更始将军，赐封广新公；京兆王兴为卫将军，赐封奉新公；轻车将军孙建为立国将军，赐封成新公；京兆王盛为前将军，赐封崇新公。这是四将。
English: Taia, Yuhu, and Daishi Ku Zhenfeng were the new generals, and Guang Xin Gong was awarded; Jing Zhao Wang Xing was the general of Wei, and Feng Xin Gong was awarded; Light Car General Sun Jian was the general of the founding of the country, and Cheng Xin Gong was awarded; Jing Zhao Wang Sheng was the former general, and Chong Xin Gong was awarded. These are the four generals.

古文：凡十一公。
现代文：总共十一公。
English: There are a total of eleven princes.

古文：王兴者，故城门令史；王盛者，卖饼；莽按符命求得此姓名十馀人，两人容貌应卜相，径从布衣登用，以示神焉。
现代文：王兴原是城门令史，王盛是卖饼的。王莽按照符命，找到十多个有这样姓名的人，而这两人的相貌符合占卜和看相的要求，便直接从平民起用，以显示神奇。
English: Wang Xing was originally a city gate keeper, and Wang Sheng was a cake seller. Wang Mang, in accordance with his fate, found more than ten people with such names, and the appearance of these two people met the requirements of divination and physiognomy, and used them directly from civilians to show magic.

古文：是日，封拜卿大夫、侍中、尚书官凡数百人，诸刘为郡守者皆徙为谏大夫。
现代文：这一天，授任卿大夫、侍中、尚书官职总共几百人。各刘姓皇族担任郡太守的，都调任谏大夫。
English: On this day, a total of several hundred people were appointed to the posts of chancellor, doctor, chamberlain, and secretary. All members of the imperial family with the surname Liu who served as county governors were transferred to the post of secretary.

古文：改明光宫为定安馆，定安太后居之；以大鸿胪府为定安公第；皆置门卫使者监领。
现代文：王莽把明光宫改为定安馆，让定安太后住在那里。把大鸿胪官署作为定安公住宅，都设置门卫、使者监护管理。
English: Wang Mang changed the Mingguang Palace into the Ding'an Pavilion, and let the Empress Dowager of Ding'an live there. He used the Dahongyu Government Office as the public residence of Ding'an, and set up a doorman and an emissary to supervise the management.

古文：敕阿乳母不得与婴语，常在四壁中，至于长大，不能名六畜；后莽以女孙宇子妻之。
现代文：告诫保育人员和奶妈不准跟定安公谈话，让他常在四壁合围的屋子里。一直到长大，定安公还不能叫出六畜的名称。后来王莽把孙女王宇的女儿嫁给了他。
English: The nursery staff and the wet nurse were warned not to talk to Ding An Gong, and he was often kept in a room surrounded by four walls. Until he grew up, Ding An Gong could not call out the names of the six animals. Later, Wang Meng married the daughter of his grandson Queen Yu to him.

古文：莽策命群司各以其职，如典诰之文。
现代文：王莽颁发策书规定百官的职责，犹如典谟训诰的文章一样。
English: Wang Mang issued a policy book stipulating the duties of the hundred officials, just like the articles of Jianmu Xunjun.

古文：置大司马司允、大司徒司直、大司空司若，位皆孤卿。
现代文：设置大司马司允、大司徒司直、大司空司若，职位都是孤卿。
English: The positions of Daishi Ma Siyun, Daishi Tutsu Sinao, and Daishi Ku Siyuo were all vacant.

古文：更名大司农曰羲和，后更为纳言，大理曰作士，太常曰秩宗，大鸿胪曰典乐，少府曰共工，水衡都尉曰予虞，与三公司卿分属三公。
现代文：将大司农改名叫羲和，后来又改为纳言；大理改名叫作士；太常改名叫秩宗；大鸿胪改名叫典乐；少府改名叫共工；水衡都尉改名叫予虞，加上三公司卿，分别归三公管辖。
English: The chief farmer changed his name to Shuhe, and later changed it to Nagan; Dali changed his name to Zuoshi; Taijo changed his name to Chichizong; Dahongshu changed his name to Tenele; Shofu changed his name to Kyoko; Captain Mizuhira changed his name to Yogo, plus the three company secretaries, respectively, under the jurisdiction of the three kings.

古文：置二十七大夫，八十一元士，分主中都官诸职。
现代文：设置二十七大夫、八十一元士，分别主管京师各官府的所有职务。
English: Twenty-seven doctors and eighty-one magistrates were set up to be in charge of all the duties of various government offices in Beijing.

古文：又更光禄勋等名为六监，皆上卿。
现代文：又把光禄勋等改名，称为六监，职位都是上卿。
English: He also changed the names of Guang Rukun and others, calling them the six supervisors, and the positions were all Shangqing.

古文：改郡太守曰大尹，都尉曰大尉，县令、长曰宰。长乐宫曰常乐室，长安曰常安。其馀百官、宫室、郡县尽易其名，不可胜纪。
现代文：将郡太守改名叫大尹，都尉改名叫大尉，县令、县长改名叫宰；长乐宫改名叫常乐室，长安改名叫常安；其余百官、宫室、郡县都改了名，不能一一记录了。
English: The name of the county governor was changed to Dainin, the captain was changed to Captain, the county magistrate and the county governor were changed to Zai, the Changle Palace was changed to the Changle Office, and Changan was changed to Chang'an. The remaining officials, the palace office, and the county changed their names, and it is impossible to record them all.

古文：封王氏齐缞之属为侯，大功为伯，小功为子，缌麻为男；其女皆为任。
现代文：赐封王氏丧服为齐的亲属为侯爵，丧服为大功的亲属为伯爵，丧服为小功的亲属为子爵，丧服为缌麻的亲属为男爵；这样的女亲属都为任爵。
English: The king's relatives with the same funeral attire were given the title of marquis, the relatives with the highest funeral attire were given the title of earl, the relatives with the lowest funeral attire were given the title of viscount, and the relatives with the highest funeral attire were given the title of baron; all such female relatives were given the title of baroness.

古文：男以 睦 ，女以 隆 为号焉。
现代文：男的用 睦 字作称号，女的用 隆 字作称号。
English: Men use "睦" as their title, while women use "隆" as their title.

古文：又曰： 汉氏诸侯或称王，至于四夷亦如之，违于古典，缪于一统。
现代文：王莽又说道： 汉朝有的诸侯称王，以至四方的夷民也仿效这样称呼，这违反了古代制度，背离了一统的原则。
English: Wang Mang also said: Some princes in the Han Dynasty called themselves kings, and even the barbarians in the four directions followed suit, which violated the ancient system and deviated from the principle of uniformity.

古文：其定诸侯王之号皆称公，及四夷僭号称王者皆更为侯。 
现代文：如今确定诸侯王的名号都称为公，以及四方夷民，冒用帝王尊号的都改为侯。 
English: Nowadays, it has been confirmed that the titles of princes and kings are called Gong, as well as Shifang Yimin, and those who pretend to use the title of emperor are changed to Hou.

古文：于是汉诸侯王二十二人皆降为公，王子侯者百八十一人皆降为子，其后皆夺爵焉。
现代文：于是汉诸侯王三十二人的名号都降为公，诸侯王的子弟名号为侯的一百八十一人都降为子，他们在后来都被剥夺了爵号。
English: As a result, the titles of thirty-two princes of the Han Dynasty were reduced to the title of prince, and the titles of one hundred and eighty-one sons of princes were reduced to the title of son. Later, they were all deprived of their titles.

古文：莽又封黄帝、少昊、颛顼、帝喾、尧、舜、夏、商、周及皋陶、伊尹之后皆为公、侯，使各奉其祭祀。
现代文：王莽又赐封黄帝、少昊、颛顼、帝喾、尧、舜、夏、商、周及皋陶、伊尹的后代都为公、侯，使他们各自奉行对自己祖先的祭祀。
English: Wang Mang also granted the descendants of the Yellow Emperor, Shao Hao, Yao, Emperor Gao, Yao, Yao, Xia, Shang, Zhou, Jintao, and Yi Yin the titles of prince and marquess, so that they could each pursue the worship of their ancestors.

古文：莽因汉承平之业，府库百官之富，百蛮宾服，天下晏然，莽一朝有之，其心意未满，狭小汉家制度，欲更为疏阔。
现代文：王莽承接汉朝盛世的庞大基业，以及国库和诸官府资产的丰厚，众多蛮族归附顺从，天下一派升平。王莽一时攫为己有，他的心意仍不满足，认为汉朝的格局太小，想要更为宏大。
English: Wang Mang inherited the huge foundation of the prosperous Han Dynasty, as well as the abundant assets of the state treasury and various government offices. Many barbarians were subservient and obedient, and the whole world was leveled. Wang Mang thought for a while that he had it all, but his heart was still not satisfied, thinking that the Han Dynasty was too small, and he wanted to be more ambitious.

古文：乃自谓黄帝、虞舜之后，至齐王建孙济北王安失国，齐人谓之王家，因以为氏；故以黄帝为初祖，虞帝为始祖。
现代文：于是，自称是黄帝、虞舜的后裔，一直传到齐王田建的孙儿济北王田安，才失去政权。齐人称齐国的王族为 王家 ，于是就以 王 为姓氏。所以，以黄帝为王姓的初祖，以虞舜帝为始祖。
English: As a result, the descendants who claimed to be the descendants of the Yellow Emperor and Emperor Yue passed down to the grandson of King Tianjian of Qi, King Tian'an of Jibei, before losing power. The Qi people called the royal family of Qi the royal family, so they took Wang as their surname. Therefore, the Yellow Emperor was the first ancestor of the royal surname, and Emperor Yue was the first ancestor.

古文：追尊陈胡公曰陈胡王，田敬仲曰齐敬王，济北王安曰济北愍王。
现代文：王莽追尊陈胡公为陈胡王，田敬仲为田敬王，济北王田安为济北愍王。
English: Wang Mangui revered Chen Hu Gong as Chen Hu Wang, Tian Jizhong as Tian Jizhong Wang, and Jibei Wang Tian'an as Jibei Shao Wang.

古文：立祖庙五、亲庙四。
现代文：他建造五座祖宗祭庙，四座皇族祭庙。
English: He built five ancestral temples and four imperial temples.

古文：天下姚、妫、陈、田、王五姓皆为宗室，世世复，无有所与。
现代文：天下姚、妫、陈、田、王五姓都是皇族，世代不纳税，不服役，不负担义务。
English: The five surnames of Yao, Zou, Chen, Tian, and Wang are all imperial families, and they have not paid taxes, served in the military, or shouldered obligations for generations.

古文：封陈崇、田丰为侯，以奉胡王、敬王后。
现代文：封陈崇、田丰二人为侯爵，使他们分别作陈胡王妫满、田敬王田完的后嗣。
English: Chen Chong and Tian Feng were made marquesses, making them the heirs of Chen Hu Wang Shuman and Tian Jing Wang Tian Gan, respectively.

古文：天下牧、守皆以前有翟义、赵明等作乱，领州郡，怀忠孝，封牧为男，守为附城。
现代文：全国州牧、郡守，都因先前在翟义、赵朋等人作乱时，领导州郡，忠于新朝，所以州牧都封男爵，郡守都封附城。
English: The state pastors and county governors across the country were all loyal to the new dynasty because they had previously led the state and county during the rebellion of Shunyi, Zhao Peng and others, so the state pastors were given the title of baron and the county governors were attached to the city.

古文：以汉高庙为文祖庙。
现代文：王莽将汉高庙改为文祖庙。
English: The Hangoo Imperial Temple is regarded as the ancestral temple.

古文：汉氏园寝庙在京师者，勿罢，祠荐如故。
现代文：在京师的刘姓皇帝陵园中的宗庙，仍维持原状，祭祀同原来一样。
English: The ancestral temple in the imperial mausoleum of Emperor Liu in Beijing is still in its original state, and the rituals are the same as before.

古文：诸刘勿解其复，各终厥身；州牧数存问，勿令有侵冤。
现代文：刘姓皇族继续免缴赋税，免服差役，直到去世。各州州牧不断慰问安抚，不让他们遭受侵害和冤枉。
English: The Liu imperial family will continue to be exempt from taxes and exempt from compulsory service until death. The state pastors of all states will continue to comfort and appease, and will not let them suffer from infringement and injustice.

古文：莽以刘之为字 卯、金、刀 也，诏正月刚卯、金刀之利皆不得行，乃罢错刀、契刀及五铢钱，更作小钱，径六分，重一铢，文曰 小钱直一 ，与前 大钱五十 者为二品，并行。
现代文：王莽认为刘字由 卯、金、刀 组成，因而下诏， 正月刚卯 佩饰和金刀钱都不准再使用。于是，废除错刀币、契刀币以及五铢钱，改铸小钱，直径六分，重量一铢，上面有 小钱值一 的字样，加上以前的 大钱五十 的货币为两类，同时发行。
English: Wang Mang believed that the Chinese character liu was made up of wu, gold, and sword, so he issued an edict that neither the New Year's wu decoration nor the gold sword money were allowed to be used again. Therefore, he abolished the wrong sword coin, the wrong sword coin, and the five-baht coin, and changed it to a small coin with a diameter of six minutes, a weight of one baht, and the words "small money worth one" on it. In addition, the former big money fifty coins were divided into two categories and issued at the same time.

古文：欲防民盗铸，乃禁不得挟铜、炭。
现代文：为了防止民间私自铸造，便下禁令不准挟带铜、炭。
English: In order to prevent non-governmental private casting, it is prohibited to bring copper and charcoal.

古文：夏，四月，徐乡侯刘快结党数千人，起兵于其国。
现代文：夏季，四月间，徐乡侯刘快集结党羽几千人，在他的封国里起兵。
English: In the summer, in April, Xu Xiangwu quickly gathered several thousand party members and raised an army in his fief.

古文：快兄殷，故汉胶东王，时为扶崇公。
现代文：刘快的哥哥刘殷，是原汉朝的胶东王，这时已经改改为扶崇公。
English: Liu Kuai's brother Liu Yin, who was the King of Jiaodong in the original Han Dynasty, had already changed his name to Fu Chonggong.

古文：快举兵攻即墨，殷闭城门，自系狱。
现代文：刘快集结兵力，进攻即墨城，刘殷关闭城门，自投监狱。
English: Liu Kuai raised an army to attack the city of Mocheng. Liu Yin closed the city gate and was automatically thrown into prison.

古文：吏民拒快。快败走，至长广死。
现代文：官民抵抗刘快，刘快失败逃跑，退到长广县死了。
English: Officials and citizens resisted Liu Kuai, Liu Kuai failed to escape, retreated to Changguang County and died.

古文：莽赦殷，益其国满万户，地方百里。
现代文：王莽赦免刘殷，增加他的封国达一万户人家，面积方圆一百里。
English: Wang Mang pardoned Liu Yin and increased his fief to ten thousand households, covering an area of one hundred li.

古文：莽曰： 古者一夫田百亩，什一而税，则国给民富而颂声作。
现代文：王莽下诏： 古代一夫分田一百庙，按十分之一交租税，就能够国家丰裕，百姓富足，于是歌颂的舆论兴起来了。
English: Wang Mang issued an edict: In ancient times, one man could farm one hundred temples and pay tax at a rate of one-tenth, so that the country could be prosperous and the people could be rich. As a result, public opinion began to sing praises.

古文：秦坏圣制，废井田，是以兼并起，贪鄙生，强者规田以千数，弱者曾无立锥之居。
现代文：秦破坏圣人制度，废除井田，因此并吞土地的现象出现了，贪婪卑鄙的行为发生了，强者占田数钱亩，贫者竟没有立锥之地。
English: The Qin Dynasty destroyed the sage system and abolished the well field. As a result, the phenomenon of annexation of land appeared, greed and despicable behavior occurred, the strong occupied several mu of land, and the poor had no place to stand.

古文：又置奴婢之市，与牛马同阑，制于民臣，颛断其命，缪于 天地之性人为贵 之义。
现代文：又设置买卖奴婢的市场，与牛马一同关闭在栅栏之内，被地方官吏控制，专横地裁决他们的命运，违背了天地之间的生命，人类最宝贵的原则。
English: They also set up a market for the sale and purchase of slaves and maidservants, closed within the fence along with the cattle and horses, controlled by local officials, arbitrarily deciding their fate, violating the life between heaven and earth, the most precious principle of mankind.

古文：汉氏减轻田租，三十而税一，常有更赋，罢癃咸出；而豪民侵陵，分田劫假。
现代文：汉朝减轻土地税，按三十分之一征税，但是经常有代役税，病残而丧失劳力的都要交纳。
English: The Han Dynasty reduced the land tax and taxed at one-thirtieth, but there was often an agency tax, and the sick and disabled had to pay.

古文：厥名三十税一，实什税五也。故富者犬马馀菽粟，骄而为邪；贫者不厌糟糠，穷而为奸。
现代文：加以土豪劣绅侵犯欺压，利用租佃关系掠夺财物，于是名义上按三十分之一征税，实际上征收了十分之五的税。所以富人的狗马有吃不完的粮食，因骄奢而作邪恶的事；穷人却吃不饱酒渣糠皮，因贫困而作邪恶的事。
English: They used local tyrants and bad gentry to invade and oppress, and took advantage of the rent-seeking relationship to plunder property, so they nominally taxed at one-thirtieth, but actually levied a tax of five-tenths. Therefore, the dogs and horses of the rich have food that they can't eat, and they do evil things because of their arrogance; but the poor can't eat enough wine dregs and bran, and they do evil things because of poverty.

古文：俱陷于辜，刑用不错。
现代文：他们都陷于犯罪，刑罚因此不能搁置不用。
English: They are all involved in crime, so the punishment cannot be suspended.

古文：今更名天下田曰 王田 ，奴婢曰 私属 ，皆不得卖买。
现代文：现在把全国的田改名叫 王田 ，奴婢叫 私属 ，都不准买卖。
English: Now the fields across the country have been renamed "King's fields," and the slaves and maidservants are called "private servants," and they are not allowed to be bought and sold.

古文：其男口不盈八而田过一井者，分馀田予九族、邻里、乡党。
现代文：那些家庭人口男性不满八人，而占有田亩超过一井的，把多余的田亩分给亲属、邻居和同乡亲友。
English: Those families with a male population of less than eight people who own more than one mu of farmland and one well shall distribute the extra mu of farmland to their relatives, neighbors and fellow villagers.

古文：故无田、今当受田者，如制度。
现代文：原来没有田，现在应当分得田的，按照规矩办。
English: Originally, there were no fields. Now, those who should be allocated fields should do so according to the rules.

古文：敢有非井田圣制、无法惑众者，投诸四裔，以御魑魅，如皇始祖考虞帝故事！ 
现代文：敢有反对井田这种圣人首创的制度，无视法律祸乱民众的，把他们流放到四方极远的地方，去抵挡妖怪鬼神，如同我的始祖虞舜帝惩罚四凶的旧例。 
English: If anyone dares to oppose the system pioneered by a sage like Ida, ignoring the law and bringing disaster to the people, they will be exiled to a place far away in the four directions to resist the monsters and ghosts, just like my ancestor, Emperor Yuxuan, used to punish the four evils.

古文：秋，遣五威将王奇等十二人班符命四十二篇于天下：德祥五事，符命二十五，福应十二。
现代文：秋季，王莽派遣五威将王奇等十二人颁符命四十二篇到全国。其中德祥类五篇，符命类二十五篇，福应类十二篇。
English: In the autumn, Wang Mang dispatched Wu Wei to send twelve people, including Wang Qi, to distribute forty-two pieces of life charms to the whole country, including five pieces of virtue charms, twenty-five pieces of life charms, and twelve pieces of good luck charms.

古文：五威将奉符命，赍印绶，王侯以下及吏官名更者，外及匈奴、西域、徼外蛮夷，皆即授新室印绶，因收故汉印绶。
现代文：五威将恭敬地捧着符命，带着印信，王侯及以下和官吏更改名称的，中原以外到匈奴、西域和远方的蛮夷，都被就地授予新朝的印信，并收缴原来汉朝的印信。
English: The Five Dynasties and Five Kingdoms will respectfully hold the banner of destiny and carry the seal. Princes and those below them and officials who change their names, from the Central Plains to the Xiongnu, the Western Regions and the barbarians in the distance, will be awarded the seal of the new dynasty on the spot, and the seal of the original Han Dynasty will be confiscated.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：五威将乘乾文车，驾坤六马，背负敝鸟鸟之毛，服饰甚伟。
现代文：五威将坐着绘有天文图象的车子，套着六匹母马，背上插着锦鸡的羽毛，服装佩饰很威武。
English: Wu Wei will be sitting in a carriage painted with astronomical images, wearing six mares, with feathers of brocade chickens on his back, and wearing very powerful clothing.

古文：每一将各置五帅，将持节，帅持幢。
现代文：每一位五威将下面各设置五个元帅。五威将手执符节，五帅举着旗幡，东行的到玄菟、乐浪、高句丽、夫余。
English: Each of the five emperors will set up five marshals below. The five emperors will hold the festival, the five marshals will hold the flag, and the eastbound will go to Xuanfan, Lelang, Goguryeo, and Fuyu.

古文：其东出者至玄菟、乐浪、高句骊、夫馀；南出都隃徼外，历益州，改句町王为侯；西出者至西域，尽改其王为侯；北出者至匈奴庭，授单于印，改汉印文，去玺曰章。冬，雷，桐华。
现代文：南行的到边塞之外，经过益州郡，把句町王改为句町侯。西行到西域，把各国国王都改为侯爵。北行到匈奴王庭，授予单于印信，更改了汉朝印信的文字，去掉： 玺 改称 章 。冬季，响雷，桐树开花。
English: The southbound trip went beyond the border fortress and passed through Yizhou County, and the King of Gu Town was changed to the Marquis of Gu Town. The westbound trip went to the western region, and the kings of all countries were changed to marquesses. The northbound trip went to the court of the Xiongnu King, and the letters of the Han Dynasty were changed, and the words: 改称 章 were removed. In winter, thunder was heard, and the paulownia trees bloomed.

古文：以统睦侯陈崇为司命，主司察上公以下。
现代文：任命统睦侯陈崇当司命，负责监视上公及以下所有朝廷官员。
English: He appointed Tongmukhou Chen Chong as his deputy, responsible for supervising Shangguo and all the officials of the imperial court.

古文：又以说符侯崔发等为中城、四关将军，主十二城门及绕霤、羊头、肴黾、汧陇之固，皆以五威冠其号。
现代文：又任命说符侯崔发等当中城、四关将军，负责京师十二城门，跟绕、羊头、肴黾、陇四处防务。官衔前都加五威二字。
English: He also appointed Fu Hou Cui Fa and others as generals of Zhongcheng and Shiguan, responsible for the twelve gates of Beijing Division, and the defense of He Wuan, Sheep's Head, Cuisine Gate, and Gate. Two characters "五威" were added before the official title.

古文：又遣谏大夫五十人分铸钱于郡国。
现代文：王莽派遣又谏大夫五十人，分别到各郡、各封国铸钱。
English: In addition, Dr. Zou sent fifty people to mint money in each county and country.

古文：是岁，真定、常山大雨雹。
现代文：这一年，真定、常山天降大冰雹。
English: That year, large hailstones rained down from the sky in Zhending and Changshan.

古文：王莽中始建国二年春，二月，赦天下。
现代文：建国二年春季，二月，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the second year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, in February, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：五威将帅七十二人还奏事，汉诸侯王为公者悉上玺绶为民，无违命者。
现代文：五威将帅七十二人回来奏报，汉朝的诸侯王去掉王号改称为公的，全部缴上印信成为平民，没有违抗命令的。
English: Seventy-two generals and admirals of the Five Dynasties returned to report, the princes and kings of the Han Dynasty removed the title of king and changed it to public, and all submitted the seal letter to become civilians, who did not disobey the order.

古文：独故广阳王嘉以献符命，鲁王闵以献神书，中山王成都以献书言莽德，皆封列侯。
现代文：只有原广阳王刘嘉因向王莽呈献符命，鲁王刘闵因向王莽呈献神书，中山王刘成都因向王莽呈书歌颂功德，都封为列侯。
English: Only the former Guangyang King Liu Jia was made a vassal because he presented a token of life to Wang Mang, the Lu King Liu Xi was made a vassal because he presented a book of devotion to Wang Mang, and the Zhongshan King Liu Chengdu was made a vassal because he presented a book of praise to Wang Mang.

古文：班固论曰：昔周封国八百，同姓五十有馀，所以亲亲贤贤，关诸盛衰，深根固本，为不可拔者也。
现代文：班固论曰：从前，周王朝分封诸侯国八百个，其中同姓家族有五十余个。这正是为了友爱亲属，尊重贤才，它关系到政权的兴衰。根深植，本坚固，使外人就无法动摇。
English: Banggu said: Once upon a time, the Zhou Dynasty divided into eight hundred vassal states, among which there were more than fifty families with the same surname. This is precisely for the sake of friendship with relatives and respect for talents. It is related to the rise and fall of the regime. It is deeply rooted and solid, so that outsiders cannot shake it.

古文：故盛则周、召相其治，致刑错；衰则五伯扶其弱，与共守；天下谓之共主，强大弗之敢倾。
现代文：所以强盛之时，周公、召公共同治理，使刑罚停止。哀弱之时，五霸在下扶助，共同守护。天下认为周王是共主，诸侯国的力量再强大，也不敢倾灭周。
English: Therefore, when strong, Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong jointly governed and stopped the punishment. When weak, the Five Emperors supported and jointly guarded. The world believed that King Zhou was the co-lord, and no matter how powerful the vassal states were, they would not dare to destroy Zhou.

古文：历载八百馀年，数极德尽，降为庶人，用天年终。
现代文：历时八百余年，气数恩德已尽，被降为平民，但仍终其天年。
English: It lasted more than eight hundred years, and when his days were up, he was reduced to a commoner, but he still lived out the rest of his days.

古文：秦讪笑三代，窃自号为皇帝，而子弟为匹夫，内无骨肉本根之辅，外无尺土籓翼之卫；陈、吴奋其白梃，刘、项随而毙之。
现代文：秦讥笑夏商周三代君王，自称 皇帝 ，却让子弟当平民。这个政权内没有骨肉至亲辅佐，外没有藩属封国护卫，一旦陈胜、吴广揭竿而起，刘邦、项羽随之而进，也就覆亡了。
English: Qin scoffed at Xia Shang, the third king, who claimed to be an emperor, but let his son be a commoner. This regime did not have any close aides within the regime, and there was no clan-affiliated escort outside the country. Once Chen Sheng and Wu Guang stood up, Liu Bang and Xiang Yu followed suit, and they also perished.

古文：故曰，周过其历，秦不及期，国势然也。
现代文：所以说，周王朝的统治能够超过期限，秦王朝则短到没有达到期限，是国家形势造成了这样的结局。
English: Therefore, it is said that the Zhou Dynasty ruled the country for too long, and the Qin Dynasty did not reach a hundred years, both of which were caused by the national situation.

古文：汉兴之初，惩戒亡秦孤立之败，于是尊王子弟，大启九国。
现代文：汉朝建立的初期，警觉到秦王朝覆亡的原因，是皇族的孤立，所以大封皇族子弟为王，建立九个封国。
English: At the beginning of the establishment of the Han Dynasty, it was alerted that the reason for the fall of the Qin Dynasty was the isolation of the royal family, so the children of the imperial family were kings and established nine fiefs.

古文：自雁门以东尽辽阳，为燕、代；常山以南，太行左转，渡河、济，渐于海，为齐、赵；穀、泗以往，奄有龟、蒙，为梁、楚；东带江、湖，薄会稽，为荆、吴；北界淮濒，略庐、衡，为淮南；波汉之阳，亘九嶷，为长沙。
现代文：从雁门郡以东到辽阳，是燕国、代国。常山以南，太行山以东，渡过黄河、济水，直到大海，是齐国、赵国。水、泗水以南，龟山、蒙山一带，是梁国、楚国。东边围绕长江、太湖，接近会稽郡，是荆国、吴国。北边与淮河附近接界，庐山、衡山一带，是淮南国。汉水之北，顺着汉水而下，九嶷山一带，是长沙国。
English: From the east of Yanmen County to Liaoyang, it is Yan Country and Dai Country. To the south of Changshan, to the east of Taihang Mountain, across the Yellow River and Jishui to the sea, it is Qi Country and Zhao Country. To the south of Shu and Shishui, around Guishan and Mengshan, it is Liang Country and Chu Country. To the east, around the Yangtze River and Taihu Lake, close to Hui County, it is Jing Country and Wu Country. To the north, near the border with the Huai River, around Lushan and Hengshan, it is Huainan Country. To the north of Hanshui

古文：诸侯比境，周匝三垂，外接胡、越。
现代文：各封国边界相接，环绕着东方、北方、南方三面边疆，外与匈奴、南越国接壤。
English: Each vassal state one after the other, encircled on the north, west and south sides, and bordered by Hudi and South Vietnam.

古文：天子自有三河、东郡、颍川、南阳，自江陵以西至巴、蜀，北自云中至陇西，与京师、内史，凡十五郡；公主、列侯颇邑其中。
现代文：皇帝直接控制的地区，有三河、东郡、颍川、南阳，从江陵以西到巴郡、蜀郡，北起云中到陇西，加上京师、内史，共十五个郡。公主和列侯的食邑，大都分布在十五郡之内。
English: The areas directly controlled by the emperor included Sanhe, Dong County, Luochuan and Nanyang, from west of Jiangling to Ba County and Shu County, from north of Yunnan to west of Shaanxi, plus Beijing and Inner Mongolia, a total of 15 counties. The food towns of princesses and princes were mostly distributed within the 15 counties.

古文：而籓国大者夸州兼郡，连城数十，宫室、百官同制京师，可谓矫枉过其正矣。
现代文：而大的封国面积跨州，有几个郡那么大，数十个城镇相连，宫殿、百官制度与京师相同。对秦朝来说，可称是矫枉过正了。
English: However, the large area of the fief was interstate, as large as several counties, dozens of towns were connected, and the palace and the system of one hundred officials were the same as that of Beijing. For the Qin Dynasty, it can be said to be overkill.

古文：虽然，高祖创业，日不暇给，孝惠享国又浅，高后女主摄位，而海内晏如，亡狂狡之忧，卒折诸吕之难，成太宗之业者，亦赖之于诸侯也。
现代文：尽管如此，高祖创立大业，事务繁多，没有空闲，惠帝在位时间又短，高后以女主身份代理皇位，临朝执政，而全国却一派崐升平，没有叛乱的忧患。后来终于摧毁吕姓家族的篡权阴谋，完成文帝的功业，也依赖于这些封国。
English: Nevertheless, Gao Zu created a great cause, there are many affairs, there is no idle time, Hui Di's reign time is short, Gao Guo acted as the empress and presided over the imperial court, while the whole country was peaceful, there was no worry of rebellion. Later, finally destroying the usurpation plot of the Lu family and completing the work of Emperor Wen also depended on these fiefs.

古文：然诸侯原本以大末，流滥以致溢，小者淫荒越法，大者睽孤横逆以害身丧国，故文帝分齐、赵，景帝削吴、楚，武帝下推恩之令而籓国自析。
现代文：然而，封国国君本是皇族的末流，末流太滥，就会满溢出来，造成灾害。小者荒淫触犯法律，大者谋反叛逆，结果自己断送性命，封国也被撤除。所以文帝分割齐国、赵国，景帝削减吴国、楚国，武帝颁布推恩令，使封国自己分解。
English: However, the feudal lords were originally the last generation of the imperial family, and if the last generation was too extravagant, it would overflow and cause disasters. The small violated the law with debauchery, and the great plotted rebellion. As a result, they lost their lives, and the feudal lords were also removed. Therefore, Emperor Wen divided Qi and Zhao, Emperor Jing reduced Wu and Chu, and Emperor Wu issued an edict of grace to disintegrate the feudal lords.

古文：自此以来，齐分为七，赵分为六，梁分为五，淮南分为三。
现代文：从此以后，齐国剖分成七国，赵国剖分成六国，梁国剖分成五国，淮南国剖分成三国。
English: Since then, the inspection has been divided into seven, the trip has been divided into six, the chisel has been divided into five, and Huainan has been divided into three.

古文：皇子始立者，大国不过十馀城。
现代文：皇子封亲王之时，大的封国不过十多个城镇。
English: When the prince was enthroned, there were only a dozen or so towns in the country.

古文：长沙、燕、代虽有旧名，皆亡南北边矣。
现代文：长沙国、燕国、代国，虽然仍是旧名，都不再紧邻南北边疆了。
English: Although the countries of Changsha, Yan and Dai still have their old names, they no longer have their former north-south borders.

古文：景遭七国之难，抑损诸侯，减黜其官。
现代文：景帝遭遇七国之乱，更贬抑诸侯王地位，减少封国官员编制。
English: When Emperor Jing suffered the disaster of the Seven Kingdoms, he restrained and weakened the princes, and reduced and dismissed the officials of various countries.

古文：武有衡山、淮南之谋，作左官之律，设附益之法；诸侯惟得衣食税租，不与政事。
现代文：武帝时衡山王刘赐、淮南王刘安图谋不轨，于是颁布左官律，制定附益法。封国国君只能得到供穿衣吃饭的租税，不参与政事。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, Hengshan King Liu Zi and Huainan King Liu An conspired to cheat, so they promulgated the Plasterer's Law and enacted the Law of Surplus Profits.

古文：至于哀、平之际，皆继体苗裔，亲属疏远，生于帷墙之中，不为士民所尊，势与富室亡异。
现代文：到了哀帝、平帝时代，封国国君都是后代苗裔，跟皇帝的血缘和亲情疏远。生长在封闭的王宫之中，不为人民所尊敬，势力与当地富翁没有什么不同。
English: By the time of Emperor Yue and Emperor Ping, the princes were all descendants of the previous generation, estranged from the heavenly son, born in the palace, not respected by the people, and their power was no different from that of the rich.

古文：而本朝短世，国统三绝。
现代文：而本朝君王在位的时间短促，又一连三代没有后嗣。
English: However, the reign of the monarchs of this dynasty was short, and three generations in a row had no heirs.

古文：是故王莽知汉中外殚微，本末俱弱，无所忌惮，生其奸心，因母后之权，假伊、周之称，颛作威福庙堂之上，不降阶序而运天下。
现代文：因此王莽知道汉家宫廷内外衰微，根本和末梢都同样脆弱，他无所顾虑惧怕，萌生了邪恶之心。依靠太皇太后的权势，假托伊尹、周公的美名，在朝廷上作威作福，用不着走下台阶就把汉朝政权全部夺取。
English: Therefore, Wang Mang knew that the Han dynasty was in decline both inside and outside the court, and that the foundation and the periphery were equally vulnerable. He had no concerns or fears, and a heart of evil sprouted. He relied on the power of the great empress dowager, pretended to use the good name of Iyin and Zhou Gong, and pretended to be good at the court. He did not need to go down the steps to seize all the power of the Han dynasty.

古文：诈谋既成，遂据南面之尊，分遣五威之吏，驰传天下，班行符命。
现代文：诈谋完成之后，王莽正式称帝，分别派遣五威将之类的官员，驾着传车急行全国，颁行符命。
English: As soon as the treacherous scheme was complete, he usurped the emperor's dignity, dispatched officials separately, quickly spread throughout the world, and promulgated the emperor's order.

古文：汉诸侯王厥角稽首，奉上玺韨，惟恐在后；或乃称美颂德以求容媚，岂不哀哉！
现代文：汉朝封国国君叩头至地，双手呈上印信，只怕落后。有些人更歌功颂德，奉承献媚，以取得王莽的欢心，岂不令人哀痛！
English: During the Han Dynasty, emperors had to bow down to the ground and present a sealed letter with both hands in order to avoid falling behind. Some emperors were more likely to sing the praises of merit, flatter and flatter in order to win the favor of the king. Isn't that sad!

古文：国师公刘秀言： 周有泉府之官，收不售，与欲得，即《易》所谓 理财正辞，禁民为非 者也。 
现代文：国师公刘秀奏称： 周王朝有泉府之官，收购民间卖不出去的产品，供应民间缺乏的货物，也就是《易经》说： 治理财富，端正言行，禁止人民为非作歹。  
English: Liu Xiu Song, a state teacher, said: The Zhou Dynasty had officials from Quanfu, purchased products that the people could not sell, and supplied goods that the people lacked, that is, the "I Ching" said: Manage wealth, speak and act righteously, and prohibit people from doing evil.

古文：莽乃下诏曰： 《周礼》有赊贷，《乐语》有五均，传记各有筦焉。
现代文：于是王莽下诏说： 《周礼》上有由官府办理赊贷的记载，《乐语》上有五均的设立，史书上有关于诸的记载。
English: Therefore, Wang Mang issued an edict saying, "In the Zhou Li, there is a record of the government's handling of loan sharking. In the Le Yue, there is a record of the establishment of the Five Uniforms, and in the history book, there is a record of Zhu.

古文：今开赊贷、张五均、设诸筦者，所以齐众庶，抑并兼也。 
现代文：现在，开展赊贷、设立五均、诸，目的在于使民众均平，遏止富豪侵吞兼并。 
English: Now, the purpose of carrying out loan-sharking and the establishment of the Fifth Five-Year Plan and the Ten-Year Plan is to equalize the people and stop the rich from annexing and annexing.

古文：遂于长安及洛阳、邯郸、临菑、宛、成都立五均司市、钱府官。
现代文：于是在长安以及洛阳、邯郸、临、宛、成都设立五均司市、钱府官。
English: As a result, Wujun city and Qianfu officials were established in Chang'an as well as Luoyang, Handan, Lin, Wan and Chengdu.

古文：司市常以四时仲月定物上中下之贾，各为其市平。
现代文：司市于每季的第二个月，对货物定出上、中、下三等价钱，保持市价的稳定。
English: In the second month of each quarter, the city sets the upper, middle and lower prices for goods to maintain the stability of market prices.

古文：民卖五谷、布帛、丝绵之物不售者，均官考检厥实，用其本贾取之；物贵过平一钱，则以平贾卖与民；贱减平者，听民自相与市。
现代文：民间卖不出去的五谷、麻布、丝绸、棉絮等，均官经过调查，认为确实之后，依照成本收购。一旦物价上涨，超过平价一钱，均官将所藏货物以平价卖给百姓。如物价比平价低，则听凭百姓自由交易。
English: For the grain, linen, silk, cotton wool, etc. that could not be sold by the people, the people's commissariat would purchase them according to the cost after investigating and considering it to be true. Once the price rose to more than the parity price of one yuan, the people's commissariat would sell the stored goods to the people at the parity price. If the price was lower than the parity price, the people would be allowed to trade freely.

古文：又民有乏绝欲赊贷者，钱府予之；每月百钱收息三钱。
现代文：另外百姓如果无钱需要赊贷，则钱府可以借给，每月一百钱收利息三钱。
English: In addition, if the people do not have money and need to borrow money, the government can lend them 100 yuan per month and charge 3 yuan interest.

古文：又以《周官》税民，凡田不耕为不殖，出三夫之税；城郭中宅不树艺者为不毛，出三夫之布；民浮游无事，出夫布一匹；其不能出布者冗作，县官衣食之。
现代文：同时，新朝朝廷依照古书《周礼》，规定：凡有田不耕种，称为不殖，要崐罚交三个人的赋税，城市中房宅不种树的称为不毛，罚交三个人的布匹；平民游手好闲，无所事事，处罚布匹一匹。缴纳不出布匹的，则应为官府做工，由官府给他衣食。
English: At the same time, the new imperial court, in accordance with the ancient book "Zhouli," stipulated that: anyone who has a field and does not cultivate it is called non-breeding and should be fined and pay three people's tax; a house in the city that does not plant trees is called barren and is fined and pay three people's cloth; a civilian who is idle and idle is punished with one cloth. If he does not pay the cloth, he should work for the government and the government should give him food and clothing.

古文：诸取金、银、连、锡、鸟、兽、鱼、鳖于山林、水泽及畜牧者，嫔妇桑蚕、织纴、纺绩、补缝，工匠、医、巫、卜、祝及它方技，商贩、贾人，皆各自占所为，于其在所之县官，除其本，计其利十一分之，而以其一为贡；敢不自占，自占不以实者，尽没入所采取而作县官一岁。
现代文：凡是在山林水泽开采金矿、银矿、铅矿、锡矿的工人，捕捉鸟兽的猎人，捞取鱼鳖的渔夫，以及从事畜牧业的牧民，种桑养蚕、织布纺线、缝纫的妇女，工匠、医生、巫师、算卦的人，祭司及有其他技能的人等和小贩、商人，全都要在所前往的地方自己申报经营所得，由地方官府除去其成本，在纯利中征收十分之一作为贡税。胆敢不自行申报，或申报不实的，把经营所得没收，并处罚为官府服役一年。
English: All workers who mine gold, silver, lead or tin in mountain forests and streams, hunters who capture birds and beasts, fishermen who fish, and herdsmen engaged in animal husbandry, women who grow mulberry trees, raise silkworms, weave cloth, and sew, craftsmen, doctors, wizards, people who tell fortunes, priests and people with other skills, as well as hawkers and merchants, must declare their business income in the places they travel to. The local government will remove their costs and collect one-tenth of the net profit as a tribute. If they dare not declare themselves or declare falsely, the business income will be confiscated and they will be punished with one year of service

古文：羲和鲁匡复奏请榷酒酤，莽从之。
现代文：羲和鲁匡又奏请酒类由官府专卖，王莽批准。
English: Zhai and Lu Kuang also requested that liquor be sold exclusively by the government, and Wang Mang approved.

古文：又禁民不得挟弩、铠，犯者徙西海。
现代文：又下令禁止民间挟带弩弓和铠甲，违犯者流放到西海郡。
English: He also issued an order prohibiting civilians from carrying crossbows and armor, with violators to be exiled to Saikai County.

古文：初，莽既班四条于匈奴，后护乌桓使者告乌桓民，毋得复与匈奴皮布税。
现代文：最初，王莽给匈奴颁布了关于处理降人的四项条例。后来，护乌桓使者通告乌桓民众，不要再向匈奴进贡兽皮布匹。
English: At first, Wang Mang issued four regulations to the Xiongnu on the handling of demotions. Later, the Wuhuan envoy announced to the Wuhuan people that they should no longer pay tribute to the Xiongnu.

古文：匈奴遣使者责税，收乌桓酋豪，缚，倒悬之。
现代文：匈奴派人催促乌桓进贡，并逮捕乌桓部落酋长，捆绑起来，倒着悬挂。
English: The Xiongnu sent people to urge Wuhuan to pay tribute, and arrested the Wuhuan tribal chief, tied him up, and hung him upside down.

古文：酋豪兄弟怒，共杀匈奴使。
现代文：酋长的兄弟勃然大怒，共同击杀匈奴使者。
English: The chief's brother flew into a rage and together they killed the Hun envoy.

古文：单于闻之，发左贤王兵入乌桓，攻击之，颇杀人民，驱妇女弱小且千人去，置左地，告乌桓曰： 持马畜皮布来赎之！ 
现代文：匈奴单于听说了这件事，征发左贤王的属兵进入乌桓，展开攻击，杀戮许多百姓，掳掠妇女儿童近千人而去，安置到东部地区，告诉乌桓： 拿牛马、兽皮和布匹来赎！ 
English: On hearing of this, the Xiongnu single-handedly conscripted soldiers belonging to King Zuoxian to enter Wuhuan, launched an attack, killed many people, abducted nearly a thousand women and children, and relocated them to the eastern region, telling Wuhuan: Take cattle and horses, animal skins and cloth to ransom!

古文：乌桓持财畜往赎，匈奴受，留不遣。
现代文：乌桓人带着财物牲畜去赎俘虏，匈奴收下，但却不遣返俘虏。
English: The Wuhuans took their property and livestock to ransom the captives, the Xiongnu accepted them, but did not repatriate the captives.

古文：及五威将帅王骏等六人至匈奴，重遗单于金帛，谕晓以受命代汉状，因易单于故印。
现代文：及至五威将王骏等六人抵达匈奴，致送单于黄金、丝绸等厚重礼物，说明新朝接受天命取代汉朝的情况，并更换单于印信。
English: By the 5th day of the 5th month of the 5th year of the 5th month of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5

古文：故印文曰 匈奴单于玺 ，莽更曰 新匈奴单于章 。
现代文：原来的印文是 匈奴单于玺 ，王莽更改后的印文是 新匈奴单于章 。
English: The original seal script was 匈奴单于, but Wang Mang replaced it with the new 匈奴单于章.

古文：将率既至，授单于印绂，诏令上故印绂。
现代文：已经到达的五威将到达后，授给单于新印信，宣读诏书要求交回汉朝旧印信。
English: After the arrival of the Wuwei, which has already arrived, a new seal letter will be issued, and an imperial decree will be read to request the return of the old seal letter of the Han Dynasty.

古文：单于再拜受诏。
现代文：单于再拜，接受诏书。
English: It only takes two prostrations to receive the imperial edict.

古文：译前，欲解取故印绂，单于举掖授之。
现代文：翻译官上前，打算从单于身上解取旧印信，单于抬起手臂交印。
English: The translator came forward and wanted to untie the original stamped umbilical cord, so I just raised my arm and let him untie it.

古文：左姑夕侯苏从旁谓单于曰： 未见新印文，宜且勿与。 
现代文：左姑夕侯苏从旁对单于说： 没有看到新印的印文，应该暂且不交旧印。 
English: At this time, Zuo Jiu Hou Su said to Shan Yu on the side: "You haven't seen the new seal script yet, you shouldn't give it to him for the time being."

古文：单于止，不肯与。
现代文：单于放下手臂，不准翻译官解绶带。
English: I just put my arm down and didn't let them pick it up.

古文：请使者坐穹庐，单于欲前为寿。
现代文：单于请使节坐在穹庐里，要上前敬酒祝寿。
English: Just invite the envoys to sit in the dome and to come forward for a toast.

古文：五威将曰： 故印绂当以时上。 
现代文：五威将说： 旧印信应当按时交上。 
English: Wu Wei said: The old seal letter should be submitted on time.

古文：单于曰： 诺。 
现代文：单于说： 好 。
English: Just say: OK.

古文：复举掖授译，苏复曰： 未见印文，且勿与。 
现代文：再抬起手臂，让翻译官解带。左姑夕侯苏再提醒说： 我们汉有看见印文，暂且不要给他们。 
English: She then raised her arm and asked the interpreter to untie her. Zuo Jiu Hou Su reminded her again, "We Han have seen the seal, please don't give it to them for the time being."

古文：单于曰： 印文何由变更！ 
现代文：单于说： 印文怎么会变！ 
English: Tai Yu replied: How can the characters be changed!

古文：遂解故印绂奉上将帅，受著新绂，不解视印。
现代文：于是解下旧印信呈交五威将，而接收新印信，没有立刻打开新印查看审视。
English: As a result, he opened the old seal letter and submitted it to Wuwei, but received the new seal letter without immediately opening the new seal to inspect it.

古文：饮食至夜，乃罢。
现代文：酒宴至夜方散。
English: The party lasted until the early hours of the morning.

古文：右帅陈饶谓诸将帅曰： 向者姑夕侯疑印文，几令单于不与人。
现代文：五威右帅陈饶对大家说： 刚才姑夕侯怀疑印文，几乎使单于不予交出。
English: Chen Rao, the right-hand man of the Five Dynasties, said to everyone: Just now, Gu Xi Hou doubted the seal, and almost made the seal not to be handed over.

古文：如令视印，见其变改，必求故印，此非辞说所能距也。
现代文：如果他们查看新印，发现印文变改，必然要索求旧印，这不是用说辞所能阻挡的。
English: If he lets you look at the seal and sees that the seal has changed, he will definitely come to ask for the original seal, so we can't use words to refuse it.

古文：既得而复失之，辱命莫大焉！
现代文：假使旧印已经到手而又失去，是对我们的使命最大的侮辱。
English: It would be the greatest insult to our mission if the old seal were to come into our possession and then be lost.

古文：不如椎破故印以绝祸根。 
现代文：不如击破旧印，以断绝祸根。 
English: It is better to break the old seal to cut off the root of evil.

古文：将帅犹与，莫有应者。
现代文：五威将帅们犹豫不决，没有响应的。
English: The five generals hesitated and did not respond.

古文：饶，燕士，果悍，即引斧椎坏之。
现代文：陈饶是燕崐地壮士，果断而勇悍，当即拿起斧锥把旧印击坏。
English: Chen Rao, a native of Yanji, was so bold that he picked up an axe and chopped down the old seal.

古文：明日，单于果遣右骨都侯当白将帅曰： 汉单于印言 玺 不言 章 ，又无 汉 字；诸王已下乃有 汉 ，言 章 。
现代文：第二天，单于果然派遣右骨都侯当对五威将帅说： 汉朝发给我们的印信称 玺 ，不称 章 ，而且没有 汉 字，王以下的印才有 汉 字，称 章 。
English: On the second day, after sending the right bone to the general of the Five Dynasties, he said to the general of the Five Dynasties: The seal letter sent to us by the Han Dynasty is called, not 章, and there is no 汉 字. Only the seals below the king have 汉 字 and 称 章.

古文：今即去 玺 加 新 ，与臣下无别。
现代文：而今，不但把 玺 改成 章 ，而且又加上 新 字，使单于与臣属之间没有分别。
English: The current seal has had the  character removed and a new 字 added, which makes it no different from a vassal.

古文：愿得故印。 
现代文：希望得到旧印。 
English: I just hope I can get the original seal.

古文：将帅示以故印，谓曰： 新室顺天制作，故印随将帅所自为破坏。
现代文：五威将帅把已损坏了的旧印拿给他看，解释说： 新朝顺应天命，制定新的印信。所以旧印由我们自行击毁。
English: The commander-in-chief Wu Wei showed him the damaged old seal and explained: "The new dynasty, in accordance with the will of heaven, has formulated a new seal. Therefore, we destroyed the old seal by ourselves.

古文：单于宜承天命，奉新室之制！ 
现代文：单于应该接受上天旨意，奉行新朝制度！ 
English: They should only accept God's will and follow the new imperial system!

古文：当还白，单于知已无可奈何，又多得赂遗，即遣弟右贤王舆奉马牛随将帅入谢，因上书求故印。
现代文：当回去报告单于，单于知道事已无可奈何，而且又得到很多新朝的赏赐，便派他的弟弟右贤王舆带着进贡的马牛，随五威将帅前往新朝致谢，并上书新朝，要求重用旧印。
English: When he went back to report to Jian Yu, Jian Yu knew that there was nothing he could do, and he had received many rewards from the new dynasty, so he sent his younger brother, U Xian Wang Yu, with a horse-and-cattle tribute, to the new dynasty to express his gratitude, and to write to the new dynasty to request the reuse of the old seal.

古文：将帅还到左犁汙王咸所居地，见乌桓民多，以问咸；咸具言状。
现代文：五威将帅回国途中，经过左犁污王咸居住的地区，看到很多乌桓人，询问咸，咸详细报告了事件的经过。
English: On his way back to China, General Wuwei passed through the area where Zuoying's King Ham lived and saw many Wuhuan people. He inquired about Ham and Ham reported the details of the incident.

古文：将帅曰： 前封四条，不得受乌桓降者。
现代文：五威将帅说： 从前，中国对匈奴有四项约束，不可以接受逃亡投降的乌桓人，速送他们回去！ 
English: Generalissimo Wu Wei said: Once upon a time, China had four restrictions on the Xiongnu. Wuhuans who had fled and surrendered could not be accepted. Send them back immediately!

古文：亟还之！ 咸曰： 请密与单于相闻，得语，归之 。
现代文：咸说： 请允许我秘密报知单于，得到单于指示，就让他们回去。 
English: Ham said, "Please allow me to report to you secretly, and if I receive your instructions, I will let them go back."

古文：单于使咸报曰： 当从塞内还之邪，从塞外还之邪？ 
现代文：单于教咸询问： 应当从塞内遣回他们呢？还是从塞外遣回他们呢？
English: Later, the king of Zaozhuang, who had sent the soldiers alone, replied: "Should these surrendering soldiers be sent back from within Tibet, or from outside Tibet?"

古文：将帅不敢颛决，以闻。
现代文：五威将帅不敢决定，报告朝廷。
English: The five generals did not dare to make a decision and reported to the imperial court.

古文：诏报： 从塞外还之。 
现代文：王莽下诏答复： 从塞外遣返。 
English: Wang Mang replied with an emphatic answer: repatriation from outside the country.

古文：莽悉封五威将为子，帅为男；独陈饶以破玺之功，封威德子。
现代文：王莽把出使匈奴的五威将等，一律封为子爵，五威帅一律封为男爵。只有五威右帅陈饶因为有毁坏匈奴旧印的功劳，赐封威德子。
English: Wang Mang made all of the five generals sent by the Huns viscounts, and all of the five generals and marshals were made barons. Only the five generals and marshals Chen Rao was given the title of Weidetsi because he had the merit of destroying the Huns' old seal.

古文：单于始用夏侯籓求地，有拒汉语，后以求税乌桓不得，因寇略其人民，衅由是生，重以印文改易，故怨恨。
现代文：匈奴单于栾提知，当初曾因夏侯藩要求割地而说过拒绝汉朝的话，后来因为向乌桓索取贡品而没有得到，攻击劫掠乌桓百姓，中国和匈奴从此产生裂痕。加以印文改换，所以对中国怨恨。
English: The Xiongnu alone knew at the time that at first they had rejected the Han Dynasty because the Xia Hou Clan had demanded land division from them. Later, because they demanded tribute from the Wu Huan and did not receive it, they attacked and plundered the Wu Huan people. From then on, China and the Xiongnu had a rift. They changed it to Hindi, so they resented China.

古文：乃遣右大且渠蒲呼卢訾等十馀人将兵众万骑，以护送乌桓为名，勒兵朔方塞下，朔方太守以闻。
现代文：于是派右大且渠蒲呼卢訾等十余人，率领一万多骑兵，以护送乌桓俘虏回国的名义，屯军于朔方郡边塞之外。朔方太守奏报朝廷。
English: As a result, he sent more than ten people, including Uda and Qu Puhu Lu, and led more than ten thousand cavalry to escort the Wuhu prisoners back to the country. The troops were stationed outside the border fortress of Shuo Fang County. Shuo Fang Taishou reported to the imperial court.

古文：莽以广新公甄丰为右伯，当出西域。
现代文：王莽任命广新公甄丰作右伯，准备取道西域出兵。
English: Wang Mang appointed Guang Xin Gong Zhen Feng as his right-hand man and prepared to send troops to the western region.

古文：车师后王须置离闻之，惮于供给烦费，谋亡入匈奴；都护但钦召置离，斩之。
现代文：车师后王国国王须置离听到这个信息，对于送往迎来的庞大开支感到害怕，谋划逃入匈奴。西域都护但钦召来须置离，将他斩杀。
English: When the king of the kingdom heard this message, he was afraid of the huge expense of sending him to usher in, and planned to escape to the Huns.

古文：置离兄辅国侯狐兰支将置离众二千馀人，亡降匈奴。
现代文：须置离的哥哥辅国侯狐兰支，率领须置离部众二千余人，逃入匈奴归降。
English: His estranged brother, Su Guo Guo Hou Xulan, led more than two thousand people from his estranged clan to flee to the Huns and surrender.

古文：单于受之，遣兵与狐兰支共入寇，击车师，杀后城长，伤都护司马，及狐兰兵复还入匈奴。
现代文：匈奴单于受降，派兵与狐兰支联合攻击车师，斩杀车师后王国后城长，击伤西域都护司马，然后连同狐兰支的部队又返回匈奴。
English: The Xiongnu alone surrendered, sent troops and the Foxtel branch to jointly attack the car division, killed the car division after the kingdom after the mayor, wounded the western capital guard horse, and then returned to the Xiongnu together with the troops of the Foxtel branch.

古文：时戊己校尉刁护病，史陈良、终带、司马丞韩玄、右曲候任商相与谋曰： 西域诸国颇背叛，匈奴欲大侵，要死，可杀校尉，帅人众降匈奴。 
现代文：当时，戊已校尉刁护有病，史陈良、终带、司马丞韩玄、右曲候任商共同商议说： 西域各国多有背叛，匈奴大举侵袭，我们面临死亡的危险。可以杀掉校尉，率领众人投降匈奴。 
English: At that time, Wu had already been ill, and his captains, Shi Chenliang, the last one, Sima Rong Han Xuan, and the next one to be appointed, discussed together and said: There are many betrayals in the western countries, the Huns have invaded in large numbers, and we are facing the danger of death. We can kill the captain and lead everyone to surrender to the Huns.

古文：遂杀护及其子男、昆弟，尽胁略戊己校尉吏士男女二千馀人入匈奴。
现代文：于是，杀死刁护跟他的儿子、兄弟，裹胁戊己校尉全部文武官员，及眷属男女，约二千余人，投奔匈奴。
English: As a result, he killed Gongyou, his son and brother, and all the civil and military officials, including the captain, and their male and female dependents, about two thousand people, and defected to the Huns.

古文：单于号良、带曰乌贲都尉。
现代文：匈奴单于任命陈良、终带同为乌贲都尉。
English: The Xiongnu alone appointed Chen Liang, and he eventually became the captain of Wuyi.

古文：冬，十一月，立国将军孙建奏： 九月辛巳，陈良、终带自称废汉大将军，亡入匈奴。
现代文：冬季，十一月，立国将军孙建奏称： 九月辛巳，陈良、终带自称废汉大将军，逃入匈奴。
English: In the winter, in November, Sun Jianso, the founding general, said: In September, Chen Liang, the self-proclaimed Han general, fled to the Huns.

古文：又今月癸酉，不知何一男子遮臣建车前，自称 汉氏刘子舆，成帝下妻子也。
现代文：此外，本月癸酉，一个不明身份的男子，挡在我的车前，自称： 我是汉朝皇族刘子舆，成帝小妻的儿子。
English: On the third day of this month, a man I don't know where he is from stopped in front of my Sun Jian's car, claiming to be Han Dynasty Liu Ziwu, the son of Emperor Han Zheng's little wife.

古文：刘氏当复，趣空宫！ 
现代文：刘家就要重登宝座，快去把宫殿腾出来。 
English: The Liu family is about to return to the throne. Hurry up and vacate the palace.

古文：收系男子，即常安姓武字仲。
现代文：把该男子逮捕，原来是常安人，姓武崐，名仲。
English: The detained man turned out to be a Chang'an resident surnamed Wu Mianzhong.

古文：皆逆天违命，大逆无道。
现代文：这些人都违背天命，大逆不道。
English: All of them are against Heaven, against the Mandate of Heaven, and against the Way.

古文：汉氏宗庙不当在常安城中，及诸刘当与汉俱废。
现代文：因此，我认为：汉朝宗庙不应当在常安城里，而刘姓家族为官者应该跟汉朝同时废弃。
English: Therefore, I think: the Han Dynasty ancestral temple should not be in Chang'an City, and officials with the surname Liu should be abandoned at the same time as the Han Dynasty.

古文：陛下至仁，久未定，前故安众侯刘崇等更聚众谋反，今狂狡之虏复依托亡汉，至犯夷灭连未止者，此圣恩不蚤绝其萌芽故也。
现代文：陛下最为仁慈，许久未下决定。先前原安众侯刘崇等人更聚众图谋反叛，使一些狂妄狡猾的家伙，又依托已经灭亡的汉朝，以至犯下夷族灭家大罪的事接连不断发生，这就是由于您的圣恩未及早杜绝他们的奢望萌芽的缘故。
English: Your Majesty is most merciful and has not made a decision for a long time. Previously, the former Prince of An, Liu Chong, and others gathered more people to plot rebellion, causing some arrogant and cunning guys to rely on the defunct Han Dynasty to commit the great crime of exterminating the barbarians. This is because your grace did not stop their extravagant hopes from sprouting early.

古文：臣请汉氏诸庙在京师者皆罢；诸刘为吏者皆罢，待除于家。 莽曰： 可。
现代文：我建议：汉朝君王在京师的祠庙，全部废除；刘姓当官的，都予以罢免，在家里等待授予新官职。 王莽说： 可以。
English: I suggested that all the temples and shrines built by Han Dynasty emperors in Beijing should be abolished, and all officials with the surname of Liu should be dismissed and wait at home for a new official post to be granted. Wang Mang said, "Yes."

古文：嘉新公、国师以符命为予四辅，明德侯刘龚、率礼侯刘嘉等凡三十二人，皆知天命，或献天符，或贡昌言，或捕告反虏，厥功茂焉。
现代文：嘉新公、国师刘秀应符命当我的四辅。明德侯刘龚、率礼侯刘嘉等三十二人都懂得天命，有的进献天符，有的提出好意见，有的拘捕、告发反贼，他们的功劳巨大。
English: Jia Xin Gong and Liu Xiu, the state teacher, should be my four assistants. Thirty-two people, such as Liu Zhen, the prince of Ming and De, and Liu Jia, the prince of Li, understood the destiny of heaven. Some presented heavenly charms, some put forward good opinions, and some arrested and reported anti-thieves. Their merits are huge.

古文：诸刘与三十二人同宗共祖者，勿罢，赐姓曰王。 
现代文：刘姓皇族成员中跟这三十二人同宗共祖的不予罢免，赐他们姓王。 
English: Among the members of the imperial family with the surname of Liu, those with the same ancestor as these thirty-two people will not be dismissed, and they will be given the surname of Wang.

古文：唯国师以女配莽子，故不赐姓。
现代文：只有国师公把女儿许配给了王莽的儿子，所以不赐姓。
English: Zou You Guosi gave his daughter to Wang Mangluo's son, so he did not give her a surname.

古文：定安公太后自刘氏之废，常称疾不朝会。
现代文：定安太后自从汉朝灭亡，时常称病，不去朝见。
English: Ever since the fall of the Han Dynasty, Empress Dowager Ding'an often claimed to be ill and did not go to see the emperor.

古文：时年未二十，莽敬惮伤哀，欲嫁之，乃更号曰黄皇室主，欲绝之于汉；令孙建世子盛饰，将医往问疾。
现代文：当时她还不满二十岁，王莽对她既尊敬害怕，又忧伤哀怜，打算让她改嫁。于是取消定安太后称号，改称黄皇室主，想使她跟汉朝一刀两断。命孙建的儿子刻意装扮，带着御医，前往问病。
English: At that time, she was not yet twenty years old. Wang Mang respected and feared her, but was also sad and pitiful, and planned to have her remarried. Therefore, he cancelled the title of the Empress Dowager Ding'an and changed it to the Lord of the Yellow Imperial Family, hoping to make her break with the Han Dynasty. The son of the deceased Sun Jian deliberately dressed up and took his doctor with him to ask for a doctor.

古文：后大怒，笞鞭其傍侍御，因发病，不肯起。
现代文：定安太后大怒，鞭打她身旁的侍从，于是真的患病，不肯起床。
English: The Empress Dowager Ding'an was so angry that she whipped the attendant next to her. As a result, she really fell ill and refused to get up.

古文：莽遂不复强也。
现代文：王莽便不再勉强她。
English: Wang Mang no longer forced her to leave.

古文：十二月，雷。
现代文：十二月，响雷。
English: Thunder in December.

古文：莽恃府库之富，欲立威匈奴，乃更名匈奴单于曰 降奴服于 ，下诏遣立国将军孙建等率十二将分道并出：五威将军苗、虎贲将军王况出五原；厌难将军陈钦、震狄将军王巡出云中；振武将军王嘉、平狄将军王萌出代郡；相威将军李棽、镇远将军李翁出西河；诛貉将军杨俊、讨濊将军严尤出渔阳；奋武将军王骏、定胡将军王晏出张掖；及偏裨以下百八十人，募天下囚徒、丁男、甲卒三十万人，转输衣裘、兵器、粮食，自负海江、淮至北边，使者驰传督趣，以军兴法从事。
现代文：王莽仗恃国库储藏丰富，打算对匈奴显示国威，于是把匈奴单于改称为 降奴服于 ，下诏派立国将军孙建率领十二位将领，分道并进，讨伐匈奴：五威将军苗、虎贲将军王况从五原出击；厌难将军陈钦、震狄将军王巡从云中出击；振武将军王嘉、平狄将军王萌从代郡出击；相威将军李、镇远将军李翁从西河出击；诛貉将军杨俊、讨将军严尤从渔阳出击；奋武将军王骏、定胡将军王晏从张掖出击。此外，还有偏裨将领一百八十人。募集天下囚犯、成年男子、兵士，共三十万人。转运军服皮衣、兵器和粮食，从沿海、长江、淮河流域到北部边郡，使者乘坐倚车疾行，监督催促，按战时法令行事。
English: Wang Mangcun thought that the national treasury was rich in reserves and planned to show national dignity to the Xiongnu, so he changed the name of the Xiongnu to "Submission to Submission," and sent the founding general Sun Jian, led by twelve generals, to go their separate ways to fight the Xiongnu: Wu Wei general Miao, Tigress general Wang Zhou launched an attack from Wuhan; Tired general Chen Qin, Shendi general Wang Jun launched an attack from the clouds; Zhenwu general Wang Jia, Ping Di general Wang Meng launched an attack from Dai County; Zangwei general Li, Zhenyuan general Li Weng

古文：先至者屯边郡，须毕具乃同时出；穷追匈奴，内之丁令。
现代文：先到达的部队在边郡驻扎，等全部到齐才同时出击。目标是穷追匈奴，直追到丁零部落。
English: The troops that arrived first were stationed in the border county, and waited until they were all in line to attack at the same time. The goal was to pursue the Xiongnu, right up to the Dingzi tribe.

古文：分其国土人民以为十五，立呼韩邪子孙十五人皆为单于。
现代文：把匈奴国土百姓分成十五个部分，物色呼韩邪单于的子孙十五人，全都立为单于。
English: Divide the Hun people into fifteen parts, find the fifteen descendants of Han Han, and all of them will stand alone.

古文：莽以钱币讫不行，复下书曰： 宝货皆重则小用不给，皆轻则僦载烦费；轻重大小各有差品，则用便而民乐。 
现代文：王莽因为钱币一直不流通，又下诏说： 钱币都是大面额，则不能应付小额交易；钱币都是小面额，则运输装载就麻烦费事。轻重大小各有等级，那么使用方便，百姓就欢迎。 
English: Wang Mang, because the coins have not been in circulation, issued another edict saying: If the coins are all large denominations, then small transactions cannot be handled; if the coins are all small denominations, then transportation and loading will be troublesome and costly. Light, heavy and small have different grades, so if it is convenient to use, the people will welcome it.

古文：于是更作金、银、龟、贝、钱、布之品，名曰宝货。
现代文：于是，更铸宝币六种：金币、银币、龟币、贝币、钱币、布币。
English: As a result, six types of treasure coins were minted: gold coins, silver coins, turtle coins, shell coins, money coins and cloth coins.

古文：钱货六品，金货一品，银货二品，龟货四品，贝货五品，布货十品，凡宝货五物、六名、二十八品。
现代文：其中钱币六种，金币一种，银币二种，龟币四种，贝币五种崐，布币十种。总计，货币共有五类、六种名称，二十八个等级。
English: Among them, there are six kinds of coins, one kind of gold coins, two kinds of silver coins, four kinds of turtle coins, five kinds of shell coins, and ten kinds of cloth coins. In total, there are five types of currencies, six names, and 28 grades.

古文：铸作钱布，皆用铜，殽以连、锡。
现代文：钱币、布币都用铜铸作，其中混杂铅锡。
English: Coins and cloth money were all made of copper, mixed with lead and tin.

古文：百姓溃乱，其货不行。
现代文：因为货币的种类太多，百姓生活陷于混乱，货币不能流通。
English: Because there are too many types of money, people's lives are in chaos, and money cannot circulate.

古文：莽知民愁，乃但行小钱直一与大钱五十，二品并行；龟、贝、布属且寝。
现代文：王莽了解人民的怨愁，于是只使用值一钱的小钱和值五十的大钱，两种并行，龟币、贝币、布币暂且停止使用。
English: Wang Mang understood the people's resentment, so he only used small money worth one yuan and big money worth fifty yuan, two kinds of parallel, and temporarily stopped using turtle coins, shellfish coins and cloth coins.

古文：盗铸钱者不可禁，乃重其法，一家铸钱，五家坐之，没入为奴婢。
现代文：私自铸钱的无法禁止，便加重那方面的刑罚，一家铸钱，邻居五家连坐，将这些人送到官府作奴婢。
English: Since it was impossible to prohibit the private minting of money, they increased the punishment for the crime of usury. One family would mint money, and five neighboring families would sit together, confiscating these people to work as slaves in the palace.

古文：吏民出入持钱，以副符传，不持者厨传勿舍，关津苛留。公卿皆持以入宫殿门，欲以重而行之。
现代文：官吏和平民外出要携带钱币作为通行副证，不携带的人，旅舍不允许住宿，关卡和渡口要盘问留难，公卿大臣都要携带它才能进入宫殿大门，想要用这样的办法提高它的身价从而得以流通。
English: Officials and commoners had to carry the coin as a secondary pass when going out. Those who did not carry the coin were not allowed to stay in hostels. They had to be questioned at checkpoints and ferry ports. Noblemen and ministers had to carry it in order to enter the palace gates. They wanted to use this method to increase its value so that it could circulate.

古文：是时百姓便安汉五铢钱，以莽钱大小两行，难知，又数变改，不信，皆私以五铢钱市买；讹言大钱当罢，莫肯挟。
现代文：当时，百姓认为汉五铢钱方便适用，而王莽钱因有大有小，两种钱同时发行，难以分辨，并且不断变化，所以不信任它，都私下用五铢钱在市场上购买商品，并谣传说大钱会废除，没有人肯于挟带。
English: At that time, the people thought that the Han Renminbi was convenient to use, while the Wang Renminbi was difficult to distinguish and constantly changing because it was large and small, and the two kinds of money were issued at the same time, so they did not trust it. They all privately used Renminbi to purchase goods in the market, and the rumor was that the large money would be abolished, and no one was willing to take it.

古文：莽患之，复下书： 诸挟五铢钱、言大钱当罢者，比非井田制，投四裔！ 
现代文：王莽深感烦恼，再下诏书： 凡是挟带五铢钱，说大钱要废除的人，比照 诽谤井田制 罪状，放逐到四方边远地区！ 
English: Wang Mang was deeply troubled, and issued another edict: Anyone who took five yuan in money and said that big money should be abolished should be banished to remote areas in the four directions according to the crime of slandering the well-field system!

古文：及坐卖买田宅、奴婢、铸钱，自诸侯、卿大夫至于庶民，抵罪者不可胜数。
现代文：连同被指控买卖田宅、买卖奴婢、盗铸钱币的人，从封国国君、朝廷官员到平民，犯法的人不计其数。
English: Along with those accused of buying and selling fields and houses, buying and selling slaves, and stealing coins, there are countless people who have broken the law, from feudal lords, imperial officials, and commoners.

古文：于是农商失业，食货俱废，民人至涕泣于市道。
现代文：于是农民、商人失业，全国经济崩溃，百姓甚至在街市道路上哭泣。
English: As a result, farmers and merchants lost their jobs, the financial economy was paralyzed, and people even shed tears in the market and on the highway.

古文：莽之谋篡也，吏民争为符命，皆得封侯。
现代文：王莽篡夺汉王朝政权时，官吏小民争先恐后地呈献符命，都被封侯爵。
English: When Wang Mang usurped the power of the Han Dynasty, officials and commoners scrambled to offer their lives, and were all made marquesses.

古文：其不为者相戏曰： 独无天帝除书乎？ 
现代文：有些没有干这种勾当的人，互相开玩笑说： 你独独没有接到天帝的任命状吗？ 
English: Some people who did not do this kind of work joked with each other, saying, "Didn't you just receive a letter of appointment from the heavenly emperor?

古文：司命陈崇白莽曰： 此开奸臣作福之路而乱天命，宜绝其原。 
现代文：司命陈崇向王莽奏称： 这将为奸臣开辟追求利禄之路，混乱天命，应该断其根源。 
English: Wang Mang said, "This has opened the way for the treacherous vassal to pursue Li Luo, and it has confused the Mandate of Heaven. This root cause should be cut off."

古文：莽亦厌之，遂使尚书大夫赵并验治，非五威将率所班，皆下狱。
现代文：王莽对这些符命也感到厌倦，于是派尚书大夫赵并负责审查，凡不属于五威将帅所颁布的符命，自行制造者一律逮捕入狱。
English: Wang Mang also hated this kind of thing, so he asked Shang Shufu to go and check and deal with it. It was not the fate decreed by Wu Wei, the commander-in-chief, and those who made it were put in prison.

古文：初，甄丰、刘秀、王舜为莽腹心，倡导在位，褒扬功德；安汉、宰衡之号及封莽母、两子、兄子，皆丰等所共谋，而丰、舜、秀亦受其赐，并富贵矣，非复欲令莽居摄也。
现代文：当初，甄丰、刘秀、王舜都是王莽的心腹死党，首先提议让王莽据有高位大权，赞美表彰他的功德。安汉公和宰衡的称号以及赐封王莽的母亲、两个儿子和侄儿，都是甄丰等人所共同策划的，而甄丰、王舜和刘秀也得到恩赐，都名利双收了，没有再想要王莽居位摄政。
English: At the beginning, Zhenfeng, Liu Xiu, and Wang Qi were all Wang Mang's closest confidants. First, they proposed that Wang Mang be given high-ranking power, praising and commending his merits. The titles of Anhan and Zaiheng, as well as the naming of Wang Mang's mother, two sons, and nephew, were all jointly planned by Zhenfeng and others. And Zhenfeng, Wang Qi, and Liu Xiu also received gifts, both fame and profit, and no longer wanted Wang Mang to be the regent.

古文：居摄之萌，出于泉陵侯刘庆、前辉光谢嚣、长安令田终术。
现代文：居位摄政的发端，来自泉陵侯刘庆、前辉光谢嚣和长安令田终术。
English: The origin of the position of regent came from Liu Qing, the lord of Quanling, Xie Guang, and Chang'an Ling Tian.

古文：莽羽翼已成，意欲称摄，丰等承顺其意；莽辄复封舜、秀、丰等子孙以报之。
现代文：王莽的羽毛已经丰满，内心想要代掌政权。甄丰等人顺从他的意图，王莽就再封赏王舜和刘秀的两个儿子以及甄丰的孙子。
English: Wang Mang's feathers were already plump, and his heart wanted to take over the power. Zhenfeng and others obeyed his intention, and Wang Mang then rewarded Wang Yao and Liu Xiu's two sons, as well as Zhenfeng's grandson.

古文：丰等爵位已盛，心意既满，又实畏汉宗室、天下豪桀。
现代文：甄丰等人爵位已经尊显，欲望已经满足，又实在害怕汉朝的皇族和天下豪杰。
English: Zhenfeng and others' titles have been honored, their desires have been satisfied, and they are really afraid of the Han Dynasty imperial family and the world's heroes.

古文：而疏远欲进者并作符命，莽遂据以即真，舜、秀内惧而已。
现代文：而那些王莽疏远的人想要向上爬，纷纷制作符命，王莽就是依靠这些力量正式登上皇位的，王舜和刘秀内心恐惧而已。
English: However, those who Wang Mang had alienated wanted to climb higher, and they made life-signs one after another. Wang Mang relied on these powers to officially ascend to the throne. Wang Yao and Liu Xiu were just afraid inside.

古文：丰素刚强，莽觉其不说，故托符命文，徙丰为更始将军，与卖饼儿王盛同列；丰父子默默。
现代文：甄丰一向刚强，王莽察觉他不高兴，所以假借符命文辞，把他调任更始将军，与卖饼儿王盛处于同等地位。甄丰父子默不吭声。
English: Zhenfeng had always been tough, and Wang Mang sensed that he was not happy, so he used a trick to transfer him to the position of general and put him in the same position as Wang Sheng, the cake seller. Zhenfeng and his son remained silent.

古文：时子寻为侍中、京兆大尹、茂德侯，即作符命：新室当分陕，立二伯，以丰为右伯，太傅平晏为左伯，如周、召故事。
现代文：这时甄丰的儿子甄寻任职侍中、京兆大尹，封爵茂德侯，便制作符命，说新朝应当把京师附近地区以陕县为界分开治理，设立两个地区长官，任命甄丰作右伯，太傅平晏作左伯，仿照周公、召公的成例。
English: At this time, Zhenfeng's son, Zhenxing, who held the posts of chamberlain, grand chamberlain of Beijing, grand chamberlain of Shandong, and grand chamberlain of Shandong, made a written order, saying that the new dynasty should govern the areas around Beijing and Shandong separately, set up two regional governors, and appoint Zhenfeng as the right-hand man, and Taifu Pingyao as the left-hand man, following the examples of Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong.

古文：莽即从之，拜丰为右伯。
现代文：王莽就照着这样办了，授任甄丰作右伯。
English: Wang Mang did as he was told and appointed Zhenfeng as his right-hand man.

古文：当述职西出，未行，寻复作符命，言故汉氏平帝后黄皇室主为寻之妻。
现代文：甄丰正要述职后西行时，还没有动身，甄寻又制作了一道符命，说原汉朝平帝的皇后黄皇室主是甄寻的妻子。
English: She was supposed to travel to the West, but before she left, Zhenxing made another omen, saying that the head of the Huang royal family, the queen of the former Han Dynasty, was Zhenxing's wife.

古文：莽以诈立，心疑大臣怨谤，欲震威以惧下，因是发怒曰： 黄皇室主天下母，此何谓也！ 
现代文：王莽靠骗术登上皇位，心里怀疑大臣怨恨诽谤，正想要显示威严来慑服臣下，因此发怒说： 黄皇室主是ó母，这是什么话！ 
English: Wang Mang ascended the throne by trickery. He was suspicious of the minister's grudge and slander. He was trying to show majesty to deter his subordinates. Therefore, he became angry and said: The head of the Huang royal family is the mother of the country, the wife of the foot searcher, what is this word!

古文：收捕寻。
现代文：便下命令拘捕甄寻。
English: He then ordered the arrest of Yan Xiang.

古文：寻亡，丰自杀。
现代文：甄寻逃跑了，甄丰自杀。
English: Zhenxing ran away and Zhenfeng committed suicide.

古文：寻随方士入华山，岁馀，捕得，辞连国师公秀子侍中、隆威侯棻，棻弟右曹、长水校尉、伐虏侯泳，大司空邑弟左关将军、掌威侯奇，及秀门人侍中、骑都尉丁隆等，牵引公卿党、亲、列侯以下，死者数百人。
现代文：甄寻跟着方士躲进了华山，过了一年多，被捉到了，供词牵涉到国师公刘秀的儿子崐隆威侯刘，刘的弟弟右曹、长水校尉、代虏侯刘泳，大司空王邑的弟弟左关将军、掌威侯王奇，以及刘秀的学生侍中、骑都尉丁隆等人，牵连公卿、亲族、列侯及以下，死的有几百人。
English: Zhenxu followed Fangzhu into Huashan. After more than a year, he was caught. The confessions implicated the son of the national teacher Liu Xiu, Gong Long Wei Hou Liu, Liu's brother Yu Cao, Changshui captain, deputy captain Liu Yong, the brother of the chief commander Kuo Wangyi, Zuo Guan general, and the commander of the troops, Hou Wang Qi, and Liu Xiu's student, chamberlain and cavalry captain Ding Long, among others. They implicated nobles, relatives, vassals, and others. Hundreds of people died.

古文：乃流棻于幽州，放寻于三危，殛隆于羽山，皆驿车载其尸传致云。
现代文：于是把刘流放到幽州，把甄寻驱逐到三危，把丁隆杀死在羽山。死者的尸体都是用驿车装载递送的。
English: As a result, Liu Cai was exiled to Yuzhou, Zhen Xiang was banished to Sanxia, and Ding Long was killed in Hasan. All of them were transported with their dead bodies by train.

古文：是岁，莽始兴神仙事，以方士苏乐言，起八风台，台成万金；又种五粱禾于殿中，先以宝玉渍种，计粟斛成一金。
现代文：本年，王莽开始崇拜神仙，听信方士苏乐的建议，兴建八风台，用费达黄金万两。又在宫殿上种植五色秫粟，播种之前，先用煮玉的水泡养。计算起来，一斛粟米成本要黄金一两。
English: This year, Wang Mang began to worship the gods. Heeding the advice of the philosopher Su Le, he built a eight-wind tower, which cost him ten thousand taels of gold. He also planted five-colored poppies on the palace. Before sowing, he first raised them with the water bubbles of boiled jade. Calculated, the cost of one poppy rice is one or two taels of gold.

古文：王莽中始建国三年
现代文：建国三年
English: Three years after the founding of the country

古文：遣田禾将军赵并发戍卒屯田五原、北假，以助军粮。
现代文：新朝朝廷派田禾将军赵并，征发边防兵士在五原、北假一带，开荒屯垦，补助军粮。
English: The new imperial court sent Tianhe General Zhao Jian to recruit and dispatch frontier soldiers in the Wuhuan and Beifu areas to clear the wasteland and subsidize military rations.

古文：莽遣中郎将蔺苞、副校尉戴级将兵万骑，多赍珍宝至云中塞下，招诱呼韩邪单于诸子，欲以次拜为十五单于。
现代文：王莽派中郎将蔺苞、副校尉戴级率领一万骑兵，携带大量金银财宝前往云中边塞，招致引诱匈奴呼韩邪单于的儿子们，打算依照顺序封他们为十五个单于。
English: Wang Mang sent Zhong Lang to lead ten thousand cavalrymen to Yunzhong Border Town, carrying a large amount of gold, silver and treasure. He invited the sons of Han Ye Shan Yu, who had been lured by the Xiongnu to call Han Ye Shan Yu, and planned to seal them as fifteen Shan Yu in order.

古文：苞、级使译出塞，诱呼右犁汙王咸、咸子登、助三人。
现代文：蔺苞、戴级派翻译出塞，将左犁污王栾提咸，以及栾提咸的儿子栾提登、栾提助等三人，诱骗到云中塞下。
English: Gong and Dai's faction translated and tricked Zuoqiao's king, Jie Tiham, as well as Jie Tiham's sons, Jie Tiden and Jie Ti Jie, and three others, into being imprisoned in the clouds.

古文：至则胁拜咸为孝单于，助为顺单于，皆厚加赏赐；传送助、登长安。
现代文：他们到达后，就用威胁的手段，封栾提咸为孝单于，栾提助为顺单于，都给予厚重的赏赐，用朝廷驿车把栾提登、栾提助送到长安。
English: After their arrival, they used the means of threat to seal 提咸 as 孝单于 and 提助 as 順单于, both of which were given heavy rewards. They used the imperial carriage to take 提登 and 提助 to Chang'an.

古文：莽封苞为宣威公，拜为虎牙将军；封级为扬威公，拜为虎贲将军。
现代文：王莽封蔺苞为宣威公、任命为虎牙将军，封戴级为扬威公、虎贲将军。
English: Wang Mang was also given the title of Xuan Wei Gong and appointed as General Hu Ya; he was also given the title of Yang Wei Gong and appointed as General Hu Ya.

古文：单于闻之，怒曰： 先单于受汉宣帝恩，不可负也。
现代文：匈奴单于栾提知听到上述消息，勃然大怒，说： 先单于受过汉宣帝的恩惠，不能辜负。
English: Hearing the above-mentioned news, the Xiongnu heard the news and was furious, saying: First of all, I have received the grace of Emperor Han Xuan, I cannot live up to it.

古文：今天子非宣帝子孙，何以得立！ 
现代文：现在中国皇帝并不是宣帝子孙，恁什么坐上宝座？ 
English: Now the Chinese emperor is not a descendant of Emperor Xuan, how can he sit on the throne?

古文：遣左骨都侯、右伊秩訾王呼卢訾及左贤王乐将兵入云中益寿塞，大杀吏民。
现代文：于是派左骨都侯、右伊秩訾王栾提呼卢訾、左贤王栾提乐，率军进攻云中郡益寿塞，大肆屠杀中国官吏和平民。
English: He sent soldiers led by Zuo Bin Duhou, Zuo Yizhichun Wang Hulun and Zuo Xian Wang Le to invade Yuzhousi in Yunnan County, killing many officials and civilians.

古文：是后，单于历告左右部都尉、诸边王入塞寇盗，大辈万馀，中辈数千，少者数百，杀雁门、朔方太守、都尉，略吏民畜产，不可胜数，缘边虚耗。
现代文：从这以后，匈奴单于栾提知逐个地告诉左右部都尉、各沿边亲王，侵入中国边塞进行攻掠，规模大时有一万余人，中等规模有数千人，规模小时则数百人。他们击杀雁门太守、朔方太守，及这两郡的都尉，掳掠官吏百姓、牲畜财产，不可胜数，沿边一带郡县空虚衰败。
English: From then on, the Huns told the captains of the left and right divisions and the princes along the border to invade the Chinese border fortress to attack and plunder, with more than 10,000 people on a large scale, thousands of people on a medium scale, and hundreds of people on a small scale. They killed the governor of Ganmen, the governor of Shuo Fang, and the captains of the two counties, and plundered officials, people, livestock and property, which were countless. Counties and counties along the border area were empty and decayed.

古文：是时诸将在边，以大众未集，未敢出击匈奴。
现代文：这时，在北方边塞的各位将军因大军集结没有完成，不敢出击匈奴。
English: At this time, the generals in the northern border fortress did not dare to attack the Xiongnu because the large army had not yet been assembled.

古文：讨濊将军严尤谏曰： 臣闻匈奴为害，所从来久矣，未闻上世有必征之者也。
现代文：讨崐将军严尤上书建议说： 我听说匈奴侵害中国，为时已久，汉有听说上古之世有非征伐不可的事。
English: Yan You, the general in charge of the investigation, suggested in a letter: I have heard that the Xiongnu have been encroaching on China for a long time, and the Han Dynasty has heard that in ancient times there were things that had to be conquered.

古文：后世三家周、秦、汉征之，然皆未有得上策者也。
现代文：后来，周、秦、汉三代王朝才用武力攻击，然而所用的全不是上等策略。
English: The three succeeding dynasties of Zhou, Qin and Mu went to conquer, but no dynasty can be said to have the best strategy.

古文：周得中策，汉得下策，秦无策焉。
现代文：周朝用的是中策，汉朝用的是下策，秦朝则没有策略。
English: It can be said that the Zhou Dynasty got the middle strategy, the Han Dynasty got the bottom strategy, and the Qin Dynasty had no strategy.

古文：当周宣王时，猃狁内侵，至于泾阳；命将征之，尽境而还。
现代文：周宣王时代，猃狁部落侵扰中原，前锋直抵泾阳，周朝命将领征伐，把他们逐出境外，即行班师。
English: In the era of King Zhou Xuan, the Qiang tribe invaded the Central Plains, and the vanguard reached as far as Fenyang. The Zhou Dynasty ordered the generals to invade and drive them out of the country.

古文：其视戎狄之侵，譬犹蚊虻，驱之而已，故天下称明，是为中策。
现代文：宣王看待外族的侵扰，犹如蚊子、虱子，驱赶掉也就算了，所以天下称颂英明，这是中等策略。
English: Xuan Wang regarded the intrusion of foreigners as mosquitoes and lice, and drove them away. Therefore, the world praised the wisdom, which was a medium strategy.

古文：汉武帝选将练兵，约赍轻粮，深入远戍，虽有克获之功，胡辄报之。兵连祸结三十馀年，中国罢耗，匈奴亦创艾，而天下称武，是为下策。
现代文：汉武帝挑选将领，训练军队，携带轻便的装备和粮草，深入遥远的敌人心脏地带，虽然有克敌制胜和获得战利品的功勋，但匈奴反攻，以致兵连祸结三十余年，中国疲惫虚耗，匈奴也受到创伤，从而天下人称之为 武帝 ，这是下等策略。
English: Emperor Hanwu selected generals, trained the army, carried light equipment and grain and grass, and penetrated deep into the distant enemy heartland. Although he had the merit of defeating the enemy and obtaining trophies, the Xiongnu counterattacked, resulting in more than thirty years of continuous misfortune. China was exhausted and exhausted, and the Xiongnu was also traumatized, so people around the world called him Emperor Wu, which was a low-level strategy.

古文：秦始皇不忍小耻而轻民力，筑长城之固，延袤万里，转输之行，起于负海；疆境既完，中国内竭，以丧社稷，是为无策。
现代文：秦始皇忍不住小的耻辱，轻率地浪费民力，修筑长城，坚固结实，长达万里，运输调动，从海滨开始，虽然保持疆界完整，但中国内部枯竭，因而丧失政权，应是没有策略。
English: Qin Shihuang couldn't bear the small humiliation of recklessly squandering the people's strength, building the Great Wall, strong and solid, stretching for thousands of miles, transportation and mobilization, starting from the seashore, although maintaining the integrity of the border, but China's internal depletion, and thus losing power, there should be no strategy.

古文：今天下遭阳九之厄，比年饥馑，西北边尤甚。
现代文：而今，国家正遭受灾荒，连年饥馑，西北边陲，尤其严重。
English: Now, however, the country is suffering from natural disasters and famine year after year, and the situation is particularly serious in the Northwest Frontier Province.

古文：发三十万众，具三百日粮，东援海、代，南取江、淮，然后乃备。
现代文：而朝廷却动员大军三十万人，供给三百天口粮，东方搜刮到海滨、贷山，南方搜刮到长江、淮河，然后才齐备。
English: The imperial court, on the other hand, mobilized an army of 300,000 people and supplied 300 days of rations. In the east, they searched as far as the seashore and Lianshan; in the south, they searched as far as the Yangtze River and the Huai River. Only then were they fully prepared.

古文：计其道里，一年尚未集合，兵先至者聚居暴露，师老械弊，势不可用，此一难也。
现代文：计算道路，大军一年都还不能集合。先到边塞的军队聚居在露天，士气已衰，武器已钝，在气势上已不可以作战，这是困难之一。
English: Consider the distance to be covered, the fact that it will take a year to assemble the troops, the fact that the first troops to arrive are huddled together and exposed in the open, the fact that the troops are exhausted, the guns are damaged, and they must have no combat effectiveness and cannot be used again. This is the first difficulty.

古文：边既空虚，不能奉军粮，内调郡国，不相及属，此二难也。
现代文：边塞既然已经空虚，无法供应粮秣，从内地各郡各封国征集运送，又相互接续不上，这是困难之二。
English: The second difficulty is that the frontiers are already quite empty and cannot supply war food, and the provinces and counties in the interior are requisitioned and cannot supply it.

古文：计一人三百日食，用Я十八斛，非牛力不能胜；牛又当自赍食，加二十斛，重矣。
现代文：总计一个士兵三百天所用干粮，就要十八斛，不用牛力运输，是不能胜任的。而牛本身也要饲养，再加二十斛，负担就更重了。
English: The total amount of dry grain used by a soldier for three hundred days is eighteen mule loads, which cannot be transported without oxen, and the oxen themselves must be raised, plus twenty mule loads, the burden is even heavier.

古文：胡地沙卤，多乏水草，以往事揆之，军出未满百日，牛必物故且尽，馀粮尚多，人不能负，此三难也。
现代文：匈奴境内，都是沙漠碱地，大多缺乏水草，拿往事揣度，大军出发不满一百天，牛一定几乎全部倒毙，剩下的粮秣还很多，士兵却无法携带，这是困难之三。
English: In the territory of the Xiongnu, it is all desert and alkaline land, mostly lacking water and grass, taking the past into account, the great army set out less than a hundred days, the cattle must have almost all died, there is still a lot of grain remaining, but the soldiers cannot carry it, this is the third difficulty.

古文：胡地秋冬甚寒，春夏甚风，多赍釜鍑、薪炭，重不可胜，食Я饮水，以历四时，师有疾疫之忧，是故前世伐胡不过百日，非不欲久，势力不能，此四难也。
现代文：匈奴地区秋冬之季天气苦寒，而春夏又有大风，军队要多带炊具、木柴、炭火，重得几乎搬运不动。吃干粮饮水，经历一年四季，军队里会有发生疾病瘟疫的忧虑。因此从前讨伐匈奴的军事行动不超过一百天，并不是不想持久，而是力量不够，这是困难之四。
English: In the autumn and winter, the weather in the Hunnu region is bitterly cold, and in the spring and summer there are strong winds. The army needs to bring more cooking utensils, firewood, and charcoal, which is so heavy that it can hardly be carried. Eating dry food and drinking water, experiencing the four seasons of the year, the army will be worried about the occurrence of diseases and plagues. Therefore, the military operations to fight the Huns in the past did not exceed one hundred days, not because they did not want to last, but because they did not have enough strength. This is the fourth difficulty.

古文：辎重自随，则轻锐者少，不得疾行，虏徐遁逃，势不能及。
现代文：大军自己携带物资补给品，则轻装的精锐部队很少，不能快速推进，即使敌人慢慢撤退，也无法追及。
English: Large armies carry their own supplies, while lightly armed elite troops are few and cannot advance quickly. Even if the enemy retreats slowly, they will not be able to catch up.

古文：幸而逢虏，又累辎重；如遇险阻，衔尾相随，虏要遮前后，危殆不测，此五难也。
现代文：幸而追及，又被物资等拖累。如果遇到险要而难于通行的地方，大军鱼贯而进，后面马头紧接前面马尾，敌人前后夹攻，危险不能测度，这是困难之五。
English: If you encounter a place that is dangerous and difficult to pass, a large army of fish will advance, the horse's head behind will follow the horse's tail in front, the enemy will attack back and forth, and the danger cannot be measured, this is the fifth difficulty.

古文：大用民力，功不可必立，臣伏忧之。
现代文：大量使用民力，功业又未必能够建立，所以我深深地忧虑！
English: I am very worried that the military exploits of defeating the Huns will not necessarily be able to be obtained through the large-scale requisition of people.

古文：今既发兵，宜纵先至者，令臣尤等深入霆击，且以创艾胡虏。 
现代文：而今既然已经征调军队，应该让先到边塞的部队发动攻击。命令臣严尤等深入敌境，以雷霆万钧之势进击，给匈奴一个重创。 
English: Now that the imperial court has dispatched troops, it should let the first arriving troops attack, let me and other generals lead the troops deep into the Huns, quickly attack them, and cause the Huns to suffer losses and injuries.

古文：莽不听尤言，转兵谷如故，天下骚动。
现代文：王莽不听严尤的建议，如同从前一样，把战士跟粮秣输往边塞，于是天下动乱不安。
English: Wang Mang did not listen to Yan You's suggestion, but still sent troops to transport grain as he did in the beginning. As a result, the whole country was thrown into chaos.

古文：咸既受莽孝单于之号，驰出塞归庭，具以见胁状白单于；单于更以为于粟置支侯，匈奴贱官也。
现代文：栾提咸被王莽封为孝单于以后，纵马飞驰出边塞，回归匈奴王庭，向单于栾提知报告了自己被胁迫的经过。栾提知单于改封他为于栗置支侯，这是匈奴低贱的官称。
English: After King Mang granted the title of filial vassal to Thich Nhat Hanh, Zongma galloped out of the frontier fortress and returned to the Hun royal court, where he reported to Thich Nhat Hanh how he had been coerced. Thich Nhat Hanh changed his title to Thich Nhat Hanh, which is a low official title of the Huns.

古文：后助病死，莽以登代助为顺单于。
现代文：后来，被王莽封为顺单于的栾提助去世，王莽让栾提登接替他成为顺单于。
English: Later, Haman's son Suke died of illness, and Wang Mang let his other son Deng replace Suke as Shunlan Wang.

古文：吏士屯边者所在放纵，而内郡愁于征发，民弃城郭，始流亡为盗贼，并州、平州尤甚。
现代文：驻扎在边塞的部队在当地放纵扰民，而内地各郡因征兵催税，苛刻迫急，百姓不堪愁苦，纷纷抛弃家园，开始流浪逃亡，成为盗贼，并州、平州尤其严重。
English: The troops stationed at the border fortress indulged in disturbing the local people, while the counties in the mainland were harsh and urgent due to conscription and tax collection, and the people were so distressed that they abandoned their homes one after another, began to wander and flee, and became thieves, and the situation was particularly serious in Zhoushu and Pingzhou.

古文：莽令七公、六卿号皆兼称将军，遣著武将军逯并等镇名都，中郎将、绣衣执法各五十五人，分镇缘边大郡，督大奸猾擅弄兵者。
现代文：王莽下令七公、六卿都兼任将军，派著武将军逯并等，镇守各大名城；另派中郎将、绣衣执法各五十五人，分别镇守沿边大郡，监察擅动干戈兴兵作乱的刁徒。
English: Wang Mang ordered the seven princes and six nobles to be concurrently appointed as generals, and sent military generals and the like to guard the major cities; in addition, he sent fifty-five middle-ranking officers and embroidered law enforcement officers respectively to guard the towns along the border counties and monitor the rioters who arbitrarily engaged in armed conflicts.

古文：皆乘便为奸于外，桡乱州郡，货赂为市，侵渔百姓。
现代文：而这些人都利用镇守之便在外地干坏事，扰乱州郡，行贿受贿像做买卖一样，掠夺百姓的财物。
English: And these people all use the town guard to do bad things in other places, disrupt the state and county, give and take bribes as if they were doing business, and plunder the people's property.

古文：莽下书切责之曰： 自今以来，敢犯此者，辄捕系，以名闻！ 
现代文：王莽下诏书严厉斥责： 自今以后，胆敢再犯这类罪行的，就逮捕监禁，把名字报上来。 
English: Wang Mang issued a stern reprimand: From now on, if you dare to commit such crimes again, you will be arrested and imprisoned, and your name will be reported.

古文：然犹放纵自若。
现代文：然而还是照样胡作非为。
English: However, he still misbehaved.

古文：北边自宣帝以来，数世不见烟火之警，人民炽盛，牛马布野；及莽桡乱匈奴，与之构难，边民死亡系获，数年之间，北边虚空，野有暴骨矣。
现代文：中国北部边疆，自从汉宣帝以来，百姓已数代看不见烽火的警报，人口繁殖，牛马遍野。及至王莽扰乱匈奴，与匈奴结成仇怨，沿边百姓或死亡，或被俘虏，几年之间，北方边疆一片荒凉，野外有无人掩埋的白骨。
English: In the northern frontier of China, since Emperor Han Xuan, the people have been unable to see the warning of bonfires for several generations, the population has multiplied, the cattle and horses have spread all over the field. And even if Wang Mang disturbs the Xiongnu and forms a grudge with the Xiongnu, the people along the border will either die or be captured. In a few years, the northern frontier is desolate, and there are white bones buried in the field.

古文：太师王舜自莽篡位后，病悸浸剧，死。
现代文：太师王舜自王莽篡夺皇位后，得了心悸病，渐渐加剧，终于病故。
English: After Wang Mang usurped the throne, Grand Master Wang Yao became ill with heart palpitations, which gradually worsened and eventually led to his death.

古文：莽为太子置师、友各四人，秩以大夫。
现代文：王莽为太子设置师、友各四人，俸禄按照大夫发给。
English: Wang Mang set up four teachers and four friends for the prince, and the salary was paid according to the doctor.

古文：以故大司徒马宫等为师疑、傅丞、阿辅、保拂，是为四师；故尚书令唐林等为胥附、奔走、先后、御侮，是为四友。
现代文：任命前大司徒马宫等，分别担任师疑、傅丞、阿辅、保拂，称为四师。任命前尚书令唐林等分别为胥附、奔走、先后、御侮，称为四友。
English: Former Grand Master Tu Ma Gong and others were appointed to serve as teacher-suspect, Fu Zheng, aide-de-camp, and bodyguard, respectively, and were called the four divisions. Former Grand Master Shang Shuling Tanglin and others were appointed to serve as aide-de-camp, aide-de-camp, successively, and insult, respectively, and were called the four friends.

古文：又置师友、侍中、谏议、《六经》祭酒各一人，凡九祭酒，秩皆上卿。
现代文：又设置师友祭酒、侍中祭酒、谏议祭酒，以及《六经》祭酒各一人，共九个祭酒，俸禄按照上卿发给。
English: In addition, there will be one person each of the master's and friend's offering, the attendant's offering, the eulogy offering, and the "Six Classics" offering, for a total of nine offerings, and the salary will be distributed according to the nobility.

古文：遣使者奉玺书、印绶、安车、驷马迎龚胜，即拜为师友祭酒。
现代文：王莽派使者带着诏书、印信，驾着四匹马的安车去接龚胜，在龚胜家拜授他为师友祭酒。
English: Wang Mang sent an envoy with an imperial edict and a seal letter, driving a four-horse carriage to pick up Xuan Sheng, and offered him sacrificial wine as a teacher and friend at Xuan Sheng's home.

古文：使者与郡太守、县长吏、三老、官属、行义、诸生千人以上入胜里致诏。
现代文：使者与郡太守、县府高级官员、三老、郡县属官、行义、学生千人以上，到龚胜所住的街巷宣读诏书。
English: The envoy and more than a thousand people, including the county governor, senior prefectural officials, elders, county officials, practitioners, and students, went to the streets and lanes where He Sheng lived to read the imperial edict.

古文：使者欲令胜起迎，久立门外。
现代文：使者打算让龚胜站起来迎接，长久地站在门外。
English: The messenger intends to make the winner stand up and greet him, standing outside the door for a long time.

古文：胜称病笃，为床室中户西、南牖下，东首加朝服拖绅。
现代文：龚胜声称病情严重，把床放到卧室门西侧、南窗之下，头向东方，穿上官服。
English: Hao Sheng claimed to be seriously ill, put the bed on the west side of the bedroom door, under the south window, head to the east, and put on the official uniform.

古文：使者付玺书，奉印绶，内安车、驷马，进谓胜曰： 圣朝未尝忘君，制作未定，待君为政；思闻所欲施行，以安海内。 
现代文：使者把皇帝诏书、印信交给他，把四匹马驾的安车拉到院子里，向龚胜致意说： 圣明的新朝未曾忘记先生。制度的厘订还没有完成，等待先生主持。想听到您的治国之道以安定天下。 
English: The messenger handed him the emperor's imperial rescript and seal letter, pulled the four-horse-drawn carriage into the courtyard, and said to Xuan Sheng: "The Holy Ming Dynasty has not forgotten you. The system has not yet been finalized, waiting for you to preside. I want to hear your way of governing the country to stabilize the world."

古文：胜对曰： 素愚，加以年老被病，命在朝夕，随使君上道，必死道路，无益万分！ 
现代文：龚胜回答： 我向来愚昧，加上年纪老迈，而又身染重病，命在旦夕，如果随阁下上道，一定死在途中，实在是极端无益！ 
English: Xuan Sheng replied: I have always been stupid, coupled with old age, and I am seriously ill, my life is at stake, if I follow your path, I will surely die on the way, it is really extremely useless!

古文：使者要说，至以印绶就加胜身；胜辄推不受。
现代文：使者要挟劝说，甚至要把印信佩戴到他身上，龚胜却总是推辞。
English: The messenger tried to persuade him, even asking him to wear the seal on his body, but he always refused.

古文：使者上言： 方盛夏暑热，胜病少气，可须秋凉乃发。 
现代文：使者只好奏报： 现在正值盛夏，天气酷热，龚胜有病，缺少气力，是不是可以等到秋季凉爽时再动身？ 
English: The envoy had no choice but to report: Now it is the height of summer, the weather is extremely hot, the empress is ill and lacks strength. Can we wait until the autumn when it is cooler before setting off?

古文：有诏许之。
现代文：王莽下诏允许。
English: Permitted by imperial decree.

古文：使者五日壹与太守俱问起居，为胜两子及门人高晖等言： 朝廷虚心待君以茅土之封，虽疾病，宜动移至传舍，示有行意；必为子孙遗大业。 
现代文：使者每隔五天，就与郡太守一同去问候龚胜起居，并告诉龚胜的两个儿子和学生高晖等说： 朝廷这么虚心地用爵位封地等待龚先生，他虽然身患疾病，但应该移住在驿站官舍，表示有应征进京的意思，这样做必将为子孙留下巨大的家产。 
English: Every five days, the emissary would go with the county daimyō to greet Geng Sheng, and tell Geng Sheng's two sons and his student Gao Qi, "The imperial court is so humbly waiting for Mr. Geng with a peerage and fiefdom. Although he is ill, he should move to the official residence of the station, indicating that he intends to enlist in Beijing. Doing so will surely leave a huge family property for his children and grandchildren."

古文：晖等白使者语，胜自知不见听，即谓晖等： 吾受汉家厚恩，无以报；今年老矣，旦暮入地，谊岂以一身事二姓，下见故主哉！ 
现代文：高晖等人把使者的话转告龚胜，龚胜自己知道推辞没有用，便对高晖等人说： 我接受汉朝的厚恩，无法报答，而今年已衰老，随时都会埋入地下，从道义出发，岂可以一身而侍奉两姓君王？在地下如何面对故主？ 
English: Gao Xuan and others relayed the words of the messenger to Xuan Sheng. Xuan Sheng himself knew that excuses were useless, so he said to Gao Xuan and others: I accept the kindness of the Han Dynasty, I can't repay it, and I am old this year, I will be buried underground at any time. From a moral point of view, can I serve two kings? How should I face the old lord underground?

古文：胜因敕以棺敛丧事： 衣周于身，棺周于衣。
现代文：龚胜于是吩咐他们准备后事，说： 衣服只要能包住身体就够了，棺材只要能包住衣服就够了。
English: So Hao Sheng ordered his sons and grandsons to prepare a coffin and other funeral matters for him, saying: "When I die, I want my clothes not to be exposed, and my coffin not to be exposed.

古文：勿随俗动吾冢、种柏、作祠堂！ 
现代文：不要随时下流行的风俗一样，在墓上动土，种植松柏，建立祠堂！ 
English: Don't follow the popular custom of digging up graves, planting conifers, and building ancestral halls!

古文：语毕，遂不复开口饮食，积十四日死。死时，七十九矣。
现代文：说完，就不再喝水吃饭，历时十四日而死，终年七十九岁。
English: And when he had said these things, he neither ate nor drank, and he died after fourteen days, being seventy-nine years old.

古文：是时清名之士，又有琅邪纪逡，齐薛方，太原旬阝越、郇相，沛唐林、唐尊，皆以明经饬行显名于世。
现代文：这时有名望的人士，还有琅邪人纪逡、齐人薛方、太原人郇越和郇相、沛人唐林和唐尊，都以深明儒家经典，行为谨慎端正而闻名当世。
English: At this time, famous people, as well as the evil person Ji Jun, Qi person Xue Fang, Taiyuan person Gong Yue and Gong Xiang, Pei person Tanglin and Tang Zun, are all famous for their profound Confucian classics and prudent behavior.

古文：纪逡、两唐皆仕莽，封侯，贵重，历公卿位。
现代文：纪逡、唐林、唐尊，都在新朝作官，被封侯爵，受到重视，得以尊贵，历任公卿。
English: Ji Lan, Tang Lin, and Tang Zun all served as officials in the new dynasty, were made marquesses, received attention, were honored, and successively served as court nobles.

古文：唐林数上疏谏正，有忠直节。
现代文：唐林多次上书规劝，纠正过失，有忠诚正直的品质。
English: Lu Zheng had written many times about being a quiet, loyal and upright person.

古文：唐尊衣敝、履空，被虚伪名。
现代文：唐尊则身着破衣服，脚穿磨出洞的鞋子，假冒俭朴，享受虚名。
English: Tang Zun is dressed in tattered clothes, wearing shoes with holes in the soles, pretending to be frugal and enjoying false fame.

古文：旬阝相为莽太子四友，病死，莽太子遣使裞以衣衾，其子攀棺不听，曰： 死父遗言： 师友之送，勿有所受。 
现代文：郇相是王莽太子王临的四友之一，去世后，王临派人赠送随葬的衣被，郇相的儿子手攀棺木拒绝，说： 死去的父亲留下遗言： 对师友们的馈赠，不可接受。 
English: Yu Xiang was one of the four friends of Wang Mang Prince Wang Lin. After his death, Wang Lin sent someone to give away the burial quilt. Yu Xiang's son refused to hand-climb the coffin, saying: The dead father left a last word: Gifts to teachers and friends are unacceptable.

古文：今于皇太子得托友官，故不受也。 
现代文：而今，皇太子自称是我父亲的朋友，所以不能接受。 
English: Now, the crown prince claims to be my father's friend, which is unacceptable.

古文：京师称之。
现代文：京师的人称道此事。
English: All the masters in Beijing praised him.

古文：莽以安车迎薛方，方因使者辞谢曰： 尧、舜在上，下有巢、由。
现代文：王莽派安车去接薛方，薛方通过使者推辞说崐： 唐尧、虞舜在上，民间准许有巢父、许由。
English: Wang Mang sent an ambulance to pick up Xue Fang. Xue Fang said through the emissary's excuse: Tang Yao and Yu Yao are on the top, the people are allowed to have a nester and Xu Yu.

古文：今明主方隆唐、虞之德，小臣欲守箕山之节。 
现代文：而今，圣明的主上正在尊崇唐尧、虞舜的美德，小臣我愿像许由隐居箕山一样，不再入世。 
English: But now, the Lord of the Sacred Light is honoring the virtues of Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan. I would like to live in seclusion in Shaoshan, like Xu Yu, and no longer enter the world.

古文：使者以闻。莽说其言，不强致。
现代文：使者奏报，王莽喜欢听这番话，不再勉强。
English: Wang Meng likes to listen to this speech, no longer reluctantly.

古文：初，隃糜郭钦为南郡太守，杜陵蒋诩为兗州刺史，亦以廉直为名。
现代文：当初，麋人郭钦任南郡太守，杜陵人蒋诩任兖州刺史，都以廉洁正直闻名。
English: At the beginning, Guo Qin of Xing served as the governor of Nan County, and Chiang Kai-shek of Duling served as the governor of Zhangzhou, both of whom were known for their integrity.

古文：莽居摄，钦、诩皆以病免官，归乡里，卧不出户，卒于家。
现代文：王莽暂居皇位处理政务时，二人都以患病为由被免去官职，回到故乡，躺着闭门不出，在家去世。
English: When Wang Mang temporarily stayed on the throne to deal with government affairs, both of them were removed from their official posts on the grounds of illness, returned to their hometown, lay down behind closed doors, and died at home.

古文：哀、平之际，沛国陈咸以律令为尚书。
现代文：哀帝、平帝在位期间，沛郡人陈咸由于通晓律令，担任尚书。
English: During the reigns of Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping, Chen Xian, a native of Pei County, served as Shangshu due to his knowledge of the Ritsuryo Code.

古文：莽辅政，多改汉制，咸心非之；及何武、鲍宣死，咸叹曰： 《易》称 见几而作，不俟终日。 
现代文：王莽辅政，大量更改汉朝制度，陈咸心里反对。到何武、鲍宣被诛杀，陈咸叹息说： 《易经》说： 看破事机的变化，果断行动，不要整天迟疑等待。 
English: When He Wu and Bao Xuan were killed, Chen Xian sighed and said: "Yijing" said: "Detect the change of circumstances, act decisively, do not hesitate to wait all day."

古文：吾可以逝矣。 
现代文：我可以走了。 
English: I'm good to go.

古文：即乞骸骨去职。
现代文：便请求退休去职。
English: He immediately asked to be relieved of duty and left.

古文：及莽篡位，召咸为掌寇大夫；咸谢病不肯应。
现代文：等到王莽篡夺帝位，征召陈咸当掌寇大夫，陈咸声称有病不肯接受。
English: When Wang Mang usurped the imperial throne and summoned Chen Xian to be the head of the band of robbers, Chen Xian refused to accept, claiming that he was ill.

古文：时三子参、钦、丰皆在位，咸悉令解官归乡里，闭门不出入，犹用汉家祖腊。
现代文：当时，他的三个儿子陈参、陈钦、陈丰都在当官，陈咸教他们全都辞职回家，闭门不出，不跟外界来往。
English: At that time, his three sons, Chen Sanwu, Chen Qin, and Chen Feng, were all officials. Chen Xian taught them all to resign and go home, not to go out, and not to interact with the outside world.

古文：人问其故，咸曰： 我先人岂知王氏腊乎！ 
现代文：祭路神和年终祭众神，仍用汉朝规定的日子。人们问他这样做的缘故，陈咸说： 我祖先难道知道王氏祭祀的日子吗？ 
English: The days set by the Han Dynasty were still used to worship the god of the road and the gods of the year-end festival. When people asked him why he did this, Chen Xian said: Did my ancestors know the days of the Wang family's sacrifice?

古文：悉收敛其家律令、书文，壁藏之。
现代文：他把家中所有有关法令的书籍都收敛起来，藏到墙壁之中。
English: He gathered up all the law books in his house and hid them in the walls.

古文：又，齐栗融、北海禽庆、苏章、山阳曹竟，皆儒生，去官，不仕于莽。
现代文：另有齐郡人栗融，北海郡人禽庆、苏章，山阳人曹竟，都是儒生，辞去官位，不在王莽新朝任职。
English: In addition, the people of Qi County, Li Rong, the people of Beihai County, Yu Qing, Su Zhang, and the people of Shanyang, Cao Qing, were all Confucian scholars, resigned their official positions, and did not serve in Wang Mang's new dynasty.

古文：班固赞曰：春秋列国卿大夫及至汉兴将相名臣，怀禄耽宠以失其世者多矣，是故清节之士，于是为贵；然大率多能自治而不能治人。
现代文：班固赞曰：从春秋时代各封国卿、大夫，到汉朝的将军、丞相、名臣，为了保护自己的荣华富贵而丧失立身处世原则的人多了。因此，节操纯洁的人士至为可贵。然而，大多数只能约束自己，不能影响别人。
English: Ban Guzan said: From the Spring and Autumn Period's secretaries of state and doctors to the Han Dynasty's generals, prime ministers, and eminent courtiers, there are many people who have lost the principle of standing up for themselves in order to protect their glory and wealth. Therefore, those who are chaste and pure are most valuable. However, most can only restrain themselves and cannot influence others.

古文：王、贡之材，优于龚、鲍。
现代文：王商、贡禹的才能，强于龚胜、鲍宣。
English: Talents like Wang Ji and Gong Yu are far superior to Gong Sheng, Yao She and Bao Xuan.

古文：守死善道，胜实蹈焉。
现代文：但以死来坚持原则，龚胜付出了实际行动。
English: By following the virtuous path until death, He Sheng truly practiced the way of a saint.

古文：贞而不谅，薛方近之。郭钦、蒋诩，好遁不污，绝纪、唐矣。
现代文：薛方的行迹相近于用诡诈言语达到忠贞目的，郭钦、蒋诩，逃出污秽，与纪逡、唐林、唐遵完全不同。
English: Xue Fang's deeds are similar to using deceitful words to achieve the purpose of loyalty, Guo Qin and Jiang Qi escaped from the filth, and are completely different from Ji Yu, Tang Lin and Tang Zun.

古文：是岁，濒河郡蝗生。
现代文：本年，濒临黄河的各郡，发生蝗虫灾害。
English: This year, locust plagues have occurred in counties along the Yellow River.

古文：河决魏郡，泛清河以东数郡。
现代文：黄河在魏郡决口，在清河以东数郡泛滥成灾。
English: The Yellow River burst its banks in Wei County, flooding Qinghe County and several counties.

古文：先是，莽恐河决为元城冢墓害；及决东去，元城不忧水，故遂不堤塞。
现代文：最初，王莽害怕黄河决口淹没元城王姓皇族祖宗坟墓，及至黄河决口向东泛滥，元城没有水患，所以决定不堵塞河堤。
English: At first, Wang Meng was afraid that the mouth of the Yellow River would flood the tombs of the ancestors of the kings of Yuancheng, and when the mouth of the Yellow River flooded to the east, there was no flood in Yuancheng, so he decided not to block the river embankment.

古文：王莽中始建国四年
现代文：建国四年
English: Four years after the founding of the country

古文：厌难将军陈钦、震狄将军王巡上言： 捕得虏生口验问，言虏犯边者皆孝单于咸子角所为。 
现代文：厌难将军陈钦、震狄将军王巡上书说： 在边塞捕得匈奴人审问，供称匈奴屡次侵犯边塞，都是孝单于栾提咸的儿子栾提角所为。 
English: General Chen Qin and General Wang Quanzhang wrote: The Huns captured at the border fortress were interrogated and confessed that the Huns repeatedly violated the border fortress, all of which were committed by Xiaodan Yu, the son of Han Tihan.

古文：莽乃会诸夷，斩咸子登于长安市。
现代文：王莽于是召集各族驻在京师的使节，在长安的街市上把栾提咸的儿子栾提登斩首。
English: Wang Mang then summoned the envoys of all ethnic groups stationed in Beijing and beheaded the son of Tuti Xian, Tuti Deng, in the streets of Chang'an.

古文：大司马甄邯死。
现代文：大司马甄邯去世。
English: Senior Secretary Ma Zhenyao passed away.

古文：莽至明堂，下书： 以洛阳为东都，常安为西都。
现代文：王莽到明堂下诏： 把洛阳定为东都，常安定为西都。
English: Wang Mang went to the Ming Hall to issue an edict: to designate Luoyang as the eastern capital, and Chang'an as the western capital.

古文：邦畿连体，各有采、任。
现代文：国家疆域联合一体，男女各有封地。
English: The national territory was unified, and men and women had their own fiefdoms.

古文：州从《禹贡》为九；爵从周氏为五。
现代文：遵从《禹贡》的记载，全国划为九州。
English: According to the records of "Yugon," the whole country was divided into Kyushu.

古文：诸侯之员千有八百，附城之数亦如之，以俟有功。
现代文：依照周王朝制度，分为五等爵位，共一千八百个封国，附城的数量也是如此，以等待有功之士。
English: The number of lordships was set at eighteen hundred, and the number of townships was set at the same level as the number of lordships, with the expectation that meritorious people would receive these titles.

古文：诸公一同，有众万户；其馀以是为差。
现代文：凡是公爵，一律平等，封一万户人家。其他爵位，由此等差而下。
English: All dukes are equal, and are entitled to ten thousand households. All other titles of nobility descend from this.

古文：今已受封者，公侯以下凡七百九十六人，附城千五百一十一人。 
现代文：现在已经受封的，公侯及以下共七百九十六人，附城一千五百五十一人。
English: There are now a total of 796 dukes and dukes-in-waiting, and 1,551 dukes and dukes-in-waiting.

古文：以图簿未定，未授国邑，且令受奉都内，月钱数千。
现代文：只因户籍地簿还没有调查测量完竣，没有授予封地。所以暂且让他们向属于大司农的都内专领薪俸，每月钱数千。 
English: Since the map and household registration have not yet been planned and the land has not been granted, let them receive their salaries at the Beijing Municipal Government for the time being, and give them a few thousand dollars a month.

古文：诸侯皆困乏，至有佣作者。
现代文：诸侯都贫困，有的甚至受雇为人做工。
English: All the lords were poor, and some were even employed as labourers.

古文：莽性躁扰，不能无为，每有所兴造，动欲慕古，不度时宜，制度又不定；吏缘为奸，天下謷謷，陷刑者众。
现代文：王莽性格浮躁，不能安静下来，每干一件事情，总想模拟古代，不管是否适合现实社会。而制度始终未能确定，贪官污吏乘机为非作歹，天下一片悲愁，被处以刑罚的人很多。
English: Wang Mang is impetuous, cannot calm down, always wants to imitate ancient times in everything he does, regardless of whether it is suitable for the real world. And the system has never been determined, corrupt officials take the opportunity to commit crimes, the world is full of sadness, and there are many people who have been punished.

古文：莽知民愁怨，乃下诏： 诸食王田，皆得卖之，勿拘以法。
现代文：王莽知道老百姓忧愁怨恨，于是下诏： 凡是持有国家土地的，都可以自由变卖，不受法律限制。
English: Wang Mang knew that the people were sad and resentful, so he issued an edict: Anyone who holds state land can sell it freely, without legal restrictions.

古文：犯私买卖庶人者，且一切勿治。 
现代文：犯法私自买卖平民的，暂且都不处罚。 
English: For the time being, no one will be prosecuted for violating the ban on the private sale and purchase of civilians.

古文：然它政悖乱，刑罚深刻，赋敛重数，犹如故焉。
现代文：然而，其他政令荒谬混乱，刑罚残酷，捐税沉重而频繁，则依然如故。
English: However, other decrees are absurdly chaotic, punishments are cruel, and taxes are heavy and frequent.

古文：初，五威将帅出西南夷，改句町王为侯，王邯怨怒不附。
现代文：当初，五威将帅去西南夷，把句町王改为侯，句町王邯怨恨愤怒，不愿服从。
English: At first, Wu Wei sent his general to Xuanxiyi and changed the title of the town's king to marquis. The town's king was resentful and angry and did not want to obey.

古文：莽讽牂柯大尹周歆诈杀邯。
现代文：王莽示意柯郡大尹周歆采用欺骗手段杀死了邯。
English: Wang Mang gestured to Fat Ke County Mayor Yin Zhou to use deception to kill Zou.

古文：邯弟承起兵杀歆，州郡击之，不能服。
现代文：邯的弟弟承起兵杀死周歆。州郡官府发兵讨伐，不能征服。
English: Zou's younger brother, Cheng, raised an army to kill Zhou. The state and county government sent troops to fight, but they could not conquer.

古文：莽又发高句骊兵击匈奴；高句骊不欲行，郡强迫之，皆亡出塞，因犯法为寇。
现代文：王莽又调动高句丽的军队进攻匈奴，高句丽人不想去，受到郡府强迫，就都逃出边界。于是触犯法律，抢劫杀人。
English: Wang Mang also mobilized the army of Goguryeo to attack the Xiongnu. The Goguryeo people did not want to go and were forced by the county government to flee the border. So they broke the law, robbed and killed.

古文：辽西大尹田谭追击之，为所杀。
现代文：辽西郡大尹田谭追击他们，被他们杀死了。
English: Liaoxi County Mayor Yin Tian Tan chased them and was killed by them.

古文：州郡归咎于高句骊侯驺，严尤奏言： 貉人犯法，不从驺起；正有它心，宜令州郡且尉安之。
现代文：州郡长官把罪责归在高句丽侯驺的身上，严尤报告说： 貉人犯法，不是从驺起始的，即使他们有别的用心，应当命令州郡权且安抚他们。
English: The prefect of the prefecture put the blame on Goguryeo Houjun, and Yan Yu reported: "The perpetrators of the crime did not start from the prefecture, even if they had other intentions, they should order the prefecture and pacify them.

古文：今猥被以大罪，恐其遂畔，夫馀之属必有和者。
现代文：现在滥加重大罪名，恐怕他们会因此叛乱，而夫馀等部族一定会有附和的。
English: Now they are adding more serious charges, and I'm afraid that they will rebel, and the remaining tribes will certainly follow suit.

古文：匈奴未克，夫馀、濊貉复起，此大忧也。 
现代文：匈奴汉有打败，夫馀和秽貉又起来，这是大忧患啊！ 
English: The Xiongnu and Han have been defeated, and the riff-raff and scum have risen again. This is a great sorrow!

古文：莽不尉安，濊貉遂反；诏尤击之。
现代文：王莽不加安抚，秽貉于是反叛。王莽下诏命严尤进击。
English: Wang Mang refused to be appeased, and therefore rebelled. Wang Mang ordered a special attack.

古文：尤诱高句骊侯驺至而斩焉，传首长安。
现代文：严尤引诱高句丽侯驺到来而把他杀了，传递首级到长安。
English: Yan You lured Gao Guo to come and killed him, passing the head to Chang'an.

古文：莽大说，下书更名高句骊为下句骊。
现代文：王莽非常高兴，把高句丽改名为下句骊。
English: Wang Mang was very happy and changed the name of Goguryeo to the next sentence.

古文：于是貉人愈犯边，东、北与西南夷皆乱。
现代文：于是貉人更加侵犯边境，东部、北部和西南的各蛮夷族都乱起来了。
English: As a result, the Xiongnu further encroached on the border, and the barbarian tribes in the east, north, and southwest became disorderly.

古文：莽志方盛，以为四夷不足吞灭，专念稽古之事，复下书： 以此年二月东巡狩，具礼仪调度。 
现代文：王莽正在志得意满，认为四方蛮夷各族用不着费多大力气就能够加以吞并、消灭，一心想查考古代的作法加以仿效，又下诏书说： 在本年二月，我要到东方巡行视察，有关部门要把礼仪程序开列出来。 
English: Wang Mang was full of pride, believing that the barbarians of all ethnic groups in the four directions could be absorbed and eliminated without much effort. He was eager to investigate ancient practices and imitate them. He also issued a decree saying: In February of this year, I will go to the East for inspection, and the relevant departments will list the etiquette procedures.

古文：既而以文母太后体不安，且止待后。
现代文：随后，因为文母皇太后身体有病，下令暂缓出发。
English: Subsequently, the departure of the empress dowager Wenmu was delayed due to her illness.

古文：初，莽为安汉公时，欲谄太皇太后，以斩郅支功奏尊元帝庙为高宗，太后晏驾后，当以礼配食云。
现代文：当初，王莽做安汉公时，打算谄媚太皇太后，借口斩杀郅支单于的功劳，报告尊称汉元帝的祭庙为高宗，待太皇太后去世后，就将按照礼仪跟丈夫分享祭祀香火。
English: At the beginning, Wang Mang, when he was the prince of Anhan, planned to flatter the empress dowager, on the pretext of killing the merit of 支單于, reported that the temple of Emperor Han Yuan was Gaozong, and after the death of the empress dowager, he would share the sacrificial incense with her husband according to the etiquette.

古文：及莽改号太后为新室文母，绝之于汉，不令得体元帝，堕坏孝元庙，更为文母太后起庙；独置孝元庙故殿以为文母篡食堂，既成，名曰长寿宫，以太后在，故未谓之庙。
现代文：到新朝建立后，王莽改太皇太后号为 新室文母 ，断绝她跟汉朝的关系，不让她跟元帝一体享受汉朝的祭祀，把高宗祭庙摧毁，而另给文崐母太后盖一座祭庙，只保留高宗祭庙的一个殿作为文母的膳堂。落成之后，名叫长寿宫。只因太皇太后仍在人世，所以不称庙。
English: After the establishment of the new dynasty, Wang Mang changed the name of the great empress dowager to Xin Miao Wenmu, severed her relationship with the Han Dynasty, did not allow her to enjoy the Han Dynasty sacrifices with the Yuan Emperor, destroyed the Gaozong Festival Temple, and built another temple for the great empress dowager, retaining only one hall of the Gaozong Festival Temple as the dining hall of the great empress dowager. After completion, it was called the Longevity Palace. Only because the great empress dowager was still alive, it was not called a temple.

古文：莽置酒长寿宫，请太后。
现代文：王莽在长寿宫摆设酒席，宴请太皇太后。
English: Wang Mang held a banquet for the Grand Empress Dowager at the Longevity Palace.

古文：既至，见孝元庙废彻涂地，太后惊泣曰： 此汉家宗庙，皆有神灵，与何治而坏之！
现代文：太皇太后到了之后，看见孝元祭庙被彻底废弃，无法收拾，惊骇悲伤地哭着说： 这些汉朝的祭庙，都是神灵的，什么地方得罪了你，非把它摧毁！
English: After the great empress dowager arrived, she saw that the Xiaoyuan Festival Temple had been completely abandoned and could not be cleaned up. She cried with shock and sadness and said, "These Han Dynasty temples are all sacred. If something has offended you, you must destroy it!"

古文：且使鬼神无知，又何用庙为！
现代文：况且假使没有鬼神，何必盖庙？
English: Moreover, if ghosts and gods are not conscious, why build a sleeping temple?

古文：如令有知，我乃人之妃妾，岂宜辱帝之堂以陈馈食哉！ 
现代文：假使有鬼神，我是他的妻子，难道应该羞辱元帝的庙堂来摆放祭祀我的食品！ 
English: If ghosts and gods know, how can I, as the former emperor's concubine, humiliate the former emperor's temple and display sacrifices for me!

古文：私谓左右曰： 此人慢神多矣，能久得祐乎！ 
现代文：她悄悄对侍从说： 这个人得罪神灵的地方太多了，能够长久得到神灵的保吗？ 
English: She said quietly to the attendant: This man has offended the gods in too many places, can he be protected by the gods for a long time?

古文：饮酒不乐而罢。
现代文：这次饮酒在不愉快中结束。
English: This drinking session also ended in disappointment.

古文：自莽篡位后，知太后怨恨，求所以媚太后者无不为，然愈不说，莽更汉家黑貂著黄貂；又改汉正朔、伏腊日。
现代文：王莽篡权之后，知道太皇太后怨恨，所以凡是可以取悦讨好她的手段，全部使用。然而，太皇太后愈发不高兴。汉朝的宫廷服装，都用黑色貂皮，王莽下令改穿黄色貂皮。
English: After Wang Mang usurped power, he knew the resentment of the Empress Dowager, so he used all the means to please her. However, the Empress Dowager became increasingly unhappy. The court costumes of the Han Dynasty were all made of black mink, and Wang Mang ordered to wear yellow mink.

古文：太后令其官属黑貂；至汉家正、腊日，独与其左右相对饮食。
现代文：汉朝以正月一日作为元旦，王莽改十二月一日作为元旦。汉朝每年十二月举行腊祭，祭祀天地神灵，王莽改在九月举行。太皇太后教她的官属仍穿汉朝的黑色貂皮，在汉朝元旦和腊祭之日，独自与身边的人聚餐。建国五年
English: The Han Dynasty took the first day of the first month as New Year's Day, and Wang Mang changed December 1 as New Year's Day. The Han Dynasty held a wax festival every December to worship the gods of heaven and earth, and Wang Mang changed it to be held in September. The Great Empress Dowager taught her officials to still wear the black ermine of the Han Dynasty, and on the day of the Han Dynasty New Year's Day and the wax festival, they dined alone with the people around them.

古文：王莽中始建国五年春，二月，文母皇太后崩，年八十四；葬渭陵，与元帝合，而沟绝之。
现代文：春季，二月，文母皇太后驾崩，终年八十四岁，安葬在渭陵，与元帝合葬一处，中间开了一条沟把它们隔开来。
English: In the spring, in February, the empress dowager, Wenma, passed away at the age of 84, and was buried in Fuling. She was buried together with Emperor Yuan, with a ditch separating them.

古文：新室世世献祭其庙；元帝配食，坐于床下。
现代文：在常安设立祠庙，规定新朝要世世代代祭祀。元帝配享，神主安放在太后神主的龛架下面。
English: An ancestral temple was set up in Chang'an, stipulating that the new dynasty should have sacrificial rites for generations to come. The Yuan Emperor was given a share, and the deity was placed under the eaves of the deity of the Empress Dowager.

古文：莽为太后服丧三年。
现代文：王莽为太后服丧三年，表示哀悼。
English: Wang Mang expressed his condolences for the three years of mourning for the empress dowager.

古文：乌孙大、小昆弥遣使贡献。
现代文：乌孙国的大昆弥和小昆弥派遣使者来进贡。
English: Great Kunmi and Little Kunmi of Wusun sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：莽以乌孙国人多亲附小昆弥，见匈奴诸边并侵，意欲得乌孙心，乃遣使者引小昆弥使，坐大昆弥使上。
现代文：王莽因为乌孙国的人多亲近归附小昆弥，又看到匈奴从它与新朝之间的所有边界上一齐侵掠，想要博得乌孙人的欢心，便派使者带领小昆弥的使节坐在大昆弥使节的上位。
English: Wang Mang, because many people in the Wusun country were close to and attached to Xiao Kunmi, saw that the Xiongnu invaded and plundered from all the borders between it and the new dynasty. In order to win the favor of the Wusun people, he sent an envoy to lead the envoy of Xiao Kunmi to sit at the top of the envoy of Da Kunmi.

古文：师友祭酒满昌劾奏使者曰： 夷狄以中国有礼谊，故诎而服从。
现代文：师友祭酒满昌上奏章弹劾使者道： 夷狄因为中国讲究礼义，所以屈服。
English: The master and friend's festival wine Manchang was played at the top of the song, and the impeachment envoy said: Because China pays attention to etiquette, Yidi gave in.

古文：大昆弥，君也，今序臣使于君使之上，非所以有夷狄也。
现代文：大昆弥是国君，现在安排臣子的使节坐在国君的使节的上位，这不是统治夷狄的办法。
English: Daikunmi is the sovereign, and now he is arranging for the envoys of his vassals to sit higher than the envoys of the sovereign. This is not the way to rule over the barbarians.

古文：奉使大不敬！ 
现代文：被派遣担任招待的使者大不敬！ 
English: To be sent as an invited emissary is a great insult!

古文：莽怒，免昌官。
现代文：王莽大怒，罢免了满昌的官职。
English: Wang Ling became angry and dismissed Manchang from his post.

古文：西域诸国以莽积失恩信，焉耆先叛，杀都护但钦；西域遂瓦解。
现代文：西域各国由于王莽长期没有恩惠和信用，焉耆国首先背叛，杀死了西域都护但钦。于是，西域各国与内地关系崩溃解体。
English: Due to Wang Mang's long-term lack of favor and trust, the countries in the western region were the first to betray and kill the western region's protector, Danqin. As a result, the relationship between the countries in the western region and the inland collapsed and disintegrated.

古文：十一月，彗星出，二十馀日，不见。
现代文：十一月间，彗星出现，经过二十多天，消失。
English: In November, the comet appeared, and after more than twenty days, it disappeared.

古文：是岁，以犯挟铜炭者多，除其法。
现代文：这一年，由于私挟铜炭的人太多，废除了该项法令。
English: That year, the law was repealed because too many people were violating the ban on the illegal possession of copper and coal.

古文：匈奴乌珠留单于死，用事大臣右骨都侯须卜当，即王昭君女伊墨居次云之婿也。
现代文：匈奴乌珠留若单于去世，当权大臣右骨都侯须卜当，正是王昭君的女儿伊墨居次栾提云的丈夫。
English: If the Xiongnu Wuzhulu died alone, the minister in power would be the right-hand man of Hou Subtang, who was the husband of Wang Zhaojun's daughter, Yimoju Jiuyong Tiyun.

古文：云常欲与中国和亲，又素与于粟置支侯咸厚善，见咸前后为莽所拜，故遂立咸为乌累若鞮单于。
现代文：栾提云时常打算跟中国和亲，又一向与栗置支侯栾提咸友善，看到栾提咸曾经被王莽封作孝单于，于是拥立栾提咸为乌累若单于。
English: Qutian often intended to ally with China, and had always been friendly with Qutian, the vassal of Li Jie. Seeing that Qutian had once been made a vassal of Wang Mang, he supported Qutian as a vassal of Wu Lei.

古文：乌累单于咸立，以弟舆为左谷蠡王。
现代文：乌累单于栾提咸即位后，封弟弟栾提舆当右谷蠡王。
English: After Urezan ascended to the throne in Haman, he made his younger brother, Myou, the king of the Zuotani clan.

古文：乌珠留单于子苏屠胡本为左贤王，后更谓之护于，欲传以国。
现代文：乌留珠单于的儿子栾提苏屠胡，本封左贤王，后来把左贤王改称护于，打算把单于的宝座传给他。
English: Uryu Zhu Shanyu's son, Xingtisu Tuhu, whose original title was Zuoxian Wang, later renamed Zuoxian Wang as Guoyu, intending to pass on the throne of Shanyu to him.

古文：咸怨乌珠留单于贬己号，乃贬护于为左屠耆王。
现代文：栾提咸怨恨乌留珠单于贬低自己的称号，就把护于栾提苏屠胡贬作左屠耆王。
English: Xing Ti Xian resented Wu Liuzhu for belittling his own title, so he belittled the tutelage of Xing Ti Su Tu Hu as the King of Zuo Tuo.

古文：王莽中天凤元年
现代文：天凤元年
English: The first year of Tianfeng

古文：春，正月，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月，大赦天下。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, amnesty all over the world.

古文：莽下诏： 将以是岁四仲月遍行巡狩之礼，太官赍Я、干肉，内者行张坐卧；所过毋得有所给。
现代文：王莽下诏： 兹定于本年每个季节的仲月周游全国，行巡狩之礼，太官携带干粮干肉，内者令布置帐篷床席，所经过的地方不要有什么供给。
English: Wang Mang issued an edict: I have decided to travel around the country in the middle of the month of each season this year, performing the ceremony of patrolling, the eunuch carrying dry grain and dry meat, and the insider ordering the arrangement of tent beds. Do not supply anything to the places you pass.

古文：俟毕北巡狩之礼，即于土中居洛阳之都。 
现代文：等结束北方的巡视活动之后，就在全国的中心洛阳定都。 
English: After the completion of the inspection activities in the north, Luoyang, the center of the country, will become the permanent capital.

古文：群公奏言： 皇帝至孝，新遭文母之丧，颜色未复，饮食损少；今一岁四巡，道路万里，春秋尊，非讙、干肉之所能堪。
现代文：众大臣奏报： 皇帝最孝顺，新近遭逢文母的丧事，容颜没有恢复，饮食减少。现在要一年四次出巡，路程万里，年岁这样高，不是吃干粮干肉所能适应得了的。
English: The ministers reported: The emperor is the most filial, he recently suffered the funeral of his mother, his face has not recovered, and his diet has been reduced. Now he has to go on tour four times a year, he has to travel thousands of miles, and his age is so high, it is not possible to adapt to eating dried grain and dried meat.

古文：且无巡狩，须阕大服，以安圣体。 
现代文：请暂时不要去巡行视察，等待国丧期满，从而保养圣体。 
English: Please do not go on inspection tours for the time being, and wait until the period of national mourning is over, so that the Blessed Sacrament can be preserved.

古文：莽从之，要期以天凤七年巡狩；厥明年，即土之中，遣太傅平晏、大司空王邑之洛阳营相宅兆，图起宗庙、社稷、郊兆云。
现代文：王莽听从，改到天凤七年巡行视察，再过一年，前往全国的中心洛阳城。派遣太傅平晏和大司空王邑前往洛阳，选择基地，打算兴建皇家宗庙、土谷神社和祭祀天地的坛址。
English: Wang Mang obeyed, and changed it to a seven-year inspection tour of Tianfeng. After another year, he went to Luoyang City, the center of the country. He sent Taifu Pingyao and Daishi Kuo Wangyi to Luoyang to choose a base, intending to build a royal ancestral temple, Tsuchiya Shrine, and a sacrificial altar site for heaven and earth.

古文：三月，壬申晦，日有食之。
现代文：三月壬申晦，出现日食。大赦天下。
English: At the end of March, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：大赦天下。以灾异策大司马逯并就侯氏朝位，太傅平晏勿领尚书事。以利苗男为大司马。
现代文：因日食天象变异之故，王莽颁策将大司马逯并免职，仅以侯爵身份参加朝会；免去太傅平晏主管尚书事的职务，任命利苗男王担任大司马。
English: Due to the eclipse phenomenon, Wang Mang issued a policy to dismiss the grand steward Ma Jun and remove him from his post, only to participate in the imperial court as a marquis; to remove the post of Tai Fu Ping Jun in charge of bookkeeping, and to appoint Lin Miao Wang as the grand steward.

古文：莽即真，尤备大臣，抑夺下权，朝臣有言其过失者，辄拔擢。
现代文：王莽正式登上皇位以后，特别防备大臣，限制、削弱大臣的权力，朝官有指责大臣错误的，总是受到提拔。
English: After Wang Mang officially ascended the throne, he became the special minister of defense, restricting and weakening the power of the minister. If a subject accused the minister of a mistake, he was always promoted.

古文：孔仁、赵博、费兴等以敢击大臣，故见信任，择名官而居之。
现代文：孔仁、赵博、费兴等人因为敢于挟击大臣，所以受到信任，选择显赫的官职让他们担任。
English: Kong Ren, Zhao Bo and Feixing and others gained trust because they dared to criticize the minister, and they were allowed to hold the posts they had chosen.

古文：国将哀章颇不清，莽为选置和叔，敕曰： 非但保国将闺门，当保亲属在西州者。 
现代文：国将哀章行为颇不端正，王莽为他挑选设置了和叔之官，告诫道： 不仅要在公府里保全国将本人，还应当保全他在西州的亲属。 
English: Wang Mang gave him the choice of setting up an uncle and admonished him: "You should not only help the general himself, but also help his relatives in Xizhou.

古文：诸公皆轻贱，而章尤甚。
现代文：王莽对他所封的公都瞧不起，而以哀章为甚。
English: Ministers are held in contempt, and the laments are particularly virulent.

古文：夏，四月，陨霜杀草木，海濒尤甚。
现代文：夏季，四月间，降了霜，冻死了草木，沿海尤其厉害。
English: In the summer, in April, frosts fell and the plants froze to death, especially along the coast.

古文：六月，黄雾四塞。
现代文：六月间，黄雾弥漫。
English: In June, the sky is covered with yellow sand.

古文：秋，七月，大风拔树，飞北阙直城门屋瓦。
现代文：秋季七月间，大风拔起树木，刮走了北阙直城门屋上的瓦。
English: During the autumn and July, high winds uprooted trees and blew away the tiles on the roof of the north gate.

古文：雨雹，杀牛羊。
现代文：落下冰雹，打死了牛羊。
English: Hail fell, killing cattle and sheep.

古文：莽以《周官》、《王制》之文，置卒正、连率、大尹，职如太守；又置州牧、部监二十五人。
现代文：王莽按照《周官》和《王制》的记载，设置卒正、连率、大尹，职务象太守一样。又设置州牧、部监二十五人。
English: Wang Mang, in accordance with the records of "Zhou Guan" and "King System," set up officers, company leaders, and grand officers, with the same duties as the governor. He also set up 25 provincial pastors and supervisors.

古文：分长安城旁六乡，置帅各一人。
现代文：把长安郊区划分为六乡，每乡设置乡帅一人。
English: Chang'an suburb will be divided into six townships, and each township will have one township marshal.

古文：分三辅为六尉郡；河东、河内、弘农、河南、颍川、南阳为六队郡。
现代文：把三辅地区划分为六尉郡，把河内郡、河东郡、弘农郡、河南郡、颍川郡、南阳郡作为六队郡。
English: The Sanfu area will be divided into six counties, and Hanoi County, Hedong County, Hongnong County, Henan County, Liuchuan County, and Nanyang County will be six counties.

古文：更名河南大尹曰保忠信卿。
现代文：把河南郡大尹改名叫保忠信卿。
English: He changed the name of Henan County Grand Yin to Bao Zhongxinqing.

古文：益河南属县满三十，置六郊州长各一人，人主五县。
现代文：增加河南郡属县达三十个。设置六郊州长各一人，每人管辖五县。
English: The number of counties belonging to Henan County will be increased to thirty. Six sub-district governors will be set up, each of whom will have jurisdiction over five counties.

古文：及它官名悉改。
现代文：其他官名全都改动。
English: and all other official names were revised.

古文：大郡至分为五，合百二十有五郡。
现代文：还将大郡划分，最多的划分为五个郡，合计共一百二十五个郡。
English: Large counties were also divided, with the largest division into five counties, for a total of one hundred and twenty-five counties.

古文：九州之内，县二千二百有三。
现代文：九州的范围里，有二千二百零三县。
English: Kyushu covers an area of 2,203 counties.

古文：又仿古六服为惟城、惟宁、惟翰、惟屏、惟垣、惟籓，各以其方为称，总为万国焉。
现代文：又模仿古代的六服，把国土划分为惟城、惟宁、惟翰、惟屏、惟垣、惟藩，各以其方位称呼，总共有一万个封国。
English: He also imitated the ancient Six Uniforms and divided the country into Woecheng, Woening, Woehan, Woiping, Woegaki, and Woehan, each of which was called by its direction, for a total of ten thousand fukoku.

古文：其后，岁复变更，一郡至五易名，而还复其故。
现代文：这以后，每年都有变动，一郡甚至改了五次名称，而还是恢复原来的名称。
English: After that, there were changes every year, and one county even changed its name five times before finally restoring its original name.

古文：吏民不能纪，每下诏书，辄系其故名云。
现代文：官吏和平民，无法记忆，每次下诏书，总要在新名之下附记原来的名称。
English: Government officials and ordinary citizens, unable to remember, must always add the original name under the new name every time they issue an edict.

古文：匈奴右骨都侯须卜当、伊墨居次云劝单于和亲，遣人之西河虎猛制虏塞下，告塞吏云： 欲见和亲侯。 
现代文：匈奴右骨都侯须卜当、伊墨居次云，建议单于栾提咸与中国和亲。栾提咸同意，派人到西河郡虎猛县制虏塞，告诉边塞的官吏： 匈奴单于想见和亲侯。 
English: The Huns' right-hand man, Su Boudang, and Yimoku Jiu Jiuyun, suggested that they make peace with China only at Khoti Haman. Khoti Haman agreed and sent a man to the border fortress in Tigermang County, Saihe County, to tell the border fortress officials: The Huns only want to see and make peace with the prince.

古文：和亲侯者，王昭君兄子歙也。
现代文：和亲侯就是王昭君哥哥的儿子王歙。
English: And the prince is Wang Zhaojun, the son of Wang Zhaojun's brother.

古文：中部都尉以闻，莽遣歙、歙弟骑都尉、展德侯飒使匈奴，贺单于初立，赐黄金、衣被、缯帛；绐言侍子登在，因购求陈良、终带等。
现代文：中部都尉奏报朝廷，王莽派遣王歙与王歙的弟弟骑都尉、殿德侯王飒出使匈奴，祝贺匈奴单于栾提咸即位，赏崐赐黄金、衣服、被褥、丝织品，欺哄说作为人质的单于的儿子栾提登还在人间，并趁机要求用钱财引渡陈良和终带等人。
English: The Central Captain reported to the imperial court, and Wang Mang dispatched Wang Xuan and Wang Xuan's younger brother, the cavalry captain, the noble prince Wang Xuan, to send an envoy to the Xiongnu to congratulate the Xiongnu on the enthronement of Jian Yu Tihaming, reward him with gold, clothes, bedding, and silk fabrics, and deceive him that Jian Yu's son Jian Yu Tihaming, who was a hostage, was still alive, and take the opportunity to demand the extradition of Chen Liang and the last band and others with money and money.

古文：单于尽收陈良等二十七人，皆械槛付使者，遣厨唯姑夕王富等四十人送歙、飒。
现代文：单于便把陈良等二十七人逮捕，全部带上刑具，装进囚车，交付中国使节。派厨唯姑夕王栾提富等四十余人护送王歙、王飒回国。
English: He arrested 27 people including Chen Liang, loaded them all with torture equipment, put them in a prison van, and handed them over to the Chinese envoy. He sent more than 40 people, including the cook Yuyuyu Wangqin Ti Fu, to escort Wang Qin and Wang Qin back to China.

古文：莽作焚如之刑，烧杀陈良等。
现代文：王莽特别制定一种烧杀刑，把陈良等人活活烧死。
English: Wang Mang specially formulated a kind of burning punishment to burn Chen Liang and others alive.

古文：缘边大饥，人相食。
现代文：边境地区发生严重饥馑，出现了人吃人的现象。
English: Severe famine has occurred along the border areas, and people are eating each other.

古文：谏大夫如普行边兵还，言： 军士久屯寒苦，边郡无以相赡。
现代文：谏大夫如普巡视边境驻军，回来说： 士兵长期驻扎在寒苦之地，边郡没有东西供应。
English: Dr. Zou Rupu inspected the border garrison and came back saying, "The soldiers have been stationed in a cold place for a long time, and the border county has nothing to supply.

古文：今单于新和，宜因是罢兵。 
现代文：现在单于刚刚与我们和好，应该趁此机会解散部队。 
English: Now that you have just made peace with us, you should take this opportunity to leave the army.

古文：校尉韩威进曰： 以新室之威而吞胡虏，无异口中蚤虱。
现代文：校尉韩威建议说： 凭新朝的威力去吞并匈奴，就好象吃掉口里的跳蚤虱子一样。
English: School Lieutenant Han Wei suggested: "Using the power of the new dynasty to eat the Xiongnu is just like eating the mouth-wrapped flea lice.

古文：臣愿得勇敢之士五千人，不赍斗粮，饥食虏肉，渴饮其血，可以横行！ 
现代文：我愿意求得勇敢的士兵五千人，不要携带一斗粮食，饿了就吃敌人的肉，渴了就喝他们的血，可以在匈奴境内横冲直撞。 
English: I would like to ask five thousand brave soldiers not to carry a bucket of grain, to eat the flesh of the enemy when they are hungry, to drink their blood when they are thirsty, and to rampage through the territory of the Huns.

古文：莽壮其言，以威为将军。
现代文：王莽认为他的话很豪壮，任命韩威作将军。
English: Wang Mang thought his words were very brave and appointed Han Wei as general.

古文：然采普言，征还诸将在边者，免陈钦等十八人，又罢四关镇都尉诸屯兵。
现代文：然而采纳如普的意见，调回驻扎在边境的各将领。免去陈钦等十八人的将军职务，又撤回了四关镇都尉的屯兵。
English: However, he accepted the general opinion and recalled the generals stationed at the border. He dismissed eighteen generals, including Chen Qin, and withdrew the garrison of the captain of Shiguan Town.

古文：单于贪莽赂遗，故外不失汉故事，然内利寇掠；又使还，知子登前死，怨恨，寇虏从左地入不绝。
现代文：匈奴乌累若单于栾提咸贪图王莽的厚重礼物，所以外貌上仍保持汉朝时代与中国和睦的成例，事实上却不断侵扰劫掠。同时，匈奴使节从中国回去后，知道单于儿子栾提登已被处死，心怀怨恨，不断从东部边境一带攻击侵袭。
English: If the Hun Ulai had been greedy for the heavy gifts of Wang Mang, he would have remained in harmony with China during the Han Dynasty, but in fact, he constantly invaded and plundered. At the same time, after the Hun envoy returned from China, he knew that the son of the Hun Ulai had been executed, and with resentment, he constantly attacked and invaded from the eastern border.

古文：使者问单于，辄曰： 乌桓与匈奴无状黠民共为寇入塞，譬如中国有盗贼耳！
现代文：中国使节向单于栾提咸诘问，栾提咸每次都回答： 乌桓跟匈奴的一些奸猾无赖，合伙干出这种坏事，侵入边塞，就像中国有强盗匪徒一样。
English: When Wang Mang's envoys asked questions, the Huns always replied: "Wu Huan and the treacherous people of the Huns banded together to invade the border fortress, just as if there were thieves in China!"

古文：咸初立持国，威信尚浅，尽力禁止，不敢有二心！ 
现代文：我刚刚即位管理国家，威信还不高，我当尽力禁止，不敢有二心！ 
English: I have just been enthroned to manage the country, and my prestige is not high. I should do my best to ban it, and I dare not have second thoughts!

古文：莽复发军屯。
现代文：王莽再次派遣军队进驻北方边塞。
English: Wang Mang once again dispatched troops to the northern border fortress.

古文：益州蛮夷愁扰，尽反，复杀益州大尹程隆。
现代文：益州蛮夷因忧愁而骚扰，同时叛乱，击杀益州大尹程降。
English: The barbarians of Yizhou harassed him out of sorrow, and at the same time rebelled and killed the grand vizier of Yizhou, Yin Chengjun.

古文：莽遣平蛮将军冯茂发巴、蜀、犍为吏士，赋敛取足于民，以击之。
现代文：王莽派遣平蛮将军冯茂调发巴郡、蜀郡、犍为郡等地方官兵，粮秣军饷直接向百姓征收，进击益州郡叛乱民众。
English: Wang Mang dispatched the barbarian general Feng Mao to dispatch local officers and soldiers from Faba County, Shu County, Suwei County, etc. to collect grain and military pay directly from the people and attack the rebellious people in Yizhou County.

古文：莽复申下金、银、龟、贝之货，颇增减其贾直，而罢大、小钱，改作货布、货泉二品并行。
现代文：王莽又下令恢复金币、银币、龟币、贝币，对价值略加调整。取消大钱、小钱，改由新发行的货布、货泉二种钱币代替。
English: Wang Mang also ordered the restoration of gold coins, silver coins, turtle coins and shellfish coins, with a slight adjustment to the value. Big money and small money were canceled, and replaced by two newly issued coins, cargo cloth and cargo spring.

古文：又以大钱行久，罢之恐民挟不止，乃令民且独行大钱；尽六年，毋得复挟大钱矣。
现代文：但是，因为大钱流通已久，一旦废除，恐怕无法禁绝人们携带，于是特准百姓暂且使用大钱，以六年为期，六年后完全禁绝。
English: However, because big money has been in circulation for a long time, once it is abolished, I am afraid that it will not be possible to prohibit people from carrying it. Therefore, the special permission for the people to temporarily use big money will be for a period of six years, and after six years it will be completely prohibited.

古文：每壹易钱，民用破业而大陷刑。
现代文：每改变一次币制，百姓随着破产一次，往往因而陷于刑网。
English: Every time the monetary system is changed, the people go bankrupt and are often caught in the net.

