古文：李乂，本名尚真，赵州房子人也。
现代文：李乂，原名尚真，赵州房子人。
English: Li Wei, formerly known as Shang Zhen, is a housewife from Zhaozhou.

古文：少与兄尚一、尚贞俱以文章见称，举进士。
现代文：少年时期与其兄长尚一、尚贞都因为善做文章而闻名，考取进士。
English: When he was a boy, he and his older brothers, Shang Yi and Shang Zhen, were both famous for being good at writing essays, and they both passed the entrance examination.

古文：景龙中，累迁中书舍人。
现代文：景龙年中，多次升为中书舍人。
English: In the middle of the Jinglong period, he was promoted to the post of Chinese scholar several times.

古文：时中宗遣使江南分道赎生，以所在官物充直。
现代文：当时逢中宗派遣使节到江南各地分路赎生，用国家的物品充值。
English: At that time, Zhongzong sent envoys to all parts of the south of the Yangtze River to redeem their lives, using state goods to recharge.

古文：乂知制诰凡数载。
现代文：李乂上书劝谏。
English: Li Gan wrote a letter to persuade him.

古文：景云元年，迁吏部侍郎，与宋璟、卢从愿同时典选，铨叙平允，甚为当时所称。
现代文：李乂主持起草国家的法规章程和皇帝的诏书命令多年。景云元年，李乂升为吏部侍郎，与宋王景、卢从愿共同掌管全国官吏的任免、考课、升降、调动等事务。选拔官吏排列顺序公平得当，在当时甚得世人称道。
English: In the first year of the Jingyun era, Li Shansheng was the secretary of the Personnel Department. Together with Song Wangjing and Lu Zongyi, he was in charge of the appointment and dismissal, examination, promotion and transfer of officials throughout the country. The order of the selection of officials was fair and proper, and was highly praised by the world at that time.

古文：寻转黄门侍郎。
现代文：李乂不久转为黄门侍郎。
English: Li Qian soon became the Yellow Gate's chamberlain.

古文：时睿宗令造金仙、玉真二观，乂频上疏谏，帝每优容之。
现代文：当时睿宗诏令建造金仙、玉真二观，李乂多次上表劝谏，睿宗往往优先采纳他的意见。
English: At that time, Emperor Ruizong issued an edict to build Jinxian and Yuzhen two views, and Li Xi repeatedly went to the table to advise him, and Emperor Ruizong often gave priority to his opinion.

古文：开元初，特令乂与中书侍郎苏颋纂集起居注，录其嘉谟昌言可体国经远者，别编奏之。
现代文：开元初年，皇上特别诏令李乂与中书侍郎苏廷页纂集起居注，选录那些上等的谋略和美好的言论作为国家长远发展的制度，另外编写上奏给皇上。
English: In the first year of the year of the founding of the Republic of China, the emperor issued a special edict to Li Xi and Su Ting, the chief secretary of the Central Committee, to compile and annotate the anthology, select those superior strategies and beautiful speeches as a system for the long-term development of the country, and prepare a report to the emperor.

古文：乂在门下，多所驳正。
现代文：李乂在门下，经常纠正朝政缺失。
English: Under the tutelage of Li Xi, he often corrected the shortcomings of the imperial government.

古文：开元初，姚崇为紫微令，荐乂为紫微侍郎，外托荐贤，其实引在己下，去其纠驳之权也。
现代文：开元初年，姚崇任紫微令，推荐李乂为紫微侍郎。姚崇对外称举荐贤才，实质上是引为自己位下，辞去李乂的纠驳权力。
English: In the first year of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Yao Chong was appointed as the magistrate of Ziwei, and recommended Li Jun to be the magistrate of Ziwei. Yao Chong publicly called the recommendation a wise man, but in essence, he resigned his position and relinquished his right to argue with Li Jun.

古文：俄拜刑部尚书。
现代文：李乂不久任刑部尚书。
English: Li Wei was soon promoted to the position of the head of the criminal department.

古文：乂方雅有学识，朝廷称其有宰相之望，会病卒。
现代文：李乂很有学识，朝廷称他有任宰相的希望，不巧这时病死。
English: Li Gan was very learned, and the imperial court said that he had hopes of being appointed prime minister. Unfortunately, he died of illness at this time.

古文：兄尚一，清源尉，早卒；尚贞，官至博州刺史。
现代文：兄长尚一，任清源尉，早死；兄长尚贞，做官至博州刺史。
English: His elder brother, Shang Yi, was appointed as a lieutenant of the Qing Dynasty, and died early; his elder brother, Shang Zhen, was an official of the State of Bozhou.

古文：兄弟同为一集，号曰《李氏花萼集》，总二十卷。
现代文：兄弟共为一集，名为《李氏花萼集》，总共二十卷。
English: The brothers are one episode, called "Li's Calyx Collection," a total of twenty volumes.

