古文：或以平虚请论七主之过，得六过一是，以还自镜，以知得失。
现代文：有的国君以平心静气的态度来评论七类君主的为君之道。归纳为 六过一是 ，以作为自我鉴戒，总结得失。
English: Some sovereigns commented on the seven types of monarchs' way of being monarchs with a calm and calm attitude. It was summarized as six times one is, as a self-examination, summing up gains and losses.

古文：以绳七臣，得六过一是。
现代文：又依此衡量七种类型的大臣，也有 六过一是 。
English: The seven types of ministers are also measured according to this, and there are six over one yes.

古文：呼呜美哉，成事疾。
现代文：这种做法真好呵，可说是一件盛事了。
English: It's a great way to do it, it's a great event.

古文：申主：任势守数以为常，周听近远以续明。
现代文：申主：顺应大势遵循事理以建立常规常法，普遍了解远近情况以加深明察国事。
English: Petitioner: Comply with the general trend, follow the facts to establish a regular common law, and generally understand the far and near situation to deepen the understanding of national affairs.

古文：皆要审则法令固，赏罚必则下服度。
现代文：国计收支明审。
English: State-accounted revenue and expenditure will be audited.

古文：不备待而得和，则民反素也。
现代文：法令也随着稳定。赏罚坚决，臣民便遵守法度。不采用戒备手段而以德亲和百姓，人民也就朴实了。
English: Laws and decrees also followed the stability. Rewards and punishments were firm, and the subjects complied with the laws. Without resorting to precautionary measures, the people became simple-minded by virtue of being close to the people.

古文：故主虞而安，吏肃而严，民朴而亲，官无邪吏，朝无奸臣，下无侵争，世无刑民。
现代文：这样君主欢娱而安定。
English: In this way, the monarch is entertained and stabilized.

古文：惠主：丰赏厚赐以竭藏，赦奸纵过以伤法。
现代文：社会上也没有受刑的罪人。惠主：赏赐过多以致使国库枯竭，赦奸纵过以致损害国法。
English: There are no criminals in society who are punished. Benefactor: Rewarding too much so as to deplete the treasury, indulging in adultery so as to damage the national law.

古文：藏竭则主权衰，法伤则奸门闿。
现代文：国库枯竭则君权衰弱。损害国法则奸门大开。
English: When the state treasury is depleted, the power of the monarchy weakens. The door is wide open for treachery that undermines the laws of the country.

古文：故曰：泰则反败矣。
现代文：所以说： 凡事做过头了反而归于失败。 
English: Therefore, it is said: If everything is overdone, it will be a failure.

古文：侵主：好恶反法以自伤，喜决难知以塞明。
现代文：侵主：专好行恶违法以至于自食其果，妄决难知之事以至于闭目塞听。
English: Infringing on the Lord: They are so dedicated to doing evil and breaking the law that they reap the consequences. They are so determined to do difficult things that they close their eyes and stop listening.

古文：从狙而好小察，事无常而法令申曳。
现代文：好从事对人窥伺而暗地观察，行事没有常规而法令疲咨无效。
English: It is good to engage in spying on people and secretly observe, act unconventionally and the law is invalid.

古文：不悟，则国失势。
现代文：如不觉悟，则国家权势皆失。
English: If they do not wake up, the country will lose all its power.

古文：芒主：目伸五色，耳常五声，四邻不计，司声不听，则臣下恣行，而国权大倾。
现代文：荒主：眼迷恋五色，耳不离五声，不考虑四大辅臣的意见，不听取谏官的诤言，臣下也就恣意妄行而国权旁落。
English: The owner of the wasteland: his eyes are obsessed with the five colors, his ears are attached to the five voices, he does not consider the opinions of the four auxiliary ministers, he does not listen to the eunuchs, and his subjects also act arbitrarily and the state power falls by the wayside.

古文：不悟，则所恶及身。
现代文：如不觉悟，其恶果及于自身。
English: If you don't wake up, you will suffer the consequences.

古文：劳主：不明分职，上下相干，臣主同则。
现代文：劳主：职务分工不明，君臣互相干扰，国君与官吏甚至按一样的职务规则行事。
English: Employer: The division of duties is unclear, monarchs and ministers interfere with each other, and the sovereign and officials even act according to the same job rules.

古文：刑振以丰，丰振以刻。
现代文：用严刑罚的办法加重赋敛，加重了赋敛又更使刑罚严刻起来。
English: Use the method of severe punishment to increase the punishment, increase the punishment and make the punishment more severe.

古文：去之而乱，临之而殆，则后世何得？
现代文：改变现状则将陷于混乱，维持统治也将陷于衰败，后代能得到什么好处呢？
English: Changing the status quo will lead to chaos, maintaining the rule will also lead to decay, what benefits can future generations get?

古文：振主：喜怒无度，严诛无赦，臣下振怒，不知所错，则人反其故。
现代文：振主：喜怒无常，严行诛罚而不讲宽赦，臣下震恐，不知所措，人们就只好回到巧谋虚伪的状态。
English: Lord Zhen: He is moody and temperamental, he punishes harshly without mercy, his vassals are terrified and at a loss, and people have no choice but to return to the state of cunning and hypocrisy.

古文：不悟，则法数日衰而国失固。
现代文：如不觉悟。法令政策就将日益无力而国家不稳。
English: If we do not wake up, laws and policies will become increasingly weak and the country will become unstable.

古文：芒主：不通人情以质疑，故臣下无信。
现代文：亡主：不近人情地怀疑臣下，所以对臣下不敢信任。
English: The deceased lord: He was suspicious of his vassals, so he did not dare to trust them.

古文：尽自治其事则事多，多则昏，昏则缓急俱植。
现代文：事事部自己处理则事务繁多。事多则昏愦，昏愦则无论事之缓急都置而不行了。
English: When the Ministry of Affairs deals with itself, there are many affairs. When there are many affairs, there is confusion, and when there is confusion, it is not possible to prioritize things.

古文：不悟，则见所不善，余力自失而罚。
现代文：如不觉悟，则余力将全部消耗，见到不善之事，只有滥施刑罚而已。
English: If you don't become aware of it, all your remaining energy will be used up. If you see something that is not good, all you can do is apply punishment indiscriminately.

古文：故一人之治乱在其心，一国之存亡在其主。
现代文：就个人说，治乱决定于心；就一国来说，存亡决定于君主。
English: As far as individuals are concerned, it is the heart that decides whether or not to rebel; as far as a country is concerned, it is the monarch who decides whether or not to survive.

古文：天下得失，道一人出。
现代文：天下得失，都是从君主起的。
English: All the gains and losses in the world come from the monarch.

古文：主好本则民好垦草莱，主好货则人贾市，主好宫室则工匠巧，主好文采则女工靡。
现代文：君主重农业，人民就开垦荒地；君主好财货，人们多去做买卖；君主好宫室，工匠就追求巧妙；君主好装饰，女事就讲求靡丽；楚王爱细腰美人，美。
English: Monarchs focus on agriculture, the people will reclaim the wasteland; monarchs are good at wealth and goods, people will do more business; monarchs are good at court, craftsmen will pursue cleverness; monarchs are good at decoration, women's affairs are about seeking beauty; King Chu loves thin waists, beautiful women, and beauty.

古文：夫楚王好小腰而美人省食，吴王好剑而国士轻死。死与不食者，天下之所共恶也，然而为之者何也？从主之所欲也。
现代文：人就减食；吴王好击剑比武、国士就轻死。死命和不吃饭，是天下人所共同厌恶的，为什么人们愿意这样干呢？
English: People cut down on food; the king of Wu was good at fencing and martial arts, and the statesmen died lightly. Dying and not eating are universally detested by the world. Why are people willing to do this?

古文：而况愉乐音声之化乎？
现代文：是因为服从君主的爱好。又何况其他音乐娱乐的风气呢？
English: Is it for the sake of obeying the monarch's wishes, not to mention other musical entertainment traditions?

古文：夫男不田，女不缁，工技力于无用，而欲土地之毛，仓库满实，不可得也。
现代文：男不耕田，女不织布，工匠技术致力于无用之处，想要土地生长禾苗，仓库堆满粮食，是根本办不到的。
English: Men do not cultivate fields, women do not weave cloth, craftsmen devote their skills to useless things. If you want the land to grow seedlings and warehouses to be full of grain, it is simply impossible.

古文：土地不毛则人不足，人不足则逆气生，逆气生则令不行。
现代文：土地无禾苗则人民穷困，人民穷困则有反抗情绪，有反抗情绪法令就行不通了。
English: If there are no crops or seedlings on the land, the people will be impoverished. If the people are impoverished, they will have a rebellious mood. If there is a rebellious mood, the decree will not work.

古文：然强敌发而起，虽善者不能存。
现代文：一旦强敌动兵起事，虽有能干的人也难得保全。
English: Once a strong enemy raises an army, it is difficult to save it, even if there are capable people.

古文：何以效其然也？
现代文：如何证明这种历史的必然结局呢？
English: How can this historical inevitability be justified?

古文：曰：昔者桀纣是也。
现代文：回答说：从前的约王就是如此。
English: And he said, So was the former king Jehoiachin.

古文：诛贤忠，近谗贼之士而贵妇人，好杀而不勇，好富而忘贫。驰猎无穷，鼓乐无厌，瑶台玉餔不足处，驰车千驷不足乘，材女乐三千人，钟石丝竹之音不绝。
现代文：他诛杀忠良，近谗奸而宠女人，好杀而不求真勇，好富而不恤穷人，他无休止地游猎与鼓奏音乐，豪华的楼台庭院不够他住，上千辆游车不够他坐，女乐有三千人。钟石丝竹之声不绝。
English: He kills the faithful and the good, he is close to the traitors and favors women, he is good at killing without seeking true courage, he is good at getting rich without pitying the poor, he endlessly hunts and plays music with drums, the luxurious courtyard is not enough for him to live, thousands of cars are not enough for him to sit, and there are three thousand women's music. The sound of bells and whistles is incessant.

古文：百姓罢乏，君子无死，卒莫有人，人有反心，遇周武王，遂为周氏之禽。
现代文：他那里百姓疲敝，官员不理政事，最终无人拥护，人人都有反心。遇到周武王便成为周朝的俘虏。
English: The people there were tired, the officials did not take care of the affairs of state, and in the end no one supported them. Everyone had a grudge. When they met King Zhouwu, they became captives of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：此营于物而失其情者也，愉于淫乐而忘后患者也。
现代文：这是迷惑于物质享受而失去人情，苟图淫乐而忘后患的结果。
English: This is the result of being obsessed with material enjoyment and losing human feelings, and being obsessed with sexual pleasure and forgetting the after-effects.

古文：故设用无度国家踣，举事不时，必受其灾。
现代文：所以，耗费无度国家必然覆亡，举事不合时宜，必然受害。
English: Therefore, a country that spends too much money will inevitably fall, and if it is not timely, it will inevitably suffer.

古文：夫仓库非虚空也，商宦非虚坏也，法令非虚乱也，国家非虚亡也。
现代文：国家仓库并不是无缘无故用空的，商贾官宦并不是无缘无故败坏的，法度政令并不是无缘无故混乱的，国家也不是无缘无故覆亡的。
English: The state warehouses are not empty for no reason, the merchants and bureaucrats are not corrupt for no reason, the laws and decrees are not chaotic for no reason, and the country is not falling apart for no reason.

古文：彼时有春秋，岁有败凶，政有急缓。
现代文：那是因为时节有春秋，年景有丰歉，政令也有急有缓。
English: That's because the seasons are spring and autumn, the year is full of surprises, and government decrees are hasty and slow.

古文：政有急缓故物有轻重，岁有败凶故民有义不足，时有春秋故谷有贵贱。
现代文：政令有缓急所以物价有高低，年景有丰歉所以人们有余或不足，时节有春秋所以谷价有贵贱。
English: Government decrees have priorities, so prices are high and low, the year is prosperous, so people have surplus or shortage, the season is spring and autumn, so grain prices are high and low.

古文：而上不调淫，故游商得以什伯其本也。
现代文：而国家不注意调剂贵贱的过分现象，游商就可以得到十、百倍的高利。
English: However, if the state does not pay attention to adjusting the excessive phenomenon of high and low prices, travel agents can get ten or hundred times higher profits.

古文：百姓之不田，贫富之不訾，皆用此作。
现代文：百姓的无法务农，贫富的相差悬殊，都是由此而来的。
English: The inability of the people to work in agriculture and the great disparity between the rich and the poor are all the result of this.

古文：城郭不守，兵士不用，皆道此始。
现代文：城郭的不能固守。战士的不肯听命，也是由此开始的。
English: The impossibility of holding the castle and the soldiers' unwillingness to obey orders also started from this.

古文：夫亡国踣家者，非无壤土也，其所事者，非其功也。
现代文：大凡亡国败家的，并不是没有土地，而是他们所做的事情，对农业并无功效。
English: It was not the lack of land that led to the downfall of the great nations, but the fact that what they had done was not effective for agriculture.

古文：夫凶岁雷旱，非无雨露也，其燥湿非其时也。
现代文：大凡凶年的水旱天灾，并不是没有雨露，而是干旱与降雨不合时节。
English: The floods, droughts and natural calamities of a particularly bad year are not due to a lack of rain and dew, but to the fact that the drought and rainfall are out of season.

古文：乱世烦政，非无法令也，其所诛赏者非其人也。
现代文：乱世的烦苛政治。并不是没有法令，而是赏功与罚罪不当其人。
English: The vexatious politics of a chaotic world. It is not that there are no laws, but that people are rewarded and punished inappropriately.

古文：暴主迷君，非无心腹也，其所取舍非其术也。故明主有六务四禁。
现代文：暴主与昏君。并不是没有心腹之臣，而是他对人的取舍，不合其道。所以，明君有 六务 和 四务 。
English: The tyrant and the weak ruler. It is not that there is no loyal subject, but that his choice of people is not in line with his path. Therefore, the wise ruler has six duties and four duties.

古文：六务者何也？
现代文：什么是六务呢？
English: What are the six tasks?

古文：一曰节用，二曰贤佐，三曰法度，四曰必诛，五曰天时，六曰地宜。
现代文：一曰节约用财，二曰任用贤佐，三曰重视法度，四曰刑罚坚决，五曰注重天时，六曰注重地利。
English: The first day is to save money, the second day is to appoint a wise assistant, the third day is to pay attention to the law, the fourth day is to resolutely punish, the fifth day is to pay attention to the time, and the sixth day is to pay attention to the location.

古文：四禁者何也？
现代文：什么是四禁呢？
English: What are the four prohibitions?

古文：春无杀伐，无割大陵，倮大衍，伐大木，斩大山，行大火，诛大臣，收谷赋。
现代文：春天不要杀伐，不开掘大丘陵，不焚烧大沼泽，不伐大树，不开大山，不放大火，不杀大臣。不征收谷赋。
English: In spring, do not cut down trees, do not excavate large hills, do not burn large swamps, do not cut down large trees, do not open large mountains, do not enlarge fires, do not kill ministers. Do not collect grain tax.

古文：夏无遏水达名川，塞大谷，动土功，射鸟兽。
现代文：夏天不要拦塞河水入大川，不填塞大山谷。不大兴土木，不射鸟兽。
English: In summer, do not block the river water into the large river, do not fill the large valley. Do not build civil engineering, do not shoot birds and beasts.

古文：秋毋赦过、释罪、缓刑。
现代文：秋天不要赦过、免罪和缓刑。
English: Don't pardon, exonerate, or suspend in the fall.

古文：冬无赋爵赏禄，伤伐五谷。
现代文：冬天不要封官赐禄，伤害五谷的埋藏。
English: In winter, do not seal the official reward, and do not hurt the hidden grain.

古文：故春政不禁则百长不生，夏政不禁则五谷不成，秋政不禁则奸邪不胜，冬政不禁则地气不藏。
现代文：所以春天不行禁政，各种生物就不能生长；夏天不行禁政，五谷就不能成熟；秋天不行禁政，奸邪就不能被制止；冬天不行禁政，地气就不能保藏。
English: Therefore, if there is no ban on politics in spring, all kinds of living things cannot grow; if there is no ban on politics in summer, the grain cannot mature; if there is no ban on politics in autumn, the evil can not be stopped; if there is no ban on politics in winter, the natural gas can not be preserved.

古文：四者俱犯，则阴阳不和，风雨不时，大水漂州流邑，大风漂屋折树，火暴焚地燋草；天冬雷，地冬霆，草木夏落而秋荣；蛰虫不藏，宜死者生，宜蛰者鸣；苴多螣蟆，山多虫螟；六畜不蕃，民多夭死；国贫法乱，逆气下生。
现代文：四者都违反了，那就阴阳不和，风雨不顺，大水淹没州邑，大风飘屋折树，大火焚地焦草；天上冬天打雷，地上冬天震动，草木夏枯而秋茂；蜇虫不藏在土里，应当死亡的活起来，应当蛰伏的鸣叫起来；草泽多有蛇和蛤蟆，山林多有虫子和蚊子；六畜不繁育，人民多天死，国贫法乱，一派反抗之气从下而起。
English: If all four are violated, then the yin and yang are not in harmony, the wind and rain are not smooth, the flood inundates the county seat, the wind blows the house and breaks the tree, the fire burns the ground and scorches the grass; the sky thunders in winter, the ground shakes in winter, the grass withers in summer and grows in autumn; the aphids do not hide in the soil, they should die and come to life, they should hum and chirp; there are many snakes and centipedes in the grass, and there are many insects and mosquitoes in the mountain forest; six animals do not breed, people die more often, the country is

古文：故曰：台榭相望者，亡国之庑也；驰车充国者，追寇之马也；羽剑珠饰者，斩生之斧也；文采纂组者，燔功之窑也。
现代文：所以说；楼台亭榭相望，等于是亡国的廊房；驰马游车充斥，等于是引寇的车马；用宝珠装饰的箭和剑，等于是杀身的兵刃；华丽衣饰与彩色绦带，等于是焚烧功业的灶窑。
English: Therefore, the view of the pavilions and pavilions is equal to the corridor of the ruined country; the horse-drawn carriages are full, which is equal to the carriages of the invaders; the arrows and swords decorated with jewels are equal to the deadly blades; the gorgeous clothing and colorful ribbons are equal to the stove kiln of burning work.

古文：明王知其然，故远而不近也。
现代文：明君懂得这些道理，所以远远离开它们而不愿接近。
English: Ming Jun understands these principles, so he stays far away from them and does not want to get close.

古文：能去此取彼，则人主道备矣。
现代文：能够舍此取彼，人君之道就完备了。
English: If you can get him without this, the way of the ruler of men is complete.

古文：夫法者，所以兴功惧暴也；律者，所以定分止争也；令者，所以令人知事也。
现代文：所谓法，是用来提倡立功威慑行暴的；律，是用来明定本分制止争端的；令，是用来命令人们管理事务的。
English: The so-called law is used to promote merit and deter violence; the law is used to specify the duty to stop disputes; the order is used to order people to manage affairs.

古文：法律政令者，吏民规矩绳墨也。
现代文：法律政令，是治理人们的规矩绳墨。
English: Laws and decrees are the rules by which people are governed.

古文：夫矩不正，不可以求方；绳不信，不可以求直。
现代文：矩不正，不能求方；绳不伸，不能求直。
English: If the moment is not right, you can't find the way; if the rope doesn't stretch, you can't get straight.

古文：法令者，君臣之所共立也；权势者，人主之所独守也。故人主失守则危，臣吏失守则乱。
现代文：法令是君臣共同建立的，权势才是君主独揽的。君主失其所守则国家危险，官吏失其所守则国家混乱。
English: Decrees are jointly established by monarch and vassal, and it is only the monarch who wields power. If the monarch loses his code, the country will be in danger, and if the officials lose their code, the country will be in chaos.

古文：罪决于吏则治，权断于主则威，民信其法则亲。
现代文：刑罚由官吏裁决则国家得治，权势由君主控制则国家威严，法令得人民拥护则人民对国家亲近。因此。
English: Therefore, if the punishment is decided by officials, the country will be governed, if the power is controlled by the monarch, the country will be dignified, and if the law is supported by the people, the people will be close to the country.

古文：是故明王审法慎权，下上有分。
现代文：明君总是明于法，慎于权，使上下各有其本分。
English: Mingjun is always clear about the law and cautious about power, so that the upper and lower levels each have their own duties.

古文：夫凡私之所起，必生于主。
现代文：大凡私弊的兴起，一定从君主开始。
English: The rise of great personal vices must begin with the monarch.

古文：夫上好本则端正之士在前，上好利则毁誉之士在侧；上多喜善赏，不随其功，则士不为用；数出重法，而不克其罪，则奸不为止。
现代文：君主好道德，品德端正的人就在眼前；君主好私利，诽谤吹捧的人就在左右；君主多宠爱而多行赏，但不看功绩，士人就不肯效力；君主多用苛重刑法，但不审核罪行，恶人就不能制止。
English: If the monarch has good morals, the people with good moral character are right in front of him; if the monarch is selfish, the people who slander and tout are on the right and left; if the monarch is more favored and rewarded, but does not look at the merits, the scholars will not be willing to work; if the monarch uses harsh criminal laws, but does not review the crimes, the wicked cannot be stopped.

古文：明王知其然，故见必然之政，立必胜之罚。
现代文：明君懂得这个道理，所以颁布坚定不移的政令，确立坚决镇压的刑罚。
English: Ming Jun understood this principle, so he issued an unswerving decree, establishing a penalty of resolute suppression.

古文：故民知所必就，而知所必去，推则往，召则来，如坠重于高，如渎水于地。
现代文：因此，人们知道哪些是一定要做的，哪些是一定要避免去做的，推之则去，招之则来，就象在高处下投重物，又象在地上开渠引水一样。
English: Therefore, people know what they must do and what they must avoid doing, push it and it will go, invite it and it will come, just like throwing a heavy object at a height and like opening a canal on the ground to divert water.

古文：故法不烦而吏不劳，民无犯禁，故有百姓无怨于上亦。
现代文：所以法令不烦琐，官吏不劳顿，人民没有违犯禁令的，故旧和百姓也都不会抱怨君主了。
English: Therefore, the decrees are not cumbersome, the officials are not overworked, and the people have not violated the ban, so the old and the people will not complain about the monarch.

古文：法臣：法断名决，无诽誉。
现代文：法臣：依法度断事，按刑名判案，没有诽谤和夸誉。
English: Law minister: adjudicate according to the law, sentence according to the name of the sentence, no defamation and praise.

古文：故君法则主位安，臣法则货赂止而民无奸。
现代文：所以君主守法则君位安定，大臣守法则贿赂停止而人民不搞奸邪之事。
English: Therefore, the monarch abides by the law, the position of the monarch is stable, the ministers abide by the law, the bribery stops, and the people do not engage in treason.

古文：呜呼美哉，名断言泽。
现代文：这样做是太好了！按刑名断案，讼狱也自会消释。
English: This is a great thing to do! The case will be decided according to the name of the convict, and the prisoner will be released.

古文：饰臣：克亲贵以为名，恬爵禄以为高。
现代文：饰臣：利用克制亲贵来猎取虚名，摆出漠视爵禄的姿态来显示清高。
English: Courtier: using restraint and gentleness to hunt for false fame, and displaying a disregard for peerage to show clemency.

古文：好名则无实，为高则不御。
现代文：好名则无实，显示清高则不服驾御。
English: A good reputation is worthless, but a high-clearance display is unacceptable to drivers.

古文：《故记》曰： 无实则无势，失辔则马焉制？ 
现代文：正如《故记》上所说： 大臣好名无实，君主就丧失威势；大臣不服从驾御，有如马失辔头，那还怎么控制呢？ 
English: As it was said in the "Historical Records": If the minister is a mere figurehead, the monarch will lose his authority; if the minister does not obey the command, it is like a horse losing its head, so how can it be controlled?

古文：侵臣：事小察以折法令，好佼反而行私请。
现代文：侵臣：从事暗地窥察来毁坏国家法令，好结交朋友来发展私人情谊。
English: Intruders: Engage in spying to subvert state laws, make friends to develop personal relationships.

古文：故私道行则法度侵，刑法繁则奸不禁。
现代文：所以私道通行法度受到侵害，刑律再繁坏人也不得制止。
English: Therefore, the private road traffic law has been infringed, and it is impossible to stop the bad people from abusing the criminal law.

古文：主严诛则失民心。
现代文：君主由此而严行诛杀则失去民心。
English: Monarchs who crack down as a result lose the people's hearts.

古文：谄臣：多造钟鼓、众饰妇女以惛上。
现代文：谄臣：多造钟鼓并多饰美女来迷惑君主。
English: Shinsen: He made more bells and drums and dressed up more beautiful women to confuse the monarch.

古文：故上惛则隟不计，而司声直禄。是以谄臣贵而法臣贱，此之谓微孤。
现代文：所以君主受迷惑而不肯听信四大辅臣，谏官也空拿俸禄不肯说话。于是谄臣得志而法臣不受重视，这就是把君主暗中孤立起来了。
English: Therefore, the monarch was pestered and did not want to listen to the four major vassals, and the eunuchs did not want to speak, so the vassals were encouraged and the courtiers were not taken seriously, which was to isolate the monarch secretly.

古文：愚臣：深罪厚罚以为行，重赋敛、多兑道以为上，使身见憎而主受其谤。
现代文：愚臣：自以为对百姓重罪厚罚是有成绩的，自以为加重赋税多多聚财都是为了君主，结果是自身见恶于人而君主也受人诽谤。
English: Foolish minister: he thought that there were achievements in imposing heavy punishment on the people for serious crimes, and he thought that the increase of taxes and the accumulation of wealth were all for the sake of the monarch. As a result, he saw himself as evil and the monarch was also slandered.

古文：《故记》称之曰： 愚忠谗贼 ，此之谓也。
现代文：《故记》上说： 愚忠实际上等于谗贼 ，就是这个意思。
English: This is what "Folklore" means when it says, "Foolish loyalty is actually tantamount to treachery."

古文：奸臣：痛言人情以惊主，开罪党以为雠除。
现代文：奸臣：痛切陈述人情来打动君主，妄开罪党之狱来为同党开路。
English: The treacherous vassal: to impress the monarch with a strong statement of personal feelings, to open the prison of the guilty party to pave the way for the same party.

古文：雠则罪不辜，罪不辜则与雠居。
现代文：为同党开路就加罪于好人，加罪于好人又可保证与同党安然相处。
English: To pave the way for the same party is to add guilt to good people, and to add guilt to good people is to ensure that they can get along well with the same party.

古文：故善言可恶以自信，而主失亲。
现代文：所以，这种人善于对君主言人之恶来发展自身，从而使君主失掉亲近的臣民。
English: Therefore, this kind of person is good at speaking evil of others to the monarch to develop himself, thus causing the monarch to lose close subjects.

古文：乱臣：自为辞功禄，明为下请厚赏。
现代文：乱臣：自己虚伪地推辞功禄，却公开为下面请求厚赏。
English: A dishonest minister: he hypocritically denied himself credit, but publicly requested a large reward for the following.

古文：居为非母，动为善栋。
现代文：私下是诽议朝政的祸首，表面上是歌功颂德的干将。
English: Privately, he is the chief villain for slandering the government, but on the surface, he is a leader in singing the praises of merit.

古文：以非买名，以是伤上，而众人不知。
现代文：用诽议猎取声名，用附和错误伤害君主，而众人不能察觉。
English: With slander they hunt for reputation, and with flattery and error they wound the sovereign, and the people are not aware of it.

古文：之谓微攻。
现代文：此之谓暗地里对君主进攻。
English: This is called a surreptitious attack on the sovereign.

