古文：峰州鱼海虾瓦屋子印鱼石斑鱼
现代文：峰州鱼
English: Fengzhou fish

古文：井鱼
现代文：玳瑁
English: Fish from the well

古文：异鱼螃鱓鱼玳瑁海术海镜
现代文：海虾
English: Prawns

古文：水母
现代文：鱼
English: Fish maw

古文：蠏百足蠏螗蠏鱼鹦鹉螺红螺鸯龟鲵鱼鲎飞鱼虎蠏蠔赤鯶公雷穴鱼
现代文：瓦屋子瓦屋子，属于蚌蛤一类，南中一带过去称呼它叫蚶子，后来因为卢钧尚书镇守这里，就改叫瓦屋子，因为它的壳上有棱象屋瓦的垅一样，所以用这个给它起名。
English: Tile house tile house, belongs to a kind of shovel. In the past, people in the south-central area called it a shovel. Later, because Lu Shanzhong kept a book here, it was changed to a tile house, because its shell has edges like the shovel of a roof tile, so it was named with this.

古文：虬尾牛鱼蝤奔係臂鸡嘴鱼剑鱼懒妇鱼黄雀化蛤天牛鱼
现代文：壳里有肉，肉是紫色的，肉很丰满，广东人很喜欢它，大多用火烤着做下酒菜吃，人们把它叫做天上的烤肉块。
English: There is meat in the shell, the meat is purple, the meat is very plump, the Guangdong people like it very much, most of them use fire to make wine and vegetables to eat, people call it the heavenly barbecue meat.

古文：峰州鱼峰州有一道水，从吐蕃中来，夏冷如冰雪。
现代文：吃多了就呼吸不畅，后背和胳膊疼痛，还不了解它的性质。
English: If you eat too much, you can't breathe well, your back and arms ache, and you don't understand its nature.

古文：有鱼长一二寸，来去有时，盖水上如粥。
现代文：印鱼印鱼，长一尺三寸，额头上呈四方形，象印章一样，上面有字。
English: Sealfish Sealfish, one foot three inches long, with a square-shaped forehead, like a seal, with writing on it.

古文：印鱼印鱼，长一尺三寸，额上四方如印，有字，诸大鱼应死者，先以印印之。
现代文：各种大鱼应当死去的，就先用印印在大鱼的身上。
English: When all kinds of big fish should die, they should first be imprinted on the body of the big fish.

古文：石斑鱼
现代文：石斑鱼
English: Grouper

古文：僧行儒言，建州有石斑鱼，好与蛇交。
现代文：行儒和尚说，建州有一种石斑鱼，喜欢与蛇交配。
English: The Confucian monk said that there is a kind of grouper fish in Jianzhou that likes to mate with snakes.

古文：南中多隔蜂窠，窠大如壶，常群螫人。
现代文：南中一带有很多蜂巢，大小象个水壶，常常成群地出来螫人。
English: There are many beehives in the Nanzhong area, the size of which is like a kettle, and they often come out in groups to sting people.

古文：土人取石斑鱼就蜂侧炙之，標于竿上，向日，令鱼影落其窠上，须臾，有鸟大如燕数百，互击其窠，窠碎落如叶，蜂亦全尽。
现代文：土人拿来石斑鱼靠近蜂巢的附近用火烧，挂在木杆上，对着太阳，让鱼的影子落在巢上。不一会，有几百只大小象燕子的鸟，轮流地攻击蜂巢，巢被弄碎象树叶一样地落到地上，蜂也全死光了。
English: The natives brought grouper fish and burned it near the beehive, hung it on a wooden pole, facing the sun, and let the shadow of the fish fall on the nest. Soon, hundreds of swallow-sized birds took turns attacking the beehive. The nest was smashed to the ground like a leaf, and the bees were all dead.

古文：唐段成式云，井鱼脑有穴，每嗡水，辄于脑穴蹙出，如飞泉，散落海中，舟人竞以空器贮之。
现代文：井鱼唐代的段成式说，井鱼的脑袋上有个洞，每当吸水时，水就会从脑袋上的洞快速地喷出来，象飞出的泉水，散落在海里，船上的人都争着用空的器具接住水并贮存起来。
English: According to the Tang Dynasty well fish passage, the well fish has a hole in its head. Whenever it absorbs water, water will quickly spray out of the hole in the head, like flying spring water, and scatter in the sea. The people on the boat compete to catch the water with empty utensils and store it.

古文：海水咸苦，经鱼脑穴出，反淡如泉水焉。
现代文：海水本来又咸又苦，经过鱼脑的洞喷出来，反而淡得象泉水一样。
English: The seawater, originally salty and bitter, is squirted out through a hole in the fish's brain, but it is as pale as spring water.

古文：成式见梵僧善提胜说。
现代文：这是段成式见到印度僧人善提胜时听他说的。
English: This is what Duan Chengshih said when he heard the Indian monk Zhen Ti Sheng speak.

古文：异鱼
现代文：异鱼
English: Alien fish

古文：异鱼，东海人常获鱼，长五六尺，腹胃成胡鹿刀槊之状，或号秦皇鱼。
现代文：异鱼是东海人常常捕到的鱼，长五六尺，肚子里的胃，呈现出盛箭器和刀槊的样子，有人叫它秦皇鱼。
English: The alien fish is a fish often caught by people in the East China Sea. It is five or six feet long and has a stomach in its belly, giving the appearance of a quiver and a knife. Some people call it the Qin emperor fish.

古文：螃
现代文：螃
English: Crabs

古文：傍海大鱼，脊上有石十二时，一名篱头溺，一名螃，其溺甚毒。
现代文：傍海地方的大鱼，脊背有石十二时。一个名叫篱头溺，一个名叫螃，这种鱼的尿有很大毒性。
English: A large fish from the coastal area, with twelve o'clock stones on its back. One of them is called hedgehog and the other is called crab. The urine of this fish is very toxic.

古文：鱓鱼
现代文：鱓鱼
English: Sea bream

古文：郫县侯生者，于沤麻池侧得鱓鱼，大可尺围，烹而食之，发白复黑，齿落复生，自此轻健。
现代文：郫县的侯生，在沤麻池的附近捉到一条鱓鱼，直径大约有一尺，煮着吃了，白发变黑，掉了的牙齿又生出来，从此就身体轻健。
English: Hou Sheng of Handan County caught a catfish with a diameter of about one foot near the nettle pond, cooked it and ate it. His white hair turned black, his lost teeth were born again, and his body was light and healthy from then on.

古文：玳瑁玳瑁形状似龟，唯腹背甲有烘点。
现代文：玳瑁的形状象龟，只是腹部和背部的甲壳上有烘烤的斑点。
English: The beak is shaped like a turtle, except that the carapace on the abdomen and back has roasted spots.

古文：《本草》云： 玳瑁解毒，其大者悉婆萨石，兼云辟邪。 
现代文：《本草》上说： 玳瑁能解毒，其中的大玳瑁全都是婆萨石，同时还能避邪。 
English: "The Herbal" said: "Cormorants can detoxify, and all of the large cormorants are pomegranates, and at the same time they can avoid evil spirits.

古文：广南卢亭，获活玳瑁龟一枚以献连帅嗣薛王。王令生取背甲小者二片，带于左臂上以辟毒。
现代文：广南的卢亭，活捉了一只玳瑁龟献给边帅的儿子薛王，薛王命令取下龟的二小片背甲，带在左臂上用来避毒。
English: Lu Ting of Guangnan captured a live hawksbill turtle for the border guard's son, Xue Wang. Xue Wang ordered that two small pieces of the turtle's dorsal armor be removed and worn on the left arm to ward off poison.

古文：龟被生揭其甲，甚极苦楚。
现代文：龟被活着揭下它的甲壳，痛苦达到了极点。
English: The tortoise was stripped of its carapace alive and in extreme pain.

古文：后养于使宅后北池，伺其揭处渐生，复遣卢亭送于海畔。
现代文：然后放到使君住宅后北面的池子里养着，等到它被揭去甲壳的地方渐渐长好，再派卢亭把它送到海边去。
English: After that, it was kept in a pond to the north of the back of Sojun's house. It was allowed to grow until the place where it was stripped of its carapace gradually became better, and then Luting sent it to the seaside.

古文：或云，玳瑁若生，带之有验，是饮馔中有盅毒，玳瑁甲即自摇动；若死，无此验。
现代文：有的人说，被揭下甲壳的玳瑁龟如果活着，带着它的甲壳就有灵验，你吃的饭菜中如果有毒，玳瑁的甲壳就会自己摇晃起来。被揭下甲壳后如果死了，就没有这种灵验了。
English: Some people say that if the turtle is alive when its carapace is removed, it will have the ability to carry its carapace with it. If there is poison in the food you eat, the turtle's carapace will shake itself. If the turtle is dead when its carapace is removed, it will not have this ability.

古文：海术
现代文：海术
English: Seamanship

古文：南海有水族，前左脚长，前右脚短，口在肋旁背上，常以左脚捉物，置于右脚，右脚中有齿啮之，方内于口。
现代文：南方有一种水产，前左脚长，前右脚短，口在肋旁边的后背上。常常用左脚捉东西，放在右脚上，右脚中有牙齿咬住那东西，这才放到口里。
English: In the south, there is a kind of aquatic product, the front left foot is long, the front right foot is short, and the mouth is on the back next to the ribs. It is often used to catch things with the left foot and put them on the right foot, and there are teeth in the right foot to bite the thing, and then put it in the mouth.

古文：大三尺余，其声 术术 ，南人呼为海术。
现代文：大的有三尺多长，它的叫声就象 术术 的声音，南方人叫它海术。
English: The big one is more than three feet long, and its call is like the call of a sea urchin. People in the south call it a sea urchin.

古文：海镜
现代文：海镜
English: Sea Mirror

古文：海镜，广人呼为膏叶，盘两片，合以成形。
现代文：海镜，广东人叫作膏叶，象两个盘子合起来的形状。
English: The sea mirror, called "paste leaf" by the Cantonese, is shaped like two plates joined together.

古文：壳圆，中甚莹滑。日照如云母光。
现代文：壳是圆的，壳的中间很光滑晶莹，在太阳光的照射下能发出云母一样的光彩，壳内有少许的肉象蚌肉一样。
English: The shell is round, the middle of the shell is very smooth and crystalline, it can emit mica-like brilliance under the sun's rays, and there is a little meat inside the shell like stew meat.

古文：内有少肉如蚌胎，腹中有红蟹子，其小如黄豆，而螯具足。海镜饥，则蟹出拾食，蟹饱归腹，海镜亦饱。
现代文：肚子里有红色的蟹子，小得象黄豆一样，可是螯等器官都长得很完全。海镜饿了，小蟹子就出来找食吃，小蟹子吃饱了回到海镜的肚子里，海镜也饱了。
English: There was a red crab in its belly, as small as a bean, but its gills and other organs were fully grown. When the sea mirror was hungry, the little crab came out to look for food. When the little crab was full, it returned to the sea mirror's belly, and the sea mirror was also full.

古文：或迫之以火，则蟹子走出，离肠腹立毙。
现代文：有的人把海镜放在火边上烤，那么小蟹就走出来，一离开海镜的肚子立刻就死了。
English: Some people put the sea mirror on the edge of the fire to roast, then the crabs come out and die as soon as they leave the belly of the sea mirror.

古文：或生剖之，有蟹子活在腹中，逡巡亦毙。
现代文：有的人活着剖开海镜，在海镜的肚子里有个小活蟹子，不一会儿，也死了。水母
English: Some people cut open the sea mirror alive, and in the belly of the sea mirror there was a small live crab, and in a moment, it also died.

古文：水母，广州谓之水母，闽谓之魠。
现代文：水母，广州人叫它水母，福建人叫它魠。
English: Jellyfish, Guangzhou people call it jellyfish, Fujian people call it cormorant.

古文：其形乃浑然凝结一物，有淡紫色者，有白色者，大如覆帽，小者如碗。
现代文：它是凝结成整体的一个生物，有淡紫色的，有白色的，大的象倒扣过来的帽子，小的象碗一样。
English: It is a creature condensed into a whole, lilac, white, large like a hat turned upside down, small like a bowl.

古文：肠下有物如悬絮，俗谓之足，而无口眼。常有数十虾寄腹下，咂食其涎。
现代文：肠子下面有象悬挂着的棉絮一样的东西，平常人叫它是脚，可是不长嘴不长眼，常常有几十只虾寄居在水母的肚子下面，吸食水母涎水。
English: Underneath the intestines there is something like hanging lint. Ordinary people call it a foot, but it doesn't have a mouth or eyes. There are often dozens of shrimps living under the jellyfish's belly, sucking the jellyfish's swill.

古文：浮泛水上，捕者或遇之，即欻然而没，乃是虾有所见耳。
现代文：水母一般漂浮在水面上，捕鱼人若遇到它，水母就很快地沉下去，那是因为虾看见了东西。
English: Jellyfish generally float on the surface of the water, and if a fisherman encounters it, the jellyfish will sink quickly, because the shrimp sees something.

古文：南中好食之，云性暖，治河鱼之疾，然甚腥，须以草木灰点生油再三洗之，莹净如水精紫玉。
现代文：南中一带的人喜欢吃它，说水母是暖性物，能治疗吃河鱼得的病，可是太腥，必须用草木灰和生油多次洗，就干净得象水晶和紫玉一样。
English: People in the south-central region like to eat it, saying that jellyfish are warm-blooded and can treat diseases caused by eating river fish. However, it is so sticky that it must be washed several times with grass and oil, so it is as clean as crystal and purple jade.

古文：肉厚可二寸，薄处亦寸余，先煮椒桂或豆蔻，生姜缕切而炸之，或以五辣肉醋，或以虾醋，如鲙食之。最宜虾醋，亦物类相摄耳。
现代文：肉厚大约有二寸，薄的地方也一寸多。先煮好椒桂或豆蔻，生姜切成丝用油炸好，或者用五辣肉醋，或者用虾醋，与水母丝一起拌着吃，最适宜的是虾醋，这也是符合物类互相辅佐互相摄取的道理。
English: The meat is about two inches thick, and the thin part is also more than one inch. First, boil the bell pepper or bean paste, cut the ginger into filaments and fry it well, or use five spicy meat vinegar, or use shrimp vinegar, and mix it with jellyfish filaments. The most suitable is shrimp vinegar, which is also in line with the principle of species assisting each other's uptake.

古文：水母本阴海凝结之物，食而暖补，其理未详。
现代文：水母本来是阴海里凝结而成的生物，吃了它可以补暖，其中的道理还不清楚。
English: The jellyfish is originally a creature that condenses in the dark sea, and eating it can warm you up. The reason for this is still unclear.

古文：蟹
现代文：蟹
English: Crabs

古文：蟹，八月腹内有芒，芒真稻芒也，长寸许，向东输与海神，未输芒，不可食。
现代文：蟹，八月的肚子里有芒刺，芒是真的稻芒，长一寸多，朝着东方献给海神，不献出芒刺，不能吃。
English: Crabs, in August, have spines in their stomachs. The spines are actually rice spines, more than an inch long, and are offered to the sea god in the direction of the east. If you don't offer the spines, you can't eat them.

古文：百足蟹
现代文：百足蟹
English: Centipede crab

古文：善苑国出百足蟹，长九尺，四螯。煎为胶，谓之螯胶，胜凤喙胶也。
现代文：善苑国出产百足蟹，长九尺，四只螯，把蟹螯煎熬成胶，叫做螯胶，胜过凤喙胶。
English: Zhenyuan Country produces centipede crabs, nine feet long, four gills, and the crab gills are boiled into glue, called ginger glue, which is better than phoenix ginger glue.

古文：螗蟹
现代文：螗蟹
English: Crayfish

古文：鱼鱼，章安县出焉。子朝出索食，暮还入母腹，中容四子。颊赤如金，甚健，网不能制，俗呼为河伯健儿。
现代文：平原郡进贡螗蟹，是在河间一带捕捉的，每年都进贡活的，劈开冰用火照明，悬挂着老狗肉，螗蟹觉察到是狗肉就浮上来，因而就捉到了，一只价值一百钱，用毡子密封起来捆在驿马上，奔驰着送到京城。鱼，出产在章安县。幼鱼早晨出找食吃，晚上回到母亲的肚子里，肚子里能装下四只幼鱼。鱼的两颊颜色象红铜，很健壮，渔网制不住它，人们叫它是河伯健儿。
English: Pingyuan County's tribute crabs are caught in the area between the rivers. They are brought to the tribute every year. The old dog meat is hung by splitting the ice and lighting it with fire. When the crabs realize that it is dog meat, it floats up, so they catch it. One is worth one hundred yuan. It is sealed with pliers and tied to a mule, and it is galloping to Beijing. Herring, produced in Zhang'an County. The young eels go out to eat in the morning, and return to their mother's stomach in the evening. The stomach can hold four young fish. The cheeks of the eel are the color

古文：鹦鹉螺
现代文：鹦鹉螺
English: Nautilus

古文：红螺，大小亦类鹦鹉螺，壳薄而红，亦堪为酒器。刳小螺为足，缀以胶漆，尤可佳尚也。
现代文：装饰成酒杯，新奇可玩赏。红螺红螺，大小也类似鹦鹉螺。壳很薄是红色的，也适合做酒器，把小螺挖空做脚，用胶粘牢，涂上漆，特别令人喜爱。
English: Decorated into a wine glass, a novelty that can be played with. Red snail, also similar in size to the nautilus. The shell is very thin and red, and is also suitable for making wine vessels. The small snail is hollowed out to make a foot, glued and painted, and is particularly popular.

古文：鸯龟
现代文：鸯龟
English: Horned turtle

古文：初宁县里多鸯龟，壳薄狭而燥，头似鹅，不与常龟同，而能啮犬也。
现代文：初宁县里有很多鸯龟，壳又薄又窄而且干燥。头象鹅子，和平常的龟不一样，却能咬狗。
English: There are many hawksbill turtles in Shuning County. Their shells are thin, narrow and dry. Their heads are like geese, and unlike ordinary turtles, they can bite dogs.

古文：鲵鱼
现代文：鲵鱼
English: Sea bream

古文：鲵鱼如鲇，四足长尾，能上树。
现代文：鲵鱼象鲇鱼一样，长着四只脚长尾巴，能爬上树。
English: Eels, like catfish, have four-legged tails and can climb trees.

古文：天旱，辄含水上山，以草叶覆身，张口，鸟来饮水，辄吸食之。
现代文：天旱的时候，就含着水上山，用草叶盖在身上，张着口，鸟来喝水，就吸住吃了，叫声象小孩子声音。
English: When the weather is dry, they go up the mountain with water, cover themselves with blades of grass, and open their mouths. When birds come to drink water, they suck it up and eat it. Their cries sound like children's voices.

古文：声如小儿，峡中人食之，先缚于树鞭之，身上白汁出，如构汁，去此方可食，不尔有毒。
现代文：山里人吃鲵鱼时，先把鲵鱼捆到树上用鞭子抽打，等身上出现白汁，象构树汁一样，去掉汁才能吃，不然就有毒。
English: When mountain people eat eel, they first tie the eel to a tree and whip it with a whip, and then the white juice appears on the body, like the juice of a tree. The juice must be removed before eating, otherwise it will be poisonous.

古文：鲎
现代文：鲎
English: 

古文：鲎雌常负雄而行，渔者必得其双。
现代文：鲎鱼中雌鱼常常背着雄鱼行走，打渔的人一定能成对地捉到。
English: In cod, the female fish often walks on the back of the male fish, so fishermen can definitely catch them in pairs.

古文：南人列肆卖之，雄者少肉。
现代文：南方人把鲎鱼摆在市场上卖，雄鱼肉很少。
English: People in the south put eels on the market and sell them, but there is very little male fish meat.

古文：旧说，过海辄相积于背，高尺余，如帆，乘风游行。
现代文：旧的传说说，渡海时就互相背在背上。高一尺象船帆一样，能乘风游行。
English: An old legend says that when crossing the sea, they carry each other on their backs. A foot high like a sail, they can parade in the wind.

古文：今鲎壳上有物，高七八寸，如石珊瑚，俗呼鲎帆。至今闽岭重鲎酱。
现代文：现在鲎鱼的壳上有个东西，高七八寸，象石珊瑚一样，一般人叫它鲎帆，至今福建一带还很重视鲎鱼酱。
English: Now there is something on the shell of the eel, seven or eight inches high, like a stone coral, the average person calls it a sail. So far, Fujian has attached great importance to eel sauce.

古文：十二足，壳可为冠，次于白角。
现代文：鲎鱼十二只脚，壳可以做帽子，仅次于白角。
English: The squid has twelve legs, and its shell can be made into a hat, second only to the white horn.

古文：南人取其尾为小如意。
现代文：南方人用它的尾巴做成小如意。
English: People in the south use its tail to make small cranes.

古文：飞鱼
现代文：飞鱼
English: Flying Fish

古文：飞鱼，朗山朗水有之，鱼长一尺，能飞，即凌云空，息即归潭底。
现代文：飞鱼，朗山的朗水有这种鱼，鱼长一尺，能飞翔，突然就飞上云空，一忽儿就回到潭水的底部。
English: Flying fish, there is this kind of fish in the Langshui of Langshan. The fish is one foot long and can fly. It suddenly flies up into the sky and returns to the bottom of the pool in no time.

古文：虎蟹
现代文：虎蟹
English: Tiger crabs

古文：虎蟹，壳上有虎斑，可装为酒器，与红蟹皆产琼崖海边，虽非珍奇，亦不易采得也。
现代文：虎蟹，壳上有虎皮一样的斑点，可以装饰做酒器。与红蟹一起出产在琼崖的海边，虽然不是奇异珍贵的东西，也不是容易捉到的。
English: Tiger crabs, with tiger skin-like spots on their shells, can be used to decorate wine containers. They are produced along with red crabs on the coast of Qiongyao, although they are not rare or easy to catch.

古文：蠔
现代文：蠔
English: 

古文：蠔即牡蛎也，其初生海岛边，如拳石，四面渐长。
现代文：蠔就是牡蛎，初时生在海岛边，像拳头大的石头，从四面渐渐地生长，有的长得高一二丈，象高大险峻的山。
English: An oyster is an oyster, born on the edge of an island at birth, like a fist-sized stone, gradually growing from all sides, some growing a couple of feet high, like a tall, precipitous mountain.

古文：有高一二丈者，巉岩如山，每一房内，蠔肉一片，随其所生，前后大小不等。每潮来，诸蠔皆开房，伺虫蚁入，即合之。
现代文：每一个石壳内，有一大片蠔肉，随壳而长。前前后后的蠔大小不相等，每当涨潮时，所有的蠔全都张开壳，遇到虫子进去，壳就合上。
English: Inside each stone shell, there is a large piece of cocoon meat that grows with the shell. The cocoons in front and behind are not the same size. Whenever the tide rises, all the cocoons open their shells. If an insect enters, the shell closes.

古文：海夷卢亭者以斧楔取壳，烧以烈火，蠔即启房，挑取其肉，贮以小竹筐，赴虚市，以易西骨米。
现代文：有个南海人卢亭用斧子楔取整个的蠔，用烈火烧它，蠔张开壳，挑出里面的肉，装在小竹筐里，到集市上去卖，用来交易米。
English: Lu Ting, a man from the South China Sea, used an axe wedge to take the whole clam, burned it with fire, opened the shell, picked out the meat inside, put it in a small bamboo basket, and sold it at the market to trade glutinous rice.

古文：蠔肉大者醃为炙，小者炒食，肉中有滋味。食之即甚，壅肠骨。
现代文：蠔肉大的腌好烤着吃，小的炒着吃，肉很有滋味，吃多了蠔肉就会堵塞肠胃。
English: Big clams are good grilled and eaten, small ones are eaten stir-fried. The meat is very tasty. If you eat too much clam meat, your stomach will be clogged.

古文：赤鯶公
现代文：赤鯶公
English: The Red Skull

古文：鲤脊中鳞一道，每鳞上有黑点，大小皆三十六鳞。
现代文：鲤鱼的脊背上有一道鳞，每片鳞上有个黑点，大的小的全都是三十六片。
English: An eel has a ridge of scales on its dorsal spine. Each scale has a black spot, and there are thirty-six scales, large and small.

古文：唐朝律，取得鲤鱼，即宜放，仍不得吃。说赤鯶公，卖者决六十。
现代文：根据唐朝的律法，捉到鲤鱼，就应该放掉，不能吃，并说卖赤鯶公鱼的人，杖打六十板。
English: According to the law of the Tang Dynasty, if a catfish is caught, it should be released and not eaten, and it was said that the person who sold red catfish should be beaten with a cane.

古文：雷穴鱼
现代文：雷穴鱼
English: Potholefish

古文：兴州有一处名雷穴，水常半穴，每雷声，水塞穴流，鱼随流而出。
现代文：兴州有一个地方叫雷穴，里面常有半穴水，每当打雷时，水就满穴并往外流，鱼也随水流出来。
English: There is a place in Xingzhou called Lei Xuan, which is often filled with water. Whenever there is a thunderstorm, the water fills the hole and flows out, and the fish also flow out with the water.

古文：百姓每候雷声，绕树布网，获鱼无限。
现代文：百姓们每当打雷时，就绕着树布置好鱼网，能网到无数鱼。
English: Whenever there is a thunderstorm, the villagers set up fishing nets around the trees, which can catch countless fish.

古文：非雷声，渔子聚鼓击于穴口，鱼亦辄出，所获半于雷时。
现代文：如果没有雷声，打鱼的人就在雷穴的洞口安上好几面鼓一起敲打起来，鱼也能流出来，捕到的鱼只有打雷时的一半。
English: If there is no thunder, the fisherman will set up several drums at the mouth of the mine hole and beat them together. Fish can also flow out, and the fish caught is only half of what it was when there was thunder.

古文：韦行规为兴州刺史时，与亲故书，说其事。
现代文：韦行规做兴州刺史时，给亲朋故友写信，说了这件事。
English: When Wei Xingjie was writing the history of Xingzhou, he wrote a letter to his relatives and friends and told them about this.

古文：虬尾
现代文：虬尾
English: Shanwei

古文：东海有鱼，虬尾似鸱，鼓浪即降雨，遂设像于屋脊。
现代文：东海有一种鱼，长着虬龙尾巴，样子象鸱鸟，它要是用尾巴掀动起波浪，就要下雨，于是人们在屋脊上放着它的像。
English: In the East China Sea, there is a fish with a dragon's tail that looks like an ostrich. If it uses its tail to stir up waves, it will cause rain, so people put its image on the roof.

古文：牛鱼
现代文：牛鱼
English: Cowfish

古文：海上取牛鱼皮悬之，海潮至，即毛竖。
现代文：在海上取一张牛鱼的皮悬挂着，要是海潮来了的话，它的毛就会竖起来。
English: Take the skin of a bullfish at sea. It hangs there, and if the tide comes in, its hair will stand on end.

古文：蝤
现代文：蝤
English: 

古文：蝤，大者长尺余，两螯至强。
现代文：蝤，大的长一尺多，两个螯非常地强劲有力。
English: The large dragonfly is more than a foot long, and the two dragonflies are very powerful.

古文：八月能与虎斗，虎不如。
现代文：八月份的时候，能与老虎拼斗，老虎敌不过它。
English: In August, when you can fight with a tiger, the tiger is no match for it.

古文：随大潮退壳，一退一长。
现代文：随着大潮退壳，退一次壳长大一次。
English: As the tide recedes, so does the shell.

古文：奔
现代文：奔
English: Bentham

古文：奔，一名瀱，非鱼非蛟，大如舡，长二三丈，若鲇，有两乳在腹下，雄雌阴阳类人。取其子着岸上，声如婴儿啼。
现代文：奔，另一个名叫瀱，不是鱼也不是蛟，大小象一条船，样子象鲇鱼。在肚子的下面有两个乳房，雌雄的阴物阳物都类似人，捉住它的幼鱼放到岸上，叫声象婴儿啼哭。
English: Ben, the other one, is not a fish or a toad, it is the size of a boat, it looks like an eel, it has two breasts under its belly, both sexes are similar to humans, it catches its young and puts them on the shore, it cries like a baby crying.

古文：项上有孔，通头，气出哧哧作声，必大风，行者以为候。
现代文：脖子上有个孔洞，通到头上。出气发出嚇嚇声音的时候，一定刮大风，行路的人用它来判断天气。
English: There is a hole in the neck, which leads to the head. When the wind makes a threatening sound, there must be a strong wind, and travelers use it to judge the weather.

古文：相传懒妇所化，杀一头，得膏三四斛，取之烧灯，照读书纺绩辄暗。照欢乐之处则明。
现代文：相传是懒女人变化而成。杀一只奔，能得到三四斛油膏，用油膏点灯，照着看书或织布的时候光亮就昏暗，照着欢乐的地方就明亮。
English: Legend has it that the lazy woman changed into a lazy woman. If you kill a horse, you can get three or four jars of ointment, and use the ointment to light a lamp. If you look at a book or weave cloth, the light will be dim, and if you look at a happy place, it will be bright.

古文：係臂
现代文：係臂
English: The jib is out

古文：係臂如龟，入海捕之，必先祭。又陈所取之数，则自出，因取之。
现代文：係臂象龟一样。入海去捕捉它时，必须事先祭祀，还要说出捕取的数目，它就会自己出来，因而就捕到了它。
English: When you go into the sea to catch it, you must first offer a sacrifice, and also say the number of captures, and it will come out by itself, so you have caught it.

古文：若不信，则风浪覆舡。
现代文：如果不遵守信用多捕，那么风浪就会把船倾覆了。
English: If you do not comply with the trust and catch more fish, then the wind and waves will overturn the boat.

古文：鸡嘴鱼
现代文：鸡嘴鱼
English: Cockerelfish

古文：李德裕幼时，常于明州见一水族，有两足，嘴似鸡，身如鱼。
现代文：李德裕幼时，曾经在明州见过一种水生物，长着两只脚，嘴象鸡，身子象鱼。
English: When Li Deyu was a child, he once saw an aquatic creature in Mingzhou with two legs, a mouth like a chicken and a body like a fish.

古文：剑鱼
现代文：剑鱼
English: Swordfish

