古文：夏文荣张希望郑从简房颖叔刘讽相州刺史王湛狄仁杰李皓张守珪杨瑒
现代文：夏文荣张希望郑从简房颖叔刘讽相州刺史王湛狄仁杰李皓张守珪杨瑒
English: Xia Wen Rong, Zhang Hope, Zheng Cong, Jane Fang, Ying, Uncle Liu, Lin, Sangzhou, Zhishu, Wang Zhan, Di, Renjie, Li Yan, Zhang Shou, Yan Yang,

古文：夏文荣
现代文：夏文荣
English: Xia Wen Rong

古文：周长安年初，前遂州长江县丞夏文荣，时人以为判冥事。
现代文：武则天长安年初，有个前任遂州长江县丞夏文荣，当时的人都知道他能预言未来之事。
English: At the beginning of the year of Wuzetian and Chang'an, there was a predecessor and then governor of Jiangxian, Xia Wenrong. At that time, people knew that he could predict future events.

古文：张鷟时为御史，出为处州司仓，替归，往问焉。荣以杖画地作柳字，曰：君当为此州。
现代文：张鷟当时是御史，出任处州司仓，特意回来，去求问夏之荣，夏文荣用木棍在地上画了个柳字，说：您应该出任这个州。
English: At that time, Zhang Xuan was the imperial historian and served as the secretary of the prefectural government. He came back specifically to ask Xia Wenyong. Xia Wenyong drew a willow character on the ground with a wooden stick and said, "You should serve as this prefectural government."

古文：至后果除柳州司户，后改德州平昌令。
现代文：到后来张鷟果然任柳州司户，后改任德州平昌令。
English: Later, Zhang Ye was appointed as the governor of Liuzhou, and later as the governor of PyeongChang, Texas.

古文：荣尅时日，晷漏无差。
现代文：夏文荣预算时间，和晷漏一样没有差错。
English: Xia Wen Rong's budget time, there is no mistake as well as mistakes.

古文：又苏州嘉兴令杨廷玉，则天之表侄也，贪猥无厌，著词曰：回波尔时廷玉，打獠取钱未足。
现代文：苏州嘉兴县令杨廷玉，是武则天的表侄，他贪婪无厌，有人写词说：回波尔时廷玉，打獠取钱未足。
English: Yang Tingyu, the governor of Jiaxing County, Suzhou, was Wu Zetian's cousin. He was insatiably greedy. Someone wrote: "When Tingyu returned to the capital, he did not have enough money.

古文：阿姑婆见作天子，旁人不得抵触。
现代文：阿姑婆见作天子，傍人不得抵触。
English: A grandmother sees herself as the son of heaven, and her attendants must not contradict her.

古文：差摄御史康訔推，奏断死。
现代文：皇上让御史康訔调查。奏明皇上，判了他死罪。
English: The Emperor asked the Grand Historian Kangxi to investigate, and after a report to the Emperor, he sentenced him to death.

古文：时母在都，见夏文荣。荣索一千张白纸，一千张黄纸，为廷玉祷。
现代文：当时他的母亲在京城，求见夏文荣，文荣要一千张白纸，一千张黄纸，为廷玉祈祷，告诉她过十天再来。
English: At that time, his mother was in Beijing and asked to see Xia Wenrong. Wenrong asked for a thousand pieces of white paper and a thousand pieces of yellow paper to pray for Tingyu and told her to come back in ten days.

古文：后十日来，母如其言。荣曰：且免死矣，后十日内有进止。
现代文：母亲听从了文荣的话，文荣说：先免掉死罪，十天内有消息。
English: His mother obeyed Wen Rong's words. Wen Rong said, "First, let the death penalty be waived. We will have news within ten days."

古文：果六日有敕：杨廷玉奉养老母残年。
现代文：果然到了第六天有了敕令：杨廷玉奉养老母残年。
English: Sure enough, on the sixth day, there was a royal decree: Yang Tingyu would serve as a pensioner mother for the rest of her life.

古文：又天官令史柳无忌造荣，荣书卫汉郴字曰：卫多不成，汉郴二州，交加不定。
现代文：天官令史柳无忌造访文荣，文荣写了卫、汉、郴等字，说：卫州可能不太行，汉、郴二州，交替不稳定。
English: The heavenly official ordered Shi Liu to visit Wen Rong without hesitation. Wen Rong wrote Wei, Han, Jie and other characters, saying: Wei Prefecture may not be feasible, Han and Jie two states, alternately unstable.

古文：后果唱卫州录事，关重，即唱汉州录事。
现代文：后来，柳无忌果然当了卫州录事，因关口重要，无忌又当了汉州录事。
English: Later, Liu Muxui became the record of the state of Weizhou. Because of the importance of the pass, he also became the record of the state of Hanzhou.

古文：时鸾台凤阁令史进状，诉天官注拟不平。
现代文：当时，鸾台凤阁令史上书朝廷，控告天官记载历史不公平。
English: At that time, Xingtai Fengge ordered the imperial court to write history, and accused the heavenly official of unfairly recording history.

古文：则天责侍郎崔玄暐，暐奏：臣注官极平。
现代文：武则天责成侍郎崔玄暐处理，玄暐奏明皇上说天官记载历史很公平。
English: Wu Zetian ordered the attendant, Cui Xuanqian, to deal with the matter. Xuanqian reported to the emperor that the heavenly official was very fair in recording the history.

古文：则天曰：若尔，吏部令史官共鸾台凤阁交换。
现代文：武则天说：若是那样，让吏部下命吏官和鸾台凤阁交换一下。
English: Wu Zetian said: If that is the case, let the officials and subordinates order the officials to exchange with Xingtai Fengge.

古文：遂以无忌为郴州平阳主簿，鸾台令史为汉州录事焉。
现代文：就让柳无忌做了郴州平阳主簿，鸾台令史为汉州录事。
English: Let Liu Muxi make the main book of Bozhou and Pingyang, and the history of Bozhou and Taiyuan become the record of Hanzhou.

古文：张希望
现代文：张希望
English: Zhang Kibo

古文：周司礼卿张希望，移旧居改造。
现代文：周司礼卿张希望，移居到旧房稍做改造后住下。
English: Zhou Shi Laiqing Zhang hopes to move into the old house and live there after a little remodeling.

古文：见鬼人冯毅见之曰：当新厩下，有一伏尸，极怒，公可避之。
现代文：有个能看到鬼的人叫冯毅，一天见到张希望，告诉他说：在你新盖的马厩下面，埋着一个尸体，他很凶恶，您应该回避他。
English: A man named Feng Yi, who could see ghosts, saw Zhang Hope one day and told him: "Under your newly built stables, there is a corpse buried. He is very vicious. You should avoid him."

古文：望笑曰：吾少长已来，未曾信如事，公勿言。
现代文：张希望笑着说：我从小到大，从不相信这类事，你不要多说了。
English: Zhang Hope said with a smile: I have never believed in such things since I was a child. Don't say more.

古文：后月余，毅入，见鬼持弓矢，随希望后。
现代文：一个多月后，冯毅来了，看见鬼拿着弓箭，跟随在希望后面。
English: More than a month later, Feng Yi came and saw the ghost holding a bow and arrow, following behind Hope.

古文：适及阶，鬼引弓射中肩膊，希望觉背痛，以手抚之，其日卒。
现代文：希望刚走到台阶，鬼就发箭射中了他的肩膀，希望觉得背痛，急用手抚摸。他当天就死了。
English: As soon as Hope walked up the steps, the ghost shot him in the shoulder with an arrow. Hope felt pain in his back and hurriedly stroked it with his hand. He died that day.

古文：郑从简
现代文：郑从简
English: Zheng Congjian

古文：周左司员外郎郑从简，所居厅事常不宁，令巫者视之，曰：有伏尸，姓宗，妻姓寇，在厅基之下。
现代文：周左司员外郎郑从简，他的住处大厅经常无缘无故地有吵吵闹闹声。
English: Zhou Zuo's son-in-law, Zheng Congjian, often had noisy noises in the hall of his residence.

古文：使问之曰：君坐我门上，我出入常值君，君自不嘉，非我之为也。
现代文：很不安宁。他请巫者到家看一看，巫师说：这里有伏尸，姓宗，妻子姓寇，在大厅的地基下面。郑从简让巫师问鬼，鬼说：您坐在我门上，我出入常碰到您，您自然就感到不好了，不是我故意的。
English: He was very uneasy. He asked the sorcerer to come to the house and take a look. The sorcerer said, "There are corpses here, surnamed Zong and his wife surnamed Kou, under the foundation of the hall." Zheng Congjian asked the sorcerer to ask the ghost. The ghost said, "You are sitting on my door. I often see you when I go out and come in. Naturally, you feel bad. It was not my intention."

古文：掘地三尺，果得旧骸，有铭如其言。移出改葬，于是遂绝。
现代文：郑从简命人挖地三尺，果然有陈旧的尸骨，有铭文和鬼说的一样，从简把尸骨移出改葬别处，于是就没有鬼来吵闹了。
English: Zheng ordered someone from Jane to dig three feet into the ground, and sure enough, there were old bones, with the same inscription as the ghost said. Jane removed the bones from Jane and reburied them elsewhere, so there were no ghosts to make noise.

古文：房颖叔
现代文：房颖叔
English: Uncle Fong Ying

古文：周地官郎中房颖叔，除天官侍郎。
现代文：周地官郎中房颖叔，官拜天官侍郎，第二天想去上任。
English: Uncle Zhongfang Ying, the official of Zhou, the official of worshipping heaven, wanted to take office the next day.

古文：明日欲上，其夜，有厨子王老，夜半起。忽闻外有人唤云：王老不须起，房侍郎不上。后三日，李侍郎上。
现代文：这天晚上，有个厨子老王，半夜起来，忽然听到外面有人说：王老不必起来，房侍郎上不了任，三天后，李侍郎才能上任。
English: That evening, a cook named Lao Wang got up in the middle of the night and suddenly heard someone outside say: "Wang Lao doesn't have to get up, the house waiter can't take office, and it will be three days before the waiter can take office."

古文：王老却卧至晓，房果病，两日而卒。
现代文：王老就一觉睡到天亮。房颖叔当天就病了，两天后死去。
English: Wang Lao slept until dawn. Uncle Fang Ying fell ill on the same day and died two days later.

古文：所司奏状下，即除李迥秀为侍郎，其日谢，即上。
现代文：有关人上报了情况，上司就重新任命李迥秀任侍郎官，李迥秀当天就去拜谢了，很快就上任了。
English: The person concerned reported the situation, and the boss reappointed Li Yuxiu as the steward. Li Yuxiu went to thank him on the same day, and soon took office.

古文：王老以其言问诸人，皆云不知，方悟是神明所告也。刘讽
现代文：王老拿这些话去问大伙，都说不知道，王老才明白这是神明的预告。刘讽
English: Wang Lao asked everyone about these words, and they all said that they didn't know. Only then did Wang Lao understand that this was a divine prediction.

古文：文明年，竟陵掾刘讽，夜投夷陵空馆。
现代文：唐文明年中，竟陵官吏刘讽，晚上投宿在夷陵空馆。
English: In the middle of the Tang Dynasty, Liu Lili, an official of the Imperial Mausoleum, stayed at the Yiling Air Museum in the evening.

古文：月明不寝，忽有一女郎西轩至，仪质温丽，缓歌闲步，徐徐至中轩。
现代文：月光很亮睡不着。忽然有一个女郎从西轩来。
English: The moonlight was so bright that I couldn't sleep. Suddenly, a girl came from Xixuan.

古文：回命青衣曰：紫绥取西堂花茵来，兼屈刘家六姨姨、十四舅母、南邻翘翘小娘子，并将溢奴来。传语道：此间好风月，足得游乐。弹琴咏诗，大是好事。虽有竟陵判司，此人已睡，明月下不足回避也。
现代文：仪态温和、美丽，轻歌慢步，徐徐而至中轩，回头告诉婢女说：紫绥取西堂花垫来，再召呼刘家六姨，十四舅母，南邻翘翘小娘子，并将溢奴带来，传话说这地方好风月，足能游乐，弹琴咏诗，非常好，虽然有竟陵判司在，此人已睡着了，明月下不用回避。
English: Her demeanor was gentle and beautiful. She sang softly and walked slowly. She slowly made her way to Zhongxuan. She turned to her maid and said, "Zi Chen, fetch the flower cushion for the West Hall. Then call Aunt Liu, the fourteenth aunt, and the little daughter of the southern neighbor, and bring the overflowing slaves. According to the legend, this place is good for the wind and the moon. You can have fun and play the piano and recite poetry. It is very good. Although there is a judge in the mausoleum, this person has fallen asleep, and there is no need to avoid the bright moon.

古文：未几而三女郎至，一孩儿，色皆绝国。
现代文：不一会儿，三个女郎来了，还有一个小孩，容貌倾国。
English: Soon, three girls arrived, as well as a little boy, his face beaming.

古文：紫绥铺花茵于庭中，揖让班坐。
现代文：紫绥在院中铺好花垫，拜谢宾客，请她们坐好。
English: Zi Chen spread a flower cushion in the courtyard, thanked the guests and asked them to sit down.

古文：坐中设犀角酒樽，象牙杓，绿罽花觯，白琉璃盏。
现代文：座中设有犀角酒杯，象牙杓，绿罽花觯，白琉璃盏。
English: There is a rhinoceros horn wine glass, an ivory goblet, a green marigold flower vase, and a white glass marigold in the center.

古文：醪醴馨香。
现代文：酒气馨香，弥漫远空。
English: The fragrance of the wine fills the sky.

古文：远闻空际。
现代文：女郎们谈笑歌咏，声音清脆、委婉。
English: The girls chatter and sing, their voices crisp and euphemistic.

古文：女郎谈谑歌咏，音词清婉。一女郎为录，一女郎为明府，举觞酹酒曰：惟愿三姨寿等祁山，六姨姨与三姨婆等，刘姨夫得太山府乣成判官，翘翘小娘子嫁得朱余国太子，谥奴便作朱余国宰相。某三四女伴，唿嫁地府司文舍人。不然，嫁得平等王郎君六郎子七郎子，则平生望足矣。
现代文：一个女郎为录事，一个女郎为明府，举杯祝酒说：祝愿三姨婆寿比祁山，六姨和三姨婆等齐寿，刘姨夫得到太山府乣成判官，翘翘小娘子嫁给朱余国太子，溢奴便作朱余国宰相，我们三四个女伴，一并嫁给地府司文舍人，不然嫁给平等王郎君六郎子七郎子，那平生的心愿就满足了。
English: A girl for the record, a girl for Mingfu, raised a toast and said: I wish the third aunt a longer life than Lushan, the sixth aunt and the third aunt a long life, Liu uncle got the judge of Taishanfu, the little girl married the Prince of Zhuyu, the slave became the Prime Minister of Zhuyu, and our three or four girlfriends married the prefectural secretary of the prefectural government, or else married the sixth son of the seventh son of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince of the Prince

古文：一时皆笑曰：须与蔡家娘子赏口。
现代文：一时都笑着说：要给蔡家娘子罚酒。
English: They both laughed and said at the same time, "We're going to give the Cai family's daughter a fine for drinking."

古文：翘翘时为录事，独下一筹，罚蔡家娘子曰：刘姨夫才貌温茂，何故不与他五道主使，空称乣成判官，怕刘姨姨不欢。请吃一盏。
现代文：翘翘这时是录事，自己先喝一杯，罚蔡娘子酒，说：刘姨夫才貌温和，什么原因不让他做五道主使，空说乣成判官，怕六姨姨不高兴，请喝一杯！
English: At this time, Zhou Zhou was recording the event. He first drank a glass of wine and then punished Cai Niangzi, saying, "Uncle Liu's talent is mild-mannered, what is the reason for not letting him be the chief envoy of the five realms, empty talk has become the judge, I'm afraid Aunt Six is not happy, please drink a glass!

古文：蔡家娘子即持杯曰：诫知被罚。直缘姨夫大年老昏暗，恐看五道黄纸文书不得，误大神伯公事。
现代文：蔡家娘子立刻拿着酒杯说：知道被罚，只是因为姨夫年纪大糊涂，恐怕看不了五道黄纸文书，误了大神伯公事，喝酒又有什么损失呢。
English: The daughter of the Cai family immediately took a glass of wine and said, "I know that I was punished, but because my uncle is old and confused, I'm afraid I can't read five yellow paper documents, I missed my great-uncle's business, what is the loss of drinking?

古文：饮亦何伤。于是众女郎皆笑倒。又一女郎起，传口令，仍抽一翠簪。急说，传翠簪过令，不通即罚。
现代文：于是众女郎都笑倒了，又一个女郎站起来，行酒令，仍抽出一个翠簪，快说，传翠簪行酒令，行不通就罚。
English: So all the girls fell about laughing. Another girl stood up, ordered the wine, and still pulled out a cup. Quickly, pass the cup, order the wine, and if you don't get it, you'll be punished.

古文：令曰：鸾老头脑好，好头脑鸾老。
现代文：令辞是：鸾老头脑好，好头脑鸾老。
English: The watchword is: Be of good cheer, be of good cheer, be of good cheer.

古文：传说数巡，因令翠绥下坐，使说令。翠绥素吃讷，令至，但称鸾老鸾老。
现代文：行过数巡。因令在翠绥下坐。让她说酒令，翠绥一向木讷，酒令到了，她只说：鸾老、鸾老。
English: After several rounds, she was ordered to sit under Cui Yao. Let her say the order of wine, Cui Yao has always been dull, when the order of wine arrived, she only said: "Cui Lao, Cui Lao."

古文：女郎皆大笑曰：昔贺若弼弄长孙鸾侍郎，以其年老口吃，又无发，故造此令。
现代文：众女郎都大笑说：以前贺若弼作弄长孙鸾侍郎，因其年老口吃，又没有头发，所以制作了这个酒令。
English: All the girls laughed loudly and said, "In the past, He Ruojun used to tease the eldest grandson, Zou Ji, because he stuttered and had no hair, so he made this sake ring."

古文：三更后，皆弹琴击筑，更唱迭和。歌曰：明月秋风，良宵会同。
现代文：三更后，都弹琴击筑，歌唱相和，歌唱道：明月秋风，良宵会同。
English: After the three changes, they all played the piano and sang together, singing: the bright moon, the autumn wind, and the good night will be together.

古文：星河易翻，欢娱不终。
现代文：星河易翻，欢娱不终。
English: The river of stars is easy to turn over, and there is no end to the fun.

古文：绿樽翠杓，为君斟酌。
现代文：禄樽翠杓，为君斟酌。
English: I've got a nice bottle of wine for you to drink.

古文：今夕不饮，何时欢乐。
现代文：今夕不饮，何时欢乐！
English: If you don't drink tonight, when will you have fun?

古文：又歌曰：杨柳杨柳，袅袅随风急。
现代文：又唱道：杨柳杨柳，袅袅随风急。
English: He also sang, "willow willow willow, the reeds blow with the wind."

古文：西楼美人春梦长，繍帘斜卷千条入。
现代文：西楼美人春梦长，绣帘斜卷千条入。
English: West Building Beauty Spring Dream long, embroidered curtain diagonally rolled into a thousand.

古文：又歌曰：玉口金缸，愿陪君主。
现代文：又唱道：玉口金釭，愿陪君王。
English: He also sang: Tamaguchi Kinzoku, may you accompany the king.

古文：邯郸宫中，金石丝簧。
现代文：邯郸宫中，金石丝簧。
English: In the cocoon, the amethyst coils.

古文：卫女秦娥，左右成行。
现代文：卫女秦娥，左右成行。
English: Lady-in-waiting Qin'e, marching left and right.

古文：绔缟缤纷，翠眉红妆。
现代文：纨缟缤纷，翠眉红妆。
English: Colorful, green-browed red makeup.

古文：王欢顾眄，为王歌舞。
现代文：王欢顾眄，为王歌舞。
English: Wang Huan Guqin, singing and dancing for the king.

古文：愿得君欢，常无灾苦。
现代文：愿得君欢，常无灾苦。
English: May you always be happy and free from suffering.

古文：歌竟，已是四更，即有一黄衫人，头有角，仪貌甚伟，走入拜曰：婆提王命娘子速来。
现代文：唱完歌，已经是四更了，突然间有一个穿黄衫的人，头上有角，相貌很是雄伟，走进来行礼说：婆提王让娘子快速回去。
English: When the song was over, it was already four o'clock, and suddenly a man in a yellow shirt, with horns on his head and a majestic appearance, came in and bowed and said, "Wang Ti Wang, let your daughter go back quickly."

古文：女郎等皆起而受命，即传语曰：不知王见召，适相与望月至此，敢不奔赴！
现代文：女郎们都起来听从命令，说道：不知王召见，刚才我们互相赏月到了这里，怎敢不去。
English: The girls all rose to their feet and obeyed the order, saying: "I don't know if the king has summoned us, but just now we both came here to watch the moon, how dare we not go?"

古文：因命青衣收拾盘筵。
现代文：就让婢女收拾筵席。
English: and let the maidservant get the table ready.

古文：讽因大声嚏咳，视庭中无复一物。
现代文：刘讽就大声咳嗽起来，看院中没有一点东西。
English: Liu Lin started coughing loudly, but there was nothing in the hospital.

古文：明旦，拾得翠钗数双，将以示人，不知是何物也。
现代文：第二天早晨，刘讽拣到几个翠钗，把它给别人看，谁也不知道是什么东西。
English: The next morning, Liu Lin picked up a few cormorants and showed it to others. No one knew what it was.

古文：相州刺史
现代文：相州刺史
English: History of Sangju

古文：唐王道坚为相州刺史，州人造板籍，毕则失之。
现代文：唐王道坚是相州刺史，州中吏人制造户籍册，完成后就丢失了。
English: Tang Wang Daojian is the history of Xiangzhou. The officials of the prefecture made the household register, but it was lost after it was completed.

古文：后于州室梁间散得之，籍皆中截为短卷，遂不用矣，弃之。
现代文：后来在州府屋中的房梁上零散地找到了它，户籍都从中间裁断，成了短卷，就不用了，放弃了它。
English: Later, I found it scattered on the beams of the room in the prefectural government building. The household register was cut from the middle and became a short volume. I didn't need it and gave it up.

古文：直吏以为亲姻家通信也，从而视之。其人正服徐行，直入中院，院门为之开，入已复闭。乃索苍头及马，皆无之。走白希玉，希玉命开中院，但见四周除扫甚洁，帐幄围匝，施设粲然，华筵广座，殽馔穷极水陆，数十人食具器物，尽金银也。
现代文：朱希玉从衙门回来，忽然有一个人穿着紫色的衣服，梳着高高的发髻，骑马进来，两个随从也骑马跟随，到了门口才下马，门卫以为是替亲家送信的，跟随着看，那人庄重地慢慢行走，直接进入中院，院门为他而开，进去后又关上了，就看随从和马匹，都没有了，门卫跑去告诉了希玉，希玉就让打开中院，只见四周打扫得非常干净，帐幄围匝，置备完好，整洁，豪华的筵席，宽敞的席位，美酒佳肴都是水中陆地最好的，几十个人的食具器物，都是金银的。
English: Zhu Xiyu came back from the gate. Suddenly, a man wearing purple clothes and a high hair bun rode in on a horse. His two attendants also rode along, and only dismounted when they reached the gate. The doorman thought that he was sending a message for his relatives. He followed and watched. The man walked slowly and solemnly, and went directly into the courtyard. The gate opened for him, and after he entered, it closed again. The attendants and horses were gone. The doorman ran to tell Xiyu, and Xiyu let him open the courtyard. All around was very clean, the curtains were closed, the place was well prepared, neat, luxurious

古文：希玉见之大惊，乃酌酒酹之以祈福。遂出，闭其门。明日更开，则如旧矣。室宇封闭，草蔓荒凉，二年而希玉卒。
现代文：希玉看见这些很吃惊，就倒酒，酒洒在地上来祈祷安康，做完这些就退出来，关上了门，第二天再打开看的时候，就象以前一样了，屋子都是关闭的，野草荒凉，两年后希玉死了。
English: When Xiyu saw this, she was very surprised. She poured wine and sprinkled it on the ground to pray for good health. After doing this, she withdrew and closed the door. When she opened it again the next day, it was the same as before. The house was closed and the weeds were desolate. Xiyu died two years later.

古文：王湛
现代文：王湛
English: Wang Zhan

古文：王湛判冥事，初叔玄式，任荆州富阳令，取部内人吴实钱一百贯。后诬以他事，决杀之以灭口。
现代文：王湛能够测算阴间的事，叔玄式任荆州富阳令，拿了衙门内吴实一百贯钱，后来因别的事诬陷他，杀了他灭口。
English: Wang Zhan was able to calculate the things of the netherworld. He appointed Jingzhou Fuyang as his uncle and took a hundred crowns of money from Wu Si, who was in the imperial court. Later, he framed him for other things and killed him to silence him.

古文：式带别优，并有上下考，五选不得官。以问，谌白为叔检之。经宿曰：叔前任富阳令日，合有负心事。其案见在，冥司判云： 杀人之罪，身后科罚。取钱一百贯，当折四年禄。
现代文：叔玄式还想再升官，经过了上下的考试，五次都没有升官，就问王湛，王湛说为叔玄式验看一下，过了一宿说：你以前当富阳令时，做了亏心事，案底现在还有，冥司判决说： 杀人之罪，身后科罚，取钱一百贯，当折四年禄。
English: Uncle Xuanshi still wanted to be promoted again. After passing the examinations, he was not promoted five times, so he asked Wang Zhan. Wang Zhan said that he would check for Uncle Xuanshi. After a night, he said: You used to be a Fuyang commander, and you did bad things. The case file is still there. The judge said: The crime of homicide, the punishment after the crime, the amount of money taken is one hundred yuan, and the reward is four years of salary.

古文：叔曰：诚有此事，吾之罪也。
现代文：叔玄式说：真有此事，是我的罪过。
English: Uncle Xuanshi said, "It really happened, it was my fault."

古文：狄仁杰
现代文：狄仁杰
English: Di Renjie

古文：则天时，狄仁杰为宁州刺史。其宅素凶，先时刺史死者十余辈。
现代文：武则天当政时，狄仁杰任宁州刺史，他那所住宅一向不吉不祥，先前在那住过的刺史死了十多个了。
English: When Wu Zetian was in power, Di Renjie was appointed as the chief historian of Ningzhou. His residence was always inauspicious, and more than a dozen historians who had previously lived there had died.

古文：杰初至，吏白官舍久凶，先后无敢居者。且榛荒棘毁，已不可居，请舍他所。
现代文：狄仁杰刚到，差衷说官家住宅长时间不祥，没有敢住的人，再说草木荒凉，已经不能住了，请改住在别的地方吧。
English: When Di Renjie first arrived, he said that it was bad luck to live in a government house for a long time, and that no one dared to live there. He also said that the grass and trees were desolate, and that he could no longer live there. Please live somewhere else.

古文：杰曰：刺史不舍本宅，何别舍乎？
现代文：狄仁杰说：刺史不住在自己的住处，怎么能住别的地方呢？
English: Di Renjie said: "If you don't live in your own place, how can you live somewhere else?

古文：命去封锁葺治，居之不疑。数夕，诡怪奇异，不可胜纪。杰怒谓曰：吾是刺史，此即吾宅。汝曲吾直，何为不识分理，反乃以邪忤正。
现代文：让人们打开锁头，修理整治，毫不犹豫地住进那宅子，几个晚上，奇异诡怪的事，多得记不住了，狄仁杰愤怒地说：我是刺史，这是我的宅子，你没理我有理，你若有理为什么不讲道理，反而以阴邪冒犯正直。
English: Let people open the locks, repair and renovate, live in the house without hesitation, a few nights, strange and weird things, too many to remember, Di Renjie said angrily: I am a history buff, this is my house, you ignore me, I am right, if you are right, why not be reasonable, but offend honesty with evil.

古文：汝若是神，速听明教；若是鬼魅，何敢相干！
现代文：你如果是神，我就想尽快听到你的教诲，你如果是鬼魅，你胆敢来冒犯我。
English: If you are a god, I want to hear your teachings as soon as possible. If you are a ghost, you dare to offend me.

古文：吾无惧汝之心，徒为千变万化耳。
现代文：我决没有惧怕你的意思，你白白地费心思变化吓人。
English: I never meant to frighten you, you've gone to a lot of trouble to scare me.

古文：必理要相见，何不以礼出耶？
现代文：你一定要相见的话，为什么不礼貌地出来呢？
English: If you must see each other, why not come out politely?

古文：斯须，有一人具衣冠而前曰：某是某朝官，葬堂阶西树下，体魄为树根所穿，楚痛不堪忍。顷前数公，多欲自陈，其人辄死。
现代文：不一会儿，有一个人穿戴着衣帽走上前来说：我是某朝代的官员，葬在堂阶西边树下，尸体被树根穿过，疼痛难忍，我想告诉前任的几位刺史，哪知道刚想要说，那些人就一个个地死了。
English: After a while, a man wearing a cap came forward and said: I am an official of a certain dynasty, buried under a tree west of the palace steps, the body was pierced by the roots of the tree, the pain was unbearable, I want to tell a few of my predecessors, who knows if I want to say, those people died one by one.

古文：幽途不达，以至于今。使君诚能改葬，何敢迁延于此！
现代文：冥界去不了，以至于到今天这样地步，您若能够改葬，怎么敢到这儿打扰。
English: You can't go to the underworld, so much so that it's come to this. If you can change the burial place, how dare you come here and disturb it.

古文：言讫不见。
现代文：说完不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：明日，杰令发之，果如其言，乃为改葬，自此绝也。
现代文：第二天，狄仁杰让人挖地，果然象他说的那样，就为他改葬，从此后就再也没有闹鬼了。
English: The next day, Di Renjie had the ground dug up, and sure enough, as he said, they reburied him, and since then there have been no more ghosts.

古文：李皓
现代文：李皓
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：唐兵部尚书李皓，时之正人也。
现代文：唐朝兵部尚书李皓是当时的正人君子。
English: Shangshu Li, a member of the Tang Dynasty Military Department, was an upright gentleman at that time.

古文：开元初，有妇人诣皓，容貌风流，言语学识，为时第一，皓不敢受。
现代文：开元初年，有个妇人面见李皓，她容貌风度，言语学识，都为当时第一。李皓不敢接。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, there was a woman who met Li Yao face to face. Her appearance, demeanor, and language knowledge were the best at that time. Li Yao did not dare to pick her up.

古文：会太常卿姜皎至，皓以妇人与之。
现代文：恰好太常卿姜皎到来，李皓把妇人介绍给他。
English: Just as Generalissimo Jiang Yu arrived, Li Yao introduced the woman to him.

古文：皎大会公卿，妇人自云善相。见张说曰：宰臣之相。
现代文：姜皎大会公卿，妇人自称会看相，看见张说说：宰相的面相。
English: Jiang Chen is a high-ranking courtier in the General Assembly. The woman said that she would see the prime minister. When she saw Zhang, she said, "The prime minister's face."

古文：遂相诸公卿，言无不中。
现代文：于是为诸位公卿相面，言无不中。
English: As a result, the two nobles met face-to-face, and nothing was left unsaid.

古文：谓皎曰：君虽有相，然不得寿终。
现代文：妇人对姜皎说：您虽有好相，但不能寿终。
English: The woman said to Jiang Chen, "Although you have a good appearance, you cannot live forever.

古文：酒阑，皎狎之于别室。媚言遍至，将及其私。公卿迭往窥睹，时皓在座，最后往视。妇人于是呦然有声，皎惊堕地。取火照之，见床下有白骨。
现代文：酒席将散的时候，姜皎轻侮地与妇人在别的屋子，把献媚的话都说尽了，将要偷情的时候，公卿们纷纷前去偷看，当时李皓在场，最后一个去看，妇人突然就高声大叫起来，姜皎惊吓得掉在地上，有人取来烛光一看，见床下有一堆白骨。
English: When the banquet was about to break up, Jiang Chen lightly moved with the woman to another room and said all the words of flattery. When they were about to have an affair, the nobles came forward one after another to peep. At that time, Li Qian was present and was the last one to look. The woman suddenly shouted loudly, and Jiang Chen fell to the ground in shock and fright. When someone took the candlelight and looked, there was a pile of white bones under the bed.

古文：当时议者，以皓贞正，故鬼神惧焉。
现代文：当时议论的人都说，那是因为李皓坚贞刚正，所以鬼才惧怕他。
English: At that time, people who talked about it said that it was because Li Shujian was upright, so the ghosts were afraid of him.

古文：张守珪
现代文：张守珪
English: Zhang Shouyi

古文：幽州节度张守珪，少时为河西主将，守玉门关。
现代文：幽州节度使张守珪，年轻时是河西主将，驻守玉门关，他的军兵都勤奋、勇敢、善战。
English: The Yuzhou Festival made Zhang Shoujun, who was the captain of Hexi when he was young, stationed at Yumen Pass. His soldiers were diligent, brave and good at fighting.

古文：其军校皆勤勇善斗，每探候深入，颇以劫掠为事。西域胡僧者，自西京造袈裟二十余驮，还大竺国，其徒二十余人。
现代文：每当探兵，远离防区，总把抢劫当成职业。有个西域胡僧，从西京制造袈裟装了二十多匹马驮着，回还大竺国，并带徒弟二十多人。
English: Whenever the scouts were far away from the defense zone, they always took robbery as a profession. There was a Western Region monk who had made and equipped more than twenty horses from Saikyo and returned to Dafeng Province with more than twenty apprentices.

古文：探骑意是罗绵等物，乃劫掠之，杀其众尽。至胡僧，刀棒乱下而不能伤，探者异焉。既而索驮，唯得袈裟，意甚悔恨。因于僧前追悔，擗踊悲泣久之，僧乃曰：此辈前身，皆负守将令，唯趂僧鬼是枉死耳。
现代文：探兵以为是锦锻等物品，就抢劫了，杀掉众人，到了杀胡僧的时候，刀棒胡乱打下而不能伤着他，探兵惊异，随即拿来马匹，只得到袈裟，探兵非常后悔，就在胡僧面前追悔，拊心哭泣了好一会儿，胡僧才说：你们这些人，都背叛了守将的命令，只是这些被劫杀的僧人成了冤死鬼。
English: The scouts thought that it was brocade and other goods, so they robbed and killed many people. When it was time to kill the monk, they randomly beat him with swords and clubs, but they could not hurt him. The scouts were surprised, so they brought horses, but they only got a donkey. The scouts were very regretful, and they repented in front of the monk, and wept bitterly for a long time. Only then did the monk say, "You people have all betrayed the commander's orders, but these monks who were robbed and killed have become ghosts.

古文：然汝守将禄位重，后当为节度大夫等官。此辈亦如君何？可白守将，为修福耳。
现代文：但你们的守将官气很重，以后应该成为节度使大夫等官，你们这些人比他如何，可告诉守将，多修点福。
English: However, your keeper has a strong sense of duty, and should become a doctor and other officials in the future. How are you people better than him? You can tell the keeper to cultivate more blessings.

古文：然后数年，守将合有小厄，亦有所以免之。
现代文：而后几年，守将当有小灾，也有免除的办法。
English: However, in the following years, there will be minor disasters and exemptions.

古文：忽见山下红旗数百骑，突前出战，守珪随之，穿其一角，寻俱得出。虏不敢逐。红旗下将谓守珪曰：吾是汉之李广，知君有难，故此相救。后富贵，母相忘也。
现代文：探兵骑马回报守珪，守珪收留胡僧供养起来，几年后走了。后来守珪和兵丁二十五人，到伊兰山打探敌情，胡人兵马几千人突然到来，守珪力量不能对抗，就下马脱鞍，以闲暇警示敌人，敌兵渐渐逼近，守珪对左右的兵丁说：没办法了，若不想自己被俘获，只能力战。刚说完，忽然看见山下有打着红旗的几百名骑兵，冲到前边作战，守珪跟随他，穿过敌兵一角，大家都出来了，敌兵不敢追，红旗下的将领对守珪说：我是汉朝的李广，知道你有难，特意到这相救，以后富贵，不要忘了我。
English: Later, Shou Yan and 25 soldiers went to Mount Elan to investigate the enemy situation. Several thousand Hu soldiers and horses suddenly arrived. Shou Yan's forces could not fight back, so he dismounted and warned the enemy with his spare time. The enemy soldiers were gradually approaching. Shou Yan said to the soldiers on the left and right, "There's nothing we can do. If we don't want to be captured, we can only fight." Just as he finished speaking, he suddenly saw hundreds of horsemen under the mountain with red flags, rushing to the front to fight. Shou Yan followed him and passed through a corner of the enemy soldiers. Everyone came out. The enemy soldiers didn

古文：言讫不见。守珪竟至幽州节度御史大夫。
现代文：说完就不见了，张守珪后来果然官至幽州节度使、御史大夫。
English: After saying this, he disappeared. Zhang Shoucheng later became the official delegate to the Yuzhou Festival and the chief historian.

古文：杨瑒
现代文：杨瑒
English: by Yang Hui

古文：开元中，洛阳令杨瑒，常因出行，见槐阴下有卜者，令过，端坐自若。伍伯诃使起避，不动。
现代文：开元年中，洛阳令杨瑒，经常有公务出行。一天，看见槐树荫下有个占卜的人，洛阳令经过，他端庄自若，伍伯训斥他让他起来回避，他还是不动。
English: In the middle of the first year of the new year, Luo Yangling, who often travels on business, saw a fortuneteller under the shade of an eucalyptus tree. Luo Yangling passed by, he was dignified and self-assured. Wu Bo scolded him to get up and avoid him, but he still did not move.

古文：瑒令散手拘至厅事，将捶之，躬自责问。术者举首曰：君是两日县令，何以责人？
现代文：杨瑒让衙役把他抓到府衙，想要打他，亲自审问，术士抬头说：你只不过是两天的县官，怎么敢随便责打我？
English: Yang Zhe asked the magistrate to take him to the county magistrate's office, wanted to beat him, and interrogate him in person. The magistrate looked up and said, "You are only a county official for two days, how dare you beat me?

古文：瑒问其事，曰：两日后，君当命终。
现代文：杨瑒听后感到惊怕和奇怪，问他是怎么知道的？术士说：两天后，你就死了。
English: After hearing this, Yang Hui felt frightened and puzzled. He asked how he knew. The sorcerer said, "In two days, you will be dead."

古文：瑒甚愕，问何以知之，术者县告所见，举家惊惧，谓术者曰：子能知之，必能禳之，若之何而免也？
现代文：术士详细地告诉他所能看到的一切，杨瑒全家惊恐不安，对术士说：先生既然能知道这件事，一定能祭祀消灾了，怎么样才能得到免除呢？
English: The sorcerer told him in detail everything he could see. The whole family of Yang Xuan was terrified and said to the sorcerer, "Since you can know this matter, you must be able to sacrifice and eliminate the disaster. How can you be exempted?"

古文：瑒再拜求解，术者曰：当以君之闻见，以卫执事。免之与否，未可知也。
现代文：杨瑒拜了又拜想求得解脱的办法。术士说：应该以你的所见所闻来防护你，能否免除，我现在还不能知道。
English: The sorcerer said, "You should use what you have seen and heard to protect yourself. I don't know if I can absolve you or not."

古文：乃引瑒入东院亭中。令瑒被发跣足，墙面而立，己则据案而书符。中夕之后，喜谓瑒曰：今夕且幸免其即来。明日，可以三十张纸作钱，及多造饼餤，与壶酒，出定罪门外，桑林之间，俟人过者则饮之。皂裘右袒，即召君之使也。若留而饮餤，君其无忧。不然，实难以济。
现代文：说完就引导杨瑒到了东院亭中，让杨瑒散开头发，赤着脚，面对墙壁站着，自己就依靠桌案画符，半夜之后，高兴地对杨瑒说：今天晚上暂且免除他来，明天，可以用三十张纸当钱，多做些饼，准备一壶酒，从定罪门出来，到桑林中间，等人过来就请他喝酒，穿着黑色的皮衣服，袒露右臂的人，就是召你的使者，如果能留他吃喝，你就没有忧患了，不这样的话，实在难以帮助你了，你也应该换件衣服，躲到小屋里面，来等候他。
English: After saying this, he led Yang Mi to the East Courtyard Pavilion, let Yang Mi spread her hair, barefoot, standing facing the wall, relying on the table case symbols. After midnight, he happily said to Yang Mi: Tonight, temporarily exempt him, tomorrow, you can use thirty pieces of paper as money, make more cakes, prepare a jug of wine, come out of the condemnation door, to the middle of the mulberry forest, wait for someone to come and invite him to drink, wearing black leather clothes, revealing his right arm, is the messenger who called you. If you can keep him to eat and drink, you will have no worries. Otherwise, it is really difficult to help you. You should

古文：瑒深以为忧，须臾遂至。
现代文：多说感谢的话，问他需要些什么。
English: Be more appreciative and ask for what you need.

古文：使人邀屈，皂裘欣然，累有所进。瑒乃拜谒。
现代文：我的办法就是这些了。杨瑒照他说的，等到日影西斜时，酒饭眼看就要没了，黑衣人也没来，杨瑒非常着急。
English: That's all I can do. Yang Mi did as he said, and by the time the sun had set, the food and wine were almost gone, and the man in black hadn't come. Yang Mi was very anxious.

古文：人云：君昨何之，数至所居，遂不复见。
现代文：又过了一会儿黑衣人走来了，杨瑒派人邀请他，黑衣人欣然前往，进了几道门，杨瑒就来拜见他，鬼说：你昨天去了哪里？
English: After a while, the man in black came. Yang Mi sent someone to invite him. The man in black gladly went. After entering a few doors, Yang Mi came to see him. The ghost said, "Where did you go yesterday?"

古文：疑于东院安处，善神监护，故不敢犯。今地府相招未已，奈何？
现代文：我几次到你的房前，都没能见到你，怀疑你在东院居住，但有神仙保护，所以不敢侵犯，现在地府招你，怎么办？
English: I've been to your house several times, but I haven't been able to see you. I suspect that you live in East Yard, but you are protected by the gods, so I don't dare to invade you. What should I do now that the government has summoned you?

古文：瑒再拜求救者千数，兼烧纸钱，资其行用。
现代文：杨瑒又拜求解救自己，并烧纸钱，来资助他出来的费用。
English: Yang Jun again begged for help and burned paper money to fund his expenses.

古文：鬼云：感施大惠，明日，当与府中诸吏同来谋之，宜盛馔相待。
现代文：鬼说：感谢你施舍恩惠，明天，我和地府中各位差吏一块来商量，你可要准备好丰盛的酒菜来招待。
English: The ghost said, "Thank you for your kindness. Tomorrow, I will come to consult with the officials of the government together. You should prepare a plentiful feast of food and drink to invite them."

古文：言讫不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：明日，瑒设供帐，极诸海陆候之。
现代文：第二天，杨瑒摆设供桌酒席，全是些山珍海味。
English: The next day, Yang Hui set up a table for serving wine, all of which were mountain and sea delicacies.

古文：日晚，使者与其徒数十人同至，宴乐殊常浩畅，相语曰：杨长官事，焉得不尽心耶？
现代文：果然黑衣使者和他的同伴几十人一起来了，宴会非同寻常地浩大、欢畅，大伙说：杨长官的事，怎么能不尽心呢！
English: Sure enough, the black-clad messenger arrived with dozens of his companions. The banquet was unusually large and joyous. Everyone said, "How could we not do our best for Chief Yang?"

古文：久之，谓瑒：君对坊杨锡，亦有才干，今揩王作金以取彼。
现代文：过了很久，对杨瑒说你家对面的人家杨锡，也有才干，现在把王字旁改成金字旁，来招他。
English: After a long time, he told Yang Xing that the person across from his house, Yang Xi, was also talented. Now, he changed the word "Wang" to "Jin" to recruit him.

古文：君至五更，鼓声动，宜于锡门相候。若闻哭声，君则免矣。
现代文：你到五更，听鼓声一响，你就在杨锡门前等候，若是听到哭声，你就得救了。
English: When you get to the fifth watch, listen to the sound of the drum, and wait in front of the Yangxi Gate. If you hear crying, you will be saved.

古文：瑒如其往，见鬼便在树头，欲往锡舍，为狗所咋，未能得前。俄从缺墙中入，迟回闻哭声，瑒遂获免。
现代文：杨瑒照他的话去做了，看见鬼在树枝上，想去杨锡家，被狗暂时阻止，随后又从断墙中跳进去，过了一会儿听到了哭声，杨瑒终于得免一死。
English: Yang Wei did as he said, saw the ghost on the branch, wanted to go to Yang Xi's house, was temporarily stopped by the dog, and then jumped into the broken wall. After a while, he heard crying, and Yang Wei finally avoided death.

