古文：文公问元帅于赵衰，对曰： 郤縠可，行年五十矣，守学弥惇。
现代文：晋文公问赵衰谁可担任元帅，赵衰回答说： 郤縠可以。他已经五十岁了，还坚持学习，而且更加重视。
English: Jin Wenguang asked Zhao Zhen who could serve as marshal, Zhao Zhen replied: He can. He is fifty years old, he still insists on studying, and he pays more attention.

古文：夫先王之法志，德义之府也。
现代文：先王制定的法规典籍，是道德信义的宝库。
English: The legal code established by the late king is a treasure trove of moral integrity.

古文：夫德义，生民之本也。
现代文：道德和信义，是人民的根本。
English: Morality and loyalty are the foundation of the people.

古文：能惇笃者，不忘百姓也。
现代文：能够重视的人，是不会忘记者百姓的。
English: People who can attach importance will not forget journalists and ordinary people.

古文：请使郤縠。 
现代文：请让郤縠担任此项职务。 
English: Please let Zou take this position.

古文：公从之。
现代文：文公采纳了赵衰的建议。
English: Cao Gong obeyed him.

古文：公使赵衰为卿，辞曰： 栾枝贞慎，先轸有谋，胥臣多闻，皆可以为辅佐，臣弗若也。 
现代文：文公又任命赵衰为卿，赵衰推辞说： 栾枝这个人忠贞谨慎，先轸足智多谋，胥臣见闻很广，都可以担任辅佐，臣下不如他们。 
English: Wenguang also appointed Zhao Zhen as a noble, but Zhao Zhen declined, saying: "This person is loyal and prudent. He is resourceful and resourceful. His vassals are well-informed and can serve as assistants. Their vassals are not as good as them."

古文：乃使栾枝将下军，先轸佐之。
现代文：于是文公任命栾枝统帅下军，由先轸为副将辅助他。
English: As a result, Wengong appointed Xingzhi to be the commander of the army, with Xingzhi as the deputy commander to assist him.

古文：取五鹿，先轸之谋也。
现代文：后来攻取五鹿，便是出于先轸的计谋。
English: Later, the capture of Goka was the result of a premeditated strategy.

古文：郤縠卒，使先轸代之。
现代文：郤縠死后，又派先轸接替他任中军统帅。
English: After the death of Zou, he also sent Xian Zou to succeed him as the commander of the Chinese army.

古文：胥臣佐下军。
现代文：由胥臣担任下军副将。
English: The lower-ranking vice-general was held by a senior vassal.

古文：公使原季为卿，辞曰： 夫三德者，偃之出也。
现代文：文公又让赵衰任下卿，赵衰推辞说： 三桩有功德的事情，都是狐偃出的计谋。
English: Wenguang also appointed Zhao Sheng as his subordinate, but Zhao Sheng refused, saying, "The three meritorious things are all the machinations of a fox.

古文：以德纪民，其章大矣，不可废也。 
现代文：用德行来治理人民，成效十分显著，不可不任用他。 
English: Using virtue to govern the people, the results are very significant, and he must be appointed.

古文：使狐偃为卿，辞曰： 毛之智，贤于臣，其齿又长。
现代文：文公便任命狐偃为下卿，狐偃推辞说： 狐毛的智慧超过小臣，他的年龄又比我大。
English: Wengong then appointed Foxtel as his second-in-command, to which Foxtel replied: Foxtel is wiser than my junior minister, and he is older than me.

古文：毛也不在位，不敢闻命。 
现代文：狐毛如果不在其位，小臣不敢接受此项任命。 
English: If Foam were not in his place, the junior minister would not dare to accept the appointment.

古文：乃使狐毛将上军，狐偃佐之。
现代文：文公于是派狐毛统帅上军，由狐偃为副将辅助他。
English: Wengong then sent Commander Foam into the army, assisted by Vice Admiral Foam.

古文：公曰： 赵衰三让。
现代文：狐毛死后，文公派赵衰代替他任
English: After Foam's death, Wen Gong sent Zhao Zhen to take his place.

