古文：蔡时鼎，字台甫，漳浦人。
现代文：蔡时鼎，字台甫，漳浦人。
English: Cai Shiding, also known as Tai Fu, was from Lop Nur.

古文：万历二年进士。历知桐乡、元城，为治清严。
现代文：万历二年进士，历任桐乡、元城知县，为官清廉。
English: He entered the priesthood in the second year of Wanli, and successively held the positions of Tongxiang and Yuancheng County. He was a clean official.

古文：征授御史。
现代文：提升为御史。
English: Conscription is history.

古文：太和山提督中官田玉兼分守事，时鼎言不可，并及玉不法状。
现代文：太和山提督中官田玉兼理守备之事，蔡时鼎认为不可，并谈到田玉不守法纪的事。
English: Cai Shiding thought it was impossible for Vice Admiral Tian Yucan of Taihe Mountain to maintain discipline, and talked about Tian Yucan's non-observance of laws and regulations.

古文：御史丁此吕以劾高启愚被谪，时鼎论救，语侵杨巍、申时行。报闻。
现代文：御史丁此吕因为弹劾高启愚被贬，蔡时鼎为他争辩，言语触怒杨巍、申时行，被报复。
English: Because of the impeachment of Gao Qigu, Gu Shiding was demoted, Cai Shiding argued for him, and his words angered Yang Xuan and Shen Shixing, and he was retaliated against.

古文：已，巡盐两淮。
现代文：不久，巡抚两淮。
English: Before long, the governor and his wife arrived.

古文：悉捐其羡为开河费，置属邑学田。
现代文：将他结余的钱都捐为开通淮河的费用，购买学田。
English: He donated all the money he had left over to pay for the opening of the Huaihe River and to buy a school field.

古文：还朝，会戚畹子弟有求举不获者，诬顺天考官张一桂私其客冯诗、童维宁及编修史钶子记纯，又滥取冒籍者五人。
现代文：回到朝廷，正好碰上因营求中举却未能如愿的外戚子弟生事，诬陷顺天考官张一桂私下照顾他的门客冯诗、章维宁和编修史钶的儿子记纯，又滥取假冒的五个人。
English: Returning to the imperial court, he just happened to run into a problem with his son-in-law, who had not been able to get the promotion he had hoped for, and framed Shuntian examiner Zhang Yikui for privately taking care of his protégé Feng Shi, Zhang Weining, and editor Shi Yan's son Ji Chun, as well as abusing five fake people.

古文：帝怒，命诗、维宁荷枷，解一桂、钶官。
现代文：皇上发怒，命逮捕冯诗、章维宁，解除张一桂、史钶的官职。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered the arrest of Feng Shih and Zhang Weining, and the dismissal of Zhang Yikui and Shi Xuan.

古文：时行等为之解。帝益怒，夺钶职，下诗、维宁吏。
现代文：申时行为他们辩解，皇上更加不高兴，夺去史钶的职务，将冯诗、章维宁下狱。
English: When Shin acted to defend them, the emperor was even more displeased, took away Shi Yan's position, and sent Feng Shi and Zhang Weining to prison.

古文：法司廷鞫无验，忤旨被让。
现代文：法司百般拷问也没有得到证据，以违背圣旨斥责他们。
English: Facing all kinds of tortures and no evidence, the Fa chastised them for violating the sacred will.

古文：卒枷二人一月，而调一桂南京。
现代文：官卒将两人枷囚了一个月，而将张一桂调往南京。
English: The officials held the two men in shackles for a month, and transferred Zhang Yikui to Nanjing.

古文：时鼎以事初纠发不由外廷，径从中出，极言 宵人蜚语直达御前，其渐不可长；且尽疑大臣言官有私，则是股肱耳目举不可信，所信者谁也？ 
现代文：蔡时鼎认为事情揭发不是外廷，直接来自宫中，因此极力说小人在皇上面前上陈流言蜚语，此风不可以长，况且全部是怀疑大臣与御史有私情，则是皇上左右耳目都不可相信，可以相信的是哪些人呢？
English: Cai Shiding believed that the disclosure of the matter was not outside the court, but came directly from the palace. Therefore, he insisted that the villain should not be allowed to spread rumors in front of the emperor. Moreover, it was all suspected that the minister had a personal relationship with the emperor. The emperor's left and right ears and eyes could not be trusted. Which people could be trusted?

古文：帝怒，手札谕阁臣治罪。
现代文：皇上发了脾气，亲笔写诏书叫内阁治他的罪。
English: The emperor lost his temper and personally wrote an edict ordering the cabinet to punish him for his crime.

古文：会时行及王锡爵在告，许国、王家屏仅拟停俸，且请稍减诗、维宁荷校之期，以全其命。
现代文：那时，申时行和王锡爵在休假，许国、王家屏仅拟定停发他的俸禄，且请求稍为减少冯诗、章维宁枷锁囚禁的时间，以保全他们的性命。
English: At that time, Shin Shigang and Wang Xizhe were on vacation, and Xu Guo and Wang Jiaping only proposed to suspend his salary, and requested to slightly reduce the time of Feng Shi and Zhang Weining's imprisonment in chains to save their lives.

古文：帝不从，责时鼎疑君讪上，降极边杂职。
现代文：皇上不听，责备蔡时鼎怀疑、嘲讽皇上，降为最边远地方的小吏。
English: The emperor did not listen, and scolded Cai Shiding for doubting and mocking the emperor, reducing him to a minor official in the most remote place.

古文：又使人诇知发遣冒籍者多宽纵，责府尹沈思孝对状。
现代文：又派人侦察，发现对那些冒籍者多较宽纵，责备府尹沈思孝报告详情。
English: They also sent someone to investigate and found that most of the impostors were more lenient, blaming the government for Yin Shen Sihiao's report.

古文：国、家屏复上言： 人君贵明不贵察。
现代文：许国、王家屏又上言说： 做皇帝的贵在明白事理而不在详察。
English: Xu Guo and Wang Jiaping also said, "The dignity of being an emperor lies in understanding things and not in detailed observation."

古文：苟任一己见闻，猜防苛密，纵听断精审，何补于治；且使奸人乘机得中伤善类，害胡可言！
现代文：假如以自己所见所闻，猜忌防范苛刻，纵使对听到的精心审查，对治理国家又有什么用呢？而且使奸臣乘机中伤忠臣，祸患怎么能够说呢？
English: If what one has seen and heard, if one's suspicions prevent one from being harsh, even if one carefully examines what one has heard, what is the use of governing the country? Moreover, if a traitor takes the opportunity to slander a loyal subject, how can one speak of a calamity?

古文：愿停察访以崇大体，宥言官以彰圣度。 
现代文：愿陛下停止察访而推崇大礼，宽容御史官以彰明皇上的气度。 
English: May His Majesty stop the inspection and promote the grand salute, and tolerate the historian to show the emperor's dignity.

古文：帝不怿，手诏诘让。
现代文：皇上不高兴，下诏书责备他们。
English: The Emperor was displeased and issued an imperial edict to reprimand them.

古文：是日，帝思时行，遣中使就第劳问。
现代文：这一天，皇上想起申时行，遣宦官到他家慰问。
English: On this day, the emperor thought of the petition and sent eunuchs to his home to offer condolences.

古文：而国等既被责，具疏谢，执争如初。
现代文：许国等已经被责备，上疏谢罪，争执如初。
English: Xu Guo and others have been reproached, and the dispute is as old as time.

古文：会帝意稍解，乃报闻。
现代文：等到皇帝怒气稍稍平息后，才批下奏疏说知道了。
English: It was only after the emperor's anger had calmed down a little that it became clear.

古文：时鼎竟谪马邑典史，告归。
现代文：蔡时鼎竟然贬为马邑典史，回家休假。
English: Cai Shiding was even relegated to the annals of history and sent home on leave.

古文：居二年，吏部拟序迁，不许。
现代文：过了二年，吏部拟定让他按制度升迁，皇上不许。
English: Two years later, the cadre department proposed that he be promoted according to the system, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：御史王世扬请如石星、海瑞、邹元标例，起之废籍，不报。
现代文：御史王世扬请如石星、海瑞、邹元标的旧例，在列入罢免官员之名册中启用，没有得到批复。
English: Goshi Wang Shiyang requested that the old cases such as Shi Xing, Hai Rui and Xuan Yuan Bei be included in the roster of dismissed officials, but did not receive approval.

古文：已，起太平推官，进南京刑部主事，就改吏部。
现代文：过了一些时候，起用为太平推官，升南京刑部主事，就近改为吏部。
English: After some time, he was appointed as the Taiping magistrate, promoted to the head of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department, and was recently changed to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：十八年冬，复疏劾时行，略言： 比年天灾民困，纪纲紊斁，吏治混淆。
现代文：万历十八年冬，又上疏弹劾申时行，大意说： 近年天灾，老百姓贫困，纲纪紊乱，吏治败坏。
English: In the winter of the 18th year of Wanli, Shangzo impeachment petition was filed, saying: In recent years, natural disasters, poverty of the people, disorder of discipline, and corruption of officials.

古文：陛下深居宫阙，臣民呼吁莫闻。
现代文：陛下深居宫中，臣民的呼吁声听不到。
English: His Majesty is holed up in the palace, unable to hear the pleas of his subjects.

古文：然群工进言，犹蒙宽贷。
现代文：群臣上言，还恩准得到宽赦。
English: The ministers appealed, and he was pardoned.

古文：乃辅臣时行则树党自坚，忌言益甚。
现代文：辅臣申时行拉帮结党，更加憎恨言论。
English: Vice-minister Shen Jixing pulled the party together and hated speech even more.

古文：不必明指其失，即意向稍左，亦辄中伤。或显斥于当时，或徐退于后日。
现代文：不必要明白地指出他们的过失，即使意见与他们稍有出入，就会遭到中伤，或者在当时就遭到严厉地斥责，或者在以后被慢慢地斥退。
English: There is no need to point out their faults clearly, even if there is a slight difference of opinion with them, they will be slandered, or they will be severely reprimanded at the time, or they will be slowly rejected later.

古文：致天下谀佞成风，正气消沮。
现代文：致使天下阿谀佞幸成风，正气消失。
English: As a result, the world's grandmothers have become popular, and the righteous spirit has disappeared.

古文：方且内托之乎雅量，外托之乎清明，此圣贤所以重似是之防，严乱德之戒也。
现代文：内廷当托付雅量之人，外廷当托付给清正、廉洁之士，这是圣贤所以重防似是而非，严明乱德的惩戒。
English: The inner court should be entrusted to a person of elegance, and the outer court should be entrusted to a clean and honest person. This is the punishment of sages who are serious about preventing falsehood and strict about immorality.

古文：夫营私之念重，则奉公之意必衰；巧诈之机熟，则忠诚之节必退。
现代文：谋求私利的念头重，则廉洁奉公的想法必然没有；巧诈的机谋熟练，忠诚的气节必然减退。
English: If the thought of seeking self-interest is heavy, then the idea of serving the public with integrity is bound to be absent; if the cunning strategy is skillful, the loyal temperament is bound to decline.

古文：自张居正物故，张四维忧去，时行即为首辅。
现代文：自从张居正死去，张四维因丧事离职，申时行为首辅。
English: Since the death of Zhang Juzheng, Zhang Siwei left the post due to the funeral, and acted as the first assistant at the time of application.

古文：惩前专擅，矫以谦退；鉴昔严苛，矫以宽平。非不欲示休休之量，养和平之福，无如患得患失之心胜，而不可则止之义微。
现代文：惩治前任专权之人，矫正为谦虚退让，鉴于前任严明苛刻，矫之以宽缓、平和的政策，并不是显示宽容的气度，培养和平的气象，而是患得患失，逐渐失去不可则止的古义。
English: Punishing the people of the former dictatorship and correcting them to be humble and concede, in view of the strict and harsh policies of the predecessor, and correcting them with leniency and peaceful policies, is not to show tolerance and cultivate a peaceful atmosphere, but to gain and lose, and gradually lose the ancient meaning of irresistible.

古文：貌退让而心贪竞，外包容而中忮刻。
现代文：貌似退让而内心贪于升迁，外表宽容而内心嫉恨苛刻。
English: Appearing to concede, but inwardly coveting promotion; outwardly tolerant, but inwardly jealous and harsh.

古文：私伪萌生，欲盖弥著。
现代文：私心假意萌发，欲盖弥彰。
English: Selfishness and pretense sprout, and covetousness abounds.

古文：夫居正之祸在徇私灭公，然其持法任事，犹足有补于国。
现代文：张居正的害处在于徇私灭公，然而他执法、做事，还是对国家有所补益。
English: The harm of Zhang Juzheng is that he is self-serving and self-defeating. However, his law enforcement and work are still beneficial to the country.

古文：今也改革其美，而绍述其私；尽去其维天下之心，而益巧其欺天下之术。
现代文：现在将他好的一面予以改变革除，而继承其徇私的一面；将他维护天下之心全部除掉，而增加他欺骗天下的权术。
English: Now he is changing his good side to be eliminated, and inheriting his selfish side; removing all of his protection of the world's heart, and increasing his power to deceive the world.

古文：徒思邀福一身，不顾国祸，若而人者，尚可俾相天下哉！ 
现代文：想把好处揽于一身，不顾国家，这样的人，可以做天下人的宰相吗？ 
English: Can such a person, who wants to take advantage of everything, regardless of the country, be the prime minister of the whole world?

古文：因历数其十失，劝之省改。
现代文：因此历数申时行的十条过失，劝他反省、改正。
English: Therefore, he listed the ten faults of the petitioner, and advised him to reflect and correct.

古文：疏留中。
现代文：奏疏被留于禁中。
English: Yuan Keli's posthumous medal was left behind in Zhongshu.

古文：寻进南京礼部郎中。
现代文：不久，蔡时鼎提拔为南京礼部郎中，死于任上。
English: Soon after, Cai Shiding was promoted to vice-chairman of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department and died in office.

古文：卒官。贫不具含殓，士大夫赙而治其丧。
现代文：他家因贫困不能买下棺木，士大夫们捐钱将他安葬。
English: His family couldn't buy a coffin due to poverty, so the scholars and doctors donated money to bury him.

古文：万国钦，字二愚，新建人。
现代文：万国钦，字二愚，新建人。
English: "Bangguoqin," "two fools" and "new-builders."

古文：万历十一年进士。授婺源知县。
现代文：万历十一年进士，授职婺源知县。
English: In the eleventh year of Wanli, he was promoted to the rank of scholar, and he was awarded the post of 源知县.

古文：征拜御史。
现代文：征召为御史。
English: The imperial seal is history.

古文：言事慷慨，不避权贵。
现代文：言事慷慨，不回避权贵。
English: He is generous in speech and does not shy away from the powerful.

古文：十八年，劾吏部尚书杨巍，被诘让。
现代文：十八年弹劾吏部尚书杨巍，被责备。
English: In the 18th year of impeachment, Yang Xi, the secretary of the cadre department, was reprimanded.

古文：里居尚书董份，大学士申时行、王锡爵座主也，属浙江巡按御史奏请存问。
现代文：居住乡里的尚书董份是大学士申时行、王锡爵的座主，嘱咐浙江巡按御史上奏请求问候。
English: Shang Shuxu Dongfen, who lives in the village, is the host of the university scholars Shenshi Xing and Wang Xizhe, and ordered the Zhejiang patrol to make a request for greetings.

古文：国钦言份谄事严嵩，又娶尚书吴鹏已字子女，居乡无状，不宜加隆礼，事遂寝。
现代文：万国钦说董份谄媚严嵩，又娶尚书吴鹏已嫁的女儿，居于乡里多有不法行为，不应当予以加礼，事情于是停止。
English: Wang Guoqin said that Dongfen was charming and strict, and married the daughter of Shangshu Wu Peng, who was already married, and lived in the village. There were many illegal acts, and they should not be rewarded, so the matter was stopped.

古文：初，吏部员外郎赵南星、户部主事姜士昌疏斥政府私人。
现代文：起初，吏部员外郎赵南星、户部主事姜士昌上疏责备执掌朝政之人。
English: At first, Zhao Nansing, the clerk's brother-in-law, and Jiang Shichang, the head of the household department, scolded the person in charge of the imperial government.

古文：给事中李春开以出位纠南星、士昌，而其党陈与郊为助。
现代文：给事中李春开越权检举赵南星、姜士昌，他的党羽陈与郊帮助他。
English: During the incident, Li Chunkai overstepped his authority to prosecute Zhao Nansing and Jiang Shichang, and his followers Chen and Xuan helped him.

古文：刑部主事吴正志上疏，言春开、与郊媚政府，干清议，且论御史林祖述保留大臣之非。
现代文：刑部主事吴正志上疏，说李春开、陈与郊谄媚当权，扰乱清议，而且还弹劾林祖述包庇大臣的过错。
English: The head of the criminal investigation department, Wu Zhengzhi Shangsuo, said that Li Chunkai, Chen and Guo Xuan were in power, disrupting the clear discussion, and also impeached Lin Zushu for the fault of the cover-up minister.

古文：于是御史赫瀛集诸御史于朝堂，议合疏纠正志，以台体为辞。
现代文：于是御史赫瀛集合各位御史在朝堂上，商议合疏纠劾吴正志。
English: Therefore, the scholars gathered in the morning hall to discuss the impeachment of Wu Zhengzhi.

古文：国钦与周孔教独不署名。
现代文：说他不顾惜台谏体统，万国钦与周孔教没有署名。
English: He said that he did not care about the Taichung style, and that Wang Guoqin and Zhou Kongjiao did not sign.

古文：瀛大恚，盛气让国钦。
现代文：赫瀛非常生气，盛气凌人地责备万国钦。
English: Hebei was very angry and scolded Wanguoqin in a domineering manner.

古文：国钦曰： 冠豸冠，服豸服，乃日以保留大臣倾善类为事，我不能苟同。 
现代文：万国钦说： 戴豸帽，穿豸服，于是以保留正直的大臣为己任，我不敢与你们苟同。 
English: Wankokuchin said, "I wear a skullcap and a robe, so I take it upon myself to retain honest ministers. I dare not disagree with you."

古文：瀛气夺，疏不果上，而正志竟谪宜君典史。
现代文：赫瀛泄了气，奏疏果然没呈上，可是吴正志竟然被贬为宜君典史。
English: Herao was discouraged and did not submit the transcript, but Wu Zhengzhi was actually relegated to the history of Yi Jun.

古文：奄人袁进等殴杀平民，国钦再疏劾之。
现代文：宦官袁进等打死平民，万国钦再次上疏弹劾。
English: The eunuch Yuan Jin and others killed civilians, and Wang Guoqin was again impeached.

古文：十八年夏，火落赤诸部频犯临洮、巩昌。
现代文：万历十八年夏，火落赤各部频频进犯临洮、巩昌。
English: In the summer of the 18th year of Wanli, the Red Guards frequently attacked Linyi and Gongchang.

古文：七月，帝召见时行等于皇极门，咨以方略，言边备废弛，督抚乏调度，欲大有所振饬。
现代文：七月，皇上在皇极门召见申时行等，咨询策略，说： 边境守备废弛，督抚缺乏调度，想大力进行整顿。 
English: In July, the emperor summoned Shen Shiguang and others at the imperial gate to consult on strategy, saying: The border defense was lax, supervisors lacked scheduling, and they wanted to vigorously carry out rectification.

古文：时行以款贡足恃为言。
现代文：申时行说和议通贡足够了。
English: It is enough to petition, negotiate, and pay tribute.

古文：帝曰： 款贡亦不足恃。
现代文：皇上说： 和议通贡也不足以依靠。
English: The emperor said, "The peace settlement tribute is not enough to rely on.

古文：若专务媚敌，使心骄意大，岂有餍足时？ 
现代文：假若专门迎合敌人，使他更为骄傲自大，哪里有满足的时候呢？ 
English: Where is the satisfaction in pandering to the enemy and making him more arrogant?

古文：时行等奉谕而退。
现代文：申时行等听令退下。
English: At the time of application, wait for the order to withdraw.

古文：未几，警报狎至，乃推郑洛为经略尚书行边，实用以主款议也。
现代文：未有多久，警报不断传来，于是推选郑洛为经略尚书巡边，实际上是使用通好的主张。
English: Not long after, the alarms kept coming, so the selection of Zheng Luo for the inspection of books was actually a good idea.

古文：国钦抗疏劾时行，曰： 陛下以西事孔棘，特召辅臣议战守，而辅臣于召对时乃饰词欺罔。
现代文：万国钦上疏弹劾申时行，说： 陛下以西边的事棘手，特地召见辅臣讨论战守问题，而辅臣在召见时粉饰事情蒙骗皇上。
English: The Emperor of All Nations impeached Shin Ji Gang, saying: His Majesty, because of the difficult situation in the west, specially summoned aides-de-camp to discuss the defense issues, and the aides-de-camp deceived the Emperor by whitewashing the situation when summoned.

古文：陛下怒贼侵轶，则以为攻抄熟番。临、巩果番地乎？
现代文：陛下对敌人的侵犯很愤怒，辅臣则认为攻打的是汉化番人居住之地，临洮、巩昌果然是番地吗？
English: His Majesty was very angry at the enemy's encroachment, but his aide-de-camp thought that the attack was on the place where the Hanhua guards lived. Was Linyi and Gongchang really the location?

古文：陛下责督抚失机，则以为咎在武臣。
现代文：陛下责备督抚丧失时机，辅臣则以为过错在武臣。
English: His Majesty reproached the overseer for losing the opportunity, but the vassal thought that the fault lay with the vassal.

古文：封疆偾事，督抚果无与乎？
现代文：边疆的事，督抚难道不参与吗？
English: Isn't the governor involved in the affairs of the frontier?

古文：陛下言款贡难恃，则云通贡二十年，活生灵百万。
现代文：陛下说和议通贡难以依靠，辅臣则说通贡二十年，使百万生灵得以存活。
English: His Majesty said that it was difficult to rely on the peace treaty tribute, and the aide-de-camp said that the treaty tribute was twenty years, enabling millions of lives to survive.

古文：西宁之败，肃州之掠，独非生灵乎？
现代文：西宁的失败，肃州被抢掠，就不是生灵吗？
English: The defeat of Xining and the plunder of Suzhou, are they not living things?

古文：是陛下意在战，时行必不欲战；陛下意在绝和，时行必欲与和。
现代文：陛下的意思是战，而申时行不想打仗；陛下的意思是断绝往来，申时行想与他们讲和。
English: Your Majesty means war, and I do not want war; Your Majesty means to break off relations, and I want to make peace with them.

古文：盖由九边将帅，岁馈金钱，漫无成画。
现代文：九边将帅，每岁送的金钱，已不计其数。
English: The amount of money sent to Jiuquan every year is beyond counting.

古文：寇已残城堡，杀吏民，犹谓计得。
现代文：敌人已毁坏了城堡，残杀官吏、百姓，还说计策已实现。
English: The enemy has destroyed the castle, killed officials and people, and said that the plan has been realized.

古文：三边总督梅友松意专媚敌。前奏顺义谢恩西去矣，何又围我临、巩？
现代文：三边总督梅友松专门谀媚敌人，前次上奏说顺义已谢恩西去，为什么又包围我临洮、巩昌呢？
English: The governor of the three sides, Mei Youmong, specially flattered the enemy. The previous time, he said that Shunyi had gone to Shienxi, why did he surround me with Linyi and Gongchang?

古文：后疏盛夸战绩矣，何景古城全军皆覆？
现代文：后又上疏极力夸耀战绩，为何景古城全军覆没呢？
English: After that, Shangxo tried its best to boast of its achievements. Why did the entire army of the ancient city of Jingcheng perish?

古文：甘肃巡抚李廷仪延贼入关，不闻奏报，反代请赎罪。
现代文：甘肃巡抚李廷议引贼入关，没有听说有奏疏报上，辅臣反代他求情请求宽恕罪过。
English: The inspector of Gansu, Li Ting, proposed to lead the thief into the customs. He did not hear that there was a report in the newspaper that the assistant minister pleaded on his behalf and asked for forgiveness.

古文：计马牛布帛不及三十金，而杀掠何止万计！
现代文：统计马牛布帛不到三十金，而被杀被掠何止万计。
English: According to statistics, less than 30 gold coins were stolen from the horses, and more than 10,000 horses were killed and stolen.

古文：欲仍通市，臣不知于国法何如也。
现代文：还想让他们互市，臣不知国法究竟怎样了？
English: Do you still want them to trade with each other, not knowing what has happened to the country's laws?

古文：此三人皆时行私党，故敢朋奸误国乃尔。 
现代文：这三个人都是申时行的死党，所以敢于祸国殃民。 
English: These three people are all die-hard supporters of the current regime, so they dare to do harm to the country and the people.

古文：因列上时行纳贿数事。
现代文：因此列上申时行接受贿赂的几件事。
English: Therefore, several cases of bribe-taking by petitioners are listed.

古文：帝谓其淆乱国事，诬污大臣，谪剑州判官。
现代文：皇上认为他混淆国事，诬陷大臣，将他贬为剑州判官。
English: The emperor thought that he was confusing state affairs, slandering the minister, and demoted him to Jianzhou magistrate.

古文：初，国钦疏上，座主许国责之曰： 若此举，为名节乎，为国家乎？ 
现代文：起初，万国钦奏疏呈上，座师许国责备他说： 这个举动，是为名节，还是为国家？ 
English: At first, Iwakuni Kinso was reluctant to perform, and the orchestra's teacher, Kogoku, scolded him: "Is this act for the festival or for the country?

古文：国钦曰： 何敢为名节，惟为国事耳。
现代文：万国钦说： 哪里敢为名节，只是为了国家。
English: Wang Guoqin said, "Wherever it is celebrated, it is only for the sake of the country."

古文：即言未当，死生利害听之。 
现代文：即使言语不当，生死利害听天由命。 
English: Even if the words are improper, life and death are at the mercy of fate.

古文：国无以难。
现代文：许国无法难为他。
English: Xu Guo couldn't help but fall for him.

古文：王教，淄川人。佐光祖澄清吏治。
现代文：万历二十年，吏部尚书陆光祖拟将万国钦改为建宁推官，饶伸为刑部主事。
English: After twenty years, Lu Guangzu, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, proposed to change the name of Wang Guoqin to Jian Ning, and to make Rao Sheng the head of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：给事中胡汝宁承权要旨劾之，事旋白。
现代文：皇上以二人都是特地贬职的，不应当提升，严厉责备陆光祖，将文选郎王教，员外郎叶隆光，主事唐世尧、陈遴玮等全部免了职。
English: The emperor said that both of them were specially demoted and should not be promoted, severely reprimanded Lu Guangzu, and dismissed Wencheng's son Wang Jiao, his son Ye Longguang, the director Tang Shijun, Chen Zhaojun, and so on.

古文：竟坐推国钦、伸，斥为民。
现代文：大学士赵志皋上疏申救，也遭到责备。万国钦后任南京刑部郎中，死于任上。
English: Zhao Zhiyuan, a university scholar, was also blamed for his failure to intervene. Wanguo Qin later served as a vice-minister of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department, and died in office.

古文：饶伸，字抑之，进贤人。
现代文：饶伸，字抑之，江西进贤人。
English: Rao Sheng, Zha Jizhi, Jiangxi Jin Xianren.

古文：万历十一年进士。授工部主事。
现代文：万历十一年进士，授职工部主事。
English: He was promoted to the rank of academician in the eleventh year of Wanli, and became the head of the Staffing Department.

古文：十六年，庶子黄洪宪典顺天试，大学士王锡爵子衡为举首，申时行婿李鸿亦预选。
现代文：十六年，庶子官黄洪宪主持顺天府的考试，大学士王锡爵的儿子王衡考了第一，申时行的女婿李鸿也预选上了。
English: In the 16th year, Huang Hongxian, the illegitimate son of an official, presided over the examination of Shuntianfu. Wang Heng, the son of the university judge Wang Xizhe, took the first place, and Li Hong, the son-in-law of Shen Shixing, was also pre-selected.

古文：礼部主事于孔兼疑举人屠大壮及鸿有私。
现代文：礼部主事于孔兼怀疑举人屠大壮和李鸿有私下交易。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies was in charge of Kong and suspected that Zhenren Tu Dazhong and Li Hong had a private transaction.

古文：尚书朱赓、礼科都给事中苗朝阳欲寝其事。
现代文：尚书朱赓、礼科都给事中苗朝阳想将此事压下。
English: The Miao and Chaoyang dynasties wanted to suppress the matter, and the Zhu Xi and the etiquette schools were both involved.

古文：礼部郎中高桂遂发愤谪可疑者八人，并及衡，请得覆试。
现代文：礼部郎中高桂于是发愤质问有疑点的八人，其中牵涉到王衡，请求再考一次。
English: Gao Gui, a member of the etiquette club, then angrily questioned eight people who had doubts, including Wang Heng, and requested a retake.

古文：锡爵疏辨，与时行并乞罢。
现代文：王锡爵上疏申辩，与申时行一起乞求离职。
English: Wang Xizhe pleaded insubordination and begged for resignation together with Shen Shixing.

古文：帝皆慰留之，而从桂请，命覆试。
现代文：皇上都一一加以劝慰，把他们留下，而又听从高桂请求，命令再试一次。
English: The emperor consoled them one by one and kept them, but he also listened to Gao Gui's request and ordered him to try again.

古文：礼部侍郎于慎行以大壮文独劣，拟乙置之。
现代文：礼部侍郎于慎行以屠大壮的文章一个人特别坏，请将置于乙等。
English: The article on the etiquette attendant, Yu Shengxing, who killed a powerful man is particularly bad, please place it in B grade.

古文：都御史吴时来及朝阳不可。
现代文：都御史吴时来和苗朝阳认为不可。
English: Wu Shilai and Miao Chaoyang, the prefectural governors, thought it was impossible.

古文：桂直前力争，乃如慎行议，列甲乙以上。
现代文：高桂上前力争，于是同意于慎行的议论，排列甲乙呈上。
English: Gao Gui struggled to come forward, so he agreed to the discussion of prudence, and ranked A and B.

古文：时行、锡爵调旨尽留之，且夺桂俸二月。
现代文：申时行、王锡爵调动圣旨全部留下，停发高桂俸禄二个月。
English: At the time of the petition, Wang Xizhe left all the sacred wills and suspended the payment of Gao Gui's salary for two months.

古文：衡实有才名，锡爵大愤，复上疏极诋桂。
现代文：王衡实有才学名气，王锡爵特别恼火，再次上疏抨击高桂。
English: Wang Hengshi is famous for his academic talent. Wang Xizhe was particularly annoyed and once again criticized Gao Gui.

古文：伸乃抗疏言： 张居正三子连占高科，而辅臣子弟遂成故事。
现代文：饶伸于是上疏说： 张居正三子连连中举，而辅臣子弟遂成了旧例。
English: So Rao Sheng said to Shang Shu: Zhang Jizheng's third son was promoted successively, and the assistant minister's son became the old case.

古文：洪宪更谓一举不足重，居然置之选首。
现代文：洪宪更说是中举不足为重，居然让他成了第一。
English: What's more, Hong Xian said that the middle weightlifting was not important, but he actually became the first.

古文：子不与试，则录其婿，其他私弊不乏闻。
现代文：儿子不参加考试，则录用女婿，其他的营私舞弊的事就不乏听到。
English: If the son does not take the exam, the son-in-law is hired, and other cases of favoritism and fraud are heard.

古文：覆试之日，多有不能文者。
现代文：复试的那一天，很多人不能作文。
English: On the day of the retest, many people can't write an essay.

古文：时来罔分优劣，蒙面与桂力争，遂朦胧拟请。
现代文：吴时来不分优劣，掩着面孔与高桂力争，于是朦朦胧胧地拟奏请求。
English: Wu Shilai, regardless of his merits and demerits, struggled with Gao Gui, hiding his face, and then vaguely imitated the request.

古文：至锡爵讦桂一疏，剑戟森然，乖对君之体。
现代文：至于王锡爵攻击高桂的奏疏，剑拔弩张，违背君臣之体。
English: As for Wang Xizhe's attack on Gao Gui's Song Zuo, it was saber-rattling and a violation of the dignity of a monarch and a minister.

古文：锡爵柄用三年，放逐贤士，援引憸人。
现代文：王锡爵掌权三年，放逐贤士，任用小人。
English: Wang Xizhe held power for three years, exiled the sages, and appointed villains.

古文：今又巧护己私，欺罔主上，势将为居正之续。
现代文：现在又花言巧语为自己私心辩护，欺君罔上，想做张居正第二。
English: Now, he is using rhetoric to justify his selfishness, and he wants to be second to Zhang Yu.

古文：时来附权蔑纪，不称宪长。请俱赐罢。 
现代文：吴时来依附权贵蔑视法纪，不配做都御史，请将他们俱予罢免。 
English: Wu Shilai's attachment to power and contempt for law and discipline is unworthy of being the capital's imperial historian. Please remove them all.

古文：疏既入，锡爵、时行并杜门求去。而许国以典会试入场，阁中遂无一人。
现代文：奏疏已经呈上，王锡爵、申时行一同闭门请求免职，而许国以主持会试进了考场，内阁遂没有一个人了。
English: The report has been submitted, Wang Xizhe and Shen Shiguang jointly petitioned for dismissal behind closed doors, and Xu Guo entered the examination hall to preside over the meeting, and there was no one left in the cabinet.

古文：中官送章奏于时行私第，时行仍封还。
现代文：中官将奏章送到申时行的家中，申时行仍原封不动地送回。
English: The lieutenant general sent the report to Shin Shigyo's home, and Shin Shigyo sent it back unopened.

古文：帝惊曰： 阁中竟无人耶？ 
现代文：皇上吃惊地说： 内阁竟然没有人了？ 
English: The Emperor was surprised and said, "There's no one left in the cabinet?

古文：乃慰留时行等，而下伸诏狱。
现代文：于是劝慰留下申时行等，而将饶伸下狱。
English: As a result, the consolation was left to Shinshigyo and others, and Rao Shinneng was released from prison.

古文：给事中胡汝宁、御史林祖述等复劾伸及桂，以媚执政。
现代文：给事中胡汝宁、御史林祖述等再上疏弹劾饶伸和高桂，以谄媚权贵。
English: In the matter, Hu Runing and Goshilin Zu recounted the impeachment of Rao Sheng and Gao Gui, with the aim of flattering the powerful.

古文：御史毛在又侵孔兼，谓桂疏其所使。
现代文：御史毛在又提到孔兼，说高桂的上疏就是他指使的。
English: Mishima also mentioned Kong Quan, saying that he was the one who ordered Gao Gui's ascension.

古文：孔兼奏辨求罢。
现代文：孔兼上疏为自己辩护乞求离职。
English: Kong Kanesho defends himself and begs for his resignation.

古文：于是诏诸司严约所属，毋出位沽名，而削伸籍，贬桂三秩，调边方，孔兼得免。
现代文：于是皇上下诏各部门严格约束部下，不要越权沽名钓誉，而将饶伸削去名籍，将高桂贬官三级，孔兼得以免除惩罚。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered all departments to strictly restrain their subordinates, not to exceed their authority, not to steal names and reputations, but to remove Rao Jian from the family name, to demote Gao Gui to the third level, and to exempt Kongyan from punishment.

古文：伸既斥，朝士多咎锡爵。
现代文：饶伸遭到贬斥，朝廷人士多怪罪王锡爵。
English: Rao Shin was disparaged, and members of the imperial court mostly blamed Wang Xizhe.

古文：锡爵不自安，屡请叙用。
现代文：王锡爵自己很不安，屡屡请求任用他。
English: Wang Xizhe himself was very uneasy and repeatedly requested to be appointed.

古文：起伸南京工部主事，改南京吏部。
现代文：艾穆被起用为南京工部主事，他改任南京吏部。
English: Ai Mu was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Engineering Department, and he was transferred to the Nanjing Personnel Department.

古文：引疾归，遂不复出。
现代文：称病归家，不再出来做官。
English: He returned home saying he was ill, and did not return to work as an official.

古文：熹宗即位，起南京光禄寺少卿。
现代文：熹宗即位，起用为南京光禄寺少卿。
English: Shoson ascended to the throne and was appointed as the Shokei of Guanglu Temple in Nanjing.

古文：天启四年累官刑部左侍郎。
现代文：天启四年逐渐做到刑部左侍郎。
English: In the fourth year of the Apocalypse, he gradually became the left-hand attendant of the Department of Justice.

古文：元霖执奏，罢之。
现代文：魏忠贤扰乱朝政，请求回乡。
English: Wei Zhongxian disturbs the imperial government and requests to return to his hometown.

古文：卒，赠太子太保。
现代文：饶伸所辑录的《学海》六百余卷，时人称赞它浩繁、博大。
English: After his death, he was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：汤显祖，字若士，临川人。
现代文：汤显祖，字若士，江西临川人。
English: Tang Xianzu, Zhaoju scholar, from Linchuan, Jiangxi Province.

古文：少善属文，有时名。
现代文：小时候善于作文，很有些名气。
English: When I was a child, I was good at composition, and I had a bit of a reputation.

古文：张居正欲其子及第，罗海内名士以张之。
现代文：张居正想让他的儿子中进士，网罗海内名士夸奖他。
English: Zhang Jiusheng wants his son to become a high school valedictorian, and he wants celebrities at home and abroad to praise him.

古文：闻显祖及沈懋学名，命诸子延致。
现代文：听说汤显祖与沈懋学的名声后，命令他的儿子们去请汤、沈二位。
English: After hearing about the fame of Tang Xianzu and Shen Xuanxue, he ordered his sons to invite Tang and Shen.

古文：显祖谢弗往，懋学遂与居正子嗣修偕及第。
现代文：汤显祖辞谢不肯前往，沈懋学于是与张居正的儿子嗣修一起进士及第。
English: Tang Xianzu declined to go, and Shen Yue Xue and Zhang Jizheng's son, Sui Xiu, were promoted to the first and second ranks.

古文：显祖至万历十一年始成进士。
现代文：汤显祖到万历十一年才中了进士。
English: It took Tang Xianzu eleven years to be promoted.

古文：授南京太常博士，就迁礼部主事。
现代文：授职南京太常博士，就近升礼部主事。
English: Awarded the post of Nanjing Taizang Doctor, he was soon promoted to the head of the ceremonial department.

古文：十八年，帝以星变严责言官欺蔽，并停俸一年。
现代文：万历十八年，皇上因为星象变化责备御史官欺骗，停了他们一年的俸禄。
English: In the 18th year of the Wanli era, the emperor accused the imperial historians of deception because of the change in the constellations, and suspended their salary for one year.

古文：显祖上言曰： 言官岂尽不肖，盖陛下威福之柄潜为辅臣所窃，故言官向背之情，亦为默移。
现代文：汤显祖上疏说： 御史官难道都不好？大概陛下的权力逐渐为辅臣所窃取，所以御史官的向背也逐渐潜移默化。
English: Tang Xianzu said, "Isn't it bad to be the official historian? Probably, His Majesty's power was gradually stolen by his vassals, so the official historian's backsliding gradually subsided.

古文：御史丁此吕首发科场欺蔽，申时行属杨巍劾去之。
现代文：御史丁此吕首先揭发科举考场上的欺骗行为，申时行嘱咐杨巍将他弹劾出去。
English: First of all, Gu Shidongguo Lui exposed the cheating behavior on the examination room of the entrance examination, and at the time of application, he ordered Yang Xuan to impeach him.

古文：御史万国钦极论封疆欺蔽，时行讽同官许国远谪之。
现代文：御史万国钦极力论证封疆大吏的欺诈，申时行煽动同官许国将他贬得远远的。
English: Wang Guoqin tried his best to prove the fraud of the Great Official of the Enclosed Regions, but Minshi Xingxing incited his colleague Xu Guoqin to disparage him.

古文：一言相侵，无不出之于外。
现代文：只要有一句话触怒了他们，就没有不被赶出朝廷的。
English: As long as there is a sentence that offends them, there is no one who will not be driven out of the imperial court.

古文：于是无耻之徒，但知自结于执政。
现代文：于是无耻之徒，仅仅知道巴结当权的人。
English: Hence the shameless, who only know how to curry favour with those in power.

古文：所得爵禄，直以为执政与之。
现代文：所得的官职、俸禄，认为是当权者给予的。
English: The official position and salary received are considered to have been given by the person in power.

古文：纵他日不保身名，而今日固已富贵矣。
现代文：纵使以后保不住身名，现在已享受到富贵了。
English: Even if he can't keep his name in the future, he's already rich and famous now.

古文：给事中杨文举奉诏理荒政，征贿巨万。
现代文：给事中杨文举奉诏书治理赈济百姓，征收贿赂数万。
English: In the matter, Yang Wenqiu issued an edict to govern and benefit the people, and collected tens of thousands of bribes.

古文：抵杭，日宴西湖，鬻狱市荐以渔厚利。
现代文：抵达杭州，日日宴游西湖，收钱脱人于狱，受贿荐人以官，获取厚利。
English: Arrived in Hangzhou, day after day banquet tour of the West Lake, received money to escape from prison, accepted bribes to recommend people to officials, and obtained hefty profits.

古文：辅臣乃及其报命，擢首谏垣。
现代文：辅臣等他报告上来，提拔他为谏垣负责人。
English: His aide-de-camp waited for his report to come up and promoted him to be the person in charge of Higaki.

古文：给事中胡汝宁攻击饶伸，不过权门鹰犬，以其私人，猥见任用。
现代文：给事中胡汝宁攻击饶伸，不过是权门的爪牙，因为有私交而被任用。
English: During the incident, Hu Runing attacked Rao Sheng, who was nothing more than a minion of the power gate and was appointed because of his personal friendship.

古文：夫陛下方责言官欺蔽，而辅臣欺蔽自如。
现代文：陛下方才责备御史官欺骗，而辅臣欺诈到这样的地步。
English: His Majesty had just reproached the Historian for deceiving him, and the vassal for deceiving him to such an extent.

古文：失今不治，臣谓陛下可惜者四：朝廷以爵禄植善类，今直为私门蔓桃李，是爵禄可惜也。
现代文：今天下失于治理，我认为陛下有四点可惜。朝廷用爵位、俸禄是培养忠臣之士，今天成为私人培植党羽的力量，爵位、俸禄为可惜。
English: I think there are four things His Majesty regrets about the loss of governance today. The Imperial Court used peerages and salaries to train loyal subjects, but today they have become a private force for cultivating party members. I regret the loss of peerages and salaries.

古文：群臣风靡，罔识廉耻，是人才可惜也。
现代文：群臣折服于权臣，没有廉耻，人才为可惜。
English: It is a pity for a group of vassals to submit to a powerful vassal without any integrity.

古文：辅臣不越例予人富贵，不见为恩，是成宪可惜也。
现代文：辅臣不按惯例给予人以富贵，不见其恩德，法令为可惜。
English: It is a pity that the aide-de-camp does not follow the practice of giving people wealth and dignity, and does not see their benevolence.

古文：陛下御天下二十年，前十年之政，张居正刚而多欲，以群私人，嚣然坏之；后十年之政，时行柔而多欲，以群私人，靡然坏之。
现代文：陛下统治天下二十年，前十年之政，张居正强硬而多欲望，结党营私，公然败坏大政。后十年的政事，申时行软弱而多欲望，结党营私，悄悄败坏了政治。
English: During the twenty years of His Majesty's reign, in the first ten years of his reign, Zhang Juzheng was strong-willed and greedy, and he openly corrupted politics by forming a faction. In the second ten years of his reign, he was weak-willed and greedy, and he quietly corrupted politics by forming a faction.

古文：此圣政可惜也。
现代文：这是圣政可惜。
English: It is a pity for the Holy See.

古文：乞立斥文举、汝宁，诫谕辅臣，省愆悔过。 
现代文：请求立即斥退杨文举、胡汝宁，告诫辅臣，自省悔过。 
English: Request to immediately expel Yang Wenju and Hu Runing, admonish the assistant ministers, and repent.

古文：帝怒，谪徐闻典史。
现代文：皇上发了脾气，将他贬为徐闻典史。
English: The emperor lost his temper and relegated him to the annals of history.

古文：稍迁遂昌知县。
现代文：逐渐升为遂昌知县。
English: It gradually became Suichang County.

古文：二十六年，上计京师，投劾归。
现代文：二十六年在京师接受考核，被弹劾回家。
English: Twenty-six years in Beijing to accept the assessment, was impeached to go home.

古文：又明年大计，主者议黜之。
现代文：第二年考核时，主持的人议论将他贬退。
English: During the second year's assessment, the person who presided over the discussion demoted him.

古文：李维祯为监司，力争不得，竟夺官。
现代文：李维桢做监司，力争没有成功，他竟然被夺去官职。
English: Li Weiwei tried unsuccessfully to become a supervisor, but he was actually deprived of his official position.

古文：家居二十年卒。
现代文：在家生活二十年后死去。
English: He died after living at home for 20 years.

古文：尝官御史。既斥归，家居三十年而卒。显祖子开远，自有传。逯中立，字与权，聊城人。
现代文：李三才管理淮河漕运时，曾送信迎接他，汤显祖辞谢没去。逯中立，字与权，聊城人。
English: When Li Sancai was in charge of the Huaihe River transportation, he sent a letter to welcome him, but Tang Xianzu did not go.

古文：万历十七年进士。
现代文：万历十七年进士。
English: Entered the priesthood at the age of seventeen.

古文：由行人擢吏科给事中。
现代文：由行人提为吏科给事中。
English: A pedestrian has been cited for disorderly conduct.

古文：遇事敢言。
现代文：遇事敢于发表意见。
English: Dare to speak out in times of trouble.

古文：行人高攀龙，御史吴弘济，南部郎谭一召、孙继有、安希范咸以争赵用贤之罢被斥，中立抗疏曰： 诸臣率好修士，使跧伏田野，诚可惜也。
现代文：行人高攀龙，御史吴弘济，南部郎谭一召、孙继有、安希范都由于为赵用贤罢官辩护而遭到斥退，逯中立上疏说： 这些大臣都是修有德行的人士，使他们隐匿于田野，的确可惜。
English: Gao Panglong, Goshi Wu Hongji, Nanbu Lang Tan Yizhong, Sun Jiyu and An Xi Fan were all expelled for defending Zhao Yixian's dismissal, and the neutral Shang Zuo said: These ministers are virtuous people, and it is indeed a pity that they are hiding in the fields.

古文：陛下怒言者，则曰 出朕独断 ，辅臣王锡爵亦曰 至尊亲裁 。
现代文：陛下对言官恼怒，则说： 出于我的独断 ，辅臣王锡爵也说： 皇上亲自裁定。 
English: When His Majesty became angry with the spokesman, he said, "Because of my arbitrary decision," and the aide-de-camp, Wang Xizhe, also said, "The Emperor himself made the decision."

古文：臣谓所斥者非正人也，则断自宸衷，固陛下去邪之明；即拟自辅臣，亦大臣为国之正。
现代文：我认为所贬退的不是正直的人，判决来自陛下，是陛下去掉邪恶小人的证明，即使出自辅臣草拟，也是大臣为国的忠心。
English: I do not think that it was an honest man who was degraded. The sentence came from His Majesty. It was proof that His Majesty had removed an evil villain. Even if it was drafted by an aide-de-camp, it was the minister's loyalty to the country.

古文：若所斥者果正人也，出于辅臣之调旨，而有心斥逐者为妒贤；即出于至尊之亲裁，而不能匡救者为窃位。
现代文：倘若所贬退的果然是正直的人，出于辅臣的怂恿而下的圣旨，有心要贬退的是遭嫉妒的贤正之人，假使出于皇上的亲自裁定而辅臣不予救援的是不称职。
English: If, indeed, it is an honest man who has been degraded, it is because of the sacred will of the vassal who has come down from the throne; if it is a virtuous man who has been subjected to jealousy, it is because of the jealousy of the vassal who has the intention to degrade him; and if it is because of the emperor's personal decision and the vassal does not give help, it is because of incompetence.

古文：大臣以人事君之道，当如是乎？
现代文：大臣以人臣侍奉君王的道理应当这样吗？
English: Should the principle of a minister serving the monarch as a personal retainer prevail?

古文：陛下欲安辅臣，则罢言者；不知言者罢，辅臣益不自安。 
现代文：陛下想安抚辅臣，则罢掉言官，不知道言官被罢，辅臣更加不安。 
English: If His Majesty wants to appease his vassals, he will dismiss the spokesman. If he does not know that the spokesman has been dismissed, the vassals will be even more uneasy.

古文：疏入，忤旨，停俸一岁。
现代文：奏疏呈上，违背旨意，被停发俸禄一年。
English: He was suspended from receiving his salary for one year for violating the will.

古文：寻进兵科右给事中。
现代文：不久升兵科右给事中。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the right side of the military department.

古文：有诏修国史，锡爵举故詹事刘虞夔为总裁。
现代文：皇上下诏编修国史，王锡爵推荐前任詹事刘虞夔为总裁。
English: Wang Xizhe recommended Zhan's predecessor, Liu Yuxuan, as president.

古文：虞夔，锡爵门生也，以拾遗劾罢。
现代文：刘虞夔是王锡爵的门生，在补录纠察过失时被弹劾罢官。
English: Liu Yuxuan, a protégé of Wang Xizhe, was impeached and removed from office when he was found guilty of picketing.

古文：诸御史言不当召。
现代文：各御史认为不应当征召他。
English: Various historians believe that he should not have been conscripted.

古文：而中立诋虞夔尤力，并侵锡爵，遂寝召命。
现代文：而逯中立诋毁虞夔尤其卖力，并提到王锡爵，皇上于是停止征召的命令。
English: However, Yan Zhongli denigrated and slandered Yu Yao especially hard, and mentioned Wang Xizhe. The emperor then issued an order to stop the conscription.

古文：未几，文选郎顾宪成等以会推阁臣事被斥，给事中卢明诹救之，亦贬秩。
现代文：没有多久，文选郎顾宪成等因为推举内阁大臣的事被贬，给事中卢明诹申救，也被贬官。
English: It didn't take long before Wen Xuan Lang, Gu Xiancheng, and others were demoted because of the matter of nominating a cabinet minister. Lu Mingyao came to their rescue and was also demoted.

古文：中立上言： 两年以来，铨臣相继屏斥。尚书孙鑨去矣，陈有年杜门求罢矣，文选一署空曹逐者至再三，而宪成又继之。
现代文：逯中立对皇上说： 两年以来，吏部大臣相继被贬，尚书孙钅龙离职了，陈有年闭门请求罢官了，文选一职刚刚有人上任就被贬退，已经三次了，顾宪成又接着遭贬斥。
English: Zou Zhonglian said to the emperor: "Since two years ago, the Minister of the Ministry of Personnel has been demoted one after another, Shang Shusun Yulong has left office, Chen Younian has requested to be dismissed behind closed doors, Wen Xuan has been demoted three times, and Gu Xiancheng has been demoted again.

古文：臣恐今而后，非如王国光、杨巍，则不能一日为冢宰；非如徐一槚、谢廷寀、刘希孟，则不能一日为选郎。
现代文：臣恐怕今后，不像王国光、杨巍，则不能执掌朝政一天；不像徐一木贾、谢廷肕、刘希孟则不能担任文选郎一天。
English: I am afraid that in the future, unlike Wang Guoguang and Yang Jie, he will not be able to take charge of the imperial government for a day; unlike Xu Yijia, Xie Tingtao and Liu Ximeng, he will not be able to serve as a literary editor for a day.

古文：臧否混淆，举错倒置，使黜陟重典寄之权门，用舍斥罚视一时喜怒，公议壅阏，烦言滋起。
现代文：好坏混淆，本末倒置，使考铨之权都寄于权贵，进用与贬退、斥责与处罚皆由一时喜怒决定，公正的言论被堵塞，繁琐的言论四起。
English: Good and bad are confused, the principle is inverted, so that the power of examination and examination is entrusted to the powerful and the noble, the promotion and demotion, the reprimand and punishment are all determined by the momentary emotions, the fair speech is blocked, and the cumbersome speech is scattered.

古文：此人才消长之机，理道废兴之渐，不可不深虑也。
现代文：这是人才消亡或成长的时机、道理废弃或兴盛的开始，陛下不能不深深地考虑。
English: This is the time for talent to die out or grow, for reason to be abandoned or for prosperity to begin, and His Majesty cannot help but think deeply about it.

古文：且会推阁臣，非自十九年始。皇祖二十八年廷推六员，而张治、李本二臣用；即今元辅锡爵之入阁，亦会推也。
现代文：况且朝臣一起推荐阁臣，不是从十九年开始，皇祖二十八年朝廷推荐了六人，任用张治、李本二人，即使现在的首辅王锡爵进入内阁，也是推荐的。
English: Moreover, the courtiers recommended the cabinet ministers together, not from the beginning of the 19th century. In the 28th year of the emperor's ancestor, the court recommended six people, and appointed two people, Zhang Zhi and Li Ben. Even the current chief aide, Wang Xizhe, was recommended to enter the cabinet.

古文：盖特简与廷推，祖宗并行已久。
现代文：特别选拔与朝廷推荐，祖宗二者都有实行。
English: Both the special selection and the recommendation of the imperial court have been implemented.

古文：廷推必谐于佥议，特简或由于私援。
现代文：朝廷推选必定依据大家的意见，特别选拔有的由于私交。
English: The selection of the imperial court must be based on the opinions of everyone, and some special selections are due to personal relationships.

古文：今辅臣赵志皋等不稽故典，妄激圣怒，即揭救数语，譬之强笑，而神不偕来，欲以动听难矣。
现代文：现在辅臣赵志皋等不考察旧典，妄自激起陛下发怒，即使有几句救援顾宪成等人的话，也是强为笑容，并无诚心，想打动别人很难。
English: Now, Vice-Minister Zhao Zhixuan and others do not study the old classics, and they dare to arouse His Majesty's anger. Even if there are a few words to rescue Gu Xiancheng and others, it is a strong smile, and there is no sincerity. It is difficult to impress others.

古文：方今疆埸交耸，公私耗敝，群情思乱，识者怀忧。
现代文：现在战场危急，公私耗散，群情思乱，有志之士很担忧。
English: Now the battlefield is critical, the public and private dissipate, the crowd is confused, and the aspirants are very worried.

古文：乃朝议纷纭若尔，岂得不长叹息哉！ 
现代文：而朝议纷纭，难道能不为此长长叹息吗！ 
English: As for the differences of opinion within the cabinet, can we not give a long sigh of relief!

古文：帝怒，严旨责让，斥明诹为民，而贬中立陕西按察司知事。
现代文：皇上发了脾气，下旨严厉责骂，贬卢明诹为平民，贬中立为陕西按察司知事。
English: The emperor lost his temper, issued a stern reprimand, demoted Lu Mingyao to a commoner, and demoted Zhong Zhong to the position of inspector general and governor of Shaanxi.

古文：引疾归，家居二十年卒。
现代文：中立称病回家，在家居住了二十年后死去。
English: Neutrality called home sick and died after living at home for twenty years.

古文：熹宗时，赠光禄少卿。
现代文：熹宗时，赠为光禄少卿。
English: When he was the head of the sect, he was given the title of Guanglu Shaoqing.

