古文：素毒
现代文：素毒
English: Vegetarian poison

古文：人问： 羊肉与鹅肉。如何这般毒得紧？ 
现代文：有人问： 羊肉与鹅肉为什么有这样大的腥臊气？ 
English: Some people ask: Why does mutton and goose meat have such a pungent smell?

古文：或答曰： 生平吃素的。 
现代文：另一人回答说： 是因为一生都吃素。 
English: Another replied: "Because I've been a vegetarian all my life."

古文：笑话一担
现代文：笑话一担
English: A bunch of jokes

古文：秀才年将七十，忽生一子。因有年纪而生，即名年纪。
现代文：有个秀才年近七十，他的妻子突然生了一个儿子，因为年岁已高才生了儿子，就取名为 年纪 。
English: Once upon a time, there was a brilliant man in his seventies. His wife suddenly gave birth to a son, and because she was too old to have a son, she named him Age.

古文：未几又生一子，似可读书，命名学问。
现代文：过了不久，又生了一个儿子，看模样像个读书的，便取名为 学问 。
English: Soon after, she gave birth to another son, who looked like a scholar, and named him "Learning."

古文：次年，又生一子。笑曰： 如此老年，还要生儿，真笑话也。 
现代文：第三年又生了一个儿子，秀才笑道： 这样大的岁数了，还能得子，真是笑话。 
English: In the third year, she gave birth to another son. Scholar smiled and said, "It's a joke that at my age, I can still have a child.

古文：因名曰 笑话。 
现代文：于是取名为 笑话 。
English: So it was called a joke.

古文：三人年长无事，俱命入山打柴，及归，夫问曰： 三子之柴孰多？ 
现代文：三个儿子长大后无事可做，秀才让他们进山打柴，等到回来，丈夫问妻子说： 三个人谁打的柴多？ 
English: When the three sons grew up, they had nothing to do, so the genius had them go into the mountains to collect firewood. When they returned, the husband asked his wife, "Which of the three of you collects more firewood?"

古文：妻曰： 年纪有了一把，学问一点也无，笑话倒有一担。 
现代文：妻子说： 年纪有了一把，学问一点也没有，笑话倒是有一担。 
English: His wife said: "He's an old man, he doesn't know anything, but he's got a lot of jokes.

古文：引避
现代文：引避
English: Evasion

古文：有势利者，每出逢冠盖，必引避。
现代文：有一个好虚荣的人，出门时遇到达官显贵路过，就避在一边。
English: There was a very vain man who avoided dignitaries when they passed by.

古文：同行者问其故，答曰： 舍亲。 
现代文：同行的人问他为什么这样做，他说： 那是我的亲戚。 
English: His companions asked him why he did that, and he said, "It is my relative."

古文：如此屡屡，同行者厌之。
现代文：这样好多次，每次他都这样，同行的人都觉得讨厌。
English: He's done this so many times, and every time he does it, the people he's with find it disgusting.

古文：偶逢一乞丐，亦效其引避，曰： 舍亲。 
现代文：后来，忽然路上遇到一个乞丐，同行的人就仿效他的做法，也躲避到旁边，说： 那个乞丐是我的亲戚。 
English: Later, he suddenly met a beggar on the road, and his companions followed his example and also hid next to him, saying, "That beggar is my relative."

古文：问： 为何有此令亲？ 
现代文：爱虚荣的人就问： 你怎么有这样的穷亲戚？ 
English: The vain man asked, "How do you have such poor relatives?"

古文：曰： 但是好的，都被尔认去了。 
现代文：同行的人说： 因为凡是好的，都被你认去了。 
English: And they that were with him said, Thou hast known him that is good.

古文：吃橄榄
现代文：吃橄榄
English: Eat olives.

古文：乡人入城赴酌，宴席内有橄榄焉。
现代文：有个农夫进城赴宴，席中有橄榄。
English: A farmer went to a banquet in the city, and there were olives on the table.

古文：乡人取啖，涩而无味，因问同席者曰： 此是何物？ 
现代文：农夫拿到嘴里吃，既涩嘴又不好吃，于是问同席的人说： 这是什么东西？ 
English: The farmer took it in his mouth and ate it. It was dry and tasteless, so he asked the people at the table, "What is this?"

古文：同席者以其村气，鄙之曰： 俗。 
现代文：同席的人认为他粗俗，鄙视地说： 俗。 
English: His fellow diners thought he was vulgar, and scornfully said: "Vulgar.

古文：乡人以 俗 为名，遂牢记之，归谓人曰： 我今日在城尝奇物，叫名 俗 。 
现代文：农夫以为 俗 是橄榄名，便牢记在心，回家后对人说： 我今天在城里吃到一种稀奇的果子，名叫 俗 。 
English: The farmer thought that "Zhu" was the name of an olive, so he kept it in mind. When he got home, he said to the man, "Today, I ate a strange fruit in the city called "Zhu."

古文：众未信，其人乃张口呵气曰： 你们不信，现今满口都是俗气哩。 
现代文：大家听了不相信，农夫便张口呵气说： 你们不信，现在我满口都是俗气哩。 
English: When everyone listened in disbelief, the farmer opened his mouth and sighed: "You don't believe me, now my mouth is full of vulgarities."

古文：嘲滑稽客
现代文：嘲滑稽客
English: Mocking comedians

古文：一人留客午饭，其客已啖尽一碗，不见添饭。
现代文：有个人留客人吃午饭，那个客人已吃完了一碗，没有人为他添饭。
English: A man had a guest for lunch. The guest had finished a bowl of rice, and no one helped him with his meal.

古文：客欲主人知之，乃佯言曰： 某家有住房一所要卖。 
现代文：客人想要主人晓得，就假装说道： 某家有住房一所要卖。 
English: The guest wanted the host to know, so he pretended to say: A certain family has a house for sale.

古文：故将碗口向主人曰： 椽子也有这样大。 
现代文：接着故意将碗口对着主人说： 椽子也有碗口这样粗。 
English: Then he deliberately pointed out the bowl mouth to his host and said, "The tongs also have a bowl mouth as thick as this."

古文：主人见碗内无饭，急呼使童添之。
现代文：主人看到碗内没有饭了，急忙呼喊仆童给他添饭。
English: When the master saw that there was no more rice in the bowl, he hurriedly called his servant to give him more rice.

古文：因问客曰： 他要价值几何？ 
现代文：随即向客人问道： 他卖多少钱？ 
English: He then asked his guest: How much does he sell?

古文：客曰： 于今有了饭吃，不卖了。 
现代文：客人回答说： 如今有了饭吃，不卖了。 
English: The guest replied, "Now that I have food to eat, I won't sell it."

古文：圆谎
现代文：圆谎
English: The Big Lie

古文：有人惯会说谎。其仆每代为圆之。
现代文：有个人习惯说谎话，他的仆人每次都替他圆谎。
English: A certain man was in the habit of telling lies, and his servant used to lie for him every time.

古文：一日，对人曰： 我家一井，昨被大风吹往隔壁人家去了。 
现代文：有一天，他对人说： 我家的一口井，昨天被大风吹到隔壁家去了。 
English: One day, he said to someone, "A well in my house was blown by a strong wind to the house next door yesterday.

古文：众以为从古所无。
现代文：大家认为这样的事从古到今都没有过。
English: It was thought that nothing like this had ever happened before.

古文：仆圆之曰： 确有其事。我家的井，贴近邻家篱笆，昨晚风大，见篱笆吹过井这边来，却像井吹在邻家去了。 
现代文：他的仆人为他圆谎说： 确实有这样的事，我家的井挨近邻家的篱笆，昨晚风大，把篱笆吹到井这边来，就像井吹到邻居家去了。 
English: His servant lied for him and said, "It's true, my well is next to the neighbor's fence, and last night there was a strong wind, and the fence blew over to the well, just as the well blew over to the neighbor's house."

古文：一日，又对人曰： 有人射下一雁，头上顶碗粉汤。 
现代文：一天，他又对人说： 有人射下一只雁，头上顶碗粉汤。 
English: One day, he said to another person, "Someone shot down a goose and put a bowl of powdered soup on its head.

古文：众又惊诧之。
现代文：大家又非常惊讶，不相信他说的话。
English: Everyone was very surprised and didn't believe him.

古文：仆圆曰： 此事亦有。我主人在天井内吃粉汤，忽有一雁堕下，雁头正跌在碗内，岂不是雁顶着粉汤。 
现代文：他的仆人又为他圆谎说： 这件事也有，我主人在天井内吃粉汤，忽然，有一只雁掉下来，雁头正好跌在碗里，岂不是雁头顶着粉汤？ 
English: His servant lied for him again and again, saying, "There was also this matter. My master was eating powdered soup in the ceiling, when suddenly a goose fell down and its head fell right into the bowl. Wasn't the goose's head holding the powdered soup?

古文：一日。又对人曰： 寒家有顶温天帐，把天地遮得严严的，一些空隙也没有。 
现代文：又一天，他又对别人说： 寒家有顶温天帐，把天地遮得严严的，一点空隙都没有。 
English: On another day, he said to someone else: "The cold family has a top-temperature canopy, which covers heaven and earth tightly, and there is no gap at all.

古文：仆人攒眉曰： 主人脱煞，扯这漫天谎，叫我如何遮掩得来。 
现代文：仆人听了这话，很为难地皱着眉头说： 主人说得太过分了，扯这漫天大谎，叫我怎么遮掩得来。 
English: When the servant heard this, he frowned in embarrassment and said, "My master has gone too far, telling such a big lie, how can I cover it up?"

古文：利水学台
现代文：利水学台
English: Lishui Learning Center

古文：秀才家丁，把娃娃撒尿，良久不撒，吓之曰： 学台来了。 
现代文：秀才家里的仆人，抱娃娃撒尿，很长时间小孩也不撒。仆人就吓唬他说： 学台来了。 
English: A servant in the family of a gifted man held a doll and peed on it, but the child did not pee for a long time. The servant scared him and said, "The stage is coming."

古文：娃娃立刻撒尿。
现代文：娃娃立刻就撒尿。
English: The doll immediately starts peeing.

古文：秀才问其故，答曰： 我见你们秀才一听学台下马，吓得尿屎齐出，如此知之。 
现代文：秀才问他为什么，回答道： 我见你们秀才一听学台来了，吓得尿屎都出来了，所以就这样吓唬他。 
English: The scholar asked him why, and replied, "I saw you scholars come to the stage as soon as you heard the news, and I was so scared that I peed my pants. That's why I scared him like that."

古文：秀才叹曰： 想不到这娃娃能承父志，克绍书香；更想不到这学台善利小水，能通二便。 
现代文：秀才感叹地说： 想不到这娃娃能继承父亲的志愿，接续书香；更想不到这学台善于利尿，能通大小便。 
English: "I couldn't imagine that this doll would be able to inherit her father's will and continue the calligraphy tradition. I couldn't even imagine that this school would be good at diuresis and would be able to pass urine and feces.

古文：怕考生员
现代文：怕考生员
English: Scared of examiners

古文：秀才怕岁考，一闻学台下马，惊慌失色，往接学台，见轿夫怨之曰： 轿夫奴才，轿夫奴才，你为何把一个学台抬了来，吓得我魂飞天外。
现代文：秀才怕每年的考试，一听说考生员来了，惊慌失色，跑上前来，迎接考生员，看见了抬轿的人就埋怨说： 轿夫奴才，轿夫奴才，你为什么把一个考生员抬来？吓得我魂飞魄散。
English: Scholars are afraid of the annual examination. As soon as they heard that the candidates were coming, they panicked and ran forward to meet the candidates. When they saw the people carrying the car, they complained, "Car slave, car slave, why are you carrying a candidate? I was scared out of my mind."

古文：那一世我做轿夫，你做秀才，我也把学台给你抬了来，看你魂儿在不在。 
现代文：哪一辈子我做了轿夫，你做了秀才，我也把学台给你抬了来，看你魂儿在不在？ 
English: In what lifetime did I become a coachman and you a genius, and did I also carry the school desk to you to see if your soul was there?

古文：孝媳
现代文：孝媳
English: Daughter-in-law

古文：一翁曰： 我家有三媳妇，俱极孝顺。
现代文：一位老人说： 我家有三个媳妇，都很孝顺。
English: An old man said: My family has three daughters-in-law, all of whom are very filial.

古文：大媳妇怕我口淡，见我进门就增盐了。
现代文：大媳妇怕我口淡，一看我进门，就往菜里多放盐。
English: My granddaughter-in-law was afraid that I was too soft-spoken. As soon as I walked in the door, she put more salt in the food.

古文：次媳妇怕我寂寞，时常打竹筒鼓与我听。
现代文：二媳妇怕我寂寞，时常打竹筒鼓给我听。
English: My second daughter-in-law is afraid of my loneliness and often plays the bamboo drum for me.

古文：第三媳妇更孝，闻说 夜饭少吃口，活到九十九 。
现代文：第三个媳妇更孝顺，听说 夜饭少吃口，活到九十九。 
English: The third daughter-in-law was more dutiful, and it was said that she ate less at dinner and lived to ninety-nine.

古文：故早饭就不与我吃。 
现代文：所以，干脆连早饭也不给我吃了。 
English: So, he didn't even give me breakfast.

古文：看扇
现代文：看扇
English: Fan watching

古文：有借佳扇观者，其人珍惜，以绵绸衫衬之。
现代文：有个人借别人的精美扇子观赏。他接过扇子，非常珍惜，用自己的绵绸衫衬在手心，拿着扇子观看。
English: One person borrowed someone else's exquisite fan to watch. He took the fan, treasured it very much, lined his palm with his own silk shirt, and watched with the fan.

古文：扇主看其袖色不堪，谓曰： 倒是光手拿着罢。 
现代文：扇主见他的衣袖实在是肮脏不堪，便对他说： 你还是光手拿着它看吧。 
English: When the fan owner saw that his sleeve was really dirty, he said to him, "You can still look at it with your bare hands."

古文：搬是非
现代文：搬是非
English: Moving in the right direction

古文：寺中塑三教像，先儒、次释、后道。
现代文：寺庙里塑有三教的圣像：先是儒教圣像，次是佛教圣像，后是道教圣像。
English: There are statues of three religions in the temple: the first is a Confucian statue, the second is a Buddhist statue, and the third is a Taoist statue.

古文：道士见之，即移老君于中。僧见，又移迦于中。士见，仍移孔子于中。
现代文：道士见了，马上将老君移到中位；和尚见了，又将释迦牟尼移到中位；读书人见了，又将孔子移到中位。
English: When the moralist saw it, he immediately moved Laojun to the middle; when the monk saw it, he moved Sakyamuni to the middle; when the scholar saw it, he moved Confucius to the middle.

古文：三圣自相谓曰： 我们原是好好的，却被这些上人搬来搬去搬坏了。 
现代文：三位圣人自相说道： 我们原是好好的，却被这些小人搬来搬去，搬坏了。 
English: The three sages said to each other, "We were fine before, but these villains moved us around and ruined us.

古文：丈人
现代文：丈人
English: Father-in-law

古文：有以岳丈之力得中魁选者。
现代文：有个人凭借岳父之力得以中魁。
English: One person was able to become a middle leader thanks to his father-in-law.

古文：或为语嘲之曰： 孔门弟子入试，临揭晓。闻报子张第九，众曰： 他一貌堂堂，果有好处。 
现代文：有人编了一套话讥讽说： 孔门弟子入试，临到揭晓，闻报子张排名第九，众人说： 他相貌堂堂，果然有好的位次。 
English: Some people have made up a set of words to say sarcastically: Confucius' disciple entered the exam, and when it was revealed, he was ranked ninth in the newspaper. People said: He is handsome, and he has a good rank.

古文：又报子路第十三，众曰： 这粗人倒也中得高，还亏他这阵气魄好。 
现代文：又报子路排名第十三，众人说： 这粗人倒也中得高，全靠他这阵子神气好。 
English: He was also ranked thirteenth, and the people said, "This ruffian has made it to the top, and it's all thanks to his good looks."

古文：又报颜第十二，众曰： 他学问最好，屈了他些。 
现代文：又报颜渊排名第十二，众人说： 他学问最好，屈了他些。 
English: Yan Yuan was also reported to be ranked 12th, and many people said, "He is the best in learning, so I gave in to him."

古文：又报公冶长第五，大家骇曰： 那人平时不见怎的，为何倒中在前？ 
现代文：又报说公冶长排名第五，大家吃惊地说： 那人平时不怎么样，为什么倒中在前面？ 
English: It was also reported that Gongye Chang ranked fifth, and everyone was surprised and said: That person is not good at ordinary times, why is he in the front?

古文：一人曰： 他全亏有人扶持，所以高掇。 
现代文：其中有个人说： 他全亏有人扶持，所以高中。 
English: One of them said: "He has no one to support him, so he has to go to high school.

古文：问： 谁扶持他？ 
现代文：众人问： 谁扶持他？ 
English: The crowd asked: Who is supporting him?

古文：曰： 丈人。  
现代文：那人回答： 丈人。  
English: The man replied, "My father-in-law."

古文：大爷
现代文：大爷
English: Grandfather

古文：一人牵牛而行，喝人让路。不听，乃云： 看你家爷来。 
现代文：有个人牵着牛走在路上，喊前面的人让路他们不听，于是便说： 看你家的大爷来了。 
English: A man was walking down the road with his ox in tow. He called out to the people in front to move out of the way, but they didn't listen, so he said, "Look, the head of your family is coming."

古文：一人回视曰： 难道我家有这样一个大爷？ 
现代文：其中一个回过头看着牛说： 难道我家里有这样一个大爷吗？ 
English: One of them looked back at the cow and said, "Do I really have such an old man in my family?

古文：苏杭同席
现代文：苏杭同席
English: Suzhou and Hangzhou at the same table

古文：苏、杭人同席。杭人单吃枣子，而苏人单食橄榄。
现代文：苏、杭二人同席，杭州人只吃枣子，而苏州人只吃橄榄。
English: Two people from Suzhou and Hangzhou were sitting at the same table. The Hangzhou people only ate dates, while the Suzhou people only ate olives.

古文：杭问苏曰： 橄榄有何好处？
现代文：杭州人问苏州人说： 橄榄有什么好的？
English: Hangzhou people asked Suzhou people: What is good about olives?

古文：而爱吃他？ 
现代文：可是你偏爱吃它。 
English: But you prefer to eat it.

古文：曰： 回味最佳。 
现代文：苏州人说： 回味最佳。 
English: Suzhou people say: The aftertaste is the best.

古文：杭人曰： 等你回味好，我已甜过半日了。 
现代文：杭州人说： 等你回味好了，我已经甜过半天了。 
English: Hangzhou people said: When your aftertaste is good, I have been sweet for more than half a day.

古文：狗衔锭
现代文：狗衔锭
English: The dogs are barking.

古文：狗衔一银锭而走，人以肉喂他不放，又以衣罩去，复又甩脱。
现代文：有一只狗叼起一块银锭便狂奔起来，人用肉喂它仍然不撒掉，随即又用衣服罩去，狗又跑脱。
English: A dog picked up a piece of silver ingot and ran away. People fed it with meat and it still did not scatter. They then covered it with clothes and the dog ran away again.

古文：人谓狗曰： 畜生，你直恁不舍，既不爱吃，复不好穿，死命要这银子何用？ 
现代文：人对狗说： 畜生，你怎么那样舍不得，既不好吃，又不好穿，不要命地要这银子有什么用？ 
English: The man said to the dog: Animal, why are you so reluctant, it is neither good to eat, nor good to wear, what is the use of desperately wanting this silver?

古文：不停当
现代文：不停当
English: Non-stop singing

古文：有开当者，本钱甚少。
现代文：有个开当铺的，本钱很少。
English: If you have a pawnshop, you have very little capital.

古文：首月，于招牌上写 当 ，未久，本钱发没，取赎人不来，于 当 之上写一 停 字，言停当也。
现代文：开业第一个月，在招牌上写一个 当 字。没多长时间，本钱发没了，取赎人不来，于是在 当 之上，又加上一个 停 字，是说 停当 了。
English: In the first month of opening, write a "Stop" sign on the signboard. Before long, the capital is gone, and the redeemers do not come, so on top of the "Stop," add a "Stop" sign, which means "Stop."

古文：及后赎者再来，本钱复至，又于 停 字之上，加一 不 字。
现代文：等到后来，当物人取赎，又有了本钱，便在 停当 前加上一个 不 字。
English: Later, when things were redeemed and there was capital again, they added a word "not" before "stop."

古文：人见之曰： 我看你这典铺中实实有些不停当了。 
现代文：人们见了说： 我看你这当铺实实在在有些不停当了。 
English: People saw it and said: I think this pawnshop of yours is really, really getting a bit out of hand.

古文：十只脚
现代文：十只脚
English: Ten feet high

古文：关吏缺课，凡空身人过关，亦要纳税，若生十只脚者免。
现代文：关吏缺钱了，凡是空手人过关，也要纳税，除非长十只脚的人才可免税。
English: Customs officials are short of money. All karate practitioners who pass customs must pay taxes, unless they are ten feet tall.

古文：初一人过关无钞，曰： 我浙江龙游人也。
现代文：开始时，有个人过关没钱，说： 我是浙江龙游人。
English: At the beginning, there was a person who passed through without money and said: I am a Zhejiang Longyuan.

古文：龙是四脚，牛是四脚，人两脚，岂非十脚？ 
现代文：龙是四脚，牛是四脚，人两脚，难道不是十只脚吗？ 
English: A dragon has four feet, a cow has four feet, a man has two feet, but aren't there ten feet?

古文：许之。
现代文：关吏允许他过了关。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：又一人求免税曰： 我乃蟹客也。
现代文：又有一人请求免税，说： 我是蟹客。
English: Another person asked for a tax exemption, saying: I am a crab customer.

古文：蟹八脚，我两脚。岂非十脚？ 
现代文：蟹八只脚，我是两只脚，难道不是十只脚吗？ 
English: Crabs have eight legs, I have two legs. Shouldn't they have ten legs?

古文：亦免之。
现代文：关吏一听也免了他的税。
English: On hearing this, the customs officer exempted him from paying taxes.

古文：末后一徽商过关，竟不纳税，关吏怒欲责之。答曰： 小的虽是两脚，其实身上之脚还有八只。 
现代文：最后一个徽商过关，竟然不想纳税，关吏大怒要打他，那人回答说： 小人我虽然是两只脚，其实身上的脚还有八只。 
English: The last Huizhong merchant to pass through customs actually did not want to pay taxes. The customs officer was furious and wanted to beat him. The man replied: "Though I am a villain with two feet, I actually have eight feet.

古文：官问： 哪里？ 
现代文：关吏问： 在哪里？ 
English: The customs officer asked: Where is it?

古文：答曰： 小的徽人，叫做徽獭猫，猫是四脚，獭又是四脚，小的两脚，岂不共是十只脚？ 
现代文：那人回答说： 小的徽人，叫做徽獭猫，猫是四脚，獭是四脚，小的两脚，岂不是一共十只脚？ 
English: The man replied, "Little Hui Man is called Hui Xuan Cat. Cats have four feet, donkeys have four feet, and small dogs have two feet. Isn't that a total of ten feet?"

古文：亲家公
现代文：亲家公
English: "Chikageko"

古文：有见少妇抱儿于怀，乃讨便宜曰： 好个乖儿子。 
现代文：有个人见少妇抱小儿在怀，就讨便宜说： 好个乖儿子！ 
English: When someone saw a young woman holding a child in her arms, they said, "What a good son!"

古文：妇知其轻薄，接口曰： 既好，你把女儿送他做妻子罢。 
现代文：少妇知其轻薄，便接话说： 那好，你把女儿送给他做妻子吧。 
English: The young woman, aware of his frivolity, replied: Well, then, give him your daughter to be his wife.

古文：其人答曰： 若如此，你要叫我做亲家公了。 
现代文：那人回答道： 如果那样，你要叫我做亲家公了。 
English: The man replied, "In that case, you'd have to make me the head of the family."

古文：中人
现代文：中人
English: Middle-aged people

古文：玉帝修凌霄殿，偶乏钱粮，欲将广寒宫典与下界人皇。
现代文：玉帝修凌霄殿，偶然缺少钱粮，想将广寒宫当给人间的皇帝。
English: The Jade Emperor Xiu Lingxiao, who happened to be short of money and grain, wanted to make Guangkang Palace the emperor of the human world.

古文：因思中人亦得一皇帝便好，乃请灶君皇帝下界议价。
现代文：玉帝考虑使者也得是一位皇帝才好，于是请灶君皇帝下到人间商议价格。
English: The Jade Emperor thought it would be better to have an emperor as an envoy, so he asked the Zhao Emperor to come down to earth to negotiate the price.

古文：既见朝，朝中人讶之曰： 天庭所遣中人，何黑如此？ 
现代文：等灶君到了人间的朝廷，朝廷里的人惊讶地说： 天上派的使者，为什么这样黑。 
English: When the stove master arrived at the earthly court, the people in the court were surprised and said, "Heavenly messenger, why is it so dark?"

古文：灶君笑曰： 天下中人，哪有是白做的。 
现代文：灶君笑道： 天下的使者，哪有是白做的。 
English: Zhao Jun said with a smile: The messengers of the world are all made of white.

古文：媒人
现代文：媒人
English: Matchmaker

古文：有忧贫者，或教之曰： 只求媒人足矣。 
现代文：有个整天忧愁贫穷的人，别人教导他说： 只要求媒人说一说就够了。 
English: There was a man who was sad and poor all day long, and he was told, "It is enough for you to have a mediator."

古文：其人曰： 媒安能疗贫乎？ 
现代文：那个忧贫的人说： 媒人怎么能救得贫穷呢？ 
English: The poverty-stricken man said, "How can a matchmaker save poverty?

古文：答曰： 随你穷人家，经了媒人口，就都发迹了。 
现代文：回答说： 不论哪个穷人家，只要经过媒人嘴一说，就都发迹了。 
English: He replied, "No matter how poor a family is, as long as it is through the mouth of a matchmaker, it will prosper.

古文：精童
现代文：精童
English: Seiko

古文：有好外者，往候一友。
现代文：有个好虚荣要面子的人，去朋友家拜访。
English: A vain, self-important man went to visit a friend's house.

古文：友知其性，呼曰： 唤精童具茶。 
现代文：主人晓得他的秉性，便喊道： 招呼精童备茶。 
English: The master knew his disposition and called out, "Call Seido to prepare tea."

古文：已而，献茶者乃一奇丑童子也。其人曰： 似此何名精童？ 
现代文：不一会，一个奇丑的仆童进来献茶。那人说： 这样的仆童为何称为精童？ 
English: After a while, a grotesquely ugly servant boy came in to serve tea. The man said, "Why is such a servant boy called Seido?"

古文：友曰： 正佳一些人气也无得。 
现代文：主人回答说： 好图虚荣。 相称
English: The master replied, "Vanity of vanities.

古文：相称一俗汉造一精室，室中罗列古玩书画，无一不备。
现代文：有个平庸的人建造了一所精美之室，室中罗列古玩书画，没有一样不备。
English: A mediocre man built an exquisite room, in which antique books and paintings were lined up, not a single one was missing.

古文：客至，问曰： 此中若有不相称者，幸指教，当去之。 
现代文：客人来了，主人问道： 室中如有不相称的，请你指教，以便去掉。 
English: When the guests arrived, the host asked: "If there is anything in the room that is not appropriate, could you please tell me how to get rid of it?"

古文：客曰： 件件俱精，只有一物可去。 
现代文：客人说： 件件俱精，只有一物可以去掉。 
English: The guest said: Everything is perfect, only one thing can be removed.

古文：主人问： 是何物？ 
现代文：主人说： 是什么东西？ 
English: The owner said, "What's that?"

古文：客曰： 就是足下。 
现代文：客人说： 就是你。 
English: The guest said: It's you.

古文：性不饮
现代文：性不饮
English: Sex without drinking

古文：一人以酒一瓶，腐一块，献利市神。
现代文：有个人用一瓶酒、一块豆腐，祭典财神。
English: One person celebrated the god of wealth with a bottle of wine and a piece of tofu.

古文：祭毕，见狗在旁，速命童子收之。
现代文：祭典之后，见狗在旁边，急忙让仆童把祭品收起来。
English: After the festival, seeing the dog nearby, he hurriedly asked the servant to put away the offering.

古文：童方携酒入内，腐已为狗所啖。
现代文：仆童刚把酒拿进去，豆腐已被狗吃了。
English: The servant had just put the wine in when the tofu was eaten by the dog.

古文：主怒曰： 奴才！
现代文：主人生气道： 奴才！
English: Master's airway: Flunky!

古文：你当收不收，只应先收了豆腐。岂不晓得狗是从来不吃酒的！ 
现代文：你该收的不收。应该先收豆腐，难道不晓得狗是从来不喝酒的。 
English: Whether you should collect it or not. You should collect the tofu first. Don't you know that dogs never drink alcohol?

古文：担鬼人
现代文：担鬼人
English: The ghost bearer

古文：钟馗专好吃鬼，其妹送他寿礼，帖上写云： 酒一坛，鬼两个，送与哥哥做点剁。
现代文：钟馗专好吃鬼，他的妹妹给他送来寿礼，帖子上写道： 酒一坛，鬼两个，送与哥哥做点剁。
English: Jonghyun's sister sent him a birthday gift. The post read: "A jar of wine, two ghosts, to make some stew with my brother."

古文：哥哥若嫌礼物少，连挑担的是三个。 
现代文：哥哥若嫌礼物少，连挑担的是三个。 
English: If the brother doesn't like the small number of gifts, he can even pick up three.

古文：钟馗看毕，命左右将三个鬼俱送庖人烹之。
现代文：钟馗看完后，命侍从将三个鬼送给厨师烹熟。
English: After watching the bell chime, the life attendant gave the three ghosts to the chef to cook.

古文：担上鬼谓挑担鬼曰： 我们死是本等，你却何苦来挑这担子？ 
现代文：担上鬼对挑担鬼说： 我们本来该死，毫无怨言，你却何苦来挑这担子。 
English: The burden-bearer said to the burden-bearer: We deserve to die, we have no complaints, but how hard is it for you to carry this burden?

古文：鬼脸
现代文：鬼脸
English: Grimace

古文：阎王差鬼卒拘三人到案，先问第一人： 你生前做何勾当？ 
现代文：阎王差遣鬼卒拘拿三人到案，先问第一人说： 你生前是干什么的？ 
English: The king of hell sent the devil to arrest three people and ask the first one, "What did you do before you died?"

古文：答云： 缝连补缀。 
现代文：回答说： 缝连补缀。 
English: He answered, "To sew and mend."

古文：王曰： 你迎新弃旧，该押送油锅。 
现代文：阎王说： 你迎新弃旧，该押送油锅。 
English: The king of hell said: You welcome the new and abandon the old, you should escort the oil pan.

古文：又问第二个： 你做何生理？ 
现代文：阎王又问第二个： 你是干什么的？ 
English: The king of hell asked the second: What do you do?

古文：答曰： 做花卖。 
现代文：回答说： 做花卖。 
English: He replied: To sell flowers.

古文：王曰： 你节外生枝，发在油锅。 
现代文：阎王说： 你节外生枝，发往油锅。 
English: The king of hell said, "If you grow branches on the day of the festival, send them to the oil pan."

古文：再问第三个，答曰： 糊鬼脸。 
现代文：阎王再问第三个，回答说： 糊鬼脸。 
English: Yan Wang asked the third one again, and he replied, "Make a face."

古文：王曰： 都押到油锅去。 
现代文：阎王说： 都押到油锅去。 
English: The king of hell said: Let's all go to the frying pan.

古文：其人不服曰： 我糊鬼脸，替大王张威壮势，如何同犯此罪？ 
现代文：第三人不服说： 我糊鬼脸，替大王您张威壮势，为什么遭受同等下场？ 
English: A third person was not convinced and said: I grimaced and displayed my strength for you, the great king. Why should I suffer the same fate?

古文：王曰： 我怪你见钱多的，便把好脸儿与他，那钱少的，就将歹脸来欺他。 
现代文：阎王说： 我怪恨你见钱多的，便把好脸给他；钱少的，就将孬脸给他。 
English: The king of hell said, "I blame and hate you. When you see someone with a lot of money, you give him a good face; when you see someone with little money, you give him a dirty face."

古文：牙虫
现代文：牙虫
English: Dental worms

古文：有患牙疼者，无法可治。
现代文：有个人牙疼，无法医治。
English: One person had a toothache that could not be treated.

古文：医者云： 内有巨虫一条，如桑蚕样，须捉出此虫方可折根。 
现代文：医生说： 牙床里有一条巨虫，像桑蚕模样，必须捉出此虫才能断绝病根。 
English: The doctor said: There is a giant worm in the gums, like a mulberry silkworm, and it is necessary to catch this worm in order to break the root of the disease.

古文：问： 如何就有恁大？ 
现代文：那人问道： 怎么能有恁大？ 
English: The man asked, "How can you have a big cock?"

古文：医曰： 自幼在牙门里吃大，是最伤人。 
现代文：医生说： 自幼在牙门里吃大，是最伤人的。 
English: The doctor said, "It is the most harmful to have worms in the mouth since childhood.

古文：狗肚一鲫
现代文：狗肚一鲫
English: The dog's stomach lurched

古文：新官到任，吏献鲫鱼一尾，其味佳美，大异寻常。
现代文：有个新官到任，属吏献上一尾鲫鱼，其味道极好，与常鱼大不相同。
English: When a new official arrived, he was presented with an eel, which tasted very good and was very different from the usual fish.

古文：官食后，每思再得，差役遍觅无有。
现代文：官吏吃了以后，还想得到这样的鱼，差役到处寻找也没有。
English: After the officials had eaten, they still wanted to get such fish, but the policemen did not look for it everywhere.

古文：仍向前吏索之。
现代文：于是向前面献鱼的属吏要鱼。
English: As a result, the subordinate officer who offered the fish to the front demanded the fish.

古文：吏禀曰： 此鱼非市中所贾。
现代文：属吏禀报说： 此鱼不是市场买的。
English: "This fish was not bought from the market," the official was quoted as saying.

古文：昨偶宰一狗，从狗肚中所得者，以为异品，故敢上献。 
现代文：昨天我宰杀了一条狗，从狗肚子里得到那条鱼，认为是珍品，所以才敢上献。 
English: Yesterday, I slaughtered a dog and got the fish from the dog's stomach. I thought it was a rare item, so I dared to offer it.

古文：官曰： 难道只有此鲫了？ 
现代文：官吏说： 难道只有此鲫了？ 
English: The official said: "Is this all there is to it?

古文：吏曰： 狗肚里焉得有第二鲫？ 
现代文：官吏说： 狗肚里怎么能有第二句？ 
English: The official said: "How can a dog have a second sentence in its stomach?

古文：吃粮披甲
现代文：吃粮披甲
English: From eating grain to wearing armor

古文：一耗鼠在阴沟内钻出，近视者睨视良久，曰： 咦！
现代文：一只耗鼠在阴沟里钻出，有个近视眼睨视良久，说： 咦！
English: A rat crawled out of the gutter, stared for a long time with one short-sighted eye, and said, "Poof!

古文：一个穿貂裘的大老官。 
现代文：一个穿貂皮袄的大老官。 
English: A grand old man in a mink coat.

古文：鼠见人随缩入，少刻，又一大龟从洞内扒出，近视曰： 你看穿貂袄的主儿才缩得进去，又差出个披甲兵儿来了。 风流不成
现代文：耗鼠见到人随即缩回，不一会，又有一只大乌龟从洞里爬出来，近视眼说： 你看穿貂皮袄的主儿刚缩回去，又派出个披铠甲的。 风流不成
English: When the mouse saw the man, it immediately retreated, and a moment later, another large turtle crawled out of the hole. The nearsighted mouse said, "You see, the owner of the mink coat just retreated and sent another one in armor.

古文：有嫖客钱尽，鸨儿置酒饯之。忽雨下，嫖客叹曰： 雨落天留客，天留人不留。 
现代文：有个嫖客钱已没了，妓院老板娘置酒饯行，忽然下起雨来，嫖客慨叹道： 雨落天留客，天留人不留。 
English: There was a client who had run out of money. The brothel owner's daughter had gone out drinking. Suddenly, it started to rain. The client lamented, "When the rain stops, no one will stay."

古文：鸨念其撒钱，勉留一宿。
现代文：老板娘念其花了嫖钱，勉强留他住了一宿。
English: The boss's daughter spent a lot of money to keep him for one night.

古文：次日下雪复留。
现代文：第二天下雪又留他一宿。
English: The next day, the snow kept him up all night.

古文：至第三日风起，嫖客复冀其留，仍前唱叹。
现代文：到了第三天起了大风，嫖客还希望留宿，仍然念叨前边说过的话。
English: On the third day, there was a strong wind, and the guests still wanted to stay, still repeating what they had said before.

古文：鸨儿曰： 今番官人没钱，风留不成。 
现代文：老板娘说： 这次你没钱，风留不成。 
English: The boss's daughter said, "This time you have no money, so you won't be able to stay.

古文：好乌龟
现代文：好乌龟
English: The Good Turtle

古文：时值大比，一人缘科举一名，命卜者占龟，颇得佳像，稳许今科奏捷。
现代文：时逢科举考试，有个人想中第一名，让卜人用龟壳占卜，颇得佳像，许愿这次科举稳中无疑。
English: At the time of the imperial examination, there was a person who wanted to win the first place in the imperial examination, and let the fortune-teller use the tortoise shell for divination. It was quite a good image, and he wished that this imperial examination would be stable.

古文：其人大喜，将龟壳谨带随身。
现代文：那人十分高兴，将龟壳小心地带在身上。
English: Delighted, the man carefully places the turtle shell on his body.

古文：至期点名入场，主试出题，旨解茫然，终日不成一字。
现代文：等到考试那天点名入场，主考官出题，那人对其题旨茫然不解，终日也没写成一个字。
English: On the day of the roll call for the exam, the examiner asked a question, and the person was at a loss as to what the question meant, and did not write a single word all day.

古文：因抚龟叹息曰： 不信这样一个好乌龟，如何竟不会做文字！ 
现代文：于是抚摸龟壳叹息道： 不信这样一个好乌龟，怎么竟不会做文章？ 
English: So he stroked the turtle's shell and sighed, "If you don't believe such a good turtle, how come you can't write an article?"

古文：定亲
现代文：定亲
English: Determination of parentage

古文：一人登厕，隔厕先有一女在焉。偶失净纸，因言： 若有知趣的给我，愿为之妇。 
现代文：有个男子登上厕所，隔壁厕所先占有一女，女子碰巧掉了手纸，于是说： 如果有知趣的把手纸给我，我愿意做他的妇人。 
English: A man boarded the toilet, and a woman occupied the next toilet first. The woman happened to drop the toilet paper, so she said, "If you give me some interesting toilet paper, I would like to be his wife."

古文：其人闻之，即以自所用者，从壁隙中递与。
现代文：男子听后，马上把自己用的手纸，从厕所的壁缝中递给女子。
English: After listening, the man immediately handed his toilet paper to the woman from a crack in the toilet wall.

古文：女净讫迳去。
现代文：女子揩净后就走了。
English: After the woman was cleansed, she left.

古文：其人叹曰： 亲事虽定了一头，这一屁股债，如何得干净？ 
现代文：男子叹气说： 亲事虽定了一头，可是这一屁股债，怎能揩得干净？ 
English: The man sighed and said: Although the relationship has been settled, how can this debt be wiped clean?

古文：有钱夸口
现代文：有钱夸口
English: The rich boast

古文：一人迷路，遇一哑子，问之不答，惟以手作钱样，示以得钱，方肯指引。
现代文：有个人迷了路，遇到一个 哑巴 ，问而不答， 哑巴 只用手比划钱的模样，示意要给钱，才肯指引。
English: A man lost his way and met a mute man who did not answer his questions. The mute man was only willing to guide him if he used his hands to make a gesture of giving him money.

古文：此人喻其意，即以数钱与之。哑子乃开口指明去路，其人问曰： 为甚无钱装哑？ 
现代文：迷路人明白其意思，马上拿出数钱给了 哑巴 。 哑巴 于是开口指明去路，迷路人问道： 为什么装哑？ 
English: The lost man understood his meaning and immediately took out some money and gave it to the dumb man.The dumb man then opened his mouth to show the way, and the lost man asked: Why are you pretending to be dumb?

古文：哑曰： 如今世界，有了钱，便会说话耳！ 
现代文： 哑巴 说： 如今世界，有了钱，便会说话。 
English: The dumb man said, "Nowadays, when the world has money, it can talk.

古文：古今三绝
现代文：古今三绝
English: The past, the present and the future

古文：一家门首，来往人屙溺，秽气难闻。
现代文：有家门口，过往行人屙屎撒尿，秽气难闻。
English: In front of my house, passers-by are defecating and urinating, and the foul air smells bad.

古文：因拒之不得，乃画一龟于墙上，题云： 在此溺尿者，即是此物。 
现代文：主人拒之不得，于是在墙上画了一只乌龟，并题字道： 在此溺尿者，即是此物。 
English: The owner couldn't resist, so he drew a turtle on the wall with the inscription: "If you urinate and drown here, this is it."

古文：一恶少见之，问曰： 此是谁的手笔？ 
现代文：有个恶少见了，问道： 这是谁的手笔？ 
English: When he saw something unusual, he asked: "Whose handwriting is this?"

古文：画者认之，恶少曰： 宋徽宗、赵子昂与吾兄三人，共垂不朽矣。 
现代文：主人承认是自己画的，恶少说： 宋徽宗、赵子昂与你三个人，共垂不朽矣。 
English: The owner admitted that he had painted it himself, and said: "Song Huizong, Zhao Ziang and the three of you are immortal."

古文：画者询其故，答曰： 宋徽宗的鹰，赵子昂的马，兄这样乌龟，可称古今三绝。 
现代文：主人询问其缘故，恶少回答说： 宋徽宗的鹰、赵子昂的马、你这样的乌龟，可称古今三绝。 
English: The host inquired about the reason, and the villain replied: The eagle of Song Huizong, the horse of Zhao Zi'ang, and the turtle like you can be called the three extremes of ancient and modern times.

古文：白蚁蛀
现代文：白蚁蛀
English: Termite pupae

古文：有客在外，而主人潜入吃饭者。既出，客谓曰： 宅上好座厅房，可惜许多梁柱都被白蚁蛀坏了。 
现代文：有客人在外厅，而主人进里屋暗自吃饭，等主人出来后，客人对主人说： 你宅上好座厅房，可惜许多梁柱都被白蚂蚁蛀坏了。 
English: There was a guest in the outer hall, and the host went into the inner room to eat in secret. When the host came out, the guest said to the host: Your house has a nice hall, but unfortunately many beams and columns have been damaged by white ants.

古文：主人四顾曰： 并无此物。 
现代文：主人环顾四周说： 并没有此物。 
English: The owner looked around and said: "There is no such thing."

古文：客曰： 他在里面吃，外面人如何知道。 
现代文：客人说： 它在里面吃，外面怎么会知道。 
English: The guest said: It's eaten inside, how would the outside world know.

古文：吃烟
现代文：吃烟
English: Eat smoke

古文：人有送夜羹饭甫毕，已将酒肉啖尽。
现代文：有个人送夜羹饭之后，已将酒肉吃光。
English: After a person sent yakitori, he had already eaten up the wine and meat.

古文：正在化纸将完，而群狗环集。其人曰： 列位来迟了一步，并无一物请你，都来吃些烟罢。 
现代文：正在焚纸，即将烧完时，群狗围着火堆聚集起来，那人说： 诸位来迟了一步，没有什么东西相赠，请你们都来吃些烟吧。 
English: The paper was being burned, and when it was almost done, the dogs gathered around the fire, and the man said: "You have come a step too late, there is nothing to give away, please come and eat some smoke."

古文：烦恼
现代文：烦恼
English: Troubles

古文：或问： 樊迟之名谁取？ 
现代文：有个人问： 樊迟之名是谁给取的？ 
English: One person asked: "Who gave you the name Zhaozhi?"

古文：曰： 孔子取的。 
现代文：另一人回答说： 孔子取的。 
English: Another replied, "Confucius took it."

古文：问： 樊哙之名谁取？ 
现代文：问： 樊哙之名谁给取的？ 
English: Q: Who gave you the name Zou?

古文：曰： 汉祖取的。 
现代文：回答说： 汉高祖取的。 
English: He replied, "The ancestors of Henkel took it."

古文：又曰： 烦恼之名谁取？ 
现代文：又问： 烦恼之名谁给取的？ 
English: He also asked: Who gave the name of trouble?

古文：曰： 这是他自取的。 
现代文：回答说： 这是他自己取的。 
English: And he answered, He took it up himself.

古文：猫逐鼠
现代文：猫逐鼠
English: The cat chases the mouse

古文：昔有一猫擒鼠，赶入瓶内。猫不舍，犹在瓶边守候。
现代文：从前，有只猫抓老鼠，把老鼠赶进瓶里，猫不肯舍弃，便在瓶子旁边看守。
English: Once upon a time, there was a cat that caught mice and drove them into a bottle. The cat refused to give up and stood guard next to the bottle.

古文：鼠畏甚，不敢出，猫忽打一喷嚏。鼠在瓶中曰： 大吉利。 
现代文：老鼠十分害怕，不敢出来。猫忽然打了一个喷嚏，老鼠在瓶子里说： 十分吉利。 
English: The mouse was very scared and did not dare to come out. The cat suddenly sneezed, and the mouse said in the bottle: Very lucky.

古文：猫曰： 不相干。凭你奉承得我好，只是要吃你哩！ 
现代文：猫说： 不相干，任凭你奉承得我再好也没用，我只是要吃你哩！ 
English: The cat said, "It doesn't matter. It's useless for you to flatter me. I just want to eat you!"

古文：祝寿
现代文：祝寿
English: Happy Birthday

古文：猫与耗鼠庆生，安坐洞口，鼠不敢出。忽在内打一喷嚏，猫祝曰： 寿年千岁！ 
现代文：猫给耗鼠庆祝生日，守在老鼠洞口。老鼠不敢出来，忽然在洞里打了一个喷嚏，猫祝贺说： 祝你们福寿千岁。 
English: A cat was celebrating a mouse's birthday and stood guard at the mouth of the mouse hole. The mouse didn't dare to come out and suddenly sneezed in the hole. The cat congratulated the mouse and said, "I wish you a long life."

古文：群鼠曰： 他如此恭敬，何妨一见？ 
现代文：群鼠说： 猫如此恭敬，何妨出去相见。 
English: The mice said, "The cat is so respectful, why don't we go out and meet."

古文：鼠曰： 他何尝真心来祝寿，骗我出去，正要狠嚼我哩。 
现代文：其中有只老鼠说： 他何尝是真心祝寿，它骗我们出去，正是要狠狠咀嚼我们哩！ 
English: One of the mice said: "He's really wishing us a happy birthday, he's tricking us into going out, he's just going to chew us up!"

古文：心狠
现代文：心狠
English: Heartbroken

古文：一人戏将数珠挂猫项间，群鼠私相贺曰： 猫老官已持斋念佛，定然不吃我们的了。 
现代文：有个人开玩笑，将数个珠子挂在猫脖子上，群鼠暗地里相祝贺说： 猫老官已经吃斋念佛，一定不吃我们了。 
English: One person joked, hanging several beads around the cat's neck, and the mice secretly congratulated each other, saying, "The old cat official has already eaten the fast and chanted the Buddha's name, so he definitely won't eat us."

古文：遂欢跃于庭。猫一见，连捕数个，众鼠奔走，背地语曰： 吾等以他念佛慈心了，原来是假意修行。 
现代文：于是在庭院欢腾跳跃，猫看见了，接连捕吃数个，众老鼠狂奔逃跑，背地里说道： 我们以为他念佛有慈善之心了，原来是假意修行。 
English: So they were jumping for joy in the courtyard. When the cat saw them, it caught and ate several of them in succession. The mice ran away and said behind their backs, "We thought he had a charitable heart when he was chanting the Buddha's name, but it turned out to be a sham practice."

古文：一答曰： 你不知。于今世上修行念佛的，最更狠十倍。 
现代文：其中一只老鼠回答说： 你们不晓得，当今世上修行念佛的，最为狠毒，比平常人的心要狠十倍。 
English: One of the mice replied, "Don't you know that in today's world, those who practice Buddhism are the most vicious? Their hearts are ten times more vicious than the hearts of ordinary people.

古文：嘲恶毒
现代文：嘲恶毒
English: Mocking viciously

古文：蜂与蛇结盟。
现代文：蜂与蛇结盟。
English: The bee forms an alliance with the snake.

古文：蜂云： 我欲同你江上一游。 
现代文：蜂说： 我想同你到江里一游。 
English: Bee said: I want to take a trip to the river with you.

古文：蛇曰： 可。你须伏在我背间。 
现代文：蛇说： 可以，你必须趴在我背上。 
English: The snake said, "Yes, you must lie on my back."

古文：行到江中，蛇已无力，或沉或浮，蜂疑蛇害己，将尾刺钉紧在蛇背上。蛇负疼骂曰： 人说我的口毒，谁知你的屁股更毒。 
现代文：行到江中，蛇已没了力气，时沉时浮。蜂怀疑蛇要害自己，将毒刺紧叮在蛇背上，蛇十分疼痛，骂道： 人说我的口毒，谁知你的屁股更毒。 
English: When they reached the middle of the river, the snake had lost its strength and was sinking and floating. The bee suspected that the snake wanted to harm itself, and stuck the poisonous sting firmly on the snake's back. The snake was in great pain and cursed: People say my mouth is poisonous, but who knows if your bottom is more poisonous.

古文：讥人弄乖
现代文：讥人弄乖
English: The mocker is made good.

古文：凤凰寿，百鸟朝贺，惟蝙蝠不至。凤责之曰： 汝居吾下，何踞傲乎？ 
现代文：凤凰寿辰，众鸟拜贺，只有蝙蝠不到，凤凰斥责蝙蝠说： 你位居我下，却不来拜贺，为何如此傲慢？ 
English: At the phoenix's birthday, all the birds came to pay their respects, but the bat did not come. The phoenix scolded the bat and said, "You are below me, but you do not come to pay your respects. Why are you so arrogant?"

古文：蝠曰： 吾有足，属于兽，贺汝何用？ 
现代文：蝙蝠说： 我有脚，属于兽，为什么要拜贺你？ 
English: The bat said: I have feet, I belong to the beast, why should I congratulate you?

古文：一日，麒麟生诞，蝠亦不至。
现代文：一天，麒麟过生日，蝙蝠也没有到。
English: One day, on Kirin's birthday, the bat did not arrive.

古文：麟亦责之。
现代文：麒麟也斥责蝙蝠。
English: Kirin also reprimanded the bat.

古文：蝠曰： 吾有翼，属于禽，何以贺汝？ 
现代文：蝙蝠说： 我有翅膀，属于禽，为什么要拜贺你？ 
English: The bat said: I have wings, I belong to the birds, why should I congratulate you?

古文：麟、凤相会，语及蝙蝠之事。互相慨叹曰： 于今世上恶薄，偏生此等不禽不兽之徒，真个无奈他何！ 
现代文：麒麟与凤凰相会，谈及蝙蝠之事，互相慨叹说： 当今世上恶薄，偏偏生出这样不禽不兽的东西，真是奈何他不得。 
English: When the unicorn and the phoenix met and talked about the bat, they sighed and said to each other, "In today's world, it's bad enough that such a beastly thing has come into being.

古文：白嚼
现代文：白嚼
English: White chewing gum

古文：三人同坐，偶谈及家内耗鼠可恶。
现代文：有三个人坐在一起，偶然谈及家里的老鼠可恶。
English: Three people are sitting together, casually discussing the family's rat problem.

古文：一曰： 舍间饮食，落放不得，转眼被他窃去。 
现代文：甲说： 家里吃的，散放不得，否则一转眼就将被它们偷去。 
English: A said: "If you eat food at home, you mustn't scatter it around, otherwise it will be stolen by them in the blink of an eye.

古文：一云： 家下衣服书籍，散去不得，时常被他侵损。 
现代文：乙说： 家里的衣服、书籍也散放不得，时常被它们咬坏。 
English: B said, "Clothes and books in the home should not be scattered around. They are often chewed up by them.

古文：又一曰： 独有寒家老鼠不偷食咬衣，终夜咨咨叫到天明。 
现代文：丙说： 惟有我家的老鼠不偷吃的、穿的，整夜吱吱叫到天明。 
English: C said: "The only mice in my house don't steal food or clothes. They squeak all night until dawn.

古文：此二人曰： 这是何故？ 
现代文：甲乙二人问： 那是什么原因？ 
English: Two people A and B asked: What is the reason for that?

古文：答曰： 专靠一味白嚼。 
现代文：丙回答说： 专靠一味白嚼。 
English: C replied: I rely solely on chewing.

古文：嚼蛆
现代文：嚼蛆
English: Chew grasshoppers

古文：有善说笑话者，人嘲之曰： 我家有一狗，落在粪坑中，三年零六个月，还不曾死。 
现代文：有个人善说笑话，他人嘲讽说： 我家有一只狗，掉在粪坑中，三年零六个月，还没有死。 
English: One person was good at telling jokes, while another mockingly said: My family has a dog that fell into a cesspit and has not died for three years and six months.

古文：其人曰： 既然如此，他吃些甚么？ 
现代文：善说笑话的人问： 既然如此，他吃些什么？ 
English: The wit asks: So what does he eat?

古文：答曰： 单靠嚼蛆。 
现代文：那人回答说： 单靠嚼蛆。 
English: The man replied: "Just by chewing ginger."

古文：取笑
现代文：取笑
English: Making fun of

古文：甲乙同行，甲望见显者冠盖，谓乙曰： 此吾好友，见必下车，我当引避。 
现代文：甲乙二人同行，甲望见一个显者的车乘，对乙说： 这是我的好友，他见我必定下车，我应该回避。 
English: Two people, A and B, were walking together. A saw the passenger of a prominent person and said to B, "This is my good friend. If he sees me, he will definitely get off the bus. I should avoid him."

古文：不意竟避入显者之家。
现代文：不想竟躲避到那个显者的家里。
English: He did not want to avoid going to the home of the seer.

古文：显者既入门，诧曰： 是何自撞，匿我门内？ 
现代文：显者进门，惊诧说： 是何人撞进来，藏在我的院子里。 
English: When the seer came to the door, he was astonished and said, "Someone has broken in and hidden in my courtyard."

古文：呼童挞而逐之。
现代文：于是呼喊仆人揍他并把他驱赶了出来。
English: So his servants shouted at him and drove him out.

古文：乙问曰： 既是好友，何见殴辱？ 
现代文：乙问道： 既然是好友，为什么被他殴打侮辱？ 
English: B asked: Since he is a good friend, why was he beaten and insulted?

古文：答曰： 他从来是这般与我取笑惯的。 
现代文：甲回答说： 他从来都是这样，和我取笑惯了。 
English: A replied: He's always been like that, he's used to me teasing him.

古文：避首席
现代文：避首席
English: Chief evasive officer

古文：有疯疾病者，延医调治，医辞不肯用药。
现代文：有个人患了疯疾，请医调治，医生推辞不肯用药。
English: There was a man who was suffering from a mental illness. He asked the doctor to adjust his treatment, but the doctor refused to give him any medication.

古文：病者曰： 我亦自知难医，但要服些生痰动气的药，改作痨、膨二症。 
现代文：病人说： 我也晓得难医，但希望吃些生痰动气的药，改做痨、膨二症。 
English: The patient said: I also know that it is difficult to treat, but I hope to take some medicine that stimulates phlegm, and change it to spasticity and distension.

古文：医曰： 疯、痨、膨、膈。同是不起之症，缘何要改？ 
现代文：医生说： 疯、痨、膨、膈，同是治不好的病，为何要改？ 
English: The doctor said, "Madness, epilepsy, edema, and epilepsy are all incurable diseases. Why should I change?

古文：病者曰： 我闻得疯、痨、膨、膈，乃是阎罗王的上客。我生平怕坐首席，所以要挪在第二、第三。 
现代文：病人说： 我听说疯、痨、膨、膈，是阎王的上客，我生平怕坐首席，所以想要挪在第二第三。 
English: The patient said: I have heard that the madman, the baboon, the swell, and the toad are the guests of the king of hell. I am afraid to sit in the first place, so I want to move to the second and third.

古文：瓦窑
现代文：瓦窑
English: Tile kiln

古文：一人连生数女，招友人饮宴。
现代文：有个人连生数女，招朋友喝酒。
English: There was a man who had several daughters in a row and invited his friends over for drinks.

古文：友作诗一首，戏赠之云： 去岁相招因弄瓦，今年又弄瓦相招，弄去弄来都弄瓦，令正原来是瓦窑。 
现代文：朋友开玩笑作诗一首，赠给他说： 去年相招因弄瓦，今年弄瓦又相招。弄去弄来都弄瓦，你的妻子原来是瓦窑。 
English: A friend jokingly composed a poem and gave it to him: "Last year, you invited me to tile your house, this year, you invited me to tile your house, this year, you invited me to tile your house, your wife turned out to be a tiler."

古文：嘲周姓
现代文：嘲周姓
English: Mocking Zhou's surname

古文：浙中盐化地方，有查、祝、董、许四大家族，簪缨世胄，科中连绵。
现代文：浙江盐化地区，有查、祝、董、许四大家族，世代做官，连年中举。
English: In the salinization area of Zhejiang Province, there are four big families of Zha, Zhu, Dong and Xu, who have been officials for generations and have been promoted year after year.

古文：后有周姓者，偶发两榜，其居乡豪横，欲与四大姓并驾齐驱。
现代文：后来姓周的家族，偶然中了两次科举，便在乡里豪横，打算与查、祝、董、许四大家族并驾齐驱。
English: Later, the family with the surname Zhou accidentally won the national exam twice, and they became arrogant in the village, intending to keep pace with the four families of Zha, Zhu, Dong and Xu.

古文：里人因作诗嘲之曰： 查祝董许周，鼋鼍蛟龙鳅，江淮河海沟，虎豹犀象猴。 
现代文：乡里人于是作诗一首讥讽道： 查祝董许周，鼋鼍蛟龙鳅，江淮河海沟，虎豹犀象猴。 
English: The villagers then wrote a poem, saying sarcastically: "Congratulations to Dong Xu Zhou, the dragon dragon, the Jianghuai River ditch, the tiger leopard rhinoceros monkey."

古文：认族
现代文：认族
English: Recognition of ethnicity

古文：有王姓者，平素最好联谱，每遇姓相似者，不曰寒宗，就说敝族。
现代文：有个姓王的人，一向最好联谱，每当遇到姓相似的人，不曰寒宗，就说敝族。
English: A person with the surname Wang is always the best match. Whenever you encounter a person with a similar surname, do not say Kanzong, say Yi nationality.

古文：偶遇一汪姓者，指为友曰： 这是舍侄。 
现代文：偶然遇到一个姓汪的，指给朋友说： 这是舍侄。 
English: He happened to come across a toad with the surname Wang and pointed it out to his friend, saying, "This is my nephew."

古文：友曰： 汪如何为是盛族？ 
现代文：朋友问： 汪姓怎么会是和你同族？ 
English: A friend asked: "How can the surname Wang be from the same ethnic group as you?"

古文：其人曰： 他是水窠路里王家。 
现代文：回答说： 他是水窠路里王家。 
English: He replied, "He is a member of the royal family of Shuigululi."

古文：遇一匡姓者，亦认是侄孙，其人曰： 匡与王，一发差得远了。 
现代文：遇到一个姓匡的，那人也认做是侄孙，朋友说： 匡与王，更差得远了。 
English: When a friend met a man with the surname Kuang, whom the man also considered to be his grandchild, he said: Kuang is far worse than Wang.

古文：答曰： 他是槿墙内王家。 
现代文：那人回答说： 他是槿墙内王家。 
English: And the man answered and said, He is of the royal house within the walls.

古文：又指一全姓，亦云： 是舍弟。 
现代文：那人又指一姓全的，也说是舍弟。
English: That person also referred to a person with the same surname, also saying that he was her younger brother.

古文： 一发甚么相干？ 
现代文：朋友说： 更是不相干了。 
English: My friend said, "That's even more irrelevant."

古文：其人曰： 他从幼在大人家做篾片的王家。 
现代文：那人说： 他是从小在大人家做蔑片的王家。 
English: The man said, "He is from the royal family and has been making scissors since he was a child.

古文：又指姓毛者是寒族，友大笑其荒唐，曰： 你不知，他本是我王家一派，只因生了一个尾巴，弄得毛头毛脑了。 
现代文：那人又指姓毛的是寒家，朋友大笑其荒唐，那人说： 你不晓得他本是我王家一派，只因他生了一尾巴，弄得毛头毛脑了。 
English: The friend laughed out loud at the absurdity, and the man said, "Don't you know that he was originally from my royal family, but because he was born with a tail, he got a hairy head and hair."

古文：人问： 王与黄同音，为何反不是一家？ 
现代文：朋友问： 王与黄同韵，为什么反而不是一家？ 
English: A friend asked: Wang and Huang have the same rhyme, so why not a family?

古文：答曰： 如何不是，那是廿一都田头八家兄。 
现代文：那人回答说： 怎么不是，那是廿一都田头八家兄。 
English: The man replied, "Why not? That's the twenty-one-year-old cowherd.

