古文：韩献肃公守成都时，蔡君谟与之书曰： 襄启：岁行甫新，鲁钝之资，日益衰老。
现代文：献肃公作成都知府时，蔡君给他写过一封信，文说： 襄启：天上岁星的远行了一个新的星次，光阴荏苒，又是一年，加之一天比一天地衰老，更不如前。
English: When dedicating the capital to the emperor, Cai Jun wrote a letter to him, saying: Yang Kai: the celestial year star has traveled a new star, the time has passed, it is another year, plus one day older than the day, even worse than before.

古文：虽勉就职务，其于精力不堪劳苦。念君之生，相距旬日，如闻年来补治有方，当愈强健，果何如哉？
现代文：尽管勉力从事本职工作，但是由于精力不济，有种难以忍受的劳苦，想起您的出生，和我相差十来天，但是听说您近年来多方保养身体，或进补，或治疗，现在您定当更加强壮健康，真正的情况究竟如何？
English: Although I tried my best to do my job, but due to lack of energy, there is a kind of unbearable toil, I remember your birth, and I am about ten days away, but I heard that you have maintained your body in many ways in recent years, or supplementation, or treatment, now you are supposed to be stronger and healthier, what is the real situation?

古文：襄于京居，尚留少时，伫君还轸，伸眉一笑，倾怀之极。今因樊都官西行，奉书问动静，不一一。
现代文：我住在京城，还停留一小段时光，等着您受诏还京、那时彼此初见，将开怀大笑，高兴之极，而今趁着樊都官要到西边去，顺便带上一信问候起居，其他的事不再一一案告。
English: I live in the capital, and I will stay for a short period of time, waiting for you to return to Beijing after receiving the imperial edict. At that time, when we see each other for the first time, we will have a good laugh and be extremely happy. But now, taking advantage of the fact that the magistrate is going to the west, I will take a letter of greetings and move in, and other matters will no longer be reported one by one.

古文：襄上子华端明阁下。 
现代文：蔡襄奉上子华、端明殿学士阁下。 
English: Cai Xiang presented to Shang Zihua, Duan Ming Dian's bachelor.

古文：此帖语简而情厚，初无寒温之问、寝食之祝、讲德之佞也。今风俗日以偷薄，士大夫之獧浮者，于尺牍之间，益出新巧，习贯自然，虽有先达笃实之贤，亦不敢自拔以速嘲骂。
现代文：这张束帖写得语言简短可是情意深厚，全然没有那些问候寒暖、祝福寝食、恭维道德的客套话，现今的风气一天天地淡薄、虚浮的士大夫，在书信中弄出越来越多的新巧花样，且习惯成自然，弄得即使是通达务实的贤人，也不敢自拔于流俗，而招致迅速而至的讥笑谩骂。
English: This bundle of letters is written in a short language but with a deep meaning. It is completely devoid of the polite phrases of greeting the cold and warm, blessing sleeping and eating, and praising morality. Today's culture is increasingly shallow and vain. The scholar-bureaucrats are making more and more new tricks in their letters, and the habit is becoming natural. Even the wise and pragmatic sages do not dare to break away from the custom, which leads to quick ridicule and abuse.

古文：每诒书多至士数纸，必系衔，相与之际，悉忘其真，言语不情，诚意扫地。
现代文：每逢给人写信就多达十几张，信中一定写清楚官衔，在这相互交流思想的场合，全都忘了写信的真正目的，说出的话一点也不实在，真诚破坏无余。
English: Every time I write a letter to someone, there are up to a dozen of them. The official title must be clearly written in the letter. On this occasion of mutual exchange of ideas, they all forgot the true purpose of writing a letter. The words they say are not true at all, and they are sincerely destructive.

古文：相呼不以字，而云某丈，僭紊官称，无复差等，观此其少愧乎！
现代文：相互称呼不称字，都称某某丈，超越礼制，使官称错乱失序，不再有等级的差别，这些轻浮之辈看到这封信大概也会有少许惭愧的吧！
English: Mutual name-calling, not name-calling, both name-calling, going beyond etiquette, envoys calling out of order, no longer having a difference in rank, these frivolous people will probably be a little ashamed to see this letter!

古文：忆二纪之前，予在馆中，见曾监吉甫与人书，独不作札子，且以字呼同舍，同舍因相约云： 曾公前辈可尊，是宜曰丈，余人自今各以字行，其过误者罚一直。 
现代文：回忆起二十四年之前，我在馆城任职，看到秘书少监曾言甫给人写信，硬是不用奏事文书的公文形式，并且对其同事称字，同事们因而相互约定，道： 曾公是前辈，宜加尊敬，称呼他应为丈，其他的人从今以后都以字相称，那些搞错了的罚他值一次。 
English: I recalled that twenty-four years ago, I was working in the pavilion city, and I saw that the secretary of the Youth Supervision Office had said that he would write to people without using the official form of the official document, and praised his colleagues, so the colleagues agreed with each other, saying: Zeng Gong is a senior, he should be respected, he should be called as a junior, other people will be commensurate with words from now on, and those who make mistakes should be punished once.

古文：行之几月，从官郎省，欣然皆欲一变，而有欲败此议者，载酒饮同舍，乞仍旧。
现代文：这个方法施行了将近一个月，郎署及台省的从属官员，也都高高兴兴地想一改旧习，可是出现了想取缔约定的人，各河请酒友约客，乞求恢复旧制。
English: This method has been in place for nearly a month, and the Rural Affairs Bureau and the subordinate officials of Taiwan Province are also happily trying to change the old habits, but there are people who want to sign contracts, each river invites alcoholics to date, and begs for the restoration of the old system.

古文：于是从约皆解，遂不可复革，可为一叹。
现代文：于是一起达成的协议都破坏了，从而再也无法改变、真让人惋惜。
English: It's a shame that all the agreements that were made together were broken and can no longer be changed.

