古文：阳货欲见孔子，孔子不见，归孔子豚。
现代文：阳货想使孔子拜见自己，但孔子不去见他。
English: Yangfang wanted Confucius to see him, but Confucius did not want to see him.

古文：孔子时其亡也而往拜之，遇诸涂。
现代文：阳货对孔子说： 来，我有话要跟你说。 
English: Yangfang said to Confucius: Come, I have something to tell you.

古文：谓孔子曰： 来，予与尔言。 曰： 怀其宝而迷其邦，可谓仁乎？ 
现代文：阳货接着说： 有才能却怀着不用而听任国家迷乱，这可以叫做仁爱吗？
English: Yangfang continued, "Can it be called benevolence to have talent but not to use it and let the country be confused?

古文：曰： 不可。 
现代文：不可以。
English: No, you can't.

古文： 好从事而亟失时，可谓知乎？ 曰： 不可！ 
现代文：喜欢参与政事而又屡次错过机会，这可以说是聪明吗？不可以。
English: Can it be said to be clever to like participating in politics but repeatedly miss opportunities? No.

古文： 日月逝矣，岁不我与！ 孔子曰： 诺，吾将仕矣。 
现代文：时间一天天过去了，岁月是不等人的。 孔子说： 好吧，我答应你去做官。 
English: Time passed day by day, and the years did not wait for anyone.Confucius said: Well, I promise you to become an official.

古文：子曰： 性相近也，习相远也。 子曰： 唯上知与下愚不移。 
现代文：孔子说： 人的原始天性是相近的，只是在后天不同的环境中受到不同的影响后才会产生区别。 孔子说： 只有上等的智者与下等的愚者是改变不了的。 
English: Confucius said: Man's original nature is similar, and it is only through different influences in different environments that differences arise.Confucius said: Only the superior wise man and the inferior fool cannot be changed.

古文：子之武城，闻弦歌之声。
现代文：孔子到武城，听见弹琴唱歌的声音。
English: Confucius went to Wucheng and heard the sound of people playing the harp and singing.

古文：夫子莞尔而笑，曰： 割鸡焉用牛刀？ 
现代文：孔子微笑着说： 杀鸡何必用宰牛的刀呢？ 
English: Confucius smiled and said, "Why do you need a cow-killing knife to kill a chicken?

古文：子游对曰： 昔者偃也闻诸夫子曰： 君子学道则爱人，小人学道则易使也。  
现代文：子游回答说： 以前我听先生说过， 君子学习了礼乐就能爱人，普通人学习了礼乐就容易指使。  
English: Ziyou replied, "I heard my master say before, a gentleman can love a person after learning the etiquette, but an ordinary person can be easily manipulated after learning the etiquette.

古文：子曰： 二三子，偃之言是也！
现代文：孔子说： 弟子们，言偃说的对。
English: Confucius said: Disciples, what you say is right.

古文：前言戏之耳。 
现代文：我刚才说的话只是跟他开玩笑罢了。 
English: What I just said was just a joke.

古文：公山弗扰以费畔，召，子欲往。
现代文：公山弗扰据费邑反叛，来召孔子，孔子准备去。
English: Mount Fuhu rebelled against Fei Yu and summoned Confucius. Confucius was ready to go.

古文：子路不说，曰： 末之也已，何必公山氏之之也？ 
现代文：子路不高兴地说： 没有地方去就算了，何必到公山氏那里去呢？ 
English: Unhappy, Zilu said, "I don't care if there is no place to go, why do I have to go to Mr. Gongshan?

古文：子曰： 夫召我者而岂徒哉？
现代文：孔子说： 那召我去的人，岂会让我白去一趟吗？
English: Confucius said, "Will the one who calls me go away empty-handed?

古文：如有用我者，吾其为东周乎！ 
现代文：如果有任用我的人，我就会使周朝的政德在东方复兴。 
English: If there is someone to appoint me, I will revive the Zhou Dynasty's political virtue in the East.

古文：子张问仁于孔子，孔子曰： 能行五者于天下为仁矣。 
现代文：子张向孔子问仁。孔子说： 能够在天下实行五种品德。就是仁了。 
English: Zi Zhang asked Confucius about benevolence. Confucius said, "To be able to practice the five virtues throughout the world is benevolence."

古文：请问之，曰： 恭、宽、信、敏、惠。
现代文：子张说： 请问哪五种。 孔子说： 庄重、宽厚、诚实、勤敏、慈惠。
English: Zi Zhang said, "What are the five?" Confucius said, "Dignity, generosity, honesty, diligence, and benevolence."

古文：恭则不侮，宽则得众，信则人任焉，敏则有功，惠则足以使人。 
现代文：庄重就不致遭受侮辱，宽厚就会得到众人的拥护，诚信就能得到别人的任用，勤敏就会提高工作效率，慈惠就能够使唤人。 
English: Dignity will not be insulted, generosity will be supported by everyone, honesty will get others appointed, diligence will improve work efficiency, and benevolence will be able to attract people.

古文：佛肸召，子欲往。
现代文：佛肸召孔子去，孔子打算前去。
English: Buddha called Confucius to go, and Confucius intended to go.

古文：子路曰： 昔者由也闻诸夫子曰： 亲于其身为不善者，君子不入也。 
现代文：子路说： 以前我我在老师这里听过： 亲自行不善的人，君子是不会去的。 
English: Zi Lu said: I have heard from my teacher before: A gentleman will not go to a place if he is not good at taking care of himself.

古文：佛肸以中牟畔，子之往也，如之何？ 
现代文：现在佛肸在中牟发动叛乱，你却要去，这是怎么回事呢？ 
English: Now that the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas are starting a rebellion in Zhongmou, you want to go. What's going on?

古文：子曰： 然，有是言也。
现代文：孔子说： 是的，我说过这样的话。
English: Confucius said, "Yes, I have said so."

古文：不曰坚乎，磨而不磷；不曰白乎，涅而不缁。
现代文：不是说坚硬的东西磨了以后不变薄？不是说洁白的东西染了以后不变黑吗？
English: Isn't it true that hard things don't get thinner after being ground? Isn't it true that white things don't get darker after being dyed?

古文：吾岂匏瓜也哉？
现代文：我难道是个苦味的葫芦吗？
English: Am I a bitter gourd?

古文：焉能系而不食？ 
现代文：怎么能只挂在那里而不给人吃呢？ 
English: How can it just hang there and not be eaten?

古文：子曰： 由也，女闻六言六蔽矣乎？ 
现代文：孔子说： 仲由呀，你听说过六种品德和六种弊病了吗？ 
English: Confucius said, "Nakayu, have you heard of the six virtues and six vices?

古文：对曰： 未也。 
现代文：子路回答说： 没有。 
English: Li Yuan replied, "No."

古文： 居！吾语女。
现代文：孔子说： 坐下，我来告诉你。
English: Confucius said, "Sit down, I will tell you."

古文：好仁不好学，其蔽也愚；好知不好学，其蔽也荡；好信不好学，其蔽也贼；好直不好学，其蔽也绞；好勇不好学，其蔽也乱；好刚不好学，其蔽也狂。 
现代文：爱仁德而不好学习，它的弊病是会变得愚蠢；爱智慧而不好学习，它的弊病是会放荡不羁；爱诚信而不好学习，它的弊病是容易被人利用，害己害人；爱直率却不好学习，它的弊病是说话尖刻刺人；爱好勇敢却不爱好学习，它的弊病是犯上作乱；爱好刚强却不爱好学习，它的弊病是狂妄自大。 
English: To love benevolence, but not to study, is to become stupid; to love wisdom, but not to study, is to become dissolute; to love honesty, but not to study, is to be easily taken advantage of, and to harm oneself and others; to love straightforwardness, but not to study, is to speak harshly and harshly; to love courage, but not to study, is to commit disorder; to love strength, but not to study, is to be arrogant.

古文：子曰： 小子何莫学夫《诗》？
现代文：孔子说： 学生们为什么不学习《诗》呢？
English: Confucius said: Why don't students study "Poetry"?

古文：《诗》可以兴，可以观，可以群，可以怨。
现代文：学《诗》可以激发人的情志，可以提高人的观察力，可以使人懂得集体意识的重要性，可以使人懂得怎样去讽谏上级。
English: Studying "Poetry" can stimulate people's emotions, can improve people's observation ability, can make people understand the importance of collective consciousness, can make people understand how to ridicule superiors.

古文：迩之事父，远之事君，多识于鸟兽草木之名。 
现代文：近可以用来事奉父母，远可以事奉君主；还可以多知道一些鸟兽草木的名字。 
English: Near can be used to serve parents, far can be used to serve the monarch; you can also know more about the names of some birds, animals and plants.

古文：子谓伯鱼曰： 女为《周南》、《召南》矣乎？
现代文：孔子对伯鱼说： 你学习《周南》《召南》了吗？
English: Confucius said to Bo Yu, "Have you studied "Zhou Nan" and "Zhao Nan"?

古文：人而不为《周南》、《召南》，其犹正墙面而立也与！ 
现代文：一个人如果连《周南》《召南》都不学习，那就像面对墙壁而站着吧？ 
English: If a person doesn't even study "Zhou Nan" and "Zhao Nan," it's like standing in front of a wall, right?

古文：子曰： 礼云礼云，玉帛云乎哉？
现代文：孔子说： 礼节礼节，只是说的玉帛之类的礼器迎来送往吗？
English: Confucius said: Is etiquette etiquette, just saying that gifts such as jade bracelets are welcomed and sent?

古文：乐云乐云，钟鼓云乎哉？ 
现代文：音乐音乐，只是说的敲敲打打钟鼓之类的乐器吗？ 
English: Music, music, is it just the banging, banging, banging of musical instruments such as bells and drums?

古文：子曰： 色厉而内荏，譬诸小人，其犹穿窬之盗也与？ 
现代文：孔子说： 外表强硬，内心虚弱，以小人作比喻，大概就像钻墙洞的盗贼吧？ 
English: Confucius said: Strong on the outside, weak on the inside, using a villain as a metaphor, probably like a burglar drilling a hole in the wall, right?

古文：子曰： 乡愿，德之贼也。 
现代文：孔子说： 是非不分的老好人，是道德的败坏者。 
English: Confucius said, "A good person is a person who is morally corrupt."

古文：子曰： 道听而涂说，德之弃也。 
现代文：孔子说： 把听到的传闻就到处去传播，这是道德所唾弃的。 
English: Confucius said: It is immoral to spread rumors everywhere.

古文：子曰： 鄙夫可与事君也与哉？
现代文：孔子说： 可以跟品质低下的人一起侍奉君主吗？
English: Confucius said, "Is it proper to serve the emperor with men of low caliber?"

古文：其未得之也，患得之；既得之，患失之。
现代文：他还没有得到职位的时候，总担心得不到。得到职位后，又怕失去它。
English: Before he got the job, he was always worried about not getting it, and after he got it, he was afraid of losing it.

古文：苟患失之，无所不至矣。 
现代文：如果他担心失掉官职，那他就什么事都干得出来了。 
English: If he's worried about losing his job, he'll do anything.

古文：子曰： 古者民有三疾，今也或是之亡也。
现代文：孔子说： 古代人有三种毛病，现在恐怕连这三种毛病也不是原来的样子了。
English: Confucius said: The ancients had three kinds of faults, and now, I'm afraid, even these three faults are not what they used to be.

古文：古之狂也肆，今之狂也荡；古之矜也廉，今之矜也忿戾；古之愚也直，今之愚也诈而已矣。 
现代文：古代的狂人是轻率肆意，现在的狂人则是放荡不羁；古代矜持的人是棱角分明，现在矜持的人是恼羞成怒，强词夺理古代愚笨的人是憨直，现在愚笨的人是欺诈伪装罢了。 
English: The madmen of ancient times were reckless and wanton, but the madmen of today are wild and uninhibited; the reserved people of ancient times were sharp-elbowed, but the reserved people of today are irritated and angry, and the strong-worded people of ancient times were straightforward, but the stupid people of today are only deceptive and disguised.

古文：子曰： 巧言令色，鲜矣仁。 
现代文：孔子说： 花言巧语，装出和颜悦色的样子，这种人的仁心就很少了。 
English: Confucius said, "Those who are good-natured are few, and those who are not good-natured are few."

古文：子曰： 恶紫之夺朱也，恶郑声之乱雅乐也，恶利口之覆邦家者。 
现代文：孔子说： 憎恶紫色夺去红色的光彩和地位，憎恶郑国的乐曲淆乱典雅正统的乐曲，憎恶用巧言善辩颠覆国家的人。 
English: Confucius said: "Hate the purple for robbing the red of its glory and status, hate the music of Zhengzhou for confusing the classical and orthodox music, and hate those who use clever words and arguments to subvert the country."

古文：子曰： 予欲无言。 
现代文：孔子说： 我想不说话了。 
English: Confucius said, "I am at a loss for words."

古文：子贡曰： 子如不言，则小子何述焉？ 
现代文：子贡说： 您如果不说话，那么我们这些学生还传述什么呢？ 
English: Zigong said, "If you don't speak, then what are we students to pass on?

古文：子曰： 天何言哉？
现代文：孔子说： 天说过什么话呢？
English: Confucius said: What did the heavens say?

古文：四时行焉，百物生焉，天何言哉？ 
现代文：四季照常运行，万物照样生长。天说了什么话呢？ 
English: The four seasons are running as usual, and everything is growing as usual. What did the heavens say?

古文：孺悲欲见孔子，孔子辞以疾。
现代文：孺悲想见孔子，孔子以生病为由推辞不见。
English: Xing Bei wanted to see Confucius, but Confucius declined on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：将命者出户，取瑟而歌，使之闻之。
现代文：传话的人刚出门，孔子便取来瑟边弹边唱，故意让孺悲听到。
English: As soon as the messenger left the house, Confucius took a harp and began to play and sing, purposely so that Gong Gao could hear.

古文：宰我问： 三年之丧，期已久矣！
现代文：宰我问： 父母去世，服丧三年，时间太长了。
English: Zhai Mei asked: My parents passed away, and it has been three years of mourning, which is too long.

古文：君子三年不为礼，礼必坏；三年不为乐，乐必崩。
现代文：君子三年不讲究礼仪，礼仪必然败坏；三年不演奏音乐，音乐就会荒废。
English: If a gentleman does not practice etiquette for three years, etiquette will surely be destroyed; if he does not play music for three years, music will surely fail.

古文：旧谷既没，新谷既升，钻燧改火，期可已矣。 子曰： 食夫稻，衣夫锦，于女安乎？ 
现代文：旧谷已经吃完，新谷已经登场，取火用的燧木已经轮换了一遍，服丧一年就可以了。 
English: The old valley has been eaten, the new valley has appeared, the firewood has been rotated, and the mourning period can last for one year.

古文：曰： 安！  女安则为之！
现代文：孔子说： 丧期不满三年你就吃大米饭，穿锦缎，对你来说心安吗？ 宰我说： 我心安。 
English: Confucius said, "If you have less than three years before your death, would you eat rice and wear brocade?

古文：夫君子之居丧，食旨不甘，闻乐不乐，居处不安，故不为也。
现代文：孔子说： 你心安，就那样去做吧！君子服丧，吃美味不觉得香甜，听音乐不感到快乐，住在家里不觉得舒适安宁，所以不那样做。
English: Confucius said: If your heart is at ease, then do that. A gentleman is in mourning, he does not feel sweet when eating delicious food, he does not feel happy when listening to music, and he does not feel comfortable and peaceful when living at home, so he does not do that.

古文：今女安，则为之！ 
现代文：如今你既觉得心安，你就那样去做吧！ 
English: Now that you feel at ease, go ahead and do it!

古文：宰我出，子曰： 予之不仁也！
现代文：宰我出去后，孔子说： 宰予真是不仁啊！
English: When Zaiya retreated, Confucius said, "Isn't Zaiya a gentleman?

古文：子生三年，然后免于父母之怀。
现代文：小孩生下来，到三岁时才能离开父母的怀抱。
English: When a child is born, it cannot leave the arms of its parents until it is three years old.

古文：夫三年之丧，天下之通丧也，予也有三年之爱于其父母乎！ 
现代文：服丧三年，这是天下通行的丧礼。难道宰子对他的父母没有三年的爱吗？ 
English: Three years of mourning, this is the world's popular funeral. Does not the son-in-law have three years of love for his parents?

古文：子曰： 饱食终日，无所用心，难矣哉！
现代文：孔子说： 整天吃饱了饭，什么心思也不用，这真的是太难了！
English: Confucius said, "When you have eaten your fill all day, you don't need to think about anything. It's really too difficult!"

古文：不有博弈者乎？为之犹贤乎已。 
现代文：不是有掷骰子、下围棋之类的游戏吗？
English: Aren't there games like craps and Go?

古文：子路曰： 君子尚勇乎？ 
现代文：做做这些，也比什么都不做的好。 子路说： 君子崇尚勇敢吗？ 
English: It's better to do these things than to do nothing at all.Zilu said: Does the gentleman advocate bravery?

古文：子曰： 君子义以为上。君子有勇而无义为乱，小人有勇而无义为盗。 
现代文：孔子答道： 君子以义作为最高尚的品德，君子有勇无义就会作乱，小人有勇无义就会偷盗。 
English: Confucius replied, "A gentleman regards righteousness as the most noble of virtues. If a gentleman has courage without righteousness, he will make trouble. If a villain has courage without righteousness, he will steal."

古文：子贡曰： 君子亦有恶乎？ 
现代文：子贡问： 君子也有憎恶的人或事吗？
English: Zigong asked: Is there anyone or anything that a gentleman hates?

古文：子曰： 有恶。
现代文：孔子说： 是有所憎恶的。
English: Confucius said, "It is detestable."

古文：恶称人之恶者，恶居下流而讪上者，恶勇而无礼者，恶果敢而窒者。 
现代文：憎恶宣扬别人过错的人，憎恶身居下位而毁谤身居上位的人，憎恶勇敢而无礼的人，憎恶果敢而顽固不化的人。 
English: Hatred of those who proclaim the faults of others, hatred of those who are inferior and slander those who are superior, hatred of those who are bold and impudent, hatred of those who are bold and obstinate.

古文：曰： 赐也亦有恶乎？ 
现代文：孔子又说： 赐，你也有厌恶的事吗？ 
English: Confucius also said, "Tell me, do you also have something you dislike?

古文： 恶徼以为知者，恶不孙以为勇者，恶讦以为直者。 
现代文：子贡说： 厌恶偷袭别人的成绩而作为自己的知识的人，厌恶把不谦虚当做勇敢的人，厌恶揭发别人的隐私而自以为直率的人。 
English: Zigong said: "I abhor those who steal other people's achievements as their own knowledge, abhor those who regard immodesty as bravery, and abhor those who expose other people's privacy and think they are forthright.

古文：子曰： 唯女子与小人为难养也，近之则不逊，远之则怨。 
现代文：孔子说： 恃宠者与小人，他们都很难培养自己的浩然正气，难养身、心、性、命，所以与之相处要有远近分寸，太近了容易失礼，坏了规矩；过于远离，又容易招致怨恨，而不利于儒学的传承。 
English: Confucius said: It is difficult for both the favorite and the villain to cultivate their magnanimous righteousness, and it is difficult to nourish the body, mind, sex, and life. Therefore, it is necessary to get along with them from far and near. If they are too close, it is easy to be impolite and break the rules; if they are too far away, it is easy to cause resentment, which is not conducive to the inheritance of Confucianism.

古文：子曰： 年四十而见恶焉，其终也已。 
现代文：孔子说： 到了四十岁的时候还被人所厌恶，他这一生也就终结了。 
English: Confucius said: If at the age of forty a man is still detested, his life is over.

