古文：常衮宋济牛锡庶崔元翰湛责尹极李程蔡南史牛僧孺杨虞卿苗缵费冠卿李固言殷尧藩施肩吾张正甫冯宿张环杨三喜
现代文：常衮宋济牛锡庶崔元翰湛责尹极李程蔡南史牛僧孺杨虞卿苗缵费冠卿李固言殷尧藩施肩吾张正甫冯宿张环杨三喜
English: Changchun, Song, Jiu, Niu, Xi, Choi, Yuanhan, Zhan, Yin, Ji, Li, Cheng, Cai, Nan, Shi, Niu, Sang, Yang, Yu, Miao, Fei, Guan, Li, Yan, Yin, Zhang, Zhengfu, Feng, Shu, Zhang, Huan, Yang, Sanxi

古文：常衮
现代文：常衮
English: Changchun

古文：唐德宗初即位，宰相常衮为福建观察使治其地。
现代文：唐德宗刚做皇帝，常衮还没有做到宰相，仅仅是福建观察使。
English: Tang Dezong had just become the emperor, and Changyu had not yet become the prime minister. He was merely an observer of Fujian.

古文：观游宴飨，必召与之。时未几，皆化翕然。
现代文：常兖以博学宏词科中进士。及做观察使，对于乡县百姓，尤其是读书人一律尊重，经常请他们做客，同他们一起吃饭、喝酒。不几年，治境安居乐业。
English: He was a junior high school student of Chinese language and literature, and as an observer, he always respected the people of the township and county, especially the readers. He often invited them to be his guests, and ate and drank with them. In a few years, he ruled the country and lived a happy life.

古文：于时欧阳詹独秀出，衮加敬爱，诸生皆推服。
现代文：当时欧阳詹在读书人中特别杰出。常兖对他格外厚爱。读书人都表示佩服。
English: At that time, Ouyang Zhan was particularly outstanding among the readers. Chang Juan was particularly fond of him. The readers all expressed their admiration.

古文：闽越之人举进士，繇詹始也。
现代文：闽越人中进士的，欧阳詹是第一个。
English: Ouyang Zhan was the first person to be promoted from the Xing Yue people.

古文：詹死于国子四门助教，陇西李翱为传，韩愈作哀辞。
现代文：欧阳詹死在国子监四门助教的任上。陇西人李翱为其作传，韩愈为其作悼文。
English: Ouyang Zhan died at the post of assistant professor of the Four Gates of the National Children's Supervision Center. The Shaanxi native Li Qian wrote a biography of him, and Han Yu wrote a eulogy.

古文：宋济
现代文：宋济
English: Song Ji

古文：唐德宗微行，一日夏中至西明寺。
现代文：唐德宗私行出访。夏日的一天到了西明寺。
English: Tang Dezong went on a private visit. One summer day, he came to Ximing Temple.

古文：时宋济在僧院过夏。上忽入济院，方在窗下，犊鼻葛巾抄书。
现代文：当时宋济在西明寺过夏，戴着布头巾，敛声屏息坐在窗下抄书。
English: At that time, Song Ji was spending the summer at Ximing Temple, wearing a cloth headscarf and sitting under the window, breathlessly copying books.

古文：上曰：茶请一碗。
现代文：德宗忽然进屋说：请给我一碗茶水喝。
English: Suddenly, Desong entered the house and said, "Please give me a bowl of tea to drink."

古文：济曰：鼎水中煎，此有茶味，请自泼之。
现代文：宋济说：壶里有开水，这杯里的茶水是旧茶水，你自己泼了自己倒。
English: Song Ji said: There is boiling water in the pot, the tea in this cup is old tea, you poured it yourself.

古文：上又问曰：作何事业？
现代文：德宗又问：你在忙什么？
English: Desong also asked: What are you busy with?

古文：兼问姓行。
现代文：并问其姓名排行第几。
English: and asked him what his first name was.

古文：济云：姓宋第五，应进士举。
现代文：宋济说：姓宋，排行老五，正在读书准备应试。
English: Song Ji said: My surname is Song, my rank is fifth, I am studying and preparing for the exam.

古文：又曰：所业何？
现代文：德宗又问：擅长什么？
English: Desong also asked: What are you good at?

古文：曰：作诗。
现代文：宋济答作诗。
English: Song Jitai wrote poetry.

古文：宋济云：圣意不测语未竟。
现代文：德宗又问：听说现在的皇上也好作诗，你认为他的诗怎么样？宋济说，皇上的诗意不好猜测。
English: Desong also asked: I heard that the current emperor is also good at writing poetry, what do you think of his poetry? Song Ji said that the emperor's poetry is not easy to guess.

古文：忽从辇递到。曰官家、官家。济惶惧待罪。
现代文：没等话说完，皇上的车马来了，人们呼喊官家，宋济惊惧请罪。
English: Before he had finished speaking, the emperor's chariot and horses arrived, people shouted at the officials, and Song Zi pleaded guilty in fright.

古文：上曰：宋五大坦率。
现代文：德宗说宋老五很坦率啊。
English: Dezong said that Song Laowu was very frank.

古文：后礼部放榜，上命内臣看有济名。
现代文：后来礼部放进士榜那天，德宗让侍臣去看有没有宋济的名字。
English: Later, on the day when the etiquette department put him on the honor roll, Emperor Dezong asked a courtier to see if Song Ji's name was on it.

古文：使回奏无名，上曰：宋五又坦率也。
现代文：侍臣回来说没有他的名字。德宗又说宋老五还是很坦率。
English: The attendant came back and said that he didn't have his name. Dezong also said that Song Laowu was still very frank.

古文：或有客讥宋济曰：白袍子何纷纷？
现代文：有人讥笑宋济，说你白丁忙碌啥呀？
English: Some people mocked Song Ji, saying, "What are you doing so busy, Bai Ding?"

古文：济曰：为朱袍、紫袍纷纷耳。
现代文：宋济说为了官袍子忙呗。牛锡庶
English: Song Ji says he's too busy for official robes. Niu Xizhong is next

古文：牛锡庶
现代文：牛锡庶性格文静，不合群。
English: Niu Xizhe has a quiet personality and doesn't fit in with the crowd.

古文：牛锡庶性静退寡合，累举不举。贞元元年，因问日者，曰：君明年合状头及第。
现代文：考了几年都没有考中。唐德宗贞元元年，请人给自己算命。那人说，你明年中状元。
English: In the first year of Tang De Zong Zhen, I asked someone to tell me my fortune. The person said, you will be in the middle of the year next year.

古文：锡庶但望偶中一第尔，殊不信也。
现代文：牛锡庶只希望考中而已，根本不信。
English: Niu Xizhe only hopes to pass the middle school entrance examination, and does not believe in it at all.

古文：时已八月，未命主司。
现代文：到了次年八月，还没有确定考官。
English: By August the following year, no examiner had been appointed.

古文：偶至少保萧昕宅前，值昕杖策，将独游南园。
现代文：牛锡庶偶然走到少保萧昕家门前，碰到萧昕拄着手杖，打算到南园散步。
English: Niu Xizhe accidentally walked in front of the door of Xiao Yao's house, met Xiao Yao with a cane, and planned to go for a walk in the South Park.

古文：锡庶遇之，遽投刺，并贽所业。
现代文：牛锡庶忙递上自己的名帖，并说明自己的状况。
English: Niu Xizhe hurriedly handed in his famous letter and explained his situation.

古文：昕独居，方思宾友，甚喜。
现代文：萧昕自己独居，很希望有人为伴，特别高兴。
English: Xiao Yao lives alone and would like to have someone as a companion. She is very happy.

古文：延与之语。
现代文：就把牛锡庶请到屋里，跟他唠喀。
English: So he invited Niu Xizhe into the house and had a picnic with him.

古文：及省文卷，再三称赏。
现代文：看到他的文章，非常赞赏。
English: When I saw his article, I really appreciated it.

古文：因问曰：外间议者以何人当知举？
现代文：萧昕问：你在外面听到传说谁任主考官没有？
English: Xiao Wei asked: Have you heard the legend about who will be the chief examiner?

古文：锡庶对曰：尚书至公为心，必更出领一岁。
现代文：牛锡庶说：大家都在传说你很公正，肯定还要主持这科考试。
English: Niu Xizhe said: Everyone is saying that you are very fair, and you will definitely have to preside over this exam.

古文：若尔。君即状头也。
现代文：萧昕说：没准，若真是那样，你就是状元了。
English: Xiao Yao said: I'm not sure. If that's really the case, then you're the real deal.

古文：锡庶起拜谢。复坐未安，忽闻驰马传呼曰：尚书知举。
现代文：牛锡庶站起来致谢，没等坐好，有人驰马而来，传命萧昕做主考官。
English: Niu Xizhe stood up to express his thanks, but before he could sit down, someone came on horseback and ordered Xiao Yu to be the chief examiner.

古文：昕遽起。锡庶复再拜曰：尚书适已赐许，皇天后土，实闻斯言。
现代文：萧昕刚站起来，牛锡庶立即再拜，说你刚才答应的事，天地都听见了。
English: As soon as Xiao Yao stood up, Niu Xizhe immediately bowed again, saying that what you just promised, heaven and earth have heard.

古文：昕曰：前言期矣。
现代文：萧昕说：我说过的话算数。
English: Xiao Yao said: What I said is what counts.

古文：明年果状头及第。崔元翰
现代文：牛锡庶果然中了状元。崔元翰
English: Niu Xixiao was indeed the winner. Cui Yuanhan was the winner.

古文：崔元翰为杨炎所引，欲拜补阙，恳曰：愿举进士，由此独步场中。
现代文：杨炎荐举崔元翰做补阙。崔元翰恳求，希望能取中进士，做考场中的佼佼者。
English: Yang Yan recommended that Cui Yuanhan be appointed as a substitute. Cui Yuanhan pleaded, hoping to win a scholarship and be the best in the examination hall.

古文：然不晓程试，先求题目为地。
现代文：但是不知道考什么，怎么考，希望能预先得到题目。
English: But I don't know what to take or how to take it, and I hope to get the questions in advance.

古文：崔敖知之。旭日，都堂始开，敖盛气白主司曰：若出白云起封中题，敖请退。
现代文：这事被崔敖知道了，考试那天早晨，试场大门刚开，崔敖对主考官强烈地提出要求，如果考现在封中的题目，我不参加。
English: This matter was known to Cui Wei. On the morning of the exam, the gate of the test site had just opened. Cui Wei strongly demanded of the chief examiner that if the exam was on the topic in the envelope, I would not participate.

古文：主司为其所中，卒愕然换之。
现代文：主考官明白崔敖知道了题目泄漏的事，愕然之后另行出题。
English: The chief examiner understood that Cui Yao knew about the leak of the topic, and after being stunned, came up with another question.

古文：是岁，二崔俱捷。
现代文：当年，崔元翰和崔敖都被取中。
English: That year, both Cui Yuanhan and Cui Gan were taken into custody.

古文：湛贲
现代文：湛贲
English: 湛

古文：彭伉、湛贲俱袁州宜春人，伉妻又湛姨也。
现代文：彭伉和湛贲都是袁州宜春人，而且是联襟。
English: Both Peng Yao and Zhan Yao are from Yichun, Yuanzhou, and they are related.

古文：伉举进士擢第，湛犹为县吏。
现代文：彭伉中了进士，湛贲只做县吏。
English: Peng Yao became a high-ranking official, while Zhan Yao only served as a county official.

古文：其妻忿然责之曰：男子不能自励，窘辱如此，复何为容？湛感其言，孜孜学业。
现代文：老丈人家为彭伉举行宴会，以示庆贺。参加的人都是当地的官员和有名的人物。彭伉坐着首席上，在座的人都很倾慕。湛贲来了，让他在后面小屋吃饭，他也并不脸红。妻子生气地责备说：男子汉不能自己激励上进，受这样的污辱有什么脸见人？
English: The old man's family held a banquet to celebrate Peng Yao. The participants were all local officials and famous figures. Peng Yao sat at the head of the table, and the people present were very admiring. Zhan Yao came and let him eat in the hut behind, and he did not blush. His wife angrily reproached: A man cannot motivate himself to advance, what face does such a disgrace have?

古文：未数载，一举登第。
现代文：湛贲非常受触动，于是，努力学习，孜孜不倦。
English: Zhan Yao was very touched, so he studied hard and tirelessly.

古文：伉常侮之，其时伉方跨驴，纵游于郊郛。
现代文：没几年，一举考中，彭伉曾经羞辱过湛贲。
English: A few years later, in a test, Peng Yao humiliated Zhan Yao.

古文：忽有家僮驰报：湛郎及第。伉失声而坠。故袁人谑曰：湛贲及第，彭伉落驴。
现代文：那天，彭伉正骑着驴在野外郊游，忽然家僮来报告湛贲中了进士的消息，他啊了一声从驴上跌下来，所以袁州人取笑说：湛贲及第，彭伉落驴。
English: That day, Peng Yao was riding a donkey on a field trip. Suddenly, a family member came to report the news that Zhan Yao had hit a young man. He fell down from the donkey with a cry. Therefore, the people of Yuanzhou made fun of him and said: Zhan Yao is the first, Peng Yao fell down from the donkey.

古文：尹极
现代文：尹极
English: Yin Ji

古文：贞元七年，杜黄裳知举。
现代文：贞元七年，杜黄裳做主考官。
English: In the seventh year of the Zhengyuan era, Du Huangxiao became the chief examiner.

古文：闻尹极时名籍籍，乃微服访之，问场中名士，极唯唯。
现代文：听说尹极很有名声，就穿了普通人的衣服去访问他。问到尹极今年参加考试的人中，有哪些名人？尹极非常谦恭。
English: Hearing that Yin Ji was very famous, she dressed in ordinary people's clothes to visit him. When asked which celebrities were among the people who took the exam this year, Yin Ji was very humble.

古文：黄裳乃具告曰：某即今年主司也，受命久矣，唯得一人，某他不能尽知，敢以为请。
现代文：杜黄裳告诉他说，我就是今年的主考。老早就接受了任命，只有一个人我了解，其他的人就不很知道，请你介绍一下。
English: Du Huangxiang told him, "I am this year's chief examiner. I accepted the appointment a long time ago. There is only one person I know, and other people don't know him very well. Please introduce him to me."

古文：极耸然谢曰：既辱下问，敢有所隐？
现代文：尹极很感动，说承蒙您问我，不敢隐讳。
English: Yin Ji was very moved and said, "Thank you for asking me, I dare not hide it."

古文：即言子弟有崔元略。孤进有沐藻、令孤楚数人。
现代文：太学中有崔元略，乡荐的有沐藻、令狐楚等人。
English: There are Cui Yuanliu in Taigaku, and Mucosa, Lingfuchu and others recommended by the township.

古文：黄裳大喜。
现代文：杜黄裳特别高兴。
English: Du Huangxiao was particularly happy.

古文：其年极状头及第。
现代文：当科，尹极考中了状元。
English: When it comes to science, Yin Ji got the first place in the exam.

古文：试珠还合浦赋。藻赋成，忽假寐，梦人告曰：何不叙珠来去之意。
现代文：试题中有《珠还合浦赋》，沐藻做完了赋，睡着了，梦中有人告诉他，你怎么不写珠子来去的意思。
English: In the exam, there was a question about the meaning of "the beads are still coming and going," and when he fell asleep after making the beads, someone told him in a dream, "Why don't you write the meaning of the beads coming and going?"

古文：既寤，乃改数句，又谢恩。
现代文：沐藻醒来，把文章改了几句。谢恩时，沐藻向杜黄裳表示谢意。
English: When she woke up, she changed a few sentences of the article. When she was thanked, she expressed her gratitude to Du Huangxiao.

古文：黄裳谓藻曰：叙珠来去，如有神助。
现代文：杜黄裳说，你的文章中论述珠子的生成与用途，似乎有神仙帮助。
English: Du Huangxiao said that your article on the generation and use of beads seems to have divine help.

古文：李程
现代文：李程
English: Li Cheng

古文：李程贞元中试日五色赋，先榜落矣。
现代文：李程在唐德宗贞元年间参加考试《日五色赋》，被批落榜。
English: Li Cheng took the examination "Japanese Five-Colour Fu" in the first year of Tang Dezongzheng, but was disqualified.

古文：初出试，杨于陵省宿归第，遇程于省门，询之所试。
现代文：出了考场。碰到大官杨于陵从衙门里出来回家，杨于陵问他考试情况。
English: He went out of the examination hall. He met Yang Yuling, a senior official, coming out of the gate to go home. Yang Yuling asked him about the examination.

古文：程探靴靿中得赋稿，示之。
现代文：李程从靴筒里掏出手稿给杨于陵看。
English: Li Cheng took out the manuscript from his shoe to show it to Yang Yuling.

古文：其破题曰：德动天鉴，祥天日华。
现代文：开头词是：德动天鉴，祥开日华。
English: The opening words are: "The virtuous move heavenward, and the virtuous open up the country."

古文：于陵览之，谓程曰：公今须作状元。
现代文：杨于陵看完对李程说，你应该做状元。
English: After watching, Yang Yuling said to Li Cheng, "You should be the first."

古文：翌日，杂文无名。
现代文：第二天，考试杂文，李程又没名。
English: The next day, in the examination essay, Li Cheng again had no name.

古文：奈何用旧题？主文辞以非也。于陵曰：不止题目，向有人赋此，韵脚亦同。
现代文：杨于陵很气不平，便在旧试题集的后面写了李程的文章，但没署名，拿去见主考官，骗他说，你这次考赋，怎么出旧题目？主考说没有的事，杨于陵说，不仅题目是旧的，而且有人写过，连限韵都一样。
English: Yang Yuling was very angry, so he wrote Li Cheng's essay at the back of the old set of questions, but without a signature. He took it to the chief examiner and lied to him, saying, "How did you come up with an old topic for this exam?" The chief examiner said nothing, Yang Yuling said. Not only was the topic old, but it had been written before, even the rhyme scheme was the same.

古文：主文大惊。
现代文：主考官吃了一惊。
English: The examiner was taken aback.

古文：于陵乃出程赋示之。主文叹赏不已。于陵曰当今场中若有此赋，侍郎何以待之？
现代文：杨于陵就把李程的赋拿出来给他看，主考非常赞赏，杨于陵说：如果这次考试中有人写出了这样的赋，你怎么办？
English: Yang Yuling took out Li Cheng's endowment and showed it to him. The examiner was very appreciative. Yang Yuling said, "If someone wrote such an endowment in this exam, what would you do?"

古文：主文曰：无则已，有即非状无不可也。
现代文：主考说：没有则罢，有的话，肯定中状元。
English: The chief examiner said: "If there is nothing, then let it be, if there is something, then it must be the middle element."

古文：于陵曰：苟如此，侍郎已遗贤矣，此乃李程所作。
现代文：杨于陵说：这样的话，你失误了，把好的人才给丢掉了，这文章是李程写的。
English: Yang Yuling said: In this case, you made a mistake and threw away a good talent. This article was written by Li Chengwu.

古文：亟命取程所纳而对，不差一字。
现代文：主考立即让人把李程的卷子拿来对照，一字不差。
English: The chief examiner immediately asked someone to compare Li Cheng's paper, which was word for word the same.

古文：主文因而致谢，谋之于陵，于是擢为状元，前榜不复收矣。
现代文：主考当面致谢，并同杨于陵共同商量。于是，李程中了状元，前面的榜，予以更正。
English: The main examiner thanked him in person and discussed the matter with Yang Yuling. Therefore, Li Cheng was awarded the first place, and the previous list was corrected.

古文：程后出镇大梁，闻浩虚舟应宏词，复赋此题，颇虑浩愈于己，驰一介取原本。既至，将启缄，尚有忧色。及覩浩破题曰：丽日焜煌，中含瑞光。程喜曰：李程在裹。
现代文：李程高兴了，说他这破题解的意思，没有超过自己的范畴。
English: Li Cheng was happy, saying that the meaning of his solution did not exceed his own scope.

古文：蔡南史
现代文：蔡南史
English: Cai Nanshi

古文：贞元十二年，驸马王士平与义阳公主反目。
现代文：唐德宗贞元十二年，驸马王士平同义阳公主不和睦。
English: In the twelfth year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty, Prince Ma Wang Shiping and Princess Yiyang did not get along.

古文：蔡南史、独孤申叔播为乐曲，号义阳子，有团雪散雪之歌。
现代文：蔡南史和独孤申叔两人为他们演奏乐曲，曲名《义阳子》，其中有歌词为团雪散雪。
English: Cai Nanshi and Uncle Duk Guo Shen played a piece of music for them, the title of which was "Yiyangzi," and one of the lyrics was "Tuan Xue Xuan Xue."

古文：德宗闻之怒，欲废科举，后但流斥南史乃止。
现代文：德宗知道这件事很恼怒，认为蔡南史有失文人体统，准奋废除科举，后来流放了蔡南史作罢。
English: Knowing this, Dezong was very angry and thought that Cai Nanshi had lost the dignity of a literate person. He tried his best to abolish the imperial examinations, and later exiled Cai Nanshi.

古文：牛僧孺
现代文：牛僧孺
English: "Cowherd"

古文：牛僧孺始举进士，致琴书于灞浐间。
现代文：牛僧孺中进士前，携琴书游于山水间。
English: Before entering the priesthood in the middle of the year of the ox monk, he swam in the mountains and rivers with a piano and a book.

古文：先以所业谒韩愈、皇甫湜。
现代文：以他的文章谒见韩愈和皇甫湜。
English: See Han Yu and Emperor Fu Xi with his article.

古文：时首造愈，值愈他适，留卷而已。
现代文：第一次拜访韩俞，韩愈没在家，便留下文章。
English: The first time I visited Han Yu, Han Yu was not at home, so I left an article.

古文：无何，愈访湜。时僧孺亦及门。
现代文：没多久，韩愈拜访皇甫湜，正好牛僧孺也来了。
English: Not long after, Han Yu paid a visit to the Empress Dowager Cixi, and it just so happened that the Cow Monk Cixi also came.

古文：二贤览刺忻然，同契延接，询及所止。
现代文：韩愈和皇甫湜看了牛僧孺的名帖，非常高兴，两人一起接见他。问到牛僧孺的打算。
English: Han Yu and Wang Fuxi read the famous postcard of Niu Son Hui and were very happy to meet him together. They asked about Niu Son Hui's plans.

古文：二公披卷，卷首有说乐一章。未阅其词，遽曰：斯高文。
现代文：牛僧孺说，我带着拙作来谒见两位前辈，听从你们的指教，我没有功名现在还没有什么事做，韩愈和皇甫湜打开牛僧孺的文章，开头的篇目是《说乐》，没有看下文，便说准是好文章。
English: Cowherd said, "I brought my poor work to see the two predecessors and listened to your advice. I have no merit and have nothing to do now. Han Yu and the Empress Dowager opened Cowherd's article. The beginning of the article was "Talking Music." Without reading the following, they said it must be a good article.

古文：且以拍板为何等？
现代文：即问牛僧孺拍板是什么？
English: What is a cowherd's clapperboard, you ask?

古文：对曰：谓之乐句。
现代文：牛僧孺回答说是乐句。
English: Niu Xiangyao replied that it was a musical phrase.

古文：二公相顾大喜曰：斯高文必矣。
现代文：两人相望，非常高兴。说这准是好文章了。
English: The two looked at each other, very happy. Said it must be a good article.

古文：僧孺因谋所居，二公沈然良久，乃曰：可于客户税一庙院。
现代文：牛僧孺说自己打算找一处房子。两人考虑再三，才说，可以去寺院里租一处地方。
English: Niu Sangyu said that he was planning to find a house. The two men thought twice before saying that they could go to the temple to rent a place.

古文：僧孺如所教。
现代文：牛僧孺照办，又登门拜谢。
English: Niu Sangyu did as he was told and went to the door to thank him.

古文：造门致谢，二公又诲之曰：某日可游青龙寺。
现代文：两人又教诲他，说某日你可以去游青龙寺，晚一点回来。
English: The two of them also told him that one day you can go to the Qinglong Temple and come back later.

古文：薄暮而归，二公联鏕至彼。因大署其门曰：韩愈、皇甫湜同访几官不遇。
现代文：那天，韩愈和皇甫湜一起坐车到牛僧孺住的地方，在大门上题字说，韩愈、皇甫湜同访牛僧孺不遇。
English: That day, Han Yu and Wang Fuxuan took a car together to the place where the cow monk lived, and wrote an inscription on the gate saying that Han Yu and Wang Fuxuan would not meet the visiting cow monk.

古文：翌日，辇毂名士咸观焉。
现代文：第二天，京都许多名人都去参观。
English: The next day, many celebrities visited Kyoto.

古文：奇章之名，由是赫然矣。
现代文：牛僧孺的大名，由是鹊起。
English: The daimyo (feudal lord) of Niu Xiangyao started from Yu Ze Xuan.

古文：僧孺既及第，过堂，宰相谓曰：扫厅奉候。
现代文：牛僧孺参加过堂时，宰相一定要把屋子打扫干净来接待。
English: The prime minister must clean the house to receive the bull when it passes through the hall.

古文：僧孺独出曰：不敢。
现代文：牛僧孺独自应声说不敢，参加过堂的进士们都感到惊奇。
English: Niu Xiangyao did not dare to answer the call alone, and the scholars who attended the hall were surprised.

古文：众耸异之。杨虞卿
现代文：杨虞卿
English: Yang Yuqing

古文：杨虞卿及第后，举宏词，为校书，来淮南就李鄘婚姻。
现代文：杨虞卿以宏词科中进士，授职校书。到淮南同李鄘的女儿结婚，遇到前进士陈商。
English: Yang Yuqing graduated from the Middle School of Chinese Language and Literature, and went to Huainan to marry the daughter of Li Xi, and met Chen Shang, a graduate.

古文：遇前进士陈商，启护穷窘，虞卿未相识。
现代文：陈商向他诉说自己的贫困，杨虞卿并不认识陈商，但听了他的陈词。
English: Chen Shang told him about his poverty. Yang Yuqing did not know Chen Shang, but he listened to his story.

古文：闻之，倒囊以济。
现代文：倾囊相助。
English: I'm all for helping out.

古文：苗缵
现代文：苗缵
English: Miao Wei

古文：苗粲子缵应举，而粲以中风语涩，而心绪至切。
现代文：苗粲的儿子苗缵即将参加科举考试，苗粲中风不语，但是望子成龙的心很切。
English: Miao Miao's son Miao Miao is about to take the college entrance examination. Miao Miao has a stroke and is speechless, but Miao Zicheng's heart is very sad.

古文：临试，又疾亟。
现代文：临近试期，苗粲的病重加沉重。
English: Nearing the trial period, Miao Wei's illness became more severe.

古文：缵乃为状，请许入试否？
现代文：苗缵就把字写在纸上，请问自己要不要去考试。
English: Miao Wei just wrote the words on the paper. Please ask yourself if you want to go to the exam.

古文：粲犹能把笔，淡墨为书曰：入入！
现代文：苗粲拿笔淡淡地在纸上写了入入二字。
English: Miao Wei took a pen and lightly wrote the two characters "入入" on the paper.

古文：其父子之情切如此。
现代文：父子这样情切令人感动。
English: It's touching to see a father and son so affectionate.

古文：其年，缵及第。
现代文：当年，苗缵中进士。
English: At that time, he was a junior high school student in Miaofen.

古文：费冠卿
现代文：费冠卿
English: Lord Falconer

古文：费冠卿元和二年及第，以禄不及亲，永怀罔极之念，遂隐于池阳九华山。
现代文：唐宪宗元和二年，费冠卿中进士。思念自己故去的父母，没有办法报答养育之恩，心情沉重。于是，隐居于池阳的九华山。
English: In the second year of Tang Xian Zong Yuanhe, Fei Guanqing was promoted to junior high school. Thinking of his deceased parents, he had no way to repay the kindness of his upbringing, and his heart was heavy. Therefore, he lived in seclusion on Jihua Mountain in Chiyang.

古文：长庆中，殿中侍御史李行修举冠卿孝节，徵拜右拾遗。
现代文：穆宗长庆年间，殿中侍御史李行修举荐费冠卿节操仁孝，请征其入朝，做右拾遗。
English: During the reign of Emperor Muzong of Changqing, Li Xingxiu, a palace attendant and historian, recommended Fei Guanqing to the emperor, asking him to recruit him into the imperial court to do the right to collect relics.

古文：峻节无双，清飚自远。
现代文：朝廷的征文说，前进士费冠卿是一个人才，曾以文才考中进士。
English: The imperial court's solicitation said that the advanced scholar Fei Guanqing was a talented person who had been promoted to a scholar in the middle of the literary examination.

古文：夫旌孝行、举逸人，所以厚风俗而敦名教也。
现代文：因为有了荣禄不能孝养故去的父母，心中遗恨绵绵。因此隐居耕种，不肯做官。守其孝道，十五年了，这样高风亮节，很少有人能比。
English: Because of the honor, he could not be filial to his deceased parents, and his heart was filled with hatred. Therefore, he lived in seclusion and did not want to be an official. He has kept his filial piety for fifteen years, and few people can match such a high wind and bright festival.

古文：宜陈高奖，以儆薄夫。
现代文：表扬孝行，录用人才，才能使世风敦厚，应当给予奖掖，以教育那些不孝顺的人。
English: It is only by praising filial piety and employing talented people that we can make the world more affluent. Rewards should be given to educate those who are not filial.

古文：擢参近侍之荣，载伫移忠之效：可右拾遗。
现代文：请到皇帝的身边，让臣子们效仿你的忠孝。可以做右拾遗。
English: Please come to the emperor's side, and let the courtiers emulate your loyalty and filial piety. You can do the right to collect relics.

古文：冠卿竟不应徵命。
现代文：费冠卿却没有应征。
English: Lord Falconer, however, did not enlist.

古文：李固言
现代文：李固言
English: Lee Kuan Yew

古文：李固言生于凤翔庄墅，性质厚，未熟造谒。
现代文：李固言生于凤翔农村。性格敦厚。没有人荐举，就去参加京试，住在表亲柳家。
English: Li Guyan was born in Fengxiang village. He has a strong personality. When no one recommended him, he went to participate in the Beijing exam and lived with his cousin Liu.

古文：始应进士举，舍于亲表柳氏京第。
现代文：柳家的兄弟们，经常嘲笑他，说他不明白事理。
English: The brothers of the Liu family often laughed at him, saying that he did not understand the reason.

古文：诸柳昆仲，率多谑戏。
现代文：他们认为不求人举荐没有能考上的道理，等候听他失意的消息。
English: They thought there was no reason why he couldn't get into the exam without asking for a recommendation, and waited to hear the news of his disappointment.

古文：以固言不闲人事，俾信趋揖之仪。
现代文：还偷着写了此处有屋出租的字条贴在李固言的头巾上。李固言自己一点不知道。出门，看见的人都偷着笑。
English: He also secretly wrote a note saying that there was a house for rent here and put it on Li Guogan's headscarf. Li Guogan didn't know anything about it. When he went out, everyone he saw was secretly laughing.

古文：诸柳与导行卷去处，先令投许常侍。
现代文：许孟容当时做右常侍，是一个没权势的官，不被人看重。人称常侍官为貂脚，没力量替年轻人说话。
English: At that time, Xu Meng Rong was the right-hand man, a low-ranking official who was not valued. People called the right-hand man lame, unable to speak for young people.

古文：虽然，亦藏之于心。又睹头巾上文字，知其朴质。无何，来年许知礼闱，乃以固言为状头。
现代文：又看到李固言头巾上的纸条，知道他忠厚。第二年许孟容做主考官，取李固言作状元。
English: He also saw a piece of paper on Li Guojin's headscarf, and knew that he was loyal. The next year, Xu Meng Rong became the chief examiner, and took Li Guojin as the principal.

古文：殷尧藩
现代文：殷尧藩
English: Yinqi Domain

古文：元和九年，韦贯之榜，殷尧藩杂文落矣。
现代文：元和九年，韦贯之主持考试。殷尧藩的杂文没被取中。
English: In the 9th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wei Gangzhi presided over the examination. The essay of Yin Yi Han was not taken.

古文：阳汉公乃贯之前榜门生，盛言尧藩之屈，贯之为之重收。
现代文：韦贯之的学生阳汉公竭力为殷尧藩分辩，说他受了委屈。韦贯之重新取中了殷尧藩。
English: Yang Hankong, a student of Wei Gangzhi, tried his best to argue for the Yinlu clan, saying that he had been wronged. Wei Gangzhi once again won the Yinlu clan.

古文：施肩吾
现代文：施肩吾
English: Shoulder to shoulder

古文：施肩吾元和十年及第。
现代文：施肩吾在元和十年考中进士。
English: Shouldering my shoulders, I made it to the top in the Yuan and Ten-Year Exams.

古文：以洪州之西山，乃十二真君羽化之地，灵迹具存，慕其真风，高蹈于此。
现代文：认为洪州的西山是十二真君升仙的地方，名胜古迹都在，很羡慕。就到那里去隐居，每天吟诗作赋。
English: He thought that the West Mountain of Hongzhou was the place where the Twelve Immortals ascended to immortality, and he was very envious that all the famous places and monuments were there. He went there to live in seclusion and chant poems every day.

古文：尝赋闲居遣兴七言诗一百韵，大行于世。
现代文：曾作闲居遣兴七言诗一百韵，为时人传诵。
English: He once composed a hundred rhymes of seven-character poems by Idler Yuanxing, which were recited by people at the time.

古文：张正甫
现代文：张正甫
English: Zhang Zhengfu

古文：张正甫为河南尹，裴度衔命伐淮西，置宴府西亭。
现代文：张正甫做河南尹，裴度奉命讨伐淮西。张正甫在府中西亭为裴度设宴。
English: Zhang Zhengfu was Henan Yin, and Pei Du was ordered to fight against Huaixi. Zhang Zhengfu held a banquet for Pei Du in the West Pavilion of the Central Government.

古文：裴言一举人词艺，好解头。
现代文：裴度谈论有一举人的才学很好，地方应取他为解头。
English: Pei Du talked about the talent of a person who is very good at learning, and the place should take him as the head.

古文：张正色曰：相公此行何为也？
现代文：张正甫正色说：宰相此行是做什么来的？
English: Zhang Zhengfu said solemnly, "What is the prime minister doing on this trip?

古文：争记得河南解头。
现代文：还有心思来争这个解元？
English: Do you still have the heart to fight for this solution?

古文：裴有惭色。
现代文：裴度感到惭愧。
English: Baidu felt ashamed.

古文：冯宿
现代文：冯宿
English: Fengjuku

古文：冯宿之三子陶、韬、图，兄弟连年进士及第，连年登宏词科。
现代文：冯宿之三子陶、韬、图，兄弟连年进士及第，连年登宏词科。
English: The three sons of Feng Shuk, Tao, Zou, and Tu, brothers, have been students for many years and have been promoted to the Hongxue School of Chinese Language and Literature for many years.

古文：一时之盛，代无比焉。
现代文：一时之盛，代无比焉。
English: A once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

古文：当太和初，冯氏进士及第者，海内十人。
现代文：当太和初，冯氏进士及第者，海内十人。
English: At the beginning of the Taihe era, there were ten people in Hainai, including Feng's apprentice and the first.

古文：而公家兄弟叔侄八人。
现代文：而公家兄弟叔侄八人。
English: But there are eight public brothers, uncles and nephews.

古文：张环
现代文：张环
English: Zhang Huan

古文：张环兄弟七人并举进士。
现代文：张环兄弟七人同时考中进士。
English: Seven Zhang Huan brothers simultaneously passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：杨三喜
现代文：杨三喜
English: Yang Sanxi

古文：杨敬之拜国子司业，次子载进士及第，长子三史登科，时号杨三喜。
现代文：杨敬之做了国子司业，同时，二儿子杨载中了进士，大儿子杨三史也被举荐入试。被称为杨三喜。
English: Yang Jingzhi became the State Secretary for Education, while his second son, Yang Zai, won a scholarship, and his eldest son, Yang Sanshi, was also recommended for entrance examination. They were known as Yang Sanxi.

