古文：刘表字景升，山阳高平人，鲁恭王之后也。
现代文：刘表传，刘表，字景升，山阳高平人，是鲁恭王的后代。
English: Liu Biao Chuan, Liu Biao, Zi Jing Sheng, Shanyang Gaoping Ren, is a descendant of King Lu Gong.

古文：身长八尺余，姿貌温伟。
现代文：刘表身高有八尺多，容貌温和，体态魁梧。
English: Liu is more than eight feet tall, with a mild-mannered appearance and a heavy build.

古文：与同郡张俭等俱被讪议，号为 八顾 ，诏书捕案党人，表亡走得免。
现代文：他与同郡的张俭等人一道被人诽谤议论，称为 八顾 。皇帝下诏书逮捕党人加以治罪，刘表逃走没被捉住。
English: Together with Zhang Jian and others from the same county, he was slandered and slandered, known as Ba Gu. The emperor issued an edict to arrest party members and punish them, but Liu Biao escaped and was not caught.

古文：党禁解，辟大将军何进掾。
现代文：党禁解除以后，刘表被大将军何进召为佐吏。
English: After the lifting of the party ban, Liu Biao was summoned by General He Jin to be an aide.

古文：初平元年，长沙太守孙坚杀荆州刺史王，诏书以表为蒯州刺史。
现代文：初平元年，长沙太守孙坚杀了荆州刺史王叙，诏书任命刘表为荆州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Sun Jian, the governor of Changsha, killed Wang Su, the statesman of Jingzhou, and the imperial edict appointed Liu Biao as the statesman of Jingzhou.

古文：时，江南宗贼大盛，又袁术阻兵屯鲁阳，表不能得至，乃单马入宜城，请南郡人荆越、襄阳人蔡瑁与共谋画。
现代文：当时长江以南同宗族结为贼寇的很多，袁术的部队又驻守鲁阳拦住道路，刘表无法到达荆州，于是只身骑马进入宜城，请南郡人蒯越、襄阳人蔡瑁一同商议对策。
English: At that time, south of the Yangtze River, there were many thieves and robbers from the same clan. Yuan Shulun's troops were stationed in Luyang to block the road. Liu Biao was unable to reach Jingzhou, so he rode alone into Yicheng. He asked the people from Nan County and Yangyang to discuss countermeasures.

古文：表谓越曰： 宗贼虽盛而众不附，若袁术因之，祸必至矣。
现代文：刘表对蒯越说： 同宗族结成的盗贼虽然多但大家并不归附，如果被袁街利用，灾难必然来临。
English: Liu table said to Yu Yue: Although there are many thieves with the same clan, everyone does not belong to them. If they are used by Yuan Jie, disaster will inevitably come.

古文：吾欲征兵，恐不能集，其策焉出？ 
现代文：我想征兵，担心结合不起来，得采用什么计策？ 
English: I want to enlist, but I'm worried that I won't be able to join the army. What strategy should I use?

古文：对曰： 理平者先仁义，理乱者先权谋。
现代文：蒯越回答说： 治理太平的时候就以仁义为先，治理战乱的时候就首先要用权变的计谋。
English: Hao Yue replied: When governing a peaceful time, we should put benevolence and righteousness first, and when governing a war, we should first use the strategy of power change.

古文：兵不在多，贵乎得人。
现代文：军队不在人多，重要的是得到合适的人才。
English: There aren't many people in the army, it's important to get the right people.

古文：袁术骄而无谋，宗贼率多贪暴。
现代文：袁术骄傲而且没有谋略，同族聚成的盗贼大多贪婪残暴。
English: Yuan Shuxu is proud and has no strategy. Most of the thieves from the same clan are greedy and cruel.

古文：越有所素养者，使人示之以利，必持众来。
现代文：其中有我平时供养的人，要是派人告诉他们好处，他们必定率领部众过来。
English: Among them are those whom I usually support. If I were to send someone to tell them about the benefits, they would certainly come with their followers.

古文：使君诛其无道，施其才用，威德既行，襁负而至矣。
现代文：您杀掉其中残暴的人，任用其中有才能的人，您的声威和恩德一旦树立，人们就会用襁褓背负着孩子来投奔您。
English: You kill the violent ones and appoint the talented ones. Once your prestige and benevolence are established, people will come to you with their children on their backs.

古文：兵集众附，南据江陵，北守襄阳，荆州八郡可传檄而定。
现代文：兵众聚集，人们归附，南部占领江陵，北部守住襄阳，荆州所辖八郡用一道檄文就可平定。
English: The soldiers gathered, the people surrendered, the south occupied Jiangling, the north defended Xiangyang, and the eight counties under the jurisdiction of Jingzhou could be pacified with a single imperial edict.

古文：公路虽至，无能为也。 
现代文：袁公路即使来到，也无能为力了。 
English: Even if Yuan He Dao arrives, there is nothing he can do.

古文：表曰： 善。 
现代文：刘表说： 对。 
English: Liu table said: That's right.

古文：乃使赵遣人诱宗贼帅，至者十五人，皆斩之而袭取其众。
现代文：于是要蒯越派人去招诱同族聚成的盗贼的头目，来的有十五个人，将他们全部杀掉并且出其不意攻取他们的部众。
English: Therefore, the leader of the thieves, fifteen people, came to invite the people of the same tribe to come and kill them all and take their followers by surprise.

古文：唯江夏贼张虎、陈坐拥兵据襄阳城，表使越与庞季往譬之，乃降。
现代文：祇有江夏的盗贼张虎、陈坐聚集人马占据襄阳城，刘表派蒯越与庞季前去晓谕二人，他们才投降。
English: The thieves Zhang Hu and Chen Za, who had just crossed the Yangtze River, gathered a large number of people to occupy Xiangyang City. Liu Bei sent Xuan Yue and Pang Ji to speak to the two before they surrendered.

古文：江南悉平。
现代文：长江以南全部平定。
English: Everything south of the Yangtze River has been pacified.

古文：诸守令闻表威名，多解印绶去。
现代文：许多太守县令听到刘表的威名，不少人解下印绶离去。
English: Many governors of counties heard the prestige of Liu table, and many people took off the seal and left.

古文：表遂理兵襄阳，以观时变。
现代文：刘壶于是在塞区整治军队，用以观察时局的变化。
English: Liu Jue then reorganized the army in Sai District to observe the changes in the current situation.

古文：袁术与其从兄绍有隙，而绍与表相结，故术共孙坚合从袭表。
现代文：袁术与其堂兄袁绍有隔阂，而且袁绍同刘表相结交，所以袁术同孙坚南北联合袭击刘表。
English: Yuan Shuxu was estranged from his cousin Yuan Shao, and Yuan Shao was friends with Liu Biao, so Yuan Shuxu and Sun Jian jointly attacked Liu Biao.

古文：表败，坚遂围襄阳。
现代文：刘表战败，孙坚接着包围襄阳。
English: Liu Bei was defeated, and Sun Jian then encircled Xiangyang.

古文：会表将黄祖救至，坚为流箭所中死，余众退走。
现代文：正好刘表的部将黄祖前来援救，孙坚被流箭射中而死，剩下的人全都退走了。
English: Just as Liu's subordinate Huang Zu came to the rescue, Sun Jian was shot dead by a stray arrow, and the rest of the people all retreated.

古文：及李等入长安，冬，表遣使奉贡。
现代文：到李催等人进入长安，冬天，刘表派使者向天子进贡。
English: When Li Xie and others entered Chang'an, Liu Bei sent an envoy to pay tribute to Tianzi in winter.

古文：傕以表为镇南将军、荆州牧，封成武侯，假节，以为己援。
现代文：李催任命刘表为镇南将军、荆州牧，封他为成武侯，持天子符节，作为自己的援助力量。
English: Li He appointed Liu Biao as Zhenan General and Jingzhou Herdsman, and appointed him as Chengwuhou, holding Tianzi Festival, as his own assistance force.

古文：建安元年，骠骑将军张济自关中走南阳，因攻穰城，中飞矢而死。
现代文：建安元年，骠骑将军张济从关中逃奔南阳，顺道进攻穣城，被飞箭射中而死。
English: In the first year of Jian'an, Zhang Jie, the general of the imperial cavalry, fled from Guanzhong to Nanyang and attacked Shicheng on the way. He was shot by an arrow and died.

古文：荆州官属皆贺。
现代文：荆州的官员部属都来庆贺。
English: Officials and subordinates from Jingzhou all came to celebrate.

古文：表曰： 济以穷来，主人无礼，至于交锋，此非牧意，牧受吊不受贺也。 
现代文：刘表说： 张济由于窘迫而来，主人没有以礼相待，造成交战，遣不是我的想法，我接受吊唁而不接受庆贺。 
English: Liu table said: Zhang Ji came due to embarrassment, the owner did not treat each other with courtesy, resulting in a war, it was not my idea to send him, I accept condolences but not congratulations.

古文：使人纳其众，众闻之喜，遂皆服从。
现代文：派人接收张济的部队，士兵们听了很高兴，于是都归顺了刘表。
English: He sent someone to receive Zhang Ji's troops, and the soldiers were very happy to hear this, so they all surrendered to Liu Bei.

古文：三年，长沙太守张羡率零陵、桂阳三郡畔表，表遣兵攻围，破羡，平之。
现代文：三年，长沙太守张羡率领零陵、桂阳三个郡背叛刘表，刘表派军队围攻，打败了张羡，平定了这些地区。
English: In three years, Changsha governor Zhang En led three counties of Jiling and Guiyang to betray Liu Bei. Liu Bei sent troops to besiege, defeat Zhang En and pacify these areas.

古文：于是开土遂广，南接五领，北据汉川，地方数千里，带甲十余万。
现代文：这样刘表拓展的地区很广，南部和五岭相接，北部拥有汉，方圆有几千里，披甲的战士有十多万。
English: In this way, Liu Biao expanded to a very wide area. In the south, it is adjacent to the Wuling Mountains, in the north it has Han, there are thousands of miles around, and there are more than one hundred thousand armored soldiers.

古文：初，荆州人情好扰，加四方骇震，寇贼相扇，处处麋沸。
现代文：起初，荆州的民情容易骚扰，加上四方到处震动恐惧，寇贼猖獗，所以处处动荡不安。
English: At first, the people of Jingzhou were easy to harass, and the fear was everywhere, and the bandits were rampant, so there was unrest everywhere.

古文：表招诱有方，威怀兼洽，其奸猾宿贼更为效用，万里肃清，大小咸悦而服之。
现代文：刘表召唤劝导有方，武力和安抚协调并用，盗贼中奸恶狡猾的老贼更是为他出力，万里之内全部削平，无论年老的年少的对他都心悦诚服。
English: Liu watch summons and persuades skillfully, and uses both force and appeasement in a coordinated manner. Even the most treacherous and cunning old thief among thieves will do his best for him, leveling everything within ten thousand miles. Regardless of whether he is old or young, he is sincerely pleased with him.

古文：关西、兗、豫学士归者盖有千数，表安尉赈赡，皆得资全。
现代文：关西、兖州、豫州的学者文人来投奔的有几千人，刘表给予安抚周济，这些人都得到资助周全。
English: Several thousand scholars and writers from Kansai, Ganzhou, and Yuzhou came to the capital, and Liu Biao gave them the pacification of Zhou Jizhi, and these people were well-funded.

古文：遂起立学校，博求儒术，綦母闿、宋忠等撰立《五经》章句，谓之《后定》。
现代文：于是刘表建立学校，广泛访求身怀儒术的人，像綦母阖、宋忠等人撰成《五经》章句，称为后定。
English: As a result, Liu Biao established a school and conducted extensive interviews with people who were fond of Confucianism, such as Zou Muxuan, Song Zhong and others, to compile the "Five Classics" chapters, known as post-setting.

古文：爱民养士，从容自保。
现代文：刘表爱护百姓，供养士人，从容守住荆州。
English: Liu Bei loved and cared for the people, provided for and nurtured the scholars, and calmly protected and lived in Jingzhou.

古文：及曹操与袁绍相持于官度，绍遣人求助，表许之，不至，亦不援曹操，且欲观天下之变。
现代文：曹操和袁绍在官度互相对峙时，袁绍派人要求援助，刘表答应了，但没派兵去，也不增援曹操，而且想静观天下的变化。
English: When Cao Cao and Yuan Shao confronted each other in the officialdom, Yuan Shao sent people to ask for assistance, Liu Biao agreed, but did not send troops, nor did he reinforce Cao Cao, and wanted to quietly watch the changes in the world.

古文：从事中郎南阳韩嵩、别驾刘先说表曰： 今豪桀并争，两雄相持，天下之重在于将军。
现代文：从事中郎南阳人韩嵩、别驾刘先劝说刘表： 现在豪杰互相较量，两个强有力的人互相对峙，天下的关键在您身上。
English: Han Song, a person from Nanyang who is engaged in the middle, and Liu Xian, a person who is not engaged in the middle, persuade Liu table: Now heroes compete with each other, two powerful people confront each other, the key to the world is in you.

古文：若欲有为，起乘其敝可也；如其不然，固将择所宜从。岂可拥甲十万，坐观成败，求援而不能助，见贤而不肯归！
现代文：若是想有所作为，趁着他们疲惫时起兵，遣是可行的办法；如果不想这样，一定得选择合宜的措施，怎么能够拥有十万军队，坐观他人的成败，别人要求援助而不去援救，见到贤明的人又不愿归顺呢！
English: If you want to make a difference, take advantage of their exhaustion and raise an army, sending troops is a feasible method; if you don't want to do this, you must choose the appropriate measures. How can you have a hundred thousand troops, watch the success or failure of others, others ask for assistance but don't go to rescue, see wise people but don't want to submit?

古文：此两怨必集于将军，恐不得中立矣。
现代文：这样，两方的怨恨一定集中到您身上，恐怕您不可能得到中立了。
English: In this way, the resentment of both sides will be concentrated on you, and I'm afraid you can't be neutral.

古文：曹操善用兵，且贤俊多归之，其势必举袁绍，然后移兵以向江汉，恐将军不能御也。
现代文：曹操善于用兵，而且贤明杰出的人大多投奔曹操，这种形势一定能击败袁绍，而后调动部队攻向长江、汉水一带，恐怕将军抵抗不了。
English: Cao Cao is good at using soldiers, and most of the wise and outstanding people have joined Cao Cao. This situation will surely defeat Yuan Shao, and then mobilize troops to attack the Yangtze River and Hanshui area. I'm afraid the general can't resist.

古文：今之胜计，莫若举荆州以附曹操，操必重德将军，长享福祚，垂之后嗣，此万全之策也。 
现代文：眼下最好的办法，不如将整个荆州归顺曹操，曹操必然看重感激将军，您可以长久地享有福禄地位，传给后代，这是万分完善的计策。 
English: The best way at the moment is to submit the whole of Jingzhou to Cao Cao. Cao Cao is bound to value gratitude to the general. You can enjoy the status of fortune for a long time and pass it on to future generations. This is a perfect strategy.

古文：蒯越亦劝之。
现代文：蒯越也造么劝刘表。
English: He also advised Liu to build a watch.

古文：表狐疑不断，乃遣嵩诣操，观望虚实。
现代文：但刘表迟疑不决，就派韩嵩到曹操那裹观望虚实。
English: However, Liu Biao hesitated and sent Han Song to Cao Cao to observe the truth.

古文：谓嵩曰： 今天下未知所定，而曹操拥天子都许，君为我观其衅。 
现代文：刘表对韩嵩说： 现在天下不知道谁能平定，但曹操拥戴天子定都许县，您替我去看看虚实。 
English: Liu table said to Han Song: Now the world does not know who can be pacified, but Cao Cao's embrace of Tianzi Dingdu Xu County, you go to see the truth for me.

古文：嵩对曰： 嵩观曹公之明，必得志于天下。
现代文：韩嵩回答说： 据我看以曹公的贤明，一定能够实现统一天下的心愿。
English: Han Song replied: In my opinion, with Cao Gong's wisdom, we will surely be able to realize the wish of unifying the country.

古文：将军若欲归之，使嵩可也；如其犹豫，嵩至京师，天子假嵩一职，不获辞命，则成天子之臣，将军之故吏耳。
现代文：将军如果想归顺曹操，派我去可以；如果犹豫不决，我到京师，天子送给我一个官职，我的推辞没被同意，那我就成了天子的大臣、将军过去的部下。
English: If the general wants to submit to Cao Cao, he can send me; if he hesitates, I will go to Beijing, and God will give me an official post. If my resignation is not accepted, then I will become God's minister and the general's former subordinate.

古文：在君为君，不复为将军死也。
现代文：在天子身边就为天子尽忠，不再为您献身了。
English: If you are around the Son of Heaven, you will be loyal to the Son of Heaven, and you will no longer be devoted to Him.

古文：惟加重思。 
现代文：希望您重新考虑。 
English: I hope you reconsider.

古文：表以为惮使，强之。
现代文：刘表认为他害怕出使，强迫他去。
English: Liu Biao thought he was afraid to send an envoy and forced him to go.

古文：至许，果拜嵩侍中、零陵太守。
现代文：到许县以后，天子果然任命韩嵩为侍中、零陵太守。
English: After arriving in Xu County, the heavenly son indeed appointed Han Song as an attendant and the governor of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：及还，盛称朝廷曹操之德，劝遣子入侍。
现代文：回来以后，韩嵩极力称赞天子和曹操的恩德，劝说刘表派儿子入侍。
English: After returning, Han Song praised the benevolence of Tianzi and Cao Cao, and persuaded Liu Bei to appoint his son as an attendant.

古文：表大怒，以为怀贰，陈兵诟嵩，将斩之。
现代文：刘表大怒，认为韩嵩怀有二心，就陈列军队，辱骂韩嵩，准备杀他。
English: Liu Biao flew into a rage, thinking that Han Song was of two minds, so he displayed his army, insulted Han Song, and prepared to kill him.

古文：嵩不为动容，徐陈临行之言。
现代文：韩嵩面不改色，慢慢讲述临走时说过的话。
English: Han Song did not change his expression and slowly recounted what he had said before leaving.

古文：表妻蔡氏知嵩贤，谏止之。
现代文：刘表的妻子蔡氏知道韩嵩的贤德，劝阻了刘表。
English: Liu Biao's wife, Cai, knew of Han Song's virtue and dissuaded Liu Biao.

古文：表犹怒，乃考杀从行者。
现代文：刘表仍然怒火未息，就拷问打死了韩嵩的随行人员。
English: Liu Biao, still furious, tortured and killed Han Song's entourage.

古文：知无他意，但囚嵩而已。
现代文：刘表了解到韩嵩没有其他意图，衹将他囚禁而已。
English: Liu table learned that Han Song had no other intention, but to imprison him.

古文：六年，刘备自袁绍奔荆州，表厚相待结而不能用也。
现代文：六年，刘备从袁绍那裹来投奔荆州，刘表厚待刘备，与他结交，但不能用他。
English: In six years, Liu Bei came from Yuan Shona to Jingzhou. Liu Bei was well received by Liu Bei and made friends with him, but he could not use him.

古文：十三年，曹操自将征表，未至。
现代文：十三年，曹操亲自率军征讨刘表，未到荆州。
English: In the thirteenth year, Cao Cao personally led the army to collect Liu tables, but did not go to Jingzhou.

古文：八月，表疽发背卒。
现代文：八月份，刘表背上生恶疮而去世。
English: In August, Liu died of a malignant ulcer on his back.

古文：在荆州几二十年，家无余积。
现代文：刘表在荆州近二十年，家中没有多余的积蓄。
English: Liu table has been in Jingzhou for nearly 20 years, and there is no extra savings at home.

古文：二子：琦、琮。
现代文：刘表有两个儿子：刘琦和刘琮。
English: Liu Biao has two sons: Liu Jun and Liu Jun.

古文：表初以琦貌类于己，甚爱之，后为琮娶其后妻蔡氏之侄，蔡氏遂爱琮而恶琦，毁誉之言日闻于表。
现代文：起初，刘表认为刘琦相貌长得像自己，非常喜欢他，后来为刘琮娶后妻蔡氏的侄女为妻，蔡氏于是喜欢刘琮而讨厌刘琦，刘表每天都听到诋毁刘琦称赞刘琮的话。
English: At first, Liu Biao thought that Liu Xuan looked like him and liked him very much. Later, Liu Biao married the niece of Cai's second wife as his wife. Cai then liked Liu Xuan and hated Liu Xuan. Liu Biao heard the words denigrating Liu Xuan and praising Liu Xuan every day.

古文：表宠耽后妻，每信受焉。
现代文：刘表深深宠幸后妻，所以每次都相信接受这些话。
English: Liu table is deeply favored by his wife, so he believes in accepting these words every time.

古文：又妻弟蔡瑁及外甥张允并得幸于表，又睦于琮。
现代文：另外，刘表的妻弟蔡瑁和外甥张允一并被刘表重用，他们又同刘琮要好。
English: In addition, Liu Biao's brother-in-law Cai Wei and nephew Zhang Yunyi were reused by Liu Biao, and they were better than Liu Biao.

古文：而琦不自宁，尝与琅邪人诸葛亮谋自安之术。
现代文：刘琦感觉自己不安全，曾经同琅邪人诸葛亮商量保住自己的办法。
English: Liu Yao felt that he was not safe. He once discussed with his fellow villain Zhuge Liang how to protect himself.

古文：亮初不对。
现代文：诸葛亮开始不回答。
English: Zhuge Liang started not to answer.

古文：后乃共升高楼，因令去悌，谓亮曰： 今日上不至天，下不至地，言出子口而入吾耳，可以言未？ 
现代文：后来两人一起登上高楼，接着刘琦就要人拿走梯子，他对诸葛亮说： 今天顶上见不着天，下面见不着地，话从您口中说出就进了我的耳朵，您可以讲了吗？ 
English: Later, the two of them ascended a tall building together, and then Liu Yao asked someone to take away the ladder. He said to Zhuge Liang: "Today, you can't see the sky from the top, and you can't see the ground from below. The words that come out of your mouth enter my ears. Can you speak?"

古文：亮曰： 君不见申生在内而危，重耳居外而安乎？ 
现代文：诸葛亮说： 您没有看到申生在国内反而危险，重耳居住国外反而安全吗？ 
English: Zhuge Liang said, "Don't you see that Shen Sheng is dangerous at home, but it is safe to live abroad?

古文：琦意感悟，阴规出计。会表将江夏太守黄祖为孙权所杀，琦遂求代其任。
现代文：刘琦心中感悟，暗中谋划出去的办法，正好刘表部将江夏太守黄祖被孙权杀死，刘琦就要求接任这个职位。
English: Liu Bei was impressed and secretly plotted a way out. It just so happened that Liu Bei's subordinate, Huang Zu, was killed by Sun Quan, and Liu Bei asked to take over this position.

古文：及表病甚，琦归省疾，素慈孝，允等恐其见表而父子相感，更有托后之意，乃谓琦曰： 将军命君抚临江夏，其任至重。
现代文：到刘表病重时，刘琦回来探视疾病。由于刘琦素性仁慈孝顺，张允等人害怕他见到刘表以后两人动了父子之情，刘表重新有让他继位的意思，就对刘琦说： 将军命令您统理江夏，这责任至关重大。
English: When Liu Biao fell seriously ill, Liu Hui came back to visit him. Because Liu Biao was kind and dutiful, Zhang Yun and others were afraid of him. After seeing Liu Biao, the two were moved by a father-son relationship. Liu Biao once again had the intention of letting him succeed, and said to Liu Hui: The general ordered you to manage Jiangxia, and this responsibility is crucial.

古文：今释众擅来，必见谴怒。
现代文：现在您丢下部众擅自前来，一定会受到怒责。
English: Now that you have left your subordinates and come here without permission, you are sure to be scolded.

古文：伤亲之欢，重增其疾，非孝敬之道也。 
现代文：破坏父亲的兴致，加重他的疾病，这不合孝敬的道理。 
English: It is not in keeping with the principle of filial piety to spoil the father's enjoyment and aggravate his illness.

古文：遂遏于户外，使不得见。
现代文：于是将他挡在门外，不让他见到刘表。
English: So he blocked him from the door and did not let him see Liu Biao.

古文：琦流涕而去，人众闻而伤焉。
现代文：刘琦流着眼泪离去，许多人听到后都为之伤叹。
English: Liu Ye left with tears streaming down his face, and many people were heartbroken after hearing the news.

古文：遂以琮为嗣。
现代文：这样就以刘琮继位。
English: In this way, Liu Bei succeeded to the throne.

古文：琮以侯印授琦。琦怒，投之地，将因奔丧作难。
现代文：刘琮以诸侯印授给刘琦，刘琦发怒，将印摔到地上，准备藉奔丧发难。
English: Liu Bei awarded Liu Bei with the seal of the princes. Liu Bei became angry and threw the seal to the ground, preparing to use the occasion to launch an attack.

古文：会曹操军至新野，琦走江南。
现代文：恰好曹操大军到达新野，刘琦逃奔江南。
English: Just as Cao Cao's army arrived in Xinye, Liu Bei fled south of the Yangtze River.

古文：蒯越、韩嵩及东曹掾傅巽等说琮归降。
现代文：蒯越、韩嵩以及东曹掾傅巽等人劝说刘琮归顺投降曹操。
English: Yu Yue, Han Song and Dong Cao Yan Fu Yao and others persuaded Liu Yao to surrender to Cao Cao.

古文：琮曰： 今与诸君据全楚之地，守先君之业，以观天下，何为不可？ 
现代文：刘琮说： 现在与各位拥有整个楚国的地盘，保住先君的事业，用来观望天下局势，为什么不可以呢？ 
English: Liu Wei said: Now that you and I own the entire territory of Chu, why can't we keep your father's business and use it to observe the situation in the world?

古文：巽曰： 逆顺有大体，强弱有定势。
现代文：傅巽说： 反叛和归顺存在重要的原则，强大和弱小存在确定的形势。
English: Fu Rong said: Rebellion and submission exist as important principles, strong and weak exist as determined situations.

古文：以人臣而拒人主，逆道也；以新造之楚而御中国，必危也；以刘备而敌曹公，不当也。
现代文：以人臣的身份去同天子对抗，这是悖逆之道；凭藉刚刚创成的楚地去抵挡中央大国，必定危险；为了刘备而同曹公敌对，不值得。
English: To confront the Son of Heaven as a vassal is a way of disobedience; to resist the Central Powers with the newly-created Chu Di is bound to be dangerous; it is not worth antagonizing Cao Gong for the sake of Liu Bei.

古文：三者皆短，欲以抗王师之锋，必亡之道也。
现代文：这三方面都是短处，而想以此抵挡王师的兵锋，这是必然灭亡的道路。
English: These three aspects are all shortcomings, and if you want to use them to resist Wang Shi's army, this is the inevitable road to ruin.

古文：将军自料何与刘备？ 
现代文：将军自己估计同刘备相比怎样？ 
English: How does the general compare with Liu Bei in his own estimation?

古文：琮曰： 不若也。 
现代文：刘琮说： 我不如他。 
English: Liu Wei said: I am not as good as him.

古文：巽曰： 诚以刘备不足御曹公，则虽全楚不能以自存也。
现代文：傅巽说： 如果凭刘备的能力都不足以抵挡曹公，那么即使拥有整个楚地也不能保住自己。
English: Fu Yao said: If Liu Bei's ability is not enough to resist Cao Gong, then even if he owns the whole of Chu Di, he cannot protect himself.

古文：诚以刘备足御曹公，则备不为将军下也。
现代文：要是刘备足以抵挡曹公，那么刘备不会在您手下了。
English: If Liu Bei is strong enough to resist Cao Gong, then Liu Bei will not be under your control.

古文：愿将军勿疑。 
现代文：希望将军不要怀疑。 
English: I hope the general doesn't have any doubts.

古文：及操军到襄阳，琮举州请降，刘备奔夏口。
现代文：等到曹操的军队到达襄阳，刘琮以整个荆州请求投降，刘备奔往夏口。
English: When Cao Cao's army arrived in Xiangyang, Liu Bei requested the surrender of the whole of Jingzhou, and Liu Bei rushed to Xiakou.

古文：操以琮为青州刺史，封列侯。
现代文：曹操任命刘琮为青州刺史，封他为列侯。
English: Cao Cao appointed Liu Ye as the governor of Qingzhou and made him a vassal lord.

古文：蒯越等侯者十五人。
现代文：蒯越等十五人被封为侯。
English: Fifteen people were given the title of feudal lord, from the great general Hao Yue on down.

古文：乃释嵩之囚，以其名重，甚加礼待，使条品州人优劣，皆擢而用之。
现代文：接着曹操将韩嵩从囚牢中放出来，由于他的名望很高，所以对他特别以礼相待，要他列举品评荆州的人才好坏，他所推举的都被提拔任用。
English: Next, Cao Cao released Han Song from prison. Because of his high reputation, he treated him with special courtesy and asked him to list the talents of Jingzhou, and all of them were promoted.

古文：以嵩为大鸿胪，以交友礼待之。
现代文：任命韩嵩为大鸿胪，以朋友相处的礼节对待他。
English: He appointed Han Song as a great magnate and treated him with the courtesy of a friend.

古文：蒯越光禄勋，刘先尚书令。
现代文：任命蒯越为光禄勋，刘先为尚书令。
English: He appointed Gong Yue as Guanglu Hon and Liu Xian as Shang Shuling.

古文：初，表之结袁绍也，侍中从事邓义谏不听。义以疾退，终表世不仕，操以为侍中，其余多至大官。
现代文：起初，刘表同袁绍结交，侍中从事邓义加以劝阻，刘表不听，邓义藉口生病告退，在刘表活着时一直没有做官，曹操任命他为侍中。其他人不少都做到大官。
English: At first, Liu Biao made friends with Yuan Shao. The attendants tried to dissuade him from engaging in Deng Yi, but Liu Biao did not listen. Deng Yi resigned on the pretext of illness. When Liu Biao was alive, he had never been an official. Cao Cao appointed him as an attendant. Many others have become high-ranking officials.

古文：操后败于赤壁，刘备表琦为荆州刺史。
现代文：曹操后来在赤壁战败，刘备上书推举刘琦做荆史。
English: Cao Cao was later defeated in the Battle of Chibi, and Liu Bei wrote a letter recommending Liu Bei as the successor.

古文：明年卒。
现代文：第二年去世。
English: He died the following year.

古文：论曰： 袁绍初以豪侠得众，遂怀雄霸之图，天下胜兵举旗者，莫不假以为名。
现代文：论曰：袁绍最初由于豪放侠义得到许多人，于是心怀称雄为霸的意图，天下凡能当兵上阵高举大旗的人，全都打着袁氏的名义。
English: It is said that: Yuan Shao initially gained many people due to his bravery and chivalry, so he had the intention of calling himself a tyrant. Everyone in the world who can go into battle and raise a big flag is in the name of the Yuan clan.

古文：及临场决敌，则悍夫争命；深筹高议，则智士倾心。
现代文：及至到战场上同敌人决战，勇悍的人就为他拚命；帷幄中深谋远虑，有智识的人就会为他尽心筹划。
English: When he comes to the battle, the valiant will fight for him, and the prudent will devise plans for him.

古文：盛哉乎，其所资也！
现代文：他所凭藉的条件是多么强大啊！
English: How powerful are the conditions on which he relies!

古文：《韩非》曰： 佷刚而不和，愎过而好胜，嫡子轻而庶子重，斯之谓亡征。 
现代文：韩非说： 凶狠刚猛而不温和，对于错误一意孤行而喜欢争强斗胜，轻视嫡妻所生的儿子而看重庶出的儿子，逭可以说是灭亡的征兆。 
English: Han Fei said: "He is fierce and tough, but not gentle; he likes to fight and win over mistakes; he despises the son born by his legitimate wife, but values the son born out of wedlock; he can be said to be a sign of doom.

古文：刘表道不相越，而欲卧收天运，拟踪三分，其犹木禺之于人也。
现代文：刘表的道德没有超出其他人，但想躺着收取上天的命数，仿效三分天下，这简直像木偶人一样地愚蠢。
English: Liu Biao's morality is not superior to others, but he wants to lie down and receive the number of God's life, and imitate the three points of the world, which is just as stupid as a puppet.

古文：选曰：绍姿弘雅，表亦长者。
现代文：赞曰：袁绍容貌宽宏雅致，刘表也算忠厚长者。
English: Zang said: Yuan Shao's appearance is broad and elegant, and Liu Biao is also a loyal elder.

古文：称雄河外，擅强南夏。
现代文：一个在黄河以北称雄，一个在中原的南部逞强。
English: One is dominant north of the Yellow River, while the other is strong in the southern part of the Central Plains.

古文：鱼俪汉舳，云屯冀马。
现代文：汉水的战船密得像鱼群一样连贯，冀州的战马多得像云层一样聚合。
English: The warships of Hanshui are as dense and coherent as a shoal of fish, and the war horses of Jizhou are as numerous as clouds.

古文：窥图讯鼎，禋天类社。既云天工，亦资人亮。
现代文：由此想窥伺图谶，问鼎王位，里祀上天，类祭社神，虽然说出于天意，但也凭藉人的信义。
English: From this, we can surmise that the throne-worshipping, heaven-worshipping, shrine-sacrificing deities, although said to be divinely inspired, also rely on people's faithfulness.

古文：矜强少成，坐谈奚望。
现代文：自恃强大的人少有成功，坐着清谈的人能指望什么？
English: Those who think they are strong rarely succeed. What can those who sit and talk expect?

古文：回皇冢嬖，身穨业丧。
现代文：在嫡子和宠爱之间抉择不定，所以造成身败名裂，事业覆灭。
English: In the choice between the legitimate son and the favorite, it is uncertain, so it caused the loss of reputation and the ruin of the cause.

