古文：郗司空在北府，桓宣武忌其握兵。
现代文：译文东晋郗愔任司空，驻在北府，桓温对他掌握兵权十分忌恨。
English: Translated text: Dong Jinjun was assigned to the position of Siku, stationed in Beifu, and Kuan Wen was very jealous of him holding military power.

古文：郗遣笺诣桓，子嘉宾出行于道上，闻之，急取笺视， 方欲共奖王室，修复园陵。 
现代文：一次郗愔写了一封便笺托人送给桓温。这时他的儿子郗超听说这件事，急忙追上正在路上的送信人，取出信来，看到上面写着：我要同您共同为王室出力，收复失地，重修陵寝云云。
English: Once upon a time, there was a letter written by a trustee to Kuan Wen. At that time, his son, Zou Chao, heard about the matter, hurried to catch up with the sender who was on the road, took out the letter, and saw that it said: I want to work with you for the royal family, recover the lost land, and rebuild the mausoleum.

古文：乃寸寸毁裂，归更作笺，自陈老病不堪人间，欲乞闲地自养。
现代文：郗超将信撕掉，回去代父亲重写一封，自称身患旧病，不能忍受世间的繁杂事务，希望得到一块闲地，来颐养天年。
English: Gong Chao tore up the letter and went back to rewrite it on behalf of his father. He said that he was suffering from an old disease and could not bear the complicated affairs of the world. He hoped to get a piece of idle land to raise his family.

古文：桓得笺大喜，即转郗公为会稽太守。
现代文：桓温看到信后喜出望外，趁机把郗愔转为会稽太守。
English: When Kan-Wen saw the letter, he was overjoyed and took advantage of the opportunity to transform Zou into the grand steward of the association.

古文：超党于桓，非肖子也，然为父画免祸之策，不可谓非智。
现代文：评译郗超与桓温暗里勾结，看似是不孝之子，但却给父亲策划了免遭祸患的计谋，这不能说不机智。
English: Commentary and translation: Zou Chao and Kan Wen secretly colluded, seemingly being unfilial sons, but they planned a plan to save their father from disaster, which can not be said to be witty.

古文：后超病将死，缄一箧文书，属其家人： 父若哀痛，以此呈之。 
现代文：后来郗超病重快死时，收拾了一箱书信文札，嘱咐家人说： 我父亲若悲哀太过，就把这些拿给他看。 
English: Later, when Gong was very ill and about to die, he packed up a box of letters and cards and told his family members: "If my father is too sad, show him these."

古文：父后哭超过哀，乃发箧睹稿，皆与桓谋逆语，怒曰： 死晚矣。 
现代文：郗超死后，他的父亲郗愔哀痛得无法自制，家人就开箱给他看儿子的遗物，结果里面全是与桓温谋划叛逆的内容。郗愔看后勃然大怒，骂道： 逆子，你死得太晚了！ 
English: After Gong Chao's death, his father, Gong Chao, was so grief-stricken that he could not control himself. His family opened the box to show him his son's relics, and it turned out that they were all about planning a rebellion with Huan Wen. After seeing them, Gong Chao flew into a rage and cursed, "Traitor, you died too late!"

古文：遂止。
现代文：并立即止住了悲哀。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：夫身死而犹能以术止父之哀，是亦智也。
现代文：郗超死后还能用办法制止父亲的哀痛，这真是很聪明的呀。
English: It's really clever that Hao Chao can still use methods to stop his father's grief after his death.

古文：然人臣之义，则宁为愔之愚，勿为超之智。
现代文：但做人臣的道德，宁肯像郗愔那样愚蠢，也不要学郗超这样的聪明。
English: But the moral of being a courtier is that one would rather be as stupid as Gong Chao than be as clever as Gong Chao.

