古文：十七年冬，公使太子伐东山。
现代文：公元前年冬天，晋献公派太子申生讨伐东山皋落狄。
English: In the winter of the year before the Common Era, the prince of the Jin Dynasty, Shen Sheng, led a crusade against the Dongshan Emperor.

古文：里克谏曰： 臣闻皋落氏将战，君其释申生也！ 
现代文：里克劝谏说： 我听说皋落狄人将拼死作战，国君还是不要派申生去冒险吧！ 
English: Rick said, "I've heard that the Zoroastrians will fight to the death, so don't send Shen Sheng to risk it!"

古文：公曰： 行也！ 
现代文：献公说： 让他去！ 
English: The devotee said: Let him go!

古文：里克对曰： 非故也。
现代文：里克回答说： 这不是过去的成例。
English: Rick replied: "It's not a thing of the past.

古文：君行，太子居，以监国也；君行，太子从，以抚军也。
现代文：过去国君出征，让太子留守，以监护国家；或者国君出征，让太子同行，以抚慰军心。
English: In the past, when the sovereign went to war, the crown prince stayed behind to be the guardian of the country; or when the sovereign went to war, the crown prince went along to soothe the soldiers' hearts.

古文：今君居，太子行，未有此也。 
现代文：如今您留守本国，却让太子出征，没有这样的安排。 
English: Now you are staying in your home country, but letting the crown prince go to war. There is no such arrangement.

古文：公曰： 非子之所知也。
现代文：献公说： 这不是你所知道的。
English: "It's not what you know," the deacon said.

古文：寡人闻之，立太子之道三：身钧以年，年同以爱，爱疑决之以卜、筮。
现代文：我听说，立太子的原则有三条：德行相同时根据年龄长幼来决定，年龄相同时根据国君的喜爱程度来决定，喜爱谁还有疑惑时根据卜筮的结果来决定。
English: I have heard that there are three principles for appointing a crown prince: the age of the eldest son should be taken into account, the age of the youngest son should be taken into account, and the degree to which the prince is loved should be taken into account. If there is any doubt as to who the prince is loved by, it should be taken into account according to the results of divination.

古文：子无谋吾父子之间，吾以此观之。 
现代文：你不必为我们的父子关系费心，我要通过这次出征来观察太子的能力。 
English: You don't have to worry about our father-son relationship. I'm going on this trip to observe the capabilities of the crown prince.

古文：公不说。
现代文：献公不高兴。
English: I'm not happy with my dedication.

古文：里克退，见太子。
现代文：里克退下后，遇见太子。
English: After Rick retreated, he met the crown prince.

古文：太子曰： 君赐我以偏衣、金玦，何也？ 
现代文：太子问： 父君赐给我偏衣和金玦，这是为什么？ 
English: The prince asked: My father gave me a robe and a golden scepter. Why?

古文：里克曰： 孺子惧乎？
现代文：里克说： 你害怕了吗？
English: Rick said: Are you scared?

古文：衣躬之偏，而握金玦，令不偷矣。
现代文：国君让你穿偏衣，握金玦，说明对你不薄。
English: If the sovereign lets you wear skimpy clothes and hold a golden scepter, it means that you are not too thin.

古文：孺子何惧？
现代文：你有什么害怕的！
English: You have nothing to fear!

古文：夫为人子者，惧不孝，不惧不得。
现代文：做儿子的，只怕不能尽孝，不怕不能继位。
English: If you are a son, don't be afraid of not being able to fulfill your filial duty, or of not being able to succeed to the throne.

古文：且吾闻之曰： 敬贤于请。 
现代文：况且我听说： 恭敬胜于请求。 
English: Besides, I've heard: Respect is better than requests.

古文：孺子勉之乎！ 
现代文：你还是努力孝敬国君吧。 
English: You should still make an effort to show your filial piety.

古文：君子曰： 善处父子之间矣。 
现代文：有识之士说： 里克善于处理父子之间的关系。 
English: An insider said: "Rick is good at handling father-son relationships.

古文：太子遂行，狐突御戎，先友为右，衣偏衣而佩金玦。出而告先友曰： 君与我此，何也？ 
现代文：太子于是出征，狐突掌驭兵车，先友担任车右。太子身上穿着偏衣，佩戴着金玦，离开国都后对先友说： 国君赐给我这些东西，意味着什么呢？ 
English: The prince then set out on a campaign, Foxtrot driving the chariot, and his former friend on the right. The prince was wearing a tunic and a golden sash. After leaving the capital, he said to his former friend: What does it mean that the sovereign has given me these things?

古文：先友曰： 中分而金玦之权，在此行也。孺子勉之乎！ 
现代文：先友答道： 意味着在这次出征中你分得了一半君权，可以用金玦来决断大事，你好自为之吧！ 
English: The former friend replied, "It means that in this expedition you have gained half of the royal power, and you can use the golden scepter to decide important matters. You are welcome to do so!"

古文：狐突叹曰： 以庞衣纯，而玦之以金铣者，寒之甚矣，胡可恃也？
现代文：狐突则叹息道： 拿杂色的衣服让纯正的人穿，用寒冷的金属来分离人心，冷酷极了，还有什么可以依赖的？
English: Foxtrot sighed and said, "Taking clothes of mixed colors and making pure people wear them, and using cold metal to separate people's hearts is extremely cruel. What else can we rely on?

古文：虽勉之，狄可尽乎？ 
现代文：即使太子努力作战，狄人能全部消灭吗？ 
English: Even if the prince fights hard, can the Di people be completely eliminated?

古文：先友曰： 衣躬之偏，握兵之要，在此行也，勉之而已矣。
现代文：先友说： 穿着偏衣，执掌着军队的指挥权，太子在这次出征中，努力作战就可以了。
English: The former friend said: "Dressed in formal attire and holding the command of the army, the prince can only fight hard in this expedition.

古文：偏躬无慝，兵要远灾，亲以无灾，又何患焉？ 
现代文：国君给你偏衣并无恶意，让你掌握兵权可以远离灾害，既无恶意又远离灾害，你还有什么可担忧的呢？ 
English: There is no malice in the fact that the sovereign gives you a choice of clothing, and letting you hold military power can keep you away from disasters. There is no malice and you are away from disasters. What else do you have to worry about?

古文：至于稷桑，狄人出逆，申生欲战。狐突谏曰： 不可。
现代文：到了稷桑，狄人出兵迎战。申生打算进攻，狐突劝告说： 不行。
English: When they arrived at Xingsang, the Di people sent troops to fight. Shen Sheng planned to attack, and Foxtrot advised: "No.

古文：突闻之：国君好艾，大夫殆；好内，适子殆，社稷危。
现代文：我听说，国君喜欢宠臣，大夫就危险；国君喜欢女色，太子就危险，国家将遭难。
English: I have heard that if the sovereign likes a favorite, the doctor will be in danger; if the sovereign likes a woman, the prince will be in danger, and the country will suffer.

古文：若惠于父而远于死，惠于众而利社稷，其可以图之乎？
现代文：如果你顺从父亲的意愿让奚齐做太子可以远离死亡，顺从民心不打仗可以有利于国家，何不考虑一下呢？
English: If you obey your father's wishes to make Ruqi the crown prince, you can stay away from death. If you obey the people's will not to fight, it can benefit the country. Why not consider it?

古文：况其危身于狄以起谗于内也？ 申生曰： 不可。
现代文：再说你在狄人的国土上冒危险，而国内却已经出现针对你的谗言了。 申生说： 不能这样做。
English: Besides, you are risking your life in the Di people's land, and there is already criticism against you at home. Shen Sheng said: You can't do that.

古文：君之使我，非欢也，抑欲测吾心也。
现代文：国君派我讨伐东山，不是喜欢我，而是想探测我的心思。
English: The Emperor sent me to fight Dongshan, not because he liked me, but to probe my mind.

古文：是故赐我奇服，而告我权。
现代文：所以才赐给我偏衣，又给了我金玦，临行前还说了些好话。
English: That's why he gave me a special robe, a golden scepter, and spoke kind words to me before I left.

古文：又有甘言焉。
现代文：说的话太甜，骨子里一定苦。
English: What you say is too sweet, it must be bitter in your bones.

古文：言之大甘，其中必苦。
现代文：谗言起于宫廷，说明父君对我已生疑心。
English: The rumor started in the court, which means that my father is already suspicious of me.

古文：谮在中矣，君故生心。
现代文：就像木蠹啃吃树心，我怎能逃避它呢？
English: Like a woodlouse eating the heart of a tree, how can I escape it?

古文：虽蝎谮，焉避之？不若战也。
现代文：不如拼死一战。不战而回，我的罪就更大了。
English: It's better to fight to the death. If I go back without a fight, my sin will be even greater.

古文：不战而反，我罪滋厚；我战死，犹有令名焉。 
现代文：我战死的话，还可以有一个孝敬的好名声。 
English: If I die in battle, I can still have a good reputation for filial piety.

古文：果败狄于稷桑而反。
现代文：申生果然在稷桑打败了狄人然后回国。
English: Shen Sheng defeated Di Ren in Xinsang and then returned to China.

古文：谗言益起，狐突杜门不出。
现代文：这时谗言更加风起，狐突闭门不出。
English: At this time, the gossip became more popular, and Foxtrot did not close the door.

古文：君子曰： 善深谋也。 
现代文：有识之士说： 狐突善于深谋远虑。 
English: A person with insight said: Foxtrot is good at forethought.

