古文：严武，中书侍郎挺之子也。
现代文：严武，中书侍郎挺之的儿子。
English: Yan Wu, the son of the Chinese scribe Tange.

古文：神气隽爽，敏于闻见。
现代文：神气隽爽，机敏聪慧。
English: Brash, quick-witted and intelligent.

古文：幼有成人之风，读书不究精义，涉猎而已。
现代文：在幼年时便有成人的风范，读书时不追求精义，浏览而已。
English: At a young age, they have the demeanor of an adult. When reading, they don't pursue the essence, they just browse.

古文：弱冠以门廕策名，陇右节度使哥舒翰奏充判官，迁侍御史。
现代文：二十岁时因门荫关系封官职，陇右节度使哥舒翰上奏任其为判官，升侍御史。
English: At the age of twenty, he was appointed to an official position due to a family connection, and the right-hand scepter made his brother Shuhan ascend to the throne and appointed him as a judge, and he was promoted to the position of imperial historian.

古文：至德初，肃宗兴师靖难，大收才杰，武杖节赴行在。
现代文：至德初年，肃宗兴兵平定国难，广收具有才能的人才，武杖节赶赴。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, Su Zong Xing Bing settled the national difficulties, recruited talented people, and rushed to the Wudang Festival.

古文：宰相房琯以武名臣之子，素重之，及是，首荐才略可称，累迁给事中。
现代文：宰相房认为武为名臣的儿子，素来器重他。此时，以其具有才略可用，因而第一个推荐他，多次升为给事中。
English: The Prime Minister's Office thought that Wu was the son of a famous minister and had always respected him. At this time, he was the first to recommend him because of his talent, and he was promoted several times.

古文：既收长安，以武为京兆少尹、兼御史中丞，时年三十二。
现代文：收复长安，任武为京兆少尹，兼任御史中丞，此时年龄为三十二岁。
English: He was thirty-two years old when he recovered Chang'an and was appointed as Jingzhao Shao Yin and concurrently as Goshi Chujo.

古文：以史思明阻兵不之官，优游京师，颇自矜大。
现代文：由于史思明阻碍兵马不能去任职，在京师优游自得，非常矜持傲慢。
English: Due to the fact that Shi Siming hindered the soldiers and horses from being able to serve, in Beijing, Shi Youyou was self-satisfied, very reserved and arrogant.

古文：出为绵州刺史，迁剑南东川节度使；入为太子宾客、兼御史中丞。
现代文：出朝任绵州刺史，升为剑南东川节度使；入朝为太子宾客，兼任御史中丞。
English: Entered the imperial court as a historian of Mianzhou and rose to the position of Jiannan Dongchuan Sect envoy; entered the imperial court as a guest of the crown prince and concurrently held the position of vice-chancellor of history.

古文：上皇诰以剑两川合为一道，拜武成都尹、兼御史大夫，充剑南节度使；入为太子宾客，迁京兆尹、兼御史大夫。
现代文：皇上诏诰将剑南两川合为一起，升武为成都尹、兼御史大夫，充任剑南节度使；入朝为太子宾客，升为京兆尹、兼御史大夫。
English: Emperor Zhaozong combined the two rivers of Jianan, and promoted Wu to Chengdu Yin and Grand Historian, serving as the Jianan Festival envoy; he entered the court as the prince's guest, and was promoted to Beijing Zhaoyun and Grand Historian.

古文：二圣山陵，以武为桥道使。
现代文：二圣山陵，任武为桥道使。
English: The Second Holy Mountain Mausoleum, Renwu was appointed as the bridge road envoy.

古文：无何，罢兼御史大夫，改吏部侍郎，寻迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：不久，免去兼御史大夫之职，改任吏部侍郎，不久升为黄门侍郎。
English: Soon, he was relieved of his duties as a doctor of history and was appointed as a chamberlain of the cadre department, and soon he was promoted to a chamberlain of the Yellow Gate.

古文：与宰臣元载深相结托，冀其引在同列。
现代文：与宰相元载结交深厚，希望元载能引荐处于同一官列。
English: He has a deep friendship with Prime Minister Motosho, and hopes that Motosho will be able to recommend him to be in the same rank.

古文：事未行，求为方面，复拜成都尹，充剑南节度等使。
现代文：事情没有如愿，请求任地方官，又升为成都尹，充任剑南节度等使职。
English: However, things did not go as planned. He asked to be appointed as a local official, and was promoted to Chengdu Yin, and was assigned to the Jiannan Festival and other duties.

古文：广德二年，破吐蕃七万余众，拔当狗城。
现代文：广德二年，打败吐蕃七万多人，攻占当狗城。
English: In the second year of Guangde, he defeated more than 70,000 people in Tubo and captured Dangucheng.

古文：十月，取盐川城，加检校吏部尚书，封郑国公。
现代文：十月，占领监川城，加授检校吏部尚书，封为郑国公。
English: In October, he occupied Guanchuancheng, and was awarded the title of Zheng Guogong.

古文：前后在蜀累年，肆志逞欲，恣行猛政。
现代文：前后在蜀多年，为所欲为，大肆施行猛政。
English: He has been in Shu for many years, doing as he pleases and implementing brutal policies.

古文：梓州刺史章彝初为武判官，及是小不副意，赴成都杖杀之，由是威震一方。
现代文：梓州刺史章彝当初是武的判官，此时因稍不符合意愿，到成都将其杖杀，由于这而威震一方。
English: Zizhou assassin Zhang Ye was originally a military judge, at this time, because of a slight disagreement with his wishes, he went to Chengdu to kill him with a cane, and because of this, he was a powerful side.

古文：蜀土颇饶珍产，武穷极奢靡，赏赐无度，或由一言赏至百万。
现代文：蜀地珍稀物品很多，武奢侈荒靡穷极，赏赐无度，有时因一句话而赏赐达百万。
English: There are many rare items in Shunde. The extravagance of martial arts is at its peak. The rewards are boundless, sometimes reaching millions for a single sentence.

古文：蜀方闾里以征敛殆至匮竭，然蕃虏亦不敢犯境。
现代文：蜀地因大肆征敛财物匮乏，然而蕃虏也不敢进犯。
English: Due to the large-scale collection of wealth, Shu was in a state of scarcity. However, the invaders did not dare to attack.

古文：而性本狂荡，视事多率胸臆，虽慈母言不之顾。
现代文：武性格狂荡，看事多根据自己意愿，虽然其慈母劝说也不顾。
English: Wu's personality is wild, seeing things more according to his own wishes, although he does not care about his mother's persuasion.

古文：初为剑南节度使，旧相房琯出为管内刺史，琯于武有荐导之恩，武骄倨，见琯略无朝礼，甚为时议所贬。
现代文：当初任剑南节度使时，旧相房出朝为管内刺史，对武有推荐引导的恩情，而武以傲自居，见到一点也没有朝廷礼节，非常被当时人们议论所贬。
English: At first, when he was appointed as an envoy to the Jian'nan Festival, the old photo studio was used to record the history of the imperial court. He recommended and guided Wu, and Wu was proud of himself. He saw that there was no court etiquette at all, which was highly criticized by people at the time.

古文：永泰元年四月，以疾终，时年四十。
现代文：永泰元年四月，患病死，终年四十岁。
English: In April of the first year of Yongtai, he died of illness, at the age of forty.

古文：郭英乂，先朝陇右节度使、左羽林军将军知运之季子也。少以父业，习知武艺，策名河、陇间，以军功累迁诸卫员外将军。
现代文：郭英乂，是先朝陇右节度使、左羽林军将军知运的季子，年少时继承父亲家业，学习武艺，在河、陇期间受封，凭借军功多次升为诸卫员外将军。
English: Guo Yingtao was the second son of the first emperor's right sectional envoy and the general of the left feather forest army. When he was young, he inherited his father's family business, studied martial arts, received a title during the He period and the He period, and was promoted to the general of the guards several times by virtue of his military service.

古文：至德初，肃宗兴师朔野，英乂以将门子特见任用，迁陇右节度使、兼御史中丞。
现代文：至德初年，肃宗在朔兴兵，英乂由于是出自将门被任用，升为陇右节度使、兼御史中丞。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, Su Zong was in Shuo Xingbing, and Ying Zang was appointed as the right-hand sectional envoy, and also as the middle-ranking officer of the imperial historian, because he was from the generals.

古文：既收二京，征还阙下，掌禁兵。
现代文：收复二京后，回到京都，掌管禁兵。
English: After the recapture of the Second Capital, he returned to Kyoto and took charge of the Imperial Army.

古文：迁羽林军大将军，加特进。
现代文：升为羽林军大将军，加授特进。
English: He was promoted to the rank of General of the Ulin Army, and was given a special promotion.

古文：以家艰去职。
现代文：由于家中丧事免职。
English: He was relieved of his duties due to a death in the family.

古文：朝廷方讨史思明，选任将帅，乃起英乂为陕州刺史，充陕西节度、潼关防御等使，寻加御史大夫，兼神策军节度。
现代文：朝廷将要征讨史思明，选任将帅，于是起用英乂任陕州刺史，充任陕西节度、潼关防御等使，不久加授御史大夫，兼任神策军节度使。
English: The imperial court was going to recruit Shi Siming and appoint him as a general, so they appointed Ying Zhen as the Shaanxi governor, the Shaanxi festival, and the defense of Shaoguan, and soon he was awarded the title of goshi daifu, and also served as the Shen Zhejun festival envoy.

古文：代宗即位，加检校户部尚书、兼御史大夫。
现代文：代宗即位，加授检校户部尚书、兼御史大夫。
English: Daizong ascended to the throne, and was additionally awarded the title of Kengakko (inspector of schools), Shosho (head of the Household Division), and also goshi daifu (chief historian).

古文：元帅雍王自陕统诸军讨贼洛阳，留英乂在陕为后殿。
现代文：元帅雍王在陕统率各军在洛阳讨伐贼军，留下英乂在陕任后殿。
English: Marshal Yong Wang led all the armies in Luoyang to fight against the invaders, leaving Ying Qi in Shaanxi as a rear admiral.

古文：东都平，以英乂权为东都留守。
现代文：东都平定后，英乂以其权势任东都留守。
English: After the pacification of the eastern capital, Ying Zheng used his power to keep the eastern capital.

古文：既至东都，不能禁暴，纵麾下兵与朔方、回纥之众大掠都城，延及郑、汝等州，比屋荡尽。
现代文：到了东都，不能制止暴行，纵容手下兵士与朔方、回纥之众大肆掠夺都城，波及郑、汝等州，众多房屋抢掠一空。
English: When he arrived in Dongdu, he was unable to stop the violence, and allowed his soldiers to plunder the capital city with the Shuo and Hui armies. This affected Zheng, Ru and other prefectures, and many houses were looted.

古文：广德元年，策勋加实封二百户，征拜尚书右仆射，封定襄郡王。
现代文：广德元年，授封加实封二百户，升为尚书右仆射，封为襄郡王。
English: In the first year of the Guangde era, he was awarded the title plus two hundred households, promoted to Shang Shuxu Rongfei, and crowned as the King of Xiang County.

古文：恃富而骄，于京城创起甲第，穷极奢靡。
现代文：仗恃富足而骄蛮，在京都修建豪华住宅，极度奢侈荒靡。
English: He was rich and arrogant, and he built luxurious houses in Kyoto, which were extremely extravagant.

古文：与宰臣元载交结，以久其权。
现代文：与宰相元载结好，以巩固自己权势。
English: He made a deal with the prime minister to consolidate his power.

古文：会剑南节度使严武卒，载以英乂代之，兼成都尹，充剑南节度使。
现代文：适逢剑南节度使严武死了，载使英乂代替他，兼任成都尹，充任剑南节度使。
English: At the time of the Jiannan Festival, Yan Wu died and was replaced by Ying Qi, who also served as Chengdu Yin and served as the Jiannan Festival envoy.

古文：既至成都，肆行不轨，无所忌惮。
现代文：到了成都，大行不轨之事，无所忌惮。
English: When he arrived in Chengdu, he had no qualms about committing major misdeeds.

古文：玄宗幸蜀时旧宫，置为道士观，内有玄宗铸金真容及乘舆侍卫图画。
现代文：玄宗幸驾蜀地时的旧宫，作为道士观，内置有玄宗铸金真容以及乘舆侍卫图画。
English: As a Taoist temple, the old palace of Emperor Xuanzong when he was lucky enough to come to Shoushu has the real image of Emperor Xuanzong cast in gold, as well as a picture of Emperor Xuanzong and his attendants.

古文：先是，节度使每至，皆先拜而后视事。
现代文：原来，节度使每次来时，都先供拜而后才办理公事。
English: It turned out that the time of the festival meant that every time they came, they first went to worship and then went about their business.

古文：英乂以观地形胜，乃入居之，其真容图画，悉遭毁坏。
现代文：英乂认为观的位置好，于是进入住在里面，其真容图画都遭到毁坏。
English: Ying Qi thought that the location of the observation was good, so he went to live inside, and his true-to-life pictures were all destroyed.

古文：见者无不愤怒，以军政苛酷，无敢发言。
现代文：见者没有不愤怒的，由于军政严酷，无人敢说。
English: No one who saw it was not outraged. Due to the harshness of the military regime, no one dared to speak out.

古文：又颇恣狂荡，聚女人骑驴击球，制钿驴鞍及诸服用，皆侈靡装饰，日费数万，以为笑乐。
现代文：英乂非常狂荡，聚集女人骑驴击乂，以钿制作驴鞍和各种衣服，全都是奢侈装饰，每天耗费数万，以此调笑为乐。
English: Yingluo is very wild, gathering women to ride donkeys and beat donkeys, using donkeys to make donkey saddles and all kinds of clothes, all of which are luxury decorations, costing tens of thousands every day, making fun of this.

古文：未尝问百姓间事，人颇怨之。
现代文：不曾询问百姓的事情，人们非常怨恨他。
English: There was a lot of resentment towards him for not consulting the people.

古文：又以西山兵马使崔旰得众心，屡抑之。
现代文：又由于西山兵马使崔旰得于人心，多次抑制他。
English: In addition, because the West Mountain soldiers and horses made Cui Gan popular, they restrained him many times.

古文：寻迁员外郎。会昌中，为谏议大夫。
现代文：旰凭借蜀人之怨恨，从西山率兵五千多人袭击成都，英乂出兵抵挡，其手下官兵全部反叛，反而攻打英乂。
English: Relying on the resentment of the Shu people, Yan attacked Chengdu with more than five thousand soldiers from Xishan, Yinglu sent troops to resist, and all his officers and soldiers rebelled and attacked Yinglu instead.

古文：确，字岳卿，颜，字希卿，位皆至尚书郎。严震，字遐闻，梓州盐亭人。
现代文：英乂逃到简州，普州刺史韩澄将英乂斩首，将首级送给旰，并杀了他的妻和子。严震，字遐闻，梓州盐亭人。
English: Ying Zhou fled to Jianzhou. Han Cheng, the governor of Puzhou, beheaded Ying Zhou, gave the head to Zou, and killed his wife and son. Yan Zhou, the author of the anecdote, was from Yanting, Zizhou.

古文：世为田家，以财雄于乡里。
现代文：世代为种田人家。凭借财物在乡里闻名。
English: They have been farmers for generations and are well known in the village for their wealth.

古文：至德、乾元已后，震屡出家财以助边军，授州长史、王府谘议参军。
现代文：至德、乾元以后，震多次拿出家财来资助驻边军队，授予州长史、王府咨议参军。
English: After Shide and Qianyuan, Zhen repeatedly took out his family wealth to fund the stationed troops, and granted the governor Shi and Wangfu the right to join the army.

古文：东川节度判官韦收荐震才用于节度使严武，遂授合州长史。
现代文：东川节度判官韦收向节度使严武推荐震的才能，于是授予合州长史。
English: The judge of the Dongchuan Festival, Wei Hui, recommended Yanwu's talent to the festival, and then awarded him the history of the governor.

古文：及严武移西川，署为押衙，改恆王府司马。
现代文：到了严武移兵西川，任为押衙，又改任恒王府司马。
English: When Yan Wu moved his army to the West River, he was appointed as an overseer, and he was also reappointed as the secretary of the Hengwang government.

古文：严武以宗姓之故，军府之事多以委之，又历试卫尉、太常少卿。
现代文：严武由于和震是同宗族的缘故，因而将军府中的事大多委托给他办理。又历任卫尉、太常少卿。
English: Due to the fact that Kazuchika was from the same clan as Yanbu, he was entrusted with handling most of the affairs in the general's office. He was also successively appointed to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guards and to the rank of Junior Secretary of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：严武卒，乃罢归。
现代文：严武死后，震于是免官还乡。
English: After Yan Wu's death, Zhen was dismissed from his post and returned to his hometown.

古文：东川节度使又奏为渝州刺史，以疾免。
现代文：东川节度使又上奏任他为渝州刺史，由于生病免去。
English: Due to illness, Dongchuan's chief of ceremonies, Dongchuan Jiedu, was relieved of his duties as Yuzhou's chief historian.

古文：山南西道节度使又奏为凤州刺史，加侍御史，丁母忧罢。
现代文：山南西道节度使又上奏任凤州刺史，加授侍御史，适逢母亲丧事免去。
English: Shannan West Road Festival Envoy was also appointed as Fengzhou stabbing history, and was additionally awarded as attendant history, coinciding with his mother's death.

古文：起复本官，仍充兴、凤两州团练使，累加开府仪同三司、兼御史中丞。
现代文：又恢复原职，仍任兴、凤两州团练使，多次加授开府仪同三司、兼御史中丞。
English: He was reinstated in his original position, and was still appointed as the regimental drill sergeant of the Xing and Feng regiments in the two states. He was also awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi and the title of Goshi Chujo several times.

古文：为政清严，兴利除害，远近称美。
现代文：为政清明严格，兴利除害，受到远近人们称赞。
English: It has been praised by people from near and far for its clear and strict politics and its efforts to eliminate harm.

古文：建中初，司勋郎中韦桢为山、剑黜陟使，荐震理行为山南第一，特赐上下考，封郧国公。
现代文：建中初年，司勋郎中韦桢任山、剑黜陟使，推荐震的理事及品行在山南为第一，皇上特别赐予上下考，封为郧国公。
English: In the first year of the middle school, Sisun Lang Zhongwei was appointed to the mountain, the sword and the messenger, the director of the recommendation shock and the moral conduct was the first in Shannan, the emperor specially granted the examination, and he was named the prince of Shandong.

古文：在凤州十四年，能政不渝。
现代文：在凤州十四年，具有才能公正严格不改。
English: In the past 14 years in Fengzhou, it has been able to be fair and strict.

古文：建中三年，代贾耽为梁州刺史、兼御史大夫、山南西道节度观察等使。
现代文：建中三年，替代贾耽任梁州刺史、兼御史大夫、山南西道节度观察等使。
English: In the third year of Jianzhong Middle School, he replaced Jia Tan as the envoy of Liangzhou Jishi, concurrently the envoy of Goshi, and the observer of the festival of Shannan West Road.

古文：及硃泚窃据京城，李怀光顿军咸阳，又与之连结。
现代文：等到朱氵此偷袭京城，李怀光在咸阳屯兵，与朱氵此配合。
English: When Zhu Xi sneaked into Beijing, Li Huaguang stationed troops in Xianyang and cooperated with Zhu Xi.

古文：泚令腹心穆庭光、宋瑗等赍白书诱震同叛，震集众斩庭光等。
现代文：氵此令心腹穆庭光、宋瑗等人带着白书引诱震一起反叛，震聚集众人将庭光等人杀死。
English: This prompted his henchmen Mu Tingguang, Song Tao and others to lure Zhen together with a white paper to rebel, and Zhen gathered everyone to kill Tingguang and others.

古文：时李怀光连贼，德宗欲移幸山南。
现代文：此时李怀光与贼军联合，德宗想转移到山南。
English: At this time, Li Huaiguang allied with the bandits, and Dezong wanted to move to Shannan.

古文：震既闻顺动，遣吏驰表往奉天迎驾，仍令大将张用诚领兵五千至盩厔已东迎护，上闻之喜。
现代文：震听说后马上行动，派遣官吏快马呈表到奉天迎接皇上，令大将张用诚率兵五千人到周至迎接护驾，皇上听说后很高兴。
English: After hearing of the earthquake, they immediately took action, dispatching officials to meet the emperor in Mukden, and ordering General Zhang Yicheng to lead five thousand soldiers to Zhouzi to meet the escort. The emperor was very happy after hearing the news.

古文：既而用诚为贼所诱，欲谋背逆，朝廷忧之。
现代文：不久用诚被贼军所引诱，想阴谋反叛，朝廷对他忧虑。
English: Soon after, Yoshinobu was lured by the bandits into plotting a rebellion, and the imperial court was worried about him.

古文：会震又遣牙将马勋奉表迎候，上临轩召勋与之语，勋对曰： 臣请计日至山南取节度使符召用诚，即不受召，臣当斩其首以复。 
现代文：此时震又派牙将马勋前来迎候，皇上临轩召勋对他说明此事，勋答道： 臣请求立刻去山南领取节度使符去召见用诚，如果不接受召见，臣就斩其首献上。 
English: At this time, Zhen again sent Tusk to meet Ma Xun, and Emperor Linxuan summoned Tusk to explain the matter to him. Tusk replied, "I request you to immediately go to Shannan to receive the festival envoy to summon Yoshinobu. If you do not accept the summons, I will behead you."

古文：上喜曰： 卿何日当至？ 
现代文：皇上高兴地说： 你什么时候回来？ 
English: The emperor said happily: When will you be back?

古文：勋克日时而奏，帝勉劳之。
现代文：勋约定时间，皇上勉励慰劳他。
English: At the appointed time, the emperor encouraged and consoled him.

古文：勋既得震符，乃请壮丁五人偕行。
现代文：勋得到震的符，于是请求以五名壮兵与他同行。
English: When he received the sign of the earthquake, he asked for five strong soldiers to accompany him.

古文：既出骆谷，用诚以勋未知其谋，乃以数百骑迎勋，勋与俱之传舍，用诚左右森然。
现代文：已经走出骆谷，用诚认为勋还不知道自己谋略，于是派数百名骑兵迎候勋，勋和同来兵士在驿舍休息，用诚左右侍卫威武森严。
English: Having already left Luogu, Yixing thought that Xun did not yet know his strategy, so he sent hundreds of cavalry to welcome Xun. Xun and the soldiers who had come with him rested in the pavilion, and Yixing was guarded by powerful warriors.

古文：勋先聚草发火于驿外，军士争附火。
现代文：勋先收集柴草在驿舍外点火燃烧，军士们都争着去扑灭。
English: The sergeants all scrambled to put out the fire, which was ignited by the foreman collecting firewood outside the hut.

古文：勋乃从容出怀中符示之曰： 大夫召君。 
现代文：勋于是不慌不忙从怀里拿出使符对用诚展示说： 大夫召见你。 
English: So Hun unhurriedly took out the messenger from his arms to show it to Yoshinobu and said, "The doctor is calling for you."

古文：用诚惶惧起走，壮士自背束手而擒之。
现代文：用诚慌忙起身想逃，壮兵从背后绑住他的手将其抓获。
English: He got up in a hurry and tried to escape, but the soldiers caught him by tying his hands behind his back.

古文：不虞用诚子居后，引刀斫勋，勋左右遽承其臂，刀下不甚，微伤勋首。
现代文：不料用诚的儿子从后面拔刀砍勋，勋的左右挡住他的手臂，刀落下不重，勋的头轻微受伤。
English: Unexpectedly, he used his son to pull out a knife from behind and cut him. The left and right sides of him blocked his arms. The knife did not fall heavily, and his head was slightly injured.

古文：遂格杀其子，而仆用诚于地。壮士跨其腹，以刃拟其喉曰： 出声即死！ 
现代文：于是杀死了他的儿子，将用诚摔在地上，壮兵坐在他肚子上，用刀尖抵住他的喉咙说： 出声即死！ 
English: So he killed his son, threw him to the ground with sincerity, sat a strong soldier on his stomach, held the tip of the knife against his throat and said: "Speak out and die!"

古文：勋即其营，军士已被甲执兵矣。
现代文：勋走近军营，军士们都已经披甲持刀。
English: When Xun approached the military camp, the sergeants were already wearing armor and carrying swords.

古文：勋大言曰： 汝等父母妻子皆在梁州，一朝弃之，欲从用诚反逆，有何利也？
现代文：勋大声说： 你们的父母都在梁州，今天舍弃他们，想跟从用诚反叛，有什么好处？
English: Xun said loudly: Your parents are both in Liangzhou, what is the benefit of abandoning them today and wanting to follow Yixin's rebellion?

古文：但灭汝族耳！
现代文：只有灭绝你们的宗族！
English: Only the extermination of your clan will do!

古文：大夫使我取张用诚，不问汝辈，欲何为乎？ 
现代文：大夫派我来抓张用诚，不涉及你们，你们还想干什么呢？ 
English: The doctor sent me to arrest Zhang Yixing. This does not involve you. What else do you want to do?

古文：众皆詟服。
现代文：众军士都害怕听从。
English: The sergeants were afraid to obey.

古文：于是缚用诚送州，震杖杀之，拔其副将，使率其众迎驾。
现代文：于是将用诚绑上押送到州，震将其乱棍打死，提拔他的副将，率领兵马去迎候皇上。
English: As a result, he was bound and escorted to the state, beaten to death with sticks, promoted to vice-general, and led the army to meet the emperor.

古文：勋以药封首驰赴行在，愆约半日，上颇忧之，及勋至，上喜动颜色。
现代文：勋率先骑马走在队伍前面，误差了半天，皇上非常担忧，等到勋赶来，皇上喜笑颜开。
English: Xun took the lead in riding in front of the team, a half-day's error. The emperor was very worried. When Xun arrived, the emperor was beaming with joy.

古文：翌日，车驾发奉天，及入骆谷，李怀光遣数百骑来袭，赖山南兵击之而退，舆驾无警急之患。
现代文：第二天，乘马车从奉天出发，等到进入骆谷，李怀光派数百名骑兵来袭击，依靠山南的兵马将敌兵击退，使皇上舆驾没有紧急时态的担忧。
English: On the second day, after departing from Fengtian by horse-drawn carriage and entering Luogu, Li Huaiguang sent hundreds of cavalry to attack, relying on the soldiers and horses of Shannan to repel the enemy soldiers, so that the emperor did not worry about the emergency time.

古文：寻加震检校户部尚书，赐实封二百户。
现代文：不久加授震为检校户部尚书，赐予实封二百户。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of inspector of schools, and 200 households were given real money.

古文：三月，德宗至梁州。
现代文：三月，德宗到梁州。
English: In March, Dezong went to Liangzhou.

古文：山南地贫，粮食难给，宰臣议请幸成都府。
现代文：山南此地贫困，粮食供给困难，宰臣商议恳请皇上去成都府。
English: Due to the poverty in this part of Shannan and the difficulty of grain supply, the Vice-Minister discussed and implored the Emperor to go to Chengdu.

古文：震奏曰： 山南地接京畿，李晟方图收复，藉六军声援。
现代文：震上奏说： 山南与京畿相接壤，李晟正在图谋收复，凭借六军的声援。
English: The epicentral report said: Shannan and Gyeonggi are adjacent to each other, and Ri Yong is attempting to recover, with the support of the Six Armies.

古文：如幸西川，则晟未见收复之期也。
现代文：如果去西川，则李晟看不见收复的日期了。
English: If he goes to Saikawa, he will not be able to see the date of the recovery.

古文：幸陛下徐思其宜。 
现代文：期望皇上仔细考虑。 
English: I expect the Emperor to give it careful consideration.

古文：议未决，李晟表至，请车驾驻跸梁、洋，以图收复，群议乃止。
现代文：商议没有结果，李晟送上表来，恳请驻军梁、汉，以图谋收复，众人商议才停止。
English: There was no result from the discussion, so Li Lan sent a letter to the garrison, imploring Liang and Han to try to recapture the city. Only then did the discussion stop.

古文：梁、汉之间，刀耕火耨，民以采稆为事，虽节察十五郡，而赋额不敌中原三数县。
现代文：梁、汉之间地域，人们还是处于刀耕火种，以采集稆为生。虽然有十五个郡，但税赋还不如中原三个县。
English: In the areas between Liang and Han, people still engage in slash-and-burn agriculture and collect straw for a living. Although there are fifteen counties, the tax burden is not as high as the three counties in the Central Plains.

古文：自安、史之后，多为山贼剽掠，户口流散大半。
现代文：自从安、史之乱后，此地常被山贼抢掠，人口流散大半。
English: Since the An-Shi Rebellion, this area has often been plundered by bandits, and most of the population has dispersed.

古文：见任州县官，考满日放选，百姓给复一年。
现代文：等到六师驻扎此地，震设法规劝课税，聚集财富，以供应时局。
English: Wait until the six divisions are stationed here, establish laws and regulations, collect taxes, and gather wealth to supply the current situation.

古文：洋州宜升为望，见任州县官，考满减两选。
现代文：民众也没有达到厌烦的程度，使税赋供应很多而没有缺乏。这年六月，收复京城，震率兵马回到京师，晋位为检校尚书左仆射。诏令说：略。
English: The people did not reach the level of boredom, so the tax supply was abundant and there was no shortage. In June of this year, the capital was recaptured, the shock troops and horses returned to the capital division, and the promotion was to the inspection school Shangshu Zuofei. The edict said: omitted.

古文：山南西道将士，并与甄叙。 以震为兴元尹，赐实封二百户。
现代文：任命震为兴元尹，赐予实封二百户。
English: He appointed Zhen as Xingyuan Yin and bestowed real fiefs on 200 households.

古文：贞元元年十一月，德宗亲祀昊天上帝于南郊，震入朝陪祭。
现代文：贞元元年十一月，德宗在南郊祭祀先帝，震进入朝廷陪同祭祀。
English: In November of the first year of the Jōgen era, Desong performed a ritual for the former emperor in the southern suburbs, and then went to the imperial court to accompany the ritual.

古文：十一年二月，加同平章事。
现代文：十一年二月，加授同平章事。
English: In February of the 11th year, he was awarded an additional peerage.

古文：贞元十五年六月卒，时年七十六，废朝三日，册赠太保，赙布帛米粟有差。
现代文：贞元十五年六月死，终年七十六岁，皇上停止上朝三天，册赠太保，赠予布帛米粟不等。
English: She died in June of the fifteenth year of the Zhen Yuan, and was 76 years old. The emperor stopped her ascension to the throne for three days.

古文：及丧将至，令百官以次赴宅吊哭。
现代文：等到丧事举行，令百官依次到他家吊唁。
English: When the funeral was held, hundreds of officials went to his home to offer condolences.

古文：严砺，震之宗人也。
现代文：严砺，为严震的宗族人。
English: Strictly speaking, they are the descendants of the earthquake.

古文：性轻躁，多奸谋，以便佞在军，历职至山南东道节度都虞候、兴州刺史、兼监察御史。
现代文：性格轻率浮躁，善于邪恶谋划，在军中巧言谄媚，历任山南东道节度虞候、兴州刺史，兼任监察御史。
English: He had a rash and impetuous personality, was good at evil planning, and was a smooth talker in the army. He was successively the host of the Shannan Festival, the governor of Xingzhou, and also served as the inspector of the imperial history.

古文：贞元十五年，严震卒，以砺权留府事，兼遗表荐砺才堪委任。
现代文：贞元十五年，严震死，由砺管理府事，震留下的遗表中，推荐砺的才干能胜此任。
English: In the fifteenth year of the reign of Zhen Yuan, after his death from a severe earthquake, Zou managed the affairs of the government. Among the surviving documents left behind by the earthquake, it was recommended that Zou's talent would be able to fulfill this duty.

古文：七月，超授兴元尹，兼御史大夫，山南西道节度、支度营田、观察使。
现代文：七月，越级授予兴元尹，兼任御史大夫、山南西道节度、支度营田、观察使。
English: In July, he was promoted to the rank of Xingyuan Yin, and concurrently served as chief historian, governor of Shannan West Road, governor of Yingtian, and observer.

古文：诏下，谏官御史以为除拜不当。
现代文：诏令下达后，谏官御史认为任职不妥当。
English: After the imperial edict was issued, the eunuch, Mishi, thought it was inappropriate for him to hold the post.

古文：是日，谏议、给事、补阙、拾遗并归门下省共议：砺资历甚浅，人望素轻，遽领节旄，恐非允当。
现代文：这天，谏议、给事、补阙、拾遗一并到门下省共同商议：砺资历非常浅，人的威望素来不高，马上任为统领，担心不合适。
English: On this day, he went to his subordinate province to discuss the issue, give advice, make amends, and pick up the remains together. He had very little seniority, and his prestige had never been high. He was immediately appointed as the leader, and was worried that it was not appropriate.

古文：既兼杂话，发论喧然。
现代文：已经兼任，议论哗然。
English: He has already held the post concurrently, and the discussion is in uproar.

古文：拾遗李繁独奏云： 昨除拜严砺，众以为不当，谏议大夫苗拯云： 已三度表论，未见听允。 
现代文：拾遗李繁单独上奏说： 昨天任命严砺，众人都认为不当。谏议大夫苗拯说： 已经多次奏章，没有听说处理意见。 
English: Li Li, the chief coroner, made a separate report, saying, "Yesterday, Yan Qi was appointed, and everyone thought it was improper." Miao Zheng, the doctor who made the report, said, "I have made many reports, but I have not heard any opinions on how to deal with it."

古文：给事中许孟容曰： 诚如此，不旷职矣。  
现代文：给事中许孟容说： 确实如此的话，也不枉为其谏议大夫了。  
English: During the presentation, Xu Meng Rong said: If this is indeed the case, it is not unreasonable for him to be a doctor.

古文：又云： 李元素、陈京、王舒并见拯及孟容言议。 
现代文：李繁又说： 李元素、陈京、王舒三人都听到了苗拯和许孟容的议论。 
English: Li Xiang also said: Li Yiren, Chen Jing and Wang Shu all heard the discussion between Miao Zheng and Xu Meng Rong.

古文：上遣三司使诘之。
现代文：皇上派遣三司使查问此事。
English: The emperor sent three envoys to investigate the matter.

古文：拯状云： 实于众中言曾论奏，不言三度。 
现代文：苗拯陈述说： 我的确在众人面前说过曾经奏章，但没有说多次奏章。 
English: Miao Zheng said: I did say in front of everyone that I had played a piece, but I did not say that I had played a piece many times.

古文：繁证之不已。
现代文：李繁证明此事不是如此。
English: Li Shang proved that this was not the case.

古文：孟容等又云： 拯实言两度。 
现代文：许孟容等人又说： 苗拯确实说过两次。 
English: Xu Meng Rong and others also said: Miao Zheng really said it twice.

古文：拯请依众状。
现代文：苗拯请求依照众人所说的情况处理。
English: Miao Zheng's request was handled in accordance with what everyone said.

古文：翌日，贬拯万州刺史，李繁播州参军，并同正。
现代文：第二天，苗拯被贬为万州刺史，李繁被贬为播州参军，同时发落。
English: The next day, Miao Zheng was relegated to the history of Banzhou, and Li Xiang was relegated to join the army in Banzhou.

古文：砺在位贪残，士民不堪其苦。
现代文：严砺在任期间既贪婪又残忍，百姓苦不堪言。
English: Yan Xuan was both greedy and cruel during his time in office, and the people suffered greatly.

古文：素恶凤州刺史马勋，诬奏贬贺州司户。
现代文：严砺历来讨厌凤州刺史马勋，于是捏造事实上奏皇上使之被贬为贺州司户。
English: Yan Xuan had always hated Fengzhou Zishi Ma Xun, so he fabricated the fact that he was the emperor to make him be relegated to the position of Hezhou Sihong.

古文：纵情肆志，皆此类也。
现代文：严砺随心所欲，纵情恣意，都类于此事。
English: Strict adherence to one's heart's desire, indulgence in one's whims, are all similar to this matter.

古文：元和四年三月卒。
现代文：元和四年三月，严砺去世。
English: In March of the 4th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Yan Xuan passed away.

古文：卒后，御史元稹奉使两川按察，纠劾砺在任日赃罪数十万。
现代文：死后，御史元稹奉命任两川按察，查出严砺在任期间贪赃数十万。
English: After his death, Mishi Motonari was ordered to investigate the two rivers and found that Yanbi had embezzled hundreds of thousands of dollars during his term of office.

古文：诏征其赃，以死，恕其罪。
现代文：皇上下命令追究严砺的贪赃罪行，因为其人已死而宽恕了他。
English: The emperor ordered his officials to prosecute him for the heinous crime of embezzlement, but forgave him because he was already dead.

