古文：易云： 观乎人文以化成天下。 
现代文：《易经》说： 考察礼仪文化，以此教化天下。 
English: "I Ching" says: Examine the culture of etiquette and use it to enlighten the world.

古文：孔子曰： 焕乎其有文章。 
现代文：孔子说： 舜的礼义文化多么光明灿烂啊。 
English: Confucius said, "How bright and splendid is the culture of etiquette and propriety in Shandong."

古文：自汉以来，辞人代有，大则宪章典诰，小则申抒性灵。
现代文：自汉朝以来，做文学的人历代都有，大的参与制定宪章典诰，小的则抒发自己的心灵感受。
English: Since the Han Dynasty, people who make literature have existed throughout the ages. The big ones participate in the formulation of the charter, while the small ones express their inner feelings.

古文：至于经礼乐而纬国家，通古今而述美恶，非斯则莫可也。
现代文：至于制定礼乐治理国家，了解古今记述善恶，舍弃文学便没有其他方法。
English: There is no other way to govern the country, understand the good and evil of the past and present, and abandon literature.

古文：是以哲王在上，咸所敦悦。
现代文：因此圣王在上时，万民敦睦欢悦。
English: Therefore, when the holy king ascended, all the people rejoiced.

古文：故云 言之不文，行之不远 。
现代文：所以说： 言之不文，行之不远。 
English: Therefore, it is said: Words are not written, actions are not far away.

古文：自中原沸腾，五马南度，缀文之士，无乏于时。
现代文：自从晋朝中原大乱，五王南渡，从事文学的人，一直都不缺少。
English: Since the Central Plains Revolt of the Jin Dynasty and the Five Kings of Nantou, there has been no shortage of people engaged in literature.

古文：降及梁朝，其流弥盛。盖由时主儒雅，笃好文章，故才秀之士，焕乎俱集。
现代文：到了梁朝，这股潮流更盛，这是由于当时的君主本人儒雅，酷爱文学，所以有才气的人，灿然汇集在一处。
English: In the Liang Dynasty, this trend was even more prevalent. This was due to the fact that the then monarch himself was refined and loved literature, so talented people brilliantly gathered in one place.

古文：于时武帝每所临幸，辄命群臣赋诗，其文之善者赐以金帛。
现代文：当时武帝每到一处，总是命群臣赋诗，做得好的便赏赐金帛。
English: At that time, whenever Emperor Wu came to a place, he always ordered his courtiers to compose poems, and if they did a good job, he would reward them with gold ingots.

古文：是以缙绅之士，咸知自励。
现代文：因此作官的人，都知道勉励自己上进。
English: Therefore, officials all know how to encourage themselves to advance.

古文：至有陈受命，运接乱离，虽加奖励，而向时之风流息矣。
现代文：等到陈朝继起，赶上天下乱离，虽说也加以鼓励，但昔时的文雅之风终于衰颓了。
English: Wait until the Chen dynasty succeeds, catch up with the chaos of the world, although it is also encouraged, but the old style of elegance has finally decayed.

古文：诗云： 人之云亡，邦国殄悴。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 贤人没有了，国家也就要灭亡了。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: When the wise men are gone, the country will perish.

古文：岂金陵之数将终三百年乎？
现代文：岂不是金陵的气数将在三百年时终止吗？
English: Isn't the number of years of the Golden Calf supposed to end in 300 years?

古文：不然，何至是也。
现代文：不然，何至于如此呢。
English: Otherwise, what's the point?

古文：宋史不立文学传，齐、梁皆有其目。
现代文：《宋书》不立《文学传》，《齐书》、《梁书》都有此栏目。
English: "Song Shu" does not have "Literature Biography," "Qi Shu" and "Liang Shu" all have this section.

古文：今缀而序之，以备此篇云尔。
现代文：如今把它们连缀起来并作序，著成这篇《文学传》。
English: Now I have linked them together and made a preface, resulting in this "Literary Biography."

古文：丘灵鞠，吴兴乌程人也。
现代文：丘灵鞠是吴兴郡乌程县人。
English: Quling Mu is a native of Wucheng County, Wuxing County.

古文：祖系，秘书监。父道真，护军长史。
现代文：祖父丘系，官秘书监，父亲丘道真，作护军长史。
English: Grandfather Yau line, official secretary superintendent, father Yau Daozhen, served as the guardian of Changshi.

古文：灵鞠少好学，善属文，州辟从事。
现代文：灵鞠从小爱读书，善写文章，州里征召他作从事。
English: Lingzhu has loved reading since childhood and is good at writing articles. He was recruited by the state to do so.

古文：诣领军沈演之，演之曰： 身昔爲州职，诣领军谢晦，宾主坐处，政如今日。卿将来复如此也。 
现代文：到领军沈演之处报到，演之说： 从前我作州从事，到领军谢晦处报到，宾主坐的位置正和今天一样，你将来也会和我现在的位置一样。 
English: Report to the place where the leader of the army is performing, the speech says: I used to be engaged in state affairs, report to the place where the leader of the army is saying goodbye, the position of the guest is the same as today, and you will be in the same position as I am now.

古文：累迁员外郎。
现代文：后逐步升迁为员外郎。
English: After that, he was gradually promoted to a member of the outer circle.

古文：宋孝武殷贵妃亡，灵鞠献挽歌三首，云： 云横广阶闇，霜深高殿寒。 
现代文：宋孝武帝的殷贵妃去世，灵鞠献挽歌三首，其中有： 云横广阶，霜深高殿寒。 
English: When Emperor Song Xiaowu's consort Yin Guifei passed away, Ling Mu dedicated three elegies to her, including: "Clouds are broad and wide, Frost is deep and cold."

古文：帝擿句嗟赏。
现代文：孝武帝对这两句叹赏不已。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was deeply impressed by these two sentences.

古文：后爲乌程令，不得志。
现代文：后来作乌程县令，不得志。
English: Later, he became the governor of Wucheng County, but he was not able to do so.

古文：泰始初，坐事禁锢数年。
现代文：泰始初年，犯了事被限令数年不得作官。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, the offender was ordered not to work as an official for several years.

古文：褚彦回爲吴兴太守，谓人曰： 此郡才士唯有丘灵鞠及沈勃耳。 
现代文：褚彦回作吴郡太守，对别人说： 北郡的才子只有丘灵鞠和沈勃而已。 
English: On his return to his post as governor of Wu County, Yan Yan said to others: The only talented people in Beishun County are Chuling Qi and Shen Bo.

古文：乃啓申之。
现代文：于是向朝廷启奏介绍他。
English: He was then introduced to the Imperial Court.

古文：明帝使着大驾南讨记论。
现代文：明帝让他著《大驾南讨记论》。
English: Emperor Ming asked him to write "The Story of the Great Southern Expedition."

古文：久之，除太尉参军。
现代文：过了很长一段，委任他为太尉参军。
English: After a long time, he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the army.

古文：升明中，爲正员郎，兼中书郎。
现代文：升明年间，作正员郎，兼中书郎。
English: After graduation, he became a full-fledged page boy and a junior high school secretary.

古文：时方禅让，齐高帝使灵鞠参掌诏策。
现代文：当时正是宋帝禅让，齐高帝让灵鞠负责诏令文书。
English: At that time, it was the Song Emperor who made Zen and the Qigong Emperor who made Lingqiu responsible for the imperial edict.

古文：建元元年，转中书郎，敕知东宫手笔。
现代文：建元元年，改任中书郎，下诏让他主持东宫书写工作。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he was reassigned to the position of Zhongshuro, and it was decreed that he should preside over the writing work of the East Palace.

古文：尝还东，诣司徒褚彦回别，彦回不起，曰： 比脚疾更增，不复能起。 
现代文：曾有一次东回故乡，到司徒褚彦回家告别，彦回不起身，说： 近来脚病加重，再也起不来了。 
English: There was a time when I was returning to my hometown from the east, and I went to bid farewell to Szuhiko as he was returning home. Hikiko did not get up and said, "My foot disease has recently worsened, and I can no longer get up."

古文：灵鞠曰： 脚疾亦是大事，公爲一代鼎臣，不可复爲覆餗。 
现代文：灵鞠说： 脚病真是大事，您是一代重臣，不可再担任您不能胜任的职务了。 
English: Lingzhu said, "It's really a big deal that you have a foot disease. You are a generation of senior vassals. You can no longer hold a position that you are not qualified for.

古文：其强切如此。
现代文：他就是这样强硬严刻。
English: That's how tough he is.

古文：不持形仪，唯取笑适。
现代文：他不讲求仪容礼节，只求高兴舒适。
English: He doesn't care about etiquette, he just wants to be happy and comfortable.

古文：寻又掌知国史。
现代文：不久又主持修国史。
English: Soon he presided over the revision of national history.

古文：武帝即位，爲通直常侍，寻领东观祭酒。
现代文：齐武帝即位，任通直常侍，不久主持东观祭酒。
English: Emperor Qiwu ascended the throne, appointed Tsunenao as his personal attendant, and soon presided over the Dongguan Festival.

古文：灵鞠曰： 人居官愿数迁，使我终身爲祭酒不恨也。 
现代文：灵鞠说： 人们作官都希望屡次升迁，让我作一辈子祭酒我都没什么遗憾。 
English: Lingqiu said: People who work as officials all hope to be promoted many times. I have no regrets about making sacrificial wine for the rest of my life.

古文：永明二年，领骁骑将军。
现代文：永明二年，兼作骁骑将军。
English: In the second year of Yongming, he also served as the general of the cavalry.

古文：灵鞠不乐武位，谓人曰： 我应还东掘顾荣冢。
现代文：灵鞠不乐意任武职，对别人说： 我应该回家乡把顾荣的墓扒了。
English: Lingzhu was not happy to take up the military post, and said to others: I should go back to my hometown and dig up Gu Rong's grave.

古文：江南地方数千里，士子风流皆出此中。顾荣忽引诸伧辈度，妨我辈涂辙，死有馀罪。 
现代文：江南地方数千里，风流才子都出在这里，顾荣突然招引一些乡巴佬南渡，挡了我们这些人的道儿，真是死有余辜。 
English: Thousands of miles south of the Yangtze River, all the glamorous and talented people are here. Gu Rong suddenly lured some country bumpkins to Nandu, blocking the path of these people. It's really regrettable.

古文：灵鞠好饮酒，臧否人物，在沈深座，见王俭诗，深曰： 王令文章大进。 
现代文：灵鞠好饮酒，爱评论褒贬别人。一次在沈深家作客，见到王俭的诗，沈深说： 王俭文章大有长进。 
English: Ling Mu likes to drink alcohol and likes to criticize and praise others. Once, when he was a guest at Shen Sheng's home and saw Wang Jian's poem, Shen Sheng said: Wang Jian's article has made great progress.

古文：灵鞠曰： 何如我未进时。 
现代文：灵鞠问道： 比我没长进时怎么样？ 
English: Lingqiu asked, "What about when I am better than I am?"

古文：此言达俭。
现代文：这话传到王俭耳朵里。
English: These words reached Wang Jian's ears.

古文：灵鞠宋时文名甚盛，入齐颇减，蓬发弛纵无形仪，不事家业。
现代文：灵鞠在宋时文章名声很大，入齐以后名气渐衰又仪表不整，披头散发松松垮垮，不理家务。
English: Lingzhu was very famous in the Song Dynasty. After it was unified, its fame gradually faded and its appearance was irregular. It wore a loose headdress and did not do housework.

古文：王俭谓人曰： 丘公仕宦不进，才亦退矣。 
现代文：王俭对人说： 丘公作官不见升迁，文才也走下坡路了。 
English: Wang Jian said to the man, "There is no promotion for you as an official, and your literary talent has also gone downhill.

古文：位长沙王车骑长史，卒。
现代文：灵鞠作长沙王萧晃的车骑长史时去世。
English: Ling Mu, who played the role of Changsha's King Xiao Jiao in the historical horse-drawn carriage, passed away.

古文：着江左文章录序，起太兴，讫元熙。文集行于时。
现代文：著有《江左文章录序》，起于太兴年间，止于元熙年间，文集当时流行于世。
English: He was the author of "Record of Jiang Zuo's Articles," which began in the Taixing years and ended in the Yuanxi years. The collection of articles was very popular at that time.

古文：子迟。迟字希范，八岁便属文。
现代文：丘迟，字希范，八岁就会诗文。
English: The eight-year-old will be able to write poetry.

古文：灵鞠常谓 气骨似我 。
现代文：他的父亲丘灵鞠常说： 诗文气骨像我。 
English: His father, Chuling Mu, often said: "My poetic temperament is like me.

古文：黄门郎谢超宗、征士何点并见而异之。
现代文：黄门侍郎谢超宗、征士何点在看到之后都很感诧异。
English: Huangmen Lang, Xie Shuxuan, and Zhe Shi all met with Qiu Chi, and thought that his talent was excellent.

古文：在齐，以秀才累迁殿中郎。
现代文：齐时，丘迟以秀才出身，累迁至殿中郎。
English: At the same time, Yuki was born as a talented person and moved to Tonochuro.

古文：梁武帝平建邺，引爲骠骑主簿，甚被礼遇。
现代文：梁武帝扫平建邺，召他担任骠骑主簿，对他很是礼遇。
English: Emperor Liangwu leveled Jianye and called him to serve as the chief rider, which was a great courtesy to him.

古文：时劝进梁王及殊礼，皆迟文也。
现代文：当时劝进为梁王以及各种特殊礼遇的诏文，都是丘迟所写的。
English: At that time, the imperial edict exhorting him to become the King of Liang, as well as various special courtesies, were all written by Qiu Qi.

古文：及践阼，迁中书郎，待诏文德殿。
现代文：梁武帝登基之后，丘迟迁任中书郎，待诏于文德殿。
English: After Emperor Liangwu ascended to the throne, he was transferred to the post of middle school teacher, and he stayed at the Winter Palace.

古文：时帝着连珠，诏群臣继作者数十人，迟文最美。
现代文：当时梁武帝写《连珠》，诏令群臣几十人续作，以丘迟的文辞最美。
English: At that time, Emperor Liangwu wrote "The String of Pearls" and ordered dozens of courtiers to continue the work, with the most beautiful words.

古文：坐事免，乃献责躬诗，上优辞答之。
现代文：因事被免职，便献上《责躬诗》，皇帝以宽和的文辞作答。
English: When he was dismissed from his post, he presented a poem of "reproach" to the emperor, who replied in a gracious manner.

古文：后出爲永嘉太守，在郡不称职，爲有司所纠。
现代文：后来丘迟出任永嘉太守，在郡时不称职，被有关部门弹劾。
English: Later, he served as the Yongjia governor-general, but was impeached by the relevant departments for being incompetent.

古文：帝爱其才，寝其奏。
现代文：武帝爱惜他的才能，把这份弹劾的奏书压下了。
English: Emperor Wu cherished his talent and suppressed the impeachment report.

古文：天监四年，中军将军临川王宏北侵魏，以爲谘议参军，领记室。
现代文：天监四年，中军将军临川王萧宏北征魏国，任命他当谘议参军，领记室。
English: In the fourth year of Tianjing, the Chinese army general Linchuan Wang Xiaohong led the Northern Expedition of Wei, and appointed him as a consultant to join the army.

古文：时陈伯之在北，与魏军来拒，迟以书喻之，伯之遂降。
现代文：当时，陈伯之在江北，和魏军一起抗拒梁军，丘迟写信劝喻，陈伯之便归降了。
English: At that time, Chen Bozhi was in the north of the Yangtze River, resisting Liang's army together with the Wei army. He wrote a letter to persuade him, and then Chen Bozhi surrendered.

古文：还拜中书侍郎，迁司空从事中郎，卒官。
现代文：回京后，丘迟官拜中书侍郎，又迁任司空从事中郎，死于任上。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was transferred to the position of the junior secretary, and then to the position of the junior secretary, where he died.

古文：迟辞采丽逸，时有锺嵘着诗评云： 范云婉转清便，如流风回雪。
现代文：丘迟的文章华丽俊美，当时有钟嵘写《诗评》，书中说： 范云婉转清便，如流风回雪。
English: Qiu Qi's essay is gorgeous and beautiful. At that time, Zhong Qi wrote "Poetry Review." In the book, he said: Fan Yunyuan turned into a clear and convenient, like the wind returning to the snow.

古文：卞彬字士蔚，济阴冤句人也。
现代文：丘迟点缀映媚，似落花依草。虽取贱文通，而秀于敬子。 卞彬字士蔚，济阴冤句人。
English: The hills are dotted with beautiful decoration, like the falling flowers on the grass. Although he took the lowly literati, he excelled in the honorable son.

古文：祖嗣之，中领军。
现代文：祖父卞嗣之，作中领军。
English: His grandfather, Takeshi, is the leader of the army in the play.

古文：父延之，弱冠爲上虞令，有刚气。
现代文：父亲卡延之，二十岁作上虞县令，刚强有骨气。
English: His father, Kayanzhi, was a twenty-year-old Shangyu County magistrate with a strong backbone.

古文：会稽太守孟顗以令长裁之，积不能容，脱帻投地曰： 我所以屈卿者，政爲此帻耳。今已投之卿矣。
现代文：会稽太守孟靑像对待一般下属县令那样节制他，时间长了他不能忍受，把官帽扔到地上说： 我之所以受你的气，只是因为这顶帽子罢了，今天已经还给你了。
English: He couldn't stand it any longer, so he threw the official's hat on the ground and said, "The only reason I got mad at you was because of this hat, and I gave it back to you today."

古文：卿以一世勋门，而傲天下国士。 
现代文：你靠着当世功臣门第，而傲视天下国士。 
English: You rely on the current generation of meritorious vassals, and pride yourself on being the world's statesman.

古文：拂衣而去。
现代文：拂衣而去。
English: With a groan, he threw off his clothes and entered the inner room.

古文：彬险拔有才，而与物多忤。
现代文：卞彬高超有才华，但多与时世不合。
English: Hao Bin is highly talented, but he is often out of step with the times.

古文：齐高帝辅政，袁粲、刘彦节、王蕴等皆不同，而沈攸之又称兵反。
现代文：齐高帝辅政，袁粲、刘彦节、王蕴等人不附和他，而沈攸之又举兵造反。
English: Emperor Qigong supported the government, but Yuan Shao, Liu Hanzi, Wang Yun and others did not join him, while Shen Youzhi raised an army and rebelled.

古文：粲、蕴虽败，攸之尚存。
现代文：后来袁粲、王蕴虽然败亡，沈攸之还在。
English: Later, although Yuan Shao and Wang Yun were defeated, Shen Youzhi was still alive.

古文：彬意犹以高帝事无所成，乃谓帝曰： 比闻谣云 可怜可念尸着服，孝子不在日代哭，列管暂鸣死灭族 。
现代文：卞彬认为高帝不能成事，于是对他说： 最近听到有民谣说 可怜可念尸著服，孝子不在日代哭，列管暂鸣死灭族 ，您可听说过吗？ 
English: Hao Bin thought that Gao Di could not accomplish anything, so he said to him: Recently, I heard a folk song that said, "Poor, pitiful, remember the corpse wearing clothes, the filial son does not cry on behalf of the day, let the pipe sing for a while, die and exterminate the tribe." Have you heard of it?

古文：公颇闻不？ 时蕴居父忧，与粲同死，故云 尸着服 也。 服 者，衣也。 孝子不在日代哭 者，褚字也。
现代文：当时王蕴正为父亲服丧，和袁粲一起被杀，所以说是 尸著服 ， 服 者， 衣 也。 孝子不在日代哭 ，为一个 褚 字。
English: At that time, Wang Yun was in mourning for his father, and was killed together with Yuan Shao, so it was said that the corpse was wearing clothes, clothes, and clothes.

古文：彬谓沈攸之得志，褚彦回当败，故言哭也。列管谓萧也。
现代文：卞彬认为沈攸之得志，褚彦回要失败，所以说 哭 。 列管 指姓萧的。
English: Hao Bin thought that Shen Yu's ambition was to succeed, and Yan Yan's was to fail, so he said, "Cry."

古文：高帝不悦，及彬退，曰： 彬自作此。 
现代文：高帝听了很不高兴，等卞彬退出后，高帝说： 这民谣是卞彬自己编造的。 
English: Gao Di was very unhappy to hear it, and after Zou Bin withdrew, Gao Di said: This ballad was made up by Zou Bin himself.

古文：后常于东府谒高帝，高帝时爲齐王。
现代文：后来卞彬曾在东府城谒见高帝，高帝当时作齐王。
English: Later, Nie Bin met with Emperor Gao in the city of Dongfu. At that time, Emperor Gao was the king of Qi.

古文：彬曰： 殿下即东宫爲府，则以青溪爲鸿沟，鸿沟以东爲齐，以西爲宋。 
现代文：卞彬说： 殿下把东宫作王府，就把青溪作为鸿沟吧，鸿沟以东为齐，以西为宋。 
English: Hao Bin said, "Your highness, instead of making the East Palace the royal palace, let's make Qingxi the chasm. The chasm is aligned with the east, and the west is Song."

古文：仍咏诗云： 谁谓宋远，跂予望之。 
现代文：于是就诵《诗》一首： 谁谓宋远，予望之。 
English: So he recited a poem from "Poetry": Who is Song Yuan, and what can we expect from him?

古文：遂大忤旨，因此摈废数年，不得仕进。
现代文：这样就大大逆了齐高帝的心意，因此被搁置了好几年，不能作官。
English: In this way, he greatly opposed the will of Emperor Qigong, so he was put on hold for several years and could not serve as an official.

古文：乃拟赵壹穷鸟爲枯鱼赋以喻意。
现代文：于是他就模仿赵壹《穷鸟赋》作《枯鱼赋》来表达自己的心情。
English: So he imitated Zhao Yi's "Poor Bird Fu" to make "Dead Fish Fu" to express his feelings.

古文：后爲南康郡丞。
现代文：后来作南康郡丞。
English: Later, he became Nankang County magistrate.

古文：彬颇饮酒，摈弃形骸，仕既不遂，乃着蚤虱、蜗虫、虾蟆等赋，皆大有指斥。
现代文：卞彬很爱饮酒，放荡不羁。既然不能作官，就写了《蚤虱》、《蜗虫》、《虾蟆》等赋，都明显有所影射攻击。
English: Hao Bin liked to drink a lot and was a debauched person. Since he couldn't be an official, he wrote "The Flea," "The Ladybug," "The Shrimp" and other works, all of which clearly contained insinuations and attacks.

古文：其蚤虱赋序曰： 余居贫，布衣十年不制，一袍之縕，有生所托，资其寒暑，无与易之。
现代文：其《蚤虱赋序》中写道： 我生活贫困，布衣十年不做新的，一件棉袍，一辈子就只靠它来度过寒暑，没有替换的。
English: He wrote in "The Prelude to the Flea": I live in poverty, I haven't made a new cloth for ten years, and a cotton robe is the only thing I rely on to get through the cold and heat for the rest of my life. There is no replacement.

古文：爲人多病，起居甚疏，萦寝败絮，不能自释。
现代文：体弱多病，生活懒散，睡觉围着破棉絮，还不愿起来。
English: Weak and sickly, living a lazy life, sleeping surrounded by broken cotton wool, and still unwilling to get up.

古文：兼摄性懈堕，懒事皮肤，澡刷不谨，澣沐失时。四体狞狞，加以臭秽，故苇席蓬缨之间，蚤虱猥流。
现代文：加上禀性懒惰，懒得收拾这张外皮，洗涮不勤，难得沐浴，四肢毛烘烘的，添了很多臭气，所以苇席蓬松，纷乱处蚤虱成群。
English: Coupled with lazy idleness, too lazy to clean up this crust, washing is not diligent, rarely bathing, limbs are hairy, adding a lot of odor, so the feast is fluffy, and fleas are swarming around the chaos.

古文：淫痒渭濩，无时恕肉，探揣擭撮，日不替手。
现代文：浑身奇痒难忍，皮肉无时不受熬煎，在身上抓挠捉掐，整天手都不闲着。
English: Itching all over the body is unbearable, the skin and flesh are constantly subjected to boiling, scratching the body to catch maggots, hands are not idle all day.

古文：虱有谚言， 朝生暮孙 ，若吾之虱者，无汤沐之虑，绝相吊之忧，晏聚乎久裤烂布之裳，复不懃于讨捕，孙孙子子，三十五岁焉。 
现代文：虱子们有谚语说， 早上出世晚上就能抱孙子 ，像我这儿的虱子，没有洗澡的顾虑，没有死亡的忧愁，平安聚集在旧衣破裤之中，又不勤于捉捕，于是子子孙孙，繁衍三十五年了。 
English: There is a saying among the cripples: "In the morning you are born, and in the evening you can hold your grandchild." Like the cripples here, they have no worries about bathing, no worries about death, they are safely gathered in old clothes and torn pants, and they are not busy catching, so their children and grandchildren have been reproducing for thirty-five years.

古文：其略言皆实录也。
现代文：所说的都有实指。
English: Everything said is true.

古文：又爲禽兽决录。目禽兽云： 羊性淫而佷，猪性卑而率，鹅性顽而傲，狗性险而出。 
现代文：又作《禽兽决录》，评论禽兽说： 羊的本性邪恶而凶狠，猪的本性卑劣而轻率，鹅的本性顽固而傲慢，狗的本性奸邪而爱显露。 
English: He also wrote "The Decisive Record of Animals," commenting on animals: "The sheep's nature is evil and fierce, the pig's nature is despicable and imprudent, the goose's nature is stubborn and arrogant, and the dog's nature is evil and love is revealed.

古文：皆指斥贵势。
现代文：都是指斥权贵。
English: It's all about denouncing the powerful.

古文：其羊淫佷，谓吕文显；猪卑率，谓朱隆之；鹅顽傲，谓潘敞；狗险出，谓文度。
现代文：其中羊邪恶凶狠，说的是吕文显；猪卑劣轻率，是说朱隆之；鹅顽固傲慢，是指潘敞；狗奸邪爱显露，是指文度。
English: Among them, the evil and ferocious sheep refers to Lü Wenxian; the despicable and imprudent pig refers to Zhu Longzhi; the stubborn and arrogant goose refers to Pan Zhan; and the evil love of the dog betrayer refers to Wen Du.

古文：其险诣如此。
现代文：他就是如此奇特。
English: He's just so weird.

古文：虾蟆赋云： 纡青拖紫，名爲蛤鱼。 
现代文：《虾蟆赋》说： 挂青拖紫，名为蛤蟆。 
English: "Shrimp Endowment" said: Hanging blue dragging purple, named dragonfly.

古文：世谓比令仆也。
现代文：世人说比喻令仆。
English: The world says, "Let's use a metaphor."

古文：又云： 蝌斗唯唯，群浮闇水，唯朝继夕，聿役如鬼。 
现代文：其中又有： 蝌蚪惟惟，群浮水，从早到晚，蠕动如鬼。 
English: Among them are: cormorants, swarms of floating water, from morning to night, creeping like ghosts.

古文：比令史谘事也。
现代文：比方令史谘事。
English: For example, the history advisory committee.

古文：文章传于闾巷。
现代文：他的文章在社会上流传。
English: His article has been circulated in the community.

古文：后历尚书比部郎，安吉令，车骑记室。
现代文：后来历任尚书比部郎，安吉县令，车骑记室。
English: Later, successively held the posts of Shang Shubiburo, Anji County magistrate, and chariot and horse record office.

古文：彬性好饮酒，以瓠壶瓢勺杬皮爲具，着帛冠，十二年不改易。
现代文：卞彬生性好饮酒，用葫芦瓢和木元子皮作酒具。戴一顶帛冠，十二年都不换。
English: Qibin is a good drinker. He uses gourd root and cassia bark to make drinking utensils. He wears a crown of gourds and does not change it for twelve years.

古文：以大瓠爲火笼，什物多诸诡异。
现代文：用大瓦壶作火笼，所用的器具大都怪异与众不同。
English: A large earthenware pot is used as a fire pit, and most of the utensils used are strange and unusual.

古文：好诗赋，多讥刺世人，坐徙巴州。
现代文：自称叫卞田居，妻子叫傅蚕室。有人问他： 你一点儿也不注意节操，官禄怎么能升上去呢？ 
English: Someone asked him: "You don't pay attention to discipline at all. How can you rise in rank?"

古文：诜字休群，太原中都人，爱文，尤赏泉石。
现代文：卞彬回答： 如果掷五木子，掷十次都不发市，难道是掷得笨拙吗？
English: Hao Bin replied, "If you throw five pieces of wood and don't hit the target ten times, is it a clumsy throw?"

古文：卒于御史中丞。
现代文：我喜欢掷，现在正是到了这个地步。 
English: I like to throw, and that's where I'm at right now.

古文：王智深字云才，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：后来作绥建太守，死在任上。王智深字云才，琅邪临沂人。
English: Later, he served as the governor-general of Fujian, and died in office. Wang Zhi was a man of deep character, and a man who fought against evil.

古文：少从陈郡谢超宗学属文。
现代文：小时候跟陈郡谢超宗学写文章。
English: When I was a child, I wrote an article about Chen County Xie Chao's religious education.

古文：好饮酒，拙涩乏风仪。
现代文：爱饮酒，笨拙迟顿缺少风度。
English: Loves to drink, clumsy, tardy, lacks grace.

古文：仕齐爲豫章王大司马参军，兼记室。
现代文：在齐朝官作豫章王大司马参军，兼记室。
English: In the Qi Dynasty, the official was Yu Zhang Wang Daisima, who joined the army and also worked as a secretary.

古文：武帝使太子家令沈约撰宋书，疑立袁粲传，以审武帝。
现代文：齐武帝让太子家令沈约撰《宋书》，沈约想立袁粲传，请示武帝。
English: Emperor Qiwu asked the prince's family to order Shen Yao to compile the "Song Book." Shen Yao wanted to establish the Yuan Dynasty, so he asked Emperor Wu to do so.

古文：帝曰： 袁粲自是宋家忠臣。 
现代文：武帝说： 袁粲本是宋家忠臣。 
English: Emperor Wu said: Yuan Shun was originally a loyal vassal of the Song Dynasty.

古文：约又多载孝武、明帝诸亵黩事，上遣左右语约曰： 孝武事迹不容顿尔。我昔经事宋明帝，卿可思讳恶之义。 
现代文：沈约又记载很多宋孝武帝、宋明帝不光彩的事。武帝派人告诉沈约说： 孝武帝的事迹不许这样败坏，我从前也曾在宋明帝手下做事，你要考虑一下为尊者讳恶的道理。 
English: Shen You also recorded many disgraceful things about Emperor Song Xiaowu and Emperor Song Ming. Emperor Wu sent someone to tell Shen You, "The deeds of Emperor Xiaowu should not be allowed to be corrupted in this way. I once worked under Emperor Song Ming. You should consider the principle of concealing evil for the sake of His Holiness."

古文：于是多所省除。
现代文：于是很多都被删除。
English: As a result, many have been deleted.

古文：又敕智深撰宋纪，召见芙蓉堂，赐衣服给宅。
现代文：又下诏让智深撰《宋纪》，在芙蓉堂召见他。赏赐衣服，提供住处。
English: He also issued an order for Zhishen to compile the "Song of Song" and summoned him to Fu Rong Tang. He rewarded him with clothes and provided him with a place to live.

古文：智深告贫于豫章王，王曰： 须卿书成，当相论以禄。 
现代文：智深向豫章王哭穷，豫章王说： 你得把书写成，就会论功行赏。 
English: Zhishen cried poor to Yu Zhang Wang, Yu Zhang Wang said: You have to write a book, you will be rewarded for your work.

古文：书成三十卷。
现代文：书写成三十卷。
English: It was written in thirty volumes.

古文：武帝后召见智深于璿明殿，令拜表奏上，表未奏而武帝崩。
现代文：武帝后来在睿明殿召见智深，令他写成章表奏上，表还未奏上武帝驾崩。
English: Emperor Wu later summoned Zhishen to Ruiming Hall and ordered him to write a chapter on the table, but the table had not yet been played on Emperor Wu's death.

古文：隆昌元年，敕索其书。
现代文：隆昌元年，朝廷下诏索要他的书。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, the imperial court issued an edict demanding his book.

古文：智深迁爲竟陵王司徒参军。
现代文：智深转任竟陵王司徒参军。
English: Zhifang transferred to Jingling Wang Sito to join the army.

古文：免官。
现代文：后免官。
English: He was later dismissed.

古文：又令以棺亲土，不须砖，勿设灵座。
现代文：家贫无人馈赠，曾挨饿五天没有饭吃，挖苋菜根充饥。
English: The family was poor and had no one to give gifts to. They went hungry for five days and had no food. They dug up amaranth roots to satisfy their hunger.

古文：祖冲之字文远，范阳遒人也。
现代文：司空王僧虔和他儿子王志分给他衣食。死在家中。祖冲之字文远，范阳遒人。
English: Siku Wang Sangyan and his son Wang Zhi gave him food and clothing. He died at home. The ancestor of Chongzhi was called Wenyuan and was from Fanyang County.

古文：曾祖台之，晋侍中。
现代文：曾祖父祖台之，是晋朝的侍中。
English: His great-grandfather, Zudai, was an attendant of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖昌，宋大匠卿。
现代文：祖父祖昌，是宋代大匠卿。
English: His grandfather, Zu Chang, was a great craftsman in the Song Dynasty.

古文：父朔之，奉朝请。
现代文：父亲祖朔之，为奉朝请。
English: Father Zu Shuo, please come to serve the emperor.

古文：冲之稽古，有机思，宋孝武使直华林学省，赐宅宇车服。
现代文：冲之爱考查古事，思维机敏。宋孝武帝让他作华林学宫侍从，赐给房宅车服。
English: Emperor Song Xiaowu made him an attendant of the Hualin Academy and gave him a housecoat.

古文：解褐南徐州从事、公府参军。
现代文：起初官作南徐州从事、公府参军。
English: At first, he was engaged in government work in southern Xuzhou and joined the army.

古文：始元嘉中，用何承天所制历，比古十一家爲密。
现代文：当初宋元嘉年间，用何承天所制定的历法，比古时十一家都精密。
English: At the beginning of the Song and Yuan Dynasties, the calendar established by He Zhengten was more precise than that of the eleven dynasties in ancient times.

古文：冲之以爲尚疏，乃更造新法，上表言之。
现代文：而冲之认为还是粗疏，就又造了新历，并上表奏明。
English: But Chongzhi thought that it was still crude, so he created a new calendar and made it clear on the table.

古文：孝武令朝士善历者难之，不能屈。
现代文：孝武帝让朝臣中精通历法的和他论辩，都驳不倒他。
English: Emperor Xiaowu had his courtiers, who were well versed in the calendar, argue with him, but they were unable to refute him.

古文：会帝崩不施行。
现代文：恰逢孝武帝死未能施行。
English: It coincided with the death of Emperor Xiaowu and was not implemented.

古文：历位爲娄县令，谒者仆射。
现代文：历任娄县令，谒者仆射。
English: Successive county magistrates of Xing, Xing's subordinate shoots.

古文：初，宋武平关中，得姚兴指南车，有外形而无机杼，每行，使人于内转之。
现代文：当初，宋武帝平定关中，缴获姚兴指南车，只有外形而无内部机关。每当行驰时，得让人在里面转动。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Songwu of Pingding Pass captured Yao Xing's guide car, which only had an external shape but no internal organs. Whenever it was driven, people had to turn it inside.

古文：升明中，齐高帝辅政，使冲之追修古法。
现代文：升明年间，齐高帝辅政，让冲之考查研究古时的制造法。
English: In the middle of the following year, Emperor Qi Gao, assisted by the government, allowed Chongzhi to investigate and study the ancient manufacturing method.

古文：冲之改造铜机，圆转不穷，而司方如一，马钧以来未之有也。
现代文：冲之改造了铜制机械，于是车子随便转动，指示方向却始终如一，自马均以来还没有过他这样的巧匠。
English: Chongzhi remodeled the copper machinery, so the car rotates freely, but the direction is consistent. There has not been a craftsman like him since Ma Jun.

古文：时有北人索驭驎者亦云能造指南车，高帝使与冲之各造，使于乐游苑对共校试，而颇有差僻，乃毁而焚之。
现代文：当时有北方人索驭駘也自称能造指南车，齐高帝使他和冲之各造一辆，让他们在乐游苑进行比试，结果索驭駘的差得很远，就把他的给烧了。
English: At that time, there was a northerner who claimed to be able to build a guide car. Emperor Qigong made him and Chongzhi each build one, and let them compete in Le Youyuan. As a result, the one who was far behind burned his gift.

古文：晋时杜预有巧思，造欹器，三改不成。
现代文：晋朝时杜预有创造才能，曾造欹器，结果改动三次都未成功。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, Du already had the ability to create, and he once made a crockery. As a result, the changes were unsuccessful three times.

古文：永明中，竟陵王子良好古，冲之造欹器献之，与周庙不异。
现代文：齐永明年间，竟陵王萧子良好古，冲之造了欹器献给他，和周代太庙中的没有两样。
English: In the middle of the second year of the Qiyong Dynasty, King Xiao Zi of the Necropolis was very old, and Chong Zi made a pottery dedicated to him, which was no different from that of the ancient temple in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：文惠太子在东宫，见冲之历法，啓武帝施行。
现代文：文惠太子在东宫，见到冲之的历法，奏请齐武帝施行。
English: Prince Wen Hui saw Chongzhi's calendar in the East Palace and asked Emperor Qiwu to implement it.

古文：文惠寻薨又寝。
现代文：不久太子一死这事又搁下了。
English: Soon after the death of the prince, the matter was shelved again.

古文：转长水校尉，领本职。
现代文：冲之调任长水校尉，兼任原职。
English: Chochin was transferred to the post of Chosui school captain, concurrently holding his original post.

古文：冲之造安边论，欲开屯田，广农殖。
现代文：他写了《安边论》，想让朝廷实行屯田，扩展耕地。
English: He wrote "On the Peaceful Side" and wanted the imperial court to carry out the settlement of farmlands and expand cultivated land.

古文：建武中，明帝欲使冲之巡行四方，兴造大业，可以利百姓者，会连有军事，事竟不行。
现代文：建武年间，齐明帝想派他去巡行四方，兴办一些对百姓有利的事业，赶上连年战争，最终未能成行。
English: During Jianwu's reign, Emperor Qiming wanted to send him on a four-way tour to set up some beneficial undertakings for the people and catch up with the years of war, but in the end he was unable to make the trip.

古文：冲之解锺律博塞，当时独绝，莫能对者。
现代文：冲之通晓乐律和博戏，是当时一绝，无人能与之匹敌。
English: Chongzhi's knowledge of music and drama was unparalleled at the time, and no one could match it.

古文：以诸葛亮有木牛流马，乃造一器，不因风水，施机自运，不劳人力。
现代文：因为诸葛亮造有木牛流马，他就造了一种器械，不借风力水力，启动机关就能自己运行，不需人力。
English: Because Zhuge Liang made a wooden ox and a horse, he made a kind of instrument, without using wind and water power, the starting organ can run by itself, without manpower.

古文：又造千里船，于新亭江试之，日行百馀里。
现代文：又造千里船，在新亭江试航，日行百余里。
English: He also built a thousand-mile boat and sailed it on the Xintingjiang River, covering more than a hundred miles a day.

古文：于乐游苑造水碓磨，武帝亲自临视。
现代文：在乐游苑造水碓磨，齐武帝曾亲自去观看。
English: Emperor Qibao personally went to see the water mill being built in Le Youyuan.

古文：又特善算。
现代文：又特别长于算术。
English: They are also particularly good at arithmetic.

古文：不用身后之誉，唯重目前知见。 
现代文：永元二年去世，年七十二。著有《易老庄义》，注释《论语》、《孝经》，注《九章》，编撰《缀述》数十篇。
English: He died in the second year of Yongyuan, in the year 72. He was the author of "Yi Lao Shouyi," annotated "Analects," "Chapter of Filial Piety," annotated "Nine Chapters," and compiled dozens of "Descriptions."

古文：锺嵘字仲伟，潁川长社人，晋侍中雅七世孙也。
现代文：钟嵘字仲伟，颍川长社人，是晋朝侍中钟雅的七世孙。
English: Zhong Wei, a member of the Qianchuan Chosha, was the seventh-generation grandson of Zhong Ya, an attendant of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：父蹈，齐中军参军。
现代文：父亲钟蹈，为齐朝中军参军。
English: His father, Zhong Tie, was serving in the Chinese army at the time.

古文：嵘与兄岏、弟屿并好学，有思理。
现代文：钟嵘和哥哥钟山元、弟弟钟屿都很好学，思维有条理。
English: Jonghyun, his elder brother Jonghyun and younger brother Jongyu are all very eager to learn, good at thinking and able to reason.

古文：嵘齐永明中爲国子生，明周易。
现代文：钟嵘在齐永明年间为国子生，通晓《周易》。
English: Zhong Rong was born in the middle of the second year of the Qiyong Dynasty. He is familiar with "Zhou Yi."

古文：卫将军王俭领祭酒，颇赏接之。
现代文：卫将军王俭作国子寺祭酒，对他很赏识，常与他交往。
English: Wang Jian, a general of the Wei Dynasty, made the festival liquor for the Guozi Temple. He was highly appreciated and often associated with him.

古文：建武初，爲南康王侍郎。
现代文：建武初年，作南康王侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Kenmu era, he became the chamberlain of King Nankang.

古文：时齐明帝躬亲细务，纲目亦密，于是郡县及六署九府常行职事，莫不争自啓闻，取决诏敕。
现代文：当时齐明帝爱亲自过问细小的事务，公务也繁多，于是各郡县以及中央各部门的日常公事，无不是争相启奏朝廷，等候皇上裁决。
English: At that time, Emperor Qiming loved to personally handle small matters, and there were many official duties. Therefore, the daily affairs of counties and central government departments were all competing to report to the imperial court, waiting for the emperor's ruling.

古文：文武勋旧皆不归选部，于是凭势互相通进，人君之务，粗爲繁密。
现代文：文武官员任命都不归吏部，于是各凭势力互相推举提拔，君主的事务很繁忙。
English: The appointment of civil and military officials did not belong to the cadre department, so each promoted the other by force, and the affairs of the monarch were very busy.

古文：嵘乃上书言： 古者明君揆才颁政，量能授职，三公坐而论道，九卿作而成务，天子可恭己南面而已。 
现代文：钟嵘就上书提出： 古时候贤明的君主职责在于根据各人的才能授予官职；三公也不管具体事务，只是陪君主谈论大政方针，具体事务都靠九卿办理，天子只须保持自己的尊严面南称孤就行了。 
English: Regarding the petition, Zhong Qi said: In ancient times, the wise monarch's duty was to bestow official positions according to each person's ability; the three princes did not care about specific affairs, but only accompanied the monarch to discuss the general policy, and the specific affairs were handled by the nine lords. The emperor only had to maintain his dignity and say that he was an orphan.

古文：书奏，上不怿，谓太中大夫顾暠曰： 锺嵘何人，欲断朕机务，卿识之不？ 
现代文：奏章递上去，明帝看了不高兴，问太中大夫顾詗说： 钟嵘是谁，想管理我的事务，你认识他吗？ 
English: When the record was handed over, Emperor Ming was not happy to see it, and asked the Grand Steward Gu Xi, "Who is Zhong Xi, who wants to manage my affairs? Do you know him?"

古文：答曰： 嵘虽位末名卑，而所言或有可采。
现代文：顾詗回答： 钟嵘虽然职位不高没有名气，但所说的有可采纳之处。
English: Gu Yao replied: Although Zhong Yao's position is not high and he is not famous, what he said is acceptable.

古文：且繁碎职事，各有司存，今人主总而亲之，是人主愈劳而人臣愈逸，所谓代庖人宰而爲大匠斲也。 
现代文：况且繁琐的日常事务，自有各部门去办，现在人君把它们都包揽起来亲自处理，这样人君就越来越忙而人臣越来越安逸，这就是所谓的代厨子做饭替木匠砍削啊。 
English: What's more, the tedious day-to-day tasks, which used to be handled by various departments, are now handled by the ministers themselves. As a result, the ministers are getting busier and the ministers are getting more and more comfortable. This is the so-called substitute chef cooking and chopping wood for the carpenter.

古文：上不顾而他言。
现代文：明帝不接茬儿把话岔开。
English: Emperor Ming did not take the bait and broke off the conversation.

古文：永元末，除司徒行参军。
现代文：永元末年，任司徒代参军。
English: At the end of the Yongyuan era, Zhong Yao was expelled from the priesthood and joined the army.

古文：梁天监初，制度虽革，而未能尽改前弊，嵘上言曰： 永元肇乱，坐弄天爵，勋非即戎，官以贿就。
现代文：梁天监初年，制度虽有改革，但未能革除前朝所有弊端，钟嵘上书说： 自齐永元年间天下动乱，滥置冗官，没上过战场就能得军功，作官靠的是行贿。
English: In the first year of Liang Tianjun, although the system was reformed, it failed to eliminate all the drawbacks of the previous dynasty. Zhong Qi wrote: Since the first year of Qi Yongyuan, the country has been in turmoil, officials have been overworked, military merit can be obtained without going to the battlefield, and officials rely on bribery.

古文：挥一金而取九列，寄片劄以招六校。骑都塞市，郎将填街。
现代文：送点儿钱财就能位居九卿，一封拍马屁的书信就可取得校尉。骑都塞市，郎将填街。
English: If you send a little money, you can rank among the nine nobles, and a flattering letter can get you a captain. If you ride to the capital city, your brother-in-law will fill the streets.

古文：服既缨组，尚爲臧获之事，职虽黄散，犹躬胥徒之役。
现代文：以至于有了官宦的身份，却还在干仆役的行当，名实混淆，莫此为甚。
English: So much so that they have the status of government officials, but they are still doing the work of servants, and the name and reality are confused.

古文：名实淆紊，兹焉莫甚。臣愚谓永元诸军官是素族士人，自有清贯，而因斯受爵，一宜削除，以惩浇竞。
现代文：我认为永元时的军官都是出身寒门，作皇帝的文职侍从，因此而得爵位，应把他们全部罢免，以惩戒那些靠侥幸不走正道向上爬的人。
English: I think that the officers at the time of Yongyuan were all from humble origins, serving as civil servants of the emperor, and therefore received a knighthood. They should all be dismissed to punish those who did not take the right path to climb up by chance.

古文：若吏姓寒人，听极其门品，不当因军遂滥清级。
现代文：至于出身小吏的寒门中人，应根据他们的门第授官，不能因为有军功就让他们占据士族们的官位。
English: As for the junior officials who were born in poor families, they should be promoted according to their families. They should not be allowed to occupy the official positions of the warrior class because of their military achievements.

古文：若侨杂伧楚，应在绥抚，正宜严断禄力，绝其妨正，直乞虚号而已。 
现代文：像那些混杂在北来侨民中的门第低下的人，应主要加以安抚，而严格限制他们的官禄，杜绝他们妨害士族作官的正途，只给予他们虚职就行了。 
English: As for the low-born who mingle with the northern immigrants, they should be mainly pacified, and their official positions should be strictly limited. They should not be allowed to obstruct the right path of officials from the warrior class, and they should only be given non-official positions.

古文：敕付尚书行之。
现代文：梁武帝交付尚书省施行。
English: Gaozhu ordered that the letter be sent to Shangshuo for implementation.

古文：衡阳王元简出守会稽，引爲宁朔记室，专掌文翰。
现代文：衡阳王萧元简出京作会稽太守，召他作宁朔记室，专管文字工作。
English: The king of Hengyang, Xiao Yuanjian, dispatched him to Beijing as the auditor-general of the Writers' Association, and called him to serve as the secretary of Ningshuo, in charge of literary work.

古文：时居士何胤筑室若邪山，山发洪水，漂拔树石，此室独存。
现代文：当时有隐士何胤在若邪山建房舍，山洪暴发，拔树漂石，他的房屋却安然保存。
English: At that time, there was a hermit, He Yin, who built a house in Wakaizashi Mountain. Flash floods occurred and trees were uprooted, but his house was safely preserved.

古文：元简令嵘作瑞室颂以旌表之，辞甚典丽。
现代文：元简让钟嵘作《瑞室颂》来表彰何胤，文辞十分典雅华丽。
English: Yuan Jian asked Zhong Qi to write "Suizhousong" to commend He Yin, and the words are very elegant and gorgeous.

古文：迁西中郎晋安王记室。
现代文：又改任西中郎晋安王记室。
English: She was also appointed as the secretary of Nishinakuro Shinan no Okimi.

古文：嵘尝求誉于沈约，约拒之。
现代文：钟嵘曾请求沈约为他传播声誉，沈约不答应。
English: Zhong Yu had asked Shen Yotong to spread his reputation, but Shen Yotong did not agree.

古文：及约卒，嵘品古今诗爲评，言其优劣，云 观休文衆制，五言最优。
现代文：等沈约死后，钟嵘把古今之诗分品级加以评论，指出它们的优劣，其中说 纵观沈休文各类诗文，以五言诗最优。
English: After Shen Yu's death, Zhong Qi commented on the classification of ancient and modern poems, pointing out their advantages and disadvantages. He said that looking at all kinds of poems by Shen Huiwen, five-character poems are the best.

古文：齐永明中，相王爱文，王元长等皆宗附约。
现代文：齐永明年间，竟陵王萧子良爱好文学，王元长等人也都尊崇依附沈约。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, King Xiao Ziliang loved literature, and Wang Yuanzhong and others also respected and adhered to Shenyu.

古文：于时谢朓未遒，江淹才尽，范云名级又微，故称独步。
现代文：当时谢月兆的诗还不够遒劲，而江淹才气已尽，范云的名声地位又低微，所以他得以独霸文坛。
English: At that time, Xie Yueshao's poetry was not vigorous enough, while Jiang Dun's talent was exhausted, and Fan Yun's reputation status was low, so he was able to dominate the literary world.

古文：所撰皇帝实录、皇德记、起居注、职仪等百余卷，文集十卷。
现代文：因此他的文辞比范云周严，意蕴却浅于江淹。 这是追念旧时的怨恨，以此来报复沈约。
English: Therefore, his words are stricter than Fan Yun, but the connotation is shallower than the flooding of the river.This is a reminiscence of the old resentment, in order to take revenge on Shen Yue.

古文：吴均字叔庠，吴兴故鄣人也。
现代文：不久死于任上。吴均字叔庠，吴兴故鄣人。
English: He died soon after taking office. Wu Junzhi Shuxuan, Wu Xing is the deceased.

古文：家世寒贱，至均好学有俊才，沈约尝见均文，颇相称赏。
现代文：家世寒贱，吴均好学有才气，沈约曾见到吴均的文章，很是赞赏。
English: Coming from a humble family, Wu Jun is eager to learn and talented. Shen You had seen Wu Jun's article, which was very appreciated.

古文：梁天监初，柳恽爲吴兴，召补主簿，日引与赋诗。
现代文：梁天监初年，柳恽作吴兴太守，召吴均任主簿，每天带他一块儿赋诗。
English: In the first year of Liang Tianjun, Liu Bei made Wu Xing the governor-general, called Wu Jun to be the chief secretary, and took him to play poetry with him every day.

古文：均文体清拔，有古气，好事者或学之，谓爲 吴均体 。
现代文：吴均文体清新超拔，有古人气韵，一些好事的人就模仿他，称之为 吴均体 。
English: Wu Jun style is fresh and superior, with the charm of the ancients. Some good people imitate him and call it Wu Jun style.

古文：均尝不得意，赠恽诗而去，久之复来，恽遇之如故，弗之憾也。
现代文：吴均曾感到不满，就对柳恽赠诗告辞，过些日子又回来，柳恽还像以前那样待他，并不记在心上。
English: Wu Jun once felt dissatisfied, so he gave a poem to Liu Bei to say goodbye. After a few days, he came back, and Liu Bei still treated him as before, without taking it to heart.

古文：荐之临川靖惠王，王称之于武帝，即日召入赋诗，悦焉。待诏着作，累迁奉朝请。
现代文：把他推荐给临川靖惠王萧宏，萧宏在武帝面前称赞他，当天武帝就把他召入宫内赋诗，对他很满意，让他作待诏著作，后来逐步升迁为奉朝请。
English: He recommended him to Linchuan Jinghui King Xiaohong, and Xiaohong praised him in front of Emperor Wu. On the same day, Emperor Wu called him into the palace to compose poems. He was very satisfied with him, and asked him to write a work for the imperial edict. Later, he was gradually promoted to serve the imperial court.

古文：先是，均将着史以自名，欲撰齐书，求借齐起居注及群臣行状，武帝不许，遂私撰齐春秋奏之。
现代文：先前，吴均想通过著史书成名，打算撰写齐代史书，向朝廷求借齐朝帝王的起居注和关于群臣的记录材料，武帝不答应。
English: Previously, Wu Jun wanted to become famous by writing a history book. He planned to write a history book of the Qi Dynasty, and asked the imperial court for the living notes of the emperor of the Qi Dynasty and the records of the ministers. Emperor Wu did not agree.

古文：书称帝爲齐明帝佐命，帝恶其实录，以其书不实，使中书舍人刘之遴诘问数十条，竟支离无对。
现代文：于是就私自撰写《齐春秋》进呈朝廷，书中称武帝曾为齐明帝辅佐，武帝恼恨他如实记录，便说此书不符合事实，派中书舍人刘之遴责问他数十条，他竟支支吾吾答不上来。
English: So I wrote "Qi Chunqiu" and submitted it to the imperial court. The book said that Emperor Wu had been an assistant to Emperor Qiming. Emperor Wu was angry that he had recorded the truth. He said that the book did not conform to the facts. He sent Liu Zhixuan, a Chinese scholar, to ask him dozens of questions, but he couldn't answer.

古文：敕付省焚之，坐免职。
现代文：于是武帝下令把他的书交有关部门烧了。吴均也因此被免职。
English: So Emperor Wu ordered that his books be handed over to the relevant departments and burned. Wu Jun was also removed from his post for this.

古文：寻有敕召见，使撰通史，起三皇讫齐代。
现代文：不久又下令召见他，让他撰写《通史》，起自三皇，止于齐代。
English: Soon after, he ordered that he be summoned to write a "general history," starting with the Three Emperors and ending with the Qi Dynasty.

古文：均草本纪、世家已毕，唯列传未就，卒。
现代文：吴均已经草拟出本纪、世家，只有列传还未写成，便去世了。
English: Wu Jun had already drafted the chronicle and the family tree, but he died before he could write the genealogy.

古文：均注范晔后汉书九十卷，着齐春秋三十卷，庙记十卷，十二州记十六卷，钱唐先贤传五卷，续文释五卷，文集二十卷。
现代文：吴均注范晔《后汉书》九十卷，著《齐春秋》三十卷，《庙记》十卷，《十二州记》十六卷，《钱塘先贤传》五卷，《续文释》五卷，文集二十卷。
English: Wu Jun annotated Fan Yu's "Post-Han Shu" with 90 volumes, "Qi Chunqiu" with 30 volumes, "Temple Records" with 10 volumes, "Twelve State Records" with 16 volumes, "Biographies of the Qiantang Sages" with 5 volumes, "Continuation Commentary" with 5 volumes, and anthologies with 20 volumes.

古文：刘勰字彦和，东莞莒人也。
现代文：刘勰字彦和，东莞莒县人。
English: Liu Junzhi, a native of Jixian County, Dongguan.

古文：父尚，越骑校尉。
现代文：父亲刘尚，作过越骑校尉。
English: His father was a cavalry captain in Vietnam.

古文：勰早孤，笃志好学。
现代文：刘勰早年丧父，一心求学。
English: Liu Yao lost his father at an early age and devoted himself to his studies.

古文：家贫不婚娶，依沙门僧佑居，遂博通经论，因区别部类，录而序之。
现代文：因家贫不曾娶妻，到寺里依靠和尚僧佑生活，因此能博通佛教经典，于是把它们分门别类，抄录下来定出次序。
English: Because of his family's poverty, he never married, and went to the temple to live on the support of the monks. As a result, he was able to become well-versed in the Buddhist classics, so he divided them into categories and copied them down to determine the order.

古文：定林寺经藏，勰所定也。
现代文：定林寺的经藏，就是刘勰所勘定的。
English: The collection of sutras in the Jilin Temple is what Liu Yuxuan is responsible for.

古文：梁天监中，兼东宫通事舍人，时七庙飨荐已用蔬果，而二郊农社犹有牺牲，勰乃表言二郊宜与七庙同改。
现代文：梁天监年间，任东宫通事舍人。当时朝廷宗庙的祭品已经用瓜果，而春秋两次郊祀农神却还用牲畜。刘勰就上奏提出郊祭应与庙祭相同。
English: During the time of Liang Tianjun, he served as the courier of the East Palace. At that time, the offerings of the imperial family temple were already using melons and fruits, but the two suburban worship of the farmer gods in spring and autumn were still using livestock. Liu Wei proposed that the suburban festival should be the same as the temple festival.

古文：诏付尚书议，依勰所陈。
现代文：武帝下诏把他的奏议交尚书省讨论，最后采纳了他的建议。
English: Emperor Wu sent his proposal to Shang Shuxuan for discussion, and finally accepted his suggestion.

古文：迁步兵校尉，兼舍人如故，深被昭明太子爱接。
现代文：改任步兵校尉，仍兼舍人之职。他深为昭明太子喜爱。
English: He was promoted to the rank of infantry captain, and still held the post of chief of staff. He was deeply loved by Crown Prince Shōmyō.

古文：初，勰撰文心雕龙五十篇，论古今文体，其序略云： 予齿在逾立，尝夜梦执丹漆之礼器，随仲尼而南行，寤而喜曰：大哉，圣人之难见也，乃小子之垂梦欤！
现代文：当初，刘勰撰《文心雕龙》五十篇，评论古今文体，其序言说： 我在三十多岁时，曾在夜里梦见捧着丹漆礼器，跟随仲尼南行。醒来后高兴地说： 真是伟大啊！圣人出现多么不容易啊。是圣人给我托的梦吧。
English: At first, Liu Wei wrote "Wenxin Jiaolong" fifty articles, commenting on ancient and modern literary styles. Its preface said: When I was in my thirties, I once dreamed at night of holding a red lacquer ritual vessel and following Zhong Ni south. After waking up, I said happily: It's really great! How difficult it is for a saint to appear. It must have been a dream the saint asked me to have.

古文：自生灵以来，未有如夫子者也。
现代文：自从有生灵以来，没有人比孔夫子更伟大了。 
English: Since the dawn of time, no one has been greater than Confucius.

古文：敷赞圣旨，莫若注经，而马、郑诸儒弘之已精，就有深解，未足立家。
现代文：宣扬赞美圣人之意，都不如注经重要，但马融、郑玄等大儒已经把它发扬光大，阐释精微，即使还有人有深刻理解，也难成一家之言。
English: It is not as important to propagate the meaning of praising saints as it is to comment on the sutras, but great scholars such as Ma Rong and Zheng Xuan have carried it forward and elaborated it. Even if there are people who have a deep understanding, it is difficult to become a household word.

古文：唯文章之用，实经典枝条，五礼资之以成，六典因之致用。
现代文：只有文学作品的作用，可谓是经典的枝条，五礼凭它助成，六典靠它推行。
English: Only the role of literary works can be said to be the classic branch, the Five Rites are supported by it, and the Six Classics are promoted by it.

古文：于是搦笔和墨，乃始论文。
现代文：于是就握笔磨墨，开始评论为文之道。
English: So I sharpened my pen and began my thesis.

古文：其爲文用四十九篇而已。 既成，未爲时流所称。
现代文：共著成文章四十九篇。 书成之后，并未被当时名流所赞许。
English: He co-authored forty-nine articles, which were not well received by celebrities at the time.

古文：勰欲取定于沈约，无由自达，乃负书候约于车前，状若货鬻者。
现代文：刘勰想让沈约给评价一下，又没门路见沈约，于是就背着自己的书等候沈约的车子经过，样子像是个小贩。
English: Liu Wei wanted Shen Yao to give an evaluation, but there was no way to see Shen Yao, so he carried his book and waited for Shen Yao's car to pass by, looking like a hawker.

古文：约取读，大重之，谓深得文理，常陈诸几案。
现代文：沈约拿去读了后，大为赏识，认为它深通为文之道，就常把它放在自己书桌上翻看。
English: After reading Shen Yonah, he greatly appreciated it and thought that it was a profound way of writing, so he often put it on his desk to look over it.

古文：勰爲文长于佛理，都下寺塔及名僧碑志，必请勰制文。
现代文：刘勰的文章长于佛经义理，京城里寺塔及名僧碑讠志，一定都要请他撰文。
English: Liu Yao's articles are better than the Buddhist sutra Giri, the capital's temples and towers and famous monks' monuments, so he must be invited to write an article.

古文：敕与慧震沙门于定林寺撰经证。
现代文：朝廷下诏让他和慧震和尚在定林寺撰写经证。
English: The imperial court ordered him and Huizhen Monk to write a scripture in Dinglin Temple.

古文：陈亡入隋，行至江州，追感其父所终，遘疾卒。论曰：文章者，盖情性之风标，神明之律吕也。
现代文：写成以后，就要求出家，先烧掉胡子头发以表明意志，皇帝下诏批准，于是就改换僧服，改名叫慧地。评论：文章，可说是情感的标志，精神的乐律。
English: After writing it, he asked to become a monk, and first burned his beard and hair to show his will. The emperor issued an edict approving this, so he changed his robes and changed his name to Huidi. Comment: An article can be said to be a sign of emotion, a spiritual melody.

古文：蕴思含豪，游心内运，放言落纸，气韵天成。
现代文：潜藏的思绪，蕴含的萌想，在内心酝酿激荡，纵情挥发写在纸上，格调意境便自然生成。
English: The latent thoughts, the contained inspirations, brewing and stirring in the heart, the indulgence and evaporation are written on paper, and the style and mood are naturally generated.

古文：莫不禀以生灵，迁乎爱嗜，机见殊门，赏悟纷杂，感召无象，变化不穷。
现代文：它们无不带有灵性，各自好尚不同，技巧各异，见解感悟也多种多样，心灵感应没有外象表露，但却变化无穷。
English: They are all spiritual, their likes and dislikes are different, their skills are different, their opinions and impressions are also diverse. Telepathy has no outward appearance, but it is endless.

古文：发五声之音响，而出言异句，写万物之情状，而下笔殊形。
现代文：弹奏五声的音响，而出言语句相异，描绘万物的情貌，而下笔形状不同。
English: The sound of five tones is played, the words and sentences are different, the appearance of all things is depicted, and the shape of the next stroke is different.

古文：畅自心灵，而宣之简素，轮扁之言，未或能尽。然纵假之天性，终资好习，是以古之贤哲，咸所用心。
现代文：从心灵奔畅而出，宣示在书帛上。或许它不能穷尽所有的要言妙道，然而它使人心解脱束缚的特性，始终养育着勤奋好学之士，因此古代的贤明之人，都爱在这项上下功夫。
English: It may not be able to exhaust all the essentials of the path, but its ability to liberate the mind and always nurture a diligent learner is why the sages of antiquity loved to work on it.

古文：至若丘灵鞠等，或克荷门业，或夙怀慕尚，虽位有穷通，而名不可灭。
现代文：至于像丘灵鞠等人，有的能够承传文学事业，有的对此矢志追求，虽然在仕途上有得意有不得意，但他们的名字却能流传下来不被磨灭。
English: As for people like Chuling and others, some are able to carry on the literary cause, while others are determined to pursue it. Although they have strengths and weaknesses in their careers, their names can be passed down and not be erased.

