古文：白幽求王太虚王子芝刘商
现代文：白幽求王太虚王子芝刘商
English: Bai Youcui, Wang Taihu, Prince Zhi, Liu Shang

古文：白幽求
现代文：白幽求
English: Bai Yuxu

古文：唐真元十一年，秀才白幽求，频年下第。
现代文：唐真元十一年，秀才白幽求，多年赴试不第。
English: In the eleventh year of Tang Zhenyuan, the talented young man asked for help in vain. After many years of trying, he finally succeeded.

古文：其年失志，后乃从新罗王子过海，于大谢公岛，夜遭风，与徒侣数十人为风所飘，南驰两日两夜，不知几千万里。
现代文：那年赴试又落了榜，后来就跟着新罗王子过海游览，在大谢公岛，夜里遇上大风，他和几十个与自己情况类似的人一起被风飘走，他们所乘的船象骏马疾行一样，在海里走了两天两夜，也不知走了几千里还是几万里。
English: That year, he failed the test again. Later, he followed the Shilla prince to cross the sea for an excursion. On the Da Xie Gong Island, he encountered a strong wind at night. He and dozens of people similar to himself were carried away by the wind. The boat they took was like a galloping horse, and they walked in the sea for two days and two nights, and they did not know whether they walked thousands of miles or tens of thousands of miles.

古文：风稍定，徐行，见有山林，乃整棹望之。
现代文：风稍稳定，船走得慢了，看见有山林，就调整船的航向，向那里驶去。
English: The wind was a little steady, so the boat slowed down. When it saw some mountains and forests, it adjusted the boat's course and headed there.

古文：及前到，山高万仞，南面半腹，有城壁。台阁门宇甚壮丽。
现代文：等到船到它的前面一看，山高万仞，南面半山腰，有城墙，台阁门宇都很壮观华丽。
English: When the ship arrives in front of it, the mountain is very high, the south side is halfway up the mountain, there are city walls, and the platform doors are all spectacular and gorgeous.

古文：维舟而升，至城一二里，皆龙虎列坐于道两旁，见幽求，乃耽耽而视幽求。
现代文：白幽求拴好船往上攀登，在到达城还有一二里的地方，都有龙虎列队坐在道的两边。看见白幽求，就全神贯注地看着白幽求。
English: Bai Yuxu rode a good boat and climbed up. When he was still one or two miles away from the city, there were dragons and tigers sitting on both sides of the road. When he saw Bai Yuxu, he looked at Bai Yuxu intently.

古文：幽求进路甚恐惧，欲求从者。失声彷徨，次于大树。
现代文：白幽求前进的道路令人恐惧，想要请求跟随的人帮助，结果是脱口而出，但又盘旋不敢上前，在大树下徘徊。
English: The path ahead for Bai Yuxu is frightening. When she wants to ask for help from the people following her, she blurts it out, but she is afraid to move forward and hovers under the big tree.

古文：枝为风相磨，如人言诵诗点。
现代文：树枝被风吹动，相互磨擦发出的声音，象人说话朗诵诗歌的声音。
English: The sound of branches being blown by the wind, rubbing against each other, and the sound of poetry being recited like human speech.

古文：幽求谛听之，乃曰： 玉幢亘碧虚，此乃真人居。徘徊仍未进，邪省犹难除。 
现代文：白幽求仔细听它说的是什么。是说： 玉幢横贯在浅蓝色的空虚，这里是仙人居住的地方，游移不定仍旧不前进，不正当的内省还是难去掉。 
English: Bai Yuxu listened carefully to what it said. It said: The Jade Pagoda stretches across the light blue emptiness, here is the place where the immortals live, the wandering still does not move forward, and the improper introspection is still difficult to remove.

古文：幽求犹疑未敢前，俄有朱衣人自城门而出，传敕曰： 西岳真君来游。 
现代文：白幽求听了之后，还是犹疑不敢向前。一会儿，有一个穿红衣服的人从城门出来，传达命令说： 西岳真君来游览。 
English: After listening to Bai Yu's entreaty, Bai Yu still hesitated and did not dare to move forward. After a while, a person wearing red clothes came out of the city gate and conveyed an order: "Xiyue Zhenjun, come for a tour."

古文：诸龙虎皆俯伏曰： 未到。 
现代文：众龙虎都俯身伏在地上说： 还没到。 
English: All the dragons and tigers prostrated themselves on the ground and said, "We haven't arrived yet."

古文：幽求因趋走前，见朱衣人不顾而入。
现代文：白幽求趁机小步快跑向前，只见穿红色衣服的人头也不回就进去了。
English: Bai Yucu took advantage of the opportunity to run forward quickly at a small pace, only to see the person wearing red clothes enter without looking back.

古文：幽求进退不得。左右诸龙虎时时目幽求，盘旋次。
现代文：白幽求进退不得，左右众龙虎又一刻不停地看着白幽求。
English: Bai Yuxu could not retreat, and the dragons and tigers on the left and right kept watching Bai Yuxu.

古文：门中数十人出，龙虎奔走，人皆乘之下山。
现代文：白幽求正在徘徊，门里出来几十个人，龙虎奔跑，那些人都骑着它们下山去了。
English: Bai Yucuo was wandering around, dozens of people came out of the door, dragons and tigers were running, and those people rode them down the mountain.

古文：幽求亦随之，至维舟处，诸骑龙虎人皆履海面而行。须臾没于远碧中。
现代文：白幽求也跟着他们。到白幽求拴船的地方，那些骑龙虎的人都踩着海面往前走，不一会儿，消失在远方碧绿的海面上。
English: Baiyucu also followed them. At the place where Baiyucu was towing the boat, those who were riding dragons and tigers walked on the surface of the sea, and soon disappeared in the distant turquoise sea.

古文：幽求未知所适。
现代文：白幽求不知道到什么地方去好。
English: Bai Yuxu didn't know where to go.

古文：舟中具馔次。忽见从西旗节队伍，仅千人；鸾鹤青鸟，飞引于路；骑龙控虎，乘龟乘鱼。有乘朱鬣马人，衣紫云日月衣，上张翠盖，如风而至。
现代文：正在船中吃饭中间，忽然看见从西面来了一队打旗帜和符节的队伍，将近有一千人。在队伍的前面，有鸾鹤青鸟飞行引路，这些人有的骑龙骑虎，有的驾龟驾鱼，其中有一个人驾着红鬣马，穿紫云日月衣，头上张开着一顶青绿色的车盖，象风一样快的来到。
English: In the middle of eating in the boat, I suddenly saw a team of nearly a thousand people coming from the west to play flags and symbols. In front of the team, there were cranes and blue birds flying to lead the way. Some of these people were riding dragons and tigers, some were driving turtles and driving fish. One of them was driving a red steed, wearing a purple moon and sun dress, with a blue-green hood open on his head. He came as fast as the wind.

古文：幽求但俯伏而已。
现代文：白幽求只得俯身伏在地上，一动不敢动。
English: Bai Yuxu only had to bend over and lie on the ground, not daring to move.

古文：乃入城门。幽求又随觇之。
现代文：来的大队人马进入城门，白幽求又跟在后面偷看他们。
English: A large group of people entered the gate, and Bai Yuxu followed behind to peek at them.

古文：诸龙虎等依前列位。与树木花药鸟雀等，皆应节盘回如舞。
现代文：众龙虎按照以前的位置列队，和树木花草鸟雀等一起，都和着拍节周旋进退，象舞蹈一样。
English: The dragons and tigers lined up according to their previous positions, and together with the trees, flowers, plants, birds and finches, they all swirled back and forth with the beat, like a dance.

古文：幽求身亦不觉足之蹈之。
现代文：白幽求也身不由己地手舞足蹈起来。
English: Bai Yuxu also involuntarily started to dance.

古文：食顷。朱衣人持一牒书，谓龙虎曰： 使水府真君。
现代文：过了吃顿饭的工夫，红衣人手拿着一公文，对龙虎说： 到水府真君那里去。 
English: After the meal, the man in red, holding a document in his hand, said to Longhu: "Go to Mizufu Zhenjun."

古文：龙虎未前。 
现代文：龙虎没有上前。
English: Dragon and tiger did not advance.

古文：朱衣人乃顾幽求授牒。幽求未知所适。
现代文：红衣人于是看着白幽求，示意他接受公文，白幽求不知到哪儿去。
English: The man in red then looked at Bai Yuxu and signaled him to accept the official document. Bai Yuxu did not know where to go.

古文：朱衣曰： 使水府。 
现代文：红衣人说： 出使水府。 
English: The man in red said, "Send me to the water bureau."

古文：以手指之。幽求随指，而身如乘风，下山入海底。虽入水而不知为水，朦胧如日中行。亦有树木花卉，触之珊珊然有声。
现代文：红衣人用手指着前方，白幽求随着红衣人所指，身子象乘风一样，下了山进入海底，虽然进入了水中，但却感觉不到有水，朦胧之中好象是在白天行走，也有树木花卉，碰它们发出佩玉之声。
English: The man in red pointed to the front with his finger. The white peregrine falcon followed the man in red's pointing, its body like riding the wind. It descended the mountain and entered the seabed. Although it entered the water, it did not feel the water. In the dimness, it seemed to be walking in the daytime. There were also trees and flowers. If you touched them, you would hear the sound of jade.

古文：须臾至一城，宫室甚伟，门人惊顾，俯伏于路。
现代文：一会儿，到了一座城，城里宫室很雄伟。守城门的人吃惊地看着，然后俯身伏在路旁。
English: In a little while they came to a city with a great hall, and the keepers of the gate were astonished, and fell down by the roadside.

古文：俄而有数十人，皆龙头鳞身，执旗仗，引幽求入水府。
现代文：不一会儿，有几十个人，都是龙头身上长满了鳞，手里持握着旗帜棍棒，引导白幽求进入水府。
English: Soon, there were dozens of people, all with their heads covered in scales, holding flags and sticks in their hands, guiding Bai Yucuo into the water palace.

古文：真君于殿下北面授符牒。
现代文：真君在大殿下面朝北接受符牒。
English: Below the main hall, Mankun heads north to receive the summons.

古文：拜起，乃出门，已有龙虎骑从。
现代文：白幽求参拜完起来，就出了门，这时已有龙虎可以乘骑，并有随从跟着，庄重整齐地顺利通行。
English: After Bai Yu had finished praying, he went out of the gate. At this time, there were dragons and tigers that he could ride, and he was accompanied by his entourage. They passed smoothly in a dignified and orderly manner.

古文：俨然遂行，瞬息到旧所。幽求至门，又不敢入。
现代文：眨眼之间来到原来的地方，白幽求到了门口，还不敢进去。
English: In the blink of an eye, I came to the original place, and when I got to the door, I didn't dare to go in.

古文：虽未食，亦不觉馁。
现代文：他虽然没吃什么，但也不觉得饥饿。
English: Although he hadn't eaten anything, he didn't feel hungry.

古文：少顷，有觅水府使者，幽求应唯而入，殿前拜，引于西廊下，接诸使下坐，饭食非人间之味。
现代文：一会儿，有人寻找水府使者，白幽求一边答应一边走了进去，先到殿前参拜，后被引导到西廊下，接着众使者之下就坐。所用饭食都不是人世间俗人饭食的味道。
English: After a while, someone was looking for the Water Palace's emissary, and while begging, he agreed and went inside. First, he visited the front of the palace, then he was led to the west corridor, and then he sat under the emissaries. The food they used was not the taste of worldly food.

古文：徐问诸使中： 此何处也？ 
现代文：白幽求问众使者中的人，这是什么地方。
English: So I asked one of the messengers, "What is this place?"

古文：对曰： 诸真君游春台也。
现代文：回答说： 这是各位真君的游春台。
English: He replied, "This is the Spring Festival stage for all of you real princes.

古文：主人是东岳真君。春夏秋冬各有位，各在诸方，主人亦随地分也。 
现代文：主人是东岳真君，春夏秋冬有彼此不同的位置，各自在他自己的方位，主人也各自随着地方进行分配。 
English: The owner is Dongyue Zhenjun. Spring, summer, autumn and winter have different positions, each in his own direction, and the owners are also distributed according to the place.

古文：其殿东廊下，列玉女数百人，奏乐。
现代文：那殿东的厢房下，排列玉女几百人。
English: At the east wing of the hall, hundreds of young women are lined up.

古文：白鹤孔雀，皆举翅动足，更应玄歌。日晚乃出殿。于山东西为迎月殿，又有一宫观望日。
现代文：奏乐，白鹤孔雀抬起翅膀，挪动足爪，再应和深奥玄妙的歌曲，翩翩起舞，天晚了才出殿，在山的东面和西面是迎月殿，还有一个宫观是望日用的。
English: music, the white crane peacock lifts its wings and moves its paws, and then responds to the profound and mysterious song, dances, and comes out of the hall late in the day. On the east and west side of the mountain is the moon-viewing hall, and there is also a palace view for looking up at the sun.

古文：至申时，明月出矣。诸真君各为迎月诗。其一真君诗曰： 日落烟水黯，骊珠色岂昏。
现代文：到了申时明月出来了，各位真君各作迎月诗，其中一个真君的诗说： 日落了云烟和水都变成了深黑色，骊珠的颜色是否会无光呢？
English: At the time of the lunar new year, the bright moon came out, and each of the real princes wrote a poem to welcome the moon. One of the real prince's poems said: When the sun sets, the clouds, smoke and water all turn dark black. Will the color of the pearl become dull?

古文：寒光射万里，霜缟遍千门。 
现代文：寒冷的月光射出千万里，好似白霜遍及千家门。 
English: The cold moonlight shoots out tens of thousands of miles, as if white frost pervades thousands of doors.

古文：又一真君诗曰： 玉魄东方开，嫦娥逐影来。洗心兼涤目，光影游春台。 
现代文：又一个真君的诗说： 月光从东方开始升起，仙女嫦娥追逐影子来，柔媚的月光爽心又悦目，月光影子布满游春台。 
English: Another poem of Zhenjun said: The moonlight begins to rise from the east, the fairy Chang'e chases the shadow, the soft moonlight is refreshing and pleasing to the eye, and the moonlight shadow is all over Yu Chuntai.

古文：又一真君诗曰： 清波滔碧乌，天藏黯黮连。二仪不辨处，忽吐清光圆。 
现代文：又一个真君的诗说： 金乌落山清清的波涛成了青绿色，隐藏在深黑色中的天与它紧相连，在那天地分辨不清的地方，忽然吐出光芒明晰的圆月。 
English: Another of Zhenjun's poems says: The clear waves of the falling mountains of Jinwu became blue-green, and the sky, hidden in the deep black, was closely connected to it. In the place where the sky and the earth were indistinguishable, a bright full moon suddenly emerged.

古文：又一真君诗曰： 乌沉海西岸，蟾吐天东头。 
现代文：又一真君的诗接着说： 金乌沉入大海的西岸，蟾光从天的东头吐出。 
English: Another of Zhenjun's poems goes on to say: Jinwu sinks into the western shore of the sea, and Ren Guang spits out from the eastern end of the sky.

古文：忘下句，其余诗并忘之矣。
现代文：忘掉了诗的下一句，其余的诗一起都忘掉了。
English: Forgot the next line of the poem, forgot the rest of the poem altogether.

古文：赋诗罢，一真君乃命夜戏。
现代文：赋诗结束，一个真君就命令表演夜戏。
English: At the end of the poem, a real prince ordered a night show.

古文：须臾，童儿玉女三十余人，或坐空虚，或行海面，笙箫众乐，更唱迭和，有唱步虚歌者，数十百辈。
现代文：一会儿，童男玉女三十多人，有的坐空虚，有的走海面，笙箫管弦鸣，互相唱和。有唱步虚歌的，所有的不下几十几百人。
English: In a moment, there were more than thirty boys and girls, some sitting in the emptiness, some walking on the surface of the sea, banging on the orchestra, singing harmonies with each other. Some were singing fake songs, all no less than dozens and hundreds of people.

古文：幽求记其一焉。词曰： 凤凰三十六，碧天高太清。元君夫人蹋云语，冷风飒飒吹鹅笙。 
现代文：白幽求记得其中有一首歌，歌词说： 凤凰三十六，碧天高太清，元君夫人踢云语，冷风飒飒吹鹅笙。 
English: Bai Yuxu remembered that there was a song in it, the lyrics of which said: Thirty-six phoenixes, the sky is high and clear, Yuan Jun's wife kicks the clouds, the cold wind blows the geese.

古文：至四更，有绯衣人走入，鞠躬屈膝白： 天欲曙。 
现代文：到了四更天，有一个穿红衣服的人走进来，鞠躬屈膝说： 天要亮了。 
English: On the fourth day, a man in a red robe came in, bowed and said, "It's getting light."

古文：唯而趋出。
现代文：听到真君的吩咐后，一边答应一边小步退出。
English: After hearing Mr. Zhen's order, Mr. Zhen agreed to withdraw in small steps.

古文：诸君命驾各辞。
现代文：众真君命令起驾各自告别休息。
English: Zhenjun ordered everyone to say goodbye and take a break.

古文：次日，昨朱衣人屈膝言曰： 白幽求已充水府使，有劳绩。 
现代文：第二天，昨日那个穿大红衣服的人屈膝对众真君说： 白幽求已经充当水府使，有功劳。 
English: The next day, yesterday's man in the crimson robe bent his knees and said to everyone: Bai Yuxu has already served as the water bureau's envoy, which is a great achievement.

古文：诸真君议曰： 便与游春台洒扫。 
现代文：众真君商议说： 就授予他游春台洒扫。 
English: Zhenjun deliberated and said: Let him go to the Spring Festival Parade.

古文：幽求恓惶，拜乞却归故乡。
现代文：白幽求烦恼不安，叩拜乞求退归故乡。
English: Bai Yuxu begged for trouble and anxiety, and begged to return to his hometown.

古文：一真君曰： 卿在何处。 
现代文：一个真君说： 你家在什么地方？ 
English: A real gentleman said: Where is your home?

古文：对曰： 在秦中。 
现代文：白幽求回答说： 在陕中。 
English: Bai Yucu replied: In Shaanxi Province.

古文：又曰： 汝归乡何恋恋也？ 
现代文：真君又说： 你要回归故乡有什么恋恋不舍的呢？ 
English: Mankun also said, "If you want to return to your hometown, what are you so attached to?"

古文：幽求未答。
现代文：白幽求没有回答。
English: Bai Yucuo did not answer.

古文：又曰： 使随吾来。 
现代文：真君又说： 让他跟我来。 
English: Mankun also said, "Let him come with me."

古文：朱衣人指随西岳真君。
现代文：穿大红衣服的人指着西岳真君让白幽求跟着西岳真君走。
English: The man in the crimson robe pointed at Seigaku Makimi and asked Baiyuko to follow him.

古文：诸真君亦各下山，并自有龙虎鸾凤，朱鬣马龟鱼，幡节羽旄等。
现代文：众真君也各自下山，并自己有龙虎鸾凤、朱鬣马龟鱼和各种旗帜符节等。
English: Zhenjun also went down the mountain separately, and had their own dragon, tiger, phoenix, horse, turtle, and various flags.

古文：每真君有千余人，履海面而行。
现代文：每个真君都有一千多人，踩着海面行走。
English: There are more than a thousand people in each real prince, walking on the surface of the sea.

古文：幽求亦操舟随西岳真君后，自有便风，迅速如电。
现代文：白幽求也驾着船跟随在西岳真君后面，自然有便利的风，速度快如闪电。
English: Bai Yuxu also drove the boat to follow behind Xi Yue Zhenjun, naturally there was a convenient wind, the speed was fast as lightning.

古文：幽求舟为所限，乃离舟上岛，目送真君，犹见旗节隐隐而渐没。
现代文：白幽求方才悔恨大哭，但已经晚了。因而只得沿着遥远曲折的路往岛上走。
English: Bai Yuquan only regretted crying, but it was too late, so she had to walk along the long and winding road to the island.

古文：幽求方悔恨恸哭，而迢迤上岛行，乃望有人烟，渐前就问，云是明州，又却喜归旧国。
现代文：走了很长时间，才看见有人烟，慢慢地走上前去询问这是什么地方，人家说是明州。白幽求又高兴回到了故国。
English: After walking for a long time, he saw someone smoking and slowly walked up to ask what the place was. The person said it was Mingzhou. Bai Yuxu was happy to return to his home country.

古文：幽求自是休粮，常服茯苓，好游山水，多在五岳，永绝宦情矣。
现代文：白幽求从这以后停止吃粮，经常吃茯苓，好游山玩水，多半在五岳活动，根本不再想做官了。
English: After this, Bai Yucu stopped eating grain, often ate bamboo shoots, liked to travel and play in the mountains and rivers, and mostly spent his time in Wuyue. He no longer wanted to be an official.

古文：王太虚
现代文：王太虚
English: Wang Taixu

古文：东极真人王太虚，隐居王屋山中。
现代文：东极真人王太虚，隐居在王屋山中。
English: The real king of the East is too weak, he lives in seclusion in the mountain of the king's house.

古文：咸通壬辰年，王屋令王畭，夙志崇道，常念《黄庭经》。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通壬辰年，王屋县令王畭，平素的志向就崇尚道术，经常念《黄庭经》，常常想自己给《黄庭经》注解。
English: In the year of Emperor Jintao of the Tang Dynasty, Wang Zong, the ruler of Wangya County, had a simple aspiration of advocating Taoism. He often read "Huangtingjing" and often wanted to annotate "Huangtingjing" himself.

古文：每欲自为注解，而未了深玄之理，但日诵五六千遍。
现代文：然而，他并没有了解《黄庭经》深奥玄妙的道理，只是天天背诵五六千遍而已。
English: However, he did not understand the profound and mysterious truth of the "Huangting Jing," but only recited it five or six thousand times every day.

古文：闻王屋小有洞天，神仙之府，求为王屋令，欲结庐于其中，冀时得游礼耳。
现代文：他听说王屋山中的一些山洞中别有天地，是神仙居住的洞府，就请求去做王屋的县令，想要建造房屋住在他们当中，希望经常获得观光和礼敬。
English: He heard that some of the caves in Wangya Mountain have a different heaven and earth, and are the dungeons where immortals live. He asked to be the county magistrate of Wangya, wanted to build a house and live among them, and hoped to receive frequent sightseeing and respect.

古文：罢官，乃绝粒咽气数月，稍觉神旺身轻。入洞屋，誓不复返。
现代文：王畭被罢了官，于是绝粒咽气几个月，稍微觉得精神旺盛，身体轻健，就进入了洞中，并发誓不再返回。
English: Wang Yao was dismissed from his post, so he was depressed for a few months. Feeling a little energetic and physically fit, he entered the cave and vowed not to return.

古文：初行三二十里，或宽广明朗，或幽暗泥黑。
现代文：最初走了二三十里，其中有的宽阔明亮，有的幽深昏暗，摸着洞壁弯着腰走。
English: At first, I walked twenty or thirty miles, some of which were wide and bright, and some were deep and dark, feeling the cave wall and bending down.

古文：扪壁俯行，经三五日，忽坦然平阔，峭崖倚空，直拔万仞，下有嵌室，可坐数百人，石床案几，俨若有人居之。
现代文：经过三五天，忽然眼前展现出宽阔平坦的天地，悬崖峭壁插入天空，高高拔起，可达万仞。下面有一个像镶在山石中的房屋，可以坐几百人，石床、书案、茶几，摆放得很整齐，好像有人居住似的。
English: After three or five days, a wide, flat world suddenly appeared before my eyes. Cliffs and cliffs pierced the sky, rising high and reaching thousands of meters. Below, there was a house like one set in the mountain stone, which could seat several hundred people. The stone bed, the bookcase, and the coffee table were neatly arranged, as if they were inhabited.

古文：案上古经一轴，未敢遂取，稽首载拜言曰： 下土贱臣，形浊气秽，辄慕长生之道，幸入洞天，仰窥灵府，是万劫良会。
现代文：书案上有一轴古经，王畭没敢去拿，而是跪下、拱手、叩拜说： 下土的贱臣，形状混浊，气质污秽，但总是羡慕长生之道，非常幸运进入神仙的洞府，瞻仰神灵的府第，这是万劫之中的良好机会。
English: There is an ancient sutra on the manuscript. Wang Yao did not dare to pick it up, but kneeled down, folded his hands, and bowed down, saying: The lowly vassal of the lower land, his shape is muddy, his temperament is filthy, but he always envies the way of eternal life. He is very lucky to enter the cave of the immortal, and to admire the palace of the gods. This is a good opportunity in the midst of all perils.

古文：今睹上天遗迹，玉案玄经，不敢辄取，愿真仙鉴祐，许尘目一披篇卷，则受罔极之恩。 
现代文：现在看见上天的遗迹，玉石书案上的深奥玄妙的经书，不敢擅取。愿意真仙教训庇祐，允许俗眼翻阅经卷，就是受了久远无穷的恩惠。 
English: Now, when I see the relics of heaven, the profound and mysterious scriptures on the jade bookcase, I dare not take them for granted. If I am willing to learn from the true gods and allow the layman to read the scriptures, then I have received endless grace.

古文：良久叩头，乞报应之兆。
现代文：他长时间的叩头，乞求报应的征兆。
English: His prolonged prostration, begging for a sign of retribution.

古文：忽有一人坐于案侧曰： 子其忘乎？
现代文：忽然有一个人坐在书案的旁边说： 你难道忘了吗？
English: Suddenly, a person sitting next to the bookcase said, "Did you forget?"

古文：缑氏仙裔，聿能好道，可以名列青简矣。
现代文：缑氏的后裔，能够爱好道术，可以名列青简了。
English: Descendants of the Zou family who are able to enjoy the martial arts can be called Qing Jian.

古文：吾东极真人，子之同姓也。
现代文：我是东极真人，与你同姓，这是《黄庭》宝经，我作的注解。
English: I am a real person in the East, with the same surname as you. This is the commentary on the "Huangting" treasure book.

古文：此《黄庭》宝经，吾之所注，使授于子。 
现代文：现在就传授给你，又赠给他桃子。王畭得了几斗。
English: Now I will teach it to you, and give him a peach. Wang Yao won a few buckets.

古文：复赠以桃，得数斗。曰： 此食之者白日飞行，此核磨而服之，不唯愈疾，亦可延算。
现代文：东极真人说： 这桃子，吃了它白日可以飞行；这桃核，辗成粉末服用，不仅能够治好病，也可以延寿。
English: "This peach, if you eat it, you can fly during the day; this peach kernel, if you take it as a powder, can not only cure diseases, but also prolong life.

古文：子虽有志，未可居此，二十年期于兹山矣。
现代文：你虽然有志向，但不可以居住在这。二十年后在这个山上相会吧。
English: Although you have aspirations, you can't live here. Let's meet on this mountain in twenty years.

古文：勉而勤之，得道也。 
现代文：只要勤勉，会得道的。 
English: As long as you are diligent, you will succeed.

古文：言讫，不复见。
现代文：说完，就不见了。
English: And with that, he was gone.

古文：畭亦不敢久住，携桃核与经而归。
现代文：王畭也不敢久住，携带着东极真人赠送的桃核和黄庭宝经回来。
English: Wang Yao did not dare to stay for a long time, and came back with peach pits and the Huangting Treasure Book presented by Dongguan Zhenren.

古文：磨服桃核，身康无疾，颜状益少。
现代文：把桃核辗成粉末服用，身体健康，没有疾病，脸和身形也越来越年轻。
English: After taking peach kernel powder, he was healthy and disease-free, and his face and body were getting younger and younger.

古文：人间因有传写东极真人所注《黄庭经》本矣。
现代文：人世间于是就有传写东极真人所注解的《黄庭经》本了。
English: As a result, the world now has a copy of the Huang Di Jing, which was annotated by a real person from the East.

古文：王子芝
现代文：王子芝
English: Prince George's County

古文：王子芝字仙苗，白云河南缑氏人。
现代文：王子芝，字仙苗，自己说是河南缑氏人。
English: Prince Zhi, also known as Xianmiao, said that he was a member of the Luo people from Henan Province.

古文：常游京洛间。
现代文：经常游览于京师和洛阳之间。
English: He often travels between Beijing and Luoyang.

古文：耆老云： 五十年来见之，状貌恒如四十许人，莫知其甲子也。
现代文：年纪很大的人说，五十多年来，看他总不见老，身形相貌总像四十岁左右的人，不知道他究竟多少岁了。
English: A very old man said that for more than fifty years, he never looked old, and his body shape and appearance always resembled that of a person around forty years old. He did not know how old he really was.

古文：好养气而嗜酒。
现代文：他喜好养气且爱喝酒。
English: He likes to keep his spirits up and likes to drink.

古文：故蒲帅琅琊公重盈作镇之初年，仙苗居于紫极宫，王令待之甚厚。又闻其嗜酒，日以三榼饷之。
现代文：原来的蒲帅琅琊公重盈坐镇的初年，王仙苗居住在紫极宫，县令对他很看重，又听说他喜欢酒，每天给他送三榼酒。
English: Wang Xianmiao lived in the Purple Palace during the first year of the original Pu Shuai, and the county magistrate attached great importance to him. He also heard that he liked wine and sent him three bottles of wine every day.

古文：间日仙苗出，遇一樵者，荷担于宫门，貌非常，意甚异焉。
现代文：有一天王仙苗外出，遇见一个樵夫，在紫极宫门前挑着担子，相貌异常，觉得很奇怪。
English: One day, Wang Xianmiao went out and met a widower who was carrying a burden in front of the Purple Palace. His appearance was unusual and he thought it was very strange.

古文：因市其薪，厚偿厥直。樵者得金，亦不让而去。
现代文：于是买了他的柴，厚偿了木柴的价值，樵夫得到钱，不推让就走了。
English: So he bought his wood, and paid the woodman handsomely for it. The woodman got the money, and went away without a word.

古文：子芝潜令人蹑其后，以伺之。
现代文：王子芝派人暗中跟随在他的后面。
English: Prince Zizhi sent people to secretly follow behind him.

古文：樵者径趋酒肆，尽饮以归。
现代文：樵夫直接快步走到酒店，开怀畅饮，尽兴而归。
English: The woodcutter walked directly to the hotel at a brisk pace, drank heartily, and returned happily.

古文：他日复来。子芝谓曰： 知子好酒，吾有中令所饷醇醪，偿子薪价，可乎？ 曰： 可。 
现代文：过了几天又来了，王子芝对他说： 我知道你喜欢喝酒，我有县令送的味道醇厚的酒，用酒抵柴价，可以吗？ 樵夫说： 可以。 
English: A few days later he came again, and the woodcutter said to him, "I know you like to drink. I have some mellow-tasting wine sent by the county magistrate. Can I use the wine to offset the price of firewood?" The woodcutter said, "Yes."

古文：乃饮之数盂，因谓子芝： 是酒佳矣。
现代文：樵夫仅仅饮了几盂，就对王子芝说： 这酒好啊！
English: The woodcutter drank only a few sips and said to the prince, "This wine is good!

古文：然殊不及解县石氏之酝也。
现代文：不过，还远远赶不上解县石氏的酒，我刚才从那来。
English: However, it is still far from being able to keep up with the wine of Gexian Shi, where I just came from.

古文：余适自彼来，恨向者无侣，不果尽于斯酌。 
现代文：遗憾的是刚才没有饮酒的伴侣，不能尽兴品尝。 
English: Unfortunately, a partner who has not been drinking just now cannot fully enjoy the taste.

古文：子芝因降阶执手，与之拥炉。
现代文：王子芝于是降阶握着樵夫的手，和他一起围着温酒的火炉饮酒。
English: So the prince stepped down, shook the woodcutter's hand, and drank with him around a fire of warm wine.

古文：祈于樵者曰： 石氏芳醪可致否？ 
现代文：王子芝向樵夫乞求说： 石氏的美酒可以弄得来吗？ 
English: Prince Zhi begged the woodcutter, saying, "Can I have some of Mr. Shi's fine wine?

古文：樵者颔之。因命丹笔，书一符，置于火上，烟未绝，有一小竖立于前。
现代文：樵夫点头，就让取丹砂朱笔，书写一符，放在火上，烟还没有断绝，就有一个小僮立在面前。
English: The woodcutter nodded, and asked them to take a red crayon, write a mark, and place it on the fire. The smoke had not yet died down, and there was a small coffin standing in front of it.

古文：樵者敕之： 尔领尊师之仆，挈此二榼，但往石家取酒。吾待与尊师一醉。 
现代文：樵夫嘱咐他说： 你领着王尊师的仆人，提着这两个榼，只往石家去取酒，我等着和王尊师尽兴一醉。 
English: The woodcutter said to him, "Take Wang Rongshi's servant and the two mules, and go to Shijia's house to get some wine. I'm waiting for you to get drunk with Wang Rongshi."

古文：时既昏夜，门已扃禁，小竖谓芝仆曰： 可闭其目。 
现代文：当时已经天黑了，门已经上了闩。小僮对王子芝的仆人说： 你可以闭上眼睛。 
English: At that time it was already dark and the door was already bolted. Xiao Yao said to the servant of the prince, "You can close your eyes."

古文：因搭其头，人与酒壶偕出自门隙，已及解县，携酒而还，因与子芝共倾焉。
现代文：于是手搭他的头，人和酒壶都从门隙出去，已经到了解县，携带酒返回。半夜，樵夫对王子芝说： 我已经醉了。
English: So he put his hand on his head, and both the man and the wine jug went out through the gap in the door. They had already arrived in Ge County and were returning with the wine. In the middle of the night, the woodcutter said to Ojijiji: I'm already drunk.

古文：其甘醇郁烈，非世所俦。
现代文：我招呼一个客人陪你喝酒，可以吗？ 王子芝说： 行。 
English: May I invite a guest to have a drink with you? "That's fine," said the prince.

古文：中宵，樵者谓子芝曰： 已醉矣。
现代文：樵夫又用丹砂朱笔写了一道符，放在火上。
English: The woodcutter also wrote a sign with a red crayon and put it on the fire.

古文：余召一客伴子饮，可乎？ 子芝曰： 诺。 复书一朱符，置火上，瞬息闻异香满室，有一人来，堂堂美须眉，拖紫秉简，揖樵者而坐。
现代文：眨眼之间，满屋异香，随后有一个人进来，仪态稳重大方，眉清目秀，须髯根根见肉，腰间下垂紫带，手里拿着书简，向樵夫揖拜后就坐下了。
English: In the twinkling of an eye, the whole house was filled with the scent of incense, and then a man came in, with a calm and dignified demeanor, clear eyebrows, shaggy whiskers, a purple sash hanging from his waist, and a booklet in his hand. He bowed to the woodcutter and sat down.

古文：引满两巡，二壶且竭。
现代文：举饮满杯的酒，酒过两巡，两个酒壶的酒快要没了。
English: Raising a full glass of wine, after two rounds of wine, two jugs of wine are about to run out.

古文：樵者烧一铁箸，以焌紫衣者，云： 可去，时东方明矣。 
现代文：樵夫烧了一根铁筷子，烙了穿紫衣服的人一下说： 可以走了。 
English: The woodcutter burned an iron chopstick and branded the man in purple, saying, "You can go now."

古文：遂各执别。
现代文：当时东方已经亮了，于是拱手告别。
English: At that time, it was already light in the east, so I said goodbye.

古文：樵者因谓子芝曰： 识向来人否？
现代文：樵夫就对王子芝说： 认识先前来的人吗？
English: The woodcutter said to the prince, "Do you know the man who came here earlier?

古文：少顷，可造河渎庙视之。 
现代文：一会儿，可以到河神庙去看一看。 
English: In a moment, you can go to the River God Temple to have a look.

古文：子芝送樵，者讫，因过庙所，睹夜来共饮者，乃神耳，铁箸之验宛然。
现代文：王子芝送走樵夫，就到庙中，看见了夜里来共同喝酒的人，竟然是庙中的神。
English: When Prince Zhi saw the woodcutter off, he went to the temple and saw that the man who had come to drink with him in the night was actually a god in the temple.

古文：赵钧郎中时在幕府，目验此事。
现代文：铁筷子的烙印依稀还在。赵均郎中时在幕府，亲眼所见，可以验证此事。
English: The branding of the iron chopsticks is still there. Zhao Junro was in the shogunate when he was in junior high school, and he saw it with his own eyes, which can verify this.

古文：弘文馆校书郎苏悦亦寓于中条，甚熟踪迹。
现代文：弘文馆校书郎苏悦也寄寓于中条，非常熟悉事情的来龙去脉。
English: Su Yue, a school teacher at the Hongwen Hall, also lives in Zhongjie and is very familiar with the ins and outs of the situation.

古文：其后子芝再遇樵仙，别传修炼之诀，且为地仙矣。
现代文：那以后，王子芝再遇到樵仙，另外向王子芝传授了修炼的秘诀，因而王子芝成为地仙了。
English: After that, Prince Zhi again encountered the Earth Immortal. In addition, he taught Prince Zhi the secret of cultivation, so Prince Zhi became the Earth Immortal.

古文：刘商
现代文：刘商
English: Liu Shang

古文：刘商，彭城人也，家于长安。
现代文：刘商，是彭城人，家住长安。
English: Liu Shang is from Pengcheng and lives in Chang'an.

古文：少好学强记，精思攻文，有胡笳十八拍，盛行于世，儿童妇女，咸悉诵之。
现代文：青年时期很好学，并且善于记忆，精于思考，深入钻研文学，有胡笳十八拍传世，在世上盛行。孩童妇女，全都能详尽地背诵它。
English: In their youth, they learn well, and are good at memory, good at thinking, and deeply study literature. There are eighteen kinds of lies that have been passed down and are prevalent in the world. Children and women can all recite it in detail.

古文：进士擢第，历台省为郎。
现代文：刘商进士考试登第，选到台省作郎官。
English: Liu Shangjin ranked first in the examination and was elected to Taiwan Province as a provincial official.

古文：性耽道术，逢道士即师资之，炼丹服气，靡不勤切。
现代文：但他的性情爱好道术而沉浸在其中，每逢遇见道士，就拜他做老师，并给予资助。自己炼丹服气，没有不努力和恳切的地方。
English: However, his nature loves Taoism and is immersed in it. Whenever he meets a Taoist, he worships him as a teacher and gives him financial support. There is no place for him not to work hard and earnestly.

古文：每叹光阴甚促，筋骸渐衰，朝驰暮止，但自劳苦，浮荣世官，何益于己。
现代文：常常叹息光阴太短促，身体渐渐衰老。早晨开始就如车马疾行，晚上方能停止，只是自己劳累辛苦，虚浮的荣耀和世间的官位，对自己有什么好处呢？
English: He often laments that time is too short and his body is getting old. In the morning, he runs like a horse and carriage, and can only stop in the evening. But what good is his hard work, vain glory, and worldly position to himself?

古文：古贤皆隳官以求道，多得度世。
现代文：古代的贤人都弃官而去寻求道术，大多都能获得出世。
English: All the sages in ancient times renounced their official positions to pursue Taoism, and most of them were able to be reincarnated.

古文：幸毕婚嫁，不为俗累，岂劣于许远游哉。
现代文：有幸已经完成了儿女的婚姻嫁娶，不再被世俗所累，难道比去各地方远游还不好吗？
English: Isn't it better to travel far and wide if you are fortunate enough to have completed the marriage of your children and are no longer burdened by the mundane?

古文：由是以病免官，道服东游。入广陵，于城街逢一道士，方卖药，聚众极多。
现代文：由于这样想，刘商就借口有病请求辞官，穿上道服东游，进入广陵，在城内街市遇到一个道士，正在卖药，聚集的人非常多。
English: Because of this way of thinking, Liu Shang used the excuse that he was ill to ask the magistrate, put on a Taoist robe, traveled east, entered Guangling, met a Taoist in the city street market, was selling medicine, and gathered a lot of people.

古文：所卖药，人言颇有灵效。
现代文：道士卖的药，人们都说很有效。
English: The medicine sold by Taoist priests is said to be very effective.

古文：众中见商，目之相异。乃罢药，携手登楼，以酒为劝。道士所谈，自秦汉历代事，皆如目睹。
现代文：道士在众人当中看见刘商，他看着刘商，觉得和常人不同，就停止卖药，拉着刘商的手登上酒楼，对刘商殷勤劝酒，道士谈的内容，是从秦汉以来历代的事，谈的非常逼真，都象亲眼所见一样。
English: The Taoist saw Liu Shang in the crowd. He looked at Liu Shang and felt that he was different from ordinary people, so he stopped selling medicine. He took Liu Shang's hand and went up to the restaurant, where he tried to persuade Liu Shang to drink. The Taoist talked about things from the Qin and Han dynasties. The talk was very realistic, just like what he saw with his own eyes.

古文：商惊异，师敬之。
现代文：刘商很惊异，象对待老师那样尊敬他。
English: Liu Shang was surprised and respected him like a teacher.

古文：复言神仙道术不可得也。
现代文：刘商又说了神仙道术很难学得。
English: Liu Shang also said that Immortal Taoism is difficult to learn.

古文：及暮，商归侨止。
现代文：等到晚上，刘商到客店栖息。
English: In the evening, Liu Shang went to the inn to rest.

古文：道士下楼，闪然不见。
现代文：道士下楼，一闪就不见了。
English: The Taoist priest went downstairs and disappeared in a flash.

古文：商益讶之。
现代文：刘商更加惊奇。
English: Liu Shang was even more surprised.

古文：商翌日，又于城街访之。
现代文：第二天，刘商又在城内街市上寻访他。
English: The next day, Liu Shang visited him again in the city street market.

古文：道士仍卖药，见商愈喜，复挈上酒楼，剧谈劝醉，出一小药囊赠商，并戏吟曰： 无事到扬州，相携上酒楼。
现代文：道士仍然卖药，看见刘商越发高兴，又领着刘商上了酒楼，高谈劝酒，拿出一个小药囊赠给刘商，并戏吟说： 无事到扬州，相携上酒楼。
English: The Taoist still sold medicine. Seeing Liu Shang more and more happy, he led Liu Shang to the restaurant, talked about wine, took out a small medicine bag and gave it to Liu Shang, and jokingly said: Nothing to do in Yangzhou, take it to the restaurant.

古文：药囊为赠别，千载更何求。 
现代文：药囊为赠别，千载更何求。 
English: The medicine bag was a gift, and I couldn't have asked for more.

古文：商记其吟，暮乃别去。
现代文：刘商记住了他的戏吟，天黑了才告别离去。
English: Liu Shang remembered his play-singing, and only said goodbye when it was dark.

古文：后商累寻之，不复见也。乃开囊视，重纸裹一葫芦子，得九粒药，如麻粟，依道士口诀吞之，顿觉神爽不饥，身轻醒然。
现代文：以后，刘商屡次寻找道士，再也没有见到，刘商就打开了药囊看，里面用多重纸包了一个小葫芦，得到了九粒药，象麻籽。刘商按照道士的口诀吞下了药，立刻觉得精神清爽，也不饥饿，身体轻健，心里清醒。
English: After that, Liu Shang repeatedly looked for the Taoist and never saw him again, so Liu Shang opened the medicine bag and saw a small gourd wrapped in multi-ply paper inside, and obtained nine pills of medicine, such as sesame seeds. Liu Shang swallowed the medicine according to the Taoist's words, and immediately felt refreshed, not hungry, physically fit, and mentally alert.

古文：过江游茅山。久之，复往宜兴张公洞。
现代文：过江游茅山，过了好久，又去宜兴张公洞。
English: After crossing the river and visiting Maoshan, after a long time, I went to Yixing Zhang Gongdong.

古文：当游之时，爱竃画溪之景，遂于胡父渚葺居，隐于山中，近樵者犹见之。曰： 我刘郎中也。 
现代文：正当刘商游张公洞的时候，喜爱竃画溪的景色。就在胡父渚用茅草盖屋居住，隐居在山中。附近的樵夫还看见过他，他说： 我是刘郎中。 
English: When Liu Shang was touring Zhanggong Cave, he loved the scenery of Zouqi Creek. He lived in a thatched-roof house on Hu's father's beach and secluded himself in the mountains. A nearby woodcutter also saw him and said, "I am Liu Langzhong."

古文：而莫知所止。
现代文：然而，却不知道他居住的地方。
English: However, it is not known where he lives.

古文：已为地仙矣。
现代文：他已经成为地仙了。
English: He's become a god.

