古文：旃涂国
现代文：旃涂国
English: 涂国

古文：周时，旃涂国献凤雏，载以瑶华之车，以五色玉为饰，驾以赤象。
现代文：周朝时，旃涂国贡献了一只幼凤，把它装载到装饰着五色玉石的华贵车子里，用红色的大象拉车。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, Zhabu contributed a young phoenix, which was loaded into a luxurious car decorated with five-colored jade and pulled by a red elephant.

古文：至京师，育于灵禽之苑，饮以琼浆，饴以云实。二物皆出《上元经方》。
现代文：到了京城，把凤雏放养到饲养珍禽的园林中，每天喂给它根据上元医药书上记载的秘方所特制的美酒和云石。
English: When he arrived in Beijing, he released the phoenix chicks into a garden for breeding rare birds, and every day he fed it with special wine and cloud stone according to the secret recipe recorded in the Shangyuan medical book.

古文：凤初至之时，毛色未彪发。及成王封泰山，禅社首之后，文彩炳耀，中国飞走之类，不复喧鸣，咸服神禽之远至。
现代文：凤雏刚到的时候，毛色不太鲜明，等到周成王到泰山祭天，到社首山祭祀山川以后，毛色变得异常光彩鲜亮。中国本地的飞禽走兽全都不再鸣叫，臣服于从远方而来的神鸟凤。
English: When the phoenix chicks first arrived, their fur color was not very bright, but after King Zhou Chengwu went to Mount Tai to worship the heavens, and to the first mountain of the company to worship the mountains and rivers, the fur color became unusually bright and bright. All the birds and beasts native to China no longer chirped, surrendering to the phoenix, the divine bird, which came from afar.

古文：及成王崩，冲天而去。
现代文：等到周成王死了，凤直冲云霄飞走了。
English: When Zhou Chengwang died, the phoenix flew straight up into the sky.

古文：凤凰台
现代文：凤凰台
English: Phoenix TV Station

古文：凤骨黑，雄雌旦夕鸣各异。
现代文：凤凰的骨头是黑色的，雄的和雌的早晨和夜晚的叫声各不相同。
English: The phoenix's bones are black, and the male and female call differently in the morning and at night.

古文：皇帝使伶伦制十二龠写之，其雄声，其雌音。乐有《凤凰台》。
现代文：皇帝让乐官制造了一支十二个孔的乐器 龠 来模仿雌雄凤凰鸣叫的声音，于是就有了《凤凰台》这支乐曲。
English: The emperor asked the musician to make a twelve-hole musical instrument  to imitate the sound of the male and female phoenixes singing, and thus the "Phoenix Radio" was born.

古文：此凤脚下物如白石者，凤有时来仪，候其所止处，掘深三尺，有圆石如卵，正白，服之安心神。
现代文：凤凰脚下有一种特殊的东西，好象是白石头。凤凰出现的时候，找到它站立过的地方，挖掘三尺深，能找到一块纯白色的像卵石一样的圆石，吃了它能使人心神安定。
English: At the foot of the phoenix, there is a special thing, like a white stone. When the phoenix appears, find the place where it stood, dig three feet deep, you can find a pure white round stone like a pebble. Eating it can make you feel calm.

古文：元庭坚
现代文：元庭坚
English: Yuan Tingjian

古文：唐翰林学士陈王友元庭坚者，昔罢遂州参军，于州界居山读书。
现代文：唐代的翰林学士陈王的朋友元庭坚，被免去遂州参军的官职后，就在州界的山上住着读书。
English: Yuan Tingjian, a friend of the Tang Dynasty scholar Chen Wang, lived and studied in the mountains on the border of Suizhou after he was dismissed from his military post.

古文：忽有人身而鸟首，来造庭坚，衣冠甚伟，众鸟随之数千，而言曰： 吾众鸟之王也，闻君子好音律，故来见君。 因留数夕，教庭坚音律清浊，文字音义，兼教之以百鸟语。如是来往岁余。庭坚由是晓音律，善文字，当时莫及。
现代文：他说： 我是鸟类之王，听说你喜欢研究诗文声韵的规律，所以来见你。 他利用好几天夜晚的时间，教授元庭坚音律的清和浊，文字的音和义，同时教给元庭坚百鸟的语言，象这样他们来往了一年多，元庭坚从此通晓了韵律，善写文章，当时的人们没有能比得上他的。
English: He said: I am the king of birds, I heard that you like to study the laws of poetic rhyme, so I came to see you. He used several days of night time to teach the clarity and cadence of the Yuan Tujian rhythm, the sound and meaning of the text, and at the same time taught the language of the Yuan Tujian hundred birds to Yuan Tujian. Like this, they traveled for more than a year. Yuan Tujian has since learned the rhythm and is good at writing articles. People at that time could not match him.

古文：阴阳术数，无不通达。
现代文：至于天文、阴阳、数术等学问，也没有他不精通的。
English: As for astronomy, yin and yang, mathematics and other sciences, there is nothing he is not familiar with.

古文：在翰林，撰《韵英》十卷，未施行，而西京陷胡庭，坚亦卒焉。
现代文：后来，元庭坚在翰林院撰写了《韵英》一书，一共十卷，但没等推广施行，西京就被匈奴人占领了，不久元庭坚也死了。
English: Later, Yuan Tingjian wrote the book "Rhyme and Ying" in Hanlin Academy, a total of ten volumes, but without waiting for promotion and implementation, West Beijing was occupied by the Huns, and soon Yuan Tingjian also died.

古文：睢阳凤
现代文：睢阳凤
English: Zou Yangfeng

古文：贞元十四年秋，有异鸟，其色青，状类鸠鹊，翔于睢阳之郊，止丛木中。
现代文：唐朝贞元十四年秋天，有一只奇异的鸟，羽毛是绿色的，样子类似于斑鸠或喜鹊，在睢阳城郊飞翔，有时落在丛林之中。
English: In the autumn of the 14th year of Zhenyuan of the Tang Dynasty, there was a strange bird with green feathers, similar in appearance to a turtle dove or a magpie, flying on the outskirts of the city of Shenyang, sometimes landing in the jungle.

古文：有群鸟千类，俱率其类，列于左右前后，而又朝夕各衔蜚虫稻粱以献焉。
现代文：这时有一大群鸟，大约有一千多个种类，由各个种类的头领率领着，排列在那只鸟的周围，这些鸟每天都把各自衔来的虫子和谷物献给这只鸟吃。
English: At this time, there was a large flock of birds, about more than a thousand species, led by the leaders of each species, lined up around the bird, and these birds dedicated their own insects and grains to the bird every day.

古文：是鸟每飞，则群鸟咸噪而导其前，咸翼其旁，咸拥其后，若传唤警卫之状。
现代文：这只鸟每次起飞，群鸟全都鸣叫着，有的飞在它的前面做向导，有的飞在它的两旁，有的跟在它的后面，全都像仆从和警卫一样簇拥在它的周围。
English: Every time the bird took off, the birds were all chirping, some flying in front of it to guide it, some flying on either side of it, some behind it, all crowding around it like servants and guards.

古文：止则环而向焉，虽人臣侍天子之礼，无以加矣。
现代文：这只鸟落下来时，群鸟全都头朝它围成一圈。就是臣子侍奉天子的礼节，也不能超过这群鸟啊。
English: When this bird fell down, the birds all circled around it with their heads facing it. Even the etiquette of a courtier serving the Son of Heaven could not surpass this group of birds.

古文：睢阳人咸适野纵观，以为羽族之灵者。然其状不类鸾凤，由是益奇之。
现代文：睢阳城的人全都到野外去观看，认为这只奇异的鸟是飞禽类中通灵的鸟，可是它的样子不象鸾鸟和凤凰，因此大家更是对它感到奇异。
English: The people of Shenyang City all went to the field to watch the owl, thinking that this strange bird was a psychic bird among birds, but it did not look like an ostrich and a phoenix, so everyone felt even stranger about it.

古文：时李翱客于睢阳，翱曰： 此真凤鸟也。 
现代文：当时李翱在睢阳城作客，他说： 这才是真正的凤鸟啊。 
English: At that time, Li Yao was a guest in Shenyang City. He said, "This is the real phoenix bird."

古文：于是作《知凤》一章，备书其事。
现代文：于是撰写了《知凤》这篇文章，详细地记载了这件事。
English: So I wrote this article for "Zhi Feng" and recorded the incident in detail.

古文：鸾
现代文：鸾
English: 

古文：尧在位七年，有鸾鹘岁岁来集，麒麟游于泽薮，鸱枭逃于绝漠。
现代文：尧在位七年，有鸾鸟和一种叫鹘鵃的鸟年年来集会，还有麒麟在沼泽中游玩，鸱枭等凶恶的鸟逃到了大漠的深处。
English: During the seven years of his reign, there were annual gatherings of ostriches and a bird called the stork, as well as unicorns playing in the swamp, and ferocious birds such as the stork fled to the depths of the desert.

古文：有折支之国，献重明之鸟，一名重睛。
现代文：有个折支国，贡献了一种叫 重明 也叫 重睛 的鸟，是说这种鸟的一只眼睛里有两个眼仁。
English: There is a country in Orizuchi that has contributed a bird called Chongming, also known as Chongei, which means that this bird has two eye sockets in one eye.

古文：言双睛在目，状如鸡，鸣似凤，时解落毛羽，以肉翮而飞。
现代文：重明的样子象鸡，叫声象凤鸣，经常脱落羽毛，用肉翅飞翔。
English: Chongming looks like a chicken and crows like a phoenix. He often sheds his feathers and uses his wings to fly.

古文：能搏逐猛虎，使妖灾不能为害，饴以琼膏。
现代文：它能追杀猛虎，使妖魔鬼怪和各种灾祸不能对人类造成伤害。
English: It can chase and kill tigers, so that demons and monsters and all kinds of disasters can not cause harm to human beings.

古文：或一岁数来，或数岁不至。
现代文：要给它饮用美酒。
English: Let him drink of the wine of astonishment.

古文：国人莫不扫洒门户，以留重明之集。
现代文：重明有时一年来好几次，有时几年也不来一次，住在都城的人没有谁不打扫干净门户，来准备迎接重明的到来。
English: Chongming sometimes comes several times a year, sometimes not even once in several years. No one who lives in the capital does not clean the portal and prepare to welcome Chongming's arrival.

古文：国人或刻木，或铸金，为此鸟之状，置于户牖之间，则魑魅丑类，自然退伏。
现代文：有的老百姓雕刻木头，有的熔铸金属，制造成这种鸟的样子，放在大门和窗户之间，则能使各种鬼怪自然退避躲藏起来。
English: Some people carve wood, some cast metal, made into the shape of this bird, placed between the gate and the window, can make all kinds of ghosts naturally retreat and hide.

古文：今人每岁元日，刻画为鸡于户牖之上，此遗像也。
现代文：如今人们每年正月的第一天，都有门窗之上刻鸡或画鸡，就是那时候留传下来的重明的形象。
English: Nowadays, on the first day of the first month of each year, people have carved chickens or painted chickens on the doors and windows, which is the image of Chongming that was passed down at that time.

古文：鹤徐奭
现代文：鹤徐奭
English: 鶴徐

古文：晋怀帝永嘉中，徐奭出行田，见一女子，姿色鲜白，就奭言调。
现代文：晋怀帝永嘉年间，徐奭出外打猎，看见一个女子，姿色艳丽，皮肤白润，走过来与徐奭说话调笑。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yongjia of the Jin Dynasty, Xu Yao went out hunting and saw a woman with a beautiful appearance and fair skin, who came over to talk and joke with Xu Yao.

古文：女因吟曰： 畴昔聆好音，日月心延伫。如何遇良人，中怀邈无绪。 
现代文：女子吟诗道： 曾聆听过你美好的声音，这么长时间仍在我耳边萦绕，为什么又让我遇到了你，然而你却似乎没有情绪。 
English: Woman's chant: I've heard your beautiful voice, it's been in my ears for so long, why did I have to meet you again, yet you don't seem to be in the mood.

古文：奭情既谐，欣然延至一屋。
现代文：徐奭同她很投机，高兴地同她来到一所房子里。
English: Xu Yao was very opportunistic with her and happily came to a house with her.

古文：女施设饮食而多鱼，遂经日不返。
现代文：女子摆上来的吃的东西大都是鱼，于是徐奭过了一天也没回家。
English: Most of the food served by the woman was fish, so Xu Wei did not go home for a day.

古文：兄弟追觅，至湖边，见与女相对坐。
现代文：他的兄弟寻找他来到湖边，看见他与一个女子相对坐着。
English: His brother came to the lake to look for him and saw him sitting opposite a woman.

古文：兄以藤杖击女，即化成白鹤，翻然高飞。
现代文：他哥哥用藤杖打那个女子，女子变成了一只白鹤，向高空飞去。
English: His brother hit the woman with a cane, and the woman turned into a white crane and flew high into the sky.

古文：奭恍惚年余乃差。
现代文：徐奭回去后精神恍惚一年多才好。
English: It would be better if Xu Yao was in a trance for more than a year after returning.

古文：乌程采捕者
现代文：乌程采捕者
English: Wucheng reed catcher

古文：隋炀帝大业三年，初造羽仪，毛氅多出江南，为之略尽。
现代文：隋炀帝大业三年下令制造仪仗队中以羽毛装饰的旗帜。
English: Emperor Taiye of the Sui Dynasty ordered the production of a feather-decorated flag for the honor guard three years ago.

古文：时湖州乌程县人身被科毛，入山捕采，见一大树高百尺，其上有鹤巢养子。
现代文：造旗用的羽毛大多出产自江南，为此差不多将鸟羽搜罗光了。当时有个湖州乌程县的人，身上披着羽毛伪装，进山去捕鸟。他看见一棵大树有一百尺高，树上有个鹤巢，里面有大鹤在养育幼鹤。
English: Most of the feathers used to make the flag were produced in the south of the Yangtze River, so the feathers were almost completely collected. At that time, a man from Wucheng County, Huzhou, disguised himself with feathers and went into the mountains to catch birds. He saw a large tree a hundred feet high with a crane's nest, with large cranes raising young cranes inside.

古文：人欲取之，其下无柯，高不可上，因操斧伐树。
现代文：这个人要捉鹤拔取羽毛，可是树的下部没有枝丫，树高上不去，便拿着斧子砍伐大树。
English: The man wanted to catch a crane to pluck the feathers, but the lower part of the tree had no branches, and the tree could not grow higher, so he took an axe to cut down the tree.

古文：鹤知人必取，恐其杀子，遂以口拔其毛放下，人收得之，皆合时用，乃不伐树。
现代文：鹤知道人一定要捉到它取毛，恐怕幼鹤被人杀害，就用嘴拔下身上的羽毛扔下来。人拾起羽毛，全都合乎标准，就不再伐树了。
English: The crane knows that it must be caught and its feathers plucked, and fearing that the young crane will be killed, it pulls out the feathers from under its body with its beak and throws them down. When the feathers are picked up, they all meet the standard, and no more trees are cut down.

古文：户部令史妻
现代文：户部令史妻
English: The wife of the head of the Household Division

古文：唐开元中，户部令史妻有色，得魅疾，而不能知之。
现代文：唐代开元年间，户部令史的妻子长得很美，被妖精附体，而他却不知道。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the wife of the head of the household was very beautiful and was possessed by a fairy, but he did not know it.

古文：家有骏马，恒倍刍秣，而瘦劣愈甚。
现代文：他家有匹骏马，总是喂给加倍的草料，反而越来越瘦弱。
English: His family has a pony, which is always fed twice as much grass and is getting thinner and thinner.

古文：以问邻舍胡人，胡亦术士，笑云： 马行百里犹倦，今反行千里余，宁不瘦耶？ 
现代文：他去请教邻居住的一个胡人，这个胡人是个占卜术士。胡人笑着说： 马行百里尚且疲倦，何况如今行了一千多里，能不瘦吗？ 
English: He went to consult a Wu man who lived next door. This Wu man was a soothsayer. The Wu man smiled and said, "The horse has traveled a hundred miles and is still tired. What's more, it has now traveled more than a thousand miles. Can it not lose weight?"

古文：令史言： 初不出入，家又无人，曷由至是？ 
现代文：令史说从来就很少骑它，家里又没有别人，为什么会这个样子？ 
English: Ling Shi said that he rarely rode it, and there was no one else at home. Why was it like this?

古文：胡云： 君每入直，君妻夜出，君自不知。
现代文：胡人说： 你每次去衙门办公，你妻子夜间就出去了，你却不知道。
English: Hu said: Every time you go to the gate office, your wife goes out at night, but you don't know.

古文：若不信，至入直时，试还察之，当知耳。 
现代文：如果不信，到你再去衙门的时候，试着回家观察一下，就知道了。 
English: If you don't believe me, when you go to the gate again, try to go home and observe, and you will know.

古文：令史依其言，夜还，隐他所。
现代文：令史照着胡人说的话，夜间偷着回到家里，隐藏在别的屋里。
English: Ling Shi did as Hu Rong said and sneaked back home at night and hid in another room.

古文：一更，妻起靓妆，令婢鞍马，临阶御之。婢骑扫帚随后，冉冉乘空，不复见。
现代文：到了一更天，妻子起身梳洗打扮得很漂亮，让女仆给马备上鞍子，走上台阶骑上马，女仆骑扫帚跟随在后面，逐渐升空而去，消失在夜色中。
English: On the following day, the wife got up, washed and dressed herself very nicely, asked the maid to saddle the horse, walked up the steps and mounted the horse, the maid followed behind on a broom, and gradually rose into the air and disappeared into the night.

古文：令史大骇，明往见胡，瞿然曰： 魅信之矣，为之奈何？ 
现代文：令史非常害怕，天亮以后去见胡人，吃惊地说： 妖精的事我相信了，怎么办呢？ 
English: So Shi was very scared. After dawn, he went to see Wu Ren and said in surprise, "I believe in fairies, what should I do?"

古文：胡令更一夕伺之。
现代文：胡人让他再观察一个晚上。
English: The goose let him watch for another night.

古文：其夜，令史归堂前幕中，妻顷复还，问婢何以有生人气，令婢以扫帚烛火，遍然堂庑，令史狼狈入堂大瓮中。
现代文：这天夜里，令史回家后隐藏在堂屋前的幕布中。妻子不一会就又回到堂屋，问女仆为什么有生人的气味。她让女仆把扫帚点上火，把堂下四周的屋子都照着看一遍。令史狼狈地钻进堂上的大坛子里面。
English: On this night, Ling Shi went home and hid in the curtain in front of the hall. His wife soon returned to the hall and asked the maid why there was the smell of a stranger. She asked the maid to light the broom and look at the house around the hall. Ling Shi, bewildered, went inside the large jar in the hall.

古文：须臾，乘马复往，适已烧扫帚，无复可骑，妻云： 随有即骑，何必扫帚。 
现代文：不一会，他妻子骑着马又要出去，因为刚才把扫帚烧了，女仆再没有可骑的了。妻子说： 随便有个什么都可以骑，何必一定要扫帚。 
English: After a while, his wife wanted to go out again on horseback, because the broom had just been burned, and the maid had nothing more to ride on. His wife said, "You can ride anything you like, why do you have to have a broom?"

古文：婢仓卒，遂骑大瓮随行。
现代文：女仆仓促之中，骑上大坛子就随着走了。
English: In her haste, the maid mounted the large jar and rode away with it.

古文：令史在瓮中，惧不敢动。
现代文：令史在坛子里，不敢活动。
English: Ling Shi is in the jar, not daring to move.

古文：须臾，至一处，是山顶林间，供帐帘幕，筵席甚盛。
现代文：不一会，到了一座山的树林中间，地上架设着帐幕，摆着丰盛的酒席。
English: Soon, we arrived in the middle of a mountain forest, where tents were set up on the ground and a sumptuous banquet was set up.

古文：群饮者七八辈，各有匹偶，座上宴饮，合昵备至，数更后方散。
现代文：一起喝酒的有七八个人，各自都带有一个伙伴，关系融洽亲昵到了极点。他们喝了几个更次才散席。
English: There were seven or eight people drinking together, each with a partner, the relationship was harmonious and intimate to the extreme. They drank a few more times before breaking up.

古文：妇人上马，令婢骑向瓮，婢惊云： 瓮中有人。 
现代文：妇人骑上马，让女仆去骑坛子。女仆吃惊地说： 坛子里有人！ 
English: The woman mounted her horse and asked the maid to mount the jar. Surprised, the maid said, "There's someone in the jar!"

古文：妇人乘醉，令推著山下，婢亦醉，推令史出，令史不敢言，乃骑瓮而去。
现代文：妇人喝醉了，让女仆把人推到山下去。女仆也醉了，把令史推出坛子。令史不敢说话，女仆就骑着坛子走了。
English: The woman was drunk and asked the maid to push the man down the hill. The maid was also drunk and pushed Ling Shi out of the jar. Ling Shi did not dare to speak, so the maid rode away on the jar.

古文：令史及明，都不见人，但有余烟烬而已，乃寻径路，崎岖可数十里方至山口。
现代文：令史等到天亮，一个人也不见了，只有剩余的冒着烟的灰烬。令史寻找路径下山，山路崎岖大约走几十里才到山口。
English: When Ling Shi woke up in the morning, one person was also missing, and only the smoking ashes remained. Ling Shi searched for a path down the mountain, and it took him about dozens of miles on a rugged mountain road to get to Yamaguchi.

古文：问其所，云是阆州，去京师千余里。
现代文：令史问路上的人这里是什么地方？回答说是阆州，离京城有一千多里。
English: Ling Shi asked the people on the road what kind of place was this? They answered that it was Zhangzhou, more than a thousand miles away from Beijing.

古文：行乞辛勤，月余，仅得至舍。
现代文：令史一路上象乞丐一样，辛辛苦苦地走了一个多月才回到家里。
English: Like a beggar along the way, Ling Shi walked painstakingly for more than a month before returning home.

古文：妻见惊问之久何所来，令史以他答。
现代文：妻子一见，吃惊地问他为什么离家这么久，是从哪里回来的，令史编造谎话回答了妻子。
English: When his wife saw him, she was surprised and asked him why he had been away from home for so long and where he had come back from. He made up a lie and answered his wife.

古文：复往问胡，求其料理，胡云： 魅已成，伺其复去，可遽缚取，火以焚之。 
现代文：令史又去找那个胡人，求他帮助解决这个问题。胡人说： 妖精已经成了气候，等它再出去的时候，可以突然地捉住它捆上，用火烧死它。 
English: Ling Shi went to the goose-man again and asked him to help solve the problem. The goose-man said, "The fairy has become the weather, and when it goes out again, you can suddenly catch it in a bundle and burn it to death."

古文：闻空中乞命，顷之，有苍鹤堕火中，焚死，妻疾遂愈。
现代文：令史照着他的话做了，就听见空中有乞求饶命的声音。不一会，有一只苍鹤落在火中被烧死了。妻子的病跟着也好了。
English: When Ling Shi did as he was told, he heard the sound of a crane in the sky begging for its life. A moment later, a crane fell into the fire and was burned to death. His wife's illness also improved.

古文：裴沆
现代文：裴沆
English: Baekhyun

古文：同州司马裴沆尝说，再从伯自洛中，将往郑州，在路数日，晓程偶下马，觉道左有人呻吟声，因披蒿莱寻之。荆丛下见一病鹤，垂翼俛咮，翅下疮坏无毛。
现代文：同州司马裴沆说，跟他父亲从祖兄弟从洛中出发去郑州，在路上走了好几天。有一天早晨在路上偶尔下马歇息，听到路旁有人呻吟的声音，于是分开蒿草寻找，在荆棘丛中看见一只病鹤，垂着翅膀低着嘴，翅膀下面生疮腐烂，患处的毛已脱落，叫的声音奇特。
English: He said that he and his father had set out from Lozhong to Zhengzhou with his grand-brother, and had walked for several days on the road. One morning, he occasionally rested on the road. He heard the sound of someone moaning on the roadside, so he separated and searched for weeds. He saw a sick crane in the thorn bushes. Its wings were hanging down and its beak was down. Sores were festering under its wings. The hair in the affected area had fallen off, and its call was strange.

古文：且异其声，忽有老人白衣曳杖，数十步而至，谓曰： 郎君少年，岂解哀此鹤邪？
现代文：这时忽然有个穿白衣服的老人，拄着拐杖从几十步外走来。他对裴沆说： 你是少年人，怎么能解救这只鹤呢？
English: At this time, an old man dressed in white suddenly came walking on crutches from dozens of paces away. He said to Pei Yao: You are a young man, how can you save this crane?

古文：若得人血一涂，则能飞矣。 
现代文：如果能得到人的血给鹤涂上，它就能飞走了。 
English: If you can get human blood to coat a crane, it can fly away.

古文：裴颇知道，性甚高逸，遽曰： 某请刺此臂血，不难。 
现代文：裴沆是个懂得事理的人，品德高尚。他急忙说： 请刺我臂上的血，没问题。 
English: Baizhang is a reasonable person with high moral character. He hurriedly said: Please prick the blood on my arm, no problem.

古文：老人笑曰： 君此志甚劲，然须三世是人，其血方中。
现代文：老人笑着说： 你的这种精神很了不起，但必须是三世为人的人，这样的人血才能用。
English: The old man smiled and said, "Your spirit is great, but you have to be a third-generation person before you can use human blood.

古文：郎君前生非人，唯洛中胡卢生，三世人矣。
现代文：你前世不是人，只有洛中的胡卢生，三世是人。
English: In your previous life, you were not a human being. Only Hulusi in Luo, the third generation, was human.

古文：郎君此行，非有急切，岂能至洛中，干胡卢生乎？ 
现代文：你这次出行，不是有急事，怎能再到洛中去面见胡卢生呢？ 
English: Your trip this time is not urgent, how can you go to Lozhong again to meet with Hulusi?

古文：裴欣然而返，未信宿，至洛，乃访胡卢生，具陈其事，且拜祈之。
现代文：裴沆毅然踏上了返回洛中的道路，不到两宿，走到洛中。到了洛中他立刻去拜访胡卢生，详细讲述了事情经过，恳切请他帮助。
English: Pei Yan resolutely embarked on the road back to Luochu, less than two nights, and walked to Luochu. When he arrived in Luochu, he immediately went to visit Hu Lousheng, told him in detail what had happened, and earnestly asked him for help.

古文：胡卢生初无难易，开袱，取一石合，大若两指，授针刺臂，滴血下满合，授裴曰： 无多言也。 
现代文：胡卢生一点也没有感到为难，打开包袱，取出一个石头盒子，大小约有二个指头。他接过针刺破手臂，将血滴满一盒，交给裴沆说： 不必多说了。 
English: Hu Lousheng did not feel embarrassed at all, opened the luggage, took out a stone box, about the size of two fingers. He took the needle and pierced his arm, dripped blood all over the box, and handed it to Pei Yao, saying: "No need to say more."

古文：及至鹤处，老人已至，喜曰： 固是信士。 
现代文：裴沆回到了遇到鹤的地方，老人已经等在那里，高兴地对他说： 你真是个守信用的人。 
English: Pei Yao returned to the place where he met the crane. The old man was already waiting there and happily said to him, "You really are a trustworthy person."

古文：乃令尽涂其鹤，复邀裴云： 我所居去此不远，可少留也。 
现代文：然后就让他把血全涂到那只鹤的伤口上，又邀请裴沆说： 我住的地方离这里不太远，可以去少呆一会。 
English: Then he asked him to smear the blood all over the wound of the crane, and invited Pei Yao to say: I live not far from here, I can go and stay for a while.

古文：裴觉非常人，以丈人呼之，因随行。
现代文：裴沆觉得这老人不是个平常的人，称他为老伯，跟着他去了。
English: Pei Yao felt that this old man was not an ordinary person. He called him "old uncle" and followed him.

古文：才数里，至一庄，竹落草舍，庭芜狼藉。
现代文：走了几里路，来到一个庄园。竹篱笆茅草屋，庭院里长满荒草。
English: After walking for a few miles, we arrived at an estate. Bamboo fences surrounded thatched huts, and the courtyard was overgrown with weeds.

古文：裴渴甚，求浆，老人指一土龛： 此中有少浆，可就取。 
现代文：裴沆觉得很渴，向老人要水喝，老人指着一个用土做的神龛说： 这里面有一点水，可以取出来喝。 
English: Pei Yao felt very thirsty and asked the old man for water to drink. The old man pointed to a shrine made of soil and said, "There is a little water in here, you can take it out and drink it."

古文：裴视龛中，有一杏核，一扇如笠，满中有浆，浆色正白，乃力举饮之，不复饥渴，浆味如杏酪。
现代文：裴沆看那神龛里，有一个杏核，一把象斗笠一样的扇子，神龛底部装满水，水的颜色是纯白的。裴沆用力举起神龛把水喝了，不再饥渴，水的味道象杏酪。
English: Pei Yao looked at the shrine, there was an apricot kernel, a fan like a top hat, the bottom of the shrine was filled with water, the color of the water was pure white. Pei Yao lifted the shrine and drank the water, no longer hungry and thirsty, the taste of the water was like apricot cheese.

古文：裴知隐者，拜请为奴仆，老人曰： 君有世间微禄，纵住亦不终其志。贤叔真有所得，吾久与之游，君自不知。
现代文：裴沆知道老人是个隐居的高人，行礼请求老人收他作仆人。老人说： 你在人世上还有点官禄，即使跟着我隐居也不会坚持到底，你的叔叔是个真正得道的高人，我很早就和他有所交往，这些你自然不会知道。
English: Pei Yao knew that the old man was a high-ranking person who lived in seclusion, and he bowed and asked the old man to accept him as a servant. The old man said: You still have a bit of official rank in the human world, even if you live in seclusion with me, you will not persevere to the end. Your uncle is a truly accomplished high-ranking person, I have been in contact with him for a long time, you will naturally not know these things.

古文：今有一信，凭君必达。 
现代文：现在我有一封信，交给你一定能送到。 
English: Now I have a letter that I'm sure I can get to you.

古文：因裹一袱物，大如合，戒无窃开。
现代文：于是包装好一个包裹，大小形状象个盒子，并告诫他不要私自打开看。
English: So they wrapped up a package, the size and shape of a box, and warned him not to open it without permission.

古文：复引裴视鹤，鹤损处毛已生矣。
现代文：又领着裴沆看那只鹤，鹤受损的地方已经长出新毛。
English: He also led Pei Yao to look at the crane. New hair had grown from the damaged area of the crane.

古文：又谓裴曰： 君向饮杏浆，当哭九族亲情，且以酒色诫也。 
现代文：他又对裴沆说： 你刚才喝了杏浆，应当为九族的血缘亲情而哭泣，并且不能接近酒色。 
English: He also said to Pei Yao: You just drank apricot syrup, you should cry for the kinship of the nine ethnic groups, and you should not get close to the color of the wine.

古文：裴复还洛中，路阅其所持，将发之，袱四角各有赤蛇出头，裴乃止。其叔得信，即开之，有物如乾大麦饭升余。
现代文：裴沆回到洛中，路上看着小包裹想打开看看，小包的四角各有一条小红蛇露出头来，裴沆便停下手没有打开，他的叔叔接过包裹打开来看，里面有一升多象是大麦饭粒的东西。
English: Pei Yao returned to Luochong. On the way, he looked at the small parcel and wanted to open it. A small red snake showed its head at each of the four corners of the parcel. Pei Yao stopped and did not open it. His uncle took the parcel and opened it. There was more than a liter of something that looked like barley rice grains inside.

古文：其叔后因游王屋，不知其终。
现代文：他的叔叔后来去王屋山了，不知道最后怎么样了。
English: His uncle later went to Wangyashan and I don't know what happened to him.

古文：裴寿至九十七。
现代文：裴沆活了九十七岁。
English: Pei Jun lived to be ninety-seven years old.

古文：又李相公游嵩山，见病鹤，亦曰须人血。李公解衣即刺血。
现代文：李丞相当初在嵩山游玩，看见一只病鹤，也说须要人血治疗，李丞相解开衣服就要刺血。
English: Licheng quite early in the Songshan tour, saw a sick crane, also said to require human blood treatment, Licheng minister unzipped his clothes to prick blood.

古文：鹤曰： 世间人至少，公不是。 
现代文：鹤说： 世上真正是人的很少，您也不是人。 
English: The crane said, "Very few people in the world are truly human, and you are not a human.

古文：乃令拔眼睫，持往东都，但映眼照之，即知矣。
现代文：并让他拔下自己的眼睫毛，让他拿着睫毛到东都去，只要把眼睫毛拿到眼前对着人看，就知道谁是真正的人了。
English: And let him pluck out his own eyelashes, let him take the eyelashes and go to the east, as long as the eyelashes are held in front of the eyes and look at the person, you will know who is a real person.

古文：李公中路自视，乃马头也。
现代文：李丞相半路上用这方法看自己，竟是个马头。
English: On his way to the meeting, Premier Li used this method to look at himself, and it turned out that he was a horse's head.

古文：至东洛，所遇非少，悉非全人，皆犬彘驴马，一老翁是人。
现代文：到了东都洛阳，遇见的人不少，全都不是人，都是些猪狗驴马。最后遇到一个老人是人。
English: When I arrived in the eastern capital of Luoyang, I met many people, all of whom were not human, but pigs, dogs, donkeys, and horses. Finally, I met an old man who was human.

古文：李公言病鹤之意，老翁笑，下驴袒臂刺血。李公得之，以涂鹤。
现代文：李公向他说了病鹤的意思，老人笑了，下驴来露出手臂刺血交给他，他得到老人的血，用血涂到鹤的伤处，鹤马上就好了。
English: Li Gong told him the meaning of the sick crane, the old man smiled, the donkey came down to reveal the arm prick blood and handed it to him. He got the old man's blood and used the blood to apply it to the crane's wound. The crane would be fine immediately.

古文：即愈，鹤谢曰： 公即为明时宰相，复当上升。相见非遥，慎无懈惰。 
现代文：鹤感谢他说： 你就是将来的宰相，又将羽化飞升天界，我们相见的日子不会太远，你一定不要懈怠。 
English: The crane thanked him and said, "You are the future prime minister, and you will fly into the sky. The day we meet will not be too far away. You must not slack off."

古文：李公谢，鹤遂冲天而去。
现代文：李丞相表示感谢，鹤就飞走了。鹄
English: Premier Li expressed his thanks, and the crane flew away.

古文：鹄鹄生百年而红，五百年而黄，又五百年而苍，又五百年为白，寿三千岁矣。苏琼
现代文：天鹅出生一百年，毛色变为红色，五百年后变成黄色，再过五百年变成灰白色，再过五百年变成白色。天鹅的寿命是三千年。苏琼
English: A swan is born for a hundred years, its fur turns red, after five hundred years it turns yellow, after another five hundred years it turns gray-white, and after another five hundred years it turns white. The life span of a swan is three thousand years.

古文：晋安帝元兴中，一人年出二十，未婚对，然目不干色，曾无秽行。
现代文：晋安帝元兴年间，有一个人年龄二十多岁，还没结婚，可是他仍然眼睛不看女色，也没有淫秽的行为。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yuanxing of Jin'an, there was a man in his twenties who had not yet married, but he still did not look at women with lustful eyes, nor did he engage in obscene behavior.

古文：尝行田，见一女甚丽，谓少年曰： 闻君自以柳季之俦，亦复有桑中之欢耶？ 
现代文：一天他去打猎，看见一个很美丽的女子。女子对他说： 听说你认为自己是柳下惠那样的人，但是你又怎能懂得私奔幽会的快乐呢？ 
English: One day he went hunting and saw a very beautiful woman. The woman said to him: I have heard that you consider yourself to be a person like Liu Shimo Hui, but how can you understand the joy of eloping?

古文：女便歌，少年微有动色，后复重见之，少年问姓，云： 姓苏名琼，家在涂中。 
现代文：说着女子便唱起歌来，少年稍微有点动心。后来又见到这个女子，他就问女子的姓名。女子说： 我姓苏名琼，家就在路边。 
English: As he spoke, the girl began to sing, which moved the boy a little. Later, when he saw the girl again, he asked her name. The girl said, "My name is Su Ming Qiong, and my home is on the side of the road."

古文：遂要还尽欢，从弟便突入，以杖打女，即化成雌白鹄。
现代文：于是邀请少年回家尽情欢乐。少年的堂弟突然走过来，用木杖打那女子，女子变成一只雌性白天鹅。
English: So he invited the boy home to enjoy himself. The boy's cousin suddenly came over and hit the girl with a wooden stick. The girl turned into a female white swan.

古文：鹦鹉
现代文：鹦鹉
English: Parrot

古文：鹦鹉能飞，众鸟趾，前三后一，唯鹦鹉四趾齐分。
现代文：鹦鹉能够飞翔。别的鸟类的脚趾，三个在前，一个在后，只有鹦鹉是四个脚趾一齐分开。
English: Parrots can fly. Other birds have three toes at the front and one at the back, but only parrots have four toes all together.

古文：凡鸟下睑向上，独此鸟两睑俱动，似人目。
现代文：凡是鸟类都是下眼皮向上动，只有鹦鹉能上下眼皮一起动，象人的眼睛一样。
English: All birds move their lower eyelids upwards, only parrots can move their upper and lower eyelids together, just like human eyes.

古文：张华
现代文：张华
English: Zhang Hua

古文：张华有白鹦鹉，华行还，鸟辄说僮仆善恶。
现代文：张华有只白色的鹦鹉，他每次外出回来，鹦鹉就向他讲述仆人的好与坏，后来又不说了。
English: Zhang Hua has a white parrot. Every time he goes out and comes back, the parrot tells him about the good and bad servants, and then stops talking.

古文：后寂无言，华问其故，鸟云： 见藏瓮中，何由得知？ 
现代文：张华问它是什么缘故，鹦鹉说： 被关在大坛子里，怎么能够知道呢？ 
English: Zhang Hua asked what was the reason for it, and the parrot said, "How can you know when you are locked up in a big jar?"

古文：公时在外，令唤鹦鹉，鹦鹉曰： 昨夜梦恶，不宜出户。 
现代文：张华有一次在屋外，让人去叫鹦鹉出来。鹦鹉说： 昨天晚上做了个恶梦，不宜到门外去。 
English: Once, when Zhang Hua was outside, someone went to call the parrot to come out. The parrot said, "I had a nightmare last night. I shouldn't go outside."

古文：强之至庭，为鸱所攫，教其啄鸱喙，仅而获免。
现代文：勉强让它到了庭院，就被鸱鸟捉住，急忙教鹦鹉啄鸱鸟的嘴，才免于一死。
English: He barely made it to the courtyard before he was caught by an ostrich. He hurriedly taught the parrot to lick the ostrich's beak to avoid death.

古文：鹦鹉救火
现代文：鹦鹉救火
English: Parrot rescues bird from fire

古文：有鹦鹉飞集他山，山中禽兽辄相贵重。
现代文：有只鹦鹉飞落在别的山上，山里的飞禽走兽都很尊重它。
English: A parrot had landed on another mountain, and all the birds and animals in the mountains respected it.

古文：鹦鹉自念，虽乐不可久也，便去。
现代文：鹦鹉心里想，这里虽然快乐却不能久住，就离开了。
English: The parrot thought to himself that although he was happy here, he couldn't stay for long, so he left.

古文：后数日，山中大火，鹦鹉遥见，便入水濡羽，飞而洒之。
现代文：过了几天，忽然山上燃起大火。鹦鹉远远地看见了，就跳进水里沾湿羽毛，飞去洒向大火。
English: A few days later, a fire suddenly broke out on the mountain. When the parrot saw it from a distance, it jumped into the water, wet its feathers, and flew to the fire.

古文：天神言： 汝虽有志，意何足云也？ 
现代文：天神说： 你虽然有救火的好意愿。但是你认为这种做法值得一提吗？ 
English: Tenjin said, "Although you have a good intention to put out the fire, do you think this practice is worth mentioning?"

古文：对曰： 虽知不能，然尝侨居是山，邻兽行善，皆为兄弟，不忍见耳。 
现代文：鹦鹉回答说： 虽然知道没有用，可是我曾经在这座山上侨居过，山上的禽兽都很善良，全都象我的兄弟一样，我不忍心看它们被烧死。 
English: The parrot replied, "Although it is useless to know, I once lived as an exile on this mountain, and the animals on the mountain are very kind, they are all like my brothers, I can't bear to see them burned to death.

古文：天神嘉感，即为灭火。
现代文：天神赞美鹦鹉并受到感动，替它将山火扑灭。
English: Tenjin praises the parrot and is moved to put out the mountain fire for it.

古文：雪衣女
现代文：雪衣女
English: Woman in snow

古文：天宝中，岭南献白鹦鹉，养之宫中。
现代文：唐玄宗天宝年间，岭南进献了一只白鹦鹉。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty, Lingnan Jinzhou presented a white parrot.

古文：岁久，颇甚聪慧，洞晓言词。
现代文：由于养在皇宫里的时间长了，鹦鹉显得很聪明，能理解人的话语。
English: Having been kept in the palace for such a long time, the parrot appears to be very intelligent and can understand human speech.

古文：上及贵妃，皆呼为雪衣女。
现代文：宫里的人，直到贵妃，全都称呼鹦鹉为 雪衣女 。
English: Everyone in the palace, including the princess, called the parrot the Snow Maiden.

古文：性既驯扰，常纵其饮啄飞鸣，然不离屏帏间。
现代文：因为鹦鹉的性情已经很温顺驯服了，所以常常放开它任其吃喝飞鸣，可是它总也不离开屏风和帐幕之间。
English: Because the nature of the parrot has been very meek and tame, so often let it go and let it eat, drink and fly, but it always does not leave between the screen and the tent.

古文：上命以近代词臣篇咏授之，数遍便可讽诵。
现代文：皇上让人把近代词臣的文章念着教给它，几遍后它就能背诵。
English: The emperor asked someone to recite the articles of modern dictionaries to teach it, and after a few times it could recite.

古文：上每与嫔妃及诸王博戏，上稍不胜，左右呼雪衣女，必飞局中，鼓翼以乱之。
现代文：皇上常常和嫔妃及各位王爷下棋玩，皇上的棋稍呈败势，左右的人呼唤雪衣女，它一定会飞到棋盘上，鼓动翅膀搅乱棋局。
English: The Emperor often played chess with the Empress Dowager and other princes. The Emperor's game was slightly losing. People on both sides called for the Snow Maiden. She would surely fly onto the board and flap her wings to disrupt the game.

古文：或啄嫔御及诸王手，使不能争道。
现代文：有时还啄嫔妃以及诸王爷的手，使他们不能抢到好的棋路。
English: Sometimes, the hands of empresses and princes were also tampered with, so that they could not get hold of good chess pieces.

古文：一旦，飞于贵妃镜台上，语曰： 雪衣女昨夜梦为鸷所搏，将尽于此乎？ 
现代文：一天早晨，雪衣女飞到贵妃的镜台上，说道： 雪衣女昨天夜里梦见被老鹰捉住，我的性命就要结束了吗？ 
English: One morning, the Snow Maiden flew to the Guifei mirror and said, "The Snow Maiden dreamt last night that she was caught by an eagle. Is my life about to end?"

古文：上令贵妃授以《多心经》，自后授记精熟，昼夜不息，若惧祸难，有祈禳者。
现代文：皇上让贵妃教给它念《多心经》，此后它记得特别熟练，昼夜不停地念，象是害怕遭受灾祸，进行祈祷以求免灾。
English: The emperor asked Guifei to teach it to recite the Many-Hearted Sutra, after which it remembered very well and recited it day and night, as if it was afraid of disaster and prayed to avoid disaster.

古文：上与贵妃出游别殿，贵妃置鹦鹉于步辇上，与之同去。
现代文：皇上与贵妃到别的宫殿游玩，贵妃就把鹦鹉放在辇车上，和她一起去。
English: When the Emperor and the Empress went to visit other palaces, the Empress put the parrot on the carriage and went with her.

古文：既至，命从官校猎于前，鹦鹉方嬉戏殿槛上。
现代文：到了以后，皇上命令随行的将校进行围猎。鹦鹉这时正在宫殿的栏杆上飞来飞去，一瞬间有一只鹰飞来，捕杀了鹦鹉。
English: When he arrived, the emperor ordered the officers accompanying him to hunt down the parrot. At that time, the parrot was flying around on the railing of the palace. In an instant, an eagle flew in and killed the parrot.

古文：瞥有鹰至，搏之而毙，上与贵妃，叹息久之，遂命瘗于苑中，立鹦鹉冢。
现代文：皇上和贵妃，长久地为它叹息，命令人把鹦鹉埋在御花园中，立起一座鹦鹉的坟墓。
English: The Emperor and Empress, sighing for it for a long time, ordered the parrot to be buried in the imperial garden and a parrot tomb to be built.

古文：开元中，宫中有五色鹦鹉，能言而惠。
现代文：开元年间，皇宫里有一只五色鹦鹉，能说话并且很聪明。
English: At the beginning of the year, there was a five-coloured parrot in the Imperial Palace. It could talk and was very clever.

古文：上令左右试牵御衣，辄瞋目叱之。
现代文：皇上让左右的人试着牵扯自己的衣服，那只鹦鹉就瞪起眼睛叱责他们。
English: The emperor let people around him try to tug at his clothes, and the parrot glared at them and scolded them.

古文：岐王文学熊延景，因献《鹦鹉篇》，上以示群臣焉。
现代文：岐王府的文学侍从熊延景，因此而奉献文章《鹦鹉篇》，皇上把文章交给群臣欣赏。
English: Xiong Yanjing, the literary attendant of Qi Wangfu, therefore dedicated the article "The Parrot," and the emperor gave the article to the courtiers to enjoy.

古文：刘潜女
现代文：刘潜女
English: Liu Qianya

古文：陇右百姓刘潜家大富，唯有一女，初笄，美姿质。
现代文：陇右人刘潜的家里很富有，只有一个刚刚成年的女儿，长得很美。
English: The family of Liu Qian, the right-hand man, is very rich. They have only one daughter who has just come of age, and she is very beautiful.

古文：继有求聘者，其父未许。
现代文：不断地有人来向刘家求婚，她的父亲都没有答应。
English: People kept coming to the Liu family to ask for her hand in marriage, but her father did not agree.

古文：家养一鹦鹉，能言无比，此女每日与之言话。
现代文：家里养了一只鹦鹉，擅长说话，女孩每天都与鹦鹉说话。
English: The family has a parrot, which is good at talking. The girl talks to the parrot every day.

古文：后得佛经一卷，鹦鹉念之，或有差误，女必证之。
现代文：后来得到一本佛经，鹦鹉念佛经，有时念错了，女孩一定纠正它。
English: Later, a Buddhist scripture was given to her. The parrot recited the Buddhist scripture, sometimes incorrectly, but the girl always corrected it.

古文：每念此经，女必焚香。
现代文：每当念佛经时，女孩一定要烧香。
English: Whenever a Buddhist sutra is recited, a girl must burn incense.

古文：忽一日，鹦鹉谓女曰： 开我笼，尔自居之，我当飞去。 
现代文：忽然有一天，鹦鹉对女孩说： 给我打开笼子，你自己来住，我应当飞走了。 
English: Suddenly one day, the parrot said to the girl: "Open the cage for me, come and live in it yourself, I should fly away."

古文：女怪而问之： 何此言邪？ 
现代文：女子奇怪地问它： 为什么这么说呢？ 
English: Bizarrely, the woman asked him: 'Why do you say that?

古文：鹦鹉曰： 尔本与我身同，偶托化刘潜之家，今须却复本族，无怪我言。
现代文：鹦鹉说： 你本来和我同是一类，偶然托生到刘潜的家里，现在却要回到原来的种族之中。
English: The parrot said, "You are originally of the same kind as me. You were accidentally sent to Liu Qian's home, but now you want to return to your original race.

古文：人不识尔，我固识尔。 
现代文：不要怪我说这样话，别人不认识你，我却认识你。 
English: Don't blame me for saying so. Others don't know you, but I know you.

古文：其女惊，白其父母，父母遂开笼，放鹦鹉飞去，晓夕监守其女。
现代文：那女子很吃惊，把这事告诉了父亲，父母就打开笼子，放鹦鹉飞走了。父母开始从早到晚地守着女儿。
English: The woman was shocked and told her father, who opened the cage and let the parrot fly away. The parents began to keep an eye on their daughter from morning until night.

古文：后三日，女无故而死，父母惊哭不已。方欲葬之，其尸忽为一白鹦鹉飞去，不知所之。
现代文：又过三天，女子无故就死了。父母吃惊地哭泣不止，正要埋葬女儿的时候，女儿的尸体忽然变成一只白鹦鹉飞走，不知飞到哪里去了。
English: Three days later, the woman died for no reason. The parents were shocked and wept. Just as they were about to bury their daughter, her body suddenly turned into a white parrot and flew away, I don't know where it went.

古文：鹰
现代文：鹰
English: The Eagle

古文：楚文王
现代文：楚文王
English: King Chu Wen

古文：楚文王好猎，有人献一鹰。
现代文：楚文王喜好打猎，有人献给他一只鹰。
English: King Chu Wen liked to hunt, and someone presented him with an eagle.

古文：王见其殊常，故为猎于云梦。
现代文：他见这鹰与普通的鹰不一样，所以带它到云梦一带打猎。
English: He saw that this eagle was different from ordinary eagles, so he took it to hunt in the Yunmeng area.

古文：毛群羽族，争噬共搏，此鹰瞪目，过瞻云际。
现代文：一般的猎鹰、猎狗争着捕捉猎物，只有这只鹰瞪着眼睛远远地望着天边的云。
English: Common falcons and hunting dogs compete to catch prey, only this eagle gazes far away at the clouds.

古文：俄有一物鲜白，不辨其形。
现代文：不久有一个东西出现在天空，分辨不出它的形状。
English: Soon an object appeared in the sky, its shape indistinguishable.

古文：鹰便竦羽而升，矗若飞电。
现代文：这只鹰就振动翅膀升上天空，快得象闪电一样。
English: So the eagle flapped its wings and soared into the sky as fast as lightning.

古文：须臾，羽堕如雪，血下如雨，有大乌堕地。
现代文：不一会，羽毛象下雪一样飘落下来，血象下雨一样洒落下来，有只大鸟掉到地上。
English: A moment later, feathers fell like snow, blood fell like rain, and a large bird fell to the ground.

古文：度其羽翅，广数十里，时有博物君子曰： 此大鹏雏也。 
现代文：估计这只大鸟的翅膀，展开有几十里宽。当时有见识广博的人说： 这是大鹏的雏鸟啊！ 
English: It is estimated that the wings of this large bird are tens of miles wide. At that time, some people with extensive knowledge said: This is the chick of the great peng!

古文：刘聿
现代文：刘聿
English: Liu Xuan

古文：唐永徽中，莱州人刘聿性好鹰，遂于之罘山悬崖，自缒以取鹰雏。
现代文：唐高宗永徽年间，莱州人刘聿喜好饲养猎鹰，于是到之罘山的悬崖上，拴好绳子缒下山崖去捉雏鹰。
English: During the Yonghui reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty, the Laizhou man Liu Xuan liked to raise falcons, so he went to the cliff of Zhulun Mountain, tied a rope and went down the cliff to catch the eaglets.

古文：欲至巢而绳绝，落于树歧间，上下皆壁立，进退无据。
现代文：当他快到鹰巢时绳子断了，他掉在树枝上。上下都是直立的石壁，没有办法爬上或爬下。
English: When he got close to the eagle's nest, the rope broke and he fell on a branch. There was an upright stone wall above and below, and there was no way to climb up or down.

古文：大鹰见人，衔肉不敢至巢所，遥放肉下，聿接取肉喂鹰雏，以外即自食之。
现代文：大鹰看见人，衔着肉不敢到巢里去，远远地放下肉。刘聿取过肉来喂雏鹰，剩下的就自己吃了。
English: When the great eagle saw the human, it didn't dare to take the meat into the nest and left the meat far away. Liu Yao took the meat to feed the baby eagle and ate the rest himself.

古文：经五六十日，雏能飞，乃裂裳而系鹰足，一臂上系三联，透身而下，鹰飞，掣其两臂，比至涧底，一无所伤，仍系鹰而归。
现代文：过了五六十天，雏鹰能飞翔了，刘聿就撕开衣服系在鹰的脚上，一只胳臂系了三根布绳，然后举着雏鹰跳下悬崖。雏鹰飞起来，提起他的两臂，人和鹰一块落到山涧的底下，一点也没有受伤。他仍旧系着鹰回家去了。
English: After fifty or sixty days, the eaglet was able to fly. Liu Yao tore his clothes and tied them to the eagle's feet. One arm was tied with three ropes, and then he jumped off the cliff holding the eaglet. The eaglet flew up, lifted his arms, and the man and the eagle fell to the bottom of the mountain, and were not injured at all. He still went home with the eagle.

古文：邺郡人
现代文：邺郡人
English: People from Handan County

古文：薛嵩镇魏时，邺郡人有好育鹰隼者。
现代文：薛嵩镇守魏州时，邺郡有个喜好养育鹰隼的人。
English: When Xue Songzhen was in charge of Weizhou, there was a person in Jixian County who liked to raise eagles.

古文：一日，有人持鹰来告于邺人，人遂市之。
现代文：有一天，有个人带着一只鹰来给这个邺郡人看，邺郡人就买下了这只鹰。
English: One day, a man with an eagle came to show it to the Jixian County man, who bought the eagle.

古文：其鹰甚神俊，邺人家所育鹰隼极多，皆莫能比，常臂以玩，不去手。
现代文：这只鹰非常威武英俊，邺城人家里饲养的鹰隼很多，但没有一只能比得上它的。
English: This eagle is very powerful and handsome. There are many eagles raised in the homes of people in Lucheng, but none of them can match it.

古文：后有东夷人见者，请以缯百余段为直，曰： 吾方念此，不知其所用。 
现代文：他常把这只鹰架在胳膊上游玩。后来有个东方少数民族的人看见了这只鹰，愿意用一百多段丝织品换取这只鹰。邺州人说： 我刚得到这只鹰，但是不知道它有什么特殊的用处。 
English: He often carried the eagle on his arm to play with it. Later, a member of an eastern ethnic minority saw the eagle and was willing to exchange more than a hundred pieces of silk for the eagle. Zhangzhou said: I just got this eagle, but I don't know what special use it has.

古文：其人曰： 此海鹞也，善辟蛟螭患，君宜于邺城南放之，可以见其用矣。 
现代文：那个人说： 这是一只海鹞，善长克制蛟和螭的危害，你应当到邺城的南面去放开它。就能看到它的用处了。
English: The man said, "This is a seagull. It is good at controlling the harm of cormorants and gulls. You should go to the south of Lushan to release it. Then you will see its usefulness."

古文：先是邺城南陂蛟常为人患，郡民苦之有年矣。
现代文：很早以前邺城南面的池塘中就有一只蛟，经常给人带来灾难。邺郡的老百姓受到蛟的祸害有好多年了。
English: A long time ago, there was a dragonfly in the pond south of Lucheng, which often brought disaster to people. The people of Lucheng County have been plagued by dragonflies for many years.

古文：邺人遂持往，海鹞忽投陂水中，顷之乃出，得一小蛟，既出，食之且尽，自是邺民免其患。
现代文：邺郡人就带着这只海鹞去了，海鹞忽然投身进塘水之中，不久就捉了一只小蛟出来，然后又把这只蛟给吃光了。
English: The people from Handan County took the seagull with them. The seagull suddenly threw itself into the pond water. Soon, it caught a small seagull and then ate the entire seagull.

古文：有告于嵩，乃命邺人讯其事，邺人遂以海鹞献焉。
现代文：从此邺郡的百姓免除了蛟患。有人把这事告诉了薛嵩，薛嵩就把邺城人找来询问这件事，邺郡人就把海鹞献给了薛嵩。
English: From then on, the people of Ya County were spared from the plague. Someone told Xue Song about this, and Xue Song asked the people of Ya City to inquire about it. The people of Ya County then dedicated the seagull to Xue Song.

