古文：周执羔王希吕陈良祐李浩陈橐胡沂唐文若李焘
现代文：李焘字仁甫，眉州丹眣人，唐宗室曹王的后代。父李中考中进士，主管仙井监。李焘刚成年，愤恨金仇未报，著《反正议》十四篇，都是有关挽救时局的大问题。
English: Li Hongzhi, a descendant of Cao Wang of the Tang Dynasty, was born in Danyang, Meizhou. His father, Li Hongzhi, was a member of the middle school entrance examination, and was in charge of Xianjing. Li Hongzhi had just come of age, and he was angry that he had not reported his financial vendetta. He wrote fourteen articles on the topic of saving the current situation.

古文：周执羔字表卿，信州弋阳人。
现代文：绍兴八年，李焘考中进士。皇上调李焘为华阳主簿，又调为雅州推官。
English: In the eighth year of Shaoxing, Li Ying was promoted to the middle school examination. The emperor transferred Li Ying to the Huayang master book, and also transferred to the Yazhou magistrate.

古文：宣和六年举进士，廷试，徽宗擢为第二。
现代文：因人事变动，李焘被任命为双流知县。县里的仕族张氏子居丧期间争夺财产，李焘说： 你能容忍丢弃祖先的教诲吗？回去想一想。 
English: Due to personnel changes, Li Wei was appointed to Shuangliu County. During the mourning period of the Zhang family, the county officials fought for property. Li Wei said: Can you tolerate discarding the teachings of your ancestors? Go back and think about it.

古文：授湖州司士曹事，俄除太学博士。
现代文：三天后张氏子又来见李焘，深感后悔表示不再诉讼。
English: Three days later, Zhang's son came to see Li Yao again, deeply regretting that he would no longer sue.

古文：建炎初，乘舆南渡，自京师奔诣扬州，不及，遂从隆祐太后于江西，还觐会稽。
现代文：又有不告诉其母亲而出卖家产的人，李焘对他晓之以理，豪强收敛了自己的行为。
English: There were also people who did not tell their mothers and sold their family property. Li Yan reasoned with him and bravely restrained his behavior.

古文：寻以继母刘疾，乞归就养，调抚州宜黄县丞。
现代文：在这里李焘利用空闲时间努力学习。李焘以读王氏的书为耻，独独广泛阅读过去的史籍，搜罗百家著作，毅然以著史为己任，对本朝的典故尤其全面地加以研究。
English: Here, Li Wei used his free time to study hard. Li Wei was ashamed of reading Wang's books, he read extensively the historical books of the past, collected hundreds of works, resolutely took writing history as his duty, and studied the allusions of this dynasty in an especially comprehensive manner.

古文：时四境俶扰，溃卒相挻为变，令大恐，不知所为，执羔谕以祸福，皆敛手听命。
现代文：李焘仿司马光的《资治通鉴》的体例，起自建隆年间，终于靖康年间，按年编写成一书，命名为《长编》，工程浩大没有完成，于是效仿司马光的体例著《百官公卿表》。
English: Imitating the style of Sima Guang's "Capital and Politics General Guide," Li Zhen compiled a book every year since the Jianlong period and finally during the Jingkang period, naming it "Long Edition." The huge project was not completed, so he followed Sima Guang's example and wrote "The Table of the Hundred Officials and Noblemen."

古文：既又訹其党，执首谋者斩以徇。
现代文：史官报告皇上，皇上下诏李焘上奏札。
English: The historian reported to the emperor, and the emperor issued an imperial edict.

古文：邑人德之，至绘像立祠。
现代文：制置使王刚中招李焘为干办公事。
English: Wang Gang Middle School was set up to recruit Li Xuan to do office work.

古文：绍兴五年，改秩，通判湖州。
现代文：李焘被任命为莱州知州。莱州凭溪水为城防，夏秋时苦于积水不畅，李焘派人修筑护坝捍卫。
English: Li Gan was appointed as the governor of Laizhou. Laizhou relied on streams for its defense. In summer and autumn, it suffered from stagnant water. Li Gan sent people to build a dam to defend the city.

古文：丁母忧，服阕，通判平江府。
现代文：李焘被任命为潼川府路转运判官，进入潼川境内，弹劾守官不尽职的四人。
English: Li Wei was appointed as the judge of the transit of the Beichuan Prefectural Road, entered the territory of Beichuan, and impeached four officers for dereliction of duty.

古文：召为将作监丞。
现代文：县里多聚敛，李焘收集一路的财赋收入，使其互通有无，斟酌了三年财赋的平均数，定为固定的科税数额，上奏给朝廷，皇上把这个方法颁布到各州县施行。
English: Counties collect more and more, and Li Lan collects the income of the financial endowment along the way to make it interchangeable. After considering the average of the three-year financial endowment, it is set as a fixed amount of science and technology tax, reported to the imperial court, and the emperor promulgated this method to all states and counties.

古文：明年春，迁太常丞。会始议建明堂，大乐久废不修，诏奉常习肄之，访辑旧闻，庀阅工器，制作始备。
现代文：乾道三年，皇上召李焘进宫对话，李焘首先列举艺祖治身、治家、治官、治吏的典故，认为这是恢复国土中兴的办法，乞求增设台谏官，允许六察官员陈述朝政得失，请求训练士兵，不要增兵，杜绝诸将私下的进贡，核实军队中的虚籍。
English: After three years of dry road, the emperor summoned Li Jie to the palace for a dialogue. Li Jie first listed the allusions of the ancestors of the art of self-governance, family management, government officials and officials, and believed that this was a way to restore the national rejuvenation. He begged for the establishment of additional eunuchs, allowed the six inspection officials to state the gains and losses of the government, and requested the training of soldiers, not to increase the number of soldiers, to eliminate the private tribute from the generals, and to verify the false registration in the army.

古文：累迁右司员外郎。
现代文：李焘被任命为兵部员外郎兼礼部郎中。
English: Li Xi was appointed as the second son of a member of the military department and the second son of the Rectification Department.

古文：八月，擢权礼部侍郎，充贺金生辰使。往岁奉使官得自辟其属，赏典既厚，愿行者多纳金以请，执羔始拒绝之。
现代文：正遇到庆祝皇上寿辰，在祭祀天地前进行的宫中斋戒期间，大家议论暂且作乐，李焘说： 汉、唐祭祀天地，在宫中斋节四天，又行致斋三天，建隆初年郊祀也是这样。自崇宁、大观时效法《周礼》祭天地之法，所以前十天受誓戒。
English: During the celebration of the emperor's birthday, during the fasting period in the palace before the sacrifice of heaven and earth, everyone discussed making music for the time being, Li Wei said: Han and Tang sacrificed heaven and earth, in the palace festival four days of fasting, and three days of fasting, and in the first year of Jianlong, the suburban worship was also like this. Since Chongning, the Taiguan time-keeping law, "Weekly Ritual," the law of sacrificing heaven and earth, so the first ten days were sworn.

古文：使还，兼权吏部侍郎。
现代文：今天已经合在一起祭了，应恢复汉、唐及建隆时的旧制，也许可以两全其美。 
English: Today, the festivals have been combined, and the old system of Han, Tang and Jianlong should be restored. Perhaps it can be the best of both worlds.

古文：请赐新进士闻喜宴于礼部，从之。
现代文：皇上下诏垂拱殿祝寿禁止作乐，正殿为北方使者使用。
English: It is forbidden to play music when the Emperor is celebrating his birthday, and the main hall is used as a messenger from the north.

古文：军兴废此礼，至是乃复。同知贡举。旧例，进士试礼部下，历十八年得免举，又四试礼部下，始特奏名推恩。秦桧既以科第私其子，士论喧哗，为减三年以悦众。
现代文：正式任命李焘为礼部郎中，李焘又说中兴以来祭礼不齐备，请按《开宝通札》、《嘉因革礼》、《政和新仪》令太常寺参考其同异，修编成祭祀之法。乾道四年，李焘呈上《续通鉴长编》，从建隆年至治平年，共一百零八卷。当时《乾道新历》编成，李焘说： 年历没差错就不用改，不验明不要用。
English: Li Wei was officially appointed as a member of the ritual department. Li Wei also said that since the founding of ZTE, the rituals were not complete. Please refer to the "Kai Bao Tong Card," "Jia Ying Ge Li," "Politics and New Rites" to make the Taizhong Temple refer to its similarities and differences, and modify it into a ritual. In the fourth year of the dry road, Li Wei submitted the "Continuation Guide," from the year of Jianlong to the year of Heping, a total of 108 volumes. When the "Dry Road New Calendar" was compiled, Li Wei said: If there is no error in the calendar, there is no need

古文：执羔言祖宗法不可乱，繇此忤桧，御史劾罢之。
现代文：没有比较不能知道它遗失的地方，没有验证不能知道它对的地方。旧历有许多错误，不能不改，而新历也没有很好的验证，乞求召集历官讨论。 
English: There is no comparison that cannot know where it is lost, no verification that cannot know where it is. The old calendar has many mistakes and cannot be changed, and the new calendar does not have good verification, begging to convene the calendar officials to discuss.

古文：又六年，起知眉州，徙阆州，又改夔州，兼夔路安抚使。
现代文：五年，李焘升任秘书少监兼权起居舍人，不久兼实录院检讨官。
English: In five years, Li Jun was promoted to the secretary of the junior superintendent and also the right-hand man, and soon became the inspector of the Record Academy.

古文：夔部地接蛮獠，易以生事。
现代文：李焘之子李篨考贤良方正、直言极谏科。
English: The son of Li Hongzhi, Li Hongzhi Kao Xianliang Fangzheng, is a forthright and outspoken person.

古文：或告溱、播夷叛，其豪帅请遣兵致讨，执羔谓曰： 朝廷用尔为长，今一方绎骚，责将焉往，能尽力则贳尔，一兵不可得也。 豪惧，斩叛者以献，夷人自是皆惕息。
现代文：李焘一向说唐三百年中无愧于此科的只有刘去华，心中很敬慕他，曾以所著《通论》五十篇给蜀帅张焘看，想得到征用，不得而止。其友晁公写信勉励他，李焘回答说应当修这门学问，但不一定凭借这个学问被举荐。既然没能亲自参加考试，于是命令二个儿子篨、塾学习它。
English: Li Wei had always said that the only one who was worthy of this subject in the 300 years of the Tang Dynasty was Liu Dehua. He admired him very much. He once showed the 50 articles of the "General Theory" he had written to the grand marshal Zhang Ye. If he wanted to be requisitioned, he couldn't stop. His friend Ye Gong wrote to encourage him. Li Wei replied that he should study this subject, but he wouldn't necessarily be recommended by virtue of this subject. Since he couldn't take the exam in person, he ordered his two sons to study it in school.

古文：三十年，知饶州，寻除敷文阁待制。
现代文：到这时，吏部尚书汪应辰推荐李篨有文才德行可应征召，所以有这个命令。
English: At this time, Shangshu Wang Yingchen of the Personnel Department recommended that Li Xuan, who was literate and virtuous, could be conscripted, so there was this order.

古文：乾道初，守婺州，召还，提举佑神观兼侍讲。
现代文：左相陈俊卿外调为福州知州，右相虞允文担负起恢复国土的大事，更改旧的典章。宰相因为李焘多次提意见，不高兴，李焘于是请求离职。
English: Left Minister Chen Junqing was transferred to Fuzhou Chizhou, and Right Minister Yu Yunwen took on the important task of restoring the country and changing the old ordinance. The prime minister was not happy because Li Jun repeatedly raised his opinions, so Li Jun requested to leave the post.

古文：首进二说，以为王道在正心诚意，立国在节用爱人。
现代文：李焘被任命为直显谟阁、湖北转运副使，临行前到宫中告辞，以想迅速改变过去的制度往往适得其反来提醒皇上。
English: Li Wei was appointed as the vice-envoy of Zhuxian Mogao and Hubei Transshipment. Before leaving, he went to the palace to say goodbye, reminding the emperor that trying to quickly change the past system is often counterproductive.

古文：二年四月，复为礼部侍郎。孝宗患人才难知，执羔曰： 今一介干进，亦蒙赐召，口舌相高，殆成风俗，岂可使之得志哉！ 上曰： 卿言是也。 一日侍经筵，自言 学《易》知数，臣事陛下之日短 ，已乃垂涕，上恻然。
现代文：李焘又奏道： 《禹贡》所记的九州中，荆州田数第八，赋税在第三位，充分发挥人的积极性，赋税才超过第五等。今天田多荒芜，赋税亏损十分之八。 
English: Li Yan also played: In the Kyushu recorded in "Yugong," Jingzhou has the eighth largest number of rice fields, and the tax is in third place. It is necessary to give full play to people's enthusiasm, and the tax will only exceed the fifth grade. Today, the fields are mostly barren, and the tax loss is eight out of ten.

古文：即拜本部尚书，升侍读，固辞，不许。
现代文：皇上命令他分条规划。
English: The emperor ordered him to draw up a detailed plan.

古文：方士刘孝荣言《统元历》差，命执羔厘正之。执羔用刘义叟法，推日月交食，考五纬赢缩，以纪气朔寒温之候，撰《历议》、《历书》、《五星测验》各一卷上之。
现代文：李焘到荆州后，上奏说 ：京湖百姓收集茅草盖房而住，用土修筑作坊，雇牛耕田，买种子种植，谷苗没长大，虎视眈眈的人已经很多了，其中有横征暴敛的人。
English: After Li Qian arrived in Jingzhou, Shangso said: The people of Jinghu gathered thatch to build houses and lived in them, used soil to build workshops, hired cattle to plow fields, bought seeds to plant, but the seedlings did not grow, and there were already many people who were jealous of Li Qian, including those who were violent in collecting taxes.

古文：上尝问丰财之术，执羔以为： 蠹民之本，莫甚于兵。
现代文：今天应该放宽侵冒的禁令，按照乾德诏书的规定只交纳旧税数额，扩大收募的办法，像咸平、元丰时所做的那样，对劝课有功的给予恩赐。 皇上诏令遵从。
English: Today, we should relax the ban on embezzlement, pay only the amount of the old tax in accordance with the provisions of the edict of Emperor Qiande, expand the methods of collection, and give a gift to those who have done a good job of exhortation, as Hamping and Yuanfeng did.

古文：古者兴师十万，日费千金。
现代文：总饷吕游问进宫奏请李焘专管其事。
English: General Gong Lyu asked the imperial court to ask Li Jun to take charge of the matter.

古文：今尺籍之数，十倍于此，罢癃老弱者几半，不汰之其弊益深。 论： 和籴本以给军兴，豫凶灾。
现代文：饥年，李焘拿出鄂州大军仓的粮食赈济百姓，下属们争论不休，认为不可行，李焘说： 我自己负责，不会牵连各位。 
English: In the famine year, Li Qian took out the grain from the large military warehouse in Ezhou to help the people. His subordinates argued endlessly and thought it was not feasible. Li Qian said: I am responsible for myself and will not implicate you.

古文：盖国家一切之政，不得已而为之。
现代文：不久如数偿还。吕游问回来后，果然弹劾李焘专权，皇上只令他把情况写清楚，不治他的罪。
English: After Lyu Yu's return, he did indeed impeach Li Xuan's absolute power, but the emperor only ordered him to write the situation clearly and did not punish him.

古文：若边境无事，妨于民食而务为聚敛，可乎？旧籴有常数，比年每郡增至一二十万石。
现代文：乾道八年，李焘直宝文阁，统帅潼川兼庐州知府，首先修好石门堡以阻止外族入侵，上奏皇上乞求警告茶马司买叙州羁縻马的数额不要再增加，警告官民不要到夷人、汉人的禁山上伐木造舟，奏请把蓄积的水调到开边旧池中，皇上都加以批准。
English: After eight years of hard work, Li Shizhong, commander of the Baichuan and governor of Bozhou, first repaired the Shimen Fort to prevent the invasion of foreigners. He begged the emperor to warn the tea masters not to increase the amount of horses bought in Suzhou, warned the officials and the people not to cut wood and build boats on the forbidden mountains of the barbarians and the Han people, and asked the accumulated water to be transferred to the old pool in Kaifeng. The emperor approved it.

古文：今诸路枯旱之余，虫螟大起，无以供常税，况数外取之乎？
现代文：淳熙改元，李焘被召进朝廷，适逢城中着火，上书自我弹劾。
English: At the time of the Yuan Dynasty reform, Li Xi was summoned to the imperial court. When the city caught fire, he wrote a letter of self-impeachment.

古文：宜视一路一郡一县丰凶之数，轻重行之，灾甚者蠲之可也。 上矍然曰： 灾异如此，乃无一人为朕言者！ 即诏从之。
现代文：提刑何熙志上奏说烧毁的东西数目不真实，又说《长编》记载了魏王吃肥肉，言词牵涉到诬谤。皇上说： 宪臣上奏焚烧物数失实，是他的职责，怎么要干预国史修撰呢？ 
English: He Xizhi was punished for saying that the number of things burned was not true. He also said that the "Long Collection" recorded that the Wei king ate fat meat, and the words involved slander. The emperor said: It is his duty to report that the number of burned things is untrue. How can he interfere with the national history?

古文：淳熙改元，被召，适城中火，上章自劾。提刑何熙志奏焚数不实，且言《长编》记魏王食肥彘，语涉诬谤，上曰： 宪臣按奏火数失实，职也，何预国史？ 命成都提刑李蘩究火事，诏熙志贬二秩罢，焘止贬一秩。焘及都门，乞祠，除江西运副，且许临遣。
现代文：命令成都提刑李蘩调查着火之事，诏令何熙志贬官二等罢职，李焘只贬一级。李焘到朝廷乞求主管一祠观，皇上任命他为江西转运副使，且允许他直接到任。有人劝他刚被诬陷，不要提及此事，李焘说： 圣主如此大度，我应竭尽忠诚来报答。 
English: Chengdu was ordered to punish Li Qian for investigating the fire, and the imperial edict ordered He Xizhi to resign as a second-class official, while Li Qian was only demoted one level. Li Qian went to the imperial court to beg the supervisor for an inspection of the shrine. The emperor appointed him as the deputy envoy of Jiangxi transshipment and allowed him to take office directly. Someone advised him that he had just been framed and not to mention the matter. Li Qian said: The Lord is so generous, I should do my best to repay his loyalty.

古文：或劝以方被谗，无及时事，焘曰： 圣主全度如此，竭忠所以为报。 遂奏： 日食、地震皆阴盛，主敌国小人，不可不虑。 且申 无变古、无欲速 两言，又上《快箴》，引太祖罢朝悔乘快决事以谏，上曰： 朕当揭之座右。 进秘阁修撰、权同修国史、权实录院同修撰。
现代文：于是奏道： 日食、地震都是阴盛的征兆，主敌国小人之事，不可不考虑。 且重申 不要改变古制、不要图快 两句话，又呈上《快箴》，引用太祖罢朝后悔太快断事之例作为劝谏，皇上说： 我应当把它贴在座位右边。 提拔李焘为秘阁修撰、权同修国史、权实录院同修撰。
English: He then recited, "Solar eclipses and earthquakes are all signs of a gloomy time, and we must not ignore the small people of the main enemy country," and reiterated, "Don't change the old system, don't be too hasty." Two sentences were also presented, and "Quick Proverbs" was presented, quoting the example of the great-great-grandfather, who regretted ruling too quickly, as an exhortation, and the emperor said, "I should stick it on the right side of the seat," and promoted Li Qian to be the author of the secret cabinet, the author of the national history, and the author of the record of the truth.

古文：焘为左史时，尝乞复行明堂礼，谓 南郊、明堂初无隆杀，合视圜坛，特免出郊浮费。 至是申言之，诏集议，嬖幸沮止。
现代文：李焘为左史时，曾乞求恢复举行明堂礼仪，说： 南郊、明堂开始没有什么丰厚的施舍，就像在圆坛祭天地一样，可免除出郊浮费。 到这时李焘又重申一次，皇上诏令集体讨论，被朝廷受宠的小人制止。
English: When Li Qiye was a leftist historian, he had begged for the resumption of the Myeongdong etiquette, saying: The southern suburbs and Myeongdong did not have rich alms at the beginning, just as in the round altar, they could be exempted from the floating fee. At this time, Li Qiye reiterated once again that the emperor ordered a collective discussion and was stopped by the court's favored villains.

古文：其后周必大为礼部尚书，申其说，始克行。
现代文：其后周必大为礼部尚书，重申李焘的意见，才开始施行。
English: After that, Zhou Bida wrote a letter to the Ministry of Ceremonies, reiterating Li Xi's opinion, before it began to be implemented.

古文：权礼部侍郎。
现代文：李焘被任命暂代礼部侍郎。
English: Li Wei was appointed as the temporary attendant of the ceremonial department.

古文：七月壬戌，雷震太祖庙柱，坏鸱尾，有司旋加修缮。
现代文：淳熙三年七月十九日，雷震动太祖庙的柱子，损坏了鸱尾，有司立即加以修缮。
English: On July 19th, the third year of the reign of King Atsuhito, lightning shook the pillars of Taizu Temple, damaging the appendix, and Yushi immediately repaired it.

古文：焘奏非所以畏天变，当应以实。
现代文：李焘奏道 ：并不是因为害怕天的变化，应当做实事应和上天。 
English: Li Junso said, "It's not because I'm afraid of the changes in the heavens. I should do practical things to be in harmony with the heavens."

古文：上谕大臣： 焘爱朕，屡进谠言。 赐金紫。
现代文：皇上告诉大臣说： 李焘爱我，屡次进呈正直的话。 
English: The emperor told the minister, "Li Gan loves me and has repeatedly been honest with me.

古文：尝请正太祖东向之位。
现代文：因此赐给李焘金紫。李焘曾请求改正太祖庙的方位为东向。
English: Therefore, Jin Zi was given to Li Xuan. Li Xuan had requested that the direction of the Great Ancestor's Temple be changed to the east.

古文：四年，驾幸太学，以执经特转一官。
现代文：淳熙四年，皇上亲临太学，李焘因为执教经学，特提升一级。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Junxi, the emperor himself came to Taigaku, and Li Xuan was promoted to the first grade because of his teaching of classics.

古文：焘论两学释奠：从祀孔子，当升范仲淹、欧阳修、司马光、苏轼，黜王安石父子；从祀武成王，当黜李勣。
现代文：李焘论述两学设奠祭祀之礼说：配享孔子的，应当升范仲淹、欧阳修、司马光、苏轼，贬黜王安石父子；配享武成王的，应当废黜李责力。
English: Li Xi said, discussing the ceremony of the two schools to set up a memorial service: those who are worthy of Confucius should be promoted to Zhongyun, Ouyang Xiu, Sima Guang, and Su Shi, and Wang Anshi and his son should be demoted; those who are worthy of King Wucheng should be demoted to Li Li Li Li.

古文：众议不叶，止黜王雱而已。
现代文：大家议论不一，只废黜了王蚞。
English: Everyone disagreed, and only Wang Xi was deposed.

古文：真拜侍郎，仍兼工部。
现代文：李焘被任命为礼部侍郎，仍兼管工部。
English: Li Wei was appointed as the attendant of the ceremonial department, and he was still in charge of the plumbing department.

古文：《徽宗实录》置院已久，趣上奏篇，焘荐吕祖谦学识之明，召为秘书郎兼检讨官。
现代文：《徽宗实录》放在实录院已很久了，李焘立即上奏章，推荐吕祖谦有学识，皇上召吕祖谦为秘书郎兼检讨官。
English: "Hui Zong Shih Lu" has been placed in the Shih Lu Academy for a long time, Li Zhen immediately inscribed the chapter, recommended Lyu Zuqian as a scholar, and the emperor called Lyu Zuqian as a secretary and reviewer.

古文：夜直宣引，奏： 近者蒙气蔽日，厥占不肖者禄，股肱耳目宜谨厥与。 赐坐。
现代文：晚上李焘值班时被皇上召见，于是奏道： 近来浓厚的气烟遮蔽了太阳，占卜显示是不肖之人的福分降临，皇上身边的大臣应该谨慎结交。 皇上赐给他座位。
English: In the evening, while on duty, Li Qian was summoned by the emperor, so he began to sing: Recently, thick smoke has obscured the sun, divination shows that the good fortune of the unlucky people has come, and the ministers around the emperor should be careful to make friends.

古文：欲起，又留赐饮、赐茶。
现代文：李焘想起身告别，皇上又留他饮茶。
English: Li Yao remembered to say goodbye, and the emperor left him to drink tea.

古文：寻诏监视太史测验天文。
现代文：不久，皇上诏李焘监视太史测验天文。
English: Soon after, Emperor Zhao Li Rong supervised Taishi's examination of astronomy.

古文：九月丁酉，日当夜食，焘为社坛祭告官，伐鼓礼废，特举行。
现代文：九月初一，晚上该有日食现象，李焘为社坛祭告官，原来的打鼓之礼被废除了，于是又举行。
English: On the first day of September, there was supposed to be a solar eclipse in the evening. Li Lan was the herald of the social event. The original drumming ceremony was abolished, so it was held again.

古文：垕既中制科，为秘书省正字，寻迁著作郎兼国史实录院编修检讨官。
现代文：李篨已经考中制科，为秘书省正字，不久升为著作郎兼国史实录院编修检讨官。
English: Li Jun had passed the middle school examination in the system science, was the secretary of the provincial official, and soon became the author and the editor-in-chief of the National History Record Institute.

古文：父子同主史事，搢绅荣之。
现代文：父子俩同管史事，士大夫以之为荣。
English: Father and son are both in charge of historical affairs, and Shidafu is proud of it.

古文：焘感上知遇，论事益切，每集议，众莫敢发言，独条陈可否无所避。
现代文：李焘感谢皇上的知遇之恩，论述事情更加急切，每次皇上召集大家讨论，大家都不敢发言，只有李焘一一分析可否，无所避讳。
English: Li Qiye thanked the emperor for his understanding, and discussed the matter more urgently. Every time the emperor convened everyone to discuss, everyone did not dare to speak, only Li Qiye analyzed whether it was possible one by one, and did not shy away from anything.

古文：近臣复举其次子塾应制科，以阁试不中程黜。
现代文：皇帝的近臣又推荐李焘的次子李塾考制科，因试没中而被废黜。
English: The emperor's close vassal also recommended Li Yu's second son, Li Jucu, to take the examination in systematics, but he was dethroned because he did not pass the examination.

古文：垕偶考上舍试卷，发策问制科，为御史所劾，语连及焘，垕罢，焘亦知常德府。
现代文：李篨偶然考上舍的试卷，议论策问制科，被御史所弹劾，言语牵连到李焘，李篨被罢，李焘也被迫离朝到常德任知府。
English: By chance, Li Yao was admitted to the examination paper of the school, discussed the question system, and was impeached by the Imperial History Institute. Li Yao was implicated in the speech, Li Yao was dismissed, and Li Yao was also forced to leave the government to serve as the governor of Changde.

古文：初，政和末，澧、辰、沅、靖四州置营田刀弩手，募人开边，范世雄等附会扰民，建炎罢之。乾道间，有建请复置者，焘为转运使，尝奏不当复，已而提刑尹机迫郡县行之，田不能给。
现代文：当初，政和末年，澧、辰、沅、靖四州设置营田刀弩手，招募人开发边地，范世雄等附会骚扰百姓，建炎时罢去了这种措施，乾道年间，有人建议恢复设置，李焘为转运使，曾上奏说不能恢复，不久提刑尹机强迫郡县推行，所开垦的田不能自给。
English: At the beginning, in the last years of the Zheng He era, the four prefectures of Yan, Chen, Lu and Jing set up the Ying Tian knife and rake to recruit people to develop marginal lands. Fan Shixiong and other affiliated associations harassed the people, and this measure was eliminated when the fire was built. During the dry road years, some people suggested restoring the setting. Li Xi was the transporter, and once said that it could not be restored, and soon the punishment machine forced the county to implement it. The cultivated fields could not be self-sufficient.

古文：焘至是又申言之，请度田立额，且约帅臣张栻列奏，诏从之。
现代文：李焘到这时又重申以前的意见，请求丈量土地确定租额，并约帅臣张木式一起上奏，皇上采纳了他的意见。
English: At this time, Li Jun also reiterated his previous opinions, requesting that the land be measured to determine the amount of rent, and asked the commander Zhang Mu to play along, and the emperor adopted his opinion.

古文：境多茶园，异时禁切商贾，率至交兵，焘曰： 官捕茶贼，岂禁茶商？ 听其自如，讫无警。
现代文：四州境内很多茶园，从前禁止商人买卖，以致用官军镇压，李焘说： 官府捕捉茶贼，岂能禁止茶商？ 任其自如，结果没有出什么事。
English: In the past, many tea estates in the four prefectures prohibited merchants from buying and selling, leading to the use of government troops to suppress them. Li Wei said, "If the government catches tea thieves, can it ban tea merchants? Let them do as they please, and nothing happened as a result."

古文：累表乞闲，提举兴国宫。
现代文：李焘多次上表请求退休，皇上任命他提举兴国宫。
English: Li Gan repeatedly petitioned for retirement, and the emperor appointed him to head the Xingguo Palace.

古文：秋，明堂大礼成，以其首议，复除敷文阁待制。
现代文：秋天，明堂大礼制成，因为李焘首次论及，又任命他为敷文阁待制。
English: In autumn, Ming-tang Grand Ceremony was made, because Li Lan discussed it for the first time, and appointed him as Shibunkaku's assistant.

古文：顷之，垕垕塾继亡，上欲以吏事纾焘忧，起知遂宁府。
现代文：不久，李篨、李塾相继死亡，皇上想用繁忙的公事来缓和李焘的悲伤，起用他为遂宁知府。
English: Soon after, Li Xi and Li Ju died one after another. The emperor wanted to use Li Xi's busy schedule to ease Li Xi's grief and appointed him as Suining governor.

古文：七年，《长编》全书成，上之，诏藏秘阁。
现代文：淳熙七年，《长编》全书完成，李焘献给皇上，皇上令藏秘阁中。
English: In the seventh year of Chunxi, the whole book of the "long edition" was completed, Li Wei dedicated it to the emperor, and the emperor ordered it to be kept in the secret cabinet.

古文：焘自谓此书宁失之繁，无失之略，故一祖八宗之事凡九百七十八卷，卷第总目五卷。
现代文：李焘自己说这本书宁可有繁琐的缺点，不能有简略的缺点，所以一祖八宗之事共九百七十八卷，卷总目五卷。
English: Li Xuan himself said that this book would rather have cumbersome shortcomings than simple shortcomings, so there are a total of nine hundred and seventy-eight volumes of the Eight Ancestors, with five volumes in total.

古文：依熙宁修《三经》例，损益修换四千四百余事，上谓其书无愧司马迁。
现代文：按照熙宁年间修《三经》的体例，增删修改为四千四百多件事，皇上说他的书无愧于司马迁的书。
English: According to Xining's practice of revising the "Three Classics" over the years, the additions, deletions and modifications amounted to more than four thousand and four hundred things. The emperor said that his book was worthy of Sima Qian's book.

古文：焘尝举汉石渠、白虎故事，请上称制临决，又请冠序，上许之，竟不克就。
现代文：李焘曾举出汉代石渠、白虎的故事，请求皇上行使权力给判断一下好坏，又请皇上做序，皇上答应了他，最终没有实现。
English: Li Wei once brought up the story of the stone canal and the white tiger in the Han Dynasty, and asked the emperor to exercise his power to judge whether it was good or bad. He also asked the emperor to make a preface. The emperor agreed, but in the end it did not come to fruition.

古文：又奏： 陛下即位二十余年，志在富强，而兵弱财匮，与 教民七年可以即戎者 异矣。 一日，召对延和殿，讲臣方读《陆贽奏议》，焘因言： 贽虽相德宗，其实不遇。
现代文：李焘又奏： 陛下即位二十多年，立志使国家富强，而兵弱财乏，与教民七年可以作战不同。 一天，皇上召李焘到延和殿对话，讲臣正在读《陆贽奏议》给皇上听，李焘就说： 陆贽虽然辅助德宗，其实没有得到信任。
English: One day, the emperor summoned Li Qiye to the Yanhe Hall for a dialogue, and while the lecturer was reading "Lu Qiye's Speech" to the emperor, Li Qiye said, "Although Lu Qiye assisted the Desong, in fact, he was not trusted.

古文：今遇陛下，可谓千载一时。 遂举贽所言切于今可举而行者数十事，劝上力行之。
现代文：今天得到陛下的礼遇，可以说是千载难逢。 于是举出陆贽所说的与当今的形势相关的应该实行的数十件事，劝皇上尽力实行。
English: Today's courtesy from His Majesty can be said to be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. Therefore, he listed dozens of things that should be implemented that are related to the current situation, and advised the Emperor to do his best.

古文：上有功业不足之叹，焘曰： 功业见乎变通，人事既修，天应乃至。 进敷文阁直学士，提举佑神观兼侍讲、同修国史。
现代文：皇上有建功立业不够的悲叹，李焘说： 建立功业在于变通，人事已经协调，上天的报答就会来的。 李焘被任命为敷文阁直学士，提举佑神观兼侍讲、同修国史。
English: The emperor lamented that he had not done enough to establish merit, and Li Lan said: The establishment of merit is flexible, the personnel has been coordinated, and the reward of heaven will come. Li Lan was appointed as a direct scholar of the Shibunkaku, and was promoted to be an attendant and lecturer of Yu Shen Guan and a student of national history.

古文：荐尤袤、刘清之十人为史官。
现代文：推荐尤袤、刘清之十人为史官。
English: The ten historians recommended by You Qi and Liu Qing.

古文：十年七月，久旱，进祖宗避殿减膳求言故事，上亟施行。
现代文：淳熙十年七月，长期干旱，李焘举出祖宗避出宫殿减少膳食以求直言的事例，皇上立即施行。
English: In July of the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Junxi, when there was a long drought, Emperor Li Yong cited the example of his ancestors avoiding the palace and reducing their meals in order to speak frankly, which was immediately implemented by the emperor.

古文：丁丑雨。
现代文：十五日降雨。
English: It rained on the 15th.

古文：一日宣对，焘言： 外议陛下多服药，罕御殿，宫嫔无时进见，浮费颇多。 上曰： 卿可谓忠爱，顾朕老矣，安得此声。
现代文：一日皇上召李焘对话，李焘说： 外面议论陛下服药多，很少上殿听事，又加上宫中嫔妃不时进见，所耗浮费颇多。 皇上说 ：你可谓忠心，爱护我，只是我已经老了，怎么还会得到这种名声？
English: One day, the emperor summoned Li Qiye for a dialogue. Li Qiye said, "It is said that His Majesty takes a lot of medicine, rarely goes to the palace to listen to matters, and the concubine of the palace visits him from time to time, which consumes a lot of floating expenses. The emperor said, "You can be described as loyal and loving me, but I am already old, how can I still get this reputation?"

古文：近惟葬李婕妤用三万缗，他无费也。 遂因转对，乞用祖宗故事召宰执赴经筵。
现代文：近来只有葬李婕妤用了三万缗，其他费用没有。 于是转而回答其他问题，乞求按祖宗过去的事例召宰执赴经筵。
English: Recently, he only spent 30,000 baht on Li Yao's funeral, and had no other expenses, so he turned to answer other questions, begging to call the priest to go to Jing Yao, as his ancestors had done in the past.

古文：太史言十一月朔，日当食心八分。
现代文：太史说十一月初一，太阳被遮掩，心宿大部分地区呈黑暗状态。
English: Tai Shi said that on the first day of November, the sun was completely covered, and most areas of Xinzhuang were dark.

古文：焘复条上古今日食是月者三十四事，因奏之曰： 心，天王位，其分为宋。
现代文：李焘又列举古今发生在这个月类似的日食现象三十四例，于是上奏说： 心宿三星，是天王的正位，它的地域为宋朝所处位置。
English: Li Wei also listed thirty-four cases of similar solar eclipses that have occurred in this month from ancient times to the present, and then said: The Three Stars of the Heart is the positive position of the King of Heaven, and its region is the location of the Song Dynasty.

古文：十一月于卦为复，方潜阳时，阴气乘之，故比他食为重，非小人害政，即敌人窥中国。 明日对延和殿，又及晋何曾讥武帝无经国远图。
现代文：十一月为复卦，正潜入阳气时，阴气乘机而入，所以比其他种类的日食现象严重，不是小人损害政事，就是敌人窥探中国。 第二天，李焘到延和殿对话，又论及晋朝何曾讥讽武帝没有治国的宏伟远图。
English: November is a double eclipse, when it is sinking into the yang, the yin takes the opportunity to enter, so it is more serious than other types of solar eclipses. It is not a villain who damages politics, or an enemy who spies on China. The next day, Li Wei went to the Yanhe Hall for a dialogue, and also discussed why the Jin Dynasty had ridiculed Emperor Wu for not having a grand vision for governing the country.

古文：十一年春，乞致仕，优诏不允。
现代文：淳熙十一年春，李焘请求退休，皇上宽待他，诏令不允许。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of the reign of Emperor Junxi, Li Xi requested to retire. The emperor treated him leniently and did not allow him to do so.

古文：上数问其疾增损，给事中宇文价传上旨，焘曰： 臣子恋阙，非老病，忍乞骸骨。 因叩价时事，勉以忠荩。
现代文：皇上多次问他病情的好坏，给事中宇文价传达了皇上的旨意，李焘说： 臣子留恋朝廷，不是又老又病，怎忍心请求告老还乡。 于是又向宇文价询问时事，勉励他尽忠尽职。
English: The emperor asked him many times whether his illness was good or bad, and in the middle of the matter, Yu Wenquan conveyed the emperor's will. Li Yan said, "If a courtier yearns for the imperial court, but is not old and sick, how can he bear to ask to return to his hometown?" So he asked Yu Wenquan about current affairs and encouraged him to be loyal and do his duty.

古文：又闻四川乞减酒课额，犹手札赞庙堂行之。
现代文：李焘又听说四川乞求减少酒课税额，还亲自写答刂子促进实行。
English: Li Wei also heard that Sichuan was begging to reduce the amount of liquor tax, and he personally wrote a reply to promote the implementation.

古文：病革，除敷文阁学士，致仕。
现代文：李焘病好后，被任命为敷文阁学士，以此职退休。
English: After Li Rong recovered from his illness, he was appointed as a Shibunkaku scholar and retired from this position.

古文：命下，喜曰： 事了矣。 口占遗表云： 臣年七十，死不为夭，所恨报国缺然。
现代文：命令下达后，李焘高兴地说 ：事情了结了。 口述遗书说 ：我年已七十，死去不算短命，所恨的是不能再报效国家。
English: After the order was issued, Li Yao happily said, "The matter is over." The dictated suicide note said, "I am 70 years old, death is not short-lived, what I hate is that I can no longer serve the country.

古文：愿陛下经远以艺祖为师，用人以昭陵为则。 辞气舒徐，乃卒，年七十。
现代文：希望陛下深谋远虑以艺祖为师，用人以昭陵仁宗为榜样。 说话时语气舒缓，言讫而卒，终年七十岁。
English: I hope that His Majesty will have the foresight to learn from the ancestors of art and follow the example of Shoryo Ninshu, and speak in a soothing tone, and speak softly, and die at the age of seventy.

古文：上闻嗟悼，赠光禄大夫。
现代文：皇上听说后悲伤叹息不已，赠他为光禄大夫。
English: When the emperor heard of this, he was overcome with grief and gave him the title of doctor of Guanglu.

古文：他日谓宇文价曰： 朕尝许焘大书 续资治通鉴长编 七字，且用神宗赐司马光故事，为序冠篇，不谓其止此。 
现代文：有一天对宇文价说 ：我曾答应李焘书写 续资治通鉴长编 七个大字，并按照神宗赏赐司马光的事例，为他的书写序，没想到到此为止了。 
English: One day, he said to Yu Wencai, "I had promised Li Qian to write "Renewal of Capital," edited by Jitong Jianlong, seven large characters, and to follow the example of Shenzong rewarding Sima Guang and write a preface for his book. I didn't expect it to end here."

古文：焘性刚大，特立独行。
现代文：李焘性情刚强、平静，卓绝不群。
English: Li Yao is strong-willed and calm, and is by no means a member of the herd.

古文：早著书，桧尚当路，桧死始闻于朝。
现代文：早年著书，秦桧还当权，秦桧死后李焘开始闻名于朝廷。
English: In his early years as a writer, Qin Hui was still in power. After Qin Hui's death, Li Wei became famous in the imperial court.

古文：暨在从列，每正色以订国论。
现代文：既然在侍从列，常常严肃议定国家的大事。
English: Since they were in the line of attendants, they often seriously discussed important matters of the state.

古文：张栻尝曰： 李仁甫如霜松雪柏。
现代文：张木式曾说： 李仁甫像霜松雪柏。
English: Zhang Mu Xi once said: Li Renfu is like a frost pine and snow cypress.

古文：无嗜好，无姬侍，不殖产。
现代文：没有嗜好，没有姬侍，不置财产。
English: No hobbies, no concubines, no possessions.

古文：平生生死文字间。 《长编》一书用力四十年，叶适以为《春秋》以后才有此书。
现代文：平生把生死都置于文字间。 《长编》一书花去四十年时间，叶适以为唯有此书堪为《春秋》之继。
English: In his life, he put life and death between words. "The Long Collection" took forty years to write, and Ye Shi thought that only this book could be the successor to "Spring and Autumn."

古文：有《易学》五卷，《春秋学》十卷，《五学传授》、《尚书百篇图》、《大传杂说》、《七十二子名籍》各一卷，《文集》五十卷，《奏议》三十卷，《四朝史稿》五十卷，《通论》十一卷，《南北攻守录》三十卷，《七十二候图》、《陶潜新传》并《诗谱》各三卷，《历代宰相年表》、《唐宰相谱》、《江左方镇年表》、《晋司马氏本支》、《齐梁本支》、《王谢世表》、《五代将帅年表》合为四十一卷。
现代文：李焘著为《易学》五卷，《春秋学》十卷，《五经传授》、《尚书百篇图》、《大传杂说》、《七十二子名籍》各一卷，《文集》五十卷，《奏议》三十卷，《四朝史稿》五十卷，《通论》十卷，《南北攻守录》三十卷，《七十二侯图》、《陶潜新传》与《诗谱》各三卷，《历代宰相年表》、《唐宰相谱》、《江左方镇年表》、《晋司马氏本支》、《齐梁本支》、《王谢世表》、《五代将帅年表》合为四十一卷。
English: Li Xuan wrote five volumes of "Easy Learning," ten volumes of "Spring and Autumn Studies," one volume each of "Five Classics," "One Hundred Scholarly Works," "Great Biography and Miscellany," and "Seventy-two Children's Names," fifty volumes of "Collection of Literature," thirty volumes of "Proposal," fifty volumes of "History of the Four Dynasties," ten volumes of "General Theory," thirty volumes of "Record of North and South Offensive and Defensive," three volumes each of "Seventy-two Horoscopes," "New Biography of Tao Qian" and "Poetic Spectrum," forty-one volumes of "Chronology of Prime Ministers

古文：谥文简，累赠太师、温国公。
现代文：李焘谥号文简，历赠太师、温国公。
English: Li Hongzhang's biography, the history of the Grand Master, Wen Guogong.

古文：子垕？塾、壁？
现代文：儿子篨、无土、塾、壁、直土。
English: Sons of the earth, no soil, cram school, wall, straight soil.

古文：垕著作郎，夔州路提点刑狱，壁、皆执政，别有传。
现代文：李篨为著作郎，李无土为夔州路提点刑狱，李壁、李直土都为执政，另外有传记。
English: Li Xi is the author of the book, Li Wuzhu is the governor of Luzhou Province, Li Qibing and Li Zhitong are the governors, and there are other biographies.

