古文：呜呼，自古宦、女之祸深矣！
现代文：唉，自古以来宦官、宫女造成的灾祸都十分深重！
English: Alas, since ancient times, the calamities caused by eunuchs and concubines have been very serious!

古文：明者未形而知惧，暗者患及而犹安焉，至于乱亡而不可悔也。虽然，不可以不戒。作《宦者传》。
现代文：明察是非的人在灾祸还没有形成的时候就懂得畏惧，昏庸暗昧的人灾祸发生了还安然相处，以至于动乱灭亡不能追悔。即使这样，也不能不引以为戒。因此作《宦者传》。
English: Those who are aware of right and wrong know how to be afraid when the disaster has not yet formed, and those who are dull and dim still get along well when the disaster occurs, so that they can not regret the turmoil and destruction. Even so, they can not be warned. Therefore, "The Story of the Deaf and Dumb."

古文：○张承业张承业，字继元，唐僖宗时宦者也。
现代文：张承业字继无，是唐僖宗时的宦官。
English: Zhang Chengye was a eunuch during the Tang Dynasty.

古文：本姓康，幼阉，为内常侍张泰养子。
现代文：原本姓康，小时候被间割，做内常侍张泰的养子。
English: Originally surnamed Kang, he was adopted as a child and became the adopted son of Zhang Tai.

古文：晋王兵击王行瑜，承业数往来兵间，晋王喜其为人。
现代文：晋王的军队攻打王行瑜，张承业多次在军队中出入，晋王喜欢他的为人。
English: Jin Wang's army attacked Wang Xingyu. Zhang Chengye was in and out of the army many times. Jin Wang liked him as a person.

古文：及昭宗为李茂贞所迫，将出奔太原，乃先遣承业使晋以道意，因以为河东监军。
现代文：到唐昭宗被李茂贞逼迫，将要出逃到太原时，就先派张承业出使晋说明意图，晋王于是任命他为河束监军。
English: When Tang Zhaozong was persecuted by Li Maozhen and was about to flee to Taiyuan, he first sent Zhang Chengye to dispatch an envoy to Jin to explain his intentions, and the King of Jin then appointed him as the Riverside Supervisor.

古文：其后崔胤诛宦官，宦官在外者，悉诏所在杀之。
现代文：后来崔胤诛杀宦官，对在京师外的宦官，都令所在地杀掉他们。
English: Later, Cui Yin ordered the killing of eunuchs, and for eunuchs outside the Beijing division, he ordered the location to kill them.

古文：晋王怜承业，不忍杀，匿之斛律寺。
现代文：晋王怜惜张承业，不忍心杀掉他，把他藏在斛律寺。
English: Jin Wang took pity on Zhang Chengye, could not bear to kill him, and hid him in the Temple of Heaven.

古文：昭宗崩，乃出承业，复为监军。
现代文：唐昭宗驾崩，纔让承业出来，又任为监军。
English: After the death of Tang Zhaozong, Yu Zhen came out of retirement and was appointed to supervise the troops.

古文：晋王病且革，以庄宗属承业曰： 以亚子累公等。 
现代文：晋王病危，把唐庄宗托付给张承业说： 以亚子麻烦你们了！ 
English: Jin Wang was critically ill and entrusted Tangzhuangzong to Zhang Chengye, saying, "I have troubled you with Yazi!

古文：庄宗常兄事承业，岁时升堂拜母，甚亲重之。
现代文：唐庄宗常常把张承业当做哥哥对待，逢年节时登堂拜见母亲，十分亲近看重他。
English: Tang Zhuangzong often treated Zhang Chengye as if he were his elder brother. He would visit his mother in the church during the New Year's festival, and held him in very high regard.

古文：庄宗在魏，与梁战河上十馀年，军国之事，皆委承业，承业亦尽心不懈。
现代文：唐庄宗在魏州，和梁在黄河边作战十多年，军国大事，都交托给张承业，张承业也尽心尽力不懈怠。
English: Tang Zhuangzong in Weizhou, and Liang in the Yellow River have been fighting for more than ten years. Military affairs are entrusted to Zhang Chengye. Zhang Chengye has also made every effort not to slack off.

古文：凡所以畜积金粟，收市兵马，劝课农桑，而成庄宗之业者，承业之功为多。
现代文：大凡蓄积钱财粮食，招兵买马，督促课赋，鼓励农桑，而成就唐庄宗的大业，张承业的功劳最多。
English: Dafan accumulated money, wealth and grain, recruited soldiers, bought horses, urged education, encouraged farmers and mulberry trees, and achieved the great cause of Tangzhuangzong. Zhang Chengye received the most credit.

古文：自贞简太后、韩德妃、伊淑妃及诸公子在晋阳者，承业一切以法绳之，权贵皆敛手畏承业。
现代文：在晋阳的贞简太后、韩德妃、伊淑妃及各位王子，张承业一概都以法律约束，权贵们都收手不敢做坏事而畏惧张承业。
English: In Jinyang, Empress Dowager Zhengjian, Empress Dowager Han Deguan, Empress Dowager Yi Shu and all the princes, Zhang Chengye was bound by the law, and the influential people were afraid of Zhang Chengye because they did not dare to do bad things.

古文：庄宗岁时自魏归省亲，须钱蒲博、赏赐伶人，而承业主藏，钱不可得。
现代文：唐庄宗逢年节时从魏州回来探枧亲眷，需要钱赌博、赏赐乐官，而张承业主管钱财，唐庄宗得不到钱。
English: Tangzhuangzong came back from Weizhou to visit his relatives at the time of the annual festival. He needed money to gamble and reward musicians, while Zhang Chengye was in charge of money and Tangzhuangzong could not get money.

古文：庄宗乃置酒库中，酒酣，使子继岌为承业起舞，舞罢，承业出宝带、币、马为赠，庄宗指钱积呼继岌小字以语承业曰： 和哥乏钱，可与钱一积，何用带、马为也？ 
现代文：唐庄宗于是在钱库中摆酒宴，酒喝到尽兴，让儿子李继岌为张承业跳舞，跳完后，张承业拿出宝带、币帛、马匹相赠，唐庄宗指着堆积的钱呼着李继岌的小名对张承业说： 和哥缺钱，可以给他一堆钱，拿宝带、马匹做什么？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong then held a wine banquet in the treasury. He drank until he was drunk, and let his son Li Jide dance for Zhang Chengye. After the dance, Zhang Chengye brought out the treasure belt, coins and horses to give to each other. Tang Zhuangzong pointed to the accumulated money and called Li Jide's nickname to Zhang Chengye and said: My brother is short of money, I can give him a bunch of money. What should I do with the treasure belt and horses?

古文：承业谢曰： 国家钱，非臣所得私也。 
现代文：张承业推辞说： 国家的钱，不是我的私财。 
English: Zhang Chengye said, "The state's money is not my private money.

古文：庄宗以语侵之，承业怒曰： 臣，老敕使，非为子孙计，惜此库钱，佐王成霸业尔！
现代文：唐庄宗说话冒犯他，张承业发怒说： 我是老宣诏使臣，我并不是为儿孙打算，珍惜这些库钱，不过是为了帮你成就霸业罢了！
English: Tang Zhuangzong's words offended him, Zhang Chengye angrily said: I am an old envoy, I do not intend to cherish these treasury money for my children and grandchildren, but to help you achieve hegemony!

古文：若欲用之，何必问臣？
现代文：你如果想用钱，何必问我？
English: If you want to use money, why do you have to ask me?

古文：财尽兵散，岂独臣受祸也？ 
现代文：钱用完了，军队散了，遭灾的哪只是我一人呢？ 
English: The money has run out, the army is scattered, and I am the only one to suffer?

古文：庄宗顾元行钦曰： 取剑来！ 
现代文：唐庄宗望着元行钦说： 拿剑来！ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong looked at Yuan Xingqin and said, "Bring a sword!

古文：承业起，持庄宗衣而泣，曰： 臣受先王顾托之命，誓雪家国之雠。
现代文：张承业起身，拉着唐庄宗的衣服哭泣，说： 我接受先王托付的使命，誓死为家为国报仇。
English: Zhang Chengye stood up, pulled Tang Zhuozong's clothes and wept, saying: I accept the mission entrusted by the former king, and swear to avenge my family and country.

古文：今日为王惜库物而死，死不愧于先王矣！ 
现代文：今天为你珍惜库中的钱物而死，死得无愧于先王了！ 
English: To die today for your treasuring the money in the treasury is a death worthy of the first king!

古文：阎宝从旁解承业手令去，承业奋拳殴宝踣，骂曰： 阎宝，硃温之贼，蒙晋厚恩，不能有一言之忠，而反谄谀自容邪！ 
现代文：间宝在一旁拉开张承业的手要他离开，张承业举拳把问宝打倒在地，骂道： 间宝是朱温的贼党，蒙受晋的大恩大德，却说不出一句忠诚的话，反而阿谀奉承以取容吗！ 
English: Ma Bao pulled Zhang Chengye's hand aside to ask him to leave, and Zhang Chengye raised his fist to knock the interrogator to the ground and scolded him: Ma Bao is Zhu Wen's bandit, he has received Jin's great favor, but he can't say a word of loyalty, but instead flatter him to gain his favor!

古文：太后闻之，使召庄宗。
现代文：太后听说后，派人召唐庄宗。
English: When the empress dowager heard about this, she sent someone to summon Tang Zhuozong.

古文：庄宗性至孝，闻太后召，甚惧，乃酌两卮谢承业曰： 吾杯酒之失，且得罪太后。
现代文：唐庄宗性格很孝顺，听说太后习他，很害怕，于是倒两杯酒向张承业谢罪说： 我酒后的过失，又得罪于太后。
English: Tang Zhuangzong had a very filial character. When he heard that the empress dowager was learning from him, he was very afraid, so he poured two glasses of wine to thank Zhang Chengye for his sin and said, "My mistake after drinking has offended the empress dowager.

古文：愿公饮此，为吾分过。 
现代文：希望你喝下这杯酒，为我分担过失！ 
English: I hope you drink this glass of wine and share my guilt!

古文：承业不肯饮。
现代文：张承业不愿喝。
English: Zhang Chengye did not want to drink.

古文：庄宗入内，太后使人谢承业曰： 小兒忤公，已笞之矣。 
现代文：唐庄宗进内官，太后派人向张承业谢罪说： 小儿冒犯了你，已鞭打了他。 
English: When Tangzhuang Zongjin was promoted to the position of inner official, the empress dowager sent someone to Zhang Chengye to apologize, saying: Xiao'er has offended you and has whipped him.

古文：明日，太后与庄宗俱过承业第，慰劳之。
现代文：第二天，太后和唐庄宗都到张承业家拜访，安慰劳赏他。
English: The next day, the empress dowager and Tang Zhuozong both visited Zhang Chengyuan's home to comfort and reward him.

古文：卢质嗜酒傲忽，自庄宗及诸公子多见侮慢，庄宗深嫉之。
现代文：卢质嗜好饮酒，傲慢轻忽，从唐庄宗到各位王子大多受到他的侮辱怠慢，唐庄宗十分憎恨他。
English: Lu Qing had a penchant for drinking and was arrogant and careless. Most of the princes from Tangzhuangzong to the princes were insulted and neglected by him. Tangzhuangzong hated him very much.

古文：承业乘间请曰： 卢质嗜酒无礼，臣请为王杀之。 
现代文：张承业趁空隙时请求说： 卢质嗜好饮酒不讲礼义，我请求为你杀掉他。 
English: Zhang Chengye took advantage of the gap to make a request: Lu Qing's drinking habit is not polite, I ask you to kill him.

古文：庄宗曰： 吾方招纳贤才以就功业，公何言之过也！ 
现代文：唐庄宗说： 我正在招纳贤才以完成我的功业，你为何说这种错误的话呢？ 
English: Tang Zhuangzong said: I am recruiting talents to complete my work, why do you say such wrong words?

古文：承业起贺曰： 王能如此，天下不足平也！ 
现代文：张承业起身庆贺说： 大王能够像这样，天下不难平定了。 
English: Zhang Chengye stood up to celebrate and said: If the great king can do this, it is not difficult to pacify the world.

古文：质因此获免。
现代文：卢质因此幸免。
English: Lu Qing was thus spared.

古文：天祐十八年，庄宗已诺诸将即皇帝位。
现代文：玉并十八年，唐庄宗已答应诸将要即皇帝位。
English: In the eighteenth year of the reign of the Jade Emperor, Tangzhuangzong had already promised Zhu Zhu that he would become emperor.

古文：承业方卧病，闻之，自太原肩舆至魏，谏曰： 大王父子与梁血战三十年，本欲雪家国之雠，而复唐之社稷。
现代文：张承业正卧病不起，听说这事，从太原乘轿到魏州，谏阻说： 大王父子和梁血战三十年，原希望为家为国报仇，而恢复唐的社稷。
English: Zhang Chengye was bedridden with illness. When he heard about this, he took a car from Taiyuan to Weizhou. He said, "The Great King and his son Liang fought a bloody war for thirty years. I originally hoped to avenge my family and my country and restore Tang society.

古文：今元凶未灭，而遽以尊名自居，非王父子之初心，且失天下望，不可。 
现代文：如今元凶还没有消灭，就匆忙以尊贵的名号自居，这不是大王父子当初的心愿，而且让天下人失望，不可以这样！ 
English: Now that the culprit has not been eliminated, he has hastily assumed the title of nobility. This was not the original wish of the great king and his son, and it is unacceptable to let the world down!

古文：庄宗谢曰： 此诸将之所欲也。 
现代文：唐庄宗推辞说： 这是将领们的意愿。 
English: Tang Zhuozong said: This is the will of the generals.

古文：承业曰： 不然，梁，唐、晋之仇贼，而天下所共恶也。
现代文：张承业说： 不对，梁是唐、晋的仇敌，是天下人共同憎恶的。
English: Zhang Chengye said: No, Liang is the enemy of Tang and Jin, and is universally hated.

古文：今王诚能为天下去大恶，复列圣之深雠，然后求唐后而立之。
现代文：现在大王如果能为天下铲除大恶，为历代圣主报深仇大恨，然后再寻找唐的后裔立为皇帝。
English: Now, if the great king can eradicate the great evil in the world and repay the deep hatred for the past generations of saints, then he will look for Tang's descendants to become emperor.

古文：使唐之子孙在，孰敢当之？
现代文：如果唐的子孙还活着，谁人敢对抗他呢？
English: If Tang's descendants are still alive, who would dare to oppose him?

古文：使唐无子孙，天下之士，谁可与王争者？
现代文：如果唐已经没有子孙了，天下的士人，谁能和王争夺皇位呢？
English: If Tang has no more descendants, who among the world's nobles can compete with the king for the throne?

古文：臣，唐家一老奴耳，诚愿见大王之成功，然后退身田里，使百官送出洛东门，而令路人指而叹曰 此本朝敕使，先王时监军也 ，岂不臣主俱荣哉？ 
现代文：我是唐家的一个老奴仆罢了！确实希望看见大王的成功，然后退身田间，让百官送我出洛阳东门，而让路上的人指着我赞叹说 这是本朝的宣诏使臣，先王时的监军 ，难道不是臣子君主都光荣的事吗？ 
English: I'm just an old servant of the Tang family! I really hope to see the success of the great king, and then retreat to the fields, let the officials escort me out of the east gate of Luoyang, and let the people on the road point at me and praise me, saying, "This is the imperial envoy of this dynasty, the supervisor of the army of the former king. Isn't it a glorious thing for the vassals of the monarch?"

古文：庄宗不听。
现代文：唐庄宗不听。
English: Tang Zhuozong did not listen.

古文：承业知不可谏，乃仰天大哭曰： 吾王自取之！误我奴矣。 
现代文：张承业明白不能谏阻了，于是望着天大哭说： 我们的王自己取天下，误了老奴我了。 
English: Zhang Chengye understood that he could no longer resist, so he looked at the sky and cried loudly, "Our king has taken the whole world by himself.

古文：肩舆归太原，不食而卒，年七十七。
现代文：坐着轿子回到太原，绝食而死，年龄七十七岁。
English: Returning to Taiyuan in a palanquin, he died of starvation at the age of 77.

古文：同光元年，赠左武卫上将军，谥曰正宪。
现代文：同光元年，赠左武卫上将军，赐谧号正宪。
English: In the same year, he was given the title of Zuo Wei Shangzheng and the posthumous title of Zheng Xian.

古文：○张居翰张居翰，字德卿，故唐掖廷令张从玫之养子。
现代文：张居翰字德卿，过去唐掖廷令张从玫的养子。
English: Zhang Juhan, known as Deqing, was the adopted son of Zhang Congmei, who was ordered by the Tang Dynasty in the past.

古文：昭宗时，为范阳军监军，与节度使刘仁恭相善。
现代文：唐昭宗时，任范阳军监军，和节度使刘仁恭关系很好。
English: At the time of Tang Zhaozong, Fan Yang was appointed as the military overseer of the army, and Liu Rengong had a good relationship with Xi Du.

古文：天复中，大诛宦者，仁恭匿居翰大安山之北谿以免。
现代文：大复年间，大肆诛杀宦官，刘仁恭把张居翰藏在大安山北面溪谷中得以幸免。
English: During the Great Restoration, eunuchs were killed in large numbers. Liu Rengong hid Zhang Juhan in a ravine on the north side of Mount Da'an and was spared.

古文：其后，梁兵攻仁恭，仁恭遣居翰从晋王攻梁潞州以牵其兵，晋遂取潞州，以居翰为昭义监军。
现代文：后来，梁军进攻刘仁恭，刘仁恭派张居翰随晋王进攻梁的潞州以牵制梁军，晋于是攻取潞州，任命张居翰为昭义监军。
English: Later, Liang's army attacked Liu Rengong. Liu Rengong sent Zhang Juhan to accompany Jin Wang to attack Liang's Bozhou to contain Liang's army. Jin then captured Bozhou and appointed Zhang Juhan as the supervisor of Zhao Yi's army.

古文：庄宗即位，与郭崇韬并为枢密使。
现代文：唐庄宗即位，和郭崇韬一起任枢密使。
English: Tang Zhuozong ascended to the throne, and he and Guo Chongyi were appointed as Privy Councilors.

古文：庄宗灭梁而骄，宦官因以用事，郭崇韬又专任政，居翰默默，苟免而已。
现代文：唐庄宗因消灭梁很骄傲，宦官借机专权，郭崇韬又独揽政事，张居翰默燃不言，苟且免责罢了。
English: Tangzhuangzong was very proud of eliminating Liang, the eunuchs took advantage of the opportunity to seize exclusive power, Guo Chongyi also monopolized political affairs, Zhang Juhan was silent, and he was exempted from responsibility.

古文：魏王破蜀，王衍朝京师，行至秦川，而明宗军变于魏。
现代文：魏王攻破蜀，王衍到京师朝见，走到秦川时，唐明宗在魏州发动兵变。
English: The Wei king conquered Shu, Wang Yan went to Beijing to meet the emperor, and when he came to Qin River, Tang Mingzong launched a mutiny in Weizhou.

古文：庄宗东征，虑衍有变，遣人驰诏魏王杀之。
现代文：唐庄宗束征，担心王衍作乱，派人飞马韶令魏王杀掉他。
English: Tangzhuang Zong Sokzheng, fearing that Wang Yan would make trouble, sent Fei Ma Yu to order Wei Wang to kill him.

古文：诏书已印画，而居翰发视之，诏书言 诛衍一行 ，居翰以谓杀降不祥，乃以诏傅柱，揩去 行 字，改为一 家 。
现代文：诏书已盖印画押，而张居翰打开看了，韶书中说 杀掉王衍一行人 ，张居翰认为杀掉降兵不吉祥，于是拿诏书贴在柱子上，抹去 行 字，改为一个 家 字。
English: The edict had been stamped and Zhang Juhan opened it and read it. The edict said to kill Wang Yan and his entourage. Zhang Juhan thought it was not auspicious to kill the soldiers, so he took the edict and stuck it on a pillar, erased the words and changed it to a family name.

古文：时蜀降人与衍俱东者千馀人，皆获免。
现代文：当时和王衍一起束行的蜀国降兵一千多人，都获免于死。
English: At that time, more than a thousand of the Shu soldiers who went into exile with Wang Yan were spared from death.

古文：庄宗遇弑，居翰见明宗于至德宫，求归田里。
现代文：唐庄宗被杀，张居翰在至德官朝见唐明宗，请求回到乡里。
English: When Tang Zhuangzong was killed, Zhang Juhan went to see Tang Mingzong at the German court and asked him to return to the countryside.

古文：天成三年，卒于长安，年七十一。
现代文：天成三年，死在长安，年龄七十一岁。
English: Tiancheng three years, died in Chang'an, the age of seventy-one.

古文：五代文章陋矣，而史官之职废于丧乱，传记小说多失其传，故其事迹，终始不完，而杂以讹缪。
现代文：五代的文章鄙陋，而史官的职责在战乱中荒废了，传记小说大多失传，因此关于五代的事迹，往往首尾不完整，而夹杂着错误。
English: The articles on the Five Dynasties are shoddy, and the duties of historians have been wasted in the war, and most of the biographical novels have been lost. Therefore, the stories about the Five Dynasties are often incomplete and mixed with errors.

古文：至于英豪奋起，战争胜败，国家兴废之际，岂无谋臣之略，辩士之谈？
现代文：至于英雄豪杰奋起力争，战争的胜败，国家兴亡的时候，难道会没有谋臣的策略，能言善辩的士人的论述？
English: As for the heroes and heroines who rise up and struggle, the victory and defeat of the war, and the rise and fall of the country, will there be no strategist's strategy, the discourse of a scholar who can speak well?

古文：而文字不足以发之，遂使泯然无传于后世。
现代文：但却不能在文字中找到这些材料，于是让它们湮汝消失不能流传到后代。
English: However, these materials cannot be found in the text, so let them disappear and cannot be passed on to future generations.

古文：然独张承业事卓卓在人耳目，至今故老犹能道之。
现代文：然而只有张承业的事迹清楚地留在人们的耳目中，到现在老人们还能谈说。
English: However, only Zhang Chengye's deeds clearly remain in people's ears and eyes, and even now the old people can still talk about it.

古文：其论议可谓杰然欤！
现代文：张承业的议论堪称杰出不凡啊！
English: Zhang Chengye's speech is outstanding and extraordinary!

古文：殆非宦者之言也。
现代文：恐怕不是宦官能够说得出来的。
English: I'm afraid it's not something a eunuch can say.

古文：自古宦者乱人之国，其源深于女祸。
现代文：从古到今宦官祸乱国家，它的根源比女色的灾祸还要深远。
English: From ancient times to the present, eunuchs have plagued the country, and its root causes are even more far-reaching than the scourge of women.

古文：女，色而已；宦者之害，非一端也。
现代文：女人，美色罢了；宦官的危害，不只是一个方面。
English: A woman is only beautiful; the harm of eunuchs is not just one aspect.

古文：盖其用事也近而习，其为心也专而忍。
现代文：宦官管辖的事务亲近而又熟悉，他们的心专横而又残忍。
English: The affairs of the eunuchs are intimate and familiar, and their hearts are domineering and cruel.

古文：能以小善中人之意，小信固人之心，使人主必信而亲之。
现代文：能够用小善来迎合人意，用小的恩信来笼络人心，让皇帝必定相信并且亲近他们。
English: They can use small kindnesses to meet people's expectations, and small letters of gratitude to win people's hearts, so that the emperor must believe in them and be close to them.

古文：待其已信，然后惧以祸福而把持之。虽有忠臣硕士列于朝廷，而人主以为去己疏远，不若起居饮食、前后左右之亲为可恃也。
现代文：等到已受到信任，然后再用祸福来威胁挟持皇帝即使在朝廷有忠臣和博学之士，而皇帝却认为他们距自己很疏远，不如侍奉他起居饮食、在其前后左右的人亲近可靠。
English: Even if there are loyal and learned people in the court, the emperor thinks that they are far away from him, and it is better to be close and reliable with those who serve him, live and eat, and are around him.

古文：故前后左右者日益亲，则忠臣硕士日益疏，而人主之势日益孤。
现代文：因此在皇帝前后左右的人日益受到亲近，那么忠臣和博学之士就日盏受到疏远，而皇帝的势力就日益孤立。
English: As a result, those around the emperor became increasingly close, loyal subjects and scholars became increasingly estranged, and the emperor's power became increasingly isolated.

古文：势孤，则惧祸之心日益切，而把持者日益牢。安危出其喜怒，祸患伏于帷闼，则向之所谓可恃者，乃所以为患也。
现代文：势力孤立，那么畏惧灾祸的心情就日益急切，而把持皇帝的人就日益稳固，安危出白他们的喜怒，祸患隐藏在帷幕中，那么过去所说的可靠的人，恰恰就是造成灾祸的人。
English: When the forces are isolated, the fear of calamity becomes more and more acute, and those who control the emperor become more and more secure. Their joy and anger are safe, and the evil is hidden in the curtain. Then the reliable person mentioned in the past is precisely the person who causes the disaster.

古文：患已深而觉之，欲与疏远之臣图左右之亲近，缓之则养祸而益深，急之则挟人主以为质，虽有圣智不能与谋，谋之而不可为，为之而不可成，至其甚，则俱伤而两败。
现代文：祸患深重后纔发觉，想和受到疏远的臣子算计左右受到亲近的人，慢了就会滋养祸患而更加深重，快了他们就会挟持皇帝作为人质，即使有大圣大智的人也不能参与谋划，即使谋划了也不能做，做了也不能成功，至于最严重的情况，就是两败俱伤。
English: When the calamity is serious, it will be discovered that those who want to be close to the estranged vassal, will slowly nourish the calamity and make it more serious. Soon they will hold the emperor as a hostage. Even those with great wisdom and wisdom cannot participate in the plan. Even if they plan, they cannot do it, and if they do it, they cannot succeed. As for the most serious situation, they will both lose.

古文：故其大者亡国，其次亡身，而使奸豪得借以为资而起，至抉其种类，尽杀以快天下之心而后已。
现代文：因此大的祸患使国家灭亡，其次使自身灭亡，而使得奸臣豪强们能够藉此作为依靠而起来作乱，直至剔除整个宦官，全部杀掉他们，让天下人高兴而后作罢。
English: Therefore, a great calamity brought about the ruin of the country, and then the ruin of itself, so that the treacherous magnates could rely on this as a support to rise up and create turmoil, until they removed the entire eunuchs, killed them all, made the people of the world happy, and then quit.

古文：此前史所载宦者之祸常如此者，非一世也。
现代文：这是从前的史书所载的宦官的灾祸常常如此，不只是在一个朝代的事。
English: This is the calamity of the eunuchs recorded in the ancient history books as often occurring, not just in one dynasty.

古文：夫为人主者，非欲养祸于内而疏忠臣硕士于外，盖其渐积而势使之然也。
现代文：作为皇帝，并不是想要在朝廷内滋生祸患而在外疏远忠臣和博学之士，是祸患逐渐积累而事势逼使其这样的。
English: As an emperor, he did not want to alienate loyal subjects and learned men outside the court by creating disasters inside the court, but the disasters gradually accumulated and the situation forced him to do so.

古文：夫女色之惑，不幸而不悟，则祸斯及矣，使其一悟，捽而去之可也。
现代文：女色的诱惑，如果不幸而不能醒悟，那么就会遭受灾祸；如果一旦醒悟，摒除了就行了。
English: A woman's temptation, if she is unfortunate enough not to wake up to it, will be a disaster; if she does wake up to it, she can just get rid of it.

古文：宦者之为祸，虽欲悔悟，而势有不得而去也，唐昭宗之事是已。
现代文：宦官造成的灾祸，即使想要悔悟，却有不能摒除的情势，唐昭宗的事就是这样。
English: The disaster caused by eunuchs, even if you want to repent, there is a situation that cannot be eliminated. This is the case of Tang Zhaozong.

古文：故曰深于女祸者，谓此也。
现代文：因此说它 比女色的灾祸深重 ，指的就是这点。
English: To say, therefore, that it is worse than the scourge of womanhood is to say just that.

古文：可不戒哉！
现代文：能不警惕吗！
English: Can we not take this as a warning?

古文：昭宗信狎宦者，由是有东宫之幽。
现代文：唐昭宗信任亲近宦官，因此纔会出现被幽禁在束宫里的事。
English: Tang Zhaozong trusted eunuchs to be close to him, which is why the eunuch was imprisoned in the palace.

古文：既出而与崔胤图之，胤为宰相，顾力不足为，乃召兵于梁。梁兵且至，而宦者挟天子走之岐。梁兵围之三年，昭宗既出，而唐亡矣。
现代文：从束官脱身后而和崔胤算计宦官，崔胤是宰相，眼见无能为力，于是向梁召兵，梁兵快到时，而宦官挟持皇帝逃奔到岐，梁兵包围了三年，唐昭宗逃出后，而唐也就灭亡了。
English: After escaping from the shogun, he and Cui Yan planned to become eunuchs. Cui Yan was the prime minister and could do nothing, so he summoned soldiers to Liang. Liang soldiers were about to arrive, and the eunuchs took the emperor and fled to Qi. Liang soldiers were surrounded for three years. After Tang Zhaozong escaped, Tang also perished.

古文：初，昭宗之出也，梁王悉诛唐宦者第五可范等七百馀人，其在外者，悉诏天下捕杀之，而宦者多为诸镇所藏匿而不杀。
现代文：当初，唐昭宗脱身后，梁千杀掉唐的所有宦官第五可范等七百多人，在京师外的宦官，诏令天下全部捕杀，但宦官多被各个节镇藏起来不杀。
English: At first, after Emperor Zhaozong of Tang escaped, Liang Qian killed more than seven hundred people, including all eunuchs of Tang, such as the fifth can Fan. Eunuchs outside the Beijing division were ordered to be killed all over the world, but eunuchs were mostly hidden by various towns and not killed.

古文：是时，方镇僭拟，悉以宦官给事，而吴越最多。
现代文：这时，藩镇企图篡国，都任用宦官做事，昊越国最多。
English: At this time, the hanzhen attempted to usurp the country, and all of them appointed eunuchs to do things, Ha Yue being the largest.

古文：及庄宗立，诏天下访求故唐时宦者悉送京师，得数百人，宦者遂复用事，以至于亡。
现代文：到唐庄宗即位后，诏令天下寻访过去唐代的宦官全部送到京师，得到敷百人，宦官于是又当权，从而导致灭亡。
English: After Emperor Zhuangzong of Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne, he issued an imperial edict to send all the eunuchs of the past Tang Dynasty to Beijing to investigate, and obtained hundreds of eunuchs. The eunuchs then took power, which led to their downfall.

古文：此何异求已覆之车，躬驾而履其辙也？可为悲夫！
现代文：这和寻找已经翻了的车，亲自驾驶而重蹈覆辙有什么不同呢：可为之悲叹啊！
English: What is the difference between this and looking for a car that has been overturned, driving it yourself and repeating the same mistake: what a pity!

古文：庄宗未灭梁时，承业已死。其后居翰虽为枢密使，而不用事。有宣徽使马绍宏者，尝赐姓李，颇见信用。
现代文：唐庄宗没有消灭梁时，张承业已经死了后来张居翰虽任枢密使，但不管事有一个宣徽使马绍宏，曾赐姓李，颇受信用。
English: When Tang Zhuangzong did not eliminate Liang, Zhang Chengye was already dead. Later, although Zhang Juhan served as a privy councilor, there was a heraldic envoy, Ma Shaohong, who was given the surname Li and was quite trusted.

古文：然诬杀大臣，黩货赂，专威福，以取怨于天下者，左右狎暱，黄门内养之徒也。
现代文：但他诬陷杀害大臣，贪污财货，专权作威，受到天下人怨恨，在皇帝身边取宠，是豢养的宦官。
English: However, he was framed for the murder of a minister, embezzled money and goods, exercised dictatorial powers, was resented by the people of the world, was favored by the emperor, and was a well-fed eunuch.

古文：是时，明宗自镇州入觐，奉朝请于京师。
现代文：适时，唐明宗从镇州前来朝见，在京师奉朝请。
English: At the right time, Tang Mingzong came from Zhenzhou to see the emperor, and was invited to the imperial court in Beijing.

古文：庄宗颇疑其有异志，阴遣绍宏伺其动静，绍宏反以情告明宗。
现代文：唐庄宗颇为怀疑他有野心，暗中派马绍宏窥视他的衍动，马绍宏反而把情况告诉唐明宗。
English: Tang Zhuangzong was rather suspicious of his ambitions and secretly sent Ma Shaohong to spy on his movements. Ma Shaohong, on the other hand, told Tang Mingzong about the situation.

古文：明宗自魏而反，天下皆知祸起于魏，孰知其启明宗之二心者，自绍宏始也！
现代文：唐明宗从魏州返回，天下人都知道灾祸起于魏州，谁知道使唐明宗萌生二心，是从马绍宏开始的。
English: When Tang Mingzong returned from Weizhou, the whole world knew that the calamity originated in Weizhou. Who knew that it was Marshal Hong who caused Tang Mingzong to have second thoughts?

古文：郭崇韬已破蜀，庄宗信宦者言而疑之。
现代文：郭从韬攻破蜀后，唐庄宗听信宦官的话而怀疑他。
English: After Guo Zongqi defeated Shu, Tang Zhuozong listened to the eunuch's words and doubted him.

古文：然崇韬之死，庄宗不知，皆宦者为之也。
现代文：但郭崇韬的死，唐庄宗不知道，都是宦官干的。
English: But Guo Chongzhen's death, Tang Zhuozong did not know, was all the work of eunuchs.

古文：当此之时，举唐之精兵皆在蜀，使崇韬不死，明宗入洛，岂无西顾之患？
现代文：当这个时候，整个唐的精锐军队都在蜀，假如郭崇韬不死，唐明宗进入洛阳后，难道没有西面的忧虑？
English: At this time, all of Tang's elite troops were in Shu. If Guo Chongzhen did not die and Tang Mingzong entered Luoyang, wouldn't the West be worried?

古文：其能晏然取唐而代之邪？
现代文：他还能平静地取代唐吗？
English: Will he be able to calmly replace Tang?

古文：及明宗入立，又诏天下悉捕宦者而杀之。宦者亡窜山谷，多削发为浮图。
现代文：到唐明宗即位时，又诏令天下全部捕捉宦官而杀掉宦官逃亡到山谷中，很多人削发做了和尚。
English: When Emperor Mingzong of Tang Dynasty ascended the throne, he also issued an edict to capture all eunuchs in the world and killed the eunuchs and fled to the valley. Many people cut their hair and became monks.

古文：其亡至太原者七十馀人，悉捕而杀之都亭驿，流血盈庭。
现代文：逃到太原的宦官七十多人，全部被抓获而在都亭驿杀掉，鲜血流满庭中。
English: More than seventy eunuchs who fled to Taiyuan were all captured and beaten to death in Du Ting, with blood flowing all over the courtyard.

古文：明宗晚而多病，王淑妃专内以干政，宦者孟汉琼因以用事。
现代文：唐明宗晚年多病，王淑妃在官中专权干预政事，宦官孟漠琼趁机专权。
English: Tang Mingzong was often ill in his later years, Wang Shufei intervened in politics as an official, and the eunuch Meng Moqiong took advantage of the opportunity.

古文：秦王入视明宗疾已革，既出而闻哭声，以谓帝崩矣，乃谋以兵入宫者，惧不得立也。
现代文：秦王进宫见唐明宗已病危，出来后听到哭声，以为皇帝驾崩了，于是策谋率兵进官，怕自己不能立为皇帝。
English: When Qin Wang entered the palace, he saw that Tang Mingzong was critically ill. When he came out, he heard cries and thought that the emperor had passed away. So he plotted to lead soldiers into office, fearing that he would not be able to become emperor.

古文：大臣硃弘昭等方图其事，议未决，汉琼遽入见明宗，言秦王反，即以兵诛之，陷秦王大恶，而明宗以此饮恨而终。
现代文：大臣朱弘昭等人正在商量逭事，还没有作出决定，孟汉琼急速进见唐明宗，说秦王反叛，就率兵诛杀他，使秦王陷于大恶，而唐明宗因此含恨而死。
English: Minister Zhu Hongzhao and others were discussing anecdotes, and had not yet made a decision. Meng Hanqiong quickly went to see Tang Mingzong, said that Qin Wang had rebelled, and led his soldiers to kill him, causing Qin Wang to fall into great evil, and Tang Mingzong died with hatred.

古文：后愍帝奔于卫州，汉琼西迎废帝于路，废帝恶而杀之。
现代文：后来唐愍帝逃奔到卫州，孟漠琼往西在路上迎接唐废帝，唐废帝讨厌他把他杀掉了。唉！
English: Later, Emperor Gaozong fled to Weizhou, and Meng Moqiong went west to meet Emperor Gaozong on the road. Emperor Gaozong hated him and killed him. Alas!

古文：呜呼！人情处安乐，自非圣哲，不能久而无骄怠。
现代文：人置身于安乐之中，如果不是圣人贤哲，就不能很久而不骄纵懈怠。
English: If you're not a sage, you can't be at ease for long without slacking off.

古文：宦、女之祸非一日，必伺人之骄怠而浸入之。
现代文：宦官、女人的灾祸不是一天形成的，他们必定要窥伺骄纵懈怠的时机再逐渐侵入。
English: The calamity of eunuchs and women is not formed in a day. They must wait for the time of arrogance and slackness, and then gradually invade.

古文：明宗非佚君，而犹若此者，盖其在位差久也。
现代文：唐明宗不是只知享乐的君主，但却还是这样，是因为他在位太久了。
English: Tang Mingzong was not a monarch who only knew pleasure, but he was still like that because he had been in power for too long.

古文：其馀多武人崛起，及其嗣续，世数短而年不永，故宦者莫暇施为。
现代文：其余的君主大多是武人出身，到他们的子孙继位时，在位时间短而享年不长，因此宦官来不及做什么。
English: Most of the remaining monarchs were of warrior origin, and when their descendants succeeded to the throne, they had been on the throne for a short time and died young, so the eunuchs had no time to do anything.

古文：其为大害者，略可见矣。
现代文：宦官造成的大灾害，大略可见了。
English: The great disasters caused by eunuchs can be roughly seen.

古文：独承业之论，伟然可爱，而居翰更一字以活千人。
现代文：惟独张承业的议论，僳出可喜，而张居翰改一个字救活了上千人。
English: However, the discussion of Zhang Chengye alone was gratifying, and Zhang Juhan changed one word to save thousands of people.

古文：君子之于人也，苟有善焉，无所不取，吾于斯二人者，有所取焉。
现代文：君子对于人，如果有好的地方，没有不赞取的。我对于这两个人认为有可取之处。
English: A gentleman does not disapprove of a person if there is something good about him. I think there is something to be said for these two people.

古文：取其善而戒其恶，所谓 爱而知其恶，憎而知其善 也。
现代文：取那些好的，而戒备那些坏的，这就是人们所说的 喜爱他们但明白他们的邪恶，憎恶他们但知道他们的美好 。
English: Take the good and beware of the bad, that is what they say, love them but know their evil, hate them but know their good.

古文：故并述其祸败之所以然者著于篇。
现代文：因此一并叙述他们导致祸败的原因，写在《宦者传》中。
English: Therefore, the reasons for their disastrous defeat are described together, written in "The Tale of the Shrew."

