古文：天地之理，至则反，盈则败，日月是也。代兴代废，四时是也。
现代文：天地间万事万物变化演进的道理是：物极必反，盛极必衰，朝代的兴衰替代，就如同一年四季的变化交替一般，是正常而必然的现象。
English: The reason for the change and evolution of all things in heaven and earth is that things must go up and down, rise and fall. The alternation of the rise and fall of dynasties, just like the alternation of the four seasons of the year, is a normal and inevitable phenomenon.

古文：有胜有不胜，五行是也。有生有死，万物是也。
现代文：一个国家、一支军队，有胜过别人、能取胜的一面，也有不如别人，不能取胜的一面，就如同金、木、水、火、土五行相生相克一样，有生就有死，世间万物都是一样。
English: A country and an army have one side that is superior to others and can win, and another side that is inferior to others and cannot win. Just as the five elements of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth compete with each other, there is life and death, and everything in the world is the same.

古文：有能有不能，万生是也。
现代文：有能做到的，也有不能做到的，所有的人都是这样。
English: There are those who can do it and those who can't. All people are like that.

古文：有所有余，有所不足，形势是也。
现代文：有条件具备而有余的，也有条件不足的情形，形势发展变化就是如此。
English: As the situation develops and changes, there will be situations where conditions are more than sufficient, and situations where conditions are insufficient.

古文：故有形之徒，莫不可名。有名之徒，莫不可胜。
现代文：因此，只要是有阵形显露的军队，就没有不能识别的；而只要是能识别的军队，就没有不可战胜的。
English: Therefore, as long as there is an army with a revealed formation, there is nothing unrecognizable; and as long as it is a recognizable army, there is nothing invincible.

古文：故圣人以万物之胜胜万物，故其胜不屈。
现代文：所以，圣人会运用万物的长处去制胜万物，而且能不断取胜。
English: Therefore, a sage will use the strengths of all things to overcome all things, and can continue to win.

古文：战者，以形相胜者也。
现代文：用兵作战的人，是靠阵形相互取胜的。
English: Those who fight with soldiers rely on formations to win over each other.

古文：形莫不可以胜，而莫知其所以胜之形。
现代文：阵形没有不能战胜的，只是有人不知道用以战胜的阵形而已。
English: There is no invincible formation, it's just that some people don't know which formation to use to win.

古文：形胜之变，与天地相敝而不穷。
现代文：以阵形取胜的变化，就如同天和地相互遮蔽一样是永无穷尽的。
English: The variations in winning formations are as endless as the sky and the earth covering each other.

古文：形胜，以楚、越之竹书之而不足。
现代文：以阵形取胜的办法，用尽楚、越两地的竹子也是写不完的。
English: There is no end to the ways in which formations can be used to win, with Chu and Yue the two ends of the bamboo.

古文：形者，皆以其胜胜者也。
现代文：阵形是用其长处去取胜的。
English: The formation uses its strengths to win.

古文：以一形之胜胜万形，不可。
现代文：用一种阵形的长处去胜过万种阵形，这是不可能的。
English: It is impossible to use the strengths of one formation to outperform a thousand formations.

古文：所以制形壹也，所以胜不可壹也。
现代文：所以说，可以给阵形规定一定的式样，但是取胜的阵形却不可能是一成不变的。
English: Therefore, it is possible to specify a certain style for the formation, but the winning formation cannot be immutable.

古文：故善战者，见敌之所长，则知其所短；见敌之所不足，则知其所有余。见胜如见日月。其错胜也，如以水胜火。
现代文：因此，善于用兵作战的人，了解敌军的长处，就能知道敌军的短处；了解敌军不足的方面，就能知道敌军优胜的方面，这种人预见胜利，就如同预见日月升降一样准确容易，这种人取胜的措施，就如同用水灭火一样有效。
English: Therefore, a person who is good at using soldiers to fight, understands the strengths of the enemy army, and can know the weaknesses of the enemy army; understands the shortcomings of the enemy army, and can know the advantages of the enemy army. Such a person foresees victory as accurately and easily as foreseeing the rise and fall of the sun and moon, and such a person's measures to win are as effective as using water to extinguish fire.

古文：形以应形，正也；无形而制形，奇也。奇正无穷，分也。
现代文：用阵形对阵形，是常规战法叫做 正 ；不用固定的阵形去对付固定的阵形，是非常规战法，叫做 奇 。 奇 和 正 的变化是无穷无尽的，关键在于酌情运用，掌握分寸。
English: Using a formation against a formation is a conventional warfare method called Zhengfu; not using a fixed formation to deal with a fixed formation is an unconventional warfare method called Qi. The changes between Qi and Zhengfu are endless, the key is to use them as appropriate and master the proportions.

古文：分之以奇数，制之以五行，斗之以□□。
现代文：要按照出奇制胜的原理，运用五行相生相克的规律去制约敌军。
English: According to the principle of surprising victory, we should use the law of the five elements to restrict the enemy.

古文：分定则有形矣，形定则有名。
现代文：分析掌握敌情清楚准确，就去有相应的取胜阵形，阵形确定自然就会有阵名了。
English: Analyze and grasp the enemy situation clearly and accurately, and then have a corresponding winning formation. Once the formation is determined, there will naturally be a formation name.

古文：同不足以相胜也，故以异为奇。是以静为动奇，件为劳奇，饱为饥奇，治为乱奇，众为寡奇。发而为正，其未发者奇也。
现代文：用和敌军相同的阵形是不能取胜的，所以必须以变异的阵形出奇制胜，由于这个原因，以静制动是出奇，以逸待劳是出奇，以饱对饥是出奇，以安定对动乱是出奇，以多对少是出奇，暴露的行动是正，隐蔽的行动是奇。
English: It is impossible to win with the same formation as the enemy, so it is necessary to win by surprise with a variant formation. For this reason, it is surprising to brake quietly, it is surprising to wait for labor, it is surprising to be full against hunger, it is surprising to be stable against turmoil, it is surprising to be more than less, the exposed action is positive, and the hidden action is surprising.

古文：奇发而不报，则胜矣。
现代文：出其不意而又不被敌军发觉，就能取胜。
English: If you do it by surprise and without the enemy noticing, you can win.

古文：有余奇者，过胜者也。
现代文：所以说，奇招层出不穷的人，就能超出常人不断取胜。
English: Therefore, a person with an endless supply of magic tricks can constantly win more than ordinary people.

古文：故一节痛，百节不用，同体也。
现代文：人的一个关节痛，其他所有关节便都不能正常发挥作用，因为所有的关节都属于同一个身体。
English: When one joint is painful, all the other joints cannot function properly, because all joints belong to the same body.

古文：前败而后不用，同形也。
现代文：前锋失败了，后队也就不能发挥作用，因为是同一阵形。
English: The forwards failed and the backs couldn't play because it was the same formation.

古文：故战势，大阵□断，小阵□解。后不得乘前，前不得然后。
现代文：所以说，作战的态势，要大阵小阵后卫不追逐超越前锋，前锋不能阻挡后卫部队。
English: Therefore, in the operational situation, it is necessary for a large group of small guards not to chase and overtake the forwards, and the forwards cannot block the rearguard troops.

古文：进者有道出，退者有道入。
现代文：前进要有道路可以出去，后退要有道路可以进入。
English: If you want to go forward, there must be a way out, and if you want to go back, there must be a way in.

古文：赏未行，罚未用，而民听令者，其令仍民之所能行也。
现代文：赏和罚都没有实行，而众军却肯听令，这是由于这些命令是众军能够执行的。
English: Rewards and punishments were not carried out, but the troops were willing to obey orders, because these orders were able to be carried out by the troops.

古文：赏高罚下，而民不听其令者，其令，民之所不能行也。
现代文：悬出高赏低罚，而众军却不听令，这是由于命令是众军无法执行的。
English: High rewards and low punishments were offered, but the troops did not obey the orders, because the orders were impossible for the troops to carry out.

古文：使民虽不利，进死而下旋睡，孟贲之所难也，而责之民，是使水逆流也。
现代文：要让众军处在不利的形势下，仍然拼死前进而毫不后退，这是像孟贲那样的勇士也难以做到的；如果因众军不能做到而责怪他们，那就犹如要让河水倒流一样了。
English: It is difficult for a brave man like Meng Xuan to lead an army in an unfavorable situation and still fight hard to advance without retreating, and blaming the army for not being able to do so is like trying to make a river flow backwards.

古文：故战势，胜者益之，败者代之，劳者息之，饥者食之。
现代文：所以说，用兵作战的人，要按情势处理：军兵得胜，要让他们得到好处；军兵打了败仗，领兵将领要承担责任，代兵受过；军兵疲劳时，要让他们休息；军兵饥饿时，要让他们能吃上饭。
English: Therefore, those who fight with soldiers should be dealt with according to the situation: if the soldiers are victorious, they should be benefited; if the soldiers are defeated, the leading generals should bear the responsibility and serve as soldiers; when the soldiers are tired, they should be allowed to rest; when the soldiers are hungry, they should be allowed to eat.

古文：故民见□人而未见死，蹈白刃而不旋踵。
现代文：这样就能使军兵遇上强敌也不怕死，踩上锋利的刀刃也不会转身后退。
English: In this way, soldiers will not be afraid of death when encountering a strong enemy, nor will they turn around and retreat when stepping on a sharp blade.

古文：故行水得其理，漂石折舟；用民得其性，则令行如流。
现代文：所以说，懂得流水的规律后，就可以做到用流水冲石头去毁掉船只；使用军兵时懂得他们的心理，贯彻军令就如同流水一样畅通无阻了。
English: Therefore, after understanding the law of flowing water, it is possible to use flowing water to wash stones to destroy ships; when using soldiers, understand their psychology, and implement military orders as smoothly as flowing water.

