古文：太祖文皇帝下之上元嘉二十八年
现代文：起，止，一共两年。宋文帝元嘉二十八年
English: a total of two years. In the 28th year of the reign of Emperor Songwen and Emperor Yuanjia

古文：春，正月，丙戌朔，魏主大会群臣于瓜步山上，班爵行赏有差。
现代文：春季正月，丙戌朔，北魏国主拓跋焘在瓜步山上召集全体官员，按照功劳大小，分别封爵升官进行奖赏。
English: In the first month of spring, Tuobao, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, summoned all officials on Guabou Mountain to reward them with knighthoods and promotions according to their merits.

古文：魏人缘江举火；太子石卫率尹弘言于上曰： 六夷如此，必走。 
现代文：北魏人沿长江北岸燃起烽火，刘宋太子左卫率尹弘对文帝说： 胡虏这种行动，一定是要撤退。 
English: When the Northern Wei people lit bonfires along the northern bank of the Yangtze River, Liu Song's crown prince Zuo Wei, led by Yin Hong, said to Emperor Wen: "Huru, with this kind of action, must withdraw.

古文：丁亥，魏掠居民、焚庐舍而去。
现代文：丁亥，北魏军队劫掠驻地的居民，焚烧了老百姓的房屋，向北而去。
English: Dinghai, the Northern Wei army looted the residents of the garrison, burned the houses of the people, and went north.

古文：故诞世之反也，江夏王义恭等奏彭城王义康数有怨言，摇动民听，故不逞之族因以生心，请徙义康广州。
现代文：胡诞世聚众反叛时，江夏王刘义恭等人奏报彭城王刘义康经常说些怨愤的话，影响百姓的视听，使一些废黜放逐不能得志的家族产生了野心。他们请求将刘义康贬斥到广州。
English: At the time of the Hu Xitong rebellion, Liu Yikang, the king of Jiangxia, Liu Yigong and others often said some resentful words, which affected the people's audio-visual, and made some families who could not achieve their ambitions. They asked to expel Liu Yikang to Guangzhou.

古文：上将徙义康，先遣使语之，义康曰： 人生会死，吾岂爱生！
现代文：刘宋文帝刘义隆要放逐刘义康时，先派使臣告诉了他。刘义康说： 人的一生最终总是要死的，我怎能贪生怕死！
English: When Liu Songwen Emperor Liu Yilong wanted to banish Liu Yikang, he first sent an envoy to tell him. Liu Yikang said: A person's life is always dying in the end, how can I be greedy for life and afraid of death!

古文：必为乱阶，虽远何益！
现代文：如果我一定要成为动乱的因由，即使把我放逐到很远的地方，又会有什么好处呢？
English: If I must be the cause of trouble, what good will it do to exile me far away?

古文：请死于此，耻复屡迁。 
现代文：我请求死在这里，不愿受到再次被贬谪的奇耻大辱。 
English: I asked to die here, not to be humiliated again.

古文：竟未及往。
现代文：刘义康终于没有被贬到广州。
English: Liu Yikang has finally not been relegated to Guangzhou.

古文：魏师之瓜步，人情忷惧。
现代文：北魏大军开到了瓜步，老百姓万分惊恐。
English: The Northern Wei army reached Guapu, and the common people were terrified.

古文：上虑不逞之人复奉义康为乱；太子劭及武陵王骏、尚书左仆射何尚之屡启宜早为之所；上乃遣中书舍人严龙赍药赐义康死。义康不肯服，曰： 佛教不许自杀；愿随宜处分。 
现代文：文帝担心不能得志的人会再次拥戴刘义康进行叛乱，太子刘劭和武陵王刘骏、尚书左仆射何尚之也不断提醒文帝应该尽早决定怎么办，文帝这才派遣中书舍人严龙携带毒药前去，命令刘义康服药自杀，刘义康拒绝服药，说： 佛教不允许人自杀，你们怎么方便就怎么办吧。 
English: Emperor Wen was worried that those who could not achieve their dreams would once again support Liu Yikang to rebel. Prince Liu Bei and King of Wuling Liu Bei, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man He Shangzhi also constantly reminded Emperor Wen that he should decide what to do as soon as possible. It was only then that Emperor Wen sent the Chinese scholar Yan Long to carry the poison and ordered Liu Yikang to take the medicine to commit suicide. Liu Yikang refused to take the medicine, saying: Buddhism does not allow people to commit suicide, what should you do if it is convenient for you.

古文：使者以被掩杀之。
现代文：严龙就用被子捂住了刘义康的头，将他活活闷死了。
English: Yanlong then covered Liu Yikang's head with a quilt and suffocated him to death.

古文：江夏王义恭以碻磝不可守，召王玄谟还历城；魏人追击败之，遂取碻磝。
现代文：江夏王刘义恭认为不能继续坚守下去，就征召王玄谟退回历城。北魏追击王玄谟军队，并把他们击败，于是夺取了。
English: Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, thought that he could not continue to hold out, so he conscripted Wang Xuanmu to return to Licheng. Northern Wei chased Wang Xuanmu's army, defeated them, and captured them.

古文：初，上闻魏将入寇，命广陵太守刘怀之逆烧城府、船乘，尽帅其民渡江。山阳太守萧僧珍悉敛其民入城，台送粮仗诣盱眙及滑台者，以路不通，皆留山阳；蓄陂水令满，须魏人至，决以灌之。
现代文：当初，刘宋文帝得到北魏将要入侵的消息后，命令广陵太守刘怀之预先放火烧掉城内官府和水上船只，率领广陵全体老百姓渡过长江，山阳太守萧僧珍将广陵所有老百姓都纳聚山阳城中；朝廷运送粮食、武器到盱眙和滑台去的官兵，因为道路不能通行，也都留在了山阳城。萧僧珍下令将山阳城附近的山坡池塘全都灌满水，等北魏军队到达山阳时，决开池塘，放水淹灌北魏军队。
English: At first, after Emperor Liu Songwen received the news that the Northern Wei Dynasty was about to invade, he ordered the governor of Guangling, Liu Huai, to set fire to the government offices and water vessels in the city in advance, and led all the people of Guangling across the Yangtze River. The governor of Shanyang, Xiao Zengzhen, gathered all the people of Guangling in Shanyang City; the officers and soldiers who were transporting grain and weapons to the rafts and slides for the imperial court also stayed in Shanyang City because the roads were impassable. Xiao Zengzhen ordered that all the hillside ponds near Shanyang City be filled with water

古文：魏人过山阳，不敢留，因攻盱眙。
现代文：因此，北魏军队在撤退路过山阳城时，不敢滞留，顺势去攻取盱眙。
English: Therefore, when the Northern Wei army was retreating and passing through Shanyang City, they did not dare to stay and took advantage of the situation to attack Shantou.

古文：魏主就臧质求酒，质封溲便与之；魏主怒，筑长围，一夕而合；运东山土石以填堑，作浮桥于君山，绝水陆道。
现代文：北魏国主派人向盱眙守将臧质索要好酒，臧质在罐子里撒了泡尿送给他。北魏国主大怒，下令修筑长围墙，一个晚上就修好接在了一起。又搬来东山上的泥土石头填平壕沟，在君山上造起了一座浮桥，从而彻底切断了盱眙的水陆通道。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty sent a man to ask the governor of the Eastern Wei Dynasty for good wine. The governor sprinkled the wine with urine in a jar and gave it to him. The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty was furious and ordered the construction of a long enclosure wall, which was repaired and connected in one night. The earth and stone from the eastern mountains were brought in to fill the trench and build a floating bridge on Junshan, thus completely cutting off the water and land passage of the dragonfly.

古文：魏主遗质书曰： 吾今所遣斗兵，尽非我国人，城东北是丁零与胡，南是氐、羌。设使丁零死，正可减常山、赵郡贼；胡死，减并州贼；氐、羌死，减关中贼。
现代文：北魏国主给臧质写了封信，说： 我现在派出去的攻城军队，都不是我们本国本族人，城东北的丁零人和匈奴人，城南的是氐人和羌人，假设让丁零人死了，正可以减少常山、赵郡的贼寇；匈奴人死了，正好减少了并州的贼寇；氐人、羌人死了，当然也就减少了关中的贼寇。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty wrote a letter to Lu Xun, saying: "The attacking troops I am sending out now are not our own people. The Ding Zi and the Huns are in the northeast of the city, and the Yao and the Xiongnu are in the south of the city. Assuming that the Ding Zi is dead, it can reduce the banditry in Changshan and Zhao County; the Huns are dead, which just reduces the banditry in Bianzhou; the Yao and the Xiongnu are dead, which of course reduces the banditry in Guanzhong.

古文：卿若杀之，无所不利。 
现代文：你如果真的杀掉了他们，对我们没有什么不利的地方。 
English: If you do kill them, it won't do us any harm.

古文：质复书曰： 省示，具悉奸怀。
现代文：臧质回信说： 看了你的信，我完全明白了你的奸诈之心。
English: He wrote back: "After reading your letter, I completely understand your treacherous heart.

古文：尔自恃四足，屡犯边境。
现代文：你自己依仗着四条腿，多次进犯我国边境。
English: You yourself have repeatedly invaded our borders on four legs.

古文：王玄谟退于东，申坦散于西，尔知其所以然邪？
现代文：王玄谟被你击败在东边，申坦军又在西边被你攻散，你知道这是为什么吗？
English: Wang Xuanmu was defeated by you in the east, and the Shintan army was attacked and dispersed by you in the west. Do you know why?

古文：尔独不闻童谣之言乎？
现代文：你难道没有听说一首童谣里所说的吗？
English: Haven't you heard what a nursery rhyme says?

古文：盖卯年未至，故以二军开饮江之路耳；冥期使然，非复人事。
现代文：只因卯年还没有来到，所以，我们用两路军队引导着你们走上饮长江水的道路罢了。冥期已经注定，这并不是任何人所能改变得了的。
English: It's just that the Year of the Rabbit hasn't arrived yet, so we're using a two-pronged army to lead you down the path of drinking water from the Yangtze River. The Dark Ages are already doomed, and no one can change that.

古文：寡人受命相灭，期之白登，师行未远。尔自送死，岂容复令尔生全，飨有桑干哉！
现代文：我奉命前来消灭你们，原预定要到达白登，可是，军队还没有走出多远，就遇到你们自己前来送死了，我怎么能让你再活着回去，到桑干河享受荣华富贵呢？
English: I was ordered to come and exterminate you, and I was originally scheduled to arrive in Baden. However, the army had not gone very far when you yourselves came and sent them to their deaths. How could I let you return alive to the Sangan River to enjoy its glory and wealth?

古文：尔有幸得为乱兵所杀，不幸则生相锁缚，载以一驴，直送都市耳。
现代文：如果你幸运的话，当被乱军所杀；如果你不走运，被我们活捉后，就会用锁链锁住你的脖子，让一头小毛驴驮着你，把你一直押送到我们的都城建康。
English: If you're lucky, you'll be killed by the rebels; if you're unlucky, and we capture you alive, we'll put a chain around your neck, put a small donkey around you, and escort you all the way to our capital Jiankang.

古文：我本图全，若天地无灵，力屈于尔，齑之，粉之，屠之，裂之，犹未足以谢本朝。
现代文：我本来就不打算全尸，如果天地没有显灵，我被你打败，即使被剁成肉酱，碾成粉末，宰割车裂，也都不足以向我们朝廷表示我的歉疚。
English: Originally, I did not plan to dismember the body. If heaven and earth do not reveal the spirit, I will be defeated by you. Even if I am chopped into meat sauce, crushed into powder, and slaughtered, it is not enough to express my remorse to our court.

古文：尔智识及众力，岂能胜苻坚邪！
现代文：你的智慧见识以及军队的力量，哪里超得过荷坚呢！
English: Your wisdom and insight, as well as the strength of your army, surpass that of Hoken!

古文：今春雨已降，兵方四集，尔但安意攻城，勿遽走！
现代文：如今，已经下起春雨，我们的各路大军就要集合起来，你只管一心一意去攻城吧，千万不要立刻逃走！
English: Now that the spring rain has set in, our various armies are about to assemble. You just have to attack the city single-mindedly. Don't run away right away!

古文：粮食乏者可见语，当出廪相贻。
现代文：如果你们粮食不够吃，可以告诉我们，我们一定会打开粮仓馈赠给你们。
English: If you don't have enough grain to eat, you can tell us, and we will open the granary and give it to you.

古文：得所送剑刀，欲令我挥之尔身邪！ 
现代文：你派人送来的刀剑我已收到，你的意思是不是想让我挥刀斩了你呢？ 
English: Now that you have given me a sword, do you want me to use it on you?

古文：魏主大怒，作铁床，于其上施铁镵，曰： 破城得质，当坐之此上。 
现代文：北魏国主看完臧质的信，气得浑身发抖，他命令手下人制造了一个大铁床，把刀尖锥尖朝上放在铁床上，说： 攻破城池，抓住臧质，我一定让他坐在这张铁床上。 
English: After reading the letter, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty was so angry that his whole body was shaking. He ordered his subordinates to make a large iron bed, put the tip of the knife on the iron bed, and said: "Break through the city, seize the city, I will definitely let him sit on this iron bed."

古文：质又与魏众书曰： 尔语虏中诸士庶：佛狸见与书，相待如此。
现代文：臧质又给北魏大军写了封信，说： 你们告诉胡虏中各位士人百姓：佛拓跋焘在给我写的信上，这样对待你们。
English: Gongye also wrote a letter to the Northern Wei army, saying: You should tell the people in Hulun that Buddha Tuoba treated you this way in his letter to me.

古文：尔等正朔之民，何为自取縻灭，岂可不知转祸为福邪！ 
现代文：你们本来是汉人，为什么要去自取灭亡呢？你们怎么不知道转祸为福呢？ 
English: You are originally Han Chinese. Why do you want to self-destruct? Why don't you know how to turn misfortune into blessing?

古文：并写台格以与之云： 斩佛狸首，封万户侯，赐布、绢各万匹。 
现代文：同时，臧质又将朝廷的悬赏写在信上告诉他们说： 砍下佛的人头的，封为万户侯，赏赐绵布、丝绸各一万匹。 
English: At the same time, he also wrote down the reward offered by the imperial court in a letter to them, saying, "The person who cuts off the head of the Buddha will be made a millionaire, and will be rewarded with ten thousand pieces of cotton cloth and silk each."

古文：魏人以钩车钩城楼，城内系以驱絙，数百人唱呼引之，车不能退。
现代文：北魏军队用钩车钩住城楼，城内军队就用铁环制成的大铁链，拴住钩车，然后再让几百士卒高声呼喊拉住铁链使北魏军的钩车无法后退。
English: The Northern Wei army used a hook cart to hook the city tower, and the army in the city used a large iron chain made of iron rings to hook the hook cart, and then let hundreds of soldiers shout loudly to pull the chain so that the Northern Wei army's hook cart could not retreat.

古文：既夜，缒桶悬卒出，截其钩，获之。
现代文：入夜以后，守军用大桶把军士从城上放下，砍断北魏军的车钩，缴获了这种工具。
English: After nightfall, the defenders used a large bucket to lower the sergeant from the city, cut off the hook of the Northern Wei Army, and captured this tool.

古文：明日，又以冲车攻城，城土坚密，每至，颓落不过数升。
现代文：第二天天亮，北魏军又改用冲城车攻城，但城墙坚硬牢固，冲城车每次冲撞，撞下墙土也不超过几升。
English: The next day, the enemy attacked the city again with rushing vehicles, but the city walls were strong, and each time the rushing vehicles collided, several liters of wall soil fell.

古文：魏人乃肉薄登城，分番相代，坠而复升，莫有退者，杀伤万计，尸与城平。
现代文：于是，北魏军就采用肉搏战术开始攻城，他们把士卒分为几个梯队，轮番往城墙上爬，从城上摔下又继续向上爬，没有一个人后退，死伤士卒数以万计，尸体堆积得与城墙一样高。
English: As a result, the Northern Wei Army began to attack the city using hand-to-hand combat tactics. They divided the soldiers into several echelons, took turns climbing up the city wall, fell down from the city and continued to climb up. No one retreated. There were tens of thousands of dead and wounded soldiers, and the bodies were piled as high as the city wall.

古文：凡攻之三旬，不拔。
现代文：北魏军这样围攻了三十天，仍未攻下。
English: The Northern Wei Army besieged the city for thirty days in this way, but still failed to capture it.

古文：会魏军中多疾疫，或告以建康遣水军自海入淮，又敕彭城断其归路；二月，丙辰朔，魏主烧攻具退走。
现代文：这时，又赶上北魏军中瘟疫流行，有人报告说，宋朝水军从东海进入淮河了，刘宋朝廷又下令彭城守军切断北魏军队回归的道路。二月，丙辰朔，北魏国主下令焚毁攻城器具，而后撤退。
English: At this time, there was also a plague epidemic in the Northern Wei army. It was reported that the Song Dynasty navy had entered the Huai River from the East Sea. The Liu Song Dynasty also ordered the Pengcheng defenders to cut off the road for the Northern Wei army to return. In February, the Northern Wei sovereign ordered the equipment for attacking the city to be burned, and then withdrew.

古文：盱眙人欲追之，沈璞曰： 今兵不多，虽可固守，不可出战；但整舟楫，示若欲北渡者，以速其走，计不须实行也。 
现代文：盱眙守军想要追击，沈璞说： 现在，我们的兵力并不多，虽然可以固守城池，却不可以出城讨战。不过，我们仍然要整治好船只，做出要北渡淮河的样子，这样，就可以促使他们更快地离开，估计并不需要真的去做。 
English: If the defenders want to pursue, Shen Yi said: At present, our troops are not many. Although we can hold the city, we can't go out to fight. However, we still have to fix the ships and make it look like we want to cross the Huai River to the north. In this way, we can make them leave faster. I don't think we really need to do it.

古文：臧质以璞城主，使之上露板，璞固辞，归功于质。
现代文：臧质认为沈璞是盱眙城主，就请他向朝廷发出报捷的奏表，沈璞坚决辞让，而把功劳全都归于臧质一人。
English: He thought that Shen Yi was the lord of the city, so he asked him to send a report to the court to report the success. Shen Yi resolutely refused to concede, and attributed all the credit to him.

古文：上闻，益嘉之。
现代文：文帝听说后，对他更是倍加嘉许。
English: When Emperor Wen heard about it, he was even more appreciative.

古文：魏师过彭城，江夏王义恭震惧不敢击。
现代文：北魏军队经过彭城，江夏王刘义恭震惊恐惧，不敢出击。
English: The Northern Wei army passed through Pengcheng, and the King of Jiangxia, Liu Yigong, was shocked and afraid, and did not dare to attack.

古文：或告 虏驱南口万馀，夕应宿安王陂，去城数十里，今追之，可悉得。 
现代文：有人来报告说： 胡虏正驱赶着南方一万多口人，晚上将住在安王陂，离彭城有几十里，现在我们去追击他们，正可以全部俘获。 
English: Someone came to report: The Khuriks are driving more than ten thousand people south, and at night they will live in An Wangtao, dozens of miles from Pengcheng. Now we will go after them, and we can capture them all.

古文：诸将皆请行，义恭禁不许。
现代文：各大将都纷纷请求出击，刘义恭下令制止，不许出兵。
English: All the generals requested to attack one after another, but Liu Yigong ordered to stop it and not to send troops.

古文：明日，驿使至，上敕义恭悉力急追。
现代文：第二天，朝廷信使抵达这里，文帝命令刘义恭立即全力追击魏军。
English: The next day, the courier arrived here, and Emperor Wen ordered Liu Yigong to immediately pursue the Wei army with all his strength.

古文：魏师已远，义恭乃遣镇军司马檀和之向萧城。
现代文：北魏军队这时已经走远，刘义恭就派镇军司马檀和之奔向萧城追赶。
English: At this time, the Northern Wei army had already gone far away, and Liu Yigong sent the town's military commander, Ma Danhe, to run to Xiaocheng to catch up.

古文：魏人先已闻之。尽杀所驱者而去。
现代文：北魏军队事先已经得到了这一消息，于是将所驱赶的南方百姓全都杀掉，然后北上。
English: The Northern Wei army had already received this information in advance, so they killed all the southern people they had driven away, and then moved north.

古文：程天祚逃归。
现代文：程天祚逃了回来。
English: Cheng Tianyao escaped and came back.

古文：魏人凡破南兗、徐、兗、豫、青、冀六州，杀掠不可胜计，丁壮者即加斩截，婴儿贯于槊上，盘舞以为戏。
现代文：北魏军队一共击破了南兖、徐、北兖、豫、青、冀等六州，杀死杀伤的人无法统计。他们抓到青壮年立即斩首或拦腰砍断，婴幼儿则用铁矛刺穿，然后挥动铁矛进行游戏。
English: The Northern Wei army defeated a total of six states, including Nanlu, Xu, Beilun, Yu, Qing and Hebei, and the number of people killed and injured is incalculable. They immediately beheaded or cut off the waist of the young and strong, and pierced the infants with iron spears, and then waved the iron spears to play.

古文：所过郡县，赤地无馀，春燕归，巢于林木。
现代文：魏军经过的郡县，都成千里荒地。春天，燕子回来了，只能在树林里筑巢。
English: The counties and counties through which the Wei army passed were all thousands of miles of wasteland. In the spring, the swallows came back and could only build nests in the woods.

古文：魏之士马死伤亦过半，国人皆尤之。
现代文：北魏军的人马也死伤了一多半，北魏国人也都大有怨言。
English: More than half of the Northern Wei troops were killed or wounded, and the Northern Wei people also complained a lot.

古文：上每命将出师，常授以成律，交战日时，亦待中诏，是以将帅趑趄，莫敢自决。
现代文：文帝每次命令将领们率兵作战，常常把已拟定好的作战计划交给他们，甚至交战的日子，也都要等待皇帝的命令，因此，军中将帅总是犹犹豫豫，没有谁胆敢自己决定什么。
English: Every time Emperor Wen ordered the generals to lead the troops into battle, he often gave them the prepared battle plan. Even on the day of the battle, they had to wait for the emperor's order. Therefore, the lieutenant generals always hesitated, and no one dared to decide anything on their own.

古文：又江南白丁，轻进易退，此其所以败也。
现代文：此外，没有经过训练的江南士卒，常常是打胜了就争着前进，打败了则争先恐后地逃命，这就是刘宋军所以战败的重要原因。
English: In addition, the untrained soldiers from the south of the Yangtze River often fought to advance when they won, and ran for their lives when they lost. This is an important reason why the Liu Song Army was defeated.

古文：自是邑里萧条，元嘉之政衰矣。
现代文：从此以后，刘宋国内走向萧条衰败阶段，元嘉时代的盛况日趋衰落了。
English: From then on, Liu Song's China entered a period of depression and decline, and the prosperity of the Yuan Jia era gradually declined.

古文：癸酉，诏赈恤郡县民遭寇者，蠲其税调。
现代文：癸酉，刘宋文帝下诏，赈济抚恤受到寇敌残害蹂躏的各郡县百姓，免除田赋捐税。
English: At the same time, Emperor Liu Songwen decreed that the county and county people who had been ravaged by the invaders should be exempted from the field tax.

古文：甲戌，降太尉义恭为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：甲戌，将太尉刘义恭降职为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Kuching demoted Lieutenant Liu Yigong to the rank of cavalry general and Kaifu Yi to the rank of Third Division.

古文：戊寅，魏主济河。
现代文：戊寅，北魏国主率军渡过黄河。
English: Wu Yin, the leader of the Northern Wei Dynasty, led his army across the Yellow River.

古文：辛巳，降镇军将军武陵王骏为北中郎将。
现代文：辛巳，刘宋朝廷将镇军将军武陵王刘骏降职为北中郎将。
English: Soon after, the Liu Song court demoted the general of the town army, Wuling Wang Liu Yao, to the position of North Vice Admiral.

古文：壬午，上如瓜步。
现代文：壬午，文帝前往瓜步。
English: In the morning, Emperor Wen went to Guapu.

古文：是日，解严。
现代文：这一天，刘宋解除戒严。
English: On the same day, martial law was lifted.

古文：初，魏中书学生卢度世，玄之子也，坐崔浩事亡命匿高阳郑罴家。吏囚罴子，掠治之。
现代文：当初，北魏中书学生卢度世是卢玄的儿子，因为受崔浩事件的牵连逃走，躲藏到高阳人郑罴家里，高阳府官吏逮捕了郑罴的儿子，酷刑拷打盘问卢度世的下落。
English: At first, Lu Duxie, a student of the Northern Wei Middle School, was the son of Lu Xuan. Because he was implicated in the Cui Hao incident, he fled and hid in the house of Zheng Yao, a Gaoyang resident. Gaoyang government officials arrested Zheng Yao's son and tortured and interrogated Lu Duxie about his whereabouts.

古文：罴戒其子曰： 君子杀身成仁，虽死不可言。 
现代文：郑罴告诫他的儿子说： 君子应当杀身成仁，你即使被打死了也不要说出来。 
English: Zheng Qi admonished his son, "A gentleman should kill himself for the sake of humanity. Even if you are beaten to death, don't speak out.

古文：其子奉父命，吏以火爇其体，终不言而死。
现代文：郑罴的儿子遵奉父亲的命令坚守秘密。官吏们用火烧他的身体，他最终也没有招出来，被折磨致死。
English: Zheng Yao's son followed his father's orders to keep his identity a secret. Officials burned his body, and he was tortured to death.

古文：及魏主临江，上遣殿上将军黄延年使于魏，魏主问曰： 卢度世亡命，已应至彼。 
现代文：北魏国主抵达长江北岸时，文帝派遣殿上将军黄延年出使北魏，魏主问道： 卢度世逃走了，应该已经逃到你们那里。 
English: When the Northern Wei sovereign arrived at the north bank of the Yangtze River, Emperor Wen dispatched General Huang Yannian to send an envoy to the Northern Wei. The Northern Wei sovereign asked: Lu Duxie has fled, he should have fled to you.

古文：延年曰： 都下不闻有度世也。 
现代文：黄延年说： 我从来没有听说过卢度世这个人。 
English: Huang Yannian said: I have never heard of Lu Duxie.

古文：魏主乃赦度世及其族逃亡籍没者。度世自出，魏主以为中书侍郎。
现代文：北魏国主于是下令赦免卢度世以及他的同族中逃亡外地或被抄家产的人，卢度世这才自动露面，北魏国主任命他为中书侍郎。
English: The Northern Wei sovereign then issued an order to pardon Lu Duxie and his compatriots who had fled abroad or had their property confiscated. Only then did Lu Duxie appear of his own accord, and the Northern Wei sovereign appointed him as the attendant of the Central Archives.

古文：度世为其弟娶郑罴妹以报德。
现代文：卢度世让他的弟弟娶了郑罴的妹妹，以此来报答郑家的恩德。
English: Lu Duxian let his younger brother marry Zheng Yao's younger sister to repay the kindness of the Zheng family.

古文：三月，乙酉，帝还宫。
现代文：三月，乙酉，文帝从瓜步返回了朝廷。
English: In March, Emperor Wen returned to the imperial court from Guapu.

古文：己亥，魏主还平城，饮至告庙，以降民五万馀家分置近畿。
现代文：己亥，北魏国主回到平城，然后，他在祖庙内设下祭祀酒席，把这次南下征讨的经过报告了祖宗，同时，又把从南宋裹胁来的五万多户人家分别安置在京畿附近。
English: Ji Hai, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, returned to Pingcheng. Then, he set up a sacrificial banquet in the ancestral temple and reported to the ancestors about the process of this southward campaign. At the same time, he resettled more than 50,000 households from the Southern Song Dynasty in the vicinity of Gyeonggi.

古文：初，魏主过彭城，遣人语城中曰： 食尽且去，须麦熟更来。 
现代文：当初，北魏国主经过彭城时，派人告诉彭城守军说： 我们粮食吃完了，暂且回去，等到你们麦熟季节我们会再来。 
English: At the beginning, when the Northern Wei sovereign passed through Pengcheng, he sent someone to tell the Pengcheng defenders: We have finished eating grain, let's go back for the time being. We will come back when your wheat is ripe.

古文：及期，江夏王义恭议欲芟麦翦苗，移民堡聚。镇军录事参军王孝孙曰： 虏不能复来，既自可保；如其更至，此议亦不可立。
现代文：因为我们的老百姓被关在城内，忍饥挨饿也已很久了，此时正是春暖花开的时节，他们完全可以挖些野菜摘些野果来充饥。
English: Because our people have been locked up in the city and have been starving for a long time, this is the time of spring flowers, and they can completely dig up some vegetables and pick some wild fruits to satisfy their hunger.

古文：百姓闭在内城，饥馑日久，方春之月，野采自资；一入堡聚，饿死立至，民知必死，何可制邪！
现代文：一旦再让他们迁到城堡里，那么，他们马上就会饿死。老百姓知道自己会被饿死，我们又怎么能控制住他们呢？
English: If we let them move into the castle again, they will starve to death. How can we control the people when they know they will starve to death?

古文：虏若必来，芟麦无晚。 
现代文：倘若胡虏一定要前来进犯，我们等他们来了再割麦子也不晚。 
English: If the enemy is sure to come, then it is not too late to cut the wheat.

古文：四坐默然，莫之敢对。
现代文：在座的人都沉默地坐着，没有人敢说话。
English: Everyone present fell silent, no one dared to argue with him.

古文：长史张畅曰： 孝孙之议，实有可寻。 
现代文：长史张畅说： 王孝孙说的这些，实在有道理。 
English: Changshi Zhang Chang said, "What Wang Xiaosun said makes sense.

古文：镇军府典签董元嗣侍武陵王骏之侧，进曰： 王录事议不可夺。 
现代文：镇军府典签董元嗣站立在武陵王刘骏的身边，他也劝说道： 王录事的意见是不可改变的。 
English: Standing next to Wuling King Liu Ye, the town's military governor, Dong Yuan Ci, said: "Wang Luo Rong's opinion on the matter is unchangeable.

古文：别驾王子夏曰： 此论诚然。 
现代文：别驾王子夏说： 这一见解，果然不错。 
English: Prince Xia said, "This opinion is indeed correct.

古文：畅敛板白骏曰： 下官欲命孝孙弹子夏。 
现代文：张畅举一下手版，对刘骏说： 我打算让王孝孙弹劾王子夏。 
English: Zhang Chang held up a manuscript and said to Liu Ye: I plan to have Wang Xiaosun impeach Prince Xia.

古文：骏曰： 王别驾有何事邪？ 
现代文：刘骏吃惊地问： 王子夏出什么事了？ 
English: Surprised, Liu Ye asked: What happened to Prince Xia?

古文：畅曰： 芟麦移民，可谓大议，一方安危，事系于此。
现代文：张畅说： 收割麦子，让老百姓转移到城堡里，这些都是很重要的决策，一个地方的安危都与此有关。
English: Zhang Chang said: Harvesting wheat and letting people move to the castle are very important decisions, and the safety of a place is all related to this.

古文：子夏亲为州端，曾无同异；及闻元嗣之言，则欢笑酬答。
现代文：王子夏身为一个州的最高官员，还从未发表过意见，等到听董元嗣这么一说，才立刻露出了笑容表示赞同。
English: Prince Xia, as the highest official of a state, has never expressed an opinion, but when he heard Dong Yuan He say this, he immediately smiled and agreed.

古文：阿意左右，何以事君！ 
现代文：这种阿谀奉迎之人，怎么能够为您做事呢？ 
English: How can this kind of flatterer work for you?

古文：子夏、元嗣皆大惭，义恭之议遂寝。
现代文：王子夏、董元嗣听了张畅的话，都深为惭愧。
English: After listening to Zhang Chang's words, both Prince Xia and Dong Yuan He were deeply ashamed.

古文：初，鲁宗之奔魏，其子轨为魏荆州刺史、襄阳公，镇长社。常思南归，以昔杀刘康祖及徐湛之之父，故不敢来。
现代文：刘义恭的计划于是也被取消了。当初，东晋雍州刺史鲁宗之投奔北魏，他的儿子鲁轨做了北魏的荆州刺史、襄阳公，镇守长社，他经常想回到南方，只是由于当年曾经杀了刘康祖和徐湛之的父亲，所以不敢回去。
English: Liu Yikong's plan was also canceled. At the beginning, Lu Zongzhi, the East Jin Yongzhou ruler, went to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and his son Lu Lu did the Northern Wei Jingzhou ruler, Xiangyang, and the town guard. He often wanted to return to the south, but because he had killed Liu Kangzu and Xu Zhan's father that year, he did not dare to go back.

古文：轨卒，子爽袭父官爵。
现代文：鲁轨去世后，他的儿子鲁爽承袭了父亲的官爵职位。
English: After Lu Lu's death, his son, Lu Shuang, inherited his father's peerage.

古文：爽少有武干，与弟秀皆有宠于魏主，秀为中书郎。
现代文：鲁爽从小就有武略才能，他和他的弟弟鲁秀都深受魏主的宠爱。
English: Lu Shuang had a talent for military strategy since childhood, and he and his brother Lu Xiu were deeply loved by the Wei Lord.

古文：既而兄弟各有罪，魏主诘责之。爽、秀惧诛，从魏主自瓜步还，至湖陆，请曰： 奴与南有仇，每兵来，常恐祸及坟墓。乞共迎丧还葬平城。 
现代文：可是不久，他们兄弟二人都犯了罪，北魏国主盘问责备他们，鲁爽和鲁秀害怕会被诛杀，因此，当他们俩跟着北魏国主从瓜步返回，来到湖陆时，二人向北魏国主请求说： 奴才与南方有深仇大恨，每次大军南下，我们都害怕这种灾祸会殃及我们的祖坟，因此，我们请求把祖先的棺木，移送到平城安葬。 
English: However, not long after, both of their brothers committed a crime, and the Northern Wei State was ready to hold them accountable. Lu Shuang and Lu Xiu were afraid that they would be killed. Therefore, when they both followed the Northern Wei State to return from Guapu and came to Hulun, the two asked the Northern Wei State to say: The slaves have a deep hatred for the South. Every time the army goes south, we are afraid that this disaster will affect our ancestral graves. Therefore, we request that the coffins of our ancestors be transferred to Pingcheng for burial.

古文：魏主许之，爽至长社，杀魏戍兵数百人，帅部曲及愿从者千馀家奔汝南。
现代文：北魏国主答应了他们的请求。鲁爽到长社后，杀了几百名北魏戍守士卒，就率领自己的军队以及愿意跟着自己的一千多家部众投奔了汝南。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty agreed to their request. After Lu Shuang arrived in Changshe, he killed several hundred soldiers of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and led his army and more than a thousand followers who were willing to follow him to the south of the Rhine.

古文：夏，四月，爽遣秀诣寿阳，奉书于南平王铄以请降。
现代文：夏季，四月，鲁爽派鲁秀前往寿阳，送信给刘宋南平王刘铄，请求投降。
English: In the summer, in April, Lu Shuang sent Lu Xiu to Shouyang to send a letter to Liu Song, the king of Nanping, Liu Xuan, requesting him to surrender.

古文：上闻之，大喜，以爽为司州刺史，镇义阳；秀为颍川太守，馀弟侄并授官爵，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：文帝听说后，十分高兴，立刻任命鲁爽为司州刺史，镇守义阳，鲁秀为颍川太守，其余的弟弟、侄子等等也一并被封官授爵，给予他们的赏赐格外厚重。
English: Upon hearing the news, Emperor Wen was very pleased and immediately appointed Lu Shuang as the governor of Shizhou, the town guard of Yiyang, and Lu Xiu as the governor of Beichuan. The rest of his brothers and nephews were also knighted, giving them an extraordinarily generous reward.

古文：魏人毁其坟墓。
现代文：北魏军队捣毁了鲁爽家族的坟墓。
English: The Northern Wei army destroyed the tomb of the Lu Shuang family.

古文：徐湛之以为庙算远图，特所奖纳，不敢苟申私怨，乞屏居田里；不许。
现代文：徐湛之认为朝廷是为了国家的长远利益打算，对他们特别嘉奖优待，所以自己也不敢计较个人的恩怨，请求辞官回乡隐居，文帝没有批准。
English: Xu Zhanzhi believed that the imperial court was planning for the long-term interests of the country and gave them special awards and preferential treatment. Therefore, he did not dare to consider personal grudges and requested the official to return to his hometown to live in seclusion. Emperor Wen did not approve.

古文：青州民司马顺则自称晋室近属，聚众号齐王。
现代文：刘宋青州平民司马顺则宣称自己是东晋皇家的近族，聚众造反，自称齐王。
English: Liu Song, Sima Shun, a commoner from Qingzhou, claimed to be a close relative of the Eastern Jin royal family, gathered people to rebel, and called himself King Qi.

古文：梁邹戍主崔勋之诣州，五月，乙酉，顺则乘虚袭据梁邹城。
现代文：这时，梁邹守将崔勋之前去州府办事，五月，乙酉，司马顺则乘城中防守空虚偷袭了梁邹城。
English: At this time, the governor of Liangyao sent Cui Xun to the state capital to do some work. In May, Yixuan and Sima Shun took advantage of the defensive void in the city to attack Liangyao.

古文：又有沙门自称司马百年，亦聚众号安定王以应之。
现代文：同时，又有一和尚自称司马百年，也聚众造反崐，号安定王，以此响应司马顺则。
English: At the same time, there was also a monk who claimed to be Sima Shunzhe for a hundred years, and also gathered people to rebel, calling himself the King of Stability, in response to Sima Shunzhe.

古文：壬寅，魏大赦。
现代文：壬寅，北魏实行大赦。
English: Jinyin, the Northern Wei Dynasty implemented an amnesty.

古文：己巳，以江夏王义恭领南兗州刺史，徙镇盱眙。增督十二州诸军事。
现代文：己巳，刘宋朝廷任命江夏王刘义恭兼任南兖州刺史，将州府迁到了盱眙，加授他为督十二州诸军事。
English: At that time, the Liu Song Dynasty court appointed the king of Jiangxia, Liu Yigong, to serve as the governor of South Luzon, moved the state capital to Handan, and appointed him as the military governor of twelve states.

古文：戊申，以尚书左仆射何尚之为尚书令，太子詹事徐湛之为仆射、护军将军。
现代文：戊申，刘宋朝廷任命尚书左仆射何尚之为尚书令，太子詹事徐湛之为仆射、护军将军。
English: According to Wu Shen, the Liu Song Dynasty court appointed Shang Shuxi's left subordinate, He Shang Xing, as Shang Shuling, and the prince's right subordinate, Xu Zhan Xing, as Shuling and escorting general.

古文：尚之以湛之国戚，任遇隆重，每事推之。
现代文：何尚之因为徐湛之是皇亲国戚，深受文帝的宠信和重用，所以每次遇到大事都全部推给徐湛之。
English: What's more, because Xu Zhanzhi was a relative of the emperor, and was deeply favored and used by Emperor Wen, every time he encountered a major event, he pushed it all to Xu Zhanzhi.

古文：诏湛之与尚之并受辞诉。
现代文：文帝又下诏，命令徐湛之与何尚之共同受理裁决公务。
English: Emperor Wen also issued an edict, ordering Xu Zhanzhi and He Shangzhi to jointly accept the official ruling.

古文：尚之虽为令，而朝事悉归湛之。
现代文：何尚之虽然身为尚书令，但实际上朝廷事务全由徐湛之一人去裁断。
English: Although He Shangzhi was Shang Shuling, in fact all the affairs of the imperial court were decided by one person, Xu Zhan.

古文：六月，壬戌，魏改元正平。
现代文：六月，壬戌，北魏改年号为正平。
English: In June, the Northern Wei Dynasty changed its name to Zhengping.

古文：魏主命太子少傅游雅、中书侍郎胡方回等更定律令，多所增损，凡三百九十一条。
现代文：北魏国主命令太子少傅游雅、中书侍郎胡方回等人改订国家法律，进行了大量的更定和补充，修订完的法律共有三百九十一条。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty ordered the young prince Fu Youya and the Chinese secretary Hu Fang Hui to revise the national laws and made a large number of amendments and supplements. The revised laws totaled 391 articles.

古文：魏太子晃监国，颇信任左右，又营园田，收其利。
现代文：北魏太子拓跋晃主持国家事务，十分相信自己左右近侍，他自己私下里经营庄园农田，收取利润。
English: The Northern Wei prince, Tuobao, presided over the affairs of the state, fully believing that he was being guided by his close attendants. He ran the manor and farmland privately and collected the profits.

古文：高允谏曰： 天地无私，故能覆载，王者无私，故能容养。
现代文：高允劝告他说： 天地因为不存私心，所以能覆盖、承载万物；帝王因为没有私心，所以能够宽容养育百姓。
English: Gao Yun advised him: Heaven and earth can cover and carry all things because there is no selfishness; the emperor can be tolerant and nurture the people because he has no selfishness.

古文：今殿下国之储贰，万方所则，而营立私田，畜养鸡犬，乃至酤贩市廛，与民争利；谤声流布，不可追掩。
现代文：如今殿下您是一国的储君，是国家上上下下作为典范的人，却自己私下经营个人的田地，养鸡养狗，甚至派人去集市上摆摊贩卖，与市井小民争夺小利，以致于诽谤您的话到处流传，没法让人去追回或掩盖。
English: Today, Your Highness, you are the crown prince of a country, a person who is a model for the whole country, but you privately operate your own fields, raise chickens and dogs, and even send people to the market to sell stalls and compete for small profits with the common people, so that your slanderous words are spread everywhere, and there is no way for people to recover or cover up.

古文：夫天下者，殿下之天下，富有四海，何求而无，乃与贩夫贩妇竞此尺寸之利乎！
现代文：国家，是殿下您个人的国家，您富裕得拥有四海，要什么会没有？何必要与贩夫、贩妇们去争夺这尺寸大小的微利呢！
English: The country is your personal country, Your Highness. You are rich enough to own the four seas, what would you not want? Why do you need to compete with traffickers for this small profit?

古文：昔虢之将亡，神赐之土田，汉灵帝私立府藏，皆有颠覆之祸；前鉴若此，甚可畏也。
现代文：过去，虢国快要灭亡时，神灵将土地赐给了它；东汉灵帝私自设立钱庄，都招来了被颠覆的灾祸。像这样的前车之鉴，是很令人可怕的。
English: In the past, when the Han Dynasty was on the verge of extinction, the gods gave the land to it; the Eastern Han Dynasty's Emperor Ling privately set up a bank, which brought about the disaster of being overthrown. Such a precedent is very frightening.

古文：武王爱国、邵、齐、华，所以王天下；殷纣受飞廉、恶来，所以丧其国。
现代文：周武王宠信周公姬旦、召公姬、齐公姜子牙和毕公姬高，才在天下称王；而殷商纣王由于宠信飞廉、恶来这种恶人，才导致了国破家亡。
English: It was because King Zhou Wu favored Zhou Gong Hidan, Zhao Gong Hidan, Qi Gong Jiang Ziga and Bi Gong Higao that he became famous in the world. However, it was because King Yin of the Shang Dynasty favored such wicked people as Fei Lian and Xilai that he led to the ruin of the country.

古文：今东宫俊乂不少，顷来侍御左右者，恐非在朝之选。
现代文：如今，太子宫内的俊杰之士有很多，但近来侍奉在您左右的人，恐怕并不是当朝的合适人选。
English: Today, there are many handsome men in the womb of the prince, but those who have recently served around you are probably not the right people for you.

古文：愿殿下斥去佞邪，亲近忠良，所在田园，分给贫下，贩卖之物，以时收散；如此，则休声日至，谤议可除矣。 
现代文：我盼望殿下您排除奸邪谄佞的小人，多同忠厚善良的忠良之士亲近。将您所占有的田地庄园，分别赏给下边的贫苦百姓；将您做生意卖的东西，即时收起来或者尽早分给百姓。如果这样去做，那么，美好的声誉将会一天天增多起来，诽谤的议论也就能够消除了。 
English: I hope that Your Royal Highness will get rid of the rascals and get closer to the loyal and good people. Give the farms you own to the poor people below, and put away the things you sell immediately or distribute them to the people as soon as possible. If you do this, then the good reputation will increase day by day, and the slanderous talk can be eliminated.

古文：不听。太子为政精察，而中常侍宗爱，性险暴，多不法，太子恶之。
现代文：拓跋晃并没有接受高允的劝谏。太子拓跋晃为政精明，洞察细微。中常侍宗爱却是个性格阴险暴躁的人，有很多违法行为，因此，拓跋晃很讨厌他。
English: Tuobao did not accept Gao Yun's advice. Prince Tuobao was a shrewd politician with subtle insight. However, Zhong Changzhi Zong Ai was a sinister and violent person with many illegal acts, so Tuobao disliked him very much.

古文：给事中仇尼道盛、侍郎任平城有宠于太子，颇用事，皆与爱不协。
现代文：给事中仇尼道盛、侍郎任平城很受拓跋晃的宠信，都掌握不少权力，都跟宗爱不能和睦相处。
English: In the middle of the affair, Takubaku's trusted friend, his nemesis, Dosenori, and his servant, Rin Heijo, both wield a great deal of power, and neither can get along with Soai.

古文：爱恐为道盛等所纠，遂构告其罪，魏主怒，斩道盛等于都街，东宫官属多坐死，帝怒甚。
现代文：宗爱恐怕自己会被仇尼道盛等检举揭发，于是编假话向北魏国主控告二人有罪，北魏国主非常气愤，下令将仇尼道盛等绑到街市上斩首示众，东宫内的官员们有很多被牵连进去，也都被斩首，北魏国主为此非常气愤。
English: Zong Ai was afraid that he would be exposed by the accusation of Qiu Ni Daosheng and others, so he made up a lie to accuse the two of guilt to the Northern Wei sovereign. The Northern Wei sovereign was very angry and ordered Qiu Ni Daosheng and others to be tied to the street market and beheaded. Many officials in the East Palace were implicated and were also beheaded. The Northern Wei sovereign was very angry about this.

古文：戊辰，太子以忧卒。
现代文：戊辰，太子拓跋晃因忧崐虑过度生病去世。
English: Prince Takubaku passed away due to illness brought on by excessive worry.

古文：壬申，葬金陵，谥曰景穆。
现代文：壬申，拓跋晃的遗体被安葬在金陵，谥号景穆。
English: In Jinshin, the remains of Tuobao were buried in Jinling, and his posthumous name was Jingmu.

古文：帝徐知太子无罪，甚悔之。
现代文：北魏国主后来慢慢知道太子拓跋晃并没有犯法，因此感到非常后悔。
English: Later, the Northern Wei sovereign gradually realized that Prince Tuobao did not violate the law, so he felt very regretful.

古文：秋，七月，丁亥，魏主如阴山。
现代文：秋季七月，丁亥，北魏国主前往阴山。
English: In the autumn of July, Dinghai, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, went to Yinshan.

古文：青、冀二州刺史萧斌遣振武将军刘武之等击司马顺则、司马百年，皆斩之。
现代文：刘宋青、冀二州刺史萧斌派振武将军刘武之等前去攻打司马顺则和司马百年，将二人斩首。
English: Liu Songqing and Xiao Bin, the governor of Hebei Province, sent General Liu Wuzhi and others to attack Sima Shunzhe and Sima Centenary, beheading them both.

古文：癸亥，梁邹平。
现代文：癸亥，梁邹的反叛被彻底平息了。
English: The rebellion of Yan Hai and Liang Hui was completely quelled.

古文：萧斌、王玄谟皆坐退败免官。
现代文：萧斌、王玄谟都被控告打了败仗而后退，因此被免去职务。
English: Both Xiao Bin and Wang Xuan Mu were accused of retreating after losing the battle, and were therefore dismissed from their posts.

古文：上问沈庆之曰： 斌欲斩玄谟而卿止之，何也？ 
现代文：宋文帝问沈庆之： 萧斌打算斩了王玄谟，你却阻止他，这是为什么？ 
English: Song Wendi asked Shen Qingrong: Xiao Bin planned to behead Wang Xuan Mu, but you stopped him. Why?

古文：对曰： 诸将奔退，莫不惧罪；自归而死，将至逃散，故止之。 
现代文：沈庆之回答说： 大将们都纷纷后退逃走，没有谁不怕受到惩处。假如有一个人自己回来了却要被处死，那么，其余将领们肯定会四处逃亡不再回来了，因此，我阻止了萧斌这样做。 
English: Shen Qingzhi replied, "The generals have all retreated and fled one after another, and no one is not afraid of being punished. If one person returns on his own and is to be executed, then the remaining generals will certainly flee everywhere and never return, so I stopped Xiao Bin from doing so.

古文：九月，癸巳，魏主还平城；冬，十月，庚申，复如阴山。
现代文：九月，癸巳，北魏国主回到平城。冬季，十月庚申，再次前往阴山。
English: In September, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Pingcheng. In winter, in October, he went to Yinshan again.

古文：上遣使至魏，魏遣殿中将军郎法祐来修好。
现代文：文帝派使节到北魏，北魏则派殿中将军郎法前来恢复友好。
English: Emperor Wen sent envoys to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and the Northern Wei Dynasty sent the palace general Lang Fa to restore friendship.

古文：己巳，魏上党靖王长孙道生卒。
现代文：己巳，北魏的上党靖王长孙道生去世。
English: It has come to my attention that the top party leader of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Jing Wang Changsun Dousheng, has passed away.

古文：十二月，丁丑，魏主封景穆太子之子濬为高阳王；既而以皇孙世嫡，不当为籓王，乃止。
现代文：十二月，丁丑，北魏国主封景穆太子拓跋晃的儿子拓跋浚为高阳王。不久，因为拓跋浚是皇室中的嫡亲皇孙，不应该封为藩王，因而取消。
English: In December, Ding Yuxi, the Northern Wei sovereign, bestowed the title of Goyang King on Tu Bajun, the son of Tu Baozhuang, the prince of Muzhuang in the Northern Wei Dynasty. Soon, because Tu Bajun was a direct descendant of the imperial family and should not have been named the king of the domain, the title was revoked.

古文：时濬生四年，聪达过人，魏主爱之，常置左右。
现代文：这一年，拓跋浚四岁，他聪明伶俐过人，北魏国主很喜爱他，常常把他带在身边。
English: This year, Tuoba Zhen was four years old. He was clever and brilliant. The Northern Wei sovereign loved him very much and often took him with him.

古文：徙秦王翰为东平王，燕王谭为临淮王，楚王建为广阳王，吴王余为南安王。
现代文：北魏国主后又改封秦王拓跋翰为东平王，燕王拓跋谭为临淮王，楚王拓跋建为广阳王，吴王拓跋余为南安王。
English: After the end of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Qin King Tuoba Han was renamed Dongping King, Yan King Tuoba Tan became Linhuai King, Chu King Tuoba Jian became Guangyang King, and Wu King Tuoba Yu became Nan'an King.

古文：帝使沈庆之徙彭城流民数千家于瓜步，征北参军程天祚徙江西流民数千家于姑孰。
现代文：文帝派沈庆之将几千家彭城难民迁移到瓜步，派征北参军程天祚将几千户江西难民迁移到姑孰。
English: Emperor Wen sent Shen Qingzhi to relocate thousands of Pengcheng refugees to Guapu, and sent Cheng Tianyao to relocate thousands of Jiangxi refugees to Guan.

古文：帝以吏部郎王僧绰为侍中。
现代文：刘宋文帝任命吏部郎王僧绰为侍中。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen appointed the bureaucrat, the prince's son, the monk, the eunuch, as a chamberlain.

古文：僧绰，昙首之子也，幼有大成之度，众皆以国器许之。
现代文：王僧绰是王昙首的儿子，他从小就有成就大事的胸怀，因此，大家也都认定他是国家的栋梁之材。
English: Wang Xizhao is the son of Wang Xizhou. Since he was a child, he has had the heart to achieve great things. Therefore, everyone believes that he is the backbone of the country.

古文：好学，有思理，练悉朝典。
现代文：王僧绰刻苦好学，思维细致慎密，非常熟悉国家的典章制度。
English: Wang Zeng likes to study hard, his thinking is meticulous and prudent, and he is very familiar with the country's legal system.

古文：尚帝女东阳献公主。
现代文：他娶了文帝的女儿东阳献公主为妻。
English: He married Emperor Wen's daughter, Princess Dongyang Xian.

古文：在吏部，谙悉人物，举拔咸得其分。
现代文：在吏部任职时，他了解并熟悉各种各样的人物，推荐选拔人物也都非常恰当。
English: When he served in the personnel department, he knew and was familiar with a wide variety of people, and the recommended selection of people was also very appropriate.

古文：及为侍中，年二十九，沉深有局度，不以才能高人。
现代文：他当上侍中时才二十九岁，他沉着稳重，处事有分寸、有度量，而且不因为自己才能高人一等而对他人傲慢无礼。
English: He was only twenty-nine years old when he became an attendant, he was calm and steady, he was measured and measured, and he was not arrogant and rude to others because he was superior.

古文：帝颇以后事为念，以其年少，欲大相付托，朝政小大，皆与参焉。
现代文：文帝一直挂记自己身后之事交托给谁。因王僧绰年纪轻，所以文帝想把国家重任全部托付给他，朝廷内无论讨论大大小小事情，都命令他去参与。
English: Emperor Wen always kept in mind to whom he should entrust the affairs of his later years. Because Wang Xiang was so young, Emperor Wen wanted to entrust him with all the important tasks of the state, and ordered him to participate in all discussions within the imperial court, no matter how big or small.

古文：帝之始亲政事也，委任王华、王昙首、殷景仁、谢弘微、刘湛，次则范晔、沈演之、庾炳之，最后江湛、徐湛之、何瑀之及僧绰，凡十二人。
现代文：文帝刚开始亲自处理政事时，最宠信王华、王昙首、殷景仁、谢弘微、刘湛，后来就是范晔、沈演之、庾炳之，最后则是江湛、徐湛之、何之及王僧绰，总计十二人。
English: When Emperor Wen first began to personally handle political affairs, the most favored were Wang Hua, Wang Shanshou, Yin Jingren, Xie Hongwei, Liu Zhan, and later Fan Xuan, Shen Yuanzhi, Zou Zhi, and finally Jiang Zhan, Xu Zhanzhi, He Zhi and Wang Zengzhu, a total of twelve people.

古文：康和入朝于魏，魏主厚礼之。
现代文：北魏镇守西域焉耆的唐和，前往平城朝见北魏国主，北魏国主用优厚的礼仪来款待他。
English: The Northern Wei Zhen, guarding the western region of Tang He, went to Pingcheng to meet the Northern Wei sovereign. The Northern Wei sovereign treated him with gracious etiquette.

古文：太祖文皇帝下之上元嘉二十九年
现代文：元嘉二十九年
English: The 29th year of the Yuan Jia

古文：春，正月，魏所得宋民五千馀家在中山者谋叛，州军讨诛之。
现代文：春季正月，北魏所俘获的刘宋百姓五千余户在中山居住的人图谋造反，该州军队前去讨伐，把他们全部诛杀。
English: In the first month of spring, more than five thousand households of Liu Song people captured by the Northern Wei Dynasty and living in Zhongshan attempted to rebel, and the state army went to fight and killed them all.

古文：冀州刺史张掖王沮渠万年坐与叛者通谋。赐死。
现代文：冀州刺史张掖王沮渠万年与反叛者相互勾结，北魏国主赐他自杀。
English: The Jizhou assassin, Zhang Xuan Wang, conspired with the rebels for thousands of years, and the Northern Wei sovereign ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：魏世祖追悼景穆太子不已，中常侍宗爱惧诛，二月，甲寅，弑帝，尚书左仆射兰延、侍中和疋、薛提等秘不发丧。
现代文：北魏国主一直在追念、哀痛太子拓跋晃。中常侍宗爱害怕自己被杀，二月，甲寅，刺杀了北魏国主。尚书左仆射兰延、侍中和疋、薛提等人，没有宣布死讯。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty had been pining for and grieving over Prince Tuobao. Middle Chamberlain Zong Ai was afraid of being killed, and in February, Jia Yin assassinated the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty. Shang Shuxu's second-in-command Sha Lan Yan, the middle chamberlains He Zou and Xie Ti, and others did not announce the death.

古文：延、疋以皇孙濬冲幼，欲立长君，征秦王翰，置之秘室；提以濬嫡皇孙，不可废。
现代文：和疋认为皇孙拓跋浚年纪尚小，所以，打算立年龄稍大的君王。于是，征召秦王拓跋翰入宫，把他安置在一个秘密房间里。但薛提却认为拓跋浚是嫡亲皇孙，不应该废黜。
English: He thought that Emperor Qin's grandson Tuobaozhun was too young, so he planned to install a slightly older king. Therefore, he summoned Emperor Qin's grandson Tuobaozhun to the palace and placed him in a secret room. However, Shetty thought that Tuobaozhun was a direct relative of the emperor's grandson and should not be deposed.

古文：议久不决。
现代文：反复讨论很久也没有决定下来。
English: Repeated discussions did not lead to a decision for a long time.

古文：宗爱知之，自以得罪于景穆太子，而素恶秦王翰，善南安王余，乃密迎余自中宫便门入禁中，矫称赫连皇后令召延等。
现代文：宗爱得到消息，自认为他已得罪于景穆太子，而平时一向就讨厌秦王拓跋翰，只跟南安王拓跋余关系密切，于是，他就把拓跋余秘密迎来，从中宫小门进入后宫，然后，他假传赫连皇后的命令，召见兰延等人。
English: When Zong Ai received the news, he thought that he had offended Prince Jing Mu, and in normal times he had always hated Qin King Tuoba Han, and only had a close relationship with Nan'an King Tuoba Yu. Therefore, he secretly welcomed Tuoba Yu, entered the harem through the small gate of the middle palace, and then, he falsely transmitted the order of the Empress He Lian to summon Lan Yan and others.

古文：延等以爱素贱，不以为疑，皆随入。
现代文：兰延等人认为宗爱的地位一向很低，所以根本没有怀疑，全都随宗爱进宫了。
English: Lan Yan and others believe that the status of Zong Ai has always been very low, so there is no doubt at all, they all entered the palace with Zong Ai.

古文：爱先使宦者三十人持兵伏于禁中，延等入，以次收缚，斩之；杀秦王翰于永巷而立余。
现代文：在这之前，宗爱就已经派三十个宦官手持武器在宫中埋伏起来，兰延等人入宫，就被这些伏兵一个个抓起来杀了。在永巷把秦王拓跋翰杀掉，而拥护南安王拓跋余登基。
English: Prior to this, Zong Ai had already sent thirty eunuchs armed with weapons to ambush the palace. Lan Yan and others who entered the palace were caught and killed one by one by these ambushers. In Yongxiang, they killed Qin King Tuoba Han and supported Nan'an King Tuoba Yu to ascend to the throne.

古文：大赦，改元承平，尊皇后为皇太后，以爱为大司马、大将军、太师、都督中外诸军事、领中秘书，封冯翊王。
现代文：拓跋余登基后，实行大赦，改年号为承平，将皇后赫连尊立为皇太后，任命宗爱为大司马、大将军、太师、都督中外诸军事及领中秘书，封为冯翊王。
English: After Tuoba Yu ascended to the throne, an amnesty was implemented, the era name was changed to Chengping, the Empress Heren Son was appointed as the Empress Dowager, and Zong Ai was appointed as the Grand Sima, the General, the Grand Master, the Governor of the Middle and Foreign Military and the Secretary of the Central Military Region, and was named King Feng Xuan.

古文：庚午，立皇子休仁为建安王。
现代文：庚午，刘宋文帝立皇子刘休仁为建安王。
English: At noon, Emperor Liu Songwen appointed Prince Liu Xuren as the King of Jianan.

古文：三月，辛卯，魏葬太武皇帝于金陵，庙号世祖。
现代文：三月，辛卯，北魏在金陵埋葬了北魏国主太武帝拓跋焘，庙号为世祖。
English: In March, Xinwu, the Northern Wei buried the Northern Wei sovereign Emperor Tuobao in Jinling, the temple's name is the ancestor.

古文：上闻魏世祖殂，更谋北伐，鲁爽等复劝之。
现代文：刘宋文帝听到北魏世祖去世，打算再次向北讨伐，司州刺史鲁爽也表示赞成。
English: When Emperor Liu Songwen heard that the founder of the Northern Wei Dynasty had passed away, he planned to march north again. The governor of Shizhou, Shishu Lushuang, also expressed his approval.

古文：上访于群臣，太子中庶子何偃以为： 淮、泗数州疮痍未复，不宜轻动。 
现代文：文帝征求其他文武官员的意见，太子中庶子何偃认为： 淮河、泗水几个州郡，受到北魏入侵的创伤，至今还没有恢复过来，不应该轻举妄动。 
English: Emperor Wen solicited the opinions of other civil and military officials, and the prince's middle son and son-in-law, He Jun, believed that: Huaihe and Surabaya, several states and counties, have been traumatized by the invasion of the Northern Wei Dynasty, and have not yet recovered, and should not act rashly.

古文：上不从。
现代文：文帝没有接受何偃的建议。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：偃，尚之之子也。
现代文：何偃是何尚之的儿子。
English: He is the son of He Shangzhi.

古文：夏，五月，丙申，诏曰： 虐虏穷凶，著于自昔；未劳资斧，已伏天诛。
现代文：夏季五月，丙甲，文帝下诏书说： 残暴的胡虏穷凶极恶，自古至今都很少见，不用辛苦我们使用武力去讨伐，他就已经遭到上天的诛杀了。
English: In the summer of May, B.C., Emperor Wen issued an edict saying: "The atrocious Hukuru is extremely vicious and has been rare since ancient times. We don't need to use force to fight him. He has already been killed by Heaven.

古文：拯溺荡秽，今其会也。
现代文：拯救快要淹死的人，荡涤世间污泥浊水，今天正是好机会。
English: Now is the time to save the weak from the violent.

古文：可符骠骑、司空二府，各部分所统，东西应接。
现代文：现在，我下令骠骑、司空二府各自统率自己的军队，东西相互呼应。
English: You can order the troops under the jurisdiction of the two prefectures to come from the east and west.

古文：归义建绩者，随劳酬奖。 
现代文：对于起义立功、回到自己土地上的人，按照他的功劳的大小进行奖励酬劳。 
English: Those who attribute and establish merits will be rewarded according to their merits.

古文：于是遣抚军将军萧思话督冀州刺史张永等向碻磝，鲁爽、鲁秀、程天祚将荆州甲士四万出许、洛，雍州刺史臧质帅所领趣潼关。
现代文：于是，派遣抚军将军萧思话督统冀州刺史张永等，向进攻；派鲁爽、鲁秀、程天祚率领荆州甲士四万人向许昌、洛阳发起攻势；雍州刺史臧质率领他所统率的部众向潼关进军。
English: As a result, he dispatched General Xiao Si, the military governor of Fuzhou, to lead the troops of Jizhou, Zhang Yong, and others to attack; sent Lu Shuang, Lu Xiu, and Cheng Tianyao to lead the 40,000 soldiers of Jingzhou to launch an offensive against Xu Chang and Luoyang; and led the troops of Yongzhou, Zhang Shijie, and his subordinates to march into Shiguan.

古文：永，茂度之子也。
现代文：张永是张裕的儿子。
English: Zhang Yong is the son of Zhang Yu.

古文：沈庆之固谏北伐；上以其异议，不使行。
现代文：沈庆之竭力劝谏文帝不要北征，文帝因为他与自己意见不同，不派他率军出征。
English: Shen Qingzhi tried his best to persuade Emperor Wen not to lead the Northern Expedition, but Emperor Wen did not send him to lead the army because his opinion was different from his own.

古文：青州刺史刘兴祖上言，以为： 河南阻饥，野无所掠；脱诸城固守，非旬月可拔。
现代文：青州刺史刘兴祖上疏，他认为： 黄河以南的老百姓饥饿受苦，千里荒野抢不到任何可以充饥的东西。
English: Liu Xingzu, a historian from Qingzhou, said: The people south of the Yellow River are starving, and thousands of miles of wilderness cannot provide anything to satisfy their hunger.

古文：稽留大众，转输方劳；应机乘势，事存急速。
现代文：万一魏各城守军坚持固守不后退，这就不是十天半月能够攻克的。浩浩大军被困在城外，粮食物资的运送也会很困难。
English: In the unlikely event that the defenders of the Wei cities insisted on holding fast and not retreating, it would not be possible to conquer them in ten and a half days. A huge army would be trapped outside the city, and the transportation of grain and food supplies would also be very difficult.

古文：今伪帅始死，兼逼暑时，国内猜扰，不暇远赴。
现代文：因此，为了抓住时机，应该利用机会乘胜进军，速战速决。现在，伪魏的统帅刚刚死去，又加上正是炎热酷暑之际，他们朝廷内部相互怀疑猜忌，还来不及派兵远征。
English: Therefore, in order to seize the opportunity, we should take advantage of the opportunity to march to victory and make a quick decision. Now, the commander of the pseudo-Wei has just died, and it is in the heat of the heat, they are suspicious of each other within the court, and it is too late to send troops to the expedition.

古文：愚谓宜长驱中山，据其关要。
现代文：我以为应该直入中山，先占领这一险要关卡。
English: I thought we should go straight to Zhongshan and occupy the town that the enemy was on the verge of taking.

古文：冀州以北，民人尚丰，兼麦已向熟，因资为易，向义之徒，必应响赴。
现代文：而且，冀州以北老百姓的生活尚比较富裕，加上这时正是麦子已经成熟的季节，借敌人的物资供应我们是轻而易举的事。
English: Moreover, the lives of the common people north of Jizhou were still relatively affluent, plus it was the season when the wheat was already ripe. It was easy for us to borrow the enemy's supplies.

古文：若中州震动，黄河以南，自当消溃。
现代文：在那里响应我们号召的义士也一定会纷纷起来归附。倘若中原震动起来，黄河以南的魏国势力，自然而然就会土崩瓦解。
English: If the Central Plains were shaken, the Wei forces south of the Yellow River would naturally collapse.

古文：臣请发青、冀七千兵，遣将领之，直入其心腹。
现代文：我请求允许我征召青、冀二州七千名士卒，派大将率领他们，直接攻入敌人的心脏。
English: I request that I be allowed to recruit seven thousand soldiers from the two states of Qingdao and Hebei, and send a general to lead them directly into the heart of the enemy.

古文：若前驱克胜，张永及河南众军宜一时济河，使声实兼举，并建司牧，抚柔初附，西拒太行，北塞军都，因事指麾，随宜加授，畏威欣宠，人百其怀。
现代文：如果我们的前锋克敌制胜，张永以及黄河以南的各路大军，也应该同时渡黄河北上，使我们的进攻声势与进攻实际力量同步前进。同时在当地建立我们的州府，委派官员前来安抚刚刚归附的百姓。在西部依据太行山，北部阻隔把守军都，按照情况的变化再行指挥前进，根据功勋大小加封官职，这样，人们敬畏我们的威严，感激我们的关心，而会百倍怀念我们的恩典。
English: If our vanguard overcomes the enemy and wins, Zhang Yong and all the armies south of the Yellow River should also cross the Yellow River to the north at the same time, so that our offensive momentum and offensive actual strength advance at the same time. At the same time, establish our state capital in the local area, appoint officials to come to appease the people who have just been annexed. In the west, according to Taihang Mountain, in the north block the defending army, advance according to the changes in the situation, and add official positions according to the merits. In this way, people revere our majesty, appreciate our concern, and will miss our grace a hundred times.

古文：若能成功，清壹可待；若不克捷，不为大伤。
现代文：如果能够获得成功，天下统一的大业就指日可待了；如果我们没有取得胜利，也不会有什么大的损失。
English: If we can succeed, the great cause of unifying the world is just around the corner; if we do not win, there will be no great loss.

古文：并催促装束，伏听敕旨。 
现代文：我已敦促我的部下整理好装束，我只等圣上您的命令了。 
English: We are all ready to go, waiting for the Emperor's command.

古文：上意止存河南，亦不从。
现代文：文帝只是想夺回黄河以南的土地，没有接受刘兴祖的建议。
English: Emperor Wen only wanted to recapture the land south of the Yellow River and did not accept Liu Xingzu's suggestion.

古文：上又使员外散骑侍郎琅邪徐爰随军向碻磝，衔中旨授诸将方略，临时宣示。
现代文：文帝又派员外散骑侍郎琅琊人徐爰，随同大军一起向进军，他按照皇帝旨意把方针策略授予各个将领，在适当的时候宣布。
English: Emperor Wen also dispatched soldiers to ride out and accompany the great army to march forward. According to the emperor's will, he assigned the policy and strategy to each general and announced it at the appropriate time.

古文：尚书令何尚之以老请致仕，退居方山。议者咸谓尚之不能固志。
现代文：尚书令何尚之因为自己年纪大了，就请求退职，去方山隐居，但人们都认为何尚之不会固守他的信念一直隐居下去。
English: Shang Shu ordered He Shangzhi to ask for retirement and go to Fangshan to live in seclusion because he was too old, but people thought that He Shangzhi would not stick to his belief and continue to live in seclusion.

古文：既而诏书敦谕数四，六月，戊申朔，尚之复起视事。
现代文：不久，文帝颁下诏书，前后多次传达旨令，要征召何尚之回来。六月，戊申朔，何尚之果然又出来接受文帝的委派处理事务。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wen issued an imperial edict, and repeatedly sent orders to summon He Shangzhi back. In June, Wu Shengshuo, He Shangzhi indeed came out again to accept Emperor Wen's appointment to handle affairs.

古文：御史中丞袁涉录自古隐士有迹无名者为《真隐传》以嗤之。
现代文：御史中丞袁淑为此搜集自古以来有事迹而不能确知姓名的隐士，编辑成《真隐传》，以此表示对何尚之行为的嗤笑。
English: To this end, the chief historian, Yuan Shu, collected the deeds of hermits from ancient times whose names could not be ascertained, and compiled them into "The True Hidden History," in order to ridicule the behavior of He Shang.

古文：秋，七月，张永等至碻磝，引兵围之。
现代文：秋季七月，张永等到达，率兵包围了该城。
English: In the autumn of July, Zhang Yong and others arrived and led the troops to surround the city.

古文：壬辰，徙汝阳王浑为武昌王，淮阳王彧为湘东王。
现代文：壬辰，刘宋朝廷将汝阴王刘浑改封为武昌王，淮阳王刘改封为湘东王。
English: In Imjin, the Liu Song Dynasty changed the title of Ruyin King Liu Hun to Wuchang King, and the title of Huaiyang King Liu to Xiangdong King.

古文：初，潘淑妃生始兴王濬。
现代文：当初，潘淑妃生下刘浚，被封为始兴王。
English: At first, Pan Shufei gave birth to Liu Jun and was given the title of Shixing Wang.

古文：元皇后性妒，以淑妃有宠于上，恚恨而殂，淑妃专总内政。
现代文：元皇后袁妫生性好嫉妒，因为潘淑妃很受文帝的宠爱，她自己怨恨而死，潘淑妃和刘浚都深为痛恨。
English: The former empress Yuan Shansheng was very jealous, because Pan Shufei was very much favored by Emperor Wen, and she herself died of resentment. Both Pan Shufei and Liu Jun were deeply hated.

古文：由是太子劭深恶淑妃及濬。濬惧为将来之祸，乃曲意事劭，劭更与之善。
现代文：刘浚害怕成为将来的后患，于是就委屈求全，极力讨好刘劭，刘劭也慢慢解除了自己的敌意，跟刘浚的感情也越来深厚了。吴兴女巫严道育，自称参不食人间烟火，驱使鬼神做事。
English: Liu Jun was afraid of becoming a future problem, so he sought to make amends for his wrongdoings and tried his best to please Liu Yao. Liu Yao also gradually resolved his hostility, and his feelings with Liu Jun became deeper and deeper. Wu Xing, a witch, had a strict upbringing, claiming that she would not eat human fireworks, and drove ghosts and gods to do things.

古文：吴兴巫严道育，自言能辟谷服食，役使鬼物；因东阳公主婢王鹦鹉出入主家。道育谓主曰： 神将有符赐主。 
现代文：由于东阳公主刘英娥的婢女王璎鹉的推荐，使得她也得以出入公主家宅。严道育对公主说： 神灵要有吉祥物赏赐给公主。 
English: As a result of the recommendation of Dongyang Princess Liu Ying'e's handmaid Queen Cockatoo, she was also able to enter and leave the princess's home. Yan Daoyu said to the princess: The gods must have a mascot to reward the princess.

古文：主夜卧，见流光若萤，飞入书笥，开视，得二青珠；由是主与劭、濬皆信惑之。
现代文：晚上，公主躺在床上，果然就看见一道像萤火样的流光闪过，飞进竹制的书箱里，打形书箱一看，看见里面的两颗青色宝珠崐。自此以后，刘英娥和刘劭、刘浚三兄妹，都对严道育的巫术深信不疑。
English: In the evening, when the princess was lying in bed, she saw a streamer of light like a firefly flash by, and it flew into a bamboo bookcase. When she opened the bookcase, she saw two blue gems inside. Since then, Liu Ying'e, Liu Yao, and Liu Jun, three brothers and sisters, have all been convinced of the witchcraft of strict education.

古文：劭、濬并多过失，数为上所诘责；使道育诉请，欲令过不上闻。
现代文：刘劭、刘浚二人犯了很多错误，为此也多次受文帝的责怪盘问，于是，二人就请严道育祈求鬼神，请求鬼神帮忙，要让文帝再也听不到他们犯的错误。
English: Liu Ye and Liu Jun have made many mistakes, for which they have been repeatedly criticized and interrogated by Emperor Wen. Therefore, the two of them asked Yan Daoyu to pray to ghosts and gods, and to ask ghosts and gods for help, so that Emperor Wen would no longer hear the mistakes they made.

古文：道育曰： 我已为上天陈请，必不泄露。 
现代文：严道育说： 我已经替你们向上天诉说你们的情况，上天已经答应以后一定不会再让皇上知道你们的过失。 
English: Yan Daoyu said, "I have already told Heaven about your situation on your behalf, and Heaven has promised that it will not let the Emperor know about your mistakes.

古文：劭等敬事之，号曰： 天师 。
现代文：刘劭等对严道育更加尊敬，恭敬侍奉，给她立号为天师。
English: Liu Ye and others had more respect for Yan Daoyu and served her respectfully, giving her the title of heavenly teacher.

古文：其后遂与道育、鹦鹉及东阳主奴陈天与、黄门陈庆国共为巫蛊，琢玉为上形像，埋于含章殿前；劭补天与为队主。
现代文：从此以后，刘劭、刘浚就跟严道育、王鹦鹉及东阳公主刘英娥的家奴陈天与、黄门陈庆国一起从事巫术害人的活动，他们用玉石雕刻了一座文帝的雕像，把它理在含章殿前。刘劭又增补陈天与为太子宫的队主。
English: From then on, Liu Wei and Liu Jun, together with Yan Daoyu, Wang Parrot and the Dongyang Princess Liu Ying'e's family slave Chen Tian and Huangmen Chen Qingguo, engaged in witchcraft activities that harmed people. They carved a statue of Emperor Wen with jade and placed it in front of the Hall of the Grand Cordon. Liu Wei also added Chen Tian and was the team leader of the Imperial Palace.

古文：东阳主卒，鹦鹉应出嫁，劭、濬虑语泄，濬府佐吴兴沈怀远；素为濬所厚，以鹦鹉嫁之为妾。
现代文：东阳公主刘英娥去世，王鹦鹉应该出嫁，但刘劭、刘浚唯恐他们的巫术活动汇露出去。刘浚府中的辅佐、吴兴人沈怀远一向受刘浚的厚爱，刘浚就把王鹦鹉嫁给了沈怀远为妾。
English: Dongyang Princess Liu Ying'e passed away, and King Parrot was supposed to get married, but Liu Ye and Liu Jun were afraid that their witchcraft activities would be exposed. Liu Jun's assistant in the palace, Wu Xingren, had always been loved by Liu Jun, and Liu Jun married King Parrot to Shen Huaiyuan as his concubine.

古文：上闻天与领队，以让劭曰： 汝所用队主副，并是奴邪？ 
现代文：文帝听到陈天与担任队主的消息后，责怪刘劭说： 你所任用的队主、队副，为什么都是家奴？ 
English: After Wen Di heard the news of Chen Tian and Wu serving as team leader, he blamed Liu Wei and said: The team leader and team deputy you have appointed, why are they all family slaves?

古文：劭惧，以书告濬。濬复书曰： 彼人若所为不已，正可促其馀命，或是大庆之渐耳。 
现代文：刘浚回信说： 那个人如果一直问个不休，正可以加速缩短他的余生，或许这也是值得大庆的日子即将到来了。 
English: Liu Jun wrote back: If that person keeps asking questions, he can speed up the shortening of the rest of his life. Perhaps this is also a day worth celebrating.

古文：劭、濬相与往来书疏，常谓上为 彼人 ，或曰： 其人 ，谓江夏王义恭为 佞人 。
现代文：在刘劭和刘浚二人相互往来的信件上，经常把文帝称为： 彼人 ， 其人 ，而把江夏王刘义恭称为 佞人 。
English: In the letters between Liu Xuan and Liu Jun, Emperor Wen was often referred to as "he," "his," while the King of Jiangxia, Liu Yigong, was referred to as "he."

古文：鹦鹉先与天与私通，既适怀远，恐事泄，白劭使密杀之。
现代文：王鹦鹉以前曾和陈天与私通过，嫁给沈怀远以后，她害怕过去的奸情败露出去，就把此事告诉了刘劭，让刘劭派人暗地里把陈天与杀了灭口。
English: Wang Parrot had previously been with Chen Tian and I. After marrying Shen Huayuan, she was afraid that her past infidelity would be exposed, so she told Liu Yao about it and asked Liu Yao to send someone to secretly kill Chen Tian and close her mouth.

古文：陈庆国惧，曰： 巫蛊事，唯我与天与宣传往来。
现代文：陈天与被杀后，陈庆国害怕了，说： 巫术害人之事，只有我同陈天与上下传达。
English: After Chen Tianyao was killed, Chen Qingguo was afraid and said, "Only I and Chen Tianyao can tell everyone about the harm caused by witchcraft.

古文：今天与死，我其危哉！ 
现代文：如今陈天与死了，我也就岌岌可危了。 
English: Now that he is dead, I am in a precarious situation.

古文：乃具以其事白上。
现代文：于是，就将以上所有事情全都报告了文帝。
English: As a result, he reported all of the above to Emperor Wen.

古文：上大惊，即遣收鹦鹉；封籍其家，得劭、濬书数百纸，皆咒诅巫蛊之言；又得所埋玉人，命有司穷治其事。
现代文：文帝听后大吃一惊，马上派人逮捕了王鹦鹉，搜查了她的家，在她家里搜取了刘劭、刘浚二人的几百封往来信件，信上所写的都是巫术害人的话。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Wen was taken aback. He immediately sent someone to arrest Wang Parrot and searched her home. In her home, they searched for hundreds of letters sent and received by Liu Ye and Liu Jun. The letters were full of words about witchcraft harming people.

古文：道育亡命，捕之不获。
现代文：又挖出了埋藏在含章殿前的玉石雕刻的文帝像。
English: They also unearthed a jade statue of Emperor Wen, which had been buried in front of the Hall of the Imperial Regalia.

古文：先是，濬自扬州剌史出镇京口，及庐陵王绍以疾解扬州，意谓己必复得之。
现代文：在此以前，刘浚从扬州刺史而被调到京口镇守。庐陵王刘绍因病辞去扬州刺史时，刘浚心想，自己一定会再次得到扬州刺史这一官职。
English: Before this, Liu Jun was transferred from Yangzhou Shishi to Jingkou Town Guard. When Liu Shao, the King of Fuling, resigned from Yangzhou Shishi due to illness, Liu Jun thought that he would definitely get the post of Yangzhou Shishi again.

古文：既而上用南谯王义宣，濬殊不乐，乃求镇江陵；上许之。
现代文：不久，文帝却任用了南谯王、荆州刺史刘义理为扬州刺史，刘浚很不高兴，于是，他向文帝请求去镇守江陵，文帝答应了他的要求。
English: Soon, however, Emperor Wen appointed Liu Yili, the king of Nanxun and the governor of Jingzhou, as the governor of Yangzhou. Liu Jun was very unhappy, so he asked Emperor Wen to go to guard Jiangling. Emperor Wen agreed to his request.

古文：濬入朝，遣还京口，为行留处分，至京口数日而巫蛊事发。
现代文：刘浚就从京口回到京师朝见文帝，文帝让他再回京口，办理交接事情。他回到京口几天，他们的巫术害人一事败露。
English: Liu Jun went back to Beijing from Beijing to see Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen asked him to return to Beijing to handle the handover. He returned to Beijing for a few days, and their witchcraft harming people was exposed.

古文：上惋叹弥日，谓潘淑妃曰： 太子图富贵，更是一理，虎头复如此，非复思虑所及。
现代文：文帝为此整天惊叹、惋惜，对潘淑妃说： 太子刘劭贪图荣华富贵，还可以理解他有自己的理由，但虎头也做出这样的事来，这不是我反复思考所能想到的事。
English: For this, Emperor Wen marveled and lamented all day long, and said to Princess Pan Shuxiu: Prince Liu Bei is greedy for glory and wealth, and it can be understood that he has his own reasons, but the tiger head also did such a thing. This is not something I can think of repeatedly.

古文：汝母子岂可一日无我邪！ 
现代文：你们母子二人怎么能够可以一天没有我呢？ 
English: How can both of you, mother and son, go a day without me?

古文：遣中使切责劭、濬，劭、濬惶惧无辞，惟陈谢而已。
现代文：文帝又派中使严厉斥责气愤，但最终还是不忍心处罚他们。
English: Emperor Wen also sent an envoy to sternly reprimand the enraged, but ultimately did not have the heart to punish them.

古文：上虽怒甚，犹未忍罪也。诸军攻碻磝，治三攻道：张永等当东道，济南太守申坦等当西道，扬武司马崔训当南道。
现代文：各路大军进攻，兵分三路一齐进发：张永等从城东进攻，济崐南太守申坦等从城西进攻，扬武司马崔训则从城南进攻。
English: Large armies attacked from all directions, and soldiers from three directions advanced together: Zhang Yong and others attacked from the east of the city, Shentan, the Southern Governor of Jilin Province, attacked from the west of the city, and Yangwu Sima Cuixun attacked from the south of the city.

古文：攻之累旬，不拔。
现代文：猛攻几十天也没能攻下。
English: The onslaught did not succeed in capturing Tomo for dozens of days.

古文：八月，辛亥夜，魏人自地道潜出，烧崔训营及攻具；癸丑夜，又烧东围及攻具；寻复毁崔训攻道。
现代文：八月，辛亥夜里，北魏军从地道里偷偷出来，烧毁了崔训的军营手他们进攻所使用的武器。癸丑，夜晚，北魏军又偷偷出来烧毁了围攻东城的宋兵营和攻城武器器械。不久，又摧毁了崔训攻城的地道。
English: In August, during the night of Xinhai, the Northern Wei Army secretly came out of the tunnel and burned the weapons used by the Cui Xun's campers in their attack. Unfortunately, at night, the Northern Wei Army also secretly came out and burned the Song military camp and siege weapons that besieged Dongcheng. Soon, they also destroyed the tunnel that Cui Xun used to attack the city.

古文：张永夜撤围退军，不告诸将，士卒惊扰；魏人乘之，死伤涂地。
现代文：张永率领军队乘夜后撤，没有通知其他将领，士卒大为惊慌。北魏军乘机进攻，刘宋军死伤者遍地都是。
English: Zhang Yong led the army to retreat at night, without informing other generals, and the soldiers were greatly alarmed. The Northern Wei Army took the opportunity to attack, and the Liu Song Army casualties were everywhere.

古文：萧思话自往，增兵力攻旬馀，不拔。
现代文：萧思话亲自前往，增兵攻城，十几天仍未攻克。
English: Xiao Siwei personally went to the city, increased the number of troops to attack the city, and it has not been conquered for more than ten days.

古文：是时，青、徐不稔，军食乏。
现代文：这时，又赶上青州、徐州庄稼收成不好，军内缺少粮食。
English: At this time, the harvest of crops in Qingzhou and Xuzhou was poor, and there was a shortage of grain in the army.

古文：丁卯，思话命诸军皆退屯历城，斩崔训，系张永、申坦于狱。
现代文：丁卯，萧思话下令各路大军全都撤退到历城驻扎，斩了崔说，逮捕了张永、申坦，送进监狱。
English: Dingwu and Xiao Siwei ordered all the troops to withdraw to Licheng and station there. They killed Cui He, arrested Zhang Yong and Shen Tan, and sent them to prison.

古文：鲁爽至长社，魏戍主秃髡幡弃城走。
现代文：鲁爽抵达长社，北魏守将秃发幡弃城逃走。
English: When Lu Shuang arrived at Changsha, the Northern Wei governor abandoned the city and fled.

古文：臧质顿兵近郊，不以时发，独遣冠军司马柳元景帅后军行参军薛安都等向潼关，元景等进据洪关。
现代文：臧质率领大军驻扎在襄阳近郊，没有及时发兵，而只派了冠军司马柳元景率领后军行参军薛安都等攻占了洪关。
English: Luo Jian led a large army stationed in the suburbs of Xiangyang, but did not send troops in time. Instead, he only sent champion Sima Liu Yuanjing to lead the troops, after which Xue Andu joined the army and conquered Hongguan.

古文：梁州刺史刘秀之遣司马马汪与左军中兵参军萧道成，将兵向长安。
现代文：梁州刺史刘秀之派司马马汪和左军中兵参军萧道成统领大军向长安进攻。
English: Sima Ma Wang, sent by Liu Xiu, the governor of Liangzhou, and Xiao Daocheng, a member of the Left Army, led the army to attack Chang'an.

古文：道成，承之之子也。
现代文：萧道成是萧承之的儿子。
English: Xiao Daocheng is the son of Xiao Chengwu.

古文：魏冠军将军封礼自浢津南渡，赴弘农。
现代文：北魏冠军将军封礼从津渡黄河南下，增援弘农。
English: The Northern Wei champion, General Feng Li, went south of the Yellow River from Tsudo to reinforce Hongnong.

古文：九月，司空高平公儿乌干屯潼关，平南将军黎公辽屯河内。
现代文：九月，北魏司空高平公儿乌干屯驻潼关，平南将军黎公辽屯驻河内。
English: In September, the Northern Wei Sikyong Gao Ping Gong's son, Ugan Tun, was stationed in Shaoguan, and the Pingnan general, Li Gong Liao Tun, was stationed in Hanoi.

古文：吐谷浑王慕利延卒，树洛干之子拾寅立，始居伏罗川；遣使来请命，亦请命于魏。
现代文：吐谷浑汗国可汗慕容慕利延去世，慕容树洛干的儿子慕容拾寅承继王位。最初，居住在伏罗川，派使节往刘宋请求封赏，同时也去北魏请求封赏。
English: Murong Muriyan, the khan of the Kingdom of the Tugu Huns, died, and Murong Shu Luo Gan's son, Murong Shu Yin, succeeded to the throne. At first, he lived in the Furo River and sent envoys to Liu Song to request a reward, and also to the Northern Wei Dynasty to request a reward.

古文：丁亥，以拾寅为安西将军、西秦、河、沙三州刺史、河南王；魏以拾寅为镇西大将军、沙州刺史、西平王。
现代文：丁亥，刘宋任命慕容拾寅为安西将军，西秦、河、沙三州刺史，河南王。北魏朝廷则任命慕容拾寅为镇西大将军、沙州刺史、西平王。
English: Dinghai and Liu Song appointed Murong Shuyin as the general of Anxi, the governor of Western Qin, He and Shanzhou, and the king of Henan. The Northern Wei court appointed Murong Shuyin as the general of Zhenxi, the governor of Shazhou, and the king of Xiping.

古文：庚寅，鲁爽与魏豫州刺史拓跋仆兰战于大索，破之，进攻虎牢。
现代文：庚寅鲁爽与北魏豫州刺史拓跋仆兰在大索会战，鲁爽击败了拓跋仆兰，而后又进攻虎牢。
English: Geng Yin, Lu Shuang and Northern Wei, Yuzhou, Zhishi, Tuoba and Minlan fought in the Great Soviet War. Lu Shuang defeated Tuoba and Minlan, and then attacked Tigardao.

古文：闻碻磝败退，与柳元景皆引兵还。
现代文：此时，他听说城打了败仗撤退下来，就和柳元景一同率军撤退返回。
English: At this time, he heard that the city had been defeated and retreated, so he and Liu Yuanqing led the army to retreat and return.

古文：萧道成、马汪等闻魏救兵将至，还趣仇池。
现代文：萧道成、马汪等听到北魏的增援部队就要到来，也撤回仇池。
English: When Xiao Daocheng, Ma Wang and others heard that reinforcements from the Northern Wei Dynasty were about to arrive, they also withdrew from Qiu Chi.

古文：己丑，诏解萧思话徐州，更领冀州刺史，镇历城。
现代文：己丑，文帝颁发诏书，解除了萧思话的徐州刺史职务，改兼冀州刺史，镇守历城。
English: Embarrassed, Emperor Wen issued an imperial edict, relieved Xiao Siwei of the post of Xuzhou historian, and changed him to the post of Jizhou historian and the town guard of Licheng.

古文：上以诸将屡出无功，不可专责张永等，赐思话诏曰： 虏既乘利，方向盛冬，若脱敢送死，兄弟父子自共当之耳。
现代文：文帝因为自己的各个将领屡次出击都没有建立功绩，不能仅仅责怪张永等人，就下诏给萧思话说： 胡虏已经乘机取得了胜利，而此时正值隆冬季节，如果他们胆敢前来送死，那么我们父子兄弟自己会共同抵挡。
English: Emperor Wen, who could not just blame Zhang Yong and the others because his generals had repeatedly failed to establish their merits, issued an edict to Xiao Si, saying: The Huns have taken advantage of the opportunity to achieve victory, and at this time it is the midwinter season. If they dare to come and send them to their deaths, then our father and son brothers will resist together.

古文：言及增愤！
现代文：说到这里，更增加我的愤怒之情。
English: At this point, my anger only increased.

古文：可以示张永、申坦。 
现代文：可以把此诏让张永和申坦看看。 
English: You can show this edict to Zhang Yong and Shentan.

古文：又与江夏王义恭书曰： 早知诸将辈如此，恨不以白刃驱之。
现代文：然后，文帝又给江夏王刘义恭写信说： 早知道各位将领们如此怯懦无能，我真恨自己没有抽刀在他们背后督战。
English: Then, Emperor Wen also wrote a letter to Liu Yigong, the King of Jiangxia, saying, "I already knew that your generals were so cowardly and incompetent. I really hate myself for not drawing a sword behind their backs to supervise the war.

古文：今者悔何所及！ 
现代文：现在后悔都来不及了。 
English: It's too late to regret now.

古文：义恭寻奏免思话官，从之。
现代文：不久，刘义恭奏请免除萧思话的官职，文帝批准了。
English: Soon after, Liu Yigong requested that Xiao Siwei be relieved of his official duties, and Emperor Wen approved.

古文：魏南安隐王余自以违次而立，厚赐群下，欲以收众心；旬月之间，府藏虚竭。
现代文：北魏南安隐王拓跋余自认为自己没有按照长幼顺序当的皇帝，就用极为优厚的东西赏赐给下属，打算以此收买人心，一个月的时间，国库被动用一空。
English: King Tuoba Yu of the Northern Wei Dynasty, who thought that he was not the emperor according to the order of eldest son and youngest son, rewarded his subordinates with extremely valuable things, intending to use them to buy people's hearts. In one month's time, the treasury was completely used up.

古文：又好酣饮及声乐、畋猎，不恤政事。
现代文：加之拓跋余自己喜欢喝得酩酊大醉，纵情声色、犬马，喜欢去野外狩猎，而不过问国家大事。
English: In addition, Tuoba Yu himself likes to get very drunk, indulge in sex, dogs and horses, like to go hunting in the field, but does not ask about national affairs.

古文：宗爱为宰相，录三省，总宿卫，坐召公卿，专恣日甚。
现代文：宗爱身居宰相高位，总管三省政务，负责皇家的安全事务，他身居高位，对公卿等呼来唤去，专权跋扈，一日比一日厉害。
English: Zong Ai held the high position of prime minister, was in charge of the government affairs of the three provinces, and was responsible for the royal security affairs. He held a high position, summoned and dismissed nobles, and wielded absolute power, becoming more powerful day by day.

古文：余患之，谋夺其权；爱愤怒。
现代文：拓跋余深为崐不安，就想谋划肃夺他的大权，宗爱知道后甚为愤怒。
English: Deeply uneasy about Tuoba Yu, he wanted to plan to seize his great power. Zong Ai was very angry when she found out.

古文：冬，十月，丙午朔，余夜祭东庙，爱使小黄门贾周等就弑余，而秘之，唯羽林郎中代人刘尼知之。
现代文：冬季，十月，丙午朔，拓跋余夜里去东庙祭祀，宗爱命令小黄门贾周等人，靠近拓跋余，暗中杀死他。宗爱一直封锁消息，只有羽林郎中代郡人刘尼知道。
English: In winter, October, mid-morning, Tuoba Yu went to the East Temple at night to offer sacrifices. Soai ordered Xiao Huangmen Jia Zhou and others to get close to Tuoba Yu and secretly kill him. Soai has been blocking the news, and only Liu Ni, a middle-aged county resident of Ulin Lang, knows.

古文：尼劝爱立皇孙濬，爱惊曰： 君大痴人！皇孙若立，岂忘正平时事乎！ 
现代文：刘尼劝宗爱拥戴皇孙拓跋浚做皇帝，宗爱大吃一惊，说： 你简直是个大白痴，如果皇孙被立为皇帝，他怎么能够忘记正平年景穆太子的事！ 
English: Liu Ni advised Zong Ai to support the crown prince's grandson Tuobaozhuang as emperor. Zong Ai was taken aback and said, "You are such an idiot. If the crown prince is made emperor, how can he forget Zhengping Nianjing Mudaizi!"

古文：尼曰： 若尔，今当立谁？ 
现代文：刘尼说： 如果不这样做，那么现在应该立谁为皇帝呢？ 
English: Liu Ni said: If this is not done, then who should be made emperor now?

古文：爱曰： 待还宫，当择诸王贤者立之。 
现代文：宗爱说： 等我们回宫之后，在各王中选拔有贤能的人做皇帝。 
English: Zong Ai said, "After we return to the palace, we will select a capable person from among the kings to be the emperor."

古文：尼恐爱为变，密以状告殿中尚书源贺。
现代文：刘尼深怕宗爱变卦，就把这些事情都偷偷告诉了殿中尚书源贺。
English: Liu Ni was deeply afraid of his father's change of heart, so he secretly told all these things to Shang Shugen He in the palace.

古文：贺时与尼俱典兵宿卫，乃与南部尚书陆丽谋曰： 宗爱既立南安，还复杀之。
现代文：源贺此时和刘尼同时领兵负责宫廷内部禁卫，他就同南部尚书陆丽商量说： 宗爱已经拥戴南安王做了皇帝，又把他杀了。
English: At this time, Yuan He and Liu Ni also led soldiers to be responsible for the inner palace guard, and he discussed with Nanbu Shangshululli and said: Zong Ai had already made Nanan Wang an emperor and killed him.

古文：今又不立皇孙，将不利于社稷。 
现代文：现在又不让皇孙登基，这样做，对我们的国家将是没有好处的。 
English: It would not be good for our country to prevent the crown prince from ascending to the throne now.

古文：遂与丽定谋，共立皇孙。
现代文：源贺就和陆丽商量定计，共同拥戴皇孙。
English: Geng He and Lu Li agreed on a fixed amount and jointly supported the imperial grandson.

古文：丽，俟之子也。
现代文：陆丽是陆俟的儿子。
English: Lu Li is the son of Lu Yao.

古文：戊申，贺与尚书长孙渴侯严兵守卫宫禁，使尼、丽迎皇孙于苑中。丽抱皇孙于马上，入平城，贺、渴侯开门纳之。
现代文：戊申，源贺同尚书长孙渴侯率兵严密把守皇宫，派刘尼、陆丽将长孙抱在马上，进入平城，源贺、长孙渴侯打开宫门，迎接皇孙一行。
English: Boshin, Minamoto no He, along with Shosho's eldest son, Sukehiro, led the troops to closely guard the Imperial Palace, and sent Liu Ni and Lu Li to hold the eldest grandson on a horse and enter Pingcheng. Minamoto no He and his eldest son, Sukehiro, opened the palace gate to welcome the imperial grandson and his party.

古文：尼驰还东庙，大呼曰： 宗爱弑南安王，大逆不道，皇孙已登大位，有诏，宿卫之士皆还宫！ 
现代文：刘尼骑马奔回到东庙，大声呼喊说： 宗爱谋杀了南安王，大逆不道，现在嫡皇孙已登上了皇位，颁下诏令，让宿卫士卒赶快回宫。 
English: Liu Ni ran back to the East Temple on horseback, shouting loudly, "Zong Ai has murdered the King of Nan'an, this is an act of high treason. Now the heir to the throne has ascended to the throne, issue a decree, and let the innkeeper quickly return to the palace."

古文：众咸呼万岁。遂执宗爱、贾周等，勒兵而入，奉皇孙即皇帝位。
现代文：大家都高喊万岁，逮捕了宗爱、贾周等人，率兵而入，拥戴嫡皇孙即帝位。
English: Everyone shouted hooray, arrested Zong Ai, Jia Zhou and others, led the troops in, and supported the legitimate emperor's grandson, that is, the throne.

古文：登永安殿，大赦，改元兴安。
现代文：嫡皇孙拓跋浚登上永安殿，实行大赦，改年号兴安。
English: The legitimate emperor's grandson, Tuoba Jun, ascended the Yongan Hall, implemented an amnesty, and changed the name of the year to Xingan.

古文：杀爱、周，皆具五刑，夷三族。
现代文：尔后，斩了宗爱、贾周，二人都被施用五刑，诛灭三族。
English: After that, Zong Ai and Jia Zhou were beheaded, and both of them were given five punishments to exterminate the three ethnic groups.

古文：西阳五水群蛮反，自淮、汝至于江、沔，咸被其患。
现代文：刘宋西阳五水一带的各蛮族起兵反抗，从淮河、汝水，到长江、沔水，都受到骚扰。
English: During the reign of Liu Song, the barbarian tribes around Xiyang and Wushui revolted, and they were harassed from the Huaihe River and Your Water to the Yangtze River and Surabaya Water.

古文：诏太尉中兵参军沈庆之督江、豫、荆、雍四州兵讨之。
现代文：文帝颁发诏令，命令太尉中兵参军沈庆之统率江、豫、荆、雍四州的士卒前去讨伐。
English: Emperor Wen issued an imperial edict, ordering the lieutenant to join the army of Shen Qingzotong and lead the soldiers from the four provinces of Jiang, Yu, Jing and Yong to go to fight.

古文：魏以骠骑大将军拓跋寿乐为太宰、都督中外诸军、录尚书事，长孙渴侯为尚书令，加仪同三司。
现代文：北魏朝廷任命骠骑大将军拓跋寿乐为太宰、都督中外诸军、录尚书事，任命长孙渴侯为尚书令，加封为仪同三司。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty court appointed the cavalry general Tuoba Shule as Dazai, the governor of the armies at home and abroad, and recorded the official records, appointed the eldest grandson Thirst as the official records, and added the seal to the ceremony and the three departments.

古文：十一月，寿乐、渴侯坐争权，并赐死。
现代文：十一月，拓跋寿乐和长孙渴侯因争夺权利，二人同时被命令自杀。
English: In November, Tuoba Shule and his eldest grandson, Thirsty Hou, were ordered to commit suicide at the same time as they fought for power.

古文：癸未，魏广阳简王建、临淮宣王谭皆卒。
现代文：癸未，北魏广阳简王拓跋建、临淮宣王拓跋谭氏去世。
English: Not long ago, Guangyang Jian Wang Tuoba Jian and Lin Huai Xuan Wang Tuoba Tan of the Northern Wei Dynasty passed away.

古文：甲申，魏主母闾氏卒。
现代文：甲申，北魏国主拓跋浚的母亲郁久闾氏去世。
English: Gao Shin, the mother of Tuobaozhun, the ruler of Northern Wei, passed away.

古文：魏南安王余之立也，以古弼为司徒，张黎为太尉。
现代文：北魏南安王拓跋余即帝位时，任命古弼为司徒、张黎为太尉。
English: When the Northern Wei Nan'an king Tuobao ascended to the throne, he appointed Gu Yao as a tutor and Zhang Li as a lieutenant.

古文：及高宗立，弼、黎议不合旨，黜为外都大官；坐有怨言，且家人告其为巫蛊，皆被诛。
现代文：文成帝拓跋浚即位，古弼和张黎的见解与文成帝不合，二人被贬为外都大官。又因发表怨恨言论，他们的家人又告发他们从事巫术诅咒活动，于是，二人都被诛杀。
English: When Emperor Wencheng ascended to the throne, the opinions of Gu Yao and Zhang Li Rong did not agree with Emperor Wencheng, and the two were relegated to foreign dignitaries. In addition, their families accused them of engaging in witchcraft and cursing activities because of their hate speech, so both of them were killed.

古文：壬寅，庐陵昭王绍卒。
现代文：壬寅，刘宋庐陵昭王刘绍去世。
English: Jinyin, Liu Song, and Zhao Wang Liu Shao passed away.

古文：魏追尊景穆太子为景穆皇帝，皇妣闾氏为恭皇后，尊乳母常氏为保太后。
现代文：北魏追尊景穆太子拓跋晃为景穆皇帝，母亲郁久闾氏为恭皇后，尊封乳母常氏为保太后。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, the son of the crown prince of Jingmu, became the emperor of Jingmu, his mother, Yu Jiuyi, became the empress, and his nanny, Chang, became the empress dowager.

古文：陇西屠各王景文叛魏，署置王侯；魏统万镇将南阳王惠寿、外都大官于洛拔督四州之众讨平之，徙其党三千馀家于赵、魏。
现代文：北魏陇西郡匈奴屠各部落人王景文聚兵反叛，设立王爵侯爵。北魏统崐万镇将南阳王拓跋惠寿，外都大官于洛拔督统四个州的军队，前去讨伐，平灭了反叛，将王景文的党徒三千多户强行迁往古赵魏地区。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wang Jingwen, a Hun and a member of various tribes in the west county of Shaanxi Province, rallied his troops to rebel and set up a marquisate. The Northern Wei Dynasty ordered the Nanyang King, Tuoba Huishou, to march to Suwan Town, and the foreign capital official, Yu Loba, ordered the armies of four states to march to fight and quell the rebellion. More than 3,000 households of Wang Jingwen's party members were forcibly relocated to the ancient Zhao Wei region.

古文：十二月，戊申，魏葬恭皇后于金陵。
现代文：十二月，戊申，北魏朝廷把恭皇后郁久闾氏安葬在金陵。
English: In December, Boushen, the Northern Wei Dynasty buried Queen Gong Yu Jiuyong in Jinling.

古文：魏世祖晚年，佛禁稍弛，民间往往有私习者。
现代文：北魏太武帝晚年，对佛教的禁令稍稍放松了些，民间往往有人私下偷偷信奉佛教。
English: In the later years of the Northern Wei Emperor Taivu, the ban on Buddhism was slightly relaxed, and people often secretly practiced Buddhism.

古文：及高宗即位，群臣多请复之。
现代文：文成帝即位后，很多大臣都来请求恢复佛教。
English: After Emperor Wencheng ascended the throne, many ministers came to request the restoration of Buddhism.

古文：乙卯，诏州郡县众居之所，各听建佛图一区；民欲为沙门者，听出家。
现代文：乙卯，拓跋浚诏令各州郡县老百姓在集中居住的地方，允许建立一座寺庙。
English: Second, the edict ordered the counties and counties in each state to allow the establishment of a temple in the places where the common people live in concentration.

古文：大州五十人，小州四十人。
现代文：老百姓有打算当和尚、做尼姑的，允许自由出家，大州郡可五十人，小州可四十人。
English: Ordinary people who have the intention to become a monk or nun are allowed to freely become a monk or nun, up to 50 people in large counties and up to 40 people in small counties.

古文：于是向所毁佛图，率皆修复。
现代文：于是，各地过去所摧毁的寺庙佛像如今大都修复。
English: As a result, most of the Buddhist statues in temples around the country that were destroyed in the past have now been restored.

古文：魏主亲为沙门师贤等五人下发，以师贤为道人统。
现代文：文成帝还亲自给和尚师贤等五人剃了发，任命师贤为道人统。
English: Emperor Wencheng also personally shaved the hair of five people, including the monk Shixian, and appointed Shixian as the leader of Taoism.

古文：丁巳，魏以乐陵王击忸为太尉，南部尚书陆丽为司徒，镇西将军杜元宝为司空。
现代文：丁巳，北魏朝廷任命乐陵王拓跋周忸为太尉，南部尚书陆丽为司徒，镇西将军杜元宝为司空。
English: Ding Si, the Northern Wei Dynasty court appointed Le Ling Wang Tuoba Zhou Qi as a lieutenant, Southern Shang Shulul Li as a scholar, and Zhenxi General Du Yuan Bao as a scholar.

古文：丽以迎立之功，受心膂之寄，朝臣无出其右者，赐爵平原王。
现代文：陆丽因为有迎奉拓跋浚即位的功劳，所以，被拓跋浚当作心腹，朝廷内没有一个官员比他更受拓跋浚宠信的。
English: Lu Li was regarded as a confidant of Tuobaozhong because of his service in welcoming Tuobaozhong to the throne. No official in the imperial court was more favored by Tuobaozhong than Lu Li.

古文：丽辞曰： 陛下，国之正统，当承基绪；效顺奉迎，臣子常职，不敢慆天之功以干大赏。 
现代文：拓跋浚赐他平原王爵位，陆丽辞让说： 陛下是我们国家的正统，理当继承帝位，我只是顺应人心，奉迎圣上登上帝位，这是臣下应份之事，我不敢有贪天之功，接受您如些的重赏。 
English: Tuobaozhong gave him the title of the king of the plain, and Lu Lijuan said: Your Majesty is the orthodox of our country and should inherit the imperial throne. I just follow the will of the people and ascend to the throne of God. This is the duty of a subject. I dare not be greedy for merit and accept such a reward from you.

古文：再三不受，魏主不许。
现代文：一再辞让不接受，文成帝不答应。
English: Repeatedly refusing to accept concessions, Emperor Wencheng did not agree.

古文：丽曰： 臣父奉事先朝，忠勤著效。
现代文：陆丽只好说： 臣下的父亲事奉先帝，忠厚、勤奋，因此在那时享有很高的声誉。
English: Lu Li had to say: The father of the subject served the former emperor, was loyal and diligent, and therefore enjoyed a high reputation at that time.

古文：今年逼桑榆，愿以臣爵授之。 
现代文：如今他已进入桑榆之年，我愿意把我的爵位让给他。 
English: Now that he has entered the year of the mulberry, I am willing to give him my title.

古文：帝曰： 朕为天下主，岂不能使卿父子为二王邪！ 
现代文：拓跋浚说： 朕身为国家的主宰，难道不能让你们父子二人都封为王爵吗？ 
English: Tuobaojun said, "As the ruler of the country, can't I have both of you, father and son, knighted?"

古文：戊午，进其父建业公俟爵为东平王。
现代文：戊午，封赐陆丽的父亲、建业公陆俟为东平王。
English: In Wu Wu, Lu Li's father, Jianye Gong Lu Yao, was given the title of Dongping King.

古文：又命丽妻为妃，复其子孙。丽力辞不受，帝益嘉之。
现代文：拓跋浚又封赐陆丽的妻子为王妃，免除陆丽子孙们的田赋捐税，陆丽竭力推辞，不肯接受。文成帝对他越发嘉许。
English: Tuobaozhun also granted Lu Li's wife the title of princess and exempted Lu Li's children and grandchildren from paying land tax. Lu Li tried her best to refuse and refused to accept. Emperor Wencheng praised him even more.

古文：以东安公刘尼为尚书仆射，西平公源贺为征北将军，并进爵为王。
现代文：拓跋浚任命东安公刘尼为尚书仆射，西平公源贺为征北将军，二人同时被晋升为王爵。
English: Tuoba Jun appointed Dong'an Gong Liu Ni as Shang Shuxu Pu Ya and Xiping Gong Yuan He as General of the Northern Expedition, both of whom were simultaneously promoted to the rank of prince.

古文：帝班赐群臣，谓源贺曰： 卿任意取之。 
现代文：文成帝又按照各个官员的功劳大小，依次封赏，对源贺说： 你喜欢什么就可以拿什么。 
English: Emperor Wencheng also rewarded the officials according to their merits, saying to Genga, "You can take whatever you like."

古文：贺辞曰： 南北未宾，府库不可虚也。 
现代文：源贺辞谢说： 我们南面和北面的敌人还没被平定，我们的国库不能空了。 
English: "Our enemies to the south and north have not yet been subdued, and our treasury cannot be empty," said Geng He Jiexie.

古文：固与之，乃取戎马一匹。
现代文：但拓跋浚还是坚持送给他点儿什么，源贺只好取了一匹战马。
English: However, Tuobaozhun still insisted on giving him something, so Genga had to take a war horse.

古文：高宗之立也，高允预其谋，陆丽等皆受重赏，而不及允，允终身不言。
现代文：拓跋浚能够登上王位，高允也参预了谋划。陆丽等人都受到了重赏，只有高允没有得到，而高允本人也终身没有吐露这件事。
English: Tuobaozhong was able to ascend to the throne, and Gao Yun also participated in the pre-planning. Lu Li and others were rewarded, only Gao Yun did not get it, and Gao Yun himself did not reveal this matter for life.

古文：甲子，周忸坐事赐死。
现代文：甲子，拓跋周忸因罪，被命令自杀。
English: One son, Tuoba Zhouqi, was ordered to commit suicide for his crime.

古文：时魏法深峻，源贺奏： 谋反之家，男子十三以下本不预谋者，宜免死没官。 
现代文：当时，北魏刑法非常严酷，源贺就奏请说： 造反叛乱者的家属，男子在十三岁以下没有参加谋反的，应该免除死刑，交给官府当奴隶。 
English: At that time, the criminal law of the Northern Wei Dynasty was very harsh, and Geng He wrote a petition saying: The families of the rebels, men under the age of thirteen who did not participate in the rebellion, should be exempted from the death penalty and handed over to the government as slaves.

古文：从之。
现代文：拓跋浚批准了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：江夏王义恭还朝。
现代文：刘宋江夏王刘义恭从盱眙返回建康。
English: Liu Songjiang Xia Wang Liu Yigong returned to Jiankang from Handan.

古文：辛未，以义恭为大将军、南徐州刺史，录尚书如故。
现代文：辛未，文帝任命刘义恭为大将军、南徐州刺史，仍然保留他的录尚书之职。
English: In Xinwei, Emperor Wen appointed Liu Yigong as the general, the history of South Xuzhou, and still retained his position as the recorder.

古文：初，魏入中原，用《景初历》，世祖克沮渠氏，得赵匪攵《玄始历》，时人以为密，是岁，始行之。
现代文：当初，北魏入侵中原时，使用《景初历》。太武帝战胜北凉沮渠氏后，得到赵所著的《玄始历》，当时人们认为很精密。
English: At first, when the Northern Wei Dynasty invaded the Central Plains, they used the "Jingchuan Calendar." After the victory of the Taiwu Emperor over the Beilang Deshu Clan, they obtained the "Xuanshi Calendar" written by Zhao, which was considered to be very precise at the time.

