古文：王生李自良李令绪裴少尹
现代文：王生李自良李令绪裴少尹
English: Wang ShengLi ZiliangLi LingxuPei ShaoYin

古文：王生
现代文：王生
English: Wang Sheng

古文：杭州有王生者，建中初，辞亲之上国。
现代文：杭州有个王生，唐德宗建中初年，辞别亲人到京城去，清理一下旧产业。
English: There is a Wang Sheng in Hangzhou. In the first year of Tang Dezong Jian Middle School, he said goodbye to his relatives and went to Beijing to clean up the old industry.

古文：收拾旧业，将投于亲知，求一官耳。
现代文：准备投奔亲属和好朋友，谋一个官职。
English: He was ready to join his relatives and friends and seek a government post.

古文：行至圃田，下道，寻访外家旧庄。
现代文：走到一个果园，又往下走，寻访外祖父家的旧庄院。
English: I walked to an orchard and then down to visit my grandfather's old farmhouse.

古文：日晚，柏林中见二野狐倚树如人立，手执一黄纸文书，相对言笑，旁若无人。
现代文：天黑了，在柏树林中看见两只野狐狸倚着树象人似的站着，手拿一本黄纸书，面对面地说笑，一付旁若无人的样子。
English: It was getting dark, and in the cypress forest I saw two wild foxes leaning against a tree, standing like humans, holding a yellow paper book in their hands, talking and laughing face to face, as if there were no one around.

古文：生乃叱之，不为变动。
现代文：王生就呵叱它们，它们也不理睬。
English: Wang Sheng scolded them, but they ignored him.

古文：生乃取弹，因引满弹之，且中其执书者之目，二狐遗书而走。
现代文：王生就拿出弹弓，拉满了用弹射它们，并且射中了那个拿着书的狐狸眼睛，二只狐狸扔下书跑了。
English: Wang Sheng took out a slingshot, pulled out a full slingshot and ejected them, and shot the fox holding the book in the eye. The two foxes dropped the book and ran away.

古文：王生遽往，得其书，才一两纸，文字类梵书而莫究识，遂缄于书袋中而去。
现代文：王生急忙跑过去，得到了那本书，书才一两张纸，书上文字类似梵文没有人能懂，就放到书袋中离开了。
English: Wang Sheng hurried over and got the book. The book was only one or two sheets of paper, and the text on the book was similar to Sanskrit, which no one could understand. He put it in his book bag and left.

古文：其夕，宿于前店，因话于主人。
现代文：那天晚上，就在前面的客店住下，并向店主人说了这件事。
English: That night, I stayed at the inn in front of it and told the owner about it.

古文：方讶其事，忽有一人携装来宿，眼疾之甚，若不可忍，而语言分明，闻王之言曰： 大是异事，如何得见其书？ 
现代文：正在惊讶的时候，忽然有一个人带着行装来住宿，眼睛病得很厉害，象是不能忍受的样子，可是话语很清楚，听了王生的话说： 是件大怪事，怎样才能看看那本书呢？ 
English: While he was being surprised, a man suddenly came to stay with luggage. His eyes were very sick, as if it was unbearable, but the words were very clear. After listening to Wang Sheng's words, he said: "It's a very strange thing, how can I see that book?"

古文：王生方将出书，主人见患眼者一尾垂下床，因谓生曰： 此狐也。 
现代文：王生正要拿出书来，店主人看见得眼病的人一条尾巴垂到床下，因此对王生说： 这人是个狐狸。 
English: Wang Sheng was about to take out a book when the shopkeeper saw a man with an eye disease with his tail hanging under the bed, so he said to Wang Sheng: This man is a fox.

古文：王生遽收书于怀中，以手摸刀逐之，则化为狐而走。
现代文：王生急忙把书收藏在怀里，用手摸了把刀追赶他，他变成狐狸跑了。
English: Wang Sheng hurriedly gathered the book in his arms and ran after him with a knife in his hand. He turned into a fox and ran away.

古文：一更后，复有人扣门，王生心动曰： 此度更来，当与刀箭敌汝矣。 
现代文：一更后，又有人敲门，王生心中一动说： 这回是第二次来，应当用刀箭对付你。 
English: After a while, someone knocked on the door again, and Wang Sheng said in his heart: This is the second time, you should be dealt with with swords and arrows.

古文：其人隔门曰： 尔若不还我文书，后无悔也！ 
现代文：那人隔着门说： 你如果不还给我书，会后悔的。 
English: The man said through the door: If you don't give me back my book, you'll regret it.

古文：自是更无消息。
现代文：从此再也没有消息了。
English: There has been no news since.

古文：王生秘其书，缄滕甚密。
现代文：王生觉得那本书很神秘，捆藏得很严密。
English: Wang Sheng felt that the book was very mysterious and was tightly bound.

古文：行至都下，以求官伺谒之事，期方赊缓，即乃典贴旧业田园，卜居近坊，为生生之计。
现代文：到了京城，因为谋取官职要伺机求人，时间就宽松了，于是去典卖了旧产业和田园，选了个靠近店铺的地方住下，做长久打算。
English: When I arrived in the capital, since I had to wait for the right time to find someone to run for public office, I had more time. So I sold my old property and farmland, chose a place to live close to the store, and made long-term plans.

古文：月余，有一僮自杭州而至，可入门，手执凶王生迎而问之，则生已丁家难已数日，闻之恸哭。
现代文：一个多月后，有个僮仆从杭州穿着丧服来了，手里拿着报丧的信。王生迎上去问那个僮仆，王生遭遇家庭灾难已经好几天了，听说后痛哭起来。
English: More than a month later, a servant came from Hangzhou wearing mourning clothes and holding a letter announcing the funeral. Wang Sheng went up to ask the servant. It had been several days since Wang Sheng had suffered a family disaster. After hearing this, he burst into tears.

古文：生因视其书，则母之手字云： 吾本家秦，不愿葬于外地。今江东田地物业，不可分毫破除，但都下之业，可一切处置，以资丧事。
现代文：王生再看那封信，是母亲的手笔，写道： 我家本来住在秦地，不愿意埋葬在别的地方，现在江东的田地和家产，不能随便乱动，但是京城里的家产，可一切由你处置，用来资助丧事。
English: Wang Sheng read the letter again, it was his mother's handwriting, and wrote: My family originally lived in Qin, and I don't want to be buried anywhere else. Now the fields and family property in the east of the river can't be moved at will, but the family property in the capital can be disposed of by you and used to fund the funeral.

古文：备具皆毕，然后自来迎接。 
现代文：一切都准备完毕，再亲自来迎接。 
English: Once everything is ready, come and meet us in person.

古文：王生乃尽货田宅，不候善价，得其资，备涂刍之礼，无所欠少。
现代文：王生就把田园住宅，不等有好价钱，全都卖了。卖的钱，购买办丧事用的车、马、人、物，所剩无几。
English: Wang Sheng sold all his rural residences without waiting for a good price. The money from the sale was used to buy cars, horses, people, and things for the funeral. There was not much left.

古文：既而复篮舁东下，以迎灵舆。
现代文：接着又坐着竹轿向东走，去迎接送灵的队伍。
English: Next, they walked eastward in a bamboo sedan to meet the procession of mourners.

古文：及至扬州，遥见一船子，上有数人，皆喜笑歌唱。渐近视之，则皆王生之家人也。意尚谓其家货之，今属他人矣。
现代文：等到了扬州，远远地看见一条小船，船上有几个人，都在高兴地唱歌，慢慢地走近一看，全是王生的家仆，还以为他们被王生家卖了，现在已经属于别人家的仆人了。
English: When he arrived in Yangzhou, he saw a small boat in the distance. There were several people on board, all singing happily. As he slowly approached, he saw that they were all Wang Sheng's servants. He thought they had been sold by Wang Sheng's family and were now servants belonging to someone else's family.

古文：须臾。又有小弟妹搴帘而出，皆彩服笑语。
现代文：不一会，又有小弟小妹们撩起门帘走出来，全都穿着彩衣服说话。
English: After a while, the little brothers and sisters came out from behind the curtain, all wearing colorful clothes and talking.

古文：惊怪之际，则其家人船上惊呼，又曰： 郎君来矣，是何服饰之异也？ 
现代文：正在吃惊奇怪的时候，就听他的家人在船上吃惊地喊叫，又说： 公子来了，他为什么穿的衣很特别呢。 
English: While he was being surprised and puzzled, he heard his family on the boat call out in surprise, saying: "The prince has arrived, why is he wearing a very special dress?"

古文：王生潜令人问之，乃见其母惊出。生遽毁其衰绖，行拜而前。母迎而问之，其母骇曰： 安得此理？ 
现代文：王生暗中派人问家人，就看见的母亲吃惊地走出来，王生立刻毁掉了孝服，一边走一边行礼走上前去，母亲迎着他问是怎么回事，吃惊地说： 哪有这个道理 。
English: Wang Sheng secretly sent someone to ask his family members, and his mother, who saw this, came out in surprise. Wang Sheng immediately destroyed his filial piety robe and walked forward, bowing as he went. His mother met him and asked what was going on, saying in surprise, "What's the reason for this?"

古文：王生乃出母送遗书，乃一张空纸耳。
现代文：王生就取出母亲送来的遗书，只是一张白纸罢了。
English: Wang Sheng took out the suicide note sent by his mother. It was just a blank piece of paper.

古文：母又曰： 吾所以来此者，前月得汝书云，近得一官，令吾尽货江东之产，为入京之计。
现代文：他母亲又说： 我之所以来到这里，是因上个月收到你的信，说是近来谋得一个官职，让我把江东的产业全卖了，做好入京的打算，现在到哪里去呢？ 
English: His mother also said: I came here because I received your letter last month, saying that I had recently obtained a government post, that I had sold all my properties in the eastern part of the province, and that I had made plans to move to Beijing. Where should I go now?

古文：今无可归矣。 及母出王生所寄之书，又一空纸耳。王生遂发使入京，尽毁其凶丧之具。
现代文：等母亲取出王生寄的信，又是一张白纸。王生于是派人进京，把那些办丧事用的东西全毁掉。
English: When his mother took out the letter sent by Wang Sheng, it was just another piece of blank paper. Wang Sheng then sent someone to Beijing to destroy everything that was used for the funeral.

古文：因鸠集余资，自淮却扶侍，且往江东。所有十无一二，才得数间屋，至以庇风雨而已。
现代文：接着又把剩余的钱凑起来，从淮水往回走，搀扶侍候着母亲，先到江东去，剩下的钱只有十分之一二了，只够买几间屋子，来遮庇风雨罢了。
English: Then he gathered up the remaining money, walked back from Huai Shui, waited for his mother, and first went to the east of the river. The remaining money was only 1/2. It was only enough to buy a few houses to shelter from the wind and rain.

古文：有弟一人，别且数岁，一旦忽至，见其家道败落，因征其由。
现代文：王生有个弟弟，分别已经好几年，一天早晨忽然来了，看见他家道败落，因而问败落的原因，王生把事情的经过全说了。
English: Wang Sheng had a younger brother who had been separated from him for several years. One morning, he suddenly arrived, saw his family's downfall, and asked the reason for the downfall. Wang Sheng told the whole story.

古文：王生具话本末，又述妖狐事，曰： 但应以此为祸耳。 
现代文：又说了妖狐的事，说： 就是因此造成的灾祸。 他弟弟吃惊地叹着气。
English: He also talked about the fox and said, "That's what caused the disaster," and his younger brother sighed in surprise.

古文：其弟惊嗟，因出妖狐之书以示之。其弟才执其书，退而置于怀中，曰： 今日还我天书。 
现代文：于是取出妖狐的书给他看，他弟弟刚拿到书，退了一步把书放在怀中，说： 到今天才还我的天书。 
English: His brother had just got the book when he took a step back, put the book in his arms, and said, "I didn't return my heavenly book until today."

古文：言毕，乃化作一狐而去。
现代文：说完，就变成一只狐狸跑了。
English: After saying this, he turned into a fox and ran away.

古文：李自良
现代文：李自良
English: Li Ziliang

古文：唐李自良少在两河间，落拓不事生业，好鹰鸟，常竭囊货，为韝绁之用。
现代文：唐代的李自良少年时在两河之间，游游荡荡，不从事谋生的事业。喜欢玩猎鹰，常常把身上的钱全拿出来，用来购买皮制臂套和架鹰牵犬的什物。
English: When Li Ziliang was a young boy in the Tang Dynasty, he wandered between the two rivers and did not engage in the business of earning a living. He liked to play with falcons, and often took all the money out of his body to buy leather arm covers and things to hold eagles and dogs.

古文：马燧之镇太原也，募以能鹰犬从禽者，自良即诣军门，自上陈。
现代文：马燧镇守太原时，招募那些能指挥鹰犬捉野兽的人，李自良就自己来到军门，自己介绍自己。
English: When Maju Town was guarding Taiyuan, recruiting those who could command eagles and dogs to catch wild beasts, Li Ziliang came to the military gate himself and introduced himself.

古文：自良质状骁健，燧一见悦之，置于左右，每呼鹰逐兽，未尝不惬心快意焉。
现代文：李自良的体形骁勇健壮，马燧一看见就喜欢他，把他留在身边，每当他招呼猎鹰追赶野兽时，无不令马燧心情舒畅痛快。
English: Li Ziliang's body shape is brave and robust. Ma Jun liked him as soon as he saw him and kept him by his side. Whenever he called the falcon to chase the beast, Ma Jun's mood was always comfortable and happy.

古文：数年之间，累职至牙门大将。
现代文：几年时间，积累提升为牙门大将军。
English: In a few years' time, he was promoted to the position of Chief Dentist.

古文：因从禽、纵鹰逐一狐，狐挺入古圹中，鹰相随之。
现代文：因为追逐禽兽，放鹰追赶一只狐狸，狐狸钻进古坟里去。鹰也随着飞进去。
English: Because of chasing animals, the eagle chased a fox, and the fox went into the ancient tomb. The eagle also flew in.

古文：自良即下马，乘势跳入圹中。
现代文：李自良就下马，跟着跳进坟里去。
English: Li Ziliang dismounted and jumped into the grave.

古文：深三丈许，其间朗明如烛，见砖塌上有坏棺，复有一道士长尺余，执两纸文书立于棺上。
现代文：坟有三丈多深，坟里明朗得象点了蜡烛，只见砖榻上有个损坏了的棺材，又有一个道士高一尺多，拿着两张纸的文书站在棺材上。
English: The grave is as deep as it is high. The grave is as clear as if a candle had been lit. All I can see is a damaged coffin on a brick bed, and another Taoist priest, more than a foot tall, standing on the coffin holding two pieces of paper.

古文：自良因掣得文书，不复有他物矣，遂臂鹰而出。
现代文：李自良顺手抽出文书，不再有别的东西了，就用胳膊架着猎鹰出了古坟。
English: Li Ziliang smoothly pulled out the document, there was nothing else left, and he used his arm to carry the falcon out of the ancient tomb.

古文：道士随呼曰： 幸留文书，当有厚报。 
现代文：那个道士跟着喊道： 请留下文书，我会优厚地报答你。 
English: The Taoist then shouted, "Please leave the document, I will reward you generously."

古文：自良不应，乃视之，其字皆古篆，人莫之识。
现代文：李自良不应声。看那文书，上面写的全是古篆字，没有人能认识。
English: Li Ziliang did not respond. Look at that document, it is all written in ancient Chinese characters, which no one can recognize.

古文：明旦，有一道士，仪状风雅，诣自良。
现代文：第二天早晨，有一个道士，仪表形象潇洒儒雅，来见李自良。
English: The next morning, a Taoist monk with a dashing and elegant appearance came to see Li Ziliang.

古文：自良曰： 仙师何所？ 
现代文：李自良说： 仙师从哪里来？ 
English: Li Ziliang said: Where did the Immortal Master come from?

古文：道士曰： 某非世人，以将军昨日逼夺天符也，此非将军所宜有，若见还，必有重报。 
现代文：道士说： 我不是世上的人，是因为将军昨天强夺了天书才来的，这文书不是将军应当有的东西，如果能还给我，一定重重地报答你。 
English: The moralist said, "I am not a man of this world. I came here because the general took the heavenly book by force yesterday. This document is not something the general should have. If you can return it to me, I will surely reward you greatly."

古文：自良固不与，道士因屏左右曰： 将军裨将耳，某能三年内，致本军政，无乃极所愿乎？ 
现代文：李自良坚持不给。道士接着屏退了他身边的人说： 将军只是个副将罢了，我能在三年之内，让你当上本地的军政长官，这不是你的最大愿望吗？ 
English: Li Ziliang insisted that he would not give in. The Taoist priest then fended off the people around him and said: The general is just a vice-general. I can make you the local military and political chief within three years. Isn't that your greatest wish?

古文：自良曰： 诚如此愿，亦未可信，如何？ 
现代文：李自良说： 我真的能有这个愿望，也不可信，怎样才能使我相信呢？ 
English: Li Ziliang said: I really can have this wish, but I can't believe it. How can I make myself believe it?

古文：道士即超然奋身，上腾空中。俄有仙人绛节，玉童白鹤，徘徊空际，以迎接之。须臾复下，谓自良曰： 可不见乎？
现代文：道士身子轻轻地一用力，就飞到空中，一会儿有个仙人拿着红色的符节，玉童和白鹤，在天上飞来飞去地迎接道士，一会儿就下来了，对李自良说： 你没见吗？
English: The Taoist's body gently rose with one effort and flew into the air. A moment later, there was a fairy holding red symbols, a ball boy and a white crane, flying around in the sky to meet the Taoist. A moment later, he came down and said to Li Ziliang, "Don't you see?

古文：此岂是妄言者耶？ 
现代文：这难道是说大话的人做得到的？ 
English: Is that what a big talker can do?

古文：自良遂再拜，持文书归之。
现代文：李自良拜了又拜，拿出文书还给他。
English: Li Ziliang bowed again and again, took out the document and gave it back to him.

古文：道士喜曰： 将军果有福祚，后年九月内，当如约矣。 
现代文：道士高兴地说： 将军果然是个有福气的人，后年的九月，就能实现我的预约了。 
English: The moralist said happily, "The general is indeed a blessed man. In September of the following year, I will be able to fulfill my appointment."

古文：于时贞元二年也。至四年秋，马燧入觐，太原耆旧有功大将，官秩崇高者，十余人从焉，自良职最卑。
现代文：这时是贞元第二年，到贞元第四年的秋天，马燧进京见皇上，太原那些年高而久负声望的大将军等官位崇高的人，有十多人跟着进京，李自良官职最低。
English: At this time, it was the second year of the Zhengyuan era, and by the autumn of the fourth year of the Zhengyuan era, Ma Jun entered Beijing to see the emperor. Taiyuan's generals, who were old and had long-standing prestige, and other high-ranking officials, more than ten people followed him to Beijing, and Li Ziliang had the lowest official position.

古文：上问： 太原北门重镇，谁可代卿者？ 
现代文：皇上问： 太原是国家北大门的重要城镇，谁能够代替你？ 
English: The emperor asked: Taiyuan is an important town at the north gate of the country. Who can replace you?

古文：燧昏然不省，唯记自良名氏，乃奏曰： 李自良可。 
现代文：马燧昏然不清醒，只记住了李自良的姓名，就上奏说： 李自良可以代替。 
English: Dazed and not lucid, Ma Yan only remembered Li Ziliang's name, and said: Li Ziliang can be replaced.

古文：上曰： 太原将校，当有耆旧功勋者。自良后辈，素所未闻，卿更思量。 
现代文：皇上说： 太原的将官，应当有年高而久负声望有功勋的人，李自良是个晚辈，从来就没听说过他，你再考虑考虑。 
English: The emperor said: Taiyuan's generals should be people of seniority, long-standing reputation, and meritorious service. Li Ziliang is a junior, I have never heard of him, please reconsider.

古文：燧仓卒不知所对，又曰： 以臣所见，非自良莫可。 
现代文：马燧匆忙地不知怎么说，又说： 以我的看法，不是李自良，谁也不行。 
English: In a hurry and not knowing what to say, Ma Jun said, "In my opinion, not Li Ziliang, anyone can do it.

古文：如是者再三，上亦未之许。
现代文：象这样说了二三次，皇上也没应许他。
English: After saying this two or three times, the Emperor did not promise him anything.

古文：燧出见诸将，愧汗洽背。私誓其心，后必荐其年德最高者。
现代文：马燧出来见到各位将军，惭愧得汗流浃背，私下里在心中发誓，以后一定推荐那年令品德最高的人。
English: Ma Wei came out to meet the generals, sweating with shame, and privately swore in his heart that he would definitely recommend the person with the highest moral character that year.

古文：明日复问： 竟谁可代卿？ 
现代文：第二天又问： 究竟谁能代替你？ 
English: The next day he asked again: Who exactly could replace you?

古文：燧依前昏迷，唯记举自良。
现代文：马燧象以前一样地昏迷，只记得推举李自良。
English: As before, Ma Ying fell into a coma and only remembered to nominate Li Ziliang.

古文：上曰： 当俟议定于宰相耳。 
现代文：皇上说： 等我和宰相商议之后再确定吧。 
English: The emperor said, "Let's wait until I have a discussion with the prime minister before we decide."

古文：他日宰相入对，上问马燧之将孰贤，宰相愕然，不能知其余，亦皆以自良对之。乃拜工部尚书，太原节度使也。
现代文：又一天，宰相进宫去答对，皇上问马燧手下的将军谁有才能，宰相愣了，记不住别的人，也用李自良的名字来回答皇上，这才任命李自良担任工部尚书、太原节度使的职务。
English: Another day, the prime minister went to the palace to answer correctly. The emperor asked the general under Ma Jun who had talent. The prime minister froze and could not remember anyone else. He also answered the emperor with the name of Li Ziliang. It was only then that Li Ziliang was appointed to the post of Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry and the post of Taiyuan Festival envoy.

古文：李令绪
现代文：李令绪
English: Li Lingxu

古文：李令绪即兵部侍郎李纾堂兄。
现代文：李令绪是兵部侍郎李纾的堂兄，他的叔叔被委任江夏县的县丞，李令绪因而去看望叔叔。
English: Li Lingxu was the cousin of Li Xuan, an attendant of the military department. His uncle was appointed the county magistrate of Jiangxia County, so Li Lingxu went to visit his uncle.

古文：其叔选授江夏县丞，令绪因往觐叔，及至坐久，门人报云： 某小娘子使家人传语。 唤入，见一婢甚有姿态，云： 娘子参拜兄嫂。 
现代文：等到了叔叔家，坐了很久，有个守门人先报告说： 有个小娘子派仆人来传话。 叫仆人进来，一看是个很漂亮的女仆，女仆说： 娘子让我来参拜哥哥和嫂子。 
English: After waiting at his uncle's house for a long time, a doorkeeper first reported: "A little girl sent a servant to deliver a message. She called the servant in, and it turned out to be a very beautiful maid. The maid said: "My daughter asked me to visit her brother and sister-in-law.

古文：且得令绪远到，丞妻亦传语云： 娘子能来此看儿侄否？ 
现代文：正好李令绪从远方来，县丞的妻子也传话说： 你家娘子能来这里看看侄儿吗？ 
English: Just as Li Lingxu came from afar, the wife of the county magistrate also sent a message saying: Can your daughter come here to see her nephew?

古文：又云： 妹有何饮食，可致之。 
现代文：又说： 妹妹那里有什么好吃的，可以带一点来。 
English: He also said, "My sister has some yakitori, you can bring some."

古文：婢去后，其叔谓令绪曰： 汝知乎，吾与一狐知闻逾年矣。 
现代文：女仆走后，叔叔对李令绪说： 你知道吗？我和一只狐狸交朋友已经一年多了。 
English: After the maid left, the uncle said to Li Lingxu: Do you know? I have been friends with a fox for more than a year.

古文：须臾，使人赍大食器至。黄衫奴舁，并向来传语婢同到，云： 娘子续来。 
现代文：不一会，派人送来一个大食器，由穿黄衫的仆人抬着，与刚才来传话的女仆一块来了，女仆说： 我家娘子一会儿就来。 
English: A moment later, someone sent for a large dish, carried by a servant in a yellow shirt, who came with the maid who had just come to deliver a message. The maid said, "My daughter will be here in a moment."

古文：俄顷间，乘四镮金饰舆，仆从二十余人至门，丞妻出迎。
现代文：一会儿，坐着装饰着四个金环的轿子，带着二十多个仆人来到，县丞的妻子出去迎接。
English: After a while, a sedan chair adorned with four gold rings arrived with more than twenty servants, and the wife of the county magistrate went out to greet them.

古文：见一妇人，年可三十余，双梳云髻，光彩可鉴。婢等皆以罗绮，异香满宅。
现代文：就见一个妇女，年龄大约三十多岁，梳了一对高耸的发髻，能够照出光彩来，仆人都穿着丝绸衣服，满屋子都是奇异的香味，令绪躲避到屋里去。
English: He saw a woman, about thirty years of age, combing a pair of towering hair buns, able to shine, the servants were wearing silk clothes, the house was full of strange scents, and he had to hide in the house.

古文：令绪避入，其妇升堂坐讫，谓丞妻曰： 令绪既是子侄，何不出来？ 
现代文：那妇女走进堂屋坐下以后，对县丞的妻子说： 李令绪既然是侄儿，为什么不出来。 
English: After the woman entered the hall and sat down, she said to the wife of the county magistrate: Since Li Lingxu is a nephew, why don't you come out?

古文：令绪闻之，遂出拜。
现代文：李令绪听了，就出来拜见。
English: After listening to Li Lingxu, he came out to meet him.

古文：谓曰： 我侄真士人君子之风。 
现代文：她对李令绪说： 我的侄儿真是读过书的正人君子。 
English: She said to Li Lingxu, "My nephew is a real gentleman who has read books.

古文：坐良久，谓令绪曰： 观君甚长厚，心怀中应有急难于众人。 
现代文：坐了很久，对李令绪说： 看你很是老成忠厚，你心里好象有急难的事向人们说。 
English: After sitting for a long time, he said to Li Lingxu: You are very loyal. It seems that you have something urgent to say to people.

古文：令绪亦知其故。
现代文：李令绪也明白其中缘故。
English: Li Lingxu also understands the reasons for this.

古文：谈话尽日辞去。后数来，每至皆有珍馔。
现代文：谈了一整天话才离开，以后又多次来，每次都带来珍贵的菜肴。
English: We talked for a whole day before leaving, and then came back several times, each time bringing precious dishes.

古文：经半年，令绪拟归东洛，其姑遂言： 此度阿姑得令绪心矣。阿姑缘有厄，拟随令绪到东洛，可否？ 
现代文：过了半年，李令绪打算回东洛去，他的姑姑就说： 这次我懂得令绪的心情了，我因为命中有难，打算随你到东洛去，可以吗？ 
English: After half a year, Li Lingxu planned to go back to Dongluo, and his aunt said, "This time, I understand Lingxu's mood. Because of the difficulties in my life, I plan to follow you to Dongluo. Is that okay?"

古文：令绪惊云： 行李贫迫，要致车乘，计无所出。 
现代文：李令绪吃惊地说： 我的行囊很少，要想坐车，我可没办法。 
English: Surprised, Li Lingxu said, "I don't have much luggage. If I want to take a bus, I can't do it.

古文：又云： 但许，阿姑家自假车乘，只将女子两人，并向来所使婢金花去。阿姑事，令绪应知，不必言也。
现代文：她又说： 只要答应，姑姑可以自己家借车坐。只带两个女人，和一向使唤的女仆金花去，我的事，你应当明白，就不必说了。
English: She also said, "As long as you agree, my aunt can borrow a car from her own home and go. Just take two women, and Jinhua, the maid she has always used. You should understand my business, so there is no need to talk about it."

古文：但空一衣笼，令逐驼家人，每至关津店家，即略开笼，阿姑暂过歇了，开笼自然出行，岂不易乎？ 
现代文：只要一个空的衣箱，叫赶骆驼仆人，每当到了关口码头和旅店，就略微打开箱子，我暂时歇一下，自然打开箱子出来走走，难道不是很容易吗？ 
English: Isn't it easy to just have an empty suitcase, call a camel driver, and every time I get to the ferry terminal and the hotel, I open the suitcase slightly, take a break, open the suitcase naturally, and go out for a walk?

古文：令绪许诺。
现代文：李令绪答应了。
English: Li Lingxu agreed.

古文：及发，开笼。见三四黑影入笼中，出入不失前约。
现代文：等到出发，打开箱子，只看见三四个黑影进入箱里，一路上出出入入不违犯先前的约定。
English: Wait until departure, open the box, only see three or four black shadows enter the box, along the way in and out without violating the previous agreement.

古文：至东都，将到宅，令绪云： 何处可安置？ 
现代文：到了东都，快到家了，李令绪说： 把阿姑安置到什么地方？ 
English: After arriving in Dongdu and getting close to home, Li Lingxu said, "Where should I put Auntie?"

古文：金花云： 娘子要于仓中甚便。 
现代文：金花说： 娘子说在仓房里就很方便。 
English: Jinhua said: My daughter said that it was very convenient to grow up in a warehouse.

古文：令绪即扫洒仓，密为都置，唯逐驼奴知之，余家人莫有知者。
现代文：李令绪就洒扫仓房，秘密地安置好，唯有赶骆驼的仆人知道这事，其他的仆人没有人知道。
English: Li Lingxu then swept the storeroom and secretly installed it. Only the servants who drove the camels knew about it, and no one else knew.

古文：每有所要，金花即自来取之，阿姑时时一见。
现代文：每次要东西，金花就亲自来取，阿姑也不时地出现一次。
English: Every time I ask for something, Jinhua comes to pick it up in person, and my aunt also appears from time to time.

古文：后数月云： 厄已过矣，拟去。 
现代文：过了几个月说： 灾难已经过去了，打算离开。 
English: After a few months, they said: the disaster has passed, and they plan to leave.

古文：令绪问云： 欲往何处？ 
现代文：李令绪说： 准备到什么地方。 
English: Li Lingxu said, "Prepare to go somewhere."

古文：阿姑云： 胡璿除豫州刺史，缘二女成长，须有匹配，今与渠处置。 
现代文：阿姑说： 胡璿担任豫州刺史，因为二个女儿已长大成人，须要婚配，现在去给他操办这件事。 
English: The aunt said: Hu Yao is in charge of the history of Yuzhou, because his two daughters have grown up and want to get married. Now go and handle this matter for him.

古文：令绪明年合格，临欲选，家贫无计，乃往豫州。
现代文：李令绪第二年合乎规定，临去候选时，家里穷没有办法，就到豫州去。
English: Li Lingxu met the requirements in the second year. When he was about to become a candidate, his poor family had no choice but to go to Yuzhou.

古文：及入境，见榜云： 我单门孤立，亦无亲表，恐有擅托亲故，妄索供拟。即获时申报，必当科断。 
现代文：快进入豫州时，看一个榜文说： 我孤伶伶地一个人安家立业，也没有亲戚，唯恐有那假托亲朋故友，前来索要供给，捉到了及时报上来，一定按律法判刑。 
English: When he was about to enter Yuzhou, he read a sample passage and said: I am a lone person who has settled down and established a business, and I have no relatives. I am afraid that someone will come to ask for supplies under the guise of relatives, friends and old friends. If they are caught and reported in time, they will be sentenced according to the law.

古文：往来商旅，皆传胡使君清白，干谒者绝矣。
现代文：来来往往的商人和旅客，都传说胡使君的清廉，前来托人求情的就没有了。
English: Merchants and travelers who come and go often have a legend about Hu Zijun's incorruptibility, and there will be no more coming to ask for mercy.

古文：令绪以此惧，进退久之，不获已。乃潜入豫州，见有人参谒，亦无所得。
现代文：李令绪因此害怕，长久的犹豫不绝，就暗中进豫州，看见有那拜见求情的人，也没得到什么。
English: Li Lingxu was afraid of this and hesitated for a long time, so he secretly went to Yuzhou to see if there was anyone who would intercede, but he did not get anything.

古文：令绪便投刺，使君即时引入，一见极喜，如故人。
现代文：令绪就递上名片，使君立即让他进去。一见面非常高兴，象老朋友一样。
English: Reiko handed him her business card, and he immediately let her in. He was very happy to see her, like an old friend.

古文：云： 虽未奉见，知公有急难，久伫光仪，来何晚也！ 
现代文：说： 虽然没有见过面，知道你有急难的事，早就恭候你的大驾，来得为什么这么晚。 
English: He said, "Although I have never met you, I know that you are in a hurry, and I have been waiting for you for a long time. Why did you come so late?"

古文：即授馆，供给颇厚。一州云： 自使君到，未曾有如此。 
现代文：就安排馆所，供给很优厚，一州的人都说： 自从使君到这里任职以来，不曾有过这样的事 。
English: As to the arrangement of the embassies, the provision was very generous, and the people of one state said: Since the envoy came here to serve, there has never been such a thing.

古文：每日入宅欢宴，但论时事，亦不言他。
现代文：每天都进宅去欢乐地参加宴会，只谈论时事，也不说别的。
English: Every day they went into the house to a merry banquet, and talked of nothing but current events.

古文：经月余，令绪告别，璿云： 即与处置路粮，充选时之费。 
现代文：过了一个多月，李令绪告别。胡璿说： 立即给你筹集资金，当做是参加考试的费用。 
English: After more than a month, Li Lingxu said goodbye. Hu Yao said: "I will immediately raise funds for you, which will be used as the fee for taking the exam."

古文：便集县令曰： 璿自到州，不曾有亲故扰。
现代文：就召集县令说： 我自从到豫州，不曾有亲朋故友来打扰。
English: He summoned the county magistrate and said, "Since I came to Yuzhou, I have never been disturbed by relatives, friends or old friends.

古文：李令绪天下俊秀，某平生永慕，奉昨一见，知是丈夫，以此重之。诸公合见耳。
现代文：李令绪是天下的少见的优秀人才，我生平常仰慕他，昨天一见面，知道他是个大丈夫，因此敬重他，各位应当见一见他。
English: Li Lingxu is a rare outstanding talent in the world. I usually admire him. As soon as I met him yesterday, I knew he was a good person, so I respect him. You should meet him.

古文：今请赴选，各须与致粮食，无令轻尠。 
现代文：现在他要去参加考试，各位都要给他些吃用的东西，不管多少都行。 
English: Now that he's going to take the exam, you all have to give him something to eat, no matter how little.

古文：官吏素畏其威，自县令已下，赠绢无数十匹已下者。
现代文：官吏们平时就惧怕他的威严，从县令以下的官吏，赠送的绢没有几十匹以下的。
English: Officials are usually afraid of his majesty. Officials below the rank of county magistrate don't give away more than a few dozen yakitori.

古文：令绪获绢千疋，仍备行装，又留宴别。
现代文：令绪得到了千匹绢，又另准备了行李用品，又留他参加宴会来送别。
English: Lingxu was given a thousand horses and mules, his luggage was also prepared, and he was left to attend a banquet to say goodbye.

古文：令绪因出戟门，见别有一门，金花自内出云： 娘子在山亭院要相见。 
现代文：李令绪走出戟门，看见另外还有一个门，金花从里面出来说： 娘子在山亭院里请你见面。 
English: Li Lingxu walked out of the gate and saw another gate. Jinhua came out of it and said, "My daughter has invited you to meet her in the pavilion."

古文：及入，阿姑已出，喜盈颜色。曰： 岂不能待嫁二女？ 
现代文：等到进去，姑姑已经出来了，脸上笑盈盈地说： 难道不能等到二个女儿出嫁吗？ 
English: When she got inside, her aunt had already come out, smiling broadly and saying, "Can't we wait until our two daughters are married?

古文：又云： 令绪买得甘子，不与令姑，太悭也。 
现代文：又说： 令绪买了柑子，不给你姑姑吃，太小气了。 
English: He also said: Lingxu bought mandarin oranges, but refused to give them to your aunt. She was too stingy.

古文：令绪惊云： 实买得，不敢特送。 
现代文：李令绪吃惊地说： 确实买了，不敢主动送给你。 
English: Surprised, Li Lingxu said, "I did buy it, but I dare not give it to you.

古文：笑云： 此戏言耳。君所买者不堪，阿姑自有上者。 
现代文：姑姑笑着说： 这只是说笑话，你买的不好吃，姑姑自己有上等的，给你带着路上吃。 
English: My aunt laughed and said, "It's just a joke. The food you bought is not good. My aunt has the best, and she'll bring it to you to eat on the way."

古文：与令绪将去，命取之，一一皆大如拳。既别，又唤令绪回云： 时方艰难，所将绢帛行李，恐遇盗贼，为之奈何？ 
现代文：派人去拿，一个个都象拳头大小。分别后，又叫李令绪回去说： 正是时事艰难的时候，你带的丝绸行李，恐怕遇上了强盗，遇上怎么呢？ 
English: After they parted, he asked Li Lingxu to go back and say, "It is precisely when the current situation is difficult that the silk luggage you brought with you, I'm afraid, encountered a robber. What happened to it?

古文：乃曰： 借与金花将去，但有事急，一念金花，即当无事。 
现代文：又说： 让金花跟着你去，只要有急事，一念金花，就会无事。 
English: He also said, "Let Jinhua follow you. As long as there is an emergency, if you think of Jinhua, you will be fine."

古文：令绪行数日，果遇盗五十余人，令绪恐惧坠马。忽思金花，便见精骑三百余人，自山而来，军容甚盛，所持器械，光可以鉴。
现代文：李令绪走了几天，果然遇上五十多个强盗，李令绪吓得掉下马，忽然想到金花，就看见三百多个精锐骑兵，自山上下来，军队的阵容很是盛大，拿的兵器，光亮得可以照人，把盗贼全杀光了。
English: After walking for a few days, Li Lingxu met more than fifty robbers. Li Lingxu was so scared that he fell off his horse. Suddenly, he thought of the golden flowers and saw more than three hundred elite cavalrymen coming down from the mountains. The lineup of the army was very grand. The weapons they carried were so bright that they could shine on people, and they killed all the thieves.

古文：杀贼略尽，金花命骑士却掣驰，仍处分兵马好去。
现代文：金花命令骑兵飞快地退回去，把兵马安排好才离开。
English: Jinhua ordered the cavalry to quickly retreat and arrange the soldiers and horses before leaving.

古文：欲至京，路店宿，其主人女病，云是妖魅。
现代文：李令绪想到京城去，路上住店，那个店主的女儿有病，说是妖魅病。
English: Li Lingxu thought of going to Beijing, and stopped at a shop on the way. The shopkeeper's daughter was ill, and it was said to be a demonic illness.

古文：令绪问主人曰： 是何疾？ 
现代文：李令绪问店主人说： 是什么病。 
English: Li Lingxu asked the owner of the store: What is the disease?

古文：答云： 似有妖魅，历诸医术，无能暂愈。 
现代文：回答说： 好象是妖魅病，请过了好多医生术士，都不能好转。 
English: He replied, "It's like a demonic disease. I've seen many doctors and magicians, but I can't get better.

古文：令绪云： 治却何如？ 
现代文：李令绪说： 我给治好病，怎么样？ 
English: Li Lingxu said: How about I give you a good cure?

古文：主人珍重辞谢，乞相救： 但得校损，报效不轻。 
现代文：店主人频频表示感谢，请求救他女儿，只要能治好病，一定重重酬谢。
English: The shop owner frequently expressed his gratitude and asked for help to save his daughter. As long as he could cure her illness, he would be very grateful.

古文：遂念金花，须臾便至，具陈其事。
现代文：就想念金花，一会儿就到了，向她细说了这件事。
English: He missed Kanka, but soon arrived and told her all about it.

古文：略见女之病，乃云： 易也。 
现代文：金花略微看了女子的病，才说： 容易。 
English: Kanka took a brief look at the woman's illness before saying, "It's easy.

古文：遂结一坛，焚香为咒。俄顷，有一狐甚疥病，缚至坛中。金花决之一百，流血遍地，遂逐之，其女便愈。
现代文：于是搭起一座坛，烧香念咒，一会儿，有一只狐狸满身癞疮，被捆到坛上，金花宣判打它一百鞭，打得遍地是血，然后赶走了，那女子病就好了。
English: So they set up an altar, burned incense and chanted incantations, and in a little while a fox, covered with sores, was tied to the altar, sentenced to a hundred lashes, beaten until the ground was covered with blood, and then driven away. The woman's illness was cured.

古文：及到京，金花辞令绪，令绪云： 远劳相送，无可赠别。 
现代文：等到了京城，金花向李令绪告别，李令绪说： 路很远，劳动你送我，实在没有什么赠送给你的东西。 
English: When they arrived in Beijing, Jinhua bid farewell to Li Lingxu. Li Lingxu said, "It's a long way, you worked hard to send me here, and I really don't have anything to give you."

古文：乃致酒馔。饮酣谓曰： 既无形迹，亦有一言，得无难乎？ 金花曰： 有事但言。 
现代文：就备办了酒菜，喝酒喝到高兴时对她说： 既然不拘形迹了，有一句话要问，不知你会不会为难呢？ 金花说： 有事尽管说。 
English: So he prepared the food and wine, and when he had drunk it to his heart's content, he said to her, "Since you are not ashamed, there is one thing I would like to ask you. I don't know if this will be a problem for you." Jinhua said, "If you have something to say, please say it."

古文：令绪云： 愿闻阿姑家事来由也。 
现代文：李令绪说： 我想知道姑姑家事的来龙去脉。 
English: Li Lingxu said: I want to know the ins and outs of my aunt's housework.

古文：对曰： 娘子本某太守女，其叔父昆弟，与令绪不远。嫁为苏氏妻，遇疾终。金花是从嫁，后数月亦卒，故得在娘子左右。
现代文：回答说： 娘子本是某太守的女儿，她的叔叔和堂兄弟血缘上和你隔得不太远，嫁给姓苏的做妻子，得病死了，我是陪嫁，几个月后也死了，所以现在能够在娘子的身边。
English: He replied, "My daughter was originally the daughter of a certain daimyo, her uncle and cousins are not too far away from you in blood, she married a wife named Su and died of illness, I was a bridesmaid and died a few months later, so now I can be with my daughter.

古文：天帝配娘子为天狼将军夫人，故有神通。
现代文：天帝把娘子配给天狼将军做夫人，所以才有神通，我也承受了天狼将军的好处。
English: Heavenly Father gave his daughter to General Sirius to be his wife, that's why he had the power, and I also received the benefits of General Sirius.

古文：金花亦承阿郎余荫。
现代文：胡使君就是天狼将军的亲侄子。
English: Hu Zhijun is the nephew of General Xiayou.

古文：胡使君即阿郎亲子侄。昨所治店家女，其狐是阿郎门侧役使，此辈甚多，金花能制之。 
现代文：昨天医治的店主人的女儿，那个狐狸是天狼将军门边听候役使的，这一类很多，我能制住他们。
English: The fox that healed the shopkeeper's daughter yesterday was the porter at General Sirius's gate. There are many of this kind, and I can control them.

古文：云锐骑救难者，是天兵。金花要换，不复多少。
现代文：那些救难的精锐骑兵，是天兵，我要支使他们，不管多少都行。 
English: Those rescuing elite cavalrymen are heavenly soldiers, and I want to support them, no matter how much.

古文：令绪谢之云： 此何时当再会？ 
现代文：令绪向她道谢说： 这一别何时能再见呢？ 
English: Lingxu thanked her and said, "When can I see you again?"

古文：金花云： 本以姻缘运合，只到今日。自此姻缘断绝，便当永辞。 
现代文：金花说： 本来从姻缘命运上看，聚会只到今天为止，从此就断绝关系，永远分别。 
English: Jinhua said: Originally, from the perspective of the fate of marriage, the party only lasted until today. From now on, we will sever the relationship and separate forever.

古文：令绪惆怅良久，传谢阿姑，千万珍重。厚与金花赠遗，悉不肯受而去。
现代文：李令绪惆怅了很长时间，请她传话感谢姑姑，千万珍重身体，给了金花很厚的赠品，全都不肯接受，就走了。
English: Li Lingxu lingered for a long time, asked her to send a message to thank her aunt, cherished her body, gave her a gift with a lot of gold flowers, refused to accept it all, and left.

古文：胡璿后历数州刺史而卒。
现代文：胡璿后来做了几个州的刺史才死去。
English: Hu Yao later made several state stabbing records before he died.

古文：裴少尹
现代文：裴少尹
English: Pei Shaoyin

古文：唐贞元中，江陵少尹裴君者，亡其名。有子十余岁，聪敏，有文学，风貌明秀，裴君深念之。
现代文：唐代贞元年间，江陵的少尹裴君，不知他的名字，有个儿子十多岁，聪明敏捷，有文才，风度面貌明朗秀美，裴君特别喜欢他。
English: In the first year of the Zhengyuan period of the Tang Dynasty, Shao Yin Pei Jun of Jiangling, I don't know his name, had a son who was more than ten years old. He was smart and agile, had literary talent, and had a bright and beautiful demeanor. Pei Jun was particularly fond of him.

古文：后被病，旬日益甚，医药无及。
现代文：后来得病，十多天后更加厉害，求医吃药也治不好。
English: Later, he fell ill, which became more severe after more than ten days. It was not possible to cure him by seeking medical treatment or taking medicine.

古文：裴君方求道术士，用呵禁之，冀瘳其苦。
现代文：裴君正要访求有道行的术士，用呵禁法治病，希望能减轻痛苦。
English: Pei Jun was about to visit a sorcerer who had the practice to cure the illness, hoping to alleviate the pain.

古文：有叩门者，自称高氏子，以符术为业。
现代文：有叩门的人，自称姓高，靠符术谋生。
English: A person with a clapping hand, who calls himself Gao, earns a living by performing magic.

古文：裴即延入，令视其子，生曰： 此子非他疾，乃妖狐所为耳。然某有术能愈之。 
现代文：裴君就请进家里，让他看视儿子。高生说： 这孩子不是别的病，是妖狐所致，可是我有法术能治好病。 
English: The high school student said, "This child doesn't have another illness, it's caused by a demon fox, but I have a spell that can cure the illness."

古文：即谢而祈焉。
现代文：裴君向他道谢并请他治病。
English: Pei Jun thanked him and asked him to treat his illness.

古文：生遂以符术考召，近食顷，其子忽起曰： 某病今愈。 
现代文：高生就用道符法术考察召魂，不到一顿饭的时间，他的儿子忽然起身说： 我的病现在好了。 
English: The high school student used Taoist spells to investigate and summon the soul. Less than a meal time, his son suddenly got up and said: My illness is now over.

古文：裴君大喜，谓高生为真术士。
现代文：裴君大喜，说高生是真正的术士。
English: Pei Jun was overjoyed, saying that the high school student was a real sorcerer.

古文：具食饮，已而厚赠缗帛，谢遣之。生曰： 自此当日日来候耳。 
现代文：准备了吃喝，接着又优厚地送给他钱物，感谢并送他走。高生说： 从此我会天天来守候着。 
English: After preparing food and drink, they generously gave him money, thanked him, and sent him on his way. The high school student said, "From now on, I will come every day to wait for him."

古文：遂去。
现代文：就走了。
English: The Qi army then left.

古文：其子他疾虽愈，而神魂不足，往往狂语，或笑哭不可禁。
现代文：他的儿子别的病虽然好了，可是，精神不充足，往往说胡话，或是又哭又笑不能禁止。
English: Although his son's other illnesses have been cured, he is not mentally well and often speaks nonsense, or cannot stop crying and laughing.

古文：高生每至，裴君即以此且祈之。生曰： 此子精魂，已为妖魅所系，今尚未还耳。不旬日当间，幸无以忧。 
现代文：高生每次来，裴君就把这种情况告诉他并请他医治，高生说： 这孩子的灵魂，已被妖魅控制住了，现在还未回到身上，不出十天当回，不要因此事担忧。 
English: Every time Gao Sheng came, Pei Jun would tell him about the situation and ask him to heal. Gao Sheng said, "This child's soul has been controlled by the evil spirit. It has not yet returned to its body. It will not return for ten days. Don't worry about it."

古文：裴信之。
现代文：裴君相信了他。
English: Pei believed him.

古文：居数日，又有王生者，自言有神符，能以呵禁除去妖魅疾，来谒。
现代文：过了几天，又有个王生，自己说有神符，能用呵禁法除去妖魅病，因而来求见。
English: A few days later, there was another Wang Sheng, who said he had a talisman and could use the method of banishing evil spirits to remove the evil spirits, so he came to see me.

古文：裴与语，谓裴曰： 闻君爱子被病，且未瘳，愿得一见矣。 
现代文：裴君与他说话，他对裴君说： 听说你的爱子得病，并且还没好，希望看他一下。 
English: Pei Jun talked to him, and he said to Pei Jun: I heard that your beloved son is ill, and he is not well, I hope to see him.

古文：裴即使见其子，生大惊曰： 此郎君病狐也，不速治，当加甚耳。 
现代文：裴君就让他看了看儿子，王生大惊说： 这个郎君得的是狐魅病，不快治，病会加重。 
English: Pei asked him to take a look at his son, and Wang Sheng said in shock: "This son-in-law is suffering from fox charm disease. It is not easy to treat, and the disease will get worse."

古文：裴君因话高生，王笑曰： 安知高生不为狐？ 
现代文：裴君因而提到高生，王生笑着说： 怎么知道高生不是狐狸呢。 
English: As a result, Pei mentioned Gao Sheng, and Wang Sheng said with a smile: How do you know Gao Sheng is not a fox?

古文：乃坐，方设席为呵禁，高生忽至，既入大骂曰： 奈何此子病愈，而乃延一狐于室内耶？
现代文：就坐下，正在安排地方施呵禁法术，高生忽然来了，进去后大骂说： 为什么这孩子病好了，却又请来一个狐狸坐在家里呢？
English: He sat down and was arranging a place to cast spells, when the high school student suddenly arrived. After entering, he cursed loudly and said, "Why did this child get well, but invite a fox to sit in the house?

古文：即为病者耳！ 
现代文：这个狐狸就是病因。 
English: This fox is the cause.

古文：王见高来，又骂曰： 果然妖狐，今果至，安用为他术考召哉？ 
现代文：王生见高生来，又骂着说： 果然是个妖狐，现在既然来了，何必施展别的法术考察拘禁他呢？ 
English: When Wang Sheng saw Gao Rong, he scolded him and said, "He is indeed a demon fox. Now that he has come, why do you need to use other spells to investigate and detain him?

古文：二人纷然，相诟辱不已。
现代文：两个人乱喊着，互相谩骂不停。
English: Two people were shouting and cursing at each other.

古文：裴氏家方大骇异，忽有一道士至门，私谓家僮曰： 闻裴公有子病狐，吾善视鬼，汝但告，请入谒。 
现代文：裴君一家正在惊怕奇怪，忽然有一个道士来到门前，私下对家僮说： 听说裴公有个儿子得了狐媚病，我善于观察鬼魅，你只去告诉，说我请求进去拜见。 
English: Pei Jun and his family were startled by something strange. Suddenly, a Taoist priest came to the door and said privately to the family, "I heard that Pei's son has lecherous disease. I am good at observing ghosts. You just have to tell him that I asked you to come in and visit me."

古文：家僮驰白裴君，出话其事，道士曰： 易与耳。 
现代文：家僮跑着告诉了裴君，出来谈起这件事，道士说： 容易对付。 
English: Jiayu ran to tell Pei Jun, came out to talk about the matter, Taoist said: easy to deal with.

古文：入见二人，二人又诟曰： 此亦妖狐，安得为道士惑人？ 
现代文：进去见了二人，二人又骂着： 这个也是妖狐，怎么能变成道士迷惑人。 
English: I went in and saw two people, and the two of them cursed again: "This is also a demon fox, how can it turn into a Taoist to confuse people?"

古文：道士亦骂之曰： 狐当还郊野墟墓中，何为挠人乎？ 
现代文：道士也骂他们说： 狐狸应当回到荒郊野外的墓穴中去，为什么来骚扰人呢？ 
English: The moralist also scolded them, saying, "The fox should go back to the grave outside the wilderness, why does it come to harass people?"

古文：既而闭户相斗殴，数食顷。
现代文：接着关上门互相殴斗，打了几顿饭的工夫。
English: Then they closed the door and fought with each other, wasting several meals.

古文：裴君益恐，其家僮惶惑，计无所出。及暮，阒然不闻声，开视，三狐皆仆地而喘，不能动矣。
现代文：裴君更加害怕，他的家僮也惊惶失措，拿不出什么好办法，等到天黑了，静静地听不到一点声音，开门一看，三个狐狸都倒在地上喘气，不能动弹了。
English: Pei Jun was even more scared, and his family was also panicked, unable to come up with any good solution. When it got dark, they couldn't hear a sound quietly. When they opened the door, all three foxes fell to the ground gasping for breath, unable to move.

古文：裴君尽鞭杀之，其子后旬月乃愈矣。
现代文：裴君全都鞭打并杀了它们，他的儿子一个月后病就好了。
English: Mr. Pei whipped and killed them all, and his son recovered after a month.

