古文：陈九畴，字禹学，曹州人。
现代文：陈九畴，字禹学，曹州人。
English: Chen Jiuzhong, Ziyu Xue, Caozhou people.

古文：倜傥多权略。
现代文：风流倜傥，多有权谋韬略。
English: The more the merry-go-round, the more the power to plot.

古文：自为诸生，即习武事。
现代文：自从作为诸生，就练习武事。
English: They have been practicing martial arts since they were sentient beings.

古文：弘治十五年进士。
现代文：弘治十五年考中进士。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of fifteen.

古文：除刑部主事。
现代文：授官刑部主事。
English: He is now in charge of the criminal justice department.

古文：有重囚越狱，人莫敢撄，九畴挺槊逐得之，遂以武健名。
现代文：有重罪囚徒越狱，无人敢捉，陈九畴手执长矛追赶并抓到犯人，于是以武健出名。
English: A felon escaped from prison, and no one dared to catch him. Chen Jiu Zang, armed with a spear, chased and caught the criminal, and became famous for his bravery.

古文：正德初，录囚南畿，忤刘瑾，谪阳山知县。
现代文：正德初年，他审查囚犯记录于南畿，忤逆刘瑾，被贬为阳山知县。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, he reviewed the records of prisoners in Nanki, rebelled against Liu Bei, and was relegated to Yangshan Zhixian.

古文：瑾败，复故官。历郎中，迁肃州兵备副使。
现代文：刘瑾败落，陈九畴恢复旧职，历任郎中，调迁肃州兵备使。
English: Liu Bei was defeated, Chen Jiuquan resumed his old post, and all the successors of his son-in-law were transferred to be the envoys of the Suzhou Military Reserve.

古文：总督彭泽之赂土鲁番也，遣哈密都督写亦虎仙往。
现代文：总督彭泽决定贿赂吐鲁番方面，他派遣哈密都督写亦虎仙前往实行。
English: Governor Peng Ze decided to bribe the Turpan side, and he sent Governor Hamid to write the "Tiger Immortal" to implement it.

古文：九畴奋曰： 彭公受天子命，制边疆，不能身当利害，何但模棱为！ 
现代文：陈九畴激动地说： 彭公受天子之命，节制边疆，不能身当利害，为何这般没有原则啊！ 
English: Chen Juzhong said excitedly: Peng Gong was ordered by the Son of Heaven to control the border and not to be a vested interest. Why does he have no principles?

古文：乃练卒伍，缮营垒，常若临大敌。
现代文：于是操练队伍士兵，修缮营垒，经常如临大敌。
English: As a result, the soldiers of the troop train, repair the camp, and often act as if they are facing a great enemy.

古文：写亦虎仙果通贼。
现代文：写亦虎仙果然暗通敌贼。
English: It turns out that the Tiger Immortal has been secretly communicating with the enemy.

古文：番酋速檀满速儿犯嘉峪关，游击芮宁败死。
现代文：番酋速檀满速儿侵犯嘉谷关，游击芮宁败死。
English: The chieftain Hayatan Mansor invaded Jiayuguan, and the guerrilla Yu Ning was defeated and died.

古文：寻复遣斩巴思等以驼马乞和，而阴遗书虎仙及其姻党阿剌思罕儿、失拜烟答等俾内应。
现代文：不久吐鲁番方面又派遣斩巴思等人用骆驼马匹求和，但暗中派人给写亦虎仙和他的同党阿刺思罕儿、失拜烟答等人送信，让他们作为内应。
English: Soon after, the Turpan side sent Chobas and others to use camels and horses to sue for peace, but secretly sent people to send letters to Shi Yiguxian and his fellow party members, Ashishankan and Shubaiyuta, so that they could reply to them.

古文：九畴知贼计，执阿剌思罕儿及斩巴思付狱。
现代文：陈九畴知道乱贼的计谋，抓住阿刺思罕儿和斩巴思送进监狱。
English: Chen Juzang knew the ruffian's plot, and he caught Azhanshan and Zhenbasi and sent them to prison.

古文：通事毛监等守之。
现代文：命通事毛鉴等人看守他们。
English: They were guarded by Mao Jian and others.

古文：监等故与通，欲纵去，众番皆伺隙为变。
现代文：毛鉴等人过去与他们有联系，想放他们离去，众番都伺隙谋变。
English: Mao Jian and others had been in contact with them in the past and wanted to let them go, and all the guards were looking for a way out.

古文：九畴觉之，佼监等。
现代文：陈九畴发现了这些情况，杀了毛鉴等人。
English: Chen Jiu Zang discovered these circumstances and killed Mao Jian and others.

古文：贼失内应，遂拔帐走。
现代文：敌贼失去内应，于是拔帐逃走。
English: The enemy thief lost his inner support, so he pulled up his tent and fled.

古文：兵部尚书王琼恶泽，并坐九畴失事罪，逮系法司狱。
现代文：兵部尚书王琼厌恶彭泽，并且追究陈九畴的失事罪，逮捕拘囚于法司监狱。
English: Shangshu Wang Qiong of the Ministry of Military Affairs detested Pengze, and investigated Chen Jujiao for the crime of causing an accident, arresting and detaining him in the Legal Department Prison.

古文：以失拜烟答系死为罪，除其名。
现代文：以失拜烟答死于狱中为罪名，在官籍中除去了他的名字。
English: His name was removed from the official register on the grounds that he died in prison.

古文：世宗即位，起故官。
现代文：世宗即位后，以原职起用陈九畴。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, Chen Jiuquan was appointed to his original post.

古文：俄进陕西按察使。
现代文：不久升为陕西按察使。
English: He was soon promoted to Shaanxi inspector.

古文：居数月，甘肃总兵官李隆嗾部卒殴杀巡抚许铭，焚其尸。
现代文：过了数月，甘肃总兵官李隆怂恿部下殴打杀死巡抚许铭，并焚烧他的尸体。
English: A few months later, the Gansu general officer Li Longyu's subordinates beat and killed the inspector general Xu Ming and burned his body.

古文：乃擢九畴右佥都御史，巡抚甘肃，按验铭事，诛隆及乱卒首事者。
现代文：于是升陈九畴为右佥都御史，巡抚甘肃，按验许铭之事，诛李隆和乱兵生事的头头。
English: As a result, Sheng Chen Jiu Zang became the right-hand governor of the capital, the governor of Gansu Province, and, according to the inspection and approval of the inscription, the leader of Li Long and the soldiers.

古文：九畴抵镇，言额军七万余，存者不及半，且多老弱，请令召募。
现代文：陈九畴抵达甘肃镇，说额定军兵七万多人，现在有的不到一半，并且多是老弱之人，请求允许下令招募。
English: Chen Juzhen arrived in Gansu Town, said that the rated soldiers were more than seventy thousand, now there are less than half, and most of them are old and weak, and requested permission to order recruitment.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下诏批准。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：嘉靖三年，速檀满速儿复以二万余骑围肃州。
现代文：嘉靖三年，速檀满速儿又用二万多骑兵围攻肃州。
English: In the third year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Mansao the Swift besieged Suizhou with more than twenty thousand cavalry.

古文：九畴自甘州昼夜驰入城，射贼，贼多死。
现代文：陈九畴从甘州昼夜奔驰入城，射击敌贼，敌贼死伤甚多。
English: Chen Juzhen galloped into the city from Ganzhou day and night, shooting the enemy, and there were many deaths and injuries among the enemy.

古文：已，又出兵击走之。
现代文：之后，又出兵追击。
English: After that, the troops were sent out to pursue.

古文：其分掠甘州者，亦为总兵官姜奭所败。
现代文：攻掠甘州的部分敌贼，也被总兵官姜打败。
English: Some of the enemy bandits who attacked and plundered Ganzhou were also defeated by the general officer Jiang.

古文：论功，进副都御史，赉金币。
现代文：根据战功，陈九畴升职为副都御史，并赐给他金币。
English: According to his war exploits, Chen Juzhen was promoted to vice-governor of the capital and given gold coins.

古文：九畴上言： 番贼敢入犯者，以我纳其朝贡，纵商贩，使得稔虚实也。
现代文：陈九畴向皇帝上奏说 ：番贼敢入犯我边境，是因为我们收纳他们的朝贡，任其商贩，使得他们熟悉我们的虚实。
English: Chen Juzang reported to the emperor: "The bandits dare to invade our borders because we collect their tribute and allow their traders to make them familiar with our truth and falsehood.

古文：写亦虎仙逆谋已露，输货权门，转蒙宠幸，以犯边之寇，为来享之宾。
现代文：写亦虎仙的逆谋已经暴露，但他贿赂权贵，反而能蒙宠幸，以犯边之寇，为来贡宾客。
English: The treacherous plot of the "Writing Tiger Immortal" has been exposed, but instead of bribing the powerful, he was able to gain favor and become a guest of honor by crossing the border.

古文：边臣怵利害，拱手听命，致内属番人勾连接引，以至于今。
现代文：边臣因利害方面的恐惧，拱手听命，致使内属与番人勾连接应，以至于今。
English: Due to the fear of interests, the vassal obeyed orders without hesitation, causing the vassal to collude with the watchman, until now.

古文：今即不能如汉武兴大宛之师，亦当效光武绝西域之计。
现代文：现在即使不能像汉武帝那样兴大宛之师，也应当效法光武帝那样隔绝西域的计谋。
English: Now, even if it is not possible to build up a large army as Emperor Han Wudi did, we should follow the example of Emperor Guangwu to cut off the western region's schemes.

古文：先后入贡未归者二百人，宜安置两粤，其谋逆有迹者加之刑僇，则贼内无所恃，必不复有侵轶。
现代文：先后入贡没有归去的人有两百多，应该将他们安置到两粤，对其中有谋逆迹象的或加刑或杀戮，那么敌贼就没有内应作为依靠，必然不再有侵略袭击。
English: There are more than two hundred people who have not returned after paying tribute. They should be resettled in the two Guangdong Provinces. If there are signs of treason, they should be punished or killed. Then the enemy will have no internal resources to rely on, and there will inevitably be no more aggressive attacks.

古文：倘更包含隐忍，恐河西十五卫所，永无息肩之期也。 
现代文：倘若再包含隐忍，恐怕河西十五个卫所，将永远没有安宁的日子。 
English: If you include the hermitage, I'm afraid the fifteen sanctuaries in the west of the river will never have a peaceful day.

古文：事下，总制杨一清颇采其议。
现代文：奏事下达之后，总督杨一清颇采纳他的建议。
English: After the report was issued, Governor Yang Iqing readily accepted his suggestion.

古文：四年春致仕归。
现代文：四年春天，退职归乡。
English: In the spring of 2004, he retired and returned to his hometown.

古文：初，土鲁番败遁，都指挥王辅言速檀满速儿及牙木兰俱死于炮，九畴以闻。
现代文：开始，吐鲁番失败逃遁，都指挥王辅说速檀满速儿和牙木兰都被炮打死，陈九畴以此上报。
English: At the beginning, when Tru Fan failed to escape, the commander Wang Fu said that Haytham Mansor and Toa Mulan were both killed by artillery, and Chen Jiuzhong reported this.

古文：后二人上表求通贡，帝怪且疑。
现代文：后来他们二人上表请求进贡。皇帝感到奇怪并且怀疑他们。
English: Later, the two of them went to the table to ask for tribute. The emperor was surprised and suspicious of them.

古文：而番人先在京师者为蜚语，言肃州之围，由九畴激之，帝益信。
现代文：而番人先在京师散布流言蜚语，说肃州的围困，是由陈九畴激发的，皇帝更加相信。
English: But the guards first spread rumors in Beijing that the siege of Suzhou was inspired by Chen Jujiao, and the emperor believed it even more.

古文：会百户王邦奇讦杨廷和、彭泽，词连九畴。
现代文：正巧百户王邦奇揭发杨廷和、彭泽的短处，言词牵连到陈九畴。
English: It just so happened that the hundred-household king, Bunchi, exposed the shortcomings of Yang Tinghe and Peng Ze, and his words implicated Chen Jiuzhou.

古文：吏部尚书桂萼等欲缘九畴以倾泽，因请许通贡，而追治九畴激变状。
现代文：吏部尚书桂萼等人想利用陈九畴来排挤彭泽，因而请允许通贡，从而追究整治陈九畴激发变乱之事。
English: Shang Shuxu Calyx and others in the cadre department wanted to use Chen Jiuye to oust Peng Ze, so they asked for permission to pay tribute, and thus investigate the rectification of Chen Jiuye's instigation of turmoil.

古文：大学士一清言事已前决。
现代文：大学士杨一清说事情在前已有决定。
English: Yang Yiching, a university student, said the matter had already been decided.

古文：帝不听，逮下诏狱。
现代文：皇帝不听，逮捕陈九畴下诏狱。
English: The emperor did not listen, and Chen Jiuquan was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：刑部尚书胡世宁言于朝曰： 世宁司刑而杀忠臣，宁杀世宁。 
现代文：刑部尚书胡世宁在朝廷上说 ：世宁掌管刑法而杀忠臣，宁可杀世宁。 
English: The head of the criminal investigation department, Hu Shining, said in the imperial court: Shining is in charge of criminal law and kills loyal subjects, but it would be better to kill Shining.

古文：乃上疏为讼冤曰： 番人变诈，妄腾谤讟，欲害我谋臣耳。
现代文：于是上疏为陈九畴鸣冤说： 番人诈变，妄图传递诽谤怨言，想加害我方的谋臣。
English: As a result, Shangxu made a complaint against Chen Jiuquan, saying, "The watchman committed treachery, attempted to pass on slanderous complaints, and tried to harm our strategist.

古文：夫其畜谋内寇，为日已久。
现代文：他们畜谋内寇，为日已久。
English: They've been plotting to invade us for a long time.

古文：一旦拥兵深入，诸番约内应，非九畴先几奋僇，且近遣属夷却其营帐，远交瓦刺扰其窟巢，使彼内顾而返，则肃州孤城岂复能保？
现代文：一旦拥兵深入，诸番约定为内应，不是陈九畴先机奋身而起，并且近派属下夷民退却他们的营帐，远交瓦刺扰乱他们的巢窟，使他们内顾而返，那么肃州这座孤城怎么又能保得住呢？
English: Once the soldiers are deeply entrenched, the troops are agreed to be in-charge, not Chen Jiuzhen, who rises up at the first opportunity, and the close subordinates of the subordinates retreat their camp, and the distant tile thorns disturb their nests, causing them to return inwardly, then how can this lonely city of Suzhou be preserved?

古文：臣以为文臣之有勇知兵忘身殉国者，无如九畴，宜番人深忌而欲杀也。
现代文：臣认为文臣里面的有勇知兵忘身殉国的人，无人能比得上陈九畴，无怪番人很惧怕而想杀他呢。
English: The retainer thought that no one among the courtiers could match Chen Jiuzhuang as a brave, knowledgeable soldier who sacrificed his life for the country. No wonder the guards were afraid and wanted to kill him.

古文：惟听部下卒妄报，以满速儿等为已死，则其罪有不免耳。 
现代文：只是他听信部下兵卒的妄报，以为满速儿已死，那么他才有其不免之罪。 
English: It was only when he listened to the erroneous reports of his subordinates and thought that Mansuyer was dead that he became guilty.

古文：已，法司具狱亦如世宁言。
现代文：之后，法司陈述案件也像胡世宁所说的一样。
English: After that, the Justice Department stated that the case was the same as what Hu Shining said.

古文：帝卒中萼等言，谪戍极边。
现代文：皇帝终于还是听信桂萼等人的话，将陈九畴贬戍于远边。
English: The emperor finally listened to the words of Gui Calyp and others and banished Chen Jiuquan to a distant land.

古文：居十年，赦还。
现代文：在那里生活了十年，陈九畴才遇赦返回内地。
English: After living there for ten years, Chen Jiuzhou was pardoned and returned to the mainland.

古文：翟鹏，字志南，抚宁卫人。
现代文：翟鹏，字志南，抚宁卫人。
English: Hao Peng, Zhi Nan, Funing Wei Ren.

古文：正德三年进士。
现代文：正德三年进士。
English: Zhengde is a three-year-old trainee.

古文：除户部主事。
现代文：封为户部主事。
English: He was appointed as the head of the household department.

古文：历员外郎中，出为卫辉知府，调开封。
现代文：历任员外郎中，出任卫辉知府，后调到开封。
English: He served as Weihui prefectural governor and was later transferred to Kaifeng.

古文：擢陕西副使，进按察使。
现代文：升陕西副使，进职为按察使。
English: He was promoted to deputy envoy of Shaanxi Province, and promoted to deputy inspector.

古文：性刚介，历官以清操闻。
现代文：性情刚直耿介，任官以清操见闻。
English: Gengsuke had a straightforward nature and was known for his clean conduct when he was appointed.

古文：嘉靖七年，擢右佥都御史，巡抚宁夏。
现代文：嘉靖七年升为右佥都御史，巡抚宁夏。
English: In the seventh year of Jiajing, he was promoted to the Right Hand of the Capital, and became the governor of Ningxia.

古文：时边政久驰，壮卒率占工匠私役中官家，守边者并羸老不任兵。
现代文：当时边政长久废弛，强壮兵卒大都被当作工匠为中官家私役占有。守边的人都是羸老不胜兵甲的人。
English: At that time, the frontier administration had been neglected for a long time, and the strong soldiers and officers were regarded as craftsmen for the private service of the middle-ranking officials. The people guarding the border were all veterans.

古文：又番休无期，甚者夫守墩，妻坐铺。
现代文：加上番兵戍边无期，更有甚者是丈夫守墩台，妻子坐店铺。
English: In addition, the guards are always on duty, and what's more, the husband is guarding the ring and the wife is sitting in the shop.

古文：鹏至，尽清占役，使得迭更。
现代文：翟鹏到达后，尽数清查占役现象，使边兵更番轮值。
English: After the arrival of Nie Peng, he made every effort to investigate the phenomenon of occupation, and made the border soldiers change the rotation.

古文：野鸡台二十余墩孤悬塞外，久弃不守，鹏尽复之。
现代文：野鸡台二十余墩孤悬塞外，长久放弃，不加防守，翟鹏全部恢复镇守。
English: More than 20 pheasants in the pheasants' roosts were left alone, abandoned for a long time, without defense, and all the town guards were restored.

古文：岁大侵，请于朝以振。
现代文：这一年是大荒年，他向朝廷请求加以救济。
English: This year was the year of the Great Famine, and he appealed to the imperial court for relief.

古文：坐寇入停俸。
现代文：因为敌寇入侵，翟鹏被停薪俸。
English: Because of the invasion of the enemy, Nie Peng was suspended from salary.

古文：复坐劾总兵官赵瑛失事，为所讦，夺职归。
现代文：又因为他弹劾总兵官赵瑛失事，而被其攻击，故而被剥夺职务回家。
English: In addition, he was stripped of his duties and sent home because he was attacked by General Zhao Ying for impeaching him.

古文：二十年八月，俺答入山西内地。
现代文：嘉靖二十年八月，俺答侵入山西内地。
English: In August of the 20th year of Jiajing, we decided to invade the Shanxi inland.

古文：兵部请遣大臣督军储，因荐鹏。
现代文：兵部请求调派大臣督察军储，因而推荐翟鹏。
English: The Ministry of Military requested the transfer of the minister inspector of the military reserve, thus recommending Zou Peng.

古文：乃起故官，整饬畿辅、山西、河南军务兼督饷。
现代文：于是翟鹏恢复故官，整治畿辅、山西、河南军务兼督军饷。
English: As a result, Zou Peng resumed his former position and rectified the military affairs of Kifu, Shanxi, and Henan, as well as the military command.

古文：鹏驰至，俺答已饱去，而吉囊军复寇汾、石诸州。
现代文：翟鹏驰马到达，俺答已经跑走，而吉囊军又侵犯汾、石诸州。
English: Zou Peng's galloping horse arrived, I replied that I had already run away, and the auspicious army encroached on Yao and Shizhu.

古文：鹏往来驰驱，不能有所挫。
现代文：翟鹏往来追赶驰驱，不能有所挫敌。
English: Hao Peng chased and chased and chased, unable to frustrate the enemy.

古文：寇退，乃召还。
现代文：敌寇退后，于是被召还朝。
English: The enemy raiders retreated and he was called back to the morning.

古文：明年三月，宣大总督樊继祖罢，除鹏兵部右侍郎代之。
现代文：第二年三月，宣、大总督樊继祖被罢免，提升翟鹏为兵部右侍郎代替他。
English: In March of the following year, Xuan, the grand governor, and Zou Jizao were dismissed, and Zou Peng was promoted to be the right hand man of the military department to replace him.

古文：上疏言： 将吏遇被掠人牧近塞，宜多方招徕。
现代文：翟鹏上疏说 ：将吏遇到被掠人员牲口靠近边塞，应当多方招徕。
English: Zou Peng Shangsuo said: If officials encounter plundered people and livestock near the border, they should solicit help from multiple sources.

古文：杀降邀功者，宜罪。
现代文：杀降邀功的人，应当罚罪。
English: Anyone who kills a person who has been awarded a meritorious deed should be punished.

古文：寇入，官军遏敌虽无功，竟赖以安者，当录。
现代文：敌寇侵入，官军遏止敌人虽然无功，但使边关赖此得以安全，应当记录在案。
English: It should be recorded in the record that the government troops, although ineffectual in stopping the enemy from invading, made the border area safe.

古文：若贼众我寡，奋身战，虽有伤折、未至残生民者，罪当原。
现代文：假若敌贼众而我寡，奋身作战，尽管有伤亡挫折、但未使生民受到残害的人，于罪应当宽免。
English: If the enemy is numerous but we are few, those who fight hard and, despite casualties and setbacks, do not cause harm to the people, should be pardoned.

古文：于法，俘馘论功，损挫论罪。
现代文：在法，按俘虏人数论功，按损失挫折论罪。
English: In the law, the number of prisoners is used to determine merit, while the number of losses and setbacks is used to determine guilt.

古文：乃有摧锋陷阵不暇斩首，而在后掩取者反积级受功，有逡巡观望幸苟全，而力战当先者反以损军治罪，非戎律之平。 
现代文：于是有冲锋陷阵而没有时间斩敌人之首级的人，而在后面掩护者反而将割取的敌人首级积累起来邀功，有犹豫观望的人幸运苟全，但奋力作战当先的人反而被以损军治罪，这不是军律平正之意。 
English: As a result, those who charged into battle and did not have time to cut off the enemy's head came out on top, while those who took cover behind accumulated the enemy's severed head and asked for credit. Those who hesitated to wait and see were lucky and meticulous, but those who fought hard and were at the forefront of the battle were punished by losing the army. This is not the meaning of military justice.

古文：帝皆从其议。
现代文：皇帝都听从他的建议。
English: Emperors followed his advice.

古文：会有降人言寇且大入，鹏连乞兵饷。
现代文：正遇上有投降的人说敌寇将要大举入侵，翟鹏连连乞求兵饷。
English: In the face of those who had surrendered and said that the enemy would invade en masse, Yan Peng repeatedly begged for soldiers.

古文：帝怒，令革职闲住，因罢总督官不设。
现代文：皇帝大怒，下令革除翟鹏职务让他在家闲住，于是罢去总督官不再设立。
English: The emperor was furious and ordered the dismissal of Zou Peng from his post and let him stay idle at home. As a result, the post of governor-general was removed and never reinstated.

古文：鹏受事仅百日而去。
现代文：翟鹏受任办事只有百日就离去了。
English: Hao Peng left his post after only 100 days.

古文：其年七月，俺答复大入山西，纵掠太原、潞安。
现代文：这一年七月，俺答又大举入侵山西，纵掠太原、潞安。
English: In July of the same year, they launched another large-scale invasion of Shanxi, sweeping through Taiyuan and Lian'an.

古文：兵部请复设总督，乃起鹏故官，令兼督山东、河南军务，巡抚以下并听节制。
现代文：兵部请求再设总督，于是又起用翟鹏任旧职，并下令他兼督山东、河南军务，巡抚以下都听从他的节制。
English: At the request of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the governor was re-appointed, so he re-appointed Zou Peng to his old post, and ordered him to also be the governor of Shandong and Henan military affairs, and the governor and below all obeyed his restraint.

古文：鹏受命，寇已出塞。
现代文：翟鹏受命，敌寇已退出塞外。
English: Zou Peng received the order, and the enemy corsairs had already left the country.

古文：即驰赴朔州，请调陕西、蓟、辽客兵八支，及宣、大三关主兵，兼募土著，选骁锐者十万，统以良将，列四营，分布塞上，每营当一面。
现代文：立即奔驰赶赴朔州，请求调陕西、蓟、辽客兵八支，以及宣、大、三关的主兵，并招募土著人丁，选骁勇精锐兵十万，以良将统领，分列四营，分布在塞上，每营挡住一面。
English: Immediately, Benz rushed to Shuozhou and requested the transfer of eight guest soldiers from Shaanxi, Shandong, and Liao, as well as the main soldiers from Xuan, Dagang, and Sankuan, and recruited indigenous people Ding, selected 100,000 brave and elite soldiers, led by General Liang, and divided into four battalions, distributed on the plug, each battalion blocking one side.

古文：寇入境，游兵挑之，诱其追，诸营夹攻。
现代文：敌寇侵入境内，用游兵挑战他们，引诱他们追击，诸营好进行夹攻。
English: The enemy raiders invaded the territory, challenged them with guerrillas, lured them to pursue, and the battalions were ready to carry out a pincer attack.

古文：脱不可御，急趋关南依墙守，邀击其困归。
现代文：如果不能抵御，紧急跑到关南靠墙死守，等他们困乏回去的时候，在半路上攻击他们。
English: If you can't resist, urgently run to Guannan to defend against the wall, and when they are too tired to go back, attack them halfway.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝听从他的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：鹏乃浚壕筑垣，修边墙三百九十余里，增新墩二百九十二，护墩堡一十四，建营舍一千五百间，得地万四千九百余顷，募军千五百人，人给五十亩，省仓储无算。
现代文：翟鹏于是下令疏通战壕，建筑垣墙，这样修边墙三百九十多里，新增墩台二百九十二个，护墩堡一十四个，建造营舍一千五百间，得地一万四千九百多顷，招募军士一千五百人，每人给五十亩，节省仓储无数。
English: Xuan Peng then ordered the trenches to be cleared and the walls to be built. In this way, more than 390 miles of border walls were repaired, 292 new battlements were added, 14 bunkers were built, 1,500 camps were built, more than 14,900 hectares of land were acquired, and 1,500 sergeants were recruited, each of whom was given 50 mu, saving countless warehouses.

古文：疏请东自平刑，西至偏关，画地分守。
现代文：上疏请求东从平型，西到偏关，划地分守。
English: Shangsu requested that the east side should be flat and the west side should be sloping, and that the land should be divided.

古文：增游兵三支，分驻雁门、宁武、偏关。
现代文：增加游兵三支，分别驻扎雁门、宁武、偏关。
English: Three detachments of rangers were added, stationed in Yanmen, Ningwu, and Yeguan, respectively.

古文：寇攻墙，戍兵拒，游兵出关夹攻，此守中有战。
现代文：敌寇攻墙，守兵抵拒，游兵出关夹攻，这是守中有攻。
English: The enemy raiders attack the wall, the defenders resist, and the guerrillas leave the gate and attack. This is an attack in defense.

古文：东大同，西老营堡，因地设伏，伺寇所向。
现代文：东边大同，西边老营堡，因地设伏，窥察敌寇的动向。
English: Datong in the east, Laoying Fort in the west, they set up camp according to the location to spy on the movement of enemy raiders.

古文：又于宣、大、三关间，各设劲兵，而别选战士六千，分两营，遇警令总督武臣张凤随机策应，此战中有守。
现代文：又在宣、大、三关之间，各设劲兵，而另外选战士六千人，分为两营，遇到紧急情况下令总督武臣张凤随机策应，这是攻中有守。
English: In addition, between the Xuan, the Great and the Three Passes, each set up strong soldiers, and another 6,000 soldiers were selected and divided into two battalions. In case of emergency, Governor Wu Zhen Zhang Feng was ordered to randomly respond. This was a defense in the attack.

古文：帝从其议，且命自今遇敌，逗遛者都指挥以下即斩，总兵官以下先取死罪状奏请。
现代文：皇帝听从他的建议，并且下令从今以后遇敌，逗留的人，是都指挥以下的立即斩首，总兵官以下的先取死罪状奏请。
English: The emperor listened to his suggestion and ordered that from now on, when encountering the enemy, those who stayed behind should be immediately beheaded, and those below the commander-in-chief should first be charged with the death penalty.

古文：先是，鹏遣千户火力赤率兵三百哨至丰州滩，不见寇。
现代文：在这以前，翟鹏派遣千户火力赤率兵三百警戒兵到丰州滩，没有发现敌寇。
English: Prior to this, Zou Peng had dispatched a thousand firepower red soldiers and three hundred guards to Fongzhou Beach, but no enemy pirates were found.

古文：复选精锐百，远至丰州西北，遇牧马者百余人，击斩二十三级，夺其马还。
现代文：又选精锐百人，远至丰州西北，遇到牧马的一百多人，击斩二十三人，并夺取他们的马返回。
English: He also selected one hundred elite warriors, who went as far as the northwest of Fuzhou, encountered more than one hundred wranglers, killed twenty-three of them, and took their horses back.

古文：未入塞，寇大至，官军饥惫，尽弃所获奔。
现代文：还没有进入边塞，敌寇大兵赶到，官军又饥饿又疲惫，放弃缴获的所有东西，奔跑回来。
English: Before entering the border fortress, the enemy raiders arrived, and the government troops, hungry and exhausted, abandoned everything they had captured and ran back.

古文：鹏具实陈状。
现代文：翟鹏根据实际情况向皇帝陈述。
English: Nie Peng made a report to the emperor according to the actual situation.

古文：帝以将士敢深入，仍行迁赏。
现代文：皇帝因将士敢深入，仍然实行升迁赏赐。
English: The emperor still rewarded generals with promotions for daring to go deeper.

古文：旧例，兵皆团操镇城，闻警出战。
现代文：按照以往旧例，我军都是团操镇守城池，闻警才出战。
English: According to the old precedent, our troops are trained to defend the city, and only go into battle when they hear the police.

古文：自边患炽，每夏秋间分驻边堡，谓之暗伏。
现代文：自从边患炽盛以来，每年夏秋期间分别驻扎边堡，称之为暗伏。
English: Since the outbreak of the epidemic, the border guards have been stationed separately during the summer and autumn every year, which is called "hiding."

古文：鹏请入秋悉令赴塞，画地分守，谓之摆边，九月中还镇。
现代文：翟鹏请求入秋后全都赴塞，划地分守，称之为摆边，九月中旬返回城镇。
English: Zou Peng requested that they all go to Sichuan after the autumn, divide the land, call it the swing side, and return to the town in mid-September.

古文：遂著为令。
现代文：于是载入军令。
English: It was then passed into law.

古文：二十三年正月，帝以去岁无寇为将帅力，降敕奖鹏，赐以袭衣。
现代文：二十三年正月，皇帝认为去年无敌寇侵犯乃是将帅之功，下诏书奖赏翟鹏，并赐衣服一套。
English: In the first month of the 23rd year, the emperor thought that invading the invincible invaders last year was a great achievement, and issued an edict to reward Zou Peng and give him a set of clothes.

古文：至三月，俺答寇宣府龙门所，总兵官郤永等却之，斩五十一级。
现代文：到三月，俺答侵犯宣府龙门戍所，被总兵官谷阝永等人打退，斩敌五十一人。
English: By March, I was able to invade the Longmen Detention Center of Xuanwu, and was repulsed by the commander-in-chief, Gu Shenyong, and others, killing fifty-one of the enemy.

古文：论功，进兵部尚书。
现代文：论功，翟鹏进升为兵部尚书。
English: On the basis of merit, Zou Peng was promoted to the military department.

古文：帝倚鹏殄寇，锡命屡加，所请多从，而责效甚急。
现代文：皇帝倚靠翟鹏消灭敌寇，屡次下达赏赐命令，翟鹏的请求建议多被听从，而责成其功者甚急。
English: The emperor relied on the Qipeng to eliminate the enemy, and repeatedly issued orders for rewards. The Qipeng's requests and suggestions were mostly obeyed, but those who ordered him to do his duty were very anxious.

古文：鹏亦竭智力，然不能呼吸应变。
现代文：翟鹏也竭尽智力，但不能在呼吸之间应对变化。
English: Hao Peng also tried his best, but he couldn't cope with the change between breaths.

古文：御史曹邦辅尝劾鹏，鹏乞罢，弗允。
现代文：御史曹邦辅曾经弹劾翟鹏，翟鹏请求罢去自己的官职，皇帝没有允许。
English: Emperor Cao Bangyu once impeached Nie Peng. Nie Peng requested to be removed from his post, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：是年九月，苏州巡抚朱方请撤诸路防秋兵，兵部尚书毛伯温因并撤宣、大、三关客兵。
现代文：这一年九月，蓟州巡抚朱方请求撤去诸路防秋兵，兵部尚书毛伯温因而一起撤掉宣、大、三关客兵。
English: In September of the same year, Zhu Fang, the governor of Zhangzhou, requested the withdrawal of all the road defense soldiers, and the military department Shangshu Maobowen thus removed the Xuan, Dai and Sanguan guest soldiers together.

古文：俺答遂以十月初寇膳房堡。
现代文：俺答于是在十月初侵犯膳房堡。
English: I replied that I would invade the mess hall at the beginning of October.

古文：为郤永所拒，乃于万全右卫毁墙入。
现代文：被谷阝永阻拒，于是在万全右卫毁墙入侵。
English: He was forever opposed by Gu Yao, so he invaded by destroying the wall in Wanquan Right Guard.

古文：由顺圣川至蔚州，犯浮屠峪，直抵完县，京师戒严。
现代文：从顺圣川到蔚州，侵犯浮屠谷，一直抵达完县，京师戒严。
English: From Shun Shengchuan to Ulshu, encroaching on Fudu Valley, all the way to Gan County, Beijing is under martial law.

古文：帝大怒，屡下诏责鹏。
现代文：皇帝大怒，屡次下诏书责问翟鹏。
English: The emperor was furious and repeatedly issued an imperial edict to reprimand Nie Peng.

古文：鹏在朔州闻警。
现代文：翟鹏在朔州听到这种紧急情况。
English: Hao Peng heard about the emergency in Shuozhou.

古文：夜半至马邑，调兵食，复趋浑源，遣诸将遏敌。
现代文：半夜赶到马邑，调兵粮，又赶到浑源，派遣诸将遏止敌人。
English: In the middle of the night, they rushed to Ma'eup to transfer troops and grain, and then rushed to Hunyuan to send soldiers to stop the enemy.

古文：御史杨本深劾鹏逗遛，致贼震畿辅。
现代文：御史杨本深弹劾翟鹏犯有逗留罪，致使敌贼威震畿辅。
English: Emperor Shi Yang deeply impeached Zou Peng for the crime of overstaying, which made the Kievan Kief tremble.

古文：兵科戴梦桂继之。
现代文：兵科戴梦桂继杨本深后弹劾翟鹏。
English: Military Science Dai Menggui follows Yang Benshen in impeaching Zou Peng.

古文：遂遣官械鹏，而以兵部左侍郎张汉代。
现代文：于是派官桎梏翟鹏，而以兵部左侍郎张汉代替翟鹏的职位。
English: As a result, he sent the officer Hao Peng, and replaced Hao Peng's position with the left attendant of the military department, Zhang Han.

古文：鹏至，下诏狱，坐永戍。
现代文：翟鹏到达京师，下诏狱，因罪永戍边关。
English: Yan Peng arrived at the Beijing Division, went to the imperial prison, and was sentenced to a long term of imprisonment for his crime.

古文：遂械系诏狱，谪戍镇西卫。
现代文：行至河西务，被民家困迫刁难，他告钞关主事用杖击民家，厂卫听说了这件事，以此上告。
English: He went to Hexi District, where he was trapped and forced into difficulties by a private house. He sued the owner of the bank for hitting the private house with a cane. The guard of the factory heard about this and appealed.

古文：后数年边警，御史陈九德荐汉。
现代文：又逮捕翟鹏送到京都，死在狱中，人们都为他可惜。
English: He was arrested again and sent to Kyoto, where he died in prison. People felt sorry for him.

古文：帝怒，斥九德为民。
现代文：原先，翟鹏在卫辉，准备上朝廷拜见皇帝，行李简朴，通判王江送金钱给他。
English: Originally, Zou Peng was in Weihui, preparing to go to the court to meet the emperor. His luggage was simple, and Wang Jiang was ordered to send him money.

古文：汉居戍所二十年卒。
现代文：翟鹏说 ：难道我的朴素衣着不能让人信服吗？ 
English: Hao Peng said, "Can't my plain clothes be convincing?"

古文：隆庆初，赠兵部尚书。
现代文：王江感到惭愧而退走，翟鹏的耿介就是这样。隆庆年初期，恢复了他的官职。
English: Wang Jiang felt ashamed and retreated, and so did Geng Zongpeng's Geng Jie. At the beginning of the Year of the Dragon, he resumed his official position.

古文：孙继鲁，字道甫，云南右卫人。
现代文：孙继鲁，字道甫，云南右卫人。
English: Sun Jilu, also known as Daofu, was a Yunnan right guard.

古文：嘉靖二年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the second year of Jiajing.

古文：授澧州知州。
现代文：授官澧州知州。
English: He was awarded the post of official of Bozhou and Chizhou.

古文：坐事，改国子助教。
现代文：因事改为国子助教。
English: Due to circumstances, he was changed to Kuniko assistant professor.

古文：历户部郎中，监通州仓。
现代文：历任户部郎中，监督通州仓。
English: Successive junior vassals of the household department, supervised the construction of the Tongzhou warehouse.

古文：历知卫辉、淮安二府。
现代文：历任卫辉、淮安二府知府。
English: Successive Weihui, Huai'an two prefectural governors.

古文：织造中官过淮，继鲁与之忤。
现代文：织造中官经过淮安，孙继鲁和他相忤逆。
English: The weaving official passed through Huai'an, and Sun Jilou was on the opposite side of him.

古文：诬逮至京，大学士夏言救免。
现代文：遭诬陷而被逮捕到京都，大学士夏言将他救免。
English: He was falsely accused and arrested in Kyoto, but university professor Natsugen saved him.

古文：继鲁不谢，言不悦。
现代文：孙继鲁不感谢他，夏言不高兴。
English: Sun Jilou did not thank him, and Xia Yan was not happy.

古文：改补黎平。
现代文：将他改补黎平。
English: He was replaced by Liping.

古文：擢湖广提学副使，进山西参政。
现代文：后提升他为湖广提学副使，又进职山西参政。
English: Later, he was promoted to vice-envoy of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region for Education, and entered politics in Shanxi Province.

古文：数绳宗藩。
现代文：数次以法绳治宗藩。
English: He made several trips to the Hojo-Jisong Domain.

古文：暨迁按察使，宗藩百余人拥马发其装，敞衣外无长物，乃载酒谢过。
现代文：等到他迁按察使时，宗藩一百多人围着马匹打开他的行装，除破旧衣服外别无长物，于是载酒谢过。
English: When he was transferred to the post of inspector, more than a hundred people from his clan surrounded the horses and opened his outfit, which was nothing more than worn-out clothes, so he thanked them by carrying wine.

古文：迁陕西右布政使。
现代文：不久升迁为陕西右布政使。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Shaanxi Ubu political envoy.

古文：二十六年擢右副都御史，代杨守谦巡抚山西。
现代文：二十六年他被提升为右副都御史，代杨守谦巡抚山西。
English: In 1926, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, replacing Yang Shouqian as the governor of Shanxi.

古文：继鲁耿介，所至以清节闻，然好刚使气。
现代文：孙继鲁耿介，所到的地方都以清正廉洁见闻，然而性情刚烈意气用事。
English: Sun Jiru Geng Suke is known for his honesty and integrity wherever he goes. However, he has a stubborn and rebellious nature.

古文：总督都御史翁万达议撤山西内边兵，并力守大同外边，帝报可。
现代文：总督都御史翁万达建议撤消山西内边兵，并且尽力镇守大同外边关，得到皇帝的准可。
English: The governor of the capital, Shion Wanda, proposed to withdraw all troops from the Inner Shanxi Frontier, and tried his best to guard the outer border of Datong, which was approved by the emperor.

古文：继鲁抗章争，言： 紫荆、居庸、山海诸关，东枕溟渤；雁门、宁武、偏头诸关，西据黄河。
现代文：孙继鲁上书抗争，说： 紫荆、居庸、山海诸关，东边临近溟渤；雁门、宁武、偏头诸关，西边靠着黄河。
English: Sun Jilu wrote a letter of protest, saying: "Baijing, Juyong, Shanhai and Guanlu are in the east, close to Handan; Ganmen, Ningwu and Yehotou are in the west, close to the Yellow River.

古文：天设重险，以藩卫国家，岂可聚师旷野，洞开重门以延敌？
现代文：天设重险，以藩卫国家，怎么能聚师旷野，洞开重门来引进敌人。
English: Heaven has set a heavy risk, with the defense of the country, how can we gather the wilderness, open the door to introduce the enemy.

古文：夫紫刑诸关之拱护京师，与雁门诸关之屏蔽全晋，一也。
现代文：紫荆诸关之拱卫京师，与雁门诸关作为全晋的屏障一样的重要。
English: The arched gates of the Bauhinia Pass are as important as the gates of the Wild Goose Gate as a barrier to the whole of Jin.

古文：今议者不撤紫荆以并守宣府，岂可独撤雁门以并守大同耶？
现代文：今建议者不撤消紫荆用来一起守卫宣府，岂可独撤雁门用来一起守卫大同呢？
English: Now, the proponents do not want to remove the Bauhinia used to guard the Xuanfu together, can they only remove the Wild Goose Gate used to guard Datong together?

古文：况自偏头、宁武、雁门东抵平刑关为山西长边，自右卫双沟墩至东阳河、镇口台为大同长边，自丫角山至双沟百四十里为大同紧边，自丫角山至老牛湾百四十里为山西紧边，论长边则大同为急，山西差缓，论紧边则均为最急。
现代文：况且从偏头、宁武、雁门向东抵达平型关是山西的漫长边塞，从右卫双沟墩至东阳河、镇口台是大同的长边，从丫角山至双沟一百四十里是大同的紧要边关，从丫角山到老牛湾一百四十里为山西紧要边关，论长边那么大同为急要，而山西则稍缓一些，就紧要边关来说则都是最急。
English: Moreover, from Yehotou, Ningwu, and Yanmen to the east, Pinggang Pass is the long border of Shanxi. From the right Wei Shuanggou ravine to the Dongyang River and Zhenkoudai is the long border of Datong. From Yaakou Mountain to Shuanggou is a hundred and forty miles is the critical border of Datong. From Yaakou Mountain to Lao Niu Bay is a hundred and forty miles is the critical border of Shanxi. As far as the long border is concerned, Datong is urgent, while Shanxi is a little slower, as far as the critical border is concerned, they are all the most urgent.

古文：此皆密迩河套，譬之门阖。
现代文：这些都与河套密近，可比作河套的门户。
English: These are all close to the estuary and can be compared to the portals of the estuary.

古文：山西守左，大同守右。
现代文：山西守在左边，大同守右边。
English: Shanxi Province on the left, Datong Province on the right.

古文：山西并力守左尚不能支，又安能分力以守大同之右？
现代文：山西就是尽力守住左边还不能支持住，又怎么能分出力量来守大同这个右边呢？
English: Even if Shanxi tries its best to keep the left side, it cannot support it. How can it allocate the strength to keep the right side of Datong?

古文：近年寇不敢犯山西内郡者，以三关备严故也。
现代文：近年来敌寇不敢侵犯山西境内各郡，是因为三关防备森严的缘故。
English: In recent years, enemy raiders have not dared to encroach on counties in Shanxi because of the strict defense of the three passes.

古文：使三关将士远离堡戍，欲其不侵犯难矣。
现代文：如果让三关的将士远离堡戍，想不受侵犯就难以做到啊。
English: If you keep the soldiers of the three passes away from the castle, it is difficult to be inviolate.

古文：全师在外，强寇内侵，即紫荆、倒马诸关不将徒守哉！ 
现代文：全师在外，强寇内侵，那么紫荆、倒马诸关不是白守了吗？ 
English: The whole division is outside, strong invaders are invading, so aren't the bauhinia and inverted horse gates a waste of time?

古文：万达闻之不悦，上疏言： 增兵摆边，始于近岁，与额设守边者不同。
现代文：翁万达听到后不高兴，就上疏说： 增兵摆边，开始于近年，这与额定守边者是不同的。
English: Onwanda was not happy to hear this, so he said, "Increasing the number of troops on the border started in recent years, which is different from the number of border guards.

古文：继鲁乃以危言相恐，复遗臣书，言往岁建云中议，宰执几不免；近年撤各路兵，督抚业蒙罪。
现代文：孙继鲁乃是用危言相恐吓，又遗臣书，论说往年建云中边关的提议，政府大臣几乎难以免罪。近年撤各路军兵，督抚已经蒙罪。
English: It is almost impossible for a government minister to be exonerated from the accusation that Sun Jilun used threatening words to intimidate and wrote a posthumous letter to discuss the proposal to build a border gate in the middle of the clouds in previous years. In recent years, troops have been withdrawn from various routes, and the overseer has been convicted.

古文：其诋排如此。
现代文：他的诋毁竟如此。
English: That's where his vilification comes from.

古文：今防秋已逼，乞别调继鲁，否则早罢臣，无误边事。 
现代文：今年秋防已经迫近，请求调走孙继鲁，否则就早点罢去臣职，无误边事。 
English: This year's autumn defense is already approaching, the request to transfer Sun Jilu, otherwise he will resign earlier, is undoubtedly a side issue.

古文：兵部是继鲁言。
现代文：兵部说孙继鲁的话是对的。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs said that Sun Jirong's words were right.

古文：帝不从，下廷议。
现代文：皇帝不从，下到朝廷议论。
English: The emperor did not agree and went down to the imperial court to discuss the matter.

古文：廷臣请如万达言。
现代文：廷臣请求按翁万达的话办。
English: The courtier requested that Onwanda's words be followed.

古文：帝方倚万达，怒继鲁腾私书，引往事议君上。
现代文：皇帝正倚赖翁万达，恼怒孙继鲁传递私书，援引往事非议君上。
English: The emperor was leaning on Weng Wanda, angry at Sun Jilou for passing on a private letter, and invoking the past to criticize him.

古文：而夏言亦恶继鲁，不为地，遂逮下诏狱。
现代文：而夏言也讨厌孙继鲁，不为他说话，于是逮捕孙继鲁下诏狱。
English: However, Xia Yan also disliked Sun Jilou and did not speak for him, so he arrested Sun Jilou and sent him to prison.

古文：疽发于项，瘐死。
现代文：因脖子上长疽疮，孙继鲁死在狱中。
English: Because of the gangrene on his neck, Sun Jilou died in prison.

古文：继鲁为巡抚仅四月。
现代文：孙继鲁做巡抚只有四个月。
English: Sun Jilu has only been governor for four months.

古文：山西人习其前政，冀有所设施，遽以非罪死，咸为痛惜。
现代文：山西的人晓习他的前政，希望有所设施，孙继鲁竟因非罪而死，他们都为他痛惜。
English: People in Shanxi learned about his previous government and hoped for better facilities. However, Sun Jilou died for a crime he did not commit, and they all felt sorry for him.

古文：宗藩有上书讼其冤者，即前夺视其装者也。
现代文：宗藩有上书为他鸣冤的人，就是以前夺视其行装的人。
English: The people who have written to Zong's domain to mourn his death are the same people who used to ignore his actions.

古文：穆宗即位，赠兵部左侍郎，赐祭葬，荫一子，谥清愍。
现代文：穆宗即位，赠孙继鲁兵部左侍郎，赐祭葬，并荫庇一子，谥号清愍。
English: When Mu Zong ascended the throne, he gave Sun Jilu the title of Left Attendant of the Military Department, gave him a ceremonial funeral, and gave him a son, whose posthumous name was Qingyu.

古文：曾铣，字子重，江都人。
现代文：曾铣，字子重，江都人。
English: Zeng Yao, Zizi Jie, a native of Jiangdu.

古文：自为诸生，以才自豪。
现代文：自入学作为诸生，就以才华自豪。
English: Since entering school as sentient beings, I have been proud of my talent.

古文：嘉靖八年成进士，授长乐知县。
现代文：嘉靖八年成为进士，授官长乐知县。
English: In the eighth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he became a Jin Shi, and was awarded the post of chief of Lechi County.

古文：征为御史，巡按辽东。
现代文：征召为御史，巡按辽东。
English: He was conscripted as an imperial historian and patrolled Liaodong.

古文：辽阳兵变，执辱都御史吕经。
现代文：辽阳发生兵变，叛卒抓住都御史吕经并加以侮辱。
English: There was a mutiny in Liaoyang, and the rebels seized and insulted the governor of the capital, Shi Lucheng.

古文：铣时按金、复，急檄副总兵李监罢经苛急事，为乱军乞赦。
现代文：曾铣当时巡抚金州、复州，急传檄文征召副总兵李鉴停止吕经的苛政，并为叛乱军士请求赦免。
English: Zeng Qi, who was the governor of Jinzhou and Fuzhou at that time, urgently sent a letter to recruit the vice-commander Li Jian to stop the harsh government of Lv Jing and request a pardon for the rebel sergeant.

古文：经罢，趋广宁，悍卒于蛮儿等复执辱经。
现代文：吕经被释放，急走广宁，悍兵于蛮儿等人又捉住吕经进行侮辱。
English: Lv Jing was released, Guangning hurriedly left, and soldiers such as Yu Baner caught Lv Jing and insulted him.

古文：其月，抚顺卒亦缚指挥刘雄父子。
现代文：就在这个月抚顺士兵也缚住指挥刘雄父子。
English: Just this month, Fushun soldiers also tied up commander Liu Xiong and his son.

古文：会朝廷遣侍郎林庭〈木昂〉往勘，乱卒惧。
现代文：正巧朝廷派遣侍郎林庭木昂前往勘察，乱兵很害怕。
English: It just so happened that the imperial court sent the chamberlain Lin Tingmuang to investigate, and the soldiers were very afraid.

古文：辽阳倡首者赵劓儿潜诣广宁与蛮儿合谋，欲俟镇城官拜表，集众乱，为总兵官刘淮所觉，计不行。
现代文：辽阳兵变的倡首人赵劓儿暗中到广宁去与于蛮儿合谋，想等到镇城官上奏章时，就集众叛乱，被总兵官刘淮察觉，阴谋未得逞。
English: The initiator of the Liaoyang mutiny, Zhao Qian'er, secretly went to Guangning to conspire with Yu Ban'er. He wanted to wait for the town officials to play the anthem, so he gathered the people to rebel. He was noticed by the chief military officer Liu Huai, but the conspiracy did not succeed.

古文：复结死囚，欲俟庭〈木昂〉至，闭城门为变。
现代文：复又结盟死囚，想等到林庭木昂到达，关闭城门搞兵变。
English: He allied with the death row inmates again and wanted to wait for Lin Tingmuang to arrive and close the city gate to carry out a mutiny.

古文：而铣已刺得二城及抚顺为恶者姓名，密授诸将，劓儿等数十人同日捕获。
现代文：但是曾铣已经刺探得到二城及抚顺为恶之人的姓名，密授诸将，将赵劓儿等数十人同一天捕获。
English: However, Zeng Yao had already obtained the names of the villains of Ercheng and Fushun through espionage, secretly instructed the generals, and captured dozens of people such as Zhao Yuer on the same day.

古文：铣上言： 往者甘肃、大同军变，处之过轻。
现代文：曾铣向皇上说： 过去甘肃大同兵变，处置得过轻。
English: Zeng Yao said to the emperor: In the past, the Gansu Datong mutiny was handled too lightly.

古文：群小谓辱命臣，杀主帅，罪不过此，遂相率为乱。
现代文：群小人说侮辱朝廷命臣，杀主帅，罪罚不过于此，于是相继作乱。
English: A group of villains said that insulting the imperial minister and killing the coach were punishable by no more than this, and they started to riot one after another.

古文：今首恶宜急诛。 
现代文：现在首恶应当急诛。 
English: Now it is time for the chief villain to make haste.

古文：乃召还庭〈木昂〉，命铣勘实，悉斩诸首恶，悬首边城，全辽大定。
现代文：于是召回林庭木昂，命令曾铣勘察核实，将诸首恶全部斩首，将首级悬挂边城，全辽大定。
English: So Lin Tingmuang was recalled, Zeng Yao was ordered to investigate and verify, all the heads were beheaded, and the heads were hung in the border city, and the whole Liao Dynasty was determined.

古文：擢铣大理寺丞，迁右佥都御史，巡抚山东。
现代文：提升曾铣为大理寺丞，迁右佥都御史，巡抚山东。
English: Zeng Rong was promoted to Daliji Rong, moved to the right to the capital, and became the governor of Shandong.

古文：俺答数入内地，铣请筑临清外城。
现代文：俺答多次入侵内地，曾铣请求修筑临清外城。
English: We have invaded the inland many times, and have requested the construction of the Linqing Outer City.

古文：工毕，进副都御史。居三年，改抚山西。
现代文：完工后，进为副都御史，过了三年，改派巡抚山西。
English: After completion, he was promoted to vice-governor of the capital. Three years later, he was reassigned as the governor of Shanxi Province.

古文：经岁寇不犯边，朝廷以为功，进兵部侍郎，巡抚如故。
现代文：经过一年敌寇没有犯边，朝廷以为是曾铣的功劳，进职为兵部侍郎，依然负巡抚之任。
English: After a year of the enemy raiders not trespassing, the imperial court thought it was Zeng Yao's merit, and he was promoted to the post of military commissary, still holding the post of governor.

古文：二十五年夏，以原官总督陕西三边军务。
现代文：嘉靖二十五年夏天，以原官总督陕西三边军务。
English: In the summer of the 25th year of Jiajing, the tripartite military affairs of Shaanxi with the former official governor.

古文：寇十万余骑由宁塞营入，大掠延安、庆阳境。
现代文：敌寇十万多骑兵从宁塞营入侵，大肆侵掠延安、庆阳境地。
English: More than 100,000 enemy cavalry invaded from the Ningsa camp and plundered Yan'an and Qingyang.

古文：铣率兵数千驻塞门，而遣前参将李珍捣寇巢于马梁山阴，斩首百余级。
现代文：曾铣率兵数千驻守塞门，而派遣前参将李珍捣毁敌巢于马梁山北，杀敌一百多人。
English: Zeng Yao led thousands of soldiers to garrison Saimen, and dispatched former general Li Zhen to destroy the enemy's nest in the north of Maliang Mountain, killing more than a hundred of the enemy.

古文：寇闻之，始遁。
现代文：敌寇听说后，才开始逃遁。
English: After hearing the news, the enemy began to flee.

古文：捷奏，赉银币。
现代文：捷报奏上皇帝，赏赐他银币。
English: The news of his victory was reported to the emperor, who rewarded him with silver coins.

古文：既而寇屡入，游击高极死焉，副总兵萧汉败绩。
现代文：既而敌寇多次入侵，游击高极战死，副总兵肖汉败绩。
English: Even though the enemy invaded several times, the guerrilla Gaoji died in battle, and the vice-chief soldier Xiao Han was defeated.

古文：铣疏诸将罪，治如律。
现代文：曾铣上疏皇帝报告诸将的罪状，被按兵律罚治。
English: Zeng Ying Shang So reported the generals' crimes to the emperor and was punished according to military discipline.

古文：时套寇牧近塞，零骑往来，居民不敢樵采。
现代文：当时河套敌寇在近塞放牧，零散骑兵往来，居民不敢樵采。
English: At that time, the enemy corsairs of Hetao were grazing in the vicinity of the fortress, and scattered cavalry were moving about, so the residents did not dare to plough.

古文：铣方筑塞，虑为所扰，乃选锐卒击之。
现代文：曾铣正在修筑边塞，怕被他们扰乱，于是选精兵打击他们。
English: Zeng Yao was building a border dam and was afraid of being disturbed by them, so he selected elite soldiers to fight them.

古文：寇稍北，间以轻骑入掠，铣复率诸军驱之远徙。
现代文：敌寇逐渐退到北方，间或用轻骑入侵抢掠，曾铣又率领诸军将他们驱赶到远处。
English: The enemy raiders gradually retreated to the north, occasionally using light cavalry to invade and plunder, and Zeng Yao led the army to drive them away.

古文：参将李珍及韩钦功为多，诏增铣俸一级，赐银币有加。
现代文：参将李珍和韩钦多有功劳，皇帝下诏增加曾铣的薪俸一级，赐银币有加。
English: The emperor issued an edict to increase Zeng Yao's salary by one level and give him more silver coins.

古文：铣素喜功名，又感帝知遇，益图所报称。
现代文：曾铣向来喜好功名，又感到皇帝的知遇，更加想有所报达。
English: Zeng Yao has always been fond of fame, and felt the wisdom of the emperor, and even more wanted to make a contribution.

古文：念寇居河套，久为中国患，上疏曰： 贼据河套，侵扰边鄙将百年。
现代文：考虑敌寇占据河套，长久为患中国，于是向皇帝上疏说 ：敌贼占据河套，侵扰边疆将近有百年。
English: Considering that the enemy corsairs occupied Hetao and had long plagued China, he said to the emperor: The enemy corsairs occupied Hetao and had been invading the frontier for nearly a hundred years.

古文：孝宗欲复而不能，武宗欲征而不果，使吉囊据为巢穴。
现代文：孝宗想收复而不能，武宗想征讨而没有实现，让吉囊占据作为巢穴。
English: Xiaozong wanted to recover but could not, Wuzong wanted to collect but did not achieve, so that Yoshizuku occupied as a nest.

古文：出套则寇宣、大、三关，以震畿辅；入套则寇延、宁、甘、固，以扰关中。
现代文：他们出河套则侵略宣、大、三关，以威震畿辅；入河套则入侵延、宁、甘、固，以扰乱关中。
English: When they went out of Hetao, they invaded Xuan, Da and San Guan, shaking Kisho with their might; when they went into Hetao, they invaded Yan, Ning, Gan and Gu, disturbing Guanzhong.

古文：深山大川，势顾在敌而不在我。
现代文：深山大川，形势有利于敌而不利于我。
English: Deep mountains and rivers, the situation is favorable to the enemy and unfavorable to me.

古文：封疆之臣曾无有以收复为陛下言者，盖军兴重务也；小有挫失，媒孽踵至，鼎镬刀锯，面背森然。
现代文：封疆之臣当中还没有对陛下说要收复河套的人，因为这是军兴重务；小有挫折损失，灾祸就会接踵到来，鼎烹刀锯，前后受刑。
English: Among the vassals of the fiefdom, there is no one who has told His Majesty that they want to recover Hetao, because this is an important task of military prosperity; if there is a small setback or loss, the disaster will come one after another, and they will be punished back and forth.

古文：臣非不知兵凶战危，而枕戈汗马，切齿痛心有日矣。
现代文：我并不是不知道兵凶战危，而枕戈汗马，切齿痛心已经有些日子了。
English: It's not that I don't know the dangers of war, but it's been a long time since I've had a good night's sleep.

古文：窃尝计之：秋高马肥，弓矢劲利，彼聚而攻，我散而守，则彼胜；冬深水枯，马无宿藁，春寒阴雨，坏无燥土，彼势渐弱，我乘其弊，则中国胜。
现代文：私下曾谋划着这件事：秋高马肥，弓矢劲利，他们聚集而进攻我们，而我们则分散而防守，让他们占上风；冬深水枯，马无隔夜之粮，春寒阴雨，土地没有干燥的地方，他们的优势渐弱，我们利用这一时机，则中国占优势。
English: Privately, he had planned this matter: Autumn is high, horses are fat, bows and arrows are strong, they gather and attack us, while we are scattered and defend, let them prevail; winter is deep and dry, horses have no overnight food, spring is cold and rainy, the land has no dry place, their advantage is weakening, we take advantage of this opportunity, then China is superior.

古文：臣请以锐卒六万，益以山东鎗手二千，每当春夏交，携五十日饷，水陆交进，直捣其巢。
现代文：我请求用精兵六万，加以山东枪手二千，每当春夏之交，携带五十天的粮饷，水陆交进，直捣他们巢穴。
English: I request that you use sixty thousand elite soldiers and two thousand gunmen from Shandong to carry fifty days of grain every spring and summer, cross land and water, and directly attack their nests.

古文：材官驺发，炮火雷激，则寇不能支。
现代文：步骑齐发，炮火如雷激荡，则敌寇就不能支撑。
English: If the cavalry and infantry fire in unison, and the artillery fire is thunderous, then the enemy raiding party cannot be supported.

古文：此一劳永逸之策，万世社稷所赖也。 
现代文：这是一劳永逸的办法，万世社稷所依赖的。 
English: It's a once-and-for-all solution that society has relied on forever.

古文：遂条八议以进。
现代文：于是逐条奏上八项建议。
English: Eight proposals were then presented one by one.

古文：是时，铣与延、宁抚臣欲西自定边营，东至黄甫川一千五百里，筑边墙御寇，请帑金数十万，期三年毕功。
现代文：这时，曾铣与延绥、宁夏抚臣想西从定边营，东到黄甫川一千五百里，修筑边墙防御敌寇，请求金币数十万，打算三年完工。
English: At this time, Zeng Yao, Yan Xuan and Ningxia Fuxin wanted to go west from Dingbian Camp and east to Huangfu River for 1,500 miles to build a border wall to defend against enemy raiders, requesting hundreds of thousands of gold coins and planning to complete it in three years.

古文：疏并下兵部。
现代文：奏章一并下到兵部。
English: It was sent to the Ministry of War together with the music.

古文：部臣难之，请令诸镇文武将吏协议。
现代文：部臣感到困难，请求下令诸镇文武将吏协议。
English: The minister felt uneasy and asked for an agreement between the towns and the generals.

古文：诏报曰： 贼据套为中国患久矣，朕宵旰念之，边臣无分主忧者。
现代文：皇帝下诏书告知说 ：敌贼占据河套为患中国已经很久了，我日夜惦念这件事，边臣没有分担主子忧愁的人。
English: The emperor's edict said, "It has been a long time since the enemy occupied Hetao, and I have been thinking about it day and night. The vassal has no one to share his master's sorrow."

古文：今铣倡恢复议甚壮，其令铣与诸镇臣悉心上方略，予修边费二十万。 
现代文：现在曾铣倡导恢复边疆的提议很壮烈，其令曾铣与诸镇臣子悉心研究方略，给予修边费用二十万两。 
English: Now, Zeng Yao's proposal to restore the frontier is very strong. He ordered Zeng Yao and the town's retainers to carefully study the strategy and give the cost of repairing the border to 200,000 taels.

古文：铣乃益锐。
现代文：曾铣于是更加坚决。
English: Zeng Yao became more resolute.

古文：而诸巡抚延绥张问行、陕西谢兰、宁夏王邦瑞及巡按御史盛唐以为难，久不会奏。
现代文：但诸巡抚延绥张问行、陕西谢兰、宁夏王邦瑞及巡按御史盛唐以为困难，长久不到一起会奏。
English: However, the governors of Yancheng, Zhang Qianxing, Shaanxi, Xie Lan, Ningxia, Wang Bangrui and the governor of Shengtang thought it was difficult, and they could not play together for a long time.

古文：铣怒，疏请于帝，帝为责让诸巡抚。
现代文：曾铣大怒，上疏向皇帝请求，皇帝责备了诸位巡抚。
English: Zeng Yao was furious, Shang Shu appealed to the emperor, and the emperor rebuked the governors.

古文：会问行已罢，杨守谦代之，意与铣同。铣遂合诸臣条上方略十八事，已，又献营阵八图，并优旨下廷议。
现代文：等到张问行被罢后，杨守谦代替他，杨守谦的意见与曾铣相同，曾铣于是集合诸臣逐条奏上方略十八事，之后又献上阵营图八幅，皇帝以赞赏性的口气下旨让朝廷讨论。
English: After Zhang Mengxing was ousted, Yang Shouqian replaced him. Yang Shouqian's opinion was the same as Zeng Yao's. Zeng Yao then gathered all the courtiers to recite the above 18 matters, one by one, and then presented eight camp maps. The emperor, with an appreciative tone, ordered the court to discuss.

古文：廷臣见上意向铣，一如铣言。
现代文：廷臣看到皇上的意思是向着曾铣，都与曾铣说的一样。
English: The courtier saw that the emperor's meaning was directed at Zeng Yao, which was the same as what Zeng Yao had said.

古文：帝忽出手诏谕辅臣曰： 今逐套贼，师果有名否？
现代文：皇帝忽然拿出亲笔诏书晓谕辅臣说： 现在驱逐河套逆贼，师出果真有名吗？
English: The emperor suddenly took out his autograph edict to instruct his aide-de-camp: "Now expel the Hetao traitors. Is it really famous?

古文：兵食果有余？
现代文：土兵粮食果真有余，一定能够成功吗？
English: If there really is enough grain for the local soldiers, will they succeed?

古文：成功可必否？一铣何足言，如先民荼毒何？ 
现代文：一个曾铣何足道之，如生民荼毒怎么样？ 
English: How about a person who has been through a lot, such as a living person recovering from poisoning?

古文：初，铣建议时，辅臣夏言欲倚以成大功，主之甚力。
现代文：当初，曾铣建议的时候，辅臣夏言想依靠他来立大功，因而极力主张这样做。
English: At first, when Zeng Yao suggested it, Vice-Minister Xia Yan wanted to rely on him to make a great contribution, so he strongly advocated doing so.

古文：及是，大骇，请帝自裁断。
现代文：这时听到这话，感到非常惊骇，请求皇帝自己裁决。
English: When he heard this, he was very shocked and asked the emperor to make his own decision.

古文：帝命刊手诏，遍给与议诸臣。
现代文：皇帝下令刊发手诏，普遍发给参加讨论的诸臣。
English: The emperor ordered the publication of a handwritten edict, which was generally issued to the ministers who participated in the discussion.

古文：时严嵩方与言有隙，欲因以倾言，乃极言套必不可复。
现代文：当时严嵩正与夏言有仇隙，想借此来搞垮夏言，于是极力言说河套一定不能收复。
English: At that time, Yan Song was having a feud with Xia Yan, and wanted to use this to bring down Xia Yan, so he insisted that Hetao must not be recovered.

古文：阴诋言，故引罪乞罢，以激帝怒。
现代文：暗中诋毁夏言，故意引罪请求罢职，以便激怒皇帝。
English: He secretly slandered Xia Yan, and deliberately asked him to resign in order to infuriate the emperor.

古文：旋复显攻言，谓 向拟旨褒铣，臣皆不预闻。 
现代文：不久又明显攻击夏言，他说 ：向来拟旨褒奖曾铣，我都没有事先听说。 
English: Soon after, he clearly attacked Xia Yan, saying: I have never heard of him before.

古文：兵部尚书王以旗会廷臣覆奏，遂尽反前说，言套不可复。
现代文：兵部尚书王以旗会集廷臣复奏，于是全部与以前说的不一样，说河套不可能收复。
English: The commander of the military, Prince Shoshu, gathered his courtiers under a flag and played a recital. As a result, everything was different from what had been said before, and it was said that Hetao could not be recovered.

古文：帝乃遣官逮铣、出以旗代之；责科道官不言，悉杖于廷，停俸四月。
现代文：皇帝于是派官逮捕曾铣，调出王以旗代替他；责怪科道兵不说话，一概在朝廷上用杖拷打，停发薪俸四个月。
English: The emperor then sent an officer to arrest Zeng Yao, and sent out Wang to replace him with a banner; he accused the soldiers of science and technology of not speaking, and they were all tortured with a cane in the court, and their salaries were suspended for four months.

古文：帝虽怒铣，然无意杀之也。
现代文：皇帝虽然恼怒曾铣，但是并不想杀他。
English: Although the emperor was furious, he did not want to kill him.

古文：咸宁侯仇鸾镇甘肃时，以阻挠为铣所劾，逮问。
现代文：咸宁侯仇鸾镇守甘肃时，因阻挠边事遭曾铣弹劾，被逮捕问罪。
English: When Xianning Hou Qianqian was in charge of Gansu, he was impeached by Zeng Yao for obstructing border affairs and was arrested for questioning.

古文：嵩故雅亲鸾。
现代文：严嵩过去向来与仇鸾亲近。
English: Yan Song has always been close to his enemy in the past.

古文：知铣所善同邑苏纲者，言继妻父，纲与铣、言尝交关传语，乃代鸾狱中草疏，诬铣掩败不奏，克军饷钜万，遣子淳属所亲苏纲赂当途。
现代文：他获知曾铣的好友苏纲，是夏言继妻的父亲，苏纲与曾铣、夏言曾经往来通话，于是代替仇鸾狱中草就疏章，诬告曾铣掩败不奏，克扣军饷上万，并派儿子曾淳跟着他的亲信苏纲贿赂当权者。
English: He learned that Zeng Yao's good friend, Su Gang, was the father of Xia Yan's step-wife. Su Gang had been in communication with Zeng Yao and Xia Yan, so instead of taking revenge, he slandered Zeng Yao in prison, falsely accused Zeng Yao of covering up the defeat and not playing his part, withheld tens of thousands of military pay, and sent his son Zeng Jun to follow his close friend, Su Gang, to bribe those in power.

古文：其言绝无左验，而帝深入其说，立下淳、纲诏狱。
现代文：这种话绝对没有佐证验检，但皇帝深信他的话，立即将曾淳、苏纲下诏狱。
English: There was absolutely no evidence to support such a statement, but the emperor was convinced of his words and immediately sent Zeng Jun and Su Gang to prison.

古文：给事中齐誉等见帝怒铣甚，请早正刑章。
现代文：给事中齐誉等人看见皇帝非常愤怒曾铣，请求早日将他依法处置。
English: During the incident, Qi Rong and others saw that the emperor was very angry with Zeng Rong and requested that he be dealt with according to the law as soon as possible.

古文：帝责誉党奸避事，镌级调外任。
现代文：皇帝责怪齐誉党奸避事，降级调出朝廷任职。
English: The emperor accused Qi Rong of being a party traitor, and he was demoted and transferred out of the imperial court.

古文：及铣至，法司比拟边帅失陷城砦者律。
现代文：等到曾铣押到，法司将他犯的罪比拟边帅失陷城寨所犯的罪。
English: When Zeng was arrested, the legal department compared the crime he committed to the crime committed by the border guard who lost the castle.

古文：帝必欲依正条，当铣交结近侍律斩，妻子流二千里，即日行刑。
现代文：皇帝依照法律正条，将曾铣以交结近侍的条律斩首，妻子流放二千里，即日执行刑法。
English: The emperor, in accordance with the law, beheaded Zeng Ying's concubine, and exiled his wife 2,000 miles away. The criminal law was implemented on the same day.

古文：铣既死，言亦坐斩，而鸾出狱。
现代文：曾铣死后，夏言也坐罪被斩，而仇鸾被释放出狱。
English: After Zeng Yao's death, Xia Yan was also beheaded for his crime, while his enemy Zeng Yao was released from prison.

古文：铣有胆略，长于用兵。
现代文：曾铣有胆略，擅长于用兵。
English: Zeng Xuan had a daring strategy and was good at using troops.

古文：岁除夜，猝命诸将出。
现代文：有一年的除夕之夜，突然命令诸将出战。
English: One year, on New Year's Eve, the generals were suddenly ordered to go to war.

古文：时塞上无警，诸将方置酒，不欲行，赂铃卒求缓于铣妾。
现代文：当时塞上没有警情，诸将刚刚准备酒席，不想出战，贿赂铃卒，叫他向曾铣的妻子求情推缓出战。
English: At that time, there was no state of emergency. The generals had just prepared a banquet and did not want to go to war, so they bribed the bell ringer and told him to plead with Zeng Yao's wife to postpone going to war.

古文：铣斩铃卒以徇。
现代文：曾铣将铃卒斩首示众。
English: Zeng Yao decapitated Ling Zuo in front of the public.

古文：诸将不得已，丙夜被甲行。
现代文：诸将不得已，半夜三更披甲出战。
English: As a last resort, the generals put on armor and went into battle at midnight.

古文：果遇寇，击败之。
现代文：果然遇到敌寇，并将他们击败。
English: He met the enemy bandits and defeated them.

古文：翼日入贺毕，前请故。
现代文：第二天入贺完毕，诸将请问原因。
English: The next day, after the congratulation ceremony, everyone will ask why.

古文：铣笑曰： 见乌鹊非时噪，故知之耳。 
现代文：曾铣笑着说 ：发现乌鹊鼓噪得不是时候，所以才知道的。 
English: Zeng Yao said with a smile: It was not the right time to find out that the black cymbals were noisy, that's why I found out.

古文：丁汝夔，字大章，霑化人。
现代文：丁汝夔，字大章，沾化人。
English: Ding Ruxuan, the character of the chapter, Zanghua Ren.

古文：正德十六年进士。
现代文：正德十六年进士。
English: Zhengde entered the priesthood in the 16th year.

古文：改庶吉士。
现代文：改为庶吉士。
English: I'm so glad I changed jobs.

古文：嘉靖初，授礼部主事。
现代文：嘉靖年初期，授官礼部主事。
English: At the beginning of the year of Jiajing, he became the head of the ceremony department.

古文：争 大礼 被杖，调吏部。
现代文：因争辩 大礼 被杖拷打，调到吏部。
English: For arguing, he was beaten with a cane and transferred to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：累官山西左布政使，擢右副都御史，巡抚甘肃。
现代文：累官山西左布政使，提升为右副都御史，巡抚甘肃。
English: He was appointed as the Shanxi Zuo Bu political envoy, promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, and the inspector of Gansu.

古文：历抚保定、应天。
现代文：历抚保定、应天。
English: Experiencing Baoding and responding to the weather.

古文：入为左副都御史。
现代文：调入朝廷任右副都御史。
English: He was transferred to the Imperial Court as the right vice-governor.

古文：坐事调湖广参政。
现代文：因事调到湖广任参政。
English: Due to the incident, he was transferred to Hubei Province to participate in politics.

古文：复以故官抚河南。
现代文：又以原官职巡抚河南。
English: He was also promoted to the post of Henan Provincial Governor.

古文：历吏部左、右侍郎。
现代文：历任吏部左侍郎、右侍郎。
English: Successive officers of the Left Attendant, Right Attendant.

古文：二十八年十月拜兵部尚书兼督团营。
现代文：二十八年十月拜封为兵部尚书兼督团营。
English: In October of the 28th year, he was awarded the title of Hyobusho (Minister of the Ministry of the Army) as well as the superintendent of regiments.

古文：条上边务十事，皆报可。
现代文：逐条奏上边关事务十事，都被皇上批准。
English: The Emperor has approved all ten items of the above-mentioned border affairs.

古文：当是时，俺答岁寇边，羽书叠至。
现代文：就在这个时候，俺答年年侵犯我边关，告急兵书纷至。
English: Just at this time, I have been violating my border gate year after year, and the emergency soldiers have come.

古文：天子方斋居西内，厌兵事，而大学士严嵩窃权，边帅率以贿进，疆事大坏。
现代文：皇帝正斋戒居住在西内，讨厌兵事，而大学士严嵩窃取权职，边关将帅一般都是因贿赂严嵩而得到提拔的，边疆防备之事很糟。
English: The emperor is fasting and living in the west and hates military affairs, while the university scholar Yan Song steals positions of power, the border guard generals are generally promoted by bribing Yan Song, and the border defense is very bad.

古文：其明年八月甲子，俺答犯宣府，诸将拒之不得入。
现代文：第二年八月初三，俺答侵犯宣府，诸将抵抗住使他们不得侵入。
English: On the third day of the second month of August, we attempted to invade Xuanwu, but the generals resisted and did not allow them to enter.

古文：汝夔即上言： 寇不得志于宣府，必东趋辽、蓟。
现代文：丁汝夔当即上疏说 ：敌寇在宣府没有成功，一定会向东侵略辽、蓟。
English: Ding Ruxuan immediately said to Shang Suo: If the enemy invaders do not succeed in Xuanfu, they will surely invade Liao and Handan to the east.

古文：请敕诸将严为备。
现代文：请求皇上告诫诸将严阵以待。
English: Request the Emperor to admonish the generals to be on the alert.

古文：潮河川乃陵京门户，宜调辽东一军赴白马关，保定一军赴古北口。 
现代文：潮河川是入侵京师的门户，应当调辽东一军开赴白马关，保定一军开赴古北口。 
English: Chaohe River is the gateway for invading Beijing Division. An army from Liaodong should be sent to Baima Pass, and an army from Baoding should be sent to Gubeikou.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的话。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：寇果引而东，驻大兴州，去古北口百七十里。
现代文：敌寇果然向东开进，驻扎在大兴州，离古北口一百七十里。
English: The enemy raiders did indeed advance eastward and were stationed in Daxingzhou, 170 miles away from the ancient Beigou.

古文：大同总兵官仇鸾知之，率所部驰至居庸南。
现代文：大同总兵官仇鸾知道后，率领部下急驰到居庸南边。
English: After Datong general officer Qiu Qi knew, he led his subordinates to rush to the south of Juyong.

古文：顺天巡抚王汝孝驻蓟州，误听谍者谓寇向西北。
现代文：顺天巡抚王汝孝驻扎在蓟州，误听情报员说敌寇攻向西北。
English: Wang Ruxiao, the governor of Shuntian, was stationed in Ganzhou and misheard the intelligence officer as saying that the enemy was attacking the northwest.

古文：汝夔信之，请令鸾还大同勿东，诏俟后报。
现代文：丁汝夔相信了他的话，请求下令仇鸾返回大同不要东进，待等后报。
English: Ding Ruxuan believed his words and asked him to order his enemy to return to Datong, not to go east, and to wait for a later report.

古文：及兴州报至，命鸾壁居庸，汝孝守蓟州。
现代文：等到兴州战报来后，命令仇鸾壁扎居庸，王汝孝守卫蓟州。
English: When the report of the battle of Xingzhou came, he ordered his enemy, Yan Wei, to stay in Zaiyong, and Wang Ruxiao to guard Yinzhou.

古文：未几，寇循潮河川南下至古北口，薄关城。
现代文：过了不久，敌寇沿着潮河川南下到古北口，迫近关城。
English: Soon after, the enemy corsairs followed the tidal river south to the ancient northern entrance, approaching Guancheng.

古文：总兵官罗希韩、卢钺不能却，汝孝师大溃。
现代文：总兵官罗希韩、卢钺不能打退敌人，王汝孝的军队也大败。
English: General officers Rohi Han and Lu Ye could not beat back the enemy, and Wang Ruxiao's army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：寇遂由石匣营达密云，转掠怀柔，围顺义城。
现代文：敌寇于是由石匣营到达密南，转掠怀柔，包围顺义城。
English: The enemy raiders then arrived in Minan from Shijiazhuang Camp, pillaged Huairou, and surrounded Shunyi City.

古文：闻保定兵驻城内，乃解而南，至通州。
现代文：听说保定军驻在城内，于是撤消包围而向南进发，到通州。
English: Hearing that the Baoding Army was stationed in the city, they lifted the siege and marched south to Tongzhou.

古文：阻白河不得渡，驻河东孤山，分剽昌平、三河，犯诸帝陵，杀掠不可胜纪。
现代文：被阻在白河不能渡过，驻扎在河东的孤山上，分兵抢劫昌平、三河、冒犯诸帝陵，杀掠不可胜数。
English: They were blocked from crossing the Shirakawa River and stationed on a lonely mountain east of the river. Detachments of soldiers robbed Changping and Sanhe, and violated the mausoleums of emperors, killing and plundering countless people.

古文：京师戒严，召各镇勤王。
现代文：京师戒严。
English: Beijing declares martial law.

古文：分遣文武大臣各九人，守京城九门，定西侯蒋传、吏部侍郎王邦瑞总督之，而以锦衣都督陆炳，礼部侍郎王用宾，给事御史各四人，巡视皇城四门。
现代文：召集各镇勤王，分派文武大臣各九人，守卫京城九门，由定西侯蒋传、吏部侍郎王邦瑞进行总督，而以锦衣都督陆炳，礼部侍郎王用宾，给事御史各四人，巡视皇城四门。
English: Nine ministers of culture and armed forces were dispatched from each town to guard the nine gates of the capital city. The governor of the capital was Ding Xi Hou Jiang Chuan, and the governor of the capital was Wang Bang Rui, and the governor of the capital was Lu Wei, and the governor of the capital was Lu Wei, and the governor of the capital was Wang Bing, and the minister of ceremonies was Wang Yibin. Four ministers of culture and armed forces were assigned to guard the nine gates of the capital city, and four ministers of history were assigned to patrol the four gates of the capital city.

古文：诏大小文臣知兵者，许汝夔委用。
现代文：诏告大小文臣懂得兵事的，准许丁汝夔进行委用。
English: It was decreed that the great and small civil servants knew military affairs, and allowed Ding Ruxuan to be appointed.

古文：汝夔条上八事，请列正兵四营于城外四隅，奇兵九营于九门外近郊。
现代文：丁汝夔逐条上奏八事，请求将正兵四营分列在城外四隅，奇兵九营分列在九门外近邻。
English: Ding Ruxuan listed eight matters one by one, and requested that the four battalions of regular soldiers be divided into four corners outside the city, and the nine battalions of special soldiers be divided into nine outlying neighborhoods.

古文：正兵营各一万，奇兵营各六千。
现代文：正营每营一万人，奇营每营六千人。
English: Ten thousand men per battalion for the main camp, and six thousand men per battalion for the special camp.

古文：急遣大臣二人经略通州、涿州，且释罪废诸将使立功赎罪。
现代文：急派大臣二人经略通州、涿州，并且释放因罪被废除的诸位将领使他们立功赎罪。
English: He urgently dispatched two ministers to Tongzhou and Zhangzhou, and released the generals who had been abolished for their crimes, so that they could make meritorious deeds to atone for their sins.

古文：帝悉从之。
现代文：皇帝都听从了他。
English: All the emperors agreed.

古文：然是时册籍皆虚数。禁军仅四五万，老弱半之，又半役内外提督大臣家不归伍，在伍者亦涕泣不敢前。
现代文：但是这时册籍都是虚数，禁军只有四五万人，老弱占了一半，又有一半在内外提督大臣家里当差役不归军队，在队伍的人也有哭泣流涕不敢上前线的。
English: But at this time, the registers were all imaginary numbers, the forbidden army was only 450,000 people, half of whom were old and weak, and half of them did not return to the army when they were sentries at the home of admirals and ministers at home and abroad, and there were also people in the ranks who were crying and did not dare to go to the front.

古文：从武库索甲仗，主库奄人勒常例，不时发。久之不能军。
现代文：军队从武库里索领甲仗，管库宦官按常例进行勒索，不按时发放武器，长久下来就不能打仗。
English: Armies fight battles from their arsenals, and the eunuchs in charge of the arsenals extort money as usual. If they don't distribute weapons on time, they can't fight for a long time.

古文：乃发居民及四方应武举诸生乘城，且大颁赏格。
现代文：于是发动居民及四方应武举人考试的诸生登城防守，并且大颁赏格。
English: As a result, the residents and the four parties launched the defense of the residents of the city in response to the military examination, and the awards were awarded.

古文：仇鸾与副将徐珏、游击张腾等军白河西，杨守谦与副将朱楫等军东直门外，诸路援兵亦稍集。
现代文：仇鸾与副将徐珏、游击张腾等驻扎在白河以西，杨守谦与副将朱楫等驻扎在东直门外，诸路援兵也逐渐集聚。
English: Qiu Qi and his second-in-command Xu Qi and guerrilla Zhang Teng were stationed west of the Baihe River, while Yang Shouqian and his second-in-command Zhu Xi were stationed outside the Dongzhimen Gate, and reinforcements from all directions also gradually gathered.

古文：议者率谓城内虚，城外有边兵足恃，宜移京军备内衅，汝夔亦以为然。
现代文：谋议事的人都说城内空虚，城外有边兵足以依靠，应当调京军以防止城内的坏事。丁汝夔也认为是这样。
English: The councilors all said that the city was empty, that there were enough border soldiers outside the city to rely on, and that the Beijing army should be transferred to prevent bad things in the city. Ding Ruxuan also thought so.

古文：遂量掣禁军入营十王府、厌寿寺前。
现代文：于是抽调禁军入营十王府、庆寿寺前。
English: As a result, the imperial army was brought into the camp in front of the Ten Kings' Palace and Keiju-ji Temple.

古文：掌营务者成国公朱希忠恐以兵少获谴，乃东西抽掣为掩饰计。
现代文：掌管营务的人成国公朱希忠怕因为兵少而受到谴责，于是东抽西调来作掩饰。
English: Zhu Xizhong, the man in charge of the camp, feared that he would be blamed for the small number of soldiers, so he moved them from east to west to cover it up.

古文：士疲不得息，出怨言，而莫晓孰为调者，则争詈汝夔。
现代文：士兵疲惫而得不到休息，产生出怨言，而不知道谁要这样调动，则竞相争骂丁汝夔。
English: The soldiers, tired and unable to rest, complained, and, not knowing who wanted to make such a move, competed to abuse Ding Ruxuan.

古文：鸾兵无纪律，掠民间。
现代文：仇鸾的兵无纪律，在民间抢掠。
English: The enemy soldiers were undisciplined and plundered the civilian population.

古文：帝方眷鸾，令勿捕。
现代文：皇帝正宠爱仇鸾，下令不要逮捕。
English: The emperor was fond of his enemies and ordered that they should not be arrested.

古文：汝夔亦戒勿治鸾兵。
现代文：丁汝夔也告诫不要整治仇鸾的兵士。
English: Ding Ruxuan also cautioned against disciplining soldiers who have vendettas.

古文：民益怨怒。
现代文：黎民百姓更加怨恨他。
English: The Lebanese people resent him even more.

古文：寇游骑四出，去都城三十里。
现代文：敌寇游击骑兵四出，离都城三十里。
English: The enemy's guerrilla cavalry is on the move, thirty miles from the capital.

古文：及辛巳，遂自通州渡河而西，前锋七百骑驻安定门外教场。
现代文：等到辛巳，于是从通州渡河向西边去，前锋七百骑兵驻扎在安定门外教场。
English: When it was dark, they crossed the river from Tongzhou to the west. The advance guard of seven hundred cavalrymen was stationed in the schoolyard outside the stable gate.

古文：明日，大营薄都城。分掠西山、黄村、沙河、大小榆河，畿甸大震。
现代文：第二日，大军迫近都城，分掠西山、黄村、沙河、大小榆河，畿甸大震。
English: On the second day, the large army approached the capital, divided and plundered Xishan, Huangcun, Shahe, and the large and small Minhe, and the Great Earthquake of Kition occurred.

古文：初，寇逼通州，部所遣侦卒出城不数里，道遇伤者，辄奔还妄言诳汝夔。
现代文：当初，敌寇威逼通州，部所派遣侦察兵出城不到数里，在路上遇到受伤的人，于是就跑回来妄言欺骗丁汝夔。
English: At first, the enemy invaded Tongzhou, and the ministry dispatched scouts to go out of the city for less than a few miles. They encountered injured people on the road, so they ran back and lied to deceive Ding Ruxuan.

古文：既而言不雠，汝夔弗罪也。
现代文：既而所言并不应验，丁汝夔不怪罪他们。
English: Even though what he said did not come true, Ding Ruxuan did not blame them.

古文：募他卒侦之复如前。
现代文：招募其他的士兵去侦察，又像以前一样。
English: Recruit other soldiers to reconnoiter, again as before.

古文：以故寇众寡远近皆不能知。
现代文：所以敌寇的多少远近等情况都不能知道。
English: Therefore, it is impossible to know how close or far away the enemy raider is.

古文：宣府总兵官赵国忠，参将赵臣、孙时谦、袁正，游击姚冕，山西游击罗恭等，各以兵入援，营玉河诸处。
现代文：宣府总兵官赵国忠，参将赵臣、孙时谦、袁正，游击姚冕，山西游击罗恭等人，各率兵回来援救，安营在玉河诸处。
English: Zhao Guozhong, the chief military officer of the Xuanwu government, Zhao Zhen, Sun Shihqian, Yuan Zheng, the guerrilla Yao Guanyin, the Shanxi guerrilla Luo Qiong, and other soldiers came back to rescue and camped in various places in the Jade River.

古文：诏兵部核诸镇兵数，行赏赉。
现代文：皇帝下诏兵部核准诸镇兵数，实行赏赐。
English: Under the emperor's edict, the military department approved the number of soldiers in each town and implemented rewards.

古文：勤王兵先后五六万人，皆闻变即赴，未赍糗粮。
现代文：勤王兵先后有五六万人，都是听说有兵变就赶赴而来，没有携带干粮。
English: There were successively fifty to sixty thousand royalist soldiers, all of whom had heard of the mutiny and rushed there, without carrying any dry rations.

古文：制下犒师，牛酒无所出。
现代文：虽有命令下来犒师，但牛肉酒等没有地方拿出。
English: Although there is an order to bring down gongshi, there is no place to take out beef wine and so on.

古文：越二三日，援军始得数饼饵，益饥疲不任战。
现代文：过了二三日，援军才得到几个饼而已，更加饥饿疲惫不能胜任战斗。
English: After two or three days, the reinforcements only got a few loaves of bread, and they were too hungry and tired to fight.

古文：帝久不视朝，军事无由面白。
现代文：皇帝长久不视朝，军事无法当面陈白。
English: For a long time, the emperor did not pay attention to the DPRK, and the military could not make a face-to-face demonstration.

古文：廷臣多以为言，帝不许。
现代文：廷臣大多要求皇帝上朝，皇帝不许。
English: Most courtiers asked the emperor to ascend to the throne, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：礼部尚书徐阶复固请，帝乃许。
现代文：礼部尚书徐阶又坚持原来的请求，皇帝允许了。
English: The ceremonial department's Shang Shuxu and Xu Qi again insisted on the original request, and the emperor allowed it.

古文：癸未，群臣昧爽入。至日晡，帝始御奉天殿，不发一词，但命阶奉敕谕至午门，集群臣切责之而已。
现代文：二十二日，群臣拂晓入朝，到黄昏，皇帝才到奉天殿，不发一词，只命令徐阶奉敕谕到午门，集聚群臣切实责备了一顿而已。
English: On the 22nd, the courtiers entered the imperial court at dawn, and it was not until dusk that the emperor arrived at the Bongtian Hall. He did not utter a word, but only ordered Xu Ji to go to the noon gate. He gathered the courtiers and effectively scolded them.

古文：帝怒文武臣不任事，尤怒汝夔。
现代文：皇帝恼怒群臣不胜任事情，特别恼怒丁汝夔。
English: The emperor was enraged by the incompetence of his courtiers, and was particularly angry with Ding Ruxuan.

古文：吏部因请起杨守礼、刘源清、史道、许论于家。
现代文：吏部因而请求起用停职在家的杨守礼、刘源清、史道、许论诸人。
English: As a result, the personnel department requested the use of Yang Shouli, Liu Yuanqing, Shido, and Xu On, who were suspended at home.

古文：汝夔不自安，请督诸将出城战，而以侍郎谢兰署部事。
现代文：丁汝夔感到不安，请允许让他总督诸将出城作战，而让侍郎谢兰代理部事。
English: Ding Ruxuan felt uneasy. Please allow him to let the governors leave the city to fight, and let the chamberlain Xie Lan act as deputy minister.

古文：帝责其推委，命居中如故。
现代文：皇帝责备他推诿，命丁汝夔居中如故。
English: The emperor reproached him for his prevarication, and ordered Ding Ruxuan to remain in his position.

古文：寇纵横内地八日，诸军不敢发一矢。
现代文：敌寇纵横八天，诸军不敢发一箭。
English: The enemy raided for eight days, and the troops did not dare to fire a single arrow.

古文：寇本无意攻城，且所掠过望，乃整辎重，从容趋白羊口而去。
现代文：敌寇本就无意攻城，而且抢掠到的东西超出原来的估计，于是清理辎重，从容地趋向白羊口而离去。
English: The enemy robbers had no intention of attacking the city, and what they looted exceeded the original estimate, so they cleaned up the debris and walked away towards the mouth of the White Goat.

古文：方事棘，帝趣诸将战甚急。汝夔以咨嵩。
现代文：事情正棘手时，皇帝急促地催诸将迎战。丁汝夔去咨询严嵩。
English: When things were getting tough, the emperor hurriedly urged Zhu to go to war. Ding Ruxuan went to consult Yan Song.

古文：嵩曰： 塞上败或可掩也，失利辇下，帝无不知，谁执其咎？
现代文：严嵩说 ：边塞上战败或许可以掩盖，京城之下失利，皇帝没有不知道的，谁来担当这一责任？
English: Yan Song said: The defeat on the frontier fortress may be covered up, the defeat under the capital, the emperor does not know, who will take this responsibility?

古文：寇饱自飏去耳。 
现代文：敌寇抢掠充足后自然会离去的。 
English: After the enemy bandits have plundered enough, they will naturally leave.

古文：汝夔因不敢主战，诸将亦益闭营，寇以此肆掠无所忌。
现代文：丁汝夔因为不敢主战，诸将也紧闭营门，敌寇因此肆无忌惮地进行抢掠。
English: Because Ding Ruxuan did not dare to lead the battle, the generals also closed the gate, so the enemy bandits brazenly carried out looting.

古文：既退，汝夔、兰及户、工尚书李士翱、胡松，侍郎骆颙、孙禬皆引罪。
现代文：到敌寇退回以后，丁汝夔、谢兰及户工部尚书李士翱、胡松，侍郎骆、孙衤会都引以为罪。
English: After the enemy corsairs retreated, Ding Ruxuan, Xie Lan, and members of the Household Engineering Department, Shangshu Li Shizhen, Hu Song, Zhi Lang Luo, and Sun Yuekai, were all found guilty.

古文：命革士翱职，停松俸，俱戴罪办事，侍郎各停俸五月，而下汝夔狱。
现代文：皇帝下令革去李士翱官职，停发胡松薪俸，都让他们戴罪办事，侍郎每人停发薪俸五个月，将丁汝夔下狱。
English: The emperor ordered Li Shih-tung to be dismissed from his post, Hu Song's salary to be suspended, and all of them to be punished for their work, and the attendants to have their salaries suspended for five months each, and Ding Rong to be sent to prison.

古文：帝欲大行诛以惩后。
现代文：皇帝想大量诛捕以儆效尤。
English: The emperor wanted to catch a large number of cormorants to set an example.

古文：汝夔窘，求救于嵩。嵩曰： 我在，必不令公死。 
现代文：丁汝夔处境困迫，向严嵩求救。严嵩说： 我在，一定不会让你死。 
English: Ding Ruxuan was in a difficult situation and asked Yan Song for help. Yan Song said, "I'm here, I won't let you die."

古文：及见帝怒甚，竟不敢言。
现代文：等到发现皇帝非常恼怒，竟不敢吱声。
English: He waited until he found that the emperor was so angry that he dared not utter a word.

古文：给事御史劾汝夔御寇无策。
现代文：给事御史弹劾丁汝夔防御敌寇没有计策。
English: There is no strategy to impeach Ding Ruxuan and defend against enemy invaders.

古文：帝责其不早言，夺俸有差。
现代文：皇帝责他不早说，相应地减少他们的薪俸，催促早点定罪。
English: The emperor scolded him for not speaking sooner, reduced their salaries accordingly, and urged an early conviction.

古文：趣具狱，怒法司奏当缓，杖都御史屠侨、刑部侍郎彭黯、大理卿沈良才各四十，降俸五等。
现代文：皇帝恼怒法司缓刑之奏，杖责都御史屠侨、刑部侍郎彭黯、大理卿沈良才各四十，降他们薪俸五等。
English: The emperor was so angry that the magistrate suspended the sentence. The magistrate of the capital, Shi Tuoqiao, the attendant of the criminal department, Peng Qian, and the minister of justice, Shen Liangcai, were each sentenced to forty years, and their salaries were reduced by five grades.

古文：刑科张侃等循故事覆奏，各杖五十，斥侃为民。
现代文：刑科张侃等人遵循旧例将事复奏，被各打五十大杖，并将张侃贬斥为民。
English: Zhang Kan and others in the criminal investigation department followed the old practice of reenacting the incident, were each beaten with fifty large sticks, and Zhang Kan was relegated to the people.

古文：坐汝夔守备不设，即日斩于市，枭其首，妻流三千里，子戍铁岭。
现代文：问丁汝夔不设守备之罪，即日斩于市，并割下脑袋悬城示众，将他的妻子流放三千里，将他的儿子贬戍铁岭。
English: Asking Ding Ruxuan not to commit the crime of guarding, he beheaded him in the city on the same day, and cut off his head to be displayed to the public, exiled his wife three thousand miles away, and banished his son to Tieling.

古文：汝夔临刑，始悔为嵩所卖。
现代文：丁汝夔临近受刑，才后悔被严嵩出卖。
English: It was only when Ding Ruxuan was about to be sentenced that she regretted being betrayed by Yan Song.

古文：方廷讯时，职方郎王尚学当从坐。
现代文：当廷审讯的时候，职方郎王尚学被连带问罪。
English: At the time of the court trial, Wang Shangxue, the official's son-in-law, was jointly charged.

古文：汝夔曰， 罪在尚书，郎中无预 ，得减死论戍。
现代文：丁汝夔说： 罪在尚书，郎中没有参加预谋。 
English: Ding Ruxuan said: The crime was committed by Shangshu, and Lang did not participate in the premeditation.

古文：比赴市，问左右： 王郎中免乎？ 
现代文：王尚学才得以减死罪而被贬戍。等到赴市问斩时，丁汝夔问左右的人 ：王郎中免死了吗？ 
English: It was only after Wang Shangxue had his death sentence commuted that he was dethroned. When he went to the city to inquire about the beheading, Ding Ruxuan asked the people around him: Was Wang Langzhong spared from death?

古文：尚学子化适在旁，谢曰： 荷公恩，免矣。 
现代文：王尚学的儿子王化正好在旁，感激地说： 承当您的大恩，我父得以免死。 
English: Wang Shangxu's son, Wang Hua, was right next to him and said gratefully, "Thanks to your great kindness, my father was able to avoid death."

古文：汝夔叹曰： 汝父劝我速战，我为政府误。
现代文：丁汝夔感叹地说： 你父亲劝我速战，我被政府所误。
English: Ding Ruxuan said with a sigh: Your father advised me to fight quickly, but I was misled by the government.

古文：汝父免，我死无恨。 
现代文：你父能免死，我死而无恨。 
English: If your father could avoid death, I can die without hate.

古文：闻者为泣下。
现代文：听到这话的人都纷纷泪下。
English: People burst into tears when they heard this.

古文：隆庆初，复官。
现代文：隆庆初年，丁汝夔复官。
English: In the first year of Longqing, Ding Ruxuan was reinstated.

古文：汝夔既下狱，并逮汝孝、希韩、钺。
现代文：丁汝夔已经下狱，一并逮捕王汝孝、罗希韩、卢钺。
English: Ding Ruxuan has been released from prison, and Wang Ruxiao, Luo Xihan, and Lu Yao have been arrested.

古文：寇未尽去，官校不敢前，托言汝孝等追寇白羊口，远不可卒至。
现代文：敌寇还未完全离去，官校不敢上前逮捕，假称王汝孝等人，到白羊口追击敌寇，由于太远而不能即刻赶到。
English: The enemy bandits had not yet completely left, and the government school did not dare to go forward to arrest them. They pretended to be Wang Ruxiao and others and pursued the enemy bandits to Baiyokou, but they could not arrive immediately because it was too far away.

古文：比逮至，论死。
现代文：等到逮捕至京城后，论死罪。
English: After his arrest in the capital, he was sentenced to death.

古文：帝怒渐解，而汝孝复以首功闻，命俱减死戍边。
现代文：这时皇帝的恼怒已逐渐消解，而王汝孝等人又以首功奏闻，因而他们都被减死罪而贬戍边关。
English: At this time, the emperor's anger had gradually dissipated, and Wang Ruxiao and others also reported their findings, so they were all commuted to death and sentenced to death.

古文：杨守谦，字允亨，徐州人。
现代文：杨守谦，字允亨，徐州人。
English: Yang Shouqian, Zi Yunheng, from Xuzhou.

古文：父志学，字逊夫，弘治六年进士。
现代文：他父亲杨志学，字逊夫，弘治六年进士。
English: His father, Yang Shigaku, was a layman, and he entered the priesthood at the age of six.

古文：巡抚大同、宁夏，边人爱之。
现代文：巡抚大同、宁夏，边关人民爱戴他。
English: He is the governor of Datong and Ningxia, and the border people love him.

古文：累官刑部尚书，卒，谥康惠。
现代文：累官刑部尚书，死后，谥号康惠。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was Kanghui.

古文：守谦登嘉靖八年进士，授屯田主事。
现代文：杨守谦考取嘉靖八年进士，授官屯田主事。
English: Yang Shouqian passed the entrance examination in the eighth year of Jiajing and was promoted to the post of chief of Tonden.

古文：改职方，历郎中，练习兵计。
现代文：改职方，历郎中，练习兵计。
English: The change of job, the change of family, and the training of soldiers.

古文：出为陕西副使，改督学政，有声，就拜参政。
现代文：出任陕西副使，改任督学政，有声望，就地升为参政。
English: He was appointed deputy envoy to Shaanxi Province, and later became the superintendent of education and politics. He had a reputation and was promoted to participate in politics on the spot.

古文：未任，擢右佥都御史，巡抚山西。
现代文：未上任，被提升为右佥都御史，巡抚山西。
English: Prior to taking office, he was promoted to the post of Right Deputy Metropolitan Historian and Governor of Shanxi Province.

古文：上言偏头、老营堡二所，余地千九百余顷，请兴举营田。
现代文：向皇上奏言说偏头、老营堡二所，余地一千九百多顷，请求作为兴举的军队耕种的田地。
English: He made a report to the emperor, saying that there were two camps, the old camp and the new camp, with a space of more than nineteen hundred hectares, and requested the fields cultivated by the army.

古文：因荐副使张镐为提调，牛种取给本土。
现代文：于是推荐副使张镐任提调，牛种取给本土。
English: As a result, the deputy envoy Zhang Yiren was recommended to be transferred, and the cattle breed was taken to the mainland.

古文：帝称为忠，即报可。
现代文：皇帝称其为忠，报告一上去就获得批准。
English: The emperor called him loyal, and the report was approved as soon as it went up.

古文：俄移抚延绥。请久任镐，终其事。
现代文：不久调移巡抚延绥，请求调任张镐，终成其事。
English: Soon after, the governor Yan Qi was transferred and Zhang Qi was asked to be transferred, which finally happened.

古文：其后二年，营田大兴。
现代文：这以后两年，军田大兴。
English: In the next two years, there was great prosperity in the military field.

古文：计秋获可当帑银十万，边关谷价减十五。
现代文：计算秋天的收获可值币银十万两，边关谷物价减十分之五。
English: The autumn harvest was estimated to be worth 100,000 taels of silver, and the price of grain at the border decreased by five-tenths.

古文：守谦荐镐可大用，且言延绥、安定诸边可如例。
现代文：杨守谦推荐张镐可以大用，并且说延绥安定诸边关都可以像这样做。
English: Yang Shouqian recommended that Zhang Ye could be put to great use, and said that the stability of Yancheng and the stability of all borders could be like this.

古文：户部请推行之九边。
现代文：户部请求将这种方法推广实行到九边。
English: The head office requested that this method be extended to the nine sides.

古文：帝悦，命亟行之，录守谦、镐功。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，命令紧急实行，并录下杨守谦、张镐的功劳。
English: The emperor was very pleased, ordered an emergency implementation, and recorded the achievements of Yang Shouqian and Zhang Ye.

古文：守谦未去延绥，而镐已巡抚宁夏矣。
现代文：杨守谦没有离开延绥，而张镐则已巡抚宁夏。
English: Yang Shouqian did not leave Yancheng, while Zhang Ye became the governor of Ningxia.

古文：守谦至延绥，言： 激劝军士在重赏。
现代文：杨守谦到延绥，说： 激励军士的关键在重赏。
English: Yang Shouqian went to Yancheng and said, "The key to motivating sergeants is to reward them.

古文：令斩一首者升一级，不愿者予白金三十两。
现代文：下令斩敌一人的升一级，如不愿意就给白金三十两。
English: If you order someone to kill an enemy, you will be promoted to the next level. If you don't want to, you will be given 30 taels of platinum.

古文：赏已薄，又文移察勘，动涉岁时，以故士心不劝。
现代文：赏已微小，又文书往来察勘调查，时间拖得很久，所以士心没有受到鼓励。
English: The reward has been small, and the inspection and investigation of documents has been delayed for a long time, so the spirit has not been encouraged.

古文：近宣、大事棘稍加赏格，请倍增其数，镇巡官验明即给。
现代文：近来宣、大的事急，渐加赏格，请求倍增赏格的数目，镇巡官验查明白后就付给。
English: Recently, it has been announced that due to great urgency, the reward will be gradually increased, and the number of requests for doubling the reward will be paid after the town inspector's inspection is clear.

古文：盖增级、袭荫，有官者利之，穷卒觊赏而已。 
现代文：而增级、袭荫，对有官的人有利，穷士兵只希望得到奖赏而已。 
English: But promotion and shadowing are advantageous to those who have officials, and poor soldiers only hope to get rewards.

古文：兵部以为然，定斩首一级者与五十两，著为令。
现代文：兵部认为是这样，规定斩敌人一个首级的给与白金五十两，并载入军令条例。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs considered this to be the case and stipulated that the severing of an enemy's head was to be rewarded with 50 taels of platinum, which was also included in the military order regulations.

古文：以前山西修边功，增俸一级，赐金币有加。
现代文：以前山西修边功，增俸一级，赐金币有加。
English: In the past, Shanxi's border-mending efforts were rewarded with a one-level salary increase and a gold coin bonus.

古文：请给新设游兵月饷，发仓储贷饥卒，皆报许。
现代文：请求给新设的游兵发月饷，发仓储贷给饥饿的士兵，报告给皇帝都得到批准。
English: Requests to issue monthly stipends to newly-formed guerrillas, store and lend money to starving soldiers, and report to the emperor were all approved.

古文：二十九年进副都御史，巡抚保定兼督紫荆诸关。
现代文：二十九年他进官副都御史，巡抚保定兼督紫荆诸关。
English: In 1929, he was promoted to vice-governor of the capital, governor of Baoding and governor of Zhengzhou.

古文：去镇之日，倾城号泣，有追送数百里外者。
现代文：在离开镇的那天，满城号啕大哭，有人追送到数百里以外。
English: On the day he left town, there was a city-wide outcry, and he was chased hundreds of miles away.

古文：未几，俺答入寇，守谦率师倍道入援。
现代文：不久，俺答入侵，杨守谦带兵倍道入援。
English: Soon after, I responded to the invasion, and Yang Shouqian came to the rescue with soldiers from Baidoa.

古文：帝闻其至，甚喜，令营崇文门外。
现代文：皇帝听到他到达，很高兴，令他扎营崇文门外。
English: The emperor was so pleased to hear of his arrival that he made him camp outside the Chongwen Gate.

古文：会副总兵朱楫，参将祝福、冯登亦各以兵至，人心稍安。
现代文：正好副总兵朱楫，参将祝福、冯登也各自带兵到达，人心稍安。
English: Just as Vice-Commander-in-Chief Zhu Rong, General Blessing, and Feng Deng arrived with their respective soldiers, the hearts of the people were a little calmer.

古文：寇游骑散掠枯柳诸村，去京城二十里。
现代文：敌寇游骑分散抢掠枯柳诸村，离京城二十里。
English: The enemy raiders rode around and plundered villages in the withered willows, twenty miles from the capital.

古文：守谦及楫等兵移营东直门外。
现代文：杨守谦和朱楫等人移兵扎营东直门外。
English: Yang Shouqian and Zhu Xi and others moved their troops and encamped outside Dongzhimen.

古文：诏同仇鸾调度京城及各路援兵，相机战守。
现代文：皇帝下令杨守谦和仇鸾调度京城及各路援兵，相机作战或守御。
English: The emperor ordered Yang Shouqian and Qu Rong to dispatch the capital and reinforcements from all directions, and to film the battle or the defense.

古文：寇薄都城，诸将高秉元、徐镛等御之，不能却。
现代文：敌寇迫近都城，诸将高秉元、徐镛等人抵御敌人，但不能将其击退。
English: The enemy raiders approached the capital city. Generals Gao Bingyuan and Xu Xi resisted the enemy, but were unable to repel them.

古文：帝拜鸾大将军，进守谦兵部右侍郎，协同提督内外诸军事。
现代文：皇帝拜封仇鸾为大将军，晋升杨守谦为兵部右侍郎，协同仇鸾提督内外诸军事。
English: The emperor appointed Qiu Jun as the grand general, promoted Yang Shouqian as the right hand man of the military department, and cooperated with Qiu Jun's admiral to lead the military inside and outside the country.

古文：鸾时自孤山还，至东直门观望，斩死人首六级，报功。
现代文：仇鸾当时从孤山返回，到东直门观望，斩死敌人六个，报功。
English: At that time, he returned from the lonely mountain, went to Dongzhimen to watch, killed six enemies, and reported his achievement.

古文：守谦孤军薄俺答营，而阵无后继，不敢战。
现代文：杨守谦孤军迫近俺答的军营，但没有后继援军，不敢作战。
English: Yang Shouqian's lone army approached our camp, but there was no follow-up reinforcement and he did not dare to fight.

古文：帝闻不悦。
现代文：皇帝听到后很不高兴。
English: The emperor was not pleased to hear this.

古文：而尚书丁汝夔虑丧师，戒勿轻战。
现代文：而尚书丁汝夔顾虑丧失军队，告诫不要轻易作战。
English: However, Shangshu Tingruo, concerned about losing troops, warned against fighting lightly.

古文：诸将离城远，见守谦不战，亦坚壁，辄引汝夔及守谦为辞。
现代文：诸将离城远，而杨守谦不战，也坚壁不出，就引出丁汝夔和杨守谦之事为遁词。
English: Zhuge will be far away from the city, and Yang Shouqian will not fight, nor will there be a solid wall, so the matter of Ding Ruxuan and Yang Shouqian will be a bad word.

古文：流闻禁中，帝益怒。
现代文：流闻传到禁城中，皇帝更加恼怒。
English: The rumor spread to the Forbidden City, and the emperor became even more angry.

古文：初，寇抵安定门，诏守谦与楫等合击，莫敢前。
现代文：起初，敌寇抵达安定门，皇帝下令杨守谦与朱楫等人合击，但他们不敢上前线。
English: At first, the enemy raiders arrived at Andingmen, and the emperor ordered Yang Shouqian and Zhu Xi and others to fight together, but they did not dare to go to the front.

古文：守谦亦委无部檄，第申儆备。
现代文：杨守谦也推诿没有兵部的檄文，只管强调戒备。
English: Yang Shouqian also pushed back on the statement that there was no military department, but stressed vigilance.

古文：寇遂毁城外庐舍。
现代文：敌寇于是烧毁城外的庐舍。
English: The enemy bandits then burned down the hermitage outside the city.

古文：城西北隅火光烛天，内臣园宅在焉，环泣帝前，称将帅为文臣制，故寇得至此。
现代文：城的西北角火光冲天，内臣的园宅在那里，于是他们围绕在皇帝面前哭泣，并说将帅被文臣所抑制，所以敌寇才得像现在这样。
English: The northwest corner of the city was ablaze, and the garden house of the vassal was there, so they gathered around and wept before the emperor, saying that the general was restrained by the vassal, so the enemy had to be like this.

古文：帝怒曰： 守谦拥众自全，朕亲降旨趣战，何得以部檄为解。 
现代文：皇帝发怒说 ：杨守谦拥众自重，我亲自降旨催促作战，怎么能用无兵部檄文来推脱。 
English: The emperor said angrily, "Yang Shou-Hian has won the respect of the people. I myself have issued an order to hasten the battle. How can I use the excuse that there is no military department?

古文：寇退，遂执守谦与汝夔廷鞫之。
现代文：敌寇退后，就捉拿杨守谦和丁汝夔在朝廷上审讯。
English: When the enemy pirates retreated, they captured Yang Shouqian and Ding Ruxuan and interrogated them in the imperial court.

古文：坐失误军机，即日戮于市。
现代文：问失误军机罪，即日杀戮于市。
English: Ask the mistake of the military machine crime, the day of the killing in the city.

古文：守谦临刑时，慨然曰： 臣以勤王反获罪，谗贼之口实蔽圣聪。
现代文：杨守谦临刑的时候，慨然地说： 我以勤王反而获罪，谗贼之口实蔽圣聪。
English: When Yang Shouqian was about to be sentenced, he said with emotion, "I have been convicted of being a king-follower, but the mouth of the thief has actually covered Shengtong."

古文：皇天后土知臣此心，死何恨。 
现代文：皇天后土知我此心，死有何恨？ 
English: The Empress Dowager Tsuchihi knows my heart. How can I hate death?

古文：边陲吏士知守谦死，无不流涕者。
现代文：边陲官兵知道杨守谦的死后，没有不哭泣流涕的。
English: When the officers and soldiers of Bentham knew that Yang Shouqian had died, there was no one who did not shed tears.

古文：守谦坦易无城府，驭下多恩意。
现代文：杨守谦坦荡平易没有城府，驭下多有恩义。
English: Yang Shou is humble, easy-going, and easy to get along with.

古文：守官廉，位至开府，萧然若寒士。
现代文：做官廉洁，官位到达开府，还像寒士一样萧然。
English: He is an honest official, and when his official rank reaches the capital, he is still depressed like a cold person.

古文：帝怒，镌时彻二秩。
现代文：然而性情迟重，客卿中有人劝他作战，他回答说： 周亚夫是什么人呢？ 
English: However, he was of a tardy nature, and when some of the foreign dignitaries urged him to fight, he replied: "Who is Zhou Yafu?

古文：明年竟卒于狱。
现代文：客卿说： 你错了，今日怎能和汉朝之法相比。 
English: He said, "You are wrong. How can today's laws be compared to those of the Han Dynasty?"

古文：隆庆初，复故官，赠兵部尚书，谥端愍。
现代文：杨守谦不采纳他的建议，竟然获罪。隆庆初年，赠官兵部尚书，谥号恪愍。
English: Yang Shouqian did not accept his suggestion and was even found guilty. In the first year of Longqing, he was awarded the title of officer of the military department, and his posthumous name was Zhuo.

古文：王忬，字民应，太仓人。
现代文：忬，字民应，太仓人。
English: ,字民应,太仓人.

古文：父倬，南京兵部右侍郎，以谨厚称。
现代文：他的父亲王倬，做过南京兵部右侍郎，因恭谨淳厚而得到称赞。
English: His father, Wang Yao, had been the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Military Department, and was praised for his respect and courtesy.

古文：忬登嘉靖二十年进士，授行人，迁御史。
现代文：忬考中嘉靖二十年进士，授官行人，迁御史。
English: In the middle of the examination, Jiajing was promoted to the rank of a scholar for 20 years. He was awarded the title of an official and moved to the imperial capital.

古文：皇太子出阁，疏以武宗居青宫为戒。
现代文：皇太子离开内宫时，他上疏皇帝以武宗居青宫为戒。
English: When the crown prince left the inner palace, he was warned by the Shang Dynasty emperor to stay away from the Qing Palace.

古文：又劾罢东厂太监宋兴。
现代文：又弹劾罢去东厂太监宋兴。
English: He also impeached and dismissed Song Xing, the eunuch of the East Factory.

古文：出视河东盐政，以疾归。
现代文：忬调出巡视河东盐政，因疾病回到家乡。
English: He was dispatched to inspect the salt politics in Hedong and returned to his hometown due to illness.

古文：已，起按湖广，复按顺天。
现代文：之后，起官巡按湖广，又巡按顺天。
English: After that, the initiators went on a tour around the lake and the sky.

古文：二十年，俺答大举犯古北口。
现代文：二十九年，俺答大举侵犯古北口。
English: In the 29th year, we responded with a large-scale invasion of Gubeikou.

古文：忬奏言潮河川有径道，一日夜可达通州。
现代文：忬上奏说潮河州有条路，一天一夜可以到达通州。
English: It is said that there is a road from Chaohezhou to Tongzhou, which can be reached overnight.

古文：因疾驰至通为守御计，尽徙舟楫之在东岸者。
现代文：为疾驰到通州进行守御考虑，应将舟楫都迁移到东岸。
English: In order to rush to Tongzhou for defense considerations, the boats should be moved to the east coast.

古文：夜半，寇果大至。
现代文：半夜，敌寇果然大量到达。
English: In the middle of the night, a large number of invaders arrived.

古文：不得渡，遂壁于河东。
现代文：敌人不能渡河，于是他们就在河东进行壁守。
English: The enemy could not cross the river, so they defended the wall on the east side of the river.

古文：帝密遣中使觇军，见忬方厉士乘城。
现代文：皇帝秘密派遣宦官侦察军队，发现忬正在激励士兵登城。
English: The emperor secretly sent eunuchs to scout the troops and found that the eunuchs were encouraging the soldiers to march on the city.

古文：还奏，帝大喜。
现代文：回来报告后，皇帝大喜。
English: When he returned with the report, the emperor was overjoyed.

古文：副都御史王仪守通州，御史姜廷颐劾其不职，忬亦言仪纵士卒虐大同军。
现代文：副都御史王仪守卫通州，御史姜廷颐弹劾他不称职，忬也说王仪纵容士兵虐待大同军。
English: The vice-governor of the capital, Wang Yi, guarded Tongzhou, and the governor, Jiang Tingyao, impeached him for incompetence. He also said that Wang Yi connived with soldiers to abuse the Datong army.

古文：大同军者，仇鸾兵也。
现代文：大同军是仇鸾的部下。
English: The Datong Army is the subordinate of the enemy.

古文：帝立命逮仪，而超擢忬右佥都御史代之。
现代文：皇帝立即下令逮捕王仪，而破格提升忬为右佥都御史代替王仪。
English: The emperor immediately ordered the arrest of Wang Yi, and in an unprecedented move, promoted Zeng to the position of Right Hand of the Emperor to replace Wang Yi.

古文：寇退，忬请振难民，筑京师外郭，修通州城，筑张家湾大小二堡，置沿河敌台。
现代文：敌寇退后，忬请求救济难民，筑京师外郭，修通州城，筑张家湾大小二堡，设置沿河敌台。
English: After the enemy corsairs retreated, Zou requested relief for the refugees, built the outpost of the Beijing Division, repaired Tongzhou City, built two fortresses of the size of Zhangjiagang Bay, and set up enemy stations along the river.

古文：皆报可。
现代文：报告上去都得到皇帝准可。
English: All replied in the affirmative.

古文：寻罢通州、易州守御大臣，召忬还。
现代文：不久罢去通州、易州守御大臣，召忬返朝。
English: Soon after, he was dismissed as the minister of defense of Tongzhou and Yizhou, and was summoned back to the imperial court.

古文：三十一年出抚山东。
现代文：三十一年出外巡抚山东。
English: It's been 31 years since the sheriff of Shandong went abroad.

古文：甫三月，以浙江倭寇亟，命忬提督军务，巡视浙江及福、兴、漳、泉四府。
现代文：刚刚三个月，因浙江倭寇事急，命令忬提督军务，巡视浙江及福、兴、漳、泉四府。
English: Just three months ago, due to urgent matters in Zhejiang, Admiral Zou was ordered to inspect Zhejiang and the four provinces of Fuxing, Xing, Handan and Quanzhou.

古文：先后上方略十二事，任参将俞大猷、汤克宽，又奏释参将尹凤、卢镗系。
现代文：先后奏上方略十二事，委任参将俞大猷、汤克宽，又上奏请求释放参将尹凤、卢镗。
English: He successively reported the above-mentioned 12 matters, appointed the general officers Gong Daxuan and Tong Kekuan, and requested the release of the general officers Yin Feng and Lu Wei.

古文：贼犯温州，克宽破之。
现代文：敌贼侵犯温州，被汤克宽攻破。
English: The invaders invaded Wenzhou and were defeated by Tong Keqiang.

古文：其据昌国卫者，为大猷击退。
现代文：敌人占据昌国卫的，被俞大猷击退。
English: When the enemy occupied Chang Guowei, they were repulsed by Zou Da Zou.

古文：而贼首汪直复纠岛倭及漳、泉群盗连巨舰百余蔽海至，滨海数千里同告警。
现代文：而贼首汪直又纠集岛倭和漳、泉群盗，连巨舰百余艘蔽海而至，海滨数千里同时告警。
English: But the thief Wang Zhi also entangled the island of Wa and Yao, the Quan group of thieves, and even more than a hundred huge ships covered the sea, and thousands of miles of seashore simultaneously alerted.

古文：上海及南汇、吴淞、乍浦、蓁屿诸所皆陷，苏、松、宁、绍诸卫所州县被焚掠者二十余。
现代文：上海和南汇、吴淞、乍浦、蓁屿诸都失陷，苏、松、宁、绍诸卫所县被烧掠的有二十多个。
English: Shanghai and Nanhui, Wuzhen, Zhaopu and Lantau all fell, and more than 20 were burned and looted in Su, Song, Ning and Shaoshu counties.

古文：留内地三月，饱而去。
现代文：逗留内地三个月，抢掠饱足后才离去。
English: They stayed on the mainland for three months and only left when they had had enough of looting.

古文：忬乃言将士逐毁其船五十余艘。
现代文：忬于是说我军将士追逐烧毁敌人船只五十多艘。
English: He then said that our soldiers chased and burned more than fifty enemy ships.

古文：于是先所夺文武将吏俸，皆得复。
现代文：所以先前文武将吏被削除的薪俸得以复还。
English: Therefore, the salaries that were previously removed from the civil and military generals were restored.

古文：寻以给事王国祯言，改巡抚。
现代文：不久因给事王国祯的进言，改任忬为巡抚。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the governor due to the advice of Wang Guojun.

古文：忬方视师闽中，贼复大至，犯浙江，卢镗等频失利。
现代文：忬在闽中正在检阅军队，敌贼又大量涌到，侵犯浙江，卢镗等人频频失利。
English: In the middle of the year of the Rooster, the army was being reviewed, and the enemy bandits came in large numbers to invade Zhejiang, and Lu Wei and others frequently lost.

古文：御史赵炳然劾其罪，帝特宥，忬因请筑嘉善、崇德、桐乡、德清、慈溪、奉化、象山城，而恤被寇诸府。
现代文：御史赵炳然弹劾忬的罪状，皇帝特别宽免忬，忬就请求修筑嘉善、崇德、桐乡、德清、慈奚谷、奉化、象山诸城，而且抚恤被敌寇侵掠的诸府。
English: The Grand Historian Zhao Yan immediately impeached Yan for his crime, and the emperor especially pardoned Yan. Yan requested to rebuild the cities of Jiashan, Chongde, Tongxiang, Deqing, Cishu Valley, Fenghua, and Xiangshan, and to subsidize the provinces that were invaded and plundered by the enemy.

古文：时已遣尚书张经总督诸军。
现代文：当时已经派遣尚书张经总督诸军。
English: At that time, Shang Shuxu Zhang Jing, the governor-general, had already been dispatched to the troops.

古文：大同适中寇，督抚苏祐、侯钺俱被逮，乃进忬右副都御史，巡抚大同。
现代文：大同正被敌寇侵犯，督抚苏、侯钺都被逮捕，于是升忬为右副都御史，巡抚大同。
English: Datong was being invaded by enemy raiders, and the governor Su and Hou Yi were both arrested, so he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, the governor of Datong.

古文：秋防事竣，就加兵部右侍郎。
现代文：秋防之事完工，就加官兵部右侍郎。
English: When the work of the autumn defense was completed, he was promoted to the position of the right hand man of the military department.

古文：蓟辽总督杨博还朝，即移忬代之。
现代文：蓟、辽总督杨博还朝，即调忬去代替他。
English: Yang Bo, the governor of Liaoning Province, was appointed to replace him.

古文：寻进右都御史。
现代文：不久晋升为右都御史。
English: He was soon promoted to udo goshi.

古文：忬言： 骑兵利平地，步兵利险阻。
现代文：忬说： 骑兵便于在平地作战，步兵利于险阻作战。
English: Zou said: Cavalry is convenient for fighting on flat ground, and infantry is beneficial for fighting in dangerous obstacles.

古文：今蓟镇画地守，请去他郡防秋马兵八千，易之以步，岁省银五万六千余两。 
现代文：现在蓟镇划地为守，请求去掉其他郡的秋防马兵八千，用步兵代替，一年节省银子五万六千多两。 
English: Now, in order to defend the town, he asked to remove 8,000 horse soldiers from other counties and replace them with infantry, saving 56,000 taels of silver a year.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的话。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：打来孙十余万骑深入广宁诸处，总兵官殷尚质等战殁。忬停俸三月。
现代文：后打来孙十多万骑兵深入广宁诸处，总兵官殷尚质等人战死，忬因此被停薪俸三个月。
English: Later, more than one hundred thousand cavalrymen were sent to Guangning, and the commander-in-chief Yin Shangqing and others were killed in the battle. Therefore, he was suspended from salary for three months.

古文：未几，打来孙复以十万骑屯青城，分遣精骑犯一片石、三道关。
现代文：不久，打来孙又用十万骑兵驻屯青城，分派精锐骑兵侵犯一片石、三道关。
English: Soon after, Sun sent another hundred thousand cavalry to occupy Qingcheng, and dispatched elite cavalry to encroach on a piece of rock and three passes.

古文：总兵官欧阳安拒却之。
现代文：总兵官欧阳安抵御并打退敌人。
English: Commander-in-chief Ouyang An resisted and beat back the enemy.

古文：事闻，赉银币。
现代文：事情奏闻朝廷后，赏赐他银币。
English: The matter spread to the capital, and the imperial court rewarded him with a large amount of silver.

古文：把都儿等犯迁安，副总兵蒋承勋战死。
现代文：把都儿等人侵犯迁安，副总兵蒋承勋战死。
English: Zhu Er and others invaded Qian'an, and the vice-commander Jiang Chengxun was killed in action.

古文：降〈木昂〉兵部侍郎，留任。
现代文：忬被降为兵部侍郎，留任。
English: He was demoted to the position of Hyobushirō, but remained in the post.

古文：初，帝器忬才，甚眷之。
现代文：起初，皇帝器重忬的才华，很宠爱他。
English: At first, the emperor was very fond of his prodigious talent.

古文：及所部屡失事，则以为不足办寇，谕严嵩与兵部计防守之宜。
现代文：等到他的部下屡次失事，则认为他不足以办寇，命令严嵩与兵部谋计防守事宜。
English: When his subordinates were repeatedly wrecked, he thought that he was not enough to carry out robberies and ordered Yan Song to work out defensive matters with the military.

古文：嵩奏流河口边墙有缺，故寇乘之入，宜大修边墙。
现代文：严嵩奏说流河口边墙有缺口，所以敌寇乘虚而入，应当大修边墙。
English: Yan Song said that there was a gap in the estuary wall of the Yangtze River, so the enemy pirates took advantage of the loophole and entered, and the border wall should be overhauled.

古文：且令忬选补额兵，操练战守，不得专恃他镇援兵。
现代文：并且下令忬选补定额士兵，对官军进行操练战斗或防守，不得专门依靠其他城镇的援兵。
English: He also ordered the selection of soldiers to supplement the quota, to practice combat or defense against the government army, and not to rely exclusively on reinforcements from other towns.

古文：部条六事，如嵩指。
现代文：兵部逐条奏上六事，像严嵩所指出的一样。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs reported six things one by one, as Yan Song pointed out.

古文：帝乃下诏责忬，赦其罪，实主兵，减客兵，如议。
现代文：皇帝于是下诏责备忬，赦了他的罪，叫他充实主兵，减少援兵，遵循奏议。
English: The emperor then issued an edict to reprimand Yu, forgave his sins, and ordered him to reinforce the main army, reduce reinforcements, and comply with the report.

古文：于是练兵之议起。
现代文：于是练兵的提议开始执行。
English: So the proposal of the drill began to be implemented.

古文：时寇别部入沈阳，有乡兵金仲良者擒其长讨赖。
现代文：当时敌寇的另一支侵入沈阳，有个乡兵叫金仲良的人捉住敌人头领讨赏。
English: At that time, another group of enemy raiders invaded Shenyang. A villager called Jin Zhongliang caught the enemy's head and received a reward.

古文：忬赉银币，官仲良三级。
现代文：忬赐他银币，将金仲良升官三级。
English: The emperor gave him silver coins and promoted Jin Zhongliang to the third rank.

古文：防秋毕，复忬官。
现代文：防秋完工之后，忬被复原职。
English: After the completion of the fall prevention, Zou was reinstated.

古文：寻复用沈阳却寇功，荫一子。
现代文：不久又因为沈阳却敌有功，荫庇一子。
English: Soon, because of Shenyang, he was able to achieve great success. He had one son, Yingbi.

古文：已而寇复入辽阳，副总兵王重禄败绩。
现代文：既而敌寇又侵入辽阳，副总兵王重禄战败。
English: Even though the enemy raiders invaded Liaoyang, Vice-Commander-in-Chief Wang Chonglu was defeated.

古文：御史周斯盛以闻。
现代文：御史周斯盛向皇帝报告这件事。
English: Zhou Shisheng, the chief historian, reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：帝置忬不问，治他将吏如律。
现代文：皇帝不问忬的罪，而按条律处治其他将吏。
English: The emperor did not question the crimes of the eunuchs, but dealt with the other generals according to the rules.

古文：初，帝从杨博言，命蓟镇入卫兵听宣大调遣。
现代文：开始，皇帝听从杨博的话，命令蓟镇入卫兵听候宣、大总督调遣。
English: At the beginning, the emperor obeyed Yang Bo's words and ordered the guards to enter the town to listen to the proclamation and dispatch the governor.

古文：忬言： 古北诸口无险可守，独恃入卫卒护陵京，奈何听调发？ 
现代文：忬说： 古北诸关口无险要可守，单单依靠入卫兵防护陵京，奈何听调发。 
English: Zou said: There is no danger in protecting the ancient North Pass, and it is better to rely solely on the guards to protect the imperial mausoleum.

古文：帝怒曰： 曩令蓟镇练兵，今一卒不练，遇防秋辄调他镇兵，兵部详议以闻。 
现代文：皇帝发怒说： 过去下令蓟镇练兵，现在一个兵卒也不练，遇到防秋就调他镇之兵，兵部详细讨论这件事，然后报告我。 
English: The emperor said angrily, "In the past, I ordered soldiers to be trained in Shanzhen, but now not a single soldier is trained. When there is an emergency, soldiers from other towns are transferred. The military department will discuss this matter in detail and then report to me.

古文：部臣言： 蓟镇额兵多缺，宜察补 。
现代文：兵部大臣说： 蓟镇定额的兵很不足，应当察补。 
English: The Minister of the Ministry of the Armed Forces said: "The quota of soldiers for the crackdown is very insufficient and should be revised.

古文：乃遣郎中唐顺之往核。
现代文：于是派遣郎中唐顺之前往核实。
English: Therefore, Tang Shun, the second-in-command, was dispatched to verify the situation.

古文：还奏额兵九万有奇，今惟五万七千，又皆羸老。
现代文：唐顺之回来奏报说，额兵规定九万多人，现在只有五万七千人，又都是羸老之人。
English: When Tang Shunzhi returned, he reported that there were more than ninety thousand soldiers, but now there are only fifty-seven thousand, and they are all old people.

古文：忬与总兵官安、巡抚马珮及诸将袁正等，俱宜按治。
现代文：忬和总兵官欧阳安、巡抚马及诸将袁正等人，都应当按治。
English: He and the commander-in-chief Ou Yang'an, the governor Ma and the generals Yuan Zheng and others should be dealt with accordingly.

古文：乃降忬俸二级。
现代文：于是降低忬薪俸二级。
English: As a result, his salary was reduced to the second level.

古文：帝因问嵩： 边兵入卫，旧制乎？ 
现代文：皇帝于是问严嵩： 边兵入卫，是旧制吗？ 
English: The emperor then asked Yan Song: Is it the old system for border soldiers to enter the guard?

古文：嵩曰： 祖宗时无调边兵入内地者。
现代文：严嵩说 ：祖宗时没有调遣边兵进入内地的事。
English: Yan Song said, "In the time of our ancestors, there was no such thing as dispatching frontier soldiers into the inland.

古文：正德中刘六猖獗，始调许泰、郤永领边兵讨贼。
现代文：正德期间刘六猖獗，才开始调许泰、谷阝永率领边兵讨伐敌贼。
English: During the Zhengde period, Liu Liu was rampant, and only then did he begin to dispatch Xu Tai and Gu Ying Yong to lead the border soldiers to fight the enemy.

古文：庚戌之变，仇鸾选边兵十八支护陵京，未用以守蓟镇。
现代文：庚戌之变，仇鸾选边兵十八支护卫陵京，没有用来守蓟镇。
English: As a result of the Genghis Khan's coup, his enemies chose 18 border soldiers to guard the imperial mausoleum in Beijing, but they were not used to guard Handan.

古文：至何栋始借二支防守，忬始尽调边兵守要害，去岁又征全辽士马入关，致寇乘虚入犯，辽左一空。
现代文：到河栋开始借二支兵防守，忬开始尽调边兵防守要害，去年又征调全辽兵马进入关内，致使敌寇乘我空虚进入侵犯。
English: When he arrived at Hedong, he began to borrow two soldiers for defense. He began to dispatch frontier soldiers to defend the key points. Last year, he also conscripted and dispatched all Liao soldiers and horses to enter Guanzhong, causing the enemy to invade through my emptiness.

古文：若年复一年，调发不已，岂惟糜饷，更有他忧。 
现代文：辽左一空，如果年复一年，调发不止，何只糜饷，更有他忧。 
English: Liao left a void, if year after year, the transfer is more than, how many dragonflies, more worries.

古文：帝由是恶忬甚。
现代文：皇帝从此更加讨厌忬。
English: From then on, the emperor hated the toad even more.

古文：逾月，寇犯清河，总兵官杨照御之，斩首八百余级。
现代文：过了一月，敌寇侵犯清河，总兵官杨照防御他们，斩敌人首级八百多个。
English: After one month, the enemy invaded Qinghe, and the general Yang Zhao defended against them, beheading more than 800 of the enemy.

古文：越四日，土蛮十万骑薄界岭口，副将马芳拒却之。
现代文：过了四天，土蛮十万骑兵迫近界岭口，副将马芳抵御并退却了他们。
English: Four days later, a hundred thousand cavalrymen approached the border of Lingkou, Vice Admiral Ma Fang resisted and retreated them.

古文：明日，敌骑二百奔还，芳及安俘斩四十级。
现代文：第二天，敌人轻骑二百又跑回来，马芳和欧阳安俘歼敌四十人。
English: The next day, the enemy lightly rode two hundred and ran back. Ma Fang and Ouyang An captured and killed forty of the enemy.

古文：忬犹被赉。
现代文：忬也被赏赐。
English: He was also awarded a gong.

古文：三十八年二月，把都儿、辛爱数部屯会州，挟朵颜为乡导，将西入，声言东。
现代文：三十八年二月，把都儿、辛爱数部屯兵会州，挟住朵颜做向导，准备西入，声言向东。
English: In February of the year thirty-eight, Du Er and Xin Ai took several detachments of soldiers to Huizhou, and took Do Yan as their guide. They prepared to enter the west, but declared that they would go to the east.

古文：忬遽引兵东。
现代文：忬于是引兵向东。
English: So the army was led eastwards.

古文：寇乃以其间由潘家口入，渡滦河而西，大掠遵化、迁安、蓟州、玉田，驻内地五日，京师大震。
现代文：敌寇于是以其间从沈家口入侵，渡过滦河向西进发，大肆掠夺遵化、迁安、蓟州、玉田，驻扎内地有五天，京师大为震动。
English: The enemy raiders invaded from Shenjiakou, crossed the Li River and headed west, plundering Zunhua, Qian'an, Zhangzhou, and Tamada. They were stationed in the inland for five days, and the Beijing Normal University was shaken.

古文：御史王渐、方辂遂劾忬、安及巡抚王轮罪。
现代文：御史王渐、方辂于是弹劾忬、欧阳安及巡抚王轮的罪状。
English: Wang Qian, the governor of Shishi Province, and Fang Yao then impeached Yao, Ouyang An, and the inspector Wang Lun.

古文：帝大怒，斥安，贬轮于外，切责忬，令停俸自效。
现代文：皇帝大怒，贬斥欧阳安，贬王轮到朝廷之外，深切责备忬，下令停止忬薪俸让他戴罪立功。
English: The emperor flew into a rage, rebuked Ouyang An, banished Wang Rong to outside the imperial court, severely reprimanded Zou, and ordered that Zou's salary be stopped and that he be made to pay for his crime.

古文：至五月，辂复劾忬失策者三，可罪者四，遂命逮忬及中军游击张伦下诏狱。
现代文：到五月，方辂又弹劾忬有三大失策、四大罪状，皇帝于是命令逮捕忬及中军游击张伦下诏狱。
English: In May, the emperor ordered the arrest of the three major blunders and four major crimes of the Chinese military guerrilla Zhang Lun.

古文：刑部论忬戍边，帝手批曰： 诸将皆斩，主军令者顾得附轻典耶？ 
现代文：刑部判论忬戍边，皇帝亲手改批为 ：诸将都斩首了，主管军令的人反而能够依附轻典执行吗？ 
English: The Emperor personally changed the sentence to: "The generals have all been beheaded. Can the person in charge of the military order instead rely on the light sentence to execute it?"

古文：改论斩。
现代文：改判为斩首。
English: The sentence was changed to beheading.

古文：明年冬，竟死西市。
现代文：第二年冬天竟死在西市。
English: In the winter of the following year, he died in Nishi-shi.

古文：忬才本通敏。
现代文：忬的才华原本通达锐敏。
English: Zou's talent was originally very keen.

古文：其骤拜都御史，及屡更督抚也，皆帝特简，所建请无不从。
现代文：他的骤然升迁为都御史，及屡次更迁督抚，都是皇帝特别提拔的，他的建议请求皇帝没有不听从的。
English: His sudden promotion to the position of Imperial Historian of the Capital, as well as his repeated changes of supervisors, were all specially promoted by the emperor. The emperor did not disobey his advice and request.

古文：为总督数以败闻，由是渐失宠。
现代文：但做总督时多次以失败见闻，因此而逐渐失宠。
English: But when he was governor, he was known to fail many times, so he gradually fell out of favor.

古文：既有言不练主兵者，益大恚，谓： 忬怠事，负我。 
现代文：既而有人说他不练主兵，皇帝更加愤怒，说 ：忬做事怠慢，负我。 
English: As soon as it was said that he did not train his soldiers, the emperor became even more angry, saying: "You have neglected your duties and have failed me.

古文：嵩雅不悦忬。
现代文：严嵩向来不喜欢忬。
English: Yan Song has always disliked cormorants.

古文：而忬子世贞复用口语积失欢于嵩子世蕃。
现代文：而忬的儿子王世贞又因口舌之事得罪严嵩的儿子严世蕃。
English: On the other hand, Yan's son Wang Shizhen and Yan's son Yan Shizhen were both punished for speaking out.

古文：严氏客又数以世贞家琐事构于嵩父子。
现代文：严氏的客卿又多次用王世贞家的琐事在严嵩父子面前构害忬一家。
English: Yan's guest lord repeatedly used trivialities of Wang Shizhen's family to frame Yan's family in front of Yan and his son.

古文：杨继盛之死，世贞又经纪其丧，嵩父子大恨。
现代文：杨继盛死后，王世贞又为其操办丧事，严嵩父子对他们大恨。
English: After the death of Yang Jisheng, Wang Shizhen also held a funeral for him. Yan Song and his son hated them very much.

古文：滦河变闻，遂得行其计。
现代文：滦河事变后，严嵩父子得以行使他们的诡计。
English: After the Lianhe Incident, Yan Song and his son were able to carry out their scheme.

古文：穆宗即位，世贞与弟世懋伏阙讼冤。
现代文：穆宗即位，王世贞和弟弟王世懋伏在宫阙前讼诉冤屈。
English: When Mu Zong ascended the throne, Wang Shizhen and his brother Wang Shiyanfu sued for grievances before the imperial court.

古文：复故官，予恤。
现代文：于是复忬原官，并对他们进行抚恤。
English: As a result, the former officials were reinstated, and they were given a pension.

古文：杨选，字以公，章丘人。
现代文：杨选，字以公，章丘人。
English: Yang Xuan, Zi Gong, Zhang Qiu Ren.

古文：嘉靖二十三年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年进士。
English: In the 23rd year of Jiajing, he passed the entrance examination.

古文：授行人。
现代文：授官行人。
English: Awarded to pedestrians.

古文：擢御史，迁易州兵备副使。
现代文：提升为御史，迁易州兵备副使。
English: He was promoted to Imperial Historian and transferred to the post of Vice-Minister of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：俺答围大同右卫，巡抚朱笈被逮，超拜选右佥都御史代之。
现代文：俺答包围大同右卫，巡抚朱笈被逮捕，越级升杨选为右佥都御史代替他。
English: We responded by encircling the Datong Right Guards, the inspector Zhu Xi was arrested, and Yang, who had been promoted beyond his rank, was elected to replace him.

古文：与侍郎江东、总兵官张承勋解其围。
现代文：与侍郎江东、总兵官张承勋解大同之围。
English: He and his attendant, Jiangdong, as well as the commander-in-chief, Zhang Chengxun, broke the siege of Datong.

古文：忧归，再起，仍故职。
现代文：因父丧回家，再次被起用，仍然任原职。
English: Due to his father's death, he returned home and was re-hired, still in his original position.

古文：四十年擢总督蓟辽副都御史。
现代文：四十年提升他为总督蓟、辽副都御史。
English: Forty years later, he was promoted to Governor-General and Vice-Governor of Liao Province.

古文：条上封疆极弊十五事，多从其请。
现代文：他逐条上奏封疆极弊十五事，皇上多听从他的请求。
English: He recounted the fifteen most serious evils of the shogunate step by step, and the emperor mostly obeyed his request.

古文：以居庸岔道却敌功，进兵部右侍郎。
现代文：因居庸岔道退却敌人有功，进官兵部右侍郎。
English: He was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the military department because of his performance in retreating from the enemy.

古文：明年五月，古北口守将遣哨卒山塞，朵颜卫掠其四人。
现代文：第二年五月，古北口守将派遣哨兵出塞，朵颜卫抓住其中四人。
English: In May of the following year, the ancient governor of Hokkou dispatched sentries out of the fortress, and Do Yanwei caught four of them.

古文：部长通汉叩关索赏，副总兵胡镇执之，并缚其党十余人。
现代文：部长通汉叩关索要赏赐，副总兵胡镇将他捉住，并将他的同党十多人捆缚起来。
English: The minister, Tonghan Baiguan, demanded a reward, but the vice-chief soldier, Hu Zhen, caught him and tied up more than ten of his fellow party members.

古文：通汉子惧，拥所执哨卒至墙下，请易其父。
现代文：通汉的儿子恐惧，带被抓住的哨兵到墙下，请求交换他的父亲。
English: Tonghan's son, Fear, took the captured sentry under the wall and asked for his father to be exchanged.

古文：通汉者，辛爱妻义父也，选欲以牵制辛爱，要其子入质，乃遣还父。
现代文：通汉是辛爱妻子的义父，杨选想用他来牵制辛爱，要他的儿子来做人质，才遣还他的父亲。
English: Tong Han is the father-in-law of Xin Ai's wife. Yang Xuan wanted to use him to restrain Xin Ai, and asked his son to be a hostage before returning his father.

古文：自是诸子迭为质，半岁而代。
现代文：从这时起通汉的诸个儿子轮流作为人质，半年换一次。
English: From then on, Tong Han's sons took turns as hostages, changing every six months.

古文：选驰疏以闻，自诩方略。
现代文：杨选急驰上疏报告皇帝知道，并自夸有方略。
English: Yang Xuan hurried up the ditch to report that the emperor knew, and boasted that he had a strategy.

古文：选及巡抚徐绅等俱受赏。
现代文：杨选和巡抚徐绅等人都受到赏赐。
English: Yang Xuan and the governor Xu Sheng and others were rewarded.

古文：十月丁卯，辛爱与把都儿等大举自墙子岭、磨刀峪溃墙入犯，京师戒严。
现代文：十月十一日，辛爱和把都儿等人大举从墙子岭、磨刀峪毁墙入侵内地，京师戒严。
English: On October 11th, Xin Ai and Tu Tu'er and others invaded the inland from Wanziling, sharpening their knives and destroying the wall, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：帝大惊，谕阁臣徐阶曰： 朕东见火光，此贼去京不远，其令兵部谕诸军并力剿逐。 
现代文：皇帝大惊，告诉阁臣徐阶说： 我看见东边的火光，说明此贼寇离京城不远，下令兵部告诉诸军并力剿除驱逐敌人。 
English: The emperor was greatly alarmed and told his courtier Xu Qi: "I saw a flash of fire in the east, indicating that this bandit is not far from the capital. I ordered the military department to inform the troops and work hard to eliminate and expel the enemy."

古文：明日，选以寇东遁闻，为将士祈赏。
现代文：第二天，杨选报告皇帝敌寇向东逃遁，并为将士祈求赏赐。
English: The next day, Yang Xuan reported to the emperor that the enemy bandits had fled to the east, and asked for a reward for his soldiers.

古文：帝疑，以问阶。
现代文：皇帝怀疑这件事，就问徐阶。
English: The emperor doubted the matter and asked Xu Qi.

古文：对曰： 寇营尚在平谷，选等往通州矣，谓追杀者，妄也。 
现代文：徐阶回答说： 敌寇的军营还在平谷，杨选等人往通州去了，说追杀敌人，简直荒谬。 
English: Xu Qia replied: The enemy's military camp was still in Pinggu, but Yang Xuan and others went to Tongzhou. To say that they chased and killed the enemy is simply absurd.

古文：帝衔之。
现代文：皇帝怀恨他。
English: Emperor Wenzhong held a grudge against Wang Xuan ever since.

古文：寇稍东，大掠三河、顺义，围诸将傅津等于郑官屯。
现代文：敌寇逐渐向东，大肆抢掠三河、顺义，包围诸将付津等人于郑官屯。
English: The enemy corsairs gradually moved eastward, plundered the Three Rivers and Shunyi, and encircled the generals and others in Zhengguantun.

古文：选遣副将胡镇偕总兵官孙膑、游击赵溱击之。
现代文：杨选派遣副将胡镇偕同总兵官孙膑、游击赵溱攻打敌人。
English: Yang Zheng sent Vice Admiral Hu Zhenyao to attack the enemy, together with the general officer Sun Ye and the guerrilla fighter Zhao Ye.

古文：膑、溱战殁，镇力战得脱。
现代文：孙膑、赵溱战死，胡镇竭力作战才得以逃脱。
English: Sun Qian and Zhao Qian were killed in the battle, while Hu Zhen fought hard to escape.

古文：寇留内地八日不退。
现代文：敌寇逗留内地八天不退走。
English: The enemy cormorants stay in the inland for eight days and do not leave.

古文：给事中李瑜遂劾选、绅与副使卢镒，参将冯诏、胡粲，游击严瞻等，俱逮下诏狱。
现代文：给事中李瑜于是弹劾杨选、徐绅和副使卢镒，参将冯诏、胡粲，游击严瞻等人，他们都被逮捕下狱。
English: As a result, Li Yu impeached Yang Xuan, Xu Sheng and vice-envoy Lu Yao, senior generals Feng Zhao and Hu Yao, and guerrilla Yan Zhan, and they were all arrested and imprisoned.

古文：又二日，寇始北去，京师解严。
现代文：又过了二日，敌寇才向北离去，京师解除戒严。
English: It took another two days for the enemy bandits to leave for the north and for martial law to be lifted in the capital.

古文：初，谍者言寇将窥墙子岭，部檄严待之，而三卫为寇导者绐选赴潘家口。
现代文：起初，侦察的人说敌寇准备窥探墙子岭，兵部檄文要求严阵以待，而三卫为敌寇引导的人欺骗杨选说敌寇开赴潘家口。
English: At first, the reconnaissance person said that the enemy bandits were preparing to spy on Wanziling, the military department's Zouwen demanded that they wait in a tight line, and the person who led the three guards to the enemy bandits deceived Yang Zeng that the enemy bandits were going to Panjiakou.

古文：寇已入，选、绅惧得罪，径趋都城，屯东直门外，旋还通州。
现代文：敌寇已经侵入，杨选、徐绅恐怕有罪，径直趋向都城，屯兵东直门外，不久返回通州。
English: The enemy corsairs had already invaded, and Yang Zheng and Xu Sheng, probably guilty, headed straight for the capital, camped outside Dongzhimen, and soon returned to Tongzhou.

古文：及遣镇等御，又不胜。
现代文：等到派遣胡镇等人抵御敌人，又不能取胜。
English: Wait until Hu Zhen and others are sent to defend against the enemy, and they can't win.

古文：内侍家蓟西者，哗言通汉父子实召寇。
现代文：内侍住在蓟西的人，纷纷传说通汉父子实际召来敌寇。
English: The people who lived in western Shaanxi had a lot of stories about how Tong Han and his son had actually invited the invaders.

古文：帝入其言，益怒。
现代文：皇帝听到这个话，更加恼怒。
English: Hearing this, the emperor became even more angry.

古文：法司坐选、绅、诏守备不设律斩，镒等戍。
现代文：法司以杨选、徐绅、冯诏守备不设之罪按律论斩，卢镒等人贬戍边关。
English: The Department of Justice sentenced Yang Xuan, Xu Sheng, and Feng Zhao to death for the crime of failing to prepare, and Lu Wei and others were sentenced to death.

古文：帝谕锦衣朱希孝坐以纵通汉勾贼罪，复下选诏狱。
现代文：皇帝告诉锦衣朱希孝问杨选放纵通汉勾结敌寇之罪，又将杨选下诏狱。
English: The emperor told Jin Yi Zhu Xi Xiao to ask Yang Xuan to indulge in the crime of colluding with the Han, and then sent Yang Xuan to the imperial prison.

古文：选不承，止承质通汉父子事，且言事已上闻。
现代文：杨选不承认，只承认抓住通汉父子这件事，并说这件事已经报告皇帝知道。
English: Yang Xuan did not admit it, but only admitted that he had seized the father and son of Tong Han, and said that the matter had been reported to the emperor.

古文：希孝录其语上，刑部如帝指论选死。
现代文：朱希孝记录他的话呈上皇帝，刑部按皇帝的意思判杨选死刑。
English: Zhu Xixiao recorded his words and submitted them to the emperor. The criminal department sentenced Yang Xuan to death according to the emperor's will.

古文：即戳于市，枭其首示边，妻子流二千里。
现代文：立即在市杀戮，枭首到边关示众，他的妻子流放二千里。
English: He immediately killed in the city, took the dagger to the border to show it to the public, and exiled his wife two thousand miles away.

古文：绅论死系狱，诏及镒等戍边。
现代文：徐绅被判死罪拘囚在狱，冯诏和卢镒等人贬戍边关。
English: Xu Sheng was sentenced to death and detained in prison. Feng Zhao and Lu Wei and others were sentenced to death.

古文：帝虽怒选甚，但欲诛其身，法司乃并坐其妻子。
现代文：皇帝虽然特别恼恨杨选，但只想诛他本人，法司则连带问他妻子的罪。
English: Although the emperor was particularly angry with Yang Xuan, he only wanted to beat him, while the magistrate also asked him about his wife's crime.

古文：隆庆初，始释还。
现代文：隆庆年初，他的妻子才释放回家。
English: At the beginning of the Lunar New Year, his wife was allowed to return home.

