古文：《通鉴》云：时论平庆州功，故贺瑰进秩。
现代文：贞明三年二月五日，晋军进攻黎阳，刘鄩击退了他们。
English: On February 5, the third year of Zhenming, the Jin army attacked Liyang, and Liu Bei repulsed them.

古文：己巳，帝幸洛阳，为来年有事于南郊也。
现代文：冬十月，晋王从魏州回太原。十二月，晋王从太原又到魏州。十五日，末帝驾临洛阳，因为明年将在南郊举行祭祀。
English: In winter, October, Jin Wang returned to Taiyuan from Weizhou. In December, Jin Wang went from Taiyuan to Weizhou. On the 15th, the last emperor arrived in Luoyang, because next year's sacrificial rites would be held in the southern suburbs.

古文：遂幸伊阙，亲拜宣陵。
现代文：于是前往伊阙，亲自拜祭宣陵。
English: He then traveled to Ili, where he visited the mausoleum in person.

古文：时租庸使赵岩劝帝郊天，且言： 帝王受命，须行此礼，愿陛下力行之。 
现代文：当时租庸使赵岩劝末帝在洛阳郊外祭天，并说： 帝王接受天命，必须行祭天大礼，愿陛下尽力做到。 
English: At that time, Zhaoyong asked Zhao Yan to persuade the last emperor to offer sacrifices to Heaven on the outskirts of Luoyang, and said: The emperor accepted the destiny of Heaven and must perform the great sacrifice to Heaven. May His Majesty do his best to do so.

古文：宰臣敬翔奏曰： 国家自刘鄩失律以来，府藏殚竭，箕敛百姓，供军不暇，郊祀之礼，颁行赏赉，所谓取虚名而受实弊也。
现代文：宰臣敬翔上奏说 ：国家从刘寻阝战败以来，仓库的积蓄用尽，靠一点点向老百姓征敛，供给军队都不够，郊祀的礼仪，需要金钱颁行赏赐，正是博取虚名而承受实际上的损耗。
English: Vice-Minister Jing Xiang said in his report: Since the country's defeat at the hands of Liu Xingyao, the warehouse's savings have been exhausted, and it is not enough to collect from the people by a little bit to supply the army. The etiquette of suburban worship requires money to award rewards, which is to gain a false reputation and bear the actual loss.

古文：况晋人压境，车驾未可轻动。 
现代文：况且晋人大军压境，御驾不可轻易行动。 
English: Moreover, the Jin people's army is under pressure, and it is not easy for you to act.

古文：帝不听，遂行。
现代文：末帝不听从，于是前往洛阳。
English: The last emperor did not obey, so he went to Luoyang.

古文：是月，晋人陷杨刘城，帝闻之惧，遂停郊礼，车驾急归东京。
现代文：本月，晋人攻陷杨刘城，末帝听到后感到害怕，于是停止南郊祭天的准备，御驾急归东京。
English: This month, the Jin people attacked and captured Yang Liu City. Upon hearing this, the last emperor was afraid, so he stopped the preparations for the Southern Suburbs Festival and rushed back to Tokyo.

古文：甲午，以右领军卫上将军齐奉国为左金吾卫大将军，充街使。
现代文：贞明四年春正月，晋军入寇郓州、濮州境内。御驾从洛阳回到东京。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 4th year of Zhenming, the Jin army entered the territory of Guozhou and Zhangzhou. You drove from Luoyang back to Tokyo.

古文：二月，遣将谢彦章帅众数万迫杨刘城。
现代文：二月，派将领谢彦章统帅数万之众进逼杨刘城。
English: In February, General Xie Yanzhang led tens of thousands of troops to force Yang Liucheng.

古文：己酉，以安南静海节度使、检校司徒曲美为检校太保、同平章事。
现代文：二十一日，晋王前来救援杨刘城。谢彦章的军队作战失利而退。八月，晋军到达杨刘口，于是驻军在麻家渡，梁军北面招讨使贺瑰领兵屯驻在濮州北面的行台村，与晋军对阵一百多天。
English: On the 21st, the Jin king came to the rescue of Yang Liu City. Xie Yanzhang's army was defeated in battle and retreated. In August, the Jin army reached Yang Liukou, so the garrison was stationed in Majiadu, the Liang army was invited to the north, and He Jisi led the soldiers stationed in Xingtai Village, north of Zhangzhou, and fought against the Jin army for more than 100 days.

古文：庚戌，以商州刺史康赞美为蔡州刺史。十一月壬辰，前怀州刺史硃勍授起复云麾将军，依前怀州刺史。
现代文：晋王率领轻骑兵前来侦察，许州节度使谢彦章出动伏兵扑击，包围晋军几层，遇上晋军救兵来到，晋王只身逃脱。
English: Jin Wang led the light cavalry to come to reconnoitre, and Xu Zhou set the stage for Xie Yanzhang to attack the ambush, encircle several layers of Jin soldiers, and when Jin soldiers came to the rescue, Jin Wang escaped alone.

古文：十二月庚子朔，晋王领军迫行台寨，距寨十里结营而止。
现代文：十二月一日，晋王领军迫近行台寨，离寨十里扎营。
English: On December 1, the leader of Jin Wang's army approached Taizhai and set up camp ten miles away.

古文：北面招讨使贺瑰杀许州节度使谢彦章、濮州刺史孟审澄、别将侯温裕等于军，以谋叛闻，为行营马步都虞候硃圭构之也。
现代文：北面招讨使贺瑰杀害许州节度使谢彦章、濮州刺史孟审澄、别将侯温裕等人于军中，而以他们图谋叛逆罪上报朝廷。这是被行营马步都虞候朱王圭所挑拨陷害。
English: In the north, he invited He Gui to kill Xu Zhou's military commander Xie Yanzhang, Zhang Zhou's military commander Meng Xianzhen, and general Hou Wenyu, and reported them to the imperial court for plotting treason. This was instigated and set up by Zhu Wanggui, who was the governor of Guizhou at that time.

古文：晋王闻之，喜曰： 彼将帅不和，亡无日矣。 
现代文：晋王闻讯后，高兴地说： 他们将帅不和，离灭亡就没有几天了。 
English: After hearing the news, Jin Wang said happily, "They will not get along, and they are only a few days away from extinction."

古文：丁未，以行营诸军马步都虞候、光禄大夫、检校太保、曹州刺史硃圭为检校太傅，充匡国军节度观察留后，依前行营诸军马步都虞候。
现代文：八日，以行营各军马步都虞候、光禄大夫、检校太保、曹州刺史朱王圭为检校太傅，充任匡国军节度观察留后，仍任行营各军马步都虞候。
English: On the 8th, with the attendance of all the troops marching in the parade, Dr. Guanglu, the inspector of the school, and Caozhou chief inspector Zhu Wanggui as the inspector of the school, after serving as the observation of the festival of the Kuangguo Army, he still served as the attendance of all the troops marching in the parade.

古文：癸丑，诏曰： 行营诸军马步都虞候、匡国军节度观察留后硃圭，昨以寇戎未灭，兵革方严，所期朝夕之间，克弭烟尘之患，每于将帅，别注忧劳。而谢彦章、孟审澄、侯温裕忽构异图，将萌逆节，赖硃圭挺施贞节，密运沈机，果致枭擒，免资仇敌。
现代文：十四日发布诏书说： 行营各军马步都虞候、匡国军节度留后朱王圭，前因敌寇未灭战火正炽之时，期望在朝夕之间，能平息战争之患，常在将帅之间，特别表现出忧虑劳苦，而谢彦章、孟审澄、侯温裕忽然产生不良意图，萌生叛逆的志向，有赖于朱王圭坚持气节，暗中运用深沉的智谋，终于擒获元凶，避免了增强敌人势力。
English: The imperial rescript issued on the 14th said: "Zhu Wanggui, after the marching of all the armies, waited for the festival of the Kuangguo Army, and when the war was raging due to the enemy's invasion, he expected to be able to quell the war between the morning and the evening, and often showed particular anxiety and labor between the generals. However, Xie Yanzhang, Meng Xizheng, and Hou Wenyu suddenly had bad intentions and budding rebellious aspirations. It was due to Zhu Wanggui's adherence to the spirit, secretly using deep wisdom, and finally catching the culprit and avoiding strengthening the enemy's power.

古文：以前房州刺史牛知业为右羽林军统军。癸亥，北面招讨使贺瑰率大军与晋人战于胡柳陂，晋人败绩。
现代文：可封为检校太傅，兼任平卢军节度使，淄、青、登、莱等州观察使处置使、押新罗渤海两蕃使兼行营各军马步军副都指挥使，又进封为沛国郡开国侯。 二十四日，北面招讨使贺瑰率领大军与晋人在胡柳陂交战，晋人战败。
English: He was also appointed as the inspector of schools, the festival envoy of the Pinglu army, the observation envoy of the states of Qi, Qing, Deng, and Lai, the disposition envoy, the deputy commander of the horse and foot troops of all the military camps, and the governor of Peiguo County. On the 24th, the army led by He Juxi and the Jin people fought in Huliangye, and the Jin people were defeated.

古文：是日既晡，复为晋人所败。
现代文：同日傍晚，又被晋人打败。
English: In the evening of the same day, they were again defeated by the Jin people.

古文：初，晋人起军将袭东京，乃下令军中老弱悉归于鄴。是月二十二日，晋王次临濮，贺瑰、王彦章自行台寨率军蹑之。
现代文：原先，晋人发兵准备袭击东京，于是下令宫中老弱全回到邺都，这月二十二日，晋王到达临濮，贺瑰、王彦章从行台寨领军跟踪他。
English: Originally, the Jin people sent troops to prepare to attack Tokyo, so they ordered the old and weak in the palace to return to the capital. On the 22nd of this month, the Jin king arrived in Linyi, and He Gui and Wang Yanzhang followed him from Xingtaizhai leading the army.

古文：二十四日，至胡柳陂，晋王领军出战，瑰军已成列，晋王以骑突之，王彦章一军先败，彦章走濮阳。
现代文：二十四日，到胡柳陂，晋王领兵出战，贺瑰军队已列成战阵，晋王领骑兵突击，王彦章一军首先战败，王彦章逃到濮阳。
English: On the 24th, Jin Wang led his troops into battle at Hu Liucheng. He Gui's army had formed a battle line. Jin Wang led his cavalry in a surprise attack. Wang Yanzhang's army was the first to be defeated, and Wang Yanzhang fled to Shenyang.

古文：晋人辎重在阵西，瑰领军薄之，晋人大奔，自相蹈籍，死者不可胜计，晋大将周德威殁于阵。
现代文：晋军的辎重在阵地西边，贺瑰领军迫近它，晋军大乱逃奔，自相践踏，死者多得数不清，晋军大将周德威战死阵中。
English: The main body of the Jin army was on the west side of the position, He Jiu led the army to approach it, the Jin army fled in disorder and trampled on each other, the dead were too numerous to count, and the Jin army general Zhou Dewei was killed in the battle.

古文：是月，以行营诸军左厢马军都指挥使、郑州防御使王彦章为许州匡国军节度观察留后，依前行营诸军左厢马军都指挥使。
现代文：贺瑰军于是占领一座土山，在山下列阵，晋王又领兵来交战。贺瑰军终于战败。第二天晋军攻打濮阳，占领了它，京师实行戒严。贞明五年春正月，晋军在德胜筑城，沿黄河两岸设营。
English: As a result, Heji's army occupied a dirt mountain, formed a line under the mountain, and Jin Wang led his army to fight. Heji's army was finally defeated. The next day, Jin's army attacked and occupied Poyang, and the Beijing division imposed martial law. In the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Zhenming, Jin's army set up camp in Deshengcong, along both sides of the Yellow River.

古文：六月壬戌，以天骥院使李随权知登州军州事。
现代文：夏四月，贺瑰攻打德胜南城，用大船、战舰横亘黄河之中，以扼守渡口和过河的航道。晋军冲断大船，渡过部队支援南城，贺瑰等人退兵。
English: In the summer of April, He Gui attacked the southern city of Desheng, using large ships and warships to cross the Yellow River to guard the ferry and the river crossing. The Jin army broke through the large ships, crossed the troops to support the southern city, and He Gui and others withdrew.

古文：秋七月，晋王自魏州还太原。
现代文：秋七月，晋王从魏州回到太原。
English: In autumn and July, Jin Wang returned to Taiyuan from Weizhou.

古文：八月乙未朔，滑州节度使贺瑰卒，辍视朝三日，诏赠侍中。
现代文：八月一日，滑州节度使贺瑰去世，末帝停止上朝三天，下诏追赠贺瑰为侍中。
English: On August 1st, He Gui passed away at the festival in Slanting. The last emperor suspended the Shang Dynasty for three days, and issued an edict to posthumously award He Gui as an attendant.

古文：是月，命开封尹王瓚为北面行营招讨使。
现代文：这月，任命开封尹王瓒为北面行营招讨使。
English: This month, Kaifeng Yin Wangyao was appointed as the envoy to the north.

古文：瓚乃与许州留后王彦章等率大军自黎阳济，营于杨村，造浮梁以通津路。
现代文：王瓒于是与许州留后王彦章等领大军从黎阳渡过黄河，驻扎在杨村，造浮桥以通水路。
English: Therefore, Wang Hui led a large army from Liyang to cross the Yellow River with Wang Yanzhang and others after staying in Xuzhou, stationed in Yangcun, and built a floating bridge to pass the waterway.

古文：九月丙寅，制削夺广州节度使、南平王刘岩在身官爵，以其将谋僭号故也。
现代文：九月二日，诏令削夺广州节度使、南平王刘岩身任官职爵位，因为他准备超越本份改变名号称帝，图谋叛逆。
English: On September 2, the Emperor's edict cut off the official title and knighthood of Liu Yan, the king of Nanping, the Guangzhou Festival envoy, because he was going to go beyond his duty, change his name to Emperor, and conspire to rebel.

古文：仍诏天下兵马元帅钱镠指挥攻讨。
现代文：并诏令天下兵马元帅钱指挥攻讨。
English: And he ordered the world's soldiers and horses to attack under the command of Field Marshal Qian.

古文：冬十月，晋王复至魏州。
现代文：冬十月，晋王又到魏州。
English: In the winter of October, Jin Wang went to Weizhou again.

古文：交绥而退。十二月戊戌，晋王领军迫河南寨，王瓚率师御之，获晋将石家才。
现代文：这月，刘寻阝攻下兖州，活捉叛将张守进，夷灭了他的全家。十二月五日，晋王领军迫近黄河南岸营寨，王瓒领军抵拒他，俘获晋军将领石家才。
English: This month, Liu Huanqian conquered Zhangzhou, captured the rebel Zhang Shoujin alive, and destroyed his entire family. On December 5th, the Jin army leader approached the camp on the south bank of the Yellow River. Wang Huan's army leader resisted him and captured the Jin army general Shi Jiacai.

古文：既而瓚军不利，瓚退保杨村寨，晋人陷濮阳。
现代文：不久王瓒军失利，王瓒退守杨村寨，晋军攻陷濮阳。
English: Soon after, Wang Hui's army was defeated, Wang Hui retreated to Yangcunzhai, and Jin's army invaded Fenyang.

