古文：长勺之役，曹刿问所以战于庄公。
现代文：鲁国的军队即将与齐国的军队在长勺交战，曹刿问鲁庄公凭借什么来作战。
English: The army of Lu was about to fight the army of Qi in the Long Spoon. Cao Pi asked Lu Zhuang what he could use to fight.

古文：公曰： 余不爱衣食于民，不爱牲玉于神。 
现代文：庄公说： 凭借我对百姓从不吝啬衣服和食物，对神灵从不吝啬牛羊和玉器 。
English: Zhuang Gong said: By virtue of me, I never begrudge clothes and food to the people, and never begrudge cattle, sheep and jade objects to the gods.

古文：对曰： 夫惠本而后民归之志，民和而后神降之福。
现代文：曹刿回答说： 只有从根本上树德施惠百姓才会归附，百姓齐心神灵才会降福。
English: Cao Pi replied, "Only by fundamentally cultivating virtue and benefiting the people will the people adhere to it, and only when the people are of one heart and one mind will the gods bestow blessings upon them."

古文：若布德于民而平均其政事，君子务治而小人务力；动不违时，财不过用；财用不匮，莫不能使共祀。
现代文：如果你能向百姓广施恩德并且公平的处理政事，使君子热心于协助治国，小民热心于贡献力量；同时你的举动不违背时令，耗费不超过常度，这样百姓的日用就不会匮乏，大家才有能力供奉神灵。
English: If you can extend kindness to the people and fairly handle political affairs, so that the nobles are eager to help govern the country and the commoners are eager to contribute; at the same time, your actions do not violate the season, and the consumption does not exceed the normal level, so that the daily needs of the people will not be scarce, and everyone will be able to worship the gods.

古文：是以用民无不听，求福无不丰。
现代文：所以你动员百姓没有不听从的，求神降福没有不应验的。
English: Therefore, you have mobilized the people not to disobey, not to fail to seek God's blessing.

古文：今将惠以小赐，祀以独恭。
现代文：现在你只是到了临战关头才给百姓施舍一点小恩惠，独自向神灵供奉祭品。
English: Now it is only when you are on the verge of war that you give the people a little favor, offering sacrifices to the gods alone.

古文：小赐不咸，独恭不优。
现代文：小恩惠不可能普遍，独自供奉也不可能丰裕。
English: Small favors cannot be widespread, nor can one's offerings be plentiful.

古文：不咸，民不归也；不优，神弗福也。将何以战？
现代文：不普遍施恩德百姓不会归附，供奉不丰裕，神灵就不会降福，你还凭借什么去作战呢？
English: If there is not universal benevolence, the people will not adhere to it. If there is not abundant offering, the gods will not bless it. What else can you rely on to fight?

古文：夫民求不匮于财，而神求优裕于享者也，故不可以不本。 
现代文：百姓所求的是日用不感到匮乏，神灵所求的是祭品的丰裕，所以不可以不从根本上着眼。 
English: What the people want is not to feel lack of daily necessities, and what the gods want is an abundance of sacrifices, so we must focus on the fundamentals.

古文：公曰： 余听狱虽不能察，必以情断之。 
现代文：庄公说： 我处理百姓的诉讼时虽然不能做到体察一切，但总是力求以情理判断。 
English: Zhuang Gong said: Although I cannot observe everything when dealing with people's lawsuits, I always try to judge by reason.

古文：对曰： 是则可矣。
现代文：曹刿回答说： 这就可以了。
English: Cao Pi replied, "That's fine.

古文：知夫苟中心图民，智虽弗及，必将至焉。 
现代文：假如内心确实为百姓考虑，智慧即使有所不及，也一定能达到目的。 
English: If the heart really thinks about the people, the wisdom, even if it falls short, will definitely achieve the goal.

