古文：邢曹进韦氏子僵僧鸡卵许文度玄法寺商居士黄山瑞像马子云云花寺观音李舟惠原延州妇人镇州铁塔渭滨钓者
现代文：邢曹进韦氏子僵僧鸡卵许文度玄法寺商居士黄山瑞像马子云云花寺观音李舟惠原延州妇人镇州铁塔渭滨钓者
English: Cao Jin Wei's son, the stiff-necked monk, the chicken's egg, Xu Mengdu, the merchant of the Genpo Temple, the merchant of the Huangshan Mountain, Rui Zi, Ma Zi, Yun Yunhua Temple, Guan Yin, Li Zhou, Hui Yuan, the woman of Yanzhou, the town of Zhou, the iron tower, the fishermen of the coast

古文：邢曹进
现代文：邢曹进
English: Zou Caojin

古文：唐故赠工部尚书邢曹进，至德已来，河朔之健将也。
现代文：唐代死后追封为工部尚书职位的邢曹进，肃宗至德年间以来，就是黄河以北的最强健有力的将领。
English: Zou Cao Jin, who was posthumously appointed to the post of Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry after the death of the Tang Dynasty, has been the strongest and most powerful general north of the Yellow River since the Su Zong and German years.

古文：守职魏郡，因为田承嗣所縻。
现代文：那时他在魏郡任职。不知什么因由曾被田承嗣拘禁过。
English: At that time, he was working in Wei County. For some unknown reason, he was once detained by Tian Chengzuo.

古文：曾因讨叛，飞矢中肩，左右与之拔箭，而镞留于骨，微露其末焉。即以铁钳，遣有力者拔而出之，其镞坚然不可动。
现代文：他在一次讨伐叛贼的战事里被一支箭射中肩膀。他左右的人急忙给他拔箭，可是箭头却留在了骨头里，稍微露出一点末端，只好用铁钳子夹，特意找来有力气的人用力拔。可是那个箭头坚固得拔不动。
English: He was shot in the shoulder by an arrow during a battle against the rebels. The people around him hurried to pull the arrow out for him, but the arrow remained in the bone, slightly exposing the end, so they had to use a pair of pliers to pull it out. But the arrow was too strong to pull out.

古文：曹进痛楚，计无所施。
现代文：曹进痛疼难忍，又想不出什么办法来。
English: Cao Jin's pain was unbearable, and he couldn't think of any way to help.

古文：妻孥辈但为广修佛事，用希慈荫。
现代文：他妻儿等多做佛事，希望佛来保佑他。
English: His wife and children often do Buddhist activities, and he hopes Buddha will come to bless him.

古文：不数日，则以索缚身于床，复命出之，而特牢如故。
现代文：过了几天之后，就用绳索把他绑在床上，再让人给拔箭头。可箭头还像当初一样牢固，丝毫不动。
English: A few days later, they tied him to the bed with a rope and asked someone to pull out the arrow, but the arrow was still as firm as it was before, it didn't move at all.

古文：曹进呻吟忍耐，俟死而已。
现代文：曹进每天呻吟忍耐，只有等死了。
English: Cao Jin groaned and endured every day, only to die.

古文：忽因昼寝，梦一胡僧立于庭中，曹进则以所苦诉之。
现代文：忽然有一天白天睡觉，梦见一个胡僧站在院子当中。曹进就把自己所受的痛苦全告诉了他。
English: Suddenly one day, while sleeping during the day, he dreamed of a goth monk standing in the middle of the courtyard. Cao Jin told him all about the pain he had suffered.

古文：胡僧久而谓曰： 能以米汁注于其中，当自愈矣。 
现代文：胡僧听了以后过了好一会儿才对他说： 你可以用米汤往伤口上灌注，一定会好的。 
English: After listening to him, the monk said to him after a while, "You can pour rice soup on the wound, and it will be fine."

古文：及寤，言于医工。
现代文：等醒来就对大夫说了这个梦。
English: When I woke up, I told the doctor about the dream.

古文：医工曰： 米汁即泔，岂宜渍疮哉！ 
现代文：大夫说： 米汤就是淘米水，怎么能用它来灌注疮伤啊？ 
English: The doctor said: "Rice soup is just rice water. How can it be used to perfuse a wound?

古文：遂令广询于人，莫有谕者。
现代文：于是派人四处打听，没有谁能明白这事的。
English: So they sent around to inquire, but no one could explain it to them.

古文：明日，忽有胡僧诣门乞食，因遽召入。
现代文：第二天，忽然有一个胡僧来到门上讨饭，曹进马上让他进来。
English: The next day, a gozong suddenly came to the door to beg for food. Cao Jin immediately let him in.

古文：而曹进中堂遥见，乃昨之所梦者也，即延之附近，告以危苦。
现代文：曹进在中堂远远地看上去，他就是昨天在梦中所见到的那个胡僧。曹进就请他到跟前来，把自己的痛苦告诉了他。
English: Cao Jin saw from a distance in the middle of the hall that he was the monk he had seen in his dream the day before. Cao Jin invited him to come and told him about his suffering.

古文：胡僧曰： 何不灌以寒食饧？当知其神验也。 
现代文：胡僧说： 为什么不用冷米汤灌注伤处，这样照做之后才会知道它效果如神。 
English: The monk said, "Why don't you use cold rice soup to perfuse the wound? Only after doing so will you know that it has a miraculous effect."

古文：曹进遂悟，饧为米汁。
现代文：曹进这才恍然大悟，汤就是米汁啊。
English: Cao Jin suddenly realized that the soup was rice soup.

古文：况所见复肖梦中，则取之，如法以点，应手清凉，顿减酸疼。
现代文：况且刚才所见到的又完全符合梦中的情景。因此就拿米汤来按照胡僧指点的办法去灌伤处。刚一洗过，果然就有清凉的感觉，米汤灌到伤口处，立刻感到酸疼减轻不少。
English: Moreover, what I just saw was completely consistent with the scene in the dream. Therefore, I took the rice soup and followed the instructions of the monk to go to the wound. As soon as I washed it, there was a feeling of coolness. I poured the rice soup into the wound and immediately felt the soreness lessen a lot.

古文：其夜，其疮稍痒，即令如前镊之。
现代文：这天夜里他的伤口处就有些发痒。
English: On this night, his wound was a little itchy.

古文：钳才及睑，镞已突然而出。
现代文：曹进就叫人像先前那样用钳子拔箭，钳子才举到眼前，箭头就突然出来了。
English: Cao Jin told the man to use the pliers to pull out the arrow as before. The pliers were lifted up to his eyes, and the arrowhead suddenly came out.

古文：后傅药，不旬日而瘥矣。
现代文：然后敷上药，不到十天伤口就痊愈了。哎！
English: Then they applied medicine, and the wound healed in less than ten days.

古文：吁，西方圣人，恩祐显灼，乃若此之明征乎。
现代文：西方的圣人啊！他的恩惠庇佑这样显著，这不就是最好的应验明证吗？
English: O sage of the West! Is not his beneficence and patronage so conspicuous that it is the best proof of its fulfilment?

古文：韦氏子
现代文：韦氏子
English: Wei's son grows up

古文：韦氏子有服儒而任于唐元和朝者，自幼宗儒，非儒不言，故以释氏为胡法，非中国宜兴。
现代文：有个信奉儒家的姓韦的人，在唐宪宗元和年间任职。他从小效法儒家，不是儒家倡导的话不说。所以把佛教看作外夷的学说在中国不应当提倡。
English: There was a Confucianist surnamed Wei who served during the reign of Emperor Zongyuan in the Tang Dynasty. From an early age, he followed the Confucianism and did not say anything that was not advocated by the Confucianists. Therefore, the doctrine of Buddhism as a foreign culture should not be promoted in China.

古文：有二女，长适相里氏，幼适胡氏。
现代文：他有两个女儿。长女嫁给相里氏。幼女嫁给胡氏。
English: He has two daughters. The eldest daughter married into the Sori clan and the younger daughter married into the Hu clan.

古文：长夫执外舅之论，次夫则反之，常敬佛奉教，攻习其文字。其有不译之字读宜梵音者，则屈舌效之，久而益笃。
现代文：他的大女婿坚持韦氏子的学说，二女婿就正好相反，敬重佛教。胡氏用心研究它的文字，如果遇到不能翻译的，而应当读梵语的字，就卷起舌头模仿着念。
English: His eldest son-in-law adhered to the teachings of Wei Shizhi, and his second son-in-law, on the contrary, respected Buddhism. Hu diligently studied its words, and if he encountered words that could not be translated, but should be read in Sanskrit, he rolled up his tongue and imitated reading.

古文：及韦氏子寝疾，命其子曰： 我儒家之人，非先王之教不服。
现代文：时间长了，就更忠实地信奉佛教了。等到韦氏子有重病卧床时，他把儿子叫到跟前说： 我是儒家的人，凡不是先王的教导我都不能服从。
English: As time went on, he became a more faithful believer in Buddhism. When Wei's son was seriously ill in bed, he called his son to him and said: "I am a Confucian, and I cannot obey anything that is not the teachings of the former king."

古文：吾今死矣，慎勿为俗态，铸释饭僧，祈祐于胡神，负吾平生之心。 
现代文：我现在快死了，千万不能成为世俗那样的情形，修佛像、请和尚吃斋，在佛的面前请求保祐，辜负了我一生的心愿。 
English: Now that I am about to die, I must not fall into the same situation as the world. I have failed my life's aspiration by repairing Buddha statues, inviting monks to fast, and begging for blessings in front of the Buddha.

古文：其子从之。
现代文：他的儿子听从了他的话。
English: His son obeyed his father's request.

古文：既除服而胡氏妻死，凶问到相里氏，以其妇卧疾，未果讣之。
现代文：脱掉了孝服不久，胡氏的妻子就死了。凶信通知到相里氏家，因他的妻子有病卧床，就没有把妹妹的死信告诉她。
English: Not long after he took off his filial piety, Mr. Hu's wife died. An ominous letter was sent to Mr. Sori's home, and because his wife was ill in bed, he did not tell her about his sister's death letter.

古文：俄而疾殆，其家泣而环之，且属纩焉。
现代文：不久他妻子的病情越加危重，他家里人都围着哭泣。
English: Soon his wife's condition became critical, and his family was crying all around.

古文：欻若鬼神扶持，骤能起坐，呼其妇曰： 妾季妹死已数月，何不相告？ 
现代文：妇人就要停床了，忽然像被鬼神扶持着一样冷不丁地坐了起来，呼喊着她的丈夫说： 我的小妹，已经死了几个月了，为什么不告诉我呢？ 
English: The woman was about to stop the bed, when she suddenly sat up coldly, as if supported by a ghost, and called out to her husband: "My little sister, she has been dead for months, why don't you tell me?

古文：因泣下呜咽，其夫绐之曰： 安得此事？
现代文：于是哭个不停。她丈夫哄骗她说： 怎么会有这样的事？
English: Her husband coaxed her: "How could this happen?

古文：贤妹微恙，近闻平复，荒惑之见，未可凭也。
现代文：贤妹只是有点小病，最近听说已经好了。你这是恍惚时看见的，没有一点凭证，千万不要特别难过。
English: My sister-in-law is just a little bit ill, and I heard recently that she has recovered. You saw this in a trance, without any proof, so don't be too sad.

古文：勿遽惆怅，今疾甚，且须将息。 
现代文：现在你病很重，特别需要好好养病才是。 
English: Now that you are seriously ill, you especially need to take good care of yourself.

古文：又泣曰： 妾妹在此，自言今年十月死，甚有所见，命吾弟兄来，将传示之。
现代文：相里氏的妻子不听丈夫劝慰，又哭泣着说： 我妹妹就在这里，她自己说是今年十月死的。并且在阴间看见了很多事情。快叫我的弟兄们来，我要亲自说给他们听。
English: Mr. Sori's wife did not listen to her husband's words of comfort, but wept again and said, "My sister is right here, she said she died in October of this year, and she saw many things in the underworld. Call my brothers, and I will tell them myself."

古文：昨到地府西曹之中，闻高墉之内，冤楚叫悔之声，若先君声焉。
现代文：妹妹对我说昨天到了阴曹地府的西曹，听见高墙里有冤屈痛楚叫悔的声音，很像先父的声音。
English: My younger sister said to me, "Yesterday, when you arrived at the palace of the wicked, you heard a voice on the high wall, crying out in anguish and remorse, very much like my father's voice.

古文：观其上则火光迸出，焰若风雷。
现代文：看那上面有火光迸出，火焰像风雷似的。
English: Look at the flames shooting out of it. The flames look like thunder and lightning.

古文：求入礼觐，不可，因遥哭呼之。
现代文：请求进入里面观看，又不准进去。只好老远哭喊他。
English: He asked to go in and look, but they would not let him in, so he cried out for help from a distance.

古文：先君随声叫曰： 吾以平生谤佛，受苦弥切，无晓无夜，略无憩时，此中刑名，言说不及。
现代文：先父随着声音叫说： 我因为一生诽谤佛教，在这里受罪很深，没白天没黑夜，一点休息的工夫都没有，这里的刑罚名称说不完。
English: My forefather cried out with the voice, "Because I have slandered Buddhism all my life, I have suffered a great deal here. There is no day or night, and there is no time to rest. I can't say the name of the punishment here.

古文：惟有罄家回向，冥资撰福，可求万一。
现代文：唯有倾家荡产，用家中全部的钱财修福，可能万一获救。
English: The only way to be saved is to go bankrupt and use all the money in the family to pay off debts.

古文：轮劫而受，难希降减。但百刻之中，一刻暂息，亦可略舒气耳。 
现代文：轮回的劫难很难减免，只是一百刻当中，能有一刻暂时休息也可略微喘口气了。
English: The calamity of reincarnation is difficult to alleviate. However, in the midst of a hundred moments, it is possible to have a moment of temporary rest and take a slight breather.

古文：妹虽宿罪不轻，以夫家积善，不堕地狱，即当上生天宫也。
现代文：你虽然前世的罪过不轻，因为丈夫积善，不会堕落到地狱去，就要上升天堂了。 
English: Although your sins in the previous life are not light, because your husband is good, you will not fall into hell, but will rise to heaven.

古文：妾以君心若先君，亦当受数百年之责，然委形之后，且当神化为乌。
现代文：我因为你的思想像我死去的父亲，不尊佛教，也应受几百年的罪了。我死了之后会化为乌鸦。
English: I should be punished for hundreds of years because you think like my dead father and disrespect Buddhism. When I die, I will turn into a crow.

古文：再七饭僧之时，可以来此。 
现代文：等二七祭祀斋僧时可以来这里。 
English: You can come here when it is time for the twenty-seven sacrificial rites.

古文：其夫泣曰： 洪炉变化，物固有之。
现代文：相里听后哭着说： 水火变化，事物本来就有的。
English: After listening to this, Sori cried and said, "Things have always existed, no matter how much they change.

古文：雀为蛤，蛇为雉，雉为鸽，鸠为鹰，田鼠为鴽，腐草为萤，人为虎、为猨、为鱼、为鳖之类，史传不绝。
现代文：雀变为蛤、蛇变为雉、雉变为鸽、鸠变为鹰、田鼠变为驽、腐草为荧、人变为虎、为猨、为鱼、为鳖之类，历史延传不绝。
English: Sparrows turn into toads, snakes into toads, toads into doves, toads into eagles, field mice into toads, rotten grass into fluorescent lights, people into tigers, toads, fish, toads, and so on, and the history continues.

古文：为乌之说，岂敢深讶！
现代文：变为乌鸦的说法，怎么敢不信呢？
English: How dare you not believe in the story of the raven?

古文：然乌群之来，数皆数十，何以认君之身而加敬乎？ 
现代文：可是乌鸦成群飞来，一群都有几十只，怎么能认识哪只是你的化身来加倍尊敬呢？ 
English: But crows come in flocks, there are dozens of them in a flock, how can you recognize which one is your avatar to double your respect?

古文：曰： 尾底毛白者妾也。
现代文：他妻子回答说： 尾巴下面长着白毛的就是我。
English: His wife replied, "I'm the one with the white hair under my tail."

古文：为妾谢世人，为不善者，明则有人诛，暗则有鬼诛，丝毫不差。
现代文：替我告诉世上的人，做坏事的人，活着有人责罚，死了有鬼责罚，丝毫不会错。
English: Tell the people of the world for me, those who do bad things, those who are alive will be punished, and those who are dead will be punished by ghosts, and they will not be wrong at all.

古文：因其所迷，随迷受化，不见天宝之人多而今人寡乎！
现代文：根据他的迷惑、迷惑多少来决定对他的惩罚。你没看到天宝年间的人多，而现在的人少吗？
English: Punish him according to his trouble, how much trouble. Didn't you see that there were more people in the Tianbao era, but now there are fewer people?

古文：盖为善者少，为恶者多。
现代文：大概做善事的人少，做恶事的人多。
English: There are probably fewer people who do good things and more people who do bad things.

古文：是以一厕之内，虫豸万计；一砖之下，蝼蚁千万。
现代文：因此一厕之内虫蛆上万，一砖之下，蝼蚁千万。
English: Therefore, there are tens of thousands of worms in a toilet, and tens of thousands of ants under a brick.

古文：而昔之名城大邑，旷荡无人；美地平原，目断草莽，得非其验乎！
现代文：而从前的名城大邑，空旷无人，美地平原、看到的尽是草莽。难道这不是应验吗？
English: But the famous cities and towns of the past are empty, deserted, beautiful plains, and all you can see is grass. Isn't this a fulfillment?

古文：多谢世人，勉植善业。 
现代文：告诉世人吧，尽力做好事。 
English: Tell the world, try to do good.

古文：言讫复卧，其夕遂卒。
现代文：说完又躺在床上，那天晚上就死了。
English: After saying this, he lay back down on the bed and died that night.

古文：其为妇也，奉上敬，事夫顺，为长慈，处下谦，故合门怜之，悯其芳年而变异物。无幼无长，泣以俟乌。
现代文：她做为媳妇，对公婆敬奉，待丈夫顺从，做长辈慈祥，对下人谦和，所以全家人都哀怜她，为她这么年轻就变成异物而怜惜，无论年老年小的都哭着等乌鸦来。
English: As a daughter-in-law, she is respectful to her in-laws, obedient to her husband, kind to her elders, and humble to her subordinates, so the whole family pities her, pities her for becoming a stranger at such a young age, and no matter how old or young, they are crying and waiting for the crows to come.

古文：及期，乌来者数十，唯一止于庭树低枝，窥其姑之户，悲鸣屈曲。
现代文：等到了二七那天，果然飞来几十只乌鸦。其中有一只落在庭院当中大树最低的树枝上，看着婆婆的门，悲切地连声叫着。
English: On the 27th day, dozens of crows flew in. One of them landed on the lowest branch of a large tree in the courtyard, looking at my mother-in-law's door and crying mournfully.

古文：若有所诉者，少长观之，莫不呜咽，徐验其尾，果有二毛，白如霜雪。
现代文：好像在诉说什么。老老小小的都看着没有不哭的。过了一会儿想起验证它的尾巴，果然有两根白毛，白得像霜雪一样。
English: It seemed to be saying something. Everyone, young and old, looked at it and couldn't help but cry. After a while, I remembered to check its tail, and sure enough, there were two white hairs, white as snow.

古文：姑引其手而祝之曰： 吾新妇之将亡也，言当化为乌而尾白。若真吾妇也，飞止吾手。 
现代文：婆婆伸出她的手来祝祷说： 我的媳妇临死时说，她会变成乌鸦，尾巴上长着白毛，如果你就是我媳妇，就快飞到我手上吧。 
English: The mother-in-law stretched out her hand in prayer and said, "My daughter-in-law said on her deathbed that she would turn into a crow with white hair on her tail. If you are my daughter-in-law, fly to my hand."

古文：言毕，其乌飞来，驯狎就食，若素养者，食毕而去。
现代文：说完，那乌鸦就飞到她婆婆手上，很温驯地吃食，就像平时家养的一样。吃完就飞走了。
English: After saying this, the crow flew to her mother-in-law's hand and ate very tamely, just like a domesticated crow. After eating, it flew away.

古文：自是日来求食，人皆知之。
现代文：从这天起天天来求食，附近的人都知道这件事。
English: Since that day, he has been begging for food every day, and everyone in the neighbourhood knows about it.

古文：数月之后，乌亦不来。
现代文：几个月之后，乌鸦就不再来了。
English: After a few months, the crows stopped coming.

古文：僵僧
现代文：僵僧
English: 僵僧

古文：唐元和十三年，郑滑节度使司空薛平、陈许节度使李光颜并准诏各就统所部兵自卫入讨东平，抵濮阳南七里，驻军焉。
现代文：唐代元和十三年，郑滑节度使司空薛平、陈许节度使李光颜一齐被皇帝下诏准许，各自统帅所领的军队自卫去讨伐东平。抵达濮阳南七里，驻扎在那里。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan and Tang dynasties, Zheng Slip Festival made Sikuo Xueping, Chen Xu Festival made Li Guangyan, and they were all approved by the emperor. The army led by their respective commanders went to fight Dongping in self-defense. They arrived seven miles south of Fenyang and stationed there.

古文：居人尽散，而村内有窣堵波者，中有僵僧，瞪目而坐，佛衣在身。
现代文：居民全都走散，而村内有一座佛塔，塔中有一位僵死的和尚，瞪着眼睛坐着，佛衣穿在身上。
English: The villagers have all scattered, but there is a stupa in the village, and in the tower there is a dead monk, sitting with staring eyes, wearing a Buddhist robe.

古文：以物触之，登时尘散。
现代文：用东西去触动他，立刻像尘土一样散落。
English: Touch him with anything and it immediately scatters like dust.

古文：众争集视，填咽累日。
现代文：大家争着围观，多日来挤得满满的。
English: People jostled for a place in the crowd, which had been packed for days.

古文：有许卒郝义曰： 焉有此事？ 
现代文：有一个许州士卒郝义说： 哪里有这等事？ 
English: A member of the Xuzhou Provincial Party Committee said: "Where did this happen?

古文：因此刀刺其心，如枨上壤。
现代文：于是用力去刺他的心，就像触动上面的土壤。
English: So he stabbed his heart with force, as if touching the soil above.

古文：义下塔不三四步，捧心大叫，一声而绝。
现代文：郝义走下塔不到三四步，就捧着心大叫一声而气绝。
English: Xing Yi walked down the tower for less than three or four steps, then he cried out with all his heart and died.

古文：李公遂令标蕝其事，瘗于其下。
现代文：李公于是命人为这件事表记，埋在塔的下面。
English: Li Gong then ordered someone to record the event and bury it under the tower.

古文：明日，陈卒毛清曰： 岂有此乎？
现代文：第二天，陈州士卒毛清说： 怎么能有这样的事？
English: The next day, Chen Zhou's subordinate Mao Qing said: "How could such a thing happen?

古文：昨者郝义因偶会耳。 
现代文：昨天郝义的死只是因为赶巧罢了。 
English: Yesterday, Zhai Yi's death was just a fluke.

古文：即以刀环筑去二齿。
现代文：用刀从僵僧嘴里敲掉二颗牙齿。
English: He knocked two teeth out of the monk's mouth with a knife.

古文：清下塔不三四步，捧颐大叫，一声而绝。
现代文：毛清走下塔不到三四步远，也捂着脸面大叫一声而气绝。
English: Mao Qing walked down the tower less than three or four steps away, but also covered his face and cried out.

古文：李公又令标其事，瘗于其下。
现代文：李公又让人为这件事表记，埋在塔的下面。
English: Li Gong also had the matter recorded and buried under the tower.

古文：自是无敢犯者。
现代文：从此再也没有敢去冒犯他的了。
English: I never dared to offend him again.

古文：而军人祈福乞灵，香火大集，往环三四里，人稠不得入焉。
现代文：而驻扎在这里的人祈求神灵降福保佑，香火不断，周围三四里远的范围内，进香的人群拥挤不堪。
English: But the people stationed here pray to the gods for blessings, incense is constantly burning, and within three or four miles of the surrounding area, the crowds of incense are overcrowded.

古文：军人以钱帛衣装檀施，环一二里而满焉。
现代文：驻扎在这里的军人又把钱帛、衣装等送去，周围一二里也挤满了。
English: The soldiers stationed here also sent money bags, clothes, etc., and the surrounding area was also crowded.

古文：司空薛公因令军卒之战伤疮重者，许其落籍居。
现代文：司空薛公因此让军队战伤严重的士兵，答应他们在那里居住下来。
English: Siku Xuegong therefore let the army take seriously wounded soldiers and allowed them to live there.

古文：不旬日，则又从军东入，而所聚之财，为盗贼挈去，则无怪矣。
现代文：不到十日，他们就又跟从军队东进，而所聚集的财物，被盗贼带走，那也是没有什么奇怪的了。
English: Less than ten days later, they followed the army east again, and it was no surprise that the stolen goods they had gathered were taken away.

古文：至今刀疮齿缺，分明犹在。
现代文：至今僵僧的刀伤缺齿，分明还在。
English: To this day, the priest's knife wound and missing tooth are clearly still there.

古文：鸡卵
现代文：鸡卵
English: Chicken and egg soup

古文：唐敬宗皇帝御历，以天下无事。视政之余，因广浮屠教，由是长安中缁徒益多。
现代文：唐敬宗皇帝临朝，认为天下太平，处理政事之余，而推广佛教，因此长安城中和尚很多。
English: Emperor Jingzong of the Tang Dynasty, who ruled at the time, believed that the world was peaceful and promoted Buddhism in addition to dealing with political affairs. As a result, there are many monks in Chang'an City.

古文：及文宗嗣位，亲阅万机，思除其害于人者。
现代文：等到文宗继位，亲自处理日常政事，想清除那些害人弊端。
English: He wants to deal with the day-to-day affairs of government personally when he succeeds Emperor Wenzong, and wants to eliminate those harmful drawbacks.

古文：曾顾左右曰： 自吾为天子，未能有补于人，今天下幸无兵革，吾将尽除害物者，使亿兆之民，指今日为尧、舜之世足矣。
现代文：曾对左右的人说： 自从我做了天子，没有做出对人民有利的事业，现在天下幸而没有战争，我将尽力除掉害人的东西，使亿万人民，把今天看成是尧、舜的时代也就够了。
English: He once said to the people around him, "Since I became the Son of Heaven, I have not done anything beneficial to the people. Now, fortunately, there is no war in the world. I will do my best to get rid of the things that harm people, so that hundreds of millions of people will regard today as the era of peace and tranquility.

古文：有不能补化而蠹于物者，但言之。 
现代文：有不利于教化而贪于物欲的，只管说出来。 
English: If there is something that is not conducive to enlightenment and is materialistic, just say it.

古文：左右或对曰： 独浮屠氏不能有补于大化，而蠹于物亦甚，可以斥去。 
现代文：左右有的人回答说： 唯独佛教不能有利于圣朝的教化，而危害于事物更严重，可以除掉它。 
English: Some people around replied: Buddhism alone cannot benefit the enlightenment of the Holy Dynasty, but it is more harmful to things and can be eliminated.

古文：于是文宗病之。始命有司，诏中外罢缁徒说佛书义，又有请斥其不修教者。
现代文：于是文宗很讨厌佛教，下命有司，诏内外取缔和尚们讲说佛法，又有除掉那些不听从教化的人。
English: As a result, Emperor Wenzong detested Buddhism, and issued orders to have officials, both inside and outside the palace, ban monks from teaching Buddhism, and eliminate those who did not follow the teachings.

古文：迫而听之，乃群卵呼观世音菩萨也，声甚凄咽，似有所诉。
现代文：诏命将下，赶上御厨给皇帝准备饭，用锅烹鸡蛋。正在锅底下点燃了火，忽然听到锅里有很小的像人说话的声音，逼近细听，是那些煮在锅里的鸡蛋在呼唤观世音菩萨。声音非常凄惨哽咽，像是有什么诉说的。
English: The imperial edict ordered him to catch up with the imperial chef, who was preparing a meal for the emperor, and to cook eggs in a pot. A fire was lit under the pot, and suddenly a small human-like voice was heard in the pot. Listen closely, it is the eggs boiled in the pot that are calling for Guanyin Bodhisattva. The voice is very mournful and choked, as if there is something to tell.

古文：尚食吏异之，具其事上闻。
现代文：御厨们感到奇怪，就把这件事告诉了皇帝。
English: The cooks were puzzled and told the emperor about it.

古文：文宗命左右验之，如尚食所奏。
现代文：文宗命左右的人验证，真像御厨们所说的。
English: The people around Wenzong are verifying that it really is as the chefs say.

古文：文帝叹曰： 吾不知浮屠氏之力乃如是耶！ 
现代文：文帝叹息曰： 我不知佛的威力却是有这样大。 
English: Emperor Wen sighed and said, "I didn't know the power of Buddha was so great.

古文：翌日，敕尚食吏无以鸡卵为膳。
现代文：第二天。下命御厨不要用鸡蛋做饭。
English: The next day, order the cook not to cook with eggs.

古文：因颁诏郡国，各于精舍塑观世音菩萨像。
现代文：于是颁布诏书于郡国：各个在庙宇里塑造观世音菩萨像。
English: As a result, an edict was issued in the county: everyone had to sculpt a statue of Guanyin Bodhisattva in a temple.

古文：许文度
现代文：许文度
English: Xu Wenda

古文：高阳许文度，唐太和中侨居岐阳郡，后以病热，近月余。
现代文：高阳许文度，唐太和年中侨居岐阳郡。以后因为有病发烧，将近一个月。
English: Gaoyang Xu Wendu, Tang Tahe and other Chinese expatriates lived in Qiyang County. Later, because of illness and fever, they were absent for nearly a month.

古文：一日卧于榻若沉醉状，后数日始寤。
现代文：一天躺在床上好像昏昏沉沉的样子。以后几天才醒过来。
English: Lying in bed one day, feeling drowsy, only to wake up a few days later.

古文：初文度梦有衣黄袍数辈与俱行田野，四望间，迥然无鸡犬声，且不知几百里。其时天景曛晦，愁思如结。
现代文：当初文度梦见有穿黄袍的许多人和他一起走在田野里。四下里连鸡犬的声音也听不到，且不知走了几百里，那时天气昏晦，忧愁不解。
English: At first, Wen Du dreamed that many people in yellow robes were walking with him in the fields. He could not even hear the voices of chickens and dogs, and he had walked hundreds of miles. At that time, the weather was gloomy and sad.

古文：有黄袍者谓文度曰： 子无苦，夫寿之与夭，固有涯矣，虽圣人安能逃其数。 
现代文：有穿黄袍的人对文度说： 你不要痛苦，人寿命的长短，本来就是有定数了。即使是圣人也不能逃脱？ 
English: A person wearing a yellow robe said to Wenda: "Don't suffer. The length of a person's life is predetermined. Even a saint can't escape it."

古文：文度忽悟身已死，恐甚。
现代文：文度忽然感到自身已死，很害怕，又走了十多里，到了一条河边。
English: He suddenly felt that he was dead and was very scared. He walked more than ten miles to a river.

古文：又行十余里，至一水，尽目无际，波若黑色，杳不知其深浅。
现代文：一望无际。水色漆黑不知它的深浅。
English: There is no end in sight. The water is so dark that you don't know how deep it is.

古文：黄衣人俱履水而去，独文度惧不敢涉。
现代文：黄衣人都一起涉水而过。唯独文度恐惧而不敢过。
English: The people in yellow waded through the water together. However, they were too scared to cross.

古文：已而有二金人，皆长五寸余，奇光皎然，自水上来，黄衣者望见金人，沮色震栗，即辟易驰去，不敢偷视。
现代文：过了一会有二个金人，都是五寸多高，闪着洁白奇异的光，从水上走来。穿黄袍的人们看见金人，面色惊恐，立即躲避而迅速离去。不敢偷看。
English: After a while, two golden men, both more than five inches tall, shining with a strange white light, came from the water. People in yellow robes saw the golden men, looked terrified, immediately dodged and quickly left. They did not dare to peek.

古文：二金人谓文度曰： 汝何为来地府中？
现代文：二个金人对文度说： 你为什么来到阴曹地府？
English: The two goldsmiths said to Wenda, "Why did you come to the House of the Devil?

古文：我今挈汝归生途，慎无恐。 
现代文：我现在领你回到阳世间去。小心不要害怕。 
English: I will now lead you back into the light. Be careful not to be afraid.

古文：文度惧稍解，因再拜谢之，于是金人与文度偕行数十里，俄望见里门，喜不胜。
现代文：文度稍微平静了些，一再行礼道谢。然后金人领着文度走了几十里，不一会看见家门，高兴得不得了。
English: Mando calmed down a bit and repeatedly bowed to thank him. Then the goldsmith led Mando on a journey of several dozen miles, and he was overjoyed to see the door of his home.

古文：忽闻有厉声呼文度者，文度悸而醒，见妻子方泣于前，且奇且叹，而羸惫不能运支体，故未暇语其事。
现代文：忽然听到有大声呼喊文度的名字，文度惊悸而醒，看见他的妻子正在面前哭泣，他又奇怪又叹息，并且疲惫不堪不能活动肢体，所以来不及说经历的事情。
English: Suddenly, he heard his name being called out loudly. He woke up in shock and saw his wife crying in front of him. He sighed strangely and was too tired to move his limbs, so he didn't have time to talk about what he had experienced.

古文：后旬日，疾少间，策而步于庭。忽见二金人皆长五寸余，在佛舍下，即昔时梦中所见者。
现代文：过了十几天，他的病稍好一些了，他想着在院子里走，忽然看见二个金人皆是高五寸多，在佛龛下，就是先前梦中所看见的那两个人。
English: After a dozen days, his illness was a little better. He thought about walking in the courtyard, and suddenly saw two golden men, both more than five inches tall, under the Buddhist altar. They were the two people he had seen in the previous dream.

古文：视其仪状，无毫缕之异，心益奇之，始以其事告于妻。
现代文：看见他们的形态容貌，跟梦中的没有丝毫差别，心里更加感到奇怪。
English: Seeing that their shapes and appearances were no different from those in the dream, I felt even more strange in my heart.

古文：妻曰： 昨者以君病且亟，妾忧不解。然常闻释氏有救苦之力，由是弃资玩，铸二金人之像，每清旦，常具食祭之。
现代文：他才把那梦中的事告诉了妻子，妻子说： 前些日子因为您病情严重，我忧愁得不能解脱，然而常听说佛祖有救苦救难的神力，因此我就卖掉了家中的财物，铸造了两个金人。
English: It was only then that he told his wife about the dream. She said, "The other day, because you were seriously ill, I was so sad that I couldn't shake it off. However, I've often heard that Buddha had the power to save people from suffering, so I sold the family's belongings and cast two golden men.

古文：自是君之苦亦瘳除，盖其力也。 
现代文：每天清晨，我常准备饭菜祭祀他们，从这以后您的病痛也就消除了，大概是他们显灵了。 
English: Every morning, I used to prepare a meal to sacrifice to them, and from then on, your ailment disappeared, and it was probably they who manifested themselves.

古文：文度感二金人报效之速，不食生牢，常阅佛书，因尽穷其指归焉。
现代文：文度感谢两个金人报效得这样快，所以不杀生不吃荤，常常念佛经，因此也就深刻地理解了佛教的真义。
English: Man-du thanked the two goldsmiths for their quick response, so he did not kill or eat the dragonfly. He often recited Buddhist scriptures, and thus deeply understood the true meaning of Buddhism.

古文：玄法寺
现代文：玄法寺
English: Genpo-ji Temple

古文：长安安邑坊玄法寺者，本里人张频宅也。
现代文：长安安邑坊有个玄法寺，本是此地人张频的住宅。
English: There is a Xuanfa Temple in Chang'an's Anyi Square, which was originally the residence of local resident Zhang Feng.

古文：频尝供养一僧，念法华经为业，积十余年。
现代文：张频曾经供养一个和尚，他把念法华经做为职业，累积十多年。
English: Zhang Feng once supported a monk, who made the study of the Lotus Sutra his profession, accumulating more than ten years.

古文：张门人谮僧通其婢，因以他事杀之。
现代文：张家的人诬陷这个和尚和张的婢女通奸，张因此借其它的罪名杀了和尚。
English: The Zhang family framed the monk for adultery with Zhang's maid, so Zhang killed the monk on other charges.

古文：僧死后，合宅常闻经声不绝。
现代文：和尚死后，整个住宅常听到念经的声音不断。
English: After the monk's death, the entire residence often heard the sound of chanting continuously.

古文：张寻知其冤，惭悔不及，因舍宅为寺。
现代文：张不久知道和尚是冤枉的，惭愧悔恨已来不及，因此把住宅施舍出去做了寺院。
English: Zhang soon knew that the monk had been wronged, and that it was too late for shame and remorse, so he gave away his house and made it into a temple.

古文：商居士
现代文：商居士
English: Commercial Clerk

古文：有商居士者，三河县人。
现代文：有个商居士，是三河县人。
English: There was a merchant-dweller who was from Mikawa County.

古文：年七岁，能通佛氏书，里人异之。
现代文：七岁就能通晓佛经，城里人认为他不一般。
English: He can understand Buddhist scriptures at the age of seven, and people in the city think that he is not ordinary.

古文：后庐于三河县西田中，有佛书数百编，手卷目阅，未尝废一日。
现代文：后来住在三河县西田中，有佛经数百部，整天手不离卷地看，不曾荒废一天。
English: Later, he lived in Nishida Junior High School in Mikawa County. There were hundreds of Buddhist scriptures, and he read them all day long, never wasting a day.

古文：从而师者百辈，往往独游城邑，偕其行者。闻居士每运支体，垅然若戛玉之音，听者奇之。
现代文：拜他为师的有百余人。他常常独自在城里游逛，有时同他一起走的人，听到居士每运动肢体时，像敲打玉器的声音，听到的人认为很奇怪。
English: There are more than a hundred people who worship him as a teacher. He often walks around the city alone, and sometimes the people who walk with him hear the sound of the householder's every limb moving, like the sound of beating a jade object, and the people who hear it think it's strange.

古文：或曰： 居士之骨。真锁骨也，夫锁骨连络如蔓。故动摇之体，则有清越之声，固其然矣。
现代文：有人说居士的骨头真是锁链合一起的，那锁骨连结着好像藤蔓，所以动摇身体时，就有清脆的声音传出，就是这个缘故。
English: Some people say that the bones of the householder are really chained together, that the clavicles are connected like vines, so when you shake your body, a crisp sound comes out, that's why.

古文：昔闻佛氏书言，佛身有舍利骨，菩萨之身有锁骨，今商居士者，岂非菩萨乎！
现代文：从前听佛经上说： 佛身有舍利骨，菩萨之身有锁骨。 今商居士难道不是菩萨吗？
English: Once upon a time, I heard a Buddhist sutra say: "The Buddha's body has a shari'a bone, and the bodhisattva's body has a collarbone. Isn't the merchant householder a bodhisattva now?"

古文：然荤俗之人，固不可辨也。 
现代文：然而一般的世俗之人，确实不能辨别啊。
English: However, the average secular person really can't tell the difference.

古文：居士后年九十余，一日，汤沐具冠带，悉召门弟子会食，因告之曰： 吾年九十矣，今旦暮且死，汝当以火烬吾尸，慎无逆吾旨。 
现代文：居士以后活了九十多岁。一天，居士用热水洗澡、穿好了衣服戴好了帽子，把门下弟子全召来集会吃饭，于是告诉他们说： 我九十多岁了，早晚将死，你们应当把我的尸体火化，千万不要违背我的意思。 
English: One day, the householder took a hot bath, put on his robe and hat, called all his disciples to a meeting for a meal, and told them, "I am over ninety years old, and will die sooner or later. You should cremate my body, and never go against my wishes."

古文：门弟子泣曰： 谨听命。 
现代文：门下弟子哭着说： 一定照办。 
English: His disciple cried and said, "I'll definitely do it."

古文：是夕坐而卒。
现代文：这天晚上居士坐着死了。
English: That night, the householder died sitting up.

古文：后三日，门弟子焚居士于野，及视其骨，果锁骨也，支体连贯，若纫缀之状，风一拂则纤韵徐引。
现代文：三天后，门下弟子在荒野烧了居士的尸体，等看那骨头，果然是锁骨。肢体连贯，像用针缝纫连结的形状。风一吹拂就慢慢发出细小而和谐的声音。
English: Three days later, his disciple burned the monk's body in the wilderness, and when he looked at the bone, he saw that it was indeed the collarbone. The limbs were connected, like the shape of a stitch. When the wind blew, it slowly emitted a small, harmonious sound.

古文：于是里人竞施金钱，建一塔，以居士锁骨瘗于塔中。
现代文：于是城里人都争着拿钱，建筑了一个塔，把居士的锁骨埋葬在塔里。
English: So the townspeople scrambled to get the money, built a tower, and buried the householder's collarbone in the tower.

古文：黄山瑞像
现代文：黄山瑞像
English: Huangshan Rui Zong

古文：鲁郡任城野黄山瑞像，盖生于石，状如胚混焉。
现代文：鲁郡任城野外的黄山瑞像，是在山石上自然形成的，形状像胚胎模糊不清。
English: The image of Huangshan Rui outside Rencheng, Lu County, is naturally formed on the mountain stone, and its shape is indistinct like an embryo.

古文：昔有采梠者，山中见像，因往祈祷，如愿必得，由是远近观者数千人。
现代文：从前有个伐木人在山上看见了瑞像，于是上前祈祷，结果心愿都达到了。因此远近观看瑞像的有数千人。
English: Once upon a time, a woodcutter saw a beautiful image on the mountain, so he went forward to pray, and as a result, all his wishes came true. As a result, there are thousands of people watching the beautiful image from far and near.

古文：知盗官恐有奸起，因命石工破山石，辇瑞像，致之邑中大寺门楼下。于是邑人于寺建大斋，凡会数千人。
现代文：地方上管理捕捉盗贼的官恐怕有坏人乘机活动，因此命令石工砸碎山石把瑞像载运到城中大寺门楼下，城里人在寺门下举行了大斋典礼，到会的有好几千人。
English: The local official in charge of catching thieves feared that bad people might take advantage of the situation, so he ordered the masons to smash the rocks and stones and carry the statue down to the gate of the city's main temple. The people of the city held a Lent ceremony under the temple gate, with several thousand people in attendance.

古文：斋毕众散，日方午，忽然大风，黑云覆寺，云中火起，电击门楼，飞雨河注。邑人惊曰： 门楼灾矣。 
现代文：大斋完毕，人们离去，天正中午，忽然刮起大风。黑云覆盖寺院上空，云中带着闪电，电冲击门楼，飞雨倾注到河里，城里人害怕说： 门楼遭灾了。 
English: After breaking the fast, the people left. At noon, a strong wind suddenly blew. Black clouds covered the sky above the temple. The clouds carried lightning. The lightning hit the gatehouse, and the rain poured into the river. The townspeople were afraid to say: The gatehouse has suffered a disaster.

古文：先是僧造门楼，高百余尺，未施丹雘，而楼势东倾，以大木撑之，及雨止，楼已正矣。
现代文：先前和尚造门楼，高百余尺，还未等刷上红漆，门楼已经向东倾斜，只好用大木头支撑着。等雨停止，楼已正了。
English: Previously, a monk had built a gate tower, more than a hundred feet high, but it had not yet been painted red. The gate tower was already leaning to the east, so it had to be supported by a large piece of wood. When the rain stopped, the building was upright.

古文：盖鬼神以像故，而共扶持焉。
现代文：大盖鬼神是因瑞像的原因，而来扶持它吧。
English: Daegai Kishin is the reason for the statue, come and support it.

古文：马子云
现代文：马子云
English: Ma Ziyun

古文：泾县尉马子云，为人数奇，以孝廉三任为泾县尉，皆数月丁忧而去。
现代文：泾县尉马子云，一生的遭遇十分奇特，他以孝廉的资格三次出任泾县尉，头两次，都是在任才几个月就因为父母丧事而告假回家。
English: Ma Ziyun, the county magistrate of Zhixian County, had a very strange life. He served as the county magistrate of Zhixian County three times with the qualification of filial piety. The first two times, he was only in office for a few months, but he went home on leave due to the death of his parents.

古文：在官日，充本郡租纲赴京。
现代文：第三次在任又被派押送租米去京城。
English: For the third time in office, he was sent to escort rent rice to the capital.

古文：途由淮水，遇风船溺，凡沉官米万斛，由是大被拘系。
现代文：途经淮水遇大风船沉了，损失了官米上万斛，因为这个判罪入狱。
English: On the way through Huai Shui, the ship sank in a gale, causing the loss of tens of thousands of dollars, and he was sentenced to prison.

古文：子云在系，乃专心念佛，凡经五年。
现代文：子云在狱中，专心念佛，总共被关押了五年。
English: In prison, Ziyun concentrated on chanting the Buddha's name. He was detained for a total of five years.

古文：后遇赦得出，因逃于南陵山寺中，常一食斋。
现代文：后来遇赦出来。于是躲到南陵山的庙里，吃斋修行。
English: Later, he was pardoned. So he hid in a temple in Nanling Mountain and practiced fasting.

古文：天宝十年，卒于泾县。
现代文：天宝十年时，死在泾县。
English: At the age of ten, Tianbao died in Jixian County.

古文：明日沐浴，衣新衣，端坐合掌。
现代文：先前对人说： 一生非常坎坷。就用功钻研佛教，现在佛教修业已经完成，应当去安乐世界了。 
English: Earlier, he told people: "My life has been very rough. I studied Buddhism diligently. Now my Buddhist studies have been completed, I should go to the world of peace and happiness."

古文：俄而异香满户，子云喜曰： 化佛来矣，且迎吾行。 
现代文：第二天洗了澡，穿上新衣服，端坐着两手相合，不一会屋里充满了奇异的香味。子云高兴地说： 化佛来了，要接我去了。 
English: The next day, after taking a bath, putting on new clothes, and sitting with folded hands, the room was soon filled with a strange fragrance. Zi Yun said happily, "The Buddha has come to pick me up."

古文：言讫而殁。
现代文：说完就死了。
English: And then he died.

古文：云花寺观音
现代文：云花寺观音
English: Unka-ji Temple Kannon

古文：长安云花寺有观音堂，在寺西北隅。
现代文：长安云花寺有个观音堂。在寺的西北角。
English: Chang'an Yunhua Temple has a Guanyin Hall in the northwest corner of the temple.

古文：大中末，百姓屈岩患疮且死，梦一菩萨摩其疮曰： 我在云花寺。 
现代文：唐宣宗大中末年，百姓屈岩得了疮快要死了，梦见一个菩萨抚摸他的疮说： 我在云花寺。 
English: At the end of the middle school of Tang Xuan Zong, the people of Quyan suffered from sores and were about to die. He dreamed that a bodhisattva stroked his sores and said: I am in Yunhua Temple.

古文：岩惊觉汗流，数日而愈。
现代文：屈岩惊醒，出了一身汗，不几天疮就全好了。
English: Qu Yan woke up with a start and broke into a sweat. Within a few days, the sores were completely healed.

古文：因诣寺寻检，至圣画堂，见菩萨，一如其睹。
现代文：于是他到了云花寺寻找查看。到了圣画堂，看见了一个菩萨，像梦中见到的一样。
English: So he went to Yunka-ji Temple to check it out, and when he got to the sacred painting hall, he saw a bodhisattva, just like the one he had seen in his dreams.

古文：倾城百姓瞻礼。
现代文：全城的百姓都来拜这菩萨。
English: People from all over the city came to worship this Bodhisattva.

古文：岩遂立社，建堂移之。
现代文：屈岩于是选了祭祀的地方，建筑了祠堂把菩萨搬了过来。
English: Qu Yan then chose a place of worship, built an ancestral hall and brought the Bodhisattva here.

古文：李舟
现代文：李舟
English: Li Zhou

古文：唐虔州刺史李舟与妹书曰： 释迦生中国，设教如周孔；周孔生西方，设教如释迦。
现代文：唐虔州刺史李舟在给妹妹的信中说： 如果释迦牟尼生于中国，设教就会像春秋战国时的孔子；如果春秋战国时的孔子生在西方，也会设教像释迦牟尼。
English: In a letter to his sister, Li Zhou, a Tang Dynasty scholar from Qianzhou, said: If Shakyamuni had been born in China, he would have taught like Confucius during the Spring and Autumn Warring States period; if Confucius had been born in the West during the Spring and Autumn Warring States period, he would have taught like Shakyamuni.

古文：天堂无则已，有则君子登；地狱无则已；有则小人入。 
现代文：天堂没有就罢了，有就有君子去登；地狱没有就罢了，有就有小人去下。 
English: If there is no heaven, it is enough for a gentleman to ascend; if there is no hell, it is enough for a villain to descend.

古文：识者以为知言。
现代文：有见识的人认为这话是有道理的。
English: Those in the know say it makes sense.

古文：惠原
现代文：惠原
English: Uehara

古文：沙门惠原，本姓春氏，义阳人也，少以弓弩为业。
现代文：出家人惠原，俗家姓春，是义阳人。年少以用弓箭狩猎为职业。
English: Hui Yuan, a layman with the surname Chun, is a native of Yiyang. In his youth, he hunted with a bow and arrow.

古文：至武陵山，射一孕鹿。
现代文：一次到武陵山，射中了一只孕鹿。
English: Once, he went to Wuling Mountain and shot a pregnant deer.

古文：将死能言曰： 吾先身只杀汝，汝今遂并杀害我母子，既是缘对，应为汝死。 
现代文：鹿快要死了，开口讲了话： 我前生只杀了你一个。你今世一下子杀害了我母子，既然是前生的冤孽，应当死在你的手里 。
English: The deer was about to die, and he opened his mouth to speak: In my previous life, I only killed you once. In this life, you killed my mother and son at once. Since it was the injustice of my previous life, I should die at your hands.

古文：复向言曰： 吾寻当成佛也。汝可行善，生生代代，勿复结冤。 
现代文：又向他说： 我很快就要成佛了，你也应该多做好事，咱们世世代代，不要再结冤仇。 
English: He also said to him, "I will soon become a Buddha. You should also do more good deeds. For generations to come, let's not have any grudges.

古文：惠原即悟前缘，遂落发于鹿死之处，而置迦蓝，名耆阇窟山寺。
现代文：惠原就明白了前缘。于是就在鹿死的地方削发为僧，并且在那里修了庙，取名耆阇窟山寺。
English: Therefore, he became a monk in the place where the deer died, and built a temple there, which was named Shuguang Mountain Temple.

古文：王融别传，言惠死后十年，有人于武当山下见之。
现代文：王融的别传中，记载惠原死后十年，有人在武当山下看见他。
English: In the legend of Wang Rong, it is recorded that ten years after Hui Yuan's death, someone saw him at the foot of Wudang Mountain.

古文：延州妇人
现代文：延州妇人
English: Yanzhou Woman Wails

古文：昔延州有妇女，白皙颇有姿貌，年可二十四五。
现代文：以前延州有一个妇女，长得白静而又有几分美貌，年龄在二十四五岁左右，独自城中往来与。
English: Once upon a time, there was a woman in Yanzhou. She was white, quiet, and somewhat beautiful. She was about twenty-four or twenty-five years old, and she went to and from the city on her own.

古文：孤行城市，年少之子，悉与之游，狎昵荐枕，一无所却。
现代文：年轻的男子，都争着与她交游，跟她亲热，甚至要她陪着睡觉也不拒绝。
English: Young men are all vying to make friends with her, make out with her, and even ask her to sleep with them.

古文：数年而殁，州人莫不悲惜，共醵丧具为之葬焉，以其无家，瘗于道左。
现代文：几年后死了。跟她亲近过的人没有不悲痛惋惜的，共同凑钱办丧埋葬她。因为她没有家。就埋在道边。
English: She died a few years later. No one who had been close to her was not saddened and sorry, and together they raised money to bury her. Because she had no home, she was buried on the side of the road.

古文：大历中，忽有胡僧自西域来，见墓，遂趺坐具，敬礼焚香，围绕赞叹。
现代文：大历年中，忽然有个胡僧从西域来，看见坟墓，于是就跪下，摆设香案，焚香敬拜，围绕着赞叹。
English: In the middle of the lunar year, a monk from the western region suddenly came and saw the tomb, so he knelt down, set up incense cases, burned incense, worshiped, and marveled around.

古文：数日，人见谓曰： 此一淫纵女子，人尽夫也，以其无属，故瘗于此，和尚何敬耶？ 
现代文：几日后，看见的人对他说： 这是一淫荡女子，所有的男人都是她的丈夫。因她没有家，所以埋在这里，和尚为什么要敬重她呢？ 
English: A few days later, someone who had seen it said to him: "This is a lewd woman, all men are her husbands. Since she had no home, she was buried here. Why should the monk respect her?"

古文：僧曰： 非檀越所知，斯乃大圣，慈悲喜舍，世俗之欲，无不徇焉。
现代文：和尚说： 并不是施主所能知道的，这是一个大圣。慈悲施舍，世俗的愿望，她没有不曲意顺从的。
English: The monk said, "It is not possible for the giver to know, this is a great saint. Compassion, charity, worldly desires, she did not disobey.

古文：此即锁骨菩萨，顺缘已尽，圣者云耳。
现代文：这就是锁骨菩萨，在尘世间的事情已经做完了，所以她是圣者。不信就打开棺材看一看。 
English: This is the Clavicle Bodhisattva, things have been done in the earthly world, so she is a saint. If you don't believe it, open the coffin and take a look.

古文：不信即启以验之。 众人即开墓，视遍身之骨，钩结皆如锁状，果如僧言。
现代文：众人于是就掘墓开棺，看她全身的骨头，钩结的都像锁状，果真像和尚说的那样。
English: The people then dug up the grave and opened the coffin, and saw that the bones of her whole body, which were all interlocked like a lock, were indeed as the monk had said.

古文：州人异之，为设大斋，起塔焉。
现代文：州人感到奇异，为她设大斋，修了塔。
English: The people of the state felt it was strange, so they held a grand banquet for her and built a tower.

古文：镇州铁塔
现代文：镇州铁塔
English: Zhenzhou Iron Tower

古文：唐天祐中，太原僧惠照因梦镇州南三十里废相国寺中埋铁塔，特往访之。
现代文：唐昭宗天祐年间，太原和尚惠照因为梦见镇州南三十里废相国寺中埋一铁塔，特意前去探访。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty, the Taiyuan Monk Huizhao had a dream that there was an iron tower buried in the abandoned Shogoku Temple, 30 miles south of Zhenzhou, so he went to visit it.

古文：至界上，为元戎王中令镕所知，延在衙署供养。
现代文：到了州界上，被元戎王中令镕知道了，请在署衙里供养。
English: When you get to the state border, you will be told by the Yuan Rong Wang Zhong Rong that you need to make a donation at the post office.

古文：衙将任友义虑是邻道谍人，或致不测，恳要诘而逐之。
现代文：衙内的将领任友义想到这也许是邻州派来的探子，或者会有什么不测的事情发生，恳切要求审问并驱逐他。
English: Ren Youyi, the general of Shennai, thought that this might be a scout sent by a neighboring state, or that something unexpected would happen, and earnestly requested to interrogate and expel him.

古文：元戎始疑，惠具以寻塔为对。
现代文：元戎也有点犯疑，惠照具实说了寻找塔的事。
English: Yuan Rong was also a bit suspicious, but Huizhong really said something about looking for the tower.

古文：遽差于府南三十里访之，果得相国寺古墓，掘其殿砌之前，得铁塔，上刻三千人姓名，悉是见在常山将校亲军，唯任友义一人无名，乃知冥数前定。
现代文：元戎就立刻派人到府南三十里去访查，果然找到了相国寺的古墓。在墓殿台阶前面挖掘，找到了铁塔。上面刻了三千人的姓名，都是在常山将校亲军中的人，唯独没有任友义的名字。才知道是前世所定。
English: Yuan Rong immediately sent someone thirty miles south of the capital to investigate, and they indeed found the ancient tomb of Shogoku-ji Temple. Digging in front of the steps of the tomb, they found an iron tower. The names of three thousand people were engraved on it, all of whom were from the pro-army of Changshan officers, except that there was no name of Renyouyi. Only then did they know that it was determined in a previous life.

古文：刻斯塔者，何神异哉。
现代文：刻这个塔的人，是何等神异啊！
English: How strange is the man who carved this tower!

古文：渭滨钓者
现代文：渭滨钓者
English: Fishing boats in the creek

古文：清渭之滨，民家之子，有好垂钓者。
现代文：清澈渭水的边上，有一个平常百姓家的儿子，喜欢钓鱼。
English: On the edge of the clear water, there is a son of an ordinary family who likes fishing.

古文：不农不商，以香饵为业，自壮及中年，所取不知其纪极。
现代文：不事农不从商，以用香饵垂钓为职业，从壮年到中年，钓到的鱼不知有多少了。
English: Many farmers do not engage in business, and their occupation is fishing with champagne hooks. From middle age to middle age, they do not know how many fish they have caught.

古文：仍得任公子之术，多以油煎燕肉置于纤钩，其取鲜鳞如寄之于潭濑，其家数口衣食，纶竿是赖。
现代文：他掌握了任公子配制鱼饵的方法，用油把燕子肉煎了挂在钓钩上来钓鱼。这种钓法就像把鱼保存在自家的池塘随用随取一样容易，他家几口人的生活，全依赖于这个钓鱼竿了。
English: He has mastered Ren Gongzi's method of preparing fish bait, frying the swallow meat with oil and hanging it on the hook to fish. This fishing method is as easy as keeping the fish in your own pond. The lives of several members of his family depend on this fishing rod.

古文：忽一日，垂钓于大涯硖，竟日无所得。
现代文：有一天，他在大涯硖钓鱼，整日无所收获，天色将晚。
English: One day, he was fishing in Daya Bay. He had been fishing all day and had caught nothing. It was getting late.

古文：将及日晏，忽引其独茧，颇讶沉重。迤逦挽之，获一铜佛像。
现代文：拉起鱼竿只感到拉不动，他很惊讶，慢慢地拉起，钓起一个铜佛像，感到纳闷。
English: He was surprised when he pulled up the fishing rod, only to find that it didn't move. He pulled it up slowly and fished up a bronze Buddha statue, feeling puzzled.

古文：既闷甚，掷之于潭心，遂移钓于别浦，亦无所得。移时，又牵出一铜佛。
现代文：又把它扔回水潭。于是又到别的河里去钓鱼，也没有收获。又钓出一个铜佛像。
English: He threw it back into the pond. He then went fishing in another river and caught nothing. He also caught a bronze Buddha.

古文：于是折其竿，断其纶，终身不复其业。
现代文：在这时他折断了他的鱼竿扯断了鱼弦终身不再钓鱼。
English: That's when he snapped his rod, snapped the line and quit fishing for good.

