古文：顾宪成，字叔时，无锡人。
现代文：顾宪成，字叔时，江苏无锡人。
English: Gu Xiancheng, nicknamed "Uncle Shi," was born in Wuxi, Jiangsu Province.

古文：万历四年，举乡试第一。
现代文：万历四年在乡试中取得第一。
English: Wanli won the first place in the township examination for four years.

古文：八年成进士，授户部主事。
现代文：八年中进士，授职户部主事。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of eight and was assigned to be the head of the household.

古文：大学士张居正病，朝士群为之祷，宪成不可。
现代文：大学士张居正生病了，朝臣群起为他祈祷，顾宪成不干。
English: Zhang Juzheng, a university scholar, fell ill. Courtiers flocked to pray for him, and Gu Xiancheng resigned.

古文：同官代之署名，宪成手削去之。居正卒，改吏部主事。
现代文：同僚代他签名，他拿笔去掉。张居正死后，他改任吏部主事。
English: A colleague signed his name for him, and he took the pen to erase it. After Zhang Jizheng's death, he was appointed as the head of the personnel department.

古文：请告归三年，补验封主事。
现代文：请假回乡三年，补为验封主事。
English: He took a three-year leave of absence to return to his hometown, and became the chief inspector of seals.

古文：十五年，大计京朝官，都御史辛自修掌计事。
现代文：万历十五年考核京城朝官，都御史辛自修掌管考核事宜。
English: In the 15th year of Wanli's reign, the evaluation of the imperial officials in the capital came to an end, and the prefectural governor, Shi Xin, took charge of the evaluation.

古文：工部尚书何起鸣在拾遗中，自修坐是失执政意。
现代文：工部尚书何起鸣在纠正过失中，辛自修因不对执政大臣之意获罪。
English: In the correction of the fault, Xin Zi Xiu was found guilty of not acting in accordance with the intention of the ruling minister.

古文：给事中陈与郊承风旨并论起鸣、自修，实以攻自修而庇起鸣。
现代文：给事中陈与郊秉承旨意弹劾何起鸣、辛自修，实际上是攻击辛自修而庇护何起鸣。
English: In this case, Chen and Quan adhered to the will to impeach He Qiming and Xin Zhi Xiu, but in fact, they attacked Xin Zhi Xiu and protected He Qiming.

古文：于是二人并罢，并责御史纠起鸣者四人。
现代文：于是二人都被罢官，并责备了检举何起鸣的四位御史。
English: As a result, both of them were dismissed, and the four magistrates who reported the incident were reprimanded.

古文：宪成不平，上疏语侵执政，被旨切责，谪桂阳州判官。
现代文：顾宪成为他们抱不平，上疏申辩，词语中有触怒当权者的地方，被圣旨责备，贬为桂阳州判官。
English: Gu Xian became a place where they held grievances, raised arguments, and had words that angered those in power. He was rebuked by the Holy Will and demoted to judge of Guiyang Prefecture.

古文：稍迁处州推官。
现代文：慢慢提为处州推官。
English: He was gradually promoted to the post of provincial governor.

古文：丁母忧，服除，补泉州推官。
现代文：母亲死后辞官，服完丧后，补为泉州推官。
English: After the death of his mother, he resigned from the post, and after the funeral, he was appointed as the deputy governor of Quanzhou.

古文：举公廉第一。
现代文：公正、廉洁被推为第一。
English: Fairness and integrity were pushed to the forefront.

古文：擢吏部考功主事，历员外郎。
现代文：提升为吏部考功主事，任员外郎。
English: He was promoted to be in charge of the merit examination of the personnel department, and was appointed as a member of the outer circle.

古文：会有诏三皇子并封王。
现代文：恰好有诏书将三位皇子一起封为藩王。
English: There just happened to be an imperial edict naming the three princes as the kings of the domain.

古文：宪成偕同官上疏曰：
现代文：顾宪成携同官上疏说：
English: Gu Xiancheng and his colleague Shang Zuo said:

古文：皇上因《祖训》立嫡之条，欲暂令三皇子并封王，以待有嫡立嫡，无嫡立长。
现代文： 皇上因为祖训立嫡长子的条例，想暂时令三位皇子一同封为藩王，以等待有嫡长子就立嫡长子，没有嫡长子立长子。
English: The emperor wanted to temporarily make all three princes the lords of the domain because of the regulation that the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son of the eldest son.

古文：臣等伏而思之， 待 之一言，有大不可者。
现代文：我等三思， 待 之一字，大不可。太子是天下的根本。
English: I think twice before waiting for a word, it's impossible. The crown prince is the foundation of the world.

古文：太子，天下本。
现代文：预定太子是为了巩固根本。
English: The appointment of the crown prince is to consolidate the foundation.

古文：豫定太子，所以固本。是故有嫡立嫡，无嫡立长，就见在论是也，待将来则非也。
现代文：所以有嫡长子就应立嫡长子，没有嫡长子就当立长子，就现在情况而论，等到将来就不对了。
English: Therefore, if there is a legitimate eldest son, the legitimate eldest son should be appointed, and if there is no legitimate eldest son, the eldest son should be appointed. As far as the current situation is concerned, it will not be right in the future.

古文：我朝建储家法，东宫不待嫡，元子不并封。
现代文：我朝建立储君的法律，东宫不一定等待嫡长子，大儿子不一起封王。
English: According to the law of establishing the crown prince, the East Palace does not necessarily wait for the eldest son, and the eldest son does not crown the king together.

古文：廷臣言甚详，皇上概弗省，岂皇上创见有加列圣之上乎？
现代文：朝廷大臣已说得很明白了，皇上一概不管，难道皇上的创见能加于诸位圣人之上吗？
English: The Minister of the Imperial Court has made it very clear that the Emperor does not care about anything. Can the Emperor's ideas be imposed on the saints?

古文：有天下者称天子，天子之元子称太子。天子系乎天，君与天一体也；太子系乎父，父子一体也。
现代文：拥有天下的称天子，天子的长子称太子，天子与天相系，君王与天为一体，太子与父亲相系，父子为一体。
English: He who possesses the whole world is called the son of heaven, the eldest son of the son of heaven is called the prince, the son of heaven is related to heaven, the king is one with heaven, the prince is related to the father, and the father and son are one.

古文：主鬯承祧，于是乎在，不可得而爵。
现代文：太子继承皇位，是天经地义的事，不能将其封爵。
English: It is a matter of natural justice for the prince to succeed to the throne, and he cannot be knighted.

古文：今欲并封三王，元子之封何所系乎？
现代文：现在想同时分封三王，长子之封与什么相系？
English: Now, if you want to divide the three kings at the same time, what does the eldest son's seal have to do with it?

古文：无所系，则难乎其为名；有所系，则难乎其为实。
现代文：没有什么相系，则难在名称上，有所相系，则难在其实。
English: If there is no relationship, it is difficult in the name, if there is a relationship, it is difficult in reality.

古文：皇上以为权宜云耳。
现代文： 皇上说是权宜之计。
English: The Emperor said it was a temporary measure.

古文：元子为太子，诸子为藩王，于理顺，于分称，于情安，有何不得已而然乎？
现代文：权宜之计，是在万不得已的时候才实行的。长子为太子，诸子为藩王，顺理成章，合情合理，有什么不得已的呢？
English: A stopgap measure is only implemented when absolutely necessary. The eldest son is the crown prince, the other sons are the lords of the domain. It is logical and reasonable. What is the last resort?

古文：耦尊钧大，逼所由生。皇上以《祖训》为法，子孙以皇上为法。
现代文：皇上以祖训为法，子孙以皇上为法。
English: The emperor takes the ancestral teachings as the law, and the descendants take the emperor as the law.

古文：皇上不难创其所无，后世讵难袭其所有？
现代文：皇上不难创造祖训所没有的，后世难道对承袭什么有难处吗？
English: It is not difficult for emperors to create what their ancestors did not have. Is it difficult for future generations to inherit anything?

古文：自是而往，幸皆有嫡可也，不然，是无东宫也。
现代文：从此以后，幸好有嫡长子的还可以，若没有，就没有东宫了。
English: Since then, fortunately, it is still possible to have a legitimate eldest son, if not, there will be no East Palace.

古文：又幸而如皇上之英明可也，不然，凡皇子皆东宫也，无乃启万世之大患乎？
现代文：如果都像皇上这么英明那也是有幸，若没有，凡是皇子都是太子。这不等于开启了万世的祸患吗？
English: If everyone were as wise as the emperor, that would be a blessing. If not, every prince would be a crown prince. Wouldn't that be the start of a worldwide calamity?

古文：皇后与皇上共承宗祧，期于宗祧得人而已。
现代文：皇后与皇上共同继承宗庙，期望宗庙有合适的人。
English: The empress and the emperor jointly inherit the ancestral temple, hoping that the ancestral temple will have the right person.

古文：皇上之元子诸子，即皇后之元子诸子。
现代文：皇上的长子诸子，就是皇后的长子诸子。
English: The eldest sons of the emperor are the eldest sons of the empress.

古文：恭妃、皇贵妃不得而私之，统于尊也。
现代文：恭妃、皇贵妃不得据为私有，统统受尊重。
English: Gongfei and Guifei should not be privately owned, and all of them should be respected.

古文：岂必如辅臣王锡爵之请，须拜皇后为母，而后称子哉？
现代文：难道一定要像辅臣王锡爵的请求，必须拜皇后为母亲，而后才能称儿子吗？
English: Is it really necessary, as requested by the aide-de-camp Wang Xizhe, that the queen must be worshipped as a mother before a son can be named?

古文：况始者奉旨，少待二三年而已，俄改二十年，又改于二十一年，然犹可以岁月期也。
现代文： 况且开始奉圣旨说，稍待二、三年后而已，不久改为二十年，又改在二十一年，然而还是可以等待的。
English: Moreover, they began to say, according to the will of God, that they would wait a little after two or three years, but soon changed it to twenty years, and then to twenty-one years, but it was still possible to wait.

古文：今曰 待嫡 ，是未可以岁月期也。
现代文：今天说 待嫡 ，不知道等到何年何月。
English: If I say today that I'll wait, I don't know how many years or months I'll have to wait.

古文：命方布而忽更，意屡迁而愈缓。
现代文：刚刚发布命令又忽然改变，意见屡屡变化而期限更加缓慢。
English: The order that has just been issued has suddenly changed, opinions have repeatedly changed, and the deadline has become even slower.

古文：自并封命下，叩阍上封事者不可胜数，至里巷小民亦聚族而窃议，是孰使之然哉？
现代文：自从一同封王的命令下了之后，叩问皇上分封一事的不可胜数，以至里巷的小老百姓也聚族偷偷地议论，是什么造成这样的呢？
English: Since the order to jointly crown the king was issued, countless people have asked the emperor about the division of the crown, and even the common people have gathered to secretly discuss it. What caused this?

古文：人心之公也。而皇上犹责辅臣以担当。
现代文：人心自有公道，可皇上还在责备辅臣担当这件事。
English: The human heart has its own justice, but the emperor is still blaming the vassal in charge of this matter.

古文：锡爵夙夜趣召，乃排群议而顺上旨，岂所谓担当？必积诚感悟纳皇上于无过之地，乃真担当耳。
现代文：王锡爵早晚赶着等待召见，于是力排众议顺从皇上的旨意，难道这就是所谓担当，一定要以诚感悟、接纳皇上到没有过失的地方，才是真的担当。
English: Sooner or later, Wang Xizhe hurriedly awaited the summons, and then forced the crowd to obey the emperor's will. Isn't this the so-called responsibility? You must sincerely understand and accept the emperor to a place where there is no fault. That is the real responsibility.

古文：不然，皇上且不能如天下何，而况锡爵哉！
现代文：不这样，皇上都不能把天下怎么样，更何况王锡爵呢？
English: Otherwise, the emperor would not be able to control the whole world, let alone Wang Xizhe.

古文：皇上神明天纵，非溺宠狎昵之比。
现代文： 皇上圣明，不是小人所能比。
English: Emperor Shengming, no one can compare to you.

古文：而不谅者，见影而疑形，闻响而疑声，即臣等亦有不能为皇上解者。
现代文：而不能谅解的，见到影子就疑心形体，听到响声就疑心声音，即使是我们也有不能替皇上明白的。
English: But what we cannot understand, what we are suspicious of when we see a shadow, what we are suspicious of when we hear a sound, even we cannot understand for the emperor.

古文：皇上盛德大业，比隆三五。
现代文：皇上盛德大业，可与三皇五帝相比。
English: Emperor Shengde's great career can be compared with the three emperors and five emperors.

古文：而乃来此意外之纷纷，不亦惜乎！
现代文：可来这样意外的纷纷议论，不可惜吗？
English: Isn't it a pity that there is so much unexpected discussion?

古文：伏乞令皇元子早正储位，皇第三子、皇第五子各就王爵。
现代文：恳求皇上命令皇长子早早成为太子，皇三子、皇五子各就王位。
English: He implored the emperor to order the eldest son of the emperor to become the prince at an early date, and the third son and fifth son of the emperor to take the throne.

古文：父父子子，君君臣臣，兄兄弟弟。
现代文：父父子子，君君臣臣，兄兄弟弟。
English: Father and son, lord and vassal, brother and brother.

古文：宗庙之福，社稷之庆，悉在是矣。
现代文：宗庙的长久、国家的安宁，都在这儿。 
English: The longevity of the ancestral temple and the tranquility of the country are all here.

古文：宪成又遗书锡爵，反覆辨论。其后并封议遂寝。
现代文：顾宪成又送书给王锡爵，反复论辩，后来一同分封的议论遂停止了。
English: Gu Xiancheng also sent a book to Wang Xizhe and argued repeatedly. Later, the discussion of dividing the territory together finally stopped.

古文：二十一年京察。
现代文：万历二十一年，京官考察。
English: In the 21st year of Wanli, an inspection of the Beijing government.

古文：吏部尚书孙籥、考功郎中赵南星尽黜执政私人，宪成实左右之。
现代文：吏部尚书孙钅龙、考功郎中赵南星将与执政有私交的人全部黜出，实际上是顾宪成左右的。
English: Zhao Nansing, a member of the cadre department, Shangshu Sun Yulong and Gao Gonglang, will bring out all the people who have personal relations with the ruling party. In fact, they are around Gu Xiancheng.

古文：及南星被斥，宪成疏请同罢，不报。
现代文：等到赵南星被斥退，顾宪成上奏请求一同罢官，没有得到回报。
English: When Zhao Nansing was expelled, Gu Xiancheng petitioned for a joint dismissal, but received no response.

古文：寻迁文选郎中。
现代文：不久升为文选郎中。
English: He was soon promoted to Bunsenroku junior high school.

古文：所推举率与执政牴牾。
现代文：他推举的人与执政的都有抵触。
English: The people he has chosen are at odds with those in power.

古文：先是，吏部缺尚书，锡爵欲用罗万化，宪成不可，乃用陈有年。
现代文：先前，吏部缺尚书，王锡爵想用罗万化，顾宪成认为不可以，于是就用了陈有年。
English: Wang Xizhe wanted to use Luo Wanhua, but Gu Xiancheng thought it was not acceptable, so he used Chen Younian.

古文：后廷推阁臣，万化复不与。
现代文：后来廷臣推举阁臣，又没有罗万化。
English: Later, courtiers promoted courtiers, and there was no Luo Wanhua.

古文：锡爵等皆恚，万化乃获推，会帝报罢而止。
现代文：王锡爵等很愤怒，罗万化获得推举，正好皇帝同意罢官后才停止。
English: Wang Xizhe and others were very angry, Luo Wanhua was elected, and it was only after the emperor agreed to dismiss him that he stopped.

古文：及是，锡爵将谢政，廷推代者。
现代文：到这时，王锡爵将辞去政务，朝廷大臣推举替代他的人。
English: At this time, Wang Xizhe will resign from the government, and the Minister of the Imperial Court will nominate his replacement.

古文：宪成举故大学士王家屏，忤帝意，削籍归。
现代文：顾宪成推举前大学士王家屏，违背了皇上的旨意，被削籍遣送回家。
English: Gu Xiancheng nominated Wang Jiaping, a former university judge, in violation of the emperor's will, and he was demoted and sent home.

古文：事具有年传。
现代文：事情在陈有年传中。
English: It's been rumored for years.

古文：宪成既废，名益高，中外推荐无虑百十疏，帝悉不报。
现代文：顾宪成既然被除名，名声更加高，朝廷内外推荐他的上疏超过上百份，皇上都不回答。
English: Now that Gu Xiancheng has been removed from the list, his reputation is even higher. More than a hundred high-ranking officials inside and outside the imperial court have recommended him, but the emperor has not responded.

古文：至三十六年，始起南京光禄少卿，力辞不就。
现代文：到万历三十六年，才起用为南京光禄少卿，顾宪成尽力辞谢不就位。
English: It was not until the 36th year of Wanli that he was appointed as the Nanjing Guanglu Shaoqing, and Gu Xiancheng did his best to decline the position.

古文：四十年，卒于家。
现代文：万历四十年死于家乡。
English: He died in his hometown after a long life of forty years.

古文：天启初，赠太常卿。
现代文：天启初年，赠为太常卿。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, he was given the title of Tai Changqing.

古文：魏忠贤乱政，其党石三畏追论之，遂削夺。
现代文：魏忠贤把持朝政，其党人石三畏又弹劾他，遂被夺去赠号。
English: Wei Zhongxian took over the reigns of the imperial court, and his party member Shi Sanji impeached him, and he was stripped of his title.

古文：崇祯初，赠吏部右侍郎，谥端文。
现代文：崇祯初年，赠吏部右侍郎，谥号端文。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was given the title of Right Attendant of the General Staff, and his posthumous name was Duanwen.

古文：宪成姿性绝人，幼即有志圣学。
现代文：顾宪成聪明过人，幼年就有志于圣学。
English: Gu Xiancheng was a brilliant man, and he was interested in sacred studies from an early age.

古文：暨削籍里居，益覃精研究，力辟王守仁 无善无恶心之体 之说。
现代文：既然被削籍在家，更加深入研究，力主排斥王守仁 无善无恶心之体 的学说。
English: Since he had been demoted at home, he studied more deeply and tried to reject Wang Shuren's doctrine of no good, no bad body.

古文：邑故有东林书院，宋杨时讲道处也，宪成与弟允成倡修之，常州知府欧阳东凤与无锡知县林宰为之营构。
现代文：无锡旧有东林学院，是宋代杨时讲道的地方，顾宪成与其弟顾允成倡导修复它，常州知府欧阳东凤与无锡知县林宰为之营建。
English: Wuxi used to have the East Forestry College, which was the place where Yang Luo preached in the Song Dynasty. Gu Xiancheng and his brother Gu Yuncheng advocated for its restoration, and it was built by Ouyang Dongfeng, the governor of Changzhou, and the forester of Wuxi Zhixian.

古文：落成，偕同志高攀龙、钱一本、薛敷教、史孟麟、于孔兼辈讲学其中，学者称泾阳先生。
现代文：落成后，顾宪成带领志同道合的高攀龙、钱一本、薛敷教、史孟麟、于孔兼辈在其中讲学，学者称他为泾阳先生。
English: After its completion, Gu Xiancheng led the like-minded Gao Panglong, Qian Yibang, Xie Shikikyo, Shi Menglin, and Yu Kongjian to lecture in it. Scholars called him Mr. Shenyang.

古文：当是时，士大夫抱道忤时者，率退处林野，闻风响附，学舍至不能容。
现代文：当时，士大夫的抱负为世不容，于是退隐山林，闻风响应，以致学舍容纳不下。
English: At that time, his ambition was unacceptable to the world, so he retreated to the mountains and forests and listened to the wind, so that the schoolhouse could not accommodate him.

古文：宪成尝曰： 官辇毂，志不在君父，官封疆，志不在民生，居水边林下，志不在世道，君子无取焉。 
现代文：顾宪成曾经说： 在朝廷做官，志向并不在皇上，在边地做官，志向不在民生，居于水边林下，志向不在世道，君子是不这样做的。 
English: Gu Xiancheng once said: To be an official in the imperial court, one's aspiration is not to be an emperor; to be an official in the outlying areas, one's aspiration is not to provide for the people's livelihood; to live under the forest by the water's edge, one's aspiration is not to live in the world; a gentleman does not do this.

古文：故其讲习之余，往往讽议朝政，裁量人物。
现代文：所以他在讲学之余，往往议论朝政，品评人物。
English: Therefore, in his spare time, he often discusses the politics of the imperial court and evaluates people.

古文：朝士慕其风者，多遥相应和。
现代文：朝廷之士仰慕他的风范，多和他遥相呼应。
English: Members of the imperial court admired his manners and often echoed his sentiments.

古文：由是东林名大著，而忌者亦多。
现代文：由此东林名声大噪，而忌恨的人也多。
English: As a result, Donglin's reputation has grown, and there are many people who loathe it.

古文：既而淮抚李三才被论，宪成贻书叶向高、孙丕扬为延誉。
现代文：等到淮南巡抚李三才被弹劾，顾宪成送信给叶向高、孙丕扬为他恢复名誉。
English: It was not until Li San, the Huainan governor, was impeached that Gu Xiancheng sent a letter to Ye Xianggao and Sun Yanyang to restore his honor.

古文：御史吴亮刻之邸抄中，攻三才者大哗。
现代文：御史吴亮将它刻在邸抄中，攻击李三才的人大哗。
English: Goshi Wu Liang engraved it in the residence copy, and the people who attacked Li Sancai shouted loudly.

古文：而其时于玉立、黄正宾辈附丽其间，颇有轻浮好事名。
现代文：而那时于玉立、黄正宾等人依附其间，颇有轻浮好事的名声。
English: At that time, Yu Yu-li, Huang Zhengbin and others were attached to it, and it had a reputation for being frivolous.

古文：徐兆魁之徒遂以东林为口实。兆魁腾疏攻宪成，恣意诬诋。
现代文：徐兆魁之徒于是以此为攻击东林党的口实，徐兆魁在奏疏上攻击顾宪成，肆意诋毁。
English: Xu Zhaokui's followers then used this as a pretext to attack the Donglin Party, and Xu Zhaokui attacked Gu Xiancheng on the record, slandering him wantonly.

古文：谓浒墅有小河，东林专其税为书院费；关使至，东林辄以书招之，即不赴，亦必致厚馈；讲学所至，仆从如云，县令馆谷供亿，非二百金不办；会时必谈时政，郡邑行事偶相左，必令改图；及受黄正宾贿。
现代文：声称浒墅有条小河，东林党占用其税收作为书院的费用。关使到，东林就以文书招请，假使关使没有应邀前往，也必定给予丰厚的报酬；讲学所至，仆人随从如云，县令令馆舍予以供应，没有二百金办不到；聚会时必定谈论时事，郡邑做事偶然与他们意见不同，必令郡邑改正；受了黄正宾贿赂。
English: He claimed that there was a small river flowing from his villa, and the Donglin Party used his taxes as the cost of the college. When the inspector arrived, Donglin invited him by letter, and if the inspector did not go by invitation, he would certainly give him a rich reward; when the lecture hall arrived, the servants followed him like a cloud, and the county ordered the supply of the library building, which could not be done without two hundred gold; they would certainly talk about current affairs at the gathering, and the county town would accidentally do things differently from their opinions, which would force the county town to make corrections; he was bribed by Huang Zhengbin.

古文：其言绝无左验。
现代文：他的话没有一句得到证实。
English: None of his claims have been substantiated.

古文：光禄丞吴炯上言为一致辨，因言： 宪成贻书救三才，诚为出位，臣尝咎之，宪成亦自悔。
现代文：光禄丞吴炯上奏为顾宪成一一辩白，因而说： 顾宪成送信救李三才，是有些出格，我尝责怪他，顾宪成也后悔。
English: Kwang Lok-jong Wu Min played a piece of music to defend Gu Hsien-cheng, saying: Gu Hsien-cheng's letter to save Li San-cai was a bit out of line. I tried to blame him, but Gu Hsien-cheng also regretted it.

古文：今宪成被诬，天下将以讲学为戒，绝口不谈孔、孟之道，国家正气从此而损，非细事也。 
现代文：现在顾宪成被诬告，天下将因此作为讲学的惩戒，闭口不谈孔、孟之道，国家正气从此而耗减，不是小事情啊！ 
English: Now that Gu Xiancheng has been falsely accused, the whole world will take this as a disciplinary action for lecturing, shut up and not talk about the hole, the Meng way, and the country's righteousness will be depleted from this, it is not a small matter!

古文：疏入，不报。
现代文：奏疏上后，皇上不予回答。
English: There has been no response since the complaint was filed.

古文：嗣后攻击者不绝，比宪成殁，攻者犹未止。
现代文：嗣后攻击顾宪成的人没有断绝，等到他死后，还有人攻击。
English: Subsequently, the people who attacked Gu Xiancheng did not break off, and when he died, there were still people attacking.

古文：凡救三才者，争辛亥京察者，卫国本者，发韩敬科场弊者，请行勘熊廷弼者，抗论张差梃击者，最后争移宫、红丸者，忤魏忠贤者，率指目为东林，抨击无虚日。
现代文：凡是救李三才的，争论辛亥京官考察的，护卫太子的，揭发韩敬科场舞弊的，请勘查熊廷弼的，为张差梃击而抗旨上疏的，最后争论移宫案、红丸案的，违背魏忠贤的人，都被指为东林党人，没有一天不遭到抨击。
English: All those who rescued Li Sancai, debated Xinhai's inspection of Beijing officials, escorted the crown prince, exposed Han Jing's scientific field fraud, requested the investigation of Xiong Tingtao, resisted Zhang Shichuan's attack, and finally debated the palace relocation case, the Red Marbles case, and those who violated Wei Zhongxian were all accused of being Donglin Party members. Not a day went by without being criticized.

古文：郡中贫士及诸生赴举者，多所资给。
现代文：凭借魏忠贤的邪恶势力，将他们一网打尽。杀的杀，禁的禁，贤明之士再也见不到了。崇祯登基后，渐渐有所任用。
English: With the help of the evil forces of Wei Zhongxian, he wiped them all out. Kill, kill, ban, ban, the wise men would never be seen again. After Chongzhen ascended the throne, he was gradually appointed.

古文：尝输万金助边，被诏旌奖。
现代文：但朋党势力已经形成，无耻小人势力大张，使国家受害，明代灭亡后才停止。
English: However, the power of the crony party has already been formed, and the power of the shameless villain has been exaggerated, causing the country to suffer, and only stopped after the Ming Dynasty died out.

古文：顾允成，字季时，宪成弟。
现代文：顾允成，字季时，宪成的弟弟。
English: Gu Yuncheng, also known as Qiji, was the younger brother of Hancheng.

古文：性耿介，厉名节，举万历十一年会试，十四年始赴殿试。
现代文：性情耿直，注重名节。参加万历十一年会试，十四年才赴殿试。
English: He has a straightforward disposition and pays attention to famous festivals. He took part in the eleventh year of the eleven-year examination, and only went to the hall for the examination in the fourteenth year.

古文：对策中有曰： 陛下以郑妃勤于奉侍，册为皇贵妃，廷臣不胜私忧过计。
现代文：对策中有这样的话： 陛下因为郑妃勤于奉侍，册封为皇贵妃，朝廷大臣私下担心不已。
English: Among the countermeasures were these words: His Majesty was enthroned as an Imperial Noble Consort because Zhengfei was diligent in her service. Privately, the Minister of the Imperial Court was worried.

古文：请立东宫，进封王恭妃，非报罢则峻逐。
现代文：请求册立太子，晋封王恭妃，不是得不到皇上答复就是立刻被斥退。
English: Requests for the appointment of a crown prince and the promotion of Wang Gongfei were either not answered by the emperor or immediately rejected.

古文：或不幸贵妃弄威福，其戚属左右窃而张之，内外害可胜言！
现代文：不幸郑贵妃擅威弄权，她的亲戚左右大张其势，内廷、外廷之害多得不得了。
English: Unfortunately, Zheng Guifei was a power-hungry bully, and her relatives flaunted their influence. The damage to the Inner Court and the Outer Court was enormous.

古文：顷张居正罔上行私，陛下以为不足信，而付之二三匪人。
现代文：不久张居正欺上专权，陛下认为他不可信，把朝政托付给二三个小人。
English: Soon after, Zhang Juzheng usurped the absolute power. His Majesty thought he was not trustworthy and entrusted the imperial government to two or three villains.

古文：恐居正之专，尚与陛下二。
现代文：恐怕张居正的专权，还与陛下不一致。
English: I am afraid that Zhang Juzheng's exclusive power is not consistent with His Majesty.

古文：此属之专，遂与陛下一。
现代文：而这些人专权，只给了陛下一致。
English: But these people only gave His Majesty absolute power.

古文：二则易间，一难图也。 
现代文：不一致则容易抓空隙，予以调整，一致则难于插手挽救。 
English: Inconsistency is easy to grasp the gap and adjust it, while consistency is difficult to intervene and save.

古文：执政骇且恚，置末第。
现代文：执掌朝政的大惊而且愤恨，把他排在末名。
English: The shock and indignation of the head of the imperial government put him in last place.

古文：会南畿督学御史德清人房寰连疏诋都御史海瑞，允成不胜愤。
现代文：正好南畿督学御史德清人房寰，连连上疏诋毁都御史海瑞，顾允成气愤异常。
English: It just so happened that the Nanki Supervisor of Education, Fusang Fong, a member of the Qing Dynasty, had repeatedly slandered the capital's governor, Shihai Rui. Gu Yuncheng was extremely angry.

古文：偕同年生彭遵古、诸寿贤抗疏劾之。略言： 寰妒贤丑正，不复知人间羞耽事。
现代文：与同年生彭遵古、诸寿贤上疏弹劾他，大意说： 房寰嫉妒贤明、丑化正直的人，不知道人间的廉耻。
English: He was impeached by his classmates, Peng Zungu and Zhu Shouxian, who were in the same year, to the effect that: Fang Yao envies the wise, vilifies the honest, and does not know the shame of the world.

古文：臣等自幼读书，即知慕瑞，以为当代伟人。
现代文：我等自幼读书，就知道仰慕海瑞，认为他是当代伟人。
English: When we were young and studying, we knew that we admired Hai Rui and thought that he was a contemporary great man.

古文：寰大肆贪污，闻瑞之风，宜愧且死，反敢造言逞诬，臣等所为痛心。 
现代文：房寰大肆贪污，听说海瑞的风范，应当羞愧而死，反而敢制造谣言诬陷，我等深表痛心。
English: We are deeply saddened to hear that the House of Representatives should die of shame for its rampant corruption, but instead dares to fabricate false rumors.

古文：因劾其欺罔七罪。
现代文：因而弹劾他欺君罔上的七大罪状。 
English: Therefore, he was impeached on seven major charges of corruption.

古文：始寰疏出，朝野多切齿。
现代文：房寰奏疏刚上时，朝野之士恨得咬牙切齿。
English: When Fusho was just beginning to play, Asano's men gnashed their teeth with hatred.

古文：而政府庇之，但拟旨谯让。
现代文：而政府庇护他，仅仅拟定圣旨责怪了他。
English: But the government shielded him, blaming him only for drafting the will.

古文：及得允成等疏，谓寰已切让，不当出位妄奏，夺三人冠带，还家省愆，且令九卿约束办事进士，毋妄言时政。
现代文：等到得到顾允成等的奏疏，说房寰已遭到严厉的责备，不应当出格妄自上奏，夺去三人的官服，回家自省，而且命令九卿约束办事进士，不要擅自议论朝政。
English: When he received a report from Gu Yuncheng and others, saying that Fong Yao had been severely reprimanded, he should not act arrogantly, he took away the official uniforms of the three people, went home to self-examine, and ordered the nine nobles to restrain the clerks and not to discuss the imperial government without authorization.

古文：南京太仆卿沈思孝上言： 二三年来，今日以建言防人，明日以越职加人罪，且移牒诸司约禁，而进士观政者，复令堂官钳束之。
现代文：南京太仆卿沈思孝上疏说： 二三年来，今天以建议防人，明天以越职加人罪，而且告诫诸部门加以约束，进士议论时政的，命令堂官管制。
English: "For the past two or three years, we have been preventing people with suggestions today, adding them with the crime of overstepping their duties tomorrow, and warning various departments to restrain them. If they discuss current affairs, we will order the officials to control them," said Shen Si Xiao Shang Zuo, the Nanjing eunuch.

古文：夫禁其作奸犯科可也，而反禁其谠言直谏；教其砥行立节可也，而反教以缄默取容。
现代文：禁止大臣作奸犯法是可以的，反过来却禁止大臣直言劝谏；教他们磨砺德行、树立名节是可以的，想不到反过来教大臣保持沉默以取得宠幸。
English: It is possible to prohibit ministers from committing treason and breaking the law, but on the other hand, it is possible to prohibit ministers from speaking out; it is possible to teach them to cultivate virtue and establish festivals, but it is unthinkable to teach ministers to remain silent in order to obtain favors.

古文：此风一开，流弊何极。
现代文：这个风气一开，弊端的尽头是哪儿呢？
English: Once this culture starts, where will the drawbacks end?

古文：谏官避祸希宠不言矣，庶官又不当言；大臣持禄养交不言矣，小臣又不许言。
现代文：御史为避开祸害希望得到宠爱不再说什么，一般官吏又不应该说；大臣持有俸禄不说，小臣又不许说。
English: In order to avoid the scourge of history, hoping to be favored, do not say anything, and ordinary officials should not say anything; ministers do not have salaries, and ministers are not allowed to say anything.

古文：万一权奸擅朝，倾危宗社，陛下安从闻之？
现代文：万一奸臣擅权，危及宗庙、社稷，陛下怎么能听到呢？
English: In the unlikely event that a treacherous vassal usurps power and endangers the ancestral temple and shrine, how will His Majesty hear about it?

古文：臣历稽先朝故事，练纲、邹智、孙磐、张璁并以书生建言，未闻以为罪，独奈何锢允成等耶？ 
现代文：我遍考前朝的旧事，练纲、邹智、孙磐、张璁都是以书生向朝廷建议，没有听说有罪，为什么独独禁锢顾允成呢？ 
English: I went through all the old cases of the previous dynasty. The syllabus, Sun Zhi, Sun Bang, and Zhang Ye were all suggested to the imperial court by students. I did not hear of any guilty party. Why was I the only one to be banned?

古文：疏入，忤旨被责，三人遂废。
现代文：奏疏进入内宫，因违背圣旨被责备，三个人遂被除去官籍。
English: Sonoso entered the inner palace and was reprimanded for violating the sacred will. As a result, three people were stripped of their official status.

古文：寰复诋瑞及思孝，其言绝狂诞，自是获罪清议，出为江西副使。
现代文：房寰又诋毁海瑞和沈思孝，其言狂妄到了极点。从而得罪了清议，贬为江西副使。
English: Fang Yao also slandered Hai Rui and Shen Sihiao, and his words were arrogant to the extreme. As a result, he was offended and demoted to Jiangxi deputy envoy.

古文：给事中张鼎思劾其奸贪，寰亦讦鼎思请寄事。
现代文：给事中张鼎思弹劾他的奸诈与贪污，房寰也攻击张鼎思私人请托一事。
English: In the matter of Zhang Dingsi's impeachment for his treachery and corruption, Fang Ye also attacked Zhang Dingsi's personal request.

古文：诸给事中不平，连章攻寰，寰与鼎思并谪，遂不复振。
现代文：各位给事中纷纷不平，连上奏章攻击房寰，房寰与张鼎思同时被贬，再也没有振作起来。
English: All of you have complained about the matter, even attacking Fusang in the last movement. Fusang and Zhang Dingsi were demoted at the same time, and they never cheered up.

古文：久之，南京御史陈邦科请录用允成等，不许。
现代文：很久以后，南京御史陈邦科请求录用顾允成等，皇上不答应。
English: After a long time, Chen Bangke, the governor of Nanjing, requested the appointment of Gu Yuncheng and others, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：巡按御史复言之，诏许以教授用。
现代文：巡按御史又说到此事，皇上下诏许他作为教授使用。
English: The inspector-general of the Imperial Household Agency also mentioned the matter, and the Emperor issued an edict allowing him to use it as a professor.

古文：允成历任南康、保定。
现代文：顾允成在南康、保定任教授。
English: Gu Yuncheng is a professor in Nankang and Baoding.

古文：入为国子监博士，迁礼部主事。
现代文：后为国子监博士，升为礼部主事。
English: Later, he was appointed as a doctor of the national children's supervisor, and was promoted to the head of the ceremonial department.

古文：三王并封制下，偕同官张纳陛、工部主事岳元声合疏谏曰： 册立大典，年来无敢再渎者，以奉二十一年举行之明诏。
现代文：三位皇子一同封王的命令下达，顾允成与同官张纳陛、工部主事岳元声合作上疏劝谏说： 册立大典，近年来没有再敢亵渎的，因为已奉有二十一年颁行的明令诏书。
English: The order for the three princes to be crowned together was issued, and Gu Yuncheng, together with his colleague Zhang Na and the head of the Ministry of Industry, Yue Yuan Sheng, cooperated to persuade Zou to say: In recent years, there has been no more daring to desecrate the grand ceremony, because there has been a clear imperial decree issued in the 21st year.

古文：兹既届期，群臣莫不引领。
现代文：今天已到期，群臣没有不殷切盼望的。
English: Today is the due date, and the ministers are eagerly looking forward to it.

古文：而元辅王锡爵星驾趣朝，一见礼部尚书罗万化、仪制郎于孔兼，即戒之弗言，慨然独任，臣等实喜且慰。
现代文：而首席辅臣王锡爵星夜赶到朝廷，见到礼部尚书罗万化、仪制郎于孔兼，就告诫他们不要说，慷慨独自担当。我等实在感到欣慰。
English: However, the chief aide-de-camp Wang Xizhe rushed to the imperial court at night, and when he saw the etiquette official Shang Shulowanhua and the etiquette official Yu Kongyan, he cautioned them not to say that they would generously take care of it on their own. We were really pleased.

古文：不意陛下出禁中密札，竟付锡爵私邸，而三王并封之议遂成，即次辅赵志皋、张位亦不预闻。夫天下事非一家私议。元子封王，祖宗以来未有此礼，锡爵安得专之，而陛下安得创之！ 
现代文：不想陛下拿出禁中密札，竟然给了王锡爵私人，三王同时分封的朝议于是达成。即使次辅臣赵志皋、张位也没有预先听说，天下的事并不是一家的私事，长子封为王，祖宗以来没有这样的规矩，王锡爵怎么能独自专断，陛下怎能开创这一先例呢？ 
English: His Majesty did not want to take out the forbidden secret, so he gave Wang Xizhe private, and the three kings at the same time divided the court. Even the second assistant minister Zhao Zhixuan and Zhang Yi did not hear in advance that the affairs of the world are not a private matter of a family, the eldest son is the king, there is no such rule since the ancestors, how can Wang Xizhe arbitrarily, how can His Majesty create this precedent?

古文：当是时，光禄丞朱维京、给事中王如坚疏先入。帝震怒，戍极边。
现代文：当时，光禄丞朱维京、给事中王如坚的奏疏先呈上，皇上震怒，让他们到边境去戍守。
English: At that time, Guanglu Zheng, Zhu Wei Jing, and Wang Rujian, who were in charge of the matter, presented the report first, and the emperor was furious and ordered them to go to the border to guard it.

古文：维京同官涂杰、王学曾继之，斥为民。
现代文：朱维京的同官涂杰、王学曾接着上疏，被斥退为百姓。
English: Zhu Weijing's fellow officials, Tu Jie and Wang Xuezhen, followed Shang Shao and were expelled as commoners.

古文：及是谏者益众，帝知不可尽斥，但报 遵旨行 。
现代文：到这时，劝谏者更加多，皇上知道不可以全部斥退，只是回答 按照圣旨行事 。
English: By this time, there were even more persuaders, and the emperor knew that he could not reject them all, but only replied to act in accordance with the Holy Will.

古文：已而竟寝。
现代文：不久竟然停止。
English: It soon stopped.

古文：未几，吏部尚书孙鑨等以拾遗事被责。
现代文：没有多久，吏部尚书孙钅龙等因为过失被责怪。
English: It didn't take long for officials such as Shang Shushu and Sun Yulong to be blamed for the mistake.

古文：允成谓阁臣张位实为之，上疏力诋位，因及锡爵。
现代文：顾允成认为张位实主使其事，上疏极力攻击张位，牵涉到王锡爵。
English: Gu Yuncheng believed that the real owner of Zhangyi had interfered in his affairs, and Shang So vigorously attacked Zhangyi, implicating Wang Xizhe.

古文：锡爵力救，诏免逮。
现代文：纳陛也上疏极力辩论，并涉及到执掌朝政的人。
English: His Majesty Na also had a vigorous debate on the topic, and it involved the person in charge of the government.

古文：诸人遂废于家。
现代文：皇上发了脾气，将顾允成贬为光州判官，纳陛贬为邓州判官。
English: The emperor lost his temper and demoted Gu Yuncheng to Gwangju magistrate and Na His Majesty to Dangzhou magistrate.

古文：继有终知府。
现代文：他们俩都乞求告假回乡，不再出来做官。
English: Both of them begged to be allowed to go back to their hometowns and not to come back to work.

古文：刘元珍，字伯先，无锡人。
现代文：刘元珍，字伯先，江苏无锡人。
English: Liu Yuanzhen, also known as Bo Xian, is from Wuxi, Jiangsu.

古文：万历二十三年进士。
现代文：万历二十三年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of 23 and was given the posthumous name of Kochi.

古文：初授南京礼部主事，进郎中，亲老归养。
现代文：起初授职南京礼部主事，进为郎中，父母年岁大了，刘元珍回家赡养他们。
English: At first, Liu Yuanzhen was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, and became the middle child. When his parents became old, Liu Yuanzhen went home to support them.

古文：起南京职方，厘汰老弱营军，岁省银二万有奇。
现代文：后又起用为南京职方郎中，淘汰军营中老弱的士兵，每岁节省银两二万多。
English: Later, he was appointed as the vice-governor of Nanjing, eliminating the old and weak soldiers in the military camp, saving more than 220,000 silver every year.

古文：三十三年京察，吏部侍郎杨时乔、都御史温纯，尽黜政府私人钱梦皋等。
现代文：万历三十三年京官考察，吏部侍郎杨时乔、都御史温纯，将宰相府的钱梦皋等全部贬退。
English: In the 33rd year of Wanli, the Beijing officials inspected, and Yang Shijiao, the attendant of the personnel department, and Wenzhun Shi, the governor of the capital, all degraded the money nightmare of the Prime Minister's Office.

古文：大学士沈一贯密为地，诏给事、御史被黜者皆留，且不下察疏。
现代文：大学士沈一贯秘密为之斡旋，皇上下诏给事中、御史被贬退的都留下，而且没发下考察的奏疏。
English: Shen, a university scholar, always mediated in secret, and the emperor issued an imperial edict, leaving those who had been demoted, and did not issue a report on the investigation.

古文：元珍方服阕需次，抗疏言： 一贯自秉政以来，比昵憸人，丛集奸慝，假至尊之权以售私，窃朝廷之恩以市德，罔上不忠，孰大于是！
现代文：刘元珍正当服丧期满等待依次补缺，上书直言： 沈一贯自从执掌朝政以来，亲近小人，窝藏奸险的人，凭借权势谋取私利，窃取朝廷的恩惠以获取好的名声，欺君罔上的不忠，没有比这更大了！
English: Liu Yuanzhen justly waited for the expiration of the mourning period to fill the vacancy in turn, and wrote bluntly: Shen has always been close to villains since he took charge of the imperial government, harboring those who commit treason, seeking personal gain by virtue of power, stealing the favor of the imperial court to gain a good reputation, and cheating the prince. There is nothing greater than this!

古文：近见梦皋有疏，每以党加人。
现代文：从古至今，小人没有比这更大！最近看到钱梦皋有奏疏，每每用朋党之名强加于人。
English: From ancient times to the present, there has never been a greater villain! Recently, we have seen a resurgence of money nightmares, each imposed on people in the name of cronyism.

古文：从古小人未有不以朋党之说先空善类者。
现代文：从古至今，小人没有不用朋党之说先控告好人的。
English: From ancient times to the present day, villains have not been able to accuse good people without first being accused by their friends.

古文：所关治乱安危之机，非细故也。 
现代文：这关系到治乱安危的大事，不是小事情。 
English: This is an important matter, not a small matter, which is related to the control of chaos and safety.

古文：疏奏，留中。一贯亟自辨，乞明示独断之意，以释群疑。
现代文：疏奏上，被留在禁中，沈一贯赶紧为自己辩护，乞请明示独断之意，好让众人放心。
English: On the other hand, being kept in detention, Shen has always rushed to defend himself, begging to express his arbitrary will, so as to reassure everyone.

古文：梦皋亦诋元珍为温纯鹰犬。
现代文：钱梦皋也诋毁刘元珍是温纯的鹰犬。
English: Qian Mengyao also slandered Liu Yuanzhen as a warm and pure eagle dog.

古文：疏皆不报。
现代文：奏疏皇上都没有批示。
English: There were no instructions from the Emperor.

古文：未几，敕谕廷臣以留用言官之故，贬元珍一秩，调边方。
现代文：没有多久，晓谕朝廷大臣以留用言官的缘故，将刘元珍降一级，调到边境。
English: Not long after, the Minister of the Imperial Court ordered Liu Yuanzhen to be demoted one level and transferred to the border for the sake of retaining the spokesman.

古文：一贯佯救，给事、御史侯庆远、叶永盛等亦争之，不从。
现代文：沈一贯假装申救，给事中、御史侯庆远、叶永盛等也替他争辩，皇上皆不听从。
English: Shen always pretended to plead for help, and in the course of the matter, Imperial Historian Qingyuan, Ye Yongsheng and others also argued on his behalf, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：时员外郎贺灿然、南京御史朱吾弼相继论察典。
现代文：当时员外郎贺灿然、南京御史朱吾弼相继讨论京察。
English: At that time, He Canran, a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, and Zhu Wuxi, the Governor of Nanjing, successively discussed the inspection of Beijing.

古文：而主事庞时雍则直攻一贯欺罔者十，误国者十，且曰： 一贯之富贵日崇，陛下之社稷日坏。
现代文：主事庞时雍则直接攻击沈一贯欺君罔上罪行十条、误国之罪十件，并且说： 沈一贯财富日日增加，陛下的社稷天天变坏。
English: The host, Pang Shiyong, directly attacked Shen Zongcheng's ten crimes of defrauding the king and ten crimes of misleading the country, and said: Shen Zongcheng's wealth is increasing day by day, and His Majesty's society is deteriorating day by day.

古文：顷南郊雷震，正当一贯奏请颁行敕谕之时。
现代文：不久前南郊发生雷震，正当沈一贯上奏请求颁行敕谕之时。
English: Not long ago, a thunderstorm occurred in the southern suburbs, just as Shen Gongjun was making a request to issue an imperial edict.

古文：意者天厌其奸，以警悟陛下，俾早除谗慝乎！ 
现代文：这不就是说老天讨厌他的奸诈，用以提醒陛下，让您早日除掉这邪恶的小人吗？ 
English: Doesn't this mean that God detests his treachery and is using it to remind His Majesty to get rid of this evil villain as soon as possible?

古文：帝得疏怒，命并元珍、灿然贬三秩，调极边。
现代文：皇上看到奏疏大发脾气，命令一并降刘元珍、贺灿然职三级，调任最边远的地方。
English: When the emperor saw that Sozoda lost his temper, he ordered Liu Yuanzhen and He Canran to be demoted to the third grade and transferred to the most remote areas.

古文：顷之，庆远及御史李柟等申救。
现代文：不久，庆远及御史李木冉等上疏救援。
English: Soon after, Qingyuan and Gu Shi Li Muran waited for Shangsu to come to their rescue.

古文：帝益怒，夺其俸，谪元珍等极边杂职。
现代文：皇帝更加不高兴，停发他们的俸禄，将刘元珍等贬到最边远的地方任杂职。
English: The emperor was even more displeased, stopped paying their salaries, and relegated Liu Yuanzhen and others to the most remote places to perform miscellaneous duties.

古文：俄御史周家栋指陈时政，语过激。
现代文：不久，御史周家栋指陈时政，言语过激。
English: Not long after, the imperial historian Zhou Jiadong pointed his finger at Chen Shizheng and spoke harshly.

古文：帝迁怒元珍等，皆除其名。
现代文：皇上迁怒于刘元珍等人，将他们皆从官籍中除掉。
English: The emperor was angry with Liu Yuanzhen and others, and they were all removed from the official register.

古文：然察疏亦下，诸被留者皆自免去。
现代文：然而考察的奏疏也颁布下来，各被留用的人都自动免职离去了。
English: However, the report of the investigation was also promulgated, and everyone who was retained was automatically dismissed and left.

古文：光宗即位，起元珍光禄少卿。
现代文：光宗即位，起用刘元珍为光禄少卿。
English: Emperor Guangzong ascended to the throne and appointed Liu Yuanzhen as Guanglu Shaoqing.

古文：时辽、沈既没，故赞画主事刘国缙入南四卫，以招抚军民为名，投牒督饷侍郎，令发舟南济。
现代文：当时辽、沈已经陷落，所以赞画主事刘国缙进入南四卫，以招抚军民为名，投递文书给督饷侍郎，命令发舟南渡。
English: At that time, Liao and Shen had already fallen, so Liu Guozhen, the main painter of the praise, entered the South Fourth Division and, in the name of appeasing the military and the people, delivered a document to the steward of the governor and ordered to send the boat to the south.

古文：议者欲推为东路巡抚，元珍上疏言： 国缙乃李成梁义儿，成梁弃封疆，国缙为营免，遂基祸本。
现代文：言官想推举他为东路巡抚，刘元珍上奏道： 刘国缙是李成梁的义子，李成梁放弃封疆，刘国缙在军营得以幸免，于是留下祸患。
English: The speech officer wanted to nominate him as the East Road inspector, and Liu Yuanzhen made a speech: Liu Guozhen is the son-in-law of Li Chengliang, Li Chengliang abandoned the blockade, Liu Guozhen was spared in the military camp, so he left a disaster.

古文：杨镐、李如柏丧师，国缙甫为赞画，即奏保二人，欲坐杜松以违制。
现代文：杨镐、李如柏丧师，刘国缙一为赞画，立即上奏担保二人，想以违反节制治杜松之罪。
English: Yang Zheng, Li Ruobao, Liu Guozhen, and others praised the painting, and immediately presented two guarantors, intending to punish the juniper with the crime of violating moderation.

古文：创议用辽人，冒官帑二十万金募土兵三万，曾不得一卒之用。
现代文：建议用辽人冒领官币二十万两招募士兵三万，结果没有一人能用。
English: It was suggested that the Liao people should use the official money of 200,000 taels to recruit 30,000 soldiers. As a result, no one could use it.

古文：被劾解官，乃忽拥数万众，欲问道登、莱，窜处内地。
现代文：被弹劾解去官职，忽然拥兵数万，想从小道进入登、莱，逃窜于内地。
English: He was impeached and removed from office, and suddenly he had tens of thousands of soldiers with him, and he wanted to use the back roads to enter the Netherlands and the Netherlands, and escape to the mainland.

古文：万一敌中间谍阑入其间，何以备之？ 
现代文：万一敌人的间谍混入其中，拿什么防备呢？ 
English: In the unlikely event that enemy spies are mixed in, what precautions should be taken?

古文：疏下兵部巡抚议，遂寝。
现代文：奏疏下放到兵部巡抚议论，于是停止。
English: The report was referred to the military governor for discussion, whereupon it was halted.

古文：未几，元珍卒官。
现代文：没有多久，刘元珍死于任上。
English: Before long, Liu Yuanzhen died in office.

古文：初，元珍罢归，以讲学为事。表节义，恤鳏寡，行义重于时。
现代文：当初，刘元珍被罢免官职回到家乡后，以讲学为业，旌表节义，抚恤鳏寡，名声、义气重于一时。
English: At first, after Liu Yuanzhen was removed from office and returned to her hometown, she devoted herself to lecturing, serving the people, caring for the widows and widowers, and her reputation and loyalty were more important than ever.

