古文：曹公少时见乔玄，玄谓曰： 天下方乱，群雄虎争，拨而理之，非君乎？
现代文：曹操年轻的时候去见乔玄，乔玄对他说： 天下正动乱不定，各路豪强如虎相争，能拨乱反正的，难道不是您吗！
English: When Cao Cao was young, he went to see Qiao Xuan. Qiao Xuan said to him, "The world is in turmoil. All the great and powerful are fighting each other like tigers. Who can put an end to the turmoil, if not you?"

古文：然君实乱世之英雄，治世之奸贼。
现代文：可是您其实是乱世中的英雄，盛世中的奸贼。
English: But you are actually a hero in a turbulent world, and a traitor in a prosperous world.

古文：恨吾老矣，不见君富贵，当以子孙相累。 
现代文：遗憾的是我老了，看不到您富贵那一天，我要把子孙拜托给您照顾。 
English: Unfortunately, I am old and cannot see the day when you become rich. I will ask you to take care of my children and grandchildren.

古文：曹公问裴潜曰： 卿昔与刘备共在荆州，卿以备才如何？
现代文：曹操问裴潜道： 你过去和刘备一起在荆州，你认为刘备的才干怎么样？ 
English: Cao Cao asked Pei Qian: You used to be with Liu Bei in Jingzhou. What do you think of Liu Bei's talent?

古文：潜曰： 使居中国，能乱人，不能为治。若乘边守险，足为一方之主。 
现代文：裴潜说： 如果让他待在国中朝廷，会买乱人心，民心不能得到治理；如果保卫边境，防守险要地区，就完全能够成为一个地区的首脑。 
English: Pei Qian said: If he is allowed to stay in the country and the court, he will buy the hearts of the people, and the hearts of the people cannot be governed; if he defends the border and defends the critical areas, he can fully become the head of a region.

古文：何晏、邓扬、夏侯玄并求傅嘏交，而嘏终不许。
现代文：何晏、邓颺、夏侯玄都希望和傅嘏结交，可是傅嘏始终没有答应。
English: He Yu, Deng Yu and Xia Hou Xuan all hoped to make friends with Fu Yu, but Fu Yu never agreed.

古文：诸人乃因荀粲说合之，谓嘏曰： 夏侯太初一时之杰士，虚心于子，而卿意怀不可，交合则好成，不合则致隙。
现代文：他们便托荀粲去说合。荀粲对傅嘏说： 夏侯太初是一代的俊杰，对您很虚心，而您心里却认为不行。如果能交好，就有了情谊；如果不行、就会产生裂痕。
English: They asked him to say yes. He said to Fu Jun: Xia Hou was once a young man of the first generation. He was very humble to you, but in your heart you thought it was impossible. If you can make friends, there will be friendship; if not, there will be a rift.

古文：二贤若穆，则国之休，此蔺相如所以下廉颇也。 
现代文：两位贤人如果能和睦相处、国家就吉祥。这就是蔺相如对廉颇退让的原因。 
English: If the two sages can live in harmony, the country will be blessed. This is the reason why Zou Xiangru gave in to Ren.

古文：傅曰： 夏侯太初，志大心劳，能合虚誉，诚所谓利口覆国之人。
现代文：傅嘏说： 夏侯太初，志向很大，用尽心思去达到目的，很能迎合虚名的需要，确实是所说的耍嘴皮子亡国的人。
English: Fu Yao said: At the beginning of the summer, Xia Hou had a great ambition, exhausted his mind to achieve the goal, and was very able to meet the needs of the false name. He is indeed the so-called people who play with words and ruin the country.

古文：何晏、邓扬有为而躁，博而寡要，外好利而内无关籥，贵同恶异，多言而妒前。
现代文：何晏和邓颺，有作为却很急躁，知识广博却不得要领，对外喜欢得到好处，对自己却不加检点约束，重视和自己意见相同的人，讨厌意见不同的人，好发表意见，却忌妒超过自己的人。
English: He Yao and Deng Yao are active but impatient, have extensive knowledge but lack essentials, like to get benefits from the outside world, but do not impose discipline on themselves, value people with the same opinions as themselves, hate people with different opinions, like to express opinions, but are jealous of people who are better than themselves.

古文：多言多衅，妒前无亲。
现代文：发表意见多，破绽也就多，忌妒别人胜过自己，就会不讲情谊。
English: If you express more opinions, you will have more flaws. If you envy others more than yourself, you will not talk about friendship.

古文：以吾观之：此三贤者，皆败德之人耳！远之犹恐罹祸，况可亲之邪？ 
现代文：依我看来，这三位贤人，都不过是败坏道德的人罢了，离他们远远的还怕遭祸，何况是去亲近他们呢！ 
English: In my opinion, these three wise men are nothing more than corrupt people, and those who are far away from them are afraid of disaster, let alone getting close to them!

古文：后皆如其言。
现代文：后来的情况都像他所说的那样。
English: It all turned out like he said.

古文：晋武帝讲武于宣武场，帝欲偃武修文，亲自临幸，悉召群臣。
现代文：晋武帝命令军队在宣武场练武，他想停止武备，提倡文教，所以亲自到场，并且把群臣都召集来了。
English: Emperor Jinwu ordered the army to practice martial arts in the martial arts field. He wanted to stop the military preparations and promote culture and education, so he came to the scene in person and gathered all the ministers.

古文：山公谓不宜尔，因与诸尚书言孙、吴用兵本意。遂究论，举坐无不咨嗟。
现代文：山涛认为不宜这样做，便和诸位尚书谈论孙武、吴起用兵的本意，于是详尽地探讨下去，满座的人听了没有不赞叹的。
English: Shantao thought that it was inappropriate to do so, so he talked with all of you about the intention of Sun Wu and Wu to use soldiers, and then discussed it in detail. The audience was full of admiration.

古文：皆曰： 山少傅乃天下名言。 
现代文：大家都说： 山少傅所论才是天下的名言。 
English: Everyone said: What Shan Shao Fu said is the best saying in the world.

古文：后诸王骄汰，轻遘祸难，于是寇盗处处蚁合，郡国多以无备，不能制服，遂渐炽盛，皆如公言。
现代文：后来诸王放纵、奢侈，轻率地造成灾难，于是兵匪到处像蚂蚁一样聚合起来，郡、国多数因为没有武备不能制服他们，终于逐渐猖獗、蔓延，正像山涛所说的那样。
English: Later, the kings indulged in extravagance and carelessly caused disasters. As a result, the bandits gathered everywhere like ants. Most counties and countries could not subdue them because they did not have weapons. Eventually, they gradually became rampant and spread, just as the mountains said.

古文：时人以谓山涛不学孙、吴，而闇与之理会。
现代文：当时人们认为山涛虽然不学孙、吴兵法，可是和他们的见解自然而然地相同。
English: At that time, people thought that although Shantao did not study Sun and Wu's methods of warfare, he naturally shared their views.

古文：王夷甫亦叹云： 公闇与道合。 
现代文：王夷甫也慨叹道： 山公所说的和常理暗合。 
English: Wang Yifu also sighed and said: What the mountain lord said coincided with common sense.

古文：王夷甫父乂为平北将军，有公事，使行人论不得。
现代文：王夷甫的父亲王义，担任平北将军，曾经有件公事，派人去上报，没办成。
English: Wang Yifu's father, Wang Yi, who served as the general of Pingbei, once had a business matter and sent someone to report it to the newspaper, but it was not done.

古文：时夷甫在京师，命驾见仆射羊祜、尚书山涛。
现代文：当时王夷甫在京都，就坐车去谒见尚书左仆射羊祜和尚书山涛。
English: At that time, Wang Yifu was in Kyoto, and he took a car to go and see Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant Shaoyu and Shang Shuxu Shantao.

古文：夷甫时总角，姿才秀异，叙致既快，事加有理，涛甚奇之。
现代文：王夷甫当时还是少年，风姿才华与众不同，不但陈述意见痛快淋漓，加以事实本身又理由充分，所以山涛认为他很不寻常。
English: At that time, Wang Yifu was still a young boy. His style and talent were different from others. He was not only happy to express his opinions, but also had sufficient reason to do so. Therefore, Shantao thought that he was very unusual.

古文：既退，看之不辍，乃叹曰： 生儿不当如王夷甫邪？ 
现代文：他告辞后，山涛一直目不转睛地看着他，终于叹息说： 生儿子难道不该像王夷甫吗？ 
English: After he left, Shantao kept staring at him, and finally sighed and said: Isn't a newborn son supposed to be like Wang Yifu?

古文：羊祜曰： 乱天下者，必此子也！ 
现代文：羊祜却说： 扰乱天下的一定是这个人。 
English: But the shepherd said, "It must be this man who is disturbing the whole world."

古文：潘阳仲见王敦小时，谓曰： 君蜂目已露，但豺声未振耳。
现代文：潘阳仲看见王敦少年时候的样子，就对他说： 您已经露出了胡蜂一样的眼神，只是还没有嗥出豺狼般的声音罢了。
English: Pan Yangzhong saw Wang Dun's appearance when he was a boy, and said to him: You have already revealed the eyes like a wasp, but you have not yet made the voice like a jackal.

古文：必能食人，亦当为人所食。
现代文：你一定能吃人，也会给别人吃掉。 
English: You must be able to eat people and be eaten by others.

古文：石勒不知书，使人读汉书。
现代文：石勒不识字，叫别人读《汉书》给他听。
English: Shi Le couldn't read, so he asked someone to read "Chinese Classics" to him.

古文：闻郦食其劝立六国后，刻印将授之，大惊曰： 此法当失，云何得遂有天下？ 
现代文：他听到郦食其劝刘邦把六国的后代立为王侯，刘邦马上刻印，将要授予爵位，就大惊道： 这种做法会失去天下，怎能最终得到天下呢！ 
English: When he heard Liu Bang, who had advised him to make the descendants of the Six Kingdoms princes, Liu Bang immediately engraved a seal to confer a title of nobility, he was shocked: This approach will lose the world, how can it finally gain the world!

古文：至留侯谏，乃曰： 赖有此耳！ 
现代文：当听到留侯张良劝阻刘邦时，便说： 幸亏有这个人呀！ 
English: When he heard Zhang Liang, a resident of Luhou, dissuade Liu Bang, he said: Fortunately, there is this person!

古文：卫玠年五岁，神衿可爱。
现代文：卫玠五岁时，襟怀可爱。
English: When Wei Wei was five years old, he was very cute.

古文：祖太保曰： 此儿有异，顾吾老，不见其大耳！ 
现代文：祖父卫瓘说： 这孩子与众不同，只是我老了，看不到他将来的成就了！ 
English: Grandfather Wei Wei said: This child is different, but I'm old and can't see his future achievements!

古文：刘越石云： 华彦夏识能不足，强果有余。 
现代文：刘越石说： 华彦夏见识、才能不足，倔强、果敢则有余。 
English: Liu Yueishi said: Hua Yanxia's insight and talent are insufficient, but his stubbornness and courage are more than enough.

古文：张季鹰辟齐王东曹掾，在洛见秋风起，因思吴中菰菜羹、鲈鱼脍，曰： 人生贵得适意尔，何能羁宦数千里以要名爵！ 
现代文：张季鹰调任齐王的东曹属官，在首都洛阳，他看见秋风起了，便想吃老家吴中的菰菜羹和鲈鱼脍，说道： 人生可贵的是能够顺心罢了，怎么能远离家乡到几千里外做官，来追求名声和爵位呢！ 
English: Zhang Jiying was transferred to the East Cao subordinate officer of King Qi. In the capital Luoyang, he saw the autumn wind rise and wanted to eat his hometown Wuzhong's bean curd soup and eel stew. He said: Life is precious only if you can follow your heart's desire. How can you pursue fame and nobility by working as an official thousands of miles away from home?

古文：遂命驾便归。
现代文：于是坐上车就南归了。
English: So I got in the car and drove back south.

古文：俄而齐王败，时人皆谓为见机。
现代文：不久齐王败死，当时人们都认为他能见微知著。
English: Soon after, King Qi was defeated and died. At that time, people thought that he could not see or know anything.

古文：诸葛道明初过江左，自名道明，名亚王、庾之下。
现代文：诸葛道明初到江南时，自己起名叫道明，名望仅次于王导、庾亮。
English: When Zhuge Daoming first came to the south of the Yangtze River, he called himself Daoming. His fame was second only to Wang Du and Lu Liang.

古文：先为临沂令，丞相谓曰： 明府当为黑头公。 
现代文：先前任临沂县令，王导曾对他说： 明府将会任黑头三公。 
English: Wang Du, the previous Linyi County Governor, once said to him, "Mingfu will become the third prince of the Blackheads."

古文：王平子素不知眉子，曰： 志大其量，终当死坞壁间。 
现代文：王平子向来对眉子没有好感，他评论王眉子说： 志向大过他的气量，终究会死在小城堡里。 
English: Wang Pingzi has always had an unfavorable opinion of Wanzi. He commented on Wanzi, saying, "Wanzi's ambition is greater than his stamina. He will eventually die in a small castle."

古文：王大将军始下，杨朗苦谏不从，遂为王致力，乘 中鸣云露车 迳前曰： 听下官鼓音，一进而捷。 
现代文：大将军王敦刚要进军京都的时候，杨朗极力劝阻他，他不听，杨朗终于为他尽力。在进攻时，杨朗坐着中鸣云露车一直到王敦面前，说： 听我的鼓音，一旦进攻就能获胜。 
English: When the great general Wang Dun was just about to march into Kyoto, Yang Lang tried his best to dissuade him. He did not listen, and Yang Lang finally did his best for him. During the attack, Yang Lang sat in the middle of the Mingyun trolley all the way to Wang Dun, saying: Listen to my drumbeat, once the attack can win.

古文：王先把其手曰： 事克，当相用为荆州。 
现代文：王敦握住他的手预先告诉他说： 战事胜利了，要用你来掌管荆州。 
English: Wang Dun held his hand and told him in advance: "The war has been won. I want to use you to control Jingzhou."

古文：既而忘之，以为南郡。
现代文：过后忘了这话，把他派到南郡做太守。
English: Later, he forgot this and sent him to Nanshun to be the governor.

古文：王败后，明帝收朗，欲杀之。帝寻崩，得免。
现代文：王敦失败后，晋明帝下令逮捕了杨朗，想杀掉他；不久明帝死了，才得到赦免。
English: After Wang Dun's defeat, Jin Mingdi ordered the arrest of Yang Lang and wanted to kill him; it was not long before Emperor Mingdi died and Wang Dun was pardoned.

古文：后兼三公，署数十人为官属。
现代文：后来兼任三公尚书，安排了几十人做属官。
English: Later, he also served as the Third Prince's secretary, and arranged for dozens of people to become subordinate officials.

古文：此诸人当时并无名，后皆被知遇，于时称其知人。
现代文：这些人在当时都没有什么名气，后来又都受到他的赏识重用。当时人们称赞他能识别人才。
English: None of them had much of a reputation at the time, but they all came to be valued and used by him later, when he was praised for his ability to spot talent.

古文：周伯仁母冬至举酒赐三子曰： 吾本谓度江托足无所。尔家有相，尔等并罗列吾前，复何忧？ 
现代文：周伯仁的母亲在冬至那天的家宴上赐酒给三个儿子，对他们说： 我本来以为避难过江以后没有个立脚的地方，好在你们家有福气，你们几个都在我眼前，我还担心什么呢！ 
English: On the day of the winter solstice, Zhou Boren's mother gave wine to her three sons at a family banquet and said to them, "I thought there would be no place to stand after fleeing across the river. Fortunately, I am blessed to be in your family. Several of you are in front of me. What should I worry about?"

古文：周嵩起，长跪而泣曰： 不如阿母言。
现代文：这时周嵩离座，恭敬地跪在母亲面前，流着泪说： 并不像母亲说的那样。
English: At this time, Zhou Song left his seat, respectfully kneeled in front of his mother, and said with tears: It's not like my mother said.

古文：伯仁为人志大而才短，名重而识闇，好乘人之弊，此非自全之道。
现代文：伯仁的为人志向很大而才能不足，名气很大而见识肤浅，喜欢利用别人的毛病来达到自己的目的，这不是保全自己的做法。
English: Boren's ambition is great but his talent is insufficient, his fame is great but his insight is shallow, and he likes to use other people's faults to achieve his own goals. This is not a way to preserve himself.

古文：嵩性狼抗，亦不容于世。
现代文：我本性乖戾，也不会受到世人的宽容。
English: My nature is grumpy, and I will not be tolerated by the world.

古文：唯阿奴碌碌，当在阿母目下耳！ 
现代文：只有小弟弟平平常常，将会在母亲的眼前罢了。 
English: Only the little brother will be in front of his mother's eyes.

古文：王大将军既亡，王应欲投世儒，世儒为江州。王含欲投王舒，舒为荆州。
现代文：大将军王敦死后，王应想去投奔王世儒，世儒当时任江州刺史；王含想去投奔王舒，王舒当时任荆州刺史。
English: After the death of the great general Wang Dun, Wang Ying wanted to go to Wang Shiru, who was then the governor of Jiangzhou; Wang Han wanted to go to Wang Shu, who was then the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：含语应曰： 大将军平素与江州云何？而汝欲归之。 
现代文：王含对王应说： 大将军平时和世儒的关系怎么样，而你却想去投靠他！ 
English: Wang Han said to Wang Ying: What is the general's relationship with Shiju in normal times, but you want to rely on him!

古文：应曰： 此迺所以宜往也。
现代文：王应说： 这才是应该去的原因。
English: Wang Ying said: This is the reason why you should go.

古文：江州当人强盛时，能抗同异，此非常人所行。及睹衰危，必兴愍恻。
现代文：江州刺史在人家强大的时候，能够坚持不同意见，这不是普通人所能做到的；到了看见人家衰败、危急时，就一定会表示同情。
English: Jiangzhou Shishi was able to hold different opinions when others were strong, which is not something that ordinary people can do; when he saw others in decline and crisis, he would definitely show sympathy.

古文：荆州守文，岂能作意表行事？ 
现代文：荆州刺史守法，怎么能按意料之外的做法办事！ 
English: Jingzhou has a long history of abiding by the law, how can it act in an unexpected way!

古文：含不从，遂共投舒。舒果沈含父子于江。
现代文：王含不听他的意见，于是两人便一起投奔王舒，王舒果然把王含父子沉入长江。
English: Wang Han did not listen to his advice, so the two of them went to Wang Shu together. Wang Shu successfully sank Wang Han and his son into the Yangtze River.

古文：彬闻应当来，密具船以待之，竟不得来，深以为恨。
现代文：王彬听说王应会来，暗地里准备好了船来等候他们；他们竟然没能来，王彬深感遗憾。
English: Wang Bin heard that Wang Ying would come and secretly prepared a boat to wait for them; Wang Bin deeply regretted that they could not come.

古文：武昌孟嘉作庾太尉州从事，已知名。
现代文：武昌郡孟嘉任太尉庾亮手下的州从事时，已经很有名气了。
English: Wuchang County Meng Jiaren was already very famous when he was engaged in the state under the command of Taifu Jialiang.

古文：褚太傅有知人鉴，罢豫章还，过武昌，问庾曰： 闻孟从事佳，今在此不？ 
现代文：太傅褚裒有识别人物的观察力，他免去豫章太守回家时，路过武昌，去见庾亮，问庾亮道： 听说孟从事很有才学，现在在这里吗？ 
English: When he was going home, he passed by Wuchang and went to see Meng Liang. He asked Meng Liang, "I heard that Meng is a very talented scholar. Is he here now?"

古文：庾云： 卿自求之。 
现代文：庾亮说： 在座，你试着自己找找看。 
English: Hao Liang said, "Here, try to find out for yourself.

古文：褚眄睐良久，指嘉曰： 此君小异，得无是乎？ 庾大笑曰： 然！ 
现代文：褚裒观察了很久，指着孟嘉说： 这一位稍有不同，恐怕是他吧？ 庾亮大笑道： 对。 
English: Gong Liang observed for a long time, pointed to Meng Jia and said: This one is a little different, I'm afraid it's him? Gong Liang laughed loudly and said: That's right.

古文：于时既叹褚之默识，又欣嘉之见赏。
现代文：当时庾亮既赞赏褚裒这种在不言中识别人物的才能，又高兴孟嘉受到了赏识。
English: At that time, Zhai Liang not only appreciated Zhai's ability to identify characters without saying a word, but was also happy that Meng Jia was appreciated.

古文：戴安道年十余岁，在瓦官寺画。
现代文：戴安道十几岁时，在京都瓦官寺画画。
English: As a teenager, Dian Do began painting in Kyoto's Wakan-ji Temple.

古文：王长史见之曰： 此童非徒能画，亦终当致名。
现代文：司徒左长史王濛看见他，说： 这孩子不只能画画，将来也会很有名望。
English: Seeing him, Shi Wangyao, the head of the Stuzhouzo, said, "This child is not only good at painting, but he will also be famous in the future."

古文：恨吾老，不见其盛时耳！ 
现代文：遗憾的是我年纪大了，见不到他富贵的时候了！ 
English: Unfortunately, I am too old to see him become rich!

古文：王仲祖、谢仁祖、刘真长俱至丹阳墓所省殷扬州，殊有确然之志。
现代文：王仲祖、谢仁祖、刘真长三人一起到丹阳郡殷氏墓地去探望扬州刺史殷渊源，谈话中知道他退隐的志向坚定不移。
English: Wang Zhongzu, Xie Renzu and Liu Zhenchang went to the Yin cemetery in Danyang County to visit the Yangzhou prelate Yin Yuanyuan. During the conversation, they knew that his desire to retire was unwavering.

古文：既反，王、谢相谓曰： 渊源不起，当如苍生何？ 
现代文：回来以后，王、谢互相议论说： 渊源不出仕，对老百姓该怎么办呢！ 
English: After returning, Wang and Xie discussed with each other, saying, "If Yuan Yuan does not serve, what should we do with the common people?"

古文：深为忧叹。
现代文：非常忧虑、叹惜。
English: Very worried and regretful.

古文：刘曰： 卿诸人真忧渊源不起邪？ 
现代文：刘真长说： 你们这些人真的担心渊源不出仕吗？ 
English: Liu Zhenchang said: Are you people really worried that Yuan Yuan will not serve?

古文：小庾临终，自表以子园客为代。
现代文：庚翼临死时，亲自上奏章推荐自己的儿子园客代理职务。
English: When Geng Ying was on his deathbed, he personally wrote a letter recommending his son for the position of gardener.

古文：朝廷虑其不从命，未知所遣，乃共议用桓温。
现代文：朝廷担心他不肯服从命令，不知该派谁去好，于是一同商议用桓温为荆州刺史。
English: The imperial court was worried that he would not obey orders and did not know who to send, so they discussed using Kuanwen to write the history of Jingzhou.

古文：刘尹曰： 使伊去，必能克定西楚，然恐不可复制。 
现代文：丹阳尹刘真长说： 派他去，一定能克服并安定西部地区，可是恐怕以后就再也控制不了他了。 
English: Danyang Yin Liu Zhenlong said, "If we send him, we will surely be able to overcome and stabilize the western region, but I am afraid that we will no longer be able to control him.

古文：桓公将伐蜀，在事诸贤咸以李势在蜀既久，承藉累叶，且形据上流，三峡未易可克。
现代文：桓温将要讨伐蜀地，当时居官的贤明人士都认为李势在蜀地已经很久，继承了好几代的基业，而且地理形势又居上游，长江三峡不是轻易能够攻克的。
English: At that time, the wise people who were in office thought that Li Xiang had been in Shu for a long time, inherited several generations of inheritance, and the geographical situation was in the upper reaches. The Yangtze River Three Gorges was not easy to conquer.

古文：唯刘尹云： 伊必能克蜀。
现代文：只有丹阳尹刘真长说： 他一定能攻克蜀地。
English: Only Danyang Yin Liu Zhenlong said: He will surely be able to conquer Shu.

古文：观其蒲博，不必得，则不为。 
现代文：从他赌博可以看出，没有必胜的把握，他是不会干的。 
English: You can see from his gambling that he won't do it unless he's sure of winning.

古文：谢公在东山畜妓，简文曰： 安石必出。既与人同乐，亦不得不与人同忧。 
现代文：谢安在东山隐居时养着歌舞女，简文帝说： 安石一定会出山，他既会和人同乐，也就不得不和人同忧。 
English: When Xie An was living in seclusion in Dongshan, he raised a song and dance girl. Emperor Jianwen said, "Anshi will definitely go out to the mountains. Since he can enjoy with others, he will also have to worry with others."

古文：郗超与谢玄不善。
现代文：郗超和谢玄不和。
English: Gong Chao and Xie Xuan are at odds.

古文：符坚将问晋鼎，既已狼噬梁、岐，又虎视淮阴矣。
现代文：这时，符坚打算灭亡晋朝，已经占据了梁州、歧山，又虎视眈眈地注视着淮阴。
English: At this time, Fu Jian intended to destroy the Jin Dynasty and had already occupied Liangzhou and Qishan. He was also keeping a close eye on Huaiyin.

古文：于时朝议遣玄北讨，人间颇有异同之论。
现代文：当时朝廷商议派谢玄北伐符坚，人们私下里很有些不赞成的论调。
English: At that time, the imperial court deliberated to send Xie Xuan to the Northern Expedition of Fu Jian, and people privately expressed some disapproval.

古文：唯超曰： 是必济事。
现代文：只有郗超同意，他说： 这个人一定能成事。
English: Only Zou Chao agreed, saying, "This man can definitely get things done."

古文：吾昔尝与共在桓宣武府，见使才皆尽，虽履屐之间，亦得其任。
现代文：我过去曾经和他一起在桓宣武的军府共事，发现他用人都能让人尽其才，即使是小事，也能使各人得到适当安排。
English: I used to work with him at the military headquarters of Huan Xuanwu, and found that he employed people to make people do their best, even if it was a small thing, he could make everyone be properly arranged.

古文：以此推之，容必能立勋。 
现代文：从这里推断，想必他能建立功勋。 
English: From this we can deduce that he will be able to build on his achievements.

古文：元功既举，时人咸叹超之先觉，又重其不以爱憎匿善。
现代文：大功告成以后，当时人们都赞叹郗超有先见之明，又敬重他不因为个人的爱憎而埋没别人的长处。
English: After the great work was completed, people at that time all praised Yu Chao for his foresight, and respected him for not burying the strengths of others because of his personal likes and dislikes.

古文：韩康伯与谢玄亦无深好。
现代文：韩康伯和谢玄也没有深交。
English: Han Kangbo and Xie Xuan are not close friends.

古文：玄北征后，巷议疑其不振。
现代文：谢玄北伐苻坚后，街谈巷议都怀疑他会打败仗。
English: After Xie Xuan's Northern Expedition against Jiaojian, people on the street doubted that he would win the war.

古文：康伯曰： 此人好名，必能战。 
现代文：韩康伯说： 这个人好名，一走能作战。 
English: Han Kangbo said, "This man has a good reputation and can fight at a moment's notice.

古文：玄闻之甚忿，常于众中厉色曰： 丈夫提千兵，入死地，以事君亲故发，不得复云为名。 
现代文：谢玄听到这话非常生气，曾经在大庭广众中声色俱厉他说： 大丈夫率领千军进入决死之地，是为了报效君主才出征，不能再说是为名。 
English: Xie Xuan was very angry when he heard this, and he was once very vocal in the audience, saying: "It's okay to lead a thousand troops into a place of death, it's to repay the service of the monarch to go to war, it can no longer be said to be for fame.

古文：褚期生少时，谢公甚知之，恒云： 褚期生若不佳者，仆不复相士。 
现代文：褚期生年轻时，谢安很赏识他，经常说： 褚期生如果还不优秀，我就不再鉴别人才了！ 
English: When 期生 was young, Xie An appreciated him very much and often said: If 期生 is still not excellent, I will no longer judge other talents!

古文：郗超与傅瑗周旋，瑗见其二子并总发。
现代文：郗超和傅瑗有交往。
English: Zou Chao and Fu Yao are in a relationship.

古文：超观之良久，谓瑗曰： 小者才名皆胜，然保卿家，终当在兄。 
现代文：傅瑗叫他两个儿子出来见郗超，两人都还是小孩子，郗超对他们观察了很久，对傅瑗说： 小的将来才学名望都超过他哥哥，可是保全你们一家的，终究是哥哥。 
English: Fu Yao called his two sons to come out to see Gong Chao. Both of them were still small children. Gong Chao observed them for a long time and said to Fu Yao, "The younger one will surpass his elder brother in learning and reputation, but it is the elder brother who will keep your family safe."

古文：即傅亮兄弟也。
现代文：所说的就是傅亮兄弟。
English: What they are talking about is the Fu Liang brothers.

古文：王恭随父在会稽，王大自都来拜墓。
现代文：王恭随他父亲住在会稽郡，王大从京都来会稽扫墓，王恭到墓地去看望他一下。
English: Wang Qiong followed his father to live in Huiqi County. Wang Da came from Kyoto to sweep the tombs of Huiqi. Wang Qiong went to the cemetery to visit him.

古文：恭暂往墓下看之，二人素善，遂十余日方还。
现代文：两人一向很要好，索性住了十多天才回家。
English: The two of them have always been very close, and they stayed together for more than ten days before returning home.

古文：父问恭： 何故多日？ 对曰： 与阿大语，蝉连不得归。 
现代文：他父亲问他为什么住了许多天，王恭回答说： 和阿大谈话，谈起来没完，没法回来。 
English: When his father asked why he had stayed there for so many days, Wang Qiong replied, "I couldn't come back after talking with Ah Da for so long.

古文：因语之曰： 恐阿大非尔之友。 
现代文：他父亲就告诉他说： 恐怕阿大不是你的朋友。 
English: His father told him: "I'm afraid your father is not your friend."

古文：终乖爱好，果如其言。
现代文：后来两人的爱好终于相反，果然和他父亲的话一样。
English: Later, the two men's interests finally went in opposite directions, just as his father had said.

古文：车胤父作南平郡功曹，太守王胡之避司马无忌之难，置郡于酆阴。
现代文：车胤的父亲任南平郡的功曹，郡太守王胡之因为要避开司马无忌的报复，就把郡的首府设在鄂阴。
English: Che-yin's father was a hero in Nanping County, and the county governor, Wang Huzhong, wanted to avoid Sima's revenge, so he set up the county's capital in Eyin.

古文：是时胤十余岁，胡之每出，尝于篱中见而异焉。
现代文：这时车胤才十多岁，王胡之每次外出，都曾隔着篱笆看见他，对他感到惊奇。
English: At that time, Cheyin was just over ten years old. Every time Wang Huzhi went out, he saw him through the fence and was surprised by him.

古文：谓胤父曰： 此儿当致高名。 
现代文：王胡之对车胤父亲说： 这孩子将会得到很高的名望。 
English: Wang Huzhi said to Che's father, "This child will be very famous."

古文：后游集，恒命之。
现代文：后来遇有游玩、聚会等事，经常把他叫来。
English: Later, when there were outings, parties, etc., he was often called in.

古文：胤长，又为桓宣武所知。清通于多士之世，官至选曹尚书。
现代文：车胤长大后，又受到桓温的赏识，在那人才济济的时代里，以清廉通达知名，宫做到吏部尚书。
English: After Cheyin grew up, he was also appreciated by Kan-Wen. In that era of abundant talent, he was known as a clean and honest person, and the palace achieved a high-ranking official.

古文：王忱死，西镇未定，朝贵人人有望。
现代文：王忱死了，西部地区长官的人选还没有决走，朝廷显贵人人都对这个官位存有希望。
English: Wang Zhen is dead, the candidate for the governor of the western region has not yet been decided, and everyone in the imperial court has hopes for this post.

古文：时殷仲堪在门下，虽居机要，资名轻小，人情未以方岳相许。
现代文：当时殷仲堪在门下省任职，虽然处在机要部门，但是资历浅，名望小，大家的心意还不赞成把地方长官的重任交给他。
English: At that time, Yin Zhongkang was serving in a subordinate province. Although he was in an important department, his seniority was low and his reputation was small. Everyone was not in favor of giving him the important position of local governor.

古文：晋孝武欲拔亲近腹心，遂以殷为荆州。
现代文：可是晋孝武帝想提拔自己的亲信心腹，就委任殷仲堪为荆州刺史。
English: However, Emperor Jinxiao Wu wanted to promote his own personal faith, so he appointed Yin Zhongkang as the leader of Jingzhou.

古文：事定，诏未出。王珣问殷曰： 陕西何故未有处分？ 
现代文：事情已经决定了，诏令还没有发出时，王珣问殷仲堪： 荆州为什么还没有安排入选？ 
English: When the matter had already been decided and the edict had not yet been issued, Wang Zhe asked Yin Zhongkan: Why has Jingzhou not yet arranged to be selected?

古文：殷曰： 已有人。 
现代文：殷说： 已经有了人选。
English: Yin said: There is already a candidate.

古文：王历问公卿，咸云 非 。
现代文：王珣就历举大臣们的名字，一个个问遍了，殷仲堪都说不是。
English: Wang Yao enumerated the names of the ministers and asked them one by one. All of them said no.

古文：王自计才地必应在己，复问： 非我邪？ 
现代文：王珣估量自己的才能和门第，认为一定是自己了，又问： 不是我吧？ 
English: Wang Yao estimated his talent and his lineage, thought it must be himself, and asked: Isn't it me?

古文：殷曰： 亦似非。 
现代文：殷说： 也好像不是。 
English: Yin said: It doesn't seem to be.

古文：其夜诏出用殷。
现代文：当夜下达诏令任用殷仲堪。
English: That night, a decree was issued to appoint Yin Zhongkan.

古文：王语所亲曰： 岂有黄门郎而受如此任？
现代文：王地对亲信说： 哪里有黄门侍郎却能担负起这样的重任！
English: Wangdi said to his relatives, "Where is there a Yellow Gate attendant who can shoulder such a heavy responsibility!

古文：仲堪此举迺是国之亡徵。 
现代文：对仲堪的这种提拔，就是国家灭亡的预兆。 
English: This kind of promotion for a friend is a harbinger of the country's demise.

