古文：子墨子言曰：凡出言谈，则必可而不先立仪而言。
现代文：墨子说： 凡是发表言论，则不能不先立标准再说。
English: Mozi said: Whenever you make a statement, you must first set a standard.

古文：若不先立仪而言，譬之犹运钧之上而立朝夕焉也，我以为虽有朝夕之辩，必将终未可得而从定也，是故言有三法。
现代文：如果言论没有标准，就好象把测时仪器放在运转的陶轮上。我认为虽有早、晚的区分，但必然终究得不到一个确定的时间。所以言论有三条标准。 
English: If there is no standard for speech, it is like putting a timer on a running pottery wheel. I think that although there is a distinction between early and late, it is inevitable that there will not be a definite time. Therefore, there are three standards for speech.

古文：何谓三法？
现代文：什么是三条标准？
English: What are the three standards?

古文：曰：有考之者，有原之者，有用之者。
现代文：答道：有考察的，有本原的，有实践的。
English: Answer: There is the investigation, there is the origin, there is the practice.

古文：恶乎考之？
现代文：怎么考察呢？
English: How to investigate?

古文：考先圣大王之事；恶乎原之？
现代文：考察先代圣王的事迹；怎么推求本原呢？
English: Examine the deeds of the previous holy kings; how can we deduce the origin?

古文：察众之耳目之请，恶乎用之？
现代文：要推求众人听见所闻的实情；怎么付诸实践呢？
English: We should ask people to listen to what they have heard; how can they put it into practice?

古文：发而为政乎国，察万民而观之。
现代文：于治国中当作政令，观察万民来评论它。
English: In the governance of the country, it should be regarded as a decree, and the people should observe and comment on it.

古文：此谓三法也。
现代文：这就是三条标准。
English: These are the three standards.

古文：故昔者三代圣王禹、汤、文、武，方为政乎天下之时，曰： 必务举孝子而劝之事亲，尊贤良之人而教之为善。 
现代文：所以古时候三代的圣王禹、汤、文、武，刚主持天下政事时，说：必举拔孝子而鼓励侍奉双亲，尊重贤良而教导人们做善事。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, the three generations of holy kings Yu, Tang, Wen, and Wu, when they had just presided over the world's political affairs, said: It is necessary to raise up filial sons and encourage them to serve their parents, respect the virtuous and teach people to do good deeds.

古文：是故出政施教，赏善罚暴。
现代文：所以公布政令实施教育，奖赏善良惩罚凶暴。
English: Therefore, a decree was issued to implement education, reward kindness and punish violence.

古文：且以为若此，则天下之乱也，将属可得而治也；社稷之危也，将属可得而定也。若以为不然，昔桀之所乱，汤治之；纣之所乱，武王治之。
现代文：认为这样，混乱的天下，将可以得到治理；危险的社稷可以得到安宁。如果不这样认为，古时桀时的混乱，汤治理了；纣时的混乱，武王治理了。
English: It is believed that in this way, the chaotic world will be able to be governed; the dangerous society will be able to obtain tranquility. If you do not think so, the chaos in ancient times was governed by Tang; the chaos in modern times was governed by King Wu.

古文：当此之时，世不渝而民不易，上变政而民改俗。
现代文：那个时候，世界、百姓都没有改变，君王改变了政务而人民改变了风俗。
English: At that time, the world and the people had not changed, the king changed the government and the people changed their customs.

古文：存乎桀、纣而天下乱，存乎汤、武而天下治。
现代文：在桀、纣那里则天下混乱，在汤武那里则天下治理。
English: The world is in chaos in the states of Shandong and Fujian, and the world is ruled by chaos in Tangwu.

古文：天下之治也，汤、武之力也；天下之乱也，桀、纣之罪也。
现代文：天下得到治理是汤武的功劳；天下的混乱是桀纣的罪过。
English: It is the merit of Tangwu that the world is governed; the chaos of the world is the fault of Yao.

古文：若以此观之，夫安危治乱，存乎上之为政也，则夫岂可谓有命哉！
现代文：如以此来看，所谓安、危、治理、混乱，在于君上的施政；那么怎么可以说是有命呢？
English: From this point of view, the so-called safety, danger, governance, and chaos lie in the governance of the sovereign; so how can it be said to be alive?

古文：故昔者禹、汤、文、武，方为政乎天下之时，曰： 必使饥者得食，寒者得衣，劳者得息，乱者得治。 
现代文：所以古时禹汤文武刚开始在天下执政时，说：必须使饥饿的人能吃上饭，寒冷的人能穿上衣服，劳作的人能够休息，混乱的得到治理。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, when Yu Tangwenwu first began to govern the world, he said: It is necessary to enable the hungry to eat, the cold to wear clothes, the laborers to rest, and the chaos to be governed.

古文：遂得光誉令问于天下。
现代文：这样他们获得了天下人的赞誉和好评。
English: In this way, they have won the praise and praise of the people around the world.

古文：夫岂可以为命哉！
现代文：怎能认为是命呢？
English: How can it be considered life?

古文：故以为其力也。
现代文：应该认为是他们的努力啊。
English: They should be credited for their efforts.

古文：今贤良之人，尊贤而好功道术，故上得其王公大人之赏，下得其万民之誉，遂得光誉令问于天下。
现代文：现在贤良的人，尊重贤人而喜好治国的道理方法，所以上面得到王公大人的奖赏，下面得到万民的称誉，这就得到天下人的称誉好评。
English: Nowadays, the virtuous people respect the wise people and like the rational method of governing the country. Therefore, the above has been rewarded by the king and empress, and the following has been praised by the people, which has been praised and praised by the people of the world.

古文：亦岂以为其命哉！
现代文：怎能认为是他们的命呢？
English: How can it be considered their lives?

古文：又以为力也。
现代文：也是他们的努力啊！
English: It's also their effort!

古文：然今夫有命者，不识昔也三代之圣善人与？
现代文：然而今天主张 有命 的人，不知是根据从前三代的圣人善人呢？
English: However, today's people who claim to be "alive" are, I don't know, saints and good people according to the previous three generations?

古文：意亡昔三代之暴不肖人与？
现代文：还是从前三代的凶暴无能的人呢？
English: Or the violent and incompetent men of the previous three generations?

古文：若以说观之，则必非昔三代圣善人也，必暴不肖人也。
现代文：如从他们的言论来看，则必定不是从前三代的圣人善人，一定是凶暴无能的人。
English: Judging from their remarks, they must not be the saints and good people of the previous three generations, but must be violent and incompetent people.

古文：然今以命为有者。昔三代暴王桀、纣、幽、厉，贵为天子，富有天下，于此乎不而矫其耳目之欲，而从其心意之辟，外之驱骋田猎毕戈，内湛于酒乐，而不顾其国家百姓之政，繁为无用，暴逆百姓，遂失其宗庙。
现代文：然而今天以为有命的人，从前三代暴君桀、纣、幽、厉，贵为天子，富有天下，于那时不改正声色的欲望，而放纵他的内心的邪僻。在外驱车打猎射鸟，在内耽于酒和音乐，而不顾他的国家百姓的政事；过多地作无用的事，残暴地对待百姓，于是失去了国家。
English: However, people who think they are alive today, the tyrants of the previous three generations were arrogant, arrogant, arrogant, arrogant, noble, and rich. At that time, they did not correct their vocal desires, but indulged in the wickedness of their hearts. They drove around shooting birds, indulged in wine and music, and did not care about the political affairs of the people of their country. They did too many useless things and treated the people cruelly, so they lost their country.

古文：其言不曰我罢不肖，吾听治不强，必曰吾命固将失之。
现代文：他们不这样说： 我疲沓无能，我不努力地听狱治国。 一定说： 我命里本来就要失国。 
English: For they shall not say, I am weary, I have no strength, I have served my time in prison, I have done nothing for my country; but they shall say, I would have perished for my country.

古文：虽昔也三代罢不肖之民，亦犹此也。
现代文：即使是三代疲沓无能的百姓，也是这样。
English: This is true even of three generations of exhausted and incompetent people.

古文：不能善事亲戚、君长，甚恶恭俭而好简易，贪饮食而惰从事，衣食之财不足，是以身有陷乎饥寒冻馁之忧，其言不曰吾罢不肖，吾从事不强，又曰吾命固将穷。
现代文：不能好好地对待双亲君长，很嫌恶恭敬俭朴而喜好简慢粗陋，贪于饮食而懒于劳作，衣食财物不足，所以自身有饥寒冻馁的忧患。他们不这样说： 我疲沓无能，不能努力地劳作。 也说： 我命里本来就穷。 
English: They can't treat their parents and elders well, they hate respect and frugality and prefer simplicity and vulgarity, they are greedy for food and lazy to work, and they lack food, clothing and property, so they have the sorrow of hunger and cold. They say: I am tired and incapable, I can't work hard. They also say: I am poor in my life.

古文：昔三代伪民，亦犹此也。
现代文：从前三代的虚伪的人也是这样。
English: So were the hypocrites of the first three generations.

古文：先圣王之患之也，固在前矣，是以书之竹帛，镂之金石，琢之盘盂，传遗后世子孙。
现代文：古时暴君编造这些话，穷人复述这些话。这些都是惑乱百姓、愚弄朴实的人，先代圣王对此感到忧虑，在前世就有了。所以写在竹帛上，刻在金石上，雕在盘盂上，流传给后世子孙。
English: In ancient times, tyrants made up these sayings, and the poor repeated them. These are the sayings of those who confused the people and fooled the simple. The previous holy king was worried about this, and it happened in a previous life. Therefore, it was written on the bamboo pole, engraved on the gold stone, carved on the plate, and passed down to future generations.

古文：曰： 何书焉存？ 
现代文：说：哪些书有这些话？
English: "What books have these words?" he said.

古文：禹之《总德》有之曰： 允不著惟天，民不而葆。
现代文：禹时《总德》上有，说： 诚信不到达天帝，就不会保佑下民。
English: In Yu Shi's "General Virtue," there is a saying: If one's integrity does not reach the heavenly emperor, he will not be able to bless the people.

古文：既防凶星，天加之咎。
现代文：既然放纵自己的凶恶的心意，天帝将会惩罚的。
English: Since he has indulged his evil heart, the Heavenly Emperor will punish him.

古文：不慎厥德，天命焉葆？ 
现代文：不谨慎而丧失了德，天命怎会保佑呢？ 
English: If one is careless and loses virtue, how can one be blessed by fate?

古文：《仲虺之诰》曰： 我闻有夏人矫天命于下，帝式是增，用爽厥师。 
现代文：《仲虺之告》说： 我听说夏人假造天命颁布于世，上天痛恨他，因此使他丧失了军队。 
English: "Zhonglu's report" said: I heard that Xia Ren forged the Mandate of Heaven and promulgated it to the world. Heaven hated him, so he lost his army.

古文：彼用无为有，故谓矫；若有而谓有，夫岂为矫哉！
现代文：他无中生有，所以叫假造；如本来就有而说有，怎么是假造呢？
English: He created something out of nothing, so he is called a forgery; if something already exists and is said to exist, how is it a forgery?

古文：昔者桀执有命而行，汤为《仲虺之告》以非之。
现代文：从前桀主张 有命 行事，汤作《仲虺之告》以批驳他。
English: Once upon a time, Zou argued that he had the power to act, and Tang wrote the "Complaint of Zhong Zou" to refute him.

古文：《太誓》之言也，于去发曰： 恶乎君子！天有显德，其行甚章。
现代文：《太誓》中太子发说： 啊呀君子！天有大德，它的所为非常显明。
English: In "The Great Oath," the crown prince said, "Ah, gentleman! Heaven has great virtue, and what it does is very obvious.

古文：为鉴不远，在彼殷王。谓人有命，谓敬不可行，谓祭无益，谓暴无伤。
现代文：可以借鉴的不太远，殷王就是：说人有命，说不必恭敬；说祭祀没有好处，说凶暴没有害处。
English: It is not too far-fetched to draw on the example of King Yin: to say that man is mortal is to say that there is no need for reverence; to say that sacrifice is of no benefit is to say that violence is of no harm.

古文：上帝不常，九有以亡；上帝不顺，祝降其丧。
现代文：上天不保佑，九州都亡灭了。上天不顺心，给他降下灭亡的灾难。
English: Without God's blessing, Kyushu would have perished. When God was displeased, He sent down the disaster of destruction.

古文：惟我有周，受之大帝。 
现代文：只有我周朝，接受了商的天下。 
English: Only I, Zhou Dynasty, accepted the world of merchants.

古文：昔纣执有命而行，武王为《太誓》去发以非之。
现代文：从前纣主张 有命 而行事，武王作《太誓》太子发反驳他。
English: Once upon a time, he insisted that he had the power to act, but King Wu countered him with the "Great Oath" issued by the crown prince.

古文：曰：子胡不尚考之乎商、周、虞、夏之记？从十简之篇以尚，皆无之。将何若者也？
现代文：说，你为什么不向上考察商、周、虞、夏的史料，从十简之篇以上都没有命的记载，将怎么样呢？
English: He said, "Why don't you look up at the historical materials of Shang, Zhou, Yu and Xia, the records of which are lifeless if they are more than ten short stories long. What will happen?

古文：是故子墨子曰：今天下之君子之为文学、出言谈也，非将勤劳其惟舌，而利其唇吻也，中实将欲其国家邑里万民刑政者也。
现代文：所以墨子说： 现在天下君子写文章。发表谈话，并不是想要使其喉舌勤劳，使其嘴唇利索，内心实在是想为了国家、邑里、万民的刑法政务。 
English: Therefore, Mozi said, "Nowadays, gentlemen all over the world write articles. When they publish a conversation, it is not because they want to make their mouthpieces work hard and their lips smart, but their hearts really want to do criminal law and government affairs for the country, the town, and the people.

古文：今也王公大人之所以蚤朝晏退，听狱治政，终朝均分而不敢怠倦者，何也？
现代文：现在的王公大人之所以要早上朝，晚退朝，听狱治政，整日分配职事而不敢倦怠，是为什么呢？
English: Why is it that today's grand dukes want to get up in the morning and retire in the evening, listen to the prison administration, and assign duties all day long without getting tired?

古文：曰：彼以为强必治，不强必乱；强必宁，不强必危。故不敢怠倦。
现代文：答道：他认为努力必能治理，不努力就要混乱；努力必能安宁，不努力就要危险，所以不敢倦怠。
English: He replied, "I believe that if you work hard, you will be able to govern, but if you don't work hard, you will be in chaos; if you work hard, you will be peaceful, but if you don't work hard, you will be in danger, so I don't dare to get tired."

古文：今也卿大夫之所以竭股肱之力，殚其思虑之知，内治官府，外敛关市、山林、泽梁之利，以实官府而不敢怠倦者，何也？
现代文：现在的卿大夫之所以用尽全身的力气，竭尽全部智慧，于内治理官府，于外征收关市、山林、泽梁的税，以充实官府，而不敢倦怠，是为什么呢？
English: Why is it that the current doctor-in-chief has exhausted all his strength, exhausted all his wisdom, to administer the government inside, and to collect the taxes of the cities, mountains, forests, and rivers outside, to enrich the government, but does not dare to be tired?

古文：曰：彼以为强必贵，不强必贱；强必荣，不强必辱。故不敢怠倦。
现代文：答道：他以为努力必能高贵，不努力就会低贱；努力必能荣耀，不努力就会屈辱，所以不敢倦怠。
English: Answer: He thought that he would be able to be noble with effort, but would be lowly without effort; that he would be able to be honored with effort, but would be humiliated without effort, so he did not dare to get tired.

古文：今也农夫之所以蚤出暮入，强乎耕稼树艺，多聚叔粟而不敢怠倦者，何也？
现代文：现在的农夫之所以早出晚归，努力从事耕种、植树、种菜，多聚豆子和粟，而不敢倦怠，为什么呢？
English: Why is it that today's farmers go out early and come back late, work hard to cultivate, plant trees, grow vegetables, and gather more beans and millet, but do not dare to get tired?

古文：曰：彼以为强必富，不强必贫；强必饱，不强必饥。故不敢怠倦。今也妇人之所以夙兴夜寐，强乎纺绩织纴，多治麻统葛绪，捆布縿，而不敢怠倦者，何也？
现代文：答道：他以为努力必能富裕，不努力就会贫穷；努力必能吃饱，不努力就要饥饿，所以不敢倦怠，现在的妇人之所以早起夜睡，努力纺纱、绩麻、织布，多多料理麻、丝、葛、苎麻，而不敢倦怠，为什么呢？
English: Answer: He thought that with hard work, he would be rich, but without hard work, he would be poor; with hard work, he would have enough to eat, but without hard work, he would be hungry, so he did not dare to get tired. Why is it that today's women get up early in the morning and go to bed at night, and work hard to spin yarn, dye hemp, weave cloth, and cook a lot of hemp, silk, gooseberry, and nettle, but they do not dare to get tired?

古文：曰：彼以为强必富，不强必贫；强必暖，不强必寒。故不敢怠倦。
现代文：答道：她以为努力必能富裕，不努力就会贫穷；努力必能温暖，不努力就会寒冷，所以不敢倦怠。
English: Answer: She thought that if she worked hard, she would be rich, but if she didn't work hard, she would be poor; if she worked hard, she would be warm, but if she didn't work hard, she would be cold, so she didn't dare to get tired.

古文：今虽毋在乎王公大人，蒉若信有命而致行之，则必怠乎听狱治政矣，卿大夫必怠乎治官府矣，农夫必怠乎耕稼树艺矣，妇人必怠乎纺绩织纴矣。
现代文：现在的王公大人若确信 有命 ，并如此去做，则必懒于听狱治政，卿大夫必懒于治理官府，农夫必懒于耕田、植树、种菜，妇人必懒于纺纱、绩麻、织布。
English: If the current kings and princes are convinced that they have the power to do so, they will not be lazy in listening to the prison and governing the government, the doctors will not be lazy in governing the government, the farmers will not be lazy in cultivating fields, planting trees, and growing vegetables, and the women will not be lazy in spinning, weeding, and weaving.

古文：王公大人怠乎听狱治政，卿大夫怠乎治官府，则我以为天下必乱矣；农夫怠乎耕稼树艺，妇人怠乎纺绩织纴，则我以为天下衣食之财，将必不足矣。
现代文：王公大人懒于听狱治国，卿大夫懒于治理官府，则我认为天下一定会混乱，农夫懒于耕田、植树、种菜，妇人懒于纺纱、绩麻、织布，则我认为天下衣食财物，一定会不足。
English: If princes are too lazy to listen and govern, and doctors are too lazy to run the government, then I believe the world will be in chaos. If farmers are too lazy to plow fields, plant trees, and grow vegetables, and if women are too lazy to spin yarn, sow flax, and weave cloth, then I believe the world will be short of food, clothing, and other goods.

古文：若以为政乎天下，上以事天鬼，天鬼不使，下以持养百姓，百姓不利，必离散，不可得用也。
现代文：如果以此来治理天下，向上侍奉天帝、鬼神，天帝、鬼神必不依从；对下以此来养育百姓，百姓没有得到利益，必定要离开不能被使用。
English: If this is the way to govern the world, to serve gods and spirits above, gods and spirits will not obey; if this is the way to raise the people below, the people will not benefit, and they must leave and cannot be used.

古文：是以入守则不固，出诛则不胜。
现代文：这样于内守国则不牢固，出去杀敌则不会胜利。
English: In this way, the inner defense of the country is not solid, and going out to kill the enemy will not be successful.

古文：故虽昔者三代暴王桀、纣、幽、厉之所以共抎其国家，倾覆其社稷者，此也。
现代文：所以从前三代暴君、桀、纣、幽、厉之所以国家灭亡，社稷倾覆的原因，就在这里啊。
English: This is why the three previous generations of tyrants, Shun, Pu, Yu and Li, were the cause of the country's demise and the society's downfall.

古文：是故子墨子言曰：今天下之士君子，中实将欲求兴天下之利、除天下之害，当若有命者之言，不可不强非也。
现代文：所以墨子说：现在天下的士人君子，内心确实希望为天下谋利，为天下除害，面对 有命 论者的话，不可不努力批驳它。
English: Therefore, Mozi said, "Nowadays, every scholar and gentleman in the world sincerely hopes to benefit the world and eliminate harm for the world. Faced with the words of the vitalists, we must strive to refute them.

古文：曰：命者，暴王所作，穷人所术，非仁者之言也。
现代文：说道：命，是暴君所捏造，穷人所传播，不是仁人的话。
English: He said: "Life is a lie invented by tyrants and spread by paupers, not the words of a benevolent man."

古文：今之为仁义者，将不可不察而强非者，此也。
现代文：今天行仁义之道的人，将不可不仔细辨别而努力反对它，就是这个道理啊。
English: It is for this reason that those who practice the way of benevolence and righteousness today must carefully discern and strive to oppose it.

