古文：二十四日晨餐后，仍渡西南门大溪候车夫，久之发，已上午矣。
现代文：二十四日早餐后，仍然渡过西南门外的大溪等候车夫，许久后才出发，已经上午了。
English: After breakfast on the twenty-fourth day, I was still waiting for the coachman to cross the stream outside the southwest gate. It was a long time before we set off, and it was already morning.

古文：南十里，新田铺。
现代文：往南十里，到新田铺。
English: Ten miles to the south, to Shinden Shop.

古文：其处山势渐开，正在西华山之南，回望诸岩突兀，俱并成一山，只有高下，无复剖裂之痕矣。
现代文：那里山势渐渐开阔，正处西华山的南面，回首望去，众岩突兀，全都连成了一座山，只有高低的差别，不再有破裂分开的痕印了。
English: There, the mountain gradually opens up. It is just south of Xihua Mountain. Looking back, the jagged rocks are all connected into one mountain, with only the difference between high and low. There are no longer any traces of rupture and separation.

古文：又十里，饭于联桂铺。
现代文：又行十里，在联桂铺吃饭。
English: Travel another ten miles and have dinner at Lian Guipu.

古文：又二十里，过马鞍山为横石铺，于是复入山谷。
现代文：又走二十里，过了马鞍山为横石铺，从横石铺后又进入山谷中。
English: Another twenty-mile walk, past Ma'anshan for the cross-stone pavement, and from the cross-stone pavement into the valley.

古文：又四里，逾一岭，下宿于申命地。
现代文：又走四里，翻越一座山岭，下了岭投宿在申命地。
English: They walked another four miles, climbed over a mountain ridge, and camped down the ridge in the land of their forefathers.

古文：其地南对应天山，为张真人上清宫入山始境，其曰 申命 者，正对 应天 而言也。
现代文：那地方南面对着应天山，是进山到张真人上清宫去的起始处，它之所以叫 申命 ，正是相对于 应天 而言的。
English: That place faces Ying Tian Shan to the south, and it is the starting point for going into the mountains to Zhang Zhenren's Shangqing Palace. The reason why it is called "De Mandate" is because it is relative to Ying Tian Shan.

古文：是夜，逆旅主人乌姓为余言： 此南去上清二十五里，而西去仙岩只二十里，若既至上清而去仙岩，亦二十里。
现代文：这天夜里，姓乌的旅店主人告诉我： 这里南面到上清宫二十五里，而西面到仙岩只有二十里，假若到上清宫后再去仙岩，也有二十里。
English: That night, the innkeeper surnamed Wu told me: To the south of here, it is 25 miles to Shangqing Palace, while to the west, it is only 20 miles to Xianyan, and if you go to Xianyan after going to Shangqing Palace, it is also 20 miles.

古文：不若即由此向仙岩而后上清也。 
现代文：不如就从这里前往仙岩然后再去上清宫。 
English: It would be better to go from here to Xianyan and then to Shangqing Palace.

古文：余善之，遂定计，明日分静闻同车一辆待我于上清，余以轻囊同顾仆西从间道向仙岩。
现代文：我很赞同他说的，于是定下计划，明天让静闻坐一辆车到上清宫等我，我和顾仆轻装向西从小路到仙岩。
English: I agree with what he said, so I set a plan. Tomorrow, I'll have Jing Wen take a car to Shangqing Palace to wait for me. I'll go west from the small road to Xianyan with Gu Min.

古文：主人复言： 仙岩之西十五里有马祖岩。
现代文：旅店主人又说： 仙岩西面十五里有个马祖岩。
English: The innkeeper also said: There is a Matsu Rock fifteen miles west of Senan Rock.

古文：在安仁界。其岩甚胜，但先趋仙岩亦复稍迂，不若竟竟，直接赴马祖，转而东，由仙岩、龙虎以尽上清为最便。 
现代文：马祖岩景致极佳，假若先奔赴仙岩后又到马祖岩也同样略有些迂曲，不如直接到马祖岩去，然后折向东，由仙岩、龙虎岩最后游览上清宫最为方便。 
English: The scenery of Matsuyama Rock is excellent. If you go to Matsuyama Rock first and then go to Matsuyama Rock, it is also a little roundabout. It is better to go directly to Matsuyama Rock, and then turn to the east. From Matsuyama Rock and Longhu Rock, it is most convenient to finally visit Shangqing Palace.

古文：余益善之。
现代文：我更加赞同这个建议。
English: I am all the more in favour of this proposal.

古文：二十五日平明，饭而发。
现代文：二十五日天大亮时，吃了饭就出发。
English: At dawn on the twenty-fifth day, they ate dinner and set out.

古文：雨丝丝下，不为止。遂别静闻，彼驱而南，余趋而西。
现代文：满天潦檬细雨，一直不停。告别了静闻，他往南行，我朝西走。
English: It rained lemons all day, non-stop. After saying goodbye to Jinghan, he headed south and I headed west.

古文：四里，至章源。
现代文：四里，到章源。
English: Four miles to Zhangyuan.

古文：四里，过一小岭，至桃源。
现代文：又走四里，翻过一座小山岭，到桃源。
English: I walked another four miles, over a small mountain ridge, to Taoyuan.

古文：又过一小岭，二里至石底。
现代文：又翻过一座小山岭，走二里到石底。
English: He also climbed over a small mountain and walked two miles to the bottom of the rock.

古文：过水二重，俱有桥，三里，至连塘。
现代文：渡过两条水流，水流上都架有桥，走三里，到连塘。
English: Crossed two streams, both with bridges over them, walked three miles to Liantang.

古文：过一小岭。二里，过一桥。
现代文：翻过一座小山岭，走二里，越过一座桥。
English: Over a small mountain, walk two miles, cross a bridge.

古文：又二里，铁垆坂。
现代文：又走二里，到铁沪板。
English: Walk another two miles to the railway station.

古文：又三里，过香炉峰。
现代文：又走三里，过香炉峰。
English: Walk another three miles and pass the incense stove peak.

古文：其峰回亘三叠，南面直剖而下，中有一凹，结佛庐于上。
现代文：这座山峰呈三层旋绕，南面从上直往下破裂开，中间有一块凹下去的地方，上面构筑了僧人的小屋。
English: The peak is a three-tiered spiral, with the south face cracked from top to bottom, and a depression in the middle with a monk's hut built on top.

古文：时雨大作，竟不及登。
现代文：当时雨下得很太，竟然没能攀登。
English: At that time, it was raining so hard that I couldn't even climb.

古文：香炉峰西即为安仁东界，于是又涉饶州境矣。
现代文：香炉峰的西面就是安仁县东界，从这里起又步入饶州府境内了。
English: The west side of the Incense Burner Peak is the eastern boundary of Anren County, and from here it enters the territory of Rao Prefecture.

古文：三里，简堂源。
现代文：走三里，到简堂摄。
English: Walk three miles and take a photo at Jiantang.

古文：过一里，雨狂甚，衣内外淋漓。三里，过新岩脚，而不知岩之在上也。从其东峡穿而北入，见其西崖下俱有横亘之岩，飞瀑交洒于上，心知已误，因避雨岩间，剖橘柚为午餐。
现代文：走一里，雨下得很猛，内外衣服都被淋透子，又走三里，经过新岩脚，然而不知道岩就在路上面、从新岩东面的山峡往北穿越，见此岩西面的崖壁下都是横亘的岩石，岩石上飞瀑交洒，心想已经走错了路，于是到岩石间去避雨，并剥开橘子、袖子当午餐吃。
English: After walking one mile, it rained very hard, and my clothes were soaked inside and out. I walked another three miles, passing through the foot of the new rock. However, I did not know that the rock was on the road, crossing north from the canyon east of the new rock. I saw that under the cliff wall on the west side of this rock were wide rocks, and waterfalls were sprinkled on the rocks. I thought I had taken the wrong path, so I went to the rocks to avoid the rain, and peeled oranges and sleeves to eat for lunch.

古文：已而令顾仆先探其北，不见影响既看不到又听不到。复还探其南，见南崖有户掩竹间，以为是无误矣，亟出而趋其上。
现代文：旋即叫顾仆先到岩北面探寻，但没有任何清息。他冬回往南面探寻，见到南面山崖间有户人家掩映在竹丛中，我以为那是马祖岩无误了，赶忙走出避雨的地方登上山崖。
English: Gu immediately called his servant to explore the northern side of the rock first, but there was no respite. He went back to the south in winter to explore, and saw a house hidden in the bamboo bushes between the cliffs on the south side. I thought it was Matsuyama Rock, and hurried out of the shelter to climb the cliff.

古文：岩虽高敞，盘亘山半，然石粗窍直，无宛转玲珑之致。
现代文：那岩洞虽然高而宽敞，盘亘在半山间，然而石质粗糙，洞穴平直，缺少曲折玲珑的意态。
English: Although the cave is high and spacious, it is located in the middle of the mountain. However, the stone is rough, the cave is flat, and it lacks twists and turns.

古文：时已知其为新岩，非旧岩也，且岩僧虽具餐，观其意惟恐客不去，余遂亟出，趋下山。
现代文：这时已经弄清它是新岩，不是旧岩，并且看出居住在岩洞间的僧人虽然备了餐，但又唯恐客人不离开的样子，于是我们赶忙出了岩洞，迅速奔下山。
English: By this time it was clear that it was a new rock, not an old rock, and we saw that although the monks living in the cave had prepared a meal, they were afraid that the guests would not leave, so we hurried out of the cave and quickly ran down the mountain.

古文：又踯躅雨中，西一里，转而北入山峡。
现代文：又在雨中时走时停地往西行一里，折往北进入山峡中。
English: Again, in the rain, I walked one mile to the west and turned north into the canyon.

古文：峡口巨石磊落，高下盘峙，深树古藤，笼罩其上，甚有雅致。由峡而入，其崖东西并峙，北连南豁，豁处即峡口，而连处其底也。
现代文：山峡入口处众多大石头杂沓地堆叠着，自高处到低处盘结耸立，深树古藤笼罩在上面，很是雅致，由峡口进去，东西两边崖壁对峙，山峡的北端山崖连接而南端敞开，敞开处就是峡口，而山崖连接处是峡底。
English: At the entrance of the canyon, many large stones are stacked in a jumble. From high to low, they are coiled and towering. Deep old vines shroud them. It is very elegant. You enter the canyon from the mouth, and the cliff walls face each other from east to west. The northern end of the canyon is connected to the cliff, while the southern end is open. The open area is the mouth of the canyon, and the place where the cliffs connect is the bottom of the canyon.

古文：马祖岩在左崖之半，其横裂一窍亦大约如新岩，而僧分两房，其狗窦猪栏，牛宫马栈，填塞更满。
现代文：马祖岩在左边山崖的半山腰，即新岩的反背。崖壁间横向裂开一个洞，也大略如同新岩的那个洞一样，僧人分住在两间房子中，岩洞中狗窝、猪栏、牛圈、马棚，填塞得满满的。
English: Matsuyama is halfway up the cliff on the left, i.e. the back of the new rock. Between the cliff walls there is a hole that splits horizontally. It is roughly the same as the hole in the new rock. The monks live in two houses, and the cave is full of dog kennels, pig pens, cattle pens, and horse stables.

古文：余由峡底登岩南上，时雨未已，由岩下行，玉溜交舞于外，玉帘环映于前，仰视重岩叠窦之上，栏栅连空，以为妙极。
现代文：我从峡底往南向上攀登此岩，当时雨未停止，从岩下行走，洁玉般的水流交相飞舞在岩外，洁玉般的水帘环绕辉映在眼前，仰视重叠的岩洞上面，栅栏飞架在空中，以为必定美妙至极。
English: I climbed this rock from the bottom of the gorge to the south, when the rain did not stop, walking under the rock, the jade-like water flow intersected and danced outside the rock, the jade-like water curtain around the glow was reflected in front of me, looking up at the overlapping rock caves, the fence flying frame in the air, I thought it must be wonderful.

古文：及登之，则秽臭不可向迩接近，皆其畜埘í窝之所，而容身之地，面墙环堵，黑暗如狱矣。
现代文：等登上去，却坑脏腐臭得不可接近，几乎都是些牛马猪鸡的栖息处所，而人居住的地方，狭小简陋，黑暗得如同地狱。
English: After climbing up, however, the pits are so dirty and rancid that they are inaccessible. They are almost all habitats for cattle, horses, pigs, and chickens, while the places where people live are small, simple, and dark as hell.

古文：时余衣甚湿，日且就昏，其南房方聚众作法法事，拒客不纳，北房亦尤而效之，求一卧不可得。
现代文：当时我衣服很湿，而且天将要黑下来，岩洞南边的房子中正汇集众人作法术，拒绝接纳客人，北边的房子也是一样，要找一个躺卧的地方都不可能。
English: My clothes were wet and it was getting dark, and the house on the south side of the cave was full of people doing spells and refusing to receive guests, as was the house on the north side, and it was impossible to find a place to lie down.

古文：彷徨既久，寒冽殊甚，强索卧石龛之间。
现代文：徘徊了许久，寒冷得要命，硬是要了一个石完躺卧在其间。
English: I wandered around for a long time, it was freezing cold, and I ended up lying on a rock.

古文：令僮以所赍ī携带米具就炊，始辞无薪，既以细米易，而成粥竟不见粒米也。
现代文：叫童仆用随身带来的米和炊具去生火做饭，僧人先是推辞说没有柴禾，后又用细米换了我们的米，而煮成粥后竟然见不到一颗米粒！
English: The boy servant was asked to use the rice and cooking utensils he had brought with him to light a fire to cook. The monk first said that there was no firewood, and then he replaced our rice with thin rice. After cooking it into porridge, there was not a single grain of rice to be seen!

古文：二十六日平明起，再以米炊，彼仍以细米易，姑餐而即行。
现代文：二十六日天大亮时起来，又拿米做饭，那僧人仍用细米调换、我们将就着吃了些就出发。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, we got up at dawn, and again took rice to cook. The monk still replaced it with thin rice, and we ate some and set off.

古文：仍从北连处下，令顾仆先出峡门之口，余独转上西崖。
现代文：仍然从山峡北端时山崖连接处下来，我让顾仆先走出峡门口，自己一个人转往西登上山崖。
English: Still descending from the mountain cliff junction at the northern end of the canyon, I let my companion go out of the canyon entrance first, and I went west to climb the cliff by myself.

古文：其岩亦横裂如马祖，而无其深，然亦无其填塞诸秽趣也。
现代文：岩洞也如马祖岩一样横向裂开，但没有马祖岩深，不过也没有马祖岩那样各种污秽之物到处填塞的情景。
English: The cave is also split horizontally like Matsuyama Rock, but there is no Matsuyama Rock depth, but there is no scene of all kinds of filth filling up everywhere like Matsuyama Rock.

古文：从岩畔直趋而南，路断处辄为开凿，既竭走完岩端，忽有洞透峡而出。
现代文：我从岩洞边一直奔向南面，路断绝的地方崖壁被凿开，到了岩的边缘处，崖壁高峻陡直，不可往下俯瞰，忽然有个洞贯通山峡显露出来。
English: I ran from the edge of the cave all the way to the south. Where the road was cut off, the cliff wall was chiseled away. When I reached the edge of the rock, the cliff was so high and steep that I couldn't look down. Suddenly, a hole through the canyon was revealed.

古文：既越洞西，遂分两道，一道循崖而北，一道循崖而南，两崖并夹，遂成一线。
现代文：越过那洞的西面后，路便分成两条， 条顺山崖往北去，一条顺山崖往南去，两边崖壁夹峙，中间便形成了一条线。
English: After crossing the west face of the cave, the road splits into two, one going north along the cliff, one going south along the cliff, with cliff walls on both sides, and a line formed in the middle.

古文：线中东崖之下，复裂为岩，亦横如马祖，而清净幽渺，忽有霄壤之异。
现代文：那条线中间的东边崖壁下面，又破裂开形成岩洞，它也如马祖岩一样呈横向，然而清新洁净，深邃幽远，我忽然觉得两者间有天壤之别。
English: Below the cliff on the eastern side of the middle of the line, it broke open again to form a cave, which was also transverse like Matsu Rock, but fresh and clean, deep and remote, I suddenly felt that there was a world of difference between the two.

古文：岩外之崖，与对崖俱下坠百仞，上插千尺，俱不合如咫，而中亦横裂，邃幽深若重楼。
现代文：岩洞外面的崖壁与对面的崖壁，都下坠百丈，上插千尺，两边相隔仅有咫尺，而且都是横向裂开，如重重高楼一样深邃。
English: The cliff wall outside the cave and the cliff wall on the opposite side, both fall down hundreds of feet, insert a thousand feet, the two sides are only a few feet apart, and they are all horizontally cracked, as deep as high-rise buildings.

古文：惟极北则豁然，以为可通外境，而豁处天光既辟，地险弥悬，削崖穹壁，莫可下上，洵实在是自然之幽阻，非所称别有天地者耶？
现代文：只有最北面很开阔，我以为可以通往外面的地方，但那敞开处虽然露出天空的光明，地势却更加高峻险要，陡峭弯隆的崖壁，不可下走和上攀，实在是大自然中非常僻静险要的一处地方，而这不就是所说的 别有洞天 的那种地方吗？
English: Only the northernmost part is wide open, and I thought I could get to the outside, but that open space, although it reveals the light of the sky, has a higher and more dangerous terrain. Steep and curved cliffs, impossible to go down and climb, are really a very secluded and dangerous place in nature. And isn't this the kind of place that is said to have a hole in the sky?

古文：复还至洞门分道处，仰其上层，飞石平出，可以上登而又高无可攀。
现代文：又回到洞门口分路处，仰头观看洞的上层，凌空飞突的岩石平平地伸出去，人可以站立到上面而又因太高无法攀援。
English: I returned to the fork in the road at the entrance of the cave and looked up to see the upper level of the cave. The flying rock stretched out flatly, and one could stand on it, but it was too high to climb for help.

古文：从其南道转峰侧而上，则飞阁高悬，莫可攀跻，另辟一境矣。
现代文：我从洞南边的路转到山峰侧面往上爬，飞阁高悬，不可攀登，另外形成了一块天地。
English: I turned from the road on the south side of the cave to the side of the mountain and climbed up. The flying pavilion was high and could not be climbed, forming another piece of heaven and earth.

古文：时顾仆候余峡下已久，乃穿透腹之洞，仍东出崖端，欲觅道下峡口，不可得；循旧沿崖抵北连处下，则顾仆见余久不出，复疾呼而至矣。
现代文：当时顾仆已经在山峡下边等了我许久，于是穿过那个贯通山崖内部的洞，仍然往东到了山崖边缘，想寻找道路下到峡口，然而没有找到路；顺来时的路沿山崖抵达北端山崖连接处时，顾仆见我许久未走出山峡，又大声地连连呼喊着找了过来。
English: At that time, Gu Min already waited for me for a long time at the bottom of the canyon, so he went through the hole that runs through the inside of the cliff and still went east to the edge of the cliff. He wanted to find a way down to the mouth of the canyon, but he did not find a way. When he reached the northern cliff junction along the cliff, Gu Min saw that I had not been out of the canyon for a long time, and shouted loudly to find me.

古文：遂与同出峡口，东南四里，过南吉岭。
现代文：于是和顾仆一同出了峡口，往东南走四里，经过南吉岭。
English: So he and his servant went out of the gorge and walked four miles southeast, passing through Nanjiling.

古文：遥望东面乱山横翠，骈耸其北者，为排衙石，最高；斜突其南者，为仙岩，最秀；而近瞰岭下，一石尖插平畴，四面削起者，为碣石，最峭。
现代文：遥望岭东面，乱山横翠，那并列耸立在北面的，是排衙石，它最为高峻，那倾斜突立在南面的，是仙岩，最为秀丽；而从近处俯瞰岭下，那尖峭地插立在平坦的田块中，四面笔直向上耸起的，是喝石，最为峻峭。
English: To the east of Dangwang Ridge, the mountains are green and jagged. The one that stands side by side to the north is the highest, the one that leans out to the south is the most beautiful, and the one that stands in the middle of the flat fields and rises straight up on all sides is the steepest.

古文：下岭，即见大溪自东而来，直逼岭脚，乃从溪北溯溪，东南四里，至碣石下。
现代文：走下南吉岭，就看见一条大溪从东面流来，直逼岭脚孟这条溪发源于沪溪县，经过上清街往下流。于是从溪北岸溯溪流，向东南走四里，到达竭石下面。
English: Walking down Nanjiling, I saw a large stream flowing from the east, reaching the foot of the mountain. This stream originated in Hulunxi County and flowed down through Shangqing Street. So I traced the stream from the north bank of the stream and walked four miles southeast to reach the bottom of the stone.

古文：则其石仰望穹然，虽渐展而阔，然削立愈甚，有孤柱撑天之状。
现代文：仰望这块石头高大弯隆，虽然它向上逐渐伸展而变得宽阔，然而却更加陡直，显出孤柱撑天的态势。
English: Looking up at this tall, curving rock, although it gradually stretches upward and becomes wider, it is nevertheless steeper and straighter, showing the posture of a lone pillar holding up the sky.

古文：其下有碣石村，是为安仁东南界；渡溪南为沥水，山溪上居民数十家，于是复属贵溪矣。
现代文：它下面有个褐石村，此村在安仁县的东南边界；渡过溪往南走为沥水，这条山溪的岸上住着几十家居民，从这个村庄开始又属于贵溪县地。
English: There is a brownstone village below it, this village is on the southeast border of Anren County; crossing the stream to the south is asphalt, dozens of residents live on the shore of this mountain stream, and from this village it belongs to Guixi County.

古文：又东五里，直抵排衙石之西，是为渔搪。渔塘居民以造粗纸为业，其地东临大溪。
现代文：又往东走五里，直抵达排衙石的西面，这里是渔塘村，村中的居民以造粗纸为业，村子的东面濒临一条大溪。
English: Another five miles to the east and you will reach the west side of the rock formation. This is Yuetang village. The residents of the village are engaged in the manufacture of coarse paper. The east side of the village is bordered by a large stream.

古文：循溪西南行一里，为蔡坊渡，遂止宿焉。
现代文：顺大溪向西南行一里，为蔡坊渡，于是停下来投宿在这里。
English: Shun Daxi to the southwest for one mile, for Cai Fangduo, so stop and stay here.

古文：二十七日蔡坊渡溪东一里，龙虎观。
现代文：二十七日从蔡坊渡渡过溪水往东走一里，为龙虎观。
English: On the 27th, I walked one mile eastward from Caifang across the stream to watch the dragons and tigers.

古文：观后一里，水帘洞。
现代文：从观后走一里，为水帘洞。
English: Walk one mile from the observation post, and you will find the Water Curtain Cave.

古文：南出山五里，兰车渡。
现代文：往南出了山走五里，为兰车渡。
English: Go south out of the mountains and walk five miles to Lanceto.

古文：三里，南镇宫。
现代文：再走三里，为南镇宫。
English: Walk another three miles and you will reach the South Town Palace.

古文：北行东转一里，渡溪即上清街，其街甚长。
现代文：往北而后折向东走一里，渡过溪水便是上清街，那街道很长。
English: Walk north and then turn east for one mile, and cross the stream to Shangqing Street, which is a long street.

古文：东一里，真人府。
现代文：往东走一里，为真人府。
English: Go one mile to the east, and you'll come to Zhenrenfu.

古文：南渡溪五里，越一岭，曰胡墅。
现代文：往南渡过溪水走五里，翻越一座山岭，那岭叫胡墅岭。
English: Go five miles to the south across the stream and climb over a mountain ridge. That ridge is called Hu Xiu Ling.

古文：西南七里，曰石冈山，金谿县东界也，是入抚州境。
现代文：往西南走七里，叫石冈山，它是金勤县的东界，从这里便进入了抚州府境内。
English: Seven miles to the southwest is called Shigang Mountain, which is the eastern border of Jinqin County. From here, it entered the territory of Fuzhou Prefecture.

古文：又三里曰淳塘，又五里曰孔坊，俱江姓，宿。
现代文：又走三里叫淳塘，又走五里叫孔坊，村中居民都姓江，这天就投宿在这里。
English: They walked another three miles to Chuntang, and another five miles to Kongfang. The residents of the village are all surnamed Jiang, and they stayed here that day.

古文：二十八日由孔坊三里，郑陀岭。
现代文：二十八日从孔坊走三里，为郑陀岭。
English: On the 28th, I walked three miles from Kongfang to reach Zhengduoling.

古文：七里，连洋铺。
现代文：七里为连洋铺。
English: Seven miles is a long distance.

古文：十里，葛坊。
现代文：十里为葛坊。
English: Ten li to Gefang.

古文：十里，青田铺。
现代文：十里为青由铺。
English: Ten miles is a long way from the shop.

古文：有石梁水，出邓埠。
现代文：十里为茅田，这里就是到抚州府的路。
English: Ten miles away is Yata, and here is the road to Fuzhou.

古文：十里，茅田，即往抚州道。下一岭为五里桥，水始西向许湾桥，南有庵，旁有阁，为迎送之所。
现代文：下一座岭为五里桥，从此处起水才向西流往许湾，桥南有座庵，庵旁边有个阁，是人们迎来送往的场所。
English: The next ridge is Wuli Bridge. From here, the water flows westward to Xu Bay. There is a hermitage south of the bridge, and a pavilion next to the hermitage. It is a place where people are welcomed and sent.

古文：东南入金谿城。
现代文：再往东南走，进入金勤城。
English: Walk further south-east and enter Jinqin Town.

古文：城径二里，由东出西，其北门为抚州道。
现代文：城东西长两里，我们由东往西走出城，城北门是到抚州府去的路。
English: The city is two miles long from east to west. We walked out of the city from east to west. The north gate of the city is the road to Fuzhou.

古文：城外东北为黄尖岭，即出金处，《志》所称金窟山。
现代文：城外东北面为黄尖岭，它就是出产金子的地方，志书上所称的金窟山。
English: To the northeast of the city is Huang Jianling, which is the place where gold is produced, known as the Golden Grotto Mountain in the history books.

古文：在城东五里。其西为茵陈岭，有冈西走，即五里北分水之冈矣。
现代文：黄尖岭的西面是茵陈岭，茵陈岭的一条山冈往西延伸，是五里桥北面的分水山冈。
English: To the west of Huang Jianling is Ying Chenling. A mountain range of Ying Chenling extends to the west. It is a watershed mountain range to the north of Wuli Bridge.

古文：自金窟、茵陈，北东南三面环城，所云 锦绣谷 也。
现代文：位于金窟山东南边、环绕在域南面的，叫朱干山。金窟山、茵陈岭从北、东、南三面环绕县城，就是所说的 锦绣谷 。
English: Located in the southeast of the Golden Grottoes and surrounded by the southern part of the region, it is called Zhugan Mountain. The Golden Grottoes and the Yin Chen Ridge surround the county seat from the north, east and south, which is the so-called Jinxiu Valley.

古文：惟西南少缺，小水沿朱干西去，而下许湾始胜舟云。
现代文：只有县城西南面略微缺开些，一条小水沿朱干山麓向西流去，流下许湾桥才能够航船。
English: Only when the southwest side of the county seat is slightly open, and a small stream of water flows westward along the foothills of Zhugan Mountain, flowing under the Xuwan Bridge, can the ship sail.

古文：朱于之南有山高耸，亦自东北绕而南，为刘阳寨、牟弥岭，其东为沪溪，西为金谿之大塘山，疑即《志》所称梅峰也。
现代文：朱干山的南面有山峰高高耸立，也是从东北绕往南面去，那是刘阳寨牟滁岭，它的东面为沪溪，西面是金黔县的大塘山，我怀疑就是志书上所称的梅峰。
English: On the south side of Zhugan Mountain, there are peaks towering high, and they also go from the northeast to the south. That is Liuyang Zhai Muxuanling. Its east side is Huxi, and its west side is Datang Mountain in Jinyuan County. I doubt that it is the Meifeng mentioned in the book.

古文：二十九日发自大塘。对大塘者，东为牟弥顶大山也。
现代文：二十九日从大塘出发。对着大塘的，东面是牟称顶大山。
English: On the 29th, we set out from Datang. Opposite Datang, to the east is Muxiaoding Mountain.

古文：南十里为南岳铺，又西南十里为贾源，又五里为清江源。
现代文：往南走十里为南岳铺，又往西南走十里为贾源，又走五里为清江源。
English: Ten miles to the south is Nan Yue Pu, another ten miles to the southwest is Jia Yuan, and another five miles is Qingjiang Yuan.

古文：沿江西南，五里为后车铺，饭。
现代文：沿江流往西南走，五里为后车铺，在那里吃扳。
English: Walk along the river to the south-west, five miles to the back car shop, where you can buy a wrench.

古文：又南十里为界山岭。
现代文：又往南十里为界山岭。
English: Another ten miles to the south is the border mountain range.

古文：一名韩婆寨。下岭二里，为沪溪分道。
现代文：下了岭走二里为到沪溪县和建昌府的分路处。
English: Two miles down the ridge is the junction to Huxi County and Jianchang Prefecture.

古文：又二里为大坪头，水始南流。又四里为横坂铺。五里，七星桥。
现代文：又走二里为大坪头，从这里水才流往南、又走四里为横坂铺扩又走五里为七星桥。
English: He walked another two miles to Dazhongtou, from where the water only flowed to the south, another four miles to Yoko-zaka Pavilions and another five miles to Qixing Bridge.

古文：又五里，潭树桥。
现代文：又走五里为潭树桥。
English: I walked another five miles to get to Tanshu Bridge.

古文：十里，梧桐隘。
现代文：再走十里为梧桐隘。
English: Wu Tong Tong is another ten miles away.

古文：揭阳无渡，到建昌东门宿。
现代文：揭阳没有渡口，到建昌府东门才投宿。
English: There is no ferry at Jieyang, so they had to stay at the east gate of Jianchang.

