古文：敬帝敬皇帝，讳方智，字慧相，小字法真，世祖第九子也。
现代文：敬皇帝名方智，字慧相，乳名法真，是世祖的第九个儿子。
English: To the emperor, his name was Fang Zhi, his nickname was Hui Xiang, and his given name was Fazhen. He was the ninth son of the founder.

古文：太清三年，封兴梁侯。
现代文：太清三年，封为兴梁侯。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, he was given the title of Xing Liang Hou.

古文：承圣元年，封晋安王，邑二千户。
现代文：承圣元年，封为晋安王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year after his ordination, he was given the title of King of Jinan, and his food village grew to 2,000 households.

古文：二年，出为平南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：承圣二年，出任平南将军、江州刺史。
English: In the second year after his ordination, he served as the general of Pingnan and the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：三年十一月，江陵陷，太尉扬州刺史王僧辩、司空南徐州刺史陈霸先定议，以帝为太宰、承制，奉迎还京师。
现代文：承圣三年十一月，江陵陷落，太尉扬州刺史王僧辩、司空南徐州刺史陈霸先商定，以敬皇帝为太宰，秉承皇帝旨意，奉迎敬帝返回京城。
English: In November of the third year of the Emperor's enthronement, when Gangneung fell, Yangzhou Lieutenant Yang Zhi Wang and Southern Xuzhou Lieutenant Chen Baxian agreed to honor the emperor as the grand vizier, uphold the emperor's will, and return to the capital in honor of the emperor.

古文：四年二月癸丑，至自寻阳，入居朝堂。
现代文：承圣四年二月二日，从寻阳入居朝堂。
English: On February 2nd, the fourth year of his consecration, he moved into the morning hall after seeking the sun.

古文：以太尉王僧辩为中书监、录尚书、骠骑将军、都督中外诸军事。加司空陈霸先班剑三十人。以豫州刺史侯瑱为江州刺史，仪同三司、湘州刺史萧循为太尉，仪同三司、广州刺史萧勃为司徒，镇东将军张彪为郢州刺史。
现代文：任太尉王僧辩为中书监、录尚书、骠骑将军、都督中外诸军事，加司空陈霸先班剑三十人，任豫州刺史侯王真为江州刺史，仪同三司；湘州刺史萧循为太尉，仪同三司；广州刺史萧勃为司徒；镇东将军张彪为郢州刺史。
English: First Lieutenant Wang Sangyan was appointed as the supervisor of the Chinese book, the record of the Chinese book, the general of the cavalry, the governor of the Chinese and foreign militaries, and the thirty-member squadron of the first squadron of the sword, the governor of Yuzhou, Prince Wang Zhen, was appointed as the governor of Jiangsu Province, and the third secretary of the Yizhong Province; the governor of Hunan Province, Xiao Xuan, was appointed as the first lieutenant of the Yizhong Province, and the third secretary of the Yizhong Province; the governor of Guangzhou, Xiao Bo, was appointed as the governor of Guangzhou Province; the governor of

古文：三月，齐遣其上党王高涣送贞阳侯萧渊明来主梁嗣，至东关，遣吴兴太守裴之横与战，败绩，之横死。
现代文：三月，齐派遣上党王高涣遣送贞阳侯萧渊明前来做梁的继承人，到达东关，派吴兴太守裴之横跟他作战，裴之横战败而死。
English: In March, Qi dispatched the upper party king Gao Wei to send Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming, the heir of Liang, to Dongguan, and sent Wu Xing Taishu Pei to fight alongside him. Pei was defeated and died.

古文：太尉王僧辩率众出屯姑孰。
现代文：太尉王僧辩率军驻扎在姑孰。
English: Captain Wang Sofen led the army stationed in Gushan.

古文：四月，司徒陆法和以郢州附于齐，遣江州刺史侯瑱讨之。
现代文：四月，司徒陆法和以郢州归附于齐，派遣江州刺史侯王真讨伐他。
English: In April, Sittulufo and Yanzhou were annexed together, and Wang Zhen, the governor of Jiangzhou, was dispatched to fight against him.

古文：七月辛丑，王僧辩纳贞阳侯萧渊明，自采石济江。
现代文：七月二十三日，王僧辩收容贞阳侯萧渊明，从采石渡江。
English: On July 23rd, Wang Sangye received Zhengyang Hou Xiao Yuanming and crossed the river from the quarry.

古文：甲辰，入于京师，以帝为皇太子。
现代文：二十六日，抵达京城，以敬帝为皇太子。
English: On the 26th, he arrived in the capital, taking Emperor Jing as his crown prince.

古文：九月甲辰，司空陈霸先举义，袭杀王僧辩，黜萧渊明。
现代文：九月二十七日，司空陈霸先仗义举兵，袭击并杀死王僧辩，废黜萧渊明。
English: On September 27th, Siku Chenba first raised an army to fight for justice, attacked and killed Wang Sangfei, and deposed Xiao Yuanming.

古文：丙午，帝即皇帝位。
现代文：二十九日，敬帝正式即皇帝位。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Kei was officially enthroned.

古文：绍泰元年冬十月己巳，诏曰： 王室不造，婴罹祸衅，西都失守，朝廷沦覆，先帝梓宫，播越非所，王基倾弛，率土罔戴。
现代文：绍泰元年冬十月二十二日，下诏： 王室处身失所，遭灾罹祸，西都失守，朝廷倾覆，先帝梓宫，流离失所，王基倾覆，国境之内，不加拥戴。
English: On the 22nd day of October in the winter of Shao Taiyuan, the following edict was issued: The royal family was displaced, suffered a disaster, the western capital was lost, the imperial court was overthrown, the former emperor Zi Gong was displaced, Wang Ji was overthrown, within the national borders, no support was given.

古文：朕以荒幼，仍属艰难，泣血枕戈，志复仇逆。
现代文：朕荒寥幼稚，处国运艰难之时，泣血枕戈，志在雪耻。
English: I am naïve and childish, and when the country is in a difficult situation, I cry and cry, and I am ashamed of the snow.

古文：大耻未雪，夙宵鲠愤。
现代文：大耻未雪，早晚鲠愤。
English: Great shame has not yet snowed, sooner or later there will be indignation.

古文：群公卿尹，勉以大义，越登寡暗，嗣奉洪业。
现代文：百官大臣，当以大义相勉励，使朕超越蒙昧，承继大业。
English: Ministers of all ranks, we should encourage each other with great righteousness, so that we can go beyond ignorance and succeed in our great cause.

古文：顾惟夙心，念不至此。
现代文：顾惟夙心，念不至此。
English: Gu Wei's heart was broken, and he could not bear to go on like this.

古文：庶仰凭先灵，傍资将相，克清元恶，谢冤陵寝。
现代文：仰凭先灵，依倚将相，克清首恶，谢冤陵寝。
English: Rely on the ancestors, rely on the generals, eliminate the evil, and thank the deceased.

古文：今坠命载新，宗祊更祀，庆流亿兆，岂予一人。
现代文：现今坠命戴新，宗礻方更祀，造福百姓，岂朕一人！
English: Nowadays, I am the only one who is willing to sacrifice my own life for the benefit of the people!

古文：可改承圣四年为绍泰元年，大赦天下，内外文武赐位一等。 
现代文：改承圣四年为绍泰元年，对全国已判罪犯减刑或免刑，内外文武大臣赐给爵位一等。 
English: The Fourth Year of Succession to the Throne was changed to the First Year of Shaotai, and the sentences of convicted criminals across the country were reduced or pardoned, and the Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Minister of Military Affairs were awarded the first class of peerage.

古文：以贞阳侯渊明为司徒，封建安郡公，食邑三千户。
现代文：任贞阳侯渊明为司徒，封为建安郡公，食邑三千户。
English: Zhengyang Hou Yuanming was appointed as a magistrate and given the title of Jian'an County official, with 3,000 households in the county.

古文：壬子，以司空陈霸先为尚书令、都督中外诸军事、车骑将军、扬、南徐二州刺史司空如故。
现代文：五日，任司空陈霸先为尚书令、都督中外诸军事、车骑将军、扬、南徐二州刺史，司空仍旧。
English: On the fifth day, Chen Baxian, the first to be appointed as the Secretary of the Air Force, was appointed as the Secretary of the Air Force, and the military, cavalry generals, Yang, and Nan Xu of the two states were appointed as the governors. The Air Force is still.

古文：震州刺史杜龛举兵，攻信武将军陈蒨于长城，义兴太守韦载据郡以应之。
现代文：震州刺史杜龛起兵，在长城攻打信武将军，义兴太守韦载倚郡接应。
English: Zhenzhou sent troops to attack General Nobutake at the Great Wall, and the governor of Yixing, Wei Zhaoyi County, responded.

古文：癸丑，进太尉萧循为太保，新除司徒建安公渊明为太傅，司徒萧勃为太尉。
现代文：六日，进太尉萧循为太保，新封的司徒建安公渊明为太傅，司徒萧勃为太尉。
English: On the 6th day, the newly promoted captain Xiao Xun was promoted to the position of Tai Bao, the newly appointed Siu Jian An Gong Yuan was promoted to the position of Taifu, and Siu Xiao Bo was promoted to the position of Taifu.

古文：以镇南将军王琳为车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：任镇南将军王琳为车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Zhenan general Wang Lin was appointed as the general of chariot and cavalry, and Kaifu ceremony and three departments were established.

古文：戊午，尊所生夏贵妃为皇太后。立妃王氏为皇后。
现代文：十一日，尊母夏贵妃为皇太后，立王妃为皇后。
English: On the 11th day of the month, His Imperial Highness Crown Princess Xia Guifei became the empress dowager, and the crown princess became the empress.

古文：镇东将军、扬州刺史张彪进号征东大将军。
现代文：镇东将军、扬州刺史张彪晋号征东大将军。
English: Zhendong general, Yangzhou chief Zhang Biao Jin became the general of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：镇北将军、谯秦二州刺史徐嗣徽进号征北大将军。
现代文：镇北将军、谯、秦二州刺史徐嗣徽晋号征北大将军。
English: Zhenbei General, Zhai, Qin Erzhou, Zhi Shi, Xu Shi, Hui Jin were the generals of the Northern Expedition.

古文：征南将军、南豫州刺史任约进号征南大将军。
现代文：征南将军、南豫州刺史任约晋号征南大将军。
English: General of the Southern Expedition, General of the Southern Expedition, General of the Southern Expedition, General of the Southern Expedition.

古文：辛未，诏司空陈霸先东讨韦载。
现代文：二十四日，诏令司空陈霸先向东讨伐韦载。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the emperor ordered Siku Chenba to go to the east to fight against Wei Zai.

古文：丙子，任约、徐嗣徽举兵反，乘京师无备，窃据石头。
现代文：二十九日，任约、徐嗣徽起兵叛乱，乘着京城没有设防，暗中占据石头城。
English: On the 29th, Ren Ying and Xu Zhihui rebelled, taking advantage of the fact that the capital was not fortified, and secretly occupied Stone Town.

古文：丁丑，韦载降，义兴平。
现代文：三十日，韦载投降，义兴安定下来。
English: On the 30th, Wei Zai surrendered, and Yixing settled down.

古文：遣晋陵太守周文育率军援长城。
现代文：派遣晋陵太守周文育率军增援长城。
English: The governor of Jinling, Zhou Wenyu, sent troops to reinforce the Great Wall.

古文：十一月庚辰，齐安州刺史翟子崇、楚州刺史刘仕荣、淮州刺史柳达摩率众赴任约，入于石头。
现代文：十一月三日，齐安州刺史翟子崇、楚州刺史刘仕荣、淮州刺史柳达摩率部投奔任约，抵达石头。
English: On November 3rd, Zhi Zi Chong from Qianzhou, Liu Shirong from Chuzhou, and Liu Damo from Huaizhou arrived at the stone.

古文：庚寅，司空陈霸先旋于京师。
现代文：十三日，司空陈霸先回到京城。
English: On the 13th, Siku Chenba first returned to Beijing.

古文：十二月庚戌，徐嗣徽、任约又相率至采石，迎齐援。
现代文：十二月四日，徐嗣徽、任约又先后到达采石，迎接齐的援军。
English: On December 4, Xu Shihui and Ren You arrived at the quarry one after another to welcome Qi's reinforcements.

古文：丙辰，遣猛烈将军侯安都水军于江宁邀之，贼众大溃，嗣徽、约等奔于江西。
现代文：十日，派遣猛烈将军侯安都水军在江宁半路拦截，贼军大败，徐嗣徽、任约等败逃到江西。
English: On the 10th, they dispatched the fierce general Hou Andu's navy to intercept in the middle of Jiangning Road. The thief army was defeated, and Xu Shihui, Ren You and others fled to Jiangxi in defeat.

古文：庚申，翟子崇等请降，并放还北。
现代文：十四日，翟子崇等请求投降，并放其回到北方。
English: On the 14th, Zou Zizong and others requested surrender and were allowed to return to the north.

古文：太平元年春正月戊寅，大赦天下，其与任约、徐嗣徽协契同谋，一无所问。
现代文：太平元年春正月初二，对全国已判罪犯减刑或免刑，与任约、徐嗣徽同谋的事，一律不予追究。
English: On the second day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Taiping era, all convicted criminals across the country who had their sentences reduced or were pardoned, and who had conspired with Ren Jiao and Xu Shihui, would not be investigated.

古文：追赠简文皇帝诸子。
现代文：给简文皇帝诸儿子追加官职。
English: Emperor Jianwen's sons were given additional official posts.

古文：以故永安侯确子后袭封邵陵王，奉携王后。
现代文：以已故永安侯确的后代袭封邵陵王，奉携王后。
English: The descendants of the late Yongan Houzhen succeed to the throne of Shao Ling Wang and take the queen with them.

古文：癸未，镇东将军、震州刺史杜龛降，诏赐死，曲赦吴兴郡。
现代文：七日，镇东将军、震州刺史杜龛投降，诏令赐以死罪，特赦吴兴郡。
English: On the seventh day, Zhendong General and Zhenzhou Zhishi Duyuan surrendered, and the death penalty was given by imperial decree, and Wu Xing County was pardoned.

古文：己亥，以太保、宜豊侯萧循袭封鄱阳王。
现代文：二十三日，以太保、宜丰侯萧循袭封鄱阳王。
English: On the 23rd, the Tai Po and Yifeng princes Xiao Cun attacked and captured the King of Shenyang.

古文：东扬州刺史张彪围临海太守王怀振于剡岩。
现代文：东扬州刺史张彪在剡岩包围临海太守王怀振。
English: Zhang Biao, the statesman of East Yangzhou, encircled Wang Huizhen, the governor of Linhai, in Shanyan.

古文：二月庚戌，遣周文育、陈茜袭会稽，讨彪。
现代文：二月五日，派遣周文育、陈袭击会稽，讨伐张彪。
English: On February 5th, Zhou Wenyu and Chen were dispatched to attack Zhang Biao.

古文：癸丑，彪长史谢岐、司马沈泰、军主吴宝真等举城降，彪败走。
现代文：八日，张彪的长史谢岐、司马沈泰、君主吴宝真等全城投降，张彪败逃。
English: On the eighth day, Zhang Biao's Long Shi Xieqi, Sima Shentai, the monarch Wu Baozhen and the whole city surrendered, and Zhang Biao was defeated and fled.

古文：以中卫将军临川王大款即本号开府仪同三司，中护军桂阳王大成为护军将军。
现代文：以中卫将军临川王大款即本号开府仪同三司，中护军桂阳王大成为护军将军。
English: With the middle guard general Lin Chuan Wang Da-song, that is, this issue's Kaifu ceremony with three divisions, the middle guard army Guiyang Wang Da-song became the guard general.

古文：丙辰，若耶村人斩张彪，传首京师，曲赦东扬州。
现代文：十一日，若耶村人杀死张彪，将他的头送到京城，特赦东扬州。
English: On the 11th day of the month, villagers in Ruye killed Zhang Biao, sent his head to Beijing, and granted amnesty to Dongyangzhou.

古文：己未，罢震州，还复吴兴郡。癸亥，贼徐嗣徽、任约袭采石戍，执戍主明州刺史张怀钧，入于齐。
现代文：十四日，废震州，仍称吴兴郡，十八日，贼徐嗣徽、任约袭击采石戍，拘捕戍主明州刺史张怀钧，到达齐。
English: On the 14th, the abandoned Zhenzhou was still called Wuxing County, and on the 18th, the thieves Xu Shihui and Ren Ying attacked the quarry and arrested the quarry owner, Zhang Huaiya, and arrived in Qi.

古文：甲子，以东土经杜龛、张彪抄暴，遣大使巡省。
现代文：十九日，因国境东部被杜龛、张彪掠取、欺凌，派遣大使巡视。
English: On the 19th, because the eastern part of the border was plundered and bullied by Du Xi and Zhang Biao, an ambassador was sent to inspect.

古文：三月丙子，罢东扬州，还复会稽郡。
现代文：三月一日，废东扬州，仍称会稽郡。
English: On March 1st, the former East Yangzhou was still called Heji County.

古文：壬午，班下远近并杂用古今钱。
现代文：七日，颁令各国各地杂用古今钱币。
English: On the 7th, an order was issued to issue miscellaneous old and new coins in various regions of various countries.

古文：戊戌，齐遣大将萧轨出栅口，向梁山，司空陈霸先、军主黄逆击，大破之。
现代文：二十三日，齐派遣大将萧轨从栅口向梁山方向进发，司空陈霸先军主黄反击，大破萧轨军。
English: On the 23rd, Qi dispatched General Xiao Rail from the gate to the direction of Liangshan. Huang, the leader of Chen Baxian's army, counterattacked and defeated Xiao Rail's army.

古文：轨退保芜湖。
现代文：萧轨败退，退守芜湖。
English: Xiaozhu defeated and retreated, retreated to Wuhu.

古文：遣周文育、侯安都众军，据梁山拒之。
现代文：派遣周文育、侯安都诸部依倚梁山，进行抵御。
English: Zhou Benyu and Hou Andu were dispatched to the provinces to rely on Liangshan to resist.

古文：夏四月丁巳，司空陈霸先表诣梁山抚巡将帅。
现代文：夏四月十三日，司空陈霸先上奏皇上到梁山安抚将帅。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, Siku Chenba went to Liangshan to appease the commander-in-chief.

古文：壬申，侯安都轻兵袭齐行台司马恭于历阳，大破之，俘获万计。
现代文：二十八日，侯安都率快捷部队在历阳袭击齐行台司马恭，大破敌军，俘虏数以万计。
English: On the 28th, Hou Andu led the Kuaicheng troops to attack the Taishi Magong in Liyang, defeating the enemy army and taking tens of thousands of prisoners.

古文：五月癸未，太傅建安公渊明薨。
现代文：五月九日，太傅建安公渊明去世。
English: On May 9, Tai Fu Jian An Gong Yuanming passed away.

古文：庚寅，齐军水步入丹阳县。
现代文：十六日齐军水步兵进入丹阳县。
English: On the 16th, the naval infantry of the Qi Army entered Danyang County.

古文：丙申，至秣陵故冶。
现代文：二十二日，抵达秣陵旧治。
English: On the 22nd, he arrived in Fuling Old Town.

古文：敕周文育还顿方丘，徐度顿马牧，杜棱顿大桁。
现代文：诏令周文育还驻方丘，徐度驻军马牧，杜陵驻军大桁。
English: The edict ordered Zhou Wenyu to be stationed in Fangqiu, Xu Du to be stationed in Ma Mu, and Du Ling to be stationed in Dadian.

古文：癸卯，齐军进据儿塘，舆驾出顿赵建故篱门，内外纂严。
现代文：二十九日，齐军进据儿塘，舆驾出顿赵建旧篱门，内外戒严。
English: On the 29th, the Qi army entered Zhitang, the Ming drove out Dong Zhao and built the old fence, and martial law was imposed at home and abroad.

古文：六月甲辰，齐潜军至蒋山龙尾，斜趋莫府山北，至玄武庙西北。
现代文：六月一日，齐秘密出兵至蒋山龙尾，斜奔莫府山北，抵达玄武湖西北。
English: On June 1, Qi secretly dispatched troops to Jiangshan Longwei, ran diagonally to the north of Mofu Mountain, and arrived at the northwest of Xuanwu Lake.

古文：乙卯，司空陈霸先授众军节度，与齐军交战，大破之，斩齐北兗州刺史杜方庆及徐嗣徽弟嗣宗，生擒徐嗣产、萧轨、东方老、王敬宝、李希光、裴英起、刘归义等，皆诛之。
现代文：十二日，司空陈霸先调节布署众军，和齐军交战，大败齐军，杀死齐北兖州刺史杜方庆、徐嗣徽及其弟弟徐嗣宗，活捉徐嗣彦、萧轨、东方老、王敬宝、李希光、裴英起、刘归义等人，并杀死了他们。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Chen Baizhong, the second-in-command of the Kuomintang (KMT), first coordinated the deployment of troops and fought with the Qi army. He defeated the Qi army, killed the northern Qi statesmen Du Fangqing, Xu Shihui and his brother Xu Shizong, and captured Xu Shihong, Xiao Rui, Dongfanglao, Wang Jingbao, Li Xiguang, Pei Yingqi, Liu Guiyi and others alive and killed them.

古文：戊午，大赦天下，军士身殒战场，悉遣敛祭，其无家属，即为瘗埋。
现代文：十五日，对全国已判罪犯免刑或减刑，将士捐躯战场的，均派人殓葬、祭祀，如果是没有家属的，即代为安葬。
English: On the 15th, for the criminals across the country who have been sentenced to be pardoned or commuted, and the soldiers who have died on the battlefield, people will be sent to bury and sacrifice, and if there are no family members, they will be buried on their behalf.

古文：辛酉，解严。
现代文：十八日，解除戒严令。
English: On the 18th, martial law was lifted.

古文：秋七月丙子，车骑将军、司空陈霸先进位司徒，加中书监，余如故。
现代文：秋七月三日，车骑将军、司空陈霸先进位司徒，加中书监，其余仍旧。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, the general of the cavalry and cavalry, and the superior of the cavalry and air force, Chen Ba, were promoted to the leading position of the scholar, and the book supervisor was added, and the rest remained the same.

古文：丁亥，以开府仪同三司侯瑱为司空。
现代文：十四日，任开府仪同三司侯王真为司空。
English: On the 14th day of the month, the ceremony for the opening of the capital was held, and the third secretary, Hou Wangzhen, was appointed as the secretary.

古文：八月己酉，太保鄱阳王循薨。
现代文：八月七日，太保鄱阳王循去世。
English: On August 7th, the bodyguard Shanyang Wangxun passed away.

古文：九月壬寅，改元大赦，孝悌力田赐爵一级，殊才异行所在奏闻，饥难流移勒归本土。
现代文：九月一日，改换年号，对已判罪犯免刑或减刑，孝顺父母、敬爱兄长、努力耕田者赐给爵位一等，才能特别突出、行为优异者由地方奏闻，遭受饥饿、灾难而流亡、迁徙的，强令回归原籍。
English: On September 1st, the year was changed. Convicted criminals were pardoned or had their sentences reduced. Those who were filial to their parents, respected their brothers and sisters, and worked hard to cultivate the land were given first-class knighthoods. Those whose talents were particularly outstanding and whose behavior was outstanding were reported by the local authorities. Those who suffered from hunger, disaster, exile, and migration were forced to return to their hometowns.

古文：进新除司徒陈霸先为丞相、录尚书事、镇卫大将军、扬州牧，封义兴郡公。
现代文：进新除司徒陈霸先为丞相、录尚书事、镇卫大将军、扬州牧，封为义兴郡公。
English: After entering the new era, Chen Baxi, who had been expelled from the priesthood, was first appointed as chancellor, secretary, general of the garrison, Yangzhou magistrate, and later appointed as the governor of Yixing County.

古文：中权将军王冲即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：中权将军王冲即本号开府仪同三司。
English: Wang Chong, the general of the Central Powers, was the one to open the ceremony and the three divisions.

古文：吏部尚书王通为尚书右仆射。
现代文：吏部尚书王通为尚书右仆射。
English: Shang Shuxu Wangtong, the head of the personnel department, was Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：丁巳，以郢州刺史徐度为领军将军。
现代文：十六日，任郢州刺史徐度为领军将军。
English: On the 16th, he was appointed as the leading general of Zhangzhou Zhishi Xu.

古文：冬十一月乙卯，起云龙、神虎门。
现代文：冬十一月十五日，建造云龙、神虎门。
English: On November 15th in winter, Yunlong Gate and Shenhu Gate were built.

古文：十二月壬申，进太尉、镇南将军萧勃为太保、骠骑将军。
现代文：十二月二日，晋太尉、镇南将军萧勃为太保、骠骑将军。
English: On December 2nd, Shao Bo, Jin's lieutenant and Zhenan's general, was promoted to Taibao and General of Cavalry.

古文：以新除左卫将军欧阳頠为安南将军、衡州刺史。
现代文：任新除左卫将军欧阳危页为安南将军、衡州刺史。
English: Ouyang, the newly-appointed left-wing general, is in danger of becoming the Annan and Hengzhou of history.

古文：壬午，平南将军刘法瑜进号安南将军。
现代文：十二日，平南将军刘法瑜晋号安南将军。
English: On the 12th, Pingnan General Liu Fayu Jin called General Annan.

古文：甲午，以前寿昌令刘睿为汝阴王，前镇西法曹、行参军萧鸑为巴陵王，奉宋、齐二代后。
现代文：二十四日，任前寿昌令刘睿为汝阴王，前镇西法曹、行参军萧为巴陵王，奉宋、齐二代后。
English: On the 24th, Liu Rui, who was appointed by Shuchang, became the king of Ruyin, and Xiao, who was appointed by Zhen Xifa Cao and marched to join the army, became the king of Baling. He was the second generation after Feng Song and Qi.

古文：二年春正月壬寅，诏曰： 夫子降灵体哲，经仁纬义，允光素王，载阐玄功，仰之者弥高，诲之者不倦。
现代文：太平二年正月初二，下诏： 夫子降灵体吉吉，经仁纬义，允光素王，载阐玄功，仰之者弥高，诲之者不倦。
English: On the second day of the first month of the second year of the Taiping era, the following edict was issued: "It is auspicious for a man to descend to the spiritual body, and it is benevolent and auspicious for a man to ascend to the spiritual body, and it is auspicious for a man to ascend to the spiritual body, and it is benevolent and auspicious for a man to ascend to the spiritual body, and it is auspicious for a man to ascend to the spiritual body, and it is auspicious for a man to ascend to the spiritual body.

古文：立忠立孝，德被蒸民，制礼作乐，道冠群后。
现代文：立忠立孝，德被民，制礼作乐，道冠诸后。
English: Loyalty and filial piety should be upheld, virtue should be cherished by the people, etiquette should be made into music, and virtue should be upheld.

古文：虽泰山颓峻，一篑不遗，而泗水余澜，千载犹在。
现代文：虽然泰山颓峻，一老不遗，然而泗水余澜，却千年犹存。
English: Although Mount Tai is so high and steep, it has not been abandoned for a long time. However, it has survived for thousands of years.

古文：自皇图屯阻，祀荐不修，奉圣之门，胤嗣歼灭，敬神之寝，簠簋寂寥。
现代文：自从皇图屯阻，祀荐不，奉圣之门，胤嗣歼灭，敬神之寝，祭器寂寥。
English: Since the Emperor Tut, there has been no recommendation for worship, no door to the priesthood, no heirs to the throne, no worship of God, and a dearth of sacrificial vessels.

古文：永言声烈，实兼钦怆。
现代文：永言声烈，实兼钦怆。
English: Yongyan is famous, but he is also sincere.

古文：外可搜举鲁国之族，以为奉圣后；并缮庙堂，供备祀典，四时荐秩，一皆遵旧。 
现代文：在外可搜举鲁国宗族，以奉圣后；并修缮庙堂，供备祀典，四时荐秩，均遵旧制。 
English: Outside, it is possible to search for the Lu nation's family lineage to be consecrated; and to repair the temple hall to prepare the ritual book, and to recommend the rank at 4 o'clock, all according to the old system.

古文：是日，又诏 诸州各置中正，依旧访举。
现代文：这天，又下诏： 诸州分别设置中正，依旧访查举荐。
English: On this day, another edict was issued: the states were to be set up separately, and visits were still recommended.

古文：不得辄承单状序官，皆须中正押上，然后量授。
现代文：不可动不动就承单状序官，均须中正押上，然后斟酌授给。
English: It is impermissible to accept the writ of summons without moving, and it must be stamped in the middle, and then awarded at discretion.

古文：详依品制，务使精实。
现代文：详依品官制度，务使精实。
English: The details are in accordance with the quality official system, and must be refined.

古文：其荆、雍、青、兗虽暂为隔阂，衣冠多寓淮海，犹宜不废司存。
现代文：荆、雍、青、兖虽然暂时隔绝不通，衣冠多寓淮海，更应不废司存。
English: Although Jing, Yong, Qing and Zhai are temporarily cut off and do not communicate, Guanlan mostly lives in Huaihai, and should not be wasted.

古文：会计罢州，尚为大郡，人士殷旷，可别置邑居。
现代文：会计罢州，尚为大郡，人士殷旷，可另置邑居。
English: Accountant Bozhou is still a large county, with a large number of people, who can live in other counties.

古文：至如分割郡县，新号州牧，并系本邑，不劳兼置。
现代文：至于分割郡县，新号州牧，并系本邑，不劳兼置。
English: As for the division of counties and counties, the new number of counties and counties, and the system of counties and counties, can be placed without effort.

古文：其选中正，每求耆德，该悉以他官领之。 
现代文：选中正，每求耆德该悉，以他官领之。 
English: Once elected, every candidate should be aware of it and lead it with his officials.

古文：以车骑将军、开府仪同三司王琳为司空、骠骑大将军。
现代文：任车骑将军、开府仪同三司王琳为司空、骠骑大将军。
English: Appointed as the chariot and cavalry general, Kaifu Yi with the three Wang Lin as the secretary of the sky, the horse and cavalry general.

古文：分寻阳、太原、齐昌、高唐、新蔡五郡，置西江州，即于寻阳仍充州镇。
现代文：分寻阳、太原、齐昌、高唐、新蔡五郡，设西江州，即于寻阳仍充州镇。
English: It is divided into five counties: Xiangyang, Taiyuan, Qichang, Gaotang, and Xin Cai, and is located in West Jiangzhou. Xiangyang is still the town of Chengzhou.

古文：又诏 宗室在朝开国承家者，今犹称世子，可悉听袭本爵。 
现代文：又下诏： 凡建立国家、承继家业的在朝宗室，现在仍称世子，当全部听袭本爵。 
English: He also issued the following edict: All those who established the country and succeeded the family business in the imperial family, and are still called the heir, should all follow the lead of this peer.

古文：以尚书右仆射王通为尚书左仆射。
现代文：任尚书右仆射王通为尚书左仆射。
English: Shangshu's right-hand man, Shaowang Tong, became Shangshu's left-hand man.

古文：丁巳，镇西将军、益州刺史长沙王韶进号征南将军。
现代文：十七日，镇西将军、益州刺史长沙王韶进号征南将军。
English: On the 17th, Zhenxi General, Yizhou Zishi, Changsha Wang Yujin, and Zhenxi General marched south.

古文：二月庚午，领军将军徐度入东关。
现代文：二月一日，领军将军徐度入东关。
English: On February 1, the leading general slowly entered Dongguan.

古文：太保、广州刺史萧勃举兵反，遣伪帅欧阳頠、傅泰、勃从子孜为前军，南江州刺史余孝顷以兵会之。
现代文：太保、广州刺史萧勃起兵谋反，派遣伪帅欧阳危页、傅泰、萧勃的侄子萧孜为前军，南江州刺史余孝顷率兵与他们会合。
English: Tai Bao and the Guangzhou assassin Xiao Bo plotted a rebellion and sent the pseudo-commanders Ouyang Guizhe, Fu Tai and Xiao Bo's nephew Xiao Ze as the vanguard, and the soldiers led by the South Jiangzhou assassin Yu Xiao He joined them.

古文：诏平西将军周文育、平南将军侯安都等率众军南讨。
现代文：诏令平西将军周文育、平南将军侯安都等率大军往南讨伐。
English: He ordered the Pingxi General Zhou Wenyu and the Pingnan General Hou Andu to lead a large army to the south to fight.

古文：戊子，徐度至合肥，烧齐船三千艘。
现代文：十九日，徐度到达合肥，焚烧齐船三千艘。
English: On the 19th, Xu Du arrived in Hefei and burned 3,000 ships.

古文：癸巳，周文育军于巴山生获欧阳頠。
现代文：二十四日，周文育在巴山活捉欧阳危页。
English: On the 24th, Zhou Wenyu captured Ouyang Huige alive in Bashan.

古文：三月庚子，文育前军丁法洪于蹠口生俘傅泰。萧孜、余孝顷军退走。
现代文：三月一日，周文育前军丁法洪在口活捉傅泰，萧孜、余孝顷军败逃跑。
English: On March 1st, Zhou Wenyu's former soldier Ding Fahong captured Fu Tai alive, while Xiao Ze and Yu Xiao He fled in defeat.

古文：甲辰，以新除司空王琳为湘、郢二州刺史。
现代文：五月，任新除司空王琳为湘、郢二州刺史。
English: In May, Wang Lin, the newly-appointed Secretary-General of the Kuomintang, visited Hunan and Fujian.

古文：甲寅，德州刺史陈法武、前衡州刺史谭世远于始兴攻杀萧勃。
现代文：十五日，德州刺史陈法武、前衡州刺史谭世远在始兴攻打并杀死萧勃。
English: On the 15th, Texas assassin Chen Fowu and former Hengzhou assassin Tan Shiyuan attacked and killed Xiao Bo in Shixing.

古文：夏四月癸酉，曲赦江、广、衡三州；并督内为贼所拘逼者，并皆不问。
现代文：夏四月五日，特赦江、广、衡三州，并督内被贼所拘捕、逼迫的人，一律不予过问。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, Jiang, Guang and Heng of the three states were amnestied, and those who were arrested and persecuted by thieves in the governor's office were not questioned.

古文：己卯，铸四柱钱，一准二十。
现代文：十一日，铸造四柱钱，一准二十。
English: On the eleventh day, four pillars of money were minted, one for every twenty.

古文：齐遣使请和。
现代文：齐派遣使者请求讲和。
English: They sent envoys to ask for peace.

古文：壬辰，改四柱钱一准十。
现代文：二十四日，改四柱钱一准十。
English: On the 24th, the four-pillar money was changed to one-unit-per-ten.

古文：丙申，复闭细钱。
现代文：二十八日，废止细钱。
English: On the 28th, fine money was abolished.

古文：萧勃故主帅前直阁兰敱袭杀谭世远，敱仍为亡命夏侯明彻所杀。
现代文：萧勃故主帅前直兰岂攴袭击并杀死谭世远，兰岂攴还是被逃亡在外的夏侯明彻所杀死。
English: Xiao Bo's former coach, Zhi Lan, attacked and killed Tan Shiyuan, and Zhi Lan was killed by Xia Houming, who had fled.

古文：勃故记室李宝藏奉怀安侯萧任据广州作乱。
现代文：萧勃故记室李宝藏尊奉怀安侯萧任盘踞广州叛乱。
English: Li Baozhuanzhong of the Xiao Bo Historical Records Office praised the Huai'an Lord Xiao Ren for instigating the Guangzhou Rebellion.

古文：戊戌，侯安都进军，余孝顷弃军走，萧孜请降，豫章平。
现代文：三十日，侯安都进军，余孝顷弃军逃跑，萧勃请求投降。豫章平定。
English: On the 30th, Hou Andu marched into the army, Yu Xiao abandoned the army and fled, and Xiao Bo asked for surrender. Yu Zhang was defeated.

古文：五月乙巳，平西将军周文育进号镇南将军，侯安都进号镇北将军，并以本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：五月七日，平西将军周文进晋号镇南将军，侯安都晋号镇北将军，并以本号开府仪同三司。
English: On May 7th, the Pingxi general Zhou Wenjin became the Zhenan general, and Hou Andu became the Zhenbei general, and used this title to start the ceremony with the three divisions.

古文：丙午，以镇军将军徐度为南豫州刺史。
现代文：八日，任镇军将军徐度为南豫州刺史。
English: On the 8th, the general of the Renzhen Army gradually became the history of South Yuzhou.

古文：戊辰，余孝顷遣使诣丞相府乞降。
现代文：三十日，余孝顷派遣使者抵丞相府乞降。
English: On the 30th, Yu Xiaoha sent an envoy to the prime minister's office to beg for surrender.

古文：秋八月甲午，加丞相陈霸先黄钺，领太傅，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，给羽葆、鼓吹。
现代文：秋八月二十九日，加丞相陈霸先黄钺，监太傅，佩剑着履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名，供给羽葆、鼓吹。
English: On the 29th day of the 8th month of the autumn, Chen Baxian, the Minister of Cao Zheng, became Huang Qi, the Inspector General, and went up to the palace with a sword. He did not enter the court, did not worship, did not offer feathers, and preached.

古文：九月辛丑，崇丞相为相国，总百揆，封十郡为陈公，备九锡之礼，加玺绂远游冠，位在王公上。加相国绿綟绶。
现代文：九月五日，尊崇丞相为相国，总领国政，封十郡为陈公，备九锡之礼，加玺绂远游冠，位居王公之上，加相国绿纟戾绶。
English: On September 5th, the minister of honor and the minister of justice became the crown prince, the leader of the country's politics, the ten counties were given to Chen Gong, the nine counties were given to Xixi, and the crown prince was given the crown of traveling far and wide, which was above the crown prince, and the crown prince was given the crown of the country.

古文：置陈国百司。
现代文：设陈国百司。
English: The 100th Division of Chen Guo was established.

古文：冬十月戊辰，进陈公爵为王，增封十郡，并前为二十郡。
现代文：冬十月三日，晋陈公爵为王，加封十郡，加上前封十郡为二十郡。
English: On October 3rd in winter, the Duke of Jin Chen became the king, adding ten counties to the former and twenty counties to the former.

古文：命陈王冕十有二旒，建天子旌旂，出警入跸，乘金根车，驾六马，备五时副车，置旄头云罕，乐舞八佾，设钟鋋宫县。
现代文：命陈公冕为十二旒，建立太子旌，出入时清路开道，禁止他人通行，乘金根车，驾六马，配备五时副车，置旄头云罕，乐舞八佾，设钟宫悬。
English: Chen Gongguan ordered to build twelve towers, set up the Prince's Tower, clear the way when entering and leaving, prohibit others from passing, take the Golden Root Car, drive six horses, equipped with a five-hour secondary car, set the Shantou Yunhan, music and dance eight towers, and set up the Bell Palace hanging.

古文：王后王子女爵命之典，一依旧仪。
现代文：王后王子女爵命之典，均按旧仪所定。
English: The titles of empress dowager, empress dowager and empress dowager are all determined according to the old rite.

古文：辛未，诏曰：
现代文：六日，下诏：
English: On the 6th, the following edict was issued:

古文：五运更始，三正迭代，司牧黎庶，是属圣贤，用能经纬乾坤，弥纶区宇，大庇黔首，阐扬洪烈。
现代文： 五运更始，三正迭代，司牧黎庶，是属圣贤，用能经纬乾坤，弥纶区宇，大庇黔首，阐扬洪烈。
English: He was a sage who used his ability to transcend time and space, he was a great scholar, he was a great scholar, he was a great scholar.

古文：革晦以明，积代同轨，百王踵武，咸由此则。
现代文：革晦以阴，积代同轨，百王踵武，咸由此则。
English: The dark side of the sword is the yin side, the positive side of the sword is the yang side, the positive side of the sword is the yang side, and the negative side is the yang side.

古文：梁德湮微，祸难荐发：太清云始，用困长蛇；承圣之年，又罹封豕；爰至天成，重窃神器。
现代文：梁德湮微，祸难荐发：太清云始，用困长蛇；承圣之年，又罹封豕；爰至天成，重窃神器。
English: Liang Dejun is weak, the disaster is difficult to recommend: the beginning of the cloud is too clear, with a long snake; in the year of consecration, he was also awarded the title of gong; in the end of the day, he stole the artifact.

古文：三光亟改，七庙乏祀，含生已泯，鼎命斯坠，我皇之祚，眇若缀旒，静惟《屯》、《剥》，夕惕载怀。
现代文：三光亟改，七庙乏祀，含生已泯，鼎命斯坠，我皇之祚，眇若缀旒，静惟《屯》、《剥》，夕惕载怀。
English: The three lights are in urgent need of reform, the seven temples are in need of worship, including the living, the dead, the dead, the dead, the dead, the dead, the dead, the dead, the dead, the dead, and the dead.

古文：相国陈王，有纵自天，降神惟岳，天地合德，晷曜齐明。
现代文： 相国陈王，有纵自天，降神惟岳，天地合德，晷曜齐明。
English: Chen Wang, the partner country, has verticality from the sky, descent from the gods to the mountains, harmony of heaven and earth, and uniformity.

古文：拯社稷之横流，提亿兆之涂炭。
现代文：拯社稷之横流，提亿兆之涂炭。
English: It is a cross-flow of saving society and raising trillions of dollars.

古文：东诛叛逆，北歼獯丑，威加四海，仁渐万国。
现代文：东诛叛逆，北迁獯酉鬼，威加四海，仁渐万国。
English: The East is rebellious, the North is rebellious, the West is arrogant, and the whole world is benevolent.

古文：复张崩乐，重纪绝礼，儒馆聿修，戎亭虚候。
现代文：复张崩乐，重纪绝礼，儒馆聿，戎亭虚候。
English: Zhang Xuanle, heavy discipline and strict etiquette, Confucian Hall, Rongting, and so on.

古文：虽大功在舜，盛绩维禹，巍巍荡荡，无得而称。
现代文：虽大功在舜，盛绩维禹，巍巍荡荡，无得而称。
English: Although he has made great achievements in the world, he is known for his great achievements in Wei Yu, and his wandering around the world.

古文：来献白环，岂直皇虞之世；入贡素雉，非止隆周之日。
现代文：来献白环，岂直皇虞之世；入贡素雉，非止隆周之日。
English: To present the white ring, is the world of the emperor; to pay tribute to the emperor, is the day of the long week.

古文：故效珍川陆，表瑞烟云，玉露醴泉，旦夕凝涌，嘉禾瑞草，孳植郊甸，道昭于悠代，勋格于皇穹。
现代文：故效珍川陆，表瑞烟云，玉露醴泉，旦夕凝涌，嘉禾瑞草，孳植郊甸，道昭于悠代，勋格于皇穹。
English: Therefore, the effect of Zhenchuan Lu, table Rui smoke cloud, jade dew spring, sunset condensation, Jiahe Rui grass, planting suburbs, Tao Zhao in Yudai, distinguished in the imperial dome.

古文：明明上天，光华日月，革故著于玄象，代德彰于谶图，狱讼有违，讴歌爰适，天之历数，实有攸在。
现代文：明明上天，光华日月，革故著于玄象，代德彰于谶图，狱讼有违，讴歌爰适，天之历数，实有攸在。
English: The heavens are clear, the sun and the moon are brilliant, the legend is written in the occult, the virtue is shown in the map, the prison case is illegal, the song is appropriate, and the calendar of the day is really important.

古文：朕虽庸藐，暗于古昔，永稽崇替，为日已久，敢忘列代之遗典，人祇之至愿乎！
现代文：朕虽庸藐，暗于古昔，永稽崇替，为日已久，敢忘列代之遗典，人只之至愿乎！
English: Although I despise, secretly in the old days, forever revere, for a long time, dare to forget the generations of posthumous works, people only wish for it!

古文：今便逊位别宫，敬禅于陈，一依唐虞、宋齐故事。
现代文：今便逊位别宫，敬禅于陈，一依唐虞、宋齐故事。 
English: Now it is inferior to the Imperial Palace, revering Zen in Chen, and following the Tang Yu and Song Qi stories.

古文：陈王践阼，奉帝为江阴王，薨于外邸，时年十六，追谥敬皇帝。
现代文：陈王践祚，奉帝为江阴王，薨于外邸，时年十六岁，追谥为敬皇帝。
English: Chen Wang was 16 years old at the time of his ascension to the throne. Feng Di was the king of Jiangyin, and he lived in a mansion.

古文：史臣曰：梁季横溃，丧乱屡臻，当此之时，天历去矣，敬皇高让，将同释负焉。
现代文：史臣曰：梁季迅速崩溃，丧乱屡屡到来，当这个时候，天数已尽，敬皇帝高让，又同时释去重负了。
English: Shi Zhen said: Liang Ji quickly collapsed, and the turmoil came again and again. At this time, the days were over, and Emperor Gao conceded, and at the same time released the heavy burden.

古文：史臣侍中、郑国公魏征曰： 高祖固天攸纵，聪明稽古，道亚生知，学为博物，允文允武，多艺多才。
现代文：史臣侍中、郑国公魏征说：产担固然是天所降生，聪明知古，道德仅次于生而知之者，学问是广知万物，能文能武，多才多艺。
English: Zheng Guogong Wei Zheng, one of the attendants of Shi Zhen, said: Of course, the burden-bearer is born of heaven, intelligent and knowledgeable, moral is second only to those who are born with knowledge, learning is a broad knowledge of all things, can be literate, can be martial, and versatile.

古文：爰自诸生，有不羁之度，属昏凶肆虐，天伦及祸，收合义旅，将雪家冤。
现代文：起自诸生，有放荡不羁的风度，处于昏暗凶险贼寇肆虐，天伦受灾祸的时候，收集义军，将要洗雪家仇。
English: From all walks of life, he has a debauched and uninhibited demeanor, in the dark when the dangerous bandits are raging, and when the heavens are plagued, he gathers the rebels and is going to wash the snow of the family vendetta.

古文：曰纣可伐，不其而会，龙跃樊、汉，电击湘、郢，剪离德如振槁，取独夫如拾遗。
现代文：人们说挝可以讨伐，现在是不期而遇，龙跳跃于矾、望，电击于姻、郢，剪除离德离心之人就如同振落枯干的草木，俘获独夫民贼如同拾取遣物。
English: People say that Laos can be fought, but now it is an unexpected encounter, the dragon jumps on the dragonfly, the dragonfly, the electric shock on the dragonfly, the person who cuts off the German centrifuge is like shaking down the dry grass, and the capture of the lone thief is like picking up the sentry.

古文：其雄才大略，固无得而称矣。
现代文：他的雄才大略，固然没有什么可比称的了。
English: His talent is great, but there is nothing to compare it to.

古文：既悬白旗之首，方应皇天之眷，布德施惠，悦近来远，开荡荡之王道，革靡靡之商俗，大修文教，盛饰礼容，鼓扇玄风，阐扬儒业，介胄仁义，折冲樽俎，声振寰宇，泽流遐裔，干戈载戢，凡数十年。
现代文：已悬白旗之首，又正应了皇天的眷顾，广布恩德遍施恩惠，使近处的人高兴使远处的人来归，开辟广大的王道，革除怯弱的直翘一样的习俗，大修文教，盛饰礼仪，鼓扇玄妙的风气，发扬儒家的事业，介胄之士讲仁义，在会盟席上可以制胜对方，声名威震寰宇，恩泽波及边远的地方，战争止息。共有数十年。
English: The head of the white flag has been hoisted, and it is in response to the patronage of the emperor, the vast bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bounty of the bount

古文：济济焉，洋洋焉，魏、晋已来，未有若斯之盛。
现代文：人才众多，政绩美好，魏、晋以来，没有如此的盛世。
English: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, there has never been such a prosperous era with so many talented people and good political achievements.

古文：然不能息末敦本，斫雕为朴，慕名好事，崇尚浮华，抑扬孔、墨，流连释、老。
现代文：然而高祖不能止息商业末技敦促农业这个根本，除去雕饰为质朴，羡慕声名喜好生事，崇尚浮华，贬抑孔、墨，流连释、老。
English: However, Gao Zu could not stop the commercial backwardness and urged agriculture as the fundamental, removed the carvings to be simple, admired the fame, liked to cause trouble, advocated the glitz, disparaged the hole, the ink, linglian, and the old.

古文：或经夜不寝，或终日不食，非弘道以利物，惟饰智以惊愚。
现代文：有时整夜不睡，有时终日不食，不是弘扬道德以利于万事万物，祇是装饰智巧来惊骇愚民。
English: Sometimes he does not sleep all night, sometimes he does not eat all day. It is not to promote morality to benefit all things, it is only to decorate cleverness to frighten fools.

古文：且心未遗荣，虚厕苍头之伍；高谈脱屣，终恋黄屋之尊。
现代文：而且心中没忘尊荣，衹是虚假地置身于下人的行列裹；高谈阔论时脱去鞋子，但是终究眷恋黄屋的尊显。
English: Moreover, he did not forget the honor in his heart. He was falsely wrapped in the ranks of the underlings; he took off his shoes when he talked about high-level discussions, but in the end he was attached to Huangya's honor.

古文：夫人之大欲，在乎饮食男女，至于轩冕殿堂，非有切身之急。
现代文：人的最大欲望，在于饮食男女，至于华车礼帽和殿堂，并没有切身的急事。
English: Man's greatest desires lie in food and drink and in men and women. As far as the Chinese carriage, ceremonial hat and hall of fame are concerned, there are no pressing matters.

古文：高祖屏除嗜欲，眷恋轩冕，得其所难而滞于所易，可谓神有所不达，智有所不通矣。
现代文：高祖屏除嗜好欲望，却眷恋华车与帝王的礼帽，达到了他难以达到的却停滞在他感到容易的事上，可以说是精神有所不明达，智慧有所不通畅。
English: Gao Zu screened the desires of his hobbies, but he was attached to the Chinese chariot and the emperor's ceremonial hat. He achieved things that were difficult for him to achieve, but he stagnated in things that were easy for him. It can be said that his spirit was not clear, and his wisdom was not smooth.

古文：逮夫精华稍竭，凤德已衰，惑于听受，权在奸佞，储后百辟，莫得尽言。
现代文：等到他的精神才华渐渐枯竭，德行威望已经衰微，受到听闻感受的迷惑，使权力落在奸佞小人手中，储君百王，没有谁能够言无不尽。
English: Wait until his spiritual talent gradually dries up, his virtue and prestige have waned, and he is confused by what he hears and feels, so that power falls into the hands of traitors and villains, crowned kings and queens, no one can say everything.

古文：险躁之心，暮年愈甚。
现代文：高祖的急躁不平静的心情，暮年更加厉害。
English: Gao Zu's impatient and restless mood was even more severe in his twilight years.

古文：见利而动，愎谏违卜，开门揖盗，弃好即仇，衅起萧墙，祸成戎羯，身殒非命，灾被亿兆，衣冠敝锋镝之下，老幼粉戎马之足。
现代文：见利就动，拒绝进谏违反占卜，开门揖盗，弃善从恶，祸患产生于内部，灾祸因为戎、羯而生成，自身死于非命，灾难殃及亿万人民，达官贵人死在锋利的箭头之下，老幼在戎马足下粉身碎骨。
English: He acted according to his interests, refused to go to the battlefield, violated divination, opened the door to banditry, abandoned good for evil. The calamity arose from within, the calamity was caused by the war and the war, he died a violent death, the disaster affected hundreds of millions of people, dignitaries died under the sharp arrows, the old and the young were crushed under the feet of the war horse.

古文：瞻彼《黍离》，痛深周庙；永言《麦秀》，悲甚殷墟。
现代文：观看《黍离》，深深为周朝宗庙痛惜；总是说《麦秀》，悲伤比殷墟引起的更甚。
English: Watching "A Separation," I deeply felt sorry for the Zhou Dynasty's ancestral temple; I always said that "Wheat Show" caused more sadness than Yin Rui.

古文：自古以安为危，既成而败，颠覆之速，书契所未闻也。
现代文：自古居安思危，而已经成功又失败，国家被颠覆得如此快速，这是书籍记载中所没有见过的。
English: Since ancient times, they have lived in peace and security, but they have succeeded and failed, and the country has been subverted so quickly that it has not been seen in the books.

古文：《易》曰： 天之所助者信，人之所助者顺。 
现代文：《易》中说： 天所赞助的人是顺从之人，人们所赞助的人是讲信用的人。 
English: "Yi" said: Those who are sponsored by heaven are obedient people, and those who are sponsored by people are trustworthy people.

古文：高祖之遇斯屯剥，不得其死，盖动而之险，不由信顺，失天人之所助，其能免于此乎！
现代文：高祖遇到这样艰难的命运，不能死得其所，大概是因为他好动赴险，不求信顺，失却天和人的赞助，他能免于此种结局吗!
English: Gaozu encountered such a difficult fate and could not die in his place, probably because he was willing to take risks, did not seek obedience, and lost the patronage of heaven and man. Can he be exempt from this outcome!

古文：太宗聪睿过人，神彩秀发，多闻博达，富赡词藻。
现代文：太宗聪明睿智超过常人，神采奕奕，见闻广博通达，词藻丰富。
English: Taizong is more intelligent and wise than ordinary people. He is energetic, well-informed, and has a rich vocabulary.

古文：然文艳用寡，华而不实，体穷淫丽，义罕疏通，哀思之音，遂移风俗，以此而贞万国，异乎周诵、汉庄矣。
现代文：然而文风华艳，可用者少，文章华而不实，文体穷尽淫靡华丽之能事，文义罕有畅通之处，哀损思念的靡靡之音，于是变移了风俗，用这种做法正万国，与周诵、漠庄相比是不同的了。
English: However, the literary style is gorgeous, there are few available people, the articles are gorgeous but insubstantial, the style exhausts the power of lasciviousness and gorgeousness, the literary meaning is rarely smooth, and the mournful thoughts are mournful, so the customs have been changed, and this practice is used in all countries, which is different from Zhouqiao and Muzhuang.

古文：我生不辰，载离多难，桀逆构扇，巨猾滔天，始自牖里之拘，终类望夷之祸。
现代文：我生不逢时，遭遇许多灾难，凶暴叛逆的人捏造罪名煽动作乱，巨恶狡猾的人罪恶滔天，灾难始于牖里那样的拘禁，结局类似望夷的灾祸。
English: I was born at an inopportune time and have suffered many calamities. Violent and rebellious people fabricated charges to incite chaos, evil and cunning people committed heinous crimes. The calamity began with the detention in Bali and ended with the disaster in Mogi.

古文：悠悠苍天，其可问哉！
现代文：悠悠苍天，这难道还可以去问吗!
English: For heaven's sake, is it even possible to ask?

古文：昔国步初屯，兵缠魏阙，群后释位，投袂勤王。
现代文：从前国家刚刚举步艰难。兵燹集中在京城，各位诸侯王放弃自己的职位，挥袖而起前来勤王。
English: Once upon a time, the country was going through a difficult time. The soldiers were concentrated in the capital, and all the princes and kings gave up their positions and came to serve the king.

古文：元帝以盘石之宗，受分陕之任，属君亲之难，居连率之长，不能抚剑尝胆，枕戈泣血，躬先士卒，致命前驱；遂乃拥众逡巡，内怀觖望，坐观时变，以为身幸。
现代文：元帝以磐石般不可否定的宗亲，接受分管陕的重任，遭遇君亲的灾难，位居联合统率之长，不能抚剑思战卧薪尝胆，枕戈待旦泪尽泣血，身先士卒，拼命前驱；反而拥众白保逡巡不前，内怀怨恨，坐观时变，以此为自身幸事。
English: Emperor Yuan, as a rock-like undeniable ancestor, accepted the heavy responsibility of being in charge of Shaanxi Province, suffered the disaster of the prince's relatives, ranked as the leader of the joint leadership, could not touch the sword, think about the battle, lie down and taste the gall, waited for tears, wept blood, stood at the forefront, and desperately drove forward; on the other hand, he supported the white bodyguards and did not move forward, harbored resentment, and watched the time change, as a blessing for himself.

古文：不急莽、卓之诛，先行昆弟之戮。
现代文：不急着诛杀王莽、董卓一样的贼人，却先行兄弟之间的杀戮。
English: They are not in a hurry to kill thieves like Wang Mang and Dong Zhuo, but they are the first to kill brothers.

古文：又沉猜忌酷，多行无礼。
现代文：又性格非常爱猜忌酷虐，多做无礼之事。
English: In addition, his personality is very suspicious and cruel, and he often does things that are disrespectful.

古文：骋智辩以饰非，肆忿戾以害物。
现代文：尽情施展他的智慧和辩才来文遇饰非，放任他的怨恨凶暴来损害事物。
English: To the utmost of his wisdom and power of argument he embellishes, and to the utmost of his malice and violence he injures.

古文：爪牙重将，心膂谋臣，或顾眄以就拘囚，或一言而及菹醢。朝之君子，相顾懔然。
现代文：他的得力助手重要将领，心腹谋臣，有的因看一下就被拘囚，有的因一句话而遭到被剁成肉酱的酷刑，朝中君子，相顾都很害怕。
English: His right-hand men, important generals, confidants, and advisers, some of whom were imprisoned for a glance, and some of whom were tortured into mincemeat for a single word, were all afraid of the courtier.

古文：自谓安若泰山，举无遗策，怵于邪说，即安荆楚。
现代文：自认为安定如泰山，举动没有遗留策略，警惕邪说，就可安定荆楚。
English: They think that stability is like Mount Tai, there is no legacy strategy in their actions, and they are wary of evil sayings, so they can be stable.

古文：虽元恶克剪，社稷未宁，而西邻责言，祸败旋及。
现代文：虽然首恶被打败剪除，但是社稷没有安宁，而且西边的邻国有责难的言辞，灾祸和失败随即来到。
English: Although the chief evil was defeated and eliminated, there was no peace in the society, and the western neighbors had words of reproach. Disaster and failure soon followed.

古文：上天降鉴，此焉假手，天道人事，其可诬乎！
现代文：上天降下明鉴，这是假手于人，天道人事，难道是可以欺骗的吗!
English: Heaven has sent down a clear test, this is a false hand to the people, Heaven's way to the people, is it possible to deceive?

古文：其笃志艺文，采浮淫而弃忠信；戎昭果毅，先骨肉而后寇仇。
现代文：元帝很有志于艺文，但采写轻浮淫靡的言辞而抛弃忠贞信誉；在战争中表明他果敢坚毅，但是他先杀亲骨肉而后杀贼寇和仇敌。
English: Emperor Yuan was very interested in art and literature, but he wrote frivolous and lascivious words and abandoned his loyalty and credibility; in the war, he showed his courage and determination, but he first killed relatives and then killed thieves and enemies.

古文：虽口诵《六经》，心通百氏，有仲尼之学，有公旦之才，适足以益其骄矜，增其祸患，何补金陵之覆没，何救江陵之灭亡哉！
现代文：虽然他口能背《六经》，心能通百姓，有仲尼的学识，有全担的才能，但这恰好足以增加他的骄横傲慢，增多他的祸患，对金陵的覆没有何补益，对江陵的灭亡有何挽救呢!
English: Although his mouth can recite the "Six Classics," his heart can communicate with the people, he has the knowledge of Zhong Ni, and he has the ability to bear the full burden, but this is just enough to increase his arrogance and increase his misfortune. It is of no benefit to the overthrow of Jinling, and of no help to the destruction of Jiangling!

古文：敬帝遭家不造，绍兹屯运，征伐有所自出，政刑不由于己，时无伊、霍之辅，焉得不为高让欤？ 
现代文：敬帝遭遇家室无成，继此艰难的国运，征伐有的是出自自己的心意，政令刑令却不能由着自己，当时没有伊、霍这样的辅佐大臣，敬帝哪能不做出高让的举动呢？
English: Emperor Jing encountered the failure of his family, followed by the difficult national movement. Some of the conquests came from his own mind, but the government orders and punishments could not be done by himself. At that time, there were no assistant ministers such as Yi and Huo. How could Emperor Jing not make a concessionary move?

