古文：元次山为道州刺史，作《舂陵行》，其序云： 州旧四万余户，经贼以来，不满四千，大半不胜赋税。
现代文：元次山任道州刺史，作《春陵行》，序文说： 道州原有人口四万多户，经历战乱之后，还不到四千户，多半承担不起赋税。
English: In the preface to his book, "A Journey to the Spring Tombs," Yuan Jishan, a historian of Doushou, said: Doushou originally had a population of more than forty thousand households, but after the war, there were less than four thousand households, and most of them could not afford to pay taxes.

古文：到官未五十日，承诸使征求符牒二百余封，皆曰 失期限者罪至贬削 。
现代文：到任不足五十天，接到上司催交赋税的公文二百多封，都说 误了期限的降职免官。 
English: Less than 50 days after taking office, he received more than 200 official documents from his superiors urging him to pay taxes. They all said that he had missed the deadline for demotion and dismissal.

古文：于戏！
现代文：啊呀！
English: Alas!

古文：若悉应其命，则州县破乱，刺史欲焉逃罪？
现代文：如果全部接受这些命令，州县就会破乱不堪，当刺史的怎能逃避罪责？
English: If all accept these orders, the state and county will be in shambles. How can the instigator of history escape culpability?

古文：若不应命，又即获罪戾。
现代文：如果不接受命令，又当即犯下罪过。
English: If he does not accept the order, he immediately commits a crime.

古文：吾将静以安人，待罪而已。 
现代文：我不打算采取什么行动，好让百姓安定下来，自己只不过等着惩罚罢了。 
English: I'm not going to do anything to calm people down, I'm just waiting for the punishment.

古文：其辞甚苦，大略云： 州小经乱亡，遗人实困疲。
现代文：《春陵行》言词十分凄苦，诗的大意是： 州小经乱亡，遗人实困疲。
English: The words of "Chunling Xing" are very bitter, the gist of the poem is: the state is in turmoil, and the dead are really exhausted.

古文：朝餐是草根，暮食乃木皮。
现代文：朝餐是草根，暮食乃木皮。
English: Breakfast is grass roots, dinner is bark.

古文：出言气欲绝，意速行步迟。
现代文：出言气欲绝，意速行步迟。
English: He is too eager to speak and too slow to walk.

古文：追呼尚不忍，况乃鞭扑之。
现代文：追呼尚不忍，况乃鞭扑之。
English: The shouting was unbearable, and so was the whipping.

古文：邮亭传急符，来往迹相追。
现代文：邮亭传急符，来往迹相追。
English: Postboxes are marked with an express courier sign, and people's movements are tracked.

古文：更无宽大恩，但有迫催期。
现代文：更无宽大恩，但有迫催期。
English: Moreover, there is no grace, but there is a period of urgency.

古文：欲令鬻儿女，言发恐乱随。
现代文：欲令鬻儿女，言发恐乱随。
English: Desires make children angry, words make them fearful, and chaos follows.

古文：奈何重驱逐，不使存活为？
现代文：奈何重驱逐，不使存活为？
English: How many expulsions does it take to make survival impossible?

古文：安人天子命，符节我所持。
现代文：安人天子命，符节我所持。
English: I hold the life of the Son of God in my hands.

古文：逋缓违诏令，蒙责固所宜。 
现代文：逋缓违诏令，蒙责固所宜。 
English: It is appropriate to reprimand and punish those who violate the edict.

古文：又《贼退示官吏》一篇，言贼攻永破邵，不犯此州，盖蒙其伤怜而已，诸使何为忍苦征敛。
现代文：又有《贼退示官吏》一首，序文说西原少数民族叛军进攻永州，攻破邵州，却不进犯道州，大概是可怜此州又小又穷吧，长官们怎么忍心苛刻征收呢？
English: There is also a song "Thieves Refuse Officials," the preamble of which says that the West Plains ethnic minority rebels attacked Yongzhou, broke through Shaoshou, but did not invade Daozhou. It is probably a pity that this state is small and poor. How can the officials have the patience to levy it harshly?

古文：其诗云： 城小贼不屠，人贫伤可怜。
现代文：诗中说： 城小贼不屠，人贫伤可怜。
English: It says in the poem: Thieves do not kill, and the poor are pitied.

古文：是以陷邻境，此州独见全。
现代文：是以陷邻境，此州独见全。
English: It's all about the neighborhood, and this state is no different.

古文：使臣将王命，岂不如贼焉？
现代文：使臣将王命，岂不如贼焉？
English: Is it not better to be a thief than a king?

古文：今彼征敛者，迫之如火煎。 
现代文：今彼征敛者，迫之如火煎。 
English: Now that he's the one doing the soliciting, the pressure is on.

古文：二诗忧民惨切如此。故杜老以为： 今盗贼未息，知民疾苦，得结辈十数公，落落参错天下为邦伯，天下少安，立可待矣。 
现代文：两首诗如此为民忧虑、悲伤恳切，所以杜甫在《同元使君春陵行》序中说： 今盗贼没有平息，了解民众疾苦，能有象元结这样的十几个人，分散到各地作地方长官，全国逐渐安定的局面，可以很快到来。 
English: The two poems are so anxious and sorrowful for the people, so Du Fu said in the preface of "Dongyuan Jijun's Spring Mausoleum": Now the thieves have not calmed down, understand the people's suffering, can have more than a dozen people like Yuan Jie, scattered to various places to serve as local governors, and the situation of gradual stabilization throughout the country can come soon.

古文：遂有 两章对秋月，一字偕华星 之句。
现代文：于是，诗中有了 两章对秋月，一字偕华星 这样的句子。
English: As a result, there are two chapters on the autumn moon in the poem, and one word on the Chinese star.

古文：今《次山集》中，载其《谢上表》两通，其一云： 今日刺史，若无武略，以制暴乱；若无文才，以救疲弊；若不清廉，以身率下；若不变通，以救时须，则乱将作矣。
现代文：现在《次山集》中，收入他的《谢上表》两通，其中一通说： 今天当刺史的，如果没有军事才能来制止暴乱，没有文才来解救疲困，不能清正廉洁给下属作榜样，不会灵活变通来补救当前的急需，那么祸乱就必将发生。
English: Now, two copies of his "Thank You List" have been included in the "Zishan Collection," one of which said: Today, if there is no military talent to stop the riot, no literary talent to relieve fatigue, no integrity to set an example for subordinates, and no flexibility to remedy the current urgent needs, then the disaster will surely happen.

古文：臣料今日州县堪征税者无几，已破败者实多，百姓恋坟墓者盖少，思流亡者乃众，则刺史宜精选谨择以委任之，固不可拘限官次，得之货贿出之权门者也。 
现代文：臣估计如今各州县负担得起赋税的很少，已经破产败落的太多，百姓依恋祖籍故土的不多，打算流浪他乡的却不少，那么刺史就应该精细认真地挑选和委派，当然不能受本人原有官阶的限制，或只凭得到多少赌赂，是否出自豪门望族。 
English: According to the minister's estimation, there are few states and counties that can afford to pay taxes nowadays, too many have gone bankrupt and fallen, not many people are attached to their ancestral homeland, but there are many people who plan to wander away from their hometown. Therefore, the history should be carefully selected and assigned. Of course, it should not be limited by my original official rank, or just by how much gambling money I get, or whether I am a proud member of a prestigious family.

古文：其二云： 今四方兵革未宁，赋敛未息，百姓流亡转甚，官吏侵刻日多，实不合使凶庸贪猥之徒，凡弱下愚之类，以货赂权势，而为州县长官。 
现代文：另一通说： 现在到处战乱尚未止息，赋税征收不上，百姓流离失所日益严重，官府对百姓欺凌刻薄愈加增多，实在不该让凶残、庸俗、贪婪、卑鄙之辈、平庸儒弱、智能低下这类人，凭着行贿的办法，依仗权势，担任州县的长官。 
English: Another said: "Nowadays, wars are still raging everywhere, taxes cannot be collected, the displacement of the people is becoming more and more serious, and the government's bullying of the people is becoming more and more severe. It is really not right to let such cruel, vulgar, greedy, despicable, mediocre, weak, and low-intelligence people take bribes and rely on power to serve as prefects of states and counties.

古文：观次山表语，但因谢上而能极论民穷吏恶，劝天子以精择长吏，有谢表以来，未之见也。世人以杜老褒激之故，或稍诵其诗，以《中兴颂》故诵其文，不闻有称其表者，予是以备录之，以风后之君子。
现代文：看次山上表中的话，只是通过向皇上致谢而能透彻论述百姓穷困、官吏凶恶的清况，规劝天子精心选择地方长官，自有谢表以来，还没有见过这种写法，人们因为杜甫表彰的缘故，或许多少读过些元结的诗，因为《中兴颂》的缘故诵读他的文章，却不见有称道他上表的，我因此全抄录下来，拿它感化后代的君子。
English: Looking at the words in the table on the second mountain, it is only by thanking the emperor that we can thoroughly discuss the poverty of the people and the viciousness of the officials, and advise the emperor to carefully select local governors. Since the thank-you table, we have not seen this kind of writing. People read his articles because of Du Fu's commendation, or because they have read a lot of poems that have little connection with the Yuan Dynasty, or because of "Zhongxing Ode," but there is no praise for him on the table. Therefore, I copied it all down and used it to inspire future generations of gentlemen.

古文：次山临道州，岁在癸卯，唐代宗初元广德也。
现代文：次山赴道州上任，是癸卯年，唐代宗广德元年。
English: The next time Shan went to Daozhou to take office was in the year of Zou Yu, the first year of the Tang Dynasty Zongguangde.

