古文：宋晟，字景阳，定远人。
现代文：宋晟，字景阳，定远人。
English: Song Xi, Zha Jingyang, Ding Yuan Ren.

古文：父朝用，兄国兴，并从渡江，皆积功至元帅。
现代文：父亲宋朝开、兄宋国兴，都随从太祖渡江，并都积功劳任到元帅。
English: His father, Song Chaokai, and his brother, Song Guoxing, both followed their great-great-grandfather across the Yangtze River, and both rose to the rank of marshal.

古文：攻集庆，国兴战殁，晟嗣其职。
现代文：攻打集庆时，国兴战死，宋晟承袭他的职位。
English: During the attack on Jieqing, Guoxing died in battle, and Song Jun inherited his position.

古文：既而朝用请老，晟方从邓愈克徽州，召还，袭父官。
现代文：不久朝开请求回家终老，宋晟正随从邓愈攻克徽州，被召回，承袭父官。
English: Soon after, the emperor asked him to return home for the rest of his life. Song Xi, who had followed Deng Yu in conquering Kehui Prefecture, was recalled to succeed his father.

古文：累进都指挥同知，历镇江西、大同、陕西。
现代文：累升为都指挥同知，历镇江西、大同、陕西。
English: He has been promoted to the rank of Metropolitan Conductor, and has conducted in Jiangxi, Datong and Shaanxi.

古文：洪武十二年坐法降凉州卫指挥使。
现代文：洪武十二年，他犯法被降为凉州卫指挥使。
English: In the 12th year of Hongwu, he broke the law and was demoted to commander of the Liangzhou garrison.

古文：十七年五月讨西番叛酋，至亦集乃路，擒元海道千户也先帖木儿、国公吴把都剌赤等，俘获万八千人，送酋长京师，简其精锐千人补卒伍，余悉放遣。
现代文：十七年五月，他讨伐西番叛乱首领，到亦集乃路时，擒获元朝海道千户也先帖木儿、国公把都剌赤等人，俘虏和斩杀一万八千人，将他们的酋长送到京师，挑选出他们的精锐一千人补充为部伍，其他人全部放还。
English: In May 17th, he fought against the leaders of the Xipan Rebellion. When he arrived at Yixin Road, he captured and killed 18,000 people, including the leaders of the Yuan Dynasty, such as Chao Daido, Chifeng, Timur, and Guogong, and sent their chiefs to the Beijing Division. He selected 1,000 of their best men to supplement the division, and all the others were released.

古文：召还，复为都指挥，进右军都督佥事，仍镇凉州。
现代文：宋晟被召回，重任为都指挥，进升右军都督佥事，仍镇守凉州。
English: Song Xi was recalled and given the important task of commanding the capital. He was promoted to the position of right-wing military governor and remained in charge of the defense of Liangzhou.

古文：二十四年充总兵官，与都督刘真讨哈梅里。
现代文：二十四年宋晟充任总兵官，与都督刘真讨伐哈梅里。
English: In 1924, Song Xizhong was appointed commander-in-chief, and he and the governor Liu Zhen fought against Hameri.

古文：其地去肃州千余里。
现代文：该地离肃州有一千多里。
English: This place is more than a thousand miles away from Suzhou.

古文：晟令军中多具粮糗，倍道疾驰，乘夜至城下。
现代文：宋晟令军中多准备干粮，一天走两天的路，疾速前进，乘夜推进到了他们城下。
English: Song Tao ordered the army to prepare mostly dry grain, walk two days a day, advance rapidly, and advance to their city by night.

古文：质明，金鼓声震地，阖城股栗，遂克之。擒其王子别儿怯帖木儿，及伪国公以下三十余人，收其部落辎重以归。
现代文：天亮时，金鼓之声震地，敌人全城股栗战抖，遂攻克了其城，擒获其王子别儿怯帖木儿，以及伪国公以下三十余人，将其部落和辎重收缴而归。
English: At dawn, the sound of the golden drum shook the earth, and the whole city trembled. The enemy conquered the city, captured its prince, Bei'er Qiu Timu'er, and more than 30 people under the pseudo-duke, and returned with their tribes and baggage.

古文：自是番戎慴服，兵威极于西域。
现代文：从此番人戎人慑服，我兵威达到西域。
English: Since then, the guards have been in uniform, and our military power has reached the western region.

古文：明年五月从蓝玉征罕东，徇阿真川，土酋哈昝等遁去。
现代文：第二年五月宋晟随蓝玉征罕东，巡行阿真川，土酋哈昝等人逃走。
English: In May of the following year, Song Tao accompanied Lan Yu to conquer Handong, marched along the Ajin River, and the local chief, Harun, and others fled.

古文：师还，调中军都督佥事。
现代文：部队回来后，他调任中军都督佥事。
English: After the troops returned, he was transferred to the post of the Chinese military governor.

古文：二十八年六月，从总兵官周兴出开原，至忽剌江。
现代文：二十八年六月，宋晟随总兵官周兴出开原，到达忽剌江。
English: In June of the 28th year, Song Tao followed the general officer Zhou Xing out of the open country and reached the Hulun River.

古文：部长西阳哈遁，追至甫答迷城，俘人畜而还。
现代文：部长西阳哈逃走，官军追到甫答迷城，俘人畜而还。
English: The minister Xiyang Ha fled, and the government army chased him to Futa Maicheng, captured people and animals, and then returned.

古文：明年拜征南右副将军，讨广西帡幪诸寨苗，擒斩七千余人。
现代文：第二年他被任为征南右副将军，讨伐广西巾并蒙等寨的苗人，擒获和斩杀七千余人。
English: The next year, he was appointed as the vice-general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, and fought against the Miao people in Guangxi Province, capturing and slaughtering more than seven thousand people.

古文：又明年，总羽林八卫兵讨平五开、龙里苗。
现代文：又过了一年，宋晟总领羽林八卫的部队讨平五开、龙里苗人。
English: Another year passed, and the troops of Song Dynasty general and leader Ulin Bawei fought to pacify Wukai and Longli Miao.

古文：三十一年出镇开平，从燕王出塞，还城万全诸卫。
现代文：三十一年他出镇开平，随从燕王出塞，回来后筑万全卫等城。
English: In the 31st year, he went out of the town to Kaiping, followed Yan Wang out of the city, and built Wanquanwei and other cities after returning.

古文：建文改元，仍镇甘肃。
现代文：建文改元后，他仍镇甘肃。
English: After Jianwen was reformed, he remained in Gansu.

古文：成祖即位，入朝，进后军左都督，拜平羌将军，遣还镇。
现代文：成祖即位后，宋晟入京朝见，进升为后军左都督，拜为平羌将军，遣回所镇地区。
English: After the enthronement of Chengzu, Song Tao entered the imperial court in Beijing, was promoted to the left governor of the rear army, was worshiped as the general of Pingyao, and was sent back to the Sozhen area.

古文：永乐三年招降把都帖木儿、伦都儿灰等部落五千人，获马驼牛羊万六千。
现代文：永乐三年，他招降把都帖木儿、伦都儿灰等部落五千人，获得马驼牛羊一万六千头。
English: In the third year of Yongle, he recruited and surrendered five thousand tribes such as Du Timur and Luntu Erhai, and obtained sixteen thousand horses, camels, cattle and sheep.

古文：封西宁侯，禄千一百石，世指挥使。
现代文：他被封为西宁侯，食禄一千一百石，世袭指挥使。
English: He was made the lord of Xining, with a stipend of 1,100 koku, and was a hereditary commander.

古文：晟凡四镇凉州，前后二十余年，威信著绝域。
现代文：宋晟共四次出镇凉州，前后二十余年，威信达于边陲。
English: Song Tao went to Liangzhou four times in total, and for more than 20 years, his prestige reached the border.

古文：帝以晟旧臣，有大将材，专任以边事，所奏请辄报可。
现代文：皇上因宋晟是旧臣，有大将之才，所以用他专任边事，凡有奏请，总是批准。
English: The emperor, because Song Tao was an old vassal and had the ability of a general, used him exclusively for peripheral affairs. Whenever there was a request, he always approved it.

古文：御史劾晟自专。
现代文：御史弹劾宋晟自专。
English: History impeached Song Tao for his self-cultivation.

古文：帝曰： 任人不专则不能成功，况大将统制一边，宁能尽拘文法。 
现代文：皇上说 ：任人不专则不能成功，况且大将军统制一边，怎能完全拘泥于文法？ 
English: The emperor said, "It is impossible to succeed if you don't follow the rules, and besides, how can you completely stick to grammar if you are in charge of the army?"

古文：即敕晟以便宜从事。
现代文：即敕令宋晟可以相机行事。
English: That is to say, the Emperor ordered Song Tao to act with the camera.

古文：诚三矢殪三人，寇惊散，尽驱所掠还。
现代文：宋晟曾请入京朝见，朝廷回报说： 西北的边务，全部托付给卿。不是朝廷召命，不要擅自来。 
English: Song Tao once invited him to visit the imperial court in Beijing. The imperial court replied: "The border affairs in the northwest are all entrusted to you. You are not summoned by the imperial court, so do not come without permission."

古文：九传至孙裕德，死流寇难。
现代文：不久命他经营河西牧地，以及规划出塞方略。
English: Before long, he was running the Hexi Pasture, as well as planning out the pasture strategy.

古文：薛禄，胶人。
现代文：正好他这时病逝，这是在五年七月。薛禄，胶人。
English: It was just at this time that he died of illness, this was in July of the fifth year.

古文：行六，军中呼曰 薛六 。
现代文：他排行第六，军中称他为薛六。
English: He ranked sixth, and the army called him Xue Liu.

古文：既贵，乃更名 禄 。
现代文：显贵之后，便更名为禄。
English: After his rise to prominence, his name was changed to Roku.

古文：禄以卒伍从燕起兵，首夺九门。
现代文：薛禄以一名兵卒跟随燕王起兵，第一个夺取九门。
English: Xue Lu followed Yan Wang with a pawn, and was the first to seize the Nine Gates.

古文：真定之战，左副将军李坚迎斗。
现代文：真定之战，左副将军李坚迎战。
English: In the decisive battle, the left vice-general Li Jian entered the battle.

古文：锋始交，禄持槊刺坚坠马，擒之。
现代文：刚一交锋，薛禄持槊将李坚刺下马，擒住了他。
English: Just after the duel, Xue Lu stabbed Li Jian Rong off his horse with a pickaxe and choked him.

古文：擢指挥佥事。
现代文：升为指挥佥事。
English: He was promoted to the post of conductor.

古文：从援永平，下大宁、富峪、会州、宽河。
现代文：后来他援助永平，攻下大宁、富峪、会州、宽河。
English: Later, he aided Yongping and captured the cities of Daning, Fuxi, Hezhou and Kuanhe.

古文：还救北平，先驱败南军游骑。进指挥同知。
现代文：回救北平时，他作为先头部队击败南军游骑，进升为指挥同知。
English: When rescuing Peiping, he led the troops to defeat the Southern Army Rangers, and was promoted to the same rank as the commander.

古文：攻大同，为先锋。
现代文：攻打大同时他任先锋。
English: He was the spearhead of the attack.

古文：战白沟河，追奔至济南，迁指挥使。
现代文：白沟河一战，他追到济南，升为指挥使。
English: During the Battle of Baigou River, he chased the enemy to Jinan and was promoted to commander.

古文：战东昌，以五十骑败南兵数百。
现代文：东昌一战，他以五十骑兵击败南军数百名。
English: In the First Battle of Dongchang, he defeated hundreds of Southern troops with fifty cavalrymen.

古文：时成祖为盛庸所败，还走北平。
现代文：当时成祖被盛庸击败，跑回北平。
English: At that time, Cheng Zu was defeated by Shengyong and ran back to Beiping.

古文：庸檄真定诸将屯威县、深州，邀燕归路。
现代文：盛庸传檄真定各将领屯驻威县、深州，拦截成祖归路。
English: Sheng Yong conveyed the message to Zhen Ding, and the generals stationed themselves in Weixian and Shenzhou to intercept Cheng Zu's return route.

古文：禄皆击走之。
现代文：薛禄将他们全部击退。
English: Xue Lu beat them all back.

古文：战滹沱河，右军却。禄驰赴阵，出入数十战，破之。追奔至夹河，斩馘无算。
现代文：滹沱河一战，右军退却，薛禄策马赴阵，出入数十战，击破南军，追到夹河，斩杀无数。
English: In the First Battle of the Li River, the right army retreated, and Xue Luo led his horse into the battle. He went into and out of dozens of battles, defeated the Southern Army, chased them to the Li River, and killed countless people.

古文：战单家桥，为平安所执。奋脱缚，拔刀杀守卒，驰还复战，大败安军。
现代文：单家桥一战，他被平安抓住，后来他奋力挣脱绳子，拔刀杀死守卒，飞驰回来再战，大败平安军。
English: He was caught by the Heian army in the Battle of Shingakubashi Bridge. Later, he struggled to break free from the rope, drew his sword and killed the guard, then rushed back to fight again, defeating the Heian army.

古文：掠顺德、大名、彰德。
现代文：攻占顺德、大名、彰德。
English: Conquer Shunde, Daimyo, and Changde.

古文：攻西水寨，生擒都指挥花英。乘胜下东阿、东平、汶上，连战淝河、小河、灵璧，功最。
现代文：攻打西水寨时，他生擒都指挥花英，乘胜攻下东阿、东平、汶上，连战淝河、小河、灵璧，功劳最大。
English: When attacking Xishuizhai, he commanded Huaying all his life, and won the victory to conquer Dong'a, Dongping, and Wenshang. He also fought the Luhe River, Xiaohe River, and Lingbi River, which was the greatest achievement.

古文：入京师，擢都督佥事。
现代文：入京师后，他升为都督佥事。
English: After moving to Beijing, he was promoted to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：永乐六年进同知。
现代文：永乐六年进升为同知。
English: Yongle was promoted to the same rank six years later.

古文：八年充骠骑将军，从北征，进右都督。
现代文：八年，他充任骠骑将军，随从皇上北征，进升为右都督。
English: Eight years later, he was appointed as the general of the cavalry, followed the emperor's Northern Expedition, and was promoted to the right-hand governor.

古文：十年上言： 自古用人，必资豫教。
现代文：十年他上书说： 自古以来，用人必先进行教育。
English: Ten years ago, he wrote: Since ancient times, employers must first educate.

古文：今武臣子弟闲暇不教，恐缓急无可使者。 
现代文：现在武臣子弟在闲暇时期不教，恐怕将来有缓急之事时，没人足以委任。 
English: Now, the sons and daughters of the samurai do not teach during their leisure time. I am afraid that in the future, when there is a matter of priority, no one will be able to delegate.

古文：帝韪其言。
现代文：皇上赞同他的话。
English: The Emperor agreed with his words.

古文：会四方送幼军数万至，悉隶禄操习之。
现代文：正好四方送来数万幼军，皇上让他们全部隶属于薛禄，由他来操练。
English: Just as the four sides sent tens of thousands of young soldiers, the emperor made them all subordinate to Xue Lu and let him train them.

古文：十五年以行在后军都督董营造。
现代文：十五年，他以行在后军都督之职总管营造工程。
English: For fifteen years, he was in charge of the construction project as the post-war military governor.

古文：十八年十二月定都北京，授奉天靖难推诚宣力武臣，封阳武侯，禄千一百石。
现代文：十八年十二月定都北京，授予他奉天靖难推诚宣力武臣，封阳武侯，食禄一千一百石。
English: In December of the 18th year, Beijing was designated as the capital, and he was awarded the title of "Bong Tianjing Nian Xuancheng Xuanli Wuxin" and "Fengyang Wuhou" with a stipend of 1,100 koku.

古文：二十一年将右哨从北征。
现代文：二十一年他率领右哨随从皇上北征。
English: In 1921, he led the Right Sentinel to accompany the Emperor on the Northern Expedition.

古文：还，讨平长兴盗。
现代文：回来时，他平长兴贼人。
English: When he came back, he was a thief.

古文：二十二年再领右哨从北征。
现代文：二十二年，他再领右哨随从北征。
English: Twenty-two years later, he again led the right post to follow the Northern Expedition.

古文：仁宗即位，命掌左府，加太子太保，予世券。
现代文：仁宗即位后，命他掌管左军都督府，加封为太子太保，给予世袭诰券。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he ordered him to be in charge of the Left Army's Governor-General's Office, to be given the additional title of Crown Prince Taibo, and to be given hereditary vouchers.

古文：洪熙元年充总兵官，备御塞外。
现代文：洪熙元年他充任总兵官，防备塞外。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, he was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the People's Liberation Army to guard against foreign invasion.

古文：寻以获寇功，益禄五百石。
现代文：不久他以擒获敌寇之功，增加禄米五百石。
English: Soon after, he was awarded 500 koku of additional rupees for capturing an enemy.

古文：是年颁诸将军印于各边镇，禄佩镇朔大将军印，巡开平，至大同边。
现代文：这一年皇上给各边镇的将军颁发印章，薛禄佩镇朔大将军印，巡视开平，到达大同边塞。
English: In this year, the emperor issued seals to the generals of each border town, and Xue Lupe Town issued a general seal, inspected Kaiping, and arrived at Datong border fortress.

古文：宣宗即位，召还，陈备边五事。
现代文：宣宗即位后，他被召回，向皇上陈述了备边的五条建议。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he was recalled and made a five-point proposal to the emperor.

古文：寻复遣巡边。
现代文：不久又遣他巡边。
English: He was soon sent out on patrol.

古文：宣德元年从征乐安，为前锋。
现代文：宣德元年他从征乐安，为前锋。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, he was promoted from a player to a striker.

古文：高煦就擒，留禄与尚书张本镇抚之。
现代文：朱高煦就擒后，留下薛禄与尚书张本镇抚乐安。
English: After Zhu Gaozhen went to bed, he left Xue Lu and Shang Shu Zhang in the town to have a good rest.

古文：明年春，奉诏巡视畿南诸府城池，严戒军士毋扰民，违者以军法论。
现代文：第二年春，他奉诏巡视畿南各府城池，严诫军士不要骚扰百姓，否则以军法论处。
English: In the spring of the following year, he was ordered to inspect the cities and towns of the prefectures in the southern part of Gyeonggi Province, and he strictly warned the soldiers not to harass the people, otherwise they would be punished according to military law.

古文：是夏复佩大将军印，北巡开平，还驻宣府。
现代文：这年夏他又佩大将军印，北巡开平，回来后驻在宣府。
English: In the summer of that year, he again wore the general's seal, went on a tour of the north, and stayed in Xuanfu after his return.

古文：敌犯开平，无所得而退，去城三百余里。禄帅精兵昼伏夜行，三夕至。
现代文：敌人侵犯开平，无所得而退，离开城池三百余里，扎营，薛禄率领精兵昼夜疾行，三天赶到敌营。
English: The enemy invaded Kaiping, retreated without any income, left the city for more than three hundred miles, and set up camp. Xue Lu led the elite soldiers to rush day and night, and rushed to the enemy camp for three days.

古文：纵轻骑蹂敌营，破之，大获人畜。
现代文：他放出轻骑践踏敌营，击破了它，大获人畜。
English: He sent out light cavalry to trample the enemy camp, broke it, and greatly increased the number of people and animals.

古文：师还，敌蹑其后，复奋击败之，敌由是远遁。
现代文：回师时，敌人跟踪，他又奋力将其击败，敌人因此远逃。
English: When he returned to his division, the enemy followed him and he fought to defeat them, so the enemy fled far away.

古文：召还。
现代文：朝廷将他召回。
English: The court recalled him.

古文：三年从北征，破敌于宽河，留镇蓟州、永平。
现代文：三年，他随从皇上北征，在宽河击破敌人，留下镇守蓟州、永平。
English: In three years, he followed the emperor to the Northern Expedition, defeated the enemy in Kuanhe, and left the garrisons of Bozhou and Yongping.

古文：复数佩镇朔印，巡边护饷，出开平、宣府间。
现代文：他又多次佩镇朔大将军印，巡视边防，保护粮饷，出入于开平、宣府之间。
English: He also repeatedly wore the seal of General Zhenshuo, patrolled the border, protected grain, and went in and out of Kaiping and Xuanfu.

古文：五年遇敌于凤凰岭，斩获多，加太保。
现代文：五年，他在凤凰镇遇上敌人，斩杀和俘获很多，加封为太保。
English: Five years later, he encountered the enemy in Fenghuang Town, killed and captured many, and was awarded the title of Taibo.

古文：上言永宁卫团山及雕鹗、赤城、云州、独石宜筑城堡，便守御。
现代文：他上书说永宁卫团山和雕鹗、赤城、云州、独石应构筑城堡，以便守卫。
English: He wrote that Yongning Weiduan Mountain and Zhulun, Akechi, Yunnan, and Monolith should build castles to guard them.

古文：诏发军民三万六千赴工，精骑一千五百护之，皆听禄节制。
现代文：诏令调发军民三万六千人去动工，以精骑一千五百人保护他们，都听薛禄节制。
English: The imperial edict dispatched 36,000 soldiers and civilians to start the construction and protected them with 1,500 horsemen, all of whom obeyed Xue Lu's restraint.

古文：临行赐诗，以山甫、南仲为比。
现代文：临行时皇上赐给他一首诗，以山甫、南仲作比喻。
English: When he was about to leave, the emperor gave him a poem, using Sanpo and Nanzhong as a metaphor.

古文：禄武人不知书，以问杨士奇。
现代文：薛禄是武人，不知书，便问杨士奇。
English: Xue Lu is a warrior, he doesn't know how to read, so he asked Yang Shiqi.

古文：士奇曰： 上以古贤人待君也。 
现代文：杨士奇说 ：皇上把你比作古代的贤人。 
English: Yang Shichi said, "The Emperor likened you to an ancient sage."

古文：禄拊心曰； 禄安敢望前贤，然敢不勉图报上恩万一。 
现代文：薛禄抚胸说道： 我薛禄怎敢望前贤，但岂敢不勉力图报皇上圣恩于万一！ 
English: Xue Luo stroked his chest and said: How dare I, Xue Luo, look up to the previous sages, but how dare I not make an effort to repay the emperor's grace in the unlikely event!

古文：其年六月有疾，召还。
现代文：这一年六月薛禄有病，将他召回。
English: In June of that year, Xue Luo fell ill and was recalled.

古文：逾月卒。
现代文：过了一个月，他去世。
English: He died a month later.

古文：赠鄞国公，谥忠武。
现代文：赠鄞国公，谥忠武。
English: He was presented with the title of "Kokuko" and the title of "Tadambu."

古文：禄有勇而好谋，谋定后战，战必胜。
现代文：薛禄有勇而好谋，谋定之后才战，所以战必胜。
English: Xue Lu was brave and resourceful. He only fought after he had made his plans, so he was sure to win the battle.

古文：妾田氏自经以殉，赠淑人。
现代文：他带兵纪律严明，秋毫无犯。
English: He led his soldiers with strict discipline and committed no crimes.

古文：刘荣，宿迁人。
现代文：他善于安抚士卒，与他们同甘苦，所以人们都乐于为他所用。 靖难 诸功臣中，以张玉、朱能和薛禄三人为最，而薛禄历事三朝，岿然是当时的宿将。刘荣，宿迁人。
English: He was good at placating his subordinates and working with them through thick and thin, so people were happy to use him.Jing NangAmong all the meritorious vassals, Zhang Yu, Zhu Neng and Xue Lu were the three most important, and Xue Lu had lived through three dynasties, so he was the commander at that time.Liu Rong, a transplant.

古文：初冒父名江。
现代文：早先冒称父亲之名刘江。
English: Earlier, Liu Jiang pretended to be his father.

古文：从魏国公徐达战灰山、黑松林。
现代文：随从魏国公徐达战灰山、黑松林。
English: Wei Guogong's followers gradually reached the War Gray Mountain and the Black Pine Forest.

古文：为总旗，给事燕邸。
现代文：后来任总旗，在燕王邸中供事。
English: Later, he served as the flag-bearer and worked in the residence of King Yan.

古文：雄伟多智略，成祖深器之，授密云卫百户。
现代文：他身材高大而多智略，成祖很器重他，授予他密云卫百户。
English: He was tall and clever, and Cheng Zu held him in high esteem, awarding him the title of "Miyunwei Hundred Households."

古文：从起兵为前锋，屡立战功。
现代文：他随从燕王起兵，做前锋，屡立战功。
English: He followed Yan Wang in the army and served as a forward, repeatedly making war exploits.

古文：徇山东，与朱荣帅精骑三千，夜袭南军于滑口，斩数千人，获马三千，擒都指挥唐礼等。
现代文：巡视山东时，他与朱荣率精骑三千名，夜袭滑口的南军，斩杀数千人，获得马匹三千，擒获都指挥唐礼等人。
English: When inspecting Shandong, he and Zhu Rong led 3,000 horsemen, attacked the Southern Army at night, killed thousands of people, obtained 3,000 horses, and captured the commander of Tang Li and others.

古文：累授都指挥佥事。
现代文：累升为都指挥佥事。
English: He has been promoted to the post of Metropolitan Conductor.

古文：战滹沱河，夺浮桥，掠馆陶、曹州，大获。
现代文：战滹沱河时，他奇取浮桥，占领馆陶、曹州，缴获很多。
English: During the Battle of the Fen River, he took the floating bridge by surprise, occupied Guantao and Caozhou, and captured a lot.

古文：还军救北平，败平安军于平村。
现代文：回军救北平时，他在平村击败平安的部队。
English: When he returned to save Peiping, he defeated the troops of Ping'an in Pingcun.

古文：杨文以辽东兵围永平，江往援，文引却。
现代文：杨文以辽东兵包围永平，刘江前往救援，杨文引兵退走。
English: Yang Wen surrounded Yongping with Liaodong soldiers, Liu Jiang went to the rescue, Yang Wen led the soldiers back.

古文：江声言还北平，行二十余里，卷甲夜入永平。
现代文：刘江扬言要回北平，走了二十余里后，又卷甲连夜进入永平城。
English: Liu Jiang threatened to return to Beiping. After walking more than 20 miles, he rolled into Yongping City overnight.

古文：文闻江去，复来攻。
现代文：杨文听说刘江走了，又来攻打永平。
English: Yang Wen heard that Liu Jiang had left and came to attack Yongping again.

古文：江突出掩击，大败之。斩首数千，擒指挥王雄等七十一人。
现代文：刘江突出掩杀，大败杨文的部队，斩首数千，擒获指挥王雄等七十一人。
English: Liu Jiang conspicuously covered up the murder, defeated Yang Wen's troops, beheaded thousands, and captured seventy-one people, including the commander Wang Xiong.

古文：迁都指挥使。
现代文：他升为都指挥使。
English: He was promoted to the post of Metropolitan Commander.

古文：从至淝河，与白义、王真以轻骑诱致平安，败之。
现代文：他随从皇上到淝河，与白义、王真以轻骑诱引平安，将他击败。
English: He followed the emperor to the Li River, and together with Bai Yi and Wang Zhen, he rode lightly to lure Ping An and defeat him.

古文：时南军驻宿州，积粮为持久计。
现代文：当时南军驻扎在宿州，积蓄粮食作持久打算。
English: At that time, the Southern Army was stationed in Suzhou, with the long-term plan of stockpiling grain.

古文：成祖患之，议绝其饷道。命江将三千人往，趑趄不行。
现代文：成祖很担心，计划断绝其粮道，命刘江率三千人前往，但刘江犹豫不前。
English: Cheng Zu was very worried. He planned to cut off his food supply and ordered Liu Jiang to go with three thousand people, but Liu Jiang hesitated.

古文：成祖大怒，欲斩之。诸将叩首请，乃免。
现代文：成祖大怒，想斩了他，诸将叩头求情，才把他免了。
English: Cheng Zu flew into a rage and wanted to behead him, but the generals bowed and begged for mercy, and he was spared.

古文：渡江策功，以前罪不封，止授都督佥事。
现代文：后来评出谋渡江之功，因为有前罪，不给他加封，只授予他都督佥事。
English: Later, he was awarded the merit of crossing the river, but because he had a previous crime, he was not given a seal, and he was only awarded the title of governor.

古文：迁中府右都督。
现代文：后升为中军都督府右都督。
English: Later, he was promoted to the right-hand governor of the Chinese military governor's office.

古文：永乐八年从北征，以游击将军督前哨。
现代文：永乐八年他随从皇上北征，以游击将军之衔督率前哨。
English: In the eighth year of Yongle, he followed the emperor to the Northern Expedition and led the outpost with the rank of guerrilla general.

古文：乘夜据清水源，败敌斡难河，复败阿鲁台于靖虏镇。
现代文：他趁夜占领清水源，击败敌人于斡难河，又击败阿鲁台于靖虏镇。
English: He took advantage of the night to occupy the clear water source, defeated the enemy in Yudanango River, and defeated Arutai in Jingru Town.

古文：师还为殿，即军中进左都督，遣镇辽东。
现代文：回师时他殿后，就在军中进升为左都督，遣去镇守孙东。
English: When he returned to his master, he was promoted to Left Governor in the army and sent to the town of Sun Dong.

古文：敌阑入杀官军。
现代文：敌人闯入杀死官军。
English: The enemy broke in and killed the government troops.

古文：帝怒，命斩江，既而宥之。
现代文：皇上大怒，下令斩刘江，过后又宽宥了他。
English: The emperor was furious, ordered Liu Jiang to be beheaded, and later pardoned him.

古文：九年复镇辽东。
现代文：九年他又出镇辽东。
English: Nine years later, he left Liaodong.

古文：十二年再从北征，仍为前锋，将劲骑侦敌于饮马河。
现代文：十二年他再次随从皇上北征，仍任先锋，率领轻骑到饮马河侦察敌人。
English: Twelve years later, he once again accompanied the emperor on the Northern Expedition, still serving as the vanguard, leading the light cavalry to spy on the enemy in the Binma River.

古文：见敌骑东走，追至康哈里孩，击斩数十人。
现代文：他见敌骑东走，便一路追到康哈里孩，斩杀数十人。
English: When he saw the enemy riding east, he chased them all the way to Kanghariyao and killed dozens of them.

古文：复与大军合击马哈木于忽失温，下马持短兵突阵，斩获多，受上赏。
现代文：后来又与大军在忽失温合击马哈木，下马持短兵器突入敌阵，斩获很多，受到上赏。
English: Later, he joined the large army in a surprise attack on Maham. He dismounted and charged into the enemy lines with a short weapon. He made a lot of gains and was rewarded.

古文：复充总兵官，镇辽东。
现代文：再次充任总兵官，镇守辽东。
English: He was once again appointed commander-in-chief and town guard of Liaodong.

古文：倭数寇海上，北抵辽，南讫浙、闽，濒海郡邑多被害。
现代文：倭寇多次侵犯海上，北自辽东，南达浙江、福建，沿海各州县多遭残害。
English: The wokou repeatedly invaded the sea, from Liaodong in the north to Zhejiang and Fujian in the south, and the coastal states and counties were mostly damaged.

古文：江度形势，请于金线岛西北望海埚筑城堡，设烽堠，严兵以待。
现代文：刘江审度形势，请在金线岛西北的望海埚构筑城堡，设立烽火，严兵以待。
English: Liu Jiang, assess the situation, please build a castle in the northwest of the Golden Line Island, set up a bonfire, and wait for the soldiers.

古文：十七年六月，瞭者言东南海岛中举火。
现代文：十七年六月，望的人说东南海岛上举火。
English: In June of the seventeenth year, onlookers said that a fire was lit on Southeast Sea Island.

古文：江急引兵赴埚上。
现代文：刘江急忙领兵赶赴埚上。
English: Liu Jiang hurriedly led the soldiers to the raft.

古文：倭三十余舟至，泊马雄岛，登岸奔望海埚。
现代文：倭寇三十余艘船来到，停泊在马雄岛，登岸奔向望海埚。
English: More than 30 wako ships came, anchored in Maoxiong Island, and rushed to the shore to watch the seagulls.

古文：江依山设伏，别遣将断其归路，以步卒迎战，佯却。
现代文：刘江依山埋设伏兵，另遣将领断其归路，以步兵迎战，假装退却。
English: Liu Jiang set up an ambush on Mount Yishan, and sent another general to cut off his way back, met the battle with infantry, and pretended to retreat.

古文：贼入伏中，炮举伏起，自辰至酉，大破贼。
现代文：贼人进入埋伏地区，炮响伏发，从早上八九点战到下午五六点，大败贼寇。
English: The bandits entered the ambush area, the cannons rang out, and from eight or nine in the morning until five or six in the afternoon, the bandits were defeated.

古文：贼走樱桃园空堡中，江开西壁纵之走。复分两路夹击，尽覆之，斩首千余级，生擒百三十人。
现代文：贼寇逃到樱桃园空堡中。刘江放开西壁让他们走，然后分两路夹击，全部将他们歼灭，斩首一千余首，生擒一百三十人。
English: The bandits fled to the empty castle in the cherry orchard. Liu Jiang opened the west wall to let them go, and then clamped them in two ways, annihilated them all, beheaded more than a thousand heads, and captured one hundred and thirty people alive.

古文：自是倭大创，不敢复入辽东。
现代文：从此倭寇受到严重打击，不敢再进入辽东。
English: From then on, the wokou were dealt a serious blow and dared not enter Liaodong again.

古文：诏封广宁伯，禄千二百石，予世券，始更名荣。
现代文：诏令封他为广宁伯，食禄一千二百石，给予世袭诰券。他这时才改名为荣。
English: The imperial edict named him Guangningbo, with a stipend of twelve hundred koku, and gave him hereditary vouchers. It was only then that he changed his name to Rong.

古文：寻遣还镇。
现代文：不久遣他回到镇守之地。
English: He was soon sent back to the town of Tsu.

古文：明年四月卒。
现代文：第二年四月他去世。
English: He died the following April.

古文：曹钦反，安被创，加太子少傅。
现代文：刘荣做将军，常做前锋，所向没有攻不破的坚阵。
English: Liu Rong as a general, often as a striker, there is no invincible lineup.

古文：成化中卒。
现代文：他约束士卒有纪律，恩信严明。
English: He is disciplined and trustworthy.

古文：赠峄国公，谥忠僖。
现代文：那些来求通于中国的外族人，他也安抚备至。
English: He was also very reassuring to foreigners who came to China to seek a better life.

古文：传爵至明亡。
现代文：他去世后，人们都怀念他。赠侯爵，谥忠武。
English: The two peerages were passed down until the fall of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：朱荣，字仲华，沂人。
现代文：朱荣，字仲华，沂人。
English: Zhu Rong, Zha Zhonghua, Zou Ren.

古文：洪武十四年，以总旗从西平侯沐英征云南。
现代文：洪武十四年，他以总旗身份随从西平侯沐英征云南。
English: In the 14th year of Hongwu, he accompanied Xiping Prince Muying to invade Yunnan as the flag-bearer.

古文：累官副千户。
现代文：累升为副千户。
English: The total number of households has risen to 1,000.

古文：守大宁，降于成祖。
现代文：后来驻守大宁，归降成祖。
English: Later, he was stationed in Danying and returned to Chengzu.

古文：袭孙霖于滑口，围定州，断南军饷道，大小二十余战，论功授都督佥事。
现代文：他在滑口袭击孙霖，包围定州，截断南军粮道，经历大小二十余战，论功被授予都督佥事。
English: He attacked Sun Lin at the slipway, encircled Dingzhou, cut off the food supply of the Southern Army, experienced more than 20 battles, and was awarded the title of Tudor Anecdote.

古文：永乐四年从新城侯张辅征交阯，破鸡陵关，会沐晟于白鹤。
现代文：永乐四年，他跟随新城侯张辅征交趾，攻破鸡陵关，在白鹤与沐晟会合。
English: In the fourth year of Yongle, he followed the new city lord Zhang Fu Zheng, broke through the chicken tomb pass, and met with Mu Xi in Bai He.

古文：辅等议于嘉林江上流济师，遣荣阵下流十八里，日增其数以惑贼。又作舟筏为欲济状，以牵制之。
现代文：张辅等人计划在嘉林江上游渡江，派朱荣在下游十八里远的地方结阵，每天给他增兵以迷惑敌人，还造船装作要渡江的样子，以牵制敌人。
English: Zhang Fu and others planned to cross the upper reaches of the Jialing River, and sent Zhu Rong to form an array in a place 18 miles downstream, giving him more troops every day to confuse the enemy. They also built a ship to pretend to cross the river to deter the enemy.

古文：贼果分兵渡江登岸。荣等奋击，大破之。
现代文：贼人果然分兵渡江登岸，朱荣等人奋勇攻击，大破贼人。
English: The bandits did indeed cross the river and go ashore, and Zhu Rong and the others bravely attacked and defeated the bandits.

古文：大军进克多邦城，荣功为多。
现代文：大军进而攻克多邦城。此战朱荣功劳最多。
English: The large army went on to conquer the city of Dobang. Zhu Rong did the most in this battle.

古文：帝以荣尝怠事，师还论功，仅擢右都督，赐白金钞币。
现代文：皇上因朱荣曾经误事，回师后论功，仅升他为右都督，赐给白金和钞币。
English: Emperor Zhu Rong once made a mistake because of Zhu Rong, and after returning to his teacher, he praised his performance, but only promoted him to the right governor, and gave him platinum and banknotes.

古文：七年复从辅讨贼余党，平之。
现代文：七年，他又随从张辅讨攻贼人余党，将其平定。
English: In the seventh year, he followed Zhang Shuo to attack the remaining traitors and subdue them.

古文：明年督右掖，从征阿鲁台，与刘荣并进左都督。
现代文：第二年他督领右掖，随从皇上征讨阿鲁台，与刘荣一起进升左都督。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the right-hand governor, followed the emperor to conquer Alutai, and was promoted to the left-hand governor together with Liu Rong.

古文：十二年复从北征，与荣俱为前锋。
现代文：十二年，他又随从皇上北征，与刘荣一起担任前锋。
English: In the twelfth year, he followed the emperor to the Northern Expedition and served as a forward together with Liu Rong.

古文：其冬充总兵官，镇大同。
现代文：这年冬，他充任总兵官，镇守大同。
English: This winter, he served as the chief military officer and the town guard of Datong.

古文：修忙牛岭、兔毛河、赤山、榆杨口、来胜诸城，寇不敢近。
现代文：他修筑忙牛岭、兔毛河、赤山、榆杨口、来胜等城，敌寇不敢靠近。
English: He was busy building cities such as Niuling, Huchenghe, Akayama, Qinyangkou, and Lai Sheng, and the enemy pirates dared not approach.

古文：居三年，召还。
现代文：过了三年，他被召回。
English: Three years later, he was recalled.

古文：十八年，代刘荣镇辽东。
现代文：十八年，他取代刘荣镇守辽东。
English: In 18 years, he replaced Liu Rongzhen as governor of Liaodong.

古文：二十年复从北征，为前锋。
现代文：二十年，他又随从皇上北征，担任前锋。
English: For twenty years, he followed the emperor on the Northern Expedition, serving as a forward.

古文：驻雕鹗诇寇，以五千骑视敌所向。
现代文：他驻扎在雕鹗侦察敌情，以五千骑兵观察敌人动向。
English: He was stationed at Zhulun to reconnoiter the enemy situation and observe the enemy's movement with five thousand cavalrymen.

古文：大军次玉沙泉。
现代文：大军驻扎玉沙泉。
English: A large army was stationed at Yushaquan.

古文：荣帅锐士三百人，人三马，赍二十日粮深入。
现代文：朱荣率锐卒三百人，每人三匹马，带二十天粮食深入。
English: Zhu Rong led three hundred soldiers, three horses per person, with twenty days of grain.

古文：敌已弃牛羊马驼北走，悉收之，焚其辎重，移师破兀良哈。
现代文：敌人已弃下牛羊马驼北逃，朱荣收缴其牛羊马驼，焚烧其辎重，移师攻破兀良哈。
English: The enemy had abandoned their cattle, sheep, and camels and fled north. Zhu Rong seized their cattle, sheep, and camels, burned their baggage, and moved his division to break through Qiliangha.

古文：师还，封武进伯，禄千二百石，仍镇辽东。
现代文：回师后，他被封为武进伯，食禄一千二百石，仍镇守辽东。
English: After returning to his division, he was given the title of Wujinbo, with a stipend of 1,200 koku, and remained in charge of Liaodong.

古文：二十二年复从北征。
现代文：二十二年，他又随从皇上北征。
English: Twenty-two years later, he accompanied the emperor on the Northern Expedition.

古文：已，还镇。
现代文：过后，回到镇守之地。
English: Afterward, return to the town guard's place.

古文：谥忠悫。子瑛嗣。
现代文：洪熙元年，他佩征虏前将军印，仍镇守辽东。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, he wore the seal of a former general who had been conscripted into the army, and he still guarded Liaodong.

古文：传爵至明亡。
现代文：这一年七月，他在驻镇之地去世。赠侯爵，谥忠靖。
English: The two peerages were passed down until the fall of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：费瓛，定远人。
现代文：费王献，定远人。
English: Fei Wang Xian, Ding Yuan Ren.

古文：祖愚，洪武时为燕府左相，改授燕山中护卫指挥使。传子肃。
现代文：祖父费愚，洪武时期任燕王府左相，后改任燕山中扩卫指挥使，传给儿子费肃。
English: Grandfather Fei Gu, during the Hongwu period, served as the Left Minister of the Yan Wangfu, and later became the commander of the Yanshan Central Expansion Guard, passed on to his son Fei Su.

古文：至瓛从成祖起兵有功，累进后军都督佥事。
现代文：传到费王献时，他随从成祖起兵有功，累升为后军都督佥事。
English: When Fei Wang Xian was passed down, he followed Cheng Zu's military exploits and was promoted to the post of military governor.

古文：永乐八年春，凉州卫千户虎保、永昌卫千户亦令真巴等叛，众数千，屯据驿路。
现代文：永乐八年春，凉州卫千户虎保、永昌卫千户亦令真巴等人反叛，有部众数千人，屯据驿路。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of the Yongle Emperor, the Liangzhou Wei-Chen households of Huabao and Yongchang Wei-Chen households also rebelled against Zhenba and others, with thousands of people camping on the road.

古文：新附伯颜帖木儿等应之。
现代文：新近归附朝廷的伯颜帖木儿等人也响应他们。
English: They were echoed by the likes of Bo Yan Timur, who had recently joined the imperial court.

古文：西鄙震动。都指挥李智击之不胜。
现代文：西部边陲震动，都指挥李智去攻打不胜。
English: The western borderlands were shaken, and Li Zhi was ordered to attack.

古文：贼声言攻永昌、凉州城。
现代文：贼人扬言要攻打永昌和凉州城。
English: Thieves have threatened to attack Yongchang and Liangzhou.

古文：皇太子命瓛往讨。
现代文：皇太子命费王献前往征讨。
English: The crown prince gave his life to go and fight.

古文：至凉州，智及都指挥陈怀以师会，遂进兵镇番。
现代文：李智和都指挥陈怀率兵来会合，于是进兵镇番。
English: Li Zhihe ordered Chen Huai and his soldiers to come to the meeting, so the soldiers were sent to guard the town.

古文：遇贼于双城。瓛击其左，怀等击其右。贼大败走，斩首三百余级。
现代文：在双城遭遇贼人，费王献攻击其左翼，陈怀等人攻击其右翼，贼人大败而逃，斩首三百余级。
English: Encountering thieves in Shuangcheng, Fei Wangchen attacked his left wing, Chen Huai and others attacked his right wing, the thieves were defeated and fled, beheading more than three hundred.

古文：追奔至黑鱼海，获贼千余，马驼牛羊十二万。
现代文：官军追到黑鱼海，俘获贼人一千余名，马驼牛羊十二万头。
English: The government army chased them to the Blackfish Sea, capturing more than a thousand thieves, 120,000 camels, cattle and sheep.

古文：虎保等远遁。
现代文：虎保等人远逃。
English: Tiger Bao and the others fled far away.

古文：乃班师。
现代文：于是班师。
English: As a result, the team returned to Japan.

古文：十二年充总兵官，镇甘肃。
现代文：十二年，他充任总兵官，镇守甘肃。
English: Twelve years later, he was appointed chief military officer, and became the town guard of Gansu.

古文：瓛以肃州兵多粮少，脱有调发，猝难措置，请以临巩税粮付近边军丁转运。
现代文：以肃州兵多粮少，倘若有军事行动，仓促之间难以筹措，请将临巩的税粮交给近边军丁转运。
English: If there is a military operation and it is difficult to raise funds in a hurry, please transfer the tax grain from Linggong to the soldiers near the border.

古文：又以凉州多闲田，请给军屯垦。
现代文：又因凉州多闲田，请拨给军队屯垦。
English: In addition, since there are many idle fields in Liangzhou, please allocate them to the army.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：洪熙元年予平羌将军印。
现代文：洪熙元年，授予他平羌将军印。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, he was awarded the seal of General Pingyao.

古文：永乐时，诸边率用宦官协镇，恣睢专军务，瓛亦为所制。
现代文：永乐时期，各边塞都用宦官协同镇守，他们恣意专断军务，费王献也为其所牵制。
English: During the Yongle period, all border fortresses used eunuchs to cooperate with the town guards. They arbitrarily decided on military affairs, and Fei Wangken was also constrained by them.

古文：仁宗知之，赐玺书责之曰： 尔以名臣后，受国重寄，乃俯首受制于人，岂大丈夫所为！
现代文：仁宗知道后，赐玺书责备他说： 你作为名臣之后，受国重寄，而竟俯首受制于人，这岂是大丈夫所为！
English: After Rinzong found out, he wrote a letter of reprimand to him, saying, "You, as a famous minister, have been sent back by the state, and yet you bow down and submit to others. Is this a proper thing to do?

古文：其痛自惩艾，图后效。 
现代文：你要痛自惩戒，以图后效。 
English: You have to discipline yourself to get results.

古文：瓛得书陈谢。
现代文：费王献收到玺书后，上书致谢。
English: After receiving the letter, Fei Wangxian sent a letter of thanks.

古文：宣宗嗣位，进右府左都督。
现代文：宣宗即位后，他进升为右军都督府左都督。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan Zong, he was promoted to the position of the right military governor and the left military governor.

古文：元年七月入朝，封崇信伯，禄千一百石。
现代文：宣德元年七月，他入京朝见，被封为崇信伯，食禄一千一百石。
English: In July of the first year of the Xuande era, he entered the imperial court in Beijing and was given the title of Chongxin Bo, with a stipend of 1,100 koku.

古文：从征高煦，次流河驿。
现代文：从征朱高煦时，他驻扎在流河驿。
English: When he was conscripted into the Zhu Gaojun army, he was stationed in Liuhe County.

古文：帝念前锋薛禄军少，命瓛帅兵益之。
现代文：皇上念前锋薛禄兵少，命费王献率兵增补。
English: Xue Lu, the forward named after the emperor, was short of soldiers, so he sacrificed his life to increase the number of soldiers.

古文：还，予世券，复镇甘肃。
现代文：回来，他被赐给世袭诰券，再去镇守甘肃。
English: When he returned, he was given a hereditary ticket and went to the town of Gansu.

古文：二年，沙州卫贼屡劫撒马儿罕及亦力把里贡使，瓛讨破之。
现代文：二年，沙州卫之贼屡次抢劫撒马儿罕以及亦力把里的朝贡使者，费王献将他们击破。
English: In the second year, the thieves of Shazhou Wei repeatedly robbed Samarkand and the tributary envoys in Yili, and Fei Wangxian defeated them.

古文：谭广，字仲宏，丹徒人。
现代文：谭广，字仲宏，丹徒人。
English: Tan Guang, Zhi Zhonghong, Dantou Ren.

古文：洪武初，起卒伍，从征金山，为燕山护卫百户。
现代文：洪武初年，他以一名士卒从征金山，被授予燕山护卫百户。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he was awarded the title of the guardian of Yanshan Mountain.

古文：从成祖起兵，以百骑掠涿州，生得将校三十人。
现代文：随从成祖起兵时，他以一百骑兵夺取涿州，生擒将校三十人。
English: When he followed Cheng Zu to raise an army, he captured Zhangzhou with a hundred cavalry and thirty officers.

古文：战白沟、真定、夹河咸有功，屡迁指挥使，留守保定。
现代文：战白沟、真定、夹河时，他都有功，屡升为指挥使，留守保定。
English: In the battles of Baigu, Zhending, and Jiahe, he made contributions and was repeatedly promoted to the position of commanding officer, remaining in Baoding.

古文：都督韩观帅师十二万来攻。广以孤军力拒四十余日，伺间破走之。
现代文：都督韩观率兵十二万来攻，谭广以孤军奋力抵抗了四十多天，后来抓住机会将他们击退。
English: Governor Han Guan led 120,000 soldiers to attack, Tan Guang fought alone for more than forty days, and later seized the opportunity to repel them.

古文：永乐九年进大宁都指挥佥事。董建北京。
现代文：永乐九年，他进升为大宁都指挥佥事，主管营建北京。
English: In the ninth year of Yongle, he was promoted to the commander of the Daming Capital and was in charge of building Beijing.

古文：既而领神机营，从北征，充骁骑将军。
现代文：后来掌管神机营，随从皇上北征，充任骁骑将军。
English: Later, he was in charge of the Shenji Battalion, followed the emperor to the Northern Expedition, and served as a cavalry general.

古文：十一年练军山西。
现代文：十一年，他到山西练兵。
English: Eleven years later, he went to Shanxi to train soldiers.

古文：明年从征九龙口，为前锋。
现代文：第二年从征九龙口，担任前锋。
English: In the second year, he went to Kowloon Bay as a striker.

古文：贼数万凭岸，广命挽强士射之。万矢齐发，死者无算。乘胜夹击，贼大败。
现代文：贼人数万凭岸布阵，谭广命能挽强弓的士卒射击，万矢齐发，贼人死亡无数，官军乘胜夹击，贼人大败。
English: Tens of thousands of thieves lined up on the shore, and the soldiers who were able to hold their bows for a long time shot at the thieves. Countless thieves died, the government army took advantage of the victory, and the thieves were defeated.

古文：论功，进都督佥事。
现代文：论功，谭广进升都督佥事。
English: On the merits, Tan Guang's promotion to the capital is an anecdote.

古文：仁宗嗣位，擢左都督，佩镇朔将军印，镇宣府。
现代文：仁宗继位后，他升为左都督，佩镇朔将军印，镇守宣府。
English: After the succession of Rinzong, he was promoted to the left governor, wearing the seal of Zhenshuo General, and the town guard of Xuanfu.

古文：宣德三年，请军卫如郡县例，立风云雷雨山川社稷坛。
现代文：宣德三年，他请军镇也照郡县之例，立风云雷雨山川和社稷坛。
English: In the third year of Xuande, he asked the military towns to follow the example of counties and counties, and rise up against the wind, thunder, rain, mountains and rivers.

古文：六年以宣府粮少，请如开平、独石召商中盐纳粟，以足兵食。
现代文：六年，因宣府粮少，他请照开平、独石的办法，招商人输运粮食到宣府以获得销售食盐的权力，以此来充实军粮。
English: In the sixth year, due to the shortage of grain in Xuanwu, he asked to recruit merchants to transport grain to Xuanwu in order to obtain the right to sell salt, in order to enrich the military grain.

古文：俱从之。
现代文：皇上都听从了。
English: All followed their advice.

古文：明年，帝从户部议，令他卫军戍宣府者，悉遣还屯种。
现代文：第二年，皇上听从户部的意见，令戍守宣府的其他卫所的军队，都遣回屯田种植。
English: The next year, the emperor listened to the opinion of the household and ordered the troops of the other sanctuaries that guarded the Xuanfu to be sent back to the cultivation of the tonden.

古文：广上言： 臣所守边一千四百余里，敌人窥伺，窃发无时。
现代文：谭广上书说： 臣所防守的边境有一千四百余里，敌人窥伺，随时都可能入侵。
English: Tan Guang wrote: The border defended by the vassal has more than fourteen hundred miles, the enemy is spying and may invade at any time.

古文：脱有警，征兵数百里外，势岂能及？
现代文：倘若有警，征兵于数百里之外，怎能来得及？
English: If there is a police force, how can conscription take place hundreds of miles away?

古文：屯种之议，臣愚未见其可。 
现代文：屯田种植的建议，臣愚以为不可行。 
English: The proposal to plant the tonden was considered unfeasible by the vassals.

古文：帝以边卒戍守有余，但命永乐中调戍者勿遣。
现代文：皇上以边兵戍守有余，只命永乐年间调戍宣府的不要遣回。
English: The emperor has more than enough soldiers to guard the border, but those who were transferred to Xuanfu during the Yongle Dynasty should not be sent back.

古文：正统初，朝议以脱欢虽款塞，狡谋未可测，命广及他镇总兵官陈怀、李谦、王彧图上方略。
现代文：正统初年，朝廷意见认为脱欢虽然已来归附，但他狡猾的阴谋不可预测，皇上命谭广以及其他镇的总兵官陈怀、李谦、王献上对策。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the opinion of the imperial court was that although Deguan had been annexed, his cunning plot was unpredictable, and the emperor ordered Tan Guang and other town general officers Chen Huai, Li Qian, and Wang to offer countermeasures.

古文：广等各上议，大要谓： 边寇出没不常，惟守御为上策。
现代文：谭广等人各自呈上意见，大略是说： 边寇出没无常，惟防御为上策。
English: Tan Guang and others each presented their opinions, roughly saying: Border raiders come and go, but defense is the best policy.

古文：宜分兵扼要害，而间遣精税巡塞外，遇敌则量力战守，间谍以侦之，轻兵以蹑之。
现代文：应分兵扼守要害之地，而间或派遣精锐部队巡视塞外，遇上敌人则量力决定是战是守。派间谍侦察敌人动静，以轻兵跟踪敌人的去向。
English: Detachments of soldiers should be kept close to the critical places, and occasionally elite troops are sent to patrol outside the block. When encountering the enemy, it is decided whether to fight or not. Send spies to spy on the enemy's movements, and track the enemy's whereabouts with light soldiers.

古文：寇来无所得，去有所惧，则边患可少弭。 
现代文：敌人来则一无所得，去则有所恐惧，这样边防之患可以稍得减轻。 
English: The enemy will come with nothing, and go with fear, so that the danger of border defense can be slightly alleviated.

古文：帝纳其言。
现代文：皇上采纳了他的意见。
English: The emperor accepted Zou's suggestion.

古文：六年十一月以御敌功，封永宁伯，禄千二百石，仍镇宣府。
现代文：六年十一月，他以御敌之功，被封为永宁伯，食禄一千二百石，仍镇守宣府。
English: In November of the sixth year, he was awarded the title of Yongningbo for his service against the enemy, with a stipend of twelve hundred koku, and he still guarded Xuanfu.

古文：八年乞致仕。优诏不许。
现代文：八年，他请求退休，皇上优诏留下他。
English: Eight years later, he asked to retire, and the emperor gave him leave.

古文：明年十月召还陛见。
现代文：第二年十月将他召回并接见他。
English: In October of the following year, he was called back and interviewed.

古文：帝悯其老，免常朝。
现代文：皇上可怜他年纪已老，免以常朝。
English: The emperor pitied him for his old age and spared him from becoming emperor.

古文：是月卒，年八十二。
现代文：这个月他去世。谥襄毅。
English: He passed away this month.

古文：谥襄毅。广长身多力，奋迹行伍至大将，大小百余战，未尝挫衄。
现代文：谭广身高体壮，从行伍奋斗到大将，身经大小一百余战，未尝遭挫败。
English: Tan Guang is tall and strong. He has fought his way up from the ranks to the rank of general. He has been through more than a hundred battles and has never been defeated.

古文：在宣府二十年，修屯堡，严守备，增驿传，又请颁给火器于各边。
现代文：在宣府二十年，修建屯堡，严整守备，增设驿传，又请给各边镇颁给火器。
English: In the 20 years of Xuanwu, he built a camp, kept it in a strict state of readiness, added a post, and asked the towns on all sides to give him firearms.

古文：将校失律，即奏请置罪，而抚士卒有恩。
现代文：将校犯法，他即奏请治罪，但他安抚士卒有恩。
English: When an officer breaks the law, he immediately asks for punishment, but he has the grace to appease his subordinates.

古文：边徼帖然，称名将。
现代文：边境安然，他堪称名将。
English: The border is safe and he is a great general.

古文：尝逞愤杖杀都司经历，又以私憾杖百户，并为言官所劾。
现代文：他曾因愤怒而杖杀都司经历，又曾以私怨杖打百户，为此而受到言官的弹劾，皇上置之不问。
English: Due to his anger, he once had the experience of killing the governor with a cane, and he once beat a hundred households with a cane for personal grudge, for which he was impeached by the speaker, but the emperor did not question it.

古文：置不问，既卒，吏部言非世券，授其子序指挥使。
现代文：他去世后，吏部说他没有世袭诰券，便授予他的儿子谭序为指挥使。
English: After his death, the cadre department said that he did not have hereditary vouchers and awarded his son, Tan Xuan, as the commanding envoy.

古文：陈怀，合肥人。
现代文：陈怀，合肥人。
English: Chen Huai, from Hefei.

古文：袭父职为真定副千户。
现代文：承袭父职为真定副千户。
English: Inheriting his father's position, he became the vice-chairman of a thousand households.

古文：永乐初，积功至都指挥佥事。
现代文：永乐初年，他积功升到都指挥佥事。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he was promoted to the post of commander of the capital.

古文：从平安南，进都指挥使，涖山西都司事。
现代文：后随从平定安南，进升为都指挥使，管山西都司事务。
English: Later, he was promoted from Pingding Annan to the capital commanding envoy, in charge of the affairs of the Shanxi capital.

古文：再从张辅擒安南贼简定，从都督费瓛征凉州叛人虎保，皆有功。
现代文：他再次随从张辅擒拿安南贼简定，又随从都督费王献征讨凉州叛人虎保，都有功。
English: He once again followed Zhang Fuxiong to capture the South Korean thief Jianzhen, and also followed the governor Fei Wang to fight the traitor of Liangzhou, Hu Bao, both of which were meritorious.

古文：仁宗立，进都督同知。
现代文：仁宗即位后，他升为都督同知。
English: After Emperor Ninsong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：宣德元年，代梁铭为总兵官，镇宁夏。
现代文：宣德元年，他取代梁铭为总兵官，镇守宁夏。
English: In the first year of Xuande, he replaced Liang Ming as the chief military officer and became the town guard of Ningxia.

古文：时官军征交阯者屡败，诏发松潘军援之，将士惮行。
现代文：当时征伐交趾的官军屡被打败，诏令调发松潘军去增援，将士们都害怕出行。
English: At that time, the government army, which was busy with conquests, was repeatedly defeated, and the emperor ordered the Songpan Army to be sent to reinforce it. The soldiers were afraid to travel.

古文：千户钱宏与众谋，诈言番叛，帅兵掠麦匝诸族。
现代文：千户钱宏与众人密谋，诈称番人反叛，率兵抢掠麦匝等部落。
English: Qianhong of Qianhu conspired with others to falsely claim that the guards had rebelled, and led his troops to plunder wheat and other crops.

古文：番人震恐，遂反。
现代文：番人非常害怕，遂造反。
English: The guards were so frightened that they rebelled.

古文：杀指挥陈杰等，陷松潘、叠溪，围威、茂诸州。
现代文：他们杀死指挥陈杰等人，攻陷松潘、叠溪，包围威、茂等州。
English: They killed commander Chen Jie and others, captured Songpan and Jiaoxi, and encircled Wuyi, Mao and other provinces.

古文：指挥吴玉、韩整、高隆相继败绩，西鄙骚然。
现代文：指挥吴玉、韩整、高隆相继失败，西陲骚然。
English: Conductors Wu Yu, Han Zhengyi and Gao Long failed one after another, and Xidi was furious.

古文：诏遣鸿胪丞何敏、指挥吴玮往招之，而命怀统刘昭、赵安、蒋贵帅师数万随其后。
现代文：诏令派鸿胪寺丞何敏、指挥吴玮前往招抚，而命陈怀统领刘昭、赵安、蒋贵率数万人跟随他们之后。
English: The imperial edict sent Ho Min, the leader of the Hongye Temple, and Wu Hao, the commander, to Zhaofu, while Chen Huai, the leader of Liu Zhao, Zhao An, and Jiang Gui led tens of thousands of people to follow them.

古文：玮等至，贼不顺命。
现代文：吴玮等人到达后，贼人不接受招抚。
English: After Wu Yao and others arrived, the thieves refused to be petted.

古文：玮与龙州知州薛继贤击贼，复松潘。
现代文：吴玮与龙州知州薛继贤击贼，收复了松潘。
English: Wu Gan and Longzhou Zhizhou Xue Jixian defeated the bandits and recovered Songpan.

古文：比怀至，仍用玮前锋，遂复叠溪，降二十余寨。招抚复业者万二千二百余户，归所掠军民二千二百余人，事遂定。
现代文：陈怀到达后，仍用吴玮为前锋，遂收复了叠溪，降服二十余寨，招抚复业者一万二千二百余户，夺回被掠去的军民二千二百余人，事态平定了。
English: After Chen Huai arrived, he still used Wu Gan as a forward, and then recovered Jiaoxi, surrendered more than 20 villages, recruited more than 12,200 resettlers, and recaptured more than 2,200 soldiers and civilians who had been plundered. The situation was stabilized.

古文：进左都督，厚赉金币，而绌玮功不录。
现代文：陈怀进升左都督，获掌大量的金币，而吴玮等人的功劳被废去不录。
English: Chen Huaijin was promoted to the left capital, and received a large amount of gold coins, while the merits of Wu Xi and others were discarded and not recorded.

古文：怀留镇四川。
现代文：陈怀留下镇守四川。
English: Chen Huai remained the town guard of Sichuan.

古文：在镇骄纵不法，干预民事，受赇庇罪人，侵夺屯田，笞辱佥事柴震等，数为言官所劾。
现代文：他在镇时骄纵不法，干预地方行政事务，接受贿赂庇护罪人，侵夺屯田，鞭打折辱佥事柴震等人，多次被言官弹劾。
English: When he was in town, he arrogantly indulged in lawlessness, interfered in local administrative affairs, accepted bribes to shelter criminals, seized farmlands, and whipped and humiliated people such as Anji Chai Zhen. He was repeatedly impeached by the speaker.

古文：帝降敕责让，复以御史王礼弹章示之。
现代文：皇上颁敕书斥责他，又将御史王礼弹劾他的奏章拿给他看。
English: The emperor reprimanded him in his imperial edict and showed him the imperial edict of impeachment.

古文：怀引罪。
现代文：陈怀引罪上奏。
English: Chen Huai pleaded guilty.

古文：置不问。
现代文：皇上置而不问。
English: The Emperor does not need to be asked.

古文：六年，松潘勒都、北定诸族暨空郎、龙溪诸寨番复叛。
现代文：六年，松潘的勒都、北定等部落以及空都、龙溪等寨的番人又反叛。
English: In the sixth year, the guards of the tribes such as Le Du and Beiting in Songpan and the villages such as Ku Du and Longxi rebelled again.

古文：怀遣兵战败，指挥安宁等死者三百余人。
现代文：陈怀遣兵前往，但战败，指挥安宁等有百余人死难。
English: Chen Huai sent troops to the area, but they were defeated, and more than a hundred people died, including the commander Anning.

古文：怀乃亲督兵深入，破革儿骨寨，进攻空郎乞儿洞。
现代文：陈怀于是亲自督军深入，攻破革儿骨寨，进而攻打空郎的乞儿洞。
English: Chen Huai then personally led the troops deeper, broke through the skeleton of the revolutionary, and then attacked the beggar's cave.

古文：贼败，斩首坠崖死者无算。
现代文：贼人失败，被斩首和坠崖而死者无数。
English: The robbers failed, were beheaded and fell down the cliff, leaving countless dead.

古文：革儿骨贼复聚生苗邀战。击破之，剿戮殆尽。
现代文：革儿骨之贼又联合生苗激战，陈怀将他们击败，剿杀殆尽。
English: The thief of the child's bones and the joint seedlings fought fiercely, Chen Huai defeated them and killed them all.

古文：于是任昌、牛心诸寨番闻风乞降，群寇悉平。
现代文：于是任昌、牛心等寨番人闻风请降，群寇全被扫平。
English: As a result, Renchang, Niu Xin and other guards of the village were asked to step down by the wind, and the group of robbers were all swept away.

古文：久之，巡按御史及按察使复奏： 怀僣侈逾分。
现代文：后来，巡抚御史和按察使又上奏说 ：陈怀行事超越本份。
English: Later, the procurator of the Imperial Household Agency and the inspector of the Imperial Household Agency also reported: Chen Huai acted beyond his duty.

古文：每旦，令三司官分班立，有事跪白。
现代文：每天早上，他令三司官员分班而立，有事要跪下汇报。
English: Every morning, he ordered the officials of the three departments to stand up in shifts, kneel down and report something.

古文：怀中坐，称旨行遣。且日荒于酒，不饬边备，致城寨失陷。 
现代文：陈怀中间落座，称旨行遣，而且每天荒于酒，不整治边备，致使城寨失陷。 
English: Chen Huai sat in the middle, praised the execution of the will, and every day he was drunk, and did not tidy up the border, resulting in the fall of the castle.

古文：宣宗怒，召怀还，命文武大臣鞫之，罪当斩。
现代文：宣宗大怒，将陈怀召回，命文武大臣审问，论罪当斩。
English: Enraged, Xuanzong recalled Chen Huai and ordered the minister of literature and armed forces to interrogate him and sentence him to beheading.

古文：下都察院狱，宥死落职。
现代文：将他投进都察院监狱，宽免死罪，撤除他的职务。
English: He was thrown into the Duka-in prison, pardoned from the death penalty, and removed from his post.

古文：正统二年以原官镇大同。
现代文：正统二年，他以原官镇守大同。
English: In the second year of his tenure, he was appointed to the post of Datong town guard.

古文：时北人来贡者日给廪饩，为军民累。
现代文：当时北人来朝贡者每天要供给膳食，这成为军民的沉重负担。
English: At that time, the northerners who came to pay tribute had to provide meals every day, which became a heavy burden on the military and civilians.

古文：怀言于朝，得减省。
现代文：陈怀向朝廷汇报，得以减省。
English: Chen Huai reported to the imperial court and was allowed to reduce his salary.

古文：居二年，以老召还，命理中府事。
现代文：两年之后，他因年老被召回，受命管理中军都督府事务。
English: Two years later, he was recalled due to old age and ordered to manage the affairs of the Chinese military governor's office.

古文：九年春，与中官但住出古北口，征兀良哈。
现代文：九年春，他与宦官但住出古北口，征讨兀良哈。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, he and the eunuch Dan lived out of the old north exit to solicit Ailangha.

古文：谥荣毅。蒋贵，字大富，江都人。以燕山卫卒从成祖起兵。
现代文：回来后与马亮等人一同受封，陈怀得封平乡伯。十四年，扈从圣驾北征，死于土木堡。赠侯爵，谥忠毅。蒋贵，字大富，江都人。以燕山卫一名士兵随从成祖起兵。
English: After returning, he was awarded the title along with Ma Liang and others, and Chen Huai was awarded the title of Pingxiangbiao. In the 14th year, Zou went on the Northern Expedition from Shanzhai and died in the earthen fort. He was given the title of marquis, Zou Zhongyi. Jiang Gui, who was called Dafu, was from Jiangdu. A soldier named Yanshanwei followed Cheng Zu to join the army.

古文：雄伟多力，善骑射，积功至昌国卫指挥同知。
现代文：他高大有力，善于骑射，积功任昌国卫指挥同知。
English: He is tall and powerful, good at riding and shooting, and is known for his achievements as the commander of Chang Guowei.

古文：从大军征交阯及沙漠，迁都指挥佥事，掌彭城卫事。
现代文：跟随大军征交趾和沙漠，升为指挥佥事，掌管彭城卫事务。
English: He went to the desert with a large army and rose to the rank of commander, in charge of Pengchengwei affairs.

古文：宣德二年，四川松潘诸番叛，充右参将，从总兵官陈怀讨之。
现代文：宣德二年，四川松潘番人反叛，他充任造右参将，跟随总兵官陈怀去征讨。
English: In the second year of Xuande, the Sichuan Songpan guards rebelled, he served as the right-hand general, and followed the general officer Chen Huai to fight.

古文：募乡导，绝险而进，薄其巢。一日十数战，大败之。
现代文：他招募向导，越险阻而进，逼近番人巢穴，一日十余战，大败番人。
English: He recruited a guide, pushed forward against all odds, approached the guards' lair, fought more than ten battles a day, and defeated the guards.

古文：进都指挥同知，镇守密云。
现代文：进升为都指挥同知，镇守密云。
English: He was promoted to the same rank as the commander of the capital, and became the town guard of Miyun.

古文：七年复命为参将，佐怀镇松潘。
现代文：七年，他又被命为参将，参佐陈怀镇守松潘。
English: Seven years later, he was appointed to be a general staff officer, and the general staff officer Chen Huai became the town guard of Songpan.

古文：明年进都督佥事，充副总兵，协方政镇守。
现代文：第二年，进升为都督佥事，充任副总兵，协助方政镇守。
English: In the second year, Jin Sheng was promoted to the post of governor and served as deputy commander-in-chief, assisting Fang Zheng, the town guard.

古文：又明年，诸番复叛，政等分道进讨。
现代文：又过了一年，诸番再叛，方政等人分道进讨。
English: After another year, all parties rebelled again, and Fang Zheng and others went their separate ways.

古文：贵督兵四千，攻破任昌大寨。会都指挥赵得、宫聚兵以次讨平龙溪等三十七寨，斩首一千七百级，投崖坠水死者无算。
现代文：蒋贵率兵四千，攻破任昌大寨，会同都指挥赵得、宫聚的部队逐个讨平龙溪等三十七寨，斩首一千七百余级，投崖落水而死的不可胜数。
English: Jiang Gui led 4,000 soldiers to break through Renchang Dazhai, and together with Zhao De, who commanded the capital, and the troops gathered in the palace, they successively leveled 37 Zhai such as Longxi, decapitated more than 1,700 levels, and killed countless people by falling into the water.

古文：捷闻，进都督同知，充总兵官，佩平蛮将军印，代政镇守。
现代文：捷报传到朝廷，蒋贵进升为都督同知，充任总兵官，佩平蛮将军印，取代方政镇守。
English: The news of the victory spread to the imperial court, and Jiang Gui Jin was promoted to the same rank as the governor, acting as the chief military officer, and Pei Ping was made the general, replacing Fang Zheng, the town guard.

古文：英宗即位，以所统皆极边地，奏增军士月粮。
现代文：英宗即位后，蒋贵因为他所管的都是极边之地，奏请增加军士月粮。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, Chiang Kai-shek, because he was in charge of the most remote areas, requested an increase in the monthly rations of the sergeants.

古文：正统元年召还，为右都督。
现代文：正统元年，他被召回行右都督。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he was recalled to serve as the right-hand governor.

古文：阿台寇甘、凉，边将告急。命佩平虏将军印，帅师讨之。
现代文：阿台入侵甘州、凉州，守边将领告急，蒋贵受命佩平虏将军印，率军征讨。
English: Attai invaded Ganzhou and Liangzhou. The garrison commander reported the situation as urgent. Jiang Gui was ordered to wear the seal of General Pingru and lead the army to investigate.

古文：贼犯庄浪，都指挥江源战死，亡士卒百四十余人。
现代文：贼人侵犯庄浪，都指挥江源战死，士卒死亡一百四十余人。
English: Thieves invaded Zhuanglang, both commanding Jiangyuan died in battle, more than one hundred and forty soldiers died.

古文：侍郎徐晞劾贵，朝议以贵方选军甘州，势不相及。而庄浪及晞所统，责晞委罪。置贵不问。
现代文：侍郎徐日希弹劾蒋贵，朝廷意见认为蒋贵正在甘州挑选军队，势不相及，而庄浪乃是徐日希所管辖，于是责备徐日希推委罪责，而置蒋贵不问。
English: Jiang Gui was impeached by his attendant Xu Rishi. The opinion of the imperial court was that Jiang Gui was selecting troops in Ganzhou, and Zhuanglang was under the jurisdiction of Xu Rishi. Therefore, the imperial court blamed Xu Rishi's criminal responsibility committee, but did not question Jiang Gui.

古文：明年春，谍报敌驻贺兰山后。
现代文：第二年春，谍报说敌人驻扎在贺兰山后。
English: In the spring of the following year, a spy report said that the enemy was stationed behind Mount Horan.

古文：诏大同总兵官方政、都指挥杨洪出大同迤西，贵与都督赵安出凉州塞会剿。
现代文：诏令大同总兵官方政、都指挥杨洪出大同西向，蒋贵与都督赵安出凉州塞会剿。
English: The edict ordered Yang Hong, commander of the Datong General Army, to go to the west of Datong, and Jiang Gui and Governor Zhao An to go to the east of Liangzhou.

古文：贵至鱼儿海子，都指挥安敬言前途无水草，引还。
现代文：蒋贵到达鱼儿海子，都指挥安敬说前路没有水草，便领兵退回。
English: When Chiang Kai-shek arrived at Yuerhaizi, he ordered An Jing to say that there were no weeds on the road ahead, and then led his troops back.

古文：镇守陕西都御史陈镒言状，尚书王骥出理边务，斩敬，责贵立功。
现代文：镇守陕西的都御史陈镒报告了这一情况，尚书王骥出京处理边务，他斩杀安敬，责成蒋贵立功。
English: Chen Xi, the governor of Shaanxi, reported this situation. Shang Shu Wang Xi went to Beijing to deal with border affairs. He killed An Jing and ordered Jiang Gui to do his duty.

古文：贵感奋，会朵儿只伯惧罪，连遣使入贡，敌势稍弱。贵帅轻骑败之于狼山，追抵石城。
现代文：蒋贵受感动而振奋，正好朵儿只伯惧罪，接连派使者入贡，敌势稍弱，蒋贵轻骑将他击败于狼山，追到石城。
English: Moved and excited, Chiang Kai-shek sent emissaries to pay tribute one after another. The enemy was slightly weaker, and Chiang Kai-shek defeated him on the Wolf Mountain and chased him to Shicheng.

古文：已，闻朵儿只伯依阿台于兀鲁乃地，贵将二千五百人为前锋往袭。
现代文：其后，听说朵儿只伯到兀鲁乃这个地方依靠阿台，蒋贵率二千五百人为前锋前往袭击。
English: After that, it was heard that Doer only went to this place in Yalunai to rely on Atai, and Jiang Gui led two thousand five hundred people as forwards to attack.

古文：副将李安沮之，贵拔剑厉声叱安曰： 敢阻军者死！ 
现代文：副将李安阻拦他，蒋贵拔剑厉声呵斥李安说 ：敢阻拦部队者死！ 
English: Vice Admiral Li An blocked him, and Chiang Kai-shek drew his sword and shouted at Li An, saying, "Anyone who dares to block the troops will die!"

古文：遂出镇夷。间道疾驰三日夜，抵其巢。
现代文：遂从镇夷出发，取近道直驰三天三夜，到达阿台的巢穴。
English: So he set out from Zhenyi, took a shortcut and drove straight for three days and three nights to reach Atai's lair.

古文：阿台方牧马，贵猝入马群，令士卒以鞭击弓韣惊马，马尽佚。
现代文：阿台正在牧马，蒋贵猝然冲入马群，令士卒们用马鞭击打弓袋，使马群受惊，全部伏在地上。
English: Atai was herding horses, and Jiang Gui suddenly rushed into the herd of horses. He ordered his officers to beat the bow bags with horsewhips, which frightened the horses and made them all lie down on the ground.

古文：敌失马，挽弓步斗。
现代文：敌人失去马匹，挽弓步行作战。
English: The enemy lost their horses and fought on foot with bows.

古文：贵纵骑蹂击，指挥毛哈阿奋入其阵，大败之。
现代文：蒋贵纵马蹂击，指挥毛哈阿奋勇冲入敌阵，大败敌人。
English: Chiang Kai-shek rode out on his horse and commanded Mao Haa to rush into the enemy lines and defeat the enemy.

古文：复分军为两翼，别遣百骑乘高为疑兵，转战八十里。
现代文：他又分兵为两翼，另派一百名骑兵登上高处为疑兵，转战八十里。
English: He also divided the army into two wings, and sent another hundred cavalry to climb the heights as suspected soldiers, and fought for eighty miles.

古文：会任礼亦追敌至黑泉，阿台与朵儿只伯以数骑远遁，西边悉平。
现代文：正好任礼也追敌到黑泉，阿台和朵儿只伯以数骑远逃，西部边疆全被平定。
English: Just at the right time, Renli also chased the enemy to Heiquan. Atai and Doer fled far away on horseback, and the western frontier was completely subdued.

古文：三年四月，王骥以捷闻，论功封定西伯，食禄一千二百石，给世券。
现代文：三年四月，王骥向朝廷报捷，蒋贵论功被封为定西伯，食禄一千二百石，给予世袭诰券。
English: In April of the third year, Wang Hui reported his success to the imperial court, and Jiang Guizhong was awarded the title of Ding Xi Bo, with a stipend of twelve hundred koku, and was given a hereditary certificate.

古文：明年代任礼镇甘肃。
现代文：第二年他取代任礼镇守甘肃。
English: The following year, he replaced Renli as the town guard of Gansu.

古文：又明年冬，以征麓川蛮思任发，召还京。
现代文：第三年冬，因征讨麓川蛮人思任发，将他召回。
English: In the winter of the third year, he was recalled due to the recruitment of barbarians from the Luchuan River.

古文：六年命佩平蛮将军印，充总兵官，与王骥帅师抵金齿。
现代文：六年，命他佩平蛮将军印，充任总兵官，与王骥率师抵达金齿。
English: Six years later, he was ordered to wear the general's seal and serve as the commander-in-chief. He arrived in Jinzu with Wang Qi and his division.

古文：分路进捣麓川上江寨，破杉木笼山七寨及马鞍山象阵，功皆第一。
现代文：他分路进捣麓川上江寨，攻破杉木、笼山等七寨以及马鞍山象阵，他的功劳都是第一。
English: He made his way to the foot of the upper reaches of the Sichuan River, and broke through the seven wards of cedar trees, cages, and Ma'anshan elephant array. His achievements are the first.

古文：事详《王骥传》。
现代文：事详《王骥传》。
English: For details, see "Wang Xuan Sheng."

古文：明年，师还，进封侯，益禄三百石。
现代文：第二年，回师，他进封侯爵，增加禄米三百石。
English: In the second year, after returning to his master, he was made a marquis, and his stipend was increased to 300 koku.

古文：八年夏，复佩平蛮将军印，与王骥讨思任发子思机发，攻破其寨。
现代文：八年夏，他再佩平蛮将军印，与王骥讨思任发的儿子思机发，攻破其寨。
English: In the summer of the eighth year, he once again wore the general's seal of Pingban, and discussed with Wang Qi about the son of Siyanfa to think of a way to break through his village.

古文：明年，师还，赏赉甚渥，加岁禄五百石。
现代文：第二年，回师，他获得优厚的赏赐，每年加禄米五百石。
English: In the second year, when he returned to his teacher, he received a generous reward of 500 koku of garum rice per year.

古文：是役也，贵子雄乘敌败，帅三十人深入。
现代文：这一战，蒋贵的儿子蒋雄乘敌人失败，率三十人深入。
English: In this battle, Chiang Kai-shek's son, Chiang Xiong, took advantage of the enemy's defeat and led thirty men deep into the country.

古文：敌扼其后，自刎沉于江。
现代文：敌人扼住他的后路，蒋雄自刎沉入江中。
English: The enemy choked his rear path, and Jiang Xiong fell into the river.

古文：赠怀远将军、彭城卫指挥使。
现代文：赠予他怀远将军、彭城卫指挥使。
English: General Huaiyuan and Commander Peng Chengwei were presented to him.

古文：十四年正月，贵卒，年七十。
现代文：十四年正月，蒋贵去世，终年七十岁。
English: In the first month of the 14th year, Jiang Gui died at the age of 70.

古文：赠泾国公，谥武勇。
现代文：赠泾国公，谥忠勇。
English: He was presented with the title of Duke of Shandong Province, and became known as Shandong Zhongyong.

古文：佩征蛮将军印，镇两广。
现代文：蒋贵出身于行伍，不识字，天性朴实，忘己为人，能与士卒同甘共苦。
English: Jiang Gui was born in the military, illiterate, simple by nature, forget oneself as a person, can share the joys and sorrows with the soldiers.

古文：以平海贼及庆远瑶功，加太子太保。
现代文：出境讨贼时，他的衣粮器械常是自己背着，不役使一人。
English: When going abroad to search for thieves, he often carries his food, clothing and equipment on his back, and does not have to rely on anyone else.

古文：明亡，爵绝。
现代文：临阵时常身先士卒，所以他所向有功。
English: Li Zengzhi was initially awarded the title of honor guard, and later promoted to the former military left-wing governor.

古文：任礼，字尚义，临漳人。
现代文：任礼，字尚义，临漳人。
English: Renli, the word Shangyi, Linyi people.

古文：以燕山卫卒从成祖起兵，积功至山东都指挥使。
现代文：以燕山卫一名士卒随从成祖起兵，积功任山东都指挥使。
English: A soldier of the Yanshan Guards followed Cheng Zu to raise an army, and was appointed commander of Shandong Province.

古文：永乐二十年擢都督佥事。从北征，前行侦敌，还受厚赏。
现代文：永乐二十年，升为都督佥事，随从皇上北征，先行侦察敌情，回来后受到优厚的赏赐。
English: Yongle twenty years, was promoted to the governor of Anji, followed the emperor to the Northern Expedition, first reconnaissance of the enemy situation, after returning to receive a generous reward.

古文：仁宗即位，命掌广西都司事。寻改辽东。
现代文：仁宗即位后，命他掌管广西都司事务，不久改到辽东。
English: After Emperor Renzong ascended the throne, he ordered him to be in charge of the affairs of the Guangxi provincial capital, and he was soon transferred to Liaodong.

古文：宣宗立，进都指挥同知。
现代文：宣宗即位后，他进升为都指挥同知。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan Zong, he was promoted to the position of prefectural commander.

古文：从平乐安，又从征兀良哈，还为后拒。
现代文：随从皇上平乐安，后来又从征兀良哈，回来时在后军拒敌。
English: He followed the emperor to Pingle'an, and later he followed the emperor to Zhengxingliangha. When he came back, he resisted the enemy in the rear.

古文：英宗立，进左都督。
现代文：英宗即位后，升为左都督。
English: After Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the left governor.

古文：正统元年佩平羌将军印，充左副总兵镇甘肃。
现代文：正统元年，他佩平羌将军印，充任左副总兵，镇守甘肃。
English: In the first year of the Zhengtong era, he held the title of General Peiping and served as the left deputy commander-in-chief and the town guard of Gansu.

古文：阿台、朵儿只伯数犯肃州，玺书谯让。
现代文：阿台、朵儿只伯多次侵犯肃州，皇上颁玺书责备他。
English: Adai and Dor only violated Suizhou many times, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to reprimand him.

古文：二年复寇庄浪。
现代文：二年，他们又入侵庄浪。
English: Two years later, they invaded Zhuanglang again.

古文：都指挥魏荣击却之，擒朵儿只伯侄把秃孛罗。
现代文：都指挥魏荣将其击退，擒获朵儿只伯的侄儿把秃孛罗。
English: Wei Rong commanded all of them to repel it, and the nephew of the uncle of the daughter-in-law won the vulture.

古文：礼以闻。
现代文：任礼上报皇上。
English: The investiture was reported to the emperor.

古文：三年与王骥、蒋贵出塞，败朵儿只伯于石城。复分道至梧桐林、亦集乃，进至黑泉而还。
现代文：三年，他与王骥、蒋贵出塞，在石城击败朵儿只伯，又分路到达梧桐林、亦集乃，推进到黑泉而返。
English: In three years, together with Wang Qian and Jiang Gui, he set out from Xi'an, defeated Du'er Tubo in Shicheng, and then went to Wu Tong Lin and Yixin, and then returned to Heiquan.

古文：斩获多，封宁远伯，禄千二百石。
现代文：任礼斩杀和俘获很多。被封为宁远伯，食禄一千二百石。
English: Renli killed and captured many people. He was given the title of Ningyuan Bo, and his stipend was 1200 koku.

古文：明年还朝。
现代文：第二年回到朝廷。
English: He returned to the Imperial Court the following year.

古文：又明年代贵镇甘肃。
现代文：又过了一年他取代蒋贵镇守甘肃。
English: A year later, he replaced Chiang Kai-shek as the governor of Gansu.

古文：八年，赤斤蒙古卫都督且旺失加苦也先暴横，欲移驻也洛卜剌。
现代文：八年，赤斤蒙古卫都督且旺失加苦于也先的残暴，想移驻也洛卜剌。
English: Eight years later, the Mongolian governor of Akakjin, frustrated by the brutality of his predecessor, wanted to move to Yelobdang.

古文：礼以其地近肃州，执不许。
现代文：任礼因该地近肃州，坚决反对。
English: Renli was adamantly opposed because the site was close to Suzhou.

古文：已，奏请建寺于其地。
现代文：后来，且旺失加奏请在那里建寺庙。
English: Later, and with varying degrees of success, a temple was built there.

古文：礼复言许其建寺，彼必移居，遗后患，事竟寝。
现代文：任礼又说如果允许他建寺，他一定会移居，这样会留有后患，这事竟这么了结了。
English: Renli also said that if he was allowed to build a temple, he would definitely move, which would leave a legacy. This is how the matter ended up.

古文：时边将家僮垦塞上田者，每顷输粮十二石。
现代文：当时边防将领的家僮开垦塞上田地的，每顷要交粮十二石。
English: At that time, the families of border guards had to pay 12 koku of grain per hectare.

古文：礼连请于朝，得减四石。
现代文：任礼接连向朝廷请求，得减去四石。
English: Renli successively petitioned the imperial court, and was forced to lose four stone.

古文：是时边塞无警，礼与巡抚曹翼屯田积粟，缮甲训兵，边备甚固。
现代文：这时边塞没有警报，任礼与巡抚曹翼屯田积粟，修缮武器，训练士兵，边备非常稳固。
English: At this time, there was no alarm at the border fort. Renli and the inspector, Cao Ying, repaired weapons, trained soldiers, and the border was very stable.

古文：十一年，沙州卫都督喃哥兄弟争，部众离贰。
现代文：十一年，沙州卫都督喃哥兄弟相争，部众离心。
English: In the eleventh year, the brothers of the governor of the Shazhou Military Region, Brother Murong, were in conflict, and the members were divided.

古文：礼欲乘其饥窘，迁之内地。
现代文：任礼想趁他们饥馑困窘之时，把他们迁到内地。
English: Renli wanted to take advantage of their hunger and misery to move them to the mainland.

古文：会喃哥亦请居肃州境内。礼因遣都指挥毛哈剌往抚其众，而亲帅兵继其后。
现代文：正好喃哥也请住到肃州境内，任礼便派都指挥毛哈剌前往安抚他的部众，而他自己亲率部队随后出发。
English: Just at that time, he also invited Muroko to live in the territory of Suzhou. Renli then sent both commanders, Mao Hao, to pacify his subordinates, while he himself led the troops and then set off.

古文：比至，喃哥复持两端。其部下欲奔瓦剌，礼进兵逼之，遂收其全部千二百余人以还。
现代文：任礼到达时，喃哥态度又摇摆不定，他的部下想投奔瓦剌，任礼进兵逼迫，遂将其整个部落一千二百余人收缴而还。
English: When Renli arrived, Murakami's attitude wavered again. His subordinates wanted to rush to the mound, forcing Renli to enter the army, and then confiscated his entire tribe of more than twelve hundred people and returned.

古文：事闻，赐赉甚厚。
现代文：事情报到朝廷后，任礼获得优厚的赏赐。
English: After the information was reported to the imperial court, Renli received a generous reward.

古文：时瓦剌也先方盛，封喃哥弟锁南奔为祁王。
现代文：当时瓦剌部的也先势力正盛，封喃哥的弟弟锁南奔为祁王。
English: At that time, the influence of Wawasabe was also at its peak, and Funango's younger brother, Zonanben, became the king of warlocks.

古文：礼以二寇合则势益难制，遣人招之。
现代文：任礼认为两寇联合则其势更加难以控制，便派人去招抚锁南奔。
English: Renli thought that the combination of the two robberies would make the situation more difficult to control, so he sent someone to entice Nanben.

古文：锁南奔欲从未决，礼潜师直抵罕东，絷之以归。
现代文：锁南奔想答应但主意未定，任礼暗中派兵直抵罕东，将他抓了回来。
English: Zonan wanted to agree but his mind was undecided. Renli secretly sent troops straight to Handong and arrested him.

古文：帝大喜，赐礼铁券，令世袭。
现代文：皇上大喜，赐给任礼铁券，令世袭爵位。
English: The emperor was overjoyed and granted Renli Tiexuan and made the title hereditary.

古文：十四年，也先分道入寇，抵肃州。
现代文：十四年，也先分路入侵，抵达肃州。
English: Fourteen years later, they also invaded by a different route and arrived in Suzhou.

古文：礼遣裨将御之，再战再败，失士马万计。
现代文：任礼遣裨将抵御，两战两败，损失士卒战马以万计。
English: With all due respect, we will resist. Two battles, two defeats, tens of thousands of soldiers and horses lost.

古文：征还，以伯就第。
现代文：任礼被召回，以伯爵归家。
English: He was recalled from duty and returned home as a count.

古文：景泰初，提督三千营，以老致仕。
现代文：景泰初年，他提督三千营，因年老退休。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, he was the admiral of the three thousand battalion, and retired due to old age.

古文：赵安，狄道人。
现代文：赵安，狄道人。
English: Zhao An, a disciple of Dido.

古文：从兄琦，土指挥同知，坐罪死，安谪戍甘州。
现代文：堂兄赵琦，是土指挥同知，因犯罪被处死，赵安被贬去戍守甘州。
English: His cousin Zhao Yao, who was an acquaintance of the local commander, was executed for the crime, and Zhao An was demoted to garrisoning Ganzhou.

古文：永乐元年进马，除临洮百户，使西域。
现代文：永乐元年，他进献马匹，被授予临洮百户，出使西域。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he donated horses, was awarded to hundreds of households in Linyi, and was sent to the western region.

古文：从北征有功，累进都指挥同知。
现代文：随从北征有功，累升为都指挥同知。
English: He had distinguished himself in the Northern Expedition, and was promoted to the rank of commander.

古文：宣德二年，松潘番叛。
现代文：宣德二年，松潘番人反叛。
English: In the second year of Xuande, the guards of Songpan rebelled.

古文：充左参将，从总兵陈怀讨平之，进都督佥事。
现代文：赵安充任左参将，随从总兵官陈怀将他们讨平，进升为都督佥事。
English: Zhao Anchong was appointed as the left adjutant general, and Chen Huai, the subordinate general officer, leveled them and was promoted to the governor of the capital.

古文：时议讨兀良哈，诏安与史昭统所部赴京师。
现代文：当时朝廷计划征讨兀良哈，诏令赵安和史昭统领所部赴京师。
English: At that time, the imperial court planned to recruit Ailiangha, and ordered Zhao An and Shi Zhao to go to Beijing.

古文：兀良哈旋来朝，命回原卫。
现代文：兀良哈不久来朝见，便命赵安回原卫。
English: Soon after Ao Liangha came to see the emperor, he ordered Zhao An to return to Yuanwei.

古文：使乌思藏，四年还。
现代文：他出使乌思藏，四年之后回来。
English: He was sent to Ussizang and came back four years later.

古文：明年复以左参将从史昭讨曲先，斩获多。
现代文：第二年他又以左参将的身份随史昭讨伐曲先，斩杀和俘获很多。
English: The next year, as a left-wing general, he followed Shi Zhao to fight against Quesen, killing and capturing many.

古文：九年，中官宋成等使乌思藏，命安帅兵千五百人送之毕力术江。
现代文：九年，宦官宋成等人出使乌思藏，赵安受命率兵一千五百人送他们到毕力术江。
English: In the ninth year, the eunuch Song Cheng and others sent Wu Sizang, and Zhao An was ordered to lead 1,500 soldiers to send them to Bilizhu River.

古文：寻与侍郎徐晞出塞讨阿台、朵儿只伯，败之。
现代文：不久他与侍郎徐出塞讨伐阿台、朵儿只伯，击败了他们。
English: Soon after, he and his attendant, Xu Zhixi, went to fight against Atai and Dorzhu Bo, and defeated them.

古文：正统元年进都督同知，充右副总兵官，协任礼镇甘肃。
现代文：正统元年，他升为都督同知，充任右副总兵官，协助任礼镇守甘肃。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he was promoted to the same rank as the governor and served as the right deputy commander-in-chief, assisting Renli in the defense of Gansu.

古文：明年与蒋贵出塞，剿寇无功。
现代文：第二年他与蒋贵出塞剿寇，但无功而还。
English: The following year, he and Chiang Kai-shek set out on the Saigon campaign, but were unsuccessful.

古文：三年，复与王骥、任礼、蒋贵分道进师，至刁力沟执右丞、达鲁花赤等三十人。
现代文：三年，他又与王骥、任礼、蒋贵分路进兵，到达刁力沟，捉住右丞、达鲁花赤等三十人。
English: In three years, he marched into the army with Wang Qian, Renli, and Jiang Gui, and arrived at Hailigou, capturing Ujo, Daruhana, and thirty others.

古文：以功封会川伯，禄千石。
现代文：以功封为会川伯，食禄一千石。
English: He was awarded the honorary title of Aikawa haku, and received a stipend of one thousand koku.

古文：明年移镇凉州。
现代文：第二年他移镇凉州。
English: The following year he moved to the town of Liangzhou.

古文：安家临洮，姻党厮养多为盗，副使陈斌以闻。
现代文：赵安家在临洮，他的姻亲和厮养的奴仆多做强盗，副使陈斌报告了朝廷。
English: Zhao An's family was in Linyi. His in-laws and servants were mostly robbers. Chen Bin, the deputy envoy, reported to the imperial court.

古文：在凉州又多招无赖为僮奴，扰民，复为御史孙毓所劾。
现代文：在凉州他又多招引无赖之徒为僮仆奴隶，骚扰百姓，又被御史孙毓弹劾。
English: In Liangzhou, he recruited many ruffians as servants and slaves, harassed the people, and was impeached by Emperor Sun Yat-sen.

古文：诏皆不问。
现代文：皇上下诏说不问罪。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict saying that no charges would be brought.

古文：安勇敢有将略，与贵、礼并称西边良将。
现代文：赵安勇敢而有将略，与蒋贵、任礼并称为西陲良将。
English: Zhao An was brave and a great general. He was known as the great general of the Western Han Dynasty along with Jiang Gui and Ren Li.

古文：九年十二月卒。
现代文：九年十二月，去世。
English: He passed away in December, 1997.

古文：子英为指挥使，立功，进都督同知。赵辅，字良佐，凤阳人。
现代文：赵辅，字良佐，凤阳人。
English: Zhao Fu, Zi Liang Zi, Feng Yang Ren.

古文：袭职为济宁卫指挥使。
现代文：承袭世职为济宁卫指挥使。
English: He succeeds to the post of Jining Provincial Commander.

古文：景帝嗣位，尚书王直等以将才荐，擢署都指挥佥事，充左参将，守怀来。
现代文：景帝继位后，尚书王直等人推荐他有将才，把他升为代理都指挥佥事，充任左参将，守怀来。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Jing, Shangshu Wang Zhi and others recommended that he had the ability to be a general, and promoted him to be the deputy commander of the army, serving as the left adjutant general and guarding the palace.

古文：天顺初，征入右府涖事。
现代文：天顺初年，把他召入右军都督府理事。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he was called into the right-wing army as a director of the governor's office.

古文：成化元年，以中府都督同知拜征夷将军，与韩雍讨两广蛮，克大藤峡，还封武靖伯。
现代文：成化元年，他以中军都督府都督同知的身份被任为征夷将军，与韩雍讨伐两广蛮人，攻克大藤峡，回来后被封为武靖伯。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was appointed as a conquering general with the identity of the Chinese military governor of the governor's office, and he and Han Yong fought against the two Guang barbarians and conquered the Dafuji Gorge. After returning, he was named Wu Jingbo.

古文：已而蛮入浔州，言官交劾。
现代文：后来蛮人进入氵寻州，言官纷纷弹劾他。
English: Later, the barbarian entered the state of Jixian, and the officials impeached him one after another.

古文：广西巡按御史端宏谓： 贼流毒方甚，而辅妄言贼尽，冒封爵，不罪辅无以示戒。 
现代文：广西巡按御史端宏说 ：贼人毒害正甚，而赵辅妄言贼人已被消灭干净，冒领封爵，不给赵辅加罪无以示惩戒。 
English: Duanhong, Guangxi's inspector of press and history, said: the thief's poisoning was very serious, and Zhao Yu's false statement that the thief had been eliminated was pure, he pretended to be knighted, and there was no way to punish Zhao Yu without adding a crime.

古文：辅乃自陈战阀，委其罪于守将欧信。
现代文：赵辅于是自述他的战功，而将罪责推给守将欧信。
English: Zhao Fu then recounted his war exploits, but shifted the blame to General Ouxin.

古文：帝皆弗问。
现代文：皇上都不问。
English: The Emperor didn't even ask.

古文：三年总兵征迤东，与都御史李秉从抚顺深入，边战有功，进侯。
现代文：三年，他率兵征东北，与都御史李秉从抚顺深入，连战有功，进封为侯爵。
English: In three years, he led the army to the northeast, and went deep into Fushun with the governor of the capital, Li Bing, and was awarded the title of marquis.

古文：八年，廷议大举搜河套，拜辅将军，陕西、延绥、宁夏三镇兵皆听节制。
现代文：八年，朝廷计划大举搜索河套，任赵辅为将军，陕西、延绥、宁夏三镇的部队都听他指挥。
English: Eight years later, the imperial court planned a large-scale search for Hetao. Zhao Fu was appointed general, and the troops in Shaanxi, Yancheng, and Ningxia were all under his command.

古文：辅至榆林，寇已深入大掠。
现代文：赵辅到榆林时，贼寇已经深入并大行抢掠。
English: When Zhao Fu arrived in Yulin, the bandits had already penetrated deep into the area and were on a large-scale looting spree.

古文：辅不能制，与王越疏请罢兵。
现代文：赵辅无法控制，与王越上书请罢兵。
English: Unable to control Zhao Yu, he and Wang Yue sent a letter requesting a general strike.

古文：言官交论其罪。
现代文：言官纷纷弹劾他的罪过。
English: The magistrates impeached him one after another for his crimes.

古文：命给事中郭镗往勘，还言： 寇于六月入平凉、巩昌、临洮，杀掠人畜。
现代文：皇上命给事中郭镗前往调查，他回来后说： 贼寇于六月进入平凉、巩昌、临洮，杀掠人口牲畜。
English: The emperor ordered Guo Jian to go to investigate the matter. After returning, he said: Thieves entered Pingliang, Gongchang and Linyi in June, killing and looting people and livestock.

古文：迨七月而纵横庆阳境内。
现代文：到七月时他们纵横于广阳境内。
English: By July, they stretched across Guangyang.

古文：辅与越至榆林不进，宜治其弛兵玩寇罪。 
现代文：赵辅与王越到榆林时停留不进，应治他们弛兵玩寇之罪。 
English: When Zhao Fu and Wang Yue arrived in Yulin, they did not advance, and they were punished for the crime of playing bandits.

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：皇上没有采纳。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：辅还，犹督京营。
现代文：赵辅回来后，还督领京营。
English: After Zhao Fu's return, he became the commander of the Beijing encampment.

古文：言者攻益力，诏姑置之。
现代文：言官更极力攻击他，皇上下诏说姑置勿论。
English: The magistrate attacked him even more vigorously, and the emperor issued an imperial edict saying that he should not be tolerated.

古文：辅辞侯，乞世伯。
现代文：赵辅辞去侯爵，请求世袭伯爵。
English: Zhao Fu resigned as marquis and requested to become a hereditary count.

古文：帝许其世伯，侯如故，仅减禄二百石。
现代文：皇上允许他世袭伯爵，但他仍是侯爵，仅减去食禄二百石。
English: The emperor allowed him to be a hereditary count, but he was still a marquis, only minus 200 koku.

古文：言官力争。不听。
现代文：言官力争，皇上不听。
English: The emperor did not listen to the officials.

古文：辅复上疏暴功，言减禄无以赡老。
现代文：赵辅又上疏列举自己的功劳，说减去禄米使他无法养老。
English: Zhao Fu also went on to enumerate his own merits, saying that the loss of Lu Mi made it impossible for him to retire.

古文：又言上命内官卢永征南蛮，黄顺、汪直征东北，皆莫大功，宜付史馆。
现代文：他又说皇上命宦官卢永征讨南蛮，黄顺、汪直征讨东北，都是莫大之功，应交付史馆。
English: He also said that the imperial eunuchs Lu Yongzheng and Huang Shun and Wang Zhizheng, who were ordered by the emperor to subjugate Nanban and Northeast respectively, were all of great merit and should be handed over to the history museum.

古文：余子俊等请置辅于法，卒不问。
现代文：余子俊等人请将赵辅依法处理，皇上终于还是不问。
English: Yu Zijun and others requested that Zhao Fu be dealt with according to the law, but the emperor finally did not ask.

古文：正德初，坐传写谏官刘郤疏，为刘瑾所恶，削半禄闲住。
现代文：十二年，他解除营务，家居十年后去世。赠容国公，谥恭肃。
English: Twelve years later, he was relieved of his duties and died ten years after returning home.

古文：四传至玄孙光远，万历中镇湖广。明亡乃绝。刘聚者，太监永诚从子也。
现代文：赵辅年轻时英俊善辩，有才华，善于词章，多结交文士，也好结交权贵和受皇上宠爱的人，所以他虽屡遭弹劾，但终不受损害。刘聚，是太监刘永诚的侄子。
English: When he was young, Zhao Fu was handsome, eloquent, talented, and good at writing poetry. He had many friends among the scribes, as well as the powerful and those who were favored by the emperor. Therefore, although he was repeatedly impeached, he was not harmed. Liu Ju was the nephew of the eunuch Liu Yongcheng.

古文：为金吾指挥同知。以 夺门 功，进都指挥佥事，复超擢都督同知。
现代文：任金吾指挥同知，后来以 夺门 之功，进升为都指挥佥事，又超升为都督同知。
English: He was appointed as the commander of Kingu with the same acquaintance. Later, with the achievement of winning the gate, he was promoted to the commander of the capital, and he was promoted to the governor of the capital with the same acquaintance.

古文：与讨曹钦，进右都督。
现代文：参与讨伐曹钦，升为右都督。
English: He took part in the campaign against Cao Qin and was promoted to right-wing governor.

古文：成化六年，以右副总兵从朱永赴延绥，追贼黄草梁。
现代文：成化六年，他以右副总兵的身份随朱永赴延绥，追击贼人黄草梁。
English: Six years later, he went to Yancheng with Zhu Yong as the right vice admiral to pursue the thief Huang Cao Liang.

古文：遇伏，鏖战伤颏，麾下力捍以免。顷复与都督范瑾等击寇青草沟，败之。
现代文：遇到埋伏，激战中他下巴受伤，部下奋力保护才得以脱身，不久又与都督范瑾等人到青草沟攻击贼寇，击败了他们。
English: He was ambushed, his jaw was injured in the fierce battle, and his subordinates struggled to protect him before he was able to escape. Soon, he and the governor Fan Qi and others went to Qingcaogou to attack the bandits and defeated them.

古文：永等追寇牛家寨，聚亦据南山力攻。
现代文：朱永等人追击贼寇到牛家寨，刘聚也占据南山奋力攻击。
English: Zhu Yong and others chased the bandits to Niu Jia Zhai, Liu Ju also occupied Nanshan and attacked.

古文：寇大败，出境。
现代文：贼寇大败，出了国境。
English: The bandits were soundly defeated and fled across the border.

古文：论功进左都督，以内援特封宁晋伯。
现代文：论功，刘聚进升左都督，又因宦官的力助被特封为宁晋伯。
English: On the basis of merit, Liu Juxin was promoted to the left capital, and was specially appointed as Ning Jinbo because of the eunuch's help.

古文：八年冬代赵辅为将军，总陕西诸镇兵。
现代文：八年，他取代赵辅为将军，总领陕西各镇之兵。
English: Eight years later, he replaced Zhao Fu as general, leading the soldiers of all towns in Shaanxi.

古文：寇入花马池，率副总兵孙钺、游击将军王玺等击却之。
现代文：敌寇进入花马池，刘聚率副总兵孙钺、游击将军王玺等人将他们击退。
English: The enemy raiders entered the Flower and Horse Pond, and Liu Ju, together with the deputy commander-in-chief Sun Qi, the guerrilla general Wang Qi and others, repelled them.

古文：还至高家堡，寇复至，败之。
现代文：回到高家堡时，敌寇再次入侵，刘聚击败了他们。
English: When they returned to Gaojia Fort, the enemy bandits invaded again, and Liu Ju defeated them.

古文：追奔至漫天岭，伏起夹击，又败之。
现代文：追到漫天岭时，官军伏兵起而夹击，又击败了他们。
English: When they chased them to Mantianling, the government army ambushed them and defeated them.

古文：钺、玺亦别破贼于井油山。
现代文：孙钺、王玺也在井油山击败敌人。
English: Sun Yat-sen and Wang Yi also defeated the enemy at Jingyu Mountain.

古文：捷闻，予世券。
现代文：捷报传到朝廷，赐予他世袭诰券。
English: The news of his victory reached the imperial court, which granted him a hereditary stipend.

古文：其冬，孛罗忽、满都鲁、癿加思兰连兵深入，至秦州、安定、会宁诸州县，纵横数千里。
现代文：这年冬，孛罗忽、满都鲁、加思兰联合深入，到达秦州、安定、会宁等州县，纵横数千里。
English: In the winter of that year, Luogu, Manduru and Qaslan jointly penetrated deep into the country, reaching Qinzhou, Ding'an, Huining and other provinces and counties, covering thousands of miles in length and breadth.

古文：贼退，适王越自红盐池还，妄以大捷闻，玺书嘉劳。
现代文：贼人退走后，正好王越从红盐池回来，妄称取得大捷，报告朝廷，皇上颁给玺书嘉奖慰劳。
English: After the thieves had retreated, Wang Yue returned from the Red Salt Pond. He falsely claimed to have won a great victory, reported it to the imperial court, and the emperor presented him with a letter of commendation and consolation.

古文：顷之，纪功兵部员外郎张谨劾聚及总兵官范瑾等六将杀被掠者，冒功。
现代文：不久，纪功兵部员外郎张谨弹劾刘聚和总兵官范谨等六名将领，杀害被抢掠的人来冒功。
English: Soon after, Zhang Jian, a member of the Discipline and Merit Corps, impeached Liu Jiu and General Officer Fan Jian and six other generals for killing the plundered people to take credit.

古文：部科及御史交章劾。
现代文：部科和御史纷纷上疏弹劾。
English: Ministry of Science and Technology and the Ministry of History have come up with impeachment.

古文：诏遣给事中韩文往勘，还奏如谨言：所报首功百五十，仅十九级。
现代文：诏令派给事中韩文前往调查，他回来后上奏，与张瑾所说的一致。所报的首功一百五十级，实际上只有十九级。
English: The imperial command sent a Korean envoy to investigate the matter, and when he returned, he played the music, which was the same as what Zhang Ye had said. The reported first-class score was 150, but it was actually only 19.

古文：帝以寇既遁，置不问。
现代文：皇上因贼寇既然已经逃走，便置而不问。
English: Since the emperor had already fled because of the bandits, he did not ask.

古文：聚寻卒。
现代文：不久刘聚去世。
English: Liu Ju died soon after.

古文：赠侯，谥威勇。
现代文：赠侯爵，谥威勇。
English: He was given the title of marquis.

