古文：起柔兆困敦，尽著雍摄提格，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。
English: A total of three years.

古文：孝献皇帝丁建安元年
现代文：汉献帝建安元年
English: Han Xian Di Jian'an Year 1

古文：春，正月，癸酉，大赦，改元。
现代文：春季，正月，癸酉，大赦天下，改年号为建安元年。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, the first day of the month, the general amnesty, and the year name was changed to the first year of Jian'an.

古文：董承、张杨欲以天子还雒阳，杨奉、李乐不欲，由是诸将更相疑贰。
现代文：董承、张杨打算护送献帝回洛阳，杨奉、李乐不同意，于是将领们进一步相互猜疑。
English: Dong Cheng and Zhang Yang planned to escort Emperor Xian back to Luoyang, but Yang Bong and Li Le disagreed, so the generals became further suspicious of each other.

古文：二月，韩暹攻董承，承奔野王。
现代文：二月，韩暹进攻董承，董承败走，投奔驻在野王的张杨。
English: In February, Han Siem attacked Dong Cheng, and Dong Cheng was defeated and fled to Zhang Yang, who was stationed in Niuwang.

古文：韩暹屯闻喜，胡才、杨奉之坞乡。
现代文：韩暹驻军闻喜，胡才、杨奉率军前往坞乡。
English: The Han and Siam garrison troops led by Wenxi, Hu Cai and Yang Bong marched to Doi Township.

古文：胡才欲攻韩暹，上使人谕止之。
现代文：胡才准备进攻韩暹，献帝派人传旨，阻止他进军。
English: Hu Cai was preparing to attack Han and Siam, but Emperor Xian sent a messenger to prevent him from marching.

古文：汝南、颍川黄巾何仪等拥众附袁术，曹操击破之。
现代文：汝南、颖川的黄巾军首领何仪等率众投靠袁术，曹操出军击溃何仪等。
English: He Yi, the leader of the Yellow Turban Army in Yingchuan, led the crowd to support Yuan Shu, and Cao Cao sent troops to defeat He Yi.

古文：张杨使董承先缮修雒阳宫。
现代文：张杨派董承先去修缮被董卓烧毁的洛阳宫殿。
English: Zhang Yang sent Dong Chengxian to repair the Luoyang Palace, which had been burned down by Dong Zhuo.

古文：太仆赵岐为承说刘表，使遣兵诣雒阳，助修宫室；军资委输，前后不绝。
现代文：太仆赵岐为董承去说服刘表，使刘表派兵到洛阳，协助修缮宫殿，并源源不断地输送军用物资和粮草。
English: Zhao Qi, the eunuch of Dongcheng, persuaded Liu Biao to send soldiers to Luoyang to help repair the palace, and continuously delivered military supplies and grain.

古文：夏，五月，丙寅，帝遣使至杨奉、李乐、韩暹营，求送至雒阳，奉等从诏。
现代文：夏季，五月，丙寅，献帝派使者到杨奉、李乐、韩暹等人营中，要求他们护送自己返回洛阳，杨奉等听从诏命。
English: In the summer, in May, Yin Yin sent an emissary to the camp of Yang Bong, Li Le, Han Siem and others, asking them to escort him back to Luoyang. Yang Bong and others obeyed the imperial command.

古文：六月乙未，车驾幸闻喜。
现代文：六月，乙未，献帝抵达闻喜。
English: In June, Ying Wei and Xian Di arrived at Wenshi.

古文：袁术攻刘备以争徐州，备使司马张飞守下邳，自将拒术于盱眙、淮阴，相持经月，更有胜负。
现代文：袁术进攻刘备，以争夺徐州。刘备派司马张飞守下邳，自己率军到盱眙、淮阴一带抵抗袁术。两军相持一下多月，各有胜负。
English: Yuan Shou attacked Liu Bei to fight for Xuzhou. Liu Bei sent Sima Zhangfei to defend the lower Yunnan, and led his own army to resist Yuan Shou in the Yunnan and Huaiyin areas. The two armies held each other for more than a month, each with its own victory and defeat.

古文：下邳相曹豹，陶谦故将也，与张飞相失，飞杀之，城中乖乱。
现代文：下邳国相曹豹，是已故徐州牧陶谦的旧部，与张飞关系不好，被张飞杀死，下邳城中大乱。
English: Cao Bao, the Vicegerent of the State of Hebei, was an old subordinate of the late Xuzhou Mu Taoqian. He did not have a good relationship with Zhang Fei. He was killed by Zhang Fei, and the city of Hebei was in turmoil.

古文：袁术与吕布书，劝令袭下邳，许助以军粮。
现代文：袁术写信给吕布，劝他袭击下邳，应许援助军粮。
English: Yuan Shu wrote a letter to Lü Bu, urging him to attack Jiaozuo and promising to provide military supplies.

古文：布大喜，引军水陆东下。
现代文：吕布大袁，率军水陆并进，向东袭击下邳。
English: Lvbu Dayuan, leading the army, marched along the water and land, and attacked the Lower Yangtze River to the east.

古文：备中郎将丹杨许耽开门迎之。
现代文：刘备部下的中郎将、丹阳人许耽打开城门，迎接吕布。
English: Liu Bei's second-in-command, Danyang's Xu Tan, opened the city gate to welcome Lü Bu.

古文：张飞败走，布虏备妻子及将吏家口。
现代文：张飞兵败退走，吕布俘虏了刘备的妻子儿女以及官员、将领们的家属。
English: Zhang Fei's defeated soldiers retreated, and Lü Bu captured Liu Bei's wife and children, as well as the families of officials and generals.

古文：备闻之，引还，比至下邳，兵溃。
现代文：刘备听到消息后，率军回救，到达下邳后，全军溃散。
English: After Liu Bei heard the news, he led the army to rescue. After reaching the lower mound, the whole army broke up.

古文：备收馀兵东取广陵，与袁术战，又败，屯于海西。
现代文：刘备收拾残部，向东攻取广陵，与袁术交战，又被打败，退守海西。
English: Liu Bei collected the remnants, captured Guangling to the east, fought with Yuan Shu, was defeated again, and retreated to the west of the sea.

古文：饥饿困踧，吏士相食，从事东海麋竺以家财助军。
现代文：军中将士饥饿不堪，只好自相残杀，以人肉充饥。从事、东海人糜竺命出家中财产，资助军费。
English: The lieutenant generals were so hungry that they had no choice but to kill each other and use human flesh to satisfy their hunger.

古文：备请降于布，布亦忿袁术运粮不继，乃召备，复以为豫州刺史，与并势击术，使屯小沛。
现代文：刘备向吕布请求投降。吕布也正忿恨袁术运粮中断，于是召刘备前来，又委任他为豫州刺史。吕布要与刘备一起进攻袁术，让刘备驻军小沛。
English: Liu Bei asked Lv Bu to surrender. Lv Bu was also angry with Yuan Shu for interrupting the grain transportation, so he called Liu Bei to come and appointed him as the governor of Henan Province. Lv Bu wanted to attack Yuan Shu together with Liu Bei and let Liu Bei garrison Xiaopei.

古文：布自称徐州牧。
现代文：吕布自称徐州牧。
English: Lvbu calls itself Xuzhou Pasture.

古文：布将河内郝萌夜攻布，布科头袒衣，走诣都督高顺营。顺即严兵入府讨之，萌败走；比明，萌将曹性击斩萌。
现代文：吕布的部将河内人郝萌叛变，乘夜进攻吕布，吕布未戴冠帽，袒露衣衫，逃到都督高顺营中，高顺立即率军入府讨伐郝萌，郝萌战败逃走。到天明时，郝萌部将曹性斩杀郝萌。
English: Lu Bu's subordinate general, the Hanoi man Hao Meng, mutinied and attacked Lu Bu at night. Hao Meng did not wear a crown and hat, but rather a loose-fitting shirt. He fled to the camp of the governor Gao Shun. Gao Shun immediately led an army into the capital to fight Hao Meng. Hao Meng was defeated and fled. By dawn, Hao Meng's subordinate, Cao Xing, had killed Hao Meng.

古文：庚子，杨奉、韩暹奉帝东还，张杨以粮迎道路。
现代文：庚子，杨奉、韩暹护送献帝东还洛阳，张杨运输粮食，在路上迎接。
English: Geng Zi, Yang Bong, Han Siem escorted Emperor Qian Dong to Luoyang, Zhang Yang transported grain and greeted him on the road.

古文：秋，七月，甲子，车驾至雒阳，幸故中常侍赵忠宅。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲子，献帝到达洛阳，住在前中常侍赵忠的家中。
English: In the autumn, in July, Ji Zi, the emperor's devoted son, arrived in Luoyang and lived in the home of Zhao Zhong, a former junior aide.

古文：丁丑，大赦。
现代文：丁丑，大赦天下。
English: Ding Chuxi, amnesty to the world.

古文：八月，辛丑，幸南宫杨安殿。
现代文：八月，辛丑，献帝到达洛阳南宫杨安殿。
English: In August, Xin Ugly arrived at the Yang An Hall of the Southern Palace in Luoyang.

古文：张杨以为己功，故名其殿曰杨安。
现代文：张杨认为献帝返回旧都是自己的功劳，所以把那座宫殿命名为杨安殿。
English: Zhang Yang believed that it was his own merit to return the emperor, so he named the palace Yang An Hall.

古文：杨谓诸将曰： 天子当与天下共之，朝廷自有公卿大臣，杨当出扞外难。 
现代文：张杨对诸将领说： 天子，是全国百姓的天子，朝廷自有公卿大臣来辅佐，我应该离开京城，做抵御外敌的屏障。 
English: Zhang Yang said to the generals: "Son of Heaven, you are the son of Heaven of the people of the whole country. The imperial court has its own noble ministers to assist you. I should leave Beijing and serve as a barrier against foreign enemies.

古文：遂还野王。
现代文：于是他返回野王，杨奉也出京驻军梁县。
English: So he led his troops back to the wild king.

古文：杨奉亦出屯梁，韩暹、董承并留宿卫。
现代文：韩暹、董承二人留在洛阳，负责保卫洛阳与皇宫的安全。
English: Han Siem and Dong Cheng stayed in Luoyang and were responsible for the security of Luoyang and the imperial palace.

古文：癸卯，以安国将军张杨为大司马，杨奉为车骑将军，韩暹为大将军、领司隶校尉，皆假节钺。
现代文：癸卯，任命安国将军张杨为大司马，杨奉为车骑将军，韩暹为大将军兼任司隶校尉，都被赐予代表天子权威的符节和黄钺。
English: At the same time, he appointed Zhang Yang, the general of An Guo, as the grand steed, Yang Feng as the general of chariot and cavalry, and Han Siem as the grand general and lieutenant of steed. All of them were given the symbols of authority and the yellow scepter to represent the Son of Heaven.

古文：是时，宫室烧尽，百官披荆棘，依墙壁间，州郡各拥强兵，委输不至；群僚饥乏，尚书郎以下自出采稆，或饥死墙壁间，或为兵士所杀。
现代文：当时，宫殿都被烧毁，百官劈开荆棘，靠在墙壁间居住。
English: At that time, the palaces were all burned down, and the officials split thorns and lived between the walls.

古文：袁术以谶言 代汉者当涂高 ，自云名字应之。又以袁氏出陈，为舜后，以黄代赤，德运之次，遂有偕逆之谋。
现代文：州、郡长官自拥有强兵，不肯进贡。官员们又饿又乏，尚书郎以下的官员自己出去采摘野菜。有人饿死于断墙残壁之间，有人被士兵杀死。袁术认为，民间流行的一句预言 代汉者当途高 中的 途 与自己的名字 术 和表字 公路 相应，并认为袁氏的祖先出于春秋时代的陈国，是舜的后裔，舜是土德，黄色；汉是火德，赤色；以黄代赤，是五行运转顺序。于是他就有了篡位的打算。
English: The state and county governors had strong soldiers of their own, and refused to pay tribute. The officials were hungry and poor, and the officials below Shang Shulang went out to pick vegetables themselves. Some people died of starvation between the broken walls, and some were killed by soldiers. Yuan Shou believed that a popular folk prophecy that the Han Dynasty people should take the high road and the middle road corresponded to his own name, and that the ancestors of the Yuan Clan came from the Spring and Autumn period of Chen Guo, and were the descendants of Yao, and Yao was the native German, yellow; Han was the fire German, red; and the red of the Yellow Dynasty was the five-line operating sequence

古文：闻孙坚得传国玺，拘坚妻而夺之。
现代文：听说孙坚得到传国御玺，袁术就拘留了孙坚的妻子，强行夺下。
English: Hearing that Sun Jian had been awarded the imperial scepter, Yuan Shou detained Sun Jian's wife and forcibly took her away.

古文：乃闻天子败于曹阳，乃会群下议称尊号；众莫敢对。
现代文：及至他听到献帝败于曹阳的消息，就召集部下，商议称帝事宜。部下无人胆敢应对。
English: When he heard the news that Emperor Xian was defeated by Cao Yang, he summoned his subordinates to discuss the matter of Emperor Xian. None of his subordinates dared to deal with it.

古文：主簿阎象进曰： 昔周自后稷至于文王，积德累功，参分天下有其二，犹服事殷。
现代文：主薄阎象进言道： 从前，周朝自始祖后稷传到文王，累积恩德，功勋卓著。三分天下，已经占有二分，但仍然臣服于殷朝。
English: Master Bo Yanxiang said, "Once upon a time, the Zhou Dynasty was passed down to King Wen from the time of the first ancestors, accumulating benevolence and outstanding achievements. It had three points in the world, and now it has two points, but it is still subject to the Yin Dynasty.

古文：明公虽弈世克昌，未若有周之盛；汉室虽微，未若殷纣之暴也！ 
现代文：虽然您家世代为官显赫，但没有周朝当初的兴盛，汉朝王室虽然衰微，却没有殷纣王那样的暴行！ 
English: Although your family has been prominent officials for generations, it did not have the prosperity of the Zhou Dynasty at the beginning. Although the Han Dynasty royal family declined, there was no violence like that of King Yin Xi.

古文：术默然。
现代文：袁术听后默然不语。
English: Yuan Shuxu was speechless after listening.

古文：术聘处士张范，范不往，使其弟承谢之。
现代文：袁术征聘隐士张范，张范不肯前往，派自己弟弟张承去向袁术表示歉意。
English: Yuan Shuxu recruited the hermit Zhang Fan. Zhang Fan refused to go and sent his brother Zhang Cheng to apologize to Yuan Shuxu.

古文：术谓承曰： 孤以土地之广，士民之众，欲徼福齐桓，拟迹高祖，何如？ 
现代文：袁术对张承说： 我以土地的广阔，百姓和军队的众多，想要与齐桓公比美，以汉高祖为榜样，你觉得怎么样？ 
English: Yuan Shu said to Zhang Chengdu: I take advantage of the vastness of the land, the large number of people and the army, I want to compete with Qi Huan Gong and take the example of Han Gaozu, what do you think?

古文：承曰： 在德不在强。
现代文：张承说： 此事在于德，而不在于强。
English: Zhang Cheng said: This is a matter of virtue, not strength.

古文：夫用德以同天下之欲，虽由匹夫之资而兴霸王之功，不足为难。
现代文：用恩德来顺应天下百姓的希望，即使是由一个人的资本去建立霸王的事业，也不困难。
English: It is not difficult to use benevolence to meet the hopes of the people around the world, even if one's capital is used to establish the cause of the overlord.

古文：若苟欲僭拟，干时而动，众之所弃，谁能兴之！ 
现代文：如果是想篡位，违背天时而动，会为众人所抛弃，谁也不能使他兴盛起来！ 
English: If he wants to usurp the throne and act contrary to the times, he will be abandoned by everyone, and no one can make him prosper!

古文：术不悦。
现代文：袁术听后很不高兴。
English: Yuan Shuxu was very unhappy after hearing this.

古文：孙策闻之，与术书曰： 成汤讨桀称 有夏多罪 ，武王伐纣曰 殷有重罚 ，此二主者，虽有圣德，假使时无失道之过，无由逼而取也。
现代文：孙策听到消息后，写信给袁术说： 商汤讨伐夏桀时说： 有夏多罪 ，周武王讨伐殷纣王时说： 殷有重罚 ，商汤与周武王，虽然有圣德，但假如当时夏桀、殷纣没有失道的过失，也没有理由逼迫他们而夺取天下。
English: After hearing the news, Sun Ce wrote to Yuan Shu, saying, "When Shang Tang was fighting against Xia Yao, he said, "There is a crime against Xia Do," and when King Zhou Wu was fighting against King Yin Qi, he said, "There is a heavy punishment against Yin." Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu, although they had the virtue, but if at that time, Xia Yao and Yin Qi did not have the fault of going astray, there was no reason to persecute them and seize the world.

古文：今主上非有恶于天下，徒以幼小，胁于强臣，异于汤、武之时也。
现代文：如今天子并未对天下百姓犯有过失，只是因为年龄幼小，被强臣所胁迫，与商汤和周武王的时代不同。
English: For example, he did not commit any wrongdoing against the people of the world, but because of his young age, he was coerced by powerful ministers, which was different from the era of Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu.

古文：且董卓贪淫骄陵，志无纪极，至于废主自兴，亦犹未也，而天下同心疾之，况效尤而甚焉者乎！
现代文：即使像董卓那样贪淫凶暴，欺上凌下，野心极大的人，也还未也废黜天子，自立为帝。而天下还是一致痛恨他，何况仿效他而做得更过分呢！
English: Even someone like Dong Zhuo, who is greedy, violent, bullying, and extremely ambitious, has not yet dethroned the Son of Heaven and established himself as the emperor. And the whole world still hates him, not to mention imitating him and going too far!

古文：又闻幼主明智聪敏，有夙成之德，天下虽未被其恩，咸归心焉。
现代文：又听说年幼的天子明智聪敏，有早成之德，天下虽然还未承受到他的恩泽，但全都归心于他。
English: In addition, it was said that the young emperor was wise and insightful, intelligent and agile, and had precocious qualities. Although the world had not yet enjoyed the emperor's grace, they all obeyed him.

古文：使君五世相承，为汉宰辅，荣宠之盛，莫与为比，宜效忠守节，以报王室，则旦、奭之美，率土所望也。
现代文：您家中五代连续出任汉朝的三分或辅佐大臣，荣宠的深厚，任何家族都不能相比，应该忠心耿耿，严守臣节，以报答王室。这便是周公姬旦、召公姬的美业，天下人的愿望。
English: Five generations of your family have consecutively served as three-point or assistant ministers of the Han Dynasty. The depth of honor and favor is incomparable to any family. You should be loyal and strictly observe the Vassal Day to repay the royal family. This is the beautiful career of Zhou Gong Hidan and Zhao Gong Hidan, and the desire of the world.

古文：时人多惑图纬之言，妄牵非类之文，苟以悦主为美，不顾成败之计，古今所慎，可不孰虑！
现代文：现在人们多被图纬之类的预言书所迷惑，望文生义，牵强附会，只求讨主人的欢心，并不考虑成败。称帝的事，从古至今都十分慎重，岂能不深思熟虑！
English: Nowadays, people are more likely to be confused by books of prophecy such as the Tu Wei, which are based on fanciful and far-fetched notions, and only seek to please their masters, without considering success or failure. The matter of praising the emperor has been very cautious from ancient times to the present, and it is impossible not to think about it deeply!

古文：忠言逆耳，驳议致憎，苟有益于尊明，无所敢辞！ 
现代文：忠言逆耳，异议招致憎恶，但只要对您有益，我一切都不敢推辞。 
English: My advice may fall on deaf ears, my dissent may arouse hatred, but I dare not refuse anything as long as it is beneficial to you.

古文：术始自以为有淮南之众，料策必与己合，及得其书，愁沮发疾。
现代文：袁术开始时自以为拥有淮南的兵众，预料孙策一定会拥护自己。及至接到孙策的信后，因忧虑沮丧而生病。
English: At the beginning, Yuan Shuxu thought that he had the soldiers of Huainan, and expected Sun Ce to support him. After receiving Sun Ce's letter, he was worried and depressed and fell ill.

古文：既不纳其言，策遂与之绝。
现代文：他既然没有听从孙策的意见，孙策便与他断绝了关系。
English: Since he did not listen to Sun Ce's advice, Sun Ce broke off relations with him.

古文：曹操在许，谋迎天子。
现代文：曹操在许县，计划迎接献帝。
English: Cao Cao is in Xu County, planning to greet the emperor.

古文：众以为 山东未定，韩暹、杨奉，负功恣睢，未可卒帛。 
现代文：部下众人都认为： 崤山以东尚未平定，而且韩暹、杨奉等人自认为护驾有功，骄横凶暴，不能迅速制服。 
English: All of his subordinates agreed that: the area east of Lushan had not yet been pacified, and Han Siem, Yang Bong and others thought that they had done a good job in protecting the area. They were arrogant and violent and could not be quickly subdued.

古文：荀彧曰： 昔晋文公纳周襄王而诸侯景从，汉高祖为义帝缟素而天下归心。
现代文：荀说： 以前，晋文公重耳迎纳周襄王，各国一致推举他为霸主；汉高祖为义帝发丧，身穿孝服，使得天下百姓诚心归附。
English: Zou said: In the past, Jinwen Gong welcomed King Zhou Xiang with open arms, and all countries unanimously elected him as the overlord; Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty mourned for the righteous emperor and wore filial piety, which made the people of the world wholeheartedly adhere to him.

古文：自天子蒙尘，将军首唱义兵，徒以山东扰乱，未遑远赴。
现代文：自从天子流离在外，将军首先倡导兴起义军，只因崤山以东局势混乱，来不及远行迎驾。
English: Since Tianzi was displaced, the general was the first to advocate the rise of the rebel army. However, due to the chaotic situation east of Lushan, it was too late to make the long journey.

古文：今銮驾旋轸，东京榛芜，义士有存本之思，兆民怀感旧之哀。
现代文：如今献帝返回旧京，但洛阳荒废，忠义之士希望能保全根本，黎民百姓也怀念旧的王室，为之悲伤。
English: Now the emperor has returned to the old Beijing, but Luoyang is desolate, loyalists hope to preserve the fundamentals, and the people of Lai also miss the old royal family and are sad about it.

古文：诚因此时，奉主上以从人望，大顺也；秉至公以服天下，大略也；扶弘义以致英俊，大德也。
现代文：借此时机，奉迎天子以顺从民心，是最合乎时势的行动；用大公无私的态度使天下心悦诚服，是最正确的策略；坚守君臣大义，辅佐朝廷，召揽天下英才，是最大的德行。
English: Taking advantage of this opportunity, it is the most up-to-date action to welcome the heavenly son by obeying the people's hearts; it is the most correct strategy to make the hearts of the world happy and sincere with a selfless attitude; it is the greatest virtue to adhere to the great justice of kings and ministers, assist the court, and recruit the world's talents.

古文：四方虽有逆节，其何能为？
现代文：这样，尽管四方还有不遵从朝廷的叛逆，但他们能有什么作为？
English: Even if someone disobeys, what can be done?

古文：韩暹、杨奉，安足恤哉！
现代文：韩暹、杨奉之辈，有什么值得顾虑！
English: Where are Han Siem and Yang Bong worth worrying about?

古文：若不时定，使豪杰生心，后虽为虑，亦无及矣。 
现代文：如果不及时决定，使别的豪杰生出奉迎的念头，以后尽管再费心机，也来不及了。 
English: If we don't decide in time to let other heroes have this heart, even if we think about it in the future, it will be too late.

古文：操乃遣扬武中郎将曹洪将兵西迎天子，董承等据险拒之，洪不得进。
现代文：于是曹操派遣扬武中郎将曹洪率兵向西，到洛阳迎接献帝。董承等扼守险要阻拦，曹洪不能前进。
English: So Cao Cao sent Yang Wuzhong to lead Cao Hong's army to the west, to Luoyang to meet the emperor. Dong Cheng and others tried to block Cao Hong's advance.

古文：议郎董昭以杨奉兵马最强而少党援，作操书与奉曰： 吾与次军闻名慕义，便推赤心。
现代文：议郎董昭认为杨奉的兵马最强，但缺少外援，就用曹操的名义给杨奉写信说： 我与将军相互倾慕，只听到名声，便已推心置腹。
English: The mediator, Dong Zhao, thought that Yang Bong's army was the strongest, but lacking foreign aid, he wrote a letter to Yang Bong in the name of Cao Cao, saying: I admire both the general and myself. I only heard the reputation, but I have already put my heart and soul into it.

古文：今将军拔万乘之艰难，反之旧都，翼佐之功，超世无畴，何其休哉！
现代文：如今，将军在艰难之中救出天子，护送他回到旧都洛阳，卫护辅佐的功勋，盖世无双，是何等的美业！
English: Now the general has overcome great difficulties, returned to the old capital, and assisted the merit of the Son of Heaven. There is no comparison in the world. How wonderful it is!

古文：方今群凶猾夏，四海未宁，神器至重，事在维辅；必须众贤以清王轨，诚非一人所能独建，心腹四支，实相恃赖，一物不备，则有阙焉。
现代文：现在，各地不法之徒扰乱中原，天下不宁，君主的平安至关重要，事情主要靠辅佐大臣。所有的贤明之士必须一齐努力，才能肃清君王道路上的障碍，这决不是一个人的力量所能办得到的。心脏、胸腹与四肢，实际是互相依存的，缺少了任何一件，都不完整。
English: At present, the Central Plains are being disturbed by lawless people from all over the country, and the world is restless. The safety of the monarch is of paramount importance, and the matter mainly depends on the assistant minister. All wise men must work together in order to clear the obstacles in the king's path, which is by no means possible by the power of one person. The heart, the chest and abdomen, and the limbs are actually interdependent, and without any one thing, they are not complete.

古文：将军当为内主，吾为外援。今吾有粮，将军有兵，有无相通，足以相济，死生契阔，相与共之。 
现代文：将军应当在朝廷主持事务，我则作为外援，如今我有粮草，将军有兵马，互通有无，足以相辅相成，我们生死与共，祸福同当。 
English: The general should preside over affairs in the imperial court, and I should act as a foreign aid. Now I have grain and grass, the general has soldiers and horses, and we can complement each other. We share life and death, misfortune and fortune.

古文：奉得书喜悦，语诸将军曰： 兗州诸军近在许耳，有兵有粮，国家所当依仰也。 
现代文：杨奉接到信后十分高兴，对其他将领说： 兖州的军队，近在许县，有兵有粮，朝廷正可以倚靠他们。 
English: After receiving the letter, Yang Feng was very happy and said to the other generals: the army of Zhangzhou, close to Xu County, has soldiers and grain, and the imperial court can rely on them.

古文：遂共表操为镇东将军，袭父爵费亭侯。
现代文：于是诸将联名上表推荐曹操担任镇东将军，并承袭他父亲曹嵩的爵位费亭侯。
English: As a result, the generals jointly recommended Cao Cao to serve as Zhendong General and inherit the title of Fei Ting Hou from his father Cao Song.

古文：韩暹矜功专恣，董承患之，因潜召操；操乃将兵诣雒阳。
现代文：韩暹倚仗护驾有功，专横霸道，董承对他十分厌恨，就私下派人召请曹操。于是曹操亲率大军到达洛阳。
English: Han Siem, who had done a good job in protecting the capital, was domineering and domineering. Dongcheng hated him very much, so he secretly sent someone to summon Cao Cao. So Cao Cao led his army to Luoyang.

古文：既至，奏韩暹、张杨之罪。
现代文：到达后，向献帝奏报韩暹、张杨的不法行为。
English: After arriving, he reported the illegal acts of Han Siem and Zhang Yang to Emperor Xian.

古文：暹惧诛，单骑奔杨奉。
现代文：韩暹害怕被杀，单人匹马投奔杨奉。
English: Han Siem was afraid of being killed, so he rode alone to join Yang Bong.

古文：帝以暹、杨有翼车驾之功，诏一切勿问。
现代文：献帝认为韩暹、张杨护驾有功，下诏一切不予追究。
English: Because Han Siem and Zhang Yang were able to drive safely, the emperor decreed that all questions would no longer be asked.

古文：辛亥，以曹操领司隶校尉、录尚书事。
现代文：辛亥，命曹操兼任司隶校尉，主持尚书事务。
English: Xinhai, by order of Cao Cao, concurrently served as the lieutenant of the division, presiding over the bookkeeping affairs.

古文：操于是诛尚书冯硕等三人，讨有罪也；封卫将军董承等十三人为列侯，赏有功也；赠射声校尉沮俊为弘农太守，矜死节也。
现代文：于是曹操诛杀尚书冯硕等三人，处罚他们犯下的罪过；封卫将军董承等十三人为列侯，奖赏他们护驾有功；追赠射声校尉沮俊为弘农太守，哀怜他为国尽节而死。
English: As a result, Cao Cao killed three people, including Shangshu Feng Shuo, and punished them for the crimes they had committed; thirteen people, including the general of the imperial guard, Dong Cheng, were made lords, and they were rewarded for their service in protecting the country; the posthumous award was given to Lieutenant Shichong Dejun, who was the governor of Hongnong, and it was mourned that he died for the country's national day.

古文：操引董昭并坐，问曰： 今孤为此，当施何计？ 
现代文：曹操请董昭与自己并坐在一起，问他： 现在我已到洛阳，应当采取什么策略？ 
English: Cao Cao invited Dong Zhao to sit with him and asked him: Now that I have arrived in Luoyang, what strategy should I adopt?

古文：昭曰： 将军兴义兵以诛暴乱，入朝天子，辅翼三室，此五伯之功也。
现代文：董昭说： 将军兴起义兵，讨伐暴乱，入京朝见天子，辅佐王室，这是春秋时期五霸的功业。
English: Dong Zhao said: The generals roused the volunteers, cracked down on the riot, went to Beijing to meet the emperor, and assisted the royal family. This was the work of the Five Overlords during the Spring and Autumn Period.

古文：此下诸将，人殊意异，未必服从，今留匡弼，事势不便，惟有移驾幸许耳。
现代文：现在洛阳的各位将领，都有自己的打算，未必听从将军的指挥。如今留在洛阳控制朝政，有许多不利因素，只有请天子移驾到许县这个办法最好。
English: However, the following generals, each with different ideas, may not be willing to obey you. Now that you are staying in the capital to support the emperor, the situation will be inconvenient. The only solution is to move the emperor to Xu County.

古文：然朝廷播越，新还旧京，远近跂望，冀一朝获安，今复徙驾，不厌众心。
现代文：但是天子在外流离多时，刚刚回到旧都城，远近都盼望迅速获得安定，如今再要移驾，是不符合民心的。
English: But Tianzi has been away for a long time, has just returned to the old capital, and both near and far are hoping for rapid stability. It is not in line with the people's will to move now.

古文：夫行非常之事，乃有非常之功，愿将军算其多者。 
现代文：不过，只有做不同寻常的事情，才能建立不同寻常的功业，希望将军作出利多弊少的选择。 
English: If you do something out of the ordinary, you'll get something out of the ordinary. I hope the general will choose the most beneficial way.

古文：操曰： 此孤本志也。
现代文：曹操说： 我本来的计划就是如此。
English: Cao Cao said, "This is my original plan.

古文：杨奉近在梁耳，闻其兵精，得无为孤累乎？ 
现代文：只是杨奉近在梁县，听说他兵强马壮，应该不会阻拦我吧？ 
English: Yang Bong is close to Liang County, I heard that his troops are elite, won't he become my hidden danger?

古文：昭曰： 奉少党援，心相凭结，镇东、费亭之事，皆奉所定，宜进遣使厚遗答谢，以安其意，说 京都无粮，欲车驾暂幸鲁阳，鲁阳近许，转运稍易，可无县乏之忧。 奉为人勇而寡虑，必不见疑，比使往来，足以定计，奉何能为累！ 操曰： 善！ 
现代文：董昭说： 杨奉缺少外援党羽，所以他愿意与将军结交。任命您为镇东将军、封费亭侯的事情，都是杨奉的主意，应该及时派遗使者带去重礼表示感谢，使他安心。并告诉他说： 洛阳无粮，想让献帝暂时移驾鲁阳，鲁阳靠近许县，运输比较便利，可以免去粮食匮乏的忧虑 杨奉这个人有勇无谋，一定不会疑心，在使者往来期间，足以定下大计，杨奉怎能进行阻挠！ 曹操说： 很好！ 
English: Dong Zhao said: Yang Bong is short of foreign aid, so he is willing to make friends with the general. The appointment of you as Zhendong General and Fengfei Tinghou was all Yang Bong's idea. You should promptly send the emissary to express your gratitude and reassure him. And tell him: Luoyang has no grain, you want to temporarily move the emperor to Luyang, Luyang is close to Xu County, transportation is more convenient, you can avoid the worry of grain shortage. Yang Bong is a man of courage and resourcefulness, he will not doubt, during the time of the envoy, it is enough to set a plan, how can Yang B

古文：即遣使诣奉。
现代文：立即派使者去晋见杨奉。
English: Send an emissary to Yang Bong at once.

古文：庚申，车驾出轘辕而东，遂迁都许。
现代文：庚申，献帝车驾出辕关，向东进行，于是迁都于许县，改称许县为许都。
English: Goshun, the imperial car drove out of Shaoguan and went eastward, so the capital was moved to Xu County, and Xu County was renamed Xu Capital.

古文：己巳，幸曹操营，以操为大将军，封武平侯。
现代文：己巳，献帝抵达曹操军营，任命曹操为大将军，封武平侯。
English: Presently, Emperor Xian arrived at Cao Cao's military camp, appointed Cao Cao as a general, and made him a military tribune.

古文：始立宗庙社稷于许。孙策将取会稽，吴人严白虎等众各万馀人，处处屯聚，诸将欲先击白虎等。策曰： 白虎等群盗，非有大志，此成禽耳。 
现代文：平始在许都建立祭祀皇家祖先的宗庙与作为国家象征的祭祀土、谷之神的社稷。孙策打算攻取会稽郡。这时，吴郡人严白虎等，各有部众万余人，在各处建有许多堡寨。诸将领想先攻击严白虎等，孙策说： 严白虎等人不过是一群强盗，没有大志，他们容易对付。 
English: Sun Ce planned to attack Heji County. At that time, the people of Wu County, including Yan Baihu, had more than ten thousand soldiers each and built many fortresses everywhere. The generals wanted to attack Yan Baihu first. Sun Ce said, "Yan Baihu and the others are just a group of robbers. They have no ambition. They are easy to deal with."

古文：遂引兵渡浙江。
现代文：于是率军渡过浙江。
English: So he led his army across Zhejiang.

古文：会稽功曹虞翻说太守王朗曰： 策善用兵，不如避之。 
现代文：会稽功曹虞翻劝太守王郎说： 孙策善于用兵，不如先躲避一下他的锐气。 
English: Cao Yu, a member of the imperial examination committee, persuaded Wang Lang, the daimyō, saying, "Sun Ce is good at using soldiers, so it is better to avoid his sharpness first."

古文：朗不从。发兵拒策于固陵。
现代文：王朗不听，发兵据守固陵，抵抗孙策。
English: Wang Lang did not listen and sent troops to defend the tomb and resist Sun Ce.

古文：策数渡水战，不能克。
现代文：孙策几次渡水作战，都未能取胜。
English: Sun Ce fought several times to cross the water, but failed to win.

古文：策叔父静说策曰： 朗负阻城守，难可卒拔。
现代文：他的叔父孙静对他说： 王朗据守坚城，很难一下攻破。
English: His uncle Sun Jing said to him, "Wang Lang is defending a stronghold, and it is difficult to break through at once.

古文：查渎南去此数十里，宜从彼据其内，所谓攻其无备，出其不意者也。 
现代文：从这里向南数十里是查渎，应从那里进入王朗的后方，这正是兵法上讲的：攻无不备，出其不意。 
English: From here, it was necessary to travel dozens of miles to the south to check the encroachment, and from there it was necessary to enter Wang Lang's rear, which was exactly what was said in the art of war: everything must be prepared for, and nothing should be taken by surprise.

古文：策从之，夜，多然火为疑兵，分军投查渎道，袭高迁屯。
现代文：孙策采纳这个建议。夜晚点燃了很多火把，作为疑兵。然后，派出一支部队从查渎道进袭高迁屯。
English: Sun Ce accepted the suggestion, lit a lot of torches at night as suspected soldiers, and then sent a troop to attack Gao Qiantun from Zhaozhu Road.

古文：朗大惊，遣故丹杨太守周昕等帅兵逆战，策破昕等，斩之。
现代文：王朗大惊，派前丹阳郡太守周昕等率军迎战，孙策打败周昕等人，斩周昕。
English: Wang Lang was so shocked that he sent the former governor of Danyang County, Zhou Qi, and others to lead the army into battle. Sun Ce defeated Zhou Qi and others and beheaded Zhou Qi.

古文：朗遁去，虞翻追随营护朗，浮海至东冶，策追击，大破之，朗乃诣策降。
现代文：王朗逃走，虞翻追随，掩护王朗，乘船渡海逃到东冶。孙策追击他们，大破王朗军，王朗只好向孙策投降。
English: Wang Lang fled, Gu Gu followed, covered Wang Lang, and fled by boat across the sea to Dongye. Sun Ce chased them, defeated Wang Lang's army, and Wang Lang had to surrender to Sun Ce.

古文：策自领会稽太守，复命虞翻为功曹，待以交友之礼。
现代文：孙策自己兼任会稽郡太守，仍委任虞翻为功曹，用朋友的礼节对待他。
English: Sun Ce himself concurrently served as the county magistrate of the county, still appointed Yu Tong as a meritorious scholar, and treated him with the courtesy of a friend.

古文：策好游猎，翻谏曰： 明府喜轻出微行，从官不暇严，吏卒常苦之。
现代文：孙策喜欢外出打猎，虞翻劝阻他说： 您喜欢轻装便服出行，随从官员来不及警戒，兵士们常常感到辛苦，身为长官，如不够稳重，就不容易树立权威。
English: Sun Ce likes to go out hunting, Gu Fu dissuaded him, saying: You like to travel light in casual clothes, officials cannot be alerted in time, soldiers often feel hard, as a commander, if you are not stable enough, it is not easy to establish authority.

古文：夫君人者不重则不威，故白龙鱼服，困于豫且，白蛇自放，刘季害之。
现代文：所以传说中的白龙，一旦变为鱼，普通的渔夫豫且就可射它；而白蛇自己放纵，被汉高祖刘邦杀死。
English: Therefore, once the legendary white dragon turned into a fish, an ordinary fisherman could easily shoot it; while the white snake indulged itself and was killed by Liu Bang, the founder of the Han Dynasty.

古文：愿少留意！ 
现代文：请您稍加留心。 
English: Please pay a little attention.

古文：策曰： 君言是也。 
现代文：孙策说： 你说得对。 
English: Sun Ce said: You are right.

古文：然不能改。
现代文：但他仍不能改这个习惯。
English: But he still can't break the habit.

古文：九月，司徒淳于嘉、太尉杨彪、司空张喜皆罢。
现代文：九月，司徒淳于嘉、太尉杨彪、司空张喜被免职。
English: In September, Sitora Junyujia, Lieutenant Yang Biao, and Siku Zhangxi were dismissed.

古文：车驾之东迁也，杨奉自梁欲邀之，不及。
现代文：曹操护送献帝从洛阳向东迁到许县时，杨奉从梁地出兵想要阻拦，但未来得及。
English: When Cao Cao escorted Emperor Xian from Luoyang eastward to Xu County, Yang Bong sent troops from Liangdi to stop him, but they were too late.

古文：冬，十月，曹操征奉，奉南奔袁术，遂攻其梁屯，拔之。
现代文：冬季，十月，曹操出兵征讨杨奉，杨奉向南投奔袁术，曹操攻陷了杨奉在梁地的营寨。
English: In winter, October, Cao Cao sent troops to recruit Yang Bong, Yang Bong went to the south to join Yuan Shu, Cao Cao attacked Yang Bong's camp in Liangdi.

古文：诏书下袁绍，责以 地广兵多，而专自树党，不闻勤王之师，但擅相讨伐。 
现代文：献帝下诏给袁绍，责备他： 地广兵多，但专门结党营私，没听说有勤王救驾的军队出动，只是擅自互相讨伐。 
English: He issued an imperial edict to Yuan Shao, reproaching him: There are many soldiers in the country, but they have formed a special party to fight for me. I have not heard of any army dispatched to save the king, but they just fight each other without authorization.

古文：绍上书深自陈诉，戊辰，以绍为太尉，封鄴侯，绍耻班在曹操下，怒曰： 曹操当死数矣，我辄救存之，今乃挟天子以令我乎！ 
现代文：袁绍上书，深自谴责和辩解。戊辰，任命袁绍为太尉，封邺侯。袁绍耻于自己的官位在曹操之下，大发雷霆，说： 曹操几次要死了，都是我救了他。现在他竟挟持天子，对我来发号施令！ 
English: Yuan Shao wrote a letter, deeply condemning and justifying himself. Wu Chen, for example, appointed Yuan Shao to the rank of lieutenant, and made him a vassal lord. Yuan Shao was ashamed of his official position under Cao Cao, and flew into a rage, saying, "I saved Cao Cao several times when he was about to die. Now he is holding the Son of Heaven in his arms and giving me orders!

古文：表辞不受。
现代文：上书辞让，拒绝接受。
English: He wrote a letter of resignation and refused to accept it.

古文：操惧，请以大将军让绍。
现代文：曹操感到害怕，请求把自己担任的大将军一职授予袁绍。
English: Cao Cao was afraid and asked Yuan Shao to be given the position of general.

古文：丙戌，以操为司空，行车骑将军事。
现代文：丙戌，任命曹操为司空，代行车骑将军职务。
English: He appointed Cao Cao as the deputy commander of the air force and acting commander of the cavalry.

古文：操以荀彧为侍中，守尚书令。
现代文：曹操委任荀为侍中，代理尚书令。
English: Cao Cao appointed Yao as an attendant, acting as Shang Shuling.

古文：操问彧以策谋之士，彧荐其从子蜀郡太守攸及颍川郭嘉。
现代文：曹操请荀推荐出谋划策之士，荀推荐自己的侄子、蜀郡太守荀攸和颖川人郭嘉。
English: Cao Cao asked him to recommend a strategist, and he recommended his nephew, Shu County Governor Yu Yu and Guo Jia from Yingchuan.

古文：操征攸为尚书，与语，大悦，曰： 公达，非常人也。吾得与之计事，天下当何忧哉！ 
现代文：曹操征召荀攸为尚书，和他谈话后，大为高兴，说： 荀攸不是寻常之人，我能与他商议大事，天下会有什么可忧虑的呢！ 
English: Cao Cao conscripted Yao You as a disciple, and after talking with him, he was very happy, saying: Yao You is not an ordinary person, I can discuss important matters with him, what would the world have to worry about!

古文：以为军师。
现代文：任用荀攸为军师。
English: Then, he took Shanyou as his strategist.

古文：初，郭嘉往见袁绍，绍甚敬礼之，居数十日，谓绍谋臣辛评、郭图曰： 夫智者审于量主，故百全而功名可立。
现代文：起初，郭嘉去见袁绍，袁绍对他十分礼敬。郭嘉住了几十天，对袁绍的谋臣辛评、郭图说： 有智之士要审慎地选择主人，才能保全自己，建立功业。
English: At first, Guo Jia went to see Yuan Shao, and Yuan Shao was very respectful to him. Guo Jia stayed for dozens of days, and said to Yuan Shao's advisers Xin Han and Guo Tu: A wise man must carefully choose his master in order to protect himself and build his career.

古文：袁公徒欲效周公之下士，而不知用人之机，多端寡要，好谋无决，欲与共济天下大难，定霸王之业，难矣。
现代文：袁绍只想仿效周公姬旦礼贤下士，却不懂得用人的方法。事务繁杂，却缺少重点；喜欢谋略，但又优柔寡断。要与他共同拯救天下的大难，建立霸王之业，太困难了。
English: Yuan Shao only wants to emulate Corporal Zhou Gong, but he does not know how to employ people. Affairs are complicated, but lack focus; he likes to strategize, but he is indecisive. It is too difficult to work with him to save the world's great difficulties and establish the overlord's career.

古文：吾将更举以求主，子盍去乎！ 
现代文：我将另投明主，你们为何不离去呢？ 
English: I'm going to the Lord. Why don't you leave?

古文：二人曰： 袁氏有恩德于天下，人多归之，且今最强，去将何之！ 
现代文：辛评、郭图说： 袁氏家族对天下有恩德，人们多来归附，而且现在他的势力最强，还要去投奔谁？ 
English: Xin commented, Guo Tu said: Yuan's family has been beneficial to the world, many people have come to join, and now his power is the strongest, who would you like to join?

古文：嘉知其不寤，不复言，遂去之。
现代文：郭嘉知道他们执迷不悟，便不再说，于是离去。
English: Guo Jia knew that they would not change their minds, so he stopped talking and left.

古文：操召见，与论天下事，豆曰： 使孤成大业者，必此人也！ 
现代文：曹操召见郭嘉，与他谈论天下大事，高兴地说： 使我成就大业的，一定就是此人！ 
English: Cao Cao summoned Guo Jia, talked with him about the world's major events, and said happily: It must be this man who made me achieve my great career!

古文：嘉出，亦喜曰： 真吾主也！ 
现代文：郭嘉出来后，也高兴地说： 这真是我的主人！ 
English: After Guo Jia came out, he also said happily: This is really my master!

古文：操表嘉为司空祭酒。
现代文：曹操上表推荐郭嘉为司空祭酒。
English: Cao Cao recommended Guo Jia as the priest of the sky.

古文：操以山阳满宠为许令，操从弟洪，有宾客在许界数犯法，宠收治之，洪书报宠，宠不听。
现代文：曹操委任山阳人满宠为许都行政长官。曹操堂弟曹洪门下的宾客在许都境内屡次犯法，满宠逮捕宾客进行审讯。曹洪写信向满宠求情，满宠不理。
English: Cao Cao appointed the shanyang man Manpiao as the chief executive of Xudou. The guests of Cao Cao's cousin Cao Hong repeatedly violated the law in Xudou, and Manpiao arrested the guests for interrogation. Cao Hong wrote to Manpiao to beg for mercy, but Manpiao ignored him.

古文：洪以白操，操寻许主旨，宠知将欲原客，乃速杀之。
现代文：曹洪报告了曹操，于是曹操召见许都的主要官员。满宠知道将要教他释放宾客，便迅速将宾客处死。
English: Cao Hong reported to Cao Cao, so Cao Cao summoned key officials in Xu's capital. Knowing that he was going to teach him to release the guests, he quickly put the guests to death.

古文：操喜曰： 当事不当尔邪！ 
现代文：曹操高兴地说： 负责的官员，难道不该这样做吗！ 
English: Cao Cao said happily, "Responsible officials, shouldn't you do this?"

古文：北海太守孔融，负其高气，志在靖难，而才疏意广，讫无成功。
现代文：北海郡太守孔融，以才气出众自负，立志平定祸乱。但他志大才疏，一直没有成效。
English: Kong Rong, the grand marshal of Beihai County, was proud of his talent and determined to put an end to the calamity. However, he lacked ambition and talent and never achieved any results.

古文：高谈清教，盈溢官曹，辞气温雅，可玩而诵，论事考实，难可悉行。
现代文：他高谈阔论，盈溢官府，谈吐优雅，可使人玩味传诵，但把他的议论具体实施，却很难全行得通。
English: He speaks eloquently, enriches the government, speaks elegantly, and can be read aloud, but it is difficult to put his arguments into practice.

古文：但能张磔网罗，而目理甚疏。
现代文：他只会口出大言，而漏洞很多。
English: All he does is talk big, and there are a lot of loopholes.

古文：造次能得人心，久久亦不愿附也。
现代文：他一时可得人心，但久而久之，人们便不愿再依附。
English: He can win hearts and minds for a while, but over time, people will no longer want to cling to him.

古文：其所任用，好奇取异，多剽轻小才，至于奠事名儒郑玄，执子孙礼，易其乡名曰郑公乡，及清俊之士左承祖、刘义逊等，皆备在座席而已，不与论政事，曰： 此民望，不可失也！ 
现代文：他所任用的官员，好标新立异，多数是耍小聪明的轻浮之人。孔融尊奉大儒郑玄，以子孙之礼对待郑玄，把郑玄所居住的乡改名为郑公乡。对其他有名望的清俊之士左承祖、刘义逊等，全都只当作宾客奉陪在座而已，不与他们讨论国家政事，他说： 这是人民尊敬的人物，不能失去他们。 
English: Most of the officials he appointed were unconventional and frivolous. Kong Rong respected the great scholar Zheng Xuan, treated him as a grandson, and changed the name of the township where Zheng Xuan lived to Zheng Gong Township. For other famous and handsome men such as Zuo Chengzu and Liu Yisong, they were all only invited as guests, and did not discuss national politics with them. He said: This is a person respected by the people, we cannot lose them.

古文：黄巾来寇，融战败，走保都昌。
现代文：黄巾军来进攻北海郡，孔融战败，退守都昌。
English: The Yellow Turban Army attacked Beihai County. Kong Rong was defeated and retreated to Duchang.

古文：时袁、公孙首尾相连，融兵弱粮寡，孤立一隅，不与相通。左承祖劝融宜自托强国，融不听而杀之，刘义逊弃去。
现代文：左承祖劝孔融，应自己选择一个较大的势力作为依靠。孔融没有听从，反而将他杀死。刘义逊因此背弃孔融，离开北海郡。
English: Zuo Chengzu advised Kong Rong that he should choose a bigger power to rely on. Kong Rong did not listen, but killed him instead. Liu Yisong therefore turned his back on Kong Rong and left Beihai County.

古文：青州刺史袁谭攻融，自春至夏，战士所馀裁数百人，流矢交集，而融犹隐几读书，谈笑自若。
现代文：青州刺史袁谭进攻孔融，从春到夏，孔融部下只剩数百名战士，乱箭四飞，孔融却还靠在案几上读书，谈笑自若。
English: The Qingzhou assassin Yuan Tan attacked Kong Rong. From spring to summer, there were only a few hundred soldiers left under Kong Rong, and the arrows were flying everywhere. However, Kong Rong was still reading books and talking freely.

古文：城夜陷，及奔东山，妻子为谭所虏。
现代文：都昌城在夜里被攻破，孔融这才逃往东山，他的妻子儿女都被袁谭俘虏。
English: Duchang City was breached at night, and Kong Rong fled to Dongshan. His wife and children were all captured by Yuan Tan.

古文：曹操与融有旧，征为将作大匠。
现代文：曹操与孔融是老友，就征召他到朝廷担任将作大匠。
English: Cao Cao and Kong Rong were old friends, and he was summoned to the imperial court to serve as a grand master.

古文：袁谭初至青州，其土自河而西，不过平原。
现代文：袁谭刚到青州时，在黄河以西的疆界，不超过平原县。
English: When Yuan Tan first arrived in Qingzhou, the border west of the Yellow River did not exceed Pingyuan County.

古文：谭北排田楷，东破孔融，威惠甚著；其后信任群小，肆志奢淫，声望遂衰。
现代文：他向北攻击公孙瓒委任的青州刺史田楷，向东又攻破北海郡太守孔融，威望和惠政十分突出。但他后来信任一些奸佞小人，纵欲肆志，骄奢淫逸，声望便衰落了。
English: To the north, he attacked Tian Kai, the Qingzhou statesman appointed by Gongsun Qi, and to the east, he defeated Kong Rong, the grand marshal of Beihai County. His prestige and favorable policies were very prominent. However, he later trusted some traitors and villains, indulged in ambition, and indulged in luxury, and his reputation declined.

古文：中平以来，天下乱离，民弃农业，诸军并起，率乏粮谷，无终岁之计，饥则寇略，饱则弃馀，瓦解流离，无敌自破者，不可胜数。袁绍在河北，军人仰食桑椹。
现代文：饥饿时就抢掠，吃饱后就扔掉剩下的粮食。军队分崩离析，未受攻击就自行瓦解的，数不胜数。袁绍在河北，军士靠吃桑椹度日；袁术在长江、淮河之间，以蛤蚌为食。
English: When hungry, they loot, and when full, they throw away the remaining grain. Armies fall apart, and those that collapse on their own without being attacked are countless. Yuan Shao in Hebei, the sergeant lives by eating mulberries; Yuan Shou between the Yangtze River and the Huai River, feeds on earthworms.

古文：袁术在江淮，取给蒲蠃，民多相食，州里萧条。
现代文：很多百姓互相残杀，用人肉充饥，各地都是一片萧条景象。
English: Many people are killing each other and using human flesh to satisfy their hunger. Everywhere is a scene of depression.

古文：羽林监枣祗请建置屯田，曹操从之，以祗为屯田都尉，以骑都尉任峻为典农中郎将。
现代文：羽林监枣祗请求建立屯田制度，曹操采纳了他的建议。曹操委任枣祗为屯田都尉，委任骑都尉任峻为典农中郎将。
English: At the request of Uebayashi no kami Zaozuke to establish the Tonden system, Cao Cao accepted his suggestion. Cao appointed Zaozuke as Tonden captain, and appointed cavalry captain Renjun as Tonnen churoshō.

古文：募民屯田许下，得谷百万斛。
现代文：召募百姓在许都周围屯田，收获谷物一百万斛。
English: The people were conscripted to work in the fields around the capital, and the grain harvest reached one million baht.

古文：于是州郡倒置田官，所在积谷，仓廪皆满。
现代文：于是州、郡依照规定设置主管屯田的官员，各地存粮都装满了仓库。
English: As a result, the state and the county set up officials in charge of the cantonment in accordance with the regulations, and the grain stores in various regions were filled with warehouses.

古文：故操征伐四方，无运粮之劳，遂能兼并群雄。
现代文：所以曹操出兵征战四方，无须运粮的劳苦，便能兼并各地方割据势力。
English: Therefore, Cao Cao sent troops to fight in four directions, and without the labor of transporting grain, he was able to annex the local separatist forces.

古文：军国之饶，起于祗而成于峻。
现代文：军队与国家的富裕，是由枣祗创业，而由任峻完成的。
English: The prosperity of the army and the country was started by Zaozhuang and completed by Renjun.

古文：袁术畏吕布为己害，乃为子求婚，布复许之，术遣将纪灵等步骑三万攻刘备，备求救于布。
现代文：袁术害怕吕布危害自己，就为儿子向吕布女儿求婚，吕布答应了。袁术派遣部将纪灵等率领步、骑兵三万进攻刘备，刘备向吕布求救。
English: Yuan Shou was afraid that Lü Bu would harm himself, so he proposed marriage to Lü Bu's daughter for his son, and Lü Bu agreed. Yuan Shou's dispatching department led Ji Ling and others, and 30,000 cavalry attacked Liu Bei, and Liu Bei asked Lü Bu for help.

古文：诸将谓布曰： 将军常欲杀刘备，今可假手于术。 
现代文：吕布属下的将领们对吕布说： 将军一直想杀刘备，这次可以借袁术的手来实现。 
English: The crowd will say to Lü Bu: The general has often wanted to kill Liu Bei, now he can get rid of him with the help of Yuan Shu.

古文：布曰： 不然。
现代文：吕布说： 不然。
English: Lüb said: Not true.

古文：术若破备，则北连泰山诸将，吾为在术围中，不得不救也。 
现代文：袁术如果击溃刘备，就可以向北联络泰山的诸将领，我就将陷入袁术的包围之中，因此不能不救刘备。 
English: If Yuan Shu defeats Liu Bei, he will be able to contact the generals of Mount Tai to the north, and I will be surrounded by Yuan Shu, so I must save Liu Bei.

古文：便率步骑千馀驰往赴之。
现代文：吕布便率领步、骑兵一千余人急速赶赴刘备处。
English: Lü Bu led the way, and more than a thousand cavalrymen rushed to Liu Bei's place.

古文：灵等闻布至，皆敛兵而止。
现代文：纪灵等听说吕布前来，都收兵回营，停止攻战。
English: Ji Ling and others heard that Lü Bu was coming, and they all put down their weapons to stop the attack.

古文：布屯沛城西南，遣铃下请灵等，灵等亦请布，布往就之，与备共饮食。
现代文：吕布驻军沛城西南，派遣侍卫去请纪灵等人，纪灵等也派人来请吕布，吕布就前往纪灵营中，邀请刘备一起赴宴。
English: Lvbu garrisoned southwest of Peicheng and sent his guards to invite Ji Ling and others. Ji Ling and others also sent people to invite Lvbu. Lvbu went to Ji Ling's camp and invited Liu Bei to a banquet.

古文：布谓灵等曰： 玄德，布弟也，为诸君所困，故来救之。
现代文：吕布对纪灵等人说： 刘玄德是我的弟弟，被你们围困，所以我来救他。
English: Lü Bu said to Ji Ling and the others, "Liu Xuande is my brother. He is besieged by you, so I have come to rescue him.

古文：布性不喜合斗，喜解斗耳。 
现代文：我生性不喜欢聚合别人争斗，只喜欢化解别人的争斗。 
English: By nature, I don't like to collect other people's fights, I only like to resolve other people's fights.

古文：乃令军候植戟于营门，布弯弓顾曰： 诸君观布射戟小支，中者当各解兵，不中可留决斗。 
现代文：于是命令军官把铁戟竖立在营门，吕布拉满了弓，对旁观的人说： 你们看我射戟头旁边的戟支，如果射中，你们就各自罢兵，如果不中，你们可以留下厮杀。 
English: Then he ordered the officers to set up the spade at the gate of the camp, and filled the bows with coals, and said to the bystanders, "Look, I am shooting the cross-bows next to the heads of the cross-bows; if any of them are hit, you may all go out of the camp; if any of them are not hit, you may stay and fight."

古文：布即一发，正中戟支。
现代文：吕布随即射了一箭，正中戟支。
English: Lv Bu immediately shot an arrow, and a small branch sprouted in the middle.

古文：灵等皆惊，言： 将军天威也！ 
现代文：纪灵等全都大吃一惊，说： 将军真是天赋神威！ 
English: Ji Ling and the others were all taken aback and said, "The general is truly gifted and powerful!"

古文：明日复欢会，然后各罢。
现代文：第三天，又设酒欢宴，然后各自班师。
English: The next day, they again held a banquet with the generals, and then each of them went home.

古文：备合兵得万馀人，布恶之，自出兵攻备。
现代文：刘备集合起一万余人的部队，吕布认为受到了威胁，就亲自出兵攻打刘备。
English: Liu Bei assembled a force of more than ten thousand men, and Lü Bu, believing that he was under threat, personally sent troops to attack Liu Bei.

古文：备败走，归曹操，操厚遇之，以为豫州牧。
现代文：刘备败走，投奔曹操。曹操对他的待遇十分优厚，又让朝廷任命他为豫州牧。
English: Liu Bei was defeated and fled to Cao Cao. Cao Cao treated him very well and had the imperial court appoint him as the herdsman of Yuzhou.

古文：或谓操曰： 备有英雄之志，今不早图，后必为患。 
现代文：有人对曹操说： 刘备有英雄大志，如今不趁早除掉他，必然会有后患。 
English: Someone said to Cao Cao: Liu Bei has a great ambition to be a hero. If we don't get rid of him as soon as possible, there will inevitably be consequences.

古文：操以问郭嘉，嘉曰： 有是。
现代文：曹操为此征询郭嘉的意见，郭嘉说： 这种说法是对的。
English: Cao Cao asked Guo Jia's opinion about this. Guo Jia said: This statement is correct.

古文：然公起义兵，为百姓除暴，推诚杖信以招俊杰，犹惧其未也。
现代文：但是，您兴起义兵，为百姓除暴，诚心诚意地招募天下英雄豪杰，还惟恐他们不来。
English: However, you have raised up volunteer soldiers to eliminate violence for the people, sincerely recruited world heroes, and are afraid that they will not come.

古文：今备有英雄名，以穷归己而害之，是以害贤为名也。
现代文：如今刘备有英雄之名，因走投无路前来投靠，而您却杀掉他，这将会使您得到谋害贤才的恶名。
English: Now Liu Bei has the reputation of a hero. He came to you for help when he was cornered, but you killed him. This will earn you the notoriety of murdering a wise man.

古文：如此，则智士将自疑，回心择主，公谁与定天下乎！
现代文：果真如此，有才智的人士将各自疑虑，改变心意，另选主人，您还去和谁一起平定天下！
English: If this is the case, talented people will have their own doubts, change their minds, and choose another master, who will you go with to level the world!

古文：夫除一人之患以沮四海之望，安危之机也，不可不察。 
现代文：因除去一个人的祸患，而失去天下人的期望，这是关系今后安危的关键，您不可不仔细考虑。 
English: To lose the expectations of the world by removing the scourge of one person is the key to the future safety of the relationship. You must carefully consider this.

古文：操笑曰： 君得之矣！ 
现代文：曹操笑着说： 你分析得很对。 
English: Cao Cao smiled and said, "Your analysis is correct.

古文：遂益其兵，给粮食，使东至沛，收散兵以图吕布。
现代文：于是拨给刘备一些军队，供应粮草，让他往东到小沛一带，集合被击溃的残部，与吕布对抗。
English: Therefore, Liu Bei was allocated some troops to supply grain and grass, and he was sent to the east to the Xiaopei area to gather the defeated remnants and confront Lvbu.

古文：初，备在豫州，举陈郡袁涣为茂才。
现代文：当初，刘备在豫州，曾推举陈郡人袁涣为茂才。
English: At the beginning, Liu Bei was in Yuzhou, and he had nominated Yuan Shao, a native of Chen County, as Mao Cai.

古文：涣为吕布所留，布欲使涣作书骂辱备，涣不可，再三强之。
现代文：袁涣被吕布扣留，吕布想要袁涣写一封信辱骂刘备，袁涣不答应，吕布再三强迫，仍被袁涣拒绝。
English: Yuan Qi was detained by Lv Bu. Lv Bu wanted Yuan Qi to write a letter insulting Liu Bei, but Yuan Qi did not agree. Lv Bu repeatedly forced him to do so, but Yuan Qi still refused.

古文：不许。布大怒，以兵胁涣曰： 为之则生，不为则死！ 
现代文：吕布大怒，用剑威胁袁涣说： 你写了这封信，就可以活；不写，就得死！ 
English: Lv Bu was furious and threatened Yuan Shao with a sword, saying, "If you write this letter, you can live; if you don't write it, you will die!"

古文：涣颜色不变，笑而应之曰： 涣闻唯德可以辱人，不闻以骂。
现代文：袁涣面不改色，笑着回答说： 我听说只有道德可以使人感到羞耻，没听说用诟骂可以达到这个目的。
English: Yuan Xuan did not change his expression, and answered him with a smile, "I have heard that only morality can insult people, but I have not heard that abuse can be used.

古文：使彼固君子邪，且不耻将军之言；彼诚小人邪，将复将军之意，则辱在此不在于彼。
现代文：假如刘备是个君子，他不会以将军的诟骂为耻；假如他真是小人，就将回骂将军，则受到羞辱的是将军，而不是他。
English: If Liu Bei is a gentleman, he will not be ashamed of the general's abuse; if he is really a villain, he will insult the general in return, and it is the general who will be humiliated, not him.

古文：且涣他日之事刘将军，犹今日之事将军也，如一旦去此，复骂将军，可乎！ 
现代文：而且，我当初跟随刘备，犹如今天跟随将军，如果有一天我离开这里，再为别人写信骂将军，难道可以吗？ 
English: Moreover, I followed Liu Bei in the beginning, just as I follow the general today. If one day I leave here and write letters for others to abuse the general, would that be okay?

古文：布惭而止。
现代文：吕布感到惭愧，于是作罢。
English: Lvbu only felt ashamed and stopped persecuting him.

古文：张济自关中引兵入荆州界，攻穰城，为流矢所中死。
现代文：张济从关中率军进入荆州地界，攻穰城，被流箭射中而死。
English: Zhang Jizhong led the army from Guanzhong into the Jingzhou territory, attacked the city, and was shot dead by a stray arrow.

古文：荆州官属皆贺，刘表曰： 济以穷来，主人无礼，至于交锋，此非牧意，牧受吊，不受贺也。 
现代文：荆州官员都向荆州牧刘表祝贺。刘表说： 张济因穷途潦倒而来，我作为主人，未尽到礼节，竟导致双方交锋，这并非我的本意。我只接受哀悼，不接受祝贺。 
English: Jingzhou officials all congratulated Jingzhou herdsman Liu Biao. Liu Biao said: Zhang Jie fell due to exhaustion. As the host, I did not perform the etiquette, which led to a confrontation between the two sides. This is not my intention. I only accept condolences, not congratulations.

古文：使人纳其众；众闻之喜，皆归心焉。
现代文：他派人去收容张济的部队，张济部下知道后大喜，全都诚心归附。
English: He sent someone to receive Zhang Zi's troops. Zhang Zi's subordinates were overjoyed when they learned of this, and they all wholeheartedly agreed.

古文：济族子建忠将军绣代领其众，屯宛。
现代文：张济的族侄、建忠将军张绣接管部队，驻守宛城。
English: Zhang Zi's nephew, General Jianzhong Zhang Xiu, took over the troops and garrisoned Wancheng.

古文：初，帝既出长安，宣威将军贾诩上还印绶，往依段煨于华阴。
现代文：当初，献帝离开长安后，宣威将军机诩就交回印绶，到华阴去投靠段煨。
English: At first, after Emperor Xian left Chang'an, General Xuan Wei handed back the imperial seal and went to Huayin to join Duan Xuan.

古文：诩素知名，为煨军所望，煨礼奉甚备。
现代文：贾诩素有名望，段煨军中将士很仰慕他，段煨对他礼遇十分周到。
English: Jia Yuxu was well-known, and the lieutenant generals of Duan Xuan's army admired him very much. Duan Xuan treated him very courteously.

古文：诩潜谋归张乡，或曰： 煨待君厚矣，君去安之？ 
现代文：贾诩暗中笄投奔张绣，有人对他说： 段煨待您这么优厚，您还要到哪里去？ 
English: Jia Yu secretly rushed to Zhang Xiu, someone said to him: Duan Yu treats you so well, where else would you go?

古文：诩曰： 煨性多疑，有忌诩意，礼虽厚，不可恃久，将为所图。
现代文：贾诩说： 段煨性情多疑，有嫉妒我在军中的威望的意思，虽然现在礼遇周到。但不能长久依赖，将来会有杀身之祸。
English: Jia Wei said: Duan Wei is suspicious and envious of my prestige in the army. Although he treats me politely now, he cannot rely on me for a long time. In the future, he will kill himself.

古文：去必喜，又望吾结大援于外，必厚吾妻子；绣无谋主，亦愿得诩：则家与身必俱全矣。 
现代文：我离开后，他一定很高兴，又希望我在外给他争取强援，必然会优待我的妻子儿女。张绣军中没有谋士，也愿意得到我，这样，我与家眷就必定都可以保全了。 
English: After I left, he must have been very happy, and hoped that I would go out to get him strong support, and would certainly treat my wife and children better. Zhang Xiu's army did not have any advisers, and they were also willing to get me, so that I and my family would certainly be safe.

古文：诩遂往，绣执子孙礼，煨果善视其家。
现代文：贾诩就前往张绣军中，张绣对他十分敬重，以晚辈自居。
English: Jia Wei went to Zhang Xiu there, Zhang Xiu received him with courtesy, Duan Wei treated Jia Wei's family well.

古文：诩说绣附于刘表，绣从之。
现代文：段煨也果然对贾诩的家眷十分优待。贾诩劝说张绣依附刘表，张绣同意。
English: Duan Yu also treated Jia Yu's family very favorably. Jia Yu persuaded Zhang Xiu to adhere to Liu He, and Zhang Xiu Yu agreed.

古文：诩往见表，表以客礼待之。
现代文：贾诩去见刘表，刘表用宾客的礼节招待他。
English: Jia Wei went to see Liu Biao, and Liu Biao invited him with the etiquette of a guest.

古文：诩曰： 表，平世三公才也，不见事变，多疑无决，无能为也！ 
现代文：贾诩与刘表接触后，说： 刘表在天下太平时，是担任三分的人才。但他看不清乱世的变化，又为人多疑，缺乏决断，不会有所作为！ 
English: After contact between Jia Wei and Liu Biao, he said: Liu Biao is a three-point talent when the world is at peace. But he can't see the changes in the chaotic world clearly, and he is suspicious, lacks determination, and will not make a difference!

古文：刘表爱民养士，从容自保，境内无事，关西、兗、豫学士归之者以千数。
现代文：刘表在荆州爱护百姓，优待士大夫，和平自保，荆州境内安宁无事，百姓生活安定。函谷关以西、兖州、豫州的学者，来投奔刘表的数以千计。
English: Liu Biao loved the people in Jingzhou, treated doctors with preferential treatment, kept the peace, there was no trouble in Jingzhou, and the people's lives were stable. Thousands of scholars from west of Hakodate, Ganzhou and Yuzhou came to Liu Biao.

古文：表乃起立学校，讲明经术，命故雅乐郎河南杜夔作雅乐。
现代文：于是刘表建立学府，用以讲授儒家经典。他命令前宫廷雅乐郎、河南人杜制作雅乐。
English: As a result, Liu Biao established a school to teach Confucian classics. He ordered the former court court court musician and the Henan people to make elegant music.

古文：乐备，表欲庭观之。
现代文：制作完毕后，刘表想在庭中观看演奏。
English: After the production is completed, Liu table wants to watch the performance in the yard.

古文：夔曰： 今将军号不为天子，合乐而庭作之，无乃不可乎！ 
现代文：杜说： 如今将军在名义上不是天子，却设置雅乐当庭雅乐，恐怕不可以吧！ 
English: Du said: "Nowadays, the general is not the son of heaven in name, but he sets up elegant music in the court of elegance, I'm afraid it's not possible!

古文：表乃止。
现代文：刘表于是打消此意。
English: Liu table then dispelled this intention.

古文：平原祢衡，少有才辨，而尚气刚傲，孔融荐之于曹操。
现代文：平原人祢衡自幼有才华，能言善辩，但气盛、刚直而又骄傲，孔融把他推荐给曹操。
English: Youheng, a man from the plains, was talented and eloquent from a young age, but he was also energetic, upright and proud. Kong Rong recommended him to Cao Cao.

古文：衡骂辱操，操怒，谓融曰： 祢衡竖子，孤杀之，犹雀鼠耳；顾此人素有虚名，远近将谓孤不能容之。 
现代文：祢衡辱骂曹操，曹操大怒，对孔融说： 祢衡这个小子，我要杀他，不过像宰一只麻雀或老鼠一样罢了！只是想到此人一向有虚名，杀了他，远近之人将说我没有容人之量。 
English: You Heng insulted Cao Cao, and Cao Cao flew into a rage and said to Kong Rong, "You Heng, this boy, I'm going to kill him, but it'll be just like killing a sparrow or a mouse! Just think, this man always had a false name. If I kill him, people near and far will say I don't have room for people."

古文：乃送与刘表，表延礼以为上宾。
现代文：于是把祢衡送给刘表。刘表对祢衡礼节周到，把他当作上宾。
English: So he gave Neheng to Liu Biao. Liu Biao was courteous to Neheng and treated him as a guest.

古文：衡称表之美盈口，而好议贬其左右，于是左右因形而谮之曰： 衡称将军之仁，西伯不过也，唯以为不能断，终不济者，必由此也。 
现代文：祢衡很赞美刘表的所作所为，但却爱讥讽刘表左右的亲信。于是，刘表的亲信就势诬陷祢衡，对刘表说： 祢衡称颂将军仁义爱人，可以与周文王相比。但又认为将军临事不能决断，而最终的失败，必定是由于这个原因。 
English: Youheng was very complimentary of Liu Biao's actions, but he liked to ridicule Liu Biao's close confidants. Therefore, Liu Biao's close confidants framed Youheng and said to Liu Biao: Youheng praised the general's benevolence, righteousness and love, which can be compared to King Zhou Wen. However, he also believed that the general was indecisive, and the ultimate failure must be due to this reason.

古文：其言实指表短，而非衡所言也。
现代文：这话实际上指出了刘表的缺点，但却不是祢衡说的。
English: This actually pointed out the shortcomings of Liu table, but it was not said by Youheng.

古文：表由是怒，以江夏太守黄祖性急，送衡与之，祖亦善街焉。
现代文：刘表因此大怒，知道江夏郡太守黄祖性情暴躁，就把祢衡送到江夏。
English: As a result, Liu Biao was furious. Knowing that Huang Zu, the governor of Jiangxia County, was short-tempered, he sent Youheng to Jiangxia.

古文：后衡众辱祖，祖杀之。
现代文：黄祖对祢衡也很优待，但后来祢衡当众辱骂黄祖，黄祖将他杀死。
English: Huang Zu also treated Neheng very well, but later Neheng insulted Huang Zu in public, and Huang Zu killed him.

古文：孝献皇帝丁建安二年
现代文：建安二年
English: Second year of Jian'an

古文：春，正月，曹操讨张绣，军于淯水，绣举众降。
现代文：春季，正月，曹操率军讨伐张绣，驻在水，张绣率部众投降曹操。
English: In the spring, the first month, Cao Cao led the army to fight Zhang Xiu, stationed in the water, Zhang Xiu led the troops to surrender to Cao Cao.

古文：操纳张济之妻，绣恨之；又以金与绣骁将胡车儿，绣闻而疑惧，袭击操军，杀操长子昂。
现代文：曹操收纳张绣族叔张济的妻子为姬妾，张绣感到恼恨。曹操又送金银给张绣部下的绕将胡车儿，张绣得知后，疑虑不安，便袭击曹军，杀死曹操的长子曹昂。
English: Cao Cao received the wife of Zhang Zhi's uncle Zhang Ji as his concubine, which angered Zhang Zhi. Cao Cao also sent gold and silver to Zhang Zhi's subordinate Hu Chaer. After Zhang Zhi learned of this, she was worried and attacked Cao Jun and killed Cao's eldest son Cao An.

古文：操中流矢，败走，校尉典韦与绣力战，左右死伤略尽，韦被数十创。绣兵前搏之，韦双挟两人击杀之，瞋目大骂而死。
现代文：曹操被流箭射中，狼狈败逃。校尉内典同张绣奋力交战，左右的卫士死伤将尽，他身上受伤数十处，张绣部下冲上前来，他双后抓住两个敌人奋力击杀，最后，瞪起眼睛大骂张绣而死。
English: Cao Cao was shot by a stray arrow and narrowly escaped. The captain, Nai Dian, fought hard with Zhang Xiu, and the guards on both sides were mortally wounded. He was wounded in dozens of places, Zhang Xiu's subordinates rushed forward, he grabbed two enemies from behind and fought to kill them, and finally, he stared at his eyes and cursed Zhang Xiu and died.

古文：操收散兵，还住舞阴。
现代文：曹操收集残部，退回舞阴驻守。
English: Cao Cao collected the remains and returned to Wuyin to stay.

古文：绣率骑来追，操击破之，绣走还穰，复与刘表合。
现代文：张绣率领骑兵前来追击，被曹操击败，张绣退回穰城，再度与刘表联合。
English: Zhang Xiu led the cavalry to pursue, was defeated by Cao Cao, Zhang Xiu returned to Lucheng, and once again united with Liu Biao.

古文：是时，诸军大乱，平虏校尉泰山于禁独整众而还，道逢青州兵劫掠人，禁数其罪而击之。
现代文：这时，曹操部下诸军一片混乱，只有平虏校尉、泰山人于禁整顿部队，有秩序地撤回。路上，于禁见到曹操属下的青州军抢掠百姓，便数说他们的罪状，并派兵进行攻击。
English: At this time, all the armies under Cao Cao were in chaos. Only Captain Pingrui and the Taishan people were able to withdraw in an orderly manner. On the way, they saw the Qingzhou Army under Cao Cao looting the people. They counted their crimes and sent troops to attack.

古文：青州兵走，诣操。
现代文：青州兵逃走，去向曹操告状。
English: The Qingzhou soldiers fled and went to complain to Cao Cao.

古文：禁既至，先立营垒，不时谒操。
现代文：于禁到达以后，先安营扎寨，没有立即去拜见曹操。
English: After Yu Han arrived, he first set up camp and did not immediately go to see Cao Cao.

古文：或谓禁： 青州兵已诉君矣，宜促诣公辨之。 
现代文：有人对于禁说： 青州兵已经先去告您的状了，您应该快去向曹公解释。 
English: Some people said about the ban: Qingzhou soldiers have already filed a complaint with the great-grandfather, so they should quickly go to the great-grandfather to defend themselves.

古文：禁曰： 今贼在后，追至无时，不先为备，何以待敌！
现代文：于禁说： 如今敌人就在后面，随时都会赶到，不先作好准备，怎么迎敌！
English: Yu Gan said, "Nowadays, the enemy is right behind us and will arrive at any time. How can we meet the enemy without first making preparations?"

古文：且公聪明，谮诉何缘得行！ 
现代文：而且曹公英明，随意诬告怎么能行得通呢！ 
English: Moreover, Cao Gong is wise, how can a random false accusation work!

古文：徐凿堑安营讫，乃入谒，具陈其状。
现代文：于是从容地挖好壕沟，安好营寨后，才进入拜见曹操，报告全部情况。
English: He slowly dug a trench and set up camp, and only after he had finished did he go to visit Taizu and inform him of the situation in detail.

古文：操悦，谓禁曰： 淯水之难，吾犹狼狈，将军在乱能整，讨暴坚垒，有不可动之节，虽古名将，何以加之！
现代文：曹操很高兴，对于禁说： 水之败，连我也狼狈不堪，将军在混乱中能整顿好自己的队伍，讨平暴乱，巩固营垒，有不可动摇的气节，即使是古代名将，也不会比你更好！ 
English: Cao Cao was very happy, and said to the Forbidden One, "The defeat by water is too much for even me to bear. In the chaos, the general is able to reorganize his troops, pacify the riots, and consolidate the camp. He has unshakable morals. Even a famous general from ancient times would not be better than you!"

古文：于是录禁前后功，封益寿亭侯。
现代文：于是累计于禁的前后战功，封为益寿亭侯。
English: As a result, he accumulated war merits before and after the ban, and was given the title of Prince of Yishuting.

古文：操引军还许。
现代文：曹操率军返回许都。
English: Cao Cao led the army back to Xu Du.

古文：袁绍与操书，辞语骄慢。
现代文：袁绍在给曹操的信中，措辞十分傲慢。
English: In Yuan Shao's letter to Cao Cao, the wording is very arrogant.

古文：操谓荀彧、郭嘉曰： 今将讨不义而力不敌，何如？ 
现代文：曹操对荀、郭嘉说： 现在，我准备讨伐背逆君臣大义的袁绍，但势力没有他强大，应该怎么办？ 
English: Cao Cao said to Zou and Guo Jia: Now, I am ready to fight against Yuan Shao, who has rebelled against the monarchs, the ministers and the great justice, but the forces are not as strong as he is. What should I do?

古文：对曰： 刘、项之不敌，公所知也。
现代文：他们回答说： 刘邦的势力比不上项羽，是您所知道的。
English: They replied: You know that Liu Bang's power is not as great as Xiang Yu's.

古文：汉祖唯智胜项羽，故羽虽强，终为所禽。
现代文：袁绍身为臣子，如果起兵进攻，便是叛逆；而您尊奉天子以统率天下，这是在道义上胜过他。
English: Yuan Shao was a vassal, if he raised an army to attack, it would be a rebellion; and you respect the Son of Heaven to lead the world, which is morally superior to him.

古文：今绍有十败，公有十胜，绍虽强，无能为也。绍繁礼多仪，公体任自然，此道胜也；绍以逆动，公奉顺以率天下，此义胜也；桓、灵以来，政失于宽，绍以宽济宽，故不摄，公纠之以猛而上下知制，此治胜也；绍外宽内忌，用人而疑之，所任唯亲戚子弟，公外易简而内机明，用人无疑，唯才所宜，不问远近，此度胜也；绍多谋少决，失在后事，公得策辄行，应变无穷，此谋胜也；绍高议揖让以收名誉，士之好言饰外者多归之，公以至心待人，不为虚美，士之忠正远见而有实者皆愿为用，此德胜也绍见人饥寒，恤念之，形于颜色，其所不见，虑或不及，公于目前小事，时有所忽，至于大事，与四海接，恩之所加，皆过其望，虽所不见，虑无不周，此仁胜也；绍大臣争权，谗言惑乱，公御下以道，浸润不行，此明胜也；绍是非不可知，公所是进之以礼，所不是正之以法，此文胜也；绍好为虚势，不知兵要，公以少克众，用兵如神，军人恃之，敌人畏之，此武胜也。 操笑曰： 如卿所言，孤何德以堪之！ 
现代文：自从桓帝、灵帝以来，政令失于松驰，袁绍却用松驰来补救松驰，因此缺乏法纪，令出不行；而您用严厉来纠正松弛，使得大小官员都知道遵守法纪，这是在治理上胜过他。袁绍外表宽厚而内心猜忌，用人好起疑心，只信任亲戚子弟；而您外表平易近人，内心机敏善察，用人不疑，只看才干，不问远近亲疏，这是在器度上胜过他。袁绍计谋多而决断少，往往错过时机；而您制定了策略就立即施行，可应付无穷的变化，这是在谋略上胜过他。袁绍喜欢高谈阔论，谦恭揖让，以沽名钓誉，因此，那些华而不实的士大夫多去投奔他；而您以至诚待人，不虚情假义，忠诚正直、有远见和真才实学之士都愿为您效力，这是在品德上胜过他。袁绍看到他人饥寒交迫，怜悯之情便在面色上显露出来，但对没有看到的，就有时考虑不周；而您对于眼前的小事，经常忽略不管，但对于大事，以及与全国各地的交往，您所施的恩惠却往往出人意外，对于看不到的事情，也考虑得无不十分周全，这是在仁义上胜过他。袁绍后下的大臣争权夺利，互进谗言，混淆视听；而您管理属下有方，谗言诬陷行不通，这是在明智上胜过他。袁绍做事没有标准，所是所非不可知；而您对正直、有功的人礼敬，对邪恶、犯罪的人以法律制裁、这是在文治上胜过他。袁绍喜欢虚张声势，而不知兵家要诀；而您善于以弱胜强，用兵如神，部下信赖，敌人畏惧，这是在武功上胜过他。 曹操笑道： 照你们的分析，我有什么德能担当得起！ 
English: Since the reign of Emperor Huan and Emperor Ling, government decrees have been lax, but Yuan Shao has used laxity to remedy laxity, so there is a lack of legal discipline, and it is not possible to issue orders; and you use severity to correct slackness, so that officials of all sizes know to abide by the law and discipline, which is better than him in governance. Yuan Shao is generous in appearance but suspicious in heart, and is suspicious of others, and only trusts relatives and children; while you are approachable in appearance, astute and observant in heart, and employ people without doubt, only look at talent, do not ask distant relatives, which is better than him

古文：嘉又曰： 绍方北击公孙瓚，可因其远征，东取吕布。
现代文：郭嘉又说： 袁绍正在北方攻击公孙瓒，可乘他远征之机，先向东收拾吕布。
English: Guo Jia also said: Yuan Shao is attacking Gongsun Yao in the north, he can take advantage of his expeditionary opportunity to first clean up Lvbu to the east.

古文：若绍为寇，布为之援，此深害也。 
现代文：如果袁绍攻我，吕布在旁支援，就会成为大害。 
English: If Yuan Shao attacks me and Lü Bu supports me, it will be a great harm.

古文：彧曰： 不先取吕布，河北未易图也。 
现代文：荀说： 不先击败吕布，我们就不容易攻击占据河北的袁绍。 
English: Zhai said: Without defeating Lvbu first, it would not be easy for us to attack Yuan Shao, who occupies Hebei.

古文：操曰： 然。
现代文：曹操说： 你们分析得对。
English: Cao Cao said: Your analysis is correct.

古文：吾所惑者，又恐绍侵扰关中，西乱羌、胡，南诱蜀、汉，是我独以兗、豫抗天下六分之五也。
现代文：我感到为难的是，又怕袁绍扰乱关中，向西联合羌人、胡人，向南勾结蜀、汉地方势力，那样的话，则我将仅以兖州、豫州来对抗全国其余六分之五的地区，该怎么办呢？ 
English: What troubles me is that I am afraid that Yuan Shao will disturb Guanzhong, unite the Qiang and Hu people to the west, and collude with the Shu and Han local forces to the south. In that case, I will only use Zhangzhou and Yuzhou to oppose the remaining five-sixths of the country. What should I do?

古文：为将奈何？ 彧曰： 关中将帅以十数，莫能相一，唯韩遂、马腾最强。彼见山东之争，必备拥众自保，今若抚以恩德，遣使连和，虽不能久安，比公安定山东，足以不动。
现代文：荀说： 关中将领数以十计，各自为政，不能统一，其中韩遂、马腾势力最强，他们看到崤山以东地区发生争斗，必然各自拥兵自保，如今，要是用恩德去安抚他们，派使者去与他们联和，虽然不会长久安定，但足以维持到您克定崤山以东。
English: Zou said: There are dozens of generals in Guan Zhong, each of whom is in charge of their own affairs and cannot be unified. Among them, Han Sui and Ma Teng are the most powerful. They saw that there was a fight in the area east of Lushan, and they must each support their troops to protect themselves. Now, if you use Ende to appease them and send an envoy to make peace with them, although it will not be stable for a long time, it will be enough to maintain it until you are sure that you are east of Lushan.

古文：侍中、尚书仆射钟繇有智谋，若属以西事，公无忧矣。 
现代文：侍中、尚书仆射钟繇有智谋，如果让他处理关中事务，您就不必忧虑了。 
English: The chamberlain, Shang Shufu (尚書仆) Sha Zhongxuan (射钟) has a clever plan. If you let him handle the affairs of the gate, you don't have to worry.

古文：操乃表繇以侍中守司隶校尉，持节督关中诸军，特使不拘科制。
现代文：曹操于是上表推荐，并由朝廷批准，在命钟繇以侍中兼任司隶校尉持符节，监督关中地区诸军，还授予他不受法令制度约束的特权。
English: Cao Cao was then recommended by the above table, and approved by the imperial court, to be appointed as an attendant and also as a sergeant-lieutenant to supervise the troops in the Guanzhong area, and also granted him the privilege of not being bound by the legal system.

古文：繇至长安，移书腾、遂等，为陈祸福，腾、遂各遣子入侍。
现代文：钟繇到达长安后，发送文书给马腾、韩遂等，为他们陈述利害，马腾、韩遂等都表示服从朝廷，各自派遣儿子到朝廷任职，充当人质。
English: When Zhong Rong arrived in Chang'an, he wrote to Ma Teng, Han Sui and others, telling them the advantages and disadvantages. Ma Teng, Han Sui and others each sent their sons to serve in the imperial court.

古文：袁术称帝于寿春，自称仲家，以九江太守为淮南尹，置公卿百官，郊祀天地。
现代文：袁术在寿春登极做皇帝，自称 仲家 ，改九江郡太守为淮南尹，作为京都最高行政长官。设置公卿百官，到郊外祭祀天地。
English: Yuan Shou ascended the throne in Shouchun and became emperor, calling himself Zhong Jia, changing the governor of Jiujiang County to Huainan Yin, as the highest administrator of Kyoto. He set up hundreds of nobles and officials to go to the suburbs to worship heaven and earth.

古文：沛相陈珪，球弟子也，少与术游。
现代文：沛国相陈是陈球弟弟的儿子，从小与袁术是朋友。
English: Pei Guoxiang Chen is the son of Chen Qiu's younger brother, and has been friends with Yuan Shou since childhood.

古文：术以书召珪，又劫质其子，期必致珪。
现代文：袁术用文书征召陈，又劫持陈的儿子做人质，以求一定能召来陈。
English: Yuan Shu drafted Chen with a letter and took Chen's son as a hostage in order to be able to call Chen.

古文：珪答书曰： 曹将军兴复典刑，将拨平凶慝，以为足下当戮力同心。匡翼汉室。
现代文：陈回信说： 曹将军重振朝廷权威，将扫平叛逆，我以为您也会同心协力，辅佐汉家王室。
English: Chen wrote back: General Cao has reinvigorated the authority of the imperial court and will sweep away the rebels. I thought you would also work together to assist the Han royal family.

古文：而阴谋不轨，以身试祸，欲吾营私阿附，有死不能也。 
现代文：然而您却阴谋不轨，以身试祸，还想要我因私废公，阿附于您，我宁死不从。 
English: However, you are scheming and trying your best, and you want me to abandon my duties for selfish reasons and attach myself to you. I would rather die than obey.

古文：术欲以故兗州刺史金尚为太尉，尚不许而逃去，术杀之。
现代文：袁术打算委任前任兖州刺史金尚为太尉，金尚拒绝后逃走，袁术将他杀死。
English: Yuan Shuxi planned to appoint his predecessor, the governor of Zhangzhou, Jin Shang, as the first lieutenant. Jin Shang refused and fled, and Yuan Shuxi killed him.

古文：三月，诏将作大匠孔融持节拜袁绍大将军，兼督冀、青、幽、并四州。
现代文：三月，献帝下诏，派将作大匠孔融持符节到邺城，任命袁绍为大将军，兼管冀州、青州、幽州、并州四州的军务。
English: In March, under the imperial edict of dedicating the emperor, he sent the great master Kong Rong to hold the festival of symbols to Licheng, and appointed Yuan Shao as the general, who was also in charge of the military affairs of Jizhou, Qingzhou, Yuzhou, and the four states of Binzhou.

古文：夏，五月，蝗。
现代文：夏季，五月，发生蝗灾。
English: In the summer, in May, a plague of locusts.

古文：袁术遣使者韩胤以称帝事告吕布，因求迎妇，布遣女随之。
现代文：袁术派遣使者韩胤把自己称帝的事告诉吕布，并乘此机会要求为袁术的儿子迎娶吕布的女儿，吕布让女儿随韩胤回寿春。
English: Yuan Shuxu sent an envoy, Han Yin, to tell Lü Bu that he had been proclaimed emperor, and took this opportunity to request that Yuan Shuxu's son marry Lü Bu's daughter, and that Lü Bu let his daughter return to Shuchun with Han Yin.

古文：陈珪恐徐、扬合从，为难未已，往说布曰： 曹公奉迎天子，辅赞国政，将军宜与协同策谋。共存大计。
现代文：陈担心徐州与扬州联合在一起，祸难更难平定，就去劝说吕布： 曹操奉迎天子，辅佐朝政，将军应该与他同心协力，共商大计。
English: Chen was worried that if Xuzhou and Yangzhou were united, the calamity would be even more difficult to quell, so he went to persuade Lv Bu: Cao Cao served as the son of heaven and assisted the government, the general should work together with him and discuss the plan.

古文：今与袁术结婚，必受不义之名，将有累卵之危矣！ 
现代文：如今要是与袁术缔结婚姻，必然招来不义的名声，将会有危如累卵的处境。 
English: Today, if a marriage is concluded with Yuan Shu, it will inevitably bring about an unfair reputation, and there will be a precarious situation.

古文：布亦怨术初不己受也，女已在涂，乃追还绝昏，械送韩胤，枭首许市。
现代文：吕布也怨恨袁术当初不肯接纳自己。吕布的女儿已随韩胤上路，吕布便将她追回来，拒绝了婚事，并给韩胤戴上型具送走。
English: Lü Bu also resented Yuan Shu's initial refusal to accept him. Lü Bu's daughter had gone on the road with Han Yin, and Lü Bu chased her back, refused to marry her, and sent Han Yin away wearing a mold.

古文：陈珪欲使子登诣曹操，布固不肯。
现代文：韩胤在许都街市上处斩，他的人头被挂起来示众。陈想让儿子陈登去晋见曹操，吕布坚决不同意。
English: Han Yan was decapitated in the market on Xu Du Street, and his head was hung up for the public to see. Chen wanted his son Chen Deng to go to Jin to see Cao Cao, but Lü Bu firmly disagreed.

古文：会诏以布为左将军，操复遗布手书，深加慰纳。
现代文：正在这时，献帝下诏任命吕布为左将军，曹操又亲自写信给吕布，对他大加慰勉和拉拢。
English: It was at this time that Cao Cao issued an imperial edict appointing Lü Bu as General Zuo. Cao Cao also personally wrote to Lü Bu, greatly consoling and coaxing him.

古文：布大喜，即遣登奉章谢恩，并答操书。
现代文：吕布大喜，立即派陈登带上谢恩的奏章和答复曹操的信，前往京师。
English: Lv Bu was overjoyed and immediately sent Chen Deng to go to the Beijing Division with a letter of thanks and a reply to Cao Cao's letter.

古文：登见操，因陈布勇而无谋，轻于去就，宜早图之。
现代文：陈登见到曹操，指出吕布有勇无谋，反复无常，应该尽早对他下手。
English: Chen Deng saw Cao Cao and pointed out that Lü Bu was reckless and capricious, and that he should be dealt with as soon as possible.

古文：操曰： 布狼子野心，诚难久养，非卿莫究其情伪。 
现代文：曹操说： 吕布狼子野心，确实难以长期蓄养，除了你，没有人能够洞察他的虚伪。 
English: Cao Cao said, "Like a wolf cub, Lv Bu has a vicious nature. It is really difficult to keep him for a long time. Not you nor anyone else knows his true condition.

古文：即增珪秩中二千石，拜登广陵太守。
现代文：随即将陈的官秩升至中二千石，并任命陈登为广陵太守。
English: He ordered that Chen Xi's annual salary be increased to 2,000 koku, and appointed Chen Deng as the governor of Guangling.

古文：临别，操执登手曰： 东方之事，便以相付。 
现代文：临别之时，曹操握着陈登的手说： 东方的事情，就委托给你了。 
English: When they were about to part, Cao Cao took him by the hand and said, "I have entrusted you with the affairs of Shou Bian.

古文：令阴合部众以为内应。
现代文：命令他暗中联络部众，作为内应。
English: He was ordered to secretly contact his subordinates as an inside job.

古文：始，布因登求徐州牧不得，登还，布怒，拔戟斫几曰： 卿父劝吾协同曹操，绝婚公路；今吾所求无获，而卿父子并显重，但为卿所卖耳！ 
现代文：当初，吕布曾要陈登请求朝廷任命自己为徐州牧，这一请求遭到拒绝。陈登返回后，吕布大怒，拔出戟来，猛击桌案，喊道： 你父亲劝我与曹操联合，拒绝袁术家的婚事，如今，我的要求被拒绝，而你们父子却加官晋爵，只是我被你出卖罢了！ 
English: At first, Lü Bu had asked Chen Deng to request the imperial court to appoint him as the Xuzhou Patriarch, but this request was rejected. After Chen Deng returned, Lü Bu flew into a rage, pulled out a shovel, slammed the table case, and shouted: Your father advised me to unite with Cao Cao and refuse the marriage of Yuan Shuxia. Now, my request has been rejected, but your father and son have been promoted to higher ranks, but I have been betrayed by you!

古文：登不为动容，徐对之曰： 登见曹公言： 养将军譬如养虎，当饱其肉，不饱则将噬人。 
现代文：陈登不动声色，慢慢地回答： 我见到曹操，对他说： 养将军就好像是养虎，必须让他吃饱，否则就会吃人。 
English: Chen Deng did not flinch and slowly replied, "I saw Cao Cao and told him, 'Raising a general is like raising a tiger. You must feed him well, otherwise he will eat people.'

古文：公曰： 不如卿言。譬如养鹰，饥则为用，饱则扬去。 
现代文：曹操却说： 你说得不对，实际是与养鹰一样，只有让他饿着，才服从命令，如果让他吃饱，就会展翅高飞，无处寻觅。 
English: Cao Cao, however, said, "You are not right. Actually, it is the same as raising eagles. They only obey orders when they are hungry. If they are well fed, they will fly high with their wings spread, and there is nowhere to look for them."

古文：其言如此。 
现代文：曹操就是这样讲的。 
English: That's what we talked about.

古文：布意乃解。
现代文：吕布的怒气才平息下来。
English: Only then did Lü Bu's anger subside.

古文：袁术遣其大将张勋、桥蕤等与韩暹、杨奉连势，步骑数万趣下邳，七道攻布。
现代文：袁术派遣大将线勋、桥蕤等与韩暹、杨奉联合，共有步、骑兵数万人，直逼下邳，分七路进攻吕布。
English: Yuan Shou dispatched generals such as Lin Xun and Qiao Jiao to unite with Han Siem and Yang Bong, with a total of tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry, and drove them straight down the Yangtze River and attacked Lvbu in seven directions.

古文：布时有兵三千，马四百匹，惧其不敌，谓陈珪曰： 今致术军，卿之由也，为之奈何？ 
现代文：吕布当时有步兵三千，战马四百匹，恐怕抵挡不住，就对陈说： 今天把袁术的大军给招惹来，是由于你的缘故，现在应该怎么办？ 
English: At that time, Lü Bu had three thousand foot soldiers and four hundred horses, and he was afraid that he would not be able to resist, so he said to Chen: Today, Yuan Shu's large army was provoked because of you. What should we do now?

古文：珪曰： 暹、奉与术，卒合之师耳，谋无素定，不能相维，子登策之，比于连鸡，势不俱栖，立可离也。 
现代文：陈说： 韩暹、杨奉与袁术只是暂时结合，没有永久的利害，也不能维持长期的团结。我儿子陈登预料，他们就好像几只公鸡，决不能同时住在一个鸡窝里，很快就会离散。 
English: Chen said: Han Siem, Yang Bong and Yuan Shucao are only temporarily united, there is no permanent interest, nor can they maintain long-term unity. My son Chen Deng expected that they are like several roosters, they must not live in a chicken's nest at the same time, and they will soon disperse.

古文：布用珪策，与暹、奉书曰： 二将军亲拔大驾，而布手杀董卓，俱立功名，今奈何与袁术同为贼乎！
现代文：吕布采用陈的计策，写信给韩暹、杨奉说： 二位将军亲自护送天子从关中出来，而我亲自杀死董卓，都为国家立下大功。如今你们怎么能和袁术一起做贼！
English: Lü Bu adopted Chen's strategy and wrote to Han Siem and Yang Bong: "The two generals personally escorted Tian Zi out of Guanzhong, and I personally killed Dong Zhuo, both of which have made great contributions to the country. Now how can you be thieves together with Yuan Shu!

古文：不如相与并力破术，为国除害。 
现代文：不如大家合力击破袁术，为国除害。 
English: It would be better if everyone worked together to defeat Yuan Shu and eliminate the harm to the country.

古文：且许悉以术军资与之。
现代文：并且答应将袁术的军用物资以及粮草全部给他们两个。
English: He also promised to give the two of them all of Yuan Shu's military supplies as well as grain and grass.

古文：暹、奉大喜，即回计从布。
现代文：韩暹、杨奉收信后大喜，就改变主意，与吕布联合。
English: Han Siem and Yang were overjoyed after receiving the letter, so they changed their minds and joined forces with Lü Bu.

古文：布进军，去勋营百步，暹、奉兵同时叫呼，并到勋营，勋等散走，布兵追击，斩其将十人首，所杀伤堕水死者殆尽。
现代文：吕布大军逼到距张勋营寨百步时，韩暹、杨奉部下同时倒戈，呼喊着一同冲向张勋营中，张勋等四散逃命，吕布军队追击斩杀袁术十名将领。其余的或被杀死，或落水淹死，袁术大军几乎全军复没。
English: When the Lvbu army was a hundred paces away from Zhang Xun's camp, Han Siem and Yang Bong's subordinates simultaneously defected, shouting and rushing together to Zhang Xun's camp. Zhang Xun and others scattered and fled for their lives. The Lvbu army chased and killed ten of Yuan Shu's generals. The rest were either killed or drowned, and almost the entire Yuan Shu army disappeared.

古文：布因与暹、奉合军向寿春，水陆并进，到钟离，所过虏略，还渡淮北，留书辱术。
现代文：吕布乘势与韩暹、杨奉合兵一处，前往寿春，水陆并进到达钟离，一路上烧杀抢掠，又渡过淮河，回到北岸，留下一封辱骂袁术的信。
English: Lv Bu took advantage of the situation with Han Siem and Yang Bonghe soldiers, went to Shuchun, marched by land and sea to Zhongli, burned and looted along the way, crossed the Huai River, returned to the north bank, and left a letter insulting Yuan Shu.

古文：术自将步骑五千扬兵淮上，布骑皆于水北大咍笑之而还。
现代文：袁术亲自率领步、骑兵五千人，在淮河南岸炫耀武力。吕布的骑兵都在北岸大声嘲笑，然后撤回。
English: Yuan Shou personally led 5,000 cavalry in a show of force on the south bank of the Huai River, while Lvbu's cavalry laughed loudly on the north bank before withdrawing.

古文：泰山贼帅臧霸袭琅邪相萧建于莒，破之。
现代文：泰山盗贼首领臧霸到莒县去袭击琅邪国相萧建，攻陷莒县，得到萧建的辎重。
English: The leader of the bandits of Mount Tai went to Shixian County to attack Xiao Jian, the leader of the bandits of Shixian County, and conquered Shixian County, gaining Xiao Jian's favor.

古文：霸得建资实，许以赂布而未送，布自往求之。
现代文：臧霸曾答应送给吕布一部分，但没有送到，吕布就亲自前去索取。
English: Yanba had promised to send a part to Lvbu, but it was not delivered, and Lvbu went to collect it in person.

古文：其督将高顺谏曰： 将军威名宣播，远近所畏，何求不得，而自行求赂！
现代文：吕布的部将高顺劝阻吕布说： 将军威名远扬，远近畏惧，想要什么会要不到，何必自己去索取财物！
English: Gao Shun, Lü Bu's subordinate, dissuaded Lü Bu from doing so, saying: The general's prestige is far-reaching, he is feared far and wide, what he wants will not be given to him, why should he go and get the property himself!

古文：万一不克，岂不损邪？ 
现代文：万一不成，岂不损害威名吗！ 
English: If you don't get it, won't your reputation be tarnished?

古文：布不从。
现代文：吕布不听。
English: Lü Bu did not listen.

古文：既至莒，霸等不测往意，固守拒之，无获而还。
现代文：吕布到莒县后，臧霸等不知吕布的来意，坚守城池，抵御吕布，吕布空手而归。
English: They had already arrived in Lucheng, but Yanba and the others did not know Lvbu's intention to come. They held fast to Lucheng and refused Lvbu. As a result, Lvbu came back without getting anything.

古文：顺为人清白有威严，少言辞，所将七百馀兵，号令整齐，每战必克，名 陷陈营 。
现代文：高顺为人廉洁，有威望，很少说话。部下有七百余兵，号令整齐，每战必胜，号称 陷阵营 。
English: Gao Shun is a man of integrity, has prestige, and rarely speaks. He has more than seven hundred soldiers under his command, his orders are orderly, and he is sure to win every battle. He is known as the "trapped camp."

古文：布后疏顺，以魏续有内外之亲，夺其兵以与续，及当攻战，则复令顺将，顺亦终无恨意。
现代文：吕布后来疏远高顺，因为魏续是自己的亲威，就把高顺的部下拨给魏续指挥。等到需要冲锋陷阵时，才又交给高顺率领，但高顺始终没有怨恨。
English: Later, Lv Bu distanced himself from Gao Shun, because Wei Cui was his kinsman, so he assigned Gao Shun's subordinates to Wei Cui's command. When it was time to charge, he gave Gao Shun the lead, but Gao Shun never held a grudge.

古文：布性决易，所以无常，顺每谏曰： 将军举动，不肯详思，忽有失得，动辄言 误 ，误岂可数乎！ 
现代文：吕布性情不稳定，反复无常，高顺每每劝他说： 将军行动，不肯多加思考，忽然失利后，总说有错误，但错误怎么可一再发生呢？ 
English: Lü Bu's temperament was unstable and capricious, and Gao Shun constantly advised him: "Generals act without thinking twice, and after a sudden defeat, they always say there was a mistake, but how can a mistake happen again and again?

古文：布知其忠而不能从。
现代文：吕布知道他忠于自己，但不能采纳他的意见。
English: Can things that go wrong happen again and again? Lü Bu understood Gao Shun's loyalty and did not accept it.

古文：曹操遣议郎王誧以诏书拜孙策为骑都尉，袭爵乌程侯，领会稽太守，使与吕布及吴郡太守陈瑀共讨袁术。
现代文：曹操派议郎王携带献帝诏书，去任命孙策为骑都尉，承袭父亲孙坚的爵位乌程侯，兼任会稽郡太守。命令孙策与吕布及吴郡太守陈共同讨伐袁术。
English: Cao Cao sent Zhe Lang Wang to carry the imperial edict to appoint Sun Ce as a cavalry captain, inheriting the title of Ucheng Marquis from his father, Sun Jian, and concurrently serving as the county magistrate. He ordered Sun Ce to jointly fight Yuan Shu with Lübu and Wu County magistrate Chen.

古文：策欲得将军号以自重，誧便承制假策明汉将军。
现代文：孙策想得到将军的名号，以抬高自己的地位，王就以献帝代表的名义，任命他为明汉将军。
English: Sun Ce wanted to get the title of general in order to elevate his status, so the king appointed him as the general of Ming and Han in the name of the emperor's representative.

古文：策治严，行到钱唐，瑀阴图袭策，潜结祖郎、严白虎等，使为内应。
现代文：孙策准备行装上路，走到钱唐时，吴郡太守陈阴谋袭击孙策，暗中勾结祖郎、严白虎等，让他们做内应。
English: Sun Ce was preparing to set out on the road, and when he reached Qiantang, Chen, the governor of Wu County, plotted to attack Sun Ce, secretly colluding with Zuro and Yan Baihu, etc., and let them do internal affairs.

古文：策觉之，遣其将吕范、徐逸攻瑀于海西；瑀败，单骑奔袁绍。
现代文：孙策察觉，派遣部将吕范、徐逸到海西去进攻陈，陈战败，单人匹马投奔袁绍。
English: Sun Ce noticed that the dispatching department sent Lu Fan and Xu Yitu to the west of the sea to attack Chen. Chen was defeated and ran to Yuan Shao single-handedly.

古文：初，陈王宠有勇，善弩射。
现代文：当初，陈王刘宠勇猛过人，善用弓弩。
English: At first, Chen Wang Liu Zhaojie was extremely brave and used his bow and arrow well.

古文：黄巾贼起，宠治兵自守，国人畏之，不敢离叛。
现代文：黄巾军起兵后，刘宠征召境内兵士，固大守城池，陈国人惧怕他，不敢叛变。
English: After the Yellow Turban Army raised an army, Liu Cai conscripted soldiers within the territory and became a staunch defender of the city. The people of Chen feared him and did not dare to rebel.

古文：国相会稽骆俊素有威恩，是时王侯无复租禄，而数见虏夺，或并日而食，转死沟壑，而陈独富强，邻郡人多归之，有众十馀万。
现代文：陈国的国相、会稽人骆俊一向很有威望，当时，诸封国的王、侯都已不再享有租赋收入，反而不断遭到抢掠，有的两天才能吃上一顿饭，流离在外，死于荒野。只有陈国仍很富强，邻郡的百姓纷纷前去投靠，拥有部众十余万人。
English: Luo Jun, the minister of state and auditor of Chen Guo, had always been very prestigious. At that time, the kings and lords of all the fiefs no longer enjoyed rent income, but were constantly robbed. Sometimes they could only eat a meal for two days, and they wandered away and died in the wilderness. Only Chen Guo was still very rich and powerful, and the people of the neighboring counties went there to seek refuge, owning more than 100,000 people.

古文：及州郡兵起，宠率众屯阳夏，自称辅汉大将军。
现代文：到各州、郡起兵讨伐董卓时，刘宠率军驻阳夏，自称辅汉大将军。
English: When troops were raised in each prefecture and county to fight against Dong Zhuo, Liu Cai led the army stationed in Yangxia and called himself the assistant Han general.

古文：袁术求粮于陈，骆俊拒绝之，术忿恚，遣客诈杀俊及宠，陈由是破败。
现代文：袁术向陈国要粮草，被骆俊拒绝，袁术大为生气，派刺客诈降，乘机杀死骆俊和刘宠，陈国从此衰败。
English: Yuan Shou asked Chen Guo for grain and grass and was refused by Luo Jun. Yuan Shou was very angry and sent an assassin to defraud and take the opportunity to kill Luo Jun and Liu Qiao. Chen Guo went into decline.

古文：秋，九月，司空曹操东征袁术。术闻操来，弃军走，留其将桥蕤等于蕲阳以拒操；操击破蕤等，皆斩之。
现代文：秋季，九月，司空曹操东征袁术，袁术听说曹操前来，抛下军队逃跑，留大将桥蕤等据守蕲阳抵抗曹操。曹操大破桥蕤等，将桥蕤等将领全部斩杀。
English: In the autumn, in September, Yuan Shu, Cao Cao's Eastern Expedition commander, heard that Cao Cao was coming. He abandoned his army and fled, leaving the commander of the bridgehead and others to defend Shenyang against Cao Cao. Cao Cao smashed the bridgehead and others, and killed all the commanders of the bridgehead and others.

古文：术走渡淮，时天旱岁荒，士民冻馁，术由是遂衰。
现代文：袁术渡过淮河，逃到淮北。当时旱灾很重，土地荒芜，百姓饥寒交迫，袁术从此便没落下。
English: Yuan Shou crossed the Huai River and fled to Huaibei. At that time, the drought was very severe, the land was barren, and the people were hungry and cold. Yuan Shou has not fallen since then.

古文：操辟陈国何夔为掾，问以袁术何如，对曰： 天之所助者顺，人之所助者信。
现代文：曹操延聘陈国人何为自己的僚属，问他对袁术的看法。何说： 只有顺应嘲流，才能得到上天帮助；只有信誉卓著，才能得到百姓帮助。
English: Cao Cao recruited Chen Guojin as one of his subordinates and asked him what he thought of Yuan Shu. He said: "Only by following the mockers can you get help from heaven; only by having a good reputation can you get help from the people."

古文：术无信顺之实而望天人之助，其可得乎！ 
现代文：袁术既不顺应潮流，又缺乏信誉，却盼望上天与百姓帮助他，怎么可以得到呢！
English: Yuan Shuxu neither conforms to the trend, nor lacks credibility, but hopes that the heavens and the people will help him, how can he get it!

古文：操曰： 为国失贤则亡，君不为术所用，亡，不亦宜乎！ 
现代文：曹操说： 任何一个政权，失去贤能的人才，都会灭亡，袁术不能重视你这样的人才，灭亡的命运不是注定了吗？ 
English: Cao Cao said, "Any political power that loses a talented person will perish. Yuan Shuxu can't value a talented person like you. Isn't the fate of extinction predestined?"

古文：操性严，掾属公事往往加杖；夔常蓄毒药，誓死无辱，是以终不见及。
现代文：曹操性情严厉，部下僚属往往因公事而受到棍棒的责打，何常常随身携带毒药，誓死不受责打的侮辱，因此，他到底也未受过责打。
English: Cao Cao was of a stern nature, and his subordinates were often beaten with clubs for doing their jobs. He often carried poison with him, and swore not to be beaten. Therefore, he was not beaten at all.

古文：沛国许褚，勇力绝人，聚少年及宗族数千家，坚壁以御外寇，淮、汝、陈、梁间皆畏惮之，操徇淮、汝，褚以众归操，操曰： 此吾樊哙也！
现代文：沛国人许褚勇力过人，聚集少年勇士及宗族数千家，坚守寨垒，以抵御外侵。淮河、汝水、陈国、梁国一带都很畏惧他的势力。曹操进军到淮河、汝水一带时，许褚率领部众归附曹操，曹操高兴地说： 这就是我的樊哙！ 
English: The people of Pei, Xu Xi, were extremely brave. They gathered young warriors and thousands of clans to defend the fortress against foreign invasion. The areas of Huaihe, Rushui, Chen Guo and Liang Guo were all afraid of his power. When Cao Cao marched into the area of Huaihe and Rushui, Xu Xi led the troops to join Cao Cao. Cao Cao said happily, "This is my son!"

古文：即日拜都尉，引入宿卫，诸从褚侠客，皆以为虎士焉。
现代文：当天就委任许褚为都尉，让他作自己的侍卫首领，跟随许褚的少年侠客们，都被任命为侍卫武士。
English: On the same day, he appointed Xu Yao as captain and let him be the leader of his bodyguard. The young knights who followed Xu Yao were all appointed as bodyguards.

古文：故太尉杨彪与袁术昏姻，曹操恶之，诬云欲图废立，奏收下狱，劾以大逆。
现代文：前任太尉杨彪与袁术家有姻亲关系，曹操对此感到厌恶，便诬告杨彪图谋罢黜皇帝，另立新君。奏报献帝后，将杨彪逮捕下狱，指控他有大逆不道之罪。
English: Cao Cao was disgusted by the fact that his predecessor, First Lieutenant Yang Biao, was related by marriage to Yuan Shuxia, so he falsely accused Yang Biao of plotting to depose the emperor and set up a new emperor. After the report was submitted to the emperor, he had Yang Biao arrested and imprisoned, accusing him of the crime of high treason.

古文：将作大匠孔融闻之，不及朝服，往见操曰： 杨公四世清德，海内所瞻。
现代文：将作大匠孔融听到消息后，来不及换上朝服，就赶去见曹操，对他说： 杨公四代都有清高的品德，受到天下人的仰慕。
English: After hearing the news, Kong Rong, the master craftsman, rushed to see Cao Cao before he could put on the imperial robes. He said to him, "The four generations of Yang Gong all have high moral character and are admired by the people of the world.

古文：《周书》，父子兄弟，罪不相及，况以袁氏归罪杨公乎！ 
现代文：根据《周书》，父子兄弟，有罪都互不牵连，何况将袁术之罪加到杨彪头上！ 
English: According to the "Zhou Shu," father and son brothers, the guilty are not involved with each other, let alone adding the crime of Yuan Shu to Yang Biao's head!

古文：操曰： 此国家之意。 
现代文：曹操说： 这是天子的意思。 
English: Cao Cao said, "This is what the Son of Heaven meant."

古文：融曰： 假使成王杀召公，周公可得言不知邪？ 
现代文：孔融说： 假如周成王要杀死召公，周公能说不知道吗？ 
English: Kong Rong said: If Zhou Cheng Wang wants to kill Zhao Gong, can Zhou Gong say that he does not know?

古文：操使许令满宠按彪狱，融与尚书令荀彧皆属宠曰： 但当受辞，勿加考掠。 
现代文：曹操命令许都令满宠来审理杨彪案件，孔融与尚书令荀都嘱咐满宠说： 只应接受杨彪的口供，不要用刑加以拷问。 
English: Cao Cao ordered Xu Du to appoint Man Cai to try Yang Biao's case, and both Kong Rong and Shang Shuling ordered Man Cai to say, "You should only accept Yang Biao's confession, and not torture him."

古文：宠一无所报，考讯如法。数日，求见操，言之曰： 杨彪考讯，无他辞语。此人有名海内，若罪不明白，必大失民望；窃为明公惜之。 
现代文：满宠根本未加理睬，照样严型拷问，过了几天，满宠求见曹操，汇报说： 杨彪受刑后，没有供出什么罪行，这个人全国闻名，如果没有确实证据就定罪，必定会大失民心，我为您惋惜。 
English: After a few days, Manchong asked to see Cao Cao and reported: "After Yang Biao was sentenced, he did not confess to any crimes. This man is famous throughout the country. If there is no solid evidence, he will be convicted and will certainly lose the hearts of the people. I feel sorry for you."

古文：操即日赦出彪。
现代文：曹操当天就下令赦免杨彪。
English: Cao Cao ordered Yang Biao to be pardoned the same day.

古文：初，彧、融闻宠考掠彪，皆怒；及因此得出，乃更善宠。
现代文：起初，荀、孔融听到满宠拷打杨彪的消息，都感到愤慨，等到杨彪因此而被赦免，才明白满宠的用意，于是对待满宠更加亲近。
English: At first, Zhai and Kong Rong felt indignant when they heard the news that Manpiao tortured Yang Biao. It was not until Yang Biao was pardoned for this that they understood Manpiao's intention, so they treated Manpiao more closely.

古文：彪见汉室衰微，政在曹氏，遂称脚挛，积十馀年不行，由是得免于祸。
现代文：杨彪看到东汉王室已经衰败，政权控制在曹操手中，就自称腿脚痉挛，十几年不走路，因此得以免祸。
English: When Yang Biao saw that the Eastern Han royal family had fallen into decay and that the political power was controlled by Cao Cao, he called himself a lame man and did not walk for more than ten years, thus avoiding disaster.

古文：马日磾丧至京师，朝廷议欲加礼，孔融曰： 日磾以上公之尊，秉髦节之使，而曲媚奸臣，为所牵率，王室大臣，岂得以见胁为辞！
现代文：太傅马日磾的灵柩运回京师，朝廷商议要为他大办丧事，提高仪式规格。孔融说： 马日以上公的尊贵地位，代表天子出使，而他曲意谄媚奸臣，受奸臣的牵制。朝廷的大臣，怎么能以被人胁迫作为借口！
English: The casket of Grand Master Ma Rihong was transported back to Beijing, and the imperial court began to discuss the need to hold a grand funeral for him and improve the specifications of the ceremony. Kong Rong said: Ma Rihong held a noble position as a prince and sent envoys on behalf of the Son of Heaven, but he played the role of a charming traitor and was constrained by the traitor. How could a minister of the imperial court use being coerced as an excuse!

古文：圣上哀矜旧臣，未忍追案，不宜加礼。 
现代文：天子怜悯旧臣，不忍加以追究，但不应该再提高规格。 
English: The emperor felt sorry for his former vassal and could not bear to prosecute him for the crime. This was a very lenient punishment and should not be commended.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：朝廷接受了孔融的意见。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：金尚丧至京师，诏百官吊祭，拜其子玮为郎中。
现代文：已故兖州刺史金尚的灵柩运到京师，献帝下诏，命令文武百官进行祭吊，任命他的儿子金玮为郎中。
English: The coffin of the late Zhangzhou poet Jin Shang was transported to Beijing and presented to the emperor. He issued an imperial edict, ordering hundreds of civil and military officials to perform a ritual hanging, and appointing his son Jin Xuan as his assistant.

古文：冬，十一月，曹操复攻张绣，拔湖阳，禽刘表将邓济；又攻舞阴，下之。
现代文：冬季，十一月，曹操再次进攻张绣，攻占湖阳，生拎擒刘表部将邓济。曹军又进攻舞阴，攻克。
English: In the winter, in November, Cao Cao once again attacked Zhangxiu and captured Hoyang, while Liu Biao led the front against Dengji. Cao's army also attacked and conquered Wuyin.

古文：韩暹、杨奉在下邳，寇掠徐、扬间，军饥饿，辞吕布，欲诣荆州；布不听。
现代文：韩暹、杨奉在十邳，纵兵抢掠徐州与扬州交界地区，但军队仍然饥饿，便向吕布告辞，打算到荆州投靠刘表。
English: Han Siem and Yang Bong were in Shijiazhuang, and their soldiers plundered the border area between Xuzhou and Yangzhou, but the army was still hungry, so they said goodbye to Lv Bu and planned to go to Jingzhou to support Liu Biao.

古文：奉知刘备与布有宿憾，私与备相闻，欲共击布；备阳许之。
现代文：吕布不允许他们离开。杨奉知道刘备与吕布有宿怨，便暗中与刘备联络，想与刘备一起进攻吕布。刘备假装同意。
English: Lv Bu did not allow them to leave. Yang Bong knew that Liu Bei had a grudge against Lv Bu, so he secretly contacted Liu Bei and wanted to attack Lv Bu together with Liu Bei. Liu Bei pretended to agree.

古文：奉引军诣沛，备请奉入城，饮食未半，于座上缚奉，斩之。
现代文：杨奉率军到沛县，刘备请杨奉进城，摆宴席款待杨奉。酒宴还未到一半，就在席上将杨奉捆起来，随即斩杀。
English: Yang Bong led the army to Peixian, Liu Bei invited Yang Bong into the city, and held a banquet to entertain Yang Bong. Before the banquet was half over, he tied up Yang Bong at the banquet, and then killed him.

古文：暹失奉，孤特，与十馀骑归并州，为抒秋令张宣所杀。
现代文：韩暹失去杨奉，十分孤立，率领部下十余名骑士投奔并州，途中被杼秋县令张宣杀死。
English: Han Siem lost Yang Bong and was very isolated. He led more than ten of his knights to join the state. On the way, he was killed by Zhang Xuan, the governor of Shu County.

古文：胡才、李乐留河东，才为怨家所杀，乐自病死。
现代文：胡才、李乐留在河东，胡才被仇人杀死，李乐自己病死。
English: Hu Cai and Li Le stayed in Hedong, Hu Cai was killed by the enemy, and Li Le died of illness.

古文：郭汜为其将伍习所杀。
现代文：郭汜被部将伍习杀死。
English: Guo Gan was killed by his subordinate Wu Xi.

古文：颍川杜袭、赵俨、繁钦避乱荆州，刘表俱待以宾礼。
现代文：颖川人杜袭、赵俨、繁钦到荆州避难，刘表都以宾客的礼节接待他们。
English: The people of Yingchuan, Du Wei, Zhao Wei, and Fang Qin, took refuge in Jingzhou. Liu Biao received them with the courtesy of a guest.

古文：钦数见奇于表，袭喻之曰： 吾所以与子俱来者，徒欲全身以待时耳，岂谓刘牧当为拨乱之主而规长者委身哉！
现代文：繁钦屡次向刘表贡献奇计，受到刘表的欣赏。杜袭劝告繁钦说： 我所以与你一起来到荆州，只是为了保全性命，以等待时机罢了。你难道认为刘表是拨乱反正的英主，而打算让长者托身于他吗！
English: Han Qin repeatedly contributed to Liu Biao's marvels, which was appreciated by Liu Biao. Du Xi advised Han Qin and said, "I came to Jingzhou with you just to save my life and wait for the right time. Do you think that Liu Biao is a troublemaker and wants the elders to rely on him?

古文：子若见能不已，非吾徒也，吾与子绝矣！ 
现代文：你如果不断显示才能，就不再是我的学生，咱们从此绝交！ 
English: If you continue to show talent, you will no longer be my student, and we will no longer be friends!

古文：钦慨然曰： 请敬受命！ 
现代文：繁饮感慨地说： 我接受你的劝告！ 
English: He said with emotion: I accept your advice!

古文：及曹操迎天子都许，俨谓钦曰： 曹镇东必能匡济华夏，吾知归矣！ 
现代文：及至曹操奉迎天子，定都许县，赵俨对繁钦说： 曹操一定能安定全国，我知道应该归附谁了。 
English: When Cao Cao was enthroned as the Son of Heaven and Xu County became the permanent capital, Zhao Wei said to Fan Qin: Cao Cao will surely be able to stabilize the whole country, I know who I should belong to.

古文：阳安都尉江夏李通妻伯父犯法，俨收治，致之大辟。
现代文：阳安郡都尉、江夏人李通妻子的伯父犯法，赵俨将他逮捕问罪，判外死刑。
English: Yang'an County captain and uncle of Li Tong's wife from Jiangxia committed a crime. Zhao Wei arrested him for questioning and sentenced him to death.

古文：时杀生之柄，决于牧守，通妻子号泣以请其命。通曰： 方与曹公戮力，义不以私废公！ 
现代文：当时，百姓的生杀大权都控制在州、郡长官手中。李通的妻子号哭着哀求李通救她伯父一命，李通说： 我正与曹公同心协力，在道义上，不能以私废公！ 
English: At that time, the power of life and death of the people was controlled by the state and county governors. Li Tong's wife cried and begged Li Tong to save her uncle's life. Li Tong said: I am working together with Cao Gong. Morally, I cannot use my private life to destroy the public!

古文：嘉俨执宪不阿，与为亲交。
现代文：李通赞扬赵俨执法无私，与赵俨结为好友。
English: He then rewarded Zhao Wei for his law-enforcement selflessness, and became his confidant.

古文：孝献皇帝丁建安三年春，正月，曹操还许。三月，将复击张绣。
现代文：建平三年春季，正月，曹操回到许都。三月，曹操准备再次进攻张绣，荀攸说： 张绣与刘表互相依靠，力量强大。
English: In the spring of the third year of Jianping, in the first month, Cao Cao returned to Xu Du. In March, Cao Cao prepared to attack Zhang Xiu again. Yu Yu said: Zhang Xiu and Liu Biao rely on each other, and their strength is strong.

古文：荀攸曰： 绣与刘表相恃为强；然绣以游军仰食于表，表不能供也，势必乖离。
现代文：但张绣是外来的军队，完全依靠刘表供应粮草，刘表无力长期供给，最后势必会闹翻。
English: However, Zhangxiu is a foreign army, completely relying on Liu Biao to supply grain and grass. Liu Biao is unable to supply for a long time, and will eventually fall apart.

古文：不如缓军以待之，可诱而致也；若急之，其势必相救。 
现代文：不如暂缓出军，等待变化，采用招诱的手段吸引张绣。如果进军紧逼，则他们必然互相救援。 
English: If we advance slowly, we can lure Zhang Xiu to come forward; if we attack quickly, Liu Biao will certainly come to the rescue.

古文：操不从，围绣于穰。
现代文：曹操没有采纳，进军包围张绣驻军的穰城。
English: Cao Cao did not accept this, and marched to encircle Zhang Shuxiu's garrison at Lucheng.

古文：夏，四月，使谒者仆射裴茂诏关中诸将段煨等讨李傕，夷其三族。
现代文：夏季，四月，朝廷派谒者仆射裴茂到关中传达献帝所下诏书，命令段煨等诸将领联合讨伐李。
English: In the summer, in April, the imperial court sent a messenger to Guanzhong to convey the imperial edict to the emperor, ordering Duan Yu and other generals to jointly fight against Li.

古文：以煨为安南将军，封閺乡侯。
现代文：段煨等将李的本族亲属全部诛灭，任命段煨为安南将军，封乡侯。
English: Duan Yu and others annihilated all of Li's relatives of the same ethnic group, and appointed Duan Yu as General Annan, sealing the township.

古文：初，袁绍每得诏书，患其有不便于己者，欲移天子自近，使说曹操以许下埤湿，雒阳残破，宜徙都鄄城以就全实；操拒之。
现代文：起初，袁绍每接到诏书，对其中一些于自己不利的措施，很觉烦恼，因此想把天子迁到离自己较近的持方。他派使者去游说曹操，指出许都地势低而潮湿，洛阳已经残破，最好迁都到鄄城，以靠近富裕的地区，便于供应。
English: At first, every time Yuan Shao received an imperial edict, he was annoyed by some of the measures that were unfavorable to him, so he wanted to move Tianzi to a place closer to him. He sent an envoy to lobby Cao Cao, pointing out that the capital was low and humid, Luoyang was in ruins, and it would be better to move the capital to Shicheng, so as to be close to affluent areas and facilitate supply.

古文：田丰说绍曰： 徙都之计，既不克从，宜早图许，奉迎天子，动托诏书，号令海内，此算之上者。
现代文：曹操拒绝了这个建议。袁绍的谋士田丰劝袁绍说： 迁都的建议既然已被拒绝，应当早日进攻许都，奉迎天子。然后，就可利用皇帝的诏书，号令全国，这是上策。
English: Cao Cao rejected the proposal. Yuan Shao's advisor Tian Feng advised Yuan Shao: Since the proposal to move the capital has been rejected, it is necessary to attack the capital as soon as possible and welcome the Son of Heaven. Then, the emperor's edict can be used to command the whole country. This is the best strategy.

古文：不尔，终为人所禽，虽悔无益也。 
现代文：不这样，最终会受制于人，尽管后悔也没有用了。 
English: If you don't, you'll end up being controlled by others, and then even regret won't work.

古文：绍不从。
现代文：袁绍未予采纳。
English: Yuan Shao did not accept his suggestion.

古文：会绍亡卒诣操，云田丰劝绍袭许，操解穰围而还，张绣率众追之。
现代文：正好袁绍部下有逃兵投奔曹操，说到男丰劝说袁绍袭击许都，曹操便从穰县解围撤退。张绣率军在后追赶。
English: It just so happened that some deserters from Yuan Shao's troops defected to Cao Cao, and when it was reported that Yan Feng had persuaded Yuan Shao to attack Xu Du, Cao Cao withdrew from the relief of the siege of Lu County. Zhang Xiu and his army pursued them.

古文：五月，刘表遣兵救绣，屯于安众，守险以绝军后。
现代文：五月，刘表派军去援救张绣，驻在安众，据守险要，切断曹军退路。
English: In May, Liu Bei sent troops to rescue Zhang Xiu and stationed them in Anzhu, according to the defense plan, to cut off the retreat of Cao's army.

古文：操与荀彧书曰： 吾到安众，破绣必矣。 
现代文：曹操给荀写信说： 我到了安众，一定可以击败张绣！ 
English: Cao Cao wrote to Zou saying, "I have arrived at Anzhu, I can surely defeat Zhang Xiu!

古文：及到安众，操军前后受敌，操乃夜凿险伪遁。
现代文：及至到达安众，曹军腹背受敌，曹操于是乘夜开凿险道，假装要逃跑。
English: By the time they reached Anzhu, Cao Cao's army was overwhelmed by the enemy, so Cao Cao took the night to cut a dangerous path, pretending to escape.

古文：表、绣悉军来追，操纵奇兵步骑夹攻，大破之，它日，彧问操： 前策贼必破，何也？ 
现代文：刘表、张绣率领全部军队前来追击，曹操布下埋伏，命步兵与骑兵前后夹击，大破刘表与张绣联军。后来，荀询问曹操说： 您以前料定敌军必败，是根据什么？ 
English: Liu Biao and Zhang Xiu led the entire army to come and pursue, Cao Cao set up an ambush, ordered the infantry and cavalry to fight back and forth, and defeated Liu Biao and Zhang Xiu's allied forces. Later, Zou asked Cao Cao: What was the basis for your previous prediction that the enemy army would be defeated?

古文：操曰： 虏遏吾归师，而与吾死地，吾是以知胜矣。 
现代文：曹操说： 敌人阻挡我们退兵，是把我军置于死地，我因此知道可以获胜。 
English: Cao Cao said, "The enemy's blocking our retreat is putting our army to death, so I know we can win.

古文：绣之追操也，贾诩止之曰： 不可追也，追必败。 
现代文：张绣追击曹操时，贾诩阻止他说： 不能去追，追则必败！ 
English: When Zhang Xiu chased Cao Cao, Jia Wei stopped him saying, "You can't chase him. If you chase him, you will be defeated!"

古文：绣不听，进兵交战，大败而还。
现代文：张绣未听，进兵交战，大败而回。
English: Zhang Xiu did not listen, went into battle, was defeated and returned.

古文：诩登城谓绣曰： 促更追之，更战必胜。 
现代文：贾诩登上城墙，对张绣说： 赶快再去追击，再战必胜！ 
English: Jia Wei climbed onto the city wall and said to Zhang Xiu, "Hurry up and go after them, you will win the next battle!"

古文：绣谢曰： 不用公言，以至于此，今已败，奈何复追？ 
现代文：张绣向他道歉说： 没有听您的话，以至落到如此地步，现已大败，怎么还要再追？ 
English: Zhang Xiu apologized to him and said: I didn't listen to your words and ended up in such a situation. I have already suffered a great defeat. How can I chase after you again?

古文：诩曰： 兵势有变，促追之。 
现代文：贾诩说： 兵势变化无常，赶快追击！ 
English: Jia Wei said: The troop strength is fickle, hurry up and pursue!

古文：绣素信诩言，遂收散卒更追，合战，果以胜还，乃问诩曰： 绣以精兵追退军，而公曰必败；以败卒击胜兵，而公曰必克，悉如公言，何也？ 
现代文：张绣一向信服贾诩的话，就收拾残兵败将，再去追赶。交兵会战，果然得胜而归。于是问贾诩说： 我用精兵去追赶退军，而您说必败；用败兵去击败军，而您说必胜。结果完全如您预料，原因在哪里？ 
English: Zhang Xiu had always been convinced of Jia Jia's words, so he gathered up the remnants of the defeated soldiers and chased after them. The battle was fought, and they were victorious. So he asked Jia Jia: I used the elite soldiers to chase the retreating army, but you said it would be defeated; I used the defeated soldiers to defeat the army, but you said it would be victorious. The result was exactly as you expected, what was the reason?

古文：诩曰： 此易知耳。
现代文：贾诩说： 这很容易明白。
English: "It's easy to understand," Jia said.

古文：将军虽善用兵，非曹公敌也。
现代文：将军虽善于用兵，但不是曹操的对手。
English: General, although you are good at using soldiers, you are not yet Cao Gong's rival.

古文：曹公军新退，必自断后。故知必败。
现代文：曹操军队刚开始撤退，必然亲自率军断后，所以知道将军必败。
English: Cao Cao's army had just begun to retreat, and he had to lead the army himself, so he knew that the general would be defeated.

古文：曹公攻将军，既无失策，力未尽而一朝引退，必国内有故也。
现代文：曹操进攻将军，既没有失策之处，又不是力量用尽，却一下子率军撤退，一定是他的后方发生了变故。
English: Cao Cao, the general of the attack, did not make any mistakes, nor did he run out of strength, but he suddenly withdrew with his army. There must have been a change in his rear.

古文：已破将军，必轻军速进，留诸将断后，诸将虽勇，非将军敌，故虽用败兵而战必胜也。 
现代文：他已击败将军的追兵，必然轻装速进，而留下其他将领断后。其他将领虽然勇猛，却不是将军的对手，所以将军虽然率败兵去追击，也必能获胜。 
English: Having defeated the general's pursuers, he was bound to advance lightly, leaving the other generals behind. The other generals, though brave, were no match for the general, so even though the general led his defeated troops in pursuit, he was sure to win.

古文：绣乃服。
现代文：张绣于是大为敬服。
English: Zhang Xiu only gave in.

古文：吕布复与袁术通，遣其中郎将高顺及北地太守雁门张辽攻刘备。
现代文：吕布又与袁术联合，派其部将中郎将高顺与北地太守、雁门人张辽进攻刘备。
English: Lv Bu also allied with Yuan Shu and sent his general Zhong Lang to attack Liu Bei with Gao Shun, the governor of the North, and Zhang Liao, the man of the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：曹操遣将军夏侯惇救之，为顺等所败。
现代文：曹操派将军夏侯去援救刘备，被高顺等击败。
English: Cao Cao sent General Xia Hou to rescue Liu Bei, but he was defeated by Gao Shun and others.

古文：秋，九月，顺等破沛城，虏备妻子，备单身走。
现代文：秋季，九月，高顺等攻破沛城，俘虏了刘备的妻子儿女，刘备只身逃走。
English: In the autumn, in September, Gao Shun and others attacked Peicheng, captured Liu Bei's wife and children, and Liu Bei fled alone.

古文：曹操欲自击布，诸将皆曰： 刘表、张绣在后，而远袭吕布，其危必也。 
现代文：曹操打算亲自去进击吕布，诸将都说： 刘表、张绣在后，如果您率军远袭吕布，必然会发生危机。 
English: Cao Cao planned to personally attack Lvbu, and all the generals said: Liu table, Zhang embroidered behind, if you lead the army to attack Lvbu, a crisis will inevitably occur.

古文：荀攸曰： 表、绣新破，势不敢动，布骁猛，又恃袁术，若从横淮、泗间，豪杰必应之。
现代文：荀攸说： 刘表、张绣新近受创，在此情势下，不敢有所举动。吕布为人骁勇，又倚仗袁术的势力，如果他纵横淮河、泗水之间，必有其他豪杰起来响应。
English: Zou You said: Liu Yubei and Zhang Shuxiu have recently been injured, and under this situation, they dare not take any action. Lv Bu is a courageous person, and relies on the power of Yuan Shu. If he stretches across the Huaihe River and the Surabaya River, there will be other heroes to respond.

古文：今乘其初叛，众心未一，往可破也。 操曰： 善！ 
现代文：如今趁他刚刚背叛朝廷，众心不定，大军前往，可以将他击破。 曹操说： 很好！ 
English: Now he can take advantage of the fact that he has just betrayed the imperial court, that people's minds are uncertain, and that a large army is on its way, to defeat him. Cao Cao said: Very good!

古文：此行，泰山屯帅臧霸、孙观、吴敦、尹礼、昌豨等皆附于布。
现代文：等到曹操大军出动时，泰山军首领臧霸、孙观、吴敦、尹礼、吕等都归附于吕布。
English: By the time Cao Cao's army was dispatched, the leaders of Taishan's army, Zhaoba, Sun Guan, Wu Dun, Yin Li, and Lu, had all attached themselves to Lv Bu.

古文：操与刘备遇于梁。进至彭城。
现代文：曹操在梁地遇到刘备，一同进驻彭城。
English: Cao Cao met Liu Bei in Liangdi and together they settled in Pengcheng.

古文：陈宫谓布： 宜逆击之，以逸击劳，无不克也。 
现代文：陈宫对吕布说： 应当迎击他们，以逸待营。无往不胜！ 
English: Chen Gong said to Lv Bu: "We should meet them head-on, and wait for the encampment. No retreat, no victory!"

古文：布曰： 不如待其来攻，蹙著泗水中。 
现代文：吕布说： 不如等待他们自己前来，我把他们赶到泗水中淹死。 
English: Lüb said: It is better to wait for them to come themselves, I will drive them into the swamp and drown them.

古文：冬，十月，操屠彭城。
现代文：冬季，十月，曹操在彭城屠城。
English: In winter, in October, Cao Cao was in the slaughterhouse of Pengcheng.

古文：广陵太守陈登率郡兵为操先驱，进至下邳。
现代文：广陵郡太守陈登率领广陵郡郡兵作为曹操的先锋，进抵下邳。
English: Chen Deng, the governor of Guangling County, led the soldiers of Guangling County as Cao Cao's vanguard and arrived at the lower mound.

古文：布自将屡与操战，皆大败，还保城，不敢出。
现代文：吕布亲自率军，屡次与曹操交战，全都大败，只好退守城池，不敢出战。
English: Lv Bu personally led the army, repeatedly clashed with Cao Cao, all were defeated, and had to retreat to the city, not daring to go to war.

古文：操遗布书，为陈祸福。布惧，欲降。
现代文：曹操写信给吕布，为他陈述利害，吕布恐惧，打算投降。
English: Cao Cao wrote to Lü Bu, stating the stakes for him, Lü Bu was afraid and planned to surrender.

古文：陈宫曰： 曹操远来，势不能久。
现代文：陈宫说： 曹操远来，势不能停留过久。
English: Chen Gong said: Cao Cao has come a long way, he can't stay too long.

古文：将军若以步骑出屯于外，宫将馀众闭守于内。若向将军，宫引兵而攻其背；若但攻城，则将军救于外。
现代文：将军如果率领步、骑兵屯驻城外，由我率领剩下的军队在内守城，如果曹军进攻将军，我就领兵攻击他们的后背；如果曹军攻城，则将军在外援救。
English: If the general takes the lead and the cavalry is stationed outside the city, I will lead the remaining troops to defend the city inside. If Cao's army attacks the general, I will lead the troops to attack their backs. If Cao's army attacks the city, the general will rescue them outside.

古文：不过旬月，操军食尽，击之，可破也。 
现代文：不过一个月，曹军粮食吃光，我们再行反击，可以破敌。 
English: However, after a month, Cao's army ran out of food, and we counterattacked again, and were able to defeat the enemy.

古文：布然之，欲使宫与高顺守城，自将骑断操粮道。
现代文：吕布同意，打算留陈宫与高顺守城，自己率骑兵截断曹军的粮道。
English: Lv Bu agreed, intending to keep Chen Palace and Gao Shun to defend the city, and led his cavalry to cut off Cao Jun's food supply.

古文：布妻谓布曰： 宫、顺素不和，将军一出，宫、顺必不同心共城守也，如有蹉跌，将军当于何自立乎？
现代文：吕布的妻子对吕布说： 陈宫与高顺一向不和，将军一出城，陈宫与高顺必然不能同心协力地守城。万一出现什么问题，将军要在哪里立脚！
English: Lü Bu's wife said to Lü Bu: Chen Gong and Gao Shun have always been at odds. As soon as the general left the city, Chen Gong and Gao Shun would not be able to jointly defend the city. In case of any problems, where should the general stand?

古文：且曹氏待公台如赤子，独舍而归我。今将军厚公台不过曹氏，而欲委全城，捐妻子，孤军远出，若一旦有变，妾岂得复为将军妻哉！ 
现代文：而且曹操对待陈宫犹如父母对待怀抱中的幼儿，陈宫还舍弃曹操来投靠我们；你待陈宫并未超过曹操，就把全城交给他，抛别妻儿家小，孤军远出。如果一亘有变，我难道能再做你的妻子吗？ 
English: Moreover, Cao Cao treated Chen Gong like a parent treats a baby in his arms. Chen Gong also abandoned Cao Cao to rely on us. If you wait until Chen Gong has not surpassed Cao Cao, you will give him the whole city, leave your wife and children at home, and go out alone. If there is a change forever, can I be your wife again?

古文：布乃止，潜遣其官属许汜、王楷求救于袁术。
现代文：吕布就打消那个计划，偷偷派遣部下官员许汜、王楷向袁术求救。
English: Lü Bu cancelled the plan and secretly dispatched his subordinate officials Xu Yao and Wang Kai to Yuan Shu for help.

古文：术曰： 布不与我女，理自当败，何为复来？ 
现代文：袁术说： 吕布不把女儿给我送来，理应失败，为什么又来找我？ 
English: Yuan Shu said, "If Lü Bu did not send his daughter to me, he should have failed. Why did he come to me again?

古文：汜、楷曰： 明上今不救布，为自败耳。
现代文：许汜、王楷说： 您现在不救吕布，是自取败亡。
English: Xu Rong and Wang Kai said, "If you don't save Lv Bu now, you will bring about your own defeat."

古文：布破，明上亦破也。 
现代文：吕布一破，您也就要破了。 
English: Once Lü Bu is broken, you will also be broken.

古文：术乃严兵为布作声援。
现代文：袁术于是整顿动员军队，声援吕布。
English: Yuan Shou then reorganized and mobilized the army to support Lvbu.

古文：布恐术为女至，故不遣救兵，以绵缠女身缚著马上，夜自送女出，与操守兵相触，格射不得过，复还。
现代文：吕布担心袁术因为自己不送女儿而不发兵救援，就用丝绵将女儿身体裹住，绑到马上，乘夜亲自送女儿出城，与曹操守兵相遇。曹军弓弩齐发，吕布不能通过，只得又退回城中。
English: Lü Bu was worried that Yuan Shu would not send soldiers to rescue her because he did not send his daughter, so he wrapped his daughter's body in silk, tied her to a horse, and personally sent his daughter out of the city at night to meet Cao Cao's guards. Cao's soldiers fired their bows and arrows, and Lü Bu could not pass, and had to return to the city.

古文：河内太守张杨素与布善，欲救之，不能，乃出兵东市，遥为之势。
现代文：河内郡太守张杨一向与吕布关系很好，想去援救，但势力不足，只能率军出驻野王县东市，遥作声势。
English: Hanoi County Governor Zhang Yang has always had a good relationship with Lvbu. He wanted to come to the rescue, but his power was insufficient. He could only lead his troops to Dongshi, Nio County, and make a loud noise.

古文：十一月，杨将杨丑杀杨以应操，别将眭固复杀丑，将其众北合袁绍。
现代文：十一月，张杨部将杨杀死张杨，响应曹操。另一个部将眭固又杀死杨，率领部下向北投奔袁绍。
English: In November, Zhang Yang's division killed Yang Zhang Yang, in response to Cao Cao. Another division, Zenggu, killed Yang Yang, and led his subordinates to the north to Yuan Shao.

古文：杨性仁和，无威刑，下人谋反发觉，对之涕泣，辄原不问，故及于难。
现代文：张杨性格宽厚仁慈，没有威严，不讲法治。部下有人叛变而被发觉，他却对着叛徒流眼泪，问题予以原谅，不加追问，因此终于被害。
English: Zhang Yang's character is generous and benevolent, he has no majesty, and does not speak of the rule of law. When one of his subordinates was found to have defected, he shed tears over the traitor, forgave the problem, and did not pursue the question, so he was finally killed.

古文：操掘堑围下邳，积久，士卒疲敝，欲还，荀攸、郭嘉曰： 吕布勇而无谋，今屡战皆北，锐气衰矣。
现代文：曹操挖掘壕沟包围下邳城。
English: Cao Cao dug a trench to encircle the city of Xiamen.

古文：三军以将为主，主衰则军无奋意。
现代文：但很久未能攻克，兵士十分疲惫，他打算撤军。荀攸、郭嘉说： 吕布有勇无谋，现在连战连败，锐气已衰。
English: The soldiers of the three armies are dominated by the commander, the commander is tired, and the army has lost the will to fight.

古文：陈宫有智而迟。
现代文：三军完全要看主将的情况，主将锐气一衰，则三军半志全消。
English: The three armies completely depend on the situation of the commander-in-chief. If the commander-in-chief is demoralized, the three armies will be half-hearted.

古文：今及布气之未复，宫谋之未定，急攻之，布可拔也。 
现代文：陈宫虽有智谋，但机变不够。现在应该乘吕布锐气未复，陈宫智谋未定的时机，发动猛攻，可以消灭吕布。 
English: Although Chen Gong had a clever plan, he was not resourceful enough. Now, he should take advantage of Lv Bu's shortness of breath, and Chen Gong's undecided time to launch an onslaught, which could eliminate Lv Bu.

古文：乃引沂、泗灌城。
现代文：于是，曹军开凿沟渠，引沂水、泗水来灌城。
English: As a result, Cao's army dug a ditch and brought in ditch water and dredged water to irrigate the city.

古文：月馀，布益困迫，临城谓操军士曰： 卿曹无相困，我当自首于明公。 
现代文：又过了一个月，吕布更加困窘，登上城头对曹军士兵说： 你们不要这样逼迫我，我要向明公自首。 
English: After another month, Lv Bu was even more embarrassed. He climbed to the top of the city and said to the soldiers of Cao's army: "Don't persecute me like this, I want to surrender to Ming Gong."

古文：陈宫曰： 逆贼曹操，何等明公！
现代文：陈宫说： 曹操不过是个逆贼，怎么配称明公！
English: Chen Gong said: Cao Cao is nothing but a traitor, how worthy he is to be called Ming Gong!

古文：今日降之，若卵投石，岂可得全也！ 
现代文：我们现在投降，就好象用鸡蛋去敲石头，岂能保住性命！ 
English: If we surrender now, it will be like hitting a stone with an egg, we will not be able to save our lives!

古文：布将侯成亡其名马，已而复得之，诸将合礼以贺成，成分酒肉先入献布。
现代文：吕布郭将侯成丢失一匹好马，不久又找回来，将领们联合送礼给侯成，向他道贺。侯成设宴招待诸将，先分一份酒肉献给吕布。
English: Houcheng, the governor of Lvbu Province, lost a good horse and soon found it again. The generals jointly sent gifts to Houcheng and congratulated him. Houcheng held a banquet to invite the generals, and first divided a portion of wine and meat to Lvbu.

古文：布怒曰： 布禁酒而卿等酝酿，为欲因酒共谋布邪？ 
现代文：吕布发怒说： 我下令禁酒，而你们又违令酿酒，打算借饮酒来共同算计我吗？ 
English: Lu Bu said angrily, "I ordered a ban on alcohol, but you brewed alcohol in violation of the order. Are you planning to use alcohol to jointly frame me?

古文：成忿惧，十二月，癸酉，成与诸将宋宪、魏续等共执陈宫、高顺，率其众降。
现代文：侯成又气又怕。十二月，癸酉，侯成与宋宪、魏续等将领共同捉住陈宫、高顺，率领部众归降曹操。
English: Hou Cheng was both angry and afraid. In December, Shun, Hou Cheng, Song Xian, Wei Zhai and other generals jointly captured Chen Gong and Gao Shun and led the troops to surrender to Cao Cao.

古文：布与麾下登白门楼。兵围之急，布令左右取其首诣操，左右不忍，乃下降。
现代文：吕布率领左右亲兵登上白门楼，曹军四面紧逼，吕布命令左右亲兵砍下他的人头去投降曹操，亲兵们不忍下手，吕布于是下楼投降。
English: Lü Bu led his left and right soldiers up to the White Gate Tower. Cao's army was closing in on him on all sides. Lü Bu ordered his left and right soldiers to cut off his head and surrender to Cao Cao. The soldiers could not bear to do it, so Lü Bu went downstairs to surrender.

古文：布见操曰： 今日已往，天下定矣。 
现代文：吕布见到曹操，说： 从今以后，天下可以平定了。 
English: When Lü Bu saw Cao Cao, he said, "From now on, the world is at peace."

古文：操曰： 何以言之？ 
现代文：曹操说： 为什么这样讲？ 
English: Cao Cao said, "Why do you say that?

古文：布曰： 明公之所患不过于布，今已服矣。若令布将骑，明公将步，天下不足定也。 
现代文：吕布说： 您所顾忌的人，不过是我吕布。现在，我已归顺，如果让我率领骑兵，您自统步兵，则天下无人能敌。 
English: Lü Bu said: "The person you are afraid of is only me, Lü Bu. Now that I have surrendered, if you let me lead the cavalry and you lead the infantry, then no one in the world will be able to defeat me.

古文：顾谓刘备曰： 玄德，卿为坐上客，我为降虏，绳缚我急，独不可一言邪？ 
现代文：吕布又回头对刘备说： 刘玄德，你是座上客，我为阶下囚，绳子把我捆得太紧，难道不能帮我说句话吗？ 
English: He also turned his head to Liu Bei and said: Xuan De, you are a guest at the table, I am a prisoner of surrender. I am tied too tightly with a rope, can't you say something for me?

古文：操笑曰： 缚虎不得不急。 
现代文：曹操笑着说： 捆绑猛虎，不能不紧。 
English: Cao Cao smiled and said, "You can't tie a tiger too tightly."

古文：乃命缓布缚。刘备曰： 不可。明公不见吕布事丁建阳、董太师乎！ 
现代文：于是下令给吕布松绑，刘备说： 不行，您没有看到吕布事奉丁原与董卓的情形吗？ 
English: So he gave the order to untie Lü Bu. Liu Bei said, "No, you can't. Didn't you see how Lü Bu served Ding Yuan and Dong Zhuo?"

古文：操颔之。
现代文：曹操点头赞同。
English: Cao Cao shook his head.

古文：布目备曰： 大耳儿，最叵信！ 
现代文：吕布瞪着刘备说： 大耳朵的家伙，最不可信！ 
English: Lü Bu stared at Liu Bei and said, "The guy with the big ears is the most untrustworthy!"

古文：操谓陈宫曰： 公台平生自谓智有馀，今竟何如？ 
现代文：曹操对陈宫说： 你平生自以为智谋有余，现在怎么样？ 
English: Cao Cao said to Chen Gong, "You have always thought that you had more than enough wisdom. How about now?

古文：宫指布曰： 是子不用宫言，以至于此。
现代文：陈宫指着吕布说： 这个人不用我的计策，才落到这样的下场。
English: Chen Gong pointed to Lü Bu and said, "This person didn't accept my opinion, and that's how it got to this point.

古文：若其见从，亦未必为禽也。 
现代文：如果他听我的话，也未必就被你捉住。 
English: If he listens to me, he may not be caught by you.

古文：操曰： 奈卿老母何？ 
现代文：曹操说： 那你的老母怎么办呢？ 
English: Cao Cao said: What about your mother?

古文：宫曰： 宫闻以孝治天下者不害人之亲。老母存否，在明公，不在宫也。 
现代文：陈宫说： 我听说，以孝道治理天下的人，不伤害别人的双亲，我老母的生死，决定于您，而不在我。 
English: Chen Gong said, "I have heard that those who rule the world with filial piety do not hurt other people's parents. My mother's life and death are decided by you, not by me.

古文：操曰： 奈卿妻子何？ 
现代文：曹操说： 你的妻子儿女怎么办？ 
English: Cao Cao said: What about your wife and children?

古文：宫曰： 宫闻施仁政于天下者不绝人之祀，妻子存否，在明公，不在宫也。 
现代文：陈宫说： 我听说施仁政于天下的人，不灭绝别人的后代，妻子儿女的生死，也决定于您，而不在我。 
English: Chen Gong said, "I have heard that it is up to you, not me, to administer benevolent government to the people of the world, not to exterminate other people's descendants, and the life and death of one's wife and children.

古文：操未复言。
现代文：曹操没有再说话。
English: Cao Cao did not speak again.

古文：宫请就刑，遂出，不顾，操为之泣涕，并布、顺皆缢杀之，传首许市。
现代文：陈宫请求受刑，于是走出门，不再回头，曹操忍不住为他落泪。陈宫与吕布、高顺全都被绞死，他们的头颅被送到京师许都。
English: Chen Gong asked to be punished, so he walked out the door and never looked back. Cao Cao couldn't help but shed tears for him. Chen Gong, Lv Bu, and Gao Shun were all hanged, and their heads were sent to Beijing.

古文：操召陈宫之母，养之终其身，嫁宫女，抚视其家，皆厚于初。
现代文：曹操把陈宫的母亲召来，赡养她直到去世；又把他的女儿嫁出去，对陈宫家属的持养照顾，比当初陈宫跟随自己时还要丰厚。
English: Cao Cao brought in Chen Gong's mother and supported her until her death. He also married off his daughter, and took better care of Chen Gong's family than when Chen Gong followed him.

古文：前尚书令陈纪、纪子群在布军中，操皆礼而用之。
现代文：前任尚书令陈纪与他儿子陈群在吕布军中，曹操对他们全都以礼相待，并任用他们为官。
English: His predecessor Shang Shu ordered Chen Ji and his son Chen Qun to join the Lvbu army. Cao Cao treated them all with courtesy and appointed them as officers.

古文：张辽将其众降，拜中郎将。
现代文：张辽率领他的部下归降，被任命为中郎将。
English: Zhang Liao led his subordinates to surrender, and was appointed as the middle-ranking general.

古文：臧霸自亡匿，操募索得之，使霸招吴敦、尹礼、孔观等，皆诣操降。
现代文：臧霸自己逃到民间隐藏起来，曹操悬赏将他捉拿，派他去招降吴敦、尹礼、孙观等，这些人全都到曹操营中归降。
English: Yan He himself fled to the people and hid. Cao Cao offered a reward for his capture and sent him to recruit Wu Tun, Yin Li, Sun Guan, etc. All of these people returned to Cao Cao's camp.

古文：操乃分琅邪、东海为城阳、利城、昌虑郡，悉以霸等为守、相。
现代文：曹操于是分割琅邪和东海，增置城阳、利城和昌虑三郡，将臧霸等人全都任命为郡太守和封国国相。
English: Cao Cao then divided the Shiyan and the East Sea, added the three counties of Chengyang, Licheng and Changxian, and appointed Zouba and others as county governors and ministers of state.

古文：初，操在兗州，以徐翕、毛晖为将。
现代文：起初，曹操在兖州时，徐翕、毛晖都是他部下的将领。
English: At first, when Cao Cao was in Zhangzhou, Xu Xi and Mao Yao were the generals of his subordinates.

古文：及兗州乱，翕、晖皆叛。
现代文：及至兖州大乱时，徐翕与毛晖都叛变了曹操。
English: At the time of the Zhangzhou Rebellion, both Xu Xi and Mao Zang rebelled against Cao Cao.

古文：兗州既定，翕、晖亡命投霸。
现代文：兖州平定后，这两个人逃亡，投奔了臧霸。
English: After Bozhou was pacified, the two men fled and joined Yanba.

古文：操语刘备，令霸送二首，霸谓备曰： 霸所以能自立者，以不为此也。
现代文：曹操让刘备传话，命令臧霸送来徐翕与毛晖的人头。臧霸对刘备说： 我所以能够自立，正是因为不作这种出卖朋友的事情。
English: Cao Cao sent Liu Bei a message, ordering the Bully to send the severed heads of Xu Jun and Mao Jun. The Bully said to Liu Bei, "The reason why I can stand on my own two feet is precisely because I don't do this kind of thing of betraying my friends."

古文：霸受主公生全之恩，不敢违命。
现代文：我受到主公的不杀之恩，不敢违抗命令。
English: I was blessed by my lord not to kill, and I did not dare to disobey the order.

古文：然王霸之君，可以义告，愿将军为之辞。 
现代文：但是，成就王霸大业的君主，可以用大义来说服，希望将军为我美言。 
English: However, the monarch, who has accomplished the great cause of Wangba, can use great righteousness to persuade, hoping that the general will speak well of me.

古文：备以霸言白操，操叹息谓霸曰： 此古人之事，而君能行之，孤之愿也。 
现代文：刘备把臧霸的话告诉曹操，曹操叹息着对臧霸说： 这是古人的高尚行为，而你能作到，这正是我的愿望。 
English: Liu Bei told Cao Cao what Yan Bao had said, and Cao Cao sighed and said to Yan Bao: This is a noble act of the ancients, and if you can do it, this is exactly my wish.

古文：皆以翕、晖为郡守。
现代文：于是，将徐翕、毛晖都任命为太守。
English: As a result, both Xu Xi and Mao Zang were appointed as governors-general.

古文：陈登以功加伏波将军。
现代文：陈登因功升任伏波将军。
English: Chen Deng was promoted to General Fubao for his service.

古文：刘表与袁绍深相结约。
现代文：刘表与袁绍往来密切，交情深厚。
English: Liu Biao and Yuan Shao had close contacts and deep friendship.

古文：治中邓羲谏表，表曰： 内不失贡职，外不背盟主，此天下之达义也。
现代文：治中邓对他进行劝告，刘表说： 我对朝廷不缺进贡，对地方不背盟主，这是天下人都能理解的道理。
English: When Deng Zizhong advised him, Liu Biao said: I do not lack tribute to the imperial court, and I do not betray the local allies. This is a principle that everyone can understand.

古文：治中独何怪乎？ 
现代文：你为什么偏要见怪呢？ 
English: Why do you want to be weird?

古文：羲乃辞疾而退。
现代文：于是邓自称有病而辞去职务。
English: So Deng claimed to be ill and resigned from his post.

古文：长沙太守张羡，性屈强，表不礼焉。
现代文：长沙郡太守张羡，性格倔强，刘表对他不礼敬。
English: Changsha County Governor Zhang En, a stubborn character, Liu table disrespectful to him.

古文：郡人桓阶说羡举长沙、零陵、桂阳三郡以拒表，遣使附于曹操，羡从之。
现代文：长沙人桓阶建议张羡将长沙、零陵、桂阳三郡联合起来抗拒刘表，派使者向曹操表示归附，张羡听从了他的建议。
English: Changsha resident Huanqu suggested that Zhang En unite the three counties of Changsha, Luling and Guiyang to resist Liu He, and sent an envoy to Cao Cao to express his support. Zhang En followed his suggestion.

古文：孙策遣其正议校尉张纮献方物，曹操欲抚纳之，表策为讨逆将军，封吴侯；以弟女配策弟匡，又为子彰取孙贲女；礼辟策弟权、翊；以张纮为侍御史。
现代文：孙策派他部下的正议校尉张到朝廷进贡地方特产。曹操打算笼络孙策，就上表推荐孙策担任讨逆将军，封吴侯；把自己的侄女嫁给孙策的弟弟孙匡，又为儿子曹彰娶孙贲的女儿。还延聘孙策的弟弟孙权、孙翊到京师任职，任命张为侍御史。
English: Cao Cao wanted to win over Sun Ce, so he recommended Sun Ce as a rebel general and appointed him Wu Hou; he married his niece to Sun Ce's brother Sun Kuang, and he married Sun Ye's daughter to his son Cao Chang. He also appointed Sun Ce's brothers Sun Quan and Sun Yao to the post of Beijing Division, and appointed Zhang to the post of Grand Historian.

古文：袁术以周瑜为居巢长，以临淮鲁肃为东城长。
现代文：袁术委任周瑜为居巢县长，临淮人鲁肃为东城县长。
English: Yuan Shou appointed Zhou Yu as the governor of Jiuye County, and Lin Huai Ren and Lu Su as the governors of Dongcheng County.

古文：瑜、肃知术终无所成，皆弃官渡江从孙策。
现代文：周瑜与鲁肃知道袁术最后成不了大事，都抛弃官职，渡过长江来投奔孙策。
English: Zhou Yu and Lu Su knew that Yuan Shu would not be able to achieve great things in the end, so they both abandoned their official positions and crossed the Yangtze River to join Sun Ce.

古文：策以瑜为建威中郎将。
现代文：孙策任用周瑜为建威中郎将。
English: Sun Ce appointed Zhou Yu as Jian Wei's lieutenant general.

古文：肃因家于曲阿。
现代文：鲁肃于是把全家都搬到曲阿来定居。
English: So Lu Su moved the whole family to Qu'ao to settle down.

古文：曹操表征王朗，策遣朗还。
现代文：曹操上表，请朝廷征召被孙策俘虏的会稽郡太守王朗，孙策送王朗返回京师。
English: Cao Cao sent a request to the imperial court to conscript Wang Lang, who was captured by Sun Ce, and send him back to Beijing.

古文：操以朗为谏议大夫，参司空军事。
现代文：曹操任命王朗为谏议大夫，参议司空府的军事。
English: Cao Cao appointed Wang Lang as the doctor of consultation and the military advisor to the Sikyong.

古文：袁术遣间使赍印绶与丹杨宗帅祖郎等，使激动山越，共图孙策。
现代文：袁术派遗秘密使者，将印绶带给丹阳郡地方势力首领祖郎等，要祖郎去煽动山越人，共同打击孙策。
English: Yuan Shuxu sent his secret emissary to bring the seal to Zu Lang, the leader of the local forces in Danyang County, and asked Zu Lang to incite the people of Shan Yue to jointly fight Sun Ce.

古文：刘繇之奔豫章也，太史慈遁于芜湖山中，自称丹杨太守。
现代文：刘繇被孙策打败，投奔豫章郡时，太史慈逃到芫湖地区的山中，自称为丹阳太守。
English: When Liu Bei was defeated by Sun Ce and fled to Yuzhang County, Taishi Ci fled to the mountains in the Wuhu region and called himself Danyang Taishu.

古文：策已定宣城以东，惟泾以西六县未服，慈因进住泾县，大为山越所附。
现代文：孙策已经平定宣城以东地区，只有泾县以西的六县还未征服。太史慈就进驻泾县，大受山越人的拥护。
English: Sun Ce had already subdued the area east of Xuancheng, and only the six counties west of Yixian had yet to be conquered. Taishi Ci entered Yixian and was greatly supported by the people of Shan Yue.

古文：于是策自将讨祖郎于陵阳。
现代文：于是，孙策亲自率军到陵阳去征讨祖郎，将他生擒。
English: As a result, Sun Ce personally led an army to Lingyang to fight Zuro and capture him alive.

古文：禽之。策谓郎曰： 尔昔袭孤，斫孤马鞍，今创军立事，除弃宿恨，惟取能用，与天下通耳，非但汝，汝勿恐怖。 
现代文：孙策对祖郎说： 你以前袭击我，曾砍中我的马鞍。如今我兴建军队，创立大业，抛除旧恨，只要是能用之才，就加以任用。我对天下人都是如此，不仅是你一个人，你不必害怕。 
English: Sun Ce said to his ancestor, "You attacked me before and once slashed my saddle. Now I am building an army, creating a great cause, discarding old hatreds, and appointing anyone I can. I am doing this for everyone in the world. You are not the only one. You do not have to be afraid.

古文：郎叩头谢罪，即破械，署门下贼曹。
现代文：祖郎叩头请罪，孙策立即打开他的枷锁，任命他为门下贼曹。
English: Zuro kowtowed and pleaded guilty, and Sun Ce immediately opened his shackles and appointed him as a subordinate thief.

古文：又讨太史慈于勇里，禽之，解缚，捉其手曰： 宁识神亭时邪？
现代文：孙策又进军勇里攻讨太史慈，将他生擒。孙策解开捆绑太史慈的绳索，握着他的手说： 还记得神亭相遇时的情景吗？
English: Sun Ce also marched into Yuli to attack Taishi Ci and captured him alive. Sun Ce untied the ropes binding Taishi Ci, held his hands and said, "Do you remember the scene when we met in Shentei?

古文：若卿尔时得我云何？ 
现代文：如果你那时捉到我，会怎么对待？ 
English: If you had caught me then, what would have happened?

古文：慈曰： 未可量也。 
现代文：太史慈说： 无法估量。 
English: "There is no way to estimate," Mr. Taishi said.

古文：策大笑曰： 今日之事，当与卿共之。
现代文：孙策大笑着说： 今天的大事，我要与你一同开创。
English: Sun Ce laughed loudly and said, "This is a national emergency, I should deal with it together with you."

古文：闻卿有烈义，天下智士也，但所托未得其人耳。
现代文：听说你有胆烈，为人忠勇，是天下的智士，只是你所跟随的并不是真正的明主罢了。
English: I have heard that you are courageous, loyal and brave, and that you are one of the world's wise men. However, what you are following is not the true Lord.

古文：孤是卿知己，勿忧不如意也。 
现代文：我是你的知已，不要担心不能如意。 
English: I know you. Don't worry if you don't get what you want.

古文：即署门下督。
现代文：随即任用太史慈为门下督。
English: He immediately appointed Taishi Ci as his subordinate governor.

古文：军还，祖郎、太史慈俱在前导，军人以为荣。
现代文：孙策大军返回时，祖郎、太史慈一同在前面开道，全军都认为是荣耀。
English: When Sun Ce's army returned, Zuro and Taishi together led the way, and the whole army thought it was an honor.

古文：会刘繇卒于豫章，士众万馀人，欲奉豫章太守华歆为主。
现代文：正在这时，扬州牧刘繇在豫章郡去世。他部下有万余人，打算推举豫章郡太守华歆为首领。
English: At this time, Yangzhou Patriarch Liu Bei died in Yuzhang County. He had more than ten thousand subordinates, and he intended to nominate Yuzhang County Governor Hua Wei as the leader.

古文：歆以为因时擅命，非人臣所宜，众守之连月，卒谢遣之。
现代文：华歆认为： 利用时机擅自夺取权力，不是人臣应该做的事情。 
English: Hua Wei believes that: using the opportunity to seize power without authorization is not what a vassal should do.

古文：其众未有所附，策命太史慈往抚安之，谓慈曰： 刘牧往责吾为袁氏攻庐江，吾先君兵数千人，尽在公路许，吾志在立事，安得不屈意于公路以求之乎？其后不遵臣节，谏之不从。丈夫义交，苟有大故，不得不离。
现代文：刘繇的部众坚持了几个月，华歆最终还是表示辞谢，把他们送走。于是这些部众无所归依。孙策命令太史慈前去安抚，他对太史慈说： 刘州牧以前责备我为袁术进攻庐江。当时，我父亲遗留下的数千精兵都在袁术那里，我志在建立大业，怎么能不向他屈意低头而索求我父亲的旧部呢！后来袁朴不遵守臣节，不听从劝谏，大丈夫以道义相交，但有大的变动时，也不能不分离，我当初投靠袁术及后来与他断交的经过，就是这样。
English: Sun Ce ordered Taishi Ci to go and pacify them. He said to Taishi Ci, "Before, Liu Zhou accused me of attacking the Minjiang River on behalf of Yuan Shuxi. At that time, the thousands of elite soldiers left behind by my father were with Yuan Shuxi. I aspired to build a great cause. How could I not bow to him and ask for my father's old ministry? Later, Yuan Puxi did not observe the feast of the vassal, did not listen to the advice of the vassal, and it was all right to have moral intercourse, but when there was a big change, it was impossible not to separate. This is how I initially

古文：吾交求公路及绝之本末如此，恨不及其生时与共论辩也。今儿子在豫章，卿往视之。并宣孤意于其部曲。部曲乐来者与俱来，不乐来者且安慰之。并观华子鱼所以牧御方规何如。
现代文：只恨不能在刘州牧活着的时候向他解释清楚。如今，刘州牧的儿子在豫章，你去看望一下，并把我的意思宣告给他的部曲，他们乐意来的就随你一同来，不乐意的也加以安抚，并观察一下华歆治理郡务的能力怎样。
English: I only wish I could have explained it to Liu Shoumu when he was alive. Today, Liu Shoumu's son is in Yuzhang. You should visit him and tell him what I want. If they are willing to come, they should come with you. If they are not willing, you should appease them and observe how Hua Tuo is able to manage county affairs.

古文：卿须几兵，多少随意。 
现代文：你需要带多少兵去，可以自作决定。 
English: You can decide for yourself how many soldiers you need to take with you.

古文：慈曰： 慈有不赦之罪，将军量同桓、文，当尽死以报德。
现代文：太史慈说： 我曾犯下不可宽怒的重罪，将军有齐桓公、晋文公那样的气量，我应当以死报答将军的恩德。
English: Ta Shi Ci said: I once committed a serious crime that cannot be forgiven. The general had the same stamina as Lord Qi Huan and Lord Jinwen. I should repay the general's kindness with my death.

古文：今并息兵，兵不宜多，将数十人足矣。 
现代文：如今双方并没有交战，不宜多带人马，率领数十人足够了。 
English: Now that the two sides are not at war, it is not advisable to bring more people. It is enough to lead dozens of people.

古文：左右皆曰： 慈必北去不还。 
现代文：孙策左右的人都说： 太史慈一定会向北逃走，不再回来。 
English: People around Sun Ce said, "Tao Shih Ci will definitely flee to the north and never come back."

古文：策曰： 子义舍我，当复从谁！ 
现代文：孙策说： 太史慈如果舍弃我，还会再追随谁？ 
English: Sun Ce said, "If Taishi Ci abandons me, who will he follow?

古文：饯送昌门，把腕别曰： 何时能还？ 
现代文：孙策在昌门为太史慈饯行，握住太史慈的手腕道别说： 什么时候能回来？ 
English: So he went to Changmen to see Taishi Ci, held his wrist and said, "When can I come back?"

古文：答曰： 不过六十日。 
现代文：太史慈回答说： 不过六十天。 
English: Taishi replied, "Only sixty days."

古文：慈行，议者犹纷纭言遣之非计。
现代文：太史慈走后，大家仍议论纷纷，认为派他去是失策。
English: After Mr. Taishi left, there was still a lot of discussion about whether it was a mistake to send him.

古文：策曰： 诸君勿复言，孤断之详矣。
现代文：孙策说： 你们不要再说，我已考虑周详。
English: Sun Ce said, "Don't talk any more, I've thought it over thoroughly.

古文：太史子义虽气勇有胆烈，然非纵横之人，其必秉道义，重然诺，一以意许知己，死亡不相负，诸君勿忧也。 
现代文：太史慈虽然为人勇猛、胆识过人，但不是一个反复之人。他以道义为重，一诺千金，一旦视作知已，生死不会相负。你们不要担忧。 
English: Although Taishi Ci is a man of great courage and daring, he is not a man of repetition. He places great importance on morality and promises a lot of money. Once he considers that he knows, he will not be burdened with life and death. Don't worry.

古文：慈果如期而反，谓策曰： 华子鱼，良德也，然无他方规，自守而已。
现代文：太史慈果然如期返回，对孙策说： 华歆品德高尚，但没有别的谋略，只能自保而已。
English: Taishi Ci did indeed return as scheduled and said to Sun Ce: Hua Tuo's character is noble, but there is no other strategy, only self-preservation.

古文：又，丹杨僮芝，自擅庐陵，番阳民帅别立宗部，言 我已别立郡海昏上缭，不受发召 ，子鱼但睹视之而已。 
现代文：另外，丹阳人僮芝擅自占领庐陵，番阳地方势力首领别立宗部，声称： 我们已在海昏、上缭另立郡府，不接受豫章郡的命令。 而华歆只能干瞪眼而已。 
English: In addition, the Danyang people, Qi Zhi, occupied Fuling without authorization, and the leader of the local forces in Panyang, Bie Li Zongbu, claimed: We have set up the county government in Haikou and Shangyu, and do not accept the order of Yuzhang County.

古文：策拊掌大笑，遂有兼并之志。
现代文：孙策拍手大笑，于是有了兼并豫章郡的想法。
English: Sun Ce clapped his hands and laughed, and the idea of annexing Yuzhang County came to him.

古文：袁绍连年攻公孙瓚，不能克，以书谕之，欲相与释憾连和；瓚不答，而增修守备，谓长史太原关靖曰： 当今四方虎争，无有能坐吾城下相守经年者明矣，袁本初其若我何！ 绍于是大兴兵以攻瓚。
现代文：袁绍连年进攻公孙瓒，不能攻克，就写信给公孙瓒，想与他解开过去的仇怨，互相联合。公孙瓒不予理睬，反而增强防备，他对长史、太原人关靖说： 如今四方龙争虎斗，显然没有人能连年坐在我的城下相守，袁绍能对我怎么样！ 袁绍于是大举增兵，向公孙瓒进攻。
English: Yuan Shao repeatedly attacked Gongsun Yao, but could not conquer him, so he wrote to Gongsun Yao, hoping to solve the past grudge with him and unite with each other. Gongsun Yao did not pay attention, but instead strengthened his defenses. He said to Changshi and Guan Jing of Taiyuan, "Nowadays, the four sides are fighting against each other. Obviously, no one can sit under my castle for years on end, how can Yuan Shao protect me! Yuan Shao then increased the number of troops and attacked Gongsun Yao.

古文：先是瓚别将有为敌所围者，瓚不救，曰： 救一人，使后将恃救，不肯力战。 
现代文：在此之前，公孙瓒据守各地的将领中，有人被敌军围困，公孙瓒不肯救援，他说： 如果救了这一个人，会使其他将领以后依赖救援，不肯努力奋战。 
English: Prior to this, among the generals in various parts of Gongsunye, some of whom were besieged by enemy forces, Gongsunye refused to rescue. He said: If you save this one person, other generals will rely on rescue and refuse to fight hard.

古文：及绍来攻，瓚南界别营，自度守则不能自固，又知必不见救，或降或溃。
现代文：等到袁绍前来进攻时，公孙瓒派到南境营寨防守的将领，自知坚守不住，又知必定不会有人援救，于是有的投降，有的溃散。
English: When Yuan Shao came to attack, the generals who were sent to the southern border to defend the encampment knew that they could not hold out, and they knew that there would be no one to rescue them, so some surrendered and some scattered.

古文：绍军径至其门，瓚遣子续请救于黑山诸帅，而欲自将突骑出傍西山，拥黑山之众侵掠冀州，横断绍后。
现代文：袁绍大军长驱直入，到达易京城门。公孙瓒派儿子公孙续向黑山军的将领们求援，并准备自己率领精锐骑兵出城，奔往西山，带领黑山军反攻冀州，切断袁绍的退路。
English: The commander of Yuan Shao's army drove straight in and arrived at the gate of Yijing. Gongsun Zou sent his son Gongsun to the generals of the Montenegrin army to ask for help, and prepared to lead the elite cavalry out of the city, rush to the West Mountain, lead the Montenegrin army to counterattack Jizhou, and cut off Yuan Shao's escape route.

古文：关靖谏曰： 今将军将士莫不怀瓦解之心，所以犹能相守者，顾恋其居处老小，而恃将军为主故耳。
现代文：关靖劝阻公孙瓒说： 如今将军部下将士无不怀着离散之心，所以还能坚守，只是因为顾念全家老少都在这里，而且依赖将军在此主持大局。
English: Guan Jing dissuaded Gongsun Yao, saying, "Nowadays, the generals and their subordinates all have the spirit of dispersion, so they can still hold on, just because they care about the whole family and rely on the generals to preside over the overall situation.

古文：坚守旷日，或可使绍自退。
现代文：继续坚守，拖延时日，或许能使袁绍知难自退。
English: Continuing to adhere to and delay the time may make it difficult for Yuan Shao to retreat.

古文：若舍之而出，后无镇重，易京之危，可立待也。 
现代文：如果将军舍弃他们，率兵出城，后方无人作主，易京的陷落，便指日可待。 
English: If the general abandons them and leads the troops out of the city, no one will be in charge in the rear, and the fall of Beijing will be just around the corner.

古文：瓚乃止。
现代文：公孙瓒于是放弃出城打算。
English: It was only after the death of his grandson that he decided to stop.

古文：绍渐相攻逼，瓚众日蹙。
现代文：袁绍大军逐渐进逼，公孙瓒部众日益窘迫。
English: Yuan Shao's army was gradually advancing, and Gongsun and his subordinates were in increasing distress.

