古文：缅甸，古朱波地。
现代文：缅甸，就是古代的朱波。
English: Myanmar is the ancient Zhu Bo.

古文：宋宁宗时，缅甸、波斯等国进白象，缅甸通中国自此始。
现代文：宋朝宁宗皇帝时期，缅甸、波斯等国向朝廷进献白象，于是中国与缅甸的交通才从此开始。
English: During the reign of Emperor Ningzong of the Song Dynasty, Myanmar, Persia and other countries presented white elephants to the imperial court, and thus the communication between China and Myanmar began.

古文：地在云南西南，最穷远。
现代文：元朝至元年间，屡次派军讨伐他们，他们才向朝廷入贡。
English: From the Yuan Dynasty to the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, they repeatedly sent troops to fight them, and only then did they pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：有城郭庐舍，多楼居。
现代文：缅甸地处云南的西南端，有城郭庐舍，那里的人大多居住在楼上。
English: Myanmar is located at the southwestern tip of Yunnan Province. There is a castle-like mansion, where most people live upstairs.

古文：元至元中，屡讨之，乃入贡。明太祖即位，遣使赍诏谕之。至安南，留二年，以道阻不能达而返，使者多道卒。
现代文：明太祖即皇帝位时，派使者带着诏书去谕告他们，到达安南时因道路阻塞无法通达，在安南居留了两年返回来。所派去的使者大多也死在路途之中。
English: When Emperor Taizu of the Ming Dynasty was on the throne, he sent an envoy with an imperial edict to tell them that when they arrived in Annan, they could not get there because of the road blockage, so they stayed in Annan for two years and returned. Most of the envoys sent also died on the way.

古文：洪武二十六年，八百国使人入贡，言缅近其地，以远不能自达。
现代文：洪武二十六年，八百国派使者向朝廷入贡，说缅甸就在他们附近，因为太远无法径自来京城。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of Hongwu, eight hundred countries sent envoys to pay tribute to the imperial court, saying that Myanmar was near them, because it was too far to travel to Beijing.

古文：帝乃令西平侯沐春遣使至八百国王所，谕意。
现代文：皇帝便命令西平侯沐春派使者到八百国国王的住所，让他向缅甸转达朝廷的谕意。
English: The emperor then ordered Xiping Hou Mu Chun to send an emissary to the residence of the king of the eight hundred countries, so that he could convey the imperial edict to Myanmar.

古文：于是缅始遣其臣板南速剌至，进方物，劳赐之。
现代文：在这种情况下缅甸开始派遣他们的大臣极南速剌到京城，向朝廷进献土产，皇帝犒劳并赏赐了他。
English: Under these circumstances, the Burmese began to send their ministers southward to the capital, to offer native products to the imperial court, and the emperor rewarded and rewarded him.

古文：二十七年置缅中宣慰使司，以土酋卜剌浪为使。
现代文：二十七年朝廷设置了缅中宣慰使司，任命当地酋长卜剌浪为宣慰使。
English: In 1927, the imperial court set up the Burmese-Chinese Consolation Envoy Division, and appointed the local chief Bu Qianlang as the consolation envoy.

古文：二十八年，卜剌浪遣使贡方物，诉百夷思伦发侵夺境土。
现代文：二十八年，卜剌浪派遣使者向朝廷进献贡品，诉说百夷的思伦发侵夺了他们的土地。
English: In the 28th year, Bu Qianlang sent an envoy to the imperial court to pay tribute, telling them that the Si Lun Fa of Baiyi had invaded their land.

古文：二十九年复来诉。
现代文：二十九年又上诉此事。
English: The matter was appealed again in 2007.

古文：帝遣行人李思聪、钱古训谕缅及百夷各罢兵守土，伦发听命。
现代文：皇帝派行人李思聪、钱古训劝谕缅甸和百夷都各自罢兵守卫自己的境土。
English: The emperor sent messengers Li Sicong and Qian Guxun to advise Burma and Baiyi to withdraw their troops and guard their own territories.

古文：会有百夷部长刀干孟之乱，逐伦发，以故事得已。
现代文：思伦发听从了朝廷的命令。后来百夷的部落酋长刀干孟作乱，赶走了思伦发，这段故事前文中已经叙述过了。
English: Shilunfa obeyed the order of the imperial court. Later, the tribal chief of Baiyi, Jian Meng, made a disturbance and drove Shilunfa away. This story has already been described in the previous article.

古文：永乐元年，缅酋那罗塔遣使入贡。因言缅虽遐裔，愿臣属中国，而道经木邦、孟养，多阻遏。
现代文：永乐元年，缅甸酋长那罗塔派使者向朝廷入贡，并说缅甸虽是边远之民，但愿意做中国的臣民，取道木邦、孟养来京城时，多遭受这两地的阻遏。
English: In the first year of Yongle, the Burmese chieftain Narota sent an envoy to the imperial court to pay tribute, and said that although Myanmar was a remote people, it was willing to be a subject of China. When taking the road of Mubang and Mengyao to Beijing, it was mostly blocked by these two places.

古文：乞命以职，赐冠服、印章，庶免欺陵。
现代文：现在请求朝廷封我们一个职位，颁赐给我们冠服、印章，这样就可免除被木邦、孟养人欺凌。
English: Now we are asking the court to appoint us to a position, award us a crown and a seal, so that we can be exempted from being bullied by Mokang and Mengyang.

古文：诏设缅甸宣慰使司，以那罗塔为宣慰使，遣内臣张勤往赐冠带、印章。
现代文：皇帝便下诏书，设置缅甸宣慰使司，任命那罗塔为宣慰使，派宦官张勤到缅甸给他颁赐冠带、印章。
English: The emperor then issued an imperial decree, set up the Burmese Consolation Envoy Division, appointed Narota as the Consolation Envoy, and sent eunuch Zhang Qin to Burma to present him with a crown and seal.

古文：于是缅有二宣慰使，皆入贡不绝。
现代文：于是缅甸便有两个宣慰使，都向朝廷入贡不绝。
English: As a result, there were two consular envoys from Burma, both of whom paid endless tribute to the imperial court.

古文：五年，那罗塔遣使贡方物，谢罪。
现代文：五年，那罗塔派使者到朝廷贡献土产，并向皇帝谢罪。
English: In the fifth year, Narota sent an envoy to the imperial court to contribute local produce and to apologize to the emperor.

古文：先是，孟养宣慰使刀木旦与戛里相攻，那罗塔乘衅袭之，杀刀木旦及其长子，遂据其地。
现代文：原来，此前孟养的宣慰使刀木且与戛里互相攻伐，那罗塔乘机袭击孟养，杀死了刀木且和他的长子，占领了孟养。
English: It turned out that, after Meng Yang's exhortation had caused Meng Yang and Narota to attack each other, Narota took the opportunity to attack Meng Yang, killed Meng Yang and his eldest son, and occupied Meng Yang.

古文：事闻，诏行人张洪等赍敕谕责。
现代文：此事传到朝廷后，皇帝下诏派行人张洪等带着皇帝的敕谕去责问那罗塔。
English: After the matter was reported to the imperial court, the emperor issued an edict to send Zhang Hong, a passerby, and others with the emperor's edict to question Narota.

古文：那罗塔惧，归其境土，而遣人诣阙谢罪。
现代文：那罗塔有所畏惧，归还了侵占的境土，派人到朝廷来谢罪。
English: Nalota was afraid, returned the occupied territory, and sent someone to the court to apologize.

古文：帝谕礼部曰： 蛮既服辜，其释不问。 
现代文：皇帝告诉礼部说 ：蛮人既然已经服罪，就可不再追究了。 
English: The emperor told the Ministry of Ceremonies, "Since the barbarians have already confessed their sins, they can no longer be investigated."

古文：仍给以信符，令三年一朝贡。
现代文：仍然给那罗塔颁给信符，让他们三年朝觐入贡一次。
English: He still gave letters of credence to Narota and made them pay tribute to the Imperial Court once every three years.

古文：初，卜剌浪分其地，使长子那罗塔管大甸，次子马者速管小甸。
现代文：原先，卜剌浪将其地一分为二，让他的长子那罗塔管理大甸，让他的次子马者速管理小甸。
English: Originally, Bu Xuan divided his land into two parts, letting his eldest son Narota manage the large territory and his second son Ma Zhe Zuo manage the small territory.

古文：卜剌浪死，那罗塔尽收其弟土地人民。
现代文：卜剌浪死后，那罗塔将他弟弟管理的土地和人民都收罗过来了。
English: After the death of Bu Qianlang, Narota took over the land and people managed by his brother.

古文：已而其弟复入小甸，遣人来朝，且诉其情。
现代文：不久，那罗塔的弟弟又进入小甸，派人来朝贡，并向朝廷诉说他的遭遇。
English: Not long after, Narota's younger brother entered Xiaodian again, sent people to pay tribute, and told the court what had happened to him.

古文：敕谕那罗塔兄弟和好如初，毋干天讨。
现代文：皇帝给那罗塔颁敕谕，劝那罗塔兄弟应像以前那样和好，不要惹朝廷派人讨伐。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to Narota, urging the Narota brothers to make peace as before, and not to provoke the court to send people to fight.

古文：六年，那罗塔复遣人入贡，谢罪，并谢赐金牌、信符，劳赐遣之。
现代文：六年，那罗塔又派人向朝廷进贡，向皇帝谢罪，并感谢皇帝给他颁赐金牌和信符。
English: In the sixth year, Narota also sent people to pay tribute to the court, to apologize to the emperor, and to thank the emperor for awarding him gold medals and tokens.

古文：七年复遣中官云仙等赍敕赐缅酋金织文绮。
现代文：皇帝犒劳并赏赐使者后将他送了回去。七年皇帝又派遣宦官云仙带着皇帝的敕诏到缅甸，给缅甸的酋长赏赐织金文的丝绸。
English: The emperor rewarded and rewarded the envoy and sent him back. Seven years later, the emperor sent the eunuch Yun Xian to Burma with the emperor's edict and rewarded the Burmese chieftain with gold-woven silk.

古文：十二年，缅人来言为木邦侵掠。
现代文：十二年，缅甸人来朝廷诉说他们遭到木邦的侵犯和掠夺。
English: In 2012, Burmese people came to the Imperial Court to complain that they had been invaded and plundered by the Muping.

古文：帝以那罗塔素强横，遣人谕之，使修好邻封，各守疆界。
现代文：皇帝认为那罗塔素来强横，便派人劝谕他，要他和邻近的朝廷所封的官员搞好关系，各守各的疆界。
English: The emperor thought that Lhota had always been domineering, so he sent someone to advise him that he should establish good relations with the nearby court-appointed officials, and that they should each guard their own borders.

古文：洪熙元年遣内官段忠、徐亮以即位诏谕缅甸。
现代文：洪熙元年，朝廷派遣宦官段忠、徐亮到缅甸，告诉他们新皇帝即位了。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, the imperial court sent eunuchs Duan Zhong and Xu Liang to Myanmar to tell them that the new emperor had ascended to the throne.

古文：宣德元年遣使往谕云南土官，赐缅甸锦绮。
现代文：宣德元年，朝廷又派遣使者谕告云南的土官，给缅甸赏赐锦绮。
English: In the first year of Xuande, the imperial court sent an envoy to tell the local officials of Yunnan to reward Burma with brocade.

古文：二年以莽得剌为宣慰使。
现代文：二年任命莽得剌为宣慰使。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as the consolatory envoy.

古文：初，缅甸宣慰使新加斯与木邦仇杀而死，子弟溃散。
现代文：当初，缅甸宣慰使新加斯与木邦宣慰使互相仇杀而死，他的子弟都溃散了。
English: At first, Burmese Xuancheng Xingas and Mupang Xuancheng killed each other, and his children were scattered.

古文：缅共推莽得剌权袭，许之。
现代文：缅甸人便共同推举莽得剌暂时代理宣慰使职务，朝廷同意了。
English: The Burmese then jointly nominated the rashly appointed provisional consul, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：自是来贡者只署缅甸，而甸中之称不复见。
现代文：从此来朝廷献贡品的人只署缅甸的名，甸中的名称再也不见了。
English: From then on, people who came to the imperial court to offer tribute only signed the name of Myanmar, and the name of Tien Chung disappeared.

古文：八年，莽得剌遣人来贡，复遣云仙赍敕赐之，并谕其勿侵木邦地。
现代文：八年，莽得剌派人来朝廷献贡品，皇帝又派云仙持敕到缅甸赏赐莽得剌，并谕告他不要去侵犯木邦。
English: In the eighth year, Mn Th sent people to the imperial court to offer tribute, and the emperor also sent Yun Xian to Burma to reward Mn Th, and told him not to invade Mubang.

古文：正统六年给缅甸信符、金牌。
现代文：正统六年朝廷给缅甸颁发了信符和金牌。
English: The Imperial Court issued a letter and a gold medal to Myanmar after six years of rule.

古文：时麓川思任发叛，将讨之，命缅甸调兵待。
现代文：此时麓川的思任发叛乱，朝廷将派兵讨伐，于是命令缅甸调集军队等待诏令。
English: At this time, Luchuan's Shiren rebelled, and the imperial court would send troops to fight, so it ordered Myanmar to mobilize the army and wait for the imperial decree.

古文：七年，任发兵败，过金沙江，走孟广，缅人攻之。
现代文：七年，思任发被官军打败，渡过金沙江，逃到孟广，缅甸人向他发起攻击。
English: In the seventh year, Shirenfa was defeated by the government army, crossed the Jinsha River, fled to Mengguang, and the Burmese launched an attack on him.

古文：帝谕能擒献贼首者，予以麓川地。
现代文：皇帝敕谕说若有人抓住贼人首领并献给朝廷，将把麓川的土地划给他。
English: The emperor's edict said that if anyone caught the leader of the thieves and presented him to the imperial court, the land of Fuchuan would be assigned to him.

古文：八年，总督尚书王骥奏，缅甸酋马哈省、以速剌等已擒获思任发，不解至，唯以麓川地为言，朝命遂有并征缅甸之命。
现代文：八年，总督尚书王骥上奏，说缅甸的酋长马哈省、以速剌等人已经抓获了思任发，不将他解送过来，是要朝廷兑现以麓川的土地换取思任发。于是朝廷便有了一并征讨缅甸的命令。
English: In the eighth year, the governor, Shang Shu Wang, issued a proclamation saying that the Burmese chieftains of Maha Province, Yidam, and others had captured Sireen Fa, and that the reason for not sending him back was that the court wanted to redeem the land in the Fuchuan River in exchange for Sireen Fa. The court then received an order to collect from Myanmar as well.

古文：是时，大师已集腾冲，缅使致书，期以今冬送思任发至贡章交付。
现代文：此时，朝廷所派的官军已经集结在腾冲，缅甸的使者来到腾冲向官军献上文书，说在这个冬天将思任发押送到贡章交付给官军。
English: At this time, the official army sent by the imperial court had already gathered in Tengchong. Myanmar's envoys came to Tengchong to present a document to the official army, saying that this winter they would send a tribute to the official army.

古文：骥与克期，遣指挥李仪等率精骑通南牙山路，抵贡章，受献，而缅人送思任发者竟不至。
现代文：王骥给缅甸使者限定日期让他们交出思任发，同时派遣指挥李仪等人率领精锐骑兵打通南牙山的道路，抵达贡章，准备接受缅甸人押送来的思任发，结果缅甸人竟然不来。
English: Wang Hui gave the Burmese envoy a limited date for them to hand over the Shiren Fa, and at the same time dispatched commander Li Yi and others to lead the elite cavalry to open the road through Nanya Mountain, arrive at the tribute, and prepare to accept the Shiren Fa escorted by the Burmese. As a result, the Burmese did not come.

古文：九年，骥驻师江上，缅人亦严兵为备，遣人往来江中，觇官军虚实。
现代文：九年，王骥将军队驻扎在江上，缅甸人也派兵严阵以待，并派人在江中往来，窥探官军的虚实。
English: In the ninth year, Wang Yao stationed the army on the river, and the Burmese also sent soldiers to wait in a strict line, and sent people to travel in the river to spy on the truth of the official army.

古文：骥以麓川未平，缅难不可复作，乃令总兵官蒋贵等潜焚其舟数百，缅人溃，骥亦班师。
现代文：王骥因麓川没有平定，不能与缅甸人太为难，便命令总兵官蒋贵等人偷偷地焚烧掉缅甸人的数百艘船。缅甸人溃散后，王骥也撤兵。
English: Because the Luchuan River was not pacified, Wang Hui could not be too difficult with the Burmese, so he ordered the general officer Jiang Gui and others to secretly burn hundreds of Burmese ships. After the Burmese dispersed, Wang Hui also withdrew his troops.

古文：于是总兵官沐昂奏： 缅恃险党贼，应加兵，但滇中方连年征讨，财力困弊，旱涝相仍，粮饷不给，未可轻举。
现代文：总兵官沐昂上奏说 ：缅甸人倚仗着地势险要与贼人为党，本来应对他们加兵，但云南正连年征战，财力困乏，旱涝灾害又袭击云南，粮饷筹集不起来，所以未可轻易动兵。
English: The general officer Muang Shangso said: The Burmese, relying on the terrain, are at risk of becoming a party with the thieves. They should have increased their troops, but Yunnan has been fighting for years. Financial resources are scarce, droughts and floods have hit Yunnan again, and grain can not be raised, so it is not easy to mobilize troops.

古文：臣已遣人谕缅祸福，俾献贼首。缅宜听从。 
现代文：我已经派人去缅甸向他们晓以祸福，让他们献出贼首，缅甸人应该会听的。 
English: I've sent people to Burma to tell them the good and the bad, to make them give up their heads, and the Burmese should listen.

古文：十二年，木邦宣慰罕盖法，缅甸故宣慰子马哈省、以速剌，遣使偕千户王政等献思任发首及诸俘馘至京，并贡方物。
现代文：十二年，木邦的宣慰罕盖法和缅甸已故宣慰的儿子马哈省、以速剌，派遣使者与千户王政等人将思任发的首级和其他俘虏献到京城，并向朝廷贡献土产。
English: In the twelfth year, Mubang's consolation, Han Gaefa, and Myanmar's late consolation's son, Maha, sent envoys with Chihaya Wang Zheng and others to present the head and other captives of Shirenfa to the capital, and to contribute local produce to the imperial court.

古文：帝命马哈省、以速剌并为宣慰使，赐敕奖劳，给冠带、印信。
现代文：皇帝任命马哈省、以速剌为并列宣慰使，颁敕奖励犒劳他们，并给他们颁发冠带和印信。
English: The emperor appointed Maha Province and Haidian Province as concurrent condolence envoys, presented them with awards and rewards, and awarded them with crowns and seals.

古文：未几，以速剌奏求孟养、戛里地，且请大军亟灭思任发之子思机发兄弟，而己出兵为助。
现代文：不久，以速剌上奏请求将孟养、戛里划给他管辖，并请求朝廷派大军剿灭思任发的儿子思机发两兄弟，自己愿意出兵帮助官军。
English: Soon after, he made a request for Mengyang and Gaoli to be placed under his jurisdiction, and requested the imperial court to send a large army to annihilate the two brothers of the son of Simefa, and he was willing to send troops to help the official army.

古文：帝谕以机发可不战擒，宜即灭贼以求分地，弗为他人得也。
现代文：皇帝谕告他说对于思机发可以不用打仗就活捉他，你应该在当地先消灭贼人，以消灭贼人的功绩来求分地，可不要让别人得了这份功劳哟。
English: The emperor told him that if he wanted to catch the thief alive without fighting, he should first eliminate the thief on the spot, and then use the achievement of eliminating the thief to gain points. However, he should not let others get the credit.

古文：景泰二年赐缅甸阴文金牌、信符。
现代文：景泰二年朝廷给缅甸颁发了阴文的金牌和信符。
English: In the second year of King Taejo's reign, the imperial court awarded Myanmar a gold medal and a letter in the Yin language.

古文：时以速剌久获思机发不献，又放思卜发归孟养。
现代文：此时以速剌已抓获了思机发很久，却不献给朝廷，还将思卜发放回孟养。
English: At this time, Zuo Yao had already captured the idea for a long time, but did not dedicate it to the imperial court, and also sent the idea back to Meng Yao.

古文：朝廷知其要挟，故缓之。
现代文：朝廷知道他想以此要挟朝廷给他分地，所以给他们颁发牌符以缓和一下他们的情绪。
English: The court knew that he wanted to use this to blackmail the court into giving him land, so he gave them license plates to ease their emotions.

古文：五年，缅人来索地，参将胡志以银戛等地与之，乃送机发及其妻孥。
现代文：五年，缅甸人向朝廷索讨土地，参将胡志将银戛等地方划给他们，他们就把思机发及其妻子儿女一起送交给官府。
English: In the fifth year, the Burmese asked the imperial court for land, and they were allocated places such as Ho Chi Minh City and Silver Pagoda. They sent Shichengfa and his wife and children to the government together.

古文：帝以思卜发既远遁，不必穷追，仍加赏锦币，降敕褒奖。
现代文：皇帝认为思卜发既然已经逃得远远的了，不必穷追不舍，因而对缅甸人仍赏赐锦币，并降敕褒奖他们。
English: The emperor thought that since Sipphat had already fled far away, there was no need to pursue him relentlessly, so he still rewarded the Burmese with gold coins and lowered the imperial sceptre to reward them.

古文：成化七年，镇守太监钱能言，缅甸宣慰称贡章、孟养旧为所辖，欲复得之。
现代文：成化七年，镇守太监钱能上奏，说缅甸宣慰声称贡章、孟养两地以前是缅甸的辖地，现想收回来。
English: In the seventh year of Chenghua, the town guard eunuch Qian Neng played a tune, saying that Myanmar was giving condolences, claiming that the two places of Gongzhang and Mengyang were formerly under the jurisdiction of Myanmar, and now he wanted to take them back.

古文：帝命往勘，贡章系木邦、陇川分治，孟养系思洪发所掌，非缅境，乃令云南守臣传饬诸部。
现代文：皇帝命令调查此事，知道贡章是木邦、陇川两地分治之所，而孟养又是思洪发所掌管，都不是缅甸的境土，于是命令云南的守卫大臣将此情况通报给各部。
English: The emperor ordered an investigation into the matter, and knowing that Gongzhang was administered by Mubang and Luochuan, and that Mengyang was administered by Shihongfa, both of which were not on the territory of Myanmar, he ordered Yunnan's Minister of Defense to report the situation to all ministries.

古文：而缅甸以所求地乃前朝所许，贡章乃朝贡必由之途，乞与之。
现代文：而缅甸人则认为他们所索讨的土地，是前朝英宗皇帝答应给的，而贡章又是他们到京城朝贡的必由之路，所以请求朝廷将这些地方还是划归他们。
English: The Burmese, on the other hand, believed that the land they were asking for was promised to them by the former Emperor Yingzong, and the tribute was the only way for them to pay tribute to the capital, so they asked the court to assign these places to them.

古文：又乞以金齿军余李让为冠带把事，以备任使。
现代文：同时他们还请求朝廷任命金齿的军余李让为冠带把事。
English: At the same time, they also asked the imperial court to appoint the gold-toothed general Yu Li Zhan to take charge of the crown.

古文：兵部尚书余子俊等以思洪发不闻有过，岂可夺其地，李让中国人，而与为把事，亦非体，宜勿许。
现代文：兵部尚书余子俊等人认为没有听说思洪发有什么过错，怎么能剥夺他的封地？李让又是汉人，却授给他一个土官把事头衔，也不适宜，所以不应该答应缅甸人的请求。
English: Shangshu Yu Zijun and others in the military department thought that they had not heard of any wrongdoing by Sihongfa, so how could they deprive him of his fief? Li Zhan was also a Han Chinese, but it was not appropriate to give him the title of a local official, so they should not agree to the Burmese's request.

古文：帝命兵部谕其使，孟养、贡章是尔朝贡所由，当饬边臣往谕思洪发，以通道往来，不得阻遏，余勿多望。
现代文：皇帝让兵部谕告缅甸派来的使者，说孟养、贡章是你们朝贡的必经之路，我们会派边防大臣去谕告思洪发，让他给出通道以供你们往来，不能阻遏，其余的想法你们就不要提了。
English: The emperor asked the military department to tell the envoys sent by Myanmar that Mengyang and Gongzhang are the only way for you to pay tribute. We will send the Minister of Border Defense to tell Sihongfa, and let him give a channel for you to come and go. You can't stop it. Don't mention the rest of your thoughts.

古文：弘治元年，缅甸来贡，且言安南侵其边境。
现代文：弘治元年，缅甸人前来朝贡，并诉说安南侵略了他们的边境。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, the Burmese came to pay tribute and complained that Annan had invaded their border.

古文：二年遣编修刘戩谕安南罢兵。
现代文：二年，朝廷派遣编修刘戬去安南，劝谕他们罢兵。
English: Two years later, the imperial court sent editor Liu Ye to Annan to persuade them to call off the troops.

古文：然缅地邻孟养，而孟养以缅先执思任发，故怨缅。
现代文：但缅甸与孟养相邻，孟养因缅甸抓走了思任发，所以对缅甸有怨恨。
English: However, Myanmar is a neighbor of Meng Yang, and Meng Yang has a grudge against Myanmar because Myanmar captured Sireen Fa.

古文：嘉靖初，孟养酋思陆子思伦纠木邦及孟密，击破缅，杀宣慰莽纪岁并其妻子，分据其地。
现代文：嘉靖初年，孟养酋长思陆的儿子思伦纠集木邦和孟密，攻打缅甸，杀死了缅甸宣慰莽纪和他的妻子儿子，占领了缅甸。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Mengyang chieftain Silu's son Silun gathered Mupang and Mengmi, attacked Burma, killed Burmese Xuan Tong Meng Ji and his wife and son, and occupied Burma.

古文：缅诉于朝，不报。
现代文：缅甸人将此诉于朝廷，朝廷没有审理此事。
English: The Burmese brought the case to the Imperial Court, which did not hear the matter.

古文：六年始命永昌知府严时泰、卫指挥王训往勘。
现代文：六年朝廷才让永昌知府严时泰、卫指挥王训前去审核此事。
English: It took six years for the imperial court to ask the governor of Yongchang, Yan Shitai, and the commander of the Imperial Guard, Wang Xun, to review the matter.

古文：思伦夜纵兵鼓噪，焚驿舍，杀赍金牌千户曹义，时泰仓皇遁，乃别立土舍莽卜信守之而去。
现代文：思伦在夜里纵兵敲鼓，大声呼叫，焚烧了驿站的房舍，杀死了持有朝廷金牌的千户曹义，严时泰仓惶而逃，另外任命土舍莽卜信镇守该地就离开了。
English: In the middle of the night, Siren's soldiers beat drums and shouted loudly. They burned down the station's buildings, killed Chihou Cao Yi, who held the gold medal of the imperial court, and fled in panic. He also appointed Doushe Mang Buxin to guard the area, and then left.

古文：值安凤之乱，不暇究其事。
现代文：此时正值安凤作乱，朝廷没有时间来追究此事。
English: At this time, An Feng was making trouble, and the imperial court did not have time to investigate the matter.

古文：莽纪岁有子瑞体，少奔匿洞吾母家，其酋养为己子。
现代文：莽纪岁有个儿子叫莽瑞体，少小时逃奔藏匿在洞吾母亲家里，洞吾的酋长将他做自己的儿子抚养。
English: Meng Ji had a son named Meng Rui Tiao when he was young. When he was young, he ran away and hid in his mother's house. The chief of Dongwu raised him as his own son.

古文：既长，有其地。
现代文：等莽瑞体长大成人，便占有了洞吾。
English: When Meng Rui grew up and became an adult, she took possession of Dongwu.

古文：洞吾之南有古喇，滨海，与佛郎机邻。
现代文：洞吾的南面有一个叫古喇的地方，临近海，与佛郎机相邻。
English: To the south of the cave, there is a place called Gura, near the sea, adjacent to Furanji.

古文：古喇酋兄弟争立，瑞体和解之，因德瑞体，争割地为献，受其约束，号瑞体为哒喇。
现代文：古喇国的酋长兄弟俩互相争夺统治权，莽瑞体出面调解，使他们兄弟和解，因而他们都感激莽瑞体，争相割地献给他，愿意接受他的约束，并称他为哒喇。
English: The two chieftain brothers of ancient Lhasa fought for the right to rule each other. Meng Rui Ting came forward to mediate and reconcile their brothers. As a result, they were all grateful to Meng Rui Ting, devoted themselves to him, willing to accept his restraint, and called him Lhasa.

古文：瑞体乃举众绝古喇粮道，杀其兄弟，尽夺其地，诸蛮皆畏服之。
现代文：莽瑞体便带领众人切断通往古喇的粮道，杀死了他们兄弟俩，将他们的土地全部兼并过去，各蛮族对他都很敬畏顺服。
English: Meng Rui led the people to cut off the food route to Gula, killed their two brothers, and annexed all their land. All barbarians were in awe of him and obeyed him.

古文：时灭缅者木邦、孟养，而与缅相抗者孟密也。
现代文：当时灭缅甸的是木邦和孟养，而承担责任的则是孟密。
English: At that time, it was Mubang and Meng Yao who destroyed Myanmar, while Meng Myo was held responsible.

古文：孟密土舍兄弟争立，诉于瑞体。
现代文：孟密的土舍兄弟俩为争夺统治权，向莽瑞体投诉。
English: In order to fight for the right to rule, Mengmi's Tushe brothers complained to Meng Rui.

古文：瑞体乃纳其弟为婿，改名思忠，遣归孟密，夺其兄印，因假道攻孟养及迤西诸蛮，以复前仇，又使其党卓吉侵孟养境。
现代文：莽瑞体便将其弟纳为女婿，改名叫思忠，将他送回孟密，夺取其兄长的官印，想假道进攻孟养和孟养以西的各蛮族，以报复以前的仇恨。同时，莽瑞体还让他的同党卓吉去侵犯孟养。
English: Meng Rui-tai then made his younger brother Na his son-in-law, changed his name to Shizhong, sent him back to Mengmi, seized his brother's official seal, and wanted to attack Meng Yao and the barbarians west of Meng Yao to avenge the previous hatred. At the same time, Meng Rui-tai also let his fellow party member Zhuo Ji invade Meng Yao.

古文：后卓吉为思真婿猛乃头目别混所杀，瑞体怒，自将攻别混父子，擒之。
现代文：后来卓吉被思真的女婿猛乃的头目别混所杀，莽瑞体很愤怒，自己带兵攻打别混父子俩，将他们擒获。
English: Later, Zhuo Ji was killed by the ringleader of the other gang, who was Si Zhen's son-in-law Meng Nai. Meng Rui was very angry, and he led his troops to attack the other gang's father and son and captured them.

古文：遂招诱陇川、干崖、南甸诸土官，欲入寇。
现代文：于是他又招抚引诱陇川、干崖、南甸等地的土官，想入侵边境。
English: As a result, he tried to invade the border by enticing and luring local officials from such places as Luanhe, Dry Cliff, and Nandian.

古文：既觇知有备，又虑他蛮袭其后，乃遁归。
现代文：当他探知边境地区都有防备时，又怕其他蛮族人偷袭他的背后，于是便逃了回去。
English: When he discovered that there were fortifications in the border region, he was afraid that other barbarians would sneak up behind him, so he fled back.

古文：于是镇巡官沐朝弼等上其事。兵部覆，荒服之外，治以不治。
现代文：对此，镇巡官沐朝弼等人将此事上奏朝廷，兵部答复说，蛮荒以外的地方，不治就是最好的治理方式。
English: In response, the town inspector Mu Zhaohui and others reported the matter to the imperial court, and the military department replied that in places other than the wilderness, death is the best way to govern.

古文：哒喇已畏威远遁，传谕诸蛮，不许交通结纳。
现代文：哒喇既已害怕朝廷的天威远远地逃跑了，就传谕告给当地的各蛮族，不许他们与莽瑞体交通来往。
English: Having already fled far away in fear of the imperial court, Zara sent out a proclamation to the local barbarians, forbidding them to have any dealings with the Mengrai.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下诏同意兵部的意见。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：时嘉靖三十九年也。
现代文：这时是嘉靖三十九年的事。
English: It was the 39th year of Jiajing.

古文：木邦土舍罕拔求袭不得，怒投于缅，潞江宣抚線贵闻之，亦入缅。
现代文：木邦的土舍罕拔向朝廷要求承袭官职，没有批准，一怒之下便投奔到缅甸，潞江宣抚线贵听说后，也投奔了缅甸。
English: The local ruler of the state of Muping, Hanba, asked the imperial court for permission to succeed to the official post. Without approval, he flew into a rage and fled to Burma. When he heard of the lineage of Xuanjiang Xuanfu, he also fled to Burma.

古文：瑞体自以起孤微，有兵众，威加诸部，中国复禁绝之，遂谋内侵，乃命線贵趣召陇川土官多士宁。
现代文：莽瑞体自认为自己起事时势力孤单微小，而现有了众多的军队，各部落都听从自己的号令，中国还禁绝与自己往来，于是谋划向边境内入侵，便派线贵到陇川去召土官多士宁。
English: Meng Rui thought that he was alone with a small force when he started the rebellion, but there were many armies, all tribes obeyed his orders, and China also forbade contacts with him, so he planned to invade the border, and he sent a line to Shichuan to summon the local official Doshinin.

古文：士宁言中国广大，诫勿妄动，瑞体稍稍寝。
现代文：多士宁说中国人口和地缘都非常广大，告诫他不要轻举妄动，莽瑞体才稍微有所收敛。
English: Doshinin said that China's population and geography are very vast, and cautioned him not to act rashly, and the reckless behavior was only slightly restrained.

古文：未几，士宁为其下岳凤所杀，干崖宣抚刀怕举亦死。
现代文：不久，多士宁被他手下的岳凤所杀，干崖的宣抚刀怕举也已死亡。
English: Not long after, Doshinin was killed by his subordinate Yue Feng, and the prompter of the dry cliff was also dead.

古文：罕拔乃请瑞体入干崖，干崖举，则陇川可坐定也。
现代文：罕拔于是请求莽瑞体入侵干崖，说只要干崖攻下来了，陇川自然而然也就可敲定了。
English: Therefore, Hanba requested Meng Rui to invade the dry cliff, saying that as long as the dry cliff was attacked, the Lugu River could naturally be finalized.

古文：瑞体子应里桀黠多智，言于瑞体曰： 陇川、干崖虽无主，远难猝取。
现代文：莽瑞体的儿子莽应里桀骜不驯，又狡黠多智，对莽瑞体说 ：陇川、干崖虽然没有首领，但是地方太远很难一下子就将它们攻取下来。
English: Meng Ruitai's son, Meng Ying, who was stubborn and cunning, said to Meng Ruitai, "Although there are no chiefs in the Qianchuan River and the Dry Cliff, it is difficult to capture them all at once because they are too far away.

古文：孟养思个近在肘腋，又吾世仇，万一乘虚顺流下，祸不测。 
现代文：孟养的思近在我们的肘边腋下，又是我们的世仇，万一他们顺流而下乘虚攻打我们，则有不测之祸。 
English: Meng Yao's thought of proximity is at our elbow, and it is also our mortal enemy. In case they go down the river and attack us, there will be an unforeseen disaster.

古文：瑞体深然之，因借木邦兵一万取干崖，而自率兵侵孟养。
现代文：莽瑞体深以为然，就借调木邦的军队一万人前去攻打干崖，自己率兵侵犯孟养。
English: Meng Rui was deeply convinced, so he seconded ten thousand troops from Mubang to attack the dry cliff, and led his own troops to invade Meng Yao.

古文：既至，屡为思个所败，思个亦退保孟伦，相持久之。
现代文：到达孟养后，莽瑞体屡被思率军打败，思也退兵保卫孟伦，双方相持很久。
English: After arriving at Mengyang, Mengrui was repeatedly defeated by the army led by Si, and Si also withdrew to defend Mengren. The two sides held each other for a long time.

古文：而陇川书记岳凤欺其主幼，私赍赂投缅，结为父子。
现代文：而此时陇川的书记岳凤欺负其主人年幼，私带重金贿赂投奔缅甸，与莽瑞体结为父子关系。
English: At this time, Yue Feng, the secretary of Luchuan, bullied his young master, took bribes and fled to Myanmar, forming a father-son relationship with Meng Rui.

古文：蛮莫土目思哲亦迎附瑞体，调缅兵万余，出入于迤西界上，以牵制思个。
现代文：蛮莫的土目思哲也投奔了莽瑞体，调遣缅甸士兵一万多人在西部边界地区出入，以牵制思。
English: The unruly Domok thinkers also rushed to Mengrui, dispatching more than ten thousand Burmese soldiers to enter and leave the western border area to deter them.

古文：复征木邦罕拔兵，会岳凤于陇川，袭孟密。
现代文：莽瑞体又征调木邦罕拔的军队，到陇川与岳凤会合，袭击孟密。
English: The reckless Rui also conscripted and dispatched troops from the state of Muping to join Yuefeng in Luchuan and attack Mengmi.

古文：万历元年，缅兵至陇川，入之。岳凤遂尽杀士宁妻子族属，受缅伪命，据陇川为宣抚。乃与罕拔、思哲盟，必下孟密，奉瑞体以拒中国。
现代文：万历元年，缅甸军队进入陇川，岳凤便将多士宁的妻子儿女和宗族的亲属全部杀死，接受缅甸莽瑞体的任命，占据陇川为宣抚，并与罕拔、思哲一起盟誓，一定攻下孟密，尊奉莽瑞体与中国相抗衡。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, the Burmese army entered the Min River. Yue Feng then killed all of Doshinin's wives, children and relatives of the clan, accepted the appointment of the Burmese Meng Rui body, occupied the Min River as a suzerain, and vowed with Han Ba and Shizhe that he would definitely capture Meng Mi and honor the Meng Rui body to compete with China.

古文：伪为锦囊象函贝叶缅文，称西南金楼白象主莽哒喇弄王书报天皇帝，书中嫚辞无状。
现代文：他们伪造锦囊象函，内装贝叶缅文，声称是西南金楼白象主莽哒喇弄王书报天皇帝。书函中的言辞轻侮倨傲。
English: They forged a brocade-like letter, with Baye Burmese script on the inside, claiming to be the white elephant master of the Southwest Golden Pavilion, who was mocking the king and reporting to the emperor. The words in the letter were contemptuous and arrogant.

古文：罕拔又为缅招干崖土舍刀怕文，许代其兄职。
现代文：罕拔又替缅甸人去招抚干崖土舍刀怕文，答应让他代理其兄的职务。
English: Han Ba also went to the dry cliff for the Burmese and promised to let him act as his brother's representative.

古文：怕文拒之，与战。
现代文：刀怕文拒绝了罕拔，并与罕拔战斗。
English: The sword-fearing man refused the offer and fought with the offer.

古文：适应里率众二十万分戍陇、干间，以其兵骤临之，怕文溃奔永昌。
现代文：此时正好碰上莽应里率领二十万军队分别戍守陇川、干崖之间，因他们突然来临，刀怕文溃败逃奔到永昌。
English: At this time, it just so happened that Meng Yingli led two hundred thousand troops to guard the Lugu River and the dry cliff respectively. Because they suddenly came, they were afraid of the sword and fled to Yongchang.

古文：遂取干崖印，付罕拔妹，以女官摄宣抚，召盏达副使刀思管、雷弄经历廖元相佐之，同守干崖，以防中国。
现代文：莽应里便夺取干崖的官印，交付给罕拔的妹妹，以女官来摄理宣抚职务，让盏达的副使刀思管和雷弄的经历廖元相两人辅佐她，共同守卫干崖，以防中国。
English: Meng Yingli then seized the official seal of the dry cliff and handed it over to Xun Ba's younger sister, using a female official to take care of the mediation duties. She was assisted by two of Zhen Da's deputies, the sword thinker and the thunderer, Liao Yuan Zi, who jointly guarded the dry cliff to prevent China.

古文：于是木邦、蛮莫、陇川、干崖诸蛮，悉附缅，独孟养未下。
现代文：至此，木邦、蛮莫、陇川、干崖等地的蛮族人，都依附于缅甸，只有孟养未被缅甸攻下。
English: At this point, the barbarians in Mubang, Sanmo, Luochuan, Dry Cliff and other places were all attached to Myanmar, and only Mengye was not conquered by Myanmar.

古文：金腾副使许天琦遣指挥侯度持檄抚谕孟养。
现代文：金腾副使许天琦派遣指挥侯度带着檄文去安抚孟养。
English: Jin Teng's deputy envoy Xu Tianyao dispatched the commandant Houdu with a letter to appease Meng Yao.

古文：思个受檄，益拒缅。
现代文：思接到檄文后，更坚定了抵抗缅甸的信心。
English: After receiving the telegram, Si's confidence in resisting Myanmar became even stronger.

古文：缅大发兵攻之，思个告急。
现代文：缅甸发大军攻打孟养，思告急。
English: The Burmese sent a large army to attack Meng Yang, who panicked.

古文：会天琦卒，署事罗汝芳犒思个使，令先归待援，遂调兵至腾越。
现代文：此时许天琦刚死，掌管事务的罗汝芳犒劳了思的使者，让他先回去等待救援，自己调兵到腾越。
English: At this time, Xu Tianyao had just died, and Luo Rufang, who was in charge of affairs, asked the exhausted envoy to let him go back first to wait for rescue, and to transfer troops to Tengyue.

古文：个闻援兵至，喜，令土目马禄喇送等领兵万余，绝缅粮道，且导大兵伏戛撒诱缅兵深入。
现代文：思听到援兵来了，大喜，让土目马禄喇送等带领一万多人，切断缅甸军队的粮道，并引导大军埋伏在戛撒，诱使缅甸军队深入。
English: When Si heard that reinforcements had arrived, he was overjoyed, and he sent more than ten thousand men led by Dôme Maru-ra and others to cut off the food supply of the Burmese army, and led a large army to ambush Kasa, enticing the Burmese army to go deeper.

古文：个率蛮卒冲其前，而约援兵自陇川尾击之。
现代文：思率领蛮族军队冲锋在前，约定前来援救的官军从陇川尾随袭击敌人。
English: Si led the barbarian army to charge forward, and the government army, which had agreed to come to the rescue, followed and attacked the enemy from Xingchuan.

古文：缅兵既败，粮又绝，屠象马以食，瑞体窘甚。
现代文：缅甸军队既遭败绩，粮食又断绝，只好屠杀大象和马来吃，莽瑞体的处境非常狼狈。
English: The Burmese army had suffered a defeat and had run out of food, so they had to slaughter elephants and horses to eat. The situation of Meng Rui was very disheartening.

古文：会有陈于巡抚王凝，言生事不便者，凝驰使止援军。
现代文：此时有人将这情形陈述给巡抚王凝，说把莽瑞体消灭了对官府也不利，王凝便急忙派使者飞马去制止援军。
English: At this time, someone reported the situation to the procurator Wang Rong, saying that it was not good for the government to eliminate the rebels. Wang Rong then hurriedly sent an envoy, Pegasus, to stop the reinforcements.

古文：汝芳闻檄退，思个待援不至。
现代文：罗汝芳看到王凝的檄文后就退兵，思等待的援军没有到。
English: Luo Rufang saw Wang Jing's letter and withdrew from the army, thinking that the reinforcements he had been waiting for had not arrived.

古文：岳凤侦知之，集陇川兵二千兼程进，导瑞体由间道遁去。
现代文：岳凤侦察了这个消息后，集结了陇川的军队二千人，日夜兼程赶到戛撒把莽瑞体从一条小路救出逃走。
English: After Yue Feng investigated the news, he gathered two thousand soldiers from Lu Chuan and rushed to Kasa day and night to rescue Meng Rui's body from a path and escape.

古文：思个追击之，缅兵大败，当是时几获瑞体。
现代文：思带兵追击，大败缅甸军队，这次几乎将莽瑞体抓获。
English: Si led his soldiers in pursuit, defeated the Burmese army, and this time almost captured Meng Rui's body.

古文：六年，廷议遣使至孟养，俾思个还所俘缅兵象，并赉以金帛，好言慰谕之。
现代文：六年，朝廷大臣商议后派使者到孟养，让思归还所俘虏的缅甸士兵和战象，并赏给他们金帛，用好言好语抚慰劝谕他们。
English: Six years later, after deliberation, the Minister of the Imperial Court sent an emissary to Mengyang, asking that the Burmese soldiers and war elephants captured by Mengyang be returned, and that they be rewarded with gold ingots, and that they be comforted and advised with kind words.

古文：瑞体不谢。
现代文：莽瑞体不向朝廷谢恩。
English: Dare not to thank the imperial court.

古文：七年，永昌千户辛凤奉使买象于孟密，思忠执凤送缅，缅遣回。
现代文：七年，永昌千户辛凤奉朝廷使命到孟密去买大象，思忠将辛凤抓起来送到缅甸。
English: In the seventh year, Xin Feng of the Yongchang thousand households was sent by the imperial court to Mengmi to buy an elephant, and Sizhong arrested Xin Feng and sent him to Myanmar.

古文：是年，缅复攻孟养，报戛撒之怨。
现代文：缅甸将辛凤遣送了回来。该年，缅甸又进攻孟养，以报戛撒之仇。
English: Myanmar sent Xin Feng back. That year, Myanmar attacked Meng Yao to avenge the death of Kaisa.

古文：思个以无援败，将走腾越，中途为其下所执，送瑞体，杀之，尽并孟养地。
现代文：思因没有援兵而失败，将要逃往腾越时，中途被他手下的人抓获，送给莽瑞体。莽瑞体杀死思，全部兼并了孟养。
English: Si failed because he did not have reinforcements, and when he was about to flee to Tengyue, he was captured by his men on the way and sent to Meng Rui. Meng Rui killed Si and annexed all of Mengyang.

古文：八年，巡抚饶仁侃遣人招缅，缅不应。
现代文：八年，巡抚饶仁侃派人去招抚缅甸，缅甸人并不响应。
English: Eight years ago, Governor Rao Jinkan sent someone to woo Myanmar, but the Burmese did not respond.

古文：十年，岳凤导缅兵袭破干崖，夺罕氏印，俘之。
现代文：十年，岳凤带领缅甸军队攻破干崖，从罕氏手中夺取了干崖官印，并俘虏了罕氏。
English: Ten years later, Yue Feng led the Burmese army to break through the dry cliff, seized the official seal of the dry cliff from the Han clan, and captured the Han clan.

古文：俄，瑞体死，子应里嗣。
现代文：不久，莽瑞体死，他的儿子莽应里接位。
English: Soon after, Meng Rui died, and his son Meng Yingli took over.

古文：岳凤嗾应里杀罕拔，尽俘其众。又说应里起兵象数十万，分道内侵。
现代文：岳凤唆使莽应里杀死罕拔，将罕拔手下的人全部俘虏；又说服莽应里带兵和战象数十万，分几路向边境侵犯。
English: Yue Feng instigated Meng Yingli to kill Han Ba and take all of Han Ba's men captive; he also persuaded Meng Yingli to lead hundreds of thousands of soldiers and war elephants to invade the border in several directions.

古文：十一年焚掠施甸，寇顺宁。
现代文：十一年他焚烧抢劫了施甸，进犯顺宁。
English: In the eleventh year, he burned and robbed Shidian and attacked Shuning.

古文：凤子曩乌领众六万，突至孟淋寨，指挥吴继勋、千户祁维垣战死。
现代文：岳凤的儿子曩乌带领六万人，突然窜到孟淋寨，指挥吴继勋、千户祁维垣都战死。
English: Yue Feng's son, Zou Wu, led 60,000 people and suddenly arrived at Meng Lian Zhai. The commander, Wu Jixun, and the commander of the thousand households, Zou Weigaki, all died in the battle.

古文：又破盏达，副使刀思定求救不得，城破，妻子族属皆尽。
现代文：他们又攻破盏达，副使刀思定向官军求救而不得，城被攻破，他的妻子儿女和族人都被杀尽。
English: They also broke through the city of Madinat, and the deputy sent his sword to the government army for help, but was unable to do so. The city was broken through, and his wife, children, and relatives were all killed.

古文：且窥腾冲、永昌、大理、蒙化、景东、镇沅诸郡。
现代文：缅甸军队还窥视腾冲、永昌、大理、蒙化、景东、镇沅等郡。
English: The Myanmar army also peered into Tengchong, Yongchang, Dali, Menghua, Jingdong, Zhenya and other counties.

古文：巡抚刘世曾请以南京坐营中军刘綎为腾越游击，移武靖参将邓子龙为永昌参将，各提兵五千赴剿，并调诸土军应援。
现代文：巡抚刘世曾请求以南京的坐营中军刘纟廷为腾越游击，将武靖参将邓子龙移为永昌参将，让他们各带兵五千前去进剿，同时调遣各地的土军响应和支援他们。
English: The governor Liu Shih had asked Liu Bingding of the Chinese army encamped in Nanking to take part in the Tangyue guerrilla attack, and transferred Wu Jing's general, Deng Zilong, to Yongchang's general, and let them each take five thousand soldiers to march into Yunnan, while dispatching Turkish troops from all over the country to respond and support them.

古文：缅亦合兵犯姚关，綎与子龙大破之于攀枝花地，乘胜追击，自十年十月至十一年四月，斩首万余。
现代文：此时，缅甸也集合军队进犯姚关。刘纟廷、邓子龙在攀枝花大破缅甸军队，又乘胜追击，从十年十月至十一年四月，共斩敌人首级一万多人。
English: At this time, Myanmar also assembled an army to attack Yaoguan. Liu Bingding and Deng Zilong defeated the Myanmar army in Panzhihua, and pursued the victory. From October 10 to April 11, a total of more than 10,000 enemies were beheaded.

古文：复率兵出陇川、孟密，直抵阿瓦，缅将猛勺诣綎降。
现代文：刘纟廷等又带兵从陇川、孟密出发，直抵阿瓦，缅甸将领猛勺到刘纟廷处投降。
English: Liu Qingting and others also led soldiers from Luochuan and Mengmi to Awa, where the Burmese generals surrendered to Liu Qingting.

古文：勺，瑞体弟也。
现代文：猛勺是莽瑞体的弟弟。
English: He is the younger brother of Meng Rui.

古文：缅将之守陇川、孟养、蛮莫者，皆遁去，岳凤及其子皆伏诛。
现代文：守卫陇川、孟养、蛮莫的缅甸军队将领都逃走了，岳凤和他的儿子也都伏法被诛杀。
English: The guards of the Lugu River, Meng Yao, and the brutal Burmese army generals all fled, and Yue Feng and his son were also killed.

古文：官军定陇川，遂归。
现代文：官军平定陇川后，便回去了。
English: After the government army had subdued the Li River, they went back.

古文：应里乃以其子思斗守阿瓦，复攻孟养、蛮莫，声言复仇。
现代文：莽应里便派他的儿子莽思斗守卫阿瓦，又向孟养、蛮莫进攻，声称要报仇。
English: Meng Yingli then sent his son Meng Si Dou to guard Awa, and attacked Meng Yao and Meng Mo, claiming to take revenge.

古文：副使李材备兵腾冲，遣兵援之，战于遮浪，大破其象阵，生擒五千余人。
现代文：副使李材已在腾冲准备了军队，派兵支援两地的守军。官军与缅甸军队在遮浪大战，大破他们的象阵，活捉了五千多人。
English: Vice-Envoy Li Zai has already prepared the army in Tengchong and sent troops to support the defenders of the two places. The government army and the Myanmar army are fighting to block the waves, breaking their elephant array and catching more than five thousand people alive.

古文：先是，蛮莫酋思化投缅。
现代文：此前，蛮莫的酋长思化投奔缅甸。
English: Previously, the fierce chief Siwa fled to Myanmar.

古文：材遣人招之，思化降。
现代文：李材派人前去招抚他，思化便向朝廷投降。
English: Li Zai sent someone to cajole him, and Si Hua surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：十九年，应里复率缅兵围蛮莫，思化告急。
现代文：十九年，莽应里又率领缅甸军队包围了蛮莫，思化向官军告急。
English: In nineteen years, Meng Ying Li led the Burmese army to encircle Xuan Mo, and Sihua was in a hurry to the government army.

古文：会天暑，军行不前，裨将万国春夜驰至，多设火炬为疑兵，缅人惧而退，追败其众。
现代文：此时正碰上天气大暑，军队前进很慢，副将万国春星夜急驰赶到蛮莫，设置了许多火炬作为疑兵之计，缅甸人害怕官军袭击便退兵，万国春乘机追击打败缅军。
English: At this time, the weather was very hot and the army was advancing very slowly. Vice-commander Wanguo Chunxing hurried to Sanmo at night and set up a lot of torches as a measure to suspect soldiers. The Burmese were afraid of the official army's attack and withdrew. Wanguo Chun took the opportunity to pursue and defeat the Burmese army.

古文：二十二年，巡抚陈用宾设八关于腾冲，留兵戍守，募人至暹罗约夹攻缅。
现代文：二十二年，巡抚陈用宾在腾冲设置八个关，留兵戍守，并招募人到暹罗，约暹罗出兵夹攻缅甸。
English: In 1922, the governor Chen Yibin set up eight checkpoints in Tengchong, kept soldiers there, and recruited people to Siam, about Siam sent troops to attack Myanmar.

古文：缅初以猛卯酋多俺为向导，寇东路。
现代文：缅甸初始时是以猛卯的酋长多俺为向导，进犯东路。
English: At the beginning of Myanmar, the fierce chieftain Dorong was the guide, attacking the east road.

古文：至是遣木邦罕钦擒多俺杀之，前筑堡于猛卯，大兴屯田。
现代文：至此，缅甸派木邦的罕钦擒杀了多俺，在猛卯修筑堡垒，大兴屯田。
English: At this point, Han Chin, a Burmese loyalist of the Mughal Empire, killed many of them, built a fortress in Mengwu, and expanded the military camp.

古文：是年，缅帅思仁寇蛮莫，败之，斩其渠丙测。
现代文：同一年，缅甸的思仁带兵进犯蛮莫，打败了蛮莫的守军，将蛮莫的酋长丙测斩杀了。
English: In the same year, Myanmar's Saren led an army to invade Xuanmo, defeated Xuanmo's defenders, and killed Xuanmo's chieftain, Xianmei.

古文：二十三年，应里属孟琏、孟艮二土司求朝贡，镇巡以闻。朝议令原差官黎景桂赍银币赐之，至境，不受。
现代文：二十三年，莽应里属下的孟琏、孟艮两个土司请求向朝廷献贡，镇巡官将此上报朝廷，朝廷讨论后让该地原来的差官黎景桂带上银币去赏赐他们。
English: In 233, at the request of Meng Ye and Meng Ye's two local magistrates, Meng Ye and Meng Ye's two local magistrates, Meng Ye and Meng Ye's two local magistrates requested to pay tribute to the imperial court. The town inspector reported this to the imperial court. After discussion, the imperial court asked the original local magistrate, Li Jinggui, to bring silver coins to reward them.

古文：诏以景桂首事贪功纳侮，下于理。
现代文：黎景桂到达他们那里后，他们竟然不接受。皇帝下诏认为黎景桂初次办事贪功，结果使朝廷蒙受侮辱，交给狱官处理。
English: After Li Jinggui arrived there, they did not accept him at all. The emperor issued an edict that Li Jinggui was greedy for the first time, and as a result, he humiliated the imperial court and handed it over to the prison officials.

古文：三十一年，阿瓦雍罕、木邦罕拔子罕衤盍俱入贡，缅势顿衰。
现代文：三十一年，阿瓦的雍罕、木邦罕拔的儿子罕衤盍都向朝廷献贡通好，缅甸的势力顿时衰落。
English: In the 31st year of the Heian period, both Yonghan of Ava and Hanjo, the son of Mubangan Hanba, offered tribute to the imperial court, and Myanmar's power suddenly declined.

古文：暹罗得楞复连岁攻缅，杀缅长子莽机挝，古喇残破。
现代文：暹罗的得楞又连年向缅甸发动进攻，杀死缅甸王的长子莽机挝，古喇也遭残破。
English: D of Siam launched an attack on Burma year after year, killing the eldest son of the Burmese king, Mc Mo, and the Gura was also destroyed.

古文：自此不敢内犯，然近缅诸部附之如初。
现代文：从此他们不敢向内地边境进犯，但在缅甸附近的几个部落依然像当初一样依附于他们。
English: Since then, they have not dared to attack the inland border, but several tribes near Myanmar are still as attached to them as they were in the beginning.

古文：崇祯末，蛮莫思绵为缅守曩木河。
现代文：崇祯末年，蛮莫的思绵替缅甸守卫曩木河。
English: In the last years of his life, he thought about guarding the Namu River for Myanmar.

古文：及黔国公沐天波等随永明王走蛮莫，思绵使告缅。
现代文：等到黔国公沐天波等人随永明王逃往蛮莫时，思绵派人告诉了缅甸。
English: When King Mu Tianbo and others of the State of Shan fled with King Yongming to Sanmo, Sima sent someone to tell the Burmese.

古文：缅遣人迎之，传语述万历时事，并出神宗玺书，索今篆合之，以为伪。
现代文：缅甸派人迎接沐天波等人，还传话述及万历年间的一些时事，出示盖有神宗皇帝印玺的诏书，向沐天波等人索讨现今的玺印来合。结果不合，他们以为是假冒的。
English: Myanmar sent people to meet Mu Tianbo and others, and also sent word about some current events in the Wanli years, presented an imperial decree stamped with the Emperor Shenzong's seal, and asked Mu Tianbo and others to discuss the current seal. The result was not good, they thought it was fake.

古文：天波出己印与先所颁文檄相比无差，始信。
现代文：沐天波又出示自己的官印与原先颁发给缅甸的檄文谕书上的官印相比较，没有差别，他们才相信。
English: Mu Tianbo also showed his official seal and compared it with the official seal on the imperial edict originally issued to Myanmar. They believed that there was no difference.

古文：盖自天启后，缅绝贡职，无可考验云。
现代文：自从天启皇帝即位以后，缅甸就与朝廷断绝了朝贡和授职的往来关系，因而他们的情况也就无从查考验证了。
English: Since Emperor Tianqi ascended the throne, Myanmar has severed its ties with the imperial court in terms of paying tribute and conferring positions, so their situation cannot be verified.

古文：元中统初，内附。
现代文：木邦，另名孟邦。
English: As the power of the bandits grew day by day, the emperor blamed Mu Xuan for playing with the bandits and nurturing them into a disaster.

古文：至元中，置镇西路军民总管府，领三甸。
现代文：元朝至元二十六年，朝廷在此设立木邦路军民总管府，下领三个甸。
English: From the Yuan Dynasty to the 26th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Imperial Court set up the Mupang Road Military and Civilian General Administration Office here, leading to three dynasties.

古文：洪武十五年改镇西府。
现代文：明朝洪武十五年，朝廷派兵平定云南后，将该地改为木邦府。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu of the Ming Dynasty, after the imperial court sent troops to subdue Yunnan, the place was changed to Mupangfu.

古文：永乐元年设干崖长官司。二年颁给信符、金字红牌并赐冠服。
现代文：建文末年，土知府罕的法派人向朝廷贡献马和金银器，皇帝则赏赐钞币给他们。
English: In the last years of the Jianwen era, a few lawmen from Tochi Prefecture donated horses and gold and silverware to the imperial court, and the emperor rewarded them with banknotes.

古文：三年，干崖长官曩欢遣头目奉表贡马及犀、象、金银器，谢恩，赐钞币。五年设古剌驿，隶干崖。
现代文：永乐元年，皇帝派遣宦官杨蠧持敕将新皇帝即位之事谕告木邦的各位土官。第二年，木邦的土官便派人来京城向朝廷献贡物。
English: In the first year of Yongle, the emperor sent eunuch Yang Xizhi to deliver the new emperor's enthronement edict to the local officials of Mupang. The following year, the local officials of Mupang sent people to the capital to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：曩欢复遣子刀思曩朝贡，赐赉如例。自是，三年一朝贡不绝。宣德六年改隶云南都司。
现代文：这时麓川向朝廷诉说木邦侵占了他们的土地，皇帝让西平侯去劝谕木邦退还侵占的土地，将木邦改为军民宣慰使司，任命知府罕的法为宣慰使，给他颁发诰印。
English: At this time, Luchuan told the imperial court that Mokang had occupied their land, and the emperor asked Xiping to persuade Mokang to return the occupied land, change Mokang to the military and civilian consolation envoy, appoint the governor Han to be the consolation envoy, and issue him a seal.

古文：时长官刀弄孟奏，其地近云南都司，而岁纳差发银于金齿卫，路远，乞改隶，而输银于布政司。
现代文：此时，朝廷所派遣的官军正征讨八百，罕的法出兵为官军助战，攻打了江下等十多个寨子，斩敌人的首级五百多个。
English: At this time, the imperial army dispatched by the imperial court was recruiting 800 soldiers, and the rare law dispatched soldiers to help the imperial army, attacked more than 10 fortresses under the river, and cut off more than 500 heads of the enemy.

古文：从之。正统三年命仍隶金齿军民指挥使司。
现代文：皇帝下诏派镇抚张伯恭、经历唐变到木邦，向罕的法和他的部下首领各按等级赏赐白金和锦币。
English: The emperor sent Zhenfu Zhang Bokong, who went through the Tang Dynasty to become Mubang, to reward Han's Fa and his subordinate leaders with platinum and gold coins according to their rank.

古文：六年升干崖副长官刀怕便为长官司，赐彩币，以归附后屡立功，从总兵官沐昂请也。
现代文：第二年罕的法等人派遣使者向皇帝进献马和土产，以感谢皇上的恩德。皇帝按惯例又给他们赏赐，并给罕的法的母亲和妻子也加赐锦绮。
English: In the second year, Han Feo and others sent envoys to the emperor to offer horses and local products to thank the emperor for his kindness. The emperor rewarded them according to the usual practice, and also gave Han Feo's mother and wife brocade.

古文：九年升干崖为宣抚司，以刀怕便为宣抚副使，刘英为同知，从总督王骥请也。
现代文：罕的法死后，他的儿子罕宾发前来京城朝贡，向朝廷请求允许他承袭其父亲的职务，皇帝命令赏赐冠服给他。
English: After Han's death, his son Han Binfa came to the capital to pay tribute and asked the court to allow him to inherit his father's position. The emperor ordered that he be given a crown.

古文：弘治三年，干崖土舍刀愈怕欺其侄刀怕落幼，劫印夺职。
现代文：七年罕宾发派使者到京城向皇上谢恩。
English: Seven years later, Han Bin sent an envoy to the capital to thank the emperor.

古文：蛮众不服，遂起兵相攻。四年，按察司副使林俊同参将沐详移文往谕，始释兵归印。
现代文：同年，罕宾发又派人上奏，说缅甸宣慰使那罗塔屡次引诱我罕宾发叛乱，我罕宾发不敢跟随他们叛逆朝廷，如果朝廷派天兵下临我们地区，我罕宾发一定替朝廷舍命效力。
English: In the same year, Han Binfa sent another envoy to report that the Burmese propaganda had caused Narota to repeatedly lure me, Han Binfa, into rebellion. I, Han Binfa, did not dare to follow them to rebel against the imperial court. If the imperial court sent heavenly soldiers to our region, I, Han Binfa, would definitely work for the imperial court.

古文：事闻，帝以镇巡官不以时奏报，责之。嘉靖三十九年，缅酋莽瑞体叛，招干崖诸土官入寇。
现代文：皇帝嘉赏他的一片忠心，派遣宦官徐亮带着皇帝的敕谕去慰劳他，给他赏赐白金三千两、锦绮三百表里，给他的祖母、母亲和妻子赏赐织金文绮、纱罗各五十匹。从此，他们每三年都派使者向朝廷贡献马和大象。十一年，罕宾发派遣使者给朝廷献上所俘虏的缅甸人。
English: The emperor commended him for his loyalty and sent eunuch Xu Liang to console him with the emperor's edict. He rewarded him with 3,000 taels of platinum and 300 taels of brocade, and his grandmother, mother and wife were each given 50 gold brocades and saros. Since then, they have sent envoys to the imperial court every three years to donate horses and elephants. In the eleventh year, Han Bin sent an envoy to the imperial court to present the captured Burmese.

古文：万历初，宣抚刀怕举死，妻罕氏，木邦宣慰罕拔妹也。
现代文：当时木邦攻破了缅甸二十多个城寨，斩杀和俘虏了不少缅甸叛军，将他们都押送到京城献给朝廷。
English: At that time, Mubang broke through more than 20 fortresses in Burma, killed and captured many Burmese rebels, and sent them all to Beijing to be presented to the imperial court.

古文：拔既叛附缅，召怕举弟怕文袭职以臣缅，且许以妹。
现代文：宣德三年皇帝派遣宦官徐亮带着皇帝的敕谕去承袭其父职务的新宣慰罕门法，给他和他的祖母、母亲和妻子赐予文绮。
English: In the third year of Xuande, the emperor sent the eunuch Xu Liang with the emperor's edict to inherit his father's post, and gave him and his grandmother, mother and wife the award.

古文：怕文不受，与战。缅兵十万骤临，怕文溃奔永昌。
现代文：八年，木邦与麓川、缅甸相互争夺土地，他们将此事上诉朝廷，皇帝命令沐晟和云南三司的官员共同去调查审核此事。
English: In the eighth year, Mubang and Luchuan and Myanmar competed with each other for land. They appealed the matter to the imperial court, and the emperor ordered Muxun and officials from the three departments of Yunnan to jointly investigate and review the matter.

古文：罕拔遂取干崖印付罕氏。
现代文：正统三年，朝廷派兵征讨麓川，皇帝敕谕木邦宣抚带兵一起会剿。
English: In the third year of orthodoxy, the imperial court sent soldiers to fight against the Luchuan, and the emperor ordered Mokang Xuanfu to lead the soldiers to fight together.

古文：十年，陇川岳凤破干崖，夺罕氏印。十一年，游击刘綎破陇川，凤降，追印竟不得。
现代文：五年，总兵官沐昂派人从小路到达木邦，得知宣慰罕盖法和他的祖母美罕板一起在孟定、孟琏地区与麓川叛军激战，杀死麓川的部落酋长二十人，斩杀叛军三万多人，缴获马和大象及军用器械很多。
English: In the fifth year, the commander-in-chief Muang sent people from the path to reach Mubang, and learned that Xuanjie Hangaifa and his grandmother Mihanban fought fiercely with the Luchuan rebels in the Mengding and Mengye areas, killing twenty tribal chiefs in Luchuan, killing more than thirty thousand rebels, and capturing many horses and elephants and military equipment.

古文：而干崖部众自相承代，亦莫得而考云。
现代文：皇帝嘉奖他们的功劳，给罕盖法加封为怀远将军，封美罕板为太淑人，赏赐给他们金带和彩帛。
English: The emperor commended them for their merits, awarding Han Gaifa the title of Huaiyuan General and Mei Hanban the title of Taishu Ren, as well as a gold belt and a color ribbon.

古文：潞江，地在永昌、腾越之间，南负高仑山，北临潞江，为官道咽喉。
现代文：七年，总督王骥上奏说罕盖法派兵攻下了麓川的板罕、贡章等村寨，追击到孟蒙，抓获麓川首领的儿女七人，缴获大象十二只，麓川酋长思任发父子俩逃往孟广。
English: In the seventh year, the governor Wang Qian reported that the troops sent by Han Gai Fa captured the villages of Banhan and Gongzhang in the Luchuan River, pursued them to Mengmeng, captured seven children of the leader of the Luchuan River, captured twelve elephants, and the father and son of the leader of the Luchuan River, Sireenfa, fled to Mengguang.

古文：地多瘴疠，蛮名怒江甸。
现代文：皇帝命令指挥陈仪前去慰劳木邦宣慰，并传达皇帝的话说： 木邦若能自动替朝廷效力，活捉贼人的首领献给朝廷，则将把麓川的土地和人民划归木邦，作为报酬。 
English: The emperor ordered the commander Chen Yi to go to comfort Mubang for consolation, and conveyed the emperor's words: If Mubang can automatically work for the court and capture the leader of the thieves alive to the court, then the land and people of Luchuan will be assigned to Mubang as a reward.

古文：至元间，隶柔远路。永乐元年内附，设潞江长官司。
现代文：八年朝廷免除了木邦每年必须筹集上交黄金一万四千两的差役。
English: Eight years ago, the imperial court exempted Mubang from the annual duty of collecting and handing over 14,000 taels of gold.

古文：其地旧属麓川平缅，西平侯奏其地广人稠，宜设长官司治之。
现代文：木邦派人到朝廷谢恩，并献上所俘获的思任发的家属。朝廷又赏赐彩帛奖励和犒劳他们。十一年，缅甸向朝廷献上思任发的首级，木邦也派使者一同前往，并且还向朝廷献贡物。
English: In the eleventh year, Myanmar presented to the imperial court the severed head of Shirenfa, and Mokang also sent an envoy to go with him, and also paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：二年颁给信符、金字红牌。
现代文：他们都要求皇帝兑现诺言，将麓川划归他们。
English: They all asked the emperor to make good on his promise to assign the Luchuan River to them.

古文：九年，潞江长官司曩璧遣子维罗法贡马、方物，赐钞币，寻升为安抚司。曩璧来朝，贡象、马、金银器，谢恩。
现代文：兵部认为麓川地区已经设置了陇川宣抚司，不能随意废置，请求朝廷将孟止划归木邦，并派官员去谕祭罕盖法的母亲，以表彰他们对朝廷的忠心和勤勉，连续三年免去他们每年筹办上交银子八锭的任务。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs believed that there was already a Shichuan Propaganda and Relief Division in the Luchuan area, which could not be arbitrarily abolished, and requested the Imperial Court to transfer Mengzhi to Mubang, and sent officials to the mother of Han Gaifa, in recognition of their loyalty and diligence to the Imperial Court. For three consecutive years, they were exempted from the task of preparing and handing in eight ounces of silver each year.

古文：宣德元年，曩璧遣人贡马，请改隶云南布政司，从之。
现代文：皇帝同意按兵部的意见办理。景泰元年，罕盖法上奏，请求将陇川边界上的者阑景线划归木邦。
English: The emperor agreed to act according to the opinion of the military department. In the first year of the reign of King Taejo, the Hanka Law was issued, requesting that the people on the border of the Jecheon River and the Jecheon Line be transferred to Mubang.

古文：遣中官云仙赍敕及绮币赐曩璧。
现代文：朝廷还未做出决定，罕盖法的儿子罕落发便突然出兵占领了者阑景线。
English: The imperial court has not yet made a decision, and Han Gaifa's son, Han Lok Fa, suddenly sent troops to occupy the Jiajing Line.

古文：三年，黔国公沐晟奏，潞江千夫长刀不浪班叛归麓川，劫潞江，逐曩璧入金齿，据潞江驿，逐驿丞周礼，立寨固守，断绝道路，请发兵讨。帝敕晟与三司计议。五年，晟奏，刀不浪班惧罪，还所据地，归旧部，输役如故，乞宥之。报可。
现代文：陇川宣抚刀歪孟为此上诉到总兵官沐瞞那里。沐瞞派使者到木邦，劝谕罕盖法退还者阑景线，将底麻划归了木邦。
English: Xuanchuan Xuanfujing Xiangmen appealed to the general officer Muxi for this reason. Muxi sent an emissary to Mubang to advise those who had returned the Hanka Law to return to the Xingjing Line, and to assign Dima to Mubang.

古文：是年置云南广邑州。
现代文：四年，罕落法承袭了父亲的职务。
English: In four years, Hanluo inherited his father's position.

古文：时云仙还言： 金齿广邑寨，本永昌副千户阿干所居。
现代文：他的族人起来发难，罕落法躲避到孟更，派人向总兵官求救。
English: His people rose up to attack, but he managed to escape to Mengge, where he sent someone to ask the general for help.

古文：干尝奉命招生蒲五千户向化。
现代文：沐瞞将此事上奏朝廷，皇帝下诏让左参将胡志调兵去招抚劝谕他们。
English: He secretly reported the matter to the imperial court, and the emperor issued an edict ordering General Zuo to send troops to persuade Ho Chi Minh.

古文：今干孙阿都鲁同蒲酋莽塞等诣京贡方物，乞于广邑置州，使阿都鲁掌州事，以熟蒲并所招生蒲属之。 
现代文：胡志招抚了罕落法的族人，并与他们设盟定誓后就回来了。而罕落法还是不敢回木邦，避居在孟都。
English: Ho Chi courted members of the Hanlu Law tribe, and after making a covenant with them, he returned. However, the Hanlu Law still did not dare to return to Mubang, and took refuge in Mengdu.

古文：帝从之，遂以阿都鲁为广邑州知州，莽塞为同知，铸印给之。
现代文：孟都靠近陇川，每年都调派二百蛮族士兵去保护罕落发。天顺元年，镇守当地的宦官罗王圭上奏说： 罕落法与他的部下相互攻击，现派人来求援。
English: In the first year of Tenshun, Luo Wanggui, the eunuch who guarded the local town, said: "Hanluo Fa and his subordinates are attacking each other, and now he is sending people to ask for help.

古文：八年改金齿永昌千户所为潞江州，隶云南布政司，以千夫长刀珍罕为知州，刀不浪班为同知，置吏目及清水关巡检各一员。
现代文：我们商量是否委托南宁伯毛胜和都督胡志适量调遣官军，相机进剿。 皇帝认为罕落法与他部下的攻击不是侵犯边境的疆界，不答应派官军前去剿捕。二年，罕落法上奏，说他遭受思坑、曩罕弄的攻击，请求朝廷派兵进剿。
English: We discussed whether to entrust Nanning Mayor Mao Sheng and Governor Ho Chi Minh with the appropriate amount of dispatching the official army, and the camera went into the moat. The emperor believed that the attack of Han Luo Fa and his subordinates was not a violation of the border of the border, and did not agree to send the official army to the front to capture. Two years later, Han Luo Fa reported that he had been attacked by Siping and Han Han, and asked the court to send troops into the moat.

古文：正统三年从黔国公沐晟奏，改潞江安抚司仍隶金齿，悉还旧制。
现代文：皇帝命令总兵官分别处理此事。六年，总兵官沐瓒上奏说，罕落法屡次侵犯陇川，他想把戍守贵州的八千军队调拨回来守卫陇川。
English: The emperor ordered the commander-in-chief to deal with the matter separately. Six years later, the commander-in-chief, Mu Rong, reported that the Han and Lu armies had repeatedly encroached on the Hechuan River, and he wanted to redeploy the eight thousand troops that had been defending Guizhou to guard the Hechuan River.

古文：五年，安抚使線旧法以麓川思任发叛来告，谕整兵以俟。
现代文：皇帝下诏让沐瓒留四千军队在贵州。成化十年，木邦管辖下的孟密，有个蛮族妇女曩罕弄带人侵入掠夺陇川，黔国公沐琮将此事上奏给朝廷。
English: Ten years later, in Mengmi, which was under the jurisdiction of Mubang, a barbarian woman, Quhan, enticed people to invade and plunder the Qianchuan River. The governor of Qian, Qian Guogong, reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：未几，麓川贼遣部众夺据潞江，杀伤官军，潞江遂削弱。
现代文：曩罕弄，是已故木邦宣慰罕揲法的女儿，长大后嫁给了孟密的部落长思外法。当地有宝井。罕揲法死后，由其孙子罕落法承袭官职。
English: Qin Han Nong was the daughter of the late Mubang Xuan Jie Han Han Nong Fa. When she grew up, she married the tribal chief of Mengmi, Siu Wai Fa. There is a treasure well in the area. After the death of Qin Han Nong Fa, his grandson, Han Lop Fa, inherited the official post.

古文：正德十六年，安抚司土官安捧夺其从弟掩庄田三十八所，掩讼于官，不报。
现代文：曩罕弄以自己是长辈自居，不喜欢受罕落法的节制，唆使族人与罕落法争权夺位。景泰年间，曩罕弄背叛木邦，赶走了宣慰，占领了宣慰官署，到邻近的陇川、孟养等地烧杀抢劫，兵力一天比一天盛。
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, Gyeonghanzo betrayed Mokguk, drove out the Xuanwu, occupied the Xuanwu government office, and burned, killed, and robbed in the nearby areas of Suecheon, Mengyeong, and so on. The military strength increased day by day.

古文：捧遂集蛮兵围掩寨，纵火屠掠，掩母子妻妾及蛮民男妇死者八十余人，据有其地。
现代文：她自称是天娘子，她的儿子思柄则自称宣慰。黔国公沐琮上奏，请求朝廷委派云南的三司官员前去招抚她。
English: She claimed to be the daughter of heaven, while her son, Sihang, claimed to be the consoler. The governor of Yunnan, Mu Xun, appealed to the imperial court to send officials from the three departments of Yunnan to appease her.

古文：官军诱执之，捧死于狱。帝命戮尸弃市，其子诏及党与皆斩。
现代文：曩罕弄竟然骄横傲慢，不听从招抚，还想从外面勾结交趾的军队，威逼胁迫木邦、八百等蛮族部落。沐琮又将此情况上奏给朝廷。
English: Qin Han Luo was so arrogant that he did not listen to the cajoling, and he also wanted to collude with friendly armies from the outside to threaten and coerce the barbarian tribes such as the Mupang and the Eight Hundred. Mu Xi also reported this situation to the imperial court.

古文：天启间，有線世禄者，继袭安抚。
现代文：兵部尚书张鹏主张对曩罕弄用兵。
English: Zhang Peng, the secretary of the military department, advocated the use of soldiers against Yan Han.

古文：南甸宣抚司，旧名南宋，在腾越南半个山下，其山巅北多霜雪，南则炎瘴如蒸。
现代文：皇帝下诏让朝廷大臣集体讨论此事，朝廷大臣多认为孟密与木邦之间的仇杀，并没有侵犯边境，只应该安抚、劝谕。
English: The emperor issued an edict to have the ministers of the imperial court discuss the matter collectively. The ministers of the imperial court mostly believed that the vendetta between Meng Mi and Mubang did not violate the border, but should only appease and advise.

古文：元置南甸路军民总管府，领三甸。
现代文：因而皇帝命令副都御史程宗骑马传递文书，要他与充当翻译的序班苏铨一起前往木邦。这时是成化十八年。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered the vice-governor of the capital, Chengzong, to deliver the document on horseback, and asked him to go to Mubang with the interpreter Su Shi, who was 18 years old at the time.

古文：洪武十五年改南甸府。永乐十一年改为州，隶布政司。
现代文：过了一年，孟密的思柄派人到京城向朝廷入贡，朝廷设宴款待思柄的使者，并按土官的惯例赏赐思柄。不久，孟密上奏说遭受木邦的侵扰，请求朝廷将孟密另设一个安抚司。
English: A year later, Meng Mi's mentor sent someone to the capital to pay tribute to the imperial court. The imperial court held a banquet to entertain Meng Mi's emissary, and rewarded Meng Mi according to the customs of the local officials. Soon after, Meng Mi reported that he had been harassed by the Mokpo, and requested the imperial court to appoint Meng Mi as a pacifier.

古文：宣德三年，南甸为麓川侵夺，有司请讨。
现代文：张鹏认为太监覃平和御史程宗安抚驾驭该地的蛮族人已有成效和头绪，于是命令程宗去云南巡抚，派覃平和程宗一起到金齿去劝谕他们。
English: Zhang Peng believed that the pacification and control of the barbarians in the area by the eunuch Zhai Heping and the eunuch Cheng Zong had been effective and successful, so he ordered Cheng Zong to go to Yunnan to supervise, and sent Zhai Heping and Cheng Zong to Jinzu to advise them.

古文：不许，降敕诫谕麓川，俾还侵地。
现代文：对于孟密到底是仍让其隶属于木邦，还是在该地另外设置一个安抚司，由他们处理后将详细情况上报朝廷。
English: As for Meng Mi, whether to keep him subordinate to Mubang in the end, or to set up a separate pacification department in the area, they will report the details to the Imperial Court after handling.

古文：五年，南甸州奏： 先被麓川宣慰司夺其境土，赖朝廷威力复之，若不置官司以正疆界，恐侵夺未厌，乞置四巡检司镇之。 
现代文：原先，曩罕弄私自占据孟密时，将孟密从木邦中分离出来。但她也担心邻近边境地区不平静，便派人从小路抵达云南，又从云南到达京城，向朝廷贡献宝石和黄金，请求朝廷在孟密开设治所，让孟密直接隶属于布政司的管辖。
English: However, she was also worried that the neighboring border areas would not be calm, so she sent people to Yunnan via a back road, and then from Yunnan to Beijing, to contribute gems and gold to the court, and to request the court to open a legal office in Mengmi, so that Mengmi would be directly under the jurisdiction of the Political Bureau.

古文：帝命吏部除官。
现代文：内阁大臣万安想答应他们。
English: The cabinet minister Wan An wanted to agree with them.

古文：八年又奏： 与麓川接境，旧十二百夫长在腾冲千户所时，赖邦哈等处军民兼守。
现代文：而刘王羽、刘吉都认为孟密原是木邦的属下，现今曩罕弄背叛木邦，到朝廷来请命，如果答应他们的请求，那么有哪一个土官不会解体呢？
English: But Liu Wang Yu and Liu Ji both believed that Meng Mi Yuan was a subordinate of Mokang, and now Yan Han was trying to betray Mokang and came to the imperial court to ask for his life. If they were granted their request, then which one of the local officials would not disintegrate?

古文：后麓川侵据，不守者十余年。
现代文：苏铨将这个情况私下里告诉了程宗。
English: Su Xi told Cheng Zong about this situation in private.

古文：今蒙敕谕还，窃恐再侵，百姓逃移，乞于赖邦哈、九浪、莽孟洞三处各置巡检，以土军杨义等三人为之。 
现代文：程宗又上奏给朝廷，说曩罕弄与木邦之间的仇杀历时已很长久，双方已很难再合了，这种情况各蛮族人都已了解。
English: Cheng Zong also reported to the imperial court, saying that the vendetta between Yan Han and Mu Bang had lasted for a long time, and it was difficult for the two sides to reunite. All barbarians have understood this situation.

古文：畏邻境不平，遣人从间道抵云南，至京，献宝石、黄金，乞开设治所，直隶布政司。
现代文：如果朝廷此时显示自己的恩德，宽恕曩罕弄等人的罪行，在孟密开设官府衙门，让他们归还所侵占的别人的土地，则他们都会踊跃地听从朝廷的命令。
English: If the court shows its benevolence at this time, forgives the crimes of Yan Han Rong and others, and opens a government office in Mengmi to allow them to return the land of others they have occupied, they will all enthusiastically obey the court's orders.

古文：阁臣万安欲许之，刘珝、刘吉皆以孟养原木邦属夷，今曩罕弄叛，而请命于朝，若许之，则土官谁不解体。苏铨私以告于宗。宗复奏曩罕弄与木邦仇杀已久，势难再合，已喻诸蛮，示以朝廷德意，宥其罪，开设衙门，令还其所侵地，皆踊跃奉命，木邦亦已允服，乞遂行之。部覆，从之。
现代文：况且，木邦也已答允服从朝廷的安排，因此请求朝廷在孟密另设官府。
English: Moreover, Mokbang had also agreed to obey the arrangements of the imperial court, and therefore requested the imperial court to set up another government office in Mengmi.

古文：二十年遂设孟密安抚司，以思柄为使。
现代文：兵部答复同意程宗的请求。二十年，朝廷在孟密设置了安抚司，任命思柄为安抚使。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs agreed to Cheng Zong's request. Twenty years later, the imperial court set up a pacification department in Mengmi and appointed Shihang as a pacification envoy.

古文：时孟密据宝井之利，资为结纳，而木邦为孟密所侵，兵力积弱，不能报，虽屡奏诉，竟不得直云。
现代文：此时孟密占了宝井之利，以宝井来结纳四周的各部落。而木邦遭受孟密的侵略，军力更弱，无法自做决断，虽然屡次上奏朝廷，诉说自己的冤屈，最终也没法获得公正。
English: At this time, Mengmi took advantage of the treasure well and used the treasure well to conquer the surrounding tribes. And Mupang suffered from Mengmi's aggression, its military strength was weaker, and it was unable to make its own decisions. Although it repeatedly appealed to the imperial court and told of its grievances, it was ultimately unable to obtain justice.

古文：弘治二年，云南守臣奏，孟密曩罕弄先后占夺木邦地二十七处，又诱其头目放卓孟等叛，其势必尽吞后已。
现代文：弘治二年，云南的守卫大臣上奏说，孟密的曩罕弄先后侵占了木邦的二十七处土地，又引诱木邦的头目放卓孟等人背叛主人，其势是必全部吞并木邦而后已。
English: In the second year of Hongzhi, the Minister of Defense of Yunnan reported that Mengmi's Qinhan had occupied twenty-seven lands of the Mupang successively, and had lured the leader of the Mupang, Fang Zhuo Meng, and others to betray their master. It was bound to completely absorb the Mupang.

古文：乞敕八百宣慰司俾与木邦和好，互相救援。亦敕木邦宣慰收复人心，亲爱骨肉，勿使孟密得乘间诱叛，自致孤弱。
现代文：请求朝廷下诏给八百宣慰司，让他们与木邦和好，相互救援；请求朝廷下敕谕给木邦宣慰，让他收复人心，与骨肉亲人相亲相爱，不要让孟密乘机引诱使他们亲人之间互相背叛，以致自己孤立自己，自己削弱自己。
English: Ask the Imperial Court to issue an edict to the 800 comfort women, so that they can make peace with Mokguk and rescue each other; ask the Imperial Court to issue an edict to comfort Mokguk, so that he can recover his heart, love his relatives, and not let Mengmi take the opportunity to lure their relatives to betray each other, so that he isolates himself and weakens himself.

古文：如孟密听谕，方许曩罕弄孙承袭。
现代文：如果孟密听从朝廷的劝谕，停止侵扰邻境，才允许曩罕弄的孙子承袭官职。
English: If Meng Mi listens to the advice of the imperial court and stops invading neighboring countries, he will allow his grandson to inherit the official post.

古文：报可，并敕云南守臣亲诣金齿晓谕，复降敕诘责前镇巡官所以受赂召侮启衅者。
现代文：朝廷决定按该奏章的建议施行，并让云南的守卫大臣亲自到金齿给当地的蛮族人讲清楚这些道理。同时，朝廷还降敕追究前任云南镇巡官受赂招致侮辱而最终又挑起争斗的责任。
English: The imperial court decided to implement the recommendations of the report, and asked Yunnan's Minister of Defense to personally go to Jintao to explain these principles to the local barbarians. At the same time, the imperial court also lowered its eyebrows to investigate the responsibility of the former Yunnan town inspector for accepting bribes, causing insults, and eventually provoking a fight.

古文：三年追论致仕南京工部尚书程宗罪。
现代文：三年，朝廷又追究已辞官在家的南京工部尚书程宗的罪行。
English: Three years later, the imperial court also investigated the crimes of Shang Shuchengzong of the Nanjing Engineering Department, who had resigned and was at home.

古文：先是，宗以右副都御史奉命率苏铨往抚谕，而铨受思柄金，绐宗奏为设孟密安抚司。
现代文：先前，程宗以右副都御史的身份奉朝廷之命率领苏铨前去抚谕木邦和孟密。苏铨接受了思柄贿赂的黄金，欺骗程宗，让他上奏朝廷设置了孟密安抚司。
English: Previously, Cheng Zong, in his capacity as the right-hand vice-governor of the capital, had been ordered by the imperial court to lead Su Shi to go and appease Mubang and Meng Mi. Su Shi accepted the gold bribe from Shisheng, deceived Cheng Zong, and made him report to the imperial court to set up a Meng Mi appeasement department.

古文：铨复教思柄伪归木邦地，而占据如故，思柄益横。
现代文：苏铨又教思柄假装归还木邦的土地，而实际上占领如故。这样，思柄便益发骄横。
English: Su Yao also taught Shigang to pretend to return the land of Mubang, but in fact the occupation remained the same. In this way, Shigang became arrogant.

古文：至是，木邦宣慰罕挖法发其事，时宗已致仕，巡按请追罪之。
现代文：至此，木邦宣慰罕法将此事揭发出来，而程宗此时已辞官在家，巡按官请求追治程宗的罪。
English: At this point, Mupang Xuanjie Hanfa exposed the matter, and Chengzong had resigned at home at this time, and the patrol officer requested to prosecute Chengzong's crime.

古文：狱具，帝以事在赦前，不问。
现代文：具体的审判状送上来后，皇帝认为程宗所犯的罪发生在大赦以前，可不再追究了。
English: After the specific judgment letter was sent, the emperor believed that the crime committed by Cheng Zong occurred before the amnesty and could no longer be investigated.

古文：六年，云南守臣奏孟密侵夺木邦，兵连祸结，垂四十余年，屡抚屡叛，势愈猖肆，请调兵往讨。
现代文：六年，云南的守卫大臣上奏说孟密侵夺木邦的土地，连年用兵祸患不断，这种状况已有四十多年了。朝廷屡次招抚他们，他们屡次叛乱，其势力越来越猖獗，请求朝廷调遣军队前去征讨。
English: Six years ago, the Minister of Defense of Yunnan reported that Meng Mi had invaded and seized the land of Mupang, and had been plagued by the use of troops for years. This situation had been going on for more than forty years. The imperial court had repeatedly courted them, they had repeatedly rebelled, their power was becoming more and more rampant, and they had requested the imperial court to dispatch troops to fight them.

古文：兵部议以孟密安抚，初隶布政司，今改隶木邦，以致争杀，仍如初隶可息兵，从之。
现代文：兵部讨论认为孟密安抚司，当初属布政司管辖，现今将其改为隶属于木邦，便造成相互争斗杀戮，若按当初那样让孟密安抚司隶属于布政司，则可息兵。
English: The discussion of the military department held that the Mengmi Pacification Division, which was originally under the jurisdiction of the Political Affairs Division, was now subordinated to Mubang, resulting in mutual fighting and killing. If the Mengmi Pacification Division was subordinated to the Political Affairs Division as it was at the beginning, it could pacify the soldiers.

古文：初，孟密之复叛木邦也，因木邦宣慰罕挖法亲迎妇于孟乃寨，孟密土舍思揲乘虚袭之，据木邦，诱降其头目高答落等，聚兵阻路。
现代文：皇帝同意了这个提议。当初，孟密之所以又一次背叛木邦，是因为木邦的宣慰罕法亲自到孟乃寨去迎接妻子，孟密的土舍思揲乘虚袭击、占领了木邦，诱降了罕法手下的头目高答落等人，聚兵阻断罕法的归路。
English: The emperor agreed to this proposal. At the beginning, the reason why Meng Mi betrayed Mubang again was because Mubang's consolation Han Fa went to Meng Nai Zhai to meet his wife in person. Meng Mi's earthy thoughts took advantage of the false attack and occupied Mubang, lured Gao Debao, the leader of Han Fa's men, and others, and gathered troops to block Han Fa's way back.

古文：罕挖法不得归，依孟乃寨者三年。
现代文：罕法无法归来，便在孟乃寨呆了三年。
English: Unable to return, Hanfa stayed in Mengnaizhai for three years.

古文：于是巡抚张诰等会奏，议遣文武大员诣孟密抚谕，思揲犹不服。
现代文：于是巡抚张诰等人联合上奏朝廷，建议朝廷派遣文武大员到孟密去劝谕思揲退出木邦，思揲还是不服。
English: As a result, the procurator Zhang Ye and others jointly appealed to the imperial court, suggesting that the imperial court send literati and military officers to Mengmi to persuade Siyu to withdraw from Mubang. Siyu was still not satisfied.

古文：诰乃遣官督率陇川、南甸、干崖三宣抚司，积粮开道，示以必征之势，又令汉土官舍耀兵以威之。
现代文：张诰于是派遣官员督率陇川、南甸、干崖三个宣抚司，积聚粮草开通道路，摆出一定出征的架势；又命令汉族官员和土舍都炫耀兵力以威慑他们。
English: Zhang Ye then dispatched officials to supervise the three propaganda departments of Fenchuan, Nandian, and Hengyao to accumulate grain and grass, open roads, and set up a certain military posture; he also ordered Han officials and local officials to show off their strength to deter them.

古文：高答落等惧，谋归罕挖法。
现代文：高答落等人有所畏惧，谋划让罕法归来。
English: Some people, such as Gao Erluo, were afraid and planned to let Hanfa return.

古文：思揲欲杀之，罕挖法乞救于邻部，调土兵合陇川等三宣抚兵至蛮遮，共围之。
现代文：思揲于是想杀高答落，罕法急忙向邻近部落求救，调遣土兵与陇川等三个宣抚的军队会合，到达蛮遮，共同包围了思揲。
English: As a result, Sima wanted to kill Gao, but was rebuffed. Hanfa hurriedly appealed to the neighboring tribes for help, and dispatched local soldiers to meet with the three armies sent by Xuanchuan and others, and arrived at Barbarossa to jointly encircle Sima.

古文：思揲惧，乃罢兵。
现代文：思揲畏惧，于是罢兵。
English: Sima was afraid, so he quit the army.

古文：诰等奏其事，且乞赏有功者。
现代文：张诰等人将此事上奏朝廷，请求朝廷奖赏有功者。
English: Zhang Xuan and others reported the matter to the imperial court, requesting that the imperial court reward those who had performed meritorious deeds.

古文：兵部议，罕挖法虽还木邦，思揲犹未悔罪，必令歃血同盟，归地献叛，永息争端，乃可论功行赏，报闻。
现代文：兵部认为罕法虽然回到了木邦，但是思揲还未悔过自己的罪行，必须让他歃血为盟，归还所侵占别人的土地，献出叛逆之徒，永远停息争端，才能论功行赏。
English: The military department believed that although Hanfa had returned to Mubang, Sijian had not yet repented of his crimes. He must be made a blood ally, return the land he had occupied, sacrifice the traitors, and forever end the dispute before he could be rewarded.

古文：九年，罕挖法及思揲各遣使来贡，报赐如例。
现代文：这个意见上报给了皇帝。九年，罕法和思揲各派使者到京城献贡物，皇帝闻报以后按惯例给以赏赐。
English: This opinion was reported to the emperor. In the ninth year, emissaries from Hanfu and Shizhen sent to the capital to offer tribute. After the emperor heard the report, he gave a reward according to the usual practice.

古文：初，思揲围蛮遮，木邦宣慰妻求救于孟养思陆。
现代文：当初，思揲包围蛮遮时，木邦宣慰的妻子向孟养的思陆发求救。
English: At the beginning, when the barbarians were besieging Simao, the wife of Mupang Xuanlu sent a cry for help to Mengyang's Simao.

古文：孟密素畏思陆之兵，闻其将至，遂解去。
现代文：孟密素来就怕思陆发的军队，听说思陆发将到，马上就解围而去。
English: Meng Mi has always been afraid of the army of Siloam. When he heard that Siloam would arrive, he immediately broke the siege and left.

古文：木邦与思陆谋共取孟密，于是蛮中之患，又在孟养矣。
现代文：木邦便与思陆发谋划共同谋取孟密，于是蛮族人中的祸患又在孟养人身上了。
English: Mupang then plotted with Si Lu Fa to jointly obtain Meng Mi, so the scourge of the barbarians once again fell on Meng Yaoren.

古文：自万安、程宗勘处失宜，诸酋长纷纭进退，中国用兵且数十年。
现代文：自从万安、程宗调查处理此地的蛮人情况有所失当之后，各蛮族酋长纷纷叫嚷退出中国，以致朝廷用兵达数十年。
English: Ever since Wan'an and Chengzong failed to properly investigate and deal with the barbarian situation here, the barbarian chiefs have been clamoring to withdraw from China, so that the imperial court has been using soldiers for decades.

古文：嘉靖初，思陆子思伦与木邦宣慰罕烈同击杀缅酋莽纪岁，而分其地。
现代文：嘉靖初年，思陆发的儿子思伦与木邦宣慰罕烈共同袭击并杀死了缅甸的酋长莽纪岁，将缅甸瓜分了。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Si Luffat's son, Si Lun, together with Mu Bang Xuan Tuo Han Rong, attacked and killed the Burmese chieftain, Meng Ji Rong, and divided up Burma.

古文：后莽瑞体强，将修怨于木邦。
现代文：后来莽瑞体强大后，想向木邦报仇。
English: Later, after Meng Rui became strong, he wanted to take revenge on Mubang.

古文：隆庆二年，木邦土舍罕拔告袭，有司索赂不为请。
现代文：隆庆二年，木邦土舍罕拔向官府报告自己想承袭宣慰职务，有关官员向罕拔索讨贿赂，不得就不替他向上请求。
English: In the second year of the Longqing, Mubang Tuse Hanba reported to the government that he wanted to assume the position of consolation. Relevant officials solicited bribes from Hanba and would not ask for him if they had to.

古文：拔怒，与弟罕章集兵梗往来道，商旅不前，而己食盐亦乏绝，乞于缅。
现代文：罕拔一怒之下与其弟弟罕章一起聚兵切断来往的道路，致使商旅不通，而他们自己的食盐也很缺乏，于是便向缅甸求援。
English: In a fit of rage, Han Biao and his brother Han Zhang gathered an army to cut off the roads leading to and from the city. As a result, trade and travel were cut off, and their own salt was also in short supply, so they turned to Myanmar for help.

古文：缅以五千籝馈之，自是反德缅，携金宝象马往谢之。
现代文：缅甸送给他们五千食盐，从此他们反而感激缅甸人，携带着金子、宝器、大象和马匹前去感谢。
English: Myanmar sent them five thousand tons of salt, and since then they have been grateful to the Burmese, bringing gold, treasures, elephants and horses to thank them.

古文：瑞体亦厚报之，欢甚，约为父子。
现代文：莽瑞体也以厚礼还报他们。于是缅甸与木邦关系甚欢，互相约为父子关系。
English: He also rewarded them with a generous gift. As a result, the relationship between Myanmar and Mubang is very happy, and they have a father-son relationship with each other.

古文：瑞体死，子应里用岳凤言诱拔杀之。时万历十一年也。
现代文：莽瑞体死后，莽瑞体的儿子莽应里听了岳凤的话将罕拔诱杀，这是万历十一年的事。
English: After Meng Rui's death, Meng Rui's son Meng Yingli listened to Yue Feng's words and booby-trapped Han Biao, which was a matter of eleven years.

古文：拔子进忠守木邦，应里遣弟应龙袭之，其孽子罕凤与耿马舍人罕虔欲擒进忠献应龙。
现代文：罕拔的儿子罕进忠镇守木邦，莽应里派遣弟弟莽应龙去袭击木邦。罕进忠的孽子罕凤和耿马的舍人罕虔想活捉罕进忠，把他献给莽应龙。
English: Hanba's son, Han Jinzhong, guarded Mubang, while Meng Yingli sent his brother, Meng Yinglong, to attack Mubang. Han Feng, Han Jinzhong's son-in-law, and Ganma's brother-in-law, Han Qian, wanted to capture Han Jinzhong alive and offer him to Meng Yinglong.

古文：进忠携妻子内奔，虔等追至姚关，焚顺宁而去。
现代文：罕进忠携带着妻子儿女逃向内地。罕虔等人追到姚关，焚烧了顺宁才离去。
English: Han Jinzhong fled inland with his wife and children. Han Qian and others chased them to Yaoguan and burned Shuning before leaving.

古文：十二年，官军破缅于姚关，立其子钦。
现代文：十二年，官军在姚关大破缅甸军队，立罕进忠的儿子罕钦为宣慰。
English: In the twelfth year, the government army defeated the Burmese army in Yaoguan, and Hanqin, the son of Han Jinzhong, came as a consolation.

古文：钦死，其叔罕衤盍约暹罗攻缅，缅恨之。
现代文：罕钦死后，他的叔叔罕衤盍约暹罗一起攻打缅甸，缅甸人便恨罕衤盍。
English: After Han Chin's death, his uncle Han Kuo attacked Burma together with Siam, and the Burmese hated Han Kuo.

古文：三十四年，缅以三十万众围其城。
现代文：三十四年，缅甸派兵三十万包围了木邦。
English: Thirty-four years ago, Myanmar sent 300,000 soldiers to encircle Mubang.

古文：请救于内地，不至，城陷，罕衤盍被掳。
现代文：罕衤盍向内地官军求救，官军不来，结果木邦被缅军攻陷，罕衤盍被俘。
English: Hanko called for help from the mainland government army, but the government army did not come. As a result, Mubang was invaded by the Burmese army, and Hanko was captured.

古文：缅伪立孟密思礼领其众。
现代文：缅甸私自册封孟密的思礼为宣慰，让他管理木邦。
English: As a consolation, the Burmese government granted Meng a posthumous title of nobility, allowing him to administer Mubangsa.

古文：事闻，黜总兵官陈宾，木邦遂亡。
现代文：此事传到朝廷后，朝廷罢黜了总兵官陈宾的官职，木邦于是也灭亡了。
English: After the matter was reported to the imperial court, the court dismissed the chief military officer Chen Bin from his official post, and Mubang also perished.

古文：孟密自思柄授安抚，继之者曰思揲，曰思真，真年至百十岁。嘉靖中，土舍兄弟争袭，走诉于缅。
现代文：孟养，蛮族人称为迤水，该地有香柏城。元朝至元年间，朝廷在孟养设置云远路军民总管府。
English: Mengyang, known to the barbarians as Surabaya, is home to Cinnamon City. From the Yuan Dynasty to the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court set up the Yunyuan Road Military and Civil Administration in Mengyang.

古文：缅人为立其弟，改名思忠，忠遂以其地附缅。
现代文：明朝洪武十五年，朝廷将云远路军民总管府改为云远府。云远府以前隶属于平缅宣慰司，后来平缅的思伦发被其部属所驱逐，逃到京城。
English: In the 15th year of the Hongwu reign of the Ming Dynasty, the imperial court changed the Yunyuan Road Military and Civil Administration Headquarters to Yunyuan Prefecture. Yunyuan Prefecture was previously subordinated to the Chinese-Myanmar Propaganda and Consolation Department. Later, the Chinese-Myanmar general Si Lunfa was expelled by his subordinates and fled to Beijing.

古文：万历十二年，忠赍伪印来归，命授为宣抚。
现代文：皇帝命令西平侯沐春用兵把思伦发送回去，归还给他以前的领地。明成祖即皇帝位后，将云远府改为孟养府，任命土官刀木旦为知府。
English: The emperor ordered Xi Ping Hou Mu Chun to use soldiers to send Silun back and return to his former territory. After Ming Cheng Zu, that is, the emperor, changed Yunyuanfu to Mengyangfu, and appointed the local official Jiaodan as the prefectural capital.

古文：已而复投缅，乃以其母罕烘代掌司印。
现代文：永乐元年，刀木旦派人向皇帝进献土产和金银器，皇帝给予他们赏赐并把刀木旦的使者送了回去。
English: In the first year of the Yongle era, the Emperor sent people to present the emperor with local products and gold and silverware. The emperor gave them a reward and sent the messenger of the Emperor back.

古文：缅攻孟密，罕烘率子思礼、从子思仁奔孟广，而孟密遂失。
现代文：二年，朝廷又将孟养府改升为孟养军民宣慰使司，任命刀木旦为宣慰使，给他颁赐诰印。
English: In the following year, the Imperial Court promoted Mengyangfu to the position of Mengyang Military and People's Consolation Envoy, and appointed Jiaodan as the consolation envoy, awarding him the imperial seal.

古文：十八年，缅复攻孟广，罕烘、思礼奔陇川，思仁奔工回，而孟广又失。
现代文：四年，孟养戛里互相仇杀，缅甸宣慰那罗塔乘乱抢劫，杀死了刀木旦和他的儿子思栾发，占领了孟养。
English: In four years, Mengyang and Kaili killed each other in a vendetta, and Burmese comforted Narota by means of indiscriminate looting, killed Daguudan and his son Siyofa, and occupied Mengyang.

古文：先是，思仁从罕烘奔孟广时，有甘線姑者，思忠妻也。思忠既投缅，思仁通于线姑，遂欲妻之，而罕烘不许。
现代文：此事传到朝廷，皇帝下诏让行人张洪带着皇帝的敕谕去责问缅甸。那罗塔害怕朝廷讨伐，归还了孟养的境土。此时正好木邦宣慰使罕宾法因那罗塔侵占孟养，主动请求带兵讨伐，攻破了缅甸二十多个城寨，缴获了大象和马匹，献到京城。
English: The matter was reported to the imperial court, and the emperor issued an edict to let Zhang Hongzhu, a passerby, take the emperor's edict to complain to Myanmar. Narota was afraid of the imperial court's crusade and returned the territory of Mengyang. At this time, it was just right for Mubang Xuan to persuade Han Binfa to invade Mengyang with Narota, and he took the initiative to request to lead troops in the crusade. He broke through more than 20 castles in Myanmar, captured elephants and horses, and presented them to Beijing.

古文：至是，罕烘携線姑走陇川，思仁奔雅盖，率兵象犯陇川，欲掳線姑去。
现代文：十四年朝廷又设置孟养宣慰司，任命刀木旦的次子刀得孟为宣慰使，任命刀木旦的侄子刀玉宾为同知。
English: In the 14th year, the imperial court also set up the Mengyang Consolation Division, appointed the second son of the sword Moutan, the sword Meng, as the consoler, and appointed the nephew of the sword Moutan, the sword Yubin, as the confidant.

古文：会陇川有备，弗克，思仁亦走归缅，缅伪署思仁于孟密，食其地。
现代文：自从刀木旦被害后，孟养有三千多人跟随刀玉宾散居干崖、金沙江等地。
English: Since Meng Yao was killed by the sword, more than 3,000 people from Meng Yao have followed him to live in Dry Cliff, Jinsha River and other places.

古文：初，孟密宝井，朝廷每以中官出镇，司采办。
现代文：朝廷曾经让刀玉宾执掌过宣慰使的职务以招抚属下众人，所以这次仍任命他为该司的同知，让他带领属下众人恢复旧业。
English: The imperial court had once allowed the Sword and Jade Emperor to hold the post of consolation envoy to recruit subordinates, so this time he still appointed him as a confidant of the department, and let him lead his subordinates to resume their old business.

古文：武宗朝钱能最横，至嘉靖、隆庆时犹然。
现代文：十五年，刀得孟派使者向朝廷进献马匹和土产。
English: In the fifteenth year, Meng sent an envoy to present horses and local produce to the imperial court.

古文：万历二十年，巡抚陈用宾言，缅酋拥众直犯蛮莫，其执词以奉开采使命令，杀蛮莫思正以开道路。
现代文：宣德五年，刀玉宾上奏说： 我的伯父刀木旦被缅甸人所杀，承蒙朝廷派遣官员查访我刀玉宾，授给我同知的职务。
English: In the 5th year of the Xuande era, Zou Yubin made the following speech: My uncle Zou Moudan was killed by the Burmese. Thanks to the Imperial Court, officials were sent to visit Zou Yubin and I was given the post of Tongzhi.

古文：全滇之祸，皆自开采启之。
现代文：我被缅甸人所阻，无法返回孟养，只好在金齿寄居了二十多年。
English: I was prevented by the Burmese from returning to Mengye, and had to live as a sojourner in Jinzu for more than twenty years.

古文：时税使杨荣纵其下，以开采为名，恣暴横，蛮人苦之。
现代文：现今孟养又被麓川宣慰思任发所占领，请求朝廷派兵将我送回本土。 
English: Today, Mengyeong is occupied by the Luchuan Xuanjie Shirenfa Institute, and I am asking the imperial court to send soldiers to return me to the mainland.

古文：且欲令丽江退地听采，缅酋因得执词深入。
现代文：皇帝命令黔国公沐晟派兵护送他回孟养，但是当时的孟养仍被思任发所占领着。
English: The emperor ordered the Duke of Shan to send troops to escort him back to Mengyang, but at that time Mengyang was still occupied by Sireenfa.

古文：巡按宋兴祖极言其害，请追还荣等，帝皆不纳。
现代文：当时的孟养宣慰名叫刀孟宾，也寄居在云南。
English: At that time, Meng Yao Xuan Ying, known as the sword Meng Bin, also lived in Yunnan.

古文：凡采办必先输官，然后与商贾贸易，每往五六百人。
现代文：等到思任发失败后逃到缅甸时，他的儿子思机发偷偷地藏匿在孟养，请求朝廷招抚他。
English: When Shifenfa failed and fled to Burma, his son Shifenfa secretly hid in Mengyang and asked the court to appease him.

古文：其属有地羊寨，在孟密东，往来道所必经。
现代文：正统十三年朝廷敕谕让孟养的头目和思机发一起来京城朝贡，并答应给思机发进升官位和赏赐。思机发对朝廷有疑忌畏惧，竟然不来。
English: In the 13th year of orthodoxy, the imperial court ordered the head of Mengyang to pay tribute to the capital together with Si Jifa, and promised to give Si Jifa a promotion and reward. Si Jifa was suspicious of the imperial court and did not come.

古文：人工幻术，采办人有强索其饮食者，多腹痛死；己所乘马亦毙，剖之，则马腹皆木石也。思真尝剿之，杀数千人，不得绝。至是，复议剿，以兵少中止。
现代文：皇帝认为孟养宣慰司的头目刀变蛮等人藏匿思机发，亲自列数他们的罪状： 孟养宣慰司是朝廷开设的，你刀变蛮等人竟敢违抗朝廷的命令，这是第一条可讨伐的罪状。思机发是叛贼的儿子，你们故意放纵他而不将其逮捕，这是第二条可讨伐的罪状。
English: The emperor believed that the head of the Mengyang Propaganda and Consolation Department, Zhaowangwang, and others were hiding Zhichengfa, and personally listed their charges: The Mengyang Propaganda and Consolation Department was opened by the court, and you, Zhaowang, and others dared to defy the order of the court, which is the first charge that can be fought. Zhichengfa is the son of a traitor, and you deliberately indulge him without arresting him, which is the second charge that can be fought.

古文：孟养，蛮名迤水，有香柏城。元至元中，于孟养置云远路军民总管府。
现代文：你们孟养的土地被思任发所侵夺，你们的宣慰也被他赶跑了，如今还寄居在云南，你们竟然与仇敌结为同党，这是第三条可讨伐的罪状。
English: The land of your Mengye was invaded and seized by Shirenfa, your Xuanyou was also driven away by him, and now you are still living in Yunnan, and you have even joined the enemy. This is the third crime that can be combated.

古文：洪武十五年改为云远府。其地故属平缅宣慰司。
现代文：云南的总兵官世世代代都管辖你们的土地，现奉朝廷之命追捕叛贼的儿子，你们竟然不听从他的调度，这是第四条可讨伐的罪状。
English: The commander-in-chief of Yunnan has governed your land for generations. Now, under orders from the imperial court, he is hunting down the son of a traitor. How dare you disobey his orders? This is the fourth charge that can be fought.

古文：平缅思伦发为其下所逐，走京师。
现代文：你们认为当地有山川险阻，官军无法轻易到达，又以为你们那里的气候多瘴气和麻疯，官军无法久居。
English: You think that the local mountains and rivers are dangerous and the government troops cannot easily reach them, and you also think that the climate there is more salty and leprous, and the government troops cannot stay for a long time.

古文：帝命西平侯沐春以兵纳之，还故地。
现代文：自己势力强盛时则与官军抗拒为敌，自己势力弱小时则逃奔而去。
English: When their forces were strong, they resisted the government army and became enemies, but when their forces were weak, they ran away.

古文：成祖即位，改云远府为孟养府，以土官刀木旦为知府。
现代文：殊不知昔日马援远征，山川险阻也挡不住他；诸葛亮五月渡金沙江，炎炎蒸气也无法伤害他。
English: However, he did not know that in the past horse-assisted expedition, the mountains and rivers could not stop him; Zhuge Liang crossed the Jinsha River in May, and the hot steam could not hurt him.

古文：永乐元年，刀木旦遣人贡方物及金银器，赐赉遣归。二年改升军民宣慰使司，以刀木旦为使，赐诰印。
现代文：他们都能扑灭蛮人的叛乱，开拓国家的境土。何况今日朝廷所派的大军有必胜的机会，麓川的叛军就是前车之鉴。
English: All of them were able to put down the rebellion of the barbarians and open up the country's territory. What's more, the large army sent by the imperial court today has a sure chance of victory. The rebel army in the Fuchu River is a good example.

古文：四年，孟养与戛里相仇杀，缅甸宣慰那罗塔乘衅劫之，杀刀木旦及子思栾发而据其地。
现代文：你们应急速悔过自新，让思机发亲自到京城来朝觐，这样还可给他封一个官分一块地，让他享受人生。
English: You should quickly repent and make amends, and let Si Jifa personally come to the capital for the hajj. In this way, you can also give him an official post and a piece of land, so that he can enjoy life.

古文：事闻，诏行人张洪等赍敕谕责缅。那罗塔惧，仍归其境土。会木邦宣慰使罕宾法以那罗塔侵据孟养，请自率兵讨，遂破缅甸城寨二十余，获其象、马献京师。
现代文：如果他不肯出来，你们就应当把他抓起来，这是上策；寻找到思机发的藏身之处，报告给官军，让官军前去抓获，这是你们的中策；如果你们代他搪塞支吾官军，让他逃跑躲藏起来，则连你们也一起剿灭，那时你们就悔之晚矣！ 
English: If he does not want to come out, you should arrest him, this is the best strategy; find a clever hiding place, report to the government army, let the government army go ahead and capture him, this is your middle strategy; if you obstruct our government army on his behalf, let him run away and hide, then you will also perish together, then you will regret it too late!

古文：十四年复设孟养宣慰司，命刀木旦次子刀得孟为使，以木旦侄玉宾为同知。
现代文：此时官军已经是第三次征讨麓川，皇帝降旨一定要活捉思机发，并将此意图悄悄地谕告总督王骥，又敕谕让在云南安居的前孟养宣慰刀孟宾替官军做向导。等到朝廷出兵连年征讨，思机发最终还是逃跑了，没抓住。
English: At this time, it was already the third time for the government army to raid the Luchuan River. The emperor decreed that they must capture Zhichengfa alive, and quietly announced this intention to the governor Wang Qian. He also ordered that the former Meng Jia and the consolation sword Meng Bin, who lived peacefully in Yunnan, be used as guides for the government army. When the imperial court sent soldiers to raid the river year after year, Zhichengfa finally fled and was not caught.

古文：自木旦被害，司遂废，孟养之人从玉宾散居干崖、金沙江诸处者三千余人。
现代文：于是把孟养的土地交给缅甸宣慰马哈省管治，命令他去捕获思机发。此时是正统十四年。
English: So he gave Meng Yao's land to Burma to administer the province of Xuancheng and Maha, and ordered him to seize the opportunity. At this time, it was the 14th year of orthodoxy.

古文：朝廷尝命玉宾署宣慰使以抚之，故仍命为本司同知，令其率众复业。
现代文：景泰二年，思任发的儿子思卜发派使者向朝廷献贡物，请求朝廷允许他管理孟养这块故地。朝廷大臣讨论认为孟养这个地方已划归缅甸，不能再变更了。
English: In the 2nd year of the reign of King Taejo, Sippah, the son of Sippah, sent an envoy to the imperial court to pay tribute and request the imperial court to allow him to manage the Mengyeong site. The ministers of the imperial court discussed that the Mengyeong site had been assigned to Myanmar and could no longer be changed.

古文：十五年，刀得孟遣使贡马及方物。
现代文：此时朝廷虽然没有答应他，而思卜发自己已偷偷地占领了孟养，连缅甸人也夺不下来。
English: At this time, although the imperial court did not agree to him, Si Bufa himself had secretly occupied Meng Yao, and even the Burmese could not take it.

古文：宣德五年，刀玉宾奏： 伯父刀木旦被杀，蒙朝廷遣官访玉宾，授同知，又阻于缅难，寄居金齿者二十余年。今孟养地又为麓川宣慰思任发所据，乞遣兵送归本土。 帝命黔国公沐晟遣还之，然其地仍为任发所有。
现代文：思卜发死后，他的儿子思洪发继嗣，从天顺、成化年间起，每次到京城朝贡，都是署的孟养的地名，俨然就是他们的封地似的。成化年间，孟养金沙江的思陆发派人向朝廷贡献大象和马，皇帝派人设宴款待并按惯例给予他们赏赐。思陆发，是思任发的后裔子孙。
English: After the death of Sibfat, his son Sihongfat's heirs, from the years of Tianshun and Chenghua, every time they paid tribute to the capital, it was the place name of Mengyang, which was like their fief. During the years of Chenghua, Siliufat of Mengyang Jinsha River sent people to contribute elephants and horses to the court, and the emperor sent people to set up a banquet and reward them according to the usual practice. Siliufat is the descendant of Siliufat.

古文：时为孟养宣慰者名刀孟宾，亦寄居云南。
现代文：太监钱能镇守云南时，思陆发常送珍宝给钱能，因此得以向朝廷入贡，称自己为孟养金沙江的思陆发，常表示要为朝廷立功以承袭祖先的官职。
English: When the eunuch Qian Neng was guarding Yunnan, Sillufatang often sent precious treasures to Qian Neng, so he was able to pay tribute to the imperial court. He called himself Sillufat of Mengyang Jinsha River, and often said that he wanted to make a contribution to the imperial court to inherit the official position of his ancestors.

古文：及任发败奔缅甸，子机发潜匿孟养，求抚。
现代文：此时正好孟密安抚司的土舍思揲侵占了木邦，与木邦人连年争杀，当地守卫大臣讨论出兵征讨思揲，思陆发知道后主动请求为朝廷效力。
English: At this time, Mengmi's pacifier, the local deserter, Simao, invaded and occupied Mubang, and fought with the Mubang people for years. The local guard minister discussed sending troops to recruit Simao. After Simao found out, he took the initiative to request to work for the imperial court.

古文：正统十三年敕孟养头目伴送思机发来朝，许以升赏，机发疑畏竟不至。
现代文：当时蛮族人中都传说孟密人最怕思陆发的军队，于是参政毛科向总兵镇巡官请示是否动用思陆发，总兵镇巡官答允了。
English: At that time, there was a legend among the barbarians that the Mengmi people were most afraid of the army of the Si Lu Fa, so Mao Ke, a politician, asked the inspector of the general garrison whether to use the Si Lu Fa, and the inspector of the general garrison agreed.

古文：帝以孟养宣慰头目刀变蛮等匿机发，敕数其罪，曰： 孟养乃朝廷开设，尔刀变蛮等敢违朝命，一可伐。
现代文：思陆发的军队还没到，思揲就解了对木邦的包围离去了。巡抚张诰建议调遣思陆发的军队，让他合力捕获思揲，于是便派使者到思陆发处督促他出兵。
English: Before the army of Silla arrived, Silla lifted the siege of Mupang and left. The governor Zhang Ye suggested dispatching the army of Silla to capture Silla, so he sent an envoy to Silla to urge him to send troops.

古文：思机发系贼子，故纵不捕，二可伐。
现代文：思陆发便派遣大陶孟伦索率领蛮族军队、大象和马一起渡过金沙江。
English: Si Lu Fa then sent Da Tao Meng Renso to lead the barbarian army, elephants and horses to cross the Jinsha River.

古文：尔孟养被思任发夺地，逐尔宣慰，见在云南优养，尔等与仇为党，三可伐。
现代文：伦索渡过金沙江后，指着天空中的鹰对张诰派来的使者说 ：我们这些人就好像是这只鹰，夺取了土地，就要占据所夺的土地并在其中生活。 毛科听说此事后甚为担忧。
English: After Renso crossed the Jinsha River, he pointed to the eagle in the sky and said to the envoy sent by Zhang Ye: "We people are just like this eagle. If we seize land, we must occupy the seized land and live in it. Mao Ke was very worried after hearing about this.

古文：云南总兵官世世管属尔地，奉命捕取贼子，尔等不从调度，四可伐。
现代文：这时思揲派陶孟思英带兵守卫蛮莫，孟养的军队到达了，思英坚守不出，不久请求讲和。
English: At this time, Shiyan sent Tao Meng Siying to lead the troops to guard Meng Yao. Meng Yao's army arrived, Siying could not hold out, and soon asked for peace.

古文：尔等不过以为山川险阻，官军未易遽到，又以为气候瘴疠，官军不可久居。
现代文：孟养的军队听说官军已与思英相约，接受思英投降，颇有怨言。这时官军的粮食已经绝乏了，于是便急忙引退。
English: When Meng Yao's army heard that the government army had reached an agreement with Siying and accepted Siying's surrender, they complained a lot. At this time, the government army had run out of food, so they hurriedly retired.

古文：势强则拒敌，力弱则奔遁。
现代文：伦索也怕思英断他的归路，也取道干崖回去了。
English: Renso was also afraid that Siying would cut off his way back, so he also took the path of the dry cliff.

古文：殊不知昔马援远标铜柱，险阻无伤，诸葛亮五月渡泸，炎蒸无害，皆能破灭蛮众，开拓境土。
现代文：毛科想起伦索前番所说的话，急忙下令让孟养的军队回去守卫自己的疆界，孟养不听从号令。当初，靖远伯王骥与他们有誓约在先，没有总兵官的信符和檄文，他们不能渡过金沙江。
English: Mao Ke recalled the words of Lenso's previous guard, and hastily ordered Meng Yang's army to return to guard their own borders. Meng Yang did not obey the order. At the beginning, Jingyuan Bo Wangqi had a pledge with them. Without the general officer's letter and letter, they could not cross the Jinsha River.

古文：况今大军有必胜之机，麓川之师可为前鉴。
现代文：从这次违犯约定之后，他们数次兴兵渡过金沙江与孟密战斗。
English: After this violation of the agreement, they crossed the Jinsha River several times to fight against Mengmi.

古文：尔等速宜悔过自图，令思机发亲自前来，仍与一官一地，令享生全。
现代文：弘治十二年，云南巡按谢朝宣给朝廷上了这样一份奏章：孟养的思陆发原本是麓川叛贼的子孙，窜居在金沙江外。
English: In the twelfth year of Hongzhi, the Yunnan inspection by Xie Zhaozong announced to the imperial court such a record: Meng Yao's Silufa was originally the descendant of the traitor of the Luchuan River, and lived outside the Jinsha River.

古文：如不肯出，尔等即擒为上策；迹思机发所在，报与官军捕取为中策；若代彼支吾，令其逃匿，则并尔等剿灭，悔无及矣。 
现代文：成化年间，他曾占领缅甸的听盏。
English: During his formative years, he occupied the Burmese throne.

古文：时已三征麓川，内旨必欲生擒机发，已密谕总督王骥，又敕谕以云南安置孟养旧宣慰刀孟宾为向导。
现代文：弘治七年朝廷征调他的军队渡过金沙江，于是他又占领了腾冲的蛮莫。不久他又纠集木邦的军队，攻打和焚烧了孟密安抚司，屠杀掳掠了蛮族百姓二千多人，抢走了大象、马和金宝，并有吞并孟密觊俞见故地的志向。
English: In the seventh year of Hongzhi, the imperial court conscripted and dispatched his army to cross the Jinsha River, so he occupied the barbarian village of Tengchong. Soon after, he gathered the troops of Mupang, attacked and burned Mengmi's pacification division, slaughtered and abducted more than two thousand barbarian people, robbed elephants, horses and gold, and had the ambition to annex Mengmi's hometown.

古文：及兵出穷征，机发卒遁去，不可得。
现代文：等到有外国人恭们和腾冲人段和做他的主要谋士后，官府屡次招抚他也不听了。
English: After waiting for foreigners such as Gongmen and Tengchong to act as his main advisors, the government repeatedly tried to entice him, but he would not listen.

古文：于是乃以孟养地给缅甸宣慰马哈省管治，命捕思机发。
现代文：云南的会城离孟养很远，其声势很难直接到达。以前是在金腾添设一名镇守太监，专门招抚安顿蛮族百姓。而近段时间以来，太监吉庆贪婪凶暴，虽然表面上曾退还思陆发给他的贿赂？
English: The capital of Yunnan is far away from Mengyang, and its influence is difficult to reach directly. In the past, a town guard eunuch was set up in Jintan specifically to appease and settle the barbarian people. But recently, the eunuch Jixing has been greedy and ferocious, although on the surface he has returned the bribe sent to him by Silu?

古文：时正统十四年也。景泰二年，任发之子思卜发遣使来贡，求管孟养旧地。
现代文：但蛮人已了解了他的贪性，又怎么知道蛮人不会借他退回原先贿赂的机会向他进献更多的贿赂！我听说蛮莫等地，乃是水陆交通汇集之地，蛮族人所需的器用全是从这里出来的，江西和云南大理的逃亡罪人大多逃向该地。
English: But the barbarians have already understood his greediness, and how do they know that the barbarians will not take the opportunity of his returning the original bribe to offer him more bribes! I heard that there is no place to wait, it is a land and water transportation hub, all the equipment needed by the barbarians comes from here, and most of the fugitive criminals in Jiangxi and Yunnan Dali have fled to this place.

古文：廷臣议，孟养地已与缅甸，岂可移易。
现代文：云南的当差官员每每将违禁物品带往该地送人，泄漏官府的情报，甘做他们的心腹之人。
English: Yunnan's duty officers often bring prohibited items to the region to send to others, leak government information, and are willing to be their confidants.

古文：时朝命虽不许，然卜发已潜据之，即缅甸不能夺也。
现代文：镇夷关只有一个巡检，怎么能够禁止节制得了他们。
English: There is only one inspection in Zhenyiguan, how can they be restrained by a ban?

古文：卜发死，子思洪发嗣，自天顺、成化，每朝贡辄署孟养地名，俨然自有其地矣。
现代文：我考虑孟养的武备抵不上中原的一个大县，以云南的军力兵临该地，就像压碎一个鸡卵那样容易。
English: I considered that Meng Yao's armed forces could not match that of a large county in the Central Plains, and that it would be as easy to crush a chicken's egg with the military forces of Yunnan.

古文：成化中，孟养金沙江思陆发遣人贡象马，宴赐皆如例。
现代文：像现在这样搞成一征调他们就来，屡次安抚他们回去就是不退兵的状况，全是镇巡官在初始时措置失宜，中间又掺杂有逃亡的奸人在其中为他们谋划，最后又有招抚蛮族人的宦官在此坏事的缘故。
English: It was the town inspector's initial ineptitude, compounded by a fugitive traitor who plotted against them, and finally by the eunuch's appeasement of the barbarians, that brought about the present situation, in which they have to be conscripted into the army and repeatedly pacified before they can return home.

古文：思陆发者，思任发之遗孽也。太监钱能镇云南，思陆发数以珍宝遗能，因得入贡，称孟养金沙江思陆发，常规立功以袭祖职。适孟密安抚土舍思揲侵据木邦地，争杀累年，守臣议征之，思陆发乃请自效。时蛮众相传孟密畏思陆兵，参政毛科请于总兵镇巡官，许之。
现代文：我希望皇上垂恩念及边境地区百姓的困苦，把云南的镇守太监保留一名就够了，另外再选用指挥一人负责镇夷关的守备，将思陆发赶回到金沙江外，把腾冲的官司移到蛮莫，并命令木邦、孟密不得窥伺该地，这样才是万全之策。假如思陆发顽固不化，不听从朝廷的抚谕，便当坚决用兵镇压，将其全部剿灭，不留活口，作为土官中不法之徒的警戒。
English: I hope that the emperor will think of the hardships of the people in the border areas. It is enough to retain one town guard eunuch in Yunnan. In addition, a commander will be selected to be responsible for the protection of the town of Yiguan. He will drive Sillufat back to outside the Jinsha River, move the court of Tengchong to Xuanmo, and order Mupang and Mengmi not to spy on the place. This is the best solution. If Sillufat is stubborn and does not obey the instructions of the court, it should be resolutely suppressed by soldiers, and it should be completely destroyed, leaving no living mouth, as a warning

古文：思陆兵未至，思揲解去。
现代文：在此之前，吉庆已经替思陆发向朝廷请求允许他朝觐献贡。
English: Prior to this, Ji Qing had already sent a request to the imperial court on behalf of Si Lu for permission to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：巡抚张诰议调思陆兵，令戮力捕思揲，乃遣使促之发兵。
现代文：至此，因谢朝宣的上疏，皇帝让镇巡官提出是剿还是抚的决策来，以致几年都决定不下来。十六年，巡抚陈金派遣金腾的参将卢和去抚谕思陆发。
English: At this point, due to the lack of appreciation for the imperial proclamation, the emperor asked the town inspector to put forward a decision on whether to support or support, so that the decision could not be made for several years. In the 16th year, the inspector Chen Jin sent Jin Teng's general Lu He to support and advise.

古文：思陆遣大陶孟伦索领蛮兵象马过江，伦索既过江，指鹰谓使者曰： 我曹犹此鹰，夺得土地，即管食之耳。 
现代文：卢和到腾冲时，思陆发派遣陶孟给卢和投递文书，进献土产。卢和一方面给思陆发晓谕以祸福，命令他将自己的军队带回到金沙江外，归还他们所占领的蛮莫等地，另一方面调遣陇川、干崖和南甸三个宣抚司的蛮族军队和战象，跟随官军分路到达金沙江。
English: When Lu He arrived in Tengchong, Si Lu Fa sent Tao Meng to Lu He to deliver documents and offer local products. On the one hand, Lu He sent a blessing and a curse to Si Lu, ordering him to take his army back outside the Jinsha River and return the barbaric places they had occupied. On the other hand, he dispatched the barbarian armies and war elephants of the three procuratorates of Luchuan, Dry Cliff and Nantian to follow the official army to reach the Jinsha River.

古文：科闻之忧甚。时思揲令陶孟思英以兵守蛮莫。
现代文：思陆发至此才派遣大陶孟伦索和怕卓等人率领部下来拜见卢和。
English: It was not until then that Si Lu Fa sent Da Tao Meng Renso and Xiang Zhuo and others to lead the troops to visit Lu He.

古文：孟养兵至，思英坚守不出，已而请和。
现代文：卢和再将上述意见向他们申述了一遍。
English: Lu He re-expressed the above-mentioned opinions to them.

古文：孟养兵闻官军听思英约降，颇有怨言。
现代文：思陆发听从命令，退还了以前所占领的蛮莫等地十三处，撤回了自己的军队、战象和战马，渡过金沙江回去了。
English: Si Lu Fa obeyed the order, returned thirteen places previously occupied by the Mongols, withdrew his army, war elephants and war horses, crossed the Jinsha River and went back.

古文：官军粮绝，遽引退。伦索亦恐思英绝其归路，取道干崖而还。
现代文：又派遣手下的陶孟和招刚等官员向官军进献战象六头、银子六百两和金银器皿等，表示自己的诚意。
English: He also sent his subordinates, officials such as Tao Meng and Zhaogang, to present six war elephants, six hundred taels of silver and gold and silverware to the government army to show his sincerity.

古文：科念伦索前语，急戒令孟养还兵守疆界，孟养不听。
现代文：镇巡官将此上报朝廷，并上奏说 ：蛮莫等地原来隶属于木邦，成化年间开始被孟密占有，近来又被思陆发所占领，连年构成祸患，现今才开始平定。
English: The town inspector reported this to the imperial court, and made a report saying: It is extremely unlikely that the land originally belonged to Mubang, was occupied by Mengmi during the Chenghua years, and has recently been occupied by Slui Fa, which has been a disaster for years, and is only now beginning to be pacified.

古文：初，靖远伯王骥与之约誓，非总兵官符檄不得渡江。
现代文：现在既不能将蛮莫等地又划回木邦和孟密，也不能将其割给陇川、干崖和南甸三个宣抚司，应暂时每年从腾冲派遣四百官军轮番守卫该地。
English: Now, it is not possible to return the land to Mupang and Mengmi, nor can it be assigned to the three Fostering Departments of Lechuan, Dry Cliff and Nandian. For the time being, four hundred officers and soldiers should be sent from Tengchong every year to guard the land in rotation.

古文：自是遂犯约，数兴兵过江与孟密战。
现代文：思陆发以前有帮助朝廷讨平思揲的功劳，现今又对自己的祸过悔悟，向朝廷投诚。
English: Before, Si Lu Fa had the merit of helping the imperial court to settle the dispute, but now he has repented of his misdeeds and is sincere to the imperial court.

古文：弘治十二年，云南巡按谢朝宣奏：
现代文：请求朝廷颁赐给他名目和冠带，仍降圣旨敕谕奖励他。 
English: He asked the Imperial Court to grant him a name and a sash, and to reward him with an imperial edict.

古文：孟养思陆本麓川叛种，窜居金沙江外。
现代文：兵部认为蛮莫等地本是木邦的属地，从大义上说应该将该地归还木邦。
English: The military department believed that it was inevitable that the land belonged to Mokpo, and that the land should be returned to Mokpo.

古文：成化中，尝据缅甸之听盏。
现代文：至于给思陆发颁赐名目和冠带，他派来献贡的使者已经说过思陆发不愿接受，所以不要轻易给他。
English: As for giving Si Lu Fa a name and a crown, the envoy he sent to pay tribute has already said that Si Lu Fa is unwilling to accept it, so don't give it to him easily.

古文：弘治七年征调其兵渡江，遂复据腾冲之蛮莫。
现代文：请求皇帝给他赏赐优厚的礼物，犒劳他的使者后将该使者遣送回去。
English: Ask the emperor to reward him with a generous gift, reward his messenger and send the messenger back.

古文：又纠木邦兵，攻烧孟密安抚司，杀掠蛮民二千余人，劫象马金宝，有并吞孟密觊觎故土之志。
现代文：皇帝认为兵部的意见可行。此时，思陆发觊俞见宣慰司的官印，兵部坚决不给他，于是他仍屡次出兵与木邦、孟密进行仇杀，搞得没有一年可得安宁。
English: The emperor thought that the opinion of the military department was feasible. At this time, Silu Fahuang saw the official seal of the Consolation Division, and the military department resolutely refused to give it to him. Therefore, he still repeatedly sent troops to carry out vendettas with Mubang and Mengmi, and it took less than a year to get peace.

古文：迤西人恭们、腾冲人段和为之谋主，屡抚不听。
现代文：嘉靖七年，总兵官沐绍勋、巡抚欧阳重派遣参政王汝舟等人遍访各蛮族地区，给他们讲解怎样会得祸怎样又会得福。
English: In the seventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the commander-in-chief Mu Shaoxun and the governor Ouyang Rong sent Wang Ruzhou and others to visit all the barbarian regions and explain to them how to get bad luck and how to get good luck.

古文：云南会城去孟养远，声势难接。曩于金腾添设镇守太监，为抚蛮安民之计。
现代文：孟养的思伦等人愿意向朝廷贡献象牙、土锦和金银器，退回所占的土地，替自己赎罪。王汝舟等人认为蛮莫等十三个地方，地域宽广，是各蛮族历年争夺的焦点。
English: Mengyang's Shilun and others were willing to donate ivory, pottery, gold and silverware to the imperial court, return the occupied land, and atone for their sins. Wang Ruzhou and others believed that it was impossible to wait for thirteen places, the region was vast, and it was the focus of the barbarians' competition over the years.

古文：而近时太监吉庆贪暴无状，虽尝阳却思陆之贽，然蛮知其贪，又乌知不因其却而更进之。
现代文：将该地区隶属于腾冲司，每年派官军去轮番守卫，则要考虑到烟雾和瘴气对官军的伤害；将该地区隶属于木邦，则又地势太辽远，蛮族人心里不顺服。
English: If the region is subordinated to Tengchong and the official army is sent every year to take turns to guard it, then the harm of smoke and radon to the official army should be taken into account; if the region is subordinated to Mubang, then the terrain is too far away, and the barbarians are not satisfied.

古文：臣闻蛮莫等处，乃水陆会通之地，蛮方器用咸自此出，江西、云南大理逋逃之民多赴之。
现代文：因此不如把该地区仍交给孟密管理，让他们每年在此地区征收差发银子一千两上交朝廷；再将该地区的孟乃等七处地方割让出来仍交归木邦的罕烈统治。这样土地已经均分，彼此间的忿争也就会平息了。皇上认为这样的措置可行。
English: Therefore, it would be better to leave the region still under the administration of Meng Mi, and let them collect 1,000 taels of silver every year in this region and submit them to the imperial court; and then cede seven places in the region, including Meng Nai, to the rare rule of Mubang. In this way, the land has been evenly divided, and the anger between each other will subside. The emperor believes that such a measure is feasible.

古文：云南差官每多赍违禁物往彼馈送，漏我虚实，为彼腹心。镇夷关一巡检耳，安能禁制。臣计孟养甲兵不能当中原一大县，以云南之势临之，易于压卵。
现代文：万历五年，云南的巡按官陈文燧上奏说孟养的思与缅甸人世代有仇，现今反而归顺于缅甸，因此不妨援引弘治皇帝当政时刘健曾经建议处理孟养事务的例子，认为思陆发有官职，还可听从朝廷的节制，即使没有官职他还是占据和统治着那个地方，这还不如直接给他那个官职，让他抵抗缅甸人的侵略为好。
English: In the fifth year of Wanli, Chen Wenjun, the inspector-general of Yunnan, reported that Meng Yang's Si had been hostile to the Burmese for generations, but was now subservient to Myanmar. Therefore, it is worth citing the example of Liu Jian, who had proposed to deal with Meng Yang's affairs when the Hongzhi Emperor was in power, and believed that Si Lu had an official post and could still obey the restraint of the imperial court. Even if he did not have an official post, he still occupied and ruled that place. It would be better to directly give him that official post and let him resist the Burmese aggression.

古文：柰何一调即来，屡抚不退，皆镇巡失之于初，逋逃奸人谋之于中，抚蛮中官坏之于后。
现代文：皇帝同意这个建议。十一年，缅甸军队被游击刘纟廷所打败，孟养的思威也杀死缅甸的使者向刘纟廷投降。十三年，官军平定了陇川，朝廷便在孟养设立了长官司。
English: The emperor agreed to this suggestion. In the eleventh year, the Burmese army was defeated by the guerrilla Liu Xingting. Mengyang's Siwei also killed the Burmese envoy and surrendered to Liu Xingting. In the thirteenth year, the government army leveled the Li River, and the court set up a magistrate's office in Mengyang.

古文：伏望垂念边民困苦，将云南镇守太监止存一员，另用指挥一员守备镇夷关，驱思陆退归江外，而移腾冲司于蛮莫，并木邦、孟密不得窥伺，乃为万全之策。
现代文：不久，孟养长官司的长官思真又被缅甸人掳走了，孟养的部落酋长思远奉着思真的妻子来归附朝廷，朝廷给她颁发了冠带，让她回去守卫本土。后来思远乘乱自己立为宣慰，向朝廷进贡大象和土产。
English: Soon after, Mengyang's chief magistrate, Sizhen, was also abducted by the Burmese. Mengyang's tribal chieftain, Siyuan, presented Siyuan's wife to the imperial court. The imperial court awarded her a crown and sash so that she could return to guard the mainland. Later, Siyuan took advantage of the turmoil to pay tribute to the imperial court in the form of elephants and local produce.

古文：设思陆冥顽不听抚谕，便当决策用兵，使无噍类，以为土官不法之戒。
现代文：但是思远行为太暴虐，各部落都恨他，将缅甸军队引来，声称是归还思真。
English: But Si Yan's actions were too violent, and all the tribes hated him and brought in the Burmese army, claiming to be returning Si Zhen.

古文：先是，吉庆已为思陆请朝贡，至是因朝宣疏，并下镇巡官议剿抚之宜，数年不决。
现代文：思远便逃奔到盏西。有一个叫思轰的人，归附朝廷，与蛮莫的酋长思正共同据险抵抗缅甸的侵扰。三十年，缅甸军队攻打思正，思轰率兵昼夜兼程赶去救援。
English: Siyuan fled to the west of Shanxi. A man named Sihong, who was attached to the imperial court, risked his life to resist the Burmese invasion together with the fierce chief Sizheng. For thirty years, the Burmese army attacked Sizheng, and Sihong led the soldiers day and night to rush to the rescue.

古文：十六年，巡抚陈金乃遣金腾参将卢和抚谕思陆。
现代文：等到达目的地时，思正已经被缅军所杀。三十二年，缅甸军队往西攻打思轰，思轰逃走死在外面。
English: When they arrived at their destination, Si Zheng had already been killed by the Burmese army. In 32, the Burmese army attacked Si Hun to the west, and Si Hun fled and died outside.

古文：和至腾冲，思陆遣陶孟投书，致方物。
现代文：缅甸就让头目思华守卫当地。思华死后，他的妻子代理他的职务。
English: After Siva's death, his wife took over his duties.

古文：和谕以祸福，令掣兵过江，归所占蛮莫等地，且调陇川、干崖、南甸三宣抚司蛮兵及战象，随官军分道至金沙江。
现代文：缅甸人轮番戍守此地，由于连年征发，当地百姓苦不堪言，都说 ：如果孟养不灭亡，我们蛮族人何以会到这个地步！ 
English: Burmese people take turns to stay here. Due to years of requisitioning and dispatching, the local people are miserable. They all say: If Meng Yao did not perish, how did we barbarians get to this point!

古文：思陆乃遣大陶孟伦索、怕卓等率所部来见，和等再申谕之。
现代文：思轰的后代名叫思祖，手下有一千多人，但不敢回孟养，只好寄居在干崖。
English: Sihong's descendants are called Sizu, and they have more than a thousand people under their command, but they do not dare to go back to Mengyang, so they have to live in the dry cliff.

古文：思陆听命，退还前所据蛮莫等地十三处，撤回象马蛮兵，渡金沙江而归。又遣陶孟、招刚等贡象六、银六百两并金银器纳款。
现代文：按原来的旧制，宣慰所派遣出使的人都称作头目，只有木邦和缅甸有陶孟、招刚等称谓，孟养则又有招八的称呼，这些都在奏章中可见，因为他们的习俗没改。
English: According to the original old system, the people dispatched by the Propaganda and Consolation Bureau were called ringleaders. Only Mubang and Myanmar had titles such as Tao Meng and Zhaogang, while Meng Yao was called Zhaoba. These can be seen in the record, because their customs have not changed.

古文：镇巡官以闻，并奏言： 蛮莫等地原隶木邦，成化间始为孟密所有，近又为思陆所据，连年构祸，今始平定。
现代文：车里，就是古代的产里，是倭泥、貂党等蛮族人杂居之地，古代没与中国有往来。元世祖命令手下的大将兀良吉耏讨伐交趾，经过车里，降服了他们，元朝廷便在此设置撒里路军民总管府，统领六个甸。
English: Chari, that is, the birthplace of the ancients, is a place where barbarians such as the Yamato and the Shinsengumi live together. In ancient times, there was no contact with China. The founder of the dynasty ordered his general, Aira Yoshitaka, to fight the Kotsugi, pass through the chariot, and subdue them. The former imperial court then set up the Saril Military and Civil Administration here, commanding six dynasties.

古文：既不可复与木邦、孟密，又不可割畀陇川、干崖、南甸三宣抚，宜暂于腾冲岁檄官军四百分番守之。
现代文：后来又设置了耿冻路耿当、孟弄两个州。明朝洪武十五年，蛮族酋长刀坎前来归降，朝廷便将当地改置为车里军民府，任命刀坎为知府。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu in the Ming Dynasty, when the barbarian chieftain Toukan came to surrender, the imperial court changed the place to the Cheli military and civilian government and appointed Toukan as the prefect.

古文：思陆前有助平思揲功，今悔祸纳款，请赐以名目、冠带，仍降敕奖谕。 
现代文：刀坎派遣他的侄子丰禄向朝廷贡献土产，皇帝下诏给刀坎和他的使者优厚赏赐衣服和绮币，因为他们是第一次来朝廷献贡。
English: Toukan dispatched his nephew Fenglu to the imperial court to contribute local products. The emperor gave Toukan and his emissary a generous reward of clothes and money, because they were the first to come to the imperial court to pay tribute.

古文：部议以蛮莫等处本木邦分地，在大义宜归之木邦。其名目、冠带，贡使已言思陆不愿受，不宜轻畀，请赐敕厚劳遣归之。
现代文：十七年，刀坎又派遣他的儿子刀思拂前来献贡，朝廷给刀坎赏赐冠带和钞币，将车里军民府改置为车里军民宣慰使司，任命刀坎为宣慰使。
English: In the seventeenth year, Toukan also sent his son Tou Shihito to pay tribute. The imperial court rewarded Toukan with a crown belt and banknotes, and changed the military and civilian government to the military and civilian consolation envoy, and appointed Toukan as the consolation envoy.

古文：报可。时思陆觊得宣慰司印，部执不予，于是仍数出兵与木邦、孟密仇杀无宁岁。嘉靖七年，总兵官沐绍勋、巡抚欧阳重遣参政王汝舟等遍历诸蛮，谕以祸福。
现代文：二十四年，刀坎的儿子刀暹答继嗣父亲的职位，派人向朝廷进献大象和土产。二十八年，因皇帝颁赐了诰命，刀暹答派人来朝廷谢恩，皇帝按前例给予赏赐。
English: In the 24th year, the son of Toukan, Tou Siam sent someone to present elephants and local products to the imperial court as the successor to his father's position. In the 28th year, because the emperor granted the death penalty, Tou Siam sent someone to the imperial court to thank him, and the emperor gave the reward according to the precedent.

古文：孟养思伦等各愿贡象牙、土锦、金银器，退地赎罪。
现代文：永乐元年，刀暹答派遣他的部下剽掠了威远州，将威远州的知州刀算党和百姓掳到车里。
English: In the first year of Yongle, the sword Siam sent his subordinates to plunder Wei Yuanzhou, and captured the Chizhou sword party and the people of Wei Yuanzhou into the car.

古文：乃以蛮莫等十三处地方宽广，诸蛮历年所争，属之腾冲司，檄军轮守，则烟瘴可虞；属之木邦，则地势辽远，蛮心不顺。
现代文：西平侯沐晟请求朝廷发兵讨伐，皇帝命令沐晟先传文书谕戒他，如果刀暹答不思悔改，再用军队讨伐。又因车里已经向官府交纳出威远的官印，这说明他们已有悔过之心，所以不必加兵。
English: Xiping Prince Mu Rong requested the imperial court to send troops to fight. The emperor ordered Mu Rong to first send a letter to warn him that if the Siamese did not repent, he would use the army to fight. And because the car had already handed over the powerful official seal to the government, this showed that they had repented, so there was no need to add troops.

古文：莫若仍属孟密管领，岁征差发银一千两，而割孟乃等七处仍归木邦罕烈，则分愿均而忿争息矣。
现代文：沐晟的使者到达车里后，刀暹答果然有所畏惧，将刀算党和所侵占的土地全归还给威远州，派人向朝廷献马以表示谢罪。皇帝认为他能改正过错，就宽恕了他。
English: After Mu Xun's emissary arrived in the car, the sword Siam really feared, returned the sword party and the occupied land to Weiyang Province, and sent someone to offer a horse to the court to express his thanks. The emperor thought he could correct the mistake and forgave him.

古文：报可。万历五年，云南巡按陈文燧言，孟养思个与缅世仇，今更归顺于缅。
现代文：从此刀暹答频频派人向朝廷进贡物。朝廷派遣宦官到车里，路经八百大甸时，被当地的宣慰刀招散所阻。三年，刀暹答派使者到朝廷，请求举兵攻打八百，皇帝对他的忠心颇为嘉赏。
English: From then on, the Siamese sent frequent tributes to the court. The court sent eunuchs to the car, and when they passed the eight hundred dynasties, they were stopped by the local consolation sword. Three years later, the Siamese sent an envoy to the court to request an army to attack the eight hundred, and the emperor was quite appreciative of his loyalty.

古文：自是频入贡。朝廷遣内官往车里者，道经八百大甸，为宣慰刀招散所阻。三年，刀暹答遣使请举兵攻八百，帝嘉其忠。八百伏罪，敕车里班师，复加奖劳。四年遣子刀典入国学，实阴自纳质。帝知其隐，赐衣币慰谕遣还，以道里辽远，命三年一贡，著为令。
现代文：八百伏罪后，皇帝敕谕让车里的军队撤去本境，并对他们又加奖赏和犒劳。四年刀暹答派遣他的儿子刀典进国子监学习，实际上是暗地里自荐他的儿子为人质。皇帝知道他的用意，给他赏赐衣服和钞币，对他慰劳和抚谕了一番之后又把他的儿子遣送回去了，告诉他们道路遥远，以后每三年朝贡一次就行了，并将此意图写成诏令。
English: After eight hundred years of subjugation, the emperor ordered the troops in the car to withdraw from their home territory, and added rewards and rewards to them. Four years later, Siam sent his son Tho Tho to study in the custody of the state, actually secretly recommending his son as a hostage. The emperor knew his intention, gave him clothes and money, comforted and caressed him, and then sent his son back, telling them that the road was far away, and that it would be enough to pay tribute every three years in the future, and wrote this intention into a decree.

古文：十一年，暹答卒。长子刀更孟自立，骄狠失民心，未几亦卒。
现代文：十一年，刀暹答死亡，他的长子刀更孟自立为宣慰使，但为人骄横狠毒，失去民心，不久也死了。
English: In the eleventh year, the sword Siam died, and his eldest son, the sword Heng Meng, stood up for himself as a consoler, but he was arrogant and cruel, lost the people's hearts, and soon died.

古文：更孟长子霸羡年幼，众推刀赛署司事。
现代文：刀更孟的长子刀霸羡年纪又小，于是当地众人便推举刀赛掌管宣慰使司的事务。
English: The eldest son of Toucheng Meng, Touba, was too young, so the local people elected Toucheng to be in charge of the affairs of Xuancheng Enshi.

古文：刀赛者，更孟弟刀怕汉也。
现代文：刀赛，是刀更孟的弟弟刀怕汉。
English: Tosai, is the younger brother of Toga Meng, Toga Han.

古文：怕汉死，妻以前夫子刀弄冒为暹答孙，请袭。
现代文：刀怕汉死后，他的妻子将自己前夫所生的儿子刀弄冒充为刀暹答的孙子，请求承袭宣慰使的职务。
English: After the death of the sword-fearing Han, his wife passed off the son she had with her ex-husband as the grandson of the sword-wielding Siamese, and asked to take over the post of consoler.

古文：十五年命刀弄袭宣慰使，以更孟从弟刀双孟为本司同知。
现代文：十五年朝廷任命刀弄承袭宣慰使的职务，又任命刀更孟的堂弟刀双孟为本司的同知。
English: In the 15th year, the imperial court appointed Tong Nong to take over the post of the consolation envoy, and also appointed Tong Xiang Meng's cousin Tong Shuang Meng as a confidant of the department.

古文：十九年，双孟言刀弄屡以兵侵劫蛮民，乞别设治所，以抚其众。
现代文：十九年，刀双孟上奏说刀弄屡次派兵侵夺抢劫蛮族百姓，请求朝廷另外设立治所，以安抚众人。
English: In the 19th year, Tong Shuang Meng reported to the emperor that Tong Lang had repeatedly sent troops to invade and rob the barbarian people, and requested the imperial court to set up a separate justice center to appease everyone.

古文：诏分其地，置靖安宣慰使司，升双孟为宣慰使，命礼部铸印给之。
现代文：皇帝下诏，将车里一分为二，设置了靖安宣慰使司，升任刀双孟为宣慰使，命令礼部铸造官印颁给刀双孟。
English: The emperor issued an edict, divided the carriage into two, set up the Jing'an Consolation Envoy Division, promoted the sword Shuangmeng to the consolation envoy, and ordered the ceremonial department to issue the official seal to the sword Shuangmeng.

古文：宣德三年，云南布政司奏刀弄、双孟相仇杀，弄弃地投老挝，请差官招抚。
现代文：宣德三年，云南布政司上奏，说刀弄与刀双孟之间互相仇杀，刀弄已弃地投奔老挝，请求朝廷派遣官员前去招抚。
English: In the third year of the Xuande era, Yunnan Bu Zheng Zi made a speech, saying that there was a vendetta between Tong Nong and Tong Shuang Meng, that Tong Nong had abandoned the country and fled to Laos, and requested the imperial court to send officials to appease him.

古文：帝命黔国公计议。
现代文：皇帝命令黔国公考虑此事。
English: The emperor ordered the Duke of Yan to consider the matter.

古文：六年，黔国公奏，谓奉命招抚刀弄，其母具言布政司差官刘亨征差发金，亨已取去，本司复来征，蛮民因而激变逐弄，弄逃入老挝，寻还境内以死。
现代文：六年，黔国公上奏说，我们奉朝廷之命去招抚刀弄，刀弄的母亲具体叙述说布政司所派的官员刘亨去征收并取走了差发金，而宣慰使司又去征收，结果激怒了蛮族百姓，将刀弄赶走。刀弄逃入老挝，不久前回到车里后死了。
English: Six years ago, the report said, we were ordered by the imperial court to appease the sword-wielding man. The mother of the sword-wielding man specifically recounted that Liu Heng, an official sent by the Secretary for Political Affairs, went to collect and took away the money, while the Minister of Consolation went to collect again. As a result, he angered the barbarian people and drove the sword-wielding man away. The sword-wielding man fled to Laos and died after returning to the car not long ago.

古文：未尝弃地外投，亦未尝与双孟仇杀。
现代文：刀弄不曾有弃地外投的动机，也没有与刀双孟仇杀的行为。
English: There was no motive for the abandonment of foreign investment, and there was no act of vendetta with the sword.

古文：帝命法司执刘亨等罪之。
现代文：皇帝下命令给司法官，让他们将刘亨抓捕治罪。
English: The emperor ordered the judicial officers to arrest and prosecute Liu Heng.

古文：七年，车里土舍刀霸羡请袭，许之，遣行人陆埙赍敕赐冠带、袭衣。
现代文：七年，车里的土舍刀霸羡请求承袭宣慰使职务，朝廷同意，派行人陆埙去给他颁赐冠带和官服。
English: In the seventh year, Tsuchesho Touba En, who was in the car, requested to take over the post of consoler, and the Imperial Court agreed to send a pedestrian, Lu Yao, to present him with a crown and official uniform.

古文：九年，靖安宣慰刀霸供言： 靖安原车里地，今析为二，致有争端，乞仍并为一，岁贡如例。 
现代文：九年，靖安宣慰刀霸供说： 靖安原是车里的地盘，现今一分为二，致使彼此间互有争端，请求朝廷仍将两地合为一处，每年的朝贡数额依旧。 
English: In the ninth year, Jing'an Xuan comforted the swordsman and confessed: Jing'an used to be the site of the carriage, but now it is divided into two, resulting in disputes between each other, requesting the imperial court to still combine the two places into one, and the annual tribute amount is still the same.

古文：帝从其请，革靖安宣慰，仍归车里，命刀霸供、刀霸羡共为宣慰使，俾上所授靖安宣慰司印。
现代文：皇帝同意了他的请求，革除了靖安宣慰的职位，让靖安仍回归车里，任命刀霸供、刀霸羡共为车里的宣慰使，并让他们上交以前所授予的靖安宣慰司的官印。
English: The emperor agreed to his request, dismissed the post of Jing'an's consoler, let Jing'an still return to the car, appointed Toba Fu and Toba Zhen as the consoler in the car, and let them submit the official seal of Jing'an's consoler previously awarded.

古文：正统五年命贡使赍敕及绮帛归赐刀霸羡及妻，嘉其勤修职贡也。
现代文：正统五年，皇帝命令车里的贡使带着皇帝的敕谕和绮帛等物回去，赏赐给刀霸羡和他的妻子，嘉奖他们勤修职贡。
English: In the fifth year of the orthodoxy, the emperor ordered the tributary in the car to return with the emperor's edict and other things, and rewarded the sword master and his wife, commending them for their diligence.

古文：六年，麓川宣慰思伦发叛，诏给车里信符、金牌，命合兵剿贼。
现代文：六年，麓川宣慰思伦发叛乱，皇帝下诏给车里颁发信符和金牌，让他们带兵与官军一起剿灭叛贼。
English: In the sixth year, the emperor issued an edict to give the car a letter and a gold medal, so that they could lead the soldiers together with the government army to destroy the traitors.

古文：景泰三年以刀霸羡奉调有功，免其积欠差发金。
现代文：景泰三年，朝廷因刀霸羡奉调有功，免除车里所积欠的差发金。
English: In the third year of Jing Tai, the imperial court, because of the envy of the swordsmen, was able to get rid of the bad money accumulated in the car.

古文：天顺元年，总兵官沐璘奏： 刀霸羡自杀，弟板雅忠等已推兄三宝历代承职。
现代文：天顺元年，总兵官沐瞞上奏说： 刀霸羡已经自杀，他的弟弟板雅忠等人已经推举其兄三宝历代承袭宣慰使的职务。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, the commander-in-chief of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, Mu Xie, said in his report: "Toba En has committed suicide, and his younger brother, Ban Yazhong, and others have nominated his older brother, Sanbao, to succeed him in the position of the Minister of Consolation.

古文：今板雅忠又作乱，纠合八百相仇杀。 
现代文：现今板雅忠又作乱，纠合八百的兵力与三宝历代相互仇杀。 
English: Today, Ban Yazhong is once again in turmoil, entangling eight hundred troops and the Three Jewels of all ages in mutual vendettas.

古文：帝命璘亟为抚谕，并勘奏应袭者。
现代文：皇帝命令沐瞞快速前去招抚，并审核谁应当承袭官职后上报朝廷。
English: The emperor ordered Mu Xie to quickly go to the court and examine who should succeed to the official post and report to the imperial court.

古文：二年，帝以三宝历代者，虽刀更孟之子，乃庶孽夺嫡，谋害刀霸羡，致板雅忠借兵攻杀，不当袭。
现代文：二年，皇帝认为三宝历代虽是刀更孟的儿子，但是庶子。以庶子夺取嫡子的权力，谋害了刀霸羡，致使板雅忠从外地借兵前来攻杀，按理不应当让三宝历代承袭官职。
English: In the second year, the emperor thought that although Sanbao was the son of the sword master Meng, he was an illegitimate son. Taking the illegitimate son to seize the power of the legitimate son, he plotted the murder of the sword master, causing Ban Yazhong to borrow soldiers from abroad to attack and kill. By rights, Sanbao should not be allowed to inherit official positions.

古文：但蛮民推立，姑从众愿，命袭宣慰使。
现代文：但既然是蛮族百姓共同推举他，朝廷暂且顺从百姓的意愿，任命三宝历代承袭宣慰使的职务。
English: However, since he was jointly elected by the barbarian people, the imperial court temporarily obeyed the will of the people and appointed Sanbao to succeed the post of the Consoler.

古文：成化十六年，交阯黎灏叛，颁伪敕于车里，期会兵共攻八百，车里持两端。
现代文：成化十六年，交的黎灏发动叛乱，颁发伪敕给车里，约车里与他一起会兵共同进攻八百，车里不置可否。
English: In the 16th year of Chenghua, he ordered Lihong to launch a rebellion, issued a fake letter to Che Li, and asked Che Li to join forces with him to jointly attack eight hundred soldiers. Che Li did not say whether he could or not.

古文：云南守臣以闻，遣使敕车里诸土官互相保障，勿怀二心。
现代文：云南守卫大臣上报朝廷后，朝廷派使者敕谕车里的各位土官，要他们互相保障，不要对朝廷怀有二心。
English: After the Yunnan Minister of Defense reported to the imperial court, the imperial court sent an envoy to instruct the local officials in the car, asking them to protect each other and not to harbor any ambivalence toward the imperial court.

古文：二十年复敕车里等部，惧固封疆，防交人入寇，不得轻与文移，启衅纳侮。
现代文：二十年，朝廷又降敕谕给车里的各部落，要他们小心地守卫自己的疆界，防止交人入侵，并不能轻易地与交人通文书，以免引起争端招致侮辱。
English: Twenty years later, the imperial court again issued an edict to the tribes in the car, asking them to carefully guard their borders and prevent the invasion of foreigners, and not to easily communicate with foreigners, so as not to cause disputes and invite insults.

古文：嘉靖十一年，缅酋莽应里据摆古，蚕食诸蛮。
现代文：嘉靖十一年，缅甸酋长莽应里占据了摆古，蚕食各蛮族部落。
English: In the eleventh year of Jiajing, the Burmese chieftain Meng Ying-li occupied Penggu, encroaching on various barbarian tribes.

古文：车里宣慰刀糯猛折而入缅，有大、小车里之称，以大车里应缅，而以小车里应中国。
现代文：车里宣慰刀糯猛遭受损失后投入缅甸，于是便有大、小车里之称，所谓大车里向着缅甸，小车里向着中国。
English: After suffering heavy losses, the Xuancheng entered Myanmar, so it was known as the "big" and "small" chariots. The so-called "big" chariot was facing Myanmar, and the "small" chariot was facing China.

古文：万历十三年命元江土舍那恕往招，糯猛复归，献驯象、金屏、象齿诸物，谢罪。
现代文：万历十三年朝廷命令元江的土舍那恕前去招抚刀糯猛，刀糯猛又回到车里，向朝廷进献驯象、金屏、象牙等物，表示谢罪。
English: In the thirteenth year of Wanli, the imperial court ordered the landowner of the Yuanjiang River to go to appease the swordsman, and the swordsman returned to the car and presented the court with a tamed elephant, a gold screen, ivory and other things to express his gratitude.

古文：诏受之，听复职。
现代文：皇帝下诏接受刀糯猛的谢罪，听任他恢复职务。
English: The emperor issued an edict accepting the fierce apology and allowed him to resume his duties.

古文：天启七年，巡抚闵洪学奏，缅人侵孟艮，孟艮就车里求救，宣慰刀韫猛遣兵象万余赴之。
现代文：天启七年，巡抚闵洪学上奏说缅甸人入侵孟艮，孟艮到车里求救，宣慰刀韫猛派遣士兵和战象一万多奔赴孟艮。
English: In the seventh year of the Chinese lunar calendar, the governor Zhai Hongxue said that the Burmese had invaded Mengye. Mengye went to the car to ask for help, and sent more than 10,000 soldiers and war elephants to Mengye.

古文：缅人以是恨车里，兴兵报复，韫猛年已衰，重赂求和。
现代文：缅甸人以此恨车里，兴兵报复。刀韫猛年纪已高，以重礼贿赂缅甸人，请求讲和。
English: The Burmese took this as an opportunity to take revenge on the Chari and raise an army. The old warrior, who was already very old, bribed the Burmese with a heavy tribute and asked them to make peace.

古文：缅闻韫猛子召河璇有女名召乌冈色美，责献乌冈。
现代文：缅甸人听说刀韫猛的儿子召诃璇有个女儿名叫召乌冈，姿色美丽，便责成刀韫猛献出召乌冈。
English: The Burmese heard that the son of the sword fighter, Zhao Kun, had a daughter named Zhao Wugang, who was beautiful, so they ordered the sword fighter to sacrifice Zhao Wugang.

古文：河璇别以女绐之。
现代文：刀诃璇以别的女人代替召乌冈献给缅甸人。
English: To the Burmese, another woman was used as a substitute to summon Wugang.

古文：缅知其诈，大愤，攻车里愈急。
现代文：缅甸人知道自己受骗后，大为愤怒，攻打车里更急。
English: When the Burmese realised they had been tricked, they were furious and attacked the car even more quickly.

古文：韫猛父子不能支，遁至思毛地，缅追执之以去。
现代文：刀韫猛父子支撑不住了，便逃到思毛。缅甸人追到思毛将他们父子抓获。
English: Unable to hold on, the father and son fled to Simao. The Burmese chased them to Simao and captured them.

古文：中朝不及问，车里遂亡。
现代文：朝廷来不及过问，车里于是就灭亡了。
English: The court did not have time to investigate, and the carriage was destroyed.

古文：老挝，俗呼为挝家，古不通中国。
现代文：老挝，俗称为挝家，古代没有与中国往来。
English: In ancient times, Laos, commonly known as Laos, had no contact with China.

古文：成祖即位，老挝土官刀线歹贡方物，始置老挝军民宣慰使司。
现代文：明成祖即皇帝位后，老挝的土官刀线歹向朝廷进献土产，朝廷才在此开始设置军民宣慰使司。
English: After Emperor Ming Cheng Zu ascended the throne, the local officials of Laos made a donation of local products to the imperial court. It was only then that the imperial court began to set up military and civilian consolation envoys.

古文：永乐二年以刀线歹为宣慰使，给之印。
现代文：永乐二年，任命刀线歹为宣慰使，颁给他印信。
English: In the second year of the Yongle Emperor's reign, the Emperor appointed him as a consolation envoy and issued him a seal letter.

古文：五年遣人来贡。
现代文：五年，刀线歹派人来京城献贡。
English: In the fifth year, the sword-throwing gangsters sent people to the capital to pay tribute.

古文：既而帝以刀线歹潜通安南季犛，遣使诘责，谕其悔过。
现代文：不久，皇帝因刀线歹暗通安南的季耑，派使者前去诘问，劝谕他悔过。
English: Not long after, the emperor sent an envoy to Annan's residence to ask him about the incident and persuade him to repent.

古文：六年，刀线歹遣人贡象马、方物。
现代文：六年，刀线歹派人向朝廷进献大象、马和土产。
English: In the sixth year, the swordsmen sent people to present elephants, horses and local products to the imperial court.

古文：七年复进金银器、犀象、方物谢罪。
现代文：七年又向朝廷进献金银器、犀象和土产，以表示谢罪。
English: Seven years later, he donated gold and silverware, a rhinoceros elephant and local produce to the imperial court to express his remorse.

古文：自是连年入贡，皆赉予如例。
现代文：从此连年向朝廷入贡，而朝廷也按例给予赏赐。
English: From then on, tribute was paid to the imperial court year after year, and the imperial court also gave rewards as usual.

古文：帝遣中官杨琳往赐文绮。
现代文：皇帝还派宦官杨琳前去老挝，赏赐文绮给刀线歹。
English: The emperor also sent eunuch Yang Lin to Laos to reward Wen Jiabao for his bravery.

古文：十年来贡，命礼部加赐焉。
现代文：十年刀线歹又派人献贡物，皇帝命令礼部给他多加赏赐。
English: Ten years later, he sent someone to pay tribute, and the emperor ordered the ceremonial department to give him more rewards.

古文：宣德六年遣使赍敕奖谕宣慰刀线达。
现代文：宣德六年，皇帝派使者带着敕谕去奖赏宣慰刀线达。
English: Six years after the declaration of martial law, the emperor sent an envoy with an edict to reward Xuan Tiao for his bravery.

古文：九年，老挝贡使还，恐道中为他部所阻，给信符，敕孟艮、车里诸部遣人护之。
现代文：九年，老挝向朝廷献贡的使者回去时，朝廷怕他在路途中被其他部落所阻拦，特地颁给他信符，敕谕孟艮、车里各部落派人护送他。
English: In the ninth year, when the emissary of Laos to pay tribute to the imperial court returned, the imperial court was afraid that he would be blocked by other tribes on the way, and specially issued him a letter of credence, instructing Mengyu and the tribes in the car to send someone to escort him.

古文：景泰元年请赐土官衣服。
现代文：景泰元年，老挝请求给土官赏赐衣服。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, Laos requested that local officials be given clothes.

古文：故事，无加赐衣服者，命加赐锦币并及其妻。成化元年颁金牌、信符于老挝。
现代文：没有赐土服的土官，皇帝命令给他和他的妻子加赐锦帛。成化元年，朝廷颁发金牌、信符给老挝。
English: The emperor ordered that he and his wife be given brocade brocades. In the first year of Chenghua, the imperial court awarded gold medals and letters to Laos.

古文：七年铸给老挝军民宣慰使司印，以皆为贼焚毁也。
现代文：七年朝廷让礼部给老挝军民宣慰使司铸印，因他们原有的印信全给叛贼焚烧了。
English: For seven years, the imperial court allowed the Ministry of Ceremonies to cast seals for the Laotian army and people, because all of their original seals were burned by the traitors.

古文：十六年，贡使至，会安南攻老挝，镇守内官钱能以闻。
现代文：十六年，老挝向朝廷献贡的使者到达京城时，正好碰上安南在向老挝进攻，镇守云南的宦官钱能将此事上报给朝廷。
English: Sixteen years later, when the envoy of Laos to pay tribute to the imperial court arrived in Beijing, it just happened that Annan was attacking Laos. Qian Neng, the eunuch who guarded Yunnan, reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：因敕其使兼程回，并量给道里费。
现代文：皇帝便让其使者日夜兼程赶回去，并赐予他适量的路费。
English: The emperor let his emissary drive back day and night, and gave him a reasonable amount of travel expenses.

古文：明年，安南黎灏率兵九万，开山为三道，进兵破哀牢，入老挝境，杀宣慰刀板雅及其子二人。
现代文：第二年，安南的黎灏带兵九万，分三路进兵攻破哀牢，进入老挝境内，杀死宣慰刀板雅和他的两个儿子。
English: The following year, Annan's successor, Riek Machar, led 90,000 soldiers in a three-pronged invasion to break through the mourning prison and enter Laos, killing the consoler, Thao Ban Nga, and his two sons.

古文：其季子怕雅赛走八百，宣慰刀揽那遣兵送至景坎。
现代文：刀板雅的三儿子怕雅赛逃到八百，宣慰刀揽那派兵将他护送到景坎。
English: The third son of Touban Ya was afraid that Yasai would escape to 800, so he consoled Touban by sending soldiers to escort him to Jingkan.

古文：黔国公沐琮以闻，命怕雅赛袭父职，免其贡物一年，赐冠带、彩币，以示优恤。
现代文：黔国公沐琮将此情况上报朝廷，朝廷任命怕雅赛为老挝宣慰使，以承袭其父的职务，免除他们一年的贡物，颁赐给他冠带、彩帛，以表示朝廷对他的体恤。
English: King Mu Xuan reported the situation to the imperial court, and the imperial court appointed Xian Yasei as the Lao comfort envoy to succeed his father's duties, exempted them from a year's tribute, and awarded him a crown and sash to show the court's sympathy for him.

古文：既怕雅赛欲报安南之仇，觊中国发兵为助。
现代文：怕雅赛既然想向安南报仇，就指望中国出兵帮助他。
English: It is feared that since Yasay wants to take revenge on Annan, he is counting on China to send troops to help him.

古文：帝以老挝、交阯皆服属中国久，恤灾解难，中国体也，令琮慎遣人谕之。
现代文：皇帝认为老挝和交很久以前就已顺服中国，中国只能替他们恤灾解难，让沐琮派人小心地劝谕他们。
English: The emperor thought that the Laotian diplomats had submitted to China a long time ago, and China could only sympathize with them and solve their problems, so he sent people to advise them carefully.

古文：弘治十一年，宣慰舍人招揽章应袭职，遣人来贡，因请赐冠带及金牌、信符。
现代文：弘治十一年，宣慰舍人招揽章应承袭宣慰使职务，他派人前来朝贡，并请朝廷给他颁赐金牌、信符和冠带。
English: In the eleventh year of the Hongzhi era, he sent someone to pay tribute to the emperor and asked the imperial court to give him a gold medal, a letter and a crown.

古文：赉赏如制，其金牌、信符，俟镇巡官勘奏至日给之。
现代文：朝廷按前例给予赏赐，至于颁给他的金牌和信符要等镇巡官审核情况后上报朝廷时，朝廷才能颁发。
English: The imperial court awards rewards according to precedent. As for the gold medal and certificate awarded to him, the imperial court can only issue them after the town inspector has reviewed the situation and reported it to the imperial court.

古文：十一月，招揽章遣使入贡。吏部言： 招揽章系舍人，未授职，僣称宣慰使，云南三司官冒奏违错，宜治罪。 
现代文：该年十一月，招揽章派人向朝廷献贡物，吏部上奏说： 招揽章是舍人，还未授予他宣慰使的职务，而他竟然就以宣慰使自居。云南三司官员也冒错上奏，应当治他们的罪。 
English: In November of the same year, Zhaozhuangzhang sent people to pay tribute to the imperial court, and the cadre department reported: Zhaozhuangzhang is a deserter, he has not yet been awarded the post of consoler, and he even pretended to be a consoler. Yunnan Third Division officials also made a mistake in reporting, and they should be punished.

古文：宥之。嘉靖九年，招揽章言： 交阯应袭长子光绍，为叔所逐，出亡老挝，欲调象马送回。 
现代文：对于光绍，将他留下来，容易引起争端；将他遣送回去，又要动用军队。两者都不适宜，最好还是听任他自己回去。
English: As for Guangsha, leaving him behind is likely to cause disputes; sending him back will require the use of the military. Neither is appropriate, and it is best to let him go back on his own.

古文：守臣言： 据招揽章之言，惧纳亡之罪，且假我为制服之资，留之启衅，遣之招兵，宜听光绍自归，并责其私纳罪。 报可。
现代文：朝廷还应责备招揽章私自收纳逃亡之人的罪行。 
English: The imperial court should also reproach the crime of privately collecting fugitives from the soliciting chapter.

古文：二十四年，云南巡抚汪文盛言： 老挝土舍怕雅闻征讨安南，首先思奋，且地广兵多，可独当一面。
现代文：皇帝同意这个建议。二十四年，云南巡抚汪文盛上奏说 ：老挝的土舍怕雅赛，听说要征讨安南，首先就会感到振奋。他那里地广兵多，可独当一面。
English: The emperor agreed to this suggestion. In 1924, the governor of Yunnan, Wang Wensheng, wrote: "The Laotian people are afraid of Yasai. When they hear that Annan is to be subdued, the first thing they feel is excitement. He has a large number of soldiers there and can stand alone.

古文：八百、车里与老挝相近，孟艮在老挝上流，皆多兵象，可备征讨。
现代文：八百和车里与老挝很相近，孟艮又在老挝的上流，这些地方都有许多土兵和大象，可让他们准备征讨工作。
English: Ya Huping and Che Liang are very close to Laos, and Meng Yao is in the upper reaches of Laos. There are many local soldiers and elephants in these places, which can prepare them for the recruitment work.

古文：请免其察勘，就令承袭，以备征调。 
现代文：请求朝廷免除对怕雅赛的审核调查，让他承袭宣慰使职务，以准备听从朝廷的调遣。 
English: He requested the imperial court to exempt him from the examination and investigation, and let him take over the post of consoler in order to be prepared to obey the imperial court's dispatch.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：四十四年，土舍怕雅兰章遣人进舞牌牙象二、母象三、犀角十，云南守臣以闻。
现代文：四十四年，老挝的土舍怕雅兰章派人向朝廷进献两只舞牌牙象、三只母象、十只犀角。他们到达云南，云南的守卫大臣将此上报朝廷。
English: In the 44th year, Lao Emperor Taoshe sent people to present two dancing elephants, three female elephants and ten rhinoceroses to the Imperial Court. They arrived in Yunnan, and the Minister of Defense of Yunnan reported this to the Imperial Court.

古文：礼部以非贡期，且无汉、缅公文，第来路险远，跋涉逾年，宜受其所贡，给赏遣之，毋令赴京。
现代文：礼部认为现在不是他们朝贡的日期，而且他们也没有用汉文或缅文写的文书，但他们来京城的路途很险远，跋山涉水要一年多的时间，云南应该接受他们的贡物，给予赏赐，让他们不要赴京城了。
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies believes that now is not the date of their tribute, and they do not have a document written in Chinese or Burmese, but they have a long way to go to Beijing. It takes more than a year to travel across the mountains and rivers. Yunnan should accept their tribute and reward them, so that they do not go to Beijing.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇帝认为这样处理可行。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：时缅势方张，剪除诸部，老挝亦折而入缅，符印俱失。
现代文：此时缅甸的势力正旺，他们剪除了各部落。老挝也因抵挡不住而投入缅甸，朝廷所颁发给他们的信符和官印都丢失了。
English: At this time, Myanmar's forces were in full swing, and they had cut off the tribes. Laos also invaded Myanmar because they could not resist, and the letters and official seals issued to them by the imperial court were lost.

古文：万历二十六年，缅败，老挝来归，奉职贡，请颁印。
现代文：万历二十六年，缅甸失败后，老挝又来归顺朝廷，向朝廷献贡，请求朝廷给他们颁发印信。
English: In the 26th year of Wanli, after the defeat of Myanmar, Laos again submitted to the imperial court, paid tribute to the imperial court, and requested the imperial court to issue a seal letter to them.

古文：命复铸老挝军民宣慰使司印给之。
现代文：朝廷又让礼部给他们铸造老挝军民宣慰使司的官印颁发给他们。
English: The Imperial Court also asked the Ministry of Ceremonies to cast the official seal of the Lao People's Liberation Army to present to them.

古文：其地东至水尾，南至交阯，西至八百，北至车里，西北六十八程至云南布政司。
现代文：四十年他们给朝廷献贡物时说朝廷给他们颁发的印信全被大火焚毁，请求朝廷再给他们颁发一次。抚镇官将此上报朝廷。第二年朝廷又给他们颁发了军民宣慰使司的印信。此时，老挝宣慰还给朝廷贡献大象、银器和缅甸席子，朝廷也按惯例给予赏赐。
English: Forty years later, when they offered their tribute to the imperial court, they said that all the seal letters issued to them by the imperial court had been destroyed by fire, and asked the imperial court to issue them again. Fuzhen officials reported this to the imperial court. The following year, the imperial court issued them a seal letter from the military and civilian consolation envoy. At this time, the Lao consolation returned to the imperial court to contribute elephants, silverware and Burmese mats, and the imperial court also rewarded them according to the usual practice.

古文：八百，世传部长有妻八百，各领一寨，因名八百媳妇。
现代文：从此以后，老挝使者就再也没有来过中国。八百，世人传说该地的部落酋长有八百个妻子，每个妻子都统领一个寨子，因此称为八百媳妇。
English: From then on, the Laotian envoy never came to China again. Eight hundred. According to legend, the local tribal chiefs had eight hundred wives, and each wife ruled over a stockade, hence the name "eight hundred daughters-in-law."

古文：元初征之，道路不通而还，后遣使招附。
现代文：元朝初年曾派兵去征讨八百，因道路不通而回，后来朝廷派使者前去招抚他们，他们就归附了元朝。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, soldiers were sent to collect 800 slaves, but they returned because the roads were impassable. Later, the imperial court sent an envoy to persuade them, and they returned to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：元统初，置八百等处宣慰司。
现代文：元朝元统初年朝廷设置了八百等处宣慰司。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court set up 800 comfort stations.

古文：洪武二十一年，八百媳妇国遣人入贡，遂设宣慰司。
现代文：明朝洪武二十一年，八百媳妇国派人向朝廷献贡物，朝廷便设置八百宣慰司。
English: In the twenty-first year of the reign of Emperor Hongwu of the Ming Dynasty, 800 daughters-in-law of the country sent people to pay tribute to the imperial court, and the imperial court set up 800 comfort stations.

古文：二十四年，八百土官刀板冕遣使贡象及方物。
现代文：二十四年，八百的土官刀板冕派使者向朝廷贡献大象和土产。
English: In 1924, 800 local officials sent envoys to the imperial court to offer elephants and local products.

古文：先是，西平侯沐英遣云南左卫百户杨完者往八百招抚，至是来贡。
现代文：此前，西平侯沐英派云南左卫的百户杨完者到八百招抚他们，至此他们就来向朝廷献贡物。
English: Previously, Xiping Prince Mu Ying had sent to Yunnan Zuwei's hundred households Yang Gan to eight hundred to entice them, so they came to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：帝谕兵部尚书茹玮曰： 闻八百与百夷构兵，仇杀无宁日。
现代文：皇帝对兵部尚书茹王韦说： 听说八百与百夷之间构兵仇杀，民无宁日。
English: The emperor said to the military commander, Shang Shuru Wang Wei, "I have heard that there is a feud between the eight hundred and the hundred, and the people are restless.

古文：朕念八百宣慰远在万里外，能修职奉贡，深见至诚。
现代文：我顾念到八百宣慰远在万里之外的地方，尚能谨修职守向朝廷进献贡物，可见他对朝廷的诚心是很深的。
English: I thought about the fact that 800 tons of condolences were sent to a place thousands of miles away, but I was still able to perform my duties and pay tribute to the imperial court. This shows that his sincerity to the imperial court is very deep.

古文：今与百夷构兵，当有以处之。
现代文：现今他们与百夷动兵，或可这样处理。
English: Now that they have mobilized against Baiyi, they may do so.

古文：可谕意八百，令练兵固守，俟王师进讨。 
现代文：你可将我们的意图告诉八百宣慰，让他们精练兵马固守疆土，等待朝廷派兵前去讨伐百夷。 
English: You can tell our intentions to the Eight Hundred Xuancheng, let them train soldiers and horses to firmly defend the territory, and wait for the imperial court to send soldiers to fight Baiyi.

古文：自是及永乐初，频遣使入贡，赐予如例。
现代文：此后至永乐初年，他们都频频派使者到朝廷献贡物，皇帝都按例给予赏赐。
English: From then until the first year of Yongle, they frequently sent emissaries to the imperial court to offer tribute, and the emperor gave rewards as usual.

古文：永乐二年设军民宣慰使司二，以土官刀招你为八百者乃宣慰使，其弟刀招散为八百大甸宣慰使，遣员外郎左洋往赐印诰、冠带、袭衣。
现代文：永乐二年，朝廷在老挝设置了两个军民宣慰使司；任命土官刀招你为八百者乃军民宣慰使司的宣慰使；任命他的弟弟刀招散为八百大甸军民宣慰使司的宣慰使。朝廷派遣员外郎左洋前去给他们颁赐官印、封官的诰命、冠带和官衣。
English: In the 2nd year of Yongle, the imperial court set up two military and people's consolation envoys in Laos; appointed the local official Jiao Zha You as the consolation envoy of the 800th military and people's consolation envoy; appointed his brother Jiao Zha Zan as the consolation envoy of the 800th military and people's consolation envoy.

古文：刀招散遣人贡马及方物谢恩，命五年一朝贡。
现代文：刀招散派人向朝廷进献贡马和土产，以感谢皇帝的恩德。皇帝让他们五年朝贡一次就行了。
English: To show his gratitude for the emperor's kindness, he sent people to the imperial court to offer tribute horses and local products. The emperor only asked them to pay tribute once every five years.

古文：是岁，遣内官杨瑄赍敕谕孟定、孟养等部，道经八百大甸，为土官刀招散所阻，弗克进。
现代文：在这一年中，朝廷派遣宦官杨蠧带着皇帝的敕谕前往孟定、孟养等地，途经八百大甸时，被土官刀招散所阻拦，无法前去。
English: During this year, the imperial court sent the eunuch Yang Xuan to Mengding, Mengyang and other places with the emperor's imperial edict. When he passed through the Eight Hundred Great Dynasties, he was blocked by local officials and could not go.

古文：三年遣使谕刀招散曰： 朕特颁金字红牌，敕谕与诸边为信，以禁戢边吏生事扰害，用福尔众。
现代文：三年，皇帝派使者谕告刀招散说 ：我特地颁发金字红牌给你，敕谕你与各边疆部落以此为信符，禁止有人屠杀边疆地区的官吏、滋事生非和骚扰危害边疆地区的安宁，给你和你的百姓降福。
English: In the third year, the emperor sent an envoy to announce and disseminate: I specially issue a gold and red card to you, and instruct you and all the frontier tribes to use it as a token to prohibit anyone from slaughtering officials in the frontier areas, causing trouble and harassing and endangering the tranquility of the frontier areas, and to bless you and your people.

古文：诸宣慰皆敬恭听命，无所违礼。惟尔年幼无知，惑于小人孟乃朋、孟允公等，启衅生祸，使臣至境，拒却不纳。
现代文：其他各宣慰都恭敬从命，没有违越行为，唯有你年幼无知，听从孟乃朋、孟允公等小人的蛊惑，惹事生祸，朝廷的使臣到达你的境内，竟然拒不接纳。
English: All other proclamations respectfully obeyed orders and did not violate them. Only you, being young and ignorant, listened to the instigation of villains such as Meng Naibang and Meng Yungong, caused troubles and disasters, and refused to accept the imperial envoys when they arrived in your territory.

古文：廷臣咸请兴师问罪，朕念八百之人岂皆为恶，兵戈所至，必及无辜，有所不忍。
现代文：朝廷的大臣们都请求派兵向你问罪，我顾念到八百的人哪里会都作恶呢？如果兵戈所至，必然会殃及无辜之人，因此不忍心动兵。
English: The ministers of the court have all asked for soldiers to be sent to question you. I am mindful of the fact that where there are eight hundred people, they will all do evil. If war comes, it will inevitably affect innocent people, so I can't bear to go to war.

古文：兹特遣司宾田茂、推官林桢赍敕往谕，尔能悔过自新，即将奸邪之人擒送至京，庶境土可保。
现代文：现特地派遣司宾田茂、推官林桢持敕前来谕告你们。若你能悔过自新，就马上将奸邪之徒抓起来送到京城，这样你的境土尚可保全。
English: I am now specially dispatching my special envoy, Shigeru Taneda, and my deputy, Hayashi Mochizuki, to tell you that if you can repent and reform, you should immediately arrest the traitors and send them to the capital, so that your territory can still be preserved.

古文：其或昏迷不悛，发兵讨罪，孥戮不贷！ 
现代文：如果你执迷不悟，不思悔改，则发兵征讨你们，决不宽赦！ 
English: If you persist and do not repent, we will send an army to conscript you, and there will be no mercy!

古文：并敕西平侯沐晟严兵以待。
现代文：同时，又敕谕西平侯沐晟整肃军队待命。
English: At the same time, he also ordered Xi Ping Hou to mobilize the rectification army to stand by.

古文：以马军六百、步军一千四百护内官杨安、郁斌前往。
现代文：朝廷派六百骑兵、一千四百步兵护送宦官杨安、郁斌前往八百。
English: The imperial court sent six hundred cavalry and fourteen hundred infantry to escort eunuchs Yang An and Yu Bin to the eight hundred.

古文：又虑老挝乘车里空虚，或发兵掩袭，或与八百为援，可遣其部长率兵一万五千往备。
现代文：朝廷又考虑到老挝可能会乘车里空虚，出兵袭击车里，或与八百相互为援，便命令老挝派遣其部落酋长率兵一万五千前来报到，做出征的准备。
English: The imperial court also took into account that Laos might empty the car, send troops to attack the car, or help each other with eight hundred, and ordered Laos to send its tribal chiefs to report to the front with fifteen thousand soldiers to make preparations for conscription.

古文：三年，刀招你等遣使奉金缕表文，贡金结丝帽及方物。
现代文：三年，刀招你等派遣使者奉金缕表文向朝廷贡献金结丝帽和土产。
English: In the third year, the sword invited you to send an envoy to the imperial court to contribute a gold-knitted silk hat and local products.

古文：帝命受之，仍加赐予。
现代文：皇帝命令接受他们的贡品，仍给他们加以赏赐。
English: The emperor ordered that their tribute be accepted, and they were rewarded.

古文：西平侯沐晟奏： 奉命率师及车里诸宣慰兵至八百境内，破其猛利石厓及者答二寨，又至整线寨。
现代文：西平侯沐晟上奏说 ：我奉命率领官军与车里等宣慰的土兵一起深入到八百境内，攻破了其猛利石崖和者答两个寨子，又抵达整线寨。
English: Xiping Hou Muxuan said in his report: I was ordered to lead the official army to go deep into the eight hundred territory together with the consoling soldiers in the car, and broke through its fierce rock cliff and two castles, and arrived at the entire line.

古文：木邦兵破其江下等十余寨。
现代文：木邦的土兵攻破了其江下等十多个寨子。
English: The local soldiers of Mubang breached more than ten stockades, including the one below the river.

古文：八百恐，遣人诣军门伏罪。 
现代文：八百已感到恐惧，派人到军门前伏罪。 
English: Eight hundred were already afraid, and sent men to lie in ambush before the army gate.

古文：乃以所陈词奏闻。
现代文：沐晟还将他们伏罪的陈词上报给朝廷闻知。
English: Mu Xi also reported their accusation to the imperial court.

古文：因遣使敕谕车里、木邦等曰： 曩者八百不恭朝命，尔等请举兵诛讨。
现代文：皇帝便派遣使者敕谕车里、木邦等地的宣慰，说 ：以往八百不听从朝廷的命令，你们主动请求出兵诛讨他们。
English: The emperor then sent an envoy to offer consolation to Chari, Mubang and other places, saying, "In the past, eight hundred people did not obey the orders of the imperial court, and you took the initiative to request the dispatch of troops to punish them.

古文：嘉尔忠诚，已从所请。
现代文：我嘉赏你们对朝廷的忠诚，顺从了你们的请求。
English: I appreciate your loyalty to the Imperial Court and have complied with your request.

古文：今得西平侯奏，言八百已伏罪纳款。
现代文：现今得到西平侯的上奏，说八百已经伏罪投诚。
English: Now it has been reported by Xiping Hou that eight hundred have already surrendered.

古文：夫有罪能悔，宜赦宥之。
现代文：凡是人一旦有罪能够悔悟，就应该赦免宽恕他。
English: Once a guilty person is able to repent, he should be pardoned and forgiven.

古文：敕至，其悉止兵勿进。 
现代文：所以这个敕谕到达你们那里时，你们就全部停止用兵，不要再进军了。 
English: Wherefore when this epistle cometh unto you, all of you, cease from fighting, neither go ye out any more unto battle.

古文：遂敕晟班师。
现代文：于是皇帝也敕令沐晟撤军返回。
English: As a result, the emperor also ordered Mu Xi to withdraw and return.

古文：四年降敕诫谕刀招散，刀招散遣人贡方物谢罪。
现代文：四年，皇帝降敕令告诫刀招散，刀招散派人向朝廷贡献土产，以表示谢罪。
English: In four years, the emperor lowered the imperial standard to admonish the sword to disperse, and the sword to disperse sent people to the court to contribute to the local production to express their thanks.

古文：帝以不诚，却之。
现代文：皇帝认为他们的诚心不够，拒绝接受他们的贡品。
English: The emperor thought their sincerity was not enough and refused to accept their tribute.

古文：五年贡使复来谢罪，命礼部受之。
现代文：五年刀招散又派朝贡的使者前来谢罪，皇帝命令礼部收下他们的贡物。
English: Five years later, the emperor sent an envoy of tributes to apologize, and ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to collect their tributes.

古文：洪熙元年遣内官洪仔生赍敕谕刀招散。
现代文：洪熙元年朝廷派遣宦官洪仔生持皇帝的敕谕去见刀招散。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, the imperial court sent eunuch Hong Zai Sheng to carry the emperor's edict to see the sword.

古文：宣德七年遣人来贡，因奏波勒土酋常纠土雅之兵入境杀掠，乞发兵讨之。
现代文：宣德七年刀招散派人来京城献贡，并上奏说波勒的酋长经常纠集土雅的军队进入八百地区屠杀抢劫，请求朝廷出兵征讨他们。
English: In the seventh year of Xuande's reign, Zhaozang sent people to the capital to pay tribute, and reported that the chiefs of Bole often gathered Tujia troops to enter 800 areas to kill and rob, and asked the court to send troops to recruit them.

古文：帝以八百大甸去云南五千余里，波勒、土雅皆未尝归化，劳中国为远蛮役，非计，止降敕抚谕而已。
现代文：皇帝认为八百大甸离云南有五千多里，而波勒、土雅都是没有归附朝廷的化外之地，劳动中国的军队为远方的蛮族人去打仗，不合算，因而只降敕谕安抚他们一番而已。
English: The emperor thought that 800 Dadian was more than 5,000 miles away from Yunnan, while Bole and Tuya were foreign lands that had not been annexed to the imperial court. It was not cost-effective for the laboring Chinese army to go to war for distant barbarians, so he only lowered the imperial standard to appease them.

古文：正统五年，八百贡使奏： 递年进贡方物，土民不识礼法，不通汉语。
现代文：正统五年，八百地区前来朝贡的使者上奏说 ：往年向朝廷进贡土产时，当地百姓不懂得朝廷的的礼法，也不通汉语。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Zhengzong, envoys from eight hundred regions who came to pay tribute to the imperial court reported: In previous years, when paying tribute to the imperial court, the local people did not understand the etiquette of the imperial court, nor did they speak Chinese.

古文：乞依永乐间例，仍令通事赍捧金牌、信符，催督进贡，驿路令军卒护送，庶无疏失。 
现代文：请求朝廷依照永乐年间的事例，仍让通事官持捧着金牌和信符，催促监督当地向朝廷进献贡物，沿途的驿站和道路上都派军士护送，这样才能保证不致疏忽失散。 
English: Ask the Imperial Court to follow the example of the Yongle Era, and still have the liaison officers hold the gold medals and tokens, urge the local supervisors to pay tribute to the Imperial Court, and send sergeants to escort them at the stations and on the roads along the way, so as to ensure that they do not lose their way.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷同意这个建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：十年，给八百大甸宣慰司金牌、信符各一，以前所给牌符为暹罗国寇兵焚毁也。
现代文：十年，朝廷因以前颁发给八百大甸的金牌和信符都被暹罗国入侵的军队所焚毁，便又给他们颁发金牌和信符各一面。
English: Ten years later, because the gold medals and tokens previously awarded to the Eight Hundred Thais had all been burned by the invading armies of Siam, the imperial court again awarded them a gold medal and token on each side.

古文：成化十七年，安南黎灏已破老挝，颂伪敕于车里，期会兵攻八百。
现代文：成化十七年，安南的黎灏已攻破了老挝，给车里颁伪敕令，约车里合兵攻打八百。
English: In the seventeenth year of Chenghua, Annan's Lihong had broken through Laos, issued a fake order to the car, and about 800 soldiers in the car attacked.

古文：其兵暴死者数千，传言为雷所震。
现代文：结果黎灏的士兵有数千人暴死，传说是被雷电击死的。
English: As a result, thousands of Lihong's soldiers died violently. Legend has it that they were killed by lightning.

古文：八百因遣兵扼其归路，袭杀万余，交败还。
现代文：八百派军队扼制住安南军队的归路，袭击并杀死他们一万多人，交人失败后回去了。
English: Eight hundred troops blocked the return route of Annan's army, attacked and killed more than ten thousand of them, and returned after the surrender failed.

古文：土官刀揽那以报。
现代文：土官刀揽那将此事上报给朝廷。
English: The local magistrate reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：黔国公沐琮奏： 揽那能保障生民，击败交贼，救护老挝。
现代文：黔国公沐琮上奏： 刀揽那能够保障百姓的安全，击败交的贼人，救护老挝。
English: Guo Guogong muttered the first line of the song: "The sword can guarantee the safety of the people, defeat the thieves, and save Laos."

古文：交人尝以伪敕胁诱八百，八百毁敕，以象蹴之，请颁赏以旌忠义。 
现代文：交人曾以伪敕令胁迫和利诱八百的刀揽那，刀揽那撕毁那个伪敕令，让大象去践踩。请求朝廷给刀揽那颁发赏赐品，以表彰忠义之人。 
English: The deliverer had coerced and enticed eight hundred swordsmen with a false edict. The swordsmen tore up the false edict and let the elephants trample on it. He asked the court to give the swordsmen a reward to commend those who were loyal.

古文：帝命云南布政司给银百两、彩币四表里以奖之。
现代文：皇帝命令云南布政司奖励他银子一百两，彩帛四个表里。
English: The emperor ordered Yunnan Bu Zhengji to reward him with one hundred taels of silver and four tables.

古文：二十年，刀揽那遣人入贡。
现代文：二十年，刀揽那派人向朝廷献贡品。
English: For twenty years, the people of Sabana sent gifts to the imperial court.

古文：云南守臣言： 交兵虽退，宜令八百诸部饬兵为备。 
现代文：云南守卫大臣上奏说： 交的军队虽然退走了，但还是应该敕谕八百等部落整肃军队，做好防备。 
English: Yunnan's Minister of Defense said in his report: Although the allied troops have retreated, it is still necessary to instruct the eight hundred tribes to clean up the troops and prepare for defense.

古文：弘治二年，刀揽那孙刀整赖贡方物，求袭祖职。
现代文：弘治二年，刀揽那的孙子刀整赖向朝廷贡献土产，请求朝廷允许他承袭祖父的职务。
English: In the second year of the Hongzhi era, the grandson of the swordsmith, Tsuchirai, contributed local products to the imperial court and requested the imperial court to allow him to inherit his grandfather's position.

古文：兵部言： 八百远离云南，瘴毒之地，宜免勘予袭。 
现代文：兵部上奏说 ：八百远离云南，是瘴气弥漫之地，对刀整赖可免于审核，直接承袭职务。 
English: The report to the Ministry of Military Affairs said: "Eight hundred kilometers away from Yunnan, it is a place full of bad breath, and relying on the knife straightening can be exempted from review and directly inherit duties.

古文：从之，仍给冠带。
现代文：皇帝同意，给刀整赖颁发了冠带。
English: The emperor agreed, and issued a crown sash to Dou Zheglai.

古文：其地东至车里，南至波勒，西至大古喇，与缅邻，北至孟艮，自姚关东南行五十程始至。
现代文：八百，其地域东至车里，南达波勒，西接大古喇，与缅甸为邻，北连孟艮。从姚关往东南方向行走五十程的路就到达八百。
English: Eight hundred, its area east to Cheli, south of Dapole, west of Daggula, neighboring Myanmar, north of Mengye. From Yaoguan to the southeast, it is a fifty-mile walk to reach eight hundred.

古文：平川数千里，有南格剌山，下有河，南属八百，北属车里。
现代文：八百有平川数千里，有南格剌山，山下有条河。该河的南面属于八百，而北面则属于车里。
English: There are thousands of miles of flat rivers in the eight hundred, there is the Nangao Mountain, and there is a river at the foot of the mountain. The south side of the river belongs to the eight hundred, while the north side belongs to the car.

古文：好佛恶杀，寺塔以万计。
现代文：八百人喜好佛教，恶杀生，寺庙宝塔数以万计。
English: Eight hundred people are fond of Buddhism, and there are tens of thousands of temples and pagodas.

古文：有见侵，乃举兵，得仇即已，俗名慈悲国。
现代文：一旦有人侵略他们，则举兵抵抗，抓住仇人后就罢兵，因而俗名叫慈悲国。
English: As soon as someone invades them, they raise an army to resist, seize the enemy and then disband, hence the common name of the Merciful Country.

古文：嘉靖间，为缅所并，其酋避居景线，名小八百。
现代文：嘉靖年间，八百被缅甸兼并，其酋长避居到景线，名叫小八百。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jiajing, the Eight Hundred was annexed by Burma, and its chieftains fled to Jianlin and became known as the Little Eight Hundred.

古文：自是朝贡遂不至。
现代文：从此以后就没来京城朝贡了。
English: Since then, no tributes have been paid to the imperial court in Kyoto.

古文：缅酋应里以弟应龙居景迈城，倚为右臂焉。
现代文：缅甸酋长莽应里派他的弟弟莽应龙居住在景迈城，将其倚为左膀右臂。
English: The Burmese chieftain Meng Ying Li sent his younger brother Meng Ying Long to live in the city of Jingmai to serve as his right and left arm.

古文：万历十五年，八百大甸上书请恢复，不报。
现代文：万历十五年，八百大甸上书给朝廷，请求恢复朝贡，而官府没有将此上报皇帝。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Wanli era, eight hundred dynasties sent a letter to the imperial court, requesting the restoration of the tribute, but the government did not report this to the emperor.

古文：初，四译馆通事惟译外国，而缅甸、八百如之，盖二司于六慰中加重焉。
现代文：原先，四译馆通事只译外国的文书，缅甸和八百也按外国对待。这两个军民宣慰使司在六慰中已经加重了。
English: Originally, the four translation centers only translated foreign documents, and Myanmar and the eight hundred were also treated as foreign countries. These two military and civilian consolation missions have been aggravated in the six consolations.

