古文：齐武王縯字伯升，光武之长兄也。
现代文：◆齐武王刘縯传齐武王刘縯字伯升，光武的大哥。
English: ◆Qiwu King Liu Xuan Qiwu King Liu Xun Zi Bo Sheng, the eldest brother of Guangwu.

古文：性刚毅，慷慨有大节。
现代文：性格刚毅，慷慨有大节。
English: He has a strong character and is generous.

古文：自王莽篡汉，常愤愤，怀复社稷之虑，不事家人居业，倾身破产，交结天下雄俊。
现代文：自从王莽篡汉，常愤愤在胸，怀抱着恢复汉室社稷的深谋远虑，不从事于治理家中产业，尽其家产，交结天下英雄俊杰。
English: Since Wang Mang usurped Han, he has often been indignant in his heart, and with the foresight of restoring the Han family society, he is not engaged in the management of the family industry, doing his best, and meeting the world's heroes.

古文：莽末，盗贼群起，南方尤甚。伯升召诸豪杰计议曰： 王莽暴虐，百姓分崩。
现代文：王莽末年，盗贼群起，南方尤甚，伯升召集各豪杰计议说： 王莽暴虐，百姓分崩离析。
English: At the end of Wang Mang's life, thieves swarmed, especially in the south. Bo Sheng called together all the heroes to discuss the plan and said: Wang Mang is a tyrant, and the people are falling apart.

古文：今枯旱连年，兵革并起。
现代文：现在枯旱连年，兵革并起。
English: Now there is a drought year after year, and wars are on the rise.

古文：此亦天亡之时，复高祖之业，定万世之秋也。 众皆然之。
现代文：这也是天亡王莽之时，恢复高祖之帝业，定万世之良机。 大家都以为对。
English: This was also the time of the death of Wang Mang, the restoration of Gao Zu's imperial career, and a golden opportunity. Everyone thought it was right.

古文：于是分遣亲客，使邓晨起新野，光武与李通、李轶起于宛。
现代文：于是分别派遣亲属宾客，使邓晨起兵于新野，光武与李通、李轶起兵于宛。
English: As a result, relatives and guests were dispatched separately, causing Deng Chen to raise an army in Shinno, and Guangwu and Li Tong and Li Xi to raise an army in Wan.

古文：伯升自发舂陵子弟，合七八千人，部署宾客，自称柱天都部。
现代文：伯升亲自发动舂陵子弟，合计七八千人，部署宾客，自称柱天都部。
English: Bo Sheng personally launched the Fuling children, a total of seven or eight thousand people, deployed guests, and claimed to be the capital of the pillar.

古文：使宗室刘嘉往诱新市、平林兵王匡、陈牧等，合军而进，屠长聚及唐子乡，杀湖阳尉，进拔棘阳，因欲攻宛。
现代文：派遣宗室刘嘉前往引诱新市、平林兵王匡、陈牧等，合军而进，屠杀了长聚及唐子乡，杀死了湖阳尉，进军拔取棘阳，趁势想攻宛。
English: He sent Liu Jia, his father-in-law, to lure Xinshi, Pinglin soldiers Wang Kuang and Chen Mu, etc. to march together, slaughtered Changju and Tangzi Township, killed Lieutenant Huyang, and marched to take Xichangyang, taking advantage of the situation to attack Wan.

古文：至小长安，与王莽前队大夫酎阜、属正梁丘赐战。
现代文：到小长安，与王莽前队大夫甄阜、属正梁丘赐交战。
English: At Xiaochang'an, he fought with Wang Mang's former team doctor Yan Fu and subordinate Zheng Liang Qiu Ji.

古文：时天密雾，汉军大败，姊元弟仲皆遇害，宗从死者数十人。
现代文：当时天正密雾，汉军大败，姊刘元弟刘仲都被杀害了，宗族跟着起义死亡的有数十人。
English: At that time, the weather was foggy, the Chinese army was heavily defeated, Liu Yuan's sister and brother Liu Zhong were both killed, and dozens of people from the clan died following the uprising.

古文：伯升复收会兵众，还保棘阳。
现代文：伯升再收集会合兵众，回到棘阳自守。
English: Bo Sheng then gathered the assembled soldiers and returned to Spineyang to defend himself.

古文：阜、赐乘胜，留辎重于蓝乡，引精兵十万南渡黄淳水，临沘水，阻两川间为营，绝后桥，示无还心。
现代文：甄阜、梁丘赐乘胜，把辎重留在兰乡，引精兵十万南渡黄淳水，靠近氵比水，在两水之间结扎营地，把后面的桥梁撤掉，表示决不后退。
English: Zhenfu and Liangqiu took advantage of the victory and left the main body of troops in Lanxiang. They led 100,000 elite soldiers south to Huangchun Water, close to Zoubi Water, set up camp between the two waters, and removed the bridge behind them, saying that they would never retreat.

古文：新市、平林见汉兵数败，阜、赐军大至，各欲解去，伯升甚患之。
现代文：新市、平林兵看到汉兵几次吃了败仗，甄阜、梁丘赐大军拥到，都想解散离去，伯升很忧虑。
English: Xinshi and Pinglin soldiers saw that the Chinese soldiers were defeated several times, and Zhenfu and Liangqiu were overwhelmed by large armies. They all wanted to disband and leave, and Bo Sheng was very worried.

古文：会下江兵五千余人至宜秋，乃往为说合从之势，下江从之。
现代文：恰好下江兵五千多人到达宜秋，就前往为他们说明联合作战的态势，下江兵同意了。
English: Just as more than 5,000 soldiers from the Lower River arrived in Yixiu, he went to explain the situation of the joint operation to them, and the soldiers from the Lower River agreed.

古文：语在《王常传》。
现代文：伯升说服下江兵的言论记载在《王常传》。
English: The speech of Bao Sheng to persuade the soldiers of the Lower River is recorded in the "Wang Chang Biography."

古文：伯升于是大飨军士，设盟约。
现代文：伯升于是大宴军士，设立盟约。
English: Bo Sheng then held a grand banquet for the soldiers and established a covenant.

古文：休卒三日，分为六部，潜师夜起，袭取蓝乡，尽获其辎重。
现代文：让兵士休息三天，分为六部，乘夜间偷偷起兵，袭击夺取了兰乡，缴获了全部辎重。
English: Let the soldiers rest for three days, divided into six parts, took advantage of the night to secretly raise an army, attacked and seized Lanxiang, and captured all the baggage.

古文：明旦，汉军自西南攻酎阜，下江兵自东南攻梁攻丘赐。
现代文：次日一早，汉军自西南攻击甄阜，下江兵自东南攻击梁丘赐。
English: In the early morning of the next day, the Chinese army attacked Zhenfu from the southwest, and the soldiers of the Lower River attacked Liangqiu from the southeast.

古文：至食时，赐陈溃，阜军望见散走，汉兵急追之，却迫黄淳水，斩首溺死者二万余人，遂斩阜、赐。
现代文：到吃饭时，梁丘赐兵阵溃败，甄阜军望见逃散，汉兵急追，阜军退却被阻在黄淳水边，斩首和溺死者二万多人，于是斩了甄阜和梁丘赐。
English: By the time of the meal, Liang Qiu Zi's army was routed, Yan Fu's army fled at sight, Han soldiers were in hot pursuit, and the retreat of the Fu army was blocked at the Huang Chun waterside, beheading and drowning more than 20,000 people, so he beheaded Yan Fu and Liang Qiu Zi.

古文：王莽纳言将军严尤、秩宗将军陈茂闻阜、赐军败，引欲据宛。
现代文：王莽纳言将军严尤、秩宗将军陈茂听说甄阜、梁丘赐军败，准备据守宛城。
English: Wang Mangna said that General Yan Yu and Chichizong General Chen Mao had heard that Zhenfu and Liangqiu had been defeated and were preparing to defend Wancheng.

古文：伯升乃陈兵誓众，焚积聚，破釜甑，鼓行而前，与尤、茂遇育阳下，战，大破之，斩首三千余级。
现代文：伯升就陈兵誓师，烧掉积聚的物资打破烧饭的釜甑，击鼓前进，与严尤、陈茂相遇于育阳，交战，大破其军，斩首三千余级。
English: Bo Sheng swore allegiance to Chen Bing, burned the accumulated materials, broke the rice-cooking kettle, and beat the drums. He met Yan Yu and Chen Mao in Yuyang, fought, defeated their army, and beheaded more than 3,000 troops.

古文：尤、茂弃军走，伯升遂进围宛，自号柱天大将军。
现代文：严尤、陈茂弃军逃走，伯升于是进围宛城，自号柱天大将军。
English: Yan Yu and Chen Mao abandoned the army and fled, so Bo Sheng entered the besieged Wancheng and called himself General Tianda.

古文：王莽素闻其名，大震惧，购伯升邑五万户，黄金十万斤，位上公。
现代文：王莽素来听了伯升的威名，大为震动恐惧，悬赏能除掉伯升者食邑五万户，黄金十万斤，位封上公。
English: Wang Mang had always heard the prestige of Bo Xing, and was greatly shocked and frightened. He offered a reward of 50,000 households, 100,000 catties of gold, and a public seal to anyone who could get rid of Bo Xing.

古文：使长安中官署及天下乡亭皆画伯升像于塾，旦起射之。
现代文：使长安城中官署及天下乡亭都画伯升像在门侧堂上，早起以箭射像。
English: So that the Chang'an City Central Government Office and the Tianka Township Pavilion are both depicted on the side of the door, and they are shot with arrows in the morning.

古文：自阜、赐死后，百姓日有降者，众至十余万。
现代文：自从甄阜、梁丘赐死后，百姓每天都有人来投降，多至十多万。
English: Since the death of Zhenfu and Liang Qiu, people have come to surrender every day, up to more than one hundred thousand.

古文：诸将会议立刘氏以从人望，豪杰咸归于伯升，而新市、平林将帅乐放纵，惮怕升威明而贪圣公懦弱，先共定策立之，然后使骑召伯升，示其议。
现代文：诸将开会讨论立刘氏以顺从众人期望，豪杰们都归心于伯升。而新市、平林的将帅们乐于放纵，害怕伯升威严明智而喜爱圣公懦弱，就事先共同策划立圣公，然后派人召集伯升，宣告其讨论结果。
English: They will meet to discuss the appointment of Liu to comply with everyone's expectations, and the heroes are all devoted to Baosheng. And the generals in Xincheng and Pinglin are willing to indulge, fearing Baosheng's majesty and wisdom and loving Shenggguo's cowardice. They will jointly plan the appointment of Shengguo in advance, and then send someone to convene Baosheng to announce the results of the discussion.

古文：伯升曰： 诸将军幸欲尊立宗室，其德甚厚，然愚鄙之见，窃有未同。
现代文：伯升说： 各位将军想立刘氏宗室，其德是很深厚的，然而依鄙人的愚见，私下还有不同的地方。
English: Bosheng said: The generals want to establish the Liu family, and their virtue is very profound. However, according to the stupidity of despicable people, there are different places in private.

古文：今赤眉起青、徐，众数十万，闻南阳立宗室，恐赤眉复有所立，如此，必将内争。
现代文：现在赤眉在青州、徐州起兵，拥有数十万人，听说南阳立了宗室，恐怕赤眉也会拥立一个，这样一来，必将发生内部争斗。
English: Now the Red Eyebrows are raising an army in Qingzhou and Xuzhou, with hundreds of thousands of people. I heard that Nanyang has set up a family room, I am afraid that the Red Eyebrows will also set up one. In this way, internal struggles will surely occur.

古文：今王莽未灭，而宗室相攻，是疑天下而自损权，非所以破莽也。
现代文：现在王莽还没有灭掉，而宗室内部互相攻击，是使天下人怀疑而使自己的权力受到损害，这不是攻破王莽的好办法。
English: Wang Mang has not yet been eliminated, and attacking each other within the family is to make the world suspicious and cause their power to be damaged. This is not a good way to defeat Wang Mang.

古文：且首兵唱号，鲜有能遂，陈胜、项籍，即其事也。舂陵去宛三百里耳，未足为功。
现代文：而且首先起义的倡号称帝，少有成功的，陈胜、项籍就是事实，舂陵离宛只有三百里，不足为功。
English: Moreover, the initiative of the first uprising was called the emperor, few were successful, Chen Sheng and Xiang Qi were the facts, and Fuling was only three hundred miles away, which was not enough.

古文：遽自尊立，为天下准的，使后人得承吾敝，非计之善者也。
现代文：仓猝之间自行尊立，就成了天下之准的，使后人得乘我们的疲敝，这不是好计。
English: It is not a good idea for future generations to have to take advantage of our exhaustion.

古文：今且称王以号令。
现代文：现在暂且称王以发号施令。
English: For the time being, the king calls the shots.

古文：若赤眉所立者贤，相率而往从之；若无所立，破莽降赤眉，然后举尊号，亦未晚也。
现代文：如果赤眉所立的是个明君，我们可以相率而前往相从；如果没有立，攻破王莽迫降赤眉后，再举行尊号，也不为晚哩。
English: If the ruler set up by the Red Eyebrows is a wise ruler, we can go to the palace together; if not, it is not too late to hold the ceremony after defeating Wang Mang and forcing the Red Eyebrows to abdicate.

古文：愿各详思之。 诸将多曰 善 。
现代文：愿各位详细考虑。 诸将多表示同意说： 好。 
English: I hope you will consider it in detail, and many of you will agree with me and say, "Good."

古文：将军张卬拔剑击地曰： 疑事无功。
现代文：这时将军张拔剑击地说 ：行事多疑无以为功。
English: At this time, General Zhang drew his sword and said: There is no merit in acting suspiciously.

古文：今日之议，不得有二。 众皆从之。
现代文：今天的决定，不得有反对。 众人都只得服从。
English: There can be no objection to today's decision; all must obey.

古文：圣公既即位，拜伯升为大司徒，封汉信侯。
现代文：圣公既已即位，拜伯升为大司徒，封汉信侯。
English: As soon as the holy prince ascended the throne, Baibo was promoted to the position of grand steward and given the title of Han Xinhou.

古文：由是豪杰失望，多不服。
现代文：由是豪杰们感到失望，多不服。
English: As a result, the heroes were disappointed and mostly unconvinced.

古文：平林后部攻新野，不能下。
现代文：平林后部攻新野，不能攻下。
English: The rear part of the plain forest will be attacked by Shinno, and cannot be attacked.

古文：新野宰登城言曰： 得司徒刘公一信，愿先下。 及伯升军至，即开城门降。
现代文：新野县宰登上城楼说 ：只要得到司徒刘公一个凭证，愿意先下。 等到伯升军到，新野宰即开门投降。
English: The governor of Nino County went up to the castle tower and said, "I am willing to go down first, as long as I get a certificate from Liu Gong, the governor of Shino County.

古文：五月，伯升拔宛。
现代文：五月，伯升攻拔宛城。
English: In May, Baosheng attacked Wancheng.

古文：六月，光武破王寻、王邑。
现代文：六月，光武破王寻、王邑。
English: In June, Guangwu defeated Wangxi and Wangyi.

古文：自是兄弟威名益甚。
现代文：自是兄弟威名更盛。
English: The brothers have since risen to prominence.

古文：更始君臣不自安，遂共谋诛伯升，乃大会诸将，以成其计。
现代文：更始君臣不能自安，于是共谋杀害伯升，就大合诸将，以成其计。
English: At first, the princes and ministers could not calm themselves, so they conspired to murder and kill Bo Xing, and then they got together with the generals to carry out their plan.

古文：更始取伯升宝剑视之，绣衣御史申屠建随献玉玦，更始竟不能发。
现代文：更始取伯升宝剑观看，纟肃衣御史申屠建随即献上玉，更始终不能发令。
English: He first took a look at Baosheng's sword, and then presented the jade to the Emperor Shen Tu Jian. What's more, he still couldn't give an order.

古文：及罢会，伯升舅樊宏谓伯升曰： 昔鸿门之会，范增举玦以示项羽。
现代文：罢令以后，伯升舅樊宏对伯升说： 过去鸿门之会，范增举所佩玉以示项羽。
English: After the order was issued, Baosheng's uncle Zhenhong said to Baosheng: In the past, when there was a meeting of the Hongmen, the jade that Fan Zengzhi was wearing was a feather.

古文：今建此意，得无不善乎？ 伯升笑而不应。
现代文：今天申屠建献玉，是不是有阴谋呢？ 伯升笑而不应。
English: Is there a conspiracy behind today's petition, construction and donation of jade?

古文：初，李轶谄事更始贵将，光武深疑之，常以戒伯升曰： 此人不可复信。 又不受。
现代文：起初，李轶巴结更始贵将，光武深感疑惑，常常警告伯升说： 李轶其人不可再信任了。 伯升又不接受。
English: At first, Li Rongba was considered to be a superior general, and Guangwu was deeply suspicious. He often warned Bo Sheng that Li Rongba could no longer be trusted, and Bo Sheng did not accept it.

古文：伯升部将宗人刘稷，数陷陈溃围，勇冠三军。
现代文：伯升部将同族人刘稷，几次陷阵打垮敌军，其勇敢冠于三军。
English: Bo Shengbu led his compatriot Liu Qi to defeat the enemy army several times, and his bravery was the best among the three armies.

古文：时将兵击鲁阳，闻更始立，怒曰： 本起兵图大事者，伯升兄弟也，今更始何为者邪？ 更始君臣闻而心忌之，以稷为抗威将军，稷不肯拜。
现代文：当时率军攻击鲁阳，听到更始即位，发怒说 ：本来起兵谋大事的，是伯升兄弟，现在更始怎么能即位呢？ 更始君臣听说后心里很忌恨，以刘稷为抗威将军，刘稷不肯拜受。
English: At that time, he led the army to attack Luyang. When he heard that Liu Bei had been enthroned, he became angry and said, "Originally, it was the brothers Baosheng who started the war, so how can Liu Bei be enthroned now? When the princes and ministers heard about Liu Bei, they hated him very much. Liu Bei was a general who resisted authority, and Liu Bei refused to bow to him.

古文：更始乃与诸将陈兵数千人，先收稷，将诛之，伯升固争。
现代文：更始就与诸将陈列军队数千人，先拘捕刘稷，将要杀害他，伯升坚决争论反对。
English: At the beginning of the revolution, he and other generals had thousands of troops on display. They first arrested Liu Bei and were going to kill him, but Baosheng resolutely argued against it.

古文：李轶、朱鲔因劝更始并执伯升，即日害之。
现代文：李轶、朱鲔就劝更始同时拘捕伯升。于当天就加以杀害了。
English: Li Yao and Zhu Xi persuaded the authorities to arrest Bo Sheng at the same time, and killed him on the same day.

古文：古人以蜂虿为戒，盖畏此也。
现代文：伯升有二子，建武二年，光武立伯升长子刘章为太原王，次子刘兴为鲁王。
English: Bo Sheng had two sons. In the second year of Jianwu, the eldest son of Guangwu Li Bo Sheng, Liu Zhang, became the King of Taiyuan, and the second son, Liu Xing, became the King of Lu.

古文：《诗》云： 敬之敬之，命不易哉！ 
现代文：建武十一年迁刘章为齐王。建武十五年，追谥伯升为齐武王。
English: In the 11th year of Jianwu, Liu Zhang was promoted to the king of Qi, and in the 15th year of Jianwu, he was promoted to the king of Qi.

古文：北海靖五兴，建武二年封为鲁王，嗣光武兄仲。
现代文：◆北海靖王刘兴传北海靖王刘兴，建武二年封为鲁王，继承光武兄刘仲。
English: ◆ Liu Xing, the King of the North Sea, is said to be Liu Xing, the King of the North Sea. In the second year of Jianwu, he was named the King of Lu, succeeding Liu Zhong, the elder brother of Guangwu.

古文：初，南顿君娶同郡樊重女，字娴都。
现代文：起初，南顿君娶同郡樊重女女间都为妻。
English: At first, Nantong Jun married a woman from the same county as his wife.

古文：娴都性婉顺，自为童女，不正容服不出于房，宗族敬焉。
现代文：女间都性情婉顺，自童女时起，就不整饰容貌衣服不出闺房，宗族都敬爱她。
English: Since she was a little girl, she did not dress up her appearance and did not go out of the boudoir, and her family loved her.

古文：生三男三女：长男伯升，次仲，次光武；长女黄，次元，次伯姬。
现代文：生三男三女：长男伯升，次子仲，三子光武；长女刘黄，次女刘元，三女伯姬。
English: They had three sons and three daughters: the eldest son, Bo Sheng, the second son, Zhong, and the third son, Guangwu; the eldest daughter, Liu Huang, the second daughter, Liu Yuan, and the third daughter, Bo Ji.

古文：皇妣以初起兵时病卒，宗人樊巨公收敛焉。
现代文：皇妣女间都在伯升兄弟初起兵时病逝，樊女间都的族人樊巨公将她安葬。
English: Both the Empress Dowager and the Empress Dowager's daughters died of illness when the Baosheng brothers first raised an army, and both of them were buried by their kinsman, the Grand Duke Zou Jiu.

古文：建武二年，封黄为湖阳长公主，伯姬为宁平长公主。
现代文：建武二年，封刘黄为湖阳长公主，伯姬为守平长公主。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Liu Huang was given the title of the eldest princess of Hoyang, and Boji was given the title of the eldest princess of Shouping.

古文：元与仲俱殁于小长安，追爵元为新野长公主，十五年，追谥仲为鲁哀王。
现代文：刘元与刘仲都在小长安去世，追加刘元爵号为新野长公主，建武十五年，追谥刘仲为鲁哀王。
English: Liu Yuan and Liu Zhong both died in Xiao Chang'an, adding Liu Yuanjie's title as the eldest princess of Nino, Jianwu for fifteen years, and chasing Liu Zhong as King Luai.

古文：兴其岁试守缑氏令。
现代文：刘兴在当年试用为缑氏县令。
English: Liu Xing was put on probation that year as the county magistrate of Jinshi County.

古文：为人有明略，善听讼，甚得名称。
现代文：为人有明智方略，长于听理诉讼，甚得好名声。
English: He has a good reputation for having a wise strategy and being better at hearing reasoned lawsuits.

古文：迁弘农太守，亦有善政。
现代文：后迁升为弘农太守，也有善政。
English: He was later promoted to Kononodai no kami (governor of Kononodai) and also had good governance.

古文：视事四年，上疏乞骸骨，征还京师，奉朝请。
现代文：任职四年，上陈条请求退职，被召回京师，参加朝会。
English: After four years in office, he was summoned back to Beijing to attend the Imperial Court Council.

古文：二十七年，始就国。
现代文：建武二十七年，方归国。
English: In the 27th year of Jianwu, Fang returned to China.

古文：明年，以鲁国益东海，故徙兴为北海王。
现代文：明年，以鲁国租入比东海多，所以徙刘兴为北海王。
English: Next year, Yilu will bring in more rent than the East China Sea, so Liu Xing will become the king of the North Sea.

古文：三十年，封兴子复为临邑侯。
现代文：三十年，封刘兴子刘复为临邑侯。
English: For thirty years, Liu Xingzi Liu Fu was the mayor of Lin.

古文：中元二年，又封兴二子为县侯。
现代文：中元二年，又封刘兴二子为县侯。
English: In the second year of the 12th century, Liu Xing's second son was also appointed as the county magistrate.

古文：显宗器重兴，每有异政，辄乘驿问焉。
现代文：显宗器重刘兴，每遇到大的政事，常传递文书向刘兴请问。
English: Hsien Zong respected Liu Xing, and whenever he encountered a major political event, he would often pass a document to Liu Xing to ask for advice.

古文：騊駼又自造赋、颂、书、论凡四篇。
现代文：在位三十九年去世，子敬王刘睦继嗣。
English: He died in the thirty-ninth year of his reign and was succeeded by his son, King Kei Liu Mutsu.

古文：赵孝王良字次伯，光武之叔父也。
现代文：◆赵孝王刘良传赵孝王刘良字次伯，光武帝的叔父。
English: ◆Zhao Xiaowang Liu Liang passed down Zhao Xiaowang Liu Liang, the second uncle, the uncle of Emperor Guangwu.

古文：平帝时举孝廉，为萧令。
现代文：平帝时被举为孝廉，为萧县县令。
English: At the time of Emperor Ping, he was elevated to the position of Xiaolian and became the county magistrate of Xiao County.

古文：光武兄弟少孤，良抚循甚笃。
现代文：光武兄弟幼年丧父，刘良抚养照顾十分周到。
English: The Guangwu brothers lost their father at a young age, and Liu Liang was very well taken care of.

古文：及光武起兵，以事告，良大怒，曰： 汝与伯升志操不同，今家欲危亡，而反共谋如是！ 既而不得已，从军至小长安，汉兵大败，良妻及二子皆被害。
现代文：等到光武起兵，把事情告诉了刘良，刘良大怒，说： 你与伯升志向操守不一样，现在家里想要危亡吗？反而共谋起兵！ 后来不得已，才从军到小长安，汉兵大败，刘良的妻及两个儿子都被害。
English: When Guangwu raised an army and told Liu Liang about the matter, Liu Liang was furious and said: You and Bo Sheng have different aspirations and ethics. Do you want your family to be in danger? Instead, you conspired to raise an army! Later, out of necessity, you went from the army to Xiaochang'an, the Chinese soldiers were defeated, and Liu Liang's wife and two sons were killed.

古文：更始立，以良为国三老，从入关。
现代文：更始即位，以刘良为国三老，跟着入关。
English: Liu Liang was enthroned as the country's third-highest-ranking official, and he entered the imperial palace.

古文：更始败。良闻光武即位，乃亡奔洛阳。
现代文：更始失败后，刘良听说光武即了位，就逃奔洛阳。
English: After the failed coup, Liu Liang heard that Guangwu had just been promoted and fled to Luoyang.

古文：建武二年，封良为广阳王。
现代文：建武二年，封刘良为广阳王。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Liu Liang was named the king of Guangyang.

古文：五年，徙为赵王，始就国。
现代文：建武五年，徙为赵王，始就国位。
English: In the fifth year of Jianwu, he became King Zhao and began to take the throne.

古文：十三年，降为赵公。
现代文：十三年，降为赵公。
English: Thirteen years later, he was demoted to Zhao Gong.

古文：频岁来朝。
现代文：每年到京朝拜。
English: They come to Kyoto every year to worship.

古文：十七年，薨于京师。
现代文：建武十七年，在京师去世。
English: In the seventeenth year of Jianwu, he died in Beijing.

古文：凡六十六年。
现代文：在位十六年。
English: Sixteen years on the throne.

古文：子节王栩嗣。
现代文：子节王刘栩嗣。
English: Zijie Wang Liu Tuxi.

古文：立九年，魏初以为崇德侯。
现代文：建武三十年，封栩二子为乡侯。
English: In the 30th year of Jianwu, Fuchu's two sons became farmers.

古文：城阳恭王祉字巨伯，光武族兄、舂陵康侯敞之子也。
现代文：建初二年，又封刘栩十子为亭侯。◆城阳恭王刘祉传城阳恭王刘祉字巨伯，光武族兄舂陵康侯刘敞的儿子。
English: In the second year of Jianchu, Liu Tu's tenth son was also appointed as the prince of the pavilion. ◆Joyang Gongwang Liu Zhi passed down the name of Joyang Gongwang Liu Zhi to his great-great-grandfather, the son of the Guangwu elder brother, Yuling Kanghou Liu Zhi.

古文：敞曾祖父节侯买，以长沙定王子封于零道之舂陵乡，为舂陵侯。
现代文：刘敞的曾祖父节侯刘买，以长沙定王的儿子封于零道之舂陵乡，为舂陵侯。
English: Liu Zhan's great-grandfather, Liu Bai, was given the title of Prince of Fuling, the son of King Ding of Changsha.

古文：买卒，子戴侯熊渠嗣。
现代文：刘买去世，子戴侯刘熊渠继位。
English: Liu Bai died and was succeeded by his son Liu Xiongqiu.

古文：熊渠卒，子考侯仁嗣。
现代文：熊渠去世，子考侯刘仁继位。
English: Xiongqiu died and was succeeded by his son Liu Ren.

古文：仁以舂陵地势下湿，山林毒气，上书求减邑内徙。
现代文：刘仁以舂陵地势低下潮湿，山林间有毒气，上奏书要求减邑内徙。
English: Liu Ren pointed out that Fuling is low-lying and wet, and there is poisonous gas between the mountains and forests. In his petition, he requested that migration within the county be reduced.

古文：元帝初元四年，徙封南阳之白水乡，犹以舂陵为国名，遂与从弟巨鹿都尉回及宗族往家焉。
现代文：元帝初元四年，徙封到南阳的白水乡，还是以舂陵为国名。于是就与从弟巨鹿都尉刘回及刘氏宗族住到一起。
English: At the beginning of the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Yuan migrated to Baishui Township in Nanyang Province, which was still called Fuling. Therefore, he lived with his younger brother Liu Hui and the Liu clan.

古文：仁卒，子敞嗣。
现代文：刘仁去世后，子刘敞继承。
English: After Liu Ren's death, his son Liu Chang took over.

古文：敞谦俭好义，尽推父时金宝财产与昆弟，刑州刺史上其义行，拜庐江都尉。
现代文：刘敞谦俭好尚义气。把父亲时期的金宝财产悉数给与了昆弟们，荆州刺史上书崇尚他的义行，拜他为庐江都尉。
English: Humble and frugal, Liu Changzhang loved to be virtuous. He gave all of his father's gold and treasure property to the Kun brothers. The history books of Jingzhou praised his virtuous deeds and worshiped him as the captain of the Minjiang River.

古文：岁余，会族兄安众侯刘崇起兵，王莽畏恶刘氏，征敞至长安，免归国。
现代文：一年多后，遇到族兄安众侯刘崇起兵，王莽害怕厌恶刘氏，征召刘敞到长安，不让他回到自己的封地去。
English: More than a year later, when he encountered Liu Chong, the elder brother of Anzhu, raising an army, Wang Mang, afraid of offending the Liu clan, conscripted Liu Chang to Chang'an and did not allow him to return to his fief.

古文：先是平帝时，敞与崇俱朝京师，助祭明堂。
现代文：原先在平帝时，刘敞与刘崇都聚会在京师，作为明堂的辅助祭祀。
English: Originally, during the reign of Emperor Ping, Liu Zhan and Liu Chongdu gathered at the Great Wall of China as an auxiliary ritual of the Ming Hall.

古文：崇见莽将危汉室，私谓敞曰： 安汉公擅国权，群臣莫不回从，社稷倾覆至矣。
现代文：刘崇看到王莽将危害汉室，私下对刘敞说： 安汉公王莽独揽国政，群臣莫不曲从，国家将被他覆亡。
English: Liu Chong saw that Wang Mang would endanger the Han dynasty, and privately said to Liu Chang: Anhan Prince Mang monopolizes the national politics, the courtiers cannot be swayed, and the country will be overthrown by him.

古文：太后春秋高，天子幼弱，高皇帝所以分封子弟，盖为此也。 敞心然之。
现代文：太后年纪老了，平帝又幼弱，高皇帝所以要分封子弟，就是为了这个啊。 刘敞从内心同意。
English: The empress dowager is old, Emperor Ping is young and weak, and Emperor Gao wants to appoint a younger brother, that's why. Liu Chang agreed from the bottom of his heart.

古文：及崇事败，敞惧，欲结援树党，乃为祉娶高陵侯翟宣女为妻。
现代文：等到刘崇事败，刘敞害怕，想结交援引树立私党，就为刘祉娶高陵侯翟宣女为妻。
English: When Liu Chong was defeated, Liu Chang was afraid and wanted to make friends and establish a private party, so he married the daughter of Gaoling Hou Yuxuan.

古文：会宣弟义起兵欲攻莽，南阳捕杀宣女，祉坐系狱。
现代文：恰逢翟宣弟翟义起兵准备攻击王莽，南阳郡吏捕杀翟宣女，刘祉被连累囚禁于牢狱。
English: At the same time, Nie Xuan's younger brother Nie Yi raised an army to attack Wang Mang, Nanyang County officials arrested and killed Nie Xuan's daughter, and Liu Zhi was repeatedly imprisoned.

古文：敞因上书谢罪，愿率子弟宗族为士卒先。
现代文：刘敞因而上书谢罪，愿意率领子弟及宗族为战士先锋。
English: As a result, Liu Chang wrote a letter of apology, saying that he was willing to lead his children and clan to be the vanguard of soldiers.

古文：莽新居摄，欲慰安宗室，故不被刑诛。
现代文：王莽新居摄政，想安慰宗室，所以没有被施刑诛杀。
English: Wang Mangxinju, the regent, wanted to comfort his family, so he was not executed.

古文：及莽篡立，刘氏为侯者皆降称子，食孤卿禄，后皆夺爵。
现代文：等到王莽篡位，刘氏宗室被封侯的都降级称子，食孤卿的俸禄，后来又都被褫夺了爵位。
English: By the time Wang Mang usurped the throne, all of the Liu family members who had been given the title of marquess had been downgraded to the rank of son-in-law, and the salary of the Minister of Food had been reduced. Later, they were all deprived of their titles.

古文：及敞卒，祉遂特见废，又不得官为吏。
现代文：等到刘敞去世，刘祉的封号都被废除了，而且不允许他做官吏。
English: By the time Liu Chang died, Liu Zhi's titles had all been abolished, and he was not allowed to work as an official.

古文：祉以故侯嫡子，行淳厚，宗室皆敬之。
现代文：刘祉因是故侯刘敞的嫡子，行为淳朴敦厚，刘氏宗室都尊敬他。
English: Because Liu Zhi was the legitimate son of the late lord Liu Zhan, his behavior was simple and dignified, and the Liu family respected him.

古文：及光武起兵，祉兄弟相率从军，前队大夫甄阜尽收其家属系宛狱。
现代文：等到光武起兵，刘祉兄弟相率从军，前队大夫甄阜就将他所有的家属囚禁于监狱。
English: When Guangwu raised an army and Liu Zhi's brothers joined the army, Zhenfu, a doctor in the vanguard, imprisoned all of his family members in prison.

古文：及汉兵败小长安，祉挺身还保棘阳，甄阜尽杀其母弟妻子。
现代文：等到汉兵在小长安失败，刘祉挺身回保棘阳，甄阜就将刘祉的母弟妻子全部杀害了。
English: When the Han soldiers failed in Xiaochang'an and Liu Zhi stood up and returned to Baochenyang, Zhenfu killed all the wives of Liu Zhi's mother and brother.

古文：更始立，以祉为太常将军，绍封舂陵侯。
现代文：更始即位，以刘祉为太常将军，继承舂陵侯。
English: He was enthroned at the beginning of the new year, with Liu Zhi as the General of Taizang, succeeding the Prince of Fuling.

古文：从西入关，封为定陶王。
现代文：又跟随入关，被封为定陶王。
English: He also followed the customs and was crowned as the king of Dingtao.

古文：别将击破刘婴于临泾。
现代文：另率部将击破刘婴于临泾。
English: The other team will defeat Liu Ying in Linyi.

古文：及更始降于赤眉，祉乃间行亡奔洛阳。
现代文：等到更始降于赤眉，刘祉就从小道逃奔洛阳。
English: After he was first demoted to Chamei, Liu Zhi escaped to Luoyang via a trail.

古文：是时宗室唯祉先至，光武见之欢甚。
现代文：这时宗室只有刘祉先到，光武见后非常欢喜。
English: At this time, only Liu Zhi's family arrived first, and Guangwu was very happy to see him.

古文：建武二年，封为城阳王，赐乘舆、御物、车马、衣服。
现代文：建武二年，封为城阳王，赐给乘舆、御物、车马、衣服。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, he was given the title of King of the City of the Sun, and was given a horse, a chariot, and clothes.

古文：追谥敞为康侯。
现代文：追谥刘敞为康侯。
English: Liu Chang, the pursuer, is a well-to-do peasant.

古文：十一年，祉疾病，上城阳王玺绶，愿以列侯奉先人祭祀。
现代文：建武十一年，刘祉患了疾病，献上城阳王玺绶，愿以列侯奉先人祭祀。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jianwu era, Liu Zhi fell ill and offered up the city's yang wang gong, saying that he was willing to offer it as a votive offering to his ancestors.

古文：永平五年，显宗更封平为竟陵侯。
现代文：光武帝亲自看望他的病。刘祉去世，年四十三岁，谥号为恭王，没能回到自己的封地，就葬于洛阳北芒。
English: Emperor Guangwu personally visited him in his illness. Liu Zhiwu died at the age of forty-three, his nickname was King Gong. He was unable to return to his fiefdom and was buried in Beimang, Luoyang.

古文：平卒，子真嗣。真卒，子禹嗣。
现代文：建武十三年，封刘祉嫡子刘平为蔡阳侯，以奉刘祉祭祀；刘平弟刘坚为高乡侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, Liu Ping, the legitimate son of Liu Zhi, was named Cai Yang Hou, and Liu Zhi's brother Liu Jian was named Gao Xiang Hou.

古文：禹卒，子嘉嗣。
现代文：◆泗水王刘歙传
English: ◆The Legend of Liu Xuan, the Water King

古文：泗水王歙字经孙，光武族父也。
现代文：泗水王刘歙字经孙，光武帝的族父。
English: He was the grandson of Liu Xizhi, the king of Yishui, and the ancestor of Emperor Guangwu.

古文：歙子终，与光武少相亲爱。
现代文：刘歙的儿子刘终，与光武从小就互相亲爱。
English: Liu Xuan's son, Liu Zhen, and Guangwu have loved each other since childhood.

古文：汉兵起，始及唐子，终诱杀湖阳尉。
现代文：汉兵兴起，开始波及唐子，刘终诱杀湖阳尉。
English: The rise of the Han soldiers began to affect Tang Zi, and Liu eventually lured and killed Captain Hu Yang.

古文：更始立，歙从入关，封为元氏王，终为侍中。
现代文：更始即位，刘歙跟随入关，被封为元氏王，刘终为侍中。
English: He was enthroned at the beginning of the new year, and Liu Bei followed him into the palace and was crowned the king of the Yuan Dynasty. Liu eventually became an attendant.

古文：更始败，歙、终东奔洛阳。
现代文：更始失败，刘歙、刘终东奔洛阳。
English: After the initial failure, Liu Ye and Liu Zhen went to Luoyang.

古文：建武二年，立歙为泗水王，终为淄川王。
现代文：建武二年，立刘歙为泗水王，刘终为淄川王。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Liu Ye was appointed as the king of Shishui, and Liu Ye eventually became the king of Shichuan.

古文：十年，歙薨，封小子燀为堂谿侯，奉歙后。
现代文：建武十年，刘歙去世，封小儿子刘火单为堂奚谷侯，奉刘歙后祀。
English: In the tenth year of Jianwu, Liu Hui passed away, and his youngest son Liu Huidan was named the Dowager of the Valley, and was worshipped as Liu Hui's heir.

古文：终居丧思慕，哭泣二十八日，亦薨。
现代文：刘终在治丧时间想念亡父，哭泣二十多天，也去世。
English: Liu eventually missed his deceased father during the mourning period, cried for more than twenty days, and died.

古文：封长子柱为邔侯，以奉终祀，又封终子凤曲阳侯。
现代文：封长子刘柱为己阝侯，以奉刘终祭祀，又封刘终子刘凤为曲阳侯。
English: He appointed Liu Zhu, the eldest son, as his vassal, and Liu Feng, the last son of Liu, as the vassal of Quyang.

古文：歙从父弟茂，年十八，汉兵之起，茂自号刘失职，亦聚众亦、密间，称厌新将军。
现代文：刘歙从父弟刘茂，年十八岁，汉兵兴起时，刘茂自号刘失职，也聚合部众于京县、密县一带，称厌新将军。
English: Liu Yao was 18 years old when he followed his father and brother, Liu Mao, into the Chinese army. When the Chinese army was on the rise, Liu Mao, who called himself Liu, lost his position. He also gathered people in the Beijing County and the Mi County area, saying that he was disgusted with the new general.

古文：攻下颍川、汝南，众十余万人。
现代文：攻下颍川、汝南，拥有部众十多万人。
English: He conquered the Li River and the south of the Yunnan Province, and gained more than one hundred thousand followers.

古文：光武既至河内，茂率众降，封为中山王。
现代文：光武既到河内，刘茂率众投降，被封为中山王。
English: Once Guangwu arrived in Hanoi, Liu Mo led the crowd to surrender and was crowned the King of Zhongshan.

古文：十三年，宗室为王者皆降为侯，更封茂为穰侯。
现代文：建武十三年，宗室为王者都降为侯，更封刘茂为穰侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, all the kings of the family were reduced to the rank of marquess, and Liu Mao was given the title of marquess.

古文：茂弟匡，亦与汉兵俱起。
现代文：刘茂弟刘匡，也与汉兵一起兴起。
English: Liu Mao's younger brother, Liu Kuang, also rose with the Han soldiers.

古文：建武二年，封宜春侯。
现代文：建武二年，封宜春侯。
English: In the second year of the Jianwu era, he was given the fief of Yichun.

古文：及王圣败，贬爵为亭侯。
现代文：为人谦逊，永平中为宗正。
English: He is a humble person, and Yongping Middle is Munemasa.

古文：安城孝侯赐字子琴，光武族兄也。
现代文：子刘浮继承，封朝阳侯。◆安成孝侯刘赐传安成孝侯刘赐字子琴，光武的族兄。
English: He was succeeded by his son Liu Fu, who was given the title of Prince of Chaoyang. ◆Ansheng Xiaohong Liu Zizhong Ansheng Xiaohong Liu Zizhong Zijin, the elder brother of Guangwu.

古文：祖父利，苍梧太守。
现代文：祖父刘利，是苍梧太守。
English: His grandfather, Liu Li, was the Cangwu governor.

古文：赐少孤。
现代文：刘赐少年丧父。
English: Liu Qi lost his father at a young age.

古文：兄显报怨杀人，吏捕显杀之。
现代文：兄刘显报怨杀人，官吏捕捉刘显把他杀了。
English: Liu Xian's brother reported a grudge and was killed. Officials caught Liu Xian and killed him.

古文：赐与显子信卖田宅，同抛财产，结客报吏，皆亡命逃伏遭赦日。
现代文：刘赐与刘显儿子刘信卖掉田园住宅，共同抛弃财产，结交宾客杀吏报仇，都在外亡命逃伏，后来遭赦免回家。
English: Liu Cai and Liu Xian's son Liu Xin sold their rural residence, jointly abandoned their property, and made friends with guests to avenge the killing of officials. They both fled abroad and were later pardoned to return home.

古文：会伯升起兵，乃随从攻击诸县。
现代文：恰逢伯升起兵，就随从伯升攻击各县。
English: Just as Baosheng raised an army, he followed Baosheng to attack the counties.

古文：更始既立，以赐为光禄勋，封广汉侯。
现代文：更始既即位，以刘赐为光禄勋，封广汉侯。
English: As soon as he ascended to the throne, he appointed Liu Zi as Guanglu Xun and made him Guanghan Hou.

古文：及伯升被害，代为大司徒，将兵讨汝南。
现代文：等到伯升被害，代理为大司徒，率兵讨伐汝南。
English: When Baosheng was damaged, he was deputized as the grand disciple and led the troops to fight against the south of Runan.

古文：未及平，更始又以信为奋威大将军，代赐击汝南，赐与更始俱到洛阳。
现代文：没有平定，更始又以刘信为奋威大将军，代刘赐攻击汝南，刘赐与更始都到洛阳。
English: There was no pacification, and at the beginning, Liu Xin was appointed as the great general. On behalf of Liu Zi, he attacked Runan. Liu Zi and Wang Zi both went to Luoyang.

古文：更始欲令亲近大将徇河北，未知所使，赐言诸家子独有文叔可用，大司马朱鲔等以为不可，更始狐疑，赐深劝之，乃拜光武行大司马，持节过河。
现代文：更始想命令亲近大将夺取河北，不知派谁为好。刘赐说刘家子弟只有文叔可用，大司马朱鲔等以为不可，更始狐疑不定，刘赐极力劝说，更始就拜光武行使大司马职务，持符节过河。
English: At first, he wanted to order a close general to seize Hebei, but he didn't know who to send. Liu Zi said that only Uncle Wen could be used by Liu's son, and the chief steward Ma Zhuqi thought it was impossible. At first, he was uncertain. Liu Zi tried his best to persuade him, and at first he worshipped Guangwu to perform the duties of the chief steward and cross the river with the festival of the runes.

古文：是日以赐为丞相，令先入关，修宗庙宫室。
现代文：当日以刘赐为丞相，令他先入关，修理宗庙宫室。
English: On the same day, Liu Zi was appointed as chancellor, and he was ordered to enter the imperial palace first to repair the imperial palace.

古文：还迎更始都长安，封赐为宛王，拜前大司马，使持节镇抚关东。
现代文：又回来迎接更始定都长安，封刘赐为宛王，拜前大司马，让他持符节镇抚关东。
English: He came back again to welcome the new capital of Chang'an, to crown Liu Zi as the king of An, to pay homage to the former grand steward Ma, and to have him hold the festival of symbols in Zhenfu Kanto.

古文：二年春，赐就国于宛，典将六部兵。
现代文：更始二年春，刘赐就以宛为封他，掌管六部兵事。
English: In the spring of the following year, Liu Zi took Wan as his vassal and took charge of the six military departments.

古文：后赤眉破更始，赐所领六部亦稍散畔，乃去宛保育阳。
现代文：后来赤眉破了更始，刘赐所领的六部也逐渐散去叛离，刘赐就去宛保守育阳。
English: Later, the Six Divisions led by Liu Zi also gradually dispersed and defected, and Liu Zi went to An to protect Yuyang.

古文：闻光武即位，乃西之武关，迎更始妻子将诣洛阳。
现代文：听到光武即位，就西去武关，迎接更始的妻子将他们带到洛阳。
English: When they heard that Guangwu was enthroned, they went west to Wuguan to meet his new wife and bring them to Luoyang.

古文：帝嘉赐忠，建武二年，封为慎侯。
现代文：光武帝嘉奖刘赐忠诚，建武二年，封他为慎侯。
English: Emperor Guangwu commended Liu Zi's loyalty, and in the second year of Jianwu's reign, he was given the title of Shenhou.

古文：十三年，更增户邑，定封为安成侯，奉朝请。
现代文：建武十三年，更增加户邑，定封为安成侯，参与朝会。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, he even increased the number of households, was given the title of Ancheng Hou, and participated in the imperial court.

古文：以赐有恩信，故亲厚之，数蒙宴私，时幸其第，恩赐特异。
现代文：以刘赐有恩信，所以亲切厚爱，多次设私宴招待，还时常驾幸刘赐府第，给予的恩宠赏赐特别优厚。
English: Because Liu Zi has a letter of grace, he is very kind and generous, and has repeatedly set up private banquets to invite guests. He also often visits Liu Zi's residence, and the grace and reward given are particularly generous.

古文：赐辄赈与故旧，有无遗积。
现代文：刘赐经常接济给他的故旧，没有作为遗产留下来。
English: Liu Zi often gave money to his father-in-law, but he did not leave it as an inheritance.

古文：帝为营冢堂，起祠庙，置吏卒，如舂陵孝侯。
现代文：帝为他营造冢堂，立起祠庙，设置吏卒，如舂陵孝侯格式。
English: The emperor built a hall for him, established an ancestral temple, and set up officials, such as Fuling Xiaohong.

古文：二十八年卒，子闵嗣。
现代文：建武二十八年去世，子刘闵继承。
English: Jianwu died in 28 and was succeeded by his son Liu Ye.

古文：光武即位，桂阳太守张隆击破之，信乃诣洛阳降，以为汝阴侯。
现代文：建武三十年，帝又封刘闵弟刘嵩为白牛侯。因楚王谋反事，口供中与刘闵有所牵连，被撤除封号。刘闵去世，子刘商继承，徙封为白牛侯。
English: In the 30th year of the Jianwu era, the emperor also made Liu Xuan's younger brother Liu Song the Prince of Baijiu. Because King Chu plotted against Liu Xuan, he was implicated in a confession and his title was revoked. Liu Xuan died, and his son Liu Shang succeeded him as the Prince of Baijiu.

古文：永平十三年，亦坐楚事国除。
现代文：刘商去世后，子刘昌继承。◆成武孝侯刘顺传
English: After the death of Liu Shang, his son Liu Chang succeeded him.

古文：成武孝侯顺字平仲，光武族兄也。
现代文：成武孝侯刘顺字平仲，光武的族兄。
English: Chengwu Liu Shun, the elder brother of Guangwu.

古文：父庆，舂陵侯敞同产弟。
现代文：父亲刘庆，舂陵侯刘敞的同母弟。
English: His father, Liu Qing, was the younger maternal half-brother of Liu Zang, Prince of Fuling.

古文：顺与光武同里闬，少相厚。
现代文：刘顺与光武同乡，从小就厚交。
English: Liu Shun and Guangwu are from the same hometown and have been close friends since childhood.

古文：更始即位，以庆为燕王，顺为虎牙将军。
现代文：更始即位，以刘庆为燕王，刘顺为虎牙将军。
English: The enthronement ceremony began, with Liu Qing as the King of Swallows and Liu Shun as the General of Tigers.

古文：会更始降赤眉，庆为乱兵所杀，顺乃间行诣光武，拜为南阳太守。建武二年，封成武侯，邑户最大，租入倍宗室诸家。
现代文：当更始向赤眉投降时，刘庆被乱兵所杀，刘顺就微行拜见光武，被封为南阳太守，建武二年，封为成武侯，所食邑户最大，地租收入为宗室各家的几倍。
English: When Gengshi surrendered to the Red Eyebrows, Liu Qing was killed by the rampaging soldiers, Liu Shun paid a small visit to Guangwu, was named the governor of Nanyang, and in the second year of Jianwu, he was named the prince of Chengwu. His household was the largest in the village, and the land rent income was several times that of the family.

古文：八年，使击破六安贼，因拜为六安太守。
现代文：建武八年，派他击破六安贼，因而拜为六安太守。
English: In the eighth year of Jianwu's reign, he was sent to defeat the bandits of Liuan, and thus became the eunuch of Liuan.

古文：弘弟梁，以侠气闻，更始元年，起兵豫章，欲徇江东，自号 就汉大将军 ，暴病卒。
现代文：数年，光武想征他入京，六安吏人上书请将他留下。建武十一年卒，帝派遣使者迎丧回京，亲临吊唁。子刘遵继承爵位，因牵连与诸王交通，降为端氏侯。
English: For several years, Guangwu wanted to recruit him to go to Beijing, and the officials of Lu'an petitioned him to stay. When Jianwu died at the age of eleven, the emperor sent an envoy back to Beijing to mourn and offer his condolences in person. His son Liu Zun succeeded to the title of nobility, but because of his connection with the kings, he was demoted to the position of Hanzhi marquis.

古文：顺阳怀侯嘉字孙，光武族兄也。
现代文：◆顺阳怀侯刘嘉传顺阳怀侯刘嘉字孝孙，光武帝的族兄。
English: ◆ Liu Jiachuan, the Prince of Shunyang, Liu Jiachi, the Prince of Shunyang, and Emperor Guangwu's elder brother.

古文：父宪，舂陵侯敞同产弟。
现代文：父刘宪，是舂陵侯刘敞的同母弟。
English: His father, Liu Xian, was the younger maternal half-brother of Liu Zang, Prince of Fuling.

古文：嘉少孤，性仁厚，南顿君养视如子，后与伯升俱学长安，习《尚书》、《春秋》。
现代文：刘嘉少年丧父，性仁爱宽厚，南顿君抚养视之如亲生子，后来与伯升都就学长安，学习《尚书》、《春秋》。
English: Liu Jia lost his father when he was young, he was kind and generous, and Nantong Jun raised him as if he were his own son. Later, he and Baosheng both went to Chang'an School to study "Shangshu" and "Spring and Autumn."

古文：及义兵起，嘉随更始征伐。
现代文：义兵兴起，刘嘉跟随更始征战。
English: With the rise of volunteer soldiers, Liu Jia followed suit and went to war.

古文：汉军之败小长安也。嘉妻子遇害。
现代文：当汉军在小长安失败时，刘嘉的妻子被杀害。
English: Liu Jia's wife was killed when the Chinese army failed in Xiaochang'an.

古文：更始即位，以为偏将军。
现代文：更始即位，以刘嘉为偏将军。
English: He was enthroned at the beginning of a new era, with Liu Jia as the leading general.

古文：及攻破宛，封兴德侯，迁大将军。
现代文：等到攻破宛城，封兴德侯，又迁为大将军。
English: When Wancheng was conquered, Fong Xingde, the warlord, was transferred to the position of general.

古文：击延岑于冠军，降之。
现代文：在冠军击破延岑，延岑降。
English: In the championship, Yan Xuan was defeated and Yan Xuan was relegated.

古文：更始既都长安，以嘉为汉中王、扶威大将军，持节就国，都于南郑，众数十万。
现代文：更始既都长安，以刘嘉为汉中王、扶威大将军，持符节往汉中封地，都于南郑，拥众数十万。
English: It all began in Chang'an, with Liu Jia as the king of the Han Dynasty and the general of Fuwei. He went to the fiefs of the Han Dynasty, all in Nanzheng, with hundreds of thousands of fans.

古文：建武二年，延岑复反，攻汉中，围南郑，嘉兵败走。
现代文：建武二年，延岑复反，进攻汉中，围攻南郑，刘嘉败走。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Yan Xuan rebelled, attacked Hanzhong, besieged Nan Zheng, and Liu Jia was defeated.

古文：岑遂定汉中，进兵武都，为更始柱功侯李宝所破。
现代文：延岑于是平定汉中，进兵武都，被更始柱功侯李宝所破。
English: Yan Xuan then subdued Hanzhong, marched into Wudu, and was defeated by Li Bao, the first pillar of Gonghou.

古文：岑走天水，公孙述遣将侯丹取南郑。
现代文：延岑败走天水，公孙述遣将侯丹攻取南郑。
English: Yan Xuan was defeated and fled to Tianshui. Gongsun Sui sent Hou Dan to capture Nan Zheng.

古文：嘉收散卒，得数万人，以宝为相，从武都南击侯丹，不利，还军河池、下辨。
现代文：刘嘉收拾散卒，得数万人，以李宝为相，从武都南击侯丹，不利，还军河池、下辨。
English: Liu Jia collected scattered soldiers, gained tens of thousands of people, with Li Bao as a partner, attacked Houdan from the south of Wudong, was unfavorable, and returned the army to Hechi and Shedan.

古文：复与延岑连战，岑引北入散关，至陈仓，嘉追击破之。
现代文：再与延岑连战，延岑引军北入散关，到陈仓，刘嘉追击攻破延岑。
English: He then fought a series of battles with Yan Kun, Yan Kun led his army north into Sankuan, and went to Chen Cang, where Liu Jia pursued and defeated Yan Kun.

古文：更始邓王廖湛将赤眉十八万攻嘉，嘉与战于谷口，大破之。
现代文：更始邓王廖湛率领赤眉军十八万攻刘嘉，刘嘉与廖湛战于谷口，大破廖湛军。
English: Later, Deng Wang Liao Tan led 180,000 Red Eyebrows to attack Liu Jia. Liu Jia and Liao Tan fought in Taniguchi and defeated Liao Tan's army.

古文：嘉手杀湛，遂到云阳就谷。
现代文：刘嘉亲手杀了廖湛，于是到云阳就地取得粮食。
English: Liu Jia killed Liao Zhan with his own hands, so he went to Yunyang to get grain on the spot.

古文：李宝等闻邓禹西征，拥兵自守，马嘉且观成败。
现代文：李宝等听说邓禹西征，就拥兵自守，劝刘嘉暂时坐观成败。
English: When Li Bao and others heard about Deng Yu's Western Expedition, they supported the soldiers to protect themselves and advised Liu Jia to temporarily sit and watch the success or failure.

古文：光武闻之，告禹曰： 孝孙素谨善，少且亲爱，当是长安轻薄儿误之耳。 禹即宣帝旨，嘉乃因来歙诣禹于云阳。
现代文：光武听到后，告邓禹说 ：孝孙素来谨慎善良，而且与我从小就相亲相爱，当是长安的轻薄儿误了他哩。 邓禹就宣告光武的旨意，刘嘉就依来歙在云阳会见邓禹。
English: When Guangwu heard this, he told Deng Yu: Xiaosun has always been cautious and kind, and he and I have loved each other since we were children. It seems that Chang'an's frivolous children have misjudged him. Deng Yu announced Guangwu's will, and Liu Jia came to Yunyang to meet Deng Yu.

古文：三年，到洛阳，从征伐，拜为千乘太守。
现代文：建武三年，到洛阳，跟从征伐，拜为千乘太守。
English: In the third year of Jianwu, he went to Luoyang, followed the conquest, and worshiped as the governor of Qianjiang.

古文：六年，病，上书乞骸骨，征诣京师。
现代文：建武六年，患病，上书请求退职，被征召到京师。
English: In the sixth year of Jianwu, he fell ill, submitted a letter requesting retirement, and was called up to the Beijing division.

古文：十三年，封为顺阳侯。
现代文：建武十三年，封为顺阳侯。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianwu, he was given the title of Shunyang Hou.

古文：秋，复封嘉子廧为黄李侯。
现代文：秋，又封刘嘉儿子刘参为黄李侯。
English: In the autumn, Liu Jia's son Liu San was also named Huang Li Hou.

古文：十五年，嘉卒。
现代文：建武十五年，刘嘉去世。
English: In the 15th year of Jianwu, Liu Jia passed away.

古文：子参嗣，有罪，削为南乡侯。
现代文：子刘参继承爵位，刘参犯罪，被削为南乡侯。
English: His son Liu San inherited the title, but Liu San committed a crime and was demoted to the position of South Township marquess.

古文：永平中，参为城门校尉。
现代文：永平中，刘参为城门校尉。
English: In Yongping Middle School, Liu San was the captain of the castle gate.

古文：参卒，子循嗣。
现代文：刘参死，子刘循继位。
English: Liu San died and was succeeded by his son Liu Xun.

古文：循卒，子章嗣。
现代文：刘循死，子刘章继位。
English: Liu Xun died and was succeeded by his son Liu Zhang.

