古文：萧望之字长倩，东海兰陵人也，徙杜陵。
现代文：萧望之字长倩，束海郡兰陵县人，后来迁徙到杜陵。
English: Zhao Wangzhi, a native of Lanling County, Sokhai County, later migrated to Tuling.

古文：家世以田为业，至望之，好学，治《齐诗》，事同县后仓且十年。
现代文：世代以种田为业，到了萧望之，爱好学问，研究《齐诗》，师从同县的后仓将近十年。
English: For generations, farming has been their occupation, but now they are eager to learn, love learning, study "Qi Shi," and have been learning from Houcang in the same county for nearly ten years.

古文：以令诣太常受业，复事同学博士白奇，又从夏侯胜问《论语》、《礼服》。
现代文：根据制度到太常门下学习，又师从以前的同学博士白奇，还跟随夏侯胜讨问《论语》、《仪礼。丧服》。
English: According to the system, he studied under the tutelage of Tai Chang, and also learned from his former classmate, Dr. Bai Qi, and also followed Xia Hosheng to discuss "Analects," "Rites. Funeral Clothes."

古文：京师诸儒称述焉。
现代文：京师的儒生们都称赞他。
English: The Confucian students in Beijing all praised him.

古文：是时，大将军霍光秉政，长史丙吉荐儒生王仲翁与望之等数人，皆召见。
现代文：当时大将军霍光执政，长史丙吉推荐儒生王仲翁和萧望之等几人，都被召见。
English: At that time, the great general Huo Guang was in power, and several people, such as the Confucian Wang Zhongweng and Xiaowang Rong, recommended by the chief scholar Shi Bijie, were summoned.

古文：先是，左将军上官桀与盖主谋杀光，光既诛桀等，后出入自备。
现代文：这以前，左将军上官桀与盖邑公主阴谋刺杀霍光，霍光就诛杀了上官桀等人，之后出入自加防备。
English: Prior to this, the Left General Shangguan Xuan and Princess Guiyi plotted to assassinate Huo Guang. Huo Guang then killed Shangguan Xuan and others, and then went into self-defense.

古文：吏民当见者，露索去刀兵，两吏挟持。
现代文：必须接见的官吏百姓，都要脱衣搜身，去除兵器，由两个官吏挟持着。
English: Officials and citizens who must be interviewed are strip-searched, stripped of weapons, and held by two officials.

古文：望之独不肯听，自引出阁曰： 不愿见。 
现代文：惟独萧望之不肯听从，自己从小门退出说： 不愿谒见。 
English: However, Xiao Wangzhi refused to listen, and withdrew from the small door, saying, "I don't want to see you."

古文：吏牵持匈匈。
现代文：官吏气势汹汹地拉他。
English: The official pulls him up aggressively.

古文：光闻之，告吏勿持。
现代文：霍光听说这个情况，就告诉官吏不要挟持他。
English: When Huo Guang heard about this, he told the officials not to detain him.

古文：望之既至前，说光曰： 将军以功德辅幼主，将以流大化，致于洽平，是以天下之士延颈企踵，争愿自效，以辅高明。
现代文：萧望之来到霍光面前，规劝他说： 将军凭仗功勋和德行辅佐年幼的皇帝，将要推行宏大的教化政策，以达到协调和平的统治，所以天下的士人都伸长脖颈，踮起脚跟，争相要亲身效力，来辅佐高明的您。
English: Xiao Wangzhi came to Huo Guang and advised him: "The generals, by virtue of their merits and virtues, are assisting the young emperor. They are going to implement a grand enlightenment policy to achieve a coordinated and peaceful rule. Therefore, all the scholars in the world are stretching their necks, stomping their heels, and competing to be personally effective to assist you.

古文：今士见者皆先露索挟持，恐非周公相成王躬吐握之礼，致白屋之意。 
现代文：现在要拜见您的士人都要先脱衣搜身受到挟持，这恐怕不合周公辅佐成王时一饭三吐哺，一沐三握发以招致寒士之礼吧。 
English: Now, anyone who wants to visit you must first be strip-searched and detained. I'm afraid this doesn't fit with Zhou's rule of three meals, three spits, three shakes of the head to invite the cold.

古文：于是光独不除用望之，而仲翁等皆补大将军史。
现代文：当时霍光惟独不任用萧望之，而王仲翁等人都补任大将军史。
English: At that time, Huo Guang was the only one who did not appoint Xiao Wangzhi, while Wang Zhongweng and others were appointed to the post of general.

古文：三岁间，仲翁至光禄大夫、给事中，望之以射策甲科为郎，署小苑东门候。
现代文：三年之中，王仲翁升至光禄大夫给事中，萧望之因为考中甲科才作了郎官，代理小苑东门候。
English: Within three years, Wang Zhongweng was promoted to the post of Guanglu Doctor, and Xiao Wang only became the deputy of Xiao Yuan Dongmeng because he had passed Grade A in the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：仲翁出入从仓头庐儿，下车趋门，传呼甚宠，顾谓望之曰： 不肯录录，反抱关为？ 
现代文：王仲翁出入有奴仆跟从，下车进门，前传后呼，甚是尊宠，他回头对萧望之说： 你不肯遵循常规，反而衹作了个守门官。 
English: Wang Zhongweng went in and out with servants following him. He got off the car and walked through the door. He was called forward and backward. He was very respected. He turned to Xiao Wangzhi and said, "You refused to follow the rules, and instead, you became a gatekeeper."

古文：望之曰： 各从其志。 
现代文：萧望之说： 各行其志。 
English: Xiao Wanzhi said, "Each one should follow his own path."

古文：后数年，坐弟犯法，不得宿卫，免归为郡吏。
现代文：几年之后，因为弟弟犯法而连坐，不能再担任皇宫警卫，被免职还乡做了郡吏。
English: A few years later, because his younger brother broke the law and was detained, he could no longer serve as a palace guard, and he was dismissed and returned to his hometown as a county official.

古文：御史大夫魏相除望之为属，察廉为大行治礼丞。
现代文：到御史大夫魏相任用萧望之作属官，经考核任命为大行治礼丞。
English: Wei Xiang, the imperial historian, appointed Xiao Wang as a subordinate official, and after examination, he was appointed as the grand marshal.

古文：时，大将军光薨，子禹复为大司马，兄子山领尚书，亲属皆宿卫内侍。
现代文：这时大将军霍光去世，他的儿子霍禹又担任大司马，他的侄子霍山任尚书，亲属都在皇宫裹当警卫侍从。
English: At this time, the great general Huo Guang died, his son Huo Yu also served as the grand steward, his nephew Huoshan Ren Shangshu, and his relatives all served as guards and attendants in the imperial palace.

古文：地节三年夏，京师雨雹，望之因是上疏，愿赐清闲之宴，口陈灾异之意。
现代文：地节三年夏天，京师下冰雹，萧望之为此向皇帝上疏，希望皇帝给他一个机会，让他讲述天灾异象的意旨。
English: In the summer of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year.

古文：宣帝自在民间闻望之名，曰： 此东海萧生邪？
现代文：宣帝在民间听说过萧望之的名声，说： 这是束海的萧生吗？
English: Emperor Xuan heard about the fame of Xiaowang in the folk, and said: Is this the Xiao Sheng of Sokhai?

古文：下少府宋畸问状，无有所讳。 
现代文：将他带给少府宋畸问明情况，让他不要有所隐讳。 
English: He was brought to Song Kyi, the young prefect, to clarify the situation, so that he would not be secretive.

古文：望之对，以为： 《春秋》昭公三年大雨雹，是时季氏专权，卒逐昭公。
现代文：萧望之回答了询问，他认为 《春秋》记载鲁昭公三年大降冰雹，当时季氏专权，最终流放了鲁昭公。
English: Xiao Wangzhi answered the inquiry, he thought that "Spring and Autumn" recorded Lu Zhaogong's three-year hailstorm, at that time the Ji family had exclusive power, and finally exiled Lu Zhaogong.

古文：乡使鲁君察于天变，宜无此害。
现代文：如果过去鲁昭公能察觉天灾的征兆，就不会有这场灾祸。
English: If Lu Zhaogong had been able to detect the signs of natural disasters in the past, this disaster would not have happened.

古文：今陛下以圣德居位，思政求贤，尧、舜之用心也。
现代文：现在陛下凭仗圣明之德居于皇帝的位置，思考政事寻求贤能，这是尧舜治理天下的用心。
English: Now, His Majesty is in the position of the emperor by virtue of the virtue of holiness, thinking about politics and seeking virtue. This is the intention of governing the world.

古文：然而善祥未臻，阴阳不和，是大臣任政，一姓擅势之所致也。
现代文：然而祥瑞之兆还未出现，阴阳不和，这是大臣执政，一姓专权所致。
English: However, the auspicious sign has not yet appeared, and the yin and yang are not in harmony. This is caused by the fact that the minister is in power and one person has exclusive power.

古文：附枝大者贼本心，私家盛者公室危。
现代文：树枝过大就会伤害树干，大臣的权势过大就会危及朝廷。
English: If the branch is too big, it will damage the trunk, and if the power of the minister is too great, it will endanger the imperial court.

古文：唯明主躬万机，选同姓，举贤材，以为腹心，与参政谋，令公卿大臣朝见奏事，明陈其职，以考功能。
现代文：只有圣明的君主亲自治理国家万事，选拔同姓，举用贤才，将他们当作心腹之人，与他们谋划政事，命令公卿大臣上朝向皇帝汇报情况，明白地说出自己的责任，来考察他们的功劳才干。
English: Only a saintly and benevolent monarch can manage the affairs of the state, choose his peers, employ his sages, treat them as confidants, plan the affairs of state with them, order his noblemen and ministers to report to the emperor, clearly state his responsibilities, and examine their merits and abilities.

古文：如是，则庶事理，公道立，奸邪塞，私权废矣。 
现代文：像这样各种事情就能得到处理，各种事情就能得到处理，公正之道得以树立，奸邪之途被堵塞掉，私家的权利就废除了。 
English: Like this, all kinds of things can be dealt with, all kinds of things can be dealt with, the way of justice can be established, the way of treachery can be blocked, and the rights of private individuals can be abolished.

古文：对奏，天子拜望之为谒者。
现代文：这番对答上报给皇帝，宣帝就任命萧望之作了谒者。
English: This reply was reported to the emperor, and Emperor Xuan appointed Xiao Wang as the executioner.

古文：时，上初即位，思进贤良，多上书言便宜，辄下望之问状，高者请丞相御史，次者中二千石试事，满岁以状闻，下者报闻，或罢归田里，所白处奏皆可。
现代文：当时宣帝刚刚登上皇位，希望提拔贤良之士，很多人都上书陈述利国利民的策略，宣帝经常把这些奏摺交给萧望之询问利弊，高明的就请丞相、御史选用，次等的交给九卿试用，一年之后再把情况上报，下等的给予批覆，或者罢官遣归家乡，萧望之所禀报处理的都被批准。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuan had just ascended the throne and hoped to promote virtuous people. Many people wrote to him to explain the strategy of benefiting the country and benefiting the people. Emperor Xuan often submitted these reports to Xiao Wang to inquire about the pros and cons. The clever ones asked the prime minister and minister of history to select, the second-class ones submitted to the nine nobles for trial use, and reported the situation after one year. The lower-class ones were given approval, or dismissed and sent back to their hometowns. All of Xiao Wang's reports were approved.

古文：累迁谏大夫，丞相司直，岁中三迁，官至二千石。
现代文：他连续升迁到谏大夫，丞相司直，一年之内三次升官，作到二千石级的官员。
English: He was successively promoted to Dr. Zou, Minister of Justice, and three times promoted within a year, making him an official of 2,000 koku level.

古文：其后霍氏竟谋反诛，望之浸益任用。
现代文：之后霍氏竟然因为谋反被诛杀，萧望之就更加受到重用。
English: After that, Mr. Huo was actually beaten to death for plotting a rebellion, and Xiao Wangzhu became even more important.

古文：是时，选博士、谏大夫通政事者补郡国守、相，以望之为平原太守。
现代文：这时正在挑选通达政事的博士和谏大夫担任郡守国相，派萧望之作平原太守。
English: At this time, Dr. Tongda and Dr. Zou were being selected to serve as county governors and ministers of state, and the long-awaited creation of the plain governor emerged.

古文：望之雅意在本朝，远为郡守，内不自得，乃上疏曰： 陛下哀愍百姓，恐德化之不究，悉出谏官以补郡吏，所谓忧其末而忘其本者也。
现代文：萧望之一向愿在朝廷任职，派他到远处作郡守，心裹不太合意，就上奏摺说： 陛下体恤百姓，担心德政教化不能普及，将谏官都派出去担任地方官，正所谓担忧事物的末节而忘记了它的根本。
English: One of his longings was for Xiang Rong to serve in the imperial court, so he sent him far away to serve as a county magistrate. They did not quite agree with each other, so they wrote a letter saying, "Your Majesty, out of consideration for the people, and fearing that the spread of the teaching of virtue and democracy will not be possible, has sent all the eunuchs out to serve as local officials. You are worrying about the end of things and forgetting the fundamentals.

古文：朝无争臣则不知过，国无达士则不闻善。
现代文：朝中没有谏官皇帝就不能发现过错，京城裹没有通达之士皇帝就无法听到善言。
English: Without eunuchs in the morning, the emperor can't find fault, and without knowledgeable people in the capital, the emperor can't hear good words.

古文：愿陛下选明经术，温故知新，通于几微谋虑之士以为内臣，与参政事。
现代文：希望陛下选拔明了经术，通晓历史而能掌握新形势，精通事理的深谋远虑之士作为朝中大臣，参与政务。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will select a person who is well versed in scripture, has a thorough knowledge of history and can grasp the new situation, and is well versed in reason and foresight to participate in government affairs as the Minister of the Middle Kingdom of Korea.

古文：诸侯闻之，则知国家纳谏忧政，亡有阙遗。
现代文：诸侯听说这个情况，就知道国家采纳忠谏之言，担心政治，没有阙失遣漏。
English: When the lords heard about this, they knew that the state had adopted the words of the loyal vassal, and they were worried about politics.

古文：若此不怠，成、康之道其庶几乎！
现代文：像这样坚持不懈，周成王、周康王时候的统治差不多就能实现了吧！
English: With such perseverance, the reign of King Zhoucheng and King Zhoukang can almost be realized!

古文：外郡不治，岂足忧哉？ 
现代文：地方郡县治理不好，难道值得忧虑吗？ 
English: Local county governance is not good, is it worth worrying about?

古文：书闻，征入守少府。
现代文：他的奏摺被呈进后，就被征调进朝廷管理少府。
English: After his report was submitted, he was conscripted and transferred to the imperial administrative minor prefecture.

古文：宣帝察望之经明持重，论议有余，材任宰相，欲详试其政事，复以为左冯翊。
现代文：宣帝了解到萧望之明晓经学，处事稳重，议事论理留有余地，才干胜任宰相，就想仔细考察他处理政务的能力，又派他当左冯翊。
English: Emperor Xuan realized that Xiao Wang was knowledgeable in the study of the classics, was steady in his work, had room for deliberation, and was capable of being a competent prime minister. He wanted to carefully examine his ability to handle government affairs, and appointed him as Zuo Fengyu.

古文：望之从少府出为左迁，恐有不合意，即移病。
现代文：萧望之从少府调出降低职位，害怕是得罪了皇帝，就上书称病请假。
English: Xiao Wangzhi was transferred from Shaofu to a lower position. Fearing that he had offended the emperor, he wrote a letter saying that he was ill and asked for leave.

古文：上闻之，使侍中、成都侯金安上谕意曰： 所用皆更治民以考功。
现代文：皇帝知道了这件事，派侍中成都侯金安上传达旨意说： 朝廷所用之人都经过治理民众以考察功绩。
English: When the emperor learned of this, he sent his chamberlain, the Chengdu marquis Jian An, to convey his will, saying: The people used by the imperial court have all gone through the governance of the people to examine their merits.

古文：君前为平原太守日浅，故复试之于三辅，非有所闻也。 
现代文：您从前当平原太守时间很短，所以再将您派到三辅去考察，不是听到了什么不好的话。 
English: When you were the governor of the plains, your time was very short, so I sent you to Sanshu to investigate. I didn't hear anything bad.

古文：望之即视事。
现代文：萧望之即刻到职任事。
English: Xiaowang immediately took up his duties.

古文：是岁，西羌反，汉遣后将军征之。
现代文：这一年西羌反叛，汉朝派遣后将军去讨伐。
English: In that year, Xidi rebelled, and the Han Dynasty sent a general to crush the rebellion.

古文：京兆尹张敞上书言： 国兵在外，军以夏发，陇西以北，安定以西，吏民并给转输，田事颇废，素无余积，虽羌虏以破，来春民食必乏。
现代文：京兆尹张敞上书说： 国家的军队在边疆，军队夏天出发，陇西郡以北，安定郡以西，官吏和百姓都参与供给运转，农业会荒废很多，从前也没有余粮储备，虽然羌虏的叛乱被击破了，但是第二年春天民众的粮食必定匮乏。
English: Jing Zhao Yin Zhang Zhang wrote: The national army is on the frontier, the army sets out in the summer, north of Shaanxi County, west of Anding County, officials and people are involved in the supply operation, agriculture will be a lot of waste, there was no surplus grain reserve before, although the rebellion of the captives was defeated, but the next spring the people's food must be scarce.

古文：穷辟之处，买亡所得，县官谷度不足以振之。
现代文：贫穷偏僻的地方，想用钱买也得不到，县裹的官库粮食不足以赈济他们。
English: In poor and remote areas, money can't buy what they want, and the grain stored in the county treasury is not enough to support them.

古文：愿令诸有罪，非盗受财杀人及犯法不得赦者，皆得以差入谷此八郡赎罪。
现代文：希望朝廷命令那些罪犯，除非是抢劫钱财、杀人和犯重罪不能赦免的，都可以有差别地送粮食到这八个郡来赎罪。
English: It is hoped that the court will order those criminals, unless they are robbing money, killing people and committing serious crimes that cannot be pardoned, can send grain to these eight counties to atone for their sins.

古文：务益致谷以豫备百姓之急。 
现代文：务必要积聚粮食来预备给百姓的急难。 
English: It is imperative to accumulate grain to prepare for the people's emergency.

古文：事下有司，望之与少府李强议，以为： 民函明阳之气，有好义欲利之心，在教化之所助。
现代文：这个事情交给有关的部门处理，萧望之和少府李彊则持有异议，认为 民众有邪正两种气质，既有坚守正义的心愿，又有追逐利益的欲望，就在于教化的引导。
English: This matter was handed over to the relevant departments to deal with, but Xiao Wangzhi and Shaofu Li Jun held objections, believing that the people have two temperaments, evil and positive, and have both the desire to adhere to justice and the desire to pursue interests, which lies in the guidance of enlightenment.

古文：尧在上，不能去民欲利之心，而能令其欲利不胜其好义也；虽桀在上，不能去民好义之心，而能令其好义不胜其欲利也。
现代文：尧，不能完全去除民众追逐利益的欲望，却能让他们的逐利之欲不胜遇他们的守义之心；即使桀在统治，也不能去除民众坚守正义的愿望，却能让他们的守义之心不胜过他们的逐利之欲。
English: He cannot completely eliminate the people's desire to pursue profits, but he can make their desire to pursue profits prevail over their desire to uphold justice; even if he is in power, he cannot eliminate the people's desire to uphold justice, but he can make their desire to uphold justice prevail over their desire to pursue profits.

古文：故尧、桀之分，在于义利而已，道民不可不慎也。
现代文：所以尧、桀的分别，不过在于正义和利益两个方面而已，引导民众不可以不谨慎。
English: Therefore, the difference between  and  is only in the two aspects of justice and interests, and it is not prudent to guide the people.

古文：今欲令民量粟以赎罪，如此则富者得生，贫者独死，是贫富异刑而法不一也。
现代文：现在想让民众捐粮食来赎罪，这样富有的人就得以生存，贫穷的人衹有死路一条，这是穷人富人受到的刑罚不同，法律也不一致了。
English: Now they want people to donate grain to atone for their sins, so that the rich can survive and the poor can die. This is because the punishments for the poor and the rich are different, and the laws are not consistent.

古文：人情，贫穷，父兄囚执，闻出财得以生活，为人子弟者将不顾死亡之患，败乱之行，以赴财利，求救亲戚。
现代文：依照人之常情，贫穷的人，父亲兄长被囚禁，听说出钱可以救其性命，他们的儿子和弟弟将不顾死亡的威胁，败乱的行径，去夺取钱财，以求救出亲戚。
English: It is human nature that a poor man, whose father and brother are in prison, and who has heard that money can save his life, and whose son and brother, despite the threat of death and acts of desperation, will try to get money in order to save their relatives.

古文：一人得生，十人以丧，如此，伯夷之行坏，公绰之名灭。
现代文：一人得以生存，十人因此丧命，这样，伯夷那样的德行被破坏，公绰的美名堙灭。
English: One person survived, but ten people died as a result. In this way, the virtue of Bo Yi was destroyed, and his reputation was ruined.

古文：政教一倾，虽有周、召之佐，恐不能复。
现代文：政治教化一旦倾颓，即使有周公、召公来辅佐，恐怕也不能恢复。
English: Once political indoctrination collapses, even if Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong come to assist, it will probably not be able to recover.

古文：古者臧于民，不足则取，有余则予。
现代文：古代粮食储存在民众那裹，国库不足就取之于民，有余就给他们。
English: In ancient times, grain was stored for the people. If the state treasury did not have enough, it was taken from the people, and if there was more, it was given to them.

古文：《诗》曰 爰及矜人，哀此鳏寡 ，上惠下也。
现代文：《诗经》说 帝王的恩泽应该给那些可怜的人，怜悯那些鳏夫寡妇 ，这是帝王惠泽下民。
English: "The Book of Songs" says that the emperor's favor should be given to those who are poor, and mercy should be shown to those widows and widowers, who are the emperor's subjects.

古文：又曰 雨我公田，遂及我私 ，下急上也。
现代文：又说 下雨了，先润泽公田，再润泽我们自己的田地，民众尊重帝王的利益。
English: He also said that when it rained, the public fields were moistened first, and then our own fields were moistened. The people respected the interests of the emperor.

古文：今有西边之役，民失作业，虽户赋口敛以赡其困乏，古之通义，百姓莫以为非。
现代文：现在有征伐西部边境的战役，百姓荒废了农作业，即使每户收赋税每人捐钱财来解救他们的穷困，这也是古来就通行的原则，百姓不会认为不对。
English: Now there is a campaign to conquer the western border, the people have abandoned agricultural work. Even if every household collects taxes and each person donates money to relieve their poverty, this is a principle that has been in use since ancient times, and the people will not think it is wrong.

古文：以死救生，恐未可也。
现代文：让那些罪犯的子弟冒死去营救亲人，恐怕不可以。
English: I'm afraid we can't let the children of those criminals risk death to rescue their relatives.

古文：陛下布德施教，教化既成，尧、舜亡以加也。
现代文：陛下普及德行教化，教化已经成功，尧舜也超不过您。
English: Your Majesty has popularized moral education, and the education has been successful, surpassing you.

古文：今议开利路以伤既成之化，臣窃痛之。 
现代文：现在提议开辟财路却损害已经成功的教化，臣为之痛心 
English: The vassal was heartbroken by the fact that the proposal to open up financial channels would damage the already successful indoctrination

古文：于是天子复下其议两府，丞相、御史以难问张敞。
现代文：当时皇帝又一次将他们的建议交给两府权衡，丞相、御史大夫拿这些诘难质问张敞。
English: At that time, the emperor once again submitted their proposal to the two governments for consideration, and the prime minister and the chief historian questioned Zhang Zhan about these difficulties.

古文：敞曰： 少府左冯翊所言，常人之所守耳。
现代文：张敞说： 少府和左冯翊所说的，不过是庸人的见解。
English: Zhang Chang said: What Shofu and Zuo Fengyao said is just a mediocre opinion.

古文：昔先帝征四夷，兵行三十余年，百姓犹不加赋，而军用给。
现代文：以前先帝讨伐四方夷狄，战争进行了三十多年，还不给百姓增加赋税，同时军队的给养充足。
English: In the past, the former emperor fought against the barbarians in four directions, and the war lasted for more than thirty years. At the same time, he did not increase taxes on the people, and at the same time, the army was well supplied.

古文：今羌虏一隅小夷，跳梁于山谷间，汉但令罪人出财减罪以诛之，其名贤于烦扰良民横兴赋敛也。
现代文：现在西羌虏寇是一个角落裹的小族，在山谷中叫嚣强横，汉朝衹要命令罪人出钱减罪来诛灭他们，这样做名声会比骚扰良民、横征赋税好得多。
English: Now, the West Han Ruiko is a small tribe in a corner, shouting arrogantly in the valley. The Han dynasty wants to order sinners to pay money to reduce their crimes to annihilate them. Doing so will have a much better reputation than harassing good people and collecting taxes.

古文：又诸盗及杀人犯不道者，百姓所疾苦也，皆不得赎；首匿、见知纵、所不当得为之属，议者或颇言其法可蠲除，今因此令赎，其便明甚，何化之所乱？
现代文：另外那些强盗和杀人犯不合道义，为百姓所痛恨，都不可以赎罪；为首的窝藏犯、明知故放罪犯的人，损人利己者之类，议论者中有人认为他们的刑罚可以蠲免，现在因为这个命令可以赎罪，它的益处很明显，扰乱了什么教化呢？
English: In addition, those robbers and murderers who are immoral and hated by the people cannot atone for their sins; those who harbor criminals, those who knowingly release criminals, those who are self-serving, and so on, some of the commentators believe that their punishments can be pardoned. Now that this order can atone for sins, its benefits are obvious. What has disrupted enlightenment?

古文：《甫刑》之罚，小过赦，薄罪赎，有金选之品，所从来久矣，何贼之所生？
现代文：《甫刑》中的刑罚，小的过错赦免，较轻的罪可以赎罪，有用钱赎罪的等级，由来已久，哪会为此而出现盗贼？
English: The punishments in the "Final Punishment," the pardoning of minor faults, the atonement for minor sins, and the use of money to atone for sins have been around for a long time. Why would a thief appear for this reason?

古文：敞备皂衣二十余年，尝闻罪人赎矣，未闻盗贼起也。
现代文：我在朝廷做官二十多年，曾经听说罪人赎免的事，却没有听说过盗贼因此出现。
English: I have been working as an official at the Imperial Court for more than twenty years, and I have heard about the redemption of sinners, but I have not heard about the emergence of thieves as a result.

古文：窃怜凉州被寇，方秋饶时，民尚有饥乏，病死于道路，况至来春将大困乎！
现代文：我私下裹可怜痉州被寇贼扰乱，正是秋收之时，百姓还有饥饿困乏的，有得病死在道路上的，更何况来年春天将会有更大的困难呢！
English: Privately, I feel sorry for Ganzhou, which has been disturbed by the bandits. It is the time of the autumn harvest, when the people are still hungry and weary, and some have fallen ill and died on the road. What's more, there will be greater difficulties next spring!

古文：不早虑所以振救之策，而引常经以难，恐后为重责。
现代文：不早早思虑赈济百姓的方法，却引用一般的原则来责难，恐怕后来要担更大的责任。
English: If you do not think about how to help the people early on, but use general principles to criticize, I am afraid you will have to bear greater responsibility later.

古文：常人可与守经，未可与权也。
现代文：庸人可以和他一起遵守常规，不可以和他商议权变之事。
English: A mediocre person can abide by the rules with him, but cannot discuss the change of power with him.

古文：敞幸得备列卿，以辅两府为职，不敢不尽愚。 
现代文：我有幸能跻身列卿，把辅佐两府作为职责，不敢不尽自己的力量。 
English: I am fortunate to be able to join the ranks of the lords, to assist the two governments as my duty, and I dare not fail to do my best.

古文：望之、强复对曰： 先帝圣德，贤良在位，作宪垂法，为无穷之规，永惟边竟之不赡，故《金布令甲》曰 边郡数被兵，离饥寒，夭绝天年，父子相失，令天下共给其费 ，固为军旅卒暴之事也。
现代文：萧望之、李彊又反驳说： 先帝圣明仁德，贤良之士在朝廷任职，制订宪章，颁布法令，作为永久的制度，长久地考虑边境百姓的生活困难，所以《金布令甲》第一篇中说 边境郡县数次遭遇战祸，经受饥寒交迫之苦，百姓不能享尽天年就会夭折，父子离散，命令天下民众共同供给他们的费用，原来是为战争突然发生做准备。
English: Xiao Wangzhi and Li Xi also countered: The previous emperor, Sheng Ming Rende, and virtuous men served in the imperial court, formulated charters, issued decrees, and considered the living difficulties of the border people as a permanent system for a long time. Therefore, the first article of "Golden Booklet A" said that the border counties and counties encountered war disasters several times, suffered from hunger and cold, and the people could not enjoy all the days of the year and would die young. Father and son were separated, and the people around the world were ordered to jointly provide for their expenses. Originally, it was to prepare for the sudden occurrence of war.

古文：闻天汉四年，常使死罪人入五十万钱减死罪一等，豪强吏民请夺假貣，至为盗贼以赎罪。
现代文：听说天汉四年，曾经让死刑犯交纳五十万钱免去死罪减刑一等，豪强、官吏和民众请求、抢夺、借贷，甚至作盗贼谋取钱财来赎罪。
English: It is said that in the 4th year of the Heian and Han dynasties, a death row inmate was allowed to pay 500 thousand yuan to be exempted from the death penalty and his sentence was reduced to the first class. Heroic and powerful people, government officials and ordinary people begged, robbed, borrowed, and even stole money to atone for their sins.

古文：其后奸邪横暴，群盗并起，至攻城邑，杀郡守，充满山谷，吏不能禁，明诏遣绣衣使者以兴兵击之，诛者过半，然后衰止。
现代文：那以后奸诈邪恶的人横行霸道，众多的盗贼同时出现，发展到攻打城市，杀害郡守，这些人漫山遍野，官吏无法禁止，国家公开命令派遣绣衣使者来带领军队攻击他们，诛杀的人超过半数，然后才衰落消失。
English: After that, treacherous and evil people ran rampant. A large number of thieves appeared at the same time. It developed into attacking cities and killing county governors. These people were everywhere, and officials could not ban them. The state openly ordered to send embroidered messengers to lead the army to attack them. More than half of the people were killed, and then they declined and disappeared.

古文：愚以为此使死罪赎之败也，故曰不便。 
现代文：我们认为这是让死刑犯赎罪而导致的，所以说这样做不恰当。 
English: We believe that this is the result of letting death row prisoners atone for their crimes, so it is inappropriate to do so.

古文：时，丞相魏相、御史大夫丙吉亦以为羌虏且破，转输略足相给，遂不施敞议。
现代文：这时丞相魏相、御史大夫丙吉也认为西羌反贼将要被击溃，转运的供给基本上可以满足需要，没有实施张敞的建议。
English: At this time, the chancellor Wei Xiang and the imperial historian Bijie Rong also believed that the Xidi rebels would be defeated, and the supply of transshipment could basically meet the needs, and did not implement Zhang Zhang's suggestion.

古文：望之为左冯翊三年，京师称之，迁大鸿胪。
现代文：萧望之任左冯翊三年，都城裹的人都称赞他。被提升为大鸿胪。
English: Feng Que, who had been in office for three years, was praised by people all over the capital. He was promoted to the highest rank.

古文：先是，乌孙昆弥翁归靡因长罗侯常惠上书，愿以汉外孙元贵靡为嗣，得复尚少主，结婚内附，畔去匈奴。
现代文：在此之前乌孙国王翁归靡通过长罗侯常惠递交文书，愿意把汉朝的外孙元贵靡作为继承人，希望能够再次迎娶少公主，结为姻亲归附汉朝，背叛匈奴。
English: Prior to this, King Wusun Quimai submitted a document through the Long Luo, Lord Chang Hui, willing to take the Han Dynasty's grandson Yuan Guimai as the heir, hoping to marry the young princess again, become in-laws and join the Han Dynasty, and betray the Xiongnu.

古文：诏下公卿议，望之以为：乌孙绝域，信其美言，万里结婚，非长策也。
现代文：皇帝下诏让公卿商议这件事，萧望之认为乌孙是边远的地域，轻信他们的好话，远离万里缔结婚姻，不是长久之计。
English: The emperor issued an edict to let the nobles discuss the matter, but they thought that Wusun was a remote area, and it was not a long-term solution to believe in their kind words and conclude a marriage thousands of miles away.

古文：天子不听。
现代文：皇帝不听。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：神爵二年，遣长罗侯惠使送公主配元贵靡。
现代文：神爵二年，派遣长罗侯惠为使节护送公主许配给元贵靡。
English: In the second year of Jianzhe, he dispatched the head of the Luo clan, Hui, as an envoy to escort the princess to the imperial court.

古文：未出塞，翁归靡死，其兄子狂王背约自立。
现代文：还没有出边境，翁归靡死了，他的侄子狂王违背约定自立为王。
English: Before he could cross the border, Weng Quimai died and his nephew, the Mad King, broke the agreement and became king.

古文：惠从塞下上书，愿留少主敦煌郡。
现代文：常惠从塞下给皇帝上书，希望让公主暂时停留在敦煌郡。
English: Chang Hui sent a letter to the emperor, hoping to let the princess stay temporarily in Dunhuang County.

古文：惠至乌孙，责以负约，因立元贵靡，还迎少主。
现代文：常惠到乌孙，用负约的事责备他们，于是立元贵靡为王，回来迎接公主。
English: Chang Hui went to Wusun and reproached them for breaking the covenant, so he made Yuan Guimai king and returned to greet the princess.

古文：诏下公卿议，望之复以为： 不可。
现代文：皇帝下诏让公卿商议，萧望之又认为 不可以。
English: The emperor issued an edict to let the nobles discuss it, but they thought it was unacceptable.

古文：乌孙持两端，亡坚约，其效可见。
现代文：乌孙首鼠两端，不能坚守信约，这样的后果已经看见。
English: The consequences of not being able to stick to the agreement have already been seen.

古文：前少主在乌孙四十余年，恩爱不亲密，边境未以安，此已事之验也。
现代文：从前的那位公主在乌孙四十多年，夫妻感情不深，边境并未因此安定，这已经是事情的征验了。
English: The former princess has been in the U.S. for more than forty years, and the couple's feelings are not deep, so the border is not stable. This is already a test of things.

古文：今少主以元贵靡不得立而还，信无负于四夷，此中国之大福也。
现代文：现在少公主因为元贵靡不能继承王位而回来，确实没有辜负四方夷族，这是汉朝的大好事呀。
English: Now that the young princess has returned because the former nobles could not succeed to the throne, she has indeed lived up to the Shifang Yi people, which is a great thing for the Han Dynasty.

古文：少主不止，繇役将兴，其原起此。 
现代文：少公主不留下来，徭役将会兴起，事情的根源就在造裹。 
English: If the young princess does not stay, the eunuch will rise, and the root of the matter is in the cocoon.

古文：天子从其议，征少主还。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的建议，召公主回朝。
English: The emperor followed his advice and summoned the princess back to court.

古文：后乌孙虽分国两立，以元贵靡为大昆弥，汉遂不复与结婚。
现代文：后来乌孙虽然分为两个并立的国家，将元贵靡立为大国王，汉也不再和他缔结婚姻。
English: Later, although Wusun was divided into two parallel countries, he made Yuan Gui a great king, and Han no longer married him.

古文：三年，代丙吉为御史大夫。
现代文：神爵三年，萧望之代替丙吉做御史大夫。
English: Three years after the investiture of Jingde, Xiao Wangzhi replaced He Jie as the chief historian.

古文：五凤中匈奴大乱，议者多曰匈奴为害日久，可因其坏乱举兵灭之。
现代文：五凤年间匈奴大乱，论者大多认为匈奴为害很长时间，可以趁它内乱发兵消灭它。
English: During the Five Phoenix Years, the Huns wreaked havoc, and most commentators believed that the Huns had been causing harm for a long time, and that they could take advantage of the civil unrest to send troops to eliminate them.

古文：诏遣中朝大司马车骑将军韩增、诸吏富平侯张延寿、光禄勋杨惲、太仆戴长乐问望之计策，望之对曰： 《春秋》恶士匄帅师侵齐，闻齐侯卒，引师而还，君子大其不伐丧，以为恩足以服孝子，谊足以动诸侯。
现代文：皇帝下韶派遣中朝大司马车骑将军韩增、富平侯张延寿、光禄勋杨惮、太仆戴长乐询问萧望之有何计策，萧望之应对说： 据《春秋》记载晋国士句率领军队侵略齐国，听说齐侯去世，就率领军队回国了，君子称赞他不征伐正在办丧事的国家，认为他的恩德足以使齐国新国君佩服，道义足以震动诸侯。
English: The emperor sent Han Zeng, Fuping, Zhang Yanshou, Guanglu, Yang Shuo, and Dai Changle to inquire about Xiaowang's strategy. Xiaowang replied: "According to the "Spring and Autumn" records, Jin Guo Jiu led the army to invade Qi, and when he heard that Qi Guo had died, he led the army back to China. The gentleman praised him for not invading the country that was holding the funeral, and thought that his kindness was enough to make the new sovereign of Qi admire, and his morality was enough to shake the princes.

古文：前单于慕化乡善称弟，遣使请求和亲，海内欣然，夷狄莫不闻。
现代文：从前的单于仰慕我朝教化，一心向善，以弟辈自居，派遣使者请求和亲，四海之内的人们都很高兴，夷狄各族没有不听说的。
English: In the past, people only admired and learned from our dynasty, aspired to do good, thought of themselves as brothers and sisters, and sent envoys to ask for peace and kinship. People across the four seas were happy, and the various tribes of the Yidi did not fail to hear about it.

古文：未终奉约，不幸为贼臣所杀，今而伐之，是乘乱而幸灾也，彼必奔走远遁。
现代文：条约没有奉行到底，单于不幸被叛臣所杀，现在去讨伐它，是趁别人内乱而幸灾乐祸的行为，他们一定会逃走远避。
English: The treaty has not been carried out to the end, only because of the misfortune of being killed by a traitor. To fight it now is to take advantage of other people's civil strife and gloat. They will definitely run away.

古文：不以义动兵，恐劳而无功。
现代文：不以仁义而战，恐怕劳而无功。
English: If you don't fight for righteousness, I'm afraid your efforts will be in vain.

古文：宜遣使者吊问，辅其微弱，救其灾患，四夷闻之，咸贵中国之仁义。
现代文：应该派遣使者吊唁慰问，在他们衰弱的时候帮助他们，在他们有困难的时候救助他们，四方夷狄，都会佩服汉朝的仁义。
English: Envoys should be sent to offer condolences and condolences, to help them when they are weak, and to help them when they are in difficulty. People from all over the world will admire the benevolence of the Han Dynasty.

古文：如遂蒙恩得复其位，必称臣服从，此德之盛也。 
现代文：如果因此承蒙恩惠能复归王位，一定会向汉朝称臣，这是一件盛大的德政。 
English: If he is able to return to the throne thanks to this favor, he will certainly be a vassal to the Han Dynasty, which is a grand German policy.

古文：上从其议，后竟遣兵护辅呼韩邪单于定其国。
现代文：皇帝听从他的建议，其后终于派军队护送辅佐呼韩邪单于安定了他的国家。
English: The emperor followed his advice and eventually sent troops to escort Vice-Emperor Han Yat-Sen to stabilize his country.

古文：是时，大司农、中丞耿寿昌奏设常平仓，上善之，望之非寿昌。
现代文：当时大司农中丞耿寿昌上奏建议设立常平仓，皇帝认为很好，萧望之反对。
English: At that time, Geng Shuchang, Senior Secretary of the Central Agrarian Commissariat, proposed the establishment of Changping Cang. The emperor thought it was good, but the emperor was opposed.

古文：丞相丙吉年老，上重焉，望之又奏言： 百姓或乏困，盗贼未止，二千石多材下不任职。
现代文：丞相丙吉年老，受到皇帝敬重，萧望之又上奏说： 有些老百姓生活困乏，盗贼不断出现，二千石级的官员多有能力低下不称职的。
English: The emperor respected the aged chancellor He Jijie, but the emperor's longing for him was rekindled: Some people live a poor life, thieves are constantly appearing, and officials of 2,000 koku rank are mostly incompetent.

古文：三公非其人，则三光为之不明，今首岁日月少光，咎在臣等。 
现代文：三公的人选不当，日月星辰就会失去光辉，今年正月日月无光，责任在我们大臣身上。 
English: If the Three Wise Men are not chosen properly, the sun, the moon and the stars will lose their brilliance. In the first month of this year, the sun and the moon will not shine. The responsibility lies with our ministers.

古文：上以望之意轻丞相，乃下侍中建章卫尉金安上、光禄勋杨惲、御史中丞王忠，并诘问望之。
现代文：皇帝认为萧望之的意思是轻视丞相，于是命令侍中建章卫尉金安上、光禄勋杨惮、御史中丞王忠，一起质问萧望之。
English: The emperor thought that Xiao Wangzhi's meaning was to despise the prime minister, so he ordered the chamberlains Jianzhang Weiwei Jin An Shang, Guanglu Xun Yang Shuo, and Gu Shi Zhongzheng Wang Zhong to question Xiao Wangzhi together.

古文：望之免冠置对，天子由是不说。
现代文：萧望之脱下官帽辩论，皇帝因此不高兴。
English: The emperor was not happy about the debate on the removal of the official's hat.

古文：后丞相司直緐延寿奏： 侍中谒者良使承制诏望之，望之再拜已。
现代文：后来丞相司直鲧延寿上奏： 侍中谒者良奉旨下韶给萧望之，他衹拜了两拜。
English: Later, the chancellor, Naosuke Enjou, recited the following: The attendant in the middle bowed to him, and he bowed twice.

古文：良与望之言，望之不起，因故下手，而谓御史曰 良礼不备 。故事丞相病，明日御史大夫辄问病；朝奏事会庭中，差居丞相后，丞相谢，大夫少进，揖。
现代文：良和萧望之说话，萧望之不起立，还故意垂下双手，反而告诉御史说 良礼节不周，按旧例丞相有病，第二天御史大夫就要问候病情；上朝时在大殿中聚会，御史大夫应在丞相后面，丞相道别，大夫稍微前进，作揖。
English: When Liang and Xiao Wang talked, Xiao Wang did not stand up, and deliberately lowered his hands. Instead, he told the historian that Liang's etiquette was not good, according to the old example, the prime minister was ill, and the next day the historian would greet the illness; when they met in the main hall in the morning, the historian should be behind the prime minister, the prime minister would say goodbye, and the doctor would advance slightly to make the sign.

古文：今丞相数病，望之不问病；会庭中，与丞相钧礼。
现代文：现在丞相数次生病，萧望之不去探病；在大殿聚会，和丞相用相同的礼节。
English: Now, the prime minister has been ill several times, and he has been reluctant to go to see him. They meet in the main hall, and they use the same etiquette as the prime minister.

古文：时议事不合意，望之曰： 侯年宁能父我邪！ 
现代文：有时议事意见不合，萧望之说： 君侯您的年纪难道能做我的父辈吗！ 
English: Sometimes there are disagreements in the deliberation, and he said sadly: Lord, at your age, can you really be my father?

古文：知御史有令不得擅使，望之多使守史自给车马，之杜陵护视家事。
现代文：知道御史不得擅自使用权力，萧望之却多次派留守官吏自备车马，回杜陵照看家事。
English: Knowing that the Emperor was not allowed to use his power without permission, he often sent officials to stay behind to take care of the household chores.

古文：少史冠法冠，为妻先引，又使卖买，私所附益凡十万三千。
现代文：让少史戴着法冠为他的妻子引路，又派他们去做买卖，这些人私下给他补助一共有十万三千。
English: Let Shoshi lead the way for his wife wearing the Dharma crown, and send them to do business, these people privately give him a total of one hundred and three thousand.

古文：案望之大臣，通经术，居九卿之右，本朝所仰，至不奉法自修，踞慢不逊攘，受所监臧二百五十以上，请逮捕系治。 
现代文：萧望之是大臣，通晓经术，职位在九卿之上，为众人所仰慕，竟然至于不守法不注意修养，傲慢不逊，贪污所监管的财物达二百五十以上，请允许逮捕囚禁治罪。 
English: Xiao Wangzhi is a minister, he is familiar with the scriptures, his position is above the nine nobles, he is admired by many people, so much so that he does not abide by the law, does not pay attention to cultivation, is arrogant, and has more than 250 properties under his supervision for corruption. Please allow him to be arrested, imprisoned and punished.

古文：上于是策望之曰： 有司奏君责使者礼，遇丞相亡礼，廉声不闻，敖慢不逊，亡以扶政，帅先百僚。
现代文：皇帝立即下策给萧望之说： 有关官员上告你苛求我派遣的使者礼节不周，遇到丞相没有礼貌，听不到你廉洁的名声，傲慢不逊，无法扶持朝政，不能做百官的表率。
English: The emperor immediately gave Xiao Wangzhi the following advice: The relevant officials appealed to you, demanding that the envoy I sent was not courteous, that he was not polite when he met the prime minister, that he could not hear your reputation for integrity, that he was arrogant, that he could not support the government, and that he could not set an example for other officials.

古文：君不深思，陷于兹秽，朕不忍致君于理，使光禄勋惲策诏，左迁君为太子太傅，授印。
现代文：你不深入思考，陷入这种污秽的境地，我不忍心让你受到法律的制裁，就派光禄勋杨惮传达韶令，把你降职为太子太傅，给予印绶。
English: If you do not think deeply and fall into such a filthy situation, I cannot bear to subject you to legal sanctions, so I will send Guanglu Xun Yangshuo to convey the imperial order to demote you to the position of crown prince and give you the seal.

古文：其上故印使者，便道之官。
现代文：把原来的印绶交给使者，然后就去上任。
English: He handed the original seal to the emissary and then went to take office.

古文：君其秉道明孝，正直是与，帅意亡愆，靡有后言。 
现代文：你应该遵守道德，彰明孝义，端正自己的思想品行，不要有什么过失，不要有什么别的话。 
English: You should abide by morality, promote filial piety, and rectify your thoughts and deeds. Don't make any mistakes, and don't say anything else.

古文：望之既左迁，而黄霸代为御史大夫。
现代文：萧望之被降职以后，黄霸接任御史大夫。
English: After Xiao Wangzhi was demoted, Huang Ba took over as chief historian.

古文：数月间，丙吉薨，霸为丞相。
现代文：几个月之后，丙吉去世，黄霸接任丞相。
English: A few months later, Heung-Gil died, and Hwanghae took over as prime minister.

古文：霸薨，于定国复代焉。望之遂见废，不得相。
现代文：黄霸去世，于定国又接替他，萧望之就被废用，不能做丞相。
English: Huangba died, and Yu Dingguo succeeded him. He was deprived of his post and could not become chancellor.

古文：为太傅，以《论语》、《礼服》授皇太子。
现代文：当太傅，给皇太子讲授《论语》和《仪礼。丧服》。
English: Taifu, taught the crown prince "Analects" and "Rituals. Funeral attire."

古文：初，匈奴呼韩邪单于来朝，诏公卿议其仪，丞相霸、御史大夫定国议曰： 圣王之制，施德行礼，先京师而后诸夏，先诸夏而后夷狄。
现代文：当初，匈奴呼韩邪单于来朝见，皇帝下诏让公卿议论召见的礼仪，丞相黄霸、御史大夫子定国以为： 圣明帝王的制度，施行德政，推行礼制，先京都而后地方，先国内而后境外。
English: At the beginning, the Xiongnu summoned Han Zidan to come to the imperial court, and the emperor issued an edict to let the nobles discuss the etiquette they had been summoned to discuss. The prime minister Huang Ba and the chief historian Ding Guo believed that: the system of Emperor Shengming, the implementation of German politics, and the promotion of the etiquette system, first in Kyoto and then in local areas, first in the country and then abroad.

古文：《诗》云： 率礼不越，遂视既发；相士烈烈，海外有截。 陛下圣德充塞天地，光被四表，匈奴单于乡风慕化，奉珍朝贺，自古未之有也。
现代文：《诗经》说： 遵循礼节不越位，四处视察得以推广；相土的威德壮壮烈烈，四海之外都要拥戴，陛下圣明仁德充满天地之间，光辉普照四方极远之地，匈奴单于仰慕我国的风俗教化，捧着珍宝前来朝贺，从古至今还未有过。
English: "The Book of Songs" said: "Following the etiquette is not overstepping, and the inspection can be promoted everywhere; the virtue of the soil is magnificent and strong, and it must be embraced beyond the four seas; His Majesty Saint Mingren's virtue is full of heaven and earth, and the brilliance shines far and wide in the four directions; the Xiongnu only admires our country's customs and enlightenment, and comes to congratulate the morning with treasures, which has never happened since ancient times.

古文：其礼仪宜如诸侯王，位次在下。 
现代文：接见他的礼仪应该和诸侯王一样，位置在诸侯王以下。 
English: The etiquette for receiving him should be the same as that for princes, and his position should be below that of princes.

古文：望之以为： 单于非正朔所加，故称敌国，宜待以不臣之礼，位在诸侯王上。
现代文：萧望之认为 单于不实行我们的历法制度，所以称做敌国，应该以不称臣的礼节相待，位置在诸侯王之上。
English: Xiao Wangzhi thought that just because they did not implement our calendar system, they were called an enemy country, and should be treated with the courtesy of a subject, and their position was above the princes.

古文：外夷稽首称藩，中国让而不臣，此则羁縻之谊，谦亨之福也。
现代文：外夷叩头自称属国，汉朝谦让不称其为臣，这是笼络的道理，通达谦虚带来的福气。
English: Foreigners who kowtow to the barbarians claim to belong to the country, while the Han Dynasty humbly refuses to call them vassals. This is the principle of entanglement, and the blessing brought about by being open-minded and humble.

古文：《书》曰 戎狄荒服 ，言其来服，荒忽亡常。
现代文：《尚书》说 戎狄荒忽归附 ，是说他们前来归附，但地处偏远反覆无常。
English: "Shangshu" says that the Yongdi suddenly joined the Han Dynasty, which means that they came to join the Han Dynasty, but the location was remote and unstable.

古文：如使匈奴后嗣卒有鸟窜鼠伏，阙如朝享，不为畔臣。
现代文：如果匈奴的后代终有流窜抢掠的行动，没有来朝拜进贡，不能算做是叛臣。
English: If the descendants of the Xiongnu did not come to pay tribute, they could not be considered traitors.

古文：信让行乎蛮貉，福祚流于亡穷，万世之长策也。 
现代文：诚信谦让推行到蛮貉之地，福运继承流传到无穷无尽，这是千秋万代的长远之计。 
English: It is a long-term plan for all generations to carry out honesty and modesty to the barbarous land, and to inherit good fortune to the endless.

古文：天子采之，下诏曰： 盖闻五帝、三王教化所不施，不及以政。
现代文：皇帝采纳了他的意见，下诏书说： 听说五帝三王对教化无法推行的地方，也不用政令统治。
English: The emperor adopted his opinion and issued an edict saying, "I have heard that the five emperors and three kings do not need to rule by decree where enlightenment cannot be carried out.

古文：今匈奴单于称北藩，朝正朔，朕之不逮，德不能弘覆。
现代文：现在匈奴单于自糊匕边的属国，定时来朝拜，我的能力有所不及，德政不能加于远方的他们。
English: Now the Xiongnu are just a vassal state on their own periphery, regularly coming to worship. My ability is somewhat inferior, and German politics cannot be imposed on them from afar.

古文：其以客礼待之，令单于位在诸侯王上，赞谒称臣而不名。 
现代文：就用客人的礼仪招待他，让单于的位置在诸侯王之上，行礼谒见时称臣而不称名字。 
English: He invited him with the etiquette of a guest, giving him a place above the princes and lords, bowing to him and calling him by his title when meeting him.

古文：及宣帝寝疾，选大臣可属者，引外属侍中乐陵侯史高、太子太傅望之、少傅周堪至禁中，拜高为大司马车骑将军，望之为前将军光禄勋，堪为光禄大夫，皆受遗诏辅政，领尚书事。
现代文：等到宣帝卧病在床，选择可以托付后事的大臣，召外戚侍中乐陵侯史高、太子太傅萧望之、少傅周堪到宫中，封史高为大司马车骑将军，萧望之为前将军光禄勋，周堪为光禄大夫，都接受遣韶辅政，领尚书事。
English: When Emperor Xuan was sick in bed, he chose the ministers who could be entrusted with the succession, summoned the foreign relatives to attend the palace, such as Le Ling Hou Shigao, Prince Taifu Xiaowangzhi, and Shao Fu Zhoukan, and appointed Shigao as the grand secretary of the carriage riding general, Xiaowangzhi as the former general Guanglu Xun, and Zhoukan as the doctor of Guanglu, all of whom were dismissed from the government and received the post of vice-governor.

古文：宣帝崩，太子袭尊号，是为孝元帝。
现代文：宣帝去世，太子继承帝号，就是孝元帝。
English: Emperor Xuan died, and the crown prince inherited the imperial title, that is, Emperor Xiaoyuan.

古文：望之、堪本以师傅见尊重，上即位，数宴见，言治乱，陈王事。
现代文：萧望之、周堪本来以师傅的身份被皇帝尊重，皇帝即位之后，数次在闲暇时召见，讨论治乱之道，陈述做帝王的事情。
English: Xiaowanzhi and Zhou Kan were originally respected by the emperor as masters. After the emperor ascended the throne, he summoned them several times in his spare time to discuss the way to control chaos and explain the things of being an emperor.

古文：望之选白宗室明经达学散骑、谏大夫刘更生给事中，与侍中金敞并拾遗左右。
现代文：萧望之推荐皇族中通晓经术学问的散骑谏大夫刘更生做给事中，和侍中金敞一起在皇帝左右任拾遣之职。
English: On the recommendation of Xiao Wang, Liu Gensheng, a horseback riding doctor of the imperial family who was well versed in the study of the classics, was assigned to the work, and together with the chamberlain Jin Zhan, he was assigned to the duty of picking up people around the emperor.

古文：四人同心谋议，劝道上以古制，多所欲匡正，上甚乡纳之。
现代文：四人同心谋划计议，用古代的制度劝勉引导皇帝，有很多事情希望扶持和纠正，皇帝对他们非常信任并采纳他们的意见。
English: The four of them plotted and discussed together, using the ancient system of exhortation to guide the emperor. There were many things they hoped to support and correct. The emperor trusted them very much and adopted their opinions.

古文：初，宣帝不甚从儒术，任用法律，而中书宦官用事。
现代文：当初，宣帝不大信奉儒术，而信奉法家，而中书宦官掌权。
English: At first, Emperor Xuan did not believe in Confucianism, but believed in the legalists, and the eunuchs in power.

古文：中书令弘恭、石显久典枢机，明习文法，亦与车骑将军高为表里，论议常独持故事，不从望之等。
现代文：中书令弘恭、石显长期管理中枢机要，熟悉条文法令，也和车骑将军史高互为表裹，议论朝政经常独自坚持旧例，不听从萧望之等人的意见。
English: In the long-term management of the Central Government, Hongqiong and Shi Xian are cardinal points, familiar with the provisions and laws, and also with the cavalry general Shigao. They often insist on the old practice alone, and do not listen to the opinions of people such as Xiaowanzhi.

古文：恭、显又时倾仄见诎。
现代文：弘恭、石显又经常因为意见偏执狭隘被人驳倒。
English: In addition, Hongyong and Shi Xian were often refuted for their narrow-minded and bigoted views.

古文：望之以为中书政本，宜以贤明之选，自武帝游宴后庭，故用宦者，非国旧制，又违古不近刑人之义，白欲更置士人，由是大与高、恭、显忤。
现代文：萧望之认为中书是政治的关键职务，应当用贤明的人选，从武帝在后宫游宴，任用宦官，但并非国家的传统制度，又违背古时不接近受过刑罚的人的原则，陈述想要用士人替换的想法，从此和史高、弘恭、石显非常抵触。
English: Xiao Wangzhi believed that the position of Zhongshu was a key political post, and that wise candidates should be used. Emperor Wu held banquets in the harem and appointed eunuchs, but this was not the country's traditional system. He also violated the principle of not approaching people who had been punished in ancient times, and expressed the idea of replacing them with nobles. From then on, he was in great conflict with Shigao, Hongong, and Shixian.

古文：上初即位，谦让重改作，议久不定，出刘更生为宗正。
现代文：元帝刚刚继位，处事谦让难以改变旧规，商议许久不能决定，就将刘更生调任宗正。
English: Emperor Yuan had just succeeded to the throne, it was difficult to change the old rules, and the deliberation could not be decided for a long time, so Liu Xiansheng was transferred to Zongzheng.

古文：望之、堪数荐名儒茂才以备谏官。
现代文：萧望之、周堪数次推荐有名的儒生和优秀人才来任谏官。
English: Desperate, Zhou Kan repeatedly recommended famous Confucian scholars and outstanding talents to serve as eunuchs.

古文：会稽郑朋阴欲附望之，上疏言车骑将军高遣客为奸利郡国，及言许、史子弟罪过。
现代文：会稽郑朋私下想攀附萧望之，就上疏说车骑将军史高派遣宾客到郡国裹做坏事谋求私利，还谈到许、史两家子弟的罪行。
English: Zheng Peng, the auditor of the guild, secretly wanted to cling to Long Zhi, so he said that the cavalry general Shi Gao sent guests to the county to do bad things for personal gain, and also talked about the crimes of the two sons of Xu and Shi.

古文：章视周堪，堪白令朋待诏金马门。
现代文：皇帝把奏章交给周堪看，周堪上奏让郑朋在金马门等待命令。
English: The emperor gave the record to Zhou Kan to read, and Zhou Kan asked Zheng Peng to wait for the order at the Golden Horse Gate.

古文：朋奏记望之曰： 将军体周、召之德，秉公绰之质，有卞庄之威。
现代文：郑朋给萧望之上书说： 将军亲身实践周公、召公的德政，具备孟公绰的才质，拥有卞庄的威严。
English: Zheng Peng wrote to Xiao Wang: The general personally practices the virtue of Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong, has the talent of Meng Gongqiao, and has the majesty of Zhuangzhuang.

古文：至乎耳顺之年，履折冲之位，号至将军，诚士之高致也。
现代文：到了六十岁的时候，身居重臣之位，官职达到将军，实在是士的最高成就呀。
English: At the age of sixty, to hold the position of senior minister and rise to the rank of general is truly the highest achievement of a statesman.

古文：窟穴黎庶莫不欢喜，咸曰将军其人也。
现代文：田野黎民没有不欢喜的，都说将军是国家的人才。
English: Tianye Li's people are not unhappy, they all say that the general is the talent of the country.

古文：今将军规橅云若管、晏而休，遂行日仄至周、召乃留乎？
现代文：现在将军追求的目标是管仲、晏子呢？还是废寝忘食勤于政事的周公、召公呢？
English: Is the goal pursued by the generals now to govern the middle class and the poor? Or is it to work hard in the political affairs of Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong?

古文：若管、晏而休，则下走将归延陵之皋，修农圃之畴，畜鸡种黍，俟见二子，没齿而已矣。
现代文：如果像管仲晏子就罢休了，那么在下就要像季札那样回延陵山野之中，修整农田，养鸡种黍，等着让两个儿子有所成就，我就这样到老得没牙齿吧。
English: If, like Guanzhong Zizi, I give up, then in the future, I will have to go back to the mountains and fields of Yanling like Ji Zhaotong, cultivate farmland, raise chickens and grow lettuce, and wait for my two sons to achieve something. I will be too old to have teeth.

古文：如将军昭然度行，积思塞邪枉之险蹊，宣中庸之常政，兴周、召之遗业，亲日仄之兼听，则下走其庶几愿竭区区，底厉锋锷，奉万分之一。 
现代文：如果将军光明正大超越常行聚集心思，堵塞邪气歪风的危险小路，宣扬中庸的正常政治，振兴周公、召公的遣业，亲自日夜操劳，兼听各种意见，那么在下愿意竭尽区区之力，磨炼锋芒，贡献万一之力。 
English: If the generals are above board and go beyond the usual gathering of thoughts, block the dangerous path of evil and crooked winds, promote the normal politics of moderation, revitalize the work of Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong, personally work day and night, and listen to various opinions, then they are willing to exhaust the strength of the region, sharpen the edge, and contribute in case of emergency.

古文：望之见纳朋，接待以意。
现代文：萧望之接纳了郑朋，尽心地接待他。
English: He accepted Zheng Peng with great eagerness and received him with all his heart.

古文：朋数称述望之，短车骑将军，言许、史过失。
现代文：郑朋则屡次称赞萧望之，贬低车骑将军，说许氏、史氏的过失。
English: Zheng Peng, on the other hand, repeatedly praised Xiao Wangzhi, belittled the cavalry general, and said that it was the fault of Mr. Xu and Mr. Shi.

古文：后朋行倾邪，望之绝不与通。
现代文：后来郑朋行奸邪之事，萧望之和他断绝关系，不再往来。
English: Later, when Zheng Peng committed adultery, Xiao Wangzhi broke off relations with him and no longer visited him.

古文：朋与大司农史李官俱待诏，堪独白宫为黄门郎。
现代文：郑朋和大司农史李宫一起等待任命，周堪单独推荐李宫做黄门郎。
English: Zheng Peng and the director of agricultural history Li Gong were both waiting to be appointed, but Zhou Kan alone recommended Li Gong as Huang Men Lang.

古文：朋，楚士，怨恨，更求入许、史，推所言许、史事曰： 皆周堪、刘更生教我，我关东人，何以知此？ 
现代文：郑朋是楚地的人，心中怀恨，转而要求加入许、史，推脱所说许、史两家坏话的责任说： 这都是周堪、刘更生教给我的，我是关东人，怎么会知道这些呢？ 
English: Zheng Peng is a person from Chu, who harbored hatred in his heart, and instead demanded to join Xu and Shi, and shirked the responsibility of saying bad words about Xu and Shi, saying: This is all taught to me by Zhou Kan and Liu Liansheng, I am a Kanto person, how could I know these things?

古文：于是侍中许章白见朋。
现代文：于是侍中许章上奏皇帝请求召见郑朋。
English: So the attendant, Xu Zhang, appealed to the emperor to summon Zheng Peng.

古文：朋出扬言曰： 我见，言前将军小过五，大罪一。
现代文：郑朋出宫后扬言说： 我被召见了，报告了前将军小过五条，大罪一条。
English: After leaving the palace, Zheng Peng threatened, "I was summoned and reported the former general for five minor offenses and one major offense.

古文：中书令在旁，知我言状。 
现代文：中书令在旁边，知道我所说的情况。 
English: The Chinese government is standing by, aware of the situation I am talking about.

古文：望之闻之，以问弘恭、石显。
现代文：萧望之听说这件事，就用它来责问弘恭、石显。
English: When Xiaowanzhi heard about this, he used it to question Hongxiong and Shi Xian.

古文：显、恭恐望之自讼，下于它吏，即挟朋及待诏华龙。
现代文：石显、弘恭害怕萧望之自己申诉，皇帝会把这个案件交给别的官吏，就要挟郑朋和待诏华龙。
English: Shih-hsien and Hong-gong were afraid that the emperor would hand the case over to other officials, so they tried to blackmail Zheng Peng and Chaozhao Hualong.

古文：龙者，宣帝时与张子蟜等待诏，以行污秽不进，欲入堪等，堪等不纳，故与朋相结。
现代文：华龙在宣帝时和张子娇等人待诏，因为品行不端没有被任用，想依附周堪等人，周堪等人不接纳他，所以和郑朋结交。
English: At the time of the proclamation of the emperor, Hualong and Zhang Zijiao and others were waiting for the edict, because they were not appointed due to misconduct, and wanted to adhere to Zhou Kan and others. Zhou Kan and others did not accept him, so he made friends with Zheng Peng.

古文：恭、显令二人告望之等谋欲罢车骑将军疏退许、史状，候望之出休日，令朋、龙上之。
现代文：弘恭、石显命令二人上告萧望之等人想要罢免车骑将军并疏远许、史两家的情况，等待萧望之出朝休假之曰，指使郑朋、华龙上告他们。
English: Hong Gong and Shi Xian ordered the two people to appeal to Xiao Wang and others who wanted to remove the cavalry general and alienate the two families of Xu and Shi. While waiting for Xiao Wang to go on vacation, Zheng Peng and Hualong appealed to them.

古文：事下弘恭问状，望之对曰： 外戚在位多奢淫，欲以匡正国家，非为邪也。 
现代文：这件事交给弘恭问明情况，萧望之应对说： 外戚担任要职多数奢侈淫侈，我是为了匡扶国家，不是要干坏事。 
English: This matter was handed over to Hong Qiong to clarify the situation, and Xiao Wangzhu replied: A relative holding an important position is mostly a luxury. I am in order to support the country, not to do bad things.

古文：恭、显奏： 望之、堪、更生朋党相称举，数谮诉大臣，毁离亲戚，欲以专擅权势，为臣不忠，诬上不道，请谒者召致廷尉。 
现代文：弘恭、石显上奏 萧望之、周堪、刘更生勾结朋党互相推举，多次诽谤大臣，攻击离间皇亲国戚，想要凭此专权揽势，作为臣子不忠心，欺骗皇帝不讲道义，请谒者传唤他们并送交廷尉。 
English: Hong Gong, Shi Xian, Shao Wangzhi, Zhou Kan, and Liu Rensheng colluded with their friends to promote each other. They repeatedly slandered ministers, attacked relatives of the emperor, and tried to use this exclusive power to gain power. As courtiers, they were disloyal, deceived the emperor, and did not preach morality. Please summon them and send them to the court.

古文：时上初即位，不省 谒者召致廷尉 为下狱也。可其奏。
现代文：当时皇帝刚刚继位，不明白 谒者传唤送交廷尉 就是开入监狱，准许了他们的奏摺。
English: At that time, the emperor had just succeeded to the throne, and he did not understand that those who had been summoned to report to the court would be sent to prison, and he allowed them to report.

古文：后上召堪、更生，曰系狱。
现代文：后来皇帝召见周堪、刘更生，回答说已关进监狱。
English: Later, the emperor summoned Zhou Kan and Liu Gensheng, who replied that they had been put in prison.

古文：上大惊曰： 非但廷尉问邪？ 
现代文：皇帝大吃一惊说： 不就是让廷尉问明情况吗？ 
English: The emperor was taken aback and said, "Wouldn't it be better to ask the court lieutenant to clarify the situation?"

古文：以责恭、显，皆叩头谢。
现代文：拿这件事责备弘恭、石显，他俩都叩头谢罪。
English: He blamed Honggong and Shi Xian for the incident, and they both bowed their heads in apology.

古文：上曰： 令出视事。 
现代文：皇帝说： 让他们出来办事。 
English: The emperor said: Let them do their work.

古文：恭、显因使高言： 上新即位，未以德化闻于天下，而先验师傅，既下九卿大夫狱，宜因决免。 
现代文：弘恭、石显就派史高说： 皇帝刚刚继位，还没有以道德教化使天下人听闻，而首先审问师傅，既然将九卿大夫下狱，应该通过审问然后减刑。 
English: Honggong and Shi Xian sent Shigao to say: The emperor has just succeeded to the throne, and has not yet made the world listen to moral education, but first interrogated the master. Since he has released the doctor from prison, he should pass the interrogation and then reduce the sentence.

古文：于是制诏丞相御史： 前将军望之傅朕八年，亡它罪过，今事久远，识忘难明。
现代文：当时就下诏给丞相和御史大夫： 前将军萧望之教授我八年，没有别的罪过，现在事实为时已久，记忆不清难以说明。
English: At that time, he issued an edict to the prime minister and the chief historian: I was a professor of the former general Xiao Wangzhi for eight years, there is no other fault, now the fact has been a long time, it is difficult to explain the memory.

古文：其赦望之罪，收前将军光禄勋印绶，及堪、更生皆免为庶人。 
现代文：应当赦免萧望之的罪过，收回前将军光禄勋印绶，和周堪、刘更生都免职成为庶人。 
English: It is necessary to pardon the crime of covetousness, revoke the former general Guanglu's medal and seal, and remove Zhou Kan and Liu Liansheng from their posts to become commoners.

古文：而朋为黄门郎。
现代文：而郑朋做了黄门郎。
English: And Zheng Peng became Huang Men Lang.

古文：后数月，制诏御史： 国之将兴，尊师而重傅。故前将军望之傅朕八年，道以经术，厥功茂焉。
现代文：几个月之后，皇帝下诏书给御史大夫： 国家将要兴隆，应该尊重师傅，原前将军萧望之教导我八年，用经学来导引我，他的功劳很大。
English: A few months later, the emperor issued an imperial edict to the imperial historian: "The country will prosper, and we should respect our teachers. The former general Xiao Wang taught me for eight years and guided me with the study of scripture. He deserves great credit."

古文：其赐望之爵关内侯，食邑六百户，给事中，朝朔望，坐次将军 天子方倚欲以为丞相，会望之子散骑中郎伋上书讼望之前事，事下有司，复奏： 望之前所坐明白，无谮诉者，而教子上书，称引亡辜之《诗》，失大臣体，不敬，请逮捕。 
现代文：应赐萧望之关内侯的爵位，食邑六百户，任给事中之职，每月初一、十五朝拜，座位次于将军。 天子正想倚靠他做丞相，遇到萧望之的儿子散骑中郎萧伋上书申诉萧望之以前的冤屈，此事被交给有关部门，回报 萧望之从前的罪过明明白白，没有诬陷之事，而他却指使儿子上书申诉，引用表明自己无辜的《诗》，有失大臣的礼仪，对皇帝不敬，请予以逮捕。 
English: Xiao Wang should be given the title of the Marquis of Guan, 600 households should be provided with food, and he should be given a position in affairs, worship on the first day and the 15th day of each month, and the seat should be next to the general. The heavenly son wanted to rely on him to be the prime minister, but Xiao Wang's son, the horseback riding middle-man Xiao Wei, wrote a letter to complain about Xiao Wang's previous grievances, and the matter was handed over to the relevant departments. Xiao Wang's previous sins were clear and there was no frame-up, but he ordered his son to write a letter of complaint, citing the

古文：弘恭、石显等知望之素高节，不诎辱，建白： 望之前为将军辅政，欲排退许、史，专权擅朝。
现代文：弘恭、石显等人知道萧望之素有高尚的气节，不肯屈服受侮辱，建议说： 萧望之从前任前将军辅佐国政，想排斥许、史两家，专权控制朝政。
English: Honggong, Shi Xian and others knew that Xiao Wangzhi had a noble temperament and would not give in to insults, suggesting that: Xiao Wangzhi was a former general who assisted in state affairs. He wanted to exclude Xu and Shi families and control the imperial government.

古文：幸得不坐，复赐爵邑，与闻政事，不悔过服罪，深怀怨望，教子上书，归非于上，自以托师傅，怀终不坐。
现代文：侥幸没被治罪，又被赐予爵位食邑，参与讨论国家政治，不悔改过错思服罪行，还心裹怀着怨恨，指使儿子上书，把不是归于皇帝，自以为凭着师傅的身份，终究不会被治罪。
English: He was lucky not to be punished, was given a knighthood and food allowance, participated in the discussion of national politics, did not repent his mistakes and thought to accept the crime, and still harbored resentment, instructed his son to write a letter, not to attribute it to the emperor, and thought that with the identity of the master, he would not be punished after all.

古文：非颇诎望之于牢狱，塞其怏怏心，则圣朝亡以施恩厚。 
现代文：如果不让萧望之在牢狱中受些侮辱，堵塞他不满的心情，那么圣朝就无法给他施以恩泽。 
English: If they don't let Xiao Wangzhu suffer some insults in prison to block his discontent, then the Holy Dynasty won't be able to give him any favors.

古文：上曰： 萧太傅素刚，安肯就吏？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 萧太傅为人素来刚直，怎么肯接受官吏的审问？ 
English: The emperor said: Xiao Taifu has always been an upright person, how can he accept the interrogation of officials?

古文：显等曰： 人命至重，望之所坐，语言薄罪，必亡所忧。 
现代文：石显等人说： 人的生命至关重要，萧望之所犯的罪，是说错了话的小罪，一定不会让您担心的。 
English: Shi Xian and others said: "Human life is very important. The crime committed by Xiao Wangzhuang is a minor crime of saying the wrong thing. It will definitely not worry you."

古文：上乃可其奏。
现代文：皇帝就批准了他的报告。
English: The emperor approved his report.

古文：显等封以付谒者，敕令召望之手付，因令太常急发执金吾车骑驰围其第。
现代文：石显等人将皇帝的批覆封好交给谒者，下令亲手交给萧望之，于是命令太常火速带领执金吾骑兵飞驰去包围他的宅第。
English: Shi Xian and the others handed the emperor's seal of approval to the eunuch, ordered him to hand it to Xiao Wang, and then ordered him to quickly lead the cavalry to surround his mansion.

古文：使者至，召望之。
现代文：使者到，传萧望之。
English: When the messenger arrives, the message is eagerly awaited.

古文：望之欲自杀，其夫人止之，以为非天子意。
现代文：萧望之想自杀，他的夫人阻止了他，认为这不是皇帝的旨意。
English: Desperate to commit suicide, his wife stopped him, saying it was not the emperor's will.

古文：望之以问门下生朱云。
现代文：萧望之以此询问门生朱云。
English: Xiao Wangzhi asked his protégé Zhu Yun about this.

古文：云者好节士，劝望之自裁。
现代文：朱云是一个爱好名节的人，就劝萧望之自杀。
English: Zhu Yun is a lover of famous festivals, so he advised Xiaowang to commit suicide.

古文：于是望之仰天叹曰： 吾尝备位将相，年逾六十矣，老入牢狱，苟求生活，不亦鄙乎！ 字谓云曰： 游，趣和药来，无久留我死！ 
现代文：当时萧望之仰天长叹说： 我曾经担任过将相之职，年纪也已超过六十岁，年老而进监狱，苟且偷生，不也太鄙陋了吗厂就叫着朱云的字说： 游，取和药来，我宁可死也不久留人世！ 
English: At that time, he looked up to the heavens and sighed, "I once held the post of commander-in-chief, and I am over sixty years old. I went to prison when I was old. Although I lived a clandestine life, isn't it too despicable?" The factory called Zhu Yun's words and said, "Go and get some medicine. I'd rather die than stay alive for a long time!"

古文：竟饮鸩自杀。
现代文：终于喝毒酒自杀了。
English: He finally committed suicide by drinking poisoned wine.

古文：天子闻之惊，拊手曰： 曩固疑其不就牢狱，果然杀吾贤傅！ 
现代文：皇帝听说这件事十分震惊，拍手叹气说： 先前我就怀疑他不肯进牢狱，结果真的杀了我的好老师！ 
English: The emperor was very shocked to hear of this, clapped his hands and sighed, "I suspected before that he wouldn't go to prison, but he actually killed my good teacher!"

古文：是时，太官方上昼食，上乃却食，为之涕泣，哀恸左右。
现代文：当时太官刚刚端上午餐，皇帝就推开饭食，为萧望之哭泣，悲哀之情感动了左右侍从。
English: At that time, the eunuch had just finished lunch, and the emperor pushed away the meal, crying for the longing, and the emotion of sadness moved the left and right attendants.

古文：于是召显等责问以议不详。
现代文：立刻召来石显等人以计划不周详责问他们。
English: Shi Xian and others were immediately summoned and reprimanded for poor planning.

古文：皆免冠谢，良久然后已。
现代文：他们都脱下帽子谢罪，很长时间才作罢。
English: They all took off their hats and apologized, and it took a long time for them to stop.

古文：望之有罪死，有司请绝其爵邑。
现代文：萧望之有罪而死，有关部门请求废除他的爵位封邑。
English: After the death of Guilty of Despair, the relevant departments requested the abolition of his title and fief.

古文：有诏加恩，长子伋嗣为关内侯。
现代文：皇帝却下诏加恩，长子萧伋继承关内侯。
English: The emperor, however, issued the edict of reinstatement, and the eldest son, Xiao Yan, succeeded Guan Nei Hou.

古文：天子追念望之，不忘每岁时遣使者祠祭望之冢，终元帝世。
现代文：皇帝追思萧望之不能忘怀，逢年过节就派使者祭祀萧望之的坟墓，整个元帝时代都是如此。
English: The emperor couldn't forget to think about Xiao Wang, and sent emissaries to sacrifice Xiao Wang's grave every year, which was the case throughout the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：望之八子，至大官者育、咸、由。
现代文：萧望之有八个儿子，做到大官的有萧育、萧咸、萧由。
English: Xiao Wangzhi had eight sons, including Xiao Yu, Xiao Xian and Xiao Yu.

古文：育字次君，少以父任为太子庶子。
现代文：萧育字次君，年轻时因父恩荫任太子庶子。
English: Xiao Yu Zi Jun, when he was young, was an illegitimate son of the crown prince due to his father's favor.

古文：元帝即位，为郎，病免，后为御史。
现代文：元帝登基，担任郎官，因为有病免职，后来当御史。
English: Emperor Yuan ascended to the throne, served as vassal, was relieved of his duties due to illness, and later served as imperial historian.

古文：大将军王凤以育名父子，著材能，除为功曹，迁谒者，使匈奴副校尉。
现代文：大将军王凤因为萧育其父之名望和他自己才能突出，任命他为功曹，升任谒者，担任出使匈奴的副校尉。
English: General Wang Feng, because Xiao Yu's father's reputation and his own ability were outstanding, appointed him as a meritorious person, promoted to the rank of eunuch, and served as the deputy captain of the Huns.

古文：后为茂陵令，会课，育第六。
现代文：后来做茂陵县令，遇到考察，萧育名列第六。
English: Later, when he was the governor of Muryeong County, he encountered an inspection, and Xiao Yu ranked sixth.

古文：而漆令郭舜殿，见责问，育为之请，扶风怒曰： 君课第六，裁自脱，何暇欲为左右言？ 
现代文：而漆县县令郭舜排最后一名，被责备，萧育给他讲情，扶风发怒说： 你考第六名，自己才脱身，有什么功夫替同僚说情呢？ 
English: However, when Guo Jun, the last in the line, was scolded, Xiao Yu pleaded with him, and Fu Feng said angrily, "You only got out of the sixth place in the examination by yourself, what kind of effort is there to plead for your colleagues?"

古文：及罢出，传召茂陵令诣后曹，当以职事对。
现代文：等到考试完毕出场，传召茂陵令到后曹去，要让他汇报任职期间的情况。
English: Wait until the examination is over to appear, summon Maoling to go to Hou Cao, and ask him to report on the situation during his tenure.

古文：育径出曹，书佐随牵育，育案佩刀曰： 萧育杜陵男子，何诣曹也！ 
现代文：萧育径直走出后曹，文书跟着拉住他，萧育按住佩刀说： 萧育是杜陵的大丈夫，为什么要到后曹！ 
English: Xiao Yu walked straight out of Hou Cao, the clerk followed him and pulled him, Xiao Yu held down his sword and said: Xiao Yu is the right man for Duling, why should he go to Hou Cao!

古文：遂趋出，欲去官。
现代文：就急步走出，想弃官而去。
English: He stormed out, wanting to resign.

古文：明旦，诏召入，拜为司隶校尉。
现代文：第二天早晨，皇帝下诏将他召入，任命为司隶校尉。
English: The next morning, the emperor issued an imperial edict summoning him and appointing him as the first lieutenant of Sili.

古文：育过扶风府门，官属掾史数百人拜谒车下。
现代文：萧育经过扶风府门口，官员掾史几百人在车前拜见。
English: Xiao Yu passed through the gate of Fu Feng Government, and hundreds of officials and scholars came to see him off.

古文：后坐失大将军指免官。
现代文：后来因违背大将军的意旨而免官。
English: He was later dismissed for going against the general's wishes.

古文：复为中郎将使匈奴。
现代文：又担任中郎将出使匈奴。
English: He also served as the middle brother of the Hun envoy.

古文：历冀州、青州两部刺史，长水校尉，泰山太守。入守大鸿胪。
现代文：历任冀州、青州两郡刺史，长水校尉，泰山太守，进京任大鸿胪。
English: He successively served as the chief historian of the two counties of Jizhou and Qingzhou, the lieutenant of Changshui, the governor of Mount Taishan, and entered Beijing as the great leader.

古文：以鄠名贼梁子政阻山为害，久不伏辜，育为右扶风数月，尽诛子政等。
现代文：因为鄂县有名的盗贼梁子政凭仗山势为害一方，很久未能捉拿伏法，萧育任右扶风敷月之后，将梁子政一伙尽数诛杀。
English: Because Liang Zizheng, a famous thief in E County, took advantage of the mountain situation to do harm, and failed to catch Nafu Law for a long time. After Xiao Yuren righted the wind, he killed Liang Zizheng and his group as much as possible.

古文：坐与定陵侯淳于长厚善免官。
现代文：后来因为和定陵侯淳于长特别要好而被免官。
English: Later, he was dismissed from his post because he was particularly friendly with the lord of Dingling, Jun Yuchang.

古文：哀帝时，南郡江中多盗贼，拜育为南郡太守。
现代文：哀帝时候，南郡一带长江水面多有盗贼，封萧育为南郡太守。
English: At the time of the Emperor's death, there were many thieves on the surface of the Yangtze River in the Nan County area, and Xiao Yu was appointed as the governor of Nan County.

古文：上以育耆旧名臣，乃以三公使车载育入殿中受策，曰： 南郡盗贼群辈为害，朕甚忧之。
现代文：皇帝因为萧育是耆宿名臣，就用三公使用的车子将萧育载入宫中接受策命，说： 南郡盗贼成群为害百姓，我非常担心这件事。
English: Because Xiao Yu was a famous retainer of Xuzhou, the emperor used the car used by the three princes to carry Xiao Yu into the palace to receive the mission, saying: Nan County thieves swarm to harm the people, I am very worried about this matter.

古文：以太守威信素著，故委南郡太守，之官，其于为民除害，安元元而已，亡拘于小文。 
现代文：因为太守一向威望很高，所以委任做南郡太守，到任之后，衹应为民除害，维护安全。不要拘于小节。 
English: Because the governor has always been highly respected, he was appointed to be the governor of Nan County. After taking office, he should eliminate harm to the people and maintain safety. Don't get hung up on details.

古文：加赐黄金二十斤。
现代文：赏赐黄金二十斤。
English: He was awarded 20 jin of gold.

古文：育至南郡，盗贼静。
现代文：萧育到南郡，盗贼被消灭。
English: Xiao Yu went to Nan County, and the thieves were eliminated.

古文：病去官，起家复为光禄大夫执金吾，以寿终于官。
现代文：因病免官，又任命为光禄大夫执金吾，在职位上享尽天年。
English: Due to illness, he was relieved of his duties and appointed as the Guanglu Doctor, and he lived out the rest of his days in this position.

古文：育为人严猛尚威，居官数免，稀迁。
现代文：萧育为人威严勇猛，做官数次被免职，很少提升。
English: Xiao Yu is a man of great dignity and courage. He has been removed from office several times and rarely promoted.

古文：少与陈咸、朱博为友，著闻当世。
现代文：小时候和陈咸、朱博为友，在当时很有名。
English: When he was a child, he was friends with Chen Xian and Zhu Bo, and was very famous at that time.

古文：往者有王阳、贡公，故长安语曰 萧、朱结绶，王、贡弹冠 ，言其相荐达也。
现代文：过去有王阳、贡公是好友，所以长安有句俗话说： 萧育、朱博结绶交好，王阳、贡公弹冠相知 ，是说他们互相推荐以至显达。
English: In the past, Wang Yang and Gong Gong were friends, so there is a saying in Chang'an: Xiao Yu and Zhu Bo are good friends, and Wang Yang and Gong Gong know each other, which means that they recommend each other and even show each other.

古文：始育与陈咸俱以公卿子显名，咸最先进，年十八，为左曹，二十余，御史中丞。
现代文：开始时萧育和陈咸都因为是公卿的儿子而闻名，陈咸是最早进宫的，十八岁任左曹，二十多岁任御史中丞。
English: At the beginning, both Xiao Yu and Chen Xianren were famous for being the sons of nobles. Chen Xianren was the first to enter the palace. He was the eighteenth-year-old Zuo Cao and the twenty-something-year-old Gu Shi Zhongzheng.

古文：时，朱博尚为杜陵亭长，为咸、育所攀援，入王氏。
现代文：当时朱博还是杜陵亭长，受陈咸、萧育所引荐，进入王氏门下。
English: At that time, Zhu Bo was still the head of the Tuling Pavilion. He was recommended by Chen Xian and Xiao Yu, and entered the Wang family.

古文：后遂并历刺史、郡守相，及为九卿，而博先至将军上卿，历位多于咸、育，遂至丞相。
现代文：后来同时担任刺史、郡守、国相，到后来任九卿。朱博先任将军上卿，经历的官位比陈咸、萧育多，一直到丞相。
English: Later, he also served as Sashishi, County Governor, and Minister of State, and later he was appointed as Jiuqing. Zhu Bo was the first general to be appointed as Shangqing, and he experienced more official positions than Chen Xian and Xiao Yu, all the way to the Minister of the Empire.

古文：育与博后有隙，不能终，故世以交为难。
现代文：萧育和朱博后来有嫌隙，不能善终，所以世人认为交朋友是件难事。
English: Xiao Yu and Zhu Bo later had a rift and could not end well, so the world thought it was difficult to make friends.

古文：咸字仲君，为丞相史，举茂材，好畤令，迁淮阳、泗水内史，张掖、弘农、河东太守。
现代文：萧咸字住，做丞相史，被举为茂才，任绖歧县令，升迁进堡、回内史，张拯、王递、迥塞太守。
English: Xiao Xianzhi lived, did the history of the prime minister, was promoted to Maocai, served as the county magistrate of Shanxi, was promoted to the fort, the history of Hui, Zhang Zheng, Wang Jie, and the governor of Yansai.

古文：所居有迹，数增秩赐金。
现代文：所到之处有政绩，多次增加俸禄和赏赐黄金。
English: Everywhere he went, there were political achievements, and his salary was increased several times and he was rewarded with gold.

古文：后免官，复为越骑校尉、护军都尉、中郎将，使匈奴，至大司农，终官。
现代文：后来被免官，又担任越骑校尉、护军都尉、中郎将，出使匈奴，官至大司农，在职位上去世。
English: Later, he was dismissed from his post, and served as an over-the-horse cavalry captain, a garrison captain, a middle-ranking general, an envoy of the Xiongnu, and a high-ranking farmer. He died in his post.

古文：由字子骄，为丞相西曹卫将军掾，迁谒者，使匈奴副校尉。
现代文：萧由字子骄，任丞相西曹卫将军掾，升为谒者，任出使匈奴副校尉。
English: Xiao Yu, nicknamed Zi Gao, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Western Cao Wei, promoted to the position of Vice-Minister of Western Cao Wei, and appointed as the Vice-Lieutenant of Xiongnu.

古文：后举贤良，为定陶令，迁太原都尉，安定太守。
现代文：后来被举荐贤良，任定陶县令，升为太原都尉，安定太守。
English: Later, he was recommended as a virtuous person, appointed as the magistrate of Tao County, promoted to the lieutenant of Taiyuan, and stabilized as the governor of Taiyuan.

古文：治郡有声，多称荐者。
现代文：治理州郡有声望，很多人称赞和举荐他。
English: He has a reputation for governing the state, and many people have praised and recommended him.

古文：初，哀帝为定陶王时，由为定陶令，失王指，顷之，制书免由为庶人。
现代文：当初，哀帝做定陶王时，萧由任定陶令，违背了定陶王的意思，很快，朝廷罢免萧由为百姓。
English: At first, when Emperor Ai made Ding Tao king, Xiao Yu was appointed as Ding Tao commander, which violated the intention of Ding Tao king. Soon, the imperial court dismissed Xiao Yu as a commoner.

古文：哀帝崩，为复土校尉、京辅左辅都尉，迁江夏太守。
现代文：哀帝去世，任复土校尉、京辅左辅都尉，升为江夏太守。
English: After the death of Emperor Aitei, he was appointed Fudo school lieutenant, Keifusaifusaifuto, and was promoted to the governor of Jiangxia.

古文：平江贼成重等有功，增秩为陈留太守，元始中，作明堂辟雍，大朝诸侯，征由为大鸿胪，会病，不及宾赞，还归故官，病免。
现代文：因扫平长江上的盗贼成重等人有功，增加俸禄任陈留太守。元始年间，修筑明堂和辟雍，召集诸侯王大举朝会，征召萧由任大鸿胪，恰巧他有病，不能主持礼仪接待宾客，回去任原来的官职，因病免职。
English: In the early years of the Yuan Dynasty, the Ming and Yong dynasties were rebuilt, the princes and kings were summoned to a grand imperial court, and the great nobles of the Xiao Dynasty were conscripted. However, it happened that he was ill and could not preside over the ceremonial reception of guests, so he returned to his original official position and was relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：复为中散大夫，终官。
现代文：后来又任中散大夫，在官任上去世。
English: Later, he was appointed as Zhongshan doctor, and died in office.

古文：家至吏二千石者六七人。
现代文：萧家做到二千石级官员的有六七人。
English: There are 67 officials of the Xiao family who have reached 2,000 koku.

古文：赞曰：萧望之历位将相，籍师傅之恩，可谓亲昵亡间。
现代文：赞曰：萧望之官至将军和副丞相，凭藉做皇帝师傅之恩，可以说和皇帝是亲密无间。
English: Zang said: "By virtue of being the emperor's master, the long-awaited official, general and vice-minister, can be said to be very close to the emperor.

古文：及至谋泄隙开，谗邪构之，卒为便嬖宦竖所图，哀哉！
现代文：等到计谋泄露，嫌隙产生，说坏话的和奸邪之人陷害他，最终被佞臣宦官小人所害，可怜呀！
English: Wait until the plot leaks, the rift arises, the evil-speaking and treacherous people frame him, and finally he is victimized by the vassal eunuch villain, poor thing!

古文：不然，望之堂堂，折而不桡，身为儒宗，有辅佐之能，近古社稷臣也。
现代文：不然的话，萧望之堂堂正正，宁折不挠，身为儒生泰斗，有辅佐皇帝的才能，近乎古代的社稷之臣了。
English: Otherwise, Xiao Wang's dignified, upright, and tireless, as a Confucian warrior, has the ability to assist the emperor, and is almost an ancient social vassal.

