古文：韦粲江子一弟子四子五张嵊沈浚柳敬礼韦粲，字长蒨，车骑将军睿之孙，北徐州刺史放之子也。
现代文：韦粲字长蒨，是车骑将军韦睿之孙，北徐州刺史韦茎之子。
English: Wei Wei, the son of Wei Wei, the son of Wei Wei, the son of Wei Wei, the son of Wei Wei, the son of Wei Wei, the son of Wei Wei.

古文：有父风，好学仗气，身长八尺，容貌甚伟。
现代文：韦粲有父亲的风度，喜爱学习，任性使气，身高八尺，魁伟高大。
English: Wei Wei has his father's demeanor, likes to study, is headstrong, and is eight feet tall.

古文：初为云麾晋安王行参军，俄署法曹，迁外兵参军，兼中兵。
现代文：他初出仕任云麾晋安王行参军，不久代理法曹，迁任外兵参军，兼中兵。
English: He first joined the army at the rank of Yuncheng Jinan Wangxing, soon acting as a legal officer, transferred to join the army as a foreign soldier, and served as a middle-ranking soldier.

古文：时颍川庾仲容、吴郡张率，前辈知名，与粲同府，并忘年交好。
现代文：当时颖!庾仲容、吴郡张率，都是前辈知名人士，他们与韦粲是同僚，相互都结为忘年之交。
English: At that time, Ying! Zou Zhong Rong and Wu County Zhang Rong were both well-known predecessors. They were colleagues with Wei Zou, and they had a long-lasting friendship with each other.

古文：及王迁镇雍州，随转记室，兼中兵如故。
现代文：晋安王迁任雍州刺史，韦粲也跟随王府转任记室，兼中兵之职不变。
English: King Jinan was transferred to the post of Yongzhou chief historian, and Wei Wei also followed the royal court to the post of secretary, and his position as lieutenant remained unchanged.

古文：王立为皇太子，粲迁步兵校尉，入为东宫领直，丁父忧去职。
现代文：晋安王被立为皇太子，韦粲迁任步兵校尉，入朝任东宫领直，遭逢父亲丧事离职。
English: Jinan Wang was appointed crown prince, Wei Wei was transferred to the rank of infantry lieutenant, entered the imperial court as the head of the East Palace, and was dismissed from his post after his father's death.

古文：寻起为招远将军，复为领直。
现代文：不久又夺情起复任招远将。军，又任领直。
English: Soon after, he was reinstated as the recruiting general of the army, and was also appointed as the leader.

古文：服阕，袭爵永昌县侯，除安西湘东王谘议，累迁太子仆、左卫率，领直并如故。
现代文：服丧期满后，他承袭永昌县侯的封号，被任命为安西湘东王谘议，屡经升迁为太子仆，左卫率，领直之职不变。
English: After the period of mourning was over, he inherited the title of Yongchang County Marquis, was appointed as an adviser to the Anxi Xiangdong King, and was repeatedly promoted to the prince's servant, the left guard, and the leading position remained unchanged.

古文：粲以旧恩，任寄绸密，虽居职屡徙，常留宿卫，颇擅威名，诞倨，不为时辈所平。
现代文：韦粲因为与皇太子有旧交情，常被任命亲近之职，虽然他的职务屡次变动，但常常留在宫中值宿，担任警卫，颇有威名，而且韦粲性格放诞倨傲，因此当时的名人深感不平。
English: Because of his old friendship with the crown prince, Wei Wei was often appointed to a close position. Although his position changed many times, he often stayed on duty in the palace and served as a guard. He was quite prestigious, and Wei Wei's character was proud of his birth. Therefore, the celebrities at that time were deeply dissatisfied.

古文：右卫硃异尝于酒席厉色谓粲曰： 卿何得已作领军面向人！ 
现代文：右卫将军朱异曾经在酒席间声色俱厉地对韦粲说： 你怎么能摆出领军的脸孔面对别人! 
English: Zhu Yi, the Right Guard General, once said to Wei Wei in a loud voice during a banquet: How can you face others with the face of a leader!

古文：中大同十一年，迁通直散骑常侍，未拜，出为持节、督衡州诸军事、安远将军、衡州刺史。
现代文：中大同十一年，韦粲迁任通直散骑常侍，还没有任职就出京担任持节、督衡州诸军事、安远将军、衡州刺史。
English: In the eleventh year of the middle and high school year, Wei Xuanqian was appointed as a non-commissioned officer, and went to Beijing to serve as a military officer, inspector of Hengzhou military, general of Anyuan, and historian of Hengzhou.

古文：皇太子出饯新亭，执粲手曰： 与卿不为久别。 
现代文：皇太子出宫，在缒为童凿饯行，拉着韦粲的手说： 我和你不会分别很久。 
English: When the crown prince left the palace, he held Wei Wei's hand and said, "I won't be separated from you for long.

古文：太清元年，粲至州。无几，便表解职。
现代文：太清元年，韦粲到衡州没多久，便上表请求免职。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, Wei Wei did not stay long in Hengzhou, and then petitioned to be relieved of duty.

古文：二年，征为散骑常侍。
现代文：二年，朝廷征调韦粲为散骑常侍。
English: Two years later, the imperial court transferred Wei Wei to the position of strolling equerry.

古文：粲还至庐陵，闻侯景作逆，便简阅部下，得精卒五千，马百匹，倍道赴援。
现代文：韦粲返京走到庐陵，听说侯景叛乱，就从部下中挑选出五千精兵，一百匹马，日夜兼程奔赴京城救援。
English: Wei Wei returned to Beijing and went to Fuling. When he heard of Houjing's rebellion, he selected five thousand elite soldiers and one hundred horses from his subordinates and rushed to Beijing to rescue.

古文：至豫章，奉命报云 贼已出横江 ，粲即就内史刘孝仪共谋之。
现代文：到了豫章，有使者报告说： 逆贼已经到达横江。 韦粲立即到内史刘孝仪那裹一起商量对策。
English: When they arrived at Yuzhang, an envoy reported: The traitors have reached the Yangtze River. Wei Wei immediately went to Liu Xiaoyi to discuss countermeasures.

古文：孝仪曰： 必期如此，当有别敕。岂可轻信单使，妄相惊动，或恐不然。 
现代文：刘孝仪说： 如果真的这样，应当另有敕命，怎么可以轻信遣一个使者，就惊恐妄动，或许情况不是这样。 
English: Liu Xiaoyi said: "If this is really the case, there should be another death, how can you be so gullible as to send a messenger, and then act in a panicked manner? Perhaps this is not the case."

古文：时孝仪置酒，粲怒，以杯抵地曰： 贼已渡江，便逼宫阙，水陆俱断，何暇有报；假令无敕，岂得自安？
现代文：当时刘孝仪正摆酒席招待韦粲，韦粲发怒，把杯子扔在地上说： 逆贼已渡江，马上就进逼京城，水路陆路都被切断，哪裹还会有回报的使者；假使没有敕令下达，难道自己就能安心吗?
English: At that time, Liu Xiaoyi was setting up a banquet to entertain Wei Wei, and Wei Wei became angry and threw the cup on the ground, saying, "The traitor has crossed the river, and will soon enter the capital, the waterways and land routes have been cut off, and there will still be a returning messenger. If there is no imperial order issued, can you be at ease?

古文：韦粲今日何情饮酒！ 
现代文：我韦粲现在哪有心思喝酒! 
English: I don't even want to drink right now!

古文：即驰马出，部分将发，会江州刺史当阳公大心遣使要粲，粲乃驰往见大心曰： 上游蕃镇，江州去京最近，殿下情计，实宜在前；但中流任重，当须应接，不可阙镇。
现代文：说完立即骑马奔出，部署军队准备出发，正好江州刺史当阳公萧大心派使者来邀请韦粲，韦粲就骑马去拜见萧大心说： 长江上游各个藩镇，衹有江蛆离京城最近，从殿下的情况考虑，实在应当先去救援；但是中游地位重要，你驻守江州任务重大，其他人救援京城也需你们接应，逭裹不能无人镇守。
English: After saying this, he immediately rode out on horseback and deployed the army to prepare for departure. It was just when Jiangzhou Zishi Dangyang Gong Xiao Daxin sent an envoy to invite Wei Wei, and Wei Wei rode to meet Xiao Daxin and said: All the towns in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, even if the river is closest to Beijing, should really go to the rescue first, considering the situation of His Royal Highness. However, the midstream status is important, your stationed in Jiangzhou is a major task, and others need to respond to the rescue of Beijing. You can't be left unguarded.

古文：今直且张声势，移镇湓城，遣偏将赐随，于事便足。 
现代文：现在你衹要虚张声势，移兵镇守湓城，然后派一员偏将跟随我前去，逭事便行了。 
English: Now you want to bluff, move the troops to defend the city, and then send a general to follow me, and that's it.

古文：大心然之，遣中兵柳昕帅兵二千人随粲。
现代文：萧左坐认为他说得对，就派遣中兵柳昕率领两千士兵跟随韦粲。
English: Xiao Zuo thought that he was right, so he sent the middle-ranking soldier Liu Jun to lead two thousand soldiers to follow Wei Jun.

古文：粲悉留家累于江州，以轻舸就路。
现代文：韦粲将家属全留在，自己乘轻舟启程。
English: Wei Wei left all his family members behind and set off on his own in a small boat.

古文：至南州，粲外弟司州刺史柳仲礼亦帅步骑万余人至横江，粲即送粮仗赡给之，并散私金帛以赏其战士。
现代文：到了南州，韦粲的表弟司州刺史柳仲礼也率领步兵骑兵一万多人到了横江，韦粲立即送粮食武器给他，并且散发自己私人的钱财布帛来奖赏柳仲礼的士兵。
English: When they arrived in Nanzhou, Wei Zheng's cousin, Liu Zhongli, also led more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry to Hengjiang. Wei Zheng immediately sent him grain and weapons, and distributed his own personal money and cloth to reward Liu Zhongli's soldiers.

古文：先是，安北将军鄱阳王范亦自合肥遣西豫州刺史裴之高与其长子嗣，帅江西之众赴京师，屯于张公洲，待上流诸军至。
现代文：在这之前，安北将军鄱阳王萧范也从合肥派西豫州刺史裴之高和自己的长子裴嗣，率领江西部队奔赴京城，驻扎在张公洲，等待上游的各路援军到来。
English: Prior to this, the Anbei general Shenyang Wang Xiao Fan also sent from Hefei to the West Henan Province to send Shi Peizhigao and his eldest son Peizhi, leading the Jiangxi troops to Beijing, stationed in Zhang Gongzhou, waiting for the arrival of reinforcements from upstream.

古文：是时，之高遣船渡仲礼，与合军进屯王游苑。
现代文：遣时，裴之高派船接柳仲礼的军队遇辽，和自己会合进驻王游苑。
English: At the appointed time, Pei Zi Gao sent a ship to pick up Liu Zhongli's army in Liao, and they met and stationed themselves in Wang Youyuan.

古文：粲建议推仲礼为大都督，报下流众军。
现代文：韦粲提议推举柳仲礼任大都督，通报下游各军。
English: Wei Wei proposed to promote Liu Zhongli to the post of grand governor and inform the downstream armies.

古文：裴之高自以年位耻居其下，乃云： 柳节下是州将，何须我复鞭板？ 
现代文：但裴之高认为自己年长位尊，羞于位居柳仲礼之下，于是说： 柳节下已经是一州刺史，哪用我来任命他呢? 
English: However, Pei Zhigao thought that he was an elder and was ashamed to be under Liu Zhongli, so he said: "Under Liu Jie is already a state history, how can I appoint him?

古文：累日不决。
现代文：因而议论整天，不能作出决定。
English: So they talk all day and can't come to a decision.

古文：粲乃抗言于众曰： 今者同赴国难，义在除贼，所以推柳司州者，政以久捍边疆，先为侯景所惮；且士马精锐，无出其前。
现代文：韦粲激愤地对众将领说： 如今我们同赴国难，目的就是消灭逆贼，我提议推举柳司州的原因，是因为他长期守卫边疆，侯景早就畏惧他，而且柳司州兵强马壮，没有人能超过他。
English: Wei Wei angrily said to the generals: "Nowadays, we are marching to the national disaster together, the purpose is to eliminate the traitors. The reason why I propose to nominate Liusizhou is because he has been guarding the border for a long time, Hou Jing has long been afraid of him, and the Liusizhou soldiers are strong, no one can surpass him.

古文：若论位次，柳在粲下；语其年齿，亦少于粲，直以社稷之计，不得复论。
现代文：如果要论官位，他在我之下，要说年龄，他也比我年轻，祇是因为考虑到国家的命运，不能再计较这些了。
English: If it is a question of position, he is below me, if it is a question of age, he is younger than me, only because, considering the fate of the country, it is no longer possible to take these things into account.

古文：今日形势，贵在将和；若人心不同，大事去矣。
现代文：现在的形势，重要的是将领之间的和睦；如果人心不和，国家大事就完了。
English: In the current situation, what is important is the harmony between the generals; if there is discord between the people, the national event will be over.

古文：裴公朝之旧齿，年德已隆，岂应复挟私情，以沮大计。
现代文：裴公是朝廷有声望的老臣，年高望重，怎么可以出于私心，破坏救援大计呢?
English: Baigong is a senior court official with a high reputation. How could he sabotage the rescue plan out of selfishness?

古文：粲请为诸君解释之。 
现代文：请允许我来为诸位消除这个障碍。 
English: Allow me to remove this obstacle for you.

古文：乃单舸至之高营，切让之曰： 前诸将之议，豫州意所未同，即二宫危逼，猾寇滔天，臣子当戮力同心，岂可自相矛盾！
现代文：于是韦粲乘坐一条小船到裴之高的军营，严词责备裴之高，说： 前些天诸位将领推举柳司州任大都督的主张，您心裹不同意，如今皇上、太子情势危急，狡猾的逆贼侯景罪恶滔天，我们这些臣子应当同心协力，哪能自相矛盾呢?
English: So Wei Wei took a small boat to the camp of Pei Zhi Gao, and sternly reproached Pei Zhi Gao, saying: "A few days ago, you generals voted for the proposal of appointing a grand governor of Liusi Province. Your heart does not agree. Now the emperor and the prince are in a critical situation, and the cunning traitor Hou Jing's crime is terrible. We, these courtiers, should work together. How can we contradict ourselves?

古文：豫州必欲立异，锋镝便有所归。 
现代文：如果您一定要有二心，我便衹有以刀剑相向了。 
English: If you must be double-minded, I'm double-minded with a sword.

古文：之高垂泣曰： 吾荷国恩荣，自应帅先士卒，顾恨衰老，不能效命，企望柳使君共平凶逆，谓众议已从，无俟老夫耳。
现代文：裴之高流着泪说： 我蒙受国家的恩惠荣宠，自然应该身先士卒，衹恨自己年老力衰，不能为国效力，希望和柳使星共同铲除逆贼，我是认为大家的主张已经实行了，不用等我作决定罢了。
English: With tears streaming down his face, Pei Zhigao said, "I have been favored and honored by the state. Naturally, I should lead the way. I hate myself for being old and feeble and not being able to serve the country. I hope to work with Liu Zhixing to eradicate the traitors. I think that everyone's idea has already been implemented. There is no need to wait for me to make a decision."

古文：若必有疑，当剖心相示。 
现代文：如果你一定怀疑我另有想法，我可以剖出心来给你看。 
English: If you must suspect that I have other ideas, I can dissect my heart to show you.

古文：于是诸将定议，仲礼方得进军。
现代文：于是将领们共同作出了决议，柳仲礼才得以领兵进发。
English: As a result, the generals jointly made a resolution, and Liu Zhongli was able to lead the troops into battle.

古文：次新亭，贼列阵于中兴寺，相持至晚，各解归。
现代文：擅领兵驻扎在新亭，叛军在中兴寺摆开战阵，双方相持到晚上，各自收兵回营。
English: The unauthorized soldiers were stationed in Xinting, and the rebels set up battle lines in Zhongxing Temple. The two sides held each other until the evening, and each of them withdrew their troops back to camp.

古文：是夜，仲礼入粲营，部分众军，旦日将战，诸将各有据守，令粲顿青塘。
现代文：遣天晚上，柳仲礼来到皇塞的军营，部署军队，准备第二天作战，将领们各自据守一方，柳仲礼命令韦粲驻军青塘。
English: On the evening of the day of the emperor's enthronement, Liu Zhongli came to the military camp of the imperial fortress, deployed the army and prepared to fight the next day. The generals each took their own side, and Liu Zhongli ordered Wei Wei to garrison Qingtang.

古文：青塘当石头中路，粲虑栅垒未立，贼必争之，颇以为惮，谓仲礼曰： 下官才非御侮，直欲以身殉国。节下善量其宜，不可致有亏丧。 
现代文：韦粲面对青塘的正中，韦粲考虑到那裹还未筑好栅栏营垒，逆贼一定会前来争夺，因此颇为担心。他对柳仲礼说： 我并不是有才能抵御外敌，衹是想以身殉国，希望你妥善地量才而用，不要因用人不当而招致有所损失。 
English: Facing the middle of Qingtang, Wei Wei was quite worried, considering that the fence and camp had not yet been built, and the invaders would certainly come to fight. He said to Liu Zhongli: I do not have the ability to resist foreign enemies, but I want to die for the country. I hope you can use your talent properly, and do not incur losses due to improper employment.

古文：仲礼曰： 青塘立栅，迫近淮渚，欲以粮储船乘尽就泊之，此是大事，非兄不可。
现代文：柳仲礼说： 在壹擅修筑营栅，靠近进回边，我想让储粮的车船全都停靠在那裹。这是大事，非兄长您承担不可。
English: Liu Zhongli said, "I want to build a camp gate at the construction site, near the entrance and exit, and I want all the grain storage ships to dock there. This is a big deal, and you must bear it.

古文：若疑兵少，当更差军相助。 
现代文：如果担心兵力少，我可以再派军队帮助您。 
English: If you're worried about low manpower, I can send more troops to help you.

古文：乃使直阁将军刘叔胤师助粲，帅所部水陆俱进。
现代文：于是派直合将军刘叔胤率军帮助韦垦，他们率领自己的部队从水陆两路一起进发。
English: Therefore, he sent Zhihe General Liu Shuyun and his army to help Wei Yan. They led their troops to advance from both land and water.

古文：时值昏雾，军人迷失道，比及青塘，夜已过半，垒栅至晓未合。
现代文：当时正遇上茫茫大雾，士兵迷失了道路，等到了青塘，已经过了半夜，营垒栅栏一直到天亮都没筑完。
English: At that time, they were encountering a thick fog. The soldiers lost their way and waited until they reached Qingtang. It was already past midnight, and the camp fence was not completed until dawn.

古文：景登禅灵寺门阁，望粲营未立，便率锐卒来攻。
现代文：候景登上禅灵寺的阁楼，远远望见韦粲的营垒栅栏未筑完，便率领精兵来攻打。
English: He climbed to the attic of the Zenling Temple. From far away, he could see that the camp fence of Wei Wei was not completed, so he led the elite soldiers to attack.

古文：军副王长茂劝据栅待之，粲不从，令军主郑逸逆击之，命刘叔胤以水军截其后。
现代文：军副王长茂劝坚守营垒等待敌军，韦粲不听从他的意见，命令军主郑逸迎击敌军，又命令刘叔胤用水军截断敌军后路。
English: Vice-commander Wang Changmao advised him to hold fast to the camp and wait for the enemy, but Wei Xuan did not listen to his advice and ordered commander Zheng Yiyi to attack the enemy, and ordered Liu Shulian to cut off the enemy's rear with water.

古文：叔胤畏懦不敢进，逸遂败。
现代文：刘叔胤胆小害怕不敢率兵前进，郑逸于是被打败。
English: Liu Shuyun was too timid and afraid to lead the troops forward, so Zheng Yue was defeated.

古文：贼乘胜入营，左右牵粲避贼，粲不动，犹叱子弟力战，兵死略尽，遂见害，时年五十四。
现代文：逆贼乘胜冲入军营，韦粲身旁的人都拉他躲避，但他屹然不动，还大声命令子弟拼命作战，士兵都差不多死尽了，韦粲也被杀，当时他五十四岁。
English: Taking advantage of the victory, the traitor rushed into the military camp. The people around Wei Wei pulled him to avoid him, but he stood still and loudly ordered his son to fight hard. The soldiers were almost dead, and Wei Wei was also killed. He was 54 years old at the time.

古文：粲子尼及三弟助、警、构、从弟昂皆战死，亲戚死者数百人。
现代文：韦粲的儿子韦尼和韦粲的三个弟弟韦助、韦警、韦构、堂弟韦昂都战死了，他的亲戚战死的有几百人。
English: Wei Yan's son, Wei Ni, and Wei Yan's three younger brothers, Wei Sui, Wei Guan, Wei Jie, and his cousin, Wei Ang, all died in the war, and hundreds of his relatives died in the war.

古文：贼传粲首阙下，以示城内，太宗闻之流涕曰： 社稷所寄，惟在韦公，如何不幸，先死行阵。 
现代文：逆贼将韦粲的首级送到宫阙之下，拿给宫城内的人看，太宗知道后流着泪说： 国家的安危就寄托在韦公身上，怎么如此不幸，他竟先战死在阵中。 
English: The traitor brought Wei Gong's head to the palace and showed it to the people in the palace. When the emperor learned of this, he shed tears and said, "The safety of the country rests on Wei Gong. How unfortunate that he died in battle first."

古文：诏赠护军将军。
现代文：于是下韶追赠韦粲为护军将军。
English: As a result, the lower court posthumously awarded Wei Wei as the general of the escorting army.

古文：世祖平侯景，追谥曰忠贞，并追赠助、警、构及尼皆中书郎，昂员外散骑常侍。
现代文：世祖平定侯景之乱后，追赠韦粲谧号为忠贞，并且追赠韦助、韦警、韦构以及韦尼为中书郎，追赠韦昂为员外散骑常侍。
English: After the founder of the dynasty had quelled the Houjing Rebellion, he posthumously bestowed the title of Wei Zheng to Zhongzheng, and the titles of Wei Su, Wei Gu, Wei Jie and Wei Ni to Zhong Shulang, and the title of Wei An to the non-commissioned officers and horsemen.

古文：粲长子臧，字君理。
现代文：韦粲的长子韦臧，字君理。
English: The eldest son of Wei Xuan, Wei Xuan, was named Kunli.

古文：历官尚书三公郎、太子洗马、东宫领直。
现代文：韦臧曾任尚书三公郎，太子洗马，束宫领直。
English: Wei Wei was once the third prince of Shangshu, the prince of Shima, and the prince of Sokgong.

古文：侯景至，帅兵屯西华门。
现代文：侯景围困在京城时，他率兵驻守西华门。
English: When Hou Jing was besieged in the capital, he stationed troops at the West China Gate.

古文：城陷，奔江州，收旧部曲，据豫章，为其部下所害。
现代文：京城陷落后，他逃到江州，收集旧部，据守豫章，后来被部下杀害。
English: After the fall of Beijing, he fled to Jiangzhou to collect the old troops and defend Yuzhang. He was later killed by his subordinates.

古文：江子一，字元贞，济阳考城人，晋散骑常侍统之七世孙也。
现代文：江子一字元贞，济阳考城人。他是晋时散骑常侍江统的第七代子孙。
English: He is the seventh generation descendant of Jiang Zi's character, Yuan Zhen, and a native of Jiyang's Kaocheng.

古文：父法成，天监中奉朝请。
现代文：他父亲江法成，天监年间任奉朝请。
English: His father, Jiang Hacheng, served as a court official during his time in prison.

古文：子一少好学，有志操，以家贫阙养，因蔬食终身。
现代文：江子一年少时喜爱学习，有志向有节操，因为家中贫穷对父母供养不周，于是终生素食。
English: When Jiang Zi was a year old, he loved to study, had ambition and self-discipline. Because the poverty in his family did not provide well for his parents, he was always on a vegetarian diet.

古文：起家王国侍郎、朝请。
现代文：他初出仕任王国侍郎，奉朝请。
English: It was his first time to serve as a royal chamberlain.

古文：启求观书秘阁，高祖许之，有敕直华林省。
现代文：他上表请求到秘阁看书，高祖答应他，并下令让江子一在华林省当值。
English: He requested to read a book in a secret place, Gaozu agreed and ordered Jiang Zi Yi to be on duty in Hualin Province.

古文：其姑夫右卫将军硃异，权要当朝，休下之日，宾客辐凑，子一未尝造门，其高洁如此。
现代文：江子一的姑父右卫将军塞昱，是当朝权贵，每当他休假回家时，家中宾客盈门，而江子一却从未登门拜访，他的品行如此高洁。
English: Jiang Zi Yi's uncle, the Right Guard General Sai Ye, was the most powerful person in the imperial court. Whenever he went home on leave, his house was crowded with guests, but Jiang Zi Yi never visited his house. His conduct was so noble.

古文：稍迁尚书仪曹郎，出为遂昌、曲阿令，皆著美绩。
现代文：后来江子一逐渐迁任尚书仪曹郎，出京任遂昌、曲阿县令，都取得了很好的政縯。
English: Later, Jiang Zi I was gradually transferred to the post of Shang Shuxi Cao Lang, and went to Beijing to serve as Suichang and Quaxianling, all of which achieved good political results.

古文：除通直散骑侍郎，出为戎昭将军、南津校尉。
现代文：江子一被任命为通直散骑侍郎。出京任戎昭将军、南津校尉。
English: Eshiichi was appointed as Tsuchida Sanzhijijiro, and went to the capital to be appointed as General Ebisho and Lieutenant Nanzin.

古文：弟子四，历尚书金部郎。大同初，迁右丞。
现代文：江子一的弟弟江子四，曾任尚书金部郎，去回初年，迁任右丞。
English: Jiang Zi I's younger brother, Jiang Zi IV, once served as Shang Shuxin's finance minister, but was transferred to the position of vice-premier in the first year of his return.

古文：兄弟性并刚烈。
现代文：他们兄弟俩都性情刚烈。
English: Both of them are tough-minded.

古文：子四自右丞上封事，极言得失，高祖甚善之，诏尚书详择施行焉。
现代文：江王皿以右丞的身份呈送封事，尽情陈说朝廷得失，高祖十分赏识，下令让尚书仔细审察，从中择善施行。
English: Jiang Wangsara, in his capacity as the right-hand man, presented the letter of transmittal, telling the imperial court's gains and losses as much as he could. Gao Zu was very appreciative, and ordered that Shang Shu be carefully examined, and the best one be selected for implementation.

古文：左民郎沈炯、少府丞顾玙尝奏事不允，高祖厉色呵责之；子四乃趋前代炯等对，言甚激切，高祖怒呼缚之，子四据地不受，高祖怒亦止，乃释之。犹坐免职。
现代文：左民郎沈炯、少府丞顾琪曾经因为奏事不恰当，高祖声色俱厉地呵责他们，江子四于是快步上前代替沈炯、顾琪二人对答，言辞十分激烈率直，高祖气愤地喊人捆绑他，江子四伏在地上不肯受缚，高祖的气也消了，叫人放了他，但他还是因此获罪免职。
English: Zuo Min Lang (左民郎), Shen Yao (沈) and Gu Qi (少府丞) had been reprimanded by Gao Zu (高祖) for improperly making a report. Jiang Zi Si (江子四) then quickly stepped forward to take the place of Shen Yao (沈) and Gu Qi, and the two had a heated and forthright exchange of words. Gao Zu angrily shouted for someone to tie him up. Jiang Zi (江子四) lay prostrate on the ground and refused to be tied up. Gao Zu's anger had also dissipated, and he asked for his release, but he was still exonerated

古文：及侯景反，攻陷历阳，自横江将渡，子一帅舟师千余人，于下流欲邀之，其副董桃生家在江北，因与其党散走。
现代文：侯景谋反，攻陷历阳，准备从横江渡，江子一率领水军一千多人，想在下游阻截侯景，他的副将董桃生家在江北，便和同伙都逃散了。
English: Hou Jing plotted a rebellion, captured Liyang, and prepared to cross the Yangtze River. Jiang Zi led a naval force of more than a thousand people and wanted to intercept Hou Jing downstream. His deputy general, Dong Taosheng, was in the north of the river, and he and his accomplices all fled.

古文：子一乃退还南洲，复收余众，步道赴京师。
现代文：于是江子一退回南洲，又收集余部，从小路步行赶赴京城。
English: Therefore, as soon as she returned to Nanzhou, she collected the rest and rushed to Beijing on foot from the back roads.

古文：贼亦寻至，子一启太宗曰： 贼围未合，犹可出荡，若营栅一固，无所用武。 
现代文：叛军不久也到了京城，江子一启禀太宗说： 逆贼的包围圈还没有合拢，可以设法冲出去，如果等他们将营垒全部筑好，那我们就没有用武之地了。 
English: The rebels soon arrived in the capital, and Emperor Taizong said: "The encirclement of the traitors has not yet closed, we can try to break out. If they wait until they have built all the fortifications, then we will have no place to go.

古文：请与其弟子四、子五帅所领百余人，开承明门挑贼。
现代文：江子一请求和他的弟弟江子四、江子五率领手下的士兵一百多人，打开承明门向逆贼挑战，贼答应了。
English: At the request of Jiang Zi I and his brother Jiang Zi IV and Jiang Zi V, they led more than a hundred soldiers under their command to open the Chengming Gate to challenge the traitors, and the traitors agreed.

古文：许之。子一乃身先士卒，抽戈独进，群贼夹攻之，从者莫敢继。子四、子五见事急，相引赴贼，并见害。
现代文：江子一身先士卒，挥戈独自冲进敌阵，逆贼夹攻他，后面的人不敢接着冲进去，江子四、江子五见情况危急，跟着冲进敌阵，三个人全都被杀害。
English: Jiang Zi was the first soldier, he rushed into the enemy's line of battle alone, the rebels attacked him, the people behind him did not dare to rush in, Jiang Zi IV and Jiang Zi V saw the situation was critical and rushed into the enemy's line of battle, all three were killed.

古文：诏曰： 故戎昭将军、通直散骑侍郎、南津校尉江子一，前尚书右丞江子四，东宫直殿主帅子五，祸故有闻，良以矜恻，死事加等，抑惟旧章。
现代文：皇上下韶书说： 前任戎昭将军、通直散骑侍郎、南津校尉江子一，前任尚书右丞江子四，东宫直殿主帅江子五。他们的噩耗传来，朕深感悲哀痛惜，对他们牺牲的嘉奖祭奠，按原先的规定，均应加等。
English: The Emperor's imperial edict said, "The former general Eunsoo Cho, the attendant Tsundo Sanzhijo, the Nanzin school lieutenant Jiang Zi I, the former Shoshu Ujo Jiang Zi IV, and the commander of the Eastern Palace Naoto Jiang Zi V. I am deeply saddened and sorry to hear of their deaths. According to the original regulations, the awards and tributes for their sacrifice should be increased.

古文：可赠子一给事黄门侍郎，子四中书侍郎，子五散骑侍郎。 
现代文：可追赠江上为给事黄门侍郎，追赠江子四为中书侍郎，追赠江子五为散骑侍郎。 
English: It can be awarded posthumously to Jiang Shang as the Yellow Gate Attendant, to Jiang Zi Yu as the Chinese Calligraphy Attendant, and to Jiang Zi Wu as the Sanzhi Attendant.

古文：侯景平，世祖又追赠子一侍中，谥义子；子四黄门侍郎，谥毅子；子五中书侍郎，谥烈子。
现代文：候景之乱平定后，世担又追赠江子一为侍中，赠谧义子；追赠江子四为黄门侍郎，赠谧号毅子；追赠江子五为中书侍郎，赠谧号烈子。
English: After the suppression of the Xuejing Disturbance, the world also posthumously awarded Jiang Zi I as a chamberlain, and presented him with the posthumous title of Yizi; posthumously awarded Jiang Zi IV as a Huangmen chamberlain, and presented him with the posthumous title of Yizi; posthumously awarded Jiang Zi V as a Zhongshu chamberlain, and presented him with the posthumous title of Yizi.

古文：子一续《黄图》及班固 九品 ，并辞赋文笔数十篇，行于世。
现代文：江子一曾续写《黄图》和逛固 九品 ，还有几十篇辞赋韵文及散文，都在世上流传。
English: Jiang Zi Yi once continued to write "Yellow Map" and "Walking through the Nine Treasures," as well as dozens of dictations, rhymes and prose, all of which have been circulated around the world.

古文：张嵊，字四山，镇北将军稷之子也。
现代文：张嵊字四山，是镇北将军张稷的儿子。
English: Zhang Xizhishan is the son of the Zhenbei general Zhang Xizhishan.

古文：少方雅，有志操，能清言。
现代文：张嵊年少时就举止方正文雅，有志向有节操，能谈论玄理。
English: When Zhang Ye was young, his manners were formal and elegant, he was ambitious and disciplined, and he could talk about metaphysics.

古文：父临青州，为土民所害，嵊感家祸，终身蔬食布衣，手不执刀刃。
现代文：他父亲在治理青州时，被当地人杀害，张蝼因家中祸事而感伤，于是终生吃素食穿布衣，手不拿刀。
English: His father was killed by the local people when he was in charge of Qingzhou. Zhang Ye was saddened by the misfortune of his family, so he ate vegetarian food, wore cloth clothes, and did not hold a knife.

古文：州举秀才。
现代文：州中把他举为秀才。
English: He was a standout in the state's junior high.

古文：起家秘书郎，累迁太子舍人、洗马、司徒左西掾、中书郎。
现代文：张嵊初出仕任秘书郎，屡经升迁为太子舍人，洗马，司徒左西掾，中书郎。
English: Zhang Xuan first served as a secretary, and was repeatedly promoted to the position of prince's concubine, washer of horses, tutor to the West, and middle school teacher.

古文：出为永阳内史，还除中军宣城王司马、散骑常侍。
现代文：他出京任永阳内史，返京后被任命为中军宣城王司马、散骑常侍。
English: He went to Beijing to serve as the Yongyang Inner Historian, and after returning to Beijing, he was appointed as the Chinese army's Xuancheng Wang Sima and straggler.

古文：又出为镇南湘东王长史、寻阳太守。
现代文：后来他又出京任镇南迩塞王长史、寻阳太守。
English: Later, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of the town of Nanxiusi and the governor of Huanyang.

古文：中大同元年，征为太府卿，俄迁吴兴太守。
现代文：中大同元年，他被征召任命为太府卿，不久迁任吴兴太守。
English: In the first year of middle and high school, he was conscripted and appointed as Taifuqing, and was soon transferred to Wu Xing, the governor.

古文：太清二年，侯景围京城，嵊遣弟伊率郡兵数千人赴援。
现代文：太清二年，侯景围困京城，张嵊派弟弟张伊率领本郡兵马敷千人前去救援。
English: In the second year of the Taiqing Dynasty, Houjing besieged the capital city, Zhang Ye sent his brother Zhang Yi to lead the county's thousand soldiers and horses to rescue.

古文：三年，宫城陷，御史中丞沈浚违难东归。嵊往见而谓曰： 贼臣凭陵，社稷危耻，正是人臣效命之秋。今欲收集兵力，保据贵乡。
现代文：太清三年，宫城被攻陷，御史中丞沈浚向东逃难回到家乡，张嵊前去拜见他说： 如今逆贼欺凌主上，国家危急君王蒙耻，这正是臣子们尽忠效命之时，现在我想收集兵力，据守您的故乡吴兴。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, when Miyagi was conquered, the Grand Historian Shen Jun headed east to escape and return to his hometown. Zhang Ye went to meet him and said, "Nowadays, the traitors are bullying the lord. The national crisis has shamed the king. This is the time for the courtiers to fulfill their duties. Now I want to gather troops to defend your hometown of Wuxing."

古文：若天道无灵，忠节不展，虽复及死，诚亦无恨。 
现代文：如果上天不保佑我，竭忠守节的心愿不能实现，就是因此而死我也毫无遗憾。 
English: If the heavens do not bless me and my wish to observe the Day of Devotion is not fulfilled, I will not regret dying for it.

古文：浚曰： 鄙郡虽小，仗义拒逆，谁敢不从！ 
现代文：选浚回答说： 我们吴兴郡虽然很小，但您凭藉正义抗拒逆贼，谁敢不听从! 
English: Zeng Jun replied: Although our Wuxing County is small, you have resisted the traitors with justice. Who dares not obey!

古文：固劝嵊举义。
现代文：选篷态度坚决地鼓励亟烟组织义兵抵抗逆贼。
English: The attitude of the canvassers is to resolutely encourage the immediate organization of volunteers to resist the traitors.

古文：于是收集士卒，缮筑城垒。
现代文：于是亟鳄收聚士兵，修筑城墙营垒。
English: So he quickly gathered soldiers and began to build a fortified wall.

古文：时邵陵王东奔至钱唐，闻之，遣板授嵊征东将军，加秩中二千石。
现代文：当时邵陵王向东逃到壁卢，听说逭事，以王府名义下令授任张烟征束将军，并加赠九卿官街。
English: At that time, King Shao Ling fled eastward to Bu Lu. Upon hearing an anecdote, he ordered the appointment of Zhang Yan as a general in the name of the royal court, and also gave Jiujing official street.

古文：嵊曰： 朝廷危迫，天子蒙尘，今日何情，复受荣号。 
现代文：张嵊说： 朝廷情势危急，天子蒙受耻辱，我如今有什么心情再接受逭荣耀的封号呢? 
English: Zhang Ye said, "The situation of the imperial court is critical, the heavenly son has suffered humiliation, what kind of mood do I have now to accept the title of "glory"?

古文：留板而已。
现代文：他衹是留下了王府授官的文件而已。
English: He only left behind the documents of the royal investiture.

古文：贼行台刘神茂攻破义兴，遣使说嵊曰： 若早降附，当还以郡相处，复加爵赏。 
现代文：逆贼的行台刘神茂攻下义兴，他派遣使者游说张嵊说： 如果你及早投降归附，一定仍然让你当郡守，此外再加官封赏。 
English: When Liu Shenmao, a renegade, invaded Yixing, he sent an envoy to lobby Zhang Ye, saying, "If you surrender and become a vassal as early as possible, you will still be allowed to serve as county magistrate, and you will also be rewarded with a promotion."

古文：嵊命斩其使，仍遣军主王雄等帅兵于鳢渎逆击之，破神茂，神茂退走。
现代文：张嵊下令将使者斩首，接着派军主王雄等人率兵在鳢渎迎击神茂，击败了他，神茂败逃。
English: Zhang Ye ordered that the envoy be beheaded, and then sent Wang Xiong, the commander of the army, and others to lead the troops to attack Shenmao in Ziguo, defeated him, and Shenmao fled.

古文：侯景闻神茂败，乃遣其中军侯子鉴帅精兵二万人，助神茂以击嵊。嵊遣军主范智朗出郡西拒战，为神茂所败，退归。
现代文：侯景听说神茂打了败仗，就派他的中军侯子鉴率领两万精兵，帮助神茂攻打张嵊，张嵊派军主范智朗到郡西抵御，被神茂击败后退回。
English: When Hou Jing heard that Jinmao had lost the battle, he sent his Chinese army Hou Zi Jian, led by 20,000 elite soldiers, to help Jinmao attack Zhang Ye. Zhang Ye sent the army commander Fan Zhilang to the west of the county to resist, but he was defeated by Jinmao and retreated.

古文：贼骑乘胜焚栅，栅内众军皆土崩。
现代文：逆贼的骑兵乘胜焚烧营栅，栅内的守军都土崩瓦解。
English: The treacherous cavalry took advantage of the victory to burn the camp gate, and the defenders inside the gate collapsed.

古文：嵊乃释戎服，坐于听事，贼临之以刃，终不为屈。
现代文：张嵊脱下军服，端坐在大厅内，逆贼面对他用刀刃胁迫，他始终不肯屈服。
English: Zhang Xuan took off his military uniform and sat in the hall. When the traitor confronted him and threatened him with a blade, he still refused to give in.

古文：乃执嵊以送景，景刑之于都市，子弟同遇害者十余人，时年六十二。
现代文：于是逆贼将他捆缚起来送到侯景那裹，侯景在京城集市上杀了他，与他一起遇害的子弟有十多个人。张嵊死时六十二岁。
English: As a result, the traitor tied him up and sent him to Houjing, who killed him at the market in the capital, together with more than ten of his children. Zhang Xuan was sixty-two years old when he died.

古文：贼平，世祖追赠侍中、中卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：侯景之乱平定之后，世祖追赠他为侍中、中卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: After the suppression of the Houjing Rebellion, the ancestor posthumously presented him with the titles of Chamberlain, General of the Middle Guard, Keifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：谥曰忠贞子。
现代文：赠谧号忠贞子。
English: She was given the posthumous name of Tadasako.

古文：沈浚，字叔源，吴兴武康人。
现代文：沈浚字叔源，吴兴武康人。
English: Shen Junzhe Shuyuan, Wu Xingwu Kangren.

古文：祖宪，齐散骑常侍，齐史有传。
现代文：他的祖父沈宪，齐时任散骑常侍，齐史上有沈宪的传。
English: His grandfather, Shen Xian, was an equerry in Qi at the time, and there is a legend of Shen Xian in Qi history.

古文：浚少博学，有才干，历山阴、吴、建康令，并有能名。
现代文：沈浚年少时博学多才。他历任山阴、吴、建康县令，而且有办事干练的名声。
English: When he was young, Shen Jun was an erudite and multi-talented person. He has successively served as the county magistrate of Shanyin, Wu and Jiankang counties, and has a reputation for being able to do things.

古文：入为中书郎、尚书左丞。
现代文：他入京任中书郎、尚书左丞。
English: He entered the capital as Chushiro and Shoshuzojo.

古文：侯景逼京城，迁御史中丞。
现代文：侯景围逼京城时，他迁任御史中丞。
English: When the lord Jingwei besieged the capital, he was transferred to the post of goshi chujo.

古文：是时外援并至，侯景表请求和，诏许之。
现代文：当时各路援兵都来到京城附近，侯景便上表请求缔结盟约，皇上下令答应。
English: At that time, reinforcements from all directions came to the vicinity of the capital, and Hou Jing went to the table to request the signing of an alliance agreement, and the emperor's order agreed.

古文：既盟，景知城内疾疫，复怀奸计，迟疑不去。
现代文：订立盟约之后，彊得知城内发生瘟疫，就又心怀奸计，拖延不肯离开。
English: After the conclusion of the covenant, Zou learned that there was a plague in the city, so he had a cunning plan and refused to leave.

古文：数日，皇太子令浚诣景所，景曰： 即已向热，非复行时。
现代文：过了好几天，皇太子命令沈浚到侯景的军营去，侯景说： 天气已渐渐变热，不是行军的时候，我逭十万人马怎能离开?
English: After several days, the crown prince ordered Shen Diao to go to Hou Jing's military camp. Hou Jing said: The weather has gradually become hot, it is not time to march, how can we leave with a hundred thousand people?

古文：十万之众，何由可去，还欲立效朝廷，君可见为申闻。 浚曰： 将军此论，意在得城。
现代文：我还想报效朝廷呢，你可以替我申奏。 沈浚回答道： 将军说这些话，真实的意图是要夺取宫城。
English: I still want to serve the imperial court, you can play the trumpet for me.Shen Jun replied: When the general said these words, his true intention was to capture Miyagi.

古文：城内兵粮，尚支百日。将军储积内尽，国家援军外集，十万之众，将何所资？
现代文：城内的兵力和粮食，还可以支持一百天，你的储粮已尽，朝廷的援军正在外集结，十万士兵，你将拿什么去养他们呢?
English: The troops and grain in the city can still support a hundred days, your grain reserves have run out, the imperial reinforcements are gathering outside, a hundred thousand soldiers, what will you use to feed them?

古文：而反设此言，欲胁朝廷邪？ 
现代文：你说出这番话来，难道想威胁朝廷吗? 
English: Are you trying to threaten the imperial court with these words?

古文：景横刃于膝，真目叱之。
现代文：侯景把刀横放在膝上，瞪着眼睛呵斥沈浚。
English: Hou Jing laid the knife horizontally on his lap and stared at Shen Zhen.

古文：浚正色责景曰： 明公亲是人臣，举兵向阙，圣主申恩赦过，已共结盟，口血未干，而有翻背。
现代文：沈浚正言厉色地谴责侯景说： 你是朝廷的大臣，却发动兵变围攻京城，圣明的君主已经给予恩典赦免你的罪过，也共同缔结了盟约，如今缔约的牲血未干，你就要反悔。
English: Shen Jun sternly denounced Hou Jing and said: You are a minister of the court, but you have launched a mutiny to besiege the capital. The holy monarch has given you the grace to forgive your sins, and you have also jointly concluded a covenant. The blood of the animals that you have signed is not dry, so you should repent.

古文：沈浚六十之年，且天子之使，死生有命，岂畏逆臣之刀乎！ 
现代文：我已经六十岁了，而且是天子的使者，生死由命，难道会害怕你这逆贼的刀刃吗? 
English: I am already sixty years old, and I am an emissary of the Son of Heaven, and I am at the mercy of life and death. Should I be afraid of your treacherous blade?

古文：不顾而出。
现代文：说完头也不回地出去了。
English: I left without looking back.

古文：景曰： 是真司直也。 
现代文：侯景说： 这人真正是国家忠诚不二的司直啊! 
English: Hou Jing said, "This man is truly a national loyalist!"

古文：然密衔之。
现代文：然而对他还是怀恨在心。
English: However, she still holds a grudge against him.

古文：及破张嵊，乃求浚以害之。
现代文：攻破张嵊的营垒后，侯景搜寻沈浚然后将他杀害。
English: After breaking through Zhang Ye's camp, Hou Jing searched for Shen Jun and then killed him.

古文：柳敬礼，开府仪同三司庆远之孙。
现代文：柳敬礼是开府仪同三司柳庆远的孙子。
English: Liu Jingli is the grandson of Kaifu Yi and Sanshi Liu Qingyuan.

古文：父津，太子詹事。
现代文：他的父亲柳津，任太子詹事。
English: His father, Yanuzin, was Prince Zhan Zhi.

古文：敬礼与兄仲礼，皆少以勇烈知名。
现代文：柳敬礼和哥哥柳仲礼，两人在年轻时就以忠勇刚烈而出名。
English: Liu Jinglei and his brother, Liu Zhongli, both became famous for their loyalty and bravery at a young age.

古文：起家著作佐郎，稍迁扶风太守。
现代文：柳敬礼被从家中征召出来任著作佐郎，渐渐迁任为扶风太守。
English: Yanagi Gyoretsu was summoned from his home to serve as Shosakusaro, and was gradually transferred to the position of Fufu Taishu.

古文：侯景渡江，敬礼率马步三千赴援。至都，据青溪埭，与景频战，恒先登陷陈，甚著威名。
现代文：侯景渡江时，柳敬礼率领三千骑兵步兵前去救援，到了京城附近，他据守青溪埭，多次与侯景交战，常常率先登城冲锋陷阵，声威远扬。
English: When Hou Jing crossed the river, Liu Jianli led three thousand cavalry and infantry to go to the rescue. When he reached the vicinity of the capital, he guarded Qingxi Ying, fought with Hou Jing many times, and often took the lead in storming the city. His fame spread far and wide.

古文：台城没，敬礼与仲礼俱见于景，景遣仲礼经略上流，留敬礼为质，以为护军。
现代文：宫城被攻陷后，柳敬礼和柳仲礼都去谒见侯景，侯景派柳仲礼去治理江上游，留下柳敬礼作为人质，并任命他为护军。
English: After the fall of Miyagi, both Liu Jingli and Liu Zhongli went to see Hou Jing. Hou Jing sent Liu Zhongli to govern the upper reaches of the river, leaving Liu Jingli as a hostage, and appointed him as a bodyguard.

古文：景饯仲礼于后渚，敬礼密谓仲礼曰： 景今来会，敬礼抱之，兄拔佩刀，便可斫杀，敬礼死亦无所恨。 
现代文：侯景在后渚为柳仲礼设宴送行，柳敬礼暗中对柳仲礼说： 侯景今天来赴宴，我紧抱着他，你便拔出佩刀把他杀掉，我死也无憾。 
English: Hou Jing set up a banquet for Liu Zhongli to see him off, and Liu Jingli secretly said to Liu Zhongli: Hou Jing came to the banquet today, I hugged him tightly, then you pulled out your saber and killed him. I have no regrets about my death.

古文：仲礼壮其言，许之。
现代文：柳仲礼认为他的话很豪壮，答应了他的要求。
English: Liu Zhongli thought his words were very brave and agreed to his request.

古文：及酒数行，敬礼目仲礼，仲礼见备卫严，不敢动，计遂不果。
现代文：酒过数巡，柳敬礼用目光向柳仲礼示意，柳仲礼见四周戒备森严，不敢动手，遣计策便没有成功。
English: After a few rounds of wine, Liu Jiali gestured with his eyes to Liu Zhongli, but when Liu Zhongli saw the tight security around him, he did not dare to do anything, and his strategy did not succeed.

古文：会景征晋熙，敬礼与南康王会理共谋袭其城，克期将发，建安侯萧贲知而告之，遂遇害。
现代文：后来遇上侯景征讨晋熙王，柳敬礼和南康王萧会理一起商议出兵袭击侯景据守的城池，已经约定了日期准备起事，建安侯萧贲知道逭事后告发了他们，于是柳敬礼被杀害。
English: Later, when Hou Jingzhen met to discuss King Jinxi, Liu Jiali and Nankang King Xiao Huili discussed sending troops to attack the castle guarded by Hou Jing together. They had already agreed on a date to prepare for the uprising. Jianan Hou Xiaoqi knew about it and reported them afterwards, so Liu Jiali was killed.

古文：史臣曰：若夫义重于生，前典垂诰，斯盖先哲之所贵也。
现代文：史臣曰：道义重于生命，是前代典籍留下的训诫，这也是先贤们所看重的品德。
English: Shichen said: Morality is more important than life, it is a precept left by the previous generation of classics, and it is also a virtue valued by the sages.

古文：故孟子称：生者我所欲，义亦我所欲，二事必不可兼得，宁舍生而取义。
现代文：所以亘王说，生命是我想要得到的，正义也是我想要得到的，这二者如果不能同时得到，就宁可舍生取义。
English: Therefore, King Guo said that life is what I want to get, justice is also what I want to get, if I can't get both of them at the same time, I would rather give up my life to get justice.

古文：至如张嵊二三子之徒，捐躯殉节，赴死如归，英风劲气，笼罩今古，君子知梁代之有忠臣焉。
现代文：像亟蟋这几个人，牺牲生命为国殉节，赴死如归，他们英雄的气概不屈的气节，光耀古今，人们应该知道梁代有忠臣啊!
English: Like these few people, who sacrificed their lives for the country, died for the country, and died for the country, their heroic spirit and unyielding spirit have shined from ancient times to the present. People should know that there are loyalists in Liang's generation!

