古文：起阏逢敦牂二月，尽旃蒙协洽，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起阏逢敦牂二月，尽旃蒙协洽，凡一年有奇。
English: The month of February is always full of surprises, and every year is full of surprises.

古文：潞王下清泰元年
现代文：后唐潞王清泰元年
English: Post-Tang Dynasty, the first year of the Qing Dynasty

古文：二月，癸酉，蜀主以武泰节度使赵季良为司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事，领节度使如故。
现代文：二月，癸酉，蜀主孟知祥任用武泰节度使赵季良为司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事，领节度使名衔如故。
English: In February, Emperor Meng Zhixiang appointed Wu Tai Jiedu to make Zhao Jiliang a subordinate attendant and a subordinate official, and the title remained unchanged.

古文：吴人多不欲迁都者，都押牙周宗言于徐知诰曰： 主上西迁，公复须东行，不惟劳费甚大，且违众心。 
现代文：吴国人很多都不想迁都，都押牙周宗向徐知诰进言说： 主上西迁金陵，您却需要东镇江都，不但劳费人力物力很大，而且违背人心。 
English: Many people in Wuxi did not want to move the capital, and Zhou Zong, who was in charge, suggested to Xu Zhisheng: "Instead of moving Jinling to the west, you need to move the capital to Dongzhenjiang. Not only is the labor, manpower and material resources very large, but it also goes against the people's will.

古文：丙子，吴主遣宋齐丘如金陵，谕知诰罢迁都。
现代文：丙子，吴主杨溥派遣宋齐丘到金陵，告谕徐知诰：迁都之事作罢。
English: The lord of Wu, Yang Pi, sent Song Qiqiu to Jinling to tell Xu Zhisheng to stop moving the capital.

古文：先是，知诰久有传禅之志，以吴主无失德，恐众心不悦，欲待嗣君；宋齐丘亦以为然。
现代文：过去，徐知诰很早就有让吴主把皇位传让给自己的意图，因为吴主没有什么失德之处。他害怕众心不服，便想等待嗣君继位后再说；宋齐丘也觉得这样做为好。
English: In the past, Xu Zhisheng had long had the intention of letting Wu Shuzhen pass the imperial throne to him, because Wu Shuzhen had nothing to lose. He was afraid of public disapproval, so he wanted to wait for the heir to succeed; Song Qiqiu also felt it was better to do so.

古文：一旦，知诰临镜镊白髭，叹曰： 国家安而吾老矣，奈何？ 
现代文：有一天早上，徐知诰照着镜子拔镊着发白的胡须，叹着气说： 国家安宁而我已经老了，怎么办呢？ 
English: One morning, Xu Zhisheng looked in the mirror and plucked his whitened whiskers, sighed and said: The country is peaceful and I am old, what should I do?

古文：周宗知其意，请如江都，微以传禅讽吴主，且告齐丘。
现代文：周宗了解他的意图，请求去江都，稍微把传让帝位的意思劝说吴主，并且告诉了宋齐丘。
English: Zhou Zong understood his intention, asked to go to Jiangdu, persuaded Wu Shizhen to slightly convey the meaning of abdicating the throne, and told Song Qiqiu.

古文：齐丘以宗先己，心疾之，遣使驰诣金陵，手书切谏，以为天时人事未可；知诰愕然。
现代文：宋齐丘认为周宗走在自己的前面，心里忌恨，便派人急奔金陵，亲笔上书极力劝阻，认为天时人心都不适宜；徐知诰听说，很出意料，表示惊愕。
English: Song Qiqiu thought that Zhou Zong was ahead of him and hated him in his heart, so he sent someone to rush to Jinling and personally wrote a letter to dissuade him, saying that it was not suitable for people's hearts; Xu Zhixuan heard that it was very unexpected and expressed surprise.

古文：后数日，齐丘至，请斩宗以谢吴主，乃黜宗为池州副使。
现代文：过了几天，宋齐丘来到金陵，请求斩了周宗，用来向吴主谢罪，于是，便把周宗贬黜为池州团练副使。
English: A few days later, Song Qiqiu came to Jinling and requested the beheading of Zhou Zong as a way to apologize to the Lord of Wu. As a result, he demoted Zhou Zong to the deputy envoy of the Chizhou Reunification.

古文：久之，节度副使李建勋、行军司马徐玠等屡陈知诰功业，宜早从民望，召宗复为都押牙。
现代文：时间长了，节度副使李建勋、行军司马徐等人多次陈奏徐知诰的功业，应该早日依从民众的期望，召回周宗恢复他的都押牙职务。
English: It has been a long time, and Deputy Minister Li Jianxun, Marching Division Ma Xu and others have repeatedly recited the exploits of Xu Zhisheng. It is necessary to comply with the expectations of the people as soon as possible and recall Zhou Zong to resume his duties as Duosha.

古文：知诰由是疏齐丘。
现代文：徐知诰从此便疏远宋齐丘了。
English: Xu Zhisheng has since distanced himself from Song Qiqiu.

古文：硃弘昭、冯赟不欲石敬瑭久在太原，且欲召孟汉琼，己卯，徙成德节度使范延光为天雄节度使，代汉琼；徙潞王从珂为河东节度使，兼北都留守；徙石敬瑭为成德节度使。
现代文：后唐朱弘昭、冯不想让石敬瑭久居太原，并且想召回权知天雄军府的孟汉琼。己卯，迁成德节度使范延光为天雄节度使，代替孟汉琼；派潞王李从珂为河东节度使，兼任北都太原留守；迁石敬瑭为成德节度使。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Zhu Hongzhao and Feng did not want Shi Jingyao to stay in Taiyuan for a long time, and wanted to recall Meng Hanqiong, who knew the military headquarters of Tianxiong. Therefore, the Chengde Festival sent Fan Yanguang as the Tianxiong Festival envoy to replace Meng Hanqiong; sent King Li Zongke as the Hedong Festival envoy to stay in Taiyuan; and transferred Shi Jingyao as the Chengde Festival envoy.

古文：皆不降制书，但各遣使臣持宣监送赴镇。
现代文：对这些调遣都不下皇帝制命，只是各派使臣持枢密院所行的文书，护送着到达镇所。
English: The emperor did not issue orders for these dispatches, but the envoys of each faction held the documents issued by the Privy Council and escorted them to the town hall.

古文：吴主诏徐知诰还府舍。
现代文：吴主杨溥下诏书命徐知诰回到他所造的府舍。
English: Emperor Yang of Wu issued an edict ordering Xu Zhisheng to return to the mansion he had built.

古文：甲申，金陵大火；乙酉，又火。
现代文：甲申，金陵大火；乙酉，又失火。
English: Jiaxin, Jinling fire; Acetylene, another fire.

古文：知诰疑有变，勒兵自卫。
现代文：徐知诰怀疑发生事变，集中兵力以自卫。
English: Xu Zhisheng suspected that an incident had occurred and concentrated his forces to defend himself.

古文：己丑，复入府舍。
现代文：己丑，再回到府舍。
English: and then go back to the house.

古文：潞王既与朝廷猜阻，朝廷又命洋王从璋权知凤翔。
现代文：后唐潞王李从珂已经与朝廷猜忌疏远，朝廷又任命洋王李从璋暂主风翔事务。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, King Li Congke had become estranged from the imperial court, and the imperial court appointed Yang Wang Li Congke as the temporary head of Fengxiang affairs.

古文：从璋性粗率乐祸，前代安重诲镇河中，欲杀之；潞王闻其来，尤恶之，欲拒命则兵弱粮少，不知所为，谋于将佐，皆曰： 主上富于春秋，政事出于硃、冯，大王功名震主，离镇必无全理，不可受也。 
现代文：李从璋性情粗鲁而且幸灾乐祸，以前代替安重诲镇守河中，亲手槌杀安重诲；李从珂听说要派他来接替自己，心里尤其厌恶，想要拒绝朝廷的命令，却兵弱粮少，不知怎么办为好，便同所属将佐商议，众人都说： 自从皇上年纪衰老以来，国家政事都操纵在朱弘昭、冯手中，大王您功高名大，震慑君主，离开镇所必然不能保全自己。不能接受别人的替代。 
English: Li Conglu was rude and gloated. In the past, he had replaced An Chonglu to guard the river, and personally killed An Chonglu with a hammer. Li Conglu was particularly disgusted when he heard that he would be sent to replace him. He wanted to refuse the order of the imperial court, but the soldiers were short of food. He did not know what to do, so he discussed with his subordinate generals. Everyone said: Since the emperor was old, national politics have been manipulated in the hands of Zhu Hongzhao and Feng. Your great king has a great reputation and has shocked the monarch. If you leave the town, you will not be able to protect yourself. You can not accept

古文：王问观察判官滴河马胤孙曰： 今道过京师，当何向为便？ 
现代文：李从珂询问观察判官河人马胤孙说： 现在，我需要前往京师洛阳，应当朝哪个方向为好？ 
English: Li Zongke inquired about the observation of the adjudicator, the river man, Ma Yinsun, saying: Now, I need to go to Beijing and Luoyang, which direction should I go?

古文：对曰： 君命召，不俟驾。
现代文：马胤孙回答说： 君主有命相召，不能等待。
English: Ma Yinsun replied: The monarch has a calling and cannot wait.

古文：临丧赴镇，又何疑焉！
现代文：您应该去京师参加先皇的葬礼，然后去太原的北都留守镇所，又有什么可犹豫的！
English: You should go to Beijing Division to attend the funeral of the first emperor, and then go to the north of Taiyuan to stay in the town, and there is nothing to hesitate!

古文：诸人凶谋，不可从也。 
现代文：大家给您出的是极坏主意，可不能听从他们的意见。 
English: People are giving you really bad ideas, and you can't listen to them.

古文：众哂之。
现代文：大家都笑他不达时变，太迂阔。
English: Everyone laughed at him for not keeping up with the times, for being too broad-minded.

古文：王乃移檄邻道，言 硃弘昭等乘先帝疾亟，杀长立少，专制朝权，别疏骨肉，动摇籓垣，惧倾覆社稷。
现代文：于是李从珂便向邻近各道发出宣告文书，言称： 朱弘昭等人，趁先帝患病严重之际，杀长立少，专擅朝廷大权，离间挑拨皇室骨肉，动摇藩镇根基，深恐他们要倾覆唐室的江山社稷。
English: As a result, Li Zongke issued a proclamation document to the neighboring provinces, saying: Zhu Hongzhao and others, taking advantage of the serious illness of the former emperor, killed the long and short, monopolized the power of the imperial court, sowed discord in the royal family, shook the foundation of the town, and deeply feared that they would overthrow the Tang Dynasty.

古文：今从珂将入朝以清君侧之恶，而力不能独办，愿乞灵邻籓以济之。 
现代文：现在，从珂即将入朝以清君侧的坏人，而如此大事又不是独力所能办到，愿意请求邻藩各道支援，合力达到这个目的。 
English: Now, a villain from Koga is about to enter the imperial court on the side of the Qing emperor, and such a big thing is not something that can be done on one's own, so he is willing to ask for support from neighboring clans and work together to achieve this goal.

古文：潞王以西都留守王思同当东出之道，尤欲与之相结，遣推官赧诩、押牙硃廷乂等相继诣长安，说以利害，饵以美妓，不从则令就图之。
现代文：潞王李从珂认为西都长安留守王思同正处在从风翔东讨洛阳的必经之路上，尤其希望和他相交结，便派遣推官郝诩、押牙朱廷等接连到长安去见王思同，向他说明利害，并馈赠美妓作诱饵，如果他不顺从，便就地把他处置了。
English: King Li Congke thought that Wang Sitong, who had stayed in Chang'an, the western capital, was on his way to Luoyang from Fengxiang in the east. He especially hoped to meet him, so he sent his magistrate, Zhu Ting, and others to Chang'an to see Wang Sitong, explain his interests to him, and present him with a beautiful prostitute as a bait. If he did not comply, he would be disposed of on the spot.

古文：思同谓将吏曰： 吾受明宗大恩，今与凤翔同反，借使事成而荣，犹为一时之叛臣，况事败而辱，流千古之丑迹乎！ 
现代文：王思同对所属将吏说： 我受过明宗皇帝的大恩，如果现在与凤翔一起造反，即使事情成功而获得荣耀，也还是关键时刻的叛臣，何况事败而遭到辱骂，流下千古的丑恶遗迹呢！ 
English: Wang Sitong said to his subordinate generals: I have received the great favor of the Emperor Mingzong. If I now rebel with Fengxiang, even if things succeed and gain glory, I will still be a traitor at the critical moment. What's more, I will be insulted by the defeat, and the ugly relics will flow down the ages!

古文：遂执诩等，以状闻。
现代文：便把郝诩等拘系起来，向朝廷作了报告。
English: He then put Xing and the others in custody and made a report to the imperial court.

古文：时潞王使者多为邻道所执，不则依阿操两端，惟陇州防御使相里金倾心附之，遣判官薛文遇往来计事。
现代文：当时，潞王李从珂派出的使者大多被邻道所拘留，没有被拘留的就是依附了对方或脚采两只船，只有陇州防御使相里金全心全意地依附顺从于他，派判官薛文遇往来商议联络。
English: At that time, most of the envoys sent by King Li of Qi from Ke were detained by the neighboring provinces. If they were not detained, they either attached the other side or captured two ships. It was only the defense of Zhangzhou that made Sori Jin wholeheartedly obey him and sent Judge Xue Wen to meet and discuss liaison.

古文：金，并州人也。
现代文：相里金是并州人。
English: Sorikane is a native of Niigata.

古文：朝廷议讨凤翔。
现代文：朝廷研究讨伐凤翔的事。
English: The Imperial Court is studying the matter of suppressing Fengxiang.

古文：康义诚不欲出外，恐失军权，请以王思同为统帅，以羽林都指挥使侯益为行营马步军都虞侯。
现代文：康义诚不想调派在外边，害怕丢了兵权，便奏请派王思同为统帅，任用羽林都指挥使侯益为行营马步军都虞候。
English: Kang Yicheng did not want to be transferred to the outside, afraid of losing military power, so he asked Wang Sitong to be the commander-in-chief, appointed Ulindu as the commander, and made Hou Yi wait for the marching horse infantry army.

古文：益知军情将变，辞疾不行。执政怒之，出为商州刺史。
现代文：侯益晓得军情将要发生变故，推辞不肯成行；执政者恼怒，把他派出去任商州刺史。
English: Hou Yi knew that the military situation was about to change, and he refused to resign; the ruler was angry and sent him out to serve as the governor of Shangzhou.

古文：辛卯，以王思同为西面行营马步军都部署，前静难节度使药彦稠副之，前绛州刺吏苌从简为马步都虞候，严卫步军左厢指挥使尹晖、羽林指挥使杨思权等皆为偏裨。
现代文：辛卯，任用王思同为西面行营马步军都部署，前静难节度使药彦稠作他的副手，前绛州刺史苌从简为马步都虞候，严卫步军左厢指挥使尹晖、羽林指挥使杨思权等都任为偏将。
English: Xinwu appointed Wang Sitong as the commander of the westward-marching horse-marching army, the former Jingnan commander-in-chief made Yao Yanchong his deputy, the former Zhangzhou commander-in-chief Zishi Yan as the commander-in-chief of the horse-marching army, the left compartment commander-in-chief of the Yanwei foot-marching army Yin Hui, and the commander-in-chief of Yulin commander-in-chief Yang Siquan were appointed as vice-commanders.

古文：晖，魏州人也。
现代文：尹晖是魏州人。
English: Yin Qi is a native of Weizhou.

古文：蜀主以中门使王处回为枢密使。
现代文：蜀主孟知祥任用中门使王处回为枢密使。
English: Shu lord Meng Zhixiang appointed the middle gate envoy Wang Shuxuan as a confidential envoy.

古文：丁酉，加王思同同平章事，知凤翔行府；以护国节度使安彦威为西面行营都监。
现代文：丁酉，加封王思同为同平章事，主持凤翔行府；任用护国节度使安彦威为西面行营都监。
English: Ding Yao, plus Wang Sitong as Tongping, presided over Feng Xiang's visit to the capital; appointed to guard the country, and made An Yanwei the inspector of the western campaign.

古文：思同虽有忠义之志，而御军无法；潞王老于行阵，将士徼幸富贵者心皆向之。
现代文：王思同虽然有忠义的志向，但是驾驭军队却没有法度；潞王对于治理行军作战很有经验，将士希望升迁跻身富贵的，内心都愿意归附他。
English: Although Wang Sitong has a loyal aspiration, there is no way to control the army; King Zou is very experienced in governing marching and fighting, and the soldiers hope to be promoted to the ranks of the rich, and are willing to join him in their hearts.

古文：诏遣殿直楚匡祚执亳州团练使李重吉，幽于宋州。
现代文：闵帝下诏派遣殿直楚匡祚拘捕亳州团练使李重吉，幽禁在宋州。
English: Emperor Gao issued an imperial edict to dispatch the imperial envoy Zhi Chu Kuang Zhou to arrest the imperial envoy Li Chongji and imprison him in Songzhou.

古文：洋王从璋行至关西，闻凤翔拒命而还。
现代文：洋王李从璋受命赴任，行至函谷关西，听说凤翔抗拒朝廷命令，便回来了。
English: Yang Wang Li was ordered to take office from Handan and went to Kansai, Hakodate. When he heard that Fengxiang was resisting the imperial order, he returned.

古文：三月，安彦威与山南西道张虔钊、武定孙汉韶、彰义张从宾、静难康福等五节度使奏合兵讨凤翔。
现代文：三月，安彦威与山南西道张虔钊、武定孙汉韶、彰义张从宾、静难康福等五镇节度使上奏联合讨伐凤翔。
English: In March, An Yanwei and Zhang Qianqian, Wuding Sun Hanqian, Zhang Congbin, Jingnan Kangfu and other five towns in Shannan West Road led a joint crusade against Fengxiang.

古文：汉韶，李存进之子也。
现代文：孙汉韶是李存进的儿子，李存进是李克用义子，本姓孙。
English: Sun Hanzhong is the son of Li Cunjin, and Li Cunjin is the son-in-law of Li Ke, whose real surname is Sun.

古文：乙卯，诸道兵大集于凤翔城下攻之，克东西关城，城中死者甚众。
现代文：乙卯，诸道之兵会集在风翔城下大举进攻，攻下了东、西城关，城里人死亡的很多。
English: However, the soldiers from all directions gathered in Fengxiang to attack the city, and captured the east and west gates. Many people in the city died.

古文：丙辰，复进攻城，期于必取。
现代文：丙辰，继续进兵攻打城垣，一定要把城池攻取下来。
English: Xing Chen, continue to advance and attack the city wall, be sure to capture the city.

古文：凤翔城堑卑浅，守备俱乏，众心危急，潞王登城泣谓外军曰： 吾未冠从先帝百战，出入生死，金创满身，以立今日之社稷；汝曹从我，目睹其事。
现代文：凤翔城垣堑壕低矮浅薄，守备器材都不足，兵众和市民都感到很危急，李从珂登上城头对城外进攻军队涕泣地说： 我从十几岁就跟随先帝经历上百次战斗，出生入死，满身创伤，创建了今日的天下；你们大家跟着我，亲眼看到过那些事实。
English: Fengxiang's city walls and trenches are low and shallow, the defensive equipment is insufficient, and the soldiers and citizens are in great danger. Li said tearfully to the attacking army outside the city from the top of Koden Castle: I have been following the former emperor since I was a teenager and have experienced hundreds of battles, from birth to death, full of trauma, and created today's world; you all follow me and have seen those facts with your own eyes.

古文：今朝廷信任谗臣，猜忌骨肉，我何罪而受诛乎！ 
现代文：现在，朝廷相信和任用坏人，猜忌自家骨肉，我有什么罪而受到诛伐啊！ 
English: Now, the imperial court believes in and appoints bad people, and is suspicious of its own flesh and blood. What crime have I committed to be attacked?

古文：因恸哭。闻者哀之。
现代文：因而痛哭不已，听到的人都哀伤而同情他。
English: Wherefore he wept sore: and all that heard him were moved with compassion to pity him.

古文：张虔钊性褊急，主攻城西南，以白刃驱士卒登城，士卒怒，大诟，反攻之，虔钊跃马走免，杨思权因大呼曰： 大相公，吾主也。 
现代文：张虔钊性情偏激而急躁，他负责主攻城西南，用刀驱逼士兵登城，士兵发怒，大骂他，反身攻击他，张虔钊赶忙骑马逃逸，才免一死。杨思权因势大声喊着说： 大相公潞王，是我的君主。 
English: Zhang Qianqian's temperament was extreme and impetuous. He was in charge of the main attack on the southwest of the city. He drove the soldiers up to the city with a sword. The soldiers became angry, shouted at him, and attacked him in turn. Zhang Qianqian quickly fled on horseback, only to avoid death. Yang Siquan shouted loudly because of the situation: King Dasogong Qianqian is my monarch.

古文：遂帅诸军解甲投兵，请降于潞王，自西门入，以幅纸进潞王曰： 愿王克京城日，以臣为节度使，勿以为防、团。 
现代文：便率领军队解去铠甲，丢掉兵器，向潞王请降，他从西门进入，用一张纸递给潞王说： 希望大王攻克京城的时候，派我当节度使，不要让我当防御、团练的职务。 
English: He entered from the west gate and handed a piece of paper to the king, saying, "I hope that when the great king conquers the capital, he will send me as a messenger of the festival, and not let me be in charge of defense and group training."

古文：潞王即书 思权可邠宁节度使 授之。
现代文：李从珂立即写了个 杨思权可任宁节度使 的字条给他。
English: Li Congke immediately wrote a note to Yang Si Quan to appoint him as the festival's envoy.

古文：王思同犹未之知，趣士卒登城，尹晖大呼曰： 城西军已入城受赏矣。 
现代文：王思同还不知道这些情况，仍在督促士兵登城，尹晖大喊说： 城西的官军已经入城接受赏赐了。 
English: Wang Sitong did not yet know these circumstances and was still urging the soldiers to go to the city. Yin Qi shouted: The government army in the west of the city has already entered the city to receive rewards.

古文：众争弃甲投兵而降，其声震地。
现代文：于是，兵众都弃甲缴械投降，那声音响的地动山摇。
English: Then all the soldiers threw down their weapons and surrendered, and the loud noise shook the mountains.

古文：日中，乱兵悉入，外军亦溃，思同等六节度使皆遁去。
现代文：到了中午，乱兵都进了城，外面的军队也溃散了，王思同等六位节度使都逃跑了。
English: By noon, the ruffians had all entered the city, and the troops outside had also dispersed. Wang Si's six equal commanders had all fled.

古文：潞王悉敛城中将吏士民之财以犒军，至于鼎釜皆估直以给之。
现代文：潞王便把城中所有将吏士民的财物收集起来，用来犒劳军队，甚至连锅釜等器皿都估价赏赐给军队。
English: King Yao then collected all the property of the officials and people in the city and used it to reward the army. Even pots and kettles and other utensils were valued and given to the army.

古文：丁巳，王思同、药彦稠等走至长安，西京副留守刘遂雍闭门不内，乃趣潼关。
现代文：丁巳，王思同、药彦稠等败退到长安，西京副留守刘遂雍关上城门不接纳，只得奔向潼关。
English: Ding Si, Wang Sitong, Yakuhiko Choshi and others were defeated and retreated to Chang'an. Liu Suiyong, the deputy governor of West Beijing, closed the city gate and refused to accept them, so they had to run to Shaoguan.

古文：遂雍，鄩之子也。
现代文：刘遂雍是刘的儿子。
English: Liu Suiyong is Liu's son.

古文：潞王建大将旗鼓，整众而东，以孔目官虞城刘延朗为腹心。
现代文：潞王李从珂设置了大将的旗鼓，整理兵众而向东挺进，把孔目官虞城人刘延朗作为心腹。
English: The warlord Li Congke set up a general's banner and drum, sorted out the soldiers and advanced eastward, taking Liu Yanlang, a Confucian official from Yucheng, as his confidant.

古文：潞王始忧王思同等并力据长安拒守，至岐山，闻刘遂雍不内思同，甚喜，遣使慰抚之，遂雍悉出府库之财于外，军士前至者即给赏令过；比潞王到，前军赏遍，皆不入城。
现代文：开始，潞王还担心王思同等联合力量占据长安抗拒，到了岐山，听说刘遂雍不接纳王思同，高兴极了，派人去慰问安抚。刘遂雍把府库中的钱财全部取出来放在外边，军士先到的就发给赏金让他过去；等到潞王到达时，前面的军队已经普遍得到赏赠，便都不入城骚扰。
English: At the beginning, the king of Qi was also worried that Wang Si would resist the occupation of Chang'an by the same combined forces. When he arrived at Qishan, he was very happy to hear that Liu Suiyong would not accept Wang Si Tong, and sent someone to comfort and pacify him. Liu Suiyong took out all the money in the treasury and put it outside. When the sergeant arrived first, he would give him a bounty to let him pass. By the time the king of Qi arrived, the troops in front had generally been rewarded, and they would not enter the city to harass.

古文：庚申，潞王至长安，遂雍迎谒，率民财以充赏。
现代文：庚申，潞王来到长安，刘遂雍迎接拜见他，并聚敛民间资财来充当赏金。
English: Goshun, the Dragon King came to Chang'an, Liu Suiyong greeted him, and gathered private funds to serve as a reward.

古文：是日，西面步军都监王景从等自军前奔还，中外大骇。
现代文：这一天，西面步军都监王景从等从前线奔逃回洛阳，朝廷内外都很震惊。
English: On this day, Wang Jing, the governor of the capital of the Ximen Infantry Corps, fled back to Luoyang from the front line. Both inside and outside the court were shocked.

古文：帝不知所为，谓康义诚等曰： 先帝弃万国，朕外守籓方，当是之时，为嗣者在诸公所取耳，朕实无心与人争国。
现代文：闵帝不知该怎么办，对康义诚等人说： 先帝辞世之际，朕正在外边戌守藩镇，当这个时候，谁来继承大位，只在诸位明公所选取而已，朕实在没有心思与别人争当皇帝。
English: Emperor Gao did not know what to do, and said to Kang Yicheng and others, "At the time of the death of the previous emperor, I was outside guarding the town. At this time, who will inherit the throne is only chosen by you. I really do not have the heart to compete with others to become emperor.

古文：既承大业，年在幼冲，国事皆委诸公。
现代文：后来继承了大业，年纪还很轻，国家大事都委托给诸位明公办理。
English: Later, he inherited a great cause at a very young age, and entrusted the handling of national affairs to you.

古文：朕于兄弟间不至榛梗，诸公以社稷大计见告，朕何敢违！
现代文：朕和兄弟之间不致于隔阻不通，诸位明公把有关国家社稷的大计见告，朕哪里敢不听从？
English: I and my brothers must not become estranged from each other. You have clearly and publicly announced the grand plans of the socialists of the relevant countries. How dare I disobey?

古文：军兴之初，皆自夸大，以为寇不足平；今事至于此，何方可以转祸？
现代文：这次兴兵讨伐凤翔之初，都夸大其辞，认为凤翔乱寇很容易讨平；现在事情已经到了这个地步，有什么办法可以扭转祸局？
English: At the beginning of this military campaign against Fengxiang, everyone exaggerated and thought that it would be easy to defeat Fengxiang; now that things have reached this stage, what can be done to reverse the disaster?

古文：朕欲自迎潞王，以大位让之，若不免于罪，亦所甘心。 
现代文：朕打算亲自迎接潞王，把皇帝大位让给他，如果不能免去罪罚，也心甘情愿。 
English: I intend to personally meet the king of Shanshan, to give him the emperor's throne, and if I cannot be exempted from punishment, I am willing to do so.

古文：硃弘昭、冯赟大惧，不敢对。
现代文：朱弘昭、冯大为恐惧，不敢答对。
English: Zhu Hongzhao and Feng Dai were afraid and did not dare to answer correctly.

古文：义诚欲悉以宿卫兵迎降为己功，乃曰： 西师惊溃，盖主将失策耳。
现代文：康义诚想用全部宿卫兵迎降作为自己的功劳，便说： 朝廷的军队溃败惊散，是由于主将的指挥失策。
English: Kang Yicheng wanted to take credit for the fact that all the guards had surrendered, so he said: The collapse and dispersal of the imperial army was due to the commander's command blunder.

古文：今侍卫诸军尚多，臣请自往扼其冲要，招集离散以图后效，幸陛下勿为过忧！ 
现代文：现在，还有很多侍卫部队，我请求亲自去扼守住冲要之地，招集离散了的部队，来谋求以后的效果，请陛下不要过于忧虑！ 
English: Now, there are still a lot of bodyguards, I ask you to personally hold the critical areas and gather the scattered troops to seek the future effect, please Your Majesty do not worry too much!

古文：帝遣使召石敬瑭，欲令将兵拒之。
现代文：闵帝想派使臣去召唤石敬瑭，让他统兵去抗拒李从珂的人马。
English: Emperor Gao wanted to send an envoy to summon Shi Jingyao and have him lead an army to resist Li Congke's troops.

古文：义诚固请自行，帝乃召将士慰谕，空府库以劳之，许以平凤翔，人更赏二百缗，府库不足，当以宫中服玩继之。
现代文：康义诚坚持请求自己去，闵帝便把将士招集起来进行慰问和动员，调用全部府库财物犒劳军队，并且许愿：平定凤翔之乱以后，每人加赏二百缗钱，如果府库不足，便用宫中锦帛珍玩变价补充。
English: Kang Yicheng insisted on asking him to go, and Emperor Gao called up his generals for condolences and mobilization, called up all the government treasury assets to reward the labor army, and made a wish: After the suppression of the Fengxiang Rebellion, each person would be rewarded with an additional 200 baht, and if the government treasury was insufficient, it would be supplemented with the palace brocade.

古文：军士益骄，无所畏忌，负赐物，扬言于路曰： 至凤翔更请一分。 
现代文：因此，军士更加骄横，肆无忌惮，背负着所赏赐的东西，在路上张扬说： 到了凤翔，还要再弄一份。 
English: As a result, the sergeant became more arrogant and unscrupulous, carrying the reward on his back and boasting on the road: "When I get to Fengxiang, I'll get another one."

古文：遣楚匡祚杀李重吉于宋州；匡祚榜棰重吉，责其家财。
现代文：朝廷派遣楚匡祚到宋州把李从珂的儿子李重吉杀了；楚匡祚拷打李重吉，没收了他的家财。
English: The imperial court sent Chu Kuangtao to Songzhou to kill Li Zongke's son Li Chongji; Chu Kuangtao tortured Li Chongji and confiscated his family wealth.

古文：又杀尼惠明。
现代文：又杀子李从珂已经出家为尼的女儿李惠明。
English: He also killed Li Congke's daughter, Li Huiming, who had become a nun.

古文：初，马军都指挥使硃洪实为秦王从荣所厚，及硃弘昭为枢密使，洪实以宗史事之；从荣勒兵天津桥，洪实首为孟汉琼击从荣，康义诚由是恨之。
现代文：以前，马军都指挥使朱洪实很被秦王李从荣所厚爱，待到朱弘昭当了枢密使，朱洪实把他当作同宗兄长；李从荣率领兵马列阵天津桥包围宫垣的时候，朱洪实响应孟汉琼的召唤，首先袭击李从荣，康义诚由于普经暗许迎立李从荣，便怀恨朱洪实。
English: In the past, Zhu Hongsi, the commander of the Ma army, was very much loved by the Qin king Li Congrong. Until Zhu Hongzhao became a confidential envoy, Zhu Hongzhi regarded him as an elder brother of the same clan. When Li Congrong led the soldiers of the Ma Li array to encircle the Tianjin Bridge, Zhu Hongzhi responded to the call of Meng Hanqiong and first attacked Li Congrong. Kang Yicheng harbored hatred for Zhu Hongzhi because he had secretly promised to welcome Li Congrong.

古文：辛酉，帝亲至左藏，给将士金帛。
现代文：辛酉，闵帝亲临府库左藏，给将士发放金帛赏物。
English: According to the legend, Emperor Xizang personally visited Zuozang, the prefectural treasury, to hand out gold and enamel gifts to the soldiers.

古文：义诚、洪实共论用兵利害，洪实欲以禁军固守洛阳，曰： 如此，彼亦未敢径前，然后徐图进取，可以万全。 
现代文：康义诚同朱洪实一起议论此次用兵的利与害，朱洪实主张用禁军固守洛阳，并说： 这样做，对方也就不敢直攻洛阳，然后再想办法进一步加以解决，这是万全之计。 
English: Kang Yicheng and Zhu Hongsi discussed the benefits and harms of this use of troops. Zhu Hongsi advocated using the forbidden army to firmly defend Luoyang, and said: In this way, the other side will not dare to directly attack Luoyang, and then find a way to further solve it. This is a perfect plan.

古文：义诚怒曰： 洪实为此言，欲反邪！ 
现代文：康义诚听了发怒地说： 洪实说这样的话，是想要造反吗？ 
English: After listening to this, Kang Yicheng said angrily, "If Hong Si said such a thing, is he trying to rebel?

古文：洪实曰： 公自欲反，乃谓谁反！ 
现代文：朱洪实说： 您自己要造反，还说别人要造反！ 
English: Zhu Hongsi said: You yourself want to rebel, and you say that others want to rebel!

古文：其声渐厉。
现代文：二人争吵的声音越来越大。
English: The sound of the two arguing grew louder and louder.

古文：帝闻，召而讯之，二人讼于帝前，帝不能辨其是非，遂斩洪实，军士益愤怒。
现代文：闵帝听到了，召唤二人来询问，二人各把自己的意见向闵帝诉说，闵帝不能明辨二人争辩的是非，便把朱洪实斩杀了，军士更加愤怒。
English: Emperor Yao heard this and summoned the two men to interrogate them. Each of the two men told Emperor Yao their opinions. Emperor Yao could not tell the difference between the two men's arguments, so he killed Zhu Hongsheng. The sergeant was even more angry.

古文：壬戌，潞王至昭应，闻前军获王思同，王曰： 思同虽失计，然尽心所奉，亦可嘉也。 
现代文：壬戌，潞王李从珂到达昭应，听说前军抓获王思同，潞王说： 虽然王思同的谋划有所失误，然而他竭尽心力为其所奉侍的主上，也是可以嘉许的。 
English: After hearing that the former army had captured Wang Sitong, King Li said: Although Wang Sitong's plan was flawed, he should be commended for doing his best for the Lord he served.

古文：癸亥，至灵口，前军执思同以至，王责让之，对曰： 思同起行间，先帝擢之，位至节将，常愧无功以报大恩。
现代文：癸亥，到达灵口，前军把王思同押见李从珂，李从珂责备他，王思同回答说： 思同起于行伍之间，先帝提拔我，位至建立节度的大将，经常惭愧自己没有功劳报答重用的大恩。
English: When he arrived at Lingkou, the front army took Wang Sitong to Li Zongke, and Li Zongke reproached him. Wang Sitong replied: "Sitong started out in the army. The former emperor promoted me to the rank of general to establish the festival. I am often ashamed that I have no merit to repay the great favor.

古文：非不知附在王立得富贵，助朝廷自取祸殃，但恐死之日无面目见先帝于泉下耳。
现代文：并非不知道依附大王您马上就能得到富贵，帮助朝廷是自取祸殃，只是怕临死之日没有面目在九泉之下见先帝。
English: It's not that you don't know that you can get rich by depending on the great king. Helping the imperial court is a self-inflicted disaster. It's just that you're afraid that you won't have the face to meet the former emperor when you're on your deathbed.

古文：败而衅鼓，固其所也。
现代文：如果失败了就用我的血来祭奠战鼓，也算是得其所了。
English: If I fail, I will use my blood to pay homage to the war drums, which is fitting.

古文：请早就死！ 
现代文：请您让我早些就死！ 
English: Please let me die sooner!

古文：王为之改容，曰： 公且休矣。 
现代文：潞王听了这些话大受感动，改容相敬，说道： 您别说了。 
English: Shao Wang was greatly moved by these words, changed his appearance to a respectful one, and said, "Don't say that.

古文：王欲宥之，而杨思权之徒耻见其面。
现代文：潞王想赦免了他，而杨思权一班人却羞见其面。
English: Shao Wang wanted to pardon him, but Yang Siquan and his group were ashamed.

古文：王之过长安，尹晖尽取思同家资及妓妾，屡言于刘延朗曰： 若留思同，虑失士心。 
现代文：当潞王兵过长安时，尹晖全部掠取了王思同的家财和姬妾，并多次对潞王心腹刘延朗说： 如果留下王思同，恐怕要失掉吏士之心。 
English: When Wang Xitong's soldiers crossed the Chang'an River, Yin Zheng plundered all of Wang Xitong's family wealth and concubines, and repeatedly said to Liu Yanlang, Wang Xitong's confidant: "If you leave Wang Xitong, I'm afraid you'll lose the heart of an official."

古文：属王醉，不待报，擅杀思同及其妻子。
现代文：趁着潞王酒醉，不等到向上报告，擅自杀了王思同和他的妻子。
English: Wang Sitong and his wife took advantage of the drunkenness of the king and did not wait for the report to the top, and committed suicide.

古文：王醒，怒延朗，嗟惜者累日。
现代文：潞王酒醒之后，很恼怒刘延朗，叹息了许多天。
English: After Shao Wang sobered up, Liu Yanlang was very angry and sighed for many days.

古文：癸亥，制以康义诚为凤翔行营都招讨使，以王思同副之。
现代文：癸亥，闵帝下令任命康义诚为凤翔行营都招讨使，任用王思同为他的副手。
English: At that time, Emperor Gao ordered the appointment of Kang Yicheng as Fengxiang's envoy, and appointed Wang Sitong as his deputy.

古文：甲子，潞王至华州，获药彦稠，囚之。
现代文：甲子，潞王攻到华州，俘获药彦稠，把他囚禁起来。
English: At the same time, the Warlord invaded Huazhou, captured Yuhang Zhou, and imprisoned him.

古文：乙丑，至阌乡。
现代文：乙丑，兵到阌乡。
English: Second Ugly, the soldiers came to the township of Zou.

古文：朝廷前后所发诸军，遇西军皆迎降，无一人战者。
现代文：朝廷前后所派发的各路军马，遇到凤翔来的军队后都纷纷迎降，没有一个肯于应战的。
English: All the horses and chariots dispatched by the imperial court before and after encountered the troops from Fengxiang, and they all surrendered one after another. No one was willing to fight.

古文：丙寅，康义诚引侍卫兵发洛阳，诏以侍卫马军指挥使安从进为京城巡检；从进已受潞王书，潜布腹心矣。
现代文：丙寅，康义诚率领侍卫兵从洛阳出发，闵帝下诏书任用侍卫马军指挥使安从进为京城巡检；安从进已经接到潞王的密信，暗中布置心腹之人。
English: Hsin-yin, Kang Yicheng led the bodyguards from Luoyang, and Emperor Wu issued an edict to appoint An Congjin as the commander of the bodyguards and cavalry to patrol the capital; An Congjin had already received a secret letter from King Wu, secretly arranging a confidant.

古文：是日，潞王至灵宝，护国节度使安彦威、匡国节度使安重霸皆降，惟保义节度使康思立谋固守陕城以俟康义诚。
现代文：这一天，潞王到达灵宝，护国节度使安彦威、匡国节度使安重霸都投降了，只有保义节度使康思立打算固守陕城来等待康义诚的到来。
English: On this day, King Zhaozong arrived at Lingbao, the National Protection Festival made An Yanwei surrender, the Kuangguo Festival made An Chongba surrender, and only the Guarantee Festival made Kang Sili intend to hold on to Shaanxi City to wait for Kang Yicheng's arrival.

古文：先是，捧圣五百骑戍陕西，为潞王前锋，至城下，呼城上人曰： 禁军十万已奉新帝，尔辈数人奚为！
现代文：从前，捧圣军有五百骑兵戌守陕西，这次充当了潞王的前锋，到了陕城之下，向城上人呼喊着说： 禁军十万人已经转奉新帝，你们这几个人有什么用！
English: Once upon a time, there were five hundred cavalrymen of the Holy Army guarding Shaanxi. This time, they acted as the vanguard of the King of Qi. When they reached the bottom of Shaanxi City, they shouted to the people on the top of the city, saying, "A hundred thousand people of the Forbidden Army have been transferred to the new emperor. What use are you few people!

古文：徒累一城人涂地耳。 
现代文：白白地连累一城人遭到屠杀而已。 
English: In vain, a townspeople was lynched and slaughtered.

古文：于是捧圣卒争出迎，思立不能禁，不得已亦出迎。
现代文：于是，捧圣军的兵卒争着出城迎降，康思立不能阻挡，不得已自己也出来迎降。
English: As a result, the soldiers of Hushang Sheng's army fought to leave the city to meet the surrender. Kang Sili could not stop them, and had no choice but to come out to meet the surrender.

古文：丁卯，潞王至陕，僚佐说王曰： 今大王将及京畿，传闻乘舆已播迁，大王宜少留于此，先移书慰安京城士庶。 
现代文：丁卯，潞王到达陕州，僚佐劝潞王说： 现在大王将要到达京畿，传闻皇帝乘舆已经转移出去，大王最好稍微在这里停留一下，先发布文告慰抚京城士庶。 
English: Dingwu, the king of Wei arrived in Shaanxi, and his advisors advised the king of Wei, saying: Now that the king is about to arrive in Gyeonggi, it is rumored that the emperor has already moved out, it is best for the king to stay here for a while, and first issue a message to comfort the soldiers in Gyeonggi.

古文：王从之，移书谕洛阳文武士庶，惟硃弘昭、冯赟两族不赦外，自馀勿有忧疑。
现代文：潞王听从这个意见，便发布安抚文告传谕洛阳文武士庶说，除了朱弘昭、冯两个家族不赦免之外，其余人等都不要有忧疑。
English: Heeding this advice, King Min issued a message of appeasement to Luoyang literati, saying that except for the two families of Zhu Hongzhao and Feng, who would not be pardoned, the rest of the people should not worry.

古文：康义诚军至新安，所部将士自相结，百什为群，弃甲兵，争先诣陕降，累累不绝。
现代文：康义诚的军队到达新安，所部将士自己相互结合，百八十人为一群，丢弃兵器铠甲，争先奔向陕州投降，连续不断。
English: When Kang Yicheng's army arrived in Xin'an, the soldiers of the headquarters combined with each other, one hundred and eighty people were a group, discarded weapons and armor, and rushed to Shaanxi to surrender, continuously.

古文：义诚至干壕，麾下才数十人；遇潞王侯骑十馀人，义诚解所佩弓剑为信，因侯骑请降于潞王。
现代文：康义诚到达干壕后，在他指挥下的人只剩几十个，路上遇到潞王在那里的候骑十多人，康义诚解下所佩戴的弓和剑作证，随着候骑请求向潞王投降。
English: After Kang Yicheng reached the dry trench, there were only a few dozen people left under his command. On the way, he encountered more than a dozen horsemen waiting for the king. The bow and sword worn by Kang Yicheng testified, and surrendered to the king with the request to wait for the horse.

古文：戊辰，闵帝闻潞王至陕，义诚军溃，忧骇不知所为，急遣中使召硃弘昭谋所向，弘昭曰： 急召我，欲罪之也。 
现代文：戊辰，闵帝闻报潞王到达陕州，康义诚军队溃败，忧愁害怕，不知如何是好，急忙派人召见朱弘昭商量怎么办，朱弘昭说： 急切召见我，是要加罪于我啊。 
English: At that time, Emperor Wu heard that King Zhaozhou had arrived in Shaanxi, Kang Yicheng's army was defeated, he was worried and afraid, and he did not know what to do. He hurriedly sent someone to summon Zhu Hongzhao to discuss what to do. Zhu Hongzhao said: "Urgently summoning me is to add to my guilt."

古文：赴井死。
现代文：便投井而死。
English: He then threw himself into a well and died.

古文：安从进闻弘昭死，杀冯赟于第，灭其族，传弘昭、赟首于潞王。
现代文：安从进听说朱弘昭死讯后，便在冯的府第杀了他，并杀灭了他的家族，把朱弘昭、冯的首级传送给潞王。
English: After An Congjin heard of Zhu Hongzhao's death, he killed him and his family in Feng's mansion, and sent the heads of Zhu Hongzhao and Feng to Shao Wang.

古文：帝欲奔魏州，召孟汉琼使诣魏州为先置；汉琼不应召，单骑奔陕。
现代文：闵帝想逃奔魏州，召见孟汉琼让他到魏州先去安置；孟汉琼不应召命，自己单骑奔向陕州。
English: Emperor Gao wanted to flee to Weizhou, and summoned Meng Hanqiong to let him go to Weizhou to resettle first; Meng Hanqiong should not summon, and he ran to Shaanxi alone.

古文：初，帝在籓镇，爱信牙将慕容迁，及即位，以为控鹤指挥使；帝将北渡河，密与之谋，使帅部兵守玄武门。
现代文：从前，闵帝在藩镇时，宠信牙将慕容迁，即位为帝后，任用他为控鹤指挥使；闵帝将要北渡黄河去魏州，秘密地与他策划，让他带领所属兵士把守玄武门。
English: Once upon a time, when Emperor Gao was in the town of the Han Dynasty, he appointed his favorite, Mu Rongqian, as the empress dowager, and appointed him as the commander of the cranes. Emperor Gao was going to cross the Yellow River to Weizhou, and secretly plotted with him to let him lead his soldiers to guard the Xuanwu Gate.

古文：是夕，帝以五十骑出玄武门，谓迁曰：朕且幸魏州，徐图兴复，汝帅有马控鹤从我。 
现代文：当晚，闵帝带了五十名骑兵出玄武门，对慕容迁说： 朕即将去魏州，慢慢再图复兴，你率领有马的控鹤军跟我走。 
English: That evening, Emperor Xuan took fifty cavalrymen out of the Xuanwu Gate and said to Murong Qian: I am about to go to Weizhou, slowly rejuvenate, you lead the horse-controlled crane army and follow me.

古文：迁曰： 生死从大家。 
现代文：慕容迁说： 生死跟着皇上。 
English: Murong Qian said, "Life and death follow the emperor."

古文：乃阳为团结；帝既出，即阖门不行。
现代文：于是表面上团结在闵帝周围；等到闵帝出了宫城后，他就关了城门不跟随了。
English: So they ostensibly rallied around Emperor Gong; but when Emperor Gong left Miyagi, he closed the gates and did not follow.

古文：己巳，冯道等入朝，及端门，闻硃、冯死，帝已北走。道及刘昫欲归，李愚曰： 天子之出，吾辈不预谋。
现代文：己巳，冯道等人入朝，刚到端门，听说朱弘昭、冯已经死了，闵帝已经向北逃走；冯道和刘就要回家，李愚说： 天子出走，我们这些人未能参与谋划。
English: Now that Feng Dao and the others had entered the imperial court, they had just arrived at the front gate when they heard that Zhu Hongzhao and Feng had died, and Emperor Xizong had fled to the north; Feng Dao and Liu were about to return home. Li Yu said, "The Son of Heaven has left, and we have not been able to participate in the planning."

古文：今太后在宫，吾辈当至中书，遣小黄门取太后进止，然后归第，人臣之义也。 
现代文：现在，太后还在宫中，我们应当到中书省去，派小黄门太监去听取太后如何进止，然后再回自己的宅第，这是人臣的大义啊！ 
English: Now that the empress dowager is still in the palace, we should save ourselves the trouble of reading Chinese books, and send a small Yellow Gate eunuch to listen to how the empress dowager should proceed, and then return to our own homestead. This is the great justice of a vassal!

古文：道曰： 主上失守社稷，人臣惟君是奉，无君而入宫城，恐非所宜。
现代文：冯道说： 主上把江山社稷丢了，作为人臣只能侍奉君主，没有了君主而进入宫城，恐怕不合适。
English: Feng Dao said, "My lord has lost the imperial insignia. As a vassal, I can only serve the monarch. I am afraid it is not appropriate to enter Miyagi without the monarch.

古文：潞王已处处张榜，不若归俟教令。 
现代文：潞王已经处处张贴榜文，不如回去听候命令。 
English: Shao Wang has already posted posters everywhere. It's better to go back and wait for orders.

古文：乃归。
现代文：便回去了。
English: They withdrew and returned to their country.

古文：至天宫寺，安从进遣人语之曰： 潞王倍道而来，且至矣，相公宜帅百官至谷水奉迎。 
现代文：到了天宫寺，安从进派人告诉他说： 潞王加倍赶路而来，即将到达，相公您应该率领百官到城西谷水去迎接。 
English: When he arrived at Tiangong Temple, Anzong Jin sent a messenger to tell him: "King Gong has come twice as fast and is about to arrive. You should lead a hundred officials to the west valley of the city to meet him."

古文：乃止于寺中，召百官。中书舍人卢导至，冯道曰： 俟舍人久矣，所急者劝进文书，宜速具草。 
现代文：冯道便在寺中停留下来，召集百官，中书舍人卢导来到，冯道说： 等待舍人先生很久了，现在所急需办的事，是准备劝进的文书，请赶快起草。 
English: Feng Dao then stopped at the temple and summoned a hundred officials. Lu Dao, the Chinese scholar, arrived. Feng Dao said, "We have been waiting for Mr. Scheeren for a long time. What we urgently need to do now is to prepare a persuasion document. Please draft it as soon as possible."

古文：导曰： 潞王入朝，百官班迎可也；设有废立，当俟太后教令，岂可遽议劝进乎？ 
现代文：卢导说： 潞王入朝，百官列班相迎就可以了；如果有废立之事，应当听候太后的教令，岂能仓促之间草率建议劝进呢？ 
English: Lu Duan said, "If the king of Qin enters the imperial court, it is enough for hundreds of officials to line up to welcome him. If there is a matter of abrogation, they should listen to the edict of the empress dowager. Is it possible to make hasty and hasty suggestions to persuade him to enter?

古文：道曰： 事当务实。 
现代文：冯道说： 办事应当从现实出发。 
English: Feng Dao said: Affairs should be based on reality.

古文：导曰： 安有天子在外，人臣遽以大位劝人者邪！
现代文：卢导说： 哪有天子在外，人臣却突然拿皇帝大位劝人进据的啊！
English: Lu Du said: "How can there be a heavenly son outside, but a vassal suddenly takes the emperor's throne to persuade people to advance!

古文：若潞王守节北面，以大义见责，将何辞以对！
现代文：如果潞王坚持在北面守臣节，用君臣大义来责备我们，将用什么话来回对？
English: If King Min insists on using the Day of Defending the North to reproach us, what words will he use?

古文：公不如帅百官诣宫门，进名问安，取太后进止，则去就善矣。 
现代文：您不如率领百官进谒宫门，送进名帖问安，听从太后的进止，那样便去就两善了。 
English: You might as well lead a hundred officials to the gate of the Imperial Palace, send them a greeting card, and listen to the empress dowager's instructions. That would be the best of both worlds.

古文：道未及对，从进屡遣人趣之曰： 潞王至矣，太后、太妃已遣中使迎劳矣，安得百官无班！ 
现代文：冯道还未及回答，安从进已经几次派人来催促，并说： 潞王来了，太后、太妃已经派遣宫中使者去迎接慰劳了，怎么能百官无人列班！ 
English: Feng Dao had not yet had time to reply, but An Congjin had already sent several people to urge him, and said: "The King of Wushu is coming, the Empress Dowager and the Empress Dowager have already sent palace envoys to meet the consolation, how can there be no one in the line of hundreds of officials!"

古文：道等即纷然而去。
现代文：冯道等人就纷纷散去。
English: Feng Dao and the others scattered.

古文：既而潞王未至，三相息于上阳门外，卢导过于前，道复召而语之，导对如初。
现代文：过了一会儿潞王尚未到达，三个宰相冯道、李愚、刘正停息在上阳门外，卢导从他们面前经过，冯道又召他来谈劝进的事，卢导对答如初。
English: After a while, Shao Wang had not yet arrived, and the three prime ministers, Feng Dao, Li Yu, and Liu, were pausing outside the Shangyang Gate. Lu Dao passed in front of them, and Feng Dao called him to talk about the matter of persuasion. Lu Dao answered as before.

古文：李愚曰： 舍人之言是也。
现代文：李愚说： 舍人的话是对的。
English: Li Yu said, "It is right to be generous.

古文：吾辈之罪，擢发不足数。 
现代文：我们这些人的罪过是拔下头发也数不尽了。 
English: We are a people whose sins are more numerous than the hairs on our heads.

古文：康义诚至陕等罪，潞王责之曰： 先帝晏驾，立嗣在诸公；今上亮阴，政事出诸公，何为不能终始，陷吾弟至此乎？ 
现代文：康义诚到陕州来等待罪处，潞王责备他说： 先帝晏驾，立谁为嗣取决于你们诸公，现在皇帝居丧，政事也取决于诸公，为什么你们这些重臣不能始终如一，以致陷害我的弟弟至于如此地步啊？ 
English: Kang Yicheng came to Shaanxi to wait for the crime to be dealt with, and the king of Qi scolded him: "Former emperor, it is up to you princes to decide who will be your heir. Now that the emperor has passed away, political affairs are also up to you princes. Why can't you chief ministers be consistent, to the point of framing my brother, and to such an extent?

古文：义诚大惧，叩头请死。
现代文：康义诚害怕极了，叩头请求赐死。
English: Kang Yicheng was terrified and begged to be allowed to die.

古文：王素恶其为人，未欲遽诛，且宥之。
现代文：潞王素来厌恶康义诚的为人，但没有想马上杀他，暂且宽赦了他。
English: Shao Wang had always disliked Kang Yicheng as a person, but he did not want to kill him immediately and pardoned him for the time being.

古文：马步都虞侯苌从简、左龙武统军王景戡皆为部下所执，降于潞王，东军尽降。
现代文：马步都虞候苌从简、左龙武统军王景戡都被部下所擒拿，向潞王投降，朝廷的军队便全部都归降了。
English: Ma Bokdu, Zhuge, Jian, and Zalong Wusong's army commander King Jingyi were all captured by their subordinates and surrendered to King Zhao, and the entire imperial army surrendered.

古文：潞王上笺于太后取进止，遂自陕而东。
现代文：潞王上书给太后听从进止，于是就从陕州向东。
English: King Yao sent a letter to the Empress Dowager to obey and stop, so he moved from Shaanxi to the east.

古文：夏，四月，庚午朔，未明，闵帝至卫州东数里，遇石敬瑭；帝大喜，问以社稷大计，敬瑭曰： 闻康义诚西讨，何如？
现代文：夏季四月，庚午朔，天还没有亮，闵帝到达卫州以东几里的地方，遇到石敬瑭，闵帝大喜，便向他询问如何保存社稷的大计，石敬瑭说： 听说康义诚向西讨伐，怎么样了？
English: In the summer of April, at the crack of dawn, the sky was not yet bright. Emperor Gaozong arrived at a place a few miles east of Weizhou. He met Shi Jingyao. Emperor Gaozong was overjoyed and asked him how to preserve the grand plan of the community. Shi Jingyao said: I heard that Kang Yicheng went to the west, what happened?

古文：陛下何为至此？ 
现代文：陛下为什么来到这里？ 
English: Why is Your Majesty here?

古文：帝曰： 义诚亦叛去矣。 
现代文：闵帝说： 康义诚也叛变离去了。 
English: Emperor Xuan said: Kang Yicheng also defected and left.

古文：敬瑭俯首长叹数四，曰： 卫州刺史王弘贽，宿将习事，请与图之。 
现代文：石敬瑭垂头长叹了好几次，说： 卫州刺史王弘贽是位宿将，懂得很多事情，请您等我和他商量。 
English: Shi Jingyao bowed his head and sighed for a long time several times, saying: Wang Hongyao, the vicar of Weizhou, knows a lot of things, please wait for me to discuss with him.

古文：乃往见弘贽问之，弘贽曰： 前代天子播迁多矣，然皆有将相、侍卫、府库、法物，使群下有所瞻仰；今皆无之，独以五十骑自随，虽有忠义之心，将若之何？ 
现代文：于是石敬瑭就去问王弘贽，王弘贽说： 前代天子流亡的也不少，然而都随从有将相、侍卫、府库、法物，使得随从的人有所依恃和希望；现在主上什么也没有，只有五十骑兵跟随着他自己，我们虽然有忠义之心，还能有什么办法呢？ 
English: So Shi Jingyao went to ask Wang Hongyao. Wang Hongyao said, "In the previous generation, there were quite a few heavenly sons who went into exile. However, they were all accompanied by generals, guards, treasuries, and sacred objects, which gave the followers something to cling to and hope for. Now the Lord has nothing, only fifty horsemen follow Him. Even though we have a loyal heart, what can we do?

古文：敬瑭还，见帝于卫州驿，以弘贽之言告。
现代文：石敬瑭回来，到卫州的驿馆去见闵帝，把王弘贽的话告诉闵帝。
English: When Shi Jingyao returned, he went to the imperial palace in Weizhou to meet the emperor and tell him what Wang Hongyao had said.

古文：弓箭库使沙守荣、奔洪进前责敬瑭曰： 公明宗爱婿，富贵相与共之，忧患亦宜相恤。
现代文：弓箭库使沙守荣、奔洪进上前责备石敬瑭说： 您是明宗的爱婿，富贵相互共同享有，忧患也应该相互体谅、承担。
English: The bow and arrow storehouse made Sha Shou Rong and Peng Hong come forward to reproach Shi Jingyao, saying: You are the beloved son-in-law of Mingzong, wealth and riches should be enjoyed together, and sorrows should be understood and borne by each other.

古文：今天子播越，委计于公，冀图兴复，乃以此四者为辞，是直欲附贼卖天子耳！ 
现代文：现在，天子奔波在外，把希望寄托给您，以图复兴，竟然拿这四样来做托辞，这简直是要依附于叛贼而出卖天子呀！ 
English: Now, the Son of Heaven is running around, pinning his hopes on you for revival, and using these four things as an excuse is nothing short of betraying the Son of Heaven by clinging to a traitor!

古文：守荣抽佩刀欲刺之，敬瑭亲将陈晖救之，守荣与晖斗死，洪进亦自刎。
现代文：沙守荣抽出佩刀要刺杀他，石敬瑭的亲将陈晖救他，沙守荣与陈晖相斗而死，奔洪进也自刎而死。
English: Sha Shou Rong drew his sword to assassinate him. Shi Jing Rong's relative Chen Yao saved him. Sha Shou Rong fought with Chen Yao and died. Ben Hong Jin also committed suicide.

古文：敬瑭牙内指挥使刘知远引兵入，尽杀帝左右及从骑，独置帝而去。
现代文：石敬瑭的牙内指挥使刘知远带着兵卒进来，杀死闵帝左右及随从的骑兵，只是留下闵帝不顾而去。
English: Shi Jingyao's inner command caused Liu Zhiyuan to come in with his soldiers and kill Emperor Gao's right and left and his cavalry, only to leave Emperor Gao regardless.

古文：敬瑭遂趣洛阳。
现代文：石敬瑭便向洛阳进发。
English: Shi Jingyao then set off for Luoyang.

古文：是日，太后令内诸司至干壕迎潞王，王亟遣还洛阳。
现代文：这一天，太后命宫内诸司的人到干壕迎接潞王，潞王赶忙把来使遣回洛阳。
English: On this day, the empress dowager ordered people from all departments of the palace to go to the dry moat to meet the king, who hurriedly sent the messenger back to Luoyang.

古文：初，潞王罢河中，归私第，王淑妃数遣孟汉琼存抚之。
现代文：当初，潞王李从珂从河中罢官回洛阳，明宗让他归居私第，王淑妃曾经多次派孟汉琼去安慰他。
English: At the beginning, King Li of Kecheng returned to Luoyang from Kecheng, and Mingzong allowed him to return to his private residence. Wang Shufei sent Meng Hanqiong to comfort him many times.

古文：汉琼自谓于王有旧恩，至渑池西，见王大哭，欲有所陈，王曰： 诸事不言可知。 
现代文：孟汉琼自以为对李从珂有旧恩，到渑池西，见到潞王大哭，想有所陈诉，潞王说： 各种事情都不必说了，我都知道。 
English: Meng Hanqiong thought that she had won Li's favor from Ke Youlu to West Dianchi. Seeing Dian Wang crying, she wanted to make a statement. Dian Wang said, "I don't need to say anything, I know everything."

古文：仍自预从臣之列，王即命斩于路隅。
现代文：孟汉琼自己到了随从臣吏之中，潞王下令把他斩首在路边。
English: When Meng Han Qiong found himself among the courtiers, the king ordered him to be beheaded on the side of the road.

古文：山南西道节度使张虔钊之讨凤翔也，留武定节度使孙汉韶守兴元。
现代文：山南西道节度使张虔钊去讨伐凤翔时，留武定节度使孙汉韶镇守兴元。
English: When the festival of Shannan Xi Dao made Zhang Qianjun go to fight Fengxiang, the festival of Remaining in Wu made Sun Hanju town guard Xingyuan.

古文：虔钊既败，奔归兴元，与汉韶举两镇之地降于蜀；蜀主命奉銮肃卫马步都指挥使、昭武节度使李肇将兵五千还利州，右匡圣马步都指挥使、宁江节度使张业将兵一万屯大漫天以迎之。
现代文：张虔钊失败以后，奔归兴元，会同孙汉韶呈献两镇之地投降了蜀国；蜀主孟知祥命奉銮肃卫马步都指挥使、昭武节度使李肇领兵五千人还镇利州，右匡圣马步都指挥使、宁江节度使张业领兵一万人屯驻大漫天以迎取他们。
English: After Zhang Qianqian's defeat, he rushed back to Xingyuan and, together with Sun Hanzhong, surrendered the two towns to Shu. Shu's lord Meng Zhixiang ordered Li Zhaozhou to lead five thousand soldiers back to the town of Lishu with the commanding envoy of Su Wei and Ma Budu, and the commanding envoy of Zhou Wu and Li Zhaozhou with the commanding envoy of Yu Kuang and Sheng Ma Budu, and the commanding envoy of Ningjiang and Zhang Ye with the commanding envoy of ten thousand soldiers to stay in Dafang Tian to welcome them.

古文：壬申，潞王至蒋桥，百官班迎于路，传教以未拜梓宫，未可相见。
现代文：壬申，潞王李从珂到达蒋桥，百官在路上列班迎接，潞王传命，因尚未拜谒明宗的灵柩，还不能接见大家。
English: According to Jinshin, Emperor Gong Wang Li arrived at Jiangqiao from Ke, and hundreds of officials lined up on the road to welcome him. Emperor Gong passed on his command, because he had not yet paid his respects to the coffin of Emperor Gong Mingzong, he could not yet receive everyone.

古文：冯道等皆上笺劝进。
现代文：冯道等人都上书劝进大位。
English: Feng Dao and others all wrote to the emperor to persuade him to promote them to high ranks.

古文：王入谒太后、太妃，诣西宫，伏梓宫恸哭，自陈诣阙之由。
现代文：潞王入宫谒见曹太后、王太妃，又到西宫，伏在明宗的棺柩上痛哭，自己陈说进诣朝廷的原因。
English: When the king entered the palace, he saw Empress Dowager Cao and Empress Dowager Wang, and then went to the West Palace, where he prostrated himself on Mingzong's coffin and wept bitterly, explaining his reasons for entering the imperial court.

古文：冯道帅百官班见，王答拜。
现代文：冯道率领百官来谒见，下拜；潞王答释。
English: Feng Dao led hundreds of officials to pay homage to the king.

古文：道等复上笺劝进，王立谓道等曰： 予之此行，事非获已。
现代文：冯道等人又上书劝进，潞王立即告诉冯道说： 我这次来，是逼不得已。
English: Feng Dao and others also sent a letter to persuade him to come, and the king of Zhai immediately told Feng Dao: I came this time out of necessity.

古文：俟皇帝归阙，园寝礼终，当还守籓服，群公遽言及此，甚无谓也！ 
现代文：等候皇帝还朝，先帝灵寝行礼完毕，理当还守藩镇的服制，各位明公突然讲到这样的事，很没有意思啊！ 
English: Waiting for the emperor to return to the throne, for the emperor's spirit to return to sleep and for the formalities to be completed, when it is right and proper to still observe the dress code of the domain and town, all of you Ming Gongs suddenly talking about such things, it's not interesting!

古文：癸酉，太后下令废少帝为鄂王，以潞王知军国事，权以书诏印施行。
现代文：癸酉，太后下令废除闵帝为鄂王，委任潞王李从珂主持军国大事，暂且以书诏印施行政令。
English: At that time, the empress dowager ordered the abolition of Emperor Gong as the king of Hubei, and appointed King Gong of Li Congke to preside over the military affairs of the country. For the time being, the imperial rescript was used to issue administrative orders.

古文：百官诣至德宫门待罪，王命各复其位。
现代文：百官进诣至德宫门待罪，潞王命他们各还其位。
English: Hundreds of officials marched to the gate of the Imperial Palace to await punishment, and the king ordered them to return to their respective positions.

古文：甲戌，太后令潞王宜即皇帝位；乙亥，即位于柩前。
现代文：甲戌，太后命令潞王应该即皇帝之位；乙亥，在明宗灵柩前即位。
English: The Empress Dowager ordered King Jia to be enthroned as emperor; King Yihai ascended the throne in front of the Ming Dynasty coffin.

古文：帝之发凤翔也，许军士以入洛人赏钱百缗。
现代文：后唐末帝李从珂从凤翔出发时，答应入洛阳以后给军士每人赏钱一百缗。
English: When Emperor Li of the late Tang Dynasty set out from Ke to Fengxiang, he promised to reward each sergeant with one hundred baht after entering Luoyang.

古文：既至，问三司使王玫以府库之实，对有数百万在。
现代文：到了洛阳，询问三司使王玫，府库中的虚实如何，回答说有数百万库存。
English: When he arrived in Luoyang, he asked the Third Divisional Envoy Wang Mei about the truth and falsehood in the government treasury, and he replied that there were millions of stocks.

古文：既而阅实，金、帛不过三万两、匹；而赏军之费计应用五十万缗。
现代文：接着派人查实，金钱和布帛不过三万两、匹；而赏军的费用预计需要五十万缗。
English: Then they sent someone to verify that the money and cloth were only 32,000 baht, while the cost of the reward was expected to be 500,000 baht.

古文：帝怒，玫请率京城民财以足之，数日，仅得数万缗，帝谓执政曰： 军不可不赏，人不可不恤，今将奈何？ 
现代文：末帝发怒，王玫提请聚敛民财来补足，收集了几天，只得到数万缗，末帝对执政的要员说： 军队不能不赏，在姓不能不体恤，这事怎么办为好？ 
English: The last emperor was angry, and Wang Mei asked to collect people's money to make up for it. After a few days of collecting, he only got tens of thousands of baht. The last emperor said to the ruling dignitaries: The army cannot be unappreciated, and the family name cannot be disregarded. What should be done about this?

古文：执政请据屋为率，无问士庶自居及僦者，预借五月僦直，从之。
现代文：执政的人建议，可以根据房屋来筹措，不论士庶自己居住或是租凭居住的，预借五个月的租金数，末帝同意这样办。
English: The people in power suggested that the funds could be raised based on the number of houses, and that five months of rent could be pre-borrowed, regardless of whether the servants lived on their own or in rented accommodation. Emperor Motei agreed to do this.

古文：王弘贽迁闵帝于州廨，帝遣弘贽之子殿直峦往鸩之。
现代文：王弘贽把闵帝从驿馆迁居到州署，末帝派王弘贽的儿子殿直王峦前往用毒酒去鸩杀他。
English: Wang Hongtao moved Emperor Xizong from the Imperial Palace to the State Security Bureau. The last emperor sent Wang Hongtao's son, Emperor Xizong, to assassinate Emperor Xizong with poisoned wine.

古文：戊寅，峦至卫州谒见，闵帝问来故，不对。
现代文：戊寅，王峦到卫州谒见闵帝，闵帝问他干什么，王峦不回答。
English: In Wuchang, Wang Yao went to Weizhou to see Emperor Gao. Emperor Gao asked him what he was doing, but Wang Yao did not answer.

古文：弘贽数进酒，闵帝知其有毒，不饮，峦缢杀之。
现代文：王弘贽几次进酒，闵帝知道其中有毒，不肯喝，王峦把他勒死。
English: Wang Hongtao drank wine several times. Emperor Zhao knew that it was poisonous and refused to drink it. Wang Yao strangled him.

古文：闵帝性仁厚，于兄弟敦睦，虽遭秦王忌疾，闵帝坦怀待之，卒免于患。
现代文：闵帝性情宽厚，对于兄弟敦诚和睦，虽然遭到秦王李从荣的忌恨，但闵帝以坦白心怀对待他，终于避免了祸患。
English: Emperor Gao was generous in nature, and he was sincere and harmonious with his brothers. Although he was hated by Qin King Li Congrong, Emperor Gao treated him with sincerity and finally avoided the disaster.

古文：及嗣位，于潞王亦无嫌，而硃弘昭、孟汉琼之徒横生猜间，闵帝不能违，以致祸败焉。
现代文：继位以后，对潞王李从珂也没有什么嫌隙，而朱弘昭、孟汉琼那一伙人横生猜疑离间，闵帝不能不听从他们，所以招致了祸败。
English: After he succeeded to the throne, he had no grudge against King Gong Li Congke, but Zhu Hongzhao, Meng Hanqiong and the others were suspicious and divisive, and Emperor Gong could not but obey them, which led to disaster.

古文：孔妃尚在宫中，王峦既还，潞王使人谓之曰： 重吉辈何在？ 
现代文：孔妃此时还在宫中，潞王让人问她说： 李重吉现在哪里？ 
English: At this time, Kongfei was still in the palace, and the king asked her: "Where is Li Chongji now?"

古文：遂杀妃，并其四子。
现代文：于是把孔妃连同他的四个儿子一起杀了。
English: So he killed Kongfei together with his four sons.

古文：闵帝之在卫州也，惟磁州刺史宋令询遣使问起居，闻其遇害，恸哭半日，自经死。
现代文：闵帝逃至卫州，只有磁州刺史宋令询派人问候起居，听到他遇害，痛哭半日，自己也上吊死了。
English: Emperor Xuan fled to Weizhou. Only the magistrate of Weizhou, Song Lingquan, sent someone to greet him. When he heard that he had been killed, he cried for half a day and hanged himself.

古文：己卯，石敬瑭入朝。
现代文：己卯，石敬瑭来朝见。
English: So, I came to see you in the morning.

古文：庚辰，以刘昫判三司。
现代文：庚辰，任用刘判理三司。
English: Geng Chen appointed Liu Xuanli as the third secretary.

古文：辛巳，蜀在赦，改元明德。
现代文：辛巳，蜀国实行大赦，改年号为明德。
English: Soon after, the State of Shu implemented an amnesty and changed the year name to Mingde.

古文：帝之起凤翔也，召兴州刺史刘遂清，迟疑不至。
现代文：末帝从凤翔起兵时，曾经召唤兴州刺史刘遂清，迟疑不肯来。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong raised an army from Fengxiang, he once summoned Liu Suiqing, the statesman of Xingzhou, but he hesitated to come.

古文：闻帝入洛，乃悉集三泉、西县、金牛、桑林戍兵以归，自散关以南城镇悉弃之，皆为蜀人所有。
现代文：听说末帝占据洛阳，刘遂清便全部聚集三泉、西县、金牛、桑林的守戌士卒回归，把散关以南的城镇全部放弃了，都被蜀人所占有。
English: Hearing that the last emperor occupied Luoyang, Liu Suiqing gathered all the guards of Sanquan, Xixian, Jinniu, and Sanlin to return, and abandoned all the towns south of Sankuan, which were occupied by the Shu people.

古文：癸未，入朝，帝欲治其罪，以其能自归，乃赦之。
现代文：癸未，来到朝廷，末帝要治他的罪，因为他能够自己归来，便又赦免了他。
English: Later, when he came to the imperial court, the last emperor wanted to punish him for his crime, but since he was able to return on his own, he pardoned him.

古文：遂清。鄩之侄也。
现代文：刘遂清是刘的侄儿。
English: Liu Suiqing is Liu's nephew.

古文：甲申，蜀将张业将兵入兴元、洋州。
现代文：甲申，蜀国将领张业率兵进入兴元、洋州。
English: Gao Shen, the Shu general Zhang Ye led the troops into Xingyuan and Yangzhou.

古文：乙酉，改元，大赦。
现代文：乙酉，后唐李从珂改年号为清泰，实行大赦。
English: Acetylene, after Tang Li changed the name from Ke to Qing Tai, amnesty was implemented.

古文：丁亥，以宣徽南院使郝琼权判枢密院，前三司使王玫为宣徽北院使，凤翔节度判官韩昭胤为左谏议大夫、充端明殿学士。
现代文：丁亥，后唐任用宣徽南院使郝琼暂时判理枢密院，前三司使王玫为宣徽北院使，凤翔节度判官韩昭胤为左谏议大夫，充任端明殿学士。
English: Ding Hai, after the Tang Dynasty, appointed Wang Mei, the former third secretary of the Southern Court of Xuanhui, as the temporary judge of the Privy Council, and appointed Han Zhaoyan, the judge of the Fengxiang Festival, as the doctor of the Left Division of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and served as the academician of the Duanming Palace.

古文：戊子，斩河阳节度使、判六军诸卫兼侍中康义诚，灭其族。
现代文：戊子，后唐斩杀河阳节度使、判六军诸卫兼侍中康义诚，诛灭他的家族。
English: Wuzi, after the Tang Dynasty killed the Kheyang Festival envoy, sentenced the six army guards and attendant Kang Yicheng, and annihilated his family.

古文：己丑，诛药彦稠。
现代文：己丑，后唐诛杀了药彦稠。
English: He was so ugly that he was killed by Emperor Tang Zi.

古文：庚寅，释王景戡、苌长简。
现代文：庚寅，后唐释放了王景戡、苌从简。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Wang Jingyao and Zou Congjian were released.

古文：有司百方敛民财，仅得六万，帝怒，下军巡使狱，昼夜督责，囚系满狱，贫者至自经、赴井。
现代文：有关官员千方百计搜敛民财，只收得六万，末帝发怒，把输财迟违的人都关进军巡使的狱中，昼夜督催，犯人把牢狱都住满了，甚至有人上吊、投井。
English: The officials concerned made every effort to collect people's wealth, but only collected sixty thousand. The last emperor was angry and put all those who delayed the transfer of wealth into the prison of the military inspector, and urged them day and night. The prisoners filled the prison, and even some people hanged themselves or threw themselves into a well.

古文：而军士游市肆皆有骄色，市人聚诟之曰： 汝曹为主力战，立功良苦，反使我辈鞭胸杖背，出财为赏，汝曹犹扬扬自得，独不愧天地乎！ 
现代文：而军士在市场上游荡脸上都显得很骄傲，市民聚在一起责骂他们说： 你们这些人为皇帝努力打仗，立功也真不容易，但是，反而使我们百姓胸背挨鞭子受棍杖，还要出钱作你们的赏金，你们这些人还扬扬自以为得意，难道你们就不知愧对天地吗？ 
English: The sergeants, on the other hand, wandered around the market with a proud look on their faces, and the citizens gathered together to scold them: "You people fight hard for the emperor, and it's not easy to win merit, but on the contrary, you make our people suffer whips and clubs on their chests and backs, and you have to pay money as your reward, and you people are still so proud of yourselves. Don't you know how to be ashamed of heaven and earth?

古文：是时，竭左藏旧物及诸道贡献，乃至太后、太妃器服簪珥皆出之，才及二十万缗，帝患之，李专美夜直，帝让之曰： 卿名有才，不能为我谋此，留才安所施乎！ 
现代文：这个时候，把存放金帛财赋的左藏中所有旧物以及各道的贡献之物，乃至太后、太妃所用的器皿服饰簪环全部拿了出来，才只有二十万缗，末帝很着急，当时枢密直学士李专美正在夜间值班，末帝责备他说： 你是个以才干闻名的人，不能为我谋划完成这件事，你留着才干往哪里用啊？ 
English: At this time, he took out all the old things and contributions from all walks of life from the left-hand stash where the gold and enamel wealth was stored, even the utensils, clothing and enamel rings used by the empress dowager and the empress dowager. There were only two hundred thousand enamel, and the late emperor was in a hurry. At that time, the Privy Vice-Chancellor Li Xuanmei was on duty at night, and the late emperor scolded him: "You are a person famous for your talent, you can't plan and complete this for me, where will you use your talent?"

古文：专美谢曰： 臣驽劣，陛下擢任过分，然军赏不给，非臣之责也。
现代文：李专美谢罪说： 为臣很蠢笨，陛下是提拔任用得过份了，然而军赏不够充分，不是我的责任。
English: Li Pengmei Xie Sin said: It is stupid to be a minister. Your majesty has used promotion and appointment excessively, but the military reward is not sufficient. It is not my responsibility.

古文：窃思自长兴之季，赏赉亟行，卒以是骄；继以山陵及出师，帑藏遂涸。
现代文：我思考过，自长兴年间以来，赏赐很频繁，士兵因此而骄纵；接着又兴建皇帝陵墓和出兵征战，国家的财帑储藏便枯竭了。
English: I reflected that since the Changxing era, rewards had been frequent and soldiers had become arrogant; then came the construction of the emperor's mausoleum and the dispatch of soldiers to war, and the country's treasury was depleted.

古文：虽有无穷之财，终不能满骄卒之心，故陛下拱手于危困之中而得天下。
现代文：虽然有无尽之财物，但不能满足骄卒之心，因此，陛下在国家危困之中才能够拱手而得天下。
English: Although he had endless wealth, it could not satisfy his pride. Therefore, it was only in the midst of a national crisis that his majesty was able to take over the world.

古文：夫国之存亡，不专系于厚赏，亦在修法度，立纪纲。
现代文：说起来国家的存亡，并不专靠厚赏，也在于修治法度，建立纪纲。
English: To put it bluntly, the survival of a country does not depend exclusively on generous rewards, but also on the revision of laws and the establishment of a disciplinary system.

古文：陛下苟不改覆车之辙，臣恐徒困百姓，存亡未可知也。
现代文：陛下如果不改革前朝覆车的老路，臣担心只能是困扰百姓，国家的存亡很难预料啊。
English: If His Majesty does not reform the old ways of the previous government, I am afraid that it will only trouble the people, and the survival of the country is difficult to predict.

古文：今财力尽于此矣，宜据所有均给之，何必践初言乎！ 
现代文：现在，国家财力只有这些了，应该根据所能得到的平均分给大家，何必非履行当初所许诺的不可呢！ 
English: Now, the state's financial resources are only these, and it should be given to everyone according to the average share that can be obtained. Why do we have to fulfill the promise we made at the beginning?

古文：帝以为然。
现代文：末帝认为他讲得对。
English: Emperor Wu believed Dongfang Shuo's explanation.

古文：壬辰，诏禁军在凤翔归命者，自杨思权、尹晖等各赐二马、一驼、钱七十缗，下至军人钱二十缗，其在京者各十缗。
现代文：壬辰，下诏命：禁军在凤翔归附的，从杨思权、尹晖等各赐马二匹、骆驼一匹、钱七十缗，下至军人赐钱二十缗，那些在京城的各赐钱十缗。
English: In Imjin, he issued the following edict: Those who joined the forbidden army in Fengxiang, from Yang Siquan and Yin Qi, were each given two horses, one camel, and 70 baht in money; those in the capital were each given 10 baht, and those in the military were each given 20 baht.

古文：军士无厌，犹怨望，为谣言曰： 除去菩萨，扶立生铁。 
现代文：军士贪得无厌，仍然不满意，编造谣言说： 除去菩萨，扶立生铁。 
English: The sergeant was insatiably greedy, still unsatisfied, and fabricated a rumor saying, "Remove the bodhisattva, and establish the pig iron."

古文：以闵帝仁弱，帝刚严，有悔心故也。
现代文：因为闵帝宽仁软弱，而末帝刚强严苛，表现出一种悔怨的心理。
English: Because Emperor Zhou was soft and lenient, while the last emperor was tough and harsh, he showed a sense of remorse.

古文：丙申，葬圣德和武钦孝皇帝于徽陵，庙号明宗。
现代文：丙申，在徽陵安葬圣德和武钦孝皇帝，庙号明宗。
English: Bishen, Emperor Wu Qinxiao and Emperor Shengde were buried in the Mausoleum of Hui, and the temple's name was Mingzong.

古文：帝衰绖护从至陵所，宿焉。
现代文：末帝穿戴丧服护随到陵墓，并留宿在陵所。
English: The late emperor was accompanied to the mausoleum in mourning clothes and stayed at the mausoleum.

古文：五月，丙午，以韩昭胤为枢密使，以庄宅使刘延朗为枢密副使，权知枢密院记房暠为宣徽北院使。
现代文：五月，丙午，任用韩昭胤为枢密使，任用庄宅使刘延朗为枢密副使，权知枢密院房为宣徽北院使。
English: In the afternoon of May 3rd, Han Zhaotong was appointed as the Privy Envoy, Liu Yanlang was appointed as the Deputy Privy Envoy, and Guanzhizhixuibang was appointed as the Envoy to the Northern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：暠，长安人也。
现代文：房是长安人。
English: Fang is from Chang'an.

古文：帝与石敬瑭皆以勇力善斗，事明宗为左右；然心竞，素不相悦。
现代文：末帝李从珂和石敬瑭都是由于勇武善斗而服侍在明宗李嗣源的左右；然而二人心里竞争，平素彼此不和睦。
English: The last emperor, Li Congke, and Shi Jingyao both served on the right and left of the Ming Dynasty's Li Siyuan because of their bravery and good fight; however, the two were in competition with each other, and they were not in harmony with each other.

古文：帝即位，敬瑭不得已入朝，山陵既毕，不敢言归。
现代文：现在，李从珂即位为皇帝，石敬瑭不得已入京朝拜，安葬完明宗以后，不敢提出归还镇所。
English: Now that Li Congke ascended to the throne as emperor, Shi Jingtao had no choice but to go to Beijing to pay homage. After burying Mingzong, he did not dare to return the town.

古文：时敬瑭久病赢瘠，太后及魏国公主屡为之言；而凤翔旧将佐多劝帝留之，惟韩昭胤、李专美以为赵延寿在汴，不宜猜忌敬瑭。
现代文：当时石敬瑭久病之后很疲弱，曹太后和魏国公主几次替他说情；而从凤翔来的将佐大多劝说末帝把他羁留洛阳，只有韩昭胤、李专美认为宣武节度使赵延寿正在汴梁，逼近洛都，为了避免赵延寿的疑惧，不应当猜忌石敬瑭。
English: At that time, Shi Jingyao was very weak after a long illness. Empress Dowager Cao and the princess of Wei Province interceded for him several times; and most of the generals from Fengxiang persuaded the last emperor to keep him in Luoyang. Only Han Zhaotian and Li Gemi believed that the proclamation of martial law made Zhao Yanshou be on the verge of Luoyang and approaching Luodou. In order to avoid Zhao Yanshou's suspicion, one should not suspect Shi Jingyao.

古文：帝亦见其骨立，不以为虞，乃曰： 石郎不惟密亲，兼自少与吾同艰难；今我为天子，非石郎尚谁托哉！ 
现代文：末帝也看到石敬瑭很削瘦衰弱，不担心他，便说： 石郎不但是内亲，关系密切，而且他从小与我共同经历艰难；现在我做了天子，不依靠石郎还能依靠谁呀！ 
English: The last emperor also saw that Shi Jingyao was very thin and weak, and did not worry about him, and said: Ishiro is not only a close relative, but he has also experienced hardships with me since childhood; now that I have become a heavenly son, who can I rely on without relying on Ishiro!

古文：乃复以为河东节度使。
现代文：便仍任用他为河东节度使。
English: He still appointed him as the chief envoy of the Hedong Festival.

古文：戊午，以陇州防御使相里金为保义节度使。
现代文：戊午，任用陇州防御使相里金为保义节度使。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, the defense minister of Zhangzhou was appointed as the guarantor.

古文：丁未，阶州刺史赵澄降蜀。
现代文：丁未，阶州刺史赵澄投降蜀国。
English: Ding Wei and Zhouzhou's top general Zhao Cheng surrendered to Shu.

古文：戊申，以羽林军使杨思权为静难节度使。
现代文：戊申，末帝任用羽林军使杨思权为静难节度使。
English: Wushin, the last emperor appointed Yang Siquan to be the military commander of Jingnan.

古文：己酉，张虔钊、孙汉韶举族迁于成都。
现代文：己酉，张虔钊、孙汉韶把全部族人迁往成都。
English: Ji Kun, Zhang Qianqian, and Sun Hanju moved the entire tribe to Chengdu.

古文：庚戌，以司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事冯道同平章事，充匡国节度使。
现代文：庚戌，末帝任用司空兼门下侍郎、同平章事冯道为同平章事，充任匡国节度使。
English: After the death of Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong appointed Feng Dao to be the second-in-command and attendant, and Dongping Zhangji to be the third-in-command, and he served as the governor's festival envoy.

古文：以天雄节度使兼侍中范延光为枢密使。
现代文：末帝任用天雄节度使兼侍中范延光为枢密使。
English: The last emperor appointed Tianxiong Jiedu envoy and attendant Fan Yanguang as a confidential envoy.

古文：帝之起凤翔也，悉取天平节度使李从严家财甲兵以供军。
现代文：末帝在凤翔起兵时，把天平节度使李从的家财甲兵全部用以供给军需。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong raised an army in Fengxiang, he set the balance so that Li Cong's family's wealth and armored soldiers were all used to supply military supplies.

古文：将行，凤翔之民遮马请复以从严镇凤翔，帝许之，至是，徙从严为凤翔节度使。
现代文：大军将要出发，凤翔的百姓拦着马请求仍任用李从镇守凤翔，未帝答应了，到此时，便把李从调迁为凤翔节度使。
English: The great army was about to set out, and the people of Fengxiang stopped the horse to request the appointment of Li Cong as the town guard of Fengxiang, but the emperor agreed. At this time, Li Cong was transferred to Fengxiang as the festival messenger.

古文：初，明宗为北面招讨使，平卢节度使房知温为副都部署，帝与别将事之，尝被酒忿争，拔刃相拟。
现代文：以前，明宗李嗣源任北面招讨使时，平卢节度使房知温任副都部署，末帝李从珂当时为别将，受房知温统辖，二人曾经酒醉后争吵，以至拔刀相对。
English: In the past, when Li Shiyuan of the Ming Dynasty was sent to the north to recruit envoys, the Pinglu Festival ordered Fang Zhiwen to be sent to the north to recruit envoys. The last emperor, Li Zongke, was the second-in-command at the time, and was under the control of Fang Zhiwen. The two of them once got drunk and quarreled, and even drew their swords against each other.

古文：及帝举兵入洛，知温密与行军司李冲谋拒之，冲请先奉表以观形势，还，言洛中已安定，知温惧，壬戌，入朝谢罪，帝优礼之。知温贡献甚厚。
现代文：等到末帝领兵进入洛阳，房知温秘密与行军司马李冲策划抗拒他，李冲劝他先上表表示拥戴来观察形势发展，上表使者回来后，说洛阳已经安定下来。壬戌，房知温入京朝见，表示谢罪，末帝优礼他；房知温的贡纳也很丰厚。
English: When the last emperor led his army into Luoyang, Fang Zhiwen secretly plotted with the secretary of marching, Ma Li Chong, to resist him. Li Chong advised him to first express his support to observe the development of the situation. After the envoy returned, he said that Luoyang had settled down. After all, Fang Zhiwen entered Beijing to see the emperor, expressed his thanks, and the last emperor gave him a courtesy; Fang Zhiwen's tribute was also very rich.

古文：吴镇南节度使、守中书令东海康王徐知询卒。
现代文：吴国镇南节度使、守中书令东海康王徐知询去世。
English: Xu Zhizhen, the envoy of the Southern Festival of Wuzhong Town and the Keeper of the Middle Book of the East Sea Kang Wang, passed away.

古文：蜀人取成州。
现代文：蜀国人攻取了成州。
English: The people of Shu conquered the city of Chengdu.

古文：六月，甲戌，以皇子左卫上将军重美为成德节度使、同平章事，兼河南尹，判六军诸卫事。
现代文：六月，甲戌，末帝任用皇子左卫上将军李重美为成德节度使、同平章事，兼河南尹，判六军诸卫事。
English: In June, in Jiaozuo, the last emperor appointed the prince's son, General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards Li Chongmei, as the Chengde Festival envoy, Tongping chapter, and Henan Yin, and sentenced the six armies to guard.

古文：文州都指挥使成延龟举州附蜀。
现代文：文州都指挥使成延龟把全州军民归附于蜀国。
English: The commander of Wenzhou ordered Cheng Yankui to annex the military and civilians of the whole state to Shu.

古文：吴徐知诰将受禅，忌照武节度使兼中书令临川王濛，遣人告濛藏匿亡命，擅造兵器；丙子，降封历阳公，幽于和州，命控鹤军使王宏将兵二百卫之。
现代文：吴国徐知诰将要受吴主杨溥的禅让，他忌恨昭武节度使兼中书令临川王杨，指使人告发杨藏匿亡命之徒，擅自制造兵器；丙子，把杨降封为历阳公，幽禁在和州，命令控鹤军使王宏领兵二百人守卫他。
English: Xu Zhisheng of the State of Wu was about to be conquered by the Zen of the Lord of the State of Wu, Yang Zhen. He hated the Zhaowu Jiedu Envoy and the Central Scribe, Linchuan Wang Yang, and ordered people to denounce Yang for hiding outlaws and manufacturing weapons without authorization; Bing Zi reduced Yang's title to Liyang Gong, confined him in Hezhou, and ordered the Control Crane Army to send Wang Hong to lead two hundred soldiers to guard him.

古文：刘昫与冯道婚姻。
现代文：刘与冯道通婚，结成儿女亲家。
English: Liu and Feng Dao married and had children.

古文：蚼性苛察，李愚刚褊；道既出镇，二人论议多不合，事有应改者，愚谓昫曰： 此贤亲家所为，更之不亦便乎！ 
现代文：刘性情狭隘、好计较小事，李愚性情刚愎偏颇；冯道出镇同州后，二人议论往往不能一致，遇到有应该改变的事情，李愚就对刘说： 这是你的贤亲家所办，变更了不是很方便吗？ 
English: Liu is narrow-minded and good at planning small things, while Li Gu is stubborn and biased. After Feng Dao left Tongzhou Town, the two of them often couldn't agree on what to discuss. When they encountered something that should be changed, Li Gu said to Liu: This was done by your wise relatives. Wouldn't it be convenient to change it?

古文：蚼恨之，由是动成忿争，至相诟骂，各欲非时求见，事多凝滞。
现代文：刘恼恨他，从此二人动不动就争吵，直至互相诟骂，都要求不是接见的时刻谒见末帝，事情往往拖延，不能及时处理。
English: Liu resented him, and from then on, the two quarreled constantly, to the point of hurling abuse at each other. Both demanded to see the late emperor at a time other than the time of the audience. Matters were often delayed and could not be dealt with in a timely manner.

古文：帝患之，欲更命相，问所亲信以朝臣闻望宜为相者，皆以尚书左丞姚顗、太常卿卢文纪、秘书监崔居俭对；论其才行，互有优劣。
现代文：末帝很恼怒，要另行任命宰相，询问所亲信之人，朝臣中的威望声誉谁是适合当宰相的，都提到尚书左丞姚、太常卿卢文纪、秘书监崔居俭；论评三人的才干和品行，互有优劣。
English: The last emperor was very angry, he wanted to appoint another prime minister, and asked the most trusted person, the prestige and reputation among the courtiers, who was suitable to be the prime minister, all mentioned Shang Shuzo Yao, Taizongqing Lu Wenji, and Secretary Supervisor Cui Juzhen; the ability and conduct of the three people were evaluated, and there were advantages and disadvantages.

古文：帝不能决，乃置其名于琉璃瓶，夜焚香祝天，且以筋挟之，首得文纪，次得顗。
现代文：末帝不能决定，于是把三人的名字放在琉璃瓶内，夜里，焚香祝天，用筷子挟取，首先得到卢文纪，其次得到姚。
English: The last emperor could not decide, so he put the names of the three people in a glass bottle. At night, he burned incense to wish for good luck, and used chopsticks to pick them up. First, he got Lu Wenji, and then he got Yao.

古文：秋，七月，辛亥，以文纪为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛亥，末帝任用卢文纪为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the autumn, in July, Xinhai, the last emperor appointed Lu Wenji as the secretary of the middle book, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：居俭，荛之子也。
现代文：崔居俭是崔荛的儿子。
English: Cui Juzhen is the son of Cui Yao.

古文：帝欲杀楚匡祚，韩昭胤曰： 陛下为天下父，天下之人皆陛下子，用法宜存至公，匡祚受诏检校重吉家财，不得不尔。
现代文：末帝要杀楚匡祚，韩昭胤说： 陛下是天下人之父，天下之人都是陛下的儿子，施用法律应该按照至公办理。楚匡祚遵受诏命检查李重吉的家财，不得不那样办。
English: When the last emperor wanted to kill Chu Kuang-tao, Han Zhao-yin said: "Your Majesty is the father of all the people in the world, and all the people in the world are the sons of Your Majesty, and the application of the law should be handled in accordance with the public interest. Chu Kuang-tao was ordered by the emperor to check the family wealth of Li Chong-ji, and had to do so.

古文：今族匡祚，无益死者，恐不厌众心。 
现代文：现在要族灭楚匡祚，对死者没有什么益处，恐怕反而不能顺服众心。 
English: It is of no benefit to the dead to have the aristocracy exterminate Chu Kuang-tao at this time. On the contrary, I am afraid that it will not be able to obey the hearts of the people.

古文：乙卯，长流匡祚于登州。
现代文：乙卯，末帝把楚匡祚长期流放到登州。
English: Second, the last emperor exiled Chu Kuangyu to Danzhou for a long time.

古文：丁巳，立沛国夫人刘氏为皇后。
现代文：丁巳，末帝立沛国夫人刘氏为皇后。
English: On the 19th, Liu, the wife of Li Peiguo, became the empress.

古文：回鹘入贡者多为河西杂虏所掠，诏将军牛知柔帅禁后卫送，与邠州兵共讨之。
现代文：回鹘入贡的人往往被河西杂胡所抢掠，末帝下诏命令将军牛知柔率领禁军护送，会同州兵马共同讨伐他们。
English: Returnees who paid tribute were often robbed and plundered by the hussars from the west of the river. The last emperor issued an edict ordering the general Niu Zhiru to lead the escort of the Imperial Army and fight them together with the state soldiers and horses.

古文：吴徐知诰召右仆谢兼中书侍郎、同平章事宋齐丘还金陵，以为诸道都统判官，加司空，于事皆无所关预，齐丘屡请退居，知诰以南园给之。
现代文：吴国徐知诰召唤左仆射兼中书侍郎、同平章事宋齐丘还归金陵，任用他为诸道都统判官，加司空，但是，对于各种事务都不让他干预，宋齐丘屡次请求退休家居，徐知诰把南园赐给他。
English: Song Qiqiu returned to Jinling after being summoned by Xu Zhixuan, the governor of Wu, to serve as his left-hand man and attendant, as well as the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China. Song Qiqiu was appointed as the judge of all the provincial capitals, but he was not allowed to intervene in various affairs. Song Qiqiu repeatedly asked for a retirement home, and Xu Zhixuan gave him the South Garden.

古文：护国节度使洋王从璋，归德节度使泾王从敏，皆罢镇居洛阳私第，帝待之甚薄；从敏在宋州预杀重吉，帝尤恶之。
现代文：护国节度使洋王李从璋，归德节度使泾王李从敏，都免去他们的军镇职务，让他们住在洛阳自己家里，末帝对待他们很苛薄；李从敏在宋州参预杀害李重吉，末帝尤其厌恶他。
English: The festival of protecting the country made the foreign king, Li Congzhen, and the festival of returning to Germany made the warlord, Li Congmin, relieve them of their military town duties and let them live in their own homes in Luoyang. The last emperor treated them very harshly; Li Congmin was involved in the premeditated killing of Li Chongji in Songzhou, and the last emperor especially detested him.

古文：尝侍宴禁中，酒酣，顾二王曰： 尔等皆何物，辄据雄籓！ 
现代文：有一次，曾经在宫中侍奉御宴，酒饮得正高兴时，末帝看着二王说： 你们都像什么东西，也敢占据雄厚冲要的藩镇！ 
English: Once, when he was serving a banquet in the palace and was happily drinking wine, the last emperor looked at the two kings and said, "You are all like something, and you dare to occupy a powerful and important han town!"

古文：二王大惧，太后叱之曰： 帝醉矣，尔曹速去！ 
现代文：二王极为惊恐，太后叱喝他们说： 皇帝醉了，你们俩快回去！ 
English: The two kings were extremely alarmed. The empress dowager scolded them and said, "The emperor is drunk. You two, hurry back!"

古文：蜀置永平军于雅州，以孙汉韶为节度使。
现代文：蜀国在雅州设置永平军，任用孙汉韶为节度使。
English: Shu established the Yongping Army in Yazhou and appointed Sun Hanju as the chief envoy.

古文：复以张虔钊为山南西道节度使、同平章事；虔钊固辞不行。
现代文：重新任用张虔钊为山南西道节度使、同平章事；张虔钊坚决推辞不去。
English: The reappointment of Zhang Qianqian as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road was a matter of equal importance; Zhang Qianqian resolutely refused to go.

古文：蜀主得风疾逾年，至是增剧。甲子，立子东川节度使、同平章事、亲卫马步都指挥使仁赞为太子，仍监国。
现代文：蜀主孟知祥患了风疾一年多，到这时病情发展严重；甲子，立他的儿子东川节度使、同平章事、亲卫马步都指挥使孟仁赞为太子，仍然做监国。
English: Meng Zhixiang, the head of Shu, had suffered from rheumatism for more than a year, and by this time his condition had become serious; Gao Zi appointed his son Dongchuan Jiedu envoy, Tongping Zhangji, Sinwei Mabudu commander, and Meng Renzan as prince, still acting as supervisor of the country.

古文：召司空、同平章事赵季良、武信节度使李仁罕、保宁节度使赵廷隐、枢密使王处回、捧圣控鹤都指挥使张公鐸、奉銮肃卫指挥副使侯弘实受遣诏辅政。
现代文：召来司空、同平章事赵季良、武信节度使李仁罕、保宁节度使赵延隐、枢密使王处回、捧圣控鹤都指挥使张公铎、奉銮肃卫指挥副使侯弘实接受遗诏辅政。
English: He summoned Siku, Tongping Zhangji Zhao Jiliang, Wuxin Jiedu to Li Renhan, Boryeong Jiedu to Zhao Yanyin, the Privy Council to Wang Shuchu, the Commanding Officer of Hushang Jiedu to Zhang Gongyao, and the Commanding Officer of Fenghuang Suwei to Hou Hongshi to accept the imperial edict.

古文：是夕殂，秘不发丧。
现代文：当夜，孟知祥便去世，保守秘密不发丧。
English: That night, Meng Zhixiang passed away, keeping it a secret.

古文：王处回夜启义兴门告赵季良，处回泣不已，季良正色曰： 今强将握兵，专伺时变，宜速立嗣君以绝觊觎，岂可但相泣邪！ 
现代文：王处回夜间开了义兴门告诉赵季良，王处回痛哭不已，赵季良严肃地对他说： 现在强将掌握兵权，专门等待随时变故，应该迅速扶立嗣君，以免有人觊觎皇位，怎么能只知道相互对泣呢！ 
English: Wang Du Hui opened the Yixing Gate at night and told Zhao Jiliang that Wang Du Hui was crying bitterly. Zhao Jiliang said to him solemnly: Now the strong will hold the military power, specially waiting for any change of circumstances, it is necessary to quickly establish the heir, so that no one can usurp the throne, how can we only know each other's tears!

古文：处回收泪谢之。
现代文：王处回收了眼泪向他表示歉谢。
English: Wang Du recovered his tears and apologized to him.

古文：季良教处回见李什罕，审其词旨然后告之。
现代文：赵季良教令王处回去见李仁罕，观察他的言行意图然后告诉他。
English: Zhao Jiliang ordered Wang to go back to Li Renhan, observe his words and deeds, and then tell him.

古文：处回至仁罕第，仁罕设备而出，遂不以实告。
现代文：王处回到了李仁罕的府第，见李仁罕布置了防备措施才出来，便没有把实情告诉他。
English: The King's Office returned to Li Renhan's prefecture, saw that Li Renhan had arranged precautionary measures before coming out, and did not tell him the truth.

古文：丙寅，宣遗制，命太子仁赞更名昶，丁卯，即皇帝位。
现代文：丙寅，宣读孟知祥的遗命，令太子孟仁赞改名孟昶，丁卯，即皇帝位。
English: Hsin-yin read out the last will and testament of Meng Zhixiang, and ordered the prince Meng Renzan to change his name to Meng Yao, Ding Wu, that is, the emperor.

古文：初，帝以王玫对左藏见财失实，故以刘昫代判三司。
现代文：以前，后唐末帝李从珂由于王玫回答府库左藏现存财物失实，因此任用刘代判掌握监铁、户部、度支的三司。
English: In the past, Li Congke, the late Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, because of Wang Mei's answer that the existing property of the government treasury was untrue, Liu was appointed to take charge of the supervision of the railway, the household, and the three departments of the government.

古文：昫命判官高延赏钩考穷核，皆积年逋欠之数，奸吏利其征责丐取，故存之。
现代文：刘命判官高延赏严格考核查索，有许多都是历年逃欠漏缴之数，奸吏认为这些有利于他们按纳税之责索求勒取，所以都保留着。
English: Liu ordered the judge Gao Yanbo to conduct a strict examination and verification of the searches, many of which are the number of evasion and non-payment in previous years. The fraudsters believe that these are conducive to their extortion according to the tax liability, so they are all retained.

古文：昫具奏其状，且请察其可征者急督之，必无可偿者悉蠲之，韩昭胤极言其便。
现代文：刘把实际情况具表上奏，并且建议凡能查实可以征收的赶紧督促缴纳，一定无法补偿的都豁免了，韩昭胤极力称赞这个办法。
English: Liu put the actual situation on the record, and suggested that anyone who could verify the levy could be hurriedly urged to pay, and those who could not be compensated were exempted. Han Zhaoyan highly praised this method.

古文：八月，庚午，诏长兴以前户部及诸道逋租三百三十八万，虚烦簿籍，咸蠲免勿征。
现代文：八月，庚午，末帝下诏把明宗长兴以前户部及各道逃欠租税三百三十八万缗，虚列薄籍，徒增烦乱，全部豁免，不再征收。
English: In the late afternoon of August, the last emperor issued an edict exempting the former households of Mingzong Changxing and all provinces from tax evasion of 3.38 million baht, all of which were exempted and no longer levied.

古文：贫民大悦，而三司吏怨之。
现代文：贫苦的百姓大为欢喜，而三司的官吏却埋怨不满。
English: The poor people were overjoyed, but the officials of the three departments were dissatisfied.

古文：辛未，以姚顗为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：辛未，末帝任用姚为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Soon after, the late emperor appointed Yao as the secretary of the Central Committee, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：右龙武统军索自通，以河中之隙，心不自安，戊子，退朝过洛，自投于水而卒。
现代文：右龙武统军索自通，因为镇守河中时，查抄过李从珂的军府兵器，心里不能自安，戊子，退朝之后路过洛水，投河而死。
English: Zuolongwu's army of unification of right-wing and left-wing forces, because when they were guarding the middle of the river, they inspected Li Congke's military weapons, and they could not be at peace with themselves. Wuzi passed through Luoshui after retiring from the imperial court, and fell into the river and died.

古文：帝闻之大惊，赠太尉。
现代文：末帝听说以后很吃惊，封赠他为太尉。
English: The Emperor was very surprised when he heard about this, and made him a second lieutenant.

古文：丙申，以前安国节度使、同平章事赵凤为太子太保。
现代文：丙申，未帝任命前安国节度使、同平章事赵凤为太子太保。
English: In response, Emperor Wei appointed the former Minister of the National Day of Peace and National Security, Tongping Zhangji Zhao Feng, as the Crown Prince's bodyguard.

古文：九月，癸卯，诏凤翔益兵守东安镇以备蜀。
现代文：九月，癸卯，末帝下诏，命凤翔增兵把守东安镇，来防备蜀国进扰。
English: In September, Emperor Taizu issued an edict ordering Fengxiang to increase the number of soldiers to guard Dongan Town to prevent Shu from invading.

古文：蜀卫圣诸军都指挥使、武信节度使李仁罕自恃宿将有功，复受顾托，求判六军，令进奏吏宋从会以意谕枢密院，又至学士院侦草麻。
现代文：蜀国卫圣诸军都指挥使、武信节度使李仁罕自恃是宿将有功劳，又受先帝遗诏辅政，希求让他总判六军，指使进奏吏宋从会把他的意图传告枢密院，又到学士院探听起草的情况。
English: Shu Guo Wei Sheng commanded all the armies, and Wu Xin Jiedu made Li Renhan believe that he would be honored. He was also assisted by the last emperor's last will and testament, hoping to make him the general judge of the Six Armies, and ordered Song Zong He, the insomniac, to announce his intention to the Privy Council, and to the Academy to inquire about the drafting situation.

古文：蜀主不得已，甲寅，加仁罕兼中书令，判六军事；以左匡圣都指挥使、保宁节度使赵廷隐兼侍中，为之副。
现代文：蜀主孟昶不得已，甲寅，加封李仁罕兼任中书令，判六军事；任用左匡圣都指挥使、保宁节度使赵廷隐兼任侍中，做他的副手。
English: Emperor Meng Xi had no choice but to appoint Jia Yin and Jafeng Li Renhan as the second-in-command of the Central Military Commission, and to issue six military orders; he also appointed Zuo Kuang as the second-in-command of the Sacred Capital, and Baoning Jiedu as the second-in-command of the Sacred Capital, and Zhao Tingyin as the second-in-command of the Sacred Capital, to be his deputy.

古文：己未，云州奏契丹入寇，北面招讨使石敬瑭奏自将兵屯百井以备契丹。
现代文：己未，云州奏报契丹入境侵犯，北面招讨使石敬瑭上奏他自己带兵屯驻百井，来防备契丹。
English: Not long ago, Yunnan reported the invasion of the Khitan invasion, and the north side invited Shi Jingjun to report that he had stationed troops in Muxi to prevent the Khitan invasion.

古文：辛酉，敬瑭奏振武节度使杨檀击契丹于境上，却之。
现代文：辛酉，石敬瑭表奏振武节度使杨檀在边境上还击契丹，把他们打回去了。
English: Yang Dan fought back against the Khitans at the border and drove them back.

古文：蜀奉銮肃卫都指挥使、昭武节度使兼侍中李肇闻蜀主即位，顾望，不时入朝，至汉州，留与亲戚燕饮逾旬；冬，十月，庚午，始至成都，称足疾，扶杖入朝见，见蜀主不拜。
现代文：蜀国奉銮肃卫都指挥使、昭武节度使兼侍中李肇听说蜀主孟昶即位，他观望形势，没有及时入朝，到了汉州时，他留下来与亲近戚友饮酒宴乐十多天；冬季，十月，庚午，才到达成都，称说脚有病，扶着手杖入朝，见到蜀主也不拜。
English: Li Zhao, the commanding envoy of Sui and Shu statesmen, and Zhaowu Jiedu envoy and chamberlain, heard that Meng Jian, the ruler of Shu, had ascended to the throne. He watched the situation and did not enter the court in time. When he arrived in Hanzhou, he stayed with close relatives and friends for more than ten days of drinking and feasting. In winter, in October, at noon, he reached the capital, said that his foot was sick, and entered the court with a cane. He would not bow when he saw the ruler of Shu.

古文：戊寅，左仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事李愚罢守本官，吏部尚书兼门下侍郎、同平章事、判三司刘昫罢为右仆射。
现代文：戊寅，左仆射、门下侍郎、同平章事李愚罢免本官，吏部尚书兼门下侍郎、同平章事、判三司刘罢职任右仆射。
English: Wu Yin, Zu minion, subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhangji, Li Yu dismissed the official, and Shangshu and subordinate attendant, Tongping Zhangji, of the Third Division of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Liu was dismissed and appointed as Zu minion.

古文：三司吏闻昫罢相，皆相驾，无一人从归第者。
现代文：三司吏属听说刘罢免宰相，都相互祝贺，没有一个人跟随他到新官署的。
English: When the three officials heard that Liu had dismissed the prime minister, they all congratulated each other. No one followed him to the new government office.

古文：蜀捧圣控鹤都指挥使张公鐸与医官使韩继勋、丰德库使韩保贞、茶酒库使安思谦等皆事蜀主于籓邸，素凶李仁罕，共谮之云仁罕有异志；蜀主令继勋等与赵季良，赵廷隐谋，因仁罕入朝，命武士，执而杀之。
现代文：蜀国捧圣控鹤都指挥使张公铎与医官使韩继勋、丰德库使韩保贞、茶酒库使安思谦等都是从蜀主孟昶为藩王时就跟随他的，平素就怨恨李仁罕，便共同讲他的坏话，说李仁罕有叛变的思想；蜀主让韩继勋等与赵季良、赵廷隐谋划，借着李仁罕入朝时，命令武士逮捕并杀了他。
English: Zhang Gongyi, the commander of the Shu State, and the medical officer, Han Jixun, the Fengde Library, Han Baozhen, and the tea warehouse, An Siqian, all followed the Shu lord Meng Jun when he was the king of the domain. They always resented Li Renhan, and together they spoke ill of him, saying that Li Renhan had the idea of rebellion. The Shu lord let Han Jixun and others plan with Zhao Jiliang and Zhao Tingyin, and ordered the samurai to arrest and kill him through Li Renhan when he entered the imperial court.

古文：癸未，下诏暴其罪，并其子继宏及宋从会等数人皆伏诛。
现代文：癸未，下诏宣布他的罪名，连同他的儿子李继宏及宋从会等几个人都被杀。
English: Soon after, the next edict announced his guilt, and he was killed, along with his son, Li Jihong, and several others from the Song Clan.

古文：是日，李肇释杖而拜。
现代文：这一天，李肇放弃了手杖而向孟昶下拜。
English: On this day, Li Zhao gave up his cane and bowed to Meng Xuan.

古文：蜀渠州都押牙文景琛据城叛，果州刺史李延厚讨平之，蜀主左右以李肇倨慢，请诛之；戊子，以肇为太子少傅致仕，徙邛州。
现代文：蜀国源州都押牙文景琛占据着州城反叛，果州刺史李延厚发兵讨伐，平定了这场叛乱。蜀主孟昶的近臣因李肇倨傲侮慢，请求杀他；戊子，蜀王封李肇为太子少傅让他退休，迁往邛州。
English: At the source of Shu, the capital of the State of Shu, Azusa Wenzhong occupied the rebel capital of the State of Shu, and the prince of the State of Guozhou, Li Yanhou, sent troops to quell the rebellion. The close vassals of the Lord of Shu, Meng Wei, requested to kill Li Zhaohui because of his arrogance and insolence; the King of Shu, Guo Zi, made Li Zhaohui the youngest prince of the State of Shu, retired him, and moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：吴主加徐知诰大丞相、尚父、嗣齐王、九锡，辞不受。
现代文：吴主杨溥加封徐知诰为大丞相、尚父、嗣齐王、加九锡；徐知诰辞谢不接受。
English: The Lord of Wu, Yang Zheng, appointed Xu Zhisheng as the Grand Minister of War, the Father of the Emperor, the King of Qi, and the Emperor of Jiu Xi; Xu Zhisheng's resignation was not accepted.

古文：雄武节度使张延郎将兵围文州，阶州刺史郭知琼拔尖石寨。
现代文：后唐雄武节度使张延朗领兵包围了蜀地文州，阶州刺史郭知琼攻下尖石寨。
English: After the Tang Xiongwu Festival, Zhang Yanlang led the troops to encircle Wenzhou of Shu, and Guo Zhixiong of Zhizhou besieged Shijiazhuang.

古文：蜀李延厚将果州兵屯兴州，遣先登指挥使范延晖将兵救文州，延朗解围而归。
现代文：蜀国李延厚带领果州兵屯扎在当时已被蜀国占领的兴州，派遣先登指挥使范延晖领兵救援文州，张延朗便解除了对文州的包围而归去。
English: Li Yanhou of Shu led the Gozhou soldiers to camp in Xingzhou, which was occupied by Shu at the time, and dispatched the first commander to lead the troops to rescue Wenzhou, Zhang Yanlang then lifted the siege on Wenzhou and returned.

古文：兴州刺史冯晖自乾渠引戍兵归凤翔。
现代文：后唐朝廷任命的兴州刺史冯晖也从干渠带领守戌兴州的士兵归还凤翔。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, the Xingzhou thorn Feng Xuan, who was appointed by the Tang Dynasty, also led the soldiers who guarded Xingzhou from the main channel to return Feng Xiang.

古文：十一月，徐知诰召其子司徒、同平章事景通还金陵，为镇海、宁国节度副大使、诸道副都统、判中外诸军事；以次子牙内马步都指挥使、海州团练使景迁为左右军都军使、左仆射、参政事，留江都辅政。
现代文：十一月，徐知诰召唤他的儿子司徒、同平章事徐景通还归吴国西都金陵，任为镇海、宁国节度副大使、诸道副都统、判中外诸军事；任用他的次子牙内马步都指挥使、海州团练使徐景迁为左右军都军使、左仆射、参政事，留在吴国东都江都辅佐政务。
English: In November, Xu Zhisheng summoned his son Sitou, Tongping Zhangji and Xu Jingtong to return to Jinling, the western capital of Wu, and appointed them as deputy ambassador of Zhenhai, Ningguo Jiedu, deputy governor of all provinces, and military commander of the Middle and Outer Provinces; appointed his second son Ganei Mabudu as commanding envoy, and Haizhou Reunification to make Xu Jingtong move to the capital of the left and right armies as military envoy, left-handed shot, and participate in political affairs, and stay in the eastern capital of Wu, Jiangdu, and assist in political affairs.

古文：十二月，己巳，以易州刺史安叔千为振武节度使，齐州防御使尹晖为彰国节度使。
现代文：十二月，己巳，末帝任用易州刺史安叔千为振武节度使，齐州防御使尹晖为彰国节度使。
English: In December, the last emperor appointed Yi Zhou's general Anshu Qian as the envoy of the Zhenwu Festival, and the defense envoy of Qi Zhou, Yin Hui, as the envoy of the Zhangguo Festival.

古文：叔千，沙陀人也。
现代文：安叔千是沙陀人。
English: Anshu Qian is a sadhu.

古文：壬申，石敬瑭奏契丹引去，罢兵归。
现代文：壬申，石敬瑭奏报契丹退兵，于是罢兵归镇。
English: In Jinshin, Shi Jingliao reported that Khitan had withdrawn from the army, so the soldiers returned to the town.

古文：乙亥，征雄武节度使张延郎为中书侍郎、同平章事、判三司。
现代文：乙亥，末帝征召雄武节度使张延朗为中书侍郎、同平章事、判三司。
English: At the end of the Heian period, Emperor Go-Shirakawa conscripted Omu Sekido to make Zhang Enlang a chushushushijiro, tohei shoji, and tohei sanji.

古文：辛巳，汉皇后马氏殂。
现代文：辛巳，南汉皇后马氏去世。
English: Soon after, Queen Ma of the Southern Han Dynasty passed away.

古文：甲申，蜀葬文武圣德英烈明孝皇帝于和陵，庙号高祖。
现代文：甲申，蜀国在和陵安葬文武圣德英烈明孝皇帝孟知祥，庙号高祖。
English: Jiaxun, Shu buried the Emperor Meng Zhixiang, known as Gao Zu, who was a scholar, warrior, saint, hero and filial son, in He Mausoleum.

古文：乙酉，葬鄂王于徽陵城南，封才数尺；观者悲之。
现代文：乙酉，在徽陵城南安葬鄂王李从厚，封土才有几尺高；看见的人都感到悲哀。
English: Acetylene, in the south of Huling City, the burial of King Li Zonghu is thick, and the fenced land is only a few feet high; people who see it feel sad.

古文：是岁秋、冬旱，民多流亡，同、华、蒲、绛尤甚。
现代文：这一年秋、冬大旱，民众许多人逃荒流亡，同州、华州、蒲州、绛州尤其严重。
English: In the autumn and winter of that year, there was a severe drought, and many people fled the countryside and went into exile. The drought was particularly severe in Tongzhou, Huazhou, Puzhou, and Zhangzhou.

古文：汉主命判六军秦王弘度募宿卫兵千人，皆市井无赖子弟，弘度昵之。
现代文：南汉主刘龚命令总判六军的秦王刘弘度募集宿卫兵一千人，都是市井无赖子弟，而刘弘度却亲昵他们。
English: The Southern Han ruler Liu Bei ordered the Qin king Liu Hongdu, the general of the Six Armies, to recruit a thousand guards, all of whom were common ruffians, but Liu Hongdu was fond of them.

古文：同平章事杨洞潜谏曰： 秦王，国之冢嫡，宜亲端士。
现代文：同平章事杨洞潜向南汉主进谏说： 秦王是国家的皇位继承人，应该亲近端正之士。
English: Tongping Zhangji Yangdong diving to the South Han Dynasty, said: King Qin is the heir to the throne of the country, and should be close to the right people.

古文：使之治军已过矣，况昵群小乎！ 
现代文：任用他治军已经是过失，何况他竟然亲昵成群的小人啊！ 
English: It's already a mistake to appoint him to lead the army, not to mention the fact that he's been fondling hordes of villains!

古文：汉主曰： 小儿教以戎事，过烦公忧。 
现代文：南汉主说： 不过是小儿教他们治军之事，过份劳烦您的忧虑了。 
English: The Southern Han lord said, "It's just that the children are teaching them how to rule the army, and your worries are too troublesome.

古文：终不戒弘度。
现代文：最终还是没有约束刘弘度。
English: In the end, there was no restraint on Liu Hongdu.

古文：洞潜出，见卫士掠商人金帛，商人不敢诉，汉曰： 政乱如此，安用宰相！ 
现代文：杨洞潜从宫廷出来，看见卫兵抢掠商人的财物，商人都不敢投诉，杨洞潜叹息说： 政事如此混乱，还要宰相有什么用！ 
English: Yang Dongqian came out of the palace and saw the guards looting the merchants' belongings. The merchants did not dare to complain. Yang Dongqian sighed and said, "Politics is so chaotic, what is the use of a prime minister!"

古文：因谢病归第；久之，不召，遂卒。
现代文：因而以有病辞谢朝政回到自己宅第；很长时间，也不召他入朝，便去世了。
English: As a result, he returned to his home with a sick note thanking the emperor; after a long time, without inviting him to the imperial court, he died.

古文：潞王下清泰二年
现代文：清泰二年
English: in the second year of the Qing Dynasty

古文：春，正月，丙申朔，闽大赦。改元永和。
现代文：春季正月，丙申朔，闽国实行大赦，改年号为永和。
English: In the first month of spring, the state of Shandong implemented an amnesty and changed the year name to Yonghe.

古文：二月，丙寅朔，蜀大赦。
现代文：二月，丙寅朔，蜀国大赦。
English: In February, Cui Yinshuo was granted amnesty by the State of Shu.

古文：甲戌，以枢密使、天雄节度使兼侍中范延光为宣武节度使兼中书令。
现代文：甲戌，末帝任用枢密使、天雄节度使兼侍中范延光为宣武节度使兼中书令。
English: Armor-plated, the last emperor appointed a privy councilor, Tianxiong Jiedu Jiedu and a chamberlain, Fan Yanguang, as the Xuanwu Jiedu Jiedu Jiedu Jiedu and a secretary.

古文：丁丑，夏州节度使李彝超上言疾病，以兄行军司马彝殷权知军州事；彝超寻卒。
现代文：丁丑，夏州节度使李彝超上书说自己有病，让他哥哥行军司马李彝殷暂时主持军州事；李彝超不久就去世了。
English: Ding Yuxiu, the festival of Xia Zhou made Li Yuchao write a letter saying that he was ill, and let his brother marching Sima Li Yiyan temporarily preside over the military affairs of the state; Li Yuchao died soon after.

古文：戊寅，蜀主尊母李氏为皇太后。
现代文：戊寅，蜀主孟昶尊上母亲李氏为皇太后。
English: Wu Yin, Shu Master Meng Wei's revered mother, the Li clan, was the empress dowager.

古文：太后，太原人，本庄宗后宫也，以赐蜀高祖。
现代文：李太后是太原人，本来是后唐庄宗后宫宫女，用来赐给蜀高祖孟知祥为妻的。
English: Empress Dowager Li was from Taiyuan. She was originally a concubine of the Later Tang Dynasty Zhuang Dynasty, and was used to give Meng Zhixiang, the founder of Shu Gao, as a wife.

古文：己丑，追尊帝母鲁国夫人魏氏曰宣宪皇太后。
现代文：己丑，末帝李从珂追尊他的母亲鲁国夫人魏氏称宣宪皇太后。
English: He was so ugly that the last emperor, Li Congke, called his mother, the Empress of Lu, the Empress of Wei, the Empress Dowager of the Constitution.

古文：闽主立淑妃陈氏为皇后。
现代文：闽国主王立淑妃陈氏为皇后。
English: The head of the country, Wang Lixu, and her consort, Chen, became empresses.

古文：初，闽主两娶刘氏，皆士族，美而无宠。
现代文：起初，闽主两度娶刘氏为妻，都是士族，虽然长得美丽但却不得宠爱。
English: At first, the tyrant married Liu twice, both of whom were from the warrior class. Although they were beautiful, they could not be favored.

古文：陈后，本闽太祖侍婢金凤也，陋而淫，闽主嬖之，以其族人守恩、匡胜为殿使。
现代文：陈皇后本来是闽太祖王审知的侍婢，名叫金凤，长得丑陋而且淫荡，但闽主王溺爱她，并任用她的本家陈守恩、陈匡胜为殿使。
English: Empress Chen was originally a servant and handmaid of the great-great-grandfather Emperor Xizong, whose name was Jinfeng. She was ugly and lewd, but Emperor Xizong doted on her and appointed her own family members, Chen Shouen and Chen Kuangsheng, as palace envoys.

古文：三月，辛丑，以前宣武节度使兼侍中赵延寿为忠武节度使兼枢密使。
现代文：三月，辛丑，末帝任用前宣武节度使兼侍中赵延寿为忠武节度使兼枢密使。
English: In March, at the height of the Qing dynasty, Zhao Yanju, the last emperor's former Xuanwu Jiedu envoy and chamberlain, was appointed as Zhongwu Jiedu envoy and privy councilor.

古文：以李彝殷为定难节度使。
现代文：末帝任用李彝殷为定难节度使。
English: The last emperor appointed Li Jianyin as an envoy to solve the problem.

古文：己酉，赠吴越王元瓘母陈氏为晋国太夫人。
现代文：己酉，后唐朝廷封赠吴越王钱元的母亲陈氏为晋国太夫人。
English: Chen, the mother of Wu Yue Wang Qianyuan, was given the title of the First Lady of Jin Province by the Tang Dynasty.

古文：元瓘性孝，尊礼母党，厚加赐与，而未尝迁官，授以重任。
现代文：钱元性情孝顺，对母亲的族属很尊敬尽礼，赐赏很丰厚，但是从未给他们升官和授予重任。
English: Qianyuan was filial by nature. He respected his mother's relatives and rewarded them generously, but he never promoted them or gave them important responsibilities.

古文：壬戌，以彰圣都指挥使安审琦领顺化节度使。
现代文：壬戌，末帝任用彰圣都指挥使安审琦领受顺化节度使。
English: At the same time, the last emperor appointed the commander of the Zhang Sheng capital to make the security review committee receive the Hue festival delegate.

古文：审琦，金全之子也。
现代文：安审琦是安金全的儿子。
English: An Xizhao was the son of An Jinquan.

古文：太常丞史在德，性狂狷，上书历诋内外文武之士，请遍加考试，黜陟能否。执政及朝士大怒，卢文纪及补阙刘涛、杨昭俭等皆请加罪。
现代文：太常丞史在德，性格狂放不羁，上书诋毁朝廷内外的文武之士，请求曾遍进行考试，从而黜拙拔能；执政者及朝士大火恼火，卢文纪及补阙刘涛、杨昭俭等都请求末帝治他的罪。
English: Taizang Zhengshi was in Germany, his character was wild and uninhibited, and he wrote a letter to slander the scholars and warriors inside and outside the imperial court, requesting that he had passed the examination, so that he could improve his ability; the ruler and the morning warrior were very angry, and Lu Wenji and Liu Tao, Yang Zhaojian and others all asked the late emperor to punish him for his crime.

古文：帝谓学士马胤孙曰： 朕新临天下，宜开言路；若朝士以言获罪，谁敢言者！
现代文：末帝对学士马胤孙说： 朕刚刚临御天下，应该开启言路，如果朝士因为说话而获致罪名，还有谁敢说话呢？
English: The last emperor said to the scholar Ma Yansun: I have just ascended to the throne, I should open the path of speech. If the morning warrior is convicted for speaking, who else would dare to speak?

古文：卿为朕作诏书，宣朕意。 
现代文：请你替朕起草诏书，宣示朕的意思。 
English: Please draft an imperial edict for me, proclaiming my will.

古文：乃下诏，略曰： 昔魏征请赏皇甫德参，今涛等请黜史在德；事同言异，何其远哉！在德情在倾输，安可责也！ 
现代文：于是下了诏书，大意是说： 从前魏徵请求唐太宗奖赏皇甫德参，现在刘涛等人请求罢黜史在德，事情相同而评价两样，为什么相差这样远，在德的心情是要倾吐自己心里想说的话，怎么能责备他呢！ 
English: Therefore, an imperial decree was issued, to the effect that: In the past, Wei Zong asked Emperor Taizong of Tang to reward Emperor Fu De Zang, and now Liu Tao and others are requesting the dismissal of Emperor Shi in Germany. The things are the same, but the evaluation is different. Why is the difference so far? In Germany, the mood is to pour out what they want to say, how can they blame him?

古文：昭俭，嗣复之曾孙也。
现代文：杨昭俭是唐文宗时宰相杨嗣复的曾孙。
English: Yang Zhaojian is the great-grandson of Yang Shifu, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：吴加徐景迁同平章事、知左右军事；徐知诰令尚书郎陈觉辅之，谓觉曰： 吾少时与宋子嵩论议，好相诘难，或吾舍子嵩还家，或子嵩拂衣而起。
现代文：吴国加封徐景迁为同平章事、知左右军事；徐知诰命令尚书郎陈觉辅助他，并且对陈觉说： 我年轻时与宋子嵩议论，喜欢相互问难，或者我停止争论放他回家，或者他拂衣而去。
English: Xu Jingqin, the governor of Wuxi Province, appointed Song Zisheng as his subordinate, and the two of them fought side by side. Xu Zhisheng ordered Shang Shulang Chen Jue to assist him, and said to Chen Jue, "When I was young, I used to argue with Song Zisheng, and we liked to ask each other difficult questions. Either I should stop arguing and let him go home, or he should brush off his clothes and leave."

古文：子嵩携衣笥望秦淮门欲去者数矣，吾常戒门者止之。
现代文：子嵩收拾衣箱眼望秦淮门想离我而去的情况有过好多次了，我常常告诫守门人不要放他走。
English: There have been many times when Qin Huamen wanted to leave me, and I often warned the gatekeeper not to let him go.

古文：吾今老矣，犹未遍达时事，况景迁年少当国，故屈吾子以诲之耳。 
现代文：我现在已经年纪大了，还没有能够对时事样样通晓，何况景迁年少担当国家大事，听以委屈您老先生来教导他啊。 
English: Now that I'm older, I haven't been able to understand everything about current affairs, and what's more, I'm too young to be in charge of national affairs, so I'll let your old master teach him.

古文：夏，四月，庚午，蜀以御史中丞龙门毋昭裔为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：夏季四月，庚午，蜀国任用御史中丞龙门人毋昭裔为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the summer of April, on the afternoon of the 7th day of the 4th month, the State of Shu appointed Gishi Chujo Longmen to be the Chusho Jiro and Tongpei Shoji.

古文：癸未，加枢密使、刑部尚书韩昭胤中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：癸未，末帝加封枢密使、刑部尚书韩昭胤中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: At that time, the last emperor appointed him as a privy councilor, and the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Han Zhaotian, became the junior secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and Tongping Zhangji became the secretary.

古文：辛卯。以宣徽南院使刘延皓为刑部尚书，充枢密使。
现代文：辛卯，任用宣徽南院使刘延皓为刑部尚书，充任枢密使。
English: Xinwu appointed Liu Yanjun, the chief of the Southern Court of Xuanhui, as the secretary of the Department of Criminal Law, and he served as a privy councilor.

古文：延皓，皇后之弟也。
现代文：刘延皓是刘皇后的弟弟。
English: Liu Yanqi is the younger brother of Empress Liu.

古文：癸巳，以左领军卫大将军刘延郎为本卫上将军，充宣徽北院使，兼枢密副使。
现代文：癸巳，任用左领军卫大将军刘延朗为本卫上将军，充任宣徽北院使，兼任枢密副使。
English: At the same time, Liu Yanlang, the left-leading general of the Great Guard, was appointed as the general of the Great Guard, acting as the envoy of the Northern Yuan Dynasty and concurrently serving as the vice-envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：五月，丙申，契丹寇新州及振武。
现代文：五月，丙申，契丹入侵新州及振武。
English: In May, the Khitan invaded Xinzhou and Zhenwu.

古文：庚戌，赐振武节度使杨檀名光远。
现代文：庚戌，末帝赐给振武节度使杨檀名字叫杨光远。
English: Geng Zheng, the last emperor gave Zhenwu Jiedu to make Yang Danzhong's name Yang Guangyuan.

古文：六月，吴德胜节度使兼中书令柴再用卒。
现代文：六月，吴国德胜节度使兼中书令柴再用去世。
English: In June, Wu Guo Desheng died.

古文：先是，史官王振尝询其战功，再用曰： 鹰犬微效，皆社稷之灵，再用何功之有！ 
现代文：以前，史官王振曾经询问他的战功，柴再用说： 鹰犬的细小作用，都是国家社稷的灵验，再用有什么功劳！ 
English: In the past, historian Wang Zhen once inquired about his war exploits, and Chai Zaiyu said: The small role of the eagle dog is the effect of the national society, and what is the merit!

古文：竟不报。
现代文：竟然没有上报。
English: It wasn't even reported.

古文：契丹寇应州。
现代文：契丹侵扰应州。
English: Khitan invade Yingzhou.

古文：河东节度使、北面总管石敬瑭既还镇，阴为自全之计。
现代文：河东节度使、北面总管石敬瑭返归镇所后，暗中谋划如何保全自己。
English: After returning to the town, the head of the north side, Shi Jingyao, secretly planned how to protect himself.

古文：帝好咨访外事，常命端明殿学士李专美、翰林学士李崧、知制诰吕琦、薛文遇、翰林天文赵延乂等更直于中兴殿庭，与语或至夜分。
现代文：末帝喜欢访查咨询外边的事情，常常命令端明殿学士李专美、翰林学士李崧、知制诰吕琦、薛文遇、翰林天文赵延等轮换在中兴殿庭院值班，有时候同他们谈论到深夜。
English: The late emperor liked to visit and consult on external matters. He often ordered Duanming Palace's academician Li Zhenmei, Hanlin's academician Li Xuan, Zhisheng's academician Lv Ying, Xue Wenyu, Hanlin's astronomer Zhao Yan and others to take turns on duty in the courtyard of Zhongxing Palace. Sometimes he would talk with them until late at night.

古文：时敬瑭二子为内使，曹太后则晋国长公主之母也。敬瑭赂太后左右，令伺帝之密谋，事无巨细皆知之。
现代文：当时，石敬瑭的两个儿子任内使，曹太后则是石敬瑭之妻晋国长公主的母亲，石敬瑭贿赂太后的左右，让他们暗中侦查末帝的密谋，不论事情的大小他都能知道。
English: At that time, Shi Jingyao's two sons served as internal envoys, and Empress Dowager Cao was the mother of Shi Jingyao's wife, Empress Dowager Jin. Shi Jingyao bribed both sides of Empress Dowager to let them secretly investigate the plot of the last emperor, and he could know no matter how big or small the matter was.

古文：敬瑭多于宾客前自称赢瘠不堪为帅，冀朝廷不之忌。
现代文：石敬瑭常常在宾客面前自称病弱不能领兵为帅，希图朝廷不猜忌他。
English: Shi Jingyao often claimed in front of guests that he was too weak to lead soldiers, hoping that the court would not suspect him.

古文：时契丹屡寇北边，禁军多在幽、并，敬瑭与赵德钧求益兵运粮，朝夕相继。
现代文：当时，契丹族频繁侵扰北部边界，守卫的禁军大多设防在幽州和并州，石敬瑭与赵德钧都请求朝廷增兵运粮，日夜相继不断。
English: At that time, the Khitan frequently invaded the northern border, and most of the guards of the forbidden army set up fortifications in Yuzhou and Bianzhou. Shi Jingyao and Zhao Deyao both requested the imperial court to increase the number of soldiers and transport grain, day and night.

古文：甲申，诏借河东人有蓄积者菽粟。
现代文：甲申，朝廷下诏向河东有积蓄的人征借菽粟。
English: In Jiaxing, the imperial court issued an edict to requisition opium poppies from people with savings in Hedong.

古文：乙酉，诏镇州输绢五万匹于总管府，籴军粮，率镇冀人车千五百乘运粮于代州；又诏魏博市籴。
现代文：乙酉，下诏令镇州输纳绢五万匹给总管府，用来购买军粮，率领镇冀的人车一千五百辆运粮供给代州；又下诏令魏博开市购粮。
English: At the same time, he issued an edict ordering the township of Zhenzhou to send 50,000 yakitori to the General Administration of the People's Liberation Army to be used to purchase military grain, and led the township of Hebei to transport 1,500 trucks of grain to supply Daizhou; he also issued an edict ordering the city of Wei Bokei to purchase grain.

古文：时水旱民饥，敬瑭遣使督趣严急，山东之民流散，乱始兆矣。
现代文：当时水灾、旱灾使得百姓饥饿，石敬瑭派人督催缴纳非常严厉紧急，崤山以东的百姓流离失散，开始露出了动乱的兆头。
English: At that time, floods and droughts made the people hungry, and Shi Jinglian sent inspectors to urge payment in a very strict and urgent manner. The people east of Lushan were displaced and dispersed, and signs of unrest began to emerge.

古文：敬瑭将大军屯忻州，朝廷遣使赐军士夏衣，传诏抚谕，军士呼万岁者数四。
现代文：石敬瑭率领大军屯驻忻州，朝廷派使臣赏赐军士夏衣，传布诏书加以抚慰，军士曾多次呼喊万岁。
English: Shi Jingyao led a large army stationed in Bozhou, and the imperial court sent envoys to reward the sergeant with a summer coat and comfort him with a proclamation. The sergeant had repeatedly shouted "long live."

古文：敬瑭惧，幕僚河内段希尧请诛其唱首者，敬瑭命都押衙刘知远斩挟马都将李晖等三十六人以徇。
现代文：石敬瑭害怕，他的幕僚河内人段希尧请求杀了那些带头呼叫的，石敬瑭命令都押牙刘知远斩了挟马都将李晖等三十六人作为此事的宣示。
English: Shi Jingyao was afraid. His staff member, the Hanoi man, Duan Xiyao, asked him to kill those who led the call. Shi Jingyao ordered Liu Zhiyuan to be beheaded, and the thirty-six people, including Li Qian, to be beheaded as a declaration of the matter.

古文：希尧，怀州人也。
现代文：段希尧是怀州人。
English: Duan Xizhe is a native of Waizhou.

古文：帝闻之，益疑敬瑭。
现代文：末帝听说这些情况，更加怀疑石敬瑭。
English: When the late emperor heard about these circumstances, he was even more suspicious of Shi Jingjun.

古文：壬辰，诏： 窃盗不计赃多少，并纵火强盗，并行极法。 
现代文：壬辰，末帝下诏： 窃盗不论赃有多少，以及纵火强盗，都施行极刑。 
English: In Imjin, the last emperor decreed that the death penalty would be carried out for theft, regardless of the number of victims, and for arson and robbery.

古文：闽福王继鹏私于宫人李春燕，继鹏请之于陈后，后白闽主而赐之。
现代文：闽国福王王继鹏与宫人李春燕私通，王继鹏请求陈皇后把李春燕赐给他，陈皇后告诉闽主王而后赏赐给他。
English: Wang Jipeng, the king of Fu of the State of Min, had a private affair with Li Chunyan, a member of the imperial court. Wang Jipeng asked Empress Chen to give him Li Chunyan, and Empress Chen told the lord king of Min and then rewarded him.

古文：秋，七月，以枢密使刘延皓为天雄节度使。
现代文：秋季七月，末帝任用枢密使刘延皓为天雄节度使。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Go-Shirakawa appointed the Privy Councilor Liu Yanqi as the Emperor's envoy to the festival.

古文：乙巳，以武宁节度使张敬达为北面行营副总管，将兵屯代州，以分石敬瑭之权。
现代文：乙巳，末帝任用武宁节度使张敬达为北面行营副总管，领兵屯驻代州，用来分散石敬瑭的权力。
English: At this time, the late emperor appointed Wu Ning Jiedu to make Zhang Jingda the deputy commander of the northern camp and the leader of the troops stationed in Daizhou, which was used to disperse Shi Jingyao's power.

古文：帝深以时事为忧，尝从容让卢文纪等以无所规赞。
现代文：末帝因为时局常常感到忧虑，曾经很平和地责备过卢文纪等，批评他们没有提供什么规劝和赞同的建议。
English: The last emperor often felt anxious because of the current situation, and once very peacefully reproached Lu Wenji and others, criticizing them for not providing any persuasion and approval.

古文：丁巳，文纪等上言： 臣等每五日起居，与两班旅见，暂获对扬，侍卫满前，虽有愚虑，不敢敷陈。
现代文：丁巳，卢文纪等上奏说： 臣等每五天一次来问候主上的起居，与文武两班众臣共同进见，暂时得到对答的机会，而侍从保卫人员布满在眼前，虽然对事情有所考虑，也不敢陈说。
English: Ding Si, Lu Wenji and the other superiors said: The ministers come once every five days to greet the Lord's residence, and go to the court together with the two groups of ministers, and temporarily get the opportunity to answer, but the attendants and guards are full in front of them, and although they have considered the matter, they dare not say anything.

古文：窃见前朝自上元以来，置延英殿，或宰相欲有奏论，天子欲有咨度，皆非时召对，旁无侍卫，故人得尽言。
现代文：我们想到前朝自从唐肃宗上元年间以后，设置延英殿，遇到宰相想有所论奏，或者天子要有所咨询商酌，旁边不设侍卫，所以人们能够把话都说出来。
English: We thought of the previous dynasty, since the first year of the Tang Sui Dynasty, setting up the Yan Ying Hall. When the prime minister wanted to discuss something, or the emperor wanted to consult, there was no bodyguard next to him, so people could say what they wanted.

古文：望复此故事，惟听机要之臣侍侧。 
现代文：希望主上也能恢复前朝的这种做法，只让机要的大臣侍候在旁边。 
English: It is hoped that the Lord can also restore the practice of the previous government, allowing only important ministers to wait on the sidelines.

古文：诏以 旧制五日起居，百僚俱退，宰相独升，若常事自可敷奏。
现代文：末帝下诏书说： 旧制施行五日问起居时，百官都退场，只有宰相单独留下来，象平常的事情仍然可以陈奏。
English: The emperor's last imperial edict said: When the old system was implemented on the fifth day of the month, all officials left the scene, only the prime minister remained alone. As usual, things can still be played out.

古文：或事应严密，不以其日，或异日听于阁门奏榜子，当尽屏侍臣，于便殿相待，何必袭延英之名也！ 
现代文：遇到有机密的事情，不按五天的期限，或者另选日期在阁门听取奏摺子，应当让侍臣都屏退，在便殿等候进见，何必要承袭延英殿的名义呢！ 
English: In the event of a confidential matter, if the five-day deadline is not met, or if a different date is chosen to listen to the sounding of the trumpet at the attic door, the courtiers should all retreat and wait in the hall to see what is going on. Why is it necessary to inherit the name of Yan Ying Dian?

古文：吴润州团练使徐知谔，狎昵小人，游燕废务，作列肆于牙城西，躬自贸易。
现代文：吴国润州团练使徐知谔，亲昵狎近小人，游赏宴集，废弃正务，在牙城以西仿造排列着商肆的市场，亲自去做商沽交易。
English: Wuzhong Runzhou group practice to make Xu Zhisheng, intimate with the villain, tour the banquet set, abandon the main business, in the west of the capital to imitate the market lined with businesses, and personally do business transactions.

古文：徐知诰闻之怒，召知谔左右诘责；知谔惧。
现代文：徐知诰听说后发怒，找来徐知谔的随从盘问责骂他们；徐知谔很害怕。
English: Upon hearing this, Xu Zhisheng became angry and summoned Xu Zhisheng's attendants to scold them; Xu Zhisheng was very scared.

古文：或谓知诰曰： 忠武王最爱知谔，而以后事传于公。
现代文：有人告诉徐知诰说： 尊翁忠武王徐温在世时最喜欢知谔，然而却把后来的大业传给了你。
English: Someone told Xu Zhisheng, "Zongweng Zhongwu Wang Xu Wen was the favorite of Zhisheng when he was alive, but he passed on his great career to you.

古文：往年知询失守，论议至今未息。
现代文：前几年知询失去镇所，议论到现在还没有停息。
English: A few years ago, Zhisheng lost its township, and the discussion has not stopped until now.

古文：借使知谔治有能名，训兵养民，于公何利？ 
现代文：如果知谔治理政务有能干的名声，训练武备，休养百姓，对您有什么好处呢？ 
English: What good is it for you to know how to administer government affairs, to have a reputation for competence, to train the armed forces, and to rest and recuperate the people?

古文：知诰感悟，待之加厚。
现代文：徐知诰有所领悟，对待徐知谔更加宽厚。
English: Xu Zhisheng has some understanding, and treats Xu Zhisheng more generously.

古文：九月，丙申，吴大赦，改元天祚。
现代文：九月，丙申，吴国实行大赦，改年号为天祚。
English: In September, Bishen, the State of Wu implemented an amnesty and changed the year name to Tianzhu.

古文：己酉，已宣徽南院使房暠为刑部尚书，充枢密使；宣徽北院使刘延朗为南院使，仍兼枢密副使。
现代文：己酉，末帝任用宣徽南院使房为刑部尚书，充任枢密使，宣徽北院使刘延朗任为南院使，仍兼任枢密副使。
English: At the same time, the last emperor appointed Liu Yanlang, the envoy of the Northern Court of the State Council, as the envoy of the Southern Court of the State Council of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, and Liu Yanlang, the envoy of the Northern Court of the State Council of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, as the envoy of the Southern Court of the State Council of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：于是延朗及枢密直学士薛文遇等居中用事，暠与赵延寿虽为使长，其听用之言什不三四。
现代文：从此刘延朗及枢密直学士薛文遇等把持朝中事务，房与赵延寿虽然做枢密院的首长，但他们的意见，被采用的不过十分之三四。
English: Since then, Liu Yanlang and Privy Councilor Xue Wenyu have been in charge of the affairs of the DPRK and China. Although Fang and Zhao Yanshou were the heads of the Privy Council, their opinions were adopted only three-fourths of the time.

古文：暠随势可否，不为事先；每幽、并遣使入奏，枢密诸人环坐议之，暠多俯首而寐，比觉，引颈振衣，则使者去矣。
现代文：房随势应称，什么事都不先拿出意见。每当幽州、并州派使者来朝廷奏事，枢密院的几位大臣环坐而讨论，房常常低着头打盹，等他醒来，伸着脖子，理理服装后，那时使者已经走了。
English: Whenever Yuzhou or Hebei sent an envoy to the imperial court to report on a matter, several ministers of the Privy Council would sit around and discuss it. Fang often slept with his head down, and when he woke up, stretched his neck and straightened his clothes, the envoy had already left.

古文：启奏除授，一归延朗。
现代文：是否启奏皇帝和任免职务，一律取决于刘延朗。
English: Whether or not to inaugurate the emperor and whether or not to appoint and remove officials all depend on Liu Yanlang.

古文：诸方镇、刺史自外入者，必先赂延朗，后议贡献。赂厚者先，得内地；赂薄者晚，得边陲。
现代文：各处方镇、刺史从外莎藩入朝的，必然先贿赂刘延朗，然后议论一下各家所贡献的礼物，贿赂多的先办，得到内地职差；贿赂少的后办，只能得到边远的职差。
English: Those who came to the imperial court from other provinces and clans were bound to bribe Liu Yanlang first, and then discuss the gifts contributed by each family. Those who paid more bribes were sent to work in the mainland, while those who paid less bribes were sent to work far away.

古文：由是诸将帅皆怨愤，帝不能察。
现代文：因此，各地将帅都怨愤不满，而末帝不能察觉。
English: Therefore, generals from all over the country were resentful and dissatisfied, and the last emperor could not detect it.

古文：蜀金州防御使全师郁寇金州，拔水寨。
现代文：蜀国任命的金州防御使全师郁攻掠金州，攻下了水寨。
English: The Jinzhou defense appointed by Shu State made the whole division attack and plunder Jinzhou, and captured the water castle.

古文：城中兵才千人，都监陈知隐托它事将兵三百沿流遁去。防御使马全节罄私财以给军，出奇死战，蜀兵乃退。
现代文：城中的守兵只有一千人，都监陈知隐推托有别的事；带兵三百沿着汉水逃遁而去；防御使马全节把自己的全部私财都拿出来赏供军队，出奇兵死命战斗，蜀兵才退回去。
English: There were only a thousand guards in the city, and the governor Chen Chih-yin had other things to do; he took three hundred soldiers and fled along the Han River; the defense made Ma Quanzi take out all of his personal wealth to reward the army, surprising the soldiers to fight to the death, and the Shu soldiers retreated.

古文：戊寅，诏斩知隐。
现代文：戊寅，末帝下诏斩了陈知隐。
English: Wu Yin, the last emperor, had Chen Zhiyin beheaded.

古文：初，闽主有幸臣曰归守明，出入卧内。闽主晚年得风疾，陈后与守明及百工院使李可殷私通，国人皆恶之，莫敢言。
现代文：从前，闽主王有个宠幸之臣名叫归守明，可以出入闽主的卧室；闽主晚年得了风寒伤身的疾病，陈皇后与归守明及百工院使李可殷私通，闽国人都厌恶他们，但是，不敢揭发。
English: Once upon a time, there was a favored vassal of the Lord King named Gui Shou Ming, who could enter and leave the Lord King's bedroom. In his later years, the Lord King contracted a cold and flu-like illness. Empress Chen and Gui Shou Ming, as well as the Hundred Industrial Institute, had a private affair with Li Ke Yin. The people of Shandong all detested them, but they did not dare to expose it.

古文：可殷尝谮皇城使李仿于闽主，后族陈匡胜无礼于福王继鹏，仿及继鹏皆恨之。
现代文：李可殷曾经在闽主面前说过皇城使李的坏话，皇后的本家陈匡胜对福王王继鹏没有礼仪，李和王继鹏都怨恨这些人。
English: Li Keyin had once said bad words about the imperial envoy Li in front of his master. The queen's own family, Chen Kuangsheng, had no etiquette for Fu Wang Wang Jipeng. Li and Wang Jipeng both resented these people.

古文：闽主疾甚，继鹏有喜色。
现代文：闽主病情发展严重，王继鹏面有喜色。
English: Wang Jipeng's face lit up with joy.

古文：仿以闽主为必不起，冬，十月，己卯，使壮士数人持白梃击李可殷，杀之，中外震惊。
现代文：李以为闽主的病必定不能再起，冬季，十月，己卯，指使几个身体强壮的人，手持棍棒去袭击李可殷，把他杀了，朝廷内外震惊。
English: Li believed that his master's illness would never return. In the winter, in October, he ordered several strong-bodied men to attack Li Keyin with clubs and killed him, shocking both inside and outside the court.

古文：庚辰，闽主疾少间，陈后诉之。
现代文：庚辰，闽主的病稍微见好，陈皇后把这件事告诉了闽主。
English: Geng Chen, the emperor's illness was slightly better, and Empress Chen told the emperor about this.

古文：闽主力疾视朝，诘可殷死状，仿惧而出，俄顷，引部兵鼓噪入宫。
现代文：闽主带病勉强临朝视事，查究李可殷是怎么死的。李恐惧而出，一会儿率领他的部属兵卒，吵嚷喧哗地进入宫中。
English: The chief magistrate reluctantly came to the imperial court with an illness to inspect the situation and investigate how Li Keyin died. Out of fear, Li led his subordinates and soldiers into the palace in a loud and noisy manner.

古文：闽主闻变，匿于九龙帐下，乱兵刺之而出。
现代文：闽主听见变故，躲在九龙帐底下，乱兵刺了他而后散出。
English: When the tyrant heard of the change of fortune, he hid under the Jiulong Tent. The ruffians stabbed him and then scattered.

古文：闽主宛转未绝，宫人不忍其苦，为绝之。
现代文：闽主受了伤，痛苦呻吟而没有死，宫人看了不忍心让他受这样的痛苦，便为他断气而死。
English: The lord of the castle was wounded, groaned in pain, but did not die. The courtiers saw that they could not bear to let him suffer such pain, so they died for him.

古文：仿与继鹏杀陈后、陈守恩、陈匡胜、归守明及继鹏弟继韬；继韬素与继鹏相恶故也。
现代文：李与王继鹏杀了陈皇后、陈守恩、陈匡胜、归守明及王继鹏的弟弟王继韬；因为王继韬素来同王继鹏相互厌恶。
English: Li and Wang Jipeng killed Empress Chen, Chen Shouen, Chen Kuangsheng, Gui Shouming and Wang Jipeng's younger brother Wang Jizhe; because Wang Jizhe and Wang Jipeng had always disliked each other.

古文：辛巳，继鹏称皇太后令监国，是日，即皇帝位。更名昶。
现代文：辛巳，王继鹏声称皇太后令他监国，就在当天，即皇帝位，改名王昶。
English: Suddenly, Wang Jipeng claimed that the Empress Dowager ordered him to supervise the country, and on the same day, that is, the emperor's throne, he changed his name to Wang Yao.

古文：谥其父曰齐肃明孝皇帝，庙号惠宗。
现代文：给其父王上谥号为齐肃明孝皇帝，庙号惠宗。
English: He gave his father, the king, the posthumous name of Emperor Qishu Mingxiao and the temple name of Huizong.

古文：既而自称权知福建节度事，遣使奉表于唐，大赦境内；立李春燕为贤妃。
现代文：接着又自称暂时主持福建节度事，派遣使者向后唐朝廷上表，在其辖境内实行大赦；册立李春燕为贤妃。
English: Next, he claimed to temporarily preside over the Fujian Festival, sent an envoy to the Tang court, and implemented an amnesty in the territory under his jurisdiction; Li Chunyan was registered as a virtuous empress.

古文：初，闽惠宗娶汉主女清远公主，使宦者闽清林延遇置邸于番禺，专掌国信。
现代文：起初，闽惠宗王娶南汉主刘龚的女儿清远公主，派宦官闽清人林延遇在番禺建立府邸，专门掌握国内的信息。
English: At first, King Gong Huizong married Princess Qingyuan, the daughter of the Southern Han Emperor Liu Bei, and sent the eunuch, the eunuch of the Qing Dynasty, Lin Yanfeng, to build a mansion in Panyu, specializing in domestic information.

古文：汉主赐以大第，禀赐甚厚，数问以闽事。
现代文：南汉主赐给他大的宅第，供给赏赐都很丰厚。
English: The lord of the Southern Han Dynasty gave him a large mansion, and the rewards were plentiful.

古文：延遇不对，退，谓人曰： 去闽语闽，去越语越，处人宫禁，可如是乎！ 
现代文：多次向他讯问闽国的事情，林延遇不回答，退下来后，对人说： 离开闽国就谈论闽，离开越国就谈论越，居处在人家的宫内，可以这样吗！ 
English: After repeatedly questioning him about the events in Yunnan, Lin Yan did not answer at all. After retreating, he said to the man: If you leave Yunnan, you can talk about Yunnan; if you leave Yue, you can talk about Yue; if you live in someone else's palace, can you do this?

古文：汉主闻而贤之，以为内常侍，使钩校诸司事。
现代文：南汉主听到这话后认为他是贤士，用他为内常侍，让他联系校核诸司的事情。
English: After hearing this, the Southern Han lord thought that he was a wise man and used him as a regular attendant to let him contact the departments of the school.

古文：延遇闻惠宗遇弑，求归，不许，素服向其国三日哭。
现代文：林延遇听说惠宗王被弑，要求归闽，没有得到南汉主的允许，穿了丧服向着他的国家方向哭了三天。
English: When Lin Yan heard that King Huizong had been captured, he demanded to return to China. Without the permission of the Southern Han Dynasty, he wore mourning clothes and wept for three days in the direction of his country.

古文：荆南节度使高从诲，性明达，亲礼贤士，委任梁震，以兄事之。震常谓从诲为郎君。
现代文：荆南节度使高从诲，性情通达，亲近和礼敬贤士，委任梁震，把他作为兄长看待；梁震常常称呼高从诲为郎君。
English: The Jingnan Festival made Gao Zongyao, a virtuous man with a well-rounded temperament, approachable and respectful, and appointed Liang Zhen as his elder brother. Liang Zhen often called Gao Zongyao his son-in-law.

古文：楚王希范好奢靡，游谈者共夸其盛，从诲谓僚佐曰： 如马王可谓大丈夫矣。 
现代文：楚王马希范喜爱奢侈糜费，和他游乐谈笑的人都夸赞他的盛况。高从诲对僚佐说： 像马王那样可以称得上是大丈夫了。 
English: King Ma Xifan of Chu loved extravagant spending, and everyone who had fun with him praised his pomp. Gao Congyao said to his colleague: It's okay to be like King Ma.

古文：孙光宪对曰： 天子诸侯，礼有等差。
现代文：孙光宪回答他说： 天子和诸侯，礼节上是有差别的。
English: Sun Guangxian replied to him, "There is a difference in etiquette between the emperor and princes.

古文：彼乳臭子骄侈僭忲，取快一时，不为远虑，危亡无日，又足慕乎！ 
现代文：他一个乳臭未干的小儿，骄纵奢侈越糜费，取得快意于一时，不作长远的思虑，不知哪天便要危亡，有什么可以羡慕的啊？ 
English: He's a spoiled brat, indulging in luxury at great expense, getting pleasure in the moment, without long-term considerations, I don't know which day he will die, what is there to envy?

古文：从诲久而悟，曰： 公言是也。 
现代文：高从诲愣怔之后而觉悟，说： 先生的话是对的。 
English: Gao Zongrui, after being stunned, came to his senses and said: Teacher's words are right.

古文：它日，谓梁震曰： 吾自念平生奉养，固已过矣。 
现代文：另一天，对梁震说： 我自己感到平生所受的奉养本来就已经过份了。 
English: On another day, he said to Liang Zhen: I myself feel that the support I have received in my lifetime is already too much.

古文：乃捐去玩好，以经史自娱，省刑薄赋，境内以安。
现代文：于是舍弃了好玩喜爱的东西，用阅读经史作为自己的乐事，省简刑罚，减轻赋税，辖境之内，得以安定。
English: As a result, he gave up the fun and favorite things, used the reading of history as his own entertainment, shortened the penalty, reduced the tax, and became stable within the jurisdiction.

古文：梁震曰： 先王待我如布衣交，以嗣王属我。
现代文：梁震说： 先王高季兴待我如同布衣之交一样，把嗣王托付给我。
English: Liang Zhen said: The late King Gao Ji treated me like a close friend, entrusting me with the throne.

古文：今嗣王能自立，不坠其业，吾老矣，不复事人矣。 
现代文：现在嗣王能够自立，可以不使先王遗业坠落了。我老了，不再侍奉别人了。 
English: Now that the heir can stand on his own, he can prevent the legacy of the former king from falling. I am old, and I no longer serve others.

古文：遂固请退居。
现代文：于是坚决请求告退家居。
English: So he made a firm request to leave his home.

古文：从诲不能留，乃为之筑室于士洲。
现代文：高从诲留不住他，便替他在土洲建筑了房子。
English: Gao Congyou couldn't keep him, so he built a house for him in Tushu.

古文：震披鹤氅，自称荆台隐士，每诣府，跨黄牛至听事。
现代文：梁震披着鹤氅，自称荆台隐士，每当到王府去谒见，骑着黄牛直到听事的大厅。
English: Liang Zhen wore a crane's beak and called himself a Jing Tai hermit. Whenever he went to the king's palace for an audience, he rode a cow to the audience hall.

古文：从诲时过其家，四时赐与甚厚。
现代文：高从诲时常到他家里去看望他，一年四季的赏赐极为丰厚。
English: Gao Zongyao often went to his home to visit him, and the rewards throughout the year were extremely rich.

古文：自是悉以政事属孙光宪。
现代文：从此，把政务全部托付给孙光宪去处理。
English: From then on, all government affairs were entrusted to Sun Guangxian to handle.

古文：臣光曰： 孙光宪见微而能谏，高从诲闻善而能徙，梁震成功而能退，自古有国家者能如是，夫何亡国败家丧身之有。 
现代文：臣司马光曰：孙光宪看到细微兆头而能够进谏，高从诲听到正确意见而能够改正，梁震功成之后而能够引退，自古握有国家大权的人能做到这样，还有什么亡国、败家、丧身的事情出现。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: Sun Guangxian saw the subtle signs and was able to make progress, Gao Zhen heard the correct opinions and was able to correct them, Liang Zhen achieved success and was able to retire, since ancient times, people who hold national power can do this, and there are still some things that have lost the country, the family, and the life.

古文：吴加中书令徐知诰尚父、太师、大丞相、大元帅，进封齐王，备殊礼，以升、润、宣、池、歙、常、江、饶、信、海十州为齐国；知诰辞尚父、丞相，殊礼不受。
现代文：吴国加封中书令徐知诰为尚父、太师、大丞相、大元帅，进封齐王，设置特殊的礼节，把、润、宣、池、歙、常、江、饶、信、海十个州划作齐国；徐知诰辞退尚父、丞相的职称，对于给他的特殊礼节也不予承受。
English: In addition, the State of Wu, in the middle of the letter, ordered Xu Zhisheng to be the Father, Grand Master, Grand Minister and Grand Marshal, and the King of Qi, and set up a special etiquette, and divided the ten states of Run, Xuan, Pool, Fen, Chang, Jiang, Rao, Xin and Hai into the Qi country; Xu Zhisheng declined the title of Father and Grand Minister, and did not accept the special etiquette given to him.

古文：闽皇城使、判六军诸卫李亻放专制朝政，阴养死士，闽主昶与拱宸指挥使林延皓等图之。
现代文：闽国皇城使、判六军诸卫李专权把持朝政，暗中培养亡命之徒，闽主王昶与拱辰指挥使林延皓等合谋他。
English: The six armies of Wei and Li in the imperial city of Shandong were given the exclusive power to control the imperial government and secretly nurture the outlaws. The lord of Shandong, Wang Qi, conspired with the commander of Gongchen, Lin Yanqi, and others.

古文：延皓等诈亲附亻放，亻放待之不疑。
现代文：林延皓等假意亲近依附于他，李对待这些人不加怀疑。
English: Li treated these people without any suspicion, such as Lin Yanyan and others who pretended to be close to him.

古文：十一月，壬子，亻放入朝，延皓等伏卫士数百于内殿，执斩之，枭首朝门。
现代文：十一月，壬子，李入朝，林延皓等在内殿，埋伏了卫士几百人，把他捉住杀了，砍下首级在朝门示众。
English: In November, Ren Zi, Li Rong, Lin Yanqi and others ambushed several hundred guards in the inner hall, captured and killed him, and cut off his head to show it to the public at the imperial gate.

古文：亻放部兵千馀持白梃攻应天门，不克，焚启圣门，夺亻放首奔吴越。
现代文：李的部兵一千多人拿着白色棍棒进攻应天门，攻不下来，焚烧了启圣门，夺取了李的头投奔吴越。
English: More than a thousand of Li's soldiers attacked Yingtian Gate with white cudgels, but were unable to conquer it. They burned the Qixing Gate, seized Li's head and fled to Wuyue.

古文：诏暴亻放弑君及杀继韬等罪，告谕中外。
现代文：闽主下诏宣布李弑君以及杀死王继韬等罪名，告示朝廷内外。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict declaring Li Shijun and the killing of Wang Jizhe guilty of various crimes, which was announced inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：以建王继严权判六军诸卫，以六军判官永泰叶翘为内宣徽使、参政事。
现代文：闽主任用建王王继严暂领判理六军诸卫的事务，任用六军判官永泰人叶翘为内宣徽使、参政事。
English: The chief magistrate used Jian Wang Wang Jian as a temporary leader to judge the affairs of the six armies and the guards, and appointed the judge of the six armies, Yong Taijin Ye Gao, as an envoy of the Inner Court and a participant in politics.

古文：翘博学质直，闽惠宗擢为福王友，昶以师傅礼待之，多所裨益，宫中谓之 国翁 。
现代文：叶翘学识渊博，为人质朴正直，闽惠宗王把他提拔为福王王昶的朋友，王昶用师傅的礼遇对待他，多方面得到他的帮助和益处，宫中管他叫 国翁 。
English: Ye Zhao was a scholar with profound knowledge and a simple and honest person. King Gong Huizong promoted him as a friend of King Fu Wang Yao. Wang Yao treated him with the courtesy of a master and received his help and benefits in many ways. He was called Guo Weng in the palace.

古文：昶既嗣位，骄纵，不与翘议国事。
现代文：后来，王昶继承了王位，便骄纵起来，不再同叶翘议论国事。
English: Later, when Wang Yao inherited the throne, he became arrogant and no longer discussed state affairs with Ye Zhao.

古文：一旦，昶方视事，翘衣道士服过庭中趋出，昶召还，拜之，曰： 军国事殷，久不接对，孤之过也。 
现代文：一天早上，王昶正在办公，叶翘穿着道士的衣服从庭院中经过并往门外走去，王昶把他召回来，向他行拜礼，说道： 军国的事太多，很久没有同您商谈了，这是我的过错。 
English: One morning, when Wang Yao was in his office, Ye Jia, dressed as a Taoist priest, passed through the courtyard and walked out the door. Wang Yao called Ye Jia back, bowed to him, and said, "There are too many military affairs. I haven't discussed them with you for a long time. It's my fault."

古文：翘顿首曰： 老臣辅导无状，致陛下即位以来无一善可称，愿乞骸骨。 
现代文：叶翘顿首下拜说： 老臣辅助引导得不得法，以致使陛下即位以来没一件好事可以称道，希望您放我告老回乡，保存躯骸归土。 
English: Ye Qiaotong bowed his head and said: "The old minister's assistance and guidance have been beyond the law, so that there has not been a single good deed to commend since His Majesty ascended the throne. I hope you will let me return to my hometown, preserve my body and return it to the earth."

古文：昶曰： 先帝以孤属公，政令不善，公当极言，奈何弃孤去！ 
现代文：王昶说： 先帝把我托付给您，政令如有不善之处，老先生应当极力进言，怎么能抛下我不管而去呢！ 
English: Wang Yao said: The previous emperor entrusted me to you. If there is anything wrong with the government order, the old gentleman should try his best to advise. How can you leave me and go away?

古文：厚赐金帛，慰谕令复位。
现代文：于是赐给他丰厚的金帛，慰问劝解，命令他恢复原来职位。
English: So he gave him a rich gold ingot, consoled and persuaded him, and ordered him to resume his original position.

古文：昶元妃梁国夫人李氏，同平章事敏之女，昶嬖李春燕，待夫人甚薄。
现代文：王昶的原配梁国夫人李氏，是同平章事李敏的女儿，王昶宠爱李春燕，对待夫人很淡薄。
English: Wang Yao's original wife Liang Guo's wife, Li, is the daughter of Tongping Zhangjiagang Li Min. Wang Yao doted on Li Chunyan and treated his wife very lightly.

古文：翘谏曰： 夫人先帝之甥，聘之以礼，奈何以新爱而弃之！ 
现代文：叶翘进谏说： 夫人是先帝的外甥女，是用隆重礼法聘娶来的，怎能因为有新欢的人就把她丢弃呢！ 
English: Ye Gao Jinjun said, "My wife is the former emperor's niece, and we married her with great ceremony. How can someone discard her just because she has a new lover?"

古文：昶不说，由是疏之。
现代文：王昶很不高兴，从此便疏远了他。
English: Wang Yao was very unhappy and distanced himself from him.

古文：未几，复上书言事，昶批其纸尾曰： 一叶随风落御沟。 
现代文：没有多久，又上书言事，王昶纸的末尾批示说： 一叶随风落御沟。 
English: It didn't take long for the matter to come up again in writing, with Wang Yao writing at the end of the paper: "A leaf falls into the ditch with the wind."

古文：遂放归永泰，以寿终。
现代文：便把叶翘放归永泰，后来因年老而去世。
English: He then released the leaves back to Yongtai and later died of old age.

古文：帝嘉马全节之功，召诣阙。
现代文：后唐末帝赞扬马全节保护金州的功劳，召他进京朝见。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, the late emperor praised Ma Quanzhong's protection of Jinzhou and called him to Beijing for a meeting.

古文：刘延朗求赂，全节无以与之；延朗欲除全节绛州刺史，群议沸腾。
现代文：刘延朗向他索求贿赂，马全节没有给他什么东西；刘延郎想任命马全节为绛州刺史，群臣不满，议论沸腾。
English: Liu Yanlang asked him for a bribe, Ma Quan Jie did not give him anything; Liu Yan Lang wanted to appoint Ma Quan Jie as the governor of Zhangzhou, the ministers were dissatisfied, and the discussion was boiling.

古文：帝闻之，乙卯，以全节为横海留后。
现代文：末帝听说后，乙卯，任命马全节为横海留后。
English: After the last emperor heard about it, he appointed Ma Quanzhong as the new empress.

古文：十二月，壬申，以中书侍郎、同平章事充枢密使韩昭胤同平章事，充护国节度使。
现代文：十二月，壬申，末帝任用户中书侍郎、同平章事充枢密使韩昭胤同平章事，充护国节度使。
English: In December, in Jinshin, the last emperor appointed Han Zhaotian as the user's middle secretary, Tongping Zhengji as the imperial envoy, Han Zhaotian as Tongping Zhengji, and Tongping Zhengji as the national festival envoy.

古文：乙酉，以前匡国节度使、同平章事冯道为司空。
现代文：乙酉，末帝任用前匡国节度使、同平章事冯道为司空。
English: Acetylene, the last emperor appointed the former Kuangguo Jiedu envoy, Tongping Zhangji Feng Dao as Siku.

古文：时久无正拜三公者，朝议疑其职事；卢文纪欲令掌祭祀扫除，道闻之曰： 司空扫除，职也，吾何惮焉。 
现代文：当时已经很久没有正式拜授为三公的人，朝廷议论中对司空的职事拿不准，卢文纪想让他掌管祭祀扫除，冯道听说后说道： 司空扫除，这也算他的职责，我有什么可怕的。 
English: At that time, it had been a long time since anyone had been officially appointed as the Three Princes, and the Imperial Court was not sure about the duties of the Sikyong. Lu Wenji wanted him to be in charge of the sacrificial sweeping. After hearing this, Feng Dao said, "Sikyong sweeping, this is also his duty, what am I afraid of?"

古文：既而文纪自知不可，乃止。
现代文：接着卢文纪自己也意识到这样做不合适，于是停止实行。
English: Then Lu Wenji himself also realized that this was not appropriate, so he stopped the practice.

古文：闽主赐洞真先生陈守元号天师，信重之，乃至更易将相、刑罚、选举，皆与之议；守元受赂请托，言无不从，其门如市。
现代文：闽主王昶赐给洞真先生陈守元以天师的称号，信任和倚重他，乃至更换将相、施行刑罚、选贤举能这样的重大事情，都同他商议；陈守元接受贿赂、请托，有求必应，门庭若市。
English: The Lord Wang Xi bestowed the title of heavenly teacher on Chen Shouyuan, Mr. Dong Zhen, and trusted and relied on him. Even such important matters as the replacement of generals, the imposition of punishments, and the selection of sages were discussed with him. Chen Shouyuan accepted bribes, requests, and requests, and his door was wide open.

