古文：朱大典，字延之，金华人。
现代文：朱大典，字延之，金华人。
English: Zhu Dadian, Zhi Yanzhi, Jin Hua Ren.

古文：家世贫贱。大典始读书，为人豪迈。
现代文：家世贫贱，到大典这里才开始读书。他为人气势豪迈。
English: His family was poor, and he only began to study here in Daedong. He was a man of great stature.

古文：登万历四十四年进士，除章丘知县。
现代文：考中万历四十四年榜进士，授官章丘知县。
English: In the 44th year of the Wanli Middle School Examination, he was awarded the title of Zhangyuchixian.

古文：天启二年擢兵科给事中。
现代文：天启二年提拔为兵部给事中。
English: In the second year of the apocalypse, he was promoted to the military department.

古文：中官王体乾、魏忠贤等十二人及乳妪客氏，假保护功，荫锦衣世袭，大典抗疏力谏。
现代文：宦官王体乾、魏忠贤等十二人以及乳母客氏，借护卫皇上的功绩荫封子孙世袭锦衣，大典抗言上书，极力谏阻。
English: Twelve eunuchs, including the eunuchs Wang Tieqian and Wei Zhongxian, as well as the wet nurse Kake, borrowed the merit of protecting the emperor to seal the hereditary brocade of the descendants, and the grand ceremony protested and wrote a letter, and tried their best to resist.

古文：五年出为福建副使，进右参政，以忧归。
现代文：五年外出担任福建副使，之后晋升为右参政，因守丧去职还乡。
English: He served as deputy envoy to Fujian Province for five years, after which he was promoted to the right to participate in politics, but he left the post and returned to his hometown because of his father's death.

古文：崇祯三年，起故官，莅山东，寻调天津。
现代文：崇祯三年重新被起用，到山东担任原先的官职，不久调往天津。
English: Three years later, he was reappointed to Shandong to take up his previous post, and was soon transferred to Tianjin.

古文：五年四月，李九成、孔有德围莱州。
现代文：五年四月，李九成、孙有德围攻莱州。
English: In April of the fifth year, Li Jucheng and Sun Youde besieged Laizhou.

古文：山东巡抚徐从治中炮死，擢大典右佥都御史代之，诏驻青州，调度兵食。
现代文：山东巡抚徐从治中炮而死，朝廷就提升大典为右佥都御史取代其职，又下诏书让他驻守青州，负责部署兵马和粮草。
English: When the governor of Shandong Province, Xu Congzhi, was killed by artillery, the imperial court promoted Datian to replace him as the right-hand governor of the capital, and issued an imperial edict to station him in Qingzhou, where he was responsible for the deployment of soldiers, horses, and grain.

古文：七月，登莱巡抚谢琏复陷于贼，总督刘宇烈被逮。
现代文：七月，登、莱巡抚谢琏又陷落在贼手中，总督刘宇烈被逮捕。
English: In July, Xie Tong, the inspector general of Deng and Lai, fell into the hands of thieves again, and the governor Liu Yulei was arrested.

古文：乃罢总督及登莱巡抚不设，专任大典，督主、客兵数万及关外劲旅四千八百余人合剿之。
现代文：于是朝廷废除总督以及登、莱巡抚，不再设立，专门任命大典率领主、客兵数万人以及关外的精干部队四千八百多人联合剿灭贼寇。
English: As a result, the imperial court abolished the governors-general and the governors-general of Dong and Lai and no longer established them, and specially appointed Datian to lead the lords, tens of thousands of guest soldiers, and more than 4,800 elite troops from outside Guanzhong to jointly destroy the bandits.

古文：以总兵金国奇将，率副将靳国臣、刘邦域，参将祖大弼、祖宽、张韬，游击柏永福及故总兵吴襄、襄子三桂等，以中官高起潜监护军饷，抵德州。
现代文：让总兵金国奇担任将领，统帅副将靳国臣、刘邦域，参将祖大弼、祖宽、张韬，游击柏永福以及旧总兵吴襄和他的儿子吴三桂等人，让宦官高起潜监督、护守军饷，进驻德州。
English: Let the general soldier Jin Guoqi serve as a general, the commander-in-chief vice-commander Zou Guotian, Liu Bangwei, the general officers Zu Daxuan, Zu Guang, Zhang Zou, the guerrilla fighter Bao Yongfu, and the former general soldier Wu Xiang and his son Wu Sangui, etc., let the eunuch Gao Qian supervise and protect the eunuchs, and enter Texas.

古文：贼复犯平度，副将牟文绶、何维忠等救之，杀贼魁陈有时，维忠亦被杀。
现代文：贼兵又进犯平度，副将牟文绶、何维忠等前去救援当地驻军，杀死贼首陈有时，维忠也被杀头。
English: The bandits attacked Pingdu again, and Vice Generals Mou Wenzhong and He Weizhong went to the rescue of the local garrison. When they killed the bandit leader Chen, Weizhong was also killed.

古文：八月，巡按监军御史谢三宾至昌邑，请斩王洪、刘国柱，诏逮治之。
现代文：八月，巡抚监军御史谢三宾到昌邑，请求朝廷斩掉王洪、刘国柱，朝廷下令逮捕他们加以治罪。
English: In August, the inspector general of the army, Gushi Xie Sanbin, went to Changyi and asked the court to behead Wang Hong and Liu Guozhu. The court ordered them to be arrested and punished.

古文：兵部尚书熊明遇亦坐主抚误国，罢去。
现代文：兵部尚书熊明遇也因为曾主张招安贻误国事，被罢官回家。
English: Shang Shuxiong of the Ministry of Military Affairs was dismissed from his post and sent home because he had advocated the recruitment of peacekeepers and misjudged the state affairs.

古文：三宾复抗疏请绝口勿言抚事。
现代文：谢三宾又上疏请求朝廷从此不要再谈论招安的事了。
English: Xie Sanbin went on to ask the court not to talk about the matter of recruiting from now on.

古文：国奇等至昌邑，分三路。国奇等关外兵为前锋，邓玘步兵继之，从中路灰埠进。昌平总兵陈洪范，副将刘泽清、方登化，从南路平度进。参将王之富、王文纬等从北路海庙进。
现代文：国奇等人到达昌邑，兵分三路：国奇等关外兵为先锋，邓王己率领步兵紧跟在后边，从中路的灰埠进兵；昌平总兵陈洪范，副将刘泽清、方登化从南路的平度进兵；参将王之富、王文纬等从北路的海庙进兵。
English: Guo Qi and others arrived in Chang'e, and the soldiers were divided into three routes: Guo Qi and other Guan foreign soldiers were the vanguard, Deng Wangyi led the infantry followed closely behind, marching from the middle of the road to the gray port; Changping general Chen Hongfan, vice generals Liu Zeching and Fang Denghua marched from the south of the road; and Wang Zhifu and Wang Wenyi marched from the north of the road to the sea temple.

古文：檄游击徐元亨等率莱阳师来会，以牟文绶守新河。
现代文：又传达文书征调游击徐元亨等人率领莱阳的军队前来会合，让牟文绶把守新河。
English: He also conveyed the document of recruiting and transferring guerrilla Xu Yuanheng and others to lead the army of Laiyang to come to the meeting, and let Mufenqin guard Xinhe.

古文：诸军皆携三日粮，尽抵新河东岸，乱流以济。
现代文：各路军都携带了三天的粮食，全部抵达新河东岸，横渡而过。
English: All the armies carried three days of grain, and all of them reached the east bank of the Xinhe River and crossed it.

古文：祖宽至沙河，有德迎战。
现代文：祖宽到达沙河，孔有德过来迎战。
English: Zu Kuan arrived at the Shaha River, and Kong Youde came to meet him.

古文：宽先进，国臣继之，贼大败，诸军乘胜追至城下。
现代文：祖宽率先发起进攻，国臣做后援，贼兵彻底溃败。各路军队乘胜追击到城下。
English: Zu Kuan took the lead in launching the attack, supported by state ministers, and the robber soldiers were completely defeated. All the armies took advantage of the victory and chased them down to the city.

古文：贼夜半东遁，围始解。
现代文：贼兵半夜向东逃跑，平度之围才被解除。
English: The bandits fled east in the middle of the night, and the siege of Pingdu was finally lifted.

古文：守者疑贼诱，炮拒之。
现代文：守城的士兵怀疑是贼兵又来引诱他们出城，发大炮抵抗他们。
English: The soldiers guarding the city suspected that the robber soldiers had come to lure them out of the city again and fired cannons to resist them.

古文：起潜遣中使入谕，阖城相庆。
现代文：起潜派宫廷信使对他们做了说明，全城军民欢庆起来。
English: A courier sent by the imperial court explained the situation to them, and the whole city erupted in celebration.

古文：明日，南路兵始至。
现代文：第二天，南路军队到来。
English: The next day, the Southern Route Army arrived.

古文：国奇等遂击贼黄县，斩首万三千，俘八百，逃散及坠海死者数万。
现代文：国奇等人于是在黄县击败贼兵，斩获首级一万三千，俘虏八百，逃亡以及坠海死去的贼兵大约有几万人。
English: Guo Qi and others then defeated the bandits in Huang County, capturing 13,000 first-class soldiers, 800 prisoners, and about tens of thousands of bandits who fled and died at sea.

古文：贼窜归登州，国臣等筑长围守之。
现代文：贼兵逃窜回登州，国臣等人修筑长长的围墙围困他们。
English: The robber soldiers fled back to Dengzhou, and the statesmen and others began to build a long wall to encircle them.

古文：城三面距山，一面距海，墙三十里而遥，东西俱抵海。
现代文：城墙三面临山，一面临海，城墙有三十多里长，东西两面都与大海相接，分兵轮流戍守。
English: Three of the city walls face the mountains, and one faces the sea. The city wall is more than thirty miles long, and both the east and west sides are connected to the sea. Divisions of soldiers take turns guarding it.

古文：分番戍，贼不能出，发大炮，官军多死伤。
现代文：贼兵不能出去，就发大炮轰击，官军死伤很多。
English: When the bandits couldn't get out, they fired cannons at them, causing many deaths and injuries among the government troops.

古文：李九成出战相当。
现代文：李九成率兵出战，双方胜负相当。
English: Li Jiu Cheng led his troops into battle, and the two sides won and lost equally.

古文：十一月，九成搏战，降者泄其谋。
现代文：十一月，九成与官军短兵相接，奋力拼战，投降的贼兵泄露了他们的机密。
English: In November, the Ninety-Nines encountered the short soldiers of the government army and fought hard. The surrendering bandits revealed their secrets.

古文：官军合击之，馘于阵，贼乃晓夜哭。
现代文：官军联合攻击他们，在作战中把不少敌兵的耳朵割下来，贼兵于是日夜哭泣。
English: The government troops jointly attacked them and cut off the ears of many enemy soldiers during the battle. The bandits cried day and night.

古文：贼渠魁五，九成、有德、有时、耿仲明、毛承禄也，及是杀其二。
现代文：贼首五人，分别是九成、有德、有时、耿忠明、毛承禄。到这时杀掉了其中的两人。
English: There were five thieves, namely, Jiuxian, Youde, Sometimes, Geng Zhongming, and Mao Chenglu. At this time, they killed two of them.

古文：帝嘉解围功，进大典右副都御史，将吏升赏有差。
现代文：崇祯帝嘉奖了他们解围的功绩，提升大典为右副都御史，其他将领、官员程度不等地也得到升赏。
English: Emperor Chongzhen commended their achievements in lifting the siege, and promoted Datian to the position of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital, and other generals and officials were also rewarded to varying degrees.

古文：是月，国奇卒，以襄代。
现代文：这个月，国奇去世，让吴襄取代其职。
English: This month, Guo Qi passed away, leaving Wu Xiang to take his place.

古文：攻围既久，贼粮绝，恃水城可走，不降。
现代文：围攻进行了很长时间后，贼兵的粮食断绝，但因为背靠水城可以逃跑，他们仍然不肯投降。
English: After a long siege, the bandits ran out of food, but they still refused to surrender because they could flee with their backs to Shuicheng.

古文：及王之富、祖宽夺其水门外护墙，贼大惧。
现代文：等到王之富、祖宽攻取了他们的水城门外的护城墙，贼兵就十分害怕了。
English: By the time Wang Zhifu and Zu Kuan had captured the city wall outside their water gate, the robber soldiers were very afraid.

古文：六年二月中旬，有德先遁，载子女财帛出海。
现代文：六年二月中旬，有德最先逃跑，用船载着自己的儿子和金银财宝出海。
English: In mid-February of the sixth year, Youde was the first to escape, carrying her son and gold and silver treasure out to sea in a boat.

古文：仲明以水城委副将王秉忠，已亦以单舸遁，官军遂入大城。
现代文：仲明把水城委托给副将王秉忠，自己也乘一艘小船逃跑了，官军于是进攻大城。
English: Zhongming entrusted the water city to Vice Admiral Wang Bingzhong, and he himself also fled in a small boat. The government army then attacked the big city.

古文：攻水城，未下。
现代文：继而攻夺水城，没有攻下。
English: It then attacked Suicheng, but failed to capture Wuzhong.

古文：游击刘良佐献轰城策，匿人永福寺中，穴城置火药，发之，城崩，官军入。
现代文：游击刘良佐献上轰城的计策，让人隐藏在永福寺中，然后在城墙上挖洞放火药，点燃火药，城墙被炸，官军就冲了进去。
English: The guerrilla Liu Liangzuo proposed a strategy of bombing the city, hiding people in the Yongfu Temple, and then digging a hole in the city wall to set off gunpowder, igniting the gunpowder, the city wall was blown up, and the government army rushed in.

古文：贼退保蓬莱阁，大典招降，始释甲，俘千余人，获秉忠及伪将七十五人，自缢及投海死者不可胜计，贼尽平。
现代文：贼兵退守蓬莱阁，大典向贼兵招降，贼兵才放下武器，一千多人做了俘虏，共捉住秉忠和其他贼将七十五人，贼兵自杀和投水而死的人不计其数，贼兵这下全部被平定了。
English: The bandits retreated to Penglai Pavilion, and Datian invited the bandits to surrender. Only then did the bandits lay down their weapons. More than a thousand people were taken prisoner, and a total of seventy-five people were captured by Bingzhong and other bandits. The bandits committed suicide and drowned countless people, and the bandits were all subdued.

古文：有德等走旅顺，岛帅黄龙邀击，生擒其党毛承禄、陈光福、苏有功，斩李应元。惟有德、仲明逸去。
现代文：活捉了同党毛承禄、陈光福、苏有功，斩掉了李应元，只有有德、仲明逃脱。于是把承禄等人献给朝廷。
English: He captured fellow party members Mao Chenglu, Chen Guangfu, and Su Yugang alive, and beheaded Li Yingyuan; only Youde and Zhongming escaped. He then presented Chenglu and the others to the imperial court.

古文：乃献承禄等于朝。磔之先一日，有功脱械走。
现代文：在即将绞死他们的前一天，有功挣脱枷锁逃脱跑了。
English: The day before they were due to be hanged, one of them broke free and ran away.

古文：帝震怒，斩监守官，刑部郎多获罪。
现代文：崇祯皇帝非常恼怒，杀了监守的官员，刑部的郎官大多数被问了罪。
English: Emperor Chongzhen was so angry that he killed the officials guarding the prison. Most of the officials of the Criminal Investigation Department were asked about their crimes.

古文：未几被执，伏诛。
现代文：不多久，有功重新被抓获，杀掉了。
English: Not long after, You Gong was recaptured and killed.

古文：叙功，进大典兵部右侍郎，世荫锦衣百户，巡抚如故。
现代文：评定功绩，提升大典为兵部右侍郎，荫封子孙世袭锦衣百户，仍然巡抚登、莱一带地面。
English: His merits were evaluated, and he was promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the military department, and his descendants inherited the best brocade dresses from hundreds of families. He was still the governor of the Deng and Lai regions.

古文：八年二月，流贼陷凤阳，毁皇陵，总督杨一鹏被逮。
现代文：八年二月，流贼攻陷凤阳，摧毁皇陵，总督杨一鹏被捕。
English: In February of the eighth year, the bandits invaded Fengyang, destroyed the imperial mausoleum, and the governor Yang Yipeng was arrested.

古文：诏大典总督漕运兼巡抚庐、凤、淮、扬四郡，移镇凤阳。
现代文：朝廷诏令大典总管漕运兼巡抚庐、凤、淮、扬四郡，移兵镇守凤阳。
English: The imperial court issued a decree to transfer the commander-in-chief of rowing transport and the patrol leader of four counties, including Handan, Feng, Huai and Yang, to Fengyang.

古文：时江北州县多陷。
现代文：这时江北州县大多陷落贼手。
English: At this time, most of Jiangbei County fell into the hands of bandits.

古文：明年正月，贼围滁州，连营百余里，总兵祖宽大破之。
现代文：第二年正月，贼兵围攻滁州，兵营相连有一百多里长，总兵祖宽把他们打得大败。
English: In the first month of the second year, the robber soldiers besieged Luzhou. The barracks were more than a hundred miles long, and the general Zou Kuan defeated them.

古文：大典会总理卢象升追袭，复破之。
现代文：大典会同总理卢象升追袭贼兵，又打败了他们。
English: The grand ceremony, together with the Prime Minister Lu Xiangsheng, pursued the bandits and defeated them.

古文：急还兵遏贼众于凤阳，贼始退。
现代文：然后急忙回师在凤阳遏止大批贼兵的进攻，贼兵才撤退了。
English: Then he hurried back to the division in Fengyang to stop the attack of a large number of bandits, and the bandits retreated.

古文：十一年，贼复入江北，谋窜茶山。
现代文：十一年，贼兵又进入江北，打算窜入茶山。
English: In the eleventh year, the bandits again entered the northern part of the Yangtze River, intending to break into the Tea Mountains.

古文：大典与安庆巡抚史可法提兵遏之，贼乃西遁。
现代文：大典与安庆巡抚史可法率兵阻止他们，贼兵于是向西逃跑了。
English: Da Dian and Anqing governor Shikofa led troops to stop them, and the bandits fled westward.

古文：大典先坐失州县，贬秩视事。
现代文：大典因为丢失州县，被贬官治事。
English: Daiten was demoted because he lost his prefecture.

古文：是年四月以平贼逾期，再贬三秩。
现代文：这年四月又因为超过期限未能平贼，又被贬官三级。
English: In April of this year, he was demoted to the third grade again because he failed to defeat the thief after exceeding the deadline.

古文：寻叙援剿及转漕功，尽复其秩。
现代文：不久评定援剿贼兵以及漕运的功绩，完全恢复了他的官职。
English: Soon after, he was appraised of his achievements in aiding the Kuomintang soldiers and rowing, and was fully restored to his official position.

古文：十三年，河南贼大入湖广。
现代文：十三年，河南贼兵声势浩大地进犯湖广。
English: In the thirteenth year, the bandits from Henan invaded Hunan with great force.

古文：大典遣将救援，屡有功，进左侍郎。
现代文：大典派遣将领前去援救，多次立功，被提拔为兵部左侍郎。
English: Daisetsu dispatched generals to the rescue, and they rendered meritorious service many times. He was promoted to the left hand man of the military department.

古文：明年六月命大典总督江北及河南、湖广军务，仍镇凤阳，专办流贼，而以可法代督漕运。
现代文：第二年六月命令大典总管江北以及河南、湖广的军务，仍然坐镇凤阳，专门办理平定流贼的军务，让史可法取代他掌管漕运。
English: In June of the following year, he ordered Datian, who was in charge of military affairs in the northern part of the Yangtze River, as well as in Henan and Hunan, to remain in Fengyang and deal specifically with the military affairs of pacifying the bandits, and let Shi Kefa take charge of transportation instead of him.

古文：贼帅袁时中众数万，横颍、亳间。
现代文：贼兵将领袁时中率领几万兵力横行在颍州、亳州之间。
English: The robber general Yuan Shizhong led tens of thousands of troops to run rampant between Ganzhou and Ganzhou.

古文：大典率总兵刘良佐等击破之，叙赉有差。
现代文：大典率领总兵刘良佐等击败了他们，程度不同地得到记功奖赏。
English: Da Dian led the general Liu Liang Zuo and other soldiers to defeat them, and they received awards of merit to varying degrees.

古文：大典有保障功，然不能持廉，屡为给事中方士亮、御史郑昆贞等所劾，诏削籍侯勘。事未竟，而东阳许都事发。
现代文：大典有保卫国家的功劳，但不能廉洁奉公，因而多次被给事中方士亮、御史郑昆贞等人弹劾，朝廷下令把他剥夺官籍，等候查处，事情还没有了结，东阳地方许都的事又发生了。
English: Da Dian had the merit of defending the country, but he could not serve the public with integrity. As a result, he was repeatedly impeached by the Chinese scholar Liang, the imperial historian Zheng Kunzhen and others. The imperial court ordered him to be stripped of his official registration, pending investigation. The matter is not over yet, and the incident in Dongyang has happened again.

古文：许都者，诸生，负气，愤县令苛敛，作乱，围金华。
现代文：许都是一个学生，凭着意气，因愤恨县令搜刮百姓，在当地造反，围攻金华。
English: Xu Du was a student who, out of resentment of the county's order to round up people, rebelled locally and besieged Jinhua.

古文：大典子万化募健儿御之，贼平而所募者不散。
现代文：大典的儿子朱万化招募勇敢的年青人抵御他们，剿平贼寇后招募的人员没有疏散。
English: Datong's son Zhu Wanhua recruited brave young people to resist them, and those recruited after the suppression of the bandits did not evacuate.

古文：大典闻，急驰归。
现代文：大典听说后，赶忙骑马回家。
English: After hearing the news, Daiten hurriedly rode home.

古文：知县徐调元阅都兵籍有万化名，遂言大典纵子交贼。
现代文：知县徐调元在查许都的叛军花名册时发现上面有万化的名字，就说大典纵容自己的儿子与贼兵勾结。
English: When Xu Zhenyuan of Zhixian County found Wanhua's name on the roster of rebels in Shudu, he said that Dadian had allowed his son to collude with the bandits.

古文：巡按御史左光先闻于朝，得旨逮治，籍其家充饷，且令督赋给事中韩如愈趣之。
现代文：巡抚御史左光先把这事报告了朝廷，奉旨逮捕大典父子治罪，把他的家产抄没充当军饷，并且命令督赋给事中韩如愈前往催促当地官员予以执行。
English: The governor, Gishi Sako, first reported the matter to the imperial court, ordered the arrest of Daiten and his son, confiscated his family's property as military pay, and ordered the governor to assign Han Ruyue to the matter to urge local officials to implement it.

古文：已而京师陷，福王立。
现代文：后来京都陷落，福王即位。
English: Later, Kyoto fell and Fukuo ascended the throne.

古文：有白其诬者，而大典亦自结于马士英、阮大铖，乃召为兵部左侍郎。
现代文：有人在朝中替他辩白，而且大典也同马士英、阮大铖结好，于是被召为兵部左侍郎。
English: Someone in the imperial court pleaded on his behalf, and Datian also made friends with Ma Shih-ying and Nguyn Đc, so he was called to be the left attendant of the military department.

古文：逾月，进尚书，总督上江军务。
现代文：过了一个月，晋升为尚书，总管长江上游的军务。
English: A month later, he was promoted to Shangshu, the head of military affairs in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River.

古文：左良玉兴兵，命监黄得功军御之。
现代文：左良玉举兵东下，福王命令他监督黄得功的军队抵御左良玉。
English: Zuo Liangyu marched eastward, and King Fu ordered him to supervise Huang's victorious army to resist Zuo Liangyu.

古文：福王奔太平，大典与大铖入见舟中，誓力战。
现代文：福王逃往太平，大典与大铖在船中觐见，发誓竭力作战。
English: Fu Wang fled to Taiping. Da Dian met with Daju in the boat and swore to fight to the best of their ability.

古文：金华被屠，集父老告之曰： 兵且至，吾义不当去。
现代文：得功死后，福王被俘，他和大铖两个人于是逃往杭州。
English: After his death, Fu Wang was captured, and he and Dazhao fled to Hangzhou.

古文：然不可以一人故，致阖城被殃。 
现代文：恰好潞王也投降了，大典才回到家乡所在的金华郡，占据城堡顽强地防御。
English: It just so happened that Shao Wang also surrendered, and it was only then that Datian returned to his hometown of Jinhua County to occupy the castle and tenaciously defend it.

古文：遂封其印，冠带向北拜，赴井死。
现代文：唐王听说后，就原地加封他为东阁大学士，督管浙东的军队。
English: After Tang Wang heard about it, he appointed him as a member of the Dongge University and put him in charge of the army in eastern Zhejiang.

古文：士民为收葬，立祠祀焉。张国维，安玉笥，东阳人。
现代文：过了一年，城被攻下，大典全家与城共亡了。张国维，字玉笥，东阳人。
English: A year later, the city was conquered, and the whole family of Datian perished with the city. Zhang Guowei, surnamed Yulong, was from Dongyang.

古文：天启二年进士。
现代文：天启二年进士。
English: Entered the priesthood in the second year of the Apocalypse.

古文：授番禺知县。
现代文：初任番禺知县。
English: He was first appointed to Panyu County.

古文：崇祯元年，擢刑科给事中，劾罢副都御史杨所修、御史田景新，皆魏忠贤党也。
现代文：崇祯二年，国维升任刑科给事中，弹劾、罢免了副都御史杨所修、御史田景新，这两个人都是魏忠贤的党羽。
English: In the second year of Chongzhen, Guowei was promoted to the Criminal Investigation Department. During the proceedings, he impeached and dismissed the vice-governor Shi Yang Shoshu and the vice-governor Shi Tian Jingxin, both of whom were Wei Zhongxian's party members.

古文：已，陈时政五事，言： 陛下求治太锐，综核太严。
现代文：后来他上书对当时政治提出五条意见，说 ：陛下求治之心太急迫，综合考察太严格。
English: Later, in a letter, he put forward five points of view on the politics of the time, saying: His Majesty's desire for reform is too urgent, and comprehensive examination is too strict.

古文：拙者跼艴以避咎，巧者委蛇以取容，谁能展布四体，为国家营职业者。
现代文：笨拙的官员小心戒惧但求无过，用心机巧的则敷衍塞责以图保住官位，谁还能施展身手为国家办理应做的事呢？
English: Clumsy officials are careful to avoid fear but seek no fault, while the diligent and skillful are perfunctory in order to maintain their official position. Who can exert their skills to do what should be done for the country?

古文：故治象精明，而腹心手足之谊实薄，此英察宜敛也。
现代文：所以皇上治国的气象精明，把臣下看作心腹、手足一样的情义实在缺乏，这样说来皇上的英明察决应该有所收敛了。
English: Therefore, the Emperor's astute management of the country and his consideration of his vassals as confidants and brothers-in-arms is really lacking. In this way, the Emperor's wisdom and decision-making should be somewhat restrained.

古文：祖宗朝，阁臣有封还诏旨者，有疏揭屡上而争一事者。
现代文：祖宗在位时，阁臣有封还圣旨不肯执行的，有章奏屡上争议一事的。
English: When the ancestor was on the throne, the cabinet ministers refused to carry out the sacred will of the emperor, and there were many disputes over the issue.

古文：今一奉诘责，则俯首不遑；一承改拟，则顺旨恐后。
现代文：现在大臣一旦受到批评，就赶快低头认错；一旦意见被皇上批评，就赶快顺着您的旨意来。
English: Now, as soon as a minister is criticized, he quickly bows his head and admits his mistake; as soon as an opinion is criticized by the emperor, he quickly follows your will.

古文：倘处置失宜，亦必不敢执奏，此将顺宜戒也。
现代文：陛下处理不当，大臣也不敢坚持自己的意见进奏。
English: His majesty handled it improperly, and the minister did not dare to insist on his own opinion.

古文：召对本以通下情，未有因而获罪者。
现代文：这样说来大臣的一味顺随应该有所戒除了。陛下召见大臣问话本来是要下情上通的，没有因此该被问罪的。
English: In this way, the minister's blind compliance should have been prevented. His Majesty's summoning of the minister for questioning was originally intended to clarify the situation, and there was no reason to be questioned.

古文：今则惟传天语，莫睹拜扬。
现代文：现在召见大臣只是传达皇上的指示，没见哪个人敢有所褒贬。
English: Now, summoning a minister is just conveying the emperor's instructions, and no one dares to praise or criticize.

古文：臣同官熊奋渭还朝十日，旁措一词，遂蒙谴谪。
现代文：我的同事熊奋渭回朝才十天，只是从旁边讲了句话，就被贬出去了。
English: It took my colleague Xiong Fengtuan only ten days to get back to the office. He only spoke a few words from the sidelines, and then he was kicked out.

古文：不可稍加薄罚，示优容之度乎？
现代文：难道不能把惩罚稍微减轻一些，显示陛下您宽宏的肚量吗？
English: Couldn't you lighten the punishment a little and show your majesty how big your heart is?

古文：此上下宜洽也。 
现代文：这样说来君臣间的关系应该有所和洽了。 
English: In this way, the relationship between princes and ministers should be somewhat harmonious.

古文：其二条，请平刑罚，溥膏泽。
现代文：另外两条是请求平治刑罚，广施恩惠的。
English: The other two articles are a request for the punishment to be carried out peacefully and a request for a wide range of favors.

古文：帝不能尽用。
现代文：庄烈帝没能全采纳。
English: Emperor Zhuang could not adopt all of them.

古文：进礼科都给事中。
现代文：国维后来升任礼科都给事中。
English: Guowei was later promoted to vice-minister of etiquette.

古文：京师地震，规弊政甚切，迁太常少卿。
现代文：京师地震后，他上书规谏弊政，话讲得很严厉。过后升任了太常少卿。
English: After the earthquake in Beijing, he wrote a letter condemning the bad government and spoke very harshly. Later, he was promoted to the position of Taizang Shaoqing.

古文：七年，擢右佥都御史，巡抚应天、安庆等十府。
现代文：崇祯七年，国维升任左佥都御史，外出巡抚应天、安庆等十府。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Guowei was promoted to the position of Zuoying Metropolitan Historian, and went out to serve as the governor of ten prefectures including Yingtian and Anqing.

古文：其冬，流贼犯桐城，官军覆没。
现代文：这年冬天，流贼进犯桐城，当地的官军全军覆没了。
English: This winter, bandits invaded Tongcheng, and the entire local government army was wiped out.

古文：国维方壮年，一夕须发顿白。
现代文：国维正当壮年，却因此一夜之间头发、胡须都变白了。
English: Guowei was in his prime, but his hair and beard turned white overnight.

古文：明年正月率副将许自强赴援，游击潘可大、知县陈尔铭等守桐不下。
现代文：第二年正月，他带着副将许自强前往增援，游击潘可大、知县陈尔铭等固守桐城，贼寇不能攻下来。
English: In the first month of the second year, he went to reinforce with Vice-General Xu Ziqiang. The guerrillas Pan Ke Da and Zhixian Chen Erming held fast to Tongcheng, and the bandits could not attack.

古文：贼乃攻潜山，知县赵士彦重伤卒。
现代文：于是转攻潜山，知县赵士彦重伤而死。
English: As a result, he turned to attack Kuchiyama, and Zhixian Zhao Shihang was seriously injured and died.

古文：攻太湖、知县金应元、训导扈永宁被杀。
现代文：攻太湖，知县金应元、训导扈永宁被杀。
English: In the attack on Taihu Lake, Zhixian Jin Yingyuan and drill instructor Zou Yongning were killed.

古文：国维至，解桐围，遣守备朱士胤趋潜山，把总张其威趋太湖。
现代文：国维赶到后，解除了桐城之围，派守备朱士胤赴潜山，把总张其威赴太湖增援。
English: After Guowei arrived, he lifted the siege of Tongcheng, sent the garrison Zhu Shitian to Qianshan, and sent the general Zhang Qiwei to Taihu for reinforcement.

古文：士胤战死，自强遇贼宿松，杀伤相当。
现代文：士胤战死了，自强在宿松遇上贼兵，双方伤亡相当。
English: Shitane died in the battle, Ziqiang met the bandits in Suqiao, and the casualties on both sides were equal.

古文：安庆山民桀石以投贼，贼多死，乃越英山、霍山而遁。
现代文：安庆山区的百姓用木棍、石头投击贼兵，贼兵死了很多人，于是越过英山、霍山逃跑了。
English: The people in the Anqing Mountains attacked the bandits with sticks and stones, and many of the bandits were killed, so they fled across Ying Mountain and Huoshan Mountain.

古文：九月，贼复由宿松入潜山、太湖，他贼扫地王亦陷宿松等三县。
现代文：九月，贼兵又从宿松进入潜山、太湖，另外的贼寇扫地王也打下了宿松等三个县。
English: In September, the bandits entered Kuchiyama and Taihu from Sukumatsu. In addition, the bandits also laid waste to Sukumatsu and three other prefectures.

古文：国维乃募土著二千人戍之，而以兵事属监军史可法。
现代文：国维于是招募当地居民两千人防守，把军事交监军史可法指挥。
English: Guowei then recruited two thousand local residents to defend the city and put the military traffic controller in command.

古文：明年正月，贼围江浦，遣守备蒋若来、陈于王战却之。
现代文：第二年正月，贼寇围攻江浦，国维派守备蒋若来、陈于五打退了他们。
English: In the first month of the second year, the bandits besieged Jiangpu. The Guo Wei faction defended Jiang Ruo Lai and Chen Yu Wu and beat them back.

古文：十二月，贼分兵犯怀宁，可法及左良玉、马爌遏之。
现代文：十二月，贼寇兵分几路进犯怀宁，可法及左良玉、马火广顶住了他们。
English: In December, the bandits attacked Huaining in several directions, but Fa, Zuo Liangyu and Ma Huiguang withstood them.

古文：复犯江浦，副将程龙及若来、于王等拒守。诸城并全。
现代文：贼寇又进犯江浦，副将程龙及若来、于五等人抗敌防守，这几座城都得以保全。
English: Thieves and robbers attacked Jiangpu again, and Vice Generals Cheng Long and Wulai and Yu Wu and others resisted the enemy's defense, and these several cities were preserved.

古文：又围望江，遣兵援之，亦解去。
现代文：贼寇又包围望江，国维派兵援救，贼寇也撤围走掉了。
English: The bandits encircled Wangjiang again, the State Council sent soldiers to rescue, and the bandits also withdrew and left.

古文：十年三月，国维率龙等赴安庆，御贼酆家店，龙军数千悉没。
现代文：十年五月，国维率领程龙等赴安庆，在酆家店抵御贼兵，程龙的几千士兵都覆灭了。
English: In May of the 10th year, Guowei led Chenglong and others to Anqing and resisted the bandits in Xingjia store. Chenglong's thousands of soldiers were annihilated.

古文：贼东陷和州、含山、定远，攻陷六合，知县郑同元溃走，贼遂攻天长。
现代文：贼寇往东打下了和州、含山、定远，攻陷六合，知县郑同元败逃，贼寇于是又攻打天长。
English: Thieves and robbers went to the east and attacked Hezhou, Hanzhan and Dingyuan, captured Liuhe, and defeated and fled Zhixian Zheng Tongyuan. Thieves and robbers then attacked Tianchang.

古文：国维见贼势日炽，请于朝，割安庆、池州、太平，别设巡抚，以可法任之。
现代文：国维看到贼寇的气焰越来越嚣张，就向朝廷申请割安定、池州、太平，另外设置巡抚，让可法担任。
English: Guowei saw that the arrogance of the bandits was getting more and more arrogant, so he applied to the imperial court to divide the provinces of Anping, Chizhou, and Taiping, and also set up an inspector to allow Kefa to serve.

古文：安庆不隶江南巡抚，自此始也。
现代文：安庆不归江南巡抚管辖，就是从这里起始的。
English: Anqing's refusal to come under the jurisdiction of the Southern Yangtze's governor started from here.

古文：议者欲并割江浦、六合，俾国维专护江南，不许。
现代文：有人主张一并割下江浦、六合，让国维专门护守江南，庄烈帝不答应。
English: Some people advocated cutting off Jiangpu and Liuhe at the same time and letting Guowei specially guard the south of the Yangtze River, but Zhuo Ledei did not agree.

古文：国维为人宽厚，得士大夫心。
现代文：国维为人宽厚，得到士大夫们的拥戴。
English: Guowei was a generous person and was loved by the scholars and doctors.

古文：属郡灾伤，辄为请命。
现代文：他所辖的郡县发生灾伤，他都替百姓向朝廷请命。
English: When disasters and injuries occurred in the counties under his jurisdiction, he always appealed to the imperial court for the people.

古文：筑太湖、繁昌二城，建苏州九里石塘及平望内外塘、长洲至和等塘，修松江捍海堤，浚镇江及江阴漕渠，并有成绩。
现代文：他对修建太湖、繁昌两城的城墙，开挖苏州九里石塘及平望内、外塘，长州至和等水塘，垒砌松江的防海堤，疏通镇江及江阴的灌运河道，都做出了成绩。
English: He made achievements in the construction of the city walls of Taihu Lake and Prosperous City, the excavation of the Suzhou Jiuli Stone Pond and the Pingwang Inner and Outer Pond, the Chungju-Hwa and other ponds, the construction of the sea wall of the Songjiang River, and the dredging of the Zhenjiang River and the Jiangyin Canal.

古文：迁工部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，总理河道。
现代文：被朝廷升为工部右侍郎并右佥都御史，总理河道。
English: He was promoted by the Imperial Court to the position of the right-hand man of the Ministry of Works and the right-hand man of the Prime Minister, Kawamichi.

古文：岁大旱，漕流涸，国维浚诸水以通漕。
现代文：当时气候严重干旱，漕运河道枯涸，国维把周围河流中的水疏通引进运河。
English: At that time, the climate was severely arid, and the canals had dried up. Guowei diverted water from the surrounding rivers into the canals.

古文：山东饥，振活穷民无算。
现代文：山东发生饥荒，他赈济无数穷苦百姓，使他们得以生存。
English: When famine struck Shandong, he helped countless poor people to survive.

古文：十四年夏，山东盗起，改兵部右侍郎兼督淮、徐、临、通四镇兵，护漕运。
现代文：十四年夏天，山东的贼寇开始活动，国维改任兵部右侍郎兼统领淮州、徐州、临江、通州四镇的部队，保卫漕运。
English: In the summer of the 14th year, the bandits in Shandong began their activities, and Guowei was appointed as the right hand man of the military department and the commander of the troops in Huaizhou, Xuzhou, Linjiang and Tongzhou four towns to protect the rowing movement.

古文：大盗李青山众数万，据梁山泺，遣其党分据韩庄等八闸，运道为梗。
现代文：大盗李青山有几万喽口罗，占据梁山泊，派遣他的党羽分别占领了韩庄等八处水闸，运粮河道因此被阻塞了。
English: The great thief Li Qingshan had tens of thousands of tributaries and occupied Liangshan Port. He sent his followers to occupy eight sluices such as Hanzhuang separately. As a result, the grain transportation channel was blocked.

古文：周延儒赴召北上，青山谒之，言率众护漕，非乱也。
现代文：周延儒应召北上时，青山去拜见他，说自己在领兵护漕，不是造反作乱。
English: When Zhou Yanru was summoned to go to the north, Aoyama went to see him and said that he was leading a troop escort, not rebelling.

古文：延儒许言于朝，授以职。
现代文：延儒答应向朝廷讲一讲，给他加封官职。
English: Yan Rong agreed to give a lecture to the imperial court, and he was given an official post.

古文：而青山竟截漕舟，大焚掠，迫临清。
现代文：可是青山竟然拦截运粮船只，大肆焚掠，兵逼临清。
English: However, Aoyama went so far as to intercept grain-carrying vessels, plundered them on a large scale, and the soldiers forced their way into Qing.

古文：国维合所部兵击降之，献俘于朝，磔诸市。
现代文：国维召集自己部下的兵力打击并降服了他，把他交给朝廷，在京师街头把他肢解了。
English: Guo Wei gathered the troops of his subordinates to attack and subdue him, handed him over to the imperial court, and dismembered him on the streets of Beijing.

古文：兵部尚书陈新甲下狱，帝召国维代之。
现代文：兵部尚书陈新甲入狱后，庄烈帝召国维入朝替任。
English: After the warlord Chen Xinjia was imprisoned, Emperor Zhuang summoned Guo Wei to replace him.

古文：乃定战守赏罚格，列上严世职、酌推升、慎咨题等七事，帝皆报可。
现代文：国维于是拟定了战守赏罚的标准，上书提出严格世袭官员，斟酌推荐升用，认真对待大臣的题本和对他们的咨询等七条意见，庄烈帝都回答说可以。
English: Guowei then worked out the standards of rewards and punishments for defending the war, and put forward seven opinions in the letter, including strict hereditary officials, carefully recommending promotion, seriously treating the minister's manuscript and consulting with them. Zhuo Ruedi replied that he could.

古文：会开封陷，河北震动，条防河数策，帝亦纳之。
现代文：当开封失陷，黄河以北受到震动时，国维又递上保防黄河的几条办法，庄烈帝也采纳了他的意见。
English: When Kaifeng fell and the north of the Yellow River was shaken, Guowei submitted several measures to protect the Yellow River, and Emperor Zhuang also adopted his opinion.

古文：十六年四月，我大清兵入畿辅，国维檄赵光抃拒螺山，八总兵之师皆溃。
现代文：十六年四月，我大清部队攻进京师郊区，国维传令赵光扌卞在螺山抵抗，八个总兵的部队都溃败了。
English: In April of the 16th year, our Qing Dynasty troops invaded the suburbs of Beijing Division, and the State Council ordered Zhao Guangya to resist in Lushan. The troops of the eight generals were defeated.

古文：言者诋国维，乃解职，寻下狱。
现代文：言官因此攻击国维，他被解除了职务，不久又被关进监狱。
English: As a result, the spokesman attacked the national guard, he was dismissed from his post, and was soon imprisoned again.

古文：帝念其治河功，得释。
现代文：庄烈帝记起他治河的功劳，他才被放出来。
English: He was only released after Emperor Zhuang could remember his merits in managing the river.

古文：召对中左门，复故官，兼右佥都御史，驰赴江南、浙江督练兵输饷诸务。
现代文：后来，庄烈帝在中左门召他问话，恢复他的原职，让他兼任右佥都御史，赶往江南、浙江管理练兵、运饷等事务。
English: Later, Emperor Zhuang Liang summoned him for questioning at the center-left gate, restored his original position, and asked him to concurrently serve as the right-hand man of the imperial historian, rushing to the south of the Yangtze River and Zhejiang to manage military training, transportation of troops and other affairs.

古文：出都十日而都城陷。
现代文：国维离开北京才十天，北京就失陷了。
English: Just ten days after Guowei left Beijing, Beijing fell.

古文：福王召令协理戎政。寻叙山东讨贼功，加太子太保，荫锦衣佥事。
现代文：福王召国维到南京协理军政，不多日子，评定他在山东讨贼的战功，给他加官太子太保，荫子锦衣佥事。
English: King Fu summoned Guowei to Nanjing to assist in military and political affairs, and after a short time, he evaluated Guowei's war exploits in Shandong, and gave him the title of crown prince and grand marshal.

古文：吏部尚书徐石麒去位，众议归国维。马士英不用，用张捷。
现代文：吏部尚书徐石麟离职后，大臣们讨论让国维接任，马士英不用他，而用了张捷。
English: After the departure of the head of the personnel department, Xu Shilin, the ministers discussed letting Guowei take over. Ma Shiying did not use him, but used Zhang Jie.

古文：国维乃乞省亲归。
现代文：国维于是请假探亲，回乡去了。
English: Guowei then asked for leave to visit relatives and went back to his hometown.

古文：南都覆，逾月，潞王监国于杭州，不数日出降。
现代文：南京失守一个月后，潞王在杭州监国，没几天就投降了。
English: A month after the fall of Nanjing, Shao Wang supervised the country in Hangzhou, and surrendered in a few days.

古文：闰六月，国维朝鲁王于台州，请王监国。
现代文：闰六月，国维到台州朝见鲁王，请鲁王监国。
English: In the intercalary month of June, Guowei went to Taizhou to meet with King Lu and asked him to supervise the country.

古文：即日移驻绍兴，进国维少傅兼太子太傅、兵部尚书、武英殿大学士，督师江上。
现代文：鲁王当天就移驻绍兴，提升国维为少傅兼太子太傅、兵部尚书、武英殿大学士，让他在钱塘江上统帅部队。
English: Lu Wang moved to Shaoxing on the same day, and Guowei was promoted to Shao Fu (少傅) and Taifu (太傅) of the prince, Shang Shu (兵部尚書) of the military department, and Wu Ying Dian (武英殿) of the college, so that he could command the troops on the Qiantang River.

古文：总兵官方国安亦自金华至。
现代文：总兵官方国安这时也从金华来了。
English: At this time, the Chief of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army also came from Jinhua.

古文：马士英素善国安，匿其军中，请入朝。
现代文：马士英一向跟国安要好，现在躲在他的部队中，申请入朝。
English: Ma Shiying has always been friendly with Guoan. Now he is hiding in his unit and applying to go to the DPRK.

古文：国维劾其十大罪，乃不敢入。
现代文：国维弹劾了他十大罪状，士英才不敢入朝。
English: Guo Wei impeached him on ten charges, and he did not dare to enter the imperial court.

古文：连复富阳、于潜，树木城缘江要害，联合国安及王之仁、郑遵谦、熊汝霖、孙嘉绩、钱肃乐诸营，为持久计。
现代文：国维连续收复了富阳、于潜，在沿江的要害地带扎下木城防守，联合了国安及王之仁、郑遵谦、熊汝霖、孙嘉绩、钱肃乐的各支部队，想做好持久战的打算。
English: Guowei successively recovered Fuyang and Yucheng, and set up the defense of Mucheng in the key areas along the river, and united the troops of Guoan and Wang Zhiren, Zheng Zunqian, Xiong Rulin, Sun Jiaqi, and Qian Sule, in order to plan for a long-term war.

古文：顺治三年五月，国安等诸军乏饷溃，王走台州航海，国维亦还守东阳。
现代文：顺治三年五月，国安等各军因为缺饷溃败，鲁王逃到台州航行离去，国维也返回家乡东阳防守。
English: In May of the third year of Shunzhi, Guoan and other armies were defeated due to lack of ploughshares. Lu Wang fled to Taizhou to sail away, and Guo Wei returned home to Dongyang to defend.

古文：六月知势不可支，作绝命词三章，赴水死，年五十有二。
现代文：六月，他看到大势已去，无法支持下去，写了三首绝命诗，赴水自杀了，终年五十二岁。
English: In June, he saw that the tide had gone out and could no longer support it. He wrote three desperate poems and went to the water to commit suicide, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：张肯堂，字载宁，松江华亭人。
现代文：张肯堂，字载宁，松江华亭人。
English: Zhang Kendang, surnamed Zhaoning, is a native of Huating, Songjiang.

古文：天启五年进士。授浚县知县。
现代文：天启五年进士，初任浚县知县。
English: He entered the priesthood in the fifth year of the Apocalypse, and was first appointed as the head of Junchu County and Zhixian County.

古文：崇祯七年，擢御史。
现代文：崇祯七年，他升任御史。
English: In the seventh year of his reign, he was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：明年春，贼陷凤阳，条上灭贼五事。
现代文：第二年春天，贼寇打下凤阳，他上书就消灭贼寇的事讲了五点意见。
English: In the spring of the following year, the bandits laid siege to Fengyang. In his letter, he made five points regarding the elimination of the bandits.

古文：俄以皇陵震惊，疏责辅臣不宜作秦、越之视，帝不问。
现代文：不久因为皇陵受到战火威胁，他上书批评辅臣不应该对战事谋划疏远，悲喜不关于心，庄烈帝没有追究。
English: Soon, because the imperial mausoleum was threatened by the war, he wrote a letter criticizing the aide-de-camp that the aide-de-camp should not be estranged from the war planning, that sadness and joy were not related to the heart, and that Emperor Zhuang did not investigate.

古文：出按福建，数以平寇功受赉。
现代文：过后他外出巡察福建，几次因为平定贼盗的战功受到奖赏。
English: After that, he went out to inspect Fujian, and was rewarded several times for his service in suppressing thieves.

古文：还朝，言： 监司营竞纷纭，意所欲就，则保留久任；意所欲避，则易地借才。
现代文：回朝以后，他上书说： 监司胡乱钻营，花样百出，心中想让谁呆在那里，就可以让他换个地方，说是借用人才。
English: After returning to the DPRK, he wrote: "The superintendent is recklessly drilling the camp, there are all kinds of tricks. Whoever wants to stay there in his heart can let him change places, saying that he is a borrowed talent."

古文：今岁燕、秦，明岁闽、粤，道路往返，动经数千，程限稽迟，多逾数月。
现代文：一个官员，今年在河北、陕西，明年调到福建、广东，道路往返，动不动就是几千里，时限的耽误，经常超过几个月。
English: An official is in Hebei and Shaanxi this year, and will be transferred to Fujian and Guangdong next year. The round trip is thousands of miles, and the time delay is often more than a few months.

古文：加一番更移，辄加一番扰害。 
现代文：官员多一次更换地方，就多一份纷扰侵害。 
English: If an official changes places more than once, there will be one more disturbance.

古文：帝是其言。
现代文：庄烈帝同意了他的意见。
English: The emperor thought this was a very good idea.

古文：十二年十月，杨嗣昌出督师。
现代文：十二年二月，杨嗣昌出任督师。
English: In February 2012, Yang Shichang took up the post of supervisor.

古文：肯堂奏言： 从古戡乱之法，初起则解散，势成则剪除，未有专任抚者。
现代文：肯堂进奏说 ：自古以来平定叛乱的办法，贼寇刚刚起事，就予以解散；如果是势力已经形成，就应加以剪除，没有专用招安的。
English: Ken-tang Jinseo said, "Since ancient times, there has been a way to quell rebellions. As soon as thieves and robbers start a riot, they should be disbanded. If a force has already been formed, it should be eliminated. There is no special recruitment.

古文：今辅臣膺新命而出，贼必仍用故技，佯摇尾乞怜。而失事诸臣，冀掩从前败局，必多方荧惑，仍进抚议。
现代文：现在辅臣接受新的任命出去剿贼，贼寇一定会故技重演，假装摇尾乞怜，而那些耽误过军事的大臣想借用招安掩饰以往的败局，一定会采用各种办法迷惑陛下，仍然提出招安的主张来。
English: Now that the aide-de-camp has accepted a new appointment to go out to fight the bandits, the bandits will certainly repeat their old tricks, pretending to shake their tails and beg for mercy, and those ministers who have delayed the military want to use the recruitment of security to cover up the past defeat, they will certainly use various methods to confuse His Majesty and still put forward the idea of recruiting security.

古文：请特申一令，专务剿除。有进招抚说者，立置重典。 
现代文：请陛下特别下达一道命令，对贼寇专门从事剿除，有谁提出招安的主张，立即重法严惩。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to issue a special order to severely punish anyone who puts forward the idea of recruiting security against the thieves and robbers who are exclusively engaged in eradication.

古文：帝以偏执臆见责之。
现代文：庄烈帝批评他的意见偏执、主观。
English: Zhuo Ledei criticized his opinion as paranoid and subjective.

古文：十四年四月言： 流寇隳城破邑，往来纵横，如入无人之境，此督师嗣昌受事前所未有。
现代文：十四年四月，肯堂上书说： 流寇攻城破邑，往来纵横，如入无人之境，这是督师嗣昌任职前所没有过的事。
English: In April of the 14th year, Ken-tang wrote in a letter: "Roving bands of robbers attacked the city and broke up the towns, and they went back and forth vertically and horizontally, as if they were entering a no-man's land. This was something that had never happened before Superintendent Shichang took office.

古文：目前大计，在先释嗣昌之权。 
现代文：目前最好的办法是首先解除嗣昌的职权。 
English: For now, the best course of action is to first remove Tsuchimasa from office.

古文：疏入而嗣昌已死。
现代文：他的奏疏刚递进去嗣昌就死掉了。
English: His sonoso had just been handed in when Tsuchimasa died.

古文：十二月复言： 今讨贼不可谓无人，巡抚之外更有抚治，总督之上又有督师。
现代文：十二月肯堂又上书说 ：现在讨伐贼寇不能说是没有人才，巡抚之外又有抚治，总督之上又有督师。
English: In December, Ken-tang wrote again, saying, "It cannot be said that there is no talent to fight against the bandits now. In addition to the governor, there is also a governor, and above the governor there is also an inspector.

古文：位号虽殊，事权无别。
现代文：官名虽然不同，所要办的事和他们的权限没什么差别。
English: Although the names of the officials are different, the tasks to be done and their powers are no different.

古文：今楚自报捷，豫自报败，甚至南阳失守，祸中亲藩，督师职掌安在。
现代文：现在湖北只管自己报捷，河南只管报败，甚至南阳失守，祸及亲王，也无人过问，督师的职掌到底是什么呢？
English: Now, Hubei only reports its own successes, Henan only reports its defeats, and even Nanyang lost its defense, to the Prince's chagrin, no one asks, what exactly is the supervisor's job?

古文：试问今为督师者，将居中而运，以发踪指示为功乎，抑分贼而办，以焦头烂额为事乎？
现代文：试问现在担任督师的大臣，是把运筹帷幄之中，发出指示当成自己的功绩呢，还是划分贼群各自剿除，把焦头烂额当成自己的责任？
English: Let me ask the minister, who is now the supervisor, whether he regards it as his merit to issue instructions in the midst of the operational planning, or whether he regards it as his responsibility to separate the groups of thieves and eliminate them one by one.

古文：今为秦、保二督者，将兼顾提封，相为掎角之势乎，抑遇贼追剿，专提出境之师乎？
现代文：现在担任陕西、保定两地督师的大臣，是要兼顾封疆，互为犄角呢，还是遇贼追剿，或专门统领出境的部队呢？
English: Is it necessary for the minister, who is now the superintendent of the two regions of Shaanxi and Baoding, to take into account the closure of the frontiers and act as an intermediary, or to be pursued by thieves, or to specially lead the troops out of the country?

古文：今为抚者，将一禀督师之令，进退惟其指挥乎，抑兼视贼势之急，战守可以择利乎？
现代文：现在担任巡抚重任的，是完全听督师的命令，进退都由他指挥呢，还是兼看贼势的松紧，战守可以自取其利呢？
English: Is the person who is now in charge of the heavy responsibilities of the superintendent, completely obeying the orders of the superintendent, and the advance and retreat are commanded by him, or is he also looking at the looseness of the thieves, and the defense can take advantage of it?

古文：凡此肯綮，一切置不问，中枢冥冥而决，诸臣瞆瞆而任。
现代文：以上这些关键，朝廷都不加过问，中枢在这里想当然地做出决策，下边的大臣在那里稀里糊涂地执行。
English: The above-mentioned keys are not questioned by the imperial court. The center makes decisions here as a matter of course, while the ministers below carry them out in a confused manner.

古文：至失地丧师，中枢纠督抚以自解，督抚又互相委以谢愆，而疆事不可问矣。 
现代文：弄到失地丧师的时候，中枢纠举督抚来自我开脱，督抚又相互推诿推卸责任，疆场上的战事就这样没法子办了。 
English: When it came to the loss of territory and the loss of a division, the central leadership and the supervisors excused themselves, and the supervisors pushed and shoved each other to shirk their responsibilities. Thus, there was no way to manage the war on the battlefield.

古文：帝纳其言，下所司详议。
现代文：庄烈帝采纳了他的意见，把他的奏疏交给有关部门详细讨论。
English: Zhuo Ledei accepted his opinion and submitted his report to the relevant departments for detailed discussion.

古文：十五年请召还建言谴谪诸臣，乃复给事中阴润、李清、刘昌，御史周一敬官。
现代文：十五年，肯堂请求召回那些因为提建议被贬出的大臣，朝廷就恢复了给事中阴润、李清、刘冒，御史周一敬的官职。
English: In the fifteenth year, Ken-tang petitioned for the recall of those ministers who had been ousted for making suggestions, and the imperial court restored the official positions given to Chung-yin Run, Li Qing, Liu Du, and Gu Shiyu.

古文：肯堂迁大理丞，旋擢右佥都御史，巡抚福建。
现代文：肯堂被提拔为大理丞，不久又升任右佥都御史，外出巡抚福建去了。
English: Ken-tang was promoted to the rank of Dali-zheng, and soon he was promoted to the position of Uesugi-tsu-goshi, and went to Fujian as a roving inspector.

古文：总兵郑鸿逵拥唐王聿键入闽，与其兄南安伯芝龙及肯堂劝进，遂加太子少保、吏部尚书。
现代文：总兵郑鸿逵护唐王朱聿键到福建以后，与他的哥哥、南安伯郑芝龙以及肯堂劝说唐王即了皇位，肯堂就被加官太子少保、吏部尚书。
English: After the general soldier Zheng Hongtao and the protector of Tang King Zhu Rongji went to Fujian, he and his brother, Nanan Bo Zheng Zhilong, as well as Ken-tang, persuaded the Tang King to take the throne. Ken-tang was promoted to the position of crown prince, minor protector, and secretary.

古文：曾樱至，言官请令樱掌吏部，乃令肯堂掌都察院。
现代文：曾樱来后，言官奏请让曾樱掌管吏部，于是唐王让肯堂改掌都察院。
English: After Zeng Ying's arrival, the speech officer asked Zeng Ying to be in charge of the personnel department, so the Tang King asked Ken Tang to be in charge of the Capital Inspection Office.

古文：肯堂请出募舟师，由海道抵江南，倡义旅，而王由仙霞趋浙东，与相声援。
现代文：肯堂自请从海路到江南，号召义师举事，请唐王从仙霞直趋浙东，与自己相互声援。
English: Ken-tang invited himself to travel by sea to the south of the Yangtze River to call on the righteous to take up the cause, and asked Tang Wang to travel from Xianxia to the east of Zhejiang to show solidarity with him.

古文：乃加少保，给敕印，便宜从事。
现代文：唐王于是给他加官为少保，给他发了敕命、印信，由他自行见机行事。
English: Therefore, the Tang King promoted him to the position of Junior Protector, issued him the imperial command and seal letter, and allowed him to act at his own discretion.

古文：芝龙怀异心，阴沮之，不成行。
现代文：芝龙怀有二心，暗中阻挠他，肯堂未能成行。
English: Zhilong harbored double-mindedness, secretly obstructed him, and failed to make the trip.

古文：顺治三年，王败死，肯堂飘泊海外。
现代文：顺治三年，唐王败死，肯堂漂泊海外。
English: In the third year of Shunzhi, Tang Wang was defeated and died, and Kentang drifted overseas.

古文：六年至舟山，鲁王用为东阁大学士。
现代文：六年，他去到舟山。鲁王任用他为东阁大学士。
English: Six years later, he went to Zhoushan. King Lu appointed him as a scholar of Dongge University.

古文：八年，大清兵乘天雾集螺头门。
现代文：八年，大清部队乘满天大雾的机会集结在螺头门。
English: In the eighth year, the Great Qing troops took the opportunity of the foggy weather to assemble at the Nut Gate.

古文：定西侯张名振奉王航海去，属肯堂城守。
现代文：定西侯张名振保护鲁王航海走掉，嘱咐肯堂防守。
English: Zhang Nanzhen, the lord of Dingxi, protected Lu Wang from sailing away, and ordered Kendang to be on the defensive.

古文：城中兵六千，居民万余，坚守十余日。
现代文：城中兵力只六千，居民一万多，坚守了十多天。
English: There were only six thousand soldiers in the city and more than ten thousand inhabitants, and they held out for more than ten days.

古文：城破，肯堂衣蟒玉南向坐，令四妾、一子妇、一女孙先死，乃从容赋诗自经。
现代文：城被打下后，肯堂身穿官袍朝南坐着，让四个妾、一个儿媳、一个孙女先死，然后从容不迫地写下绝命诗，上吊自杀了。
English: After the city was taken, Ken-tang, dressed in an official robe, sat facing south, let four concubines, a daughter-in-law, and a granddaughter die first, then calmly wrote a desperate poem and hanged himself.

古文：时同死者，兵部尚书李向中、礼部尚书吴锺峦、吏部侍郎朱永佑、安洋将军刘世勋、左都督张名扬。
现代文：当时和他一同死掉的还有：兵部尚书李向中、礼部尚书吴钟峦、吏部侍郎朱永佑、安洋将军刘世勋、左都督张名扬等。
English: Others who died with him at that time included: Li Xiangzhong of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Wu Zhongya of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Zhu Yongyou of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Liu Shixun of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army, and Zhang Mingyang, the governor of Zuo Province.

古文：又有通政使会稽郑遵俭，兵科给事中鄞县董志宁，兵部郎中江阴朱养时，户部主事福建林瑛、苏州江用楫，礼部主事会稽董元，兵部主事福建朱万年、长洲顾珍、临山卫李开国，工部主事长洲顾中尧，中书舍人苏州苏兆人，工部所正鄞县戴仲明，定西侯参谋顺天顾明楫，诸生福建林世英，锦衣指挥王朝相，内官监太监刘朝。凡二十一人。李向中，锺祥人。
现代文：共二十一个人。李向中，钟祥人。
English: A total of twenty-one people. Li Xiangzhong, Zhong Xiangren.

古文：崇祯十三年进士。
现代文：崇祯十三年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of thirteen.

古文：授长兴知县，调秀水。
现代文：初任长兴知县，改调到秀水。
English: First appointed governor of Xingchi County, reassigned to Xiushui.

古文：福王时，历车驾郎中，苏松兵备副使。
现代文：福王在位时他先后做过车驾郎中、苏松兵备副使。
English: When Fu Wang was on the throne, he successively served as a chauffeur and vice-envoy of Su Song Bei.

古文：唐王以为尚宝卿。
现代文：唐王用他当尚宝卿。
English: Tang Wang used him as Shang Baoqing.

古文：闽事败，避海滨。
现代文：福建的朝廷败亡以后，他在海边避难。
English: After the fall of the imperial court in Fujian, he took refuge by the sea.

古文：鲁王监国，召为右佥都御史，从航海，进兵部尚书，从至舟山。
现代文：鲁王监国后，召他为右佥都御史，他跟着鲁王航海时，升为兵部尚书，跟随鲁王来到了舟山。
English: After King Lu oversaw the country, he was called to be the right-hand captain of the imperial capital. When he sailed with King Lu, he was promoted to the rank of military secretary, and followed King Lu to Zhoushan.

古文：及是破，大帅召向中，不赴。发兵捕之，以衰纟至见。
现代文：到这时城被打下，大清的将帅召他，他不来，派兵去抓，他穿着丧服来见。
English: By this time the city had been taken, the Daqing commander-in-chief summoned him, but he did not come, he sent soldiers to arrest him, and he came to see him in mourning clothes.

古文：大帅呵之曰： 聘汝不至，捕即至，何也？ 
现代文：大清的将帅呵斥说 ：请你，你不来，要抓你，你就来了，什么道理？ 
English: The commander-in-chief of the Great Qing shouted: "Please, you don't come, if I want to catch you, you come, what's the reason?"

古文：向中从容曰： 前则辞官，今就戮耳。 
现代文：向中从容不迫地说： 上次不来是辞你的官不做，现在来是准备受死的。 
English: Xiang Zhong calmly said, "Last time, if you didn't come, it meant you didn't do your duty. Now, you've come to prepare to die."

古文：吴钟峦，字峦稚，武进人。
现代文：吴钟峦，字峦稚，武进人。
English: Wu Zhongyao, Zhaozhuang Wuchang, Wu Jinren.

古文：崇祯七年进士。
现代文：崇祯七年进士。
English: Chongzhen entered the priesthood seven years ago.

古文：授长兴知县。以旱潦，征练饷不中额，谪绍兴照磨。
现代文：初任长兴知县，因为水旱灾害，他征收练饷没达到标准，被贬为绍兴照磨。
English: The first governor of Xingchi County, because of the floods and droughts, he did not meet the standards for the levying of taxes, and was relegated to Shaoxing.

古文：逾年，移桂林推官。
现代文：过了一年，改任桂林推官。
English: A year later, he was transferred to the post of Guilin magistrate.

古文：闻京师变，流涕曰： 马君常必能死节。 
现代文：钟峦听说京师失陷的消息以后，涕泪交下地说 ：马君常一定能为道义而死。 
English: After Zhong Qi heard the news of the fall of the capital, he said with tears in his eyes, "Ma Jun will always be able to die for morality."

古文：已而世奇果死。
现代文：后来得知士奇果然死了。
English: It was later learned that Shiki had indeed died.

古文：福王立，迁礼部主事。
现代文：福王登基后，钟峦升任礼部主事。
English: After King Fu ascended to the throne, Zhong Qi was promoted to the head of the ceremonial department.

古文：抵南雄，闻南都失，转赴福建，痛陈国计。
现代文：他走到南雄，听说南京失守，便转赴福建，向唐王痛心地讲述国家大计。
English: He went to Nanxiong, heard that Nanjing was lost, and then went to Fujian to painfully tell Tang Wang about the country's grand plan.

古文：鲁王起兵，以钟峦为礼部尚书，往来普陀山中。
现代文：鲁王起兵后，让钟峦担任礼部尚书，他往来于普陀山中，尽瘁国事。
English: After the king of Lu raised an army, he asked Zhong Qi to serve as the ceremonial secretary. He went back and forth in the Putuo Mountains to carry out state affairs.

古文：大清兵至宁波，钟峦慷慨谓人曰： 昔仲达死珰祸，吾以诸生不得死。
现代文：大清兵打到宁波后，钟峦慷慨激昂地对人说 ：过去仲达死于宦官之祸，我因为一帮学生没能死。
English: After the Qing soldiers arrived in Ningbo, Zhong Qi said to the people impetuously: In the past, Zhong Da died of the eunuch's misfortune, I could not die because of a group of students.

古文：君常死贼难，吾以远臣不得从死。
现代文：君常死于贼寇之灾，我是边远的大臣没法跟着死。
English: You often died from the plague of thieves and robbers, and I, a faraway minister, could not die with you.

古文：今其时矣！ 
现代文：现在是时候了！ 
English: Now is the time!

古文：乃急渡海，入昌国卫之孔庙，积薪左庑下，抱孔子木主自焚死。
现代文：于是急忙渡海，去到昌国卫的孔庙里，在左边的廊檐下堆了柴草，抱着孔子的牌位自焚而死。
English: So he hurried across the sea, went to the Confucius Temple in Changguowei, piled firewood under the gallery on the left, and burned himself to death while holding the Confucius plaque.

古文：仲达者，江阴李应升，锺峦弟子，忤魏忠贤死党祸者也。
现代文：他所说的仲达，是江阴人李应升，是钟峦的学生，是触犯魏忠贤死于党祸的一位君子。
English: The Zhongda he was talking about was Li Ying Sheng, a native of Jiangyin Province, a student of Zhong Qi, and a gentleman who had offended Wei Zhongxian and died in a party accident.

古文：朱永佑，字爰启。
现代文：朱永佑，字爰启。
English: Zhu Yongyou, the character 启.

古文：崇祯七年进士。
现代文：崇祯七年进士。
English: Chongzhen entered the priesthood seven years ago.

古文：朝相闻城失守，护王妃陈氏、贵嫔张氏、义阳王妃杜氏入井，用巨石覆之，自刎其旁。
现代文：初任刑部主事，改吏部主事，被罢官还乡。后来他扶持唐王，又跟着鲁王来到舟山。城失陷后被俘，他表示愿意出家为僧，大清官员不答应，他就接受了死刑。张名扬，是名振的弟弟。
English: At first, he was the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, but he was changed to the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, and was removed from office and returned to his hometown. Later, he supported the Tang King, and followed the King of Lu to Zhoushan. After the city fell and he was captured, he expressed his willingness to become a monk, but the officials of the Great Qing Dynasty did not agree, so he accepted the death penalty. Zhang Mingyang was the younger brother of Zhang Mingyang.

古文：开国母，瑛、明楫妻皆自尽。曾樱，字仲含，峡江人。
现代文：城失陷后他一家从母亲范氏以下有几十个人都自焚而死了。曾樱，字仲含，峡江人。
English: After the fall of the city, dozens of members of his family, from his mother Fan down, died by self-immolation.

古文：万历四十四年进士。
现代文：万历四十四年进士。
English: Forty-four years later, he became a priest.

古文：授工部主事，历郎中。
现代文：初任工部主事，又做过郎中。
English: He was the head of the engineering department for the first time, and also worked as a junior clerk.

古文：天启二年，稍迁常州知府。
现代文：天启二年，他略有提升，做了常州知府。
English: In the second year of the Apocalypse, he was promoted slightly and became the governor of Changzhou.

古文：诸御史巡盐、仑、江、漕及提学、屯田者，皆操举劾权，文牒日至。
现代文：当时御史巡按盐政、粮仓、江防、漕运及提学、屯田的都掌握着检举、弹劾地方官的大权，他们的文书天天传来，让人应接不暇。
English: At that time, the Gu Shizhu Junpo, the Salt Politics, the Grain Storehouses, the River Defense, the Rowing, the Schooling, and the Military Camps all held the power to report and impeach local officials. Their documents came in every day, and people had no time to deal with them.

古文：樱牒南京都察院曰： 他方守令，奔命一巡按，独南畿奔命数巡按。
现代文：曾樱批报告给南京都察院说 ：别处的郡守县令只是为一个巡按官奔走应命，只有南畿的地方官需要奔走应付几个巡按官。
English: Zeng Sakura submitted a report to the Nanki Prefectural Prosecutor's Office, saying, "Other prefectural governors only have to run to meet the orders of one patrol officer. Only local officials in Nanki have to run to meet several patrol officers."

古文：请一切戒饬，罢钩访取赎诸陋习。 
现代文：请全面整顿一下，清除巡按官侦查地方官过错然后让人设法赎免的陋习。 
English: Please comprehensively rectify the situation and get rid of the bad habit of inspectors investigating the faults of local officials and then letting people try to redeem themselves.

古文：都御史熊明遇为申约束焉。
现代文：都察院长官熊明遇为此一再向巡按官申明规约。
English: To this end, the head of the city prosecutor's office, Mr. Xiong Mingyuan, has repeatedly affirmed the statute to the inspector.

古文：樱持身廉，为政恺悌公平，不畏强御。
现代文：曾樱自己为政清廉，和乐平易，不害怕承担压力。
English: Zeng Ying himself is a clean politician, easy to get along with, and is not afraid to bear pressure.

古文：屯田御史索属吏应劾者姓名，樱不应。御史危言恐之，答曰： 僚属已尽，无可纠，止知府无状。 
现代文：屯田御史向他要他手下应予弹劾的官员的名单，曾樱不理睬，御史故意说些吓人的话恐吓他，曾樱回答说： 我手下的官员都已经没什么可以纠举的了，只有知府罪不可言。 
English: Tonden Mishi asked him for a list of officials under him who should be impeached, but Zengakura ignored him. Mishi deliberately said some frightening words to intimidate him, and Zengakura replied: My officials have nothing to complain about, only the prefectural crime is unspeakable.

古文：因自署下考，杜门待罪。
现代文：于是他把自己列为下等，呆在家里等候处理。
English: So he downgraded himself and stayed at home to wait it out.

古文：抚按亟慰留，乃起视事。
现代文：抚按官急忙安慰他，他才出来办公。
English: Fuzhou officials hurried to comfort him, and he came out to work.

古文：织造中官李实迫知府行属礼，樱不从。
现代文：负责织造的宦官李实强迫各地知府向他行下级对上级的礼仪，曾樱不服从。
English: Li Si, the eunuch in charge of weaving, forced the governors of various regions to show him the etiquette of subordinates to superiors, and Zeng Ying disobeyed.

古文：实移檄以 尔  汝 侮之，樱亦报以 尔  汝 ，卒不屈。
现代文：李实传送公文就用 尔 、 汝 的称呼来侮辱他，曾樱的回文也对他使用 尔 、 汝 的称呼，到底都不肯屈服。
English: Li Si insulted Zeng Sakura by addressing him as "Er, Ryou" when transmitting official documents, and Zeng Sakura's reply also addressed him as "Er, Ryou." In the end, they refused to give in.

古文：无锡高攀龙，江阴缪昌期、李应升被逮，樱助昌期、应升赀，而经纪攀龙死后事，为文祭之，出其子及僮仆于狱。
现代文：无锡的高攀龙，江阴的缪昌期、李应升被逮捕时，曾樱送给昌期、应升盘缠钱，等到攀龙死后，曾樱撰写祭文祭奠他，设法把他的儿子和僮仆从狱中放出。
English: Wuxi's Gao Panglong, Jiangyin's Mu Changzhi, when Li Yingsheng was arrested, Zeng Ying gave money to Changzhi and Ying Sheng. After Panglong's death, Zeng Ying wrote a dedication to him and tried to release his son and servant from prison.

古文：宜兴毛士龙坐忤魏忠贤遣戍，樱讽士龙逃去。
现代文：宜兴的毛士龙因为触犯魏忠贤被判处戍边，曾樱暗示他逃走了。
English: Yixing's Mao Shilong was sentenced to death for offending Wei Zhongxian, and Zeng Ying hinted that he had fled.

古文：上官捕其家人，赖樱以免。
现代文：上级官员要逮捕他的家人，靠着曾樱的周旋才算作罢。
English: If higher-ranking officials want to arrest his family members, they can only do so with Zeng Ying's help.

古文：武进孙慎行忤忠贤，当戍，樱缓其行。忠贤败，事遂解。
现代文：武进的孙慎行触犯了忠贤，应去戍边，曾樱拖延把他放出的时间，忠贤倒台后，事情也就过去了。
English: Wujin's Sun Shengxing offended Zhongxian and should go to Lijiang, Zeng Ying delayed the time to release him, and after the fall of Zhongxian, the matter was over.

古文：崇祯元年以右参政分守漳南。
现代文：崇祯元年，曾樱以右参政的身份负责防守漳南。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, Zeng Ying, as a right-wing politician, was responsible for the defense of southern Anhui.

古文：九莲山贼犯上杭，樱募壮士击退之，夜捣其巢，歼馘殆尽。
现代文：九莲山的山贼进犯上杭，曾樱召募壮士打退了他们，在夜间捣毁他们的巢穴，把山贼基本上消灭完了。
English: The mountain bandits of the Mount Kowloon attacked the hill, and Zeng Sakura called for the recruitment of strong men to repel them, destroy their nests at night, and basically wipe out the mountain bandits.

古文：士民为樱建祠。
现代文：上杭的士绅、百姓为他立了一座祠庙。
English: The gentry and common people of Shanghang erected an ancestral temple for him.

古文：母忧归。
现代文：后来他为母亲守丧，回家去了。
English: Later, he went home for his mother's funeral.

古文：服阕，起故官，分守兴、泉二郡。
现代文：除下丧服后，他以原官起复，负责守护兴化、泉州二府。
English: After removing his mourning clothes, he was reinstated as a former official, responsible for guarding Xinghua and Quanzhou.

古文：进按察使，分巡福宁。
现代文：又升为按察使，负责巡视福宁。
English: He was also promoted to the post of inspector, responsible for inspecting Fu Ning.

古文：先是，红夷寇兴、泉，樱请巡抚邹维琏用副总兵郑芝龙为军锋，果奏捷。
现代文：在此之前，红夷侵犯兴化、泉州，曾樱请巡抚邹维莲用副总兵郑芝龙的军队当先锋，果然打了胜仗。
English: Prior to this, when the Hongyi invaded Xinghua and Quanzhou, Zeng Ying asked the governor Xing Weilian to use the army of the vice-general Zheng Zhilong as the vanguard, and the battle was won.

古文：及刘香寇广东，总督熊文灿欲得芝龙为援，维琏等以香与芝龙有旧，疑不遣。
现代文：等刘香侵犯广东时，总督熊文灿想要芝龙来增援，维莲等因为刘香和芝龙间有老关系，心中猜疑，不肯派芝龙去。
English: When Liu Xiang invaded Guangdong, Governor Xiong Wencang wanted Zhilong to come as reinforcement, but Wei Lian and others were suspicious because of the old relationship between Liu Xiang and Zhilong, and refused to send Zhilong.

古文：樱以百口保芝龙，遂讨灭香，芝龙感樱甚。
现代文：曾樱用一百张嘴巴保荐芝龙去，后来消灭了刘香。芝龙因此对曾樱很感激。
English: Zeng Ying used a hundred mouths to sponsor Zhilong to go, and later eliminated Liu Xiang. Zhilong is therefore very grateful to Zeng Ying.

古文：十年冬，帝信东厂言，以樱行贿谋擢官，命械赴京。
现代文：十年冬天，庄烈帝相信了东厂的话，认为曾樱行贿，谋求升官，就传令把他套上刑具送到京师来。
English: In the winter of the tenth year, Zhuo Ledei believed the words of the East Factory and thought that Zeng Ying had paid bribes and sought promotion, so he ordered Zeng Ying to be put in a torture device and sent to the Beijing Division.

古文：御史叶初春尝为樱属吏，知其廉，于他疏微白之。
现代文：御史叶初春曾经是曾樱的手下，知道他廉洁，就在上书说别的事时含蓄地提到这一点。
English: At the beginning of spring, Mishi Ip, who had once been a subordinate of Zeng Sakura, knew that he was incorruptible, and implicitly mentioned this in the letter when he said something else.

古文：有诏诘问，因具言樱贤，然不知贿所从至。
现代文：庄烈帝下诏责问，初春于是就具体地讲说了曾樱的贤德，但也表示说不知道行贿事是从哪来的。
English: The Emperor solemnly reprimanded him, and in early spring he specifically spoke of Zengzakura's virtue, but also said that he did not know where the bribe-taking came from.

古文：诏至闽，巡抚沈犹龙、巡按张肯堂阅厂檄有奸人黄四臣名。
现代文：朝廷的诏书下到福建后，巡抚沈犹龙、巡按张肯堂查阅东厂的檄书，看到上面有坏人黄四臣的名字。
English: After the imperial edict of the imperial court came to Fujian, the procurator Shen Yulong and the procurator Zhang Kendang examined the imperial edict of the East Factory and saw the name of the villain Huang Shichen on it.

古文：芝龙前白曰： 四臣，我所遣。
现代文：芝龙前往说明，说： 四臣是我派去的。
English: Zhilong went to explain, saying: I sent the four ministers.

古文：我感樱恩，恐迁去，令从都下讯之。
现代文：我感激曾樱的恩德，怕他调走，让四臣到京城去打听消息。
English: I am grateful for Zeng Ying's kindness. I was afraid that he would be transferred away, so I asked four ministers to go to Beijing to inquire about the news.

古文：四臣乃妄言，致有此事。 
现代文：四臣竟胡说八道，以致惹出这样的事情来。 
English: The four ministers are talking nonsense to provoke such a thing.

古文：犹龙、肯堂以入告，力白樱冤，芝龙亦具疏请罪。
现代文：犹龙、肯堂就把这件事报告给朝廷，极力说明曾樱的冤屈，芝龙也上书谢罪。
English: Yulong and Kentang reported the matter to the imperial court and tried their best to explain Zengzakura's grievances, and Zhilong also wrote a letter of apology.

古文：士民以樱贫，为醵金办装，耆老数千人随至阙下，击登闻鼓讼冤。
现代文：当地的士绅、百姓因为曾樱家里清贫，为他凑钱准备了行装，几千名老年人跟着他到京师敲登闻鼓，为他诉冤。
English: Because Zeng Ying's family was poor, the local gentry and common people pooled their money to prepare costumes for him. Several thousand elderly people followed him to Beijing to beat the drums and appeal for justice.

古文：帝命毋入狱，俟命京邸。
现代文：庄烈帝传令不要把曾樱送进监房，让他住到京师的官邸中听候命令。
English: Zhuge Liang ordered not to send Zeng Ying to the cell, but to let him live in the official residence of the Beijing Division to await orders.

古文：削芝龙都督衔，而令樱以故官巡视海道。
现代文：后来剥夺了芝龙都督的官衔，让曾樱以原职去巡视海道。
English: Later, the official title of the governor of Zhilong was stripped, and Zeng Ying was allowed to use his original position to inspect the seaway.

古文：寻以衡、永多寇，改樱湖广按察使，分守湖南，给以敕。
现代文：不久因为衡阳、永州有很多强盗，让曾樱改任湖广按察使，负责分守湖南，给他颁发了敕命。
English: Soon, because there were many robbers in Hengyang and Yongzhou, Zeng Ying was appointed inspector of Hunan Province, responsible for guarding Hunan, and he was given a short life.

古文：故事，守道无敕，帝特赐之。
现代文：按惯例，守道官不发敕命，是庄烈帝特意赐给他的。
English: According to the usual practice, the preceptor did not have to give up his life, which was specially given to him by Emperor Zhuang.

古文：时贼已残十余州县，而永州知府推官咸不任职。
现代文：当时贼盗已经破坏了十多个州县，而永州的知府、推官都不能胜任自己的职务。
English: At that time, thieves had already destroyed more than ten prefectures and counties, and the prefectures and governors of Yongzhou could not fulfill their duties.

古文：樱荐苏州同知晏日曙、归德推官万元吉才。
现代文：曾樱向朝廷推荐苏州同知晏日曙、归德推官万元吉的才干。
English: Zeng Ying recommended to the imperial court the talents of Suzhou Tongzhi, Sun Yat-sen, and Gui De's superior officer, Yuan Ji.

古文：两人方坐事罢官，以樱言并起用。
现代文：当时他们两个正因故被罢官，因为曾樱的推荐都得到了起用。
English: At that time, both of them had just been dismissed for cause, because Zeng Ying's recommendation had been used.

古文：樱乃调芝龙剿贼，贼多降，一方遂安。
现代文：曾樱接着调芝龙来剿贼，贼盗大部分归降了，这一带于是稳定下来。
English: Zeng Ying then brought in Zhi Long to fight the bandits. Most of the bandits surrendered, and the area stabilized.

古文：迁山东右布政使，分守登、莱。
现代文：后来，曾樱又升为山东右布政使，负责守护登州、莱州。
English: Later, Zeng Ying was promoted to Shandong Right Branch Political Envoy, responsible for guarding Dengzhou and Laizhou.

古文：十四年春，擢右副都御史，代徐人龙巡抚其地。
现代文：十四年春天，曾樱被提拔为右副都御史。接替徐人龙巡抚他的辖区。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, Zeng Ying was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, succeeding Xu Renlong as the governor of his jurisdiction.

古文：明年迁南京工部右侍郎，乞假归。
现代文：第二年调任南京工部右侍郎，他请假还乡去了。
English: The following year, he was transferred to the Nanjing Engineering Department as a right-hand man, and he took a leave of absence to return to his hometown.

古文：山东初被兵，巡抚王永吉所部济、兖、东三府州县尽失，匿不以闻。
现代文：当初山东战乱时，巡抚王永吉所辖的济南、兖州、东昌三府的州县都失陷了，他隐瞒着不往上报。
English: When the war in Shandong broke out, the prefectures of Jinan, Zhangzhou and Dongchang, which were under the jurisdiction of the governor Wang Yongji, all fell, but he concealed the fact and did not report it.

古文：兵退，以恢复报。
现代文：后来贼兵退出，他作为收复之功报了上去。
English: Later, the bandits withdrew, and he went up as a reward for the recovery.

古文：而樱所部青、登、莱三府失州县无几，尽以实奏。
现代文：曾樱所辖的青州、登州、莱州三府没丢失几个州县，他完全如实报上去了。
English: The three prefectures of Qingzhou, Dengzhou and Laizhou under the jurisdiction of Zeng Ying did not lose several prefectures and counties, and he went to the newspaper completely truthfully.

古文：及论罪，永吉反擢总督，而樱夺官，逮下刑部狱。
现代文：等后来评定功过时，永吉反而升为总督，曾樱被剥夺官职，逮进了刑部的监狱里。
English: Later, when the award was judged to be out of date, Yongji was promoted to governor instead, and Zeng Ying was stripped of his official position and taken to the prison of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：不十日而京师陷，贼释诸囚，樱乃遁还。
现代文：此后不到十天功夫，京师失陷了，贼寇释放各种囚犯，曾樱才得以逃回南方去。
English: After that, it took less than ten days for the Beijing division to fall and the bandits to release various prisoners before Zeng Ying was able to escape back to the south.

古文：其后唐王称号于福州。芝龙荐樱起工部尚书兼东阁大学士。
现代文：后来唐王在福州称帝，芝龙推荐曾樱起任工部尚书兼东阁大学士。
English: Later, Tang Wang became emperor in Fuzhou, and Zeng Ying was recommended by Zhilong to become a member of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce and a scholar of Dongge University.

古文：无何，令掌使部，寻进太子太保、吏部尚书、文渊阁。
现代文：不久让他掌管吏部，很快又加封为太子太保、吏部尚书、文渊阁大学士。
English: Soon, he was put in charge of the personnel department, and soon he was given the titles of Crown Prince Taibo, Personnel Department Shangshu, and Wenyu Academy Scholar.

古文：王驻延平，令樱留守福州。
现代文：唐王驻在延平时，让曾樱留守福州。
English: When the Tang king was stationed in Yanping, Zeng Ying stayed in Fuzhou.

古文：大清兵破福州，樱挈家避海外中左卫。
现代文：大清部队打下福州后，曾樱带着全家到海外的中左卫避难。
English: After the Qing Dynasty troops defeated Fuzhou, Zeng Ying took the whole family to take refuge overseas in Zhong Zuwei.

古文：越五年，其地被兵，遂自缢死。
现代文：过了五年，海岛也受到攻打，曾樱于是上吊自杀了。
English: Five years later, the island was also attacked, and Zeng Ying hanged himself.

