古文：父母呼，应勿缓。
现代文：父母呼唤我们，我们应该及时答应，不要缓慢答应。
English: Our parents are calling us, and we should respond promptly, not slowly.

古文：父母命，行勿懒。
现代文：父母交待的事情，要马上去做，不可拖延或推辞偷懒。
English: Parents should do what they tell their children to do right away, and should not procrastinate or be lazy.

古文：父母教，须敬听。
现代文：父母教导我们为人处事的道理，我们应该恭敬聆听。
English: Parents teach us how to behave, and we should listen respectfully.

古文：父母责，须顺承。
现代文：父母责备教训时，应恭顺地虚心接受。
English: Parents should humbly and humbly accept their parents' reproaches and lessons.

古文：冬则温，夏则凊。晨则省，昏则定。
现代文：侍奉父母要用心体贴，冬天寒冷时为父母温暖被窝，夏天睡前为父母铺床扇凉。
English: Serving parents should be thoughtful and considerate. In winter, when it is cold, parents should warm the bed. In summer, parents should make the bed before going to bed.

古文：出必告，反必面。
现代文：早晨起床，应先探望父母，向父母请安问好；晚上伺候父母安睡。
English: When you get up in the morning, you should first visit your parents and wish them a good day. In the evening, wait for your parents to sleep peacefully.

古文：居有常，业无变。事虽小，勿擅为。
现代文：外出办事时，应该告诉父母去处；回家以后，也要当面禀报父母，让他们心安。
English: When you go out on an errand, you should tell your parents where you are going; when you get home, you should also report to your parents face-to-face to reassure them.

古文：苟擅为，子道亏。物虽小，勿私藏。
现代文：平常起居作息，要保持规律，做事有规矩，不任意改变世代相沿的事业。纵然是小事，也不能擅自做主，不向父母禀告。
English: It is necessary to maintain a regular daily routine, do things in an orderly manner, and do not arbitrarily change the career of the same generation. Even if it is a small matter, you cannot make decisions without informing your parents.

古文：苟私藏，亲心伤。亲所好，力为具。
现代文：如果任性而为，就有损于为人子女的本分，是不孝的行为。
English: If you act in a wayward manner, you will undermine your duty as a human child, and it is an act of filial piety.

古文：亲所恶，谨为去。
现代文：公物虽小，也不可私自收起占为己有。
English: Although the public property is small, it is not allowed to pick it up and take it as one's own.

古文：身有伤，贻亲忧。
现代文：如果这样，品德就有缺失，父母知道了一定很伤心。
English: If so, there is a lack of moral character, and the parents must be very sad to know.

古文：德有伤，贻亲羞。亲爱我，孝何难。
现代文：父母亲所喜好的东西，做子女的应尽力准备齐全；父母厌恶的事情，要小心谨慎去除。
English: If you are a child, you should do your best to be well-prepared for the things that your parents like; if you are a parent, you should be careful to remove the things that you dislike.

古文：亲憎我，孝方贤。亲有过，谏使更。
现代文：要爱护自己的身体，不要使之受到伤害，让父母忧虑。
English: Take care of your body, don't hurt it, and don't worry your parents.

古文：怡吾色，柔吾声。谏不入，悦复谏。
现代文：要注重自己的品格修养，不可以做出有违道德的事情，让父母蒙羞。
English: It is necessary to pay attention to one's own character cultivation, and it is not allowed to do things that are against morality and disgrace one's parents.

古文：号泣随，挞无怨。亲有疾，药先尝。昼夜侍，不离床。
现代文：父母生病时，子女应尽心照顾亲尝汤药，一旦病情沉重要昼夜服侍，不离病床。
English: When parents are ill, their children should take good care of them, taste the soup medicine, and once the illness is serious, serve them day and night, and do not leave the sickbed.

古文：丧三年，常悲咽。
现代文：父母去世，要守孝三年，要常常追思感怀父母教养的恩德。
English: After the death of parents, it is necessary to observe filial piety for three years, and it is necessary to often think about the benevolence of parents' upbringing.

古文：居处变，酒肉绝。
现代文：守孝期间自己住的地方也改为简朴，并戒绝酒肉。
English: During the period of filial piety, the place where he lived was also changed to a simple one, and he abstained from meat and alcohol.

古文：丧尽礼，祭尽诚。
现代文：办理父母的丧事要依照礼仪，不可草率马虎，祭拜时要诚心诚意。
English: Parents' funerals should be handled in accordance with the etiquette, should not be hasty and careless, and should be sincere when worshiping.

古文：事死者，如事生。
现代文：对待已经去逝的父母，要如同生前一样的恭敬。
English: Treat your parents who have passed away with the same respect as you did when they were alive.

