古文：徐謇，字成伯，丹阳人也，家本东莞。与兄文伯等皆善医药。
现代文：徐謇字成伯，丹阳人，家本住东莞，与兄长文伯等都擅长治病配药。
English: Xu Yanzi, a native of Danyang, who lives in Dongguan, and his brother Wenbo are both good at prescribing medicine.

古文：謇因至青州，慕容白曜平东阳，获之，送京师。
现代文：徐謇因到青州，慕容白曜平定东阳，被抓住送到京城。
English: As a result of his visit to Qingzhou, Murong Bai You subdued Dongyang and was arrested and sent to Beijing.

古文：献文欲验其能，置病人于幕中，使謇隔而脉之，深得病形，兼知色候，遂被宠遇。
现代文：献文帝想检验他的能力，把病人放在帷幕里面，让徐謇隔着帷幕把脉。非常清楚病状，又知道病人面色症候，于是被宠幸。
English: Emperor Xianwen wanted to test his ability, so he put the patient inside the curtain and let Xu Yao check the pulse through the curtain. He was very clear about the condition and knew the patient's facial symptoms, so he was favored.

古文：为中散，稍迁内行长。
现代文：做了中散。不久升为内侍长。
English: He was promoted to nakaisan (middle-ranking official) and later to Naishi no chieftain.

古文：文明太后时问经方，而不及李脩之见任用。
现代文：文明太后时常询问医药方书，但比不上李修那样被重用。
English: The empress dowager of civilization often inquired about the medical prescription book, but it was not as reused as Li Xiu.

古文：謇合和药剂攻疗之验，精妙于脩。
现代文：徐謇配药治病的方法，比李修精妙。
English: Xu Xi's method of prescribing medicine to cure diseases is more exquisite than Li Xiu's.

古文：而性秘忌。承奉不得其意，虽贵为王公，不为措疗也。
现代文：但性情古怪，应接往往不合他意，即使贵为王公大人，也不去为他们治疗。
English: However, he has an eccentric temperament, and his responses are often not to his liking. Even if you are an adult prince, you will not go to treat them.

古文：孝文迁洛，稍加眷待，体小不平，及所宠冯昭仪有病，皆令处疗。
现代文：孝文帝迁都洛阳后，稍得眷顾接待，身材矮小不如常人，皇帝宠爱的冯昭仪有病时，都让他去治疗。
English: After Emperor Xiaowen moved the capital to Luoyang, Emperor Xiaowen treated Feng Zhaoyi with special care. He was not as short as an ordinary person. When Emperor Xiaowen's favorite Feng Zhaoyi was ill, he had him treated.

古文：又除中散大夫，转侍御师。
现代文：又任命为中散大夫，转任侍御师。
English: He was also appointed as Nakasanzan no daibu (a doctor of Chinese medicine) and transferred to the post of Samurai master.

古文：謇欲为孝文合金丹，致延年法，乃入居嵩高，采营其物，历岁无所成，遂罢。
现代文：徐謇想替孝文帝配制金丹，得到延年益寿的方法，便到嵩山居住，采集物品，历经一年没有什么成就，便告停止。
English: Xu Yao wanted to prepare the jujube for Emperor Xiaowen and get the method of prolonging life, so he went to Songshan to live and collect items. After a year of little achievement, he stopped.

古文：二年，上幸县瓠，有疾大渐，乃驰驿召謇，令水路赴行所，一日一夜行数百里。
现代文：太和二十二年，皇帝驾临悬瓠，得了重病，就急速召引徐謇，让他从水路到行宫，一天一夜走了几百里。
English: In the 22nd year of the Taiwa era, the emperor arrived in Hangul and fell seriously ill. He quickly summoned Xu Yao and made him walk hundreds of miles from the waterway to the palace, day and night.

古文：至，诊省有大验。
现代文：到行宫，诊断治疗很有效果。
English: At the time of delivery, the diagnosis and treatment are very effective.

古文：九月，车驾次于汝滨，乃大为謇设太官珍膳。
现代文：九月，皇帝车驾驻汝水边，于是替徐謇摆下太官珍膳。
English: In September, the emperor's carriage stopped at the water's edge, so he set out the eunuch's precious meal for Xu Xi.

古文：因集百官，特坐謇于上席，遍陈餚觞于前，命左右宣謇救摄危笃振济之功，宜加酬赍。乃下诏褒美，以謇为大鸿胪卿、金卿县伯，又赐钱绢、杂物、奴婢、牛马，事出丰厚，皆经内呈。诸亲王咸阳王禧等各有别赍，并至千匹。
现代文：集合百官，特意让徐謇坐在上席，把各种美肴名酒摆放在他面前，让身边侍卫宣讲徐謇拯救病危周济人伦的功劳，应该给予酬谢，便下达诏书褒扬赞美，让徐謇做了大鸿胪卿、金乡县伯，又赏赐钱绢、各种物品、奴婢、牛马，赏赐丰厚，都经内省呈报诸位亲王，咸阳王禧等人也各有酬赠，都达到千匹。
English: Hundreds of officials were gathered, and they specially invited Xu Xi to sit in the upper seat. They placed various famous dishes and wines in front of him. They asked the guards around him to preach that Xu Xi's contribution to saving the sick and endangered Zhou Jianren should be rewarded, and then issued an edict praising and commending him. They made Xu Xi a great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great great

古文：从行至鄴，上犹自发动，謇日夕左右。
现代文：随皇上到邺城，皇帝还不断发病，徐謇早晚侍奉在身边。
English: As the emperor went to Shicheng, the emperor was constantly ill, and Xu Yao served around him in the morning and evening.

古文：明年，从诣马圈，上疾势遂甚，蹙蹙不怡，每加切诮，又欲加之鞭捶，幸而获免。
现代文：第二年，跟随皇上到马圈，皇上病情加重，性情暴躁不和悦，常对他尖刻讽刺，还想用鞭捶惩罚，幸而得免。
English: In the second year, he followed the emperor to the stables. The emperor's condition worsened, his temper was irritable and disagreeable, he was often sarcastic, and he wanted to punish him with a whipping, but fortunately he was spared.

古文：帝崩后，謇随梓宫还洛。
现代文：皇帝死后，徐謇随着棺木回到洛阳。
English: After the emperor's death, Xu Xi followed the coffin back to Luoyang.

古文：謇常有将饵及吞服道，年垂八十，而鬓发不白，力未多衰。
现代文：徐謇有一种饮食调养吞服的方法，年近八十，但鬓发不白，体力不减。
English: Xu Wei has a method of eating and swallowing, nearly eighty years old, but his hair is not white, and his physical strength is not reduced.

古文：正始元年，以老为光禄大夫。
现代文：正始元年，因年老，做了光禄大夫。
English: At the beginning of the first year, due to old age, he became a doctor of Guanglu.

古文：卒，赠安东将军、齐州刺史，谥曰靖。
现代文：下世后，追封安东将军、齐州刺史，谥号靖。
English: After his death, he was posthumously given the titles of General Anton, Chizhou Shishi, and the posthumous name of Jing.

古文：然性自矜大，轻诸医人，自徐之才、崔叔鸾以还，俱为其所轻。
现代文：儿子徐践，字景癉，袭承爵位，官职建兴太守。兄文伯在南齐做官，是东莞、太山、兰陵三郡的太守。儿子徐雄，是员外散骑侍郎，医道在长江下游以东地区被人称赞，事迹都见于《南史》。
English: His son, Xu Jian, surnamed Jianxing, inherited the title of knight and became the official governor of Jianxing. His brother, Wenbo, served as an official in Nanqi and was the governor of Dongguan, Taishan and Lanling counties. His son, Xu Xiong, was a non-commissioned officer, and his medical skills were praised in the areas east of the lower reaches of the Yangtze River. His deeds can be seen in the "History of the South."

古文：姚僧垣，字法卫，吴兴武康人，吴太常信之八世孙也。
现代文：姚僧垣字法卫，吴兴武康人，是吴国太常姚信的八世孙。
English: Yao Sangyak Zi Fa Wei, Wu Xing Wu Kang Ren, is the eighth generation of Yao Xin.

古文：父菩提，梁高平令。
现代文：父亲姚菩提，梁朝高平县令。
English: His father, Yao Bodi, was a magistrate of Gaoping County in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：尝婴疾疹历年，乃留心医药。
现代文：幼婴患病一年多，于是留心医术。
English: The infant had been ill for more than a year, so he paid attention to the doctor's treatment.

古文：梁武帝召与讨论方术，言多会意，由是颇礼之。
现代文：梁武帝召见与他讨论医卜星相之术，言语多有领悟，由此比较礼遇他。
English: Emperor Liangwu summoned him to discuss the art of divination with him. He spoke with a lot of understanding, so he was treated with more courtesy.

古文：僧垣幼通洽，居丧尽礼，年二十四，即传家业。
现代文：姚僧垣自幼博识，服丧期间曲尽礼义，年二十四岁，便继承家业。
English: Yao Sangaki was well-versed from a young age, and he was polite and courteous during the funeral. At the age of twenty-four, he inherited the family business.

古文：仕梁为太医正，加文德主帅。
现代文：仕宦梁朝时是太医正，加授文德主帅。
English: When he was serving the Liang Dynasty, he was the Chief Physician. He was also the head coach of the Wende Youth Football Team.

古文：梁武帝尝因发热，服大黄。
现代文：梁武帝曾因发热，服用大黄。
English: Emperor Liangwu used to take rhubarb for fever.

古文：僧垣曰： 大黄快药，至尊年高，不宜轻用。 
现代文：姚僧垣说： 大黄是利药，天子年事已高，不应轻易服用。 
English: Yao Sangaki said: Rhubarb is a beneficial medicine, the child is old, it should not be taken lightly.

古文：帝弗从，遂至危笃。
现代文：皇帝不听劝阻，于是导致病情加重。
English: The emperor did not listen to dissuasion, which led to a worsening of his condition.

古文：太清元年，转镇西湘东王府中记室参军。
现代文：太清元年，迁职镇西湘东王府中记室参军。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he joined the army from the Central Records Office of the Eastern King's Mansion in Xixiang.

古文：僧垣少好文史，为学者所称。
现代文：姚僧垣年轻时喜好文史，为学者称道。
English: When he was young, Yao Sangaki liked literature and history and was praised as a scholar.

古文：及梁简文嗣位，僧垣兼中书舍人。
现代文：梁简文帝继位后，姚僧垣任中书舍人。
English: After Emperor Liang Jianwen succeeded to the throne, Yao Sangak was appointed as the scribe.

古文：梁元帝平侯景，召僧垣赴荆州，改受晋安王府谘议。
现代文：梁元帝平定侯景后，召请姚僧垣到荆州，改授晋安王府谘议。
English: After Emperor Liang Yuan had subdued Houjing, he summoned Yao Sangak to Jingzhou to consult on the transfer of the title to the Jinan royal court.

古文：梁元帝尝有心腹病，诸医皆请用平药。
现代文：梁元帝曾患有心腹疼痛，许多医生都请求皇上服用普通药物。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan suffered from pain in his heart and abdomen, and many doctors asked the emperor to take common medicines.

古文：僧垣曰： 脉洪实，宜用大黄。 
现代文：姚僧垣说： 脉搏有力充实，适宜服用大黄。 
English: Yao Sangaki said: The pulse is strong and substantial, suitable for taking rhubarb.

古文：元帝从之。进汤讫，果下宿食，因而疾愈。
现代文：梁元帝听从他的话，药汁喝完，果然能吃下平素饭食，因而病疾得以痊愈。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan obeyed his words. After drinking the medicinal juice, he was able to eat a plain vegetarian meal, and his illness was cured.

古文：时初铸钱，一当十，乃赐十万贯，实百万也。
现代文：当时刚铸造的钱，一顶十，于是赏赐钱十万贯。实际上是百万贯。
English: At that time, the newly minted money was ten to one, so the reward was 100,000 kroner. In fact, it was a million kroner.

古文：及魏军克荆州，僧垣犹侍梁元，不离左右，为军人所止，方泣涕而去。
现代文：魏军攻破荆州时，姚僧垣仍然侍奉梁元帝，被士兵所阻止，才哭着离开。
English: When the Wei army broke through Jingzhou, Yao Sangaki was still serving Emperor Liang Yuan. He was stopped by soldiers and left crying.

古文：寻而周文遣使驰驿徽僧垣。燕公于谨固留不遣，谓使人曰： 吾年衰暮，疾病婴沉，今得此人，望与之偕老。 
现代文：不久周文派使臣驰马急速征召姚僧垣，燕公于谨坚决挽留不放行，对使臣说： 我年已衰老迟暮，疾病很重，现在得到这人，希望能与他相处到老。 
English: Before long, Zhou Wen dispatched the envoy Chima to quickly conscript Yao Sangaku, and Yan Gong Yu Jian resolutely refused to let him go. He said to the envoy: I am old and very sick, and now I have this person, and I hope to get along with him until I am old.

古文：周文以谨勋德隆重，乃止。
现代文：周文因于谨功德隆重，便不再征召。
English: Zhou Wen was no longer conscripted due to his distinguished service.

古文：明年，随谨至长安。
现代文：明年，随于谨到长安。
English: Next year, I will follow you to Chang'an.

古文：武成元年，授小畿伯下大夫。
现代文：武成元年，授官小畿伯下大夫。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wucheng, he was awarded the post of junior doctor.

古文：金州刺史伊娄穆以疾还京，请僧垣省疾，乃云自腰至脐，似有三缚，两脚缓纵，不复自持。
现代文：金州刺史伊娄穆因病回京，请姚僧垣去看病，说从腰间到肚脐，好像有三根绳索捆绑，两脚痿痹，不能把持，姚僧垣就给他开三剂汤药。
English: Back in Beijing due to illness, Jinzhou's chief priest Shi Yanmu asked Yao Sangaki to see a doctor. Yao Sangaki said that from the waist to the navel, there seemed to be three ropes tied, his feet were paralysed, and he couldn't hold on. Yao Sangaki prescribed him three doses of decoction.

古文：僧垣即为处汤三剂，穆初服一剂，上缚即解；次服一剂，中缚复解；又服一剂，三缚悉除。而两脚疼痹，犹自挛弱。更为合散一剂，稍得屈申。
现代文：伊娄穆刚服第一剂药，上面绳索就解开了；再服第二剂药，中间绳索又解开了；又服一剂药，三根绳索全部解除，而两脚痿痹，仍然曲孱弱，又配一剂散药，两脚稍能伸展。
English: After taking the first dose of medicine, the upper rope was loosened; after taking the second dose of medicine, the middle rope was loosened again; after taking another dose of medicine, all three ropes were loosened, but the paralysis of the feet was still weak, and with another dose of loose medicine, the feet could be slightly stretched.

古文：僧垣曰： 终待霜降，此患当愈。 
现代文：姚僧垣说： 必须等到下霜，这种病才会好。 
English: Yao Sangaki said: "We have to wait until the frost, this disease will get better.

古文：及至九月，遂能起行。
现代文：等到九月，伊娄穆能够起来行走。
English: By September, Iyamu was able to stand and walk.

古文：大将军、襄乐公贺兰隆先有气疾，加以水肿，喘息奔急，坐卧不安。
现代文：大将军、襄乐公贺兰隆开始患有胸气堵塞病，又加上水肿，喘息急促，坐卧不安。
English: General He Lanlong began to suffer from chest gas blockage disease, coupled with edema, shortness of breath, and restlessness.

古文：或有劝其服决命大散者，其家疑未能决，乃问僧垣。
现代文：有劝他服用决命大散药的，他的家人犹豫不能决定。于是请教姚僧垣。
English: His family members hesitated and could not decide whether to advise him to take the fatal medicine, so they asked Yao Sangaki for advice.

古文：僧垣曰： 意谓此患，不与大散相当。 
现代文：姚僧垣说： 我想这种病，不与大散药相适应。 
English: Yao Sangaki said, "I don't think this kind of disease is compatible with bulk medicine.

古文：即为处方，劝急使服，便即气通。更服一剂，诸患悉愈。
现代文：便给他开一药方，让他快速服下。随即胸气畅通，又服一剂药，各种病都好了。
English: He was then prescribed a medicine, which he quickly took. Immediately, his chest gas cleared up, he took another dose of medicine, and all kinds of diseases were cured.

古文：大将军、乐平公窦集暴感风疾，精神瞀乱，无所觉知。
现代文：大将军、乐平公窦集突然受风得病，精神错乱，没有知觉。
English: The great general, Leping Gongzui, was suddenly taken ill by the wind and became delirious and unconscious.

古文：医先视者，皆云已不可救。
现代文：最初给他看病的医生，都说已经不可救治。
English: The doctors who initially treated him all said it was incurable.

古文：僧垣后至曰： 困矣，终当不死。 
现代文：姚僧垣到后，说： 疲惫了，终不会死。 
English: After Yao Sangaki arrived, he said, "I'm tired, but I won't die."

古文：为合汤散，所患即疗。
现代文：配制一盒汤散药。所得病很快好了。
English: Prepare a box of soup medicine. Your illness will soon be over.

古文：大将军、永世公叱伏列椿苦痢积时，而不损废朝谒。
现代文：大将军、永世公叱伏列椿被痢病所苦有很久时间，但不影响他进朝中拜谒。
English: The great general, Yong Shigong, suffered from dysentery for a long time, but it did not affect his entry into the court.

古文：燕公谨尝问僧垣曰： 乐平、永世，俱有痼疾，意永世差轻。 
现代文：燕公于谨曾对姚僧垣说： 乐平公、永世公都患有经久难愈的疾病，我觉得永世公的病情稍轻。 
English: Yan Gong Yu Jian once said to Yao Sanguan: Both Leping Gong and Yongshi Gong are suffering from a long-term incurable disease. I think Yongshi Gong's illness is slightly mild.

古文：对曰： 夫患有深浅，时有危杀，乐平虽困，终当保全；永世虽轻，必不免死。 
现代文：回答说： 病有深浅，时有危杀，乐平公虽然困窘，最终能够保全；永世公虽然较轻，一定免不了死。 
English: He replied, "Diseases have different depths and depths, and sometimes there is danger of death. Although Mr. Leping is in distress, he can be saved in the end; although Mr. Yongshihong is lighter, he will inevitably die.

古文：谨曰： 当在何时？ 
现代文：燕公于谨说： 应该在什么时候。 
English: Yan Gongyu said: When should it be?

古文：对曰： 不出四月。 
现代文：回答说 ：不出四月份。 
English: He replied: not until April.

古文：果如其言，谨叹异之。
现代文：结果正像他说的那样，燕公谨很是叹愕惊异。
English: As a result, just as he said, Yan Gongjun was very surprised.

古文：天和六年，迁遂伯中大夫。
现代文：天和六年，升职为遂伯中大夫。
English: Ten days and six years later, he was promoted to the position of Su Bo junior doctor.

古文：建德三年，文宣太后寝疾，医巫杂说，各有同异。
现代文：建德三年，文宣太后卧病，医生巫师纷纷发表自己的意见，互有异同。
English: In the three years of Jiande, Empress Dowager Wenxuan was bedridden, and doctors and wizards expressed their opinions one after another, with differences and similarities.

古文：武帝引僧垣坐，问之。
现代文：武帝召请姚僧垣同坐，问他。
English: Emperor Wu summoned Yao Sangak and asked him to sit with him.

古文：对曰： 臣准之常人，窃以忧惧。 
现代文：回答说： 我以普通人衡量，私下很担心忧虑。 
English: He said: "I'm a very private person and I worry a lot.

古文：帝泣曰： 公既决之矣，知复何言！ 
现代文：皇帝哭着说： 您既然决定下来了，还能再说什么呢？ 
English: The emperor wept and said, "Since you have decided to come down, what more can you say?

古文：寻而太后崩。
现代文：不久太后死去。
English: The empress dowager died soon after.

古文：其后复因召见，乃授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：这之后又因被召见，授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: After that, because he was summoned, he was given the title of General of Cavalry and the ceremony of opening the government and the three departments.

古文：敕停朝谒，若非别敕，不劳入见。
现代文：诏令他不再入朝拜谒，如果不是其他诏书，不烦劳入朝相见。
English: The imperial edict ordered him not to go to the Imperial Court to pay homage. If it were not for other imperial edicts, he would not have bothered to go to the Imperial Court.

古文：四年，帝亲戎东讨，至河阴遇疾，口不能言；睑垂覆目，不得视；一足短缩，又不得行。
现代文：建德四年，皇帝亲自带兵东征，到河阴时得病，口不能说话，眼下垂盖住眼睛，不得看东西，一只脚缩短，又不能行走。
English: In the four years of Jiande, the emperor personally led the army to the east, and when he arrived in the shade of the river, he fell ill. His mouth could not speak, his eyes were covered, he could not see, one foot was shortened, and he could not walk.

古文：僧垣以为诸藏俱病，不可并疗，军中之要，莫过于语，乃处方进药，帝遂得言。
现代文：姚僧垣认为各内脏器官同时得病，不能同时治疗，而军中要务，莫过于语言，于是开处方逐次用药。
English: Yao Sanguan thought that all the internal organs were ill at the same time and could not be treated at the same time, and the most important task in the army was the language, so he prescribed medicine successively.

古文：次又疗目，目疾便愈。未及足，足疾亦瘳。
现代文：皇帝能够说话；又治疗眼睛，眼病很快痊愈；未治疗到脚，脚病也好了。
English: The emperor was able to speak; the eye was treated and the eye disease was quickly cured; the foot was not treated and the foot disease was cured.

古文：比至华州，帝已痊复。
现代文：等到华州，皇帝已经完全康复。
English: By the time he arrived in Washington, the emperor had fully recovered.

古文：即除华州刺史，仍诏随驾入京，不令在镇。
现代文：当即授职华州刺史。仍令他随宫驾回京，不让他在镇府。
English: He was immediately appointed as the governor of the State of Washington. However, he was still ordered to return to Beijing with the imperial court, and was not allowed to remain in the capital.

古文：宣政元年，表请致仕，优诏许之。
现代文：宣政元年，上奏章请求辞官归居，特别优待下诏准许。
English: In the first year of the proclamation of the Republic of China, a petition was sent to the emperor asking him to resign his post and return home, which was granted with a special favor.

古文：是岁，帝幸云阳，遂寝疾，乃召僧垣赴行在所。
现代文：这一年，皇帝到云阳去，卧病，便召请姚僧垣到行宫所在地。
English: This year, the emperor went to Yunyang and was ill, so he summoned Yao Sangak to the location of the palace.

古文：内史柳昂私问曰： 至尊脉候何如？ 
现代文：内史柳昂偷偷地问道 ：天子脉象怎么样？ 
English: Inner historian Liu Ang secretly asked: What about the image of the Son of Heaven?

古文：对曰： 天子上应天心，或当非愚所及。
现代文：回答说： 天子应和上天之心，恐怕不是我能做到的。
English: He replied, "I'm afraid it's not something I can do.

古文：若凡庶如此，万无一全。 
现代文：如果一般人患病到这个样子，万人中无一保全。 
English: If the average person gets sick to this extent, there is no protection for anyone.

古文：寻而帝崩。
现代文：不久皇帝下世。
English: Soon after, the emperor died.

古文：宣帝初在东宫，常苦心痛，乃令僧垣疗之，其疾即愈。
现代文：宣帝最初在东宫当太子的时候，常为心痛所苦，就让姚僧垣治疗，病很快好了。
English: When Emperor Xuan was first crown prince in the East Palace, he often suffered from heartache, so he let Yao Zengqi treat him, and his illness soon improved.

古文：及即位，恩礼弥隆。
现代文：即位后，对姚僧垣的恩惠礼遇更加丰厚。
English: After the enthronement, Yao Sangak was treated more generously.

古文：谓曰： 尝闻先帝呼公为姚公，有之？ 
现代文：对他说 ：曾经听到先帝喊您为姚公，有这回事吗？ 
English: I said to him, "Have you ever heard the former emperor call you Yao Gong? Is that true?"

古文：对曰： 臣曲荷殊私，实如圣旨。 
现代文：回答说： 臣下如弯荷特受偏爱，确实如圣主所言。 
English: He replied, "Indeed, it is as the Lord has said that the most beloved of servants is he who is the most pious."

古文：帝曰： 此是尚齿之辞，非为贵爵之号。
现代文：皇帝说： 这是尊崇老人的话，不是显贵爵位的称号。
English: The emperor said, "This is a word of respect for the elderly, not a title of nobility.

古文：朕当为公建国开家，为子孙永业。 
现代文：我应为您建立封地开创家业，成为子孙的长久基业。 
English: I should establish a fiefdom for you, create a family business, and become a long-term foundation for your descendants.

古文：乃封长寿县公。册命之日，又赐以金带及衣服等。
现代文：于是封为长寿县公，册封那天，又赏金带以及衣服等物。
English: As a result, he was made a public official of Changshou County, and on the day he was officially made a public official, he received a reward belt, clothes, and other items.

古文：大象二年，除太医下大夫。
现代文：大象二年，授职太医下大夫。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the post of junior doctor.

古文：帝寻有疾，至于大渐，僧垣宿直侍疾。
现代文：皇帝不久得病，后来加重，姚僧垣便在殿堂住宿，侍奉皇上。
English: The emperor soon fell ill, which later worsened, and Yao Sangaki stayed in the palace to serve the emperor.

古文：帝谓隋公曰： 今日性命，唯委此人。 
现代文：皇帝对隋公说： 今天我的性命，只有交付给这个人。 
English: The emperor said to Sui Gong, "Today, my life can only be entrusted to this man.

古文：僧垣知帝必不全济，乃对曰： 臣但恐庸短不逮，敢不尽心！ 
现代文：姚僧垣知道皇帝一定不会痊愈，就回答说： 臣子只担心医道平庸不及，岂敢不竭尽心力！ 
English: Yao Sangaki knew that the emperor would not recover, so he replied: "A courtier only worries about the mediocrity of medicine, how dare he not do his best!

古文：帝颔之。
现代文：皇帝点头称是。
English: The emperor nodded yes.

古文：及静帝嗣位，迁上开府仪同大将军。
现代文：静帝即位后，升迁上开府仪同大将军。
English: After Emperor Jing ascended the throne, he was promoted to Kaifu Yi and became a general.

古文：隋开皇初，进爵北绛郡公。
现代文：隋朝开皇初年，增封爵位为北绛郡公。
English: In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Beibei County.

古文：三年，卒，年八十五。
现代文：开皇三年，下世，时年八十五岁。
English: He was eighty-five years old when he died, three years after his accession to the throne.

古文：遗诫衣帢入棺，朝服勿敛，灵上唯置香奁，每日设清水而已。
现代文：遗嘱中告诫衣帽放入棺，朝服不要入殓，灵柩上只放香匣，每天摆放清水罢了。
English: In his will, he warned that the coat and hat should be placed in the coffin, that the morning dress should not be placed in the coffin, that only the incense burner should be placed on the coffin, and that only clean water should be placed on the coffin every day.

古文：赠本官，加荆、湖二州刺史。
现代文：追赠本官，加授荆、湖二州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title, and was also awarded the Jing and the Huzhou two-pronged history.

古文：僧垣医术高妙，为当时所推，前后效验，不可胜纪。
现代文：姚僧垣医术高妙，为当时人所推重，前后验证，不可一一记载。
English: Yao Sangaki's medical skills were excellent, which was highly valued by the people at that time. It is impossible to record everything.

古文：子则，亦传其家业。
现代文：声誉隆盛，远闻边境，以至于各蕃疆外域，都请求委托他。
English: He had a great reputation and was well-known far and wide, so much so that people from all over the country asked to commission him.

古文：许智藏，高阳人也。祖道幼，常以母疾，遂览医方，因而究极，时号名医。
现代文：姚僧垣便参详校正有征验的，编为《集验方》十二卷，又撰写《行记》三卷，流传于世。许智藏，高阳人。祖父许道幼，常常因母亲患病，四处寻觅医方，因而深究医理，当时号称名医。
English: Yao Sangak can be found in the 12 volumes of the "Collection of Examination Methods" and the 3 volumes of the "Diary of Practice," which have been passed down to the world. Xu Zhizang was from Gaoyang. His grandfather, Xu Daojun, was often in search of cures for his mother's illnesses, and thus studied medical science in depth. At that time, he was known as a famous doctor.

古文：诫诸子曰： 为人子者，尝膳视药，不知方术，岂谓孝乎。 
现代文：告诫他的几个孩子说 ：做晚辈的，父母吃饭吃药前，先尝后进。不知医术，能够称为孝顺吗？ 
English: He admonished several of his children, saying, "As the younger generation, parents should taste first before taking medicine. If you don't know medicine, can you be called filial?"

古文：由是，遂世相传授。
现代文：因此，便世代相传。
English: Therefore, it has been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：仕梁，位员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：出仕梁朝，官职员外散骑侍郎。
English: Liang Chao was sent to serve, and outside officials and clerks rode horseback.

古文：父景，武陵王谘议参军。
现代文：父亲许景，是武陵王谘议参军。
English: His father, Xu Jing, was advised by King Wuling to join the army.

古文：智藏少以医术自达，仕陈，为散骑常侍。
现代文：许智藏年轻时以通晓医术而得志，在陈朝做官，是散骑侍郎。
English: When he was young, Xu Zhizang gained his ambition through his knowledge of medicine. He served as an official in the Chen Dynasty and was a horseback riding attendant.

古文：陈灭，隋文帝以为员外散骑侍郎，使诣扬州。
现代文：陈朝灭亡后，隋文帝让他做了员外散骑侍郎，派他到扬州去。
English: After the fall of the Chen dynasty, Emperor Sui Wen made him a non-commissioned officer and sent him to Yangzhou.

古文：会秦王俊有疾，上驰召之。
现代文：恰巧秦王杨俊有病，皇上派人驱马疾行召他。
English: It so happened that Yang Jun, the king of Qin, was ill, and the emperor sent someone to call him on horseback.

古文：俊夜梦其亡妃崔氏泣曰： 本来相迎，如闻许智藏将至。
现代文：秦王俊夜间梦见已故妃子崔氏哭着说： 本应迎接你，但听到许智藏将要来到。
English: During the night, Qin Wangjun dreamed of his deceased daughter-in-law Cui crying and said, "I was supposed to welcome you, but I heard that Xu Zhizang was coming.

古文：其人若到，当必相苦，为之奈何？ 
现代文：这个人如果到，势必被他害苦，怎么办呢？ 
English: If this person arrives, he is bound to suffer, so what should we do?

古文：明夜，俊又梦崔氏曰： 妾得计矣，当入灵府中以避之。 
现代文：第二天夜里，秦王俊又梦见崔氏说： 我找到办法了，可以入心中躲避。 
English: The next night, Qin Wangjun dreamed of Cui again and said: I have found a way, I can go into my heart to escape.

古文：及智藏至，为俊诊脉曰： 疾已入心，即当发痫，不可救也。 
现代文：等到许智藏到来，给他诊脉说 ：病已进入心中。很快就会发疯。不能医救。 
English: When Xu Zhizang arrived, he gave him the diagnosis: "The disease has entered the heart. It will soon go mad. It cannot be cured."

古文：果如言，俊数日而薨。
现代文：果然如他所说，秦王俊几天后死去。
English: As he said, Qin Wangjun died a few days later.

古文：上奇其妙，赍物百段。
现代文：皇上惊奇他医术奇妙，送给物品百段。
English: The emperor was surprised at his wonderful medical skills and gave him hundreds of items.

古文：炀帝即位，智藏时致仕。帝每有苦，辄令中使就宅询访，或以辇迎入殿，扶登御床。
现代文：炀帝即位后，许智藏辞官在家，皇帝每次有病，就令中使到他府中询问请教，或者用皇帝车驾迎进宫中，扶到皇帝床上。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xizang, Xu Zhizang, the imperial secretary, was at home. Whenever the emperor was ill, he would send an envoy to his palace to ask for advice, or use the emperor's car to drive into the palace and take him to the emperor's bed.

古文：智藏为方奏之，用无不效。
现代文：许智藏开药方呈奏，用后没有不起作用的。
English: Xu Zhizang opened the prescription and played it, and there was nothing ineffective after use.

古文：卒于家，年八十。
现代文：死在家中。年八十岁。
English: He died at home, aged 80.

古文：宗人许澄，亦以医术显。
现代文：何稠字桂林，国子祭酒何妥哥哥的儿子。父亲何通，擅长雕琢玉石。
English: He was born in Guilin, the son of the elder brother He Zuo. His father, He Tong, was good at carving jade.

古文：澄父奭，仕梁，为中军长史，随柳仲礼入长安，与姚僧垣齐名，拜上仪同三司。
现代文：何稠十多岁时，碰到江陵平定，随何妥到长安。
English: When he was more than ten years old, he came across Jiangling Pingding and followed it to Chang'an.

古文：澄有学识，传父业，尤尽其妙。
现代文：在周朝任职，任御饰下士。隋文帝为丞相时，召补为参军，兼管细作署。
English: He served in the Zhou Dynasty and was appointed as a decorated corporal. When the Sui Emperor Wen was the prime minister, he summoned him to join the army, and also managed the detail.

古文：历位尚药典御、谏议大夫，封贺川县伯。
现代文：开皇年间，连续升职为太府丞。何稠博览古代图表，认识多种古物。
English: During the Emperor's reign, he was continuously promoted to Taifu no jo. He was well versed in ancient charts and knew a variety of antiquities.

古文：父子俱以艺术名重于周隋二代，史失其事，故附云。
现代文：波斯国曾经进献金线锦袍，织物相当美丽。皇上命令何稠织做一件。
English: Persia once donated gold-threaded brocade robes, the fabric is quite beautiful. The emperor ordered He Chuxi to make one.

古文：万宝常，不知何许人也。
现代文：何稠织成后，超过波斯国进献的那件。
English: How thickly it was woven, surpassing the one presented by the Persian state.

古文：父大通，从梁将王琳归齐，后谋还江南，事泄伏诛。
现代文：皇上非常高兴。当时中原琉璃制作失传很久，匠工不敢改变。
English: The emperor was very pleased. At that time, the production of Central Plains glass had been lost for a long time, and craftsmen did not dare to change.

古文：由是宝常被配为乐户，因妙达钟律，遍工八音。与人方食，论及声调。
现代文：何稠用绿瓷制作，与真品没有什么区别。不久，升为员外散骑侍郎。
English: He thickly made with green porcelain, and there is no difference from the real thing. Soon, he was promoted to the rank of non-commissioned officer.

古文：时无乐器，宝常因取前食器及杂物，以箸扣之，品其高下，宫商毕备，谐于丝竹，大为时人所赏。
现代文：开皇末年，桂州俚李光仕叛乱，皇上诏令何稠征兵讨伐，军队驻扎在衡岭，派人招降叛军首领。
English: In the last years of the Emperor's reign, Li Guangshi rebelled in Guizhou, and the Emperor ordered He Chuxu to recruit soldiers for the crusade. The army was stationed in Hengling and sent people to recruit the rebel leader.

古文：然历周、隋，俱不得调。
现代文：洞主莫崇解甲投降。桂州长史王文同捆缚莫崇到何稠处。
English: The cave's owner, Mo Chong, has surrendered. Gui Governor Shi Wangwen has tied up Mo Chong and taken him to a dark place.

古文：开皇初，沛国公郑译等定乐，初为黄钟调。
现代文：何稠骗他道： 州县不能抚养百姓，不是莫崇的罪过。 
English: Ho Chou lied to him and said: It is not Motsung's fault that the prefectures and counties cannot support the people.

古文：宝常虽为伶人，译等每召与议，然言多不用。
现代文：让人释放他，拉他同坐，加上随从四个人，设酒宴款待后放他们回去。莫崇非常高兴，回洞后不设防备。
English: They let him go, sat him down, and his four followers, had a banquet, and then let them go. Mochon was so happy that he went back to the cave unprepared.

古文：后译乐成，奏之。
现代文：何稠到五更天，偷袭到洞口，发动全部俚兵包围残敌。
English: How thick to five more days, sneak attack to the mouth of the cave, launch all the soldiers to surround the remaining enemy.

古文：上召宝常，问其可不。
现代文：象州贼帅杜条辽、罗州贼帅庞靖等相继归降。
English: Du Jiao Liao, the thief-in-chief of Xiangzhou, and Pang Jing, the thief-in-chief of Luozhou, were successively demoted.

古文：宝常曰： 此亡国之音，岂陛下所宜闻！ 上不悦。
现代文：于是分遣建州开府梁昵讨伐叛夷罗寿，罗州刺史冯暄讨伐叛军主帅檀，一并平定之，以承制署首领做州县官后回师，众人都心悦诚服。
English: As a result, Liang Ni of Jianzhou Kaifu was dispatched to fight against the traitor Luo Shou, and Luo Zhou Zhishi Feng Qi to fight against the rebel army commander Dang, and together they pacified it, with the head of the Defense Production Department as the state and county official, and everyone was sincerely convinced.

古文：宝常因极言乐声哀怨淫放，非雅正之音，请以水尺为律，以调乐器，其声率下郑译调二律。
现代文：有个钦州刺史宁猛力帅部下对抗官军。开始，宁猛力图谋叛乱，到这个时候也恐惧起来，请求入朝请罪。何稠觉得他很厚道，不会猜忌有二心，放他回本州，与他相约八九月到京城相见。
English: There was a man from Qinzhou, Shi Ning, who led his subordinates in a violent struggle against the government army. At first, Ning tried hard to plot a rebellion, but by this time he was afraid and asked to go to the imperial court to plead guilty. Ho Chou felt that he was very kind and would not suspect him of having a double heart, so he let him go back to Honshu and agreed to meet him in Beijing in August or September.

古文：并撰《乐谱》六十四卷。
现代文：何稠还京上奏，皇上心里不高兴。
English: The emperor was not happy with how thickly the opera was performed in Kyoto.

古文：且论八音旋相为宫法，改弦移柱之变，为八十四调，一百四十律，变化终于一千八百声。
现代文：这年十月，宁猛力死去，皇上对何稠说： 你以前不将宁猛力带来，现在竟然死了。 何稠说： 猛力与臣相约，即使自身死去，也会让儿子入京侍奉皇上。越地人性情刚直，他的儿子一定会来。 
English: In October of that year, Ning Mengli died, and the emperor said to Ho Chou, "You didn't bring Ning Mengli before, and now he's dead." Ho Chou said, "Mengli made an agreement with his vassal that even if he died, he would let his son enter Beijing to serve the emperor. The people of Viet Nam are upright, and his son will definitely come."

古文：时以《周礼》有旋宫之义，自汉已来，知音不能通，见宝常特创其事，皆哂之。
现代文：当初猛力临死时，告诫他的儿子长真说： 我和皇上的大使有约，不可失信于国中贤人。你把我埋葬后，就要立即上路。 
English: When he was on the verge of death, he warned his son Nagamasa: "I have an appointment with the emperor's ambassador, and I must not betray the trust of the wise men of the country. After you bury me, you must immediately go on your way."

古文：至是，试令为之，应手成曲，无所疑滞，见者莫不嗟异。
现代文：长真依言入京。皇上非常高兴地说 ：何稠施言于蛮夷，竟到了如此地步。 
English: The Emperor was very pleased and said, "How dare you preach to the barbarians, you have come this far."

古文：于是损益乐器，不可胜纪。
现代文：因功授职升府。仁寿初年，文献皇后死后，何稠与宇文恺参与主管山陵规章与规划。
English: In the first year of Ren Shou's reign, after the death of the Empress of Literature, He Chouzo and Uwen Zang took part in supervising the regulation and planning of the mausoleum.

古文：其声雅淡，不为时人所好。
现代文：何稠生性寡言少语，善于听候皇上意图，由此逐渐得到皇上宠幸。
English: He was taciturn by nature, and good at listening to the emperor's intentions, and gradually became the emperor's favorite.

古文：太常善声者，多排毁之。
现代文：皇上重病，对何稠说： 你已经埋葬过皇后，现在我死去，也要好好安置。
English: The emperor was seriously ill and said to Ho Chou, "You have already buried the empress. Now that I am dying, I want to be properly laid to rest."

古文：又太子洗马苏夔以钟律自命，尤忌宝常。
现代文：安排你这些有什么益处呢？只是不能忘怀了。灵魂有知觉，应当在黄泉下相见。 
English: Of what profit is it to thee that thou shouldest prepare these things? but they shall not be forgotten: for the soul is conscious that it shall see the Lord's face in hell.

古文：夔父威方用事，凡言乐者附之而短宝常。
现代文：皇上揽着太子的脖子说： 何稠的心意，从我后事的办理情况上就可以明白。 
English: The emperor grabbed the prince by the scruff of the neck and said, "You can see how much I care from the way I handled the aftermath.

古文：数诣公卿怨望，苏威因诘宝常所为，何所传受。
现代文：大业初年，炀帝准备到扬州，下令让何稠查阅图籍，制作车服羽饰，送到江都。
English: In the first year of the Taiei era, Emperor Gong was preparing to go to Yangzhou, and he ordered He Chouzhu to look up the maps, make a coat of feathers, and send it to Jiangdu.

古文：有一沙门谓宝常曰： 上雅好符瑞，有言征祥者，上皆悦之。
现代文：那一天，授职太府少卿。何稠便造黄旗三万六千面，以及车舆辇辂，皇后仪仗队，百官礼服，按期完成，送到江都。
English: On that day, he was appointed to the post of Taifu Shaoqing. He Chuxu then made 36,000 yellow flags, as well as chariots, honor guards, and officials' dresses, which were completed on schedule and sent to Jiangdu.

古文：先生当言徒胡僧受学，云是佛家菩萨所传音律，则上必悦。先生当言，所为可以行矣。 宝常遂如其言以答威。
现代文：役使的工匠十万多人。花费的金银钱物可以用亿计。皇上派兵部侍郎明雅、选部郎薛迈等核查，几年才结束。
English: More than 100,000 artisans worked on the project. The amount of gold, silver and money spent was in the hundreds of millions. The emperor sent the secretary of the military department, Ming Ya, and the secretary of the election department, Xue Mai, to inspect the project, which was only completed a few years later.

古文：威怒曰： 胡僧所传，乃四夷之乐，非中国宜行。 
现代文：毫厘不差。
English: Not bad at all.

古文：其事竟寝。
现代文：何稠检校今古，多有改革创新。
English: There have been many reforms and innovations in today's heavily inspected schools.

古文：宝常听太常所奏乐，泫然泣曰： 乐声淫厉而哀，天下不久将尽。 
现代文：魏、晋以来，皮弁冠有缨带而没有笄导，何稠说 ：这是古代田猎的服装，现在穿戴入朝，应该改变样式。 
English: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, the flapper's crown has had a ribbon instead of a band, He Chouzhu said: This is an ancient hunting costume, now worn into the morning, the style should be changed.

古文：时四海全盛，闻言者皆谓不然。
现代文：所以皮弁冠用象牙笄导，就是从何稠开始的。
English: That's why the use of ivory as a guide for the crown of the valve started with Ho Chou.

古文：大业之末，其言卒验。宝常贫而无子，其妻因其卧疾，遂窃其资物而逃，宝常竟饿死。
现代文：另外下属各区官吏服装，开始没有佩带的印授，何稠说 ：这是早晚小朝时的服装，怎么有臣子拜谒皇上而解去印授，又没有佩玉之类的符节呢？ 
English: In addition, the clothing of the subordinate officials in each district did not wear the imperial seal at the beginning. He said: This is the clothing of the early and late Xiao Dynasty. How can there be a vassal who worships the emperor and removes the imperial seal, and there is no symbol such as the pearl?

古文：将死，取其所著书焚之，曰： 何用此为？ 见者于火中探得数卷，见行于世。
现代文：于是加上兽头小印绶以及一支佩玉。过去规定，五种车子在车辕上建车箱，皇帝与侍从都在车箱中。何稠说： 君臣相处过于接近，有相逼之感。 
English: As a result, a small seal with a beast's head and a pearl were added. In the past, it was stipulated that five kinds of cars should have a car box built on the car frame, and the emperor and his attendants should be in the car box. Ho Chou said: The monarchs and ministers are too close to each other, and there is a sense of pressure.

古文：开皇中，郑译、何妥、卢贲、苏夔、萧吉并讨论坟籍，撰著乐书，皆为当时所用，至于天然识乐，不及宝常远矣。
现代文：于是增大车盘，另造栏杆，侍臣站在里面。在里面再造须弥平座，天子单独居于上面。其他旗子车帘装饰物品，增加改变不少。皇帝又命令何稠制造兵车一百乘，后宫八百连。皇帝觉得很好。
English: As a result, the chariot base was enlarged, another railing was built, and courtiers stood inside. Inside, the Shumi flat seat was rebuilt, and the heavenly son lived alone on it. Other flags, curtains, and decorative items were added and changed a lot. The emperor also ordered Ho Chou to make a hundred chariots and a harem of eight hundred companies. The emperor felt very good.

古文：安马驹、曹妙达、王长通、郭令乐等能造曲，为一时之妙，又习郑声，而宝常所为，皆归于雅。
现代文：让何稠为太府卿。
English: Let Ho Choshi become the Grand Steward.

古文：此辈虽公议不附宝常，然皆心服，谓以为神。
现代文：后监管少府监。辽东之战，辅助右屯卫将军。
English: Later, he supervised the Junior Prefectural Supervisor. In the Battle of Liaodong, he assisted the Right Tunwei General.

古文：时乐人王令言亦妙达音律。
现代文：统领御林军弓箭手三万人。
English: The commander of the Goryo army has 30,000 archers.

古文：大业末，炀帝将幸江都，令言之子尝于户外弹胡琵琶，作翻调《安公子曲》，令言时卧室中，闻之惊起，曰： 变！
现代文：当时工部尚书宇文恺造辽水桥没有成功，军队不能渡河，右屯卫大将军麦铁杖因此被害。皇上派何稠建桥，两日便成了。当初，何稠建造行宫与六合城，到这里后，皇上在辽水东与贼相对峙。夜间建造城，周围环绕八里。
English: At that time, the Liaoshui Bridge was not successfully built by the Ministry of Works, the army could not cross the river, and the general of the Right Tunwei, Mai Tiedzhu, was damaged as a result. The emperor sent He Chouzhu to build the bridge, and it was completed in two days. At the beginning, He Chouzhu built the palace and Liuhe City, and after arriving here, the emperor confronted the thieves in the east of Liaoshui. The city was built at night, surrounded by eight miles.

古文：赵国李幼序、洛阳丘何奴并工握槊。
现代文：城与城墙上面的小墙高十仞。上面安排武装士兵，树杖建旗，四角立下缺口，对面建造一个台观，观下有三门，天亮建好。
English: The city and the small wall above the city wall are ten fathoms high. Armed soldiers are arranged on top, tree canes build a flag, a gap is made in the four corners, a platform is built opposite, there are three doors under the observation, and it is built at dawn.

古文：此盖胡戏，近入中国。
现代文：高丽人远远望见，称作神功。
English: The Koryo people can be seen from far away and are called Shengong.

古文：云胡王有弟一人遇罪，将杀之，弟从狱中为此戏以上之，意言孤则易死也。宣武以后，大盛于时。
现代文：不久升为右光禄大夫。跟随皇上到江都，碰上宇文化及叛乱，任命为工部尚书。兵败后，被窦建德俘获，又做工部尚书、舒国公。建德兵败后，归顺大唐，授职少府监，下世。
English: He was soon promoted to Uguanglu doctor. He followed the emperor to Jiangdu, encountered the Uygur culture and rebellion, and was appointed as a senior official of the Ministry of Industry. After the defeat, he was captured by Dou Jiande, and also became a senior official of the Ministry of Industry and Shu Guogong. After Jiande's defeat, he surrendered to Datang, was awarded the post of junior prefectural inspector, and died.

古文：何稠，字桂林，国子祭酒妥之兄子也。
现代文：何稠字桂林，国子祭酒何妥哥哥的儿子。
English: He is the son of the brother of Guilin, the son of Guilin, the son of Guilin, the son of Guilin.

古文：父通，善琢玉。
现代文：父亲何通，擅长雕琢玉石。
English: His father, Ho Tong, was good at carving jade.

古文：稠年十余，遇江陵平，随妥入长安。
现代文：何稠十多岁时，碰到江陵平定，随何妥到长安。
English: When he was more than ten years old, he came across Jiangling Pingding and followed it to Chang'an.

古文：仕周，御饰下士。
现代文：在周朝任职，任御饰下士。
English: He served in the Zhou Dynasty as a decorated corporal.

古文：及隋文帝为丞相，召补参军，并掌细作署。
现代文：隋文帝为丞相时，召补为参军，兼管细作署。
English: When Emperor Sui Wen was the prime minister, he called up his subordinates to join the army, and was also in charge of the detailed work of dispatching.

古文：开皇中，累迁太府丞。
现代文：开皇年间，连续升职为太府丞。
English: During the Emperor's reign, he was continuously promoted to Taifu no jo.

古文：稠博览古图，多识旧物。
现代文：何稠博览古代图表，认识多种古物。
English: He is well versed in ancient charts and knows a variety of antiquities.

古文：波斯尝献金线锦袍，组织殊丽。
现代文：波斯国曾经进献金线锦袍，织物相当美丽。
English: Persia once donated gold-threaded brocade robes, and the fabric is quite beautiful.

古文：上命稠为之。
现代文：皇上命令何稠织做一件。
English: The emperor ordered He Chuxiao to make one.

古文：稠锦成，逾所献者，上甚悦。
现代文：何稠织成后，超过波斯国进献的那件。皇上非常高兴。
English: The emperor was very pleased with the piece, which was woven so densely that it surpassed the one presented by the Persian Empire.

古文：时中国久绝琉璃作，匠人无敢措意，稠以绿瓷为之，与真不异。
现代文：当时中原琉璃制作失传很久，匠工不敢改变。何稠用绿瓷制作，与真品没有什么区别。
English: At that time, the production of Central Plains glaze had been lost for a long time, and craftsmen did not dare to change it. Ho Chou was made of green porcelain, and there was no difference between it and the real thing.

古文：师次衡岭，遣使招其渠帅，洞主莫崇解兵降款，桂州长史王文同锁崇诣稠所。
现代文：不久，升为员外散骑侍郎。开皇末年，桂州俚李光仕叛乱，皇上诏令何稠征兵讨伐，军队驻扎在衡岭，派人招降叛军首领。洞主莫崇解甲投降。桂州长史王文同捆缚莫崇到何稠处。
English: Soon, he was promoted to the rank of non-commissioned officer. At the end of the first year of the emperor, the rebellion of Li Guangshi in Guizhou broke out. The emperor ordered He Chouzhu to recruit soldiers for the crusade. The army was stationed in Hengling and sent people to recruit and surrender the rebel leaders. The cave owner Mo Chong surrendered. The governor of Guizhou, Shi Wangwen, tied up Mo Chong and took him to He Chouzhu.

古文：稠诈宣言曰： 州县不能绥养，非崇之罪。 
现代文：何稠骗他道： 州县不能抚养百姓，不是莫崇的罪过。 
English: Ho Chou lied to him and said: It is not Motsung's fault that the prefectures and counties cannot support the people.

古文：命释之，引共坐，与从者四人，为设酒食遣之。
现代文：让人释放他，拉他同坐，加上随从四个人，设酒宴款待后放他们回去。
English: They released him, seated him and his four attendants, gave them a feast, and sent them on their way.

古文：大悦，归洞不设备。
现代文：莫崇非常高兴，回洞后不设防备。
English: Mo Chong was very happy and did not set up any defences after returning to the cave.

古文：稠至五更，掩及其洞，悉发俚兵以临余贼，象州逆帅杜条辽、罗州逆帅庞靖等相断降款。
现代文：何稠到五更天，偷袭到洞口，发动全部俚兵包围残敌。象州贼帅杜条辽、罗州贼帅庞靖等相继归降。
English: How thick to five more days, sneak attack to the mouth of the cave, launch all the soldiers to encircle the remaining enemy. Xiangzhou Thief-in-Chief Du Jiao Liao, Luozhou Thief-in-Chief Pang Jing, etc. have successively surrendered.

古文：分遣建州开府梁昵讨叛夷罗寿，罗州刺史冯暄讨贼帅李大檀，并平之。承制署首领为州县官而还，众皆悦服。
现代文：于是分遣建州开府梁昵讨伐叛夷罗寿，罗州刺史冯暄讨伐叛军主帅檀，一并平定之，以承制署首领做州县官后回师，众人都心悦诚服。
English: As a result, Liang Ni of Jianzhou Kaifu was dispatched to fight against the traitor Luo Shou, and Luo Zhou Zhishi Feng Qi to fight against the rebel army commander Dang, and together they pacified it, with the head of the Defense Production Department as the state and county official, and everyone was sincerely convinced.

古文：有钦州刺史甯猛力帅众迎军。
现代文：有个钦州刺史宁猛力帅部下对抗官军。
English: There was a Qinzhou assassin, Shi Ning, who led his subordinates against the government army.

古文：初，猛力欲图为逆，至是惶惧，请身入朝。
现代文：开始，宁猛力图谋叛乱，到这个时候也恐惧起来，请求入朝请罪。
English: At first, Ning vigorously tried to plot a rebellion, but by this time he was also afraid and asked to enter the court to plead guilty.

古文：稠以其疾笃，示无猜贰，放还州，与约八九月诣京师相见。
现代文：何稠觉得他很厚道，不会猜忌有二心，放他回本州，与他相约八九月到京城相见。
English: Ho Chou thought he was very kind and would not suspect him of having second thoughts. He let him go back to Honshu and arranged to meet him in the capital in August or September.

古文：稠还奏状，上意不怿。
现代文：何稠还京上奏，皇上心里不高兴。
English: The emperor was not happy with how thickly the opera was performed in Kyoto.

古文：其年十月，猛力卒，上谓稠曰： 汝前不将猛力来，今竟死矣。 
现代文：这年十月，宁猛力死去，皇上对何稠说： 你以前不将宁猛力带来，现在竟然死了。 
English: In October of that year, Ning Mengli died, and the emperor said to He Zhou: You did not bring Ning Mengli before, and now he is dead.

古文：稠曰： 猛力共臣约，假令身死，当遣子入侍。
现代文：何稠说： 猛力与臣相约，即使自身死去，也会让儿子入京侍奉皇上。
English: Ho Choshi said, "I made an agreement with my father-in-law that even if I died, I would let my son enter the capital to serve the emperor."

古文：越人性直，其子必来。 
现代文：越地人性情刚直，他的儿子一定会来。 
English: The people of Viet Nam are straightforward, and his son will definitely come.

古文：初，猛力临终，诫其子长真曰： 我与大使期，不可失信于国士，汝葬我讫，即宜上路。 
现代文：当初猛力临死时，告诫他的儿子长真说： 我和皇上的大使有约，不可失信于国中贤人。你把我埋葬后，就要立即上路。 
English: When he was on the verge of death, he warned his son Nagamasa: "I have an appointment with the emperor's ambassador, and I must not betray the trust of the wise men of the country. After you bury me, you must immediately go on your way."

古文：长真如言入朝。
现代文：长真依言入京。
English: Nagamasa entered the capital as promised.

古文：上大悦曰： 何稠著信蛮夷，乃至于此！ 
现代文：皇上非常高兴地说 ：何稠施言于蛮夷，竟到了如此地步。 
English: The emperor was very pleased and said, "How dare you speak to a barbarian like that.

古文：以勋授开府。
现代文：因功授职升府。
English: He was promoted to the prefectural government for meritorious service.

古文：仁寿初，文献皇后崩，稠与宇文恺参典山陵制度。
现代文：仁寿初年，文献皇后死后，何稠与宇文恺参与主管山陵规章与规划。
English: In the first year of Ren Shou's life, after the death of the Empress of Literature, He Chou and Uwen Yao took part in supervising the regulations and planning of the mausoleum.

古文：稠性少言，善候上旨，由是渐见亲昵。
现代文：何稠生性寡言少语，善于听候皇上意图，由此逐渐得到皇上宠幸。
English: He was taciturn by nature, and good at listening to the emperor's intentions, and gradually became the emperor's favorite.

古文：上疾笃，谓稠曰： 汝既曾葬皇后，今我方死，亦宜好安置。
现代文：皇上重病，对何稠说： 你已经埋葬过皇后，现在我死去，也要好好安置。
English: The emperor was seriously ill and said to Ho Chou, "You have already buried the empress. Now that I am dying, I want to be properly laid to rest."

古文：嘱此何益？
现代文：安排你这些有什么益处呢？
English: Of what benefit is it to you to arrange these things?

古文：但不能忘怀耳。
现代文：只是不能忘怀了。
English: I just can't forget it.

古文：魂而有知，当相见于地下。 
现代文：灵魂有知觉，应当在黄泉下相见。 
English: The soul is sentient and should meet him in the netherworld.

古文：上因揽太子颈曰： 何稠用心，我后事动静当共平章。 
现代文：皇上揽着太子的脖子说： 何稠的心意，从我后事的办理情况上就可以明白。 
English: The emperor grabbed the prince by the scruff of the neck and said, "You can see how much I care from the way I handled the aftermath.

古文：大业初，炀帝将幸扬州，敕稠讨阅图籍，造舆服羽仪，送至江都。
现代文：大业初年，炀帝准备到扬州，下令让何稠查阅图籍，制作车服羽饰，送到江都。
English: In the first year of the Taiei era, Emperor Gong was preparing to go to Yangzhou, and he ordered He Chouzhu to look up the maps, make a coat of feathers, and send it to Jiangdu.

古文：其日，拜太府少卿。
现代文：那一天，授职太府少卿。
English: On that day, he was given the title of Taifu Shokei.

古文：稠于是营黄麾三万六千人仗，及车舆辇辂、皇后卤簿、百官仪服，依期而就，送于江都。
现代文：何稠便造黄旗三万六千面，以及车舆辇辂，皇后仪仗队，百官礼服，按期完成，送到江都。
English: Ho Chou then made 36,000 yellow flags, as well as chariots and horses, the queen's guard of honor, and ceremonial robes for a hundred officials, which were completed on schedule and sent to Jiangdu.

古文：所役工十万余人，用金银钱物巨亿计。
现代文：役使的工匠十万多人。花费的金银钱物可以用亿计。
English: There are more than 100,000 artisans in the service. The amount of gold, silver and money spent can be counted in the hundreds of millions.

古文：帝使兵部侍郎胡雅、选部郎薛迈等勾覆，数年方竟，毫厘无舛。
现代文：皇上派兵部侍郎明雅、选部郎薛迈等核查，几年才结束。毫厘不差。
English: The emperor sent the secretary of the military department, Ming Ya, and the secretary of the election department, Xue Mai, to check, and it took a few years to complete. It was perfect.

古文：稠参会今古，多所改创。
现代文：何稠检校今古，多有改革创新。
English: There have been many reforms and innovations in today's heavily inspected schools.

古文：魏、晋以以来，皮弁有缨而无笄导。稠曰： 此古田猎服也，今服以入朝，宜变其制。 
现代文：魏、晋以来，皮弁冠有缨带而没有笄导，何稠说 ：这是古代田猎的服装，现在穿戴入朝，应该改变样式。 
English: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, the flapper's crown has had a ribbon instead of a band, He Chouzhu said: This is an ancient hunting costume, now worn into the morning, the style should be changed.

古文：故弁施象牙簪导，自稠始也。
现代文：所以皮弁冠用象牙笄导，就是从何稠开始的。
English: That's why the use of ivory as a guide for the crown of the valve started with Ho Chou.

古文：又从省之服，初无佩绶。稠曰： 此乃晦朔小朝之服，安有人臣谒帝，而除去印绶，兼无佩玉之节乎？ 
现代文：另外下属各区官吏服装，开始没有佩带的印授，何稠说 ：这是早晚小朝时的服装，怎么有臣子拜谒皇上而解去印授，又没有佩玉之类的符节呢？ 
English: In addition, the clothing of the subordinate officials in each district did not wear the imperial seal at the beginning. He said: This is the clothing of the early and late Xiao Dynasty. How can there be a vassal who worships the emperor and removes the imperial seal, and there is no symbol such as the pearl?

古文：乃加兽头小绶及佩一只。
现代文：于是加上兽头小印绶以及一支佩玉。
English: So he added a small seal with a beast's head and a pearl.

古文：旧制，五辂于辕上起箱，天子与参乘同在箱内。
现代文：过去规定，五种车子在车辕上建车箱，皇帝与侍从都在车箱中。
English: In the past, it was stipulated that five kinds of cars should have a box on the rim, and the emperor and his attendants should be in the box.

古文：稠曰： 君臣同所，过为相逼。 
现代文：何稠说： 君臣相处过于接近，有相逼之感。 
English: He Xiao said: The prince and the minister are too close to each other, and there is a sense of pressure.

古文：乃广为盘舆，别构栏楯，侍臣立于其中。
现代文：于是增大车盘，另造栏杆，侍臣站在里面。
English: As a result, the turntable was enlarged, a railing was built, and the chamberlain stood inside.

古文：于内复起须弥平坐，天子独居其上。
现代文：在里面再造须弥平座，天子单独居于上面。
English: Inside, recreate Shuya Heian-za, where the heavenly son dwells alone.

古文：自余麾幢文物，增损极多。
现代文：其他旗子车帘装饰物品，增加改变不少。
English: Other flags, curtains and decorative items have been added and changed a lot.

古文：帝复令稠造戎车万乘，钩陈八百连。
现代文：皇帝又命令何稠制造兵车一百乘，后宫八百连。
English: The emperor also ordered He Chuxu to build a hundred chariots and eight hundred companies for the imperial palace.

古文：帝善之，以稠守太府卿，后兼领少府监。
现代文：皇帝觉得很好。让何稠为太府卿。后监管少府监。
English: The emperor thought it was a good idea. He made He Chuxu the Grand Prefect, and later the Supervisor and Junior Prefect.

古文：辽东之役，摄左屯卫将军，领御营弩手三万人。
现代文：辽东之战，辅助右屯卫将军。统领御林军弓箭手三万人。
English: In the Battle of Liaodong, he assisted the General of the Right Tunwei and led the Goryeo army of 30,000 archers.

古文：时工部尚书宇文恺造辽水桥不成，师未得济，左屯卫大将军麦铁杖因而遇害。
现代文：当时工部尚书宇文恺造辽水桥没有成功，军队不能渡河，右屯卫大将军麦铁杖因此被害。
English: At that time, the construction of the Liaoshui Bridge by the Ministry of Industry, Science and Technology was not successful, the army could not cross the river, and the general of the Right Tunwei, Mai Tiesu, was therefore damaged.

古文：帝遣稠造桥，二日而就。
现代文：皇上派何稠建桥，两日便成了。
English: The emperor sent Ho Chou to build the bridge, and it was completed in two days.

古文：初，稠制行殿及六合城，至是，帝于辽左与贼相对，夜中施之。
现代文：当初，何稠建造行宫与六合城，到这里后，皇上在辽水东与贼相对峙。夜间建造城，周围环绕八里。
English: At first, He Chuxu built Xinggu and Liuhe City, and after arriving here, the emperor confronted the thieves in the east of Liao Shui. The city was built at night and surrounded by eight miles.

古文：其城，周回八里，城及女垣合高十仞，上布甲士，立仗建旗，四隅置阙，面列一观，观下三门，比明而毕。
现代文：城与城墙上面的小墙高十仞。上面安排武装士兵，树杖建旗，四角立下缺口，对面建造一个台观，观下有三门，天亮建好。
English: The city and the small wall above the city wall are ten fathoms high. Armed soldiers are arranged on top, tree canes build a flag, a gap is made in the four corners, a platform is built opposite, there are three doors under the observation, and it is built at dawn.

古文：高丽望见，谓若神功。
现代文：高丽人远远望见，称作神功。
English: The Koryo people can be seen from far away and are called Shengong.

古文：稍加至右光禄大夫。
现代文：不久升为右光禄大夫。
English: He was soon promoted to Doctor of Ukokoroku.

古文：从幸江都，遇宇文化及乱，以为工部尚书。
现代文：跟随皇上到江都，碰上宇文化及叛乱，任命为工部尚书。
English: He followed the emperor to Jiangdu, encountered the Yu culture and rebellion, and was appointed as a member of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：及败，陷于窦建德，复为工部尚书、舒国公。
现代文：兵败后，被窦建德俘获，又做工部尚书、舒国公。
English: After the military defeat, he was captured by Dou Jiande, and he also served as Shangshu and Shu Guogong of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：建德败，归于大唐，授少府监，卒。
现代文：建德兵败后，归顺大唐，授职少府监，下世。
English: After the defeat of the Jiande soldiers, he surrendered to the Great Tang Dynasty, was awarded the post of Junior Prefect, and passed away.

