古文：皇帝御宇，其言也神。
现代文：统治着天下的帝王，他说的话是神圣的。
English: The emperor who rules the world, his words are sacred.

古文：渊嘿黼扆，而响盈四表，其唯诏策乎！
现代文：帝王静坐御前，他的意旨能够满布四海，主要就是通过诏策了。
English: When the emperor sits quietly in front of the throne, his will can be spread all over the world, mainly through the imperial edict.

古文：昔轩辕唐虞，同称为 命 。命之为义，制性之本也。其在三代，事兼诰誓。誓以训戎，诰以敷政，命喻自天，故授官锡胤。
现代文：在轩辕黄帝和尧舜的时候，帝王的话都叫做 命 。 命 的意义，本来是给有功德之臣赐以姓氏；它在夏、商、周时期，还包括像《甘誓》、《汤诰》之类的诰和誓。 誓 是用来教训军旅的， 诰 是用来实施政治的。 命 表示来自上天，所以用来授与官爵，赐给姓氏。
English: In the time of Emperor Huangdi and Emperor Xuanzong, the emperor's words were all called "life." The meaning of life was originally to give surnames to meritorious subjects; it also included vows and oaths such as "Kanso" and "Tanggu" in the summer, Shang and Zhou dynasties. Oaths were used to teach military travel, and vows were used to implement politics. Life was said to come from heaven, so it was used to award official ranks and give surnames.

古文：《易》之《姤》象∶ 后以施命诰四方。 
现代文：《周易·姤卦》的《象辞》中曾说： 国君用命令来教训四方臣民。 
English: It was once said in the "Elegy" of "Zhou Yi · Gong Gua": The sovereign uses orders to teach the four subjects.

古文：诰命动民，若天下之有风矣。
现代文：诰命的作用，就如大风起于大地之间，所有臣民无不随风而动。
English: The role of life and death, just as the wind blows between the earth, all the subjects are moving with the wind.

古文：降及七国，并称曰 令 。
现代文：到了战国时期，就都称为 令 。
English: By the time of the Warring States period, they were all called ryo.

古文：令者，使也。
现代文：所谓 令 ，就是 使 的意思。
English: The so-called "令" means "to make."

古文：秦并天下，改命曰制。
现代文：秦始皇统一六国，又把 命 改称为 制 。
English: Qin Shihuang unified the six states and changed the name of the state to "Qing Dynasty."

古文：汉初定仪则，则命有四品∶一曰策书，二曰制书，三曰诏书，四曰戒敕。
现代文：汉初制走法度，把 命 分为四类：第一类叫 策书 ，第二类叫 制书 ，第三类叫 诏书 ，第四类叫 戒敕 。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, there was a law that divided life into four categories: the first category was called "writing a book," the second category was called "making a book," the third category was called "issuing an edict," and the fourth category was called "restraining oneself."

古文：敕戒州部，诏诰百官，制施赦命，策封王侯。
现代文：用 敕书 来警戒州、部长官，用 诏书 来教训各种官吏，用 制书 来发布减免刑罚的命令，用 策书 来封赠王侯。
English: The imperial edict was used to warn prefectural and ministerial officials, the imperial edict was used to instruct various officials, the imperial edict was used to issue orders for the reduction and remission of punishments, and the imperial edict was used to seal and present princes.

古文：策者，简也。制者，裁也。诏者，告也。敕者，正也。
现代文：所谓 策 ，就是竹简， 制 就是截断， 诏 就是告诉， 敕 就是戒正。
English: The so-called "strategy" is "bamboo slips," "system" is "cutting off," "decree" is "telling," and "precept" is "rectification."

古文：《诗》云 畏此简书 ，《易》称 君子以制数度 ，《礼》称 明神之诏 ，《书》称 敕天之命 ，并本经典以立名目。
现代文：《诗经》中曾说 害怕这告急的简书 ，《周易》中曾说 君子要使礼尊卑有度 ，《周礼》中曾讲到 诏告于日月山川之神 ，《尚书》中曾讲过 帝王奉正天之命 等，可见策、制、诏、敕，都是根据经书中的说法来确立名目。
English: In the "Book of Poems" it was said, "Be afraid of this urgent short book," in the "Zhou Yi" it was said, "A gentleman should have a certain degree of reverence," in the "Weekly Rituals" it was said, "An imperial edict was issued to the god of the sun, moon, mountains and rivers," in the "Book of Songs" it was said, "The emperor obeyed the order of Zheng Tian," etc. It can be seen that measures, systems, imperial edicts, and edicts are all based on the sayings in the scriptures to establish names.

古文：远诏近命，习秦制也。
现代文：后来重诏而轻命，是沿习秦制而来的。
English: Later, it was re-issued, but with a lighter sentence, following the Qin system.

古文：《记》称 丝纶 ，所以应接群后。
现代文：《礼记》里说：帝王的话虽细如丝，一讲出来就变成粗绳；因此对群臣说话必须慎重。
English: "The Book of Etiquette" says: Although the emperor's words are as thin as silk, they become coarse rope as soon as they are spoken; therefore, one must be careful when speaking to the courtiers.

古文：虞重纳言，周贵喉舌，故两汉诏诰，职在尚书。
现代文：虞舜早就重视纳言之臣，周宣王则把出纳王命的官吏视如喉舌。到了两汉时期，就由尚书来管理帝王文诰。
English: For a long time, the statesmen attached importance to the courtiers, while King Zhou Xuan regarded the officials as mouthpieces. In the Han Dynasty, it was Shangshu who managed the Emperor Wenjun.

古文：王言之大，动入史策，其出如綍，不反若汗。
现代文：帝王的话关系重大，往往要写入史书；话一出口就产生了巨大作用，好像人的汗水一样，出来了就不能返回。
English: The words of emperors are of great importance and often have to be written into the history books; words have a great effect as soon as they are uttered, just like human sweat, once they are out, they cannot be returned.

古文：是以淮南有英才，武帝使相如视草；陇右多文士，光武加意于书辞：岂直取美当时，亦敬慎来叶矣。
现代文：所以，由于淮南王刘安文才英俊，汉武帝给他的书信，先要请司马相如等人审查草稿。由于隗嚣部下文士众多，所以，光武帝和他在文辞上的往来特别留意。
English: Therefore, as Liu Anwencai, King of Huainan, was a handsome man, Emperor Hanwu's letters to him should first be reviewed by Sima Xiangru and others. Due to the large number of scribes under him, Emperor Guangwu paid special attention to his correspondence with him.

古文：观文景以前，诏体浮杂，武帝崇儒，选言弘奥。
现代文：这不只是为了在当时得到美誉，也为了后世的影响而不得不慎重。查考西汉文帝、景帝以前的诏书，大都写得虚浮杂乱；汉武帝崇尚儒学，诏书就较为弘大深刻。
English: This had to be done carefully, not only in order to gain a good reputation at the time, but also for the sake of influencing future generations. If you look at the imperial decrees of the Western Han Dynasty, before Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, most of them were written in a flamboyant and chaotic manner; Emperor Hanwu advocated Confucianism, and his imperial decrees were more profound.

古文：策封三王，文同训典；劝戒渊雅，垂范后代。
现代文：如封齐王、燕王和广陵王的策书，文辞和《尚书》中的训、典相同，其深刻而正确的劝戒之义，为后代留下了典范。
English: For example, the policy books of King Fuzi, King Yan and King Guangling are written in the same style as the edicts and sermons in the Shangshu, and their profound and correct exhortation has left a model for future generations.

古文：及制诏严助，即云∶ 厌承明庐 ，盖宠才之恩也。孝宣玺书，责博于陈遂，亦故旧之厚也。
现代文：他在批评严助的制诰中，曾讲到严助不愿在朝内做官，这正体现了汉武帝爱才的恩典，汉宣帝给太原大守陈遂的玺书，也表现了对故旧的厚意。
English: In his criticism of Yan Sui, he once said that Yan Sui did not want to be an official in the imperial court, which reflected the grace of Emperor Hanwu's love for talent. Emperor Han Xuan's letter to Taiyuan's Great Guardian Chen Sui also showed his kindness to the past.

古文：逮光武拨乱，留意斯文，而造次喜怒，时或偏滥。
现代文：东汉光武帝在治平了乱世之后，对文化学术颇为注意，但喜怒之情比较轻率，有时不免过分一些。
English: Emperor Guangwu of the Eastern Han Dynasty paid much attention to culture and learning after he had pacified the chaotic world, but his feelings of joy and anger were rather imprudent and sometimes excessive.

古文：诏赐邓禹，称司徒为尧；敕责侯霸，称黄钺一下。
现代文：如在给邓禹的敕书中，竟称邓禹为尧；在批评侯霸荐人不如意的玺书中，就用死刑来吓唬他。
English: For example, in a letter to Deng Yu, he actually called Deng Yu a scoundrel; in a letter criticizing Houba's unsatisfactory recommendation, he used the death penalty to scare him.

古文：若斯之类，实乖宪章。
现代文：如像这类诏策，实在是违背法度的。
English: If it is like this kind of imperial edict, it is really against the law.

古文：暨明章崇学，雅诏间出。
现代文：到明帝、章帝时，他们都重视儒学，典雅的诏书，还偶然出现一些。
English: By the time of Emperor Ming and Emperor Zhang, both of them attached great importance to Confucianism, and elegant imperial edicts occasionally appeared.

古文：和安政弛，礼阁鲜才，每为诏敕，假手外请。
现代文：及至安帝、和帝时，政治松弛，负责诏令的尚书省又缺乏人材，每次写诏书、敕书，还要请外人代笔。
English: By the time of Emperor An and Emperor He, politics had slackened, and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, which was responsible for imperial edicts, lacked human resources. Every time an imperial edict or imperial edict was written, a foreigner had to be asked to write it.

古文：建安之末，文理代兴，潘勖九锡，典雅逸群。卫觊禅诰，符采炳耀，弗可加已。
现代文：到了建安末年，诏策文的写作迭更兴起。如潘勖的《册魏公九锡文》，写得高雅出群；卫觊的《为汉帝禅位魏王诏》，对曹丕的受命为帝，表达得十分昭明显著。
English: Towards the end of the Jian'an era, the writing of imperial edicts became more and more popular. For example, Pan Zheng's "Book of the Wei Dynasty and the Nine Kingdoms" was written with great elegance; Wei Zheng's "Imperial Edict of the Wei Dynasty for the Han Emperor" was very clear about Cao Zheng's appointment as emperor.

古文：自魏晋诰策，职在中书。
现代文：要比他们写得更好，已不可能了。
English: It's impossible to write better than they do.

古文：刘放张华，并管斯任，施令发号，洋洋盈耳。
现代文：魏晋以后，管理诏策的机构改为中书省，魏国的刘放，西晋的张华，前后担任中书监的职务，因此，发号施令的诏策，传闻于世的很多。
English: After the Wei and Jin Dynasties, the organization that managed the imperial edicts was changed to the Central Book Ministry, and Liu Fang of the Wei Dynasty and Zhang Hua of the Western Jin Dynasty held the position of the Central Book Supervisor. Therefore, there are many rumors in the world about the imperial edicts.

古文：魏文帝下诏，辞义多伟。至于作威作福，其万虑之一蔽乎！
现代文：这个时期魏文帝曹丕的诏书，文辞义理大都写得宏伟，但有的诏书中，竟鼓励夏侯尚让其部下 作威作福 ，这是他没有考虑周到的一点小毛病吧！
English: During this period, Wei Emperor Cao Pi's imperial edicts were mostly written in grand style, but in some imperial edicts, he actually encouraged Xia Hou Shang to let his subordinates use their authority to do good, which was a minor fault that he did not consider carefully.

古文：晋氏中兴，唯明帝崇才，以温峤文清，故引入中书。
现代文：晋元帝建立东晋之后，只有晋明帝比较重才；因温峤文笔清新，被引进中书省任职。
English: After Emperor Jin Yuan established the Eastern Jin Dynasty, only Emperor Jin Ming was more important; because of the freshness of Wen Xuan's writing, he was introduced to the Ministry of Literature.

古文：自斯以后，体宪风流矣。
现代文：不过从此以后，古代写作诏策的法度就逐渐消失了。
English: However, since then, the ancient law of writing imperial edicts has gradually disappeared.

古文：夫王言崇秘，大观在上，所以百辟其刑，万邦作孚。
现代文：帝王的话是崇高而神圣的，这是因为帝王对全国情况有深透的观察了解，所以他的话能为各个诸侯效法，并使天下信服。
English: The emperor's words are lofty and sacred. This is because the emperor has a profound observation and understanding of the national situation, so his words can be emulated by various princes and convince the world.

古文：故授官选贤，则义炳重离之辉；优文封策，则气含风雨之润；敕戒恒诰，则笔吐星汉之华；治戎燮伐，则声有洊雷之威；眚灾肆赦，则文有春露之滋；明罚敕法，则辞有秋霜之烈：此诏策之大略也。
现代文：因此，选拔贤才、授与官爵的命令，应如日月之光那样明亮；褒奖或策封臣下的诏书，就要有和风雨露般的润泽；关于敕正教戒方面的文诰，则要像灿烂群星吐出的光华；关于治理军事或召集诸侯会同讨伐的军令，就要表现出滚滚雷霆的声威；对于因过失而造成灾害的人予以宽赦，赦书就要像春天的露水那样滋润；对于明赏罚、正法纪的文诰，则要像秋天的严霜那样刚烈：这就是写作诏策的基本要求。
English: Therefore, the orders for selecting talents and conferring titles of nobility should be as bright as the light of the sun and the moon; the edicts for praising or granting fiefs to vassals should be as moist as the rain and dew; the edicts for enforcing orthodox religious precepts should be as brilliant as the stars; the edicts for governing the military or summoning the princes to join the crusade should be as thunderous as the thunder; the edicts for pardoning those who caused disasters due to negligence should be as moist as the spring dew; and the edicts for clarifying rewards and punishments and establishing legal discipline should be as hardy as the autumn frost:

古文：戒敕为文，实诏之切者，周穆命郊父受敕宪，此其事也。
现代文：至于戒敕之文，是诏令中更为切实的一种；如《穆天子传》所载周穆王命郊父接受戒敕的教令，这就是戒敕文了。
English: As for the precepts, it is one of the most practical of the edicts; for example, the edict of King Zhou Mu ordering his father to accept the precepts, which is recorded in the "Biography of Mu Tianzi," is a precept.

古文：魏武称作敕戒，当指事而语，勿得依违，晓治要矣。
现代文：魏武帝曹操曾说，作敕戒应根据事实，写得明确果断，而不要依违不决。这就通晓治术之要了。
English: Emperor Cao Cao of the Wei Dynasty once said that the imperial edict should be based on the facts, written clearly and decisively, and should not be inconsistent. This is the key to understanding the art of governance.

古文：及晋武敕戒，备告百官；敕都督以兵要，戒州牧以董司，警郡守以恤隐，勒牙门以御卫，有训典焉。
现代文：到了晋武帝，就把敕戒普遍用于各种官吏：如告戒都督掌握军事要领，告戒州牧严格督察其下属，警戒郡守要体恤百姓痛苦，督促牙门将领要加强防卫等，都具有诏策的古义。所谓 戒 ，就是谨慎。
English: By the time of Emperor Jinwu, the imperial edict was commonly used for all kinds of officials: for example, the imperial edict to the governor of the capital to master military essentials, the imperial edict to the state herdsman to strictly inspect his subordinates, the warning to the county governor to sympathize with the suffering of the people, and the urging to the commander of the gate to strengthen defense, all of which have the ancient meaning of the imperial edict. The so-called imperial edict is prudence.

古文：戒者，慎也，禹称 戒之用休 。
现代文：夏禹曾说： 用赞美来进行警戒。 
English: Xia Yu once said: Use praise to be vigilant.

古文：君父至尊，在三罔极。
现代文：国君、父母和老师是最尊严的，作为君、父和师，他们给人的恩德是无穷无尽的。
English: The sovereign, parents and teachers are the most dignified. As the sovereign, father and teacher, the grace they give to people is endless.

古文：汉高祖之《敕太子》，东方朔之《戒子》，亦顾命之作也。
现代文：汉高祖的《手敕太子》、东方朔的《诫子》，都是临终之前所作的遗命。
English: Han Gaozu's "The Handcuffed Prince" and Dongfang Shuo's "The Preceptor" were both made before his death.

古文：及马援以下，各贻家戒。
现代文：从东汉马援以后，便开始留下自己的家戒。
English: After Donghan Ma'an, he began to leave his family ring.

古文：班姬《女戒》，足称母师矣。
现代文：班昭的《女戒》，可以称之为傅母和女师了。
English: Ban Zhao's "Lady's Ring" can be called a mother and a teacher.

古文：教者，效也，出言而民效也。
现代文：所谓 教 ，就是效法，讲出话来老百姓便按照去做。
English: The so-called "teaching" is to follow the example, speak the words and the people will follow.

古文：契敷五教，故王侯称教。
现代文：舜的臣子契曾提出 父义、母慈、兄友、弟恭、子孝 五教，所以后来王侯大臣对老百姓的训示就叫做 教 。
English: Zou's treaty of vassalage had proposed the five teachings of fatherly righteousness, motherly kindness, brotherly friendship, brotherly respect, and filial piety, so later the instruction of princes and ministers to the common people was called teaching.

古文：昔郑弘之守南阳，条教为后所述，乃事绪明也；孔融之守北海，文教丽而罕施，乃治体乖也。
现代文：西汉郑弘任南阳太守时，他条列教令为后世所称述，就因为他讲的事情头绪清楚明白。汉末孔融做北海相，他的教令虽写得雅丽，治理上却差一些，这是治理和教令不一致。
English: In the Western Han Dynasty, when Zheng Hong served as the Nanyang Daju, he wrote down a series of edicts that were later known as the Analects, because the gist of what he said was clear and understandable. At the end of the Han Dynasty, when Kong Rong was the Minister of the North Sea, although his edicts were elegantly written, they were somewhat poor in governance, which was inconsistent with governance and edicts.

古文：若诸葛孔明之详约，庾稚恭之明断，并理得而辞中，教之善也。自教以下，则又有命。
现代文：如诸葛亮的教令，内容周详而辞采简朴；庾翼的教令，明确而果断：他们都写得道理得当而文辞切中，这就是优秀的教令了。教令之外还有 命 。《诗经》中说： 命来自天。 
English: For example, the edicts of Zhuge Liang are detailed in content and simple in wording; the edicts of Xuan Ying are clear and decisive: they are all written in a reasonable and concise manner, which is an excellent edict. In addition to edicts, there is life. "The Book of Songs" says: Life comes from heaven.

古文：《诗》云 有命自天 ，明命为重也；《周礼》曰 师氏诏王 ，明诏为轻也。
现代文：这表明 命 很重要。
English: It shows that life is important.

古文：今诏重而命轻者，古今之变也。
现代文：《周礼》中说： 主管教育的官员诏告周王。 
English: "Zhou Li" said: The official in charge of education sent a message to King Zhou.

古文：赞曰∶皇王施令，寅严宗诰。
现代文：这表明 诏 是用于臣对君的。
English: This shows that 诏 is used for the vassal to the prince.

古文：我有丝言，兆民伊好。
现代文：秦以后则重 诏 而轻 命 ，这是古今变化的不同。总结：
English: After the Qin Dynasty, the emphasis was more on edicts and less on life, which is the difference between ancient and modern times.

古文：辉音峻举，鸿风远蹈。
现代文：光辉的诏策高举，鸿大的教化远播。
English: The glorious imperial edict is held high, and the great enlightenment is spread far and wide.

古文：腾义飞辞，涣其大号。
现代文：充分发扬诏策的意义和文辞的作用，使帝王的号令更为盛大。
English: Fully carry forward the significance of the imperial edict and the role of the words, so that the emperor's proclamation is more grand.

