古文：宗爱，不知其所由来，以罪为阉人，历碎职至中常侍。
现代文：宗爱，其出身由来情况不清楚，因为犯了罪而成为阉人，后来历任办理杂务的职位直至任中常侍。
English: Zong Ai, whose origin is unclear, became a eunuch because he committed a crime, and later held various positions dealing with miscellaneous duties until he was appointed as a regular attendant.

古文：正平元年正月，世祖大会于江上，班赏群臣，以爱为秦郡公。
现代文：正平元年正月，世祖在长江边上举行盛大集会，颁赏朝中群臣，授任宗爱为秦郡公。
English: In the first month of the first year of Zhengping, the founder held a grand meeting on the edge of the Yangtze River, awarded the middle-ranking officials of the dynasty, and appointed Zong Ai as the Qin County Governor.

古文：恭宗之监国也，每事精察。
现代文：恭宗在代理国政的时候，遇事都要精细地考察。
English: When he was in charge of state affairs, he had to examine every situation carefully.

古文：爱天性险暴，行多非法，恭宗每衔之。
现代文：宗爱天性阴险暴戾，行为多有违法的地方，恭宗常常对他表示怨愤。
English: Zong Ai's nature is insidious and violent, and his actions are mostly illegal. Gong Zong often expresses resentment towards him.

古文：给事仇尼道盛、侍郎任平城等任事东宫，微为权势，世祖颇闻之。
现代文：给事仇尼道盛、侍郎任平城两人在东宫任事，颇有权势，世祖对他们有所了解。
English: The two people who were assigned to the East Palace, the Empress Dowager Dowager Michimori and the Prince Consort Ren Heijo, were quite powerful, and the ancestor knew something about them.

古文：二人与爱并不睦。
现代文：这两个人与宗爱的关系都不和睦。
English: Both of them are not at peace with their romantic relationship.

古文：为惧道盛等案其事，遂构告其罪。
现代文：宗爱由于惧怕仇尼道盛等人揭露他的行为，就给他俩人罗织罪名。
English: Soa, fearing that his enemy Daosheng and others would expose his actions, framed the two of them.

古文：诏斩道盛等于都街。
现代文：皇帝下令把道盛等人斩于京都街市。
English: The emperor ordered that Dousheng and others be beheaded in the streets of Kyoto.

古文：时世祖震怒，恭宗遂以忧薨。
现代文：当时世祖极为震怒，恭宗也就因此忧愤而死。
English: At that time, the patriarch was extremely furious, and because of this, King Gyeongjong died of grief.

古文：是后，世祖追悼恭宗，爱惧诛，遂谋逆。
现代文：事后，世祖追怀悼念恭宗，宗爱害怕自己事发而受到诛戮，就图谋叛逆。
English: After the incident, the patriarch mourned and commemorated Gongzong, and Zong Ai, fearing that he would be killed, plotted to rebel.

古文：二年春，世祖暴崩，爱所为也。
现代文：正平二年春，世祖突然驾崩，这是由于宗爱所致。
English: In the spring of the second year of Zhengping, the patriarch died suddenly, which was caused by the love of the family.

古文：尚书左仆射兰延、侍中吴兴公和疋、侍中太原公薛提等秘不发丧。
现代文：尚书左仆射兰延、侍中吴兴公和疋、侍中太原公薛提等人隐瞒此事而不公开发丧。
English: Shangshu's left-hand servant Jialan Yan, chamberlain Wu Xinggong He He, chamberlain Taiyuan King Xie Ti and others concealed the matter and did not publicly announce the death.

古文：延、疋二人议以高宗冲幼，欲立长子，征秦王翰置之秘室。
现代文：兰延、和疋二人商议认为高宗年岁幼小，想要立世祖的长子为帝，就把秦王元翰召来安置在一间密室里。
English: Lanyan and He Xuan considered that Gao Zong was too young and wanted to make the eldest son of the ancestor the emperor, so they summoned Qin Wang Yuanhan and placed him in a secret room.

古文：提以高宗有世嫡之重，不可废所宜立而更求君。
现代文：薛提认为高宗是嫡系子孙，不能废除应当继位的人而另外求取国君。
English: Xue Ti believed that Gao Zong was a legitimate descendant, and that it was not possible to abolish the person who should succeed to the throne and seek another sovereign.

古文：延等犹豫未决。
现代文：兰延等人犹豫不决。
English: Lan Yan and others hesitated.

古文：爱知其谋。
现代文：宗爱得知了他们的图谋。
English: Soai learned of their plot.

古文：始爱负罪于东宫，而与吴王余素协，乃密迎余自中宫便门入，矫皇后令征延等。
现代文：起先宗爱在东宫犯下罪行时，与吴王元余早就关系密切，这时就秘密迎接元余从中宫的便门进入宫内，伪造皇后的旨令征召兰延等人入宫。
English: At first, when Zong Ai committed a crime in the East Palace, he had a close relationship with Wu Wang Yuan Yu. At that time, he secretly welcomed Yuan Yu to enter the palace through the casual gate of the Central Palace, and forged the queen's order to recruit Lan Yan and others to enter the palace.

古文：延等以爱素贱，弗之疑，皆随之入。
现代文：兰延等人因为宗受一向身份卑下，并没有怀疑其中有诈，都跟随他进了宫。
English: Lan Yan and the others followed him into the palace, not suspecting any treachery because he had always been treated as an inferior.

古文：爱先使阉竖三十人持仗于宫内，及延等入，以次收缚，斩于殿堂。
现代文：宗爱事先就安排了三十名太监拿着武器在宫内等候，等到兰延等人进来，就把他们一个一个地捆绑起来，在殿堂上杀掉。
English: Zong Ai had arranged in advance for thirty eunuchs to wait in the palace with weapons, and when Lan Yan and the others came in, he tied them up one by one and killed them in the hall.

古文：执秦王翰，杀之于永巷而立余。
现代文：又抓住了秦王元翰，在永巷把他杀死，立元余为君。
English: He also captured Qin Wang Yuanhan and killed him in Yongxiang, setting up Yuan Yu as ruler.

古文：余以爱为大司马、大将军、太师、都督中外诸军事，领中秘书，封冯翊王。
现代文：元余授任宗爱为大司马、大将军、太师、都督中外诸军事，兼中秘书，封他为冯翊王。
English: Yuan Yu appointed Zong Ai as the grand steward, general, grand master, military governor of foreign countries, and secretary of China, and named him Feng Xuan Wang.

古文：爱既立余，位居元辅，录三省，兼总戎禁，坐召公卿，权恣日甚，内外惮之。
现代文：宗爱既然拥立元余为君，自己身居首辅之位，掌管朝中三省，兼总领军事和禁卫，随意召唤公卿大臣，滥用权力日益严重，朝廷内外都畏惧他。
English: Since Zong Ai supported the enthronement of Yuan Yu as emperor, he was the first and second in command, in charge of the three provinces of Korea and China, as well as the commander-in-chief of the military and the imperial guards. He summoned nobles and ministers at will. The abuse of power was becoming increasingly serious, and he was feared both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：群情咸以为爱必有赵高、阎乐之祸，余疑之，遂谋夺其权。
现代文：在人们心目中，都认为宗爱必定有赵高、阎乐篡权的危险。元余对他有所怀疑，就图谋剥夺他的权力。
English: In people's minds, they all thought that Zongai must be in danger of Zhao Gao and Yan Le usurping power. Yuan Yu suspected him and tried to deprive him of his power.

古文：子盖海，袭祖琚爵。初琚年七十余，赐得世祖时宫人郭氏，本钟离人，明严有母德，内外妇孙百口，奉之肃若严君，家内以治。盖海官至青州乐陵太守。赵黑，字文静，初名海，本凉州隶户。
现代文：宗爱得知非常愤怒，派小黄门贾周等人趁夜晚杀死了元余，此事在《元余传》中有记载。高宗即位以后，诛杀了宗爱、贾周等人，都动用五刑，夷灭三族。赵黑，字文静，原先名为赵海，出身于凉州的一个奴隶家庭。
English: It was learned that Zong Ai was very angry and sent Xiao Huangmen, Jia Zhou and others to kill Yuan Yu in the night, which was recorded in "The Biography of Yuan Yu." After Gao Zong ascended the throne, he killed Zong Ai, Jia Zhou and others, all of whom used the five punishments to exterminate the three tribes. Zhao Hei, originally named Zhao Hai, was born in a slave family in Liangzhou.

古文：自云其先河内温人也，五世祖术，晋末为平远将军、西夷校尉，因居酒泉安弥县。
现代文：自己说他的先祖是河内温人，他的五世祖赵术，在晋朝末年曾任平远将军、西夷校尉，所以居住在酒泉安弥县。
English: He said that his ancestors were Hanoi Wens, and his fifth-generation ancestor, Zhao Shu, had served as General Pingyuan and Captain Xi Yi at the end of the Jin Dynasty, so he lived in Jiuquan Ami County.

古文：海生而凉州平，没入为阉人，因改名为黑。
现代文：赵海出生以后凉州被大魏平定，他被没收进宫中做了阉人，就改名叫黑。
English: After Zhao Hai was born, Liangzhou was subdued by the Great Wei Dynasty. He was confiscated into the palace and made a eunuch, and his name was changed to Hei.

古文：有容貌，恭谨小心。
现代文：赵黑颇有容貌，为人谦恭，小心谨慎。
English: Zhao Hei is good-looking, modest and cautious.

古文：世祖使进御膳，出入承奉，初无过行。
现代文：世祖让他给自己进奉饮食，他内外应承侍奉，从来没有发生什么过失。
English: The ancestor asked him to serve himself food and drink. He should serve both inside and outside, and there was never any fault.

古文：迁侍御，典监藏，拜安远将军，赐爵睢阳侯。
现代文：后来升任侍御，掌管监督宫中府库之职，授予安远将军，赐爵位为睢阳侯。
English: Later, he was promoted to chamberlain, in charge of supervising the palace treasury, awarded General Anyuan, and given the title of Duke of Poyang.

古文：转选部尚书，能自谨厉，当官任举，颇得其人。
现代文：又调任选部尚书，他在任上能做到自谨自励，举荐人选，任用官职，都颇能做到人尽其才。
English: He was also transferred to the Selection Department of Shangshu, and he was able to be self-respecting and self-motivated, recommend candidates, and appoint officials, all of which were quite able to do their best.

古文：加侍中，进爵河内公。
现代文：又加授侍中之职，爵位升进为河内公。
English: He was also awarded the position of chamberlain, and was promoted to the rank of Lord of Hanoi.

古文：显祖将传位京兆王子推，访诸群臣，百官唯唯，莫敢先言者，唯源贺等词义正直，不肯奉诏。
现代文：显祖打算把皇位传给京兆王元子推，征求朝廷群臣的意见，朝中百官都只是惟惟诺诺，没有人敢于先开口说话，惟有源贺等人敢于照直陈述自己的看法，不愿意顺从皇帝的意见。
English: Emperor Xianzu planned to pass the imperial throne to Emperor Jingzhao Wangyuan and sought the opinions of the imperial court. All the officials in the imperial court only made promises. No one dared to speak first. Only Geng He and others dared to state their opinions directly and were not willing to follow the emperor's opinions.

古文：显祖怒，变色，复以问黑。
现代文：显祖对此心中有气，脸上变色，又问赵黑有什么看法。
English: Xianzu is angry about this, his face changes color, and he asks Zhao Hei what he thinks.

古文：黑曰： 臣愚无识，信情率意。
现代文：赵黑对皇帝说： 我愚昧无知，只知对皇上诚心诚意，尽忠尽力。
English: Zhao Hei said to the emperor: I am stupid and ignorant, I only know how to be sincere and loyal to the emperor.

古文：伏惟陛下春秋始富，如日方中，天下说其盛明，万物怀其光景，元元之心，愿终万岁。
现代文：俯伏思考陛下正当年富力强，如日中天，天下臣民都称颂您治理国家的圣明，世间万物都沐浴您如同日月的光辉，举国上下一片诚心，祝愿陛下万寿无疆。
English: Bowing down and thinking, Your Majesty is of the right age, rich and powerful. As the sun rises and sets, the subjects all over the world praise the sacredness of your governance of the country. All things in the world are bathed in your glory like the sun and the moon. The whole country is filled with sincerity. I wish Your Majesty eternal life without borders.

古文：若圣性渊远，欲颐神味道者，臣黑以死奉戴皇太子，不知其他。 
现代文：倘若陛下思虑深远，有想要颐神养寿的意思，我赵黑拥戴皇太子，不知道还有其他人能代替他。 
English: If His Majesty is far-sighted and wants to prolong his life, I, Zhao Hei, support the crown prince, and I don't know anyone else who can replace him.

古文：显祖默然良久，遂传祚于高祖。
现代文：显祖听了之后久久沉默不语，于是就把皇位禅授给了高祖。
English: After listening, Emperor Xianzu was silent for a long time, and then conferred the imperial throne to Emperor Gaozu.

古文：黑得幸两宫，禄赐优厚。
现代文：赵黑在两宫受到宠幸，官禄赏赐都非常优厚。
English: Zhao Hei was favored in the two palaces, and the official rewards were very generous.

古文：是时尚书李亦有宠于显祖，与黑对绾选部。
现代文：当时尚书李讠斤也很受显祖的宠幸，与赵黑共同掌管选部。
English: At that time, Shangshu Li Shujin was also very favored by Xianzu, and he was in charge of the selection department together with Zhao Hei.

古文：奏中书侍郎崔鉴为东徐州，北部主书郎公孙处显为荆州，选部监公孙蘧为幽州，皆曰有能也，实有私焉。
现代文：李讠斤向皇帝启奏任命中书侍郎崔鉴为东徐州刺史，北部主书郎公孙处显为荆州刺史，选部监公孙蘧为幽州刺史，说他们几个都很有才能，实际上李讠斤是怀有私心。
English: Li Shujin told the emperor that he had appointed the chief secretary of the Central Committee, Cui Jian, as the chief secretary of East Xuzhou, the chief secretary of the North, Gongsun Shuduan, as the chief secretary of Jingzhou, and the chief secretary of the Selection Committee, Sun Jian, as the chief secretary of Yuzhou. He said that several of them were very talented, but in fact, Li Shujin was selfish.

古文：黑疾其亏乱选体，遂争于殿庭曰： 以功授官，因爵与禄，国之常典。
现代文：赵黑憎恶李讠斤损坏了选任官员的规矩，就同他在殿前争辩起来，说： 凭功绩授任官职，依爵位给予俸禄，这是国家固有的制度。
English: Zhao Hei hated Li Shujin for breaking the rules of appointing officials, so he argued with him in front of the palace, saying: It is the inherent system of the country to appoint officials on the basis of merit and pay them according to their titles.

古文：中书侍郎、尚书主书郎、诸曹监，勋能俱立，不过列郡，今皆用为方州，臣实为惑。 
现代文：中书侍郎、尚书主书郎、各部曹监，其功勋和能力具备，职位也不能超过郡守，现在李讠斤把他们都任用为一州刺史，我实在对此感到困惑不解。 
English: I am really puzzled by the fact that Li Yujin has appointed all of them as the county magistrate, including the chief magistrate of the county, the chief magistrate of the county, the chief magistrate of the county, and the chief magistrate of the county, all of whom have merits and abilities, and whose positions cannot exceed the county governor.

古文：显祖疑之，曰： 公孙蘧且止。 
现代文：显祖听了以后犹豫不决，说道： 那就暂且不考虑公孙蘧吧。 
English: Xianzu hesitated after listening and said, "Then let's not think about Gongsun Yao for the time being."

古文：蘧最为厚，于是黑与遂为深隙。
现代文：公孙蘧最为李讠斤所器重，于是赵黑与李讠斤之间便产生很深的隔阂。
English: Gongsun Yao was the most important to Li Shujin, so there was a deep rift between Zhao Hei and Li Shujin.

古文：竟列黑为监藏时多所截没。
现代文：李讠斤竟然在皇帝面前诬告赵黑掌管库府时拦截私吞了很多财物。
English: When Li Shujin falsely accused Zhao Hei of being in charge of the treasury in front of the emperor, he intercepted and swallowed a lot of property.

古文：先是法禁宽缓，百司所典，与官并食，故多所损折。
现代文：原先由于制度禁令比较宽松，朝廷百官各自掌管的财物，都是与大家共同受用，所以多有减少和损坏。
English: Originally, due to the looser system of prohibitions, the property of the 100 officials of the imperial court, each of whom was in charge, was shared with everyone, so there was a lot of reduction and damage.

古文：遂黜为门士。
现代文：于是赵黑被贬黜为看门的士卒。
English: As a result, Zhao Hei was relegated to the role of gatekeeper.

古文：黑自以为诉所陷，叹恨终日，废寝忘食，规报前怨。
现代文：赵黑因为自己被李讠斤所陷害，整日叹息怨恨，废寝忘食，谋求有一天要申报这个怨仇。
English: Because he was framed by Li Shujin, Zhao Hei sighed with resentment all day, lost sleep and forgot to eat, and sought to declare this grudge one day.

古文：逾年，还入为侍御、散骑常侍、侍中、尚书左仆射，复兼选部如昔。
现代文：过了一年，赵黑回到朝廷受任侍御、散骑常侍、侍中、尚书左仆射等职，再次像往昔一样兼管选部。
English: A year later, Zhao He returned to the imperial court and was appointed as an attendant, horseback riding attendant, chamberlain, and secretary, and again, as in the past, he was also in charge of the selection department.

古文：黑告专恣，遂出为徐州。
现代文：赵黑上告李讠斤专横恣肆，李讠斤于是被派出任徐州刺史。
English: Zhao Hei sued Li Shujin for high-handedness and arbitrariness, and Li Shujin was sent to Xuzhou to investigate.

古文：及其将获罪也，黑构成以诛之。
现代文：待到李讠斤因事获罪的时候，赵黑就把他的罪行罗织起来构成死罪，把他杀掉了。
English: When Li Shujin was found guilty, Zhao Hei made his crime a capital crime and killed him.

古文：然后食甘寝安，志在于职事。
现代文：从此以后他就吃得好睡得稳，一心专注于自己职内的事务。
English: Since then, he has been eating well, sleeping well and concentrating on his work.

古文：出为假节、镇南大将军、仪同三司、定州刺史，进爵为王。
现代文：后来，赵黑出任假节、镇南大将军、仪同三司、定州刺史，爵位升进为王。
English: Later, Zhao Hei served as the False Festival, the General of Zhenan, the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the Historian of Dingzhou, and was promoted to the king.

古文：克己清俭，忧济公私。
现代文：他为官克己奉公，清廉俭朴，一心考虑公家的事务。
English: He was a self-disciplined public servant, clean and frugal, and devoted to the affairs of the public.

古文：时有人欲行私赂，黑曰： 高官禄厚，足以自给，卖公营私，本非情愿。 
现代文：当时有人因私事想要对他进行贿赂，赵黑说道： 我身居高官享受丰厚的俸禄，足以维持自己的生活，假借公事来营求私利，本来不是我所情愿做的事。 
English: At that time, someone wanted to bribe him for a private matter, Zhao He said: I am a high-ranking official enjoying a rich salary, enough to maintain my own life, and pretending to be a public official to seek personal gain is not something I would like to do.

古文：终无所纳。
现代文：在任期间始终不肯接受贿赂。
English: He has always refused to accept bribes while in office.

古文：高祖、文明太后幸中山，闻之，赐帛五百匹、谷一千五百石。
现代文：高祖、文明太后来到中山，听说赵黑的作为，就赏赐给他帛五百匹、谷一千五百石。
English: Gao Zu, the great-grandmother of civilization, came to Zhongshan later, and when she heard of Zhao Hei's deeds, she rewarded him with five hundred horses and fifteen hundred stones.

古文：转冀州刺史。 
现代文：赵黑又转任冀州刺史。
English: It is a turning point in the history of Jizhou.

古文：太和六年秋薨于官。
现代文：太和六年秋天，赵黑在官任上去世。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year of his reign, Zhao Hei died in office.

古文：诏赐绢四百五十匹、谷一千斛、车牛二十乘，致柩至都。
现代文：皇帝诏令赐给绢四百五十匹、谷一千斛、车牛二十乘，把他的灵柩移送到京都。
English: By imperial decree, the emperor gave 450 yakitori, 1,000 yakitori, and 20 wagons and oxen to transport his coffin to Kyoto.

古文：追赠司空公，谥曰康。
现代文：又追赠他为司空公，规定其谥号为康。
English: He also posthumously granted him the title of Siku Gong, and stipulated that his nickname be Kang.

古文：黑养族弟赵奴第四子炽为后。
现代文：赵黑收养了他的族弟赵奴第四个儿子赵炽为子。
English: Zhao Hei adopted his brother Zhao Nu's fourth son Zhao Blazing as his son.

古文：炽，字贵乐。
现代文：赵炽，字贵乐。
English: Zhao blazing, the word guile.

古文：初为中散，袭黑爵，后降为公。
现代文：起初任中散之职，承袭赵黑的爵位，后来爵位降为公。
English: At first, he held the position of Zhongsan, inheriting the peerage of Zhao Hei, and later the peerage was reduced to public.

古文：官至扬州安南府长史，加平远将军。
现代文：赵炽的官职做到了扬州安南府长史，加授平远将军。
English: Zhao Blaze's official position was made the governor of Yangzhou Annan Prefecture, and he was awarded the title of General Pingyuan.

古文：元嵩之死寿春也，炽处分安辑，微有声称。
现代文：元嵩在寿春死后，赵炽进行处置安顿，曾颇受称赞。
English: After the death of Motosuke Shuchun, Zhao Blaze was praised for his handling of the situation.

古文：神龟中卒，赠光州刺史。
现代文：神龟年间赵炽去世，被追授为光州刺史。
English: Zhao Blaze passed away in the Year of the Divine Turtle, and was posthumously awarded the title of Gwangju's history.

古文：黑为定州，与炽纳钜鹿魏干女，有二子。
现代文：早年赵黑任定州刺史时，替赵炽娶钜鹿人魏干之女为妻，生有两个儿子。
English: In the early years of Zhao Hei's appointment as governor of Dingzhou, he married the daughter of Wei Gan, an elk man, and had two sons.

古文：太和末，为长秋卿，赐爵云阳男。
现代文：赵炽的长子赵揆，字景则。承袭他父亲的爵位为侯，官职做到了乐陵太守。
English: Zhao Zhao, the eldest son of Zhao Zhao, was called Zijing. He inherited his father's title of marquis, and achieved the official position of Le Ling Taishu.

古文：世宗封其妻王氏为云阳县君。
现代文：死后，追赠左将军、沧州刺史。赵揆的弟弟赵隽之，字仲彦，为人轻薄，缺少德行。
English: After his death, he bequeathed General Zuo and Cangzhou Jishi. Zhao Yao's younger brother, Zhao Yaozhi, nicknamed "Nakahiko," was frivolous and lacked virtue.

古文：卒，赠平北将军、并州刺史。
现代文：曾任给事中，转任谒者仆射，是刘腾收养的子息。
English: He was the adopted son of Liu Teng.

古文：刘腾，字青龙，本平原城民，徙属南兗州之谯郡。
现代文：由于他用其义父作阉官所积的余资，去贿赂朝中权贵，所以频频历任显要官职一直到他死去。刘腾，字青龙，本是平原城民，后迁至属南兖州的谯郡。
English: Because he used the surplus funds accumulated by his father-in-law as a eunuch to bribe the nobility of the dynasty, he frequently held important official positions until his death. Liu Teng, the word Qinglong, was originally a plain city dweller, and later moved to Ying County, which belongs to South Yingzhou.

古文：幼时坐事受刑，补小黄门，转中黄门。
现代文：未成年时因犯罪受到刑罚，补任小黄门，又迁任中黄门。
English: At a young age, he was convicted and sentenced for an incident, served as a small yellow door, and was transferred to a medium yellow door.

古文：高祖之在悬瓠，腾使诣行所。
现代文：高祖在悬瓠时，刘腾出使到高祖所在地。
English: When Gao Zu was hanged, Liu sent an envoy to Gao Zu's place.

古文：高祖问其中事，腾具言幽后私隐，与陈留公主所告符协，由是进冗从仆射，仍中黄门。
现代文：高祖向他询问宫里的事，他一一告知有关幽后的隐私，与陈留公主所告的情况相符，由于这他升为冗从仆射，仍为中黄门。
English: Gaozu asked him about the palace, and he told him about the privacy of the empress dowager, which was consistent with the situation reported by Princess Chen Liu. As a result, he was promoted to the position of a diligent servant, but he was still in the middle of the yellow gate.

古文：后与茹皓使徐兗，采召民女。
现代文：后来刘腾与茹皓出使徐州、兖州，搜访挑选民女。
English: Later, Liu Teng and Ru Yi sent envoys to Xuzhou and Zhangzhou to search for female voters.

古文：及还，迁中给事，稍迁中尹、中常侍，特加龙骧将军。
现代文：回朝廷后，升中给事，逐步升为中尹、中常侍，特加龙骧将军。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was promoted to middle-ranking official, and was gradually promoted to middle-ranking Yin, middle-ranking attendant, and general Tegarongjun.

古文：后为大长秋卿、金紫光禄大夫、太府卿。
现代文：后来任大长秋卿、金紫光禄大夫、太府卿。
English: Later, he served as the Grand Chancellor, the Autumn Emperor, the Golden Purple Emperor, and the Grand Prefect.

古文：肃宗践极之始，以腾预在宫卫，封开国子，食邑三百户。
现代文：肃宗登位之初，因刘腾先在宫卫，封为开国子，食邑三百户。
English: At the beginning of Su Zong's ascension to the throne, because Liu Tengxian was in the palace guard, he was given the title of the founder of the country, and there were more than three hundred households in the food village.

古文：是年，灵太后临朝，以与于忠保护之勋，除崇训太仆，加中侍中，改封长乐县开国公，食邑一千五百户。
现代文：这一年，灵太后临朝执政，因刘腾同于忠保护有功，授予崇训太仆之职，加中侍中，改封长乐开国公，食邑一千五百户。
English: In the same year, after the Lingdai Emperor came to power, Liu Teng, who had served as a loyal protector, was awarded the position of Chongxun's servant, and he was promoted to Chao Le, the founding father of the country, with 1,500 households.

古文：拜其妻时为钜鹿郡君，每引入内，受赏赍亚于诸主外戚。
现代文：其妻时被授为钜鹿郡君，每次进入内廷，得到的赏赉仅次于诸主外戚。
English: When she was his wife, she was awarded the title of Elk County Princess. Every time she entered the Inner Court, she received a decoration second only to that of her maternal relatives.

古文：所养二子，为郡守、尚书郎。
现代文：所生二子，被授予郡守、尚书郎。
English: His two adopted sons, the county governor and Sho Shuro, grew up.

古文：腾曾疾笃，灵太后虑或不救，迁卫将军、仪同三司，余官仍旧。
现代文：刘腾曾患重病，灵太后恐怕他或许不治，把他升为卫将军、仪同三司，其他官职仍旧。
English: Liu Teng had been seriously ill, and the Dowager Empress feared that he might not recover. She promoted him to General of the Guards, the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and other official positions.

古文：后疾瘳。
现代文：后来刘腾的病好了。
English: He later recovered.

古文：腾之拜命，肃宗当为临轩，会其日大风寒甚而罢，乃遣使持节授之。
现代文：刘腾受命的时候，肃宗走到殿前，刚好那天起了大风，十分寒冷，因而作罢，就派一使者持节授之。
English: When Liu Teng received the order, Su Zong walked to the front of the hall. On that particular day, there was a strong wind and it was very cold, so he gave up and sent an emissary to hold the ceremony.

古文：腾幼充宫役，手不解书，裁知署名而已。
现代文：刘腾自幼充当宫役，很少读书，裁断事情只知画押签名而已。
English: Liu Teng has served as a palace servant since he was a child, rarely reads, and only knows how to draw and stamp his signature to decide things.

古文：奸谋有余，善射人意。
现代文：刘腾为人奸谋有余，善于猜测人意。
English: Liu Teng is more than a schemer, he is good at guessing people's will.

古文：灵太后临朝，特蒙进宠，多所干托，内外碎密，栖栖不倦。
现代文：灵太后当朝，他独蒙提拔宠爱，多有所托，内外琐碎秘密之事，他忙忙碌碌，乐而不疲。
English: In the days of the Empress Dowager, he was the only one to be promoted, favored, and entrusted with many things. In and out of trivial and secret matters, he was busy, happy, and never tired.

古文：洛北永桥，太上公、太上君及城东三寺，皆主修营。
现代文：洛北永桥、太上公、太上君及城东三处寺庙，都是由他主持营建的。
English: He presided over the construction of the Yongqiao Bridge in the north of Luo, the Grand Duke, the Grand Duchess and three temples in the east of the city.

古文：吏部尝望腾意，奏其弟为郡带戍，人资乖越，清河王怿抑而不与。
现代文：吏部曾经依刘腾之意，上奏让其弟为郡戍官，其弟为人性情乖张，清河王元怿将此事按下而不予办理。
English: According to Liu Teng's wishes, the cadre department once asked his younger brother to be the county eunuch, and his younger brother had a mischievous personality. Qinghe Wang Yuanqi suppressed the matter and did not deal with it.

古文：腾以为恨，遂与领军元叉害怿。
现代文：刘腾因此怀恨在心，就与领军元叉一道杀害元怿。
English: Liu Teng therefore harbored a grudge, and together with the leader of the army, Yuan Xuan, he killed Yuan Xuan.

古文：废灵太后于宣光殿，宫门昼夜长闭，内外继绝。
现代文：刘腾又伙同元叉在宣光殿废黜灵太后，将宫门昼夜关闭，内外断绝。
English: Liu Teng, together with Yuan Zha, closed the palace gates to the deposed empress dowager at the Xuan Guang Dian Palace day and night, cutting off communication inside and out.

古文：腾自执管钥，肃宗亦不得见，裁听传食而已。
现代文：刘腾亲自执掌宫门钥匙，就连肃宗也不得相见，只能处理政务受人供养而已。
English: Liu Teng personally holds the key to the palace gate, and even Su Zong is not allowed to see him, and can only deal with the government's support.

古文：太后服膳俱废，不免饥寒。
现代文：灵太后的衣服膳食都被废除，不免饥寒加身。
English: The empress dowager was not provided with clothing or food, so she was inevitably hungry and cold.

古文：又使中常侍贾粲假言侍肃宗书，密令防察。
现代文：刘腾又使中常侍贾粲假借侍奉肃宗书案，暗中令其监视肃宗行迹。
English: Liu Teng also made the vice-chancellor Jia Wei pretend to serve Su Zong and secretly ordered him to monitor Su Zong's activities.

古文：叉以腾为司空公，表里擅权，共相树置。
现代文：元叉以刘腾为司空公，二人里外擅权，互相结为朋党。
English: The original screenplay featured Liu Teng as Siku Gong, with the two of them wielding power inside and outside of the family and forming a friendship group.

古文：叉为外御，腾为内防，迭直禁闼，共裁刑赏。
现代文：元叉在外抵挡，刘腾在内防备，轮流在宫禁之中值班，共同裁决刑罚和赏赐。
English: Yuan Zha is the external governor, Liu Teng is the internal defense, take turns on duty during the palace ban, and decide on rewards and punishments together.

古文：腾遂与崔光同受诏乘步挽出入殿门。
现代文：刘腾于是同崔光一道同受皇帝诏令乘车出入殿门。
English: Liu Teng, together with Cui Guang, was ordered by the emperor to ride in and out of the palace gate.

古文：四年之中，生杀之威，决于叉、腾之手。
现代文：四年之中，一切生杀予夺之权，都取决于元叉、刘腾之手。
English: In four years, all the power of life and death depends on the hands of Yuan Xuan and Liu Teng.

古文：八坐、九卿，旦造腾宅，参其颜色，然后方赴省府，亦有历日不能见者。公私属请，唯在财货。
现代文：八座、九卿与所有朝廷官员，都要一早就到刘腾府宅，观其颜色，然后才到各自省府处理政务，也有整日见不到刘腾的，无论公私请托，他都要受纳财物。
English: The eight concubines, nine concubines, and all the officials of the imperial court had to go to Liu Teng's residence early in the morning to see its color, and then go to their respective provincial capitals to deal with government affairs. There were also people who could not see Liu Teng for the whole day. Regardless of public or private request, he had to accept property.

古文：舟车之利，水陆无遗；山泽之饶，所在固护；剥削六镇，交通互市。
现代文：水陆交通之利都归其所得；山泽丰饶之所都在其统辖之下，他垄断各地城镇的贸易，搜刮民财。
English: The profits of land and water transportation all belong to his income; the places of abundance in the mountains and lakes are all under his jurisdiction. He monopolizes the trade of towns and cities around the country and collects people's wealth.

古文：岁入利息以巨万计。
现代文：一年攫取的钱财就数以巨万计。
English: The amount of money and property seized each year is in the tens of millions.

古文：又颇役嫔御，时有征求；妇女器物，公然受纳。
现代文：他又肆意驱役宫女，经常向她们征索财货；一应美女财物，都公开受纳。
English: He also forced his concubines to work for him, and often solicited goods from them; he openly accepted anything from beautiful women and their possessions.

古文：逼夺邻居，广开室宇。
现代文：他还抢夺他人房屋，大建房舍屋宇。
English: He also robbed other people's houses and built large houses.

古文：天下咸患苦之。
现代文：天下百姓都倍受其苦。
English: People all over the world are suffering from it.

古文：正光四年三月，薨于位，年六十。
现代文：正光四年三月，刘腾死于职上，时年六十岁。
English: In March of the fourth year of Zhengguang, Liu Teng died on duty, at the age of sixty.

古文：赗帛七百匹、钱四十万、蜡二百斤。
现代文：殡葬所费的物财有帛七百匹、钱四十万贯、蜡二百斤。
English: The funeral home's expenses included seven hundred yakitori, four hundred thousand Korean won in money, and two hundred pounds of wax.

古文：鸿胪少卿护丧事。
现代文：一切丧事都由鸿胪少卿承办。
English: All of the funerals were conducted by the Honorable Young Master Hung Ho.

古文：中官为义息，衰绖者四十余人。
现代文：宦官没有子息，而为他穿丧服的却有四十余人。
English: The eunuch had no son, yet there were more than forty people dressed in mourning for him.

古文：腾之初治宅也，奉车都尉周特为之筮，不吉，深谏止之，腾怒而不用。
现代文：刘腾当初建造官宅，奉车都尉周特替他卜卦，认为不吉利，极力劝他停止，他大怒而不从。
English: Liu Teng was building an official residence at the time, and he thought it was unlucky for Feng Chariot Captain Zhou Te to speculate on his behalf. He tried his best to persuade him to stop, but he was furious and refused to do so.

古文：特告人曰： 必困于三月、四月之交。 
现代文：周特告诉别人说： 刘腾在三月、四月之交必有厄运。 
English: Zhou Te told others: Liu Teng will have bad luck at the turn of March and April.

古文：至是果死，事甫成，陈尸其下。
现代文：果然他在这个时候死去，官邸刚刚建成，他的尸首便陈放在这里。
English: Sure enough, he died at this time, the official residence had just been built, and his body was placed here.

古文：追赠使持节、骠骑大将军、大尉公、冀州刺史。
现代文：皇上追赠刘腾为使持节、骠骑大将军、太尉公、冀州刺史。
English: Liu Teng was posthumously awarded by the emperor with the title of "Envoy of the Year," "General of the Horse," "Lieutenant General" and "Historian of Jizhou."

古文：腾之葬日，阉官为义服，杖绖衰缟者以百数，朝贵皆从，轩盖填塞，相属郊野。
现代文：刘腾出葬那一天，太监们当他的义子，执丧杖穿丧衣的数以百计，朝中权贵都相随送葬，他们乘坐的车马填塞大路，前后连接直达郊野。
English: On the day of Liu Tuan's funeral, eunuchs acted as his godchildren, hundreds of eunuchs wore mourning clothes, and dignitaries from the imperial court accompanied the funeral procession. The carriages and horses they rode in clogged the highways, connecting them back and forth to the countryside.

古文：魏初以来，权阉存亡之盛莫及焉。
现代文：自魏初到当时，宦官权贵死后礼仪的盛大，没有能赶得上刘腾的。
English: From the beginning of the Wei Dynasty to that time, the grandeur of eunuchs, dignitaries and etiquette after death could not catch up with Liu Teng.

古文：灵太后反政，追夺爵位，发其冢散露骸骨，没入财产。
现代文：后来，灵太后再次临朝执政，把刘腾所封的一切爵位统统取消，并挖开他的坟墓，将尸骨都散在野外，没收他的全部财产。
English: Later, the Empress Dowager Ling once again came to power, revoked all the titles conferred on Liu Teng, dug up his grave, scattered his bones in the open, and confiscated all his property.

古文：后腾所养一子叛入肃衍，太后大怒，因徙腾余养于北裔，寻遣密使追杀之于汲郡。
现代文：后刘腾所收养的一个儿子叛变投向萧衍，灵太后大怒，就把刘腾收养的其他义子都迁到北方边境，不久又派密使往汲郡将其追杀。
English: Later, a son adopted by Liu Teng defected to Xiao Yan, and the Empress Dowager was so angry that she moved all the other adopted sons of Liu Teng to the northern border, and soon sent an envoy to Kew County to hunt him down.

