古文：起重光大渊献，尽阏逢摄提格，凡四年。
现代文：起，止，一共四年。
English: A total of four years.

古文：烈祖明皇帝中之上太和五年
现代文：魏明帝太和五年
English: Emperor Wei and Empress Dowager Cixi

古文：春，二月，吴主假太常潘濬节，使与吕岱督诸军五万人讨五溪蛮。
现代文：春季，二月，吴王授予太常潘浚符节，命他与吕岱统领大军五万人讨伐五蛮。
English: In the spring, in February, the King of Wu awarded Pan Jianfu to Taizhong and ordered him and Lv Ying to lead an army of fifty thousand people to fight against the Five Barbarians.

古文：濬姨史蒋琬为诸葛亮长史，武陵太守卫旍奏濬遣密使与琬相闻，欲有自托之计。
现代文：潘浚的妻只蒋琬担任诸葛亮长史，武陵太守卫上奏说潘浚派遣密使与蒋琬联系，有寄托归附的打算。
English: Pan Jun's wife, Chiang Kai-shek, served as Zhuge Liang for a long time, and the Wuling Tai guard reported that Pan Jun sent a secret envoy to contact Chiang Kai-shek with the intention of entrusting him.

古文：吴主曰： 承明不为此也。 
现代文：吴王说： 潘浚不会做这种事。 
English: Wu Wang said, "Pan Jun will not do such a thing.

古文：即封旍表以示濬，而召旍还，免官。
现代文：随即封好卫奏章以给潘浚看，而把卫召回，免去官职。
English: He then sealed Wei Songzhang to show it to Pan Jun, and recalled Wei from his post.

古文：卫温、诸葛直军行经岁，士卒疾疫死者什八九，亶洲绝远，卒不可得至，得夷洲数千人还。
现代文：卫温、诸葛直率军出海已有一年，兵士因为得了传染病而死的有十之八九。洲极其遥远，最终也没能到达，只掠得夷洲几千人返回。
English: It has been a year since Wei Wen and Zhu Ge's forthright army went to sea, and nine out of ten soldiers died because of infectious diseases. The continent is extremely far away, and they were ultimately unable to reach it. They only plundered Yizhou and forced several thousand people to return.

古文：温、直坐无功，诛。
现代文：卫温、诸葛直因出师无细，论罪被杀。
English: Wei Wen and Zhuge Zhi were killed for the crime of being too good to be true.

古文：汉丞相亮命李严以中都护署府事。严更名平。
现代文：蜀汉丞相诸葛亮命李严以中都护的官职署理汉中留府的事务，李严改名李平。
English: Shu Han chancellor Zhuge Liang ordered Li Yan to take charge of the affairs of Han Zhongliu Prefecture as the official deputy of Zhongduo, and Li Yan changed his name to Li Ping.

古文：亮帅诸军入寇，围祁山，以木牛运。
现代文：诸葛亮率领各路大军进犯魏境，围祁山，用木牛运输军用物资。
English: Zhuge Liang led armies from all directions to invade the Wei territory, encircle Lushan Mountain, and transport military supplies with wooden oxen.

古文：于是大司马曹真有疾，帝命司马懿西屯长安，督将军张郃、费曜、戴陵、郭淮等以御之。
现代文：这时大司马曹真有病，明帝命司马懿向西驻扎在长安，统领将军张、费曜、戴陵、郭淮等御诸葛亮。
English: At this time, Grand Master Ma Cao was really ill, and Emperor Ming ordered Grand Master Ma Jie to move westward and stationed in Chang'an, leading the generals Zhang, Fei You, Dai Ling, Guo Huai and others.

古文：三月，邵陵元侯曹真卒。
现代文：三月，邵陵元侯曹真去世。
English: In March, Shao Ling Yuanhou Cao Zhen passed away.

古文：自十月不雨，至于十月。
现代文：自去年十月起不降雨，一直到这个月。
English: There has been no rain since last October until this month.

古文：司马懿使费曜、戴陵留精兵四千守上邽，馀众悉出，西救祁山。
现代文：司马懿命费曜、戴陵留下四千精兵防守上，其余的士兵全部出动，往西援救祁山。
English: Sima Fei died on Friday, Dai Ling left four thousand elite soldiers to defend, and the rest of the soldiers all went out to the west to rescue Lushan.

古文：张郃欲分兵驻雍、郿，懿曰： 料前军能独当之者，将军言是也。若不能当而分为前后，此楚之三军所以为黥布禽也。 
现代文：张打算分出部分兵力驻守在雍县、县，司马懿说： 估计前面的部队能够独立抵挡敌军，将军的意见就对了；如果前面的部队不能抵挡敌军而分为前后两部分，这说是楚国三军所以被黥布击溃的原因。 
English: Zhang planned to allocate a part of the troops to be stationed in Yongxian and Xian, Sima Yu said: It is estimated that the troops in front can independently resist the enemy army, and the general's opinion is right; if the troops in front cannot resist the enemy army and are divided into two parts, this is said to be the reason why the three armies of Chu were defeated by Zibo.

古文：遂进。
现代文：于是进军。
English: So they marched in.

古文：亮分兵留攻祁山，自逆懿于上邽。
现代文：诸葛亮分出一支部队留下来进攻祁山，亲自率领大军到上迎战司马懿。
English: Zhuge Liang detached a force to stay behind and attack Lushan, personally leading a large army to meet Sima Yu in battle.

古文：郭淮、费曜等徼亮，亮破之，因大芟刈其麦，与懿遇于上邽之东。
现代文：郭淮、费曜等抄袭诸葛亮，诸葛亮击败他们，乘机收割了上的麦子，与司马懿在上以东相遇。
English: Guo Huai, Feiyou and others copied Zhuge Liang, Zhuge Liang defeated them, took the opportunity to harvest the wheat on the east, and met Sima Yi on the east.

古文：懿敛军依险，兵不得交，亮引还。
现代文：司马懿收兵据险防守，两军不得交战，诸葛亮率军退回。
English: Sima Qian received the troops and defended the perilous position. The two armies were not allowed to fight, and Zhuge Liang led the army back.

古文：懿等寻亮后至于卤城。
现代文：司马懿尾随诸葛亮之后到达卤城。
English: Sima Yi followed Zhuge Liang and arrived at Halong City.

古文：张郃曰： 彼远来逆我，请战不得，谓我利不在战，欲以长计制之也。
现代文：张说： 他这来迎战我军，要求作战达不到目的，认为我军利于不战，打算以持久之计制胜。
English: Zhang said: He came here to fight against our army, demanding that the purpose of the battle could not be achieved, believing that our army would benefit from not fighting, and planning to win with a long-term plan.

古文：且祁山知大军已在近，人情自固，可止屯于此，分为奇兵，示出其后，不宜进前而不敢逼，坐失民望也。
现代文：况且祁山方面知道大军已经靠近，人心自然稳定，可以在这里驻军，分出一支奇兵，出现在他们的后路，不应当只敢尾随而不敢追击，使得民众失望。
English: Moreover, the Lushan side knew that the large army was already approaching, and people's hearts were naturally stable, and they could station troops here, separate a strange soldier, and appear in their rear path. They should not only dare to follow but not dare to pursue, which made the people disappointed.

古文：今亮孤军食少，亦行去矣。 
现代文：现在诸葛亮孤军用战，粮食又少，也快要走了。 
English: Now Zhuge Liang is fighting alone, food is scarce, and he is about to leave.

古文：懿不从，故寻亮。
现代文：司马懿不听从张的意见，有意尾随诸葛亮。
English: Sima Yao did not listen to Zhang's advice and intentionally followed Zhuge Liang.

古文：既至，又登山掘营，不肯战。
现代文：已经赶上，又上山扎营，拒绝同诸葛亮交战。
English: Having caught up, they went up the mountain again to set up camp, refusing to engage Zhuge Liang.

古文：贾诩、魏平数请战，因曰： 公畏蜀如虎，奈天下笑何！ 
现代文：贾栩、魏平多次请求出战，还说： 您畏蜀如虎，怎能不让天下人取笑！ 
English: Jia Tuo and Wei Ping repeatedly requested to fight, and also said: You fear Shu like a tiger, how can you not let the world make fun of you!

古文：懿病之。
现代文：司马懿对此很不满意。
English: Sima Yi was very dissatisfied with this.

古文：诸将咸请战。
现代文：将领们纷纷请求出战。
English: Generals begged to go to war.

古文：夏，五月，辛已，懿乃使张郃攻无当监何平于南围，自案中道向亮。
现代文：夏季，五月，辛已，司马懿便让张攻击围祁山之南的蜀无当军监军何平，亲自据中路与诸葛亮正面对峙。
English: In the summer, in May, Sima Yu let Zhang attack He Ping, the supervisor of the Shu Wudang Army in the south of the Wushan Mountains, and personally confronted Zhuge Liang in the middle of the road.

古文：亮使魏延、高翔、吴班逆战，魏兵大败，汉人获甲着三千，懿还保营。
现代文：诸葛亮命魏延、高翔、吴班迎战，魏军大败，蜀军俘获了三千人，司马懿退军何卫大营。
English: Zhuge Liang ordered Wei Yan, Gao Xiang, and Wu Ban to fight, the Wei army was defeated, the Shu army captured three thousand people, and Sima Yi withdrew to He Wei's camp.

古文：六月，亮以粮尽退军，司马懿遣张郃追之。
现代文：六月，诸葛亮因为粮尽退军，司马懿命张追击。
English: In June, Zhuge Liang withdrew from the army due to running out of food, and Sima Yu chased after him.

古文：郃进至木门，与亮战，蜀人乘高布伏，弓弩乱发，飞矢中郃右膝而卒。
现代文：张进兵到木门，与诸葛亮交战，蜀军利用居于高地布下伏兵，万箭齐发，张右膝中箭而死。
English: Zhang Jinhe went to the wooden gate and fought with Zhuge Liang. The Shu army took advantage of the soldiers living in the highlands to lay an ambush. Thousands of arrows were fired, and Zhang died from an arrow in his right knee.

古文：秋，七月，乙酉，皇子殷生，大赦。
现代文：秋季，七月，乙酉，皇子曹殷生，大赦天下。
English: In the autumn, in July, Prince Cao Yin Sheng was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：黄初以来，诸侯王法禁严切。吏察之急，至于亲姻皆不敢相通问。
现代文：黄初以来，对诸侯王的法制禁令为严厉，以至于姻戚之间都不敢互相往来问侯。
English: Since the beginning of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the legal prohibition against princes was so strict that relatives by marriage did not dare to visit each other.

古文：东阿王植上疏曰： 尧之为教，先亲后疏，自近及远。
现代文：东阿王曹植上书说： 尧教化天下，先从亲族开始再推及到疏远的人，从近支推及到远支。
English: East Asian King Cao Zhi said in an epistle: "The spread of Buddhism throughout the world began with the relatives and then spread to the estranged, from the near branch to the far branch.

古文：周文王刑于寡妻，至于兄弟，以御于家邦。
现代文：周文王以礼法对待其妻，推及兄弟，用此来治理国家。
English: Zhou Wenwang treated his wife and his brothers with courtesy, and used this to govern the country.

古文：伏惟陛下资帝唐钦明之德，体文王翼翼之仁，惠洽椒房，恩昭九族，群后百寮，番休递上，执政不废于公朝，下情得展示私室，亲理之路通，庆吊之情展，诚可谓恕己治人，推惠施恩者矣。
现代文：陛下具有唐尧一样神明完美的德行，推行文王谦谨恭敬的仁爱之心，恩惠遍沾后宫，恩宠显于九族，诸王百官轮流入值，国家的务不会在朝堂废弃，个人的感情也能在私下展布，姻亲之间的交往可以通达，喜庆哀吊的情感能够表达，真可谓是推己及人、广施恩德的了。
English: His Majesty has the same divine and perfect virtue as Tang Xuan. He has promoted the benevolence of King Wen, who was humble and respectful. His benevolence has spread throughout the harem. His grace has been shown to the nine ethnic groups. The kings of the world have received hundreds of officials. The affairs of the state will not be abandoned in the imperial court. Personal feelings can also be displayed in private. Interactions between in-laws can be communicated. Emotions of joy and sorrow can be expressed. It is truly a blessing to others and a blessing to oneself.

古文：至于臣者，人道绝绪，禁锢明时，臣窃自伤也。
现代文：至于为臣我，人际关系完全断绝，在政治清明时却受到禁锢，我暗自伤心。
English: As for me as a vassal, I am secretly saddened by the complete severance of interpersonal relationships, and by being imprisoned when politics were clear.

古文：不敢乃望交气类，修人事，叙人伦。近且婚媾不通，兄弟乖绝，吉凶之问塞，庆吊之礼废。
现代文：不敢奢望结交志同道合的朋友，再去修明世事，叙次人伦，更何况近来姻亲关系不能交往，兄弟之间背离绝交，吉凶之事不得不到音信，喜庆哀吊之礼完全废除。
English: They do not dare to hope to make friends with like-minded friends, and then try to clarify the world affairs and describe the second-class human relations, not to mention that recently the relationship between in-laws can not communicate, the brothers have broken away from each other, the good and bad things have to be reported, and the celebration and mourning ceremonies have been completely abolished.

古文：恩纪之违，甚于路人；隔阂之异，殊于胡越。
现代文：恩情如此背离，甚于过路之人，隔如此深远，超过胡人、越人。
English: Such a departure from kindness is worse than a passer-by, the distance is so far-reaching, more than the Hu people and the Yue people.

古文：今臣以一切之制，永无朝觐之望，至于注心皇极，结情紫闼，神明知之矣。
现代文：现在我因为受到种种制约，永无进朝晋见的希望，至于倾心王室，情绕宫庭，只有神明才知道。
English: Now, due to various restrictions, I have no hope of ever entering the imperial court to see the emperor. As for my love for the royal family and my affection for the imperial court, only the gods know.

古文：然天实为之，谓之何哉！
现代文：可是天意如此，有什么可说的呢！
English: But if it is God's will, what can I say?

古文：退惟诸王常有戚戚具尔之心，愿陛下沛然垂诏，使诸国庆问，四节得展，以叙骨肉之欢恩，全怡怡之笃义。
现代文：但是想到各位新王时常怀有兄弟手足这情，愿陛下能沛然开恩赐下诏书，使各封国互相祝贺通问，四时之节，得以来京展拜，以叙骨肉欢聚的情谊，成全兄弟友好的义理。
English: However, considering that the new emperors often cherish the feeling of being brothers and sisters, I hope that His Majesty will be able to grant an imperial edict, so that all the feudal states can congratulate each other and ask for mutual understanding. On the four o'clock festival, since then, Beijing has been worshiped, with the feeling of bones and flesh gathering together, to fulfill the brotherly and friendly principle.

古文：妃妾之家，膏沐之遗，岁得再通，齐义于贵宗，等惠于百司。
现代文：妃妾的母家，馈赠脂粉，一年可以两次往来问候，使亲王在礼义上与其他皇亲外戚比齐，在待遇上和文武百官同等。
English: The concubine's mother's family, as a gift of fat powder, can send greetings to the prince twice a year, so that the prince is on a par with other imperial relatives in terms of etiquette, and is equal in treatment to civil and military officials.

古文：如此，则古人之所叹，风雅之所咏，复存于圣世矣！
现代文：如果这样，那么古人所赞叹、《经》所歌咏的就再现于当今圣世了！
English: If so, then the praise of the ancients and the songs of the "scripture" will reappear in today's holy world!

古文：臣伏自惟省，无锥刀之用；及观陛下之所拔授，若以臣为异姓，窃自料度，不后于朝士矣。
现代文：我私下反省自己，连锥刀的用处都没有；但看到陛下所提拔任用的人，如果把我当作皇室之外的人，私下度量，也不比在朝人士差。
English: Privately, I reflect on myself, and I don't even have the use of a cone knife; but seeing the people promoted and appointed by His Majesty, if I consider myself a person outside the royal family, I privately measure myself, I am not worse than those in the DPRK.

古文：若得辞远游，戴武弁，解硃组，佩青绂，驸马、奉车，趣得一号，安宅京室，执鞭珥笔，出从华盖，入侍辇毂，承答圣问，拾遗左右，乃臣丹诚之至愿，不离于梦想者也。
现代文：如能允许我脱下藩王所戴远游冠，戴上大臣的武弁帽，解下藩王的红绣带，佩上大臣的青绣带，得到一个驸马都尉、奉车都尉之类的名号，把宅第安在京师，手执马鞭，帽边插笔，天子出游时随从前后，天子返宫后待命殿前，圣上垂问，承应回答，拾遗补阙，侍奉左右，这就是我亦诚之心的最大愿望，梦以求的理想。
English: If I can be allowed to take off the crown worn by the lord of the domain, put on the minister's military cap, take off the red embroidered belt of the lord of the domain, put on the blue embroidered belt of the minister, get a name such as the captain of the horse and the captain of the carriage, keep the residence in Beijing, hold the horse whip in my hand, insert a pen into the brim of the hat, follow the heavenly son when he travels, and wait for his order before the temple after the heavenly son returns to the palace, ask questions from the saint, answer them, pick up the remains, and serve the left and right, this is the greatest wish

古文：远慕《鹿鸣》君臣之宴，中咏《常棣》匪他之诫，不思《伐木》友生之义，终怀《蓼莪》罔极之哀。每四节之会，塊然独处，左右惟仆隶，所对惟妻子，高谈无所与陈，精义无所与展，未尝不闻乐而拊心，临觞而叹息也。
现代文：我追慕《鹿鸣》所描述君臣之的情景，经常吟咏《常棣》 兄弟不是外人 的告诫，近思《伐木》求友的意义，最终感怀《蓼莪》父母之恩难以报答的悲哀，每逢四时节令，离群独处，左右只有奴仆，面前只有妻子儿女，高谈阔论没有人听，精辟见解不能发挥，未尝不是听到音乐就抚心悲痛，举起洒怀就长长叹息。
English: I admire the scene of the monarchs and ministers described in "Deersong," often chant the admonition of "Changshu" that brothers are not outsiders, reflect on the meaning of "Lumbering" to make friends, and finally feel the sorrow of "Shu" that the parents' grace is difficult to repay. Every four seasons, I am alone, with only servants on my right and left, and only my wife and children in front of me. No one listens to high-pitched talk, and I can't play out my incisive opinions. If I don't hear music, I will touch my heart with sorrow, and if I don't lift my

古文：臣伏以犬马之诚不能动人，譬人之诚不能动天，崩城、陨霜，臣初信之，以臣心况，徒虚语耳！
现代文：我以犬马的诚心不能感动人，正如人的真城不能感动天。感动上天而使城墙崩塌、夏日降霜的典故，我当初相信它们，但以我的心相比，这些不过是些虚夸！
English: I cannot move people with the sincerity of a dog or a horse, just as the true city of man cannot move heaven. The allusions to moving heaven and causing the city walls to collapse and the summer frost to fall, I believed them at first, but compared to my heart, these are nothing but boasting!

古文：若葵藿之倾叶太阳，虽不为回光，然向之者诚也。
现代文：犹如向日葵倾向太阳，虽然太阳不为之回光，然而倾向之心是真诚的。
English: Just as a sunflower inclines towards the sun, although the sun does not reflect its light, yet the inclination of the heart is sincere.

古文：窃自比葵藿，若降天地之施，垂三光之明者，实在陛下。
现代文：我暗中自比为向日葵，而能够降下天地般恩惠，赐给日月星一样光明的人，其实正是陛下。
English: Secretly, I liken myself to a sunflower, but it is actually Your Majesty who can bestow the bounty of heaven and earth and bestow the same light as the sun, moon and stars.

古文：臣闻《文子》曰： 不为福始，不为祸先。 
现代文：我听说《文子》一书上说： 不要开始有福，不要首先遇祸。 
English: I heard that in the book "Wen Zi" it was said: "Don't start being blessed, don't get into trouble first."

古文：今之否隔，友于同忧，而臣独倡言者，实不愿于圣世有不蒙施之物，欲陛下崇光被时雍之美，宣缉熙章明之德也！ 
现代文：现在互相疏远隔阂，兄弟一同担忧，而我独自首先上奏的原因，实在是不愿意在圣明之世仍有人蒙受不到恩泽，想使陛下崇尚唐尧时代亲族和睦的美好，发扬文王之世政治清明的德政！ 
English: Now, estranged from each other, estranged from each other, brothers are worried together, and the reason why I am the first to play alone is that I really don't want anyone to be deprived of grace in the holy world, I want His Majesty to worship the beauty of the harmony of relatives in the Tang Dynasty, and carry forward the clean politics of the King Wen era!

古文：诏报曰： 盖教化所由，各有隆敝，非皆善始而恶终也，事使之然。
现代文：明帝用诏书回答说： 教化的推行，各有兴盛和衰落，不都是开始完善，终局非坏不可，而是时势迫使它这样。
English: Emperor Ming replied with an edict: "The implementation of indoctrination has its own rise and fall. Not all beginnings are perfect, and the end result is inevitably bad, but the current situation forces it to be this way.

古文：今令诸国兄弟情礼简怠，妃妾之家膏沐疏略，本无禁锢诸国通问之诏也。
现代文：现今只是让各封国兄弟之间人情礼仪间化，妃妾母家减省脂粉馈赠，并没有禁止各封国往来问候的诏命。
English: Today, it is just that the humanities and etiquette between the brothers of each fong are intermingled, and the mother's family of the concubine reduces the gift of fat powder. There is no edict prohibiting the exchange of greetings between each fong.

古文：矫枉过正，下吏惧谴，以至于此耳。
现代文：矫枉过正，下边的官吏害怕受到谴责，才造成您说的那种状况。
English: Over-correction and fear of reprimand on the part of lower-level officials have led to the situation you describe.

古文：已敕有司，如王所诉。 
现代文：已命令主管官员，照您的意见办。 
English: The relevant authorities have been ordered to do as you have stated.

古文：植复上疏曰： 昔汉文发代，疑朝有变，宋昌曰： 内有硃虚、东牟之亲，外有齐、楚、淮南、琅邪，此则磐石之宗，愿王勿疑。 
现代文：曹植又上书说： 从前，汉文帝众代国出发，怀疑朝廷肆生事变，宋昌说： 京城内有朱虚侯、东牟侯这些皇亲，外有齐、楚、淮南、琅琊各封国，都是磐石般的皇族，望君王不要怀疑。 
English: Cao Zhi also wrote: Once upon a time, emperors of the Han Dynasty left their countries, suspecting that the imperial court was plotting a coup. Song Chang said: In the capital, there are the imperial relatives of Zhu Xuhong and Dong Muhong, and outside there are Qi, Chu, Huainan, and Qi provinces. They are all rock-like imperial families. Don't doubt the king.

古文：臣伏惟陛下远览姬文二虢之援，中虑周成召、毕之辅，下存宋昌磐石之固。
现代文：我想陛下远的一定观览过周文王依靠虢仲、虢叔两位弟弟完成王业的记载，近一点还考虑过周成王时召公、毕公辅佐朝政之事，再就是关于宋昌磐石之固的比喻。
English: The minister sincerely hoped that His Majesty could look far and wide for the assistance of Gongzhong and Gongzhuang to King Zhou Wen, and consider calling Gong and Bi Gong to assist King Zhou Cheng in the middle, and retain the solid friendship like the rock mentioned by Song Chang.

古文：臣闻羊质虎皮，见草则悦，见豺则战，忘其皮之虎也。
现代文：我听说羊披上虎皮，看见草就高兴，看见豺狼就胆战，是忘记它身上披的虎皮了。
English: The minister heard about the sheep wearing tiger skins, was happy to see the grass, and trembled when he saw the jackal, because he forgot that it was wearing tiger skins.

古文：今置将不良，有似于此。
现代文：而今任用的将领不优良，则与此相似。
English: This is similar to the current appointment of generals who are not good.

古文：故语曰： 患为之者不知，知之者不得为也。 
现代文：所以俗话说： 怕就怕做事的人不了解所做的事，了解应该怎样做事的人却不能够去做。 
English: Therefore, as the saying goes: Those who worry about doing things do not understand them, and those who understand them cannot do them.

古文：昔管、蔡放诛，周、召作弼；叔鱼陷刑，叔向赞国。三监之衅，臣自当之；二南之辅，求必不远。
现代文：古代周成王杀死管叔，流放蔡叔，用周公、召公作为辅佐；叔鱼被恶侯所杀，叔向却助晋国以成霸业；西周三监之乱，我自会引以为戒；二南之辅，不必远求。
English: In ancient times, King Zhou Chenggong killed Uncle Guan, exiled Uncle Cai, and used Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong as assistants; Uncle Yu was killed by an evil lord, but Uncle Xiang helped Jin Guo to become a tyrant; I would caution myself against the West Central Supervisor's Rebellion; I don't have to look far for Second South's assistant.

古文：华宗贵族籓王之中，必有应斯举者。
现代文：皇宗显贵和封国藩王中，必定有这种人才。
English: Among the emperors, eminent nobles and feudal lords, there must have been such a talent.

古文：夫能使天下倾耳注目者，当权者是也。
现代文：能使天下倾耳注目的人，是当权者。
English: The people who can make the world sit up and take notice are those in power.

古文：故谋能移主，威能慑下。
现代文：所以谋略能够使人主改变，威望能够使下面慑服。
English: Therefore, strategy can make people change their minds, and prestige can make subordinates be intimidated.

古文：豪右执政，不在亲戚，权之所在，虽疏必重，势之所去，虽亲必轻。
现代文：豪门大族执政，不在于是否皇亲国戚，掌握着权柄，虽然疏远也举足轻重；势力衰落，虽是皇亲也必定轻微。
English: Whether or not the emperor is a relative of the imperial family is not important for the ruling of the great families. They hold the power, although the estrangement is also important; the decline of power, even if it is a relative of the imperial family, must be slight.

古文：盖取齐者田族，非吕宗也；分晋者赵、魏，非姬姓也。惟陛下察之。
现代文：所以取代齐国的人是田姓家族，而非吕姓家族；瓜分晋国者，是赵姓、魏姓，而不是姬姓，请陛下明察。
English: Therefore, the person who replaced Qi is a family with the surname of Tian, not a family with the surname of Lv; and the person who divided Jin is a family with the surnames of Zhao and Wei, not a family with the surname of Ji. Please pay attention.

古文：苟吉专其位，凶离其患者，异姓之臣也。
现代文：在吉祥太平时专擅权位，在凶祸来临时赶快逃避的，都是异姓之臣。
English: If you monopolize the official position in times of peace, and stay away from duties in times of turmoil, you are a foreign minister.

古文：欲国之安，祈家之贵，存共其荣，殁同其祸者，公族之臣也。
现代文：希望国家安定，祈求家族高贵，存则共享荣耀，亡时同当灾祸，都是皇族之臣。
English: They hope for the stability of the country, pray for the nobility of the family, share the glory when they exist, and share the calamity when they die. They are all royal subjects.

古文：今反公族疏而异姓亲，臣窃惑焉。
现代文：而今反倒疏远皇族亲近异姓，我因不解。
English: Now, on the other hand, he is distancing himself from the ministers of his own family and getting closer to officials with foreign surnames. Privately, the minister feels doubtful.

古文：今臣与陛下践冰履炭，登山浮涧，寒温燥湿，高下共之，岂得离陛下哉！
现代文：我跟陛下齐踏薄冰，同蹈炭火，攀登高山，跨越深漳，寒冷炎热，燥热潮湿，无论环境好坏，都在一起，怎么能离开陛下呢？
English: I tread on thin ice with Your Majesty, walk on coals with You, climb mountains, cross the deep, cold and hot, hot and humid, whether the environment is good or bad, we are all together, how can I leave Your Majesty?

古文：不胜愤懑，拜表陈情。若有不合，乞且藏之书府，不便灭弃，臣死之后，事或可思。
现代文：我内心不胜悲愤苦闷，上书陈情，如有不合圣意之处，请求暂且交给书府收藏，不要毁掉丢弃，我死之后，或许可以引起深思。
English: My heart is overwhelmed with sadness, anger and anguish. I am writing to make a complaint. If there is anything that is not in accordance with the holy will, I request that it be temporarily handed over to the library for collection, not destroyed and discarded. After my death, it may cause deep thought.

古文：若有毫厘少挂圣意者，乞出之朝堂，使夫博古之士，纠臣表之不合义者，如是则臣愿足矣。 
现代文：如果有一丝一毫能合陛下圣意的地方，请在朝廷公开，使博古通今之士纠正我上书中不合大义之处。如能这样，我的愿望就满足了。 
English: If there is anything that is not in accordance with His Majesty's wishes, please make it known to the Imperial Court so that Bogutongtongjin can correct the inaccuracies in my letter. If this can be done, my wish will be fulfilled.

古文：帝但以优文答报而已。
现代文：明帝只是以措辞感人的文章作为回答而已。
English: Emperor Ming only replied with a touching article.

古文：八月，诏曰： 先帝著令，不欲使诸王在京都者，谓幼主在位，母后摄政，防微以渐，关诸盛衰也。
现代文：八月，明帝下诏说： 先帝颁布诏令，不想让亲王们留在京都的原因，是因为皇帝年幼，母后摄政，防微杜，关系国家盛衰。
English: In August, Emperor Ming issued an imperial edict saying: The reason why the previous emperor issued an imperial edict and did not want the princes to stay in Kyoto was because the emperor was young, his mother was regent, it was to prevent micro-management, and it had to do with the rise and fall of the country.

古文：朕惟不见诸王十有二载，悠悠之怀，能不兴思！
现代文：朕不见各亲王已有十二年，悠悠情怀，怎能不思念！
English: For this reason, I have not seen you princes for twelve years. Brothers and sisters are very affectionate, how can I not miss you!

古文：其令诸王及宗室公侯各将適子一人朝明年正月，后有少主、母后在宫者，自如先帝令。 
现代文：现下令所有亲王及皇族的公爵侯爵，各派嫡子一人于明年正月来京朝会，但以后如有皇帝年少、母后在宫摄政的情况，自当按先帝的诏令办。 
English: He has now ordered all princes and dukes and marquesses of the imperial family to send one of their legitimate sons to the imperial court in Beijing in the first month of next year, but in the future, if there is a situation where the emperor is young and the empress is a regent at the palace, it should be done according to the emperor's edict.

古文：汉丞相亮之攻祁山也，李平留后，主督运事。
现代文：蜀汉丞相诸葛亮进攻祁山的时候，李平留守后方，掌管督运军需事务。
English: When Zhuge Liang, the prime minister of Shu Han, attacked Lushan, Li Ping stayed behind to supervise the transportation and quartermaster affairs.

古文：会天霖雨，平恐运粮不继，遣参军孤忠、督军成籓喻指，呼亮来还；亮承以退军。
现代文：当时正值霖雨连绵，他平担心运粮供应不上，派遣参军狐忠、督军成藩传喻后主旨意，叫诸葛亮退军。
English: At that time, it was raining incessantly. He was worried that the supply of grain would not be able to be transported, so he sent Fox Zhong to join the army and ordered Zhuge Liang to withdraw from the army.

古文：平闻军退，乃更阳惊，说 军粮饶足，何以便归！ 
现代文：诸葛亮承此旨退回。李平听到退军的消息，假装惊讶，说 军粮充足，为什么就回来？ 
English: Zhuge Liang returned with this intention. When Li Ping heard the news of the withdrawal, he pretended to be surprised and said that there was enough military food. Why did he come back?

古文：又欲杀督运岑述以解己不办之责。
现代文：又要杀督远粮的岑述来解脱自己失职不办的责任。
English: He also wanted to kill Du Yuan Rye's narration in order to free himself from the responsibility of not doing his duty.

古文：又表汉主，说 军伪退，欲以诱贼与战。 
现代文：还向汉王上表，说 军队假装退却，是想引诱敌人 。
English: He also reported to the Han king that the army was pretending to retreat in order to lure the enemy.

古文：亮具出其前后手笔书疏，本末违错。
现代文：诸葛亮出示李平前后亲笔所写的全部信函、书奏等，矛盾重重。
English: Zhuge Liang showed all the letters, calligraphy, etc. written by Li Ping before and after, which were full of contradictions.

古文：平辞穷情竭，首谢罪负。
现代文：李平理屈词穷，低头认罪。
English: Li Ping reasoned poorly, bowed his head and pleaded guilty.

古文：于是亮表平前后过恶，免官，削爵土，徙梓潼郡。
现代文：于是诸葛亮上表奏明李平前后的罪恶，罢掉官职，削去封爵和食邑，流放到梓潼郡。
English: As a result, Zhuge Liang made a report on the evils before and after Li Ping, abolished the official post, removed the knighthood and the food town, and exiled to Zizhi County.

古文：复以平子丰为中郎将、参军事，出教敕之曰： 吾与君父子戮力以奖汉室，表都护典汉中，委君于东关，谓至心震动，终始可保，何图中乖乎！
现代文：又任用李平的儿子李丰为中郎将、参军事，写信告诫他说： 我和你们父子同心力辅助汉室，上表推荐你父亲典理汉中事务，委任你在东关镇守，自认为真心感动，自始至终可以依靠，怎么会想到中途背离呢？
English: He also appointed Li Ping's son, Li Feng, as middle-ranking general and military officer, and wrote a letter to him, admonishing him: "I and your father and son have made a concerted effort to assist the Han family. In the above table, I recommend that your father handle Han affairs and appoint you as Dongguan town guard. I believe that I was sincerely moved and can rely on you from beginning to end. How could I have thought of deviating halfway?

古文：若都护思负一意，君与公琰推心从事，否可复通，逝可复还也。
现代文：如果你父亲能认罪诲过，一心一意为国效忠，你与蒋琬推心置腹，同心共事，那么闭塞的可能通泰失去的可以再得到。
English: If your father can admit his guilt, be loyal to the country with one heart and one mind, and if you and Chiang Kai-shek are sincere and work together with one heart and one mind, then the possibility of obstruction can be eliminated, and what has been lost can be regained.

古文：详思斯戒，明吾用心！ 
现代文：请仔细思考这一劝戒，明白我的用心。 
English: Please consider this exhortation carefully and understand my intention.

古文：亮又与蒋琬、董允书曰： 孝起前为吾说正方腹中有鳞甲，乡党以为不可近。
现代文：诸葛亮又给蒋琬、董允写信说： 孝起以前对我说李严居心刻深，乡里认为不好接近。
English: Zhuge Liang also wrote to Chiang Kai-shek and Dong Yun, saying: Xiaoqi told me before that Li Yanju was very close to him, and the villagers thought it was not good to get close to him.

古文：吾以为鳞甲者但不当犯之耳，不图复有苏、张之事出于不意，可使孝起知之。 
现代文：我以为他虽然严峻苛刻，但不触犯他也无妨，没有想到又有苏秦、张仪反复无常之事出人意料地重演，可以让孝起知道这件事。 
English: I thought that although he was severe and harsh, it would be all right not to offend him. I did not expect that the capriciousness of Su Qin and Zhang Yi would be repeated unexpectedly, so that Xiaoqi could know about it.

古文：孝起者，卫尉南阳陈震也。
现代文：孝起就是卫尉南阳人陈震。
English: Xiaoqi is the bodyguard Nanyang Chen Zhen.

古文：冬，十月，吴主使中郎将孙布诈降，以诱扬州刺史王凌，吴主伏兵于阜陵以俟之。
现代文：冬季，十月，吴王派遣中郎将孙布诈降，以引诱扬州刺史王凌，吴王在阜陵设下伏兵布诈降。
English: In the winter, in October, the king of Wu sent a middle man to trick Sun Bu into surrendering, in order to lure the Yangzhou assassin Wang Ling, and the king of Wu set up an ambush in Fulin to trick Bu into surrendering.

古文：布遣人告凌云： 道远不能自致，乞兵见迎。 
现代文：孙布派人告诉王凌说： 道路太远，不能自己前去，请求出兵迎接。 
English: Sun Bu sent a person to tell Wang Ling that: The road is too far, I can't go by myself, and I ask for soldiers to meet me.

古文：凌腾布书，请兵马迎之。
现代文：王凌把孙布的书向上呈报，请求出兵相迎。
English: Wang Ling reported Sun Bu's book to the emperor and requested that troops be dispatched to meet him.

古文：征东将军满宠以为必诈，不与兵，而为凌作报书曰： 知识邪正，欲避祸就顺，去暴归道，甚相嘉尚。
现代文：征东将军满宠认为这必是许诈降，不给派军队，而替王凌写了一封给孙布的回信说： 知道邪正之分，想要避开灾祸，顺应天意，脱离暴政，归顺正道，非常值得嘉许。
English: The general of the Eastern Expedition thought that this must be a betrayal and refused to send troops. Instead, he wrote a reply to Sun Bu on behalf of Wang Ling, saying: Knowing the difference between right and wrong, wanting to avoid disaster, conforming to the will of heaven, breaking away from tyranny, and following the right path is very commendable.

古文：今欲遣兵相迎，然计兵少则不足相卫，多则事必远闻。
现代文：本打算派兵迎接，可是算计着兵少不足以保卫您，兵多则事情必然远近传播。
English: Now you want us to send troops to meet you, but if you think about it, fewer troops can't protect you, and more troops are more likely to leak secrets.

古文：且先密计以成本志，临时节度其宜。 
现代文：请暂且先对你的意图严加保密，以成全本来的志向，临到时机合适时再做部署。 
English: For the time being, please keep your intentions strictly confidential, with the aim of fulfilling your original ambitions, and then make arrangements when the time is right.

古文：会宠被书入朝，敕留府长史， 若凌欲往迎，勿与兵也。 
现代文：适逢满宠接到命令入朝，临行命令留府长史： 如果王凌想要去迎孙布，一定不要给他军队。 
English: Wang Ling received the order to enter the imperial court, and he immediately ordered the governor of the prefecture to stay. If Wang Ling wanted to go to meet Sun Bu, he must not be given an army.

古文：凌于后索兵不得，乃单遣一督将步骑七百人往迎之，布夜掩袭，督将迸走，死伤过半。
现代文：王凌在这以后要不到兵，就单独派遣一名督将率领步、骑兵七百人前往迎接，孙布乘夜袭击，督将逃走，兵士死伤过半。
English: After this, Wang Ling did not want any soldiers, so he sent a single viceroy to lead the way and seven hundred cavalry to meet. Sun Bu attacked at night, the viceroy fled, and more than half of the soldiers were killed and wounded.

古文：凌，允之兄子也。
现代文：王凌是王允的侄子。
English: Wang Ling is Wang Yun's nephew.

古文：先是凌表宠年过耽酒，不可居方任。
现代文：先前，王凌上表说满宠年纪老迈，酷嗜饮酒，不可再担任独当一面的职务。
English: Earlier, Wang Ling said on the table that he was too old and too fond of drinking, and that he could no longer hold a position of sole responsibility.

古文：帝将召宠，给事中郭谋曰： 宠为汝南太守、豫州刺史二十馀年，有勋方岳；及镇淮南，吴人惮之。
现代文：明帝将要召回满宠，给事中郭谋说： 满宠任汝南太守、豫州刺史二十多年来，著有功劳，后来镇守准南，吴中十分畏惧他。
English: Emperor Ming is going to recall Manjie, to which Guo Mu said: Manjie served as the governor of Yunnan Province and the governor of Yuzhou Province for more than 20 years, and he did a great deal of work. Later, he became the governor of Junnan Province, and Wu Zhong was very afraid of him.

古文：若不如所表，将为所窥，可令还朝，问以东方事以察之。 
现代文：如果情况不象王凌上表所说，将被敌人窥探利用，可以令他还朝，用询问东方军事的方式考察他。 
English: If the situation is not as Wang Ling said in the above table, it will be used by the enemy to snoop, he can be made to return to the morning and investigate him by inquiring about the Oriental military.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：明帝听从了他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：既至，体气康强，帝慰劳遣还。
现代文：满宠既到，看起来身体健康气色强壮，明帝加以慰劳后让他回任上。
English: When he arrived, he looked healthy and strong. Emperor Ming consoled him and allowed him to return to his post.

古文：十一月，戊戌晦，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，戊戌晦，出现日食。
English: In November, on the eve of the Lunar New Year, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：十二月，戊午，博平敬侯华歆卒。
现代文：十二月，戊午，博平敬侯华歆去世。
English: In the afternoon of December, Boping Jinghou Huayuan passed away.

古文：丁卯，吴大赦，改明年元曰嘉禾。
现代文：丁卯，吴国大赦，改明年年号为嘉禾。
English: Dingwu, Wu Guo amnesty, change next year's name to Jiahe.

古文：烈祖明皇帝中之上太和六年春，正月，吴主少子建昌侯虑卒。
现代文：太和六年春季，正月，吴王的小儿子建昌侯孙虑去世。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the first month, the youngest son of King Wu, Jianchang Hou Sun Xian, died.

古文：太子登自武昌入省吴主，因自陈久离定省，子道有阙；又陈陆逊忠勤，无所顾忧。
现代文：太子孙登从武昌入朝晋见吴王，诉说自己久离京城父母，不能尽到儿子的孝道；又说陆逊忠心勤恳，没有什么可顾虑担忧的。
English: The prince's grandson Deng came from Wuchang to the Jin Dynasty to see King Wu, and told him that he had been away from his parents in Beijing for a long time and could not fulfill his son's filial piety; he also said that Lu Xun was loyal and diligent, and there was nothing to worry about.

古文：乃留建业。
现代文：于是孙登留在建业。
English: So Sun Deng stayed in Jianye.

古文：二月，诏改封诸侯王，皆以郡为国。
现代文：二月，魏明帝颁诏改封诸侯王，都由郡改称为国。
English: In February, Emperor Wei Ming issued an edict to change the title of princes, and they were all renamed from counties to countries.

古文：帝爱女淑卒，帝痛之甚，追谥平原懿公主，立庙洛阳，葬于南陵。取甄后从孙黄与之合葬，追封黄为列侯，为之置后，袭爵。
现代文：明帝的爱女曹淑去世，明帝极为悲痛，追谥为平原懿公主，在洛阳建庙，在南陵安葬，取甄后已亡的侄孙甄黄与她合葬匹配，追封甄黄为侯爵，并为他选立继承人，承袭爵位。
English: Cao Shu, the beloved daughter of Emperor Ming, passed away. Emperor Ming was extremely sad. He chose Zhen as the princess of Pingyuan, built a temple in Luoyang, and buried her in Nanling. After selecting Zhen, his deceased grandnephew Zhen Huang was buried together with her. He made Zhen Huang a marquis and chose an heir for him to inherit the title.

古文：帝欲自临送葬，又欲幸许。
现代文：明帝想要亲皇送葬，还想前往许昌。
English: Emperor Ming wanted to be present at the Emperor's funeral and also wanted to go to Xu Chang.

古文：司空陈群谏曰： 八岁下殇，礼所不备，况未期月，而以成人礼送之，加为制服，举朝素衣，朝夕哭临，自古以来，未有此比。
现代文：司空陈群直言规劝说： 八岁以下的孩子死亡，没有丧葬的礼仪，何况还未满月，就以成人丧葬之送葬，加穿丧服，满朝都穿白衣服，日夜在棺哀哭，自古以来没有能与此相比的。
English: Siku Chenqun bluntly advised: There is no funeral etiquette for the death of a child under the age of eight, not to mention that before the full moon, the funeral will be conducted as an adult funeral, with the addition of funeral clothes. The whole family will wear white clothes and mourn in the coffin day and night. There is nothing comparable to this since ancient times.

古文：而乃复自往视陵，亲临祖载！
现代文：而陛下还要亲自去察看陵暮，亲自送葬。
English: However, His Majesty had to personally inspect the mausoleum and personally escort the funeral procession.

古文：愿陛下抑割无益有损之事，此万国之至望也。
现代文：愿陛下抑制割舍这种有损无益之事，这是普天下最大的愿望。
English: May His Majesty restrain from this wasteful act of renunciation, which is the greatest aspiration of the whole world.

古文：又闻车驾欲幸许昌，二宫上下，皆悉俱东，举朝大小，莫不惊怪。
现代文：又听说陛下打算驾临许昌，太后、皇后两宫上下，都一齐随驾东行，满朝大小官员无不感到震惊奇怪。
English: They also heard that His Majesty was planning to visit Xuchang. The Empress Dowager, the two palaces of the Empress, and all the officials of the dynasty were shocked and surprised.

古文：或言欲以避衰，或言欲以便移殿舍，或不知何故。
现代文：有人说这是想要避灾，有人说是打算营缮宫室而迁移殿舍，有的则不知什么原因。
English: Some said it was to avoid disasters, others said they planned to renovate the palace and move the palace, while others did not know the reason.

古文：臣以为吉凶有命，祸福由人，移走求安，则亦无益。
现代文：我认为吉祥和凶险，全是天命，灾祸和福分，由人掌握，用移居来祈求平安，也无益于事。
English: I believe that good fortune and bad fortune are all the fates, misfortunes and blessings that are controlled by people, and it is not beneficial to pray for peace by migrating.

古文：若必当移避，缮治金墉城西宫及孟津别宫，皆可权时分止，何为举宫暴露野次！公私烦费，不可计量。
现代文：如果必须移居避灾，修缮整治金墉城西宫及孟津别宫，都可暂时分住，为什么要举宫上下暴露在旷野之地，公私花费巨大，难以计算。
English: If it is necessary to relocate to avoid disasters, repair and renovate the West Palace of Jincheng and the Mengjin Palace, they can be temporarily separated. Why should the palace be exposed to the wilderness, the public and private expenses are huge and difficult to calculate.

古文：且吉士贤人，犹不妄徙其家，以宁乡邑，使无恐惧之心，况乃帝王万国之主，行止动静，岂可轻脱哉！ 
现代文：而且贤人吉士还不轻易迁居搬家，以便乡里安宁，使乡亲们没有恐惧之心，何况陛下是天下的主人，一举一动怎么可以如此轻率呢！ 
English: Moreover, the sage Kishi does not easily move house, so that the countryside is peaceful, so that the villagers have no fear, not to mention that His Majesty is the master of the world, how can every move be so imprudent!

古文：少府杨阜曰： 文皇帝、武宣皇后崩，陛下皆不送葬，所以重社稷，备不虞也；何至孩抱之赤子而送葬也哉！ 
现代文：少府杨阜说： 文皇帝、武宣皇后去世，陛下都不送葬，为的是以国家利益为重，以防不测，为什么要给一个尚在襁褓中的婴儿送葬呢？ 
English: Young prefect Yang Fu said, "When Emperor Wen and Empress Wu Xuan died, their majesties did not send them to be buried, in order to prioritize national interests and prevent accidents. Why should a baby still in its infancy be buried?

古文：帝皆不听。
现代文：明帝都不接受。
English: Emperor Wei did not listen to them.

古文：三月，癸酉，行东巡。
现代文：三月，癸酉，起驾向东巡游。
English: In March, at the crack of dawn, they set off on a cruise to the east.

古文：吴主遣将军周贺、校尉裴潜乘海之辽东，从公孙渊求马。
现代文：吴王派遣将军周贺、校尉裴潜乘船渡海到辽东，向公孙渊求购马匹。
English: King Wu sent General Zhou He and Lieutenant Pei Qian to Liaodong by ship to buy horses from Gongsun Yuan.

古文：初，虞翻性疏直，数有酒失，又好抵忤人，多见谤毁。
现代文：起初，虞翻性情粗疏率直，洒后屡次出现过失，又喜好顶撞别人，多次被人毁谤。
English: At first, he was rude and straightforward, but later he repeatedly made mistakes, liked to confront others, and was repeatedly slandered.

古文：吴主尝与张昭论及神仙，翻指昭曰： 彼皆死人而语神仙，世岂有仙人也！ 
现代文：吴王曾与张昭谈论到神仙，虞翻指着张昭说： 他们都是死人而你却说是神仙，世上哪有仙人！ 
English: Wu Wang had talked with Zhang Zhao about immortals. Gu Gu pointed at Zhang Zhao and said, "They are all dead people, but you say they are immortals. How can there be immortals in the world?"

古文：吴主积怒非一，遂徙翻交州。
现代文：吴王对虞翻的恨愤不止一次两次，于是将虞翻贬到交州。
English: King Wu was angry with Yutou more than once or twice, so he relegated Yutou to Jiaozhou.

古文：及周贺等之辽东，翻闻之，以为五溪宜讨，辽东绝远，听使来属，尚不足取，今去人财以求马，既非国利，又恐无获。欲谏不敢，作表以示吕岱，岱不报。
现代文：等到周贺等去辽东，虞翻听到后，认为应该出兵讨伐五，辽东相隔极远，即使前来归附，也不足取，而今派人带财物去辽东购马，既不是国家之利又恐怕没有收获，想上书规劝不敢，将奏章给吕岱过目，吕岱没有回答。
English: After waiting for Zhou He and others to go to Liaodong, Gu Guo heard that it was necessary to send troops to fight against the five, Liaodong was very far apart, and even if they came to attach, it was not enough, and now they sent people with wealth to buy horses in Liaodong, which was neither beneficial to the country nor profitable, and they did not dare to write a letter to persuade, so they sent a letter to Lv Ying, but Lv Ying did not answer.

古文：为爱憎所白，复徙苍梧猛陵。
现代文：虞翻被怨恨的人告发，再次被贬到苍梧郡猛陵县。
English: Gu Dou was denounced by the resentful people, and was once again relegated to Wuying County, Giangwu County.

古文：夏，四月，壬寅，帝如许昌。
现代文：夏季，四月，壬寅，明帝到达许昌。
English: In summer, in April, Ren Yin and Ming Di arrived in Xuchang.

古文：五月，皇子殷卒。
现代文：五月，皇子曹殷去世。
English: In May, Prince Cao Yin passed away.

古文：秋，七月，以卫尉董昭为司徒。
现代文：秋季，七月，明帝提升卫尉董昭为司徒。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Ming promoted the guard lieutenant, Dong Zhao, to the position of tutor.

古文：九月，帝行如摩陂，治许昌宫，起景福、承光殿。
现代文：九月，明帝前往摩陂，修整许昌皇宫，新建景福殿、承光殿。
English: In September, Emperor Ming went to Matsu to renovate the Xuchang Palace and build the Gyeongbokgung Palace and Jeonggwang Palace.

古文：公孙渊阴怀贰心，数与吴通。帝使汝南太守田豫督青州诸军自海道，幽州刺史王雄自陆道讨之。
现代文：辽东太守公孙渊暗地怀有二心，多次与吴国联系，明帝命当南太守田豫督领青州各路大军从海道，幽州刺史王雄从陆路同时进军讨伐公孙渊。
English: Liaodong Daju Gongsunyuan secretly harbored double-mindedness and repeatedly contacted with Wuzhong. When the Ming Emperor ordered the Southern Daju Tianyu to lead the Qingzhou army from the sea, Yuzhoushi Wangxion marched from the land to fight Gongsunyuan.

古文：散骑常侍蒋济谏曰： 凡非相吞之国，不侵叛之臣，不宜轻伐。
现代文：散骑常侍蒋济劝谏说： 凡不是准备加以吞并的国家，不骚扰又不叛逆的藩属，都不宜轻易出兵诗伐。
English: Chiang Chih-kui, the imperial equerry, advised him, "It is not proper for any country that is not preparing for annexation, or any vassal of a domain that does not harass or rebel, to easily send troops into battle.

古文：伐之而不能制，是驱使为贼也。
现代文：讨伐他们而不能制服，是迫使他们成为寇贼。
English: To fight them and not subdue them is to force them to become bandits.

古文：故曰： 虎狼当路，不治狐狸。 
现代文：所以说： 虎狼当路，不治狐狸。 
English: Therefore, it is said that the tiger and the wolf are the way to go, and the fox cannot be cured.

古文：先除大害，小害自己。
现代文：先除掉大害，小害自会消失。
English: Eliminate the major harm first, and the minor harm will disappear by itself.

古文：今海表之地，累世委质，岁选计、孝，不乏职贡，议者先之。
现代文：如今海边之地，世世代代臣属于朝廷，每年上计报告人口、赋税、刑狱等情况，推举孝廉，不缺赋税和贡品，朝廷官员议论时都把辽东排在前面。
English: Today, Liaodong is a seaside land. For generations, the courtiers have belonged to the imperial court. Every year, the population, taxation, imprisonment and other conditions are reported. Filial piety is promoted. There is no shortage of taxation and tribute. When the court officials discuss, they all put Liaodong in front.

古文：正使一举便克，得其民不足益国，得其财不足为富；倘不如意，是为结怨失信也。 
现代文：即使一举出兵就能把他们打败，获得的民众也不足以增加国力，获得的财物也不能使我们富足；倘若失败，会由此结下怨恨，自毁信誉。 
English: Even if we can defeat them with a single stroke of the sword, the people we gain will not be enough to increase our national strength, and the wealth we gain will not make us rich; if we fail, it will create resentment and destroy our credibility.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：明帝不接爱。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：豫等往，皆无功，诏令罢军。
现代文：田豫待前往征讨都徒劳无功，下诏停止用兵。
English: Tian Yu waited and waited to go to the draft, but to no avail. He issued an edict to stop using soldiers.

古文：豫以吴使周贺等垂还，岁晚风急，必畏漂浪，东道无岸，当赴成山，成山无藏船之处，遂辄以兵屯据成山。
现代文：田豫认为吴国买马使节周贺等行将返归，时已冬季，海上风急，肯定畏惧海浪飘摇，靠岸行驶，而东边海岸水浅不能靠岸，必当赴经成山，成山又没有藏船之处，于是就派出部队把守成山。
English: Tian Yu believed that the emissaries of the State of Wu, including Zhou He, would return. It was winter, and the sea was rough. He was sure to be afraid of the waves, and drove to the shore, but the eastern coast was shallow and could not be docked. He had to go through Chengshan. There was no place to hide the ship in Chengshan. So he sent troops to guard Chengshan.

古文：贺等还至成山，遇风，豫勒兵击贺等，斩之。
现代文：周驾等返回行至成山，果然遇风上岸，田豫率军袭击周贺等，并杀了他。
English: Zhou drove back to Chengshan, and when the wind hit the shore, Tian Yu led the army to attack Zhou He and killed him.

古文：吴主闻之，始思虞翻之言，乃召翻于交州。
现代文：吴王听说后，才想起虞翻的建议，于是召虞翻从交州返回。
English: After hearing this, King Wu thought of Yufu's suggestion, so he called Yufu to return from Jiaozhou.

古文：会翻已卒，以其丧还。
现代文：这时虞翻已经去世，只运回灵柩。
English: By this time, Gu Fu had already passed away, and only his coffin was brought back.

古文：十一月，庚寅，陈思王植卒。
现代文：十一月，庚寅，陈思王曹植去世。
English: In November, Geng Yin, Chen Si Wang Cao Zhi passed away.

古文：十二月，帝还许昌宫。
现代文：十二月，明帝回到许昌宫。
English: In December, Emperor Ming returned to Xu Chang Palace.

古文：侍中刘晔为帝所亲重。
现代文：侍中刘晔为明帝所亲近器重。
English: Liu Ye, a chamberlain, was close to Emperor Ming.

古文：帝将伐蜀，朝臣内外皆曰不可。
现代文：明帝将要讨伐蜀国，朝廷内外都说： 不可。 
English: Emperor Ming was going to invade Shu, and both inside and outside the imperial court said, "No."

古文：晔入与帝议，则曰可伐；出与朝臣言，则曰不可。
现代文：刘晔入朝与明帝商议，则说： 可讨伐 ；出来和朝廷大臣讨论，则又曰 不可 。
English: If Liu Bei entered the court to consult with Emperor Ming, it was said that he could fight; if he came out to discuss with the minister of the court, it was said that he could not.

古文：晔有胆智，言之皆有形。中领军杨暨，帝之亲臣，又重晔，执不可伐之议最坚，每从内出，辄过晔，晔讲不可之意。
现代文：晔有胆有识，谈论起来，有声有色，很动听，中领军杨暨是明帝的亲信大臣，也看重刘晔，是持不可伐意见中最为强硬的人，每次从朝廷出来，就去拜访刘晔，刘晔都讲不可讨伐的道理。
English: He was courageous and insightful, and when he spoke, his voice was colorful and very attractive. Yang Jie, the leader of the middle army, was a trusted minister of the Ming Emperor. He also valued Liu Bei. He was the toughest person who held the unassailable opinion. Every time he came out of the imperial court, he went to visit Liu Bei. Liu Bei always preached the principle of not being able to fight.

古文：后暨与帝论伐蜀事，暨切谏，帝曰： 卿书生，焉知兵事！ 
现代文：后来，杨暨和明帝谈起伐蜀之事，杨暨恳切规劝，明帝说： 你是个书生，怎么知晓军事！ 
English: Later, Yang Jie and Emperor Ming talked about the felling of Shu. Yang Jie earnestly advised Emperor Ming and said, "You are a scholar, how do you know about military affairs!

古文：暨谢曰： 臣言诚不足采，侍中刘晔，先帝谋臣，常曰蜀不可伐。 
现代文：杨暨谢罪说： 我的话诚然不足采纳，侍中刘晔是先帝的谋臣，常常说蜀不可讨伐。 
English: Yang Jie Xie Sin said: My words are indeed insufficient to be accepted, the chamberlain Liu Ye was the former emperor's adviser, and he often said that Shu could not be defeated.

古文：帝曰： 晔与吾言蜀可伐。 
现代文：明帝说： 刘晔与我说蜀可伐。 
English: Emperor Ming said: Liu Bei told me that Shu could be defeated.

古文：暨曰： 晔可召质也。 
现代文：杨暨说： 可以把刘晔叫来对质。 
English: YangJi said, "You can call Liu Yao as a witness."

古文：诏召晔至，帝问晔，终不言。
现代文：明帝下诏让刘晔来，问刘晔，刘晔始终不说话。
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict to let Liu Bei come and ask Liu Bei, but Liu Bei never spoke.

古文：后独见，晔责帝曰： 伐国，大谋也，臣得与闻大谋，常恐眯梦漏泄以益臣罪，焉敢向人言之！
现代文：后来刘晔单独晋见，责备明帝说： 讨伐一个国家，是一项重大的决策，我知道这件大事后，常常害怕说梦话泄漏出去增加我的罪过，怎么敢向人说这件事？
English: Later, Liu Ye met with Jin alone and reproached Ming Di, saying, "To crusade against a country is a major decision. After I knew about this major event, I was often afraid of talking about it in my sleep and leaking it out to increase my sins. How dare I tell people about this?

古文：夫兵诡道也，军事未发，不厌其密。
现代文：用兵之道在于诡诈，军事行动没开始时，越机密越好。
English: The use of military force is based on deception. When military operations have not begun, the more secret the better.

古文：陛下显然露之，臣恐敌国已闻之矣。 
现代文：陛下公开泄漏出去，我恐怕敌国已经听说了。 
English: Your Majesty has let it out in the open, and I'm afraid the enemy has heard about it.

古文：于是帝谢之。
现代文：于是明帝向他道歉。
English: So Ming Di apologized to him.

古文：晔见出，责暨曰： 夫钓者中大鱼，则纵而随之，须可制而后牵，则无不得也。
现代文：刘晔出来后，责怪杨暨说： 渔夫钓到一条大鱼，就要放长线跟在后，必须到可以制用时再用线将它牵回，那就没有得不到的。
English: After Liu Yao came out, he blamed Yang Jian and said, "When a fisherman catches a big fish, he has to put out a long line and follow it. He has to use the line to pull it back when it can be used. Then there is nothing he can't get.

古文：人主之威，岂徒大鱼而已！
现代文：帝王的威严，难道只是一条大鱼而已！
English: Isn't the majesty of the emperor just a big fish!

古文：子诚直臣，然计不足采，不可不精思也。 
现代文：你诚然是正直的臣僚，然而计谋不足以采纳，不可不仔细想一想。 
English: You are indeed an honest minister, but the scheme is not enough to adopt, you must think carefully.

古文：暨亦谢之。
现代文：杨暨也向他道歉。
English: Yang Jie also apologized to him.

古文：或谓帝曰： 晔不尽忠，善伺上意所趋而合之。陛下试与晔言，皆反意而问之，若皆与所问反者，是晔常与圣意合也。
现代文：有人对明帝说： 刘晔不尽忠心，善于探察皇上的意向而献媚迎合，请陛下试一试，和刘晔说话时全用相反的意思问他，如果他的回答都与所问意思相反，说明刘晔经常与陛下圣意相一致。
English: Someone said to Emperor Ming, "Liu Ye is not completely loyal. He is good at probing the emperor's intentions and pandering to him. I would like to ask Your Majesty to try it. When speaking with Liu Ye, ask him to use the opposite meaning. If his answers are contrary to the meaning of the question, it means that Liu Ye often agrees with Your Majesty's will.

古文：每问皆同者，晔之情必无所复逃矣。 
现代文：如果他的回答都与所问意思相同，刘晔的迎合之情必然暴露无遗。 
English: If his answers are the same as the meaning of the question, Liu Ye's pandering will inevitably be fully exposed.

古文：帝如言以验之，果得其情，从此疏焉。
现代文：明帝如其所言检验刘晔，果然发现他的迎合之情，从此疏远了他。
English: As he said, Emperor Ming inspected Liu Bei and found him to be accommodating, and distanced himself from him.

古文：晔遂发狂，出为大鸿胪，以忧死。
现代文：刘晔于是精神失常，出任大鸿胪，因忧虑而死。
English: As a result, Liu Bei went insane, became the Great Dragon Emperor, and died of worry.

古文：《傅子》曰：巧诈不如拙诚，信矣！
现代文：《傅子》曰：巧诈不如拙诚，确实是这样。
English: "Fu Zi" said: "Cunning is not as good as shamelessness, this is indeed the case."

古文：以晔之明智权计，若居之以德义，行之以忠信，古之上贤，何以加诸！
现代文：以刘晔的聪明智慧和权术计谋，如果坚守道德大义，将忠信作为行动的准则，即使是古代的贤人，又怎能超过他！
English: With Liu Xuan's clever wisdom and strategy, if you adhere to morality and justice, and take loyalty as the standard of action, even the wise men of ancient times, how can you surpass him!

古文：独任才智，不敦诚悫，内失君心，外困于俗，卒以自危，岂不惜哉！
现代文：而刘晔只是施展才智，不重诚恳，在内失掉君王的宠信，在外受窘于世俗的压力，最终因此危害了自己，岂不可惜！
English: However, Liu Ye was only displaying his talent, not his sincerity. He lost the favor of the king on the inside, was embarrassed by the pressure of the world on the outside, and ultimately harmed himself. Isn't that a pity!

古文：晔尝谮尚书令陈矫专权，矫惧，以告其子骞。
现代文：刘晔曾经进谗言说尚书令陈矫专权，陈矫十分害怕，将此事告诉儿子陈骞。
English: Liu Ye once said that Shang Shuling had given Chen Jiao absolute power. Chen Jiao was very afraid and told his son Chen Ye about this.

古文：骞曰： 主上明圣，大人大臣，今若不合，不过不作公耳。 
现代文：陈骞说： 主上圣明，您是大臣，如果不能融洽，不过不当三公而已。 
English: Chen Yao said: Lord Shengming, you are a minister, if you can't get along, it's just not appropriate for the three princes.

古文：后数日，帝意果解。
现代文：几天后，明帝的不满之意果然消除。
English: A few days later, Emperor Ming's dissatisfaction was resolved.

古文：尚书郎乐安廉昭以才能得幸，昭好抉擿群臣细过以求媚于上。
现代文：尚书郎乐安人廉昭因有才干受到宠信，他喜好收集群臣的微小过失用以向上献媚。
English: Shang Shulang Le An's disciple Ren Zhao was favored because of his talent. He liked to collect the minor faults of his retainers to flatter them.

古文：黄门侍郎杜恕上疏曰： 伏见廉昭奏左丞曹璠以罚当关不依诏，坐判问。
现代文：黄门侍郎杜恕上书说： 我看见谦昭上奏说左丞曹有罪罚应当禀报，但曹不依据诏书，应深入追究责问。
English: Du Xun, Huangmen's chamberlain, wrote: I saw Qian Zhao's report that Zuo Cao's punishment should be reported, but Cao did not follow the edict and should be investigated and questioned.

古文：又云： 诸当坐者别奏。 
现代文：还说： 其安应当处罚的人另行奏报。 
English: He also said: Those who should be punished for their safety should be reported separately.

古文：尚书令陈矫自奏不敢辞罚，亦不敢陈理，志意恳恻。臣窃愍然为朝廷惜之！
现代文：尚书令陈矫上奏说自己不敢逃避处罚，也不敢陈述理由，辞意恳切悲恻，我暗自哀怜而为朝廷惋惜。
English: He also wrote to Chen Jiao to report that he did not dare to evade punishment, nor did he dare to state the reason, and expressed his sincere sorrow. I secretly felt sorry for the court.

古文：古之帝王所以能辅世长民者，莫不远得百姓之欢心，近尽群臣之智力。
现代文：古代帝王所以能矫正世风抚育人民的原因，没有不是远得百姓的戴，近靠群臣的竭尽智力。
English: The reason why the ancient emperors were able to correct the ways of the world and nurture the people was not because they were far away from the people, but because they were close to the exhausted intelligence of their ministers.

古文：今陛下忧劳万机，或亲灯火，而庶事不康，刑禁日弛。
现代文：而今陛下日理万机，担忧劳苦，有时还在灯光下处理公务，但很多事情仍不能安顿，刑法禁令日渐松弛。
English: Today, His Majesty is busy with his daily routine, he is worried about his work, and sometimes he still handles his official duties under the lights, but many things still cannot be settled, and the criminal law ban is loosening day by day.

古文：原其所由，非独臣不尽忠，亦主不能使也。
现代文：察究原因，并非只是群臣不尽忠心，也是主上不能恰当地使用他们。
English: The reason to be investigated is not only the lack of loyalty of the ministers, but also the Lord's inability to use them properly.

古文：百里奚愚于虞而智于秦，豫让苟容中行而著节智伯，斯则古人之明验矣。
现代文：百里奚在虞地愚钝而在秦国足智多谋，豫让在中行氏那里马马虎虎过日子，而在智伯那里显出了节操，这些都是古人的明证。
English: It is clear evidence of the ancients that Bai Lijun was dull in the land of chaos, but resourceful in the land of Qin, that Yu Zhen lived a leisurely life in the land of Zhong Xing, but showed discipline in the land of Zhibo.

古文：若陛下以为今世无良才，朝廷乏贤佐，岂可追望稷、契之遐踪，坐待来世之俊乂乎！
现代文：如果陛下当今之世没有良才，朝廷乏贤能辅佐，难道可以追望稷、契的遥远踪迹，坐等来世的俊杰吗？
English: If Your Majesty believes that there are no sages in the world today, and that the Imperial Court lacks the assistance of sages, how can you pursue the opportunity of sages such as Houyi and Qi, and wait for people of outstanding talent in future generations?

古文：今之所谓贤者，尽有大官而享厚禄矣，然而奉上之节未立，向公之心不一者，委任之责不专，而俗多忌讳故也。
现代文：现在所谓的贤能，都做了大官而享受着厚禄，然而侍奉君王的节操没建立，奉公守法的心思不专一的原因，是由于对委任的职责没有独断的权力，而时俗有许多禁忌的缘故。
English: The virtuous people we are talking about now all have high official positions and enjoy rich salaries, but they have not established the discipline of serving the Lord. The reason why they are not dedicated to public affairs is that the duties assigned are not specific, and most of them are taboo.

古文：臣以为忠臣不必亲，亲臣不必忠。
现代文：我以为忠臣不必是亲信，亲信不一定就忠心耿耿。
English: The vassal believes that a loyal vassal does not need to be a close person, and a close vassal is not necessarily a loyal vassal.

古文：今有疏者毁人而陛下疑其私报所憎，誉人而陛下疑其私爱所亲，左右或因之以进憎爱之说，遂使疏者不敢毁誉，以至政事损益，亦皆有嫌。
现代文：现在被疏远的人批评别人而陛下怀疑是挟私报仇，赞誉别人则陛下怀疑是出以私情偏爱，左右亲信有的就乘机顺着您的心意说话，于是使被疏远的人不敢提出批评或赞誉，以至政事中的变更也都受到猜嫌。
English: Now the estranged person criticizes others, and Your Majesty suspects that it is a vendetta, and praises others, and Your Majesty suspects that it is out of personal preference. Some close friends and relatives take the opportunity to speak according to your wishes, so that the estranged person does not dare to criticize or praise, and even changes in government affairs are suspected.

古文：陛下当思所以阐广朝臣之心，笃厉有道之节，使之自同古人，垂名竹帛，反使如廉昭者扰乱其间，臣惧大臣将遂容身保位，坐观得失，为来世戒也。
现代文：陛下应当思如何使朝臣的心胸开阔起来，鼓励有道之士的气节，使他们自行向古人看齐，垂名史册，可是现在反而让像廉昭这种人在中间扰乱，我恐怕大臣们将会只要求安身保位，而坐观国家得失，成为后世的鉴戒。
English: His Majesty should think about how to broaden the hearts of courtiers, encourage the virtuous, and make them align themselves with the ancients and go down in history. But now, instead of letting people like Liang Zhao disturb the middle, I'm afraid that ministers will only ask to secure their positions, and sit and watch the country's gains and losses, becoming a warning to future generations.

古文：昔周公戒鲁侯曰： 无使大臣怨乎不以。 
现代文：古代周公警告鲁侯说： 不在使大臣抱怨不任用他们。 
English: In ancient times, Zhou Gong warned Lu Hou, "Don't let the minister complain about not appointing them.

古文：言不贤则不可为大臣，为大臣则不可不用也。
现代文：这是说不是贤能就不可用为大臣，凡是大臣就不可不用。
English: This means that if you are not a virtuous person, you cannot be a minister, and if you are a minister, you cannot be dispensable.

古文：《书》数舜之功，称去四凶，不言有罪无问大小则去也。
现代文：《尚书》举出舜的功劳，称他除去四凶，不是说有罪的人可以不问大小一概赶走。
English: "Shangshu" cited the merits of Zou, saying that he removed the four villains, not to say that the guilty people can be driven away regardless of size.

古文：今者朝臣不自以为不能，以陛下为不任也；不自以为不知，以陛下为不问也。陛下何不遵周公之所以用，大舜之所以去，使侍中、尚书坐则侍帷幄，行则从华辇，亲对诏问，各陈所有，则群臣之行皆可得而知，患能者进，闇劣者退，谁敢依违而不自尽。
现代文：而今朝廷大臣不是认为自己没有才干，而认为是陛下不任用；不是认为自己无知，而认为是陛下没有询问，陛下为什么不遵照周公和贤能，大舜排除奸恶的作法，使侍中、尚书坐则在帷幄中侍侯，行则跟从在御驾左右，亲自答对陛下诏问，各尽所知，那么群臣的品德行为都可以了解，忠成贤能的人进用，愚笨恶劣的人降职，谁还敢模棱两可而不竭尽才能。
English: Today, the ministers of the Imperial Court do not think that they are incompetent, but think that His Majesty does not appoint them; they do not think that they are ignorant, but think that His Majesty did not inquire why His Majesty does not follow the practice of Zhou Gong and Zheng Neng, and why His Majesty does not eliminate the practice of treachery, so that the attendants and Shang Shuxu sit in the curtain, and the attendants follow around the carriage, and answer His Majesty's questions in person. As far as they know, the moral behavior of the ministers can be understood, and the loyal and capable people are promoted, and the stupid and bad people are demoted. Who

古文：以陛下之圣明，亲与群臣论议政事，使群臣人得自尽，贤愚能否，在陛下之所用。
现代文：以陛下的圣明，亲自与群臣商议国家大事，使群臣人人能竭尽才能，是贤能还是愚劣，在于陛下使用恰当。
English: With His Majesty's sacred wisdom, He personally consults with His subjects on national affairs, so that His subjects can make the best of their abilities. Whether they are wise or foolish depends on His Majesty's proper use of them.

古文：以此治事，何事不办；以此建功，何功不成！
现代文：这样治理事情，什么事不能办；这样来建立功勋，什么功勋不能成就！
English: To govern things in this way, what can not be done; to establish merit in this way, what merit can not be achieved!

古文：每有军事，诏书常曰： 谁当忧此者邪？
现代文：每有军机大事，诏书上常说： 谁能忧虑这些呢？
English: Whenever there is a military event, the imperial edict often says: Who can worry about this?

古文：吾当自忧耳。 
现代文：我只能自己忧虑。 
English: I only have myself to worry about.

古文：近诏又曰： 忧公忘私者必不然，但先公后私即自办也。 
现代文：最近诏书上又说： 忧公忘私的人必定不能这样，但先公后私自己就可以做到。 
English: The recent edict also said: "This is definitely not the case for those who are worried about business and forget about personal affairs, but if they put business before personal affairs, they will deal with it themselves."

古文：伏读明诏，乃知圣思究尽下情，然亦怪陛下不治其本而忧其末也。
现代文：恭读圣明诏书，才知道陛下对下情了解得很深很透，然而也对陛下不根本上治理而只忧虑枝节问题感到奇怪。
English: I respectfully read the edict to know that His Majesty wants to know everything about the situation of the lower class, but also that His Majesty does not deal with the fundamental situation but is worried about the minor situation.

古文：人之能否，实有本性，虽臣亦以为朝臣不尽称职也。
现代文：人贤能与否，当然有先天本情，就是我也认为朝廷大臣不都完全称职。
English: Whether a person's talent is good or not, it is really an innate nature, although the minister also believes that courtiers are not all competent.

古文：明主之用人也，使能者不能遗其力，而不能者不得处非其任。
现代文：圣明的主上用人，是使贤能的人不敢保留他的能力，而使没有才能的人不得占据不能胜任的官位。
English: The Lord's use of the sacred oracle is to make the capable one not dare to retain his ability, and to make the untalented one not occupy the incompetent position.

古文：选举非其人，未必为有罪也；举朝共容非其人，乃为怪耳。
现代文：推选不是贤能之人，未必是有罪过；满朝上下都能容得这种不适当的人，才是怪事。
English: It is not necessarily a crime to select and recommend a person who is unsuitable; it would be strange if the entire court accepted this unsuitable person.

古文：陛下知其不尽力也而代之忧其职，知其不能也而教之治其事，岂徒主劳而臣逸哉，虽圣贤并世，终不能以此为治也！
现代文：陛下明知某人没有尽力而为他的职责忧虑，知道某人没有才能而教他办事，岂不只是主上辛劳而臣下安逸吗？即使圣贤同时并存于世，也终究不能认为这样就算是治理国家。
English: Your Majesty, knowing that a man does not do his best and worrying about his duties, and knowing that a man has no talent and teaching him to do things, is it not just the Lord's toil and the subject's ease? Even if sages coexist in the world at the same time, it can not be considered that this is even the governance of the country.

古文：陛下又患台阁禁令之不密，人事请属之不绝，作迎客出入之制，以恶吏守寺门，斯实未得为禁之本也。
现代文：陛下还担心台阁禁令不够严，人情请托不能断绝，定出迎客出入的制度，让凶恶的官吏守卫官府厦门，这实在不是实行禁令的根本作法。
English: His Majesty was also worried that the ban on Taigak was not strict enough, and that people's feelings could not be broken, and set up a system to welcome guests and let vicious officials guard the government office in Xiamen. This was not the fundamental practice of implementing the ban.

古文：昔汉安帝时，少府窦嘉辟廷尉郭躬无罪之兄子，犹见举奏，章劾纷纷；近司隶校尉孔羡辟大将军狂悖之弟，而有司嘿尔，望风希指，甚于受属。选举不以实者也。
现代文：以前汉安帝时，少府窦嘉征召廷尉郭躬无罪侄儿，还有人止书控，纷纷弹劾。最近司隶校尉孔羡聘用大将军狂妄无理的弟弟，而主管官员不说一句话，那种望风迎合的态度，甚于接受嘱托，这是不按实情选用人才的结果。
English: In the past, when Emperor An of Han, the young prefect Dou Jia conscripted the innocent nephew of the imperial lieutenant Guo Miao, and there were also people who stopped the written accusation and impeached one after another. Recently, the officer-in-charge colonel Kong Qian hired the arrogant and unreasonable brother of the general, and the responsible officials did not say a word. That kind of pandering attitude is even worse than accepting the commission. This is the result of not selecting talents according to the actual situation.

古文：嘉有亲戚之宠，躬非社稷重臣，犹尚如此；以今况古，陛下自不督必行之罚以绝阿党之原耳。
现代文：窦嘉有皇亲的宠信，郭躬不是国家重臣，还尚且如此；用今天的情况和古代相比，这是陛下自己没有作出必要的处罚用以杜绝结党营私的源头。
English: Guo Mian is not a high-ranking court official, even though he enjoys the favor of his relatives. Comparing the current situation with that of ancient times, it is natural that His Majesty does not supervise the punishment that must be carried out in order to cut off the situation of party and private interests.

古文：出入之制，与恶吏守门，非治世之具也。
现代文：也入禁地的制度，让恶吏守门，不是治世的办法。
English: The system of entering forbidden places and letting evil officials guard the gates is not the way to rule the world.

古文：使臣之言少蒙察纳，何患于奸不削灭，而养若廉昭等乎！
现代文：假使我的话有一点承陛下明察采纳，还怕什么邪恶不除灭，而豢养廉昭之辈！
English: If my words are accepted by Your Majesty, I am afraid that evil will not be eradicated, and honest people will be raised!

古文：夫纠擿奸宄，忠事也；然而世憎小人行之者，以其不顾道理而苟求容进也。
现代文：本来，检举揭发奸恶，就是尽忠的举动；然而世人憎恨小人来这样做，是因为他们不顾情理而只是以迎合以求提拔。
English: To denounce treachery is in itself an act of loyalty; but the world hates a scoundrel for doing so, because he is pandering for advancement, regardless of reason.

古文：若陛下不复考其终始，必以违众迕世为奉公，密行白人为尽节，焉有通人大才而更不能为此邪？
现代文：如果陛下不再察究事情的来龙去脉，一定以为违背众议抵世事是为奉公，窥人过失向上告发是尽忠节。那么为什么真有才能的人反而不去做这种事？
English: If His Majesty no longer investigates the ins and outs of things, he must think that it is a public service to come to the world against the advice of the public, and that it is a day of loyalty to spy on people's faults and report them to the top. So why do really talented people not do this kind of thing?

古文：诚顾道理而弗为耳。
现代文：实在是顾及正道而不去这样做而已。
English: It's just that they don't do it out of a sense of morality.

古文：使天下皆背道而趋利，则人主之所最病者也，陛下将何乐焉！ 
现代文：使天下的人都背离正道而去谋取私利，本是君王所最忧虑的，陛下还有什么可高兴的呢？ 
English: To turn the world's people away from the right path to seek personal gain is what kings and emperors are most worried about. What else could His Majesty be happy about?

古文：恕，畿之子也。
现代文：杜恕是杜畿的儿子。
English: Du Shum is the son of Du Gui.

古文：帝尝卒至尚书门，陈矫跪问帝曰： 陛下欲何之？ 
现代文：明帝曾经突然来到尚书台门，陈矫跪着向明帝说： 陛下要去哪里？ 
English: Emperor Ming once suddenly came to Shang Shudai Gate. Chen Jiao knelt down and said to Emperor Ming: "Where is Your Majesty going?"

古文：帝曰： 欲案行文书耳。 
现代文：明帝说： 我想看一看公文。 
English: Ming Di said: I want to have a look at the official document.

古文：矫曰： 此自臣职分，非陛下所宜临也。
现代文：陈矫说： 这是我的职责，不是陛下应该亲临的事情。
English: Chen Jiao said: This is my duty, not something that His Majesty should attend in person.

古文：若臣不称其职，则请就黜退，陛下宜还。 
现代文：如果我不称职，那么就请罢免我，陛下应该回去。 
English: If I am not up to the job, then please remove me. Your Majesty should go back.

古文：帝惭，回车而反。
现代文：明帝惭悔，乘车返回。
English: Please go back, Your Majesty. Ashamed, Emperor Ming changed the direction of the train and went back.

古文：帝尝问矫： 司马公忠贞，可谓社稷之臣乎？ 
现代文：明帝曾经问陈矫： 司马懿忠贞不渝，可以答得上是国家大臣吗？ 
English: Emperor Ming once asked Chen Jiao-wu: Sima Yi is loyal and unswerving, can you answer that he is a minister of state?

古文：矫曰： 朝廷之望也，社稷则未知也。 
现代文：陈矫答： 他是朝廷中有声望的人，国家能不能依靠他不知道。 
English: Chen Kaoru: He is a man of prestige in the imperial court, and I don't know if the country can rely on him.

古文：吴陆逊引兵向庐江，论者以为宜速救之。
现代文：吴陆逊率军向庐江进发，朝中议论认为应该火速前往救援。
English: Wu Luxun led the army to the Minjiang River, and the discussion between North Korea and China was that they should rush to the rescue.

古文：满宠曰： 庐江虽小，将劲兵精，守则经过。
现代文：满宠说： 庐江虽小，但有精兵良将，可以防守一段时间。
English: Manchong said: Although the Li River is small, it has excellent soldiers and can be defended for a while.

古文：又，贼舍船二百里来，后尾空绝，不来尚欲诱致，今宜听其遂进。但恐走不可及耳。 
现代文：而且，敌人是舍船登陆行军二百里而来，没有后继部队。不来还找算引诱他们来，现在应该听任他们向前行进，怕的就是他们逃走我们赶不上。 
English: Moreover, the enemy came on a two-hundred-mile march without disembarking from the ship, and there are no follow-up troops. If they do not come, they will find a way to lure them to come. Now we should let them go forward. We are afraid that they will not be able to catch up with us if they escape.

古文：乃整军趋杨宜口，吴人闻之，夜遁。
现代文：于是整军直赴杨宜口，吴军听到消息后，连夜撤退。
English: As a result, the army of rectification went straight to Yang Yigou. After hearing the news, the Wu army withdrew overnight.

古文：是时，吴人岁有来计。
现代文：这时，吴国每年都有攻魏的计划。
English: At this time, Wu had an annual plan to invade Wei.

古文：满宠上疏曰： 合肥城南临江湖，北远寿春，贼攻围之，得据水为势；官兵救之，当先破贼大辈，然后围乃得解。
现代文：满宠上书说： 合肥城南临长江、巢湖，北面远离寿春，敌军围攻合肥，肯定据水取占地势；我军救援，应当先攻破敌人主力部队，然后包围才会解除。
English: The letter said: Hefei City is located south of the Yangtze River and Lake Chaohu, and north of Shouchun. If the enemy besieges Hefei, it is certain to occupy the land by water. Our army should first defeat the enemy's main force to rescue, and then the siege will be lifted.

古文：贼往甚易，而兵往救之甚难，宜移城内之兵，其西三十里，有奇险可依，更立城以固守，此为引贼平地而掎其归路，于计为便。 
现代文：敌军进攻极为容易容易，而我们出兵救援却很困难，应该调出城内军队，在城西三十上，有奇险可依，另建城堡固守，这是为了引诱敌人上岸，在平地上功断他们的退路，此计为宜。 
English: It is very easy for the enemy to attack, but it is very difficult for us to send troops to rescue. It is advisable to transfer troops out of the city. On the 30th west of the city, there are risks to be taken, and another castle should be built to hold fast. This is to lure the enemy ashore and cut off their escape route on the plain.

古文：护军将军蒋济议以为： 既示天下以弱，且望贼烟火而坏城，此为未攻而自拔；一至于此，劫略无限，必淮北为守。 
现代文：护军将军蒋济议论说： 这样做既是向天下表现出软弱，而且望到敌人烟火就毁坏城池，这是敌人还未进攻而先自动解除防守。一旦到这种地步，敌人就会肆强抢掠夺，我军肯定将会退到淮河北岸防守。 
English: Jiang Ji, the general of the garrison, commented: "This is not only to show weakness to the world, but also to destroy the city at the sight of the enemy's fireworks. This is because the enemy has not yet attacked and has automatically lifted the defense. Once it reaches this stage, the enemy will rob and plunder wildly. Our army will certainly retreat to the north bank of the Huaihe River to defend.

古文：帝未许。
现代文：明帝不同意。
English: Therefore, Emperor Ming did not agree with Manpiao's opinion.

古文：宠重表曰： 孙子言： 兵者，诡道也，故能而示之不能，骄之以利，示之以慑， 此为形实不必相应也。
现代文：满宠又上书说： 孙子说 用兵必须诡诈，所以要能战而显示也不能，以小利引诱敌人骄狂，假装恐惧使敌人上当 ，这就是表面和实质不必相适应。
English: Filled with favor, he wrote again: Grandson said that soldiers must be cunning, so they must be able to fight but not show it, lure the enemy into arrogance with small profits, and deceive the enemy by pretending to be afraid, which means that the surface and the substance do not have to match.

古文：又曰： 善动敌者形之。 
现代文：又说： 善于牵动敌人者要造成一定的势态。 
English: He also said: Those who are good at influencing the enemy must create a certain situation.

古文：今贼未至而移城却内，所谓形而诱之也。
现代文：现在敌人未到而我们已从城内撤出，这就是以阵势引诱敌人。
English: Now that the enemy has not arrived and we have withdrawn from the city, it is tempting the enemy with a position.

古文：引贼远水，择利而动，举得于外，而福生于内矣！ 
现代文：引诱敌人远离水域，选择有利时机发动攻击，在城外战场上取胜，城内就会得到保佑！ 
English: Lure the enemy away from the water, choose a favorable time to launch an attack, win on the battlefield outside the city, and the city will be blessed!

古文：尚书赵咨以宠策为长，诏遂报听。
现代文：尚书赵咨认为满宠的计策比较完善，明帝于是下诏批准。
English: Shangshu Zhao Zi thought that the favored strategy was more in line with reality, so the emperor issued an edict to do so.

古文：烈祖明皇帝中之上青龙元年春，正月，甲申，青龙见摩陂井中，二月，帝如摩陂观龙，改元。
现代文：青龙元年春季，正月，甲申，在摩陂中出现一条青龙。二月，明帝去摩陂观青龙，更改年号。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Qinglong Dynasty, in the first month of the year, Jiaxing, a blue dragon appeared in Mahu. In February, Emperor Ming went to Mahu to watch the blue dragon and changed the year.

古文：公孙渊遣校尉宿舒、郎中令孙综奉表称臣于吴；吴主大悦，为之大赦。
现代文：公孙渊派遣校尉宿舒、郎中令孙综携带表章赴吴称臣，吴王非常高兴，为此大赦天下。
English: The king of Wu was very pleased and pardoned Sun Yuan, who had sent his lieutenant, Shu, and his son-in-law, Sun Simi, to Wu with a medal to commend him to the king.

古文：三月，吴主遣太常张弥、执金吾许晏、将军贺达将兵万人，金宝珍货，九锡备物，乘海授渊，封渊为燕王。
现代文：三月，吴王派遗太常张弥、执金吾许晏、将军贺达率领大军万人，携带金银财宝、奇珍异贷及九锡齐备，乘船渡海赏赐公孙渊，封公孙渊为燕王。
English: In March, the King of Wu dispatched Zhang Ya, the Grand Empress Dowager, Wu Xu Xi, and General Heda to lead a large army of ten thousand people, carrying gold, silver, treasures, rare and unusual loans and nine hundred pennies, to cross the sea to reward Gongsun Yuan and crown Gongsun Yuan as the King of Swallows.

古文：举朝大臣自顾雍以下皆谏，以为： 渊未可信而宠待太厚，但可遣吏兵护送舒、综而已。 
现代文：自顾雍以下的满朝大臣都直言规劝，座为 公孙渊不可轻信，这样做，对他的恩遇太厚了，只要派遣官兵护送宿舒、孙综就够了。 
English: All the ministers of the Manchurian dynasty from Gu Yong on down advised him bluntly that he should not be gullible, and that doing so would be a great favor to him. It was enough to send officers and soldiers to escort Shukshu and Sun Zong.

古文：吴主不听。
现代文：吴王不接受。
English: Wu Wang did not listen.

古文：张昭曰： 渊背魏惧讨，远来求援，非本志也。
现代文：张昭说： 孙渊背叛魏国，害怕讨伐，从远地而来求援，绝不是他的本意。
English: Zhang Zhao said: It was never Sun Yuan's intention to betray Wei, fear a crusade, and come from afar to ask for help.

古文：若渊改图，欲自明于魏，两使不反，不亦取笑于天下乎！ 
现代文：如果公孙渊改变主意，打算自动向魏表明忠心，我们的两位使节不能返回，不也让天下人取笑吗？ 
English: If Gongsun Yuan changes his mind and intends to automatically show his loyalty to Wei, our two envoys can't return, won't the whole world make fun of them?

古文：吴主反覆难昭，昭意弥切。
现代文：吴王反复驳诘张昭，张昭越发坚持己见。
English: Wu Wang repeatedly refuted Zhang Zhao, and Zhang Zhao insisted on his own opinion more and more.

古文：吴主不能堪，案刀而怒曰： 吴国士人入宫则拜孤，出宫则拜君，孤之敬君亦为至矣，而数于众中折孤，孤常恐失计！ 
现代文：吴王不能忍受，按着佩剑恼怒地说： 吴国士族之人入宫则参拜我，出宫则参拜您，我敬重您已经到了极点，而您屡次在大庭广众之下顶撞我，我常常唯恐自己做出不愿做的事。 
English: The King of Wu could not bear it, and he raised his sword and said angrily: "People of the Wu nationality visit me when they enter the palace, and visit you when they leave the palace. My respect for you has reached the extreme, and you have repeatedly confronted me in public. I am often afraid of doing something I don't want to do.

古文：昭熟视吴主曰： 臣虽知言不用，每竭愚忠者，诚以太后临崩，呼老臣于床下，遗诏顾命之言故在耳。 
现代文：张昭看着吴王说： 我虽然知陛下不会采纳我的建议，但每次都竭尽愚忠的原因，实在是因为太后临终时呼唤我到她的床前，留下遗诏，吩咐我辅佐陛下的话音犹在耳边的缘故。 
English: Zhang Zhao looked at King Wu and said, "Although I know that Your Majesty will not accept my suggestion, the reason why I have been so loyal every time is because the words of the Empress Dowager, who called me to her bedside on her deathbed, left a will and ordered me to assist Your Majesty, are still in my ears.

古文：因涕泣横流。吴主掷刀于地，与之对泣。
现代文：接着泪满面，吴王将刀扔在地上，与张昭相对哭泣。
English: Then, with tears on his face, Wu Wang threw the knife on the ground and wept with Zhang Zhao.

古文：然卒遣弥、晏往。
现代文：然而还是派遣张弥、许晏去往辽东。
English: However, Sun Quan eventually sent Zhang Ya and Xu Xi to Liaodong.

古文：昭忿言之不用，称疾不朝。
现代文：张昭对不采纳他的意见忿忿不平，声称有病不去朝见。
English: Zhang Zhao was angry that his rebuke had not been accepted, and said that he would no longer go to the imperial court due to illness.

古文：吴主恨之，土塞其门，昭又于内以土封之。
现代文：吴王怨恨张昭，下令用土将张昭家的大门都住，张昭又从里面用土将门封死。
English: Wu Wang resented Zhang Zhao and ordered that the gates of Zhang Zhao's house be sealed with soil. Zhang Zhao then sealed the gates with soil from the inside.

古文：夏，五月，戊寅，北海王蕤卒。
现代文：夏季，五月，戊寅，北海王曹蕤去世。
English: In the summer, in May, Wu Yin, the king of the North Sea, Cao Pi, passed away.

古文：闰月，庚寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：闰五月，庚寅朔，出现日食。
English: Leap May, Geng Yin Shuo, the appearance of a solar eclipse.

古文：六月，洛阳宫鞠室灾。
现代文：六月，洛阳宫鞠室发生火灾。
English: In June, a fire broke out in the ballroom of Kyoto's Luoyang Palace.

古文：鲜卑轲比能诱保塞鲜卑步度根与深结和亲，自勒万骑迎其累重于陉北。并州刺史毕轨表辄出军，以外威比能，内镇步度根。
现代文：鲜卑首领轲比能引诱保塞鲜卑首领步度根与他深交和睦，亲自率领一万骑兵在陉北迎接步度根的人马辎重，荆州刺史毕轨上表请求马上出兵，对外威胁柯比能，对内镇压步度根。
English: Xianbei leader Zou Bi was able to lure Bose and Xianbei leader Boudogan into a deep friendship and harmony with him. He personally led ten thousand cavalry to meet Boudogan's heavy cavalry in the north of Shandong. Jingzhou sent troops at the request of Boudogan, threatening Kobieng from the outside and suppressing Boudogan from the inside.

古文：帝省表曰： 步度根已为比能所诱，有自疑心。
现代文：明帝审阅上表后说： 步度根已以被轲比能引诱，心虚多疑。
English: After reviewing the above table, Emperor Ming said, "Buddogan has been seduced by the power of comparison, and is more suspicious.

古文：今轨出军，慎勿越塞过句注也。 
现代文：现在毕轨也兵征讨，一定要谨慎行事，不要越过边塞句注山。 
English: Now that conscription has been completed, we must be careful not to cross the border.

古文：比诏书到，轨已进军屯阴馆，遣将军苏尚、董弼追鲜卑。
现代文：等到诏书送到，毕轨已经进军到阴馆驻屯，派遣将军苏尚、董弼追击鲜卑人。
English: By the time the imperial edict was delivered, Bi Luo had already marched to the Yinyuan garrison and dispatched the generals Su Shang and Dong Xuan to pursue the Xianbei.

古文：轲比能遣子将千馀骑迎步度根部落，与尚、弼相遇，战于楼烦，二将没，步度根与泄归泥部落皆叛出塞，与轲比能合寇边。
现代文：轲比能派遣儿子率领一千多骑兵迎接步度根部落，自己与苏尚、董弼遭遇，在楼烦交战。苏尚、董弼战死，步度根部落与泄归泥部落全部叛变出塞，与轲比能联合，侵犯魏边境。
English: Zou Bineng sent his son to lead more than a thousand cavalry to meet the Boudogan tribe. He encountered Su Shang and Dong Yao and fought with them in the courtyard. Su Shang and Dong Yao were killed in the battle. The Boudogan tribe and the Hui tribe all rebelled and invaded the Wei border in alliance with Zou Bineng.

古文：帝遣骁骑将军秦朗将中军讨之，轲比能乃走幕北，泄归泥将其部众来降。步度根寻为轲比能所杀。
现代文：明帝派遣骁骑将军秦郎率中军前往征讨，轲比能逃到漠北，泄归泥率领部众归降，步度根不久就轲比能杀掉。
English: Emperor Ming dispatched the Chinese cavalry general Qin Lang to lead the Chinese army to go to the conquest. Zou Bi Neng fled to the north of the desert, led the people to surrender, and soon killed Zou Bi Neng.

古文：公孙渊知吴远难恃，乃斩张弥、许晏等首，传送京师，悉没其兵资珍宝。
现代文：公孙渊自知吴国相距遥远难以信用靠，于是斩张弥、许晏等人首级，送到京城，全部吞并了吴国的士兵及带来的金银财宝。
English: Gongsun Yuan knew that Wu was far away and difficult to trust, so he cut off the heads of Zhangya, Xu Rong and others, sent them to Beijing, and swallowed up all the soldiers from Wu and the gold, silver and treasure they brought.

古文：冬，十二月，诏拜渊大司马，封乐浪公。
现代文：冬季，十二月，颁诏任命公孙渊为大司马，封为乐浪公。
English: In winter, in December, an imperial edict was issued to appoint Gongsun Yuan as the grand steward, and he was given the title of Le Lang Gong.

古文：吴主闻之，大怒曰： 朕年六十，世事难易，靡所不尝。近为鼠子所前却，令人气踊如山。
现代文：吴王听到消息勃然大怒说： 朕年已六十，人世间的艰难困苦，还有什么没经历过，近来却被鼠辈所戏弄，令人气涌如山。
English: Upon hearing the news, King Wu flew into a rage and said, "I am sixty years old. I have never experienced the hardships and tribulations of the human world, but recently I have been teased by rats, which has made me furious.

古文：不自截鼠子头以掷于海，无颜复临万国。就令颠沛，不以为恨！ 
现代文：如不亲手斩掉鼠辈的脑袋扔进大海，就再也无颜君临万国，即令为此亡国颠沛，也决不怨恨！
English: If you do not personally cut off the heads of the rats and throw them into the sea, you will no longer have a face to face with the world, even if you make the dead country angry, you will never resent it!

古文：陆逊上疏曰： 陛下以神武之姿，诞膺期运，破操乌林，败备西陵，禽羽荆州。斯三虏者，当世雄杰，皆摧其锋。
现代文：陆逊上书说： 陛下以神明威武的资质，生当大命，在乌林大破曹操，在西陵大败刘备，在荆州生擒关羽，这三个败虏都是当世英雄，却都被陛下摧折他们的锋芒。
English: Lu Xun said in his letter: His Majesty, with the qualification of divine and powerful, was born with a great destiny, defeated Cao Cao in Wulin, defeated Liu Bei in Xiling, and gave birth to Xuan Guan Yu in Jingzhou. These three defeated people are contemporary heroes, but they were all broken by His Majesty.

古文：圣化所绥，万里草偃，方荡平华夏，总一大猷。今不忍小忿而发雷霆之怒，违垂堂之戒，轻万乘之重，此臣之所惑也。
现代文：圣明的教化安抚四方，风行万里而小草为之倾倒，如今，正临荡平中原、统一天下之时，现在不能忍住小恨而发出雷霆万钧般怒火，是违背了 千金之子，坐不垂堂 的古训，轻视自己为帝王的贵重身分，这是我感到惑的。
English: It is puzzling to me that now, when the enlightenment and pacification of the Holy Light has pacified the four quarters, and it has been popular for thousands of miles, and the grass has fallen for it. Now, when it is time to level the Central Plains and unify the world, it is not possible to hold back small hatreds and now it is angry like a thunderbolt. It is a violation of the ancient teachings of the son of a thousand golds, who does not bow down, and despises his precious status as an emperor.

古文：臣闻之，行万里者不中道而辍足，图四海者不怀细以害大。
现代文：我听说，行万里路的人不在中途止步，立志取得天下的人不对小事耿耿于怀而危害大局。
English: I have heard that those who travel a thousand miles do not stop in the middle of the road, and those who are determined to win the world do not worry about small things and harm the overall situation.

古文：强寇在境，荒服未庭，陛下乘桴远征，必致闚，戚至而忧，悔之无及。
现代文：强大的敌人压境，荒远之地还没有臣服，陛下乘船远征，必然给敌人以可乘之机，事到临头才去忧虑，恐怕后悔都来不及了。
English: With a powerful enemy bearing down on the frontier, and a desolate land yet to be conquered, Your Majesty's expedition by ship is bound to give the enemy an opportunity to take advantage of. Don't worry until it's too late. I'm afraid it's too late to regret.

古文：若使大事时捷，则渊不讨自服。
现代文：如能使国家大事及时报捷，那么分孙渊不用征讨自己就会归顺。
English: If the country's major events can be reported in a timely manner, then the Branch Sunyuan will submit without having to fight for itself.

古文：今乃远惜辽东众之与马，奈何独欲捐江东万安之本业而不惜乎！ 
现代文：而今陛下还恋惜远在辽东的人口和马匹，怎么单单要舍弃江东万安的根本基业而不珍惜呢？ 
English: But now, His Majesty still pines for the people and horses far away in Liaodong. How can He abandon the fundamental foundation of the East River without treasuring it?

古文：尚书仆射薛综上疏曰： 昔汉元帝欲御楼船，薛广德请刎颈以血染车。
现代文：尚书仆射薛综上书说： 从前汉元帝想乘楼船，薛广德请求自刎，以鲜血染车来阻止。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant Sho Xue Zi wrote: Once upon a time, Emperor Han Yuan wanted to take a boat ride. Xue Guangde asked him to commit suicide and stained the car with blood to stop him.

古文：何则？
现代文：为针么？
English: Why is that?

古文：水火之险至危，非帝王所宜涉也。
现代文：因为水火无情，至危至险，不是帝王所应北临之地。
English: Because water and fire are the most dangerous things, not something an emperor should touch.

古文：今辽东戎貊小国，无城隍之固，备御之术，器械铢钝，犬羊无政，往必禽克，诚如明诏。
现代文：今辽东蛮戒小国，没有坚固的城堡，防御的战术，兵器轻钝，如犬、羊一般不懂治国，前去征伐必胜无疑，正如陛下诏书所言。
English: Today, Liaodong is a small country without a strong castle, defensive tactics, and blunt weapons. Like dogs and sheep, they generally do not know how to govern the country. As His Majesty's edict said, there is no doubt that they will conquer.

古文：然其方土寒埆，谷稼不殖，民习鞍马，转徙无常，卒闻大军之至，自度不敌，鸟惊兽骇，长驱奔窜，一人匹马，不可得见，虽获空地，守之无益，此不可一也。
现代文：然而其国土狭小、贫瘠严寒，庄稼不能生长，民众熟习骑马，流动无常，忽听大军来到，自量抵抗不过，如鸟惊兽骇，四散远逃，我们会连一人一马都见不到，虽然得到了这块空旷地方，但守住它毫无益处，这是不可出兵的原因之一。
English: However, its land is small, barren and cold, crops cannot grow, the people are familiar with riding horses, the flow is fickle, they suddenly hear a large army coming, but they can't resist on their own, like a bird startled by a beast, they scatter far and wide, we can't even see a person or a horse. Although we have obtained this open space, it is useless to keep it, which is one of the reasons why we can't send troops.

古文：加又洪流混滉漾，有成山之难，海行无常，风波难免，倏忽之间，人船异势，虽有尧、舜之德，智无所施，贲、育之勇，力不得设，此不可二也。
现代文：加之大海无际，洪流深广，已有成山之难，海上肮行变化无常，大风大浪难以避免，转眼之间，连人带船全被吞没，即使有尧舜的德行和智慧，也无法施展，有孟贲、夏育的勇敢和力量，也不能发挥，这是不可出兵的原因之二。
English: In addition, the sea is boundless, the torrent is deep and wide, the mountain has become a mountain, the sea is dirty and changeable, the wind and waves are unavoidable, and in a blink of an eye, even the people and the ship are all swallowed up. Even if you have the virtue and wisdom of a dragonfly, you can't exert it. The bravery and strength of Meng Xuan and Xia Yu can't be exerted. This is the second reason why you can't send troops.

古文：加以郁雾冥其上，碱水蒸其下，善生流肿，转相洿染，凡行海者，稀无斯患，此不可三也。
现代文：还有，浓郁的云雾罩在天空，咸苦的海水蒸发在下面，极易使人生脚气病，互相传染，凡在海上肮行的人，很少有人不生此病，这是不可出兵的原因之三。
English: In addition, thick clouds and fog cover the sky, and salty and bitter seawater evaporates below. It is very easy to make people suffer from beriberi and infect each other. Those who are dirty at sea rarely do not suffer from this disease. This is one of the three reasons why soldiers cannot be sent out.

古文：天生神圣，当乘时平乱，康此民物。
现代文：上天生出神明的圣人，当运用时机削平动乱，使人民康盛，社会富足。
English: The saints who are born of God by nature should use the opportunity to smooth out the turmoil, make the people prosperous and the society rich.

古文：今逆虏将灭，海内垂定，乃违必然之图，寻至危之阻，忽九州之固，肆一朝之忿，既非社稷之重计，又开辟以来所未尝有，斯诚群僚所以倾身侧息，食不甘味，寝不安席者也。 
现代文：而今敌逆就要灭除，海内将要平安，却要违背既定的大政方略，自寻至危的困阻，忽视国家的安危，发泄一时的气愤，既不是有利于国家的大计，又是开天辟地以来未曾有过的举动，实在是群臣所以坐卧不安，吃饭不香，睡觉不稳的原因。 
English: But now that the enemy is to be eliminated and the country is to enjoy peace at sea, it is necessary to go against the established grand political strategy, to seek out the most dangerous obstacles, to ignore the country's security, and to vent momentary anger. This is neither a good plan for the country, nor a move that has not been seen since the beginning of time. It is really the reason why the ministers are restless, do not eat well, and do not sleep well.

古文：选曹尚书陆瑁上疏曰： 北寇与国，壤地连接，苟有间隙，应机而至。
现代文：选曹尚南瑁上书说： 北方的魏与我国土地相接，如果稍有空隙，就会乘机而入。
English: Zeng Cao Shang Nanjun wrote: The northern Wei is adjacent to our land, if there is a slight gap, it will take the opportunity to enter.

古文：夫所以为越海求马，曲意于渊者，为赴目前之急，除腹心之疾也。
现代文：我们所以要渡越大海，求购马匹，违心结交孙渊的原因，是为解决眼前的马荒之急，除掉魏这一心腹之患。
English: The reason why we want to cross the sea, buy horses, and make friends with Sun Yuan against our will is to solve the urgent horse shortage at hand and get rid of Wei, a close confidant.

古文：而更弃本追末，捐近治远，忿以改规，激以动众，斯乃猾虏所愿闻，非大吴之至计也。
现代文：现在反而要舍本求末，舍近求远，因一时气忿改变规划，一时激动兴师动众，这才是狡猾的敌人愿意听到的，而绝不是我大吴最好计策。
English: Now, on the contrary, it is necessary to abandon the principle and seek the end, abandon the near and seek the far, change the plan because of anger, and excite the teachers and motivate the masses. This is what the cunning enemy wants to hear, but it is by no means my best strategy.

古文：又兵家之术，以功役相疲，劳逸相待，得失之间，所觉辄多。且沓渚去渊，道里尚远，今到其岸，兵势三分，使强者进取，次当守船，又次运粮，行人虽多，难得悉用。
现代文：还有，兵家战术，在于使敌人疲劳，以逸待劳，得失之间，察觉与不察觉则大不相同，况且沓渚县离公孙渊路途还很遥远，如大军到达，也要把兵力一分为三，让体格强壮的士兵向前进攻，稍差的守卫船舰，最差的运送粮食。大军人数虽然很多，但难以全部用上。
English: In addition, the soldiers' tactics are to make the enemy tired, to make use of the shortcomings to wait for labor, and the difference between gains and losses is very different between noticing and not noticing. Moreover, Gongsunyuan is still far away from Gongsunyuan. If a large army arrives, it is also necessary to divide the troops into three, so that the strong soldiers can advance and attack, the slightly worse ones can guard the ships, and the worst ones can transport grain. Although the number of large troops is large, it is difficult to use all of them.

古文：加以单步负粮，经远深入，贼地多马，邀截无常。
现代文：加之靠步行背粮，长途跋涉深入故境，那一带战马众多，能够随时截击我们。
English: In addition, relying on walking rations, trekking deep into the old territory, there are many war horses in that area, which can intercept us at any time.

古文：若渊狙诈，与北未绝，动众之日，脣齿相济；若实孑然无所凭赖，其畏怖远迸，或难卒灭使天诛稽于朔野，山虏承间而起，恐非万安之长虑也！ 
现代文：如果公孙渊狡猾奸许，与魏并未断绝关系，我们大军出动之日，他们就会如同唇齿，互相援助；如果确实孤立无援，因为惧怕而远逃，或许也难很快消灭，我们对他的惩罚及于北方荒野，而国内的山越叛民乘机四起，这恐怕也不是万全的长久这策。 
English: If Gongsun Yuan is cunning and treacherous, and has not severed relations with Wei, the day our army sets out, they will be like lips and teeth, helping each other; if he is indeed alone and helpless, fleeing far away because of fear, it may not be possible to quickly eliminate him, and our punishment will extend to the northern wilderness, while the domestic Shan Yue rebels take advantage of the opportunity to move around, which is probably not a perfect long-term strategy.

古文：吴主未许。
现代文：吴王没有同意。
English: Wu Wang did not agree.

古文：瑁重上疏曰： 夫兵革者，固前代所以诛暴乱、威四夷也。
现代文：陆瑁再次上书说： 战争，固然中古代用来诛杀暴乱、威镇四方蛮夷的行动。
English: Lu Yao wrote again, saying: War, of course, is an action used in ancient times to fight and kill rioters and to subdue barbarians in all directions.

古文：然其役皆在奸雄已除，天下无事，从容庙堂之上，以馀议议之耳。
现代文：然而战事要在奸雄已经灭除，天下太平无事，在朝廷之上从从容容地充分讨论之后才可进行。
English: However, the war can only be carried out after the villain has been eliminated, the world is at peace, and the imperial court has fully discussed it in a relaxed manner.

古文：至于中夏鼎沸，九域盘互之时，率须深根固本，爱力惜费，未有正于此时舍近治远，以疲军旅者也。昔尉佗叛逆，僭号称帝，于时天下乂安，百姓康阜，然汉文犹以远征不易，告喻而已。
现代文：至于在中原战乱不断，九州之地各自盘踞相互为敌之时，大都须将本国的根本大业加深加固，爱护人力，珍惜财物，没有偏在这时舍近治远，使军队疲的，从前尉佗叛逆，僭号称帝，当时天下太平，百姓安居富足，可是汉文帝仍然认为出兵远征并不容易，只是派陆贾前去劝喻而已。
English: As for the time when the Central Plains were in constant turmoil and the lands of Kyushu were entrenched against each other, most of them had to deepen and strengthen the fundamental cause of their country, cherish manpower, and cherish property. They did not hesitate to go near and far at this time, so that the army was tired, the lieutenants were rebellious, and the emperor was proclaimed. At that time, the world was peaceful, and the people lived in peace and prosperity. However, Emperor Hanwen still thought that it was not easy to send troops on an expedition, but only sent Lu Jia forward to persuade.

古文：今凶桀未殄，疆场犹警，未宜以渊为先。
现代文：而今首恶元凶还未消灭，边境地区不断报警，不宜先去讨伐公孙渊。
English: But now the main culprit has not been eliminated, and the border areas are constantly alerting the police. It is not appropriate to go to fight Gongsunyuan first.

古文：愿陛下抑威任计，暂宁六师，潜神嘿规，以为后图，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：愿陛下抑制盛怒，任用计谋，暂息六军，秘密策划，以后再去图取，则天下万幸！ 
English: May His Majesty restrain his rage, employ stratagems, suspend the Six Armies, plan in secret, and then go to the drawing board, and all will be well!

古文：吴主乃止。
现代文：吴王这才罢休。
English: King Wu finally gave up.

古文：吴主数遣人慰谢张昭，昭因不起。
现代文：吴王多次派人慰问张昭，向他道歉，张昭始终不出来。
English: Wu Wang repeatedly sent people to offer condolences to Zhang Zhao and apologize to him, but Zhang Zhao still did not come out.

古文：吴主因出，过其门呼昭，昭辞疾笃。
现代文：吴王有次出宫，经过张昭家门呼唤他，张昭声答病重。
English: King Wu once went out of the palace and called him through Zhang Zhao's door. Zhang Zhao replied that he was seriously ill.

古文：吴主烧其门，欲以恐之，昭亦不出。
现代文：吴王让人火烧张昭家门，想要恐吓张昭，张昭也不出来。
English: King Wu had the door of Zhang Zhao's house set on fire in an attempt to intimidate him, and Zhang Zhao did not come out.

古文：吴主使人灭火，住门良久。昭诸子共扶昭起，吴主载以还宫，深自克责。昭不得已，然后朝会。
现代文：吴王便让人把火来掉，在门中长时间等侯，张昭几个儿子一齐扶张昭起床，吴王自己的车把他拉回宫，深切地责备自己，张昭不得已，然后参加朝会。
English: King Wu then had the fire put out and waited for a long time in the middle of the door. Zhang Zhao's several sons helped Zhang Zhao get up. King Wu's own car pulled him back to the palace and he deeply reproached himself. Zhang Zhao was forced to attend the imperial court meeting.

古文：初，张弥、许晏等至襄平，公孙渊欲图之，乃先分散其吏兵，中使秦旦、张群、杜德、黄强等及吏兵六十人置玄菟。
现代文：最初，张弥、许晏等到达辽东襄平，公孙渊打算消灭他们，于是拆散他们的官兵，把中使秦旦、张群、杜德、黄强等及宫兵六十人安置在玄菟。
English: At first, Zhang Mi, Xu Qi and others arrived in Xiangping, East Liaodong. Gongsun Yuan intended to exterminate them, so he dispersed their officers and soldiers, and placed the middle envoys Qin Dan, Zhang Qun, Du De, Huang Qiang and others, as well as sixty palace soldiers, in Xuan Qi.

古文：玄菟在辽东北二百里，太守王赞，领户二百，旦等皆舍于民家，仰其饮食，积四十许日。
现代文：玄菟在辽东以北二百里，太守王赞管辖二百户人家。秦旦等都居住在民家，靠他们供给饮食，住了四十多天。
English: Xuanzang is two hundred miles north of Liaodong, and the eunuch Wang Zan is in charge of two hundred households. Qin Dan and others all lived in private homes, relying on them to provide meals, and lived for more than forty days.

古文：旦与群等议曰： 吾人远辱国命，自弃于此，与死无异。
现代文：秦旦与张群等商议说： 我们远在异域，辜负了使命，被弃于此地，与死无异。
English: Qin Dan and Zhang Qun deliberated and said: We are far away in a foreign land, we have failed in our mission, and being abandoned here is tantamount to death.

古文：今观此郡，形势甚弱，若一旦同心，焚烧城郭，杀其长吏，为国报耻，然后伏死，足以无恨。
现代文：现观察此郡，防守十分薄弱，如果我们一旦齐心，放火焚烧城廓，杀死他们的官吏，为国家报仇雪耻，然后一死，也足以无恨了。
English: Looking at this county now, the defenses are very weak. If we all set fire to the city walls, kill their officials, avenge the country, and then die, there will be no hatred.

古文：孰与偷生苟活，长为囚虏乎！ 
现代文：这比苟且偷生，长久地做囚犯活着怎么样！ 
English: That's better than living like a prisoner for a long time!

古文：群等然之。
现代文：张群等都赞成。
English: Zhang Qun and others all agree.

古文：于是阴相结约，当用八月十九日夜发。
现代文：于是暗中相互约定，当在八月十九日夜里起事。
English: It was therefore secretly agreed that the uprising would take place on the night of 19 August.

古文：其日中时，为郡中张松所告，赞便会士众，闭城门，旦、群、德、强皆逾城得走。
现代文：那天中午，被郡中人张松告密，王赞便集合起部众，关闭城门，秦旦、张群、杜德、黄强全都爬过城墙逃出。
English: At noon that day, after being tipped off by Zhang Song, a person from the county, Wang Zan gathered his followers and closed the city gate. Qin Dan, Zhang Qun, Du De and Huang Qiang all climbed over the city wall to escape.

古文：时群病疽创著膝，不及辈旅，德常扶接与俱，崎岖山谷，行六七百里，创益困，不复能前，卧草中，相守悲泣。
现代文：当时张群膝盖生疮，跟不上别人，杜德常常搀扶照应他一起走，山路程崎岖不平，走出六七百里，伤势更加严重，不能再向前走，躺在草丛中，互相守悲伤流泪。
English: At that time, Zhang Qun's knees were sore and he could not keep up with others. Du De often helped him to walk with him. The mountain path was bumpy and bumpy. After walking six or seven hundred miles, the injury was more serious. He could no longer walk forward. He lay in the grass and wept with sadness.

古文：群曰： 吾不幸创甚，死亡无日，卿诸人宜速进道，冀有所达，空相守俱死于穷谷之中，何益也！ 
现代文：张群说： 我不幸伤得厉害，离死没儿天了，你们几位应该加紧向前赶路，指望有个去处，白白地守着我都会死在深山穷谷之中，有什么益处！ 
English: Zhang Qun said: I am unfortunately badly injured, and I am days away from death. Several of you should hurry forward, hoping to have a place to go. If you guard me in vain, you will all die in the depths of the mountains and valleys. What is the use?

古文：德曰： 万里流离，死生共之，不忍相委。 
现代文：杜德说： 万里流离，生死与共，怎么能忍心抛弃你！ 
English: Dude said, "I've traveled thousands of miles, I've been with you through life and death, how can I bear to abandon you!"

古文：于是推旦、强使前，德独留守群，采菜果食之。
现代文：于是推出秦旦、黄强在前先行，杜德一人留守张群，采集野菜、山果给他吃。
English: As a result, Qin Dan and Huang Qiang were sent ahead, leaving Dud alone with Zhang Qun to collect vegetables and berries for him to eat.

古文：旦、强别数日，得达句丽，因宣吴主诏于句丽王位宫及其主簿，给言有赐，为辽东所劫夺。
现代文：秦旦、杜德离开了几天，到达高句丽国，随机宣称吴王给高句丽王位宫及其主簿颁下诏书，谎称赏有赐品，都被辽东所劫掠。
English: Qin Dan and Du De left for a few days and arrived in Goguryeo. They randomly announced that King Wu had issued an edict to the Goguryeo Throne Palace and its main book, falsely claiming that there were gifts, all of which were looted by Liaodong.

古文：位宫等大喜，即受诏，命使人随旦还迎群、德，遣皁衣二十五人，送旦等还吴，奉表称臣，贡貂皮千枚，鹖鸡皮十具。
现代文：位宫等非常高兴，随即受诏，下令使人跟随秦旦返回迎接张群，又派遣差役二十五人，护送秦旦等返回吴国，上表称臣，进贡貂皮一千张，鸡皮十件。
English: Wigu and others were very happy, and immediately received the imperial edict, ordering people to follow Qin Dan to return to meet Zhang Qun, and dispatching twenty-five guards to escort Qin Dan and others back to Wuxi, the above table was called a minister, and the tribute was one thousand mink skins and ten chicken skins.

古文：旦等见吴主，悲喜不能自胜。吴主壮之，皆拜校尉。
现代文：秦旦等见到吴王，悲喜交集，不能自制，吴王也被他们感动，都提升为校尉。
English: Qin Dan and others could not control themselves when they saw Wu Wang, who was overcome with a mixture of joy and sorrow. Wu Wang was also moved by them, and they were all promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：是岁，吴主出兵欲围新城，以其远水，积二十馀日，不敢下船。
现代文：这一年，吴王出动大军打算围攻新城，但因远离水域，停泊二十多天，不敢下船上岸。
English: This year, King Wu sent out a large army to besiege the new city, but because it was far from the water and anchored for more than twenty days, he did not dare to go ashore.

古文：满宠谓诸将曰： 孙权得吾移城，必于其众中有自大之言。今大举来，欲要一切之功，虽不敢至，必当上岸耀兵以示有馀。 
现代文：满宠对将领们说： 孙权得知我们迁移城址，必定在他的部众中说了狂妄自大的话，如今大举出兵而来，是想求得一时之功，虽然不敢到城前攻击，也必当上岸炫耀武力，显示实力有余。 
English: Manchong said to the generals, "When Sun Quan learned that we were moving the site of the city, he must have uttered arrogant words among his subordinates. Now he has come with a large number of soldiers, hoping to gain a moment's merit. Although he does not dare to attack in front of the city, he will go ashore to show off his strength and show that he has more than enough power."

古文：乃潜遣步骑六千，伏肥水隐处以待之。
现代文：于是秘密派遣步、骑兵六千人，埋伏在肥水隐蔽的地方等待。
English: So he secretly sent six thousand men on foot and horseback to wait in ambush at the hidden place of Fertile Waters.

古文：吴主果上岸耀兵，宠伏军卒起击之，斩首数百，或有赴水死者。
现代文：吴王果然率军上岸炫耀，满宠伏兵突然起而袭击，斩杀吴兵数百，吴兵中也有跳入水中淹死的。
English: The king of Wu led his army ashore to show off, and the ambushed soldiers suddenly attacked, killing hundreds of Wu soldiers. Some of the Wu soldiers also jumped into the water and drowned.

古文：吴主又使全综攻六安，亦不克。
现代文：吴王又派全琮攻打六安，也没能攻下。
English: King Wu also sent Quanzhang to attack Liu'an, but failed to capture it.

古文：蜀庲降都督张翼，用法严峻，南夷豪帅刘胄叛。
现代文：蜀国降都督张翼执法严峻，南方夷人首领刘胄起兵叛乱。
English: The governor of the surrendered capital of Shu, Zhang Ying, enforced the law severely, and the leader of the southern barbarians, Liu Xuan, started a mutiny.

古文：丞相亮以参军巴西马忠代翼，召翼令还。
现代文：丞相诸葛亮命参军巴西人马忠接替张翼，调张翼返回。
English: The chancellor Zhuge Liang was ordered to join the army, the Brazilian Ma Zhong succeeded Zhang Ying, and Zhang Ying returned.

古文：其人谓翼宜速归即罪。翼曰： 不然，吾以蛮夷蠢动，不称职，故还耳。
现代文：他的部下告诉张翼应即速返归接受处罚，张翼说： 不对，我是因为蛮夷叛乱，没有能力平息，因此被召回。
English: His subordinates told Zhang Ying that he should return immediately to accept the punishment. Zhang Ying said: No, I was recalled because I was unable to quell the barbarian rebellion.

古文：然代人未至，吾方临战场，当运粮积谷，为灭贼之资，岂可以黜退之故而废公家之务乎！ 
现代文：可是，接替我的人还没有到达，而我正身临战场，应当转运粮食积存谷米，作为消灭叛敌的资本，怎么可以因罢黜的缘故而使国家的军务荒废呢？ 
English: However, my successor has not yet arrived, and I am on the verge of the battlefield, and grain should be transported and stored as capital for the destruction of the enemy. How can the country's military affairs be wasted because of the dismissal?

古文：于是统摄不懈，代到乃发。
现代文：于是统筹兼理毫不松懈，马忠抵达后才出发返回。
English: As a result, the co-ordinator did not relax, and Ma Zhong did not leave until he arrived.

古文：马忠因其成基，破胄，斩之。
现代文：马忠利用张翼打下的基础，击败刘胄，并杀了他。
English: Ma Zhong used the foundation laid by Zhang Ying to defeat Liu Xuan and kill him.

古文：诸葛亮劝农讲武，作木牛、流马，运米集斜谷口，治斜谷邸阁；息民休士，三年而后用之。
现代文：诸葛亮鼓励发展农业，训练军队，制作木牛、流马为运载工具，运粮集存在斜谷口，修整斜谷屯积军粮和物资的仓库；百姓和士兵得以休息，前后三年，才动用他们。
English: Zhuge Liang encouraged the development of agriculture, trained the army, made wooden oxen and horses as means of transport, stored grain at the mouth of the valley, and repaired the warehouses of grain and supplies in the valley. The people and soldiers were able to rest for three years before using them.

古文：烈祖明皇帝中之上青龙二年
现代文：青龙二年
English: The Year of the Dragon

古文：春，二月，亮悉大众十万由斜谷入寇，遣使约吴同时大举。
现代文：春季，二月，诸葛亮倾十万大军从斜谷出兵攻魏，并派遣使节前往吴国相约同时大举出兵。
English: In the spring, in February, Zhuge Liang sent a hundred thousand troops from the valley to attack Wei, and sent envoys to Wu to make an appointment and send troops.

古文：三月，庚寅，山阳公卒，帝素服发丧。
现代文：三月，庚寅，山阳公刘协去世，魏明帝身穿素服发丧。
English: In March, Gyeongin, Sanyanggong Liu Xie passed away, and Wei Mingdi, dressed in plain clothes, went into mourning.

古文：己酉，大赦。
现代文：已酉，大赦天下。
English: On the 25th, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：夏，四月，大疫。
现代文：夏季，四月，流行瘟疫。
English: Summer, April, the plague.

古文：崇华殿灾。
现代文：洛阳崇华殿发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in Luoyang's Chonghua Palace.

古文：诸葛亮至郿，军于渭水之南。
现代文：诸葛亮到达县，大军驻扎在渭水的南面。
English: Zhuge Liang arrived in the county, and a large army was stationed in the south of Surabaya.

古文：司马懿引军渡渭，背水为垒拒之，谓诸将曰： 亮若出武功，依山而东，诚为可忧；若西上五丈原，诸将无事矣。 
现代文：司马懿率领军队渡过渭水，背水立营抵御诸葛亮，对将领们说： 诸葛亮如果从武功出兵，依山而往东，确实可怕；如果向西前往五丈原，将领们就没事了。 
English: Sima Yu led the army across the Surabaya River and set up a camp against Zhuge Liang, saying to the generals: "If Zhuge Liang sends troops from the martial arts and goes east along the mountain, it will be really terrible; if he goes west to the Wuzhen Plain, the generals will be fine."

古文：亮果屯五丈原。
现代文：诸葛亮果然驻扎在五丈原。
English: Zhuge Liang was indeed stationed in Wuzhen.

古文：雍州刺史郭淮言于懿曰： 亮必争北原，宜先据之。 
现代文：雍州刺史郭淮对司马懿说： 诸葛亮肯定争夺北原，应当先去占据它。 
English: Guo Huai, the chief historian of Yongzhou, said to Sima Yao: Zhuge Liang is definitely competing for the Northern Plains, he should occupy it first.

古文：议者多谓不然，淮曰： 若亮跨渭登原，连兵北山，隔绝陇道，摇荡民夷，此非国之利也。 
现代文：议论的人多数都说不必这样，郭淮说： 如果诸葛亮跨过渭水登上北原，和北山连兵，断绝长安通往陇西的道路，使百姓和羌人动荡不安，这对国家是不利的。 
English: Guo Huai said: "If Zhuge Liang crosses the Surabaya River to the North Plains and joins forces with the North Mountain Company to cut off the road from Chang'an to the west of Shaanxi, making the people of Chang'an and the people of Shaanxi restless and uneasy, this will be detrimental to the country.

古文：懿乃使淮屯北原。
现代文：司马懿便郭淮驻防在北原。
English: Sima Qian stationed Guo Huai in the North Plains.

古文：堑垒未成，汉兵大至，淮逆击却之。
现代文：营垒还没有筑成，蜀炽大部队已经到来，郭淮迎战，击退了蜀军。
English: The camp has not yet been built, the Shu army has already arrived, and Guo Huai has fought and repulsed the Shu army.

古文：亮以前者数出，皆以运粮不继，使己志不伸，乃分兵屯田为久驻之基，耕者杂于渭滨居民之间，而百姓安堵，军无私焉。
现代文：诸葛亮因为前几次出兵，都是由于运粮跟不上，使自己的志向不能伸展，就分出部队实行屯田，作为长期驻军的基础，屯田的士兵和渭水之滨居民杂处在一起，而百姓安居乐业，蜀军并无私弊。
English: Zhuge Liang, because of the previous troop dispatches, was unable to keep up with the grain transportation, so that his aspirations could not be extended. He separated the troops to carry out the military garrison, as the basis for a long-term garrison. The soldiers of the military garrison and the residents of the coast of Surabaya were together, and the people lived and worked in peace. The Shu army had no selfish disadvantages.

古文：五月，吴主入居巢湖口，向合肥新城，众号十万；又遣陆逊、诸葛瑾将万馀人入江夏、沔口，向襄阳；将军孙韶、张承入淮，向广陵、淮阴。
现代文：五月，吴王率军信驻巢湖口，直指合肥新城，号称十万大军；又派遣陆逊、诸葛瑾统率一万余人进入江夏、沔口，进指襄阳；将军孙韶、张承进入淮河，直指广陵、淮阴。
English: In May, Wu Wang led the military letter stationed in Chaohukou, pointing directly to Hefei New City, and was known as the 100,000-strong army; he also sent Lu Xun and Zhuge Li, leading more than 10,000 people, into Jiangxia and Hukou, pointing to Xiangyang; generals Sun Wei and Zhang Cheng entered the Huai River, pointing directly to Guangling and Huaiyin.

古文：六月，满宠欲率诸军救新城，殄夷将军田豫曰： 贼悉众大举，非图小利，欲质新城以致大军耳。
现代文：六月，满宠想要率领各路大军救援新城，殄夷将军田豫说： 敌人倾巢动，大举进攻，不是为图小利，而是打算以新城为钓饵，引诱我大军前来。
English: In June, when Manchong wanted to lead a large army to rescue Xincheng, General Tian Yu of the Qi said, "The enemy has made a full-scale attack, not to make a small profit, but to use Xincheng as a bait to lure our army to come.

古文：宜听使攻城，挫其锐气，不当与争锋也。城不可拔，众必罢怠；罢怠然后击之，可大克也。
现代文：应当听任仓们攻打新城，挫伤其锐气，不应与之争战以决胜负，城攻不下，士兵必然疲怠；待他们疲怠后再攻击，可以大获全胜。
English: It is necessary to let the storehouses attack the new city and deflate its spirit, and it is not necessary to fight with it to decide whether to win or lose. If the city cannot be attacked, the soldiers will inevitably be tired; if they are tired and then attack, they can win a great victory.

古文：若贼见计，必不攻城，势将自走。
现代文：如果敌人看出这一计策，必不再攻城，势必自行撤退。
English: If the enemy had foreseen this, they would not have attacked the city, but would have retreated.

古文：若便进兵，适入其计矣。 
现代文：如果我们马上进军，正中了他们的奸计。 
English: If we go in now, we'll be playing right into their hands.

古文：时东方吏士皆分休，宠表请召中军兵，并召所休将士，须集击之。
现代文：此时，在东方的部队正轮番休假，满宠上表请征召中军兵，并征召休假的将士，集中力量迎战。
English: At this time, the troops in the East were taking turns to take a vacation, and the table was full of petitions to recruit Chinese soldiers, and to recruit soldiers on vacation, to concentrate on the war.

古文：散骑常侍广平刘邵议以为： 贼众新至，心专气锐，宠以少人自战其地，若便进击，必不能制。
现代文：散骑常侍广平人刘劭商议时认为： 敌军人数众多，而且刚刚来到，意志专一，士气旺盛，满宠因守军人少又在自己防地作战，即使出击，步定不能制胜敌军。
English: Liu Wei, a knight-errant from Guangping who often served as a knight-errant, thought during the discussion: The enemy forces are numerous, and they have just arrived. They are single-minded and have strong morale. Due to the small number of defending soldiers, they are also fighting on their own defense. Even if they attack, they will not be able to defeat the enemy forces.

古文：宠请待兵，未有所失也，以为可先遣步兵五千，精骑三千，先军前发，扬声进道，震曜形势。
现代文：他请求援军，没什么过失。我认为可以先派遣步兵五千，精骑兵三千，做为先头出发，扬言从数道进军，造成震慑敌人的形势。
English: He asked for reinforcements, no mistake. I think we can first send five thousand infantry and three thousand elite cavalry, as the first departure, threatening to march from several directions, creating a situation of deterrence to the enemy.

古文：骑到合肥，疏其行队，多其旌鼓，曜兵城下，引出贼后，拟其归路，要其粮道。
现代文：骑兵到达合肥，疏散队列，多布旌旗，多擂战鼓，在城下展示兵力，然后带领部队从敌人背后出现，占其退路，扼其粮道。
English: When the cavalry arrived in Hefei, they would evacuate the queue, march with more banners and drums, show their strength under Hefei City, lead the enemy troops out, and cut off the road for them to return and transport grain.

古文：贼闻大军来，骑断其后，必震怖遁走，不战自破矣。 
现代文：敌人听说我大军前来，骑兵截断了后路，必定震惊而逃，不战自破。 
English: When the enemy heard that our army was coming and that the cavalry had cut off the rear route, they must have been shocked and fled, defeating themselves without a fight.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：明帝采纳子这一建议。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：宠欲拔新城守，致贼寿春，帝不听，曰： 昔汉光武遣兵据略阳，终以破隗嚣，先帝东置合肥，南守襄阳，西固祁山，贼来辄破于三城之下者，地有所必争也。
现代文：满宠想要转移新城守军，引敌人到寿春，明帝不同意，说： 从前汉光武派遣部队占据略阳，终于攻破隗嚣。先帝在东方设置合肥，在南方把守襄阳，在西方固守祁山，贼兵一来就在这三城之下被击败，其原因正是因为它们处于必争之地。
English: Manchong wanted to transfer the new city's defenders and lead the enemy to Shouchun, but Emperor Ming disagreed, saying: In the past, Han Guangwu sent troops to occupy Liaoyang, and finally broke through the clamor. The former emperor set up Hefei in the east, guarded Xiangyang in the south, and held fast to Lushan in the west. Once the robber soldiers were defeated under these three cities, the reason was precisely because they were in a contested area.

古文：纵权攻新城，必不能拔。
现代文：即使权攻打新城，肯定不能攻下。
English: I hope that the generals guarding the city will fight together, and I will personally supervise the division to go to the battle with the Wu Army.

古文：敕诸将坚守，吾将自往征之，比至，恐权走也。 
现代文：命令将士们坚持守住，我将亲自前往征讨。到那时，孙权恐已经逃走。 
English: Needless to say, by the time I arrived in Xincheng, the Wu army had already been defeated!

古文：乃使征蜀护军秦朗督步骑二万助司马懿御诸葛亮，敕懿： 但坚壁拒守以挫其锋，彼进不得志，退无与战，久停则粮尽，虏略无所获，则必走；走而追之，全胜之道也。 
现代文：于是派遣征蜀护军秦朗统率步、骑兵二万人援助事马懿抵御诸葛亮，命令司马懿： 一定要坚守壁垒，不与决战，挫败敌军锋芒，使们们进攻不能得逞，撤退不能交战，停留时间长久，粮食就要耗尽，劫掠也不会有收获，则必撤军。待敌撤退时再去追击，才是全胜之道。 
English: So he dispatched Qin Lang to lead the Shu Protectorate and 20,000 cavalrymen to help Zhima Zhou resist Zhuge Liang, and ordered Sima Zhou: "Be sure to hold on to the barriers, do not fight a decisive battle, defeat the enemy's front line, so that the attack cannot succeed, the retreat cannot fight, the stay time is long, the grain will be exhausted, and the looting will not be fruitful, then the army must withdraw. When the enemy retreats, it is the way to win.

古文：秋，七月，壬寅，帝御龙舟东征。
现代文：秋季，七月明帝亲登龙舟东征。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Ming personally boarded a dragon boat to go to the East.

古文：满宠募壮士焚吴攻具，射杀吴主之弟子泰；又吴吏士多疾病。
现代文：满宠招募壮士焚烧吴国攻城的器械，射死吴王的侄子孙泰，而且吴国官兵多有生病。
English: Manchong recruited strong men to burn the siege equipment of the State of Wu, shot dead the nephew of the King of Wu, Sun Tai, and most of the officers and soldiers of the State of Wu were ill.

古文：帝未至数百里，疑兵先至。
现代文：明帝离吴国驻地数百里时，迷惑敌人的先遣军已先行到达。
English: When Emperor Ming was hundreds of miles away from his residence in the State of Wu, the enemy's advance troops had already arrived.

古文：吴主始谓帝不能出，闻大军至，遂遁，孙韶亦退。
现代文：吴王开始认为明帝不会亲征，听到率大军已到，于是撤走，孙韶也退兵。
English: King Wu began to think that Emperor Ming would not personally enlist. When he heard that a large army had arrived, he withdrew, and Sun Yat-sen also withdrew.

古文：陆逊遣亲人韩扁奉表诣吴主，逻者得之。
现代文：陆逊派遣亲信韩扁携带表章到吴王那里，被魏巡逻的人截获。
English: Lu Xun sent a close confidant, Han Bian, to bring the seal to King Wu, but he was intercepted by Wei patrols.

古文：诸葛瑾闻之甚惧，书与逊云： 大驾已还，贼得韩扁，具知吾阔狭，且水干，宜当急去。 
现代文：诸葛瑾听到消息后非常害怕，写信给陆逊说： 主上已经撤军回去，敌军俘得韩扁，会完全知道我们的虚实，而且河水已干，应当火速撤军。 
English: After hearing the news, Zhuge Liang was very scared and wrote to Lu Xun, saying, "The Lord has withdrawn the troops back, the enemy troops have captured Han Bian, they will fully know our true and false, and the river has dried up, we should withdraw the troops quickly."

古文：逊未答，方催人种葑、豆，与诸将奕棋、射戏如常。
现代文：陆逊未回答，正在催促部众种菜、种豆，和部将下棋射戏同平常一样。
English: Lu Xun did not answer, he was urging his ministers to plant more vegetables and beans, and the ministers were playing chess and jousting as usual.

古文：瑾曰： 伯言多智略，其必当有以。 
现代文：诸葛瑾说： 陆逊足智多谋，他一定有原因。 
English: Zhuge Liang said: Lu Xun is resourceful, he must have a reason.

古文：乃自来见逊。
现代文：于是亲自前来会见陆逊。
English: So I came to meet Lu Xun in person.

古文：逊曰： 贼知大驾已还，无所复忧，得专力于吾。
现代文：陆逊说 贼军知道主上已经回去，再没有什么忧虑的，得以专门用力对付我。
English: Lu Xun said that the bandits knew that the Lord had returned, and they had nothing to worry about, so they could use special force to deal with me.

古文：又已守要害之处，兵将意动，且当自定以安之，施设变术，然后出耳。
现代文：而且他们地住关口要道，我们的兵将心怀恐惧，应当镇定以安军心，再设计权变，然后撤出。
English: Moreover, they have already taken the key points, and our soldiers' morale has been shaken. This requires us to stabilize ourselves in order to stabilize the morale of the military, and then retreat.

古文：今便示退，贼当谓吾怖，仍来相蹙，必败之势也。 
现代文：现在即便表示撤退，贼军必定认为我们害怕了，仍然会来施加压力，我们势所必败。 
English: If we announce that we are withdrawing now, the enemy will think that we are afraid and will come to attack us. This is a lose-lose situation.

古文：乃密与瑾立计，令瑾督舟船，逊悉上兵马以向襄阳城。魏人素惮逊名，遽还赴城。
现代文：于是秘密地与诸葛瑾订下计谋，命令诸葛瑾督领船队，陆逊出动全部兵马以示向襄阳城进发，魏兵素来惧怕陆逊的名声，急忙撤还赶赴襄阳城。
English: Therefore, he secretly made a plan with Zhuge Liang and ordered Zhuge Liang to lead the fleet and Lu Xun to send all the soldiers and horses to show that they were heading for Xiangyang City. The Wei soldiers had always been afraid of Lu Xun's reputation and hurriedly withdrew and rushed to Xiangyang City.

古文：瑾便引船出，逊徐整部伍，张拓声势，步趣船，魏人不敢逼。
现代文：诸葛瑾便率领船队驶出，陆逊从容地整理队伍，故作声势，步行走到船上，魏军不敢逼近。
English: Zhuge Liang then led the fleet to sail out. Lu Xun calmly organized the team, made a pretentious noise, and walked to the ship on foot. The Wei army did not dare to approach.

古文：行到白围，托言往猎，潜遣将军周峻、张梁等击江夏、新市、安陆、石阳，斩获千馀人而还。
现代文：行到白围时，假称停留打猎，秘密派遣将军周峻、张梁等袭击江夏、新市、安陆、石阳，杀死俘获一千人余人而还。
English: When he went to Baiei, pretending to stay for hunting, he secretly sent generals Zhou Jun, Zhang Liang and others to attack Jiangxia, Xinshi, Anlu and Shiyang, killing and capturing more than a thousand people and returning.

古文：群臣以为司马懿方与诸葛亮相守未解，车驾可西幸长安。
现代文：群臣以为司马懿正在同诸葛亮相持不解，明帝可以向西临幸长安。
English: The courtiers were puzzled that Sima Qian was appearing with Zhuge, and thought that Emperor Ming could go west to Chang'an.

古文：帝曰： 权走，亮胆破，大军足以制之，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：明帝说： 孙权已经退走，诸葛亮必然破胆，大军足以制胜，我没有忧虑了。 
English: Emperor Ming said: Sun Quan has already retreated, Zhuge Liang must have lost his courage, a large army is enough to win, I am not worried.

古文：遂进军至寿春，录诸将功，封赏各有差。
现代文：于是进军到寿春，检录各将领的功劳，封官授爵赏赐嘉奖各有不同。
English: Therefore, they marched to Shuchun, catalogued the merits of each general, and knighted the generals with different awards.

古文：八月，壬申，葬汉孝献皇帝于禅陵。
现代文：八月，壬申，在禅陵为汉献帝下葬。
English: In August, Emperor Han Xian was buried in the Zen Mausoleum in Jinshin.

古文：辛巳，帝还许昌。
现代文：辛巳，明帝返回许昌。
English: Soon after, Emperor Ming returned to Xuchang.

古文：司马懿与诸葛亮相守百馀日，亮数挑战，懿不出。
现代文：司马懿同诸葛亮相持了一百多天，诸葛亮多次挑战，司马懿就是不出兵。
English: Sima Yi and Zhuge Liang appeared and held more than a hundred days, Zhuge Liang challenged many times, Sima Yi did not go to war.

古文：亮乃遗懿巾帼妇人之服。
现代文：诸葛亮就把妇女使用的头巾、发饰和衣服送给司马懿，司马懿恼羞成怒，上表请求出战。
English: Zhuge Liang gave Sima Yao the headscarves, hair ornaments and clothes used by women. Sima Yao became angry and asked for permission to go to war.

古文：懿怒，上表请战，帝使卫尉辛毘杖节为军师以制之。
现代文：明帝派遣卫尉辛毗执持符节为军师来节制司马懿的行动。
English: Emperor Ming dispatched the guard officer Xin Pi to carry out the rite for the military division to restrain Sima Yi's actions.

古文：护军姜维谓亮曰： 辛佐治杖节而到，贼不复出矣。 
现代文：护军姜维对诸葛亮说： 辛毗持符节来到，贼军不会再出战了。 
English: Jiang Wei, the escort, said to Zhuge Liang: "When Xin Pi holds the Rune Festival, the thief army will no longer go to war.

古文：亮曰： 彼本无战情，所以固请战者，以示武于其众耳。
现代文：诸葛亮说： 司马懿本来就无心作战，所以一定要请求出战，是向部众表示敢于用武而已。
English: Zhuge Liang said: Sima Yu originally had no intention of fighting, so he must request to go to war. It was just to show his subordinates that he dared to use military force.

古文：将在军，君命有所不受，苟能制吾，岂千里而请战邪！ 
现代文：将领在军中，君主的命令可以不接受，如果他能制胜我军，难道还要远隔千里而请求作战吗？ 
English: As a general in the army, the king's order is unacceptable. If you can really deal with me, why would you go thousands of miles away to fight?

古文：亮遣使者至懿军，懿问其寝食及事之烦简，不问戎事。使者对曰： 诸葛公夙兴夜寐，罚二十已上，皆亲览焉；所啖食不至数升。 
现代文：诸葛亮派遣使节到司马懿军中，司马懿向使者询问诸葛亮的睡眠、饮食和办事多少，不打听军事情况，使者答道： 诸葛公早起晚睡，凡是二十杖以上的责罚，都亲自披阅；所吃的饭食不到几升。 
English: Zhuge Liang sent an envoy to Sima Yi's army. Sima Yi asked the envoy how much Zhuge Liang slept, ate, and worked, without inquiring about the military situation. The envoy replied: Zhuge Liang got up early and went to bed late. He personally read all the punishments of more than twenty rods; the meals he ate were less than a few liters.

古文：懿告人曰： 诸葛孔明食少事烦，其能久乎！ 
现代文：司马懿告诉人说： 诸葛孔明进食少而事务烦，他还能活多久呢！ 
English: Sima Yi told the man, "Zhuge Confucius eats little and is preoccupied with affairs. How long can he live?

古文：亮病笃，汉主使尚书仆射李福省侍，因谘以国家大计。
现代文：诸葛亮病重，汉后主派遣尚书仆射李福前来问候，同时询问国家大事。
English: Zhuge Liang was seriously ill, and the emperor sent Shang Shufu (尚書僕) to greet Li Fu and inquire about national affairs.

古文：福至，与亮语已，别去，数日复还。
现代文：李福来到，诸葛亮谈话完毕，辞别而去，几天之后又回来。
English: Li Fu came, Zhuge Liang finished the conversation, said goodbye and left, and came back a few days later.

古文：亮曰： 孤知君还意，近日言语虽弥日，有所不尽，更来亦决耳。
现代文：诸葛亮说： 我知道您返回来的意图，近来虽然整天谈话，有些事还没有交待，又来听取决定了。
English: Zhuge Liang said: I know your intention to return. Although we have been talking all day recently, there are still some things that have not been communicated. I have come to listen to the decision.

古文：公所问者，公琰其宜也。 
现代文：你所要问的事蒋琬适合。 
English: What you want to ask Jiang Chen is appropriate.

古文：福谢： 前实失不咨请，如公百年后谁可任大事者，故辄还耳。
现代文：李福道歉说： 日前确实不曾询问，如您面年这后，谁可以担负重任，所以就又返回。
English: Li Fu apologized and said, "I didn't really ask who could take on heavy responsibilities after you've been gone for so long, so I'm going back."

古文：乞复请蒋琬之后，谁可任者？ 
现代文：再请问蒋琬之后，谁可承担重任？ 
English: Again, after Chiang Kai-shek, who can shoulder the heavy responsibility?

古文：亮曰： 文伟可以继之。 又问其次，亮不答。
现代文：诸葛亮说： 费可以继任。 又问费这后怎么样？
English: Zhuge Liang said: Fei can succeed. He also asked Fei what will happen after this?

古文：是月，亮卒于军中。长史杨仪整军而出。
现代文：诸亮没有回答。这个月，诸葛亮在军中去世，长史杨仪整顿军队而退。
English: Zhu Liang did not answer. This month, Zhuge Liang died in the army, and the commander Shi Yangyi withdrew to reorganize the army.

古文：百姓奔告司马懿，懿追之。
现代文：百姓跑着去报告司马懿，司马懿追赶汉宫。
English: The common people ran to report to Sima Yi, and Sima Yi chased after the Han Palace.

古文：姜维令仪反旗鸣鼓，若将向懿者，懿敛军退，不敢逼。
现代文：姜维命令杨仪调转战旗方向，擂响战鼓，象是即将对司马懿进攻。司马懿收军后退，不敢向前逼进。
English: Jiang Wei ordered Yang Yi to change the direction of the battle flag and to beat the war drums, as if he was about to attack Sima Yi. Sima Yi withdrew his troops and did not dare to push forward.

古文：于是仪结陈而去，入谷然后发丧。
现代文：于是杨仪结阵离去，进入斜谷之后才发丧。
English: As a result, Yang Yi left in a group and only went into mourning after entering the valley.

古文：百姓为之谚曰： 死诸葛走生仲达。 
现代文：百姓为此事编了一句谚语说： 死诸葛亮吓走活仲达。 
English: The people made up a proverb about this, saying: Death scares away the living.

古文：懿闻之，笑曰： 吾能料生，不能料死故也。 
现代文：司马懿听到后笑着说： 这是我能够意料诸葛亮活着，不能料想诸葛亮已死的缘故。 
English: After hearing this, Sima Yi smiled and said: This is the reason why I can expect Zhuge Liang to be alive, but cannot expect Zhuge Liang to be dead.

古文：懿案行亮之营垒处所，叹曰： 天下奇才也！ 
现代文：司马懿到诸葛亮驻军营垒处所察看，感叹说： 真是天下的奇才啊！ 
English: Sima Yi inspected Zhuge Liang's military camp and said with a sigh: What a genius!

古文：追至赤岸，不及而还。
现代文：追到赤岸，没有追上蜀军而还。
English: They chased them to the Red Bank, but did not catch up with the Shu army.

古文：初，汉前军师魏延，勇猛过人，善养士卒。
现代文：起初，蜀汉前军师魏延，勇猛过人，善待士兵。
English: At first, Wei Yan, the former military instructor of Shu Han, was extremely brave and kind to soldiers.

古文：每随亮出，辄欲请兵万人，与亮异道会于潼关，如韩信故事，亮制而不许。
现代文：每次跟随诸葛亮出兵，总是请求带兵一万人，和诸葛亮分道行军队一样，诸葛亮制止而不许可。
English: Every time Zhuge Liang sent out troops, he always asked for ten thousand soldiers to accompany him. Like Zhuge Liang's troops going their separate ways, Zhuge Liang stopped him and would not allow it.

古文：延常谓亮为怯，叹恨己才用之不尽。
现代文：魏延常说诸葛亮胆怯，叹息抱怨自己的才干没有得到充分发挥。
English: Wei Yan often thought that Zhuge Liang was timid and lamented that his talent could not be exhausted.

古文：杨仪为人干敏，亮每出军，仪常规画分部，筹度粮谷，不稽思虑，斯须便了，军戎节度，取办于仪。
现代文：杨仪为人干练机敏，诸葛亮每次兵，杨仪常常规划调遣部队，筹办粮谷，不假思索，即刻便完，军事节制调度，都依靠杨仪办理。
English: Yang Yi is a capable and astute person. Every time Zhuge Liang sent soldiers, Yang Yi often planned to dispatch troops, prepare grain, without thinking, immediately finished, military restraint scheduling, all rely on Yang Yi to handle.

古文：延性矜高，当时皆避下之，唯仪不假借延，延以为至忿，有如水火。
现代文：魏延性格矜持高傲，当时众将都避而让之，只有杨仪对他不加忍让，魏延最为忿恨，如同水火不能相容。
English: Wei Yan's character was arrogant and haughty. At that time, all generals avoided him, only Yang Yi did not tolerate him. Wei Yan was the most angry, as incompatible as water and fire.

古文：亮深惜二人之才，不忍有所偏废也。
现代文：诸葛亮深深爱惜二人的才干，不忍心偏废任何一方。
English: Zhuge Liang deeply cherished the talents of the two people and could not bear to waste either side.

古文：费祎使吴，吴主醉，问祎曰： 杨仪、魏延，牧竖小人也，虽尝有鸣吠之益于时务，然既已任之，势不得轻。
现代文：费祎出使吴国，吴王酒醉，问费说： 杨仪、魏延是像牧童一样的小人，虽然曾经以鸡鸣狗吠的本事有益于时务，但是既已任用他俩，情势不能轻视。
English: Fei Xuan sent an envoy to Wu, and Wu Wang was drunk. He asked Fei, "Yang Yi and Wei Yan are villains like shepherds. Although they were once useful in current affairs with their ability to make a rooster crow and a dog bark, now that they have been appointed, the situation cannot be taken lightly.

古文：若一朝无诸葛亮，必为祸乱矣。诸君愦愦，不知防虑于此，岂所谓贻厥孙谋乎！ 
现代文：如果一旦诸葛亮不在了，必定发生祸乱，各位糊涂，不知道对此要用心防备，难道这就是所谓谋及子孙吗？ 
English: If once Zhuge Liang is no longer there, a disaster is bound to happen. You are all confused and don't know how to take precautions against this. Is this what is meant by reaching out to one's descendants?

古文：祎对曰： 仪、延之不协，起于私忿耳，而无黥、韩难御之心也。
现代文：费答道： 杨仪、魏延的不和，是起因于私忿，而没有黥布、韩信的叛逆心意。
English: Fei replied: The discord between Yang Yi and Wei Yan was caused by personal grudges, and did not have the traitorous intention of Zibo and Han Xin.

古文：今方扫除强贼，混一函夏，功以才成，业由才广，若舍此不任，防其后患，是犹备有风波而逆废舟楫，非长计也。 
现代文：如今正在扫除强敌，统一华夏，功劳依靠人才来成就，业绩需要人才来扩展，如果舍弃他们而不任用，防备他们造成后患，就如同防备发生风波反倒弃舟楫一样，不是最好的办法。 
English: Today, strong enemies are being swept away, China is being unified, achievements rely on talents, and performance requires talents to expand. If you abandon them and do not appoint them, and prevent them from causing subsequent problems, it is not the best way, just as it is not the best way to prevent the occurrence of storm waves and abandon the boat.

古文：亮病困，与仪及司马费祎等作身殁之后退军节度，令延断后，姜维次之；若延或不从命，军便自发。
现代文：诸葛亮病危的时候，与杨仪和司马费等安排死后退军的调度，命令魏延殿后阻击追敌，姜维作为副将；如果魏延不服从命令，军队便自行出发。
English: When Zhuge Liang was critically ill, he arranged with Yang Yi and Sima Fei the scheduling of the retreat of the army after death, ordered Wei Yan to block the pursuit of the enemy, and Jiang Wei as vice-general; if Wei Yan did not obey the order, the army would set out on its own.

古文：亮卒，仪秘不发丧，令祎往揣延意指。
现代文：诸葛亮去世，杨仪秘而不发丧，让费去魏延处揣度他的意向。
English: Zhuge Liang passed away, Yang Yi did not mourn secretly, and let Fei go to Wei Yan's place to figure out his intention.

古文：延曰： 丞相虽亡，吾自见在。
现代文：魏延说： 丞相虽然去世，还有我在。
English: Wei Yan said: Although the prime minister has passed away, I am still here.

古文：府亲官属，便可将丧还葬，吾当自率诸军击贼；云何以一人死废天下之事邪！
现代文：相府亲信和官属，便可将遗体送还归葬，我当亲自统率各路大军攻击贼军；怎么能因一人死去而废弃天下的大事呢？
English: I should personally lead all the armies to attack the bandits. How can I abandon the great cause of the world because of the death of one person?

古文：且魏延何人，当为杨仪之所部勒，作断后将乎！ 
现代文：何况我魏延是何等人，就应当被杨仪约束，作断后的将军吗？ 
English: Besides, who am I, Wei Yan, that I should be constrained by Yang Yi to be the general after the severance?

古文：自与祎共作行留部分，令祎手书与己连名，告下诸将。
现代文：他就私自和费共同作出撤退和留下的安排，让费亲笔写信连同自己签名，传告下面将领。
English: He made arrangements for me and Fei to withdraw and stay together, and asked Fei to write a letter in his own handwriting with his signature and tell the generals below.

古文：祎绐延曰： 当为君还解杨长史。长史文吏，稀更军事，必不违命也。 
现代文：费欺骗魏延说： 我当为您回去向杨仪解释，杨仪是个文官，很少经历军事，一定不会违抗尊命。 
English: Fei deceived Wei Yan and said, "I should go back and explain to Yang Yi for you. Yang Yi is a civilian official, with little military experience, and he will not disobey your order."

古文：祎出门，奔马而去。
现代文：费出来，策马奔驰而去。
English: out of the way and galloped away.

古文：延寻悔之，已不及矣。
现代文：魏延旋即后悔，但已追不到费了。
English: Wei Yanxuan immediately regretted, but he could not catch up with Fu.

古文：延使人觇仪等，欲案亮成规，诸营相次引军还，延大怒，搀仪未发，率所领径先南归，所过烧绝阁道。
现代文：魏延派人窥探到杨仪等人打算按照诸葛亮既定的计划，各军营依次带领部队撤还。魏延勃然大怒，抢在杨仪没有发兵之前率领所属部队径先南归，所过之处烧绝栈道。
English: Wei Yan sent someone to spy on Yang Yi and others who intended to withdraw the troops in accordance with Zhuge Liang's established plan, with each military camp leading the troops in turn. Wei Yan flew into a rage, leading his troops to return south before Yang Yi did not send troops, and burned the boardwalk wherever he passed.

古文：延、仪各相表叛逆，一日之中，羽檄交至。
现代文：魏延、杨仪各自上表说对方叛逆，一天之内，羽书一并送到都城。
English: Wei Yan and Yang Yi each made a statement that the other side was plotting a rebellion, and within a day the documents were delivered to the imperial court.

古文：汉主以问侍中董允、留府长史蒋琬，琬、允咸保仪而疑延。
现代文：汉后主以此事询问侍中董允、留府长史蒋琬，董允、蒋琬都担保杨仪而怀疑魏延。
English: The empress dowager inquired about this from the chamberlain, Dong Yun, and the governor of the capital, Shi Jiang Yu. Dong Yun and Jiang Yu both vouched for Yang Yi, but suspected Wei Yan.

古文：仪等令槎山通道，昼夜兼行，亦继延后。
现代文：杨仪等人命令砍伐山林打通道路，日夜兼程行进，紧随在魏延之后。
English: Yang Yi and others ordered to cut down the mountains and forests to open the road, marching day and night, following Wei Yan.

古文：延先至，据南谷口，遣兵逆击仪等，仪等令将军何平于前御延。
现代文：魏延先到，占据南谷口派兵迎击杨仪等人，杨仪等命将军何平在前面抵御魏延。
English: Wei Yan arrived first, occupied the south valley entrance and sent troops to meet Yang Yi and others. Yang Yi and other generals He Ping were in front to resist Wei Yan.

古文：平叱先登曰： 公亡，身尚未寒，汝辈何敢乃尔！ 
现代文：何平叱责先登上南谷口的士兵说： 诸葛公死，尸骨未寒，你们怎如此！ 
English: He Ping scolded the soldiers who first ascended the South Valley mouth, saying: Zhuge Gong is dead, his bones are not cold, how can you be so!

古文：延士众知曲在延，莫为用命，皆散。
现代文：魏延的部众知道魏延理亏，不愿为他卖命，都四散逃走。
English: Wei Yan's subordinates knew that Wei Yan was a loser and did not want to work hard for him. They all scattered and fled.

古文：延独与其子数人逃亡，奔汉中，仪遣将马岱追斩之，遂夷延三族。
现代文：魏延独自和他的儿子共几个人逃奔汉中，杨仪派遣将领马岱追杀了他们，最终诛灭魏延三族。
English: Wei Yan alone and several of his sons fled to Hanzhong, and Yang Yi dispatched the general Ma Jun to chase them down and finally exterminate Wei Yan's three tribes.

古文：蒋琬率宿卫诸营赴难北行，行数十里，延死问至，乃还。
现代文：蒋琬率领宿卫各军北上赶汉中，走出几十里，魏延被杀的音讯传来，于是回军。
English: Chiang Kai-shek led the armies of the guards to the north to catch up with Han Zhong, and after walking dozens of miles, the news of Wei Yan's death came, so he returned to the army.

古文：始，延欲杀仪等，冀时论以己代诸葛辅政，故不北降魏而南还击仪，实无反意也。
现代文：开始时，魏延想杀杨仪等人，希望舆论让自己代替诸葛亮辅政，所以不向魏投降而南还攻击场仪，确实没有叛逆之心。
English: At the beginning, Wei Yan wanted to kill Yang Yi and others, hoping that the public opinion would allow him to replace Zhuge Liang as the vice-president, so he did not surrender to Wei, but Nan also attacked Zhan Yi. He really did not have a rebellious heart.

古文：诸军还成都，大赦，谥诸葛亮曰忠武侯。
现代文：各路大军返回成都，大赦天下，赐诸葛亮谥号为忠武侯。
English: All the armies returned to Chengdu, pardoned the world, and gave Zhuge Liang the title of Zhongwu marquis.

古文：初，亮表于汉主曰： 成都有桑八百株，薄田十五顷，子弟衣食自馀饶，臣不别治生以长尺寸。
现代文：当初，诸葛亮曾上表汉王说： 我在成都有桑树八百株，薄田十五顷，家中子弟衣食，自有富裕，我没有别的收入增加家产。
English: At the beginning, Zhuge Liang once said: I have 800 mulberry trees and 15 hectares of thin fields in Chengdu. My children have food and clothing at home, and I am rich. I have no other income to increase my family property.

古文：若臣死之日，不使内有馀帛，外有赢财，以负陛下。 
现代文：臣死去之日，必不让家内有多余的绢帛，家外有多余的钱财，而有负陛下。 
English: When a vassal died, he was not allowed to have too many clothes at home, or too much money and property outside, in order to live up to His Majesty's grace.

古文：卒如其所言。
现代文：最后，果如其所言。
English: In the end, he got what he wanted.

古文：丞相长史张裔常称亮曰： 公赏不遗远，罚不阿近，爵不可以无功取，刑不可以贵势免，此贤愚之所以佥忘其身者也！ 
现代文：丞相长史张裔常称赞诸葛亮： 他行赏不遗忘疏远的人，处罚不宽恕亲近的人，封爵不允许无功者取得，刑责不因为是权贵而免除。这就是贤能者和一般人都能够忘身报国的原因。 
English: The Minister of Justice and Chief Historian Zhang Xuan often praised Zhuge Liang: He rewarded those who did not forget the estranged, punished those who did not forgive those who were close, did not allow those who did not merit to be knighted, and did not exempt those who were powerful from punishment. This is the reason why both the wise and the ordinary people can forget about the country.

古文：陈寿评曰：诸葛亮之为相国也，抚百姓，示仪轨，约官职，从权制，开诚心，布公道；尽忠益时者，虽雠必赏，犯治怠慢者，虽亲必罚，服罪输情者，虽重必释，游辞巧饰者，虽轻必戮；善无微而不赏，恶无纤而不贬；庶事精练，物理其本，循名责实，虚伪不齿。
现代文：陈寿评曰：诸葛亮当丞相，安抚百姓，显示法度准则，限制官员的职权，遵照法令制度，开诚布公，坦白无私。对尽忠而有益于国家的人，即使是仇人也必加奖赏，对违法而怠慢的人，即使是亲近者也必定处罚；对真心诚意认罪悔改的人，即使罪行较重也必定释放，对革命化言巧语进行掩饰的人，即使罪行较轻也必定诛杀；再小的善行也予以赞扬，再小的恶行也予以贬责。精熟各种事物，能从根本上治理，要求名义与实际相符，端端厌恶虚伪。
English: Chen Shourai said: Zhuge Liang as prime minister, appease the people, show the legal standards, restrict the powers of officials, comply with the legal system, be open and honest, and be selfless. For those who are loyal and beneficial to the country, even the enemy must be rewarded, for those who violate the law and neglect, even those who are close to them must be punished; for those who sincerely confess and repent, even if the crime is heavy, they must be released, for those who cover up the revolutionary rhetoric, even if the crime is light, they must be killed; even the smallest good deed should be praised, and the smallest evil deed should be condemned. Skilled in

古文：终于邦域之内，咸畏而爱之，刑政虽峻而无怨者，以其用心平而劝戒明也。
现代文：最终是蜀国上下都对他怀有敬晨爱戴之情，刑罚虽然严苛，但没有怨恨，这是因为他用心公正，而且劝诫分明。
English: In the end, he was held in high esteem throughout Shu. Although the punishment was harsh, there was no resentment. This was because his intentions were just and his exhortations were clear.

古文：可谓识治之良才，管、萧之亚匹矣！
现代文：可以说他是懂得治国之道的卓越人才，与管仲和萧何并列。
English: It can be said that he is an outstanding talent who understands the way of governing the country, and is on a par with Guan Zhong and Xiao He.

古文：初，长水校尉廖立，自谓才名宜为诸葛亮之副，常以职位游散，怏怏怨谤无已，亮废立为民，徙之汶山。
现代文：当初，长水校尉廖立，自以为才气名声适宜作诸葛亮的副手，常因职位调动频繁，抱怨诽谤，怏怏不已。诸葛亮罢免廖立为平民，放逐到汶山。
English: At first, Changshui Lieutenant Colonel Liao Li, who thought that his talent and reputation were suitable to be Zhuge Liang's deputy, often complained about the slander because of frequent post transfers. Zhuge Liang dismissed Liao Li as a civilian and banished him to Wenshan.

古文：及亮卒，立垂泣曰： 吾终为左衽矣！ 
现代文：到诸葛亮去世，廖立流着泪说： 我终生要做野人了！ 
English: When Zhuge Liang died, Liao Li said with tears streaming down his face: I'm going to be a wild man for the rest of my life!

古文：李平闻之，亦发病死。
现代文：李平听到噩耗，也发病而死。
English: When Li Ping heard the bad news, he also fell ill and died.

古文：平常冀亮复收己，得自补复，策后人不能故也。
现代文：这是由于李平常常希望诸葛亮再次收用自己，得以补过，而料想后来的当权者不能这样做的缘故。
English: This was due to the fact that Li Ping often hoped that Zhuge Liang would re-employ him to make up for it, but he thought that the later authorities would not be able to do so.

古文：习凿齿论曰：昔管仲夺伯氏骈邑三百，没齿而无怨言，圣人以为难。
现代文：习凿齿论曰：从前管仲夺了伯氏在骈地的采邑三百多家，伯氏终生没有怨言而已！圣人都取为是件难事。
English: According to the theory of chiseling teeth: Formerly, Guanzhong captured more than three hundred of Bo's mining villages in Handi, and Bo never complained in his life! It is difficult to win over sages.

古文：诸葛亮之使廖立垂泣，李严致死，岂徒无怨言而已哉！
现代文：诸葛亮去世使廖立流泪哭泣，李平发病而死，岂只是没有怨言而已！
English: Zhuge Liang's death made Liao Li shed tears and cry, Li Ping died of illness, is there just no complaint!

古文：夫水至平而邪者取法，鉴至明而丑者忘怒；水鉴之所以能穷物而无怨者，以其无私也。
现代文：水最平正，倾斜的物体会取以为准；镜最明亮，丑陋的人会忘记发怒。平水、明镜所以能使万物原形毕现而不招致怨恨的原因，是由于它们无私。
English: Water is the most level, and oblique objects will be taken for granted; the mirror is the brightest, and ugly people will forget to be angry. The reason why flat water and bright mirrors can make all things appear without causing resentment is because they are selfless.

古文：水鉴无私，犹以免谤，况大人君子怀乐生之心，流矜恕之德，法行于不可不用，刑加乎自犯之罪，爵之而非私，诛之而不怒，天下有不服者乎！
现代文：水、镜无私，还可以因此免遭毁谤，何况大人君子心怀怜惜众生的爱心，广布体恤宽恕的恩德，法在不可不用时才使用，刑罚加于罪犯自己所犯下的罪行，不因怒而诛杀，天下还会有不顺服的人吗？
English: The water and the mirror are selfless, and can therefore be protected from defamation. What's more, the adults and gentlemen have compassion and love for all living beings in their hearts, and the grace of forgiveness is widespread. The law is used only when it is necessary, and the punishment is imposed on the crimes committed by the criminals themselves. They do not fight and kill because of anger. Will there still be people who disobey?

古文：蜀人所在求为诸葛亮立庙，汉主不听。
现代文：蜀地民众请求为诸葛亮建立祭庙，汉王不准。
English: The people of Shu requested that a temple be built for Zhuge Liang, but the Han king did not allow it.

古文：百姓遂因时节私祭之于道陌上，步兵校尉习隆等上言： 请近其墓，立一庙于沔阳，断其私祀。 
现代文：百姓于是随着岁时节令在路上自己祭祀。步兵校尉习隆等向上建议：请在靠近诸葛亮墓地的沔阳，建立一个祭庙，断绝私人祭祀。
English: Therefore, the people sacrificed themselves on the road according to the seasons of the year. Infantry Lieutenant Xi Long and others suggested to the higher-ups: Please build a temple in Shanyang near Zhuge Liang Cemetery and cut off private sacrifices.

古文：汉主从之。
现代文：汉后主同意了。
English: The empress dowager of the Han Dynasty accepted this suggestion.

古文：汉主以左将军吴懿为车骑将军，假节，督汉中；以丞相长史蒋琬为尚书令，总统国事，寻加琬行都护，假节，领益州刺史。
现代文：汉后主任左将军吴懿为车骑将军，授予符节，督领汉中，任丞相长史蒋琬为尚书令，总管国事，不久又给蒋琬加官行都护，授予符节，兼益州刺史。
English: After the Han Dynasty, the director of the left, General Wu Gan, was the general of the chariot and cavalry, and was awarded the festival of the runes. The leader of the Han Dynasty, the prime minister, General Shi Jiang Han, was the chief secretary and in charge of state affairs. Soon after, he was promoted to the position of the guardian of the capital, and was awarded the festival of the runes, as well as the history of Yizhou.

古文：时新丧元帅，远近危悚，琬出类拔萃，处群僚之右，既无戚容，又无喜色，神守举止，有如平日，由是众望渐服。
现代文：当时刚刚失去统帅，远近都惶惶不安，蒋琬则出类拔萃，处在百官之首，既没有悲戚的面容，也没有高兴的样子，神态举止，如同平日。于是逐渐赢得人心。
English: At that time, he had just lost his commander-in-chief, and people in and out of the country were in a state of panic and anxiety. Chiang Kai-shek, however, stood out from the crowd and was at the head of a hundred officials. He did not have a sad face, nor did he look happy, and his demeanor and behavior were as usual. As a result, he gradually won the hearts of the people.

古文：吴人闻诸葛亮卒，恐魏承衰取蜀，增巴丘守兵万人，一欲以为救援，二欲以事分割。
现代文：吴国听说诸葛亮去世，害怕魏乘机攻取蜀地，增加巴丘守军一万人，一是打算用以救援，二是打算待机分割。
English: When the State of Wu heard that Zhuge Liang had died, it was afraid that Wei would seize the opportunity to conquer Shudi and increase the number of Baqiu's defenders by 10,000. On the one hand, it intended to use them for rescue, and on the other hand, it intended to divide them on standby.

古文：汉人闻之，亦增永安之守以防非常。
现代文：蜀国听到后，也增加永安的守军的以防止非常情况发生。
English: Upon hearing this, Shu also increased the number of Yongan's defenders to prevent an emergency situation from occurring.

古文：汉主使右中郎将宗预使吴，吴主问曰： 东之与西，譬犹一家，而闻西更增白帝之守，何也？ 
现代文：汉后主命右中郎将宗预出使吴国，吴王问道： 吴国与西蜀，尤如一家，可是听说西蜀却增加了白帝城的守军，为什么？ 
English: Emperor Han's second-in-command, U Zhong Lang, sent Zong to Wu in advance. The king of Wu asked, "Wu and Xishu are like a family, but it is said that Xishu has increased the number of troops defending Baidicheng. Why?"

古文：对曰： 臣以为东益巴丘之戍，西增白帝之守，皆事势宜然，俱不足以相问也。 
现代文：宗预对答说： 我认为吴国增加巴丘的军队，西蜀增加白帝城的守卫，都是符合时势的必然举动，都不足以互相询问。 
English: Zong prefaced his answer by saying, "I think that Wu's increase of Baqiu's army and Xishu's increase of Baidicheng's guards are both inevitable moves in line with the current situation, and neither of them is enough to inquire about each other.

古文：吴主大笑，嘉其抗尽，礼之亚于邓芝。
现代文：吴王大笑，称赞他抗言不屈，言无所隐。对他的礼遇仅次于邓芝。
English: Wu Wang laughed loudly, praising him for his unyielding resistance and his frankness. His courtesy was second only to Deng Zhihu.

古文：吴诸葛恪以丹杨山险，民多果劲，虽前发兵，徒得外县平民而已。其馀深远，莫能禽尽，屡自求为官出之，三年可得甲士四万。
现代文：吴国诸葛恪因丹阳山路程险阻，山民又多强悍，虽然以前出征讨，只是空得一些外县的平民而已，其余都藏在深山远谷，不能全部擒获，便多次请求到当地做官让山民出山，保证三年可获得士兵四万。
English: Zhuge of the State of Wu, because of the dangerous path of Danyang Mountain and the many strong mountain people, although he had previously gone out to fight, he only got some civilians from outside the county. The rest were hidden in the deep mountains and valleys and could not all be captured. He repeatedly requested the local officials to let the mountain people out of the mountain and ensure that he could get forty thousand soldiers in three years.

古文：众议咸以为： 丹杨地势险阻，与吴郡、会稽、新都、番阳四郡邻接，周旋数十里，山谷万重。
现代文：大家都认为： 丹阳地势险阻，与吴郡、会稽、新都、番阳四郡邻接，周围数千里，山谷万重。
English: Everyone agrees that: Danyang is in a precarious location, adjacent to four counties of Wuxi, Huijian, Xindu and Panyang, with thousands of miles around and countless valleys.

古文：其幽邃民人，未尝入城邑，对长吏，皆仗兵野逸，白首于林莽；逋亡宿恶，咸共逃窜。
现代文：当地人民深居幽谷，从没有进过城，遇到官吏，都是手持武器，在山野中逃跑，老死在丛林之中。被追捕逃亡的惯犯，也都一起逃窜。
English: The local people live deep in the valley, have never been to the city, and when they encounter officials, they are all armed with weapons, run away in the mountains, and die in the jungle. The recidivist criminals who were chased and fled also fled together.

古文：山出铜铁，自铸甲兵。
现代文：山里出产铜铁，自己铸造兵器。
English: The mountains produce copper and iron, and they make their own weapons and armor.

古文：俗好武习战，高尚气力；其升山赴险，抵突丛棘，若鱼之走渊，猿狖之腾木也。
现代文：民俗喜好练武，熟习打仗，崇尚气势勇力。他们爬高山越险地、穿密林过棘丛，好象鱼游深渊、猿猴攀树一样自如。
English: Folk customs like to practice martial arts, are familiar with war, and advocate strength and courage. They climb high mountains more dangerously, pass through dense forests and thorn bushes, as freely as fish swim in the abyss and monkeys climb trees.

古文：时观间隙，出为寇盗，每致兵征伐，寻其窟藏。
现代文：不时观察机会，出山抢掠，时常招致官兵讨伐，寻找他们藏身的山洞。
English: From time to time, they spy an opportunity to take advantage of it, go out of the mountains and become robbers, and force the government to send soldiers to investigate, looking for their hiding place.

古文：其战则蜂至，败则鸟窜，自前世以来，不能羁也。 
现代文：他们战则一轰而上，败则如鸟飞鼠窜，从前代以来，一直没能制服他们。 
English: Since the previous generation, they have not been able to subdue them.

古文：皆以为难。
现代文：大家都认为很难。
English: Everyone thinks it's difficult.

古文：恪父瑾闻之，亦以事终不逮，叹曰： 恪不大兴吾家，将赤吾族也！ 
现代文：诸葛恪的父亲葛谨听到后，也认为事情最终办不到，叹息说： 诸葛恪不能使我家兴旺，终将使家门败灭！ 
English: After listening to Zhuge Ke, Zhuge Ke's father, he also thought that things could not be done in the end. He sighed and said: Zhuge Ke could not make my family prosperous, but would eventually bring about the downfall of the family!

古文：恪盛陈其必捷，吴主乃拜恪为抚越将军，领丹杨太守，使行其策。
现代文：诸葛恪一再说他必能取胜报捷，吴王于是任命他为抚越将军，兼丹阳太守，让他按自己的计划行事。
English: Zhuge Ke repeatedly said that he would be able to win the victory, so King Wu appointed him as the general of Fu Yue and the governor of Danyang, and let him act according to his own plan.

古文：冬，十一月，洛阳地震。
现代文：冬季，十一月，洛阳发生地震。
English: In winter, in November, an earthquake occurred in Luoyang.

古文：吴潘濬讨武陵蛮，数年，斩获数万。
现代文：吴国潘浚讨伐武陵蛮夷，几年时间，斩杀俘获几万人。
English: Panjun of the State of Wu fought the barbarians of Wuling for several years, killing and capturing tens of thousands of people.

古文：自是群蛮衰弱，一方宁静。
现代文：自此之后，各蛮夷部落衰落，一方平静无事。
English: Since then, each barbarian tribe has declined, while the other side has remained calm.

古文：十一月，濬还武昌。
现代文：十一月，潘浚返回武昌。
English: In November, Pan Jun returned to Wuchang.

