古文：陵州盐井，深五百余尺，皆石也。
现代文：陵州有一口盐井，深五百多尺，井壁都是石头。
English: There is a salt well in Lingshou, more than five hundred feet deep, and the walls of the well are made of stone.

古文：上下甚宽广，独中间稍狭，谓之杖鼓腰。
现代文：其上部和下部都很宽敞，唯独中间稍微狭窄，俗称 杖鼓腰 。
English: Its upper and lower parts are very spacious, except that the middle is slightly narrow, commonly known as the cane drum waist.

古文：旧自吉底用柏木为干，上出井口，自木榦垂绠而下，方能至水。井侧设大车绞之。
现代文：以前从井底立柏木为井干，上出于井口，自木干垂汲绠而下，才能送汲器至井底取盐水，井旁设一大绞车把汲器绞上来。
English: In the past, cedar trees were used to make the wellbore from the bottom of the well, and then a rope was pulled up from the top of the wellbore, and a ladle was lowered from the ladle to the bottom of the well to draw salt water. Next to the well, a large winch was set up to winch the ladle up.

古文：歳久，井榦摧败，屡欲新之，而井中阴气袭人，入者辄死，无缘措手。
现代文：年深月久，井干折坏，屡次想换新的，而井中阴气袭人，下井的人往往会丧命，没有办法着手。
English: For a long time, the well has been broken and repeatedly wants to be replaced with a new one, but the negative atmosphere in the well attacks people, and people who go down the well often die, and there is no way to start.

古文：惟侯有雨入井，则阴气随雨而下，稍可施工，雨睛復止。
现代文：只能等到有雨的时候下井，这时阴气随雨水下落，稍可以施工，雨过天晴就又停止。
English: You can only wait until it rains to go down the well. At this time, the shade falls with the rain, so you can do a little construction, and the rain will stop after the weather clears.

古文：后有人以一木盘，满中贮水，盘底为小窍，酾水一如雨点，设于井上，谓之雨盘，令水下终日不绝。
现代文：后来有人用一个大木盘满满地盛上水，盘底穿许多小孔，用它洒水一如雨点落下，置于井口上，叫作 雨盘 ，使盘中的水终日洒个不停。
English: Later, someone used a large wooden pan to fill the ground with water, pierced many small holes in the bottom of the pan, used it to sprinkle water like raindrops, and placed it on the wellhead, called the rain pan, so that the water in the pan would sprinkle all day long.

古文：如此数月，井榦为之一新，而陵井之利復旧。
现代文：这样几个月，井干又全部更新，而陵井盐又像从前一样获利。
English: In such months, the wellbore is completely renewed, and the salt mine is profitable as before.

古文：世人以竹、木、牙、骨之类为叫子，置人喉中吹之，能作人言，谓之 颡叫子 。
现代文：人们用竹、木、牙、骨之类的材料做成哨子，放在喉咙里吹，能够模仿人讲话的声音，这种哨子就叫 嗓叫子 。
English: People use bamboo, wood, teeth, bones and other materials to make whistles, which are placed in the throat and blown to imitate the sound of human speech. This kind of whistle is called a throat whistle.

古文：尝有病瘖者，为人所若，烦冤无以自言。
现代文：曾有人得了哑症，被人坑害，烦恼与冤情没有办法自己说出来。
English: There were people who suffered from muteness, who were victimized by others, and who were unable to express their troubles and grievances on their own.

古文：听讼者试取叫子令颡之，作声如傀儡子。
现代文：负责审判的官员试着拿来 嗓叫子 让他放在喉咙里，这人发出来的声音就像傀儡戏演员模拟人物声音一般。
English: The officers in charge of the trial tried to put him in a chokehold, and the man's voice sounded like that of a puppeteer imitating a character.

古文：粗能辨其一二，其冤获申。
现代文：约略可以听懂一些他要说的意思，他的冤情因此得以申雪。
English: Some of what he had to say could be understood, and his grievances could be aired.

古文：此亦可记也。
现代文：这件事情也是值得一记的。
English: This is also worth noting.

古文：宝元中，党项犯塞，时新募万胜军，未习战陈，遇寇多北。
现代文：宝元年间，西夏进犯边塞，当时新招募的万胜军还不习于战阵，遇敌接战多败北。
English: In the first year of the Baoyuan era, the Western Xia invaded the frontier fortress. At that time, the newly recruited Wan Sheng army was not yet accustomed to the battlefield, and it was often defeated when it encountered the enemy.

古文：狄青为将，一日尽取万胜旗付虎冀军，使之出战。
现代文：狄青为将，一日尽取万胜军的旗帜付与虎翼军，令虎翼军出战。
English: Di Qing was the commander, and he tried his best to capture the banner of the victorious army and give it to the Tiger Wing Army, so that the Tiger Wing Army would go to war.

古文：虏望其旗，易之，全军径趋，为虎翼所破，殆无遗类。
现代文：敌人望见虎翼军的旗帜而轻视之，全部人马都直趋冲过去，结果为虎翼军所破，几乎全军覆没。
English: The enemy saw the banner of the Tiger Wing Army and despised it. All the men and horses rushed straight ahead. As a result, the Tiger Wing Army was defeated and almost the entire army was wiped out.

古文：又青在泾、原，尝以寡当众，度必以奇胜。
现代文：又狄青在泾原路守边时，曾以少量人马遭遇大批敌兵，自思必须用奇计才能制胜。
English: In addition, when Di Qing was guarding the edge of the Qibao Road, he encountered a large number of enemy soldiers with a small number of men and horses, and thought that he had to use magic to win.

古文：预戒军中，尽舍弓弩，皆执短兵器。
现代文：因此预先命令军中全部舍弃弓箭弩机，都只带短兵器。
English: Therefore, the army was ordered in advance to abandon all bow and arrow harpoons and carry only short weapons.

古文：令军中：闻钲一声则止；再声则严阵而阳却；钲声止则大呼而突之。
现代文：又令军中听到一声锣响就停止前进；听到锣声再响起来则严阵以待而佯装退却；锣声停止即返身大呼而突击敌人。
English: It also made the troops stop advancing when they heard a beep; when they heard the beep again, they waited and pretended to retreat; when the beep stopped, they shouted and attacked the enemy.

古文：士卒皆如其教。
现代文：士卒都听从他的部署。
English: The soldiers obeyed his orders.

古文：才遇敌，未接战，遽声钲，士卒皆止；再声，皆却。
现代文：其军刚与敌人相遇，还没有接战，他就立即下令击锣，士卒都停了下来；锣声再次响起，士卒都退却。
English: No sooner had his army encountered the enemy, and had not yet engaged in battle, than he immediately gave the order to strike the gong, and the soldiers stopped; the gong sounded again, and the soldiers retreated.

古文：虏人大笑，相谓曰： 孰谓狄天使勇？ 
现代文：敌人大笑，相互说道： 谁说狄天使是勇武的将领？ 
English: The enemy laughed loudly and said to each other: Who said that Di Angel was a brave general?

古文：时虏人谓青为 天使 钲声止，忽前突之，虏兵大乱，相蹂践死者，不可胜计也。
现代文：当时敌人称狄青为 天使 。等到锣声停止，士卒忽然转身勇往直前，突入敌阵，敌兵顿时大乱，相互践踏而死者不可胜计。
English: At that time, the enemy called Di Qing an angel. When the beeping stopped, the soldiers suddenly turned around and rushed forward, rushing into the enemy lines. The enemy soldiers were suddenly in chaos, trampling each other and the dead were incalculable.

古文：王元泽数歳时，客有以一麞一鹿同笼以问雱： 何者是麞，何者是鹿？ 
现代文：王元泽才几岁大的时候，有个宾客把一头獐子和一头鹿关到同一个笼子里，然后问王元泽： 哪个是獐子，哪个是鹿？ 
English: When Wang Yuanze was just a few years old, a guest put a mule and a deer in the same cage, and then asked Wang Yuanze: Which is the mule and which is the deer?

古文：雱实未识，良久对曰： 麞边者是鹿，鹿边者是麞。 
现代文：王元泽确实不认识这两种动物，过了好一会儿回答说： 獐子旁边的那个是鹿，鹿旁边的那个是獐子。 
English: Wang Yuanze really did not know these two animals, and after a while he answered: The one next to the mule is a deer, and the one next to the deer is a mule.

古文：客大奇之。
现代文：宾客觉得他的回答实在奇妙。
English: The guests thought his answer was really strange.

古文：陕西因洪水下大石，塞山涧中，水遂横流为害。
现代文：陕西因洪水冲下巨石，堵塞到山涧中，水遂横流而造成祸患。
English: In Shaanxi, due to floods, huge boulders were washed down, blocked into the mountains, and the water then flowed sideways, causing a disaster.

古文：石之大有如屋者，人力不能去，州县患之。
现代文：巨石有像房子那么大的，靠人力不能移走，州县都为此忧虑。
English: The boulders are as big as houses, and cannot be moved by human power. All prefectures and counties are worried about this.

古文：雷简夫为县令，乃使人各于石下穿一穴，度如石大，挽石人穴窖之，水患遂息也。
现代文：雷简夫为县令，于是让人各在巨石下挖一坑穴，估计坑穴已像巨石那样大，就拉动巨石填入坑穴而窖起来，水患遂平息。
English: Lei Jianfu was the county magistrate, so he had people dig a pit under each of the boulders. Estimating that the pit was as big as the boulders, he pulled the boulders into the pit and buried them, and the flood subsided.

古文：苏州至昆山县凡六十里，皆浅水，无陆途，民颇病涉。
现代文：苏州到昆山县共有六十里，都是浅水洼而没有陆路，老百姓苦于涉水行走，早就想修筑二条长堤。
English: There are a total of sixty miles from Suzhou to Kunshan County, all of which are shallow depressions and have no land routes. The common people are struggling to wade through the water, and have long wanted to build two long levees.

古文：久欲为长堤，但苏州皆泽国，无处求土。
现代文：可是苏州一带是低洼积水之地，没有地方可以取土。
English: However, the Suzhou area is a low-lying waterlogged land, and there is no place to take soil.

古文：嘉祐中，人有献计，就水中以蘧刍癗为墙，栽两行，相去三尺。
现代文：到了嘉祐年间，有人想出妙计，在水中用芦席、草把子扎成墙，栽成两行，中间相距三尺。
English: In the Jiayu era, someone came up with a clever plan, using reed seats and straw handles to tie a wall in the water and plant it in two rows, three feet apart in the middle.

古文：去墙六丈又为一墙，亦如此。
现代文：在相距六丈的地方，也用同样的方法扎一道墙。
English: At a distance of six feet, they also use the same method to tie a wall.

古文：漉水中淤泥实蘧蒢中，候干，则以水车畎去两墙之间旧水。
现代文：捞起水中淤泥填到芦席草墙中，等泥干了，用水车把两墙之间的积水排掉，就露出了六丈宽的泥土。
English: Silt was scooped up from the water and filled into the rush grass wall, and when the mud was dry, the water truck drained the accumulated water between the two walls, revealing the six-feet-wide soil.

古文：墙间六丈皆土，留其半以为堤脚，掘其半为渠，取土以为堤，每三四里则为一桥，以通南北之水。
现代文：将这六丈土留一半作为修堤的基础，将另一半挖成水渠，挖出来的土正好用来筑堤。每隔三四里便造一座桥，用来沟通南北的水流。
English: Half of the six feet of earth was left as a foundation for repairing the dike, and the other half was excavated into canals. The excavated soil was used to build the dike. A bridge was built every three to four miles to connect the north and south streams.

古文：不日堤成，至今为利。
现代文：没有多久堤就修好了，直到今天，这些大堤还在给人们以行路之便。
English: It didn't take long for the levees to be repaired, and to this day, these large levees are still providing people with travel convenience.

古文：陈述古密直知建州浦城县日，有人失物，捕得莫知的为盗者。
现代文：枢密院直学士陈述古任建州浦城县令时，有人家中被盗，抓到了一些嫌疑人，但是不知道究竟谁是盗贼。
English: When the Privy Council's direct scholar stated the ancient appointment of Jianzhou Pucheng County, someone's home was stolen, some suspects were caught, but it was not known who the thief was.

古文：述古乃绐之曰： 某庙有一钟，能辨盗，至灵！ 
现代文：陈述古就骗他们说： 某某庙里有一口钟，能够辨认盗贼，非常灵验。 
English: The statement has been lying to them for a long time: There is a bell in such-and-such a temple that can identify thieves, which is very effective.

古文：使人迎置后閤祠之，引群囚立钟前，自陈不为盗者，摸之则无声；为盗者摸之则有声。
现代文：他派人把那口钟抬到后室供奉起来，把那些嫌疑人带到钟前站好，对他们说：如果不是盗贼，摸了钟，钟不会响；如果是盗贼，摸了钟，钟就会响。
English: He sent someone to take the bell to the back room and set it up as an offering. He brought the suspects to stand in front of the bell and said to them, "If it wasn't for the thief touching the bell, the bell wouldn't ring; if it was the thief touching the bell, the bell would ring."

古文：述古自率同职，祷钟甚肃，祭讫，以帷帷之，乃阴使人以墨涂钟，良久，引囚逐一令引手入帷摸之，出乃验其手，皆有墨。唯有一囚无墨，讯之，遂承为盗。
现代文：陈述古亲自带领县衙的官员们十分严肃地向钟祈祷，祭祀结束以后，用布幔将钟围起来，又暗地里派人用黑墨涂抹钟壁。过了好一会儿，带来嫌疑人让他们逐一把手伸进帷幔里摸钟，出来以后便查验他们的手，发现众嫌疑人手上都有黑墨，只有一个嫌疑人手上没有。
English: Gu personally led the officials of the county magistrate to pray very seriously to the bell. After the end of the ceremony, they surrounded the bell with cloth and secretly sent someone to smear the bell wall with black ink. After a while, they brought the suspects and let them reach into the curtain one by one to touch the bell. After they came out, they checked their hands and found that all the suspects had black ink on their hands, but only one suspect did not.

古文：盖恐钟有声，不敢摸也。
现代文：于是对这个嫌疑人进行审讯，他承认自己是盗贼，因为害怕钟会发出声音，所以不敢去摸它。
English: The suspect was interrogated and confessed that he was a thief and that he did not dare to touch the bell for fear that it would ring.

古文：此亦古之法，出于小说。
现代文：这也是古代就已经有的方法，出自于小说的记载。
English: This is also a method that has been around since ancient times and is described in novels.

