古文：○崔仲方
现代文：○于仲文
English: ○ at Zhongwen

古文：崔仲方，字不齐，博陵安平人也。
现代文：于仲文，字次武，是建平公于义之兄的儿子。
English: Yu Zhongwen, also known as Jiwu, was the son of Jianping, the elder brother of Yu Yi.

古文：祖孝芬，魏荆州刺史。
现代文：父亲于萛，北周大左辅、燕国公。
English: His father was Yu Yao, the left assistant of North Zhou University, and the son of Yan Guogong.

古文：父宣猷，周小司徒。
现代文：仲文小时就聪明机灵，很小上学，就沉溺书中而不知疲倦。
English: Zhongwen was smart and clever at an early age, went to school at a very young age, and indulged in books tirelessly.

古文：仲方少好读书，有文武才干。
现代文：他父亲感到很奇异，说： 这个儿子肯定会振兴我们于家。 
English: His father was overjoyed and said, "This son will definitely revive our family."

古文：年十五，周太祖见而异之，令与诸子同就学。
现代文：他九岁时，曾在云阳宫拜见北周太祖。太祖问他： 听说你爱读书，书上有些什么？ 
English: When he was nine years old, he visited Northern Zhou Taizu in Yunyang Palace. Taizu asked him: I heard that you like to read, what are some of the books?

古文：时高祖亦在其中，由是与高祖少相款密。
现代文：仲文回答说： 帮助父亲，侍奉君王，只有忠孝而已。 
English: Zhongwen replied, "Helping my father and serving the king are nothing but being loyal and filial."

古文：后以明经为晋公宇文护参军事，寻转记室，迁司玉大夫，与斛斯徵、柳敏等同修礼律。
现代文：太祖非常赞赏他。这以后他跟博士李祥学习《周易》、《三礼》，略知大义。长大后，倜傥风流而胸有大志，气度超凡，当时称他是名公子。
English: His great-grandfather admired him very much. After that, he studied "Zhou Yi" and "Three Rites" with Dr. Li Xiang, and knew a little about the Great Righteousness. After growing up, he was full of manners and had great aspirations, and his temperament was extraordinary. At that time, he was said to be a great nobleman.

古文：后以军功，授平东将军、银青光禄大夫，赐爵石城县男，邑三百户。时武帝阴有灭齐之志，仲方献二十策，帝大奇之。
现代文：开始当赵王的部下，不久升任安固太守。任、杜两家都丢了牛，后来找到一头牛，两家都说是自己的，州郡无法决断。益州长史韩伯隽说： 安固于太守年少时就很聪明，可让他决断这事。 于仲文说： 这事很容易解决。 
English: He started out as a subordinate of King Zhao, and was soon promoted to the position of the Anggu governor. Both the Ren and Du families lost a cow, and later they found a cow. Both families said it was their own, and the prefecture could not decide. Governor Shi Hanbo said: Anggu was very smart when he was a young governor, and he could let him decide this matter. Yu Zhongwen said: This matter is easy to resolve.

古文：后与少内史赵芬删定格式。
现代文：于是让两家各赶牛群来，放出那头牛，那头牛就奔向任家的牛群中。
English: So let each of the two families drive the cattle, release the cow, and the cow will run to the cattle of its family.

古文：寻从帝攻晋州，齐之亚将崔景嵩请为内应，仲方与段文振等登城应接，遂下晋州，语在《文振传》。又令仲方说翼城等四城，下之。
现代文：他又偷偷让人轻轻地伤了那头牛，任家人叹惜不已，而杜家人却没事一般。于仲文于是诃责姓杜的，姓杜的认罪而去。始州刺史屈突尚，是宇文护一党的，以前因事入狱，无人敢治他结党之罪。
English: He also secretly had someone lightly wound the cow. Ren's family members lamented, but Du's family members were fine. Yu Zhongwen then reprimanded Du, who confessed and left. Shizhou Jishi Qu Tu Shang, a member of Uwen's bodyguard, had previously been imprisoned for an incident, and no one dared to punish him for the crime of forming a party.

古文：授仪同，进爵范阳县侯。
现代文：于仲文到郡后，穷追究治，终于让他坐牢。
English: After Yu Zhongwen arrived in the county, he was persecuted and finally sent to prison.

古文：后以行军长史从郯公王轨擒陈将吴明彻于吕梁，仲方计策居多。
现代文：蜀中人因此传语说： 明断无双有于公，不避强暴有次武。 不久，调他任御正下大夫，封为延寿郡公爵，食邑三千五百户。
English: As a result, the people of Shuzhong spread a rumor saying, "There is no match for the public, and there is no avoiding the violence of Zi Wu." Soon, he was transferred to the post of Imperial Chief Physician, and was named the Duke of Yanzhou County, with 3,500 households.

古文：宣帝嗣位，为少内史，奉使淮南而还。
现代文：几次随军出征，累功升迁到当仪同三司。
English: He went to the front with the army several times, and was promoted to the Third Division of Dangyi.

古文：会帝崩，高祖为丞相，与仲方相见，握手极欢，仲方亦归心焉。
现代文：北周宣帝时，他任东郡太守。隋高祖为北周丞相后，尉迟迥造反作乱，派部将檀让攻占黄河以南地区。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, he served as the governor of Dong County. After Emperor Gaozong of the Northern Zhou Dynasty became the prime minister, his subordinates rebelled and caused a riot, and the faction seized the area south of the Yellow River.

古文：其夜上便宜十八事，高祖并嘉纳之。
现代文：尉迟迥还派人诱招于仲文，仲文拒绝了。
English: He also sent someone to entice Zhongwen, but Zhongwen refused.

古文：又见众望有归，阴劝高祖应天受命，高祖从之。
现代文：尉迟迥恨他不听自己的，派仪同宇文威进攻他，于仲文迎战，大破宇文威，斩首五百多级。
English: He hated that he didn't listen to him, so he sent Yi and Yu Wenwei to attack him. Yu Zhongwen fought back and defeated Yu Wenwei, beheading more than 500 of his subordinates.

古文：及受禅，上召仲方与高颎议正朔服色事。
现代文：仲文因功被授为开府。尉迟迥又派其部将宇文胄渡过石济，宇文威、邹绍从白马，两路俱进，又进攻于仲文。
English: At the time of receiving Zen, the Sui Emperor summoned Cui Zhongfang and Gao Qi to discuss the change of time and the color of the chariots and horses used for sacrifice.

古文：仲方曰： 晋为金行，后魏为水，周为木。
现代文：贼人的势力更大，东郡人十分害怕，郡中人赫连僧伽、敬子哲率人响应尉迟迥。
English: The influence of the thieves is greater, the people of Dong County are very afraid, and the people of Hulien Sangha, Keiko Tetsu and others in the county are slow to respond.

古文：皇家以火承木，得天之统。
现代文：于仲文估计不能挺住，抛妻别子，带六十多个骑兵，打开城西门，冲破重围而逃走。
English: Yu Zhongwen estimated that he could not hold out, left his wife and son, took more than sixty cavalrymen, opened the west gate of the city, broke through the heavy siege and fled.

古文：又圣躬载诞之初，有赤光之瑞，车服旗牲，并宜用赤。 
现代文：他被贼人追赶，且战且行。跟随他的骑兵，十之七八都战死。仲文独得免祸，到达京师。
English: He was chased by thieves, but he fought on. Seventy-eight out of ten of the cavalrymen who followed him were killed in battle. Zhongwen was the only one to avoid disaster and reach the capital division.

古文：又劝上除六官，请依汉、魏之旧。
现代文：尉迟迥于是杀了他的三子一女。高祖见仲文，引他到内室，为他下泪。
English: He then killed his three sons and one daughter. Gaozhu saw Zhongwen, led him to the inner room, and shed tears for him.

古文：上皆从之。进位上开府，寻转司农少卿，进爵安固县公。
现代文：高祖赐他采帛五百段，黄金二百两，提拔他当大将军，兼任河南道行军总管。
English: Gao Zu gave him a reward of five hundred dan and two hundred taels of gold, promoted him to be a general, and concurrently served as the general manager of the march in Henan Province.

古文：令发丁三万，于朔方、灵武筑长城，东至黄河，西拒绥州，南至勃出岭，绵亘七百里。
现代文：给他鼓吹，让他乘驿车到洛阳发兵，以讨伐檀让。当时韦孝宽在永桥一带抵抗尉迟迥，仲文到孝宽处与他商议。当时，总管宇文忻颇有自疑之心，因此对仲文说： 你刚从京师来，你看丞相的意思怎么样？
English: At that time, Wei Xiaokuan was in the Yongqiao area, resisting the delay of the lieutenant, and Zhongwen went to Xiaokuan's place to discuss with him. At that time, the general manager, Wu Wenyi, was quite self-doubting, so he said to Zhongwen: You just came from Beijing, how do you see the meaning of the prime minister?

古文：明年，上复令仲方发丁十五万，于朔方已东缘边险要筑数十城，以遏胡寇。
现代文：尉迟迥实在不值得一打，只担心事情完了以后，又有鸟死藏弓的忧虑。 仲文怕宇文忻发生变故，就对他说： 丞相宽弘大度，明识有余，我们如能尽力为国，他必定不会有二心。我在京师三天，常见他有三个好处，以此看来，丞相不是一般的人。 
English: Zhongwen was afraid that something would happen to Yuwen Yao, so he said to him: "The prime minister is broad-minded and knowledgeable, and if we can do our best for the country, he will definitely not have two hearts. In my three days in Beijing, it is common for him to have three benefits, so from this point of view, the prime minister is not an ordinary person.

古文：丁父艰去职。
现代文：宇文忻说： 三个好处怎样？ 
English: Uwen Zang said: What are the three benefits?

古文：未期，起为虢州刺史。上书论取陈之策曰：
现代文：于仲文说： 有个叫陈万敌的，新近从贼人中来，丞相马上叫他的弟弟陈难敌召集人马，随官军讨伐贼人。
English: Yu Zhongwen said: There was a man named Chen Wanji, who had recently come from the thieves. The prime minister immediately called his brother, Chen Nanji, the convener of Ma, to fight the thieves with the government army.

古文：臣谨案晋太康元年岁在庚子，晋武平吴，至今开皇六年，岁次丙午，合三百七载。
现代文：这是丞相有大度的第一个长处。上士宋谦，奉命调查一些事，宋谦于是要调查陈万敌别的罪过。丞相责备他说： 上当入网的，自可推求，何必又去调查访问，有亏大礼！ 
English: This is the first advantage of the chancellor's magnanimity. Staff Sergeant Song Qian was ordered to investigate some things, and Song Qian wanted to investigate Chen Wanqi's other crimes. The chancellor scolded him: If you are tricked into the net, you can ask for it, why do you have to investigate and visit again, it's a waste of money!

古文：《春秋宝乾图》云： 王者三百年一蠲法。 今年三百之期，可谓备矣。
现代文：这是他不管人隐私的第二个长处。说到我于仲文的妻子儿女，丞相没有不潸然落泪的。这是丞相有仁爱之心的第三个好处。 
English: This is the second advantage of his disregard for people's privacy. When I mentioned my wife and children to Zhongwen, the prime minister was moved to tears. This is the third advantage of the prime minister's benevolent heart.

古文：陈氏草窃，起于丙子，至今丙午，又子午为冲，阴阳之忌。
现代文：宇文忻从此才安下心来。于仲文的部队到汴州的东倪坞，与尉迟迥的部将刘子昂、刘浴德等相遇，仲文进击而破之。仲文军驻扎在蓼堤，离梁郡七里，檀让拥众几万。
English: Chen's usurpation of the imperial throne began in the year of C, and this year is the year of C, the year of the meridian, which is exactly the year of the great taboo in Yin and Yang studies.

古文：昔史赵有言曰： 陈，颛顼之族，为水，故岁在鹑火以灭。 
现代文：仲文用老弱挑战，檀让军全部来拒战。于仲文假装失败逃跑，檀让军很骄傲轻敌。仲文于是派出精兵在左右两翼出击，大败檀让军，活捉五千多人，斩首七百级。
English: In the past, Shi Zhao once said: Chen surname, from the Qin dynasty, water virtue, so when the year star is in the campfire, it will perish.

古文：又云： 周武王克商，封胡公满于陈。 
现代文：仲文军进攻梁郡，尉迟迥的守将刘子宽弃城逃走。
English: He also said: King Zhou Wu exterminated the merchants, and Hu Gong was filled with Chen.

古文：至鲁昭公九年，陈灾，裨灶曰： 岁五及鹑火而后陈亡，楚克之。 
现代文：仲文率军追击，活捉、斩杀敌军几千人，刘子宽独个逃走。当初，仲文在蓼堤时，诸将都说： 我军从远方来，人马疲劳，不可立即决战。 
English: At first, when Zhong Wen was on the bank of the Yangtze River, all the generals said, "Our army has come from far away, the men and horses are tired, we cannot fight a decisive battle immediately."

古文：楚，祝融之后也，为火正，故复灭陈。
现代文：仲文却令三军立即吃饭，摆阵大战。
English: However, Zhongwen ordered the three armies to eat immediately and prepare for a big battle.

古文：陈承舜后，舜承颛顼，虽太岁左行，岁星右转，鹑火之岁，陈族再亡，戊午之年，妫虞运尽。
现代文：破贼以后，诸将都请教道： 此前，我军疲劳，按道理不可交战，最后反而克敌制胜，这是用的什么计？ 
English: After defeating the bandits, the generals all asked: Previously, our army was fatigued and, according to the principle, could not engage in battle. However, in the end, we were able to defeat the enemy and win the victory. What was the purpose of this?

古文：语迹虽殊，考事无别。皇朝五运相承，感火德而王，国号为隋，与楚同分。
现代文：仲文笑着说： 我所率领的将士，都是华山以东地区的人，他们善于速战速决，不应该打持久战。乘势进军，我们所以能克敌制胜。 
English: Zhongwen said with a smile, "The soldiers I lead are all from the areas east of Huashan Mountain. They are good at quick battles and quick decisions, and should not fight a protracted war. By taking advantage of the momentum, we can defeat the enemy and win.

古文：楚是火正，午为鹑火，未为鹑首，申为实沉，酉为大梁。
现代文：诸将都认为他们赶不上仲文。仲文军进击曹州，活捉了尉迟迥所署的刺史李仲康和上仪同房劲。
English: The generals all thought that they could not catch up with Zhongwen. Zhongwen's army invaded Caozhou and captured Li Zhongkang and Shangyi Tongfangjin, who were sent by the lieutenant to arrest Li Zhongkang.

古文：既当周、秦、晋、赵之分，若当此分发兵，将得岁之助，以今量古，陈灭不疑。
现代文：檀让率余部驻在城武，部将高士儒率万人驻扎在永昌。于仲文装模作样下公文到各州县说： 大将军来了，你们可以积集点粮食。 檀让还以为于仲文不可能马上到，正在那里杀牛犒赏人马。
English: Dangzhen stationed the rest of his troops in Chengwu, and stationed the generals, high-ranking officials, Confucian scholars, and ten thousand people in Yongchang. With the model of Zhongwen dressed up, Gongwen went to all the prefectures and counties and said, "The great general has come, you can collect some grain." Dangzhen also thought that it was impossible for Yu Zhongwen to come right away, and he was killing cattle and horses there.

古文：臣谓午未申酉，并是数极。
现代文：于仲文知道他太大意，挑选骑兵袭击他，一天便赶到了。于是，于仲文攻占了城武。
English: Yu Zhongwen knew that he was too careless, and selected cavalry to attack him, and arrived one day. Therefore, Yu Zhongwen captured the city.

古文：盖闻天时不如地利，地利不如人和，况主圣臣良，兵强国富，动植回心，人神叶契。
现代文：尉迟迥的部将席毗罗，拥众十万，驻扎在沛县，将要攻打徐州。他的妻子儿女在金乡。于仲文派人假装是席毗罗的使者，对金乡城的守主徐善净说： 檀让明天午时到达金乡，将要宣布蜀公的命令，犒赏将士。 金乡人信以为真，都很喜欢。于仲文挑选精兵，打起尉迟迥的旗帜，加速前进。
English: Yuzhongwen sent a man pretending to be an emissary of Yuzhongwen to Xu Shengjing, the guardian of Jinxiang City, saying, "If you arrive in Jinxiang at noon tomorrow, you will announce the order of Shu Gong and reward the soldiers. The people of Jinxiang believe it to be true and like it very much. Yuzhongwen will select the best soldiers, raise the banner of Yuzhongwen, and speed up the advance.

古文：陈既主昏于上，民讟于下，险无百二之固，众非九国之师。
现代文：徐善净远远望见于仲文军将到，还以为是檀让来了，于是出城迎接。于仲文活捉了他，于是占领金乡城。
English: Xu Shanzhong saw from afar that Zhongwen's army was about to arrive, and thought it was a concession, so he went out of the city to meet it. Yu Zhongwen captured him alive, and then occupied Jinxiang City.

古文：夏癸、殷辛尚不能立，独此岛夷而稽天讨！伏度朝廷自有宏谟，但刍荛所见，冀申萤爝。
现代文：诸将大多劝仲文屠城，仲文说： 这里是席毗罗起兵的地方，我们应宽待他们的妻子儿女，那么，他的部下会自动回来。如果屠城，他们就绝望了。 
English: Most of the generals advised Zhongwen to go to the slaughterhouse. Zhongwen said, "This is the place where Shiviro raised his army. We should be lenient with their wives and children. Then his men will come back voluntarily. If they go to the slaughterhouse, they will be in despair."

古文：今唯须武昌已下，蕲、和、滁、方、吴、海等州更帖精兵，密营渡计。
现代文：众人都说好。
English: Everyone said yes.

古文：益、信、襄、荆、基、郢等州速造舟楫，多张形势，为水战之具。
现代文：于是席毗罗仗着人多势众，来逼近官军。于仲文背城布阵，在离阵几里远的地方，在麻田里设下埋伏。两下里刚刚交手，仲文的伏兵就动手了，他们都扌曳着柴，鼓噪呐喊，尘埃升得很高。
English: As a result, Shiviro, with the help of a large number of people, approached the government army. He set up an ambush in Asada, a few miles away from Chūmonmon's rear, and set up an ambush in Asada. Two miles away, just after the battle, Chūmon's ambush began, and they were all dragging firewood, drumming and shouting, and the dust rose very high.

古文：蜀、汉二江，是其上流，水路冲要，必争之所。
现代文：席毗罗的部队溃逃了，于是仲文乘机追杀，贼人都投洙水而淹死，洙水因此而断流。
English: The two rivers of Shu and Han are the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, waterway fortresses, and have always been a place for soldiers to compete.

古文：贼虽于流头、荆门、延州、公安、巴陵、隐矶、夏首、蕲口、盆城置船，然终聚汉口、峡口，以水战大决。若贼必以上流有军，令精兵赴援者，下流诸将即须择便横渡。如拥众自卫，上江水军鼓行以前。虽恃九江五湖之险，非德无以为固，徒有三吴、百越之兵，无恩不能自立。上览而大悦，转基州刺史，征入朝。仲方因面陈经略，上善之，赐以御袍袴，并杂彩五百段，进位开府而遣之。及大举伐陈，以仲方为行军总管，率兵与秦王会。及陈平，坐事免。未几，复位。后数载，转会州总管。
现代文：仲文活捉了檀让，用囚车把他送到京师。黄河以南地区全部平定。
English: Zhongwen captured Danzhang alive and sent him to the capital in a prison van. All areas south of the Yellow River were pacified.

古文：时诸羌犹未宾附，诏令仲方击之，与贼三十馀战，紫祖、四邻、望方、涉题、干碉、小铁围山、白男王、弱水等诸部悉平。赐奴婢一百三十口，黄金三十斤，杂物称是。
现代文：席毗罗藏在荥阳一户民家，被捉来杀了，把他的首级传到京师。朝廷为于仲文刻石纪功，碑就树立在泗水之滨。于仲文回到京师朝见高祖，高祖引他到内室，一起饮宴，极尽欢乐。赐他杂采一千多段，妓女十人，又授他柱国、河南道大行台。
English: Shifiro was hidden in a private house in Shenyang. He was caught and killed, and his head was sent to Beijing. The imperial court engraved a stone monument to Zhongwen, and the monument was erected on the shore of Surabaya. Yu Zhongwen returned to Beijing to see Gaozu in the morning. Gaozu led him to the inner room, had a banquet together, and was extremely happy. He was given more than a thousand pieces of miscellaneous plunder, ten prostitutes, and he was also awarded the pillar country and the Henan Road.

古文：仁寿初，授代州总管，在职数年，被征入朝。
现代文：刚好这时高祖受北周之禅，他就留在了京师。不久，他的叔父、太尉于翼因罪下狱，于仲文也被有关官吏抓到牢里去了。
English: It was just at this time that Gao Zu was introduced to Northern Zhou's Zen, and he remained in the Beijing division. Soon after, his uncle, Lieutenant Yu Ying, was sent to prison for a crime, and Yu Zhongwen was also taken to prison by the relevant officials.

古文：会上崩，汉王谅馀党据吕州不下，炀帝令周罗攻之，中流矢卒，乃令仲方代总其众，月馀拔之。
现代文：他在狱中上书高祖，说：我听说春生夏长，是天地平分之功；子孝臣忠，是人伦不易之道。过去尉迟迥作乱，所在之处，如影随物地都追随他。我地处险要的函谷关和黄河之间，地方是要冲。
English: In prison, he wrote to Gao Zu, saying, "I heard that being born in the spring and the summer is the achievement of leveling the heavens and the earth; being a filial son and a loyal subject is a difficult path to human relations. In the past, I was late to make trouble, and wherever I was, I followed him like a shadow. We are located between the dangerous Hanzhouguan and the Yellow River, and the place is rushing.

古文：进位大将军，拜民部尚书，寻转礼部尚书。
现代文：我尝胆枕戈，誓死为国。尉迟迥当时收买我，用大将军的官位和万户侯的爵禄。
English: I had the courage to die for my country. At that time, I was bribed with the official rank of general and the peerage of the Prince of Ten Thousand Households.

古文：后三载，坐事免。
现代文：我不顾妻子儿女，不爱惜自己的生命，冒着白刃，突破重围。
English: I disregarded my wife and children, did not spare my own life, braved the white blade, and broke through the encirclement.

古文：寻为国子祭酒，转太常卿。
现代文：我的三个儿子、一个女儿，相继惨死。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the son of the state, and changed his title to Taizongqing.

古文：朝廷以其衰老，出拜上郡太守。
现代文：我披肝沥胆，跑到京师。承蒙陛下授我高官，委我兵权。
English: Due to his old age and frail health, the imperial court made him the governor of Shang County.

古文：未几，以母忧去职。
现代文：那时黄河以南的贼人，如狼似鸱。
English: At that time, thieves south of the Yellow River were like wolves.

古文：岁馀，起为信都太守，上表乞骸骨，优诏许之。
现代文：我以八千疲弱兵卒，扫除妖雾，在梁郡打败刘子宽，在蓼堤打败檀让，平定曹州，收复东郡、安城、武定、永昌，解了亳州之围，消灭了徐州的贼人。
English: With eight thousand weak soldiers, I swept away the evil mist, defeated Liu Zikang in Liang County, defeated Danzhang in Zhudi, pacified Caozhou, recovered Dong County, Ancheng, Wuding, and Yongchang, lifted the siege of Zhangzhou, and eliminated the thieves in Xuzhou.

古文：寻卒于家，时年七十六。
现代文：席毗罗的十万之众，一战便土崩瓦解；黄河南边的蚁聚之徒，我都按时消灭了。
English: The hundred thousand people of Shivira fell apart in one battle; the ant-gatherers on the south side of the Yellow River, I destroyed in time.

古文：子民寿，官至定陶令。○于仲文兄凯从父弟玺
现代文：在群凶问鼎之时，百姓无主之日，我的二叔于翼先在幽州，总管燕赵，他南邻反贼，北防胡人。
English: At the height of the war, when the people had no master, my second uncle Yu Yuxian was in Yuzhou, the head of Yan Zhao, his southern neighbor, the anti-thief, and the northern defense Hu people.

古文：于仲文，字次武，建平公义之兄子。
现代文：他内外安抚，辖区才得以免遭祸害。
English: He pacified both inside and outside, and the jurisdiction was able to avoid the scourge.

古文：父实，周大左辅、燕国公。
现代文：我的五叔于智，在黑水一带树起大旗，与反贼王谦为邻。
English: My fifth uncle, Yu Zhi, set up a large banner in the Blackwater area and became neighbors with the anti-thief Wang Qian.

古文：仲文少聪敏，髫龀就学，耽阅不倦。
现代文：五叔他遏制蛮人，镇守蜀道。我的兄长于岂页，任州牧于淮南，受命杀敌，他乘机剿贼，传贼人首级到京师。
English: My fifth uncle, he curbed the barbarians and guarded the Shu Road. My elder brother, Yu Xizhe, was appointed as a state shepherd in Huainan and was ordered to kill the enemy. He took the opportunity to fight the thieves and summon the head of the thieves to Beijing.

古文：其父异之曰： 此兒必兴吾宗矣。 
现代文：王谦窃据二江，背叛于蜀。我的第三个叔父于义，受命于朝廷，替天讨逆。
English: Wang Qian stole the territory of Erjiang and betrayed Shu. My third uncle, Yu Yi, was ordered by the imperial court to rebel on behalf of Heaven.

古文：九岁，尝于云阳宫见周太祖，太祖问曰： 闻兒好读书，书有何事？ 
现代文：我家此外的父叔兄弟，都受到文武重任，或受命于危难之际，或侍卫于战阵之前。我们于家全家忠诚，望能查明真相。
English: All the other uncles and brothers in my family have been entrusted with important military and diplomatic duties, or have been ordered in times of danger, or have served as guards before the battle. We are loyal to the whole family and hope to be able to find out the truth.

古文：仲文对曰： 资父事君，忠孝而已。 
现代文：请陛下垂泣辜之恩，降云雨之施，追草昧之始，录点滴小功。
English: I would like to ask His Majesty to weep for the grace of his heart, to pray for the rain and the clouds, to trace the beginning of the weeds, and to record the small achievements.

古文：太祖甚嗟叹之。其后就博士李祥受《周易》、《三礼》。
现代文：这样，那么就能死灰重燃，枯骨生肉，不胜感激之至，谨冒死上闻。
English: In this way, the ashes of the dead can be rekindled, and the bones and flesh of the dead can be reborn. I am very grateful for this, and I am willing to take the risk.

古文：略通大义。
现代文：皇上看了表章，将于仲文和于翼都放了。
English: The emperor looked at the badge and released both Zhou Zhongwen and Yu Ying.

古文：及长，倜傥有大志，气调英拔，当时号为名公子。
现代文：不久，皇上下诏，让于仲文率兵屯扎在白狼塞，以防备胡人。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued an edict to have Yu Zhongwen and his soldiers camp at White Wolf Pass to be on the lookout for Hu people.

古文：起家为赵王属，寻迁安固太守。
现代文：次年，授他行军元帅，统帅十二总管，以进攻胡人。
English: The following year, he was awarded the title of marching marshal and commander of the 12th General Administration to attack the Hu people.

古文：有任、杜两家各失牛，后得一牛，两家俱认，州郡久不能决。
现代文：出兵服远镇，遇到胡军，打败了他们，斩首一千多级，得到牲畜数以万计。
English: He sent troops to Yuancheng, encountered the Hu army, defeated them, beheaded more than a thousand, and obtained tens of thousands of livestock.

古文：益州长史韩伯俊曰： 于安固少聪察，可令决之。 仲文对曰： 此易解耳。 
现代文：于是，从金河出白道，派总管辛明瑾、元滂、贺兰志、吕楚、段谐等二万人出盛乐道，到那颉山去。官军到了护军川北边，与胡人军相遇，可汗见于仲文的军队军容整肃，不战而退。
English: Therefore, from Jinhe, they went to Bai Dao, and dispatched 20,000 people, including the chief commanders Xin Mingyao, Yuan Qi, Helan Zhi, Lu Chu, and Duan Jing, to go to Sheng Le Dao and go to Nanzhong Mountain. The government army arrived at the north side of the Military River and met with the Hu people's army. The Khan saw that the army of Zhongwen was tidying up and withdrew without a fight.

古文：于是令二家各驱牛群至，乃放所认者，遂向任氏群中。
现代文：于仲文率领精干的五千骑兵，越山追击，没追上而回还。
English: Yu Zhongwen led the elite five thousand cavalry, chased across the mountains, did not catch up and returned.

古文：又阴使人微伤其牛，任氏嗟惋，杜家自若。
现代文：皇上因尚书省文书多而杂，官吏多行奸诈，让于仲文调查尚书省的事。
English: The emperor gave Zhongwen the task of investigating the affairs of Shangshu due to the fact that the documents of Shangshu were many and complicated, and the officials were often treacherous.

古文：仲文于是诃诘杜氏，杜氏服罪而去。
现代文：他所揭发的尚书省的问题很多，皇上嘉奖他的明断，厚加慰劳赏赐。
English: There were many problems with the Ministry of Education and Culture that he uncovered. The Emperor commended his clear-headedness and rewarded him for his hard work.

古文：始州刺史屈突尚，宇文护之党也，先坐事下狱，无敢绳者。仲文至郡穷治，遂竟其狱。
现代文：皇上每每担心运输跟不上，于仲文请求挖掘疏通渭水，开通水运。皇上以为然，让仲文总管这件事。到伐陈战争时，授他行军总管，率水军从章山出汉口。
English: The emperor was worried that transportation would not be able to keep up, so he asked Zhongwen to excavate the canal, clear the water, and start water transportation. The emperor thought so, and let Zhongwen be in charge of this matter. When it came to the Battle of Jiaocheng, he was given the title of chief marching officer and led the navy from Zhangshan to Hankou.

古文：蜀中为之语曰： 明断无双有于公，不避强御有次武。 
现代文：陈国的郢州刺史荀法尚、鲁山城主诞法澄、邓沙弥等请求投降，秦王杨俊都让于仲文率兵接受他们投降。
English: The Qin King Yang Jun allowed the soldiers led by Zhongwen to accept their surrender.

古文：未几，征为御正下大夫，封延寿郡公，邑三千五百户。
现代文：高智慧等人在江南作乱，他又以行军总管身份讨伐他们。当时三军缺粮，米价猛涨，于仲文私下里卖军粮，因此被除名。次年，他被恢复官爵，率领兵马驻扎在马邑，以防备胡人。
English: At that time, the three armies were short of grain, and the price of rice soared. He sold grain to the troops in secret, and was therefore removed from the list. The following year, he was reinstated as an official peer, and stationed in Ma'e with his soldiers and horses to guard against the Hu people.

古文：数从征伐，累勋授仪同三司。
现代文：过了几十天，就作罢了。晋王杨广因于仲文有将帅之才，常注意他。
English: After a few dozen days, he stopped working on it. King Yang Guang of Jin often paid attention to Zhongwen because of his skill as a general.

古文：宣帝时，为东郡太守。高祖为丞相，尉迥作乱，遣将檀让收河南之地。
现代文：到这时，晋王上奏，要于仲文去，朝廷于是下令让他监督晋王军府之事。
English: At this time, the Jin king appealed to go to Zhongwen, and the court ordered him to supervise the affairs of the Jin king's military headquarters.

古文：复使人诱致仲文，仲文拒之。
现代文：后来突厥进犯边塞，晋王任元帅，让仲文率领先头部队，大破贼人而回。仁寿初年，授仲文为太子右卫率。
English: Later, the Turks invaded the border fortress, and Jin Wang was appointed as a marshal, and let Zhongwen lead the first troops to break the thieves and return. In the first year of Jinshou, Zhongwen was awarded the right guard of the prince.

古文：迥怒其不同己，遣仪同宇文威攻之。
现代文：炀帝即位后，升他为右翊卫大将军，参与掌管选用文臣武将之事。
English: After Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the right guard general and participated in the selection of civilian generals.

古文：仲文迎击，大破威众，斩首五百馀级。
现代文：随炀帝讨伐吐谷浑，仲文升任光禄大夫，很被亲信。辽东战争爆发，于仲文率军直指乐浪道。
English: Accompanying Emperor Qian to fight the Tuyugun, Zhongwen was promoted to the post of Guanglu doctor, and was highly trusted by his relatives. The Liaodong War broke out, and Yu Zhongwen led the army straight to Le Lang Road.

古文：以功授开府。迥又遣其将宇文胄渡石济，宇文威、邹绍自白马，二道俱进，复攻仲文。
现代文：部队驻扎在乌骨城，于仲文挑选瘦弱的马、驴几千头，放在军后。
English: The troops were stationed in the Black Bone City, and Zhongwen selected thousands of emaciated horses and donkeys and placed them behind the army.

古文：贼势逾盛，人情大骇，郡人赫连僧伽、敬子哲率众应迥。
现代文：接着率部往东。高丽人出兵袭击他的后部，仲文回军打击，大破敌军。
English: Then, he led his troops to the east. The Koreans attacked his rear with troops, and Zhongwen returned to the front to strike and destroy the enemy troops.

古文：仲文自度不能支，弃妻子，将六十馀骑，开城西门，溃围而遁。
现代文：到鸭绿江，高丽将领乙支文德诈降，来到于仲文的军营。仲文早就接到密旨，如遇到高元和乙支文德，一定要抓住。到这时，乙支文德来了，于仲文将要活捉他。
English: At the Yalu River, the Goryeo general B Chih Moon-tae, who had betrayed the surrender, came to Yu Zhongwen's camp. Zhongwen had already received a secret order that if he encountered Gao Yuan and B Chih Moon-tae, he must capture them. By this time, B Chih Moon-tae had arrived, and Yu Zhongwen was about to capture him alive.

古文：为贼所追，且战且行，所从骑战死者十七八。
现代文：当时尚书右丞刘士龙任慰抚使，坚持劝阻他。
English: At that time, Shang Shuyuan Liu Shilong was appointed as the consoling envoy, and persisted in dissuading him.

古文：仲文仅而获免，达于京师。迥于是屠其三子一女。
现代文：仲文于是放了乙支文德。接着又后悔，派人骗文德说： 还有话要说，你可再来一下。 
English: Then he regretted it again and sent someone to trick Wende, saying, "I still have something to say, you can come again."

古文：高祖见之，引入卧内，为之下泣。
现代文：文德不听，于是渡江。于仲文选拔骑兵渡江追他。
English: Wen De did not listen, so he crossed the river. Yu Zhongwen selected cavalry to cross the river to chase him.

古文：赐彩五百段，黄金二百两，进位大将军，领河南道行军总管。
现代文：每次作战，必破敌军，乙支文德送诗于仲文说： 神策究天文，妙算穷地理。战胜功既高，知足愿云止。 
English: In every battle, the enemy army must be defeated, and Bixi Wende sent a poem to Zhongwen, saying: God studies astronomy, but he is poor at geography. The victory is already high, but it is not enough.

古文：给以鼓吹，驰传诣洛阳发兵，以讨檀让。
现代文：于仲文回信叫他投降，文德烧掉军营而逃走。
English: Yu Zhongwen wrote back and told him to surrender. Wende burned down the military camp and fled.

古文：时韦孝宽拒迥于永桥，仲文诣孝宽有所计议。
现代文：当时宇文述因粮尽想退军，于仲文说要以精兵追杀乙支文德，可以立功。
English: At that time, Yu Wenshu said that he wanted to withdraw from the army due to lack of food, and Yu Zhongwen said that he wanted to pursue Eulji Mende with elite soldiers, and he could make a contribution.

古文：时总管宇文忻颇有自疑之心，因谓仲文曰： 公新从京师来，观执政意何如也？
现代文：宇文述坚持阻止他，于仲文发怒说： 将军率十万之众，不能破小贼，有何脸面见皇上？而且这么一退，我于仲文此行，就无有战功了。 宇文述也厉声说： 何以见得无功？ 
English: Yu Wenshu insisted on stopping him, and Yu Zhongwen angrily said, "A general leading a hundred thousand people can't defeat a petty thief, what kind of face does he have when he sees the emperor? Moreover, if I retreat like this, I won't have any war achievements during this trip." Yu Wenshu also said in a strong voice, "How can I see no achievements?"

古文：尉迥诚不足平，正恐事宁之后，更有藏弓之虑。 
现代文：于仲文说： 过去周亚夫为将时，看见天子，军容不变。
English: Yu Zhongwen said: In the past, when Zhou Yafu was commander-in-chief, he saw the Son of Heaven, and the appearance of the army remained unchanged.

古文：仲文惧忻生变，因谓之曰： 丞相宽仁大度，明识有馀，苟能竭诚，必心无贰。
现代文：这是因为决定权在他一人手里，所以他能功成名就。现在我们却人各一心，怎能赴敌？ 
English: This is because the decision-making power is in his hands alone, so he can succeed. But now we are all of one mind, how can we go to the enemy?

古文：仲文在京三日，频见三善，以此为观，非寻常人也。 
现代文：起初，炀帝因于仲文有谋略，下令各部听他节制，所以仲文才有这番话。因此，宇文述等人不得已而听他的，于是前行。
English: At first, Emperor Qian had a plan for Zhongwen, and ordered all departments to listen to him and restrain themselves, which is why Zhongwen only said this. Therefore, Wu Wenshu and others had no choice but to listen to him, so they went ahead.

古文：忻曰： 三善如何？ 
现代文：往东到了萨水，宇文述以士兵饥饿为由而退回，所以隋军失败。
English: After heading east to Sasui, Yu Wenshu retreated on the grounds that his soldiers were starving. As a result, the Sui army failed.

古文：仲文曰： 有陈万敌者，新从贼中来，即令其弟难敌召募乡曲，从军讨贼。此其有大度一也。
现代文：炀帝把这事交给有关部门处理，诸将都把罪过推给于仲文。炀帝大怒，放了诸将，独关仲文。仲文忧愤发病，病很重了才出狱，死在家里，时年六十八岁。仲文撰有《汉书刊繁》三十卷、《略览》三十卷。
English: Emperor Qian handed the matter over to the relevant departments to deal with, and the generals all blamed the crime on Zhongwen. Emperor Qian was furious and released the generals, leaving Zhongwen alone. Zhongwen fell into a rage, was very ill before he was released from prison, and died at home at the age of sixty-eight. Zhongwen authored 30 volumes of "Chinese Classics" and 30 volumes of "Summary."

古文：上士宋谦，奉使勾检，谦缘此别求他罪。丞相责之曰： 入网者自可推求，何须别访，以亏大体。 
现代文：有九个儿子，于钦明最有名。
English: He had nine sons, of whom Yu Qinming is the most famous.

古文：此其不求人私二也。
现代文：○于顗顗字元武，身高八尺，丰髯美须。
English: ○ Yu Xuan, the character of Genbu, is eight feet tall and has a full beard.

古文：言及仲文妻子，未尝不潸泫。
现代文：北周大冢宰宇文护见了，很器重他，把小女嫁给他为妻。
English: When the Northern Zhou Grand Vizier and Protector of the North, Yu Wen, saw him, he was very respectful and married the little girl to him as his wife.

古文：此其有仁心三也。 
现代文：不久，因为父亲的功勋，赐他新野郡公爵的爵位，食邑三千户。
English: Soon, because of his father's merits, he was given the title of Duke of Nino-gun, which provided food for three thousand households.

古文：忻自此遂安。
现代文：授他大都督，升任车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: He was awarded the title of Grand Governor and promoted to General of Cavalry and Cavalry and Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：仲文军至汴州之东倪坞，与迥将刘子昂、刘浴德等相遇，进击破之。
现代文：其后累因军功，授为上开府。历任左、右宫伯、郢州刺史。大象中，他以水军总管身份随韦孝宽经略淮南。顗率领开府元绍贵、上仪同毛猛等，率水军从颍口进入淮河。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Shangkaifu for his military exploits. He was successively the Left and Right Palace Counts, and the Governor of Zhangzhou. Among the elephants, he followed Wei Xiaokuan through Huainan as the commander-in-chief of the naval forces. He led the naval forces into the Huaihe River from Zhangkou, led by Kaifu Yuan Shao Gui, Shangyi Tong Mao Meng and others.

古文：军次蓼堤，去梁郡七里，让拥众数万，仲文以羸师挑战。
现代文：陈国防军主帅潘深丢弃军营而逃走。顗进而与韦孝宽攻占寿阳。
English: The commander of Chen's National Defense Army, Pan Sheng, abandoned the camp and fled. He then captured Shouyang with Wei Xiaokuan.

古文：让悉众来拒，仲文伪北，让军颇骄。于是遣精兵左右翼击之，大败让军，生获五千馀人，斩首七百级。
现代文：他又带兵围困硖石，守将许约惧怕而投降，顗于是拜官东广州刺史。尉迟迥反叛时，总管赵文表与顗平素就关系不好。顗将要杀他，因此睡在家里，假装说有心病，对左右说： 我见到两三个人到跟前的，就大惊，就想砍他们，我不能控制自己。 
English: He also besieged Shanshi with his soldiers. The garrison surrendered out of fear, and he then became an admirer of the governor of East Guangzhou, Zhishi. When the lieutenant rebelled, the general manager, Zhao Wenbo, had a bad relationship with Shansi. Shansi was going to kill him, so he slept at home, pretending to have a heart condition, saying to the right and left: "I saw two or three people come up to me, I was shocked, I wanted to cut them, I couldn't control myself."

古文：进攻梁郡，迥守将刘子宽弃城遁走。
现代文：凡有宾客来问候的，都让把左右留在外面。
English: If you have guests coming to greet you, leave them outside.

古文：仲文追击，擒斩数千人，子宽仅以身免。
现代文：顗逐步假称快死了，赵文表去问候他，他让文表的随从到大门口停下来，让文表独自一个到顗的卧室。
English: Gong gradually pretended to be dying. Zhao Wenbo went to greet him. He asked Wenbo's entourage to stop at the gate and let Wenbo go to Gong's bedroom alone.

古文：初，仲文在蓼堤，诸将皆曰： 军自远来，士马疲敝，不可决胜。 
现代文：顗突然跳起来，抽刀杀了他，因此高声说： 赵文表与尉迟迥通谋，所以杀了他。 文表的麾下，没有敢动手的。
English: He suddenly jumped up and killed him with his sword, saying in a loud voice, "Zhao Wenbai conspired with his lieutenant to kill him, and Wenbai's subordinates didn't dare to do anything.

古文：仲文令三军趣食，列阵大战。
现代文：这时高祖因尉迟迥未平，怕顗又生边患，因此慰劳他，就授他吴州总管。
English: At this time, Gao Zu consoled him for his delay in taking office, fearing that he might be ill again, and awarded him the post of Wuzhou Chief Administrator.

古文：既而破贼，诸将皆请曰： 前兵疲不可交战，竟而克胜，其计安在？ 
现代文：陈国将军钱茂和率几千人，袭击江阳，顗迎战并打跑了他们。陈国又派将领陈纪、周罗目侯、燕合儿等袭击顗，顗抗击并打退了他们。
English: Chen's general Qian Maohu, with several thousand men, attacked Jiangyang, met the Mongols in battle and drove them away. Chen also sent generals Chen Ji, Zhou Romuhou, Yan He'er and others to attack the Mongols, resist and repel them.

古文：仲文笑曰： 吾所部将士皆山东人，果于速进，不宜持久。乘势击之，所以制胜。 
现代文：皇上赐他缣采几百段。隋高祖受北周之禅后，赵文表的弟弟到朝廷称其兄长无罪。
English: The emperor gave him several hundred rupees. After the Sui Emperor Gaozhu accepted Northern Zhou's Zen, Zhao Wenbo's younger brother went to the imperial court to say that his brother was not guilty.

古文：诸将皆以为非所及也。
现代文：皇上下令调查这事。太傅窦炽等人认为，顗应处死。
English: The emperor ordered an investigation into the matter. Taifu Doucheng and others believed that Gong should be put to death.

古文：进击曹州，获迥所署刺史李仲康及上仪同房劲。
现代文：皇上因于家功勋卓著，特别原宥了他，只贬他为开府。
English: The emperor was particularly fond of him because of his outstanding family achievements, and only demoted him to the position of the head of the government.

古文：檀让以馀众屯城武，别将高士儒以万人屯永昌。
现代文：顗后来承袭了燕国公的爵位，食邑一万六千户。不久因病免职。
English: Later, Zou inherited the title of Prince of Yan Province, with 16,000 households. He was soon relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：仲文诈移书州县曰： 大将军至，可多积粟。 
现代文：开皇七年，授他泽州刺史。过了几年，免职，在家去世。
English: In the seventh year of the emperor's reign, he was awarded the title of Zeshu sashimi. A few years later, he was relieved of his duties and died at home.

古文：让谓仲文未能卒至，方槌牛享士。
现代文：他儿子于世虔继承爵位。
English: His son, Yu Shijian, succeeded to the title.

古文：仲文知其怠，选精骑袭之，一日便至，遂拔城武。迥将席毗罗，众十万，屯于沛县，将攻徐州。
现代文：○于玺于玺字伯符，父亲于翼，仕北周为上柱国、幽州总管、任国公。隋高祖为北周丞相后，尉迟迥作乱，派人引诱于翼。于翼抓了使者，送到长安，高祖很高兴。高祖受禅后，于翼入朝，皇上为迎接他，从榻上下来，与他握手，非常高兴。几天后，授他为太尉。过了一年多，去世，谥号为 穆 。
English: ○ Yu Zhi was a member of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and his father was a member of the Eastern Zhou Dynasty. His father was a member of the Eastern Zhou Dynasty, and his father was a member of the Western Zhou Dynasty. His father was a member of the Northern Zhou Dynasty, and his father was a member of the Eastern Zhou Dynasty. His father was a member of the Eastern Zhou Dynasty, and his father was a member of the Western Zhou Dynasty. His father was a member of the Eastern Zhou Dynasty, and his father was a member of the Western Zhou Dynasty. His father was a member of the Eastern Zhou Dynasty, and his father was a member of the Western

古文：其妻子在金乡。
现代文：于玺小时就有才干，仕北周，开始任右侍上士。
English: He showed his talent at the eleventh hour and served as the Northern Zhou, starting as the Right Attendant Staff Sergeant.

古文：仲文遣人诈为毗罗使者，谓金乡城主徐善净曰： 檀让明日午时到金乡，将宣蜀公令，赏赐将士。 
现代文：不久授他仪同，兼管右羽林军，升任少胥附。周武帝时，他随齐王宇文宪在洛阳打败北齐军队，因功赐他丰宁县子的爵位，食邑五百户。不久随武帝平定北齐，加授开府，改封为黎阳县公爵，食邑一千二百户。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhou Wu, he followed Qi Wang Yuwen Xian to defeat the Northern Qi army in Luoyang, and was awarded the title of Fengning County for his service, with a population of 500 households. Soon after Emperor Wu conquered Northern Qi, he was awarded the title of Kaifu, and was renamed the Duke of Liyang County, with a population of 1,200 households.

古文：金乡人谓为信然，皆喜。
现代文：授为职方中大夫。到周宣帝即位后，他转任右勋曹中大夫，不久兼管右忠义军。
English: After Emperor Zhou Xuan ascended to the throne, he was transferred to the post of the Right Honorable Cao Zhongdafu, and soon he was also in charge of the Right Loyalist Army.

古文：仲文简精兵，伪建迥旗帜，倍道而进。善净望见仲文军且至，以为檀让，乃出迎谒。
现代文：隋高祖为北周丞相，加授他上开府。高祖受禅后，升他任大将军，授他汴州刺史。
English: Sui Gaozu was the minister of Northern Zhou Dynasty, and he was awarded the title of Shangkaifu. After Gaozu accepted Zen, he was promoted to general, and he was awarded the title of Zhangzhou Sashishi.

古文：仲文执之，遂取金乡。
现代文：他很有才名，皇上知道了称赞他，下诏书褒奖他，赐他布帛上百匹。
English: Yu Zhongwen seized the opportunity to take down Xu Shengjing, and thus captured Jinxiang City.

古文：诸将多劝屠之，仲文曰： 此城是毗罗起兵之所，当宽其妻子，其兵可自归。
现代文：不久升他为上大将军，晋爵位为郡公。转任邵州刺史，在州里几年，很有恩惠。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of senior general and given the title of county magistrate. He was appointed as the governor of Shaozhou, and was very favored for several years in the state.

古文：如即屠之，彼望绝矣。 
现代文：后任检校江陵总管，州里人张愿等几十人，到朝廷上表，请求留下于玺。
English: If we slaughtered their wives, children and families, they would be in utter despair.

古文：众皆称善。
现代文：皇上叹赏很久，让他回到邵州。
English: Everyone praised it and said it was good.

古文：于是毗罗恃众来薄官军，仲文背城结阵，去军数里，设伏于麻田中。
现代文：州里父老们相互庆贺。不久调任洛阳刺史，又任熊州刺史，都有仁政。
English: The fathers and grandfathers in the prefecture congratulated each other. Soon he was transferred to Luoyang and then to Xiongzhou, both of which were benevolent regimes.

古文：两阵才合，伏兵发，俱曳柴鼓噪，尘埃张天。
现代文：因病调回京师。
English: Due to illness, he was transferred back to the Kyoto division.

古文：毗罗军大溃，仲文乘之，贼皆投洙水而死，为之不流。获檀让，槛送京师，河南悉平。毗罗匿荥阳人家，执斩之，传首阙下。
现代文：仁寿末年，在家中去世。
English: He died at home at the end of his life.

古文：勒石纪功，树于泗上。
现代文：谥号叫 静 。有儿子名叫于志本。
English: Her nickname is Shizuka. She has a son named Yushimoto.

古文：入朝京师，高祖引入卧内，宴享极欢。
现代文：○段文振
English: ○Dan Wen Zhen

古文：赐杂彩千馀段，妓女十人，拜柱国、河南道大行台。
现代文：段文振，北海期原人。祖父段寿，西魏沧州刺史。父亲段威，北周洮州、河州、甘州、渭州四州刺史。
English: Duan Wenzhen was born in the North Sea period. His grandfather, Duan Shou, was born in Cangzhou in the Western Wei Dynasty. His father, Duan Wei, was born in Bozhou, Hezhou, Ganzhou and Shizhou in the Northern Zhou Dynasty.

古文：属高祖受禅，不行。
现代文：段文振小时就有膂力，胆量过人，生性正直，通晓时务。
English: As soon as Duan Wen is vibrated, there will be strength, courage, honesty, and knowledge of current affairs.

古文：未几，其叔父太尉翼坐事下狱，仲文亦为吏所簿，于狱中上书曰：
现代文：刚为宇文护亲信时，宇文护知他有才干，提拔他当中外府兵曹。
English: When he was just a close confidant of Umenomori, Umenomori knew that he had talent and promoted him to the rank of foreign prefectural petty officer.

古文：臣闻春生夏长，天地平分之功，子孝臣诚，人伦不易之道。
现代文：后来，北周武帝在晋州进攻北齐的海昌王尉相贵，尉相贵的亚将侯子钦、崔景嵩为内应。段文振以槊为杖，与崔仲方等几十人率先登上晋州城。
English: Later, the Northern Zhou Emperor attacked the Northern Qi's Prince Haichang in Jinzhou, and his subordinate generals Hou Ziqin and Cui Jingsong supported him. Duanwen Zhen used a scepter as a staff, and he and Cui Zhongfang and dozens of others took the lead in climbing up to Jinzhou City.

古文：曩者尉迥逆乱，所在影从。
现代文：段文振随崔景嵩到尉相贵的住处，拔出佩刀迫他投降，尉相贵不敢动弹，晋州城于是被攻下。
English: Duanwen Zhen followed Cui Jingsong to the residence of Liao Zangui, pulled out a saber to force him to surrender, Liao Zangui did not dare to move, and Jinzhou City was then captured.

古文：臣任处关河，地居冲要，尝胆枕戈，誓以必死。
现代文：北周武帝十分高兴，赐他布帛上千段。进而攻占文侯、华谷、高壁三城，他都有功劳。
English: The Northern Zhouwu Emperor was very pleased and gave him more than a thousand pieces of cloth. He then conquered the three cities of Wenhou, Huaya, and Gaobi, all of which he was responsible for.

古文：迥时购臣位大将军、邑万户。
现代文：到攻并州时，他攻陷城东门而进去，北齐安德王高延宗惧怕而出来投降。
English: When it came time to attack and annex the province, he attacked the east gate of the city and entered it. King Gao Yanzong of North Qi'an was afraid and came out to surrender.

古文：臣不顾妻子，不爱身命，冒白刃，溃重围，三男一女，相继沦没，披露肝胆，驰赴阙庭。蒙陛下授臣以高官，委臣以兵革。
现代文：朝廷录他前后的功勋，将授他高官，因有人上谗言而被谴责，因此只授他上仪同，赐他襄国县公的爵位，食邑一千户。
English: The imperial court recorded his merits before and after, and will award him a high-ranking official. Because he was criticized by some people, he was condemned, so he was only awarded a high-ranking official, and he was given the title of Xiangguo County and a thousand households.

古文：于时河南凶寇，狼顾鸱张，臣以羸兵八千，扫除氛昆。
现代文：进而他又平定邺都，又赐他罗绮二千匹。后来他随滕王宇文荄攻击稽胡，打破敌军。
English: He then subdued Xindu and gave him two thousand Luo horses. Later, he attacked Qihu along with King Teng Yuwen and defeated the enemy army.

古文：摧刘宽于梁郡，破檀让于蓼堤，平曹州，复东郡、安城、武定、永昌，解亳州围，殄徐州贼。
现代文：历任相州别驾、扬州总管长史。
English: Successive governors of Xiangzhou and Yangzhou have gone down in history.

古文：席毗十万之众，一战土崩，河南蚁聚之徒，应时戡定。
现代文：入京任天官都上士，随韦孝宽经略淮南。不久尉迟迥作乱，当时段文振的老母亲和妻子儿女都在邺城，尉迟迥派人引诱他，文振不顾，归随隋高祖。
English: He entered Beijing as a senior sergeant of Tianguandu and went to Huainan with Wei Xiaokuan. Not long after, he caused a disturbance. At that time, Duan Wenzhen's old mother and his wife and children were in Lucheng. He sent someone to lure him, but Wenzhen ignored him and followed Sui Gaozu.

古文：当群凶问鼎之际，黎元乏主之辰，臣第二叔翼先在幽州，总驭燕、赵，南邻群寇，北捍旄头，内外安抚，得免罪戾。
现代文：高祖任他为丞相掾，兼任宿卫骠骑。司马消难投奔陈国后，高祖让段文振安抚淮南。回京后，授他卫尉少卿，兼任内史侍郎。
English: Gao Zu appointed him as the second secretary of the imperial palace, and also served as the second-in-command of the imperial guards. After Sima fled to Chen Province, Gao Zu let Duan Wenzhen pacify Huainan. After returning to Beijing, he was awarded the rank of second secretary of the imperial guards, and also served as the attendant of the imperial historian.

古文：臣第五叔智建斿黑水，与王谦为邻，式遏蛮陬，镇绥蜀道。
现代文：不久以行军长史身份随达奚震讨伐背叛的南蛮，平定了他们，被加授上开府。过了一年多，升任鸿胪卿。
English: Soon, as a long-term marcher, he went to Quan Zhen to fight against the traitorous Southern Barbarians, pacified them, and was awarded the title of Shangkaifu. After more than a year, he was promoted to Hongyuqing.

古文：臣兄顗作牧淮南，坐制勍敌，乘机剿定，传首京师。
现代文：卫王杨爽北征突厥，让段文振任长史，因功劳簿不实而被免官。后作石州、河州二州刺史，很有威名和恩惠。
English: Yang Shuang, the king of Wei, led the Northern Expedition against the Turks, leaving Duanwen Zhenren to write the long history. He was dismissed from his post due to the fact that his service record was not true. Later, he wrote the history of Shishu and Hezhou, which was very prestigious and favored.

古文：王谦窃据二江，叛换三蜀。
现代文：迁任兰州总管，改封龙岗县公。
English: He was transferred to the post of Lanzhou chief administrator, and changed his title to Longgang County official.

古文：臣第三叔义受脤庙庭，龚行天讨。
现代文：突厥人进犯边塞，他以行军总管的身份率部破敌，一直追击到居延塞才回还。
English: The Turks attacked the frontier fortress, and he, as the commander-in-chief of the march, led the troops to defeat the enemy, and pursued them until they reached Juyan fortress before returning.

古文：自外父叔兄弟，皆当文武重寄，或衔命危难之间，或侍卫钩陈之侧，合门诚款，冀有可明。
现代文：开皇九年，隋国大举伐陈，以段文振为元帅秦王的司马，另兼行军总管。平定江南后，授他为扬州总管司马。
English: In the ninth year of the Emperor's reign, the State of Sui carried out a large-scale felling of stumps, with Duan Wen Zhen as the marshal of the Qin King, and also as the commander-in-chief. After the south of the Yangtze River was pacified, he was awarded as the commander-in-chief of Yangzhou.

古文：伏愿下泣辜之恩，降云雨之施，追草昧之始，录涓滴之功，则寒灰更然，枯骨生肉，不胜区区之至，谨冒死以闻。上览表，并翼俱释之。
现代文：不久他又转任并州总管司马，因母丧离职。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of the state chief administrator, Sima, and left the post due to the death of his mother.

古文：未几，诏仲文率兵屯白狼塞以备胡。明年，拜行军元帅，统十二总管以击胡。
现代文：不久，令他复职管事，他坚持推辞，但朝廷不许可。几年后，授他云州总管，不久任太仆卿。
English: Soon, he was reinstated as a steward, he insisted on resigning, but the court did not allow it. A few years later, he was awarded the post of Yunnan chief steward, and soon after, the post of eunuch.

古文：出服远镇，遇虏，破之，斩首千馀级，六畜巨万计。
现代文：开皇十九年，突厥人进犯边塞，段文振以行军总管的身份抵敌，在沃野遭遇达头可汗，大破敌军。段文振早先与王世积有旧交，起初，文振北征，王世积送给他骆驼、马匹。
English: In the 19th year of the Emperor's reign, the Turks attacked the border fortress, and Duan Wen Zhen, as the commander-in-chief of the marching troops, fought against the enemy and encountered the Dadu Khan in the fertile field, defeating the enemy army. Duan Wen Zhen had an old friendship with Wang Shizhe earlier. At the beginning of the Northern Expedition of Wen Zhen, Wang Shizhe gave him camels and horses.

古文：于是从金河出白道，遣总管辛明瑾、元滂、贺兰志、吕楚、段谐等二万人出盛乐道，趋那颉山。
现代文：文振回京后，王世积因罪被杀，段文振因与他交好，功勋于是不被录取。次年，率部出灵州道以防备胡人，无敌而还。越間蛮反叛，段文振讨平了他们，朝廷赐他奴婢二百人。
English: After Wen Zhen returned to Beijing, Wang Shizhe was killed for his crime, and Duan Wen Zhen was not admitted because of his friendship and merits. The following year, he led his troops out of Lingshou Road to guard against the Hu people, but they were invincible. The Yue people rebelled violently, Duan Wen Zhen defeated them, and the court gave him two hundred slaves.

古文：至护军川北，与虏相遇，可汗见仲文军容齐肃，不战而退。
现代文：仁寿初年，嘉州獠造反，段文振以行军总管身份讨伐他们。
English: In the first year of Ren Shou's reign, the Jiazhou cormorants rebelled, and Duan Wen Zhen fought them as the commander-in-chief.

古文：仲文率精骑五千，逾山追之，不及而还。
现代文：他领兵出山谷间，被贼人袭击，前后阻于险，不得相互救援，官军于是大败。
English: He led the soldiers out of the valley, was attacked by thieves, was blocked by danger, was not allowed to rescue each other, and the government army was defeated.

古文：上以尚书文簿繁杂，吏多奸计，令仲文勘录省中事。
现代文：段文振又收集散兵，出其不意而攻击他们，最后打败贼人。段文振生性刚正，不肯在人之下。
English: Duan Wenzhen gathered the scattered soldiers again, attacked them by surprise, and finally defeated the thieves. Duan Wenzhen was a man of integrity, and refused to be subordinate to others.

古文：其所发擿甚多，上嘉其明断，厚加劳赏焉。
现代文：当初，官军在益州驻扎，他拜见蜀王杨秀，样子对蜀王不大恭敬，杨秀很忌恨他。
English: At first, the government army was stationed in Yizhou. When he met Yang Xiu, the King of Shu, he did not show much respect for him. Yang Xiu hated him.

古文：上每忧转运不给，仲文请决渭水，开漕渠。
现代文：到现在，杨秀告段文振军白白地败绩送死。右仆射苏威，与段文振有矛盾，因此上谗言害他。
English: Up to now, Yang Xiu told Duan Wen Zhen that the army had lost in vain and died. His right-hand man, Shu Suwei, had a conflict with Duan Wen Zhen, so he slandered him.

古文：上然之，使仲文总其事。
现代文：他因此被除名。到杨秀被废王后，段文振上表申冤，高祖安慰他，授他大将军。
English: As a result, he was expelled. When Yang Xiu was dethroned as queen, Duanwen filed a complaint. Gaozu consoled him and awarded him the rank of general.

古文：及伐陈之役，拜行军总管，以舟师自章山出汉口。
现代文：不久授他灵州总管。炀帝即位后，调他任兵部尚书，待遇很深。
English: He was soon given the post of Lingzhou governor-general. After the enthronement of Emperor Zhou, he was transferred to the post of military commissar, and was treated very well.

古文：陈郢州刺史荀法尚、鲁山城主诞法澄、邓沙弥等请降，秦王俊皆令仲文以兵纳之。
现代文：随军征讨吐谷浑，段文振督兵驻扎在雪山，连营三百多里，东接杨义臣，西连张寿，把吐谷浑国主围困在覆袁川。
English: Accompanying the army to recruit and discuss Tuyuhun, Duanwen Zhendu soldiers were stationed in the Snow Mountain, more than three hundred miles away, east of Yang Yichen, west of Zhang Shou, and besieged the ruler of Tuyuhun in the Yuan River.

古文：高智慧等作乱江南，复以行军总管讨之。
现代文：他因战功升任右光禄大夫。炀帝巡幸江都，让段文振兼管江都郡事。
English: He was promoted to Uguanglu doctor due to his war service. Emperor Gao toured the Yangtze River, leaving Duanwen Zhen in charge of Yangtze River county affairs.

古文：时三军乏食，米粟踊贵，仲文私粜军粮，坐除名。
现代文：段文振见高祖那时容纳突厥的启民可汗于塞内，又嫁给他公主，不断地赏赐他，到了大业初，对他的赏赐更多。段文振考虑到，突厥可汗，狼子野心，恐为国家祸害。
English: Duanwen Zhen saw that Gaozu then received the Turkic Qin people's khan in Senai, married his princess, and constantly rewarded him. At the beginning of his great career, he was rewarded more. Duanwen Zhen considered that the Turkic khan, the wolf's ambition, was a national scourge.

古文：明年，复官爵，率兵屯马邑以备胡。
现代文：于是他上表说： 我听说古时候远方人不乱近处人，夷人不乱华夏。
English: So he said aloud, "I heard that in ancient times, people from far away did not disturb people from nearby, and people from afar did not disturb people from China.

古文：数旬而罢。晋王广以仲文有将领之才，每常属意，至是奏之，乃令督晋王军府事。
现代文：周宣王外攘戎狄，秦始皇筑城万里，这是远谋良计，不能忘记。我看国家容纳启民可汗，给他士兵吃的，借给他地利。
English: Zhou Xuan Wang went abroad to conquer and conquer, and Qin Shihuang built a great city. This is a far-sighted strategy and must not be forgotten. I see the country accommodating the Qimin Khan, giving him soldiers to eat, and lending him territory.

古文：后突厥犯塞，晋王为元帅，以仲文将前军，大破贼而还。
现代文：如按我的糊涂想法，以为这种作法欠妥当。为什么呢？
English: According to my muddled thinking, I thought this practice was inappropriate. Why?

古文：仁寿初，拜太子右卫率。炀帝即位，迁右翊卫大将军，参掌文武选事。
现代文：胡人的生性，不亲近人，很贪婪，他弱小时就投靠你，强大了就反要吃掉你，这是他们的本性。
English: The nature of the wolf is to be aloof and greedy. When it is weak, it will rely on you, but when it is strong, it will eat you. This is their nature.

古文：从帝讨吐谷浑，进位光禄大夫，甚见亲幸。
现代文：我学问不渊博，不能有远见，只听说过晋朝的刘曜、梁代的侯景的事。近代这些事情的应验，众所周知，依我看来，启民可汗必为国家大害。
English: I am not well-read and have no foresight. I have only heard about Liu You of the Jin Dynasty and Hou Jing of the Liang Dynasty. The fulfillment of these events in modern times is well known. In my opinion, the Qimin Khan must be a great harm to the country.

古文：辽东之役，仲文率军指乐浪道。
现代文：依我的计策，按时打发他走，让他们到塞外去。
English: According to my plan, I sent him away on time and let them go out of the country.

古文：军次乌骨城，仲文简羸马驴数千，置于军后。
现代文：然后设上烽火，沿着边境防守，一定要严密，这是千秋万代的长远谋略。 
English: Then set up a bonfire, along the border defense, must be strict, this is a long-term strategy.

古文：既而率众东过，高丽出兵掩袭辎重，仲文回击，大破之。
现代文：当时，兵曹郎斛斯政专掌兵权。段文振知道他是个凶险无德的家伙，不可把机密大权交给他，所以屡次对炀帝说这事，炀帝都不采纳。
English: At that time, Petty Officer Lang Ye's political specialist was in charge of the military. Duan Wen Zhen knew that he was a dangerous and evil guy, and he could not give him the power of confidentiality, so he repeatedly said this to Emperor Gao, and Emperor Gao did not accept it.

古文：至鸭绿水，高丽将乙支文德诈降，来入其营。
现代文：辽东战争爆发，炀帝授段文振左侯卫大将军，率部出南苏道。
English: When the Liaodong War broke out, Emperor Qian conferred the title of Duanwen Zhenzao Houwei on the general, and he led the troops out of the South Sudo Province.

古文：仲文先奉密旨，若遇高元及文德者，必擒之。
现代文：在路上，他病得很重，上表炀帝说： 我以凡庸、微贱之身，幸逢盛世，承受奖励提拔，我的荣誉超过了同辈人。
English: On the way, he was very ill. On the table, Emperor Qian said: I am a mediocre and lowly person. I have been fortunate to have a prosperous life, receive awards and promotions, and my honor exceeds that of my contemporaries.

古文：至是，文德来，仲文将执之。时尚书右丞刘士龙为慰抚使，固止之。
现代文：但是，我的智能无所可取，得到的又太多，因此我常念叨国家的大恩，废寝忘食，我常想效犬马之劳，以报答国家大恩于万一。
English: However, my intelligence is unsatisfactory, and I have received too much, so I often talk about the great kindness of the country, and I often want to work hard to repay the great kindness of the country.

古文：仲文遂舍文德。
现代文：但我养身无方，疾病于是很重。
English: But there was nothing I could do to improve my health, so my illness was very severe.

古文：寻悔，遣人绐文德曰： 更有言议，可复来也。 文德不从，遂济。仲文选骑渡水追之，每战破贼。
现代文：抱着如此深的愧疚，就要永远地埋在地下，我承受不了巨大遗憾，于是略略陈述一点我的管见。
English: I can't bear the immense regret of being buried forever with such a deep sense of guilt, so I'll just state my opinion.

古文：文德遗仲文诗曰： 神策究天文，妙算穷地理。
现代文：我看这辽东小丑，不服严刑，我国远降六军，皇上御驾亲征。
English: In my opinion, this clown from Liaodong did not serve a severe sentence, and our country was relegated to the 6th army, and the emperor personally led the conscription.

古文：战胜功既高，知足愿云止。 
现代文：但是，夷狄多行其诈，皇上要多多防备。
English: However, Empress Dowager Cixi often resorted to deception, and the emperor had to be on guard against it.

古文：仲文答书谕之，文德烧栅而遁。
现代文：他们往往口里说投降，心里却想背叛，可谓诡计多端，请不要随意接受他们投降。
English: They often say they surrender, but in their hearts they want to betray. They are very cunning. Please do not accept their surrender at will.

古文：时宇文述以粮尽欲还，仲文议以精锐追文德，可以有功。
现代文：眼下水位正好下降，我军不可迟疑，但愿皇上严令各路人马，星夜奔驰，水陆俱进，出其不意，那么平壤这座孤城，就可攻下来了。
English: Right now, the water level has just dropped, and our army should not hesitate to attack. I hope that the emperor will strictly order all the people and horses, the stars and the night to gallop, the water and the land to enter, and surprise them, then Pyongyang, this lonely city, can be attacked.

古文：述固止之，仲文怒曰： 将军仗十万之众，不能破小贼，何颜以见帝！
现代文：如果打下了平壤，就挖了他们的根，其余城邑自可平定。如不按时平定，假如遇上绵绵秋雨，深为阻隔，兵粮又尽，强兵在前头，革末革曷人在后头，迟疑不决，这不是上策。 
English: Yu Zhongwen said angrily, "A general relies on a hundred thousand people, but cannot defeat a petty thief. What kind of face does he have to go to see the Most Holy?

古文：且仲文此行也，固无功矣。 
现代文：几天后，段文振在军中去世。
English: A few days later, Duan Wenzhen died in the army.

古文：述因厉声曰： 何以知无功？ 仲文曰： 昔周亚夫之为将也，见天子军容不变。
现代文：炀帝看了他的表章，悲叹很久，追赠他为光禄大夫、尚书右仆射、北平侯，谥号为 襄 。
English: Emperor Qian saw his epaulettes and lamented for a long time. He was posthumously given the titles of Guanglu Doctor, Shangshu Yujubei, Beiping Marquis, and his posthumous name was Xiang.

古文：以疾征还京师。仁寿末，卒于家，谥曰静。
现代文：赐他家缣帛一千段，粮食二千石，在仪仗队的鼓吹下，送他到墓地。
English: He gave his family a thousand rupees and two thousand kilos of grain, and sent him to the cemetery with the encouragement of the honor guard.

古文：有子志本。
现代文：段文振有十个儿子。
English: Duan Wenzhen has ten sons.

