古文：贞观二年，太宗谓房玄龄曰： 为人大须学问。
现代文：贞观二年，唐太宗对房玄龄说： 做人非常需要学问。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to Fang Xuanling: "Being a person requires a lot of learning.

古文：朕往为群凶未定，东西征讨，躬亲戎事，不暇读书。
现代文：我当年因为各路顽敌没有平定，东征西讨，亲自带兵打仗，没有时间读书。
English: At that time, I did not have time to study, because I did not pacify my bitter enemies, and I personally led soldiers to fight in the East and West.

古文：比来四海安静，身处殿堂，不能自执书卷，使人读而听之。
现代文：近来四海安宁，身为君主，即使不能自己手拿书卷阅读，也要叫人读来听。
English: Lately all the seas have been calm. As a monarch, even if you can't read a book with your own hands, you should have someone read it to you.

古文：君臣父子，政教之道，共在书内。
现代文：君臣父子的伦常、政治教化的种种道理，都在书里。
English: All kinds of reasons for the morality of princes and statesmen, and political education, are in the book.

古文：古人云： 不学，墙面，莅事惟烦。 
现代文：古人说： 不学习，就像面对着墙壁，头脑一片空白，遇到事情就麻烦了。 
English: The ancients said: "If you don't study, it's like facing a wall, your mind is a blank, and you'll get into trouble when you encounter things."

古文：不徒言也。却思少小时行事，大觉非也。 
现代文：这确实不是句空话，我现在想起小时候做的事情，觉得很多都做得不对。 
English: This is really not an empty phrase, I now think of the things I did when I was a child and feel that many of them were not done correctly.

古文：贞观中，太子承乾多不修法度，魏王泰尤以才能为太宗所重，特诏泰移居武德殿。
现代文：贞观年间，太子李承乾常常不讲法度，而魏王李泰因为出众的才华深得唐太宗的喜爱，一次，唐太宗下诏让李泰搬到武德殿居住。
English: During the Zhenguan period, the prince Li Chengqian often did not follow the law, and the Wei king Li Tai was deeply loved by the Tang Taizong because of his outstanding talent. Once, the Tang Taizong issued a decree to let Li Tai move to the Wude Hall to live.

古文：魏征上疏谏曰： 魏王既是陛下爱子，须使知定分，常保安全，每事抑其骄奢，不处嫌疑之地也。
现代文：魏徵上书劝阻，说： 魏王既然是陛下的爱子，应当知道自己的名分和地位，保证自身的安全，遇事应该控制骄傲奢侈的习气，不住在招惹是非的地方。
English: Wei Zheng wrote a letter to dissuade him, saying: Since Wei Wang is the beloved son of His Majesty, he should know his place and status, ensure his own safety, control his pride and extravagant habits in times of trouble, and not live in a place that causes trouble.

古文：今移居此殿，使在东宫之西，海陵昔居，时人以为不可。
现代文：现在他搬到武德殿来居住，就在太子东宫的西边，过去海陵住在那里，当时的人都认为不合适。
English: Now he has moved to live in Wude Hall, just to the west of the East Palace of the Crown Prince, where Haering used to live, which was considered inappropriate at the time.

古文：虽时移事异，犹恐人之多言。又王之本心，亦不宁息。既能以宠为惧，伏愿成人之美。 
现代文：现在形势虽然变了，恐怕还是会引来风言风语，魏王的内心，也不会平静，李泰既然因为受到宠爱而感到害怕，何不退居原处，成人之美呢？ 
English: Now, although the situation has changed, I'm afraid it will still attract gossip. Wei Wang's heart will not be calm. Since Li Tai is afraid because he is favored, why not retreat to the original place, adult beauty?

古文：太宗曰： 我几不思量，甚大错误。 
现代文：唐太宗说： 我没仔细考虑就这么做了，差点酿成大错。 
English: Tang Taizong said, "I did it without careful consideration and almost made a big mistake.

古文：遂遣泰归于本第。
现代文：于是就让李泰回到原来的住所居住。
English: So Li Tai was allowed to return to his original residence.

古文：贞观十七年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 人情之至痛者，莫过乎丧亲也。
现代文：贞观十七年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 人情之中最让人哀痛的，莫过于失去亲人。
English: In the seventeenth year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong said to his attendant: Among human feelings, the most sorrowful is the loss of relatives.

古文：故孔子云： 三年之丧，天下之通丧，自天子达于庶人也。 
现代文：所以孔子说： 父母死后，服丧三年，是天下的通理，从天子到平民莫不如此。 
English: Therefore, Confucius said: "After the death of parents, mourning for three years is the common sense of the world, from the son of heaven to the common people.

古文：又曰： 何必高宗？
现代文：他又说： 何必只说商代的国君武丁这么做呢？
English: He also said, "Why do you have to say that King Wuding of the Shang Dynasty did this?

古文：古之人皆然。 
现代文：古代的人都是这样做的。 
English: That's what the ancients did.

古文：近代帝王遂行不逮汉文以日易月之制，甚乖于礼典。
现代文：可是，近代的帝王实行汉文帝以日代月的短期服丧礼仪，这与古代礼义的典范大相违逆。
English: However, modern emperors practice the Han Emperor's funeral etiquette of short-term clothing, which is contrary to the ancient etiquette.

古文：朕昨见徐幹《中论·复三年丧》篇，义理甚深，恨不早见此书。
现代文：我昨天看到徐幹写的《中论·复三年丧》这篇文章，觉得他论述的道理非常深刻，只可惜没早些看到它。
English: Yesterday, I saw the article "On the Middle Kingdom and the Three-Year Mourning Period" written by Xu Gan. I thought that the reason he discussed was very profound, but it was a pity that I didn't see it earlier.

古文：所行大疏略，但知自咎自责，追悔何及！ 
现代文：现在我才发现，我对丧礼太疏忽大意了，可现在只能责备自己，后悔已经来不及了。 
English: I realise now that I was too casual about the funeral, but I can only blame myself now and it's too late to regret it.

古文：因悲泣久之。
现代文：说完，便因悲伤过度而哭泣良久。
English: After saying this, she cried for a long time due to excessive sadness.

古文：贞观十八年，太宗谓侍臣曰： 夫人臣之对帝王，多承意顺旨，甘言取容。
现代文：贞观十八年，唐太宗对侍臣说： 臣子对帝王，常常只顺从他的旨意，用好听的话来博得他的欢心。
English: In the 18th year of Zhenguan, Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers: "As far as the emperor is concerned, courtiers often only obey his wishes and use fine words to win his favor.

古文：朕今欲闻己过，卿等皆可直言。 
现代文：但现在我要听听自己的过失，你们尽管坦率地指出来吧。 
English: But now I will hear of my transgression: and ye shall declare it openly.

古文：散骑常侍刘洎对曰： 陛下每与公卿论事，及有上书者，以其不称旨，或面加诘难，无不惭退，恐非诱进直言之道。 
现代文：散骑常侍刘洎说： 陛下每次和大臣们共商国事，或看奏疏，如果发现他们的意见不合己意，就面露责备的神情，结果提意见的大臣无不面带惭色退朝。臣认为，这样恐怕不是鼓励大臣们提意见的态度。 
English: His equestrian equerry, Liu Wei, said: "Every time His Majesty and his ministers discuss state affairs, or look at the records, if they find that their opinions are not to their liking, they show a reproachful look. As a result, the ministers who offered their opinions all left the court with shame on their faces. In my opinion, this is probably not the attitude that encourages ministers to offer their opinions.

古文：太宗曰： 朕亦悔有此问难，当即改之。 
现代文：唐太宗说： 对此，我也很后悔，从现在起我要改掉这个毛病。 
English: Tang Taizong said, "I also regret this. From now on, I want to get rid of this problem."

