古文：广顺元年冬十月己丑朔，宰臣王峻献唐张蕴古《大宝箴》、谢偃《惟皇诫德赋》二图。
现代文：广顺元年冬十月一日，宰臣王峻献上唐代张蕴古的《太宝箴》、谢偃的《惟皇诫德赋》两图。
English: On the first day of October in the winter of the first year of Guangshun, the vice-minister Wang Jun presented the Tang Dynasty Zhang Yungu's "Tai Bao Zhen" and Xie Yao's "Except the Emperor's Commandment."

古文：诏报曰： 朕生长军戎，勤劳南北，虽用心於于《钤》、《匮》，且无暇于《诗》、《书》，世务时艰，粗经阅历，前言往行，未甚讨寻。
现代文：太祖诏告说 ：朕生长在军戎中，转战南北，虽然钻研过《钤》、《匮》等类兵书，却没有闲暇阅览《诗》、《书》等儒家经典，治理时世艰难，阅历见识粗浅，古代哲人的言行，没有怎么探究。
English: The great-great-grandfather said: I grew up in the army and fought in the north and south, and although I have studied military books such as "Shan" and "Cha," I did not have the leisure to read Confucian classics such as "Poetry" and "Book." It was a difficult time to govern, my experience and knowledge were shallow, and I did not explore the words and deeds of ancient philosophers.

古文：卿有佐命立国之勋，居代天调鼎之任，恆虑眇德，未及古人。于是采掇箴规，弼谐寡昧，披文阅理，怿意怡神，究为君治国之源，审修己御人之要。
现代文：卿有辅佐天子建立国家的功勋，负有改朝换代的重任，常常忧虑寡闻，使我披览文章理解义理，心情欢洽精神愉悦，探究作为人君治理国家的根本，明晓修养自身驾驭他人的要略。
English: He has the merit of assisting the Son of Heaven to establish the country, has the important task of changing the dynasty, and is often worried and unheard. He has made me understand the principles, feel happy and joyful, explore the fundamentals of governing the country as a human being, and know the key to cultivating myself and controlling others.

古文：帝王之道，尽在于兹，辞翰俱高，珠宝何贵！
现代文：做帝王的方法规律，全部都在这里，意义和文笔都很高妙，相比之下珠宝何足珍贵！
English: The methods and rules of being an emperor are all here, the meaning and writing are exquisite, and the jewels are precious in comparison!

古文：癸巳，以刑部侍郎司徒诩为户部侍郎，以左散骑常侍张煦为刑部侍郎，以给事中吕咸休为左散骑常侍。
现代文：再三细读深思，深感惭愧而有所裨益。所进献的图，已让人在我行走坐卧的地方悬挂，以期进入都能看看读读，用它做律己的镜子。 
English: It has been helpful to read and think about it again and again, feeling deeply ashamed. The picture I submitted has been hung in the place where I walk, sit, and sleep, so that people can look at it, read it, and use it as a mirror for themselves.

古文：甲午，绛州防御使孙汉英卒。
现代文：四日，潞州报告，巡检使陈思让、监军向训在羋亭击破河东的军队。六日，绛州防御使孙汉英去世。
English: On the 4th, Zhangzhou reported that Chen Sijan, the patrol commander, and Xiang Hun, the supervisor of the army, defeated the army of Hedong in Fengting. On the 6th, the defense of Zhangzhou caused Sun Hanying to die.

古文：辛丑，荆南奏，湖南乱，大将军陆孟俊执伪节度使马希萼迁于衡州，立希萼弟希崇为留后，将吏二千余人，遇害者半，牙署库藏焚烧殆尽。
现代文：十三日，荆南报告，湖南动乱，大将军陆孟俊抓获伪节度使马希萼，迁往衡州，立马希萼的弟弟马希崇为留后，将吏两千多人中，被杀害的占了一半，衙署的库存，焚烧得几乎没有了。
English: On the 13th, Jing Nan reported that in the turmoil in Hunan Province, General Lu Mengjun was captured by the pseudo-government and moved to Hengzhou, where his brother Ma Xizong stayed. Of the more than 2,000 generals, half of them were killed, and the inventory of the Bureau of Reclamation was almost burned.

古文：乙巳，诏并吏部三铨为一铨，委本司长官通判。
现代文：十七日，诏令将吏部三铨合并为一铨，委任本司长官统管。
English: On the 17th, the Imperial Edict merged the three bureaus of the Personnel Department into one, and appointed the director of this department to be in charge.

古文：丙午，晋州巡检王万敢奏，河东刘崇入寇，营于州北。
现代文：十八日，晋州巡检王万敢报告，河东刘崇寇犯晋州，在晋州北面扎营。
English: On the 18th, Jinzhou patrolman Wang Wanqiang reported that Liu Chongkou of Hedong had invaded Jinzhou and set up camp in the north of Jinzhou.

古文：辛亥，潞州奏，河东贼军寇境。
现代文：二十三日，潞州报告，河东贼军进犯边境。
English: On the 23rd, Zhangzhou reported that the Kleptocratic Army of Hedong invaded the border.

古文：乙卯，荆南奏，淮南遣鄂州节度使刘仁赡，以战船二百艘于今月二十五日入岳州。
现代文：二十七日，荆南报告，南唐派鄂州节度使刘仁赡，率领两百艘战船在本月二十五日进入岳州。
English: On the 27th, Jing Nan reported that the Southern Tang Dynasty sent Liu Renyi to the Ezhou Festival and led two hundred warships into Yuezhou on the 25th of this month.

古文：丙辰，诏枢密使王峻率兵援晋州。
现代文：二十八日，诏令枢密使王峻领兵支援晋州。
English: On the 28th, Wang Jun was sent by imperial edict to lead troops to support Jinzhou.

古文：丁巳，以左卫将军申师厚为河西军节度使、检校太保。
现代文：二十九日，以左卫将军申师厚担任河西军节度使、检校太保。
English: On the 29th, General of the Left Division Shen Shihou was appointed as the festival envoy of the Hexi Army and the school inspector.

古文：师厚素与王峻善，及峻贵，师厚羁旅无依，日于峻马前望尘而拜，会西凉请帅，帝令择之，无欲去者，峻乃以师厚奏之，师厚亦欣然求往，寻自前镇将授左卫将军、检校工部尚书。翼日，乃有凉州之命，赐旌节、驼马、缯帛以遣之。
现代文：恰逢西凉要求委派将帅，太祖让人自报去做将帅，没有人愿意去。王峻于是将申师厚报告上去，师厚也欣然要求去，旋即从原镇将职务提升为左卫将军、检校工部尚书。第二天，就有凉州的任命，赐给旌旗节仗、骆驼马匹、缯布绢帛而派遣他去上任。
English: At the same time, Xilang asked for the appointment of a marshal, the great-grandfather asked people to report themselves to be marshals, but no one wanted to go. Wang Jun then reported the request to Shi Hou, and Shi Hou also gladly asked to go, and immediately promoted his position from the original town to the left guard general and the school inspection department Shang Shu. The next day, there was the appointment of Liangzhou, and he was given the flag festival, camels and horses, and embroidered cloth and sent to take office.

古文：甲戌，日南至，群臣拜表称贺。甲申，葬故贵妃张氏。
现代文：十一月一日，荆南报告，南唐大将边镐率领士兵三万人，从袁州路过直奔潭州，马希崇派遣从事送给牌印，供给武器。
English: On November 1st, Jing Nan reported that the general of Southern Tang Dynasty, Bentham, led 30,000 soldiers from Yuanzhou to Tanzhou, and Ma Xizong dispatched troops to deliver plaques and supply weapons.

古文：丁亥，诏： 唐朝五庙，旧在至德宫安置，应属徽陵庄田园舍，宜令新除右监门将军李重玉为主。
现代文：边镐进城，称为武安军节度使，楚国马氏的家族和将吏一千多人都被迁往金陵。六日，东南方有白色的霓虹横贯天空。七日，命王峻出发增援晋州，太祖驾临西庄设宴为他送行。二十六日，安葬已故贵妃张氏。二十九日，颁布诏令说： 后唐五祖神庙，以前在至德宫安置，应该放到徽陵庄园田舍，应让新任命的右监门将军李重玉主管。
English: On the 6th, a white neon sign streaked across the sky in the southeast. On the 7th, King Jun departed to reinforce Jinzhou. On the 26th, the late Princess Zhang was buried. On the 29th, the imperial edict was issued, saying: The temple of the Five Patriarchs of the Later Tang Dynasty, which was previously located in the Shide Palace, should be moved to the farmhouse of the Huling Manor, and the newly appointed guardian general, Li Shouguang, should be put in charge.

古文：其缘陵缘庙法物，除合留外，所有金银器物，充迁葬故淑妃王氏及许王从益外，其余并给与重玉及尼惠英、惠灯、惠能、惠严等。
现代文：那装饰陵庙的法物，除应该保留的外，所有金银器物，充作迁葬故淑妃王氏和许王李从益之用，再多余的全部给李重玉以及尼姑惠英、惠灯、惠能、惠严等人。
English: Apart from the objects that should be preserved, all the gold and silver objects that adorned the mausoleum were used for the funeral of the late Queen Su and King Xu, and all the excess was given to Li Chongyu and the nuns Hui Ying, Hui Lan, Hui Neng, Hui Yan and others.

古文：令重玉以时祀陵庙，务在丰洁。 
现代文：令李重玉按时祭祀陵庙，力求丰盛清洁。 
English: Li Chongyu ordered that the funeral rites of the mausoleum be held on time and that the mausoleum be kept clean.

古文：重玉，故皇城使李从璨之子，明宗之孙，惠英等亦明宗亲属也，故帝授重玉官秩，令主先祀，恤王者之后也。
现代文：李重玉，是皇城使李从灿的儿子，后唐明宗的孙子，惠英等人也是明宗的亲属，所以太祖授与李重玉官位，让他主持先祖的祭祀，以抚恤帝王的后代。
English: Li Chongyu was the son of the imperial envoy Li Congcan and the grandson of Emperor Mingzong of the Later Tang Dynasty. Hui Ying and others were also relatives of Emperor Mingzong. Therefore, Emperor Taizu awarded Li Chongyu the official rank and let him preside over the ancestor's sacrificial rites to show mercy to the emperor's descendants.

古文：十二月戊子朔，诏以刘崇入寇，取当月三日暂幸西京。
现代文：十二月一日，因刘崇入寇晋州，诏令在本月三日暂时移驾西京洛阳。
English: On December 1st, due to Liu Chong's entry into Qo Jinzhou, the imperial decree temporarily moved the West Beijing Luoyang on the 3rd of this month.

古文：庚寅，诏巡幸宜停。
现代文：三日，又下诏令移驾行动应当停止。
English: On the third day, another edict was issued, ordering that the removal operation should be stopped.

古文：时王峻驻军陕府，闻帝西巡，遣使驰奏，不劳车驾顺动，帝乃止。
现代文：当时王峻驻军在陕府，听说太祖准备驾移西京，派遣使者飞马报告，说不宜劳动圣驾轻易行动，太祖才作罢。
English: At that time, Wang Jun was garrisoned in Shaanxi Province. When he heard that Taizu was preparing to move to West Beijing, he sent an envoy to report to Pegasus, saying that it was not appropriate for a labor saint to move easily. Only then did Taizu stop.

古文：乙未，幸西庄。
现代文：八日，驾临西庄。
English: On the eighth day, they arrived in Xizhuang.

古文：兗州慕容彦超上言，乞朝觐，诏允之，寻称部内草寇起，不敢离镇。
现代文：兖州慕容彦超派人禀告，请求朝见太祖，太祖诏令答应他，旋即慕容彦超又推说辖区内草寇兴起作乱，不能离开兖州。
English: Bozhou Murong Yanchao sent an obituary notice, requesting to see the great ancestor. The great ancestor's edict allowed him to do so, and Murong Yanchao immediately inferred that there was turmoil caused by the rise of the Straw Hats in his jurisdiction, and that he could not leave Bozhou.

古文：广顺二年春正月戊午朔，不受朝贺，以宿兵在外故也。
现代文：二十一日，郓州报告，慕容彦超盘踞兖州城反叛。二十二日，王峻报告，刘崇逃走，王朝大军已进入晋州。广顺二年春正月一日，太祖不受朝贺，因为屯兵在外的缘故。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhangzhou reported that Murongyan rebelled against Zhangzhou. On the twenty-second day, Wang Jun reported that Liu Chong had fled and the imperial army had entered Jinzhou. On the first day of the first month of the second year of Guangshun's reign, Emperor Taizu did not accept the imperial congratulations because the troops were away.

古文：庚申，王峻奏，起近镇丁夫二万城晋州。
现代文：三日，王峻报告，征用接近州镇的丁壮民夫二万人修缮晋州城。
English: On the third day, Wang Jun reported that he had requisitioned 20,000 people from Ding Zhuang Minfu, which is close to Zhouzhen, to repair Jinzhou City.

古文：壬戌，修东京罗城，凡役丁夫五万五千，两旬而罢。
现代文：五日，修缮东京汴都外城，共役使丁壮民夫五万五千人，二十天才完工。
English: On the fifth day, the repair of the outer city of Tokyo, with 55,000 people working together with Ding Zhuang, was completed in 20 days.

古文：及元福至，英、训皆父事焉。诸军入兗州界，不得下路停止村舍，犯者以军法从事。
现代文：七日，以侍卫步军都指挥使曹英担任兖州行营都部署，以齐州防御使史延韬任副部署，以皇城使向训担任兵马都监，陈州防御使药元福任马步都虞候，领兵征讨慕容彦超。各路军马进入兖州境内，不准离开道路到村子里去休息住宿，违犯者以军法处置。
English: On the 7th, Cao Ying was assigned as the commander of the Bozhou encampment with the command of the Foot Guards, Shi Yanjun was assigned as the deputy commander with the defense of Qizhou, Xiangxun was assigned as the commander of the Horse Guards with the command of the Imperial City, and He Yuanfu was assigned as the commander of the Horse Guards with the defense of Chenzhou, and Murong Yanchao was assigned as the leader of the soldiers. All the horses entered the territory of Bozhou, and they were not allowed to leave the road to go to the village for rest and accommodation. Violators would be dealt with according to military law.

古文：丙寅，徐州巡检供给官张令彬奏，破淮贼于沭阳，斩首千余级，擒贼将燕敬权。
现代文：九日，徐州巡检供给官张令彬报告，在沭阳攻破南唐贼军。杀死一千多人，俘获贼军将领燕敬权。
English: On the 9th, Zhang Lingbin, the Xuzhou inspection and supply officer, reported that he had defeated the South Tang thief army in Fenyang. He killed more than a thousand people and captured the thief army general Yan Jingquan.

古文：时慕容彦超求援于淮南，淮南伪主李景发兵援之，师于下邳，闻官军至，退趋沭阳，遂破之。
现代文：当时慕容彦超向南唐求救，南唐伪帝李景发兵援救他，驻军在下邳，听到周朝军队来了，退往沭阳，于是被攻破了。
English: At that time, Murong Yanchao appealed to Southern Tang for help, and the pseudo-emperor of Southern Tang, Li Jing, sent troops to rescue him. The garrison was in Jiaozuo, and when they heard that the Zhou army was coming, they retreated to Fenyang, where they were defeated.

古文：庚午，高丽权知国事王昭遣使贡方物。
现代文：十三日，高丽国临时主管国事的王昭派使者进贡地方物产。
English: On the 13th, Wang Zhao, who was temporarily in charge of state affairs in Goryeo, sent an envoy to pay tribute to local products.

古文：壬申，镇州何福进差人部送先擒获到河东贼军二百余人至阙下，诏给巾履衫袴以释之。
现代文：十五日，镇州何福进派人押送先抓获的河东贼军两百多人到京城，诏令发给衣服毛巾鞋子后释放他们。
English: On the 15th, Zhenzhou He Fuxin sent a person to escort the more than 200 people of the Hedong Kleptocracy, who were first captured, to Beijing, and issued a decree to give them clothes, towels and shoes before releasing them.

古文：戊寅，徐州部送沭阳所获贼将燕敬权等四人至阙下，诏赐衣服金帛，放归本土，敬权等感泣谢罪。
现代文：二十一日，徐州押送沭阳被抓获的贼军将领燕敬权等四人到京城，诏令赐给衣服钱物，放回原处，燕敬权等人感动得哭了，忏悔罪过。
English: On the twenty-first day, Xuzhou escorted four people including Yan Jingquan, the leader of the bandit army, who was captured in Fenyang, to Beijing. The imperial edict gave them clothes, money and other things and put them back in their original place. Yan Jingquan and others were moved to tears and confessed their sins.

古文：帝召见谓之曰： 夫恶凶邪，奖忠顺，天下一也。
现代文：太祖召见他们，说： 惩罚残暴邪恶，奖励忠诚和顺，是天下同理。
English: The great-grandfather summoned them and said: "The punishment of cruelty and evil, and the reward of loyalty and obedience, are the same all over the world.

古文：我之贼臣，挠乱国法，婴城作逆，殃及生灵，不意吴人助兹凶恶，非良算也，尔当归言之于尔君。 
现代文：我的臣下慕容彦超反叛，扰乱国法，围城抗逆，殃及生灵，没想到你们吴人也帮助凶暴邪恶，这不是好的谋划呀。你们回去应该告诉你们君主。 
English: My vassal, Murong Yan, went beyond rebellion, disrupted the law of the land, besieged and resisted, and caused harm to living beings. I did not expect that you Wu people would also help the violent evil. This is not a good plan. You should go back and tell your monarch.

古文：初，汉末遣三司军将路昌祚于湖南市茶，属淮南将边镐陷长沙，昌祚被贼送金陵。
现代文：当初，后汉末年派三司军将路昌祚到湖南购买茶叶，遇上淮南将领边镐攻陷长沙，路昌祚被吴人押往金陵。
English: At first, at the end of the Han Dynasty, three armies were sent to Lu Changyu to buy tea in Hunan. When they encountered the Huainan general Bianyu, they invaded Changsha, and Lu Changyu was pushed to Jinling by the Wu people.

古文：及敬权自大朝归，具以帝言告于李景，景乃召昌祚，延坐从容久之，且称美大朝皇帝圣德广被，恩沾邻土，深有依附国家之意。
现代文：到燕敬权从周朝回去，都把太祖的话告诉了李景，李景就召来路昌祚，延请坐下款言很久，又称颂周朝皇帝的圣德广泛传播，恩泽沾溉相邻的小国，很有依附周朝的意思。
English: When Yan Jingquan returned from the Zhou Dynasty, he told Li Jing the words of his great-grandfather. Li Jing summoned Lu Changyu and asked him to sit down for a long time. He also praised the holiness of the Zhou Dynasty emperor and spread it widely. The small neighboring countries were touched by the benevolence, and they were very attached to the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：及罢，遣伪宰相宋齐丘宴昌祚于别馆，又令访昌祚在湖南遭变之时，亡失纲运之数，命依数偿之，给茗荈万八千斤，遣水运至江夏，仍厚给行装，遣之归阙。
现代文：到谈完时，又派伪吴国宰相宋齐丘在别馆宴请路昌祚，又令人调查路昌祚在湖南遭遇变乱时，丢失的茶叶数目，命令如数赔偿给他，赔给茶叶一万八千斤，派船只运到江夏，又送给丰厚的行装，让他回到京城。
English: At the end of the conversation, he also sent the pseudo-Wu Prime Minister Song Qiqiu to invite Lu Changyao to a banquet in another hall, and had him investigate the number of tea leaves that Lu Changyao lost when he encountered turmoil in Hunan, ordered him to compensate him for the number, pay him 18,000 kg of tea, send ships to Jiangxia, and give him a rich shipment to let him return to Beijing.

古文：二月庚寅，府州防卸使折德扆奏，河东贼军寇境，率州兵破之，斩首二千级。
现代文：二月四日，府州防御使折德报告，河东贼军寇犯边境，折德率领府州军队攻破了他们，杀死两千人。
English: On February 4, the Fuzhou Defense Force reported to Oride that the Kleptocratic Army of Hedong had invaded the border, and Oride led the Fuzhou Army to defeat them, killing two thousand people.

古文：辛卯，太白经天。
现代文：五日，太白星经过天空。
English: On the fifth day, a white star streaked across the sky.

古文：癸巳，以权知高丽国事王昭为高丽国王。
现代文：七日，以临时掌管高丽国事的王昭担任高丽国王。
English: On the seventh day, Wang Zhao, who was temporarily in charge of the state affairs of Korea, became the king of Korea.

古文：应行从诸庄园林、亭殿、房舍、什物课利，宜令逐司依旧收管。 夏四月丙戌朔，日有食之，帝避正殿，百官守司。
现代文：十四日，府州防御使折德报告，招安河东境内的岢岚军。十七日，诏令将以前俘获的河东乡军一百多人，各发给钱物鞋子放回乡里。三月四日，驾临南庄，命随行臣子练习射箭。十八日，回鹘派使者进贡地方物产。夏四月一日，日蚀，太祖到正殿躲避灾祸。
English: On the 14th, the prefectural defense envoy made a report to the emperor, inviting the Han army in the east of the An River. On the 17th, the imperial edict ordered the more than 100 people of the Hedong Township Army who had been captured earlier to return to the village, each with money and shoes. On the 4th of March, he arrived in Nanzhuang and practiced archery with the courtiers. On the 18th, Emperor Hui sent an envoy to pay tribute to local products. On the 1st of April in summer, the solar eclipse, the great-grandfather went to the main hall to avoid disaster.

古文：丁亥，诏停蔡州乡军。
现代文：二日，诏令取消蔡州乡军。
English: On the second day, the imperial edict cancelled the Caizhou Township Army.

古文：戊子，以京师旱，分命群臣祷雨。
现代文：三日，因京师旱灾，分别命令臣子们祭神求雨。
English: On the third day, due to the drought in the capital, the courtiers were ordered to go to the shrine to pray for rain.

古文：癸巳，制削夺慕容彦超在身官爵。
现代文：八日，诏令削除慕容彦超身任官职爵位。
English: On the 8th, the imperial edict removed Murong Yanchao's official title and rank.

古文：五月丙辰朔，帝御崇元殿受朝，仗卫如仪。
现代文：三十日，诏令于下月五日，御驾亲赴兖州城下，慰劳将士。五月一日，太祖上崇元殿接受朝拜，仪仗卫士按礼仪排列。
English: On the 30th, the imperial edict was issued, and on the 5th of the following month, he personally went to the city of Zhangzhou to console the soldiers. On the 1st of May, the great-grandfather went to the Chongyuan Hall to receive worship, and the guards of honor were arranged according to etiquette.

古文：庚申，车驾发京师。
现代文：五日，御驾从京师出发。
English: On the fifth day, the car set off from Kyoto Station.

古文：戊辰，至兗州城下。
现代文：十三日，驾临兖州城下。
English: On the 13th, I drove to the outskirts of Zhangzhou City.

古文：乙亥，收复兗州，斩慕容彦超，夷其族。
现代文：二十日，收复兖州，杀死慕容彦超，诛灭他的家族。
English: On the 20th, he recovered Bozhou, killed Murong Yanchao, and annihilated his family.

古文：诏端明殿学士颜衎权知兗州军州事。
现代文：诏令端明殿学士颜絗临时执掌兖州军政事务。
English: Duanming Palace scholar Yan Xuan temporarily took charge of Zhangzhou's military and political affairs.

古文：壬午，曲赦兗州管内罪人，取五月二十七日已前所犯罪，大辟已下，咸赦除之。
现代文：二十七日，部分赦免兖州辖区内犯人，凡于五月二十七日以前所犯罪行，除死刑以外，全部赦免。
English: On the 27th, a partial amnesty was granted to prisoners in the jurisdiction of Zhangzhou. All crimes committed before May 27 were pardoned, except for the death penalty.

古文：慕容彦超徒党，有逃避潜窜者，及城内将吏等并放罪。
现代文：慕容彦超的党徒们，有逃避藏匿的，以及在城内的将士官吏等，全部免罪。
English: Murong Yanchao's party members, including those who fled and hid, as well as officers and officials in the city, were all exonerated.

古文：自慕容彦超违背以来，乡州内有接便为非者，一切不问。
现代文：慕容彦超背叛以来，城乡内外有趁机为非作歹的，统统都不追究。
English: Since Murong Yanchao's betrayal, all those who took advantage of the opportunity to commit crimes in and out of the city and countryside have not been investigated.

古文：诸军将士殁于王事者，各与赙赠，都头已上与赠官。
现代文：各军将士为国捐躯的，各给予丧资，都头以上的追赠官职。
English: The soldiers of each army who sacrificed their lives for the country will each be given the loss of capital and the posthumous official position above the capital.

古文：兗州城内及官军下寨四面去州五里内，今年所征夏秋税及沿征钱物并放；十里内，只放夏税；一州管界，今夏苗子三分放一分。
现代文：兖州城内以及朝廷军队营寨四面离州城五里以内的地方，今年应征收的夏秋两季的税收以及相沿应征收的钱物全部免除；十里以内的地方，只减免夏天税收；兖州全州境内，今年夏天秧苗税减免三分之一。
English: In the city of Ganzhou and within five miles of the imperial army camps on all four sides of the city, the summer and autumn taxes that should be levied this year and the money and goods that should be levied are all exempted; within ten miles, only summer taxes are exempted; within the state of Ganzhou, this summer's seedlings tax is exempted by one-third.

古文：城内百姓遭毁拆舍屋及遭烧焚者，给赐材木。诸处差到人夫内，有遭矢石死者，各给绢三匹，仍放户下三年徭役云。
现代文：城内百姓被拆毁和被焚烧的房屋，赐给建筑材料树木，各处调遣来的民夫中，有遭弓箭炮石而死的，各供给三匹绢布，再免除其家人三年的徭役等等。
English: The houses of the people in the city that were demolished and burned were given building materials such as trees, and some of the people sent from various places were killed by bows and arrows, each was provided with three horses of coarse cloth, and their families were exempted from three years of forced labor, and so on.

古文：六月乙酉朔，帝幸曲阜县，谒孔子祠。
现代文：六月一日，太祖驾临曲阜县，参观孔子祠。
English: On June 1, the great ancestor drove to Qufu County to visit the Confucius Shrine.

古文：既奠，将致拜，左右曰： 仲尼，人臣也，无致拜。 
现代文：祭奠之后，准备行跪拜之礼，身边的人说： 仲尼是人臣，不要跪拜。 
English: After the memorial service, as he prepared to kneel, people around him said, "Zhongni is a vassal, don't kneel.

古文：帝曰： 文宣王，百代帝王师也，得无敬乎！ 
现代文：太祖说 ：孔圣人被谥为文宣王，是百世帝王的老师，能不恭敬吗！ 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Kong Shengren was crowned King of Manchu, and he was the teacher of a hundred emperors. How can you not respect him?"

古文：即拜奠于祠前。
现代文：于是在祠前跪拜祭奠。
English: So they knelt in front of the shrine to pay their respects.

古文：其所奠酒器、银炉并留于祠所。
现代文：用来奠祭的酒器、银炉都留在祠内。
English: The wine vessels used for the libation and the silver stove were all left in the shrine.

古文：遂幸孔林，拜孔子墓。
现代文：接着参观孔林，拜孔子坟墓。
English: Next, visit the Confucian Grove and visit the tomb of Confucius.

古文：帝谓近臣曰： 仲尼、亚圣之后，今有何人？ 
现代文：太祖对身边臣子说： 孔子和孟子的后代，现在还有什么人？ 
English: The great-grandfather said to the courtiers around him: "The descendants of Confucius and Mencius, who are there now?

古文：对曰： 前曲阜令、袭文宣公孔仁玉，是仲尼四十三代孙；有乡贡《三礼》颜涉，是颜渊之后。 
现代文：回答说： 原曲阜县令、沿袭文宣公爵位的孔仁玉，是孔子的四十三代孙。有由地方举送中央考试《三礼》的颜涉，是颜渊的后代。 
English: He replied: Kong Renyu, the former governor of Qufu County, who inherited the title of Duke of Wensun, is the forty-third generation of Confucius's grandchildren. Yan Wuan, who had the central examination "Three Rites" sponsored by the local government, is the descendant of Yan Yuan.

古文：即召见。仁玉赐绯，口授曲阜令，颜涉授主簿，便令视事。
现代文：于是召见他们，赐给孔仁玉绯衣，口头任命为曲阜县令，授与颜涉主簿官职，即令他上任。
English: Therefore, he summoned them, gave Kong Ren a jade brocade robe, verbally appointed him as the magistrate of Qufu County, and conferred the official post of the chief of Yanwabang, and then appointed him to the post.

古文：仍敕兗州修葺孔子祠宇，墓侧禁樵采。
现代文：又诏令兖州修葺孔子祠堂房屋，孔子墓旁禁止砍柴割草。
English: He also ordered that the house of Confucius's ancestral hall be repaired in Luzhou, and prohibited cutting firewood and mowing grass near Confucius's tomb.

古文：丙戌，车驾还京。
现代文：二日，御驾动身回京。
English: On the second day, they left to return to Kyoto.

古文：初，帝以五月十三日至兗州，贼尚拒守，至十七日，昼梦道士一人进书，卷首云 车驾来月二日还京 ，其下文字绝多，不能尽记。
现代文：开始，太祖在五月十三日到兖州时，贼兵仍然抗拒固守，到十七日，太祖白天梦见一位道士进上一封信，开头说 车驾下月二日回京 ，下面还有很多文字，不能全记下来。
English: At first, when the great-grandfather arrived in Zhangzhou on May 13th, the bandits still resisted and held fast. On the 17th, the great-grandfather dreamed during the day that a Taoist monk entered a letter, saying at the beginning that he would drive back to Beijing on the 2nd of the following month. There was still a lot of text below, and it was impossible to write it all down.

古文：既寤，以梦告宰臣，又四日而城拔。
现代文：醒过来后，将梦告诉宰臣，又过四天后，兖州城被攻下。
English: After waking up, he told his dream to his vassal, and four days later, Zhangzhou City was captured.

古文：帝至军，凡驻跸九日而贼平，果以六月二日发离城下，近代亲征克捷，无如此之速也。
现代文：太祖到军中，总共停驻九天就平定了贼寇，果然在六月二日从兖州城下出发，近世皇帝亲往征战而获胜利的，没有像这次这样迅速的。
English: The great-great-grandfather went to the army, stayed for a total of nine days and quelled the bandits. On June 2, he set off from the foot of Zhangzhou City. No emperor in modern times has personally gone to war and won a victory as quickly as this time.

古文：是日大雨，城下行宫，水深数尺。
现代文：这天下大雨，城下太祖的行宫内水深数尺。
English: It was raining heavily that day, and the water in the palace was several feet deep.

古文：秋七月丙辰，诏： 内外臣僚，每遇永寿节，旧设斋供。
现代文：当天晚上，到中都县，太祖笑着对侍臣们说 ：今天如不离开兖州城下，就将被大水淹死了。 
English: In the evening of the same day, in Zhongdu County, the great-grandfather smiled and said to his courtiers: "If you don't leave the city of Zhangzhou today, you will be drowned by the flood."

古文：今后中书门下与文武百官共设一斋，侍卫亲军都指挥使已下共设一斋，枢密使、内诸司使已下共设一斋，其余前任职员及诸司职掌，更不得开设道场及设斋。 
现代文：十四日，车驾回到京城。十七日，因灵武节度使冯晖去世，停止上朝一天。十八日，前翰林学士李遆从契丹送上表章，陈奏机密要事，又说伪幽州节度使萧海贞想归顺朝廷，太祖很是赞扬了李遆。十九日，德妃董氏去世。三十日，驾临旧宅，因为要为德妃举行丧礼。秋七月二日，颁布诏令： 朝廷内外臣子僚属，每遇永寿节，以前都设置斋供。今后中书门下与文武百官一起设置一斋，侍卫亲军都指挥使以下一起设置一斋，枢密使、内诸司使以下一起设置一斋，其余前任职员和各部门主管，再不准开设道场和设斋。 
English: On the 14th, the car drove back to Beijing. On the 17th, due to the Lingwu Festival, Feng Yu died and stopped going to the imperial court for one day. On the 18th, the former Hanlin Scholar Li Yu sent a watch badge from Khitan, played a confidential important matter, and said that the pseudo-Yuzhou Festival made Xiao Haizhen want to submit to the imperial court. The great-grandfather praised Li Yu very much. On the 19th, Tefei Dong died. On the 30th, he drove to the old house because he wanted to hold a funeral for Tefei. On the 2nd of July in autumn, he issued

古文：是日大风雨，破屋拔树，尚书省都堂有龙穿屋坏兽角而去，西壁有爪迹存焉。
现代文：这日起了大风雨，吹倒房屋拔起大树，尚书省大厅里有龙穿透屋顶弄环了房檐上的兽角而去，西边的墙上有龙爪的印迹。
English: On this day, there was a heavy wind and rain, which blew down houses and uprooted trees. In the hall of Shangshu Provincial Government, there was a dragon that penetrated the roof and circled the horns on the eaves. There were dragon claw marks on the west wall.

古文：襄州大水。
现代文：襄州涨大水。
English: Big water rises in Xiangzhou.

古文：丁卯，诏复升陈州、曹州为节镇。以侍卫马军都指挥使、洋州节度使郭崇为陈州节度使，以侍卫步军都指挥使曹英为曹州节度使，并典军如故。
现代文：十三日，诏令恢复提升陈州、曹州为节镇，以侍卫马军都指挥使、洋州节度使郭崇任陈州节度使，以侍卫步军都指挥使曹英任曹州节度使，并仍旧掌管军队。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict reinstated the promotion of Chenzhou and Caozhou as festival towns, and appointed Guo Chong as the commander of the Chenzhou festival, Guo Yong as the commander of the Yangzhou festival, and Cao Ying as the commander of the Caozhou festival, and still controlled the army.

古文：时穀以今年七月，因步履伤臂，请告数旬，诏穀扶持三司，刻名印署事，仍放朝参。
现代文：八月二日，枢密使王峻上奏章，请求免去他的枢密使一职，共上奏章三次，诏令不应允。七日，颍州报告，以前在淮南俘获的牲畜，已按诏令送还本土。
English: On August 2, the envoy, Wang Jun, petitioned the emperor three times to be relieved of his post as envoy, but the imperial edict did not agree. On the 7th, Zhangzhou reported that the livestock previously captured in Huainan had been returned to the mainland according to the imperial edict.

古文：庚子，潞州节度使常思移镇宋州，相州节度使李筠移镇潞州。
现代文：十一日，诏令禁止官吏百姓到京城请派刺史、县令。赐给宰臣李谷白藤编成的轿子。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial edict forbade officials and commoners to come to the capital to request the dispatch of sashimi and prefectural ordinances. A palanquin made of white vine was given to the vice-minister, Li Gu.

古文：壬寅，郓州节度使高行周薨。
现代文：李谷于本年七月，因步行摔伤了手臂。十七日，郓州节度使高行周去世。
English: In July of this year, Li Gu fell and injured his arm while walking. On the 17th, Gao Xing Zhou passed away.

古文：癸丑，诏改盐曲法，盐曲犯五斤已上处死，煎硷盐者犯一斤已上处死。
现代文：十九日，诏令更改盐曲法，私自贩卖盐曲五斤以上者处死刑，煎盐炼盐一斤以上者处死刑。
English: On the 19th, the imperial edict changed the salt recipe, and those who illegally sold more than five pounds of salt were sentenced to death, and those who refined more than one pound of salt were sentenced to death.

古文：诏北面沿边州镇，自守疆埸，不得入北界俘掠。
现代文：此前，汉代法律不论盐曲斤两多少，犯者全部处以极刑，到现在开始改革法律。九月十七日，诏令北面沿边境一线的州镇，各自守卫自己的疆界，不准越过边界俘获抢劫。
English: Previously, the laws of the Han Dynasty punished all offenders with capital punishment, no matter how much salt they had. Now, they have begun to reform the laws. On September 17, the emperor ordered the towns along the border line in the north to guard their own borders and not allow them to cross the border to capture robbers.

古文：乙亥，镇州奏，契丹寇深、冀州，遣龙捷都指挥使刘诲、牙内都指挥使何继筠等率兵拒之而退。
现代文：二十二日，镇州报告，契丹进犯深州、冀州，派龙捷军都指挥使刘诲、牙内都指挥使何继筠等领兵抵拒契丹使他们后退。
English: On the 22nd, Zhenzhou reported that the Khitan had invaded Shenzhou and Jizhou, and that Liu Yan and He Jizhong, both commanders of the Longjing Army, and He Jizhong, both commanders of the Jiaxing Army, had led the troops to resist the Khitan and make them retreat.

古文：时契丹闻官军至，掠冀部丁壮数百随行，狼狈而北，冀部被掳者望见官军，鼓噪不已，官军不敢进，其丁壮尽为蕃军所杀而去。
现代文：当时契丹人听到官军来到，就抓获冀州丁壮几百人带走，狼狈撤回北部，冀州被掳掠的人望见官军到来。不停地欢呼呐喊，官军投鼠忌器不敢进攻，那些丁壮全被契丹士兵杀死。
English: At that time, when the Khitan heard that the official army was coming, they captured hundreds of Jizhou Dingzhuang and took them away. They retreated to the north in disarray. The abducted people in Jizhou saw the official army coming. They kept cheering and shouting. The official army did not dare to attack. Those Dingzhuang were all killed by the Khitan soldiers.

古文：易州奏，契丹武州刺史石越来奔。
现代文：二十五日，乐寿都监杜延熙报告，在瀛州南面打败契丹人，杀死三百人，俘获战马四十七匹。
English: On the 25th, Du Yanxi, the governor of Leju, reported that he had defeated the Khitan in the south of Zhangzhou, killing three hundred people and capturing forty-seven horses.

古文：冬十月丙戌，以前晋州节度使王彦超为河阳节度使。
现代文：三十日，太祖姨母韩氏追封为楚国夫人，已故第四姐追封福庆长公主。同日，易州报告，契丹武州刺史石越来投奔。
English: On the 30th, the great-great-aunt Han was posthumously crowned as the wife of the State of Chu, and the deceased fourth sister was crowned the eldest princess of Fuqing. On the same day, Yizhou reported that the Khitan of Wuzhou, Shishi Yue, had fled.

古文：庚寅，诏： 诸州罢任或朝觐，并不得以器械进贡。 
现代文：冬十月七日，颁布诏令说： 各州长官离任或来京朝见，均不准以武器甲仗进贡。 
English: On the 7th of October in winter, the imperial edict was issued, saying: "Governors who leave office or come to Beijing to meet the imperial court are not allowed to pay tribute with weapons and armor.

古文：先是，诸道州府，各有作院，每月课造军器，逐季搬送京师进纳。
现代文：此前，各道、州、府，都有自己的作坊，每月督促制造兵器，每季度运送到京师进贡。
English: Previously, each province, state, and prefecture had its own workshop, which made weapons on a monthly basis and sent them to the capital every quarter as tribute.

古文：其逐州每年占留系省钱帛不少，谓之 甲料 ，仍更于部内广配土产物，征敛数倍，民甚苦之。
现代文：各州每年截留省下的钱财有不少，叫作 甲料 ，又在辖区内广泛征取土特产品，所征取的数量超过进贡朝廷的几倍，人民对此感到很痛苦。
English: Each year, the states intercepted and saved a great deal of money and wealth, known as "Jia Liang," and extensively collected local special products in the area under their jurisdiction. The amount collected exceeded the imperial court's tribute several times, and the people felt very miserable about this.

古文：除上供军器外，节度使、刺史又私造器甲，以进贡为名，功费又倍，悉取之于民。
现代文：除了上供的兵器外，节度使、刺史又私造武器战甲，以进贡为名义，所费的劳力费用又加倍，全取之于民间。
English: In addition to the weapons that were provided, there were also weapons and armor that were made illegally, in the name of tribute, and the labor costs were doubled, all of which were taken from the people.

古文：帝以诸州器甲造作不精，兼占留属省物用过当，乃令罢之。
现代文：太祖因为各州制造的武器兵甲，制作不精，又截留节省的财物太过份，就诏令停止进贡。
English: The great-grandfather ordered to stop the tribute because the weapons and armor made by the states were not well made, and the savings were too much.

古文：仍选择诸道作工，赴京作坊，以备役使。
现代文：又挑选各州道的作工，到京城作坊中，以备使用。
English: In addition, the work of each state road was selected and brought to the Beijing workshop for use.

古文：庚子，幸枢密院，王峻请之也。
现代文：十二日，永兴军报告，宣徽北院使、知军府事翟光邺去世。十四日，下葬德妃。
English: On the 12th, the Yongxing Army reported that the envoy of the Northern Court of the State Council of Hunan and the governor of the military government, Qu Guangyao, passed away. On the 14th, Tefui was buried.

古文：甲辰，宰臣李穀以臂伤未愈，上表辞位，凡三上章，诏报不允。
现代文：十五日，以宣徽南院使袁山义临时执掌永兴军政事务。十六日，提升钜野县为济州。十七日，驾临枢密院，是王峻请他来的。二十一日，宰臣李谷因手伤没有好，上表辞退官位，共递上三次章表，诏令回答不应允。
English: On the 15th, Yuan Shanyi was temporarily put in charge of Yongxing's military and political affairs by the Southern Court of Xuanhui. On the 16th, Gongye County was promoted to Jeju. On the 17th, he came to the Privy Council, invited by Wang Jun. On the 21st, the Vice-Minister Li Gu was not well due to a hand injury, and resigned from the post. He submitted the last three chapter tables, and the answer was not approved.

古文：丁未，沧州奏，自十月已前，蕃归汉户万九千八百户。
现代文：二十四日，沧州报告，到十月以前，蕃族移居汉地的已有一万九千八百户。
English: On the 24th, Cangzhou reported that by October, 19,800 Yi families had moved to Hanzhong.

古文：是时，北境饥谨，人民转徙，襁负而归中土者，散居河北州县，凡数十万口。
现代文：这时，北方饥荒，人民流离逃荒，前面抱着后面背着而到汉族境内来的，散居在黄河以北各县，共有几十万人。
English: At this time, there was famine in the north, and people were displaced to escape the famine. Hundreds of thousands of people, who had come to the Han territory with their backs against the front, scattered to the counties north of the Yellow River.

古文：以前宋州节度使李洪义为安州节度使。癸酉，青州符彦卿移镇郓州。
现代文：十一月四日，荆南报告，朗州大将刘言，于今年十月三日领兵奔赴长沙，十五日到潭州。
English: On November 4th, Jing Nan reported that Lanzhou General Liu Yan led troops to Changsha on October 3rd this year, and to Tanzhou on the 15th.

古文：甲戌，诏曰： 累朝已来，用兵不息，至于缮治甲胄，未免配役生灵，多取于民，助成军器。
现代文：南唐所任命的湖南节度使边镐、岳州刺史宋德权都弃城逃跑。十三日，刑部尚书张沆去世。二十二日，颁布诏令说 ：相连几朝以来，战争没有停息，至于修造甲胄，又不免使用生灵，多取自民间，以制造成军器。
English: The Hunan festival appointed by the Southern Tang Dynasty made the borderlands, Yuezhou and Song Dequan abandon the city and flee. On the 13th, the criminal department Shangshu Zhang Jun died. On the 22nd, a decree was issued saying: Since several dynasties, the war has not stopped. As for the repair of armor, it is unavoidable to use living beings, mostly taken from the people to make military equipment.

古文：就中皮革，尤峻科刑，稍犯严条，皆抵极典，乡县以之生事，奸猾得以侵渔，宜立新规，用革前弊。
现代文：其中皮革，特别有严峻的刑法管制，稍微触犯严厉的条例，都要处以极刑，乡县因此而产生纠纷，奸猾的人得以欺人获利，应该做出新的规定，以革除以前的弊病。
English: Among them, leather, in particular, has strict criminal law control, and the slightest violation of strict regulations is punishable by capital punishment. As a result, disputes have arisen in townships and counties, and deceitful people have been able to defraud others. New regulations should be made to eliminate the previous ills.

古文：应天下所纳牛皮，今将逐所纳数，三分内减二分，其一分于人户苗亩上配定。
现代文：凡天下交纳的牛皮，现将每年所交纳的数量，减少三分之二，另一分根据每户田产配定。
English: The amount of cowhide paid by all over the world will now be reduced by two-thirds each year, and the other one-third will be allocated according to each household's farm produce.

古文：每秋夏苗共十顷纳连角皮一张，其黄牛纳干筋四两，水牛半斤，犊子皮不在纳限。
现代文：每年秋夏禾稻共十顷者交纳连角的牛皮一张，其黄牛交纳干牛筋四两，水牛则交半斤，小牛皮不在交纳限制以内。
English: Every year, a total of ten hectares of autumn and summer rice will pay one piece of horned cowhide, its cattle will pay four pairs of dried beef tendons, buffalo will pay half a catty, and calf skin is not within the payment limit.

古文：牛马驴骡皮筋角，今后官中更不禁断，只不得将出化外敌境。
现代文：牛马骡驴的皮、筋、角，今后官府不准禁管，民间只是不准带出国境卖给国外敌人。
English: The skin, sinews and horns of cattle, horses and donkeys will no longer be prohibited by the government, but people are not allowed to take them out of the country and sell them to foreign enemies.

古文：州县先置巡检牛皮节级并停。 
现代文：州县以前设置的巡检牛皮节级官员全部停止工作。 
English: All state and county-level inspection and quarantine officials previously set up have stopped working.

古文：丙子，诏曰： 应内外文武官僚幕职、州县官举选人等，今后有父母、祖父母亡殁未经迁葬者，其主家之长，不得辄求仕进，所由司亦不得申举解送。
现代文：二十四日，颁布诏令说： 凡朝廷内外文武百官、州县官府举荐的人选等，今后有父母、祖父母去世而没有下葬的，家中的主人，不准马上做官提拔，主管部门也不准申报。
English: On the 24th, the imperial edict was issued, saying: "All candidates recommended by the imperial court, civil and military officials, and state and county governments, who have parents or grandparents who have passed away and have not been buried, the master of the family, are not allowed to be promoted immediately, and the competent departments are not allowed to declare.

古文：如是卑幼在下者，不在此限。 
现代文：如果不是家主或年幼者，不在此限定之内。 
English: If you are not the landlord or a minor, you are not subject to this restriction.

古文：己卯，日南至，帝御崇元殿受朝贺，仗卫如仪。
现代文：冬至日，太祖登崇元殿接受朝贺，仪仗卫队按礼仪排列整齐。
English: On the winter solstice, the great ancestor ascended to the Chongyuan Hall to receive morning greetings, and the guard of honor was neatly arranged according to etiquette.

古文：十二月丙戌，权武平军留后刘言遣牙将张崇嗣入奏，于十月十三日，与节度副使王进逵、行军司马何敬贞、指挥使周行逢等，同共部领战棹，攻收湖南，伪节度使边镐当夜出奔，王进逵等已入潭州。
现代文：十二月四日，临时武平军留后刘言派牙将张崇嗣到京城报告，在十月十三日，与节度副使王进逵、行军司马何敬贞、指挥使周行逢等，共同率领战船，攻收湖南。伪节度使边镐当夜出逃，王进逵等已进入潭州。
English: On December 4, Liu Yan sent Zhang Chongzhi to Beijing to report after the temporary Wu Ping Army stayed. On October 13, with the deputy festival envoy Wang Jinjun, the marching secretary Ma Hejingzhen, and the commanding envoy Zhou Xingfeng, they jointly led the warships to conquer Hunan. The false festival made the border troops flee that night, and Wang Jinjun and others had entered Tanzhou.

古文：甲午，诏今后诸侯入朝，不得进奉买宴。
现代文：十二日，诏令今后诸侯入朝，不准进奉参加宴席预先交纳的买宴钱。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor decreed that in the future, when lords entered the imperial court, they would not be allowed to bring in the money paid in advance for the banquet.

古文：丁酉，皇子澶州节度使荣落起复，加同平章事。
现代文：十五日，皇子澶州节度使郭荣服丧期满后复职，加封同平章事。
English: On the 15th, Guo Rong was reinstated after the period of mourning was over by the prince of Zhangzhou Festival, and was awarded the title of the same level.

古文：戊戌，太子少傅致仕王延卒。
现代文：十六日，以太子少傅辞官退隐的王延去世。
English: On the 16th, Wang Yan, who had retired from his post as a minor official, passed away.

古文：壬寅，幸西庄。
现代文：二十日，太祖驾临西庄。
English: On the 20th, the great-grandfather arrived in Xizhuang.

古文：御史台奏： 请改左右威卫复为左右屯卫。 
现代文：二十三日，御史台报告： 请求改左右威卫仍为左右屯卫。 
English: On the 23rd, the History Channel reported: The request to change the left and right Weiwei is still the left and right Tunwei.

古文：从之，避御名也。
现代文：太祖听从，这是为避太祖御名。
English: The great-grandfather obeyed, this is to avoid the great-grandfather's name.

古文：是冬无雪。
现代文：这年冬天没下雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：广顺三年春正月壬子朔，帝御崇元殿受朝贺，仗卫如仪。
现代文：广顺三年春正月一日，太祖登崇元殿接受朝贺，仪仗卫队按礼仪整齐排列。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the third year of Guangshun, the great ancestor ascended the Chongyuan Hall to receive morning greetings, and the honor guard was neatly arranged according to etiquette.

古文：幸太平宫起居汉太后。
现代文：驾临太平宫问候汉太后。
English: He arrived at the Taiping Palace to greet the Empress Dowager of Han.

古文：甲寅，赐群臣射于内鞠场。乙卯，武平军兵马留后刘言奏： 潭州干戈之后，焚烧殆尽，乞移使府于武陵。 
现代文：四日，武平军兵马留后刘言报告 ：潭州战役之后，城池焚烧几乎没有了。请求将节度使官署迁到武陵。 
English: On the fourth day, Liu Yan reported after the soldiers and horses of the Wuping Army stayed: After the Battle of Tanzhou, there was almost no burning of the city. Request to relocate the festival administration office to Wuling.

古文：从之。
现代文：太祖同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：诏升朗州为大都督府，在潭州之上。
现代文：诏令提升朗州为大都督府，地位在潭州之上。
English: The imperial edict elevated Lanzhou to the status of a major governor's office, which is higher than that of Tanzhou.

古文：丙辰，以武平军节度使留后、检校太尉刘言为检校太师、同平章事，行朗州大都督，充武平军节度兼三司水陆转运等使，制置武安、静江等军事，进封彭城郡公；武平军节度副使、权知潭州军州事、检校太傅王进逵为检校太尉，行潭州刺史，充武安军节度使；以武安军行军司马兼衙内步军都指挥使、检校太傅何敬贞为检校太尉，行桂州刺史，充静江军节度使；以张仿领眉州刺史，充武平军节度副使；以硃元琇领黄州刺史，充静江军节度副使；以周行逢领集州刺史，充武安军节度行军司马。
现代文：五日，以武平军节度使留后、检校太尉刘言为检校太师、同平常事，履行朗州大都督职责，兼任武平军节度兼三司水陆转运等使，管辖武安、静江等地军事，进封彭城郡公；武平军节度副使、临时掌管潭州军政事务、检校太傅王进逵任检校太尉，兼桂州刺史、兼任静江军节度使；以张仿任眉州刺史、兼任武平军节度副使；以朱元王秀任黄州刺史、兼任静江军节度行军司马。
English: On the 5th, with the Wu-Ping Army's commander-in-chief, Lieutenant Colonel Liu Yan as the commander-in-chief, the same as usual, to perform the duties of the governor of Langzhou, and also serve as the commander-in-chief of the Wu-Ping Army and the three departments of land and water transportation, and to govern the military in Wu'an, Jingjiang and other places, and to be the governor of Pengcheng County; the deputy commander-in-chief of the Wu-Ping Army and temporarily in charge of the military and political affairs of Tanzhou; the commander-in-chief of the Wu-Ping Army, Lieutenant Colonel Wang

古文：自进逵而下，皆刘言将校也。
现代文：从王进逵以下，都是刘言的将校。
English: From Wang Jinyu on down, they were all Liu Yan's officers.

古文：邠州奏，庆州略蕃部野鸡族略夺商旅，侵扰州界。
现代文：分阝州报告，庆州蕃部野鸡族抢劫路过的商人和旅行的人，侵扰州界。
English: According to the report of Fengtai County, the Gyeongju Hebei pheasants robbed passing merchants and travelers, and encroached on the state border.

古文：诏遣宁州刺史张建武等率兵掩袭，仍先赐敕书安抚，如不从命，即进军问罪。
现代文：诏令派宁州刺史张建武等人领兵扑袭，仍然先赐诏书安抚，如不从命，即进军问罪。
English: The imperial edict ordered Zhang Jianwu and others from Ningzhou to lead the troops to attack, but still gave the imperial edict to appease first, and if they did not obey the order, they would march to ask for punishment.

古文：辛酉，诏赐朗州刘言应两京及诸道旧属湖南楼店邸第。乙丑，诏： 诸道州府系属户部营田及租税课利等，除京兆府庄宅务、赡国军榷盐务、两京行从庄外，其余并割属州县，所征租税课利，官中只管旧额，其职员节级一切停废。
现代文：十日，颁布诏令： 各道州府隶属于户部管辖、租给流民耕种的营田及征收的租税赢利等，除京兆府庄宅务、赡国军盐务、两京行宫所属的庄园外，其余割让给州县，所征收的租税赢利，官中只管旧额，其户部营田务职员机构一律废除。
English: On the 10th, the imperial edict was promulgated: Each province and prefecture was under the jurisdiction of the Household Department, and the farmland leased to the displaced people for cultivation and the tax profits collected were, except for the manor houses belonging to the Jingzhao Prefecture, the salt farms for supporting the national army, and the manor houses belonging to the two imperial palaces, the rest were ceded to the prefectures and counties, and the tax profits collected were only the old amount, and their household camp farm staff agencies were abolished.

古文：应有客户元佃系省庄田、桑土、舍宇，便赐逐户，充为永业，仍仰县司给与凭由。
现代文：凡有流民原来租佃的田园、桑土、房屋，就便赐给各户，作为永久的产业，并望各县有关部门给与凭证。
English: All the pastoral land, mulberry soil and houses that were originally rented by the displaced people were given to each household as a permanent property, and the relevant departments in each county were expected to give certificates.

古文：应诸处元属营田户部院及系县人户所纳租中课利，起今年后并与除放。
现代文：凡各处原属营田户部院及系县人户所征收的税利，从今年起都给予免除。
English: All the taxes and interest levied on households in Yingtan Household Department and its affiliated counties will be exempted from this year.

古文：所有见牛犊并赐本户，官中永不收系 云。
现代文：现有耕牛都赐给本户，官中永不收取。 
English: The existing farmed cattle are given to the households, and the officials never collect them.

古文：帝在民间，素知营田之弊，至是以天下系官庄田仅万计，悉以分赐见佃户充永业。
现代文：太祖来自民间，一向知悉营田的弊病，现在将天下属于官府的数以万计的庄园田地，全都用来分别赐给现有佃户当作永久产业。
English: The great-grandfather came from the common people and had always been aware of the ills of yakitori. Now, all the tens of thousands of manor fields that belong to the government are used to give to existing tenants as permanent properties.

古文：是岁出户三万余，百姓既得为己业，比户欣然，于是葺屋植树，敢致功力。
现代文：这年户部增加三万多户，流民佃户既得到了田地房屋作为自己的产业，各家各户都高兴，于是修葺房舍种植树木，放心尽力经营。
English: This year, more than 30,000 households were added to the household department. As soon as the displaced tenant households received the field houses as their own property, every household was happy, so they repaired the buildings, planted trees, and tried their best to operate with confidence.

古文：又，东南郡邑各有租牛课户，往因梁太祖渡淮，军士掠民牛以千万计，梁太祖尽给与诸州民，输租课，自是六十余载，时移代改，牛租犹在，百姓苦之，至是特与除放。
现代文：又，东南各郡都有租用官牛交纳租税的民户，以前在梁太祖渡过淮河攻击淮南时，军士们抢掠了数以千万计的民家耕牛，梁太祖全部租给东南各州民户，获取牛租。此后六十多年，时间过了朝代换了，而牛租依然存在，百姓以此为苦，到现在特地给予免除。
English: In addition, every county in the southeast has private households that rent government cattle to pay taxes. In the past, when Liang Taizu crossed the Huai River to attack Huainan, the soldiers looted tens of millions of private farm cattle. Liang Taizu rented all of them to private households in the southeastern states to obtain cattle rent. After more than 60 years, the time has passed and the dynasties have changed, but cattle rent still exists, the people are suffering from this, and they are now specially exempted.

古文：未几，京兆府庄宅务及榷盐务亦归州县，依例处分。
现代文：不久，京兆府庄宅务和榷盐务也归还州县，依例处理。
English: Soon after, the residences of villages and salt mines in Jinghao Prefecture were also returned to prefectures and counties, and the cases were handled accordingly.

古文：或有上言，以天下系官庄田，甚有可惜者，若遣货之，当得三十万缗，亦可资国用。
现代文：有人上言说，天下属于官府的庄园田地，很是可贵，如果卖给佃户，可获取三十万缗的钱财，也可以增加国家的费用。
English: Some people said that the manor and fields belonging to the government are very valuable. If they are sold to tenants, they can obtain 300,000 baht of money and wealth, and can also increase the cost of the state.

古文：帝曰： 苟利于民，与资国何异。 
现代文：太祖说 ：如果对人民有利，与帮助国家有什么不同？ 
English: Grandfather said: If it is good for the people, how is it different from helping the country?

古文：丁卯，户部侍郎、权知贡举赵上交奏： 诸科举人，欲等第各加对义场数；进士除诗赋外，别试杂文一场。 
现代文：十六日，户部侍郎、临时掌管选拔推荐的赵上交报告说： 各科的举人，要按等级次第各加考提问对答的门数，进士除考诗赋以外，另外加试一门其他文章。 
English: On the 16th, Zhao Shangjiao, the head of the Household Division and the person temporarily in charge of selecting and recommending candidates, reported: The number of questions and answers in each examination should be increased according to the rank of the candidates. In addition to the poetry examination, the candidates should additionally try one other essay.

古文：从之。
现代文：太祖答应了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：两浙吊祭使、左谏议大夫李知损责授登州司马，员外置，仍令所在驰驿放遣。
现代文：两浙吊祭使、左谏议大夫李知损因过贬授登州司马，作为不在官额之内的员外官，又令他所在地方政府用快马将他贬谪到登州。
English: Due to the demotion of the two Zhejiang Hanging Envoys, the left-wing doctor Li Zhizang was demoted to Danzhou Sima, and as a foreign official who was not in the official post, he was also ordered by his local government to use a fast horse to demote him to Danzhou.

古文：临水亭，见双凫戏于池上，帝引弓射之，一发迭贯，从臣称贺。庚午，以前邠州节度使侯章为邓州节度使。前莱州刺史叶仁鲁赐死，坐为民所讼故也。
现代文：因为李知损到江、浙履行使命时，经过各州郡，都向州牧郡守强行借贷，被青州知州张凝报告皇上，所以有此任命。十八日，驾临南庄，到水中亭子旁边，看见有两只鸭子在池中嬉戏，太祖拉开弓箭射击它们，一箭射中两只，跟随的臣子都称颂祝贺。十九日，前莱州刺史叶仁鲁被赐死，因为被民众告发的缘故。
English: The reason for this appointment was that when Li Zhizai went to Jiangsu and Zhejiang to carry out his mission, he passed through all the prefectures and counties and borrowed money from the governor of Shumu County. He was reported to the emperor by Zhang Jian of Qingzhou. On the 18th, he drove to Nanzhuang, went to the water pavilion and saw two ducks playing in the pool. Taizu pulled out his bow and arrow and shot them. He hit two of them with one arrow, and the following courtiers all praised and congratulated him. On the 19th, the former governor of Laizhou, Ye Renlu, was put to death because he was reported

古文：辛未，诏枢密使王峻巡视河堤。峻请行，故从之。
现代文：二十日，诏令枢密使王峻巡视黄河堤岸，是王峻请求去巡视，所以答应他。
English: On the 20th, the Emperor ordered the Privy Council to send Wang Jun to inspect the embankment of the Yellow River. It was Wang Jun who requested to inspect, so he agreed.

古文：辛巳，幸南庄。
现代文：三十日，驾临南庄。
English: On the 30th, we arrived in Nanzhuang.

古文：闰月甲申，朗州刘言、潭州王进逵奏，广贼占据桂管，深入永州界俘劫，遣朗州行军司马何敬贞与指挥使硃全琇、陈顺等，率水陆军五万进击。
现代文：闰一月三日，朗州刘言、潭州王进逵报告，广州贼寇占据桂管，深入永州境内搜刮抢劫，于是派朗州行军司马何敬真与指挥使朱全王秀、陈顺等，率领五万水陆大军进击。
English: On the third day of the leap January, Liu Yan of Langzhou and Wang Jinqi of Tanzhou reported that the Guangzhou bandits occupied Guizhou and searched and robbed deep into the territory of Yongzhou. Therefore, Ma He Jingzhen, the secretary of the marching army of Langzhou, and the commanding officers Zhu Quan Wang Xiu and Chen Shun, led the fifty thousand land and sea army to attack.

古文：丙戊，回鹘遣使贡方物。
现代文：五日，回鹘派使者进贡地方物产。
English: On the fifth day, the Uighurs sent an envoy to pay tribute to local products.

古文：诏故梁租庸使赵严侄崇勋，见居陈州，量赐系官店宅，从王峻之请也。
现代文：诏令后梁租庸使赵岩的侄子赵崇勋，现住在陈州，适时赐以官府的店铺住宅，是听从了王峻的请求。
English: After the edict, Liang Renyong made Zhao Yan's nephew, Zhao Chongxun, who now lives in Chenzhou, timely grant the government's shop and residence, heeding Wang Jun's request.

古文：辛卯，定州奏，契丹攻义丰军，出劲兵夜斫蕃营，斩首六十级，契丹遁去。
现代文：十日，定州报告，契丹人进攻义丰军，定州出动精兵夜晚杀向契丹兵营，杀死六十人，契丹人逃走。
English: On the 10th, Dingzhou reported that the Khitan attacked the Yifeng army. Dingzhou dispatched elite soldiers to the Khitan barracks at night, killing sixty people, and the Khitan fled.

古文：甲午，镇州奏，契丹寇境，遣兵追袭，至无极而还。
现代文：十三日，镇州报告，契丹人进犯边境，派兵追击，到无极山才回来。
English: On the 13th, Zhenzhou reported that the Khitan attacked the border, sent troops to pursue, and returned to Wuji Mountain.

古文：丙申，皇子澶州节度使荣来朝。
现代文：十五日，皇子、澶州节度使郭荣来京朝见。
English: On the 15th, Guo Rong was sent by the prince and the Bozhou Festival to the imperial court in Beijing.

古文：延州衙内指挥使高绍基奏言： 父允权患脚膝，令臣权知军州事。 
现代文：二十一日，延州衙内指挥使高绍基报告说： 父亲高允权膝盖得了病，令臣子我临时掌管军政事务。 
English: On the 21st, Gao Shaoqi, the commanding officer of the Yanzhou Inner Palace, reported: Father Gao Yunquan fell ill with a knee injury, so I, his vassal, took temporary charge of military and political affairs.

古文：二月辛亥朔，以前西京留守白文珂为太子太师致仕，进封韩国公。
现代文：二十二日，陈州报告： 官吏百姓请求为前任刺史李谷建立祠堂。 高祖答应了。
English: On the 22nd, Chen Zhou reported: The officials and common people requested to build a shrine for the former assassin Li Gu. Gao Zu agreed.

古文：癸丑，安州节度使李洪义、侍卫马军都指挥使郭崇、侍卫步军都指挥使曹英，并加检校太尉。
现代文：当时李谷已做宰相，听到陈州人的陈述请求，谦让再三，才作罢。二十八日，开封府报告，都城内登记到没有名称的僧尼寺院五十八所。
English: At that time, Li Gu was already the prime minister, and he listened to the request of the people of Chenzhou to make a statement, and he humbly conceded repeatedly before giving up. On the 28th, the Kaifeng government reported that fifty-eight monasteries and nunneries without names were registered in the capital.

古文：唐州方城县令陈守愚弃市，坐克留户民蚕盐一千五百斤入己也。
现代文：诏令废掉它们。二月三日，唐州方城县令陈守愚被诛杀弃市，因他克扣民户蚕盐一千五百斤归为己有。
English: On February 3, Chen Shouwu, the governor of Fangcheng County in Tangzhou, was killed and the city was abandoned because he took away 1500 kg of silkworm salt from private households.

古文：内制国宝两座，诏中书令冯道书宝文，其一以 皇帝承天受命之宝 为文，其一以 皇帝神宝 为文。
现代文：内廷制造两座国宝，诏令中书令冯道书写宝文，一座写上 皇帝承天受命之宝 ，一座写上 皇帝神宝 。
English: The Inner Court created two national treasures. In the imperial edict, Feng Dao was ordered to write a treasure poem, one was inscribed with "the treasure of the emperor's obedience to God's command," and the other was inscribed with "the emperor's sacred treasure."

古文：案，传国宝始自秦始皇，令李斯篆之，历代传授，事具前史。
现代文：按：传国之宝始自秦始皇，令李斯撰写，历代传授，事迹详见于前代史书。
English: According to: the treasure of national inheritance began with Qin Shihuang, written by Li Si and passed down through the ages, the details of the deeds can be found in the previous history book.

古文：至唐末帝自燔之际，以宝随身，遂俱焚焉。
现代文：到唐末帝自焚之际，将传国之宝带在身边，于是都被烧掉了。
English: At the time of Emperor Tang's self-immolation, he took the national treasure with him, so they were all burned.

古文：晋高祖受命，特制宝一座，开运末，契丹犯阙，少帝遣其子延煦赍送于契丹主，讶其非真，少帝上表具诉其事，及契丹北归，赍以入蕃。
现代文：晋高祖称帝后，特制传国宝一座。开运末年，北方契丹进犯京城，晋少帝派他儿子石延煦将国宝送给契丹王，契丹国王惊讶得不相信它是真的，少帝上表详细说明这回事，到契丹国王回归北方时，将传国宝一起带回了契丹。
English: At the end of the Heian period, when the Northern Khitan invaded the capital, Emperor Jin sent his son Shi Yanqi to give the national treasure to the Khitan king. The Khitan king was so surprised that he did not believe it was real. The Young Emperor's table above explains the matter in detail. When the Khitan king returned to the North, he brought the national treasure back to Khitan.

古文：汉朝二帝，未暇别制，至是始创为之。
现代文：汉朝两任帝王，没有工夫另外制造，至周朝这时才开始制造传国宝。
English: The two emperors of the Han Dynasty did not have time to make another one, and it was not until the Zhou Dynasty that they began to make the national treasure.

古文：庚申，遣将作监李琼知陕州军州事。甲子，枢密使、平卢军节度使、尚书左仆射、平章事、监修国史王峻责授商州司马，员外置，所在驰驿发遣。
现代文：十四日，枢密使、平卢军节度使、尚书左仆射、平章事、监修国史王峻因过贬为商州司马，作为不在官额之内的员外官，令所在官府用快马发遣到商州。
English: On the 14th day of the month, Wang Jun, the Privy Envoy, the Pinglu Military Festival Envoy, the Shang Shuzhu Zuopuzha, the Pingzhangji, and the Supervisor of the State History, was demoted to the Shangzhou Sima for misconduct. As a foreign official who was not within the official ranks, he ordered his government office to send him to Shangzhou on a fast horse.

古文：戊辰，左监门上将军李建崇卒。
现代文：十八日，左监门上将军李建崇去世。
English: On the 18th, General Li Jianchong passed away.

古文：延州牙内都指挥使高绍基奏，交割军府与副使张图。
现代文：延州牙内都指挥使高绍基报告，将军府移交给副使张图。
English: Gao Shaoqi, the commanding envoy of Yanzhou Inner Capital, reported, and the general's office was handed over to the deputy envoy Zhang Tu.

古文：以枢密直学士、工部侍郎陈观为秘书监。壬申，凤翔少尹桑能责授邓州长史。
现代文：十九日，朗州刘言报告，本道先遣行军司马何敬真领兵掩袭广州贼寇，进到潭州时，部下溃逃。
English: On the 19th, Liu Yan of Lanzhou reported that Ma He Jingzhen, the divisional commander of the advance troops, led the troops to attack the bandits in Guangzhou. When they entered Tanzhou, his subordinates fled.

古文：能，晋相维翰之庶弟也，坐据维翰别第为人所讼故也。
现代文：湖南王进逵认为何敬真失职，已经砍头示众。二十二日，凤翔少尹桑能因过贬为邓州长史。桑能，是晋代宰相桑维翰的旁支弟弟，因占据桑维翰的其他房产被人告发。
English: On the 22nd, Feng Xiang's younger brother, Yin San Neng, was demoted to the rank of prefectural governor due to his misconduct. San Neng, the younger brother of the Jin Dynasty's prime minister, San Wei Han, was accused of occupying other properties of San Wei Han.

古文：癸酉，以户部侍郎、知贡举赵上交为太子詹事。
现代文：二十三日，以户部侍郎、主管选拔科举的赵上交任太子詹事。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Shang, who was the steward of the Household Department and in charge of selecting candidates for the imperial examinations, was handed over to Prince Zhan Zhi.

古文：是岁，新进士中有李观者，不当策名，物议喧然，中书门下以观所试诗赋失韵，勾落姓名，故上交移官。
现代文：这一年，新进士中有一个叫李观的人，不该录取做官，舆论哗然。中书门下因为李观所做的诗赋不合押韵要求，勾掉了他的名字，所以赵上交因此调任官职。
English: This year, one of the new recruits was a man named Li Guan, who should not have been accepted as an official, and public opinion was in an uproar. Zhongshumen ticked off his name because Li Guan's poetry did not meet the rhyme requirements, so Zhao Shangjia was transferred to an official position.

古文：丁丑，幸南庄，赐从官射。
现代文：二十七日，驾幸南庄，赐随从官员射猎。
English: On the 27th, he drove to Nanzhuang and gave the officials accompanying him a shooting.

