古文：大卜掌三兆之法，一曰玉兆，二曰瓦兆，三曰原兆。
现代文：大卜掌管对于三类兆象的占卜法：一是玉兆，二是瓦兆，三是原兆。
English: Dabo presides over the divination method for three types of signs: one is the jade sign, the second is the tile sign, and the third is the original sign.

古文：其经兆之体，皆百有二十，其颂皆千有二百。
现代文：它们基本的兆象之体，都有一百二十种，它们的繇辞都有一千二百条。
English: There are one hundred and twenty types of their basic sign bodies, and twelve hundred of their countersigns.

古文：掌三易之法，一曰连山，二日归藏，三曰周易。
现代文：掌管三种《易》书的占筮法：一是《连山》，二是《归藏》，三是《周易》。
English: He is in charge of the divination methods of three "Yi" books: one is "Lianshan," the second is "Gathering," and the third is "Zhou Yi."

古文：其经卦皆八，其别皆六十有四。
现代文：它们的经卦都有八卦，它们的重卦都有六十四卦。
English: Their sutras all have eight sutras, and their major sutras all have sixty-four sutras.

古文：掌三梦之法，一曰致梦，二曰觭梦，三曰咸陟。
现代文：掌管三种梦书的占梦法：一是《致梦》，二是《觭梦》三是《咸陟》。
English: The dream divination method that controls three dream books: one is "To Dream," the second is "To Dream" and the third is "To Dream."

古文：其经运十，其别九十，以邦事作龟之八命，一曰征，二曰象，三曰与，四曰谋，五曰果，六曰至，七曰雨，八曰廖。
现代文：它们所记载的基本占法有十种，又变化出九十种占法。根据国家大事制作八个方面的命龟辞：一是有关征伐，二是有关天象，三是有关赐予，四是有关谋议，五是有关事情果能成功与否，六是有关到达与否，七是有关下雨与否，八是有关病好与否。
English: According to them, there are ten basic methods of divination and ninety variations of divination. Eight aspects of fortune-telling are made according to national events: one is related to conquest, the second is related to celestial phenomena, the third is related to bestowal, the fourth is related to deliberation, the fifth is related to the success or failure of the matter, the sixth is related to arrival or failure, the seventh is related to rain or failure, and the eighth is related to illness or failure.

古文：以八命者赞三兆、三易、三梦之占，以观国家之吉凶，以诏救政。
现代文：借用这八个方面的命辞，帮助推演三类兆象、三种《易》书和三种梦书之占，以观察国家的吉凶，如果不吉就香诉王采取挽救国政的措施。
English: Use these eight aspects of the words of destiny to help deduce the proportion of three types of omens, three "Yi" books and three dream books to observe the fortunes of the country, and if it is not good, appeal to the king to take measures to save the country's politics.

古文：凡国大贞，卜立君，卜大封，则眡高作龟。大祭祀，则眡高命龟。
现代文：凡国家有大事要贞问，如占卜立新君，占卜大分封，就指示龟甲高起的部位给大宗伯看并在此处凿眼以便灼烤。
English: Whenever a country has an important event to be sacred, such as divination to make a new king, or divination to divide a large territory, they will indicate the part of the tortoise's shell that is raised to show it to the great patriarch and gouge an eye here so that it can be roasted.

古文：凡小事，莅卜。国大迁、大师，则贞龟。
现代文：占卜国都大迁移，或进行大征伐，就端正地把龟甲放置在卜位上。
English: As soon as the divinatory countries were greatly displaced, or large-scale conquests were carried out, the tortoise shell was neatly placed on the divination seat.

古文：凡旅，陈龟。
现代文：凡占卜举行旅祭，就把龟甲陈放出来。
English: Whenever divination is held at a traveling festival, the tortoise shell is brought out.

古文：凡丧事，命龟。
现代文：凡占卜丧事，就发布命龟辞。
English: When fortune-telling is done at funerals, an oracle is issued.

古文：卜师掌开龟之四兆，一曰方兆，二曰功兆，三曰义兆，四曰弓光。
现代文：卜师掌管占卜时拿出龟卜的四篇兆书：一是《方兆》，二是《功兆》，三是《义兆》，四是《弓兆》。
English: When the fortuneteller was in charge of divination, he took out four books of omens from the turtle: one was "the square omen," the second was "the virtue omen," the third was "the virtue omen," and the fourth was "the bow omen."

古文：凡卜事，眡高，扬火以作龟，致其墨。
现代文：凡占卜就指示龟甲高起的部位给临视卜事的官员看，举火灼烤龟甲，直到出现兆纹。
English: The diviners would show the part of the tortoise's shell that was raised to the officials who were supervising the divination, and they would light a fire and grill the tortoise's shell until the mark appeared.

古文：凡卜，辨龟之上下、左右、阴阳，以授命龟者而诏相之。
现代文：凡是占卜，辨别龟的仰头、低头、左斜、右斜、后长、前长，以授给发布命龟辞的人，并告教和协助发布命龟辞。
English: All divination, distinguishing the turtle's upturned head, downturned head, left slope, right slope, posterior length, anterior length, is given to the person issuing the oracle, and teaches and assists in issuing the oracle.

古文：龟人掌六龟之属。各有名物。天龟曰灵属，地龟曰绎属，东龟曰果属，西龟曰雷属，南龟曰猎属，北龟曰若属，各以其方之色与其体辨之。
现代文：龟人掌管六类龟，各有各的名称与特征：行走低头的天龟之类叫做灵属，行走仰头的地龟之类叫做绎属，前甲稍长的东龟之类叫做果属，龟甲左侧稍斜的西龟之类叫做雷属，后甲稍长的南龟之类叫做猎属，龟甲右侧稍斜的北龟之类叫做若属，各依照这些龟的方色及其龟体特征来辨别它们。
English: Turtle Man presides over six types of turtles, each with its own name and characteristics: the species of tortoise that walks with its head down is called the spiritual genus, the species of tortoise that walks with its head up is called the deductive genus, the species of eastern tortoise with a slightly longer anterior carapace is called the fruit genus, the species of western tortoise with a slightly oblique carapace on the left side of the carapace is called the thunder genus, the species of southern tortoise with a slightly longer posterior carapace is called the hunting genus, and the species of northern tortoise with a slightly oblique carapace on the right side of the

古文：凡取龟用，秋时；攻龟用，春时，各以其物，入于龟室。
现代文：凡捕龟用秋季，治龟甲用春季，各依照它们的名称种类，收入藏龟室。
English: Where turtle trapping is used in the fall, and tortoise shell treatment is used in the spring, according to their name and type, they are included in the turtle chamber.

古文：上春衅龟，祭祀先卜。
现代文：春正月用牲血涂龟，祭祀卜筮的发明者。
English: In the first month of spring, he painted a turtle with animal blood, and was the inventor of the ritual of Bo-yeon.

古文：若有祭事，则奉龟以往。
现代文：如果有祭祀，就捧龟而往。
English: If there is a religious service, he will go there holding a turtle.

古文：旅，亦如之。
现代文：举行旅祭也这样。
English: It's the same with holding a traveling festival.

古文：丧，亦如之。
现代文：有丧事也这样。
English: It's the same with funerals.

古文：菙氏掌共燋契，以待卜事。
现代文：菙氏掌管供给燃和契，以待占卜用。
English: Mr. Zou is in charge of the supply and ignition of the contract, to be used for divination.

古文：凡卜，以明火热燋，遂龠其焌契，以授卜师，遂役之。
现代文：凡占卜，先用明火点燃憔，接着吹燃火点燃契，以授给卜师，然后听从卜师的吩咐以协助卜师。
English: When divining, first light a match with an open flame, then blow on the flame to light a contract to give to the diviner, and then follow the diviner's orders to assist the diviner.

古文：占人掌占龟。
现代文：占人掌管用龟甲占卜和用蓍草占筮。
English: The fortune-teller is in charge of divination with tortoise shell and divination with thistle.

古文：以八筮占八颂，以八卦占筮之八故，以眡吉凶。
现代文：占卜之前先据筮辞占筮八事，如果只筮而不卜，就依八卦占筮的八事，来观察吉凶。
English: Before divination, the first thing to do is to predict the eight things. If you are reluctant to do so, you can observe the auspicious and inauspicious things according to the eight things of the Eight Trigrams.

古文：凡卜筮，君占体，大夫占色，史占墨，卜人占坼。
现代文：凡卜筮，君观察兆象，大夫观察兆气，史官观察兆的粗纹，卜人观察兆的细纹。
English: For example, the king observes the signs, the doctor observes the signs, the historian observes the coarse lines of the signs, and the scholar observes the fine lines of the signs.

古文：凡卜筮，既事，则系币，以比其命。
现代文：凡卜筮完毕，就把进献神的帛和记录下来的命辞及兆系在一起收藏起来。
English: Whenever the divination was finished, the god's coffin was collected together with the recorded omens and omens.

古文：岁终，则计其占之中否。
现代文：年终，就总计全年卜筮的结果应验或未应验的各有多少。
English: At the end of the year, how many of the total results of the whole year have been fulfilled or not fulfilled.

古文：筮人掌三易。以辨九筮之名，一曰连山，二曰归藏，三曰周易。九筮之名。一曰巫更，二曰巫咸，三曰巫式，四曰巫目，五曰巫易，六曰巫比，七曰巫祠，八曰巫参，九曰巫环，以辨吉凶。
现代文：筮人掌管三种《易》书，以辨别九筮的名称：一是《连山》，二是《归藏》，三是《周易》；九筮的名称，一是筮更，二是筮成，三是筮式，四是筮目，五是筮易，六是筮比，七是筮祠，八是筮参，九是筮环：以辨别吉凶。
English: Three kinds of "Yi" books are in charge of the people to distinguish the names of the nine mountains: one is "Lianshan," the second is "Gathering," and the third is "Zhou Yi"; the names of the nine mountains are: one is "Yu Geng," the second is "Yu Cheng," the third is "Yu Shi," the fourth is "Yu Me," the fifth is "Yu Yi," the sixth is "Yu Bi," the seventh is "Yu Si," the eighth is "Yu Zhan," and the ninth is "Yu Huan": to distinguish between good and evil.

古文：凡国之大事，先筮而后卜。
现代文：凡国家大事，先占筮而后占卜。
English: In all matters of state, first divination, then divination.

古文：上春。
现代文：春正月选择蓍草。
English: In the first month of spring, the grass is picked.

古文：相筮。凡国事，共筮。
现代文：凡占筮国事负责供给蓄草。
English: The relevant ministries are responsible for the supply of grass seed.

古文：占梦掌其岁时观天地之会，辨阴阳之气。
现代文：占梦掌管每年四季观察日月的交会，辨别阴阳之气。
English: Zhan Meng is in charge of observing the meeting of the sun and the moon every four seasons to distinguish the yin and yang.

古文：以日、月、星、辰占六梦之吉凶。一曰正梦，二曰恶梦，三曰思梦，四曰寤梦，五曰喜梦，六曰惧梦。
现代文：依据得梦时日月运行的度数和交会的位置来占测六类梦的吉凶：一是正梦，二是噩梦，三是思梦，四是寤梦，五是喜梦，六是惧梦。
English: According to the frequency of the movement of the sun and the moon during the dream and the position of the meeting, the six types of dreams are measured: one is a dream, the second is a nightmare, the third is a dream, the fourth is a dream, the fifth is a dream, and the sixth is a dream.

古文：季冬，聘王梦，献吉梦于王，王拜而受之，乃舍萌于四方，以赠恶梦，遂令始难，驱疫。
现代文：冬十二月，问王所梦以占来年吉凶，将全年所占王的吉梦献给王，王先拜而后接受。于是用菜祭四方，以送走恶梦，接着令方相氏开始驱逐疫鬼。
English: In the winter of December, he asked the king's dream to account for the next year's good luck and bad luck, and offered the king's good luck dream of the whole year to the king. The king first bowed and then accepted. So he used the vegetable sacrifice to send away the nightmare, and then ordered the Fang Xiang clan to begin to expel the pestilence.

古文：眡祲掌十煇之法，以观妖祥，辨吉凶。一曰祲，二曰象，三曰镌，四曰监，五曰暗，六曰瞢，七曰弥，八曰叙，九曰隮，十曰想，掌安宅叙降。
现代文：视祲掌管观察十种日旁气晕之法，以观察善恶，辨别吉凶：一是稷，二是象，三是锖，四是监，五是暗，六是瞢，七是弥，八是叙，九是防，十是想。
English: Guan Yin presided over the observation of ten ways to observe the atmosphere around the sun, in order to observe good and evil, and to distinguish between good and evil: one is yin, two is yang, three is yin, four is yang, five is dark, six is yin, seven is yang, eight is yin, nine is yang, and ten is yang.

古文：正岁，则行事；岁终，则弊其事。
现代文：掌管安定居宅、依次占测凶祸所降之地而进行攘除或迁移。夏历正月开始进行安定居宅的事，年终总计全年安定居宅的情况。
English: In charge of the stable residence, and successively occupied the place where the measured disaster fell, and carried out the expulsion or relocation. The stable residence began in the first month of the lunar calendar, and the total stable residence situation throughout the year.

古文：大祝掌六祸之辞，以事鬼神示，祈福祥，求永贞。一曰顺祝，二曰年祝，三曰吉祝，四曰化祝，五曰瑞祝，六曰筴祝。
现代文：大祝掌握六种祝告辞，用于祭祀人鬼、天神和地神，祈求福祥，祈求永得正命而无邪：一是顺祝，二是年祝，三是吉祝，四是化祝，五是瑞祝，六是策祝。
English: There are six kinds of greetings for the great blessing, which are used to worship ghosts, angels and gods, to pray for good fortune, and to pray for eternal life without evil: one is the blessing, the second is the year blessing, the third is the auspicious blessing, the fourth is the transmutation blessing, the fifth is the auspicious blessing, and the sixth is the strategic blessing.

古文：掌六祈以同鬼神示，一曰类，二曰造，三曰禬，四曰禜，五曰攻，六曰说。
现代文：掌握六种祭祀祈祷法以使人鬼、天神和地神和协一致：一是类祭，二是造祭，三是桧祭，四是萘祭，五是攻祭，六是说祭。
English: Mastering six kinds of sacrifice and prayer methods to make ghosts, angels and earth gods harmonize: one is the class sacrifice, the second is the creation sacrifice, the third is the burnt sacrifice, the fourth is the burnt sacrifice, the fifth is the attack sacrifice, and the sixth is the speech sacrifice.

古文：作六辞以通上下亲疏远近，一曰祠，二曰命，三曰诰，四曰会，五曰祷，六曰诔。
现代文：撰作六类文辞，以沟通上下、亲疏、远近的人：一是朝聘往来交接之辞，二是外交辞令，三是上对下的训诫、劝励之辞，四是会同盟誓之辞，五是祝福庆贺之辞，六是对死者的诔辞。
English: Six types of words were composed to communicate with people up and down, close and distant: one is the word of exchange between the North and the South, the second is the diplomatic word, the third is the word of exhortation and encouragement from the top to the bottom, the fourth is the word of alliance oath, the fifth is the word of blessing and celebration, and the sixth is the eulogy of the deceased.

古文：辨六号，一曰神号，二曰鬼号，三曰示号，四曰牲号，五曰齍号，六曰币号。
现代文：辨别六种祭祀时所用的尊美的称号：一是神的美号，二是祖先的美号，三是地神的美号，四是牺牲的美号，五是谷物的美号，六是玉帛的美号。
English: Distinguish six kinds of titles for honoring beauty used in sacrificial rituals: one is the beauty of the gods, the second is the beauty of the ancestors, the third is the beauty of the earth gods, the fourth is the beauty of sacrifice, the fifth is the beauty of grain, and the sixth is the beauty of jade.

古文：辨九祭，一曰命祭，二曰衍祭，三曰炮祭，四曰周祭，五曰振祭，六曰擩祭，七曰绝祭，八曰缭祭，九曰共祭。
现代文：辨别九种食前祭礼：一是命祭，二是衍祭，三是包祭，四是周祭，五是振祭，六是搞祭，七是绝祭，八是缭祭，九是供祭。
English: Distinguish nine kinds of pre-meal rituals: one is the life sacrifice, the second is the yang sacrifice, the third is the package sacrifice, the fourth is the weekly sacrifice, the fifth is the vibrating sacrifice, the sixth is the engaging sacrifice, the seventh is the never-ending sacrifice, the eighth is the dizzying sacrifice, and the ninth is the offering sacrifice.

古文：辨九拜，一曰稽首，二曰顿首，三曰空首，四曰振动，五曰吉拜，六曰凶拜，七曰奇拜，八曰褒拜，九日肃拜，以享右、祭祀。
现代文：辨别九种拜礼：一是稽首，二是顿首，三是空首，四是振动，五是吉拜，六是凶拜，七是奇拜，八是褒拜，九是肃拜，用于祭祀时向尸献酒和劝侑尸吃饭。
English: Distinguish nine kinds of worship: one is to check the head, the second is to blow the head, the third is to empty the head, the fourth is to vibrate, the fifth is to worship, the sixth is to worship, the seventh is to worship, the eighth is to worship, and the ninth is to worship, which is used for offering wine to the corpse and persuading the corpse to eat.

古文：凡大禋祀、肆享、祭示，则执明火、水而号祝。
现代文：凡用大袒祀祭祀天神、剔解牲体祭祀宗庙、祭祀地神，就拿着明水和明火而告教各种祭祀的名号并发布祝辞。
English: All those who use a large yakitori to worship the gods, sacrifice animals to worship the ancestral temple, and worship the gods of the earth, hold open water and open fire to teach the names of various rituals and issue congratulations.

古文：隋衅，逆牲，逆尸，令钟鼓；右，亦如之。
现代文：向祖先进献牲血、迎取祭祀用牲、迎接尸的时候，就命令演奏钟鼓。劝侑尸吃饭时也命令演奏钟鼓。
English: When offering blood to the ancestors, receiving sacrificial animals, and welcoming the dead, the bell drum is ordered to be played. When exhorting the dead to eat, the bell drum is also ordered to be played.

古文：来瞽，令皋舞；相尸礼。
现代文：呼瞽者进来歌唱奏乐，并命令呼舞者进来表演舞蹈，相赞尸行礼。
English: The caller came in to sing a piece of music, and ordered the caller to come in to perform a dance, praising the corpse.

古文：既祭，令彻。
现代文：祭祀完毕，命令彻除祭器。
English: Once the ritual is complete, the order is given to completely remove the sacrificial vessels.

古文：大丧始崩，以肆鬯渳尸，相饭，赞敛。彻奠，言甸人读祷，付练祥。
现代文：大丧，王始死，为陈尸设郁鬯并用以浴尸，协助行饭含礼，协助大敛、小敛，负责彻除奠祭物；撰作并告诉甸师读代王受灾祸的祷辞；在举行衬祭、小祥祭和大祥祭时，掌管供给祭物和相赞礼仪等国事。
English: In the great mourning, when the king died, he set up a tulou urn for the dead body and used it to bathe the corpse, assisted in the meal ceremony, assisted in the great restraint and small restraint, and was responsible for the removal of the sacrificial offering; he wrote and told Dian Shi to read the prayer of the king's calamity; he was in charge of the national affairs such as the supply of the sacrificial offering and the eulogy ceremony when the Lin Festival, Xiao Xiang Festival and Grand Xiang Festival were held.

古文：掌国事，国有大故、天灾，弥祀社稷，祷祠。
现代文：国家有大的变故或天灾，就遍祀社稷，并向诸神祈祷消灾，事后举行祭祀以报答诸神。
English: When there is a major disaster or natural calamity in the country, the community worships and prays to the gods to eliminate the disaster, and then holds a sacrifice to repay the gods.

古文：大师，宜于社，造于祖。设军社，类上帝。国将有事于四望，及军归献于社，则前祝。
现代文：王亲征，用宜祭祭祀社神，用造祭祭祀祖先，在军中设立军社，并用类祭祭祀上天，国家的军将们还要祭祀四方名山大川。到军队出征回来向社神献捷时，就在前先致祝告辞。
English: Princes and emperors were enlisted, shrine gods were worshipped with the Yi sacrifice, ancestors were worshipped with the Zong sacrifice, military shrines were established in the army, and class sacrifices were made to the heavens, and the country's generals also had to worship the famous mountains and rivers in all four directions. When returning from a military expedition to offer a sacrifice to the shrine gods, they would first make a congratulatory speech.

古文：大会同，造于庙，宜于社。
现代文：有大会同，就用造祭祭祀宗庙，用宜祭祭祀社神。
English: If there is a large assembly, it is appropriate to make a sacrifice to worship the ancestral temple, and to make a sacrifice to worship the shrine god.

古文：遇大山川，则用事焉；反行，舍奠。
现代文：前往会同途中经过大山川，就对它们进行祭祀。
English: On the way to the meeting, they pass through large mountains and rivers, and then they are sacrificed.

古文：建邦国，先告后土用牲币，禁督逆祀命者，颁祭号于邦国都鄙。
现代文：返回后就在宗庙行释奠礼。封建诸侯国，就先告祭社神后土，用牲和玉帛做祭品。禁止和督察诸侯是否有违背有关祭祀命令的。颁布有关祭祀的各种名号给各诸侯国和王畿各采邑。
English: After returning, a memorial service will be held at the ancestral temple. The feudal lords will first inform the shrine of the god's back ground, and use animals and jade bracelets as offerings. The lords will prohibit and inspect whether there is any violation of the relevant sacrifice order. Various names related to the sacrifice will be promulgated to all the lords and kingdoms.

古文：小祝掌小祭祀将事、侯、禳、祷、祠之祝号，以祈福祥，顺丰年，逆时雨，宁风旱，弥灾兵，远皋疾。
现代文：小祝负责在举行小祭祀时，为之撰作侯祭、禳祭、祈祷和报福之祭的祝辞及有关的名号，以祈求福祥，祝祷风调雨顺年成丰收，迎接时雨，宁息风旱，消弭灾兵，远离罪咎和疾病。
English: Xiaozhu is responsible for writing the congratulatory speeches and related names for the horse festival, burnt offering, prayer and blessing festival when holding small sacrifices, to pray for good luck, to pray for the wind and rain to bring a good harvest, to welcome the rain, to calm the wind and drought, to eliminate the plague, and to stay away from sin and disease.

古文：大祭祀，逆齍盛，送逆尸，沃尸盥，赞隋，赞彻，赞奠。
现代文：举行大祭祀时，负责迎取盛在祭器中的谷物，迎送尸，浇水为尸盥手，协助尸行食前祭礼，协助彻除祭器，协助酌酒放置在尸席前。
English: When holding a large ritual, he is responsible for receiving the grain in the sacrificial vessel, welcoming the corpse, watering the hands of the corpse, assisting the corpse in the pre-feast ritual, assisting in the removal of the sacrificial vessel, and assisting in placing the wine in front of the corpse.

古文：凡事，佐大祝。
现代文：凡事协助大祝。
English: I wish you every success in your endeavors.

古文：大丧，赞渳，设熬，置铭。
现代文：有大丧，协助沐浴尸体，殡棺时在棺柩周围放置炒熟的谷物，设置铭旌。
English: There is a great mourning, help to bathe the body, when the coffin is placed in the coffin around the fried cereals, set up inscriptions.

古文：及葬，设道赍之奠，分祷五祀。
现代文：到将出葬时置遣奠，并分出牲体祭祀五祀。
English: At the time of the funeral, a memorial service will be held, and five animal sacrifices will be held.

古文：大师，掌衅祈号祝。
现代文：王亲征，掌管衅鼓、祈祷、祭祀的各种名号和祝告辞。
English: Wang Zhenzhen, in charge of the drums, prayers, various names of the rites and congratulatory speeches.

古文：有寇戎之事，则保郊祀于社。
现代文：有寇贼或外敌入侵的事，就负责祭祀和守护国郊诸祀坛及社坛。
English: In the event of an invasion by bandits or foreign enemies, they are responsible for offering sacrifices and guarding the country's suburban shrines and shrines.

古文：凡外内小祭祀、小丧纪、小会同、小军旅、掌事焉。
现代文：凡外内小祭祀、小丧祭、小会同、小征伐，掌管有关祈祷祝号的事。
English: For all external and internal small sacrifices, small funerals, small gatherings, and small campaigns, he is in charge of matters related to prayers and congratulatory calls.

古文：丧祝掌大丧劝防之事。
现代文：丧祝掌管大丧时指挥拉柩车者和执披者以防护柩车的事。
English: Funeral celebrants are in charge of directing the procession of the hearse and the performers to protect the hearse.

古文：及辟，令启；及朝，御，乃奠；及祖，饰棺，乃载，遂御。
现代文：到需要除去殡棺的涂封物时，下令开启棺殡。到行朝庙礼时，指挥运载棺柩前往祖庙 ，于是设置朝庙奠。到设祖奠时，装饰棺柩，载上柩车，接着指挥柩车调头。
English: When it was necessary to remove the coating of the funeral casket, he ordered the opening of the funeral casket. When performing the temple ceremony, the conductor carried the coffin to the ancestral temple, and then set up the temple memorial. When setting up the ancestral memorial, decorate the coffin, load the carriage, and then direct the carriage to turn around.

古文：及葬，御，出宫，乃代。
现代文：到出葬时，指挥拉柩车出庙，于是由另一丧祝接替指挥。
English: At the time of the funeral, the conductor pulled the hearse out of the temple, so another mourner took over the conductor.

古文：及圹，说载，除饰。
现代文：到达墓穴处，把棺柩从柩车上卸下，除去棺饰。
English: When arriving at the grave, remove the coffin lid from the hearse and remove the coffin ornaments.

古文：小丧，亦如之，掌丧祭祝号。
现代文：遇有小丧也这样做。负责有关丧祭的祝告辞和各种名号。
English: In the case of small funerals, they do the same. They are responsible for the eulogies and various names related to the funeral.

古文：王吊，则与巫前，掌胜国邑之社稷之祝号，以祭祀祷祠焉。
现代文：王外出吊唁臣丧，就与男巫走在王前为王驱除凶邪之气。掌管对被灭之国的社稷的祝告和各种名号，以对它进行祭祀、祈祷和事后的报祭。
English: When the king went out to mourn his dead, he and the sorcerer walked in front of the king to drive away the evil spirit. He was in charge of the congratulations and various names for the society of the destroyed country, with which to perform sacrifices, prayers and post-funeral offerings.

古文：凡卿大夫之丧，掌事，而敛，饰棺焉。
现代文：凡卿大夫的丧事，掌管有关的事项并负责尸体入殓和装饰棺柩。
English: He is in charge of the funeral of the deceased and is responsible for the burial of the body and the decoration of the coffin.

古文：甸祝掌四时之田表貉之祝号。舍奠于祖庙，弥亦如之。
现代文：甸祝掌管四季田猎在立表处举行貉祭时的祝声辞和各种名号，出发前在祖庙和祢庙行释奠礼时也这样做。
English: Tian Zhu presides over the congratulatory speech and various names of the four seasons of Tianhu when holding the wreath-laying ceremony at the table, and does the same when performing the memorial service at the ancestral temple and the temple before departure.

古文：师甸，致禽于虞中，乃属禽。
现代文：举行大田猎，当把猎物集中到树有虞旗的田猎处的中央时，便给猎物分类。
English: Large-scale hunting is held, and when the prey is concentrated in the center of the hunting ground where there is a yakitori tree, the prey is classified.

古文：及郊，馌兽，舍奠于祖弥，乃敛禽，禂牲禂马，皆掌其祝号。
现代文：返回时到达国郊，就用所猎获的禽兽馈祭国郊四方群神，回到国都又用所猎获的兽在祖庙和祢庙行舍奠礼，然后挑选三十头禽牲缴纳给腊人。用稠祭祭所猎获的禽牲，用禂祭祭马，都负责祝告辞和各种名号。
English: When returning to the outskirts of the country, they use the animals they have hunted to feed the gods of the four directions in the suburbs of the country. When returning to the capital, they also use the animals they have hunted to pay homage at the ancestral temple and Your temple, and then select thirty birds and animals to pay to the La people. The birds and animals hunted with the thick sacrifice and the horses sacrificed with the burnt offering are responsible for the farewell and various names.

