古文：武帝世祖武皇帝讳赜，字宣远，太祖长子也。
现代文：世祖武皇帝名萧赜，字宣远，是太祖的长子。
English: The ancestor of Emperor Wu was named Xiao Jun and his surname was Xuan Yuan. He was the eldest son of the great-grandfather.

古文：小讳龙儿。
现代文：小名龙儿。
English: Little dragons.

古文：生于建康青溪宅，其夜陈孝后、刘昭后同梦龙据屋上，故字上焉。
现代文：出生在建康青溪的家宅，出生那天夜里，陈孝后、刘昭后都梦到龙盘踞在屋顶上，所以给世祖取小名龙儿。
English: Born in Jiankang Qingxi's family home, on the night of his birth, Chen Xiao Hou and Liu Zhao Hou both dreamed of a dragon on the roof, so they gave their ancestor the nickname Long Er.

古文：初为寻阳国侍郎，辟州西曹书佐，出为赣令。
现代文：世祖起初做寻阳国侍郎，后被征召为州西曹书佐，出任赣县令。
English: At first, Sezu served as the attendant of Xuanyang Province. Later, he was conscripted to serve as the assistant of the Western Cao, and became the county magistrate of Zhang County.

古文：江州刺史晋安王子勋反，上不从命，南康相沈肃之絷上于郡狱。
现代文：江州刺史晋安王刘子勋反叛，世祖不听从命令，南康相沈肃之把世祖拘禁在那裹的监狱。
English: Liu Zixun, the King of Jinan, rebelled in Jiangzhou, and Shizuo disobeyed the order, and the Southern Kangxi Minister Shenshu detained Shizuo in the prison there.

古文：族人萧欣祖、门客桓康等破郡迎出上。
现代文：族人萧欣祖、门客桓康等攻破南康郡，接出世祖。
English: Xiao Xinzu, a member of the clan, and Huan Kang, a disciple, broke through Nankang County and brought out the ancestor.

古文：肃之率将吏数百人追击，上与左右拒战，生获肃之，斩首百余级，遂率部曲百余人举义兵。始兴相殷孚将万兵赴子勋于寻阳，或劝上击之，上以众寡不敌，避屯揭阳山中，聚众至三千人。
现代文：沈肃之率领兵将官吏数百人追击，世祖和左右的人作战抵抗，生擒沈肃之，杀敌一百余人，于是率领自家兵士一百余人起义始兴相殷孚率领上万军队到寻阳投奔刘子勋，有人劝世祖阻击他，世祖认为寡不敌众，躲避到揭阳山中驻守，聚集兵众达到三千人。
English: Shen Cunzhi led the soldiers to chase hundreds of officials. Shizhu and the people around him fought and resisted. Shen Cunzhi, who was still alive, killed more than a hundred of the enemy. He then led more than a hundred of his own soldiers to revolt. Xing Xiang and Yin Fu led tens of thousands of troops to Huanyang to join Liu Zixun. Some people advised Shizhu to stop him. Shizhu thought he was outnumbered and hid in the mountains of Jieyang, gathering up to three thousand soldiers.

古文：子勋遣其将戴凯之为南康相，及军主张宗之千余人助之。
现代文：刘子勋委派他的将领戴凯之为南康相，并让军主张宗之率一千余人协助他。
English: Liu Zixun appointed his general Dai Kaiji as the minister of public health, and let the army advocate Zong lead more than a thousand people to assist him.

古文：上引兵向郡，击凯之别军主程超数百人于南康口，又进击宗之，破斩之，遂围郡城。
现代文：世祖率领军队向南康郡进发，在南康关口袭击戴凯之的别军主程超率领的几百人，又进攻张宗之，击败并杀了他，于是包围了南康郡城。
English: The ancestor led the army to march to Nankang County. At the Nankang Pass, he attacked the hundreds of people led by the main course of the other army led by Dai Kai, and attacked Zhang Zong, defeated and killed him, and then surrounded the city of Nankang County.

古文：凯之以数千人固守，上亲率将士尽日攻之，城陷，凯之奔走，杀伪赣令陶冲之。
现代文：戴凯之用数千人固守，世祖亲自率领将士终日攻打，城被攻陷，戴凯之逃跑，杀掉伪赣县令陶冲之。
English: With the help of several thousand people, Dai Kai's forces held fast. Shizu personally led his soldiers in an all-day attack. The city was captured, and Dai Kai's forces fled, killing Tao Chong, the pseudo-prefectural magistrate.

古文：上即据郡城，遣军主张应期、邓惠真三千人袭豫章。
现代文：世祖便占据郡城，派遣军主张应期、邓惠真率三千人袭击豫章。
English: The ancestor then occupied the county seat and dispatched an army to attack Yuzhang at the right time, led by Deng Huizhen with 3,000 men.

古文：子勋遣军主谈秀之等七千人，与应期相拒于西昌，筑营垒，交战不能决。
现代文：刘子勋派遣军主谈秀之等七千人，在西吕与张应期抗拒，修筑营垒，交战不能决出胜负。
English: Liu Zihun dispatched seven thousand soldiers, including the main leader Tuan Xiu, to resist Zhang Ying in Xilu and build barracks. The battle could not be decided.

古文：闻上将自下，秀之等退散。
现代文：听说世祖将亲自率兵前来进攻，谈秀之等后退逃散。
English: Hearing that the ancestor would personally lead an army to attack, Tanshu and the others retreated and fled.

古文：事平，徵为尚书库部郎、征北中兵参军、西阳县子，带南东莞太守、越骑校尉、正员郎、刘韫抚军长史、襄阳太守。
现代文：战事平息，世祖被任为尚书库部郎，征北中兵参军，西阳县子，兼任南东莞太守，越骑校尉，正员郎，刘韫抚军长史，襄阳太守。
English: After the war was over, Shizu was appointed as the secretary of the Shang Library, the enlisted soldier of the Northern Expeditionary Army, the son of Xiyang County, the governor of the Southern Dongguan Province, the captain of the Yue cavalry, the chief officer, the commander of the Liu Xifu Army, and the governor of Xiangyang Province.

古文：别封赣县子，邑三百户，固辞不受。
现代文：另外又封为赣县子，食邑三百户，坚决推辞不接受。
English: In addition, he was also given the title of the son of Jixian County, with three hundred households in the food village, and he resolutely refused to accept it.

古文：转宁朔将军、广兴相。
现代文：转任宁朔将军、广兴相。
English: He was transferred to the posts of Ningshuo General and Guangxing Minister.

古文：桂阳王休范反，上遣军袭寻阳，至北峤，事平，除晋熙王安西谘议，不拜，复还郡。
现代文：桂阳王刘休范反叛，世祖派军队袭击寻阳，赶至北崤，事态平息，授官晋熙王安西谘议，没有接受，又回到本郡。
English: Guiyang King Liu Xiufan rebelled, Shizhu sent an army to attack Huanyang, rushed to Beilun, the situation calmed down, conferred the post to Jinxi King Anxi for consultation, did not accept, and returned to the county.

古文：转司徒右长史、黄门郎。
现代文：转任司徒右长史、黄门郎。
English: He was transferred to the positions of Shituu Nagashi and Omonro.

古文：沈攸之在荆楚，宋朝密为之备。
现代文：沈攸之在荆楚，宋朝秘密对他加以防备。
English: Shen Youzhi was in Jingchu, and the Song Dynasty secretly guarded against him.

古文：元徽四年，以上为晋熙王镇西长史、江夏内史、行郢州事。
现代文：元徽四年，任命世祖为晋熙王镇西长史、江夏内史、行郢州事。
English: In the 4th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the founder of the dynasty was appointed as Jinxi Wangzhen Xi Changshi, Jiangxia Neishi, and Xingye Zhouxi.

古文：顺帝立，徵晋熙王燮为抚军、扬州刺史，以上为左卫将军，辅燮俱下。
现代文：从帝即位，征召晋熙王刘燮为抚军、扬州刺史，任命世祖为左卫将军，辅助刘燮一起沿江而下。
English: After ascending to the throne, he conscripted Liu Bei, the king of Jinxi, to be the leader of the Fuzhu army and the historian of Yangzhou, appointed Shizu to be the General of the Left Guards, and assisted Liu Bei to go down the river together.

古文：沈攸之事起，未得朝廷处分，上以中流可以待敌，即据盆口城为战守之备。
现代文：沈攸之反叛事起，朝廷还未加以处置，世祖认为中游可以等待敌人，当即占据盆口城作战守的准备。
English: Since the rebellion of Shen You, the imperial court has not yet dealt with it. The ancestor believed that the midstream could wait for the enemy and immediately occupy the preparation of the garrison of the basin.

古文：太祖闻之，喜曰： 此真我子也！ 
现代文：太祖听说遣件事，高兴地说： 这真是我的儿子啊! 
English: When the great-grandfather heard about the transfer, he said happily, "This is really my son!"

古文：上表求西讨，不许，乃遣偏军援郢。
现代文：上表请求西去讨伐，未被允许，于是派部分军队支援郢。
English: The upper table asked the west to go to the crusade, but was not allowed, so he sent part of the army to support him.

古文：平西将军黄回等皆受上节度。
现代文：平西将军黄回等都受世祖指挥。
English: Pingxi General Huang Hui and others were all under the command of the ancestor.

古文：加上冠军将军、持节。
现代文：加封世祖为冠军将军、持节。
English: Jafeng Shizu is the champion general and holds the festival.

古文：升明二年，事平，转散骑常侍，都督江州、豫州之新蔡、晋熙二郡军事，征虏将军，江州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：升明二年，事态平息，转任散骑常侍、都督江州豫州之新蔡晋熙二郡军事、征虏将军、江州刺史，持节仍旧保留。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, the state of affairs calmed down, and the new Cai Jinxi, who was transferred to the position of straggling equerry, the new governor of Yuzhou of Jiangzhou, the military of the two counties, the conscript general, and the history of Jiangzhou, still retained the festival.

古文：封闻喜县侯，邑二千户。
现代文：封为闻喜县侯，食邑二千户。
English: He was given the title of the lord of Wensi County, which had 2,000 households.

古文：其年，徵侍中、领军将军。
现代文：这年，征召为侍中、领军将军。
English: That year, he was conscripted as a chamberlain and general leading the army.

古文：给鼓吹一部。
现代文：赐给鼓吹即乐队一部。
English: Part of the trumpet band.

古文：府置佐史。
现代文：府第设置佐史。
English: The government established Sasafumi.

古文：领石头戍军事。
现代文：统领石头戍军事。
English: He was in charge of the military.

古文：寻又加持节、督京畿诸军事。
现代文：不久封持节、督京畿诸军事。
English: Soon after the enthronement festival, the governorship of Gyeonggi Province was transferred to the military.

古文：三年，转散骑常侍、尚书仆射、中军大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵为公，持节、都督、领军如故。
现代文：升明三年，转任散骑常侍、尚书仆射、中军大将军、开府仪同三司，进封爵位为公，持节、都督、领军仍旧保留。
English: After three years of promotion, he was transferred to the posts of straggler, cavalryman, general of the Chinese army, keeper of the imperial residences, and the three departments. He was granted a title of nobility, but he still retained the title of emperor, governor-general, and leader of the army.

古文：给班剑二十人。
现代文：赐给班剑仪仗二十人。
English: He gave twenty swordsmen to the Panjian ceremonial unit.

古文：齐国建，为齐公世子，改加侍中、南豫州刺史，给油络车，羽葆鼓吹，增班剑为四十人。
现代文：齐国建立，世祖被立为齐公世子，改而加封侍中、南豫州刺史，赐给油络车，羽葆、鼓吹，增加班剑仪仗为四十人。
English: After the founding of the State of Qi, the founder was appointed as the eldest son of the Prince of Qi, and he was given the titles of middle-ranked attendant and senior statesman of South Henan Province. He was also given an oil tanker, feather boas, and a trumpet, and the number of ceremonial swords was increased to forty.

古文：以石头为世子宫，官置二率以下，坊省服章，一如东宫。
现代文：把石头作为世子宫，设置左右卫率以下属官，官署、服制，和东宫完全相同。
English: The stone is used as the world's womb, and the subordinate officials, government offices, and dress code below the left and right guards are set up, which are exactly the same as the East Palace.

古文：进爵王太子。
现代文：进升爵位为王太子。
English: The most likely candidate for promotion to the peerage is the crown prince.

古文：太祖即位，为皇太子。
现代文：太祖即位，世祖成为皇太子。
English: The great-grandfather ascended the throne, and the great-grandfather became crown prince.

古文：建元四年三月，壬戌，太祖崩，上即位，大赦。
现代文：建元四年三月壬戌，太祖病逝，世祖即位，大赦。
English: In March of the fourth year of the founding of the Republic of China, the great-grandfather died of illness, the great-grandfather ascended to the throne, and was pardoned.

古文：征镇州郡令长军屯营部，各行丧三日，不得擅离任，都邑城守防备幢队，一不得还。
现代文：征镇、州郡长官、军屯营部，各行丧三天，不得擅离职守；驻守都市的戍卫部队，一律不得回来。
English: The town marshal, the prefect of the prefecture and county, and the camp commander of the military camp shall not leave their posts without permission for three days after the funeral; the garrison troops of the city shall not return.

古文：乙丑，称先帝遗诏，以司徒褚渊录尚书事，尚书左仆射王俭为尚书令，车骑将军张敬儿为开府仪同三司。
现代文：乙丑，宣称先帝遣诏，任命司徒褚渊为绿尚书事，尚书左仆射王俭为尚书令，车骑将军张敬儿为开府仪同三司。
English: Second Ugly, claiming that the previous emperor had sent an imperial edict, appointed Sittu Shanyuan as the Green Shang Shujie, Shang Shujie's left-hand servant Shaowang Jian as the Shang Shujie, and the cavalry general Zhang Jing'er as the Kaifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：诏曰： 丧礼虽有定制，先旨每存简约，内官可三日一还临，外官间日一还临。
现代文：诏书说： 丧礼虽然有一定的制度，可是先帝的旨命常有简约之意，近侍臣僚可以三天来哭吊一次，其余百官可以隔一天进宫哭吊一次。
English: The imperial edict said: Although there is a certain system for funerals, the decrees of the former emperor often have a simple meaning. Close attendants and ministers can come to mourn once every three days, and other officials can come to the palace to mourn once every other day.

古文：后有大丧皆如之。 
现代文：今后有大的丧礼都如此。 
English: This will be the case for all large funerals in the future.

古文：丁卯，以右卫将军吕安国为司州刺史。
现代文：丁卯，任命右卫将军吕安国为司刺史。
English: Dingwu, appointed the right guard general Lu Anguo as the secretary of history.

古文：庚午，以司空豫章王嶷为太尉。
现代文：庚午，任命司空豫章王萧嶷为太尉。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, he appointed Wang Xiaojun, the Secretary of the General Office of the Communist Party of China, as the first lieutenant.

古文：癸酉，诏曰： 城直之制，历代宜同，顷岁逋弛，遂以万计。
现代文：癸酉，下韶说： 值勤守城制度，历代应该相同，可是近年逃避守城兵役的人，数以万计。
English: "The system of guarding the city on duty should be the same throughout the ages, but in recent years, tens of thousands of people have evaded military service to guard the city.

古文：虽在宪宜惩，而原心可亮。
现代文：虽然依据法律应当惩处，但追究其本意可以宽谅。
English: Although it should be punished according to the law, it is forgivable to investigate its original intention.

古文：积年逋城，可悉原荡。
现代文：历年逃避的守城兵役可以全部免除。
English: Those who have evaded military service for the defense of the city over the years can be completely exempted.

古文：自兹以后，申明旧科，有违纠裁。 
现代文：从此以后，申明原有的律令，有违犯者要纠正制裁。 
English: Since then, the original regulation has been affirmed, and violators have to correct the sanctions.

古文：庚辰，诏曰： 比岁未稔，贫穷不少，京师二岸，多有其弊。
现代文：庚辰，下诏说： 连年收成不好，贫穷的人很多，京城江水两岸，多有灾民。
English: Geng Chen, the next emperor, said: The harvest has been bad for years, there are many poor people, and there are many disaster victims on both sides of the Beijing River.

古文：遣中书舍人优量赈恤。 
现代文：派中书舍人酌量赈济救助。 
English: The middle school librarian was dispatched to help with the rescue.

古文：夏，四月，丙午，以辅国将军张倪为兖州刺史。
现代文：夏四月丙午，任命辅国将军张倪为兖州刺史。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fourth month of the summer, Zhang Ni, the general of the auxiliary state, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：辛卯，追尊穆妃为皇后。
现代文：辛卯，追封穆妃为皇后。
English: In Xinwu, Emperor Wu of Southern Qi crowned Princess Mu as empress.

古文：五月，乙丑，以丹阳尹闻喜公子良为南徐州刺史。
现代文：五月乙丑，任命丹阳尹闻喜公萧子良为南徐州刺史。
English: In May, Danyang Yin Wen Xi Gong appointed Xiao Ziliang as the chief historian of South Xuzhou.

古文：甲戌，以新除左卫将军垣崇祖为豫州刺史。
现代文：甲戌，任命新提拔的左卫将军垣崇祖为豫州刺史。
English: Armor, appointed the newly promoted left guard general Gao Chongzu as the history of Yuzhou.

古文：癸未，诏曰： 顷水雨频降，潮流荐满，二岸居民，多所淹渍。
现代文：癸未，下诏书说： 近来降雨频繁，河流屡屡涨满，沿江两岸居民，多遭水淹。
English: In the meantime, the next edict said: "Recently, rainfall has been frequent, rivers have repeatedly filled up, and residents on both sides of the river have been flooded.

古文：遣中书舍人与两县官长优量赈恤。 
现代文：派中书舍人和沿江两县的长官酌量赈济救助。 
English: Shushe and the governors of the two counties along the river were dispatched to provide assistance.

古文：六月，甲申，立皇太子长懋。
现代文：六月甲申，立长懋为皇太子。
English: In June of the year of the Monkey, Nagamine was appointed crown prince.

古文：诏申壬戌赦恩百日。
现代文：下诏书申明白壬戌日施行的赦免恩典一百天。
English: The following rescript clarifies that the grace of pardon granted on the Day of Atonement is for one hundred days.

古文：乙酉，以鄱阳王锵为雍州刺史，临汝公子卿为郢州刺史。
现代文：乙酉，任命鄱阳王萧锵为雍州刺史，临汝公萧子卿为郢州刺史。
English: Yixing, appointed the king of Poyang, Xiao Qi, as the governor of Yongzhou, and Lin Ryu Gong, Xiao Ziqing, as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：甲午，以宁朔将军臧灵智为越州刺史。
现代文：甲午，任命宁朔将军臧灵智为越州刺史。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Ningshuo General Gong Lingzhi was appointed as the first governor of Yuezhou.

古文：丙申，立皇太子妃王氏。
现代文：丙申，立王氏为皇太子妃。
English: In other words, the Crown Prince and Crown Princess are from the same family.

古文：进封闻喜公子良为竟陵王，临汝公子卿为庐陵王，应城公子敬为安王，江陵公子懋为晋安王，枝江公子隆为随郡王，皇子子真为建安王，皇孙昭业为南郡王。
现代文：进封闻喜公萧子良为竞陵王，临汝公萧子卿为庐陵王，应城公萧子敬为安陆王，江陵公萧子懋为晋安王，枝江公萧子隆为随郡王，皇子萧子真为建安王，皇孙萧昭业为南郡王。
English: According to the records of the imperial court, Prince Xizirong was the king of Jingling, Prince Linru was the king of Jingling, Prince Yingcheng was the king of Anlu, Prince Jiangling was the king of Jinan, Prince Yejiang was the king of Su County, Prince Xiaozhizhen was the king of Jianan, and Prince Xiao Zhaoye was the king of Nan County.

古文：戊戌，诏曰： 水潦为患，星纬乖序。京都囚系，可克日讯决；诸远狱委刺史以时察判。
现代文：戊戌，下诏书说： 洪涝为患，天象错乱京城关押的囚犯，可以限定日期审讯判决；外地各监狱的囚犯，委派刺史按时审查判决。
English: Therefore, the next edict said: Due to floods and landslides, prisoners held in Beijing may have their verdicts reviewed on a limited date; prisoners in other cities may have their verdicts reviewed on a regular basis.

古文：建康、秣陵二县贫民加赈赐，必令周悉。
现代文：建康、秣陵两县的贫民增加赈济赏赐，一定要做到周到全面。
English: The poor in Jiankang and Fuling counties should be given more financial rewards, and it must be done in a thoughtful and comprehensive manner.

古文：吴兴、义兴遭水县，蠲除租调。 
现代文：吴兴、义兴遭水害的县，免除租税。 
English: The counties of Wuxing and Yixing that suffered from floods are exempt from taxes.

古文：癸卯，以司徒褚渊为司空、骠骑将军。
现代文：癸卯，任命司徒褚渊为司空、骠骑将军。
English: At the same time, he appointed Sitoru Shanyuan as the general of the air force and cavalry.

古文：秋，七月，庚申，以卫尉萧顺之为豫州刺史。
现代文：秋七月庚申，任命卫尉萧顺之为豫州刺史。
English: In the autumn and July of Goshun, he appointed the guard lieutenant Xiao Shun to be the chief historian of Yuzhou.

古文：壬戌，以冠军将军垣荣祖为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：王戌，任命冠军将军垣荣祖为青、冀二州刺史。
English: Wang Qian appointed the champion general, Waki Rongzu, as the young and the history of the two states of Hebei.

古文：八月，癸卯，司徒褚渊薨。
现代文：八月癸卯，司徒渣镯去世。
English: At the end of August, Siu Jia Gang passed away.

古文：九月，丁巳，以国哀故，罢国子学。
现代文：九月丁巳，因为国家举办丧事的缘故，停办国子学。
English: In September, Kuniko Gakuen was suspended due to a state funeral.

古文：己巳，以前军将军姜伯起为秦州刺史。
现代文：己巳，任命前军将军姜伯起为秦州刺史。
English: Jiang Boqi, a former military general, has been appointed as the new governor of Qinzhou.

古文：辛未，以征南将军王僧虔为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，尚书右仆射王奂为湘州刺史。
现代文：辛未，任命征南将军王僧虔为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，尚书右仆射王奂为湘州刺史。
English: Xin Wei appointed the general of the Southern Expedition, Wang Xiangqian, as the doctor of Zuo Guanglu, the secretary of Kaifu Yi and the three departments, and the right-hand man of Shangshu, Sha Wangqi, as the historian of Hunan.

古文：冬，十二月，己丑，诏曰： 缘淮戍将，久处边劳，三元行始，宜沾恩庆。
现代文：冬十二月己丑，下诏书说： 沿淮河防卫的将领，长期遭受戍边的劳苦，值此元旦新年伊始，应该享受恩典欢庆。
English: Winter December is ugly, the next edict said: Generals defending along the Huai River, who have long suffered from the hardships of the border, should enjoy the grace and celebration at the beginning of the New Year on this New Year's Day.

古文：可遣中书舍人宣旨临会。
现代文：可以派中书舍人前去宣读圣旨。
English: You can send a lay person to read out the will.

古文：后每岁皆如之。 
现代文：今后每年都如此。 
English: This will continue to be the case every year.

古文：庚子，以太子左卫率戴僧静为徐州刺史。
现代文：庚子，任命太子左卫率戴僧静为徐州刺史。
English: Geng Zi, appointed Prince Zuo Wei to lead Dai Sang Jing as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：永明元年春，正月，辛亥，车驾祠南郊，大赦，改元。
现代文：永明元年春正月辛亥，世祖驾临南郊祭天。实行大赦，改年号。
English: In the first month of spring of the first year of Yongming, in the month of Xinhai, the ancestors came to the southern suburbs to celebrate the day. An amnesty was implemented, and the year was changed.

古文：壬子，诏内外群僚各举朕违，肆心规谏。
现代文：壬子，下诏书让内外群臣各自列举皇上的过失，尽心规劝。
English: Therefore, in the next imperial edict, let the domestic and foreign courtiers each list the emperor's faults and do their best to persuade him.

古文：又诏王公卿士，各举所知，随方登叙。
现代文：又下韶书令王公卿士，各自推举自己知道的人才，根据其才能大小予以升迁。
English: In addition, Wang Gongqing and Wang Jingshi were ordered to nominate their own talents and promote them according to their talents.

古文：诏曰： 经邦之寄，实资莅民，守宰禄俸，盖有恒准。
现代文：韶书说： 治理国家所依靠的，实际是对百姓的统治，各级官吏的俸禄，一般有固定的标准。
English: The imperial edict said: What the governance of the country relies on is actually the rule of the people. The salaries of officials at all levels generally have a fixed standard.

古文：往以边虞告警，故沿时损益；今区宇宁晏，庶绩咸熙，念勤简能，宜加优奖。
现代文：往年因为边境忧患告急，所以根据时势的变化予以增减。如今境内安宁，各项事业都很兴盛，顾念官吏的勤劳精干，应该加以优待奖赏。
English: In previous years, the number of officials was increased or decreased according to the changes in the current situation due to the border crisis. Nowadays, the country is peaceful, and various undertakings are flourishing. In consideration of the hard work and efficiency of officials, they should be given preferential treatment and rewards.

古文：郡县丞尉，可还田秩。 
现代文：郡、县的丞、尉，可以恢复禄田。 
English: Counties, county vice-premiers, and lieutenants may restore their lucden.

古文：太尉豫章王嶷领太子太傅，护军将军长沙王晃为南徐州刺史，镇北将军竟陵王子良为南兖州刺史。
现代文：太尉豫童工芦盛领太子太傅，护军将军长沙王萧晃为南徐州刺史，镇北将军竟陵王萧子良为直至业刺史。
English: Captain Yu, the child laborer Lu Sheng, the crown prince Taifu, the escort general Changsha Wang Xiao Huan are the history of southern Xuzhou, and the general Jingbei Wang Xiao Ziliang are the history of the industry.

古文：庚申，以侍中萧景先为中领军。
现代文：庚申，任命侍中萧景先为中领军。
English: Goshun, appointed the chamberlain Xiao Jingsen as the leader.

古文：壬戌，立皇弟锐为南平王，铿为宜都王，皇子子明为武昌王，子罕为南海王。
现代文：壬戌，立皇弟萧锐为南平王，萧铿为宜都王，皇子萧子塱为武昌王，芦王至为尘蛙。
English: On the 13th day of the lunar month, Xiao Rui, the younger brother of Emperor Wu of Southern Qi, was crowned the king of Nanping, Xiao Yao was crowned the king of Yidu, the prince Xiao Ziming was crowned the king of Wuchang, and Xiao Zihan was crowned the king of Nanhai.

古文：甲子，为筑青溪旧宫，诏槊仗瞻履。
现代文：甲子，为了修筑直迳的旧宫，诏令仪仗随同前去瞻仰勘察。
English: In order to build the old palace of Naosuke, the emperor ordered the ceremonial troops to go forward with him to observe and investigate.

古文：二月，辛巳，以征虏将军杨炅为沙州刺史。
现代文：二月辛巳，任命征虏将军杨炅为沙州刺史。
English: In February, Yang Jie, a conscript general, was appointed to write the history of Shazhou.

古文：辛丑，以陇西公宕昌王梁弥机为河、凉二州刺史，东羌王像舒彭为西凉州刺史。
现代文：辛丑，任命陇西公宕昌王梁弥机为河、凉二州刺史，束羌王像舒彭为西凉州刺史。
English: Xin Ugly, appointed Shaanxi Gongtang Chang Wang Liang Yijian as the river, Liang Erzhou as the history, and Shu Peng as the history of West Liangzhou.

古文：三月，癸丑，诏曰： 宋德将季，风轨陵迟，列宰庶邦，弥失其序，迁谢遄速，公私凋弊。
现代文：三月癸丑，下诏书说： 宋朝的德运衰落，风俗礼仪遭受破坏，国家四分五裂，完全失去了秩序，官吏的升迁、谢任极其频繁，公私凋敝。
English: In March, the Emperor issued the following edict: The Song Dynasty's fortunes declined, customs and etiquette were destroyed, the country was torn apart, order was completely lost, officials were promoted and reappointed extremely frequently, and public and private life withered away.

古文：泰运初基，草昧惟始，思述先范，永隆治根。莅民之职，一以小满为限。
现代文：我朝刚刚奠定吉祥的气数，一切都在草创之中。想要遵循先代圣王的轨范，永久地隆盛治国的根基，治理百姓的官职，一律以三年为限。
English: My reign has just laid the auspicious foundation, and everything is in the process of creation. If you want to follow the example of the previous holy kings, and lay the foundation for the permanent prosperity of the country, and govern the people, the official position is limited to three years.

古文：其有声绩克举，厚加甄异；理务无庸，随时代黜。 
现代文：那些有声名功绩的官员，限期举荐，严加甄别；没有行政才干，随时更换罢免。 
English: Those officials with renowned achievements will be recommended within a time limit and strictly screened; those without administrative ability will be replaced and removed at any time.

古文：丙辰，诏曰： 朕自丁荼毒，奄便周忌，瞻言负荷，若坠渊壑。
现代文：丙辰，下诏书说： 朕自从遭遇苦难，不久便被周围人所畏惧，敬仰的话成为负担，如同坠入深渊。
English: The next imperial edict said: "Since I suffered, I was soon feared by those around me. Words of admiration became a burden, as if I had fallen into the abyss.

古文：而远图尚蔽，政刑未理，星纬失序，阴阳愆度。
现代文：可是长远的规划尚未清楚，政务刑事还未得到治理，天象失序，阴阳错乱。
English: However, the long-term plan is not yet clear, the political criminal has not yet been governed, the celestial phenomenon is out of order, and the yin and yang are disordered.

古文：思播先泽，兼酬天眚，可申辛亥赦恩五十日，以期讫为始。
现代文：朕想要播布先帝的恩泽，兼以回应上天的警告，可以延长辛亥日的赦免恩典五十天，从辛亥赦免期限的终了算起。
English: I want to spread the grace of the former emperor, and also to respond to the warning from heaven, I can extend the pardon grace of Xinhai Day for fifty days, starting from the end of the Xinhai pardon period.

古文：京师囚系，悉皆原宥。
现代文：京城在押的囚犯，全部都谅情宽赦其罪。
English: All prisoners in custody in Beijing have been pardoned for their crimes.

古文：三署军徒，优量降遣。
现代文：三署服役的兵众，酌情优待，予以减免遣散。
English: The soldiers serving in the three departments will be given preferential treatment, reduced pay and discharge as appropriate.

古文：都邑鳏寡尤贫，详加赈恤。 
现代文：城镇特别贫困的鳏夫寡妇，要周全地加以赈济救助。 
English: Widows and widowers who are particularly poor in cities and towns should be comprehensively helped and assisted.

古文：戊寅，诏 四方见囚，罪无轻重，及劫贼余口长徒敕系，悉原赦。
现代文：戊寅，下诏书说： 四方现在关押的囚犯，无论罪行轻重，以及打劫的强盗余下的家口，长期服劳役的人，钦定的罪犯，全部谅情赦免。
English: Wu Yin, the next edict said: The prisoners currently detained by the four sides, regardless of the severity of the crime, as well as the remaining robbers who robbed, the long-term laborers, and the designated criminals, were all pardoned and pardoned.

古文：逋负督赃，建元四年三月以前，皆特除。 
现代文：拖欠需要追交的赃物，凡是建元四年三月以前的，都特予免除。 
English: Any stolen goods that are in arrears and need to be recovered before March of the year of the founding of the People's Republic of China are specifically exempted.

古文：夏，四月，壬午，诏曰： 魏矜袁绍，恩洽丘墓；晋亮两王，荣覃余裔。二代弘义，前载美谈。
现代文：夏四月壬午，下诏书说： 曹魏尊重袁绍，恩泽博及其坟墓；晋代宽恕两王，荣耀延及其后裔，魏、晋两代的大义，成为前代美谈。
English: On the morning of the third day of the fourth month of the summer, the next imperial edict said: Cao Wei respected Yuan Shao, Nzebo and their tombs; the Jin Dynasty forgave the two kings, glorified Yan and his descendants, and the great righteousness of the Wei and Jin Dynasties became a beautiful story of the previous generation.

古文：袁粲、刘秉与先朝同奖宋室，沈攸之于景和之世，特有乃心，虽末节不终，而始诚可录。
现代文：袁粲、刘歪与前朝直担共同辅助塞王室，选迪之在量劲年间，特别忠心，虽然没能保全晚节，但是最初的忠诚可以载入史册。
English: Yuan Xuan and Liu Kuang assisted the royal family of Tibet jointly with the former direct leaders of the Qing Dynasty. During the turbulent years, Zeng Di was particularly loyal. Although he failed to preserve the late festival, his initial loyalty can be recorded in history.

古文：岁月弥往，宜特优降。
现代文：岁月已经过去了很久，应当予以特别优待。
English: It's been a long time and they should be given special treatment.

古文：粲、秉前年改葬茔兆，未修材椁，可为经理，令粗足周礼。
现代文：袁粲、刘秉前年改葬坟地，没有修治棺椁，可以再给他们料理一下，使之大致合乎周礼的规定。
English: Yuan Qi and Liu Bing changed the burial site the previous year, but did not repair the coffin, so you can cook for them again to make it roughly meet the rules of the weekly ritual.

古文：攸之及其诸子丧柩在西者，可符荆州送反旧墓，在所为营葬事。 
现代文：沈攸之及他的几个儿子灵柩在西部的，可以命令荆州送回到他们的旧墓，在那裹为他们料理一下丧葬事宜。 
English: If the caskets of Shen Youzhi and several of his sons are in the west, he can order Jingzhou to send them back to their old graves, where he can prepare funeral arrangements for them.

古文：五月，丁酉，车骑将军张敬儿伏诛。
现代文：五月丁酉，车骑将军张敬儿被处死。
English: In May of Dingyao, the cavalry general Zhang Jing'er was executed.

古文：六月，丙寅，诏 凡坐事应覆治者，在建元四年三月已前，皆原宥。 
现代文：六月丙寅，下诏说： 凡是犯了法应当审察惩治的人，在垩毖四年三月以前的，都宽赦。 
English: In June, the Emperor issued the following edict: All those who have violated the law and should be investigated and punished will be pardoned before March in 2044.

古文：秋，七月，戊戌，新除左光禄大夫王僧虔加特进。
现代文：秋七月戊戌，新上任的左光禄大夫王僧虔，赐官特进。
English: In the autumn of July, the newly appointed Doctor of the Left Guanglu, Wang Zengqian, was promoted to the rank of special promotion.

古文：九月，己卯，以荆州刺史临川王映为骠骑将军，冠军将军庐陵王子卿为荆州刺史，吴郡太守安陆侯缅为郢州刺史。
现代文：九月己卯，任命型业刺史堕川匡萧迭为骠骑将军，冠军将军庐堡王盖王翅为型业刺史，昱郡太守宣堡法蕴面为呈圳刺史。
English: In September of the same year, he appointed the champion general, Qibao Wang Gai Wang Ying, as the champion general, and the governor of Qi County, Xuan Bao, as the champion general.

古文：二年春，正月，乙亥，以司州刺史吕安国为南兖州刺史，征北将军竟陵王子良为护军将军兼司徒，征北长史刘悛为司州刺史。
现代文：丞朋二年春正月乙亥，任命旦炒刺史旦塞迩为南兖州刺史，征北将军竟陵王芦王且为护军将军兼司徒，征北长史型堡为旦业刺史。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring of the Year of the Horse, he appointed the general of the Northern Expedition, the general of the Northern Expedition, the general of the Southern Expedition, the general of the Northern Expedition, the general of the Northern Expedition, the general of the Northern Expedition, the general of the Northern Expedition, the general of the Northern Expedition, and the general of the Northern Expedition.

古文：丙子，以右光禄大夫王延之为特进。
现代文：丙子，加封右光禄大夫王至蛙为特进。
English: In addition, the doctor Wang Zhi Rong of Uguanglu Hospital was promoted to the special promotion.

古文：三月，乙亥，以吴兴太守张岱为南兖州刺史，前将军王奂为江州刺史，平北将军吕安国为湘州刺史。
现代文：三月乙亥，任命呈兴太守灵贷为南剑刺史，前将军工垒为丝州刺史，干北将军吕安国为翅州刺史。
English: In March of the 19th year of the Heian period, Gen. Shingen Taishu Lingkui was appointed to write the history of Nanjian, former Gen. Gongye to write the history of Shizhou, and Gen. Ganbei Lu'an Guo to write the history of Fengzhou.

古文：戊寅，以少府赵景翼为广州刺史。
现代文：戊寅，任命少府赵垦墨为卢业刺史。
English: Wu Yin, appointed the minor prefect Zhao Xunmo as Lu Ye's successor.

古文：夏，四月，甲辰，诏 扬、南徐、南兖、徐、兖五州统内诸狱，并、豫、江三州府州见囚，江州寻阳、新蔡两郡系狱，并部送还台，须候克日断枉直。
现代文：夏四月甲辰，下韶令说： 扬、南徐、南兖、徐、兖五州统辖的各个监狱，并、豫、江三州府、州现有的囚犯，江州寻阳、新蔡两郡关押的罪犯，由官署统一押送回御史台，等候限期之内断定曲直。
English: Xia April Jia Chen, the lower court order said: Yang, Nanxu, Nanxu, Xu, Zou five states under the jurisdiction of the various prisons, and, Yu, Jiang three state capitals, the state's existing prisoners, Jiangzhou Xiangyang, Xin Cai two counties held by the criminal, by the government office uniformly escorted back to the historical platform, waiting for the deadline to determine the straightness.

古文：缘江远郡及诸州，委刺史详察讯。 
现代文：沿江较远的郡以及其他各州，委托刺史详加审讯。 
English: Counties farther along the river, as well as other states, have commissioned detailed trial histories.

古文：己巳，以宁朔将军程法勤为宁州刺史。
现代文：己巳，任命宁朔将军程法勤为宁州刺史。
English: At the same time, he appointed Ningshuo General Cheng Haoqin as the governor of Ningzhou.

古文：六月，癸卯，车驾幸中堂听讼。
现代文：六月癸卯，世祖乘车亲临中堂听取诉讼。
English: At the end of June, Shizu drove to the central hall to listen to the proceedings.

古文：乙巳，以安陆王子敬为南兖州刺史。
现代文：乙巳，任命安陆王萧子敬为南兖州刺史。
English: At this time, Anlu Wang Xiao Zi Jing was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：戊申，以黄门侍郎崔平仲为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：戊申，任命黄门侍郎崔平仲为青、冀二州刺史。
English: Wushin, appointed Huangmen waiter Cui Pingzhong as the blue, and Ji Erzhou as the red.

古文：秋，七月，癸未，诏曰： 夫乐所自生，先哲垂诰，礼不忘本，积代同风。
现代文：秋七月癸未，下韶书说： 乐发自人的内心，这是先哲留给我们的训诫；礼不忘记根本，所以历代风俗相同。
English: In the autumn and July, the second imperial edict said, "Let joy arise from the heart of man, this is the admonition left to us by the ancient philosopher; do not forget the fundamentals of etiquette, so the customs of all ages are the same.

古文：是以汉光迟回于南阳，魏文殷勤于谯国。
现代文：因此汉光武帝在南阳推迟回京，魏文帝在谯国殷勤侍亲。
English: Therefore, Emperor Han Guangwu delayed his return to Beijing in Nanyang, while Emperor Wei Wen diligently waited on his relatives in Shandong.

古文：青溪宫体天含晖，则地栖宝，光定灵源，允集符命。
现代文：青溪宫取法上天蕴含光辉，效法大地蕴藏宾物，灵光肇源于此，天命赐授所在。
English: According to Qingxi Palace, the heavens contain brilliance, and the earth contains guests, and the source of inspiration is here, and it is where the heavenly destiny is bestowed.

古文：在昔期运初开，经纶方远，缮筑之劳，我则未暇。
现代文：在从前因为运数初开，筹划的是些治国方略，修缮筑造之类劳作，我就没有时间去做。
English: In the past, because of the early start of the operation, the plan was to do some work such as governing the country, repairing and building, and I did not have time to do it.

古文：时流事往，永惟哽咽。
现代文：时光流逝，衹有悲痛哽咽。
English: As time passed, I choked with grief.

古文：朕以寡薄，嗣奉鸿基，思存缔构，式表王迹。
现代文：我德寡势薄，继承鸿大的基业，心存营构祖居的念头，以表记王室兴发之迹。
English: I am a woman of modest means, inheriting a vast inheritance, and cherishing the idea of building an ancestral home to mark the rise of the royal family.

古文：考星创制，揆日兴功，子来告毕，规摹昭备。
现代文：察考星象创立制式，推测时动工兴建，你们来报告已完工，规制程式清楚完备。
English: Observe the stars to create a system, speculate when construction starts, you come to report that it has been completed, and the regulatory program is clear and complete.

古文：宜申衅落之礼，以畅感尉之怀，可克日小会。 
现代文：应当举办落成典礼，以尽情表达感谢告慰的心怀，可约定日期举行小型集会。 
English: An inauguration ceremony should be held to fully express the feelings of gratitude and consolation, and a small gathering can be held on an agreed date.

古文：甲申，立皇子子伦为巴陵王。
现代文：甲申，立皇子萧子伦为巴陵王。
English: Jiaxing crowned Prince Xiaozilun as the king of Baling.

古文：八月，丙午，车驾幸旧宫小会，设金石乐，在位者赋诗。
现代文：八月丙午，世祖亲临旧宫举行小型集会，安排乐队奏乐，在座的人赋诗。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of August, the ancestor himself came to the old palace to hold a small meeting, arranged for the band to play music, and the people present performed poems.

古文：诏申 京师狱及三署见徒，量所降宥。
现代文：下韶令说： 京城监狱的囚犯及三署正服役的囚徒，酌量予以减免宽赦。
English: The edict said: The prisoners of the Keijo Prison and the prisoners of the Third Precinct who are serving time shall be pardoned and exempted in a discretionary manner.

古文：领宫职司，详赐币帛 。
现代文：在王宫任职的人，全部赐予财物。 
English: All those who work in the royal palace are given property.

古文：戊申，车驾幸玄武湖讲武。
现代文：戊申，世担亲临玄武湖讲习军事。
English: Boshin, the world's most powerful man, came to Lake Xuanwu for military training.

古文：甲子，诏曰： 窆枯掩骼，义重前诰，恤老哀癃，实惟令典。
现代文：甲子，下诏书说： 掩埋枯骨，前人训诫中看作是重义之举；体恤老人哀悯病者，实际是国家法典的内容。
English: The next imperial edict said: "Burying the dead bones is regarded as a serious act in the teachings of the predecessors; sympathizing with the elderly and pitying the sick is actually the content of the national code."

古文：朕永思民瘼，弗忘鉴寐。
现代文：我一直思虑百姓的疾苦，睡觉都难安稳，不敢忘怀。
English: I have been thinking about the sufferings of the people, it is difficult to sleep peacefully, I dare not forget.

古文：声憓未敷，物多乖所。
现代文：声名还不足以使人顺服，事物多有乖异之处。
English: Reputation is not enough to make people obey, things are often deviant.

古文：京师二县，或有久坟毁发，可随宜掩埋。遗骸未榇，并加敛瘗。
现代文：京城的两个县，有些古坟被毁坏发掘，可以随地适当掩埋遣骸没有入棺的，一并予以殓葬掩埋。
English: In the two counties of Beijing, some ancient tombs have been destroyed and excavated. If the remains are not properly buried, they can be buried together.

古文：疾病穷困不能自存者，详为条格，并加沾赉。 
现代文：对患病贫困不能维持生活的人，制定条例，一并给予赏赐史。
English: For those who are sick and poor and cannot sustain their lives, regulations will be formulated and rewards will be given.

古文：冬，十月，丁巳，以桂阳王铄为南徐州刺史。
现代文：冬十月丁巳，任命桂阳王萧铄为南徐州刺。
English: In the winter of October, Guiyang King Xiao Wei was appointed as the leader of South Xuzhou.

古文：十一月，丁亥，以始兴王鉴为益州刺史。
现代文：十一月丁亥，任命始兴王萧鉴为益州刺史。
English: In November of Dinghai, Shi Xing Wang Xiao Jian was appointed as the chief historian of Yizhou.

古文：三年春，正月，丙辰，以大司农刘楷为交州刺史，安西咨议参军崔庆绪为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：永明三年春正月丙辰，任命大司农刘楷为交州刺史，安西谘议参军崔庆绪为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: In the first month of the spring of the third year of the Yongming Emperor, Liu Kai, the Chief Secretary of Agriculture, was appointed as the military governor of Jiaozhou, Cui Qingxu, the military governor of Anxi Province, was appointed as the military governor of Liang, and the military governor of the two provinces of Southern Qin was appointed as the military governor of Erzhou.

古文：甲申，以晋安王子懋为南豫州刺史。
现代文：甲申，任命晋安王萧子懋为南豫州刺史。
English: Jiaxun appointed the king of Jin'an, Xiao Zixuan, as the chief historian of southern Henan.

古文：辛卯，车驾祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：辛卯，世祖至南郊祀天，实行大赦。
English: Xinwu, the ancestor to the southern suburbs worshiped the sun, and implemented an amnesty.

古文：都邑三百里内罪应入重者，降一等，余依赦制。
现代文：都邑三百里之内犯了罪应从重处罚的，降罪一等，其余的依据赦令的规定。
English: Those who have committed a crime within 300 miles of the capital that should be punished more severely will have their crime reduced to the first class, and the rest will be based on the provisions of the pardon order.

古文：劾系之身，降遣有差。
现代文：因被人弹劾受拘禁的人，减轻放逐各有不等。
English: For those who are detained due to being impeached, the easing of banishment varies.

古文：赈恤二县贫民。
现代文：赈济救助京城两县的贫民。
English: to help the poor in the two counties of Beijing.

古文：又诏曰： 《春秋国语》云 生民之有学斅，犹树木之有枝叶。 果行育德，咸必由兹。
现代文：又下诏书说： 《春秋国语》说 百姓有学校教育，好像树木有枝叶，果敢实行培育道德，都必定由此开始。
English: The next edict said: "Spring and Autumn Classic" said that the people have school education, just like trees have branches and leaves, and the courage to cultivate morality must start from this.

古文：在昔开运，光宅华夏，方弘典谟，克隆教思，命彼有司，崇建庠塾。
现代文：我朝当年开启国运，据有华夏，正要弘扬尧舜德业，兴盛教育，命令各级官吏，重视学校创建。
English: When I started the national movement in the morning of that year, according to Huaxia, it was necessary to promote virtue, prosper education, order officials at all levels, and attach importance to the creation of schools.

古文：甫就经始，仍离屯故，仰瞻徽猷，岁月弥远。
现代文：开国伊始，四方还未归服，仰望高明的谋略，岁月越来越久远。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the four parties had not yet surrendered, and the years were getting longer and longer.

古文：今遐迩一体，车轨同文，宜高选学官，广延胄子。 
现代文：如今远近一统，车同轨，书同文，应该选择高明的教官，广泛延纳贵族子弟。 
English: Nowadays, it is far from uniform, the car is on the same track, the book is the same text, it is necessary to choose a clever instructor, and widely recruit the children of aristocrats.

古文：又诏 守宰亲民之要，刺史案部所先，宜严课农桑，相土揆时，必穷地利。
现代文：又下诏书说： 州县官治理百姓的关键，刺史巡视部属的首务，应是严加考查农桑，观察土质推测天时，一定要穷尽地利。
English: The following edict also said: the key to the governance of the people by the state and county officials, and the first task of the inspection department should be to strictly inspect the agricultural mulberry, observe the soil quality and speculate the weather, and must exhaust the geography.

古文：若耕蚕殊众，足厉浮堕者，所在即便列奏。
现代文：如果从事农耕养蚕的人非常多，足以振奋轻浮堕落者，所在地方要立即条列上奏。
English: If the number of people engaged in farming and raising silkworms is large enough to excite the frivolous degenerate, the location should be listed immediately.

古文：其违方骄矜，佚事妨农，亦以名闻。
现代文：那些行为不正，骄横自夸，渎职误事，妨碍农耕的人，也要将他们的名字上报。
English: The names of those who behave improperly, arrogantly boast, derelict in their duties, and obstruct farming should also be reported.

古文：将明赏罚，以劝勤怠。
现代文：将要赏罚分明，以鼓励勤恳处罚懈怠。
English: There will be clear rewards and punishments to encourage diligence and punish slacking.

古文：校核殿最，岁竟考课，以申黜陟。 
现代文：校核政绩的上等下等，岁末考核，据此罢黜提升。 
English: The upper and lower grades of the school's performance are evaluated at the end of the year, and the students are promoted accordingly.

古文：二月，辛丑，车驾礼祠北郊。
现代文：二月辛丑，世祖至北郊祭地。
English: February is harsh and ugly, the ancestor to the northern suburb of the festival.

古文：夏，四月，戊戌，以新除右卫将军豫章王世子子响为豫州刺史，辅国将军桓敬为兖州刺史。
现代文：夏四月戊戌，任命新上任的右术将军豫章王的嫡长子萧王飨为逸州刺史，辅国将军担敬为兖州刺史。
English: In the summer of April, Xia Wangsheng, the eldest son of the newly appointed right-hand general Yu Zhangwang, was appointed as the governor of Yizhou, and the vice-governor of the country was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：五月，乙未，诏曰： 氓俗凋弊，于兹永久，虽年谷时登，而歉乏比室。
现代文：五月乙未，下韶说： 民俗凋敝，已经很久，虽然年成时常五谷丰登，然而歉收贫困的家庭仍然一户挨一户。
English: "Folk customs have been withering for a long time. Although the harvest is often bountiful, poor families still go from house to house.

古文：凡单丁之身及茕独而秩养养孤者，并蠲今年田租。 
现代文：凡是单身一人以及依赖俸禄为生的孤独者、领养孤儿的人，一并取消今年的田租。 
English: This year's field rent will be canceled for all single people, lonely people who depend on salaries, and people who adopt orphans.

古文：是月，省总明观。
现代文：这个月，世祖视察总明观。
English: This month, the patriarch inspected the general view.

古文：六月，庚戌，进河南王度易侯为车骑将军。秋，七月，辛丑，诏 丹阳所领及余二百里内见囚，同集京师；自此以外，委州郡决断。 
现代文：六月庚戌，进封河南王度易侯马车骑将军秋七月辛丑，下诏说： 丹阳所属各地以及其余地区二百里内现关押的囚犯，一同集中到京城，除此以外的，委派州郡决断。 
English: In June, Geng Zheng, the chariot-riding general of Henan Wang Duyi Hou, issued the following edict: The prisoners currently detained in all parts of Danyang and the remaining areas within 200 miles will be concentrated together in Beijing. In addition to this, the state and county will be appointed to make a decision.

古文：甲戌，左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王僧虔薨。
现代文：甲戌，左光禄大夫开府仪同三司王僧虔去世。
English: Gao Jian, Dr. Zuo Guanglu and the Three Kings Monk Kian passed away.

古文：丁亥，以骠骑中兵参军董仲舒为宁州刺史。
现代文：丁亥，任命骠骑中兵参军董仲舒为宁州刺史。
English: Dinghai, appointed Dong Zhongshu, a member of the Qing cavalry, to be the historian of Ningzhou.

古文：八月，乙未，车驾幸中堂听讼。
现代文：八月乙未，世祖亲临中堂听取诉讼。
English: In August of the same year, the patriarch himself came to the central hall to listen to the proceedings.

古文：丁巳，以行宕昌王梁弥颉为河、凉二州刺史。
现代文：丁巳，任命行宕昌王梁弥颉为河、凉二州刺史戊午。
English: Ding Si, appointed by Emperor Gong of Tang and Chang of Liang and Miao of Liang and Miao of Liang and Zhou of Liang and Zhou of Liang and Miao.

古文：戊午，以尚书令王俭领太子少傅，太子詹事萧顺之为领军将军。
现代文：任命尚书令王俭领太子少傅，太子詹事萧顺之为领军将军。
English: Shang Shuling appointed Wang Jian to lead the prince Shao Fu, and the prince Zhan Zhi Xiao Shun to be the leading general.

古文：冬，十月，壬戌，诏曰： 皇太子长懋讲毕，当释奠，王公以下可悉往观礼。 
现代文：冬十月壬戌，下诏说： 皇太子萧长懋讲经完毕，应当举行祭祀先师典礼，王公以下可全部前往观礼。 
English: In the winter of October, the following edict was issued: After Crown Prince Xiao Changjun finished his sermon, a ceremony should be held, and everyone from the prince on down could go to the ceremony.

古文：十一月，乙丑，以冠军将军王文仲为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：十一月乙丑，任命冠军将军玉塞仲为壹、冀二史。
English: In November of the second month, the champion general, Yuxizhong, was appointed as the first and the second history of Hebei.

古文：十二月，丁酉，诏曰： 九谷之重，八材为末，是故洁粢丰盛，祝史无愧于辞，不籍千亩，周宣所以贻谏。
现代文：十二月丁酉，下诏书说： 九种谷物很重要，珠、玉、石、木、金属、象牙、皮革、羽毛之类相比之下衹属末流，因此洁净的粮食作为丰盛的祭品，祝史才会无愧于言辞，周宣王没有在春耕前亲自耕田，所以给后人留下进谏的事例。
English: In December of Dingxi, the next imperial edict said: Nine kinds of grains are important, pearls, jade, stone, wood, metal, ivory, leather, feathers and the like are the lowest in comparison. Therefore, pure grain as a rich offering can only be worthy of words. King Zhou Xuan did not personally plow the fields before spring plowing, so he left the example of plowing to posterity.

古文：昔期运初启，庶政草昧，三推之典，我则未暇。
现代文：当年国运刚刚开启，各种政务尚处草创之中，三推典礼，我就没有时间去举行。
English: At that time, the National Games had just begun, various government affairs were still in the process of being created, and I did not have time to hold the three-push ceremony.

古文：朕嗣奉鸿基，思隆先轨，载耒躬亲，率由旧式。
现代文：我继承鸿大的基业，想振兴先帝的规范，带着农具亲自去耕田，遵循过去的仪式。
English: I inherited the foundation of Hongda and want to revitalize the norms of the former emperor. I will personally go to the farm with farm tools and follow the past rituals.

古文：可以开春发岁，敬简元辰，鸣青鸾于东郊，冕朱纮而莅事。
现代文：可以在开春岁首，敬选吉曰良辰，在束郊鸣响銮铃，头戴装饰红色丝带的皇冠莅临典礼，对上奉祀祖宗，对下勉励百姓。
English: At the beginning of spring, you can bow your heads, respectfully choose the auspicious and auspicious time, ring the bells in the suburbs, wear a crown adorned with a red ribbon to attend the ceremony, worship the ancestors on the top, and encourage the people on the bottom.

古文：仰荐宗禋，俯勖黔皂，将使囷庾内充，遗秉外牣。既富而教，兹焉攸在。 
现代文：将使谷仓充实，古代遣留的量器装满，百姓富裕之后再加以教化，造就是意义所在。 
English: The significance lies in enriching the barns, filling the measuring instruments left over from ancient times, and educating the people after they are rich.

古文：是夏，琅邪郡旱。百姓芟除枯苗，至秋擢颖大熟。
现代文：这年夏天，琅邪郡发生旱灾，百姓拔除枯苗，到秋天谷物脱去外壳都很饱满。
English: In the summer of this year, there was a drought in Suiyang County, and the people pulled out the dead seedlings. By the autumn, the grain was full of husks.

古文：四年春，正月，甲子，以南琅邪、彭城二郡太守随郡王子隆为江州刺史，征虏长史张瑰为雍州刺史，征虏将军薛渊为徐州刺史，护军将军兼司徒竟陵王子良进号车骑将军。
现代文：丞塱四年春正月甲子，任命南琅邪、彭城两郡太守随郡王萧子隆为辽丛刺史，征虏长史张坛为壅州刺史，征虏将军薛渊为徐州刺史，护军将军兼司徒宣陆王盖土良进封号为车骑将军。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the Joseon Dynasty, the governor of the two counties of Nanluye and Pengcheng was appointed as the governor of Liao Cong, with the governor of the county Wang Xiaozilong as the governor of Liao Cong, the conscript Chang Shi Zhang Tan as the governor of Bozhou, the conscript general Xue Yuan as the governor of Xuzhou, and the general of the guard and the governor of Stuxuan Lu Wang Gai Tu Liang Jinfeng as the general of the cavalry.

古文：富阳人唐宇之反，聚众桐庐，破富阳、钱塘等县，害东阳太守萧崇之。
现代文：宣堕入卢富之造反，在掴庐县聚集徒众，攻破富彊、壁塘等县，杀害塞优太守萧塞之。
English: Xuan fell into the rebellion of Lufu, gathered a crowd of followers in Baotian County, broke through the counties of Fufu and Jiutang, and killed the governor of Saiyou, Xiao Sai.

古文：遣宿卫兵出讨，伏诛。
现代文：派遣宫廷卫戍部队出兵讨伐，唐寓之被杀。
English: The troops of the palace guards were dispatched to fight, and Tang Ye was killed.

古文：丁酉，冠军将军、马军主陈天福坐讨唐宇之烧掠百姓，弃市。
现代文：丁酉，冠军将军、马军主速玉桓在讨伐唐富之时犯了烧杀抢掠百姓的罪，被处死刑。
English: Ding Xi, the champion general and the leader of the horse army, committed the crime of burning, killing and robbing the people when he was fighting against Tangfu, and was sentenced to death.

古文：辛卯，车驾幸中堂策秀才。
现代文：辛卯，世祖亲临中堂策试秀才。
English: Xinwu, the ancestor personally came to the Middle Hall to test the talents.

古文：闰月癸巳，立皇子子贞为邵陵王，皇孙昭文为临汝公。
现代文：闰正月癸巳，立皇子萧子贞为邵陵王，皇孙萧昭文为临汝公。
English: On the first day of the leap month, the prince Xiao Zizhen was established as the King of Shaoling, and the grandson Xiao Zhaowen as the Prince of Linyu.

古文：丁未，以武都王杨集始为北秦州刺史。
现代文：丁未，任命武都王杨集始为北秦州刺史。
English: Ding Wei, appointed the King of Wudang, Yang Jizhong, as the governor of North Qin.

古文：辛亥，车驾籍田。
现代文：辛亥，世祖亲临举行藉田典礼。
English: At the turn of the year, the founder himself held the ceremony of renting the field.

古文：诏曰： 夫耕籍所以表敬，亲载所以率民。
现代文：下诏书说： 耕种藉田是为了表示敬意，亲自带着农具是为了给百姓做出表率。
English: The next edict said: Cultivating rented land is to show respect, and personally carrying farm tools is to set an example for the people.

古文：朕景行前规，躬执良耜，千畛咸事，六稔可期，教义克宣，诚感兼畅。
现代文：我遵照从前的规矩，亲自手持好耜，田间道路均已整治，谷物的成熟可以预期，教化之义得以宣扬，确实感激而通畅。
English: In accordance with the previous rules, I personally hold a good plough, the field roads have been repaired, the ripening of the grain can be expected, the righteousness of enlightenment can be preached, and it is indeed grateful and smooth.

古文：重以天符灵贶，岁月鳞萃，宝鼎开玉匣之祥，嘉禾发同穗之颖，甘露凝晖于坰牧，神爵骞翥于兰囿。
现代文：加之上天降下符命神灵赐予恩惠，岁月群聚，宝鼎出现玉匣祥瑞，吉祥之禾生出一茎多穗的果实，甘露凝结晨光于野外的牧草，神爵高飞在兰囿。
English: In addition, the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods of the gods.

古文：斯乃宗稷之庆，岂寡薄所臻！
现代文：这是宗庙社稷的幸福，岂是我所导致的。
English: This is the happiness of the family, the temple, and the community. Is it because of me?

古文：思俾休和，覃兹黔皂，见刑罪殊死以下，悉原宥。
现代文：我想使欢乐祥和推及广大百姓，现正服刑的死罪以下的囚犯，全部赦免。
English: I would like to bring joy and peace to the broad masses of the people by pardoning all prisoners serving sentences for crimes punishable by death or less.

古文：诸逋负在三年以前尤穷弊者，一皆蠲除。
现代文：拖欠官府赋税徭役在三年以上，而又特别贫困的人，一律都予以免除。
English: All persons who have been in arrears with the tax authorities for more than three years, and who are particularly poor, will be exempted.

古文：孝悌力田，详授爵位，孤老贫穷，赐谷十石。
现代文：孝顺父母，敬爱兄长，致力耕田的人，审察授予爵位，孤老贫穷的人，赐给十石谷子。
English: Those who are filial to their parents, respect their brothers and sisters, and devote themselves to farming will be granted a peerage, and those who are old and poor will be given ten koku of rice.

古文：凡欲附农而粮种阙乏者，并加给贷，务在优厚。 
现代文：凡是打算务农而又缺乏粮种的人，一并给予借贷，务必优厚。 
English: For those who plan to engage in agriculture but lack grain seeds, loans must be generous.

古文：癸丑，以始兴内史刘敕为广州刺史。
现代文：癸丑，任命始兴内史刘来为广州刺史。
English: Ugly, appointed Shi Xingnaishi Liu to be the chief historian of Guangzhou.

古文：甲寅，以籍田礼毕，车驾幸阅武堂劳酒小会，诏赐王公以下在位者帛有差。戊午，车驾幸宣武堂讲武。诏曰： 今亲阅六师，少长有礼，领驭群帅，可量班赐。 
现代文：甲寅，因为藉田典礼完毕，世祖亲临板武堂犒劳酒食，举行小型聚会，诏令赏赐王公以下在座者帛不等戊午，世祖亲临宣武堂讲习军事，下诏令说： 今天我亲自检阅六军，年少的和年长的彬彬有礼，统领军队的诸位将帅，可酌量赏赐。 
English: A: Because the ceremony of land lease was over, the ancestor personally came to Panwu Hall to enjoy wine and food, hold a small gathering, and issued a decree to reward those present from the prince on down. At noon, the ancestor personally came to Xuanwu Hall for military training, and issued a decree saying: Today I personally reviewed the six armies, the young and the old were courteous, and the generals who commanded the army could be rewarded at their discretion.

古文：二月，己未，立皇弟銶为晋熙王，铉为河东王。
现代文：二月己未，立皇弟萧銶为晋熙王，萧铉为河塞王。
English: In February, Emperor Wu's younger brother, Emperor Xiao, was crowned King of Jinxi, and Emperor Xiao was crowned King of Hedong.

古文：庚寅，以光禄大夫王玄载为兖州刺史。
现代文：庚寅，任命光禄大夫王室盏属蛮业刺史。
English: Geng Yin, the appointment of Dr. Guanglu to the royal family is a barbaric stab at history.

古文：三月，辛亥，国子讲《孝经》，车驾幸学，赐国子祭酒、博士、助教绢各有差。
现代文：三月辛亥，国子学讲授《孝经》，世祖亲临学校，赏赐国子学祭酒、博士、助教绢各有不等。
English: In March of Xinhai, "Filial Piety" was taught by Kuniko Gakuin, the founder of the nation came to the school in person, and the Kuniko Gakuin was awarded with a ceremonial wine, a doctorate, and a teaching assistant.

古文：夏，四月，丁亥，以尚书左仆射柳世隆为湘州刺史。
现代文：夏四月丁亥，任命尚书左仆射柳世隆为湘州刺史。
English: In the summer of April, Dinghai appointed Shangshu's right-hand man, Shailiu Shilong, as the governor of Hunan Province.

古文：临沂县麦不登，刈为马刍，至夏更苗秀。
现代文：临沂县麦子长势不好，割了做马料，到夏天更换苗之后抽穗开花。
English: In Linyi County, the growth of wheat was not good. It was cut to make horse feed, and after replacing the seedlings in the summer, the spikelets bloomed.

古文：五月，癸巳，诏 扬、南徐二州，今年户租三分二取见布，一分取钱。
现代文：五月癸巳，韶令 扬、南徐二州今年的户租，三分之二收取现成的布，三分之一收取钱。
English: In May, two-thirds of this year's household rent in the two prefectures of Gu Ling Yang and Nan Xu was collected by ready-made cloth, and one-third was collected by money.

古文：来岁以后，远近诸州输钱处，并减布直，匹准四百，依旧折半，以为永制。 
现代文：明年以后，远近各州的输钱处。都要降低布价，每匹标准为四百钱，旧的折半，以此作为永久的制度 。
English: After next year, the far and near money transfer offices in all states will reduce the cloth price, each horse standard is four hundred dollars, the old half, as a permanent system.

古文：丙午，以吴兴太守西昌侯鸾为中领军。
现代文：丙午，任命吴兴太守西昌侯萧鸾为中领军。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, Wu Xing appointed Xiao Jun, the governor of Xichang, as the leader of the middle army.

古文：秋，八月，辛酉，以镇南长史萧惠休为广州刺史。
现代文：秋八月辛酉，任命镇南长史萧惠休为广州刺史
English: In the autumn and August of Xinwu, Xiao Huixiu, the mayor of the south of the town, was appointed as the mayor of Guangzhou

古文：九月，甲寅，以征虏将军王广之为徐州刺史。
现代文：九月甲寅，任命征虏将军王广之为徐州刺史。
English: In September, Jia Yin appointed the conscript general Wang Guang as the leader of Xuzhou.

古文：冬，十二月，乙亥，以东中郎司马崔惠景为司州刺史。
现代文：冬十二月乙亥，任命束中郎司马崔惠景为司业刺史。
English: In the winter of December of the second year of the Heian period, the middle son of Sokuchū, Ma Choi Hoeking, was appointed as the secretary of the imperial court.

古文：五年春，正月，戊子，以太尉豫章王嶷为大司马，车骑将军竟陵王子良为司徒，骠骑将军临川王映、卫将军王俭、中军将军王敬则并本号开府仪同三司，都官尚书沈文季为郢州刺史，左将军安陆王子敬为荆州刺史，征虏将军晋安王子懋为南兖州刺史，辅国将军建安王子真为南豫州刺史。
现代文：永明五年春正月戊子，任命太尉豫章王萧嶷为大司马，车骑将军竟陵王萧子良为司徒，骠骑将军临川王萧映、卫将军王俭、中军将军王敬则都受封为开府仪同三司，都官尚书沈文季为竖皿刺史，左将军叁卫逗萧子敬为翅业刺史，征虏将军晋安王萧子懋为南兖州刺史，辅国将军建安王萧子真为南豫州刺史。
English: In the first month of the spring of the fifth year of the Ming Dynasty, Wu Zi appointed the captain Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Zi as the chief steward, the cavalry general Ling Wang Xiao Ziliang as the steward, the cavalry general Linchuan Wang Xiao Ying, the guard general Wang Jian, and the Chinese army general Wang Jing were all appointed as the three officers of the Kaifu ceremony, the city official Shang Shuxu Shen Wenzhi as the scribe of the vertical plate, the left general Yu Weizhi Xiao Zi Jing as the scribe of the wing industry, the conscript general Jin An Wang Xiao Zi Zi as the

古文：辛卯，诏曰： 朕昧爽丕显，思康民瘼。
现代文：辛卯，下诏书说： 我通宵达旦，考虑的是解脱民间疾苦。
English: Xinwu, the next edict said: I stayed up all night, thinking about how to relieve people's suffering.

古文：虽年谷亟登，而饥馑代有。
现代文：虽然谷物连年丰收，然而饥荒仍交替发生。
English: Despite successive years of bumper grain harvests, famines still occur.

古文：今履端肇运，阳和告始，宜协时休，覃兹黎庶。
现代文：现在我即国君之位，国运肇始，春天的阳气刚刚发生，应该协调时令与民休息，广施恩惠于百姓。
English: Now that I am the ruler of the country, the national movement has just begun, and the spring yang qi has just occurred. It is necessary to coordinate the season with the people's rest, and widely benefit the people.

古文：诸孤老贫病，并赐粮饩，遣使亲赋，每存均普。 
现代文：那些孤老贫病的人，都赐给粮食，派遣使者亲自发放，要做到平均普遍。 
English: Those who are lonely, old, poor and sick should be given food, and an envoy should be sent to distribute it in person, so that it is average and universal.

古文：雍、司二州蛮虏屡动，丁酉，遣丹阳尹萧景先出平阳，护军将军陈显达出宛、叶。
现代文：雍、司二州的少数民族屡屡骚动，丁酉，派遣丹阳尹萧景先出兵平阳，护军将军陈显达出兵宛、叶。
English: The ethnic minorities in the two prefectures of Yong and Si repeatedly rioted. Ding Qi dispatched troops to Danyang, Yin Xiao Jing first dispatched troops to Pingyang, and Chen Xianda, the escort general, dispatched troops to Wan and Ye.

古文：三月，戊子，车驾幸芳林园禊宴。
现代文：三月戊子，世祖亲临芳林园设宴举办楔礼。
English: In March, Empress Dowager Dowager Cixi and the founder of the dynasty attended a banquet at the Fanglin Garden and held a wedge-shaped ceremony.

古文：丁未，以护军将军陈显达为雍州刺史。
现代文：丁未，任命护军将军陈显达为雍州刺史。
English: Ding Wei appointed Chen Xianda, a general of the escort army, as the chief historian of Yongzhou.

古文：夏，四月，车驾殷祠太庙。
现代文：夏四月庚午，世祖至太庙举行盛大祭礼。
English: On the afternoon of the fourth day of the fourth month of the summer, a grand festival was held at the ancestral temple.

古文：诏 系囚见徒四岁刑以下，悉原遣，五年减为三岁，京邑罪身应入重，降一等。 
现代文：下诏令说： 在押的囚犯和正被拘禁的刑徒，刑期四年以下的，全部遣返原籍，五年的减为三年。京城人犯罪应加重处罚的，罪降一等。 
English: The edict said: "Prisoners in custody and convicts currently under detention, with a sentence of less than four years, shall all be repatriated to their place of origin, and five years shall be reduced to three years. If the crime committed by citizens of Beijing should be punished more severely, the crime shall be downgraded to the first class."

古文：六月，辛酉，诏曰： 比霖雨过度，水潦洊溢，京师居民，多离其弊。
现代文：六月辛酉，下诏令说： 近来霖雨过度，河水溢出，京师居民，大多遭受其害。
English: At the end of June, the following edict was issued: "Recently, due to excessive rain, rivers have overflowed, and most of the residents of Beijing and Shandong have been affected.

古文：遣中书舍人、二县官长随宜赈赐。 
现代文：派遣中书舍人、京城二县的长官适当赈济赏赐。 
English: The officials of the two counties in Beijing who sent the middle school students were rewarded with appropriate subsidies.

古文：秋，七月，戊申，诏 丹阳属县建元四年以来至永明三年所逋田租，殊为不少。
现代文：秋七月戊申，下诏令说： 丹阳郡所属各县自建五四年至丞塱三年拖欠的田租，非常之多。
English: In the autumn of July, the imperial edict said: There are a lot of farm rents in arrears in the counties belonging to Danyang County from May 4 to July 3.

古文：京甸之内，宜加优贷。
现代文：京郊之内，应当给予优待宽恕。
English: In the suburbs of Kyoto, they should be given preferential treatment and forgiveness.

古文：其非中赀者，可悉原停。 
现代文：那些不是中等收入的家庭，可以全部宽恕停止征收。 
English: Those who are not middle-income families can be completely forgiven and stop the levy.

古文：八月，乙亥，诏 今夏雨水，吴兴、义兴二郡田农多伤，详蠲租调。 
现代文：八月乙亥，下诏令说： 今年夏天的雨水，旦兴、羞兴二郡农民多受损失，审察之后减免租调。 
English: In August of this year, the following edict was issued: This summer's rain, farmers in the two counties of Dangxing and Shixing have suffered a lot of losses. After examination, they will be given rent reductions and exemptions.

古文：九月，己丑，诏曰： 九日出商飙馆登高宴群臣。 
现代文：九月己丑，下诏说： 九日出游商飙馆登高宴请诸位大臣。 
English: September was ugly, and the following edict was issued: On the 9th, please invite all ministers to a banquet at the Gao Pavilion for traveling merchants.

古文：辛卯，车驾幸商飙馆。
现代文：辛卯，世祖亲临商飙馆。
English: Xinwu, the ancestor of the family came to the Shangrao Pavilion.

古文：馆，上所立，在孙陵岗，世呼为 九日台 者也。
现代文：商飙鳇是世袒所建，在珏堕岗，就是世人称为 九日台 的地方。
English: Shanggaoqiao is built by the world, and it is the place where the world is known as the nine-day platform.

古文：丙午，诏曰： 善为国者，使民无伤，而农益劝。
现代文：丙午，下诏书说： 善于治理国家的，使百姓不受损害，因而农民更受鼓励。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, the next imperial edict said: If you are good at governing the country, the people will not be harmed, so the farmers will be more encouraged.

古文：是以十一而税，周道克隆，开建常平，汉载惟穆。
现代文：所以实行十分抽一税制，周朝得以国运兴隆；创建持久的和乎，汉代史籍裹都是和睦相处的记载。
English: Therefore, the implementation of the tax system was very effective, and the Zhou Dynasty was able to flourish; the creation of a lasting harmony, and the Han Dynasty history books are all records of harmonious coexistence.

古文：岱畎丝枲，浮汶来贡，杞梓皮革，必缘楚往。
现代文：泰山一带田间出产丝麻，就经汶水船运来京进贡，至于杞木、梓木、皮革之类物品，必定是自楚地进贡而来。
English: The silk produced in the fields around Mount Tai was shipped to Beijing via the Wenchuan River, and the tribute, as well as items such as camphor wood, azusa wood, and leather, must have come from Chu.

古文：自水德将谢，丧乱弥多，师旅岁兴，饥馑代有。
现代文：自从运伐的水德将要逝去，丧乱越来越多，军队每年都要出兵作战，饥荒交替发生。
English: Since the water-saving virtue of hauling was about to pass away, there were more and more disasters, the army had to send troops to fight every year, and famines occurred alternately.

古文：贫室尽于课调，泉贝倾于绝域。军国器用，动资四表，不因厥产，咸用九赋，虽有交贸之名，而无润私之实。民咨涂炭，实此之由。
现代文：贫穷的人家被征收租税搜刮干净，钱财在遥远的边境消耗殆尽，军队国家的器具用度，动辄依赖四方进贡，不是依据各地的出产，而是都采用九赋税制，虽然有交流贸易之名，却没有使私人沾惠之实，百姓叹息生灵涂炭，实由此而来。
English: Poor people's homes were raided for taxes, money and wealth were exhausted on the distant border, the equipment used by the army and the state was often dependent on the tribute of the four parties, not based on the production of various regions, but all using the nine-tax system. Although there was the name of exchange and trade, there was no real benefit to private individuals, and the people sighed and suffered.

古文：昔在开运，星纪未周，余弊尚重。
现代文：从前在好运开通之时，岁月未及一周年，遗留的弊病还很严重。
English: In the past, at the time of the opening of the Good Luck Bridge, the years had not reached the first anniversary, and the remaining ills were still very serious.

古文：农桑不殷于曩日，粟帛轻贱于当年。
现代文：农桑业者不比从前殷实，粟帛比当年轻贱。
English: Agricultural mulberry growers are not as affluent as they used to be, and corn poppies are cheaper than they used to be.

古文：工商罕兼金之储，匹夫多饥寒之患。
现代文：工商业者罕有精金储存百姓多有饥寒的担忧。
English: Industrialists and businessmen rarely have enough gold to store. People are more worried about hunger and cold.

古文：良由圜法久废，上弊稍寡。
现代文：这确实是由于货币流通制度长久废弃，上等货币缺乏。
English: This is indeed due to the long-term abandonment of the currency circulation system and the lack of high-grade currency.

古文：所谓民失其资，能无匮乎？
现代文：所谓百姓失去他的资财，能没有匮乏吗?
English: If the so-called common people lose their wealth, can there be no scarcity?

古文：凡下贫之家，可蠲三调二年。
现代文：凡是极端贫穷的家庭，可以减免三调两年。
English: All extremely poor families can be exempted for two years.

古文：京师及四方出钱亿万，籴米谷丝绵之属，其和价以优黔首。
现代文：京城及四方出钱亿万，购进米、谷、丝、绵之类物品，以平价优惠卖给百姓。
English: The capital and the four districts have spent hundreds of millions of yuan to buy rice, grain, silk and cotton and sell them to the people at a discounted price.

古文：远邦尝市杂物，非土俗所产者，皆悉停之。
现代文：曾经在边远地区采购的杂物，如果不是当地传统的产品，全部都停止。
English: The sundry goods that used to be procured in remote areas, if not the local traditional products, have all been stopped.

古文：必是岁赋攸宜，都邑所乏，可见直和市，勿使逋刻。 
现代文：一定要让当年的赋税适宜，都邑所缺乏的，可以根据现价议价购买，不要拖欠削减。 
English: It is necessary to make the current year's tax increase appropriate. What the capital lacks can be purchased according to the current price. Do not delay the reduction.

古文：冬，十月，甲申，以中领军西昌侯鸾为豫州刺史，侍中安陆侯缅为中领军。
现代文：冬十月甲申，任命中领军西昌侯萧鸾为豫业刺史，侍中安陆侯萧面为中领军。
English: In the winter of October in Jiaxing, the middle leader of the army, Xichang Hou Xiaoqi, was appointed as the head of the history of Yuye, and the middle leader of the army, Anlu Hou Xiaomen, was appointed as the middle leader.

古文：初起新林苑。
现代文：开始建造堑拯蕴。
English: Began construction of the Tsukiji fish market.

古文：六年春，正月，壬午，以祠部尚书安成王暠为南徐州刺史。
现代文：丞塱六年春正月壬午，任命祠部尚书安成王芦员为南徐州刺史。
English: On the morning of the first day of spring in the sixth year of the Joseon Dynasty, the priest of the ancestral hall, Shang Shuancheng Wang Lujian, was appointed as the chief historian of South Xuzhou.

古文：诏 二百里内狱同集京师，克日听览，自此以外，委州郡讯察。
现代文：下诏令说： 距京城二百里内的囚犯一同会集到京城，限期听候处理，自此以外的，委派州郡审讯。
English: The edict said: Prisoners within 200 miles of Beijing will be gathered together in Beijing for a limited period of time to await processing, and from then on, they will be assigned to the county for trial.

古文：三署徒隶，详所原释。 
现代文：三署服劳役的刑徒，审查之后宽免释放。 
English: The three labor camp inmates will be pardoned and released after review.

古文：三月，己亥，以豫章王世子子响为巴东王。
现代文：三月己亥，任命逸童工的嫡长子萧子响为巴塞王。
English: In March, Emperor Ji Hai appointed Xiao Zi Xuan, the eldest legitimate son of a child laborer, as the King of Baxi.

古文：癸卯，以光禄大夫周盘龙为行兖州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，任命光禄大夫且挝为行蛮业刺史。
English: Therefore, he appointed Dr. Guanglu to write a history of the barbaric practice.

古文：五月甲午，以宕昌王梁弥承为河、凉二州刺史。
现代文：五月甲午，任命岂员工銮翅为回、凉二州束史。
English: In the afternoon of May 1st, the employees of the company were appointed as Hui and Liang of the two states.

古文：六月，甲寅，以散骑常侍沈景德为徐州刺史。
现代文：六月甲寅，任命散骑常侍沈景德为徐州刺史。
English: In June, Jia Yin appointed Shen Jingde, a knight errant, as the chief historian of Xuzhou.

古文：丙子，以始兴太守房法乘为交州刺史。
现代文：丙子，任命始兴太守房法乘为交州刺史。
English: Cun Zi, the appointment of Shi Xing Taizhong Law multiplied into the history of Jiaozhou.

古文：秋，七月，乙巳，都官尚书吕安国为领军将军。
现代文：秋七月乙巳，任命都官尚书吕安国为领军将军。
English: In the autumn and July, Shangshu Lu'an Guo, the governor of the capital, was appointed as the leading general.

古文：八月，乙卯，诏 吴兴、义兴水潦，被水之乡，赐痼疾笃癃口二斛，老疾一斛，小口五斗。 
现代文：八月乙卯，下韶令说： 吴兴、义兴大雨成灾，遭受水害的地方，赐给久治不愈的病人二斛粮食，年老有病的一斛，小孩五斗。 
English: In August, the imperial edict said: In the areas of Wuxing and Yixing hit by heavy rains and floods, the long-term patients should be given two bushels of grain, the old and the sick one bushel, and the children five bushels.

古文：九月，壬寅，车驾幸琅邪城讲武，习水步军。
现代文：九月壬寅，世祖亲临琅邪城讲习军事，训练水军、步军。
English: In September of the same year, the founder personally went to the evil city of Linyi for military training, training sailors and marching troops.

古文：冬，十月，庚申，立冬，初临太极殿读时令。
现代文：冬十月庚申，立冬，世祖首次亲临太极殿宣读按季节制定的政令。
English: In winter, October, Goshun, and the beginning of winter, Emperor Wu of Southern Qi came to the Taiji Hall for the first time and began to read the almanac.

古文：辛酉，以祠部尚书武陵王晔为江州刺史。
现代文：辛酉，任命祠部尚书武陵王萧晕为江州刺史。
English: Xin Rong, appointed the ancestral hall of Shangshu Wuling Wang Xiao Huan as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：闰月乙卯，诏曰： 北兖、北徐、豫、司、青、冀八州，边接疆场，民多悬罄，原永明以前所逋租调。 
现代文：闰十月乙卯，下诏令说： 北兖、北徐、豫、司、青、冀八州，边界连接疆埸，百姓大多一无所有，免除永明以前所拖欠的租调。 
English: At the turn of October, the following edict was issued: "The eight prefectures of Beilun, Beilun, Xu, Yu, Si, Qing and Hebei, whose borders are connected by the Yangtze River, where most of the people have nothing, shall be exempted from the rent transfer arrears previously owed by Yongming.

古文：辛卯，以尚书仆射王奂为领军将军。
现代文：辛卯，任命尚书仆射王奂为领军将军。
English: Xinwu, appointed Shang Shuxu's servant Sha Wangyu as the leading general.

古文：十一月，乙卯，以羽林监费延宗为越州刺史。
现代文：十一月乙卯，任命羽林监费延宗为越州刺史。
English: In November, Fei Yanzong, the overseer of Ulin, was appointed as the next governor of Yuezhou.

古文：庚申，以后将军、晋安王子懋为湘州刺史，西阳王子明为南兖州刺史。
现代文：庚申，任命后将军晋安王萧子懋为湘州刺史，西阳王萧子明为南兖州刺史。
English: Goshun, after the appointment of the general Jinan Wang Xiao Zixuan as the Hunan governor, Xiyang Wang Xiao Ziming as the Southern Fujian governor.

古文：七年春，正月，丙午，以中军将军王敬则为豫州刺史，中军将军阴智伯为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：永明七年春正月丙午，任命中军将军王敬则为豫州刺史，中军将军阴智伯为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On the morning of the first day of spring in the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, the Chinese general Wang Jing was appointed as the governor of Henan Province, the Chinese general Yin Zhibo was appointed as the governor of Liang Province, and the Chinese general Yin Zhibo was appointed as the governor of the two provinces of Southern Qin.

古文：戊申，诏曰： 雍州频岁戎役，兼水旱为弊，原四年以前逋租。 
现代文：戊申，下诏说： 雍州连年兵役，加之水旱成灾，免除永明四年以前拖欠的田租。 
English: Wushin, the next edict said: Yongzhou's consecutive years of military service, coupled with floods and droughts, exempted Yongming from land rent arrears four years ago.

古文：辛亥，车驾祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：辛亥，世祖到南郊祭天，实行大赦。
English: Xinhai, the ancestor went to the southern suburbs to celebrate the day, and implemented an amnesty.

古文：京邑贫民，普加赈赐。
现代文：京邑贫民，普遍给予赈济赏赐。
English: The poor in Beijing were generally given financial rewards.

古文：又诏曰： 春颁秋敛，万邦所以惟怀，柔远能迩，兆民所以允殖。
现代文：又下诏说： 春季发放秋季征收，各邦国才会归顺；怀柔远方之人使其亲近，亿万百姓才会繁衍生息。
English: The following edict also said: The spring levy will be issued in the autumn, and then all states will submit; those who cherish gentleness from afar will bring it closer, and then hundreds of millions of people will be able to reproduce.

古文：郑浑宰邑，因姓立名，王濬剖符，户口殷盛。
现代文：郑浑治理地方时，百姓生育儿女就以郑为姓；王浚剖开符节免除生儿之家的徭役，户口丰盛。
English: When Zheng Hun was in charge of the local government, the people gave birth to children with the surname Zheng. Wang Junkai, the founder of the dynasty, exempted the families of his sons and daughters from the post of steward, and the household accounts were abundant.

古文：今产子不育，虽炳常禁，比闻所在，犹或有之。
现代文：如今生孩子不养育，虽然一直有明确的禁令，但接连听到某些地区，还有这种情况。
English: Although there has always been a clear ban on having children without raising them, it is still the case in some regions.

古文：诚复礼以贫杀，抑亦情由俗淡。
现代文：到底是礼被贫穷抹杀了，抑或是人情被世俗冲淡了。
English: In the end, is courtesy obliterated by poverty, or are human feelings diluted by the world?

古文：宜节以严威，敦以惠泽。
现代文：应该用严厉的态度加以节制，用优惠的恩泽加以敦化。
English: It should be restrained with a stern attitude and tempered with preferential grace.

古文：主者寻旧制，详量附定，蠲恤之宜，务存优厚。 
现代文：主事的人寻找旧有的制度，酌量比照参定，免除赋税救济贫病要适宜，务必要优厚。 
English: The person in charge should look for the old system, the discretionary amount should be determined by reference, tax exemption and relief for poverty and disease should be appropriate, and it must be generous.

古文：壬戌，骠骑将军、开府仪同三司临川王映薨。
现代文：壬戌，骠骑将军、开府仪同三司临川王盖迭去世。
English: Rinchen, the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi, and the three kings of Linchuan died.

古文：戊辰，诏曰： 诸大夫年秩隆重，禄力殊薄，岂所谓下车惟旧，趋桥敬老？
现代文：戊辰，下诏令说： 诸位大夫年事已高，幸禄微薄，所谓下车礼让故旧，快步过桥以示敬老。
English: Wuchen, issued a decree saying: "All of you doctors are old and have meager incomes. The so-called alighting ceremony is outdated. Walk quickly across the bridge to show respect for the elderly."

古文：可增俸，详给见役。 
现代文：可以增加俸禄，周全地赐给现职。 
English: It is possible to increase the salary and give it to the current position.

古文：二月，丙子，以左卫将军、巴东王子响为中护军。
现代文：二月丙子，任命左卫将军巴东王萧子响为中护军。
English: In February, he appointed the left guard general, Ba Dongwang Xiao Zixing, as the middle guard.

古文：己丑，诏曰： 宣尼诞敷文德，峻极自天，发辉七代，陶钧万品，英风独举，素王谁匹！
现代文：己丑，下诏书说： 孔子广布文德，峻极至天，发出的光辉耀及七代，培育万千士人，独有他标举美好名声，谁能与他素王相提并论。
English: The next imperial edict said, "Confucius is the most virtuous, the most sublime, the most brilliant, and he has brought up thousands of scholars for seven generations. He is the only one with a good reputation, and no one can be compared to him.

古文：功隐于当年，道深于日月。感麟厌世，缅邈千祀，川竭谷虚，丘夷渊塞，非但洙泗湮沦，至乃飨尝乏主。
现代文：功绩隐没在当年，道德比曰月深远，感慨获麟而厌世，至今遥远千年，河流枯竭，山谷空虚，丘陵夷平，深渊堵塞，不但洙水、泗水湮没，竟至于祭祀没有了牌位。
English: In that year, the merits disappeared, the morality was more profound than that of the moon, the emotion was rare and world-weary, so far a distant millennium, the rivers were exhausted, the valleys were empty, the hills were flattened, the abysses were blocked, not only the irrigation and irrigation disappeared, but as for the sacrifices, there were no plaques.

古文：前王敬仰，崇修寝庙，岁月亟流，鞠为茂草。
现代文：前代帝王敬仰孔子，崇敬地修筑其寝庙，岁月急速流逝，寝庙生出了高大茂密的野草。
English: The previous emperor admired Confucius and reverently built his sleeping temple. The years passed quickly, and the sleeping temple produced tall, lush weeds.

古文：今学敩兴立，实禀洪规，抚事怀人，弥增钦属。
现代文：现在兴办学校，实在是禀承孔子博大的仪规，抚事怀人，更增添了敬佩之意。
English: Now, the establishment of a school is really following Confucius's extensive etiquette, caring for others, and adding to the sense of admiration.

古文：可改筑宗祊，务在爽垲。
现代文：可以改建孔子宗庙，务必要干爽明亮。
English: Confucius' ancestral temple can be rebuilt, but it must be clean and bright.

古文：量给祭秩，礼同诸侯。奉圣之爵，以时绍继。 
现代文：酌量给予祭祀官品，礼节与诸侯相同，供奉圣人的爵位，按时代承袭。 
English: Sacrifices and official gifts are given in moderation, the etiquette is the same as that of the princes, and the titles of saints are offered and inherited according to the times.

古文：壬寅，以丹阳尹王晏为江州刺史。
现代文：壬寅，任命丹阳尹王晏为江州刺史。
English: Ren Yin, appointed Danyang Yin Wang Qi as the chief historian of Jiangzhou.

古文：癸卯，以巴陵王子伦为豫州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，任命巴陵王萧子伦为豫州刺史。
English: At the same time, he appointed the king of Baling, Xiao Zilun, as the chief historian of Yuzhou.

古文：三月，丁未，以太子右卫率王玄邈为兖州刺史。
现代文：三月丁未，任命太子右卫率王玄邈为兖州刺史。
English: In March of the same year, Wang Xuanqian, the prince's right guard, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：庚戌，以中护军、巴东王子响为江州刺史，中书令、随郡王子隆为中护军。
现代文：庚戌，任命中护军巴束王萧子响为江州刺史，中书令随郡王萧子隆为中护军。
English: Gyeongbokgung, appointed the middle protector Ba Sok Wang Xiao Zi Rong as the governor of Gyeongju, and ordered the middle protector to follow the county king Xiao Zi Rong.

古文：甲寅，立皇子子岳为临贺王，子峻为广汉王，子琳为宣城王，子珉为义安王。
现代文：甲寅，立皇子萧于岳为堕笪王，芦王些为庐选王，芦王继为宣城王，萧子珉为义安王
English: Jia Yin, set up the prince Xiao Yueyue as the fallen king, Luo Wangzhe as the chosen king, Luo Wang as the king of Xuancheng, and Xiao Zixu as the king of Yian

古文：夏，四月，戊寅，诏曰： 婚礼下达，人伦攸始，《周官》设媒氏之职，《国风》兴及时之咏。
现代文：夏四月戊寅，下诏书说： 婚姻是人伦之始，《周官》设有媒氏一职，《国风》兴起及时嫁娶的吟咏。
English: In the summer of April, the next imperial edict said: Marriage is the beginning of human relations. "Zhou Guan" has the position of matchmaker, and "Guofu" has the rise of timely marriage.

古文：四爵内陈，义不期侈，三鼎外列，事岂存奢！
现代文：四爵在内陈列，礼仪不希望浪费；三鼎在外陈列，婚事岂能存有奢侈。
English: If the four jewels are displayed inside, the etiquette does not want to waste; if the three rings are displayed outside, the marriage can not have luxury.

古文：晚俗浮丽，历兹永久，每思惩革，而民未知禁。
现代文：后来风俗虚华不实，沿续至今已经很久，常想惩戒改革，可是百姓不知道禁止。
English: Later, the custom was false and unrealistic, and it has been followed for a long time. People often wanted to reform the discipline, but the people did not know about the ban.

古文：乃闻同牢之费，华泰尤甚；膳羞方丈，有过王侯。
现代文：听说新婚夫妇同食仪式的费用，尤其浮华奢侈；美食佳肴的丰盛，有过于王侯。
English: It is said that the cost of the newlyweds' meal ceremony is particularly extravagant; the richness of the cuisine is beyond the reach of a prince.

古文：富者扇其骄风，贫者耻躬不逮。
现代文：富有的人煽起骄奢之风，贫穷的人羞愧自己比不上。
English: The rich inspire pride, the poor shame themselves.

古文：或以供帐未具，动致推迁，年不再来，盛时忽往。宜为节文，颁之士庶。并可拟则公朝，方樏供设，合卺之礼无亏，宁俭之义斯在。如故有违，绳之以法。 
现代文：应当制定节制的文告，颁发给士庶人等。并且可以拟订规约公之于众，限定摆供设宴的规模，使合卺的礼节不致亏欠，又包含有宁静俭朴之义。如果有人故意违背，绳之以法。 
English: A temperance proclamation should be drawn up and issued to the commoners, etc. And a regulation can be drawn up and made public, limiting the size of the banquet, so that the etiquette of the banquet is not deficient, and contains the meaning of tranquility and frugality. If someone deliberately violates it, he will be brought to justice.

古文：五月，乙巳，尚书令、卫将军、开府仪同三司王俭薨。
现代文：五月乙巳，尚书令、卫将军、开府仪同三司王俭去世。
English: In May, Shang Shuling, Wei Zheng, Kaifu Yi, and Wang Jian passed away.

古文：甲子，以新除尚书左仆射柳世隆为尚书令。
现代文：甲子，任命新晋升的尚书左仆射柳世隆为尚书令。
English: Jia Zi, appointed the newly promoted Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant, Jia Liu Shilong, as Shang Shuling.

古文：六月，丁亥，车驾幸琅邪。
现代文：六月丁亥，世祖驾临琅邪。
English: In June, Dinghai, the ancestor drove to the evil.

古文：秋，八月，庚子，以左卫将军建安王子真为中护军。
现代文：秋八月庚子，任命左卫将军建安王萧子真为中护军。
English: In autumn and August, Geng Zi appointed the left guard general Jian An Wang Xiao Zi Zhen as the middle guard.

古文：冬，十月，己丑，诏曰： 三季浇浮，旧章陵替，吉凶奢靡，动违矩则。
现代文：冬月己丑，下韶书说： 如同夏商周三代末年社会风气浮薄，旧有的规章纲纪废弛，遇吉凶之事竞相奢靡，动辄违犯礼仪规定。
English: The winter months are ugly, the lower part of the book said: Just as the summer merchants in the late third generation, the social atmosphere is weak, the old rules and disciplines are useless, the good and bad things are competing with each other, and the rules of etiquette are frequently violated.

古文：或裂锦绣以竞车服之饰，涂金镂石以穷茔域之丽。
现代文：有的割锦绣来攀比车辆衣服的装饰，涂抹黄金雕缕石头来竭尽坟茔的华丽。
English: Some cut brocade to match the decoration of the vehicle's clothes, smeared with gold carved stone to exhaust the tomb's splendor.

古文：至班白不婚，露棺累叶，苟相夸衒，罔顾大典。
现代文：竟至于年老仍不结婚，棺材暴露在外多年不葬，衹为相互夸耀，不顾礼仪大典。
English: As for the elderly, they still do not marry, the coffin is exposed for many years and is not buried, they are proud of each other, regardless of the etiquette ceremony.

古文：可明为条制，严勒所在，悉使画一。
现代文：应明确制订条例制度，严厉勒令所在地区，使其全部整齐划一。
English: A system of regulations should be clearly established, and strict orders should be given to the regions to make them all uniform.

古文：如复违犯，依事纠奏。 
现代文：如果再违犯，依照事实纠正禀奏。 
English: If it violates the law again, it will be corrected according to the facts.

古文：十二月，己亥，以中护军、建安王子真为郢州刺史，江州刺史、巴东王子响为荆州刺史，前安西司马垣荣祖为兖州刺史。
现代文：十二月己亥，任命中护军建安王萧子真为郢州刺史，江州刺史巴束王萧子响为荆州刺史，前安西司马垣荣祖为兖州刺史。
English: In December of the same year, Xiao Zizhen, Jian'an Wang Xiao Zhen, Jiangzhou Zishi Ba Zi Wang Xiao Zhen, and former Anxi Sima Qi Rong Zu were appointed as the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：八年，春，正月，庚子，征西大将军王敬则进号骠骑大将军，左将军沈文季为领军将军，丹阳尹、鄱阳王锵为江州刺史。
现代文：丞塱八年春正月庚子，征西大将军工董型进封为骠骑大将军，任命左将军沈文季为领军将军，且厘尹鄱阳王盖锵为丝业刺史。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eighth year, Geng Zi, the general of the Western Expedition, Gong Dong-chi, was appointed as the general of the cavalry, the left general, Shen Wenzhi, was appointed as the leading general, and Li Yin, the Yang Wang Gai, was appointed as the silk industry.

古文：诏放遣隔城虏俘，听还本土。
现代文：诏令释放遣散在区球抓获的俘虏，听任他们返回故里。
English: The imperial edict ordered the release and demobilization of prisoners captured in the area and allowed them to return to their hometowns.

古文：二月，壬辰，零陵王司马药师薨。
现代文：二月壬辰，零陵王司马药师去世。
English: In February, Ziling Wang Sima, a pharmacist, passed away.

古文：夏，四月，戊辰，诏 公卿已下各举所知，随才授职。
现代文：夏四月戊辰，下韶令说： 公卿以下各推举自己所了解的人才，依据才能授予官职。
English: The imperial edict issued at the end of the summer and the beginning of the spring said, "All persons below the rank of court noble shall be selected on the basis of their ability to understand talent, and shall be granted official positions.

古文：进得其人，受登贤之赏；荐非其才，获滥举之罚。 
现代文：推举的是人才，受举贤的奖赏；举荐的名不符实，要受滥行举荐的处罚。 
English: It is talent that is recommended, and it is rewarded by the person who recommends it; if the name of the recommendation is not true, it will be punished by the person who recommends it.

古文：秋，七月，辛丑，以会稽太守安陆侯缅为雍州刺史。
现代文：秋七月辛丑，任命会稽太守安陆侯萧缅为雍州刺史。
English: In the autumn, in July, Xin Ug, Nanzhi appointed the auditor-general of the association, and Anlu Hou Xiao Meng became the history of Yongzhou.

古文：癸卯，诏曰： 阴阳舛和，纬象愆度，储胤婴患，淹历旬晷。
现代文：癸卯，下诏书说： 阴阳乖舛失调，星象错乱，皇位继承人遭遇不幸，已沿续了很长时间。
English: Meanwhile, the next imperial edict said: The yin and yang are out of balance, the stars are out of alignment, and the heir to the throne has suffered misfortune. This has been going on for a long time.

古文：思仰祗天戒，俯纾民瘼，可大赦天下。 
现代文：要对上尊奉天帝的警告，对下解除百姓的疾苦，可在全国实行大赦。 
English: It is necessary to carry out an amnesty in the whole country in order to heed the emperor's warning and relieve the suffering of the people.

古文：癸亥，诏 司、雍二州，比岁不稔，雍州八年以前、司州七年以前逋租悉原。
现代文：癸亥，下韶令说： 司、雍二州，连年歉收，雍州永明八年以前，州丞塱七年以前，拖欠的田租全部免掉。
English: According to the imperial edict issued at the end of the 19th century, the two provinces of Si and Yong had poor harvests year after year. Eight years before Yongming, and seven years before Zhouzheng, the land rent arrears were completely waived.

古文：汝南一郡复限更申五年。 
现代文：汝南一郡偿还的期限再延长五年。 
English: The repayment period for one county in southern Ryukyu will be extended for another five years.

古文：八月，丙寅，诏 京邑霖雨既过，居民泛滥，遣中书舍人、二县官长赈恤。 
现代文：八月丙寅，下诏令说： 京城大雨已经过度。居民受雨水泛滥之灾，派中书舍人、两县长官赈济救助。 
English: In August, the following edict was issued: "The heavy rain in Beijing has been excessive. Residents have been affected by the rainwater flooding, and the Central Library staff and the governors of the two counties have been sent to provide relief.

古文：乙酉，以行河南王世子休留代为秦、河二州刺史。
现代文：乙酉，任命行河南王世子休留成为秦、回二州刺史。
English: He appointed the heir of the king of Henan to stay in Qin and return to Erzhou to make history.

古文：壬辰，以左卫将军、随郡王子隆为荆州刺史。
现代文：壬长，任命左卫将军随郡王萧子隆为型蛆刺史。
English: In Jinchang, he appointed General Zuwei to follow the county king, Xiao Zilong, as a model.

古文：巴东王子响有罪，遣丹阳尹萧顺之率军讨之，子响伏诛。
现代文：巴束王芦王响有罪，派且屋尹曲驻率军征讨，萧王飨被处死。
English: Batsuk Wang Luo Wang Xiang was found guilty, and sent Kechiya Yin Qu to lead the army to investigate, and Xiao Wang Yao was executed.

古文：冬，十月，丁丑，诏 吴兴水淹过度，开所在仓赈赐。 
现代文：冬十月丁丑，下诏令说： 吴兴遭水淹很厉害，打开所在粮仓赈济赏赐。 
English: In the winter and October of Dingwuxi, the next imperial edict said: Wu Xing was flooded very badly, and the reward for opening the granary was given.

古文：癸巳，原建元以前逋租。
现代文：癸巳，免除建元以前拖欠的田租。
English: At the same time, the farm rent that was in arrears before Jianyuan was exempted.

古文：十一月，乙卯，以建武将军伏登之为交州刺史。
现代文：十一月乙卯，任命建武将军伏登之为交州刺史。
English: In November, Gen. Fudeng Jianwu was appointed as the governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：十二月，乙丑，以振威将军陈僧授为越州刺史。
现代文：十二月乙丑，任命振威将军陈僧授为越州刺史。
English: On December 2nd, General Zhenwei appointed Chen Sangzhu as the governor of Yuezhou.

古文：戊寅，诏 尚书丞郎职事繁剧，恤俸未优，可量增赐禄。 
现代文：戊寅，下诏令说： 尚书丞郎公务繁重，但俸禄不优厚，可以酌量增加赏赐俸禄。 
English: Wu Yin, the next imperial edict said: Shang Shuzhe Rong's official duties are heavy, but the salary is not generous, and the salary can be increased as appropriate.

古文：己卯，皇子子建为湘东王。
现代文：己卯，皇子萧子建就任湘束王。
English: At the same time, Prince Xiaozijian became the king of Hunan Province.

古文：癸巳，以监青冀二州军、行刺史事张冲为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：癸巳，任命监青、冀二州军、行刺史事张冲为青、冀二州刺史。
English: At the same time, Zhang Chong was appointed as the Youth Prisoner of War, the Youth of Hebei Province and the Youth of Hebei Province and the Youth of Hebei Province.

古文：九年春，正月，甲午，以侍中、江夏王锋为南徐州刺史，冠军将军刘悛为益州刺史。
现代文：永明九年春正月甲午，任命侍中江夏王萧锋为南徐州刺史，冠军将军刘悛为益州刺史。
English: In the early morning of the first day of spring in the ninth year of the Ming Dynasty, Xia Wang Xia Feng, a middle-ranking official of the Jiangxi Province, was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou, and the champion general Liu Wei was appointed as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：辛丑，车驾祠南郊，诏 京师见囚系，详量原遣。 
现代文：辛丑，世祖亲临南郊祭天，下韶令说： 京城现在押的囚犯，适当赦免遣散。 
English: Sin ugly, the ancestor personally came to the southern suburbs to worship the heavens, and issued a decree saying: The prisoners currently detained in Beijing will be appropriately pardoned and discharged.

古文：三月，乙卯，以南中郎司马刘楷为司州刺史。
现代文：三月乙卯，任命南中郎司马刘楷为司州刺史。
English: In March, Nanzhong Lang appointed Sima Liu Kai as the secretary of state.

古文：辛丑，以太子左卫率刘缵为广州刺史。
现代文：辛丑，任命太子左卫率刘缆为广州刺史。
English: Xin ugly, the appointment of Prince Zuo Wei rate Liu cable for Guangzhou stabbing history.

古文：夏，四月，乙亥，有司奏： 旧格一年两过行陵，三月十五日曹郎以下小行，九月十五日司枯以下大行。今长停小行，唯二州一大行。 
现代文：夏四月乙亥，主管部门上奏： 旧制一年两次到祖陵祭祖，三月十五日曹郎以下官员、规模拜祭，九月十五司空以下官员大规模拜祭，现在长期停止小规模拜祭，祇有二州每年举行一次大规模拜祭。 
English: In the summer and April of the year of the boar, the competent department reported: The old system of visiting the ancestral mausoleum twice a year was abolished. On March 15th, officials below the rank of sergeant held a large-scale worship festival. On September 15th, officials below the rank of air marshal held a large-scale worship festival. Now, small-scale worship festivals have been suspended for a long time. Only two states hold a large-scale worship festival every year.

古文：诏曰： 可。 
现代文：下韶说： 可以。 
English: Emperor Wu said: Yes.

古文：六月，甲戌，以尚书左仆射王奂为雍州刺史。
现代文：六月甲戌，任命尚书左仆射王奂为雍州刺史。
English: In June, Jiaxuan and Nanqi appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Wangtao, as Yongzhou's chief historian.

古文：秋，九月，戊辰，车驾幸琅邪城讲武，观者倾都，普颁酒肉。
现代文：秋九月戊辰，世祖亲临琅邪城讲习军事，全城的人观看，普遍发放酒肉。
English: In the autumn and September of the year of the horse, the ancestor personally went to the evil city for military training, and the whole city watched, and generally distributed meat and wine.

古文：十年春，正月，戊午，诏 诸责负众逋七年以前，悉原除。
现代文：永明十年春正月戊午，下诏令说： 拖欠七年以上的各类债务，全部免除。
English: At noon on the first day of spring in the 10th year of Sun Myung Moon, the following edict was issued: All types of debts that have been in arrears for more than seven years will be completely waived.

古文：高赀不在例。
现代文：高额债务不在此例。
English: High debt is not one of them.

古文：孤老六疾，人谷五斛。
现代文：孤寡年老患病者，每人救助五斛谷物。
English: For the lonely, the elderly and the sick, five bags of grain per person will be provided.

古文：内外有务众官增禄俸。 
现代文：在朝廷内外任职的全体官员增加俸禄。 
English: All officials working inside and outside the Imperial Court will receive an increase in salary.

古文：以左民尚书、南平王锐为湘州刺史，司徒、竟陵王子良领尚书令，右卫将军王玄邈为北徐州刺史，中军将军、庐陵王子卿进号车骑将军，北中郎将、南海王子罕为兖州刺史，辅国将军、临汝公昭文为南豫州刺史，冠军将军王文和为北兖州刺史。
现代文：任命左民尚书亩垩王芦鲤为翅州刺史，司徒童龃萧工皂领尚书令，右卫将军王玄邈为北徐州刺史，中军将军庐陵王萧子卿进封为车骑将军，北中郎将南海王萧子罕为轰州刺史，辅国将军堕龇芦旦虿墓为南豫州刺史，冠军将军王塞勉为韭查业刺史。
English: Appointed the Left People's General Wang Xuan as the Wing State Historian, the Right People's General Wang Xuan as the North Xuzhou Historian, the Chinese General Gu Ling Wang Xiao Ziqing as the Chariot and Cavalry General, the North Middle Man appointed the South Sea King Xiao Zihan as the Hanzhou Historian, the General of the Auxiliary State, the General of the Fallen, the Rudan Tomb as the South Yuzhou Historian, and the Champion General Wang Seiming as the Research History Historian.

古文：二月，壬寅，镇军将军陈显达领中领军。
现代文：二月壬寅，镇军将军陈显达领中领军。
English: In February, in Renin, Chen Xianda, the general of the town army, became the leader of the troops.

古文：夏，四月，辛丑，大司马豫章王嶷薨。
现代文：夏四月辛丑，大司马豫章王萧嶷去世。
English: In the summer of April, Grand Master Ma Yuanzhang Wang Xiaojun passed away.

古文：五月，己巳，司徒、竟陵王子良为扬州刺史。
现代文：五月己巳，司徒竞陵王萧子良就任扬州刺史。
English: In May, King Xiao Ziliang of the Jingtong Mausoleum in Szeto became Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：秋，八月，丙申，以新城太守郭安明为宁州刺史。
现代文：秋八月丙申，任命新城太守郭安明为宁州刺史。
English: In autumn and August, he appointed Guo Anming, the governor of Xincheng, as the prefect of Ningzhou.

古文：冬，十月，乙丑，车驾幸玄武湖讲武。
现代文：冬十月乙丑，世祖亲临玄武湖讲习军事。
English: In the winter of October and November, the ancestors came to Lake Xuanwu for military training.

古文：甲午，车驾殷祠太庙。
现代文：甲午，世祖至太庙举行盛大的祭礼。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, a grand festival was held at the ancestral temple.

古文：十一月，戊午，诏曰： 顷者霖雨，樵粮稍贵，京邑居民，多离其弊。
现代文：十一月戊午，下诏令说： 近来连下大雨，木柴粮食很贵，京城居民，多受其害。
English: At noon of November, the following edict was issued: "Recently, there has been continuous heavy rain, firewood and grain are very expensive, and residents of Beijing are mostly affected.

古文：遣中书舍人、二县官长赈赐。 
现代文：派中书舍人、两县长官赈济赏赐。 
English: Two county magistrates and a person who donated books were sent to reward the winners.

古文：十一年春，正月，癸丑，诏 京师见系囚，详所原遣。 
现代文：永明十一年春正月癸丑，下诏令说： 京城在押的囚犯，审查之后赦免遣散。 
English: In the spring of the eleventh year of Sun Myung Moon, the following edict was issued: The prisoners in custody in Beijing will be pardoned and discharged after review.

古文：以骠骑大将军王敬则为司空，江州刺史、鄱阳王锵为领军将军，镇军大将军陈显达为江州刺史，右卫将军崔慧景为豫州刺史。
现代文：任命骠骑大将军王敬则为司空，江州刺史鄱阳王萧锵为领军将军，镇军大将军陈显达为江州刺史，右卫将军崔慧景为豫州刺史。
English: Wang Jing, the general of the cavalry, was appointed as the secretary of the sky, Wang Xiaohui, the general of the garrison, was appointed as the general of the garrison, Chen Xianda, the general of the garrison, was appointed as the general of the garrison, and Cui Huijing, the general of the right guard, was appointed as the general of the garrison.

古文：丙子，皇太子长懋薨。
现代文：丙子，皇太子萧长懋去世。
English: Crown Prince Xiao Changyu passed away.

古文：二月，壬午，以车骑将军、庐陵王子卿为骠骑将军、南豫州刺史，抚军将军、安陆王子敬进号车骑将军。
现代文：二月壬午，任命车骑将军庐陵王萧于卿为骠骑将军、南豫州刺史，抚军将军安陆王萧子敬进封号为车骑将军。
English: At noon of February, he appointed the chariot and cavalry generals Gongling Wang Xiao Yuqing as the chariot and cavalry general, Nan Yuzhou as the chariot and cavalry general, and Anlu Wang Xiao Zi Jingjin as the chariot and cavalry general.

古文：己丑，辅国将军曹虎为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：己丑，辅国将军曹虎就任梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: Vice-province general Cao Hu was appointed as the leader, and the Southern Qin and the two states became the history.

古文：癸卯，以新除中书监、晋安王子懋为雍州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，任命新上任的中书监晋安王萧子懋为雍州刺史。
English: At the same time, the newly appointed Chinese book supervisor, Jinan Wang Xiao Zixuan, was appointed as the historian of Yongzhou.

古文：丙午，以冠军将军王文和为益州刺史。
现代文：丙午，任命冠军将军王文和为益州刺史。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd, the champion general Wang Wenhe was appointed to write the history of Yizhou.

古文：三月，乙亥，雍州刺史王奂伏诛。
现代文：三月乙亥，雍州刺史王奂被处死。
English: In March of the Year of the Rooster, the Yangzhou assassin Wang Xi was executed.

古文：夏，四月，壬午，诏 东宫文武臣僚，可悉度为太孙官属。 
现代文：夏四月壬午，下诏令说： 东宫的文武官僚，可全部转为皇太孙的属官。 
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fourth month of the summer, the imperial edict was issued, saying: The civil and military bureaucrats of the East Palace may all be converted into subordinate officials of the Emperor's grandson.

古文：甲午，立皇太孙昭业、太孙妃何氏。
现代文：甲午，立皇太孙萧昭业、太孙妃何氏。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the great-great-grandson of Emperor Xiao Zhaoye and the great-great-grandson of Emperor He.

古文：诏 赐天下为父后者爵一级，孝子顺孙义夫节妇粟帛各有差。 
现代文：下诏令说： 赏赐天下继承父业的人爵位一级，赏赐孝子贤孙义夫节妇粮帛各有不等。 
English: The edict said: There is a difference between awarding a first-class title of nobility to those who inherit their father's inheritance, and awarding filial piety, wisdom and benevolence to the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the sons and daughters of the fathers.

古文：癸卯，以骁骑将军刘灵哲为兖州刺史。
现代文：癸卯，任命骁骑将军刘灵哲为兖州刺史。
English: At the same time, he appointed Liu Lingzhe, the general of the Qin cavalry, as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：五月，戊辰，诏曰： 水旱成灾，谷稼伤弊，凡三调众逋，可同申至秋登。
现代文：五月戊辰，下韶令说： 水旱成灾，作物受害，凡是众人拖欠的粮食、布帛、劳役，可一同延至秋粮登场。
English: At the end of May, the next imperial edict said: "Floods and droughts have become a disaster, crops have suffered, and all the grain, cloth, and labor that people are in arrears can be extended to autumn grain.

古文：京师二县、朱方、姑熟，可权断酒。 
现代文：京城两县、朱方、姑熟，可暂且禁止酿酒。 
English: The two counties of Beijing, Zhu Fang and Gu Rong may temporarily ban the brewing of alcohol.

古文：庚午，以辅国将军萧惠休为徐州刺史。
现代文：庚午，任命辅国将军萧惠休为徐州刺史。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Xiao Huixiu, the general of the auxiliary state, was appointed as the new governor of Xuzhou.

古文：丙子，以左民尚书、宜都王铿为南豫州刺史。
现代文：丙子，任命左民尚书宜都王萧铿为南豫蛆刺史。
English: Xiong Zi, appointed the leftist Shangshui Yidu Wang Xiaohui as the leader of the Southern Yuanshan.

古文：六月，壬午，诏 霖雨既过，遣中书舍人、二县官长赈赐京邑居民。 
现代文：六月壬午，下韶令说： 大雨连绵，为害已相当严重，派中书舍人、两县长官赈济赏赐京城居民。 
English: At noon in June, the imperial edict said: "The continuous heavy rain has caused serious damage. The central government has sent scholars and the governors of the two counties to reward the residents of Beijing.

古文：秋，七月，丁巳，诏曰： 顷风水为灾，二岸居民多离其患，加以贫病六疾，孤老稚弱，弥足矜念。
现代文：秋七月丁巳，下诏令说： 近来风雨成灾，两岸居民，多受其害。至于贫穷疾病、孤寡年老、幼小体弱的人，就更值得怜悯惦念。
English: In the autumn of July, the following edict was issued: "Recently, the typhoons and rains have been disastrous, and the residents on both sides of the strait have suffered a lot. As for the poor, the sick, the lonely, the old, and the small and weak, they are more worthy of pity and regret.

古文：遣中书舍人履行沾恤。 
现代文：派中书舍人亲自去巡视救助。 
English: Zhongshushe people were sent to inspect the rescue in person.

古文：又诏曰： 水旱为灾，实伤农稼。
现代文：又下诏令说： 水旱成灾，的确损伤农业。
English: He also issued a decree saying, "Floods and droughts are disasters that really damage agriculture.

古文：江淮之间，仓廪既虚，遂草窃充斥，互相侵夺，依阻山湖，成此逋逃。
现代文：江、淮之间，仓库已经空虚，草寇盗贼充斥，互相侵夺，凭藉山湖险阻，得以逃亡。
English: Between the Yangtze River and the Huai River, the warehouses were already empty. Thieves and bandits were rampant, invading and seizing each other. They were able to escape by taking advantage of the dangerous obstacles in the mountains and lakes.

古文：曲赦南兖、兖、豫、司、徐五州，南豫州之历阳、谯、临江、庐江四郡，三调众逋宿债，并同原除。
现代文：赦免南兖、兖、豫、司、徐五州，南豫州的历阳、谯、临江、庐江四郡的三调，民众拖欠的旧债，一并免除。
English: Pardoning the three counties of Nanzhang, Handan, Henan, Sichuan and Hebei, and the four counties of Liyang, Handan, Linjiang and Minjiang in Nanzhang, Handan, Henan, Sichuan and Hebei, and the old debts of the people in arrears will be exempted together.

古文：其缘淮及青、冀新附侨民，复除已讫，更申五年。 
现代文：那些在淮河沿岸及青、冀二州新迁来的侨民，已免除的徭役，再延长五年。 
English: For those newly arrived overseas Chinese along the Huai River and in Qinghai and Hebei provinces, the exempted corvee service will be extended for another five years.

古文：是月，上不豫，徙御延昌殿，乘舆始登阶，而殿屋鸣咤，上恶之。
现代文：当月，世祖身体不适，移驾延昌殿，乘轿刚登上台阶，宫殿的屋子就发出呜叫呼喝声，世祖认为不祥而厌恶。
English: That month, Shizu felt unwell and moved to the Yanchang Palace. As soon as he climbed the steps in the limousine, the palace room was filled with wailing and shouting, which Shizu considered ominous and detested.

古文：虏侵边，戊辰，遣江州刺史陈显达镇雍州樊城。
现代文：少数民族侵犯边境，戊辰，委派江州刺史陈显达镇守雍州樊城。
English: Ethnic minorities encroached on the border, and Chen Xianda, the chief historian of Jiangzhou, was appointed to guard Yongzhou's Lucheng.

古文：上虑朝野忧惶，乃力疾召乐府奏正声伎。
现代文：世祖担心朝野忧虑恐惧，于是勉强支撑病体，召集乐府演奏纯正的乐舞。
English: The ancestor was worried about the chaos, anxiety and fear, so he reluctantly supported the sick body and convened the music department to perform pure music and dance.

古文：戊寅，大渐。
现代文：戊寅，世祖病情加剧。
English: Wu Yin, Shizu's condition has worsened.

古文：诏曰： 始终大期，贤圣不免，吾行年六十，亦复何恨。
现代文：下韶书说： 生死大限，圣贤也不能避免，我年将六十，还有什么可遣恨的。
English: The Lower Ying Zi said: "Life and death is a predetermined limit, even a sage cannot avoid it. I will be sixty years old, what else is there to hate?"

古文：但皇业艰难，万机事重，不能无遗虑耳。
现代文：但是帝业艰难，有许多关系重大的事务，不能没有身后的顾虑啊。
English: But the imperial business is difficult, there are many important matters, and there must be worries behind.

古文：太孙进德日茂，社稷有寄。
现代文：太孙的德业已经深厚，国家已有寄托。
English: The great-grandson's virtue has been profound, and the country has been entrusted to him.

古文：子良善相毗辅，思弘治道；内外众事，无大小悉与鸾参怀，共下意。
现代文：子良要善加辅佐。想着光大治国之道；内外诸事无论大小，都要和萧銮坦诚商讨，共同作出决定。
English: Zi Liang should be a good helper. He should think about the great way of governing the country; he should discuss all matters, big and small, both at home and abroad, with Xiao Wei, and make decisions together.

古文：尚书中是职务根本，悉委王晏、徐孝嗣。
现代文：尚书是最关键的职位，全权委托王晏、徐孝嗣。
English: Shangshu was the most important post, entrusted to Wang Qi and Xu Xiaozhi.

古文：军旅捍边之略，委王敬则、陈显达、王广之、王玄邈、沈文季、张瑰、薛渊等。
现代文：行军戍边的方略，委托给王敬则、速题达、王垦兰、王室塑、选塞圣、张壁、莲遄等人。
English: The strategy of marching along the ridge was entrusted to Wang Jingzhe, Xu Tieda, Wang Yulan, Guo Guo, Xuan Zai Sheng, Zhang Jie, Lian Jie and others.

古文：百辟庶僚，各奉尔职，谨事太孙，勿有懈怠。
现代文：大小官僚，各自奉行职守，小心事奉太孙，不得懈怠。
English: Bureaucrats of all ranks should carry out their duties, carefully serve the great-grandson, and not slack off.

古文：知复何言。 
现代文：我想到的就是这些。 
English: That's all I can think of.

古文：又诏曰： 我识灭之后，身上著夏衣，画天衣，纯乌犀导，应诸器悉不得用宝物及织成等，唯装复裌衣各一通。
现代文：又下诏书说： 我死之后，身上穿夏衣、画天衣，用镶黑边的犀角做绾头发的导，应用的各种器具一律不得用齐物以及丝织品等，衹放置复衣、挟衣各一身。
English: The next edict also said: After my death, I will wear a summer coat and a painting gown, and use a rhinoceros horn with a black border as a guide to braid my hair. All kinds of appliances used must not be used, such as braids and silk fabrics. I will put on a double coat and a jacket for each body.

古文：常所服身刀长短二口铁环者，随我入梓宫。
现代文：平常所佩带的长短两口有铁环的刀，随我放入棺木。
English: Two knives with iron rings, the length of which I usually wear, were put into the coffin with me.

古文：祭敬之典，本在因心，东邻杀牛，不如西家禴祭。
现代文：祭祀致敬的典礼，关键在于内心，束邻杀牛祭祀，不如西家一年四季祭祀。
English: The key to the ceremony of sacrifice and homage lies in the heart, and the sacrifice of slaughtering cattle by neighbors is not as good as the year-round sacrifice of the West family.

古文：我灵上慎勿以牲为祭，唯设饼、茶饮、干饭、酒脯而已。
现代文：我的灵柩上千万不要用牲畜做祭品，衹摆设饼、茶饮、干饭、酒脯即可。
English: On my coffin, please do not use livestock as an offering. It is enough to place bread, tea, dry rice and a wine jug.

古文：天下贵贱，咸同此制。
现代文：天下无论贵贱，都要用此种丧制。
English: No matter how high or low, everyone should use this mourning system.

古文：未山陵前，朔望设菜食。
现代文：没有起陵墓之前，初一、十五可陈设菜食献祭。
English: Before the mausoleum was built, vegetarian offerings could be set up on the first and fifteenth day of the first month.

古文：陵墓万世所宅，意尝恨休安陵未称，今可用东三处地最东边以葬我，名为景安陵。
现代文：陵墓是死后万世的居所，我内心曾恨休安陵不称己意，现在可以用束三处地的最束边来安葬我，命名为景安陵。
English: The mausoleum is the eternal residence after death. In my heart, I used to hate to leave the mausoleum. Now, I can be buried in the narrowest of the three places, and it will be named Jing'an Mausoleum.

古文：丧礼每存省约，不须烦民。
现代文：丧礼要常存节俭，不要烦扰百姓。
English: Always be frugal at funerals and don't bother the people.

古文：百官停六时入临，朔望祖日可依旧。
现代文：百官停职六个时辰到宫内哭吊，初一、十五、祭祖日可以依照旧例。
English: Hundreds of officials were suspended for six hours to cry and hang themselves in the Imperial Palace. The first day of the New Year, the 15th day of the month, and the day of the ancestor's festival can continue as before.

古文：诸主六宫，并不须从山陵。
现代文：各位封王及六宫后妃，都不需跟随到山陵。
English: All the princes and queens of the Six Courts do not need to follow the horse to the mountain.

古文：内殿凤华、寿昌、耀灵三处，是吾所治制。
现代文：宫内凤华、寿昌、耀灵三处殿堂，是我所整修的。
English: I renovated the three main halls of Fenghua, Shuchang and Yaoling in the palace.

古文：夫贵有天下，富兼四海，宴处寝息，不容乃陋，谓此为奢俭之中，慎勿坏去。
现代文：高贵到拥有天下，富有到兼容四海，日常起居休息的地方如果不加修饰，就会显得鄙陋，我认为这处在奢侈和节俭之间，千万不要毁坏掉。
English: Noble enough to own the world, rich enough to be compatible with the four seas, if the daily living and resting place is not decorated, it will appear humble. I think this is between luxury and frugality. Don't destroy it.

古文：显阳殿玉像诸佛及供养，具如别牒，可尽心礼拜供养之。
现代文：显阳殿诸尊玉佛像及供养像，另外备有谱牒，可尽心礼拜供养他们。
English: The statues of the precious jade Buddha and the offering statues in the Hall of the Rising Sun are on display. In addition, there is a memorial tablet so that you can worship and offer them with all your heart.

古文：应有功德事，可专在中。
现代文：应该有的功德法事，可以专在其中举办。
English: The meritorious service, which should exist, can be held exclusively in it.

古文：自今公私皆不得出家为道，及起立塔寺，以宅为精舍，并严断之。
现代文：从今以后，公私人等都不得出家为道士，以及建造塔寺，把住宅作为精舍，一并严加处置。
English: From now on, both the public and private sectors will not be allowed to be ordained as Taoists, build pagodas and temples, and treat houses as retreats, all of which will be strictly dealt with.

古文：唯年六十，必有道心，听朝贤选序，已有别诏。
现代文：惟有年满六十的人，必会有悟道之心，可听取朝中贤者意见，量才授官，这已另有韶书。
English: Only those who have reached the age of sixty will have the heart of enlightenment, can listen to the opinions of the sages in the court, and can only be appointed to the post. This has been confirmed by another document.

古文：诸小小赐乞，及阁内处分，亦有别牒。
现代文：其他一些赐予事宜，以及家庭后事的安排，也另有书札。
English: A number of other bestowal matters, as well as arrangements for the family's aftercare, also appear on the cards.

古文：内外禁卫劳旧主帅左右，悉付萧谌优量驱使之，勿负吾遗意也。 
现代文：内外禁卫值勤于前宅帅左右很辛苦，全部委托给萧谌从优役使，不要辜负我的遗愿。 
English: It was very hard for the guards at home and abroad to be on duty around the former mansion, and they were all entrusted to Xiao Yu, the superior officer, so as not to live up to my last wish.

古文：是日上崩，年五十四。
现代文：这天世祖驾崩，终年五十四岁。
English: On this day, Shiso passed away at the age of fifty-four.

古文：上刚毅有断，为治总大体，以富国为先。
现代文：世祖刚毅果断，认为治理国家要抓住关键，把富国放在首位。
English: The founder was resolute and determined, and believed that the key to governing the country should be grasped, and the rich country should be put first.

古文：颇不喜游宴、雕绮之事，言常恨之，未能顿遣。
现代文：很不喜欢出游宴饮，以及雕饰美服等事，言语中常常表示憎恶，但未能立刻消除。
English: They dislike traveling banquets, as well as carving beautiful clothes and other things. They often express their disgust in words, but they cannot be eliminated immediately.

古文：临崩又诏 凡诸游费，宜从休息。
现代文：临驾崩又下诏令说： 凡是那些出游耗费，应该禁止。
English: On the eve of his death, he issued another edict, saying: "All those travel expenses should be banned.

古文：自今远近荐献，务存节俭，不得出界营求，相高奢丽。
现代文：从今以后，远近各地的进贡，一定要节俭，不得越出地界搜求，相互攀比奢侈华丽。
English: From now on, when making offerings near and far, we must be careful to be frugal, and are not allowed to go outside the region to seek luxury and splendor.

古文：金粟缯纩，弊民已多，珠玉玩好，伤工尤重，严加禁绝，不得有违准绳。 
现代文：黄金、粮食、丝绵，收取百姓已经很多；珠宝玉器珍玩，损害手工业更重，严加禁绝，不得违背规定。 
English: Gold, grain and silk have been collected by the people in large quantities; precious jewels and jade, which are more harmful to handicrafts, are strictly prohibited and must not violate regulations.

古文：九月，丙寅，葬景安陵。
现代文：九月丙寅，世祖安葬在景安陵。
English: In September, the ancestor was buried in the Jing'an Mausoleum.

古文：史臣曰：世祖南面嗣业，功参宝命，虽为继体，事实艰难。
现代文：史臣曰：世祖即位继承帝业，功绩高比天命，虽然是承继大统，但事业实际很艰难。
English: Shichen said, "The ancestor ascended the throne to inherit the imperial inheritance, and his achievements are higher than the fate of heaven. Although he is the successor to the emperor, the cause is actually very difficult.

古文：御衮垂旒，深存政典，文武授任，不革旧章。明罚厚恩，皆由上出，义兼长远，莫不肃然。
现代文：身穿帝王礼服冠冕，深切地保存治国的典章法制，文武官员的授职任命，不革除旧有的规定，赏罚分明，施恩宽厚，而且都是由皇上作出决定，仁义既长又远，没有人不肃然起敬。
English: Wearing the imperial ceremonial dress and crown, deeply preserving the rules of governing the country, the legal system, the appointment of civil and military officials, not abolishing the old regulations, the reward and punishment are clear, the grace is generous, and it is decided by the emperor. The benevolence and righteousness are both long and far away, and no one is not awe-inspiring.

古文：外表无尘，内朝多豫，机事平理，职贡有恒，府藏内充，民鲜劳役。
现代文：社会没有丑恶，朝内多有安乐，国家要事有条不紊，四方贡物常年不断，国家府库充实，百姓很少有劳役。
English: There is no ugliness in the society, there is a lot of happiness in the court, the important matters of the state are handled in an orderly manner, the tributes from all over the country continue year after year, the state treasury is well-stocked, and the people rarely have labor service.

古文：宫室苑囿，未足以伤财，安乐延年，众庶所同幸。
现代文：宫室苑囿，不足以浪费钱财，安享欢乐，延年益寿，成为百姓所共有的幸运。
English: The palace is not enough to waste money, enjoy happiness, prolong life, and become the common luck of the people.

古文：若夫割爱怀抱，同彼甸人，太祖群昭，位后诸穆。
现代文：至于割弃同胞之爱，把他们等同甸人，太祖以下的众多昭辈人，位列诸穆辈之后。
English: As far as renouncing the love of fellow countrymen is concerned, they are the same as the Tongdian people, and the numerous Zhao generations below the great-grandfather are ranked after the Mu generations.

古文：昔汉武留情晚悟，追恨戾园，魏文侯克中山，不以封弟，英贤心迹，臣所未详也。
现代文：从前汉武帝有所留情晚年才醒悟，以致追恨于戾园，魏文侯攻占中山国，不封给弟弟，英杰贤人的心迹，是臣下所不了解的。
English: It was only in his later years that Emperor Wudi of the Han Dynasty realized that he had been too lenient. As a result, he pursued his grudge to the Summer Palace, and Wei Wen Hou conquered Zhongshan Province, but did not give the title to his younger brother, Ying Jie Xianren. This is something that his subjects do not understand.

古文：赞曰：武帝丕显，徽号止戈。
现代文：赞曰：武帝圣明，以武为徽号。
English: Praise says: Emperor Wudi Shengming, with Wu as his emblem.

古文：韶岭歇祲，彭派澄波。
现代文：韶岭的不祥云气停歇，彭派的水波澄清。
English: The ominous clouds in Fuling have stopped, and the water wave of Peng Pai has been clarified.

古文：威承景历，肃御金科。
现代文：庄重地承用景初历，严肃地利用重要的法令。
English: Solemnly adopt the lunar calendar and seriously implement important laws and regulations.

古文：北怀戎款，南献夷歌。
现代文：北面戎人归顺议和，南面夷人献上颂歌。
English: The soldiers in the north surrendered and made peace, while the soldiers in the south offered a song of praise.

古文：市朝晏逸，中外宁和。
现代文：朝野安逸闲适，中外宁静和平
English: The morning and evening are comfortable and leisurely, and there is tranquility and peace at home and abroad.

