古文：陆法和，不知何许人也。隐于江陵百里洲，衣食居处，一与苦行沙门同。
现代文：陆法和，不知道是何地人氏，隐居江陵百里洲，其衣食居处，与苦行的沙门和尚相同。
English: Lu Fa and, I don't know who he is, live in seclusion in Gangneung and Baili Zhou. The place where they live and eat is the same as that of the ascetic Shamen Monk.

古文：耆老自幼见之，容色常不定，人莫能测也。
现代文：年岁大的人小的时候就看见过他，他的容貌脸色经常改变，人们无法猜度。
English: The old man had seen him when he was a child, and his appearance and countenance had changed so often that it was impossible to tell.

古文：或谓自出嵩高，遍游遐迩。既入荆州汶阳郡高安县之紫石山，无故舍所居山，俄有蛮贼文道期之乱，时人以为预见萌兆。
现代文：有的人说他来自嵩高，游遍了远近诸地，入荆州汶阳郡高安县的紫石山，很快就舍弃了寄居的此山，不久便出现了蛮贼文道期之乱，时人认为他有先见之明。
English: Some people said that he came from Songgao, traveled far and wide, and entered the Purple Rock Mountain in Gao'an County, Wenyang County, Jingzhou. He soon abandoned the mountain where he lived. Soon, there was a civil war in the barbarian period. At that time, people thought that he was prescient.

古文：及侯景始告降于梁，法和谓南郡朱元英曰： 贫道共檀越击侯景去。 
现代文：侯景降梁，法和对南郡朱元英说： 施主和贫道一块击打侯景去吧！ 
English: Hou Jing fell from the beam, and the law said to Zhu Yuanying of Nan County: Let the donor and the poor go together to beat Hou Jing!

古文：元英曰： 侯景为国立□，师云击之，何也？ 
现代文：元英道： 侯景为国立功，师傅说击打，为什么？ 
English: Yuan Yingdao: Houjing is a national merit, the master said that it was due to striking, why?

古文：法和曰： 正自如此。 
现代文：法和答： 正从此时开始。 
English: and the law of the land, saying, This is the way it shall be.

古文：及景渡江，法和时在青溪山，元英往问曰： 景今围城，其事云何？ 
现代文：到侯景渡江时，法和住在青溪山，元英前往请教： 眼下侯景围城，这事该怎么办？ 
English: At the time of Hou Jing's crossing of the Yangtze River, Fa and Yuan Ying were living in Qingxi Mountain, and Yuan Ying went to consult: How should we deal with Hou Jing's siege of the city?

古文：法和曰： 凡人取果，宜待熟时，不撩自落。
现代文：法和说： 凡人摘果，应在熟时，不撩自行落下。
English: Lu Fa did not give a positive answer, but said: If one wants to pick fruit, it is best to wait for the fruit to ripen, then do not touch it, it will fall down by itself.

古文：檀越但待侯景熟，何劳问也。 
现代文：施主只需等着侯景熟透，何必劳驾您来询问？ 
English: Donors just have to wait for Houjing to give them a good opportunity, you don't have to ask me.

古文：固问之，乃曰： 亦克亦不克。 
现代文：再三追问，法和才说： 能成功也不能成功。 
English: Repeatedly asked, the law and reason say: If you can succeed, you can succeed.

古文：景遣将任约击梁湘东王于江陵，法和乃诣湘东乞征约，召诸蛮弟子八百人在江津，二日便发。
现代文：侯景调遣大将任约前往江陵攻打梁朝的湘东王，法和便前往湘东王处乞求征讨任约，还聚集诸蛮族弟子八万人到长江的渡口，第二天就开拔上路。
English: Hou Jing dispatched General Ren Cao to Gangneung to attack the Eastern Hunan King of the Liang Dynasty, and Fa Fa went to the Eastern Hunan King's Office to beg for the appointment. He also gathered 80,000 barbarian disciples to the ferry of the Yangtze River, and set out on the road the next day.

古文：湘东遣胡僧佑领千余人与同行。
现代文：湘东王也派遣胡僧佑率领一千多人与法和同行。
English: The king of eastern Hunan also sent Hu Xiangyou to lead more than a thousand people to accompany the Fa.

古文：法和登舰大笑曰： 无量兵马。 
现代文：法和登船后大笑着说： 好多的兵马。 
English: "We have an infinite number of men and horses," Fa He said, laughing as he boarded the warship.

古文：江陵多神祠，人俗恒所祈祷，自法和军出，无复一□，人以为神皆从行故也。
现代文：江陵之地神祠很多，民俗喜好向其祈祷，自从法和军出发，再也不灵验了，人们认为这是神跟随法和去了的原因。
English: There are many shrines and temples in Gangneung, and the people's custom is to pray to them. Since the law and the army set out, they have not been effective. People think that this is the reason why the gods followed the law and went.

古文：至赤沙湖，与约相对，法和乘轻船，不介冑，沿流而下，去约军一里乃还。
现代文：走到赤沙湖，与任约军相对。法和坐着小船，没穿铠甲，沿流而下，离任约军一里来路才回返。
English: He walked to the Red Sand Lake, opposite Ren Yu's army. Fa and sat in a small boat, without armor, down the stream, leaving Ren Yu's army one mile to return.

古文：谓将士曰： 聊观彼龙睡不动，吾军之龙甚自踊跃，即攻之。
现代文：他对将士们说： 看对方那条龙是寝卧不动，我军之龙却是异常活跃，马上发起攻击吧！
English: He said to the soldiers: Look, the dragon of the other side is lying motionless, but the dragon of our army is unusually active, launch an attack immediately!

古文：若得待明日，当不损客主一人而破贼，然有恶处。 
现代文：如果是明天，当不损一根毫毛就能打败敌人，可却有害处。 
English: If it were tomorrow, when we could defeat the enemy without losing a hair, it would be harmful.

古文：遂纵火舫于前，而逆风不便，法和执白羽麾风，风势即返。
现代文：于是点燃早就安置好的火船，但风向不对，法和拿起白羽扇扇风，风向即转。
English: As a result, the fire boat, which had already been placed, was ignited, but the wind was in the wrong direction. The wind direction was reversed.

古文：约□皆见梁兵步于水上，于是大溃，皆投水而死。
现代文：任约军看见梁兵在水上行走，随即大溃，纷纷投水而死。
English: When Ren York's army saw Liang's soldiers walking on the water, they were immediately routed and drowned one after another.

古文：约逃窜不知所之。
现代文：任约则不知逃到哪里去了。
English: Renjo ran away and I don't know where he went.

古文：法和曰： 明日午时当得。 
现代文：法和说： 明天中午准能抓住。 
English: "We can catch him by noon tomorrow," Mr. Hawa said.

古文：及期而未得。
现代文：到时却没有虏获。
English: At that time, there was no capture.

古文：人问之，法和曰： 吾前于此洲水干时建一剎，语檀越等，此虽为剎，实是贼标，今何不向标下求贼也。 
现代文：有人问他，法和说： 我前些时候在此洲水干时建造过一塔，告诉施主们，它虽为塔，却是贼的标识，眼下为什么不向标志处求贼？ 
English: When he was asked, he said: I built a tower some time ago when the water was dry on this continent. I told the donors that although it was a tower, it was a sign of a thief. Why not ask the thief at the sign right now?

古文：如其言，果于水中见约抱剎，仰头裁出鼻，遂擒之。
现代文：遵其言，果然在水中看到任约抱着塔，仰着头，鼻子露出水面。
English: True to his word, he saw Ren roughly holding the tower in the water, with his head tilted back and his nose sticking out of the water.

古文：约言求就师目前死。
现代文：因此马上就抓住了他。任约乞求在法和面前去死。
English: So they took him at once, and he begged that he might die before the law.

古文：法和曰： 檀越有相，必不兵死，且于王有缘，决无他虑，王于后当得檀越力耳。 
现代文：法和说： 施主有福相，肯定不会死在战场上，再说湘东王与施主有缘，请不要多虑，施主以后定会助王一臂之力的。 
English: Dharma and said: the donor has a blessed appearance and will certainly not die on the battlefield. Moreover, the king of Hunan has a predestined relationship with the donor. Please do not worry, the donor will surely help the king in the future.

古文：湘东果释用为郡守。
现代文：湘东王果然宽宥了任约还拜他做了郡守。
English: The king of eastern Hunan did indeed release him and made him the county governor.

古文：及魏围江陵，约以兵赴救，力战焉。
现代文：当魏围江陵时，任约率兵救援，而且出力不小。
English: When Wei besieged Jiangling, Ren Guo led his soldiers to the rescue and tried his best to fight.

古文：法和既平约，往进见王僧辩于巴陵，谓曰： 贫道已断侯景一臂，其更何能为，檀越宜即遂取。 
现代文：法和打败任约之后，来到巴陵进见王僧辩，说： 贫道已砍下侯景一臂，他还有什么作为，请施主马上进攻。 
English: After defeating Ren Guo, Fa He came to Baling to see Wang Sangye, saying, "Poor Tao has already cut off one of Hou Jing's arms. What else can he do? Please ask your benefactor to attack immediately."

古文：乃请还，谓湘东王曰： 侯景自然平矣，无足可虑。
现代文：返回江陵，又对湘东王说： 侯景之乱自然会平，没有值得担忧的理由。
English: When he returned to Gangneung, he also said to the King of Eastern Hunan, "The Houjing Rebellion will naturally end, and there is no reason to worry.

古文：蜀贼将至，法和请守巫峡待之。 
现代文：蜀贼快要来了，我请求守巫峡等待他们自投罗网。 
English: The bandits of Shu will come, and the law and the request will be stationed in Wuxia to wait for the bandits.

古文：乃总诸军而往，亲运石以填江，三日，水遂分流，横之以铁锁。
现代文：很快就率领诸军赶往巫峡，亲自搬运石块堵塞长江，三天，水便分流，接着又用铁锁横断。
English: He soon led the army to Wuxia, personally carrying stones to block the Yangtze River. For three days, the water was diverted, and then crossed with an iron lock.

古文：武陵王纪果遣蜀兵来渡，峡口势蹙，进退不可。王琳与法和经略，一战而殄之。
现代文：武陵王纪果然调派蜀兵赶往巫峡渡江，因峡口势蹙，不能进退，王琳与法和指挥兵马，一仗就取得了全胜。
English: Wuling Wang Ji successfully dispatched Shu soldiers to rush to Wuxia to cross the Yangtze River. Due to the situation at the mouth of the gorge, they could not advance or retreat. Wang Lin, with the law and the command of soldiers and horses, achieved complete victory in one battle.

古文：军次白帝，谓人曰： 诸葛孔明可谓名将，吾自见之。
现代文：军队驻扎白帝，法和对人讲： 诸葛孔明可谓名将，我亲眼看到过。
English: When the army was stationed in Baidu, Fa and others said: Zhuge Kongming is a great general, I have seen it with my own eyes.

古文：此城旁有其埋弩箭镞一斛许。 
现代文：此城旁边有他埋藏起来的弓弩箭镞。 
English: Next to the castle, there is a pile of bows and arrows that he hid.

古文：因插表令掘之，如其言。
现代文：插下标志让人挖掘，实如其言。
English: Just put up a sign and let the sergeant dig, just like he said.

古文：又尝至襄阳城北大树下，画地方二尺，令弟子掘之，得一龟，长尺半，以杖叩之曰： 汝欲出不能得，已数百岁，不逢我者，岂见天日乎？ 
现代文：又曾到襄阳城北边的大树底下，画地两平方尺，令弟子下挖，得一龟，长有尺半。法和用杖叩打着龟说： 你想出来却不能，呆在这里几百年了；如果不是我，你能重见天日吗？ 
English: He also went to a large tree on the north side of Xiangyang City, where he painted a two-square-foot space and had his disciples dig it up. They found a turtle that was a foot-and-a-half long. Fa said, tapping the turtle with his cane, "You want to come out, but you can't. You've been here for hundreds of years. If it weren't for me, would you be able to see the light of day again?"

古文：为授三归，龟乃入草。
现代文：说着，便向龟传授佛法，之后，龟才爬走。
English: As he spoke, he taught the Buddha Dharma to the turtle, after which the turtle crawled away.

古文：初八迭山多恶疾人，法和为采药疗之，不过三服皆差，即求为弟子。
现代文：当初八叠山很多人患恶疾，法和采药治疗，不过三服药，这些人的病就好了，所以很多人请求成为弟子。
English: At the beginning, many people in Mount Hachiai suffered from malignant diseases, and they were treated with medicine and herbal medicine. However, after three doses of medicine, these people's diseases were cured, so many people asked to become disciples.

古文：山中毒虫猛兽，法和授其禁戒，不复噬螫。
现代文：对山中的毒虫猛兽，法和给以禁戒，它们就再也不噬螫害人了。
English: For the poisonous insects and ferocious beasts in the mountains, laws and prohibitions are given, and they will no longer devour and harm people.

古文：所泊江湖，必于□侧结表，云 此处放生。 
现代文：法和停泊江湖，一定要在侧旁用纸写上 此处放生 四字。
English: Law and mooring rivers and lakes, be sure to write on the side of a roll of paper Here is a four-letter word.

古文：渔者皆无所得，才有少获，辄有大风雷。
现代文：打鱼的人就会一无所获，即使有点收获，马上就会遭受大风雷的袭击。
English: The fisherman will get nothing, and even if he gets something, he will immediately be attacked by heavy winds and thunder.

古文：船人惧而放之，风雨乃定。
现代文：渔人害怕而放走捕捉的鱼虾，风雨才会平息。
English: The fishermen are afraid and let go of the fish and shrimp they have caught. Only then will the storm subside.

古文：晚虽将兵，犹禁诸军渔捕。
现代文：晚年时虽然领兵打仗，但还是禁止诸军捕鱼。
English: In his later years, although he led troops into battle, he still prohibited the troops from fishing.

古文：有窃违者，中夜猛兽必来欲噬之，或亡其船缆。
现代文：有违犯者，半夜便会有猛兽跑来威胁，或者丢失船缆。
English: If there is a violation, there will be a beast running in the middle of the night to threaten, or lose the boat cable.

古文：有小弟子戏截蛇头，来诣法和。
现代文：有小弟子戏截蛇头，并报告法和。
English: A young disciple got a snake's head as a result of a game and came to tell the dharma.

古文：法和曰： 汝何意杀蛇。 
现代文：法和说： 你为何要杀蛇？ 
English: Dharma replied, "Why do you want to kill a snake?

古文：因指以示之，弟子乃见蛇头□裆而不落。
现代文：边说边指点着让小弟子看。弟子这才看到蛇头紧咬着自己的裤裆不放。
English: While talking and pointing, he showed it to his little apprentice, who then saw the snake's head biting his trouser crotch.

古文：法和使忏悔，为蛇作功德。
现代文：法和责令弟子忏悔，为蛇做功德。
English: Dharma and let him repent, for this snake chanting, chanting.

古文：又有人以牛试刀，一下而头断，来诣法和。
现代文：又有人用牛试刀，一刀之下而牛头断，跑来告诉法和。
English: Others use oxen to test the sharpness of the blade, and cut off the bull's head with a single stroke to tell it the lay of the land.

古文：法和曰： 有一断头牛，就卿征命殊急，若不为作功德，一月内报至。 
现代文：法和说： 有一断头之牛，跑来请我救命，你若不为它作功德，一个月内报应就要临头。 
English: Lu Fa said, "There is a headless cow that has come to ask for your life. It is very urgent. If you don't perform the Buddhist rites for it, it will be punished within a month."

古文：其人弗信，少日果死。
现代文：此人不信，没几天就死了。
English: The man didn't believe it and died a few days later.

古文：法和又为人置宅图墓，以避祸求福。
现代文：法和又帮人相宅相墓，为的是避祸求福。
English: Dharma and also help people to live in the same house and the same grave, in order to avoid misfortune and seek happiness.

古文：尝谓人曰： 勿系马于碓。 
现代文：他曾对人讲： 不要把马系在碓上。 
English: I used to tell people: don't tie your horse to a rock.

古文：其人行过乡曲，门侧有碓，因系马于其柱。
现代文：其人途经乡村，门旁有碓，随手将马系在碓上。
English: The man was passing through the countryside when he saw a stone pillar in front of a house. He tied his horse to the pillar.

古文：入门中，忆法和戒，走出将解之，马已毙矣。
现代文：走进门后，记起了法和的告诫，慌忙跑出来解马，马已经倒毙在地。
English: He entered the gate, remembered the precepts of the Law of the Land, and ran out of the gate to untie the horse, which had fallen to the ground and died.

古文：梁元帝以法和为都督、郢州刺史，封江乘县公。
现代文：梁元帝拜法和为都督、郢州刺史，封江乘县公。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan appointed Lu Fa as the governor and Zhang Zhou as the chief historian, and Jiang Rongxian as the county magistrate.

古文：法和不称臣，其启文朱印名上，自称司徒。
现代文：法和对朝廷不称臣，法和在自己撰写的表奏的姓名前，自署司徒。
English: Law and order are not subordinate to the imperial court, and law and order are the names of the forms written by themselves, and they are self-signed.

古文：梁元帝谓其仆射王褒曰： 我未尝有意用陆为三公，而自称何也？ 
现代文：梁元帝对仆射王褒说： 我不曾拜陆为三公，他为什么自称司徒？ 
English: Emperor Liang Yuan praised the servant of the king: "I have never worshipped Lu as the Three Kings. Why does he call himself a scholar?

古文：褒曰： 彼既以道术自命，容是先知。 
现代文：褒对： 他以道术自命，或许是有先知之明。 
English: Wang Bo replied: Since he is conceited about Taoism, I think he has a premonition.

古文：梁元帝以法和功业稍重，遂就加司徒，都督、刺史如故。
现代文：梁元帝认为法和功勋较重，便加给司徒，都督、刺史等职依旧。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan believed that Fa's merits were greater, so he added him as a scholar, governor, and historian, just as before.

古文：部曲数千人，通呼为弟子，唯以道术为化，不以法狱加人。
现代文：法和有部曲几千人，他统统地唤作弟子，而且只以道术点化，从不使用刑法惩罚。
English: He has called thousands of people to be his disciples, and he has never used criminal law to punish them.

古文：又列肆之内，不立市丞牧佐之法，无人领受，但以空槛钥在道间，上开一孔受钱。
现代文：商铺之处，不定市丞牧佐等制度，没人收税，只将一空箱置放在道间，箱上开一受钱孔。
English: In places where there are shops, there is no system such as the mayor, mayor and deputy mayor, no one collects taxes, only an empty box is placed between the streets, and a money hole is opened on the box.

古文：贾客店人随货多少，计其估限，自委槛中。
现代文：贾客店人依据货物的多少，计算出应该缴纳的税钱，自行投放到箱中。
English: According to the quantity of the goods, the Jia Innkeeper calculated the amount of tax that should be paid and put it in the box.

古文：行掌之司，夕方开取，条其孔目，输之于库。
现代文：主管之人，傍晚开箱，记载数量，输入国库。
English: The person in charge will open the box in the evening, record the quantity, and enter it into the treasury.

古文：又法和平常言若不出口，时有所论，则雄辩无敌，然犹带蛮音。
现代文：法和平时沉默少语，如若开口，却是雄辩无敌，但还带有南蛮口音。
English: In addition, Lu Fa and ordinary people do not seem to speak easily. Occasionally, when there is a discussion, they are eloquent and eloquent. They cannot find an opponent, but they still have a rude sound.

古文：善为攻战具。
现代文：善于设计制作攻战的工具。
English: They are good at making offensive weapons.

古文：在江夏，大聚兵舰，欲袭襄阳而入武关。
现代文：在江夏，聚集兵船，想偷袭襄阳后攻入武关。
English: In Jiangxia, they gathered warships and tried to sneak into Wuguan after attacking Xiangyang.

古文：梁元帝使止之。
现代文：可是梁元帝派人加以制止。
English: But Emperor Liang Yuan sent someone to stop them.

古文：法和曰： 法和是求佛之人，尚不希释梵天王坐处，岂规王位。
现代文：法和说： 法和是求佛之人，不希望释梵天王的坐处，岂想图谋王位。
English: Dharma and said: Dharma and is a seeker of Buddha, do not want to release the seat of the king of Brahma, do not want to seek the throne.

古文：但于空王佛所与主上有香火因缘，见主人应有报至，故求援耳。
现代文：只是由于我佛与皇上有香火因缘，见主人当有报应到来，所以来援罢了。
English: However, since my Buddha and the emperor have a special affinity, I came to the rescue when I saw that my master was about to receive retribution.

古文：今既被疑，是业定不可改也。 
现代文：眼下既然被人怀疑，这是业定，无法更改的。 
English: Now that he is under suspicion, this feat will definitely not be accomplished.

古文：于是设供食，具大□薄饼。
现代文：于是设置供食，摆设蒸饼薄馍。
English: As a result, food was provided and steamed biscuits were set out.

古文：及魏举兵，法和自郢入汉口，将赴江陵。
现代文：魏兴兵时，法和从郢入汉水口，欲往江陵。
English: At the time of Wei Xingbing, Fa and Zou entered the Han River estuary and wanted to go to Jiangling.

古文：梁元帝使人逆之曰： 此自能破贼，但镇郢州，不须动也。 
现代文：梁元帝派人迎接他，说： 我们自然能打退敌军的进攻，你只须镇守郢州，不要移动。 
English: Emperor Liang Yuan sent someone to meet him and said, "Naturally, we can beat back the enemy's attack. All you have to do is to guard Zhangzhou and not move."

古文：法和乃还州，垩其城门，□粗白布衫、布□、邪巾，大绳束腰，坐苇席，终日乃脱之。
现代文：于是法和归州，用白灰涂抹城门，自己则穿着粗白布衫、布裤、邪巾，用大绳束腰，坐在苇席上，整整一天才脱去。
English: So Fa and Guizhou smeared the gates with white ash, while he wore a coarse white shirt, trousers, and scarf, tied his waist with a large rope, sat at the banquet, and took it off for a whole day.

古文：及闻梁元帝败灭，复取前凶服□之，哭泣受吊。
现代文：当听到梁元帝败灭的消息，又马上穿好前些日子穿过的那套丧服，哭泣哀悼。
English: When he heard the news of Emperor Liang Yuan's defeat, he immediately put on the mourning clothes he had worn a few days before, weeping and mourning.

古文：梁人入魏，果见□饼焉。
现代文：梁人入魏，果然看到了蒸饼传到北方。
English: When Liang people entered the Wei Dynasty, they saw steamed buns spread to the north.

古文：法和始于百里洲造寿王寺，既架佛殿，更截梁柱，曰： 后四十许年佛法当遭雷电，此寺幽僻，可以免难。 
现代文：法和开始在百里洲建造寿王寺，已经架好了佛殿，他再次截短梁柱，说： 四十多年后佛法将受雷电，该寺幽静偏僻，可以免受灾难。 
English: Dharma and began to build Shouwang Temple in Baizhou, and had already built a Buddhist hall. He again cut short the beams and pillars, saying: After more than forty years, Buddhism will be affected by lightning. The temple is quiet and secluded, and can be protected from disaster.

古文：及魏平荆州，宫室焚烬，总管欲发取寿王佛殿，嫌其材短，乃停。
现代文：魏平荆州，宫室俱焚，总管想夺取寿王佛殿，嫌其材短，才没有拆除。
English: After the Wei Dynasty conquered Jingzhou, the palace was burned to ashes. The general wanted to send troops to capture the Shouwang Buddha Hall, but stopped because the wood in the hall was too short.

古文：后周氏灭佛法，此寺隔在陈境，故不及难。
现代文：后周武帝灭佛，此寺在陈朝境内，故未及难。
English: Later, Zhou banned Buddhism, and this temple was far away in the territory of the Chen Dynasty, so it was not attacked.

古文：天保六年春，清河王岳进军临江，法和举州入齐。
现代文：天保六年春，清河王岳进军来到江边，法和便举州降齐。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Xuan of the Northern Qi Dynasty in Tianbo, King Yue of the Qing Dynasty marched to the riverside, and Lu Fa led the people of the whole state to the Qi Dynasty.

古文：文宣以法和为大都督十州诸军事、太尉公、西南道大行台，大都督、五州诸军事、荆州刺史、安湘郡公宋□为郢州刺史，官爵如故。
现代文：齐文宣帝任命法和为大都督十州诸军事、太尉公、西南道大行台。大都督、五州诸军事、荆州刺史、安湘郡公宋莅为郢州刺史，官爵如故。
English: Emperor Qianwen promulgated the Law of Appointment and appointed him as the grand governor of the Ten Military Provinces, the Second Lieutenant of the Military Provinces, and the Grand Marshal of the Southwest Provinces. The grand governor, the Five Military Provinces, the Governor of Jingzhou, and the Governor of Anxiang County, Song Xi, was the Governor of Zhangzhou, and he remained a peer.

古文：□弟簉为散骑常侍、仪同三司、湘州刺史、义兴县公。
现代文：宋莅弟鋍为散骑常侍、仪同三司、湘州刺史、义兴县公。
English: Song Yao's younger brother, Song Yao, was a horseback riding attendant, the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, the governor of Hunan Province, and the governor of Yixing County.

古文：梁将侯瑱来逼江夏，齐军弃城而退，法和与宋□兄弟入朝。
现代文：梁将侯調进逼江夏，齐军弃城而退，法和与宋莅兄弟入朝。
English: Liang transferred Hou to force Jiangxia, the Qi army abandoned the city and retreated, and Fa and the Song brothers entered the imperial court.

古文：文宣闻其奇术，虚心相见，备三公卤簿，于城南十二里供帐以待之。
现代文：文宣帝听说法和的奇术，诚心相见，备好了三公的仪仗，在都城南门外十二里的地方设供帐迎候。
English: Emperor Wenxuan listened to the story and the magic trick, and sincerely agreed to meet. He prepared the ceremonial battle of the three princes, and set up a supply account to welcome them at a place twelve miles outside the south gate of the capital.

古文：法和遥见邺城，下马禹步。
现代文：法和在很远的地方望见邺城，下马禹步。
English: Law and order in a faraway place to see Lucheng, dismounted Yubo.

古文：辛术谓曰： 公既万里归诚，主上虚心相待、何为作此术？ 
现代文：辛术见了，说： 公既然万里归诚，主上虚心相待，为何还要作此法术？ 
English: When Xin saw the trick, she said, "Since the prince has returned to sincerity, and the lord has treated us with humility, why do you still want to do this trick?"

古文：法和手持香炉，步从路车，至于馆。
现代文：法和手持香炉，步行在辂车的后面，一直到旅馆。
English: and, incense burner in hand, walked behind the cart all the way to the hotel.

古文：明日引见，给通幰油络网车，仗身百人。
现代文：明日朝见前，文宣赐给法和通巾宪油络网车以及随从卫士百人。
English: Before seeing him tomorrow morning, Wen Xuan gave Fa and Tongyan the oil network cart as well as a hundred guards.

古文：诣阙通名，不称官爵，不称臣，但云荆山居士。
现代文：诣阙通报名姓，却不称官爵，也不称臣，只说是荆山居士。
English: He was a common name at the Imperial Court. He was not called by his official rank or title, nor was he called a vassal, but only a Jingshan layman.

古文：文宣宴法和及其徒属于昭阳殿，赐法和钱百万、物千段、甲第一区、田一百顷、奴婢二百人、生资什物称是，宋□千段，其余仪同、刺史以下各有差。
现代文：文宣在昭阳殿宴请法和及其徒众，并赐法和钱百万、物千段、甲第一区、田地百顷、奴婢二百人以及生活用品等；宋莅千段，其余的仪同、刺史以下各官也有赏赐。
English: Wen Xuan invited Fa and his disciples to a banquet at the Zhoyang Palace, and gave Fa and his disciples a million of money, a thousand pieces of goods, the first district of A, a hundred hectares of fields, two hundred slaves and daily necessities, etc.; Song Xi a thousand pieces, and the remaining officials such as Yi Tong and Zhishi were also rewarded.

古文：法和所得奴婢，尽免之，曰： 各随缘去。 
现代文：法和将所得奴婢，全部释放为良，还说： 各随缘份而去。 
English: He released all the slaves and maidservants who had been given land and gifts, saying, "Each of you must find his own destiny."

古文：钱帛散施，一日便尽。
现代文：散发钱财，一天便尽。
English: Give money and cloth to others, and the day is done.

古文：以官所赐宅营佛寺，自居一房，与凡人无异。
现代文：将朝廷赐宅改建佛寺，自己只住一间，与凡人没有区别。
English: He built a Buddhist temple in a mansion given to him by the emperor, and he only lived in one room, just like an ordinary person.

古文：三年间再为太尉，世犹谓之居士。
现代文：三年之间再为太尉，民间还是称他为居士。
English: Within three years, he was promoted to the rank of captain, and the world still calls him a layman.

古文：无疾而告弟子死期，至时，烧香礼佛，坐绳□而终。
现代文：没有生病却将自己的死期告诉给弟子。届时，烧香视佛，坐绳床而终。
English: He didn't get sick, but he told his disciples when he would die. At that time, he burned incense, saw a Buddha, sat on a rope bed and died.

古文：浴讫将敛，尸小，缩止三尺许。
现代文：沐浴将入殓，尸体缩小，只有三尺多。
English: The body shrinks to just over three feet after the bath.

古文：文宣令开棺视之，空棺而已。
现代文：文宣命令开棺检视，却成了空棺。
English: Wen Xuan ordered to open the coffin for inspection, but it turned out to be an empty coffin.

古文：法和书其所居壁而涂之，及剥落，有文曰： 十年天子为尚可，百日天子急如火，周年天子递代坐。 
现代文：法和书其所居屋室的墙壁，之后用泥涂盖，泥剥落，有文云： 十年天子为尚可，百日天子急如火，周年天子递代坐。 
English: The wall of the living room where Fa He Shou lived was plastered, and then covered with mud. The mud peeled off, and there was a written cloud: Ten years of Tianzi is acceptable, one hundred days of Tianzi is urgent, and the anniversary of Tianzi passes.

古文：又曰： 一母生三天，两天共五年。 
现代文：又云： 一母生三天，两天共五年。 
English: He also wrote: A mother gives birth to three children in two days, for a total of five years.

古文：说者以为娄太后生三天子，自孝昭即位，至武成传位后主，共五年焉。
现代文：有人附会，认为娄太后生了三个天子，从孝昭即位，至武成传位给后主，一共五年时间。
English: Some people think that Empress Dowager Cixi gave birth to three heavenly sons, from Xiao Zhao's enthronement to Wu Cheng's passing on the throne to his successor, a total of five years.

古文：法和在荆郢，有少姬，年可二十余，自称越姥，身披法服，不嫁，恒随法和东西。
现代文：法和在荆、郢时，有一美女，年二十左右，自称 越姥 ，身披法衣，不婚嫁，常跟随在法和身旁。
English: There was a beautiful woman in her twenties who called herself "Yue Grandma," wore a nun's habit, never married, and often followed Fa Zhe and his entourage.

古文：或与其私通十有余年。
现代文：有人与其私通十余年。
English: Some have been having an affair with her for more than ten years.

古文：今者赐弃，别更他淫。
现代文：如今赐弃，不再他淫。
English: Forsake her now, and let her not play the harlot.

古文：有司考□并实。
现代文：有司查验属实。
English: This was confirmed by a departmental investigation.

古文：越姥因尔改适，生子数人。
现代文：越姥于是改嫁，生有数子。
English: Grandmother Yue then remarried and had a daughter.

古文：王琳，字子珩，会稽山阴人也。
现代文：王琳，字子珩，会稽山阴人。
English: Wang Lin, who has the Chinese character, is a member of the Shan Yin people.

古文：父显嗣，梁湘东王国常侍。
现代文：父亲王颢嗣，梁湘束王国常侍。
English: His father, Wang Xizhi, was the crown prince of the Kingdom of Liang Xiangzhu.

古文：琳本兵家，元帝居藩，琳姊妹并入后庭见幸，琳由此未弱冠得在左右。
现代文：王琳本为士兵出身，元帝居于藩国之时，王琳的姐妹一起入后宫被宠幸，王琳因此未到二十岁就得以在元帝左右。
English: Wang Lin was born as a soldier. When the former emperor lived in the domain, Wang Lin's sisters were favored to enter the harem together. As a result, Wang Lin was able to be around the former emperor before the age of twenty.

古文：少好武，遂为将帅。
现代文：少年时好武，于是作了将帅。
English: When he was a boy, he was good at martial arts, so he became a general.

古文：太清二年，侯景渡江，遣琳献米万石。
现代文：太清二年，侯景渡江，元帝派王琳献米万石。
English: In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, Hou Jing crossed the Yangtze River, and the Yuan Emperor sent Wang Lin to offer rice worth 10,000 koku.

古文：未至，都城陷，乃中江沉米，轻舸还荆州。
现代文：没有到达，都城失陷，就把米沉入江中流，轻船返回荆州。
English: When they did not arrive and the capital was lost, they sank the rice into the middle reaches of the river and took a boat back to Jingzhou.

古文：稍迁岳阳内史，以军功封建宁县侯。
现代文：不久升任为岳阳内史，因军功封建宁县侯。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of Yueyang Inner Historian, and became the feudal lord of Jianning County due to his military service.

古文：侯景遣将宋子仙据郢州，琳攻克之，擒子仙。
现代文：侯景派将领宋子仙占据郢州，王琳攻克郢州，抓获了子仙。
English: Song Zixian, the general of the Houjing faction, occupied Bozhou, and Wang Lin conquered Bozhou and captured Zixian.

古文：又随王僧辩破景。
现代文：又跟随王僧辩攻破侯景。
English: He also followed Wang Sangye to defeat Houjing.

古文：后拜湘州刺史。
现代文：后拜授湘州刺史。
English: Later, officials paid homage to the history of Hunan.

古文：琳果劲绝人，又能倾身下士，所得赏物，不以入家。
现代文：王琳果敢强劲过人，又能礼贤下士，所得到的赏物，不拿到家中。
English: Wang Lin's courage and strength are superior to others, and she is also able to praise the corporal. The rewards she receives are not received at home.

古文：麾下万人，多是江淮□盗。
现代文：部下万人，多数是江淮成群的盗贼。
English: He has ten thousand subordinates, most of whom are gangs of thieves from Jianghuai.

古文：平景之勋，与杜龛俱为第一，恃宠纵暴于建业。
现代文：平定侯景的功劳，舆杜宠并为第一，凭藉得宠在建业胡作非为。
English: The merit of pacifying Houjing, the public's favorite and the first, with the help of the favorite in the construction of the wrongdoing.

古文：王僧辩禁之不可，惧将为乱，启请诛之。
现代文：王僧辩不能禁止他，恐他们将作乱，启奏请求杀了他。
English: Wang Sangye could not forbid him, fearing that they would create a disturbance, so he requested that they kill him.

古文：琳亦疑祸，令长史陆纳率部曲前赴湘州，身径上江陵。
现代文：王琳也怀疑有祸患，令长史陆钠率部下前赴湘州，自身直接到江陵。
English: Wang Lin also suspected that there was a calamity, so he ordered his subordinates to go to Hunan Province, and he himself went directly to Jiangling.

古文：将行，谓纳等曰： 吾若不返，子将安之？ 
现代文：将要出发，对陆纳等人说： 我如果不返回，你们将到哪裹? 
English: He was about to set out, and he said to Lu Na and the others, "If I don't return, where will you go?"

古文：咸曰： 请死相报。 
现代文：都说： 请以死相报。 
English: They all said: "Please give us death."

古文：泣而别。
现代文：流着泪分别。
English: They parted in tears.

古文：及至，帝以下吏，而廷尉卿黄罗汉太府卿张载宣喻琳军。
现代文：到达后，帝已将王琳交司法官吏审讯，而廷尉卿黄罗汉、太府卿张载以帝诏令晓谕王琳军。
English: After arriving, the emperor had already handed Wang Lin over to judicial officials for interrogation, and the imperial edict was issued to Wang Lin's army by the courtier Huang Luo Han and the prefectural governor Zhang Zai.

古文：陆纳等及军人并哭对使者，莫肯受命，乃执黄罗汉，杀张载。
现代文：陆钠等和军人一起哭着面对使者，不肯受命，于是抓住黄罗汉，杀了张载。
English: Lu Nao and other soldiers cried together in front of the messenger and refused to accept the order, so they grabbed Huang Luo Han and killed Zhang Zai.

古文：载性深刻，为帝所信，荆州疾之如，故纳等因人之欲，抽肠系马□，使绕而走，肠尽气绝，又脔割备五刑而斩之。
现代文：张载性情严峻、苛刻，为元帝信任，荆州恨他如仇敌，所以陆纳等顺应众人的意愿，抽肠拴在马腿上，让马绕着跑，肠尽气绝，又碎割施加五种刑法而后杀了他。
English: Zhang Zhaozhe was stern and harsh, trusted by the Yuan Emperor, and hated by Jingzhou as if he were an enemy. Therefore, Lu Na and others complied with the wishes of many people, pulled his intestines onto the horse's leg, let the horse run around, exhausted his intestines, and then killed him by imposing five kinds of criminal laws.

古文：梁元遣王僧辩讨纳，纳等败走长沙。
现代文：梁元帝派王僧辩征讨陆纳，陆纳等败逃到长沙。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan sent Wang Sangye to argue with Lu Na, and Lu Na fled to Changsha in defeat.

古文：是时湘州未平，武陵王兵又甚盛，江陵公私恐惧，人有异图。
现代文：这时湘州未平定，武陵王的兵士又气势旺盛，江陵官民恐惧，人们有谋反的意图。
English: At this time, Xiangzhou was not pacified, the soldiers of King Wuling were vigorous, the officials and people of Jiangling were afraid, and people had the intention to rebel.

古文：纳启申琳罪，请复本位，永为奴婢。
现代文：陆钠启奏申说王琳没有罪过，请求恢复原来的官位，求敌婢。
English: Lu Naqi said that Wang Lin did not commit any crime, and asked for the restoration of her former official position.

古文：梁元乃锁琳送长沙。
现代文：梁元帝就押着王琳送往长沙。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan then sent Wang Lin to Changsha.

古文：时纳兵出方战，会琳至，僧辩升诸楼车以示之。
现代文：当时陆钠的兵士出来正要作战，适逢王琳到，僧辩让王琳登上楼车给他们看。
English: At that time, soldiers from Lunda were about to go out to fight, when Wang Lin arrived. The monk asked Wang Lin to climb onto the carriage to show them.

古文：纳等投戈俱拜，举军皆哭，曰： 乞王郎入城，即出。 
现代文：陆纳等人扔下武器一起下拜，全军都哭了，说： 请求让王郎入城，便立即出城。 
English: Lu Na and the others threw down their weapons and bowed together. The whole army cried and said, "Please let Wang Lang enter the city," and immediately left the city.

古文：及放琳入，纳等乃降，湘州平。
现代文：放王琳入城，陆纳等才降，湘州平定。
English: Wang Lin was allowed to enter the city, Lu Na and others were allowed to leave, and Hunan was pacified.

古文：仍复本位，使琳拒萧纪。
现代文：仍然恢复了他们本来的官位，让王琳抵抗萧纪。
English: They still restored their original official positions, allowing Wang Lin to resist Xiao Ji.

古文：纪平，授衡州刺史。
现代文：萧纪平定后，拜授衡州刺史。
English: After subduing Xiao Ji, he appointed him as the governor of Hengzhou.

古文：梁元性多忌，以琳所部甚□，又得□心，故出之岭外，又受都督、广州刺史。
现代文：梁元帝生性多猜忌，因王琳部属甚多，又得众人之心，所以派他到岭外，又授任都督、广州刺史。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan was suspicious by nature. Because Wang Lin had many subordinates and won the hearts of many people, he sent him to Lingwai and appointed him as the governor of the capital and the historian of Guangzhou.

古文：其友主书李膺，帝所任遇，琳告之曰： 琳蒙拔擢，常欲毕命以报国恩。
现代文：他的友人主书李膺，为帝所信任重用，王琳告诉他说： 王琳承蒙提拔，常想毕生报效国恩。
English: His friend, the chief scribe Li Yan, was trusted and used by the emperor. Wang Lin told him: Wang Lin was promoted and often wanted to serve the country for the rest of his life.

古文：今天下未平，迁琳岭外，如有万一不虞，安得琳力。
现代文：今天下未平，把王琳迁移到岭外，如有万一没有预料的情况，怎么得到王琳的力量。
English: If there is no peace today, how can I be effective if there is a national emergency and I am transferred to Lingnan?

古文：忖官正疑琳耳。
现代文：考虑是皇上怀疑我吧。
English: Perhaps the Emperor suspects me.

古文：琳分望有限，可得与官争为帝乎？
现代文：王琳的分内之望是有限的，能与皇上争做帝王吗?
English: Wang Lin's domestic prospects are limited. Can she compete with the emperor to become emperor?

古文：何不以琳为雍州刺史，使镇武宁，琳自放兵作田，为国御捍。
现代文：为什么不以王琳为雍州刺史，让我镇守武宁，王琳自然弃兵种田，守卫国家。
English: Why not use Wang Lin to write the history of Yongzhou, let me guard the town of Wu Ning, Wang Lin naturally abandoned the soldiers to farmland and guard the country.

古文：若警急，动静相知。
现代文：如有繁急情况，也能知道动静。
English: If there is an urgent situation, you can also know the situation.

古文：孰若远弃岭南，相去万里，一日有变，将欲如何？
现代文：假若远弃岭南，相距万里，一旦有变，将要怎么样?
English: If we abandon Lingnan, thousands of miles away, once there is a change, what will happen?

古文：琳非愿长坐荆南，正以国计如此耳。 
现代文：王琳不是愿意长期坐镇荆南，正是为国家考虑罢了。 
English: Wang Lin is not willing to stay in Jingnan for a long time, just for the sake of the country.

古文：膺然其言，不敢启，故遂率其□镇岭南。
现代文：李膺认为他的话是对的，却不敢兽奏，所以就率领他的部下镇守岭南。
English: Li Yan thought his words were right, but he did not dare to play the beast, so he led his subordinates to defend Lingnan.

古文：梁元为魏围逼，乃征琳赴援，除湘州刺史。
现代文：梁元帝为魏围困，就召王琳前往救援，任湘州刺史。
English: When Emperor Liang Yuan was besieged by Wei, he called Wang Lin to go to the rescue, and he was appointed to write the history of Hunan.

古文：琳师次长沙，知魏平江陵，已立梁王。
现代文：王琳的军队驻扎在长沙，知道魏平定江陵，已立梁王萧察。
English: Wang Lin's army was stationed in Changsha. He knew that Wei had pacified the Jiangling and established Liang Wang Xiaocha.

古文：乃为梁元举哀，三军缟素。
现代文：就为梁元帝高声哭号哀悼，三军穿上丧服。
English: In mourning for Emperor Liang Yuan, the three armies put on mourning clothes.

古文：遣别将侯平率舟师攻梁。
现代文：派别将侯乎率水军攻梁。
English: The faction sent Hou Hu to lead the navy to attack the bridge.

古文：琳屯兵长沙，传檄诸方，为进趋之计。
现代文：王琳屯兵长沙，向各方传达檄文，制定进攻计策。
English: Wang Lin stationed troops in Changsha, conveyed the imperial edict to all parties, and formulated offensive strategies.

古文：时长沙藩王萧韶及上游诸将推琳主盟。
现代文：当时长沙藩国之王萧韶和上游众将推举王琳主盟。
English: At that time, Xiao Yu, the king of the Changsha Domain, and the upstream people would nominate Wang Lin as the leader of the alliance.

古文：侯平虽不能渡江，频破梁军，又以琳兵威不接，翻更不受指麾。
现代文：侯平虽然不能渡江，却多次攻破梁军，又因王琳军队的威势达不到，反而更加不受指挥。
English: Although Hou Ping could not cross the river, he repeatedly defeated Liang's army, and because Wang Lin's army could not match its might, it was even more uncontrollable.

古文：琳遣将讨之，不克，又师老兵疲不能进。
现代文：王琳派将攻打他，不胜，又因为军队疲劳不能前进。
English: Wang Lin's faction will attack him, but will not win, and will not be able to advance because of the fatigue of the army.

古文：乃遣使奉表诣齐，并献驯象；又使献款于魏，求其妻子；亦称臣于梁。
现代文：于是派使者奉奏章到齐国，并呈献驯养的大象；又派人向魏归顺投诚，索求他的妻子儿女；也向梁称臣。
English: Therefore, he sent an envoy to Qi with the Song of Solomon, and presented a tame elephant; he also sent people to Wei Qishun to ask for his wife and children; and to Liang to praise him.

古文：陈霸先既杀王僧辩，推立敬帝，以侍中司空征。
现代文：陈霸先已经杀了王僧辩，推立敬帝，以侍中司空召王琳。
English: Chen Baxian had already killed Wang Sofen, promoted Wang Jingdi, and summoned Wang Lin as an attendant.

古文：琳不从命，乃大营楼舰，将图义举。
现代文：王琳不接受，就大造楼船，将谋划起义。
English: If Wang Lin does not accept, she will build a big ship and plan an uprising.

古文：琳将帅各乘一舰，每行，战舰以千数，以 野□ 为名。
现代文：王琳将帅各乘一战船，每次行动，战船敷以千计，以 野猪 为名。
English: Wang Lin will command one warship each. For each action, there will be thousands of warships named after wild boars.

古文：陈武帝遣将侯安都、周文育等诛琳，仍受梁禅。
现代文：陈武帝派将领侯安都、周文育等讨伐王琳，并继承了梁的君位。
English: Chen Wudi sent generals Hou Andu and Zhou Wenyu to fight Wang Lin, and inherited Liang's throne.

古文：安都叹曰： 我其败乎，师无名矣。 
现代文：安都叹息说： 我们将失败啊，出师无名了。 
English: Ando sighed, "We're afraid that we're going to lose the war, and we'll be left without a name.

古文：逆战于沌口，琳乘平肩舆，执钺而麾之，禽安都、文育，其余无所漏。
现代文：迎战于沌口，王琳乘坐轿子，执钹指挥军队，抓获了安都、文育，其余的人无一漏网。
English: Wang Lin rode in a palanquin and commanded the army, capturing Andu, Wenyu, and the rest of the people.

古文：唯以周铁虎一人背恩，斩之。
现代文：衹因周铁虎一人背弃恩义，杀了他。
English: Because of Zhou Tiehu, one person betrayed his gratitude and killed him.

古文：锁安都、文育置琳所坐舰中，令一阉□监守之。
现代文：给安都、文言带锁放在王琳所乘的战船中，命令一个守门的僮仆看守他们。
English: He locked Wang Lin and Wang Du in the warship, and ordered a servant to guard them.

古文：琳乃移湘州军府就郢城，带甲十万，练兵于白水浦。
现代文：王琳于是迁移湘州军府到郢城，甲兵十万，在白水浦练兵。
English: Wang Lin moved the military command authority of Hunan to Shicheng, led a hundred thousand troops, and trained soldiers in Baishuipu.

古文：琳巡军而言曰： 可以为勤王之师矣，温太真何人哉！ 
现代文：王琳视察军队说： 可以作为尽力王事的军队了，温太真是什么人呢! 
English: Wang Lin inspected the troops and said, "This is an army that can do its best for the king. Who is Wen Taizhen really?

古文：江南渠帅熊昙朗、周迪怀贰，琳遣李孝钦、樊猛与余孝顷同讨之。
现代文：江南首领熊昙朗、周迪怀有二心，王琳派李孝钦、樊猛和余孝顷共同攻打他们。
English: The leaders of the south of the Yangtze River, Xiong Yulang and Zhou Di, were of two minds. Wang Lin sent Li Xiaoqin, Yan Meng and Yu Xiaohua to jointly attack them.

古文：三将军败，并为敌所囚。
现代文：三个将领的军队失败，全被敌人囚禁。
English: The armies of the three generals failed, and they were all imprisoned by the enemy.

古文：安都、文育等尽逃还建业。
现代文：安都、文育等全逃回建业。
English: Andu, Benyu and others all fled back to Jianye.

古文：初魏克江陵之时，永嘉王庄年甫七岁，逃匿人家，后琳迎还湘中，□送东下。
现代文：当初魏攻克江陵的时候，永嘉王萧庄才七岁，躲藏到别人家，后来，王琳迎回湘中，护卫送他束下。
English: When Wei conquered Jiangling, Yongjia Wang Xiaozhuang was only seven years old and hid in someone else's home. Later, Wang Lin returned to Hunan Middle School, escorted by guards.

古文：及敬帝立，出质于齐，请纳庄为梁主。
现代文：敬帝即位，到齐做人质，请求让萧庄回国作梁王。
English: Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, came to Qi to be a hostage, and requested that Xiao Zhuang return to China as the King of Liang.

古文：文宣遣兵援送，仍遣兼中书令李騊駼册拜琳为梁丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事。
现代文：文宣派军队护送，于是派兼中书令李驹验以册书授王琳为梁丞相、都督中外诸军、绿尚书事。
English: Wen Xuan sent an army to escort them, and then sent Li Qianqian, who was also the commander-in-chief of the army, to appoint Wang Lin as the prime minister, the governor-general of the armies at home and abroad, and the secretary-general of the army.

古文：舍人辛□、游诠之等赍玺书江表宣劳，自琳以下皆有颁赐。
现代文：亲近左右之官辛慇、游诠之等人携带诏书到江南降旨慰劳，从王琳以下都有赏赐。
English: The officials close to Wang Lin, such as Xin Qi and You Yan, carried the edict to the south of the Yangtze River, and received rewards from Wang Lin and below.

古文：琳乃遣兄子叔宝率所部十州刺史子弟赴邺，奉庄纂梁祚于郢州。
现代文：王琳就派兄子叔宝率领所属十州刺史的子弟奔赴邺，在郢州拥戴萧庄篡夺梁的君位。
English: Wang Lin then dispatched his brother's son, Wang Shubao, to lead the children of the ten states in his sphere of influence to the North Qidu city of Shicheng as a pledge, and supported Xiao Zhuang to usurp Liang as emperor in Zhangzhou.

古文：庄授琳侍中、使持节、大将军、中书监，改封安城郡公，其余并依齐朝前命。
现代文：授予王琳侍中、使持节、大将军、中书监，改封安城郡公，其他都依照齐朝以前的命令。
English: Wang Lin was awarded the titles of attendant middle-ranking official, envoy, general, and chief librarian of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and was made the county magistrate of Ancheng County. All the other awards were in accordance with the previous orders of the Qi Dynasty.

古文：及陈霸先即位，琳乃辅庄次于濡须口。
现代文：陈霸先即位，王琳就辅佐萧庄在濡须口驻扎。
English: Chen Baxi ascended the throne first, and Wang Lin assisted Xiao Zhuang to stay in Nusukou.

古文：齐遣扬州道行台慕容俨率□临江，为其声援。
现代文：齐派扬州道行台慕容俨率领众人抵临长江，作为他的声援。
English: Qi sent Yangzhou Daogangdai Murongjun to lead the crowd to the Yangtze River to show his support.

古文：陈遣安州刺史吴明彻江中夜上，将袭湓城。
现代文：陈派安州刺史吴明彻在夜间逆江而上，将偷袭湓城。
English: Chen Pai Anzhou assassin Wu Mingche went upstream at night and will attack Lucheng.

古文：琳遣巴陵太守任忠大败之，明彻仅以身免。
现代文：王琳派巴陵太守任忠把他打得大败，明彻仅自身得免。
English: Wang Lin sent Wu Mingcher, who was defeated by Baling Taizhu Renzhong, and Mingcher escaped.

古文：琳兵因东下，陈遣司空侯安都等拒之。
现代文：王琳的军队于是束下，陈派司空侯安都等抵御他。
English: As a result, Wang Lin's army was defeated, and Chen dispatched Sikyong Hou Andu and others to resist him.

古文：侯瑱等以琳军方盛，引军入芜湖避之。
现代文：侯填等人因王琳军气势正盛，带领军队进入墓翅避开他们。
English: Because Wang Lin's army was in full swing, Hou Jian and others led the army into the tomb wing to avoid them.

古文：时西南风忽至，琳谓得天道，将直取扬州。
现代文：当时西南风忽起，王琳称是得天道，将要直接攻取扬州。
English: At that time, the southwesterly wind suddenly arose, and Wang Lin said that he had obtained the way of heaven and would directly conquer Yangzhou.

古文：侯瑱等徐出芜湖，蹑其后。
现代文：侯填等偷偷从芜湖出来，在他们后面跟踪。
English: Hou Filling and others sneaked out of Wuhu Lake and followed them.

古文：比及兵交，西南风翻为瑱用。
现代文：等到双方交兵，西南风翻转为堡填所用。
English: By the time the two sides exchanged fire, the southwesterly wind had reversed and was used to fill the fort.

古文：琳兵放火燧以掷船者，皆反烧其船。
现代文：王琳的军队点燃火炬用以掷向敌船的，皆返回来烧了自己的船。
English: When Wang Lin's troops lit torches to throw at the enemy ships, they all returned to burn their own ships.

古文：琳船舰溃乱，兵士投水死十二三，其余皆弃船上岸，为陈军所杀殆尽。
现代文：王琳的船舰溃败大乱，士兵投水淹死的有十分之二三，其余的都弃船上岸，被陈军杀戮殆尽。
English: Wang Lin's ship was wrecked in the turmoil, and two-thirds of the soldiers drowned in the water. The rest abandoned the ship and were killed by Chen's army.

古文：初琳命左长史袁泌、御史中丞刘仲威同典兵侍□庄，及军败，泌遂降陈，仲威以庄投历阳。
现代文：当初王琳令左长史袁泌、御史中丞刘仲威一同统领军队保卫萧庄，到了军队失败，袁泌就投降了陈，仲威带着萧庄投奔历阳。
English: At the beginning, Wang Lin ordered the Left Chief Historian Yuan Xiu and the Imperial Historian Liu Zhongwei to jointly lead the army to defend Xiaozhuang. When the army failed, Yuan Xiu surrendered to Chen, and Zhongwei took Xiaozhuang to Liyang.

古文：琳寻与庄同降邺都。
现代文：王琳不久舆萧庄一起投降邺都。
English: Wang Lin soon surrendered the capital together with Shao Zhuang.

古文：孝昭帝遣琳出合肥，鸠集义故，更图进取。
现代文：孝昭帝派王琳从合肥出发，聚集故旧，再谋划进攻。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao sent Wang Lin to set out from Hefei, gather the old and the new, and then plan the attack.

古文：琳乃缮舰，分遣招募，淮南伧楚，皆愿戮力。
现代文：王琳就修理船艋，分派到各地募集人员，淮南楚人，皆愿同心协力。
English: Wang Lin repaired the ship's anchor and sent out to various regions to recruit personnel. The people of Huainan and Chu are all willing to work together.

古文：陈合州刺史裴景晖，琳兄□之□也，请以私属导引齐师。
现代文：陈合州刺史裴景晖，是王琳兄王堡的女婿，请求以私人的亲信引导齐军。
English: Chen Hezhou's cousin Pei Jingyao, the son-in-law of Wang Lin's brother Wang Bo, asked him to lead the Qi army with his personal trust.

古文：孝昭委琳与行台左丞卢潜率兵应赴，沉吟不决。
现代文：孝昭委派王进与行台左丞卢攫带兵前往接应，犹豫不决。
English: Xiao Zhao's committee sent Wang Jin and Gangtai Zuo Rong to meet the troops, but they hesitated.

古文：景晖惧事泄，挺身归齐。
现代文：星厘害怕事情泄露，独自脱身归顺蛮。
English: Xingli is afraid of things leaking out, so she escapes on her own.

古文：孝昭赐琳玺书，令镇寿阳，其部下将帅悉听以行，乃除琳骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扬州刺史，封会稽郡公，又增兵秩，兼给铙吹。
现代文：耋压赐王登韶书，令他镇守昼盐，他部下的将帅任凭他们前往，于是任王琳骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、扰塑刺史，封为会稽郡公，又增加供官员役使的仆役和俸禄，并供给演铙歌的军乐队。
English: He pressured Wang Dengxun to give him a letter, ordered him to guard the day salt, and allowed his subordinate generals to go to them. Therefore, Wang Lin was appointed as the general of the cavalry, Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, disturbed the history of sculpture, was appointed as the county auditor, and increased the servants and salaries for officials, and provided the military band to perform the anthem.

古文：琳水陆戒严，将观衅而动。
现代文：王琳戒严水陆，将伺机而动。
English: Wang Lin is under martial law on land and sea, and will wait for an opportunity to make a move.

古文：属陈氏结好于齐，使琳更听后图。
现代文：适逢陈氏与齐结好，让王壁再听今后的打算。
English: When the time was right, Mr. Chen and Qi made a good match, and let Wang Wei listen to their future plans.

古文：琳在寿阳，与行台尚书卢潜不协，更相是非，被召还邺，武成弘而不问。
现代文：王进在昼盐，舆行台尚书卢澄不和，彼此攻击，被召回到邺，亘递宽容不加过问。
English: Wang Jin in the afternoon salt, the public and private sectors Shangshu Lucheng discord, attack each other, was called back to Shun, Wuchang tolerance without question.

古文：除沧州刺史，后以琳为特进、侍中。
现代文：任沧州刺史，后又用王琳任特进、侍中。
English: He was appointed to Cangzhou to write history, and later Wang Lin was appointed as a special envoy and a chamberlain.

古文：所居屋脊无故剥破，出赤蛆数升，落地化为血，蠕蠕而动。
现代文：所住屋脊无故剥落，出来赤蛆敷升，落地化为血，蠕蠕而动。
English: The roof ridge where I lived peeled off for no reason. Red pus came out, rose, turned into blood, and crawled around.

古文：又有龙出于门外之地，云雾起，昼晦。
现代文：又有龙从门外之地出现，云雾升起，白天昏暗。
English: Another dragon appears from the land outside the gate, clouds and fog rise, and the day is dark.

古文：会陈将吴明彻来寇，帝□领军将军尉破胡等出援秦州，令琳共为经略。
现代文：适逢陈将领吴明彻入侵，帝令领军将军尉破胡等出兵救援秦州，让王琳共同进行谋划。
English: When Chen's general Wu Mingche invaded, the imperial command sent troops to rescue Qinzhou, allowing Wang Lin to plan together.

古文：琳谓所亲曰： 今太岁在东南，岁星居斗牛分，太白已高，皆利为客，我将有丧。 
现代文：王琳对他的亲信说： 今日太岁在东南，岁星居牛斗星宿的分界钱上，太白已升高，皆有利于敌人，我们将有难。 
English: Wang Lin said to his cronies: Today, the Tai Lai is in the southeast, the Lai Xing is on the demarcation line of the bullfight constellation, and the Tai Bai has risen, all of which are favorable to the enemy, and we will have difficulties.

古文：又谓破胡曰： 吴兵甚锐，宜长策制之，慎勿轻□。 
现代文：又对破胡说： 吴的军队非常精锐，应当从长计议，千万不要轻易作战。 
English: He also said to Pahu, "Wu's army is very elite. We should think long-term and never fight lightly.

古文：破胡不从，遂战，军大败，琳单马突围，仅而获免。
现代文：破胡不听从，就作战，军队大败，王琳独自突围，仅而得免。
English: If she did not listen to Hu, she would fight, and the army would be defeated. Wang Lin broke through the encirclement on her own and was spared.

古文：还至彭城，帝令便赴寿阳，并许召募。
现代文：回到彭城，帝令即赴寿阳，并允许聚集人马。
English: Back in Pengcheng, the imperial order went to Shouyang and allowed people to gather.

古文：又进封琳巴陵郡王。
现代文：又加封王琳为巴陵郡王。
English: He was also promoted to be the King of Baling County.

古文：陈将吴明彻进兵围之，堰淝水灌城，而皮景和等屯于淮西，竟不赴救。
现代文：陈将吴明彻进兵包围他，在淝水筑堤，以水灌城，而皮景和等屯军在进西，竟然不前往救援。
English: Chen encircled Wu Mingche's troops and built a dike in Surabaya to flood the city with water, while Pijing and other troops in the west did not go to the rescue.

古文：明彻昼夜攻击，城内水气转侵，人皆患肿，死病相枕。
现代文：明彻昼夜攻击，城内水气转侵，人们都患肿病，病死的人互相枕藉。
English: The city was attacked day and night, the air and water in the city were attacked, everyone was swollen, the dead and the seriously ill were lying next to each other.

古文：从七月至十月，城陷被执，百姓泣而从之。
现代文：从七月至十月，城陷王琳被抓，百姓流着眼泪跟随他。
English: From July to October, Wang Lin was arrested and the people followed him with tears.

古文：吴明彻恐其为变，杀之城东北二十里，时年四十八，哭者声如雷。
现代文：吴明彻害怕有变故，在城东北二十里之处杀了他，当时四十八岁，哭的人悲声如雷。
English: Wu Ming Che, who was forty-eight years old at the time, killed him twenty miles northeast of the city, fearing that something would happen to him. The cries of the mourners were thunderous.

古文：有一叟以酒脯来酹，尽哀，收其血，怀之而去。
现代文：有一个老人用酒肉来祭奠他，哀悼完毕，收他的血，放在怀中离去。
English: An old man offered wine and meat as a sacrifice to him, and when his mourning was over, he collected his blood, placed it in his arms, and departed.

古文：传首建康，悬之于市。
现代文：传车送首级到建康，悬挂于市。
English: The first stage will be transported by truck to Jiankang and suspended in the city.

古文：琳故吏梁骠骑府仓曹参军朱玚致书陈尚书仆射徐陵求琳首曰： 窃以朝市迁贸，传骨梗之风；历运推移，表忠贞之迹。
现代文：王琳的故吏梁骠骑府仓曹参军朱场给陈尚书仆射徐陵写信求王琳的首级说：我私下认为朝廷变迁，传颂刚直的风尚；朝廷兴衰更替，表彰忠贞的事迹。
English: Wang Lin's late official, Liang Xuan, wrote a letter to Chen Shang's servant, Shao Xuling, asking for Wang Lin's head, saying: I privately believe that the imperial court changes, extolling the rigid style; the rise and fall of the imperial court changes, commending the deeds of loyalty.

古文：故典午将灭，徐广为晋家遗老；当涂已谢，马孚称魏室忠臣。
现代文：所以晋朝将要灭亡，徐广就作了司马氏的遣老；魏国已经衰败，马孚自称魏室的忠臣。
English: Therefore, the Jin Dynasty was about to perish, and Xu Guang became the elder of the Sima clan; the Wei State was already in decline, and Ma Fu called himself the loyal subject of the Wei family.

古文：用能播美于前书，垂名于后世。
现代文：其目的是能在史书中传扬美名，名声流传于后世。
English: Its purpose is to be able to propagate the reputation in the history books, and the reputation will be passed on to future generations.

古文：梁故建宁公琳，洛滨余胄，沂川旧族，立功代邸，□绩中朝，当离乱之辰，总方伯之任。
现代文：梁朝的旧臣建宁公王琳，是洛渍的后人，沂州的旧族，先立功于梁始建之前，后又效力于朝廷，当离乱之时，总领地方之长的重任。
English: The Liang Dynasty's former vassal, Jianning Wanglin, was a descendant of Luo Zui, an old ethnic group from Zhangzhou. He first contributed to Liang's construction, and later served in the imperial court. When there was a disturbance, he was given the important task of leading the local chief.

古文：尔乃轻躬殉主，以身许国，实追踪于往彦，信踵武于前修。
现代文：于是轻生殉主，以身许国，确实是效法前修，追随前贤。
English: As a result, the lightly-born martyrs, who sacrificed themselves for the country, were indeed following the example of the predecessors and following the previous sages.

古文：而天厌梁德，上思匡继，徒蕴包胥之念，终遘苌弘之眚。
现代文：而上天厌弃梁朝的德行，还想匡扶时局，以延续统治，结果白白地怀有申包胥的信念，最终遇到了苌弘的灾祸。
English: However, Heaven abhorred the virtue of the Liang Dynasty and wanted to support the current situation in order to continue the reign. As a result, the belief in Shen Baozhen was in vain, and the calamity of Zeng Hong finally occurred.

古文：洎王业光启，鼎祚有归，于是远迹山东，寄命河北。
现代文：到王业扩大，政权有了归属，于是速走山东，寄身河北。
English: By the time Wangye expanded, the political power had been vested, so he quickly left Shandong and settled in Hebei.

古文：虽轻旅臣之叹，犹怀客卿之礼，感兹知己，忘此捐躯。
现代文：虽然自己怀有羁旅之臣的慨叹，仍然尽客卿之礼，感激遇到知己，为此忘我捐躯。
English: Although he harbored the sigh of a loyal traveler, he was still grateful to the host, grateful to meet his confidant, and sacrificed his life for this.

古文：至使身没九泉，头行万里。
现代文：致使身体埋于九泉，头颅远行万里。
English: As a result, his body was buried in Jiuzhen and his head traveled thousands of miles.

古文：诚复马革裹尸，遂其生平之志；原野暴骸，会彼人臣之节。
现代文：确实想以马革裹尸，实现他平生的志愿；原野暴体，成全他人臣的节义。
English: He really wanted to wrap the corpse of Ma Ge to realize his lifelong wish; the wild and violent body, to fulfill the meaning of his vassal.

古文：然身首异处，有足悲者；封树靡卜，良可怆焉。
现代文：然而身首异处，实在是令人悲哀啊；堆土为坟，植树为饰，而没有人祭奠，确实让人感到凄凉啊。
English: However, it is really sad to be in a different place; the heap of dirt is a grave, the planting of trees is a decoration, and there is no one to pay tribute. It really makes people feel desolate.

古文： 玚早簉末席，降薛君之吐握，荷魏公之知遇。
现代文：我朱场早年侧身于末僚之中，悦服薛君的吐哺握发，礼贤下士，承蒙魏公的知遇之恩。
English: In my early years, I was one of Zhu's subordinates, happily wearing Xue Jun's spit-and-shake hairstyle, a virtuous corporal, thanks to Wei Gong's wisdom.

古文：是用沾巾雨袂，痛可识之颜；回肠疾首，切犹生之面。
现代文：因此，手巾和衣袖被泪水沾湿，为可识别的面颜哀痛；痛心疾首，为虽死犹生的面容忧伤。
English: As a result, handkerchiefs and sleeves are wet with tears, grieving for the recognizable face; heartbroken, saddened for the lifeless countenance.

古文：伏惟圣恩博厚，明诏爰发，赦王经之哭，许田横之葬，玚虽刍贱，窃亦有心。
现代文：念及圣恩广博深厚，发出英明的韶示，赦免王经之哭，应允田横的葬礼，朱场虽然微贱，私下也有这种心意。
English: Mindful of the vastness and profundity of grace, he issued a wise edict, pardoned Wang Jing's cry, and accepted Tian Yang's funeral. Although Zhu Bao was humble, he also had this kind of intention in private.

古文：琳经莅寿阳，颇存遗爱；曾游江右，非无余德。
现代文：王琳治理寿阳，很有德政；曾经游历江右，并非没有留的恩泽。
English: Wang Lin's governance of Shouyang is very virtuous; he once traveled to the right bank of the Yangtze River, which is not without its blessings.

古文：比肩东合之吏，继踵西园之宾，愿归彼境，还修窀穸。
现代文：并肩于束阁的官吏，接踵与西园的宾客，希望王琳的头颅能够归还其境，回去修了坟墓。
English: Alongside the officials in the pavilion, followed by the guests in the west garden, I hope that Wang Lin's head can be returned to its territory and go back to repair the grave.

古文：庶孤坟既筑，或飞衔土之燕；丰碑式树，时留堕泪之人。
现代文：孤坟已经修建，时而有衔土之燕飞来，丰碑树立，时而有驻留落泪之人。
English: The lonely grave has been built, and now and then the swallow of the earth flies, the monument is erected, and now and then there are people who stay and shed tears.

古文：近故旧王绾等已有论牒，仰蒙制议，不遂所陈。
现代文：近来老友王绾等已有呈文，承蒙裁断，而没有同意所陈之见。
English: Recently, long-time friend Wang Wei and others have submitted a petition, which was accepted for adjudication, but did not agree with the views presented.

古文：昔廉公告逝，即淝川而建茔域；孙叔云亡，仍芍陂而植楸槚。
现代文：从前廉公逝世，在淝川修建了坟地；孙叔敖去世，在芍陂种植了楸树。
English: Once upon a time, after the death of Lian Gong, a cemetery was built in Luochuan; after the death of Sun Shuxuan, eucalyptus trees were planted in Luochuan.

古文：由此言之，抑有其例。
现代文：由此说来，还是有这样的先例的。
English: An old man came with meat and wine, wept and poured wine in his honour, collected his blood and took it away.

古文：不使寿春城下，唯传报葛之人；沧洲岛上，独有悲田之客。昧死陈祈，伏待刑宪。 
现代文：不要让寿春城下，独传报葛之人；沧州岛上，惟有为田横悲痛的宾客冒死陈述祈求，恭恭敬仿地等待刑罚。
English: Don't let Shouchun Castle be the only one to announce the winner; on Cangzhou Island, only the guests who grieved for Tian Yang risked their lives to make a statement and pray, respectfully waiting for the punishment.

古文：陵嘉其志节。
现代文：徐陵赞赏他的志气和节操。
English: Xu Ling appreciated his spirit and discipline.

古文：又明彻亦数梦琳求首，并为启陈主而许之。
现代文：此外明彻也多次梦见王琳要他的头，一并启奏陈主答应他。
English: In addition, Mingcher also dreamed many times that Wang Lin wanted his head, and the Lord Chen promised him.

古文：仍与开府仪同主簿刘韶慧等持其首还于淮南，权瘗八公山侧，义故会葬者数千人。
现代文：就与开府仪同主簿刘韶慧等携带他的头回到淮南，暂且埋葬在八公山侧，故旧前来送葬的有数千人。
English: He returned to Huainan with his head, together with Kaifu Yi and Liu Qianhui, and was temporarily buried on the side of Mount Bagong. Thousands of people came to pay their respects.

古文：玚等乃间道北归，别议迎接。
现代文：朱场等于是抄小道北归，另议迎接。
English: Zhu field is equivalent to returning to the north by taking a small path, and another proposal to meet.

古文：寻有扬州人茅知胜等五人密送葬柩达于邺。
现代文：不久有扬州人茅知胜等五人秘密送灵柩到达邺。
English: Soon, five people, including Yangzhou resident Mao Zhisheng, secretly sent the casket to the coffin.

古文：赠十五州诸军事、扬州刺史、侍中、特进、开府、录尚书事，谥曰忠武王，葬给辒辌车。
现代文：追赠十五州诸军事、扬州刺史、侍中、特进、开府、录尚书事，谧号为忠武王，葬礼中使用了辊鲸车。
English: He was posthumously awarded the military titles of 15 prefectures, the title of Yangzhou chief historian, the title of chamberlain, the title of special envoy, the title of kaifu, and the title of record keeper. His nickname was Chungwu Wang, and a beaked whale cart was used in his funeral.

古文：琳体貌闲雅，立发委地，喜怒不形于色。
现代文：王琳体态容貌娴雅，站立时头发拖到地上，喜怒不形于色。
English: Wang Lin's physical appearance is calm and elegant. When she stands up, her hair can hang down to the ground, and she can be happy or angry.

古文：虽无学业，而强记内敏，军府佐吏千数，皆识其姓名。刑罚不滥，轻财爱士，得将卒之心。
现代文：虽然没有学问，而记忆力强，思维敏捷，军府佐吏用千来计算，都记住他们的姓名，不滥施刑罚，轻财爱士，深得将卒之心。
English: Although there is no learning, but the memory is strong and the thinking is quick, the military officers use thousands to calculate, remember their names, do not impose penalties, love light money, and are deeply devoted to soldiers.

古文：少任将帅，屡经丧乱，雅有忠义之节。
现代文：年轻时任将帅，屡经战乱，平素有忠义的节操。
English: When he was young, he was appointed as a field marshal. He has been through many wars, and he has always been a loyal and disciplined person.

古文：虽本图不遂，邺人亦以此重之，待遇甚厚。
现代文：虽然本来的计划没有成功，邺人也因此看重他，待遇甚为丰厚。
English: Although the original plan did not succeed, the people of Hinomaru valued him for this, and the treatment was very rich.

古文：及败，为陈军所执。
现代文：到失败，为陈军抓获。
English: In the end, Chen Jun was captured.

古文：吴明彻欲全之，而其下将领多琳故吏，争来致请，并相资给，明彻由此忌之，故及于难。
现代文：吴明彻想成全他，而他手下的将领多数为王琳的旧吏，争相来请求，并给予资助，明彻因此嫉妒他，所以遭受灾祸。
English: Wu Ming Che wanted to make him perfect, and the generals under him, most of whom were Wang Lin's old officials, scrambled to ask for and give financial support. As a result, Ming Che was jealous of him, so he suffered a disaster.

古文：当时田夫野老，知与不知，莫不为之歔欷流泣。
现代文：当时，田夫野老，认识与不认识他的人，没有谁不为他悲痛流泪。
English: At that time, there was no one who did not shed tears of grief for him, whether they knew him or not.

古文：观其诚信感物，虽李将军之恂恂善诱，殆无以加焉。
现代文：看他的诚信感人，即使是李将军的循循善诱，恐怕也无以复加啦。
English: Judging from his touching sincerity, I'm afraid that even Li Guang, who is a good inducer, is nothing more than that.

古文：琳十七子。
现代文：王琳有十七个儿子。
English: Wang Lin has seventeen sons.

古文：长子敬，在齐袭王爵，武平末，通直常侍。
现代文：长子王敬，在齐承袭王爵，亘迎末年，为通直常侍。
English: The eldest son, Wang Jing, succeeded Wang Jie in Qi, and in the last years of his life, he was a regular attendant.

古文：第九子衍，隋开皇中开府仪同三司，大业初，卒于渝州刺史。
现代文：第九个儿子王翅，堕题皇年问为开府仪同三司，左业初年，在渝州刺史任上去世。
English: The ninth son, Wang Ying, known as Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, died in his first year as a member of the Yuzhou Shishi.

