古文：隐皇帝，讳承祐，高祖第二子也。
现代文：隐皇帝，讳名承祐，是高祖的第二子。
English: Emperor Yin, alias Shouyu, was Gaozu's second son.

古文：母曰李太后，以唐长兴二年，岁在辛卯，三月七日，生帝于鄴都之旧第。高祖镇太原，署节院使，累官至检校尚书右仆射。
现代文：母亲李太后，在后唐长兴二年三月七日，在邺都的旧居生下隐帝。高祖镇守太原时，暂任他为节院使，历官至检校尚书右仆射。
English: His mother, Empress Dowager Li, was born on March 7th, 2nd year of the Later Tang Dynasty in Changxing, in the old residence of Shidu. When Gao Zuzhen was in charge of Taiyuan, he was temporarily appointed as an envoy to the imperial court, and all officials went to the inspection of the school.

古文：国初，授左卫大将军、检校司空，迁大内都点检、检校太保。
现代文：建国初，授予左卫大将军、检校司空爵位，迁任大内都点检、检校太保。
English: At the beginning of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was awarded the titles of General of the Left Division and Inspector of Schools, and transferred to the positions of inspector of universities and inspector of schools.

古文：乾祐元年正月二十七日，高祖崩，秘不发丧。
现代文：乾元年正月二十七日，高祖驾崩，隐秘未发布讣告。
English: On the 27th day of the first month of Qianyuan, Gao Zu passed away, but no obituary was published.

古文：二月辛巳，授特进、检校太尉、同平章事，封周王。
现代文：二月一日，授与特进、检校太尉、同平章事爵位，封为周王。
English: On February 1st, he was awarded the titles of "Special Promotion," "Inspector Lieutenant" and "Dong Pingzhang" and was named King of Zhou.

古文：宣制毕，有顷，召文武百僚赴万岁殿内，降大行皇帝遗制，云： 周王承祐，可于柩前即皇帝位。服纪日月，一依旧制。 
现代文：宣读诏令完毕后，召文武百官到万岁殿内，传达初丧高祖的遗诏，说 ：周王承，可在灵柩前即皇帝位，服制和纪年，全依旧制。 
English: After the proclamation of the imperial edict was completed, he summoned all the civil and military officials to the Hall of Long Life to convey the imperial edict of the first-deceased emperor, saying: Zhou Wangcheng, can be the emperor before the coffin, the dress code and the age, all the same system.

古文：是日，内外发哀成服。
现代文：当天，朝廷内外举哀服丧。
English: On the same day, mourning was held inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：初，高祖欲改年号，中书门下进拟 乾和 二字，高祖改为乾祐，至是与御名相符。
现代文：当初，高祖想改年号，中书门下进上 乾和 二字，高祖改为 乾 ，现在年号与高祖所命名相符。
English: At first, Gao Zu wanted to change the year, so the Chinese characters "乾和" were written under the door of the book, and Gao Zu changed it to "乾." Now the year matches Gao Zu's name.

古文：甲申，群臣上表请听政，诏答不允，凡四上表，从之。
现代文：四日，群臣上表请隐帝临朝听政，隐帝诏令不允，共上表四次，才听从。
English: On the fourth day, a group of courtiers petitioned Emperor Inti to come to the Imperial Court to listen to the government, but Emperor Inti did not agree, and they petitioned a total of four times before listening.

古文：丁亥，帝于万岁殿门东庑下见群臣，尊母后为皇太后。
现代文：七日，隐帝在万岁殿大门东边廊庑下会见群臣，尊母后为皇太后。
English: On the seventh day, Emperor Inchi met with a group of courtiers at the east corridor of the gate of the Hall of Long Life. His mother later became the Empress Dowager.

古文：壬辰，右卫大将军王景崇奏，于大散关大败蜀军，俘斩三千人。
现代文：十二日，右卫大将军王景崇上奏，在大散关大败蜀军，俘虏斩杀三千人。
English: On the twelfth day, Wang Jingsong, the right guard general, led the troops into battle, defeating the Shu army at the Great Sankuan Pass and slaughtering three thousand prisoners.

古文：初，契丹犯京师，侯益、赵赞皆受其命，节制岐、蒲，闻高祖入洛，颇怀反仄。
现代文：当初，契丹侵犯京师，侯益、赵赞都接受契丹指令，统辖岐下、薄州。听到高祖进入洛阳后，他们深为不安。
English: At first, the Khitans invaded Beijing, and Hou Yi and Zhao Zan both accepted the Khitans' orders to govern Qishan and Bozhou. After hearing that Gao Zu had entered Luoyang, they were deeply uneasy.

古文：丙子，邓州节度使刘重进、相州节度使王继宏、安州节度使杨信，并自检校太傅加检校太尉；以镇州留后兼幽州一行马步军都部署、检校太傅刘在明为镇州节度使，加检校太师，部署如故；贝州节度使、检校太傅李殷加检校太尉；定州节度使、检校太尉孙方简，府州节度使、检校太傅折从阮，并加检校太师。
现代文：朝廷调赵赞到京兆，侯益与赵赞都向蜀人求援，蜀人派何建领军从大散关出兵以接应他们。现在王景崇聚合岐下、雍州、州、泾州一带兵力打败了蜀军。
English: The imperial court transferred Zhao Zan to Jingzhao, and both Hou Yi and Zhao Zan appealed to the Shu people for help. The Shu people sent He Jian, the leader of the army, from Dashan Pass to meet them. Now, Wang Jingzong gathered troops from the areas of Heki, Yongzhou, Zhouzhou, and Zhangzhou and defeated the Shu army.

古文：丁丑，中书侍郎兼户部尚书、平章事李涛罢免，勒归私第。
现代文：三月二十八日，中书侍郎兼户部尚书、平章事李涛被罢免，勒令还家。
English: On March 28th, Li Tao, the attendant of Chinese calligraphy and also the head of the household, was dismissed and ordered to return home.

古文：时苏逢吉等在中书，枢密使杨邠、副枢密使郭威等，权势甚盛，中书每有除授，多为邠等所抑。
现代文：当时苏逢吉等人在中书省，枢密使杨、副枢密使郭威等人，权势极盛，中书省每有任免，多被杨等人压制。
English: At that time, Su Fengji and others were in the Central Literature Department, and Yang, the Privy Councilor, Guo Wei, the Deputy Privy Councilor, and others were extremely powerful. The Central Literature Department had every appointment and removal, and was mostly suppressed by Yang and others.

古文：涛不平之，因上疏请出邠等，以籓镇授之，枢密之务，宜委逢吉、禹珪。
现代文：李涛不平，因而上书隐帝请求调杨等人出京，授予藩镇官职，枢密使的职务，应交给苏逢吉、苏禹王圭。
English: Li Tao was not pleased, so he sent a letter to the Emperor requesting that Yang and others be transferred out of Beijing, that they be granted the posts of officials of the domain and town, and that the posts of the privy councilors should be given to Su Fengji and Su Yu Wang Gui.

古文：疏入，邠等知之，乃见太后泣诉其事，太后怒，涛由是获谴。
现代文：奏疏呈上后，被杨等人知悉，于是求见太后哭诉此事，太后大怒，李涛因此遭遣。
English: After the report was submitted, it was learned by Yang and others, so he asked to see the empress dowager to complain about the matter. The empress dowager was furious, and Li Tao was dismissed as a result.

古文：西道诸州奏，河中李守贞谋叛，发兵据潼关。
现代文：西道各州上奏，河中李守贞图谋反叛，出兵占据了潼关。
English: The states on the west road played up, and Li Shouzhen in the middle of the river plotted a rebellion, and sent troops to occupy Shaoguan.

古文：夏四月辛巳，陕州兵马监押王玉奏，收复潼关。
现代文：夏四月二日，陕州兵马监押王玉上奏，收复了潼关。
English: On the 2nd day of April in summer, Wang Yu, the commander of the Shaanxi Terracotta Warriors and Horses, returned to Shaoguan.

古文：庚子，以左金吾大将军、充两街使、检校太傅刘承赟为徐州节度使。
现代文：定州孙方简上奏，三月二十七日，契丹人放弃定州逃走。三日，郢州刺史尹实上奏，荆南起兵到郢州边境，将攻城。这天，以澶州节度使郭从义为永兴军一行兵马都部署。
English: On March 27, the Khitans abandoned Dingzhou and fled. On the 3rd, the governor of Zhangzhou, Zishi Yin Si, announced that Jingnan had raised an army to the border of Zhangzhou and would attack the city. On this day, Guo Congyi was deployed as the commander of the Yongxing Army on the occasion of the Zhangzhou Festival.

古文：甲辰，以宣徽北院使薛可言为右金吾上将军，以皇城使李晖为宣徽南院使。乙巳，定州节度使孙方简奏，复入于本州。
现代文：当时供奉官时知化、王益，从凤翔部署、前永兴节度使赵赞部下牙兵赵思绾等三百多人前往京城，三月二十四日，开到永兴，赵思绾等人作乱，抢进府城，据城反叛，所以命令郭从义领兵讨伐他。二十六日，定州节度使孙方简上奏，回到本州。
English: At that time, Jihua and Wang Yi, who served as officials, were deployed from Fengxiang, and the former Yongxing Festival made more than 300 people, including Zhao Zhan's subordinate soldiers Zhao Siyu, go to Beijing. On March 24, they drove to Yongxing. Zhao Siyu and others made a riot, rushed into the capital, and rebelled against the city, so they ordered Guo to lead the soldiers to fight him. On the 26th, the Dingzhou Festival made Sun Fangjian play and return to Honshu.

古文：初，方简为狼山寨主，叛晋归契丹，及契丹降中渡之师，乃以方简为定州节度使。
现代文：当初，孙方简为狼山寨主，背叛晋朝归顺契丹人，到契丹降伏了中渡的军队，便以孙方简为定州节度使。
English: At first, Sun Fangjian was the master of the wolf's cottage. He betrayed the Jin Dynasty and returned to the Shun Khitan people. When the Zhongdu army surrendered to the Khitan, he used Sun Fangjian as the Dingzhou Festival envoy.

古文：契丹主死，永康王嗣位，即以蕃将耶律忠代之，移方简为云州节度使，方简不受命，遂归狼山。
现代文：契丹国主死后，永康王即位，即以蕃将耶律忠接替孙方简，调孙方简任云州节度使，孙方简不接受调令，于是回到狼山。
English: After the death of the Khitan sovereign, King Yongkang ascended to the throne, and immediately appointed Ye Liutong as Sun Fangjian's successor. Sun Fangjian was appointed as the envoy to the Yunnan Festival. However, Sun Fangjian did not accept the appointment and returned to Wolf Mountain.

古文：高祖至阙，方简归款，复以中山命之。
现代文：高祖到京城后，孙方简求和，高祖又命他节制中山。
English: After Gaozu arrived in Beijing, Sun Fangjian sued for peace, and Gaozu ordered him to restrain Zhongshan.

古文：是岁三月二十七日，契丹弃定州，隳城壁，焚室庐，尽驱人民入蕃，惟余空城瓦砾而已。
现代文：这年三月二十七日，契丹放弃定州，毁坏城墙，焚烧房舍，将居民全赶往蕃地，只剩下空城瓦砾而已。
English: On March 27 of this year, the Khitans abandoned Dingzhou, destroyed the city walls, burned the houses, and drove all the residents to the ploughed land. Only the rubble of the empty city remained.

古文：至是，方简自狼山回保定州。
现代文：至此，孙方简从狼山回归守卫定州。
English: At this point, Sun Fangyan returned from Wolf Mountain to guard Dingzhou.

古文：是月，河决原武县，河北诸州旱，徐州饿死民九百三十有七。
现代文：本月，黄河冲决武原县堤防，河北各州干旱，徐州饿死九百三十七人。
English: This month, the Yellow River burst through the dike in Wuhan County, Hebei Province was in drought, and 937 people starved to death in Xuzhou.

古文：五月己酉朔，国子监奏，《周礼》、《仪礼》、《公羊》、《穀梁》四经未有印板，欲集学官考校雕造。
现代文：五月一日，国子监上奏，《周礼》、《仪礼》、《公羊传》、《谷梁传》四种经书没有印板，想聚合专家考证校勘后雕板印刷。
English: On May 1st, the four scriptures of "Zhouli," "Giri," "Ramzhuan" and "Gu Liangzhuan" did not have printing plates, and they wanted to gather experts to check and print the engraved plates.

古文：从之。
现代文：隐帝听从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己未，回鹘遣使朝贡。
现代文：十一日，回鹘派使者来朝贡。
English: On the eleventh day, the Uighurs sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丁卯，前翰林学士徐台符自幽州逃归。
现代文：十九日，前翰林学士徐台符从幽州逃回。
English: On the 19th, former Hanlin scholar Xu Taifu fled back from Yuzhou.

古文：乙亥，河决滑州鱼池。
现代文：二十七日，黄河冲决了滑州的鱼池地区。
English: On the 27th, the Yellow River broke through the Yuchi area of Luzhou.

古文：辛卯，永兴兵马都部署郭从义奏，得王景崇报，有兵自陇州来，欲投河中，追袭至鄜城。
现代文：六月一日，日食。十四日，永兴兵马总部署郭从义上奏，得到王景崇报告，有部队从陇州开来，想投奔河中府，被追击直到城。
English: On the 14th day of the month, the Yongxing general troop and horse deployment of Guo Zongyi reported to Wang Jingsong that some troops came from Zhangzhou and wanted to go to Hezhongfu, but they were chased all the way to the city.

古文：荆南节度使高从诲上表归命，从诲尝拒朝命，至是方遣牙将刘扶诣阙请罪。
现代文：荆南节度使高从诲呈上降表归顺，高从诲曾抗拒朝命，至此才派牙将刘扶到京城请罪。
English: The Jingnan Festival made Gao Congchu submit to the abdication table. Gao Congchu had resisted the imperial order, and only then did he send Fang Liu Fu to the capital to plead guilty.

古文：壬子，以工部侍郎李穀充西南面行营都转运使。
现代文：二十五日，荆南高从诲进贡朝奉谢恩，被免罪。本月，河北干旱，青州发生蝗灾。
English: On the 25th, Jing Nangao was exonerated from the crime of bringing tribute to the emperor. This month, Hebei was in drought, and a locust plague occurred in Qingzhou.

古文：乙卯，礼仪使张昭上高祖庙尊号，献舞名并歌辞，舞曲请以 观德 为名，歌辞不录。
现代文：秋七月一日，相州节度使王继弘杀死节度判官张易，捏造罪名上报朝廷。这时，法律严酷，藩镇州郡凡上奏法办罪犯，朝廷不核查实情，就顺从下面的奏请，所以当时的幕僚们极少受到宾客的礼遇，小心翼翼地服侍主子，仍不能避免他们的祸害。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, Wang Jihong was ordered by the Xiangzhou Festival Committee to kill the judge of the festival committee, Zhang Yi, and report the fabricated charges to the imperial court. At that time, the law was strict, and the imperial court did not check the facts, but obeyed the following report request. Therefore, the staff members at that time were rarely treated with courtesy by the guests, and carefully served their master, but still could not avoid their scourge.

古文：丙辰，以久旱，幸道宫、佛寺祷雨，是日大澍。
现代文：八月，礼仪使张昭进上高祖庙号。九日，因久旱，隐帝到道观、佛寺祈祷下大雨。
English: In August, the etiquette made Zhang Zhao enter the Gaozu Temple. On the 9th, due to a long drought, the Emperor went to the Taoist and Buddhist temples to pray for heavy rain.

古文：开封言，阳武、雍丘、襄邑三县，蝗为瞿鹆聚食，诏禁捕瞿鹆。
现代文：开封府说，阳武、雍丘、襄邑三县，蝗虫被瞿鸟鹆成群啄食，诏令禁捕瞿鸟鹆。
English: The Kaifeng government said that the locusts in Yangwu, Yongqiu and Xiangyi counties were eaten by flocks of ostriches, and banned the hunting of ostriches.

古文：庚午，故兵部尚书李怿赠尚书左仆射。
现代文：十四日，沧州上报，从今年七月后，幽州境内前来投奔的人口共有五千一百四十七，因为幽州饥荒的缘故。
English: On the 14th, Cangzhou reported that since July this year, a total of 5,147 people have fled to Yuzhou because of the Yuzhou famine.

古文：镇州奏，准诏处斩节度副使张鹏讫。
现代文：二十三日，镇州上奏，依诏处斩节度副使张鹏。
English: On the 23rd, Zhenzhou was proclaimed, and the deputy envoy Zhang Peng was appointed in accordance with the edict.

古文：鹏以一言之失，为鄴帅高行周所奏，故命诛之。
现代文：张鹏因一言之失，被邺都主帅高行周奏请，所以诏令诛杀他。
English: Zhang Peng lost a word and was asked to play by Shandong coach Gao Xing Zhou, so he was ordered to kill him.

古文：乙亥，新授凤翔节度使赵晖奏，与八作使王继涛领部下兵同赴凤翔。时王景崇拒命故也。
现代文：二十八日，新任凤翔节度使赵晖上奏，与八作使王继涛领部下兵马一同奔赴凤翔，因为当时王景崇抗拒朝命的缘故。
English: On the 28th, the newly-appointed Fengxiang Festival Committee sent Zhao Xuan to lead the procession, and he and the eight generals sent Wang Jitao to lead the soldiers and horses to Fengxiang, because Wang Jingsong was resisting the imperial order at that time.

古文：新授凤翔节度使赵晖奏，部署兵士赴凤翔城下。
现代文：八月六日，命枢密使郭威到河中府军前，诏令河东、永兴、凤翔行营各军，全受郭威的节制。
English: On August 6th, Guo Wei, the designated emissary of the imperial court, arrived at the front of the central government army, and ordered the armies of Hedong, Yongxing, and Fengxiang to march, all of which were restrained by Guo Wei.

古文：癸卯，郭威奏，今月二十三日，大军已抵河府贼城；至二十六日，开长连堑毕，筑长连城次。
现代文：这时李守贞、王景崇、赵思绾联合反叛，朝廷虽已令白文珂、常思攻讨河中，而舆论认为二帅非李守贞的对手，朝廷内外为此担忧，到任命郭威的诏令发布后，人心大快。
English: At this time, Li Shouzhen, Wang Jingzhong, and Zhao Siyi jointly rebelled. Although the imperial court had ordered Bai Wenke and Chang Siyi to attack the middle of the river, the public opinion believed that the two generals were not Li Shouzhen's opponents. Both inside and outside the imperial court were worried about this. After the decree appointing Guo Wei was issued, people were overjoyed.

古文：九月戊申，侯益部曲王守筠自凤翔来奔，言益家属尽为王景崇所害。
现代文：九月三日，侯益的部下王守筠从凤翔前来投奔，说侯益的家属全被王景崇杀害。
English: On September 3, Houyi's subordinate, Wang Shoujun, came from Fengxiang to take refuge, saying that all of Houyi's family members had been killed by Wang Jingsong.

古文：戊寅，赵晖奏，破王景崇贼军于凤翔城下。
现代文：七日，郭威上奏，在河府城下打败贼军。二十日，天下雪。
English: On the seventh day, Guo Wei led the troops to defeat the invaders at the foot of Hefu Castle. On the 20th day, the whole country was covered in snow.

古文：甲申，吐番遣使献方物。丙戌，右羽林将军张播停任，坐检田受请托也。
现代文：二十三日，凤翔总部署赵晖上奏，在大散关大败川军，杀死三千多人，其余弃甲而逃。
English: On the 23rd, Fengxiang's general Zhao Qian led the troops to defeat the Sichuan army in Dazanggu, killing more than three thousand people, while the rest deserted and fled.

古文：丁亥，中书舍人张谊责授房州司户，兵部郎中马承翰责授庆州司户，并员外置，所在驰驿发遣。
现代文：二十七日，郭威上奏，得到郭从义报告，本月十四日，凤翔王景崇士兵离开本城，旋即派监军李彦从领兵追击到法门寺以西，杀死二千多人。冬十月三日，赵晖上奏，在凤翔城下打败王景崇贼军。十二日，中书舍人张谊贬任房州司户，兵部郎中马承翰贬任庆州司户，均为员外职，由所在地驿使遣送。
English: On the 27th, Guo Wei led an expedition and received a report from Guo Congyi. On the 14th of this month, the soldiers of Fengxiang Wang Jingsong left the city, and Li Yan, the leader of the expedition, immediately sent his troops to chase them to the west of Famen Temple, killing more than 2,000 people. On the 3rd of October in winter, Zhao Qian led an expedition and defeated Wang Jingsong's army of thieves at the foot of Fengxiang. On the 12th, Zhang Yi, a scholar of the Chinese Academy of Letters, was demoted to the position of the steward of Fuzhou, and Ma Chenghan, a military

古文：先是，谊与承翰俱衔命于两浙，睹其骄僭之失，形于讥诮，兼乘醉有轻肆之言，钱宏俶耻之，摭其过以奏之，朝廷以方务怀柔，故有是命。
现代文：此前，张谊与马承翰均出使两浙，目睹那里骄横僭越的过失，予以讥讽，又乘醉有轻慢的话，钱弘亻叔因以为耻，摘取他们的过错上奏，朝廷正在怀柔两浙，所以有对张、马二人的贬任。
English: Previously, Zhang Yi and Ma Chenghan were both sent to the two Zhejiang Provinces. They witnessed the arrogance and arrogance of the mistakes there, ridiculed them, and took advantage of drunkenness and frivolous words. Uncle Qian Hongyao was ashamed and picked up their mistakes and played them. The imperial court was taking care of the two Zhejiang Provinces, so there was a demotion of Zhang and Ma.

古文：十二月丁丑，荆南节度副使、检校太傅、行峡州刺史高保融起复，授荆南节度使、检校太尉、同平章事、渤海郡侯。壬午，帝被衮冕御崇元殿，授六庙宝册，正使宰臣苏禹珪，副使大府卿刘皞赴西京行礼。
现代文：二十九日，延州上奏，夏州李彝殷先出兵临近延州边境，想接应李守贞，现在撤回去了。十一月九日，诛杀太子太傅李崧以及他的弟弟司封员外郎李屿、国子博士李山义，夷灭了他们的家族，因为被部下诬告的缘故。十五日，高祖灵车出发。二十七日，葬高祖于睿陵。十二月八日，隐帝身披衮袍冠冕上崇元殿，授六庙宝册，正使宰臣苏禹王圭及副使、大府卿刘白皋赴西京行礼。
English: On the 29th, Yanzhou issued a proclamation. Xiazhou Li Shouyin first sent troops near the border of Yanzhou to meet Li Shouzhen, but now withdrew. On November 9th, he killed the Prince Daifu Li Shou and his brother, the Foreign Minister Li Yu and the Doctor of the State Li Shan Yi, and destroyed their families because they were falsely accused by their subordinates. On the 15th, Gao Zu's hearse set off. On the 27th, Gao Zu was buried in Rui Mausoleum. On December 8th, the Hidden Emperor dressed in a robe and crown at the Chongyuan Hall, awarded six temple treasure books,

古文：兗州奏，淮贼先于沂州界立栅，前月十七日已归海州，为李守贞牵制也。
现代文：兖州上奏，淮南贼人先在沂州边界建立营垒，上月十七日已回海州，是因为受李守贞的牵制。
English: The Huainan bandits first set up a camp on the border of Bozhou, and returned to Haizhou on the 17th of last month, because they were constrained by Li Shouzhen.

古文：庚寅，奉高祖神主于西京太庙。
现代文：十六日，奉高祖神主牌位到西京的太庙。
English: On the 16th, the main tablet of the god Gaozushin was brought to the Great Temple in West Beijing.

古文：淮南伪主李璟奉书于帝，云： 先因河府李守贞求援，又闻大国沿淮屯军，当国亦于境上防备。
现代文：南唐伪国主李王景写信给隐帝，说 ：前因河府李守贞求援，又听到贵国沿淮河屯驻军队，我国也在边境上设防。
English: South Tang's pseudo-king, Li Wangjing, wrote a letter to Emperor Ying, saying: "Previously, because of the request for help from Li Shuzhen of Hefu, I also heard that your country has stationed troops along the Huaihe River, and our country has also fortified the border.

古文：昨闻大朝收军，当国寻已彻备，其商旅请依旧日通行。 
现代文：昨日听说贵国已经收兵，我国已旋即撤防，希望商贾游人依旧往来通行。 
English: I heard yesterday that your country has withdrawn its troops, and our country has immediately withdrawn its defense. I hope that business travelers will still be able to come and go.

古文：朝廷不报。
现代文：朝廷没有答复。
English: The court did not reply.

古文：辛卯，群臣上表，请以三月九日诞圣日为嘉庆节。
现代文：十七日，群臣上表，请求以三月九日隐帝生日为嘉庆节，隐帝应准。
English: On the 17th, a group of courtiers submitted a petition requesting that the 9th of March, Emperor Inti's birthday, be celebrated as Jiaqing Festival. Emperor Inti agreed.

