古文：◎忠义四普颜不花，字希古，蒙古氏。倜傥有大志。
现代文：普颜不花字希古，蒙古族人。为人豪爽，有大志。
English: Puyan, a member of the Mongolian ethnic group, is a man of great courage and ambition.

古文：至正五年，由国子生登右榜进士第一人，授翰林修撰，调河南行省员外郎。
现代文：至正五年由国子生登右榜进士第一，任翰林修撰，调河南行省员外郎。
English: In the fifth year of the Taisho era, Kuniko's son was promoted to the first place in the right list of recruits, Hanlin Shuxian was appointed, and Henan Provincial Party member Gairo was transferred.

古文：十一年，迁江西行省左右司郎中。蕲黄徐寿辉来寇，普颜不花战守之功为多，语在《道童传》。
现代文：十一年，迁江西行省左右司郎中，时蕲黄徐寿辉起事，普颜不花多立战守之功，详见《道童传》。
English: In the eleventh year, when Huang Xu Shouhui, one of the left and right leaders of the province, moved to the west of Jiangsu Province, he rose in revolt. Puyan did not spend much on the war, as detailed in "Dodo Biography."

古文：十六年，除江西廉访副使。
现代文：十六年，任江西廉访副使。
English: For 16 years, he served as the deputy envoy of Jiangxi Lianhuizhou.

古文：顷之，召还，授益都路达鲁花赤，迁山东廉访使，再转为中书参知政事。
现代文：不久便回调，授益都路达鲁花赤，升山东廉访使，再转为中书参知政事。
English: Soon, he was transferred back, and he was promoted to the position of the envoy to Shandong Province, and then he was transferred to the position of the vice-governor of Shandong Province.

古文：十八年，诏与治书侍御史李国凤同经略江南。
现代文：十八年，顺帝诏令普颜不花与治书侍御史李国凤共同攻取江南。
English: In the 18th year, Emperor Shun issued an imperial edict ordering Puyan to conquer the southern part of the Yangtze River together with Li Guofeng.

古文：至建宁，江西陈友谅遣邓克明来寇，而平章政事阿鲁温沙等皆夜遁。
现代文：进至建宁，江西陈友谅派邓克明来攻建宁，平章政事阿鲁温沙等连夜逃跑。
English: Entering Jianning, Jiangxi Chen You Rong sent Deng Keming to attack Jianning, and Pingzhang's political secretary Aru Wensha and others fled overnight.

古文：国凤时分镇延平，城陷，遁去。
现代文：李国凤分工守延平，城被攻陷，也逃跑了。
English: Li Guofeng was assigned to guard Yanping. When the city was captured, he also fled.

古文：普颜不花曰： 我承制来此，去将何之？誓与此城同存亡耳。 
现代文：普颜不花说 ：我受命来此，还能去哪里呢，我决心和此城同存亡。 
English: He said, "I have been ordered to come here, where else can I go? I am determined to live and die with this city."

古文：命筑各门瓮城，前后拒战六十四日，既而大败贼众。
现代文：下令在各城门之外筑月城，前后坚守六十四日，挫败攻城义军。
English: It was ordered to build a moon castle outside each gate and hold out for 64 days, defeating the attacking rebels.

古文：明年，召还，授山东宣慰使，再转知枢密院事、平章山东行省，守御益都。
现代文：次年召还，授山东宣慰使再转知枢密院事，平章山东行省，守御益都。
English: The following year, he was recalled to Shandong, and was awarded the title of Shandong Xuanlian so that he could be transferred to the Privy Council. He was also appointed to Shandong Province to guard the Imperial Capital of Yiwu.

古文：大明兵压境，普颜不花捍城力战。城陷，而平章政事保保出降。
现代文：时朱元璋兵大至，城陷，平章政事保保出降。
English: When Zhu Yuanzhang's army was too large, the castle fell, and Pingzhang's political affairs were guaranteed to rise and fall.

古文：普颜不花还告其母曰： 儿忠孝不能两全，有二弟，当为终养。 拜母，趋官舍，坐堂上。主将素闻其贤，召之再三，不往。
现代文：普颜不花力战不支，归家告别母亲说， 儿忠孝不能两全，只能由二弟来奉养母亲了 ，讲后，便直奔政府大堂，像办公似地 坐堂 ，起义军主将素闻其贤，再三劝降，不听，只好把他捆起来。
English: Puyan said goodbye to her mother after returning home, saying that children cannot be both loyal and filial, and that her mother can only be supported by her second brother. After the speech, she went straight to the government lobby and sat in the hall like an office. The leader of the rebel army was well known for his wisdom, and repeatedly persuaded him to surrender. When he did not listen, she had to tie him up.

古文：既而面缚之，普颜不花曰： 我元朝进士，官至极品，臣各为其主。 
现代文：普颜不花对起义军主将说： 我是元朝进士，官至极品，我们各为其主吧。 
English: He said to the commander of the insurgent army, "I am a veteran of the Yuan Dynasty, and I am the best officer. Let's each be our own master."

古文：遂自经。
现代文：宁死不降。
English: I'd rather die than surrender.

古文：闵本，字宗先，河内人。性刚正敏给，而刻志于学。
现代文：普颜不花之妻阿鲁真也以 夫受国恩，我亦封齐国夫人，事至如此，唯有死耳 ，便和弟媳一道携婢妾抱幼子投井而死。闵本字宗先，河内人。性情刚毅敏捷，刻志于学。
English: Puyan's wife, Aru Zhen, also received the grace of the state with her husband, and I also received the grace of the state, so it was only a dead ear, and together with my sister-in-law, I threw myself into the well with my concubine and child. Enomoto Zongxian, a native of Hanoi. Tough and agile temperament, determined to learn.

古文：早岁得推择为礼部令史，御史大夫不花奇本之才，辟以为掾，平反冤狱，甚有声。
现代文：早年任礼部令史，御史大夫不花见他有奇才，招为部属助理。其于平反冤狱，颇有声誉。
English: In his early years, he was appointed as the history of the Ministry of Ceremonies. It did not take long for Dr. Goshi to see that he was a prodigy, and he recruited him as a subordinate assistant. He has quite a reputation for rehabilitating wrongful imprisonment.

古文：擢御史台照磨。
现代文：后提升为御史台照磨。
English: Later, it was upgraded to Goshidai Shōma.

古文：顷之，迁枢密院都事，拜监察御史，迁中书左司都事，五转为吏部尚书，移刑、户二部，皆以能见称。
现代文：接着，迁任枢密院都事、监察御史、中书左司都事、吏部尚书及刑、户二部尚书等职。在所有的职位上，他都干得很出色。
English: Next, he was transferred to the Privy Council, the Office of the Inspector-General of History, the Office of the Registrar-General of the People's Republic of China, the Office of the Registrar-General of the People's Republic of China, the Office of the Registrar-General of the People's Republic of China, the Office of the Registrar-General of the People's Republic of China, and the Office of the Registrar-General of the People's Republic of China. In all positions, he did an excellent job.

古文：本素贫，且有目疾，尝上章乞谢事，不允，诏授集贤侍讲学士。
现代文：闵本一向清贫，有目病，曾要求朝廷免除他的职务，但未获准许，还被授予集贤侍讲学士。
English: Enomoto, who had always been poor and suffered from poor eyesight, had asked the Imperial Court to relieve him of his duties, but was not allowed to do so. He was also awarded the title of Jixianbei Lecturer.

古文：大明兵薄京师，本谓其妻程氏曰： 国事至此，吾知之久矣。愧不能立功补报，敢爱六尺躯苟活哉！ 
现代文：朱元璋反元义军接近首都时，本对妻说 ，我很早就已知道元朝不久了，自愧不能为国立功，现在只能以死报君，不敢贪生苟活。 
English: When Zhu Yuanzhang's anti-Yuan rebels approached the capital, he said to his wife, "I have known for a long time that the Yuan Dynasty is not long, I am ashamed to be unable to be a national merit, now I can only repay you with death, I dare not live greedily."

古文：程氏曰： 君能死忠，我尚有爱于君乎！ 
现代文：妻子说： 你能以死忠君，我还能阻止你吗？ 
English: My wife said, "Can you be loyal to your husband until death, and can I still stop you?"

古文：本乃朝服，与程氏北向再拜，大书于屋壁曰： 元中奉大夫、集贤侍讲学士闵本死。 遂各缢焉。
现代文：于是夫妻向北再拜，书写 元中奉大夫、集贤侍讲学士闵本死 等字句于墙上，遂同时自缢死。
English: As a result, the husband and wife bowed to the north again and wrote the words "the original junior high school doctor, the collection of virtuous attendants and lecturers, and the death of the scholar" on the wall, and then simultaneously strangled themselves to death.

古文：二女：长真真，次女女，见本死，呼天号泣，亦自缢于其傍。有拜住者，康里人也，字闻善。
现代文：二女见父母已死，亦各自缢于旁。又有拜住者，康里人，字闻善。
English: When the two daughters saw that their parents were dead, they also huddled together. There were also worshipers, people from Kangri, who were good at reading and writing.

古文：以材累官至翰林国史院都事，为太子司经。
现代文：以才能历任翰林国史院都事、太子司经等职。
English: With his talent, he was successively appointed to the capital affairs of the Hanlin Institute of National History, and the position of the prince's secretary.

古文：兵至，拜住谓家人曰： 吾始祖海蓝伯封河东公者，与太祖同事王可汗，太祖取王可汗，收诸部落，吾祖引数十骑驰西北方，太祖使人追问之，曰： 昔者与皇帝同事王可汗，王可汗今已灭，欲为之报仇，则帝乃天命；欲改事帝，则吾心有所不忍，故避之于远地，以没吾生耳。 
现代文：反元义军至，拜住对家中人说： 我始祖海蓝伯封河东郡公，与太祖铁木真同事王可汗，后来太祖取代王可汗，统一诸部落，我始祖引数十骑驰向西北方。太祖使人追问对太祖灭王可汗事采取何种态度，始祖对太祖说： 过去我和你共同效忠可汗，今王可汗已灭，我为他报仇吗，便有违天命，因为你今天的境况是天命所定，我顺天命再来侍奉你吗，我又觉得对不起王可汗，故决心远走高飞，混我的下辈子。 
English: When the anti-Yuan rebels arrived, Bai Zhu said to his family members: My ancestor, Hai Lan Bo, was the governor of Hedong County, and my great-grandfather, Tiemu Zhen, was a colleague of Wang Khan. Later, my great-grandfather replaced Wang Khan to unify the tribes. My great-grandfather led dozens of horsemen to the northwest. My great-grandfather made people ask what kind of attitude they should take towards my great-grandfather's extermination of Wang Khan. My great-grandfather said to my great-grandfather: In the past, I was loyal to Khan together with you. Now King Khan is dead. If I take revenge

古文：此吾祖之言也。
现代文：这是我始祖说过的话。
English: This is what my forefathers said.

古文：且吾祖生朔漠，其言尚如此，今吾生长中原，读书国学，而可不知大义乎！
现代文：我认为，我祖先在漠北，还能说这样讲义气的话，如今我生在中原，在国子学，知书达理，还能不明大义吗？
English: I think that my ancestors in the north of the desert can still say such words of loyalty, now I was born in the Central Plains, in the study of the country, I know the book, can I still not know the truth?

古文：况吾上世受国厚恩，至吾又食禄，今其国破，尚忍见之！与其苟生，不如死。 
现代文：何况我的上辈人已深受元朝厚恩，我自己又在元朝为官，今天元朝溃灭，我不忍看到这种情况，与其苟生不如死。 
English: What's more, my seniors had been deeply favored by the Yuan Dynasty, and I myself was an official in the Yuan Dynasty. Today, the Yuan Dynasty has collapsed. I can't bear to see this situation. I'd rather die than live like this.

古文：遂赴井死。
现代文：遂投井而死。
English: He then threw himself into a well and died.

古文：其家人瘗之舍东，悉以其书籍焚之为殉云。
现代文：家人把他葬于宅东边，把他所有的书籍作为殉葬品烧掉。
English: His family buried him on the east side of the house and burned all his books as a funeral gift.

古文：赵弘毅，字仁卿，真定晋州人。
现代文：赵弘毅字仁卿，真定晋州人。
English: Zhao Hongyi, surnamed Renqing, was from Jinzhou.

古文：少好学，家贫无书，佣于巨室，昼则为役，夜则借书读之。
现代文：少好学，家贫无书，便到富人家帮工，白天干活，夜晚借书读。
English: If a child is not good at learning and the family is poor and has no books, he will go to the rich family to help, work during the day, and borrow books to read at night.

古文：或闵其志，但使总其事而不役焉。
现代文：主人同情他这种好学之心，只使他管其事而不亲自劳动，以满足他好学的要求。
English: His master sympathized with his eagerness to learn, and only let him take care of things without working personally to meet his eagerness to learn.

古文：尝受经于临川吴澄。始辟翰林书写，再转为国史院编修官，调大乐署令。
现代文：他曾受教于临川吴澄，开始被推举为翰林书写，再转为国史院编修官，调大乐署令。
English: He was taught by Linchuan Wu Cheng, and was first elected to write Hanlin, and then became an editor of the National Academy of History, and the director of the Department of Music.

古文：大明兵入京城，弘毅叹息曰； 忠臣不二君，烈女不二夫，此古语也。
现代文：反元起义军进京城时，弘毅叹息说： 忠臣不事二君，烈女不事二夫，这是古人说的话。
English: When the anti-Yuan rebels entered Beijing, Hongyi sighed and said: "A loyal subject does not need two princes, a brave woman does not need two husbands. This is what the ancients said.

古文：我今力不能救社稷，但有一死报国耳。 
现代文：我今天不能拯救元朝的政权，就只有以一死报之。 
English: If I can't save the Yuan regime today, I can only repay it with my death.

古文：乃与妻解氏皆自缢。
现代文：乃和妻解氏同时自缢死。
English: However, he and his wife, Katsuji, both committed suicide at the same time.

古文：其子恭，中书管勾，与妻子诀曰： 今乘舆北奔，我父子食禄，不能效尺寸力，吾父母已死，尚何敢爱死乎！ 
现代文：弘毅之子赵恭，任中书管勾。在反元军入京时，与妻子诀别说： 今皇上北逃，我父子吃俸禄，不能报效尺寸之力，父母已死，我还何敢爱命不死呢？ 
English: When the anti-Yuan army entered Beijing, he said goodbye to his wife: "Now the emperor has fled to the north, my father and son are paid a salary, I can't repay the power of size, my parents are dead, how dare I love life and not die?"

古文：或止之曰： 我曹官卑，何自苦如此。 
现代文：有人劝他说： 我辈小官，何必自苦如此？ 
English: Someone advised him: "Petty officers like us, why do we have to suffer like this?

古文：郑玉，字子美，徽州歙县人。
现代文：恭斥责说 ：你和我不一样，过去忠义之人，各尽自心，岂能问职位高低吗？ 
English: You and I are different, said the scold. Can a man who has been faithful in the past, and who has done his best, ask for a higher or lower position?

古文：幼敏悟嗜学，既长，覃思《六经》，尤邃于《春秋》，绝意仕进，而勤于教。学者门人受业者众，所居至不能容。学者相与即其地构师山书院以处焉。
现代文：乃穿上礼服向北再拜，也自缢而死。郑玉字子美，徽州歙县人，年幼聪明好学，深悉六经，尤精于春秋。无意做官而勤于教学，学子门人前来求学的很多，以致房子容不下，有的学生便在他的住处旁就地建造 师山书院 作为课堂宿舍。
English: Zheng Yu Zi Mei, a native of Yixian County, Huizhou, was bright and eager to learn at a young age. He was well versed in the Six Classics of Confucianism, especially in the Spring and Autumn. He was diligent in teaching without intending to become an official, and many students came to study, so much so that the house could not accommodate them. Some students built Shishan Academy next to his residence as a classroom dormitory.

古文：玉为文章，不事雕刻煅炼，流传京师，揭徯斯、欧阳玄咸加称赏。
现代文：郑玉的文章不必再三雕琢锤炼，便流传京师，揭彳奚斯、欧阳玄都交口称赞。
English: Zheng Yu's article does not need to be repeatedly carved and tempered, it will be passed on to the Beijing division, and it will be praised by both Zhang Ye and Ouyang Xuan.

古文：至正十四年，朝廷除玉翰林待制、奉议大夫，遣使者赐以御酒名币，浮海征之。
现代文：至正十四年朝廷任命他为翰林待制、奉议大夫，并遣使者赐以御酒与钱币，从海路去征用他。
English: In the 14th year of the Heian period, the imperial court appointed him as a doctor of Hanlin, and sent an envoy to requisition him by sea, giving him wine and money.

古文：玉辞疾不起，而为表以进曰： 名爵者，祖宗之所以遗陛下，使与天下贤者共之者，陛下不得私予人。
现代文：玉推辞自己有病，不去就职，并向皇帝写了一份报告说： 名称爵号，是祖宗遗留给皇帝的，是要皇帝和天下圣者共有的，皇帝不能私下给人。
English: Jade prevaricated that he was ill and would not attend the inauguration, and wrote a report to the emperor: The name and title of peer, bequeathed to the emperor by his ancestors, is to be shared by the emperor and the saints of the world. The emperor cannot give it to anyone in private.

古文：待制之职，臣非其才，不敢受。
现代文：待制一职，我非胜任之才，不敢接受。
English: I do not dare to accept a position on the waiting list unless I am qualified for it.

古文：酒与币，天下所以奉陛下，陛下得以私与人，酒与币，臣不敢辞也。 
现代文：酒与钱币是天下人奉献给皇帝的，皇帝也可以私下给人，故酒与钱币，我不敢不受。 
English: Wine and money are dedicated to the emperor by the people of the world, and the emperor can also give them to people privately. Therefore, I dare not accept the wine and money.

古文：玉既不仕，则家居，日以著书为事，所著有《周易纂注》。
现代文：玉既不做官，就在家日以著书为事，所著有《周易纂注》。
English: Since he was not an official, he spent his days at home writing books. He is the author of "Zhou Yi Codification Note."

古文：十七年，大明兵入徽州，守将将要致之，玉曰： 吾岂事二姓者耶！ 
现代文：十七年，反元义军进入徽州时，也有意罗致郑玉，玉说： 我哪能事二姓？ 
English: In the seventeenth year, when the anti-Yuan rebels entered Huizhou, Luo also intended to call Zheng Yu. Yu said: How can I have two surnames?

古文：因被拘囚。
现代文：于是被反元义军拘囚。
English: As a result, he was taken prisoner by the rebels.

古文：久之，亲戚朋友携具饷之，则从容为之尽欢，且告以必死状。
现代文：时间长了，亲戚朋友便都带吃的东西去探监，玉态度从容，与亲友尽欢，但誓称必死。
English: After a long time, relatives and friends all brought food to visit the prisoner. Jade took it easy and had a good time with relatives and friends, but vowed to die.

古文：今纵无我戮，何面目见天下士乎！ 
现代文：其妻听后说， 你如死，我便从你于地下。 
English: When his wife heard this, she said, "If you die, I'll leave you underground."

古文：遂赴井而死，年六十一。
现代文：玉得知妻的态度，便对妻说， 你如果真随我去死，我就没有遗憾了。 
English: When Jade learned of her wife's attitude, she said to her wife, "If you really die with me, I will have no regrets."

古文：有诗文传于世。
现代文：次日，便整理衣冠，向北再拜后，自缢死。
English: The next day, he tidied up his clothes, bowed to the north, and then strangled himself.

古文：柏帖穆尔，字君寿，蒙古人。
现代文：柏帖穆尔字君寿，蒙古族人。
English: A Mongolian, he is also known by his nom de guerre, Kim Soo.

古文：家世历履无所考。居官所至，以廉能著声。
现代文：其家世履历无所考，但知凡是他任过职的地方，都留有廉洁的名声。
English: His family history has not been examined, but it is known that wherever he has held office, he has left a reputation for integrity.

古文：至正中，累迁为福建行省左右司郎中。行省治福州。
现代文：至正中期，迁升为福建行省左右司郎中，行省省治在福州。
English: In the mid-to-late 20th century, he was promoted to the middle-ranking official of the Fujian Provincial Government. The provincial government was based in Fuzhou.

古文：二十七年，大明以骑兵出杉关，取邵武，以舟师由海道趣闽，奄至城下。
现代文：至正二十七年，朱元璋以骑兵出杉关，取邵武，以水军由海道趋福建，兵临福州城下。
English: In the 27th year of the reign of Zhu Yuanzhang, Zhu Yuanzhang led his cavalry out of Sugiguan to take Shaowu, and his navy headed for Fujian by sea, and his soldiers arrived at the city of Fuzhou.

古文：柏帖穆尔知城不可守，引妻妾坐楼上，慷慨谓曰： 丈夫死国，妇人死夫，义也。
现代文：柏帖穆尔知道城不可守，便引家人坐在城楼上，慷慨宣称： 丈夫为国而死，妻子为夫而死，是大义事。
English: Knowing that the city could not be defended, Pottymoor led his family to sit on the towers of the city and generously declared: "It is a great justice for a husband to die for his country and for a wife to die for her husband."

古文：今城且陷，吾必死于是，若等能吾从乎？ 
现代文：今守城将陷落，我必死在此，尔等能随我而死吗？ 
English: Now the castle is about to fall, and I'm going to die here. Will you die with me?

古文：皆泣曰： 有死而已，无他志也。 缢而死者六人。
现代文：其妻妾都哭着说 ，有死而已，别无他志 ，于是同时缢死者六人。
English: His wives and concubines all cried and said, "There is only death, there is nothing else," so he killed six of the dead at the same time.

古文：有十岁女，度其不能自死，则绐之曰： 汝稽颡拜佛，庶保我无恙也。 
现代文：柏帖穆尔还有女十岁，他估计女儿无能力自杀，乃骗女儿说： 你磕头拜佛以求保佑我不生病，好吗？ 
English: Pottymoor also had a ten-year-old daughter, whom he thought incapable of committing suicide, but tricked her by saying: "Would you bow down to the Buddha to keep me from getting sick?

古文：乃命媪抱匿旁近民舍，而敛金珠畀之曰： 即有缓急，可以此赎儿命。 
现代文：等女儿刚一磕头，便取一米袋压女儿头部致死。时乳母抱其幼子，站在旁边哭泣，柏帖穆尔久久凝视后叹道 ：父死国，母死夫，妾与女从父者皆当死，汝三岁儿，应怎么办呢？
English: As soon as her daughter bumped her head, she took a one-meter sack and pressed her daughter's head to death. When the nanny held her infant son and stood by weeping, Bertemur stared for a long time and sighed: Father dead country, mother dead husband, concubine and daughter-in-law should all die, you three-year-old, what should you do?

古文：有顷，兵入城，即举灯自燃，四围窗火大发，遂自焚死。
现代文：把你留下来传宗接代吧！ 乃命乳母把幼儿藏于旁近民家，并搜集家中的金银珠宝给乳母，让她在紧急需要时，可以此财物赎幼儿之命。不久，反元义军入城，柏帖穆尔便举灯自焚死。
English: The nanny hid the child in a nearby house and gathered the family's gold, silver and jewels to give to the nanny, so that she could redeem the child's life in an emergency.Soon, the rebels entered the city, and Bertemur lit a lamp and burned himself to death.

古文：迭里弥实，字子初，回回人。
现代文：迭里弥实字子初，回回人。
English: Diligently, Yasushi began to write, and eventually became a writer.

古文：性刚介，事母至孝。
现代文：性刚强耿介，对母亲极为孝敬。
English: Gengsuke has a strong character and is extremely respectful towards his mother.

古文：年四十，犹不仕，或问之，曰： 吾不忍舍吾母以去也。 
现代文：年已四十，还不肯去做官，有人问他，他说 ：我不忍离开母亲。 
English: At the age of forty, he still refused to become an official. When asked, he said, "I can't bear to leave my mother."

古文：以宿卫年劳，授行宣政院崇教，三迁为漳州路达鲁花赤，居三年，居甚安之。
现代文：因参加宿卫多年，有劳绩，授行宣政院崇教，三度转任为漳州路达鲁花赤，在漳州任职三年，民众甚是安定。
English: Because of his many years of service in the Guards, he was awarded the highest honor of the Xuan Zheng Academy, and was appointed as the Luzhou Ludar of the Red Flowers for three times. He served in Luzhou for three years, and the people were very stable.

古文：时陈有定据全闽，八郡之政，皆用其私人以总制之。
现代文：陈有定据全福建，八郡的政事，皆安插私人统制。
English: Chen has made it clear that all of Fujian, including the eight counties, will be under private control.

古文：朝廷命官，不得有所与。
现代文：朝廷任命的官吏，不能参与其事。
English: Officials appointed by the imperial court cannot participate in it.

古文：大明兵既取福州，兴化、泉州皆纳款。
现代文：后朱元璋军既取福州，兴化、泉州皆归顺。
English: After Zhu Yuanzhang's army took Fuzhou, Xinghua and Quanzhou all surrendered.

古文：或以告，迭里弥实仰天叹曰： 吾不材，位三品，国恩厚矣，其何以报乎！
现代文：或有告之此事，迭里弥实仰天悲叹说 ：我无用，官居三品，受朝廷厚恩，怎么报答朝廷呢？
English: When there was a complaint about this matter, Dairi Yasushi looked up to the heavens and lamented, "I am useless, I hold three official ranks, I am favored by the Imperial Court, how can I repay the Imperial Court?"

古文：既死，犹手执刀按膝坐，俨然如生时。郡民相聚哭庭中，敛其尸，葬东门外。
现代文：只有以死报国恩。 不久，漳州官吏告诉他说，明朝派使者来了，请他出城迎接。他从容不迫地对部下说： 你先去，我随后出城。 至官府大堂，身着公服，向北方再拜毕，用斧劈其印，再在名帖上大书 大元臣子 字样后，入位端坐，拔佩刀自刎喉。
English: Soon, the officials of Zhangzhou told him that an envoy had been sent in the morning to invite him out of the city to meet them. He calmly said to his subordinates: "You go first, I will leave the city later." He went to the lobby of the government office, dressed in his official uniform, bowed to the north, cut his seal with an axe, and wrote the words "great vassal" on his name board. After that, he sat down and drew his sword to cut his own throat.

古文：时又有获独步丁者，回回人，旧进士，累官佥广东廉访司事；有吕复者，为江西行省左右司都事。皆闲居，寓福州。而复以行省命，摄长乐县尹。
现代文：死时犹执刀按膝，俨如生时。时又有获独步丁者，回回人，元朝进士，官至佥广东廉访司事。有称吕复的人，为江西行省左右司都事，都闲居福州，吕复受行省之命，代理长乐县知县。
English: At the time of his death, he was kneeling with his sword at his side, and when he was alive, he was kneeling with his sword at his side. At the same time, there were those who had been promoted to the highest ranks, those who had returned to China, those who had been promoted to the Yuan Dynasty, and those who had been promoted to the highest ranks in Guangdong. The famous Lu Fu lived in Fuzhou, and he was appointed by the governor of Jiangxi Province to be the deputy of Changle County and Zhixian County.

古文：福州既下，获独步丁曰： 吾兄弟三人，皆忝进士，受国恩四十年，今虽无官守，然大节所在，其可辱乎！ 
现代文：福州既为反元义军所据，获独步丁便说： 我兄弟三人，都是进士，受朝廷之恩四十年。今虽没有官职，但大节所在，岂能玷污。 
English: Since Fuzhou was a stronghold of the anti-Yuan rebels, Ding said when he was promoted: My three brothers are all high-ranking soldiers, and have been favored by the imperial court for forty years. Although they do not have official positions now, but they are in Daqing, how can they be tarnished?

古文：获独步丁兄曰穆鲁丁者，官建康；曰海鲁丁者，官信州。先是，亦皆死国难云。
现代文：乃以石头系在腰上沉井水而死。吕复也说： 我世食君主俸禄，今虽是兼任官，若不以死报效朝廷，则无脸见先人于地下。 
English: But he died with a stone tied around his waist and the water of the well below. Lü Fu also said, "I have always lived off the salary of the monarch. Although I am now also an official, if I do not repay the imperial court with my death, then I will have no face to see my ancestors in the ground."

古文：朴赛因不花，字德中，肃良合台人。
现代文：乃用绳子自缢而死。朴赛因不花字德中，肃良合台人。
English: But he hanged himself with a rope and died. Pak Sai was a virtuous man and a good Taiwanese because he did not waste words.

古文：有膂力，善骑射。
现代文：体力过人，善骑射。
English: He has superior physical strength and is good at riding and shooting.

古文：由速古儿赤授利器库提点，再转为资正院判官，累迁同知枢密院事，迁翰林学士，寻升承旨，赐虎符，兼巡军合浦全罗等处军民万户都元帅，除大司农，出为岭北行省右丞，升平章政事。
现代文：由速古儿赤任命为利器库提点，再转为资正院判官，接着迁任同知枢密院事、迁任翰林学士。不久，又升承旨，赐虎符，兼巡军合浦、全罗等处军民万户都元帅，任大司农，又离京任岭北行省右丞，升平章政事。
English: He was appointed as a sharpshooter of the sharpshooter's library, and then he became a judge of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, and then he was transferred to the Tongzhi Privy Council, and then to the Hanlin Academy. Soon, he was promoted to the position of general, given the Tiger Badge, and also became the marshal of the army and the people of all the provinces such as Hapu and Jeolla, and was appointed as the chief secretary of agriculture. He was also transferred from Beijing to Lingbei to be the provincial right-hand man, and was promoted to the position of political affairs.

古文：至正二十四年，甘肃行省以孛罗帖木儿矫弑皇后、皇孙，遣人白事，平章政事也速答儿即欲署谕众榜，朴赛因不花持不可曰： 此大事，何得轻信，况非符验公文。 
现代文：至正二十四年，甘肃行省以孛罗帖木儿诈称皇后、皇孙被杀，遣人报告。平章政事也速答儿即欲就此事发布告示，晓谕民众。朴赛因不花认为不可，他说 ，此大事，何得轻信，何况现在提供此情的并非经检验的公文 ，最后，还是没有发布告示。
English: In the 24th year of the Joseon Dynasty, Gansu Province sent a report to Luo Timur, who falsely claimed that the empress and her grandson had been killed. Pingzhang Zhengji also quickly replied that he wanted to issue a notice on this matter to inform the public. Because he did not think it was necessary, he said, "This event is not credible, and what's more, it is not a verified official document to provide this situation. In the end, no notice was issued.

古文：卒不署榜。既而果妄传。
现代文：后来事实证明果真是妄传。
English: It later turned out to be a hoax.

古文：会皇太子抚军冀宁，承制拜朴赛因不花翰林学士承旨，迁集贤大学士，又为宣政院使，遂拜中书平章政事。
现代文：恰逢这时皇太子在冀宁带兵，拜朴赛因不花为翰林学士承旨，后迁集贤大学士，又为宣政院使，拜中书平章政事。
English: At that time, the crown prince was leading an army in Jining. Baiposai did not spend much time as a scholar of Hanlin, and later moved to gather scholars and scholars. He was also an envoy of the Xuancheng Academy, and paid attention to the government affairs of Pingzhang.

古文：大明兵逼京师，诏朴赛因不花以兵守顺承门，其所领兵仅数百羸卒而已。乃叹息谓左右曰： 国事至此，吾但知与此门同存亡也。 
现代文：朱元璋的大军逼近京师，朝廷诏令朴赛因不花守顺承门。时朴赛因不花之兵仅数百老弱之卒，乃对左右叹息说： 政局已发展到如此地步，我只有和顺承门共存亡了。 
English: When Zhu Yuanzhang's army was approaching Beijing, the imperial court ordered Pak Sai to retreat because he did not spend money to defend the Shuncheng Gate. At that time, Pak Sai was only a few hundred old and weak soldiers, but he sighed to the left and right, saying: The political situation has developed to such a degree that I can only coexist with the Shuncheng Gate.

古文：城陷被执，以见主将，唯请速死，不少屈。
现代文：后来城陷被执，见朱元璋军的主将时，只求快死，不肯屈服。
English: Later, when the castle was captured and he saw the commander of Zhu Yuanzhang's army, he only asked for a quick death and refused to give in.

古文：主将命留营中，终不屈，杀之。
现代文：明军将领命留营中，终因其拒降被杀。
English: The Ming general stayed in the camp and was eventually killed for his refusal to surrender.

古文：是时有张庸者，字存中，温州人。
现代文：同时还有张庸这个人，字存中，是温州人。
English: At the same time, there is also Zhang Yong, who is a Wenzhou native.

古文：性豪爽，精太乙数，会世乱，以策干经略使李国凤，承制授庸福建行省员外郎，治兵杉关。
现代文：性豪爽，精通道教经典。正逢世乱，向经略使李国凤提出治世之策。李受命任庸为福建行省员外郎，领兵驻守杉关。
English: Li Guofeng, a man with a heroic nature and a classic of fine channel teaching, proposed a strategy for ruling the world to Li Guofeng, the Minister of Economic Affairs, at a time when the world was in turmoil. Li was assigned to be the foreign minister of Fujian Province and the leader of the troops stationed in Sugiguan.

古文：顷之，计事赴京师，因进《太乙数图》，顺帝喜之，擢秘书少监。
现代文：不久，因议事赴京，向顺帝献《太乙数图》，顺帝很高兴，提拔为秘书少监。
English: Soon after, he went to Beijing for business and presented "Tai Yi Ji Pu" to Emperor Shun. Emperor Shun was very pleased and promoted him to the position of secretary and junior inspector.

古文：皇太子立大抚军院，命庸团结房山，迁同佥将作院事，又除刑部尚书，仍领团结。
现代文：皇太子立大抚军院，命庸到房山训练民兵，迁同佥将作院事，又任为刑部尚书，仍管领民兵。
English: The crown prince set up the Dafu Military Academy, and ordered Zeng to go to Fangshan to train the militia. Zeng, who had been transferred to Fangshan, was put in charge of the affairs of the academy, and was also appointed as the secretary of the Penal Department, still in charge of the militia.

古文：会诸寨既降，庸守骆驼谷，遣从事段祯请援于扩廓帖木儿，不报。
现代文：当诸寨已降反元义军时，庸守骆驼谷，遣从事段祯向扩廓帖木儿求援，援军不至。
English: When Zhuzhai had already fallen to the rebels, Yang Shou of Camel Valley sent Duan Xuan to Zhan Guo Timur for help, but reinforcements did not arrive.

古文：庸独坚守拒战，众将溃，庸无去志。
现代文：庸独自抵抗，虽众将逃散，他还坚守岗位。
English: Yon alone resisted. Although the crowd dispersed, he remained at his post.

古文：已而寨民李世杰执庸出降，以见主将，庸不屈，与祯同被杀。
现代文：后来寨民李世杰执庸出降，并使令见反元义军主将，终因庸不愿站到反元军一边，与段祯同被杀。
English: Later, the villager Li Shijie made Duan Rong surrender, and made Duan Rong the leader of the anti-Yuan rebel army. However, Duan Rong was unwilling to stand on the side of the anti-Yuan army, and was killed together with Duan Rong.

古文：丁好礼，字敬可，真定蠡州人。
现代文：丁好礼字敬可，真定蠡州人。
English: Ding good etiquette and words of respect can be, really determined by the people of Zhangzhou.

古文：精律算，初试吏于户部，辟中书掾，授户部主事，擢江南行台监察御史，复入户部为员外郎，拜监察御史，又入户部为郎中，升侍郎。
现代文：精于音律书算。初试用于户部，举为中书椽，授与户部主事。提升为江南行台监察御史，回户部为员外。拜监察御史后，又入户部为郎中，升侍郎。
English: He was good at musical notation and arithmetic. At the first trial, he was assigned to the household department, promoted to the middle secretary, and given the position of the head of the household department. He was promoted to the inspector of the Southern Yangtze River, and returned to the household department as a non-member. After serving as the inspector of the household department, he entered the household department as a junior clerk, and was promoted to a junior clerk.

古文：除京畿漕运使，建议置司于通州，重讲究漕运利病，著为成法，人皆便之。
现代文：任京畿漕运使时，曾建议设漕运机构于通州，很注重漕运的利弊，著为成法，人皆便之。
English: When he was appointed as the Gyeonggi Railroad Commissioner, he proposed to set up a railroad transportation agency in Tongzhou. He paid great attention to the pros and cons of railroad transportation, and wrote a law to make it convenient for everyone.

古文：除户部尚书。时国家多故，财用空乏，好礼能撙节浮费，国家用度，赖之以给。
现代文：任户部尚书时，因国家多事，财用空虚，好礼能抑制浮费，使国家用度得以供给。
English: When the Minister of Household Affairs was still in office, due to the country's many affairs, financial use was empty, and good etiquette could restrain floating costs, so that the country's consumption could be supplied.

古文：拜参议中书省事，迁治书侍御史，出为辽阳行省左丞，未行，留为枢密副使。
现代文：又任参议中书省事、治书侍御史等职，还将离京任辽阳行省左丞，未到职，便留京任枢密副使。
English: He was also appointed to the posts of Counselor of the Central Government, Secretary of the Central Government, Secretary of the Central Government, and Secretary of the Central Government. He would also leave Beijing to serve as Liaoyang Provincial Secretary of the Central Government, and before taking office, he would stay in Beijing to serve as Vice-Minister of the Privy Council.

古文：至正二十年，遂拜中书参知政事。
现代文：至正十二年又任中书参知政事。
English: In the twelfth year of the Taisho era, he was appointed to the post of Chusho-sanchi.

古文：时京师大饥，天寿节，庙堂欲用故事大宴会，好礼言： 今民父子有相食者，君臣当修省，以弭大患，燕会宜减常度。 
现代文：时京城大饥荒，皇帝生日，朝廷有人想沿旧例举行盛大宴会，好礼说： 今百姓有父子相食者，君臣宜修身反省，以消除大患，故宴会当降低规格、节约开支才是。 
English: At the time of the great famine in Beijing and the emperor's birthday, some people in the imperial court wanted to hold a grand banquet in accordance with the old custom. They politely said, "Nowadays, the common people have father-son cannibals. Monarchs and ministers should reflect on themselves in order to eliminate the big disease. Therefore, the banquet should be reduced in size and cost-saving.

古文：不听，乞谢事，乃以集贤大学士致仕，给全俸家居。
现代文：朝廷不采纳，好礼请求准予辞职，便以集贤大学士的荣誉头衔给全俸退休。
English: The court did not accept his resignation, so he politely asked for permission to resign, and then retired with full salary with the honorary title of Jixian University Scholar.

古文：扩廓帖木儿扈从皇太子还京，输山东粟以遗朝贵，馈好礼麦百石，好礼不受。
现代文：扩廓帖木儿随从皇太子回京时，运回山东粮食赐予朝廷贵族，也送好礼百石麦，好礼不受。
English: When Zhangkuo Timur followed the crown prince back to Beijing, he transported grain from Shandong back to the imperial court to give to the nobles. He also sent a gift of 100 kilos of barley, but the gift was not accepted.

古文：二十七年，复起为中书平章政事，寻以论议不合，谢政去，特封赵国公。大明兵入京城，或勉其谒大将，好礼叱之曰： 我以小吏致位极品，爵上公，今老矣，恨无以报国，所欠惟一死耳。 
现代文：二十七年，再被起用为中书平章政事，不久，又因政见不合去职。元朝灭亡，有人劝说好礼去会见明军大将，好礼斥责说 ：我以小吏出身，官位到极品，爵为上公，现在我老了，自恨不能报效朝廷，所缺者只一死耳。 
English: In the 27th year, he was again appointed to the political affairs of Pingzhang, and soon left the post because of his political views. When the Yuan Dynasty fell, someone persuaded Horei to meet with the general of the Ming Army, and Horei scolded him, saying, "I was born as a minor official, I have reached the highest rank, and I am a peer. Now I am old, and I hate myself for not being able to serve the imperial court. The only thing I lack is a deaf ear."

古文：后数日，大将召好礼，不肯行，舁至齐化门，抗辞不屈而死，年七十五。
现代文：数日后，明军大将召见好礼，好礼不肯见，抬至齐化门，不屈而死，年七十五岁。
English: A few days later, the general of the Ming army summoned him, but he refused to see him, and carried him to Qihua Gate, where he died at the age of seventy-five.

