古文：田单者，齐诸田疏属也。
现代文：田单，是齐国田氏王族的远房本家。
English: Tianlan is the ancestral home of the royal family of the Tian clan in Qi.

古文：湣王时，单为临菑市掾，不见知。
现代文：齐湣王时期，田单担任首都临菑市佐理市政的小官，没有受到齐王重用。
English: During the reign of King Qizong, Tian Dan served as a minor official of the capital city of Linyi, Sari Municipality, but was not given much importance by King Qizong.

古文：及燕使乐毅伐破齐，齐湣王出奔，已而保莒城。
现代文：后来，燕国派遣大将乐毅攻破齐国，齐湣王被迫从都城逃跑，不久又退守莒城。
English: Later, Yan sent general Le Yi to conquer Qi, and the king of Qi was forced to flee from the capital, and soon retreated to the defense of Lucheng.

古文：燕师长驱平齐，而田单走安平，令其宗人尽断其车轴末而傅铁笼。
现代文：在燕国军队长驱直入征讨齐国之时，田单也离开都城，逃到安平，叫他的族人们把车轴两端突出的部分统统锯断而裹上铁皮。
English: When the commander of Yan's army drove straight into the conquest of Qi, Tian Shan also left the capital and fled to Anping, telling his people to saw off all the parts protruding from both ends of the axle and wrap them in iron.

古文：已而燕军攻安平，城坏，齐人走，争涂，以轊折车败，为燕所虏，唯田单宗人以铁笼故得脱，东保即墨。
现代文：不久，燕军又围攻安平，城池被攻破，齐国人抢路逃亡，许多人都因车轴被撞断，被燕军俘虏。只有田单和同族人因用铁箍包住了车轴，得以逃脱，向东退守即墨。
English: Soon, Yan's army besieged Anping again, the city was breached, and the Qi people fled. Many people were broken by the axle and captured by Yan's army. Only Tian Shan and his compatriots were able to escape because they wrapped the axle with a shovel and retreated to the east.

古文：燕既尽降齐城，唯独莒、即墨不下。
现代文：这时候，燕国军队已经全部降服了齐国的城邑，只有莒和即墨两个城池还没有被攻破。
English: At this time, Yan's army had already conquered all of Qi's cities and towns. Only the two cities of Ya and Mo had not yet been conquered.

古文：燕军闻齐王在莒，并兵攻之。
现代文：燕军听说齐湣王在莒城，就集合兵力，全力攻打莒城。
English: When Yan's army heard that King Qizong was in Handan, they gathered their forces and attacked Handan with all their might.

古文：淖齿既杀湣王於莒，因坚守，距燕军，数年不下。
现代文：大臣淖齿在莒城中杀死了齐湣王，坚守城池，抗击燕军，燕军几年都没有攻破这座城池。
English: The minister Zou Zhen killed the king of Qi in the city of Zou, held on to the city and fought against the Yan army. The Yan army did not break through the city for several years.

古文：燕引兵东围即墨，即墨大夫出与战，败死。
现代文：迫不得已，燕将只能带兵东行，围攻即墨。即墨的守城官员出城与燕军交战，战败被杀。
English: As a last resort, Yan could only march east with his troops to besiege Zhimo. Zhimo's garrison officers went out to fight Yan's army and were defeated and killed.

古文：城中相与推田单，曰： 安平之战，田单宗人以铁笼得全，习兵。 
现代文：即墨城中军民都推举田单当首领，说： 安平那一仗，田单和同族人因用铁箍包住车轴才得以安然脱险，足见他是懂兵法的。 
English: That is to say, the military and the people in Mocheng all nominated Tian Shan as their leader, saying: In that battle of Anping, Tian Shan and his compatriots were able to safely escape the danger by wrapping the axle with a spade, which shows that he understands the art of war.

古文：立以为将军，以即墨距燕。
现代文：于是，大家就拥立田单为将军，坚守即墨，抵抗燕军。
English: As a result, everyone supported the establishment of Tian Shan as a general, adhered to the ink, and resisted the Yan army.

古文：顷之，燕昭王卒，惠王立，与乐毅有隙。
现代文：没过多久，燕昭王去世，燕惠王即位，他和乐毅之间有嫌隙。
English: Not long after, Yan Zhao Wang died, Yan Hui Wang ascended the throne, and there was a rift between him and Le Yi.

古文：田单闻之，乃纵反间於燕，宣言曰： 齐王已死，城之不拔者二耳。
现代文：田单听到这个消息之后，就派人到燕国去行使反间计，扬言说： 齐湣王已被杀死，没被攻克的齐国城池只不过两座而已。
English: After Tian Shan heard this news, he sent someone to Yan Guo to carry out a counter-strategy, threatening: King Qizhi has been killed, and there are only two citadels in Qi that have not been conquered.

古文：乐毅畏诛而不敢归，以伐齐为名，实欲连兵南面而王齐。
现代文：乐毅是害怕被国君杀死而不敢回国，他是以攻打齐国为名，实际上是想和齐国兵力联合起来，在齐国称王。
English: Le Yi was afraid of being killed by the king and did not dare to return home. He claimed to attack Qi, but in fact he wanted to unite with the Qi forces and become king of Qi.

古文：齐人未附，故且缓攻即墨以待其事。
现代文：齐国人心还未归附，因此暂且拖延时间，缓攻即墨，以便等待时机成熟再称王。
English: The hearts of the people of Qi have not yet been won over, so they are delaying the time, delaying the attack, so that they can wait for the time to be ripe to become king.

古文：齐人所惧，唯恐他将之来，即墨残矣。 
现代文：齐国人担心的是，唯恐燕国派遣其他将领来，那样的话，墨城就必破无疑了。 
English: What the people of Qi were worried about was that Yan might send other generals, in which case, the city of Mocheng would undoubtedly be destroyed.

古文：燕王以为然，使骑劫代乐毅。
现代文：燕惠王认为这些话是对的，就派大将骑劫去代替乐毅。
English: Yan Hui Wang thought that these words were right, so he sent a general on horseback to replace Le Yi.

古文：乐毅因归赵，燕人士卒忿。
现代文：乐毅因此逃到赵国去了，燕军官兵都为此忿忿不平。
English: As a result, Le Yi fled to Zhao Province. Yan's officers and soldiers were very angry about this.

古文：而田单乃令城中人食必祭其先祖於庭，飞鸟悉翔舞城中下食。
现代文：田单又命城中军民在吃饭之前一定要在庭院中祭祀先祖，使得众多的飞鸟因争食祭祀的食物，在城上盘旋飞舞。
English: Tian Shan also ordered the soldiers and civilians in the city to sacrifice their ancestors in the courtyard before eating, so that many birds circled and danced on the city due to the competition for food for the sacrifice.

古文：燕人怪之。
现代文：城外的燕军看了，都感到很奇怪。
English: When the Yan troops outside the city saw it, they all felt very strange.

古文：田单因宣言曰： 神来下教我。 
现代文：田单又扬言说： 这是神仙要从天而降，来指导我们克敌致胜。 
English: Tian Shan also threatened, saying, "This is a god who will descend from the sky to guide us to defeat the enemy and win."

古文：乃令城中人曰： 当有神人为我师。 
现代文：并且城里人说： 一定会有神人来做我的军师。 
English: And the people of the city said, "Surely there is a man of God who will come and be my military instructor."

古文：有一卒曰： 臣可以为师乎？ 
现代文：有一个士兵说： 我可以当您的军师吗？ 
English: One soldier said, "Can I be your drill sergeant?"

古文：因反走。
现代文：说完接着就扬长而去。
English: After saying this, he walked away.

古文：田单乃起，引还，东乡坐，师事之。
现代文：田单连忙站起来，把他拉过来，请他坐在面向东的上座，用侍奉老师的礼节来侍奉他。
English: Tian Shan quickly stood up, pulled him over, invited him to sit in the upper seat facing east, and served him with the etiquette of a serving teacher.

古文：卒曰： 臣欺君，诚无能也。 田单曰： 子勿言也！ 
现代文：那个士兵说： 我欺骗了您，我实际上没什么本领。 田单说： 您不要说了。 
English: The soldier said, "I lied to you, I don't really have any skills," and Tian Ran said, "Don't say that."

古文：因师之。
现代文：接着就奉他为师。
English: He then became his mentor.

古文：每出约束，必称神师。
现代文：每次发号施令，一定要称是神师的主意。
English: Every time an order is given, it must be said to be the idea of the priest.

古文：乃宣言曰： 吾唯惧燕军之劓所得齐卒，置之前行，与我战，即墨败矣。 
现代文：他又扬言说： 我最怕的是燕军把俘虏的齐兵的鼻子割掉，将他们放在队伍的前列，再和我们交战，那即墨就必然被攻克。 
English: He also threatened, "What I fear most is that Yan's army will cut off the noses of the captured Qi soldiers, put them at the front of the line, and then fight us, and then we will inevitably be defeated."

古文：燕人闻之，如其言。
现代文：燕军听到这话，就照此施行。
English: When Yan Jun heard this, he acted accordingly.

古文：城中人见齐诸降者尽劓，皆怒，坚守，唯恐见得。
现代文：城里的人看到齐国众多的降兵都被割去了鼻子，人人义愤填膺，更加坚定防守，唯恐被敌人捉住。
English: When the people in the city saw that many of Qi's soldiers had their noses cut off, everyone was filled with indignation and defended themselves more firmly, lest they be caught by the enemy.

古文：单又纵反间曰： 吾惧燕人掘吾城外冢墓，僇先人，可为寒心。 
现代文：田单又派人施反间计说： 我很害怕燕国人挖了我们城外的祖坟，侮辱了我们的祖先，这可真是让人寒心的事。 
English: Tian Shan also sent someone to make countermeasures, saying: I am very afraid that the Yan people have dug up our ancestral graves outside the city and insulted our ancestors, which is really a chilling thing.

古文：燕军尽掘垄墓，烧死人。
现代文：燕军听说之后，又把齐国人的坟墓全部挖出，并把死尸焚烧殆尽。
English: After the Yan army heard about this, they dug up all the graves of the Qi people and burned all the dead bodies.

古文：即墨人从城上望见，皆涕泣，俱欲出战，怒自十倍。
现代文：即墨人从城上看到此情此景，人人痛哭流涕，都请求出城拼杀，十分激愤。
English: When the Mexicans saw this scene from the top of the city, they all cried and begged to be allowed to leave the city to fight. They were very angry.

古文：田单知士卒之可用，乃身操版插，与士卒分功，妻妾编於行伍之间，尽散饮食飨士。
现代文：田单知道现在是出战的最好时机，于是就亲自拿着夹板铲锨，和士兵们一起修筑防御工事，并把自己的妻子姬妾都编在队伍之中，还把所有食物都拿出来犒劳将士。
English: Tian Shan knew that now was the best time to go to war, so he personally took a spade and shovel, built fortifications with the soldiers, and organized his wives and concubines in the ranks, and took out all the food to reward the laborers.

古文：令甲卒皆伏，使老弱女子乘城，遣使约降於燕，燕军皆呼万岁。
现代文：命令装备整齐的精锐部队都埋伏不出，让老弱残兵和妇女在城头防守，又派使者到燕军的营地和燕军约定投降事宜，燕军官兵得知消息后都高呼万岁。
English: He ordered the well-equipped elite troops to lie in ambush, let the old and weak remnants and women defend the city, and sent an envoy to the camp of the Yan army to negotiate the surrender of the Yan army. When the Yan officers and soldiers learned the news, they all shouted "long live."

古文：田单又收民金，得千溢，令即墨富豪遗燕将，曰： 即墨即降，原无虏掠吾族家妻妾，令安堵。 
现代文：田单又把民间的黄金收集起来，共得一千镒，让即墨城里有钱有势的富豪前去送给燕国将军，请求说： 即墨就要投降了，希望你们进城之后，不要掳掠我们的妻子姬妾，让他们得到安全。 
English: Tian Shan also collected the gold of the people and got a total of one thousand baht, so that the rich and powerful rich people in Jimo City went to give it to General Yan Guo, requesting: Jimo is about to surrender, I hope that after you enter the city, do not kidnap our wives and concubines, so that they can be safe.

古文：燕将大喜，许之。
现代文：燕军将领非常高兴，答应了他。
English: The general of Yan's army was very pleased and agreed.

古文：燕军由此益懈。
现代文：燕军因此更加松懈。
English: As a result, Yan's army became more lax.

古文：田单乃收城中得千馀牛，为绛缯衣，画以五彩龙文，束兵刃於其角，而灌脂束苇於尾，烧其端。
现代文：田单又从城里收集了一千多头牛，给它们披上大红绸绢制成的被服，在上面画着五颜六色的蛟龙图案，在牛角上绑好锋利的刀子，把渍满油脂的芦苇绑在牛尾上，点燃牛尾上的芦苇。
English: Tian Tan also collected more than a thousand cows from the city, and draped them with large red silk coats made of camphor, painted with colorful dragon patterns on them, tied sharp knives on the horns of the cattle, tied grease-stained reeds to the tail of the cow, and ignited the reeds on the tail of the cow.

古文：凿城数十穴，夜纵牛，壮士五千人随其後。
现代文：又把城墙凿开几十个洞穴，趁夜间把牛从洞穴中赶出，派精壮士兵五千人跟在火牛的后面。
English: He also hewed out dozens of caves in the city wall, drove the cattle out of the caves at night, and sent five thousand strong soldiers to follow the fire oxen.

古文：牛尾热，怒而奔燕军，燕军夜大惊。
现代文：因为尾巴被烧得发热，火牛都狂怒地直奔燕军军营，这一切都在夜间突然发生，使燕军惊慌失措。
English: Because their tails were burning hot, the fire oxen ran furiously straight to the Yan army camp. All of this happened suddenly at night, causing the Yan army to panic.

古文：牛尾炬火光明炫燿，燕军视之皆龙文，所触尽死伤。
现代文：牛尾上的火把将夜间照得通明如昼，燕军看到它们身上都是龙纹，所触及到的人非死即伤。
English: The torches on the oxen's tails will illuminate the night as brightly as day. The Swallow Army saw that they all had dragon stripes on their bodies, and anyone who touched them would be killed or injured.

古文：五千人因衔枚击之，而城中鼓譟从之，老弱皆击铜器为声，声动天地。
现代文：五千壮士口衔着枚不声不响地攻来，而墨城里的人乘机擂鼓呐喊，紧紧跟随在后面，甚至连老弱妇孺都手持铜器，敲得震天价响，和城外的呐喊声汇合成惊天动地的声浪。
English: Five thousand strong men marched silently to attack, while the people in Mexico City took the opportunity to beat drums and shout, followed closely behind, and even the old and weak women and children were holding copper utensils, beating them to a deafening roar, and the shouting outside the city merged into an earth-shattering sound wave.

古文：燕军大骇，败走。
现代文：燕军大为惊骇，溃败奔逃。
English: Yan's army was greatly alarmed and fled in defeat.

古文：齐人遂夷杀其将骑劫。
现代文：齐国人在乱军之中杀死了燕国的主将骑劫。
English: The people of Qi killed the master of Yan in the midst of the rebel army.

古文：燕军扰乱奔走，齐人追亡逐北，所过城邑皆畔燕而归田单，兵日益多，乘胜，燕日败亡，卒至河上，而齐七十馀城皆复为齐。
现代文：燕军纷乱，溃散逃命，齐军紧紧追击溃逃的敌军，所经过的城镇都背叛燕军，归顺田单。田单的兵力也日益增多，乘着战胜的军威，一路追击。燕军仓皇而逃，战斗力一天天减弱，一直退到了黄河边上，原来齐国沦亡的七十多座城池又被齐国收复。
English: Yan's army was in disarray, scattered and fled for their lives. Qi's army closely pursued and defeated the fleeing enemy army. The towns they passed through all betrayed Yan's army and surrendered to Tan's army. Tan's army was also increasing in strength, taking advantage of the victorious military power to pursue them all the way. Yan's army fled in haste, its combat effectiveness weakened day by day, and retreated all the way to the edge of the Yellow River. More than seventy cities that had fallen to Qi were recovered by Qi.

古文：乃迎襄王於莒，入临菑而听政。
现代文：于是田单到莒城迎接齐襄王，襄王也就回到都城临淄来处理政务。
English: As a result, Tian Shan went to Licheng to meet Qi Xiang Wang, and Xiang Wang also returned to the capital Linyi to deal with government affairs.

古文：襄王封田单，号曰安平君。
现代文：齐襄王封赏田单，赐爵号为安平君。
English: The king of Qixiang rewarded him with the title of Anping.

古文：太史公曰：兵以正合，以奇胜。
现代文：太史公说：用兵作战既以正面交锋，有要以奇兵突袭制胜。
English: Tai Shikong said: the use of soldiers to fight is not only a head-to-head battle, but also a surprise attack to win.

古文：善之者，出奇无穷。
现代文：善于用兵的人，总是能够奇兵迭出而变化无穷。
English: A person who is good at using soldiers can always come up with a surprise attack, and the changes are endless.

古文：奇正还相生，如环之无端。
现代文：正面的交锋和奇兵取胜相互配合运用，就如同圆环没有起止一般使人捉摸不定。
English: The head-to-head battle and the use of surprise to win are used in conjunction with each other, just as the ring does not start and stop, generally making people unpredictable.

古文：夫始如处女，適人开户；後如脱兔，適不及距：其田单之谓邪！
现代文：用兵之初要像处女那样沉静、柔弱，诱使敌人大开门户，毫不戒备；然后在时机到来之时，就像逃脱的兔子一般快速、敏捷，使敌人来不及防御。田单用兵，正是如此吧！
English: At the beginning of the use of soldiers, it is necessary to be as quiet and weak as a virgin, to entice the enemy to open the door wide, without warning; then, when the time comes, it is as fast and agile as an escaped rabbit, so that the enemy is too late to defend.

古文：初，淖齿之杀湣王也，莒人求湣王子法章，得之太史嬓之家，为人灌园。
现代文：当初，在淖齿杀死齐湣王的时候，莒城人寻找齐湣王的儿子法章，结果在太史嬓的家里找到了他，他正在替人家种地浇田。
English: At the beginning, when the gnome killed King Qizhi, the people of Qicheng were looking for King Qizhi's son, Fa Zheng. As a result, they found him at the home of Taishuo, where he was ploughing the fields for someone else.

古文：嬓女怜而善遇之。
现代文：太史嬓的女儿喜欢他并对他很好。
English: Taishi's daughter likes him and treats him well.

古文：後法章私以情告女，女遂与通。
现代文：后来法章就把自己的情况告诉了她，她就和法章私通了。
English: Later, Fa Zhang told her about his situation, and she had sexual intercourse with him.

古文：及莒人共立法章为齐王，以莒距燕，而太史氏女遂为后，所谓 君王后 也。
现代文：等到莒城人共同拥立法章为齐王，以莒城抗击燕军，太史嬓的女儿就被立为了王后，这就是人们所说的 君王后 。
English: When the people of Lucheng jointly held the legislative charter as the king of Qi, and fought against the Yan army with Lucheng, the daughter of Taishi Yan was established as the queen, which is what people call the queen.

古文：燕之初入齐，闻画邑人王蠋贤，令军中曰 环画邑三十里无入 ，以王蠋之故。
现代文：燕军最初攻入齐国的时候，听说画邑人王蠋贤能，就命令军队说： 在画邑周围三十里之内不许进入。 这是因为王蠋的缘故。
English: When Yan's army first invaded Qi, they heard that the painter Wang Zhenxian could paint, so they ordered the army to say: "Do not enter within thirty miles around the painting, because of Wang Zhen."

古文：已而使人谓蠋曰： 齐人多高子之义，吾以子为将，封子万家。 
现代文：不久，燕国又派人对王蠋说： 齐国有许多人都称颂您的高尚品德，我们要任用您为将军，还封赏给您一万户的食邑。 
English: Before long, Yan's country sent another person to say to Wang Qi: Many people in Qi praise your noble character, we want to appoint you as a general, and reward you with ten thousand households of food villages.

古文：蠋固谢。
现代文：王蠋坚决推辞，不肯接受。
English: Wang Yao resolutely refused and refused to accept.

古文：燕人曰： 子不听，吾引三军而屠画邑。 
现代文：燕国人说： 您若不肯接受的话，我们就要带领大军，屠平画邑！ 
English: Yan Guo said, "If you refuse to accept it, we will lead a large army, Tu Pingyao!"

古文：王蠋曰： 忠臣不事二君，贞女不更二夫。
现代文：王蠋说： 尽忠的臣子不能事奉两个君主，贞烈的女子不会改嫁给第二个丈夫。
English: Wang Yao said, "A loyal vassal cannot serve two sovereigns, and a virtuous woman will not remarry a second husband.

古文：齐王不听吾谏，故退而耕於野。
现代文：齐王不听从我的劝谏，所以我才隐居在乡野耕种。
English: King Qi did not listen to my advice, so I retired to the countryside to farm.

古文：国既破亡，吾不能存；今又劫之以兵为君将，是助桀为暴也。
现代文：如今齐国已经破亡，我不能使它复存，现在你们又用武力劫持我当你们的将领，我若是答应了，这是叫我助桀王为暴。
English: Now that the State of Qi has been destroyed, I cannot restore it. Now you have taken me by force to be your general. If I agreed, it would be tantamount to asking me to aid the tyrant.

古文：与其生而无义，固不如烹！ 
现代文：与其活着做这不义之事，还不如受烹刑死了更好！ 
English: Rather than live to do this injustice, it is better to be tortured to death!

古文：遂经其颈於树枝，自奋绝脰而死。
现代文：然后他就把自己的脖子吊在树枝上，奋力挣扎，扭断脖子后死去。
English: He then hung himself by the neck from a tree branch, struggled, broke his neck and died.

古文：齐亡大夫闻之，曰： 王蠋，布衣也，义不北面於燕，况在位食禄者乎！ 
现代文：齐国那些四散奔逃的官员们听到这件事，说： 王蠋只是一个平民百姓，尚且能坚守节操，不向燕人屈服称臣，更何况我们这些享受国家俸禄的在职官员了！ 
English: On hearing this, the officials of Qi, who had fled in all directions, said, "Wang Yao is just a commoner, yet he is able to adhere to the principle of self-discipline and not give in to the vultures, much less those of us who are officials in office and enjoy state salaries!"

古文：乃相聚如莒，求诸子，立为襄王。
现代文：于是他们就聚集在一起，赶赴莒城，寻求齐湣王的儿子，拥立他为齐襄王。
English: So they gathered together and rushed to Lushan to find the son of the king of Qi, and made him the king of Qixiang.

