古文：董和字幼宰，南郡枝江人也，其先本巴郡江州人。
现代文：董和字幼宰，是南郡枝江人，祖辈原本是巴郡江州人。
English: Dong He Zi Yuzai is from the Yangtze River in Nan County, and his ancestors were originally from the Yangtze River in Ba County.

古文：汉末，和率宗族西迁，益州牧刘璋以为牛鞞、江原长、成都令。
现代文：汉朝末年，董和率领家族西迁，益州牧刘璋任命他为牛鞸县、江原县县长、成都县县令。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Dong He led his family to move to the west, and Liu Ye, the governor of Yizhou, appointed him as the governor of Niuye County, the governor of Gangwon County, and the governor of Chengdu County.

古文：蜀土富实，时俗奢侈，货殖之家，侯服玉食，婚姻葬送，倾家竭产。
现代文：蜀地殷实富足，当地的风俗崇尚奢侈，经商的人家穿的如同王侯，饮食非常奢华，遇到婚礼丧葬之事，都倾尽家财。
English: Shu is rich and affluent, local customs advocate luxury, business people dress like princes, the food is very luxurious, and when it comes to weddings and funerals, all the family's wealth is spent.

古文：和躬率以俭，恶衣蔬食，防遏逾僣，为之轨制，所在皆移风变善，畏而不犯。
现代文：董和亲自以节俭为表率，穿着朴素，饮食节俭，防止自己的行为有逾越身份的地方，处处以符合礼制为行为准则，于是当地的风俗都有良好的转变，大家都心存畏惧而不敢违犯。
English: Donghe himself took frugality as a model, wearing plain clothes, eating frugally, preventing his behavior from exceeding his status, and complying with the etiquette as a code of conduct everywhere. As a result, local customs have a good change, and everyone is afraid to violate them.

古文：然县界豪强惮和严法，说璋转和为巴东属国都尉。
现代文：但县中的豪强因害怕董和的严厉法度，劝说刘璋将东河调任为巴东属国的都尉。
English: However, Gao Qiang in the county, fearing the strictness of Dong He's law, persuaded Liu Ye to transfer Dong He to the post of captain of the State of Padang.

古文：吏民老弱相携乞留和者数千人，璋听留二年，还迁益州太守，其清约如前。
现代文：当地的官吏老弱百姓互相扶持着请求留下的有数千人，刘璋允许他留任两年，然后升任为益州太守，他还是像过去一样清简节约。
English: Thousands of local officials and ordinary people supported each other and asked to stay. Liu Bei allowed him to stay for two years, and then he was promoted to the governor of Yizhou. He was still as simple and economical as in the past.

古文：与蛮夷从事，务推诚心，南土爱而信之。
现代文：他与少数民族交流时，总是竭诚相待，所以南方少数民族非常爱戴和信赖他。
English: When communicating with ethnic minorities, he always treats them with sincerity, so the southern ethnic minorities love and trust him very much.

古文：先主定蜀，徵和为掌军中郎将，与军师将军诸葛亮并署左将军大司马府事，献可替否，共为欢交。
现代文：刘备平定蜀地后，征召董和担任掌军中郎将，跟军师将军诸葛亮一同主管左将军大司马府中的事宜，出谋划策，结交下深厚的交情。
English: After Liu Bei had subdued Shu, he conscripted Dong He to serve as the second-in-command of the army, and together with the army general Zhu Ge Liang, he was in charge of the affairs of the left general, the grand secretary Ma Fuchu, and made suggestions and deep friendships.

古文：苟能慕元直之十一，幼宰之殷勤，有忠於国，则亮可少过矣。 又曰： 昔初交州平，屡闻得失，后交元直，勤见启诲，前参事於幼宰，每言则尽，后从事於伟度，数有谏止；虽姿性鄙暗，不能悉纳，然与此四子终始好合，亦足以明其不疑於直言也。 其追思和如此。
现代文：自从董和任官享受俸禄以来，对外治理边疆少数民族，对内平衡国家大事，二十多年，临终之时家中没有值得一石粮食的财产。诸葛亮后来担任丞相，告诫群臣说： 参与国家政事应该集思广益，如果计较很小的事情，就会难以互相沟通，旷日持久，就会带来损失。能够互相沟通消息而调和折中，就如同丢弃破鞋而获得珠玉宝石，但人心苦于不能除尽这些小事，只有徐元直处理这些事情不糊涂，再加上董幼宰在朝中参政七年，遇到不周到的事情，哪怕往返十次都前来相告，如果大家能做到徐元直的十分之一，像董幼宰那样殷勤恳切，为国尽忠，那我的过错就会少很多了。 又说： 过去我和崔州平结交时，经常听到他的得失评论，后来跟徐元直交往，总是受到他的启发教诲，之前跟董幼宰共同处理政事，他总是言则尽意，后来与胡伟度共事，经常听到他有劝谏之言，我虽然天资鄙陋执拗，不能完全采纳他们的意见，但和这四个人始终保持友好相处，这也证明他们不怀疑直言的好处啊。 诸葛亮就是像这样深切的追思董和。
English: For more than twenty years, ever since Dong and his officials enjoyed their salaries, they managed ethnic minorities on the border and balanced national affairs internally. At the time of his death, there was no property worth a stone of grain in the family. Zhuge Liang, who later served as the prime minister, admonished the group of ministers, saying, "Participating in national affairs should be a brainstorming session. If it is a small matter, it will be difficult to communicate with each other, and if it takes a long time, it will bring losses. Being able to communicate with each other and make compromises is like throwing away a broken shoe and getting a gemstone. But people suffer from not being able

古文：刘巴字子初，零陵烝阳人也。
现代文：刘巴字子初，是零陵郡烝阳人。
English: Liu Ba is a native of Luling County, Shenyang.

古文：少知名，荆州牧刘表连辟，及举茂才，皆不就。
现代文：年少时就很知名，荆州牧刘表接连征召他，再等到他被推举为茂才，他都没有就任。
English: He was well-known when he was young. He was successively recruited by Jingzhou Mu Liu table, and he did not take office until he was elected as Maocai.

古文：表卒，曹公征荆州。先主奔江南，荆、楚群士从之如云，而巴北诣曹公。曹公辟为掾，使招纳长沙、零陵、桂阳。
现代文：刘表去世后，曹操征讨荆州，刘备逃奔到江南，荆、楚之地的士人都像云一样追随刘备，而刘巴往北拜谒曹操，曹操征召他为掾吏，让他招纳长沙、零陵、桂阳之地的人。
English: After Liu Biao's death, Cao Cao went to discuss Jingzhou, and Liu Bei fled to the south of the Yangtze River. The scholars in Jing and Chu followed Liu Bei like a cloud, while Liu Ba went to the north to pay homage to Cao Cao. Cao Cao enlisted him as a magistrate to recruit people from Changsha, Luling and Guiyang.

古文：会先主略有三郡，巴不得反使，遂远適交阯，先主深以为恨。
现代文：正值刘备占有了这三个郡，刘巴不能返回复命，就远赴交趾郡，刘备心中非常怨恨。
English: At the time when Liu Bei occupied these three counties, Liu Ba could not return to resume his life, so he went to Jiaozi County. Liu Bei was very resentful.

古文：巴复从交阯至蜀。
现代文：刘巴又从交趾郡到了蜀地。
English: Liu Ba also went from Jiaozi County to Shunde.

古文：俄而先主定益州，巴辞谢罪负，先主不责。
现代文：不久，刘备平定益州，刘巴前去负罪道歉，刘备没有责怪他。
English: Soon after, Liu Bei defeated Dingyizhou, and Liu Ba went to apologize for his crime. Liu Bei did not blame him.

古文：而诸葛孔明数称荐之，先主辟为左将军西曹掾。
现代文：而诸葛孔明多次称赞举荐他，刘备就征召他担任左将军西曹掾。
English: Zhuge Kongming praised and recommended him many times, and Liu Bei conscripted him to serve as the Left General Xi Cao Pi.

古文：建安二十四年，先主为汉中王，巴为尚书，后代法正为尚书令。
现代文：建安二十四年，刘备被推举为汉中王，刘巴担任尚书，后来代替法正担任尚书令。
English: In the twenty-fourth year of Jian'an, Liu Bei was elected as the king of Han, Liu Ba served as Shangshu, and later replaced Fa Zheng as Shangshu Ling.

古文：躬履清俭，不治产业，又自以归附非素，惧见猜嫌，恭默守静，退无私交，非公事不言。
现代文：他行为清廉节俭，没有置办产业，又自认为不是一开始就归附刘备的，心中害怕受到猜疑，就恭敬寡言，退朝之后也不私下结交大臣，不是公事就不加以评论。
English: His conduct was honest and frugal, he did not acquire any property, and he did not think that he had been attached to Liu Bei from the beginning. In his heart, he was afraid of being suspected, so he was respectful and reticent. After retiring from the imperial court, he did not make friends with the minister in private, and he did not comment on public affairs.

古文：先主称尊号，昭告于皇天上帝后土神祇，凡诸文诰策命，皆巴所作也。
现代文：刘备称帝之后，向皇天上帝后土和神衹昭告，凡事文书诏令，都是刘巴所撰写的。
English: After Liu Bei was proclaimed emperor, he announced to the emperor that all official documents and decrees were written by Liu Ba.

古文：章武二年卒。卒后，魏尚书仆射陈群与丞相诸葛亮书，问巴消息，称曰刘君子初，甚敬重焉。
现代文：刘巴在章武二年去世，去世后，魏朝的尚书仆射陈群给丞相诸葛亮写信，问到刘巴的消息，称呼他是刘君的子初，对刘巴非常敬重。
English: Liu Ba died in the second year of Zhangwu. After his death, the Wei Dynasty's Shang Shuxu servant, Sha Chenqun, wrote a letter to the chancellor Zhuge Liang, asking for information about Liu Ba, calling him the first son of Liu Jun, and respecting Liu Ba very much.

古文：马良字季常，襄阳宜城人也。
现代文：马良字季场，是襄阳郡宜城人。
English: Ma Liang, surnamed Qifang, is from Yicheng, Yangyang County.

古文：兄弟五人，并有才名，乡里为之谚曰： 马氏五常，白眉最良。 良眉中有白毛，故以称之。
现代文：家中兄弟五人，都很有才名，乡里有流传他们的俗语： 马氏五常，白眉最良。 马良的眉中有白毛，所以用白梅称呼他。
English: The five brothers in the family are all very talented, and there is a saying in the village about them: Ma's five constants, white eyebrows are the best. Ma Liang's eyebrows have white hair, so they call him Bai Mei.

古文：先主领荆州，辟为从事。
现代文：刘备兼领荆州牧时，征召他担任从事。
English: When Liu Bei was also the leader of Jingzhou, he was conscripted to serve as a general.

古文：及先主入蜀，诸葛亮亦从后往，良留荆州，与亮书曰： 闻雒城已拔，此天祚也。
现代文：等到刘备进入蜀地，诸葛亮也随后前往，马良留守荆州，给诸葛亮写信说： 得知雒城已经攻克，这是上天的福祉。
English: After Liu Bei entered Shu, Zhuge Liang also went there. Ma Liang stayed behind in Jingzhou and wrote to Zhuge Liang, saying, "It is heaven's blessing to know that Lucheng has been conquered.

古文：尊兄应期赞世，配业光国，魄兆见矣。
现代文：尊兄您顺应天时，把握时机，辅佐光大国家事业，智慧的光芒已经显现。
English: Your venerable brother, you have responded to the time, grasped the opportunity, and assisted the great national cause of the Light. The light of wisdom has already appeared.

古文：夫变用雅虑，审贵垂明，於以简才，宜適其时。
现代文：能灵活地运用思维，智慧地审查，明确地判断，应该在此时挑选人才，符合时势。
English: Can flexibly apply thinking, intelligently review, clearly judge, should be at this time to select talent, in line with the current situation.

古文：若乃和光悦远，迈德天壤，使时闲於听，世服於道，齐高妙之音正郑、卫之声，并利於事，无相夺伦，此乃管弦之至，牙、旷之调也。
现代文：如果能高瞻远瞩，仁德达于上天，使世人都能聆听，使世人服于道义。用高妙的音律纠正郑、卫的淫声，有利于各项事务，不互相侵扰，这是管弦演奏的极致，是俞伯牙和师旷的协调，虽然我不是钟子期，但又怎么能不击节叫好呢？ 
English: If one can look far and wide, if one's benevolence reaches to the heavens, if one can make the world listen, if one can make the world submit to morality, if one can correct the obscene voices of Zheng and Wei with exquisite melodies, it will be beneficial to various affairs, and they will not interfere with each other. This is the ultimate of orchestral performance, the coordination of Zibo and Shiguang. Although I am not a child of the clock, how can I say hello without hitting the syllable?

古文：虽非锺期，敢不击节！ 先主辟良为左将军掾。
现代文：刘备征召马良为左将军掾。
English: Liu Bei conscripted Ma Liang as the left general.

古文：后遣使吴，良谓亮曰： 今衔国命，协穆二家，幸为良介於孙将军。 亮曰： 君试自为文。 良即为草曰： 寡君遣掾马良通聘继好，以绍昆吾、豕韦之勋。
现代文：后来，马良奉命出使吴国，马良对诸葛亮说： 现在我奉国命协调两国关系，希望您能为我介绍孙将军。 
English: Later, Ma Liang was ordered to send an envoy to the State of Wu. Ma Liang said to Zhuge Liang: Now I am ordered by the State to coordinate the relations between the two countries. I hope you can introduce General Sun to me.

古文：其人吉士，荆楚之令，鲜於造次之华，而有克终之美，愿降心存纳，以慰将命。 权敬待之。
现代文：诸葛亮说： 您尝试着自己写文书。 马良就起草文书说： 本国国君派属官马良前来沟通交好，以发扬光大昆吾、豕韦的功业。来人是吉士，曾经担任荆楚之地的县令，很少有造次的举动，但有周全的美德，希望能屈尊接纳，以使他完成使命。 孙权后来非常恭敬的接待他。
English: Zhuge Liang said, "You are trying to write a document by yourself." Ma Liang drafted a document and said, "My country's sovereign has sent a subordinate official, Ma Liang, to come to communicate and make friends in order to carry forward the work of Guangda Kunwu and Zou Wei. The visitor is Kishi, who once served as a county magistrate in the land of Jingchu. He rarely acts out of line, but has a well-rounded virtue. I hope to condescendingly accept him so that he can complete his mission. Sun Quan later received him very respectfully.

古文：先主称尊号，以良为侍中。
现代文：刘备登基即位后，任命马良为侍中。
English: After Liu Bei ascended the throne, he appointed Ma Liang as an attendant.

古文：及东征吴，遣良入武陵招纳五溪蛮夷，蛮夷渠帅皆受印号，咸如意指。
现代文：等到东征吴国，刘备派马良进入武陵郡，招揽五溪之地的少数民族，少数民族首领都接受印信封号，听从马良的指派。
English: When it came to the Eastern Expedition of Wu, Liu Bei sent Ma Liang into Wuling County to recruit ethnic minorities in the Five Creeks. The ethnic minority leaders all accepted the sealed envelope number and obeyed Ma Liang's assignment.

古文：会先主败绩於夷陵，良亦遇害。
现代文：适逢刘备在夷陵战败，马良也遇害身死。
English: When Liu Bei was defeated at Yiling, Ma Liang was also killed.

古文：先主拜良子秉为骑都尉。
现代文：刘备就任命马良的儿子马秉为骑都尉。
English: Liu Bei appointed Ma Liang's son, Ma Bing, as the captain of the cavalry.

古文：良弟谡，字幼常，以荆州从事随先主入蜀，除绵竹成都令、越隽太守。
现代文：马良的弟弟马谡，字幼常，以荆州从事的身份跟随刘备进入蜀地，担任绵竹、成都县令、越隽太守。
English: Ma Liang's younger brother, Ma Jun, who was also known as Youzheng, followed Liu Bei to Shu as an official of Jingzhou, and served as Mianzhu, Chengdu County Governor, and Yueyuan Governor.

古文：才器过人，好论军计，丞相诸葛亮深加器异。
现代文：他才能气量超过常人，喜好谈论军中大事，丞相诸葛亮对他非常器重。
English: He has more energy than an ordinary person, likes to talk about important things in the army, and the prime minister Zhuge Liang is very important to him.

古文：先主临薨谓亮曰： 马谡言过其实，不可大用，君其察之！ 亮犹谓不然，以谡为参军，每引见谈论，自昼达夜。
现代文：刘备临去世时，对诸葛亮说： 马谡言过其实，不能大用，您要好好观察。 诸葛亮依然不在意这些话，任命马谡为参军，每次召见马谡谈论，经常从白天持续到夜间。
English: When Liu Bi Lin died, he said to Zhuge Liang: "Ma Xuan's words are exaggerated and cannot be of much use, you should observe carefully." Zhuge Liang still did not care about these words, appointed Ma Xuan to join the army, and every time he summoned Ma Xuan to talk, it often lasted from day to night.

古文：建兴六年，亮出军向祁山，时有宿将魏延、吴壹等，论者皆言以为宜令为先锋，而亮违众拔谡，统大众在前，与魏将张郃战于街亭，为郃所破，士卒离散。
现代文：建兴六年，诸葛亮率军出兵祁山，当时有老将魏延、吴壹等人，商议的人都认为应该让他们作为先锋，而诸葛亮违背众意，提拔马谡，让他统帅大军在前开锋，与魏朝将领张郃在街亭交战，马谡被张郃攻破，士兵离散。
English: In the sixth year of Jianxing, Zhuge Liang led the army to Lushan. At that time, there were veterans Wei Yan, Wu Yi and others. The people who discussed the matter thought that they should be made the vanguard, but Zhuge Liang went against everyone's will, promoted Ma Jun, let him lead the army to the front, and fought with the Wei Dynasty general Zhang Jun in the street pavilion. Ma Jun was defeated by Zhang Jun, and the soldiers dispersed.

古文：亮进无所据，退军还汉中。
现代文：诸葛亮进兵没有据守之地，就率军返回汉中。
English: Zhuge Liang had no place to defend when he marched in, so he led his army back to Hanzhong.

古文：谡下狱物故，亮为之流涕。
现代文：马谡被收押下狱，被处死刑，诸葛亮为他流泪。
English: Ma Jun was taken into custody and sentenced to death. Zhuge Liang shed tears for him.

古文：良死时年三十六，谡年三十九。
现代文：马良去世时年仅三十六岁，马谡去世时三十九岁。
English: At the time of his death, Ma Liang was only thirty-six years old, while Ma Jun was thirty-nine years old.

古文：陈震字孝起，南阳人也。
现代文：陈震，字孝起，南阳郡人。
English: Chen Zhen, surnamed Xiaoqi, from Nanyang County.

古文：先主领荆州牧，辟为从事，部诸郡，随先主入蜀。
现代文：刘备兼任冀州牧时，征召他担任从事，管理各郡，后来跟随刘备进入蜀地。
English: When Liu Bei concurrently served as the pastor of Jizhou, he was called to serve and manage the counties. Later, he followed Liu Bei to enter Shu.

古文：蜀既定，为蜀郡北部都尉，因易郡名，为汶山太守，转在犍为。
现代文：蜀地平定后，他被任命为蜀郡北部都尉，因姓名改换，改为汶山太守，后来转任为犍为太守。
English: After Shu was settled, he was appointed as the northern captain of Shu County, and because of the name change, he was changed to the governor of Wenshan, and later he was transferred to the governor of Yunnan.

古文：建兴三年，入拜尚书，迁尚书令，奉命使吴。
现代文：建兴七年，孙权登基称帝，刘备任命陈震为卫尉，前往东吴祝贺孙权登基。
English: In the seventh year of Jianxing, Sun Quan was enthroned as emperor. Liu Bei appointed Chen Zhen as a guard lieutenant and went to East Wu to congratulate Sun Quan on his enthronement.

古文：七年，孙权称尊号，以震为卫尉，贺权践阼，诸葛亮与兄瑾书曰： 孝起忠纯之性，老而益笃，及其赞述东西，欢乐和合，有可贵者。 震入吴界，移关候曰： 东之与西，驿使往来，冠盖相望，申盟初好，日新其事。东尊应保圣祚，告燎受符，剖判土宇，天下响应，各有所归。
现代文：诸葛亮给兄长诸葛瑾写信说： 孝起性情忠厚纯正，老而坚定，他能有助于两国关系的和谐融洽，是非常可贵的。 陈震进入东吴国界，在给吴国守关官员的文书上说： 吴蜀两国，使者往来，冠盖相望，两相结盟交好。尊敬的国主应保住国运，祷告上天接受符命，开疆拓土，天下响应，各有归依。
English: Zhuge Liang wrote a letter to his brother Zhuge Liang, saying: Filial piety is loyal, pure, old and firm, and it is very valuable to be able to contribute to the harmony and rapprochement of relations between the two countries. Chen Zhen entered the national border of East Wu, and said in a letter to the customs officer of Wu: The two countries of Wuxu, the envoys come and go, the crowns look at each other, and the two countries are allied and friendly. The respected sovereign should keep the national fortune, pray to heaven to accept the fate, open up the territory, and the world responds, and each has to be converted.

古文：於此时也，以同心讨贼，则何寇不灭哉！
现代文：在这样的形势之下，同心协力征讨国贼，那什么样的敌寇不能消灭呢？
English: Under such a situation, what kind of enemy and intruder can't be eliminated if concerted efforts are made to fight against traitors?

古文：西朝君臣，引领欣赖。
现代文：我蜀国的君臣，引领仰望，欣慰有所依赖。
English: We, the princes and ministers of Shu, look up to you for guidance and rely on you for consolation.

古文：震以不才，得充下使，奉聘叙好，践界踊跃，入则如归。
现代文：陈震不才，得以充当使节，奉命延续两国友好关系，踏上贵国边界就十分雀跃，就如同回到家中。
English: Chen Zhen was not able to serve as an envoy and was ordered to continue the friendly relations between the two countries. When he stepped on the border of your country, he was very excited, as if he was returning home.

古文：献子適鲁，犯其山讳，春秋讥之。
现代文：献子前往鲁国，触犯人家忌讳，《春秋》中讥讽他。
English: His devoted son went to the State of Lu, breaking the family taboo. He was ridiculed in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：望必启告，使行人睦焉。
现代文：如果有不周到之处，希望您务必提醒，以使我能适应贵国风情。
English: If there are any imperfections, I hope you will remind me so that I can adapt to your country's style.

古文：即日张旍诰众，各自约誓。
现代文：现在我要张开外交大臣的旌节昭告众人，各自盟市。
English: Now I would like to open the Foreign Minister's gong festival to tell everyone, each alliance city.

古文：顺流漂疾，国典异制，惧或有违，幸必斟诲，示其所宜。 震到武昌，孙权与震升坛歃盟，交分天下：以徐、豫、幽、青属吴，并、凉、冀、兖属蜀，其司州之土，以函谷关为界。
现代文：顺流而下，乘船快行，各国典章制度有所不同，我担心有所违背，希望能多加教导，指示我应如何做。 陈震到了武昌，孙权与陈震升坛歃血盟誓，划分两国势力范围，划徐州、豫州、青州、幽州四州土地归属东吴，并州、凉州、冀州、广州归属蜀国，其中的四州共同所辖土地，则以函谷关为界平分。
English: I went down the river and took a fast boat ride. The legal systems of various countries are different. I was worried that I had violated something, and I hoped to be taught more and instructed on what I should do. Chen Zhen arrived in Wuchang. Sun Quan and Chen Zhen made a blood oath to divide the spheres of influence of the two countries. The four states of Xuzhou, Yuzhou, Qingzhou and Yuzhou belonged to Dongwu, and the four states of Suzhou, Liangzhou, Jizhou and Guangzhou belonged to Shu. The land under the joint jurisdiction of the four states was divided equally along the border of Hakodate.

古文：震还，封城阳亭侯。
现代文：陈震返回后，刘备封他为城阳亭侯。
English: After Chen Zhen returned, Liu Bei appointed him as the mayor of Chengyang Pavilion.

古文：九年，都护李平坐诬罔废；诸葛亮与长史蒋琬、侍中董允书曰： 孝起前临至吴，为吾说正方腹中有鳞甲，乡党以为不可近。
现代文：建兴九年，都户李平因诬告诸葛亮被废为平民，诸葛亮给长史蒋琬、侍中董允写信说： 孝起之前临出发到吴国时，曾告诉我李平的心中有奸诈，他的同乡之人都认为不可亲近。
English: In the ninth year of Jianxing, Li Ping, a member of the imperial household, was abolished as a commoner for falsely accusing Zhuge Liang. Zhuge Liang wrote to Changshi Jiang Qi and the chamberlain, Dong Yun, saying: "Before leaving for Wu, Xiaoqi told me that Li Ping had treachery in his heart, and his fellow countrymen all thought that he should not be approached.

古文：吾以为鳞甲者但不当犯之耳，不图复有苏、张之事出於不意。
现代文：我认为有奸诈之意的，只需不去触犯罢了，想不到他还有苏秦、张仪那样出其不意之时，这事应该让孝起知道。 
English: I think that if there is a treacherous intention, it is only necessary not to offend. When he and Su Qin and Zhang Yi are taken by surprise, this should be made known to Xiaoqi.

古文：可使孝起知之。 十三年，震卒。子济嗣。
现代文：建兴十三年，陈震去世，他的儿子陈济继承爵位。
English: In the thirteenth year of Jianxing, Chen Zhen died, and his son Chen Ji inherited the title.

古文：董允字休昭，掌军中郎将和之子也。
现代文：董允字休昭，是掌军中郎将董和的儿子。
English: Dong Yun, whose family name was Xiu Zhao, was the son of the middle-ranking general Dong He, who was in charge of the army.

古文：先主立太子，允以选为舍人，徙洗马。
现代文：刘备册立太子，董允被选拔为舍人，升任为洗马。
English: Liu Bichang was installed as the crown prince, and Dong Yun was selected as the heir and promoted to the position of the horse washer.

古文：后主袭位，迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：后主刘禅继承皇位，董允升任黄门侍郎。
English: Later, Lord Liu Zhen succeeded to the throne, and Dong Yun was promoted to Yellow Gate Chamberlain.

古文：丞相亮将北征，住汉中，虑后主富於春秋，朱紫难别，以允秉心公亮，欲任以宫省之事。
现代文：丞相诸葛亮将要北征，住在汉中，心中忧虑后主刘禅年轻，不能辨别是非好坏，又因为董允持心公正，想要让他担任宫中辅佐之事。
English: The chancellor Zhuge Liang was about to go on the Northern Expedition and was living in the Han Dynasty. He was worried that the empress Liu Zhen was young and could not distinguish between right and wrong, and because Dong Yun was fair-minded, he wanted him to serve as a palace aide.

古文：上疏曰： 侍中郭攸之、费祎、侍郎董允等，先帝简拔以遗陛下，至於斟酌规益，进尽忠言，则其任也。
现代文：诸葛亮上书说： 侍中郭攸之、费祎、侍郎董允等人，是先帝选拔出来留给陛下的，至于斟酌损益，劝谏忠正之言就是他们的职责。
English: Zhuge Liang wrote: The attendants Guo Youzhi, Fei Yu, and the attendant Dong Yun were selected by the former emperor and left to his majesty. As for the consideration of profit and loss, it is their duty to persuade him to be loyal.

古文：愚以为宫中之事，事无大小，悉以咨之，必能裨补阙漏，有所广益。
现代文：我认为宫中的事无论大小，都能咨询他们，一定能弥补缺漏，有所助益。
English: I think that no matter how big or small things are in the palace, they can consult with them, and they can certainly make up for the shortcomings and be helpful.

古文：若无兴德之言，则戮允等以彰其慢。 亮寻请祎为参军，允迁为侍中，领虎贲中郎将，统宿卫亲兵。
现代文：如果没有修养德行的言论，那就斩杀董允等人，以表示他们的怠慢。 诸葛亮不久就请任命费祎为参军，升任董允为侍中，兼任虎贲中郎将，统领宿卫亲兵。
English: If there is no speech of cultivating virtue, then kill Dong Yun and others to show their negligence. Zhuge Liang soon asked to appoint Fei Yao as a member of the army, promoted Dong Yun as an attendant, and concurrently served as the vice-commander of the Tiger Clan and the leader of the inn guards.

古文：攸之性素和顺，备员而已。
现代文：郭攸之的性格向来和顺，只是后备官员而已。
English: Guo Youzhi's character has always been conciliatory, but he is only a reserve official.

古文：献纳之任，允皆专之矣。
现代文：向皇帝进言的责任，就是董允的专职。
English: The responsibility of advising the emperor is Dong Yun's full-time job.

古文：允处事为防制，甚尽匡救之理。
现代文：董允为人处世，防患于未然，能竭尽匡扶正气的事理。
English: Dong Yun is a person who deals with the world, prevents problems in advance, and can do his best to support the cause of righteousness.

古文：后主常欲采择以充后宫，允以为古者天子后妃之数不过十二，今嫔嫱已具，不宜增益，终执不听。
现代文：后主刘禅经常想要采选美女充实后宫，董允认为古代的天子后妃之人不过十二人，现在妃嫔已经具备，不应该再增加，始终坚持没有听从命令。
English: Dowager Liu Zen often wanted to select beautiful women to enrich the harem. Dong Yun believed that there were only twelve princesses in ancient times. Now there are already princesses, and there should not be any more. He always insisted that he did not follow the order.

古文：后主益严惮之。
现代文：后主刘禅也对他更加敬重忌惮。
English: His successor, Liu Zen, also held him in higher esteem.

古文：尚书令蒋琬领益州刺史，上疏以让费祎及允，又表 允内侍历年，翼赞王室，宜赐爵土以褒勋劳。 允固辞不受。
现代文：尚书令蒋琬兼任益州刺史，上书想要让位给费祎和董允，又上表说： 董允在宫内任职多年，辅佐王室，应该赏赐爵位封土，以褒奖他的功劳。 
English: Shang Shu ordered Chiang Kai-shek to also serve as the governor of Yizhou, and wanted to give way to Fei Yao and Dong Yun. He also wrote: Dong Yun has served in the palace for many years, assisting the royal family, and should be awarded a knighthood and fief to commend his service.

古文：后主渐长大，爱宦人黄皓。皓便辟佞慧，欲自容入。
现代文：董允坚决推辞没有接受，后主刘禅渐渐长成，宠爱宦官黄皓，黄皓就阿谀献媚，想要攀登高位。
English: Dong Yun resolutely refused to accept the refusal, and his successor, Liu Zen, gradually grew up to love the eunuch Huang Qi, and Huang Qi flattered the eunuch and wanted to climb to a high position.

古文：允常上则正色匡主，下则数责於皓。
现代文：董允经常对上正色批评皇帝过失，对下多次责备黄皓。
English: Dong Yun often criticized the emperor's negligence to the upper positive color, and repeatedly reproached Huang Qi to the lower.

古文：皓畏允，不敢为非。终允之世，皓位不过黄门丞。
现代文：黄皓畏惧董允，不敢惹是生非，在董允在世之时，黄皓的官职也不过是黄门丞而已。
English: Huang Qi was afraid of Dong Yun and did not dare to stir up trouble. When Dong Yun was alive, Huang Qi's official position was no more than that of Huang Menjo.

古文：允尝与尚书令费祎、中典军胡济等共期游宴，严驾已办，而郎中襄阳董恢诣允脩敬。
现代文：董允曾经和尚书令费祎、中典军胡济等人共同相约游乐宴饮，车马已经备好，而郎中襄阳人董恢前来向董允请教。
English: Dong Yun was once a monk who ordered Fei Yao, Zhong Dian Jun Hu Zi and others to have a banquet together. The chariot and horse were ready, and his brother-in-law, the Yangyang man Dong Wei, came to consult with Dong Yun.

古文：恢年少官微，见允停出，逡巡求去，允不许，曰： 本所以出者，欲与同好游谈也，今君已自屈，方展阔积，舍此之谈，就彼之宴，非所谓也。 乃命解骖，祎等罢驾不行。
现代文：董恢年少，官职低微，看到董允即将出门，犹豫片刻就起身求去，董允没有答应，说： 本来我之所以外出，是想要跟喜好相同的人游乐交谈，现在您已屈尊来访，正要展开深谈阔论，放弃这里的谈话，到那边去宴饮，那就不像话了。 就下令解开车马，费祎等人也停车不出行。
English: Seeing that Dong Yun was about to go out, he hesitated for a moment and got up and asked to go. Dong Yun did not agree, saying: Originally, I went out to have fun and talk with people who like the same things. Now that you have condescended to visit, you are about to start a deep discussion. It would be inappropriate to give up the conversation here and go to a banquet there. He ordered the horses to be unloaded, and Fei Yao and others also stopped and did not go.

古文：其守正下士，凡此类也。
现代文：董允坚守正道，礼贤下士，大概都是这样的事情。
English: Dong Yun adhering to the right path, Corporal Li Xian, are probably all such things.

古文：延熙六年，加辅国将军。
现代文：延熙六年，董允加封辅国将军。
English: In the sixth year of Yanxi, Dong Yun was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：七年，以侍中守尚书令，为大将军费祎副贰。
现代文：七年，以侍中身份兼任尚书令，为大将军费祎做副手。
English: For seven years, as an attendant, he also served as Shang Shuling, and served as a deputy to General Fei Yao.

古文：九年，卒。
现代文：延熙九年去世。
English: Yan Xi died nine years later.

古文：陈祗代允为侍中，与黄皓互相表里，皓始预政事。
现代文：陈衹接替董允担任侍中，与黄皓相互勾结，黄浩就开始干预政事。
English: Chen Hao succeeded Dong Yun as chamberlain, and in collusion with Huang Qi, Huang Hao began to interfere in political affairs.

古文：祗死后，皓从黄门令为中常侍、奉车都尉，操弄威柄，终至覆国。
现代文：陈衹去世后，黄皓从黄门令升任为中常侍、奉车都尉，玩弄权术，建立威势，最终导致国家灭亡。
English: After Chen Qi's death, Huang Qi was promoted from Huangmenling to Zhong Changzhi and Bongche Duifeng. He played power games and built up his power, which ultimately led to the country's demise.

古文：蜀人无不追思允。
现代文：蜀地百姓没有不追思董允的。
English: The people of Shu did not spare a thought for Dong Yun.

古文：及邓艾至蜀，闻皓奸险，收闭，将杀之，而皓厚赂艾左右，得免。
现代文：等到邓艾到了蜀地，得知黄皓的奸险狡诈，将他收押，将要处死，而黄皓重金贿赂邓艾左右侍从，得以免于一死。
English: When Deng Ai arrived in Shu, he learned of Huang Qi's treachery and cunning. He was taken into custody and was about to be executed, but Huang Qi bribed Deng Ai's right and left attendants with a large sum of money and was able to avoid death.

古文：祗字奉宗，汝南人，许靖兄之外孙也。
现代文：陈衹字奉宗，汝南人，是许靖兄长的外孙。
English: Chen Shanzhi Fongzong, a native of southern Ryukyu, is the grandson of Xu Jing's elder brother.

古文：少孤，长於靖家。
现代文：年少时父亲就去世，在许靖家中长大。
English: His father died when he was young, and he grew up in the family of Xu Jing.

古文：弱冠知名，稍迁至选曹郎，矜厉有威容。多技艺，挟数术，费祎甚异之，故超继允内侍。
现代文：长到二十岁时就已经出名，渐渐升至选曹郎，他矜持严厉，很有威严，擅长多种技艺，懂得旁门左道，费祎对他感到惊异，所以越级提拔让他接替董允担任内侍。
English: He was already famous by the time he was twenty years old, and gradually rose to the position of choirmaster. He was stern, very dignified, good at a variety of skills, and knew his way around. Fei Yao was surprised by him, so he was promoted to succeed Dong Yun as a chambermaid.

古文：吕乂卒，祗又以侍中守尚书令，加镇军将军，大将军姜维虽班在祗上，常率众在外，希亲朝政。
现代文：吕乂去世后，陈衹又以侍中身份兼任尚书令，加官镇军将军，大将军姜维虽然官职在陈衹之上，但经常在外统军，很少参与朝政。
English: After Lv Ying's death, Chen Yu, as an aide-de-camp, concurrently served as Shang Shuling, the general of the official town army, and the general Jiang Wei, although the official position was above Chen Yu, he was often in the United Front Army, and rarely participated in court politics.

古文：祗上承主指，下接阉竖，深见信爱，权重於维。
现代文：陈衹对上逢迎皇上所好，对下结交宦官奸臣，深受皇帝信赖宠幸，权势超过姜维。
English: Chen Xi was favored by the emperor when it suited him, befriended eunuchs and treacherous vassals when it didn't, and was favored by the emperor's trust. He had more power than Jiang Wei.

古文：景耀元年卒，后主痛惜，发言流涕，乃下诏曰： 祗统职一纪，柔嘉惟则，幹肃有章，和义利物，庶绩允明。
现代文：他在景耀元年去世后，后主刘禅非常悲痛，一提到他就流泪，就下诏说： 陈衹在他的官位上，以柔和温顺为准则，处理事务很有条理，和气忠义，有利于各项事务，所以政绩非常鲜明。
English: After his death in the first year of Jingyao, his successor Liu Zen was very sad. He shed tears as soon as he mentioned him, and issued an edict saying: Chen Xi, in his official position, takes softness and meekness as the standard, handles affairs in a very orderly manner, is friendly and loyal, and is conducive to various affairs, so his political achievements are very clear.

古文：命不融远，朕用悼焉。夫存有令问，则亡加美谥，谥曰忠侯。 赐子粲爵关内侯，拔次子裕为黄门侍郎。
现代文：但天不假年，朕非常悲痛，如果能纪念或和他进行交流，那就是在他去世后加以美好的谥号，谥号为 忠侯 。 于是赏赐陈衹的儿子陈粲爵位为关内侯，提拔陈衹的次子陈裕为黄门侍郎。
English: But every year, I am very sad. If I could commemorate or communicate with him, it would be to give him a beautiful nickname after his death, the nickname is "Loyal Marquis." Therefore, Chen Yao's son Chen Yao was awarded the title of "Kuanai Marquis" and Chen Yao's second son Chen Yu was promoted to "Yellow Gate Attendant."

古文：自祗之有宠，后主追怨允日深，谓为自轻，由祗媚兹一人，皓构间浸润故耳。
现代文：自从陈衹得到宠幸，后主刘禅对董允的怨念越加深厚，说董允轻视他人，这都是陈衹阿谀媚上，黄皓挑拨离间，使后主渐渐形成这样的想法。
English: Since Chen Yao was favored, the resentment of his successor Liu Zen against Dong Yun has become deeper and thicker. He said that Dong Yun despised others. This was all due to Chen Yao's flattery and Huang Yao's sowing of discord, causing the successor to gradually form such an idea.

古文：允孙宏，晋巴西太守。
现代文：董允的孙子董宏，在晋代担任巴西太守。
English: Dong Yun's grandson, Dong Hong, served as the governor of Brazil during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：吕乂字季阳，南阳人也。
现代文：吕乂，字季杨，是南阳郡人。
English: Lv Ying, also known as Ji Yang, is from Nanyang County.

古文：父常，送故将刘焉入蜀，值王路隔塞，遂不得还。
现代文：他的父亲吕常，送原先的将军刘焉进入蜀地，因正值官路堵塞，所以不能返回。
English: His father, Lv Chang, sent the former general Liu Yan to enter Shu, but he could not return because the official road was blocked.

古文：乂少孤，好读书鼓琴。
现代文：吕乂从小父亲就去世了，喜好读书弹琴。
English: Lv Yao's father passed away when he was still a child. He liked to read and play the piano.

古文：初，先主定益州，置盐府校尉，较盐铁之利，后校尉王连请乂及南阳杜祺、南乡刘幹等并为典曹都尉。
现代文：当初刘备平定益州，设置盐府校尉，管理盐铁的财政收益，后来校尉王连请吕乂和南阳人杜褀、南乡人刘幹等人共同担任典曹都尉。
English: At the beginning, Liu Bei leveled Dingyizhou, and set up the captain of Yanfu to manage the financial income of Yanfei. Later, the captain Wang Lian invited Lv Ying, Dujuan of Nanyang, Liu Gan of Nanxiang and others to jointly serve as the captain of the army.

古文：乂迁新都、绵竹令，乃心隐恤，百姓称之，为一州诸城之首。
现代文：吕乂又升迁为新都、绵竹的县令，他心怀仁厚，体恤百姓，百姓都称赞他，属于本州各县城的首位。
English: Lv Ying was promoted to the new capital and became the county magistrate of Mianzhu. He was kind-hearted and sympathetic to the people, and the people all praised him, ranking first among the county towns in Honshu.

古文：迁巴西太守。
现代文：后来升任为巴西太守。
English: He was later promoted to the position of the Brazilian governor-general.

古文：丞相诸葛亮连年出军，调发诸郡，多不相救，乂募取兵五千人诣亮，慰喻检制，无逃窜者。
现代文：丞相诸葛亮连年出征，征调各州郡的粮草士兵，大多地方都不能按时上交，吕乂招募五千士兵送到诸葛亮处，他对这些人进行慰问，讲明道理，并加以监管约束，这些人中没有逃跑的。
English: The chancellor Zhuge Liang went to war for years on end, recruiting grain and grass soldiers from every state and county, and most places could not be handed over on time. Lv Ying recruited five thousand soldiers and sent them to Zhuge Liang's place. He consoled these people, explained the reason, and supervised and restricted them. None of these people ran away.

古文：徙为汉中太守，兼领督农，供继军粮。
现代文：后来调任为汉中太守，兼任父农，负责供应军需粮草。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Hanshong Dazhong, and also served as the father farmer, responsible for supplying grain and grass to the military.

古文：亮卒，累迁广汉、蜀郡太守。
现代文：诸葛亮去世后，吕乂又多次升迁为广汉、蜀郡太守。
English: After the death of Zhuge Liang, Lv Ying was promoted several times to become the governor of Guanghan and Shu counties.

古文：蜀郡一都之会，户口众多，又亮卒之后，士伍亡命，更相重冒，奸巧非一。
现代文：蜀郡是都城之地，人数众多，又在诸葛亮死后，士兵有很多逃亡的，又有冒领士兵领军饷的，奸诈之事层出不穷。
English: Shu County is the place of the capital city, with a large number of people. After Zhuge Liang's death, there were many soldiers who fled, and there were soldiers who led the army, and there were many treacherous things.

古文：乂到官，为之防禁，开喻劝导，数年之中，漏脱自出者万馀口。
现代文：吕乂到任之后进行防范禁止，对士兵们劝导宽慰，几年之间，那些脱了军籍自愿出来的有一万多人。
English: After Lyu Hao took office, he carried out prevention and prohibition, and advised and comforted soldiers. In a few years, there were more than 10,000 people who voluntarily left the military.

古文：后入为尚书，代董允为尚书令，众事无留，门无停宾。
现代文：后来吕乂入朝担任尚书，接替董允担任尚书令，众多公事都不存留，门前没有停留的宾客。
English: Later, Lv Hao entered the imperial court to serve as Shang Shu, and succeeded Dong Yun as Shang Shu Ling. Many official duties did not remain, and there were no guests staying in front of the door.

古文：乂历职内外，治身俭约，谦靖少言，为政简而不烦，号为清能；然持法刻深，好用文俗吏，故居大官，名声损於郡县。
现代文：吕乂先后在朝廷内外任职，修身养性，勤俭节约，恭敬谦卑沉默少言，处理政事简约而不繁琐，所以众人称赞他清明能干。但他用法严酷，喜好任用文官俗吏，所以虽然身居高位，各县对他的评价并不是太好。
English: Lv Ying successively served inside and outside the imperial court. He cultivated himself, was diligent and frugal, respectful and humble, silent and seldom spoke, and dealt with government affairs in a simple and not cumbersome manner, so people praised him for his clarity and ability. However, he used harsh methods and liked to appoint civil servants and commoners, so although he was in a high position, the counties did not have a very good evaluation of him.

古文：延熙十四年卒。
现代文：吕乂在延熙十四年去世。
English: Lv Ying died in the fourteenth year of Yanxi.

古文：子辰，景耀中为成都令。
现代文：他的儿子吕辰在景耀年间担任成都令。
English: His son Lü Chen served as the mayor of Chengdu during the Jingyao years.

古文：辰弟雅，谒者。
现代文：吕辰的弟弟吕雅，专任谒者。
English: Lyu Chen's younger brother, Lyu Ya, is a full-time actor.

古文：雅清厉有文才，著格论十五篇。
现代文：吕雅清正威严，很有文采，就著写了《格论》十五篇。
English: Lyu Ya was upright and dignified, and he was very literary. He wrote 15 articles of "On Lattice."

古文：杜祺历郡守监军大将军司马，刘幹官至巴西太守，皆与乂亲善，亦有当时之称，而俭素守法，不及於乂。
现代文：杜褀曾担任过郡守、将军、大将军司马，刘幹做官到巴西太守，都和吕乂有交情，在当时也很有名声，而在节俭朴素，遵纪守法上比不上吕乂。
English: Du Juan had served as county governor, general, and grand general Sima, and Liu Gan had served as an official to the Brazilian governor, both of whom had a friendship with Lyu Juan. They were also very famous at that time, but they were not as frugal and simple as Lyu Juan in terms of discipline and law.

古文：评曰：董和蹈羔羊之素，刘巴履清尚之节，马良贞实，称为令士，陈震忠恪，老而益笃，董允匡主，义形於色，皆蜀臣之良矣。
现代文：评曰：董和亲身力行节俭，刘巴行为清正有风范，马良忠贞笃实，在当时都称为美好的士人，陈震忠正恪守，老而坚定，董允匡扶君主，讲求正义，他们都是蜀国的良臣。
English: The commentary said: "Dong He personally practised frugality, Liu Ba behaved in a pure and dignified manner, Ma Liang was loyal and upright, and was known as a good scholar at that time, Chen Zhenzhong was scrupulous, old and firm, and Dong Yunkuan supported the monarch and advocated justice. They were all good ministers of Shu.

古文：吕乂临郡则垂称，处朝则被损，亦黄、薛之流亚矣。
现代文：吕乂在郡上任官被称赞，在朝中任职却名声受损，也是仅次于黄、薛等人。
English: Lyu Hao was praised when he took office in the county, but his reputation was tarnished when he served in the imperial court, second only to Huang, Xue and others.

