古文：桓康，北兰陵承人也。
现代文：桓康，北兰陵承县人。
English: Huan Kang, a native of North Lanling County.

古文：勇果骁悍。
现代文：英勇果敢而骁悍。
English: Heroic, courageous and tough.

古文：宋大明中，随齐高帝爲军容，从武帝在赣县。
现代文：宋朝大明时期，曾经随齐高帝为军容，跟从武帝在赣县。
English: During the Song Dynasty and the Ming Dynasty, it once followed the Qigong Emperor as a military figure, and followed the Emperor Wu in Jixian.

古文：泰始初，武帝起义，爲郡所絷，衆皆散。
现代文：泰始初年，武帝起义，被郡里所囚禁，兵众都逃散了。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, Emperor Wu revolted and was imprisoned by the county, and all the soldiers fled.

古文：康装担，一头贮穆后，一头贮文惠太子及竟陵王子良，自负置山中。
现代文：桓康找了个担子，一头装了穆皇后，一头装了文惠太子以及竟陵王萧子良，自己把他们挑到了山中。
English: Huan Kang found a load, one end was loaded with Empress Mu, the other with Prince Wenhui and King Xiao Ziliang, and he picked them up in the mountains.

古文：及闸客萧欣祖等四十馀人相结，破郡狱，出武帝。
现代文：他与门客萧欣祖等四十多人互相联合，攻破郡里的监狱，救出了武帝。
English: He and his protégé, Xiao Xinzu, and more than forty others joined forces to break into the county prison and rescue Emperor Wu.

古文：郡追兵急，康等死战破之。
现代文：郡里的追兵逼得很紧，桓康等人拼死战斗，才把他们打败。
English: The pursuers in the county pressed very hard, and Huan Kang and others fought to the death to defeat them.

古文：随武帝起兵，摧坚陷阵，膂力绝人。
现代文：此后便随武帝起兵，摧坚陷阵，臂力远远超过别人。
English: After that, he followed Emperor Wu in raising an army, and was victorious, with his arm strength far exceeding that of others.

古文：所经村邑，恣行暴害，江南人畏之，以其名怖小儿，画其形于寺中。
现代文：他在所经过的村庄，都是残暴横行，江南的人都很害怕他，常常用他的名字吓唬小孩，把他的像画在寺中。
English: People in the south of the Yangtze River were afraid of him, often using his name to scare children and painting his image in temples.

古文：病疟者写形帖着床壁，无不立愈。
现代文：患了虐疾的人把他的像画下来贴在床边的墙壁上，无不立即痊愈。
English: People suffering from malaria painted his image and stuck it on the wall next to their bed, and all of them recovered immediately.

古文：后除襄贲令。
现代文：后来他被任命为襄贲令。
English: Later, he was appointed to the Xiangfan order.

古文：桂阳王休范事起，康弃县还都就高帝。
现代文：桂阳王刘休范事件发生后，桓康丢掉县城回到京都去找高帝。
English: After the Guiyang King Liu Xuan Incident, Huan Kang lost the county seat and returned to Kyoto to find Emperor Gao.

古文：会事已平，除员外郎。
现代文：正好事情已经平定，任命他为员外郎。
English: Just as things were calming down, he was appointed to the post of foreign minister.

古文：元徽五年七月六日夜，少帝微行至领军府，帝左右人曰： 一府皆眠，何不缘墙入？ 
现代文：元徽五年七月初六夜里，少帝化装出行到了领军府，少帝身边的人说： 全府的人都睡着了，何不翻墙过去？ 
English: On the 6th night of the 7th month of the 5th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the young emperor traveled in disguise to the leading military government. The people around the young emperor said: People in the whole government are asleep, why not climb over the wall?

古文：帝曰： 我今夕欲一处作适，待明日夜。 
现代文：少帝说： 我今天晚上想到一个地方去玩，等明天夜里吧！ 
English: The young emperor said: I've thought of a place to play tonight, let's wait until tomorrow night!

古文：康与高帝所养健儿卢荒、向黑于门间听得其语。
现代文：桓康与高帝所养的健儿卢荒、向黑在门缝里听到了他们的话。
English: Huan Kang and Gao Di's foster sons Lu Ao and Xiang He heard their words in the crack of the door.

古文：明旦，王敬则将帝首至，扣府门。
现代文：第二天黎明，王敬则提着少帝的头来到，敲击府门。
English: At dawn the next day, Wang Jing came with the young emperor's head and knocked on the palace door.

古文：康谓是变，与荒、黑拔白刃欲出，仍随高帝入宫。
现代文：桓康认为是发生了变故，与卢荒、向黑拔出刀来想冲出去。结果随武帝进入皇宫。
English: Huan Kang thought that there had been a change of fortune, and he and Lu Ao and Xiang Hei drew their swords to rush out. As a result, they entered the imperial palace with Emperor Wu.

古文：高帝镇东府，除武陵王中兵、甯朔将军，带兰陵太守，常卫左右。
现代文：高帝镇守东府，任命他为武陵王中兵、宁朔将军，兼带兰陵太守，常常侍卫在身边。
English: Gao Di zhen guarded Dongfu, appointed him Wuling Wangzhongfei, Ningshuo General, and Lanling Taizhou, often with attendants at his side.

古文：高帝诛黄回，回时爲南兖州，部曲数千，欲收恐爲乱，召入东府，停外斋，使康数回罪，然后杀之。
现代文：高帝杀死了黄回，黄回当时为南兖州刺史，部队数千人，想对他们加以拘捕，又怕他们作乱，便把他们召进了东府，停在外斋前面，使桓康去宣布黄回的罪行，然后把他杀死。
English: Emperor Gao killed Huang Hui. Huang Hui was a famous historian in southern Luzhou at that time. Thousands of troops wanted to arrest him, but they were afraid that he would make trouble. So they called him to the East Office, stopped him in front of the outer courtyard, and sent Huan Kang to announce Huang Hui's crime, and then killed him.

古文：时人爲之语曰： 欲侜张，问桓康。 
现代文：当时的人为此编了谣谚说： 要欺诳，问桓康。 
English: The people at that time made up a rumor about this saying: If you want to be cheated, ask Huan Kang.

古文：除后军将军、直合将军、南濮阳太守。
现代文：高帝任命他做了后军将军、直阁将军、南濮阳太守。
English: Emperor Gao appointed him as the general of the rear army, the general of the direct cabinet, and the governor of Nan Poyang.

古文：建元元年，封吴平县侯。
现代文：建元元年，他被封为吴平县侯。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan era, he was named the marquis of Wuping County.

古文：高帝谓康曰： 卿随我日久，未得方伯，亦当未解我意，正欲与卿先共灭虏耳。 
现代文：高帝对桓康说： 你跟随我时间很久了，还没有当上地方诸侯，也许不能理解我的心意，我是打算和你首先共同消灭敌虏啊！ 
English: Gao Di said to Huan Kang: You have been following me for a long time, and you have not yet become a local lord. Perhaps you cannot understand my intentions. I intend to destroy the enemy together with you first!

古文：三年，魏军动，康大破魏军于淮阳。
现代文：建元三年，魏军出动，桓康在淮阳大破魏军。
English: In the third year of Jianyuan, the Wei army was dispatched, and Huan Kang defeated the Wei army in Huaiyang.

古文：武帝即位，卒于骁骑将军。
现代文：武帝即位后，他在骁骑将军的职位上去世。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, he died in the position of general of cavalry.

古文：焦度字文绩，南安氐也。
现代文：焦度字文绩，是南安氐人。
English: Focussing on academic achievements, he is a graduate of Nan'an University of Technology.

古文：祖文珪，避难居仇池。
现代文：祖父焦文圭，避难住在仇池。
English: Grandfather Jiao Wengui, who took refuge in Qiuchi.

古文：宋元嘉中，裴方明平杨难当，度父明与千余家随居襄阳，乃立天水郡略阳县以居之。
现代文：宋朝元嘉时期，裴方明平定了杨难当，焦度的父亲焦明与一千余家随着迁居到襄阳，于是建立了天水郡略阳县，住了下来。
English: During the Song Dynasty and Yuan Jia period, Pei Fangming leveled Yang Nantang, and Jiao's father Jiao Ming and more than a thousand families moved to Yangyang, thus establishing Tianshui County and Liaoyang County, and settled down.

古文：度少有气干，便弓马。
现代文：焦度少年的时候就很有气概，熟悉弓马。
English: When he was a teenager, Jiao Du was very spirited and familiar with the bow and arrow.

古文：孝武初，青州刺史顔师伯出镇，台差度领幢主送之，与魏豹皮公遇，交槊斗，豹皮公墯地，禽其具装马，手杀数十人。
现代文：孝武帝初年，青州刺史颜师伯出京镇守，省台差焦度兼作幢主去送他，途中与魏朝的豹皮公相遇，交槊战斗，豹皮公落马，焦度捉了他的具装战马，亲手杀死了几十人。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Shiyan Shibao from Qingzhou went to Beijing to guard the city. He was accompanied by Jiao Du, who was also the governor of Taiwan. On the way, he met and fought with the Leopard Skin Emperor of the Wei Dynasty. The Leopard Skin Emperor fell from his horse. Jiao Du caught his horse and killed dozens of people with his own hands.

古文：师伯啓孝武，称度气力弓马并绝人，帝召还充左右。
现代文：颜师伯表奏孝武帝，称赞焦度的气力弓马都超绝常人，孝武帝把他召回充任侍从。
English: Yan Shibo watched the performance of Emperor Xiaowu, praised the focus of the force of the bow and the horse are beyond ordinary people, Emperor Xiaowu called him back to serve as an attendant.

古文：见度形状，谓师伯曰： 此真健人也。 
现代文：他看见了焦度的形体相貌后，对颜师伯说： 这真是一位健人啊！ 
English: After he saw the physical appearance of the focus, he said to Yan Shi Bao: This is really a healthy person!

古文：补晋安王子勋夹毂队主，随镇江州。
现代文：后来补任了晋安王萧子勋的夹毂队主，跟随镇守江州。
English: Later, he took up the post of Jinan King Xiao Zixun's pincer team leader, following the town guard Jiangzhou.

古文：子勋起兵，以度爲龙骧将军。
现代文：萧子勋起兵，以焦度为龙骧将军。
English: Xiao Zixun raised an army, with Cao Du as the dragon general.

古文：爲前锋，所向无不胜。
现代文：担任前锋，所向无不战胜。
English: He plays as a striker and always wins.

古文：事败，逃宫亭湖爲贼。
现代文：事情失败后，逃往宫亭湖为贼。
English: After the plot failed, he fled to Lake Miyatine as a thief.

古文：朝廷闻其勇，甚患之。
现代文：朝廷听说他十分骁勇，非常担忧。
English: The court heard that he was very courageous and very worried.

古文：使江州刺史王景文诱降之。
现代文：便派江州刺史王景文去诱降他。
English: He then sent Jiangzhou assassin Wang Jingwen to lure him down.

古文：景文以爲己镇南参军，领中军直兵，厚待之。
现代文：王景文让他做了自己的镇南参军，兼中军直兵，相待十分优厚。
English: Wang Jingwen asked him to do his own Zhennan to join the army, and also to be a direct soldier of the Chinese army, and the treatment was very generous.

古文：随景文还都，常在府州内。
现代文：他随王景文回到了京城，常常住在府州里面。
English: He returned to Beijing with Wang Jingwen and often lived in Fuzhou.

古文：景文被害夕，度大怒，劝景文拒命，景文不从，明帝不知也。
现代文：王景文被害的那天晚上，焦度大怒，劝王景文拒绝接受命令，王景文没有听从，而明帝不知道这个情况。
English: On the night of Wang Jingwen's murder, he was furious and urged Wang Jingwen to refuse to accept the order. Wang Jingwen did not obey, and Emperor Ming did not know about the situation.

古文：以度武勇，补晋熙王燮防合，随镇夏口。
现代文：因为焦度武勇，补任晋熙王萧燮防阁，跟随镇守夏口。
English: Because of his ardor and bravery, he was appointed by the King of Jin Dynasty, Xiao Bingboge, to follow the town guard, Xia Kou.

古文：武陵王赞代燮爲郢州，度仍留镇，爲赞前军参军。
现代文：武陵王萧赞代替萧燮管辖郢州，焦度仍然留在军镇，做萧赞的前军参军。
English: Wuling King Xiao Zan replaced Xiao Yao to govern Zhangzhou. Cao Du still remained in the military town, as Xiao Zan's former army joined the army.

古文：沈攸之事起，转度中直兵。
现代文：沈攸之事件发生，转任焦度为中直兵。
English: After the incident involving Shen You, the focus shifted to Zhong Zhi Bing.

古文：齐高帝又使假度辅国将军、屯骑校尉，转右将军。
现代文：齐高帝又让任命焦度为辅国将军、屯骑校尉，转右将军。
English: Emperor Qigong also had Jiao Du appointed as an auxiliary general, a cavalry lieutenant, and a general of the Right Division.

古文：度容貌壮丑，皮肤若漆，质直木讷，口不能出言。
现代文：焦度容貌粗壮丑陋，皮肤好似黑漆，朴实笨拙，口不能讲话。
English: His features are coarse and ugly, his skin is like black lacquer, he is plain and clumsy, and he cannot speak.

古文：晋熙王夹毂主周彦与度俱在郢州，彦有左右人与度父同名，彦常呼其名使役之。
现代文：晋熙王的夹毂主周彦与焦度都在郢州，周彦有个侍从与焦度的父亲同名，周彦常常喊着他的名字使唤他。
English: King Jinxi's chief eunuch Zhou Yan and Jiaodu were both in Zhangzhou. Zhou Yan had a servant with the same name as Jiaodu's father. Zhou Yan often called him by his name.

古文：度积忿，呵责彦曰： 汝知我讳 明 ，而恒呼明，何也！ 
现代文：焦度积压了很大的忿怒，呵斥周彦说： 你本来知道我忌讳 明 字，而总是喊 明 ，为什么？ 
English: With a great deal of anger pent up in his focus, he rebuked Zhou Yan, saying, "You knew that I abhorred the word "clarify," but you always shouted "clarify," why?

古文：及在郢城，尤爲沈攸之所忿。
现代文：后来到了郢城，尤其为沈攸之所忿怒。
English: Later, when he came to Lucheng, he was particularly enraged by Shen Youyou.

古文：攸之大衆至夏口，将直下都，留偏兵守郢而已。
现代文：沈攸之的大军到了夏口，即将直下京城，只留下偏兵守着郢城。
English: Shen Yuanzhi's large army arrived in Xiakou, about to go straight to Beijing, leaving only partisans to guard Shicheng.

古文：度于城楼上肆言骂辱攸之，至自发露形体秽辱之，故攸之怒，改计攻城。
现代文：焦度在城楼上破口辱骂沈攸之，以至于自己脱下衣服裸露出身体污辱他，所以沈攸之十分愤怒，改变计划攻打郢城。
English: Caught up in the excitement, he verbally abused Shen Youzhu on the castle tower, to the extent that he took off his clothes and exposed his naked body to insult him. Shen Youzhu was so angry that he changed his plan to attack Shicheng.

古文：度亲力战，攸之衆蒙楯将登，度令投以秽器，贼衆不能冒，后呼此楼爲焦度楼。
现代文：焦度亲自奋力作战，沈攸之的军众蒙着盾将要登城，焦度命令把污秽的东西投下，贼军的兵众不能忍受，后来便称此楼为焦度楼。
English: Jiaodu personally fought hard, Shen Yuanzhi's army was about to enter the city with shields. Jiaodu ordered to throw the filthy things down, the soldiers of the thief army could not bear it, and later called this building the Jiaodu Building.

古文：事甯，度功居多，封东昌县子、东宫直合将军。
现代文：事情平定以后，焦度的功劳很大，封为东昌县子、东宫直阁将军。
English: After the situation was calmed down, he received great credit for his efforts, and was given the title of the son of Dongchang County and the general of Donggong Zhaogu.

古文：还都，爲贵戚追敍郢城时褰露秽亵之事，其戆如此。
现代文：回到京城，焦度还为贵戚们追叙在郢城时脱衣裸露污辱敌人的事，他就是这样的憨直。
English: Back in the capital, the focus is also for the noble relatives to pursue the story of stripping naked and insulting the enemy while in the capital, he is such a straightforward person.

古文：爲人朴涩，欲就高帝求州，比及见，竟不涉一语。
现代文：焦度为人质朴生涩，他想向高帝请求做个州官，等见了面后，竟又一句也没有提到。
English: He wanted to ask Emperor Gao to make him a prefect, but when they met, he didn't say a word.

古文：帝以其不闲政事，竟不用。
现代文：高帝因为他不懂政事，一直没有用他。
English: Emperor Gao didn't use him because he didn't understand politics.

古文：后求竟陵郡，不知所以置辞，亲人授之辞百余言，度习诵数日，皆得上口。
现代文：后来他要求管竟陵郡，但不知道怎样措词，他的亲人给他编词教了他一百多字，焦度练习背诵了好几天，都能上口了。
English: Later, he asked to be put in charge of Jingling County, but he didn't know how to put it into words. His relatives taught him more than a hundred words, and he recited them for several days with great concentration. They were all catchy.

古文：会高帝履行石头城，度于大衆中欲自陈，临时卒忘所教，乃大言曰： 度啓公，度啓公，度无食。 
现代文：正遇上高帝巡行石头城，焦度在大众之中想自己提出，临时忽然忘了教给他的话，于是便大声说： 焦度启奏，焦度启奏，焦度无食。 
English: Just as Gao Di was marching through Stone Town, Cao Du suddenly forgot the words he had taught him, and shouted: "Cao Du has begun to play, Cao Du has begun to play, Cao Du has nothing to eat."

古文：帝笑曰： 卿何忧无食。 
现代文：高帝笑着说： 你哪里用担心无食！ 
English: Gao Di said with a smile: "Why should you worry about not having food!

古文：寻病卒，年七十九。
现代文：于是就赐给他白米一百斛。建元四年，任命他为淮陵太守。
English: So he gave him a hundred baht of white rice. In the fourth year of the Jianyuan era, he was appointed the governor of Huairing.

古文：子奉叔，勇力绝人，少随盘龙征讨，所在暴掠。爲东宫直合将军。
现代文：他生性好喝酒，一醉便暴怒起来，皇上常常让人对他进行节制。他年纪虽老，而力气依旧，任命他为游击将军，去世。周盘龙的儿子周奉叔，勇力超人，少年时代跟随周盘龙征讨，所到之处都以暴力掠夺。担任了东宫的直阁将军。
English: He had a natural affinity for drinking, and would fly into a rage when drunk. The emperor often had people restrain him. Although he was old, his strength remained the same. He was appointed a guerrilla general and died. Uncle Zhou Fong, the son of Zhou Panlong, was a man of great courage. As a boy, he followed Zhou Panlong on campaigns and plundered with violence wherever he went. He served as the general of the Eastern Palace.

古文：郁林在西州，奉叔密得自进，及即位，与直合将军曹道刚爲心膂。
现代文：郁林王在西州，周奉叔自己得以秘密入内，等即位后，他与直阁将军曹道刚为心腹朋友。
English: Yu Lin Wang was in Xizhou, Zhou Fongzhu himself was able to secretly enter the palace, and after his enthronement, he was a confidant of General Cao Daogang.

古文：奉叔善骑马，帝从其学骑，尤见亲宠，得入内，无所忌惮。
现代文：周奉叔善于骑马，废帝跟着他学习骑马，尤其受到亲宠，得以进入内殿，无所顾忌。
English: Zhou Fengshu was good at riding horses, and Emperor Wu followed him to learn how to ride. He was especially favored by the emperor and was allowed to enter the inner hall without any scruples.

古文：陵轹朝士，就司空王敬则换米二百斛，敬则以百斛与之，不受。
现代文：他欺凌朝士，曾经找司空王敬则换米二百斛，王敬则拿一百斛送给他，他不接受。
English: He bullied the Asashi. He once asked Sku Wang Jing to give him 200 baht in exchange for rice, and Wang Jing gave him 100 baht, which he did not accept.

古文：敬则大惧，乃更饷二百斛并金铪等物。
现代文：王敬则非常恐惧，便另给了二百斛，并且加上金铪等物品。
English: Wang Jing was very afraid, so he gave another two hundred baht, plus gold ingots and other items.

古文：敬则有一内妓，帝令奉叔求。
现代文：王敬则有一个内妓，废帝派周奉叔去要。
English: Wang Jing, on the other hand, had a concubine. The deposed emperor sent his uncle Zhou Feng to get her.

古文：奉叔不通径前，从者执单刀皆半拔，敬则跣走入内。
现代文：周奉叔也不通告，一直走了进去，随从的人手里拿着单刀都拔出了一半，王敬则光着脚走进屋内。
English: Uncle Zhou Fong also did not announce, he kept walking in, and his followers pulled out half of it with a single knife in their hands, while Wang Jing walked barefoot into the house.

古文：既而自计不免，乃出，遥呼奉叔曰： 弟那忽能顾？ 
现代文：随后又自己想着不能逃脱，便出来了，远远地叫着周奉叔： 老弟怎么忽然光临？ 
English: Then, thinking that he could not escape, he came out and called out to Uncle Zhou Fong from a distance, "How did my brother suddenly appear?"

古文：奉叔宣旨求妓意，乃得释。
现代文：周奉叔宣读圣旨，说明了来求艺妓的意思，王敬则才松了一口气。
English: After Uncle Zhou read out the sacred edict and explained the meaning of seeking a geisha, Wang Jing was relieved.

古文：与綦母珍、曹道刚、朱隆之共相唇齿，煽弄威权。
现代文：平时他与綦母珍、曹道刚、朱隆之共同互为唇齿，煽弄威权。
English: In ordinary times, he and Zou Muzhen, Cao Daogang, and Zhu Long were all friends, taunting the authority.

古文：奉叔常翼单刀二十口，出入禁闱，既无别诏，门卫莫敢诃。
现代文：周奉叔常常有二十口单刀保护，出入宫禁，只要没有特别的诏令，门卫都不敢干涉。
English: Zhou Fongshu was often protected by a twenty-pronged single-edged sword, and was forbidden to enter or leave the palace. As long as there was no special edict, the gatekeepers did not dare to interfere.

古文：每语人云： 周郎刀不识君。 
现代文：他常常对别人说： 周郎的刀不认得您。 
English: He often said to others: Zhou Lang's sword does not recognize you.

古文：求武帝御角及舆，并求御仗以给左右。事无不从。
现代文：他去要武帝的御用酒器和车子，并且要御仗送给左右的人，所求的事情无不听从。
English: He went to ask for Emperor Wu's imperial liquor and car, and to give the imperial sword to the people around him. Everything he asked for was obeyed.

古文：又求黄门郎，明帝作辅，固执不能得，乃令萧谌、萧坦之说帝出奉叔爲外镇，树腹心。
现代文：他又要求做黄门郎，当时明帝做宰相，一直坚持，所以他没能得到。明帝又让萧谌、萧坦之劝说废帝派周奉叔去外镇任职，树立心腹。
English: He also asked to be Huangmenlang, but Emperor Ming, who was the prime minister at the time, insisted on it, so he couldn't get it. Emperor Ming also had Xiao Yu and Xiao Tan persuade the deposed emperor to send Uncle Zhou Feng to work in a foreign town, to establish a close relationship.

古文：又说奉叔以方伯之重，奉叔纳其言。
现代文：又以地方诸侯的重要来劝说周奉叔，周奉叔听取了他的话。
English: He also persuaded Uncle Zhou with the importance of local princes, and Uncle Zhou listened to his words.

古文：隆昌元年，出爲青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：隆昌元年，被委派为青、冀二州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he was assigned to write the history of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei.

古文：奉叔就帝求千户侯，帝许之。
现代文：周奉叔向废帝求做千户侯，废帝答应了他。
English: Uncle Zhou Feng asked the emperor to make him a thousand households, and the emperor agreed.

古文：明帝以爲不可。
现代文：明帝认为不可以。
English: Emperor Ming thought it was unacceptable.

古文：忽谓萧谌曰： 若不能见与千户侯，不复应减五百户；不尔，周郎当就刀头取办耳。 
现代文：他忽然对萧谌说： 如果不能给我千户侯，不再应该少于五百户；不然的话，周郎要让钢刀来取办。 
English: He suddenly said to Xiao Yao: "If you can't give me a thousand households, you should no longer have less than five hundred households; otherwise, Zhou Lang will have the steel knife handle it."

古文：既而封曲江县男，奉叔大怒，于衆中攘刀，厉目切齿。
现代文：随后封他为曲江县男，周奉叔大怒，在众人当中抽出刀来，瞪目切齿。
English: Subsequently, he was appointed as the man of Qujiang County. Zhou Fengshu was furious and pulled out a knife from among the crowd. He was stunned and gritted his teeth.

古文：明帝说谕乃受。
现代文：明帝加以劝说才接受了。
English: Emperor Ming persuaded him to accept.

古文：及将之镇，明帝虑其不可复制，因其早入，引往后堂，执送廷尉尽之。
现代文：等他将要到镇的时候，明帝担心他再不能加以控制，便趁着他较早地进来，把他引入了后堂，抓住送交廷尉将他处死。
English: When he was about to arrive in the town, Emperor Ming feared that he would no longer be able to control him, so he took advantage of his early arrival, led him into the back hall, seized him and sent him to the court lieutenant to be executed.

