古文：李继勋，大名元城人。
现代文：李继勋是大名元城人。
English: Li Jixun is a famous man from Yuancheng.

古文：周祖领镇，选隶帐下。
现代文：周太祖领兵时，选用在军中。
English: When Zhou Taizu led the army, he chose to be in the army.

古文：广顺初，补禁军列校，累迁至虎捷左厢都指挥使、领永州防御使。
现代文：广顺初年，补任禁军列校，历升至虎捷左厢都指挥使、兼任永州防御使。
English: In the first year of Guangshun, he was appointed as the commanding envoy of the Forbidden Army, and also served as the Yongzhou defense envoy.

古文：显德初，迁侍卫步军都指挥使、领昭武军节度。
现代文：显德初年，升任侍卫步军都指挥使、兼任昭武军节度。
English: In the first year of Emperor Hende's reign, he was promoted to the post of the Commander-in-Chief of the Foot Guards and the Commander-in-Chief of the Shouwu Army.

古文：岁余，改领曹州。
现代文：一年多后，改为兼任曹州节度。
English: More than a year later, it was changed to also serve as the Caozhou Festival.

古文：世宗亲征淮上，令继勋领兵屯寿州城南，进洞屋、云梯，以攻其城。
现代文：世宗亲自征伐淮地，令李继勋领兵驻屯寿州城南，建造洞屋、云梯，用来攻城。
English: Shizong personally conquered Huaiji, and ordered Li Jixun to lead the troops stationed in the south of Shuzhou, to build caves and ladders to attack the city.

古文：继勋怠于守御，为其所败，死者数万，梯、屋悉皆被焚。
现代文：李继勋守御懈怠，被敌人打败，死了数万人，云梯、洞屋都被焚烧。
English: Li Jixun was slack in defense, was defeated by the enemy, tens of thousands of people died, and the ladders and caves were burned.

古文：召归阙，出为河阳三城节度。
现代文：世宗召他回朝，出京任河阳三城节度。
English: King Sejong called him back to the imperial court, and he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of the three cities in Hebei Province.

古文：议者以为失责帅之义。
现代文：议者认为不合谴责将帅的意义。
English: The legislator thought that it was inappropriate to condemn the significance of the general.

古文：及再幸寿春回，左授继勋右武卫大将军，又以其掌书记陈南金裨赞无状，并黜之。
现代文：世宗再次到寿春回来后，贬任继勋为右武卫大将军，又因为他的掌书记陈南金辅佐无方，一并黜贬。
English: After Sejong returned to Shuchun again, he demoted his successor to the rank of General of the Right Division of the Middle Palace Guards, and because his secretary, Chen Nanjin, was unable to do anything, he demoted him as well.

古文：显德四年冬，复从世宗南征，及次迎銮，即命继勋帅黑龙船三十艘于江口滩，败吴兵数百，获战船二艘，以功迁左领军卫上将军。
现代文：显德四年冬天，又跟从世宗南征，到驻扎在迎銮时，命继勋率领黑龙船三十艘在江口滩，打败数百吴兵，俘获战船二艘，因战功升任左领军卫上将军。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of Xiande's reign, when he followed Shizong's southern expedition and was stationed in Yingtao, Mu Jixun led thirty Black Dragon ships to defeat hundreds of Wu soldiers, captured two warships, and was promoted to General of the Left Division of the National Guard for his war service.

古文：七月，改右羽林统军。
现代文：七月，改任右羽林统军。
English: In July, he was reassigned to the Uebayashi Unification Army.

古文：六年春，世宗幸沧州，以继勋为战棹左厢都部署，前泽州刺史刘洪副之，俄权知邢州。
现代文：显德六年春天，世宗到沧州，任命继勋为战左厢都部署，前任泽州刺史刘洪任他的副手，不久任权知邢州。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Xiande, Shizong went to Cangzhou and appointed Ji Xun as the left flank of the war. Liu Hong, the former governor of Zezhou, served as his deputy, and Guanzhizhou as the next governor.

古文：恭帝即位，授安国军节度，加检校太傅。
现代文：恭帝即皇帝位，授任继勋为安国军节度，加官检校太傅。
English: Emperor Gongdi was enthroned as emperor, and his successor was appointed as the commander of the Korean People's Army, and he was also promoted to the rank of Taifu.

古文：宋初，加检校太尉。
现代文：宋初，加官检校太尉。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of inspector.

古文：太祖平泽、潞，继勋朝于行在，即以为昭义军节度。
现代文：太祖平定泽、潞二州，继勋到行营朝见皇帝，被任命为昭义军节度。
English: The great-great-grandfather Ping Dingze, Xing Erzhou, and Jixun went to the camp to see the emperor and were appointed to the Shouyi Army Festival.

古文：是秋，率师入河东，燔平遥县，俘获甚众。
现代文：这年秋天，率领军队进入河东，火烧平遥县城，俘敌很多。
English: In the autumn of that year, he led the army into Hedong, set fire to Pingyao County, and captured many enemies.

古文：建隆二年冬，又败并军千余人，斩首百余级，获其辽州刺史傅延彦及弟延勋来献。
现代文：建隆二年冬天，又打败并军千余人，斩首百余人，俘获其辽州刺史傅延彦及其弟弟延勋献给朝廷。
English: In the winter of the second year of Jianlong, he defeated more than a thousand people of the allied forces, beheaded more than a hundred people, and captured his Liaozhou assassin Fu Yanhan and his brother Yan Xun to present to the imperial court.

古文：乾德二年，诏与康延沼、尹训率步骑万余攻辽州，太原将郝贵超领兵来援，战于城下，继勋大败之。
现代文：乾德二年，诏令继勋与康延沼、尹训率领步骑万余人进攻辽州，太原将领郝贵超领兵来援，在城下决战，继勋大败敌军。
English: In the second year of the Qiande era, Zhaozhong ordered Jixun and Kang Yanmo and Yin Chun to lead more than 10,000 horsemen to attack Liaozhou. Taiyuan General Zou Guichao led the troops to come to the rescue, fought a decisive battle under the city, and Jixun defeated the enemy army.

古文：州将杜延韬危蹙，与拱卫都指挥使冀进、兵马都监供奉官侯美籍部下兵三千送款于继勋。
现代文：州将杜延韬危急，与拱卫都指挥使冀进、兵马都监供奉官侯美带领部下三千人降附于继勋。
English: Du Yanqi, the governor of the state, was in a critical situation, and he ordered Ji Jin, the commander of the arch guard, and Hou Mei, the commander of the army and cavalry, to lead three thousand of his subordinates to Jixun.

古文：即遣内供奉官都知慕容延忠入奏，诏褒之。
现代文：立即派遣内供奉官都知慕容延忠到朝廷奏告，诏令褒奖他们。
English: He immediately dispatched Murong Yanzhong, an official of the Imperial Household Agency, to report to the Imperial Court, and the Imperial Edict commended them.

古文：未岁，并人诱契丹步骑六万人来取辽州，复遣继勋与罗彦瑰、郭进、曹彬等领六万众赴之，大破契丹及太原军于城下。
现代文：不久，并州人引诱契丹步兵骑兵共六万人来攻取辽州，再次派遣李继勋与罗彦瑰、郭进、曹彬等人率领六万军队前去抵抗，大败契丹军及太原军于城下。
English: Not long after, the people of Hanzhou lured a total of 60,000 Khitan infantry and cavalry to attack Liaozhou, and once again sent Li Jixun and Luo Yankui, Guo Jin, Cao Bin and others to lead 60,000 troops to resist, defeating the Khitan army and Taiyuan army at the foot of the city.

古文：五年，加同平章事。
现代文：乾德五年，加任同平章事。
English: After five years of hard work, he was promoted to the same rank.

古文：开宝初，将征河东，以继勋为行营前军都部署，败并人于涡河。
现代文：开宝初年，准备征伐河东，任命继勋为行营前军都部署，在涡河大败并州部队。
English: In the first year of Kaibao, they prepared to invade the eastern part of the river and appointed Ji Xun as the commander of the front army. However, they were defeated and merged into the state army in Turuhe.

古文：二年，太祖亲征河东，命继勋为行营前军都部署。
现代文：开宝二年，太祖亲自征伐河东，任命继勋为行营前军都部署。
English: In the second year of Kaibao, Emperor Taizu personally conquered the eastern part of the river and appointed Ji Xun as the commander of the army.

古文：驾至城下，分军四面，继勋栅其南。
现代文：皇帝到了城下，分军队为四面，继勋统领南面。
English: When the emperor arrived at the foot of the castle, he divided the army into four sides, with the heir to the throne leading the southern side.

古文：三年春，移镇大名。
现代文：开宝三年，李继勋移职镇守大名。
English: Three years after the founding of Kaibao, Li Jixun was transferred to the post of town guard.

古文：太平兴国初，加兼侍中。
现代文：太平兴国初年，加兼侍中。
English: In the first year of the Taiping Restoration, he was also appointed as a junior chamberlain.

古文：俄以疾求归洛阳，许之，赐钱千万、白金万两。
现代文：不久因病请求回到洛阳，太祖同意他的请求，赐给他钱千万、白金万两。
English: Soon after, he returned to Luoyang due to illness. The great-grandfather agreed to his request and gave him tens of thousands of yuan and a million taels of platinum.

古文：是秋，上表乞骸骨，拜太子太师致仕，朝会许缀中书门下班。
现代文：这年秋天，上表请求退休，太祖授任他为太子太师职退休，朝会时可以站在中书门下班。
English: In the autumn of this year, the above table asked to retire, and the great-grandfather appointed him to retire as the prince's teacher, and he could stand in the middle of the book gate at the time of the imperial meeting.

古文：寻卒，年六十二，赠中书令。
现代文：不久去世，终年六十二岁，追赠中书令。
English: He died soon after, at the age of sixty-two, and was posthumously awarded the Order of the Chinese Eagle.

古文：继勋累历藩镇，所至无善政，然以质直称。
现代文：继勋历任藩镇，所到地方没有善政，但是以质朴耿直著称。
English: Successive lords of the town, there is no good governance in the place, but it is known for its simplicity.

古文：信奉释氏。
现代文：信仰佛教。
English: Believes in Buddhism.

古文：与太祖有旧，故特承宠遇。
现代文：与太祖是旧交，所以受到特别宠遇。
English: He is an old friend of the great-grandfather, so he is particularly favored.

古文：弟继偓，亦有武勇，周显德末，补内殿直。
现代文：继勋的儿子守恩官至如京使，守元官至北作坊使，守徽任崇仪副使。继勋的弟弟继亻屋，也很勇武，后周显德末年，补任内殿直。
English: Jishun's son, Shou Enkan, became the envoy to Beijing, Shou Yuankan became the envoy to the northern workshops, and Shou Hui became the deputy envoy to Chongyi. Jishun's younger brother, Jishuya, was also very brave, and later, in the last years of Zhou Xiande's reign, he was appointed to fill the post of Naitenno.

古文：宋初，累历军职。
现代文：宋初，多次任军职。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, he served in the military several times.

古文：开宝中，为步军副都军头。
现代文：开宝年间，任步军副都军头。
English: During the Khao years, he served as deputy commander of the infantry.

古文：太平兴国三年，迁内外马步军副都军头。
现代文：太平兴国三年，升任内仆马步军副都军头。
English: In the third year of Taiping Xingguo, he was promoted to the vice-commander of the Inner Puppet Horse Infantry Corps.

古文：坐事改右卫率府率。
现代文：因罪改任右卫率府率。
English: Due to his crime, he was reassigned to the post of right guard.

古文：六年，加本卫将军、领奖州刺史。
现代文：太平兴国六年，加任本卫将军、兼任州刺史。
English: In the sixth year of Taiping's rejuvenation of the country, he was appointed to the post of General of the Imperial Guards and concurrently served as the State Historian.

古文：累至龙卫右厢都指挥使、领本州团练使。
现代文：历升至龙卫右厢都指挥使、兼任本州团练使。
English: He rose to the rank of commander of the right wing of Longwei and concurrently served as the Honshu regimental training envoy.

