古文：崔子武马道猷顾总邢鸾肖摩侯道人法力肖思遇任胄董寿之樊孝谦
现代文：崔子武马道猷顾总邢鸾肖摩侯道人法力肖思遇任胄董寿之樊孝谦
English: Cui Zi, Master of the Martial Arts and the Way of the Horse; Gu Gu Zong, Master of the Martial Arts and the Way of the People; Man Liang, Master of the Way of the Horse; Ren, Master of the Way of the Horse and the Way of the Horse; Dong Shou, Master of the Way of the Horse and the Way of the Horse

古文：李文府史万岁房玄龄魏征唐俭
现代文：李文府史万岁房玄龄魏征唐俭
English: Li Wenfu, Shih Wanling, Fang Xuanling, Wei Zheng, Tang Jian

古文：崔子武
现代文：崔子武
English: Choe Ji-moo

古文：齐崔子武幼时，宿于外祖扬州刺史赵郡李宪家。
现代文：南齐崔子武小时候住在外祖父扬州刺史赵郡人李宪家。
English: When she was a child, Nanqi Cui Ziwu lived in the home of her maternal grandfather Li Xianrong, a native of Zhao County, Yangzhou.

古文：夜梦一女子，姿色甚丽，自谓云龙王女，愿与崔郎私好。
现代文：夜里梦见一个女子，姿色很美丽。自称是龙王的女儿，愿意同崔子武私下交好。
English: At night, I dreamed of a woman with a beautiful appearance. She claimed to be the Dragon King's daughter and was willing to make friends with Cui Zibu in private.

古文：子武悦之，牵其衣裾，微有裂绽。
现代文：子武很高兴，牵着她的衣袖。微微拉出一条裂缝。
English: Zowu was very happy and took hold of her sleeve. She slightly pulled out a tear.

古文：未晓告辞，结带而别。
现代文：天没亮她就告辞，子武给她衣带打上一个结走了。
English: She said goodbye before dawn, and Zowu tied a knot in her belt and left.

古文：至明，往山祠中观之，傍有画女，容状即梦中见者，裂裾结带犹在。
现代文：到了白天，子武去山祠中参观。旁边的墙上挂有一个女子的画像，容貌体态就是梦中见到的那个女子。裂缝的衣袖和打着结的带子也在像上。
English: During the day, Zi Wu went to visit the ancestral shrine. On the wall next to the coffin hung a picture of a woman, whose appearance and physique was that of the woman he had seen in his dream. The slit sleeves of her dress and the knotted ribbon were also on the picture.

古文：子武自是通梦，恍惚成疾。
现代文：子武自然明白了那个梦，恍恍惚惚得了病。
English: Zowu naturally understood the dream, and in a daze fell ill.

古文：后逢医禁之，乃绝。
现代文：后来遇到医生禁止他的梦昧，就断绝了。
English: Later, when a doctor forbade him to dream, he broke it off.

古文：马道猷
现代文：马道猷
English: Ma Daoxuan

古文：南齐马道猷为尚书令史，永明元年，坐省中，忽见鬼满前，而傍人不见。
现代文：南齐马道猷为尚书令史。永明元年，在坐着自省中，忽然看见鬼满满地站在眼前，而旁人都看不见。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, while sitting in self-examination, he suddenly saw ghosts standing in front of him, but no one else could see them.

古文：须臾两鬼入其耳中，推出魂，魂落屐上。
现代文：一会儿，两个鬼进入到他耳中，推出他的魂，落在鞋上。
English: In an instant, two ghosts entered his ear, pushed out his soul, and landed on his shoe.

古文：指以示人：诸君见否？
现代文：马道猷指着魂示意旁人：诸位看到了吗？
English: Pointing to the soul, Ma Daojun gestured to the bystanders, "Did you all see that?

古文：旁人并不见。
现代文：旁人并没有看见，问魂的形状像什么？
English: The bystanders didn't see it, and asked what the shape of the soul looked like.

古文：问魂形状云何，道猷曰：魂正似虾蟆。
现代文：道猷说：魂正像虾蟆。
English: The Tao Te Ching says: The soul is just like a shrimp.

古文：云：必无活理，鬼今犹在耳中。
现代文：还说自己一定没有生还的可能，鬼现在还在他的耳中。
English: He also said that there was no way he could have survived. The ghost is still in his ear.

古文：视其耳皆肿，明日便死。
现代文：旁人看他的耳朵都肿了，第二天就死了。
English: Onlookers saw that his ears were swollen, and he died the next day.

古文：顾总
现代文：顾总
English: Gu Zong

古文：梁天监元年，武昌小吏顾，性昏憨，不任事。
现代文：梁天监元年，武昌小吏顾总性情昏怡憨厚，不能担事，曾多次被县令鞭打。
English: In the first year of Liang Tianjun, the Wuchang petty official Gu had a dim and thick temperament, and was unable to carry out his duties. He was repeatedly whipped by the county leader.

古文：数为县令鞭朴，尝郁郁怀愤，因逃墟墓之间，彷徨惆怅，不知所适。
现代文：常常心情抑郁，满怀愤怒。因而逃避到坟墓之地，彷徨惆怅，不知去哪里。
English: Often depressed and full of anger, he flees to the land of the dead, bewildered and not knowing where to go.

古文：忽有二黄衣，顾见总曰：刘君颇憶畴日周旋耶？
现代文：忽然有二个黄衣人拜见顾总，说：刘君很想念我们昔日的来往吧？
English: Suddenly, two people in yellow came to see General Gu and said, "Liu Jun, do you miss our past interactions?

古文：总曰：敝宗乃顾氏，先未曾面清颜，何有周旋之问？
现代文：顾总说：我宗姓是顾氏。以前未曾见过面，怎么会有来往呢？
English: Gu Zong said, "My family name is Gu. I've never met you before, how can I have a relationship with you?"

古文：二人曰：仆王粲、徐干也，足下前生是刘祯，为坤明侍中，以纳赂金，谪为小吏。
现代文：二人说：我们是王粲、徐干。你前生是刘桢。是坤明侍中。因收受赂金而贬为小吏。
English: The two said, "We are Wang Qian and Xu Gan. You were Liu Qian in your previous life. You were Kun Ming's chambermaid. Because you accepted bribes, you were reduced to a minor official.

古文：公当自知矣。
现代文：你应该自己知道啊？
English: Shouldn't you know that?

古文：然公言辞历历，犹见记事音旨。
现代文：但你言辞严肃，还是看下记室的文辞吧！
English: But if you are serious, take a look at the wording in the diary room!

古文：因出袖中轴书示之曰：此君集也，当谛视之。
现代文：就从袖中拿出轴书给他看，说：这是你的文集，应该仔细看看它。
English: He took out the anthology from his sleeve and showed it to him, saying, "This is your anthology, you should take a close look at it.

古文：总试省览。乃了然明悟，便觉文思坌涌。
现代文：顾总验看，才了然明悟，就觉文思一起涌出。
English: Gu Zongxian looked at it, only then did he clearly understand, and his thoughts poured out.

古文：其集人多有本，唯卒后数篇记得。
现代文：那本集子人们多有传本，只佚失了最后几篇。
English: There are many copies of that anthology, but only the last few have been lost.

古文：诗一章题云《从驾游幽丽宫，却忆平生西园文会，因寄地文府正郎蔡伯喈》诗曰：在汉绳纲绪，溟渎多腾湍。
现代文：记得有诗一章，题目是：《从驾游幽丽宫，却忆平生西园文会，因寄地文府正郎蔡伯喈》。诗曰：在汉绳纲绪，溟渎多腾湍。
English: I remember one chapter of a poem, the title of which was: "From the driving tour of the Yuli Palace, but I remember the West Garden Cultural Society in my lifetime, because the place of stay was the Chief of the Ministry of Education, Cai Boqi."

古文：煌煌魏英祖，拯溺静波澜。
现代文：煌煌魏英祖，拯溺静波澜。
English: Glorious Wei Ying Zu, rescuing drowning waves.

古文：天纪已垂定，邦人亦保完。
现代文：天纪已垂定，邦人亦保完。
English: The laws of the heavens have been established, and the people of Japan have been saved.

古文：大开相公府，掇拾尽幽兰。
现代文：大开相公府，掇拾尽幽兰。
English: The grand opening of the Sangongfu, and the picking up of all the yulan.

古文：始从众君子，日侍贤王欢。
现代文：始从众君子，日侍贤王欢。
English: Beginning with the gentlemen, the day attendants, the wise men, the kings and queens.

古文：文皇在春宫，蒸孝踰问安。
现代文：文皇在春宫，蒸孝踰问安。
English: Emperor Wen is in the Spring Palace, and Xi Xiaojuan is coming to say hello.

古文：监抚多余暇，园圃恣游观。
现代文：监抚多余暇，园圃恣游观。
English: Supervisors have more leisure time, and they can visit gardens at will.

古文：末臣戴簪笔，翊圣从和銮。
现代文：末臣戴簪笔，翊圣从和銮。
English: Younger vassals wear the same pen, and the same saint is from the same family.

古文：月出行殿凉，珍木清露团。
现代文：月出行殿凉，珍木清露团。
English: The moon makes the hall cool, and the precious wood makes the dew.

古文：天文信辉丽，铿锵振琅干。
现代文：天文信辉丽，铿锵振琅干。
English: The heavens are bright, the earth is quivering, and the sea is dry.

古文：被命仰为和，顾已试所难。
现代文：被命仰为和，顾已试所难。
English: Ordered to make peace, Gu has tried his best.

古文：弱质不自持，危脆朽萎残。
现代文：弱质不自持，危脆朽萎残。
English: Weak and not self-sustaining, brittle and withered.

古文：岂意十余年，陵寝梧楸寒。
现代文：岂意十余年，陵寝梧楸寒。
English: For more than ten years, the tomb lay cold.

古文：今来坤明国，再顾簪蝉冠。
现代文：今来坤明国，再顾簪蝉冠。
English: Now, I come to Kunming, and I'd like to take a closer look at the cicada crown.

古文：侍游于离宫，足蹑浮云端。
现代文：侍游于离宫，足蹑浮云端。
English: Tourists in the Imperial Villa, with their feet dangling in the clouds.

古文：却想西园时，生死暂悲酸。
现代文：却想西园时，生死暂悲酸。
English: But when I think of the West Park, life and death are temporarily sad and sour.

古文：君昔汉公卿，未央冠群贤。
现代文：君昔汉公卿，未央冠群贤。
English: You used to be a court noble in the Han Dynasty, and you are a great scholar.

古文：倘若念平生，览此同怆然。
现代文：倘若念平生，览此同怆然。
English: If you think about life in general, it's the same.

古文：其余七篇，传者失本。
现代文：剩余七篇，传下来的失了原样。
English: The remaining seven, handed down, have been lost.

古文：王粲谓总曰：吾本短小，无何娶乐进女。
现代文：王粲对顾总说：我生来矮小，没办法娶了乐进的女儿。
English: Wang Yao said to Gu Chuan: I was born short, I can't marry Lejin's daughter.

古文：女似其父，短小尤甚。
现代文：女儿象她父亲，矮小尤其厉害。
English: A daughter is like her father, especially if she is short.

古文：自别君后，改娶刘荆州女，寻生一子。
现代文：自与你分别以后，改娶刘荆州的女儿。不久就生了一个儿子。
English: After separating from you, he remarried Liu Jingzhou's daughter and soon gave birth to a son.

古文：荆州与字翁奴，今年十八，长七尺三寸。
现代文：刘荆州起名叫翁奴，今年十八岁，身长七尺三寸。
English: Liu Jingzhou gave his name as Wengnu. He is 18 years old and seven feet three inches tall.

古文：所恨未得参丈人也。
现代文：遗憾的是未能参拜您。
English: Unfortunately, I was unable to pay you a visit.

古文：当渠年十一，与予同览镜。
现代文：当他十一岁的时候，和我一起照镜子，我对他说： 你的脑袋比我大。
English: When he was 11, he looked in the mirror with me, and I said to him: Your head is bigger than mine.

古文：予谓之曰： 汝首魁梧于予。渠立应予曰： 防风骨节专车，不如白起头小而锐。
现代文：他立刻回答我说： 防风氏骨节满车，不如白起的头小而精明。我又对他说： 你长大应该当将军。
English: He immediately replied to me: "Bozhong's bones are full of cars, not as small and shrewd as a white-haired head." I also said to him: "You should grow up to be a general."

古文：予又谓曰： 汝长大当为将。又应予曰： 仲尼三尺童子，羞言霸道。况承大人严训，敢措意于斫刺乎。
现代文：他又回答我说： 仲尼是三尺孩童的时候，就耻于谈及霸道，况且我承蒙大人严训，怎敢执意于砍砍杀杀呢？ 
English: He also replied to me, "When Zhongni was a three-foot-tall child, he was ashamed to talk about domineering. Moreover, I have received strict training from adults. How dare I insist on cutting and killing?"

古文：予知其了了过人矣。
现代文：我知道他聪明过人。
English: I knew he was brilliant.

古文：不知足下生来，有郎娘否？
现代文：不知你有生以来有没有郎娘？
English: I don't know, have you had any children since you were born?

古文：良久沈思，稍如相识，因曰：二君既是总友人，何计可脱小吏之厄？
现代文：沉默很久，好象稍稍熟悉了。顾总就问：二位先生既然是顾总的朋友，有什么办法可以解脱我当小吏的厄运呢？
English: They were silent for a long time, as if they were slightly familiar with each other. Gu Zonglu asked: Since the two gentlemen are friends of Gu Zonglu, what can I do to get rid of my bad luck as a minor official?

古文：徐干曰：君但执前集，诉于县宰则脱矣。
现代文：徐干说：你只要拿着以前的文集向县宰说明，就解脱了。
English: Xu Gan said: You just need to take the previous anthology and explain it to the county magistrate, and you will be relieved.

古文：总又问：坤明是何国？
现代文：顾总又问：坤明是什么国家？
English: Gu also asked: What country is Kunming?

古文：干曰：魏武开国邺地也。
现代文：徐干说：是魏武帝开国时的邺地。
English: Xu Gan said: "It was the land of plenty at the time of the founding of the country by Emperor Wei Wu.

古文：公昔为其国侍中，遽忘耶？
现代文：你以前是那个国家的侍中，竟然忘了吗？
English: Did you forget that you were once a samurai in that country?

古文：公在坤明家累，悉无恙。
现代文：你在坤明的家小都没有祸患。
English: Your home in Kunming is safe.

古文：贤小娇羞娘，有一篇《奉忆》，昨者已诵似丈人矣。
现代文：贤小娇羞娘，有一篇《奉忆》之作，以前吟诵得如同老者。
English: Xian Xiao Jiao Xi Niang, there is a work of "Memory," which used to be recited like an old man.

古文：诗曰： 忆爷爷，抛女不归家。不作侍中为小吏，就他辛苦弃荣华。
现代文：诗曰： 忆爷爷，抛女不归家，不作诗侍为小吏，就他辛苦弃荣华。
English: The poem says: Remember grandpa, if you don't return home with a girl, if you don't serve as a poet and a minor official, then you have abandoned your glory.

古文：愿爷相念早相见，与儿买李市甘瓜。
现代文：愿爷相念早相见，与儿买李市甘瓜。
English: May the grandfather miss seeing each other in the morning, and buy the Li City sweet melon with his son.

古文：诵讫，总不觉涕泗交下，因为一章《寄娇羞娘》云：忆儿貌。念儿心。
现代文：朗诵完毕，顾总不觉涕泪交流，就写给娇羞娘一首诗。诗云：忆儿貌，念儿心，不见泪沾襟。
English: After the recitation, Gu wrote a poem for Jiao Shimi without feeling the tears of communication. Poem cloud: remember the child's appearance, remember the child's heart, do not see tears.

古文：望儿不见泪沾襟，时移世异难相见。弃谢此生当重寻。
现代文：时移世异难相见，弃谢此生当重寻。
English: It is difficult to see each other across time and generations, so it is better to find each other again in this life.

古文：既而王粲、徐干与总殷勤叙别，乃遗刘桢集五卷。
现代文：接着王粲、徐干与顾总殷勤话别，赠送刘桢文集五卷。
English: Then, Wang Qian, Xu Gan and Gu Zong said farewell with great courtesy, and presented Liu Qian's five-volume collection.

古文：见县令，具陈其事。
现代文：顾总面见县令，具体陈述了这件事。
English: Gu Zongwen met with the county magistrate and explained the matter in detail.

古文：令见桢集后诗，惊曰：不可使刘公干为小吏。
现代文：县令见到刘桢文集后面的诗，惊叹道：不能让刘公干为小吏。
English: When the county magistrate saw the poem at the back of Liu Xuan's collection of poems, he exclaimed, "We can't let Liu Gongran be a minor official."

古文：既解遣，以宾礼侍之。
现代文：马上解除了差遣，以宾客的礼节对侍他。
English: He immediately dismissed him and served him with the courtesy of a guest.

古文：后不知总所在，集亦寻失。
现代文：后来不知道顾总在什么地方。
English: Later, I didn't know where Gu was.

古文：时人勖子弟，皆曰：死刘桢犹庇得生顾总，可不修进哉。
现代文：文集不久也消失了。当时人们勉励后辈都说：死去的刘桢还能庇护活着的顾总，难道可以不求上进吗？
English: The anthology also disappeared soon. At that time, people encouraged the younger generation to say: the dead Liu Ye can still shelter the living Gu Zong, can we not strive for advancement?

古文：邢鸾
现代文：邢鸾
English: 

古文：后魏洛阳永和里，汉太师董卓之宅也。
现代文：后魏洛阳永和里，是汉太师董卓的故宅。
English: After Wei, Luoyang, Yonghe Village, is the former home of Hantai Master Dong Zhuo.

古文：里中太傅录尚书长孙稚，尚书右仆射郭祚，吏部尚书邢鸾，廷尉卿元洪超，卫尉卿许伯桃，凉州刺史尉成兴等六宅，皆高门华屋，斋馆敞丽，楸槐荫途，桐杨夹植。
现代文：里的南北都有水池，是董卓建造的，水冬夏不干。里中有太傅录尚书长孙稚、尚书右仆射郭祚、吏部尚书邢鸾、廷尉卿元洪超、卫尉卿许伯桃、凉州刺史尉成兴等六所住宅。都是高高的门楼，华丽的房子。斋馆宽敞明丽，楸树、槐树遮荫道路，桐树、杨树夹道种植。
English: There are pools in the north and south of the courtyard, built by Dong Zhuo, and the water is not dry in winter and summer. There are six residences in the courtyard, including Taifu Luo Shangshu Changsangzhu, Shangshu's right-hand man, Shao Guoqi, Li Bu Shangshu's right-hand man, Tingfei Yuan Hongchao, Wei Fei's right-hand man, Xu Baotou, and Liangzhou's right-hand man, Shishi Fei Chengxing. They are all high gate towers and gorgeous houses. The hall is spacious and bright, with eucalyptus and euc

古文：当世名为贵里。
现代文：当时是著名的富贵的里弄。
English: At that time, it was a famous and affluent neighborhood.

古文：掘此地，轧得金玉宝玩之物。
现代文：挖掘此地，就能得到金玉宝玩等物。
English: If you dig here, you can get gold, jewels and other things.

古文：时邢鸾家，常掘得丹砂及钱数十万，铭云：董太师之物。
现代文：当时邢鸾家时常挖到丹砂及铜钱几十万枚。钱铭有字：董太师之物。
English: At that time, the Xing family often dug up hundreds of thousands of Tanzanite and copper coins. The inscriptions on the coins read: "Things of Dong Taishi."

古文：后卓夜中随鸾索此物，鸾不与之，终年而鸾卒。
现代文：后来董卓夜间跟邢鸾索要这些东西。邢鸾不给他。一年后邢鸾就死了。
English: Later, in the night, Dong Zhuo demanded these things from Yao. Yao didn't give them to him. One year later, Yao died.

古文：肖摩侯
现代文：肖摩侯
English: Xiao Ma Hou

古文：后魏胡太后末年，泽州田参军肖摩候家人，浣一黄衫，晒之庭树，日暮忘收。
现代文：后魏胡太后末年，泽州田参军肖摩侯的家人，洗一件黄衫。晾在庭院的树上，晚上忘收了回来。
English: In the late years of the late Empress Dowager Hu of the late Wei Dynasty, a family member of Xiao Ma Hou, who had joined the army, washed a yellow shirt. He hung it on a tree in the courtyard and forgot to take it back in the evening.

古文：夜半，摩侯家起出，见此衣为风所动，仿佛类人。
现代文：半夜，摩侯家人起夜，看见这件衣服被风吹动，仿佛象人一样。
English: In the middle of the night, the Moh family got up and saw that the dress was moved by the wind, as if it were human.

古文：谓是窃盗，持刀往击，就视乃是衣。
现代文：他以为是盗贼，持刀朝它打去，走近一看是件衣服。
English: Thinking it was a thief, he swung his knife at it. When he got closer, he saw it was a piece of clothing.

古文：自此之后，内外恐惧。
现代文：从此以后，摩侯家内外都很恐惧。
English: From then on, there was fear both inside and outside the Moh family.

古文：更数日，忽有二十骑，尽为戎服，直造其家，扬旗举杖，往来掩袭。前后六七处。
现代文：过了几天，忽有二十个骑马的人，都穿着军服，径直来到他家。扬着旗帜，高举木棍，来来往往掩杀奔袭，前后六七拨。
English: A few days later, twenty men on horseback, all wearing military uniforms, came straight to his house, waving flags, holding high wooden sticks, and coming and going to cover up the attack.

古文：家人惶惧，不知何方御之。
现代文：摩侯家里人惶惧不安，不知用什么方法抵御它们。
English: The Mohawks are scared and unsure of how to defend themselves.

古文：有一人云，按药方，烧羖羊角，妖自绝。
现代文：有人告诉他说：按药方烧羖羊角，妖孽自然就没了。
English: Someone told him, "If you burn the horns of a lamb according to the recipe, the witchcraft will naturally disappear."

古文：即于屠肆得之，遂烧此等。
现代文：摩侯就从肉市场买来羖羊角烧了。
English: The mayor bought lamb horns from the meat market and roasted them.

古文：后来至，掩鼻曰：此家不知烧何物，臭秽如此！
现代文：那些人过后又来到他家都捂着鼻子说：这家不知烧什么东西了，臭秽如此。
English: Afterward, those people came to his house and held their noses and said, "I don't know what's burning in this house, it's so filthy."

古文：翻然回，自此便绝。
现代文：转身就回去了。从此之后就没了。
English: He turned around and went back. He hasn't been seen since.

古文：道人法力
现代文：道人法力
English: Dojin Mana

古文：广州显明寺道人法力，向晨诣厕，于户中见一鬼，状若昆仑，两目尽黄，裸身无衣。
现代文：广州显明寺道人法力，快到早晨的时候去厕所，在门口遇见一鬼，形状象西城人，两眼都是黄色的，裸露着身体没穿衣服。
English: Mana, a Taoist at the Shennming Temple in Guangzhou, went to the toilet in the early morning and met a ghost at the door. It was shaped like a Xicheng person, both eyes were yellow, and it was naked without clothes.

古文：法力素有臂力，便缚着堂柱，以杖鞭之，终无声。
现代文：法力一向有臂力，把鬼绑在柱子上，用木棍打它。
English: Mana has always had arm strength, tying a ghost to a post and beating it with a wooden stick.

古文：乃以铁锁缚之，观其能变去否，日已昏暗，失鬼所在。
现代文：鬼始终不出声。法力又用铁锁锁住它，看鬼能不能变走。天色昏暗后，就失去了鬼的踪影。
English: The ghost never uttered a sound. Mana locked it with an iron lock to see if the ghost would go away. After it got dark, the ghost disappeared.

古文：肖思遇
现代文：肖思遇
English: Xiao Si Rong

古文：肖思遇，梁武帝从侄孙。
现代文：肖思遇是梁武帝的堂侄孙。
English: Xiao Siyuan is a cousin and grandnephew of Emperor Liangwu.

古文：父悫，为侯景所杀。
现代文：父亲肖悫，被侯景所杀。
English: His father, Xiao Yao, was killed by Hou Jing.

古文：思遇以父遭害，不乐仕进。常慕道，有冀神人，故名思遇而字望明，言望遇神明也。
现代文：思遇因为父亲被害，不喜欢仕途进取，常仰慕道家，寄希望于神人，故起名叫思遇，字望明。意即希望遇见神明。
English: Because his father was killed, Si Xuan did not like to pursue a career. He often admired Taoists and pinned his hopes on godmen. That is why he was named Si Xuan and his name means "hope to meet gods."

古文：居虎丘东山，性简静，爱琴书。
现代文：他居住在虎丘东山，性情闲静，爱好琴书。
English: He lives in the East Mountain of Huqiu, has a quiet disposition, and likes to play the piano.

古文：每松风之夜，罢琴长啸，一山楼宇皆惊。
现代文：每当松风之夜，他弹罢琴一声长啸，满山的楼堂殿宇都为之而惊。
English: Whenever, on the night of the pine wind, he played his harp and let out a long wail, the palaces all over the mountain were startled.

古文：常雨中坐石酣歌。
现代文：常常在雨中坐在石头上尽情歌唱。
English: He would often sit on a rock in the rain and sing.

古文：忽闻扣柴门者，思遇心疑有异，命侍者遥问。
现代文：一天，他忽然听到扣柴门的声音，心里想着是否有异人出现，就叫侍人远远地问一问。
English: One day, he suddenly heard the sound of a door being closed, and thinking about whether a stranger had appeared, he asked the waiter to ask a question from a distance.

古文：乃应曰：不须问。
现代文：那人回答说：不用问。
English: The man replied, "Don't ask.

古文：但言雨中从浣溪来。
现代文：只说是雨中从浣溪来的。
English: They only said that they had come from Lixi in the rain.

古文：及侍童开户，见一美女，二青衣女奴从之，并神仙之容。
现代文：等侍童打开门，就看见了一个美女，后面有二个穿青色衣服的女侍跟从。都象神仙一样美貌。
English: When the servant boy opened the door, he saw a beautiful woman, followed by two maidservants dressed in blue, both of whom were as beautiful as immortals.

古文：思遇加山人之服，以礼见之，曰：适闻夫人云，从浣溪来。
现代文：思遇穿上山人的衣服，以礼节会见了这个女子，说：刚才听夫人说从浣溪来，下着大雨，道路又远。
English: I put on the clothes of a mountaineer and met this woman with courtesy, saying: Just now I heard my wife say that it was raining heavily and the road was far from Lixi.

古文：雨中道远，不知所乘何车耶？女曰：闻先生心怀异道，以简洁为心，不用车舆，乘风而至。
现代文：不知夫人所乘的是什么车？美女说：听说先生心怀神异之道，以简洁为心境。我就不用车子，乘风而来。
English: I don't know what kind of car my wife was riding in. The beautiful woman said, "I heard that my husband has a mystical way of thinking and is simple-minded. I don't need a car, I'll come by the wind."

古文：思遇曰：若浣溪来，得非西施乎？
现代文：思遇说：若从浣溪来，你莫非是西施吗？
English: Si Yu said, "If you come from Luoxi, aren't you from Xishi?"

古文：女回顾二童而笑，复问：先生何以知之？
现代文：那美女回头看了下二个女侍，笑着问：先生怎么知道？
English: The beautiful woman looked back at the two waitresses and asked with a smile: How did you know?

古文：思遇曰：不必虑怀，应就寝耳。
现代文：思遇说：不要心怀疑虑，应该睡觉休息了。
English: "Don't be doubtful and worried, you should sleep and rest," said Siyuan.

古文：及天晚将别，女以金钏子一只留诀。
现代文：到天亮，那美女就要告别了，她用一只金钏子留做告别之物。
English: In the morning, the beautiful woman was going to say goodbye, and she had left a golden rake as a parting gift.

古文：思遇称无物叙情，又曰：但有此心不忘。
现代文：思遇说没有什么东西来表达心情，又说：只有此心不忘。
English: Thought encounter said that there is nothing to express the mood, and said: Only this mind does not forget.

古文：夫人曰：此最珍奇。
现代文：夫人说：这是最珍贵的。
English: My wife said, "This is the most precious wax."

古文：思遇曰：夫人此去，何时来？
现代文：思遇又说：夫人这一去，什么时候再来？
English: The thought occurred to him again: "Madame, when will you come back after all this time?

古文：女乃掩涕曰：未敢有期，空劳情意。
现代文：夫人就抹着眼泪说：不敢商定日期，免得白白劳烦你的情意。
English: My wife wiped away her tears and said, "I don't dare to agree on a date, so as not to waste your time."

古文：思遇亦怆然。
现代文：思遇也感到悲伤。
English: I also feel sad.

古文：言讫，遂乘风而去。须臾不见，唯闻香气犹在寝室。
现代文：夫人说完，就乘风而去，一会就不见了，只闻得香气还在房内。
English: When she had finished speaking, she took advantage of the wind and flew away. She disappeared in a moment, but the fragrance was still in the room.

古文：时陈文帝天嘉元年二月二日也。
现代文：这是陈文帝天嘉元年二月二日的事情。
English: This happened on February 2nd, the first year of Emperor Wen's reign.

古文：任胄
现代文：任胄
English: 任

古文：东魏丞相司马任胄，谋杀高欢，事泄伏诛，其家未之知。
现代文：东魏丞相司马任胄，想刺杀高欢，事情败露被杀。他的家里还不知道。
English: East Wei chancellor Sima Renzhong tried to assassinate Gao Huan, but the plot was uncovered and he was killed. His family still doesn't know what happened.

古文：家内忽见其头在饭甑上，相召看之，少顷，失所在。
现代文：家里人忽然看见他的头在饭锅上，互相召呼着来看。一会，头不见了。
English: The family members suddenly saw his head on the cooking pot and called out to each other to look. A moment later, the head was gone.

古文：俄知被戮。
现代文：才知道任胄被杀。
English: It was only then that I learned that Ren Zhuang had been killed.

古文：董寿之
现代文：董寿之
English: Dong Shouzhi

古文：北齐董寿之被诛，其家尚未之知。
现代文：北齐董寿之被杀了，他家里还不知道。
English: Beiqi Dong Shouzhi was killed, but his family still doesn't know.

古文：其妻夜坐，忽见寿之居其侧，叹息不已。
现代文：他的妻子夜里坐着，忽然看见寿之在她身旁叹息不停。
English: His wife was sitting at night when she suddenly saw Shuzo sighing beside her.

古文：妻问夜间何得而归，寿都不应答。
现代文：妻子问他晚上怎么回来了？寿之都不回答。
English: His wife asked him how he came back in the evening, but he did not answer.

古文：有顷出门，绕鸡笼而行，笼中鸡惊叫。
现代文：一会，寿之出门绕着鸡笼行走，笼中鸡惊叫起来。
English: After a while, Shouko went out and walked around the chicken cage. The chicken in the cage started to scream.

古文：其妻疑有异，持火出户视之，见其血数斗，而寿失所在。遂以告姑，因与大小号哭，知有变。
现代文：他的妻子怀疑有异常，拿着灯火出门观看，见血有好几斗，而寿之却不见了，就告诉了小姑，于是同家里大小一同啼哭，知道大事不好。
English: His wife suspected something was wrong and went outside with a torch to take a look. She saw several buckets of blood, but Shouji was gone. She told her sister-in-law, and the whole family cried together, knowing that something was wrong.

古文：及晨，果得死闻。
现代文：到了早晨，果然得到寿之死的消息。
English: In the morning, we got the news of Shou's death.

古文：樊孝谦
现代文：樊孝谦
English: Zou Xiaoqian

古文：北齐樊孝谦，少有才名。
现代文：北齐樊孝谦，少年时代就有才气名声。
English: Bei Qiqian Xiaoqian had a reputation for talent since he was a boy.

古文：年二十二，答秀才策，累迁至员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：二十二岁那年，因考中秀才，官拜员外散骑侍郎。
English: At the age of twenty-two, due to his excellent performance in the junior high school entrance examination, he was promoted to the position of a non-commissioned officer.

古文：尝于其门首，观贵人葬车，揖方相而别。
现代文：他曾在门口看到贵人的葬车，他向驱鬼的方相作揖就回来了。
English: He once saw a nobleman's hearse at the gate, and he returned to taunt the exorcist.

古文：是后周年，至此葬日，有人扣门。孝谦出视，乃见所揖方相。门首立云：君去年此日，共我语否。
现代文：这之后一年，到了这个忌日，有人敲门，孝谦出来一看，就看见了他去年拜揖的方相，站在门口说：您去年的今天和我说话了吗？
English: A year later, on the anniversary of his death, someone knocked on the door, and when he came out, he saw the face he had bowed to last year. He stood in the doorway and said, "Did you talk to me today last year?"

古文：孝谦惊倒。
现代文：孝谦惊倒在地，一会就死了。
English: Xiao Qian fell to the ground in shock and died soon after.

古文：须臾便卒。贞观初，崔信明为洋州，与县丞向瓘无二说。
现代文：贞观初年，崔信明为洋州令，和县丞向瓘说法一样。李文府
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Cui Xinming was the Yangzhou governor, the same as the county magistrate Xiang Yao said. Li Wenfu

古文：李文府隋文帝开皇初，安定李文府，住邺都石桥坊。
现代文：隋文帝开皇初年，安定人李文府，住在邺都石桥坊。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Sui Wen, the stable man Li Wenfu lived in Shidou Shiqiao Fang.

古文：曾夜置酒瓶于床下。
现代文：他曾在晚上把酒瓶放在床下。
English: He used to keep a bottle under his bed at night.

古文：半夜觉，忽闻瓶倒漏酒声，使婢看之，酒瓶不倒，盖塞如旧。
现代文：半夜醒来，忽然听到酒瓶倒了酒洒了的声音。让婢女看看，酒瓶没倒，盖塞依旧。
English: Waking up in the middle of the night, I suddenly heard the sound of a wine bottle being poured and spilled. I asked the maid to take a look. The bottle hadn't been poured and the cork was still in place.

古文：须臾，复闻有物嗒水声，索火照看，屋内静无所见。
现代文：一会，又听到有东西滴嗒水的声音，拿火照看，屋内静悄悄的没看到什么。
English: After a while, I heard the sound of something dripping water again. I took care of the fire and quietly did not see anything inside.

古文：灭烛下关，未睡，似有以手指斫其膝。至三，文府起扪之，又无所得。乃拔刀四面挥之，即闻有声如飞蝉曳响，冲而出。
现代文：灭烛躺下没睡着，好象有手指砍他膝部，到第三次，文府起身按住，又没有什么，就拔刀四面挥砍，就听到好象飞蝉的声响冲出门去。
English: When he lay down to extinguish the candle and did not fall asleep, it was as if a finger had cut his knee. On the third time, Wenfu got up and held him down, but there was nothing, so he pulled out his knife and swung it in all directions, and he heard a sound like a cicada rushing out of the door.

古文：文府后仕兖州须昌县丞，至开皇八年，见州故录事孔瓒，即须昌人，先亡。
现代文：文府后来官至兖州须昌县丞。到开皇八年，看见了兖州以前的录事孔瓒。是须昌人，已经死了。
English: Later, officials from the Ministry of Education and Culture came to Bozhou, the county seat of Suchang County. In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Qianlong, they saw the old record of Bozhou, Kong Yao. He was from Suchang and had already died.

古文：忽白日至文府厅前再拜，文府惊问何为，云：太山府君选好人，瓒以公明干，则相荐举。
现代文：忽然白天到文府厅见拜见。文府惊讶地问为什么？孔瓒说：太山府君选贤。我因你有才干，就举荐了你。
English: Suddenly, during the day, they met at the Education Bureau. The Education Bureau was surprised and asked why? Kong Yu said: "The government of Taishan selected you. I recommended you because you have talent."

古文：文府忧惶叩头。
现代文：文府仓惶叩谢。
English: The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology was overwhelmed with gratitude.

古文：瓒良久云：今更为方便，慎勿漏言。
现代文：孔瓒过了半天说：现在为你帮忙，千万不要说出。
English: After half a day, Kong Yao said, "I'll help you now, but please don't tell anyone."

古文：至十年，自说之，说讫，便觉不快，须臾而死。
现代文：到了开皇十年，文府自己说出了这件事，说完就觉得不舒服，一会就死了。
English: In the 10th year of the emperor's reign, Wenfu himself spoke out about this matter, and after he said it, he felt uncomfortable and died soon after.

古文：史万岁
现代文：史万岁
English: Long live history.

古文：长安待贤坊，隋北领军大将军史万岁宅。
现代文：长安待贤坊，是隋北领军大将军史万岁的住宅。
English: Chang'an Zhixianfang is the residence of General Shi Wanling, the leader of the Sui and Northern armies.

古文：其宅初常有鬼怪，居者则死，万岁不信，因即居之。
现代文：这个宅子开始常闹鬼。住的人都死了。万岁不信，就住进了这个宅子。
English: This house started to be haunted. The people who lived there all died. I couldn't believe it, so I moved into this house.

古文：夜见人衣冠甚伟，来就万岁。
现代文：夜里见一个人衣冠高大华美，来见万岁。
English: If you see a tall, richly dressed man at night, come and see him.

古文：万岁问其由，鬼曰：我汉将军樊哙，墓近君居厕，常苦秽恶。
现代文：万岁问他来的事由，鬼说：我是汉将军樊哙。墓地靠近您住宅的厕所。常常苦于秽恶之气。
English: He asked the reason for his visit, and the ghost said, "I am Han Zhengyuan. The cemetery is near the toilet of your house. I often suffer from the foul breath.

古文：幸移他所，必当厚报。
现代文：如果有幸移葬他处，必当厚报。
English: If we are fortunate enough to be able to relocate the burial to another place, it will be a great reward.

古文：万岁许诺。因责杀生人所由，鬼曰：各自怖而死，非我杀也。
现代文：万岁答应了，进而责问他杀人的原由，鬼说：他们各自因害怕而死，不是我杀的。
English: Hooray, he agreed, and went on to ask him the reason for the killing. The ghost said, "They both died of fright. I didn't kill them."

古文：及掘得骸柩，因为改葬。
现代文：到后来挖出棺木，作了改葬之后。
English: Later, after the coffin had been dug up and the reburial had taken place.

古文：后夜又来谢曰：君当为将，吾必助君。
现代文：鬼夜里又来道谢，说：您能成为将军，我一定帮助您。
English: In the middle of the night, he came to thank me again and said, "If you can become a general, I will definitely help you."

古文：后万岁为隋将，每遇贼，便觉鬼兵助己，战必大捷。
现代文：后来万岁为隋朝将军。每每遇到贼军，就觉得有鬼相助。打起仗来必定大胜。
English: Later, he became a general of the Sui Dynasty. Whenever he encountered a bandit army, he felt that the devil was helping him. When he fought, he was sure to win a great victory.

古文：房玄龄
现代文：房玄龄
English: Fang Xuanling

古文：房玄龄、杜如晦微时，尝自周偕之秦，宿敷水店。
现代文：房玄龄、杜如晦未显贵之时，曾经一起从周地到秦地去。晚上宿于敷水店。
English: When Fang Xuanling and Du Rugao were not prominent, they used to go from Zhou to Qin together. In the evening, they stayed at a water supply store.

古文：适有酒肉，夜深对食。
现代文：正好有酒有肉，深夜对坐而食。
English: Just as there is wine and meat, there is late-night feasting.

古文：忽见两黑毛手出于灯下，若有所请，乃各以一炙置手中。
现代文：忽然看见两只长着黑毛的手从灯光下伸出来，好象有什么请求，就各自拿一块烤肉放在手中。
English: Suddenly he saw two black-haired hands protruding from the light, as if they wanted something. They each took a piece of grilled meat and placed it in their hands.

古文：有顷复出，若掬，又各斟酒与之，遂不复见。
现代文：过了一会儿。手又出来，象捧着东西的样子。房、杜又各自斟了一杯酒给他，就没再见手出现。
English: After a while, the hand came out again, as if it was holding something. Fong and Du each poured him a glass of wine, but the hand did not reappear.

古文：食讫，背灯就寝，至二更，闻街中有连呼王文昂者，忽闻一人应于灯下。
现代文：吃完饭，背对着灯就睡觉了。到了二更时，听到街中有连声呼唤王文昂的声音。忽然听见一个人在灯下答应。
English: After eating, he turned his back to the lamp and went to sleep. At two o'clock, he heard a series of voices in the street calling for Wang Wenyang. Suddenly, he heard a person say yes under the lamp.

古文：呼者乃曰：正东二十里，村人有筵神者，酒食甚丰，汝能去否？
现代文：喊的人就说：正东二十里，有村人祭神的筵席，酒菜很丰盛。你能不能去？
English: The caller then said, "Twenty miles due east, there is a village festival, and the food and wine are very rich. Can you go?

古文：对曰：吾已醉饱于酒肉，有公事，去不得。
现代文：回答说：我已酒足饭饱。还有公事，去不了。
English: He answered, "I've had enough to eat and drink. I have business to attend to, so I can't go."

古文：劳君相召。
现代文：劳烦你召呼我。
English: Don't bother calling me.

古文：呼者曰：汝终日饥困，何有酒肉。
现代文：喊的人说：你整天被饥饿所困，哪来酒肉？
English: The caller said, "You've been hungry all day. Where did you get meat and wine?"

古文：本非吏人，安得公事。
现代文：你本来不是官吏，怎么会有公差？
English: You are not an official, so how can you have a business trip?

古文：何妄语也？
现代文：为什么要说谎呢？
English: Why lie about it?

古文：若常时闻命，即子行吾走矣。呼者谢而去。
现代文：回答说：我受阴累官吏差遣来给二位丞相值班。承蒙二相赐我酒肉，所以不能去。若平时听到呼喊，立刻就你追我赶地去了。喊的人辞别而去。
English: He replied, "I was sent by a shady government official to be on duty for the two prime ministers. Thanks to the two prime ministers for giving me meat and wine, I can't go. If you hear shouting in normal times, immediately chase me to the ground. The shouters say goodbye and leave.

古文：魏征
现代文：魏征
English: Wei Zheng

古文：郑国公魏征，少时好道学，不信鬼神。
现代文：郑国公魏征年轻时喜好道学，不信鬼神。
English: When Zheng Guogong Wei Zheng was young, he liked Taoism and did not believe in ghosts and gods.

古文：尝访道至恒山，将及山下，忽大风雪，天地昏暗，不能进。
现代文：曾到恒山去访道，快到恒山的时候，忽然遇见了大风雪，天地昏暗，不能前进。
English: I once went to Hengshan to visit Tao. When I was about to get to Hengshan, I suddenly encountered a blizzard, the sky was dark, and I couldn't move forward.

古文：忽有道士，策青竹杖，悬《黄庭经》。亦至路次。谓征曰：何之？
现代文：忽然有个道士拿着青竹杖，腰悬《黄庭经》，也到了路边，对魏征说：去什么地方？
English: Suddenly, a Taoist monk holding a blue bamboo cane, with the "Huangtingjing" hanging from his waist, also came to the roadside and said to Wei Zheng: "Where should we go?"

古文：征曰：访道来此，为风雪所阻。
现代文：魏征说：访道来此，被风雪阻隔。
English: Wei Zheng said: When the delegation came here, it was blocked by wind and snow.

古文：道士曰：去此一二里，予家也，可一宿会语乎？
现代文：道士说：离这一、二里路就是我家。去住一宿，趁机交谈，可以吗？
English: The spiritualist said, "My home is two miles away from here. Would it be all right if I went to stay for a night and take the opportunity to talk?"

古文：征许之，遂同行，至一宅，外甚荒凉，内即雕刻。
现代文：魏征同意了。就一起走到一个宅院，外面很是荒凉，内里却是雕梁画栋。
English: Wei Zheng agreed. They walked together to a courtyard. The outside was very desolate, but inside there were carved beams and paintings.

古文：延征于深阁，对灯火而坐，进以美酒嘉肴。从容论道，词理博辨，征不能屈。
现代文：道士请魏征到里间，对着炉火而坐，端上美酒佳肴，从容论道，言辞通理广博雄辨，魏征不能把他说服。
English: The Taoist monk invited Wei Zheng to the inner room, sat facing the fire, served wine and delicacies, talked about Taoism calmly, and his words were rational and extensive. Wei Zheng could not convince him.

古文：临曙，道士言及鬼神之事，征切言不能侵正直也。
现代文：临近天亮的时候，谈及鬼神之事，魏征真切地说鬼神不能侵犯正直之人。
English: When approaching dawn, talking about ghosts and gods, Wei Zheng earnestly said that ghosts and gods cannot invade honest people.

古文：道士曰：子之所奉者仙道也，何全诬鬼神乎？
现代文：道士说：您所尊奉的是仙道，为什么诬蔑鬼神呢？
English: The moralist said, "What you worship is the way of immortality. Why do you slander ghosts and gods?

古文：有天地来有鬼神，夫道高则鬼神妖怪必伏之；若奉道自未高，则鬼神妖怪，反可致之也。何轻之哉？征不答，及平旦，道士复命酒以送征，仍附一简，达恒山中隐士。征既行，寻山路，回顾宿处，乃一大冢耳。探其简，题云：寄上恒山神佐。征恶之，投于地，其简化一鼠而走，征自此稍信鬼神。
现代文：魏征讨厌它，就扔在地上。那封信变成一只老鼠跑了。魏征自此稍稍相信了鬼神。
English: Wei Zheng hated it and threw it on the ground. The letter turned into a mouse and ran away. From then on, Wei Zheng believed in ghosts and gods a little.

古文：唐俭
现代文：唐俭
English: Tang Jian

古文：唐俭少时，乘驴将适吴楚。
现代文：唐俭年轻时，骑驴要去吴楚。
English: When Tang Jian was young, he rode a donkey to go to Wu Chu.

古文：过洛城，渴甚，见路旁一小室，有妇人年二十余，向明缝衣，投之乞浆，则缝袜也。
现代文：经过洛城的时候，渴得很厉害。看见路旁有个小屋，有个妇人，年纪有二十多，对着光亮缝补衣服。唐俭到她这里要水。
English: When he passed through Los Angeles, he was very thirsty. He saw a hut on the side of the road. There was a woman, more than twenty years old, sewing clothes against the light. Tang Jian went to her to ask for water.

古文：遂问别室取浆，郎渴甚，为求之。
现代文：近前一看她在缝袜子。她就到别的屋子取水。您渴得厉害，我为您取水。
English: When I looked closer, I saw that she was sewing socks. She went to another room to fetch water. You are very thirsty, so I fetched water for you.

古文：逡巡，持一盂至。
现代文：很快拿着一个盆去了。
English: He quickly went to the toilet with a basin.

古文：俭视其室内，无厨灶，及还而问曰：夫人之居，何不置火？
现代文：唐俭看她屋里，没有厨灶。等她回来就问：夫人的住处，怎么不生火？
English: Tang Jian saw that there was no kitchen in her house. When she returned, he asked, "Why is there no fire in your wife's house?"

古文：曰：贫无以炊，侧近求食耳。
现代文：回答说：贫穷没有东西做饭，向附近人家求食。
English: He replied: "Poverty is not having anything to cook, and begging for food from people nearby.

古文：言既，复缝袜，意绪甚忙。
现代文：说完又继续缝袜子，神情很忙。
English: After that, he continued to sew socks, looking very busy.

古文：又问何故急速也，曰：妾之夫薛良，贫贩者也，事事十余年矣。
现代文：唐俭又问：什么原因这么着忙呢？回答说：我的丈夫薛良，是个贫穷的小商贩，干了十多年了。
English: Tang Jian also asked: What is the reason for being so busy? He replied: My husband Xue Liang, a poor small trader, has been working for more than ten years.

古文：未尝一归侍舅姑，明早郎来迎，故忙耳。
现代文：不曾回来一次照顾家里。明天早晨来人接我，所以很忙。
English: I haven't been back once to look after the house. Someone is picking me up tomorrow morning, so I'm very busy.

古文：俭微挑之，拒不答，俭愧谢之，遗饼两轴而去。
现代文：唐俭暗暗引诱她，妇人拒不回答。唐俭羞愧地辞别她，留下两轴饼。
English: Tang Jian secretly seduced her, but the woman refused to answer. Tang Jian bade her farewell in shame, leaving behind two loaves of bread.

古文：行十余里，忽记所要书有忘之者，归洛取之，明晨复至此，将出都，为涂刍之阻。
现代文：走了十多里，忽然想起所看的书有忘带的，就经洛城回家去取。第二天早晨又到了这个地方，被送葬的涂车和刍灵阻拦。
English: After walking more than ten miles, I suddenly remembered that I had forgotten to bring the book I was reading, so I went home via Los Angeles to pick it up. The next morning I arrived at this place, and was stopped by the funeral car and the coffin.

古文：问何人，对曰：货师薛良之柩也。
现代文：唐俭问什么人出殡？回答说：是商人薛良的灵柩。
English: When Tang Jian asked who was attending the funeral, he replied that it was the coffin of the merchant Xue Liang.

古文：骇其姓名，乃昨妇人之夫也，遂问所在，曰：良婚五年而妻死，葬故城中。
现代文：薛良的哥哥主办他的丧事。
English: Xue Liang's brother presided over his funeral.

古文：又五年而良死，良兄发其柩，将祔先茔耳。
现代文：想要合坟。
English: I want to join the grave.

古文：俭随观焉，至其殡所，是求水之处。
现代文：唐俭跟着观看。到了墓地，正是唐俭要水的地方。
English: Tang Jian watched. When he arrived at the cemetery, it was the place where Tang Jian asked for water.

古文：俄而启殡，棺上有饼两轴，新袜一双。
现代文：一会儿打开棺材。棺材上有饼两轴，新袜子一双。
English: After a while, open the coffin. There are two loaves of bread and a pair of new socks in the coffin.

古文：俭悲而异之，遂东去。
现代文：唐俭伤感而且很惊异这件事，就继续东行。
English: Tang Jian was saddened and surprised by this, so he continued his journey east.

古文：舟次扬州禅智寺东南，有士子二人，各领徒，相去百余步，发故殡者。
现代文：船停在扬州禅智寺东南。有二个男子，各领一些人，相距百余步，在挖掘旧坟。
English: The boat is anchored southeast of Yangzhou Zenshi Temple. Two men, each leading a few people, are digging an old grave about a hundred paces apart.

古文：一人惊叹久之，其徒往往聚笑。
现代文：一人叹息良久，他领的那伙人在一起哭。
English: One man sighed for a long time, and the group he led wept together.

古文：一人执锸，碎其柩而骂之。
现代文：叹息的人说：我姓韦。以前的太湖令。
English: The man sighed and said, "My surname is Wei. I used to be a Taihu official.

古文：俭遂造之，叹者曰：璋姓韦，前太湖令，此发者，璋之亡子。窆十年矣，适开易其棺，棺中丧其履，而有妇人履一只。
现代文：这个挖开的坟，是我死去的儿子，已经埋了十年了。刚才打开想换个新棺材，棺材里失去了一只鞋，却有妇人的鞋一只。
English: This opened grave is my dead son, who has been buried for ten years. I just opened it to replace a new coffin. The coffin lost a shoe, but there was a woman's shoe.

古文：彼乃裴冀，前江都尉，其发者爱姬也。
现代文：指另一人说：他是裴冀，前任江都尉。他开掘的是爱姬的墓。
English: Referring to another person, he said, "He is Bae Jie, the former lieutenant of Jiang, and he excavated Aiki's grave."

古文：平生龙之，裴到任二年而卒，葬于此一年。
现代文：平生宠爱她。裴冀到任二年她死了，葬在这儿一年了。
English: He loved her all his life. She died two years after Pei Ji took office and was buried here a year ago.

古文：今秩满将归，不忍弃去，将还于洛。
现代文：现在十年任期已满将要回家。不忍心弃她而去，想迁还洛城。
English: Now that her ten-year term is up, she's going home. She can't bear to leave and wants to move back to Los Angeles.

古文：既开棺，丧其一履，而有丈夫履一只。
现代文：等打开棺材，见丢失了一只鞋，却有男人的鞋一只。
English: When they opened the coffin, they saw that one shoe was missing, but there was a man's shoe.

古文：两处互惊，取合之，彼此成对。
现代文：双方都很惊异，拿来一配，彼此正好一对。
English: Both of them were surprised. It was a perfect match. They were a perfect match.

古文：盖吾不肖子淫于彼，往复无常，遂遗之耳。
现代文：这是因为我的不肖之子和她淫乱，往复无常，把鞋留在这里了。
English: This is because my son, who is not a good-looking man, has been unfaithful to her, has been unfaithful, and has left his shoes here.

古文：俭闻言，登舟静思之曰：货师之妻死五年，犹有事舅姑之心。
现代文：唐俭闻言。登船想道：商人的妻子死了五年，还有照顾家的心情。
English: Tang Jian listened to the words. Boarding the ship, he thought: The merchant's wife has been dead for five years, and he is still in the mood to take care of his family.

古文：逾宠之姬，死尚如此，生复何望哉。
现代文：受到过份宠爱的姬妾，死了尚且如此，活着的时候还能希望她怎么样呢？
English: What can you wish for your beloved concubine when she is still alive, even though she is dead?

古文：士君子可溺于此辈而薄其妻也？
现代文：那么，君子还应该沉溺在这种人身上而轻视自己的妻氏吗？
English: So, should a gentleman still indulge in such a person and despise his wife?

