古文：苏轼苏轼，字子瞻，眉州眉山人。
现代文：苏轼字子瞻，眉州眉山人。
English: Su Shi Zizhun, a native of Meishu Meishan.

古文：生十年，父洵游学四方，母程氏亲授以书，闻古今成败，辄能语其要。
现代文：他十岁时，父亲苏洵到各地求学，母亲程氏亲自教授他读书，苏轼听到古今成败之处，就能说出其中的要旨。
English: When he was ten years old, his father, Su Xi, went to various places to study, and his mother, Ms. Cheng, personally taught him to read. When Su Xi heard about the past and present successes and failures, he could tell the gist of it.

古文：程氏读东汉《范滂传》，慨然太息，轼请曰： 轼若为滂，母许之否乎？ 程氏曰： 汝能为滂，吾顾不能为滂母邪？ 
现代文：程氏读东汉《范滂传》时，激愤叹息，苏轼请问： 我如果成为范滂，母亲是否赞许？ 程氏说： 你能成为范滂，难道我就不能成为范滂的母亲吗？ 
English: When Ms. Cheng read the East Han Dynasty "Fan Yu Biography," she sighed with indignation. Su Shi asked: If I become Fan Yu, will my mother approve? Ms. Cheng said: Can you become Fan Yu, can't I become Fan Yu's mother?

古文：比冠，博通经史，属文日数千言，好贾谊、陆贽书。
现代文：到二十岁时，苏轼博通经书史籍，一天能写几千字的文章，喜欢读贾谊、陆贽的书。
English: By the age of twenty, Su Yanbo was well versed in the history of books, could write several thousand words a day, and liked to read books by Jia Yi and Lu Yao.

古文：既而读《庄子》，叹曰： 吾昔有见，口未能言，今见是书，得吾心矣。 嘉祐二年，试礼部。
现代文：不久读了《庄子》，感叹地说： 我过去有见解，口中说不出来，今天见到这本书，正中我的心意。 嘉二年，参加礼部考试。
English: After a while, he read Zhuangzi and said with a sigh: I used to have an opinion, but I can't say it out loud. Today, when I saw this book, it was my heart's desire. In the second year of Ji'an, I took the etiquette exam.

古文：方时文磔裂诡异之弊胜，主司欧阳修思有以救之，得轼《刑赏忠厚论》，惊喜，欲擢冠多士，犹疑其客曾巩所为，但置第二；复以《春秋》对义居第一，殿试中乙科。
现代文：当时文风中割裂肢解，诡辩异辞的弊病占据优势，主考官欧阳修很想矫正这些弊端，看到苏轼的《刑赏忠厚论》，十分惊喜，打算把苏轼录取为第一名，但又怀疑文章是自己的门客曾巩所做，所以只列置第二；苏轼再以对答《春秋》旨意，获第一，殿试时考中进士乙科。
English: At that time, the literary style was divided and dismembered, and the evil of sophistry and heterodoxy prevailed. The chief examiner Ouyang Xiu was very eager to correct these evils. He was very surprised to see Su Shi's "Theory of Punishing and Rewarding the Faithful," and intended to admit Su Shi as the first, but he suspected that the article was written by his own disciple Zeng Gong, so it was only listed second. Su Shi then answered "Spring and Autumn" and won the first place, and passed the entrance examination for junior high school.

古文：后以书见修，修语梅圣俞曰： 吾当避此人出一头地。 闻者始哗不厌，久乃信服。
现代文：此后苏轼写了谢书去见欧阳修，欧阳修对梅圣俞说 ：我应当避让此人以出一头之地。 听说此话的人开始纷纷议论不息，久久以后才信服。
English: After that, Su Shi wrote a letter of thanks to Ouyang Xiu. Ouyang Xiu said to Mei Sheng Yao, "I should avoid letting this person get ahead." The people who heard this began to argue incessantly, and only after a long time were they convinced.

古文：丁母忧。
现代文：苏轼因母亲去世在家服丧。
English: Every mother's death is sad.

古文：五年，调福昌主簿。欧阳修以才识兼茂，荐之秘阁。
现代文：嘉五年，苏轼调任福昌主簿，欧阳修认为苏轼才能学识都好，把他推荐到秘阁。
English: In the fifth year of Jia, Su Shi was transferred to the main book of Fuchang. Ouyang Xiu thought that Su Shi's ability and knowledge were good, and recommended him to the secret cabinet.

古文：试六论，旧不起草，以故文多不工。
现代文：考试六篇文章，以往考试不打草稿，因此文章大多写得不工整。
English: There are six essays in the exam. In the past, there were no drafts in the exam, so most of the essays were not well written.

古文：轼始具草，文义粲然。
现代文：自从苏轼开始打草稿，文字意义十分粲然可观。
English: Since Su Shi began to draft, the meaning of the text is very impressive.

古文：复对制策，入三等。自宋初以来，制策入三等，惟吴育与轼而已。
现代文：再对答皇帝的策问，考入三等，自宋朝初年以来，制策入为三等的，只有吴育和苏轼二人而已。
English: Since the first year of the Song Dynasty, only Wu Yu and Su Xi have been admitted to the third grade.

古文：除大理评事、签书凤翔府判官。
现代文：苏轼被任命为大理评事、签书凤翔府判官。
English: Su Wei was appointed as a Dali critic and a Fengxiangfu judge.

古文：关中自元昊叛，民贫役重，岐下岁输南山木筏，自渭入河，经砥柱之险，衙吏踵破家。
现代文：关中自从元昊叛乱以来，百姓贫困，徭役沉重，岐下每年筏运南山木材，从渭水进入黄河，经过砥柱山险要地区，负责运输的衙吏接踵倾家荡产。
English: In Guanzhong, since the rebellion of Yuan Hao, the people have been poor and the laborers have been heavy. Every year, the Nanshan timber is transported from Guizhong to the Yellow River from Surabaya, passing through the dangerous areas of the pillar mountain, and the laborers responsible for transportation are successively losing their income.

古文：轼访其利害，为修衙规，使自择水工以时进止，自是害减半。
现代文：苏轼调查了运输南山木筏的利害关系，特为修正了衙规，允许衙吏自行选择水工和因时制宜决定木筏是行进还是停止，从此以后运输的危害减少了一半。
English: Su Ying investigated the interests of transporting Nanshan rafts, especially for the purpose of amending the rafting regulations, allowing the raftsmen to choose their own waterworks and decide whether the rafts should go or stop according to the time system. Since then, the harm of transportation has been reduced by half.

古文：治平二年，入判登闻鼓院。
现代文：治平二年，苏轼回京任判登闻鼓院。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, Su Shi returned to Beijing and was appointed to the Wen Drum Academy.

古文：英宗自藩邸闻其名，欲以唐故事召入翰林，知制诰。
现代文：英宗在藩王府时就听到苏轼的名声，打算仿照唐朝成例召他进入翰林院，任命他为知制诰。
English: Yingzong heard of Su Shi's reputation when he was in the royal palace of the domain, and planned to follow the example of the Tang Dynasty and invite him to enter the Hanlin Academy and appoint him as the imperial eunuch.

古文：宰相韩琦曰： 轼之才，远大器也，他日自当为天下用。
现代文：宰相韩琦说： 苏轼的才能，是会成大器的，将来自然会被朝廷大用。
English: Prime Minister Han Zheng said: Su Zheng's talent will become a great tool, and will naturally be used by the imperial court in the future.

古文：要在朝廷培养之，使天下之士莫不畏慕降伏，皆欲朝廷进用，然后取而用之，则人人无复异辞矣。
现代文：关键在朝廷要培养他，使天下的人都仰慕信服他，都希望朝廷任用他，到那时重用苏轼，那么人们就不会再有异议。
English: The key is to cultivate him in the imperial court, so that people all over the world admire and believe in him, and hope that the imperial court will appoint him. At that time, Su Shi will be reused, and then people will no longer have objections.

古文：今骤用之，则天下之士未必以为然，适足以累之也。 英宗曰： 且与修注如何？ 琦曰： 记注与制诰为邻，未可遽授。
现代文：假如现在马上重用他，那么天下人未必信服，反而有害于他。 英宗说： 暂且让他任修起居注如何？ 韩琦说： 修起居注和知制诰的职位差不多，不可急于任使。
English: If he were to be reused right now, people around the world would not necessarily be convinced, but it would be harmful to him. Yingzong said: How about temporarily letting him take up the post of preceptor? Han Zheng said: The post of preceptor is similar to the post of magistrate, and you should not rush to appoint him.

古文：不若于馆阁中近上贴职与之，且请召试。 英宗曰： 试之未知其能否，如轼有不能邪？ 琦犹不可，及试二论，复入三等，得直史馆。
现代文：不如给苏轼一个接近皇上的馆阁职务，并且请召他来参加考试。 英宗说 ：考试是不知道他能不能胜任，像苏轼还有什么不能的呢？ 韩琦还是不同意，等到考试二道策论，苏轼再次考入三等，得到直史馆的职务。
English: It would be better to give Su Shi a cabinet position close to the emperor, and invite him to take the examination. Yingzong said: The examination does not know whether he is competent, what else can not be like Su Shi? Han Yu still disagreed, until the examination of the two-way policy, Su Shi was again admitted to the third grade, and got the post of the direct history museum.

古文：轼闻琦语，曰： 公可谓爱人以德矣。 会洵卒，赙以金帛，辞之，求赠一官，于是赠光禄丞。
现代文：苏轼听说了韩琦的这番话后，对韩琦说： 韩公可以说是用道德修养来爱护人才。 适逢苏洵去世，英宗赠给黄金丝帛帮助办理丧事，苏轼辞谢了赏赐，请求赠给父亲一个官职，于是朝廷赠苏洵为光禄丞。
English: After Su Qian heard what Han Qian said, he said to Han Qian: Han Gong can be said to use moral cultivation to cherish talent. When Su Qian died, Ying Zong gave gold silk brocade to help with the funeral, Su Qian thanked him for the gift and asked to give his father an official post, so the court gave Su Qian to Guangluo.

古文：洵将终，以兄太白早亡，子孙未立，妹嫁杜氏，卒未葬，属轼。
现代文：苏洵临终时，因为兄长苏太白早年亡故，子孙还没有自立，妹妹嫁给了杜氏，死后还没有下葬，他把这些事托付给苏轼。
English: At the time of Su Shi's death, because his brother Su Taibai died at an early age, his children and grandchildren had not yet become independent, his sister was married to Du Shi, and he had not yet been buried, he entrusted these things to Su Shi.

古文：轼既除丧，即葬姑。
现代文：苏轼守丧期满后，马上安葬了姑母。
English: After Su Shi's mourning period expired, she buried her aunt immediately.

古文：后官可荫，推与太白曾孙彭。
现代文：后来苏轼的官职可以荫补子孙时，让给了苏太白的曾孙苏彭。
English: Later, Su Shi's official post was given to Su Taibai's great-grandson, Su Peng, when he was able to supplement his children and grandchildren.

古文：熙宁二年，还朝。
现代文：熙宁二年，苏轼回到朝廷。
English: In the second year of Xining, Su Shi returned to the imperial court.

古文：王安石执政，素恶其议论异己，以判官告院。
现代文：王安石执掌朝政，一直厌恶他的议论与自己不同，让他判官告院。
English: Wang Anshi, who was in charge of the imperial government, had always disliked the fact that his opinions differed from his own, so he had the judge sue the court.

古文：四年，安石欲变科举、兴学校，诏两制、三馆议。
现代文：熙宁四年，王安石打算变更科举、兴立学校，皇帝下诏两制、三馆讨论。
English: In the fourth year of Xining, Wang Anshi planned to change the imperial examination and establish a school, and the emperor issued an edict to discuss the two systems and three institutions.

古文：轼上议曰：
现代文：苏轼上疏说：
English: Su Ying Shang So said:

古文：得人之道，在于知人；知人之法，在于责实。
现代文： 得到人才的途径，在于知人，知人的方法，在于求实。
English: The way to get talent is to get to know people, and the way to get to know people is to seek truth.

古文：使君相有知人之明，朝廷有责实之政，则胥史皂隶未尝无人，而况于学校贡举乎？
现代文：假使皇帝和宰相具有知人之明，朝廷具有求实措施，那么胥吏皂隶中未尝没有人才，何况是学校贡举呢？
English: Assuming that the emperor and the prime minister are well-informed, and that the imperial court has measures to seek truth, then there is no lack of talent among the officials, let alone the school tribute?

古文：虽因今之法，臣以为有余。
现代文：即使因袭现在的办法，我认为足够有余。
English: Even with the current approach, I think there is more than enough.

古文：使君相不知人，朝廷不责实，则公卿侍从常患无人，而况学校贡举乎？
现代文：假使皇帝和宰相没有知人之明，朝廷不求实，那么公卿侍从中也会经常担忧没有人才，更何况学校贡举呢？
English: If the emperor and the prime minister do not know the truth, and the court does not seek the truth, then the courtiers will often worry about the lack of talent, let alone the school tribute?

古文：虽复古之制，臣以为不足。
现代文：即使恢复古代的制度，我认为也是不够的。
English: Even if we were to restore the ancient system, I don't think it would be enough.

古文：夫时有可否，物有废兴，方其所安，虽暴君不能废，及其既厌，虽圣人不能复。
现代文：时代有可以不可以，万物有废有兴，当一项制度是合乎时代需要的，即使是暴君也不能废除它，等到它已经没落，即使是圣人也不能使它恢复。
English: All things have their pros and cons. When a system suits the needs of the times, even a tyrant cannot abolish it. When it has fallen, even a saint cannot restore it.

古文：故风俗之变，法制随之，譬如江河之徙移，强而复之，则难为力。
现代文：所以风俗变化了，法制也随之变化，这好比江河的移迁，如果强行要它回故道，那是难以为力的。
English: Therefore, customs have changed, and the legal system has also changed accordingly. This is like the migration of rivers. If it is forced to return to the old way, it is difficult.

古文：庆历固尝立学矣，至于今日，惟有空名仅存。
现代文： 庆历年间本曾建立学校，到了今天，只是仅存空名。
English: A school was originally built in the Keiji era, but today, only an empty name remains.

古文：今将变今之礼，易今之俗，又当发民力以治宫室，敛民财以食游士。百里之内，置官立师，狱讼听于是，军旅谋于是，又简不率教者屏之远方，则无乃徒为纷乱，以患苦天下邪？
现代文：如今要改变现存的礼制，变易现在的风俗，又要征发民力修筑官府房舍，聚敛百姓的钱财来供养游说的人，百里范围内，设立官员设立老师，案件诉讼听命于此，军旅之事谋划于此，又检查出不遵守教育的人摒弃到远方，这不是空增纷乱，因而害苦天下吗？
English: Nowadays, it is necessary to change the existing etiquette, to change the current customs, to solicit and send people to build government buildings, to collect people's money and wealth to support lobbyists, to set up officials and teachers within a hundred miles, to have cases and lawsuits obeyed here, to plan military travel here, and to check out those who do not comply with education and abandon them far away. Isn't this an empty increase in chaos, thus harming the world?

古文：若乃无大更革，而望有益于时，则与庆历之际何异？
现代文：如果没有大的更新改革，而期望对时政有利，那么与庆历年间改革有什么不同呢？
English: If there is no major renewal and reform, and the expectation is favorable to the current politics, then what is the difference from the reform during the celebration year?

古文：故臣谓今之学校，特可因仍旧制，使先王之旧物，不废于吾世足矣。
现代文：所以我认为现在的学校，只能因袭原有的制度，使先王的旧制度，不在我们这一代废弃就足够了。
English: Therefore, I think that the current school can only inherit the original system, so that the old system of the former king is not abandoned in our generation is enough.

古文：至于贡举之法，行之百年，治乱盛衰，初不由此。
现代文：至于说贡举制度，已实行了百年之久，国家的治乱兴衰，当初就不由此决定。
English: As for the tribute system, it has been implemented for a hundred years, and the rise and fall of the country's rule was not initially determined by it.

古文：陛下视祖宗之世，贡举之法，与今为孰精？
现代文：陛下看祖宗时代，贡举制度，和现在的相比哪时更精审？
English: Your Majesty, looking at the time of the ancestors, the tribute system, compared to the present, when is it more refined?

古文：言语文章，与今为孰优？
现代文：文章著作，和现在相比哪时更优秀？
English: When was writing better than it is now?

古文：所得人才，与今为孰多？
现代文：得到的人才，和现在相比哪时更多？
English: When did we get more talent than we do now?

古文：天下之事，与今为孰办？
现代文：天下的事情，与现在相比哪时更得到治理？
English: When were the affairs of the world better governed than they are now?

古文：较此四者之长短，其议决矣。
现代文：比较这四方面的优劣长短，这次讨论就可以得出结论了。
English: By comparing the strengths and weaknesses of these four aspects, this discussion can come to a conclusion.

古文：今所欲变改不过数端：或曰乡举德行而略文词，或曰专取策论而罢诗赋，或欲兼采誉望而罢封弥，或欲经生不帖墨而考大义，此皆知其一，不知其二者也。
现代文： 现在想改变的不过几件事：或者说乡试重视德行而忽略文词，或者说专取策问和议论而废除诗赋，或者想兼采声誉人望而废除封弥制度，或是想让参加考试儒家经典著作的考生不考试帖经墨义而考试经书的要旨，这是只知其一、不知其二的做法。
English: There are only a few things that I would like to change now: either the township examination will focus on virtue and ignore the text, or it will focus on questioning and discussion and abolish the poem endowment, or it will want to take advantage of the reputation of the people and abolish the femi system, or it will want the candidates who take the examination of Confucian classics to take the examination of the essence of the scripture book instead of the examination of the meaning of the scripture. This is only one or the other approach.

古文：愿陛下留意于远者、大者，区区之法何预焉。
现代文：我希望陛下注意长远的事情、大的事情，区区科举、学校制度何必参预呢？
English: I hope that Your Majesty will pay attention to long-term and big things. Why should you get involved in the regional science education and school system?

古文：臣又切有私忧过计者。
现代文：我又切实有超过正常估计的暗自忧虑之点。
English: I do have more than my fair share of secret anxieties.

古文：夫性命之说，自子贡不得闻，而今之学者，耻不言性命，读其文，浩然无当而不可穷；观其貌，超然无著而不可挹，此岂真能然哉！
现代文：关于性命的学说，自从子贡那时就没有听说了，然而今天的学者，却以不谈性命为耻，读他们的文章，浩瀚无边，下无底当，上无篷盖，真是不可穷尽；看他们的容貌仪表，超脱世俗，无所附者，如清泉夏露，不可掬挹，这怎么真能如此呢？
English: The doctrine of life has not been heard of since the time of Zigong, but today's scholars are ashamed of not talking about life. Reading their articles, the vastness is boundless, the bottom is bottomless, and there is no canopy on the top. It is truly inexhaustible. Looking at their appearance, they are beyond the world, and those who are not attached, such as the clear spring Xia Lu, should not be beaten. How can this really be so?

古文：盖中人之性，安于放而乐于诞耳。
现代文：一般人的习性，安于放纵自己而喜欢说大话。
English: It is the habit of the common people to indulge themselves and talk big.

古文：陛下亦安用之？
现代文：陛下又怎么能任用他们呢？ 
English: How can His Majesty appoint them?

古文：议上，神宗悟曰： 吾固疑此，得轼议，意释然矣。 即日召见，问： 方今政令得失安在？
现代文：苏轼的奏疏呈上之后，神宗醒悟说： 我本来怀疑这件事，读了苏轼的奏议，思想上的疑虑消失了。 当天召见苏轼，问道 ：现在政令的得失在哪里？
English: After Su Shi's report was submitted, Shenzong woke up and said: I originally doubted this matter, read Su Shi's report, and my ideological doubts disappeared. That day, I summoned Su Shi and asked: Where are the gains and losses of the government order now?

古文：虽朕过失，指陈可也。 对曰： 陛下生知之性，天纵文武，不患不明，不患不勤，不患不断，但患求治太急，听言太广，进人太锐。
现代文：即使是我的过失，你也可以指明陈述出来。 苏轼回答说： 陛下天性具有文武才能，不担心陛下不明察，不担心陛下不勤奋，不担心陛下不果断，但是担心陛下求治太急迫，听他人的话太广，提拔人太快。
English: Even if it is my fault, you can point it out. Su Xi Rong replied: Your Majesty is naturally gifted in literature and martial arts. I am not worried that Your Majesty is not observant, not worried that Your Majesty is not diligent, not worried that Your Majesty is not decisive, but I am worried that Your Majesty is too anxious to seek a cure, listens to others too widely, and promotes people too quickly.

古文：愿镇以安静，待物之来，然后应之。 神宗悚然曰： 卿三言，朕当熟思之。
现代文：希望陛下以安静来镇住局面，待事情发生，然后再应付它。 神宗吃惊地说 ：你所说的三句话，我当要周密考虑。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will calm down the situation, wait for things to happen, and then deal with it.Amazed, Shenzong said, "I should carefully consider the three sentences you said.

古文：凡在馆阁，皆当为朕深思治乱，无有所隐。 轼退，言于同列。
现代文：凡是在馆阁任职的人，都应该为我深入思考治乱问题，不要有所隐瞒。 苏轼退出后，把召见的情况向同僚们说了。
English: Everyone who serves in the cabinet should think deeply about the problem of chaos management for me, and should not hide anything.After Su Shi withdrew, he told his colleagues about the situation of his appointment.

古文：安石不悦，命权开封府推官，将困之以事。
现代文：王安石不高兴，任命苏轼权开封府推官，想用事务来困住苏轼。
English: Wang Anshi was not happy and appointed Su Shi Quan as the governor of Kaifeng. He wanted to use the affair to trap Su Shi.

古文：轼决断精敏，声闻益远。
现代文：苏轼决狱断案精审敏捷，名声越传越远。
English: Su Shi's case of breaking out of prison was adjudicated with precision and agility, and his reputation spread further and further.

古文：会上元敕府市浙灯，且令损价。
现代文：恰逢上元节皇帝敕令开封府购买浙江的灯，而且下令压低价格。
English: The Lantern Festival coincided with the emperor's order to Kaifeng to buy Zhejiang lamps, and ordered to lower the price.

古文：轼疏言： 陛下岂以灯为悦？
现代文：苏轼上疏说 ：陛下难道是用灯取乐？
English: Su Ying Shang Zuo said, "Does your majesty use the lamp for entertainment?"

古文：此不过以奉二宫之欢耳。
现代文：这不过是让两宫太后高兴罢了。
English: It's just to make the Empress Dowager happy.

古文：然百姓不可户晓，皆谓以耳目不急之玩，夺其口体必用之资。
现代文：然而百姓不可能家家知晓陛下的心意，都说是用听的看的一类不急需的玩物，夺取他们吃的、穿的生活必需品。
English: However, it is impossible for the people to know His Majesty's will, and they are said to use listening and watching as a kind of toy that is not urgently needed, to seize the necessities of life that they eat and wear.

古文：此事至小，体则甚大，愿追还前命。 即诏罢之。
现代文：这件事很小，对国家大体却影响很大，希望陛下追还前面下达的敕令。 
English: This is a small matter, but it has a great impact on the country as a whole. I hope that His Majesty will restore the royal order issued earlier.

古文：时安石创行新法，轼上书论其不便，曰：
现代文：皇帝立即下诏停止买灯。当时王安石开始颁行新法，苏轼上书论新法不便，说：
English: The emperor immediately issued an edict to stop buying lamps. At that time, Wang Anshi began to promulgate the new law. Su Qian wrote a book about the inconvenience of the new law, saying:

古文：臣之所欲言者，三言而已。
现代文： 我所要说的，仅三句话而已。
English: All I have to say is three words.

古文：愿陛下结人心，厚风俗，存纪纲。
现代文：希望陛下凝聚人心，敦厚风俗，保存纪纲。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will unite people's hearts, strengthen customs, and preserve the curriculum.

古文：人主之所恃者人心而已，如木之有根，灯之有膏，鱼之有水，农夫之有田，商贾之有财。
现代文：皇上可以凭借的是人心而已。好比树木有根，灯有油，鱼有水，农夫有田，商贾有财。
English: The emperor can only rely on the hearts of the people. Just as trees have roots, lamps have oil, fish have water, farmers have fields, and merchants have wealth.

古文：失之则亡，此理之必然也。
现代文：失去这些东西就会败亡，这是必然的道理。
English: If you lose these things, you will be defeated, this is an inevitable truth.

古文：自古及今，未有和易同众而不安，刚果自用而不危者。
现代文：从古到今，没有和悦同其众而不安定的。刚愎自以为是而不危险的。
English: From ancient times to the present, there is no harmony with the masses and unsettled. Impetuous self-righteous and not dangerous.

古文：陛下亦知人心之不悦矣。
现代文：陛下也知道现在人心是不快乐的。
English: Your Majesty also knows that people are not happy at the moment.

古文：祖宗以来，治财用者不过三司。
现代文： 祖宗开国以来，管理财政开支的不过是三司。
English: Since the founding of the country, only three departments have been responsible for the management of fiscal expenditure.

古文：今陛下不以财用付三司，无故又创制置三司条例一司，使六七少年，日夜讲求于内，使者四十余辈，分行营干于外。
现代文：现在陛下不把财政开支交给三司管理，无缘无故又创建制置三司条例司这一机构，让六七名少年，日夜在里面谋划索取，使者四十余人，在外面分到各地经营办理。
English: Now, instead of entrusting the management of financial expenditure to the Three Departments, His Majesty has, without any reason, created the Department for the Establishment of the Three Departments' Regulations, an institution that allows sixty-seven young people to work day and night inside to plan and request, and more than forty emissaries to be sent outside to operate and manage in various regions.

古文：夫制置三司条例司，求利之名也；六七少年与使者四十余辈，求利之器也。
现代文：制置三司条例司，是求利的名称；六七少年与四十多名使者，是求利的工具。
English: The establishment of the Three Departments of Regulations is the name of seeking profits; the June 7th Youth and more than 40 emissaries are the tools of seeking profits.

古文：造端宏大，民实惊疑；创法新奇，吏皆惶惑。
现代文：开始时声势浩大，百姓实在惊疑，创立的各法新奇古怪，官吏也都感到疑惧。
English: At the beginning, there was a lot of noise, the people were really surprised, the laws created were new and strange, and the officials were also suspicious.

古文：以万乘之主而言利，以天子之宰而治财，论说百端，喧传万口，然而莫之顾者，徒曰： 我无其事，何恤于人言。 操网罟而入江湖，语人曰 我非渔也 ，不如捐网罟而人自信。
现代文：以大国之主来谈利，以天子的宰相来治财，议论百出，万人喧哗，然而仍不回头，光是空说： 我没有做这种事，何必怕人们说三道四。 拿着渔网到江河湖泊去，对人说 我不是去打鱼 ，不如舍弃渔网而人们自然相信。
English: With the lord of a great country to talk about profit, with the prime minister of the son of heaven to manage wealth, talk about a million things, everyone is noisy, but still do not look back, just say in vain: I did not do such a thing, why should I be afraid of people's gossip.Take fishing nets to rivers and lakes, tell people I am not going to fish, it is better to abandon fishing nets and people will naturally believe.

古文：驱鹰犬而赴林薮，语人曰 我非猎也 ，不如放鹰犬而兽自驯。
现代文：驱赶着鹰到森林里去，对人说 我不是打猎 ，不如放走鹰犬而野兽自然驯服。
English: If you chase an eagle into the forest and say, "I'm not hunting," it's better to let the hounds go and the beast tame itself naturally.

古文：故臣以为欲消谗慝而召和气，则莫若罢条例司。
现代文：所以我认为要消除谗言恶语而召来和气，就不如废除制置三司条例司。
English: Therefore, I think that in order to eliminate abusive language and bring about harmony, it is better to abolish the establishment of the three departments of regulations.

古文：今君臣宵旰，几一年矣，而富国之功，茫如捕风，徒闻内帑出数百万缗，祠部度五千余人耳。
现代文： 现在皇帝和大臣们勤于政务，已经快一年了，然而富强国家的功效，渺茫好比捕风捉影，光听说内库钱拿出来数百万，祠部准许剃度五千多人出家罢了。
English: Now the emperor and his ministers have been diligent in government affairs for almost a year. However, the effectiveness of a rich and powerful country is as elusive as chasing the wind. I have heard that millions of treasury money has been taken out, and the ancestral hall has allowed more than 5,000 people to become ordained.

古文：以此为术，其谁不能？
现代文：用这来作为办法，那么谁不能呢？
English: Using that as a measure, who couldn't?

古文：而所行之事，道路皆知其难。汴水浊流，自生民以来，不以种稻。
现代文：然而要实行的事情，大家都知道它的困难，汴水浑浊，自有百姓以来，不用来种植水稻。
English: However, everyone knows the difficulties of what needs to be done. The water is muddy and has not been used to grow rice since there were people.

古文：今欲陂而清之，万顷之稻，必用千顷之陂，一岁一淤，三岁而满矣。
现代文：现在打算修筑陂塘使水澄清，种万顷地的水稻，必须使用千顷面积的陂塘，一年一淤积，三年陂塘就淤满了。
English: Now it is planned to build a paddy pond to make the water clear and plant rice on thousands of hectares, so it is necessary to use a paddy pond with an area of thousands of hectares. The paddy pond is silted up once a year, and it is silted up in three years.

古文：陛下遂信其说，即使相视地形，所在凿空，访寻水利，妄庸轻剽，率意争言。
现代文：陛下于是相信这种说法，立即派人察看地形，到处凿空，访寻水利，狂妄轻飘的人，任意争相进言。
English: His Majesty then believed this statement and immediately sent people to inspect the terrain, digging holes everywhere, visiting water conservancy, arrogant and light-hearted people, and arbitrarily competing to make suggestions.

古文：官司虽知其疏，不敢便行抑退，追集老少，相视可否。
现代文：有关衙门虽然知道他们的办法粗疏，却不敢自行贬退他们，把年老的和年少的人追集起来，去察看他们所说的是否可行。
English: The magistrates, though they knew their methods were crude, dared not on their own disparage them, and called the old and the young together to see if what they said was practicable.

古文：若非灼然难行，必须且为兴役。
现代文：假如不是明显难以办理的，就必须动工兴建。
English: If it is not obviously difficult to handle, it is necessary to start construction.

古文：官吏苟且顺从，真谓陛下有意兴作，上糜帑廪，下夺农时。
现代文：官吏苟且顺从，真的以为是陛下有意兴建，上耗费国库的钱财粮食，下误农时。
English: The officials were obedient and obedient, and really thought that it was His Majesty's intention to build. On the one hand, they spent money and grain from the national treasury, and on the other, they wasted farmers' time.

古文：堤防一开，水失故道，虽食议者之肉，何补于民！
现代文：万一堤防决口，河水冲出原来的河道，即使吃提出建议的人的肉，对于百姓有什么补救！
English: In the unlikely event that the levee breaks and the water rushes out of the original river channel, even if they eat the flesh of the person who made the suggestion, what remedy is there for the people?

古文：臣不知朝廷何苦而为此哉？
现代文：我不知道朝廷何苦要做这件事？
English: I don't know how hard it is for the Imperial Court to do this.

古文：自古役人，必用乡户。
现代文： 自古以来役使人，必然使用乡村农户。
English: Since ancient times, people have been forced to use rural farmers.

古文：今者徒闻江、浙之间，数郡顾役，而欲措之天下。
现代文：现在但听说江、浙之间，有几个州郡雇募役人，而且想把这一做法推行于全国。
English: Now, however, I have heard that between Jiangsu and Zhejiang, several states and counties have hired recruiting officers, and they want to promote this practice throughout the country.

古文：单丁、女户，盖天民之穷者也，而陛下首欲役之，富有四海，忍不加恤！
现代文：单丁、女户，是百姓中最穷苦的人，然而陛下首先想要役使他们，陛下富有四海，怎么忍心不加以抚恤！
English: Single men and single women are the poorest of the people, yet His Majesty wants to serve them first. His Majesty is rich beyond measure, how can He bear not to show mercy!

古文：自杨炎为两税，租调与庸既兼之矣，奈何复欲取庸？
现代文：自从杨炎推行两税法，田租户调和庸役就已包括在一起了，如何又要征取庸役呢？
English: Since Yang Yan implemented the two-tax law, the field tenant and the mediocrity have been included together. How should the mediocrity be collected?

古文：万一后世不幸有聚敛之臣，庸钱不除，差役仍旧，推所从来，则必有任其咎者矣。
现代文：万一后世不幸有搜括百姓钱财的大臣，庸役钱没有被废除，而差役照旧，推究其根源，就必然会有担当这罪责的人。
English: In the unfortunate event that in future generations there is a minister who collects money from the people, and the money of the mediocre servant is not abolished, but the servant is still the same, and the root cause is investigated, there will inevitably be a person responsible for this crime.

古文：青苗放钱，自昔有禁。
现代文：青苗时放债钱，自古代就有禁令。
English: Since ancient times, there has been a ban on lending money to young seedlings.

古文：今陛下始立成法，每岁常行。
现代文：现在陛下开始把它立为成法，每年都要推行。
English: Now His Majesty has begun to codify it into law, to be implemented annually.

古文：虽云不许抑配，而数世之后，暴君污吏，陛下能保之与？
现代文：虽然说不许强迫百姓借贷交息，但几代之后，暴君污吏，陛下能保证他们不这样做吗？
English: Although it is said that people should not be forced to pay interest on loans, after several generations of tyrants and corrupt officials, can Your Majesty guarantee that they will not do so?

古文：计愿请之户，必皆孤贫不济之人，鞭挞已急，则继之逃亡，不还，则均及邻保，势有必至，异日天下恨之，国史记之，曰 青苗钱自陛下始 ，岂不惜哉！
现代文：估计愿意借青苗钱的农户，肯定都是孤苦贫困没有接济的人，鞭挞他们急了之后，他们就要接着逃亡，这些人不还青苗钱，就由邻居互保户均摊，这种情况是必然的发展势头，将来天下百姓会痛恨青苗法。国史记载这件事，说： 青苗钱自陛下开始。 难道不可惜？
English: It is estimated that farmers who are willing to borrow money for young seedlings must be destitute and poor people who have no financial support. After whipping them in a hurry, they will then flee. If these people do not return the money for young seedlings, it will be shared equally by neighboring mutual insurance companies. This situation is an inevitable development momentum. In the future, people around the world will hate the young seedlings law. National history records this matter, saying: Young seedlings money began with His Majesty. Isn't it a pity?

古文：且常平之法，可谓至矣。
现代文：况且常平法，可以说是非常完备了。
English: Moreover, the Changping method can be said to be very complete.

古文：今欲变为青苗，坏彼成此，所丧逾多，亏官害民，虽悔何及！
现代文：现在想改变为青苗法，破坏常平法推行青苗法，所丧失的更加多了，亏了官府害了百姓，即使后悔又怎么来得及！
English: Now they want to change it to the Young Seedlings Law, destroy the Ordinary Law, and implement the Young Seedlings Law. They have lost even more. The government has harmed the people, and how can they regret it?

古文：昔汉武帝以财力匮竭，用贾人桑羊之说，买贱卖贵，谓之均输。
现代文： 过去汉武帝因为财力匮乏枯竭，采用商人桑羊的建议，便宜买进高价卖出，称为均输。
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwu, due to the depletion of financial resources, used the suggestion of the merchant Mulberry Goat to buy cheap and sell at a high price, which was called equal loss.

古文：于时商贾不行，盗贼滋炽，几至于乱。
现代文：在当时行商坐贾都不流通，盗贼滋生势盛，几乎导致动乱。
English: At that time, peddlers and beggars did not circulate, and thieves thrived, almost leading to unrest.

古文：孝昭既立，霍光顺民所欲而予之，天下归心，遂以无事。
现代文：孝昭帝即位当了皇帝，霍光顺应百姓所想要的而给予他们，天下百姓都归向朝廷，于是天下无事。
English: Xiao Zhaodi ascended the throne and became emperor. Huo Guang complied with the people's wishes and gave them what they wanted. People all over the world returned to the imperial court, so there was nothing to worry about.

古文：不意今日此论复兴。
现代文：不料今天这种论调重新兴起。
English: Unexpectedly, this argument has re-emerged today.

古文：立法之初，其费已厚，纵使薄有所获，而征商之额，所损必多。
现代文：立法的初期，其费用已经很多，纵使稍稍有什么收获，但征收商税的数额，损失的必然很多。
English: In the early days of legislation, the costs are already high, and even if there is a little gain, the amount of commercial tax levied will inevitably cause a lot of losses.

古文：譬之有人为其主畜牧，以一牛易五羊。一牛之失，则隐而不言；五羊之获，则指为劳绩。
现代文：譬如有人替他的主人放牧牲畜时，用一头牛换五只羊，一头牛的损失，就隐瞒而不说，五只羊的收获，却指为功劳成绩。
English: For example, when a man was pasturing cattle for his master, he would exchange one ox for five sheep. The loss of one ox would be concealed and not mentioned, but the gain of five sheep would be referred to as a merit.

古文：今坏常平而言青苗之功，亏商税而取均输之利，何以异此？
现代文：现在破坏常平法而说青苗法的功劳，亏损商税来获取均输的利益，与上面所举的例子有什么不同？
English: What is the difference between the above-mentioned example and the current situation where the merits of the Standing Committee Law are destroyed and the merits of the Young Seedlings Law are said to be won, and the losses of commercial taxes are used to obtain the benefits of equal losses?

古文：臣窃以为过矣。
现代文：我私下认为太过份了。
English: I personally think it's too much.

古文：议者必谓： 民可与乐成，难与虑始。 故陛下坚执不顾，期于必行。
现代文：议论的人必然会说 ：可以和百姓一起享受成功的快乐，难以和他们一起谋划创始。 所以陛下坚持实行而不顾反对意见，期望这些新法必然得以推行。
English: The commentators would say: it is possible to enjoy the happiness of success with the people, but it is difficult to plan the founding with them, so His Majesty insisted on implementing the new laws in spite of the opposition and hoped that they would be implemented.

古文：此乃战国贪功之人，行险侥幸之说，未及乐成，而怨已起矣。臣之所愿陛下结人心者，此也。
现代文：这正是战国时代贪图功利的人，冒险侥幸的观点，没有等到成功的快乐，怨恨却已经起来了，我之所以希望陛下凝聚人心，正在于此。
English: This is exactly the view of the people who were greedy for utilitarianism in the Warring States period, who risked and got lucky. They did not wait for the joy of success, but the resentment has already arisen. This is why I hope that His Majesty will rally people's hearts.

古文：国家之所以存亡者，在道德之浅深，不在乎强与弱；历数之所以长短者，在风俗之薄厚，不在乎富与贫。
现代文： 国家之所以生存和灭亡的原因，在于道德的高低，不在于国家的强弱；改朝换代之所以有长有短，在于风俗的轻薄敦厚，不在于国家的富有与贫穷。
English: The reasons for the survival and demise of a country lie in the level of morality, not in the strength and weakness of the country; the reasons for the change of dynasty and generation are long and short, in the lightness and thickness of customs, not in the wealth and poverty of the country.

古文：人主知此，则知所轻重矣。
现代文：皇帝知道了这个道理，就知道哪个轻哪个重了。
English: If the emperor knew this truth, he would know which is lighter and which is heavier.

古文：故臣愿陛下务崇道德而厚风俗，不愿陛下急于有功而贪富强。
现代文：因此我希望陛下务必崇尚道德而敦厚风俗，不希望陛下急于取得成功而希图富强。
English: Therefore, I hope that Your Majesty will be moral and have good manners. I hope that Your Majesty will not be anxious to succeed and want to be rich and strong.

古文：爱惜风俗，如护元气。
现代文：爱惜风俗，好比保护人的元气一样。
English: Cherishing customs is like protecting one's vitality.

古文：圣人非不知深刻之法可以齐众，勇悍之夫可以集事，忠厚近于迂阔，老成初若迟钝。
现代文：圣人不是不知道严峻刻薄的法律可以使百姓整齐划一，勇猛强悍的男子可成就事业，忠厚近似迂阔，老成初看好像迟钝。
English: The sage is not unaware that a severe and harsh law can make the people neat and uniform, a brave and strong man can achieve a career, a loyal person is similar to a roundabout, and an old man looks like a dullard at first.

古文：然终不肯以彼易此者，知其所得小，而所丧大也。
现代文：但终究不肯以彼代此，是因为知道所得到的小，而所丧失的大。
English: But in the end, he refused to take his place, because he knew that what he gained was small, but what he lost was big.

古文：仁祖持法至宽，用人有叙，专务掩覆过失，未尝轻改旧章。
现代文：仁宗皇帝执法非常宽厚，用人按次序，专意从事掩过盖失，不曾轻易改变旧的典章制度。
English: Emperor Nenzong was very lenient in enforcing the law. He employed people in order, was dedicated to covering up mistakes, and did not easily change the old award system.

古文：考其成功，则曰未至。
现代文：考察他的成功，只能说还没有得到。
English: If you look at his success, it's just not there yet.

古文：以言乎用兵，则十出而九败；以言乎府库，则仅足而无余。
现代文：说到用兵，那么十次出征九次失败；说到国库，那么仅仅满足需要而没有剩余。
English: When it comes to the use of soldiers, nine out of ten military expeditions fail; when it comes to the national treasury, there is only enough to meet the needs and no surplus.

古文：徒以德泽在人，风俗知义，故升遐之日，天下归仁焉。
现代文：仅仅因为恩泽存在百姓之中，民间风俗懂得大义，因此仁宗皇帝升天之日，天下归于仁。
English: Just because benevolence exists among the people, and folk customs understand the Great Righteousness, therefore, on the day of Emperor Nizong's ascension to heaven, the whole world belongs to Nizong.

古文：议者见其末年吏多因循，事不振举，乃欲矫之以苛察，齐之以智能，招来新进勇锐之人，以图一切速成之效。
现代文：议论的人见仁宗皇帝晚年官吏大多因循守旧，政事没有什么起色，就想以苛细急察的办法加以矫正，用智谋和才能加以划一，招来新提拔的人勇于急进的人，以求取得一切速成的效果。
English: Observing that most of the officials in Emperor Renzong's later years were old-fashioned and old-fashioned, and that there was no improvement in political affairs, the commentators wanted to correct them by means of strict and urgent inspection, to unify them by means of wisdom and talent, and to recruit newly promoted people who were brave enough to make rapid progress, in order to achieve all the quick results.

古文：未享其利，浇风已成。
现代文：还没有享受到它的好处，浮薄的风气已经形成。
English: They have not yet enjoyed its benefits, and a frivolous culture has formed.

古文：多开骤进之门，使有意外之得，公卿侍从跬步可图，俾常调之人举生非望，欲望风俗之厚，岂可得哉？
现代文：多开迅速提拔官员的门径，假使有意外收获，一步就可得到公卿侍从这样的官职，使得按常规升迁的人也产生非份之想，想到期望风俗敦厚，哪里可能得到呢？
English: More avenues have been opened for the rapid promotion of officials. Assuming there is a windfall, one step can get a court noble attendant of such an official post, so that people who are promoted according to the usual procedures also have a non-partial thought, think of expectations and customs, where is it possible to get it?

古文：近岁朴拙之人愈少，巧进之士益多。
现代文：近年直率纯厚的人越来越少，投机取巧得到提拔的人越来越多。
English: In recent years, there have been fewer and fewer people who are straightforward and pure, and more and more people who are opportunistic and clever have been promoted.

古文：惟陛下哀之救之，以简易为法，以清净为心，而民德归厚。
现代文：只有陛下痛惜这种状况挽救这种风气，以简单易便为立法的标准，以清静作为思想的出发点，百姓的道德就会归向敦厚了。
English: Only if His Majesty deplores this state of affairs, rescues this culture, takes simplicity and convenience as the standard for legislation, and takes tranquility as the starting point of thought, will the morality of the people return to being strong.

古文：臣之所愿陛下厚风俗者，此也。
现代文：我之所以希望陛下敦厚风俗，原因就在于此。
English: That's why I'd like His Majesty to break with custom.

古文：祖宗委任台谏，未尝罪一言者。纵有薄责，旋即超升，许以风闻，而无官长。
现代文： 祖宗委任台谏官，不曾处罚过一位进谏的人，即便有轻微责罚，不久就越级提升，允许台官根据传闻弹劾，而御史台和谏院都不设第一把手。
English: The ancestor appointed the Taiwan eunuch, never punished a person who entered the eunuch, even if there is a slight punishment, it will soon be promoted to the next level, allowing the Taiwan official to impeach according to rumors, and neither the imperial history nor the imperial court has the first commander.

古文：言及乘舆，则天子改容；事关廊庙，则宰相待罪。
现代文：进谏时说到皇帝，那么天子改变仪容；弹劾之事牵涉到朝廷，那么宰相暂离相位等待调查。
English: If the emperor is mentioned at the time of investiture, then the emperor changes his appearance; if the impeachment involves the imperial court, then the prime minister temporarily leaves the phase to await the investigation.

古文：台谏固未必皆贤，所言亦未必皆是。
现代文：台谏官固然未必个个是贤人，所说的也未必都是正确的。
English: Of course, not all Taiwanese eunuchs are necessarily wise, and not everything they say is necessarily correct.

古文：然须养其锐气，而借之重权者，岂徒然哉？
现代文：然而必须培养他们的锐气，借用他们来使掌权者感到压力沉重，这是空话吗？
English: But is it not true that they must be sharpened, that they must be used to bring pressure to bear on those in power?

古文：将以折奸臣之萌也。
现代文：将用他们摧折奸臣的萌芽。
English: They will be used to crush the buds of traitors.

古文：今法令严密，朝廷清明，所谓奸臣，万无此理。
现代文：现在法令严密，朝廷清明，所谓的奸臣，万万没有存在的道理。
English: Now the laws are strict, the imperial court is clear, and the so-called treacherous vassals have no reason to exist.

古文：然养猫以去鼠，不可以无鼠而养不捕之猫；畜狗以防盗，不可以无盗而畜不吠之狗。
现代文：然而养猫是为了捕捉老鼠，不能因为没有老鼠而养不捕捉老鼠的猫；养狗是为了防盗，不能因为没有盗贼而养不叫的狗。
English: However, a cat is kept to catch mice, and a cat that does not catch mice cannot be kept because there are no mice; a dog is kept to prevent theft, and a dog that does not bark cannot be kept because there are no thieves.

古文：陛下得不上念祖宗设此官之意，下为子孙万世之防？
现代文：陛下怎能不上念祖宗设立此官职的用意，下为子孙后代作好永久的防备？
English: How can His Majesty not remember the intention of his ancestors to establish this post, and make permanent preparations for future generations?

古文：臣闻长老之谈，皆谓台谏所言，常随天下公议。
现代文：我听到老年人的谈话，都说台谏官所讲的，常常是随着天下公论。
English: I have heard elderly people say that what Taiwan's eunuchs say is often in line with public opinion.

古文：公议所与，台谏亦与之；公议所击，台谏亦击之。
现代文：公论所赞许的，台谏官也赞许；公议所抨击的，台谏官也抨击。
English: What the public opinion approves, the Taiwan eunuchs also approve; what the public opinion criticizes, the Taiwan eunuchs also criticize.

古文：今者物论沸腾，怨讟交至，公议所在，亦知之矣。
现代文：现在舆论沸腾，怨恨毁谤交替而来，公议所在之处，也可知道了。
English: Now public opinion is boiling, resentment and slander are alternating, and we can see where the public discussion is taking place.

古文：臣恐自兹以往，习惯成风，尽为执政私人，以致人主孤立，纪纲一废，何事不生！
现代文：我恐怕从今以后，习惯成风气，台谏官都成为执政大臣的私人工具，以致皇帝孤立，纪纲一旦坏乱，什么事情不会发生？
English: I am afraid that from now on, the custom will become a tradition, and the eunuchs will become the private tools of the ruling ministers, so that the emperor is isolated, and once the discipline is out of order, what will happen?

古文：臣之所愿陛下存纪纲者，此也。
现代文：我之所以希望陛下保存纪纲法度，原因也正在于此。 
English: This is precisely the reason why I would like His Majesty to preserve the Code of Discipline.

古文：轼见安石赞神宗以独断专任，因试进士发策，以 晋武平吴以独断而克，苻坚伐晋以独断而亡，齐恒专任管仲而霸，燕哙专任子之而败，事同而功异 为问，安石滋怒，使御史谢景温论奏其过，穷治无所得，轼遂请外，通判杭州。
现代文：苏轼见王安石力赞神宗独断专行和专用大臣，因此在考试进士策论出题时，用 晋武帝平定东吴因为独自决断而成功，苻坚伐晋因为独自决断而亡国，齐桓公专意任用管仲而称霸，燕哙专用子之而失败，事情相同而结果不同 作为问题，王安石更加恼怒，让御史谢景温弹劾苏轼的过失，但一再追究一无所得，苏轼于是请求出任地方官，任杭州通判。
English: Su Qian saw Wang Anshi praising Shenzong's arbitrary and exclusive minister. Therefore, when the question of the examination was put forward, he used "Jinwu Emperor succeeded in pacifying the Eastern Wu because of his independent decision-making, Zou Jianwu defeated the country because of his independent decision-making, Qi Huan Gong exclusively appointed Guanzhong to dominate, Yan Xuan's exclusive son failed, the same thing but the result was different." As a problem, Wang Anshi was even more angry. He let Gu Shi Xie Jingwen impeach Su Qian's fault, but repeatedly pursued nothing. Su Qian then requested to be appointed as a local official

古文：高丽入贡，使者发币于官吏，书称甲子。
现代文：高丽来朝进贡，使者赠送礼物给官吏们，书写时用干支纪年。
English: Koryo came to pay tribute to the emperor, the envoy presented gifts to officials, and used the Chinese zodiac to write.

古文：轼却之曰： 高丽于本朝称臣，而不禀正朔，吾安敢受！ 使者易书称熙宁，然后受之。
现代文：苏轼拒绝接受礼物说 ：高丽对本朝称臣，但不接受本朝颁布的年号历法，我怎么敢接受他们的礼物！ 使者改写为熙宁年号，然后苏轼才接受了礼物。
English: Su Shi refused to accept the gift, saying: Goryeo is a loyal subject of this dynasty, but it does not accept the year calendar issued by this dynasty, how dare I accept their gift! The messenger was rewritten as the Xining year, and then Su Shi accepted the gift.

古文：时新政日下，轼于其间，每因法以便民，民赖以安。
现代文：当时新政天天下达，苏轼在这中间，每每借行新法之际方便百姓，百姓赖之以得到安定。
English: At that time, the New Deal was spreading all over the world, and Su Shi, in the midst of this, made it convenient for the people to borrow the new law every time, and the people relied on it to get stability.

古文：徙知密州。
现代文：调任密州知州。
English: He was transferred to Mishu Chishu.

古文：司农行手实法，不时施行者以违制论。
现代文：司农寺推行手实法，不按时实行的官吏以违反法令论处。
English: Shennongji implemented the hand-to-hand method, and officials who did not implement it on time were punished for violating the law.

古文：轼谓提举官曰： 违制之坐，若自朝廷，谁敢不从？
现代文：苏轼对提举官说 ：违反法令的罪名，如果出自朝廷，谁敢不遵从？
English: Su Shi said to the nominating officer: If the charge of violating the law comes from the imperial court, who would dare to disobey?

古文：今出于司农，是擅造律也。 提举官惊曰： 公姑徐之。 未几，朝廷知法害民，罢之。
现代文：现在出于司农寺，这是擅自制造法律。 提举官惊慌地说 ：您暂且慢慢施行。 不久朝廷知道手实法危害百姓，废除了它。
English: It is now out of Sionnji that this is a law made without authorization. The nominating official said in alarm: You should implement it slowly for the time being. Soon, the imperial court knew that the Handshake Law harmed the people and abolished it.

古文：有盗窃发，安抚司遣三班使臣领悍卒来捕，卒凶暴恣行，至以禁物诬民，入其家争斗杀人，且畏罪惊溃，将为乱。
现代文：有盗贼案发生，安抚司派三班使臣率领强悍兵士前来搜捕，兵士凶暴放纵行事，甚至用藏有违禁物品来诬陷百姓，进入百姓家中争斗杀人，又畏罪惊慌溃散，将要作乱。
English: A case of theft occurred, and the Pacifying Division sent three groups of envoys led by strong soldiers to search and arrest. The soldiers acted violently and indulgently, and even used the possession of prohibited items to frame the people, entered the people's homes to fight and kill, and were afraid of crime, panicked and dispersed, and were going to make trouble.

古文：民奔诉轼，轼投其书不视，曰： 必不至此。 散卒闻之，少安，徐使人招出戮之。
现代文：百姓急忙跑去告诉苏轼，苏轼扔掉百姓的投诉书不看，说： 一定不会到这样的地步。 溃散的兵士听说此事后，稍稍安定，苏轼慢慢派人查出肇事的兵士杀了。
English: The people hurriedly ran to tell Su Shi that Su Shi had thrown away the people's complaint form without reading it, saying, "It will definitely not get to this point." After the soldiers heard about this, the situation calmed down a little, and Su Shi slowly sent someone to find out and kill the soldiers who had caused the accident.

古文：徙知徐州。
现代文：调任徐州知州。
English: He was transferred to Xuzhou Chizhou.

古文：河决曹村，泛于梁山泊，溢于南清河，汇于城下，涨不时泄，城将败，富民争出避水。轼曰： 富民出，民皆动摇，吾谁与守？
现代文：黄河在曹村决口，使梁山泊泛滥，南清河水溢出故道，洪水汇聚在徐州城下，暴涨的洪水不时泄出，城墙即将被洪水冲毁，富有的百姓争相出城躲避洪水，苏轼说： 富民出城，全城百姓都会动摇，我和谁来守城？
English: The Yellow River broke through Cao Cun, flooding Liang Shan Po, and the Nanqing River overflowed its old course. Floods converged under the Xuzhou city. The surging floodwaters leaked from time to time. The city wall was about to be washed away by the flood. The rich people rushed out of the city to avoid the flood. Su Wei said: If the rich people leave the city, the whole city people will be shaken. Who will protect the city with me?

古文：吾在是，水决不能败城。 驱使复入。
现代文：我在这里，洪水决不能冲毁城墙。 驱使富民重新回到城里。
English: I am here, and the flood will not break the walls of the city, forcing the rich people back into the city.

古文：轼诣武卫营，呼卒长曰： 河将害城，事急矣，虽禁军且为我尽力。 卒长曰： 太守犹不避涂潦，吾侪小人，当效命。 率其徒持畚锸以出，筑东南长堤，首起戏马台，尾属于城。
现代文：苏轼到武卫营，呼喊士兵长官说 ：河水即将冲毁城墙，事情危急，虽然你们是禁军，但也请你们为我尽一点力。 士兵长官说 ：太守尚且不躲避路上的洪水，我辈小人，应当效命。 带领他的士兵们拿着畚箕铁锹出来，修筑东南长堤，头起戏马台，尾连着城墙。
English: Su Xuan went to Wuwei Camp and shouted to the commander of the soldiers, saying, "The river is about to wash away the city wall, the situation is critical, although you are forbidden soldiers, I also ask you to do something for me." The commander of the soldiers said, "The governor is still not avoiding the flood on the road, we are villains, we should serve our lives." He led his soldiers out with a pick-axe and built a southeastern long embankment, with a horse-drawn carriage at the head and a city wall at the tail.

古文：雨日夜不止，城不沈者三版。
现代文：雨日夜不停地下，城墙露出水面仅仅只有三版那么高。
English: It rained day and night, and the city wall was only three stories high when it was exposed to the water.

古文：轼庐于其上，过家不入，使官吏分堵以守，卒全其城。
现代文：苏轼搭建小草屋住在城墙上，路过自己家门也不进去，派官吏分别堵塞缺口以守护城墙，终于保全了徐州城。
English: Su Shi built a small grass hut and lived on the city wall. He did not enter his own house when he passed by. He sent officials to block the gaps to guard the city wall, and finally preserved Xuzhou City.

古文：复请调来岁夫增筑故城，为木岸，以虞水之再至。
现代文：又请求征调明年夫役增筑徐州旧城，修建木质护岸，以防洪水再来。
English: He also asked for more manpower to build the old city of Xuzhou next year and build a wooden seawall to prevent floods from happening again.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：朝廷同意了他的请求。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：徙知湖州，上表以谢。
现代文：调任湖州知州，苏轼上表感谢。
English: After being transferred to Huzhou and Chizhou, Su Yao thanked the table above.

古文：又以事不便民者不敢言，以诗托讽，庶有补于国。
现代文：又因为一些事不方便百姓但又不敢说，他写诗寄托讽喻，希望对国家有所补益。
English: And because some things are inconvenient for the people but dare not say, he wrote poems and sent irony, hoping to benefit the country.

古文：御史李定、舒亶、何正臣摭其表语，并媒蘖所为诗以为讪谤，逮赴台狱，欲置之死，锻炼久之不决。
现代文：御史李定、舒、何正臣摘录苏轼谢表上的话，并且诬陷苏轼所写的诗是毁谤朝廷，逮捕苏轼押送京城投入御史台监狱，想置他于死地，罗织罪名很长时间却一直不能决断。
English: Imperial Historians Li Ding, Shu, and He Zhengchen excerpted the words on Su Shi's thank-you list, and framed Su Shi's poem for defaming the imperial court. They arrested Su Shi and sent him to the capital to be put in the Imperial History Prison. They wanted to put him to death, but they could not decide the crime for a long time.

古文：神宗独怜之，以黄州团练副使安置。
现代文：惟独神宗怜惜苏轼，用黄州团练副使安置了他。
English: However, Shenzong took pity on Su Shi and appointed him as the deputy envoy of Huangzhou Reunification.

古文：轼与田父野老，相从溪山间，筑室于东坡，自号 东坡居士。 
现代文：苏轼和乡里父老结伴于山水之间，他在东坡修筑房屋，自号 东坡居士 。
English: Su Yao and his fellow villagers accompanied him between the mountains and rivers. He built houses in Dongpo and called himself Dongpo Householder.

古文：三年，神宗数有意复用，辄为当路者沮之。
现代文：元丰三年，神宗几度有意再次起用苏轼，但被当政的大臣阻止了。
English: In the third year of Yuanfeng, Shenzong several times intended to use Su Shi again, but was stopped by the minister in power.

古文：神宗尝语宰相王珪、蔡确曰： 国史至重，可命苏轼成之。 珪有难色。
现代文：神宗曾对宰相王王圭、蔡确说： 国史至关重要，可以命苏轼撰成国史。 王王圭面有难色。
English: Shenzong once said to the prime ministers Wang Wang Gui and Cai Ji: National history is very important, you can order Su Shi to compile a national history.

古文：神宗曰： 轼不可，姑用曾巩。 巩进《太祖总论》，神宗意不允，遂手紥移轼汝州，有曰： 苏轼黜居思咎，阅岁滋深，人材实难，不忍终弃。 轼未至汝，上书自言饥寒，有田在常，愿得居之。
现代文：神宗说： 苏轼不可用，姑且用曾巩。 曾巩进上《太祖总论》，神宗意思不满意，于是亲自写信把苏轼调到汝州，其中这样说 ：苏轼贬谪居住期间反思自己的错误，经过一年更加深刻，人材确实难得，不忍心一直弃而不用。 苏轼还没有到达汝州时，上书说自己饥寒贫穷，在常州有田地，希望能到常州居住。
English: Shenzong said: Su Shi cannot be used, let alone Zeng Gong. Zeng Gongjin was not satisfied with the "General Theory of the Great Ancestors," so Shenzong personally wrote a letter to transfer Su Shi to Ruzhou, in which he said: Su Shi has reflected on his mistakes during his residence, and after a year has become more profound, talent is really rare, and he cannot bear to abandon it and not use it. When Su Shi had not yet arrived in Ruzhou, the letter said that he was hungry, cold and poor, had fields in Changzhou, and hoped to live in Changzhou.

古文：朝奏入，夕报可。
现代文：早晨上奏，傍晚皇帝就答复同意了。
English: In the morning it was played, and in the evening the emperor agreed to the reply.

古文：道过金陵，见王安石，曰： 大兵大狱，汉、唐灭亡之兆。
现代文：路过金陵，见到王安石，苏轼说 ：兴大兵起大狱，是汉、唐灭亡的征兆。
English: Passing through Jinling and seeing Wang Anshi, Su Wei said, "When the soldiers of the Xing Dynasty went to prison, it was a sign of the downfall of the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty.

古文：祖宗以仁厚治天下，正欲革此。
现代文：祖宗以仁厚治理天下，正是想革除它。
English: Our ancestors, who governed the world with benevolence, wanted to get rid of it.

古文：今西方用兵，连年不解，东南数起大狱，公独无一言以救之乎？ 安石曰： 二事皆惠卿启之，安石在外，安敢言？ 轼曰： 在朝则言，在外则不言，事君之常礼耳。
现代文：现在西方打仗，连年不得解除，东南几次兴起大狱，您独不能说句话来制止它吗？ 王安石说： 这两件事都是吕惠卿挑起的，我在朝廷外面，怎么敢说话？ 苏轼说： 在朝廷就说，在朝廷外就不说，这是侍奉皇帝的常礼。
English: Now the West is at war, which cannot be ended for years on end, and several times a great inferno has arisen in Southeast Asia, can't you just say something to stop it? Wang Anshi said: These two things were provoked by Lü Huiqing, how dare I speak outside the court? Su Shi said: Speak in the court, don't speak outside the court, this is the common courtesy of serving the emperor.

古文：上所以待公者，非常礼，公所以待上者，岂可以常礼乎？ 安石厉声曰： 安石须说。 又曰： 出在安石口，入在子瞻耳。 又曰： 人须是知行一不义，杀一不辜，得天下弗为，乃可。 轼戏曰： 今之君子，争减半年磨勘，虽杀人亦为之。 安石笑而不言。
现代文：皇帝对待您的不是常礼，您对待皇上，怎么可以用常礼呢？ 王安石大声说： 我王安石要说话的。 又说 ：话出自我王安石之口，进入你苏子瞻的耳朵。 又说 ：一个人要知道做一件不义的事，杀一个无辜的人，虽能得到天下也不去做，这才可以。 苏轼开玩笑说： 现在的君子，争着要减半年磨勘，虽去杀人也会干的。 王安石笑而不答。
English: The emperor's treatment of you is not common courtesy, how can you treat the emperor with common courtesy? Wang Anshi said in a loud voice: My Wang Anshi wants to speak. He also said: Words come out of my Wang Anshi's mouth and enter your Su Zizan's ears. He also said: A person must know that to do an unjust thing, to kill an innocent person, even if he can gain the whole world, he should not do it. Su Yao joked: Today's gentleman, fighting to reduce half a year's wear and tear, will do it even if he has to kill. Wang Anshi laughed and did not answer.

古文：至常，神宗崩，哲宗立，复朝奉郎、知登州，召为礼部郎中。
现代文：苏轼到常州时，神宗去世，哲宗即位当皇帝，恢复苏轼为朝奉郎、登州知州，召入朝廷任礼部郎中。
English: When Su Shi arrived in Changzhou, Shenzong died, and Tetsuzong ascended to the throne as emperor. Su Shi was reinstated as a court official, and was summoned to the imperial court to serve as a member of the ceremonial staff.

古文：轼旧善司马光、章惇。
现代文：苏轼过去与司马光、章友好。
English: Su Yao was friendly with Sima Guang and Zhang in the past.

古文：时光为门下侍郎，惇知枢密院，二人不相合，惇每以谑侮困光，光苦之。
现代文：当时司马光任门下侍郎，章知枢密院，二人意见不合，章经常开玩笑侮辱围困司马光，司马光对此很苦恼。
English: At that time, Sima Guang served as a subordinate attendant, Zhang Zhiguo of the Privy Council, the two disagreed, Zhang often joked and insulted the besieged Sima Guang, Sima Guang was very distressed about this.

古文：轼谓惇曰： 司马君实时望甚重。
现代文：苏轼对章说 ：司马君实现在声望很高。
English: Su Wei said to Zhang: Sima Junshi has a high reputation now.

古文：昔许靖以虚名无实，见鄙于蜀先主，法正曰： 靖之浮誉，播流四海，若不加礼，必以贱贤为累 。
现代文：以前许靖因为只有虚名而没有实际才能，为蜀先主鄙视，法正说 ：许靖虚假的名声，在四海流传，如果对他不加礼遇，必然会被认为轻视贤人而受到损害。 
English: Formerly, Xu Jing was despised as the ancestor of Shu because he only had a false name and no real talent. Fa Zheng said: Xu Jing's false reputation has been spread all over the world. If you do not treat him with courtesy, you will inevitably be considered to despise the wise man and suffer damage.

古文：先主纳之，乃以靖为司徒。
现代文：先主采纳了他的意见，就让许靖担任司徒。
English: The patriarch accepted his opinion and allowed Xu Jing to serve as a tutor.

古文：许靖且不可慢，况君实乎？ 惇以为然，光赖以少安。
现代文：许靖尚且不可轻慢，何况是君实呢。 章认为苏轼说得对，司马光借此得以稍稍安定。
English: Xu Jing is still not to be despised, let alone Junshi. Zhang believes that Su Shi is right, and Sima Guang has been able to stabilize a little.

古文：迁起居舍人。
现代文：升任起居舍人。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of chief householder.

古文：轼起于忧患，不欲骤履要地，辞于宰相蔡确。
现代文：苏轼起自忧患之中，不想立即进入要害部门，他向宰相蔡确要求辞去这一职务。
English: In the midst of his sorrow, Su Xiqi did not want to immediately enter the key department, and he asked Prime Minister Cai Ji to resign from this position.

古文：确曰： 公徊翔久矣，朝中无出公右者。 轼曰： 昔林希同在馆中，年且长。 确曰： 希固当先公耶？ 卒不许。
现代文：蔡确说 ：您在仕途盘旋已经很久了，朝廷中没有人能超过您。 苏轼说 ：以前林希与我同在馆阁中，而且他年纪比我大。 蔡确说： 林希果真应当比你先提拔吗？ 
English: Cai Ji said, "You have been circling your career path for a long time, and no one in the imperial court can surpass you." Su Shi said, "Previously, Lin Xi was with me in the cabinet, and he was older than me." Cai Ji said, "Should Lin Xi Guo really be promoted ahead of you?"

古文：元祐元年，轼以七品服入侍延和，即赐银绯，迁中书舍人。
现代文：最终还是不同意。元元年，苏轼穿戴七品官服入延和殿侍奉皇帝，哲宗立即赐给苏轼用银装饰的红色六品官服，升为中书舍人。
English: Ultimately, they still disagreed. In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Su Shi wore a seven-piece official uniform to enter the Yanhe Hall to serve the emperor. Zhe Zong immediately gave Su Shi a red six-piece official uniform decorated with silver, and promoted him to the position of middle school teacher.

古文：初，祖宗时，差役行久生弊，编户充役者不习其役，又虐使之，多致破产，狭乡民至有终岁不得息者。
现代文：起初，祖宗时，差役法实行的时间长了产生弊病，百姓中服役的人却不习惯所服的差役，官府又残暴地役使他们，导致多数人破产，地多人少的地方有人终年得不到休息。
English: At the beginning, during the Ancestor's time, the length of time for which the Quartering Law was enforced was too long, resulting in illnesses. People who served in the civil service were not accustomed to the quartering service they had to perform, and the government also forced them to serve brutally, leading to the bankruptcy of most people, and some people in many places did not get a break all year round.

古文：王安石相神宗，改为免役，使户差高下出钱雇役，行法者过取，以为民病。
现代文：王安石在神宗朝任宰相时，把差役法改为免役法，根据户等的高低让他们出钱雇人服役，执行免役法的官吏向百姓索取超过规定的钱财，因此免役法成了百姓的祸患。
English: When Wang Anshi was appointed prime minister of the Shensong Dynasty, he changed the law of punishment to the law of exemption. According to the level of households, they were allowed to pay money to hire people to serve. The officials who implemented the exemption law asked the people for more money than the prescribed amount. Therefore, the exemption law became a scourge to the people.

古文：司马光为相，知免役之害，不知其利，欲复差役，差官置局，轼与其选。
现代文：司马光任宰相，知道免役法的危害，而不知它有利的一面，打算恢复差役法，选派官吏和设置机构，苏轼被选中。
English: Sima Guang, who was appointed as the prime minister, knew the harm of the exemption law, but did not know its beneficial side. He planned to restore the service law, select officials and set up institutions. Su Yao was selected.

古文：轼曰： 差役、免役，各有利害。
现代文：苏轼说： 差役法、免役法，各有利弊。
English: Su Shi said, "The punishment method and the exemption method have their own advantages and disadvantages.

古文：免役之害，掊敛民财，十室九空，敛聚于上而下有钱荒之患。
现代文：免役法的害处，在于聚敛民财，百姓十室九空。聚敛于上而下面却有钱荒之害。
English: The harm of the exemption law lies in the accumulation of people's wealth, the people have ten rooms and nine skies.

古文：差役之害，民常在官，不得专力于农，而贪吏猾胥得缘为奸。
现代文：差役法的害处，在于百姓常在为官府服役，不能集中力量务农，而贪官污吏得以乘机敲榨勒索。
English: The drawback of the compulsory service law is that the people are often in the service of the government, unable to concentrate on farming, while corrupt officials can take advantage of the opportunity to extort money.

古文：此二害轻重，盖略等矣。 光曰： 于君何如？ 轼曰： 法相因则事易成，事有渐则民不惊。
现代文：这二者危害的轻重程度，大致相等。 
English: The severity of the harm of the two is roughly equal.

古文：三代之法，兵农为一，至秦始分为二，及唐中叶，尽变府兵为长征之卒。
现代文：司马光说 ：你说怎么办呢？ 苏轼说 ：法令制度连续相承事情就容易成功，事情渐渐变化百姓就不会惊慌。
English: Sima Guang said: What do you say? Su Wei said: The legal system is continuous, things are easy to succeed, things gradually change, people will not panic.

古文：自尔以来，民不知兵，兵不知农，农出谷帛以养兵，兵出性命以卫农，天下便之。
现代文：三代的制度，兵农合一，到秦朝才分为二，等到唐朝中叶，把府兵全部改变为长征健儿，自从那时以来，百姓不知道当兵，当兵的也不知道务农，农民出粮食布帛养活军队，军队出性命保卫农民，天下都感到方便。
English: The three-generation system, soldiers and peasants united, was divided into two only in the Qin Dynasty, and it was not until the middle of the Tang Dynasty that all the provincial soldiers were changed into Long March soldiers. Since then, the people do not know how to be soldiers, and soldiers do not know how to do farming. Farmers provide grain cloth to feed the army, and the army protects the farmers with their lives. The whole world feels convenient.

古文：虽圣人复起，不能易也。
现代文：即使圣人再出现，也不能改变这种情况。
English: Even the reappearance of a saint would not change the situation.

古文：今免役之法，实大类此。
现代文：现在的免役法，实际上大致和这一样。
English: The current exemption law, in fact, is roughly the same.

古文：公欲骤罢免役而行差役，正如罢长征而复民兵，盖未易也。 光不以为然。
现代文：您想立即废除免役法而实行差役法，正好像废除了长征健儿而恢复府兵，不容易吧？ 司马光听了不以为然。
English: You want to immediately abolish the exemption from military service law and implement the compulsory military service law, just like abolishing the Long March and reinstating the national guard, isn't it easy? Sima Guang was not impressed.

古文：轼又陈于政事堂，光忿然。
现代文：苏轼又到政事堂陈述自己的意见，司马光很不高兴。
English: Su Yao went to the State Council again to present his views, which made Sima Guang very unhappy.

古文：轼曰： 昔韩魏公刺陕西义勇，公为谏官，争之甚力，韩公不乐，公亦不顾。
现代文：苏轼说 ：过去韩魏公在陕西招纳义勇，您任谏官，为此事争辩得十分激烈，韩公不高兴，您也不顾。
English: Su Wei said: In the past, Han Wei Gong recruited volunteers in Shaanxi, and you served as a eunuch. You argued very fiercely about this matter. Han Gong was not happy, and you did not care.

古文：轼昔闻公道其详，岂今日作相，不许轼尽言耶？ 光笑之。
现代文：我过去听您讲这事的详细情况，难道您今天做了宰相，就不允许我讲完自己的意见吗？ 司马光笑笑。
English: I used to listen to you talk about the details of this matter, but since you became prime minister today, won't you allow me to finish my opinion? Sima Guang smiled.

古文：寻除翰林学士。
现代文：不久苏轼被任命为翰林学士。
English: Soon after, Su Shi was appointed as a Hanlin Scholar.

古文：二年，兼侍读。
现代文：元二年，苏轼兼任侍读。
English: In 1902, Su Shi also served as a reading room attendant.

古文：每进读至治乱兴衰、邪正得失之际，未尝不反覆开导，觊有所启悟。
现代文：每当给皇帝读书读到治乱兴衰、邪正得失的时候，无不反复开导皇帝，希望对皇帝有所启发醒悟。
English: Whenever he read to the emperor about the ups and downs of governing chaos and the gains and losses of evil and righteousness, he would repeatedly enlighten the emperor, hoping to enlighten the emperor.

古文：哲宗虽恭默不言，辄首肯之。
现代文：哲宗虽然恭敬而沉默不语，但总是点头肯定。
English: Although Tetsuzo is respectful and silent, he always nods affirmatively.

古文：尝读祖宗《宝训》，因及时事，轼历言： 今赏罚不明，善恶无所劝沮；又黄河势方北流，而强之使东；夏人入镇戎，杀掠数万人，帅臣不以闻。每事如此，恐浸成衰乱之渐。 轼尝锁宿禁中，召入对便殿，宣仁后问曰： 卿前年为何官？ 曰： 臣为常州团练副使。 。曰： 今为何官？ 曰： 臣今待罪翰林学士。 曰： 何以遽至此？ 曰： 遭遇太皇太后、皇帝陛下。 曰： 非也。 曰： 岂大臣论荐乎？ 曰： 亦非也。 轼惊曰： 臣虽无状，不敢自他途以进。 曰： 此先帝意也。
现代文：苏轼吃惊地说 ：我虽然不肖，但也不敢通过其他途径来得到提升。 宣仁太后说 ：这是先帝的意思。
English: Suruga was surprised and said, "Although I'm not handsome, I don't dare to be promoted by any other means."Empress Dowager Xuanren said, "This is what the former emperor meant."

古文：先帝每诵卿文章，必叹曰： 奇才，奇才！ 
现代文：先帝每次诵读你的文章，一定感叹地说： 奇才，奇才！ 
English: Every time the late emperor read your articles, he would exclaim: "Wonderful talent, wonderful talent!"

古文：但未及进用卿耳。 轼不觉哭失声，宣仁后与哲宗亦泣，左右皆感涕。
现代文：只是没来得及提拔任用你罢了。 苏轼不觉痛哭失声，宣仁太后与哲宗也哭泣，左右侍从也感动得泪下涕流。
English: It's just that I didn't have time to promote and appoint you. Su Shi suddenly lost her voice in tears, Empress Dowager Xuanren and Zhe Zong also cried, and the attendants on both sides were moved to tears.

古文：已而命坐赐茶，彻御前金莲烛送归院。
现代文：过了一会儿让苏轼坐下喝茶，撤下皇帝御前的金莲烛送苏轼回到学士院。
English: After a while, he asked Su Shi to sit down and drink tea, removed the golden lotus candle in front of the emperor and sent Su Shi back to the Academy.

古文：三年，权知礼部贡举。
现代文：元三年，苏轼权知礼部贡举。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, the tribute was raised by the Su Shi Quan Zhili Department.

古文：会大雪苦寒，士坐庭中，噤未能言。
现代文：适逢大雪纷飞十分寒冷，参加贡举考试的士人坐在庭院中，噤冷得说不出话。
English: The heavy snowfall coincided with very cold weather, and the scholars who participated in the tribute examination sat in the courtyard, so cold that they could not speak.

古文：轼宽其禁约，使得尽技。
现代文：苏轼放宽对他们的禁约，使他们得以施展自己的全部才能。
English: Su Shi relaxed the ban on them, allowing them to use all their talents.

古文：巡铺内侍每摧辱举子，且持暧昧单词，诬以为罪，轼尽奏逐之。
现代文：巡铺内侍每每折辱应试的举人，并且拿举子文章中意思暧昧的单词，诬陷为罪状，苏轼全部上奏朝廷赶走了他们。
English: The innkeeper of the pawnshop humiliated the exam-takers at every turn, and took the ambiguous words in the essay as a crime, all of which were reported to the court and they were driven away.

古文：四年，积以论事，为当轴者所恨。
现代文：元四年，因为积久评论政事，苏轼为当权大臣所恼恨。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Su Shi was resented by the minister in power because he had been commenting on politics for a long time.

古文：轼恐不见容，请外，拜龙图阁学士、知杭州。
现代文：苏轼担心不被大臣宽容，请求出任地方官，任龙图阁学士，知杭州。
English: Su Wei was worried that he would not be tolerated by the minister, and asked to be appointed as a local official, Ren Longtuge Bachelor, Zhou Hangzhou.

古文：未行，谏官言前相蔡确知安州，作诗借郝处俊事以讥太皇太后。
现代文：还没走，谏官说前任宰相蔡确知安州时，写诗借郝处俊事来讥讽太皇太后。
English: Before he left, the eunuch said that when the former prime minister Cai Jizhong visited Anzhou, he wrote a poem to ridicule the empress dowager.

古文：大臣议迁之岭南。
现代文：大臣们讨论把蔡确迁到岭南。
English: Ministers discuss moving Cai Jizhen to Lingnan.

古文：轼密疏： 朝廷若薄确之罪，则于皇帝孝治为不足；若深罪确，则于太皇太后仁政为小累。
现代文：苏轼秘密上疏说 ：朝廷如果从轻处罚蔡确的罪行，那么对皇帝以孝治国来说是不够的；如果从重处罚蔡确的罪行，那么对于太皇太后的仁政不免有些损害。
English: Su Shi secretly said: If the imperial court lightly punishes Cai Jichang's crime, it will not be enough for the emperor to rule the country with filial piety; if it severely punishes Cai Jichang's crime, it will inevitably cause some damage to the benevolent politics of the great empress dowager.

古文：谓宜皇帝敕置狱逮治，太皇太后出手诏赦之，则于仁孝两得矣。 宣仁后心善轼言而不能用。
现代文：我认为应该是皇帝降旨设置诏狱逮捕蔡确治罪，然后太皇太后出示亲笔诏令赦免他，那么仁孝两个方面都照顾到了。 宣仁太后内心赞同苏轼建议却不能采纳。
English: In my opinion, the emperor should have issued an imperial edict to imprison and arrest Cai Jizhen to punish him, and then the empress dowager should have issued an imperial edict to pardon him, then both aspects of benevolence and filial piety would have been taken care of.

古文：轼出郊，用前执政恩例，遣内侍赐龙茶、银合，慰劳甚厚。
现代文：苏轼到京城郊外，哲宗沿用前任执政大臣的恩例，派内侍赐给苏轼龙茶、银合，慰劳很优厚。
English: When Su Shi went to the outskirts of the capital, Tetsuzo followed the example of the previous ruling minister and sent a chambermaid to give Su Shi Long tea and silverware. The consolation was very generous.

古文：既至杭，大旱，饥疫并作。
现代文：不久苏轼到杭州，杭州大旱，饥馑瘟疫一起发生。
English: Soon after, Su Shi arrived in Hangzhou, and the great drought, famine and plague occurred in Hangzhou.

古文：轼请于朝，免本路上供米三之一，复得赐度僧牒，易米以救饥者。
现代文：苏轼向朝廷请求，减免本路上供米三分之一，又得到赐给剃度和尚的度牒，换成大米来救济饥饿的百姓。
English: Su Shi asked the imperial court for a reduction of one-third of the rice supplied on this road, and was given an ultimatum to exchange it for rice to relieve the starving people.

古文：明年春，又减价粜常平米，多作饘粥药剂，遣使挟医分坊治病，活者甚众。
现代文：第二年春天，又减价出卖常平米，做了很多的厚粥和汤药，派人带着医生分街坊给百姓治病，救活了很多人。
English: In the spring of the following year, he sold ordinary flat rice at a reduced price, made a lot of thick porridge and soup medicine, and sent people with doctors to treat people in different neighborhoods, saving many people.

古文：轼曰： 杭，水陆之会，疫死比他处常多。 乃裒羡缗得二千，复发橐中黄金五十两，以作病坊，稍畜钱粮待之。
现代文：苏轼说： 杭州，水陆交会的地方，因瘟疫死亡的人常常比其他地方多。 于是集中多余的公款二千缗，苏轼又拿出自己的黄金五十两，办起病坊，稍微积蓄一些钱粮收治有病的百姓。
English: Su Shi said: Hangzhou, the place of the Water and Land Fair, often has more people die from the plague than other places, so he concentrated the excess public funds of two thousand baht, Su Shi also took out his own gold fifty-two, set up a hospital, and slightly saved some money and grain to collect and treat sick people.

古文：杭本近海，地泉咸苦，居民稀少。
现代文：杭州本来靠近大海，地下的泉水又苦又咸，居民稀少。
English: Hangzhou used to be close to the sea. The underground spring water is bitter and salty, and there are few residents.

古文：唐刺史李泌始引西湖水作六井，民足于水。
现代文：唐代杭州刺史李泌首先引来西湖水修建六井，百姓饮用水充足了。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Li Xiu, the famous historian of Hangzhou, was the first to draw water from the West Lake to build six wells, and the people had plenty of drinking water.

古文：白居易又浚西湖水入漕河，自河入田，所溉至千顷，民以殷富。
现代文：白居易又疏浚西湖水引入运河，湖水自运河流入农田，所灌溉的农田达千顷，百姓因此殷富。
English: Bai Juyi also dredged the West Lake water and introduced it into the canal, and the lake water was transported by the river into the farmland. The irrigated farmland reached a thousand hectares, and the people became rich as a result.

古文：湖水多葑，自唐及钱氏，岁辄浚治，宋兴，废之，葑积为田，水无几矣。
现代文：西湖水中水草很多，自唐代到五代钱氏，年年都要疏浚治理，宋朝建立后，不再疏浚治理，水草淤积形成封田，湖水几乎没有了。
English: There are many aquatic plants in the water of West Lake. From the Tang Dynasty to the Five Dynasties of the Qian Dynasty, dredging was carried out every year. After the establishment of the Song Dynasty, dredging was no longer carried out, aquatic plants were silted up to form fenced fields, and there was almost no lake water left.

古文：漕河失利，取给江潮，舟行市中，潮又多淤，三年一淘，为民大患，六井亦几于废。
现代文：运河失去西湖水的补给，就从钱塘江的潮水中引水，船航行在城市中，湖水又挟带大量的泥沙淤积运河，每隔三年就得淘一次，成为百姓的一大灾害。六井也几乎被废坏了。
English: When the canal lost its supply of water from the West Lake, it diverted water from the tidal water of the Qiantang River. Ships sailed in the city, and the lake water brought a large amount of silt and silted up the canal. It had to be dredged once every three years, becoming a major disaster for the people. The six wells were also almost destroyed.

古文：轼见茅山一河专受江潮，盐桥一河专受湖水，遂浚二河以通漕。
现代文：苏轼看到茅山有一条河专门容纳钱塘江潮水，盐桥有一条河专门容纳西湖水，于是疏浚这二条河道以通航。
English: Su Wei saw that there was a river in Mao Shan that was specially designed to accommodate the tidal water of the Qiantang River, and a river in Yanqiao that was specially designed to accommodate the water of the West Lake, so he dredged these two rivers for navigation.

古文：复造堰闸，以为湖水畜泄之限，江潮不复入市。
现代文：再修造堤堰闸门，控制西湖水的蓄积与排泄，钱塘江潮水不再进入杭州城内。
English: Rebuild the dam gate, control the accumulation and discharge of West Lake water, and the Qiantang River tidal water will no longer enter the city of Hangzhou.

古文：以余力复完六井，又取葑田积湖中，南北径三十里，为长堤以通行者。
现代文：又用剩余的人力修复了六井，再把挖出来的淤泥堆积在西湖中，南北长三十里，修筑成长堤以来往行人。
English: They also used the remaining manpower to repair the six wells, and then piled up the excavated silt in the West Lake, which is 30 miles long from north to south. Since the construction of the growth embankment, pedestrians have come.

古文：吴人种菱，春辄芟除，不遣寸草。
现代文：吴地百姓种菱，春天就除草，不留寸草。
English: The people of Wudi grow rhizomes, and weed them in the spring, leaving no grass.

古文：且募人种菱湖中，葑不复生。
现代文：苏轼又雇募人力在西湖中种菱，水草不再生长。
English: Su Ying also hired manpower to plant lingonberries in the West Lake, but the aquatic plants no longer grew.

古文：收其利以备修湖，取救荒余钱万缗、粮万石，及请得百僧度牒以募役者。
现代文：把种菱的收入备作以后修浚西湖的费用，取救济荒灾剩余的一万缗钱、万石粮食；以及申请得到的一百张僧人度牒用来雇募民工。
English: The income from the cultivation of rhizomes will be used to prepare for the cost of dredging the West Lake in the future, and the remaining 10,000 baht and 10,000 koku of grain will be used for the relief of the disaster; and the one hundred monks' certificates applied for and obtained will be used to recruit migrant workers.

古文：堤成，植芙蓉、杨柳其上，望之如画图，杭人名为苏公堤。
现代文：长堤筑成，在堤上种植芙蓉、杨柳，望去好像图画，杭州人把长堤命名为苏公堤。
English: A long embankment was built, and hibiscus and willow trees were planted on the embankment. Looking down, it looked like a picture. The people of Hangzhou named the long embankment the Su Gong embankment.

古文：杭僧净源，旧居海滨，与舶客交通，舶至高丽，交誉之。
现代文：杭州和尚净源，原来居住在海边，与海船客商交往，海船到高丽，客商交口称赞他。
English: Hangzhou and Shang Jingyuan, who originally lived on the coast, interacted with seagoing merchants. When the seagoing ship arrived in Korea, the merchants praised him.

古文：元丰末，其王子义天来朝，因往拜焉。
现代文：元丰末年，高丽王子义天来宋朝拜，因而前往净源住处拜访。
English: At the end of the Yuanfeng era, the Prince of Goryeo, Yi Tian, came to Song Dynasty to pay homage, so he went to visit Jingyuan's residence.

古文：至是，净源死，其徒窃持其像，附舶往告。
现代文：到这时，净源死了，他的门徒偷偷地拿着他的遗像，搭海船前往高丽报告。
English: By this time, Ching Yuan had died, and his disciples secretly took his portrait and sailed to Korea to report the news.

古文：义天亦使其徒来祭，因持其国母二金塔，云祝两宫寿。
现代文：义天也派他的门徒来祭奠净源，并且拿着高丽国母的两座金塔，说是祝两宫太后寿辰。
English: Yiteng also sent his disciples to pay tribute to the Pure Source, and took the two golden towers of the mother of the Korean nation, saying that it was to wish the two palaces the birthday of the queen mother.

古文：轼不纳，奏之曰： 高丽久不入贡，失赐予厚利，意欲求朝，未测吾所以待之厚薄，故因祭亡僧而行祝寿之礼。
现代文：苏轼不接受，上奏说： 高丽很久不进贡了，失去了朝廷赐给他们的厚利，他们的意图是想要求朝贡，但不了解我们对待他们的厚薄，所以借祭奠死去的和尚而行祝寿之礼。
English: Su Shi did not accept it, and the prelude said: Goryeo has not paid tribute for a long time, and has lost the rich profits given to them by the imperial court. Their intention was to demand tribute, but they did not understand how we treated them, so they used the offering of a dead monk to celebrate their anniversary.

古文：若受而不答，将生怨心；受而厚赐之，正堕其计。
现代文：如果接受他们的贺礼而不回报他们，高丽将会产生怨恨的思想；接受贺礼而厚赐他们，又正好堕入他们的计策中。
English: If she accepts their gifts and does not return them, Goryeo will have thoughts of resentment; if she accepts gifts and gives them generously, she will fall right into their schemes.

古文：今宜勿与知，从州郡自以理却之。
现代文：现在朝廷应该不参予这件事，让州郡自行以理由拒绝他们的礼物。
English: Now the court should stay out of the matter and let the states and counties come up with their own reasons for rejecting their gifts.

古文：彼庸僧猾商，为国生事，渐不可长，宜痛加惩创。 朝廷皆从之。
现代文：那些平庸的和尚狡猾的客商，给国家挑起事端，这种事不可渐长，应该痛加惩治。 朝廷完全同意苏轼的意见。
English: Those mediocre monks and cunning merchants who stirred up trouble for the country should be punished severely. The court fully agreed with Su Shi's opinion.

古文：未几，贡使果至，旧例，使所至吴越七州，费二万四千余缗。
现代文：不久，来进贡的高丽使臣果然到了，按旧例使臣所到的吴越七个州，要花费二万四千余缗钱。
English: Soon, the Korean envoys who came to pay tribute actually arrived. According to the old practice, the envoys had to spend more than 24,000 baht to visit the seven provinces of Wuyue.

古文：轼乃令诸州量事裁损，民获交易之利，无复侵挠之害矣。
现代文：苏轼于是命令各州根据情况裁减开支，百姓获得交易的好处，再也没有受到侵扰的危害。
English: So Susan ordered the states to cut their spending accordingly, and the people got the benefits of the deal and were no longer in danger of being harassed.

古文：浙江潮自海门东来，势如雷霆，而浮山峙于江中，与渔浦诸山犬牙相错，洄洑激射，岁败公私船不可胜计。
现代文：浙江潮自海门东来，势如雷霆，而浮山屹立在江中，与渔浦各山犬牙交错，水流相激，漩涡回旋，每年损坏的公私船只不可胜数。
English: The Zhejiang tides come from the east of the sea gate and are as powerful as thunder, while the floating mountains stand in the middle of the river, intertwined with the mountains of the fishing port, the water current is fierce, the whirlpool swirls, and the number of damaged public and private ships is countless every year.

古文：轼议自浙江上流地名石门，并山而东，凿为漕河，引浙江及溪谷诸水二十余里以达于江。
现代文：苏轼建议自浙江上游名叫石门的地方，沿山向东，开凿成运河，引浙江及溪谷各水二十多里到达钱塘江。
English: Su Wei suggested that from the place called Shimen in the upper reaches of Zhejiang, along the mountain to the east, a canal should be dug to lead the water of Zhejiang and the valley more than 20 miles to the Qiantang River.

古文：又并山为岸，不能十里以达龙山大慈浦，自浦北折抵小岭，凿岭六十五丈以达岭东古河，浚古河数里达于龙山漕河，以避浮山之险，人以为便。
现代文：又沿山作河岸，不出十里到达龙山大慈浦，自浦北转弯抵达小岭，开凿六十五丈山岭通达岭东古河，疏浚古河几里到达龙山漕河，以避开浮山之险。人们认为便利。
English: They also made riverbanks along the mountains, reaching the Longshan Cipu River in less than ten miles, reaching the Xiaoling River by turning from the north of Pu, digging a sixty-five-meter-high mountain ridge to the East Guhe River, and dredging several miles of the ancient river to the Longshan Caohe River to avoid the risk of floating mountains. People thought it was convenient.

古文：奏闻，有恶轼者，力沮之，功以故不成。
现代文：奏章上报朝廷，有厌恶苏轼的大臣，极力阻止这个计划，因此凿河工程没有完成。
English: The report was reported to the imperial court, and some ministers who disliked Su Shi tried their best to stop the plan. As a result, the river-drilling project was not completed.

古文：轼复言： 三吴之水，潴为太湖，太湖之水，溢为松江以入海。
现代文：苏轼又说： 三吴地区的水，蓄积形成太湖的水，溢出形成松江流入大海。
English: Su Wei also said: The water in the Sanwu region accumulates to form Taihu Lake, and overflows to form the Songjiang River, which flows into the sea.

古文：海日两潮，潮浊而江清，潮水常欲淤塞江路，而江水清驶，随辄涤去，海口常通，则吴中少水患。
现代文：大海每天两次潮汐，潮水浑浊而江水清澈，潮水常常要淤塞松江水道，然而江水清澈流速快，随即就把泥沙冲走，出海口经常是通畅的。因此吴中地区很少有水灾。
English: The sea tides twice a day, the tide is turbid and the river water is clear. The tide often clogs the Songjiang waterway, but the river water is clear and fast-flowing, and then it washes away the sediment. The entrance to the sea is often smooth. Therefore, there are few floods in Wuzhong area.

古文：昔苏州以东，公私船皆以篙行，无陆挽者。
现代文：过去苏州以东地区，公私船只都用竹篙撑行，没有在陆地背纤行船的。
English: In the past, in the area east of Suzhou, both public and private vessels were propped up with bamboo rafts and did not sail on land.

古文：自庆历以来，松江大筑挽路，建长桥以扼塞江路，故今三吴多水，欲凿挽路、为十桥，以迅江势 。
现代文：自庆历年间以来，松江大筑背纤的道路，修建长桥扼塞松江水道，所以现在三吴地区多水灾，我打算凿平背纤道路，修建千桥，以加快江水的流速。 
English: Since the Qinglian period, the Songjiang River has seen a great deal of road construction, and the construction of the Long Bridge has choked the Songjiang Waterway, so now there are many floods in the Sanwu area. I plan to level the road and build a thousand bridges to speed up the flow of river water.

古文：亦不果用，人皆以为恨。
现代文：这个建议也没有被采纳，人们都感到很遗憾。
English: This suggestion was also not adopted, and people felt very sorry.

古文：轼二十年间再莅杭，有德于民，家有画像，饮食必祝。
现代文：苏轼二十年间两次到杭州任官，因他对杭州百姓有恩德，百姓家中有他的画像，吃饭时一定要在像前祝福。
English: Su Shi went to Hangzhou twice in twenty years to serve as an official, because he was kind to the people of Hangzhou. People have his picture in their homes, and they must bless themselves in front of it when eating.

古文：又作生祠以报。
现代文：又修建苏轼生祠以报答他的恩德。
English: He also built the Su Shi Ancestral Shrine to repay his kindness.

古文：六年，召为吏部尚书，未至。
现代文：元六年，苏轼被召为吏部尚书，还没有到任。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Su Shi was called to be the secretary of the cadre department, but he had not yet taken up the post.

古文：以弟辙除右丞，改翰林承旨。
现代文：因为弟弟苏辙任尚书右丞，苏轼改任翰林承旨。
English: Because his younger brother, Su Ritsu, was appointed to the post of Shojojo-jo, Su Shosei was appointed to the post of Hanrin-shoji.

古文：辙辞右丞，欲与兄同备从官，不听。
现代文：苏辙推辞尚书右丞的职务，想和兄长苏轼一同担任侍从官，朝廷没有同意。
English: The imperial court did not agree to Su Rong's resignation from the post of Shang Shuyuan and his desire to serve as an attendant together with his brother Su Shi.

古文：轼在翰林数月，复以谗请外，乃以龙图阁学士出知颍州。
现代文：苏轼到翰林院几个月，又因为谗言请求出任地方官，于是以龙图阁学士出知颍州。
English: A few months after Su Shi arrived at Hanlin Academy, he was asked to serve as a local official, so he left Zhangzhou with a bachelor's degree from Longtu Ge.

古文：先是，开封诸县多水患，吏不究本末，决其陂泽，注之惠民河，河不能胜，致陈亦多水。
现代文：以前，开封府各县多水灾，地方官吏不深究造成水灾的原委，挖开陂泽，把水注入惠民河，惠民河容纳不下，造成陈州也多水灾。
English: In the past, there were many floods in various counties of Kaifeng Prefecture, and local officials did not thoroughly investigate the cause of the floods, dug up Heze, and injected water into Huimin River. Huimin River could not accommodate, resulting in many floods in Chenzhou.

古文：又将凿邓艾沟与颍河并，且凿黄堆欲注之于淮。
现代文：又打算凿开邓艾沟与颍河勾通。并且开凿黄堆想把水引入淮河。
English: It also plans to dig the Dengai ditch to connect it to the Min River, and dig the Huangdui ditch to bring water into the Huai River.

古文：轼始至颍，遣吏以水平准之，淮之涨水高于新沟几一丈，若凿黄堆，淮水顾流颍地为患。
现代文：苏轼才到颍州，派官吏用水平器测量地形高低，淮河涨水时水位高出新沟几乎有一丈，如果开凿黄堆，淮水将倒灌颍州地区造成水灾。
English: Su Yingcai came to Ganzhou and sent officials to measure the height of the terrain with a leveler. When the Huai River rises, the water level is almost a foot higher than the new ditch. If the Yellow Heap is excavated, the Huai River will flood the Ganzhou area, causing floods.

古文：轼言于朝，从之。
现代文：苏轼向朝廷说了自己的意见，朝廷同意了。
English: Su Shi told the court his opinion, and the court agreed.

古文：郡有宿贼尹遇等，数劫杀人，又杀捕盗吏兵。
现代文：颍州有长期做盗贼的尹遇等人，几次抢劫杀人，又杀死捕盗的官吏兵士。
English: Yin Yu, a long-time thief in Zhangzhou, robbed and killed people several times, and killed officials and soldiers who caught thieves.

古文：朝廷以名捕不获，被杀家复惧其害，匿不敢言。
现代文：朝廷用名捕捉拿他也没有擒获，被害家属又害怕他再次加害，躲避不敢说。
English: The court did not catch him by name, and the victim's family members were afraid that he would harm them again, so they did not dare to speak out.

古文：轼召汝阴尉李直方曰： 君能禽此，当力言于朝，乞行优赏；不获，亦以不职奏免君矣。 直方有母且老，与母诀而后行。
现代文：苏轼召来汝阳县尉李直方说 ：你能擒获尹遇，我当力荐于朝廷，要求从优奖赏；抓不到他，我也要以不称职奏免你的官职。 李直方家有母亲而且已经年老，他和母亲诀别后就出发了。
English: Su Shi summoned Li Naofang, a lieutenant of Ryuyang County, and said, "If you can capture Yin Rong, I will recommend you to the imperial court and ask for a high reward; if you can't capture him, I will also dismiss you from your official position for incompetence. Li Naofang's family has an old mother, and he and his mother said goodbye before leaving.

古文：乃缉知盗所，分捕其党与，手戟刺遇，获之。
现代文：于是李直方侦察得知盗贼所在的地方，分派人力捕获尹遇的党羽，他自己亲手戟击了尹遇，擒获了他。
English: As a result, Li Naofang scouted the place where the thief was located, dispatched manpower to capture Yin Rong's party members, and personally attacked Yin Rong and captured him.

古文：朝廷以小不应格，推赏不及。
现代文：朝廷以事情太不符合奖赏的规定，推赏时没有赏到李直方。
English: The imperial court said that the matter was too inconsistent with the provisions of the award, and Li Naofang was not awarded when the award was proposed.

古文：轼请以己之年劳，当改朝散郎阶，为直方赏，不从。
现代文：苏轼请求以自己的年资劳绩，应当改官阶为朝散郎，把它作为对李直方的奖赏，朝廷没有同意。
English: The imperial court did not agree to Su Shi's request that he should be promoted to the rank of chosanro based on his years of service as a reward to Li Naofang.

古文：其后吏部为轼当迁，以符会其考，轼谓已许直方，又不报。
现代文：后来吏部认为苏轼应当升官，以符合苏轼的考绩，苏轼说已经许给李直方了，又没有得到答复。
English: Later, the personnel department thought that Su Yao should be promoted to match Su Yao's performance appraisal. Su Yao said that he had already promised Li Naofang, but did not get a reply.

古文：七年，徙扬州。
现代文：元七年，调任扬州。
English: In 1871, he was transferred to Yangzhou.

古文：旧发运司主东南漕法，听操舟者私载物货，征商不得留难。
现代文：过去发运司主管东南漕运，听任掌船的人私载货物，征收商税的部门不得留他们。
English: In the past, the person in charge of the shipping department in charge of Southeast Rowing allowed the person in charge of the ship to carry the goods. The department that levied the commercial tax was not allowed to keep them.

古文：故操舟者辄富厚，以官舟为家，补其敝漏，且周船夫之乏，故所载率皆速达无虞。
现代文：因此掌船的人往往富厚，他们以官船为家，修补官船损坏的地方，并且周济船夫短缺，所以运载的货物到达目的地既迅速又没有损失。
English: As a result, the people in charge of the ship are often rich. They use the official ship as a home, repairing the damaged areas of the official ship, and there is a shortage of Zhouji boatmen, so the goods carried reach their destination quickly and without loss.

古文：近岁一切禁而不许，故舟弊人困，多盗所载以济饥寒，公私皆病。
现代文：近年来禁止一切私载货物，因此船破损人穷困，船夫多盗窃所运载的官物来接济饥饿贫寒的生活。
English: In recent years, all private cargo has been banned. As a result, ships have been damaged and people have been impoverished, and many boatmen have stolen the goods they carry to help the hungry and poor.

古文：轼请复旧，从之。
现代文：公私都受害，苏轼请求恢复原有的制度，朝廷同意了。
English: Both the public and private sectors suffered. Su Shi requested the restoration of the original system, and the imperial court agreed.

古文：未阅岁，以兵部尚书召兼侍读。
现代文：没过一年，朝廷以兵部尚书的职务召苏轼入京，兼任侍读。
English: Less than a year later, the imperial court summoned Su Shi to Beijing with the post of military secretary, and he also served as an attendant.

古文：是岁，哲宗亲祀南郊，轼为卤簿使，导驾入太庙。
现代文：这一年，哲宗亲自到南郊祭祀，苏轼担任卤簿使，引导圣驾进入太庙。
English: In that year, Tetsuzo himself went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices, and Su Shi served as a halo messenger to guide the saint into the Imperial Temple.

古文：有赭繖犊车并青盖犊车十余争道，不避仪仗。
现代文：有十几辆打着红伞的牛车和十多辆打青盖的牛车抢争道路，不躲避皇帝的仪仗队。
English: There are more than a dozen ox carts with red umbrellas and more than a dozen ox carts with blue covers fighting for the road, not avoiding the emperor's honor guard.

古文：轼使御营巡检使问之，乃皇后及大长公主。
现代文：苏轼派御营巡检使询问他们，竟是皇后和大长公主。
English: Su Shi sent an imperial inspector to inquire whether they were the empress and the eldest princess.

古文：时御史中丞李之纯为仪仗使，轼曰： 中丞职当肃政，不可不以闻之。 纯不敢言，轼于车中奏之。
现代文：当时御史中丞李之纯任仪仗使，苏轼说： 中丞的责职应当是严肃政纪，不能不把这件事报告皇帝。 李之纯不敢说，苏轼在车中把这件事报告了皇帝。
English: At that time, the vice-chancellor of history, Li Zhichun, was in charge of the ceremonial envoy, and Su Yao said: The responsibilities of the vice-chancellor should be serious political discipline, and it is impossible not to report this matter to the emperor.

古文：哲宗遣使赍疏驰白太皇太后，明日，诏整肃仪卫，自皇后而下皆毋得迎谒。
现代文：哲宗派使臣捧着书信骑马告诉太皇太后，第二天，下诏整肃皇宫仪卫，自皇后以下都不得迎接接见。
English: An envoy of the Zhe sect, holding a letter and riding a horse, told the great empress dowager that on the next day, she would issue an edict to clean up the palace guards, and no one from the empress down would be allowed to receive an audience.

古文：寻迁礼部兼端明殿、翰林侍读两学士，为礼部尚书。
现代文：不久苏轼升任礼部兼端明殿、翰林侍读两学士，任礼部尚书。
English: Soon after, Su Xi was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies and Taomei Hall, and Han Lin attended two bachelor's degrees and served as the Minister of Ceremonies.

古文：高丽遣使请书，朝廷以故事尽许之。
现代文：高丽派使臣请求朝廷给他们一些书籍，朝廷沿用成例全部同意了他们的请求。
English: The Koryo envoys asked the court to give them some books, and the court, as usual, agreed to all of their requests.

古文：轼曰： 汉东平王请诸子及《太史公书》，犹不肯予。
现代文：苏轼说 ：汉朝东平王请求朝廷赐给他诸子及《太史公书》，朝廷尚且不肯给予。
English: Su Shi said: Dongping Wang of the Han Dynasty asked the court to give him his sons and the "Tai Shi Gong Shu," but the court still refused to give it.

古文：今高丽所请，有甚于此，其可予乎？ 不听。
现代文：现在高丽所要求的书籍，远远超过了汉东平王的请求，难道可以给他们吗？ 
English: Now, the books demanded by Goryeo far exceed the request of the Han Dongping King. Can they be given to them?

古文：八年，宣仁后崩，哲宗亲政。
现代文：朝廷没有接受他的意见。元八年，宣仁太后去世，哲宗亲政。
English: The Imperial Court did not accept his opinion. In 1881, Empress Dowager Xuanren died, and Zhezong took over the government.

古文：轼乞补外，以两学士出知定州。
现代文：苏轼请求出外任地方官，以两学士的身份出知定州。
English: Su Ying requested to be appointed as a foreign local official and leave Dingzhou with the status of two bachelors.

古文：时国事将变，轼不得入辞。
现代文：当时国家大计方针即将发生变化，苏轼没能入宫向皇帝辞行。
English: At that time, the state's overall policy was about to change, and Su Shi failed to enter the palace and resigned to the emperor.

古文：既行，上书言： 天下治乱，出于下情之通塞。
现代文：已经上路赴任时，苏轼上书说： 天下治乱，由于下情上达的道路是畅通还是堵塞所决定。
English: When he was already on his way to take office, Su Shi said in a letter: The world is in turmoil, and whether the road is smooth or blocked is determined by the circumstances.

古文：至治之极，小民皆能自通；迨于大乱，虽近臣不能自达。
现代文：天下大治时，普通百姓的意见都能自由通达朝廷；等到天下大乱时，即使是皇帝的近臣也不能将自己的意见进给皇帝。
English: When the country is at peace, the opinions of ordinary people can freely reach the imperial court; when the country is in turmoil, even the emperor's courtiers cannot give their opinions to the emperor.

古文：陛下临御九年，除执政、台谏外，未尝与群臣接。
现代文：陛下即位已经九年了，除了执政大臣、台谏官外，不曾与大臣们接触。
English: It has been nine years since His Majesty ascended the throne, and he has had no contact with the ministers except for the ruling ministers and Taiwanese eunuchs.

古文：今听政之初，当以通下情、除壅蔽为急务。
现代文：现在陛下刚开始亲自处理政务，应当把了解下情、清除阻塞作为急务。
English: Now that His Majesty has just begun to personally handle government affairs, it should be a matter of urgency to understand the situation and clear the blockage.

古文：臣日侍帷幄，方当戍边，顾不得一见而行，况疏远小臣欲求自通，难矣。
现代文：我每天侍奉在宫中，现在正要去戍守边境，却不能见陛下一次就动身了，何况疏远的小官们想要把自己的意见报告给陛下，那就更困难了。
English: I serve every day in the palace, and now I'm going to guard the border, but I can't see His Majesty the next time I leave, and it's even more difficult for alienated petty officials to report their opinions to His Majesty.

古文：然臣不敢以不得对之故，不效愚忠。
现代文：然而我不敢因为不得与陛下答对的缘故，不报效自己的愚忠。
English: However, I did not dare not to repay his foolish loyalty because I had to answer to His Majesty.

古文：古之圣人将有为也，必先处晦而观明，处静而观动，则万物之情，毕陈于前。
现代文：古代的圣人将有作为的时候，必然先处在暗处而观察明处，处在静止而观察动态，那么万物的情形，全部摆在面前。
English: When an ancient sage is about to do something, he must first be in the dark and observe the light, at rest and observe the dynamic, then the situation of all things is all in front of him.

古文：陛下圣智绝人，春秋鼎盛。臣愿虚心循理，一切未有所为，默观庶事之利害，与群臣之邪正。
现代文：陛下的智慧超人，年龄正当盛年，我希望陛下虚心循理，一切不要有所作为，暗自观察各种事物的利与弊，以及大臣们的邪与正。
English: Your Majesty's wisdom is superhuman, and his age is just right. I hope that Your Majesty will be open-minded and follow reason, not do anything, and secretly observe the pros and cons of various things, as well as the evil and righteousness of ministers.

古文：以三年为期，俟得其实，然后应物而作。
现代文：以三年为期限，等得到实际情况，然后顺应事物采取措施。
English: Take three years as a deadline, wait for the actual situation to be obtained, and then take measures in accordance with things.

古文：使既作之后，天下无恨，陛下亦无悔。
现代文：要使有了作为之后，天下没有怨恨，陛下也不后悔。
English: We want to make sure that there is no resentment in the world and that His Majesty does not regret his actions.

古文：由此观之，陛下之有为，惟忧太蚤，不患稍迟，亦已明矣。
现代文：由此看来，陛下有所作为，只担心太早，不担心稍迟，这已是很明显的了。
English: It is clear from this that His Majesty is on to something, and is not worried about being a little late, only about being too early.

古文：臣恐急进好利之臣，辄劝陛下轻有改变，故进此说，敢望陛下留神，社稷宗庙之福，天下幸甚。 
现代文：我恐怕急功好利的大臣们，就要劝陛下轻率地有所改变，因此进呈了上述意见，冒昧地企望陛下留神，则是国家宗庙的福运，天下的大幸。 
English: I am afraid that the ministers, who are eager to succeed, will have to persuade His Majesty to change something rashly. Therefore, I have submitted the above opinions, and I have the audacity to hope that His Majesty will pay attention. It is the good fortune of the national ancestral temple and the great fortune of the world.

古文：定州军政坏驰，诸卫卒骄惰不教，军校蚕食其廪赐，前守不敢谁何。
现代文：定州军政败坏松弛，兵士们骄惰不服教诲，军校们蚕食士卒的口粮和赏赐的财物，前任地方官也不敢把他们怎么样。
English: The military government in Dingzhou is corrupt and slack, the soldiers are arrogant and do not listen to instructions, the military schools encroach on the soldiers' rations and rewards, and the former local officials do not dare to do anything to them.

古文：轼取贪污者配隶远恶，缮修营房，禁止饮博，军中衣食稍足，乃部勒战法，众皆畏伏。
现代文：苏轼把贪污的军官发配到远恶的地方，修缮营房，禁止饮酒赌博，这样军中衣服粮食稍稍充足了一些，于是用战法部署约束士兵，士兵都畏服他。
English: Su Shi dispatched the corrupt officers to faraway evil places, repaired the barracks, prohibited drinking and gambling, so that the clothes and grain in the army were slightly more abundant, so he used the tactics of deployment to restrain the soldiers, and the soldiers were afraid of him.

古文：然诸校业业不安，有卒史以赃诉其长，轼曰： 此事吾自治则可，听汝告，军中乱矣。 立决配之，众乃定。
现代文：然而军校们害怕不安，有卒史拿着赃物控告他的长官，苏轼说： 这件事我自己处理是可以的，听任你告状，会在军队中造成混乱。 立即把他判决流放，于是大家才安定。
English: However, the military academies were afraid and uneasy. One of the cadets charged his superior with stolen goods. Su Shi said, "I can handle this matter myself. If I let you sue me, it will cause chaos in the army." He was immediately sentenced to exile, and then everyone was stable.

古文：会春大阅，将吏久废上下之分，轼命举旧典，帅常服出帐中，将吏戎服执事。
现代文：适逢春天大检阅，将校官吏们很长时间废除了上下级的名分，苏轼命令全按旧有的规章制度，主帅穿平常的服装到帐中来，将校官吏穿军装供给使令。
English: It was the time of the grand spring review, and the officers and officials of the school had abolished the ranks of superiors and subordinates for a long time. Su Xi ordered that everything should be in accordance with the old rules and regulations. The head coach wore ordinary clothes to the account, and the officers and officials wore military uniforms to provide orders.

古文：副总管王光祖自谓老将，耻之，称疾不至。
现代文：副总管王光祖自认为是老将，觉得这样做耻辱，假装生病不来。
English: Wang Guangzu, the deputy chief steward, considered himself a veteran and felt it was a disgrace to do so, so he pretended to be ill and did not come.

古文：轼召书吏使为奏，光祖惧而出，讫事，无一慢者。
现代文：苏轼叫来书吏，让他起草奏章，王光祖惧怕而出来参加阅军，检阅结束，没有一个怠慢的人。
English: Su Yao called a clerk and asked him to draft a report. Wang Guangzu was afraid and came out to participate in the military parade. The review was over, and no one was negligent.

古文：定人言： 自韩琦去后，不见此礼至今矣。 契丹久和，边兵不可用，惟沿边弓箭社与寇为邻，以战射自卫，犹号精锐。
现代文：定州的人说： 自从韩琦走后，一直到今天没有见过这种检阅礼了。 与契丹和平已久，边兵已不能用。只有边境一带的弓箭社与敌寇相邻，因战射自卫，尚可称精锐。
English: The people of Dingzhou said, "Since Han Zheng left, we have never seen such a review ceremony until today. Peace with Khitan has been long, border soldiers can no longer be used. Only the bow and arrow company around the border is adjacent to the enemy, and because of self-defense, it can still be called elite.

古文：故相庞籍守边，因俗立法。
现代文：已故宰相庞籍守卫边境时，因当地风俗立法。
English: When the late Prime Minister Pang Quek was guarding the border, he passed legislation due to local customs.

古文：岁久法弛，又为保甲所挠。
现代文：年代久远法令弛废，又被保甲法所阻挠。
English: The long-standing law has lapsed, and has been obstructed by the warranty law.

古文：轼奏免保甲及两税折变科配，不报。
现代文：苏轼上奏朝廷免除保甲法和两税折变、摊派，没有得到朝廷的答复。
English: Su Shi appealed to the imperial court for exemption from the Armor-Purchasing Law and the two-tax rebate and apportionment, but did not receive a reply from the imperial court.

古文：绍圣初，御史论轼掌内外制日，所作词命，以为讥斥先朝。
现代文：绍圣初年，御史弹劾苏轼执掌内外制命的时候，所起草的制词诰命，是讥讽指斥先朝。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, when the imperial historian impeached Su Shi for taking charge of the internal and external affairs, the draft of the word "suicide" was a sarcastic reference to the first dynasty.

古文：遂以本官知英州，寻降一官，未至，贬宁远军节度副使，惠州安置。
现代文：于是苏轼以本官知英州，不久降一官，苏轼还没有到达英州，被贬为宁远军节度副使，安置在惠州居住。
English: As a result, Su Qian was demoted to the position of deputy commander of the Ningyuan Army and resettled in Huizhou. Su Qian had not yet arrived in Yingzhou.

古文：居三年，泊然无所蒂芥，人无贤愚，皆得其欢心。
现代文：苏轼在惠州居住了三年，心境淡泊而没有什么怨恨不快，人不论聪明的和愚笨的，都得到他的欢心。
English: Su Yao has lived in Huizhou for three years. He is in a light-hearted mood without any resentment. He likes everyone, whether they are smart or stupid.

古文：又贬琼州别驾，居昌化。
现代文：又被贬为琼州别驾，在昌化居住。
English: He was also relegated to Qiongzhou, and lived in Changhua.

古文：昌化，故儋耳地，非人所居，药饵皆无有。
现代文：昌化，旧儋耳郡地，不是人所能居住的地方，药物、调补品都没有。
English: Changhua, the former county seat of Kunlun, is not a place where people can live. There are no medicines or supplements.

古文：初僦官屋以居，有司犹谓不可，轼遂买地筑室，儋人运甓畚土以助之。
现代文：开始时苏轼租赁官屋居住，官吏还说不可以，苏轼于是买地建房，儋耳百姓搬砖运土帮助他。
English: At the beginning, Su Shi rented a government house to live in, but the officials said it was not allowed, so Su Shi bought land to build a house, and the local people helped him by carrying bricks and carrying soil.

古文：独与幼子过处，著书以为乐，时时从其父老游，若将终身。
现代文：苏轼独自和小儿子苏过相处，以著书为乐，常常和当地的父老乡亲交往，好像要在这里终老一生。
English: Su Yao spent time alone with his younger son Su, enjoyed writing books, and often socialized with local parents and fellow villagers, as if he wanted to live here forever.

古文：徽宗立，移廉州，改舒州团练副使，徒永州。
现代文：徽宗即位当皇帝，苏轼迁移到廉州，改任舒州团练副使，又迁徙到永州。
English: Huizong ascended the throne as emperor, Su Shi migrated to Lianzhou, was appointed deputy envoy of Shuzhou Reunification, and migrated to Yongzhou.

古文：更三大赦，遂提举玉局观，复朝奉郎。轼自元祐以来，未尝以岁课乞迁，故官止于此。
现代文：经过三次大赦，苏轼于是提举玉局观，恢复为朝奉郎，元年间以来，不曾因为每年的考课要求升官，所以他的官职停止在此。
English: After three amnesties, Su Shi then promoted Yu Jie Guan and was reinstated as a court servant. Since the first year of the year, he had not been promoted because of the annual examination requirements, so his official position stopped here.

古文：建中靖国元年，卒于常州，年六十六。
现代文：建中靖国元年苏轼在常州逝世，终年六十六岁。
English: Su Shi died in Changzhou in the first year of the reign of Emperor Jing, at the age of 66.

古文：轼与弟辙，师父洵为文，既而得之于天。
现代文：苏轼与弟弟苏辙，以父亲苏洵为老师学习写文章，而他们文学才能得自天赋。
English: Su Yao and his brother Su Rong learned to write articles from their father Su Yao, and their literary talent comes from their natural talent.

古文：尝自谓： 作文如行云流水，初无定质，但常行于所当行，止于所不可不止。 虽嬉笑怒骂之辞，皆可书而诵之。
现代文：苏轼自己曾说 ：写文章好比行云流水，开始时没有一定的形态，但是文章要常行在它所应当行的时候，止在它不可以不停止的地方。 即使是嬉笑怒骂的辞句，也都可以写下来诵读。
English: Su Shi himself once said: "Writing an article is like walking on water, there is no definite form at the beginning, but the article should always walk when it should walk, stop where it must not stop. Even the words of laughter and abuse can be written down and recited.

古文：其体浑涵光芒，雄视百代，有文章以来，盖亦鲜矣。
现代文：苏轼的文章广大深沉光芒四射，雄视百代，自有文章以来，也很少有像他那样的文章。
English: Su Shi's articles are broad, deep and radiant, and have been admired by hundreds of generations. Since there were articles, there have been few articles like him.

古文：洵晚读《易》，作《易传》未究，命轼述其志。
现代文：苏洵晚年读《易》，撰写《易传》没有完成，命苏轼继承他的遗志。
English: In his later years, Su Shi read "Yi" and did not finish writing "The Biography of Yi," and ordered Su Shi to carry on his legacy.

古文：轼成《易传》，复作《论语说》；后居海南，作《书传》；又有《东坡集》四十卷、《后集》二十卷、《奏议》十五卷、《内制》十卷、《外制》三卷、《和陶诗》四卷。
现代文：苏轼撰写成《易传》，又撰写了《论语说》；后来居住在海南，撰写《书传》；又有《东坡集》四十卷、《后集》二十卷、《奏议》十五卷、《内制》十卷、《外制》三卷、《和陶诗》四卷。
English: Su Shi wrote "I Chuan" and "Analects of Confucius"; later, living in Hainan, he wrote "Analects"; there were also forty volumes of "Dongpo Collection," twenty volumes of "Second Collection," fifteen volumes of "Recommendation," ten volumes of "Internal System," three volumes of "External System," and four volumes of "Watou Poetry."

古文：一时文人如黄庭坚、晁补之、秦观、张耒、陈师道，举世未之识，轼待之如朋俦，未尝以师资自予也。
现代文：同时代的文人如黄庭坚、晁补之、秦观、张耒、陈师道，还没有被社会所了解时，苏轼对待他们好比朋友同辈，不曾以老师的资格自居。
English: When the literati of his time, such as Huang Tingjian, Gong Shu Rongzhi, Qin Guan, Zhang Xuan and Chen Shidao, had not yet been understood by society, Su Shi treated them as friends and peers, and did not consider himself as a teacher.

古文：自为举子至出入侍从，必以爱君为本，忠规谠论，挺挺大节，群臣无出其右。
现代文：苏轼自为举子到出入宫廷担任侍从，必定以爱君作为根本，忠规直论，正直大节，大臣们没有谁能超过他。
English: Su Qian raised his son to enter and leave the court as an attendant. He must take love for the prince as the foundation, be loyal to rules and regulations, and be honest. No minister can surpass him.

古文：但为小人忌恶挤排，不使安于朝廷之上。
现代文：但是被小人妒忌排挤，不让他安处朝廷上做官。
English: However, he was pushed out by the villain's jealousy, and he was not allowed to work as an official in the court.

古文：高宗即位，赠资政殿学士，以其孙符为礼部尚书。
现代文：高宗即皇帝位，赠苏轼为资政殿学士，以他的孙子苏符任礼部尚书。
English: Gaozong, the emperor, bestowed Su Shi with the title of scholar of the Palace of the Great Counselor, and appointed his grandson Su Fu to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：又以其文置左右，读之终日忘倦，谓为文章之宗，亲制集赞，赐其曾孙峤。
现代文：又把苏轼的文章放在身边，整天读他的文章以致忘记了疲倦，认为是文章之宗，亲自写了东坡集赞，赐给苏轼的曾孙峤。
English: He also kept Su Shi's articles by his side, read his articles all day long so that he forgot his tiredness, thought that he was the author of the article, and personally wrote a Dongpo collection of praise, which was given to Su Shi's great-grandson Zou.

古文：遂崇赠太师，谥文忠。
现代文：于是赠苏轼为太师，谥 文忠 。
English: As a result, Su Shi was given the title of Grand Master, and his name was changed to Wen Zhong.

古文：轼三子：迈、迨、过，俱善为文。
现代文：苏轼有三个儿子：苏迈、苏迨、苏过，都善于写文章。
English: Su Yao has three sons: Su Mai, Su Yao and Su Quan, all of whom are good at writing articles.

古文：迈，驾部员外郎。
现代文：苏迈，任驾部员外郎。
English: Sumai, the driver's brother.

古文：迨，承务郎。
现代文：苏迨，任承务郎。
English: Su Shi, Ren Chengyurong.

