古文：谯国夫人者，高凉洗氏之女也。
现代文：谯国夫人是高凉冼氏的女儿。
English: Mrs. Min Guo is the daughter of Mr. Gao Liangyu.

古文：世为南越首领，跨据山洞，部落十余万家。
现代文：世代都是南越的首领，占据山洞，部属有十余万家。
English: They have been the leaders of South Vietnam for generations, occupy caves, and have more than one hundred thousand subordinates.

古文：夫人幼贤明，多筹略，在父母家，抚循部众，能行军用师，压服诸越。
现代文：夫人幼时就很贤明，有很多谋略。在娘家时，能够约束部下，行军布阵，镇服百越。
English: When she was young, she was very wise and had a lot of strategies. When she was at her mother's house, she was able to restrain her subordinates, march in formation, and dress well.

古文：每劝亲族为善，由是信义结于本乡。
现代文：常常鼓励亲族多做好事，因此在本乡信义卓著。
English: They often encourage their relatives to do more good deeds, so they are very loyal to their hometown.

古文：越人之俗，好相攻击，夫人兄南梁州刺史挺，恃其富强，侵掠傍郡，岭表苦之。
现代文：越人的风俗是爱互相攻击。夫人的兄长、南梁州刺史冼挺，倚杖他的富强，侵略掠夺别的州县，岭表一带为他所苦。
English: The custom of the Yue people is to love to attack each other. My wife's brother, Nan Liang Zhou Zhi Shi Xingtian, relied on his wealth and strength to invade and plunder other states and counties, and the area around Lingdingshan was hard for him.

古文：夫人多所规谏，由是怨隙止息，海南、儋耳归附者千余洞。
现代文：夫人多次规劝他，因此别郡的怨隙止息，海南、儋耳归附的有千余洞。
English: His wife persuaded him many times, so the resentment of the county ceased. There are more than a thousand caves in Hainan and Jiu'er.

古文：梁大同初，罗州刺史冯融闻夫人有志行，为其子高凉太守宝娉以为妻。
现代文：梁朝大同初年，罗州刺史冯融听说夫人有志行，为他的儿子高凉太守冯宝聘为妻子。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Liang, Luozhou ruler Feng Rong heard that his wife wanted to become a nun, so he hired Grand Empress Gao Liang's son Feng Bao to be his wife.

古文：融本北燕苗裔，初，冯弘之投高丽也，遣融大父业以三百人浮海归宋，因留于新会。
现代文：冯融本是北燕的后裔。当初，冯弘投靠高丽的时候，派冯融的祖父冯业带着三百人过海归宋，从此留在新会。
English: Feng Rong was a descendant of Bei Yan. At the beginning, when Feng Hong came to Korea, Feng Rong's grandfather Feng Ye sent three hundred people to cross the sea to Song and stayed in the new society.

古文：自业及融，三世为守牧，他乡羁旅，号令不行。
现代文：从冯业到冯融，三代是高凉太守，但客寓岭南异地，政令不能施行。
English: From Feng Ye to Feng Rong, three generations of herdsmen, living in other villages, do not carry out orders.

古文：至是，夫人诫约本宗，使从民礼。每共宝参决辞讼，首领有犯法者，虽是亲族，无所舍纵。
现代文：到了这时，夫人约束本族，让他们依从民礼，每次同冯宝解决诉讼问题，首领中有犯法的，即使是亲族，也没有使其逃逸的。
English: At this time, the lady restrained her people, let them follow the folk rites, and solved the litigation problem with Feng Bao every time. There were leaders who broke the law, even if they were relatives, and did not let them escape.

古文：自此政令有序，人莫敢违。
现代文：从此以后，政令有序，人们不敢违抗。
English: From then on, the decrees were orderly and people did not dare to disobey them.

古文：遇侯景反，广州都督萧勃征兵援台。
现代文：遇侯景反叛梁朝，广州都督萧勃征召兵马援助。
English: When Houjing rebelled against the Liang Dynasty, the governor of Guangzhou, Xiao Bo, conscripted soldiers and horses to help.

古文：高州刺史李迁仕据大皋口，遣召宝。宝欲往，夫人止之曰： 刺史无故不合召太守，必欲诈君共为反耳。 
现代文：高州刺史李迁仕占领大皋口，派人征调冯宝，冯宝想去，夫人阻止他说： 刺史无故不能召太守，肯定想骗你去一同谋反。 
English: Gaozhou assassin Li Qian occupied Dazhongkou and sent someone to recruit Feng Bao. Feng Bao wanted to go, but his wife stopped him, saying, "There is no reason why assassin Li Qian can't summon the Empress Dowager. He must be trying to trick you into joining the rebellion."

古文：宝曰： 何以知之？ 
现代文：冯忠说： 你凭什么知道？ 
English: Feng asked: How did you know?

古文：夫人曰： 刺史被召援台，乃称有疾，铸兵聚众，而后唤君。
现代文：夫人说： 刺史被召援助台城，可是说自己有病不去，铸造兵器，聚集部众，然后召唤您。
English: His wife said, "Tashi was called to help Taicheng, but he said he was too sick to go. He forged weapons, gathered his followers, and then summoned you."

古文：今者若往，必留质，追君兵众。
现代文：现在假如您去了，肯定会留作人质，胁迫你的部众。
English: Now, if you go, you'll be held hostage, and your men will be threatened.

古文：此意可见，愿且无行，以观其势。 
现代文：这个意思很明显，希望您暂时不要去，看看情况的发展。 
English: This meaning is obvious, I hope you will not go for the time being and see how the situation develops.

古文：数日，迁仕果反，遣主帅杜平虏率兵入灨石。
现代文：几天后，李迁仕果然谋反，派遣主帅杜平虏率领军队侵入氵赣石。
English: A few days later, Li Qianshi indeed rebelled and sent head coach Du Pingru to lead the troops into Shanshi.

古文：宝知之，遽告，夫人曰： 平虏，骁将也，领兵入灨石，即与官兵相拒，未得还。
现代文：冯宝听说这件事，急告夫人。
English: When Feng Bao heard about this, he immediately called his wife.

古文：迁仕在州，无能为也。
现代文：夫人说： 平虏是一员猛将。
English: His wife said: "He is a fierce general.

古文：若君自往，必有战斗。
现代文：带领军队侵入氵赣石，就要同官兵相抗衡，大概不能回兵。
English: If you lead an army to invade Shanshi, you will have to compete with officers and soldiers, and you probably can't return to the army.

古文：宜遣使诈之，卑辞厚礼，云身未敢出，欲遣妇往参。
现代文：迁仕在州里，就没有什么作为了。如果您能亲自去，一定有战斗，应派使者去骗他，说谦卑的话，送上厚礼，说自己不敢出来，想派夫人去参拜。
English: If you can go in person, there must be a battle, you should send an emissary to deceive him, say humble words, send a gift, say that you dare not come out, and want to send your wife to worship.

古文：彼闻之喜，必无防虑。
现代文：他们听说只顾喜欢，肯定没有防备。
English: They've heard they can do what they like and they're certainly not prepared.

古文：于是我将千余人，步担杂物，唱言输赕，得至栅下，贼必可图。 
现代文：这样我就带领千余人，步行挑着杂物，扬言去送礼，待到军营，贼人一定可以消灭。 
English: In this way, I will lead more than a thousand people, pick up debris on foot, threaten to send gifts, stay in the military camp, and the thieves can definitely be eliminated.

古文：宝从之，迁仕果大喜，觇夫人众皆担物，不设备。夫人击之，大捷。
现代文：冯宝听从了夫人意见。迁仕果然大喜，看到夫人部众都挑着杂物，就没有设防，夫人攻击，大胜。
English: Feng Bao listened to his wife's advice. The reshuffle was a great success. When he saw that everyone in his wife's department was picking up debris, there was no fortification. His wife attacked and won a great victory.

古文：迁仕遂走，保于宁都。
现代文：迁仕于是逃跑了，在宁都苟安。
English: Mengshi then ran away and is now safe in Ningdu.

古文：夫人总兵与长城侯陈霸先会于灨石。
现代文：夫人带兵与长城侯陈霸先在氵赣石相会。
English: The wife led the soldiers to meet the Great Wall marquis Chen Baxi in Shanshi.

古文：还谓宝曰： 陈都督大可畏，极得众心。
现代文：回来时对冯宝说： 陈都督很可怕，非常得民心。
English: When he came back, he said to Feng Bao, "Chen Tudou is very scary and very popular.

古文：我观此人必能平贼，君宜厚资之。 
现代文：我看这个人一定能够剿平贼人，你应该重重赞助他。 
English: I think this man will surely be able to defeat the thieves, and you should support him.

古文：及宝卒，岭表大乱，夫人怀集百越，数州晏然。
现代文：等到冯宝死了，岭南一带大乱。夫人安抚百越，几个州都很太平。
English: After the death of Feng Bao, the Lingnan War broke out, and his wife called together more than a hundred Vietnams, and several states were at ease.

古文：至陈永定二年，其子仆年九岁，遗帅诸首领朝于丹阳，起家拜阳春郡守。
现代文：到陈永定二年，夫人的儿子冯仆九岁，夫人派他带着各位首领在丹阳朝见皇帝，冯仆始任阳春郡守。
English: In the second year of Chen Yongding, his wife's son Feng Du was nine years old. His wife sent him to meet the emperor in Danyang with the leaders. Feng Du became the first governor of Yangchun County.

古文：后广州刺史欧阳纥谋反，召仆至高安，诱与为乱。
现代文：后来广州刺史欧阳纥谋反，召冯仆到高安，诱使他一同谋反。
English: Later, Guangzhou assassinated Shi Ouyang for plotting a rebellion, summoned Feng Min to Gao'an, and enticed him to join the rebellion.

古文：仆遣使归告夫人，夫人曰： 我为忠贞，经今两代，不能惜汝，辄负国家。 
现代文：冯仆派人回去报告夫人。夫人说： 我家做忠臣到现在已经两代了，不能因爱惜你就有负于国家。 
English: Feng Zhu sent someone back to report to his wife. His wife said: My family has been loyal for two generations now. You can't be ungrateful to the country just because you care about it.

古文：遂发兵拒境，帅百越酋长迎章昭达。内外逼之，纥徒溃散。
现代文：于是发兵抵御，带领百越酋长迎接章昭达，里应外合，欧阳纥部众溃散。
English: As a result, he sent troops to resist, and led the Hundred Yue Chiefs to meet Zhang Zhaoda. Li Ying and Gao He joined forces, and the Ouyang Xibe crowd dispersed.

古文：仆以夫人之功，封信都侯，加平越中郎将，转石龙太守。
现代文：冯仆因为夫人的功勋，封为信都侯，又加授平越中郎将，转任石龙太守。
English: Relying on his wife's merits, Feng Servant was awarded the title of the Prince of Xin, granted the title of the General of Pingyue and transferred to the position of the Governor of Shilong.

古文：诏使持节册夫人为中郎将、石龙太夫人，赉绣 油络驷马安车一乘，给鼓吹一部，并麾幢旌节，其卤簿一如刺史之仪。
现代文：诏令使者持节册封夫人为中郎将、石龙太夫人。赏赐络驷安车一乘，给鼓吹一部，以及旌旗与节符仪仗，同刺史的级别一样。
English: The emperor ordered the envoys to have the wife of the festival to be the middle-rank general and the wife of the stone dragon. They were rewarded with a ride on the cable car, a part of the propaganda, and a ceremonial battle with the flag and the festival emblem, the same level as the history.

古文：至德中，仆卒。
现代文：至德中，冯仆死。
English: During his stay in Germany, Feng Pucong died.

古文：后遇陈国亡，岭南未有所附，数郡共奉夫人，号为圣母，保境安民。
现代文：后遇陈国灭亡，岭南一带无所依托，几个州都奉夫人为主，号为圣母，保境安民。
English: After the fall of Chen Guo, there was nothing to support the Lingnan area. Several prefectures worshiped the Lady as the main deity, calling her the Virgin Mary, to keep the country and people safe.

古文：高祖遣总管韦洸安抚岭外，陈将徐璒以南康拒守。
现代文：高祖派总管韦氵光安抚岭外，陈将徐王登凭借南康拒守。
English: Wei Bingguang, the head of the Gaozhu faction, pacified Ling, but Chen refused to defend Xu Wangden with the help of Nankang.

古文：洸至岭下，逡巡不敢进。
现代文：韦氵光到了岭下，徘徊不敢前行。
English: Wei Zengguang arrived at the foot of the ridge, and did not dare to move forward.

古文：初，夫人以扶南犀杖献于陈主，至此，晋王广遣陈主遗夫人书，谕以国亡，令其归化，并以犀杖及兵符为信，夫人见杖，验知陈亡，集首领数千，尽日恸哭。
现代文：当初，夫人把扶南犀仗献给陈主，到了这时候，晋王杨广拿出陈主送给夫人的信，告诉她陈国灭亡了，让她归服，并且用兵符和犀杖作为凭证。夫人看见犀杖，确认陈国已经灭亡，聚集几千首领，整天痛哭。
English: At first, his wife dedicated the Battle of the Foonan Rhinoceros to Lord Chen. At this time, King Yang Guang of Jin took out the letter that Lord Chen had sent to his wife, telling her that the State of Chen had perished and asking her to submit. He also used the military badge and the rhinoceros cane as proof. When his wife saw the rhinoceros cane, she confirmed that the State of Chen had perished and gathered several thousand leaders to weep bitterly all day long.

古文：遣其孙魂帅众迎洸，入至广州，岭南悉定。
现代文：派她的孙子冯魂领着众人迎接韦氵光，进入广州，岭南全部平定。
English: She sent her grandson Feng Shun to lead the crowd to meet Wei Shuguang, enter Guangzhou, and subdue all of Lingnan.

古文：表魂为仪同三司，册夫人为宋康郡夫人。
现代文：韦氵光表奏冯魂仪同三司，册封夫人为宋康郡夫人。
English: The inscribed seal of Feng Tun is the ceremony with the three divisions, and the inscribed seal of the wife is the wife of Song Kang County.

古文：未几，番禺人王仲宣反，首领皆应之，围洸于州城，进兵屯衡岭。
现代文：不久，番禺人王仲宣谋反。首领都响应他，在州城包围了韦氵光，进兵屯在衡岭。
English: Before long, Wang Zhong, a Panyu man, declared a rebellion. The leaders all responded to him, surrounded Wei Xuguang in the state capital, and marched into Hengling.

古文：夫人遣孙暄帅师救洸。
现代文：夫人派孙子冯暄带领军队救韦氵光。
English: His wife sent her grandson Feng Rong to lead the army to rescue Wei Rongguang.

古文：暄与逆党陈佛智素相友善，故迟留不进。
现代文：冯暄同逆党陈佛智平时很要好，所以滞留不前。
English: Feng Xuan and the rebel party Chen Fuzhi are usually very good, so they do not move forward.

古文：夫人知之，大怒，遣使执暄，系于州狱。又遣孙盎出讨佛智，战克，斩之。
现代文：夫人听说非常愤怒，派人抓住冯暄，押在州牢中，又派孙子冯盎出讨陈佛智，战胜了，杀了佛智。
English: His wife was said to be very angry. She sent someone to seize Feng Xuan and put him in a state prison. She also sent her grandson Feng Weng to challenge Chen Fozhi. He won and killed Fozhi.

古文：进兵至南海，与鹿愿军会，共败仲宣。
现代文：进兵到南海，同鹿愿军队相会，一起打败仲宣。
English: He also sent his grandson Feng Ang to attack and kill Chen Fuzhi, marched into the South China Sea, met with De Rui's troops, and together defeated Wang Zhongxuan.

古文：夫人亲被甲，乘介马，张锦伞，领彀骑，卫诏使裴矩巡抚诸州，其苍梧首领陈坦、冈州冯岑翁、梁化邓马头、藤州李光略、罗州庞靖等皆来参谒。
现代文：夫人亲自披着铠甲，乘着战马，撑着锦伞，带领铁骑，保卫宣诏使者裴矩巡抚诸州。苍梧首领陈坦、冈州冯首领岑翁、梁化首领邓马头、藤州首领李光略、罗州首领庞靖等都来参拜裴矩。
English: His wife herself, wearing armor, riding a war horse, holding a brocade umbrella, and leading an iron horse, guarded and proclaimed the envoy Pei Mom to patrol the states. Gorgon leader Chen Tan, Gansu leader Feng Shao Weng, Lianghua leader Deng Ma Tou, Fujian leader Li Guangliao, and Luozhou leader Pang Jing all came to pay homage to Pei Mom.

古文：还令统其部落，岭表遂定。
现代文：仍然让他们统率他们的部落，岭表一带就安定下来。
English: Still let them lead their tribes, and the area around the ridge table will settle down.

古文：高祖异之，拜盎为高州刺史，仍赦出暄，拜罗州刺史。
现代文：高祖很惊异，拜冯盎为高州刺史，仍然赦免了冯暄，拜为罗州刺史。
English: Gaozu was very surprised. He pardoned Feng Xuan, and pardoned Luo Zhou.

古文：追赠宝为广州总管、谯国公，册夫人为谯国夫人。
现代文：追赠冯宝为广州总管、谯国公，册封夫人为谯国夫人。
English: Feng Bao was posthumously awarded the title of General Manager of Guangzhou and Governor of Shandong Province, and his wife was awarded the title of Lady of Shandong Province.

古文：夫人宜训导子孙，敦崇礼教，遵奉朝化，以副朕心。 
现代文：把宋康邑赏赐给冯仆的妾冼氏，依旧开谯国夫人幕府，设置长史以下官属，给印章，任凭调动部落六州兵马，如果有紧急情况，可以随机行事。
English: The concubine Min clan, which gave Song Kangyur to Feng Zhuang, still established the Lady of the Country Shogunate, set up officials and subordinates under Long Shi, gave seals, and allowed the tribe to mobilize soldiers and horses from six states. If there is an emergency, they can act randomly.

古文：皇后以首饰及宴服一袭赐之，夫人并盛于金箧，并梁、陈赐物各藏于一库。
现代文：下诏书赐夫人布帛五千段，令夫人训教子孙，遵奉教化。皇后把首饰和宴服一套赐给夫人，夫人一同盛在金箧里，同梁国、陈国赐物各藏在一个仓库里。
English: In the following imperial edict, the Empress gave her consort five thousand pieces of cloth, instructing her to teach her children and grandchildren and make them follow the teachings. The Empress gave her consort a set of jewelry and a banquet gown, which she placed in a golden urn together with her consort. The gifts from Liang Guo and Chen Guo were each hidden in a warehouse.

古文：每岁时大会，皆陈于庭，以示子孙，曰： 汝等宜尽赤心向天子。
现代文：每年大集会，都陈列在庭上，用以明示子孙。她说： 你们应该忠心对待天子。
English: She said: "You should be loyal to the Son of God.

古文：我事三代主，唯用一好心。
现代文：我侍奉三代皇帝，只用一片诚心。
English: I have served three generations of monarchs with nothing but a good heart.

古文：今赐物具存，此忠孝之报也，愿汝皆思念之。 
现代文：现在赏赐的东西都在，这是忠孝的报答，希望你们都思念。 
English: Everything I have been given now is here. This is the reward for loyalty and filial piety. I hope you will all think about it.

古文：时番州总管赵讷贪虐，诸俚獠多有亡叛。
现代文：当时番州总管赵讷非常贪婪暴虐，各处俚人獠人多有逃亡叛乱的。
English: At that time, the head of Fanzhou, Zhao Ne, was greedy and tyrannical, and most of those Yi people fled and rebelled.

古文：夫人遣长史张融上封事，论安抚之宜，并言讷罪状，不可以招怀远人。
现代文：夫人派长史张融上密奏，论安抚的办法，并说明赵讷的罪状，不能让他招抚边远之人。
English: His wife sent Zhang Rong, the chief historian, on a secret mission to discuss methods of appeasement and explain Zhao Ne's crimes, and that he should not be allowed to appease people in outlying areas.

古文：上遣推讷，得其赃贿，竟致于法。
现代文：皇上派人追问赵讷，搜获他的赃物，终至于依法论罪。
English: The emperor sent someone to question Zhao Na, seized his stolen goods, and eventually convicted him according to law.

古文：降敕委夫人招慰亡叛。
现代文：下诏委任夫人招慰逃亡反叛之人。
English: The following edict appointed his wife to solicit fugitive rebels.

古文：夫人亲载诏书，自称使者，历十余州，宣述上意，谕诸俚獠，所至皆降。
现代文：夫人亲自带着诏书，自称是皇上使者，经过十余州宣布皇上的圣意，遍告各位俚獠，所到的地方都降服了。
English: His wife personally carried the imperial rescript, claiming to be the emperor's emissary, went through more than ten states to announce the emperor's sacred will, and told everyone everywhere, and all the places they went to surrendered.

古文：高祖嘉之，赐夫人临振县汤沐邑，一千五百户。
现代文：高祖嘉奖她，赐夫人临振县汤沐邑，食邑一千五百户。
English: Gao Zu commended her and gave her the Tang Mu Village of Linzhen County, with 1,500 households.

古文：赠仆为岩州总管、平原郡公。
现代文：追赠冯仆为崖州总管、平原郡公。
English: As a posthumous gift, Feng Servant became the chief administrator of Yap State and the governor of Pingyuan County.

古文：仁寿初，卒，赙物一千段，谥为诚敬夫人。
现代文：仁寿初年，夫人逝世，赐物一千段，谥号为诚敬夫人。
English: In the first year of his benevolent life, his wife died, leaving him a gift of one thousand dan, and his nickname was Lady Sincerity.

