古文：曹鼐王佐孙祥袁彬
现代文：曹鼐，字万锺，宁晋人。
English: Cao Qi, Zi Wan Qi, Ning Jin Ren.

古文：曹鼐，字万钟，宁晋人。少伉爽有大志，事继母以孝闻。宣德初，由乡举授代州训导，愿授别职，改泰和县典史。
现代文：年少时刚直豪爽志向远大，侍奉继母以孝顺闻名。宣德初年，中乡试任命为代州训导，愿意任其它职务，改任泰和县典史。
English: When he was young, he was an upright man with high aspirations, and was known for his filial piety while serving his stepmother. In the first year of Xuande, Zhongxiang was appointed as the acting state tutor, and he was willing to take on other positions, changing his position to the history of Taihe County.

古文：七年督工匠至京师，疏乞入试，复中顺天乡试。
现代文：七年，督伲工匠到京城，上疏请求入场考试，又中顺天乡试。
English: In the seventh year, Duxuan craftsmen came to Beijing, Shangsu requested an entrance examination, and Zhongshun Tianxiang tried again.

古文：明年举进士一甲第一，赐宴礼部。
现代文：第二年，中进士一甲第一，皇帝在礼部赐宴。
English: In the second year, the Emperor gave a banquet in the ceremonial hall.

古文：进士宴礼部，自鼐始。
现代文：进士在礼部赐宴，从曹鼐开始。
English: The officiant will give a banquet in the ceremonial hall, starting with Cao Yu.

古文：入翰林，为修撰。
现代文：进入翰林院，任修撰。
English: Entered the Hanlin Academy and was appointed as a scholar.

古文：正统元年，充经筵讲官。
现代文：正统元年，充任御前讲席讲官。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he was appointed as a lecturer at the Imperial throne.

古文：《宣宗实录》成，进侍讲，锡三品章服。
现代文：《宣宗实录》完成，进升为侍讲，赏赐三品章服。
English: The "Proclamation of the True Faith" was completed, he was promoted to attendant lecturer, and was awarded three pieces of chapter clothing.

古文：五年，以杨荣、杨士奇荐，入直文渊阁，参预机务。
现代文：五年，因杨荣、杨士奇的推荐，进入文渊闰任职，参与机要事务。
English: In five years, due to the recommendation of Yang Rong and Yang Shiqi, he entered Wenyuan Leap and participated in important affairs.

古文：鼐为人内刚外和，通达政体。
现代文：曹鼐为人内心刚强外表平和，通晓执政大要。
English: Cao Wei is a man who is strong at heart, peaceful on the outside, and knows the essentials of governing.

古文：荣既殁，士奇常病不视事，阁务多决于鼐。
现代文：杨荣去世后，杨士奇经常有病不能管事，文渊阁的事务多决定于曹鼐。
English: After the death of Yang Rong, Yang Shiqi was often ill and unable to manage affairs. The affairs of Wenyuan Pavilion were mostly decided by Cao Pi.

古文：帝以为贤，进翰林学士。
现代文：皇帝认为他贤良，进升为翰林学士。
English: The emperor considered him to be virtuous and promoted him to the rank of Hanlin Scholar.

古文：十年进吏部左侍郎兼学士。
现代文：十年，进升为吏部左侍郎兼学士。
English: Ten years later, he was promoted to the left hand man of the personnel department and a bachelor.

古文：十四年七月，也先入寇，中官王振挟帝亲征。
现代文：十四年七月，也先入侵，宦官王振挟持皇帝亲自征讨。
English: In July 14th, they also invaded first, and eunuch Wang Zhen took the emperor personally to collect taxes.

古文：朝臣交章谏，不听。鼐与张益以阁臣扈从。
现代文：朝廷大臣交互上书进谏，不听，曹鼐和张益以阁臣身份随从皇帝出巡。
English: The ministers of the imperial court alternately wrote to the emperor, but he did not listen. Cao Pi and Zhang Yi, as cabinet ministers, accompanied the emperor on a tour.

古文：未至大同，士卒已乏粮。宋瑛、朱冕全军没。
现代文：还没有到大同，士卒已经缺乏粮食，宋瑛、朱冕全军覆没，众臣请求撤军回朝。
English: Before reaching Datong, the officers and men were already short of food, Song Ying and Zhu Guan had lost their entire army, and their vassals were pleading with them to withdraw back to the imperial court.

古文：诸臣请班师，振不许，趣诸军进。大将朱勇膝行听命，尚书邝埜、王佐跪草中，至暮不得请。
现代文：王振不允许，督促各军进攻。大将朱勇跪行听命，尚书墉婪、王佐跪在草中，到晚上请求仍没有得到允许。
English: Wang Zhen did not allow it and urged all the troops to attack. General Zhu Yong knelt down and obeyed his orders, Shang Shuxuan greedily, Wang Zu knelt down in the grass, and the request was still not allowed in the evening.

古文：钦天监正彭德清言天象示警，若前，恐危乘舆。
现代文：钦天监正彭德清进言说天象显示警报，如果前进，恐怕危及皇帝。
English: Qin Heavenly Inspector Peng Deqing said that the celestial object showed an alarm, and if it moved forward, it would endanger the emperor.

古文：振詈曰： 尔何知！
现代文：王振骂道： 你知道什么！
English: Wang Zhen scolded: You know what!

古文：若有此，亦天命也。 
现代文：如果有这样的事，也是天命。 
English: If there is such a thing, it is also fate.

古文：鼐曰： 臣子固不足惜，主上系天下安危，岂可轻进？ 
现代文：曹鼐说： 臣子本来不值得颅惜，皇帝关系到天下的安危，怎能轻率前进？ 
English: Cao Pi said, "A courtier is not worthy of being patted on the head. The emperor is related to the safety and security of the world. How can he move forward rashly?

古文：振终不从。
现代文：王振最终没有听从。
English: In the end, Wang Zhen did not listen.

古文：前驱败报踵至，始惧，欲还。
现代文：先行部队失败的消息接踵而至，纔开始害怕，想要回去。
English: The news of the defeat of the advance troops came one after another, and the baboons began to be afraid and wanted to go back.

古文：定襄侯郭登言于鼐、益曰： 自此趋紫荆，裁四十余里，驾宜从紫荆入。 
现代文：定襄侯郭登对曹鼐、张益说： 从这里赶到紫剂关，纔四十多里，皇帝应从紫剂关入京。 
English: Guodeng, the Prince of Dingxiang, said to Cao Pi and Zhang Yi: From here, it takes more than forty miles to get to Ziyangguan, and the emperor should enter Beijing from Ziyangguan.

古文：振欲邀帝至蔚州幸其第，不听，复折而东，趋居庸。
现代文：王振想请皇帝到蔚州临幸他的府宅，不听，又转折向东走，赶赴居庸关。
English: Wang Zhen wanted to invite the emperor to visit his mansion in Ulshu, but he did not listen, and turned to the east to go to Juyongguan.

古文：八月辛酉次土木。
现代文：八月辛酉，驻扎在土木。
English: In August, he was stationed in Tsuchimoku.

古文：地高，掘地二丈不及水。
现代文：地势高，掘地二丈不见水。
English: The terrain is high, the excavated area is two-storeys high, and there is no water.

古文：瓦剌大至，据南河。
现代文：瓦剌大军到来，占据南河。
English: The Varangian army arrives and occupies Nanhe.

古文：明日佯却，且遣使通和。
现代文：第二日佯装退却，并派使者沟通讲和。
English: On the second day, he pretended to retreat and sent an envoy to negotiate peace.

古文：帝召鼐草诏答之。
现代文：皇帝召曹鼐草拟诏书答复他。
English: The emperor summoned Cao Bing to draft an edict to reply to him.

古文：振遽令移营就水，行乱。
现代文：王振仓促命令迁移营地靠近水源，队伍混乱。
English: Wang Zhen hastily ordered the relocation of the camp near the water source, and the team was in disarray.

古文：寇骑蹂阵入，帝突围不得出，拥以去。
现代文：寇贼骑兵践踏营阵冲入，皇帝突围不能出去，被挟持而去。
English: The corsair cavalry trampled the camp and rushed in. The emperor could not break out of the encirclement and was taken hostage.

古文：鼐、益等俱及于难。
现代文：曹鼐、张益等都遇难。
English: Cao Wei, Zhang Yi and others were all killed.

古文：景帝立，赠鼐少傅、吏部尚书、文渊阁大学士，谥文襄，官其子恩大理评事。
现代文：景帝即位，追赠曹鼐少傅、吏部尚书、文渊阁大学士，谧号文襄，任命他的儿子曹恩为大理评事。
English: When Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, he posthumously bestowed upon Cao Jun the titles of Cao Jun Shao Fu, Li Bu Shang Shu, and Wen Yuan Ge University Scholar, and appointed his son Cao En as the Dalian Commentator.

古文：英宗复位，加赠太傅，改谥文忠，复官其孙荣锦衣百户。
现代文：英宗复值，加赠太傅，改谧号文忠，又封他的孙子曹荣为锦衣百户。
English: Yingzong restored the value, added Taifu, changed the surname to Wenzhong, and named his grandson Cao Rong as the best of the best.

古文：鼐弟鼎进士，历吏科都给事中。
现代文：曹鼐弟弟曹鼎是进士，任吏科都给事中。
English: Cao Cao's younger brother Cao Ding was promoted to the rank of academician.

古文：张益，字士谦，江宁人。
现代文：张益，字士谦，江宁人。
English: Zhang Yi, Zi Shi Qian, Jiangning Ren.

古文：永乐十三年进士。
现代文：永乐十三年进士。
English: Yongle, a 13-year-old junior high school student, passed the entrance examination.

古文：由庶吉士授中书舍人，改大理评事。
现代文：由庶吉士任命为中书舍人，改任大理评事。
English: He was appointed as a member of the Chinese Calligraphy Society by his father-in-law Kishi, and was later appointed as a commentator of Dali.

古文：与修《宣宗实录》成，改修撰。
现代文：参与修纂《宣宗实录》完成，改任修撰。
English: He participated in the compilation of the "Proclamation Record" and was appointed as a reviewer.

古文：博学强记，诗文操笔立就，三杨雅重之。
现代文：博学强记，诗文挥笔而成，三杨素来敬重他。
English: Erudite, with a strong memory and a penchant for poetry, Sanyang has always respected him.

古文：寻进侍读学士，正统十四年入文渊阁。
现代文：不久进升为侍读学士。正统十四年，进入文渊阁。
English: He was soon promoted to attendant bachelor. After fourteen years of orthodoxy, he entered Bunyukaku.

古文：未三月，遽蒙难以殁。
现代文：不到三个月，突然遇难去世。
English: Less than three months later, he died suddenly.

古文：景帝立，赠学士，谥文僖。
现代文：景帝即位，追赠学士，谧号文僖。
English: Emperor Jing ascended the throne, posthumously awarded a bachelor's degree, and received the posthumous title of Wenjun.

古文：曾孙琮进士。
现代文：曾孙张琮是进士。
English: Zhang Ye's great-grandson is a graduate.

古文：嘉靖初历官南京右都御史。
现代文：嘉靖初年，任南东右都御史。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, he was appointed as the governor of the southeastern right capital.

古文：邝埜，字孟质，宜章人。
现代文：墉婪，字孟质，宜章人。
English: Greed, character and quality, are the characteristics of a good person.

古文：永乐九年进士，授监察御史。
现代文：永乐九年进士。任命为监察御史。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 9th year of Yongle and was appointed as the inspector general of history.

古文：成祖在北京，或奏南京钞法为豪民沮坏，帝遣埜廉视。众谓将起大狱，埜执一二市豪归。奏曰： 市人闻令震惧，钞法通矣。 
现代文：成祖在北京，有人上奏南京纸币制度被豪强破坏，皇帝派墉堃查访，众人都以为将要大肆逮捕，郦堃逮捕一两个街市豪强回京，上奏说： 市人听到命令很害怕，纸币制度通行了。 
English: Cheng Zu was in Beijing. Someone reported to him that the paper money system in Nanjing had been destroyed by the local strongmen. The emperor sent an envoy to inspect the situation. Everyone thought that there would be a large-scale arrest, and that one or two of the local strongmen would be arrested and brought back to Beijing. The envoy said, "The people of the city were very afraid when they heard the order, and the paper money system was allowed to go into effect."

古文：事遂已。
现代文：事情就完结了。
English: It's over.

古文：倭犯辽东，戍守失律者百余人，皆应死。
现代文：倭寇侵犯辽东，戍守违法的一百多人，都应当处死。
English: The more than one hundred people who invaded Liaodong and illegally occupied it should all be put to death.

古文：命埜按问，具言可矜状，帝为宥之。
现代文：命令墉堃查办，上奏述说值得怜悯的情况，皇帝宽恕了他们。
English: The emperor pardoned them, after ordering the magistrate to investigate the case and report the situation to the emperor as deserving of mercy.

古文：营造北京，执役者钜万，命埜稽省，病者多不死。
现代文：营建北京，服劳役的极多，命令墉茎稽察，病的人大多没有死去。
English: During the construction of Beijing, there were a lot of forced laborers, and the inspection of the sprouts was ordered. Most of the sick people did not die.

古文：十六年有言秦民群聚谋不轨者，擢埜陕西按察副使，敕以便宜调兵剿捕。
现代文：十六年，有人报告秦地百姓群聚图谋不轨，升任墉堃为陕西按察副使，诏令见机调兵清剿逮捕。
English: Sixteen years later, it was reported that a group of people from Qin and other provinces had gathered in an attempt to derail the plan. Zou was promoted to the post of deputy inspector of Shaanxi Province, and the imperial edict saw the opportunity to transfer troops and arrest Qing Zou.

古文：埜白其诬，诏诛妄言者。
现代文：墉堃说明事情的虚假，诏令诛杀乱说的人。
English: explain the falsity of the matter,  order the killing of those who talk nonsense.

古文：宣德四年振关中饥。
现代文：宣德四年，赈济关中饥荒。
English: In the four years of Xuande, there was a famine in Fuzhiguan.

古文：在陕久，刑政清简。
现代文：在陕西时间长，刑罚清明简约。
English: In Shaanxi, the time is long, and the punishment is clear and simple.

古文：父忧服除，擢应天府尹。
现代文：父亲去世服丧期满，升任应天府尹。
English: When the mourning period for his father's death expired, he was promoted to Ying Tianfu Yin.

古文：蠲苛急政，市征田税皆酌其平。
现代文：免除苛刻过急的行政措施，市场征收田地赋税都考虑让它平缓。
English: Exemption from harsh and hasty administrative measures, the market levying field tax are all considered to make it smooth.

古文：正统元年进兵部右侍郎。
现代文：正统元年，进升为兵部右侍郎。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he was promoted to the position of the right hand man of the military department.

古文：明年，尚书王骥出督军，埜独任部事。
现代文：第二年，尚书王骥出京督察军务，郦堃独自管理兵部事务。
English: In the following year, Prince Shangshu went to Beijing to supervise the military affairs, and managed the affairs of the military department independently.

古文：时边陲多警，将帅乏人，埜请令中外博举谋略材武士，以备任使。
现代文：当时边疆多有警报，将帅缺乏人选，墉堃请求命令朝廷内外广泛举荐有谋略才干勇武的士人，以准备任用。
English: At that time, there were many alarms on the frontier, there was a lack of candidates for generals, and the emperor requested an order to widely recommend strategists and brave warriors inside and outside the imperial court to prepare for appointment.

古文：六年，山东灾。
现代文：六年，山东遭灾。
English: Six years have passed since the disaster in Shandong.

古文：埜请宽民间孳牧马赔偿之令，以苏其力。
现代文：墉堃请求放宽民间繁殖牧养马匹赔赏的法令，以恢复百姓的财力。
English: Request to relax the law of compensation for private breeding and herding horses in order to restore the financial resources of the people.

古文：十年进尚书。
现代文：十年，进升为尚书。
English: Ten years later, it was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：旧例诸卫自百户以下当代者，必就试京师，道远无资者，终身不得代。
现代文：旧有制度各卫从百户以下当接替的，必须到京城考试，道路迁远没有钱的，终身不能接替。
English: Under the old system, those who were to take over from less than a hundred households had to take an exam in the capital, and those who did not have the money to move far away from the road could not take over for life.

古文：埜请就令各都司试之，人以为便。
现代文：废垒请求就近命令各都司考试他们，人们都认为方便。
English: The people thought it was convenient to order the prefectural government to examine them.

古文：瓦剌也先势盛，埜请为备，又与廷臣议上方略，请增大同兵，择智谋大臣巡视西北边务。
现代文：瓦剌也先势力强盛，墉堃请求作好防备，又和朝廷大臣商议上奏策略，请求增加大同兵力，选择有智谋的大臣巡视西北边疆事务。
English: Vaju, whose power was also strong at the time, requested that preparations be made. He also discussed with the ministers of the imperial court on the strategy of rising up, requested an increase in the number of troops, and selected a wise minister to inspect the affairs of the northwest frontier.

古文：寻又请罢京营兵修城之役，令休息以备缓急。
现代文：不久又请求废止京城士兵修建城池的劳役，命令他们休息以应付紧急情况。
English: Soon after, he requested the abolition of the labour service of the soldiers in the capital to build the city, and ordered them to take a break to deal with emergencies.

古文：时不能用。
现代文：当时不能采纳。
English: The recommendation was not implemented.

古文：也先入寇，王振主亲征，不与外廷议可否。
现代文：也先入侵，王振主张皇帝亲自出征，不和朝廷商议可以不可以。
English: They also invaded first. Wang Zhen advocated that the emperor should personally go to war, and whether or not he should consult with the imperial court.

古文：诏下，埜上疏言： 也先入犯，一边将足制之。
现代文：诏书下达，墉堃上疏说： 也先入侵，一个边将就足以制服他们。
English: When the imperial edict was issued, Zhang Xiangsu said, "We will also invade first. One general will be enough to subdue them."

古文：陛下为宗庙社稷主，奈何不自重。 不听。
现代文：陛下作为一国之主，怎能不珍重自己。 不听。
English: Your Majesty, as the head of a country, how can you not value yourself.

古文：既扈驾出关，力请回銮。
现代文：已护卫皇帝出关，竭力请求回宫。
English: He had escorted the emperor out of the imperial palace and pleaded with him to come back.

古文：振怒，令与户部尚书王佐皆随大营。
现代文：王振恼怒，命令他和户部尚书王佐都随大营行军。
English: Wang Zhen was furious and ordered him and his household secretary, Wang Zuo, to march with the army.

古文：埜堕马几殆，或劝留怀来城就医。
现代文：墉堃落马几乎死去，有人劝他留在怀来城治病。
English: Zhao Luo Ma almost died. Someone advised him to stay in Huailai City for treatment.

古文：埜曰： 至尊在行，敢托疾自便乎？ 
现代文：墉茎说： 皇帝行在途中，敢托病自由行动吗？ 
English: Bran said: The emperor is on his way, do you dare to take sick leave?

古文：车驾次宣府，朱勇败没。
现代文：皇帝到宣府，朱勇战败阵亡。
English: When the emperor arrived at Xuanfu, Zhu Yong was defeated and killed.

古文：埜请疾驱入关，严兵为殿。
现代文：墉堃请求快速入关，用严整的军队殿后。
English: Request fast entry and exit with a well-groomed military escort.

古文：不报。
现代文：不回复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：又诣行在申请。
现代文：又到皇帝驻地申诉请求。
English: He also went to the emperor's residence to appeal.

古文：振怒曰： 腐儒安知兵事，再言者死！ 
现代文：王振恼怒地说： 迂腐的儒生怎么懂得用兵之事，再说者处死！ 
English: Wang Zhen said angrily: How can a pedantic Confucian understand the use of soldiers, let alone be put to death!

古文：埜曰： 我为社稷生灵言，何惧？ 
现代文：廊堃说： 我为国家百姓说话，害怕什么？ 
English: "I'm speaking for the people of my country. What are you afraid of?"

古文：振叱左右扶出。
现代文：王振叱令左右把他拖出去。
English: Wang Zhen scolded and dragged him out.

古文：埜与佐对泣帐中。
现代文：墉堃和王佐相对哭泣于帐中。
English: Zou and Wang Zu are crying in the middle of the account.

古文：明日，师覆，埜死，年六十五。
现代文：第二天，军队覆没，郦董死难，时年六十五岁。
English: The next day, the army was wiped out, and Yu Dong died at the age of sixty-five.

古文：埜为人勤廉端谨，性至孝。
现代文：郦堃为人勤奋廉洁端正谨慎，生性十分孝顺。
English: He is diligent, honest, upright and prudent. He is very filial by nature.

古文：父子辅为句容教官，教埜甚严。
现代文：父亲墉子辅任句容教官，教育墉婪很严格。
English: His father, Zou Zi Fu, was an instructor at the Confucius Institute, and his education was very strict.

古文：埜在陕久，思一见父，乃谋聘父为乡试考官。
现代文：墉茎在陕西时间久，想见一见父亲，就计划聘任父亲为乡试考官。
English: He had been in Shaanxi for a long time and wanted to see his father. He planned to hire his father as the township examiner.

古文：父怒曰： 子居宪司，而父为考官，何以防闲？ 
现代文：父亲愤怒地说： 儿子任监察官，而父亲任考官，怎么防范？ 
English: The father angrily said, "How can we prevent our son from becoming an inspector and our father an examiner?

古文：驰书责之。
现代文：急速去信责备他。
English: She quickly disowned him and blamed him.

古文：埜又尝寄父褐，复贻书责曰： 汝掌刑名，当洗冤释滞，以无忝任使，何从得此褐，乃以污我。 
现代文：郦堃又曾经寄给父亲褐布，父亲又寄信责备他说： 你掌管刑律，应当洗刷冤情解决疑难问题，以无愧于任命，从哪里得到这块褐布，用来玷污我。 
English: He also sent a brown cloth to his father, and his father sent a letter to rebuke him, saying, "You are in charge of the criminal law. You should clear up grievances and solve difficult problems to be worthy of appointment. Where did you get this brown cloth to use to defile me?"

古文：封还之。
现代文：包好退还他。
English: return it to him in a sealed package.

古文：埜奉书跪诵，泣受教。
现代文：墉堃捧信跪读，哭着接受教诲。
English: He read the letter on his knees, weeping as he received the instruction.

古文：景泰初，赠埜少保，官其子仪为主事。
现代文：景泰初年，追赠墉茔少保，任他的儿子墉仪为主事。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, he posthumously granted Gong Shao Bao, and let his son Pu Yi take the lead.

古文：成化初，谥忠肃。
现代文：成化初年，赠谧号忠肃。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was awarded the honorary title of Zhongsu.

古文：王佐，海丰人。
现代文：王佐，海丰人。
English: Wang Zuo, Hai Feng Ren.

古文：永乐中举于乡。
现代文：永乐年间乡试中举。
English: Yongle won the junior high school examination in his hometown.

古文：卒业太学，以学行闻，擢吏科给事中。
现代文：毕业于太学，以学问品行闻名，升任吏科给事中。
English: He graduated from the University of Taichung, and is known for his academic performance. He was promoted to the middle of the administrative department.

古文：器宇凝重，奏对详雅，为宣宗所简注。
现代文：仪态稳重，上奏对答详尽儒雅，被宣宗所关注。
English: His dignified demeanor, and detailed and refined responses to the first performance, attracted the attention of Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：宣德二年，超拜户部右侍郎。
现代文：童德二年，破格拜授户部右侍郎。
English: In the second year of his childhood, he was given the unprecedented honor of becoming the right hand man of the household.

古文：以太仓、临清、德州、淮、徐诸仓多积弊，敕佐巡视。
现代文：因太仓、临清、德州、淮、徐各仓多累积的弊病，诏令王佐巡视。
English: Due to the accumulated maladies in Taicang, Linqing, Dezhou, Huai and Xu warehouses, Wang Zuo was ordered to inspect.

古文：平江伯陈瑄言，漕卒十二万人，岁漕艰苦，乞佥南方民如军数，更番转运。
现代文：平江伯陈管进言说，漕运的士卒十二万人，每年漕运艰苦，请求征集和漕运士卒数量相同的南方百姓，轮流担任转运。
English: Pingjiang Mayor Chen Guan said that there are 120,000 rowing taxi drivers, and rowing transport is arduous every year. He requested to recruit the same number of southern people as rowing taxi drivers, and take turns to serve as transshipment.

古文：诏佐就瑄及黄福议之。
现代文：诏令王佐去和陈坛及黄福商议。
English: He ordered Wang Zuo to consult with Chen Tan and Huang Fu.

古文：佐还奏，东南民力已困，议遂寝。
现代文：王佐回来上奏，东南民力已困乏，建议就被搁置。
English: When Wang Zuo returned to report, the southeastern people's strength was exhausted, and the proposal was shelved.

古文：受命治通州至直沽河道。
现代文：接受命令治理通州到直沽的河道。
English: He was ordered to manage the river from Tongzhou to Dajiaocheng.

古文：已，赴宣府议屯田事宜。
现代文：事后，到宣府商议屯田事务。
English: Afterwards, they went to Xuanwu to discuss the issue of the military cantonment.

古文：英宗初立，出镇河南。
现代文：英宗刚即位，出京镇守河南。
English: Soon after Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, he went to Beijing to govern Henan Province.

古文：奏言军卫收纳税粮，奸弊百出，请变其制。
现代文：上奏说军卫征收税粮，奸诈弊端到处出现，请求改变制度。
English: It was reported that the military guards levied taxes and grain, and there were malpractices everywhere, and it was requested to change the system.

古文：廷议自边卫外，皆改隶有司。
现代文：朝廷商议除边卫外，都改为隶属有司。
English: With the exception of border guards, all Imperial Court deliberations were placed under the jurisdiction of the Imperial Division.

古文：寻召还，命督理甘肃军饷。
现代文：不久召回，命令管理甘肃军饷。
English: He was soon recalled and ordered to manage the Gansu Military Region.

古文：正统元年理长芦盐课，三年提督京师及通州仓场，所至事无不办。
现代文：正统元年，治理长芦盥税。三年，管理京城和通州的仓库货场。所到之处事情没有办不好的。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, he administered the reed tax. For three years, he managed warehouses in Beijing and Tongzhou. Everywhere he went, things went well.

古文：六年，尚书刘中敷得罪，召理部事，寻进尚书。
现代文：六年，尚书刘中敷获罪，召回管理户部事务，不久进升为尚书。
English: In six years, Shangshu Liu Zhongshiki was convicted, recalled to manage the household affairs, and soon promoted to Shangshu.

古文：十一年承诏讯安乡伯张安兄弟争禄事，坐与法司相诿，被劾下吏，获释。
现代文：十一年，秉承诏令审讯安乡伯张安兄弟争夺俸禄的事，被判定和法司相互推诿有罪，被弹劾交付法司审讯，获得释放。
English: In the eleventh year, adhering to the imperial edict, he tried the Anxiang Bo Zhang'an brothers for the salary dispute, was found guilty of pushing each other and the law department, was impeached and handed over to the law department for trial, and was released.

古文：时军旅四出，耗费动以钜万，府库空虚。
现代文：当时军队四处征伐，耗费动不动就极多，国库空虚。
English: At that time, the army was conquering everywhere, the expenditure was enormous, and the treasury was empty.

古文：佐从容调剂，节缩有方。
现代文：王佐从容调剂，节约紧缩有方。
English: Wang Zuo adjusts the dosage with ease, and is economical and economical.

古文：在户部久，不为赫赫名，而宽厚有度，政务纠纷，未尝废学，人称其君子。
现代文：在户部时间久，不追求显赫的名声，而宽大忠厚有节制，政务杂乱，不曾荒废学业，人们称他为君子。
English: He has been in the household department for a long time, does not pursue a prominent reputation, but is generous and loyal, has restraint, government affairs are messy, has not wasted his studies, and people call him a gentleman.

古文：土木之变，与邝埜、丁铉、王永和、邓棨同死难。
现代文：土木之变，和墉堃、丁铉、王永和、邓鉴同时遇难。
English: Due to changes in civil engineering, Kazuchika, Ding Jun, Wang Yonghe, and Deng Jian all died at the same time.

古文：赠少保，官其子道户部主事。
现代文：追赠少保，任命他的儿子王道为户部主事。
English: He posthumously granted him the title of Junior Public Security Officer and appointed his son Wang Dao as the head of the Household Department.

古文：成化初，谥忠简。
现代文：成化初年，赠谧号忠简。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was awarded the honorary title of Zhongjian.

古文：丁铉，字用济，丰城人。永乐中进士。
现代文：丁铉，字用济，丰城人，永乐年间进士。
English: Ding Xi, Zha Yuzhi, Fengcheng people, Yongle years into the stars.

古文：授太常博士。
现代文：任命为太常博士。
English: He was appointed as Dr. Taijō.

古文：历工、刑、吏三部员外郎，进刑部郎中。
现代文：历任工、刑、吏三部员外郎，进升为刑部郎中。
English: He was promoted to vice-minister of the Ministry of Public Security after serving as vice-minister of the three departments of labor, punishment, and public officials.

古文：正统三年超拜刑部侍郎。
现代文：正统三年，破格授予刑部侍郎。
English: After three years of regular service, he was awarded the unprecedented title of Criminal Investigation Officer.

古文：九年出理四川茶课，奏减其常数，以俟丰岁。
现代文：九年，出京管理四川茶税，上奏减少固定的数量，以等待丰收之年。
English: In the ninth year, he went to Beijing to manage the Sichuan tea tax, and reduced the fixed quantity to wait for the year of the harvest.

古文：振饥江淮及山东、河南，民咸赖之。
现代文：到江、淮和山东、河南赈济饥荒，人民都依靠他。
English: The people rely on him to relieve the famine in Jiangsu, Huaihe, Shandong and Henan.

古文：平居恂恂若无能，临事悉治办。
现代文：平日温顺恭谨像没有能力，遇事都能办好。
English: Ordinary meekness and gentleness seem to have no ability to handle things well.

古文：从征殁，赠刑部尚书，官其子琥大理评事。
现代文：随从出征阵亡，追赠刑部尚书，任他的儿子丁琥焉大理评事。
English: He was killed in the campaign, and was posthumously given a book of the Ministry of Justice, and his son Ding Yandai was appointed as a commentator.

古文：后谥襄愍。
现代文：后赠谧号襄愍。
English: He was later given the posthumous name "Xiang Yu."

古文：王永和，字以正，昆山人。
现代文：玉永和，字以正，昆山人。
English: Yu Yonghe, surnamed Yizheng, from Kunshan.

古文：少至孝。
现代文：年少时十分孝顺。
English: He was very dutiful when he was young.

古文：父病伏枕十八年，侍汤药无少懈。
现代文：父亲生病卧床十八年，侍奉汤药从不松懈。
English: My father has been ill in bed for eighteen years, and he has never slacked in serving soup and medicine.

古文：永乐中举于乡，历严州、饶州训导。
现代文：永乐年问乡试中举，历任严州、饶州训导。
English: In the Yongle Year, he visited his hometown to give a junior high school entrance examination, and successively served as a tutor in Yanzhou and Raozhou.

古文：以蹇义荐，为兵科给事中。
现代文：因蹇义的推荐，任兵科给事中。
English: Due to the recommendation of Xinyi, Ren Bingke was removed from the case.

古文：尝劾都督王彧镇蓟州纵寇，及锦衣马顺不法事。
现代文：曾经弹劾都督王或镇守煎刈放纵寇贼，以及锦衣马顺违法的事情。
English: He once impeached the governor of the capital or the town guard for letting the robbers go free, as well as the illegal things of Jinling Ma Shun.

古文：持节册韩世子妃，纠中官蹇傲罪。
现代文：持符节册立韩世子的妃子，举发宦官傲慢的罪行。
English: It is a crime of arrogance for a eunuch to set up Han Sejong's concubine on the day of the festival.

古文：以劲直闻。
现代文：以刚劲正直闻名。
English: Known for his toughness and honesty.

古文：正统六年进都给事中。
现代文：正统六年，进升为都给事中。
English: After six years of orthodoxy, promotion and advancement are both in the middle of things.

古文：八年擢工部右侍郎。
现代文：八年，升任工部右侍郎。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to the post of Right Attendant of the Ministry of Works.

古文：从征殁，赠工部尚书，官其子汝贤大理评事。
现代文：随从出征阵亡，追赠工部尚书，任他的儿子王汝贤为大理评事。
English: He was killed in the campaign and was posthumously awarded the title of Shang Shu of the Ministry of Industry, and his son Wang Ruxian was appointed as a Dalian commentator.

古文：后谥襄敏。
现代文：后来赠谧号襄敏。
English: Later, he was given the nickname "Xiangmin."

古文：邓棨，字孟扩，南城人。
现代文：邓桨，字孟扩，南城人。
English: Deng Oar, Meng Zhan, Nancheng people.

古文：永乐末年进士。
现代文：永乐末年进士。
English: Yongle at the end of the year.

古文：授监察御史，奉敕巡按苏、松诸府。
现代文：任命为监察御史，奉诏巡按苏、松各府。
English: He was appointed as the inspector general of history, and went on a tour of the prefectures of Su and Song.

古文：期满将代去，父老赴阙乞留，得请。
现代文：任期屈满将要被接替而离去，父老乡亲到京城请求留任，得以允许。
English: When his term of office expired, he was about to be replaced and leave. His father and fellow townsmen went to the capital to request that he remain in office, which was granted.

古文：旋以忧去。
现代文：不久又因服丧离去。
English: Soon he left again because of mourning.

古文：宣德十年，陕西阙按察使，诏廷臣举清慎有威望者。
现代文：宣德十年，陕西缺按察使，诏令朝廷大臣举荐清廉谨慎有威望的。
English: Ten years after the promulgation of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, Shaanxi was short of inspectors, and the imperial edict ordered the imperial minister to recommend those who were clean, prudent, and had prestige.

古文：杨士奇荐棨，遂以命之。
现代文：杨土奇推荐邓柴，于是就任命他。
English: Yang Tuqi recommended Deng Chai, so he appointed him.

古文：正统十年入为右副都御史。
现代文：正统十年，入京任右副都御史。
English: After ten years as the legitimate ruler, he entered the capital as the right vice-governor.

古文：北征扈从，师出居庸关，疏请回銮，以兵事专属大将。
现代文：北征时随从皇帝，军队出了居庸关，上疏请求皇帝回宫，将军事完全交给大将。
English: When the Northern Expedition followed the emperor, the army went out of Juyongguan. Shangsu requested the emperor to return to the palace and handed over the military entirely to the general.

古文：至宣府、大同，复再上章。
现代文：到宣府、大同，又两次上疏。
English: To Xuanfu, Datong, and twice to Shangzhu.

古文：皆不报。
现代文：都不答覆。
English: None of this has been approved.

古文：及遇变，同行者语曰： 吾辈可自脱去。 
现代文：等到遭遇变故，同行的人告诉他说： 我们可以自行离去。 
English: When disaster struck, his companions told him: "We can leave on our own.

古文：棨曰： 銮舆失所，我尚何归！
现代文：邓柴说： 皇帝都没地方走，我们还回到哪里去呢！
English: Deng Chai said: The emperor has no place to go, where should we go back to?

古文：主辱臣死，分也。 
现代文：主上受辱臣子当死，这是本分。 
English: It is the duty of a vassal who has been insulted by his lord to die.

古文：遂死。
现代文：于是遇害。
English: He was then hacked to death.

古文：赠右都御史，官其子瑺大理评事。
现代文：追赠右都御史，任他的儿子邓瑺为大理评事。
English: He posthumously bestowed the title of Utsunomiya Imperial Prince, and appointed his son, Deng Yu, as a commentator of Dali.

古文：后谥襄敏。
现代文：后来赠谧号襄敏。
English: Later, he was given the nickname "Xiangmin."

古文：英宗之出也，备文武百官以行。
现代文：英宗出征时，配备文武百官随行。
English: When Emperor Yingzong went to war, he was accompanied by hundreds of military and civilian officials.

古文：六师覆于土木，将相大臣及从官死者不可胜数。英国公张辅及诸侯伯自有传。其余姓氏可考者，卿寺则龚全安、黄养正、戴庆祖、王一居、刘容、凌寿；给事、御史则包良佐、姚铣、鲍辉、张洪、黄裳、魏贞、夏诚、申祐、尹竑、童存德、孙庆、林祥凤；庶寮则齐汪、冯学明、王健、程思温、程式、逯端、俞鉴、张瑭、郑瑄、俞拱、潘澄、钱昺、马预、尹昌、罗如墉、刘信、李恭、石玉。
现代文：在土木六师覆没，将相大臣和随从官员死的不可胜敷，英国公张辅和各侯伯各自有传记，其余有姓名可考的，卿寺则有龚全安、黄养正、戴庆祖、王一居、刘容、浚寿，给事、御史则有包良佐、姚铣、鲍辉、张洪、黄裳、魏贞、夏诚、申佑、尹兹、童存德、孙庆、林祥凤，庶寮则有齐汪、冯学明、王健、程思温、程序、逯端、俞鉴、张瑭、郑管、俞拱、潘澄、钱禺、马预、尹昌、罗如墉、刘信、李恭、石玉。
English: In the Civil Engineering Sixth Division, the Minister of the Prime Minister and the officials who accompanied him were all killed. The British official Zhang Fu and each Hou Bo had their own biographies, and the rest had names that could be checked. In the Qing Temple, there were Gao Quan'an, Huang Yaozheng, Dai Qingzu, Wang Yiju, Liu Rong, Dong Shou, and in the History Department, there were Bao Liang Zu, Yao Wei, Bao Hui, Zhang Hong, Huang Zhao, Wei Zhen, Xia Cheng, Shen You, Yin Zi, Tong Cun De, Sun Qing, Lin Xiangfeng. In the common room, there

古文：景帝立，既赠恤诸大臣，自给事、御史以下，皆降敕褒美，录其子为国子生，一时恤典綦备云。
现代文：景帝即位，追赠抚恤各大臣之后，从给事、御史以下，都下诏褒奖赞美，录用他们的儿子为国子生，一时间丧葬抚恤的礼式很是完备。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Jing and the subsequent gift of a pension, all the ministers, from the emperor and empress downwards, issued an edict praising and commending their sons as sons of the state. The etiquette of a one-time funeral pension was very complete.

古文：龚全安，兰溪人。
现代文：龚全安，兰溪人。
English: Zou Quan'an, from Lanxi.

古文：进士，授工科给事中，累迁左通政。
现代文：进士，授任工科给事中，多次迁升至左通政。
English: He was promoted to Shinshi (Junior Scholar) and assigned to the Engineering Science Research Center, and was promoted to Sotongzheng several times.

古文：殁赠通政使。
现代文：死后追赠通政使。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of political envoy.

古文：黄养正，名蒙，以字行，瑞安人。
现代文：黄养正，名蒙，以字行世，瑞安人。
English: Huang Yaozheng, a famous Mongolian poet, was born in Ruian.

古文：以善书授中书舍人，累官太常少卿。
现代文：因善于写文章除授中书舍人，多次迁升至太常少卿。
English: Because he was good at writing articles, he was promoted to Taizang Shaoqing several times.

古文：殁赠太常卿。
现代文：死后追赠太常卿。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Tai Changqing.

古文：戴庆祖，溧阳人，王一居，上元人。
现代文：戴庆祖，溧阳人，王一居，上元人。
English: Dai Qingzu, Shenyang people, Wang Yijie, Shangyuan people.

古文：俱乐舞生，累官太常少卿。
现代文：都是祭典中的乐舞生，升任至太常少卿。
English: They were all dancers at the festival and were promoted to the rank of Taijo Shokei.

古文：殁，俱赠太常卿。
现代文：死后都追赠太常卿。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Tai Changqing.

古文：包良佐，字克忠。慈溪人。
现代文：包良佐，字克忠，慈溪人。
English: Bao Liangzuo, surnamed Kechong, from Cixi.

古文：进士，授吏科给事中。
现代文：进士，授任吏科给事中。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Shinshi and was awarded the title of Rikei (administrative officer).

古文：鲍辉，字淑大，浙江平阳人。
现代文：鲍辉，字淑大，浙江平阳人。
English: Bao Hui, Zhi Shuda, from Pingyang, Zhejiang Province.

古文：进士，授工科给事中，数有建白。
现代文：进士，授任工科给事中，多次对国事有所建议。
English: During his tenure as a professor of engineering, he repeatedly made suggestions on national affairs.

古文：张洪，安福人；黄裳，字元吉，曲江人。
现代文：张洪，安福人，黄裳，字符吉曲江人。
English: Zhang Hong, Anfu people, Huang Zhou, characters from the Yangtze River.

古文：俱进士，授御史。
现代文：都是进士，授任御史。
English: All of them were promoted to the rank of Shinshi and appointed to the post of Shisho.

古文：裳尝言宁、绍、台三府疫死三万人，死者宜蠲租，存者宜振恤。
现代文：黄裳曾经进言说宁、绍、台三府因瘟疫而死亡三万人，死的人应当免除租税，活着的人应当赈济抚恤。
English: Huang Xiang once said that 30,000 people died from the plague in the three provinces of Ning, Shaoxing and Taiwan. The dead should be exempt from taxes, and the living should be given subsidies.

古文：巡视两浙盐政，请恤水灾。
现代文：巡视两浙的盐务，请抚恤水灾。
English: To inspect the salt business in Zhejiang and Zhejiang, please pay attention to the flood disaster.

古文：报可。
现代文：回复可以。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：魏贞，怀远人。
现代文：魏贞，怀远人。
English: Wei Zhen, a nostalgic person.

古文：进士，官御史。
现代文：进士，任御史。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Shinshi and appointed to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：申祐。字天锡，贵州婺川人。
现代文：申佑，字天锡，贵州婺川人。
English: Shen You, also known as Tian Xi, is a native of Xichuan, Guizhou.

古文：父为虎啮。祐持梃奋击之，得免。
现代文：父亲被虎咬，申佑拿木棍奋力打虎，得以幸免。
English: When his father was bitten by a tiger, Shen You fought the tiger with a wooden stick and was able to escape.

古文：举于乡，入国学，帅诸生救祭酒李时勉。
现代文：乡试中举，进入国学，率领诸生营救祭酒李时勉。
English: He passed the township examination, entered the national school, and led all the students to rescue the sacrificial wine, Li Shimin.

古文：旋登进士，拜四川道御史，以謇谔闻。
现代文：不久中进士，拜授四川道御史，以正直敢言闻名。
English: He was soon promoted to junior high school and was awarded the title of Sichuan Provincial Historian. He was known for his honesty and boldness.

古文：尹竑，字太和，巴人；童存德，字居敬，兰溪人。
现代文：尹兹，字太和，巴人。童存德，字居敬，兰溪人。
English: Yin Zi, Zi Tahe, Ba people. Tong Cun De, Zi Ju Kei, Lanxi people.

古文：俱进士，官御史。
现代文：都是进士，任御史。
English: All of them were promoted to the rank of Shishi (senior officer) and appointed to the position of Shishi.

古文：林祥凤，字鸣皋，莆田人。
现代文：林祥凤，字鸣皋，莆田人。
English: Lin Xiangfeng, Zi Mingtang, Xingtian Ren.

古文：由乡举授训导，擢御史。
现代文：因乡试中举授任训导，升任御史。
English: As a result of the township examination, he was awarded the position of tutor and promoted to the position of imperial historian.

古文：齐汪，字源澄，天台人。
现代文：齐汪，字源澄，天台人。
English: Qi Wang, Ziyuan Cheng, Tiantai people.

古文：以进士历兵部车驾司郎中。
现代文：以进士身份任兵部车驾司郎中。
English: He served as a junior officer in the driver's office of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：程思温，婺源人；程式，常熟人；逯端，仁和人。
现代文：程思温，鍪源人。程序，常熟人。逯端，仁和人。
English: Cheng Si Wen, Xuan Yuan Ren. Program, Frequent Acquaintance. Xuan Duan, Ren He Ren.

古文：俱进士，官员外郎。
现代文：都是进士，任员外郎。
English: All of them are new recruits, and all of them are second-generation recruits.

古文：俞鉴，字元吉，桐庐人。
现代文：俞鉴，字符吉，桐庐人。
English: He is the author of the classics, the characters, and the stories.

古文：以进士授兵部职方司主事。
现代文：以进士身份除授兵部职方司主事。
English: In addition to his duties as an officer, he will also be in charge of the positional party department of the military training department.

古文：驾北征，郎中胡宁当从，以病求代，鉴慷慨许诺。
现代文：皇帝北征，郎中胡宁应当随从，因病请求让人代替，俞鉴慷慨答应。
English: Emperor Bei Zheng and his son-in-law Huning should accompany him. He asked for someone to take his place due to illness, and Gong Jian generously agreed.

古文：或曰： 家远子幼奈何？ 
现代文：有人说： 家逮孩子小怎么办？ 
English: Some people say: What if I have a small child at home?

古文：鉴曰： 为国，臣子敢计身家！ 
现代文：俞鉴说： 为了国家，臣子怎敢考虑自己和家庭！ 
English: Hao Jian said: For the sake of the country, how dare a courtier think about himself and his family!

古文：尚书邝埜知其贤，数与计事，鉴曰： 惟力劝班师耳。 
现代文：尚书墉堃知道他贤良，多次与他商量事情，俞鉴说： 只有竭力规劝回师了。 
English: Shang Shuxuan knew that he was a virtuous man and discussed matters with him many times. He said, "I can only persuade him to return to his master.

古文：时不能用。
现代文：当时不能采纳。
English: The recommendation was not implemented.

古文：张瑭，字廷玉，慈溪人。
现代文：张瑭，字廷玉，慈溪人。
English: Zhang Qian, Zhi Tingyu, Cixi people.

古文：进士，授刑部主事。
现代文：进士，授任刑部主事。
English: Promoted to sergeant and appointed head of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：尹昌，吉永人。
现代文：尹昌，吉水人。
English: Yin Chang, a person of auspicious water.

古文：进士，官行人司正。
现代文：进士，授官行人司正。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Shinshi, and given the title of Shosoin Shisho.

古文：罗如墉，字本崇，庐陵人。
现代文：罗如墉，字本崇，庐陵人。
English: Luo Ruxuan, Zaben Chong, Fuling Man.

古文：进士，授行人。
现代文：进土，授任行人。
English: He went into the ground and was given the title of pedestrian.

古文：从北征，濒行，诀妻子，誓以死报国，属翰林刘俨铭其墓。
现代文：随从北征，临行，告别妻子儿女，发誓以死报国，嘱咐翰林刘俨为他的墓作墓铭。
English: He accompanied the Northern Expedition, bade farewell to his wife and children, swore to serve his country until death, and ordered Hanlin Liu Yao to make an epitaph for his grave.

古文：俨惊拒之，如墉笑曰： 行当验耳。 
现代文：刘俨震惊而拒绝，罗如墉笑着说： 出行后会应验的。 
English: Liu Ye was shocked and refused, while Luo Ruxuan said with a smile: "It will be fulfilled after the trip."

古文：后数日果死。
现代文：遇了几天果然死难。
English: A few days later, he met with certain death.

古文：刘容，太仆少卿。
现代文：刘容，太仆少卿。
English: Liu Rong, the servant of the young lord.

古文：凌寿，尚宝少卿。
现代文：浚寿，尚宝少卿。
English: Junshu, Shangbao Shaoqing.

古文：夏诚、孙庆皆御史。
现代文：夏诚、孙庆都是御史。
English: Xia Cheng and Sun Qing are both history.

古文：冯学明，郎中。
现代文：冯学明，郎中。
English: Feng Xueming, a retainer.

古文：王健，员外郎。
现代文：王健，员外郎。
English: Wang Jian, member of the outer circle.

古文：俞拱、潘澄、钱昺，皆中书舍人。
现代文：俞拱、潘澄、钱禺，都是中书舍人。
English: Gong Gong, Pan Cheng, Qian Ye, are all Chinese calligraphers.

古文：马预，大理寺副。
现代文：马预，大理寺副。
English: Ma pre, deputy of Dali Temple.

古文：刘信，夏官正。
现代文：刘信，夏官正。
English: Liu Xin, Xia Guanzheng.

古文：李恭，石玉，序班。
现代文：李恭、石玉，序班。
English: Li Qiong, Shi Yuping, first-year students.

古文：里居悉无考。
现代文：籍贯都无从考证。
English: There is no reference to his place of origin.

古文：孙祥，大同人。
现代文：孙祥，大同人。
English: Sun Xiang, the founder of Datong.

古文：正统十年进士。
现代文：正统十年进士。
English: Ten years of orthodoxy, junior high school graduate.

古文：授兵科给事中。
现代文：任职兵科给事中。
English: He is in the process of resigning from the military.

古文：擢右副都御史，守备紫荆关。
现代文：升任右副都御史，防守紫剂关。
English: Promoted to the post of right vice-governor of the capital, in charge of defense of Shijiazhuang.

古文：也先逼关，都指挥韩青战死，祥坚守四日。
现代文：也先侵犯边关，都指挥韩青战死，孙祥坚守四天。
English: They also invaded the border first. Both commanders, Han Qing, died in the battle, while Sun Xiang held out for four days.

古文：也先由间道入，夹攻之，关破。
现代文：也先由小道进入，夹攻他，关被攻破。
English: He also entered through the path first, attacked him, and the barrier was broken.

古文：祥督兵巷战，兵溃被杀，言官误劾祥弃城遁。
现代文：孙祥领兵巷战，军队溃败被杀，谏官错误地弹劾孙祥弃城逃跑。
English: Sun Xiang led the troops in a street battle, the army was defeated and killed, and the eunuchs wrongly impeached Sun Xiang for abandoning the city and fleeing.

古文：寇退，有司修关，得其尸战地，焚而瘗之，不以闻。
现代文：寇贼撤退，有关部门修理关隘，在战地找到他的尸体，焚烧后埋了，没有报告让皇帝知道。
English: The robbers retreated, the relevant departments repaired the pass, found his body on the battlefield, burned and buried it, and did not report it to the emperor.

古文：祥弟祺诣阙言冤，诏恤其家。
现代文：孙祥的弟弟孙祺到朝中陈述冤情，下诏抚恤他的家人。
English: Sun Xiang's younger brother Sun Yao went to the imperial court to state his grievances, and the imperial edict was issued to compensate his family.

古文：成化改元，录其子绅为大理寺右评事。
现代文：成化元年，录用他的儿子孙绅为大理寺右评事。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, his son Sun Sheng was hired as the Right Reviewer of Dali Temple.

古文：又谢泽者，上虞人。
现代文：又有个叫谢泽的，上虞人。
English: There's another one called Xie Ze, a Shangyu man.

古文：永乐十六年进士。
现代文：永乐十六年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 16th year of Yongle.

古文：由南京刑部主事出为广西参政。
现代文：由南京刑部主事出任广西参政。
English: He served as the head of the Nanjing Criminal Justice Department and participated in politics in Guangxi.

古文：正统末，擢通政使，守备白羊口。
现代文：正统末年，升任通政使，防守白羊口。
English: At the end of the orthodox era, he was promoted to the post of political envoy to defend Baiyangkou.

古文：王师败于土木，守边者无固志，泽与其子俨诀而行。
现代文：军队战败于土木，守边的人没有坚定的斗志，谢泽和他的儿子谢俨诀别而前去。
English: The army was defeated by the earthworks, the people guarding the border did not have a strong fighting spirit, Xie Ze and his son Xie Yao said goodbye and left.

古文：受事未数日，也先兵大入，守将吕铎遁。
现代文：接受职务汝几天，也先军队大量侵入，守将吕铎逃跑。
English: A few days after accepting the post, a large number of troops invaded first, and the commander Lv Ying fled.

古文：泽督兵扼山口，大风扬沙，不辨人马。
现代文：谢泽督促士兵把持山口，大风扬沙，不能分辨人和马。
English: Xie Ze urged the soldiers to control the mountain pass, the wind was blowing sand, and they could not distinguish between people and horses.

古文：或请移他关避敌，泽不可。
现代文：有人请转移到其它关口躲避敌人，谢泽不允许。
English: Someone please move to another pass to evade the enemy, Xie Ze does not allow it.

古文：寇至，众溃，泽按剑厉声叱贼，遂被杀。
现代文：寇贼到来，众人溃败，谢泽按剑厉声叱责寇贼，于是被杀。
English: When the bandits arrived, everyone was defeated. Xie Ze used his sword to scold the bandits and was killed.

古文：事闻，遣官葬祭，录俨为大理评事。
现代文：事情被皇帝得知，派官员埋葬祭祀，录用谢俨为大理评事。
English: The emperor learned of the matter, sent officials to bury the sacrificial rites, and hired Xie Jun as a Dali commentator.

古文：袁彬，字文质，江西新昌人。
现代文：袁彬，字文质，江西新昌人。
English: Yuan Bin, a literary scholar, from Xinchang, Jiangxi Province.

古文：正统末，以锦衣校尉扈帝北征。
现代文：正统末年，以锦衣校尉身份护卫皇帝北征。
English: At the end of the orthodox era, he escorted the Emperor's Northern Expedition as a lieutenant in brocade.

古文：土木之变，也先拥帝北去，从官悉奔散，独彬随侍，不离左右。
现代文：土木之变，也先劫持皇帝向北离去，随从官员都奔跑逃散，祇有袁彬随从服侍，不离左右。
English: In the civil engineering revolution, the emperor was first abducted and fled to the north. The officials who followed him all ran away and dispersed. Only Yuan Bin followed him and served him, never leaving his side.

古文：也先之犯大同、宣府，逼京师，皆奉帝以行。
现代文：也先侵犯左旦、童府，进逼京城的时候，都侍奉皇帝随行。
English: They also invaded the Eastern Capital and Tongfu first, and when they forced their way into the capital, they all accompanied the emperor.

古文：上下山坂，涉溪涧，冒危险，彬拥护不少懈。
现代文：上下山坡趟水遇河，冒着危险，袁彬护卫没有一点松懈。
English: Going up and down the mountain slope, encountering the river, risking danger, Yuan Bin's escort did not relax at all.

古文：帝驻跸土城，欲奉书皇太后贻景帝及谕群臣，以彬知书令代草。
现代文：皇帝暂住土城，想要写信给皇太后转致景帝并告谕群臣，因袁彬有学识令他代为起草。
English: The emperor was temporarily staying in Tucheng and wanted to write a letter to the empress dowager to be forwarded to Emperor Jing and to inform the courtiers. Yuan Bin had the knowledge to have him draft it on his behalf.

古文：帝既入沙漠，所居止毳帐敝帏，旁列一车一马，以备转徙而已。
现代文：皇帝进入沙漠以后，住的只是毡帐和破旧的帏幔，旁边放着一车一马，藉以准备转移。
English: After the emperor entered the desert, he only lived in a bank account and a worn-out yakitori, with a cart and a horse next to him to prepare for the transfer.

古文：彬周旋患难，未尝违忤。
现代文：袁彬周旋于患难闻，不曾触犯皇帝的旨意。
English: Yuan Bin dealt with adversity and did not violate the emperor's will.

古文：夜则与帝同寝，天寒甚，恒以胁温帝足。
现代文：夜里就与皇帝同睡，天很寒冷，常用胸脯温暖皇帝的脚。
English: At night, she slept with the emperor. It was very cold, and she often used her bosom to warm the emperor's feet.

古文：有哈铭者，蒙古人。
现代文：有个叫哈铭的，蒙古人。
English: There is a Mongolian called Haming.

古文：幼从其父为通事，至是亦侍帝。
现代文：年幼时随从父亲作翻译，到这时也服侍皇帝。
English: As a young boy, he followed his father as a translator, and by this time he was also serving the emperor.

古文：帝宣谕也先及其部下，尝使铭。
现代文：皇帝晓谕也先和他的部下，曾经任用哈铭。
English: Emperor Xiaozhu first and his subordinates, once appointed Haming.

古文：也先辈有所陈请，亦铭为转达。
现代文：也先等人有陈奏请求的事，也是哈铭为他们转达。
English: It was also Haming who conveyed the matter of the request for the performance to the first responders.

古文：帝独居毡庐，南望悒郁。
现代文：皇帝独自居住在毡篷中，向南方眺望很忧郁。
English: The emperor lives alone in a canopy, gazing gloomily to the south.

古文：二人时进谐语慰帝，帝亦为解颜。
现代文：二人时常进献诙谐语言宽慰皇帝，皇帝也就脸色舒缓。
English: The two of them often comforted the emperor with witty words, and the emperor also looked relieved.

古文：中官喜宁为也先腹心。
现代文：宦官喜宁是也先的心腹。
English: The eunuch Kinin was also a close confidant.

古文：也先尝谓帝曰： 中朝若遣使来，皇帝归矣。 
现代文：也先曾对皇帝说： 明朝如派使者来，皇帝就可以回去了。 
English: He also said to the emperor: If you send an envoy tomorrow morning, the emperor can go back.

古文：帝曰： 汝自送我则可，欲中朝遣使，徒费往返尔。 
现代文：皇帝说： 你亲自送我就可以了，想要明朝派使者来，只是往返白跑罢了。 
English: The emperor said, "You can send me by yourself. If you want to send an envoy tomorrow morning, it's just a round trip.

古文：宁闻，怒曰： 欲急归者彬也，必杀之。 
现代文：喜宁听说丁，愤怒地说： 想要急着回去的是袁彬，一定要杀了他。 
English: When Xi Ning heard about Ding, he said angrily, "It is Yuan Bin who wants to rush back, we must kill him."

古文：宁劝也先西犯宁夏，掠其马，直趋江表，居帝南京。
现代文：喜宁劝说也先向西侵犯宁夏，劫掠他们的马匹，直奔江表，让皇帝住到南京去。
English: He persuaded Xi Ning to invade Ningxia first, plunder their horses, go straight to Jiangbei, and let the emperor live in Nanjing.

古文：彬、铭谓帝曰： 天寒道远，陛下又不能骑，空取冻饥。
现代文：袁彬、哈铭对皇帝说： 天寒路远，陛下又不能骑马，白白忍饥挨冻。
English: Yuan Bin and Haming said to the emperor: The cold weather is far away, your majesty cannot ride a horse, and it is in vain to endure hunger and cold.

古文：且至彼而诸将不纳，奈何？ 
现代文：而且到了那里众将不接纳，怎么办？ 
English: And when they get there, they won't be accepted, so what to do?

古文：帝止宁计。
现代文：皇帝制止了喜宁的计划。
English: The emperor put a stop to Xining's plan.

古文：宁又欲杀二人，皆帝力解而止。
现代文：喜宁又想杀掉二人，都因皇帝竭力劝解纔作罢。
English: Xining also wanted to kill the two, because the emperor tried his best to dissuade him.

古文：也先将献妹于帝，彬请驾旋而后聘，帝竟辞之。
现代文：也先要把妹妹献给皇帝，袁彬请皇帝回去后再聘娶，皇帝最终推辞了。
English: He also wanted to give his sister to the emperor first. Yuan Bin asked the emperor to marry her after he returned, but the emperor eventually declined.

古文：也先恶彬、铭二人，欲杀者屡矣。
现代文：也先恨袁彬、哈铭二人，想杀他们有多次了。
English: He also hated Yuan Bin and Haming, and had wanted to kill them many times.

古文：一日缚彬至旷埜，将支解之。
现代文：一天绑塞拯到旷野，将要支解他。
English: One day he will be led out into the wilderness and will be broken.

古文：帝闻，如失左右手，急趋救，乃免。
现代文：皇帝听说了，如同失去了左右手，急忙赶去解救，纔免于一死。
English: When the emperor heard of this, it was as if he had lost his right and left hand. He hurried to the rescue, and the dragonfly was saved from certain death.

古文：彬尝中寒，帝忧甚，以身压其背，汗浃而愈。
现代文：袁彬曾经中寒。皇帝很担忧，用身体压在他背上，汗流出来病就好了。
English: Yuan Bin was once suffering from a cold. The emperor was very worried and pressed his body against his back, sweating profusely.

古文：帝居漠北期年，视彬犹骨肉也。
现代文：皇帝居住在漠北一年，对待袁彬像亲人一样。
English: The emperor lived in the north of the desert for a year and treated Yuan Bin like a relative.

古文：及帝还京，景帝仅授彬锦衣试百户。
现代文：等到皇帝回到京城，景帝仅授袁彬为锦衣试百户。
English: By the time the emperor returned to Beijing, Emperor Jing had only granted Yuan Bin the right to test 100 households for brocade clothes.

古文：天顺复辟，擢指挥佥事。
现代文：天顺复辟，升任指挥食事。
English: Tian Shun was reinstated and promoted to the post of meal conductor.

古文：寻进同知。
现代文：不久进为同知。
English: They soon became friends.

古文：帝眷彬甚，奏请无不从。
现代文：皇帝很看重袁彬，上奏请求没有不依从的。
English: The emperor thought highly of Yuan Bin, and there was no one who did not comply with his request.

古文：内阁商辂既罢，彬乞得其居第。既又以湫隘，乞官为别建，帝亦报从。
现代文：内阁大臣商辖被罢免后，袁彬请求得到了他的府宅后来又因地方低洼而狭小，请求官府为他在别处修建，皇帝也回复依从。
English: After the cabinet minister Shang Jiu was removed from office, Yuan Bin obtained his mansion at his request, and later, because the area was low-lying and narrow, he asked the government to build it for him elsewhere, and the emperor complied.

古文：彬娶妻，命外戚孙显宗主之，赐予优渥。
现代文：袁彬娶妻，命令外戚孙显宗主持，赏赐很丰厚。
English: Yuan Bin married a wife and ordered his relative, Sun Xianzong, to preside over the ceremony. The reward was very rich.

古文：时召入曲宴，叙患难时事，欢洽如故时。
现代文：不时召入便宴，叙述患难时的旧事，欢乐融洽像以前一样。
English: From time to time, they invite guests to a banquet, recount old stories from times of hardship, and are as happy and harmonious as before.

古文：其年十二月进指挥使，与都指挥佥事王喜同掌卫事。
现代文：这年十二月，进升为指挥使，和都指挥食事王喜共同掌管锦衣卫事务。
English: In December of that year, Jin was promoted to the post of conductor, and Wang Xi, who was in charge of catering, was jointly in charge of brocade clothing and hygiene affairs.

古文：二人尝受中官夏时嘱，私遣百户季福侦事江西。
现代文：二人曾受宦官夏时的嘱托，私自派百户季福到江西侦察。
English: At the behest of the eunuch Xia, the two of them had sent a hundred households of Ji Fu to Jiangxi to investigate.

古文：福者，帝乳媪夫也。
现代文：季福是皇帝乳母的丈夫。
English: Ji Fu was the husband of the emperor's wet nurse.

古文：诏问谁所遣，二人请罪。
现代文：下诏查问是谁派遣的，二人认罪请求处罚。
English: After an investigation to find out who sent them, the two men pleaded guilty and requested punishment.

古文：帝曰： 此必有主使者。 
现代文：皇帝说： 这一定有主使的人。 
English: The emperor said, "There must be a mastermind behind this.

古文：遂下福吏，得二人受嘱状。
现代文：就把季福交法司审讯，得知了二人受嘱托的情况。
English: He brought Ji Fu to the legal department for interrogation and learned that the two had been entrusted with the case.

古文：所司请治时及二人罪。
现代文：法司请求惩治夏时和二人的罪行。
English: The Department of Justice requested that Xia Xi and the two be punished for their crimes.

古文：帝宥时，二人赎徒还职，而诏自今受嘱遣官者，必杀无赦。
现代文：皇帝宽恕了夏时，二人交钱免刑归还原职，而下诏从今以后受嘱托派遣官员的，必杀不赦。
English: The emperor pardoned Xia Jie, the two paid money and were released from punishment and returned to their original posts, and the following edict decreed that from now on, those who were commissioned to dispatch officials would not be forgiven.

古文：已而坐失囚，喜解职，彬遂掌卫事。
现代文：不久因逃失囚犯获罪，王喜解除职务，袁彬就掌管锦衣卫事务。
English: Wang Xi was soon found guilty of missing prisoners and relieved of his duties, leaving Yuan Bin in charge of brocade, clothing and hygiene affairs.

古文：五年秋，以平曹钦功，进都指挥佥事。
现代文：五年秋，因平定曹钦立功，进升为都指挥愈事。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year, because of Cao Qin's contribution to the pacification, he was promoted to the commander of the capital.

古文：时门达恃帝宠，势倾朝野。
现代文：当时门达依仗皇帝宠幸，势力倾倒朝野。
English: At that time, Menda relied on the favor of the emperor, and his forces overthrew the court.

古文：廷臣多下之，彬独不为屈。
现代文：朝廷大臣多屈服于他，惟独袁彬不屈服。
English: Most of the imperial court ministers yielded to him, but Yuan Bin did not.

古文：达诬以罪，请逮治。
现代文：门达以罪名诬陷他，请求逮捕查办。
English: Menda framed him with a crime and requested his arrest for investigation.

古文：帝欲法行，语之曰： 任汝往治，但以活袁彬还我。 
现代文：皇帝想要法规通行，告诉他说： 随你去惩治，但要把活的袁彬还给我。 
English: The emperor wanted to enforce the law and told him, "Punish as you like, but return Yuan Bin alive to me."

古文：达遂锻炼成狱。
现代文：门达就捏造罪名将案子办成。
English: Menda fabricated the charges and the case was closed.

古文：赖漆工杨埙讼冤，狱得解。
现代文：多靠漆工杨垠申诉冤情，官司纔得以解除。
English: Many rely on the painter Yang Wei to complain about grievances, and the magistrate's decision can be lifted.

古文：然犹调南京锦衣卫，带俸闲住。
现代文：然而还是调任南京锦衣卫，带俸闲居。
English: However, he was still transferred to Nanjing Jinlingwei and lived idly with a salary.

古文：语详《达传》。
现代文：记载详见《门达传》。
English: For a detailed account, see "The Legend of Menda."

古文：越二月，英宗崩，达得罪，贬官都匀。
现代文：遇了两个月，英宗崩，门达获罪，贬官到都匀。
English: After two months, Yingzong collapsed, Menda was convicted, and demoted to Duyun.

古文：召彬复原职，仍掌卫事。
现代文：召袁彬恢复原有职务，仍掌管锦衣卫事务。
English: Yuan Bin was called back to his original position and is still in charge of brocade, clothing and hygiene affairs.

古文：未几，达征下狱，充军南丹。
现代文：不久，门达被召回入狱，充军南丹。
English: Soon after, Menda was recalled to prison and sent to Nantan.

古文：彬饯之于郊，馈以赆。
现代文：袁彬在郊外为他饯别，赠送他财物。
English: Yuan Bin bade him farewell in the suburbs and gave him gifts.

古文：成化初，进都指挥同知。
现代文：成化初年，进升为都指挥同知。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, he was promoted to the same rank as the commanding officer.

古文：久之，进都指挥使。
现代文：很久以后，进升为都指挥使。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to the post of metropolitan commanding officer.

古文：先是，掌锦衣卫者，率张权势，罔财贿。
现代文：在此之前，掌管锦衣卫的人，都声张权势，欺诈财物贿赂。
English: Prior to this, the people in charge of brocade clothing and shoes all claimed to be powerful, and engaged in financial fraud and bribery.

古文：彬任职久，行事安静。
现代文：袁彬任职时间久，处事安稳。
English: Yuan Bin has been in office for a long time, and his work is stable.

古文：十三年擢都督佥事，莅前军都督府。
现代文：十三年，升任都督愈事，管理前军都督府。
English: Thirteen years later, he was promoted to the post of governor and managed the former military governor's office.

古文：卒于官。
现代文：死在任上。
English: He died in office.

古文：世袭锦衣佥事。
现代文：后人世袭锦衣食事。
English: Later generations inherited the brocade-and-cloth meal.

古文：哈铭从帝还，赐姓名杨铭，历官锦衣指挥使，数奉使外蕃为通事。
现代文：哈铭随从皇帝回京，赐姓名为杨铭，任锦衣指挥使，多次奉命出使外族担任翻译。
English: Ha Ming followed the emperor back to Beijing, was given the surname Yang Ming, served as the commander of the imperial envoys, and was repeatedly ordered to send foreign envoys to serve as translators.

古文：孝宗嗣位，汰传奉官，铭以塞外侍卫功，独如故。
现代文：孝宗继位，淘汰传奉官，哈铭因塞外侍卫有功，独自像以前一样。
English: Xiaozong succeeded to the throne, eliminated the preacher, and Haming, who had distinguished himself as a foreign bodyguard, was left alone as before.

古文：以寿卒于官。
现代文：以高寿死在任上。
English: He died in office at a ripe old age.

古文：袁敏者，金齿卫知事也。
现代文：袁敏，金齿卫知事。
English: Yuan Min, Governor of Jinzuwei.

古文：英宗北征，应募从至大同。
现代文：英宗北征，应招募随从到大同。
English: Yingzong Northern Expedition, should recruit followers to Datong.

古文：及驾还，驻万全左卫。
现代文：等到皇帝归还，驻扎在万全左卫。
English: Wait until the emperor returns, stationed in Wanzhen Zuwei.

古文：敏见敌骑逼，请留精兵三四万人扼其冲，而车驾疾驱入关。
现代文：袁敏见敌人骑兵逼近，请求留下精锐的士卒三四万人扼守冲要，而皇帝赶快入关。
English: Yuan Min saw the enemy cavalry approaching and asked for thirty to forty thousand elite soldiers to stay behind to guard the entrance, while the emperor hurriedly entered the pass.

古文：王振不纳，六师遂覆。
现代文：王振不采纳，六师于是覆没。
English: Wang Zhen did not accept it, and the Sixth Division disappeared.

古文：敏跳还，上书景帝曰： 上皇曩居九重，所服者衮绣，所食者珍羞，所居者琼宫瑶室。
现代文：袁敏逃归，上书景帝说： 太上皇以前居于深宫中，穿的是锦衣锈裳，吃的是山珍海味，住的是琼宫瑶室。
English: Yuan Min fled back, and Emperor Jing said in a letter: "Formerly, the great emperor lived in a deep palace, wore rich brocade clothes, ate mountain delicacies and seafood, and lived in Qiong Gong's bedroom.

古文：今驾陷沙漠，服有衮绣乎？
现代文：如今皇帝困在沙漠，穿的有锦衣绣裳吗？
English: Is the emperor now stranded in the desert, wearing richly embroidered robes?

古文：食有珍羞乎？
现代文：吃的有山珍海味吗？
English: Do you eat mountain or sea food?

古文：居有宫室乎？
现代文：住的有宫室吗？
English: Do you live in a palace?

古文：臣闻之，主辱臣死。
现代文：我听说，主上受辱，臣子当死。
English: I've heard it said that if the master is disgraced, the vassal must die.

古文：上皇辱至此，臣子何以为心，臣不惜碎首刳心。
现代文：上皇受辱到这种地步，臣子怎能心安，臣不惜碎首剖心。
English: The emperor was humiliated to such an extent, how could the vassal be at peace, the vassal did not hesitate to cut off his head and dissect his heart.

古文：乞遣官一人，或就令臣赍书及服御物问安塞外，以尽臣子之义。
现代文：请求派官员一人，或者就命令臣带着诏书负载着皇帝的物品到塞外问安，以此尽到臣子的大义。
English: The request was to send an official, or to order the vassal to carry the imperial edict and the emperor's belongings to ask for the emperor's greetings, in order to do justice to the vassal.

古文：臣虽万死，心实甘之。 
现代文：我即使死一万次，也甘心了。 
English: If I could die ten thousand times, I would.

古文：命礼部议，竟报寝。
现代文：命令礼部商议，竟回复搁置。
English: He ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to discuss the matter, but the reply was put on hold.

古文：赞曰：异哉，土木之败也。
现代文：赞曰：奇怪啊，土木之战的失败。
English: Zang said: "It's strange, the failure of the civil engineering battle.

古文：寇非深入之师，国非积弱之势，徒以宦竖窃柄，狎寇弄兵，逆众心而驱之死地，遂致六师挠败，乘舆播迁，大臣百官身膏草野。
现代文：宠贼并不是深入内地的军队，国家并不是长期衰弱的形势，只因为宦官窃取大权，轻视寇贼，玩弄兵权，违背众人意愿而将他们赶向死地，于是导致六师战败，皇帝流离，大臣百官葬身草野。
English: The favorite thief was not an army that penetrated deep into the interior, and the country was not in a situation of long-term weakness. It was only because the eunuchs stole great power, despised the robbers, played with military power, and drove them to death against the wishes of the people, which led to the defeat of the six divisions, the emperor's displacement, and the death of hundreds of ministers.

古文：夫始之不能制其不出，出不能使之早旋，枕藉疆场，无益于败。
现代文：开始之时不能制止他们而不出征，出征后又不能使他们早日返回，许多人陈尸疆埸，对挽救失败没有什么效果。
English: At the beginning, they could not be stopped from going to war, and after the war, they could not be made to return early, and many of them died, which had no effect on saving the defeat.

古文：然值仓皇奔溃之时，主辱臣死，志异偷生，亦可无讥于伤勇矣。
现代文：然而正当仓皇逃散之时，主上受辱臣子当死，志向和苟且偷生迥异，也可以不讥讽他们有失勇武了。
English: However, just as the emperor was about to flee in panic, the lord's humiliated vassal was about to die. They had very different ambitions, and there was no need to ridicule them for their lack of courage.

