古文：呜呼！
现代文：唉！
English: Alas!

古文：孟子谓 春秋无义战 ，予亦以谓五代无全臣。
现代文：孟子说 春秋的时候没有正义的战争 ，我也认为五代时没有道德始终无瑕的臣子。
English: Mencius said that there was no just war in the Spring and Autumn Period, and I also think that there was no vassal whose morality was always flawless in the Five Dynasties Period.

古文：无者，非无一人，盖仅有之耳，余得死节之士三人焉。其仕不及于二代者，各以其国系之，作梁、唐、晋、汉、周臣传。
现代文：说没有，不是指没有一人，而是说很少。我发现有三个为节义而死的人。那些只在一代做官的人，分别按照他们的国籍罗列，作《梁臣传》、《唐臣传》、《晋臣传》、《汉臣传》、《周臣传》。
English: I found that there were three people who died for the sake of righteousness. Those who only served as officials for one generation were listed according to their nationality, making "Liang Chen Biography," "Tang Chen Biography," "Jin Chen Biography," "Han Chen Biography" and "Zhou Chen Biography."

古文：其余仕非一代，不可以国系之者，作《杂传》。
现代文：其它不只在一代做官，不能按照国籍来归属的人，作《杂传》。
English: Others, who have been officials for more than one generation and cannot be classified according to nationality, write "Miscellaneous."

古文：夫入于杂，诚君子之所羞，而一代之臣，未必皆可贵也，览者详其善恶焉。
现代文：载入《杂传》，确实是让君子感到羞耻的，但仅仅在一代做官的臣子也未必都可贵，请读者细辨他们的善恶吧！
English: It is indeed shameful for a gentleman to be included in "Miscellaneous Biography," but not all courtiers who have served as officials in just one generation are necessarily valuable. Readers, please carefully discern their good and evil!

古文：○敬翔敬翔，字子振，同州冯翊人也，自言唐平阳王晖之后。
现代文：敬翔字子振，同州冯翊人，自称是唐平阳王敬晖的后代。
English: Jing Xiang Zi Zhen, a native of Fengye County, claimed to be a descendant of the Tang Pingyang King Jing Xi.

古文：少好学，工书檄。乾符中举进士不中，乃客大梁。
现代文：从小好学，书信檄文写得很好，干符年间考进士没考中，于是客居大梁。
English: From a young age, he was eager to learn and wrote letters and essays well. However, he failed to pass the junior high school entrance examination during his junior year, so he ended up living in a dormitory.

古文：翔同里人王发为汴州观察支使，遂往依焉。
现代文：敬翔的同乡王发任汴州观察支使，于是前去投靠他。
English: Wang, a respected fellow countryman of Xiang, was appointed as the observation envoy of Zhangzhou, so he went to join him.

古文：久之，发无所荐引，翔客益窘，为人作笺刺，传之军中。
现代文：过了很久，王发没有地方可推荐他，敬翔客居在那里生活更加窘迫，只好替人写奏笺名帖，流传到军队中。
English: After a long time, Wang Fa had no place to recommend him, and it was even more difficult for him to live there, so he had to write a famous poem for others and spread it to the army.

古文：太祖素不知书，翔所作皆俚俗语，太祖爱之，谓发曰： 闻君有故人，可与俱来。 
现代文：梁太祖素来不读书，敬翔写的都是通俗易懂的话，梁太祖很喜欢，对王发说： 听说你有个老朋友，可以和他一起来。 
English: Liang Taizu had never been a reader, and everything written by Jingxiang was simple and easy to understand. Liang Taizu liked it very much and said to Wang Fa, "I heard you have an old friend, you can come with him."

古文：翔见太祖，太祖问曰： 闻子读《春秋》，《春秋》所记何等事？ 
现代文：敬翔见到梁太祖，梁太祖问他说： 听说你读遇《春秋》，《春秋》上写的是什么事？ 
English: Qian Xiang met Liang Taizu. Liang Taizu asked him: I heard that you read "Spring and Autumn." What was written in "Spring and Autumn"?

古文：翔曰： 诸侯争战之事耳。 
现代文：敬翔说： 只是诸侯争斗作战的事罢了。 
English: Keixiang said, "It's just a matter of lords fighting.

古文：太祖曰： 其用兵之法可以为吾用乎？ 
现代文：梁太祖说： 那上面用兵打仗的方法可以为我所用吗？ 
English: Liang Taizu said: Can I use the above method of using soldiers to fight a war?

古文：翔曰： 兵者，应变出奇以取胜，《春秋》古法，不可用于今。 
现代文：敬翔说： 所谓用兵，在于应付急变，出奇制胜，《春秋》是古代的兵法，不能用在今天。 
English: Qian Xiang said: The so-called use of troops is to cope with sudden changes and win unexpectedly. "Spring and Autumn" is an ancient military method, which cannot be used today.

古文：太祖大喜，补以军职，非其所好，乃以为馆驿巡官。
现代文：梁太祖大喜，任命他军中职务，但这不是敬翔喜好的，于是任命为馆驿巡官。
English: Liang Taizu was overjoyed and appointed him to a position in the army, but this was not to Qixiang's liking, so he was appointed as the inspector of the Imperial Palace.

古文：太祖与蔡人战汴郊，翔时时为太祖谋画，多中，太祖欣然，以谓得翔之晚，动静辄以问之。太祖奉昭宗自岐还长安，昭宗召翔与李振升延喜楼劳之，拜翔太府卿。
现代文：梁太祖和蔡人在汴州郊外作战，敬翔时时为梁太祖出主意，大多见效，梁太祖很高兴，认为遇到敬翔太晚，一有事情就向敬翔请教占梁太祖随从唐昭宗从岐州返回长安，唐昭宗叫来敬翔和李振，登上延喜楼慰劳他们，拜为太府卿。
English: Liang Taizu and Cai people fought on the outskirts of Zhangzhou. Jing Xiang often made suggestions for Liang Taizu, and most of them were effective. Liang Taizu was very happy. He thought that it was too late to encounter Jing Xiang. Whenever something happened, he would ask Jing Xiang for advice. Liang Taizu followed Tang Zhaozong from Qizhou to return to Chang'an. Tang Zhaozong called for Jing Xiang and Li Zhen, boarded Yanxi Tower to console them, and prayed for the Taifu Emperor.

古文：初，太祖常侍殿上，昭宗意卫兵有能擒之者，乃佯为鞋结解，以顾太祖，太祖跪而结之，而左右无敢动者，太祖流汗浃背，由此稀复进见。
现代文：当初，梁太祖常常在殿上侍奉，唐昭宗猜想有能捉住他的卫兵，于是假装鞋带散了，回头看看梁太祖，梁太祖跪下替他系上鞋带，左右卫兵却没人敢动，梁太祖汗流浃背，从此很少进见。
English: At first, Liang Taizu often served in the palace. Tang Zhaozong guessed that there were guards who could catch him, so he pretended that his shoelaces were loose. Looking back at Liang Taizu, Liang Taizu knelt down to tie his shoelaces for him, but no one dared to move the guards on either side. Liang Taizu was sweating profusely, and from then on he could hardly see.

古文：昭宗迁洛阳，宴崇勋殿，酒半起，使人召太祖入内殿，将有所托。
现代文：唐昭宗迁往洛阳，在崇勋殿设宴，酒喝到中途起身，派人叫梁太祖进入内殿，准备有所托付。
English: Tang Zhaozong moved to Luoyang, held a banquet in the Chongxun Hall, got up halfway through drinking wine, and sent someone to tell Liang Taizu to enter the inner hall and prepare something to entrust.

古文：太祖益惧，辞以疾。
现代文：梁太祖更加害怕，以患病为由推辞不去。
English: Liang Taizu was even more afraid and refused to go on the grounds of illness.

古文：昭宗曰： 卿不欲来，可使敬翔来。 
现代文：唐昭宗说： 你不想来，可以派敬翔来。 
English: Tang Zhaozong said: If you don't want to come, you can send Jingxiang.

古文：太祖遽麾翔出，翔亦佯醉去。
现代文：梁太祖急忙招手叫敬翔出来，也假装喝醉酒离去。
English: Liang Taizu hurriedly beckoned for Jing Xiang to come out and also pretended to be drunk and left.

古文：太祖已破赵匡凝，取荆、襄，遂攻淮南。
现代文：梁太祖打败赵匡凝后，攻取剂、襄二州，于是进攻淮南。
English: After Liang Taizu defeated Zhao Kuangning, he attacked Huainan, taking the capture agent, Xiang Erzhou.

古文：翔切谏，以谓新胜之兵，宜持重以养威。
现代文：敬翔苦苦劝阻，认为刚打胜仗的军队，应当谨慎行动养精蓄锐。
English: Keixiang tried hard to dissuade him, saying that the army, which had just won the war, should act cautiously to keep its energy and sharpness.

古文：太祖不听。
现代文：梁太祖没有听从。
English: Liang Taizu did not listen.

古文：梁之篡弑，翔之谋为多。太祖即位，以唐枢密院故用宦者，乃改为崇政院，以翔为使。
现代文：军队由光州出发，碰上大雨，几乎不能前进，进攻寿州，没有攻克，而逃跑的士兵很多，梁太祖纔开始深深后悔。回来后气愤暴躁，差不多杀尽了唐的大臣，但却更加信任敬翔。梁杀君篡位，多半采用敬翔的计谋。梁太祖登位后，因为唐枢密院曹经用过宦官，于是改为崇政院，任命敬翔为院使。
English: The army set out from Gwangju, encountered heavy rain, could hardly advance, attacked Shoushu, did not conquer, and there were many soldiers who fled. Liang Taizu began to deeply regret. After returning, he was angry and almost killed Tang's minister, but he trusted Qixiang more. Liang killed the usurper, mostly using Qixiang's strategy. After Liang Taizu ascended the throne, because the Tang Privy Council Cao Jing used eunuchs, he changed it to the Supreme Court and appointed Qixiang as the envoy.

古文：迁兵部尚书、金銮殿大学士。
现代文：升兵部尚书、金銮殿大学士。
English: He was a member of the promotion committee, and graduated from the University of Konpeito.

古文：翔为人深沉有大略，从太祖用兵三十余年，细大之务必关之。
现代文：敬翔为人深沉有雄才大略，跟随梁太祖用兵打仗三十多年，大小事情都必定通报他。
English: Qixiang is a man of great depth and talent. He has followed Liang Taizu in the military for more than 30 years. He must be informed of all matters big and small.

古文：翔亦尽心勤劳，昼夜不寐，自言惟马上乃得休息。
现代文：敬翔也尽心尽意，勤勤恳恳，昼夜不眠，自称祇有骑在马上时纔能得到休息。
English: Qixiang is also dedicated, diligent and earnest, sleepless day and night, claiming that he can only get rest when riding a horse.

古文：而太祖刚暴难近，有所不可，翔亦未尝显言，微开其端，太祖意悟，多为之改易。
现代文：梁太祖性情刚烈暴躁难以亲近，有做不得的事，敬翔也从不明说，只略微提一提，梁太祖省悟后，常常照敬翔的话改变了主意。
English: Liang Taizu's temperament was inflexible and irascible, difficult to get close to, and there were things that could not be done. It was never clear what Qixiang said, only a slight mention. After Liang Taizu reflected, he often changed his mind according to Qixiang's words.

古文：太祖破徐州，得时溥宠姬刘氏，爱幸之，刘氏故尚让妻也，乃以妻翔。
现代文：梁太祖攻破徐州，抓获时溥的爱姬刘氏，很宠爱她，刘氏是已故尚让的妻子，于是把她嫁给敬翔。
English: When Liang Taizu invaded Xuzhou and captured the beloved Liu, he was very fond of her. Liu was the wife of the late Shangzhang, so he married her to Qixiang.

古文：翔已贵，刘氏犹侍太祖，出入卧内如平时，翔颇患之。
现代文：敬翔显贵后，刘氏仍然侍奉梁太祖，进出卧室像过去一样，敬翔对此很烦恼。
English: After Jing Xiang became eminent, Liu still served Liang Taizu, entering and leaving the bedroom as in the past. Jing Xiang was very troubled by this.

古文：刘氏诮翔曰： 尔以我尝失身于贼乎？
现代文：刘氏讥讽敬翔说： 你以为我曾经失身于贼人吗？
English: Liu sneered at Qian Xiang and said, "Do you think I ever lost my body to a thief?

古文：尚让，黄家宰相；时溥，国之忠臣。
现代文：尚让，是黄家的宰相；时溥，是国家的忠臣。
English: Shang Zhan was the prime minister of the Huang family, and Jisheng was a loyal subject of the state.

古文：以卿门地，犹为辱我，请从此决矣！ 
现代文：凭你的门第，都算是委屈了我，请从此分手吧！ 
English: With your lineage, you have wronged me, please break up from now on!

古文：翔以太祖故，谢而止之。
现代文：敬翔由于梁太祖的缘故，向她道歉，劝阻了她。
English: Keixiang apologized to her and dissuaded her from going because of Liang Taizu.

古文：刘氏车服骄侈，别置典谒，交结籓镇，权贵往往附之，宠信言事不下于翔。
现代文：刘氏的车马服饰华丽奢侈，另外设置专管谒见的官，和藩镇交结，权贵们常常依附她，受到的宠信和进言于太祖而奏效都不在敬翔之下。
English: Liu's carriage and horse costumes are gorgeous and extravagant. In addition, an official in charge of imperial visits has been set up to communicate with the domain and town. The powerful often rely on her. The favors and advice received by the great-grandfather are not under respect.

古文：当时贵家，往往效之。
现代文：当时的富贵人家，常常效法她。
English: The rich and noble families of the time often emulated her.

古文：太祖崩，友珪立，以翔先帝谋臣，惧其图己，不欲翔居内职，乃以李振代翔为崇政使，拜翔中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：梁太祖死，朱友珪登位，因敬翔是先帝谋臣，怕他算计自己，不想让敬翔担任机要官职，于是用李振代替敬翔任崇政使，拜敬翔为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Liang Taizu died and Zhu Youyi ascended to the throne. Because Qixiang was the former emperor's adviser, he was afraid that he would miscalculate himself and did not want Qixiang to hold an important official post. Therefore, Li Zhen replaced Qixiang as the high political envoy, and Bai Qixiang was the attendant of Zhongshu and the subordinate of Zhongshu.

古文：翔以友珪畏己，多称疾，未尝省事。
现代文：敬翔因朱友珪害怕自己，常常称病，不曾管事。
English: Because of Zhu Youyao, Keixiang was afraid of himself, often called in sick, and did not take care of business.

古文：末帝即位，赵岩等用事，颇离间旧臣，翔愈郁郁不得志。
现代文：梁末帝登位，趟岩等人主持朝政，常挑拨旧臣同君主的关系。敬翔更加郁郁不得志。
English: Emperor Liang Mucai ascended the throne, and Wai Yan and others presided over court politics, often provoking the relationship between former vassals and the monarch. Qixiang was even more depressed.

古文：其后，梁尽失河北，与晋相拒杨刘，翔曰： 故时河朔半在，以先帝之武，御貔虎之臣，犹不得志于晋。
现代文：后来，梁全部丧失河北，和晋在杨刘形成对峙，敬翔说： 从前的河朔一半在手，凭先帝的勇武，统率如貔似虎的众臣，沓不能征服晋。
English: Later, Liang lost all of Hebei and confronted Jin at Yang Liu. Qian Xiang said, "In the past, half of Hebei was in my hands. With the bravery of the former emperor and the leadership of his ministers who were like tigers, I could not conquer Jin.

古文：今晋日益强，梁日益削，陛下处深宫之中，所与计事者，非其近习，则皆亲戚之私，而望成事乎？
现代文：现在晋一天天更加强大，梁一天天更加削弱，陛下待在深宫中，一同计议大事的，不是身边惟命是从的人，就是私家的亲戚，还能指望成就事业吗？
English: Now Jin is getting stronger day by day, Liang is getting weaker day by day, His Majesty is staying in the depths of the palace, discussing major events together, not with people around him who are just following orders, but with his own relatives. Can he still hope to achieve his career?

古文：臣闻晋攻杨刘，李亚子负薪渡水，为士卒先。
现代文：我听说晋进攻杨刘，李亚子背着柴草渡水，身先士卒。
English: I heard that Jin attacked Yang Liu, and Li Yazi crossed the water with firewood on his back, leading the way.

古文：陛下委蛇守文，以儒雅自喜，而遣贺瑰为将，岂足当彼之余锋乎？
现代文：陛下遇事敷衍应付，墨守条文，以风流儒雅沾沾自喜，而派贺瓖为将领，哪里能够抵挡对方的余勇呢？
English: His majesty deals with things in a perfunctory manner, abides by the rules and regulations, and takes pride in his grace and elegance, but he has appointed He Zhen as his general. How can he resist the other side's courage?

古文：臣虽惫矣，受国恩深，若其乏材，愿得自效。 
现代文：我虽然衰惫了，但蒙受国家的思德深重，如果国家缺人，希望自己能够焉国尽力。 
English: Although I am exhausted, I have been deeply affected by the country's morals. If the country is short of people, I hope that I can do my best.

古文：岩等以翔为怨言，遂不用。
现代文：趟岩等人认为敬翔在口吐怨言，于是没有理他。
English: Wabiwa and others thought that Qixiang was complaining, so they ignored him.

古文：其后，王彦章败于中都，末帝惧，召段凝于河上。
现代文：后来，王彦章在中都被打败，梁末帝感到恐惧，于是令段凝去往河上。
English: Later, Wang Yanzhang was defeated in the middle, and Emperor Liang was afraid, so he ordered Duan Jie to go to the river.

古文：是时，梁精兵悉在凝军，凝有异志，顾望不来。
现代文：这时，梁的精兵都在段凝军中，段凝有二心，观望形势不来。
English: At this time, Liang's elite soldiers were all in Duan Rong's army. Duan Rong was of two minds and could not wait to see what would happen.

古文：末帝遽呼翔曰： 朕居常忽卿言，今急矣，勿以为怼，卿其教我当安归？ 
现代文：梁末帝急忙叫来敬翔说： 我平时常常忽视你的话，现在事情危急了，不要因此怨恨，请你告诉我应当怎么办吧！ 
English: Liang Mu Di hurriedly called to Qian Xiang and said, "I usually ignore your words, but now things are critical, don't be resentful, please tell me what to do!"

古文：翔曰： 臣从先帝三十余年，今虽为相，实硃氏老奴尔，事陛下如郎君，以臣之心，敢有所隐？
现代文：敬翔说： 我跟随先帝三十多年，现在虽为宰相，实际上只是朱家的老奴才，事奉陛下如同夫君，凭我的忠心，怎么敢有所隐瞒？
English: Qian Xiang said: I have followed the former emperor for more than thirty years. Although I am now the prime minister, I am actually just an old slave of the Zhu family. I serve your majesty like a husband. With my loyalty, how dare I hide anything?

古文：陛下初用段凝，臣已争之，今凝不来，敌势已近，欲为陛下谋，则小人间之，必不见听。
现代文：陛下当初重用段凝，我就争执过此事，如今段凝不来，敌人已大兵压境，想为陛下出谋划策，小人就来挑拨离间，一定不会被听取。
English: I disputed the matter when Your Majesty was reusing punctuation, but now punctuation cannot be used. The enemy is in full retreat. If you want to make a suggestion for Your Majesty, the villains will try to sow discord and will certainly not be listened to.

古文：请先死，不忍见宗庙之亡！ 
现代文：请求先死，我不忍心看见国家灭亡！ 
English: Please die first, I can't bear to see the country destroyed!

古文：君臣相向恸哭。
现代文：君臣相对痛哭。
English: The princes and ministers wept bitterly.

古文：翔与李振俱为太祖所信任，庄宗入汴，诏赦梁群臣，李振喜谓翔曰： 有诏洗涤，将朝新君。 
现代文：敬翔和李振都受到梁太祖的信任，唐庄宗进入汴州，下诏赦免梁众臣，李振高兴地对敬翔说： 有诏令洗刷罪名，将要朝见新的君主。 
English: Both Qian Xiang and Li Zhen were trusted by Liang Taizu. Tang Zhuangzong entered Zhangzhou and issued an edict to pardon Liang's ministers. Li Zhen happily said to Qian Xiang: If the edict clears the charges, I will meet the new monarch.

古文：邀翔欲俱入见。
现代文：想叫敬翔一起进见。
English: I want to ask Keisho to come with me.

古文：翔夜止高头车坊，将旦，左右报曰： 崇政李公入朝矣！ 
现代文：敬翔夜晚停留在高头车坊中，快天亮时，手下人报告说： 崇政使李公进朝了！ 
English: During the night, Jingxiang stayed at the Gaotou Coach Depot. When it was almost dawn, his subordinates reported: "Suzheng has made Li Gong enter the imperial court!"

古文：翔叹曰： 李振谬为丈夫矣！
现代文：敬翔叹息说： 李振枉为大丈夫了！
English: Keixiang sighed and said: Li Zhenyu is fine!

古文：复何面目入梁建国门乎？ 
现代文：又有什么脸面跨进梁的建国门呢？ 
English: What other faces have stepped through the gate to the founding of the country?

古文：乃自经而卒。
现代文：于是自己上吊而死。
English: He then hanged himself and died.

古文：硃珍，徐州丰人也。
现代文：朱珍，徐州丰县人。
English: Zhu Zhen, from Feng County, Xuzhou.

古文：少与庞师古等俱从梁太祖为盗。
现代文：年轻时和庞师古等人都跟随梁太祖做盗贼。
English: When he was young, he and Pang Shigu and others followed Liang Taizu as thieves.

古文：珍为将，善治军选士，太祖初镇宣武，珍为太祖创立军制，选将练兵甚有法。
现代文：朱珍作将领，善于治理军队挑选士兵，梁太祖最初镇守宣武军时，朱珍为梁太祖创立军队的制度，选将练兵很有办法。
English: Zhu Zhen, as a general, is good at managing the army and selecting soldiers. When Liang Taizu was initially in charge of the Xuanwu army, Zhu Zhen created an army system for Liang Taizu. He is very good at selecting generals and training soldiers.

古文：太祖得诸将所募兵及佗降兵，皆以属珍，珍选将五十余人，皆可用。
现代文：梁太祖获得众将领招募的士兵和其它投降的士兵，都归朱珍统率，朱珍从中挑选将领五十多人，都能用。
English: Liang Taizu received soldiers recruited by generals and other surrendered soldiers, all of which were under the command of Zhu Zhen. Zhu Zhen selected more than fifty generals from them, all of whom could be used.

古文：梁败黄巢、破秦宗权、东并兗郓，未尝不在战中，而常勇出诸将。
现代文：梁打败黄巢、击溃秦宗权、向东吞并充、鄣二州，朱珍都参加了战斗，并常常勇猛超过众将领。
English: Liang defeated Huang Chao, defeated Qin Zongquan, annexed Chongqing to the east, conquered two states, Zhu Zhen took part in the battle, and often bravely surpassed the generals.

古文：太祖与晋王东逐黄巢，还过汴，馆之上源驿，太祖使珍夜以兵攻之，晋王亡去，珍悉杀其麾下兵。
现代文：梁太祖和晋王向东追击黄巢，回来时经过汴州，驻扎在上源驿，梁太祖派朱珍趁夜率兵进攻晋王，晋王逃去，朱珍杀掉他手下全部的士兵。
English: Liang Taizu and Jin Wang pursued Huang Chao to the east. When they returned, they passed through Zhangzhou and were stationed in Shangyuanlu. Liang Taizu sent Zhu Zhen to attack Jin Wang with his nightly soldiers. Jin Wang fled and Zhu Zhen killed all of his soldiers.

古文：义成军乱，逐安师儒，师儒奔梁。
现代文：义成军内乱，驱逐安师儒，安师儒逃奔梁。
English: The Yicheng Army had a civil war, expelled An Shiru, and An Shiru ran away.

古文：太祖遣珍以兵趋滑州，道遇大雪，珍趣兵疾驰，一夕至城下，遂乘其城。
现代文：梁太祖派朱珍率兵奔赴滑州，路上碰到大雪，朱珍催促军队快速前进，仅用一夜就赶到城下，于是登城。
English: Liang Taizu sent Zhu Zhen and his army to rush to Slanting. On the way, they encountered heavy snow. Zhu Zhen urged the army to advance quickly. It took only one night to reach the city, so they went to the city.

古文：义成军以为方雪，不意梁兵来，不为备，遂下之。
现代文：义成军以为正下雪，没料到梁兵会来，没有防借，于是梁军攻下滑州。
English: The Yicheng army thought that it was snowing, but did not expect the Liang soldiers to come, there was no defense, so the Liang army attacked the downhill state.

古文：秦宗权遣卢瑭、张晊等攻梁，是时梁兵尚少，数为宗权所困。
现代文：秦宗权派遣卢瑭、张晤等进攻梁，这时梁兵还很少，几次被秦宗权围困。
English: Qin Zongquan sent Lu Wei, Zhang Xime and others to attack Liang. At that time, Liang's soldiers were still few, and they were besieged several times by Qin Zongquan.

古文：太祖乃拜珍淄州刺史，募兵于淄青。
现代文：梁太祖于是拜朱珍为淄州刺史，在淄、青二州招募士兵。
English: Liang Taizu then asked Zhu Zhen to write a history of Luzhou and recruited soldiers in Luzhou and Qingdao.

古文：珍偏将张仁遇白珍曰： 军中有犯令者，请先斩而后白。 
现代文：朱珍的副将张仁遇对朱珍说： 军中如有违犯命令的人，请求先斩后奏。 
English: Zhang Renren, Zhu Zhen's vice-general, said to Zhu Zhen: If there are people in the army who violate orders, please behead them first.

古文：珍曰： 偏将欲专杀邪？ 
现代文：朱珍说： 副将想专权杀人吗？ 
English: Zhu Zhen said: Does the vice-admiral want to kill people with absolute power?

古文：立斩仁遇以徇军，军中皆感悦。
现代文：立即杀掉张仁遇，将其尸体在军中展示，军中士兵都感动喜悦。
English: He immediately killed Zhang Renren and displayed his corpse in the army. The soldiers in the army were moved with joy.

古文：珍得所募兵万余以归，太祖大喜曰： 贼在吾郊，若践吾麦，奈何！
现代文：朱珍率领招募到的士兵一万多人返回，梁太祖大喜说： 贼兵在我郊外，如果践踏我的麦田，怎么办！
English: Zhu Zhen led more than ten thousand recruited soldiers to return. Liang Taizu was overjoyed and said: "Thief soldiers are in my suburb, what if they trample my wheat fields!

古文：今珍至，吾事济矣！
现代文：现在朱珍回来，我的事就好办了！
English: Now that Zhu Zhen is back, my business is easier to handle!

古文：且贼方息兵养勇，度吾兵少，而未知珍来，谓吾不过坚守而已，宜出其不意以击之。 
现代文：何况贼军正让士兵休息，养精蓄锐，估计我的兵少，并不知道朱珍回来，说我不过是坚守罢了，应当出其不意攻击他们。 
English: What's more, the thief army was letting the soldiers rest and keep their energy up, estimating that I had fewer soldiers, and did not know that Zhu Zhen had returned, saying that I was just holding out and should attack them unexpectedly.

古文：乃出兵击败晊等，宗权由此败亡，而梁军威大振，以得珍兵故也。
现代文：于是出兵打败张啰等军，秦宗权从此败亡，而梁的军威大振，都是因为得到朱珍招募的士兵的缘故。
English: As a result, troops were dispatched to defeat Zhang Ye and other troops, Qin Zongquan was defeated, and Liang's military power was greatly enhanced, all because of the soldiers recruited by Zhu Zhen.

古文：珍从太祖攻硃宣，取曹州，执其刺史丘弘礼。
现代文：朱珍跟随梁太祖进攻朱宣，攻取曹州，捕获刺史丘弘礼。
English: Zhu Zhen followed Liang Taizu to attack Zhu Xuan, capture Caozhou, and capture Zhishi Qiu Hongli.

古文：又取濮州，刺史硃裕奔于郓州。
现代文：又攻取濮州，刺史朱裕逃到鄣州。
English: He also captured Bozhou, and Zhu Yu fled to Bozhou.

古文：太祖乃还汴，留珍攻郓州。
现代文：梁太祖于是返回汴州，留下朱珍进攻郫州。
English: Liang Taizu then returned to Zhangzhou, leaving Zhu Zhen to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：珍去郓二十里，遣精兵挑之，郓人不出。
现代文：朱珍离郸州二十里，派精兵挑战朱裕的军队，郫州人不敢出战。
English: Zhu Zhen was twenty miles away from Zhangzhou and sent elite soldiers to challenge Zhu Yu's army. The Zhangzhou people did not dare to go to war.

古文：硃裕诈为降书，阴使人召珍，约开门为内应。
现代文：朱裕假作降害，暗中派人召唤朱珍，约定打开城门作内应。
English: Zhu Yu pretended to do harm, secretly sent someone to summon Zhu Zhen, and agreed to open the city gate for internal correspondence.

古文：珍信之，夜率其兵叩郓城门，硃裕登陴，开门内珍军，珍军已入甕城而垂门发，郓人从城上磔石以投之，珍军皆死甕城中，珍仅以身免，太祖不之责也。
现代文：朱珍信以为真，趁夜率领军队叩击郫州城门，朱裕登上城上矮墙，开门让朱珍的军队入城，朱珍的军队进入瓮城后吊门起动，郓州人从城墙上投下乱石，朱珍的军队都死在瓮城中，朱珍仅仅免于一死，梁太祖并没有责备他。
English: Zhu Zhenxin thought it was true, and took advantage of the night to lead the army to knock on the gate of Zhangzhou City. Zhu Yu climbed the low wall on the city, opened the door to let Zhu Zhen's army enter the city, Zhu Zhen's army entered the city, and the hanging door started. The Zhangzhou people threw rocks from the city wall. Zhu Zhen's army all died in Zhangzhou. Zhu Zhen was only spared one death. Liang Taizu did not blame him.

古文：魏博军乱，囚乐彦贞。
现代文：魏博的军队叛乱，囚禁乐彦贞。
English: Wei Bo's army rebelled, imprisoning Lok Yan Zhen.

古文：太祖遣珍救魏，珍破黎阳、临河、李固，分遣聂金、范居实等略澶州，杀魏豹子军二千于临黄。
现代文：梁太祖派遣朱珍救援魏博，朱珍攻破黎阳、临河、李固，分别派遣聂金、范居实等横扫澶州，在临黄杀死魏博豹子军两千人。
English: Liang Taizu dispatched Zhu Zhen to rescue Wei Bo, Zhu Zhen broke through Liyang, Linhe, and Li Gu, respectively, dispatched Bao Jin, Fan Jushi, etc. to sweep across Ganzhou, and killed two thousand of Wei Bo's Leopard Army in Linhuang.

古文：珍威振河朔。
现代文：朱珍威震河朔。
English: Zhu Zhenwei shook the river.

古文：魏人杀彦贞，珍乃还。
现代文：魏博人杀死乐彦贞，朱珍纔返回。
English: Wei Bo killed Lok Yan Zhen, and Zhu Zhenya returned.

古文：梁攻徐州，遣珍先攻下丰县，又败时溥于吴康，与李唐宾等屯萧县。
现代文：梁进攻徐州，派遣朱珍先攻下丰县，又在昊康打败时溥，和李唐宾等人屯驻萧县。
English: Liang attacked Xuzhou, and sent Zhu Zhen to conquer Feng County first, and when he was defeated by Hao Kang, he and Li Tangbin and others were stationed in Xiao County.

古文：唐宾者，陕人也。
现代文：李唐宾，陕州人。
English: Li Tangbin, from Shaanxi Province.

古文：初为尚让偏将，与太祖战尉氏门，为太祖所败，唐宾乃降梁。
现代文：最初是尚让的副将，和梁太祖在尉氏门作战，被梁太祖打败，李唐宾于是向梁投降。
English: At first, he was the vice-commander of Shangzhan, and fought with Liang Taizu at the gate of Liuzhi. He was defeated by Liang Taizu, and Li Tangbin then surrendered to Liang.

古文：梁兵攻掠四方，唐宾常与珍俱，与珍威名略等，而骁勇过之，珍战每小却，唐宾佐之乃大胜。
现代文：梁兵攻战四方，李唐宾常和朱珍在一起，和朱珍的名气差不多，而骁悍勇猛超过朱珍，朱珍打仗凡遇小败，李唐宾辅佐他就大胜。
English: Liang soldiers fought in four directions, Li Tangbin was often with Zhu Zhen, and his reputation was similar to that of Zhu Zhen, but he was more courageous than Zhu Zhen. Whenever Zhu Zhen suffered a small defeat in battle, Li Tangbin assisted him to a great victory.

古文：珍尝私迎其家置军中，太祖疑珍有异志，遣唐宾伺察之。
现代文：朱珍曾经私下接来自己的家属安置在军队中，梁太祖怀疑朱珍有二心，派李唐宾窥探他。
English: Zhu Zhen once secretly brought his own family members to be placed in the army. Liang Taizu suspected that Zhu Zhen was double-minded and sent Li Tangbin to spy on him.

古文：珍与唐宾不协，唐宾不能忍，夜走还宣武，珍单骑追之，交诉太祖前。
现代文：朱珍和李唐宾不和，李唐宾不能忍受连夜逃往宣武车，朱珍独自骑马追上他，二人在梁太祖跟前互相控告。
English: Zhu Zhen and Li Tangbin did not get along. Li Tangbin could not bear to flee to Xuanwu vehicle overnight. Zhu Zhen caught up with him on horseback alone. The two accused each other in front of Liang Taizu.

古文：太祖两惜其材，为和解之。
现代文：梁太祖爱惜这两个将才，让他们互相和解。
English: Liang Taizu took pity on the two generals and let them reconcile with each other.

古文：珍屯萧县，闻太祖将至，戒军中治馆厩以待。
现代文：朱珍屯驻萧县，听说梁太祖将要到来，命令军中准备馆舍马房等待。
English: Zhu Zhentun stationed in Xiao County, heard that Liang Taizu was about to arrive, and ordered the military to prepare a pavilion and stable to wait.

古文：唐宾部将严郊治厩失期，军吏督之，郊诉于唐宾，唐宾以让珍，珍怒，拔剑而起，唐宾拂衣就珍，珍即斩之，遣使者告唐宾反。
现代文：李唐宾部下将领严郊整治马房超过期限，军吏催逼，严郊向李唐宾诉苦，李唐宾因此责备朱珍，朱珍发怒，拔剑而起，李唐宾挥动衣服奔向朱珍，朱珍当即杀掉他，并派使臣报告李唐宾造反。
English: Li Tangbin's subordinates exceeded the time limit for the rectification of the stable by the general of Yanjiao, the military officials urged him, Yanjiao complained to Li Tangbin, Li Tangbin blamed Zhu Zhen, Zhu Zhen was angry and drew his sword, Li Tangbin waved his clothes and ran to Zhu Zhen, Zhu Zhen immediately killed him, and sent an envoy to report Li Tangbin's rebellion.

古文：使者晨至梁，敬翔恐太祖暴怒不可测，乃匿使者，至夜而见之，谓虽有所发，必须明旦，冀得少缓其事而图之。
现代文：使臣早晨到梁，敬翔怕梁太祖暴怒发生意外，于是隐藏使臣，到晚上纔见他，以为即使太祖要采取什么措施，也必定等到天亮，希望能够稍稍拖延时间再想办法。
English: The envoy came to Liang in the morning, but Jing Xiang was afraid that Liang's great-grandfather's violent anger would cause an accident, so he hid the envoy and met him in the evening, thinking that even if the great-grandfather wanted to take any measures, he would have to wait until dawn, hoping to delay the time a little and then find a way.

古文：既夕，乃引珍使者入见，太祖大惊，然已夜矣，不能有所发，翔因从容为太祖画。
现代文：天黑后，纔领朱珍的使臣进见，梁太祖大惊，但已是晚上了，不能做什么，敬翔于是慢慢地焉梁太祖谋划。
English: After dark, the envoys led by Zhu Zhen came to see Liang Taizu. Liang Taizu was shocked, but it was already evening and there was nothing he could do, so Qixiang slowly guided Liang Taizu in his planning.

古文：明日，佯收唐宾妻子下狱。
现代文：第二天，假装逮捕李唐宾的妻子儿女入狱。
English: The next day, Li Tangbin's wife and children were taken to jail under the pretense of arrest.

古文：因如珍军，去萧一舍，珍迎谒，太祖命武士执之。
现代文：于是去往朱珍的军队，离萧县三十里，朱珍迎见，梁太祖命令武士把朱珍逮捕。
English: So he went to Zhu Zhen's army, thirty miles from Xiao County, to meet Zhu Zhen. Liang Taizu ordered the samurai to arrest Zhu Zhen.

古文：诸将霍存等十余人叩头救珍，太祖大怒，举胡床掷之曰： 方珍杀唐宾时，独不救之邪！ 
现代文：众将领霍存等十多人叩头为朱珍求情，梁太祖大怒，举起胡床砸向他们说： 朱珍杀李唐宾的时候，为什么偏不救他呢！ 
English: Generals Huo Cun and more than a dozen others prostrated themselves and begged for mercy for Zhu Zhen. Liang Taizu was furious and raised his cane and said to them: When Zhu Zhen killed Li Tangbin, why didn't you save him!

古文：存等退，珍遂缢死。
现代文：霍存等人退下，朱珍于是被绞死。
English: Huo Cun and others retreated, and Zhu Zhen was hanged.

古文：○庞师古庞师古，曹州南华人也，初名从。
现代文：庞师古，曹州南华人，原名庞从。
English: Pang Shigu, originally named Pang Cong, is a South Chinese from Caozhou.

古文：梁太祖镇宣武，初得马五百匹为骑兵，乃以师古将之，从破黄巢、秦宗权，皆有功。
现代文：梁太祖镇守宣武军，刚得到战马五百匹组成骑兵，就令庞师古统率，跟随他打败黄巢、秦宗权，都立下战功。
English: Liang Taizu garrisoned the Xuanwu army, and as soon as he got five hundred horses to form a cavalry, he ordered Pang to lead the ancient division, and followed him to defeat Huang Chao and Qin Zongquan, both of which made great achievements.

古文：太祖攻时溥未下，留兵属师古守之，师古取其宿迁，进屯吕梁。
现代文：梁太祖进攻时溥没能攻克，留下军队令庞师古坚守，庞师古夺取了宿迁县，进驻吕梁。
English: When Liang Taizu attacked, Zhai failed to conquer, leaving the army to order Pang Shigu to stand firm. Pang Shigu captured Suqian County and stationed in Luliang.

古文：溥以兵二万出战，师古败之，斩首二千级。
现代文：时溥率兵二万人出战，庞师古打败了他，杀敌二千人。
English: Shisheng led 20,000 soldiers into battle, and Pang Shigu defeated him, killing 2,000 of the enemy.

古文：孙儒逐杨行密，取扬州，淮南大乱，太祖遣师古渡淮攻儒，为儒所败。
现代文：孙儒追随杨行密，攻取扬州，淮南大乱，梁太祖派庞师古渡过淮河进攻孙儒，被孙儒打败。
English: Sun Ru followed Yang Xingmi to conquer Yangzhou, followed by the Huainan Rebellion. Liang Taizu sent Pang Shigu to cross the Huai River to attack Sun Ru, but was defeated by Sun Ru.

古文：是时，硃珍、李唐宾已死，师古与霍存分将其兵。
现代文：这时，朱珍、李唐宾已死，庞师古和霍存分别统率他们的军队。
English: At this time, Zhu Zhen and Li Tangbin had died, and Pang Shigu and Huo Cun separately led their armies.

古文：郴王友裕攻徐州，硃瑾以兵救时溥，友裕败溥于石佛山，瑾收余兵去。
现代文：郴王朱友裕进攻徐州，朱瑾率兵救援时溥，朱友裕在石佛山打败时溥，朱瑾收拾残兵逃去。
English: Zhu Youyu, the king of Qi, attacked Xuzhou. Zhu Youyu led his soldiers to the rescue. When Zhu Youyu was defeated in Shifoshan, Zhu Youyu collected the remaining soldiers and fled.

古文：太祖以友裕可追而不追，夺其兵以属师古。
现代文：梁太祖认为朱友裕可以追击却不去追击，将他的军队交给庞师古。
English: Liang Taizu thought that Zhu Youyu could pursue but did not pursue, and handed over his army to Pang Shigu.

古文：师古攻破徐州，斩溥，太祖表师古徐州留后。
现代文：庞师古攻破徐州，杀死时溥，梁太祖表奏庞师古任徐州留后。
English: Pang Shigu invaded Xuzhou, killed Shijie, and Liang Taizu played the role of Pang Shigu staying in Xuzhou.

古文：梁兵攻郓州，临济水，师古彻木为桥，夜以中军先济。
现代文：凿军进攻郫州，兵临济水，庞师古拆木搭桥，晚上遣中军先渡河。
English: The Chisel Army attacked Zhangzhou, the soldiers came to Jishui, the Pang Division dismantled the wood and built a bridge, and the Chinese Army was sent to cross the river in the evening.

古文：硃宣走中都，见杀。
现代文：朱宣逃到中都，被杀。
English: Zhu Xuan fled to Zhongdu and was killed.

古文：太祖已下兗、郓，乃遣师古与葛从周攻杨行密于淮南，师古出清口，从周出安丰。
现代文：梁太祖攻下兖、鄣二州后，派遣庞师古和葛从周去淮南进攻杨行密，庞师古从清口比兵，葛从周从安丰出兵。
English: After Liang Taizu conquered the two states of Yunnan and Shandong, he sent Pang Shigu and Ge from Zhou to Huainan to attack Yang Xingmi, Pang Shigu from Qingkou, and Ge from Zhou from Anfeng.

古文：师古自其微时事太祖，为人谨甚，未尝离左右，及为将出兵，必受方略以行，军中非太祖命，不妄动。
现代文：庞师古从微贱时开始跟随梁太祖，为人很谨慎，不曾离开梁太祖一步，到作将领，出兵打仗时，必定请示行动方案后纔出发，军中没有梁太祖的命令，从不妄自行动。
English: Pang Shigu began to follow Liang Taizu when he was very young. He was very cautious and never left Liang Taizu. When he became a general and sent troops to fight, he would certainly ask for a plan of action and then set off. There was no order from Liang Taizu in the army, and he never acted on his own.

古文：师古营清口，地势卑，或请就高为栅，师古以非太祖命不听。
现代文：庞师古在清口安营扎寨，清口地势低下，有人请求到高处筑栅，庞师古认为不是梁太祖的命令而不接受。
English: Pang Shigu set up camp at Qingkou. Qingkou was in a low-lying area, and someone asked him to build a high fence. Pang Shigu did not accept the request, thinking that it was not Liang Taizu's order.

古文：淮人决水浸之，请者告曰： 淮人决河，上流水至矣！ 
现代文：淮南人放水淹没他们，请求的人报告说： 淮南人挖开河堤，上流的水涌来了！ 
English: The Huainan people released water to flood them, and the petitioner reported: The Huainan people dug up the river embankment, and the upstream water surged!

古文：师古以为摇动士卒，立斩之。
现代文：庞师古认为这是动摇军心，立即杀掉他。
English: Pang Shigu thought that this would shake the morale of the army and killed him immediately.

古文：已而水至，兵不能战，遂见杀。
现代文：不久大水涌来，士兵不能作战，庞师古于是被杀。
English: Soon, the flood came, the soldiers could not fight, and Pang Shigu was killed.

古文：呜呼，兵之胜败，岂易言哉！
现代文：唉，军队的胜败，岂是容易说清楚的！
English: Alas, how easy it is to declare the victory or defeat of an army!

古文：梁兵强于天下，而吴人号为轻弱，然师古再举击吴，辄再败以死。
现代文：梁的军队在天下最强大，而昊的军队被枧为弱小，然而庞师古两次攻击昊，却两次被打败最后战死。
English: Liang's army was the strongest in the world, while Hao's army was considered weak. However, Pang Shigu attacked Hao twice, but was defeated twice and finally died in battle.

古文：其后太祖自将出光山，攻寿春，然亦败也。
现代文：后来，梁太祖亲自率兵从光山出发，进攻寿春，但也被打败。
English: Later, Liang Taizu personally led an army from Guangshan to attack Shouchun, but was also defeated.

古文：盖自高骈死，唐以梁兼统淮南，遂与孙、杨争，凡三十年间，三举而三败。
现代文：大概从高骈死后，唐用梁兼管淮南，于是和孙儒、杨行密争斗，总共三十年中，三次出兵而三次被打败。
English: Probably after the death of Gao Pi, Tang used Liang to concurrently govern Huainan, and then fought with Sun Ru and Yang Xingmi. In a total of thirty years, he sent troops three times and was defeated three times.

古文：以至强遭至弱而如此，此其不可以理得也。
现代文：最强大的军队遇上最弱小的军队而结局如此，这是不可以常理解释的。
English: It is not often that the strongest army meets the weakest and ends up like this.

古文：兵法固有以寡而败众、以弱而胜强者，顾吴岂足以知之哉！
现代文：兵法中固然有以少胜多、以弱胜强的战例，然而昊怎么能够懂得它呢！
English: In the art of war, there are of course cases of victory of the few over the many and victory of the weak over the strong, but how could Hao understand it?

古文：岂非适与其机会邪？
现代文：难道不是恰好碰上了机会吗？
English: Wasn't it just a chance meeting?

古文：故曰： 兵者凶器，战者危事也。 
现代文：因此说： 武器是凶器，打仗是危险的事情。 
English: Therefore it is said, "A weapon is a deadly weapon, and war is a dangerous thing."

古文：可不慎哉！
现代文：能不小心吗！
English: You can't be too careful!

古文：○葛从周葛从周，字通美，濮州甄城人也。
现代文：葛从周字通美，濮州甄城人。
English: Ge from Zhou Zi Tongmei, Zhangzhou Zhencheng people.

古文：少从黄巢，败降梁。
现代文：年轻时跟随黄巢，被打败后向梁投降。
English: When he was young, he followed Huang Chao. After being defeated, he surrendered to Liang.

古文：从太祖攻蔡州，太祖坠马，从周扶太祖复骑，与敌步斗伤面，身被数疮，偏将张延寿从旁击之，从周得与太祖俱去。
现代文：跟随梁太祖进攻蔡州时，梁太祖从马上摔下，葛从周扶起梁太祖重新骑到马上，和敌兵徒步格斗脸上受伤，身上也多处受伤，副将张延寿从一旁攻击敌军，葛从周纔得以和梁太祖一起逃掉。
English: When he followed Liang Taizu to attack Caizhou, Liang Taizu fell off his horse, Ge Zhou helped Liang Taizu get back on his horse, and he was injured on his face and body in a foot fight with enemy soldiers. Vice Admiral Zhang Yanshu attacked the enemy army from the side, and Ge Zhouyu was able to escape with Liang Taizu.

古文：太祖尽黜诸将，独用从周、延寿为大将。
现代文：梁太祖罢免全部将领，只用葛从周、张延寿为大将。
English: Liang Taizu dismissed all the generals, only using Ge Cong Zhou and Zhang Yanshou as generals.

古文：秦宗权掠地颍、亳，及梁兵战于焦夷，从周获其将王涓一人。
现代文：秦宗权攻掠颖、毫二州，和梁军在焦夷发生战斗，葛从周捉获敌将王涓一人。
English: Qin Zongquan attacked and plundered Ying, Milli and Erzhou, and there was a battle with Liang's army in Jiaoyi. Ge captured the enemy general Wang Xuan from Zhou.

古文：从硃珍收兵淄青，遇东兵辄战，珍得兵归，从周功为多。
现代文：随朱珍在淄青招募士兵，碰上东面的军队就作战，朱珍招募到士兵返回，葛从周的功劳最大。
English: With Zhu Zhen recruiting soldiers in Jiaqing, when he encountered the army in the east, he fought. Zhu Zhen recruited soldiers to return, Ge Cong Zhou's greatest achievement.

古文：张全义袭李罕之于河阳，罕之奔晋，召晋兵以攻全义，全义乞兵于梁，太祖遣从周、丁会等救之，败晋兵于沇河。
现代文：张全义在河阳袭击李罕之，李罕之逃奔到晋，召集晋军进攻张全义，张全义向梁求兵增援，梁太祖派葛从周、丁会等去救援，在沈河打败晋军。
English: Zhang Quan Yi attacked Li Han Zhi in Heyang, Li Han Zhi fled to Jin and summoned Jin troops to attack Zhang Quan Yi, Zhang Quan Yi asked Liang for reinforcements, Liang Taizu sent Ge from Zhou, Dinghui to rescue and defeat Jin troops in Shenhe.

古文：潞州冯霸杀晋守将李克恭以降梁，太祖遣从周入潞州，晋兵攻之，从周不能守，走河阳。
现代文：潞州冯霸杀掉晋守将李克恭向粱投降，梁太祖派葛从周进入潞州，晋军进攻潞州，葛从周无法坚守，逃到河阳。
English: Zhangzhou Fengba killed the Jin governor, Li Keqiong surrendered to Zhou, Liang Taizu sent Ge from Zhou to enter Zhangzhou, the Jin army attacked Zhangzhou, Ge from Zhou could not hold out and fled to Heyang.

古文：太祖攻魏，从周与丁会先下黎阳、临河，会太祖于内黄，败魏兵于永定桥。
现代文：梁太祖进攻魏州，葛从周和丁会先攻下黎阳、临河，在内黄同梁太祖会合，在永定桥打败魏军。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Weizhou. Ge Cong Zhou and Ding Hui first attacked Liyang and Linhe. They joined Liang Taizu in Neihuang and defeated the Wei army at Yongding Bridge.

古文：从丁会攻宿州，以水浸其城，遂破之。
现代文：跟随丁会进攻宿州，用水淹没宿州城，于是攻破宿州。
English: He followed the Ding Association to attack Shuzhou, flooded the city of Shuzhou with water, and then defeated Shuzhou.

古文：太祖攻硃瑾于兗州，未下，留从周围之，瑾闭壁不出，从周诈言救兵至，阳避之高吴，夜半潜还城下，瑾以谓从周已去，乃出兵收外壕，从周掩击之，杀千余人。
现代文：梁太祖在兖州进攻朱瑾，没有攻克，留下葛从周围困朱瑾，朱瑾闭城不出，葛从周谎称援兵到了，假装逃到高昊躲避，半夜潜回城下，朱瑾认为葛从周已经离去了，于是出兵收拾外面的城壕，葛从周袭击朱瑾的军队，杀死一千多人。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Zhu Xi in Zhangzhou, but failed to conquer it, leaving Ge to besiege Zhu Xi from the surrounding areas. Zhu Xi did not close the city. Ge from Zhou lied that reinforcements had arrived, pretended to escape to Gao Hao to hide, and sneaked back under the city in the middle of the night. Zhu Xi thought that Ge from Zhou had left, so he sent troops to clean up the outer trenches. Ge from Zhou attacked Zhu Xi's army and killed more than a thousand people.

古文：晋攻魏，魏人求救，太祖遣侯言救魏，言筑垒于洹水。
现代文：晋军进攻魏，魏人求救，梁太祖派侯言救援魏，侯言在洹水修筑营垒。
English: The Jin army attacked Wei, Wei people called for help, Liang Taizu sent Houyan to rescue Wei, Houyan built a camp in Surabaya.

古文：太祖怒言不出战，遣从周代言。
现代文：梁太祖怨愤侯言不出战，派遣葛从周代替侯言。
English: Liang Taizu, angry that Houyan did not go to war, sent Ge from Zhou to replace Houyan.

古文：从周至军，益闭垒不出，而凿三暗门以待，晋兵攻之，从周以精兵自暗门出击，败晋王兵。
现代文：葛从周来到军中，更加闭垒不出，却凿了三个暗门等待敌军，晋兵进攻他们，葛从周率领精兵从暗门出击，打败晋王的军队。
English: Ge from Zhou came to the army, more closed the base, but dug three secret doors to wait for the enemy army, Jin soldiers attacked them, Ge from Zhou led the elite soldiers to attack from the secret door and defeat the Jin army.

古文：晋王怒，自将击从周，从周虽大败，而梁兵擒其子落落，送于魏，斩之。
现代文：晋王发怒，亲自率兵攻击葛从周，葛从周虽然大败，但梁兵擒获晋王的儿子落落，把他送到魏，杀掉了他。
English: Jin Wang became angry and personally led his soldiers to attack Ge Cong Zhou. Although Ge Cong Zhou was defeated, Liang Bingyao captured Jin Wang's son, sent him to Wei, and killed him.

古文：遂徙攻郓州，擒硃宣于中都，又攻兗州，走硃瑾。
现代文：于是转攻郸州，在中都擒获朱宣，又进攻兖州，赶走朱瑾。
English: So he turned to attack Bozhou, captured Zhu Xuan in Zhongdu, and attacked Bozhou again, driving away Zhu Xi.

古文：太祖表从周兗州留后，以兗、郓兵攻淮南，出安丰，会庞师古于清口。
现代文：梁太祖表奏葛从周为充州留后，以充、郓二州兵力进攻淮南，取道安丰，在清口和庞师古会合。
English: After Liang Taizu played Ge from Zhou to stay in Chenzhou, he attacked Huainan with troops from Chenzhou and Shandong, took the road to Anfeng, and rendezvoused with Pangshigu in Qingkou.

古文：从周行至濠州，闻师古死，遽还，至渒河将渡而淮兵追之，从周亦大败。
现代文：葛从周行进到濠州，听说庞师古死，急速返回，到达淖河，正要渡河时淮军追上他们，葛从周也大败。
English: Ge from Zhou marched to Luzhou, heard that Pang Shigu died, quickly returned, reached the Luzhou River, and when the Huai Army caught up with them when they were about to cross the river, Ge from Zhou was also defeated.

古文：是时，晋兵出山东攻相、卫，太祖遣从周略地山东，下洺州，斩其刺史邢善益；又下邢州，走其刺史马师素；又下磁州，杀其刺史袁奉滔。
现代文：这时，晋军出山东进攻相、卫二州，梁太祖派葛从周征战山东，攻克沼州，杀死沼州刺史邢善益；又攻克邢州，赶走刺史马师素；又攻克磁州，杀死刺史袁奉滔。
English: At this time, the Jin army went to Shandong to attack Zhou and Wei two states. Liang Taizu sent Ge to fight in Shandong from Zhou to conquer Nuzhou and kill Nuzhou's Zhi Zhen Shan Yi; also conquered Zhangzhou and drove out Zhi Zhi Ma Shi Su; and also conquered Zhengzhou and killed Zhi Zhi Yuan Feng Tao.

古文：五日而下三州。
现代文：五天攻克三个州。
English: Three states in five days.

古文：太祖乃表从周兼邢州留后。
现代文：梁太祖于是表奏葛从周兼任邢州留后。
English: Liang Taizu then played Ge from Zhou and stayed in Zhangzhou.

古文：刘仁恭攻魏，已屠贝州，罗绍威求救于梁，从周会太祖救魏，入于魏州。
现代文：刘仁恭进攻魏州，已经在贝州屠城，罗绍威向梁求救，葛从周和梁太祖会合救援魏州，进入魏州。
English: Liu Rengong attacked Weizhou and was already in the slaughterhouse of Beizhou. Roshowei asked Liang for help. Ge Zhou and Liang Taizu met to rescue Weizhou and entered Weizhou.

古文：燕兵攻馆陶门，从周以五百骑出战，曰： 大敌在前，何可返顾！ 
现代文：燕兵进攻馆陶门，葛从周率五百人马出战，说： 大敌当前，怎可回头！ 
English: When the Yan soldiers attacked the Tao Gate of the Pavilion, Ge, who had sent 500 men and horses to fight, said, "How can we turn back when the great enemy is present!"

古文：使闭门而后战。
现代文：命令关上城门然后作战。
English: The order was given to close the gates and fight.

古文：破其八栅，燕兵走，追至于临清，拥之御河，溺死者甚众。
现代文：攻破燕军八个栅寨，燕兵逃跑，追到临清，把他们堵在御河，淹死的人很多。
English: The Yan army broke through eight fences, the Yan soldiers fled, chased them to Linqing, blocked them in the Ohe River, and many people drowned.

古文：太祖以从周为宣义行军司马。
现代文：梁太祖任命葛从周为宣义行军司马。
English: Liang Taizu appointed Ge from Zhou to be the leader of the proclamation of righteousness.

古文：太祖遣从周攻刘守文于沧州，以蒋晖监其军。
现代文：梁太祖派遣葛从周到沧州进攻剀守文，派蒋晖督察军事。
English: Liang Taizu dispatched Ge from Zhou to Cangzhou to attack Zou Shouwen, and sent Jiang Wei as a military inspector.

古文：守文求救于其父仁恭，仁恭以燕兵救之，晖语诸将曰： 吾王以我监诸将，今燕兵来，不可迎战，宜纵其入城，聚食仓廪，使两困而后取之。 
现代文：刘守文向父亲刘仁恭求救，刘仁恭遣燕兵援救，蒋晖对将领们说： 我王要我督察各将，现在燕兵来到，不能迎战，应该放他们进城，和刘守文的军队一起吃掉仓库中的粮食，让他们都被困在城中然后攻取沧州。 
English: Liu Shouwen asked his father Liu Rengong for help, Liu Rengong sent the Yan soldiers to rescue him, Jiang Yu said to the generals: My king asked me to inspect the generals, now the Yan soldiers are coming, they can't fight, they should be let into the city, and Liu Shouwen's army should eat the grain in the warehouse together, let them all be trapped in the city and then capture Cangzhou.

古文：诸将颇以为然。
现代文：众将领都认为这样很好。
English: The generals all thought it was a good idea.

古文：从周怒曰： 兵在上将，岂监军所得言！
现代文：葛从周发怒说： 军队取决于主将的指挥，哪里有监军说话的地方！
English: Ge Cong Zhou said angrily, "The army depends on the command of the commander-in-chief. Where is the place for the commander-in-chief to speak?"

古文：且晖之言乃常谈尔，胜败之机在吾心，晖岂足以知之！ 
现代文：况且蒋晖的话不过是老生常谈罢了，胜败的关键掌握在我心里，蒋晖怎么能明白呢！ 
English: Moreover, what Chiang Kai-shek said was nothing more than a commonplace. The key to victory and defeat was in my heart. How could Chiang Kai-shek understand it?

古文：乃勒兵逆仁恭于乾宁，战于老鸦堤，仁恭大败，斩首三万余级，获其将马慎交等百余人，马三千匹。
现代文：于是率领军队在干宁迎候刘仁恭，在老鹪堤开战，刘仁恭大败，杀敌三万多人，捉获将领马慎交等一百多人，缴获战马三千匹。
English: Therefore, he led the army to meet Liu Renkong in Gangning and went to war in Laotian Dike. Liu Renkong was soundly defeated, killed more than 30,000 of the enemy, captured more than 100 people, including the general Ma Shengqiao, and captured 3,000 horses.

古文：是时，守文亦求救于晋，晋为攻邢、洺以牵之，从周遽还，败晋兵于青山。
现代文：这时，刘守文也向晋求救，晋进攻邢、沼二州以牵制葛从周，葛从周急速返回，在青山打败晋军。
English: At this time, Liu Shouwen also appealed to Jin for help. Jin attacked Shao and Nanzhou to keep Ge away from Zhou, and Ge quickly returned from Zhou to defeat Jin's army in Aoyama.

古文：遂从太祖攻镇州，下临城，王熔乞盟，太祖表从周泰宁军节度使。
现代文：于是随梁太祖进攻镇州，攻克临城，王镕求和，梁太祖表奏葛从周为泰宁军节度使。
English: Therefore, with Liang Taizu attacking Zhenzhou and conquering Lincheng, Wang Qi sued for peace, and Liang Taizu played Ge from Zhou as the commander of the Taining Army.

古文：从氏叔琮攻晋太原，不克。
现代文：跟随氏叔琮进攻昔太原，没有攻克。
English: He followed his uncle and uncle-in-law to attack Taiyuan in the past, but failed to conquer it.

古文：梁兵西攻凤翔，青州王师范遣其将刘掞袭兗州，从周家属为掞所得，厚遇之而不杀。
现代文：梁军向西进攻凤翔，青州王师范派他的将领刘郡袭击充州，葛从周的家属被剀郭俘获，刘郭对他们很好而没有杀掉他们。
English: Liang's army attacked Fengxiang to the west, Qingzhou Wang Shifan sent his general Liu County to attack Chengzhou, Ge Cong Zhou's family members were captured by Zhang Guo, Liu Guo was very kind to them and did not kill them.

古文：太祖还自凤翔，乃遣从周攻掞，从周卒招降掞。
现代文：梁太祖从凤翔返回，于是派葛从周进攻刘郡，最后葛从周招降了刘郡。
English: Liang Taizu returned from Fengxiang, so he sent Ge to attack Liu County from Zhou, and finally Ge recruited Liu County from Zhou.

古文：太祖即位，拜左金吾卫上将军，以疾致仕，拜右卫上将军，居于偃师。
现代文：梁太祖登位，拜葛从周为左金吾卫上将军，因病退休，拜为右卫上将军，住在偃师。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, Baige from Zhou to the left, retired due to illness, to the right, and lived in Jinshi.

古文：末帝即位，拜昭义军节度使、陈留郡王，食其俸于家。
现代文：梁末帝登位，拜为昭义军节度使、陈留郡王，在家享受俸禄。
English: Emperor Liang Mucai ascended the throne, and Chen Liu, the county king, who served as the Shouyi Army's envoy to the festival, began to enjoy his salary at home.

古文：卒，赠太尉。
现代文：死后赠太尉。
English: When he died, he was posthumously promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：○霍存
现代文：霍存，沼州曲周人。
English: Huo Cun, a native of Quzhou, Numazu.

古文：霍存，洺州曲周人也。少从黄巢，巢败，存乃降梁。
现代文：年轻时跟随黄巢，黄巢被打败后，霍存就向梁投降。
English: When he was young, he followed Huang Chao. After Huang Chao was defeated, he surrendered to Liang.

古文：存为将骁勇，善骑射。
现代文：霍存作为将领骁悍勇猛，擅长骑马射箭。
English: Huo Cun, as a brave general, is good at horse riding and archery.

古文：秦宗权攻汴，存以三千人夜破张晊栅，又以骑兵破秦贤，杀三千人，败晊于赤冈。
现代文：秦宗权进攻汴州，霍存率三千人趁夜攻破张昵军队的栅寨，又率骑兵攻破秦贤，杀敌三千人，在赤冈打败张晖。
English: Qin Zongquan attacked Bozhou, taking advantage of the night to break through the barricade of Zhang Ni's army. He also led cavalry to break through Qin Xian, killed 3,000 enemies, and defeated Zhang Ye in Akaoka.

古文：从硃珍掠淄青、庞师古攻时溥，皆有功。
现代文：跟随朱珍征战淄、青二州，又跟随庞师古进攻时溥，都立下战功。
English: He followed Zhu Zhen in conquering the Warring States, Qing Erzhou, and followed Pang Shigu in attacking the Warring States, all of which made great achievements in the war.

古文：硃珍与李唐宾俱死，乃以庞师古代珍、存代唐宾以攻溥，破砀山，存获其将石君和等五十人。
现代文：朱珍和李唐宾双双死后，就用庞师古代替朱珍、霍存代替李唐宾进攻时溥，攻破砚山，霍存捉获敌将石君和等五十人。
English: After the death of both Zhu Zhen and Li Tangbin, he used the Pang division to replace Zhu Zhen and Huo Cun for Li Tangbin's attack, and broke through Shaoshan, Huo Cun captured the enemy general Shi Junhe and other fifty people.

古文：梁攻宿州，葛从周引水浸之，丁会与存战城下，遂下之。
现代文：梁进攻宿州，葛从周引水淹没宿州，丁会和霍存在城下进攻，于是攻克宿州。
English: Liang attacked Shuzhou, Ge from Zhou diverted water and flooded Shuzhou, Ding Hui and Huo existed and attacked outside the city, thus conquering Shuzhou.

古文：从攻潞州，与晋人遇，战马牢川，存入则当其前，出则为其殿，晋人却，遂东攻魏，取淇门，杀三千人。
现代文：跟随进攻潞州，和晋人相遇，在马牢川发生战斗，霍存进攻则冲在前面，撤退则在后面坐镇，晋军退却，于是向东进攻魏，夺取淇门，杀敌三千人。
English: Following the attack of Bozhou, they met the Jin people, and a battle took place in Ma Liao River. The Huo Cun attack rushed in front, the retreat was behind the town, and the Jin army retreated, so they attacked Wei to the east, captured Qimen, and killed three thousand enemies.

古文：梁得曹州，太祖以存为刺史，兼诸军都指挥使。
现代文：梁取得曹州后，梁太祖任命霍存为刺史，兼各军都指挥使。
English: After Liang obtained Caozhou, Liang Taizu appointed Huo Cun as the chief historian and the commander of each army.

古文：梁攻郓州，硃瑾来救，梁诸将或劝太祖纵瑾入郓，耗其食，坚围勿战，以此可俱弊。
现代文：梁进攻郸州，朱瑾前来救援，梁众将领有的劝说梁太祖放朱瑾进入鄣州，让他们消耗粮食，牢牢围困他们而不打，靠这个办法可以使他们都疲惫。
English: When Liang attacked Zhangzhou, Zhu Xi came to the rescue. Liang's generals persuaded Liang Taizu to let Zhu Xi enter Zhangzhou, let them consume grain, and firmly besiege them without fighting. This method could make them all tired.

古文：太祖曰： 瑾来必与时溥俱，不若遣存邀之。 
现代文：梁太祖说： 朱瑾一定含和时溥一起来，不如派霍存拦击他们。 
English: Liang Taizu said: Zhu Xi must have come with Shi Yan, it is better to send Huo Cun to stop them.

古文：存伏兵萧县，已而瑾果与溥俱出迷离，存发伏击之，遂败瑾等于石佛山，存中流矢卒。
现代文：霍存在萧县埋伏军队，不久朱瑾果然和时溥一起浑浑噩噩地赶来，霍存出兵伏击他们，于是在石佛山打败朱瑾等人，霍存中飞箭死去。
English: However, there was an ambush army in Xiao County, and soon Zhu Xi and Shi Lang arrived together. Huo Cun sent soldiers to ambush them, and defeated Zhu Xi and others in Shifoshan. Huo Cun was killed by a flying arrow.

古文：太祖已即位，阅骑兵于繁台，顾诸将曰： 使霍存在，岂劳吾亲阅邪！
现代文：梁太祖登位后，在繁台检阅骑兵，回头对众将领说： 如果霍存还活着，哪里会劳驾我亲自检阅呢！
English: After Liang Taizu ascended the throne, he reviewed the cavalry in Fangtai and turned back to the generals and said: If Huo Cun is still alive, who would bother to review me personally!

古文：诸君宁复思之乎？ 
现代文：诸君难道不想念他吗？ 
English: Don't you guys miss him?

古文：佗日语又如此。
现代文：过了几天又这样说。
English: A few days later he said the same thing.

古文：○张存敬
现代文：张存敬，谯郡人。
English: Zhang Cunqin, from Zhang County.

古文：张存敬，谯郡人也。为人刚直有胆勇，少事梁太祖为将，善因危窘出奇计。
现代文：为人刚强耿直，胆大勇猛，年轻时跟随梁太祖作将领，善于在危急窘迫之中想出妙计。
English: He is a strong, courageous and brave person. When he was young, he followed Liang Taizu as a general. He is good at coming up with a good plan in a critical situation.

古文：李罕之与晋人攻张全义于河阳，太祖遣存敬与丁会等救之，罕之解围去。
现代文：李罕之和晋人在河阳进攻张全义，梁太祖派张存敬和丁会等人救援他们，李罕之撤围离去。
English: Li Han Zhi and the Jin attacked Zhang Quan Yi in Heyang, Liang Taizu sent Zhang Cunqian and the Ding Association to rescue them, and Li Han Zi withdrew from the siege.

古文：太祖以存敬为诸军都虞候。
现代文：梁太祖任命张存敬为诸军都虞候。
English: Liang Taizu appointed Zhang Cunjing as the military governor.

古文：太祖攻徐、兗，以存敬为行营都指挥使。
现代文：梁太祖进攻徐、兖二州，任命李存敬为行营都指挥使。
English: Liang Taizu attacked the two prefectures of Xu and Handan, and appointed Li Cunjing as the commander of the campaign.

古文：从葛从周攻沧州，败刘仁恭于老鸦堤。
现代文：随葛从周进攻沧州，在老鹞堤打败刘仁恭。
English: He followed Ge Zhou to attack Cangzhou, and defeated Liu Renkong at the Laojiao dike.

古文：还攻王熔于镇州，入其城中，取其马牛万计。
现代文：回军时在镇州进攻王镕，攻进城中，缴获牛马敷以万计。
English: When he returned to the army, he attacked Wang Qi in Zhenzhou, invaded the city, and captured tens of thousands of cattle and horses.

古文：迁宋州刺史。
现代文：升任宋州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the post of Songzhou chief historian.

古文：复从诸将攻幽州，存敬取其瀛、莫、祁、景四州。
现代文：又随众将领进攻幽州，张存敬攻取瀛、莫、祁、景四州。
English: He also followed the generals to attack Yuzhou, and Zhang Cunjing captured the four provinces of Quzhou, Mo, Handan and Jing.

古文：梁攻定州，与王处直战怀德驿，大败之，枕尸十余里。
现代文：梁进攻定州，和王处直在怀德驿作战，大败敌军，尸体横陈十多里地。
English: Liang attacked Dingzhou, and fought with Wang directly in Huai Dechu, defeating the enemy army, and the dead bodies stretched for more than ten miles.

古文：梁已下镇、定，乃遣存敬攻王珂于河中，存敬出含山，下晋、绛二州，珂降于梁。
现代文：梁攻下镇、定二州后，就派张存敬在河中进攻王珂，张存敬出兵含山，攻克晋、绛二州，王珂向梁投降。
English: After Liang conquered the town and the two prefectures, he sent Zhang Cunjing to attack Wang Ke in the middle of the river. Zhang Cunjing sent troops to the mountains and conquered the two prefectures of Jin and Shu. Wang Ke surrendered to Liang.

古文：太祖表存敬护国军留后，复徙宋州刺史，未至，卒于河中，赠太傅。
现代文：梁太祖表奏张存敬为护国军留后，又调任宋州刺史，尚未到任，死在河中，赠官太傅。
English: After Liang Taizu appointed Zhang Cunqian as a member of the National Defense Force, he was transferred to the post of Songzhou chief historian. He died in the river before taking up the post, and was given the title of grand steward.

古文：存敬子仁颖、仁愿。
现代文：张存敬的儿子叫张仁颖、张仁愿。
English: Zhang Cunqin's sons are named Zhang Renying and Zhang Renzheng.

古文：仁愿有孝行，存敬卒，事其兄仁颖，出必告，反必面，如事父之礼。
现代文：张仁愿很孝顺，张存敬死后，事奉他的哥哥张仁颖，外出必定告知，返回时必定面见，如同事奉父亲的礼节。
English: Zhang Renzhen was very filial. After Zhang Cun Rong's death, he served his brother Zhang Renying. When he went out, he would certainly inform him, and when he returned, he would certainly meet him, like a colleague obeying his father's etiquette.

古文：仁愿晓法令，事梁、唐、晋，常为大理卿，卒，赠秘书监。
现代文：张仁愿通晓法令，效力梁、唐、晋三朝，曾经担任大理卿，死后，赠官秘书监。
English: Zhang Renzhong was familiar with the laws and regulations, served the three dynasties of Liang, Tang, and Jin, and once served as a grand secretary. After his death, he was given the post of superintendent secretary.

古文：○符道昭
现代文：符道昭，蔡州人。
English: Fu Daozhao, from Caizhou.

古文：符道昭，蔡州人也。为秦宗权骑将，宗权败，道昭流落无所依，后依凤翔李茂贞，茂贞爱之，养以为子，名继远。
现代文：曾作秦宗权的骑将，秦宗权失败后，符道昭流浪四方无所依靠，后来投靠凤翔李茂贞，李茂贞很喜欢他，收为养子，取名符继远。
English: He used to be the cavalry commander of the Qin Dynasty. After the defeat of the Qin Dynasty, he had no one to rely on. Later, he relied on Fengxiang Li Maozhen. Li Maozhen liked him very much, adopted him as her son, and named him Fu Jianyuan.

古文：梁攻茂贞，道昭与梁兵战，屡败，乃归梁，太祖表道昭秦州节度使，以乱不果行。
现代文：梁进攻李茂贞，符道昭和梁乓作战，多次被打败，于是归附梁，梁太祖表奏符道昭为秦州节度使，由于战乱没能赴任。
English: Liang attacked Li Maozhen and fought against Liang Peng several times. Liang was defeated many times and became a vassal of Liang. Liang's great-great-grandfather, Liang Taizu, was the Qin State Festival envoy, but was unable to take up the post due to the war.

古文：太祖为元帅，初开府，而李周彝以鄜州降，以为左司马，择右司马难其人，及得道昭，乃授之。
现代文：梁太祖作元帅，刚开元帅府，李周彝便以郦州之地投降，任命为左司马，右司马则一时难以找到合适人选，得到符道昭后，就任命他为右司马。
English: Liang Taizu was a marshal, and as soon as he opened the marshal's office, Li Zhouqi capitulated to the land of Zhangzhou and was appointed as the left secretary, while the right secretary was difficult to find a suitable candidate. After getting the certificate of Tao Zhao, he was appointed as the right secretary.

古文：罗绍威将诛其牙兵，恶魏兵强，未敢发，求梁为助。
现代文：罗绍威准备诛杀他的牙兵，畏惧魏兵强大，不敢轻举妄动，请求梁的帮助。
English: Rossowe was ready to fight and kill his tooth soldiers. He was afraid of the powerful Wei soldiers and did not dare to act rashly. He asked Liang Zong for help.

古文：太祖乃悉发魏兵使攻燕，而遣马嗣勋助绍威诛牙兵。
现代文：梁太祖于是派遣全部魏兵让他们进攻燕，又派马嗣勋协助罗绍威诛杀牙兵。
English: Liang Taizu then sent all the Wei soldiers to let them attack Yan, and also sent Ma Shixun to assist Rossow in killing the soldiers.

古文：牙兵已诛，魏兵在外者闻之皆乱，魏将左行迁据历亭、史仁遇据高唐以叛，道昭等从太祖悉破之。
现代文：牙兵被杀后，在外的魏兵听说后都叛乱了，魏将领左行迁占据历亭、史仁遇占据高唐发动叛乱，符道昭等人跟随梁太祖全部打败了他们。
English: After the tooth soldier was killed, all the Wei soldiers outside rebelled when they heard about it. Wei generals Zuo Xingqian occupied Liting, Shi Ren occupied Gaotang and launched a rebellion. Fu Daozhao and others followed Liang Taizu and defeated them all.

古文：道昭为将，勇于犯敌而少成算，每战先发，多败，而周彝等继之乃胜。
现代文：符道昭任将领，进攻敌人勇猛，但缺乏周密的谋划，每次作战都率先出击，大多被打败，李周彝等人作为后续纔能取胜。
English: In accordance with the principle of appointing generals, he attacked the enemy bravely, but lacked a thorough plan. He took the lead in every battle and was mostly defeated. Li Zhouqi and others were able to win as a follow-up.

古文：开平元年与康怀英等攻潞州，筑夹城为蚰蜒堑以围之，逾年不能下，晋兵攻破夹城，道昭战死。
现代文：开平元年和康怀英等人进攻潞州，修筑夹城和蚰蜒状的壕沟围困敲人，一年多不能攻克，晋军攻破夹城，符道昭战死。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Kang Huaiying and others attacked Zhangzhou. They built a double city and a winding trench, besieged and knocked down people, and could not be conquered for more than a year. The Jin army broke through the double city, and Fu Tao Zhao died in battle.

古文：○刘捍
现代文：刘捍，开封人。
English: Liu Han, a person from Kaifeng.

古文：刘捍，开封人也。为人明敏有威仪，善摈赞。
现代文：为人聪明机敏仪表威武，善于出迎宾客入为礼赞。
English: He is clever, quick-witted, dignified, and good at welcoming guests.

古文：太祖初镇宣武，以为客将，使从硃珍募兵淄青。
现代文：梁太祖刚刚镇守宣武军时，让他作客将，派他随朱珍在淄青二州招募士兵。
English: When Liang Taizu was just in charge of the Xuanwu army, he made him a guest general and sent him to recruit soldiers with Zhu Zhen in Jiaqing and Erzhou.

古文：太祖北攻镇州，与王镕和，遣捍见镕，镕军未知梁意，方严兵，捍驰一骑入城中，谕镕以太祖意，镕乃听命。
现代文：梁太祖向北进攻镇州，和王镕讲和，派刘捍去见王镕，王镕的军队不知道梁的用意，正整兵以待，刘捍孤身独骑飞驰入城，把梁太祖的用意告诉王镕，王镕于是遵命。
English: Liang Taizu attacked Zhenzhou to the north, and made peace with Wang Qian. He sent Liu Han to meet Wang Qian. Wang Qian's army did not know Liang's intention, and was preparing for battle. Liu Han galloped into the city alone, told Wang Qian of Liang Taizu's intention, and Wang Qian obeyed the order.

古文：梁兵攻定州，降王处直，捍复以一骑入慰城中。
现代文：梁军进攻定州，降服王处直，刘捍又一人骑马入城慰劳。
English: Liang's army attacked Dingzhou, Wang Shanzhi surrendered, Liu Han and another person rode into the city to comfort.

古文：太祖围凤翔，遣捍入见李茂贞计事。
现代文：梁太祖围攻凤翔，派刘捍进见李茂贞商议战事。
English: Liang Taizu besieged Fengxiang and sent Liu Han to meet with Li Maozhen to discuss the war.

古文：唐昭宗召见，问梁军中事，称旨，赐以锦袍，拜登州刺史，赐号 迎銮毅勇功臣。 
现代文：唐昭宗召见刘捍，询问梁军的情况，对答很合唐昭宗之意，赐给锦袍，拜为登州刺史，赐号叫 迎銮毅勇功臣 。
English: Tang Zhaozong summoned Liu Han, inquired about the situation of Liang Jun, and the answer was very much in line with Tang Zhaozong's intention. He gave him a brocade robe, asked him to make history by going to the state, and gave him the title of Yingqiu Yi Yong Hero.

古文：梁兵攻淮南，遣捍先之淮口，筑马头下浮桥以渡梁兵。
现代文：梁军进攻淮南，派刘捍先去淮口，修筑马头下浮桥让梁兵渡河。
English: Liang's army attacked Huainan, sent Liu Han to Huaikou first, and built a pontoon bridge to let Liang cross the river.

古文：太祖出光山攻寿州，又使捍作浮桥于淮北，以渡归师。
现代文：梁太祖出兵光山进攻寿州，又派刘捍在淮北建浮桥，让返回的军队渡过。
English: Liang Taizu sent troops from Guangshan to attack Shoushou, and also sent Liu Han to build a pontoon bridge in Huaibei to allow the returning troops to cross.

古文：拜宋州刺史。
现代文：拜为宋州刺史。
English: Bai is a historical figure in Songzhou.

古文：太祖即位，迁左天武指挥使、元从亲军都虞候、左龙虎统军，出为佑国军留后。
现代文：梁太祖登位后，升为左天武指挥使、元从亲军都虞候、左龙虎统军，出任佑国军留后。
English: After the enthronement of Liang Taizu, he was promoted to the left Tianwu commander, the former from the pro-army capital city, the left dragon and tiger unified army, and served as the Yueguo army.

古文：同州刘知俊反，以赂诱捍将吏，执捍而去，知俊械之，送于李茂贞，见杀。
现代文：同州刘知俊反叛，贿赂引诱刘捍手下的将官，把刘捍捉去，刘知俊给刘捍戴上脚镰手铐，送到李茂贞那里，将其杀死。
English: Liu Zhijun rebelled in the same province, bribed and lured Liu Han's generals, captured Liu Han, put Liu Han in leg irons and handcuffs, sent Liu Zhijun to Li Maozhen, and killed him.

古文：太祖哀之，赠捍太傅。
现代文：梁太祖哀悼刘捍，赠刘捍太傅头衔。
English: Liang Taizu mourned Liu Han and gave Liu Han the title of Taifu.

古文：○寇彦卿寇彦卿，字俊臣，开封人也。世事宣武军为牙将。
现代文：寇彦卿字俊臣，开封人，世代在宣武军任牙将。
English: Korehiko-kyo, also known as Junshin, was from Kaifeng and had been a general in the Imperial Japanese Army for generations.

古文：太祖初就镇，以为通引官，累迁右长直都指挥使，领洺州刺史。
现代文：梁太祖刚到宣武军镇守时，任命为通引官，历次升迁至右长直都指挥便，领沼州刺史。
English: When Liang Taizu had just arrived at the town guard of the Xuanwu Army, he was appointed as the leading officer, and he was promoted to the command of the right long straight line, and the history of the marshland was written.

古文：罗绍威将诛牙军，太祖遣彦卿之魏计事，彦卿阴为绍威计画，乃悉诛牙军。
现代文：罗绍威准备诛杀牙军，梁太祖派寇彦卿到魏商议事情，寇彦卿私下为罗绍威出谋划策，于是全部杀掉牙军。
English: Rossoway prepared to fight and kill the Yaga army. Liang Taizu sent Sir Ko Yan to Wei to discuss the matter. Sir Ko Yan privately made a plan for Rossoway, and then killed all the Yaga army.

古文：彦卿身长八尺，隆准方面，语音如钟，工骑射，好书史，善伺太祖意，动作皆如旨。
现代文：寇彦卿身高八尺，鼻高脸方，声音像钟一样洪亮，擅长骑马射箭，喜好读书，善于窥伺梁太祖的心意，所作所为都符合梁太祖的意愿。
English: Eight feet tall, with a high nose and a square face, his voice is as loud as a bell. He is good at riding and archery, likes to read, and is good at spying on Liang Taizu's intentions. Everything he does is in line with Liang Taizu's wishes.

古文：太祖尝曰： 敬翔、刘捍、寇彦卿皆天为我生之。 
现代文：梁太祖曾经说： 敬翔、刘捍、寇彦卿三人都是老天特意赐给我的。 
English: Liang Taizu once said: "Jing Xiang, Liu Han, and Kou Yanqing are the three bestowed upon me by God.

古文：其爱之如此。
现代文：喜欢他们到这种程度。
English: I like them to that extent.

古文：赐以所乘爱马 一丈乌 。
现代文：梁太祖赐给寇彦卿自己喜爱的坐骑 一丈乌 。
English: Emperor Liang Taizu gave his favorite horse, Ijo-U, to Emperor Kōhiko.

古文：太祖围凤翔，以彦卿为都排阵使，彦卿乘乌驰突阵前，太祖目之曰： 真神将也！ 
现代文：梁太祖围攻凤翔，任命寇彦卿为都排阵使，寇彦卿骑着 一丈乌 在阵前来回奔驰，梁太祖看着他说： 真是神将啊！ 
English: Liang Taizu besieged Fengxiang and appointed Sir Ko Yan as the capital's marshal. Sir Ko Yan rode a horse called Ijaw and rode back and forth between the two armies. Liang Taizu looked at him and said, "What a great general!

古文：初，太祖与崔胤谋，欲迁都洛阳，而昭宗不许。
现代文：当初，梁太祖和崔胤谋划，打箅迁都到洛阳，但唐昭宗不同意。
English: At first, Liang Taizu and Cui Yin planned to move the capital to Luoyang, but Tang Zhaozong did not agree.

古文：其后昭宗奔于凤翔，太祖以兵围之，昭宗既出，明年，太祖以兵至河中，遣彦卿奉表迫请迁都。
现代文：后来唐昭宗逃奔到凤翔，梁太祖率兵包围他，唐昭宗逃出后，第二年，梁太祖率兵到河中，派寇彦卿上表逼迫唐昭宗迁都。
English: Later, Tang Zhaozong fled to Fengxiang, and Liang Taizu led an army to encircle him. After Tang Zhaozong escaped, the next year, Liang Taizu led an army to the middle of the river and sent Guo Yanqing to the table to force Tang Zhaozong to move the capital.

古文：彦卿因悉驱徙长安居人以东，人皆拆屋为筏，浮渭而下，道路号哭，仰天大骂曰： 国贼崔胤、硃温使我至此！ 
现代文：寇彦卿于是驱赶着全部长安居民向东迁移，将房屋全部拆毁做成木筏，沿渭河顺流而下，百姓在路上呼号哭泣，仰天大骂说： 国贼崔胤、朱温让我们落到现在这个地步！ 
English: Kou Yanqing then drove all the residents of Chang'an to migrate to the east, demolished all the houses to make rafts, and went down the Li River. The people cried on the road and swore at the heavens, saying: National traitors Cui Yan and Zhu Wen have brought us to this point!

古文：昭宗亦顾瞻陵庙，傍徨不忍去，谓其左右为俚语云： 纥干山头冻死雀，何不飞去生处乐。 
现代文：唐昭宗也回头瞻望陵墓宗庙，徘徊不忍离去，用俚语对手下人说： 纥干山头冻死雀，何不飞去生处乐。 
English: Tang Zhaozong also looked back at the mausoleum and the ancestral temple, lingered and could not bear to leave, and said to his opponent in slang: "If the frozen birds on the mountains of Shougan are dead, why not fly to enjoy life."

古文：相与泣下沾襟。
现代文：君臣相挽，泪下沾襟。
English: Princes and ministers hugged each other, tears streaming down their faces.

古文：昭宗行至华州，遣人告太祖以何皇后有娠，愿留华州待冬而行。
现代文：唐昭宗行进到华州，派人告诉梁太祖因何皇后怀有身孕，希望留在华州等冬天过后再走。
English: Tang Zhaozong marched to Huazhou and sent someone to tell Liang Taizu why the empress was pregnant and hoped to stay in Huazhou until after the winter.

古文：太祖大怒，顾彦卿曰： 汝往趣官家来，不可一日留也。 
现代文：梁太祖大怒，回头对寇彦卿说： 你去催皇帝来，一天也不能停留。 
English: Liang Taizu was furious and turned back to Kou Yanqing and said, "If you go to urge the emperor to come, you won't be able to stay for a single day.

古文：彦卿复驰至华，即日迫昭宗上道。
现代文：寇彦卿又驰马到华州，当天就迫使唐昭宗上路。
English: Kou Yanqing also rode his horse to Huazhou, forcing Tang Zhaozong to set out on the same day.

古文：太祖即位，拜彦卿感化军节度使。
现代文：梁太祖登位，拜寇彦卿为感化军节度使。
English: Emperor Taizu ascended to the throne, and Baikohan was appointed as the military envoy of the Kuomintang.

古文：岁余，召为左金吾卫大将军，充金吾衙仗使。
现代文：一年多后，召回担任左金吾卫大将军，充金吾街仗使。
English: A little more than a year later, he was recalled to serve as General Zuo Kingu Wei and General Zeng Kingu Street Warlord.

古文：彦卿晨朝至天津桥，民梁现不避道，前驱捽现投桥上石栏以死。
现代文：寇彦卿早晨上朝走到天津桥时，百姓梁现不让路，前面开路的士兵揪住梁现扔向桥上石栏将他摔死。
English: When Kou Yanqing walked to Tianjin Bridge in the morning of the previous day, the people did not give way to Liang Zeng, and the soldiers who opened the road ahead grabbed Liang Zeng and threw him to the stone railing on the bridge, killing him.

古文：彦卿见太祖自首，太祖惜之，诏彦卿以钱偿现家以赎罪。
现代文：寇彦卿进见梁太祖自陈认罪，梁太祖爱惜他，诏令寇彦卿用钱赔偿梁现家赎罪。
English: Lord Guo Yan went to see Liang Taizu confess his sins, and Lord Guo Yan ordered Lord Guo Yan to pay money to Liang Jian's family to atone for his sins.

古文：御史司宪崔沂劾奏彦卿，请论如法，太祖不得已，责授彦卿左卫中郎将。
现代文：御史司意崔沂上奏弹劾寇彦卿，请求依法论处，梁太祖迫不得已，贬降寇彦卿为左卫中郎将。
English: The Chief Historian, Cui Jun, sent a report to impeach Sir Ko Yan and requested that the matter be dealt with according to the law. As a last resort, Liang Taizu demoted Sir Ko Yan to the rank of Middle Captain of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard.

古文：复拜相州防御使，迁河阳节度使。
现代文：又拜为相州防御使，迁任河阳节度使。
English: He also served as the defense envoy of Xiangzhou and was transferred to be the envoy of the Heyang Festival.

古文：太祖遇弑，彦卿出太祖画像事之如生，尝对客语先朝，必涕泗交下。
现代文：梁太祖被杀后，寇彦卿挂出梁太祖的画像如同他还活着那样事奉饱，常常对客人谈起先朝时事，总是泪流满面。
English: After Liang Taizu was killed, Sir Ko Yan hung up a picture of Liang Taizu as if he was still alive, and often talked to guests about the events of the previous day, always with tears streaming down his face.

古文：末帝即位，徙镇威胜。
现代文：梁末帝登位，调任镇守威胜军。
English: Emperor Liang Mucai ascended to the throne and transferred to the post of town guard of the victorious army.

古文：彦卿明敏善事人，而怙宠作威，好诛杀，多猜忌。
现代文：寇彦卿聪明机敏善于事奉人，但依仗宠信作威作福，喜好杀人，常常猜忌别人。
English: Lord Kōhiko is clever, quick-witted, and good at serving others. However, he relies on favoritism to gain power, likes to kill people, and is often suspicious of others.

古文：卒于镇，年五十七。
现代文：死在镇所，时年五十七岁。
English: He died in the town hall at the age of fifty-seven.

