古文：凡人主者，猛毅则伐，懦弱则杀，猛毅者何也？
现代文：凡为人君，猛毅就为人所伐，懦弱就被人所杀。什么叫猛毅呢？
English: For everyone who is a prince, strength is cut down by men, and weakness is killed by men. What is strength?

古文：轻诛杀人之谓猛毅。
现代文：轻易杀人的，叫作猛毅。
English: He who kills easily is called ferocious.

古文：懦弱者何也，重诛杀人之谓懦弱。
现代文：什么是懦弱呢？姑息于杀人的，叫作懦弱。
English: What is cowardice? To condone killing is called cowardice.

古文：此皆有失彼此。
现代文：此二者各有所失。
English: Both of these have their drawbacks.

古文：凡轻诛者杀不辜，而重诛者失有皋，故上杀不辜，则道正者不安；上失有皋，则行邪者不变。
现代文：凡轻易杀人的，会杀了无罪的人；凡姑息于杀人的，会遗漏真正的罪犯。国君杀了无罪的人，正人君子就心怀不安；遗漏真正的罪犯，干坏事的就不肯改正。
English: He who kills a man carelessly kills an innocent man; he who tolerates the killing of a man leaves out the real criminal. When the sovereign kills an innocent man, the just man is uneasy; when he leaves out the real criminal, he does not want to set right what he has done.

古文：道正者不安，则才能之人去亡；行邪者不变，则群臣朋党；才能之人去亡，则宜有外难，群臣朋党，则宜有内乱。
现代文：正人君子不放心，人材就会外流；做坏事的不改正，群臣就结党营私。人材外流，势必带来外患；群臣结党，势必带来内乱。
English: If upright people and gentlemen are not assured, human resources will be outflowed; if bad things are not corrected, the ministers will form a party to fight each other. The outflow of human resources is bound to bring external disasters; if the ministers form a party, it is bound to bring civil unrest.

古文：故曰猛毅者伐，懦弱者杀也。
现代文：所以说，猛毅之君为人所伐，懦弱之君将被人所杀。
English: Therefore, it is said that the prince of vigor will be cut down by people, and the prince of cowardice will be killed by people.

古文：君之所以卑尊，国之所以安危者，莫要于兵。
现代文：决定君主尊卑、国家安危的，没有比军队更重要的了。
English: Nothing is more important than the army in determining the superiority or inferiority of the monarch and the security of the country.

古文：故诛暴国必以兵，禁辟民必以刑。
现代文：征伐暴国，必用军队；镇压坏人，必用刑杀。
English: To conquer a tyrannical country, troops must be used; to suppress evil-doers, executions must be used.

古文：然则兵者外以诛暴，内以禁邪。
现代文：于是军队是对外用于征伐暴国，对内用于镇压坏人的。
English: As a result, the army was used externally to conquer tyrannical countries and internally to suppress evil-doers.

古文：故兵者尊主安国之经也，不可废也。
现代文：因此，军队是尊君安国的根本，不可废置。
English: Therefore, the military is the foundation of respecting the emperor and ensuring national security, and it should not be abolished.

古文：若夫世主则不然。外不以兵，而欲诛暴，则地必亏矣。内不以刑，而欲禁邪，则国必乱矣。
现代文：现时的君主则不然，对外不用军队而想征伐暴国，那就必然要丧失国土；对内不用刑杀而想镇压坏人，国家就一定混乱了。
English: The current monarch is different. If you want to conquer a tyrannical country without using the army, you will inevitably lose the land. If you want to suppress the bad people without killing them, the country will certainly be in chaos.

古文：故凡用兵之计，三惊当一至，三至当一军，三军当一战；故一期之师，十年之蓄积殚；一战之费，累代之功尽；今交刃接兵而后利之，则战之自胜者也。
现代文：凡用兵的计划，三次警备等于一次出征，三次出征等于一次围敌，三次围敌等于一次交战。所以，一年的军费，要准备消耗十年的积蓄；一战的费用，要准备用光几代的积累。现在，如果等到两国交兵以后，才创造有利于备战的条件，那只好一接战就自己宣告失败。
English: In any plan for the employment of soldiers, three times of guarding is equal to one campaign, three times of campaigning is equal to one encirclement of the enemy, and three times of encirclement of the enemy is equal to one engagement. Therefore, one year of military expenditure should be prepared to consume ten years of savings; the cost of the First World War should be prepared to use up several generations of accumulation. Now, if you wait until after the two countries have exchanged troops to create conditions conducive to preparing for war, then you have no choice but to declare yourself a failure as soon as you engage in battle.

古文：攻城围邑，主人易子而食之，析骸而爨之，则攻之自拔者也。
现代文：如果等到攻城围邑以后，才知道守城者易子而食，烧骨为炊的顽强抵抗，那只好一进攻就自己宣告拔寨而退了。
English: If you wait until after the siege and encirclement of the city, you will know that the defenders of the city will eat their own children, and the stubborn resistance of burning bones will be cooked, then you will have to announce the withdrawal of the castle and retreat as soon as you attack.

古文：是以圣人小征而大匡，不失天时，不空地利，用日维梦，其数不出于计。
现代文：所以圣人总是对小的征战有大的警惧、争取不失天时，不失地利，白天作战夜间就计划好。
English: That is why sages are always very wary of small battles. They strive not to lose the day, not to lose the place, and they plan well during the day and at night.

古文：故计必先定而兵出于竟，计未定而兵出于竟，则战之自败，攻之自毁者也。
现代文：其各项办法都不超出于计划，所以，计划必须先定而后才兴兵出境，没有计划好而兴兵出境，那是战起来自己就失败，攻起来自己就毁灭的。
English: All of its measures do not exceed the plan. Therefore, the plan must be determined before the troops are sent out. If the troops are sent out without a good plan, they will fail when they fight, and they will be destroyed when they attack.

