古文：秦景公使其弟鍼来求成，叔向命召行人子员。
现代文：秦景公派他的弟弟鍼到晋国订立盟约，叔向命令把行人子员召来。
English: Qin Jingsong sent his younger brother Shu to Jin to conclude a covenant, and his uncle ordered him to summon the son of a pedestrian.

古文：行人子朱曰 朱也在此。 
现代文：行人子朱说： 我子朱也在这里。 
English: Zhu, the pedestrian's son, said, "My son Zhu is also here.

古文：叔向曰： 召子员。 
现代文：叔向仍说： 把子员召来。 
English: Uncle Xiang still said, "Bring your son here."

古文：子朱曰： 朱也当御。 
现代文：子朱说： 我子朱是当班值日的。 
English: Zizhu said: My son Zhu is on duty.

古文：叔向曰： 肸也欲子员之对客也。 
现代文：叔向说： 我想叫子员来应接宾客。 
English: Uncle Xiang said, "I'd like to have the boys come and meet the guests."

古文：子朱怒曰： 皆君之臣也，班爵同，何以黜朱也？ 
现代文：子朱发怒说： 我和子员都是君王的臣子，官爵职位都相同，为什么要贬斥我呢？ 
English: Zi Zhu said angrily, "I and my disciples are all the king's vassals, with the same official and noble positions. Why do you disparage me?

古文：抚剑就之。
现代文：说完就拿着剑挺身向前。
English: With that, he drew his sword and stepped forward.

古文：叔向曰： 秦、晋不和久矣，今日之事幸而集，子孙飨之。不集，三军之士暴骨。
现代文：叔向说： 秦、晋两国邦交不和已经很久了，今天的事情幸而能够成功，子子孙孙都享其福，不成功的话，三军将士将暴骨沙场。
English: Uncle Xiang said: It has been a long time since the Qin and Jin dynasties have been at odds with each other. Fortunately, today's event can be a success, and the children and grandchildren can all enjoy its blessings. If it is not a success, the soldiers of the three armies will have a fierce battle.

古文：夫子员导宾主之言无私，子常易之。
现代文：子员传答宾主两国的话没有私心，而你却常常改变原意。
English: The disciple preached that there was no selfishness in the words of the guest, but you often changed the original meaning.

古文：奸以事君者，吾所能御也。 
现代文：一个用奸诈之术来事奉国君的人，我是能加以抵御的。 
English: I can resist a man who uses treachery to serve his sovereign.

古文：拂衣从之，人救之。
现代文：说着提起衣襟就上前搏斗，人们把他们拉开了。
English: Saying that, they raised their collars and fought, and people pulled them away.

古文：平公闻之曰： 晋其庶乎！
现代文：平公听说这件事后，说： 晋国应该要大治了吧！
English: After hearing about this, Ping Gong said, "Jin State should have a major crackdown!"

古文：吾臣之所争者大。 
现代文：我的臣下所争论的都是国家大事。 
English: What my lieutenants are arguing about is a matter of state.

古文：师旷侍，曰： 公室惧卑，其臣不心竞而力争。 
现代文：师旷在一旁侍候，说： 公室的地位恐怕要衰落了，因为这两位大臣不是斗智而是斗力。 
English: Shigu, who was waiting on the sidelines, said, "I'm afraid that the status of the public office is about to decline, because these two ministers are not fighting for wisdom, but for power.

