古文：佛图澄
现代文：佛图澄
English: Buddha Toocheng

古文：佛图澄者，西域人也。
现代文：佛澄图是西域人。本姓帛氏。
English: Foshentu is a native of the Western Regions, originally from the Jiu clan.

古文：本姓帛氏。
现代文：少年出家。
English: The boy became a monk.

古文：少出家。清真幼学，诵经数百万言。
现代文：自幼清真务学，能诵经书数百万言。
English: He has been studying religious affairs since childhood and can recite millions of sutras.

古文：以晋怀帝永嘉四年来适洛阳，志弘大法。善念神咒，能役使鬼物。
现代文：晋怀帝永嘉四年来到洛阳。他志宏大法，善念神咒，能役使鬼神。
English: Jin Huai Emperor Yongjia came to Luoyang for four years. He had a great aspiration for the Fa, was good at reciting divine spells, and was able to use ghosts and gods.

古文：以麻油杂烟灰涂掌，千里外事，皆彻见掌中，如对面焉，亦能令洁斋者见。
现代文：他把麻油的烟灰涂在手掌上，能从掌中看见千里之外的事物，就像看见对面的事物一样清楚，他也能让洁斋者看见。
English: He applied the soot of hemp oil to his palms and could see things thousands of miles away from his palm as clearly as he could see things on the opposite side. He could also make the fasting person see.

古文：又叫听铃音以言事，无不效验。
现代文：他根据佛塔上的铃声预言吉凶福祸，没有不应验的。
English: According to the sound of the bell on the pagoda, he predicts good, bad, and misfortune, and there is no failure to pass the test.

古文：欲于洛阳立寺，值刘曜寇斥洛台，帝京扰乱，澄立寺之志遂不果。乃潜身革野，以观世变。
现代文：他本想在洛阳建立寺院，正值刘曜攻陷洛阳，京都扰乱，建立寺院的志愿未能实现，于是潜居草野，观察世事的变化。
English: Originally, he wanted to build a temple in Luoyang. However, at the time of Liu You's attack on Luoyang and the disruption of Kyoto, his wish to build a temple was not realized, so he hid in the grassland to observe the changes in the world.

古文：时石勒屯兵葛陂，专以杀戮为威，沙门遇害者甚众。
现代文：当时石勒屯兵于葛陂，随意杀害无辜，佛门弟子也有许多遇害。
English: At that time, the troops of Shile were stationed in Gezi, killing innocents at will, and many Buddhist disciples were also killed.

古文：澄悯念苍生，欲以道化勒，于是杖策到军门。
现代文：佛图澄悯念苍生，想以佛道感化石勒，于是杖策来到军门。
English: Buddha's compassion for all sentient beings, he wanted to use his sense of Buddhism as a fossil, so Jie Zhe came to the military gate.

古文：勒大将郭黑略素奉法，澄即投止略家。
现代文：石勒的大将郭黑略是信奉佛教的，佛图澄便住到他那里。
English: Shihle's general, Guo Heiliu, was a Buddhist, and Buddha Tucheng came to live with him.

古文：略从受五戒，崇弟子之礼。
现代文：郭黑略跟他接受了五戒，拜他为师父。
English: Guo Heiliu accepted the Five Precepts with him and worshipped him as a master.

古文：略后从勒征伐，辄预克胜负，勒疑而问曰： 孤不觉卿有出众智谋，而每知行军吉凶，何也？ 
现代文：后来郭随石勒征战时，佛图澄就为他预卜胜负，石勒惊疑地问郭： 我怎么不知道你竟有这么出众的智谋，每次出兵你都能预知吉凶，这是怎么回事？ 
English: Later, when Guo went to war with Shi Le, Buddha Tucheng predicted his victory and defeat for him. Shi Le asked Guo in surprise, "How did I not know that you have such an outstanding wit? Every time you go to war, you can predict the fortunes. What's going on?"

古文：略曰：将军天挺神武，幽灵所助。
现代文：郭说： 您天赋神威，为神灵所辅助。
English: Guo said: You are endowed with divine power, assisted by the gods.

古文：有一沙门，术智非常，云将军当略有区夏。
现代文：有一个沙门、法术、智慧非同寻常，说您略有君临诸夏的机缘。
English: There is a samana, a magic, an extraordinary wisdom, saying that you have the opportunity to reign over the summer.

古文：己应为师，臣前后所白，皆其言也。 勒喜曰： 天赐也。 
现代文：我已拜他为师，我所告诉您关于吉凶的话，都是他说的呀。 石勒高兴地说： 真是天赐我也！ 
English: I've looked up to him as a mentor, and everything I've told you about good and bad luck, he told me.Schiele said happily, "It was a godsend for me!

古文：召澄问曰： 佛道有何灵验？ 
现代文：他召见佛图澄问道： 佛道有什么灵验？ 
English: He summoned the Buddha Tuzhen and asked: What is the efficacy of Buddhism?

古文：澄知勒不达深理，正可以道术为教，因言曰： 至道虽远，亦可以近事为证。 
现代文：佛图澄知道石勒不懂深奥的道理正适合通过道术教化他，所以说： 真正的佛道虽然很深远，但也可以以近事为证。 
English: Knowing that Shi Le did not understand the esoteric principles, it was suitable to enlighten him through Taoism, so he said: Although the true Buddhist path is very far-reaching, it can also be proved by recent events.

古文：即取器盛水，烧香咒之。
现代文：他当场拿来一个容器盛上水，然后烧香念咒。
English: He brought a container on the spot, filled it with water, and then burned incense and chanted mantras.

古文：须臾生青莲华，光色曜日。
现代文：容器内顿见生出一枝水凌凌的莲花，鲜艳耀眼。
English: Inside the container, a lotus flower bursts forth, dazzlingly bright.

古文：勒由此信伏。
现代文：石勒由此表示信服。
English: Shearer is convinced by this.

古文：澄因谏曰： 夫王者德化洽于宇内则四灵表瑞，政弊道消则彗孛见于上。恒象著见，体咎随行。斯乃古今之常理，天人之明戒。 
现代文：佛图澄接着劝谏说： 为王者以德化遍施宇内则四方献出灵物表示祥瑞，人政治乃弊道消则乖象丛生，自然现象的呈现，伴随而来的是人间的吉凶福祸；这是古往今来的常理，天与人的明鉴。 
English: Buddha Tuzhen went on to exhort him, saying, "When a king spreads virtue throughout the world, the four directions offer up spiritual objects to express auspiciousness. When human politics is the elimination of evils, it is like a swarm. When natural phenomena appear, it is accompanied by good luck, bad luck, and calamity in the human world. This has been the common sense from ancient times to the present, and is a clear example for heaven and man.

古文：勒甚悦之。
现代文：石勒听了心悦诚服。
English: Shi Le listened with sincere pleasure.

古文：凡应被诛残蒙其益者，十有八九，于是中州之胡，皆愿奉佛。
现代文：此后，凡属应被杀害的人，十有八九因佛图澄的劝谏而免于被害，中国境内的胡人于是都愿意奉佛。
English: After that, all those who should have been killed were, in all likelihood, spared from harm due to the advice of Buddha Tuzhen, and the Hu people in China were all willing to worship Buddha.

古文：时有痼疾，世莫能知者，澄为医疗，应时瘳损。
现代文：当时，凡有痼疾而为世人所不了解的，佛图澄为他们治疗就能应时而愈。
English: At that time, whenever there was a malady that the world didn't understand, Buddha Tso Ching was able to treat it for them.

古文：阴施默益者，不可胜记。
现代文：他默然施恩于人，使其受益的，不可胜记。
English: His silent benevolence to the people, benefiting them, is unforgettable.

古文：勒自葛陂还河北，过坊头，人夜欲斫营，澄语黑略曰： 须臾贼至，可令公知。 
现代文：石勒从葛陂回河北时路过坊头，有人想乘夜间劫营，佛图澄对郭黑略说： 一会儿贼寇就要来到，你可去通知主公。 
English: When Shi Le was returning to Hebei from Gezi, he passed by a village. Someone wanted to take advantage of the night to rob the camp. Buddha Tucheng said to Guo Heyao, "The bandits will be coming soon. You can go and inform your lord."

古文：果如其言，有备故不败。
现代文：果如其言，因为预先有了防备，所以没有吃败仗。
English: As it turned out, he did not lose the battle because he had prepared in advance.

古文：勒欲试澄，夜冠胄衣甲执刃而坐，遣人告澄云： 夜来不知大将军所在。 使人始至，未及有言，澄逆问曰： 平居无寇，何故夜严？ 
现代文：石勒想考一考佛图澄，一天夜晚，他顶盔挂甲执利刃坐在那里，却让人去告诉佛图澄自己不知哪里去了，去的人没等开口，佛图澄反而冲他问道： 明明平安无事，主公今晚为什么全身披挂？ 
English: Shi Le wanted to take a test on the Buddha Tu Cheng. One night, he was sitting there with his helmet, armor and sword, but someone told him to tell the Buddha Tu Cheng that he did not know where he had gone. The person who had gone did not wait for him to speak. Instead, the Buddha Tu Cheng asked him, "It's clear that everything is fine. Why is the Lord Lord fully clothed tonight?"

古文：勒益敬之。
现代文：石勒对他更为敬佩了。
English: Shearer admired him even more.

古文：勒后因忿，欲害诸道士，并欲苦澄。澄乃避至黑略舍，语弟子曰： 若将军使至，问吾所在者，报云不知所之。 
现代文：后来石勒为一件事非常恼火，便想加害各位道士，并想叫佛图澄吃点苦头，澄便躲到郭黑略家里，告诉弟子说： 如果主公派人来问我在什么地方，就说我不知道哪里去了。 
English: Later, Shi Le was very angry about something, and he wanted to harm all the Taoists, and he wanted to make Buddha Tuzhen suffer some hardships. Tuzhen then hid in Guo He Liao's home and told his disciple, "If the Lord sends someone to ask me where I am, I will say that I don't know where I am."

古文：使人寻至，觅澄不得，使还报勒。
现代文：派的人很快就来了，没找到沸图澄，回去报告了石勒。
English: The person who was sent soon arrived, did not find沸图澄, and went back to report to Shiller.

古文：勒惊曰： 吾有恶意向圣人，圣人舍我去矣。 
现代文：石勒惊讶地说： 我对圣人有恶意，圣人舍我而去了！ 
English: Surprised, she said, "I have a grudge against the sage, and the sage has abandoned me!"

古文：通夜不寝，思欲见澄。澄知勒意悔，明旦造勒，勒曰： 昨夜何行？ 
现代文：因为很想见到澄，他一宿没睡着，澄知道石勒心里后悔，第二天早上去见石勒，石勒说： 昨天夜晚去哪里了？ 
English: Because he really wanted to see Cheng, he did not fall asleep for a whole night. Cheng knew that Shi Le regretted it in his heart, and went to see Shi Le the next morning. Shi Le said: Where did you go last night?

古文：澄曰： 公有怒心，昨故权避；公今改意，是以敢来。 
现代文：澄说： 因为您恼怒，昨晚上暂时躲起来了；您现在已经回心转意，所以敢来见您。 
English: Sumi said, "Because of your anger, I temporarily hid myself last night; now that you have changed your mind, I dare to come and see you."

古文：勒大笑曰： 道人谬耳。 
现代文：石勒大笑道， 你想错了！ 
English: Shi Le laughed loudly. You thought wrong!

古文：襄国城堑水源，在城西北五里，其水源暴竭。勒问澄： 何以致水？ 澄曰： 今当敕龙取水。 
现代文：襄国护城河的水源，在城西北五里处，水源突然枯竭了，石勒问澄用什么方法弄到水，澄说： 如今应当让龙取水。 
English: The water source of the moat in Xiangguo, five miles northwest of the city, suddenly dried up. Shi Le asked Cheng how to get water. Cheng said: Now it is time to let the dragon draw water.

古文：勒字世龙，谓澄嘲己，答曰： 正以龙不能致水，故相问耳？ 
现代文：石勒的字是 世龙 ，他以为澄在嘲笑自己，便说： 正因为我这条龙不能取水，所以才问你呀。 
English: Shi Le's character is Dragon. He thought that Cheng was laughing at himself, so he said, "It is because I, a dragon, cannot draw water that I am asking you."

古文：澄曰： 此诚言，非戏也。
现代文：澄说： 我说的是实话，不是开玩笑。
English: Sumi said, "I'm telling the truth, I'm not joking.

古文：水泉之源，必有神龙居之，往以敕语告之，水必可得。 
现代文：水泉的源头，定有神龙住在那里，去用咒语告诉它，水一定能得到。 
English: At the source of the spring, there must be a divine dragon living there. Go and use a spell to tell it that water will definitely be available.

古文：乃与弟子法首等数人，至故泉源上。其源故处，久已乾燥，坼如车辙。从者心疑致水难得。
现代文：他与弟子法首等数人来到了水源处，那里早已干裂得开着一条条像车辙般的口子，同去的人都对取水没有信心。
English: He and several other people, including the head of his Dharma disciples, went to the water source. It was so dry and cracked that there were openings like ruts. The people who went with him were not confident about getting water.

古文：澄坐绳床，烧安息香，咒愿数百言。
现代文：佛图澄坐在绳床上，点燃安息香，口诵咒语数百言。
English: Sitting on a rope bed, Buddha Tucheng lit the incense and recited hundreds of incantations.

古文：如此三日，水泫然微流，有一小龙，长五六寸许，随水来出。
现代文：这样连续三天，出现了潺潺细流，还有一条小龙，长约五六寸，也随着水出来了。
English: For three days in a row, there was a trickle, and a small dragon, about five or six inches long, also came out with the water.

古文：诸道士竟往视之，澄曰： 龙有毒，勿临其上。 
现代文：各位道士抢着去看，澄说： 龙有毒，不要靠近它。 
English: All the Taoists rushed to see, and Ching said, "The dragon is poisonous, don't go near it."

古文：有顷，水大至，隍堑皆满。
现代文：过了一会儿，水流变得特别大，壕沟与护城河全都灌满了。
English: After a while, the current became so strong that the ditch and moat were completely filled.

古文：澄闲坐叹曰： 后二日，当有一小人惊动此下。 
现代文：佛图澄闲坐着叹息道： 过两天，会有一个小人惊动这里。 
English: Sitting idly, Buddha Tu-chen sighed and said, "In two days, there will be a villain here.

古文：即而襄国人薛合，有二子，既小且骄，轻侮鲜卑奴。奴忿，抽刃刺杀其弟，执兄于室，以刀拟心，若人入屋，便欲加手，谓薛合曰： 送我还国，我活汝儿。不然，共死于此。 
现代文：后来，襄国有个叫薛合的，他有两个儿子长得既小又骄横，哥俩儿侮辱一个鲜卑奴，鲜卑奴火了，抽刀刺死弟弟，抓着哥哥进了一间房子，用刀逼着他的胸口，如有人进屋就下手，对薛合说： 送我回国，我就放你儿子，不然，我们俩一块儿死在这里！ 
English: Later, there was a man named Xue He in Xiang Province. He had two sons who were both small and arrogant. Brother and brother insulted a lowly slave. The lowly slave was enraged and stabbed his brother to death with a knife. He grabbed his brother and entered a house, forcing his chest with a knife. If anyone entered the house, he would attack them. He said to Xue He, "Send me back to my country, and I will release your son. Otherwise, we will both die here!"

古文：内外惊愕，莫敢往观。
现代文：家里家外的人都惊呆了，谁也不敢到跟前去看。
English: People at home and abroad were stunned, and no one dared to go and see.

古文：勒乃自往视之，谓薛合曰： 送奴以全卿子，诚为善事。
现代文：石勒一人走到跟前看了看，对薛合说： 送回鲜卑奴以保全你的儿子，实在是件好事。
English: Shi Le walked up to Xue He and said to him, "It's really a good thing to send Xian Biao back to protect your son.

古文：此法一开，方为后害，卿且宽情，国有常宪。 
现代文：但开了这个先例，就会造成后患，你且放宽心，国家是有固定的法令的。 
English: However, if this precedent is set, there will be consequences, so relax. The country has fixed laws and regulations.

古文：命人取奴，奴遂杀儿而死。
现代文：他命令人抓那个鲜卑奴、鲜卑奴便杀了薛合的儿子，自己也死了。
English: He ordered someone to catch the ruffian, and the ruffian killed Xue He's son and died himself.

古文：鲜卑段末波攻勒，其众甚盛。
现代文：鲜卑奴段末波出兵攻石勒，来势凶猛，石勒惊惧，去问佛图澄。
English: At the end of the Xianbei slave section, Suibo sent troops to attack Shiller, the situation was fierce, Shiller was alarmed and went to ask Buddha Tucheng.

古文：勒惧问澄，澄曰： 昨日寺铃呜云，明旦食时，当擒段末波。 
现代文：澄说： 昨天寺庙上的铃声告诉我，明天早上吃饭的时候，就能擒获段末波。 
English: Sumi said, "Yesterday, the bell in the temple told me that I would be able to catch the fish when I eat tomorrow morning.

古文：与勒登城望波军，不见前后，失色曰： 岂可获。
现代文：他与石勒登城遥望段末波的军队，前不见头后不见尾，石勒大惊失色，说： 怎么能够捉到他呢！
English: He and the army of the last wave of the far-sighted section of Shi Le's ascent to the city did not see each other before or after. Shi Le was shocked and said: How can I catch him!

古文：是公安我辞耳。 
现代文：这是你安慰我的话罢了。 
English: It's just something you said to comfort me.

古文：更遣夔安问澄，澄曰： 已获波矣。 
现代文：他又让夔安去问澄，澄说： 已经捉到段末波了。 
English: He also asked Yan'an to ask Cheng, and Cheng said, "I've caught the last wave of the section."

古文：时城北伏兵出，遇波执之。
现代文：当时城北的伏兵出动后，遇上段末波就把他抓住了。
English: At that time, after the ambush of the north of the city, he was caught by the last wave of the last wave.

古文：澄劝勒宥波，遣还本国，勒从之，卒获其用。
现代文：澄劝石勒宽宥段末波，遣还回国，石勒听从了，使他的计谋得用。
English: Cheng advised Shi Le to pardon Duan Mianbo and send him back to China. Shi Le listened and put his plan into action.

古文：时刘载已死，载从弟曜篡袭伪立，称元光初。
现代文：当时刘载已死，堂弟刘曜篡袭帝位，年号称为 光初 。
English: At that time, Liu Zai was already dead, and his cousin Liu You usurped the imperial throne. The year was called Guangchu.

古文：光初八年，曜遣从弟中山王岳将兵攻勒，勒遣石虎率步骑拒之，大战洛西，岳败，保石梁坞，虎坚栅守之。
现代文：光初八年，刘曜派堂弟中山王岳带兵攻石勒，石勒派石虎率领部队迎击，两军大战于洛西，刘岳兵败，石梁坞保住了，石虎关紧城门固守石梁坞。
English: In the eighth year of the Guanghu era, Liu You sent his cousin Zhongshan Wang Yue to attack Shilu with troops, Shilu sent Shiguo to lead the troops to counterattack, the two armies fought in Losi, Liu Yue was defeated, Shiliang dock was saved, Shiliang tiger closed the city gate and firmly defended Shiliang dock.

古文：澄与弟子自官寺至中寺，始入寺门，叹曰： 刘岳可悯！ 
现代文：佛图澄与弟子从官寺来到中寺，刚踏进寺门他就叹道： 刘岳可怜！ 
English: Buddha Tucheng and his disciples came from the government temple to the middle temple. As soon as he stepped into the temple gate, he sighed: Liu Yue is pitiful!

古文：弟子法祚问其故，澄曰： 昨亥时岳已被执。 
现代文：弟子法祚问他何故，澄说： 昨日亥时刘岳已被抓获。 
English: Disciple Fa Yu asked him why, and Cheng said: Liu Yue was captured at the time of the boar yesterday.

古文：果如所言。
现代文：果然跟他说的一样。
English: He did exactly as he was told.

古文：光初十一年，曜自率兵攻洛阳，勒欲自往拒曜，内外僚佐，无不毕谏，勒以访澄。澄曰： 相轮铃音云： 秀支替戾冈，仆谷劬秃当 ，此羯语也。
现代文：光初十一年刘曜亲自率兵攻打洛阳，石勒想亲自领兵前去拒敌，部属们都劝他不要去，石勒问佛图澄，澄说： 寺庙里的铃声说： 秀支替戾冈，仆谷劬秃当。 
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the year, Liu You personally led an army to attack Luoyang. Shi Le wanted to personally lead an army to repel the enemy, and his subordinates all advised him not to go. Shi Le asked Buddha Tuzhen, and Tuzhen said: The bell in the temple said: Xiu Zhi stands for Shougang, and Minya stands for Baldang.

古文：秀支替戾冈出也， 仆谷 刘曜胡位，劬秃当捉也，此言军出捉得曜也。 
现代文：这是一句羯语。 秀支替戾冈 是个 出 字， 仆谷 是刘曜的胡位， 劬秃当 是个 捉 字，这句羯语是说，军队出击能捉到刘曜。 
English: This is a slang saying. 秀支替冈 is a 出 character, 仆谷 is the 胡 position of 劉曜, 秃当 is a 捉 character. This slang saying means that the army's attack can catch 劉曜.

古文：时徐光闻澄此言苦劝。
现代文：徐光听到佛图澄的这番话后也来苦劝。
English: After Xu Guang heard Buddha Tuzhen's words, he also came to persuade him.

古文：勒乃留长子石弘，共澄以镇襄国，自率中军步骑直指洛城。
现代文：石勒留下长子石弘，与佛图澄共同镇守襄国，自己率领中军人马直指洛阳。
English: Shiller left his eldest son, Ishihiro, to jointly defend Xiang Province with Buddha Tujing, and himself led the Chinese soldiers straight to Luoyang.

古文：两军才交，曜军大溃，曜马没水中，石堪生擒之送勒。
现代文：两军刚刚交战，刘曜的军队就溃败了，刘曜的马没入水中，石堪将他生擒了，送到石勒面前。
English: The two armies had just engaged in battle, and Liu You's army was routed. Liu You's horse sank into the water, and Shi Kan caught him alive and brought him to Shi Le.

古文：澄时以物涂掌观之，见有大众，中缚一人，朱丝约其肘。
现代文：澄当时以烟灰涂在手掌上观看洛阳的战况，见在大群人马中捆缚着一个人，用红色绳索从背后栓着他的双肘。
English: At the time, Cheng was watching the battle in Luoyang with soot smeared on his palms. He saw a man tied up in a large crowd, with red ropes tied to his elbows from behind.

古文：因以告弘。
现代文：澄把看到的这一场面告诉了石弘。
English: Sumi told Ishihiro about the scene.

古文：当尔之时，正生擒曜也。
现代文：这个时候，正是石堪生擒刘曜的时候。
English: At this time, it was the time for Shi Kansheng to visit Liu You.

古文：时平之后，勒乃僭称赵天王行皇帝事，改元建平，是岁晋成皇帝咸和五年也。
现代文：时局平定之后，石勒自立为帝，号称赵天王，改年号为建平，这一年是晋成帝咸和五年。
English: After the situation was stabilized, Shi Le became emperor on his own, known as Zhao Tianwang, and changed his name to Jianping. This year was the fifth year of Emperor Jinsheng's reign.

古文：勒登位已后，事澄益笃。
现代文：石勒登位之后，对待佛图澄更加器重。
English: After Shi Le ascended to the throne, he treated Buddha Tu Cheng more seriously.

古文：时石葱叛，其年，澄戒勒曰： 今年葱中有虫，食必害人，可令百姓无食葱也。 
现代文：当时石葱反叛，澄告诚石勒说： 今年葱中有虫子，吃葱对人有害，要叫百姓别吃葱。 
English: At that time, the green onions rebelled, and Cheng Guozhen Shi Le said, "This year, there are insects in the green onions. Eating green onions is harmful to people. People should be told not to eat green onions."

古文：勒颁告境内，慎无食葱。
现代文：石勒布告境内，千万不要吃葱。
English: In the territory of Shiloh, do not eat onions.

古文：到八月，石葱果走。
现代文：到了八月，石葱果然逃走了。
English: In August, Shi Ying finally escaped.

古文：勒益加尊重，有事必咨而后行，号大和尚。
现代文：石勒更加尊重佛图澄，有事必先征求他的意见，然后再行动，尊称他为 大和尚 。
English: Shi Le respected Buddha Tucheng even more. Whenever he had to do something, he would first ask for his advice, and then act. He called him the Great Monk.

古文：石虎有子名斌，后勒以为子，勒爱之甚重。
现代文：石虎有个儿子叫石斌，后来石勒把他当作自己的儿子，非常喜爱他。
English: Shihu had a son named Shi Bin. Later, Shi Le took him as his own son and loved him very much.

古文：忽暴病而亡，已涉二日。勒曰： 朕闻虢太子死，扁鹊能生。
现代文：石斌突然暴病身亡，已经两天了，石勒说： 我听说虢国太子死后，扁鹊能让他复生。
English: It's been two days since Shi Bin died suddenly of a violent illness, Shi Le said: I heard that after the death of the Crown Prince of Shandong Province, the flat gourd can revive him.

古文：大和尚国之神人，可急往告，必能致福。 
现代文：大和尚是我们国家的神人，赶快去告诉他，他定能招来福音。 
English: The great monk is the man of God in our country. Go quickly and tell him that he will surely be able to bring the gospel.

古文：澄乃取杨枝咒之，须臾能起，有顷平复。
现代文：澄拿来杨树枝条，口诵神咒，石斌顿时坐了起来，过了一段时间便恢复健康了。
English: Cheng took a poplar branch and recited a mantra. Shi Bin suddenly sat up. After a while, he recovered.

古文：由是勒诸稚子多在佛寺中养之。每至四月八日，勒躬自诣寺，观佛像而发愿。
现代文：从此，石勒的小儿子多在佛寺里寄养着，每年四月八日，石勒亲自到佛寺，对着佛像祷告许愿。
English: Since then, Shiller's youngest son has mostly been fostered in Buddhist temples. Every year on April 8, Shiller himself goes to a Buddhist temple to pray and make a wish in front of a Buddha statue.

古文：至建平四年四月，天静无风，而塔上一铃独鸣。澄谓众曰： 铃音云： 国有大丧，不出今年矣。  
现代文：建平四年四月的一天，天静无风，佛塔上的一只铜铃却独自响了起来，佛图澄对大家说： 铃的声音告诉我们：不出今年，国家要有大的丧事。 
English: One day in April of the fourth year of Jianping, the weather was calm and there was no wind, but a bronze bell on the pagoda rang out on its own. Buddha Tucheng said to everyone: The sound of the bell tells us that this year, the country will have a great funeral.

古文：是岁七月勒死。
现代文：这年七月，石勒去世。
English: In July of that year, Shiller died.

古文：太子弘袭位。少时，虎废弘自立，迁都于邺，改元建武。倾心事澄，又至于勒。乃下书曰： 和尚国之大宝，荣爵不加，高禄不受，荣禄匪颁，何以旌德。
现代文：太子石弘继承皇位，不久，石虎废除石弘，自立为帝，迁都于邺，改元建武，石虎敬奉佛图澄比石勒还重，他宣布：和尚乃国之大宝，荣爵他不要加，高禄他不接受，不给他荣和禄，还用什么方式来表彰他的仁德呢。
English: Prince Ishihiro succeeded to the throne. Soon after, Ishiguro abolished Ishihiro, established himself as the emperor, moved the capital to Shizuoka, and changed the era to Jianwu. Ishiguro's reverence for the Buddha was even greater than that of Sekiro. He declared: a monk is a great treasure of the country. He did not want to be awarded a peerage, he did not accept a high stipend, he did not give him honor and reward. How else could he be recognized for his benevolence?

古文：从此已往，宜衣以绫锦，乘以雕辇。
现代文：从此以后，应当让他穿绫锦，乘宝车。
English: From now on, he should be allowed to wear brocade and ride in luxury cars.

古文：朝会之日，和尚升殿，常侍已下，悉助举舁，太子诸公，扶辇而上。
现代文：朝会之日，和尚升殿时，常侍以下都要帮助抬举，太子诸公要扶着他的车上朝。
English: On the day of the morning assembly, when the monk ascends to the throne, the regular attendants and below should help lift him up, and the princes should help him onto the carriage.

古文：主者唱大和尚，众座皆起，以彰其尊。 
现代文：领班的喊声 大和尚到 ，在座者都要起立。
English: The foreman shouts, "The Great Monk has arrived," and everyone present must stand up.

古文：又敕伪司空李农旦夕亲问，太子诸公，五日一朝，表朕敬焉。
现代文：要通过上述方示表示对他的尊重。他又颁布命令说，司空李农每天早晚要亲自登门问候，太子诸公五天一次前往朝谒，以表达我对他的敬意。
English: I want to show my respect for him through the above-mentioned instructions. He also issued an order saying that Siku Li Nong should personally visit the door every morning and evening for greetings, and Prince Zhu Gong should go to the hajj once every five days to show my respect for him.

古文：澄时止邺城内中寺，遣弟子法常北至襄国，弟子法佐从襄国还，相遇，在梁塞城下共宿。
现代文：佛图澄当时住在邺城内的中寺，他派弟子法常北至襄国，而弟子法佐正从襄国回邺城，两人途中相遇，一块在梁塞城下住宿。
English: At that time, Buddha Tucheng lived in the Middle Temple in Licheng. He sent his disciple Fa Changbei to Xiangguo, while his disciple Fasa was returning to Licheng from Xiangguo. The two met on the way and stayed together under Liangcai Castle.

古文：对车夜谈，言及和尚，比旦各去。
现代文：两人对车夜谈，谈话中说到和尚，天亮后各自上路。
English: The two had a late-night conversation in the car, in which they mentioned the monk, and went their separate ways after dawn.

古文：法佐至，始入觐澄。澄逆笑曰： 昨夜尔与法常交车共说汝师耶。
现代文：法佐回到邺城后首先入见佛图澄，澄冲着他笑道： 昨夜你与法常交车共谈你师父了吧！
English: After Fazo returned to Shicheng, he first saw the Buddha Tuzhen. Tuzhen smiled at him and said, "Last night, you and Fa Changcheng talked about your master!

古文：先民有言： 不曰敬乎？
现代文：先人曾说过： 不曰敬乎？
English: The ancients once said: Do not say respectfully?

古文：幽而不改；不曰慎乎？
现代文：幽而不改；不曰慎乎？
English: Quiet and unchanging; not to say prudent?

古文：独而不怠。 
现代文：独而不怠。 
English: Alone but not idle.

古文：幽独者敬慎之本，而不识乎？ 
现代文：幽独者为敬慎之本。难道你们不懂得这个道理吗？ 
English: The solitary person is the epitome of prudence. Do you not understand this principle?

古文：佐愕然愧忏。
现代文：法佐听了十分惊讶，同时感到惭愧和悔恨。
English: Fazo was surprised, ashamed and remorseful.

古文：于是国人每共相语曰： 莫起恶心。和尚知汝。 
现代文：从此，国人每每互相告诉对方说： 不要有什么坏心思，和尚会知道你的。 
English: From then on, the Chinese people always told each other, "Don't have any bad thoughts, the monk will know about you."

古文：及澄之所在，无敢向其方面涕唾便利者。
现代文：在佛图澄所在的地方，没有人敢朝那个方向吐唾沫甩鼻涕和大小便的。
English: No one dares to spit, blow their nose or urinate in the direction of the Buddha statue where it is located.

古文：时太子石邃有二子在襄国，澄语邃曰： 小阿弥比当得疾，可往迎之。 
现代文：太子石邃有两个儿子住在襄国，一天，佛图澄对石邃说： 你的小儿子现在有病了，应该去接回来。 
English: Prince Shi Yan had two sons living in Xiang Province. One day, Buddha Tucheng said to Shi Yan, "Your little son is ill now, you should go and bring him back."

古文：邃即驰信往视，果已得疾。
现代文：石邃立即派亲信骑马跑去看望，儿子果然得了病。
English: Shi Hao immediately sent his cronies to visit him on horseback, and his son did indeed fall ill.

古文：太医殷腾及外国道士自言能治，澄告弟子法常曰： 正使圣人复出，不愈此疾，况此等乎？ 
现代文：太医殷腾与外国道士都说自己能治，佛图澄告诉弟子法常说： 纵使圣人复出，也不能治愈这种病，何况是他们这几个人呢。 
English: Both the eunuch doctor Yenteng and the foreign Taoist priest said they could cure him. Buddha Tuzhen told the disciple that the Buddha often said, "Even if a sage returns, he cannot cure this disease, let alone these few people."

古文：后三日果死。石邃荒酒，将图为逆，谓内竖曰： 和尚神通，傥发吾谋，明日来者，当先除之。 
现代文：过了三天果然死了，石邃沉溺于酗酒，要图谋反叛，对宫内太监说： 和尚有神通，倘或发觉我的计划，明天来时就先除掉他。 
English: After three days, he died. Sekiguchi, who was addicted to alcohol, wanted to plot a rebellion and said to the eunuch in the palace, "The monk has magical powers. If he discovers my plan, get rid of him first when he comes tomorrow."

古文：澄月望将入觐虎，谓弟子僧会曰： 昨夜天神呼我曰： 明日若入，还勿过人。 
现代文：这个月十五日佛图澄要入朝见石虎，他跟弟子僧会说： 昨夜天神招呼我说： 明日如果入朝，见完主公之后就回来，不要探望别人。 
English: On the fifteenth day of this month, Buddha Tushan was going to enter the imperial court to see the stone tiger. He said to his disciple-monk, "Last night, the sky god beckoned to me and said, 'If you enter the imperial court tomorrow, come back after seeing the lord, and do not visit others.'

古文：我傥有所过，汝当止我。 
现代文：如果我要去探望，你就要制止我。 
English: If I want to visit, you have to stop me.

古文：澄常入，必过邃。知澄入，要候甚苦。澄将上南台，僧会引衣，澄曰： 事不得止。 
现代文：澄平常入朝时，一定要去探望石邃，石邃知道他今天要入朝，等候他等得很苦，澄要上南台看望石邃时，僧会拉他的衣服制止，澄说： 按常礼必须打打招呼，现在你不能制止我。 
English: When Cheng normally visits the Imperial Palace, he must visit Shijie. Shijie knew that he was going to visit the Imperial Palace today, and it was very hard for him to wait. When Cheng wanted to visit Shijie on Nantai, the monk would pull his clothes to stop him. Cheng said, "According to the usual etiquette, you must say hello. You can't stop me now."

古文：坐未安，便起，邃固留不住，所谋遂止。
现代文：当上南台还没等坐稳，就起身告辞了，石邃极力挽留也没留住，原来的预谋只好作罢。
English: When he arrived at the South Stand, he didn't even have time to sit down before he stood up and said his goodbyes. Ishizaki tried his best to hold him back, but he couldn't. The original plan had to be abandoned.

古文：还寺叹曰： 太子作乱，其形将成。 
现代文：澄回到寺院后叹道： 看样子，太子肯定要作乱。 
English: After returning to the temple, Sumi sighed, "It looks like the crown prince is determined to cause trouble."

古文：欲言难言，欲忍难忍，乃因事从容箴虎，虎终不解。俄而事发，方悟澄言。
现代文：他想告诉石虎又难于开口，想忍着不说又忍不住，便借着别的事情很委婉地提示石虎，石虎却一直没有明白他的示意，不久，事情暴露了，石虎才明白澄的意思。
English: He wanted to tell Shihu, but it was difficult to open his mouth, and he couldn't bear not to say anything, so he used other things to gently prompt Shihu, but Shihu didn't understand his gesture. Soon, the matter was exposed, and Shihu understood the clear meaning.

古文：后郭黑略将兵征长安北山羗，堕羗伏中。
现代文：后来，郭黑略领兵征伐长安北部山中的羗人，陷入羗兵的埋伏中。
English: Later, Guo Heiliu led an army to conquer the Yao people in the mountains north of Chang'an, and fell into the ambush of the Yao soldiers.

古文：时澄在堂上座，弟子法常在侧，澄忽惨然改容曰： 郭公陷狄。 
现代文：此时澄正在佛堂上打坐，弟子法常在他身边，澄忽然脸色凄惨地说： 郭公陷入狄兵的包围了！ 
English: At this time, Cheng was meditating in the Buddhist hall, with his disciple often by his side. Cheng suddenly looked miserable and said: Guo Gong is surrounded by Di soldiers!

古文：令众生咒愿，澄又自咒愿，须臾更白： 若东南出者活，余向则困。 
现代文：他令弟子们为郭祷告，自己也口诵咒语，一会儿又说： 如果从东南方向突围就能逃命，其他方向都不成。 
English: He told his disciples to pray for Guo, and recited a spell himself. After a while, he said, "If you break out of the siege from the southeast, you will be able to escape, but not in any other direction."

古文：复更咒愿，有顷曰： 脱矣。 
现代文：说完之后又念咒语，过了一阵他说： 逃脱了！ 
English: After that he recited a spell, and after a while he said: "I've escaped!

古文：后月余日，黑略还说，随羗围中东南走，马乏，正遇帐下人推马与之，曰： 公乘此，小人乘公马，济与不济，任命也。 
现代文：一个月后的一天，郭黑略回来说，陷入羗兵包围后他跟着人群往东南方向跑，马跑累了，正遇一个手下人推过一匹马给他，说： 您乘这匹马，我骑您的，能不能逃脱，只能由命。 
English: One day a month later, Guo Hei glanced back and said that after he was surrounded by soldiers, he followed the crowd to the southeast. The horse was tired, and he was just about to meet a subordinate who pushed a horse to him and said: You ride this horse, I ride yours. Whether you can escape or not, you can only do so with your life.

古文：略得其马，故获免。
现代文：郭黑略得到了那匹马，所以才能逃脱。
English: Guo Heiliu got the horse, so he could escape.

古文：推验日期，正是澄咒愿时也。
现代文：推算时间，这正是佛图澄为他念咒的时候。
English: Estimating the time, this is exactly when the Buddha recited the mantra for him.

古文：伪大司马燕公石斌，虎以为幽州牧，镇有群凶凑聚，因以肆暴。澄戒虎曰： 天神昨夜言： 疾牧马还。
现代文：石虎任命大司马燕公石斌为幽州牧，镇上有许多凶徒聚结在一起，肆意妄为骄横残暴，澄告诫石虎说： 天神昨夜说： 疾牧马还。
English: Shihu appointed the general secretary Ma Yan Gong Shi Bin as the Yuzhou herdsman. Many thugs in the town gathered together and were arrogant and cruel. Cheng admonished Shihu, saying: The sky god said last night: The sick herdsman is still alive.

古文：至秋，齐当瘫烂。  
现代文：至秋，齐当瘫烂。  
English: By the autumn, it had completely collapsed.

古文：虎不解此语，即敕诸处牧马送还。
现代文：石虎不理解这句话，便令各处将牧马送回来。
English: Shihu did not understand this sentence, so he ordered that the horses be sent back everywhere.

古文：其秋，有人谮斌于虎，虎召斌，鞭之三百，杀其所生齐氏。
现代文：那年秋天，有人向石虎告发石斌，石虎召回石斌，决定打他三百鞭子，杀死他所生的齐氏。
English: That autumn, someone reported Shi Bin to Shi Hu. Shi Hu recalled Shi Bin and decided to give him 300 lashes and kill his son Qi.

古文：虎弯弓捻矢，自视行斌罚。
现代文：石斌受罚时，石虎弯弓捻箭亲自监督。
English: When Shi Bin was punished, Shi Hu personally supervised the bending of the bow and twisting of the arrow.

古文：罚轻，虎乃手杀五百人。
现代文：罚的轻了，石虎便亲手杀死五百人。
English: When the punishment was reduced, Shihu killed five hundred people with his own hands.

古文：澄谏曰： 心不可纵，死不可生。
现代文：澄劝石虎说： 祸心不可纵容，当死者不可使其活。
English: Cheng advised Shihu: "Do not indulge evil intentions. When someone dies, do not let them live.

古文：礼不亲杀，以伤恩也。
现代文：但是礼不亲杀，以免伤了恩情。
English: However, Rei does not kill herself, so as not to hurt her feelings.

古文：何有天子亲行罚乎？ 
现代文：哪有天子亲手执行刑罚的呢？ 
English: Where is the Son of God who executes punishment with his own hands?

古文：虎乃止。
现代文：石虎于是罢手。
English: Shihu then gave up.

古文：后晋军出淮泗，陇北瓦城皆被侵逼，三方告急，人情危扰，虎乃瞋曰： 吾之奉佛，而更致外寇，佛无神矣。 
现代文：后来，晋军从淮河出击。陇北瓦城都受到侵凌，三方告急，人心惶惶，石虎生气地说： 我现在奉佛，反而招致更多的外寇侵凌，佛实在没有神威呀！ 
English: Later, the Jin army launched an attack from the Huaihe River. All the cities in northern Hubei Province were encroached upon, the three parties were in a hurry, and people were panicked. Shihu said angrily: I now worship Buddha, but instead invite more foreign invaders to encroach. Buddha really has no divine power!

古文：澄明旦早入，虎以事问澄，因让虎曰： 王过世经为大商主，至罽宾寺，尝供大会，中有六十罗汉，吾此身亦预斯会。时得道人谓吾曰，此主人命尽，当更化身，后晋王地。
现代文：第二天早上佛图澄入朝时，石虎以此事问澄，澄责备石虎说： 你上一生曾经是个大商人，到了罽的寺院，曾给寺院的大会提供经费，那次大会中有六十个罗汉，我此身也参加了这个大会，当时有个得了道的人告诉我说，这个大会的主人寿命已经完了，他要转化成另一个人。
English: The next morning, when the Buddha entered the court, Shihu questioned him about this, and he reproached Shihu, saying, "In your previous life, you were a great merchant. You went to the temple in Handan and provided funds for the temple's assembly. At that assembly, there were sixty arhats. I myself also attended the assembly. At that time, a man who had attained the Way told me that the life span of the host of the assembly was over, and that he wanted to transform into another person.

古文：今王为王，岂非福耶？
现代文：他死后安葬在你们墓地里。现在你已当了国王，这岂不是福分吗？
English: When he died, he was buried in your cemetery. Now that you are king, isn't that a blessing?

古文：疆场军寇，国之常耳，何为怨谤三宝，夜兴毒念乎？ 
现代文：打仗御寇，这是国家的常事，为什么要抱怨、毁谤佛法，夜兴毒念呢？ 
English: Fighting wars and repelling invaders is a regular affair of the country. Why complain, defame the Dharma, and indulge in poisonous thoughts at night?

古文：虎乃信悟，跪而谢焉。
现代文：石虎听信了他的话，省悟了，跪在地上谢罪。
English: Shihu listened to his words, reflected, and knelt on the ground to repent.

古文：虎常问澄： 佛法不杀，朕为天下之主，非刑杀无以肃清海内，既违戒杀生，虽复事佛，谁获福耶？ 
现代文：石虎时常问澄： 佛法不杀生，我为天下之主不用刑罚杀人无法肃清天下，既然违戒杀生，即使又来信奉佛教，谁还能够得到佛主的保祐呢？ 
English: Shihu often asked, "Buddhism does not kill. As the Lord of the universe, I cannot purify the world without punishing those who kill. Since it is against the precepts to kill, even if one comes to believe in Buddhism, who can receive the protection of the Lord Buddha?

古文：澄曰： 帝王事佛，当在体恭心顺，显扬三宝。不为暴虐，不害无辜。
现代文：澄说： 帝王奉佛，应当是心地虔诚地显扬佛法，不为暴虐之事，不杀无辜之人。
English: Sumire said, "When an emperor worships the Buddha, he should do so with a sincere and pious heart to show forth the Dharma, not to be violent, and not to kill innocent people.

古文：至于凶暴无赖，非化所迁，有罪不得不杀，有恶不得不刑，但当杀可杀，当刑可刑耳。
现代文：至于凶徒无赖，并非教化所能改变，有罪不得不杀，有恶不得不刑，如若暴虐恣意，妄杀无罪者，即使再去减刑罚，信奉佛法，也不能免除灾祸。
English: As for the murderers and scoundrels, they cannot be changed by education. The guilty must be killed, and the evil must be punished. For example, if the violence is arbitrary and the innocent are killed, even if the punishment is reduced and the Dharma is believed, the disaster cannot be exempted.

古文：若暴虐恣意，杀害非罪，虽复轻刑事法，无解殃祸。愿陛下省欲兴慈，广及一切，则佛教永隆，福祚方远。 
现代文：愿陛下省欲兴慈，广及一切。如此，则佛教永隆，福运久远。 
English: May His Majesty's benevolence extend to all. In this way, Buddhism will be eternally prosperous and good fortune will last for a long time.

古文：虎虽不能尽从，而为益不少。
现代文：石虎对这些意见虽不能全部采纳，但这些话对他还是很有教益的。
English: Although Shihu cannot accept all of these opinions, these words are still very instructive to him.

古文：虎尚书张离、张良，家富事佛，各起大塔。
现代文：石虎的尚书张离、张良，家里极奢华但都供奉佛教，各自建立起大的佛塔。
English: Zhang Liang and Zhang Liang, both of Stone Tiger's Shangshu, have extremely luxurious homes, but they both worship Buddhism and have each built a large stupa.

古文：澄谓曰： 事佛在于清静无欲，慈矜为心。檀越虽仪奉大法，而贪吝未已，游猎无度，积聚不穷，方受玩世之罪，何福报之可希耶？ 
现代文：佛图澄对他们说： 事佛在于清静无欲，以慈悲为怀，施主虽然供奉佛法，却又贪婪无厌，游猎无度，积聚无穷；如今正受玩世之罪，请问有何福报可求？ 
English: Buddha Tucheng said to them: The Buddha's concern is to be calm and desireless, with compassion in mind. Although the benefactor is dedicated to Buddhism, he is greedy and insatiable, hunting without limit, and accumulating endlessly. Now he is suffering from the sin of cynicism. What kind of blessing can I ask for?

古文：离等后并被戮灭。
现代文：张离等人后来都被杀掉了。
English: Zhang Li and the others were all killed later.

古文：时又久旱，自正月至六月。
现代文：有一年久旱不雨，从正月一直到六月。
English: One year there was no rain for a long time, from the first month until June.

古文：虎遣太子诣临漳西釜口祈雨，久而不降。
现代文：石虎派遣太子到临漳西釜口祈雨，很长时间没有求下雨来。
English: Shihu sent the prince to West Kamaguchi in Linyi to pray for rain, but it did not rain for a long time.

古文：虎令澄自行，即有白龙二头降于祠所，其日大雨，方数千里，其年大收。
现代文：石虎又令佛图澄自行祈雨，当即有两条白龙降临他祈雨的庙祠，那天大雨普降，方圆几千里解除了旱情，这一年获得了大丰收。
English: The stone tiger also made Buddha Tucheng pray for rain on his own. Immediately, two white dragons descended on the temple and shrine where he was praying for rain. That day, heavy rain fell everywhere, alleviating the drought in a radius of several thousand miles. This year, there was a bumper harvest.

古文：戎貊之徒，先不识法，闻澄神验，皆遥向礼拜，并不言而化焉。
现代文：许多落后民族，原不懂佛法，后闻澄如此神验，便都遥向礼拜，澄并未对他们宣讲佛法而用具体行动感化了他们。
English: Many backward peoples, who originally did not understand Buddhism, and who later heard that the Buddha was so divine, went to worship far away. The Buddha did not preach Buddhism to them, but inspired them with concrete actions.

古文：澄常遣弟子向西城中市香，即行。澄告余弟子，掌中见买香弟子在某处被劫，垂死。
现代文：澄常常派弟子到西域去买香，有一次，买香的正在道上，澄对其余弟子说，他在手掌上看见这个买香的弟子在某处被抢劫，面临死的危险。
English: He often sent disciples to the western region to buy incense. Once, when the incense buyer was on his way, he told the other disciples that he saw on the palm of his hand that the disciple who bought the incense had been robbed somewhere and was in danger of death.

古文：因烧香咒愿，遥救护之。
现代文：他便烧香念咒祝愿，远远地救护他。
English: He then burned incense, recited a prayer, and rescued him from a distance.

古文：弟子后还，云某月某日某处，为贼所劫，垂当见杀，忽闻香气，贼无故自惊曰： 救兵已至。 
现代文：这个弟子回来后，说某月某日于某处被贼所抢，眼看要被杀死，忽然闻到一股香气，盗贼无故自惊道： 救兵来了！ 
English: After this disciple returned, he said that on a certain day of a certain month, he was robbed by a thief in a certain place. He was about to be killed when he suddenly smelled an aroma. The thief was startled for no reason and said, "The rescuers are coming!"

古文：弃之而走虎于临漳修治旧塔，少承露盘，澄曰： 临缁城内有古阿育王塔，地中有承露盘及佛像，其上林木茂盛，可掘取之。 
现代文：扔下他就跑了。石虎在临漳维修旧的佛塔，缺少露盘，佛图澄说： 临缁城内有座古阿育王塔，地下埋有承露盘和佛像，上面生有茂盛的林木，可以去挖取。 
English: The stone tiger is in Linyi to repair the old pagoda, which lacks a dew plate, said Buddha Tucheng: Linyi has an ancient Ashoka pagoda in the city, with a dew plate and a Buddha statue buried underground, and lush trees growing on it, which can be dug up.

古文：即画图与使，依言掘取，果得盘像。
现代文：他画了一张位置图给使者，石虎派人按照他说的地方和画的位置图去挖，果然挖到了佛像和承露盘。
English: He drew a location map for the messenger, and Shihu sent someone to dig according to the place he said and the location map he drew, and they actually dug up a Buddha statue and a tray.

古文：虎每欲伐燕，澄谏曰： 燕国运未终，卒难可克。 
现代文：石虎几次想征伐燕国，澄规劝道： 燕国的气运未终，很难攻克。 
English: Shihu tried several times to invade Yan's country, but Cheng Jie advised him: "Yan's air fortune is not over, and it is difficult to conquer.

古文：屡行败绩，方信澄戒。
现代文：石虎屡攻不克，连吃败仗，才相信澄的规劝。
English: Shihu repeatedly failed to conquer, and even suffered defeat, before he believed in Cheng's persuasion.

古文：澄道化即行，以人多奉佛，皆营造塔庙，相竞出家，真伪混淆，多生愆过。
现代文：佛图澄的道化既已普遍传扬，信佛的人越来越多，到处建造寺塔，人们竞相出家，结果真伪混乱，多生弊端。
English: The clowning of Buddha Tuzhen has been widely spread, more and more people believe in Buddhism, temples and pagodas are built everywhere, and people compete to become monks. As a result, the truth and falsehood are confused, and there are many drawbacks.

古文：虎下书问中书曰： 佛号世尊，国家所奉。
现代文：石虎下书给中书说： 佛号世尊，乃国家所信奉。
English: Shihu wrote a letter to the Chinese saying, "The Buddha's name is Shizun, which is believed by the country.

古文：里闾小人无爵秩者，为应得事佛与不？
现代文：至于闾里小人没有爵位官职的，应当奉佛与否？
English: As for those who do not have a title or official post, should they worship Buddha or not?

古文：又沙门皆应高洁贞正，行能精进，然后可为道士。
现代文：沙门皆应高洁纯正，才能精诚进取，然后可成为道士。
English: Shamans should be pure and virtuous before they can be sincere and enterprising, and then they can become Taoists.

古文：今沙门甚众，或有奸宄避役，多非其人。
现代文：如今沙门甚众，其中或有犯法作乱而逃避刑役之徒，多非真心奉佛之人。
English: Nowadays, there are a lot of shamans, some of whom have broken the law, caused disturbances, and evaded penal servitude, but most of them are not sincere devotees of Buddha.

古文：卿可同议。 
现代文：此事你可共我一起议之。 
English: You can discuss this with me.

古文：伪中书著作郎王度奏曰： 夫王者郊祀天地，祭奉百神，载在祀典，礼有常飨。
现代文：中书著作郎王度奏道： 为王者祭祀天地，供奉门神，自古如此，但据祀典记载，祭祀都有固定的礼仪。
English: According to the Chinese classics, "Langwangduso" (Song of the Long-reigning King): Since ancient times, heaven and earth have been sacrificed for the king, and the door gods have been offered, but according to the records of the ritual, the rituals have fixed etiquette.

古文：佛出西域，外国之神，功不施民，非天子诸华所应祠奉。
现代文：佛出自西域，是外国之神，不适于我国人民，不是天子与华夏人应供奉的。
English: The Buddha came from the Western Regions. He was a foreign god, unsuitable for our people. He was not the Son of Heaven to be worshipped by the Chinese people.

古文：往者汉明感梦，初传其道，唯听西域人得立寺都邑，以奉其神。汉人皆不得出家。
现代文：过去汉朝明帝感梦，开始传布佛道，当时只让西域人在都邑建立佛寺，以奉其神，汉人皆不得出家。
English: In the past, Emperor Ming of the Han Dynasty had a dream and began to propagate Buddhism. At that time, only Westerners were allowed to build Buddhist temples in capital cities to worship their gods. Chinese people were not allowed to become monks.

古文：魏承汉制，亦循前轨。
现代文：魏承汉制，也遵循旧规。
English: Wei Cheng Han system, also follow the old rules.

古文：今大赵受命，率由旧章。
现代文：如今大赵受命立国，一律遵照旧章行事。
English: Now that the Great Zhao has been ordered to establish the country, everyone will act in accordance with the old chapter.

古文：华戎制异。人神流别，外不同内，飨祭殊礼。
现代文：华与戎异制，人神也都不同，祭祀的礼仪差别更大。
English: China and the United States have different systems, people and gods are also different, and the etiquette of sacrifice is even more different.

古文：荒下服礼，不宜杂错。
现代文：荒下服礼，不应当错杂不一。
English: When it comes to formal wear, there should be no mismatches.

古文：国家可断赵人，悉不听诣寺烧香礼拜，以尊典礼。
现代文：国家可以明令赵国人，一律不许到佛寺去烧香礼拜，以维护旧有典礼的规定。
English: The state can explicitly order all citizens of Zhao not to go to Buddhist temples to burn incense and worship, in order to maintain the old ceremonial rules.

古文：其百辟卿士，下逮众隶，例皆禁之。
现代文：上自公卿士人下至皂隶平民，一律禁止奉佛。
English: From nobles to commoners, it is forbidden to worship Buddha.

古文：其有犯者，与淫祀同罪。
现代文：如有犯者，与私立淫祠同罪。
English: If found guilty, they will be charged with the same crime as a private brothel.

古文：赵人为沙门者，还从四民之服。 
现代文：赵国人已经出家成为沙门的，要恢复士、农、工、商原来的身份。 
English: The people of Zhao who have become monks and nuns should restore their original identities as scholars, farmers, workers and merchants.

古文：伪中书令王波同度所奏。
现代文：中书王波同意王度的意见。
English: Zhongshu Wang Bo agreed with Wang Du's opinion.

古文：虎下书曰： 度议云： 佛是外国之神，非天子诸华所可宜奉。 
现代文：石虎下书说： 王度议称： 佛是外国之神，非天子诸华所可宜奉。 
English: Shihu said in his next letter: Wang Du said: Buddha is a foreign god, and it is not suitable to be worshipped by the sons of heaven.

古文：朕生自边壤，忝当期运，君临诸夏。
现代文：朕生于边境地区，有幸遇上时运，得以君临诸夏。
English: I was born in the border area, and I was lucky enough to be born in the summer.

古文：至于飨礼，应兼从本俗。
现代文：至于祭奉佛教的礼仪，应当兼顾我们原来的习俗。
English: As for the etiquette of celebrating Buddhism, we should take into account our original customs.

古文：佛是戎神，正所应奉。
现代文：佛是西域之神，正好是应当信奉的。
English: Buddha is the god of the Western Regions, which is exactly what should be believed in.

古文：夫制由上行，永世作则，苟事克无亏，何拘前代。
现代文：制度礼仪由上层人颁行，成为永久的规则，只要于事无害，何必拘守前代的规定。
English: Institutional etiquette is issued by those at the top and becomes a permanent rule. As long as it is not harmful, why should you stick to the rules of the previous generation.

古文：其夷赵百蛮，有余其淫礼乐事佛者，悉听为道。 
现代文：赵国各族万姓，有舍其乱杂礼仪而愿意奉佛者，悉听其自由选择。 
English: There are people of all ethnic groups and all surnames in Zhao who are willing to sacrifice their messy etiquette to worship Buddha, and listen to their free choice.

古文：于是慢戒之徒，因之以厉。
现代文：于是，不能严守佛教戒规的人，越来越多，越来越随便。
English: As a result, more and more people who cannot strictly abide by Buddhist precepts are becoming more and more casual.

古文：黄河中旧不生鼋，忽得一以献虎，澄见而叹曰： 桓温其入河不久。 
现代文：黄河里面原来不生长鼋，一天突然抓到一只，献给了石虎，佛图澄看见后叹息道： 桓温这个人才入河不长时间。 
English: Originally, dragonflies did not grow in the Yellow River. One day, he suddenly caught one and dedicated it to the stone tiger. After seeing it, Buddha Tucheng sighed and said, "This person, Kuan Wen, has only been in the river for a short time.

古文：温字元子。
现代文：恒温的字为 元子 。
English: The Chinese character for constant temperature is 元子.

古文：后果如言也。
现代文：后来得知果然像澄所说的一样。
English: Later, it was learned that it was indeed as Choi had said.

古文：时魏县有一流民，莫识氏族，恒著麻襦布裳，在魏县市中乞丐，时人谓之麻襦。
现代文：当时魏县有一个流浪汉，不知他是什么氏族，总穿着麻布衣裳，在魏县市场上乞讨，时人称他为麻衣。
English: At that time, there was a vagrant in Wei County. I don't know what clan he belonged to. He always wore linen clothes and begged in the Wei County market. At that time, people called him Mai.

古文：言语卓越，状如狂病，乞得米谷不食，辄散置大路，云饲天马。
现代文：他言语非凡，状如疯狂，讨得干粮不吃，动不动就撒在大道上，说是喂天马。
English: His speech was extraordinary, as if he were mad. He couldn't eat the dry food he was begging for, and would scatter it on the boulevard at every turn, saying that he was feeding the heavenly horses.

古文：赵兴太守藉拔收送诣虎。
现代文：赵兴太守藉拔将他收留后送给了石虎。
English: Zhao Xing Taishu took him in and gave him to Shihu.

古文：先是澄谓虎曰： 国东二百里某月某日当送一非常人，勿杀之也。 
现代文：在这之前，佛图澄曾对石虎说过： 国都东面二百里处在某月某日会送给你一个非常的人，不要杀他。 
English: Before this, Buddha Tuzhen had said to the stone tiger: "Two hundred miles east of the capital, on a certain day of a certain month, a very special person will be sent to you. Don't kill him."

古文：如期果至。
现代文：到这一天果然送来了。
English: On this day, it was delivered.

古文：虎与共语，了无异言，唯道 陛下当终一柱殿下。 
现代文：石虎与他谈话，他只是反复说 陛下当死于一柱殿下 ，其他话一句没有。
English: When Shihu talked to him, he only said repeatedly, "Your Majesty should die on a pillar, Your Highness," and nothing else.

古文：虎不解此语，令送以诣澄。
现代文：石虎不懂这句话是什么意思，让人把他送到佛图澄那里。
English: Shihu didn't understand what this meant, so he asked someone to take him to the Buddha statue.

古文：麻襦谓澄曰： 昔在元和中会，奄至今日。有戎受玄命，绝历终有期。
现代文：麻衣对澄说： 从前在元和年间相会，忽而到了今天，有戌受玄命，绝历经有期。
English: Ma Yi said to Cheng: Once upon a time, they met in the Yuan and Qing dynasties, but now, suddenly, they have met today.

古文：金离销于壤，边荒不能尊。
现代文：金离销于壤，边荒不能尊。
English: The gold is sold in the soil, the border can not be respected.

古文：驱除灵期迹，莫已已之懿。
现代文：驱除灵期迹，莫已已之懿。
English: Exorcise the ghostly traces of time, the scars of the past are gone.

古文：裔苗叶繁，其来方积，休期如何斯？
现代文：后代繁盛，绵延不断，到底何时终了呢？
English: Successive generations of prosperity, stretching on and on, when will it end?

古文：永以叹之！ 
现代文：只好歌咏以表感慨！ 
English: You just have to sing the chorus with great emotion!

古文：澄曰： 天回运极，否将不支。
现代文：佛图澄道： 天回运转无终期，天地不交将不支。
English: Buddha-Dharma: There is no end to the cycle of heaven and earth. If heaven and earth do not meet, there will be no sustenance.

古文：九木水为难，无可以术学。
现代文：枯木太多水难养，术数学问皆无济。
English: Too much dead wood is difficult to grow, and questions of art and mathematics are of no help.

古文：玄哲虽存世，莫能基必馥久游阎浮利，扰扰多此患。行登凌云宇，会于虚游间。 
现代文：纵使玄圣犹存世，也无起死回生力。久游尘世间，扰扰多此患，所幸即将登天宇，届时会于虚游间。 
English: Even if the dead saints are still alive, there is no way to bring them back to life. Having wandered the world for a long time, they are disturbed by many troubles, but fortunately, they are about to ascend to heaven, at which time they will be in the virtual world.

古文：澄与麻襦，讲语终日，人莫能解。有窃听者，唯得此数言，推计似如论数百年事。
现代文：澄与麻衣一直讲到天黑，别人不知道他们讲了些什么，有偷听的人也只记得上面几句，推想起来，他们似乎在谈论几百年前的事。
English: Sumi and Mai talked until it was dark. No one else knew what they were talking about, and those who eavesdropped only remembered the first few sentences. In retrospect, they seemed to be talking about something that happened hundreds of years ago.

古文：虎遣马驿送还本县，既出城外，辞能步行，云： 我当有所过，未便得发。至合口桥，可留见待。 
现代文：石虎派马通过驿道把麻衣送还本县，刚出城门，他就下马说能步行，并说： 我要去拜访一个人，不能马上就走，到了合口桥时，你可以在那里等着我。 
English: Shihu sent a horse through the turnpike to return the linen to the county. Just after leaving the city gate, he dismounted and said that he could walk, and said: I want to visit someone, I can't go right away, when I get to the bridge, you can wait for me there.

古文：使如言驰去，未至合口，而麻襦已在桥上。
现代文：使者遵从他的话，自己上马飞驰而去。没等使者到合口，麻衣已经站在桥上。
English: The messenger obeyed his words, mounted his horse and galloped away. Before the messenger reached the entrance, Ma Yi was already standing on the bridge.

古文：考其行步，有若飞也。澄有弟子道进，学通内外，为虎所重。
现代文：算算他走路的速度，就像飞一样，佛图澄有个弟子叫道进，学问贯通中外，为石虎所看重。
English: Calculating the speed of his walking, it is just like flying. There is a disciple of Buddha Tsu-cheng called Daojin, whose learning permeates throughout China and abroad, and is valued by Shihu.

古文：尝言及隐士，虎谓进曰： 有杨轲者，朕之民也，徵之十余年，不恭王命，故往省视。
现代文：有一次谈到隐士，石虎对道进说： 有个叫杨轲的，是朕国内的一个百姓，征调十余年，他一直不从王命，所以亲自去探望。
English: Once, talking about hermits, Shihu said to Daojin, "There is a man named Yang Xuan, a commoner in our country, who has been conscripted for more than ten years. He has never obeyed the king's order, so I went to visit him in person.

古文：傲然而卧。
现代文：他则傲然而出，连君臣礼都不行。
English: On the other hand, he behaved arrogantly and could not even perform the courtesies of a prince.

古文：虽不得君临万邦，乘舆所向，天沸地涌。
现代文：朕虽未能君临万邦，但大驾所到之处，无不天沸地涌。
English: Though I have not been able to reign over all nations, I have been able to make waves wherever I have gone.

古文：虽不能令木石屈膝，何匹夫而长慠耶？
现代文：朕虽不能令木石屈膝，但他一介匹夫，为什么总是这么傲慢呢？
English: Although I can't make wood and stone bend their knees, he's a great teammate. Why is he always so arrogant?

古文：昔太公之齐，先诛华士。太公贤哲，岂其谬乎？ 
现代文：从前太公到齐国，先杀华而不实之士，太公是贤能之人，难道他这么做不对吗？ 
English: Once upon a time, when the Grand Duke came to Qi, he first killed those who were flashy but insincere. The Grand Duke was a man of virtue. Wasn't he right to do so?

古文：进对曰： 昔舜优蒲衣，禹造伯成，魏饰干木，汉美周党，管宁不应曹氏，皇甫不屈晋世，二圣四君，共嘉其节，将欲激厉贪竟，以峻清风。
现代文：道进说： 从前舜帝礼让于浦衣，禹帝造访于伯成，魏国夸饰段士木，汉代赞美周党，管宁不应于曹氏，皇甫不屈于晋进。两位圣贤与四位君子，他们的节操都应受到嘉许，以此游厉贪竞之人，借以端正清明之风。
English: Daojin said, "Once upon a time, Emperor Qian gave up the imperial title to Puyi, Emperor Yu visited Baocheng, the State of Wei praised Duan Shimu, the Han Dynasty praised Zhou, Guan Ning should not be subordinated to Cao, and the Emperor Fu did not yield to Jinjin. The two sages and the four gentlemen should be commended for their self-restraint, so that those who are greedy and competitive can use it to correct the style of clarity.

古文：愿陛下遵舜、禹之德，勿效太公用刑。
现代文：愿陛下遵从舜、禹之仁德，不要效法太公滥用刑罚。
English: May His Majesty follow the benevolence of Emperor Xizong and Emperor Yu, and not follow the example of Emperor Taigong in abusing punishment.

古文：君举必书，岂可令赵史遂无隐遁之传乎？ 
现代文：您的举措行为将来必然记载于史册，难道能让赵国的史书上竟无隐遁之士的传记吗？ 
English: Your actions will certainly be recorded in the history books in the future. Is it possible for the history books of Zhao Province to have no biographies of the Hidden People?

古文：虎悦其言，即遣轲还其所止，遣十家供给之。进还，具以白澄，澄睆然笑曰： 汝言善也，但轲命有所县矣！ 
现代文：石虎对他的话十分悦服，立即派人送杨轲回到原来的住处，并派十户人家供给他衣食，道进回去把此事告诉了佛图澄，澄开朗地笑道： 你的话很好。但是杨轲的生命危险呀！ 
English: Shihu was very pleased with his words. He immediately sent someone to take Yang Mi back to his original place of residence, and sent ten households to provide him with food and clothing. On the way back, he told this to Buddha Tucheng. Tucheng smiled brightly and said, "Your words are very good. But Yang Mi's life is in danger!"

古文：后秦州兵乱，轲弟子以牛负轲西奔，戍军追擒，并为所害。
现代文：后来秦州发生战乱，杨轲的弟子用牛驮着他往西逃奔，被守兵追上擒获，一起被杀害了。
English: Later, a war broke out in Qinzhou. Yang Xuan's disciples used oxen to drag him to the west to escape. They were caught by the guards and killed together.

古文：虎尝昼寝，梦见群羊负鱼，从东北来。
现代文：石虎曾在白天睡觉时，梦见一群羊驮着鱼从东北方向走来。
English: Shihu used to sleep during the day, dreaming of a flock of sheep coming from the northeast with fish.

古文：寤已访澄，澄曰： 不祥也。
现代文：醒后访向佛图澄，澄说： 这个梦不吉祥。
English: After he woke up, he visited the Buddha, and the Buddha said, "This dream is not auspicious.

古文：鲜卑其有中原乎？ 
现代文：鲜卑有人要统治中原吗？ 
English: Is there anyone who wants to rule the Central Plains?

古文：慕容氏后果都之。
现代文：慕容氏后来果然建都于中原。
English: The Murong clan later built their capital in the Central Plains.

古文：澄尝与虎共处中堂，澄忽惊曰： 幽州当火灾。 
现代文：佛图澄有一次与石虎共同坐在正厅中间，澄忽然惊道： 幽州起火了！ 
English: Once upon a time, Buddha Tuzhen and Stone Tiger were sitting together in the middle of the main hall. Tuzhen suddenly exclaimed in surprise, "Yuzhou is on fire!"

古文：仍取酒洒之，久而笑曰： 救已得矣。 
现代文：他拿酒来泼洒出去，过了一会儿又笑道： 已经救下来了！ 
English: He took some wine and poured it out, and after a while he laughed and said, "I've been saved!"

古文：虎遣验幽州，云： 尔日火从四门起，西南有黑云来，骤雨灭之，雨亦颇有酒气。 
现代文：石虎派人去幽州检查，回来说： 那天大火从四门烧起来，骤然降雨把大火浇灭了，雨水有一股很浓的酒气。 
English: Shihu sent someone to Yuzhou to inspect everything, and came back to say: That day, the fire burned from four sides, and the sudden rain put out the fire. The rainwater had a strong smell of alcohol.

古文：至虎建武十四年七月，石宣、石韬将图相杀。
现代文：建武十四年七月，石宣与石韬要互相残杀。
English: In July of the 14th year of Jianwu, Shixuan and Shijie wanted to kill each other.

古文：宣时到寺，与澄同坐。浮图一铃独鸣，澄谓宣曰： 解铃音乎？
现代文：一天，石宣来到佛寺，与佛图澄坐在一起，寺塔上有一铜铃独自响了起来，澄对石宣说： 能听懂铃音吗？
English: One day, Shi Xuan came to the Buddhist temple and sat together with the Buddha figure Cheng Yu. A bronze bell on the temple tower rang by itself. Cheng said to Shi Xuan: Can you understand the ringing?

古文：铃云： 胡子洛度。  
现代文：铃音在说： 胡子洛度。  
English: The ringtone is saying: Beard Lotte.

古文：宣变色曰： 是何言与？ 
现代文：石宣脸色大变，说： 这话说的是什么？ 
English: Shi Xuan's face changed dramatically and he said, "What is this saying?

古文：澄谬曰： 老胡为道，不能山居无言，重茵美服，岂非洛度乎？ 
现代文：澄撒谎道： 我这个老胡人身为道士，不能像山居之人那样不说话，又受到这么优厚的待遇，难道这不是洛度吗？ 
English: Cheng Li said, "I, Lao Hu, am a Taoist. I can't not speak like a mountain dweller and be treated so generously. Isn't this what Lodo is like?

古文：石韬后至，澄熟视良久，韬惧而问澄，澄曰： 怪公血臭，故相视耳。 
现代文：石韬后来到了佛图澄那里，澄盯着他看了好久，石韬感到恐惧，便问澄，澄说： 我奇怪你身上有血腥味，所以直瞅你。 
English: Later, Ishizuka went to see the Buddha, Shucho. Shucho stared at him for a long time. Shucho felt afraid, so he asked Shucho. Shucho said, "I'm surprised that you have the smell of blood on your body, so I stabbed you."

古文：至八月，澄使弟子十人斋于别室，澄时暂入东阁。虎与后杜氏问讯，澄曰： 胁下有贼，不出十日，自佛图从西，北殿以东，当有流血。慎勿东行走。 
现代文：八月的一天，佛图澄让弟子十人在另一间屋里去做斋事，自己暂时进了东阁，石虎与杜后前来问讯，澄说： 你身边有贼，不出十天，在我的西南与北殿的东面，会有人流血，你千万不要往东面去。 
English: One day in August, the Buddha Tushin asked ten of his disciples to break their fast in another room. He himself temporarily entered the East Pavilion. Shihu and Du Hou came to inquire. Tushin said, "There is a thief near you. Within ten days, there will be bloodshed in my southwest and in the east of the north hall. You must not go to the east.

古文：杜后曰： 和尚耄耶，何处有贼？ 
现代文：杜后说： 和尚老胡涂了！哪里来的贼呢。 
English: The Empress Dowager Du said, "The monk is a fool! Where did the thief come from?"

古文：澄即易语云： 六情所受，皆悉是贼。
现代文：澄立即改变口吻说： 人所有的六情，都是贼。
English: Cheng immediately changed his tone and said, "All six human emotions are thieves.

古文：老自应耄，但使少者不暋。 
现代文：老的自然难免，只要少的不糊涂就行。 
English: Old nature is unavoidable, as long as there is less confusion.

古文：遂便寓言，不复章的。
现代文：他借题暗示，不愿直说。
English: He was alluding to something, he didn't want to say it.

古文：后二日，宣果遣人害韬于佛寺中，欲因虎临丧，仍行大逆。虎以澄先戒，故获免。
现代文：过了两天，石宣果然派人在佛寺里杀害了石韬，想借石虎前去吊丧之机，行刺大王，石虎因为佛图澄预先有劝诫，所以得免。
English: Two days later, Shi Xuan did indeed send someone to kill Shi Yan in the Buddhist temple. He wanted to use Shi Hu to go to the funeral and assassinate the great king. Shi Hu was spared because Buddha Tucheng had warned him in advance.

古文：及宣事发被收，澄谏虎曰： 既是陛下之子，何为重祸耶？
现代文：石宣的事情败露了，被收入监，澄劝谏石虎道： 既然是陛下的儿子，为什么要加给他重刑呢。
English: When Shi Xuan's affair was exposed, he was taken into custody. Zou Shihu advised him, "Since he is your majesty's son, why should he be given a heavy sentence?"

古文：陛下若忍怒加慈者，尚可六十余岁。如必诛之，宣当为彗星，下扫邺宫也。 
现代文：陛下如果忍怒而施以慈悲，王位可延至六十余岁，如果定要杀了他，石宣会成为扫帚星，下扫邺宫的。 
English: If His Majesty withstands anger and shows mercy, the throne can be extended to more than sixty years old. If he is to be killed, Shixuan will become a broom star, the next broom palace.

古文：虎不从，以铁鏁穿宣领，牵上薪积而焚之，收其官属三百余人，皆车裂支解，投之漳河。
现代文：石虎没有听从他的劝告，用铁锁链拴着石宣的头，牵到柴堆上点火烧了，又将其官属三百余人抓来，全部车裂分尸，扔到漳河里。
English: Shihu did not listen to his advice. He chained Shi Xuan's head with an iron chain, led him to a pile of firewood and set it ablaze. He also captured more than 300 of his officials and subordinates, dismembered all of their bodies and threw them into the Fen River.

古文：澄乃敕弟子罢别室斋也。
现代文：佛图澄便令弟子停止在另一件屋里的斋事。
English: Buddha Tuzhen then ordered the disciple to stop the fasting in another room.

古文：后月余日，有一妖马，耄尾皆有烧状，入中阳门，出显阳门，东首东宫，皆不得入，走向东北，俄尔不见。
现代文：一个月后的一天，有一匹妖马，鬃毛与马尾都有被烧的痕迹，进中阳门，出显阳门，头冲着东宫，哪里也进不去，向东北方向跑了，眨眼之间就不见了。
English: One day a month later, there was a demon horse. Its mane and tail were both burned. It went in and out of the Zhongyang Gate and the Xianyang Gate. Its head was facing the East Palace. It couldn't get in anywhere. It ran in the northeast direction and disappeared in the blink of an eye.

古文：澄闻而叹曰： 灾其及矣。 
现代文：佛图澄听说这件事情后，叹道： 灾难到来了！ 
English: After hearing about this, Buddha Tucheng sighed: Disaster has come!

古文：至十一月，虎大飨群臣于太武前殿，澄吟曰： 殿乎殿乎，棘子成林，将坏人衣。 
现代文：十一月，石虎大宴群臣于太武前殿，佛图澄吟唱道： 殿乎殿乎，棘子成林，将坏人衣！ 
English: In November, the great feast of the stone tiger was held in the hall in front of the Great Martial Arts Hall. Buddha Tuzhen chanted, "The hall is the hall, the thorns are the thorns, and the villain is the villain!"

古文：虎令发殿石下视之，有棘生焉。澄还寺，视佛像曰： 怅恨不得庄严。 
现代文：石虎令人欣开殿前石头一看，见有棘子生在石下，佛图澄回到寺院，看着佛像说： 很遗憾，没有能够维护佛祖的庄严。 
English: Seeing the stone in front of the hall, he saw a thorn growing under the stone. Buddha Tsoen returned to the temple, looked at the Buddha statue and said, "I'm sorry that I wasn't able to maintain the Buddha's dignity."

古文：独语曰： 得三年乎？ 
现代文：又自语道： 还能有三年吗？ 
English: I thought to myself, "Can I still have three more years?

古文：自答 不得不得。 
现代文： 不能，不能。 
English: I can't, I can't.

古文：又曰： 得二年、一年、百日、一月乎？ 
现代文： 有二年、一年、一百天、一个月吗？  都不能。 
English: Is it two years, one year, one hundred days, one month?

古文：自答 不得 乃无复言，还房，谓弟子法祚曰： 戊申岁祸乱渐萌，己酉石氏当灭。吾及其未乱，先从化矣。 
现代文：于是不再说话。默默走回自己房里，对弟子法祚说： 戊申年祸乱兴起，己酉年石氏就会灭亡，我要在末乱之前，先从化了。 
English: So he stopped talking. He walked back to his room in silence and said to his disciple, Falun: "When the calamity of the Year of the Horse arose, the Stone Clan would perish in the Year of the Horse. I want to become a follower before the end of the calamity."

古文：既遣人与虎辞曰： 物理必迁，身命非保，贫道焰幻之躯，化期已及。
现代文：他即刻派人给石虎送去辞别信，信中写道： 万物之理在于变迁，自身生命不能永保。贫道焰幻之躯，从化之期已到。
English: He immediately sent someone to send a farewell letter to Shihu, in which he wrote: The principle of all things lies in change, and one's own life cannot be guaranteed forever.

古文：既荷恩殊重，故逆以仰闻。 
现代文：既往蒙恩殊重，故特奉告。 
English: In the past, I have received special grace, so I would like to make a special announcement.

古文：虎怆然曰： 不闻和尚有疾，乃忽尔告终。 
现代文：石虎悲伤地说： 没听说和尚有病，怎么突然告终。 
English: Shihu said sadly, "I hadn't heard that the monk was ill, so how did it end so suddenly?

古文：即自出至寺而慰谕焉。
现代文：他立即出宫亲自到寺院慰问佛图澄。
English: He immediately left the palace and went to the temple to offer his condolences to the Buddha.

古文：澄谓虎曰： 出入生死，道之常也。修短分定，非所能言。
现代文：澄对石虎说： 出入生死乃道之常也，寿长寿短皆由命定，不是谁能说了算的。
English: Cheng told Shihu: Entering and exiting life and death is the normal course of events. The length of one's life is predetermined. It is not up to anyone to decide.

古文：夫道重行全，德贵无怠，苟业操无亏，虽亡若在。
现代文：道重于行为圆满，德贵在永无懈怠，如能做到事业操守无亏于广道无损于德，虽死犹存。
English: The path is more important than the perfect behavior, and the virtue is never slacking. If you can achieve the cause of integrity without detriment to the broad path and without damage to the virtue, although the death still exists.

古文：违而获延，非其所愿。
现代文：违背这些而去延长寿命，非我所愿。
English: I would not want to prolong my life in violation of these principles.

古文：今意未尽者，以国家心存佛理，奉法无吝。兴起寺庙，崇显庄丽。称斯德也，宜享休祉。而布政猛烈，刑酷罪滥，显违圣典，幽背法戒，以不自惩革。终无佛祐。
现代文：如今意有未尽的是，国家心存佛理而全力奉法，兴起的寺庙崇显庄丽，堪称德政，应享神祐；然而，施政苛刻，刑酷罪滥，显然有违于圣典有背于法戒，如不自省而革除，终当无佛保祐。
English: Today, the meaning is still not exhausted: the country is mindful of the Buddha's teachings and devotes itself to practicing the law, and the temples that have sprung up are dignified, worthy of being called virtuous, and should enjoy the blessings of the gods; however, the government is harsh, the punishment is cruel and the crime is obviously contrary to the scriptures and contrary to the precepts of the law, and if it is eliminated without self-examination, there will be no guarantee of the Buddha.

古文：若降心易虑，惠此下民，则国祚延长，道俗庆赖。毕命就尽，没无遗恨。 
现代文：若能改变心思，施惠于民，国运得以延长，道与俗皆固有了依赖而庆贺；贫道命尽寿终，死无遗恨！ 
English: If you can change your mind and benefit the people, the national movement can be extended, and both the Tao and the mundane will celebrate with dependence; the poor way of life will end in death, and there will be no regrets!

古文：虎悲动呜咽，知其必逝，即为凿圹营坟。
现代文：石虎悲恸呜咽，知其必逝，立即为他挖圹营造坟穴。
English: The stone tiger pitifully whimpered, knowing that he would die, and immediately dug a grave for him.

古文：士庶悲哀，号赴倾国。春秋一百一十七岁矣。
现代文：十二月八日，佛图澄逝世于邺宫寺，这一年是晋穆帝永和四年，享年一百一十七岁。
English: On December 8th, Buddha Tushin passed away at Shogu-ji Temple. It was the fourth year of Emperor Jinmu's reign, and he was 117 years old.

古文：仍窆于临漳西紫陌，即虎所创冢也。
现代文：士人黎庶无不悲哀，倾国哭赴丧。遗体葬于临漳西紫山间，就是石虎为他修造的坟地。
English: Li Shizhe, a scholar, was so sad that he went to the funeral in tears. His body was buried in the West Purple Mountains of Linyi, in the cemetery built for him by Shihu.

古文：俄而梁犊作乱，明年虎死，冉闵篡戮，石种都尽。
现代文：不久梁犊作乱，第二年石虎死了，冉闵篡位杀戮，石氏一家全被杀尽。
English: Soon after, Liang Kun started a riot. The following year, Shi Hu died, Ran Kun usurped the position and killed everyone. The entire Shi family was killed.

古文：闵小字棘奴，澄先所谓棘子成林者也。
现代文：闵的乳名叫 棘奴 ，佛图澄原先所说的 棘子成林 ，指的就是他。
English: The dragonfly's milk is called acanthus, which is what Buddha Tsu-chen originally referred to as the forest of acorns.

古文：澄左乳旁先有一孔，围四五寸，通彻腹内，有时光从中出，或以絮塞孔，夜欲读书，辄拔絮，则一室洞明。又斋日辄至水边，引肠洗之，还复内中。
现代文：佛图澄左乳房旁边原先有个小孔，周长约有四五寸，直通胸腔，时常有光亮从里面透出来。他有时候用棉絮将小孔堵塞上，夜晚要读书时，就把棉絮掏出来，满屋通明，每逢斋戒之日，他就到水边将肠子从这个小孔里引出来清洗，洗完后再放回去。
English: There used to be a small hole next to the Buddha's left breast, with a circumference of about four or five inches, which went straight through the chest cavity, and light would often shine through it. Sometimes he would plug the small hole with cotton wool. When he wanted to read at night, he would take out the cotton wool, and the whole house would be illuminated. Every day of fasting, he would go to the water's edge to draw the intestines out of this small hole, wash them, and then put them back.

古文：澄身长八尺，风姿甚美，妙解深经，旁通世论。
现代文：佛图澄身高八尺，风姿甚美，妙解深奥的经书，兼通治世之论。
English: The Buddha is eight feet tall, has a very beautiful appearance, has a profound understanding of the scriptures, and is well versed in the theory of ruling the world.

古文：讲说之日，正标宗致，使始末文言，昭然可了。
现代文：每逢讲经的时候，他能正确阐明教义的宗旨和细微的意思，使经典的古奥原文明确清晰易懂。
English: Whenever he gave a sermon, he was able to correctly clarify the purpose and subtle meaning of the doctrine, making the classic ancient text clear and easy to understand.

古文：加复慈洽苍生，拯救危苦，二石凶强，虐害非道，若不以与澄同日，熟可言哉。
现代文：他能以慈悲大度的襟怀对待苍生，竭诚拯救世人的危难困苦。石勒、石虎凶暴强横，动不动虐害无辜，残忍无道；若不是与佛图澄生活在同一时日，谁能劝说了他们两个啊！
English: He can treat sentient beings with compassion and generosity, and wholeheartedly save the world's perils and hardships. Shi Le and Shi Hu are ferocious and domineering, abusing the innocent at every turn, and are ruthless; if they had not lived at the same time as Buddha Tucheng, who could have persuaded the two of them?

古文：但百姓蒙益，日用而不知耳。
现代文：然而百姓每天都在蒙恩受益，却不知道是澄劝导二石的结果呢。
English: However, the people are benefiting from the grace every day, but they do not know that it is the result of two stones of persuasion.

古文：佛天、须菩提等数十名僧，出自天竺、康居，不远数万之路，足涉流沙，诣澄受训。
现代文：佛调、须菩提等数十位名僧，出自天竺、康居，不远数万里，足涉流沙荒野，前来从澄受学。
English: Dozens of famous monks, including Buddha Tune and Subhuti, came from Tianzhu and Kangju, not tens of thousands of miles away, wading through the quicksand wilderness, to come and learn from Cheng.

古文：樊淝释道安、中山竺法雅，并跨越关河，听澄讲说。
现代文：樊淝的释道安、中山的竺法雅等本土名僧，也跋山涉水来听他讲道。
English: Local famous monks, such as Xie Dao'an from Handan and Zou Faya from Zhongshan, also trekked to listen to his sermons.

古文：皆妙达精理，研测幽微。
现代文：他们都能通经明理，研究教义幽微之处。
English: They can all reason through the subtleties of doctrine.

古文：澄自说生处去邺九万余里，弃家入道一百九年，酒不逾齿。过中不食，非戒不履，无欲无求。
现代文：佛图澄自己说他出生的地方离邺城九万余里，他弃家入道一百零九年，平生酒不入口，过了中午不食，不符合戒规的不做，无欲无求。
English: Buddha Tucheng himself said that the place where he was born was more than ninety thousand miles away from Lucheng. He abandoned his home and entered the path one hundred and nine years ago. Throughout his life, he did not drink wine, did not eat after noon, did not do anything that did not conform to the precepts, and had no desires or desires.

古文：受业追随，常有数百，前后门徒，几且一万。所历州郡，兴立佛寺八百九十三所，弘法之盛，莫与先矣。
现代文：跟他受业的弟子常有数百名之多，前后门徒几近一万，他所经历的州郡，兴立佛寺多达八百九十三所，他弘扬佛法的盛况，没有人比得上。
English: There were often hundreds of disciples with him, and there were nearly ten thousand disciples before and after him. He went through as many states and counties as possible, and built as many as 893 Buddhist temples. There is no one who can match the grandeur of his promotion of Buddhism.

古文：初虎殓澄以生时锡杖及钵内棺中，后冉闵篡位，开棺唯得钵杖，不得见尸。
现代文：当初，石虎把佛图澄生前的锡杖及钵盂装殓在棺材里面，后来冉闵篡位，开棺时只见有锡杖和钵子，没有见到尸体。
English: At first, the stone tiger put the pewter staff and yakitori of the Buddha Tu Cheng in the coffin. Later, Ran Yu usurped the position. When he opened the coffin, he only saw the pewter staff and yakitori, but no corpse.

古文：或言澄死之日，有人见澄于流沙。
现代文：有人说，佛图澄死的那天，有人在流沙上看见过他。
English: Some people say that on the day of the Buddha's death, someone saw him on the quicksand.

古文：虎疑其不死，因发墓开棺视之，唯见一石，虎曰： 石者朕也，师葬我而去矣。 
现代文：石虎怀疑他没有死，便打开坟墓和棺材看一看，棺材里只见到一块石头，石虎说： 石头就是我呀，大师埋葬了我而他却走了。 
English: The stone tiger suspected that he was not dead, so he opened the grave and the coffin and took a look. There was only one stone in the coffin. The stone tiger said, "The stone is me. The master buried me, but he is gone."

古文：未几虎死。
现代文：没过多久石虎就死了。
English: It didn't take long for Shihu to die.

古文：后慕容隽都邺，处石虎宫中，每梦见虎啮其臂，意谓石虎为崇。
现代文：后来慕容隽建都于邺城，住在原先石虎的宫里，每每梦见老虎咬他的胳膊，心里说，一定是石虎作祟，便找人寻找石虎的尸体。
English: Later, Murong Jiandu lived in the former palace of the stone tiger in Lucheng. Whenever he dreamed of a tiger biting his arm, he said in his heart that it must be a stone tiger, and he looked for someone to find the stone tiger's body.

古文：乃募觅虎尸，于东明馆掘得之，尸僵不毁。
现代文：后来在东明馆掘到了，尸体僵硬没有腐败。
English: Later, it was found in the Dongming Pavilion. The corpse was stiff and had not decomposed.

古文：隽蹹之骂曰： 死胡敢怖生天子！
现代文：慕容隽踢着尸体骂道： 死胡人竟要吓唬活天子！
English: Murong Yao kicked the corpse and scolded, "The dead man is trying to scare the living God!"

古文：汝作宫殿成，而为汝儿所图，况复他耶。 
现代文：你把宫殿建成后连你儿子都要图谋，更何况其他人呢！ 
English: After you build the palace, even your son will plot, let alone others!

古文：鞭挞毁辱，投之漳河。
现代文：他把石虎的尸体鞭打毁辱够了，又让人扔进了漳河。
English: He had whipped the body of the stone tiger enough to humiliate it, and had someone throw it into the Li River.

古文：尸倚桥柱不移，秦将王猛乃收而葬之。
现代文：尸体倚着桥柱不动地方，秦将王猛便将他收起来安葬了。
English: When the corpse was leaning against the bridge pillar, the Qin general Wang Meng took it away and buried it.

古文：麻襦所言一柱殿也。
现代文：这桥柱，就是当年那个叫 麻衣 的人所说的 一柱殿 。
English: This bridge pillar is what a man named Ma Ying called a pillar hall.

古文：后符坚征邺，隽子蹹为坚大将郭神虎所执，实先梦虎之验也。
现代文：后来符坚攻大邺城，慕容焦的儿子慕容暐，被符坚的大将郭神虎抓获，这才是慕容隽原先梦见虎的真实验证。
English: Later, Fu Jian attacked Dalat City, and Murong Jiao's son, Murong Yao, was captured by Fu Jian's general, Guo Shenghu. This was the true experimental evidence of Murong Yao's original dream of seeing a tiger.

古文：田融赵记云： 澄未亡数年，自营冢圹。 
现代文：田融在《赵记》中说： 澄在未死之前数年，自己营造坟圹。 
English: Tian Rong said in "The Diary of Zhao": "Several years before he died, Cheng Zeng built his own tomb.

古文：澄既知冢必开，又尸不在中，何容预作？
现代文：澄既知道坟墓一定被掘开，他的尸体又不在里面，为什么还要预先营造呢？
English: Since Cheng knew that the grave would definitely be opened and his body was not inside, why did he have to build it in advance?

古文：恐融之谬矣。
现代文：恐怕是田融搞错了吧。
English: I'm afraid Tian Rong made a mistake.

古文：澄或言佛图澄，或言佛屠澄，皆取梵音之不同耳。
现代文：澄，有人写作佛图澄，有人写作佛屠澄，都是因为根据梵文音译时出现的不同而已。
English: Some people write "Buddha figure" and others write "Buddha butcher" because of the difference that occurs when translating from Sanskrit.

