古文：宫正掌王宫之戒令纠禁，以时比宫中之官府、次舍之众寡，为之版以待。
现代文：宫正掌管王宫中的戒令、纠察违反禁令的人。白天按时检查宫中大小官府人员的多少，记载在木版上以待考核。
English: The palace is in charge of the restraining order in the royal palace and picketing those who violate the ban. During the day, the number of government officials in the palace is checked on time and recorded on a wooden board for review.

古文：夕击柝而比之，国有故则令宿。
现代文：黄昏时敲击木梆而检查值班人员。王国有非常事故就命令宿卫王宫，对这些宿卫者也像平常一样进行检查。
English: In the event of an emergency, the palace guards are called to the palace, and they are inspected as usual.

古文：其比，亦如之。
现代文：辨别宫外、宫内的人而禁止他们不在规定的时间出入。
English: to distinguish between people outside and inside the palace and prohibit them from entering and leaving the palace outside the specified time.

古文：辨外、内而时禁，稽其功绪，纠其德行，几其出入，均其稍食，去其淫怠，与其奇衮之民，会其什伍而教之道艺。
现代文：考察宫中官吏的功业，纠察他们的德行，检查他们的出入，合理发给他们食粮。摈弃那些放纵、懈怠的官吏，以及官吏家属中那些诡异、邪恶的人。
English: Examine the exploits of the officials in the palace, inspect their virtues, check their comings and goings, and rationally distribute food to them. Abandon those officials who are indulgent and slack, as well as those strange and evil people in the families of officials.

古文：月终，则会其稍食。
现代文：按照什伍编制把宫中官吏的子弟组合起来，教他们礼乐射御书数。
English: According to Shwu's compilation, the sons of officials in the imperial court were grouped together to teach them the number of books on etiquette and music.

古文：岁终，则会其行事，凡邦之大事，令于王宫之官府、次舍，无去守而听政令。
现代文：月底合计宫中官吏的报酬，年终总结宫中官吏的任职情况。凡王国有大事，就命令王宫中大小官府的人员，不要擅离职守而听从命令。
English: At the end of the month, the remuneration of officials in the palace is summed up, and at the end of the year, the position of officials in the palace is summed up. Whenever there is a major event in the kingdom, the personnel of the government offices in the royal palace are ordered not to leave the office without permission, but to obey orders.

古文：春秋以木铎修火禁。
现代文：春秋时节，摇动木铎告诫宫中严格遵守有关用火的禁令。
English: During the spring and autumn seasons, the shaking of the wooden stake admonishes the palace to strictly abide by the ban on the use of fire.

古文：凡邦之事，跸、宫中、庙中、则执烛。
现代文：凡王国有祭祀，在隶仆禁止宫中、庙中通行时，就拿火把为王照明。
English: Wherever there is a religious service in a kingdom, when servants are forbidden to enter the palace or temple, torches are used to light the way for the king.

古文：大丧，则授庐舍、辨其亲疏贵贱之居。
现代文：王丧，负责安排居丧的庐舍，要分别亲疏贵贱来安排居丧处所。
English: Wang Zou, who is in charge of arranging the funeral home, should arrange the funeral home separately.

古文：宫伯掌王宫之士、庶子凡在版者，掌其政令，行其秩叙，作其徒役之事，授八次、八舍之职事。
现代文：宫伯负责掌管王宫中的士和庶子，凡是列在名籍上的。掌管有关他们的政令，安排他们宿卫的先后次序，组织他们供太子役使，还有负责分配他们宿卫时的八次和休息时的八舍的职责。
English: The palace steward is in charge of the palace's servants and illegitimate children, all of whom are listed in the name register. He is in charge of the decrees concerning them, arranges the order of their guards, organizes them to serve the prince, and is also responsible for assigning them eight times when they are guards and eight times when they are resting.

古文：若邦有大事作宫众，则令之。
现代文：如果王国有大事要发动宫中众人，就负责召集士、庶子。
English: If there is an important event in the kingdom that requires everyone in the palace to be mobilized, it is the responsibility of the king to gather the courtiers and illegitimate children.

古文：月终，则均秩。岁终，则均叙。
现代文：月底调整士、庶子宿卫的次序，年终调整士、庶子轮值的先后。
English: At the end of the month, the order of the adjuster and the bastard guard, at the end of the year, the order of the adjuster and the bastard guard.

古文：以时颁其衣裘，掌其诛赏。
现代文：按时颁发给他们夏衣和冬衣。掌管对他们的奖惩。
English: He gives them summer clothes and winter clothes at the right time, and controls their rewards and punishments.

古文：膳夫掌王之食饮、膳羞，以养王及后、世子。
现代文：膳夫掌管王的饭食、饮料、牲肉、美味，以供养王、王后和太子。
English: The butler is in charge of the king's food, drink, meat, and delicacies to feed the king, queen, and prince.

古文：凡王之馈，食用六谷，膳用六牲，饮用六清，羞用百有二十品，珍用八物，酱用百有二十瓮。
现代文：凡馈送王的饮食，饭用六种谷物做成，牲肉用六种牲，饮料用六种清饮料，美味用一百二十种，珍肴用八种，酱用一百二十瓮。
English: The king's diet was made up of six kinds of grains for the rice, six kinds of animals for the meat, six kinds of clear beverages for the drinks, one hundred and twenty kinds of delicacies, eight kinds of delicacies, and one hundred and twenty kinds of sauces.

古文：王日一举，鼎十有二物，皆有俎，以乐侑食。
现代文：王用膳每天一杀牲，陈列十二鼎，鼎中牲肉取出后都有俎盛着进上。用音乐助王进食。
English: Every day, the king's table is set up with 12 dishes, and after the meat is taken out of the dishes, it is placed on the table. Music is used to help the king eat.

古文：膳夫授祭，品尝食，王乃食。
现代文：食前膳夫把当行祭礼的食物授给王，并先为王品赏食物，然后才吃。
English: Before the meal, the headwaiter presents the king with the ceremonial food, and first tastes the food for the king before eating it.

古文：卒食，以乐彻于造。
现代文：食毕，用音乐伴奏把食器彻回原处。
English: When you have finished eating, use the musical accompaniment to put the crockery back in its place.

古文：王齐，日三举。
现代文：王斋戒期间，每日三餐都杀牲。
English: During the fasting period of Wang Lai, animals were killed for three meals a day.

古文：大丧，则不举。大荒，则不举。大札，则不举。天地有灾，则不举。邦有大故，则不举。
现代文：有大丧不杀牲，有大灾荒不杀牲，瘟疫流行不杀牲，天地出现灾异不杀牲，王国有大的军事行动不杀牲。
English: If there is a great calamity, do not kill the animals; if there is a great disaster, do not kill the animals; if there is a plague, do not kill the animals; if there is a disaster, do not kill the animals; if there is a great military operation in the kingdom, do not kill the animals.

古文：王燕食，则奉膳，赞祭。
现代文：王进午餐和晚餐时，就为王奉进牲肉，并帮助王行食前祭礼。
English: When Wang Jin had lunch and dinner, she served him meat and helped him with the pre-meal ritual.

古文：凡王祭祀、宾客食，则彻王之胙俎。
现代文：凡王举行祭祀，或款待宾客酒食，礼毕就彻下王的胙俎。
English: Every king held a religious service, or entertained guests with food and wine, and after the ceremony, the royal scepter was lowered.

古文：凡王之稍事，设荐脯醢。
现代文：凡王因小事而饮酒，就为王进设脯醢。
English: If a king drinks wine for a trifle, it is a disgrace to the king.

古文：王燕饮酒，则为献主。
现代文：王与臣下燕饮酒时，就代王为主人向臣下献酒。
English: When the king and his vassals were drinking, the king offered wine to his vassals on behalf of his master.

古文：掌后及世之膳羞，凡肉修之颁赐，皆掌之。
现代文：掌管供给王后和太子的牲肉及美味。凡王用牲肉和股惰颁赐群臣的事，都由膳夫掌管。
English: He is in charge of the meat and delicacies served to the queen and the prince, and he is in charge of all the meat and delicacies given to the courtiers by the king.

古文：凡祭祀之致福者，受而膳之。
现代文：凡群臣祭祀而将祭肉馈送给王的，就接受而用作王的肴馔。
English: If a group of courtiers offer a sacrifice and feed the sacrificial meat to the king, it will be accepted and used as the king's dish.

古文：以挚见者，亦如之。
现代文：对于臣下拿着挚来见王的，也这样做。
English: Do the same for your vassals who come to see the king with a sincere request.

古文：岁终则会，唯王及后、世子之膳不会。
现代文：夏历年终就做结算，只有供给王、王后和太子的膳食不结算。
English: Accounts are settled at the end of the year according to the lunar calendar, except for the meals provided to the king, queen and crown prince.

古文：庖人掌共六畜、六兽、六禽，辨其名物。
现代文：庖人掌管供应六畜、六兽、六禽，辨别它们的名号和毛色。
English: Six people are in charge of supplying six animals, six beasts, and six birds, distinguishing their names and coat colors.

古文：凡其死生鲜薨之物，以共王之膳，与其荐羞之物，及后世子之膳羞。
现代文：凡是那些死的、活的、鲜的、干的畜禽及兽肉，用以作为供奉给王的牲肉，和进献给王的美味，以及供奉王后与太子的牲肉何美味。
English: And all flesh of fowls, and of cattle, whether dead, or alive, or fresh, or dry, for the meat of the king, and for the delicacies of the king, and for the delicacies of the queen, and of the prince.

古文：共祭祀之好羞，共丧纪之庶羞，宾客之禽献。
现代文：供给祭祀所用的四时珍美之物。供给丧事所用各种美味，以及款待宾客所用的禽兽肉。
English: and the meat of the beasts of the field for the sacrifices, and the sweetmeats for the burnt offerings, and the meat of the beasts of the field for the burnt offerings, and the meat of the beasts of the field for the burnt offerings.

古文：凡令禽献，以法授之。
现代文：凡命令兽人进献禽兽，把所应献禽兽的数目交给她。
English: Whoever gives the order for the animal-sacrificers to come, let him give her the number of the animal-sacrifices.

古文：其出入，亦如之。凡用禽献：春行羔豚，膳膏香；夏行腒鱐，膳膏臊；秋行犊麛，膳膏腥；冬行鲜羽，膳膏膻。
现代文：庖人接受兽人所献入的禽兽以及向宾客献出禽兽也按规定的数目进行。凡用禽兽肉进献给王，春季用羊羔肉和小猪肉，用有香味的牛膏脂煎和；夏季用干野鸡肉和干鱼，用有臊味的狗膏脂煎和；秋季用牛犊肉和小兽肉，用有腥味的鸡膏脂煎和；冬季用鲜鱼和鹅肉，用有逭味的羊膏脂煎和。
English: The eunuchs accepted the animals offered by the orcs and presented the animals to the guests according to the prescribed number. If the meat of animals was offered to the king, in the spring, lamb and small pork were fried with fragrant beef fat; in the summer, dried pheasant meat and dried fish were fried with salty dog fat; in the autumn, beef and small animal meat were fried with spicy chicken fat; in the winter, fresh fish and goose meat were fried with salty sheep fat.

古文：岁终，则会，唯王及后之膳禽不会。
现代文：到夏历年终就做结算，只有供给王和王后的禽兽不结算。
English: Accounts are settled at the end of the year according to the lunar calendar, except for the animals that feed the king and queen.

古文：内饔掌王及后、世子膳羞之割、烹、煎、和之事。辨体名肉物，辨百品味之物。
现代文：内饔掌管供给王及王后、太子的牲肉和美味的宰割、烹煮、煎熬以及调味的事情，辨别牲体和脏腑的名称，辨别各种美味的名称。
English: The Inner Court is in charge of the slaughtering, cooking, curing and seasoning of the meat and delicacies provided to the king and queen and the prince. It is responsible for distinguishing the names of animals and organs, and distinguishing the names of various delicacies.

古文：王举，则陈其鼎俎，以牲体实之，选百羞、酱物、珍物，以俟馈。
现代文：为王杀牲，就负责陈列鼎和俎，并负责将牲体盛在鼎中和俎上。选择各种美味、酱类和珍肴，以待膳夫馈送给王。
English: For the king to kill animals, he is responsible for displaying the ding and yakitori, and is responsible for placing the animals on the ding and yakitori. A variety of delicacies, sauces and delicacies are selected for the caterer to feed to the king.

古文：共后及世子之膳羞。
现代文：供给王后及太子牲肉和美味。
English: Provided the queen and the prince with meat and delicacies.

古文：辨腥、臊、膻、香之不可食者。
现代文：辨别鸡、犬、羊、牛赞等牲中不可食用。
English: Distinguish between chicken, dog, sheep, cow and other animals that are not edible.

古文：牛夜鸣则庮，羊泠毛而毳膻，犬赤股而躁臊，乌□廌色而沙鸣狸，豕盲□而交睫腥，马黑脊而般臂蝼。
现代文：牛如果在晚上叫，它的肉就会恶臭。羊如果毛长而又打结，它的肉就膻。狗如果后腿内侧没有毛而又奔跑急躁，它的肉就臊。鸟的毛色失去光泽而又鸣声嘶哑，它的肉就腐臭。猪如果作远视貌而睫毛相交，它的肉中就生有囊虫。马脊作黑色而前胫有杂斑，它的肉就作蝼蛄臭。
English: If an ox brays at night, its flesh will stink; if a sheep has long and knotted hair, its flesh will rot; if a dog has no hair on the inside of its hind legs and runs quickly, its flesh will rot; if a bird's hair is dull and its song is hoarse, its flesh will rot; if a pig has far-sightedness and its eyelashes meet, its flesh will be covered with worms; if a horse's back is black and its front mottled, its flesh will stink.

古文：凡宗庙之祭祀，掌割亨之事；凡燕饮食，亦如之。
现代文：凡宗庙祭祀，掌管宰割、烹煮的事，凡王、王后及太子行燕饮酒礼或用午餐、晚餐时也这样。
English: He is in charge of slaughtering and cooking for all temple and temple rituals, as well as for all kings, queens, and princes when they perform the swallow drinking ceremony or have lunch or dinner.

古文：凡掌共羞、修、刑、膴、胖、骨、鱐，以待共膳。
现代文：预备各种美味、腶脩、铏羹、大肉片、不干的咸肉、牲体、干鱼等，以待供王、王后和太子膳食所用。
English: Prepared all kinds of delicacies, clams, bean curd soup, large pieces of meat, uncured salted meat, livestock, dried fish, etc., to be used for the king, queen and prince's meal.

古文：凡王之好赐肉修，则饔人共之。
现代文：凡王喜欢某臣而赐予牲肉和腶脩，就由内饔供给他。
English: If the king loves a vassal and gives him meat and fodder, the vassal will give it to him.

古文：外饔掌外祭祀之割亨。共其脯、修、刑、膴。陈其鼎俎实之牲体、鱼腊。
现代文：外饔掌管外祭祀所用牲的宰割和烹煮，供给祭祀所需的脯、腶脩、铏羹、大肉片，陈列鼎和俎，并把牲体、鱼、于兽肉等盛入鼎中和俎上。
English: The outer yakitori is in charge of slaughtering and cooking the animals used in the outer ritual, supplying the yakitori, yakitori, yakitori soup, and large pieces of meat needed for the ritual, displaying the inner yakitori, and putting the animals, fish, and other meat into the middle yakitori.

古文：凡宾客之飧饔、饔食之事，亦如之。
现代文：凡为宾客设便宴、馈饔饩、举行飨礼和食礼的事，也这样做。
English: The same shall apply to all the banquets, the feeding of the flocks, the offering of burnt offerings, and the breaking of bread.

古文：邦飨耆老、孤子，则掌其割亨之事。
现代文：王国用飨礼款待老人和孤子，就掌管所用牲的宰割和烹煮的事。
English: The kingdom will honor the aged and the fatherless with a feast, and will be in charge of the slaughtering and cooking of its animals.

古文：飨士、庶子，亦如之。
现代文：用飨礼款待士和庶子时，也这样做。
English: Do the same when you entertain your servant and your son-in-law with a feast.

古文：师役，则掌共其献赐脯肉之事。
现代文：出师征伐及巡守、田猎，就掌管供给王向将帅献酒或赏赐时所需脯和牲肉的事。
English: He was in charge of supplying the king with the plough and meat needed to offer wine to the commander or to reward him.

古文：凡小丧纪，陈其鼎俎而实之。
现代文：凡是小丧事，就负责陈列鼎、俎并盛入所需牲肉。
English: For small funerals, it is responsible for displaying the troughs, urns and filling them with the required animal meat.

