古文：太史公曰：洋洋美德乎！
现代文：太史公说： 礼具有盛大广远的美德。
English: Taishigong said, "Ritual has great and far-reaching virtues.

古文：宰制万物，役使群众，岂人力也哉？
现代文：它主宰制约着世间万物，役使着天下民众，岂是人力所能做到的？
English: It dominates and restricts all things in the world, and serves the people of the world. Is it humanly possible?

古文：余至大行礼官，观三代损益，乃知缘人情而制礼，依人性而作仪，其所由来尚矣。
现代文：我曾到大行礼官那里，研究夏、商、周三代礼制的演变，才知道，按照社会情况制定礼，依据人的本性制定仪，这种情况由来已久了。
English: I once went to the Da Xing etiquette official to study the evolution of the summer, business and Wednesday etiquette, only to learn that it has been a long time since the etiquette was formulated according to the social situation and according to human nature.

古文：人道经纬万端，规矩无所不贯，诱进以仁义，束缚以刑罚，故德厚者位尊，禄重者宠荣，所以总一海内而整齐万民也。
现代文：人所行之道千条万条，无不贯穿一条基本准则，就是诱导人们，使知仁义，并以刑罚相约束。所以，道德高尚的人，地位尊显贵重；俸禄多的人备受尊宠，以此来统一天下人的意识，整齐人心。
English: There are thousands of ways for people to behave, but there is one basic principle that runs through all of them, that is, to induce people to be wise, benevolent and righteous, and to be bound by punishment. Therefore, people with high morals have a high status; people with high salaries are highly respected and favored, in order to unify the consciousness of the common people and tidy the hearts of the people.

古文：人体安驾乘，为之金舆错衡以繁其饰；目好五色，为之黼黻文章以表其能；耳乐钟磬，为之调谐八音以荡其心；口甘五味，为之庶羞酸咸以致其美；情好珍善，为之琢磨圭璧以通其意。
现代文：人的身体乘车马感到舒适，就以金饰车，又雕镂车衡，镶金错银，加上繁琐的装饰；眼睛喜欢看五彩美色，就在服装上设计了图案花纹，使外表形态更美好；人耳乐于听钟磬等动听的声音，就调谐各种乐器以激荡人内心的情感；人的口舌喜欢吃美味食物，就烹调出嘉肴异馔，或酸或咸，各尽其美；性情喜爱珍贵美好的事物，就以美玉制成圭璧，又加雕琢打磨，以顺应自己的心意。
English: The human body feels comfortable when riding a horse, so it is adorned with gold-decorated carriages, engraved scales, inlaid with gold and silver, and cumbersome decorations; the eyes like to see colorful beauty, so they design patterns and patterns on clothing to make the appearance more beautiful; the human ear is happy to listen to beautiful sounds such as chimes, so they tune various musical instruments to stir people's inner emotions; the human mouth likes to eat delicious food, so it cooks delicious dishes, either sour or salty, each to its best; the temperament loves precious and beautiful things, so it is made with gems, and it is polished to conform to one's own

古文：故大路越席，皮弁布裳，朱弦洞越，大羹玄酒，所以防其淫侈，救其雕敝。
现代文：因此天子的大辂车用蒲草做席子，鹿皮冠帽配布衣裳，红弦的琴瑟底部有孔洞，用清肉汤和淡水酒祭祀，都是因为要防止过分奢侈，改正铺张的弊端。
English: Therefore, the celestial chariot uses rushes to make mats, the deerskin crown cap distributes clothes, the red stringed lyre has a hole at the bottom, and the sacrifice is made with clear broth and fresh water wine, all because it is necessary to prevent excessive luxury and correct the drawbacks of extravagance.

古文：是以君臣朝廷尊卑贵贱之序，下及黎庶车舆衣服宫室饮食嫁娶丧祭之分，事有宜适，物有节文。
现代文：所以，上至君臣等朝廷中的尊卑贵贱秩序，下到黎民百姓衣食住行、婚丧嫁娶的等级，事事皆有适宜之度，万物皆有节制。
English: Therefore, from the hierarchical order in the imperial court, such as princes and ministers, down to the level of the common people's food, clothing, housing, and marriage, everything has a degree of appropriateness, and everything has moderation.

古文：仲尼曰： 禘自既灌而往者，吾不欲观之矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 鲁国举行的天子禘祭之礼，从以酒灌地后，我就不想再看了。 
English: Confucius said, "After I was drenched with wine at the beginning of the Feast of the Immaculate Conception in the State of Lu, I didn't want to watch it anymore.

古文：周衰，礼废乐坏，大小相逾，管仲之家，兼备三归。
现代文：周朝衰落后，礼制废弃，乐制破坏，各等级相互僭越，以至管仲家中娶三姓妇女为妻。
English: After the decline of the Zhou Dynasty, the etiquette system was abandoned, the music system was destroyed, and all levels of society were at each other's throats, so much so that Guan Zhong married a woman with three surnames.

古文：循法守正者见侮于世，奢溢僭差者谓之显荣。
现代文：世上遵法律、守正道的人被人欺辱，奢侈逾制的人被看作显贵荣耀。
English: In the world, people who abide by the law and keep to the right path are bullied by others, and people who are extravagant and go beyond the limits are considered to be noble and honorable.

古文：自子夏，门人之高弟也，犹云 出见纷华盛丽而说，入闻夫子之道而乐，二者心战，未能自决 ，而况中庸以下，渐渍于失教，被服于成俗乎？
现代文：上自子夏这样的孔门高弟，犹且说： 出门见到纷纭华丽盛美的事物而欢喜，回来听到夫子的学说而欢喜，这两种让人高兴的事常在心中斗争，不能决定取舍 。更何况资质中等以下的人，长期处在失于教导的习俗、环境中了？
English: A Confucian scholar such as Shang Zizixia said, "When you go out, you will be happy to see a variety of gorgeous and magnificent things, and when you come back, you will be happy to hear your master's teachings. These two kinds of joyful things often struggle in your heart, and you can't decide which to choose. What's more, people with less than average qualifications have long been in a custom and environment that is lost in teaching?

古文：孔子曰 必也正名 ，于卫所居不合。
现代文：孔子论卫国政治说： 必先正其名分。 
English: Confucius said about the politics of defending the country: It is necessary to rectify its name first.

古文：仲尼没后，受业之徒沈湮而不举，或适齐、楚，或入河海，岂不痛哉！
现代文：但他在卫国居住的时候看到了很多不合礼法的事情。孔子死后，受业门人沉沦星散，有的到了齐、楚，有的迁入河北、海内。岂不令人痛惜！
English: However, when he lived in the motherland, he saw a lot of things that were not in accordance with etiquette and law. After the death of Confucius, practitioners were scattered far and wide, some went to Qi and Chu, and some moved to Hebei and Hainan. Isn't that deplorable!

古文：至秦有天下，悉内六国礼仪，采择其善，虽不合圣制，其尊君抑臣，朝廷济济，依古以来。
现代文：至秦统一天下，全部收罗了六国的礼仪制度，择其善者而用之，虽与先圣先贤的制度不合，却也尊君抑臣，使朝廷威仪，庄严肃穆，依照了古代沿袭下来的礼仪。
English: By the time of Qin's unification, the ceremonial system of the Six Kingdoms had been collected in its entirety, and those who were good at it were chosen to use it. Although it did not match the system of the ancients and sages, it also respected the king and despised the vassals, making the imperial court dignified, solemn, and in accordance with the etiquette inherited from ancient times.

古文：至于高祖，光有四海，叔孙通颇有所增益减损，大抵皆袭秦故。
现代文：到汉高祖光复四海，拥有天下，儒者叔孙通增损秦制，制定了汉代制度，主体都是沿袭秦朝原有的礼制。
English: By the time the founder of the Han Dynasty, Guangfu, had conquered the four seas and ruled the world, the Confucians, through their uncles and grandsons, had added to and subtracted from the Qin system and established the Han Dynasty system. The main body of this system followed the original Qin Dynasty system of etiquette.

古文：自天子称号下至佐僚及宫室官名，少所变改。
现代文：上自天子称号，下至僚佐和宫殿、官名，都很少变更。
English: From the title of son of heaven, down to the title of councillor, palace, and official title, there are very few changes.

古文：孝文即位，有司议欲定仪礼，孝文好道家之学，以为繁礼饰貌，无益于治，躬化谓何耳，故罢去之。
现代文：孝文帝即位后，朝廷有关部门建议重新制定礼仪，那时孝文帝喜爱道家学说，以认为繁琐的礼节只能粉饰外表，无益于天下治乱，通过身体力行来教化别人有什么意义呢！
English: After Emperor Xiaowen ascended the throne, the relevant departments of the imperial court proposed to reformulate the etiquette. At that time, Emperor Xiaowen loved the Taoist doctrine, and thought that the cumbersome etiquette could only whitewash the appearance, and was not beneficial to the world. What is the meaning of educating others through physical practice?

古文：孝景时，御史大夫晁错明于世务刑名，数干谏孝景曰： 诸侯藩辅，臣子一例，古今之制也。
现代文：就没有采纳。孝景帝时期，御史大夫晁错明于世务，深通刑名之学，屡次进谏说： 诸侯是天子的屏藩、辅佐，与臣子同列与朝廷，古往今来都是如此。
English: It was not adopted. During the reign of Emperor Xiao Jing, the goshi daifu, who was well versed in world affairs and had a deep understanding of the study of surnames, repeatedly said: Princes are the sons of heaven, the Pinghan, the auxiliary, and the imperial court are the same as the vassals, and this has been the case from ancient times to the present.

古文：今大国专治异政，不禀京师，恐不可传后。 
现代文：如今却是诸侯大国专治其境，与朝廷政令不同，诸事又不向京城禀报，此事断然不可持续下去，流毒后世。 
English: Today, however, the feudal lords and great powers exclusively govern their territories. In contrast to the decrees of the imperial court, they do not report everything to the capital. This is absolutely unsustainable and will poison future generations.

古文：孝景用其计，而六国畔逆，以错首名，天子诛错以解难。
现代文：孝景帝采纳他的计策，削弱诸侯，导致了六国叛乱，将诛杀晁错放在起兵理由的第一条，天子不得己，杀晁错以解时局的危难。
English: Emperor Xiaojing adopted his strategy to weaken the lords, which led to the rebellion of the Six Kingdoms. He put the killing of the enemy as the first reason for starting the war. The emperor was disappointed and killed the enemy to solve the crisis of the situation.

古文：事在《袁盎》语中。
现代文：这件事详细记载在《袁盎列传》中。
English: This event is recorded in detail in the "Biography of Yuan Xuanli."

古文：是后官者养交安禄而已，莫敢复议。
现代文：自此以后，为官者只热衷于结交诸侯、安享俸禄而已，无人敢再复倡此议。
English: From then on, government officials were only interested in making friends with the lords and enjoying a secure salary, and no one dared to repeat this proposal.

古文：今上即位，招致儒术之士，令共定仪，十余年不就。
现代文：今上即位后，招纳罗致通晓儒学的人才，命他们共同制定礼仪制度，进行了十余年也没有成功。
English: Now, after ascending to the throne, Luo Zhizhi recruited talented people who were familiar with Confucianism and ordered them to jointly formulate the etiquette system, which was carried out for more than ten years without success.

古文：或言古者太平，万民和喜，瑞应辨至，乃采风俗，定制作。
现代文：有人说，古时天下太平，万民和睦安乐，感应上天，降下各种祥瑞征兆，才能够采择风俗，制定制度。
English: Some people say that in ancient times, the world was peaceful, all people were harmonious and happy, and all kinds of auspicious and auspicious signs were sent down by heaven. Only then could customs be selected and systems established.

古文：上闻之，制诏御史曰： 盖受命而王，各有所由兴，殊路而同归，谓因民而作，追俗为制也。
现代文：如今不具备这些条件。皇帝听了这些话后向御史下诏书道： 历朝受天命而为王，虽然各有其兴盛的原因，却是殊途而同归，即因民心而起，遵循民众的风俗习惯来创建制度。
English: These conditions do not exist today. After listening to these words, the emperor issued an edict to the Emperor, saying, "All the dynasties have been made kings by the decree of heaven. Although each has its own reasons for prosperity, they all share the same path, that is, to create a system based on the people's will and following the people's customs and habits.

古文：议者咸称太古，百姓何望？
现代文：如今议论的人都厚古而薄今，百姓还有何指望？
English: Nowadays, everyone is talking about the past and the present. What hope is there for the people?

古文：汉亦一家之事，典法不传，谓子孙何？
现代文：汉朝也是一家帝王，如果典法制度不能流传下去，如何对后世子孙解释？
English: The Han Dynasty was also an imperial dynasty. If the legal system could not be passed down, how could it be explained to future generations?

古文：化隆者闳博，治浅者褊狭，可不勉与！ 
现代文：教化深远崇高的，对后世的影响也恢宏广博；治民目光浅薄的，在人们心目中的地位也偏颇狭隘，怎么能不以此自勉呢！ 
English: The far-reaching and lofty enlightenment has a vast and wide-ranging influence on future generations; the shallow-sighted governance has a rather narrow position in people's minds. How can we not be self-disciplined with this!

古文：乃以太初之元改正朔，易服色，封太山，定宗庙百官之仪，以为典常，垂之于后云。
现代文：于是，以 太初 为元年改定历法，变易服饰颜色，于泰山举行封禅大典，制定宗庙祭祀、百官朝贺的礼仪，作为朝廷不变的制度，流传后世。
English: As a result, the calendar was revised for the first year from the beginning of the year, the color of clothing was changed, the grand ceremony of the enthronement of Zen was held on Mount Tai, the rituals of the ancestral temple and the etiquette of the morning greetings of the dignitaries were established, and they were passed down to future generations as an unchanging system of the imperial court.

古文：礼由人起。人生有欲，欲而不得则不能无忿，忿而无度量则争，争则乱。
现代文：礼是因人而产生的，人生而有欲望，欲望达不到则不能没有怨愤，愤而不止就会引发争斗，有了争斗就会产生祸乱。
English: Rites are caused by people, life is caused by desires, and if desires are not achieved, there can be no resentment. If there is more than resentment, there will be conflict, and if there is conflict, there will be calamity.

古文：先王恶其乱，故制礼义以养人之欲，给人之求，使欲不穷于物，物不屈于欲，二者相待而长，是礼之所起也。
现代文：古代帝王厌恶祸乱，才制定礼仪来滋养人的欲望，满足人的需求，使欲望不会因为物质不足而受到限制，物质也不会因欲望太大而显得匮乏，物、欲二者相得而长，这就是礼制产生的原因。
English: Ancient emperors abhorred evil, so they formulated etiquette to nourish people's desires and meet people's needs, so that desires would not be limited due to lack of material, and material would not appear scarce due to too much desire. Both things and desires are compatible, which is the reason for the emergence of etiquette.

古文：故礼者养也。
现代文：所以，礼就是一种调养之法。
English: Therefore, etiquette is a kind of method of correction.

古文：稻粱五味，所以养口也；椒兰芬茝，所以养鼻也；钟鼓管弦，所以养耳也；刻镂文章，所以养目也；疏房床笫几席，所以养体也：故礼者养也。
现代文：稻梁等五味是养人之口的；椒、兰、芬芳的芷草，是养人之鼻的；钟、鼓及各种管弦乐器的音声是养人之耳的；雕刻花纹是养人眼目的；宽敞的房屋以及床箦几席，是养人身体的。所以说礼是一种调养之法。
English: Five tastes, such as rice stalks, nourish the mouth; peppers, orchids, and fragrant rushes, nourish the nose; the sound of bells, drums, and various orchestral instruments nourish the ears; carved patterns nourish the eyes; spacious houses and beds with several seats, nourish the body. Therefore, etiquette is a method of cultivation.

古文：君子既得其养，又好其辨也。
现代文：君子欲望既得到滋养而满足，又愿受到礼仪区别的限制。
English: The desire of a gentleman is both nourished and satisfied, and is also willing to be limited by the difference in etiquette.

古文：所谓辨者，贵贱有等，长少有差，贫富轻重皆有称也。
现代文：所谓辨，就是辨别贵贱使有等级，长少使有差别，贫穷、富有、卑贱、尊贵都能得到相称的待遇。
English: The so-called distinction means that there is a grade for distinguishing between high and low, and there is a difference between high and low, and the poor, rich, lowly, and distinguished can all receive commensurate treatment.

古文：故天子大路越席，所以养体也；侧载臭茝，所以养鼻也；前有错衡，所以养目也；和鸾之声，步中《武》《象》，骤中《韶》《濩》，所以养耳也；龙旗九斿，所以养信也；寝兕持虎，鲛韅弥龙，所以养威也。
现代文：因此，天子乘大辂车用蒲草做席子保养身体；身旁摆放香草，用来养鼻；前面的车衡经过嵌错装饰，用来养目；车动时，鸾铃叮铃，节奏缓和如《武》《象》二舞的乐曲，急骤时如《韶》《濩》舞曲，是用来养耳的；龙旗下，九旒低垂，是用来培养天子诚信之心。
English: Therefore, the son of heaven takes a big carriage with a bed of rushes to make a mat to maintain his body; vanilla is placed next to him to nourish his nose; the front scales are decorated with inlays to nourish his eyes; when the carriage is moving, the cymbals are jingling, and the rhythm is relaxed, such as the music of the two dances of "Wu" and "Elephant," and when it is sudden, such as the music of the two dances of "Dragon" and "Dragon," it is used to nourish the ears; under the banner of the dragon, nine cymbals are hanging low, it is used to cultivate the

古文：故大路之马，必信至教顺，然后乘之，所以养安也。
现代文：车轮装饰着伏卧犀牛的形状，伏轼上装饰有虎皮，马肚带以鲨鱼皮制成，车轭雕刻成龙的样子，用来培养天子威严之气。驾驭大路的马，一定要调教顺驯，才能乘坐，是为了保证天子安全。
English: The wheels are decorated with the shape of a crouching rhinoceros, the crotch is decorated with tiger skin, the horse's belly band is made of shark skin, and the rim is carved into the shape of a dragon, which is used to cultivate the majesty of the emperor. Horses that drive on the road must be trained to be obedient before they can ride, in order to ensure the safety of the emperor.

古文：孰知夫出死要节之所以养生也。
现代文：谁能知道，士人出生入死，邀立名节，正是为了养护他们的生命？
English: Who could have known that it was precisely to preserve the lives of the scholars that they were born and died, and that they were invited to establish a famous festival?

古文：孰知夫轻费用之所以养财也，孰知夫恭敬辞让之所以养安也，孰知夫礼义文理之所以养情也。
现代文：谁能知道，轻财好施，挥金如土，是为了聚集财富呢？谁知谦恭辞让、循循多礼，是为了养护平安？谁知道学习礼仪、仁义、文章、道理正是为了调养性情呢？
English: Who can know that spending money lavishly is to accumulate wealth? Who can know that being humble and courteous is to maintain peace? Who can know that studying etiquette, benevolence, literature, and reason is to cultivate one's disposition?

古文：人苟生之为见，若者必死；苟利之为见，若者必害；怠惰之为安，若者必危；情胜之为安，若者必灭。
现代文：人若一意苟且求生，就必定死亡；一意苟且图利，就必定受害；安于懈怠、懒惰的必危，固执情性的必亡。
English: If a man is bent on living, he is sure to die; if he is bent on gaining, he is sure to suffer; if he is content to be lazy, he is sure to perish; if he is obstinate, he is sure to perish.

古文：故圣人一之于礼义，则两得之矣；一之于情性，则两失之矣。
现代文：因此，圣人用礼仪和道义来规范一切，就能获生避死、近利远害、居安离危，事事得两全其美了。反之，若一概任情尽性，就会两者齐失。
English: Therefore, if a saint uses etiquette and morality to regulate everything, he will be able to avoid life and death, short-term gain and long-term harm, and stay safe and away from danger, and everything will be perfect. On the other hand, if everyone is indulgent, both will be lost.

古文：故儒者将使人两得之者也，墨者将使人两失之者也。是儒墨之分。
现代文：儒家的学说使人两全其美，墨家的学说使人两皆有失，这是儒墨两家的区别。
English: The teachings of Confucianism make people have the best of both worlds, while the teachings of Buddhism make people have the worst of both worlds. This is the difference between Confucianism and Buddhism.

古文：治辨之极也，强固之本也，威行之道也，功名之总也。
现代文：礼是圣人治理天下的最高准则，强国固家的根本，威力施行的最佳途径，人们成就功业声名的总体纲要。
English: Rites are the highest standard for saints to govern the world, the foundation of a strong country, the best way to implement power, and the overall outline for people to achieve fame.

古文：王公由之，所以一天下，臣诸侯也；弗由之，所以捐社稷也。
现代文：王公奉行它，可以统一天下，使诸侯臣服；不奉行就会捐弃社稷，家破国亡。
English: If a prince follows it, he can unify the country and make the princes submit; if he does not follow it, he will give up his social status and his family will be ruined.

古文：故坚革利兵不足以为胜，高城深池不足以为固，严令繁刑不足以为威。
现代文：所以，坚韧的甲胄和锋利的兵器，不足以获得胜利，高大的城墙、宽深的护城河，不能保证防守坚固，严苛的法令、繁苛的刑罚，不能保证树立威严。
English: Therefore, tough armor and sharp weapons are not enough to win, high walls and deep moats cannot ensure strong defense, and harsh laws and harsh punishments cannot ensure the establishment of dignity.

古文：由其道则行，不由其道则废。
现代文：按礼办事，就事事成功，不按礼办事，就诸事皆废。
English: If you act according to etiquette, everything will be successful. If you don't act according to etiquette, everything will be useless.

古文：楚人鲛革犀兕，所以为甲，坚如金石；宛之钜铁施，钻如蜂虿，轻利剽遬，卒如熛风。
现代文：楚人以鲛鱼革，犀牛、兕牛皮为衣甲，坚韧如同金石；又有宛城制造的大铁矛，钻刺时犀利如锋虿之尾；军队轻利飘速，士卒像疾风骤雨一样迅猛。
English: The people of Chu use eel skin, rhinoceros, and yakitori for their armor, which is as tough as gold; there is also a large iron spear made by Wancheng, which is as sharp as the tail of a sharp beak when drilled; the army is light and fast, and the soldiers are as swift as the wind and rain.

古文：然而兵殆于垂涉，唐昧死焉；庄蹻起，楚分而为四参。
现代文：然而，楚国的军队兵败于垂涉，将军唐昧战死在此地；庄蹻起兵，楚国一分为四。
English: However, the soldiers of the army of the State of Chu were defeated in the battle, and General Tangmai died in battle here; Zhuangzi raised an army, and the State of Chu was divided into four parts.

古文：是岂无坚革利兵哉？
现代文：这能说是由于没有坚甲利兵吗？
English: Can this be said to be due to the absence of armored soldiers?

古文：其所以统之者非其道故也。
现代文：这是统治手段没有遵循礼制的缘故。
English: This is due to the fact that there is no rule of etiquette.

古文：汝颍以为险，江汉以为池，阻之以邓林，缘之以方城。
现代文：楚国以汝水、颖水为险阻，以岷江、汉水为护城河，以邓林与中原相阻隔，以方城山为边境。
English: The State of Chu regards the Ru-shui and Ying-shui as dangerous obstacles, the Lijiang River and the Han-shui as moats, the Denglin and the Central Plains as barriers, and the Fangcheng Mountains as the border.

古文：然而秦师至鄢郢，举若振藁。
现代文：然而，秦国军队直攻到鄢郢，一路如摧枯拉朽。
English: However, the Qin army attacked directly to Handan, and the whole way was like being battered.

古文：是岂无固塞险阻哉？
现代文：这难道是因为没有坚固的要塞和险要的阻隘吗？
English: Is it because there are no strongholds and no critical choke points?

古文：其所以统之者非其道故也。
现代文：这是由于统治手段没有遵循礼治的缘故。
English: This is due to the fact that there is no rule of etiquette.

古文：纣剖比干，囚箕子，为炮格，刑杀无辜，时臣下懔然，莫必其命。
现代文：殷纣王剖比干之心，囚禁箕子，造炮烙刑具，用来残杀无辜的人，当时臣民懔然畏惧，生死不保。
English: The king of Yin and Yan cut the heart of the match, imprisoned the mule, made cannons and branded the torture tools, used to kill innocent people. At that time, the subjects were so afraid that they were not sure of life and death.

古文：然而周师至，而令不行乎下，不能用其民。是岂令不严，刑不陖哉？
现代文：周朝军队一到，纣王的命令无人奉行，百姓不为所用，这难道是号令不严、刑罚不峻吗？
English: As soon as the Zhou Dynasty's army arrived, no one carried out the order of the king of Qi, and the people were not used. Is this a lax order and a lax punishment?

古文：其所以统之者非其道故也。
现代文：这是由于统治没有礼治之道的缘故。
English: This is due to the fact that there is no rule of etiquette.

古文：古者之兵，戈矛弓矢而已，然而敌国不待试而诎。
现代文：古时的兵器，不过戈、矛、弓矢这几种罢了，然而，不待使用敌国就已经屈服。
English: The weapons of the ancients were nothing more than clubs, spears, and bows and arrows. However, if they were not used, the enemy country would have already surrendered.

古文：城郭不集，沟池不掘，固塞不树，机变不张，然而国晏然不畏外而固者，无他故焉，明道而均分之，时使而诚爱之，则下应之如景响。
现代文：城郊百姓不须聚集起来守城，城外也不须挖掘防守用的护城河，不须建立坚固的阨塞要地，不用兵机谋略，而国家平安，不畏外敌，坚固异常。没有其他原因，只不过是懂得礼义之道并且能公平地处理人际关系，役使有时，并且推诚相爱。所以，百姓听命，如影附形，如响附声。
English: The people on the outskirts of the city do not need to gather to defend the city, do not need to dig a moat for defense outside the city, do not need to build a strong foothold, do not need to use military tactics, and the country is safe, not afraid of foreign enemies, and is unusually strong. There is no other reason, but to understand the way of courtesy and justice and to be able to deal with interpersonal relationships fairly, to serve and sometimes, and to love each other sincerely. Therefore, the people obey orders, like a shadow attached to a shape, like a ring attached to a sound.

古文：有不由命者，然后俟之以刑，则民知罪矣。
现代文：间有不服从命令的，再用刑罚对待他，那么百姓就知道哪些是犯罪行为了。
English: If someone disobeys an order, punish him with a penalty, and then the people will know which actions are criminal.

古文：故刑一人而天下服。
现代文：所以，一人受刑，天下皆服。
English: Therefore, if one person is punished, the whole world will obey.

古文：罪人不尤其上，知罪之在己也。
现代文：犯罪的人对上级无怨无尤，因为他们知道错在自己。
English: People who commit crimes have no complaints about their superiors, because they know that the fault lies with themselves.

古文：是故刑罚省而威行如流，无他故焉，由其道故也。
现代文：因而，刑罚简省而威令推行无阻。没有其他原因，只因为遵循礼治之道的缘故。
English: Therefore, the reduction of punishments and the enforcement of the edict are unimpeded. There is no other reason, only for the sake of following the path of propriety.

古文：故由其道则行，不由其道则废。
现代文：所以，遵行礼义之道，万事能行；不遵此道，诸事皆废。
English: Therefore, if you follow the path of propriety and righteousness, all things are possible; if you do not follow this path, all things are useless.

古文：古者帝尧之治天下也，盖杀一人刑二人而天下治。
现代文：古时帝尧治理天下，杀一人、刑二人，天下就太平安定了。
English: In ancient times, emperors ruled the world. If they killed one person or punished two people, the world would be peaceful and stable.

古文：传曰： 威厉而不试，刑措而不用。 
现代文：书传说是： 威严虽然勐厉但是不可轻易采用，刑罚虽然设置但是不可轻易施行。 
English: The legend of the book is: Although the authority is fierce, it cannot be easily adopted, and although the punishment is set up, it cannot be easily enforced.

古文：天地者，生之本也；先祖者，类之本也；君师者，治之本也。
现代文：天地是生命的本原，先祖是宗族种类的本原，君主与业师是国家治理、安定的本原。
English: Heaven and earth are the origin of life, ancestors are the origin of the types of clans, and monarchs and scholars are the origin of national governance and stability.

古文：无天地恶生？
现代文：没有天地怎么会有生命？
English: How can there be life without heaven and earth?

古文：无先祖恶出？
现代文：没有先祖有怎么能有后代？
English: Without ancestors, how can there be descendants?

古文：无君师恶治？
现代文：无君主和业师，国家怎能得到治理？
English: How can a country be governed without a monarch and a guru?

古文：三者偏亡，则无安人。
现代文：三者缺一，则无人能安。
English: If one of the three is missing, no one can be safe.

古文：故礼，上事天，下事地，尊先祖而隆君师，是礼之三本也。
现代文：所以，礼上奉事天，下奉事地，尊敬先祖而隆遇恩师，是礼的三项根本问题。
English: Therefore, the three fundamental issues of the ritual are to serve God first, to serve the land second, and to respect the ancestors and meet the teachers.

古文：故王者天太祖，诸侯不敢怀，大夫士有常宗，所以辨贵贱。
现代文：所以，帝王得以太祖配天而祭之，诸侯不敢怀有这种想法，大夫和士也各自有支脉的先祖，这样是为了区别贵贱。
English: For this reason, emperors were able to offer sacrifices to match their ancestors with the heavens. Princes did not dare to entertain such an idea. Doctors and priests also had their own ancestors, in order to distinguish between high and low.

古文：贵贱治，得之本也。
现代文：贵贱有别，这样就得到礼的根本了。
English: There is a difference between high-ranking and low-ranking, and this is how you get the essence of etiquette.

古文：郊畴乎天子，社至乎诸侯，函及士大夫，所以辨尊者事尊，卑者事卑，宜钜者钜，宜小者小。
现代文：只有天子才有郊天、祭太祖的权力，自立社以祭地则由诸侯祭祀，下及士大夫各有定制，以此表现尊贵的人敬奉最贵的神灵，卑贱的人敬奉卑贱的神灵，适合做大事的人去做大事，适合做小事的人就去做小事。
English: Only the son of heaven has the power of suburb heaven and ancestor worship. The self-supporting shrines and sacrificial sites are sacrificed by the lords, and the lower ones and the scholars have their own custom, which shows that the noble people worship the most expensive gods, the lowly people worship the lowly gods, the people who are suitable for doing big things do big things, and the people who are suitable for doing small things do small things.

古文：故有天下者事七世，有一国者事五世，有五乘之地者事三世，有三乘之地者事二世，有特牲而食者不得立宗庙，所以辨积厚者流泽广，积薄者流泽狭也。
现代文：所以，统治天下的天子奉事七世宗庙，统治一国的诸侯奉事五世宗庙，拥有五乘土地的大夫可以供奉三代祖先的牌位，拥有三乘士地的士人可以供奉两代祖先的牌位，普通百姓不允许设立宗庙，这样是为了区别道德高深的人恩泽流布广阔，道德浅薄的人恩泽流布狭窄。
English: Therefore, the heavenly sons who rule the world serve the seventh generation ancestral temple, the princes who rule a country serve the fifth generation ancestral temple, the doctors who own the land of the Five Immortals can offer the card rank of the three generations of ancestors, and the scholars who own the land of the Three Immortals can offer the card rank of the two generations of ancestors. Ordinary people are not allowed to set up ancestral temples. This is to distinguish the people with high morals from the people with low morals.

古文：大飨上玄尊，俎上腥鱼，先大羹，贵食饮之本也。
现代文：大祭祀飨神，崇尚玄水，俎实崇尚腥鱼，羹以大羹为先，是饮食贵本原的意思。
English: Great sacrifices are made to the god of stew, the water of the spring is revered, the fish is revered, and the soup is made with the soup first, which is the original meaning of the meal.

古文：大飨上玄尊而用薄酒，食先黍稷而饭稻粱，祭哜先大羹而饱庶羞，贵本而亲用也。
现代文：大祭祀飨神虽崇尚玄酒，饮用的却是薄酒；食物崇尚黄米和小米，所饭还要加稻粱；祭尸先上大羹，饱腹的却是各种肴核杂饍，这是既重视饮食的本原又兼顾实际效用的意思。
English: Although the deities of the great sacrificial rites worship the black wine, they drink the thin wine; the food worships the yellow rice and the millet, and rice bran is added to the meal; the sacrificial corpse is first served with the large soup, but the full stomach is a mixture of various dishes. This is the meaning of not only paying attention to the origin of the diet but also taking into account the actual effect.

古文：贵本之谓文，亲用之谓理，两者合而成文，以归太一，是谓大隆。
现代文：重视本原是为了展现祭祀的形式，所以叫做文；兼顾实用是为了表达祭祀的理念，所以叫做理。两者相合还是文。只有再加入礼的初始状态那种质朴性，才算有文有质，达到礼最隆盛完美的阶段了，称为大隆。
English: The emphasis on the original is to show the form of the ritual, so it is called "Wen"; the consideration of practicality is to express the concept of the ritual, so it is called "Ri." The combination of the two is still "Wen." Only by adding the simplicity of the initial state of the ceremony can it be considered to have the quality of "Wen" and reach the most prosperous and perfect stage of the ceremony, called "Dalong."

古文：故尊之上玄尊也，俎之上腥鱼也，豆之先大羹，一也。
现代文：因此，樽酒尚玄酒，俎实尚腥鱼，羹尚大羹，道理是一样的。
English: Therefore, it is the same reason that barrel wine is Shang Xuan wine, solid fish is Shang Ying fish, and jelly is Shang Daojun.

古文：利爵弗啐也，成事俎弗尝也，三侑之弗食也，大昏之未废齐也，大庙之未内尸也，始绝之未小敛，一也。大路之素帱也，郊之麻絻，丧服之先散麻，一也。三年哭之不反也，《清庙》之歌一倡而三叹，县一钟尚拊膈，朱弦而通越，一也。
现代文：天子大路用素色帷盖，郊祭时服麻布冕，丧服最重散麻带，道理是相同的，都是礼尚质不尚文的意思。斩衰之丧，哭声哀痛，不重形式；《清庙》这首祭歌，一人唱，三人叹和，情致殷殷，溢于歌辞之外；乐钟在架，却有时悬而不击，拊击钟架以为节拍；大瑟练丝制成朱红色弦，音质清越，却于瑟底穿孔，使声音重浊，道理也都相同，是重情不重声，亦重本原的意思。
English: Tianzi avenue is covered with plain-colored curtains, the suburb festival dress is a linen crown, and the funeral dress is the heaviest loose linen belt. The reason is the same, all of which mean the quality of the eulogy is not the quality of the text. The death of decadence, the sorrowful cry, is not a heavy form; the "Qing Temple" hymn, one person singing, three people sighing, is affectionate and overflowing with words; the music clock is on the shelf, but sometimes it hangs and does not strike, and the hammering of the clock frame is considered to be the beat; the large silk string is made of vermilion

古文：凡礼始乎脱，成乎文，终乎税。
现代文：凡礼都始于简略疏脱，加上文彩，才算完成，文彩又不可过盛，终须加以取舍，以合实用。
English: All rituals begin with a simple distraction, and are completed only with the addition of literature. Literature should not be overflowing, and must eventually be discarded in order to be practical.

古文：故至备，情文俱尽；其次，情文代胜；其下，复情以归太一。
现代文：所以，完备之极的礼，是内在情感和外在形式全都具备的；次一等的是外在形式胜于内在情感，或者内在情感胜于外在形式，二者具其一；最下等的是内在情感完全归结为天地的本源。
English: Therefore, the most complete form of worship is that which has both internal emotion and external form; the next best is that the external form is superior to the internal emotion, or the internal emotion is superior to the external form, both of which are one; the lowest is that the internal emotion is completely reduced to the source of heaven and earth.

古文：天地以合，日月以明，四时以序，星辰以行，江河以流，万物以昌，好恶以节，喜怒以当。
现代文：天地根据礼仪之道相互协调，日月根据礼仪之道彰显光明，四季根据礼仪之道井然有序，星辰根据礼仪之道周行不殆，江河根据礼仪之道奔流不止，万物根据礼仪之道繁荣昌盛，好恶根据礼仪之道克制调节，喜怒根据礼仪之道处置恰当。
English: According to the etiquette, heaven and earth coordinate with each other, according to the etiquette, the sun and the moon shine brightly, according to the etiquette, the four seasons are well-ordered, according to the etiquette, the stars circulate, according to the etiquette, the rivers flow, according to the etiquette, everything prospers, according to the etiquette, likes and dislikes are restrained and adjusted, according to the etiquette, and anger and happiness are appropriately handled.

古文：以为下则顺，以为上则明。
现代文：礼仪治理臣下就会和顺，用礼仪规范君上就会英明。
English: If you use etiquette to govern your subjects, they will be well-behaved, and if you use etiquette to govern your superiors, they will be wise.

古文：太史公曰：至矣哉！
现代文：太史公说：完美极了！
English: Taishikong said, "It was perfect!"

古文：立隆以为极，而天下莫之能益损也。
现代文：树立隆盛完备的礼作为人道的最高准则，天下没有人能有所增损。
English: To establish a flourishing and complete culture as the highest standard of humanity, no one in the world can add or subtract.

古文：本末相顺，终始相应，至文有以辨，至察有以说。
现代文：它情文相符，首尾呼应，富于文彩而不繁缛、有节制，明察秋毫而不苛细、使人心悦服。
English: It matches the sentiment, echoes the beginning and the end, is rich in color but not cumbersome, has moderation, observes the autumn but not harsh, and makes people happy.

古文：天下从之者治，不从者乱；从之者安，不从者危。
现代文：天下人遵从就太平，不遵从就生祸乱；遵从者得安定，不遵从则危亡。
English: Those who obey will have peace, those who disobey will have chaos; those who obey will be stable, those who disobey will be in danger.

古文：小人不能则也。
现代文：平民百姓无法以此为法则。
English: Civilians cannot make this a law.

古文：礼之貌诚深矣，坚白同异之察，入焉而弱。
现代文：礼的本身实在深奥啊， 坚白 与 同异 理论的辨析入微，与它相比，就会丧败破灭。
English: The ritual itself is really profound, compared with the nuanced analysis of the theory of firmness and dissimilarity, it will be defeated and destroyed.

古文：其貌诚大矣，擅作典制褊陋之说，入焉而望。
现代文：礼本身实在太宏大了，那些擅自制作的典章制度，及狭隘、浅陋的理论，与它相比，就会自愧渺小，望尘莫及。
English: The ceremony itself is really too grand, and those arbitrarily made award systems, and narrow, shallow theories, compared to it, will be ashamed of themselves for being small and unreachable.

古文：其貌诚高矣，暴慢恣睢，轻俗以为高之属，入焉而队。
现代文：礼本身太高尚了，那些粗暴、傲慢、放纵、浅露而又轻俗自高之徒，与之相比，就会自坠形象，显露出浮薄来。
English: The etiquette itself is too noble, and those who are rude, arrogant, self-indulgent, shallow, and self-exalted, will fall from their own image and show their superficiality in comparison.

古文：故绳诚陈，则不可欺以曲直；衡诚悬，则不可欺以轻重；规矩诚错，则不可欺以方员；君子审礼，则不可欺以诈伪。
现代文：所以说，绳墨既设，就不能再以曲直相欺骗了；秤锤已悬，就不能再以轻重相欺骗了；圆规和角尺摆在那里了，就不能以方圆相欺骗了；君子精审于礼，人们就不能以狡诈虚伪相欺。
English: Therefore, when the rope and ink are set up, it is no longer possible to deceive with the curvature and straightness; when the scale and hammer are suspended, it is no longer possible to deceive with the weight and heaviness; when the compass and the protractor are placed there, it is no longer possible to deceive with the square and the circle; when a gentleman scrutinizes with courtesy, people cannot deceive with cunning and hypocrisy.

古文：故绳者，直之至也；衡者，平之至也；规矩者，方员之至也；礼者，人道之极也。
现代文：因为，绳墨是直的标准；秤锤是轻重的标准；圆规和角尺是方圆的标准；礼则是为人处事的最高标准。
English: Because, rope and ink are the standards for straightness; the scale and hammer are the standards for lightness and weight; the compass and the protractor are the standards for squareness; and etiquette is the highest standard for dealing with people.

古文：然而不法礼者不足礼，谓之无方之民；法礼足礼，谓之有方之士。
现代文：那些不守礼法的人不值得待之以礼，称之为不守法术之民；遵从礼仪的人才值得以礼相待，称为守法术之士。
English: Those who do not observe the etiquette are not worthy of being treated with courtesy and are called the people who do not observe magic; those who follow the etiquette are worthy of being treated with courtesy and are called the people who observe magic.

古文：礼之中，能思索，谓之能虑；能虑勿易，谓之能固。
现代文：能得礼之中道，不偏不倚，又能事事思索，不违情理，叫做勤于思考；能思考而又不变易礼法，叫做持之以恒。
English: To be able to be courteous in the middle, to be impartial, and to be able to think about everything, without violating reason, is called diligence in thinking; to be able to think and not change etiquette is called perseverance.

古文：能虑能固，加好之焉，圣矣。
现代文：既能思考又能坚持道义，加上对礼的无比喜好，那就是圣人了。
English: To be able to think and be moral at the same time, and to have a great liking for propriety, that is a saint.

古文：天者，高之极也；地者，下之极也；日月者，明之极也；无穷者，广大之极也；圣人者，道之极也。
现代文：天是高的极点，地是低下的极点，日月是明亮的极点，无究是广大的极点，圣人则是礼义之道的极点。
English: The sky is the high pole, the earth is the low pole, the sun and moon are the bright poles, and everything is the vast pole. The sage is the pole of the path of etiquette.

古文：以财物为用，以贵贱为文，以多少为异，以隆杀为要。
现代文：礼的应用表现在财物的使用上，文彩表现在贵贱的等级上，差异表现在礼节的繁简上，要领表现在礼遇的厚薄上。
English: The application of etiquette is reflected in the use of property, culture is reflected in the level of nobility, differences are reflected in the complexity of etiquette, and politeness is reflected in the thickness of courtesy.

古文：文貌繁，情欲省，礼之隆也；文貌省，情欲繁，礼之杀也；文貌情欲相为内外表里，并行而杂，礼之中流也。
现代文：文彩繁多而人情淡薄的，是过盛的礼；文彩不足而人情浓厚的，是简易之礼；文彩和人情互为表里，揉合适中，才是最合乎礼的表现。
English: If there is a lot of literature but little human feeling, it is a grand ceremony; if there is not enough literature but a lot of human feeling, it is a simple ceremony; if the literature and the human feeling are the same, it is the most appropriate performance.

古文：君子上致其隆，下尽其杀，而中处其中。
现代文：君子能上得过盛之礼的文彩，下得简易之礼的人情，又能以中礼做得恰到好处，缓急左右不失于礼。
English: A gentleman can achieve the grandeur of a grand eulogy, the humanity of a simple eulogy, and can do just right with a middle eulogy. It is proper to prioritize the right and the left.

古文：步骤驰骋广骛不外，是以君子之性守宫庭也。
现代文：所以说，君子的本性就是持守中庸之道，不偏激。
English: Therefore, the nature of a gentleman is to adhere to the middle way, not to be extreme.

古文：人域是域，士君子也。
现代文：能严格以礼义的范畴作为行动范畴的，是士君子。
English: It is the gentleman who can strictly take the scope of courtesy as the scope of action.

古文：外是，民也。
现代文：做事超出礼的界限的，是普通百姓。
English: It is the common people who do things beyond the bounds of propriety.

古文：于是中焉，房皇周浃，曲得其次序，圣人也。
现代文：在士君子和平民百姓之间，既不像士君子那样拘泥，也不像平民百姓那样不守礼范，而是能徘徊周旋，随事曲直而变化，总不失礼之次序的，便是圣人。
English: Between the scholar-gentlemen and the common people, it is not the scholar-gentlemen who are stiff-necked, nor the common people who do not observe the rules of etiquette. Rather, it is the sage who can wander around, change with the situation, and always follow the rules of etiquette.

古文：故厚者，礼之积也；大者，礼之广也；高者，礼之隆也；明者，礼之尽也。
现代文：所以，圣人道德深厚，是多行礼义，积累所致；恢弘博大，是礼义拓广的结果；道德高尚，是礼义隆盛原因；心智聪明，是事事尽礼的缘故。
English: Therefore, the saint's profound morality is the result of the accumulation of many acts of propriety and righteousness; the magnificence and vastness are the result of the expansion of propriety and righteousness; the high morality is the reason for the prosperity of propriety and righteousness; the cleverness of the mind is the reason for the propriety in everything.

