古文：朱衡，字士南，万安人。
现代文：朱衡，字土南，万安人。
English: Zhu Heng, Zhidunan, Wan'an people.

古文：嘉靖十一年进士。
现代文：嘉靖十一年的进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 11th year of Jiajing.

古文：历知尤溪、婺源，有治声。
现代文：历任尤溪、婺源知县，有治绩声誉。
English: Successive heads of Youxi and Shiyuan County have a reputation for outstanding performance.

古文：迁刑部主事，历郎中。
现代文：调任刑部主事，历任郎中。
English: He was transferred to the position of the head of the criminal justice department.

古文：出为福建提学副使，累官山东布政使。
现代文：外调担任福建提学副使，升至山东布政使。
English: He was transferred to Fujian to serve as vice-envoy for education, and was promoted to Shandong to serve as envoy for political affairs.

古文：三十九年，进右副都御史巡抚其地。
现代文：嘉靖三十九年升职为右副都御史，辖治山东。
English: In the 39th year of Jiajing, he was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital and governed Shandong.

古文：奏言： 比辽左告饥，暂弛登、莱商禁，转粟济之。
现代文：他上奏说： 近来辽东饥荒，暂时放松登、莱地区的商禁，转运粟去接济他们。
English: He said at the beginning of his speech: Recently, Liaodong has been suffering from famine, and the ban on trade in the areas of Dong and Lai has been temporarily relaxed, and millet has been transported to help them.

古文：猾商遂窃载他货，往来贩易，并开青州以西路。
现代文：狡猾的商人就偷偷运载其他商品，往来贩卖，并开拓青州以西的道路。
English: The cunning merchants smuggled other goods, traded back and forth, and opened up the road west of Qingzhou.

古文：海岛亡命，阴相构结，禁之便。 
现代文：逃命至海岛的人，与他们暗中勾结，应当禁止此事。 
English: Those who fled to the island to save their lives and colluded with them should be prohibited from doing so.

古文：从之。召为工部右侍郎。
现代文：皇帝听从了建议，召见他担任工部右侍郎。
English: The emperor listened to the suggestion and summoned him to serve as the right hand man of the Ministry of Works.

古文：四十四年，进南京刑部尚书。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年他升任南京刑部尚书。
English: In the 44th year of Jiajing, he was promoted to the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：其秋，河决沛县飞云桥，东注昭阳湖，运道淤塞百余里。
现代文：当年秋天，黄河在沛县飞云桥决堤，向东注入昭阳湖，漕运的河道淤塞了一百多里。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Feiyun Bridge in Pei County and flowed eastward into Zhaoyang Lake, silting up the river for more than a hundred miles.

古文：改衡工部尚书兼右副都御史，总理河漕。
现代文：朱衡被改任工部尚书兼右副都御史，总管治河运漕粮。
English: Zhu Heng was reassigned to the post of Vice-Minister of Works and Right Vice-Governor of the Capital, in charge of river transportation and grain distribution.

古文：衡驰至决口，旧渠已成陆。
现代文：朱衡骑快马赶往决口处，旧渠已经成为陆地。
English: Zhu Heng rode a fast horse to rush to the breach, the old canal has become land.

古文：而故都御史盛应期所开新河，自南阳以南东至夏村，又东南至留城，故址尚在。
现代文：但以前的御史盛应期所开凿的新河，从南阳以南向东至夏村，再向东南至留城，旧址尚在。
English: However, the old site of the new river excavated by the former imperial historian Sheng Ying, from the south of Nanyang to the east to Xia Cun, and then to the southeast to Lucheng, is still there.

古文：其地高，河决至昭阳湖止，不能复东，可以通运，乃定议开新河，筑堤吕孟湖以防溃决。
现代文：当地地势高，黄河决口泻至昭阳湖，不能再向东流，可以贯通漕运水道，于是决定开挖新河道，在吕孟湖筑堤以防溃决。
English: The local terrain is high, the Yellow River flows into Zhaoyang Lake at its mouth, and can no longer flow to the east, but can run through the canal, so it was decided to dig a new river channel and build a dike in Lumen Lake to prevent the river from breaking.

古文：河道都御史潘季驯以为浚旧渠便，议与衡不合。
现代文：河道都御史潘季驯认为疏浚旧渠方便些，意见与朱衡不合。
English: Pan Jiaru, the governor of the capital of Sichuan Province, believes that it is more convenient to dredge the old canal, but his opinion does not coincide with Zhu Heng.

古文：衡持益坚，引鲇鱼、薛沙诸水入新渠，筑马家桥堤以遏飞云桥决口，身自督工。
现代文：朱衡更加坚持自己的意见，引导鲇鱼、薛沙等河流的水至新渠，修筑马家桥堤以便遏制飞云桥的决口，亲自监督施工。
English: Zhu Heng insisted on his opinion even more, guiding the water of rivers such as the Eel River and Xuesha River to the new canal, building the Majia Bridge Embankment in order to contain the breach of the Feiyun Bridge, and personally supervising the construction.

古文：劾罢曹濮副使柴涞，重绳吏卒不用命者，浮议遂起。
现代文：弹劾并罢免了曹濮的副使柴涞，对不出力的官吏、兵卒从重惩治，于是议论纷纷。
English: He impeached and dismissed Cao Pi's vice-envoy, Chai Tong, and severely punished officials and soldiers who did not work hard, so there was a lot of discussion.

古文：明年，给事中郑钦劾衡虐民幸功，诏遣给事中何起鸣往勘，工垂竣矣。
现代文：第二年，给事中郑钦弹劾朱衡为贪功而虐待百姓，诏令给事中何起鸣前往核查，工程临近竣工。
English: In the second year, Zheng Qin impeached Zhu Heng for abuse of the people and abuse of power, and ordered him to go to the verification, and the project was near completion.

古文：及秋，河决马家桥，议者纷然谓功不可成。起鸣初主衡议，亦变其说，与给事中王元春、御史黄襄交章请罢衡。
现代文：等到秋天，黄河在马家桥决堤，议论的人纷纷说不能成功，何起鸣起初赞同朱衡的意见，现在也改变了观点，与给事中王元春、御史黄襄接连上奏请求罢免朱衡。
English: In the autumn, when the Yellow River broke through the dike at Majia Bridge, the people who discussed it said that it could not be successful. Many people initially agreed with Zhu Heng's opinion, but now they have changed their point of view. Wang Yuanchun and Gu Shi Huangxiang, who were involved in the matter, made a request to remove Zhu Heng.

古文：会新河已成，乃止。
现代文：遇上新河修成，议论才平息。
English: It was only with the arrival of Shinghe Shucheng that the debate was put to rest.

古文：河长一百九十四里。
现代文：新河长一百九十四里。
English: The Xinhe River is 194 miles long.

古文：漕艘由境山入，通行至南阳。
现代文：漕运的船只由境山入河，航行至南阳。
English: Rowing boats enter the river from Jingshan and sail to Nanyang.

古文：未几，季驯以忧去，诏衡兼理其事。
现代文：不久，潘季驯因父母丧事而离去，诏令朱衡兼管他的事务。
English: Soon after, Pan Jitai left due to the death of his parents, and ordered Zhu Heng to take charge of his affairs.

古文：隆庆元年，加太子少保。
现代文：隆庆元年他被加封为太子少保。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, he was given the additional title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：山水骤溢，决新河，坏漕艘数百。
现代文：山间的水骤然溢出，使新河决堤，损坏数百艘漕运的船只。
English: Water from the mountains suddenly overflowed, causing the Xinhe River to burst its banks and damaging hundreds of boats.

古文：给事中吴时来言： 新河受东、兖以南费、峄、邹、滕之水。
现代文：给事中吴时来说： 新河接纳东昌、兖州以南的费、峄、邹、滕等河水。
English: In the words of Wu Shiji: The Xinhe River receives water from the Fei, Min, Lu, Teng and other rivers south of Dongchang and Zhangzhou.

古文：以一堤捍群流，岂能不溃？
现代文：用一道堤防捍卫数条河流，岂能不决堤。
English: It is impossible to defend several rivers with a single dike without breaking the dike.

古文：宜分之以杀其势。 
现代文：应该分流以减小水势。 
English: Diversions should be put in place to reduce water levels.

古文：衡乃开支河四，泄其水入赤山湖。
现代文：朱衡就开挖了四条支流，将河水引入赤山湖。
English: Zhu Heng excavated four tributaries and introduced the river water into Lake Akayama.

古文：明年秋，召还部。
现代文：第二年秋天，他被召回工部。
English: In the autumn of the following year, he was recalled to the engineering department.

古文：又明年，衡上疏曰： 先臣宋礼浚治旧渠，测量水平，计济宁平地与徐州境山巅相准，北高南下，悬流三十丈。
现代文：第三年，朱衡上奏说： 死去的大臣宋礼疏浚整治旧渠测量水平高度，计算出济宁的平地与徐州的境山之巅相持平，北面高南面低，河流落差达二十丈。
English: In the third year, Zhu Heng reported: The deceased minister Song Li dredged and rectified the old canal, measured the level height, and calculated that the flat land of Jining was equal to the top of the mountains in Xuzhou, the north was high and the south was low, and the river had a drop of 20 meters.

古文：故鲁桥闸以南稍启立涸，舟行半月始达。
现代文：所以鲁桥闸稍稍开启，其南面就马上干涸，船行驶半个月才能抵达。
English: Therefore, the Luqiao lock is opened slightly, and the south side of it dries up immediately, and it takes half a month for the ship to arrive.

古文：东、兖之民增闸挑浅，苦力役者百六十年。
现代文：东昌、兖州的百姓增设闸门以抬高水位，一百六十年都出苦力服差役。
English: The people of Dongchang and Zhangzhou built additional sluice gates to raise the water level, and all the coolies were sent to forced labor for 160 years.

古文：属者改凿新渠，远避黄流，舍卑就高，地形平衍，诸闸不烦起闭，舟行日可百余里，夫役漫无事事。
现代文：近来改凿新渠，远远地避开黄河，舍低就高，地形平坦，各座闸门不必繁琐地开启与关闭，船一天可以航行一百多里，民夫、差役基本上无事可做。
English: Recently, new canals have been dug to avoid the Yellow River at a great distance. The height of the houses is high, the terrain is flat, and the gates do not have to be opened and closed in a complicated way. The ship can sail more than a hundred miles a day, and the policemen and dispatchers basically have nothing to do.

古文：近河道都御史翁大立奏请裁革，宜可听。 
现代文：最近河道都御史翁大立奏请裁减民夫，应该可以听从。 
English: Recently, the governor of the capital of Hebei Province, Weng Dada, made a request to reduce the number of civil servants, which should be heeded.

古文：于是汰闸官五，夫役六千余，以其僦直为修渠费。
现代文：因此淘汰了五名闸官，六千多余民夫和差役，用这些雇工的开支作为修渠的经费。
English: As a result, five lock keepers and more than six thousand civil servants and police officers were eliminated, and the expenses of these employees were used to finance the repair of the canal.

古文：四年秋，河决睢宁，起季驯总理。
现代文：隆庆四年秋天，黄河在睢宁决堤，启用潘季驯全权负责。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year of Longqing, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Suining, and Pan Ji Taming was fully responsible for the opening of the dam.

古文：明年冬，阅视河道给事中雒遵劾罢季驯，言廷臣可使，无出衡右者。
现代文：第二年冬天，巡视河道的给事中雒遵弹劾罢免了潘季驯，称可以出使的朝廷大臣，没有超过朱衡的人。
English: In the winter of the following year, during the inspection of the river, Zou Zong impeached and dismissed Pan Jitai, saying that there was no other imperial minister who could be dispatched than Zhu Heng.

古文：六年正月，诏兼左副都御史，经理河道。
现代文：六年正月诏令他兼任左副都御史，负责整治河道。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, he was also appointed to the post of deputy governor of the capital, responsible for the rectification of the river.

古文：穆宗崩，大学士高拱以山陵工请召衡。
现代文：穆宗逝世，大学士高拱以修山陵的工程的名义奏请召回朱衡。
English: After the death of Mu Zong, the university's senior scholar Gao Gong called for the recall of Zhu Heng in the name of the project to repair the mausoleum.

古文：会邳州工亦竣，衡遂还朝。
现代文：遇上邳州的工程也刚好完工，朱衡就返回了朝廷。
English: When the project in Zhangzhou was just completed, Zhu Heng returned to the imperial court.

古文：衡先后在部，禁止工作，裁抑浮费，所节省甚众。
现代文：朱衡先后在工部禁止无益工作，裁减多余的开支，节省的经费很多。
English: Zhu Heng has successively banned useless work in the Ministry of Industry and Trade, cut unnecessary expenses, and saved a lot of money.

古文：穆宗时，内府监局加征工料，滥用不訾，衡随时执奏。
现代文：穆宗时期，内府的监局加征工程的材料，滥开支不做估量，朱衡随时提出来奏呈皇帝。
English: During the reign of Emperor Muzong, the Inner Prefectural Supervision Bureau increased the collection of materials for the project. Excessive expenditure was not estimated, and Zhu Heng was ready to present it to the emperor.

古文：未几，诏南京织造太监李佑趋办袍缎千八百余匹，衡因言官孙枝、姚继可、严用和、骆问礼先后谏，再疏请，从之。
现代文：不久，诏令南京的织造太监李佑催办一千八百多匹袍缎，朱衡趁着言官孙枝、姚继可、严用和、骆问礼先后劝谏之机，再度上奏请求，皇帝依从了他。
English: Soon after, he ordered Li You, the weaving eunuch of Nanjing, to organize more than 1,800 robes. Zhu Heng took the opportunity to persuade Sun Zhi, Yao Jike, Yan Yiwu, and Luo Qili, the speaker, to re-submit the request, and the emperor obeyed him.

古文：帝切责太监崔敏，传令南京加造缎十余万匹。衡议停新造，但责岁额，得减新造三之二。
现代文：皇帝痛斥太监崔敏，传令南京增造十多万匹绸缎，朱衡建议停止新增的纺织额，只责成每年的定额，得以减少了三分之二的新增纺织额。
English: The emperor scolded the eunuch Cui Min and ordered Nanjing to increase the production of more than 100,000 silk cocoons. Zhu Heng proposed to stop the increase in textile volume and only impose an annual quota, which reduced the new textile volume by two-thirds.

古文：命造鳌山灯，计费三万余两，又命建光泰殿、瑞祥阁于长信门，衡皆奏止之。
现代文：皇帝命令建造鏊山灯，估计要耗费三万多两白银，又命令在长信门建造光泰殿、瑞祥阁，朱衡都上奏劝阻了。
English: The emperor ordered the construction of the Lushan Lantern, which was estimated to cost more than thirty thousand taels of silver. He also ordered the construction of the Guang Tai Hall and the Ruixiang Pavilion at the Changxin Gate. Zhu Heng was dissuaded.

古文：及神宗即位，首命停织造，而内臣不即奉诏，且请增织染所颜料。
现代文：等到神宗即位，首先就命令停止织造，但太监不马上奉行诏令，并且请求增添织染所的颜料。
English: When Shinso ascended the throne, he first ordered to stop the weaving, but the eunuch did not immediately comply with the edict, and requested to add the paint from the weaving and dyeing factory.

古文：衡奏争，皆得请。
现代文：朱衡上奏争辩，都请求成功了。
English: Zhu Heng made an argument, and all requests were successful.

古文：皇太后传谕发帑金修涿州碧霞元君庙。
现代文：皇太后传谕拨发金币在涿州修造碧霞元君庙。
English: The empress dowager issued an edict to allocate gold coins to build the Bixia Yuanjun Temple in Zhangzhou.

古文：衡复争，报闻。
现代文：朱衡又争辩，皇帝答复知道了。
English: Zhu Heng argued again, and the emperor knew the answer.

古文：衡性强直，遇事不挠，不为张居正所喜。
现代文：朱衡性格刚直，遇事不屈服，不被张居正所喜欢。
English: Zhu Heng has a straightforward personality, does not give in to adversity, and is not liked by Zhang Jizheng.

古文：万历二年，给事中林景旸劾衡刚愎。
现代文：万历二年，给事中林学弹劾朱衡刚愎自用。
English: In the second year of Wanli, Zhu Heng Gangyao was impeached by Lin Xue for his own use.

古文：志伊时已知九江府，亦谪知陈州。
现代文：朱衡再度上奏请求退休。诏令加封他为太子太保，乘驿车回乡。
English: Zhu Heng again appealed for retirement. The imperial edict added him as the prince's bodyguard, and he returned to his hometown by train.

古文：志伊，吴江人。进士，终广西右参政。历官有声。
现代文：当年夏天，大雨毁坏了昭陵的绫恩殿，追究督工官的罪，剥夺了他的太子太保头衔。
English: In the summer of that year, heavy rain destroyed the Zhaon Hall in Zhaoling, and the superintendent was investigated for the crime and stripped of his title of crown prince.

古文：潘季驯，字时良，乌程人。
现代文：他七十三岁去世。潘季驯，字时良，乌程人。
English: He died at the age of seventy-three. Pan Ji Tame, also known as Shi Liang, was from Ucheng.

古文：嘉靖二十九年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年的进士。
English: The 29th year of Jiajing.

古文：授九江推官。
现代文：授职为九江推官。
English: Awarded the post of Jiujiang magistrate.

古文：擢御史，巡抚广东。
现代文：升任御史，为广东巡按。
English: He was promoted to the post of Imperial Historian, and was appointed to the Guangdong Inspection.

古文：行均平里甲法，广人大便。
现代文：推行均平里甲法，广东的人觉得大为便利。
English: People in Guangdong find it very convenient to implement the equalization method.

古文：临代去，疏请饬后至者守其法，帝从之。
现代文：临到将离职时，他还上奏请求告诫后来的人遵守此法，皇帝依从了他。
English: When he was about to leave office, he also petitioned to admonish those who came after him to abide by this law, and the emperor obeyed him.

古文：进大理丞。
现代文：晋升为大理寺丞。
English: He was promoted to Daliji no jo.

古文：四十四年，由左少卿进右佥都御史，总理河道。
现代文：四十四年，他由左少卿晋升为右佥都御史，总管河道。
English: In 1944, he was promoted from Sashokyo (Minor Secretary of the Left) to Utsunomiya Miyoshi (Minor Secretary of the Right), and became the chief administrator of river channels.

古文：与朱衡共开新河，加右副都御史。
现代文：他与朱衡共同开挖新河，被加封为右副都御史。
English: He and Zhu Heng jointly excavated a new river, and was given the title of Right Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：隆庆四年，河决邳州、睢宁。
现代文：不久因奔父母的丧事而离职。隆庆四年，黄河在邳州和睢宁决堤。
English: Soon after, he left his job due to the death of his parents. In the fourth year of the Longqing, the Yellow River burst its banks in Luzhou and Lining.

古文：起故官，再理河道，塞决口。
现代文：他出任原职，再度负责河道，堵塞决口。
English: He took up his original post, again in charge of the river, blocking the outlet.

古文：明年，工竣，坐驱运船入新溜漂没多，为勘河给事中雒遵劾罢。
现代文：第二年，工程完成，因驱使漕运船只进入新河漂散沉没了很多而获罪，被勘河给事中雒遵弹劾而遭罢免。
English: In the second year, when the project was completed, he was found guilty of driving a rowing boat into the Xinhe River, causing it to drift and sink a lot. He was impeached and removed from his post by Guanhe Zongzhong.

古文：万历四年夏，再起官，巡抚江西。
现代文：万历四年夏天，他再次出任官职，担任江西巡抚。
English: In the summer of the 4th year of Wanli, he once again assumed an official position, serving as the governor of Jiangxi Province.

古文：明年冬，召为刑部右侍郎。
现代文：第二年冬天，被召为刑部右侍郎。
English: In the winter of the following year, he was called to serve as the Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：是时，河决崔镇，黄水北流，清河口淤淀，全淮南徙，高堰湖堤大坏，淮、扬、高邮、宝应间皆为巨浸。
现代文：当时，黄河在崔镇决口，滔滔黄水向北奔流，清河口淤塞，整个淮河河床南移，高堰的湖堤严重损坏，淮、扬、高邮、宝应地区都是一片汪洋。
English: At that time, the Yellow River was at the mouth of Cui Town, the torrent of yellow water was rushing northward, the mouth of the Qing River was silted up, the entire Huaihe River bed moved southward, the embankment of the high weir was seriously damaged, and the Huai, Yang, Gaoyou and Baoying regions were all a vast ocean.

古文：大学士张居正深以为忧。
现代文：大学士张居正很忧虑。
English: Zhang Juzheng, a university student, is worried.

古文：河漕尚书吴桂芳议复老黄河故道，而总河都御史傅希挚欲塞决口，束水归漕，两人议不合。
现代文：河漕尚书吴桂芳提议恢复先前的黄河故道，但是总河都御史傅希挚想堵塞决口，约束河水回归河槽，两个人的意见不合。
English: Wu Guifang, a river navigator, proposed to restore the old way of the Yellow River, but the chief river governor Fu Xi earnestly wanted to block the outlet and restrict the river water to return to the river basin. The two people disagreed.

古文：会桂芳卒，六年夏，命季驯以右都御史兼工部左侍郎代之。
现代文：遇上吴桂芳去世，六年的夏天，皇帝任命潘季驯任右都御史兼任工部左侍郎取代他。
English: When Wu Guifang died, in the summer of the sixth year, the emperor appointed Pan Ji to replace him as the governor of the right capital and also as the left attendant of the work department.

古文：季驯以故道久湮，虽浚复，其深广必不能如今河，议筑崔镇以塞决口，筑遥堤以防溃决。
现代文：潘季驯认为黄河故道长期废置，虽然再疏浚，它的深度和宽度必定不如现在的河道，提议在崔镇筑堤堵塞决口，筑长堤以防止溃决。
English: Pan Jitong believed that the old Yellow River channel had been abandoned for a long time. Although it was dredged again, its depth and width must be inferior to the current river channel. He proposed to build a dike in Cui Town to block the breach and build a long dike to prevent the breach.

古文：又： 淮清河浊，淮弱河强，河水一斗，沙居其六，伏秋则居其八，非极湍急，必至停滞。
现代文：又上奏： 淮河清澈黄河混浊，淮河水弱黄河水强，一斗黄河水，沙占十分之六，夏秋时期达到十分之八，如果不是很湍急，必然导致淤塞滞流。
English: And again: The Huaihe River is clear, the Yellow River is turbid, the Huaihe River is weak, the Yellow River is strong, one bucket of Yellow River water, sand accounts for six out of ten, and reaches eight out of ten in summer and autumn. If it is not very urgent, it will inevitably lead to silting and stagnant flow.

古文：当藉淮之清以刷河之浊，筑高堰束淮入清口，以敌河之强，使二水并流，则海口自浚。
现代文：应借淮河的清水冲刷黄河的浊水，在高堰筑堤约束淮河的水流入清口，使之与黄河的水势匹敌，两条河水合流，那么海口就自然疏浚了。
English: The clear water of the Huai River should be used to wash away the turbid water of the Yellow River, and the water of the Huai River should be constrained by building a dike at the high weir to flow into the clear mouth, so that it is comparable to the water potential of the Yellow River, and the two rivers converge, then the estuary will be dredged naturally.

古文：即桂芳所开草湾，亦可不复修治。 
现代文：就是吴桂芳所开辟的草湾也可以不再修治。 
English: Even Caowan, which was opened by Wu Guifang, can no longer be repaired.

古文：遂条上六事，诏如议。
现代文：他条陈六件事，诏令同意他的意见。
English: He listed six things, and the edict agreed with him.

古文：明年冬，两河工成。
现代文：第二年冬天，两条河的工程完工。
English: In the winter of the following year, the construction of the two rivers was completed.

古文：又明年春，加太子太保，进工部尚书兼左副都御史。
现代文：第三年春天，他被加封为太子太保，升任工部尚书兼左副都御史。
English: In the spring of the third year, he was given the additional title of Crown Prince and Protector of the Realm, and was promoted to the post of Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Works and Left Deputy Metropolitan Historian.

古文：季驯初至河上，历虞城、夏邑、商丘，相度地势。
现代文：潘季驯初次到黄河上游，视察虞城、夏邑、商丘，估量地势。
English: For the first time, Pan Jitong went to the upper reaches of the Yellow River to inspect Yucheng, Xiayi and Shangqiu, and assess the situation.

古文：旧黄河上流，自新集经赵家圈、萧县，出徐州小浮桥，极深广。
现代文：旧黄河的上游，从新集经过赵家圈、萧县，徐州小浮桥，水势极为深广。
English: In the upper reaches of the old Yellow River, from Xinji through Zhaojia Circle, Xiao County, Xuzhou Small Floating Bridge, the water potential is extremely deep and wide.

古文：自嘉靖中北徙，河身既浅，迁徙不常，曹、单、丰、沛常苦昏垫。上疏请复故河。
现代文：自从嘉靖中期黄河北移，河床变浅，迁移无常，曹、单、丰、沛地区人民常受淹没之苦，他上奏请求恢复旧河道。
English: Since the Yellow River moved north in the mid-Jiajing period, the riverbed has become shallow, and the migration is unstable. The people in Cao, Shan, Feng and Pei regions often suffer from flooding. He appealed for the restoration of the old river channel.

古文：给事中王道成以方筑崔镇高堰，役难并举。
现代文：给事中王道成认为刚在崔镇、高堰筑堤，很难同时兴工。
English: In the middle of the matter, Wang Daocheng thought that it was difficult to start construction at the same time as he had just built a dike in Cui Town and Gao Weir.

古文：河南抚按亦陈三难，乃止。
现代文：河南的抚按大臣也陈述三个困难，于是终止了此议。
English: Henan's Fuzhong minister also stated three difficulties, so the proposal was terminated.

古文：迁南京兵部尚书。
现代文：他调任南京兵部尚书。
English: He was transferred to the Nanjing Military Department.

古文：十一年正月，召改刑部。
现代文：万历十一年正月他改任刑部职务。
English: In the first month of the eleventh year of the lunar calendar, he was transferred to the position of the criminal department.

古文：季驯之再起也，以张居正援。
现代文：潘季驯的复出，是因为张居正的支持。
English: Pan Ji Tame's comeback is due to Zhang Juzheng's support.

古文：居正殁，家属尽幽系，子敬修自缢死。
现代文：张居正死后，家属全部被幽禁，儿子张敬修上吊自杀。
English: After Zhang Jizheng's death, all his family members were imprisoned, and his son Zhang Jingxiu hanged himself.

古文：季驯言： 居正母逾八旬，旦暮莫必其命，乞降特恩宥释。 
现代文：潘季驯劝谏： 张居正的母亲年过八十，早晚会去世，请求下诏以特别的恩惠宽恕她。 
English: Pan Ji Tame advised: Zhang Jizheng's mother is over eighty years old and will die sooner or later. Please pardon her with a special favor.

古文：又以治居正狱太急，宣言居正家属毙狱者已数十人。
现代文：又认为治张居正的罪太急迫了，宣称张居正的家属死于此案的已达数十人。
English: They also believe that Zhang Juzheng's crime is too urgent, claiming that dozens of Zhang Juzheng's family members have died in this case.

古文：先是，御史李植、江东之辈与大臣申时行、杨巍相讦。
现代文：在此之前，御史李植、江东等人与大臣申时行、杨巍相互攻击。
English: Prior to this, Mishi Li Zhi, Jiang Dong and others attacked each other with Minister Shin Shih-hong and Yang Hui.

古文：季驯力右时行、巍，痛诋言者，言者交怒。
现代文：潘季驯极力支持申时行、杨巍，痛斥言官，言官们很恼怒。
English: Pan Jiamei strongly supported Shen Shihong and Yang Jie, and scolded the speech officials. The speech officials were very angry.

古文：植遂劾季驯党庇居正，落职为民。
现代文：于是李植弹劾潘季驯与张居正结党相庇护，将他削职为民。
English: As a result, Li Zhi impeached Pan Jitai and protected Zhang Jizheng, the party secretary, and removed him from his post.

古文：十三年，御史李栋上疏讼曰： 隆庆间，河决崔镇，为运道梗。
现代文：万历十三年，御史李栋上奏替他鸣冤： 隆庆年间，黄河在崔镇决口，将漕运通道阻梗。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Wanli era, the imperial historian Li Dong gave a speech to express his grievances: During the Longqing era, the Yellow River broke through Cui Town, blocking the rowing channel.

古文：数年以来，民居既奠，河水安流，咸曰： 此潘尚书功也。 
现代文：多年来，百姓定居，黄河水安然流淌，人们都说： 这是潘尚书的功劳。 
English: Over the years, the people have settled down and the Yellow River has been flowing smoothly. People say: This is the merit of Pan Shangshu.

古文：昔先臣宋礼治会通河，至于今是赖，陛下允督臣万恭之请，予之谥荫。
现代文：过去已故大臣宋礼治理会通河，至今都受益，陛下应允了督臣万恭的请求，给予他谥号和荫庇。
English: In the past, the late Minister Song Li Zhi would go to Tonghe, and has benefited from it to this day. His Majesty granted the request of the Vice-Minister Wan Gong, giving him the nickname and shade.

古文：今季驯功不在礼下，乃当身存之日，使与编户齿，宁不隳诸臣任事之心，失朝廷报功之典哉！ 
现代文：现在潘季驯的功绩不在宋礼之下，却在身存之日，成为一般平民，难道这不损害大臣建功立业之心，损害朝廷酬报功勋的典制吗？ 
English: Now Pan Ji Tame's achievements are not under the Song Rite, but in the day of his existence, he has become an ordinary civilian. Does this not damage the minister's heart to build a career, and damage the imperial reward system?

古文：御史董子行亦言季驯罪轻责重。
现代文：御史董子行也称潘季驯的罪行轻处罚重。
English: Historian Dong Zi Xing also said that Pan Jitai's crime was punished severely.

古文：诏俱夺其俸。其后论荐者不已。
现代文：诏令将他们的俸禄全部剥夺了，此后举荐的人不断。
English: The imperial edict deprived them of their entire salary, and since then, people have been coming forward.

古文：十六年，给事中梅国楼复荐，遂起季驯右都御史，总督河道。
现代文：万历十六年，给事中梅国楼又举荐他。于是启用潘季驯任右都御史，全权督察河道。
English: In the 16th year of Wanli, he was recommended again by Mei Guolou, who was in the middle of the matter. Therefore, Pan Ji was appointed as the governor of the right capital and the full-power inspector of the river.

古文：自吴桂芳后，河漕皆总理，至是复设专官。
现代文：从吴桂芳之后，治河与漕运由一人总理，此时又设置专职官吏。
English: After Wu Guifang, river management and rowing transport were the responsibility of a single prime minister, at which time full-time officials were also set up.

古文：明年，黄水暴涨，冲入夏镇，坏田庐，居民多溺死。
现代文：第二年，黄河水暴涨，冲入夏镇，毁坏田园房屋，居民多被淹死。
English: The following year, the Yellow River surged, rushing into Xia Town, destroying rural houses and drowning many residents.

古文：季驯复筑塞之。
现代文：潘季驯又筑堤堵塞决口。
English: Pan Ji Tame also built a dike to block the breach.

古文：十九年冬，加太子太保、工部尚书兼右都御史。
现代文：十九年冬天，他被加封为太子太保、工部尚书兼右都御史。
English: In the winter of 1919, he was given the additional titles of Crown Prince and Imperial Protector, Imperial Secretary of the Ministry of Works, and Imperial Historian of the Right Capital.

古文：季驯凡四奉治河命，前后二十七年，习知地形险易。
现代文：潘季驯总计四次奉命治理黄河，前后达二十七年，熟习地形的险夷。
English: Pan Jitong was ordered to govern the Yellow River a total of four times, for a total of 27 years, and he became familiar with the perils of the terrain.

古文：增筑设防，置官建闸，下及木石桩埽，综理纤悉，积劳成病。
现代文：增筑堤防，设置专员，修建水闸，以至于木石舂埽，他都处理周详，因此积劳成疾。
English: He dealt with the construction of additional dikes, the establishment of commissioners, the construction of sluices, and even wooden and stone locks in great detail, so the accumulation of work became a disease.

古文：三疏乞休，不允。
现代文：多次上奏请求退休，皇帝不允许。
English: He repeatedly requested to retire, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：二十年，泗州大水，城中水三尺，患及祖陵。
现代文：万历二十年，泗州发大水，城中积水达三尺高，祸患到祖陵。
English: In the past 20 years, Zhangzhou has been flooded, and the water level in the city has reached three feet high. The disaster has reached the ancestral mausoleum.

古文：议者或欲开傅宁湖至六合入江，或欲浚周家桥入高、宝诸湖，或欲开寿州瓦埠河以分淮水上流，或欲弛张福堤以泄淮口。
现代文：议论者有的主张挖开傅宁湖从六合入江，有的主张疏浚周家桥注入高、宝诸湖，有的人主张开挖寿州的瓦埠河分流淮河上游的水，有的人主张开放张福堤由淮河排泄河水。
English: Some commentators advocated digging up the Fu Ning Lake from the Liuhe River, some advocated dredging the Zhou Jia Bridge to inject water into the Gao and Baozhu Lakes, some advocated digging up the Wabu River in Shuzhou to divert water from the upper reaches of the Huai River, and some advocated opening the Zhangfu Dike to discharge river water from the Huai River.

古文：起总督漕运，历南京户、兵二部尚书。召理戎政，以老被劾。
现代文：潘季驯称祖陵的王气不能轻易排泄，但是巡抚周肕、陈于陛，巡按高举称周家桥在祖陵之后百里之地，可以疏浚，意见不一，都给事中杨其休请求允许潘季驯离去。他回乡三年后去世，享年七十五岁。
English: The royal spirit that Pan Ji Tame called the ancestral mausoleum could not be easily excreted, but the inspectors Zhou Qi and Chen Yu Shi, who were on high alert, said that Zhou Jia Qiao was a hundred miles behind the ancestral mausoleum and could be dredged. Opinions differed, and Yang Qixiu asked for permission to leave Pan Ji Tame. He died three years after returning to his hometown, at the age of seventy-five.

古文：加太子少保致仕。王宗沐，字新甫，临海人。
现代文：王宗沐，字新甫，临海人。
English: Wang Zongmu, Zi Xinfu, Linhai people.

古文：嘉靖二十三年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十三年的进士。
English: In the 23rd year of Jiajing, he passed the entrance examination.

古文：授刑部主事。
现代文：授职为刑部主事。
English: He is now in charge of the criminal justice department.

古文：与同官李攀龙、王世贞辈，以诗文相友善。
现代文：与同僚李攀龙、王世贞等人，以诗词、文字相互结交友好。
English: With colleagues such as Li Panglong and Wang Shizhen, they made friends with each other through poetry and writing.

古文：宗沐尤习吏治。
现代文：王宗沐尤其通晓吏治。
English: Wang Zongmu was particularly adept at governing officials.

古文：历江西提学副使。
现代文：历任江西提学副使。
English: Successive deputy envoys of Jiangxi University of Technology.

古文：修白鹿洞书院，引诸生讲习其中。
现代文：修建白鹿洞书院，招引诸生在其中讲学研习。
English: He built the Baiju-dong Academy and invited all students to lecture and study there.

古文：三迁山西右布政使。
现代文：三次迁官后升任山西右布政使。
English: After being transferred three times, he was promoted to the post of Shanxi Ubu political envoy.

古文：所部岁祲，宗沐因入觐上疏曰： 山西列郡俱荒，太原尤甚。
现代文：当时山西连续灾荒，王宗沐趁上京觐见皇帝之机上奏说： 山西诸郡都受荒灾，太原尤其严重。
English: At that time, Shanxi was suffering from continuous disasters. Wang Zongmu took advantage of the opportunity of going to Beijing to see the emperor to report: All counties in Shanxi suffered from disasters, and Taiyuan was particularly serious.

古文：三年于兹，百余里不闻鸡声。
现代文：三年来，都是如此，一百多里听不见鸡鸣。
English: For the past three years, this has been the case. You can't hear a rooster crow for more than a hundred miles.

古文：父子夫妇互易一饱，命曰 人市 。
现代文：父子、夫妇彼此交换以吃饱一餐，称作 人市 。
English: Fathers and sons, couples exchange with each other to eat a full meal, known as the people's market.

古文：宗禄八十五万，累岁缺支，饥疫死者几二百人。
现代文：宗亲的八十五万石俸禄，多年欠缺，因饥饿、瘟疫而死亡的人达二百人。
English: My relative's 850,000 koku stipend was insufficient for many years, and up to 200 people died of starvation and plague.

古文：夫山西京师右掖，自故关出真定，自忻、代出紫荆，皆不过三日。
现代文：山西是京城的右掖。从故关至真定，从忻、代地区至紫荆，都不到三天的行程。
English: Shanxi is the right bank of the capital city. It takes less than three days to travel from Guoguan to Zhending, and from Handan and Dai regions to Bauhinia.

古文：宣、大之粮虽派各郡，而运本色者皆在太原。
现代文：宣、大地区的粮食虽然分派到了各郡，但是运送粮食的人全在太原。
English: Although the grain from Xuan and the greater region was distributed to the counties, the people who transported the grain were all in Taiyuan.

古文：饥民一聚，蹂践劫夺，岁供宣、大两镇六十七万饷，谁为之办？
现代文：饥民一旦聚集，蹂躏、践踏、劫夺，每年供给宣、大两镇六十七万两粮饷，谁替他们采办。
English: Once the starving people have gathered, they will ravage, trample and plunder. Every year, they will supply 670,000 taels of grain to Xuanwu and Dadu towns. Who will buy it for them?

古文：此可深念者一也。
现代文：这是一件深为忧念之事。
English: This is a matter of deep concern.

古文：四方奏水旱者以十分上，部议常裁而为三，所免不过存留者而已。
现代文：各地上奏的水旱灾害以十计，部里评议常常裁减至十分之三，免除的不过是各地应该留存的部分。
English: There are ten flood and drought disasters reported in various regions, and the ministerial review is often reduced to three-tenths, but only the parts that should be retained in various regions are exempted.

古文：今山西所谓存留者，二镇三关之输也。
现代文：现在山西存留的是供应的镇关的粮饷。
English: What is left in Shanxi now is the supply of grain stalks from Zhenguan.

古文：存留乃反急于起运，是山西终不蒙分毫之宽。
现代文：存留却反而比起运还急，因此山西最终没有享受丝毫的宽缓。
English: On the contrary, it was more urgent to remain than to leave, so Shanxi did not enjoy the slightest relaxation in the end.

古文：此可深念者二也。
现代文：这是第二件忧心的事。
English: That's the second worry.

古文：开疆万山之中，岩阻巉绝，太原民不得至泽、潞，安望就食他所？
现代文：在万山之中开拓疆域，峰岩阻隔，太原的百姓不能到达泽、潞，怎么能到其他地方寻饭吃。
English: People in Taiyuan can't go to Ze and Handan because of the mountain peaks and rocks. How can they go to other places to find food?

古文：独真定米稍可通。
现代文：唯独真定的米稍稍可以通济。
English: However, rice that is really firm can be softened a little.

古文：然背负车运，率二斗而致一斗，甫至寿阳，则价已三倍矣。
现代文：然而背负车运，大致两斗得到一斗，刚至寿阳，价钱就涨了三倍。
English: However, with the burden of car transport, roughly two buckets get one bucket, just to Shouyang, the price has tripled.

古文：是可深念者三也。
现代文：这是第三件忧心的事。
English: This is the third worry.

古文：饥民相聚为盗，招之不可，势必扑杀。
现代文：饥民聚众造反，招抚不了他们，必将进行捕杀。
English: Hungry people gather to rebel. If you can't appease them, you'll have to hunt them down and kill them.

古文：小则支库金，大则请内帑。
现代文：小则动用库存的经费，大则要请求调拨内府的资金。
English: The small ones will use the funds from the inventory, while the large ones will request the allocation of funds from within the prefecture.

古文：与其发帑以赏杀盗之人，孰若发帑使不为盗？
现代文：与其拨钱奖赏杀强盗的人，不如拨钱使他们不做强盗。
English: Instead of giving money to reward those who kill robbers, it is better to give money to prevent them from becoming robbers.

古文：此可深念者四也。
现代文：这是第四件忧心的事。
English: That's the fourth worry.

古文：近丘富往来诱惑，边民妄传募人耕田不取租税。
现代文：近来丘富进行诱惑，边地百姓谣传他募人耕田不征收租税。
English: Lately, Qiu Fu has been on a charm offensive, and the people in the outlying areas have been spreading rumors that he is recruiting people to farm the land without collecting taxes.

古文：愚民何知，急不暇择，长边八百余里，谁要之者？
现代文：愚昧的百姓知道什么，急迫间无暇选择，八百多里长的边关没有谁要挟他们。
English: What do the ignorant people know? They have no time to choose between pressing matters. No one is threatening them at the more than eight-hundred-mile-long border.

古文：彼诱而众，我逃而虚。
现代文：他们诱惑聚众，我方因逃亡而空虚。
English: They seduce the crowd, we flee empty-handed.

古文：此可深念者五也。 
现代文：这是第五件忧心的事。 
English: This is the fifth worry.

古文：因请缓征逋赋，留河东新增盐课以给宗禄。
现代文：他因而请求延缓征收拖欠的赋税，截留河东新增加的盐课供给宗族的俸禄。
English: He therefore requested a delay in the collection of the tax arrears and the withholding of the newly increased salt levy from Hedong to provide the clan with a salary.

古文：寻改广西左布政使，再补山东。
现代文：不久他改任广西左布政使，又调补山东。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the post of Guangxi Zuo Bu Political Envoy, and then to Shandong Province.

古文：隆庆五年，给事中李贵和请开胶莱河。
现代文：隆庆五年，给事中李贵和请求开挖胶莱河。
English: In the fifth year of the Longqing era, Li Guihe requested to excavate the Jiaolai River.

古文：宗沐以其功难成，不足济运，遗书中朝止之。
现代文：王宗沐认为此事难办，不足以振兴漕运，致函给朝廷劝阻此事。
English: Wang Zongmu thought that the matter was difficult and not enough to revitalize the rowing movement, and sent a letter to the imperial court to dissuade the matter.

古文：拜右副都御史，总督漕运兼巡抚凤阳，极陈运军之苦，请亟优恤。
现代文：他升任右副都御史，总管漕运，兼任凤阳巡抚，极力陈说运粮军士的困苦，请求即刻进行抚恤。
English: He was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital, the general manager of rowing transport, and concurrently the Fengyang inspector. He tried his best to explain the hardships of the grain transport sergeant and requested an immediate pension.

古文：又以河决无常，运者终梗，欲复海运，上疏曰： 自会通河开浚以来，海运不讲已久。
现代文：又因为黄河经常决堤，漕运通道终于被梗塞，他想恢复海运，上奏称： 自从会通河开通以来，已经很久没人提海运之事。
English: Also, because the Yellow River often bursts its banks, the rowing channel was finally blocked, and he wanted to resume shipping. He said: Since the opening of the Huitong River, no one has mentioned shipping for a long time.

古文：臣近官山东，尝条斯议。
现代文：我近来在山东任官，曾经逐条陈述此议。
English: I recently took office in Shandong Province, and I have stated this proposal one by one.

古文：巡抚都御史梁梦龙毅然试之，底绩无壅，而虑者辄苦风波。
现代文：巡抚都御史梁梦龙毅然尝试，无所阻滞，但是有顾虑者总是担心风浪危害。
English: The governor of the capital, Liang Menglong, is determined to try, and nothing is blocked, but those who have concerns are always worried about wind and wave damage.

古文：夫东南之海，天下众水之委也，茫渺无山，趋避靡所，近南水暖，蛟龙窟宅。
现代文：南海域，全国众多的河流汇注那里，渺茫一片没有山岛，连躲避风浪的地方也没有，越往南方海水温度越高，它是蛟龙的巢穴。
English: In the South China Sea, where the country's many rivers converge, there is no mountain or island, not even a place to escape the wind and waves. The further south you go, the higher the temperature of the seawater. It is the dragon's lair.

古文：故元人海运多惊，以其起自太仓、嘉定而北也。
现代文：所以元代的人对海运很惊骇，因而从太仓、嘉定向北航行。
English: Therefore, the people of the Yuan Dynasty were very shocked by the sea transport, so they sailed northward from Taicang and Jiading.

古文：若自淮安而东，引登、莱以泊天津，是谓北海，中多岛屿，可以避风。
现代文：如果从淮安向东，经过登、莱，停靠天津，此称为北海，其中岛屿很多，可以避风浪。
English: If you sail from Huai'an to the east, pass through Deng and Lai, and dock at Tianjin, this is called the North Sea. There are many islands in the North Sea, so you can avoid the wind and waves.

古文：又其地高而多石，蛟龙有往来而无窟宅。
现代文：又因为它的地势高多礁石，蛟龙出没却没有巢穴。
English: Also, because of its high terrain and many reefs, dragonflies come and go, but there are no nests.

古文：故登州有海市，以石气与水气相搏，映石而成，石气能达于水面，以石去水近故也。
现代文：所以登州有海市，由石气与水气相互搏击，映在石上就形成了，石气能够超出水面，因为石头离水近的缘故。
English: Therefore, there is a sea market in Danzhou. The stone gas and water gas fight each other and are reflected on the stone. The stone gas can go beyond the water surface because the stone is close to the water.

古文：北海之浅，是其明验。
现代文：北海较浅，就是明显的应验。
English: The North Sea is shallow, which is an obvious answer.

古文：可以佐运河之穷，计无便于此者。 
现代文：可以弥补运河的不足，没有比这更便利的事情。 
English: It can make up for the lack of a canal, and there is nothing more convenient than this.

古文：因条上便宜七事。
现代文：他趁势逐条上奏陈述了七件便利的事情。
English: He took advantage of the situation to recite seven convenient things one by one.

古文：明年三月遂运米十二万石自淮入海，五月抵天津。
现代文：第二年三月运送十二万石米由淮安入海，五月份抵达天津。
English: In March of the following year, it transported 120,000 koku of rice from Huai'an to the sea, arriving in Tianjin in May.

古文：叙功，与梦龙俱进秩，赐金币。
现代文：陈述功绩时，他与梁梦龙一起晋级，被赏赐金币。
English: In the merit presentation, he was promoted together with Liang Menglong and was awarded a gold coin.

古文：而南京给事中张焕言： 比闻八舟漂没，失米三千二百石。
现代文：但是南京给事中张焕称： 听说有八艘船漂走或沉没了，损失三千二百石米。
English: However, Zhang Huan said in Nanjing: I heard that eight ships had drifted away or sunk, with a loss of 3,200 koku.

古文：宗沐预计有此，私令人籴补。
现代文：王宗沐预计有此损失，私下派人买粮补充。
English: Anticipating this loss, Wang Zongmu privately sent someone to buy grain to supplement the supply.

古文：夫米可补，人命可补乎？
现代文：米可以补充，人命可以补充吗？
English: Can rice be replenished, can human lives be replenished?

古文：宗沐掩饰视听，非大臣谊。 
现代文：王宗沐掩饰视听，不合乎大臣的道义。 
English: Wang Zong's cover-up of the audio-visual is not in line with the minister's morals.

古文：宗沐疏辩求勘。
现代文：王宗沐上奏争辩，请求核查。
English: Wang Zong took up the argument and asked for verification.

古文：诏行前议，习海道以备缓急。
现代文：皇帝下诏施行先前的意见，熟习海运路径以防紧急之事。
English: The emperor issued an edict to implement the previous opinions and familiarize themselves with the shipping routes to prevent emergencies.

古文：未几，海运至即墨，扬飓风大作，覆七舟，都给事中贾三近、御史鲍希颜及山东巡抚傅希挚俱言不便，遂寝。
现代文：不久，海运船队抵达即墨，刮起飓风，七艘船翻沉。都给事中贾三近、御史鲍希颜以及山东巡抚傅希挚都称海运不便，因此就废置了。
English: Not long after, the sea transport fleet arrived in Zhimo, a hurricane blew up, and seven ships capsized. All of them were scrapped because Jia Sanqian, Gu Shi Bao Xiyan, and Shandong Inspector Fu Xiyi all said that sea transport was inconvenient.

古文：时万历元年也。
现代文：当时是万历元年。
English: It was the first year of Wanli.

古文：宗沐以徐、邳俗犷悍，多奸猾，滨海盐徒出没，六安、霍山矿贼窃发，奏设守将。
现代文：王宗沐认为徐、邳地区的民俗蛮横、凶悍，很奸诈、狡猾，沿海地区走私的盐贩出没，六安、霍山地区暗中盗矿的人很多，奏请设置守将。
English: Wang Zongmu thought that the folk customs of the Xu and Qian regions were rude, fierce, very treacherous and cunning, the salt traders who smuggled salt in the coastal regions haunted, and there were many people who secretly stole minerals in the Lu'an and Huoshan regions. He requested that guards be set up.

古文：又召豪侠巨室三百余人充义勇，责令捕盗，后多以功给冠带。
现代文：又召募豪侠富户的三百多人充当义勇兵，责令他们追捕盗贼，此后都按功授予官职。
English: He also called up more than 300 people from wealthy households to act as volunteers and ordered them to hunt down thieves. Since then, they have been awarded official posts according to their merits.

古文：迁南京刑部右侍郎，召改工部。
现代文：调任南京刑部右侍郎，改任工部职。
English: He was transferred to the post of the right-hand man of the Nanjing Criminal Investigation Department, and was reassigned to the post of the Engineering Department.

古文：寻进刑部左侍郎，奉敕阅视宣、大、山西诸镇边务。
现代文：不久又升任刑部左侍郎，奉旨巡视宣、大、山西各镇的边防事务。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of the Left Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, and was ordered to inspect the border defense affairs of the towns of Xuanwu, Dali and Shanxi.

古文：母丧归。
现代文：母亲去世后他回乡了。
English: After his mother's death, he returned home to be a filial son.

古文：累官江西左参政。
现代文：万历九年，他在京官考核中被罢免，不予进职。
English: In the ninth year of Wanli, he was dismissed in the evaluation of Beijing officials and was not promoted.

古文：予告归，久之卒。
现代文：在家闲居十多年后去世。
English: He died after more than a decade of idleness at home.

古文：徐贞明，字孺东，贵溪人。
现代文：被赠封为刑部尚书。天启初年，追授谥号为襄裕。徐贞明，字孺东，贵溪人。
English: He was awarded the title of Shoshu of the Department of Criminal Law. In the first year of Tianqi, he was posthumously awarded the honorary title of Xiangyu. Xu Zhenming, Zhaodong, Guixi people.

古文：父九思，见《循吏传》。
现代文：父亲徐九思，参见《循吏传》。
English: His father was Xu Jiusi, see the "Biographies of Officials."

古文：贞明举隆庆五年进士。
现代文：徐贞明考取了隆庆五年的进士。
English: Xu Zhenming was awarded the Longqing Five-year Achievement Award.

古文：知浙江山阴县，敏而有惠。
现代文：任浙江山阴县知县时明敏而有仁爱。
English: He was an astute and benevolent leader of Zhixian County, Shanyin County, Zhejiang Province.

古文：万历三年，征为工科给事中。
现代文：万历三年被征召为工科给事中。
English: He was called up to the engineering corps three years ago.

古文：会御史傅应祯获罪，贞明入狱调护，坐贬太平府知事。
现代文：遇上御史傅应祯被治罪，徐贞明到监狱中调护他，被降职为太平府的知事。
English: When Gu Shi Fu Ying Yao was convicted, Xu Zhenming went to the prison to look after him and was demoted to the post of governor of Taiping Prefecture.

古文：十三年，累迁尚宝司丞。
现代文：十三年升任为尚宝司丞。
English: Thirteen years later, he was promoted to Shang Bao Jie.

古文：初，贞明为给事中，上水利、军班二议，谓：
现代文：起初，徐贞明担任给事中，就水利和军班两事上奏，称：
English: At first, Xu Zhenming was in charge of reporting, reporting on water conservancy and military affairs, saying:

古文：神京雄据上游，兵食宜取之畿甸，今皆仰给东南。
现代文： 京城雄居上游，兵源和粮食都应取之于京郊，现在都仰仗东南地区供给。
English: The capital city is located in the upper reaches, and the supply of soldiers and grain should be obtained from the suburbs of Beijing. Now they all rely on the southeastern region for supply.

古文：岂西北古称富强地，不足以实廪而练卒乎？
现代文：难道西北地区古时的富强之地，不可以充实粮仓、训练兵卒吗？
English: Isn't it possible that the northwest region, a place of wealth and strength in ancient times, can't replenish grain silos and train soldiers?

古文：夫赋税所出，括民脂膏，而军船夫役之费，常以数石致一石，东南之力竭矣。
现代文：赋税出自于对民脂民膏的搜刮，但是军船船夫的费用，常达到开支数石才能运来一石，东南地区的财力枯竭。
English: The tax comes from the scrounging of the people's money, but the expenses of the military ship sailors often reach the expenditure of several stones to transport one stone, and the financial resources of the southeastern region are exhausted.

古文：又河流多变，运道多梗，窃有隐忧。
现代文：又因为河道多变，运输线多处阻梗，颇有隐隐忧虑。
English: In addition, because the river is changeable and the transportation line is blocked in many places, there are some concerns.

古文：闻陕西、河南故渠废堰，在在有之；山东诸泉，引之率可成田；而畿辅诸郡，或支河所经，或涧泉自出，皆足以资灌溉。
现代文：听说陕西、河南的旧渠废堰，处处存在；山东的诸眼泉水，引灌那里就可以成为农田；但是京郊的几个郡，有的有支流流经，有的当地就有山涧泉水涌出，都足以供给灌溉。
English: It is said that old canal waste weirs in Shaanxi and Henan exist everywhere; Zhuyan spring water in Shandong can be used to irrigate farmland; but several counties on the outskirts of Beijing, some of which have tributaries flowing through, and some of which have hawthorn spring water gushing out, are sufficient to supply irrigation.

古文：北人未习水利，惟苦水害，不知水害未除，正由水利未兴也。
现代文：北方人不熟谙水利，只是苦于水害，不知道水害也能清除，正是由于没有兴修水利设施。
English: People in the north are not familiar with water conservancy, but they suffer from water damage and do not know that water damage can also be removed, precisely because there is no construction of water conservancy facilities.

古文：盖水聚之则为害，散之则为利。
现代文：水聚积了就是祸害，分散了就是利事。
English: Accumulated water is a scourge, dispersed water is a blessing.

古文：今顺天、真定、河间诸郡，桑麻之区，半为沮洳，由上流十五河之水惟泄于猫儿一湾，欲其不泛滥而壅塞，势不能也。
现代文：现在顺天、真定、河间各郡，是桑麻的产区，一半为低湿地带，由于上游十五条河水只排泄到猫儿湾，想它们不堵塞泛滥，势必不可能行。
English: Now, Shuntian, Zhending and Hema counties are the production areas of mulberry, and half of them are low-humidity zones. Since the upstream fifteen rivers only discharge into the Cat Bay, it is impossible for them not to block the flooding.

古文：今诚于上流疏渠浚沟，引之灌田，以杀水势，下流多开支河，以泄横流，其淀之最下者，留以潴水，稍高者，皆如南人筑圩之制，则水利兴，水患亦除矣。
现代文：现在果真在上游疏通渠道和沟壑，引水灌溉农田，减弱水势，在下游多开挖支河，排泄横溢四方的水，最低洼的地方，留作储蓄水之用，稍高的地方，都像南方人筑堤坝，那么水利兴起，水患也解除了。
English: Now it is true that upstream channels and gullies are dredged, water is diverted to irrigate farmland, and the water potential is weakened. In the downstream, more tributaries are dredged to drain the overflowing water. The lowest depressions are reserved for water storage, and the slightly higher places are like southerners building dikes. Then water conservancy arose, and flooding was relieved.

古文：至于永平、滦州抵沧州、庆云，地皆萑苇，土实膏腴。
现代文： 至于从永平、滦州到沧州、庆云，满地芦苇，土地肥沃。
English: As for from Yongping and Zhangzhou to Cangzhou and Qingyun, the land is full of reeds and the land is fertile.

古文：元虞集欲于京东滨海地筑塘捍水以成稻田。
现代文：元代的虞集想在京城东面临海的地区筑塘蓄水以便开辟稻田。
English: Yu Ji of the Yuan Dynasty wanted to build a pond to store water in the area east of Beijing facing the sea in order to open up rice paddies.

古文：若仿集意，招徕南人，俾之耕艺，北起辽海，南滨青齐，皆良田也。
现代文：如果仿效虞集的意见，招揽南方人，让他们耕耘，北起辽、海，南临青、齐，都是良田。
English: If we follow Yu Ji's advice and invite people from the south to work, the fields from the north, including Liao and Hai, and from the south, including Linqing and Qi, will all be good.

古文：宜特简宪臣，假以事权，毋阻浮议，需以岁月，不取近功。
现代文：应该特派专员，给他权力，不必阻止非议，保障时间，不求近期功效。
English: A special commissioner should be sent to give him power, without having to prevent criticism, guarantee time, and without seeking short-term effectiveness.

古文：或抚穷民而给其牛种，或任富室而缓其征科，或选择健卒分建屯营，或招徕南人许其占籍。
现代文：或者抚恤穷困的百姓给他们提供耕牛和粮种，或者任用富户而延缓对他们征收赋税，或者选择强健的士卒分别建立屯营，或者招募南方人给予附籍用地的便利。
English: Or they will give subsidies to poor people and provide them with farm cattle and grain seeds, or appoint rich households and delay the collection of taxes on them, or choose strong soldiers to build camps separately, or recruit southerners to give them the convenience of land use.

古文：俟有成绩，次及河南、山东、陕西。
现代文：等待有了成绩，再推广到河南、山东、陕西。
English: After waiting for the results, it will be extended to Henan, Shandong and Shaanxi.

古文：庶东南转漕可减，西北储蓄常充，国计永无绌矣。
现代文：可望使东南地区的漕运减少，西北地区的储蓄常保充足，国家永远没有穷困之日。 
English: It is hoped that the rowing traffic in the southeast region will be reduced, the savings in the northwest region will always be sufficient, and the country will never be impoverished.

古文：其议军班则言：
现代文：他关于军班的奏章称：
English: He said of the drill:

古文：东南民素柔脆，莫任远戍。
现代文： 东南地区的百姓一向柔弱，不能担负边远地方的防卫。
English: The people in the southeastern region have always been weak and cannot shoulder the defense of remote areas.

古文：今数千里勾军，离其骨肉。
现代文：现在远隔数千里征兵，使他们骨肉分离。
English: Now, thousands of miles away, conscription is ripping them apart.

古文：而军壮出于户丁，帮解出于里甲，每军不下百金。
现代文：而军队的壮士出自户丁，帮助解运出自里甲，每支队伍的开支不下一百两黄金。
English: But the brave soldiers of the army came from Houting, and the help of the liberation movement came from Lijia, and the expenditure of each team was less than one hundred and two gold.

古文：而军非土著，志不久安，辄赂卫官求归。
现代文：而且不是土著兵的队伍，没有长期安定的志向，动辄贿赂卫所的长官请求回乡。
English: Moreover, it is not a team of indigenous soldiers, has no long-term stable aspirations, and often bribes the commander of the guard station to request to return to their hometown.

古文：卫官利其赂，且可以冒饷也，因而纵之。
现代文：卫所的长官从其贿赂中谋利，并且可以冒领粮饷，也就放纵他们。
English: The superintendent of the infirmary indulged them by profiting from their bribes and allowing them to steal grain.

古文：是困东南之民，而实无补于军政也。
现代文：这使东南地区的百姓困苦，却对军政没有实质性的帮助。
English: This made the people in the southeastern region suffer, but it did not substantially help the military and government.

古文：宜仿匠班例，军户应出军者，岁征其钱，而召募土著以足之便。
现代文：应该仿效匠班制，军户应当担负军务的，每年向他们征收银两，用以召募土著人求得足员的便利。 
English: We should follow the example of the journeyman system. If military households are to be responsible for military affairs, they should be levied two silver coins every year, which can be used to recruit indigenous people for the convenience of recruiting.

古文：事皆下所司。
现代文：事情都下达给有关部门。
English: The matter has been referred to the relevant authorities.

古文：兵部尚书谭纶言勾军之制不可废。
现代文：兵部尚书谭纶称征兵的制度不可偏废。
English: The head of the military department, Shangshu Tan, said that the conscription system should not be abolished.

古文：工部尚书郭朝宾则以水田劳民，请俟异日。
现代文：工部尚书郭朝宾则认为水田劳累百姓请求等待他日。
English: Shangshu Guo morning guest of the Ministry of Works thought that the people who were tired of paddy fields asked to wait for another day.

古文：事遂寝。
现代文：事情就都被搁置起来了。
English: So it was stopped.

古文：及贞明被谪，至潞河，终以前议可行，乃著《潞水客谈》以毕其说。
现代文：等到徐贞明被贬职，到了潞河，始终认为先前的提议可以实施，就撰写了《潞水客谈》完备他的观点。
English: By the time Xu Zhenming was demoted and arrived in Luohe, he always believed that the previous proposal could be implemented, and he wrote "Talks with People in Surabaya" to complete his point of view.

古文：其略曰：
现代文：它的大意是说：
English: The article said in summary:

古文：西北之地，旱则赤地千里，潦则洪流万顷，惟雨旸时若，庶乐岁无饥，此可常恃哉？
现代文： 西北地区遇上旱灾就赤地千里，遇上涝灾就万顷洪流，唯有晴雨适调才可能有常年的欢乐而没有饥饿之苦，这样能长久依赖吗？
English: In the northwest region, if there is a drought, there will be thousands of miles of red earth, and if there is a flood, there will be thousands of hectares of torrents. Only if the fine rain is adjusted can there be perennial joy without the suffering of hunger. Can this be relied on for a long time?

古文：惟水利兴而后旱潦有备，利一。
现代文：唯有兴修水利而后对旱涝有备，这是第一件利事。
English: The only way to be prepared for droughts and floods is to build water conservancy, which is the first benefit.

古文：中人治生，必有常稔之田，以国家之全盛，独待哺于东南，岂计之得哉？
现代文：中国人谋生必须有常年丰收的农田，将国家的全盛唯独寄托于东南地区的粮食供给，难道能够得成吗？
English: To make a living, Chinese people must have farmland with a good harvest all year round. Can the country's prosperity be entrusted solely to the grain supply in the southeastern region?

古文：水利兴则余粮栖亩皆仓庾之积，利二。
现代文：水利振兴了就有大量的余粮屯积仓库，这是第二件利事。
English: With the revitalization of water conservancy, there will be a large amount of surplus grain stored in warehouses. This is the second benefit.

古文：东南转输，其费数倍。
现代文：东南地区的转运费高于货值数倍。
English: The transshipment fee in the southeastern region is several times higher than the value of the goods.

古文：若西北有一石之入，则东南省数石之输，久则蠲租之诏可下，东南民力庶几稍苏，利三。
现代文：如果西北输送一石粮，那么东南的就减省数石粮食的输送，时间长了就颁布减免田租诏书，东南地区的民力或许稍稍得到休整，这是第三件利事。
English: If the northwest transports one stone of grain, then the southeast will reduce the transportation of several stones of grain. If the time is long, the land rent reduction and exemption decree will be issued. The people's power in the southeast may be slightly adjusted. This is the third advantage.

古文：西北无沟洫，故河水横流，而民居多没。
现代文：西北地区没有沟壑，所以河水横流，百姓的房屋大都淹没了。
English: There is no gully in the northwestern region, so the river flows sideways, and most of the people's houses are flooded.

古文：修复水田，则可分河流，杀水患，利四。
现代文：修复水田就可以分散河水，减少水患，这是第四件利事。
English: Repairing paddy fields can disperse river water and reduce flooding, which is the fourth benefit.

古文：西北地平旷，寇骑得以长驱。
现代文：西北地区地势平坦、开阔。放骑可以长驱直入。
English: The terrain in the northwestern region is flat and open, and horseback riding is allowed at long distances.

古文：若沟洫尽举，则田野皆金汤，利五。
现代文：如果全部开挖了沟渠，那么田野就全是金汤，这是第五件利事。
English: If all the ditches are dug, then the fields will be full of gold, which is the fifth advantage.

古文：游民轻去乡土，易于为乱。
现代文：游民轻易离开乡土，容易发生骚乱。
English: It is easy for vagrants to leave the countryside, and it is easy for riots to occur.

古文：水利兴则业农者依田里，而游民有所归，利六。
现代文：兴建了水利就使务农的人依附田亩乡里，并且使一些游民回归，这是第六件利事。
English: The sixth benefit is that the construction of water conservancy has made the farmers dependent on the farmland and made some wanderers return.

古文：招南人以耕西北之田，则民均而田亦均，利七。
现代文：招募南方的人耕种西北的田地，那么民力均衡，田亩也均衡。
English: If people in the south are recruited to cultivate fields in the northwest, then the people's power will be balanced, and the acres will be balanced.

古文：东南多漏役之民，西北罹重徭之苦，以南赋繁而役减，北赋省而徭重也。
现代文：这是第七件利事。东南地区逃避劳役的百姓很多，西北地区却深受苛重徭役之苦，因为南方的赋税繁多而徭役减少了，北方的赋税减少了而徭役加重了。
English: This is the seventh benefit. In the southeastern region, there are many people escaping from labor service, but in the northwest region, they are suffering from the hardships of forced labor. Because of the large amount of taxes in the south, the number of forced laborers has decreased. In the north, the number of forced laborers has increased due to the reduction of taxes.

古文：使田垦而民聚，则赋增而北徭可减，利八。
现代文：如果垦田聚民，那么赋税增加了，北方的徭役就可以减少，这是第八件利事。
English: If there are more people in the rice paddies, the tax will increase, and the laborers in the north can be reduced. This is the eighth benefit.

古文：沿边诸镇有积贮，转输不烦，利九。
现代文：沿着边关的各镇都有积蓄，转运不麻烦，这是第九件利事。
English: The towns along the border have savings, and transportation is not troublesome. This is the ninth advantage.

古文：天下浮户依富家为佃客者何限，募之为农而简之为兵，屯政无不举矣，利十。
现代文：依附富户做佃客的浮户有无数，召募他们务农，选拔他们当兵，屯防的事没有不兴办的，这是第十件利事。
English: There are countless floating households that rely on rich households as brokers. They can be recruited to work in agriculture, and they can be selected to serve as soldiers. There is nothing that can be done without setting up a garrison. This is the tenth advantage.

古文：塞上之卒，土著者少。
现代文：边塞上的兵卒，土著人较少。
English: There are fewer indigenous soldiers on the frontier fortress.

古文：屯政举则兵自足，可以省远募之费，苏班戍之劳，停摄勾之苦，利十一。
现代文：兴起屯防则兵源自然充足，可以节省到远方召募的费用，减少换防的劳苦，停止勾捉军丁的苦楚，这是第十一件利事。
English: With the rise of the garrison, the supply of soldiers is naturally sufficient, which can save the cost of recruiting from far away, reduce the labor of changing fortifications, and stop the pain of catching soldiers. This is the eleventh advantage.

古文：宗禄浩繁，势将难继。
现代文：宗族的俸禄浩繁，势必难以继续。
English: It is bound to be difficult to continue as the clan's stipend is extensive.

古文：今自中尉以下，量禄之田，使自食其土，为长子孙计，则宗禄可减，利十二。
现代文：现在从中尉以下依照俸禄授田，使他们在自己的禄田上自食其力，为子孙做长远考虑，可以减免宗族的俸禄，这是第十二件利事。
English: Now, the lieutenant and below are given land in accordance with the salary, so that they can make their own efforts on their own land, and make long-term considerations for their children and grandchildren, and can reduce or waive the family's salary, which is the twelfth benefit.

古文：修复水利，则仿古井田，可限民名田。
现代文：修复水利，仿效古时的井田制，可以限制百姓占田。
English: The restoration of water conservancy, following the example of the ancient well field system, can limit the people's occupation of fields.

古文：而自昔养民之政渐可举行，利十三。
现代文：而且自古的养民政策渐渐可以施行，这是第十三件利事。
English: Moreover, the ancient policy of supporting the people can gradually be implemented, which is the thirteenth benefit.

古文：民与地均，可仿古比闾族党之制，而教化渐兴，风俗自美，利十四也。
现代文：百姓与田亩分配均衡，可以仿效古时邻里族党的制度，逐渐兴起教化，风俗自然美好，这是第十四件利事。 
English: The distribution of the people and farmland is balanced, and the ancient neighborhood party system can be emulated, and enlightenment will gradually emerge, and the customs will naturally be beautiful. This is the fourteenth advantage.

古文：谭纶见而美之曰： 我历塞上久，知其必可行也。 
现代文：潭纶读后赞美： 我在边塞任职很久，知道它必然可以推行。 
English: Praise after reading: I have been working in the border town for a long time and know that it can definitely be implemented.

古文：已而顺天巡抚张国彦、副使顾养谦行之蓟州、永平、丰润、玉田，皆有效。
现代文：不久顺天巡抚张国彦、副使顾养谦在蓟州、永平、丰润、玉田推行此法，都有效果。
English: Soon after, Shuntian Governor Zhang Guohan and Vice-Envoy Gu Yangqian took the initiative to implement this law in Zhangzhou, Yongping, Fengrun and Tamada, all of which have been effective.

古文：及是贞明还朝，御史苏瓒、徐待力言其说可行，而给事中王敬民又特疏论荐，帝乃进贞明少卿，赐之敕，令往会抚按诸臣勘议。
现代文：等到徐贞明返回朝廷，御史苏瓒、徐待极力称道此法可以推行，而且给事中王敬民又特意上奏评论与举荐，神宗才晋升徐贞明为少卿，赏赐他敕令，命令他与抚按大臣们核查、商议。
English: When Xu Zhenming returned to the imperial court, the imperial advisors Su Shi and Xu Zhitong strongly praised that this law could be implemented, and in the middle of the matter, Wang Jingmin also made a special comment and recommendation. It was only then that Shen Zong promoted Xu Zhenming to Shaoqing, awarded him the imperial edict, and ordered him to check and discuss with the Fuzhou ministers.

古文：时瓒方奉命巡关，复献议曰： 治水与垦田相济，未有水不治而田可垦者。
现代文：当时苏瓒刚刚奉命巡视边关，又献计说： 治水与垦田相互协调，没有不治好水却可以开垦田亩的。
English: At that time, Su Qian had just been ordered to inspect the border, and he proposed a plan: water control and reclamation should be coordinated with each other. There is no incurable water, but it is possible to reclaim mu of reclamation.

古文：畿辅为患之水莫如卢沟、滹沱二河。
现代文：京郊最忧患的河流是卢沟、滹沱两条河流。
English: The most troubled rivers in the suburbs of Kyoto are the Lugou River and the Zou River.

古文：卢沟发源于桑乾，滹沱发源于泰戏，源远流长。
现代文：卢沟发源于桑干河，滹沱发源于泰戏河，源远流长。
English: Lugou originates from the Sanggan River and bursts from the Taijiao River. It has a long history.

古文：又合深、易、濡、泡、沙、滋诸水，散入各淀，而泉渠溪港悉注其中。
现代文：又汇聚了深、易、濡、泡、沙、滋各条河水，散布各淀，泉渠溪流都注入其中。
English: In addition, the deep, easy, wet, frothy, sandy, and turbid rivers and streams have been gathered together, the lakes have been dispersed, and the spring canals and streams have been injected into them.

古文：以故高桥、白洋诸淀，大者广围一二百里，小亦四五十里。
现代文：所以高桥、白洋等淀，大的方圆一二百里，小的也有四五十里。
English: That's why the largest lakes, such as Takahashi and Shiroyo, have a circumference of 1,200 miles, while smaller ones have a circumference of 450 miles.

古文：每当夏秋淫潦，膏腴变为泻卤，菽麦化为萑苇，甚可惜也。
现代文：每当夏秋受涝积，肥沃的农田变成咸卤地，菽麦变成芦苇，很可惜呀。
English: It's a pity that whenever summer and autumn are affected by hoarding, fertile farmland turns into salty brine, and buckwheat turns into asparagus.

古文：今治水之策有三：浚河以决水之壅，疏渠以杀淀之势，撤曲防以均民之利而已。 
现代文：现在治水的办法有三条：疏浚河道排除水的堵塞，疏通渠道减少各淀的水势，撤除弯曲的堤防使百姓都能受益。 
English: At present, there are three methods of water control: dredging the river to eliminate water blockage, dredging channels to reduce the water potential of each reservoir, and removing curved dikes so that the people can benefit.

古文：帝并下贞明。
现代文：皇帝将奏章一起下达给徐贞明。
English: The emperor also issued the imperial rescript to Xu Zhenming.

古文：贞明乃躬历京东州县，相原隰，度土宜，周览水泉分合，条列事宜以上。
现代文：徐贞明亲自到京东的州县，审察高原和低地，揣度土壤的适宜情况，详细巡视河水的分合态势，上奏逐条陈述事宜。
English: Xu Zhenming personally went to the prefectures and counties of Jingdong to inspect the plateaus and lowlands, estimate the suitable conditions of the soil, inspect the situation of the confluence of rivers in detail, and report the matters one by one.

古文：户部尚书毕锵等力赞之，因采贞明疏，议为六事：请郡县有司以垦田勤惰为殿最，听贞明举劾；地宜稻者以渐劝率，宜黍宜粟者如故，不遽责其成；召募南人，给衣食农具，俾以一教十；能垦田百亩以上，即为世业，子弟得寄籍入学，其卓有明效者，仿古孝弟力田科，量授乡遂都鄙之长；垦荒无力者，贷以谷，秋成还官，旱潦则免；郡县民壮，役止三月，使疏河芟草，而垦田则募专工。
现代文：户部尚书毕锵等人极力赞助他，采用徐贞明的奏疏，建议着手六件事：请按郡县有司开垦田亩的勤懒情况列出前后次序听凭徐贞明举荐、弹劾；适宜种稻的地方渐渐劝民众种稻，适宜种黍、粟的地方依旧，不急速责令他们完成；召募南方人，提供衣食农具，使他们以一教十；能开垦百亩以上的人，就可以世代以此为业，子弟能够寄托户籍入学，其中卓有成效的人，仿效古时对孝顺父母、敬爱兄长积极耕作的人的奖励办法，根据情况授予他们为乡村的首领；无力垦荒的人，贷给他们谷物，秋收后还给官府，遇上旱涝灾就免还；郡县的壮丁，只服三个月的劳役，派他们疏浚河道，清除杂草。而开垦农田则召募专门的人手。
English: Shangshu Bi and others in the household department tried their best to sponsor him, using Xu Zhenming's syllabus to suggest six things to start with: please list the diligence of the county and county magistrates to open mu of rice fields according to the order of precedence, and listen to Xu Zhenming's recommendation and impeachment; gradually advise the people to grow rice in suitable places, and continue to grow millet and poppy in suitable places, and do not quickly order them to complete; recruit southerners and provide them with clothing, food and farm tools, so that they can learn ten things at a time; people who can cultivate more than 100 mu can do this for generations

古文：帝悉从之。
现代文：神宗全部同意他的意见。
English: All the emperors agreed.

古文：其年九月，遂命贞明兼监察御史领垦田使，有司挠者劾治。
现代文：当年九月就命令徐贞明担当监察御史兼任垦田使，对阻挠的有关部门弹劾、惩治。
English: In September of that year, he ordered Xu Zhenming, who was in charge of supervising the imperial history and also served as a field marshal, to impeach and punish the relevant departments for obstruction.

古文：贞明先诣永平，募南人为倡。
现代文：徐贞明先到永平，召募南方人进行倡导。
English: Xu Zhenming went to Yongping first to recruit southerners for advocacy.

古文：至明年二月，已垦至三万九千余亩。
现代文：到了第二年二月，已经开垦三万九千多亩田。
English: By February of the following year, more than 39,000 mu of land had been reclaimed.

古文：又遍历诸河，穷源竟委，将大行疏浚。
现代文：他又遍巡各条河流，探究源流，全部分派职责，准备大举疏浚。
English: He also visited all the rivers, explored the headwaters, assigned responsibilities to all of them, and prepared for extensive dredging.

古文：而奄人、勋戚之占闲田为业者，恐水田兴而己失其利也，争言不便，为蜚语闻于帝。
现代文：但是太监、外戚中占据闲田的人，担心兴修了水田使自己失去了利益，争相称此举不好。在皇帝面前进行无根据地诽谤。
English: However, the eunuchs and relatives of those who occupied idle fields, fearing that the construction of paddy fields would cause them to lose profits, argued that this was not a good move, and slandered the emperor without any basis.

古文：帝惑之。
现代文：皇帝对此疑惑。
English: The emperor was puzzled.

古文：三月，阁臣申时行等以风霾陈时政，力言其利。
现代文：三月，内阁大臣申时行等人借风沙的情况陈述时政，极力称赞此举的好处。
English: In March, Cabinet Minister Shin Shigyo and others took advantage of the wind and sand to present the current political situation and praised the benefits of this move.

古文：帝意终不释。
现代文：神宗最终未消除疑虑。
English: In the end, Shinso did not dispel the doubts.

古文：御史王之栋，畿辅人也，遂言水田必不可行，且陈开滹沱不便者十二。
现代文：御史王之栋，是京郊的人，称水田必然不可以推行，并且陈述了开凿滹沱河的十二条不便。
English: Wang Zhidong, a man from the suburbs of Beijing, said that rice paddies must not be promoted, and stated the twelve inconveniences of excavating the Fenhe River.

古文：帝乃召见时行等，谕令停役。
现代文：皇帝召见申时行等人，下令停止工程。
English: The emperor summoned Shin Shigyo and others and ordered to stop the project.

古文：时行等请罢开河，专事垦田。
现代文：申时行等人请求罢除开河之举，专门从事垦田。
English: Shen Shigang and others requested the removal of the move to open the river, specializing in reclamation.

古文：已，工部议之栋疏，亦如阁臣言。
现代文：此后，工部讨论王之栋的奏疏，也同内阁大臣的观点一致。
English: After that, the Ministry of Industry and Trade discussed Wang Zhidong's report, which was also in line with the cabinet minister's view.

古文：帝卒罢之，而欲追罪建议者，用阁臣言而止。
现代文：皇帝最后罢除了修河垦田事务，并想追究建议人的罪责，因为内阁大臣的劝谏才终止。
English: The emperor finally dismissed the matter of repairing rivers and ploughing fields, and wanted to prosecute the proponents, because the cabinet minister's persuasion only ended.

古文：贞明乃还故官。
现代文：于是徐贞明回任以前官职。
English: As a result, Xu Zhenming returned to his previous post.

古文：寻乞假归。
现代文：不久请假回乡。
English: He will soon take a leave of absence to return to his hometown.

古文：十八年卒。
现代文：万历十八年去世。
English: In the seventh year of Atsuhiro's reign, he retired as a scholar of the House of Councillors.

古文：贞明识敏才练，慨然有经世志。
现代文：徐贞明才思敏捷，办事干练，颇有治理世务的抱负。
English: Xu Zhenming is a quick thinker, capable of doing things, and has quite an ambition to manage the affairs of the world.

古文：京东水田实百世利，事初兴而即为浮议所挠，论者惜之。
现代文：京东的水田实为百世的好事，事情刚刚兴起就被虚浮的议论阻挠，舆论的人对此都很惋惜。
English: JD.com's rice paddies are truly a once-in-a-lifetime good deed. However, as soon as the matter arose, it was obstructed by vain discussions. People in the public opinion are very sorry about this.

古文：初议时，吴人伍袁萃谓贞明曰： 民可使由，不可使知。
现代文：刚讨论的时候，吴地人伍袁萃对徐贞明说： 可以让百姓跟从，不可以让他们明了。
English: At the beginning of the discussion, Wu Yuanqiu, a native of Wu, said to Xu Zhenming: You can make the people follow you, but you can't make them understand.

古文：君所言，得无太尽耶？ 
现代文：你的话，太说得详尽了。 
English: Your words are too detailed.

古文：贞明问故。袁萃曰： 北人惧东南漕储派于西北，烦言必起矣。 
现代文：徐贞明询问原因，伍袁萃讲： 北方人害怕东南地区的漕运负担加派到西北地区，厌烦的话必然会出现。 
English: When Xu Zhenming inquired about the reason, Wu Yuanqiu said: Northerners are afraid that the burden of transportation in the southeast region will be assigned to the northwest region, and boredom will inevitably occur.

古文：贞明默然。
现代文：徐贞明沉默不语。
English: Xu Zhenming was silent.

古文：已而之栋竟劾奏如袁萃言。
现代文：不久王之栋竟然如袁萃预先所说那样进行上奏弹劾。
English: Soon, Wang Zhidong went so far as to call for impeachment, as Yuan Zhi had said in advance.

