古文：论贤儒之才，既超程矣，世人怪其仕宦不进，官爵卑细。
现代文：论说贤儒的才能，已经很出众了。世人惊异他们做官得不到提拔，官爵低下。
English: On the talent of the wise men, it is already very outstanding. The world is surprised that they do not get promoted to officials, and the official rank is low.

古文：以贤才退在俗吏之後，信怪也。
现代文：其实以贤才落在俗吏的后面，实际并不值得奇怪。
English: In fact, it is not really surprising that the wise fall behind the vulgar.

古文：夫如是，而适足以见贤不肖之分，睹高下多少之实也。
现代文：像这样才恰好足以显出贤与不贤的区别，看出才能高低大小的实际情况。
English: Like this, it is just enough to show the difference between virtuous and non-virtuous, to see the actual situation of talent.

古文：龟生三百岁，大如钱，游於莲叶之上。
现代文：乌龟活三百年才像铜钱大，在莲叶上游玩。
English: Turtles live for three hundred years before they are as big as a copper coin, and they play on lotus leaves.

古文：三千岁青边缘，巨尺二寸。
现代文：活三千年龟壳的边缘才会变青，身体才有一尺二寸长。
English: It takes three thousand years for the edges of a tortoise's shell to turn blue and for its body to grow a foot and two inches long.

古文：蓍生七十岁生一茎，七百岁生十茎。
现代文：蓍草活七十年长一根茎，活七百年才长十根茎。
English: The reed-grass lives seventy years and grows one stalk; it lives seven hundred years and grows ten stalks.

古文：神灵之物也，故生迟留，历岁长久，故能明审。
现代文：因它们是神奇灵验的东西，所以生长得很缓慢，由于经历的年代长，所以用来占卜非常灵验。
English: Because they are magical things, they grow very slowly, and because they have been around for a long time, they are very effective for divination.

古文：实贤儒之在世也，犹灵蓍、神龟也。
现代文：考察贤儒在社会上，就像灵验的蓍草，神奇的乌龟一样。
English: In society, the study of the wise men is like a powerful weed or a magical turtle.

古文：计学问之日，固已尽年之半矣。
现代文：算一算他们钻研学问的日子，确实已以有半辈子了。
English: In fact, they have been studying for half a lifetime.

古文：锐意於道，遂无贪仕之心。
现代文：他们集中精力研究先王之道，于是没有贪图做官的心。
English: They concentrated their efforts on studying the ways of the former king, so they did not have the desire to become officials.

古文：及其仕也，纯特方正，无员锐之操。
现代文：等到他们做了官，就特别纯洁，非常正直，没有圆滑钻营的行为。
English: When they become officials, they are particularly pure, very honest, and do not have the behavior of a smooth drill battalion.

古文：故世人迟取进难也。
现代文：所以世上有权势的人难得录用和提拔他们。
English: That's why the most powerful people in the world rarely hire and promote them.

古文：针锥所穿，无不暢达。
现代文：针和锥穿过的地方，没有不通畅的。
English: Where the needle and the cone pass, there is nothing impassable.

古文：使针锥末方，穿物无一分之深矣。
现代文：假使针和锥的尖端是方的，穿进物体里就不会有一分深。
English: If the tips of the needle and the cone are square, they will not penetrate into the object.

古文：贤儒方节而行，无针锥之锐，固安能自穿、取暢达之功乎？
现代文：贤儒本着正直的节操办事，失去了针锥的锐利，所以怎么能亲自去钻营，取得到飞黄腾达的功效呢！
English: The wise man acts in the spirit of honest economy and has lost the sharpness of the needle and cone, so how can he personally go to the drilling camp and get the soaring effect!

古文：且骥一日行千里者，无所服也，使服任车舆，驽马同。
现代文：再说千里马一天能跑一千里，是没有负重，假使让它拉着装满东西的车子，跟劣马一样。
English: Moreover, the chariot horse can run a thousand miles a day, without any load, and if it were to pull a cart full of things, it would be the same as a bad horse.

古文：骥曾以引盐车矣，垂头落汗，行不能进。
现代文：过去，千里马曾用来拉过盐车，结果它垂着头浑身冒汗，想往前走却不能前进。
English: In the past, the horse was used to pull the salt wagon. As a result, it hung its head and sweated profusely. It wanted to go forward, but couldn't.

古文：伯乐顾之，王良御之，空身轻驰，故有千里之名。
现代文：伯乐发现它，请王良来驾御，光着身体快跑，所以有千里马的美名。
English: When Bo Le found it, he asked Wang Liang to drive it, and he ran fast with his bare body. That's why it's known as the "Thousand Mile Horse."

古文：今贤儒怀古今之学，负荷礼义之重，内累於胸中之知，外劬於礼义之操，不敢妄进苟取，故有稽留之难。
现代文：如今贤儒胸怀古今的学问，担负着礼义的重任，内心受胸中知识的束缚，行为又受礼义节操的约束，不敢随便乱谋求官位，所以不易当官或被提拔。
English: Nowadays, wise men and women cherish ancient and modern learning, shoulder the heavy responsibility of etiquette, are bound by the knowledge in their hearts, and their behavior is constrained by etiquette and discipline. They do not dare to seek official positions randomly, so it is not easy to become an official or be promoted.

古文：无伯乐之友，不遭王良之将，安得驰於清明之朝，立千里之迹乎？
现代文：没有伯乐这样的朋友，不遇上王良这样的地方长官，怎么能在清明的朝廷上驰骋，表现出千里马的样子来呢？
English: Without a friend like Bo Le, and without meeting a local governor like Wang Liang, how could he gallop around the clean imperial court and show himself to be a great horse?

古文：且夫含血气物之生也，行则背在上而腹在下；其病若死，则背在下而腹在上。
现代文：有血气的动物活着的时候，走路则背朝上，腹向下；要是生病或死去，那么就背在下，腹朝上。
English: When a flesh-and-blood animal is alive, it walks on its back and belly; when it is sick or dying, it walks on its back and belly.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：背肉厚而重，腹肉薄而轻也。
现代文：因为背部肉厚肉多，腹部肉薄肉少。
English: Because the back has more thick meat and the abdomen has less thin meat.

古文：贤儒、俗吏，并在当世，有似於此。
现代文：贤儒、俗吏同时生在当今世上，有点类似这种情况。
English: It is somewhat similar to the situation in today's world, where the wise and the vulgar are born at the same time.

古文：将明道行，则俗吏载贤儒，贤儒乘俗吏。
现代文：要是地方长官贤明先王之道就能实行，那么是俗吏驮贤儒，贤儒骑俗吏。
English: If the local magistrate can practice the way of the wise forefathers, then it is the commoners who will beat the wise men, and the wise men who will ride the commoners.

古文：将暗道废，则俗吏乘贤儒，贤儒处下位，犹物遇害，腹在上而背在下也。
现代文：要是地方长官昏庸先王之道被废弃，那么就是俗吏骑贤儒，贤儒处在低下的位置，就像动物遇害，腹朝上背在下一样。
English: If the way of the local magistrate, King Dumyong, is abandoned, then it will be the commoners riding the wise men, and the wise men will be in a low position, just like the animals killed, belly up and back down.

古文：且背法天而腹法地，生行得其正，故腹背得其位；病死失其宜，故腹反而在背上。
现代文：背象征天，腹象征地，活着走路的时候，背和腹的位置符合天在上、地在下的原则，所以腹背得到了它们各自正确的位置；生病或者死去，违反正常状态，所以腹部反而在背的上面。
English: The back symbolizes heaven, and the abdomen symbolizes earth. When walking, the position of the back and abdomen is in accordance with the principle of heaven above and earth below, so the abdomen and back get their respective correct positions. If you are sick or die, it is against the normal state, so the abdomen is on top of the back.

古文：非唯腹也，凡物仆僵者，足又在上。
现代文：不仅仅是腹部在上，凡是动物死了，脚也会朝上。
English: It's not just the belly that's turned up. When an animal dies, the feet also turn up.

古文：贤儒不遇，仆废於世，踝足之吏，皆在其上。
现代文：贤儒不被赏识重用，等于死在世上，而那些妄进苟取的俗吏，却都在他们上面。
English: Wise men, if they are not appreciated and used, are as good as dead in this world, but the vulgar, who want to get ahead, are above them.

古文：东方朔曰： 目不在面而在於足，救昧不给，能何见乎？ 
现代文：东方朔说： 如果眼睛不在脸上而长在脚上，救治眼瞎都来不及，怎么还谈得上看见东西呢？ 
English: Dongfang Shuo said: If the eyes are not on the face but on the feet, it is too late to cure blindness, how can we still talk about seeing things?

古文：汲黯谓武帝曰： 陛下用吏如积薪矣，後来者居上。 
现代文：汲黯对汉武帝说： 陛下使用官吏就像堆柴一样，后来的放在上面。 
English: Ku Ying said to Emperor Han Wudi: Your Majesty uses officials like a stack of firewood, and later places them on top.

古文：原汲黯之言，察东方朔之语，独以俗吏之得地，贤儒之失职哉？
现代文：考察汲黯的话，考察东方朔的话，岂不是因为俗吏得到了很高的地位，而贤儒却失去了应得的官职吗！
English: If we look at the past, if we look at the future, isn't it because the commoners have gained a high status, while the wise men have lost their deserved official positions?

古文：故夫仕宦，失地难以观德；得地难以察不肖。
现代文：因此，做官没有得到应有地位，难以了解他的品德；得到了应得的地位，又难以考察他的不贤。
English: Therefore, it is difficult to understand the moral character of an official who has not been given the status he deserves; and it is difficult to investigate his immorality when he has been given the status he deserves.

古文：名生於高官，而毁起於卑位。卑位，固赏贤儒之所在也。
现代文：好名声来自高官显位，遭诽谤起源于地位低下，地位低下本来经常是贤儒所处的环境。
English: A good reputation comes from high-ranking officials, and being slandered originates from low status, which is often the environment in which a wise man lives.

古文：遵礼蹈绳，修身守节，在下不汲汲，故有沉滞之留。
现代文：他们遵循礼义，按规矩办事，修养身心，遵守节操，处在低下地位而不急于上爬，所以长期得不到任用和提拔。
English: They follow etiquette, act according to rules, cultivate their mind and body, observe discipline, are in a low position and are not eager to climb, so they do not get appointed and promoted for a long time.

古文：沉滞在能自济，故有不拔之扼。
现代文：长期被埋没又不能自己想办法，所以才处于不被提拔的困境。
English: They have been buried for a long time and cannot think of a way out on their own, so they are in the predicament of not being promoted.

古文：其积学於身也多，故用心也固。
现代文：他们自身积累的学问很多，因此不钻营的意志很坚定。
English: They have accumulated a lot of knowledge themselves, so their will not to drill is very firm.

古文：俗吏无以自修，身虽拔进，利心摇动，则有下道侵渔之操矣。
现代文：俗吏没有什么用来作自我修养的，地位虽然被提升，由于贪图私利的心在作怪，就会有违背道德侵夺财物的行为出现。
English: Lay officials have nothing to use for self-cultivation. Although their status is elevated, their greed for self-interest will cause them to behave in an unethical manner.

古文：枫桐之树，生而速长，故其皮肌不能坚刚。
现代文：枫树桐树，生长速度快，所以它们的树枝不坚硬。
English: Maple trees grow fast, so their branches are not stiff.

古文：树檀以五月生叶，後彼春荣之木，其材强劲，车以为轴。
现代文：檀树在五月份长叶子，虽然在春天树木茂盛之后，但它的木质却坚强有力，所以车子用它来做车轴。
English: The leaves of the sandalwood tree come out in May, although after the trees are in full bloom in the spring, its wood is strong and powerful, so the car uses it to make axles.

古文：殷之桑谷，七日大拱，长速大暴，故为变怪。
现代文：殷朝时有桑树和穀树，七天长成一抱粗，高得太迅速，大得太突然，所以是灾变。
English: In the Yin Dynasty, there were mulberry trees and grain trees, which grew into a thick embrace in seven days. It was too fast and too big, so it was a disaster.

古文：大器晚成，宝货难售也。
现代文：珍贵的器物形成总是缓慢，宝贵的货物销售总是困难。
English: The formation of precious objects is always slow, and the sale of precious goods is always difficult.

古文：不崇一朝，辄成贾者，菜果之物也。是故湍濑之流，沙石转而大石不移。
现代文：而瓜菜之类东西，不到一个早晨就能卖完。所以急流流过时，沙砾冲得打转，而大石头却不动。
English: But things like melons and vegetables can be sold out in less than a morning, so the rapids are out of date, the gravel is turning, and the big stones are not moving.

古文：何者？
现代文：这是什么原因呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：大石重而沙石轻也。
现代文：因为大石头重而沙砾轻。
English: Because boulders are heavy and gravel is light.

古文：沙石转积於大石之上，大石没而不见。
现代文：沙砾辗转堆积在大石头上，大石头就被埋没而看不见了。
English: Sand and gravel pile up on the boulders, and the boulders are buried out of sight.

古文：贤儒俗吏，并在世俗，有似於此。
现代文：贤儒、俗吏，同时生在社会上，就有点类似这种情况。
English: This is somewhat similar to the situation of a scholar and a layman being born into society at the same time.

古文：遇暗长吏，转移俗吏超在贤儒之上，贤儒处下，受驰走之使，至或岩居穴处，没身不见。
现代文：遇到昏庸的地方长官，使俗吏升迁超在贤儒之上，贤儒却处于低下地位，干些跑腿的差使，甚至有的人被迫隐居山洞，终身无所表现。
English: Encountering dull local officials, the vulgar officials were promoted above the wise men, but the wise men were in a low position, doing some errands, and even some people were forced to live in a cave, and had nothing to show for life.

古文：咎在长吏不能知贤，而贤者道大，力劣不能拔举之故也。
现代文：过错在于地方长吏不能了解贤儒，贤儒的先王之道大，而地方长吏能力低下不能提拔、推荐他们的缘故。
English: The fault lies in the fact that the local governors cannot understand the wise men, the wise men's ancestors are great, and the local governors are unable to promote and recommend them because of their low ability.

古文：夫手指之物器也，度力不能举，则不敢动。
现代文：用手去拿东西，估计力气不能举起来，就不敢动它。
English: If you try to pick something up with your hands, and you don't have the strength to lift it, you won't dare to move it.

古文：贤儒之道，非徒物器之重也。
现代文：贤儒的先王之道，不仅仅是东西的重量能比。
English: The way of the wise men is not just the best ratio of the weight of things.

古文：是故金铁在地，猋风不能动，毛芥在其间，飞扬千里。
现代文：铜铁在地上，暴风吹不动；毛草在地上，能飞扬一千里。
English: Brass and iron on the ground, the storm does not blow; hair grass on the ground, can fly a thousand miles.

古文：夫贤儒所怀，其犹水中大石、在地金铁也。
现代文：贤儒胸中所怀藏的东西，就像水中的大石、在地上的铜铁一样。
English: What a wise man conceals in his heart is like a big rock in the water, or like copper and iron on the ground.

古文：其进不若俗吏速者，长吏力劣，不能用也。
现代文：他们被提升不像俗吏那样快的原因，是地方长官能力低下，不能重用。
English: The reason why they are not promoted as quickly as ordinary officials is that local governors have low ability and cannot be reused.

古文：毛芥在铁石间也，一口之气，能吹毛芥，非必猋风。
现代文：毛草在铁与石头之间，一口气，就能吹它起来，不一定靠风暴。
English: Hair grass between iron and stone, a breath, can blow it up, not necessarily by the storm.

古文：俗吏之易迁，犹毛芥之易吹也。
现代文：俗吏容易迁升，就像毛草容易吹起来一样。
English: It is easy for a commoner to move up, just as it is easy for grass to be blown up.

古文：故夫转沙石者，湍濑也；飞毛芥者，猋风也。活水洋风，毛芥不动。
现代文：所以能使沙砾打转的是急流，能使毛草飞扬千里的是暴风。平静的水，不会使沙砾打转；平和的风，不会使毛草飞动。
English: Therefore, it is the rapid current that can make the gravel turn, and it is the storm that can make the grass fly thousands of miles. Calm water will not make the gravel turn; peaceful wind will not make the grass fly.

古文：无道理之将，用心暴猥，察吏不详，遭以奸迁，妄授官爵，猛水之转沙石，猋风之飞毛芥也。
现代文：不懂先王之道的地方长官，用心急躁不正派，考察官吏不公平，任用官吏，凭自己喜欢来提拔，乱授官爵，就像洪水使沙砾转动，暴风使毛草飞扬一样。
English: Local governors who do not understand the ways of the former king are hasty and unfair, inspecting officials is unfair, appointing officials, promoting officials according to their own preferences, and arbitrarily awarding titles and ranks, just like the flood makes the gravel turn, and the storm makes the grass fly.

古文：是故毛芥因异风而飞，沙石遭猛流而转，俗吏遇悖将而迁。
现代文：所以毛草靠暴风而飞扬，沙砾遇洪流而转动，俗吏碰到昏乱的地方长官而得升迁。
English: Therefore, the grass is blown by the storm, the gravel is turned by the torrent, and the laymen are promoted by the local magistrate who is in a daze.

古文：且圆物投之於地，东西南北，无之不可，策杖叩动，才微辄停。
现代文：圆的东西掷在地上，东西南北，没有滚不到的，拿根棍子阻挡它，才稍微一挡就停住了。
English: A round object is thrown on the ground, from east to west and from north to south, and there is nothing that can't be rolled away. If you hold a stick to block it, it will only stop with a slight push.

古文：方物集地，壹投而止；及其移徒，须人动举。
现代文：方的东西落在地上，一扔下去就停住了，至于它的移动，需要人去触动它。
English: The square thing fell to the ground and stopped as soon as it was thrown down. As for its movement, a person needs to touch it.

古文：贤儒，世之方物也，其难转移者，其动须人也。
现代文：贤儒，是世上方的东西。他们难得移动，要移动就需要有人帮助。
English: Wise men are things of the world. They rarely move, and they need someone to help them move.

古文：鸟轻便於人，趋远，人不如鸟，然而天地之性人为贵。
现代文：鸟比人轻便，能去很远的地方，人不如鸟，然而在天地之间有生命的东西当中，人是最宝贵的。
English: Birds are lighter than people and can travel far. People are not as good as birds, but among the living things between heaven and earth, people are the most precious.

古文：蝗虫之飞，能至万里；麒麟须献，乃达阙下。
现代文：蝗虫飞行能达万里，麒麟必须有人进献，才能到皇宫门前。
English: Locusts can fly thousands of miles, and the unicorn must be presented by someone in order to reach the front of the imperial palace.

古文：然而蝗虫为灾，麒麟为瑞。
现代文：然而蝗虫是灾祸，麒麟是祥瑞。
English: However, locusts are a scourge, and the unicorn is auspicious.

古文：麟有四足，尚不能自致，人有两足，安能自达？
现代文：麒麟有四只脚，尚且不能自己到达宫廷，人有两只脚，怎么会自己到达呢？
English: A giraffe has four legs, yet it can't get to the palace by itself. If a person has two legs, how can they get there by themselves?

古文：故曰：燕飞轻於凤皇，兔走疾於麒麟，跃躁於灵龟，蛇腾便於神龙。
现代文：所以说，燕子飞得比凤凰轻盈，兔子跑得比麒麟快速，青蛙跳得比灵龟爬行快，老蛇穿行比神龙灵便。
English: Therefore, it is said that the swallow flies lighter than the phoenix, the rabbit runs faster than the unicorn, the frog jumps faster than the turtle crawls, and the snake is easier to walk through than the dragon.

古文：吕望之徒，白首乃显；百里奚之知，明於黄发：深为国谋，因为王辅，皆夫沉重难进之人也。
现代文：姜太公白了头才显贵；百里奚的智慧，到晚年才表现出来。他们能为国家深谋远虑，因此成了君主的辅佐，但都是些才高德重，很难被提拔任用的人。
English: Jiang Taigong was a man of noble birth; Bai Lijun's wisdom was only revealed in his later years. They were able to think deeply about the country and thus became the monarch's aides, but they were all highly moral people who were difficult to promote.

古文：轻躁早成，祸害暴疾。
现代文：轻浮急进的人早被任用提拔，但祸害的到来会特别迅速。
English: Frivolous and impetuous people have long been appointed and promoted, but the arrival of the scourge will be particularly rapid.

古文：故曰：其进锐者，退速。
现代文：所以说： 前进得快的退缩也快。 
English: Therefore, it is said that: the faster the advance, the faster the retreat.

古文：阳温阴寒，历月乃至；灾变之气，一朝成怪。
现代文：春夏秋冬，要经过几个月才会变更，而灾变的气，一个早晨就会发生不可想象的事。
English: In spring, summer, autumn and winter, it takes several months for everything to change, but in times of cataclysm, the unthinkable can happen in a single morning.

古文：故夫河冰结合，非一日之寒；积土成山，非斯须之作。
现代文：所以黄河的水结冰，不是一天寒冷能形成；把土堆成山，不是一会儿就可以弄成。
English: Therefore, the water of the Yellow River freezes, and it takes more than one day of cold to form it; and it takes more than one minute to make a mound of soil into a mountain.

古文：干将之剑，久在炉炭，銛锋利刃，百熟炼历。
现代文：干将宝剑，要在炉火中锻烧很久，锐利的锋刃，要经过无数次精细的冶炼磨光。
English: To make a good sword, it is necessary to forge and burn it for a long time in the fire, and the sharp edge must go through countless times of fine smelting and polishing.

古文：久销乃见作留，成迟故能割断。
现代文：由于经过长时间的熔炼，就显得形成非常迟缓，正因为形成非常迟缓，所以才能够割断东西。
English: Because after a long time of smelting, it appears that the formation is very slow, and it is precisely because the formation is very slow that it is possible to cut things.

古文：肉暴长者曰肿，泉暴出者曰涌，酒暴熟者易酸，醢暴酸者易臭。
现代文：突然长出来的肉叫肿，突然喷出来的泉叫涌，酒太熟的容易变酸，醋太酸的容易变臭。
English: The meat that suddenly grows out is called swollen, the spring that suddenly gushes out is called gushing, the wine that is too ripe easily turns sour, and the vinegar that is too sour easily turns rancid.

古文：由此言之，贤儒迟留，皆有状故。
现代文：像这样说，贤儒不能任用提拔，都有他们自己的缘故了。
English: To put it like this, wise men and women can't be appointed and promoted, and it's all their own fault.

古文：状故云何？
现代文：原因是什么呢？
English: What is the reason for this?

古文：学多道重，为身累也。
现代文：学问太多，先王之道太重，成了自己的负担。
English: Too much learning, too heavy the path of the first king, became his burden.

古文：草木之生者湿，湿者重；死者枯。
现代文：草木活的潮湿，潮湿的就重；草木死的枯焦，枯焦的就轻。
English: The dampness of living plants and trees is heavy; the dead coke of dead plants and trees is light.

古文：枯而轻者易举，湿而重者难移也。
现代文：枯焦而轻的容易拿起来，潮湿而重的难得移动。
English: It is easy to pick up the charred and light cranes, but it is difficult to move the wet and heavy cranes.

古文：然元气所在，在生不在枯。
现代文：然而元气所在，是在活着的草木而不在枯死的。
English: However, the vitality lies in the living plants and not in the dead.

古文：是故车行於陆，船行於沟，其满而重者行迟，空而轻者行疾。
现代文：因此车在陆地上走，船在河中行，装得满的重的走得慢，空的轻的走得快。
English: Therefore, the car travels on the land, the boat travels in the river, the loaded heavy goes slowly, and the empty light goes fast.

古文：先王之道，载在胸腹之内，其重不徒船车之任也。
现代文：先王之道，装在胸中，它的重量不仅仅是车船能胜任的。
English: The way of the Ancestor, carried in the chest, its weight is more than a car or ship can bear.

古文：任重，其取进疾速，难矣。
现代文：胜任的重，任用和提拔要快，就困难。
English: Competence is important, and it is difficult to appoint and promote quickly.

古文：窃人之物，其得非不速疾也，然而非其有，得之非己之力也。
现代文：偷人的东西，脏物得来不能说不快当，然而别人指责他的这种占有，得来不是靠自己的能力。
English: Stealing people's belongings, filth can not be said to be unpleasant, but others accuse him of this kind of possession, did not come from his own ability.

古文：世人早得高官，非不有光荣也，而尸禄素餐之谤，喧哗甚矣。
现代文：世人早得高官，不是不光荣，但是当官不做事白吃饭的指责，社会上议论厉害得很。
English: It is not dishonorable for the world to have a high-ranking official, but the accusation that officials do not do anything in vain, the discussion in the society is very strong.

古文：且贤儒之不进，将相长吏不开通也。
现代文：贤儒不被提拔，是地方长官不推荐。
English: Wise men are not promoted, local governors do not recommend them.

古文：农夫载谷奔都，贾人赍货赴远，皆欲得其愿也。
现代文：农夫装谷子跑到城里，商人带货赶去远方，都是想得到自己想得到的东西。
English: The farmer pretends to be a corncracker and runs to the city, the merchant rushes far away with goods, all of them want to get what they want.

古文：如门郭闭而不通，津梁绝而不过，虽有勉力趋时之势，奚由早至以得盈利哉？
现代文：如果城门紧闭不能通过，渡口桥梁断绝不能过去，虽然有努力赶时间的劲头，怎么能及早赶到从而谋取厚利呢？
English: If the city gate is tightly closed and cannot be passed, and the ferry bridge can never be passed, although there is an effort to hurry, how can you get there early and make a profit?

古文：长吏妒贤，不能容善，不被钳赭之刑，幸矣，焉敢望官位升举，道理之早成也？
现代文：要是地方长官嫉妒贤能，不能容纳好人，贤儒不受刑挨罚，就算万幸，怎么还敢奢望官位高升，使先王之道早日实现呢！
English: If local governors are jealous of the virtuous and cannot accommodate good people, and if the virtuous are not punished, even if they are lucky, how can they dare to hope for a higher official position, so that the way of the former king can be realized as soon as possible!

