古文：庞籍，字醇之，单州成武人。
现代文：庞籍字醇之，单州成武人。
English: From the huge number of ethnic groups, the number of people from a single state has increased.

古文：及进士第，为黄州司理参军，知州夏竦以为有宰相器。调开封府兵曹参军，知府薛奎荐为法曹。
现代文：及进士第，为黄州司理参军，知州夏竦认为庞籍有宰相的才能，调任开封府兵曹参军，知府薛奎推荐庞籍为法曹。
English: In addition to the promotion of officers, the secretary of Huangzhou joined the army, the governor of Chizhou, Xia Yao, thought that Pang Zeki had the ability of the prime minister, and transferred him to the army as a military officer of Kaifeng Prefecture, and the governor of Chifu, Xue Kui, recommended Pang Zeki as a legal expert.

古文：迁大理寺丞、知襄邑县。
现代文：升任大理寺丞、知襄邑县。
English: He was promoted to the post of Daliji no jo, Chisang-eup County.

古文：预修《天圣编敕》，为刑部详覆官。
现代文：朝廷准备编修《天圣编敕》，庞籍任刑部详覆官。
English: The Imperial Court was preparing to compile the "Tenshohikire," and a large number of people were appointed as detailed inspectors of the criminal department.

古文：擢群牧判官，因转封言： 旧制不以国马假臣下，重武备也。
现代文：升为群牧判官，于是上言说 ：过去的制度规定臣下不能使用国家所养之马，这是一种重视武装装备的表现。
English: He was promoted to the position of herd-herding judge, so he said, "The previous system stipulated that vassals could not use horses raised by the state, which is a manifestation of the importance attached to military equipment.

古文：枢密院以带甲马借内侍杨怀敏，群牧覆奏，乃赐一马，三日，乃复借之，数日而复罢。
现代文：枢密院将带甲马借给内侍杨怀敏，大臣们反复上奏，才被赏赐一匹马，三天后，枢密院又借给杨怀敏一匹马，数日后又停止。
English: The Privy Council lends a horse to Yang Huimin, the chambermaid, and the ministers repeatedly play it until they are awarded a horse. Three days later, the Privy Council lends another horse to Yang Huimin, and then stops after a few days.

古文：枢密掌机命，反覆乃如此。
现代文：枢密院掌机要事务，都是这样反复无常。
English: Such is the capriciousness of the Privy Council's handling of important matters.

古文：平时，百官奏事上前，不自批章，止送中书、枢密院。
现代文：平时，百官上朝进事，皇帝不自己亲自批阅奏章，只送给中书、枢密院。
English: In ordinary times, when hundreds of officials came to court, the emperor did not personally approve the music, but only sent it to the Chinese Academy of Letters and the Privy Council.

古文：近岁玺书内降，浸多于旧，无以防偏请、杜幸门矣。
现代文：近年来朝廷诏书不断，逐渐多于过去，这样就不能防止私自请托，杜绝佞幸之徒。
English: In recent years, there have been more imperial decrees issued by the imperial court than in the past, so it is impossible to prevent people from asking for help from others, and to put an end to opportunists.

古文：往者，王世融以公主子殴府吏，法当赎金，特停任。
现代文：以前，王世融身为公主之子殴打府吏，按照法律应当交纳赎金，特地停官任职。
English: In the past, Wang Shihong, the son of a princess, beat up a government official, was required by law to pay a ransom, and was suspended from his post.

古文：近作坊料物库主吏盗官物，辄自逃避。
现代文：近来作坊物料库主管官吏盗窃国家物资，而自己却逃避。
English: Recently, officials in charge of the workshop's storeroom have been stealing state materials while evading arrest.

古文：以宫掖之亲，三司遽罢追究。
现代文：凭借着宫亲关系，三司就不再追究。
English: By virtue of the relationship with the imperial family, the three departments will no longer pursue the case.

古文：今日圣断乃异于昔，臣窃惑焉。
现代文：如今皇上决断不同于过去，臣下私下觉得很迷惑。
English: Today, the emperor's decision is different from the past, and the vassal privately feels very puzzled.

古文：祥符令检下稍严，胥吏相率空县而去，令坐罢免。
现代文：祥符年间朝廷命令有司对属下逐渐严格检查，胥吏都相继空县离职而去，县令因此而被罢免。
English: During the Xiangfu era, the imperial court ordered some officials to gradually strictly inspect their subordinates, and the officials all left the county one after another, and the county magistrate was therefore dismissed.

古文：若是，则清强者沮矣。 
现代文：如果这样，那么清廉的官吏就会感到丧气。 
English: If this is the case, then honest officials will feel frustrated.

古文：又奏： 陛下躬亲万机，用人宜辨邪正、防朋党，擢进近列，愿采公论，毋令出于执政。 孔道辅谓人曰： 言事官多观望宰相意，独庞醇之，天子御史也。 为开封府判官，尚美人遣内侍称教旨免工人市租。
现代文：很久后，庞籍离开京师任秀州知州。奉召任殿中侍御史，章献太后颁布遗诏：章惠太后参议军国大事。庞籍请求下令门，将垂帘礼仪制度全部烧掉。又上奏说 ：陛下亲自处理国家事务，使用人才应当辨明奸邪和正直，防止朋党，提拔近亲大臣，希望听取大家的意见，不要由宰相一人决定。 孔道辅对人说 ：言事官大多看宰相的眼色。揣摸宰相的意图，唯有庞醇之，是天子的御史。 任开封府判官时，尚美人派遣内侍声称教旨免除工人市租。
English: After a long time, Pang Kee left Beijing to become a teacher in the province of Xiuzhou and Chizhou. He was called to serve as a historian in the palace, and the Empress Dowager Zhang Xian issued a will: the Empress Dowager Zhang Hui will attend the military and national events. Pang Kee requested that the door be ordered and all the curtain-hanging etiquette system be burned. He also reported that: His Majesty personally handles state affairs, and the use of talents should identify treachery and honesty, prevent cronyism, promote close relatives of ministers, and hope to listen to everyone's opinions, not to be decided by the prime minister

古文：籍言： 祖宗以来，未有美人称教旨下府者，当杖内侍。 诏有司： 自今宫中传命，毋得辄受。 数劾范讽罪，讽善李迪，皆寝不报，反坐言宫禁事不得实，以祠部员外郎罢为广南东路转运使。
现代文：庞籍说： 宋朝建国以来，还没有美人声称教旨下达州府的，应当杖打内侍。 诏令有司： 从今以后宫中传命，不要接受。 多次弹劾范讽的犯罪之事，范讽与李迪要好，都扣留没有上报朝廷，反而说庞籍上奏宫禁之事不实，以祠部员外郎罢免为广东南路转运使。
English: Pang Zi said: Since the founding of the Song Dynasty, there has never been a beautiful woman who claimed that if the edict was issued to the state capital, it should be beaten with a cane. The edict had a section: From now on, orders from the palace should not be accepted. Repeated impeachments of Fan Xiao's crimes, Fan Xiao and Li Di are better, were all detained without being reported to the imperial court, but on the contrary, Pang Zi said that it was not true that the matter was banned by the palace, and he was dismissed as a transfer envoy to the south of Guangdong as a member of the ancestral hall.

古文：又言范讽事有不尽如奏，讽坐贬，籍亦降太常博士、知临江军。
现代文：又说范讽没有将事情全部上奏，范讽因此而贬官，庞籍也降为太常博士、知临江军。
English: It was also said that Fan Lian did not report the whole matter, and Fan Lian was demoted as a result, and Pang was also demoted to the rank of Tai Chang Ph.D. and Zhirinjiang Army.

古文：寻复官，徙福建转运使。
现代文：不久又官复原职，调任福建转运使。
English: Soon after, he was reinstated and transferred to the post of Fujian transfer envoy.

古文：景祐三年，为侍御史，改刑部员外郎、知杂事，判大理寺，进天章阁待制。
现代文：景祐三年，任侍御史，改任刑部员外郎、知杂事，判大理寺，担任天章阁待制。
English: In the third year of Kageyuki, he was appointed as an attendant to the shogun, was reassigned as a member of the criminal justice department, and was appointed as a judge of Dali Temple, and served as a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：元昊反，为陕西体量安抚使。
现代文：赵元昊反叛，任陕西体量安抚使。
English: Zhao Yuanhao rebelled and was appointed the Shaanxi volume pacification envoy.

古文：坐令开封府吏冯士元市女口，降知汝州。
现代文：由于令开封府官吏冯士元买卖妇女而犯有过失，被降职为汝州知州。
English: As a result of ordering Feng Shiyuan, an official of Kaifeng Prefecture, to buy and sell women, he committed negligence and was demoted to Ruzhou Zhizhou.

古文：徒同州，就除陕西都转运使。
现代文：调任同州知州，于是授予陕西都转运使。
English: He was transferred to Chizhou of the same prefecture, and was then awarded the title of Shaanxi Capital Transfer Envoy.

古文：文彦博鞫黄德和狱，未上，诏籍同案。
现代文：文彦博审讯黄德和一案，没有上奏，朝廷诏令庞籍与文彦博共同办案。
English: Fumihiko Bo tried Huang Dehe's case, but it was not reported, and the Imperial Court ordered Pang Zeki and Fumihiko Bo to jointly handle the case.

古文：籍言曰： 德和退怯当诛。
现代文：庞籍上言说 ：黄德和退却应当诛杀。
English: Pang wrote on his tombstone: "Virtue and retreat should be fought against."

古文：刘平力战而没，宜加恤其子孙。 又建言： 频岁灾异，天久不雨。
现代文：刘平尽力而战，裹尸疆场，应该抚恤其子孙。 又上言说 ：每年发生灾异，天旱不雨。
English: Liu Ping fought to the best of his ability, and was buried in the battlefield, and his children and grandchildren should be cared for. He also said, "Disasters happen every year, and droughts do not bring rain.

古文：宫中费用奢靡，出纳不严，须索烦多，有司无从钩校虚实。
现代文：宫中花费奢侈，支出收入不严格，朝廷勒索繁多，有司无法核对虚实。
English: The palace spent extravagantly, the expenditure and income were not strict, and there were many extortions from the imperial court. Some officials were unable to verify the facts.

古文：臣窃谓凡乘舆所费，宫中所用，宜务加裁抑，取则先帝，修德弭灾之道也。
现代文：臣下私自认为凡是皇帝出巡乘车的费用，宫中的花费，应该坚决加以裁减抑制，仿效先帝修善德以消灭灾害的办法。
English: Privately, the vassals thought that the expenses of the emperor's motorcade and the expenses of the palace should be resolutely reduced and curbed, emulating the former emperor's method of cultivating virtue and eliminating disasters.

古文：今宿兵西鄙，将士力战，弗获功赏；而内官、医官、乐官，无功劳，享丰赐，天下指目，谓之 三官 。
现代文：如今到处驻兵，将士尽力而战，不能获得奖赏；而内官、医官、乐官，没有功劳，享受丰厚的赏赐，天下人都指着他们，叫作 三官 。
English: Nowadays, soldiers are stationed everywhere, and soldiers fight as hard as they can, but they can't get a reward; while officers, medical officers, and music officers have no merit, but enjoy rich rewards. People all over the world point at them and call them the three officials.

古文：愿少裁损，无厚赉予，专励战功，寇不足平也。 
现代文：希望稍微进行裁减，不要对宫人给予丰厚赏赐，应专门奖励战功，这样就不用担心敌寇不能平定了。 
English: It is hoped that a slight reduction will be made, and the palace people should not be given rich rewards, but should be specially rewarded for their war service. In this way, there is no need to worry that the enemy can not be leveled.

古文：进龙图阁直学士、知延州，俄兼鄜延都总管、经略安抚缘边招讨使。
现代文：担任龙图阁直学士、知延州，不久兼任延都总管、经略安抚缘边招讨使。
English: He served as the direct bachelor of Longtu Ge, Chiyan Prefecture, and soon concurrently served as the head of Yandu and the envoy to pacify the border.

古文：明年，改延州观察使，力辞，换左谏议大夫。
现代文：第二年，改任延州观察使，坚决辞谢，改任左谏议大夫。
English: The following year, he was reassigned as the Yangzhou Observation Envoy, but he resolutely resigned and was reassigned as the doctor of the Left Division of the NPC.

古文：自元昊陷金明、承平、塞门、安远、栲栳砦，破五龙川，边民焚掠殆尽，籍至，稍葺治之。
现代文：自从元昊攻陷金明、承平、塞门、安远、栲栳砦，攻破五龙川，边境之民都被焚烧掠夺尽净，庞籍到任后，逐渐修葺治理。
English: Since Yuan Hao attacked and captured the forts of Jinming, Chengping, Saimen, Anyuan and Handan, and breached the Wulong River, the people on the border were all burned and plundered. After Pang Zeki took office, he gradually repaired and governed.

古文：戍兵十万无壁垒，皆散处城中，畏籍，莫敢犯法。
现代文：戍兵十万没有坚壁完垒，都分散驻扎在城中，由于畏惧庞籍，没有一人犯法违禁。
English: The hundred thousand soldiers did not have a solid wall to complete the base, they were all stationed in the city. Due to the fear of a large number of people, no one violated the law.

古文：金明西北有浑州川，土沃衍。
现代文：金明西北边有浑州川，土地肥沃平坦。
English: There is the Hunzhou River on the northwest side of Jinming, and the land is fertile and flat.

古文：川尾曰桥子谷，寇出入之隘道。
现代文：在浑州川的尽头处有叫桥子谷的地方，这是敌寇出入的狭隘通道。
English: At the end of the Hunzhou River, there is a place called Qiao Zi Valley, which is a narrow passage for invaders.

古文：使部将狄青将万余人，筑招安砦于谷旁，数募民耕种，收粟以赡军。
现代文：庞籍派部将狄青率领万余人，在桥子谷的旁边修筑招安砦，多次招募百姓进行耕种，将收获的粮食来作为军需之用。
English: The Pang Ke faction led by Di Qing led more than 10,000 people to build the Zhao'an Fort next to the Qiaozi Valley, repeatedly recruited people to cultivate, and used the harvested grain for military supplies.

古文：周美袭取承平砦，王信筑龙安砦，悉复所亡地，筑十一城。
现代文：周美偷袭攻取承平砦，王信修筑龙安砦，将所有失地全部收复，修筑十一座城池。
English: Zhou Mei made a sneak attack to capture the Chengping Fort, Wang Xin built the Longan Fort, recovered all the lost land, and built eleven castles.

古文：及开癿名、平戎道，通永和、乌仁关，更东西阵法为方阵，颇损益兵械。
现代文：到开通名、平戎之道，沟通永和、乌仁关，将东西阵法更换为方阵，这样减少了不少兵械。
English: By the time of the opening of the Ming and Ping Rong roads, and the communication between Yonghe and Wuren Pass, the east-west array method was replaced by a square array, thus reducing a lot of weapons.

古文：元昊遣李文贵赍野利旺荣书来送款，籍曰： 此诈也。 乃屯兵青涧城。
现代文：元昊派李文贵带着野利旺荣的书信说前来投诚，庞籍说： 这是欺骗。 于是在青涧城驻扎军队。
English: Yuan Hao sent Li Wengui with a letter from Wang Rong, saying that Wang Rong had come to surrender, and the huge document said: This is deception. Therefore, the army was stationed in Qingtao City.

古文：后数月，果大寇定川，籍召文贵开谕之，遣去。
现代文：数月后，元昊果然大举进犯定川，庞籍召见李文贵进行劝导晓谕，将他遣送走。
English: A few months later, Yuan Hao did indeed attack Dingchuan on a large scale, and Pang Zi summoned Li Wengui for persuasion and sent him away.

古文：既而元昊又以旺荣书来，会帝厌兵，因招怀之，遣籍报书，使呼旺荣为太尉。
现代文：不久元昊让野利旺荣修书一封，这时仁宗正厌恶战争，于是对元昊进行招安安抚，派遣庞籍回报书信，叫旺荣为太尉。
English: Not long after, Yuan Hao asked Wang Rong to write a letter to him. At that time, Emperor Renzong was averse to war, so he recruited and pacified Yuan Hao, sent a large number of letters in return, and called Wang Rong a lieutenant.

古文：籍曰： 太尉三公，非陪臣所得称，使旺荣当之，则元昊不得臣矣。今其书自称 宁令 或 谟宁令 ，皆其官名也，于义无嫌。 朝廷从之。
现代文：庞籍说 ：太尉三公，不是陪臣所能称呼的，使旺荣为太尉，那元昊就不是臣子了，如今他的来信自称 宁令 或 谟宁令 ，都是官名，在意义上没有什么疑忌。 
English: Pang Zi said: "The third rank of captain is not something a vassal can be called. If Wang Rong is a captain, then Yuan Hao is not a vassal. Now his letters call themselves "Ning Ling" or "Mooning Ling," both official names, and there is no doubt about the meaning.

古文：会敌新破泾原城砦，方议修复。
现代文：朝廷听从了庞籍的建议。当时正当敌人刚刚攻破泾原城栅栏，正商议如何修复。
English: The imperial court listened to Pang's suggestion. At that time, the legitimate enemy had just breached the fence of Suwon Castle and was discussing how to repair it.

古文：使者往返，逾年，又遣贺从勖来，改名曰曩霄，称男不称臣。
现代文：使者来来往往，第二年，又派遣贺从勖前来，改名字叫曩霄，称男不称臣。
English: Envoys came and went frequently, and the following year, He Zonglu sent another envoy, who changed his name to Zongxiao, saying that he was a man, not a minister.

古文：籍不敢闻，从勖曰： 子事父，犹臣事君也。
现代文：庞籍认为不合礼仪，贺从勖说 ：儿子事奉父亲，就像臣下事奉君主一样。
English: Pang Zeki thought it was not proper etiquette, but He Cong Quan said, "A son serves his father, just as a vassal serves the sovereign."

古文：若得至京师，天子不许，更归议之。 籍送使者阙下，因陈便宜，言： 羌久不通和市，国人愁怨。
现代文：如果能到京师，天子不允许，再回去商议。 庞籍送使者到京师，于是利用这个机会，上奏说： 羌人很长时间没有与中原往来，国人都担忧抱怨。
English: If it were possible to go to the capital, the emperor would not allow it, and they would have to go back to discuss it again.Pang Zi sent an envoy to the capital, so he took advantage of this opportunity to say in his report: "We have not had any contact with the Central Plains for a long time, and the Chinese people are worried and complaining.

古文：今辞理浸顺，必有改事中国之心，请遣使者申谕之。 朝廷采用其策。
现代文：如今辞理渐通，一定会有改弦事奉中原之心，请求派遣使者申述告诉他们。 朝廷采用了他的对策。
English: Now that the rhetoric is gradually getting through, there will certainly be a change in the line of service to the heart of the Central Plains, requesting that an envoy be sent to tell them. The court adopted his countermeasures.

古文：元昊既臣，召籍为枢密副使。
现代文：元昊臣服后，召庞籍为枢密副使。
English: After Yuan Hao submitted to the emperor, Zhao Pang was appointed as a privy vice-envoy.

古文：籍言： 自陕西用兵，公私俱困，请并省官属，退近塞之兵就食内地。 从之，于是颇省边费。
现代文：庞籍说 ：从陕西用兵以来，朝廷和百姓都感到负担沉重，请求合并省份减少官员，退掉靠近要塞的士兵让他们在内地谋生。 朝廷听从了他的意见，这样节省了不少守边的开支。
English: Pang Zhi said: Since the use of troops in Shaanxi, both the imperial court and the people have felt a heavy burden. He asked for the merger of provinces, the reduction of officials, and the withdrawal of soldiers near the fortress so that they could earn a living in the mainland. The imperial court listened to his opinion, thus saving a lot of expenses for border defense.

古文：改参知政事，拜工部侍郎、枢密使，迁户部，拜同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士、监修国史。
现代文：改任参知政事，授职工部侍郎、枢密使，升任户部，授职同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士、监修国史。
English: He was appointed to the post of Sanchi Seiji, and promoted to the post of Chamberlain of the Ministry of Works and the post of Privy Councilor. He was also promoted to the post of Head of the Household Department, and promoted to the post of Shogun of the Shogunate, Shobunkan University Scholar, and Supervisor of National History.

古文：籍初入相，且独员，而遽为昭文馆大学士，出殊拜也。
现代文：庞籍初任宰相，而且单独一人，立即成为昭文馆大学士，完全是破格特殊的任职。
English: Pang Zi was the first to be appointed prime minister, and he was the only one to immediately become a scholar of the Shobunkwan University, which is a completely unprecedented and special post.

古文：侬智高反，师数不利，遣狄青为宣抚使。
现代文：侬智高叛乱，朝廷多次出师不利，派遣狄青为宣抚使。
English: Nong Zhi Gao rebelled, and the imperial court dispatched Di Qing as an envoy several times, but to no avail.

古文：谏官韩绛谓武人不宜专任，帝以问籍。
现代文：谏官韩绛说武人不应当专任，仁宗以此询问庞籍。
English: The eunuch Han Zheng said that warriors should not be full-time, and Ren Zong used this to inquire about Pang Zeki.

古文：籍曰： 青起行伍，若以文臣副之，则号令不专，不如不遣。 诏岭南诸军，皆受青节度。
现代文：庞籍说： 狄青起自行伍，如果用文臣来辅佐他，会造成号令不统一，还不如不派遣。 诏令岭南诸军，都接受狄青节度。
English: Pang Zi said, "Dixing has raised his own troops, and if he uses a civil servant to assist him, it will result in a lack of uniformity of orders, and it is better not to send them.

古文：既而捷书至，帝喜曰： 青破贼，卿之力也。 遂欲以青为枢密使、同平章事，籍力争之，不听。
现代文：不久战胜敌人的捷报传到朝廷，仁宗高兴地说： 狄青打败敌人，是庞籍你的力量啊。 于是想以狄青为枢密使、同平章事，庞籍为此力争，朝廷不听。
English: Not long after, news of the victory over the enemy reached the imperial court, and Rinzong Zhuang said happily, "Dixing defeated the enemy, it is your great power." Therefore, he wanted to appoint Dixing as a privy councilor to settle the dispute, but the imperial court would not listen to him.

古文：岭南平，二广举人推恩者六百九十一人，论者以为过。
现代文：岭南平定后，二广举人推恩者达六百九十一人，论者认为过分。
English: After the subjugation of Lingnan, the number of people from the two regions who were named as benefactors reached 691, which was considered excessive by the commentators.

古文：顷之，齐州学究皇甫渊以捕贼功，法当赏钱，数上书求用。
现代文：不久，兖州学究皇甫渊由于捕捉盗贼有功，按照法律规定应当奖赏钱，皇甫渊多次上书请求朝廷任用。
English: Soon after, Emperor Fuyuan, the scholar of Zhangzhou, was rewarded with money in accordance with the law for his achievements in catching thieves. Emperor Fuyuan repeatedly petitioned the imperial court for appointment.

古文：道士赵清贶与籍姊家亲，绐为渊白籍，乃与堂吏共受渊赂。
现代文：道士赵清贶与庞籍是姊妹亲家，受欺骗替皇甫渊向庞籍求用，于是与堂吏共同接受了皇甫渊的贿赂。
English: Taoist Zhao Qingyao and Pang Zeki were sisters. He was deceived into asking Pang Zeki for help on behalf of Emperor Fu Yuan, so he and the court officials accepted the bribe from Emperor Fu Yuan.

古文：小吏诉之，下开封府，捕清贶，刺配远州，道死。
现代文：小吏控告他们，庞籍给开封府下达指令，将清贶捕捉，发配到其他边远州县，未到，在路上就死了。
English: The petty officials sued them, and Pang Ke ordered the Kaifeng government to capture the pangolins and send them to other outlying prefectures. Before they arrived, they died on the way.

古文：韩绛言籍阴讽府杖杀清贶以灭口，覆之无状。
现代文：韩绛上言说庞籍暗中吩咐府吏杖杀赵清贶来灭口供，朝廷反覆核查没有此事。
English: Han Qian said that Pang secretly ordered the government officials to kill Zhao Qingyao to quash his confession, but the imperial court repeatedly verified that this was not the case.

古文：言不已，乃罢知郓州。
现代文：但上奏不断，于是罢为郓州知州。
English: However, it continued to be played, so it was changed to Bozhou Chizhou.

古文：居数月，加观文殿大学士。
现代文：居留数月，兼观文殿大学士。
English: He stayed there for a few months, and became a scholar at Gwangbunden University.

古文：拜昭德军节度使、知永兴军，改并州。
现代文：授职昭德军节度使、知永兴军，改任并州知州。
English: Zhao Dejun was appointed as the military envoy of the Qing Dynasty and Zhi Yongxing was appointed as the military envoy of the Yongxing Dynasty.

古文：仁宗不豫，籍尝密疏，请择宗室之贤者为皇子，其言甚切。
现代文：仁宗身体不适，庞籍曾暗中上疏，请求选择宗室中的贤俊之士为皇太子，言辞十分恳切。
English: Rinzong was unwell, his large family had been secretly split up, and he pleaded earnestly for the selection of a virtuous man from his family to be crown prince.

古文：坐擅听麟州筑堡白草平，而州将武戡等为夏人所败，复为观文殿大学士、户部侍郎、知青州。
现代文：由于擅自听任麟州在白草平修筑堡垒，而州将武戡等被西夏人打败，因此又为观文殿大学士、户部侍郎、知青州。
English: Because he allowed Linzhou to build a fortress in Bai Cao Ping without permission, and the Western Xia people defeated Zhuge Liang and others, he became a scholar of the Academy of Confucius, a chamberlain of the Household Division, and a scholar of Qingzhou.

古文：迁尚书左丞，不拜。
现代文：升任尚书左丞，没授职。
English: Promoted to Shoshu-zojo, but did not receive the post.

古文：徙定州，召还京师，上章告老，寻以太子太保致仕，封颍国公。
现代文：调往定州，奉召回到京师，上书朝廷告老还乡，不久以太子太保致仕，封为颍国公。
English: He was transferred to Dingzhou, was called back to Beijing Division, and sent a letter to the imperial court to return to his hometown. Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Taiho, and was given the title of Duke of Shandong.

古文：薨，年七十六。
现代文：去世，终年七十六岁。
English: He died at the age of 76.

古文：时仁宗不豫，废朝、临奠皆不果，第遣使吊赙其家。
现代文：这时仁宗身体不适，废朝、临奠都未实现，只派遣使者吊唁并资助其家办理丧事。
English: At this time, Rinzong was not feeling well, and neither the abdication nor the memorial service had been realized. Only an envoy was sent to offer condolences and to help his family with the funeral.

古文：赠司空，加侍中，谥庄敏。
现代文：追赠司空，加侍中，谥号 庄敏 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Siku, and was also given the title of Zhanmin.

古文：籍晓律令，长于吏事。
现代文：庞籍通晓律令，擅长吏事。
English: Pang is familiar with the laws and regulations, and is good at administrative work.

古文：持法深峭，军中有犯，或断斩刳磔，或累笞至死，以故士卒畏服。
现代文：执法严密，军中有人犯法，或断肢斩首剖腹分裂肢体，或多次抽打致死，因此士兵们都害怕而服帖。
English: Law enforcement is strict, and some soldiers have broken the law, severed limbs, beheaded, disemboweled, split limbs, or beaten to death several times, so soldiers are afraid and submit.

古文：性喜佛，慕裴休之为人，然风迹弗逮也。
现代文：治理百姓十分爱惜，到他任宰相时，其声望比在郡县任官时要低。儿子庞元英，朝散大夫。孙子庞恭孙。
English: He was very fond of governing the people, and when he became prime minister, his reputation was lower than when he was a county official. His son, Pang Yuanying, was a doctor in the Joseon Dynasty. His grandson, Pang Gongsun.

古文：章得象，字希言，世居泉州。
现代文：章得象字希言，世代居住在泉州。
English: The chapter is like the word "hope" and has lived in Quanzhou for generations.

古文：高祖仔钧，事闽为建州刺史，遂家浦城。
现代文：高祖章仔钧，在闽任建州刺史，于是全家定居在浦城。
English: Gao Zu Zhang Zi Yao was appointed as Jianzhou's historian in Yao, so the whole family settled in Pucheng.

古文：得象母方娠，梦登山，遇神人授以玉象，及生，父奂复梦家庭积笏如山。
现代文：章得象母亲正怀孕时，做梦登山，遇到神人授予玉象，到章得象降生时，其父又梦见家中填积的笏板像山一样高。
English: When Zhang De Liang's mother was pregnant, she dreamed of climbing a mountain and met a godman who granted her a jade elephant. When Zhang De Liang was born, his father dreamed that the cutting board at home was as high as a mountain.

古文：长而好学，美姿表，为人庄重。
现代文：章得象长大后好学，体貌优美，为人庄重。
English: Zhang De grew up to be studious, good-looking and dignified.

古文：进士及第，为大理评事、知玉山县，迁本寺丞。
现代文：进士及第，为大理评事、知玉山县，升任大理寺丞。
English: He was promoted to the position of Daliji-jo (大理寺丞) after he was promoted to the position of Dali critic and chancellor of Yushan County.

古文：真宗将东封泰山，以殿中丞签书兖州观察判官事，知台州，历南雄州，徙洪州。
现代文：真宗将要东封泰山，章得象以殿中丞兼领兖州观察判官事、台州知州，任南雄州知州，调任洪州。
English: Shinshong will be assigned to Taishan in the east, and Zhang Dexiang will be appointed as the vice-chairman of the palace and the judge of the observation of Zhangzhou, Taizhou will be assigned to Zhizhou, Nanxiong will be assigned to Zhizhou, and Hongzhou will be assigned to Hongzhou.

古文：杨亿以为有公辅器，荐之。
现代文：杨亿认为章得象有辅佐王公之才，向朝廷进行推荐。
English: Yang Yili believed that Zhang Delu had the ability to assist the king and recommended him to the imperial court.

古文：或问之，亿曰： 闽士轻狭，而章公深厚有容，此其贵也。 得象尝与亿戏博李宗谔家，一夕负钱三十万，而酣寝自如。
现代文：有人问他，杨亿说： 闽州人轻率气量狭小，而章公庄重深厚，这是他的可贵之处。 章得象曾经与杨亿在李宗谔家进行戏博，一晚上输钱三十万，但章得象照样酣睡自如。
English: When someone asked him, Yang Rong said: Zhangzhou people are short-tempered and narrow-minded, while Zhang Gong is dignified and profound, which is his valuable point. Zhang Rong once played a game with Yang Rong at the home of Li Zongya, losing 300,000 yuan in one night, but Zhang Rong still slept soundly.

古文：他日博胜，得宗谔金一奁；数日博又负，即反奁与宗谔，封识未尝发也。
现代文：又一天戏博获胜，获得李宗谔一奁金，数天后又输了，立即将一奁金交给李宗谔，奁上的封条都没有开启。
English: Another day, the drama club won and won a gold medal for Li Zongyao. A few days later, it lost again and immediately handed the gold medal to Li Zongyao. The seal on the medal was not opened.

古文：其度量宏廓如此。
现代文：他的气量宽宏就是如此。
English: Such is his air of magnanimity.

古文：未几，召试，为直史馆、安抚京东，权三司度支判官，累迁尚书刑部郎中，使契丹，遂以兵部郎中知制诰。
现代文：不久，奉召考试，为直史馆、安抚京东，暂代三司度支判官，多次升任尚书刑部郎中，出使契丹，就以兵部郎中的身份任知制诰。
English: Soon after, he was called for an examination, and he served as the head of the direct history museum, pacified Jingdong, temporarily served as the judge of the Third Division of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was repeatedly promoted to the vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice, dispatched Khitan, and served as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：逾年，为翰林学士，迁右谏议大夫，以给事中为群牧使，迁礼部侍郎兼龙图阁学士，进承旨兼侍讲学士，擢同知枢密院事，迁户部侍郎，遂拜同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：第二天，为翰林学士，升为右谏议大夫，以给事中为群官之首，升任礼部侍郎兼龙图阁学士，接受朝廷诏令兼任侍读学士，升为同知枢密院事，升为户部侍郎，于是授职同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: The next day, he was awarded the title of Hanlin Scholar, promoted to the title of Doctor of the Right Division of the Council of State, promoted to the head of the group of officials, promoted to the title of Attendant of the Ministry of Rites and Decrees and the title of Bachelor of Longtu Court, received the Imperial Decree and served as an Attendant of the Academy, promoted to the title of Tongzhi Privy Councillor, promoted to the title of Attendant of the Household Department, and was then awarded the title of Junior High School Student, Junior High School Student, Junior High School Student, Junior High School Student, and Junior High School Student.

古文：帝谓得象曰： 向者太后临朝，群臣邪正，朕皆默识之。
现代文：真宗对章得象说 ：从前太后执掌朝政，大臣们的奸邪和正直，朕都默默地记在心中。
English: Shinsong said to Zhang Dexiang, "I have silently kept in my heart the treachery and honesty of the ministers when the empress dowager was in charge of the imperial government.

古文：卿清忠无所附，且未尝有所干请，今日用卿，职此也。 
现代文：你清廉忠诚不依附任何权贵，而且没有任何私自的要求，如今任用你，就是凭的这一点。 
English: Your integrity, your loyalty, your non-attachment to any authority, and the absence of any personal demands are the reasons for your appointment today.

古文：陕西用兵，加中书侍郎兼工部尚书兼枢密使，辞所加官。
现代文：陕西用兵，章得象兼任中书侍郎兼工部尚书兼枢密使，辞掉所加官职。
English: Shaanxi used soldiers, Zhang Dexiang concurrently served as the Secretary of the Central Government, the Secretary of the Ministry of Industry, and the Privy Councilor, and resigned from the additional official position.

古文：明年，以工部尚书为昭文馆大学士。
现代文：第二年，以工部尚书任昭文馆大学士。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as a scholar of Shobunkwan University by the Ministry of Industry and Commerce.

古文：庆历五年，拜镇安军节度使、同平章事，封郇国公，徙判河南府，守司空致仕，薨。
现代文：庆历五年，授职镇安军节度使、同平章事，封为郇国公，调往河南府，守司空致仕。
English: In the fifth year of the celebration calendar, he was awarded the post of Zhen'an Jun Festival Envoy, and the same rank and file, he was appointed as the governor of Shandong Province, transferred to Henan Province, and served as the commander of the sky.

古文：故事，致仕官乘舆不临奠，帝特往焉。
现代文：去世，按以往惯例，致仕官员皇帝不亲自祭奠，仁宗特地前往。
English: After his death, according to past practice, the emperor did not personally pay tribute to the deceased official, instead, Emperor Nenzong made a special trip.

古文：赠太尉兼侍中，谥文宪。
现代文：追赠太尉兼侍中，谥号 文宪 。
English: He was posthumously promoted to the rank of captain and chamberlain, and given the posthumous name Wen Xian.

古文：皇祐中，改谥文简。
现代文：皇年间，改谥号为 文简 。
English: During the reign of the emperor, he changed his pen name to Wenjian.

古文：得象在翰林十二年，章献太后临朝，宦官方炽，太后每遣内侍至学士院，得象必正色待之，或不交一言。
现代文：章得象在翰林十二年，章献太后执掌朝政，宦官势力正盛，太后每次派遣内侍到学士院，章得象一定脸色严肃接待他们，有时不说一句话。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Hanlin, Empress Dowager Zhang Xian was in charge of the imperial government, and eunuchs were in full swing. Every time the Empress Dowager sent courtiers to the Academy, Emperor Zhang received them with a serious face, and sometimes did not say a word.

古文：在中书凡八年，宗党亲戚，一切抑而不进。
现代文：在中书共八年，宗党亲戚，都抑制而不进用。
English: For a total of eight years in the Chinese book, the relatives of the patriarchal party restrained and did not use it.

古文：仁宗锐意天下事，进用韩琦、范仲淹、富弼，使同得象经画当世急务，得象无所建明，御史孙抗数言之，得象居位自若。
现代文：仁宗执意治理天下大事，任用韩琦、范仲淹、富弼，让他们与章得象共同管理策划当世最急需的事务，章得象没有任何建树，御史孙抗多次上奏言说，但章得象仍然若无其事地任官。
English: Renzong insisted on governing the world's major events, appointing Han Zheng, Fan Zhongran, and Fuxi, and let them jointly manage and plan the most urgent affairs of the world with Zhang Dexiang. Zhang Dexiang did not have any achievements, and the Grand Historian Sun Quan said many times in his speech, but Zhang Dexiang still served as an official without incident.

古文：既而章十上请罢，帝不得已，许之。
现代文：不久十人上奏请求罢免章得象，仁宗不得已，同意了此事。
English: Not long after, ten people petitioned for the dismissal of Zhang Dexiang. As a last resort, Renzong agreed to the matter.

古文：初，闽人谣曰： 南台江合出宰相。 至得象相时，沙涌可涉云。
现代文：起初，闽人的歌谣说 ：南台江汇合就要出宰相。 到章得象任宰相时，南台江中沙子上冒可以继续渡水。
English: At the beginning, a folk song said: "When the Nantai River meets, it is time for the prime minister to come out; when the prime minister is appointed, the sand in the Nantai River can continue to cross the water."

