古文：高汝砺张行信
现代文：高汝砺，字岩夫，应州金城人。
English: Gao Rucheng, also known as Iwafu, is from Jincheng, Yingzhou.

古文：高汝砺，字岩夫，应州金城人。
现代文：大定十九年中进士，当官以能干而著称。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of nineteen, and was known for his ability as a government official.

古文：登大定十九年进士第，莅官有能声。明昌五年九月，章宗诏宰执，举奏中外可为刺史者，上亲阅阙点注，盖取两员同举者升用之。
现代文：明昌五年九月，章宗诏令宰执大臣，举奏朝内外可以担任刺史的官员，皇帝亲自根据有缺额的地方点名任用，选取由两位大臣共同推荐的官员升任刺史。
English: In September of the 5th year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Zhang Zong issued an edict to the minister-in-charge, stating that officials both inside and outside the court could serve as the chief historian. The emperor personally appointed officials according to the shortage of places, and selected the officials recommended by the two ministers to be promoted to the chief historian.

古文：于是，汝砺自同知绛阳军节度事起为石州刺史。
现代文：因此，高汝砺从同知绛阳军节度事提拔当了石州刺史。
English: Therefore, Gao Rucheng was promoted from Tongzhi Shenyang Army Festival to become the history of Shishu.

古文：承安元年七月，入为左司郎中。
现代文：承安元年七月，入朝任左司郎中。
English: In July of the first year of the Shoan era, he entered the Imperial Court as a junior assistant secretary.

古文：一日奏事紫宸殿，时侍臣皆回避，上所御凉扇忽堕案下，汝砺以非职不敢取以进。
现代文：有一天，他在紫宸殿奏事，当时侍臣们都回避了，皇帝所用的凉扇忽然掉到桌子下面，高汝砺因为这不是自己的职责不敢拾起来送给皇帝。
English: One day, when he was giving a speech at the Palace of the Empress Dowager Cixi, the courtiers all avoided him, and the cooling fan used by the emperor suddenly fell under the table. Gao Rucheng did not dare to pick it up and give it to the emperor because it was not his duty.

古文：奏事毕，上谓宰臣曰： 高汝砺不进扇，可谓知体矣。 
现代文：奏事结束之后，皇帝对宰辅大臣们说： 高汝砺不送扇子，可说是懂规矩的。 
English: After the report was over, the emperor said to the vice-ministers: Gao Rucheng did not send a fan, which can be said to understand the rules.

古文：未几，擢为左谏议大夫。
现代文：不久，被提拔为左谏议大夫。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of doctor of the left lower jaw.

古文：以赋调军须，郡县有司或不得人，追胥走卒利其事急，规取货赂，深为民害，建言： 自今若因兵调发，有犯者乞权依 推排受财法 治之，庶使小人有所畏惧。 
现代文：由于当时在征收赋税和军需物品时，郡县有关官员用人不合适，也有些胥吏走卒们故意把事情催得急迫些，以便收取贿赂，民众深受其害。高汝砺便建议说 ：从今以后如果在收取军需所用的调赋时，由士兵征收的，犯了法就请暂时依照 推排受财法 治罪，这样才能让那些小人们有所畏惧。 
English: Since at that time, when collecting taxes and military supplies, it was not appropriate to employ county and county officials, and some bureaucrats deliberately made things more urgent in order to collect bribes, and the people suffered from it. Gao Rucheng then suggested: From now on, if soldiers collect money when collecting military supplies, if they violate the law, please temporarily be punished according to the financial law, so that those little people can be afraid.

古文：二年六月，定制，因军前差发受财者，一贯以下徒二年，以上徒三年，十贯处死，从汝砺之言也。
现代文：二年六月，规定：因征发军需品而接受贿赂的，钱财在一贯以下的判徒刑二年，一贯以上的徒刑三年，满十贯的处死。这是听从了高汝砺的意见。
English: In June of the second year, it was stipulated that: those who accepted bribes for requisitioning and dispatching military supplies would be sentenced to two years in prison if the amount was less than one yuan, three years in prison if it was more than one yuan, and death if it was more than ten yuan. This was in accordance with Gao Rucheng's opinion.

古文：时遇奏事，台臣亦令回避，汝砺乃上言： 国家置谏臣以备侍从，盖欲周知时政以参得失，非徒使排行就列而已。
现代文：有时遇到奏事，让朝臣们也回避。高汝砺便上奏说： 国家设置谏臣，作为近侍之臣，是要让他们能够详知时政以参与研究有关得失问题，不是仅仅让他们排队站班而已。
English: Gao Rucheng then made a report saying: The state has set up courtiers as courtiers, so that they can know the current political situation in detail and participate in the study of relevant gains and losses, not just let them stand in line.

古文：故唐制，凡中书、门下及三品以上入阁，必遣谏官随之，俾预闻政事，冀其有所开说。
现代文：所以唐代规定，凡中书、门下省以及三品以上官员入阁时，必定让谏官跟随，让他先知所奏之事，希望他能提出具有开启之功的建议。
English: Therefore, the Tang Dynasty stipulated that whenever officials from the Central Government, subordinate provinces, and three or more lineages entered the cabinet, they must have a eunuch follow, let him prophesy things, and hope that he can put forward suggestions that have the effect of opening up.

古文：今省台以下，遇朝奏事则一切回避，与诸侍卫之臣旅进旅退。
现代文：如今省台以下官员，遇到朝奏事情全部回避，和各侍卫之臣同进同退。
English: Nowadays, officials from the provincial level and below avoid all things related to the morning concert, and march and retreat together with the attendants.

古文：殿廷论事初莫得闻，及其已行，又不详其始末，遂事而谏，斯亦难矣。
现代文：在朝廷中议论事情时一开始就不知道，当开始实行以后，又搞不清其始末，想要因事以进谏，也就很难办到了。
English: When things are discussed in the imperial court, it is difficult to know what to do at the beginning, and when they are implemented, it is difficult to figure out what to do.

古文：顾谏职为何如哉？
现代文：这样来看，谏臣应当是怎么样的人呢？
English: From this perspective, what kind of person should a vassal be?

古文：若曰非材，择人可也，岂可置之言责而疏远若此。
现代文：如果认为选用的不合格，那就另行选择。怎么能够交给他进谏的责任却又这样疏远他？
English: If you don't think the candidate is qualified, then choose another one. How can you give him the responsibility of making a decision and alienate him like this?

古文：乞自今以往，有司奏事谏官得以预闻，庶望少补。
现代文：请从今以后，有关官员奏事时，谏官也能一开始就知道，也许能够多少有所裨益。
English: From now on, please let the eunuchs also know from the beginning when the relevant officials report things, it may be of some benefit.

古文：且修注之职，掌记言动，俱当一体。 
现代文：包括修起居注的官员，负责记录言行的，也都应当同等对待。 
English: The officials responsible for recording words and deeds, including those responsible for the establishment of settlements, should also be treated equally.

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：又言： 年前十月尝举行推排之法，寻以逾时而止，诚知圣上爱民之深也。
现代文：他又上言说 ：年前在十月间曾经实行推排的办法，不久因为过期而停止，但也可知陛下爱民的深情了。
English: He went on to say, "Years ago, in October, the method of postponing graduation was implemented, but it was soon stopped because it was overdue, but we can also see His Majesty's deep love for the people.

古文：切闻周制，以岁时定民之众寡，辨物之多少，入其数于小司徒，以施政教，以行征令，三年则天下大比，按为定法。
现代文：我所知道的周朝制度，每年弄清楚民众的人数多少，分辨财物数额多少，由小司徒将这个数目记载下来，以便施行政令教化，实行征税法令，三年便在全国普查一次人口，作为成法。
English: The Zhou Dynasty system that I know, every year to figure out the number of people and distinguish the amount of property, by the small Setter will record this number, in order to carry out administrative edification, the implementation of taxation laws, three years will be a national population census, as a law.

古文：伏自大定四年通检前后，迄今三十余年，其间虽两经推排，其浮财物力，惟凭一时小民之语以为增减，有司惟务速定，不复推究其实。
现代文：我朝自从大定四年普查以来，至今已三十多年，中间虽然两次推排，但其浮财物力，只是凭着小民一时的说法作为增减的标准，有关方面只想赶快确定上报，并不追查是否真实。
English: It has been more than 30 years since the four-year census in Datong. Although it was postponed twice in the middle, its floating wealth and material resources are only based on the temporary statements of the common people as the standard of increase and decrease. The relevant parties only want to quickly confirm the report, and do not investigate whether it is true.

古文：由是豪强有力者符同而幸免，贫弱寡援者抑屈而无诉。
现代文：因此那些豪强有势力的人因为欺瞒而得以幸免，贫困弱小没有靠山的便受到委屈压抑而无处申诉。
English: Therefore, those who are strong and powerful are spared because of deception, and those who are poor, weak, and have no support are oppressed and have nowhere to appeal.

古文：况近年以来，边方屡有调发，贫户益多。
现代文：况且近年以来，边境有事而屡次征收，贫困户更多。
English: Moreover, in recent years, the border has been repeatedly levied due to incidents, and there are more poor households.

古文：如止循例推排，缘去岁条理已行，人所通知，恐新强之家预为请嘱狡狯之人，冀望至时同辞推唱。
现代文：如果只依旧例实行推排，沿用去年旧方法实行，这种方法人所共知，只怕那些新富户预先买通那些狡猾的奸人，指望到时候一起推诿。
English: If we just carry out the reshuffle as usual, using last year's old method, which is well-known to everyone, the only fear is that the newly rich will buy off the cunning traitors in advance and hope to reshuffle together when the time comes.

古文：或虚作贫之，故以产业低价质典，及将财物徙置他所，权止营运。
现代文：或者装出贫困的样子，故意将产业低价典押给别人，或者将财物转移到别处，暂时停止经营等。
English: Or pretending to be poor, deliberately pawning the industry at a low price to others, or transferring assets elsewhere, temporarily suspending operations, etc.

古文：如此奸弊百端，欲望物力均一，难矣。
现代文：这样弊端百出，指望平均物力，也就困难了。
English: In this way, the drawbacks abound, and it is difficult to rely on average material resources.

古文：欲革斯弊，莫若据实通检，预令有司照勘大定四年条理，严立罪赏，截日立限，关防禁约。
现代文：如果想要革除弊病，不如实行通查，预先让有关方面依照大定四年实行的规定条例，严设赏罚标准，规定好截止日期，严查违令者。
English: If you want to eliminate the ills, it is better to carry out a general inspection and let the relevant parties strictly set the reward and punishment standards, set the deadline, and strictly check the violators in accordance with the provisions and regulations implemented in the fourth year of the Great Reform.

古文：其间有可以轻重者斟酌行之，去烦碎而就简易，戒搔扰而事镇静，使富者不得以苟避，困者有望于少息，则赋税易办，人免不均之患矣。 
现代文：中间有的问题可以考虑其轻重而斟酌实行，去掉琐碎的采用简单易行的，严戒扰民力求安定，让富有的不能苟求逃避，困难者可望稍得喘息之机，这样，赋税就容易收齐，民众也就免去负担不平均的祸患了。 
English: Some of the problems in the middle can be considered important and carefully implemented, the trivial use of simple and easy to do can be eliminated, the people should be disturbed to seek stability, the rich should not be able to escape, and the needy can be expected to have a little breathing space. In this way, the tax will be easy to collect, and the people will be spared the scourge of uneven burden.

古文：诏尚书省俟边事息行之。
现代文：皇帝诏令尚书省，等边境战事平静以后实行。
English: The Emperor issued a decree to suspend the publication of the book, to be implemented after the border war calmed down.

古文：是岁十月，上谕尚书省，遣官诣各路通检民力，命户部尚书贾执刚与汝砺先推排在都两警巡院，令诸路所差官视以为法焉。
现代文：当年十月，皇帝告诉尚书省，让派遣官员到各路普查民众财力，命令户部尚书贾执刚和高汝砺在两警巡院先行推排，让派往各路的官员一起参看，作为依照实行的方法。
English: In October of that year, the emperor told Shangshu Province to send officials to all provinces to survey the people's financial resources, and ordered the household departments of Shangshu Jia, Xigang and Gao Rucheng to advance in the two police stations, so that the officials sent to all provinces could see it together, as a method of implementation.

古文：寻为同知大兴府事。
现代文：不久，高汝砺被任命为同知大兴府事。
English: Soon after, Gao Rucheng was appointed as Tongzhi Daxing prefectural official.

古文：四年十二月，为陕西东路转运使。
现代文：四年十二月，任陕西东路转运使。
English: In December of the fourth year, he was appointed as the transfer envoy of Shaanxi East Road.

古文：泰和元年七月，改西京路转运使。
现代文：泰和元年七月，改任西京路转运使。
English: In July 2019, he was appointed as the transfer envoy of Xijing Road.

古文：二年正月，为北京临潢府路按察使。
现代文：二年正月，任北京临潢府路按察使。
English: In the first month of the second year, he was appointed as the inspector of Beijing Linyufu Road.

古文：四年二月，迁河北西路转运使。
现代文：四年二月，改任河北西路转运使。
English: In February of the same year, he was transferred to the post of Hebei West Road Transfer Envoy.

古文：十一月，进中都路都转运使。
现代文：十一月，进升为中都路都转运使。
English: In November, the company was promoted to Zhongdu Road Transportation Company.

古文：六年六月，拜户部尚书。
现代文：六年六月，任户部尚书。
English: In June of the sixth year, he was appointed as the head of the household.

古文：时钞法不能流转，汝砺随事上言，多所更定，民甚便之，语在《食货志》。
现代文：当时钞票不能流通运转，高汝砺根据情况上疏奏事，多方改进，民众使用起来感到很方便。事情写在《食货志》中。
English: At that time, banknotes could not circulate and operate. Gao Ruchen made various improvements according to the situation, and the people felt very convenient to use. The matter was written in the "Food Diary."

古文：上嘉其议，敕尚书省曰： 内外百官所司不同，比应诏言事者不啻千数，俱不达各司利害，汗漫陈说，莫能详尽。
现代文：皇帝很是赞许，并对尚书省下令说： 内外百官所负责的各有不同，近时应诏言事的不止千数，但都没有谈到各自负责方面的要害问题，所陈说的过于空泛，没有详尽的。
English: The emperor was very appreciative, and said to Shang Shuxuan: "The responsibilities of hundreds of officials at home and abroad are different. Recently, there have been more than a thousand speeches, but they have not talked about the key issues in their respective areas of responsibility. What they have said is too vague and not exhaustive.

古文：近惟户部尚书高汝砺，论本部数事，并切事情，皆已行之。
现代文：近日唯有户部尚书高汝砺，论奏本部几件事，均切中要害，并已实行。
English: Recently, only the household department has been highly praised, and several matters concerning the headquarters have been raised, and have been implemented.

古文：其谕内外百司各究利害举明，若可举而不即申闻，以致上司举行者，量制其罚。 
现代文：你们应晓谕内外百官，各自研究要害问题列举指明，如果可以举报而不立即上奏，而由上司举报的，量情给予处罚。 
English: You should instruct hundreds of officials at home and abroad to study the key issues and enumerate and point out, if it is possible to report without immediately reporting, and if reported by the boss, the situation will be punished.

古文：贞祐二年六月，宣宗南迁，次邯郸，拜汝砺为参知政事。
现代文：贞二年六月，宣宗迁都南京，到邯郸时，拜高汝砺为参知政事。
English: In June of the 2nd year of Zhen, the capital of the Xuan Zong was moved to Nanjing. When he arrived, Bai Gaorujun became the party secretary.

古文：次汤阴，上闻汴京谷价腾踊，虑扈从人至则愈贵，问宰臣何以处之。
现代文：走到汤阴时，皇帝听说汴京谷物价格大涨，担心随驾人员到达后会更贵，便问宰辅大臣们怎么处置。
English: When he came to Tangyin, the emperor heard that the price of grain in Beijing had risen sharply, and he was worried that it would be more expensive after the attendants arrived, so he asked the vice-ministers what to do.

古文：皆请命留守司约束，汝砺独曰： 物价低昂，朝夕或异，然籴多粜少则贵。
现代文：他们都说命令留守司加以管制。高汝砺却独自发表意见说： 物价的高低，早晚不同，但买粮人多卖出的人少就贵。
English: They all said that they had ordered the Resident Division to control it. Gao Rucheng, however, expressed his own opinion, saying: The level of prices will vary sooner or later, but the more people buy grain and the fewer people sell it, the more expensive it is.

古文：盖诸路之人辐凑河南，籴者既多，安得不贵？
现代文：目前各路人员都聚集到河南，买粮人多，怎么会不贵。
English: At present, people from all walks of life have gathered in Henan, and there are many people buying grain. How can it not be expensive?

古文：若禁止之，有物之家皆将闭而不出，商旅转贩亦不复入城，则籴者益急而贵益甚矣。
现代文：如果加以禁止，存有货物的人家将都关闭起来不出售，而转运的商贩们也不再进城，这样买的人更急而就贵得更狠了。
English: If it were prohibited, all the houses where goods were stored would be closed down and not sold, and the transporters would no longer enter the city. This would make buyers more anxious and prices more expensive.

古文：事有难易，不可不知，今少而难得者谷也，多而易致者钞也，自当先其所难，后其所易，多方开诱，务使出粟更钞，则谷价自平矣。 
现代文：事情有难有易，不能不知，如今东西少而难得的是粮食，多而易得的是钞票，自当先解决难的，然后再考虑容易办的，多方开通劝诱，务必让粮食都拿出来换钱，那么粮价自然就会平稳下来。 
English: There are things that are difficult and things that are easy. We must not forget that what is scarce and hard to get nowadays is grain, and what is more easily obtainable is banknotes. We should solve the difficult things first, and then consider the easy things to do. Multiple parties should be set up to persuade people, and it is imperative to exchange grain for money. Then grain prices will naturally stabilize.

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：三年五月，朝廷议徙河北军户家属于河南，留其军守卫郡县，汝砺言： 此事果行，但便于豪强家耳，贫户岂能徙？
现代文：三年五月，朝廷计议将河北军户的家属迁到河南，只留下军队守卫郡县。高汝砺说： 这事如果实行，只是那些豪强之家便于办到，贫困户怎么能够迁徙？
English: In May of the third year, the imperial court planned to relocate the families of military households in Hebei to Henan, leaving only the army to guard the counties. Gao Ruxuan said: If this is implemented, only those powerful families can easily do it, how can poor households move?

古文：且安土重迁，人之情也。
现代文：况且安于故土，不愿迁移，是人之常情。
English: Moreover, it is human nature to be comfortable in one's native land and not want to move.

古文：今使尽赴河南，彼一旦去其田园，扶携老幼，驱驰道路，流离失所，岂不可怜。
现代文：如今让他们都前往河南，他们一旦离开家园，扶老携幼，在道路上跋涉，流离失所，岂不是十分可怜？
English: Now let them all go to Henan, once they leave their homes, help the elderly with their children, trudge on the road, displaced, is not it very pitiful?

古文：且所过百姓见军户尽迁，必将惊疑，谓国家分别彼此，其心安得不摇。
现代文：况且所路过的百姓们见到军户全部迁移了，必将产生惊疑情绪，认为国家分别看待，他们心里能不动摇吗？
English: Moreover, when the people passing by see that all the military households have been relocated, they will surely have a feeling of surprise, thinking that the country will look at them separately. Can they not be shaken in their hearts?

古文：况军人已去其家，而令护卫他人，以情度之，其不肯尽心必矣。
现代文：况且军人的家属既已迁离，却让他们去保护别人，以情理而论，必定不肯尽心的。
English: Moreover, the family members of the soldiers have already moved away, but let them go to protect others, reasonably speaking, they must be unwilling to do their best.

古文：民至愚而神者也，虽告以卫护之意，亦将不信，徒令交乱，俱不得安，此其利害所系至重。
现代文：民众再怎么愚蠢也是很有思想的，尽管告诉他们还是要保卫他们的，他们也必然不肯相信，这样只会交相混乱，各方都不得安宁，这件事所关系到的是极为重大的利害问题。
English: The people, no matter how stupid, are very thoughtful, and even if they are told that they still have to defend them, they will certainly not believe it. This will only lead to mutual confusion, and all parties will not be at peace. This matter is related to extremely important interests.

古文：乞先令诸道元帅府、宣抚司、总管府熟论可否，如无可疑，然后施行。 
现代文：请先让各道的元帅府、宣抚司、总管府反复论议是否可行，如确无可疑之处，然后施行。 
English: Please first let the marshal's office, the propaganda department, and the general administration office of each province repeatedly discuss whether it is feasible, and if there is no doubt, then implement it.

古文：不报。
现代文：进言以后没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：军户既迁，将括地分授之，未有定论，上敕尚书省曰： 北兵将及河南，由是尽起诸路军户，共图保守。
现代文：军户既已南迁，准备收括田地分给他们，还没有拿定意见，皇帝对尚书省说 ：北军将到河南，因此而尽迁各路军户，共同加以保卫。
English: Since the military families had already moved south and were preparing to collect and distribute the fields to them, they had not yet made up their minds. The emperor said to Shangshu Province: The Northern Army will come to Henan, so the military families from all directions will move to jointly defend it.

古文：今既至矣，粮食所当必与，然未有以处之。
现代文：如今既已到达，粮食自当分地给他们，但至今没有加以处理。
English: Now that it has arrived, they are being given their fair share of the grain, but it has not been processed yet.

古文：可分遣官聚耆老问之，其将益赋，或与之田，二者孰便。 
现代文：可以派遣官员聚集各地老人询问他们，是准备增加赋税，还是分给他们田地，二者哪种比较方便实行？ 
English: Can officials be sent to gather elderly people from all over the country to ask them whether they are prepared to increase taxes or allocate fields to them, which of the two is more convenient to implement?

古文：又以谕汝砺。
现代文：他又将这事告知高汝砺。
English: He also told Gao Ruchen about this.

古文：既而所遣官言： 农民并称，比年以来，租赋已重，若更益之，力实不足，不敢复佃官田，愿以给军。 
现代文：不久，那些派去的官员们来报告说 ：农民们都说，近年来租赋越来越重，如果再增加，就难以承受了。不敢再租用官田了，愿意分地给军户。 
English: Soon, the officials who had been dispatched came to report: the farmers all said that in recent years the rents had become heavier and heavier, and if they were to increase again, it would be unbearable. They dared not rent government-owned land anymore, and were willing to give land to military households.

古文：于是汝砺奏： 迁徙军户，一时之事也。
现代文：于是，高汝砺上奏说 ：迁移军户，是一时的举动。
English: As a result, Gao Rucheng said in his report that the relocation of military households was a temporary move.

古文：民佃官田，久远之计也。
现代文：民众租用官田，是长久之计。
English: It is a long-term solution for the public to rent government-owned land.

古文：河南民地、官田，计数相半。
现代文：河南的民地和官田，数量相当。
English: The number of private land and government-owned land in Henan is almost equal.

古文：又多全佃官田之家，坟茔、庄井俱在其中。率皆贫民，一旦夺之，何以自活？
现代文：又有许多人家都是租佃官田耕种的，他们的祖坟、村庄等都在官田里，这些人大多是贫民，一旦夺田，何以维持生活？
English: There are also many people whose families rent and cultivate government-owned land. Their ancestral graves, villages, etc. are all in government-owned land. Most of these people are poor. Once they seize land, how can they sustain their lives?

古文：夫小民易动难安，一时避赋，遂有此言。
现代文：况且小民容易动荡难以安定，因为一时避收田赋，所以说出这种话来。
English: Moreover, the common people are prone to turbulence and difficult to stabilize, because they temporarily avoid receiving rice, so they say this kind of thing.

古文：及其与人，即前日之主，今还为客，能勿悔乎？
现代文：可是真让他们把土地给了人家，那么，前日还是主人今天就变成了客户，能不悔恨吗？
English: But they really let them give the land to someone else, so, the day before or the owner became a customer today, can you not regret it?

古文：悔则忿心生矣。
现代文：悔恨便产生愤慨之心。
English: Remorse breeds resentment.

古文：如山东拨地时，腴田沃壤尽入势家，瘠恶者乃付贫户。无益於军，而民则有损，至于互相憎疾，今犹未已，前事不远，足为明戒。
现代文：像在山东调拨土地时，肥沃的田地都被有权势人家所占有，贫瘠的土地才给贫困户耕种，这样无益于军户，有损于民众，导致他们相互憎恨，这件事至今还没有平息下来。前事为时不远，足以成为鉴戒。
English: For example, when allocating land in Shandong, fertile fields were occupied by powerful people, and poor land was cultivated by poor households. This did not benefit military households, harmed the people, and caused them to hate each other. This matter has not yet subsided. The past is not far away, and is enough to serve as a warning.

古文：惟当倍益官租，以给军粮之半，复以系官荒田、牧马草地量数付之，令其自耕，则百姓免失业之艰，而官司不必为厉民之事矣。
现代文：只能采用增加官田赋税，以供给军户粮食的一半，再将原属官田现已荒芜的田地、放马的草地按数分给他们，让军户自己耕种，这样，百姓就免去失业的艰辛，而官府也不必做出对民众有害的事情。
English: The only way is to increase the tax on government-owned land to supply half of the grain to military households, and then divide the fields that are now barren and the grasslands where horses are allowed to run free, so that military households can cultivate themselves. In this way, the people will be spared the hardships of unemployment, and the government will not have to do anything harmful to the people.

古文：且河南之田最宜麦，今雨泽沾足，正播种之时，诚恐民疑以误岁计，宜早决之。 
现代文：况且河南的土地最适宜种麦，如今雨水充足，又正当播种时节，只恐民众产生疑惑而误了计划，应当早做决断。 
English: Moreover, the land of Henan is most suitable for growing wheat. Now that there is sufficient rain and the sowing season is right, the public should make a decision as soon as possible, lest they have doubts and miss the plan.

古文：上从其请。
现代文：皇帝听从他的意见。
English: Emperor Xuan Zong approved.

古文：寻迁尚书右丞。
现代文：不久转任尚书右丞。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Shoshuu-jo.

古文：时上以军户地当拨付，使得及时耕垦，而汝砺复上奏曰： 在官荒田及牧马地，民多私耕者。
现代文：当时皇帝认为，军户的土地必须拨给，让他们能够及时开垦耕耘。高汝砺又上奏说 ：官府所有的荒田和牧马地，有许多被民众私自耕种了。
English: At that time, the emperor believed that the land of military households must be allocated, so that they could open up and cultivate in time. Gao Ruchen also reported that: many of the wasteland and pasture land owned by the government were cultivated by the people.

古文：今正艺麦之时，彼知将以与人，必皆弃去。军户虽得，亦已逾时，徒成旷废。
现代文：如今正当种麦时节，他们知道准备拨给别人，就必定都抛弃不种，等军户分到时，又已错过播种时机，这样就成了荒废的土地了。
English: Now, when it is time to sow wheat, they know that if they were to allocate it to someone else, they would all abandon it and not plant it. By the time the military households received their allotment, they had already missed the time to sow, and so the land became waste.

古文：若候毕功而后拨，量收所得，以补军储，则公私俱便。
现代文：不如等这一季收成之后再调拨，依照土地的收成征收适量的赋税，以补充军需储备，这样对公私两方均有利。
English: It would be better to wait until after this season's harvest before allocating funds and levying an appropriate amount of tax according to the land's harvest to supplement the military reserve, which would be beneficial to both the public and private sectors.

古文：乞尽九月然后遣官。 
现代文：请等到九月以后再拨调还官府。 
English: Please wait until after September before transferring back to the government.

古文：十月，汝砺言： 今河北军户徙河南者几百万口，人日给米一升，岁率三百六十万石，半给其直犹支粟三百万石。
现代文：十月，高汝砺又进言说： 如今河北的军户迁到河南的多达几百万人，每人一天给一升米，一年就需要三百六十万石，给予一半，其价值仍相当支出粟三百万石。
English: In October, Gao Ruchen added: Nowadays, up to several million people from the military households in Hebei have moved to Henan. Each person gives one liter of rice a day. In a year, 3.6 million stones are needed, and half is given. Its value is still equivalent to spending 3 million stones of millet.

古文：河南租地计二十四万顷，岁征粟才一百五十六万有奇，更乞于经费之外倍征以给，仍以系官闲田及牧马地可耕者畀之。 
现代文：河南租出的土地合计是二十四万顷，每年所收的粟才只有一百五十六万多石，请在正常经费之外加倍征收，以便配给他们，同时仍将原属官府所有的闲田和放马地可耕种的分给他们。 
English: The total land leased by Henan is 240,000 hectares, and the annual millet harvest is only more than 1.56 million koku. Please double the collection in addition to the normal funds so that it can be allocated to them, while still allocating to them the idle fields and horse-riding land that can be cultivated that originally belonged to the government.

古文：奏可。
现代文：皇帝表示同意。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：乃遣右司谏冯开等分诣诸郡就给之，人三十亩，以汝砺总之。
现代文：于是，派遣右司谏冯开等分别到各郡县就地配给，每人分给三十亩，由高汝砺总管其事。
English: As a result, he dispatched Feng Kai, the Right Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and others to the counties and counties separately for on-site distribution, each person was allocated thirty mu, and Gao Rucheng was in charge of the matter.

古文：既而括地官还，皆曰： 顷亩之数甚少，且瘠恶不可耕。计其可耕者均以与之，人得无几，又僻远处不免徙就之，军人皆以为不便。 
现代文：后来，搜括土地的官员回京，都说： 土地的亩数很少，且都是贫瘠难以耕种的，估计可以耕种的已经都分给了他们，每人所得无几，又都是偏僻较远的地方，必须迁移到那里去，军户们都感到不方便。 
English: Later, the land survey officials returned to Beijing and said: The number of mu of land is very small, and they are all barren and difficult to cultivate. It is estimated that all that can be cultivated has been allocated to them. Each person has little income, and they are all remote and distant places. It is necessary to move there, and military households feel inconvenient.

古文：汝砺遂言於上，诏有司罢之，但给军粮之半，而半折以实直焉。
现代文：高汝砺便将有关情况上奏皇帝，下诏让有关方面停止办理，只供给一半军粮，另一半折成钱配给。
English: Gao Rucheng then reported the relevant situation to the emperor, and ordered the relevant parties to stop handling, only providing half of the military grain, and the other half was divided into cash rations.

古文：四年正月，拜尚书左丞，连上表乞致仕，皆优诏不许。
现代文：四年正月，被任命为尚书左丞，他接连上表请求告退，朝廷都下优诏不答应。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, he was appointed as Shangshu Zuojo. He successively requested to withdraw from the table, but the imperial court did not agree.

古文：会朝廷议发兵河北，护民芟麦，而民间流言谓官将尽取之。
现代文：正值朝廷商议出兵河北，保护民众收麦，但民间却正在传言说官府准备把麦都收走。
English: It was the time when the imperial court was discussing sending soldiers to Hebei to protect the people from collecting wheat, but the people were spreading rumors that the government was preparing to take away all the wheat.

古文：上闻，以问宰职曰： 为之奈何？ 
现代文：皇帝知道以后，问宰辅们说： 怎么办呢？ 
English: When the emperor found out, he asked the aides-de-camp, "What should we do?

古文：高琪等奏： 若令枢密院遣兵居其冲要，镇遏土寇，仍许收逃户之田，则军民两便。或有警急，军士亦必尽心。 
现代文：高琪等上奏说 ：如果让枢密院派兵占领交通要道，镇压当地匪寇，仍然准许民众收割出逃者的民田，这样，军民两便，若有战事，士兵们也必定尽心尽力。 
English: Gao Qi and others said in the report: If the Privy Council is allowed to send troops to occupy major roads, suppress local bandits, and still allow the people to harvest the fields of those who have fled, then, for both the military and the people, if there is a war, the soldiers will certainly do their best.

古文：汝砺曰： 甚非计也。
现代文：高汝砺说 ：这绝不是好办法。
English: Gao Ruchen said, "This is definitely not a good way out."

古文：盖河朔之民所恃以食者，惟此麦耳。
现代文：因为河朔的民众所依赖的食粮只有这季麦子了。
English: Because the only grain that the people of Heshaku depend on is this season's wheat.

古文：今已有流言，而复以兵往，是益使之疑惧也。
现代文：如今外面已有谣言，再派军队前去，势必更让他们产生疑惧之心。
English: There are already rumours out there, and sending in more troops is only going to make them more suspicious.

古文：不若听其自便，令宣抚司禁戢无赖，不致侵扰足矣。
现代文：不如听从他们自便，让宣抚司出来查禁无赖之徒，不让这些人侵扰民众就够了。
English: It would be better to listen to them and let the procuratorate come out and ban the ruffians. It is enough to prevent these people from harassing the public.

古文：逃户田令有司收之，以充军储可也。 
现代文：已出逃的民户田地让有关方面收割，以充军粮就行了。 
English: Let the relevant parties harvest the fields of the people who have fled, and it will be enough to fill the army with grain.

古文：乃诏遣户部员外郎裴满蒲剌都阅视田数，及访民愿发兵以否，还奏： 臣西由怀、孟，东抵曹、单，麦苗苦亦无多，讯诸农民，往往自为义军。
现代文：于是派遣户部员外郎裴满蒲剌都前去检查麦田数量，并且向民众询问是否愿意朝廷发兵护麦。回来后，他上奏说： 我西自怀、孟，东至曹、单等地，见收麦时受干扰情况并不多，访问农民时，知道他们往往自行建起义军。
English: Therefore, he dispatched a member of the Household Department, Wairo Pei Manpo, to inspect the number of wheat fields, and asked the people whether they would like the imperial court to send soldiers to protect the wheat. After returning, he reported: In Zhihai and Meng in the west, and Cao and Shan in the east, there were not many cases of interference during the collection of wheat. When visiting farmers, he knew that they often set up a rebel army on their own.

古文：臣即宣布朝廷欲发兵之意，皆感戴而不愿也。 
现代文：臣下向他们宣布朝廷原打算出兵护收的意图，均表示感激却不愿朝廷出兵。 
English: When their subjects announced to them the intention of the imperial court to send troops to escort them, they all expressed their gratitude but were reluctant to send troops.

古文：于是罢之。
现代文：于是停止发兵。
English: So they stopped sending troops.

古文：汝砺以数乞致仕不从，乃上言曰： 立非常之功，必待非常之人。
现代文：高汝砺连连请求辞退得不到许可，便上奏说： 要建立非同寻常的功勋，必须有待非同寻常的人才来实现。
English: Gao Rucheng repeatedly asked for permission to resign, but was not allowed to do so, and then made a report saying: To establish extraordinary merit, it must be realized by extraordinary talents.

古文：今大兵既退，正完葺关隘、简练兵士之时，须得通敏经纶之才预为筹画，俾济中兴。
现代文：如今大兵已退，正应当修整关隘，训练兵士，必须有精明能干、善于处理国家大事的人才来预先筹划，以助中兴大业。
English: Now that the soldiers have retreated, it is time to rectify the obstacles and train the soldiers. It is necessary to have people who are shrewd and capable and good at handling national affairs to plan in advance to help ZTE.

古文：伏见尚书左丞兼行枢密副使胥鼎，才擅众长，身兼数器，乞召还朝省。 
现代文：我见尚书左丞兼行枢密院副使胥鼎，才兼众长，身兼数职，请求召回朝廷。 
English: I saw Shang Shuzhu Zuorong concurrently acting as the vice-envoy of the Privy Council, only to be concurrently the head of the general staff, holding several positions, and requested to be recalled to the imperial court.

古文：不从。
现代文：皇帝不从。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：时高琪欲从言事者岁阅民田征租，朝廷将从之。
现代文：当时高琪准备听从进言人的建议，每年清查一次民田亩数据以征收租税，朝廷也打算听从。
English: At that time, Gao Qi was ready to listen to the suggestion of the spokesman and check the data of the people's mu of land once a year to collect taxes, and the court also intended to listen.

古文：汝砺言： 臣闻治大国者若烹小鲜，最为政之善喻也。
现代文：高汝砺进言说 ：臣下听说治理大国的人要像烹煎小鱼那样，这是有关为政的极好的比喻。
English: Gao Rucheng said: My subjects have heard that those who govern big countries should be like cooking small fish, which is an excellent metaphor for politics.

古文：国朝自大定通检后，十年一推物力，惟其贵简静而重劳民耳。
现代文：国朝从大定年间实行一次普查之后，十年推排一次物力情况，这是贵于简易安定而不轻易烦劳民众。
English: After the country and the dynasty carried out a survey in the Taidong era, the material resources situation was revised once every ten years. This was more important than simple stability and did not easily bother the people.

古文：今言者请如河北岁括实种之田，计数征敛，即是常时通检，无乃骇人视听，使之不安乎。
现代文：如今进言者请求派人到河北每年清查实际耕种的民田，计数征收租税，也就是每年都要普查一次田地，这岂不是骇人听闻的事情？
English: Now, the proponent is requesting that someone be sent to Hebei to annually inspect the actually cultivated people's fields, count and collect taxes, that is, to survey the fields once a year. Isn't this a terrible thing?

古文：且河南、河北事体不同。
现代文：必定让民众心中不安。
English: It is bound to make people feel uneasy.

古文：河北累经劫掠，户口亡匿，田畴荒废，差调难依元额，故为此权宜之法，盖军储不加多，且地少而易见也。
现代文：况且河南、河北，事情不同，河北连遭劫难和抢掠，人口出逃躲避，田地荒芜，征收时难以依照原有数额，所以实行目前的权宜的办法，这样，军需粮不增加，而土地的减少是轻易可见的。
English: Moreover, the situation in Henan and Hebei is different. Hebei has been subjected to frequent robberies and looting, the population has fled to escape, the fields are deserted, and it is difficult to collect according to the original amount. Therefore, the current expedient method is implemented. In this way, the military grain demand does not increase, but the reduction of land is easily visible.

古文：河南自车驾巡幸以来，百姓凑集，凡有闲田及逃户所弃，耕垦殆遍，各承元户输租，其所征敛，皆准通推之额，虽军马益多，未尝阙误，讵宜一概动扰。
现代文：河南自从车驾南行以来，百姓剧增，所有闲田以及逃亡户遗弃的土地，都被开垦耕种完了，他们各自承担了原户人家的租税，对他们的征收额也是依照推排的数额，所以虽然兵马越来越多，却并未有所缺误，怎么能够总是干扰让他们不得安宁呢？
English: Henan Since driving south, the population has increased dramatically. All idle fields and land abandoned by fugitive households have been reclaimed and cultivated. They have each borne the tax of the original households, and the amount levied on them is also in accordance with the amount of displacement. So although there are more and more soldiers and horses, there is no shortage. How can they always be disturbed and have no peace?

古文：若恐豪右蔽匿而逋征赋，则有司检括亦岂尽实。
现代文：如果担心豪强们欺瞒而逃避征税，那么，即使让有关方面查检也难以保证尽符其实。
English: If you are worried that the powerful are cheating and evading taxes, then even if you let the relevant authorities inspect it, it is difficult to ensure that it is true.

古文：但严立赏罚，许其自首，及听人告捕，犯者以盗军储坐之，地付告者，自足使人知惧，而赋悉入官，何必为是纷纷也。
现代文：只要严设赏罚的规定，允许各人自首，或者让人上告并加以逮捕，违犯的以盗用军需物资罪论处，将他们的土地交给上告的人耕种，这就足以让人感到害怕，而赋税也就能够全部收缴入官，何必干这种纷纷扰扰的事情呢？
English: As long as there are strict rules of reward and punishment, allowing everyone to surrender, or let people appeal and arrest them, violating the crime of embezzlement of military supplies, giving their land to the appellant to cultivate, this is enough to make people feel scared, and the tax can be fully collected into the official, why do such disturbing things?

古文：抑又有大不可者三：如每岁检括，则夏田春量，秋田夏量，中间杂种亦且随时量之，一岁中略无休息，民将厌避，耕种失时，或止耕膏腴而弃其余，则所收仍旧而所输益少，一不可也。
现代文：况且还有三条原因不能实行：假如每年都清查，那么夏熟田春天就要清量，秋熟田夏天清量，中间杂种的庄稼也必须随时丈量，一年之中没有休止的时间，民众将感到厌烦并逃避，这样耕种就会误失农时，或者只耕种肥沃的田地而抛弃其他的，这时，所收的数额依旧的话能够交来的赋税就要减少许多，这是不可行的原因之一。
English: Moreover, there are three reasons why it cannot be carried out: if the survey is carried out every year, then the summer-ripening fields must be measured in the spring, the autumn-ripening fields must be measured in the summer, and the crops of intermediate hybrids must also be measured at any time. There is no rest time during the year, the people will get bored and escape. In this way, farming will miss the farming time, or only cultivate fertile fields and abandon others. At this time, if the amount received is the same, the tax that can be paid will be reduced a lot. This is one of the reasons why it is not feasible.

古文：检括之时，县官不能家至户到，里胥得以暗通货赂，上下其手，虚为文具，转失其真，二不可也。
现代文：清查田地时，县官不可能到所有人家里去，这样，乡间小吏们就能够暗中贿赂，上下其手，假写文字，反而失真，这是原因之二。
English: When inspecting fields, it is impossible for county officials to go to everyone's home. In this way, village officials can secretly bribe, shake hands, forge words, and distort the truth. This is the second reason.

古文：民田与军田犬牙相错，彼或阴结军人以相冒乱，而朝廷止凭有司之籍，倘使临时少于元额，则资储阙误必矣，三不可也。
现代文：民田和军田犬牙交错，相互之间如勾结起来冒认，朝廷只凭当地官府的簿籍收赋税，到时如果发现少于原有数额，那么误缺粮食物资储备的事必然发生，这是三不可。
English: The people's fields and the army's fields are intertwined, and if they collude with each other, they will deceive each other. The imperial court only relies on the books of the local government to collect taxes. If it is found to be less than the original amount, then the shortage of grain and food reserves will inevitably occur. This is inevitable.

古文：夫朝廷举事，务在必行，既行而复中止焉，是岂善计哉。 
现代文：凡朝廷办事，务必要办到底，如果已实行了又中途停止，岂是一种好的计谋呢？ 
English: Whenever the imperial court does something, it must be carried out to the end. If it is carried out and then stopped midway, is that a good strategy?

古文：议遂寝。
现代文：于是原来议定的办法被中止。
English: The discussion then came to an end.

古文：兴定元年十月，上疏曰： 言者请姑与宋人议和以息边民，切以为非计。
现代文：兴定元年十月，高汝砺又上疏说 ：有人进言请求暂时和宋人议和求得边境安宁，这绝非好办法。
English: In October of the first year of Xingding, Gao Rucheng once again said, "It is by no means a good way for someone to make a request to temporarily negotiate with the Song Dynasty and seek peace on the border.

古文：宋人多诈无实，虽与文移往来，而边备未敢遽撤。
现代文：宋人多狡诈不实，虽然彼此交和的文书经常往来，而边境的警戒却不敢立即撤除。
English: The Song people were more cunning and insincere, although the documents of mutual peace were often exchanged, but the border guard did not dare to withdraw immediately.

古文：备既不撤，则议和与否盖无以异。
现代文：防备既然难以撤除，那么议不议和也都是一样的。
English: Since defences are difficult to remove, it is all the same whether they are discussed or not.

古文：或复蔓以浮辞，礼例之外别有求索，言涉不逊，将若之何？
现代文：如果对方以虚辞敷衍，在正常礼仪之外别有所求，出言不逊，将怎么办？
English: What will happen if the other party uses perfunctory rhetoric, asks for something in addition to normal etiquette, or makes insolent remarks?

古文：或曰： 大定间亦尝先遣使，今何不可？ 
现代文：有人说 ：大定年间也曾经先派使者，现在有何不可？ 
English: Some people say: In the Daiding era, an envoy was also sent ahead, so why not now?

古文：切谓时殊事异，难以例言。
现代文：须切记时候不同，事情也就不一样，难以同等而言。
English: It is important to remember that times are different, things are different, and it is difficult to speak in the same way.

古文：昔海陵师出无名，曲在于我，是以世宗即位，首遣高忠建等报谕宋主，罢淮甸所侵以修旧好。
现代文：原来海陵王出师无名，理曲在我，所以世宗即位，先派高忠建等报知宋王，停止了在淮甸南侵的行动以修旧好。
English: It turned out that there was no name for the disciple sent by King Hailing, and I was the reason. Therefore, when King Sejong ascended the throne, he first sent Gao Zhongjian and others to report to King Song, and stopped the southward invasion in Huai Dian in order to mend fences.

古文：彼随遣使来，书辞慢易，不复奉表称臣，愿还故疆，为兄弟国。
现代文：宋人随即派使者前来，书信中言辞傲慢，改变语气，不再奏表称臣，要求归还旧疆土，双方成为兄弟国家。
English: The Song people immediately sent an envoy to come, the words in the letter were arrogant, changed the tone, no longer played the role of vassal, demanded the return of the old territory, and the two sides became brotherly countries.

古文：虽其枢密院与我帅府时通书问，而侵轶未尝已也。
现代文：虽然宋朝的枢密院和我国的元帅府时常通信访问，而入侵的行动从未停止过。
English: Although the Privy Council of the Song Dynasty and the Marshal's Office of our country often corresponded and visited each other, the invasion never stopped.

古文：既而征西元帅合喜败宋将吴璘、姚良辅于德顺、原州，右丞相仆散忠义、右副元帅纥石烈志宁败李世辅于宿州，斩首五万，兵威大振。
现代文：后来，征西元帅合喜在德顺、原州打败了宋将吴瞞、姚良辅，右丞相仆散忠义、右副元帅纥石烈志宁在宿州打败了李世辅，斩首五万级，兵威大振。
English: Later, the Western Conquest Marshal He Xie defeated the Song generals Wu Xie and Yao Liangyu in Deshun and Wonju, and the Minister of the Right, Minxuan Zhongyi, and the Vice-Marshal of the Right, Zou Shi Leshining, defeated Li Shifu in Suizhou, beheading 50,000 troops and greatly boosting military power.

古文：世宗谓宰臣曰： 昔宋人，言遣使请和，乘吾无备遂攻宿州，今为我军大败，杀戮过当，故不敢复通问。
现代文：世宗对宰辅大臣们说 ：以前宋人说派使者请求议和，乘我无备而进攻宿州，如今被我军打得大败，被杀过多，所以不敢再相互通问。
English: Sejong said to the vice-ministers, "In the past, the Song people sent envoys to ask for peace and took advantage of my unpreparedness to attack Sukju, but now they have been defeated by our army and killed too much, so they dare not ask each other again."

古文：朕哀南北生灵久困于兵，本欲息民，何较细故，其令帅府移书宋人，以议和好。 
现代文：我哀怜南北民众久困于兵燹，本意在于使民众安宁，何必计较细节问题，特令帅府写信给宋人以便议和修好。 
English: I feel sorry for the people in the north and the south who have been trapped in the siege for a long time. My intention is to bring peace to the people. Why should I care about the details? I hereby order the governor's office to write to the Song people for discussion and reconciliation.

古文：宋果遣使告和，以当时堂堂之势，又无边患，竟免其奉表称臣之礼。
现代文：宋人果然派使者前来和谈。以当时堂堂之气势，又无边境的祸患，还免去宋人奉表称臣的礼仪。
English: The Song Dynasty sent an envoy to negotiate peace. With the momentum of the time, and without the scourge of the border, the Song Dynasty was also exempt from the etiquette of obeying the table.

古文：今宋弃信背盟，侵我边鄙，是曲在彼也。
现代文：如今宋人抛弃信义违背盟约，侵我边境，是对方理曲。
English: Now that the Song people have abandoned their loyalty, violated the covenant, and invaded our borders, it is the other side's logic.

古文：彼若请和，于理为顺，岂当先发此议而自示弱耶？
现代文：如果对方来请求和议，于理为顺，怎么能由我方先提出和议而自示软弱呢？
English: If it is reasonable for the other side to request peace talks, how can we show weakness by proposing peace talks first?

古文：恐非徒无益，反招谤侮而已。 
现代文：只怕不仅无益，反而招致侮辱而已。 
English: It's not only unhelpful, it's insulting.

古文：十一月，汝砺言： 臣闻国以民为基，民以财为本，是以王者必先爱养基本。
现代文：十一月，高汝砺进言说： 我听说国家以民为基，民众以财为本，所以王者必然先爱其基本。
English: In November, Gao Rucheng said: I heard that the country is based on the people, and the people are based on wealth, so the king must first love its fundamentals.

古文：国家调发，河南为重，所征税租率常三倍于旧。
现代文：国家征收赋税，以河南为最重，所征收租税经常三倍于往前。
English: The state levied taxes, with Henan as the heaviest, and the taxes levied were often three times as much as before.

古文：今省部计岁收通宝不敷所支，乃于民间科敛桑皮故纸钱七千万贯以补之。
现代文：如今省部计算岁收时通宝不够支出使用，便在民间收集了桑皮故纸钱币七千万贯来补空。
English: Now, when the provincial department calculates the annual revenue, the treasure is not enough to spend and use, so the people have collected 70 million pieces of mulberry bark old paper money to fill the gap.

古文：近以通宝稍滞，又加两倍。
现代文：近来因为通宝流通稍有不畅，又要增收两倍钱。
English: Recently, because the distribution of Tongbao is a bit sluggish, they have to collect twice as much money.

古文：河南人户，农民居三之二，今税租犹多未足，而此令复出，彼不粜所当输租，则必减其食以应之。
现代文：河南的人口中，农民占三分之二，如今租税大多还未交足，而此令再发出，农民如果不卖应当交纳租税的粮食，就必须减少食粮来应付。
English: Farmers account for two-thirds of Henan's population, and most of them have yet to pay their taxes in full. This order was issued again, and if farmers do not sell grain that should be taxed, they will have to reduce grain to cope.

古文：夫事有难易，势有缓急。
现代文：事情有难有易，时势有缓有急。
English: Things are difficult and easy, the situation is slow and urgent.

古文：今急用而难得者，刍粮也，出于民力，其来有限，可缓图。
现代文：如今急用而难以得到的是粮草，是由民力生产出来的，来源有限，可以慢慢收取。
English: What is urgently needed and hard to get nowadays is grain and grass, which is produced by the people, has a limited source, and can be collected slowly.

古文：而易为者，钞法也，行于国家，其变无穷。
现代文：而容易办的是钞票，它通行于国家，变化无穷。
English: What is easy to manage is banknotes, which circulate in the country and are subject to endless changes.

古文：向者大钞滞，更为小钞，小钞弊，改为宝券，宝券不行，易为通宝，从权制变，皆由于上，尚何以烦民为哉。
现代文：过去大钞用起来不方便就改成小钞，小钞产生弊端就改为宝券，宝券不通行了就改为通宝，随机应变都在于国家，又何必来干扰民众呢？
English: In the past, when it was inconvenient to use large banknotes, they were changed to small banknotes, when the drawbacks of small banknotes occurred, they were changed to treasure certificates, and when treasure certificates were impassable, they were changed to treasure certificates. Random contingency is up to the country, and why bother the people?

古文：彼悉力以奉军储已患不足，而又添征通宝，苟不能给，则有逃亡。
现代文：农民尽力供奉军用物资已感力量不足，如今又要加征通宝，如果难以交出，就会逃亡。
English: Farmers have tried their best to offer military supplies, but have felt powerless, and now they have to increase the collection of treasure. If it is difficult to hand it over, they will flee.

古文：民逃亡则农事废，兵食何自而得？
现代文：民众逃亡就会荒废农事，军队的食粮从何而得？
English: If people flee, agriculture will be devastated. Where will the army's food come from?

古文：有司不究远图而贪近效，不固本原而较末节，诚恐军储、钞法两有所妨。
现代文：有关方面不考虑长久之计而贪求近利，不固其本原而计较细枝末节，只恐军储和钞法两方面都出现问题。
English: The relevant parties are greedy for short-term gains without considering long-term measures, and are not firm in their foundation but are concerned with the minutiae, fearing that problems may arise in both the military reserve and the banknote law.

古文：臣非于钞法不为意也，非于省部故相违也，但以钞法稍滞物价稍增之害轻，民生不安军储不给之害重耳。
现代文：我并非不在意于钞法，也不是有意和省部作对，只是认为钞法稍缓些，实行物价稍有提高的办法民众所害较轻，如民众不安定，军储不充足为害就严重了。
English: It's not that I don't care about the banknote law, and it's not my intention to oppose the ministries and departments. I just think that the banknote law is a little slower, and the implementation of a slight increase in prices will cause less harm to the people. If the people are unstable, and the military reserve is not sufficient, the harm will be serious.

古文：惟陛下外度事势，俯察臣言，特命有司减免，则群心和悦，而未足之租有所望矣。 
现代文：请陛下考虑外间的形势，详察臣下的意见，特命有关方面减免推行，这样民众之心就会喜悦，而不足的租税就有望收到。 
English: Please ask His Majesty to consider the external situation, carefully examine the opinions of his subjects, and specially order the relevant parties to implement the reduction and exemption, so that the hearts of the people will be pleased, and the insufficient taxes are expected to be received.

古文：时朝廷以贾仝、苗道润等相攻不和，将分畀州县、别署名号以处之。
现代文：当时朝廷因为贾仝、苗道润相互攻击不和，准备采取划分州县地区、别封名号加以处置。
English: At that time, the imperial court was preparing to divide the state and county regions and assign names to the fiefs in order to deal with the discord caused by the mutual attacks of Jia Wei and Miao Daorun.

古文：汝砺上书曰： 甚非计也。
现代文：高汝砺上书说 ：这很不是办法。
English: Gao Ruchen wrote: This is not the way to go.

古文：盖河北诸帅多本土义军，一时权为队长，亦有先尝叛亡者，非若素宦于朝，知礼义、识名分之人也。贪暴不法，盖无足怪。
现代文：因为河北各路统帅大多是本地的义军，一时暂当队长，也有过去曾经背叛过的，不像长期在朝为官的人，知晓礼仪，懂得名份。贪婪暴虐，不守法纪，本不足为怪。
English: Because most of the commanders of all roads in Hebei are local rebels, temporarily serving as captains, and some have betrayed in the past. Unlike those who have been in the government for a long time, they know the etiquette and understand the name. Greed, tyranny, non-observance of law and order, this is not surprising.

古文：朝廷以时方多故，姑牢笼用之，庶使遣民少得安息。
现代文：朝廷因为这时正是多事之秋，暂且笼络住他们加以任用，是要使遗留下来的民众能稍得安宁。
English: The Imperial Court, because this was a time of many events, temporarily entrapped them and appointed them, so that the people left behind could have a little peace.

古文：彼互相攻劫则势浸弱，势力既弱则朝廷易制。
现代文：他们相互攻打则实力越来越弱，势力弱小则朝廷容易制约。
English: If they attack each other, their strength will become weaker and weaker, and if their power is weak, it will be easy for the imperial court to restrict them.

古文：今若分地而与之，州县官吏得辄署置，民户税赋得擅征收，则地广者日益强，狭者日益弱。
现代文：如今如果将土地分开交给他们，州县官员他们就能自己委任，民众的租税他们就能自行征收，这样地大的就会越加强大，地小的就会越来越弱。
English: Today, if the land is handed over to them separately, they will be able to appoint their own state and county officials, and they will be able to collect the people's taxes on their own. In this way, the big land will become stronger and stronger, and the small land will become weaker and weaker.

古文：久之，弱者皆并于强，强者之地不可复夺，是朝廷愈难制也。
现代文：长久以后，弱的就会被强的兼并，而强的所占地盘朝廷就难以再收回，这样朝廷就越难约束。
English: After a long time, the weak will be annexed by the strong, and the territory occupied by the strong will be difficult for the imperial court to recover, so the more difficult it will be to restrain the imperial court.

古文：昔唐分河朔地授诸叛将，史臣谓其护养孽萌以成其祸，此可为今日大戒也。
现代文：过去唐朝分开河朔的土地来给那些叛将，史官们认为这是保护和养育孽根使之萌长而成大祸，这事应当成为今日的大戒。
English: In the past, the Tang Dynasty divided the land of Hexuo to give to those traitors. Historians believed that this was to protect and nurture the roots of evil so that it would sprout and become a great disaster. This should become today's great commandment.

古文：不若姑令行省羁縻和辑，多方牵制，使之不得逞。
现代文：不如命令行省对他们加以牵制笼络，多方制约使他们的野心不能得逞。
English: It would be better to order the government and the provinces to restrain them and make their ambitions fail.

古文：异时边事稍息，气力渐完，若辈又何足患哉。 
现代文：将来边疆战争稍息，国力恢复，如此鼠辈又何足为患！ 
English: In the future, the frontier war will subside and the national strength will be restored, so what a problem for the rat generation!

古文：议遂寝。
现代文：于是，原来议论被中止。
English: The discussion then came to an end.

古文：上尝谓汝砺曰： 朕每见卿侍朝，恐不任其劳，许坐殿下，而卿终不从何哉？
现代文：皇帝曾经对高汝砺说 ：我每次见您侍立朝班时，总是担心您受不了这种辛苦，让您坐在殿下，而您总是不肯听从，这是什么原因？
English: The emperor once said to Gao Rucheng: Every time I see you attend the court, I always worry that you can't bear the hard work, let you sit in your highness, and you always refuse to listen, what is the reason?

古文：夫君臣相遇，贵在诚实，小谨区区，朕固不较也。 
现代文：君臣相互知遇贵在诚实，谨小慎微的区区小事我向来是不计较的。 
English: I have always paid no attention to the petty, small things that dignitaries and ministers value in honest, discreet encounters with each other.

古文：汝砺以君臣之分甚严，不敢奉命。
现代文：高汝砺便说君臣的名份区别十分严格，自己不敢听从命令。
English: Gao Rucheng then said that the distinction between the titles of lords and ministers was very strict, and that he did not dare to follow orders.

古文：三年，河南颇丰稔，民间多积粟，汝砺乃奏曰： 国家之务，莫重于食，今所在屯兵益众，而修筑新城其费亦广，若不及此丰年多方营办，防秋之际或乏军兴。
现代文：兴定三年，河南颇获丰收，民间多有存粮，高汝砺便上奏说： 国家的要务没有比粮食更重要的了。如今屯守的军队越来越多，而修建新城的耗费也很大，何不趁此丰年多方经营办理，以防秋季时可能出现军用不足。
English: In the third year of Xingding, Henan had a good harvest and many people had stored grain. Gao Ruchen then made a report saying: There is no more important task for the country than grain. Nowadays, there are more and more troops stationed, and the cost of building a new city is also very high. Why not take advantage of this good year to manage the business in multiple ways to prevent a possible military shortage in the fall.

古文：乞于河南州府验其物价低昂，权宜立式，凡内外四品以下杂正班散官及承荫人，免当暴使监官功酬，或僧道官师德号度牒、寺观院额等，并听买之。
现代文：请在河南各州府查验一下物价的高低，暂设规定，凡是朝廷内外四品以下杂正班的散官以及受荫人，免于试用充任监官给予报酬，或者僧道的官师要求德号度牒、寺观院匾额等，都可以让他们来买。
English: Please check the level of prices at the various prefectures in Henan Province, and set a temporary rule that all officials of the Imperial Court and outside the Imperial Court below the fourth grade, as well as those who are subject to the shadow, are exempt from probationary appointment as supervisors and remuneration, or officials and teachers of monasticism who require a certificate of virtue, temple inspection, etc., can let them buy it.

古文：司县官有能劝诱输粟至三千石者，将来注授升本榜首，五千石以上迁官一阶，万石以上升职一等，并注见阙。
现代文：任县官的如果能够劝导人交粟米达到三千石的，将来优先予以晋升，五千石以上的晋升一级官阶，一万石以上的提升一等职务，并且立即补给现缺。
English: If a county official is able to persuade people to hand over up to 3,000 koku of millet, they will be given priority for promotion in the future, and those with more than 5,000 koku will be promoted to the first-class official rank, and those with more than 10,000 koku will be promoted to the first-class position, and will be immediately replenished.

古文：庶几人知劝慕，多所收获。 
现代文：以使人人知道努力和敬慕，多有收获。 
English: So that everyone knows that hard work and admiration are more rewarding.

古文：上从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：同提举榷货司王三锡建议榷油，高琪以用度方急，劝上行之。
现代文：同提举榷货司的王三锡建议朝廷实行油类专卖，高琪因为正急需用钱，劝皇帝实行。
English: At the same time, Wang Sanxi, who held the post of Commodity Secretary, suggested that the imperial court implement the oil monopoly. Gao Qi, because he was in urgent need of money, persuaded the emperor to implement it.

古文：汝砺上言曰： 古无榷法，自汉以来始置盐铁酒榷均输官，以佐经费。
现代文：高汝砺上奏说 ：古时没有专卖法，从汉以来才设置盐、铁、酒榷，都将收入交公，以助经费开支。
English: Gao Rucheng said in his report: In ancient times, there was no monopoly law. Only since the Han Dynasty, salt, iron and wine have been set up. All income will be paid to the public to help finance expenses.

古文：末流至有算舟车、税间架，其征利之术固已尽矣，然亦未闻榷油也。
现代文：末流的甚至有算计到车、船、建构房屋等，其征税的方法也用尽了，但是还没有听说榷油的。
English: For the lower class, even cars, boats, construction of houses, etc. have been calculated, and the methods of taxation have been exhausted, but they have not heard of oil extraction.

古文：盖油者世所共用，利归于公则害及于民，故古今皆置不论，亦厌苛细而重烦扰也。
现代文：这是因为油料是世人所共用的东西，利归于公家就会有害于民，所以古今都对此置之不论，也是厌恶过于苛刻而轻易不愿烦扰民众的缘故。
English: This is because oil is something that is shared by the world, and if the profits go to the public, it will be harmful to the people, so it has been ignored from ancient times to the present. It is also because of the aversion to being too harsh and not wanting to bother the people easily.

古文：国家自军兴，河南一路岁入税租不啻加倍，又有额征诸钱、横泛杂役，无非出于民者，而更议榷油，岁收银数十万两。
现代文：国家自从征收军需物资以来，河南一路每年交纳的租税何止加倍，又有额外征收的各种钱财，横加的各类杂役，无非都从民众所出。而再提议征收油税，一年征收几十万两银。
English: Since the collection of military supplies by the state, the annual taxes paid by Henan Province have more than doubled, and all kinds of additional money and wealth have been collected, and all kinds of miscellaneous services have been added, all of which come from the people. And then it is proposed to collect oil tax, and collect several hundred thousand taels of silver a year.

古文：夫国以民为本，当此之际，民可以重困乎！
现代文：国家以民为本，当此之时还能再让民众受困吗？
English: The country is people-oriented. At this time, can we still let the people be trapped?

古文：若从三锡议，是以举世通行之货为榷货，私家常用之物为禁物，自古不行之法为良法，切为圣朝不取也。
现代文：如果听从王三锡的建议，就是把举世通用的货物变成国家专卖的货物，私人家里常用的物品成为禁物，自古以来不实行的办法当成好的方法，这实在是圣朝所不应采取的。
English: If Wang Sanxi's suggestion is followed, it will mean that goods that are universally used will be turned into goods that are exclusively sold by the state, items that are commonly used in private homes will become prohibited, and methods that have not been practiced since ancient times will be regarded as good methods. This is really something that the Holy Temple should not take.

古文：若果行之，其害有五，臣请言之：河南州县当立务九百余所，设官千八百馀员，而胥隶工作之徒不与焉。
现代文：如果真的实行，其害处有五条，请让我加以说明。河南各州县就必须设立油务九百多所，设官一千八百多人，这还不算那些小吏和工人们。
English: If it is really implemented, there will be five harmful effects, please let me explain. Each prefecture and county in Henan will have to set up more than 900 oil service stations and employ more than 1,800 officials, not including those petty officials and workers.

古文：费既不赀，而又创构屋宇，夺买作具，公私俱扰，殆不胜言。
现代文：这样费用不可计量，而且要新建房屋，夺人买卖，制作器具，公私两方均受烦扰，这是说不完的。
English: The cost of this is incalculable, and there is no end to the new houses to be built, the people to be bought and sold, the utensils to be made, and the inconvenience to both the public and the private.

古文：至于提点官司有升降决罚之法，其课一亏，必生抑配之弊，小民受病，益不能堪，其害一也。
现代文：至于提点官司有升降决罚的方法，如果征收的赋税不足就必定要想法强行抑制或者配给，以此而产生弊端，小民百姓受苦就更加难以忍受，这是害处之一。
English: As for the method of raising and lowering the penalty for filing a lawsuit, if the tax collected is insufficient, it must be forcibly suppressed or rationed, thereby creating a drawback, and the suffering of the common people is even more unbearable, which is one of the harms.

古文：夫油之贵贱所在不齐，惟其商旅转贩有无相易，所以其价常平，人易得之。
现代文：油价的贵贱各地不同，只有依靠商人转运贩卖互换有无的物品，所以其价格能时常保持比较平稳，人们都容易得到它。
English: The price of oil varies from place to place, and it is only possible to rely on merchants to transport, sell and exchange goods, so its price can often remain relatively stable, and people can easily get it.

古文：今既设官各有分地，辄相侵犯者有罪，是使贵处常贵而贱处常贱，其害二也。
现代文：如今既然设立官务，各管一地，相互侵犯就有罪，这就会使价贵的地方经常很贵，而价贱的地方又总是很贱，这是第二条害处。
English: Now that the establishment of government affairs, each in charge of one place, is guilty of mutual infringement, this will make expensive places often very expensive, and low-priced places always very low-priced, which is the second harm.

古文：民家日用不能躬自沽之，而转鬻者增取利息，则价不得不贵，而用不得不难，其害三也。
现代文：民众家庭日常使用时不能亲自去灌，而转卖的人就要增收利息，这样价钱不能不贵，而使用起来也就不能不难，这是害处之三。
English: Households cannot fill their own water bottles when using them on a daily basis, and resellers have to charge higher interest rates. This makes the price more expensive and the use more difficult. This is the third harm.

古文：盐、铁、酒、醋，公私所造不同，易于分别，惟油不然，莫可辨记。
现代文：盐、铁、酒、醋，公家和私人所制作的不相同，容易区分，只有油却不同，难以辨认。
English: Salt, iron, wine, vinegar, made by public and private are different, easy to distinguish, only oil is different, difficult to identify.

古文：今私造者有刑，捕告者有赏，则无赖辈因之得以诬构良民枉陷于罪，其害四也。
现代文：而今私造者有罪，捕告者有赏，那些无赖之流因而可以诬陷和给良民构罪，这是害处之四。
English: Now, the smugglers are guilty, the accusers are rewarded, and those scoundrels can therefore frame and frame good people. This is the fourth harm.

古文：油户所置屋宇、作具，用钱已多，有司按业推定物力，以给差赋。
现代文：油户所建的房屋、器具，原来已用钱很多，有关方面按照行业推定物力，摊派了赋税。
English: The houses and equipment built by oil companies have already cost a lot of money, and the relevant parties have apportioned taxes according to the estimated material resources of the industry.

古文：今夺其具、废其业而差赋如前，何以自活，其害五也。
现代文：如今夺其器具，废其产业，而要征收的赋税如前，他们怎么生存下去，这是害处之五。
English: Now they are robbed of their utensils, their industry is destroyed, and the taxes to be levied are the same as before. How can they survive? This is the fifth harm.

古文：惟罢之便。 
现代文：只有停止才是好办法。 
English: The only way is to stop.

古文：上是之，然重违高琪意，乃诏集百官议于尚书省。
现代文：皇帝表示赞同，但又觉得难以违背高琪的心意，便下诏聚集百官到尚书省商议。
English: The emperor agreed, but found it difficult to go against Gao Qi's wishes, so he issued an edict to gather hundreds of officials to Shangshu to discuss.

古文：户部尚书高夔、工部侍郎粘割荆山、知开封府事温迪罕二十等二十六人议同高琪，礼部尚书杨云翼、翰林侍读学士赵秉文、南京路转运使赵瑄、吏部侍郎赵伯成、刑部郎中姬世英、右司谏郭著、提举仓场使时戩皆以为不可。
现代文：户部尚书高夔、工部侍郎粘割荆山、知开封府事温迪罕二十等二十六人的意见都和高琪相同，礼部尚书杨云翼、翰林侍读学士赵秉文、南京路转运使赵蠧、吏部侍郎赵伯成、刑部郎中姬世英、右司谏郭著、提举仓场使时戬都认为不行。
English: Twenty-six people, including Gao Qi, the head of the Household Department, Shang Shu Gao, the attendant of the Engineering Department, the servant of the Criminal Department, the servant of Jing Shan, and the twenty-second of the Chihkaifeng Government, Wendy Han, all had the same opinion as Gao Qi. Yang Yunyi, the head of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Zhao Bingwen, the attendant of the Hanlin Academy, Zhao Zou, the attendant of the Nanjing Road, Zhao Bocheng, the attendant of the Personnel Department, Zhao Bocheng, the servant of the Criminal Department, Ji Shiying, the right-hand man of

古文：上曰： 古所不行者而今行之，是又生一事也，其罢之。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：古代所不实行的今天却加以实行，这是多生一事，停止了吧！ 
English: The emperor said, "What was not practiced in ancient times is practiced today. This is a matter of survival. Stop it!"

古文：十月，赐金鼎一，重币三。
现代文：十月，赏赐给高汝砺一只金鼎、多彩的锦帛三端。
English: In October, Gao Ruchen was awarded a gold-plated, multi-colored brocade bracelet.

古文：四年三月，拜平章政事，俄而进拜尚书右丞相，监修国史，封寿国公。
现代文：四年三月，拜为平章政事，不久又任命为尚书右丞相、监修国史，封为寿国公。
English: In March of the fourth year, he was appointed to the Taira no Shosho government, and soon after, he was appointed as the Minister of the Right of the Imperial Household, the Supervisor of the National History, and the Crown Prince of Jukoku.

古文：五年二月，上表乞致政，不许。
现代文：五年二月，上表请求退休，不得许可。
English: In February 2005, he submitted a request to retire, which was denied.

古文：九月，上谕汝砺曰： 昨日视朝，至午方罢。
现代文：九月，皇帝对高汝砺说： 昨天上朝听政，直至午时才罢朝。
English: In September, the emperor said to Gao Ruxuan, "Yesterday morning, I listened to the government, and I didn't leave until noon.

古文：卿老矣，不任久立，奏事毕，用宝之际，可先退坐，恐以劳致疾，反妨议政也。 
现代文：您年老了，不能长久站立，等奏事结束，使用印玺的时候，你就可以先退出坐下，只恐积劳成疾，反而妨碍了参议朝政。 
English: If you are old and cannot stand for a long time, you can withdraw and sit down when the report is over and the seal is used, for fear of accumulating work-related diseases, but it hinders the deliberation of the government.

古文：是月，复乞致仕，上谕之曰： 丞相之礼尽矣，然今廷臣谁如丞相者，而必欲求去乎，姑留辅朕可也。 
现代文：当月，他又请求退休。皇帝说： 丞相您已经尽礼了，然而今日朝臣之中，谁能比得上您，又何必一定要求离去呢？暂且留下来再辅佐我吧！ 
English: In the same month, he also asked to retire. The emperor said: "You have done your duty, prime minister, but who among the courtiers today can match you, and why do you have to ask to leave? Stay for the time being and assist me!

古文：十月，躐迁荣禄大夫，仍谕曰： 丞相数求去，朕以社稷事重，故坚留之。
现代文：十月，越级晋升为荣禄大夫，皇帝仍对他说： 丞相几次请求离任，我因社稷责任重大，所以坚持再让你留任。
English: In October, he was promoted to doctor of honor, but the emperor still said to him, "The prime minister has asked you to leave several times, but because of my great social responsibility, I insist that you stay on.

古文：丞相老矣，而官犹未至二品，故特升两阶。 
现代文：丞相老了，而官阶还不到二品，所以特地晋升了两阶。 
English: The prime minister is old, and the official rank is less than second grade, so he was specially promoted to the second grade.

古文：十二月，上复谕曰： 向朕以卿年老，视朝之日侍立为劳，令用宝时退坐廊下，而卿违之，复侍立终朝，岂有司不为设榻耶？
现代文：十二月，皇帝又对他说： 以前因为你年老，听政时久立辛苦，让你在使用印玺时退下坐在廊下，而你却不听我的话，仍站立直到罢朝，莫非有关方面没有给您设下坐榻吗？
English: In December, the emperor also said to him: In the past, because of your old age, it was hard for you to stand for a long time when you were listening to politics, and you had to step down and sit in the corridor when you used the seal, but you did not listen to my words and still stood until you went to the palace. Could it be that the relevant parties did not provide you with a place to sit?

古文：卿其勉从朕意。 
现代文：您要尽量听从我的意见。 
English: You should try to follow my advice.

古文：元光元年四月，汝砺跪奏事，上命起曰： 卿大臣也，所言皆社稷计。
现代文：元光元年四月，高汝砺跪着奏事，皇帝让他站起来，并说 ：您是大臣，所进言的都是事关国家的大计。
English: In April of the first year of the Yuan dynasty, Gao Rucheng knelt down to deliver a speech. The emperor asked him to stand up and said, "You are a minister, and everything you say is related to the country's overall plan."

古文：朕之责卿，惟在尽诚，何事小谨，自今勿复尔也。 
现代文：我要求您的只是尽忠国事，何必在小事上这样谨慎，从今以后不要这样。 
English: All I ask of you is to be loyal to the state. Why should you be so cautious in small matters? Don't do that from now on.

古文：七月，上谓宰臣曰： 昔有言世宗太俭者，或曰不尔则安得广畜积。
现代文：七月，皇帝对宰辅们说： 以前有人说世宗过于俭朴，有的说不这样的话怎么能够广于积蓄。
English: In July, the emperor said to the vice-premiers: In the past, some people said that Shizong was too frugal, and some said that if it were not so, how could it be wider than savings.

古文：章宗时用度甚多，而得不阙乏者，盖先朝有以遗之也。 
现代文：章宗时支出很多，却没有觉得匮乏，也是因为先朝有积蓄遗留下来！ 
English: Zhang Zong spent a lot of money, but did not feel deprived, also because there were savings left over from the previous dynasty!

古文：汝砺因进言曰： 俭乃帝王大德，陛下言及此，天下福也。 
现代文：高汝砺便进言说 ：俭用是帝王的大德，陛下说到这事，就是天下的福份了。 
English: Gao Ruchen then said, "Frugality is the emperor's great virtue. When His Majesty said this, it was a blessing for the world."

古文：九月，上又谓宰臣曰： 有功者虽有微过亦当贷之，无功者岂可贷耶？
现代文：九月，皇帝又对宰辅们说： 有功劳的人虽然有小的过失也应当宽免他，没有功绩的人怎么能够宽恕呢？
English: In September, the emperor also said to the vice-premiers: A meritorious person should be pardoned even if he has a small fault, but how can a person without merit be pardoned?

古文：然有功者人喜谤议。
现代文：但是有功劳的人容易受到人们的诽谤。
English: But a man of merit is liable to be slandered.

古文：凡有以功过言于朕者，朕必深求其实，虽近侍为言不敢轻信，亦未尝徇一己之爱憎也。 
现代文：凡是有功劳的人别人向我说起他的过失的，我必定要深加究察，看是否符合事实，即使是亲近的侍臣们所说的也不敢轻信，但是也未曾因个人的爱憎而徇私情的。 
English: If anyone of merit tells me of his faults, I must scrutinize them to see if they are true. Even close courtiers are not to be trusted, but I have never been swayed by personal likes and dislikes.

古文：汝砺因对曰： 公生明，偏生暗。
现代文：高汝砺说： 公正就会明察，偏听就会暗昧。
English: Gao Ruchen said: Fairness will be clear-sighted, partiality will be obscure.

古文：凡人多徇爱憎，不合公议。
现代文：平常人大多容易根据个人爱憎而徇情，不合公论。
English: Most ordinary people are easily swayed by personal likes and dislikes, and do not conform to public opinion.

古文：陛下圣明，故能如是耳。 
现代文：陛下圣明之君，所以才能这样。 
English: Your Majesty, the Prince of Holiness, that's why we can do this.

古文：二年正月，复乞致政，上面谕曰： 今若从卿，始终之道俱尽，于卿甚安，在朕亦为美事。
现代文：二年正月，他又请求退休。皇帝当面对他说： 今日如果听从您的话，善始善终之道也就尽情了，于你心安，在我也是一件好事。
English: In the first month of the second year, he again asked to retire. The emperor said to him in person: "Today, if I listen to your words, I will be able to start well and end well. It is a good thing for your peace of mind and for me.

古文：但时方多故，而朕复不德，正赖旧人辅佐，故未能遂卿高志耳。 
现代文：但时局正多事，而我又无德，正要依赖旧人来辅佐，所以未能满足您高洁的志向啊！ 
English: But the situation is very complicated, and I am not virtuous, and I am about to rely on the old people to assist, so I could not satisfy your noble aspirations!

古文：汝砺固辞，竟不许，因谓曰： 朕每闻人有所毁誉，必求其实。 
现代文：高汝砺坚决请求，宣宗始终不肯答应，并对他说： 我每当听人说别人的好坏时，必定深究真实情形。 
English: Gao Ruchen firmly requested, but Xuan Zong still refused to agree, and said to him, "Whenever I hear people say that others are good or bad, I must deeply investigate the true situation.

古文：汝砺对曰： 昔齐威王封即墨大夫，烹阿大夫及左右之尝毁誉者，由是群臣恐惧，莫敢饰非，齐国大治。
现代文：高汝砺回答说 ：过去齐威王封即墨大夫，烹了阿大夫和身边那些毁坏人家名誉的人，于是群臣都恐惧不安，不敢再说假话，齐国大治。
English: Gao Ruxuan replied: In the past, King Qiwei had appointed the so-called "Dr. Meng" to rule the country, and had punished the "Dr. A" and those around him who ruined the reputation of others. As a result, the ministers were afraid and uneasy, and dared not tell lies anymore.

古文：陛下言及此，治安可期也。 
现代文：陛下能够谈到这事，大治安定的局势可以预期实现了。 
English: His Majesty was able to speak about this, and the situation of great peace and stability can be expected to have been achieved.

古文：二月，上以汝砺年高，免朝拜，侍立久则憩于殿下，仍敕有司设榻焉。
现代文：二月，皇帝因高汝砺年纪大，免去朝拜之礼，站立久了就让他到殿下休息，仍令有关方面设立坐榻。
English: In February, the emperor exempted Gao Ruchen from the worship service due to his advanced age. When Gao Ruchen had been standing for a long time, he was allowed to rest in the presence of his royal highness. However, he still ordered the relevant authorities to set up a bed for him.

古文：三月，又乞致仕，复优诏不许。
现代文：三月，高汝砺又请求退休，皇帝仍优诏劝谕不许可。
English: In March, Gao Rucheng again requested to retire, but the emperor still did not allow him to do so.

古文：上谓群臣曰： 人有才堪任事，而处心不正者，终不足贵。 
现代文：皇帝对群臣们说： 人有才干能够做事，但心术不正的，毕竟不足为贵。 
English: The emperor said to his courtiers: People have the talent to do things, but if the mind is not right, it is not enough.

古文：汝砺对曰： 其心不正而济之以才，所谓虎而翼者也，虽古圣人亦未易知。 
现代文：高汝砺回答说： 他心术不正而又有才干，正像所说的老虎而添翼，这种人就是古代圣人贤君也难以深知了。 
English: Gao Ruchen replied, "He is not good at mind tricks, but he is talented, just like the tiger gaining wings. It is hard to know whether he is an ancient sage.

古文：上以为然。
现代文：皇帝赞同他的看法。
English: Tenshi thinks it makes sense.

古文：他日复谓宰臣曰： 凡人处心善良而行事忠实，斯为难得。
现代文：过了些时候，皇帝又对宰辅们说： 凡是为人处事心地善良而办事忠实的，这是最为难得的。
English: After some time had passed, the emperor said to the vice-premiers, "Anyone who does things for others with a kind heart and acts faithfully is the most rare of all.

古文：若言巧心伪，亦复何用。
现代文：如果巧于言语心怀奸诈，又有何用？
English: For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?

古文：然善良者，人又多目为平常。 
现代文：然而那些心地善良的，往往被人认为是平庸的。 
English: However, those who are kind-hearted are often considered to be mediocre.

古文：汝砺对曰： 人材少全，亦随其所长取之耳。 
现代文：高汝砺回答说 ：人才难以十全十美，还是根据他的专长加以任用吧！ 
English: Gao Ruchen replied, "Talent is difficult to be perfect, so let's appoint someone based on his expertise!"

古文：上然之。
现代文：皇帝表示赞同。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：五月，上问宰执以修完京城楼橹事，汝砺奏： 所用皆大木，顾今难得，方令计置。 
现代文：五月，皇帝问宰辅大臣们有关修建好京城城楼上的高台事。高汝砺上奏说： 所使用的都是大木，而现在比较难找，正让他们想办法。 
English: In May, the emperor asked the vice-premiers about the construction of a high platform on the castle tower of the capital. Gao Rucheng said: All the trees used are large trees, and it is difficult to find them now, so let them find a way.

古文：上曰： 朕宫中别殿有可用者即用之。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：我宫中别殿里如有合用的立即搬去使用。 
English: The emperor said, "If there is anything in my palace that can be put to better use, I will move it immediately."

古文：汝砺对以不宜毁，上曰： 所居之外，毁亦何害，不愈于劳民远致乎！ 
现代文：高汝砺回答说不应拆毁。皇帝说 ：除了居住的地方外，拆毁点又有什么害处？不然岂不是更有劳民众从远方送来吗？ 
English: Gao Ruchen replied that it should not be demolished. The emperor said, "Besides the place of residence, what is the harm of the demolition site? Otherwise, wouldn't there be more hard-working people sent from far away?"

古文：哀宗初即位，谏官言汝砺欺君固位，天下所共嫉，宜黜之以厉百官。
现代文：金哀宗刚即位，谏官们便进谏说高汝砺欺君以巩固自己的地位，为天下人所共恨，应当罢免他以督责百官。
English: As soon as King Jin Aizong ascended the throne, the eunuchs came to him and said that Gao Ruchen had deceived the king in order to consolidate his position and was hated by the whole world. He should be dismissed and the officials should be held accountable.

古文：哀宗曰： 昔惠帝言，我不如高帝，当守先帝法耳。
现代文：哀宗说 ：以前汉惠帝曾说，我比不上高帝，应当遵守先帝的法则。
English: Aizong said: In the past, Emperor Han Hui once said that I was not as good as Emperor Gao, and that I should abide by the rules of the former emperor.

古文：汝砺乃先帝立以为相者，又可黜欤！ 
现代文：汝砺是先帝立为丞相的，又怎么可以罢黜呢？ 
English: You were appointed as chancellor by the former emperor, so how can you be dismissed?

古文：又有投匿名书云： 高某不退当杀之。 
现代文：又有人写了匿名信说 ：高某如不退休就要杀死他。 
English: Another person wrote an anonymous letter saying that Gao would kill him if he did not retire.

古文：汝砺因是告老，优诏不许。
现代文：高汝砺因此而又以年老为由请求退休，皇帝下优诏不许可。
English: Therefore, Gao Rucheng requested to retire on the grounds of old age, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：正大元年三月，薨，年七十一，配享宣宗庙。
现代文：正大元年三月，去世，享年七十一岁，让他在宣宗庙里配祭。
English: In March of the first year of Zheng Da, he passed away at the age of seventy-one, and he was allowed to officiate in the Xuan Zong Temple.

古文：为人慎密廉洁，能结人主知，然规守格法，循嘿避事，故为相十余年未尝有谴诃。
现代文：高汝砺为人谨慎，严守机密，廉洁，能够使国君了解和信任他。但是他固守旧法，看着国君脸色办事，回避要害的事情，所以他任宰相十多年，没有受到过责备。
English: Gao Rucheng's prudence, strict adherence to confidentiality, and incorruptibility enabled the king to understand and trust him. However, he adhered to the old law, watched the king's face, and avoided important matters, so he served as prime minister for more than ten years and was never reproached.

古文：贪恋不去，当时士论颇以为讥云。
现代文：他贪恋官职地位不肯离开，当时的士人在议论时颇以此来讥讽他。
English: He was so attached to his official position that he refused to leave it, and the nobles of the time used this to ridicule him in their discussions.

古文：张行信，字信甫，先名行忠，避庄献太子讳改焉。
现代文：张行信，字信甫，原名行忠，因为避庄献太子讳而改名。
English: Zhang Xingxin, also known as Xingfu, was originally named Xingzhong, but changed his name because he wanted to avoid becoming a prince.

古文：行简弟也。
现代文：是张行简的弟弟。
English: He is Zhang Xingyan's younger brother.

古文：登大定二十八年进士第，累官铜山令。
现代文：大定二十八年中进士，累官至铜山县令。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of 28 and rose through the ranks to become the magistrate of Tongshan County.

古文：明昌元年，以廉擢授监察御史。
现代文：明昌元年，因为廉政被提升为监察御史。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was promoted to inspector general of history because of his integrity.

古文：泰和三年，同知山东西路转运使，俄签河东路按察司事。
现代文：泰和三年，同知山东西路转运使，不久又签河东路按察司事。
English: In the third year of Taihe, Tong Zhishan East-West Road Transfer Envoy, and soon signed the East River Road Inspector.

古文：四年四月，召见于泰和殿，行信因言二事，一依旧移转吏目以除民害，一徐、邳地下宜麦，税粟许纳麦以便民。
现代文：四年四月，皇帝在泰和殿召见他。张行信便向皇帝进言两件事：一是依照旧例调换吏官以除民害，一是徐、邳一带土地适宜种麦，收粟时应当允许他们交纳麦子使民众便利。
English: In April of the fourth year, the emperor summoned him to the Taihe Hall. Zhang Xingxin then proposed two things to the emperor: one was to replace the officials in accordance with the old practice to eliminate the harm to the people, and the other was that the land around Xu and Handan was suitable for growing wheat, and they should be allowed to pay wheat when harvesting corn to make it convenient for the people.

古文：上是其言，令尚书省议行之。
现代文：皇帝同意他的建议，让尚书省商议后实行。
English: The emperor agreed to his suggestion and let Shangshu Province discuss and implement it.

古文：崇庆二年，为左谏议大夫。
现代文：崇庆二年，任左谏议大夫。
English: In the second year of Chongqing, he was appointed as the doctor of the Left Division of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：时胡沙虎已除名为民，赂遗权贵，将复进用。
现代文：当时胡沙虎已免职为民，但他仍贿赂朝中权贵，想要重新起用。
English: At that time, Hu Shahu had been removed from his post as a citizen, but he still bribed the dignitaries of the DPRK and China and wanted to be reinstated.

古文：举朝无敢言者，行信乃上章曰： 胡沙虎残忍凶悖，跋扈强梁，媚结近习，以图称誉。
现代文：满朝官员没人敢表态。张行信便上奏说 ：胡沙虎为人残忍凶狠，骄横跋扈，献媚于近臣，妄图让他们加以称赞。
English: None of the officials of the Manchu Dynasty dared to make a statement. Zhang Xingxin then made a report: "Husha Hu was a cruel and ferocious man, arrogant, flattering his close vassals and trying in vain to get them to praise him.

古文：自其废黜，士庶莫不忻悦。
现代文：自从被罢免以来，士民百姓无不欢欣鼓舞。
English: Since he was removed from office, the people have been very happy and encouraged.

古文：今若复用，惟恐为害更甚前日，况利害之机更有大于此者。 
现代文：如今如再任用，只怕为害更超过往日，况且还会有比这更加利害的事情。 
English: Now, if you are reappointed, you may do more harm than before, and there will be more interests than this.

古文：书再上，不报。
现代文：他接连上书奏告，但没有回音。
English: He wrote to them one after another, but there was no response.

古文：及胡沙虎弑逆，人甚危之，行信坦然不顾也。
现代文：当胡沙虎弑君谋逆时，人们都替他担忧，而张行信坦然自若，不以为意。
English: When Hu Shaoguan plotted against him, people were worried about him, but Zhang Xingxin was calm and unconcerned.

古文：是岁九月，宣宗即位，改元贞祐。
现代文：当年九月，宣宗即位，改年号为贞。
English: In September of that year, Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne and changed his name to Zhen.

古文：行信以皇嗣未立，无以系天下之望，上疏曰： 自古人君即位，必立太子以为储副，必下诏以告中外。
现代文：张行信因为当时没有立皇太子，没有能满足天下人的愿望，上疏说： 自古国君即位，必定立太子作为储君，必然下诏布告中外。
English: Zhang Xingxin, because there was no crown prince at that time, and there was no crown prince who could satisfy the wishes of the people of the world, said: Since the ancient sovereign ascended the throne, the crown prince must be appointed as the crown prince, and the imperial edict must be announced to China and abroad.

古文：窃见皇长子每遇趋朝，用东宫仪卫，及至丹墀，还列诸王班。
现代文：我私下见皇长子每当到朝廷的时候，用的是东宫的仪仗和护卫，可是到殿堂时，又和诸王排列在一起。
English: Privately, I saw that whenever the eldest son of the emperor arrived at the imperial court, he used the ceremonial guards and escorts of the East Palace, but when he arrived at the palace, he was lined up with the kings.

古文：况已除侍臣，而今未定其礼，可谓名不正言不顺矣。
现代文：况且已经任命了侍臣，可是至今却没有定下礼节，可说是名不正而言不顺啊！
English: Moreover, a courtier has already been appointed, but so far there has been no set etiquette, which can be said to be unfair and unsatisfactory!

古文：昔汉文帝元年，首立子启为太子者，所以尊祖庙、重社稷也。
现代文：在汉文帝元年，首先就立皇子启为太子，这是用以表示尊从祖先，注重社稷。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, the prince was first appointed as the crown prince, which was used to show respect for the ancestors and pay attention to social ethics.

古文：愿与大臣详议，酌前代故事，早下明诏，以定其位，慎选宫僚，辅成德器，则天下幸甚。 
现代文：希望陛下能和大臣们详细商议，斟酌前代的故事，早下明诏，以确定其地位，谨慎地选任官员，辅佐他成为有德行有器度的继承人，那就是天下的大幸！ 
English: I hope that His Majesty will consult with his ministers in detail, consider the stories of the previous generation, issue a clear edict early to determine his status, carefully select officials, and help him become a virtuous and well-equipped successor. That is the great happiness of the world!

古文：上嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝嘉奖并采纳了他的意见。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：胡沙虎诛，上封事言正刑赏，辞载《胡沙虎传》。
现代文：胡沙虎被杀后，张行信上密封奏书主张端正刑赏之事，有关言论记载在《胡沙虎传》中。
English: After the killing of the Husa Tiger, Zhang Xing wrote a sealed letter in which he advocated the proper punishment and reward. The relevant remarks are recorded in "The Legend of the Husa Tiger."

古文：又言： 自兵兴以来，将帅甚难其人，愿陛下令重臣各举所知，才果可用，即赐召见，褒显奖谕，令其自效，必有奋命报国者。
现代文：他又说： 自从战事兴起以来，难以得到合适的将帅，请陛下让重臣各举荐所了解的人员，如果确是可用之才，立即加以召见，公开奖赏，让他们自愿报效国家，必定有舍命报国的人。
English: He also said: Since the outbreak of the war, it has been difficult to obtain suitable generals. I would like to ask His Majesty to have his senior ministers recommend people they know, and if they are indeed available, to summon them immediately, publicly reward them, and let them volunteer to serve the country. There must be people who are willing to sacrifice their lives to serve the country.

古文：昔李牧为赵将，军功爵赏皆得自专，出攻入守不从中覆，遂能北破大敌，西抑强秦。
现代文：以前李牧在当赵国将军时，军功爵位封赏都能自己做主，出兵进攻退守等不需听从朝中复议，因而能够北破大敌，西抑强秦。
English: In the past, when Li Mu was the general of Zhao, he could decide on his own whether to award military honors and knighthoods, and he did not need to listen to the review of the North and the Middle East when he sent troops to attack and retreat. As a result, he was able to defeat the great enemy in the north and suppress the strong Qin in the west.

古文：今命将若不以文法拘绳、中旨牵制，委任责成，使得尽其智能，则克复之功可望矣。 
现代文：现今任命将领如果不再采用条文旧法将他们约束，由朝中意旨来牵制他们，而是委以全任，责其成功，让他们能够全部发挥自己的智慧和才能，则克敌恢复国土的功业可望有成了！ 
English: If today's appointed generals no longer use the provisions of the old law to constrain them, and are restrained by the will of the DPRK and China, but are entrusted with the full responsibility and success, so that they can give full play to their wisdom and talents, then the work of defeating the enemy and restoring the land is expected to be completed!

古文：上善其言。
现代文：皇帝赞许他的意见。
English: The emperor thought that what Tanaga said was reasonable.

古文：时方擢任王守信、贾耐儿者为将，皆鄙俗不材、不晓兵律。行信惧其误国，上疏曰： 《易》称 开国承家，小人勿用 。
现代文：这时刚刚提拔任用王守信、贾耐儿当将领，他们都是鄙俗不堪、不懂兵法律令的人，张行信担心他们贻误国家大事，便上疏说： 《易》中写道： 开国和继承大业，小人不可任用。 
English: At this time, Wang Shouxin and Jia Nair had just been promoted and appointed as generals. They were both vulgar and did not understand military laws and regulations. Zhang Xingxin was worried that they would delay national affairs, so he said: "Yi" wrote: To open a country and inherit a great cause, villains cannot be appointed.

古文：圣人所以垂戒后世者，其严如此。
现代文：这是圣人用以警戒后世的，话说得这样严厉。
English: This is what the sages used to warn future generations about, to put it bluntly.

古文：今大兵纵横，人情汹惧，应敌兴理，非贤智莫能。
现代文：如今大兵纵横遍地，人心惶惶不安，抵抗敌军兴国理政如非贤能而有智慧的人是难以成功的。
English: Today, soldiers are all over the country, people are panicked and anxious, and it is difficult for those who are not capable and intelligent to resist the enemy army and restore national governance.

古文：狂子庸流，猥蒙拔擢，参预机务，甚无谓也。 
现代文：狂滥庸俗之辈，承蒙提拔，参预机要大事，实在是毫无意义的。 
English: It is really meaningless for the vulgar and vulgar generation to accept the promotion and participate in the preparatory meeting.

古文：于是上皆罢之。
现代文：于是，皇帝把他们都罢免了。
English: So the emperor dismissed them all.

古文：权元帅右都监内族讹可率兵五千护粮通州，遇兵辄溃，行信上章曰： 御兵之道，无过赏罚，使其临敌有所慕而乐于进，有所畏而不敢退，然后将士用命而功可成。
现代文：代理元帅右都监皇族讹可率兵五千人到通州护粮，遇到敌军立即溃败。张行信上表奏道： 领兵之道，无过于赏罚二字，当派兵对敌时必须让他有所思慕而乐于前进，有所畏惧而不敢后退，然后将士听从命令而功业可成。
English: Zhang Xingxin, the acting marshal and procurator of the imperial family, led five thousand soldiers to Tongzhou to protect grain, and was immediately defeated by the enemy. Zhang Xingxin said in the letter: The way to lead soldiers is nothing more than reward and punishment. When sending soldiers to the enemy, they must make them think and be willing to advance, be afraid and not dare to retreat, and then make them obey orders and achieve success.

古文：若讹可败衄，宜明正其罪，朝廷宽容，一切不问，臣恐御兵之道未尽也。 
现代文：像讹可败退，就应当公开明确他的罪责，朝廷如果加以宽容，一点不追究，我担心领兵之道未能尽用了。 
English: If a general can be defeated and retreat, he should publicly clarify his guilt. If the court is lenient and does not investigate at all, I am worried that the way of leading soldiers has not been fully used.

古文：诏报曰： 卿意具悉，讹可等已下狱矣。 
现代文：朝廷下诏回报说 ：你的意思已经清楚，讹可等人已经下狱治罪了。 
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict saying, "Your intention is already clear, and Yan Ke and others have already been sent to prison and punished."

古文：时中都受兵，方遣使请和，握兵者畏缩不敢战，曰： 恐坏和事。 
现代文：当时中都受到敌军威胁，朝廷刚刚派使者前去议和，统率军队的人畏缩不敢出战，说是 担心破坏和议 。
English: At that time, both were threatened by enemy forces. The imperial court had just sent an envoy to negotiate a peace treaty. The man leading the army was afraid to go to war, saying that he was worried about spoiling the peace treaty.

古文：行信上言： 和与战二事本不相干，奉使者自专议和，将兵者惟当主战，岂得以和事为辞。
现代文：张行信上书进言说： 和跟战两件事情本不相干，派出的使者专心于议和，领兵的人要一心考虑作战，怎么能以议和作为不战的借口。
English: Zhang Xing said in his letter: The two things of peace and war are irrelevant. The envoys sent are concentrating on peace talks. The person leading the troops should concentrate on fighting. How can peace talks be used as an excuse not to fight?

古文：自崇庆来，皆以和误，若我军时肯进战，稍挫其锋，则和事成也久矣。
现代文：自从崇庆年间以来，都是因和议而误事，如果我军肯努力作战，略略打败敌军的锐气，那么和议的事早就可以成功了。
English: Since the time of Chongqing, it has been peace talks that have led to mistakes. If our army is willing to fight hard and slightly defeat the enemy's sharpness, then the peace talks can be successful.

古文：顷北使既来，然犹破东京，略河东。
现代文：不久前北方使者前来，但他们的军队仍然攻破东京，入侵河东。
English: Not long ago, the northern envoys came, but their army still broke through Tokyo and invaded the east of the river.

古文：今我使方行，将帅辄按兵不动，于和议卒无益也。
现代文：如今我方的使者刚派出，将帅们就马上按兵不动，这对和议是毫无益处的。
English: Now, as soon as our envoys are dispatched, the generals immediately stand still, which is of no benefit to the peace talks.

古文：事势益急，刍粮益艰，和之成否盖未可知，岂当闭门坐守以待弊哉。
现代文：形势越是危急，粮草就越是困难，和议能否成功尚未可知，怎么能够闭门坐守待毙呢？
English: The more critical the situation is, the more difficult it is for grain and grass. Whether the peace talks will be successful is not yet known. How can they sit behind closed doors and wait for death?

古文：宜及士马尚壮，择猛将锐兵，防卫转输，往来拒战，使之少沮，则附近蓄积皆可入京师，和议亦不日可成矣。 
现代文：应当乘兵马还强壮的时候，挑选精兵猛将，防卫运输通道，往来和敌军作战，稍微挫败敌人，那么附近储存的粮草就能运进京城，和议也就不用多久就能成功了！ 
English: When the soldiers and horses are still strong, it is necessary to select the elite soldiers and ferocious generals, defend the transportation channel, fight with the enemy forces, and slightly defeat the enemy, then the grain and grass stored nearby can be transported into the capital, and the peace talks will not take long to succeed!

古文：上心知其善而不能行。
现代文：皇帝知道他说得对但却不能实行。
English: The emperor knew he was right but could not carry it out.

古文：二年三月，以朝廷括粮恐失民心，上书言： 近日朝廷令知大兴府胥鼎便宜计画军食，鼎因奏许人纳粟买官。
现代文：二年三月，因为朝廷搜括民间的存粮，张行信害怕失去民心，便上书说 ：近日朝廷命令知大兴府的胥鼎根据方便的办法筹划军粮，胥鼎便奏请允许人们交粟米买官。
English: In March of the second year, because the imperial court was collecting the grain stored by the people, Zhang Xingxin was afraid of losing the people's hearts, so he wrote a letter saying: Recently, the imperial court ordered Zhi Daxingfu's Zhaoding to plan military grain according to a convenient method. Zhaoding then requested that people be allowed to buy corn from the official.

古文：既又遣参知政事奥屯忠孝括官民粮，户存两月，余悉令输官，酬以爵级银钞。
现代文：接着又派参知政事奥屯忠孝搜括官员和民众的粮食，每户存粮两个月，其他全部交给官府，用官爵品级银钱来作为报酬。
English: Next, he sent the political advisor to the prefectural governor, Otun Zhongxiao, to collect grain from officials and the public. Each household stored grain for two months, and all the rest was handed over to the government, using silver coins of the rank of nobility as payment.

古文：时有粟者或先具数于鼎，未及入官。
现代文：当时有粟米的人有的已经报数字给了胥鼎，但还没来得及送到官府。
English: At that time, some people who had corn had already reported the figures to Zhaoding, but had not yet been able to send them to the government.

古文：忠孝复欲多得以明己功，凡鼎所籍者不除其数，民甚苦之。
现代文：奥屯忠孝想多搜粮食来表明自己功劳大，凡是胥鼎已经记载上的数字他也不扣除，民众甚为痛苦。
English: Otun Zhongxiao wanted to search for more grain to show his great merit, and he did not deduct any of the figures already recorded by Gongding. The people were very distressed.

古文：今米价踊贵，无所从籴，民粮止两月又夺之，将不独归咎有司，亦怨朝廷不察也。
现代文：如今米价飞涨，无处可购，民众所存的两月粮食又被夺走，他们将不单归罪于有关方面，也要埋怨朝廷没有明察。
English: Now that the price of rice has skyrocketed and there is nowhere to buy it, and the February grain stored by the people has been taken away, they will not only blame the relevant parties, but also complain that the imperial court did not notice.

古文：大兵在迩，人方危惧，若复无聊，或生他变，则所得不偿所损矣。 
现代文：大兵已经压境，人人已觉危险，如果再干这种不该干的事，只怕会发生其他变故，那就得不偿失了！ 
English: The soldiers have been pushed to the limit, and everyone feels in danger. If we do this kind of thing again, which we shouldn't do, just in case something else happens, then it will be too late!

古文：上深善其言，即命与近臣往审处焉。
现代文：皇帝十分赞同他的话，当即命令近臣前往审视并加以处置。
English: The emperor fully agreed with his words and immediately ordered his courtiers to go and investigate and deal with the matter.

古文：仍谕忠孝曰： 极知卿尽心于公，然国家本欲得粮，今既得矣，姑从人便可也。 
现代文：皇帝对奥屯忠孝说 ：我已深知你尽心国事，但国家目的是要得到一部分粮食，如今粮已获得，就暂且让民众自行安排吧！ 
English: The emperor said to Otun Zhongxiao: I am well aware that you are devoted to the affairs of state, but the purpose of the state is to obtain a part of the grain. Now that the grain has been obtained, let the people arrange it themselves for the time being!

古文：四月，迁山东东路按察使，兼转运使，仍权本路宣抚副使。
现代文：四月，任命张行信为山东东路按察使，兼转运使，仍代理本路宣抚副使。
English: In April, Zhang Xingxin was appointed as the inspector of Shandong East Road, as well as the transfer envoy, and still acting as the deputy envoy of this road.

古文：将行，求入见，上御便殿见之。
现代文：他将要离京时，请求入见皇帝，皇帝在便殿接见了他。
English: When he was about to leave Beijing, he asked to see the emperor, who received him in the hall.

古文：奏曰： 臣伏见奥屯忠孝饰诈不忠，临事惨刻，与胡沙虎为党。 
现代文：他上奏说： 我观察奥屯忠孝这个人虚伪不忠，遇事惨毒残酷，和胡沙虎是同党。 
English: He said at the beginning of his speech: I have observed that Otun Zhongxiao, a man of hypocrisy and disloyalty, is cruel and cruel, and is a member of the same party as Hu Shaohu.

古文：历数其罪，且曰： 无事时犹不容一相非才，况今多故，可使斯人与政乎？
现代文：他历数奥屯忠孝的罪状，并且说： 平时无事还容不得一位宰相是没有才干的，何况如今正是多事之秋，能够让这样的人参政吗？
English: He enumerated the crimes of Otun's loyalty and filial piety, and said: In normal times, a prime minister with no talent would not be tolerated. Moreover, now is a time of many events, can such a person be allowed to participate in politics?

古文：愿即罢之。 
现代文：希望能立即罢免他。 
English: I hope that he will be removed from office immediately.

古文：上曰： 朕始即位，进退大臣自当以礼，卿语其亲知，讽令求去可也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 我刚即位，选用和罢免大臣应当合乎礼节，你可以告诉他的亲信，转劝他辞去就行了。 
English: The emperor said, "I have just ascended the throne. The selection and dismissal of ministers should be in accordance with etiquette. You can just tell his close friends and persuade him to resign."

古文：行信以告右司郎中把胡鲁白忠孝，忠孝不恤也。
现代文：张行信便告诉了右司郎中把胡鲁让他转告奥屯忠孝，忠孝却不在乎。
English: Zhang Xingxin then told the right-hand sergeant to ask Hulu to tell Otun Zhongxiao, but Zhongxiao didn't care.

古文：三年二月，改安武军节度使，兼冀州管内观察使。
现代文：三年二月，改任安武军节度使，兼冀州管内观察使。
English: In February of the third year, he was reappointed as the Anwu Army Festival Envoy, and also the Jizhou Province Internal Observation Envoy.

古文：始至，即上书言四事，其一曰： 杨安儿贼党旦暮成擒，盖不足虑。
现代文：刚到任，便上书奏四件事，其一是说： 杨安儿贼党早晚就可以抓获，不须忧虑。
English: As soon as he took office, he wrote down four things, one of which was: Yang An'er's bandits can be caught sooner or later, there is no need to worry.

古文：今日之急，惟在收人心而已。
现代文：今日急务，在于收用民心而已。
English: The urgent task today is to win the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：向者官军讨赋，不分善恶，一概诛夷，劫其资产，掠其妇女，重使居民疑畏，逃聚山林。
现代文：以前官军讨贼，不分好坏，一概杀掉，抢劫财产，掳掠妇女，这就更让居民怀疑和害怕，逃走聚集山林。
English: In the past, the government army would hunt down thieves, regardless of whether they were good or bad, and kill them all, rob their property, and kidnap their women. This made the residents even more suspicious and afraid, and they fled to the mountains and forests.

古文：今宜明敕有司，严为约束，毋令劫掠平民。
现代文：如今应当明令有关方面，严加管制，不让劫掠平民百姓。
English: Now it is time to issue a clear order to the relevant parties to strictly control and prevent the looting of civilians.

古文：如此则百姓无不安之心，奸人诳胁之计不行，其势渐消矣。 
现代文：这样百姓安心，坏人的诈骗和威胁就不起作用，他们的实力就大减。 
English: In this way, the people can rest assured that the frauds and threats of the bad guys will not work, and their power will be greatly reduced.

古文：其二曰： 自兵乱之后，郡县官豪，多能纠集义徒，摧击土寇，朝廷虽授以本处职任，未几遣人代之。
现代文：其二说 ：自从兵乱之后，郡县官吏豪族，大多能够纠集义兵，攻打土匪，朝廷虽然委任他们本地的职务，但不久又派人代任。
English: The second said: Since the war, most of the county and county officials were able to gather volunteers and fight the bandits. Although the imperial court appointed them to local posts, they were soon replaced by others.

古文：夫旧者人所素服，新者未必皆才，缓急之间，启衅败事。
现代文：那些旧官员是当地民众所一向信服的，而新派去的人却未必有才干，危急之时，就会引起事端坏了大事。
English: The old officials are the ones the local people have always trusted, while the new ones are not necessarily competent, and in times of crisis, they will cause an accident.

古文：自今郡县阙员，乞令尚书省选人拟注。其旧官，民便安者宜就加任使，如资级未及，令摄其职，待有功则正授。庶几人尽其才，事易以立。 
现代文：从今以后，郡县缺少官员，请让尚书省在选人时特别注意，原官吏能使民众感到方便和安定的，就让他们延长任期，如果因为资格品级不够，就先让他们代理，等有功绩以后授予正职，这样才能人尽其才，事情也就容易成功。 
English: From now on, counties and counties are short of officials. Please let the Ministry of Education and Culture pay special attention to the selection of officials. If the original officials can make the people feel convenient and stable, let them extend their term of office. If the qualification grade is not enough, let them act as agents first. If there is merit, they will be awarded the official position. In this way, people can make the best of their talents, and things will be easy to succeed.

古文：其三曰： 掌军官敢进战者十无一二，其或有之，即当责以立功，不宜更授他职。 
现代文：其三说 ：目前掌管军队的将官勇敢善战的十人中没有一两个，如有敢于作战的人，就应当督责他们建立功勋，不应当任命他们担任其他职务。 
English: The third said: Of the ten generals currently in charge of the army, there are not one or two who are brave and good at fighting. If there are those who dare to fight, they should be ordered to establish merit, and they should not be appointed to other positions.

古文：其四曰： 山东军储皆鬻爵所获，及或持敕牒求仕，选曹以等级有不当鬻者往往驳退。
现代文：其四说 ：山东的军需物资都是出卖爵位获得的，可是当这些人带着证书请求任职时，选用官员的选曹往往以有的等级不应当出卖为理由来驳回他们。
English: The fourth said: Shandong's military supplies are all obtained by selling titles, but when these people apply for positions with certificates, the selection officers often reject them on the grounds that some ranks should not be sold.

古文：夫鬻所不当，有司罪也，彼何责焉。
现代文：卖爵位不合适，这是有关方面的罪责，他们个人有什么责任？
English: It is inappropriate to sell a knighthood. This is the fault of the parties concerned. What are their individual responsibilities?

古文：况海岱重地，群寇未平，田野无所收，仓廪无所积，一旦军饷不给，复欲鬻爵，其谁信之？ 
现代文：况且山东为海岱重地，群寇尚未讨平，田地无所收获，仓库毫无积蓄，一旦军饷不足，要再卖给爵位，还有谁肯相信？ 
English: What's more, Shandong is a region heavily affected by the tsunami, the bandits have not yet been defeated, the fields have not been harvested, the warehouses have no savings, and if there is a shortage of military supplies, it will be sold to the peerage, who else would believe it?

古文：朝廷多用其议。
现代文：朝廷大多采纳了他的意见。
English: The Imperial Court mostly adopted his opinion.

古文：八月，召为吏部尚书。
现代文：八月，召回任吏部尚书。
English: In August, Shosho, the newly appointed director, was recalled.

古文：九月，改户部尚书。
现代文：九月，改任户部尚书。
English: In September, he was reassigned to the Household Division of the Ministry of Education.

古文：十二月，转礼部尚书，兼同修国史。
现代文：十二月，转任礼部尚书，兼同修国史。
English: In December, he was transferred to the Ministry of Rites and Decrees, and concurrently studied national history.

古文：四年二月，为太子少保，兼前职。
现代文：四年二月，任太子少保，兼以前的职务。
English: In February of the fourth year, he was appointed as the Prince's Junior Bodyguard, concurrently with his previous position.

古文：时尚书省奏： 辽东宣抚副使完颜海奴言，参议官王澮尝言，本朝绍高辛，黄帝之后也。
现代文：这时，尚书省上奏说： 辽东宣抚副使完颜海奴进言，参议官王浍曾说，本朝是高辛氏、黄帝的后裔。
English: At this time, Shang Shuxu made a report to the provincial government, saying: "Liaodong's vice-envoy for propaganda and pacification, Yan Hainu, has made a speech. The councillor Wang Qian once said that this dynasty is a descendant of the Gaoxin clan and the Yellow Emperor.

古文：昔汉祖陶唐，唐祖老子，皆为立庙。
现代文：原来汉代始祖陶唐氏，唐朝先祖老子，都被立庙祭祀。
English: Originally, the founding fathers of the Han Dynasty, the Tao-Tang Clan, and the ancestors of the Tang Dynasty, the Laozi, were all enshrined in temples.

古文：我朝迄今百年，不为黄帝立庙，无乃愧于汉、唐乎！ 
现代文：我朝至今已有百年，不替黄帝立庙，岂不是有愧于汉、唐吗？ 
English: My dynasty has been around for a hundred years. If I don't build a temple for the Yellow Emperor, won't I be a disgrace to the Han and Tang dynasties?

古文：又云： 本朝初兴，旗帜尚赤，其为火德明矣。
现代文：又说： 本朝刚刚开始兴盛时，旗帜为赤色，这是因火德而兴是很清楚的。
English: He also said: When this dynasty was just beginning to flourish, the flag was red, which is very clear that it flourished because of fire and virtue.

古文：主德之祀，阙而不讲，亦非礼经重祭祀之意。
现代文：主德的祭祀，缺而不论，也不合礼经里重祭祀的意思。
English: Sacrifices of the Lord's virtue, regardless of their absence, do not correspond to the meaning of heavy sacrifices in the sutras.

古文：臣闻于澮者如此，乞朝廷议其事。 
现代文：这是我听王浍所说的，请朝廷商议这件事。 
English: This is what I heard Wang Yao say. I would like to ask the imperial court to discuss this matter.

古文：诏问有司，行信奏曰： 按《始祖实录》止称自高丽而来，未闻出于高辛。
现代文：皇帝诏问有关部门。张行信奏道： 查《始祖实录》，只说是从高丽而来，并没有听说出于高辛氏。
English: Emperor Zhao asked the relevant departments. Zhang Xingxin recited: Checking the "Ancestor Record," he only said that he came from Goryeo, and did not hear that he was from the Gaoxin clan.

古文：今所据欲立黄帝庙，黄帝高辛之祖，借曰绍之，当为木德，今乃言火德，亦何谓也？
现代文：如今据其所说要建黄帝庙，黄帝为高辛氏的祖先，借以绍继，那就应当是木德，而今却说是火德，又从何而言呢？
English: Now, according to what he said, he wants to build a temple to the Yellow Emperor. The Yellow Emperor was the ancestor of the Gaoxin clan, and he was succeeded by Shao. Then, it should be wood virtue, but now it is fire virtue. Why?

古文：况国初太祖有训，因完颜部多尚白，又取金之不变，乃以大金为国号，未尝议及德运。
现代文：况且建国初期太祖有遗训，因为完颜部崇尚白色，又取金之不变色，便以大金为国号，并没有议及德运的问题。
English: Moreover, in the early days of the founding of the country, the great-grandfather had a behest, because he advocated white color and took gold as the invariable color, he chose Daikin as the country name, and did not discuss the issue of the German invasion.

古文：近章宗朝始集百僚议之，而以继亡宋火行之绝，定为土德，以告宗庙而诏天下焉。
现代文：近至章宗才聚集百官商议，而以继承被灭的宋国之后，定为土德，并用以告祭宗庙诏示于天下了。
English: It was not until recently that Zhang Zong gathered hundreds of officials to discuss it, and after inheriting the extinguished Song Dynasty, it was designated as a national virtue, and used to announce the Zong Temple to the world.

古文：顾澮所言特狂妄者耳。 
现代文：可见王浍所说是狂妄无知。 
English: It can be seen that what Wang Yao said was arrogance and ignorance.

古文：上是之。
现代文：皇帝赞同他的看法。
English: The emperor agreed with him.

古文：八月，上将祔享太庙，诏依世宗十六拜之礼。
现代文：八月，皇帝准备祭祀太庙，下诏依照世宗所定的十六拜的礼仪。
English: In August, the emperor prepared to offer sacrifices at the Imperial Temple, and issued an edict according to the rite of sixteen prostrations established by King Sejong.

古文：行信与礼官参定仪注，上言宜从四十四拜之礼，上嘉纳焉，语在《礼志》。
现代文：张行信和礼官们一起参议确定了礼仪的制度，上奏说应当采用四十四拜的礼节，皇帝表示赞赏，奏言记在《礼志》中。
English: Zhang Xingxin and the etiquette officials jointly consulted and determined the etiquette system. The emperor expressed his appreciation by saying that the etiquette of the forty-four prostrations should be adopted. The speech is recorded in the "Li Zhi."

古文：祭毕，赐行信宝券二万贯、重币下端，谕之曰： 太庙拜礼，朕初欲依世宗所行，卿进奏章，备述随室读祝，殊为中理。
现代文：祭完，赐给张行信宝券二万贯、彩锦十端，并对他说： 太庙拜礼，我原想依照世宗时的实行的，您所进的奏章，详细叙述了各室宣读祭文的情况，十分有理。
English: At the end of the ceremony, he gave Zhang Xing a treasure certificate of twenty thousand yuan and ten pieces of brocade, and said to him: "For the temple worship, I originally wanted to follow the practice of the time of King Sejong. The music piece you entered described in detail the situation of the reading of the sacrificial text in each room. It is very reasonable.

古文：向非卿言，朕几失之，故特以是旌赏，自今每事更宜尽心。 
现代文：如果不是你进言，我差点失礼了，所以特别奖赏你。从今以后，各事更应当尽心。 
English: If it hadn't been you who suggested it, I would have almost been rude, so I'm giving you a special reward. From now on, you should be more conscientious in everything.

古文：是年十二月，行信以父暐卒，去官。
现代文：当年十二月，张行信因父亲张日韦去世而离职。
English: In December of that year, Zhang Xingxin resigned from his post due to the death of his father, Zhang Rongwei.

古文：兴定元年三月，起复旧职，权参知政事。
现代文：兴定元年三月，起任恢复旧职，代理参知政事。
English: In March of the first year of Xingding, he resumed his old post and became the acting governor.

古文：六月，真拜参知政事。
现代文：六月，正式拜任参知政事。
English: In June, he officially assumed the post of co-governor.

古文：时高琪为相，专权用事，恶不附己者，衣冠之士，动遭窘辱，惟行信屡引旧制力抵其非。
现代文：当时高琪当丞相，专权用事，恨那些不依附他的人。衣冠士人动则遭他侮辱，唯独张行信多次引用旧制尽力反对他的胡作非为。
English: At that time, when Gao Qi was the prime minister, he exercised absolute power and hated those who did not adhere to him. He insulted those who did not follow him, but Zhang Xingxin repeatedly cited the old system and tried to oppose his misdeeds.

古文：会宋兵侵境，朝廷议遣使详问，高琪等以为失体，行信独上疏曰： 今以遣使为不当，臣切惑之。
现代文：适值宋兵入侵边境，朝廷商议派使者前去详问原因。高琪等人认为是有失体面的事情，唯独张行信上奏疏说： 如今有人认为派使者不合适，我十分疑惑。
English: When the Song soldiers invaded the border, the imperial court discussed sending an envoy to inquire about the reason. Gao Qi and others thought it was a disgraceful thing, but Zhang Xingxin said in a letter: Nowadays, some people think it is inappropriate to send an envoy, I am very doubtful.

古文：议者不过曰： 遣使则为先示弱，其或不报，报而不逊，则愈失国体。 
现代文：评议人的理由不过是说： 派使者就是先表示软弱，对方或者不回话，或者回话了却不逊，这样就更加丧失国家的体面。 
English: The commentator's reason is simply this: To send an envoy is to show weakness first, and the other side will either not reply, or reply but be inferior, thus further losing the country's dignity.

古文：臣独以为不然。
现代文：我独不以为然。
English: I don't think so.

古文：彼幸吾衅隙，数肆侵掠，边臣以兵却之复来，我大国不责以辞而敌以兵，兹非示弱乎。
现代文：对方乘我方有机可乘前来挑衅，几次大肆入侵掳掠，边臣用兵打退了以后又重来，我方作为大国不以言辞责问而用兵对抗，难道就不是示弱吗？
English: The other side took advantage of the fact that we have the ability to take advantage of the provocation, invaded and plundered several times, and the border guards fought back with soldiers and then came back again. As a big country, we do not use words to rebuke and use soldiers to confront, is it not a sign of weakness?

古文：至于问而不报，报而不逊，曲自在彼，何损于我。
现代文：至于责问之后不回报，或回报却出言不逊，理屈就在于对方，对我有何损害？
English: As for not reciprocating after a reprimand, or making an insolent remark in return, the logic lies with the other party. What is the damage to me?

古文：昔大定之初，彼尝犯顺，世宗虽遣丞相乌者行省于汴，实令元帅撒合辇先为辞诘之，彼遂伏罪。
现代文：过去在大定初年，对方曾经不肯顺从，世宗虽然派遣丞相乌者到汴京设立行省，实际上又命令元帅撒合辇先以言辞责问，对方便表示伏罪。
English: In the past, in the first year of Dading, the other side once refused to obey, and although Shizong sent the prime minister of Wu to Shijing to set up a provincial government, he actually ordered the marshal Sahai to ask questions first, indicating that it was convenient to lie in wait.

古文：其后宋主夺取国书，朝廷复欲加兵，丞相娄室独以为不可，及刑部尚书梁肃衔命以往，寻亦屈焉。
现代文：后来宋国国君夺去国书，朝廷又准备派兵问罪，丞相娄室独自认为不行，当刑部尚书梁肃奉命前去时，不久对方也就屈服了。
English: Later, Song Guo Guojun took away the imperial edict, and the imperial court was preparing to send soldiers to ask for punishment. The chancellor's office alone thought that it was not possible. When the criminal department Shang Shuliang Su was ordered to go forward, the other side soon gave in.

古文：在章宗时，猖狂最甚，犹先理问而后用兵。
现代文：在章宗时期，是最为猖狂的，尚且先以理责问然后用兵。
English: In the period of Zhang Zong, it was the most rampant, and he first used reason and then used soldiers.

古文：然则遣使详问正国家故事，何失体之有。
现代文：可见派使者详问正是国家的惯例，有什么失国体可言？
English: It can be seen that it is the country's practice to send envoys to ask detailed questions. What is the reason for the loss of national identity?

古文：且国步多艰，戍兵滋久，不思所以休息之，如民力何。
现代文：况且目前国家多难，戍兵为时已久，不想法让他们休息，怎么取得民力？
English: Moreover, at present, the country is facing many difficulties. It has been a long time since the soldiers were mobilized, and there is no way to let them rest. How can we gain the people's strength?

古文：臣书生无甚高论，然事当机会，不敢不罄其愚，惟陛下察之。 
现代文：我是一个书生没有什么高明的办法，但办事应当珍惜机会，不敢不竭力陈述自己愚暗的想法，请陛下明察。 
English: I'm a bookworm, so I don't have any clever ways, but I should cherish the opportunity to do things, and I don't dare not to try my best to present my foolish and dark thoughts. Please, Your Majesty, take a closer look.

古文：上复令尚书省议，高琪等奏： 行信所言固遵旧制，然今日之事与昔不同。 
现代文：皇帝又让尚书省商议，高琪等奏道： 张行信所说，固然是遵循旧例，但今天的事情和过去不同。 
English: The emperor also asked Shang Shuzhou to discuss, Gao Qi and others sang: Zhang Xingxin said that, of course, it is to follow the old example, but today's things are different from the past.

古文：诏姑待之。
现代文：皇帝下诏让暂时等一下。
English: The emperor gave the order to wait for a while.

古文：已而高汝砺亦上言先遣使不便，议遂寝，语在汝砺传。
现代文：后来，高汝砺也上奏说先派使者不合适，这个动议便停止了，高汝砺的话记在《汝砺传》中。
English: Later, Gao Ruxuan also made a report that it was inappropriate to send an envoy first, and this motion was stopped. Gao Ruxuan's words are recorded in "Ruxuan Biography."

古文：时监察御史多被的决，行信乃上言曰： 大定间，监察坐罪大抵收赎，或至夺俸，重则外降而已，间有的决者，皆有为而然。
现代文：当时监察御史多被判罪，张行信便上奏道 ：大定年间，监察御史有罪大抵收取赎罪费，或者夺去俸禄，重的降任外地职务而已，偶尔有被判决的也是有其他原因才这样。
English: At that time, many inspectors were found guilty, and Zhang Xingxin made a report: During the Taidong era, inspectors who were found guilty usually received atonement fees, or their salaries were taken away, and they were severely demoted to overseas posts. Occasionally, those who were sentenced did so for other reasons.

古文：当时执政程辉已尝面论其非是，又有敕旨，监察职主弹劾，而或看循者，非谓凡失察皆然也。
现代文：当时的辅政大臣程辉已经当面争议认为是不适当的。朝廷又有旨意，监察的职务主要是弹劾官员，看他们是否守法，并非凡失察的都是这样。
English: Cheng Hui, the then Vice-Minister of State, had already argued in person that it was inappropriate. The imperial court also had a purpose, and the monitoring function was mainly to impeach officials to see if they complied with the law, which was not always the case with those who lost sight.

古文：近日无问事之大小、情之轻重，一概的决，以为大定故实、先朝明训，过矣。 
现代文：近来也不问事情的大小、情节的轻重，一概判决，认为是大定以来的规矩，先朝的明训，太过分了。 
English: Recently, no matter the size of the case or the seriousness of the circumstances, all decisions are made, which is considered to be the rule since the Great Reform, the clear teaching of the previous government, which is too much.

古文：于是诏尚书省更定监察罪名制。
现代文：于是，诏令尚书省重新确定监察的罪名制度。
English: As a result, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology was ordered to redefine the supervision system.

古文：史馆修《章宗实录》，尚书省奏： 旧制，凡修史，宰相执政皆预焉。
现代文：史馆编修《章宗实录》，尚书省奏道： 旧规定，凡修史，宰相和辅政大臣都参预。
English: The History Museum compiled the "Zhangzong Record," and the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology said: According to the old regulations, the Prime Minister and the Vice-Minister of State all participated in the preparation of history.

古文：然女直、汉人各一员。
现代文：但由女真和汉人各出一人。
English: However, one person from each of the two groups will be selected.

古文：崇庆中，既以参知政事梁絪兼之，复命翰林承旨张行简同事，盖行简家学相传，多所考据。
现代文：崇庆年间，既由参知政事梁王堂兼管，又让翰林承旨张行简同管，这是因为张行简家学相传，多有考据。
English: During the Chongqing period, not only was the political advisor Liang Wangtang concurrently in charge, but Hanlin also had Zhang Xingjian concurrently in charge. This was due to the fact that Zhang Xingjian's learning was passed down from generation to generation, and there were many references.

古文：今修《章宗实录》，左丞汝砺已充兼修，宜令参知政事行信同修如行简例。 
现代文：如今修《章宗实录》，左丞高汝砺已充当兼修官，应当让参知政事张行信同修，如同张行简的时候一样。 
English: Now that Gao Rucheng, the left-hand man, has become a part-time editor of the "Zhangzong Record," he should let Zhang Xingxin, the political advisor, edit it, just as he did with Zhang Xingjian.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝批准。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：二年二月，出为彰化军节度使，兼泾州管内观察使，谕之曰： 初，朕以朝臣多称卿才，乃令参决机务。
现代文：二年二月，出任彰化军节度使，兼泾州管内观察使，皇帝对他说： 当初，我因为朝臣们大多称赞你的才能，因此让你参预机要大事。
English: In February of the second year, when he was appointed as the Changhua military festival envoy and the Zhangzhou administrative observation envoy, the emperor said to him: At first, I mostly praised your talent because of the courtiers, so it is important for you to participate in the preparatory work.

古文：而廷议之际，每不据正，妄为异同，甚非为相之道。
现代文：可是你在朝廷商议时，总是不按正道，乱提异议，很不合为相之道。
English: However, when you were deliberating in the imperial court, you always did not follow the right path, raised objections in a disorderly manner, and were very inconsistent with each other.

古文：复闻迩来殊不以干当为意，岂欲求散地故耶？
现代文：又听说你近来不把正经事情放在心上，莫非是想分裂土地的缘故吗？
English: I also heard that you have not been paying attention to serious matters recently, is it because you want to divide the land?

古文：今授此职，卿宜悉之。 
现代文：如今任命你这个职务，你应当知道原因。 
English: Now that you have been appointed to this position, you should know why.

古文：初，内族合周避敌不击，且诡言密奉朝旨，下狱当诛。
现代文：起初，皇族的合周逃避敌军不敢出击，并且假称是秘密收到朝廷的旨意，被逮捕入狱以罪该杀。
English: At first, members of the imperial family did not dare to attack in order to evade the enemy, and pretended that they had secretly received the will of the imperial court, and were arrested and imprisoned for the crime of deserving to be killed.

古文：诸皇族多抗表乞从末减，高琪以为自古犯法无告免者，行信独曰： 事无古今，但合周平昔忠孝，或可以免。 
现代文：众皇族都上奏章表示不同意见，并请求赦免，但皇帝不从，高琪认为自古以来犯了法没有因哀告而免除的。张行信却说 ：事不论古或今。不过合周平时一向忠孝，也许可以宽免他。 
English: All the royal families sent their dissenting opinions to the emperor and asked for a pardon, but the emperor did not agree. Gao Qi believed that since ancient times, people had broken the law and were not excused because of complaints. Zhang Xingxin, however, said, "It doesn't matter whether it's ancient or modern. However, He Zhou has always been loyal and filial, so perhaps he can be pardoned."

古文：又以行信族弟行贞居山东，受红袄贼伪命，枢密院得宋人书，有干涉行信事，故出之。
现代文：又因当时张行信的族弟张行贞居住在山东，接受了红袄贼的任命，枢密院收到宋国来书，其中有牵涉到张行信的事情，所以让他离开朝廷。
English: In addition, because Zhang Xingxin's younger brother Zhang Xingzhen was living in Shandong at that time and accepted the appointment of the Red Skull Thief, the Privy Council received a letter from Song Guo, one of which involved Zhang Xingxin, so let him leave the imperial court.

古文：其子莒，时为尚书省令史，亦命别加注授焉。
现代文：张行信的儿子张莒，当时任尚书省令史，朝廷也让另行任用。
English: Zhang Xingxin's son, Zhang Hao, was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Education at that time, and the imperial court also gave him another appointment.

古文：初，行信言： 今法，职官论罪，多从的决。
现代文：起初，张行信进言说： 依今日的法令，官员犯罪，多依照法律判决。
English: At first, Zhang Xingxin said: According to today's laws and regulations, officials who commit crimes are mostly sentenced according to the law.

古文：伏见大定间世宗敕旨，职官犯故违圣旨，徒年、杖数并的决。
现代文：我见大定年间世宗下旨，官员犯有故意违反圣旨的罪，徒刑、杖责并判决。
English: I saw that during the Great Lent, the emperor issued an edict, and officials who committed the crime of deliberately violating the edict were sentenced to imprisonment and caning.

古文：然其后三十余年，有司论罪，未尝引用，盖非经久为例之事也。
现代文：可是在以后的三十多年间，有关部门定罪，都不曾引用，这也不是经久而成惯例之事，请详加论定。 
English: However, over the next thirty years, the relevant departments never cited the conviction, which is not a matter of long-standing practice. Please elaborate.

古文：乞详定之。 行信既出，上以其章付尚书省。
现代文：张行信离开朝廷以后，皇帝将这份奏章交给尚书省。
English: After Zhang Xingxin left the imperial court, the emperor gave this musical score to Shangshuo.

古文：至是，宰臣奏： 自今违奏条之所指挥、及诸条格，当坐违制旨者，其徒年、杖数论赎可也。
现代文：这时，宰辅们上奏说 ：从今以后，凡因违犯所奏条款所指明各项规定的，应当判为违背皇帝圣旨罪的，他们判徒刑年限，责打的次数可允许赎罪。
English: At this time, the vice-premiers reported: From now on, anyone who violates the provisions specified in the above-mentioned clause shall be convicted of violating the emperor's edict, and they will be sentenced to a term of imprisonment, and the number of times they are beaten can be allowed to atone for their sins.

古文：特奉诏旨违者，依大定例。 
现代文：特别送去了诏令圣旨而故意违背的，依照大定年间的条例执行。 
English: Those who deliberately violate the sacred will of the Imperial Edict, which was specially sent to them, will be executed in accordance with the regulations of the Taisho era.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝批示同意。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：行信去未久，上尝谕宰臣曰： 自张行信降黜，卿等遂缄默，此殊非是。
现代文：张行信离开朝廷不久，皇帝曾经对宰臣们说 ：自从张行信被降职之后，你们便闭口不说话了，这极不应该。
English: Not long after Zhang Xingxin left the imperial court, the emperor once said to his aides-de-camp: "Since Zhang Xingxin was demoted, you have shut up and not spoken, which is extremely inappropriate.

古文：行信事，卿等具知，岂以言之故耶！
现代文：张行信的事情，你们都是很清楚的，哪里是因为进言的缘故？
English: You all know very well about Zhang Xingxin. What is the reason for the suggestion?

古文：自今宜各尽言，毋复畏忌。 
现代文：从今以后应当言无不尽，不要有所畏忌。 
English: From now on, we should speak out and not be afraid.

古文：行信始至泾，即上书曰： 马者甲兵之本，方军旅未息，马政不可缓也。
现代文：张行信刚到泾州，立即上书说： 马匹是军队的根本，如今战事不止，马匹不可延缓办理。
English: Zhang Xingxin had just arrived in Zhangzhou, and immediately wrote a letter saying: Horses are the foundation of the army, now there are more and more battles, horses cannot be delayed.

古文：臣自到泾，闻陕右豪民多市于河州，转入内地，利盖百倍。
现代文：我自到泾州，听说陕西的豪强大都去河州买马，转卖到内地，获利百倍。
English: Since I came to Ganzhou, I have heard that the rich and powerful in Shaanxi go to Hezhou to buy horses and resell them to the mainland, making a hundredfold profit.

古文：及见省差买马官平凉府判官乌古论桓端市于洮州，以银百铤几得马千疋，云生羌木波诸部蕃族人户畜牧甚广。
现代文：当见到省里派去的买马官平凉府判官乌古论桓端到洮州买马时，用百铤的银子买到近千匹马，他说在生羌、木波各部，蕃族人家养了许多马。
English: When he saw the horse-buying official, Ping Liangfu Judge Ugu Xuan Duan, who was sent from the province to buy horses in Ganzhou, he bought nearly a thousand horses with a hundred shekels of silver. He said that in Zhouzhuang and Mubo, the Yao people raised many horses.

古文：盖前所遣官或抑其直，或以势陵夺，遂失其和，且常患银少，所以不能多得也。
现代文：以前由于派去的官员或者故意压价，或者仗势抢夺，因而产生不和，而且常受到银子少的限制，所以难以多得。
English: In the past, officials were sent to lower prices on purpose or to take advantage of the situation, leading to discord, and they were often limited by a lack of money, so it was difficult to get more.

古文：又闻蕃地今秋薄收，鬻马得银辄以易粟。
现代文：又听说蕃地今年秋收不好，需卖马得银买粟米。
English: I also heard that the autumn harvest in Handan is not good this year, and it is necessary to sell horse silver to buy corn.

古文：冬春之交必艰食，马价甚低。乞令所司辇银粟于洮、河等州，选委知蕃情、达时变如桓端者贸易之。
现代文：冬春之际肯定缺少食物，马价很低，请让有关方面运银和粟米到洮、河等州，选派熟悉蕃邦情形，通达而能随机应变的像桓端这样的人去购买和交换。
English: At the time of winter and spring, there is definitely a shortage of food, and the price of horses is very low. Please let the relevant authorities transport silver and corn to Shan, He and other states, and select people like Huanduan who are familiar with the situation in Shan State, and who are able to adapt at random to purchase and exchange.

古文：若捐银万两，可得良马千疋，机会不可失，惟朝廷亟图之。 
现代文：如果用银万两，就可以得到良马千匹，机不可失，请朝廷尽快考虑。 
English: If you use 10,000 taels of silver, you can get a thousand good horses. Don't lose this opportunity. Please consider it as soon as possible.

古文：又曰： 此者沿边战士有功，朝廷遗使宣谕，赐以官赏，莫不感戴圣恩，愿出死力，此诚得激劝之方也。
现代文：他又说： 近来沿边的将士们立功，朝廷派使者前去宣旨，赐给官爵，他们无不感激皇恩，愿出死力报国，这也是激励他们的好方法。
English: He also said, "Recently, soldiers along the coast have made great achievements, and the imperial court has sent an envoy to announce the order and give it to the nobles. They are all grateful for the imperial grace and are willing to do their best to serve the country. This is also a good way to motivate them.

古文：然赠遗使者或马或金，习以为常，臣所未谕也。
现代文：可是，他们赠送使者的或者马匹，或是金钱，成为惯例了，这是我所不能理解的。
English: However, it has become customary for them to give the envoys either horses or money, which I do not understand.

古文：大定间，尝立送宣礼，自五品以上各有定数，后竟停罢。
现代文：大定年间，曾经制定送给宣读圣旨的使者礼品时，凡五品以上官员都有规定的数目，后来竟然废止了。
English: During the Taisho era, when gifts were given to the messenger who read out the imperial edict, there was a specified number for all officials above the rank of vipon, but it was later abolished.

古文：况今时务与昔不同，而六品以下及止迁散官者，亦不免馈献，或莫能办，则敛所部以应之，至有因而获罪者。
现代文：何况目前时局和过去不同，而那些受封为六品以下以及只是散官的人也免不了送礼，有的没法备办礼物，便向部下收取来应付，甚至有人因此犯了罪。
English: What's more, the current situation is different from the past, and those who have been awarded the rank of six or less and those who are only non-commissioned officers cannot avoid giving gifts. Some cannot prepare gifts, so they collect them from their subordinates to deal with them, and some have even committed crimes.

古文：彼军士效死立功，仅蒙恩赏，而反以馈献为苦，是岂朝廷之意哉。
现代文：那些将士们拼命立功，朝廷刚给予赏赐官爵，而他们又要因送礼物而发愁，这哪里是朝廷的本意？
English: What is the intention of the imperial court to reward those soldiers who worked hard for their meritorious service with peerages, while they are worried about giving gifts?

古文：乞令有司依大定例，参以时务，明立等夷，使取予有限，无伤大体，则上下两得矣。 
现代文：请令有关方面依照大定年间规定，参考目前时局，明确规定数目一律等同，让他们收受之间有限度，这样无伤大体，而上下齐美了！ 
English: I would like to ask the relevant parties to clearly stipulate that the number will be the same in accordance with the provisions of the Dating era, with reference to the current situation, and that there will be a limit between their acceptance and acceptance. In this way, there will be no injury, and the top and bottom will be the same!

古文：又曰： 近闻保举县令，特增其俸，此朝廷为民之善意也。
现代文：又说： 近来听说保举县令，特别增加他们的俸禄，这也是朝廷对民众的善意。
English: He also said, "Recently, I heard that the Baoju County Order, especially increased their salaries, which is also the goodwill of the imperial court to the people.

古文：然自关以西，尚未有到任者，远方之民不能无望。岂举者犹寡，而有所不敷耶？
现代文：然而从潼关以西，至今还没有到任的，远方的民众不能总是没有指望，难道是举荐的人数少，因而不足吗？
English: However, the people from the west of Shaoguan, who have not yet arrived, cannot always have no hope. Is it because the number of people recommended is small, and therefore insufficient?

古文：乞诏内外职事官，益广选举，以补其阙，使天下均受其赐。
现代文：请诏令内外官员，增大选举范围，以补其缺，让天下人都得到好处。
English: I would like to ask officials at home and abroad to increase the scope of the election to make up for its shortcoming, so that everyone in the world can benefit.

古文：且丞、簿、尉亦皆亲民，而独不增俸，彼既不足以自给，安能禁其侵牟乎。
现代文：况且县丞、主簿、县尉也都是接近民众之官，却独不增加俸禄，他们既然不够自给自足，又怎么能禁止他们侵占和牟利呢？
English: Moreover, the county magistrate, the chief registrar, and the county lieutenant are all officials who are close to the people, but they do not increase their salaries. Since they are not self-sufficient, how can they prohibit them from appropriating and making profits?

古文：或谓国用方阙，不宜虚费，是大不然。
现代文：有人认为国家经费正紧张，不应当乱花钱，这是很不对的。
English: Some people think that the national budget is tight and that we should not waste money, which is very wrong.

古文：夫重吏禄者，固使之不扰民也，民安则国定，岂为虚费。
现代文：给官吏俸禄丰厚，正是要让他们不侵扰民众，民众安宁国家就安定，怎么是乱花钱？
English: It is precisely to ensure that officials do not disturb the people and that the people are at peace and the country is stable that officials are given generous salaries. How is this a waste of money?

古文：诚能裁减冗食，不养无用之人，亦何患乎不足。
现代文：假如能够裁减那些机构中无事无用的官员，不养那些毫无用处的人，又何必担心费用不足？
English: If it is possible to reduce the number of useless officials in those agencies and not to maintain those who are useless, why worry about insufficient expenses?

古文：今一军充役，举家廪给，军既物故，给其子弟，感悦士心，为国尽力耳。
现代文：如今一个人当兵，全家都由国家供给，军人死亡后，又供给他的子弟，以激励军心，为国尽力。
English: Nowadays, when a person becomes a soldier, the whole family is provided for by the state. After the death of a soldier, his children are also provided for in order to encourage the military spirit and do their best for the country.

古文：至于无男丁而其妻女犹给之，此何谓耶？
现代文：至于没有男丁的家庭，他们的妻子和女儿仍然供给，这是什么原因？
English: As for the families without a male child, their wives and daughters still provide for them. What is the reason for this?

古文：自大驾南巡，存赡者已数年，张颐待哺，以困农民。
现代文：自从皇帝车驾南巡以来，已负担几年了，都张着嘴等吃饭，农民就要受困。
English: Ever since the emperor's southern inspection tour by car, it has been a burden for several years. People are waiting to eat with their mouths open, and farmers are about to be trapped.

古文：国家粮储，常患不及，顾乃久养此老幼数千万口，冗食虚费，正在是耳。
现代文：国家时常担心存粮不足，这也是因为赡养这些老幼几千万人，多人求食，白费的金钱也正在于此。
English: The state is often worried about the shortage of grain reserves, which is also because of the support of these tens of millions of people, old and young, many people are looking for food, and wasted money is also here.

古文：如即罢之，恐其失所，宜限以岁月，使自为计，至期而罢，复将何辞。 
现代文：如果立即停止供应，恐怕流离失所，但应当规定时间，让他们各自想办法，到规定期限便停止供应，他们又有什么可说。 
English: If the supply is stopped immediately, I am afraid they will be displaced, but a time should be set for them to find their own way, and if the supply is stopped by the set deadline, what can they say?

古文：上多采纳焉。
现代文：皇帝大多采纳他的意见。
English: Most emperors followed his advice.

古文：元光元年正月，迁保大军节度使，兼鄜州管内观察使。
现代文：元光元年正月，升为保大军节度使，兼任州管内观察使。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Yuan Guang Dynasty, he was promoted to the military commander of the Great Patriotic War, and also served as the state observation envoy.

古文：二月，改静难军节度使，兼邠州管内观察使。
现代文：二月，改任静难军节度使，兼州管内观察使。
English: In February, he was reappointed as the commander of the Jingnan Army, and also as the commander of the observation in the prefecture.

古文：未几，致仕。
现代文：不久，告退离职。
English: Soon after, he resigned from his post.

古文：哀宗即位，征用旧人，起为尚书左丞。言事稍不及前，人望颇减。
现代文：哀宗即位，召用旧官员，起用他为尚书左丞，他奏事已略不如以前那样，名望也有所降低。
English: When Emperor Aizong ascended to the throne, he summoned the old officials and appointed him as Shangshu Zuo, but his performance was not as good as before, and his reputation also declined.

古文：寻复致仕家居，惟以抄书教子孙为事，葺园池汴城东，筑亭号 静隐 ，时时与侯挚辈游咏其间。
现代文：不久，又请求退休回家，日常只是抄书教给子孙们，并在汴城东面修建园林，建一座亭子称为 静隐亭 ，他时常跟侯挚等人在里面游览吟咏。
English: Soon after, he asked to retire and return home. His daily life consisted of copying books and teaching his children and grandchildren. He also built a garden on the east side of Lucheng and a pavilion called Jingyin Pavilion, which he often visited with Hou Zhi and others.

古文：正大八年二月乙丑，薨于嵩山崇福宫，年六十有九。
现代文：正大八年二月乙丑，死于嵩山的崇福宫，当年六十九岁。
English: In February of the eighth year of his senior year, he died at the age of sixty-nine in Songshan's Chongfu Palace.

古文：初游嵩山，尝曰： 吾意欲主此山。 
现代文：他初次游览嵩山时，曾经说： 我多想主管这座山！ 
English: During his first visit to Songshan, he once said: I would like to be in charge of this mountain!

古文：果终于此。
现代文：果然死在这里。
English: He died here.

古文：为人纯正真率，不事修饰，虽两登相位，殆若无官然。
现代文：张行信为人品德纯正直率，不喜欢粉饰自己，虽然两次担任丞相，却依然像没有当官一样。
English: Zhang Xingxin is a person of pure honesty and does not like to whitewash himself. Although he has served as chancellor twice, he is still like he is not an official.

古文：遇事辄发，无所畏避，每奏事上前，旁人为动色，行信处之坦如也。
现代文：他遇事敢于发表意见，无所畏惧和避讳，每次在皇帝面前奏事时，别人都替他捏一把汗，而张行信坦然自若。
English: He dared to express his opinions in times of trouble, without fear or shyness. Every time he made a report in front of the emperor, others were sweating for him, but Zhang Xingxin was calm and self-possessed.

古文：及薨之日，虽平昔甚媢忌者，亦曰正人亡矣。
现代文：他去世时，即使是平日非常嫉妒他的人，也在说一个正派人去世了。
English: When he died, even people who were normally very jealous of him were saying that a decent man had died.

古文：初至汴，父暐以御史大夫致仕，犹康健，兄行简为翰林学士承旨，行信为礼部尚书，诸子侄多中第居官，当世未之有也。
现代文：初到汴京，他父亲以御史大夫之职退休时身体还很健康，他的哥哥张行简任翰林学士承旨，张行信任礼部尚书，各子侄当中许多人中进士当了官，这是当世所未有过的情况。
English: When he first arrived in Beijing, his father was still in good health when he retired from the post of Imperial Historian, his brother Zhang Xingjian served as Hanlin Scholar, Zhang Xing trusted the Ministry of Ceremonies, and many of his sons and nephews became officers, which was an unprecedented situation.

