古文：虞翻字仲翔，会稽馀姚人也，太守王朗命为功曹。
现代文：虞翻，字仲翔，会稽郡余姚县人，会稽太守王朗任命他为功曹。
English: Yu Tong, alias Zhong Xiang, is from Yuyao County, the county's auditing county. Wang Lang, the county's auditing governor, appointed him as a meritorious fellow.

古文：孙策征会稽，翻时遭父丧，衰绖诣府门，朗欲就之，翻乃脱衰入见，劝朗避策。
现代文：孙策讨伐会稽，虞翻当时正值父亲去世，他穿着丧服来到郡府门前，王朗想迎他进府，虞翻就脱去孝服进去拜见，劝王朗避开孙策。
English: At the time of Sun Ce's crusade against the association, Gu Dou was at the time of his father's death. He came to the front of the county government in mourning clothes. Wang Lang wanted to welcome him into the government. Gu Dou took off his filial piety and went in to see him. He advised Wang Lang to avoid Sun Ce.

古文：朗不能用，拒战败绩，亡走浮海。
现代文：王朗没有采纳，抗击孙策而失败，逃到海上。
English: Wang Lang did not accept the offer, failed to resist Sun Ce, and fled to the sea.

古文：翻追随营护，到东部候官，候官长闭城不受，翻往说之，然后见纳。
现代文：虞翻追随护卫，直到王朗逃到东部候官县，候官县长关闭城门不让他们入城，虞翻前往劝说，然后才被允许入城。
English: Yu Dou followed the escort until Wang Lang fled to the eastern county of Xuanquan. The head of the county of Xuanquan closed the city gate to prevent them from entering the city. Yu Dou went to persuade them before being allowed to enter the city.

古文：朗谓翻曰： 卿有老母，可以还矣。 
现代文：王朗对虞翻说： 您家中有老母，可以回去。 
English: Wang Lang said to Yu Fan: You have an old mother at home, you can go back.

古文：翻既归，策复命为功曹，待以交友之礼，身诣翻第。
现代文：虞翻回来后，孙策又任命他为功曹，以朋友之礼对待他，亲自到他家中拜访。
English: After Gu Guo's return, Sun Ce appointed him as a meritorious person, treated him as a friend, and personally visited his home.

古文：策好驰骋游猎，翻谏曰： 明府用乌集之众，驱散附之士，皆得其死力，虽汉高帝不及也。
现代文：孙策喜好驰马狩猎，虞翻劝谏说： 您用乌合之众，驾驭散乱无依附的士人，能得到他们拼死效力，即使是汉高祖也比不上。
English: Sun Ce was fond of horse-riding and hunting. Gu Guo Fu advised him, saying, "If you can use the rabble to control the scattered and unattached scholars and gain their deadly effectiveness, even the founder of the Han Dynasty can't match it."

古文：至於轻出微行，从官不暇严，吏卒常苦之。
现代文：至于随意轻装出行。随从官员无暇整理行装，将士们常为此苦恼。
English: As for traveling with light luggage at will, the soldiers are often troubled by the fact that the officials accompanying them have no time to organize their luggage.

古文：夫君人者不重则不威，故白龙鱼服，困於豫且，白蛇自放，刘季害之，愿少留意。 策曰： 君言是也。
现代文：做为君主，不庄重则不能树立威信，所以白龙化变为鱼，就招来豫且射其目，白蛇放任自我，就招致刘邦杀害。希望您多加留意。 孙策说： 您说得对。
English: As a monarch, if you are not dignified, you cannot establish prestige, so if the white dragon turns into a fish, it will attract suspicion and shoot its eyes, and if the white snake lets itself go, it will cause Liu Bang to be killed. I hope you will pay more attention. Sun Ce said: You are right.

古文：然时有所思，端坐悒悒，有裨谌草创之计，是以行耳。 
现代文：但时常有所思虑，端坐而思，心中烦闷，就像裨谌草拟稿件时的思虑，所以才出外行猎。 
English: However, I often have thoughts, sit down and think, and feel bored, just like the thoughts when I draft a manuscript, so I go out to hunt.

古文：翻出为富春长。
现代文：虞翻出京担任富春县县长。
English: Yu Guotong left Beijing to serve as the governor of Fuchun County.

古文：策薨，诸长吏并欲出赴丧，翻曰： 恐邻县山民或有奸变，远委城郭，必致不虞。 
现代文：孙策去世时，县中各长官都想出县奔丧，虞翻说： 恐怕邻县山越部族可能会有奸人生变，我们都远离城郭，必然会招致意外。 
English: When Sun Ce died, all the officials in the county wanted to rush out of the county to pay their respects. Yu Fan said, "I'm afraid that the neighboring Shan Yue tribe may have a traitor. We are far away from the castle, which will inevitably lead to an accident."

古文：因留制服行丧。
现代文：就留在治所穿着丧服守丧。
English: He stayed at the detention center and dressed in mourning clothes.

古文：诸县皆效之，咸以安宁。
现代文：各县都仿效他的做法，都得以安定无事。
English: All the counties followed his example and were able to maintain stability without any problems.

古文：后翻州举茂才，汉召为侍御史，曹公为司空辟，皆不就。
现代文：后来虞翻被州里推举为茂才，汉朝廷征召他担任侍御史，曹操以司空身份征召他，他都没有到任。
English: Later, Gu Tuo was selected by the state to be Maocai, the Han court called him to serve as an attendant historian, Cao Cao called him as a flight attendant, but he did not arrive at the post.

古文：翻与少府孔融书，并示以所著易注。
现代文：虞翻与少府孔融通信，并将自己撰写的《易注》寄给他看。
English: Gu Dou corresponded with Shaofu Kong Rong and sent him the "Easy Note" he had written.

古文：融答书曰： 闻延陵之理乐，睹吾子之治易，乃知东南之美者，非徒会稽之竹箭也。
现代文：孔融回信说： 听说延陵精通音乐，阅览您对《周易》的钻研，才知道东南地区的俊杰之美，并非只有会稽郡出产的竹箭著名啊。
English: Kong Rong wrote back: I heard that Yanling is proficient in music. After reading your study of "Zhou Yi," I know that the beauty of the southeastern region is not only famous for the bamboo arrows produced by Heji County.

古文：又观象云物，察应寒温，原其祸福，与神合契，可谓探赜穷通者也。 
现代文：又有《易注》观察云气天象，观察气温寒暖相应，推究祸福根源，都与神妙之事契合，可说是探奥索微、通晓事物规律的大作。 
English: There is also "Easy Note," which observes the weather of clouds, observes the corresponding temperature of cold and warm, and investigates the root causes of misfortune and good fortune, all of which are consistent with miraculous things. It can be said to be a masterpiece of exploring the subtle and understanding the laws of things.

古文：会稽东部都尉张纮又与融书曰： 虞仲翔前颇为论者所侵，美宝为质，彫摩益光，不足以损。 
现代文：会稽东部都尉张郃又给孔融写信说： 虞仲翔过去常被评论者贬损，但精美的宝玉常显出质朴的表象，越打磨越光亮，贬抑并不会损害他。 
English: The eastern captain of the Audit Commission, Zhang Qian, also wrote to Kong Rong, saying: Yu Zhongxiang was often belittled by critics in the past, but the exquisite gems often showed a rustic appearance. The more polished, the brighter, and belittling him would not harm him.

古文：孙权以为骑都尉。
现代文：孙权以虞翻为骑都尉。
English: Sun Quan promoted Gu Dou to lieutenant.

古文：翻数犯颜谏争，权不能悦，又性不协俗，多见谤毁，坐徙丹杨泾县。
现代文：虞翻多次冒犯孙权而极力劝谏，孙权心中不喜，且他性情又不与世人调和，所以经常被人毁谤，所以被定罪流放丹杨泾县。
English: Gu Dou repeatedly offended Sun Quan and tried his best to persuade him. Sun Quan did not like it, and his disposition was not reconciled with the world, so he was often slandered, so he was convicted and exiled to Danyangye County.

古文：吕蒙图取关羽，称疾还建业，以翻兼知医术，请以自随，亦欲因此令翻得释也。
现代文：吕蒙图谋攻取关羽，自称有病返回建业，以虞翻兼通医术为由，请求让虞翻跟随自己，也想借此使虞翻从事件中脱离出来。
English: Lv Meng plotted to capture Guan Yu, claiming to be ill and returning to Jianye. On the grounds that Guo Tuo was also a doctor, he requested that Guo Tuo follow him. He also wanted to use this to get Guo Tuo out of the incident.

古文：后蒙举军西上，南郡太守麋芳开城出降。
现代文：后来吕蒙率军西上，蜀国南郡太守麋芳献城投降。
English: Later, Lv Meng led the army westward, and the governor of the southern county of Shu, Yu Fang, surrendered the city.

古文：蒙未据郡城而作乐沙上，翻谓蒙曰： 今区区一心者麋将军也，城中之人岂可尽信，何不急入城持其管籥乎？ 
现代文：吕蒙没有占据城池，而在沙滩上奏乐庆贺，虞翻对吕蒙说： 现在一心投降的只有麋将军一人，城里的人怎么能全都相信？为什么不赶快进城去控制住这座城池呢？ 
English: Lv Meng did not occupy the city, but played music on the beach to celebrate. Gu Guo said to Lv Meng: Only General Yu is surrendering now. How can all the people in the city believe him? Why not rush into the city to control the city?

古文：蒙即从之。
现代文：吕蒙立即采纳他的意见。
English: Lv Meng immediately adopted his opinion.

古文：时城中有伏计，赖翻谋不行。
现代文：当时城中确实有人定了埋伏吴军的计划，仰赖虞翻建议，这阴谋才未施行。
English: At that time, someone in the city did indeed set up a plan to ambush the Wu army, relying on the suggestion of Yufu, but this plot was not carried out.

古文：关羽既败，权使翻筮之，得兑下坎上，节，五爻变之临，翻曰： 不出二日，必当断头。 
现代文：关羽被攻破后，孙权让虞翻占卜结局，虞翻得 兑 上 坎 下，卦 节 ，五爻而演变为 临 ，虞翻就说： 不出二日，关羽必定断头。 
English: After Guan Yu was defeated, Sun Quan asked Guo Guo to predict the outcome. Guo Guo was able to predict the outcome. Guo Guo was able to predict the outcome. Guo Guo was able to predict the outcome. Guo Guo was able to predict the outcome. Guo Guo was able to predict the outcome. Guo Guo was able to predict the outcome.

古文：果如翻言。
现代文：后果真像虞翻所说。
English: The consequences are really like what Yufuang said.

古文：权曰： 卿不及伏羲，可与东方朔为比矣。 
现代文：孙权说： 你比不上伏羲，却可与东方朔相比。 
English: Sun Quan said: You are no match for Fuxi, but you can be compared to Dongfangshuo.

古文：魏将于禁为羽所获，系在城中，权至释之，请与相见。
现代文：魏国将领于禁被关羽所生擒，关收押在城中，孙权到后将他释放，请他前来相见。
English: The Wei general took the scepter from Guan Yu, who had been banned, and detained him in the city. When Sun Quan arrived, he released him and asked him to come and see him.

古文：他日，权乘马出，引禁并行，翻呵禁曰： 尔降虏，何敢与吾君齐马首乎！ 
现代文：后来，孙权骑马外出，带着于禁并列前行，虞翻斥责于禁： 你是投降的俘虏，怎敢与我们的主上并驾齐驱呢？ 
English: Later, Sun Quan went out on horseback, and he and Yu Gan rode side by side, and Gu Gu rebuked Yu Gan: "You are a surrendered prisoner, how dare you ride alongside our lord?"

古文：欲抗鞭击禁，权呵止之。
现代文：就想要举鞭抽打于禁，孙权呵斥制止了他。
English: Sun Quan yelled at him to stop when he wanted to whip him.

古文：后权于楼船会群臣饮，禁闻乐流涕，翻又曰： 汝欲以伪求免邪？ 
现代文：后来孙权在楼船上会集群臣宴饮，于禁听到演奏的音乐泪流满面。虞翻又说： 你想以虚情假意来求得幸免于难吗？ 
English: Later, Sun Quan would gather a group of courtiers for a banquet on the houseboat, and tears streamed down his face when he heard the music being played. Gu Fu also said: Do you want to use false feelings and pretenses to survive?

古文：权怅然不平。
现代文：孙权心中怅然不快。
English: Sun Quan was very unhappy.

古文：权既为吴王，欢宴之末，自起行酒，翻伏地阳醉，不持。
现代文：孙权做吴王后，有次在宴饮享乐尾声时，亲自起身巡行斟酒，虞翻趴在地上装醉，不端酒杯。
English: Sun Quan, the Queen of Wu, once got up to pour the wine at the end of a banquet, rolled over on the floor and pretended to be drunk.

古文：权去，翻起坐。
现代文：孙权离开，他就坐起来。
English: When Sun Quan left, he sat up.

古文：权於是大怒，手剑欲击之，侍坐者莫不惶遽，惟大农刘基起抱权谏曰： 大王以三爵之后杀善士，虽翻有罪，天下孰知之？
现代文：孙权大怒，手里拿着剑要刺他，陪坐的人都震惊惶恐，只有大农刘基起身抱住孙权劝说： 大王因酒过三巡之后杀了有名望之人，虽说虞翻有罪，但天下人谁知道呢？
English: Sun Quan flew into a rage and wanted to stab him with a sword in his hand. The people who were sitting with him were shocked and frightened. Only the farmer Liu Ji got up and hugged Sun Quan to persuade him: The great king killed a famous person after three rounds of drinking. Although Gu Tong was guilty, who in the world knows?

古文：且大王以能容贤畜众，故海内望风，今一朝弃之，可乎？ 
现代文：况且大王因为能容纳贤才，供养士人，所以天下望风依附。现在因一件事而将其抛弃，值得吗？ 
English: Moreover, because the great king can accommodate sages and provide support for scholars, the world is looking forward to it. Is it worth it to abandon it now because of one thing?

古文：权曰： 曹孟德尚杀孔文举，孤於虞翻何有哉？ 
现代文：孙权说： 曹操尚且杀死孔融，我对虞翻又有什么怜惜的。 
English: Sun Quan said, "Even though Cao Cao killed Kong Rong, I have no pity for Gu Fu.

古文：基曰： 孟德轻害士人，天下非之。
现代文：刘基说： 曹操轻率地杀害士人，天下人认为不对。
English: Liu Qi said: Cao Cao killed the scholar carelessly, and the whole world thought it was wrong.

古文：大王躬行德义，欲与尧、舜比隆，何得自喻於彼乎？ 
现代文：大王躬行仁义道德，希望和尧、舜比肩，怎么能自比曹操呢？ 
English: How can Cao Cao compare himself with the great emperors who practiced benevolence, righteousness and morality, and whose hopes were on a par with those of Yao and Shun?

古文：翻由是得免。
现代文：虞翻因此免于一死。
English: As a result, Gu Guo was spared from death.

古文：权因敕左右，自今酒后言杀，皆不得杀。
现代文：孙权因此事下令身边人，从今以后自己酒后说要杀的人，都不得杀。
English: As a result, Sun Quan ordered his entourage that from now on, anyone who he said he wanted to kill after drinking should not be killed.

古文：翻尝乘船行，与麋芳相逢，芳船上人多欲令翻自避，先驱曰： 避将军船！ 
现代文：虞翻曾经乘船出行，与麋芳相遇，麋芳船上的人都想让虞翻自行避让，站在船头的人说： 避开将军的船！ 
English: Yufuang once traveled by boat and met with Yu Fang. The people on Yu Fang's boat wanted to let Yufuang avoid them on his own. The person standing at the bow of the boat said: Avoid the general's boat!

古文：翻厉声曰： 失忠与信，何以事君？
现代文：虞翻厉声地说： 抛去忠诚与信义，拿什么侍奉君主？
English: Gu said angrily, "Leaving loyalty and faithfulness aside, what is the use of serving the monarch?

古文：倾人二城，而称将军，可乎？ 
现代文：倾覆了人家委托的两座城池，却自称将军，是应当的吗？ 
English: Did he deserve to be a self-proclaimed general after he overturned two cities entrusted to him?

古文：芳阖户不应而遽避之。
现代文：麋芳紧闭船窗没有回应，且迅速避让虞翻的船。
English: Yu Fang closed the window tightly and did not respond, and quickly avoided the capsized boat.

古文：后翻乘车行，又经芳营门，吏闭门，车不得过。
现代文：后来虞翻乘车出行，又经过麋芳军营的大门，营中军官将营门关上，虞翻的车无法通过。
English: Later, Yu Qian traveled by car, and passed through the gate of the Yu Fang military camp. The officers in the camp closed the gate, and Yu Qian's car could not pass.

古文：翻复怒曰： 当闭反开，当开反闭，岂得事宜邪？ 
现代文：虞翻又大怒说： 该关时反而打开，该开时反而关闭，哪有这样的事情！ 
English: Guo Fu said angrily, "The gate opens when it is supposed to, and closes when it is supposed to. There is no such thing!"

古文：芳闻之，有惭色。
现代文：麋芳听了此话，面有愧色。
English: Hearing this, Hao Fang felt ashamed.

古文：翻性疏直，数有酒失。
现代文：虞翻性格疏朗耿直，多次因酒犯错。
English: The character of Gu Dou is sparse and straightforward, and he has made mistakes due to alcohol many times.

古文：权与张昭论及神仙，翻指昭曰： 彼皆死人，而语神仙，世岂有仙人邪！ 
现代文：孙权和张昭谈论神仙之事，虞翻手指张昭说： 那些都是死人，反而说是神仙，世上哪有什么仙人呢！ 
English: Sun Quan and Zhang Zhao were talking about immortals, when Gu flipped his finger at Zhang Zhao and said, "Those are all dead people, but they are immortals. What kind of immortals are there in the world?"

古文：权积怒非一，遂徙翻交州。
现代文：孙权对虞翻积压的怒气已不是一次，就将他流放到交州。
English: Not for the first time, Sun Quan's anger at the backlog of illegal immigrants boiled over, and he exiled him to Jiaozhou.

古文：虽处罪放，而讲学不倦，门徒常数百人。
现代文：虽然因罪被流放，但虞翻却讲学不倦，学生常有数百人。
English: Although he was exiled for his crimes, he never tired of lecturing, often to hundreds of students.

古文：又为老子、论语、国语训注，皆传於世。
现代文：又为《老子》、《论语》、《国语》撰写注释，都流传于世。
English: He also wrote commentaries for "Lao Zi," "Analects" and "National Language," all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：初，山阴丁览，太末徐陵，或在县吏之中，或众所未识，翻一见之，便与友善，终成显名。
现代文：当初，山阴人丁览、太末人徐陵，有的身处县吏之中，有的尚未被世人所知晓，虞翻一见他们，就和他们关系友好，最后都得以显名。
English: At the beginning, the Shanyin person, Ding Xuan, and the late great person, Xu Ling, were both county officials, and some were not yet known to the world. Once Gu Guo Fu saw them, he had a friendly relationship with them, and they eventually became famous.

古文：在南十馀年，年七十卒。归葬旧墓，妻子得还。
现代文：虞翻在南方十几年，七十岁时去世，灵柩运回余姚祖先墓地安葬，妻子儿女也得以返归故里。
English: After spending more than ten years in the south, he died at the age of seventy. The coffin was transported back to Yuyao Ancestral Cemetery for burial. His wife and children were also able to return to their hometown.

古文：翻有十一子，第四子汜最知名，永安初，从选曹郎为散骑中常侍，后为监军使者，讨扶严，病卒。
现代文：虞翻有十一个儿子，第四子虞汜最出名。永安初年，虞汜从选曹郎担任散骑中常侍，后来担任监军使者，征讨扶严，因病去世。
English: He had eleven sons, the most famous of whom was his fourth son, Yutong. In the first year of Yongan, Yutong served as a cavalry officer from the time he was selected as a cavalry officer, and later served as an emissary to supervise the army, and fought against Fuyan. He died of illness.

古文：汜弟忠，宜都太守；耸，越骑校尉，累迁廷尉，湘东、河间太守；昺，廷尉尚书，济阴太守。
现代文：虞汜的弟弟虞忠，做过宜都太守；虞耸，做过越骑校尉，多次升迁至廷尉，又担任了湘东、河间两地太守；虞昺，做过廷尉尚书，济阴太守。
English: His younger brother, Yu Zhong, served as the governor of Yidu; Yu Sheming, served as the captain of the Yue cavalry, was promoted to lieutenant many times, and served as the governor of Shandong and Hema; Yu Yu, served as the lieutenant of Shangshu, and the governor of Jiyin.

古文：陆绩字公纪，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：陆绩，字公纪，吴郡吴县人。
English: Lu Ji, Zi Gongji, Wu County, Wu County.

古文：父康，汉末为庐江太守。
现代文：他的父亲陆康，汉朝末年做过庐江太守。
English: His father, Lu Kang, was the governor of the Li River at the end of the Han Dynasty.

古文：绩年六岁，於九江见袁术。
现代文：陆绩六岁时，在九江见到袁术。
English: When Lu Jie was six years old, he met Yuan Shuxing in Jiujiang.

古文：术出橘，绩怀三枚，去，拜辞堕地，术谓曰： 陆郎作宾客而怀橘乎？ 
现代文：袁术拿出橘子给他，陆绩拿了三个揣在怀里，临走时，因跪拜告辞而橘子滚落在地，袁术对他说： 陆郎作客还要怀揣橘子吗？ 
English: Yuan Shu took out an orange and gave it to him. Lu Ji took three oranges and carried them in his arms. As he was about to leave, he knelt down to say goodbye and the oranges fell to the ground. Yuan Shu said to him, "As Lu Lang's guest, do you still want to carry oranges?"

古文：绩跪答曰： 欲归遗母。 
现代文：陆绩跪着回答说： 打算带回去给母亲吃。 
English: Lu Jie kneeled down and replied, "I plan to take it back to my mother to eat."

古文：术大奇之。
现代文：袁术认为他很奇异。
English: Yuan Shuxu thought he was very strange.

古文：孙策在吴，张昭、张纮、秦松为上宾，共论四海未泰，须当用武治而平之，绩年少末坐，遥大声言曰： 昔管夷吾相齐桓公，九合诸侯，一匡天下，不用兵车。
现代文：孙策在吴郡，张昭、张郃、秦松做为他的上宾，他们共同讨论天下未定，应当用武力来平定，陆绩年纪小坐在末席，远远地大声说： 过去管夷吾做齐桓公的相国，召集诸侯，统一天下，不用兵马战车。
English: Sun Ce was in Wu County, with Zhang Zhao, Zhang Xuan, and Qin Song as his chief guests. They discussed together that the world was undecided and should be pacified by force. Lu Ji, who was young, sat in the last seat and said loudly from a distance: "In the past, Guan Yiwu was the partner country of King Qi Huan, summoned the princes, unified the country, and did not use horse-drawn chariots.

古文：孔子曰： 远人不服，则脩文德以来之。 
现代文：孔子说： 远方之人不归服，就修行德政招揽他们。 
English: Confucius said: If people in faraway places do not submit, we should practice virtue and invite them.

古文：今论者不务道德怀取之术，而惟尚武，绩虽童蒙，窃所未安也。 
现代文：现在你们不讨论如何致力于用道义仁德来安取天下的方法，而只崇尚武力，陆绩我虽年幼无知，但心中也认为不应当。 
English: Now you do not discuss how to use morality and benevolence to secure the world, but only advocate force. Although I am young and ignorant, I do not think it is right.

古文：昭等异焉。
现代文：张昭等人对他深感奇异。
English: Zhang Zhao and others are deeply puzzled by him.

古文：绩容貌雄壮，博学多识，星历算数无不该览。
现代文：陆绩外貌雄壮，博学多闻，天文、历法、算数全都钻研。
English: Lu Cunxin is handsome, erudite and well-informed, and has thoroughly studied astronomy, the calendar and arithmetic.

古文：虞翻旧齿名盛，庞统荆州令士，年亦差长，皆与绩友善。
现代文：虞翻在耆宿中很有盛名，庞统是荆州的名士，他们都与陆绩年龄相差很大，但都与他关系很好。
English: Gu Tuo is very famous in Shaoshu, and Pang Tong is famous in Jingzhou. They are very different in age from Lu Yi, but they have a good relationship with him.

古文：孙权统事，辟为奏曹掾，以直道见惮，出为郁林太守，加偏将军，给兵二千人。
现代文：孙权主管朝政，征召陆绩为奏曹掾。他因说话耿直而为人忌惮，所以出朝为郁林太守，加授为偏将军，授予两千士兵。
English: Sun Quan, who was in charge of the imperial court, called up soldiers to play the role of Cao Pi. He was feared because of his straightforward speech, so he was sent to the court as the governor of Yulin, promoted to the rank of general, and awarded two thousand soldiers.

古文：绩既有躄疾，又意存儒雅，非其志也。
现代文：陆绩既腿脚有毛病，又致力于研究经典，所以带兵上阵并非他的志向。
English: He has problems with his legs and feet and is committed to studying the classics, so it is not his ambition to lead soldiers into battle.

古文：虽有军事，著述不废，作浑天图，注易释玄，皆传於世。
现代文：虽说有军事任务，但著述并没有废止，他制作《浑天图》，注释《周易》和《太玄》，都流传后世。
English: Although he had a military mission, he did not stop writing. He produced "The Map of the Heavens" and annotated "Zhou Yi" and "The Great Mystery," both of which have been passed down to future generations.

古文：豫自知亡日，乃为辞曰： 有汉志士吴郡陆绩，幼敦诗、书，长玩礼、易，受命南征，遘疾逼厄，遭命不永，呜呼悲隔！ 
现代文：他预知到自己的死期，就给自己作好了挽辞： 汉朝志士，吴郡陆绩，幼时喜爱《诗》、《书》，年长钻研《礼》、《易》，奉命南征，染病遭厄，寿命不长，与世长辞，悲痛啊！ 
English: Anticipating his own death, he prepared a eulogy for himself: Han Dynasty aspirant, Wu County land record, loved "Poetry" and "Books" when he was young, studied "Rite" and "Ease" when he was older, was ordered to march to the south, contracted the disease and suffered misfortune, his life was not long, a long farewell, sorrow!

古文：又曰： 从今已去，六十年之外，车同轨，书同文，恨不及见也。 
现代文：又说： 自现在开始，六十年以后，车同轨、书同文，遗憾我无法见到。 
English: He also said: From now on, sixty years later, the car is the same track, the book is the same text, unfortunately I can't see it.

古文：年三十二卒。
现代文：他三十二岁就去世。
English: He was thirty-two when he died.

古文：长子宏，会稽南部都尉，次子叡，长水校尉。
现代文：陆绩长子陆宏，担任会稽南部都尉；次子陆睿又，任长水校尉。
English: Lu Hong, the eldest son of Lu Jie, served as the Southern Lieutenant of the Board of Auditors; the second son, Lu Rui, served as the First Lieutenant of Changshui.

古文：张温字惠恕，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：张温，字惠恕，吴郡吴县人。
English: Zhang Wen, surnamed Huizhong, from Wuxi, Wuxi County.

古文：父允，以轻财重士，名显州郡，为孙权东曹掾，卒。
现代文：他的父亲张允，因轻视钱财看重人才，声名在州郡中很显达，但任孙权的东曹掾，随后去世。
English: His father, Zhang Yun, because of his contempt for money and talent, was very famous in the state and county, but Dong Cao Wei, who was the grandson of Sun Quan, later died.

古文：温少脩节操，容貌奇伟。
现代文：张温从小就修养节操，容貌奇特雄伟。
English: Zhang Wen has been cultivating self-restraint since childhood, and his appearance is strangely majestic.

古文：权闻之，以问公卿曰： 温当今与谁为比？ 
现代文：孙权听说，就询问朝中大臣说： 张温能与当今何人相比？ 
English: When Sun Quan heard about it, he asked the Minister of the DPRK and China and said: How many people can Zhang Wen compare with today?

古文：大农刘基曰： 可与全琮为辈。 
现代文：大司农刘基说： 可与全琮相等。 
English: Farmer Liu Ji said: It can be equal to the whole strawberry.

古文：太常顾雍曰： 基未详其为人也。
现代文：太常顾雍说： 刘基未详细了解了解张温为人。
English: Gu Yong said: Liu Ji did not have a detailed understanding of Zhang Wen as a person.

古文：温当今无辈。 
现代文：张温当今无人可比。 
English: No one can compare to Zhang Wen today.

古文：权曰： 如是，张允不死也。 
现代文：孙权说： 如果是这样，那张允就算没有死！ 
English: Sun Quan said, "If that's the case, then that Zhang Yun didn't even die!"

古文：徵到延见，文辞占对，观者倾竦，权改容加礼。
现代文：就征召张温前来相见。张温谈吐文雅回答流畅，在旁之人都倾慕，孙权为之改变神色增加礼节。
English: He summoned Zhang Wen to come and meet him. Zhang Wen spoke fluently and elegantly, and the people around him admired him. Sun Quan changed his appearance and increased his etiquette.

古文：罢出，张昭执其手曰： 老夫讬意，君宜明之。 
现代文：拜见结束出宫，张昭握着张温的手说： 老夫将心意托付你，你应该明白。 
English: At the end of the visit, Zhang Zhao shook Zhang Wen's hand and said: The old man entrusts his heart to you, you should understand.

古文：拜议郎、选曹尚书，徙太子太傅，甚见信重。
现代文：就孙权任命张温为议郎、选曹尚书，又升为太子太傅，很受信任重视。
English: As far as Sun Quan was concerned, Zhang Wen was appointed as the chief adviser, the chief selector, and was promoted to the position of the crown prince. He was highly trusted and valued.

古文：时年三十二，以辅义中郎将使蜀。
现代文：张温三十二岁时，以辅义中郎将身份出使蜀国。
English: When Zhang Wen was thirty-two years old, he was sent to Shu Province as a vice-governor.

古文：权谓温曰： 卿不宜远出，恐诸葛孔明不知吾所以与曹氏通意，故屈卿行。
现代文：孙权对他说： 您本不宜外出远地，只是担心诸葛亮不知晓我与曹操往来的原因，所以委屈您前往。
English: Sun Quan said to him: You are not supposed to go far away, but you are worried that Zhuge Liang does not know the reason for my contact with Cao Cao, so you are wronged.

古文：若山越都除，便欲大构於丕。
现代文：如果山越祸患全部消除，我们便会对曹丕大举出兵。
English: If all the disasters in Shan Yue are eliminated, we will send troops to Cao Pi in a big way.

古文：行人之义，受命不受辞也。 
现代文：身为使者的使命，即接受命令但不接受言辞。 
English: The mission of an envoy is to take orders but not words.

古文：温对曰： 臣入无腹心之规，出无专对之用，惧无张老延誉之功，又无子产陈事之效。
现代文：张温回答说： 我在朝中没有作为心腹大臣出谋划策，奉命出使没有独自应对的才能，担心没有像张孟宣扬国家声誉的能力，又没有子产陈述事理的效果。
English: Zhang Wen replied: I did not act as a confidant minister in the government to make suggestions, I did not have the ability to respond independently when I was ordered to send envoys, I was worried that I did not have the ability to promote the reputation of the country like Zhang Meng, and I did not have the effect of explaining the situation.

古文：然诸葛亮达见计数，必知神虑屈申之宜，加受朝廷天覆之惠，推亮之心，必无疑贰。 
现代文：但诸葛亮见识深远，精于谋划，必定知晓您的神明思虑和屈伸权宜之计，加上朝廷天降恩惠，推测诸葛亮的想法，一定没有猜忌。 
English: However, Zhuge Liang is far-sighted and good at planning. He must know your divine thoughts and expedient measures, coupled with the grace of the imperial court, and there must be no fear of guessing Zhuge Liang's thoughts.

古文：温至蜀，诣阙拜章曰： 昔高宗以谅闇昌殷祚於再兴，成王以幼冲隆周德於太平，功冒溥天，声贯罔极。
现代文：张温到蜀国后，前往宫廷拜上奏章说： 古代商高宗守丧却使殷商国祚再次兴盛，周成王以年幼之身使周朝推行德政得享太平，他们的功绩覆盖天下，声威远播山海。
English: After Zhang Wen arrived in Shu, he went to the court to pay homage to the inscribed scroll and said: The ancient merchants Gaozong kept the funeral, but made the Yin merchants prosperous again. King Zhou Cheng, with his young body, made the Zhou Dynasty enjoy peace and tranquility through the implementation of German politics. Their achievements covered the world, and their fame spread far and wide.

古文：今陛下以聪明之姿，等契往古，总百揆於良佐，参列精之炳耀，遐迩望风，莫不欣赖。
现代文：现在陛下以聪明的资质，与古代圣贤等同，贤良大臣辅佐处理政事，满朝人才有如群星闪耀，远近人们仰望您的风采，无不欢欣前来依赖。
English: Now, His Majesty is equated with the sages of ancient times with his clever qualifications. The wise ministers assist him in handling political affairs. The talents of the whole dynasty shine like stars. People from far and near look up to your style and are happy to come and rely on you.

古文：吴国勤任旅力，清澄江浒，愿与有道平一宇内，委心协规，有如河水，军事凶烦，使役乏少，是以忍鄙倍之羞，使下臣温通致情好。
现代文：吴国勤于提升军事实力以安定江南之地，希望与有道之君一起安定天下，齐心协力规劝谋划，就像河水奔涌向前。只因战事频频猛烈，我们足以动用的军队太少，所以只好忍受卑鄙之人强加的耻辱。现特派下臣张温沟通情况表达交好之情。
English: Wu Guoqin is diligent in improving military strength to stabilize the land south of the Yangtze River, hoping to stabilize the world together with the virtuous prince, and make concerted efforts to persuade and plan, just like the river rushing forward. However, due to the frequent and fierce wars, we have too few troops to use, so we have to endure the shame imposed by the despicable people. Now he has sent a special envoy, Zhang Wen, to communicate the situation and express friendship.

古文：陛下敦崇礼义，未便耻忽。
现代文：陛下推崇礼义，不应以此为耻而忽视我的请求。
English: Your Majesty is a great believer in propriety and should not ignore my request out of shame.

古文：臣自远境，及即近郊，频蒙劳来，恩诏辄加，以荣自惧，悚怛若惊。
现代文：臣从遥远边境而来，直到贵国首都之郊，频频蒙受贵国礼节待遇，恩惠诏书不断传来，我受此荣耀心中惶恐，又感到意外的惊奇和不安。
English: I have come from the farthest borders to the outskirts of your capital, and I have often been treated with the courtesy of your country, and the letters of commendation have been coming in. I am frightened by this honor, and I feel unexpected surprise and uneasiness.

古文：谨奉所赍函书一封。 
现代文：谨此奉献我主致陛下信函一封。 
English: I have the honour to present a letter from my lord to your majesty.

古文：蜀甚贵其才。
现代文：蜀国很看重张温的才干。
English: Shu pays great attention to Zhang Wen's talent.

古文：还，顷之，使入豫章部伍出兵，事业未究。
现代文：回国不久，朝廷就派他进豫章郡的部队出征作战，但他对军功没有追求。
English: Soon after returning to China, the imperial court sent him to fight in the troops of Yuzhang County, but he did not pursue military glory.

古文：权既阴衔温称美蜀政，又嫌其声名大盛，众庶炫惑，恐终不为己用，思有以中伤之，会暨艳事起，遂因此发举。
现代文：孙权既暗中嫉恨张温称赞蜀国政治，又嫌忌他的声名太过显扬，百姓都被他的德行才能所迷惑，忧虑他最终不能为自己所用，就考虑办法来中伤他，恰逢暨艳事件发生，就借此机会找出张温的错漏。
English: Sun Quan not only secretly envied Zhang Wen for praising the politics of Shu, but also disliked that his reputation was too prominent. The people were all confused by his virtue and talent. Worried that he could not use it for himself in the end, he considered ways to defame him. When the Ji Yan incident happened, he took this opportunity to find out Zhang Wen's mistakes.

古文：艳字子休，亦吴郡人也，温引致之，以为选曹郎，至尚书。
现代文：暨艳，字子休，也是吴郡人，张温将他引荐入朝，朝廷任命为选曹郎，官至尚书。
English: Ji Yan, also known as Zi Xiu, was also from Wuxi County. Zhang Wen introduced him to the imperial court, and the court appointed him as Choengsaorang, the highest-ranking official.

古文：艳性狷厉，好为清议，见时郎署混浊淆杂，多非其人，欲臧否区别，贤愚异贯。
现代文：暨艳生性狷狂严厉，喜欢清谈议论，看到当时郎署混浊杂乱，大多官员名不副实，想将好坏区别开来，贤能、愚陋区别使用。
English: C. Yan Sheng's temperament is fierce and stern, he likes to talk and discuss, he saw that the liaison office was chaotic at that time, most of the officials' names were not true, he wanted to distinguish between good and bad, and he used the difference between ability and stupidity.

古文：弹射百僚，覈选三署，率皆贬高就下，降损数等，其守故者十未能一，其居位贪鄙，志节汙卑者，皆以为军吏，置营府以处之。
现代文：他弹劾百官，考选三署官员，都是将高的官职贬低，连降几级，能在原官位上继续任职的不及十分之一，那些在官职上贪污卑劣、节操污秽的，都被贬为军中小吏，安置在军营作幕府。
English: He impeached hundreds of officials, and officials of the three bureaus were selected for examination. All of them were high-ranking officials who were degraded, even down several levels, and were less than one-tenth of those who could continue to serve in their original positions. Those who were corrupt and dirty in their official positions were degraded to junior and middle-level military officials and placed in military camps to serve as the shogunate.

古文：而怨愤之声积，浸润之谮行矣。竞言艳及选曹郎徐彪，专用私情，爱憎不由公理，艳、彪皆坐自杀。
现代文：于是愤怨之声逐渐累积，诋毁谗言四处流传，都争相控告暨艳和选曹郎徐彪，说他们循用私情，爱憎判断由公理。暨艳、徐彪都因此获罪自杀。
English: As a result, the voices of resentment gradually accumulated, and slanderous gossip spread everywhere, all vying to accuse Ji Yan and the election of Cao Lang Xu Biao, saying that they used personal feelings, and judged love and hate by reason. Ji Yan and Xu Biao were both convicted of suicide.

古文：温宿与艳、彪同意，数交书疏，闻问往还，即罪温。
现代文：张温向来与暨艳、徐彪意见相符，多有书信来往，互相来往问候，于是又判张温有罪。
English: Zhang Wen always agreed with Ji Yan and Xu Biao, and they often exchanged letters and greetings. Therefore, Zhang Wen was found guilty.

古文：权幽之有司，下令曰： 昔令召张温，虚己待之，既至显授，有过旧臣，何图凶丑，专挟异心。
现代文：孙权将他收押在有关部门，下令说： 从前下令征召张温，空出官位虚心等待他来，授予他高官厚禄，超过一般旧臣，哪里料到他竟如此凶坏，专生二心。
English: Sun Quan detained him in the relevant department and ordered: "I once ordered the conscription of Zhang Wen, vacated the post and waited for him to come, and awarded him a high-ranking official and generous salary, more than the average old minister. Where did you expect him to be so fierce and single-minded.

古文：昔暨艳父兄，附于恶逆，寡人无忌，故进而任之，欲观艳何如。
现代文：昔日暨艳父兄，依附凶恶叛逆者，我没有忌惮，因此提拔任用他们，想观察暨艳究竟如何。
English: In the past, I had no scruples about being attached to the vicious rebels, Ji Yan's father and brother, so I promoted and appointed them to see what Ji Yan was really like.

古文：察其中间，形态果见。
现代文：探查他的内心，真实面目果然显露。
English: Probe into his heart, and the true face is revealed.

古文：而温与之结连死生，艳所进退，皆温所为头角，更相表里，共为腹背，非温之党，即就疵瑕，为之生论。
现代文：而张温与他结为生死之交，暨艳的言行举止，都是以张温为首，两人互为表里，关系亲密，只要不是张温的同党，很快就会受到他们的吹毛求疵，让他们拟造虚妄的罪名而受到指责。
English: And Zhang Wen is his life-and-death friend, and Yan's words and deeds are all led by Zhang Wen. The two are on the same page and have a close relationship. As long as they are not Zhang Wen's party members, they will soon be criticized by them, and they will be accused of fabricating false charges.

古文：又前任温董督三郡，指捴吏客及残馀兵，时恐有事，欲令速归，故授棨戟，奖以威柄。
现代文：又有之前委任张温督察三郡，指挥那里的官吏和剩余部队，当时担心生出祸乱，想让他迅速返回。所以授予他瞈戟，奖赏他威权。
English: He had also previously appointed Zhang Wen as the inspector of the three counties to command the officials and remaining troops there. At that time, he was worried about creating a disaster and wanted him to return quickly. Therefore, he awarded him the gong and rewarded him with authority.

古文：乃便到豫章，表讨宿恶，寡人信受其言，特以绕帐、帐下、解烦兵五千人付之。
现代文：于是他就到豫章，上表请求征讨一直做乱的贼寇，寡人相信而采纳他的建议，特地将五千绕帐兵、帐下兵、解烦兵拨付给他。
English: So he went to Yuanzhang and asked the table to collect the bandits who had been causing trouble. Many people believed and accepted his suggestion, and specially allocated five thousand soldiers around the table, soldiers under the table, and soldiers to relieve the trouble.

古文：后闻曹丕自出淮、泗，故豫敕温有急便出，而温悉内诸将，布於深山，被命不至。
现代文：后来得知曹丕亲自进军淮河、泗水一带，所以我预先下令张温有紧急情况就随时出兵，而张温却召集将领们，将他们部署在深山中，受命后却不赶赴战场。
English: Later, I learned that Cao Pi personally marched into the Huaihe and Surabaya areas, so I ordered Zhang Wen in advance to dispatch troops at any time in case of an emergency. However, Zhang Wen summoned the generals and deployed them deep in the mountains, but did not rush to the battlefield after receiving the order.

古文：赖丕自退，不然，已往岂可深计。
现代文：幸亏曹丕自己退兵，否则后果难料。
English: Fortunately, Cao Pi himself retired from the military, otherwise the consequences would have been unpredictable.

古文：又殷礼者，本占候召，而温先后乞将到蜀，扇扬异国，为之谭论。
现代文：还有殷礼，本来因为他善于占卦卜筮而征召他来，而张温先后请求要带他到蜀国，在他国大肆吹捧宣扬他，为他宣扬夸大的言论。
English: There was also Yin Li, who was originally called up because he was good at divination, while Zhang Wen successively requested to take him to Shu Province, touted him in other countries, and promoted exaggerated statements for him.

古文：又礼之还，当亲本职，而令守尚书户曹郎，如此署置，在温而已。
现代文：殷礼回来后，应当回到他的本职，而张温让他主管尚书户曹郎的职务，这样工作安排，都出于张温个人。
English: After Yin Li's return, he should return to his job, and Zhang Wen let him be in charge of Shang Shudou Cao Lang's duties. This work arrangement was all due to Zhang Wen personally.

古文：又温语贾原，当荐卿作御史，语蒋康，当用卿代贾原，专衒贾国恩，为己形势。揆其奸心，无所不为。
现代文：还有张温对贾原说，要举荐贾原担任御史，又告诉蒋康，说一定用他替代贾原，专门擅自夸耀国家的恩典，为自己形成势力，探查他的险恶用心，真是无所不作。
English: Zhang Wen also said to Jia Yuan that he wanted to recommend Jia Yuan as imperial historian, and told Jiang Kang that he would definitely use him as a replacement for Jia Yuan, specifically boasting of the country's grace without authorization, forming forces for himself, and investigating his sinister intentions. He really did everything.

古文：不忍暴於巿朝，今斥还本郡，以给厮吏。
现代文：我不忍心让他抛尸街头，现在敕令他回本郡，让他做一个低级的小官。
English: I couldn't bear to let him dump the body in the street, so now I've ordered him to come back to our county and become a low-ranking minor official.

古文：呜呼温也，免罪为幸！ 
现代文：唉张温啊，免你死罪作为你的幸运。 
English: Alas, Zhang Wen, you are lucky to be spared the death penalty.

古文：将军骆统表理温曰： 伏惟殿下，天生明德，神启圣心，招髦秀於四方，置俊乂於宫朝。
现代文：将军骆统上表为张温申辩： 敬禀陛下，上天赐予您贤明的仁德，神灵启发您圣明的内心，从四方招揽俊杰，在宫廷中选拔贤士。
English: General Luo Rong made the following plea for Zhang Wen: "Respect your majesty, the heavens have bestowed upon you the benevolence of the wise, and the gods have inspired your holy heart to recruit talents from the four directions and select sages from the court.

古文：多士既受普笃之恩，张温又蒙最隆之施。
现代文：众多才学之士已受到您普遍而切实的恩德，张温又蒙受最为隆重的恩宠。
English: Many talented scholars have received your universal and tangible benevolence, and Zhang Wen has received the most solemn grace.

古文：而温自招罪谴，孤负荣遇，念其如此，诚可悲疚。
现代文：但张温自己招罪被贬，辜负陛下的荣宠恩遇，想到他变成这样，实在可悲可痛。
English: However, Zhang Wen himself was blamed and demoted, and he failed to live up to his majesty's honor and favor. It is really sad and painful to think of him becoming like this.

古文：然臣周旋之间，为国观听，深知其状，故密陈其理。
现代文：然而为臣在与他交往中，为国家观察打听过他，深知他的真实状况，所以细密地陈述其中情状。
English: However, as a vassal in his dealings with him, and as a state observer who had interviewed him, I was well aware of his true condition, so I carefully described the situation.

古文：温实心无他情，事无逆迹，但年纪尚少，镇重尚浅，而戴赫烈之宠，体卓伟之才，亢臧否之谭，效褒贬之议。
现代文：张温本心没有其他非分的想法，他的行为也无叛逆的迹象，只是年纪尚轻，承担重任的资历还浅，就蒙受显赫的恩宠，发挥卓越超群的才干，发表评论高低的言论，提出褒贬是非的言论。
English: Zhang Wen did not have any other evil thoughts in his heart, and his behavior did not show any signs of rebellion. However, he was still young and did not have enough seniority to shoulder heavy responsibilities, so he received prominent grace, exerted outstanding talents, made high-level comments, and put forward praise and criticism.

古文：於是务势者妒其宠，争名者嫉其才，玄默者非其谭，瑕衅者讳其议，此臣下所当详辨，明朝所当究察也。
现代文：就有趋炎附势之人嫉妒他的恩宠，追名逐利之人忌恨他的才干，默然无为者非议他的言论，恶行显著之人忌讳他的提议。这是为臣应当详细辨明，朝廷应当深究细察的地方。
English: There are those who envy his grace, those who pursue fame and profit, those who hate his talent, those who are silent and inactive criticize his words, and those who have committed significant evil deeds shun his proposal. This is a place that should be clarified in detail by the minister, and the court should investigate and scrutinize.

古文：昔贾谊，至忠之臣也，汉文，大明之君也，然而绛、灌一言，贾谊远退。
现代文：昔日贾谊，是极为忠诚的臣子，汉文帝是极为英明的君主，但周勃、灌婴他们一句话，贾谊就被疏远放逐。
English: In the past, Jia Yi was an extremely loyal vassal, and Emperor Hanwen was an extremely wise monarch, but Zhou Bo and Guan Yu said one word to them, and Jia Yi was alienated and banished.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：疾之者深，谮之者巧也。
现代文：妒忌的深切，谗言的诡诈导致如此。
English: The bitterness of envy, the deceit of reproach, hath wrought this.

古文：然而误闻天下，失彰於后世，故孔子曰 为君难，为臣不易 也。
现代文：而这也使得汉文帝的错误天下皆知，过失在后世彰显，故此孔子有言 为君难，为臣亦难 。
English: And this also made the mistakes of Emperor Hanwen known to the world, and the mistakes were highlighted in later generations. Therefore, Confucius said that it was difficult to be a prince and difficult to be a vassal.

古文：温虽智非从横，武非虓虎，然其弘雅之素，英秀之德，文章之采，论议之辨，卓跞冠群，炜晔曜世，世人未有及之者也。
现代文：张温虽说并无纵横家的才智，武功上也不像武将的勇猛，但他气质弘大文雅，品德优秀，文章辞采，论辩敏捷，卓越拔萃，光彩耀世，时人没有能和他相比的。
English: Although Zhang Wen did not have the wisdom of a great strategist, nor did he have the bravery of a great general in martial arts, his temperament was magnanimous and elegant, his moral character was excellent, his writing was eloquent, his argumentation was quick, his excellence was outstanding, and his brilliance shone brightly in the world. At that time, there was no one who could compare to him.

古文：故论温才即可惜，言罪则可恕。
现代文：故此说张温的才华令人叹惋，说他的罪过实可宽恕。
English: Therefore, it is said that Zhang Wen's talent is deplorable, and his sins can be forgiven.

古文：若忍威烈以赦盛德，宥贤才以敦大业，固明朝之休光，四方之丽观也。
现代文：如果陛下忍耐威烈压抑怒气来赦免盛德之人，宽恕贤德之士以促进国家大业，这必将成为圣明朝代的弘大光辉，壮丽四方的大观。
English: If His Majesty patiently and majestically suppresses his anger to pardon those who are virtuous, and forgives those who are virtuous to promote the great cause of the country, this will surely become the magnificence and splendor of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：国家之於暨艳，不内之忌族，犹等之平民，是故先见用於朱治，次见举於众人，中见任於明朝，亦见交於温也。
现代文：国家对于暨艳，未将其纳入败类行列，而等同于平民，所以他先被朱治任用，接着被众人举荐，这才能被朝廷任用，也才和张温熟识而结交。
English: For Cui Yan, the state did not include him in the ranks of scum, but equated him with civilians, so he was first appointed by Zhu Zhi, and then recommended by everyone. Only then could he be appointed by the imperial court, and only then did he become familiar with Zhang Wen.

古文：君臣之义，义之最重，朋友之交，交之最轻者也。
现代文：君臣之道义，是所有道义中最重要的；朋友之交情，是所有交情中最轻微的。
English: The conduct of a prince is the most important of all moralities; that of a friend the least.

古文：国家不嫌於艳为最重之义，是以温亦不嫌与艳为最轻之交也。
现代文：国家不嫌弃暨艳，对他怀着最重要的道义，所以张温也能不避忌和暨艳有最轻微的交情。
English: The state is not averse to abandoning Ji Yan, and has the most important moral for him, so Zhang Wen can also have the slightest friendship with Ji Yan.

古文：时世宠之於上，温窃亲之於下也。
现代文：当时是大家宠信暨艳在先，张温和暨艳结交在后。
English: At that time, it was everyone's favorite letter and bright first, and Zhang Zhengyi and bright made friends later.

古文：夫宿恶之民，放逸山险，则为劲寇，将置平土，则为健兵，故温念在欲取宿恶，以除劲寇之害，而增健兵之锐也。
现代文：总是作恶的贼人，放纵在深山险处，就会成为强大的贼寇；将他们安置到平原上，就会成为矫健部队，故此张温志向于想攻取素来作恶的贼寇，以便铲除强大贼寇的祸患，而增加强健部队的力量。
English: Thieves who always do evil will become powerful thieves if they are indulged in deep mountains and dangerous places; if they are placed on the plain, they will become vigorous troops. Therefore, Zhang Wen aspired to capture thieves who always do evil in order to eradicate the scourge of powerful thieves and increase the strength of strong troops.

古文：但自错落，功不副言。
现代文：但是他举措不当，效果与理想不一致。
English: But his actions were inappropriate, and the results were not consistent with his ideals.

古文：然计其送兵，以比许晏，数之多少，温不减之，用之强羸，温不下之，至於迟速，温不后之，故得及秋冬之月，赴有警之期，不敢忘恩而遗力也。
现代文：但统计他派出的兵马，同许晏相比，数量多少，张温不比他少；这些兵力的强弱，也不在许晏之下；至于出兵的效率，也落后于许晏。所以能够赶在秋冬时节，在警报的期限内赶赴战场，不敢忘恩而留有余力。
English: However, when the number of soldiers and horses dispatched by him is compared with that of Xu Bei, Zhang Wen is not less than him; the strength of these troops is not inferior to that of Xu Bei; as for the efficiency of dispatching troops, it also lags behind that of Xu Bei. Therefore, it is possible to rush to the battlefield in the autumn and winter season, within the warning period, and dare not be ungrateful and have spare capacity.

古文：温之到蜀，共誉殷礼，虽臣无境外之交，亦有可原也。
现代文：张温出使蜀国，同蜀国共同赞誉殷礼，虽说为臣者不应与境外私交，但也有有情可原之处。
English: Zhang Wen sent an envoy to Shu and was praised by Shu for his courtesy. Although it is said that a vassal should not have personal relations with foreign countries, there is room for improvement.

古文：境外之交，谓无君命而私相从，非国事而阴相闻者也；若以命行，既脩君好，因叙己情，亦使臣之道也。
现代文：所谓国外私交，指的是没有国君的命令而自己私下来往，并不是因为朝政而暗中传递消息。如果奉命出行，既能修好两国君主之间的，同时由此而谈叙个人的交情，这也是外交使臣的使命。
English: The so-called foreign private diplomacy refers to going abroad without the order of the sovereign, and not secretly passing on information because of the government. If you are ordered to travel, you can not only repair the relationship between the two monarchs, but also talk about personal friendship, which is also the mission of a diplomatic envoy.

古文：故孔子使邻国，则有私觌之礼；季子聘诸夏，亦有燕谭之义也。
现代文：所以孔子出使邻国，便有私人相见之礼；季札聘问诸夏，也有宴饮畅谈之事。
English: Therefore, when Confucius sent his envoys to neighboring countries, there was a private meeting; when the envoys asked questions in the summer, there was also a banquet to talk about.

古文：古人有言，欲知其君，观其所使，见其下之明明，知其上之赫赫。
现代文：古人有言，要想了解这个国家的君主，就观察这个国家的使臣，看到这个国家使臣的明智聪慧，就能知晓这个国家君主圣明贤德。
English: The ancients said that if you want to understand the monarch of this country, you should observe the envoys of this country. If you see the wisdom and wisdom of the envoys of this country, you can know the wisdom and wisdom of the monarch of this country.

古文：温若誉礼，能使彼叹之，诚所以昭我臣之多良，明使之得其人，显国美於异境，扬君命於他邦。
现代文：张温如果称扬殷礼，能使对方也赞誉他，确实能彰显我国朝臣有很多俊杰，表明派出的使者得当，能在别国彰显我国的美德，在异国弘扬我君主的英名。
English: If Zhang Wen praises Yan Li, he can make the other side also praise him. It can really highlight that our courtiers have many outstanding people, show that the emissaries sent are appropriate, highlight the virtues of our country in other countries, and promote the reputation of my monarch in foreign countries.

古文：是以晋赵文子之盟于宋也，称随会於屈建；楚王孙圉之使于晋也，誉左史於赵鞅。
现代文：所以晋国赵文子到宋国结盟，在屈建面前赞誉随会；楚国王孙圉出使晋国，在赵鞅耳边称扬左史。
English: Therefore, Zhao Wenzi of the Jin Dynasty allied with the Song Dynasty and was praised by Qu Jian; Sun Yat-sen, King of Chu, sent an envoy to the Jin Dynasty and praised Zuo Shi in front of Zhao Yao.

古文：亦向他国之辅，而叹本邦之臣，经传美之以光国，而不讥之以外交也。
现代文：这也是在别国的辅臣面前，赞叹本国的大臣，经传赞美这是光大国威，而不指责这是与外国结交。
English: This is also in front of the aides of other countries, praising their own ministers, praising this is the light of national prestige, without accusing this is to make friends with foreign countries.

古文：王靖内不忧时，外不趋事，温弹之不私，推之不假，於是与靖遂为大怨，此其尽节之明验也。
现代文：王靖在朝内不忧虑时事，对外不关心军事，张温弹劾他没有徇私，推究他并非作假，于是便与王靖有了深仇大怨，这是张温竭尽忠诚的明证。
English: Wang Jing did not worry about current affairs in the imperial court, and did not care about the military in the outside world. Zhang Wen impeached him for not being self-serving, and concluded that he was not a fake. As a result, he had a deep grudge with Wang Jing. This is clear evidence of Zhang Wen's utmost loyalty.

古文：靖兵众之势，幹任之用，皆胜於贾原、蒋康，温尚不容私以安於靖，岂敢卖恩以协原、康邪？
现代文：王靖部队的实力，重要官员的才干任用，都超过贾原、蒋康，张温尚且不容私情来以从王靖处得到自身的安全，又岂敢出卖恩信去拉拢贾原、蒋康呢？
English: The strength of Wang Jing's troops, the talent and appointment of important officials are all superior to Jia Yuan and Jiang Kang. Zhang Wenshan did not tolerate selfishness to obtain his own safety from Wang Jing, and did not dare to betray the trust to woo Jia Yuan and Jiang Kang?

古文：又原在职不勤，当事不堪，温数对以丑色，弹以急声；若其诚欲卖恩作乱，则亦不必贪原也。
现代文：又有贾原在官任上并不勤勉，处事颇有不称职的地方，张温多次对他脸色不好，用严厉的言语斥责他。如果张温确实想出卖国挑起祸乱，就无必要去贪求贾原这样的人。
English: There was also Jia Yuan, who was not diligent in his official duties and was quite incompetent in his work. Zhang Wen repeatedly scolded him with harsh words. If Zhang Wen really wanted to betray the country and stir up trouble, there would be no need to covet someone like Jia Yuan.

古文：凡此数者，校之於事既不合，参之於众亦不验。
现代文：总述这些事，核对情况，与事实既不相符，查问众人也无证据。
English: Summarizing these things, checking the situation, is not consistent with the facts, and there is no evidence from the people who were questioned.

古文：臣窃念人君虽有圣哲之姿，非常之智，然以一人之身，御兆民之众，从层宫之内，瞰四国之外，照群下之情，求万机之理，犹未易周也，固当听察群下之言，以广聪明之烈。
现代文：为臣私心认为国君虽有圣贤的姿质，超常的智谋，但仅靠自己一人的力量，来管理天下人民，在深宫之内俯察国家边境，体会臣民情感，探求各类朝政的处置方法，还是有顾及不周到的地方，实在应当倾听明察群臣的意见，以增广明智的功业。
English: The vassal selfishly thought that although the sovereign had the stature of a sage and extraordinary wisdom, he could only manage the people of the world by relying on his own strength, surveying the national borders in the depths of the palace, experiencing the feelings of his subjects, and exploring various methods of dealing with court politics. However, there was still a place where he was not considerate. He should really listen to the opinions of his vassals in order to expand his wise work.

古文：今者人非温既殷勤，臣是温又契阔，辞则俱巧，意则俱至，各自言欲为国，谁其言欲为私，仓卒之间，犹难即别。
现代文：现在别人非议张温殷勤行事，我和张温又交情深厚，言辞都很机巧，而意思全在其中，各自都说为了国家利益，谁又会说是为了私人利益呢？仓促之间，对错仍难以立即辨别。
English: Now others accuse Zhang Wen of acting diligently, and Zhang Wen and I have a deep friendship. The words are very clever, but the meaning is all in it. Each of us says it is for the national interest, but who would say it is for private interests? It is still difficult to distinguish right from wrong in a hurry.

古文：然以殿下之聪叡，察讲论之曲直，若潜神留思，纤粗研核，情何嫌而不宣，事何昧而不昭哉？
现代文：但凭借陛下的聪明睿智，详察双方谈论的是非，如果潜神凝思思虑集中，大小情况研究核实，那么事情的真相岂能蒙昧不明、疑虑不清呢？
English: But with the help of His Majesty's wisdom and sagacity, if we scrutinize the merits and demerits of what the two sides are talking about, if we concentrate our minds and study and verify the situation, then can the truth of the matter be unclear and unclear?

古文：温非亲臣，臣非爱温者也。
现代文：张温并不亲近我，为臣也不偏爱他。
English: Zhang Wen is not close to me, and I do not favor him.

古文：昔之君子，皆抑私忿，以增君明。
现代文：过去的君子，都是抑制私人恩怨，来增进君主的明慧。
English: In the past, gentlemen restrained personal grudges to enhance the wisdom of the monarch.

古文：彼独行之於前，臣耻废之於后，故遂发宿怀於今日，纳愚言於圣听，实尽心於明朝，非有念於温身也。 
现代文：他们在前代践行此道，为臣在后世也以抛弃这种美德而为耻，所以在今天将自己一贯的情怀抒发出来，向陛下奉献浅陋的见解，实在是想为圣明的朝廷尽心竭力，而不是对张温个人有什么眷念之情。 
English: They practiced this way in the previous generation, and they were ashamed that their vassals also abandoned this virtue in the future, so today they expressed their consistent feelings and offered their shallow opinions to His Majesty. They really wanted to do their best for the sacred imperial court, rather than have any feelings for Zhang Wen personally.

古文：权终不纳。
现代文：孙权最终还是没有接受骆统的意见。
English: In the end, Sun Quan did not accept Luo Tong's opinion.

古文：后六年，温病卒。
现代文：六年后，张温病逝。
English: Six years later, Zhang Wen died of illness.

古文：二弟祗、白，亦有才名，与温俱废。
现代文：他的两个弟弟张祗和张白，也很有才干名望，和张温一同被废黜。
English: His two younger brothers, Zhang Rong and Zhang Bai, also very talented and famous, were deposed together with Zhang Wen.

古文：骆统字公绪，会稽乌伤人也。
现代文：骆统，字公绪，会稽郡乌伤县人。
English: Luo Tong, Zi Gongxu, from Wuxi County.

古文：父俊，官至陈相，为袁术所害。
现代文：他的父亲骆俊，官至陈国丞相，被袁术杀害。
English: His father, Luo Jun, a high-ranking official, was killed by Yuan Shuxing.

古文：统母改適，为华歆小妻，统时八岁，遂与亲客归会稽。
现代文：骆统母亲改嫁，做了华音欠的妾，骆统当时八岁，就和亲戚一道回到会稽。
English: Luo Tong's mother remarried and became Hua Yinchuan's concubine. Luo Tong, who was eight years old at the time, returned to the auditorium with his relatives.

古文：其母送之，拜辞上车，面而不顾，其母泣涕於后。
现代文：他的母亲送别他，他拜辞母亲上车后，脸朝前不回头看，他母亲在后面流着泪跟随。
English: His mother saw him off, and he bowed to her as he got into the car, his face straight ahead and not looking back, his mother trailing behind him in tears.

古文：御者曰： 夫人犹在也。 
现代文：驾车的人说： 夫人还在后面。 
English: The driver said: My wife is still in the back.

古文：统曰： 不欲增母思，故不顾耳。 
现代文：骆统说： 不想增添母亲的思念，所以不回头看他。 
English: Luo said, "I don't want to add to my mother's sorrow, so I don't look back at him.

古文：事適母甚谨。
现代文：他侍奉嫡母很是恭谨。
English: He served his mother-in-law with great respect.

古文：时饥荒，乡里及远方客多有困乏，统为之饮食衰少。
现代文：当时遭遇饥荒，乡里及远方而来的外客大多生活贫乏，骆统为了帮助他们而减少自己的饮食。
English: At that time, there was a famine, and most of the foreigners who came from the countryside and far away were living in poverty. In order to help them, Luo Tong reduced his diet.

古文：其姊仁爱有行，寡归无子，见统甚哀之，数问其故。
现代文：他的姐姐仁爱有德行，但没有儿子，又因守寡回到娘家，看到骆统的样子心中感伤，多次问他其中缘故。
English: His sister, Ren Ai, was virtuous, but had no son, and because she was a widow, she returned to her daughter's home. Seeing Luo Tong's appearance, her heart was sad, and she repeatedly asked him why.

古文：统曰： 士大夫糟糠不足，我何心独饱！ 
现代文：骆统说： 士大夫们连糟糠都无法维继，我怎么有心思自己个人吃饱？ 
English: Luo Tong said, "Scholars and doctors can't even keep up with the waste, how can I have the heart to feed myself?

古文：姊曰： 诚如是，何不告我，而自苦若此？ 
现代文：他的姐姐说： 果真如此，为何不告诉我，而自己把自己折磨成这个样子。 
English: His sister said, "If that's the case, why didn't you tell me, and why did you torture yourself like this?"

古文：乃自以私粟与统，又以告母，母亦贤之，遂使分施，由是显名。
现代文：她就将自己的粮食给了骆统，又将此事告知母亲，母亲也认为他很贤德，就派人分发食物救济，从此闻名。
English: She gave her grain to Luo Tong, and told her mother about it. Her mother also thought he was very virtuous, so she sent someone to distribute food relief, and she has been famous ever since.

古文：孙权以将军领会稽太守，统年二十，试为乌程相，民户过万，咸叹其惠理。
现代文：孙权以将军身份兼任会稽太守，骆统二十岁，试任乌程相，乌程百姓超过万户，都赞叹他的恩惠治理。
English: Sun Quan, as a general, also served as the Auditor-General of the Association. Luo Tong, at the age of twenty, was appointed as the Prime Minister of Wucheng on a trial basis. The people of Wucheng, more than ten thousand households, all praised his benevolent governance.

古文：权嘉之，召为功曹，行骑都尉，妻以从兄辅女。
现代文：孙权赞赏他，征召他做功曹，代理骑都尉之职，并将堂兄孙辅的女儿嫁给他为妻。
English: Sun Quan appreciated him, enlisted him as a gong cao, acting as a lieutenant, and married the daughter of his cousin Sun Yu to him.

古文：统志在补察，苟所闻见，夕不待旦。
现代文：骆统志在补救考查朝政，如有所见所闻，晚上的事不到第二天一早就要办完。
English: Luo Tongzhi is in the remedial examination of the dynastic government, if you have seen or heard anything, the evening's affairs will be completed in the early morning of the next day.

古文：常劝权以尊贤接士，勤求损益，飨赐之日，可人人别进，问其燥湿，加以密意，诱谕使言，察其志趣，令皆感恩戴义，怀欲报之心。
现代文：他常劝说孙权尊重贤才接纳士人，勤勉探究时政损益；宴饮赏赐时，可让大家分别进见，对他们嘘寒问暖，加以密切关怀，启发诱导他们说出心里话，观察他们的志趣，使他们都感恩戴德，常怀回报之心。
English: He often persuaded Sun Quan to respect the wise and accept scholars, and diligently explore the current political gains and losses; when giving a banquet, he could let everyone think about it separately, greet them warmly, pay close attention to them, inspire and induce them to speak their minds, observe their interests, and make them all grateful and considerate, and always have a heart of return.

古文：权纳用焉。
现代文：孙权采纳并施行他的建议。
English: Sun Quan accepted and implemented his suggestion.

古文：出为建忠中郎将，领武射吏三千人。
现代文：他出朝外任建忠中郎将，带领武射吏三千人。
English: He went to the imperial court and served as the general of Jianzhong, leading 3,000 artillery officers.

古文：及凌统死，复领其兵。
现代文：等到凌统去世，他又统管凌统的军队。
English: When Lingdian died, he took control of Lingdian's army.

古文：是时徵役繁数，重以疫疠，民户损耗，统上疏曰： 臣闻君国者，以据疆土为强富，制威福为尊贵，曜德义为荣显，永世胤为丰祚。
现代文：当时税征徭役繁重，再加上瘟疫流行，百姓减少，骆统上奏说： 为臣听说君主治理国家，将占据国土视为强富，发扬威福视为尊贵，光耀德义视为荣耀，延续福泽视为大福。
English: At that time, taxes and labor were onerous, the plague was prevalent, and the people were dwindling. Luo Tong said in his report to the emperor: As a vassal, I heard that the monarch governs the country, and I will regard occupying the land as strong and rich, promoting dignity as noble, shining virtue as glory, and continuing blessings as great blessings.

古文：然财须民生，强赖民力，威恃民势，福由民殖，德俟民茂，义以民行，六者既备，然后应天受祚，保族宜邦。
现代文：但财物须靠百姓生产，强盛依赖百姓力量，威权要倚仗民众势力，福祚要仗赖百姓供养，德行要依靠民众兴盛，仁义要赖民众推行，这六个方面都具备，然后才能顺应天命、传承福泽，保佑宗族有利国家。
English: However, wealth must be produced by the people, prosperity depends on the power of the people, authority must rely on the power of the people, prosperity must rely on the people to provide, virtue must rely on the people to flourish, and benevolence must rely on the people to promote. These six aspects must be met before we can comply with the destiny of heaven, inherit blessings, and bless the country that is beneficial to the clan.

古文：书曰： 众非后无能胥以宁，后非众无以辟四方。 
现代文：《尚书》中说： 百姓没有国君就无法相互安宁，国君没有百姓就不能开疆辟土。 
English: "Shangshu" said: The people cannot have peace with each other without the sovereign, and the sovereign cannot expand its territory without the people.

古文：推是言之，则民以君安，君以民济，不易之道也。
现代文：由此推究，那百姓因君王治理得以安定，君王依靠百姓得以立国，这是不变的事理。
English: From this, it can be deduced that the people are stable because of the king's governance, and the king relies on the people to establish the country. This is an unchanging principle.

古文：今强敌未殄，海内未乂，三军有无已之役，江境有不释之备，徵赋调数，由来积纪，加以殃疫死丧之灾，郡县荒虚，田畴芜旷，听闻属城，民户浸寡，又多残老，少有丁夫，闻此之日，心若焚燎。
现代文：现在强敌尚未铲除，四海尚未安定，三军有无尽的战争，江边有不放松的警备，赋税征调，一向积聚繁重，再加上瘟疫造成的死亡灾祸，郡县空虚，田地荒芜。听到所辖城邑的报告，百姓的户口逐渐减少，又多是老弱病残，少有青壮劳力，得知这种情况之后，为臣心急如焚。
English: Now, the strong enemy has not yet been eradicated, the four seas have not yet been stabilized, the three armies have endless wars, the riverside has unrelaxed vigilance, tax collection and transfer, has always accumulated heavily, coupled with the death scourge caused by the plague, counties are empty, fields are desolate. After hearing the report of the cities and towns under the jurisdiction, the household registration of the people has gradually decreased, and most are old and weak and sick, and there are few young and strong laborers. After learning this situation, the subject is anxious.

古文：思寻所由，小民无知，既有安土重迁之性，且又前后出为兵者，生则困苦无有温饱，死则委弃骸骨不反，是以尤用恋本畏远，同之於死。
现代文：思虑探究其中因由，主要怪于小民不明事理，他们既有安土重迁的想法，且又因先后出外当兵的人，活着的人生活困苦不能维持温饱，死了则抛尸露骨不能回归故乡，所以他们更加眷恋故土，畏惧远行，将此事等同于死亡。
English: Pondering the reasons for this, the main reason is that the common people do not know the reason. They both have the idea of relocating to a safe place, and because of those who have gone abroad to serve as soldiers, those who are alive cannot maintain food and clothing, and those who are dead cannot return to their hometown. Therefore, they are more attached to their homeland, afraid of traveling far, and equate this with death.

古文：每有徵发，羸谨居家重累者先见输送。
现代文：每有劳役征发，那些负担沉重的贫苦百姓先被派送。
English: Whenever there is conscription, the poor people who are burdened with heavy loads are sent first.

古文：小有财货，倾居行赂，不顾穷尽。
现代文：家中小有财产的人，就用家中钱财贿赂，不顾倾家荡产。
English: Those who have small or medium-sized property at home, use their family's money and wealth to bribe, regardless of the family's bankruptcy.

古文：轻剽者则迸入险阻，党就群恶。
现代文：轻率剽悍之人就逃亡艰难险要之地，与盗匪为伍。
English: The rash and daring flee to the difficult and dangerous places, and join hands with the bandits.

古文：百姓虚竭，嗷然愁扰，愁扰则不营业，不营业则致穷困，致穷困则不乐生，故口腹急，则奸心动而携叛多也。
现代文：百姓虚弱困苦，饥饿忧虑，忧虑烦扰就不安心生产，不安心生产就导致贫穷，贫穷就无法安生，所以口腹饿急了，那邪恶念头就萌生了，而叛逆之人日益增长。
English: The people are weak and needy, hungry, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried, worried,

古文：又闻民间，非居处小能自供，生产儿子，多不起养；屯田贫兵，亦多弃子。
现代文：又听说在民间，如果家中生活不能勉强自给的话，生下儿子，大多不抚养，就连那些屯田的贫困士卒，也有很多抛弃孩子的。
English: I also heard that among the common people, if a family is not able to be self-sufficient, most of them do not raise their sons. Even the poor peasants in the townships often abandon their children.

古文：天则生之，而父母杀之，既惧干逆和气，感动阴阳。且惟殿下开基建国，乃无穷之业也，强邻大敌非造次所灭，疆埸常守非期月之戍，而兵民减耗，后生不育，非所以历远年，致成功也。
现代文：上天繁育这些孩子，但父母却杀伤他们，既担心这种情况会冒犯天地、震动阴阳，况且陛下奠定的国家基业是长久功业，强邻大敌不是立即可以消灭，边疆防守不是几个月可以撤除，而士兵百姓不断损耗，后生之人不得养育，这不是坚持长久年月，最终得以成功的情况。
English: Heaven bred these children, but their parents killed them, fearing that this would offend heaven and earth and shake the yin and yang. Moreover, the national foundation laid down by His Majesty is a long-term achievement. Strong neighbors and great enemies cannot be eliminated immediately, border defenses cannot be removed in a few months, and soldiers and civilians are constantly depleted, and future generations cannot be raised. This is not a situation of persevering for a long time and ultimately succeeding.

古文：夫国之有民，犹水之有舟，停则以安，扰则以危，愚而不可欺，弱而不可胜，是以圣王重焉，祸福由之，故与民消息，观时制政。
现代文：国家有百姓，就像水上行船。水平静则船安稳，水不平则船不安，百姓愚昧但不可欺骗，势弱但不可强压。所以圣明君主都看重他们，是因为祸福来源于他们，所以作君主者要沟通与百姓的情况，以便观察时事民情来制定合适政策。
English: A country with people is like a ship sailing on the water. If the water is calm, the ship is stable; if the water is rough, the ship is uneasy; if the people are ignorant, they cannot be deceived; if they are weak, they cannot be suppressed. Therefore, the wise monarchs all value them, because misfortunes and blessings come from them. Therefore, the monarchs should communicate with the people in order to observe the current affairs and people's conditions to formulate appropriate policies.

古文：方今长吏亲民之职，惟以办具为能，取过目前之急，少复以恩惠为治，副称殿下天覆之仁，勤恤之德者。
现代文：现在长官处于接近百姓的职位，但他们却以办事周到为能事，向百姓索取的超过国家的急需，很少有人再依靠恩惠来治理，符合陛下上天有覆盖大地般的仁义，施加勤勉体恤的仁德。
English: Now the officials are in a position close to the people, but they are able to do things carefully. They ask more from the people than the urgent needs of the country. Few people rely on favors to govern. It is in line with His Majesty's heavenly benevolence that covers the earth and imposes a diligent and compassionate benevolence.

古文：官民政俗，日以彫弊，渐以陵迟，势不可久。
现代文：官吏的政务、百姓的习俗，日益颓败，逐渐废弛，势必不能长久推延。
English: The government affairs of officials and the customs of the people are becoming more and more decadent and gradually degenerate, and it is inevitable that they cannot be postponed for a long time.

古文：夫治疾及其未笃，除患贵其未深，愿殿下少以万机馀间，留神思省，补复荒虚，深图远计，育残馀之民，阜人财之用，参曜三光，等崇天地。
现代文：治病要赶在病情未恶化之前，除患要赶在祸患尚未深厚之时。希望陛下能在日理万机的繁忙中抽出一点空闲，凝神细思，弥补不足，深谋远虑，抚育剩余百姓，增添人财费用，使国家事业与三光同辉，与天地等同。
English: It is necessary to cure the disease before the condition worsens, and to eliminate the disease before the disaster is profound. I hope that His Majesty can take some time off from the busy schedule of the Japanese government, meditate, make up for deficiencies, foresight, nurture the remaining people, increase human and financial costs, and make the national cause shine with the three lights, and be equal to the world.

古文：臣统之大愿，足以死而不朽矣。 
现代文：为臣骆统这个大愿能够实现，也足以死而不朽了。 
English: If the great wish of becoming a vassal of the Emperor could be realized, it would be enough to die and become immortal.

古文：权感统言，深加意焉。
现代文：孙权有感于他的言论，对他的意见特别重视。
English: Sun Quan was impressed by his speech and paid special attention to his opinion.

古文：以随陆逊破蜀军於宜都，迁偏将军。
现代文：骆统因跟随陆逊在宜都攻破蜀军，所以升任偏将军。
English: Because Luo Tong followed Lu Xun in defeating the Shu army in Yidu, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：黄武初，曹仁攻濡须，使别将常雕等袭中洲，统与严圭共拒破之，封新阳亭侯，后为濡须督。
现代文：黄武初年，曹仁攻打濡须，另派将领常雕等进攻中洲，骆统与严圭齐力抵御并攻破了他。骆统被封为新阳亭侯，后为濡须督。
English: In the first year of Huangwu, Cao Ren attacked Nuxu, and sent other generals such as Chang Zhaoru to attack Zhongzhou. Luo Du and Yan Gui resisted and defeated him. Luo Du was made the prince of Xinyangting, and later the governor of Nuxu.

古文：数陈便宜，前后书数十上，所言皆善，文多故不悉载。
现代文：他多次陈述有益时政的见解，前后上奏书数十次，所说的情况和建议都很符合情况，因文字太多所以不做记录。
English: He has repeatedly stated opinions that are beneficial to current politics, and has submitted dozens of reports before and after. The situation and suggestions he has made are very much in line with the situation, and because there are too many words, they are not recorded.

古文：尤以占募在民间长恶败俗，生离叛之心，急宜绝置，权与相反覆，终遂行之。
现代文：其中尤其是他估计募兵的举措在民间助长邪恶败坏风俗，容易使百姓产生叛离之心，应当紧急断绝，孙权与他反复论辩，最后还是按骆统的意见施行。
English: In particular, he estimated that the measure of recruiting soldiers promoted evil and corrupt customs among the people, and it was easy to make the people have a rebellious heart. It should be urgently cut off. Sun Quan repeatedly argued with him, and finally implemented according to Luo Tong's opinion.

古文：年三十六，黄武七年卒。陆瑁字子璋，丞相逊弟也。
现代文：黄武七年，骆统在三十六岁去世。陆瑁，字子璋，丞相陆逊的弟弟。
English: In the seventh year of Huangwu, Luo Tong died at the age of 36. Lu Yao, Zi Yao, was the younger brother of the prime minister Lu Xun.

古文：少好学笃义。
现代文：他年少就爱好学习，坚守道义。
English: From a young age, he loved to study and was a stickler for ethics.

古文：陈国陈融、陈留濮阳逸、沛郡蒋纂、广陵袁迪等，皆单贫有志，就瑁游处，瑁割少分甘，与同丰约。
现代文：陈国人陈融、陈留人濮阳逸、沛郡人蒋纂、广陵人袁迪等，都是清贫却心怀大志之人，都到陆瑁处和他结交，陆瑁常分出自己不多的财物给他们，与他们同分享共节俭。
English: Chen Rong from Chen Province, Chen Rui from Shiyangyi, Pei Gu from Jiangsu, Guangling from Yuan Di, etc. were all poor but ambitious people. They all went to Lu Xun to make friends with him. Lu Xun often allocated his few belongings to them and shared and economized with them.

古文：及同郡徐原，爰居会稽，素不相识，临死遗书，讬以孤弱，瑁为起立坟墓，收导其子。
现代文：以至同郡人徐原，迁到会稽，和陆瑁素不相识，临死前留下遗信，将自己年幼的孩子托付给他，他为徐原修建坟墓，扶养教导徐原的儿子。
English: So much so that Xu Yuan, a fellow county resident, moved to the county auditor's office and did not know Lu Yuxu. Before his death, he left a last letter, entrusting his young child to him. He built a grave for Xu Yuan and supported and taught Xu Yuan's son.

古文：又瑁从父绩早亡，二男一女，皆数岁以还，瑁迎摄养，至长乃别。
现代文：又有陆瑁的叔父陆绩早年去世，留下两男一女，都只有几岁就返归乡里，陆瑁迎接并抚养他们，到长大后才分开。
English: Another uncle of Lu Yao, Lu Ji, died early, leaving two sons and a daughter. They were only a few years old when they returned to their hometown. Lu Yao welcomed and raised them until they grew up.

古文：州郡辟举，皆不就。
现代文：州郡征召举荐他，他都没有就任。
English: State and county recruits recommended him, but he never took office.

古文：时尚书暨艳盛明臧否，差断三署，颇扬人闇昧之失，以显其谪。
现代文：当时尚书暨艳特别喜爱评价人物，在选议三署官员时，颇喜爱宣扬别人不体面的过失，以显示自己的严格要求。
English: At that time, Shang Shuxu and Yan Zang were particularly fond of evaluating people. When selecting officials of the three departments, they were quite fond of publicizing the unseemly faults of others to show their strict requirements.

古文：瑁与书曰： 夫圣人嘉善矜愚，忘过记功，以成美化。
现代文：陆瑁给他写信说： 圣人嘉奖善人同情愚昧，忘记过失记述功绩，以此成就美好的教化。
English: Lu Yao wrote to him, "A saint commends a good man, a good man sympathizes with the ignorant, forgets the faults, and records the merits, thus achieving a beautiful enlightenment.

古文：加今王业始建，将一大统，此乃汉高弃瑕录用之时也，若令善恶异流，贵汝颍月旦之评，诚可以厉俗明教，然恐未易行也。
现代文：再加上现在帝王基业刚刚奠定，将要一统天下，这是汉高祖不避瑕疵录用人才的时代，如果能使善恶泾渭分明，崇尚汝颍名士许邵、许靖兄弟月初品评人物的做法，果真可以整肃风俗、倡导教化，但恐怕不容易施行。
English: In addition, now that the foundation of the emperor has just been laid, he will rule the world. This is the era when Han Gao Zu hired talents without avoiding defects. If we can make good and evil clear, and advocate the practice of the famous Xu Shao and Xu Jing brothers' first month's appraisal of characters, we can really rectify customs and advocate enlightenment, but I am afraid it is not easy to implement.

古文：宜远模仲尼之汎爱，中则郭泰之弘济，近有益於大道也。 
现代文：应当远则效法孔子泛爱天下，中则学习郭泰救济他人，近则想到有益于帝王大业建立之事。 
English: In the future, we should follow the example of Confucius to love the world, in the middle, we should learn from Guo Tai to help others, and in the near future, we should think of things that are beneficial to the establishment of the great cause of the emperor.

古文：艳不能行，卒以致败。
现代文：暨艳没有按照他的建议施行，终于招致败亡。
English: Ji Yan did not act according to his suggestion, which eventually led to his downfall.

古文：嘉禾元年，公车徵瑁，拜议郎、选曹尚书。
现代文：嘉禾元年，朝廷公车征召陆瑁，以他为议郎、选曹尚书。
English: In the first year of Jiahe, the imperial court bus conscripted Lu Yao, with him as the mediator and the selector Shang Shu.

古文：孙权忿公孙渊之巧诈反覆，欲亲征之，瑁上疏谏曰： 臣闻圣王之御远夷，羁縻而已，不常保有，故古者制地，谓之荒服，言慌惚无常，不可保也。
现代文：孙权不满公孙渊反复欺诈，想要亲自前往征讨，陆瑁上疏劝谏说： 为臣听说圣明的君主控制远方的外族，只是笼络保持良好关系而已，不求长期占有这些地方。所以古人划分国土，称这种地方为 荒服 ，是说这些地方恍惚无偿，不能保守。
English: Sun Quan was dissatisfied with the repeated fraud of Sun Yuan, who wanted to go to the conquest in person, and Lu Shaoqiao advised him to say: "As a vassal, I heard that the holy monarch controlled the distant foreigners, but he only kept a good relationship with them, and did not seek to occupy these places for a long time. Therefore, the ancients divided the land and called such places "wild clothes," saying that these places were trance-free and could not be preserved.

古文：今渊东夷小丑，屏在海隅，虽讬人面，与禽兽无异。
现代文：现在公孙渊不过是东夷小丑，远在海角，虽然有人的面孔，实际与禽兽无异。
English: Now Gongsun Yuan is nothing more than a clown of the Eastern Yi, far away on the cape, although he has a human face, he is actually no different from an animal.

古文：国家所为不爱货宝远以加之者，非嘉其德义也，诚欲诱纳愚弄，以规其马耳。
现代文：国家之所以不吝惜财宝遥远地封赏他们，不是用以嘉奖他们的道德道义，不过是想招诱安抚摆弄他们，以便谋取他们的马匹。
English: The reason why the state does not spare treasure to reward them far away is not to reward their morality, but to entice, pacify and manipulate them in order to obtain their horses.

古文：渊之骄黠，恃远负命，此乃荒貊常态，岂足深怪？
现代文：公孙渊骄矜狡猾，自恃地处偏远而违背王命，这是荒蛮之人常有的，哪里值得过分惊怪呢？
English: Gongsun Yuan was proud of his cunning, boasted of his remoteness, and disobeyed the king's order. This is common among barbarians. Why should we be so surprised?

古文：昔汉诸帝亦尝锐意以事外夷，驰使散货，充满西域，虽时有恭从，然其使人见害，财货并没，不可胜数。
现代文：过去汉朝各位皇帝也曾努力地安抚和少数民族，派遣使节散发财物，中原的物品遍布西域，虽说他们有时也恭敬顺从，但他们杀害使者、侵吞财物之事，数不胜数。
English: In the past, the emperors of the Han Dynasty also made efforts to appease the Han and ethnic minorities, sending envoys to distribute wealth. The goods of the Central Plains were all over the western region. Although they sometimes respectfully obeyed, they killed envoys and embezzled countless things.

古文：今陛下不忍悁悁之忿，欲越巨海，身践其土，群臣愚议，窃谓不安。
现代文：现在陛下不忍下这份强烈的怨愤，想渡过大海，亲自踏上那块土地，朝臣商议，私下都认为心中不安。
English: Now His Majesty could not bear this strong resentment and wanted to cross the sea and set foot on that land himself. His courtiers discussed this and privately thought that he was uneasy in his heart.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：北寇与国，壤地连接，苟有间隙，应机而至。
现代文：北方的敌寇和我国土地边境接壤，若有可乘之机，便会趁机攻打过来。
English: The enemy raiders in the north border our land border. If there is an opportunity, they will take advantage of it to attack us.

古文：夫所以越海求马，曲意於渊者，为赴目前之急，除腹心之疾也，而更弃本追末，捐近治远，忿以改规，激以动众，斯乃猾虏所愿闻，非大吴之至计也。
现代文：我国之所以越海求马，违心地对待公孙渊，是为了缓解眼前的紧急情况，消除心腹祸患，若转而弃本求末，舍近求远，因为怨愤而更改计划，激怒而出动大军，这正是狡猾的敌人所乐意听到的消息，不我大吴的良计。
English: The reason why our country crossed the sea to beg for horses and treated Gongsunyuan against its will was to alleviate the immediate emergency and eliminate the internal and external calamities. If, on the other hand, it abandons the principle of begging for the end and seeks the distance, changes the plan because of resentment, and provokes the army to move out, this is exactly the news that the cunning enemy is happy to hear, and is not a good plan of my great Wu.

古文：又兵家之术，以功役相疲，劳逸相待，得失之间，所觉辄多。
现代文：又有兵家的策略，是以奔波使敌人疲弊，在安逸之下等待敌军，得失之间，头脑清醒者获得的机会多。
English: There is also a soldier's strategy, which is to exhaust the enemy by running around, and wait for the enemy army at ease. Between gains and losses, those who are clear-headed have more opportunities.

古文：且沓渚去渊，道里尚远，今到其岸，兵势三分，使强者进取，次当守船，又次运粮，行人虽多，难得悉用；加以单步负粮，经远深入，贼地多马，邀截无常。
现代文：况且沓渚至公孙渊处，路还很远，现在到达敌方岸边，大军要分成三份，一是派强大的主力部队攻取，其二派部分将士守卫船只，三是用一些部队运输粮草，出征大军即使很多，但很难全部动用。再加上徒步背运粮食，经过远地而深入敌人腹地，而敌方多马，无法判定会何时拦截我军。
English: Moreover, it is still a long way from the coast to Gongsunyuan, and now we have reached the enemy's shore. The army should be divided into three parts. First, a strong main force should be sent to attack, and the two factions should guard the ships. Third, some troops should be used to transport grain and grass. Even if there are a lot of troops, it is difficult to use all of them. In addition, the grain should be transported on foot, through the distance and deep into the enemy's heartland, and the enemy should not be able to determine when it will intercept our army.

古文：若渊狙诈，与北未绝，动众之日，唇齿相济。
现代文：如果公孙渊用计欺诈，与北边魏国关系并未断绝，我方行军之时，他们就会唇齿相依互相救助。
English: If Gongsunyuan cheated and relations with northern Wei were not severed, when we marched, they would come to each other's aid.

古文：若实孑然无所凭赖，其畏怖远迸，或难卒灭。
现代文：如果他确实单独与我方对抗而没有凭借，他又会因为畏惧而撤军远离，恐怕就难以一下子歼灭。
English: If he does confront us alone without any support, he will withdraw his troops out of fear, and it will be difficult to annihilate them all at once.

古文：使天诛稽於朔野，山虏承间而起，恐非万安之长虑也。 
现代文：假如陛下征伐兵卒被滞积于北方的土地上，而山间盗贼又乘隙兴起，恐怕这就不是绝对安全的长远思虑了。 
English: If His Majesty's soldiers of conquest are stranded in the northern lands, and mountain bandits take advantage of the situation, I'm afraid this is not a long-term consideration of absolute security.

古文：权未许。
现代文：孙权没有采纳他的建议。
English: Sun Quan did not accept his suggestion.

古文：瑁重上疏曰： 夫兵革者，固前代所以诛暴乱，威四夷也，然其役皆在奸雄已除，天下无事，从容庙堂之上，以馀议议之耳。
现代文：陆瑁又上书说： 战争之事，是前人用以铲除暴乱、威震四方的，然而这种战争都是在奸雄已被诛讨，天下安定，君王安然地处于庙堂之上，在谈论中了解天下之事。
English: Lu Yao also wrote: War is something that the ancients used to eradicate riots and shake the four quarters. However, this kind of war is when the villain has been defeated, the world is stable, and the monarch is safely above the temple, and understands the things of the world in the discussion.

古文：至于中夏鼎沸，九域槃互之时，率须深根固本，爱力惜费，务自休养，以待邻敌之阙，未有正於此时，舍近治远，以疲军旅者也。
现代文：至于中原混乱，九州交战之时，大概都需要巩固根本加厚根基，爱护民力珍惜财物，努力使自己国家的休养生息，以待邻国敌人的衰败，没有正处于现在这个时期，反而舍近求远，治理远地，而使自己军队疲惫的。
English: As for the chaos in the Central Plains, at the time of the war in Kyushu, it was probably necessary to consolidate the foundation and thicken the foundation, cherish the people's strength and treasure the property, and strive to make their own country recuperate and live to wait for the decay of the neighboring enemy.

古文：昔尉佗叛逆，僣号称帝，于时天下乂安，百姓殷阜，带甲之数，粮食之积，可谓多矣，然汉文犹以远征不易，重兴师旅，告喻而已。
现代文：过去尉佗反叛，僭称帝号，当时天下平稳，百姓富足，将士的数额，粮食的储备，可说很多了。但汉文帝依然认为征讨边远之地不容易，虽说也大兴军事，但只是明喻尉佗而已。
English: At that time, the world was stable, the people were rich, and the number of soldiers and grain reserves could be said to be a lot. However, Emperor Hanwen still believed that it was not easy to conquer remote places, and although he was also very active in the military, it was only a metaphor.

古文：今凶桀未殄，疆埸犹警，虽蚩尤、鬼方之乱，故当以缓急差之，未宜以渊为先。
现代文：现在凶顽敌人还没歼灭，边境依旧传递警报，即使是蚩尤、鬼方那样的叛乱，也得根据情况缓急而区别对待，不应将公孙渊做为首要问题。
English: Now that the fierce enemy has not been annihilated, the border still transmits alarms. Even if it is a rebellion like that of Qiuyu and Qiguang, it must be treated differently according to the situation and priorities. Gongsunyuan should not be the primary issue.

古文：愿陛下抑威住计，暂宁六师，潜神嘿规，以为后图，天下幸甚。 
现代文：希望陛下抑制威怒运用良计，暂且稳定大军，潜心思虑长远规划，以做日后图谋，这样天下人就是大幸了。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will restrain his arrogance and anger, use a good strategy, stabilize the army for the time being, and concentrate on long-term planning in order to plan for the future, so that everyone in the world will be very lucky.

古文：权再览瑁书，嘉其词理端切，遂不行。
现代文：孙权再次细看陆瑁的上书，赞赏他言词有理端正恳切，就没有出兵。
English: Sun Quan once again carefully read Lu Yao's letter and appreciated that his words were reasonable, upright and sincere, and did not send troops.

古文：初，瑁同郡闻人敏见待国邑，优於宗脩，惟瑁以为不然，后果如其言。
现代文：起初，陆瑁同郡人闻人敏在京都被优待，超过了宗脩，只有陆瑁不以为然，后来果然与他所说的一样。
English: At first, Lu Yao and county resident Wenzhenshin were given preferential treatment in Kyoto, surpassing Zong Yao. Only Lu Yao did not agree, but later he did as he had said.

古文：赤乌二年，瑁卒。
现代文：赤乌二年，陆瑁去世。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Akau, Lu Xun passed away.

古文：子喜亦涉文籍，好人伦，孙皓时为选曹尚书。
现代文：他的儿子陆喜也涉猎文章典籍，喜好品评人物，孙皓当时是选曹尚书。
English: His son, Lu Xi, also dabbled in literary classics and liked to comment on characters. At that time, Sun Yat-sen was a book collector.

古文：吾粲字孔休，吴郡乌程人也。
现代文：吾粲，字孔休，吴郡乌程县人。
English: He is a native of Wucheng County, Wuxi County.

古文：孙河为县长，粲为小吏，河深奇之。
现代文：孙河做乌程县县长时，吾粲是小吏，孙河认为他有奇才。
English: When Sun He was the governor of Wucheng County, Wu Yao was a minor official. Sun He thought he was a genius.

古文：河后为将军，得自选长吏，表粲为曲阿丞，迁为长史，治有名迹。
现代文：孙河后来做将军，可以自己选拔地方官吏，便上表请任吾粲为曲阿县县丞，又升为长史，治理有声名政绩。
English: Later, when Sun He became a general, he was allowed to select local officials by himself, and he invited Wu Xi to be appointed as the county magistrate of Qu'a County, and he was promoted to the position of long history, and his governance had a reputation for political achievements.

古文：虽起孤微，与同郡陆逊、卜静等比肩齐声矣。
现代文：吾粲虽然出身低微，但和同郡人陆逊、卜静等人声名相当。
English: Although Azuchi was from a lowly background, his reputation was comparable to that of fellow county residents Lu Xun and Bu Jing.

古文：孙权为车骑将军，召为主簿，出为山阴令，还为参军校尉。
现代文：孙权做车骑将军时，征召吾粲为主簿，出外担任山阴县县令，入朝为参军校尉。
English: When Sun Quan was a general of chariots and cavalry, he enlisted Wu Xuan as his main bookkeeper. He went abroad to serve as the county magistrate of Sanyin County, and entered the court as an army lieutenant.

古文：黄武元年，与吕范、贺齐等俱以舟师拒魏将曹休於洞口。
现代文：黄武元年，吾粲与吕范、贺齐等人一同率领水军在洞口抵御魏国将领曹休。
English: In the first year of Huangwu, Wu Xi, together with Lu Fan, He Qi and others, led the navy to resist the Wei general Cao Xiu at the mouth of the cave.

古文：值天大风，诸船绠绁断绝，漂没著岸，为魏军所获，或覆没沈溺，其大船尚存者，水中生人皆攀缘号呼，他吏士恐船倾没，皆以戈矛撞击不受。
现代文：适逢天刮大风，船只的缆绳都扯断，有的漂到岸边，被魏军取得，有的倾覆沉没，那些还留存的大船，落水幸存的士兵攀附着船舷大声呼救，船上的官兵都怕人多使船翻倒，都用戈矛刺击水中士兵，不让他们上船。
English: When a strong wind blew, the cables of the ships were all torn, some floated to the shore and were captured by the Wei army, some capsized and sank, those large ships that still remained, the soldiers who survived the fall into the water clung to the side of the ship and shouted for help. The officers and soldiers on board were afraid that more people would overturn the ship, and they all stabbed the soldiers in the water with spears to prevent them from boarding the ship.

古文：粲与黄渊独令船人以承取之，左右以为船重必败，粲曰： 船败，当俱死耳！
现代文：只有吾粲与黄渊让船上的人将落水者拉上船，身边人认为船只超载定会倾覆，吾粲说： 船只出事，我们就一起去死罢了！
English: Only Wu Yao and Huang Yuan let the people on the boat pull the drowning people onto the boat. The people around them thought that the overload of the boat would definitely capsize. Wu Yao said: If the boat has an accident, let's die together!

古文：人穷，奈何弃之。 
现代文：人家陷入绝境，怎能抛弃他们呢？ 
English: They are in a desperate situation, how can you abandon them?

古文：粲、渊所活者百馀人。
现代文：吾粲与黄渊救活了一百多人。
English: He and Huang Yuan saved more than a hundred people.

古文：还，迁会稽太守，召处士谢谭为功曹，谭以疾不诣，粲教曰： 夫应龙以屈伸为神，凤皇以嘉鸣为贵，何必隐形於天外，潜鳞於重渊者哉？ 
现代文：回师后，吾粲升任会稽太守，征召隐士谢谭担任功曹，谢谭称病不到任，吾粲劝导说： 应龙因为能屈能伸被视作神明，凤凰因为善于鸣叫而显得珍贵，何必要在天边隐藏自己，在深渊中潜伏鳞甲呢？ 
English: After returning to his teacher, Wu Gan was promoted to the position of the auditor of the association, and the hermit Xie Tan was conscripted to serve as the gong cao. Xie Tan said that he was ill and could not take up the position. Wu Gan advised: The dragon is regarded as a god because of its ability to bend and stretch, and the phoenix is precious because it is good at singing. Why is it necessary to hide yourself on the edge of the sky and lurk in the abyss?

古文：粲募合人众，拜昭义中郎将，与吕岱讨平山越，入为屯骑校尉、少府，迁太子太傅。
现代文：吾粲招募了许多人马，被任为昭义中郎将，与吕岱一起征讨平定山越，入朝担任屯骑校尉、少府，升至太子太傅。
English: Azuchi recruited many people and horses, was appointed as Shōyō chūro shogun, and together with Ryuichi fought to pacify Yamagoe. He entered the imperial court as a cadet and shōfu, and was promoted to daifu.

古文：遭二宫之变，抗言执正，明嫡庶之分，欲使鲁王霸出驻夏口，遣杨竺不得令在都邑。又数以消息语陆逊，逊时驻武昌，连表谏争。
现代文：遇上两宫事变时，他仗义执言，明析嫡庶之分，想让鲁王孙霸出京守卫夏口，派杨竺出外不让他留在京都，又多次将消息传给陆逊，陆逊当时驻守武昌，接连数次上表劝谏。
English: When the Incident of the Two Palaces occurred, he spoke out for the sake of justice, analyzed the legitimate branch, wanted Lu Wang Sun He to leave Beijing to guard Xia Kou, sent Yang Xuan abroad to prevent him from staying in Kyoto, and repeatedly passed the news to Lu Xun. Lu Xun was stationed in Wuchang at the time, and went to the table several times to persuade him.

古文：由此为霸、竺等所谮害，下狱诛。
现代文：因此吾粲遭到孙霸、杨竺等人的诋毁构陷，被下狱处死。
English: As a result, he was slandered and framed by Sun Ba and Yang Jie, and was sent to prison and executed.

古文：朱据字子范，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：朱据，字子范，吴郡吴县人。
English: Zhu Zhen, Zizi Fan, Wu County, a native of Wu County.

古文：有姿貌膂力，又能论难。
现代文：他姿容出众气力过人，又善于论辩诘难。
English: He has a powerful appearance and is good at debating difficult issues.

古文：黄武初，徵拜五官郎中，补侍御史。
现代文：黄武初年，他被征召任命为五官郎中，补任侍御史。
English: In the first year of Huang Wu, he was conscripted and appointed as one of the five officials, supplementing the position of chamberlain.

古文：是时选曹尚书暨艳，疾贪汙在位，欲沙汰之。
现代文：当时选曹尚书暨艳，厌恶在职的贪赃枉法官员，想要筛除这些人。
English: At that time, Cao Shangshu and Yan Yan, disgusted with the corrupt officials in office, wanted to screen out these people.

古文：据以为天下未定，宜以功覆过，弃瑕取用，举清厉浊，足以沮劝，若一时贬黜，惧有后咎。
现代文：朱据认为天下未定，应以功补过，弃用有污点之人，表彰清白之人以激励污浊者，足以阻止劝诫他们，如果一时间全都贬黜，恐怕会有后患。
English: Zhu was of the opinion that the world was undecided, and that it was necessary to make up for the past with merits, discard those who were tainted, and commend those who were innocent in order to encourage those who were tainted. This was enough to prevent them from being admonished. If all were disparaged at one time, there would probably be consequences.

古文：艳不听，卒败。
现代文：暨艳不采纳，最后败亡。
English: Cum bright not adopted, finally defeated.

古文：权咨嗟将率，发愤叹息，追思吕蒙、张温，以为据才兼文武，可以继之，自是拜建义校尉，领兵屯湖孰。
现代文：孙权感叹将帅的才干，以致愤怒叹息，心中追思吕蒙和张温，又认为朱据文武兼备，可以继任吕蒙、张温的事业，从此任命朱据为建义校尉，领兵守卫湖孰。
English: Sun Quan lamented the talent of the general so much that he sighed with anger. In his heart, he thought of Lv Meng and Zhang Wen. He also thought that Zhu Zhen was both literate and armed and could succeed Lv Meng and Zhang Wen. From then on, he appointed Zhu Zhen as the Jianyi lieutenant to lead the troops to guard the lake.

古文：黄龙元年，权迁都建业，徵据尚公主，拜左将军，封云阳侯。
现代文：黄龙元年，孙权迁都建业，征召朱据并将公主嫁给他，任命朱据为左将军，封为云阳侯。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Dragon, Sun Quan moved the capital to Jianye, conscripted Zhu Zheng and married the princess to him, appointed Zhu Zheng as the left general, and crowned him as the prince of Yunyang.

古文：谦虚接士，轻财好施，禄赐虽丰而常不足用。
现代文：朱据性情谦卑，礼贤下士，看轻财物，乐于施舍，俸禄赏赐虽然丰厚但常不够用。
English: Zhu Yue was a humble and courteous corporal, who valued property and was willing to give alms. Although his salary was generous, it was often insufficient.

古文：嘉禾中，始铸大钱，一当五百。
现代文：嘉禾年间，朝廷开始铸造大钱，一大钱可当五百枚小钱。
English: During the Jiahe era, the imperial court began to mint large coins. A large coin could be exchanged for 500 small coins.

古文：后据部曲应受三万缗，工王遂诈而受之，典校吕壹疑据实取，考问主者，死於杖下，据哀其无辜，厚棺敛之。
现代文：后来朱据的部队应当派发兵饷三万缗，工匠王遂作假贪下这批军饷，典校吕壹怀疑是朱据贪污了，便拷问主管兵饷之人，主管死于杖刑之下，朱据哀感此人无辜被杀，就用上好的棺木殓葬他。
English: Later, Zhu Zuo's troops were supposed to send out 30,000 soldiers, and the craftsman Wang Ran made a fake and embezzled this batch of soldiers. Lu Yi, the inspector, suspected that Zhu Zuo was corrupt and tortured the person in charge of the soldiers. The person in charge died under the cane. Zhu Zuo felt sad that this person was killed innocently, and used a good coffin to bury him.

古文：壹又表据吏为据隐，故厚其殡。
现代文：吕壹又上表说朱据的部下为朱据隐瞒事情真相，故此朱据厚葬此人。
English: Lu Yi also said that Zhu Zuoxuan's subordinates concealed the truth of the matter for Zhu Zuoxuan, so Zhu Zuoxuan buried this person.

古文：权数责问据，据无以自明，藉草待罪。
现代文：孙权数次责问朱据，朱据无法自己澄清，躺在草垫上等待罪名。
English: Sun Quan questioned Zhu Zheng several times. Zhu Zheng could not clarify himself and lay down on a straw mat to wait for the accusation.

古文：数月，典军吏刘助觉，言王遂所取，权大感寤，曰： 朱据见枉，况吏民乎？ 
现代文：几个月后，典军吏刘助发觉事情的真相，上报说是王遂贪污了军饷，孙权非常感慨并醒悟过来，说： 朱据尚且被冤枉，更何况是官员百姓！ 
English: A few months later, Liu Zui, an officer of the Imperial Army, discovered the truth of the matter and reported that Wang Sui had embezzled military funds. Sun Quan was very moved and came to his senses, saying, "Zhu Jian Shang has been wronged, not to mention the officials and common people!"

古文：乃穷治壹罪，赏助百万。
现代文：于是彻底地追查吕壹的罪责，奖励刘助一百万钱。
English: As a result, the criminal responsibility of Lü Yi was thoroughly investigated, and Liu Jiu was awarded one million yuan.

古文：赤乌九年，迁骠骑将军。
现代文：赤乌九年，朱据升任骠骑将军。
English: In the ninth year of the Red Emperor Wu, Zhu Rong was promoted to general of the cavalry.

古文：遭二宫构争，据拥护太子，言则恳至，义形于色，守之以死，遂左迁新都郡丞。
现代文：遭遇两宫争斗事件，朱据拥护太子，言辞恳切周到，言辞神色正义，誓死捍卫太子地位，就被降职为新都郡丞。
English: Encountered with the conflict between the two palaces, Zhu Zheng supported the prince, his words were earnest and thoughtful, his words were righteous, and he swore to defend the prince's status. He was demoted to the post of Xindu County Commissioner.

古文：未到，中书令孙弘谮润据，因权寝疾，弘为昭书追赐死，时年五十七。
现代文：还没到治所，中书令孙弘诋毁他，并乘着孙权重病在床，孙弘伪造诏书追赐朱据自尽，当时朱据五十七岁。
English: Before he arrived at the detention center, the Chinese government ordered Sun Hongzhu to defame him, and he took advantage of Sun Quan being seriously ill in bed. Sun Hongzhu forged an imperial edict to have Zhu Zheng commit suicide. At that time, Zhu Zheng was fifty-seven years old.

古文：孙亮时，二子熊、损各复领兵，为全公主所谮，皆死。
现代文：孙亮时期，朱据的两个儿子朱熊、朱损又都开始率兵，被全公主构陷，都被处死。
English: In Sun Liang's time, Zhu Zi's two sons, Zhu Xiong and Zhu Zai, both began to lead armies. They were framed by Quanzhong and both were executed.

古文：永安中，追录前功，以熊子宣袭爵云阳侯，尚公主。
现代文：永安年间，朝廷追叙朱据生前功绩，让朱熊的儿子朱宣继承云阳侯爵位，娶公主为妻。
English: During the Yong'an era, the imperial court made Zhu Xuan's son, Zhu Xuan, inherit the marquisate of Yunyang and marry the princess.

古文：孙皓时，宣至骠骑将军。
现代文：孙皓时期，朱宣官至骠骑将军。
English: During the Sun Yat-sen period, Zhu Xuanguan rose to the rank of general.

古文：评曰：虞翻古之狂直，固难免乎末世，然权不能容，非旷宇也。
现代文：评曰：虞翻向古人一般狂妄率直，在末世中难免一难，但是孙权不能容下他，是没有宽广的胸怀。
English: The commentary said: Guo Tong is generally arrogant and straightforward towards the ancients, which is unavoidable in the last days, but Sun Quan cannot tolerate him, he does not have a broad mind.

古文：陆绩之於扬玄，是仲尼之左丘明，老聃之严周矣；以瑚琏之器，而作守南越，不亦贼夫人欤！
现代文：陆绩对于扬玄，就像仲尼对于左丘明，老子对于严周；以瑚琏的才干，却只守卫南越，不也是贼人吗！
English: Lu Jie is to Yang Xuan as Zhongni is to Zuo Qiuming and Lao Zi is to Yan Zhou; with the talent of Hu Jia, he only guards South Vietnam, isn't he also a thief!

古文：张温才藻俊茂，而智防未备，用致艰患。
现代文：张温才干出众，是杰出俊杰，但不具备智谋防备，才导致艰难祸患。
English: Zhang Wen's talent is outstanding, he is an outstanding man, but he does not have the wisdom to prevent and prepare, which leads to a difficult disaster.

古文：骆统抗明大义，辞切理至，值权方闭不开。
现代文：骆统深明大义，言辞恳切，情理兼备，适逢孙权闭塞不听。
English: Luo Di had a profound understanding of justice, his words were earnest and reasonable, which coincided with Sun Quan's obstruction and refusal to listen.

古文：陆瑁笃义规谏，君子有称焉。
现代文：陆瑁笃定忠义，进言规劝，君子都称赞他。
English: Lu Yao was steadfastly loyal and persuasive, and the nobles all praised him.

古文：吾粲、朱据遭罹屯蹇，以正丧身，悲夫！
现代文：吾粲、朱据遭逢祸患，导致身死，悲叹啊！
English: I, Zhu, have met with misfortune, leading to death, lament!

