古文：华佗张仲景吴太医句骊客范光禄徐文伯徐嗣伯腹瘕病李子豫徐之才甄权孙思邈许裔宗秦鸣鹤卢元钦周允元杨玄亮赵玄景张文仲郝公景崔务
现代文：华佗张仲景吴太医句骊客范光禄徐文伯徐嗣伯腹瘕病李子豫徐之才甄权孙思邈许裔宗秦鸣鹤卢元钦周允元杨玄亮赵玄景张文仲郝公景崔务
English: Huayuan Zhangzhongjing Wu Taijiquan Guest Fan Guanglu Xu Wenbo Xujiubo Diarrhea Disease Plum 豫 Xu ZiCai Zhenquan Sun Siqian Xu Zongzong Qin Minghe Lu Yuanqin Zhou Yun Yuan Yang Xuanliang Zhao Xuanjing Zhangwenzhong  Gongjing Cui

古文：华佗
现代文：华佗
English: Hua Zhen

古文：魏华佗善医。
现代文：三国人华佗，医术高明。
English: The people of the three countries are brilliant, and their medical skills are excellent.

古文：尝有郡守病甚，佗过之。
现代文：有一郡守得了重病，华佗去看他。
English: When a county official fell seriously ill, Hua Yan went to see him.

古文：郡守令佗诊候，佗退，谓其子曰：使君病有异于常，积淤血在腹中。当极怒呕血，即能去疾。不尔无生矣。
现代文：郡守让华佗为他诊治，华佗退了出来，对郡守的儿子说：你父亲的病和一般的病不同，有淤血在他的腹中，应激怒他让他把淤血吐出来，这样就能治好他的病，不然就没命了。
English: The county magistrate asked Hua Wei to treat him. Hua Wei backed out and said to the son of the county magistrate: Your father's illness is different from the general illness. There is a blood clot in his abdomen. If he gets angry, let him spit out the blood clot. This will cure his illness, otherwise he will die.

古文：子能尽言家君平昔之俧，吾疏而责之。
现代文：你能把你父亲平时所做过的错事都告诉我吗？我传信斥责他。
English: Can you tell me all the bad things your father has ever done? I'll send him a letter to reprimand him.

古文：其子曰：若获愈，何谓不言？
现代文：郡守的儿子说：如果能治好父亲的病，有什么不能说的？
English: The son of the county governor said: "If I can cure my father's illness, what can I not say?

古文：于是具以父从来所为乖误者，尽示佗。
现代文：于是，他把父亲长期以来所做不合常理的事情，全都告诉了华佗。
English: As a result, he told Hua Wei all the unreasonable things that his father had been doing for a long time.

古文：佗留书责骂之。父大怒，发吏捕佗。佗不至，遂呕黑血升余，其疾乃平。
现代文：华佗写了一封痛斥郡守的信留下，郡守看信后，大怒，派捕吏捉拿华佗，没捉到，郡守盛怒之下，吐出一升多黑血，他的病就好了。
English: Hua Wei wrote a letter criticizing the county magistrate and left it behind. After the county magistrate read the letter, he was furious and sent an arresting officer to arrest Hua Wei. When he didn't catch him, the county magistrate, in a rage, vomited out more than a liter of black blood, and his illness was cured.

古文：又有女子极美丽，过时不嫁。以右膝常患一疮，脓水不绝。
现代文：又，有一位极漂亮的姑娘，已经过了结婚的年龄，可是仍没有嫁人，因为常期以来她的右膝，长了个疮，不断往外流浓水。
English: There was also a very beautiful girl, who was past the age of marriage, but had not yet married, because she had had a sore on her right knee for a long time, and thick water kept flowing out.

古文：华佗过。其父问之，佗曰：使人乘马，牵一栗色狗走三十里，归而热截右足，柱疮上。
现代文：华佗看过后，她父亲问女儿的病情，华佗说：派人骑马，牵着一条栗色的狗跑三十里。回来后，乘狗身子正热时截下狗的右脚，拄在疮口上。
English: After Hua Tuo had seen it, her father asked about her daughter's condition. Hua Tuo said, "I sent someone to ride a horse and lead a chestnut-colored dog for thirty miles. After returning, when the dog's body was hot, I cut off the dog's right foot and rubbed it on the wound.

古文：俄有一赤蛇从疮出，而入犬足中，其疾遂平。
现代文：不一会儿，有一条红色的小蛇从疮口中出来，进到狗的脚中，那姑娘的病就好了。
English: In a little while, a little red snake came out of the wound and went into the dog's foot, and the girl's illness was cured.

古文：又后汉末，有人得心腹瘕病，昼夜切痛。
现代文：又，后汉末年时，有人腹中长一结块，白天黑夜疼痛无比。
English: Also, at the end of the Han Dynasty, some people developed a lump in the abdomen, which was extremely painful day and night.

古文：临终，敕其子曰：吾气绝后，可剖视之。
现代文：临死时，他对儿子说：我死以后，可以剖腹把那东西拿出来，看看到底是什么。
English: As he was about to die, he said to his son, "After I die, you can cut open my abdomen and take that thing out and see what it is."

古文：其子不忍违言，剖之，得一铜枪，容数合许。
现代文：他儿子不忍心违抗父命，于是剖腹，取出一个铜枪头，约有三分之一升左右。
English: His son could not bear to disobey his father's order, so he cut open his abdomen and took out a copper bullet, about a third of a liter.

古文：后华佗闻其病而解之。
现代文：华佗听说后，就前去了解。
English: After hearing this, Hua Jun went to investigate.

古文：因出巾箱中药，以投枪，枪即成酒焉。张仲景
现代文：华佗看完，从小箱子里取出药放在枪头上，枪头立刻化成了酒。张仲景
English: After reading it, Hua Wei took the medicine from the small box and put it on the barrel of the gun. The barrel of the gun immediately turned into wine. Zhang Zhongjing

古文：何颙妙有知人之鉴。
现代文：何颙有极高的识别人才的能力。
English: He Yan has a very high ability to recognize talent.

古文：初郡张仲景总角造颙。颙谓曰：君用思精密，而韵不能高，将为良医矣。
现代文：当初，郡中少年张仲景来拜访他，他对仲景说：你考虑问题细微周到，但你的气派、风度不太高，以后必成为一名良医呀！
English: At first, Zhang Zhongjing, a boy from the county middle school, came to visit him. He said to Zhongjing: You consider the problem subtly and thoughtfully, but your style and demeanor are not very high. You will surely become a good doctor in the future!

古文：仲景后果有奇术。
现代文：后来张仲景果然医术超凡。
English: Later, Zhang Zhongjing was indeed an extraordinary doctor.

古文：王仲宣年十七时过仲景，仲景谓之曰：君体有病，宜服五石汤。若不治，年及三十，当眉落。
现代文：王仲宣十七岁时来拜访张仲景，仲景对王仲宣说：你身体有病，应当服用五石汤，若不治疗，到三十岁时，眉毛该脱落了。
English: When Wang Zhongxuan was 17 years old, he came to visit Zhang Zhongjing. Zhongxing said to Wang Zhongxuan: You are physically ill, you should take five stone soup. If you do not take treatment, by the age of 30, your eyebrows should fall off.

古文：仲宣以其赊远不治。
现代文：王仲宣认为到三十岁还远着呢，没及时治疗。
English: Wang Zhongxuan thought that he was still far away from the age of thirty and did not receive timely treatment.

古文：后至三十，果觉眉落。
现代文：到三十岁时，果然发现眉毛脱落。
English: At the age of thirty, he discovered that his eyebrows were falling off.

古文：其精如比，世咸叹颙之知人。
现代文：张仲景的医术精深到这种程度，世人无不赞叹何颙识别人才能力的神妙！
English: Zhang Zhongjing's medical skills are so profound that the world is full of admiration for his ability to recognize talent!

古文：吴太医
现代文：吴太医
English: Wu Taiji

古文：吴孙和宠邓夫人。尝醉舞如意，误伤邓颊，血流，娇惋弥苦。
现代文：吴国的孙和宠爱邓夫人，一次酒醉后挥舞如意，不意刺伤了邓夫人的面颊，流出了血，邓夫人娇声叹惜疼痛不已。
English: The grandson of Wu Guo and the favorite of Mrs. Deng, after a drunken wave, accidentally stabbed Mrs. Deng's cheek, blood flowed out, and Mrs. Deng lamented the pain.

古文：命太医合药。
现代文：孙和令太医配药。
English: Dr. Sun Wo-ling dispenses medicine.

古文：言得白獭髓、杂玉与琥珀屑，当灭此痕。
现代文：太医讲，须用白獭骨髓、杂玉和琥珀粉末调配，可以除掉疤痕。
English: According to the Chinese medicine, it is necessary to use the mixture of chalk bone marrow, miscellaneous beads and amber powder to remove the scars.

古文：和以百金购得白獭，乃合膏。
现代文：孙和用一百两黄金买来白獭，于是太医配制药膏。
English: Sun He bought the paddlefish with one hundred taels of gold, so the doctor mixed it with pharmaceutical cream.

古文：琥珀太多，及差，痕不灭，左颊有赤点如痣。
现代文：因琥珀用得过多，到伤愈时，邓夫人左颊疤疮没有完全去掉，脸上留下一颗象痣一样的红点。
English: Due to the excessive use of amber, when the injury healed, Mrs. Deng's left cheek scar was not completely removed, leaving a red spot like a wart on her face.

古文：句骊客
现代文：句骊客
English: 句客

古文：魏时有句骊客善用针。
现代文：魏时有个句骊客人擅长用针治病。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, there was a saying that guests were good at curing diseases with needles.

古文：取寸发，斩为十余段，以针贯取之，言发中虚也。
现代文：他拿来一寸长头发，截为十多段，用针把它穿起来，说是头发中间是空的，真是绝妙。
English: He took an inch of long hair, cut it into more than ten sections, put it through with a needle, and said that the middle of the hair was empty, it was really wonderful.

古文：其妙如此。范光禄
现代文：范光禄
English: Fan Guanglu

古文：有范光禄者得病，两脚并肿，不能饮食。
现代文：有位叫范光禄的人得了病，两只脚全都肿了，不能吃也不能喝。
English: A man named Fan Guanglu fell ill. Both of his feet were swollen and he couldn't eat or drink.

古文：忽有一人。不自通名，径入斋中。坐于光禄之侧。
现代文：忽然有一人，不通报自己的姓名，径直进入光禄的书房中，坐在他的旁边。
English: Suddenly, a man, without giving his name, walked straight into Guanglu's study and sat next to him.

古文：光禄谓曰：先不识君，那得见诣？
现代文：范光禄对来人说：先前我并不认识你，怎么到我这里来了？
English: Fan Guanglu said to the stranger: I didn't know you before, how did you come to me?

古文：答云：佛使我来理君病也。
现代文：来人回答说：是佛派我来治病的。
English: The man replied, "Buddha sent me to cure the sick."

古文：光禄遂废衣示之。
现代文：于是范光禄脱去衣服给他看。
English: So Fan Guanglu took off his clothes to show him.

古文：因出针针肿上。
现代文：来人拿出针，在肿脚上行针。
English: Someone took out a needle and threaded it into the swollen foot.

古文：倏忽之间，顿针两脚及膀胱百余下，出黄脓水三升许而去。
现代文：不一会儿，就在两脚和膀胱的穴上进针一百多次，流出黄脓水三升多，他就走了。
English: In a short time, more than a hundred needles were inserted into the holes of his feet and bladder, and more than three liters of jaundiced water flowed out, and he left.

古文：至明日，并无针伤而患渐愈。
现代文：到第二天，范光禄没有留下伤，他的病渐渐好了。
English: By the next day, Fan Guanglu was not injured, and his illness gradually improved.

古文：徐文伯
现代文：徐文伯
English: Xu Wenbo

古文：宋徐文伯尝与宋少帝出乐游苑门，逢妇人有娠。
现代文：宋国徐文伯曾与宋国的少帝一起走出乐游苑门，遇见一孕妇。
English: Xu Wenbo of the Song Dynasty once walked out of the Le Youyuan Gate with the young emperor of the Song Dynasty and met a pregnant woman.

古文：帝亦善诊候，诊之曰：是女也。
现代文：少帝也擅长诊病，他给妇人诊视后说：是个女孩。
English: The young emperor was also good at diagnosing illnesses. After he had examined the woman, he said: "It's a girl."

古文：问文伯，伯曰：一男一女，男在左边，青黑色，形小于女。
现代文：又问文伯，徐文伯说：一男一女。男孩在左边，青黑色，比女孩小一些。
English: Asked Wenbo again, Xu Wenbo said, "One man and one woman. The boy is on the left, blue and black, and is smaller than the girl."

古文：帝性急，令剖之。
现代文：少帝性子急，令剖妇人腹。
English: The young emperor was impatient and had the woman's stomach cut open.

古文：文伯恻然曰：臣请针之，必落。
现代文：徐文伯不忍心，说：请让我给她用针，胎儿一定能下来。
English: Xu Wenbo could not bear it and said, "Please let me give her a needle, the fetus will surely come out."

古文：便针足太阴，补手阳明。
现代文：于是针那孕妇脚的太阴穴，并用手按摩她的阳明穴。
English: The needle is then inserted into the sunken area of the pregnant woman's foot, and her sunken area is massaged with the hand.

古文：胎应针而落，果效如言。
现代文：用针后，胎儿随之落下来，果然和他说的一样。
English: After using the needle, the fetus fell down, just as he said.

古文：文伯有学行，不屈公卿，不以医自业，为张融所善，历位泰山太守。
现代文：徐文伯有学问，品德好，不畏权贵，不以医术为自己的职业，深得张融的赏识，多次任泰山的太守。
English: Xu Wenbo had learning, good moral character, was not afraid of power and nobility, did not take medicine as his profession, and was deeply appreciated by Zhang Rong. He was appointed the governor of Mount Tai for many times.

古文：文伯祖熙之好黄老，隐于秦望山。
现代文：徐文伯的祖父徐熙之崇尚黄帝和老子，在秦望山过着隐居的生活。
English: Xu Wenbo's grandfather, Xu Xizhi, revered the Yellow Emperor and Laozi, and lived a secluded life in Qinwang Mountain.

古文：有道士过乞饮，留一胡芦子曰：君子孙宜以此道术救世，当得二千石。
现代文：有位道士路过他那时向他讨水喝，之后留下一只胡芦，说：你的子孙就用这个道术来拯救人世吧，必定能得至二千石的报酬。
English: At that time, a Taoist passed by him and asked him for water to drink, and then left a gourd, saying, "Let your descendants use this Taoism to save the world. They will surely receive a reward of up to two thousand stones."

古文：熙开视之，乃扁鹊医经一卷。
现代文：徐熙之打开一看，原来里面装的是扁鹊的医书一卷。
English: When Xu Xizhi opened it, he found that it contained a medical book on alopecia areata.

古文：因精学之，遂名振海内。
现代文：于是，他专心致志地学习医术，终于名振四方。
English: As a result, he devoted himself to studying medicine and eventually became famous.

古文：仕至濮阳太守。
现代文：他做官做到濮阳太守。
English: He rose through the ranks to become the governor of Shenyang.

古文：子秋夫为射阳令，尝有鬼呻吟，声甚凑苦。
现代文：徐熙之的儿子徐秋夫任射阳县令时，曾经有一次，他听见鬼在呻吟，声音非常凄苦。
English: Once, when Xu Xizhi's son, Xu Qiuwu, was the magistrate of Shayang County, he heard a ghost moaning. The sound was very bitter.

古文：秋夫问曰：汝是鬼也，何所须？
现代文：徐秋夫问道：你这鬼，要干什么？
English: Xu Qiufu asked, "What do you want to do, you ghost?

古文：鬼曰：我姓斛斯，家在东阳。患腰痛而死。虽为鬼，疼痛犹不可忍。闻君善术，愿见救济。
现代文：鬼说：我姓斛斯，家住在阳县，因患腰痛病死，现在虽然做了鬼但还是疼得不能忍受，听说你医术很好，希望你救救我。
English: The ghost said, "My family name is Yu Si, my home is in Yang County, and I died of low back pain. Although I am now a ghost, I still can't bear the pain. I heard that your medical skills are very good, and I hope you can help me."

古文：秋夫曰：汝是鬼，无形，云何措治？
现代文：徐秋夫说：你是鬼，没有形状，我怎么给你治疗啊？
English: Xu Qiuwu said: You are a ghost, without shape, how can I treat you?

古文：鬼曰：君但缚刍作人。按孔穴针之。
现代文：鬼说：你只要割草，扎个草人，按着穴位用针就可以了。
English: The ghost said, "All you have to do is cut the grass, tie a straw man, and use a needle according to the hole.

古文：秋夫如其言，为针四处，又针肩井三处，设祭而埋之。
现代文：徐秋夫按着鬼说的，扎好草人，在四个穴位用了针，又在肩部的三个穴位用了针，又摆酒供食，祭祷之后才把草人埋掉。
English: Xu Qiuwu did as the ghost said, tied the straw man, used a needle in four points, and used a needle in three points of the shoulder, and offered wine for food, and buried the straw man only after the prayer.

古文：明日，见一人来谢曰：蒙君疗疾，复为设祭，除饥解疾，感惠实多。
现代文：第二天有人来谢徐秋夫，说：承蒙你为我治病，又为我设祭，除病解饥，你对我的恩惠太多了，真该好好谢谢你！
English: The next day, someone came to thank Xu Qiuwu, saying: "Thanks to you for curing my illness, setting up a sacrifice for me, removing my illness and relieving my hunger, you have been so generous to me. I really should thank you!

古文：忽然不见。
现代文：说完，忽然不见踪影。
English: After saying this, he suddenly disappeared.

古文：当代服其通灵。
现代文：与徐秋夫同时代的人都佩服他能通鬼神。
English: Xu Qiuwu's contemporaries all admired his ability to communicate with ghosts and gods.

古文：又宋明帝宫人患腰疼牵心，发即气绝。
现代文：又，宋明帝的一位宫女患腰痛病，连着心也痛，发病时就不省人事。
English: In addition, a concubine of Emperor Song Ming suffered from low back pain, which was accompanied by pain in the heart, and she was unconscious at the time of onset.

古文：众医以为肉症。徐文伯曰：此发瘕也。
现代文：许多医生都诊断是肉症，徐文伯诊视过后，说：此病是发症。
English: Many doctors have diagnosed it as a flesh disease. After the examination, Xu Wenbo said: This disease is the onset.

古文：以油灌之，则吐物如发。稍稍引之，长三尺，头已成蛇。
现代文：给这宫女灌了油之后，她就吐出了象头发样的东西，轻轻拨弄它，有三尺长，头已经长成蛇的形状。
English: After pouring oil on the courtesan, she spat out something like a hair and gently touched it. It was three feet long and its head had grown into the shape of a snake.

古文：能动，悬柱上，水滴尽，一发而已。病即愈。
现代文：能动，把它悬挂在柱上，水滴尽后，一根头发罢了，病就全好了。
English: He was able to move it, and hung it on a post. After the water dripped out, it was just a hair, and the illness was completely cured.

古文：徐嗣伯
现代文：徐嗣伯
English: Xu Zhibo

古文：徐嗣伯字德绍，善清言，精于医术。
现代文：徐嗣伯字德绍，善谈老庄之道，精通医术。
English: Xu Zhibo, a native of Dessau, is good at talking about the way of the old village and is proficient in medicine.

古文：曾有一妪，患滞淤，积年不差。
现代文：曾有一老妇人，患有滞淤病，多年不愈。
English: There was an old woman who had suffered from constipation for many years.

古文：嗣伯为之诊疾曰：此尸注也，当须死人枕煮服之可愈。于是就古塚中得一枕，枕以半边腐缺，服之即差。
现代文：徐嗣伯给她诊视，说：这是鬼附身，应该用死人的枕头煮后服用，可以治好你的病，于是老夫人从古墓中找到一只已经半边腐烂，残缺不全的死人枕头，煮后服用，病就好了。
English: Xu Zhibo examined her and said, "This is demonic possession. You should boil a dead person's pillow and take it to cure your illness. So the old lady found a half-rotten, incomplete dead person's pillow from an ancient tomb, boiled it and took it to cure her illness.

古文：后秣陵人张景年十五，腹胀面黄，众医不疗。
现代文：后来，有秣陵人张景，十五岁，腹胀，面目焦黄，许多医生都不给他治了，因此就去找徐嗣伯。
English: Later, Zhang Jing, a 15-year-old from Fuling, was bloated and pale. Many doctors refused to treat him, so he went to see Xu Zhibo.

古文：以问嗣伯，嗣伯曰：此石蛔耳，当以死人枕煮服之。
现代文：徐嗣伯说：这是石蛔！应该用死人枕煮后服用。张景按嗣伯的话去做，煮死人枕服用后，去大解，便出了蛔虫。
English: Xu Shibo said, "This is the stone pestle! It should be taken after being boiled with the dead man's pillow. Zhang Jing did as Shibo said. After taking the boiled dead man's pillow, it was thoroughly dissolved, and maggots came out.

古文：依语，煮枕以服之，得大利，出蛔虫，头坚如石者五六升许，病即差。
现代文：这些蛔虫坚硬如石头，约有六、七寸长。打下蛔虫后，张景的病就好了。
English: These tapeworms are as hard as stone, about six or seven inches long. After getting rid of the tapeworms, Zhang Jing's illness was cured.

古文：后沈僧翼眼痛，又多见鬼物。
现代文：后来还有一位叫沈翼的和尚眼睛疼痛，并常常看见鬼。
English: Later, there was also a monk named Shen Ying who suffered from eye pain and often saw ghosts.

古文：以问之，嗣伯曰：邪气入肝，可觅死人枕煮服之。竟，可埋枕于故处。
现代文：这个和尚来找徐嗣伯诊治。徐嗣伯说：这是邪气进入肝脏，可以找死人枕头煮后服用，完了，再把枕头埋在原处。
English: This monk came to Xu Zhibo for diagnosis and treatment. Xu Zhibo said, "This is evil gas entering the liver. You can find a dead person's pillow, boil it, and then bury the pillow in its original place."

古文：如其言又愈。
现代文：和尚按徐嗣伯的话做了，他的病也好了。
English: The monk did as Xu Zhibo said, and his illness was cured.

古文：王晏知而问之曰：三病不同，而皆用死人枕疗之，俱差何也？
现代文：王晏知道了徐嗣伯用尸枕治病的事后，来问徐嗣伯，说：三个人的病不一样，却都是用死人枕头治疗，而且全都治好了，是什么原因？
English: After Wang Yao learned that Xu Zhibo had used a dead man's pillow to treat his patients, he came to ask Xu Zhibo, saying, "Three people have different diseases, but they were all treated with a dead man's pillow, and they were all cured. What is the reason?"

古文：答曰：尸注者，鬼气也。伏而未起，故令人沉滞。得死人枕促之，魂气飞越，不复附体，故尸注可差。
现代文：徐嗣回答说：鬼附身的人，是中了鬼气，它附在人身上不离开，所以使人沉滞，必须用死人枕让它离去，鬼气飞走，不再附在人的身上，所以鬼附身的人的病就好了。
English: Xu Zhi replied: A person who is possessed by a ghost is possessed by a ghost. It attaches to a person's body and does not leave, so it makes a person stagnant. It is necessary to use a dead person's pillow to let it leave. The ghost flies away and no longer attaches to a person's body, so the disease of a person who is possessed by a ghost is cured.

古文：石蛔者，医疗即僻。蛔虫转坚，世间药不能除，所以须鬼物驱之，然后可散也。
现代文：得石蛔病的人，已是不常见的，蛔虫变成石头，人世间的药打不下来，所以须用鬼物来驱逐它，然后就可以打下它了。
English: It is not common for a person to get stone mite disease. The mite turns into stone and cannot be beaten down with earthly medicine, so it is necessary to expel it with a ghostly object, and then it can be beaten down.

古文：夫邪气入肝，故使眼痛而见魍魉。应须邪物以钓其气，因而去之，所以令埋于故处也。
现代文：因为邪气进入肝脏，所以就眼睛痛，并且看见鬼魅，必须用邪物把邪气引出来，因此就除掉它了，所以让他把死人枕埋在原处呵！
English: Because the evil spirit enters the liver, his eyes hurt, and he sees ghosts. He must use evil things to draw the evil spirit out, so he can get rid of it, so let him bury the dead pillow in the same place!

古文：晏深叹其神妙。
现代文：王晏深深赞叹徐嗣伯的神妙！
English: Wang Yao deeply praised the magic of Xu Zhibo's performance!

古文：腹瘕病
现代文：腹瘕病
English: Diarrheal disease

古文：昔有一人，与奴同时得腹瘕病。
现代文：过去有一个人，与仆人同时得了腹内结块的病，不久仆人就死了。
English: In the past, there was a man who developed a lump in his abdomen at the same time as his servant, and the servant soon died.

古文：奴既死，令剖腹视之，得一白鳖。乃试以诸药浇灌之，并内药于腹中，悉无损动，乃系鳖于床脚。
现代文：这个人让剖腹查看，从里面取出一只白鳖，于是试着用各种药浇灌它，并同时给它内服这些药，但这些药全都不能损伤这只白鳖，就把它拴在床脚上。
English: The man had a caesarean section performed, and a stoat was taken out of it. He tried to douse it with various drugs and give it these drugs at the same time, but none of these drugs could harm the stoat, so he tied it to the foot of the bed.

古文：忽有一客来看之。
现代文：忽然有一天，一位客人来看望这个病人，客人是骑着一匹白马来的。
English: Suddenly, one day, a guest came to visit the sick man, riding a white horse.

古文：乘一白马，既而马溺溅鳖。鳖乃惶骇。疾走避之。
现代文：过不多久。白马撒尿。溅在白鳖上，白鳖非常慌恐，急忙躲避着马尿。
English: Not long after, the white horse urinated and splashed the egret. The egret panicked and quickly ran away from the horse's urine.

古文：既系之，不得去，乃缩藏头颈足焉。
现代文：因为拴着，没能逃掉，就把头和脚都缩回去了。
English: Because he was stumbling and couldn't get away, he pulled his head and feet back.

古文：病者察之，谓其子曰：吾病或可以救矣。
现代文：那个病人看到了这情景，对他儿子说：我的病也许可以好啦。
English: The sick man, seeing this, said to his son, "Perhaps my illness can be cured."

古文：乃试以白马溺灌鳖。须臾消成水焉。
现代文：于是试着用白马尿灌白鳖，不一会，鳖化成了水。
English: So he tried to fill the paddlefish with white horse urine. After a while, the paddlefish turned into water.

古文：病者遂顿服升余白马溺，病却豁然除愈。
现代文：那位病人立刻就服了一升多白马尿，病当即就好了。
English: The patient immediately took more than a liter of white horse urine and was immediately cured.

古文：李子豫
现代文：李子豫
English: Li Ziyu

古文：许永为豫州刺史，镇历阳。
现代文：许永任豫州刺史，镇守历阳。
English: After taking off the mourning clothes at the end of the three-year mourning period, Shen Yizhi married the only daughter of Shen Tao to Yan Qiqi of Hokiang.

古文：其弟得病，心腹坚痛。
现代文：他的弟弟患病，腹内有一硬硬的东西阵阵作痛。
English: His younger brother was ill, with a hard lump in his abdomen.

古文：居一夜，忽闻屏风后有鬼言：何不速杀之？
现代文：这天夜里，忽然听见屏风后面，有鬼说话。鬼说：为什么不快点杀了他？
English: That night, I suddenly heard a ghost talking behind the screen. The ghost said, "Why don't you hurry up and kill him?"

古文：明日，李子豫当以赤丸打汝，汝即死矣。
现代文：明天李子豫该用红丸打你，你就得死了。
English: If Li Ziyu were to hit you with a red pill tomorrow, you would die.

古文：及旦，遂使人迎子豫。
现代文：到了天亮，派人去接李子豫，不多时，李子豫来了。
English: At dawn, someone was sent to pick up Li Ziyu, and before long, Li Ziyu arrived.

古文：即至，病者忽闻腹中有呻吟之声。
现代文：许永的弟弟忽然又听见腹中呻吟的声音。
English: Xu Yong's younger brother suddenly heard a groaning sound in his stomach.

古文：子豫遂于巾箱中出八毒赤丸与服之。须臾，腹中雷鸣绞转。大利，所病即愈。
现代文：李子豫从小药箱中拿出八毒红药丸给许永的弟弟服下去，不一会儿，许永弟弟腹中鸣响绞痛，去大便，回来之后，他的病就好了。
English: Li Ziyu took out eight poison red pills from a small medicine box and gave them to Xu Yong's brother to take. Soon, Xu Yong's brother had colic in his stomach, went to defecate, and after returning, his illness was cured.

古文：徐之才
现代文：徐之才
English: Xu Zhicai

古文：北齐右仆射徐之才善医术。
现代文：北齐的右仆射徐之才擅长医术。
English: Beiqi's right-hand man, Ya Xu Zongcai, was good at medicine.

古文：时有人患脚跟肿痛，诸医莫能识之。窥之曰：蛤精疾也。得之当由乘船入海，垂脚水中。
现代文：当时有一人患了脚跟肿痛的病，很多医生都诊断不出是什么病，徐之才看这后说：是蛤蜊精病，是你在海上乘船时，你的脚垂到水中而得的。
English: At that time, there was a person who suffered from swollen heel pain. Many doctors could not diagnose what kind of disease it was. Xu Zhicai looked at him and said, "It's beriberi. You got it when you were on a boat and your foot fell into the water."

古文：疾者曰：实曾如此。
现代文：患者说：真是这样的。
English: The patient said: "It really is like that."

古文：为割之，得蛤子二个，如榆荚。
现代文：徐之才为患者做手术，取出两个象榆钱大小的蛤蜊仔。
English: Xu Zhicai operated on the patient and took out two tadpoles the size of pennies.

古文：甄权
现代文：甄权
English: Screening rights

古文：甄权精究医术，为天下最。
现代文：甄权专心致志研究医术，成为天下第一。
English: Zhenquan devoted himself to the study of medicine and became the first in the world.

古文：年一百三岁，唐太宗幸其宅，拜朝散大夫。
现代文：他一百零三岁时，唐太宗到他家中去看望了他，封他为朝散大夫。
English: When he was one hundred and three years old, Emperor Taizong visited him at his home and appointed him as a Choshan doctor.

古文：孙思邈
现代文：孙思邈
English: Sung Si-soo

古文：唐邓王元裕，高祖第十八子也。好学，善谈名理，与典签卢照邻为布衣之交。常称曰：寡人之相如也。
现代文：唐朝邓王李元裕，是唐高祖的第十八位儿子，喜欢学习，擅长谈论辨名析理之学，典签卢照邻是他的布衣朋友，他经常声称，说：我的命相就这样了。
English: Li Yuanyu, the 18th son of Tang Gaozu, the king of the Tang Dynasty, liked to study and was good at discussing the science of name recognition. Lu Zhao, his neighbor, was his clothed friend. He often said, "This is my life."

古文：照邻范阳人，为新都尉，因染恶疾，居于阳翟之具茨山，著释《疾文》及《五悲》。
现代文：卢照邻是范阳人，任新都尉，因为患有难医治的疾病，他住在阳翟的具茨山，编著并注释《疾文》和《五悲》。
English: Lu Zhaozhong was from Fanyang and was appointed as a new captain. Because he suffered from an incurable disease, he lived in the impotent Guzishan. He compiled and annotated "Illness Literature" and "Five Paths."

古文：雅有骚人之风，竟自沉于颍水而死。
现代文：卢照邻性情高雅颇具诗人风度，不料后来竟投颍水自杀身亡。
English: Lu Zhaozhong had a high-spirited and poetic demeanor. However, he later committed suicide by throwing himself into a river.

古文：照邻寓居于京城鄱阳公主之废府。
现代文：卢照邻曾居住在景城鄱阳公主废弃的府第中。
English: Lu Zhao's neighbor once lived in the abandoned middle school of Jingcheng's Poyang Princess.

古文：显庆三年，诏征太白山隐士孙思邈。
现代文：显庆三年时，唐高宗召见太白山隐士孙思邈，当时孙思邈也住在这里。
English: In the third year of Emperor Xianqing's reign, Tang Gaozong summoned the Taibaishan hermit Sun Siyi, who was also living here at the time.

古文：亦居此府。思貌华原人，年九十余，而视听不衰。
现代文：孙思邈是华原人，当年已经九十多岁了，但是他的视力和听力都一点没有减弱。
English: Sun Siyu is a native of Hua Yuan. He was more than 90 years old at that time, but his eyesight and hearing had not weakened at all.

古文：照邻自伤年才强仕，沉疾困备，乃作《蒺藜树赋》，以份其禀受之不同。
现代文：卢照邻见到孙思邈后伤感自己正在壮年，却疾病缠身，久治不愈，终日里困顿疲备，于是作《蒺藜树赋》，用来伤悼他与孙思邈二人之间承受自然的体质的差异。
English: After seeing Sun Siyi, Lu Zhaoqin felt sad that he was in his prime, but he was riddled with illness and could not be cured for a long time. He was exhausted all day, so he wrote "Banyan Tree Fu" to mourn the natural physical differences between him and Sun Siyi.

古文：词甚美丽。
现代文：卢照邻作的赋，词句极其美丽。
English: Lu Zhaoqin's Fu, the words are extremely beautiful.

古文：思邈既有推步导养之术。
现代文：孙思邈会算天象历法和摄生养性之术。
English: Sun Siyu will count the celestial calendar and the art of life-preservation and health.

古文：照邻与当时知名之士宋令文、孟诜。皆执师资之礼。
现代文：卢照邻和当时的名士宋令文、孟诜都用对老师的礼节待孙思邈。
English: Lu Zhaojiang and the famous Song Lingwen and Meng Yao at that time all waited for Sun Siyu with the etiquette of a teacher.

古文：尝问思貌曰：名医愈疾。其道何也？
现代文：他们曾问孙思邈，说：名医能治好病，是根据什么道理呢？
English: They once asked Sun Siyu, "What is the basis for the famous doctor's ability to cure diseases?"

古文：思邈曰：吾闻善言天者，必质于人。善言人者，必本于天。故天有四时五形，日月相推，寒暑迭代。其转运也。
现代文：孙思邈说：我听说通晓天的人，一定能在人的身上找到它的本体，熟悉人的人一定是以天为本体，所以天有春、夏、秋、冬和金、木、水、火、土。黑天、白日轮流更替，寒冬暑夏交换更迭，这是大自然在运动。
English: Sun Siyu said: I have heard that people who are familiar with the sky can definitely find its essence in people, and people who are familiar with people must take the sky as the essence. Therefore, the sky has spring, summer, autumn, winter, and gold, wood, water, fire, and earth. The black sky and the day take turns, and the cold winter and the hot summer exchange changes. This is nature in motion.

古文：和而为雨，怒而为风，散而为露，乱而为雾，凝而为霜雪，张而为虹霓。此天之常数也。
现代文：自然界中的大气，合起来就成为雨，流动的时候就成为风，散发开去的时候就成为露，紊乱无序时就成为雾，凝聚时就成为霜雪，伸展扩大成为虹霓，这是大自然的正常规律。
English: The atmosphere in nature, when combined, becomes rain, when it flows, it becomes wind, when it disperses, it becomes dew, when it is disorderly, it becomes fog, when it condenses, it becomes frost and snow, and when it expands, it becomes a rainbow. This is the normal law of nature.

古文：人有四肢五脏，一觉一寐，呼吸吐纳，精气往来。
现代文：人体有四肢和五脏，醒着、睡时，呼出吸进，吐故纳新，精脉和气血循环。
English: The human body has four limbs and five viscera, waking and sleeping, exhaling and inhaling, exhaling and absorbing, and the circulation of sperm and blood.

古文：流而为荣卫，彰而为气色，发而为音声，此亦人之常数也。
现代文：流动就是血气循环，显现出来就是人的气色，放出来的就成为声音，这是人体的正常运动。
English: Flow is the circulation of blood and gas. What emerges is a person's appearance, and what is released becomes sound. This is the normal movement of the human body.

古文：阳用其精，阴用其形。天人之所同也。
现代文：阳用它的精华，阴用它的形体，这是天与人相同的，及至它违背了这正常规律就要生病了。
English: The yang uses its essence, the yin uses its form, which is the same as heaven and man, and if it violates this normal law, it will get sick.

古文：及其失也，蒸则为热，否则生寒，结而为瘤赘，隔而为痈疽，奔而为喘乏，竭而为焦枯。诊发乎面，变动乎形。
现代文：蒸就发热，不然就生寒，淤结就成为瘤赘，阻隔就成为痈疽，奔走过疾，就气喘嘘嘘用尽了精力，就会焦枯，根据表面的诊断，可以检查出身体内部的变化。
English: Steaming will cause fever, otherwise it will cause cold, congestion will become nodules, blockage will become gangrene, running through illness, asthma, exhausted energy, it will be scorched, according to the surface diagnosis, you can check the internal changes of the body.

古文：推此以及天地，亦如之。
现代文：从人体类比自然界也是这样。
English: From the analogy of the human body to the natural world, it is the same.

古文：故五纬盈缩，星辰错行，日月薄蚀，彗孛流飞。此天地之危诊也。
现代文：因此金、木、水、火、土的伸屈变化，星辰运行中出现的差错，日蚀、月蚀现象，彗星的陨落，这是自然界的危险的征兆！
English: Therefore, the stretching and bending of gold, wood, water, fire, and earth, the errors that occur in the movement of stars, the phenomenon of solar and lunar eclipses, and the fall of comets are signs of danger in the natural world!

古文：寒暑不时，此天地之蒸否也。
现代文：寒暑颠倒，这就是外界的冷热失常啊。
English: The cold and heat are reversed. This is the cold and heat abnormalities of the outside world.

古文：石立土踊，此天地之瘤赘也。
现代文：石头竖起。泥土跳跃，这是自然界的瘤赘啊。
English: Stones stand upright. Dirt jumps. This is nature's tumult.

古文：山崩地陷，此天地之痈疽也。
现代文：山崩地陷，这是自然界的痈疽。
English: A landslide and a cave-in. This is nature's gangrene.

古文：奔风暴雨，此天地之喘乏也。
现代文：急风暴雨，这是自界的喘乏。
English: Sudden storms and rain, this is the exhaustion of self-criticism.

古文：雨泽不降，川泽涸竭。此天地之焦枯也。
现代文：不降雨露，河流、湖泽干涸，这是大自然的焦枯啊！
English: If there is no rain or dew, the rivers and lakes will dry up. This is the withering of nature!

古文：良医导之以药石，救之以针灸。圣人和之以至德，辅之以人事。
现代文：良医用药物进行输导，用针灸治病救人；圣明的人用高尚的道德和善于用贤任能来治理天下。
English: Good doctors use drugs to conduct treatment and acupuncture to cure diseases and save people; holy people use high morals and are good at using their talents to govern the world.

古文：故体有可消之疾，天有可消之灾。通乎数也。
现代文：所以身体有可以消除的疾病，天有可以去掉的灾害，这全都是气数啊！
English: Therefore, the body has diseases that can be eliminated, and the heavens have disasters that can be eliminated, all of which are qi numbers!

古文：照邻曰：人事如何？
现代文：卢照邻说：人世间的事情怎么样呢？
English: Lu ZhaoNing said: How are things in the human world?

古文：思邈曰：胆欲大而心欲小，智欲圆而行欲方。
现代文：孙思邈说：胆要大，心要小；智虑要圆通，行为要方正不苟。
English: Sun Siyu said: the courage should be big, the heart should be small; the wisdom should be well-rounded, and the behavior should be upright.

古文：照邻曰：何谓也？
现代文：照邻说：怎么讲呢？
English: His neighbor said, "How can I tell?

古文：胆为五脏之将。将以果决为务，故胆欲大。
现代文：思邈说：心是五脏的元首，它应该遵循规律办事，所以要谨慎。胆是五脏的将领，它必须坚决果断，所以胆要大。
English: Sima said: "The heart is the head of the five internal organs. It should follow the rules, so be careful. The gut is the general of the five internal organs. It must be resolute and decisive, so be bold."

古文：智者动象天，故欲圆。仁者静象地，故欲方。
现代文：有智慧的人行动如同天，所以要圆通，仁义的人沉静如同地，所以要方正不苟。
English: A wise man acts like the heavens, so he should be well-rounded. A righteous man is calm like the earth, so he should be well-rounded.

古文：《诗》曰： 如临深渊，如履薄冰，为小心也。
现代文：《诗经》说， 好象走到了深渊的边缘，仿佛踩在薄薄的冰层之上，是小心。
English: The "Song of Songs" says, "Be careful, as if you have walked to the edge of the abyss, as if you have stepped on a thin layer of ice."

古文：赳赳武夫，公侯干城，为大胆也。
现代文：威武雄壮的武士，保卫着三公九卿，是大胆。
English: The mighty and strong samurai, guarding the three princes and nine lords, is bold.

古文：《传》曰： 不为利回，不为义疚，仁之方也。
现代文：《传》说 不因为有利可图就返回去；不因为行仁施义就悔疚，就是仁义的人的方正不苟。
English: "Legend" says, "If you do not return because it is profitable, and if you do not repent because you are benevolent and righteous, then you are not a righteous person."

古文：《易》曰： 见几而作，不俟终日，智之圆也。
现代文：《易经》说 遇到机会就要立刻去做，不能整天地等待，这就是明智人的圆通。
English: "I Ching" says that if you encounter an opportunity, you must do it immediately, you can't wait all day and night, this is the roundness of a wise person.

古文：照邻又问：养性之道，其要何也。
现代文：卢照邻又问：养性的道理，最重要的是什么呢？
English: Lu Zhaoqin also asked: According to the principle of nurture, what is the most important thing?

古文：思邈曰：天道有盈缺，人事多屯厄。
现代文：孙思邈说：天有满有亏，人世间的事情有许多艰难和困苦。
English: Sun Siyu said: The world is full of misfortune, and there are many difficulties and hardships in the affairs of the human world.

古文：苟不自慎而能济于厄者，未之有也。
现代文：如果不谨慎行事而能从危难中解脱出来的人，从来也没有过。
English: There has never been a man who could extricate himself from danger if he did not proceed with caution.

古文：故养性之士，先知自慎。
现代文：所以讲求养性的人，自己首先要懂得谨慎。
English: Therefore, people who are concerned about nutrition should first be cautious.

古文：自慎者，恒以忧畏为本。
现代文：自己谨慎的人，长期以忧畏为根本。
English: People who are self-cautious have long been rooted in fear.

古文：《经》曰： 人不畏威，天威至矣。
现代文：《经》说， 人不畏惧灾祸，天就要降灾难给你。
English: The sutra says, "If one does not fear calamity, the heavens will bring calamity upon you."

古文：忧畏者，死生之门，存亡之由，祸福之本，吉凶之源。
现代文：忧畏，是生死的通路，存亡的因由，祸福的根本，吉凶的源头。
English: Anxiety is the path to life and death, the cause of survival, the root of misfortune and fortune, and the source of good and evil.

古文：故士无忧畏则仁义不立，农无忧畏则稼穑不滋，工无忧畏则规矩不设，商无忧畏则货殖不盈，子无忧畏则孝敬不笃，父无忧畏则慈爱不著，臣无忧畏则勋庸不建，君无忧畏则社稷不安。故养性者，失其忧畏则心乱而不理，形躁而不宁，神散而气越，志荡而意昏。
现代文：所以读书人无忧畏，仁义就不存在；种田的人无忧畏，粮食就不能增产；做工的人无忧畏，就没有可以遵循的标准和法则；做买卖的人无忧畏，经营就不能盈利；当儿子的无忧畏，孝敬父母亲就不至诚；做父亲的无忧畏，慈爱就不执著；为人臣子的无忧畏，就不能建功立勋；身为君王的无忧畏，国家就不会安定，因此养性的人，失掉了忧畏就心思紊乱没有条理，行为焦燥，难以自持，神散气越，意迷志摇。
English: Therefore, when a reader is fearless, benevolence and righteousness do not exist; when a farmer is fearless, grain production cannot be increased; when a worker is fearless, there are no standards and laws to follow; when a trader is fearless, business cannot be profitable; when a son is fearless, filial piety and parents cannot be sincere; when a father is fearless, love cannot be persistent; when a vassal is fearless, achievements cannot be made; when a king is fearless, the country cannot be stable. Therefore, when a person who cultivates character loses fear, his mind will be disordered and disorganized, his behavior will be impatient, and he will

古文：应生者死，应存者亡，应成者败，应吉者凶。
现代文：应该活着的却死了，应该存在的却消亡了，应该成功的却失败了，应该吉利的却遇凶险。
English: Those who should have lived are dead, those who should have existed are extinct, those who should have succeeded have failed, those who should have been lucky are in danger.

古文：夫忧畏者，其犹水火不可暂忘也。
现代文：啊忧畏就象水与火一样，一会儿也不能忘掉它呀！
English: Ah, fear is like water and fire, one cannot forget it for a moment!

古文：人无忧畏，子弟为勍敌，妻妾为寇仇。
现代文：人无忧畏，子弟就会成为你的强敌；妻妾变成你的仇寇。
English: If one is fearless, one's children will become one's strong enemies; one's wife and concubine will become one's enemies.

古文：是故太上畏道，其次畏天，其次畏物，其次畏人，其次畏身。
现代文：因此，最重要的是畏道，然后是畏天，其次是畏物，再次是畏人，最后是畏你自身。
English: Therefore, the most important thing is the fear of the Tao, then the fear of heaven, followed by the fear of things, again the fear of people, and finally the fear of yourself.

古文：忧于身者，不拘于人，畏于己者，不制于彼。
现代文：你不忘忧畏，就不被别人限制，自己永记忧畏就不受别人管束。
English: If you do not forget your worries and fears, you will not be restricted by others. If you always remember your worries and fears, you will not be controlled by others.

古文：慎于小者，不懼于大。戒于近者，不懼于远。
现代文：在小的事情上谨慎，就不怕大的挫折；戒惧眼前忧虑，就不害怕以后的磨难。
English: If you are careful in small matters, you will not be afraid of big setbacks; if you are afraid of worries at the moment, you will not be afraid of future hardships.

古文：能知此者，水行蛟龙不能害，陆行虎兕不能伤。
现代文：能懂得这些道理的人。
English: Someone who understands these things.

古文：五兵不能及，疫疠不能染。谗贼不能谤，毒螫不加害。知此则人事毕矣。
现代文：在水中航船，蛟龙不能害你，在路上行走，老虎、犀牛这些雄猛的动物都不会伤着你；各种兵器也碰不到你；各种疾病、瘟疫也传染不上你；爱说别人坏话的人也毁谤不了你；有毒的蜂、蝎也螫不到你。了解这个道理的人，人世间的一切事情就全明白了。
English: When sailing on the water, dragons cannot harm you; when walking on the road, tigers, rhinoceroses and other ferocious animals cannot hurt you; all kinds of weapons cannot touch you; all kinds of diseases and plagues cannot infect you; people who like to speak ill of others cannot defame you; poisonous bees and scorpions cannot sting you. People who understand this truth understand everything in the human world.

古文：思邈寻授承务郎，直尚药局。
现代文：不久，孙思邈被授予承务郎，执掌药局事务。
English: Soon after, Sun Siyu was awarded the title of Chengyurong, in charge of the affairs of the pharmacy.

古文：以永淳初卒，遗令薄葬。不设冥器，祭祀无牲牢。
现代文：孙思邈在唐高宋永淳初年去逝，留下遗嘱：要薄葬，不要焚烧那些纸扎的阴间器物，祭祀时不宰杀性畜。
English: Sun Siyu passed away in the first year of the Tang Gao and Song Yongchun dynasties, leaving a will: to be buried thinly, not to burn those paper-covered netherworld objects, and not to slaughter sexual animals during sacrifices.

古文：死经月余。颜色不变。举尸就木。如空衣焉。
现代文：他死后一个多月，颜色还和活着的时候一样，当抬他的尸体放入棺中时，给人的感觉就象抬的是空衣服一样。
English: More than a month after his death, his skin was still the same color as when he was alive, and when his body was carried into the coffin, it felt as if it was carrying empty clothes.

古文：撰《千金方》三十卷行于代。
现代文：孙思邈一生撰写《千金方》三十卷，传给后代。
English: During his lifetime, Sun Siyu wrote 30 volumes of "The Book of One Thousand and One Squares" and passed it down to future generations.

古文：许裔宗
现代文：许裔宗
English: Xu Zong

古文：许裔宗名医若神。
现代文：名医许裔宗医术高超，如同神仙一般。
English: The famous doctor, Xu Zizong, was highly skilled in medicine, like a god.

古文：人谓之曰：何不著书，以贻将来？
现代文：有人对他说：怎么不著书立说，留给后人？
English: Someone said to him: why not write it down and leave it for posterity?

古文：裔宗曰：医乃意也，在人思虑。又脉候幽玄，甚难别。意之所解，口莫能宣。
现代文：许裔宗说：医术就是 意 呀，它决定于人的思考，而脉又是极奥妙的，很难识别，只能心意领会，嘴不能说出来。
English: Xu Rongzong said: "Medicine is the meaning, it is determined by people's thinking, and the pulse is very mysterious, it is difficult to identify, only the mind can understand, the mouth can not speak out.

古文：古之名手，唯是别脉。
现代文：自古以来的名手，与别人不同的，唯一差别就在诊脉。
English: Masters since ancient times, different from others, the only difference is in the diagnosis.

古文：脉既精别，然后识病。
现代文：先准确切出脉象，然后才能诊断病情，用药治病。
English: First, accurately cut out the pulse image, and then diagnose the condition and treat it with medicine.

古文：病之于药，有正相当者。唯须用一味，直攻彼病，即立可愈。
现代文：如果诊断准确，只须用一味药，就能直接攻克他的病，病立刻就能好。
English: If the diagnosis is accurate, it is only necessary to use a medicine to directly overcome his disease, and the disease can be cured immediately.

古文：今不能别脉，莫识病源，以情亿度，多安药味。
现代文：不准确辨别脉象，不了解病因，凭自己主观推测进行诊断，多放几味药。
English: Inaccurately distinguish the pulse, do not understand the cause, rely on their own subjective speculation to diagnose, put a few more herbs.

古文：譬之于猎，不知兔处，多发人马，空广遮围。
现代文：这好比打猎，不知兔子在哪里，大批出动人马，大面积包抄围剿。
English: It's like hunting. You don't know where the rabbit is, so you send out a large number of horses, and they surround the hare in a large area.

古文：或冀一人偶然逢也。
现代文：希望有人也许偶然能碰上。
English: Hoping that someone might stumble across it.

古文：以此疗病，不亦疏乎。
现代文：用这种方法治病，不是太粗疏了吗？
English: Isn't it too crude to treat diseases with this method?

古文：脉之深趣，既不可言，故不能著述。
现代文：脉的奥妙，是不能用语言表达的，所以不能著书之立说。
English: The mystery of the pulse cannot be expressed in words, so it cannot be said in a book.

古文：秦鸣鹤
现代文：秦鸣鹤
English: Qin Minghe

古文：唐高宗苦风眩，头目不能视。
现代文：唐高宗患风眩病痛苦不堪，头晕目眩看不清东西。
English: Tang Gaozong is suffering from wind and vertigo and is in excruciating pain. He is dizzy and cannot see clearly.

古文：召侍医秦鸣鹤诊之。秦曰：风毒上攻，若刺头出少血，愈矣。
现代文：高宗召侍医秦鸣鹤给他看病，秦鸣鹤看后说：是风毒往上攻引起的，如果刺头出点血就能好。
English: Gao Zong called his personal physician, Qin Minghe, to examine him. After examining him, Qin Minghe said, "It is caused by wind poisoning, and it would be better if there was some blood from the sting.

古文：天后自帘中怒曰：此可斩也。
现代文：则天皇后在帘后面大怒道：此人该斩！
English: The Empress fumed from behind the curtain: "This man should be beheaded!"

古文：天子头上，岂是出血处耶？
现代文：天子的头上是出血的地方吗！
English: Is there a spot of blood on the Son of God's head!

古文：鸣鹤叩头请命。
现代文：秦鸣鹤磕头请求饶命。
English: Qin Minghe bowed his head and begged for his life.

古文：上曰：医人议病，理不加罪。且吾头重闷，殆不能忍，出血未必不佳。
现代文：高宗说：给人看病，议谈病情，按道理是不应该治罪的，并且我的头非常沉闷，几乎不能忍受了，出点血不一定就不好。
English: Gao Zong said, "It should not be a crime to see a doctor and discuss a patient's condition. Moreover, my head is very dull and I can hardly bear it. It is not necessarily a bad thing to have some blood.

古文：朕意决矣。
现代文：我决心已定。
English: My mind is made up.

古文：命刺之。
现代文：高宗让他给刺。
English: Gao Zong asked him to stab him.

古文：鸣鹤刺百会及脑户出血。
现代文：秦鸣鹤刺唐高宗的百会穴和脑户穴，并出血。
English: Qin Minghe stabbed Tang Gaozong's "hundred meeting points" and "brain door" and bled to death.

古文：上曰：吾眼明矣。
现代文：唐高宗说：我的眼睛能看见了。
English: Tang Gaozong said: My eyes can see.

古文：言未毕，后自帘中顶礼以谢之曰：此天赐我师也。
现代文：他的话未说完，则天后在帘后行大礼，谢秦鸣鹤，说：这是上天赐给我的医师啊！
English: Before his words were finished, the Queen of Heaven made a grand salute behind the curtain, thanked Qin Minghe, and said: "This is the doctor given to me by Heaven!

古文：躬负缯宝以遗之。
现代文：然后亲自赠送丝帛、珠宝给秦鸣鹤。
English: Then he personally presented silk brocades and jewelry to Qin Minghe.

古文：卢元钦
现代文：卢元钦
English: Lu Yuanqin

古文：泉州有客卢元钦染大风，唯鼻根未倒。
现代文：卢元钦客居泉州，患了麻疯病，只有鼻根还未烂掉。
English: Lu Yuanqin lived in Quanzhou and suffered from leprosy. Only the bridge of his nose was still intact.

古文：属五月五日，官取蚺蛇胆欲进，或言肉可治风，遂取一截蛇肉食之。三五日顿渐可，百日平复。
现代文：正值五月五日，医官拿着蚺蛇胆正要给他吃，这时有人说，蛇肉可以治麻疯病，于是取一段蛇肉给他吃，吃了三五天后，病渐好转，百日以后就完全好了。
English: On the 5th of May, the medical officer was about to give him a boa constrictor to eat, when someone said that snake meat could cure leprosy, so he took a piece of snake meat to eat. After eating it for three to five days, his illness gradually improved, and he was completely well after 100 days.

古文：又商州有人患大风，家人恶之，山中为起茅舍。
现代文：又，商州有人患麻疯病，家里人讨厌他，在山中给他盖了茅舍，他一个人住在那里。
English: Also, there was a man in Shangzhou who suffered from leprosy. His family hated him and built him a hut in the mountains, where he lived alone.

古文：有乌蛇坠酒罂中，病人不知，饮酒渐差。
现代文：有一条黑蛇掉进一个小口大肚的酒坛子里，病人不知道，饮坛中酒后病渐渐好了。
English: There was a black snake that fell into a wine jug with a big mouth. The patient did not know that the illness had gradually improved after drinking from the jug.

古文：罂底见蛇骨，方知其由也。
现代文：后来在坛底发现蛇骨，才知道是因为喝了蛇浸泡过的酒的缘故。
English: Later, snake bones were found at the bottom of the altar, and it was discovered that it was due to drinking wine that had been soaked in snakes.

古文：周允元
现代文：周允元
English: Zhou Yongyuan

古文：则天时，凤阁侍郎周允元朝罢入阁。
现代文：武则天时，凤阁侍郎周允元朝中议完事后，到阁中。
English: At the time of Wu Zetian, Zhou Yunyuan, a Fengge attendant, went to Fengge after the discussion in the morning.

古文：太平公主唤一医人自光政门入，见一鬼撮允元头，二鬼持棒随其后，直出景运门。医白公主，公主奏之。
现代文：这时太平公主传唤一位医生从正光门进宫，正看见一鬼摘周允元的头，两个鬼手里拿着木棒跟在他的后边，一直走出景运门，医生把这事告诉了太平公主，太平公主把这事禀报了武则天。
English: At this time, Princess Taiping summoned a doctor to enter the palace through the Zhengguang Gate. The doctor saw a ghost plucking Zhou Yunyuan's head, and two ghosts followed behind him with wooden sticks in their hands, all the way out of the Jingyun Gate. The doctor told Princess Taiping about this, and Princess Taiping reported the matter to Wu Zetian.

古文：上令给使觇问。
现代文：武则天命给使去察询。
English: Wu Zetian ordered the envoy to investigate.

古文：在阁无事，食讫还房，午后如厕。
现代文：周允元在阁中无事，吃完饭回房休息。
English: Zhou Yunyuan was fine in the pavilion. After eating, he went back to his room to rest.

古文：长参典怪其久，思往候之。允元踣面于厕上，目直视不语，口中涎落。
现代文：午后上厕所，长参典奇怪他去的时间长，想到这儿，就去厕所看他，只见周允元面向前扑倒在厕所里。参典扶起他，他眼睛直视不说话，口中流涎水。
English: In the afternoon, he went to the toilet. Chang San Dian was surprised that he had been there for such a long time. Thinking of this, he went to the toilet to see him, only to see Zhou Yunyuan face forward and fall down in the toilet. San Dian helped him up, his eyes stared straight ahead without speaking, and his mouth was watering.

古文：给使奏之。上问医曰：此可得几时？
现代文：给使把这情况奏明武则天，武则天问医生说：他这样能坚持多久？
English: Wu Zetian asked the doctor, "How long can he go on like this?"

古文：对曰：缓者三日，急者一日。
现代文：医生说：慢了三两天，快了就一天。
English: The doctor said: three or two days late, but one day early.

古文：上与锦被覆之，并床舁送宅。止夜半而卒。
现代文：武则天拿被给他盖上，派人连床抬着送回住处，到半夜他就死了。
English: Wu Zetian was covered with a blanket and sent back to his home with a bed. By midnight, he was dead.

古文：上自为诗以悼之。
现代文：武则天亲自作诗悼念他。
English: Wu Zetian himself wrote a poem to mourn him.

古文：杨玄亮
现代文：杨玄亮
English: Yang Xuanliang

古文：久视年中，襄州人杨玄亮年二十余，于虔州汶山观庸力。昼梦见天尊云：我堂舍破坏，汝为我修造，遣汝能医一切病。
现代文：武则天久视年间，襄州人杨玄亮，当时二十多岁，在虔州，受汶山观雇用，在这里做工白天睡觉梦见天尊对他说：我的房屋已破旧不堪，你能给我重新修造，我使你能医治一切病。
English: During the years of Wu Zetian's long-sightedness, Yang Xuanliang from Xiangzhou, who was in his twenties at the time, was employed by Wenshan Gu in Qianzhou. He worked here and slept during the day. He dreamed that the divine being said to him, "My house is dilapidated. You can rebuild it for me. I can make you cure all diseases."

古文：寤而说之。试疗无不愈者。
现代文：玄亮睡醒后很高兴，试着给人治病，没有不好的。
English: After waking up, Xuan Liang was very happy. He tried to cure people, and there was nothing bad about it.

古文：赣县里正背有肿，大如拳。亮以刀割之，数日平复。
现代文：赣县有位里正，背部有拳头大一块肿留，玄亮用刀割下，几天以后就好了。
English: In Handan County, there is a lump in the groin, and there is a large lump on the back of the fist. Xuan Liang cut it with a knife, and it will be fine in a few days.

古文：疗病日获十千。
现代文：玄亮给人治病每天可得钱十千。
English: Geng Liang can earn ten thousand yuan a day by curing people.

古文：造天尊堂成，疗病渐渐无效。
现代文：待他为天尊修造好了庙堂，再给治病，渐渐无效了。
English: Waiting for him to build a temple for the deity, and then curing him, gradually became ineffective.

古文：赵玄景
现代文：赵玄景
English: Zhao Xuanjing

古文：如意年中，洛州人赵玄景病卒，五日而苏云。
现代文：武则天如意年间，洛州人赵玄景病逝，五天后又复活了。
English: During the Wu Zetian Ruyi years, Zhao Xuanjing, a resident of Los Angeles, died of illness and was revived five days later.

古文：见一僧与一木长尺余。教曰：人有病者，汝以此木拄之即愈。
现代文：他说：我看见一个和尚，他给了我一根长木，有一尺多长，他告诉我说 有患病的人，你用它触一下病人，病立刻就好。
English: He said, "I saw a monk. He gave me a long stick, more than a foot long. He told me that there are people who are sick. If you touch the sick person with it, the illness will be cured immediately."

古文：玄景得见机上尺，乃是僧所与者。
现代文：赵玄景看见几上有一只长尺，正是和尚送给他的。
English: Zhao Xuanjing saw a long ruler on the table, which was given to him by the monk.

古文：试将疗病，拄之立差。
现代文：他试着用它治病，触病人，立刻就好了。
English: He tried to use it to heal, to touch the sick and make them well immediately.

古文：门庭每日数百人。御史马知己以其聚众，追之禁左台。病者满于台门。
现代文：消息传开，人们纷纷来找他，每天有几百人聚在他门前等待让他治病。御史马知己认为他是聚众闹事，逮捕了他并把他囚禁在左台，患者又聚集在左台门前。
English: The news spread, people came looking for him one after another, and every day hundreds of people gathered in front of his door waiting for him to cure them. Mishima's friends thought he was a troublemaker, arrested him and imprisoned him on the left platform, and the patients gathered in front of the left platform.

古文：则天闻之，召入内。
现代文：武则天听说了这事，召赵玄景进宫。
English: Wu Zetian heard about this and summoned Zhao Xuanqing to the palace.

古文：宫人病，拄之即愈。
现代文：宫人有病。他用尺触病人，病人立刻就好。
English: He touched the sick man with his ruler, and the man was immediately healed.

古文：放出，任救病百姓。
现代文：武则天放他出宫，任由他为百姓治病。
English: Wu Zetian let him out of the palace and allowed him to treat the people.

古文：数月以后，得钱七百余贯。
现代文：几个月以后，赵玄景得钱七百多贯。
English: A few months later, Zhao Xuanjing received more than 700 yuan.

古文：后渐渐无验，遂绝。
现代文：后来渐渐不灵验了，就再也没有人找他治病了。
English: Later, it gradually failed, and no one came to treat him anymore.

古文：张文仲
现代文：张文仲
English: Zhang Wenzhong

古文：洛州有士人患应病，语即喉中应之。以问善医张文仲。
现代文：洛州有位读书人患了应答之病，每次说话，喉咙中就应答一声，这位读书人去问懂医术的张文仲。
English: There was a reader in Los Angeles who suffered from the disease of answering questions. Every time he spoke, there was an answer in his throat. This reader went to ask Zhang Wenzhong, who understood medicine.

古文：张经夜思之，乃得一法。即取《本草》，令读之。
现代文：张文仲经过一夜的考虑，想出一个办法：拿《本草》一书让患者读。
English: After a night of consideration, Zhang Wenzhong came up with a solution: let the patient read the book "Hengcao."

古文：皆应，至其所畏者，即不言。
现代文：所读的，喉咙中全都有应答之声。
English: Everything I read has an echo in my throat.

古文：仲乃录取药，合和为丸。服之，应时而止。
现代文：读到它害怕的药名时就没有应声了，于是文仲就把那味药先抄录下来，然后配制成丸剂，让患者服用，应声当时就止住了。
English: There was no response when he read the name of the medicine he was afraid of, so Wenzhong copied down the medicine first, then formulated it into a pill for the patient to take, and the response stopped at that time.

古文：一云，问医苏澄云。
现代文：还有的说，那书生是找苏澄云看的病。
English: Another said that the student was looking for Su Chengyun to see the disease.

古文：郝公景
现代文：郝公景
English: Gongye

古文：郝公景于泰山采药，经市过。
现代文：郝公景在泰山采药，回来时经过集市。
English: Gongjing Zou went to Taishan to collect medicines, and passed through the bazaar on his way back.

古文：有见鬼者，怪群鬼见公景，皆走避之。
现代文：有一个能看见鬼的人，奇怪群鬼看见郝公景全都逃离而去。
English: There was a man who could see ghosts, and when the strange group of ghosts saw Gongjing, they all ran away.

古文：遂取药和为杀鬼丸，有病患者，服之差。
现代文：于是这个人向郝公景讨来草药，制成杀鬼丸，有患邪病的人，服用后就好。
English: Therefore, this person asked Zou Gongjing for herbal medicine, which was made into a demon-killing pill, and people with evil diseases felt better after taking it.

古文：崔务
现代文：崔务
English: Cui Wu

古文：定州人崔务坠马折足。
现代文：定州人崔务从马上掉下来。
English: Choi Woo, a resident of Dingzhou, fell off his horse.

古文：医令取铜末，和酒服之，遂痊平。
现代文：摔断了脚。
English: He broke his leg.

古文：乃亡后十余年，改葬，视其胫骨折处，铜末束之。
现代文：崔务死后十多年，迁坟另葬，看见他胫骨折损的地方，用铜末束着。
English: More than ten years after Cui Wu's death, he moved the grave and buried it separately. He saw the place where Cui Wu's shinbone was broken, and it was bandaged with copper powder.

