古文：黄帝问曰：痹之安生？
现代文：黄帝问道：痹病是怎样产生的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "How did the paralysis come about?"

古文：岐伯对曰：风寒湿三气杂至，合而为痹也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：由风、寒、湿三种邪气混杂相合侵犯人体而形成 痹病 。
English: Qibo replied, "Wind, cold and humidity are three evil elements that combine to invade the human body and cause paralysis.

古文：其风气胜者为行痹，寒气胜者为痛痹，湿气胜者为着痹也。
现代文：痹病可分为三种基本类型：风邪偏胜的叫 行痹 ，寒邪偏胜的叫 痛痹 ，湿邪偏胜的叫 着痹 。
English: Paralytic diseases can be divided into three basic types: cold-induced paralytic, cold-induced paralytic, and wet-induced paralytic.

古文：帝曰：其有五者何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：痹病又可分为五种，为什么呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: Poliomyelitis can be divided into five types of worms. Why?

古文：岐伯曰：以冬遇此者为骨痹，以春遇此者为筋痹，以夏遇此者为脉痹，以至阴遇此者为肌痹，以秋遇此者为皮痹。
现代文：岐伯说：在冬天得病称为 骨痹 ；在春天得病的称为 筋痹 ；在夏天得病的称为 脉痹 ；在长夏得病的称为 肌痹 ；在秋天得病的称为 皮痹 。
English: Qibo said: in winter, the disease is called bone paralysis; in spring, the disease is called muscle paralysis; in summer, the disease is called pulse paralysis; in summer, the disease is called muscle paralysis; in autumn, the disease is called skin paralysis.

古文：帝曰：内舍五脏六腑，何气使然？
现代文：黄帝问道：痹病的病邪又有内侵而累及五脏六腑的，是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked: What is the reason for the disease of paralysis to invade the internal organs and affect the internal organs?

古文：岐伯曰：五脏皆有合，病久而不去者，内舍于其合也。
现代文：岐伯说：五脏都有与其相合的五体，若病邪久留不除，五体痹就会内犯于相合的内脏。
English: Qi Bo said: The five viscera all have five bodies that are compatible with them. If the disease is left untreated for a long time, pentadiopathy will invade the compatible viscera.

古文：故骨痹不已，复感于邪，内舍于肾；筋痹不已，复感于邪，内舍于肝；脉痹不已，复感于邪，内舍于心；肌痹不已，复感于邪，内舍于脾；皮痹不已，复感于邪，内舍于肺。
现代文：所以，骨痹日久不愈，再重复感受邪气，就会内舍于肾；筋痹日久不愈，再重复感受邪气，就会内舍于肝；脉痹日久不愈，再重复感受邪气，就会内舍于心；肌痹日久不愈，再重复感受邪气，就会内舍于脾；皮痹日久不愈，再重复感受邪气，就会内舍于肺。
English: Therefore, if the bone paralysis persists for a long time and the evil spirit is felt repeatedly, the kidney will be affected; if the muscle paralysis persists for a long time and the evil spirit is felt repeatedly, the liver will be affected; if the pulse paralysis persists for a long time and the evil spirit is felt repeatedly, the heart will be affected; if the muscle paralysis persists for a long time and the evil spirit is felt repeatedly, the spleen will be affected; if the skin paralysis persists for a long time and the evil spirit is felt repeatedly, the lung will be affected.

古文：所谓痹者，各以其时，重感于风寒湿之气也。
现代文：总之，这些痹证是各脏在所主季节里重复感受了风、寒、湿气所造成的。
English: In short, these symptoms are caused by repeated exposure to wind, cold and humidity during the season.

古文：凡痹之客五脏者：肺痹者，烦满喘而呕；心痹者，脉不通，烦则心下鼓，暴上气而喘，嗌干善噫，厥气上则恐；肝痹者，夜卧则惊，多饮，数小便，上为引如怀；肾痹者，善胀，尻以代踵，脊以代头；脾痹者，四肢解堕，发咳呕汁，上为大塞。
现代文：凡痹病侵入到五脏，症状各有不同：肺痹的症状是烦闷胀满，喘逆呕吐；心痹的症状是血脉不通畅，烦躁则心悸，突然气逆上壅而喘息，咽干，易叹息，厥阴上逆则引起恐惧；肝痹的症状是夜眠多惊，饮水多而小便频数，疼痛循肝经由上而下牵引少腹如怀孕之状；肾痹的症状是腹部易作胀，骨萎而足不能行，行步时臀部着地，脊柱曲屈畸行，高耸过头；脾痹的症状是四肢倦怠无力，咳嗽，呕吐清水，上腹部痞塞不通。
English: All paralytic diseases invade the five viscera, and the symptoms are different: the symptoms of pneumonia are irritation, fullness, wheezing and vomiting; the symptoms of heart paralysis are blood vessel obstruction, irritability is palpitations, sudden gas back up and wheezing, throat dryness, easy sighing, and vomiting inversion causes fear; the symptoms of liver paralysis are night sleep and shock, drinking more water and frequent urination, pain follows the liver from top to bottom and pulls the small abdomen as if pregnant; the symptoms of kidney paralysis are easy swelling of the abdomen, bone atrophy and unable to walk, hip landing when walking, spinal

古文：肠痹者，数饮而出不得，中气喘争，时发飧泄。
现代文：大小肠痹的症状是频频饮水而小便困难，腹中肠鸣，时而发生完谷不化的泄泻。
English: The symptoms of large and small intestine paralysis are difficulty in urinating due to frequent drinking of water, guttural sounds in the abdomen, and intermittent diarrhea.

古文：胞痹者，少腹膀胱按之内痛，若沃以汤，涩于小便，上为清涕。
现代文：膀胱痹的症状是少腹膀胱部位按之疼痛，如同灌了热水似的，小便涩滞不爽，上部鼻流清涕。
English: The symptoms of cystic palsy are pain in the area of the bladder below the abdomen, as if it had been filled with hot water, unpleasantly sticky urine, and a runny nose in the upper part.

古文：阴气者，静则神藏，躁则消亡。
现代文：五脏精气，安静则精神内守，躁动则易于耗散。
English: The five viscera are the essence, quietness protects the spirit, and restlessness is easily dissipated.

古文：饮食自倍，肠胃乃伤。
现代文：若饮食过量，肠胃就要受损。
English: If you eat too much, your intestines and stomach will be damaged.

古文：淫气喘息，痹聚在肺；淫气忧思，痹聚在心；淫气遗溺，痹聚在肾；淫气乏竭，痹聚在肝；淫气肌绝，痹聚在脾。
现代文：痹邪引起呼吸喘促，是痹发生在肺；痹邪引起忧伤思虑，是痹发生在心；痹邪引起遗尿，是痹发生在肾；痹邪引起疲乏衰竭，是痹发生在肝；痹邪引起肌肉瘦削，是痹发生在脾。
English: Paralysis causes shortness of breath, and paralysis occurs in the lungs; paralysis causes sadness and anxiety, and paralysis occurs in the heart; paralysis causes urination, and paralysis occurs in the kidneys; paralysis causes fatigue, and paralysis occurs in the liver; paralysis causes muscle wasting, and paralysis occurs in the spleen.

古文：诸痹不已，亦益内也。
现代文：总之，各种痹病日久不愈，病变就会进一步向内深入。
English: In short, all kinds of paralysis will not go away, and the lesion will be further deepened.

古文：其风气胜者，其人易已也。
现代文：其中风邪偏胜的容易痊愈。
English: Among them, those with colds tend to recover easily.

古文：帝曰：痹，其时有死者，或疼久者，或易已者，其故何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：患了痹病后，有的死亡，有的疼痛经久不愈，有的容易痊愈，这是什么缘故呢？
English: Huangdi asked: After suffering from paralysis, some people die, some suffer from pain for a long time, and some recover easily. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：其入脏者死，其留连筋骨间者疼久，其留皮肤间者易已。
现代文：岐伯说：痹邪内犯到五脏则死，痹邪稽留在筋骨间的则痛久难愈，痹邪停留在皮肤间的容易痊愈。
English: Qi Bo said: If the evil is committed within the five viscera, the person will die. If the evil is left between the muscles and bones, the pain will not heal for a long time. If the evil is left between the skin, it will heal easily.

古文：帝曰：其客于六腑者何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：痹邪侵犯六腑是何原因呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "What is the reason for the evil to invade the Six Banyan Trees?"

古文：岐伯曰：此亦其食饮居处，为其病本也。
现代文：岐伯说：这也是以饮食不节、起居失度，为导致六腑痹症的根本原因。
English: Qi Bo said: This is also the root cause of sextuple paralysis due to irregular diet and living in a disordered way.

古文：六腑亦各有俞，风寒湿气中其俞，而食饮应之，循俞而入，各舍其腑也。
现代文：六腑也各有俞穴，风寒湿邪在外侵入六腑的俞穴，而内有饮食所伤与之相应，于是病邪就循着俞穴入里，留滞在相应的腑。
English: Each of the six gills also has a pore. Cold and dampness invade the pore of the six gills from the outside, while eating and drinking injuries invade the corresponding pore from the inside, so the disease follows the pore into the inside and stays in the corresponding pore.

古文：帝曰：以针治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝问道：怎样用针刺治疗呢？
English: Huang Di asked: How can acupuncture be used to treat it?

古文：岐伯曰：五脏有俞，六腑有合，循脉之分，各有所发，各随其过，则病瘳也。
现代文：岐伯说：五脏各有五输穴的输穴可取，六腑各有五输穴的合穴可取，循着经脉所行的部位，各有发病的征兆可察，根据病邪所在的部位，取相应的输穴或合穴进行针刺，病就可以痊愈了。
English: Qi Bo said: The five viscera each have five infusion points, and the six glands each have five infusion points, and the place where the disease occurs can be observed by following the meridians. According to the location of the disease, the corresponding infusion point or the point where the disease occurs can be used for acupuncture, and the disease can be cured.

古文：帝曰：荣卫之气，亦令人痹乎？
现代文：黄帝问道：营卫之气亦能使人发生痹病吗？
English: Huangdi asked: Can the spirit of Yingwei also cause paralysis?

古文：岐伯曰：荣者，水谷之精气也，和调于五脏，洒陈于六腑，乃能入于脉也。故循脉上下，贯五脏，络六腑也。
现代文：岐伯说：营气是水谷所化生的精气，它平和协调地运行于五脏，散布于六腑，然后汇入脉中，所以营气循着经脉上下运行，起到连贯五脏，联络六腑的作用。
English: Qi Bo said: Ying qi is the essence of water valley. It runs peacefully and harmoniously in the five viscera, spreads to the six bowels, and then flows into the veins. Therefore, Ying qi runs up and down along the meridians, and plays the role of connecting the five viscera and connecting the six bowels.

古文：卫者，水谷之悍气也，其气慓疾滑利，不能入于脉也。故循皮肤之中，分肉之间，熏于肓膜，散于胸腹。
现代文：卫气是水谷所化生的悍气，它流动迅疾而滑利，不能进入脉中，所以循行于皮肤肌肉之间，熏蒸于肓膜之间，敷布于胸腹之内。
English: It flows swiftly and smoothly, and cannot enter the bloodstream, so it travels between the skin and muscles, fumigates between the diaphragm, and spreads inside the chest and abdomen.

古文：逆其气则病，从其气则愈，不与风寒湿气合，故不为痹。
现代文：若营卫之气的循行逆乱，就会生病，只要营卫之气顺从调和了，病就会痊愈。总的来说，营卫之气若不与风寒湿邪相合，则不会引起痹病。
English: If the qi of ying wei is disordered, it will cause illness. As long as the qi of ying wei is harmonized, the illness will be cured. In general, if the qi of ying wei does not coincide with the cold and dampness, it will not cause paralysis.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：痹，或痛，或不痛，或不仁，或寒，或热，或燥，或湿，其故何也？
现代文：痹病，有的疼痛，有的不痛，有的麻木不仁，有的表现为寒，有的表现为热，有的皮肤干燥，有的皮肤湿润，这是什么缘故呢？
English: Some paralytic diseases are painful, some are not painful, some are insensitive, some are cold, some are hot, some have dry skin, and some have moist skin. Why is this?

古文：岐伯曰：痛者寒气多也，有寒故痛也。
现代文：岐伯说：痛是寒气偏多，有寒所以才痛。
English: Qi Bo said, "The pain is caused by the cold, and the cold is the reason for the pain."

古文：其不痛不仁者，病久入深，荣卫之行涩，经络时疏，故不通；皮肤不营，故为不仁。
现代文：不痛和麻木不仁的，系患病日久，病邪深入，营卫之气运行涩滞，致使经络中气血空虚，所以不痛；皮肤得不到营养，所以没有知觉。
English: If it is not painful and insensitive, it is because the patient has been ill for a long time, the disease is deep-seated, and the qi of the camp guard is running sluggishly, causing the qi and blood in the meridians to be empty, so there is no pain; the skin does not get nutrition, so there is no consciousness.

古文：其寒者，阳气少，阴气多，与病相益，故寒也。
现代文：表现为寒象的，是由于机体阳气不足，阴气偏盛，阴气助长寒邪之势，所以表现为寒象。
English: The appearance of cold symptoms is due to the body's lack of yang, the prevalence of yin, and the tendency of yang to promote cold, so it appears as a cold symptom.

古文：其热者，阳气多，阴气少，病气胜，阳遭阴，故为痹热。
现代文：表现为热象的，是由于机体阳气偏盛，阴气不足，偏胜的阳气与偏胜的风邪相结合而侵犯阴气，所以出现热象。
English: If it is manifested as heat, it is due to the body's yang being overabundant and yin being deficient, and the yang that prevails over the yang combined with the wind that prevails over the wind, resulting in heat.

古文：其多汗而濡者，此其逢湿甚也。阳气少，阴气盛，两气相感，故汗出而濡也。
现代文：多汗而皮肤湿润的，是由于感受湿邪太甚，加之机体阳气不足，阴气偏盛，湿邪与偏盛的阴气相结合，所以汗出而皮肤湿润。
English: If you sweat a lot and your skin is moist, it's because you're too sensitive to humidity, plus your body lacks yang and has too much yin. The combination of humidity and too much yin results in sweating and moist skin.

古文：帝曰：夫痹之为病，不痛何也？
现代文：黄帝问道：痹病而不甚疼痛是什么缘故呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "What is the reason for the paralysis but not much pain?"

古文：岐伯曰：痹在于骨则重，在于脉则血凝而不流，在于筋则屈不伸，在于肉则不仁，在于皮则寒。
现代文：岐伯说：痹病，发生在骨则身重；发生在脉则血凝涩而不畅；发生在筋则曲屈不能伸；发生在肌肉则麻木不仁；发生在皮肤则寒冷。
English: Qi Bo said: "In case of paralysis, if it occurs in the bone, the body will be heavy; if it occurs in the pulse, the blood will be coagulated and not smooth; if it occurs in the muscle, it will not be able to flex; if it occurs in the muscle, it will be insensitive; if it occurs in the skin, it will be cold.

古文：故具此五者，则不痛也。
现代文：如果有这五种情况，就不甚疼痛。
English: If you have these five things, it's not very painful.

古文：凡痹之类，逢寒则虫，逢热则纵。
现代文：凡痹病一类疾患，遇寒则筋脉拘急，遇热则筋脉弛缓。
English: In diseases such as paralytic illness, when it is cold, the myocardium is tense, and when it is hot, the myocardium is relaxed.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝道：讲得好！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

