古文：葛乾孙，字可久，长洲人。
现代文：葛乾孙，字可久，苏州府长洲县人。
English: Ge Qiansun, surnamed Kekiu, was born in Changzhou County, Suzhou Province.

古文：父应雷，以医名。
现代文：父亲葛应雷，以医术著名。
English: His father, Ge Yinglei, was famous for his medical skills.

古文：时北方刘守真、张洁古之学未行于南。
现代文：当时北方刘守贞、张洁古之医学流行于南方。
English: At that time, the medicine of Liu Shuzhen and Zhang Jiegu in the north was popular in the south.

古文：有李姓者，中州名医，官吴下，与应雷谈论，大骇叹，因授以张、刘书。自是江南有二家学。
现代文：有个姓李的人，是中州名医，在苏州做官，与应雷谈论医术，大为惊奇，送他张、刘二人医书，从此江南医学有两派。
English: There was a man surnamed Li, a famous doctor in Zhongzhou, who worked as an official in Suzhou. He was very surprised to talk about medicine with Yinglei, and sent him medical books by Zhang and Liu. Since then, there have been two schools of Jiangnan medicine.

古文：乾孙体貌魁硕，好击刺战阵法。后折节读书，兼通阴阳、律历、星命之术。
现代文：乾孙体貌魁伟，好击剑和兵法，其后转而立志读书，兼通阴阳、律历、星象、相命之术，而且准确无差。
English: Qian's grandson was tall and handsome, good at fencing and military tactics. Later, he decided to study. He also learned yin and yang, the lunar calendar, astrology, and the art of fortune-telling, and he was very accurate.

古文：屡试不偶，乃传父业。然不肯为人治疾，或施之，辄著奇效，名与金华朱丹溪埒。
现代文：他继承了父亲的医术，但不肯为人治病，偶尔应诊，立即有奇效，其名声与金华的朱丹溪相提并论。
English: He inherited his father's medical skills, but he did not want to treat people. Occasionally, he consulted a doctor, and immediately had a miraculous effect. His reputation is on a par with that of Zhu Danxi of Jinhua.

古文：富家女病四支痿痹，目瞪不能食，众医治罔效。
现代文：有一富家女子生病，四肢麻木，两眼直瞪，不能食，许多医生医治无效。
English: There was a rich woman who fell ill. Her limbs were numb, her eyes were staring, she couldn't eat, and many doctors couldn't cure her.

古文：乾孙命悉去房中香奁、流苏之属，掘地坎，置女其中。
现代文：乾孙命将房中的香奁、流苏等物全部拿走，掘一地洞，将病人置于其中。
English: Qiansun took away all the champagne, tassels and other things in the room, dug a hole in the ground and placed the patient in it.

古文：久之，女手足动，能出声。
现代文：久而久之，女手足能动，口能出声。
English: Over time, the woman's hands and feet can move, and her mouth can speak.

古文：投药一丸，明日女自坎中出矣。
现代文：给她服药一丸，第二天此女自地洞中出来了。
English: He gave her a pill, and the next day she emerged from the hole.

古文：盖此女嗜香，脾为香气所蚀，故得是症。
现代文：因为此女好香，脾脏为香气所侵蚀，故得此症。
English: Because this woman is fragrant, the spleen is eroded by the aroma, so she has this disease.

古文：其疗病奇中如此。
现代文：其治病医术之奇如此。
English: This is the miracle of its medical treatment.

古文：吕复，字元膺，鄞人。
现代文：吕复，字元膺，浙江鄞县人。
English: Lv Fu, surnamed Yu, from Yu County, Zhejiang Province.

古文：少孤贫，从师受经。
现代文：自幼失去父亲，家境贫寒，求师读经。
English: He lost his father at a young age, his family was poor, and he had to seek a teacher to read the Bible.

古文：后以母病求医，遇名医衢人郑礼之，遂谨事之，因得其古先禁方及色脉药论诸书，试辄有验。
现代文：后来因母病求医，遇名医衢州人郑礼之，恭敬地侍奉他，因而从郑医生那里得到在古代已被禁止的药方及关于气色、经脉、药论诸书，每次试用有效。
English: Later, she sought medical treatment for her mother's illness, met the famous doctor Zheng Li, a native of Zhangzhou, and served him respectfully. As a result, she received from Dr. Zheng a prescription that had been banned in ancient times, as well as books on complexion, meridians, and pharmacology. Each trial is valid.

古文：乃尽购古今医书，晓夜研究，自是出而行世，取效若神。
现代文：于是他尽量购买古今医书，日夜研究。从此他开始行医，疗效若神。
English: So he tried his best to buy ancient and modern medical books, and studied day and night. From then on, he began to practice medicine, with amazing results.

古文：其于《内经》、《素问》、《灵枢》、《本草》、《难经》、《伤寒论》、《脉经》、《脉诀》、《病原论》、《太始天元玉册公诰》、《六微旨》、《五常政》、《玄珠密语》、《中藏经》、《圣济经》等书，皆有辨论。
现代文：他对于《内经》、《素问》、《灵枢》、《本草》、《难经》、《伤寒论》、《脉经》、《脉诀》、《病原论》、《太始天元玉册元诰》、《六微旨》、《五常政》、《玄珠密语》、《中藏经》、《圣济经》等书，皆有所评论。
English: He has commented on books such as "The Inner Canon," "The Primer," "The Spiritual Core," "The Primordial Herb," "The Difficult Canon," "On Typhoid Fever," "The Pulse Sutra," "The Pulse Recipe," "The Pathogenic Theory," "The First Emperor Yuanzhong," "The Six Minor Precepts," "The Five Principles of Politics," "The Secret Language of the Gems," "The Middle Tibetan Canon" and "The Classic of St. James."

古文：前代名医如扁鹊、仓公、华佗、张仲景至张子和、李东垣诸家，皆有评骘。
现代文：对前代名医如扁鹊、仓公、华佗、张仲景以至张子和、李东垣诸家，皆有所评说。
English: The previous generation of famous doctors such as Bian Qi, Cang Gong, Hua Qi, Zhang Zhongjing and even Zhang Zi and Li Dongqi all have their own comments.

古文：所著有《内经或问》、《灵枢经脉笺》、《五色诊奇眩》、《切脉枢要》、《运气图说》、《养生杂言》诸书甚众。
现代文：其著作有《内经或问》、《灵枢经脉笺》、《五色诊奇眩》、《切脉枢要》、《运气图说》、《养生杂言》等等甚多。
English: His works include "Naijing or Q&A," "Spiritual Heart Chakra Tuning," "Five Color Diagnosis," "Changing Heart Chakra," "Fortune Chart," "Healthy Diet" and many more.

古文：浦江戴良采其治效最著者数十事，为医案。
现代文：浦江戴良将吕复疗效最著的数十病例编辑为医案。
English: Pujiang Dayliang edited dozens of cases with the best-known Lu Fu curative effect into a medical case.

古文：历举仙居、临海教谕，台州教授，皆不就。
现代文：复被举荐为仙居、临海教谕、台州教授。他都不去就职。
English: Fu was recommended for Xianju, Linhai and Taizhou professorships, but he did not take up the posts.

古文：倪维德，字仲贤，吴县人。
现代文：倪维德，字仲贤，苏州府吴县人。
English: Ni Weide, alias Zhongxian, from Wuxian County, Suzhou Province.

古文：祖、父皆以医显。
现代文：祖父、父亲都以医术显于世。
English: Both his grandfather and father made their mark on the world with their medical skills.

古文：维德幼嗜学，已乃业医，以《内经》为宗。
现代文：维德自幼好学，后学医，以《内经》为主。
English: Vader has been eager to learn since he was a child, and later studied medicine, focusing on the Inner Canon.

古文：病大观以来，医者率用裴宗元、陈师文《和剂局方》，故方新病多不合。
现代文：他认为自北宋大观年间以来，医生都用裴宗元与陈师文合著的《和剂局方》，这种陈旧的药方对新发现的病多不合用。
English: He believes that since the Northern Song Dynasty, doctors have been using the "Hao Jiao Jiao Fang" co-authored by Pei Zongyuan and Chen Shiwen. This old prescription is mostly unsuitable for newly discovered diseases.

古文：乃求金人刘完素、张从正、李杲三家书读之，出而治疾，无不立效。
现代文：他求得金人刘完素、张从正、李杲三家医书阅读后，出去治病，无不立见疗效。
English: After reading the medical books of three famous doctors, Liu Wan Su, Zhang Cong Zheng, and Li Xuan, he went out to treat the disease and saw the curative effect.

古文：周万户子，八岁昏眊，不识饥饱寒暑，以土炭自塞其口。
现代文：周万户的儿子八岁就两眼昏花失明，且不知饥饱寒暑，以土炭自塞其口。
English: At the age of eight, Zhou Wanyu's son lost his sight in both eyes, and he didn't know whether he was hungry, cold or hot, so he stuffed his mouth with soil charcoal.

古文：诊之曰： 此慢脾风也。
现代文：经维德诊视，认为是 慢性脾风。
English: After a thorough examination, it was found to be chronic splenic disease.

古文：脾藏智，脾慢则智短。 以疏风助脾剂投之，即愈。
现代文：脾中藏智，脾患慢症则智短 ，用疏风助脾之药，立即病愈。
English: Wisdom is hidden in the spleen, but if the spleen is chronically diseased, wisdom is short. Take medicine to help the spleen by blocking wind, and the disease will be cured immediately.

古文：顾显卿右耳下生癭，大与首同，痛不可忍。
现代文：顾显卿右耳下生一囊肿，与头一样大，痛不可忍。
English: Gu Xianqing was born with a cyst under his right ear, as big as his head, and it was excruciatingly painful.

古文：诊之曰： 此手足少阳经受邪也。 饮之药，逾月愈。
现代文：经维德诊视，断定是 手足少阳经受邪 所引起的，服了他的药，一个月就好了。
English: After Vader's examination, it was determined that the deformity of the limbs was caused by the evil influence of Shao Yang. He took his medicine and was well in a month.

古文：刘子正妻病气厥，或哭或笑，人以为崇。诊之曰： 两手脉俱沉，胃脘必有所积，积则痛。 
现代文：刘子正的妻子患厥症，时而哭时而笑，人们以为有鬼怪，维德诊断后说： 两手脉都沉，胃腔中必积有什么东西，所以痛。 
English: Liu Zizheng's wife suffers from epilepsy. She cries and laughs at the same time. People think there is a ghost. After the diagnosis, Vader said, "Both of my veins are heavy. Something must be accumulating in my stomach cavity. That's why it hurts."

古文：问之果然，以生熟水导之，吐痰涎数升愈。
现代文：令喝生水导之，吐痰涎数升，病愈。
English: Let the drinking of raw water guide it, the spitting will increase by several liters, and the disease will be cured.

古文：盛架阁妻左右肩臂奇痒，延及头面，不可禁，灼之以艾，则暂止。
现代文：盛架阁的妻子左右臂奇痒，扩散到头面，止不住，用艾熏也只能管一时。
English: Sheng Jia Ge's wife had a strange itch on her left and right arm, which spread to her head. She couldn't stop it, and she could only control it for a short time with moxa.

古文：诊之曰： 左脉沉，右脉浮且盛，此滋味过盛所致也。 
现代文：维德诊断说： 左脉沉，右脉浮而且很盛，这是吃东西过多所引起的。 
English: According to Vader's diagnosis: The left vein is depressed, the right vein is buoyant and very strong, which is caused by eating too much.

古文：投以剂，旋愈。
现代文：服他的药就好了。
English: Just take his meds.

古文：林仲实以劳得热疾，热随日出入为进退，暄盛则增剧，夜凉及雨则否，如是者二年。
现代文：林仲实在劳动中得热病，热随日出日落而有升降，晚春天气暖和时更加厉害，到夜凉或下雨时则好一些，如是二年了。
English: Lin Zhongzheng fell ill with a fever while working. The fever would rise and fall with the sunrise and sunset. It was more severe when the weather was warm in late spring, and better when it was cool at night or raining. This was two years ago.

古文：诊之曰： 此七情内伤，阳气不升，阴火渐炽。故温则进，凉则退。 
现代文：经诊断，认为是 此七情内伤，阳气不升，阴火渐旺，故天热则热，天凉则退热 。
English: After diagnosis, it is believed that these seven conditions are internal injuries, yang does not rise, and yin and yang gradually flourish. Therefore, hot weather is hot, and cool weather is cool.

古文：投以东垣内伤之剂，亦立愈。
现代文：服用李东垣内伤的药方，也立即痊愈。
English: After taking the medicine prescribed for Li Dongqi's internal injury, he also recovered immediately.

古文：他所疗治，多类此。
现代文：他治病情形大致如此。
English: That's pretty much how he treated his patients.

古文：常言： 刘、张二氏多主攻，李氏惟调护中气主补，盖随时推移，不得不然。 
现代文：维德常说： 刘、张二氏治病多主攻，李则调护中气，主补。因为是随着时间的推移，只能是如此。 
English: Wei De often said: Liu and Zhang Er's treatment of diseases is mostly the main attack, while Li is the regulation of qi, the main supplement. Because it is with the passage of time, it can only be so.

古文：故其主方不执一说。
现代文：他诊病开处方不执一说，因病而论。
English: He does not insist on prescribing a diagnosis, depending on the disease.

古文：常患眼科杂出方论，无全书，著《元机启微》，又校订《东垣试效方》，并刊行于世。
现代文：他深感到眼科的处方杂出，没有这方面的医书，因著《元机启微》一书。又校订了《东垣试效方》，刊行于世。
English: He deeply felt that ophthalmic prescriptions were miscellaneous, and there was no medical book in this field, because of the book "The Origin of the Machine." He also revised "The Higashigaki Test Method" and published it.

古文：洪武十年卒，年七十五。
现代文：洪武七年逝世，年七十五岁。
English: Hongwu died seven years later, at the age of 75.

古文：周汉卿，松阳人。医兼内外科，针尤神。
现代文：周汉卿，浙江松阳人，医生，内外科均治，其针疗尤为神奇。
English: Zhou Hanqing, Zhejiang Songyang people, doctors, internal surgery are treated equally, and their acupuncture is particularly magical.

古文：乡人蒋仲良，左目为马所踶，睛突出如桃。他医谓系络已损不可治。
现代文：同乡蒋仲良左目为马所踢，眼珠突出如桃，其他医生都说眼神经已损坏，不可治。
English: His countryman Jiang Zhongliang's left eye was kicked by a horse, and the eyeball protruded like a peach. Other doctors said that the optic nerve had been damaged and could not be cured.

古文：汉卿封以神膏，越三日复故。
现代文：汉卿给他用神膏封贴，三日恢复如故。
English: Han Ching sealed it with God's anointing, and it was restored three days later.

古文：华州陈明远瞽十年。汉卿视之，曰： 可针也。 为翻睛刮翳，欻然辨五色。
现代文：华州陈明远失明十年，汉卿诊视，认为可以针疗，把眼皮翻过来，刮去眼珠上的一层翳，立即能辨五色。
English: Huazhou Chen Mingyuan, who has been blind for ten years, was diagnosed by Hanqing, who believed that acupuncture could be used. He turned his eyelids upside down and scraped off a layer of moles on his eyeballs. He could immediately distinguish five colors.

古文：武城人病胃痛，奋掷乞死。
现代文：武城人患胃痛病，发作起来痛得难忍，宁愿去死。
English: The people of Wucheng suffer from a stomach ache, the pain is unbearable when it comes on, and they would rather die.

古文：汉卿纳药于鼻，俄喷赤虫寸许，口眼悉具，痛旋止。
现代文：汉卿给他灌药于鼻，忽然喷出红虫，长约寸许，有口有眼，痛立即止。
English: Lord Han pours medicine into his nose, and suddenly red worms come out. They are about an inch long, have a mouth and eyes, and the pain stops immediately.

古文：马氏妇有娠，十四月不产，尫且黑。
现代文：马氏妇人怀孕，十四个月不产。汉卿说： 腹中有虫，不是有孕。 
English: Ma's wife was pregnant, but did not give birth for fourteen months. Lord Han said, "There are worms in the abdomen, but she is not pregnant."

古文：刺其一，砉然鸣，又刺其一亦如之，加以按摩，疾遂愈。
现代文：用药打下来，如金鱼，病也好了。永康人患腹痛病，只能弯腰而行。汉卿解其衣诊视，气突出于腹部有两处，其大如臂，刺破一个，发出响声，再刺一个也一样，然后加以按摩，病就好了。
English: Medicated down, such as goldfish, the disease is also good. Yongkang people suffer from abdominal pain, can only bend over. Hanqing explained his clothing diagnosis, there are two gas bursts from the abdomen, its large as an arm, pierce one, make a noise, and then pierce another one as well, and then massage it, the disease is good.

古文：长山徐妪痫疾，手足颤掉，裸而走，或歌或笑。
现代文：长山徐太婆患癫痫病，手足颤动，赤脚而行，或歌或笑。
English: Changshan Grandmother Xu suffers from epilepsy, her hands and feet tremble, she walks barefoot, she sings and laughs.

古文：汉卿刺其十指端，出血而痊。
现代文：汉卿刺其十个指头，血出病愈。
English: Han Ching pricked his ten fingers, and the bleeding stopped.

古文：钱塘王氏女生瘰疬，环头及腑，凡十九窍。窍破白沈出，将死矣。
现代文：钱塘王氏女患淋巴结核，头及腋共十九窍，窍破流白汁，将死。
English: Qiantang Wang's daughter was suffering from lymphatic tuberculosis. There were nineteen spots on her head and eyelids, and the spots were leaking white fluid. She was going to die.

古文：汉卿为剔窍母深二寸，其余烙以火，数日结痂愈。
现代文：汉卿为之割开窍母二寸深，其余的用火烙，数日结痂即愈。
English: Han Ching cut off the cauliflower two centimeters deep, and burned the rest with fire. The scab healed in a few days.

古文：山阴杨翁项有疣如瓜大，醉仆阶下，溃血不能止。
现代文：山阴的杨老翁，颈项生疣，大如瓜，醉仆于阶下，流血不止。
English: Yang Lao Weng in the shade of the mountain, his neck is raw, as big as a melon, drunk at the foot of the stairs, bleeding more and more.

古文：疣溃者必死。
现代文：疣溃乱必死。
English: If you try to break the chaos, you will die.

古文：汉卿以药糁其穴，血即止。
现代文：汉卿用药和米汤注入穴中，血即止。
English: Hanqing injected medicine and rice soup into the hole to stop the bleeding.

古文：义乌陈氏子腹有块，扪之如罂。
现代文：义乌陈氏子，腹中有一硬块，手摸如同瓦钵。
English: Yiwu Chen Shi Zi, there is a hard lump in his stomach, his hand feels like a tile.

古文：汉卿曰： 此肠痈也。 用大针灼而刺之，入三寸许，脓随针迸出有声，愈。诸暨黄生背曲，须杖行。
现代文：汉卿认为这是肠痈，用大针烧热刺入三寸许，脓随即流出，有声，病愈。诸暨黄生背曲，须扶拐杖行走。
English: According to Lord Han, it was intestinal fistula. A large needle was used to prick the inflamed intestine to a depth of about three centimeters. The fistula immediately drained, there was a sound, and the patient recovered. Zhu Ji and Huang Sheng were recalcitrant and had to walk with crutches.

古文：他医皆以风治之，汉卿曰： 血涩也。 刺两足昆仑穴，顷之投杖去。其捷效如此。
现代文：其他医生都做风湿病治，汉卿认为是血脉不通，针刺两脚的昆仑穴位，立即弃杖而去，其疗效之快如此。
English: Other doctors were treating rheumatism, but Dr. Han thought it was due to a blocked blood vessel, so he pricked the Kunlun acupoints on both feet and immediately abandoned his cane. This is how quickly the treatment worked.

古文：王履，字安道，昆山人。
现代文：王履，字安道，苏州府昆山人。
English: Wang Lu, surnamed Ando, from Kunshan, Suzhou.

古文：学医于金华朱彦修，尽得其术。
现代文：从金华朱房修学医，完全学到了他的医术。
English: He studied medicine under Jinhua Zhu Fangxiu and fully learned his medical skills.

古文：尝谓张仲景《伤寒论》为诸家祖，后人不能出其范围。
现代文：曾认为张仲景的《伤寒论》是各家医学的鼻祖，后人未能超出他的范围。
English: He once believed that Zhang Zhongjing's "On Typhoid" was the originator of all medical science, and later generations could not go beyond his scope.

古文：且《素问》云 伤寒为病热 ，言常不言变，至仲景始分寒热，然义犹未尽。
现代文：《素问》说 伤寒为热病 ，不说有什么变化。至仲景则开始把伤寒分为寒热两类，但还是没有说彻底。
English: "Su Qian" said that typhoid fever was a fever, without mentioning any changes. Zu Jiajing began to divide typhoid fever into two categories of cold and fever, but still did not say it thoroughly.

古文：乃备常与变，作《伤寒立法考》。
现代文：王履因做《伤寒立法考》。
English: Wang Luyin did the "Typhoid Legislation Examination."

古文：又谓《阳明篇》无目痛，《少阴篇》言胸背满不言痛，《太阴篇》无嗌乾，《厥阴篇》无囊缩，必有脱简。
现代文：又认为《阳明篇》中无目痛之说，《少阴篇》中只讲胸背胀满而不说痛，《太阴篇》中不说咽喉干，《厥阴篇》无囊缩之说，必有缺页或脱漏。
English: It is also believed that "Yangming" has no eye pain, "Shaoying" only talks about the chest and back swelling without pain, "Taiyin" does not talk about the throat, and "Jueyin" has no contraction, so there must be missing pages or omissions.

古文：乃取三百九十七法，去其重者二百三十八条，复增益之，仍为三百九十七法。
现代文：他取三百九十七法，去其重复者二百三十八条，又增加新的，仍为三百九十七法。
English: He took three hundred and ninety-seven laws, removed two hundred and thirty-eight duplicates, and added new ones, still three hundred and ninety-seven laws.

古文：极论内外伤经旨异同，并《中风》、《中暑辨》，名曰《溯洄集》，凡二十一篇。
现代文：透彻地论述了内外伤经的异同，将《中风》、《中暑辨》合为《溯洄集》，凡二十一篇。
English: Thoroughly discussed the similarities and differences of internal and external dysmenorrhea, and combined "Stroke" and "Heatstroke" into "Trajectory Collection," all twenty-one.

古文：又著《百病钩玄》二十卷，《医韵统》一百卷，医家宗之。
现代文：又著《百病钩玄》二十卷，《医韵统》一百卷，受到医家们的推崇。
English: He is also the author of "Hundreds of Illnesses" with 20 volumes, and "Compendium of Medical Rhymes" with 100 volumes, both of which are highly respected by doctors.

古文：履工诗文，兼善绘事。尝游华山绝顶，作图四十幅，记四篇，诗一百五十首，为时所称。
现代文：王履还工于诗文，又善绘画，曾游华山之顶峰，做画四十幅，游记四篇，诗一百五十首，为时人称赞。
English: Wang Lu also worked on poetry and was good at painting. He once traveled to the peak of Huashan Mountain and made forty paintings, four travelogues, and one hundred and fifty poems, which was praised by people at the time.

古文：自滑寿以下五人，皆生于元，至明初始卒。
现代文：自滑寿以下五人：葛乾孙、吕复、倪维德、周汉卿、王履，皆生于元代，逝于明初。
English: There are five people below Zilan Shou: Ge Qiansun, Lu Fu, Ni Weide, Zhou Hanqing and Wang Lu, all of whom were born in the Yuan Dynasty and died in the early Ming Dynasty.

古文：周颠，建昌人，无名字。
现代文：周颠，江西建昌人，本无名字，颠为其绰号。
English: Zhou Bing, a native of Jiangxi Jianchang, originally had no name, but his nickname was Bing.

古文：年十四，得狂疾，走南昌市中乞食，语言无恒，皆呼之曰颠。
现代文：十四岁时得狂病，在南昌市中乞食，语无伦次，故人们都叫他周颠。
English: At the age of fourteen, he got mad, begged in Nanchang, and was incoherent, so people called him Zhou Biao.

古文：及长，有异状，数谒长官，曰 告太平 。
现代文：长大像貌与众不同，多次进见长官，说是求 告太平 。
English: He grew up with a distinctive appearance and repeatedly visited his superiors, saying that he was appealing for peace.

古文：时天下宁谧，人莫测也。
现代文：当时天下安宁，人们不明其所言。
English: At that time, the world was at peace and people did not know what he was talking about.

古文：后南昌为陈友谅所据，颠避去。
现代文：后南昌为陈友谅占据，颠避去了。
English: After that, Nanchang was occupied by Chen Youyong, and he fled.

古文：太祖克南昌，颠谒道左。
现代文：太祖克南昌，颠在道边要见太祖。
English: The great-grandfather of Nanchang, walking on the roadside to see the great-grandfather.

古文：洎还金陵，颠亦随至。
现代文：太祖到金陵，颠也随去。
English: When the great-grandfather went to Jinling, the toad also went with him.

古文：一日，驾出，颠来谒。
现代文：有一天，太祖刚出，颠就来拜见。
English: One day, when the great-grandfather had just left, the toad came to see him.

古文：问 何为 ，曰 告太平 。
现代文：问他何事，他说： 告太平。 
English: Ask him anything and he says: "Tell the world."

古文：自是屡以告。太祖厌之，命覆以巨缸，积薪煅之。薪尽启视，则无恙，顶上出微汗而已。
现代文：从此以后多次来 告太平 ，太祖讨厌他，命人把他装入一大缸中，堆起薪柴烧，薪柴烧完了，启缸来看，颠在缸中无恙，头上只出点小汗而已。
English: From then on, Taiping came many times to complain, the great-grandfather hated him and ordered someone to put him in a large bowl, pile up the firewood, and when the firewood was burned, open the bowl and see that there is no pus in the bowl, only a little sweat on his head.

古文：太祖异之，命寄食蒋山僧寺。
现代文：太祖十分惊异，命他于蒋山寺中寄食。
English: The great-grandfather was very surprised and ordered him to send food to Jiangshan Temple.

古文：已而僧来诉，颠与沙弥争饭，怒而不食且半月。
现代文：不久寺中僧人来说，颠与和尚争饭，一怒之下，半月不吃。
English: Not long after, a monk in the temple said that he and the monk had a quarrel over a meal, and in a fit of anger, he did not eat for half a month.

古文：太祖往视颠，颠无饥色。
现代文：太祖去看，而颠毫无饥色，赐他饭食。
English: The great-grandfather went to see, but the toad was not hungry at all, so he gave it some food.

古文：乃赐盛馔，食已闭空室中，绝其粒一月，比往视，如故。
现代文：颠吃完后把自己关闭在一间空房里，一月粒米不进。再看他，还是面无饥色。
English: After he finished eating, he shut himself in an empty room, and did not eat a grain of rice for a month. Looking at him again, he still did not look hungry.

古文：诸将士争进酒馔，茹而吐之，太祖与共食则不吐。
现代文：诸将士争着送他酒菜，他吃在口中，又都吐了出来，而与太祖共食时则不吐。
English: Generations of soldiers vied to give him food and drink. He ate it with his mouth open and vomited it all up, but when he ate with his grandfather, he didn't vomit.

古文：太祖将征友谅，问曰： 此行可乎？ 
现代文：太祖准备征伐陈友谅，问颠： 此行可否？ 
English: The great-grandfather is preparing to conquer Chen Youyong, and asks the elder brother: Is this trip possible?

古文：对曰： 可。 
现代文：他说 ：可以。 
English: Grandson replied: Yes.

古文：曰： 彼已称帝，克之不亦难乎？ 
现代文：太祖说 ：友谅已称帝，要战败他不亦难乎？ 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Friend has already been proclaimed emperor. Is it difficult to defeat him?"

古文：颠仰首视天，正容曰： 天上无他座。 
现代文：颠仰首看天，一本正经地说 ：天上没有其他星座。 
English: Looking up at the sky, he said solemnly, "There are no other constellations in the sky."

古文：太祖携之行，舟次安庆，无风，遣使问之，曰： 行则有风。 
现代文：太祖带他去出征，船行到安庆，无风，派人去问颠。颠说 ：行则有风。 
English: The great-grandfather took him to go to war, and they sailed to Anqing. There was no wind, so he sent someone to ask the toad. The toad said, "It's windy."

古文：遂命牵舟进，须臾风大作，直抵小孤。
现代文：于是命人拉船前进，一会儿大风起，船直抵小孤山。
English: So he ordered someone to pull the boat forward. A moment later, the wind picked up and the boat reached the small isolated mountain.

古文：太祖虑其妄言惑军心，使人守之。
现代文：太祖怕颠胡说惑乱军心，命人把他看守。
English: The great-grandfather was afraid that his nonsense would confuse the soldiers, so he ordered someone to guard him.

古文：至马当，见江豚戏水，叹曰： 水怪见，损人多。 
现代文：行到马当，见江豚戏水，颠叹息道 ：水怪见，这次征战会损失多人。 
English: He went to Madang, saw the finless porpoise playing in the water, and sighed, "I've seen a water monster. I'll lose a lot of people in this campaign."

古文：守者以告。
现代文：看守将此话报告了太祖。
English: The guard reported this to the patriarch.

古文：太祖恶之，投诸江。
现代文：太祖厌恶他，把他投入江中。
English: The great-grandfather loathed him and threw him into the river.

古文：师次湖口，颠复来，且乞食。
现代文：太祖大军到达湖口，颠又来求见，还讨口饭吃。
English: When the great-grandfather's army arrived at the mouth of the lake, the toad came to see him again and begged for a bite to eat.

古文：太祖与之食，食已，即整衣作远行状，遂辞去。
现代文：太祖给了他饭食，他吃完便整衣做远行的样子，辞别而去。
English: The great-grandfather gave him some food, and after he finished eating, he dressed and went away, as if he were going on a long journey.

古文：友谅既平，太祖遣使往庐山求之，不得，疑其仙去。
现代文：平定陈友谅后，太祖派人往庐山去寻找周颠，没找到，以为是死了。
English: After subduing Chen Youpeng, the Great Ancestor sent people to Shaoshan to look for Zhou Biao. When they didn't find him, they thought he was dead.

古文：洪武中，帝亲撰《周颠仙传》，纪其事。
现代文：洪武中，太祖亲笔撰写了《周颠仙传》，记述其事。
English: In Hongwu Middle School, the great-grandfather wrote "Biography of Zhou Buxian" in his own handwriting, describing the matter.

古文：张中，字景华，临川人。
现代文：张中，字景华，江西临川人。
English: Zhang Zhong, also known as Jinghua, is from Linchuan, Jiangxi Province.

古文：少应进士举不第，遂放情山水。
现代文：年少时考进士未中，便纵情于山水之中。
English: When he was young, before he passed the entrance examination, he indulged in the mountains and rivers.

古文：遇异人，授数学，谈祸福，多奇中。
现代文：遇一异人，教他推算命运，预言祸福。
English: In the case of a stranger, teach him to calculate his fate and predict misfortune and fortune.

古文：太祖下南昌，以邓愈荐召至，赐坐。问曰： 予下豫章，兵不血刃，此邦之人其少息乎？ 
现代文：太祖攻下南昌，由于邓愈的推荐，召见张中，问他 ：我攻下豫章，兵不血刃，这里的人岂不是得到了休息？ 
English: The great-grandfather conquered Nanchang. On the recommendation of Deng Yu, he summoned Zhang Zhong and asked him, "I conquered Yuzhang without bloodshed. Didn't the people here get some rest?"

古文：对曰： 未也。旦夕此地当流血，庐舍毁且尽，铁柱观亦仅存一殿耳。 
现代文：张中回答说： 不然，此地早晚会发生流血事件，庐舍将被烧尽，铁柱观会只存留一殿。 
English: Zhang Zhong replied, "Otherwise, sooner or later, there will be bloodshed in this place, the monastery will be burned to the ground, and only one hall of the pillar viewing society will remain.

古文：未几，指挥康泰反，如其言。
现代文：不久，指挥康泰叛乱，果如张中所预言。
English: Soon after, he led the Kangtai Rebellion, which turned out to be just as Zhang predicted.

古文：寻又言国中大臣有变，宜豫防。
现代文：又不久，张中又预言国内大臣会有不轨行为，应加惕防。
English: Not long after, Zhang Zhong also predicted that the Minister of the Interior would commit misconduct and should be guarded against.

古文：至秋，平章邵荣、参政赵继祖伏甲北门为乱，事觉伏诛。
现代文：到了秋天，平章邵荣、参政赵继在北门称兵作乱，事发被诛。
English: In the autumn, Pingzhang Shao Rong and Zhao Jian, both of whom were involved in politics, staged a riot at the North Gate and were arrested.

古文：陈友谅围南昌三月，太祖伐之，召问之。
现代文：陈友谅围南昌三月，太祖出兵讨伐，召张中问战争结果如何。
English: In March, when Chen Youzhen was besieging Nanchang, the great-grandfather sent troops to fight and summoned Zhang Zhong to inquire about the outcome of the war.

古文：曰： 五十日当大胜，亥子之日获其渠帅。 
现代文：中说 ：五十日当大胜，亥子日俘获其主帅。 
English: It said: On the fiftieth day, when there was a great victory, the coach was captured on the day of the boar.

古文：帝命从行，舟次孤山，无风不能进。
现代文：太祖命他随行，船到孤山，无风不能进。
English: The great-grandfather ordered him to accompany the boat to the lonely mountain, and he couldn't get in without wind.

古文：乃以洞玄法祭之，风大作，遂达鄱阳。
现代文：张中以洞玄法祭之，风大作，船顺利到鄱阳。
English: In Zhangzhong, the ceremony was held with the help of the Dongxuan method. The wind blew hard, and the ship sailed smoothly to Shenyang.

古文：大战湖中，常遇春孤舟深入，敌舟围之数重，众忧之。
现代文：与陈友谅大战于湖中，常遇春孤舟深入，被敌舰重重包围，大家都很忧虑。
English: With Chen Youyuan's big battle in the lake, often in the spring, the lonely boat is deep, surrounded by enemy ships, everyone is very worried.

古文：曰： 无忧，亥时当自出。 
现代文：张中说： 不要担心，亥时当自会出围。 
English: Zhang said, "Don't worry, you'll make it out when it's time for the boar."

古文：已而果然。
现代文：其后果然。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：连战大胜，友谅中流矢死，降其众五万。
现代文：连战大捷，友谅中箭身亡，其众五万人悉降。
English: Liancheng won a great victory, Yu Peng was killed by an arrow, and all of his fifty thousand men surrendered.

古文：自启行至受降，适五十日。
现代文：从太祖出兵到受降，刚好是五十天。
English: It was exactly fifty days from the time my great-grandfather sent out the troops to the time he surrendered.

古文：始南昌被围，帝问 何日当解 ，曰 七月丙戌 。
现代文：南昌被围，太祖问何日解围，张中说 七月丙戌 。
English: Nanchang was besieged. Taizu asked what day the siege would be lifted. Zhang replied that it would be in July.

古文：报至，乃乙酉，盖术官算历，是月差一日，实在丙戍也。
现代文：战报至，乙酉日南昌解围，这是因为术官的历法推算差错一日，实际上是丙戌。
English: The battle report arrived, and the siege of Nanchang was lifted on the day of Acetylene. This was because the magistrate's calendar was miscalculated by one day, and it was actually Acetylene.

古文：其占验奇中，多若此。
现代文：其占卜如此之灵验。张中为人洁身自好，很少与人来往。
English: His divination is so effective. Zhang Zhong is a self-effacing person and rarely interacts with others.

古文：张三丰，辽东懿州人，名全一，一名君宝，三丰其号也。以其不饰边幅，又号张邋遢。
现代文：同他谈，只要稍涉及伦理，他立即用话岔开，如同疯癫玩世不恭之人。曾好戴铁帽，人称 铁冠子 。张三丰，名全一，一名君宝，号三丰，辽东懿州人，因不修边幅，又号张邋遢。
English: Talk to him, as long as there is a little bit of ethics involved, he will immediately use words to pry open, like a crazy cynic. Once he liked to wear an iron cap, known as the Iron Crown. Zhang Sanfeng, named one, a treasure, called Sanfeng, from Luzhou, East Liaoning Province, because of his unkempt appearance, also called Zhang Xuan.

古文：颀而伟，龟形鹤背，大耳圆目，须髯如戟。
现代文：其貌：身长、魁伟、鹤背、大耳、圆眼、须如戟。
English: Appearance: Tall, powerful, crane back, big ears, round eyes, beard like a stork.

古文：寒暑惟一衲一蓑，所啖，升斗辄尽，或数日一食，或数月不食。
现代文：寒暑只穿一件道袍，一件蓑衣。一餐能吃米一斗，或数日一餐，甚至数月不食。
English: In cold and hot weather, they only wear a robe and a jacket. They can eat a bucket of rice for one meal, or a meal for several days, or even go without food for several months.

古文：尽经目不忘，游处无恒，或云能一日千里。
现代文：有过目不忘之才。浪迹天涯，有人说他能一日千里。
English: He has a talent of not forgetting what he has seen. Some people say he can travel a thousand miles in a day.

古文：善嬉谐，旁若无人。
现代文：善于诙谐，旁若无人。
English: Good at witticisms, like nobody's business.

古文：尝游武当诸岩壑，语人曰： 此山异日必大兴。 
现代文：曾游武当山各处奇岩深谷，对人说： 此山日后必香火兴旺。 
English: He once toured the strange rock valleys around Mount Wudang and told people: This mountain will be prosperous in the future.

古文：时五龙、南岩、紫霄俱毁于兵，三丰与其徒去荆榛，辟瓦砾，创草庐居之，已而舍去。
现代文：当时武当之五龙、南岩、紫霄诸殿均在战乱中焚毁，三丰与其门徒斩荆披棘，盖茅屋居住，不久又离去。
English: At that time, Wudang's Wulong, Nanyan and Zishiao temples were all burned down in the war, and Sanfeng and his disciples lived in huts and soon left.

古文：太祖故闻其名，洪武二十四年遣使觅之，不得。
现代文：太祖久闻其名，曾于洪武二十四年遣使寻访，没有找到。
English: The name of the great ancestor has been known for a long time. In the 24th year of Hongwu, an envoy was sent to search for him, but he was not found.

古文：后居宝鸡之金台观。一日自言当死，留颂而逝，县人共棺殓之。及葬，闻棺内有声，启视则复活。
现代文：三丰后来居于宝鸡之金台观，有一天忽然去世，该县百姓置棺安葬时，闻棺有声，开棺一看，见三丰又活了过来。
English: Later, Sanfeng lived in Jintaiyuan, Baoji, and died suddenly one day. When the people of the county placed the coffin for burial, they smelled the coffin and heard a sound. When they opened the coffin, they saw that Sanfeng had come back to life.

古文：乃游四川，见蜀献王。复入武当，历襄、汉，踪迹益奇幻。
现代文：此后，到四川拜见蜀献王，再上武当山，云游襄、汉，踪迹变幻不定。
English: After that, he went to Sichuan to meet Shu Xian Wang, and then went to Wudang Mountain, Yunyu Xiang, Han, and the trail changed.

古文：永乐中，成祖遣给事中胡濙偕内侍朱祥赍玺书香币往访，遍历荒徼，积数年不遇。乃命工部侍郎郭琎、隆平侯张信等，督丁夫三十余万人，大营武当宫观，费以百万计。
现代文：永乐时期，成祖遣给事中胡荧同宦官朱祥四处寻访，走遍了荒原边境，虽历时数年，终未找到他，乃命工部侍郎郭王进、隆平侯张信等，督率民工三十余万人，大建武当宫观，费资以百万计。
English: During the Yongle period, Cheng Zu sent Zhu Xiang, the eunuch of Hu Hu, to search everywhere and traveled all over the wasteland border. Although it took several years, he did not find him. He ordered Guo Wangjin, the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, and Zhang Xin, the prince of Longping, to supervise more than 300,000 migrant workers and build a grand palace. The cost was in the millions.

古文：既成，赐名太和太岳山，设官铸印以守，竟符三丰言。
现代文：建成后，赐名 太和太岳山 ，设官铸印看守，这正合张三丰昔日的预言。
English: After it was built, it was given the name Taihe Taiyakusan, and an official was appointed to guard the seal, which is in line with Zhang Sanfeng's old prophecy.

古文：或言三丰金时人，元初与刘秉忠同师，后学道于鹿邑之太清宫，然皆不可考。
现代文：有人说张三丰是金朝时代的人，元初与刘秉忠同学，后来在鹿邑之太清宫学道。这些传闻均不可考。
English: Some people say that Zhang Sanfeng was a person of the Kim dynasty era. He was a classmate of Liu Bingzhong at the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, and later studied Taoism at the Taiqing Palace in Ruyi. These rumors cannot be verified.

古文：天顺三年，英宗赐诰，赠为通微显化真人，终莫测其存亡也。
现代文：天顺三年英宗赐诰，赠为 通微显化真人 。关于三丰的生死存亡，始终无人知晓。
English: In the third year of Tenshun, Emperor Yingzong bestowed him with the title of Tongyu Xuanhua Zhenren (通微显化真人). No one has ever known about Sanfeng's life or death.

古文：袁珙，字廷玉，鄞人。
现代文：袁珙，字廷玉，鄞县人。
English: Yuan Yu, also known as Ting Yu, is a native of Handan County.

古文：高祖镛，宋季举进士。
现代文：高祖袁镛为宋朝进士。
English: His great-great-grandfather, Yuan Qi, was a member of the Song Dynasty.

古文：元兵至，不屈，举家十七人皆死。
现代文：元兵灭宋，镛宁死不屈，全家十七人皆遇难。
English: The Yuan soldiers annihilated the Song Dynasty, and Huning died defiantly. All seventeen members of his family were killed.

古文：父士元，翰林检阅官。
现代文：父名袁士元，曾任翰林检阅官。
English: His father's name was Yuan Shiyuan, and he was once a Hanlin inspector.

古文：珙生有异禀，好学能诗。
现代文：袁珙禀性与众不同，好学能诗。
English: Yuan Qi's nature is different from others, and he is good at learning poetry.

古文：尝游海外洛伽山，遇异僧别古崖，授以相人术。
现代文：曾游海外洛伽山，遇见一非凡僧人别古崖，授他以看相之术。
English: He once traveled overseas to Mount Loga, where he met an extraordinary monk named Begu, who taught him the art of seeing faces.

古文：然守正秉忠，名垂后世，愿自勉。 
现代文：珙在元代时已颇负盛名，求他看相的士大夫有百十人，预言其生死福祸及降临早迟，无一不验。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Yao was already quite famous. There were a hundred and ten scholars and doctors who asked him to see their faces, predicting their life and death, fortune and misfortune, and whether they would come sooner or later. All of them came true.

古文：普署台事于越，果为张士诚逼取印绶，抗节死。
现代文：南台大夫普化帖木儿，由福建取海道来求他相面。
English: Nantai doctor Puhua Timur traveled by sea from Fujian to meet him.

古文：见江西宪副程徐曰： 君帝座上黄紫再见，千日内有二美除。
现代文：珙说他虽有大富大贵相，但印堂司空有赤气，一百四十天后被人夺去官印。
English: Zou said that although he was very rich and noble, the official seal was taken away from him after one hundred and forty days.

古文：但冷笑无情，非忠节相也。 
现代文：后来果被元末义军张士诚逼取官印。为江西副使程徐相面，说他虽官运亨通，但非忠节之相。
English: Later, he was forced by Zhang Shicheng, a member of the pro-independence forces at the end of the Yuan Dynasty, to take the official seal. Cheng Xu, the deputy envoy to Jiangxi, said that although he was a successful official, he was not a loyalist.

古文：徐于一年后拜兵部侍郎，擢尚书。又二年降于明，为吏部侍郎。
现代文：徐于一年后为元朝拜为兵部侍郎，再升为尚书，二年后投降明朝，为吏部侍郎。
English: One year later, Xu was promoted to Yuan Chaoba as the attendant of the military department, then to Shangshu, and two years later he surrendered to the Ming Dynasty as the attendant of the administrative department.

古文：尝相陶凯曰： 君五岳朝揖而气色未开，五星分明而光泽未见，宜藏器待时。不十年以文进，为异代臣，官二品，其在荆、扬间乎！ 
现代文：为陶凯看相，说他 五岳朝揖而气色未开，五星分明而光泽未见，虽为栋梁之材，但要等待时日，不出十年就会成为异代重臣，在荆、扬间任二品高官。 
English: Looking at Tao Kai, he said that although he was a pillar, he would become a senior vassal of a different generation in less than ten years, and would be a high-ranking official of the second grade between Jing and Yang.

古文：凯后为礼部尚书、湖广行省参政。
现代文：凯后果然为明朝礼部尚书、湖广行省参政。
English: Kai subsequently became a member of the Ming Dynasty's Ministry of Ceremonies and Hunan Province.

古文：其精类如此。洪武中，遇姚广孝于嵩山寺，谓之曰： 公，刘秉忠之俦也，幸自爱。 后广孝荐于燕王，召至北平。
现代文：洪武年间，珙在嵩山寺遇僧人姚广孝，说他将是与元代刘秉忠一样的人。后来，广孝还俗至北平辅助燕王夺取皇位。
English: During Hongwu's reign, Zou met the monk Yao Guangxiao at Songshan Temple, who said that he would be the same person as Liu Bingzhong in the Yuan Dynasty. Later, Guangxiao went to Peiping to help Yan Wang seize the throne.

古文：王杂卫士类己者九人，操弓矢，饮肆中。珙一见即前跪曰： 殿下何轻身至此。 
现代文：燕王在夺取皇位前也曾召袁珙至王府，珙说燕王有太平天子相，四十岁登基。果然如此。
English: King Yan, before seizing the throne, had also summoned Yuan Shao to the royal palace. Shao said that King Yan had the appearance of a peaceful emperor and ascended to the throne at the age of forty. This was indeed the case.

古文：珙相人即知其心术善恶。
现代文：燕王登基后拜珙为太常寺丞，赐冠服、鞍马、锦绣、宝钞、住宅等。
English: After Yan Wang ascended to the throne, he made Baisheng the chief priest of Taizhong Temple, and bestowed crowned robes, pommel horses, brocades, precious banknotes, residences, and so on.

古文：人不畏义，而畏祸患，往往因其不善导之于善，从而改行者甚多。
现代文：珙又为仁宗、宣宗相命，说他们都有天子之相。袁珙看相，能知人心术之善恶，对于心术不善的人，予以开导，劝他为善。
English: Yuanzhang is also a disciple of Ren Zong and Xuan Zong, saying that they all have the image of the Son of Heaven. Yuan Zang can see the image, know the good and evil of the human heart, and enlighten those who are not good at heart, and persuade them to be good.

古文：为人孝友端厚，待族党有恩。
现代文：珙为人厚道，对于同族、同乡肯于周济。
English: He was kind and generous to his fellow countrymen and fellow villagers.

古文：所居鄞城西，绕舍种柳，自号柳庄居士，有《柳庄集》。
现代文：其住所在鄞县城西，屋舍周围栽种柳树。因自称 柳庄居士 。著有《柳庄集》。
English: His residence is located in the west of the city in Min County, and willows are planted around the house. Because he calls himself a willow village resident. He is the author of "Willow Village Collection."

古文：永乐八年卒，年七十有六。赐祭葬，赠太常少卿。
现代文：永乐八年卒，年七十六岁，成祖皇帝赐葬，赠太常少卿。
English: Eight years after Yongle's death, at the age of seventy-six, Emperor Chengzu gave him a funeral and bestowed him with the title of Taizang Shaoqing.

古文：子忠彻，字静思。
现代文：袁忠彻，字静思，袁珙之子。
English: Yuan Zhongcher, Zi Jing Si, the son of Yuan Xuan.

古文：幼传父术。
现代文：自幼承传其父相面之术。
English: He inherited his father's facial expression from a young age.

古文：从父谒燕王，王宴北平诸文武，使忠彻相之。
现代文：随父亲进见燕王朱棣，王宴请北平诸文武，令忠彻给他们相面。
English: He accompanied his father to see the king of Yan, Zhu Xi. The king invited Beiping's literati and martial artists to a banquet, and made Zhongcheng the chief guest.

古文：谓都督宋忠面方耳大，身短气浮，布政使张昺面方五小，行步如蛇，都指挥谢贵拥肿蚤肥而气短，都督耿瓛颧骨插鬓，色如飞火，佥都御史景清身短声雄，于法皆当刑死。
现代文：忠彻说都督宋忠，面方耳大，身短气浮；布政使张籨，面方五官小，行步如蛇；都指挥谢贵，臃肿早肥而气短；都督耿王献，颧骨插鬓，色如飞火；佥都御史景清，身短声音洪亮。
English: According to Zhongcher, the governor Song Zhong had a large face, square ears, and short body; the cloth political envoy Zhang Qian had a small face, small facial features, and walked like a snake; the commander Xie Gui was bloated, early fat, and short of breath; the governor Geng Wang Xian had his cheekbones pierced, and his color was like flying fire; the governor of Shandong had a clear history, a short body, and a loud voice.

古文：王大喜，起兵意益决。
现代文：这些人将来都会依法判处死刑。燕王大喜，起兵的念头更加坚决。
English: In the future, these people will all be sentenced to death according to the law. Yan Wang is overjoyed, and the idea of starting an army is even more resolute.

古文：及为帝，即召授鸿胪寺序班，赐赍甚厚。
现代文：燕王皇帝后是为成祖，召忠彻为鸿胪寺序班，赏赐甚厚。
English: Emperor Yan Wang's empress was the ancestor, called Zhong Che to be the preceptor of Hongye Temple, and was rewarded very richly.

古文：迁尚宝寺丞，已，改中书舍人，扈驾北巡。
现代文：忠彻调任尚宝寺丞，其后改中书舍人，扈驾北巡。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shobo-ji-jo, and later to the post of Chushoshojin, and went on a northern tour.

古文：驾旋，仁宗监国，为谗言所中，帝怒，榜午门，凡东宫所处分事，悉不行。
现代文：京都由太子仁宗代理朝政。帝回京后，听信对仁宗的谗言，大怒，在午门张榜宣布，凡太子所决定的事，都不准办理。
English: After the Emperor returned to Kyoto, he was furious at the insults he had received from Prince Ninso, and he posted a notice on the gate of the Imperial Palace declaring that no matter what the Prince had decided, he was not allowed to carry it out.

古文：太子忧惧成疾，帝命蹇义、金忠偕忠彻视之。
现代文：太子忧惧成疾，皇帝命蹇义、金忠同忠彻去看望。
English: The prince was worried that he might be ill, and the emperor ordered Shunyi and Kim Zhongtong to pay him a visit.

古文：还奏，东宫面色青蓝，惊忧象也，收午门榜可愈。
现代文：回来忠彻奏道，太子面色青蓝，是受惊忧所致，若把午门的榜收回，病即可愈。
English: Upon his return, Zhong Chieh said that the prince's blue complexion was the result of worry. If he took back the list of noon gates, his illness would be cured.

古文：帝从之，太子疾果已。
现代文：皇帝听从，太子的病果然好了。
English: The emperor obeyed, and the prince's illness was cured.

古文：帝尝屏左右，密问武臣朱福、朱能、张辅、李远、柳升、陈懋、薛禄，文臣姚广孝、夏原吉、蹇义及金忠、吕震、方宾、吴中、李庆等祸福，后皆验。
现代文：帝曾令左右退避，问忠彻，武臣朱福、朱能、张辅、李远、柳升、薛禄，文臣姚广孝、夏原吉、蹇义及金忠、吕震、方宾、吴中、李庆等人的祸福。
English: Emperor Zeng ordered the left and right sides to retreat, and asked the blessings and curses of Zhu Fu, Zhu Neng, Zhang Fu, Li Yuan, Liu Sheng, and Xue Lu, the warriors, and Yao Guang Xiao, Xia Yuanji, Yu Yi, and Jin Zhong, Lu Zhen, Fang Bin, Wu Zhong, Li Qing, and others.

古文：九载秩满，复为尚宝司丞，进少卿。
现代文：忠彻的预测后皆灵验。九年任期满，又为尚宝寺丞，进少卿。
English: After the nine-year term was over, he was promoted to Shobo-ji-jo and promoted to Shosho-kyo.

古文：礼部郎周讷自福建还，言闽人祀南唐徐知谔、知诲，其神最灵。
现代文：礼部郎周讷自福建回朝，说闽人祭祀南唐的徐知谔、知诲，其神最灵。
English: Reiburo Zhou Ne, who returned to the dynasty from Fujian, said that the worshipers of the Southern Tang worshipped Xu Zhisheng and Zhiyu, and that their god was the most spiritual.

古文：帝命往迎其像及庙祝以来，遂建灵济宫于都城，祀之。
现代文：帝命人迎其像及管理神庙的人，在京都建灵济宫祭祀。
English: The emperor ordered the person who welcomed his image and the person who managed the temple to build the Jingu Shrine in Kyoto.

古文：帝每遘疾，辄遣使问神。
现代文：帝每有病，就遣使去问神。
English: Whenever the emperor was ill, he sent emissaries to consult the gods.

古文：庙祝诡为仙方以进，药性多热，服之辄痰壅气逆，多暴怒，至失音，中外不敢谏。
现代文：管理神庙的人向皇帝进仙方，其药性多热，服后痰塞气喘，脾气暴躁，以至于失音，朝廷中任何人都不劝谏。
English: The person in charge of the temple gave the emperor a potion of immortelle. It was very hot, and after taking it, he had phlegm, asthma, and a short temper, to the extent that he lost his voice. No one in the imperial court tried to persuade him.

古文：忠彻一日入侍，进谏曰： 此痰火虚逆之症，实灵济宫符药所致。 
现代文：有一天，忠彻入侍皇帝，进谏说： 此痰火虚逆之症，实是因服灵济宫的符药所致。 
English: One day, when Zhongcheng became an attendant of the emperor, he said: "This phlegm-fire-virtue-reversal disease is actually caused by the charms of the Lingji Palace.

古文：帝怒曰： 仙药不服，服凡药耶？ 
现代文：皇帝大怒 ：仙药不服，去服凡药吗？ 
English: The emperor was furious: If you don't want to take the magic medicine, why not take the ordinary medicine?

古文：忠彻叩首哭，内侍二人亦哭。
现代文：忠彻忙叩头大哭，两个宦官也哭了。
English: The two eunuchs also cried.

古文：帝益怒，命曳二内侍杖之，且曰： 忠彻哭我，我遂死耶？ 
现代文：帝更加恼怒，命将二个宦官拖出去鞭打，并且说道： 忠彻哭我，难道我就会死吗？ 
English: The emperor was even more enraged. He had the two eunuchs dragged out and flogged, and said: "If I weep faithfully, will I die?"

古文：忠彻惶惧，趋伏阶下，良久始解。
现代文：忠彻诚惶诚恐，忙伏于阶下，好久皇帝才息怒让他起来。
English: The emperor was furious with him for a long time because he was too busy being loyal to his subordinates.

古文：帝识忠彻于藩邸，故待之异于外臣。
现代文：帝在即位前就认识忠彻，故待与一般外臣不同。
English: The emperor knew Tadatsugu before his accession to the throne, and treated him differently from ordinary foreign ministers.

古文：忠彻亦以帝遇己厚，敢进谠言，尝谏外国取宝之非，武臣宜许行服，衍圣公诰宜改赐玉轴，闻之韪之。
现代文：忠彻也因帝待他甚厚，敢于直言进谏。他曾进谏说到外国去取宝是不对的，武臣应许他们行服丧礼，衍圣公的诰命应改赐玉轴，闻者莫不称是。
English: Due to the emperor's generous treatment of him, Tadateru also dared to be outspoken. He once said that it was wrong to go to a foreign country to get treasure. The vassal promised to perform a funeral service for them, and that they should be given a jade shaft in place of the holy man's dying order. Those who heard about it couldn't deny it.

古文：宣德初，睹帝容色曰： 七日内，宗室当有谋叛者。 
现代文：宣德初年，忠彻为帝相面，奏称 ：七日内宗室有谋叛者。 
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuande's reign, Zhongcheng met the emperor face to face and reported: "Within seven days, there was a plotter in my father's house."

古文：汉王果反。
现代文：汉王果然反叛。
English: Han Wang did indeed rebel.

古文：尝坐事下吏罚赎。
现代文：曾因犯过而纳钱赎罪。
English: He once paid money to atone for his crime.

古文：正统中，复坐事下吏休致。
现代文：正统年间又因犯过交司法官问罪，令退休后。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, he was also punished for committing the crime of contacting a judicial officer, and was ordered to retire.

古文：二十余年卒，年八十有三。
现代文：退休二十余年卒，享年八十三岁。
English: After more than 20 years of retirement, he died at the age of 83.

古文：忠彻相术不殊其父，世所传轶事甚多，不具载。
现代文：忠彻的相术与其父一样，世间所传轶事很多，不一一载述。
English: As with his father, there are many anecdotes about the life of the faithful sorcerer, none of which have been written down.

古文：其相王文，谓 面无人色，法曰沥血头 。
现代文：为王文看相，说他 面无人色，日后会有杀头之祸 。
English: Looking at Wang Wen, he said that his face was unattractive, and there would be a head-killing disaster in the future.

古文：相于谦，谓 目常上视，法曰望刀眼 。
现代文：为于谦看相，说他 目常上视，日后也遭砍头之灾 。
English: In order to look modest, he said that he always looked up, and later he was beheaded.

古文：后果如其言。
现代文：后果如其言。
English: And then it happened.

古文：然性阴险，不如其父，与群臣有隙，即缘相法于上前齮龁之。
现代文：然其性阴险，这方面不像他父亲。与群臣不和，即根据 相法 在皇帝面前攻击别人。
English: He is naturally insidious, unlike his father in this respect. If he does not get along with his courtiers, he will attack others in front of the emperor according to the Law of Phase.

古文：颇好读书，所著有《人相大成》及《凤池吟稿》、《符台外集》，载元顺帝为瀛国公子云。
现代文：颇好读书，所著有《人相大成》及《凤池口金稿》、《符台外集》，载述元顺帝为瀛国公之子的事。
English: He was a good reader. His books include "Jinso Da Chengu" and "Hengchikuchi Kingaku" and "Futai Gaisetsu," which describe the fact that Emperor Yuan Shun was the son of the Duke of Yunnan.

古文：戴思恭，字原礼，浦江人，以字行。
现代文：戴思恭，字原礼，浦江人，拜义乌朱震亨为师。
English: Dai Sikyong, Azahara Rei, a native of Pujiang, studied under Bai Yiwu Zhu Zhenheng.

古文：震亨医学大行，时称为丹溪先生。
现代文：朱震亨为金华许谦弟子，得朱熹学说真传；又从宋内侍钱塘罗知悌学医，医学大行，人称 丹溪先生 。
English: Zhu Zhenheng was a disciple of Jinhua Xu Qian, who learned the true story of Zhu Xi's teachings; he also served Qiantang Luo Zhixuan as a doctor from the Song Dynasty, and was a great practitioner of medicine. He was known as Mr. Danxi.

古文：爱思恭才敏，尽以医术授之。
现代文：震亨爱思恭才思敏捷，将其医术尽授与思恭。
English: Zhenhengheng loves Sikyong, he is quick at thinking, and he has given Sikyong all of his medical skills.

古文：洪武中，征为御医，所疗治立效，太祖爱重之。
现代文：洪武年间，思恭被朝廷召为御医，所治之病立即痊愈，太祖十分器重他。
English: During the Hongwu era, Sikyong was called by the imperial court as a royal physician. The illness he treated was cured immediately, and his great-grandfather held him in high esteem.

古文：燕王患瘕，太祖遣思恭往治，见他医所用药良是，念何以不效，乃问王何嗜。曰： 嗜生芹。 思恭曰： 得之矣。 
现代文：有次太祖派他去为燕王治病，虽用尽良药，终不见效。问燕王有何嗜好，燕王说好吃生芹菜。思恭说 ：明白了！ 
English: Once, the great-grandfather sent him to cure Yan Wang. Although he used all the good medicine, it did not work. When asked what Yan Wang's hobbies were, Yan Wang said that he liked to eat raw celery. Sikyong said, "I see!

古文：投一剂，夜暴下，皆细蝗也。
现代文：加开一剂服下，夜间大泻，所泻都是细小蝗虫，病愈。
English: After taking an additional dose, she had diarrhea at night. The diarrhea was caused by small locusts, and she recovered.

古文：晋王疾，思恭疗之愈。已，复发，即卒。
现代文：晋王患病，思恭为他治好了，但不久复发病死。
English: When Jin Wang fell ill, Sikyong cured him, but he soon fell ill again and died.

古文：太祖怒，逮治王府诸医。
现代文：太祖大怒，将王府医生全部逮捕治罪。
English: The great-grandfather flew into a rage and had all the doctors in Wangfujing arrested and prosecuted.

古文：思恭从容进曰： 臣前奉命视王疾，启王曰： 今即愈，但毒在膏肓，恐复作不可疗也。 今果然矣。 
现代文：思恭从容进言曰 ：臣前奉命为晋王治病，告诉晋王，现在虽愈，但毒入膏肓，若再发恐难治愈了，如今果然。 
English: Sikyong calmly said, "I was ordered to treat the illness of the King of Jin. I told the King of Jin that although he is better now, he was poisoned, and if it happened again, it would be difficult to cure him, and now it is true.

古文：其年冬，复乞骸骨，遣官护送，赍金币，逾月而卒，年八十有二，遣行人致祭。所著有《证治要诀》、《证治类元》、《类证用药》诸书，皆括丹谿之旨。
现代文：永乐初，思恭以年老请求返乡，永乐三年再召入朝，免行跪拜礼，是年冬又请示还乡。成祖赐金币，遣使护送。一月后去世，享年八十二岁。著有《证治要诀》、《证治类元》、《证治用药》等书。
English: At the beginning of Yongle, Sikyong requested to return home due to his old age. Yongle was summoned to the imperial court three years later, and was exempted from kneeling worship. In the winter of the same year, he asked to return home. Chengzu gave him gold coins and sent an escort. He died one month later, at the age of 82. He was the author of "The Key to Secrecy," "Secrets of Secrecy," "Secrets of Secrecy" and other books.

古文：又订正丹谿《金匮钩玄》三卷，附以己意。人谓无愧其师云。
现代文：又订正朱震亨所著之《金匮钩玄》三卷，并附有自己的见解，人们称赞他无愧其师。
English: He also revised Zhu Zhenheng's three-volume work "The Gold Standard" and added his own opinions. People praised him as a worthy teacher.

古文：盛寅，字启东，吴江人。
现代文：盛寅，字启东，苏州吴江人。
English: Sheng Yin, surnamed Qidong, from Wujiang, Suzhou.

古文：受业于郡人王宾。
现代文：受业于郡人王宾。
English: He started his career at Guoren Wangbin.

古文：初，宾与金华戴原礼游，冀得其医术。
现代文：原来王宾与金华人戴原礼交游时，就想得到原礼的医书。
English: Originally, Wang Bin wanted to get the medical book of the original etiquette when he traveled with Jinhua people wearing the original etiquette.

古文：原礼笑曰： 吾固无所吝，君独不能少屈乎？ 
现代文：原礼笑道： 我固然会无保留地把医术传给你，难道君不能屈驾作为我的弟子？ 
English: Gundotra laughed and said, "Of course, I will pass on my medical skills to you without reservation. Can't you bow down as my disciple?"

古文：宾谢曰： 吾老矣，不能复居弟子列。 
现代文：王宾说 ：我老了，不能再居于弟子的地位。 
English: Wang Bin said, "I am old and can no longer live as a disciple.

古文：他日伺原礼出，窃发其书以去，遂得其传。
现代文：有天，待原礼外出后，把他的医书偷了去，于是尽传原礼的医术。
English: One day, after waiting for Yuanli to go out, he stole his medical book, so he did his best to pass on Yuanli's medical skills.

古文：将死，无子，以授寅。
现代文：临死时因无子，把医书授与盛寅。
English: At the time of his death, because he had no son, he awarded the medical certificate to Sheng Yin.

古文：寅既得原礼之学，复讨究《内经》以下诸方书，医大有名。
现代文：寅得到原礼的医书，再研究《内经》以下诸药方，其医术大有名气。
English: Ting obtained the original medical book, and then studied the following prescriptions from the Inner Canon. His medical skills are very famous.

古文：永乐初，为医学正科。
现代文：永乐初年，为医学正科。
English: In Yongle's first year, he majored in medicine.

古文：坐累，输作天寿山。
现代文：因犯过失而罚至天寿山服劳役。
English: He was sentenced to forced labor in Tianshou Mountain for negligence.

古文：列侯监工者，见而奇之，令主书算。
现代文：列侯监工者见他与众不同，令他管书算。
English: The lords of the bedchamber overseer saw that he was different and made him take charge of accounting.

古文：先是有中使督花鸟于江南，主寅舍，病胀，寅愈之。
现代文：在此之前，有太监为督促花鸟到江南，住在盛寅家中，患头昏脑胀病，寅给他治好了。
English: Prior to this, there was a eunuch who lived in Sheng Yin's house and urged the flowers and birds to go to the south of the Yangtze River. He was suffering from dizziness and encephalitis, but Yin cured him.

古文：适遇诸途，惊曰： 盛先生固无恙耶！
现代文：没料到这时在路上遇见，这个太监惊讶问道： 盛先生别来无恙！
English: Unexpectedly met on the road at this time, the eunuch asked in surprise: Mr. Sheng is fine!

古文：予所事太监，正苦胀，盍与我视之。 
现代文：我们那有位太监正苦于头昏脑胀病，何不同我去看看。 
English: One of our eunuchs was suffering from dizziness and encephalopathy, so I went to have a look.

古文：既视，投以药立愈。
现代文：盛寅去诊视下药，立即痊愈。
English: Sheng Yin went to the clinic for examination and medication, and recovered immediately.

古文：会成祖较射西苑，太监往侍。
现代文：正遇上成祖在西苑比射箭，太监去侍奉。
English: Cheng Zu was shooting arrows in the West Courtyard Competition, and the eunuch went to serve.

古文：成祖遥望见，愕然曰： 谓汝死矣，安得生？ 
现代文：成祖看到这个患脑胀病的太监，惊讶地问道： 我以为你死了，怎样活过来的？ 
English: Seeing this eunuch suffering from encephalopathy, Chengzu asked in surprise: I thought you were dead, how did you come back to life?

古文：太监具以告，因盛称寅，即召入便殿，令诊脉。
现代文：太监把盛寅如何为他治病的事据实陈奏。成祖立即把寅召入便殿，为他诊脉。
English: The eunuch told Cheng Zu exactly how Sheng Yin had treated him. Cheng Zu immediately called Sheng Yin into the latrine to check his pulse.

古文：寅奏，上脉有风湿病，帝大然之，进药果效，遂授御医。
现代文：寅奏称：皇上脉有风湿病。帝十分相信，吃药后就好了，于是授为御医。
English: Inso said: The emperor has rheumatism. The emperor believed very much that it would be fine after taking medicine, so he was awarded as a royal doctor.

古文：一日，雪霁，召见。帝语白沟河战胜状，气以甚厉。
现代文：有天，雪霁，召见盛寅，同他讲白沟河打胜仗的情形，讲得有声有色。
English: One day, Xue Yao summoned Sheng Yin to talk with him about the victorious battle of Baigouhe, and the talk was loud and colorful.

古文：寅曰： 是殆有天命耳。 
现代文：寅说 ：恐怕是有天命。 
English: Tora said, "I'm afraid it's fate."

古文：帝不怿，起而视雪。
现代文：成祖不高兴，起来看雪。
English: Cheng Zu was not happy. He got up to look at the snow.

古文：寅复吟唐人诗 长安有贫者，宜瑞不宜多 句，闻者咋舌。他日，与同官对弈御药房。
现代文：寅吟唐人诗句： 长安有贫者，宜瑞不宜多。 闻者为他捏了一把冷汗，不敢做声。
English: According to a Chinese poem, "If there are poor people in Chang'an, it is not good to have too many rich people." The listener broke into a cold sweat for him and dared not make a sound.

古文：帝猝至，两人敛枰伏地，谢死罪。
现代文：有天，寅正在御药房与同僚下棋，皇帝突然到来，两人收捡棋盘，伏地请罪。
English: One day, Yin was playing chess with his colleagues in the pharmacy, when the emperor suddenly arrived. The two men picked up the chessboard and pleaded guilty.

古文：帝命终之，且坐以观，寅三胜。
现代文：帝命他俩下完，并坐在一旁观看。寅战胜三局。
English: The emperor ordered the two of them to finish their games, and they sat on the sidelines and watched.

古文：帝喜，命赋诗，立就。
现代文：帝很高兴，命他赋诗。
English: The emperor was pleased and ordered him to compose a poem.

古文：帝益喜，赐象牙棋枰并词一阕。
现代文：寅立即写成，帝更加高兴，赐象牙棋一付，并词一阕。
English: The emperor was even more pleased and gave him a set of ivory chess pieces and a set of words.

古文：帝晚年犹欲出塞，寅以帝春秋高，劝毋行。
现代文：帝晚年还要出塞，寅认为帝年岁已高，劝他不去。
English: In his later years, the emperor still wanted to go out, but Yin thought that the emperor was too old and advised him not to go.

古文：不纳，果有榆木川之变。
现代文：成祖不听，果然在归途中于榆木川病逝。
English: Cheng Zu did not listen and died of illness on his way home in Zhangmu River.

古文：仁宗在东宫时，妃张氏经期不至者十月，众医以妊身贺。
现代文：仁宗在东宫时，其妃张氏有十个月没来月经，众医认为是有孕，都来祝贺。
English: When Rinzong was in the East Palace, his wife Zhang had not menstruated for ten months, and the doctors thought she was pregnant. They all came to congratulate her.

古文：寅独谓不然，出言病状。
现代文：唯独寅不以为然，出宫后说明妃子的病情。
English: However, Tora was not convinced, and after leaving the palace, she explained the condition of her daughter-in-law.

古文：妃遥闻之曰： 医言甚当，有此人何不令早视我。 
现代文：妃子听到后以为： 医生说的是，有此人何不令他早来为我诊治。 
English: Upon hearing this, the concubine thought, "What the doctor is saying is, why didn't this man make him come to see me earlier?"

古文：及疏方，乃破血剂。
现代文：寅开的药方，是破血剂。
English: Toraaki's prescription is a blood-thinning agent.

古文：东宫怒，不用。
现代文：太子怒，不用。
English: There's no need for the prince to be angry.

古文：数日病益甚，命寅再视，疏方如前。
现代文：数日后妃子病情加重，命寅再去诊视，开出的药方与前一样。
English: A few days later, the condition of the concubine worsened, and she went to the clinic again. The prescription was the same as before.

古文：妃令进药，而东宫虑堕胎，械寅以待。
现代文：妃子令进药，太子怕是堕胎，把寅囚禁起来以待后果。
English: The concubine was ordered to take medicine, and the prince, fearing an abortion, imprisoned Tora to await the consequences.

古文：已而血大下，病旋愈。
现代文：其后妃子血大下，病立即好了。
English: After that, the concubine had a massive haemorrhage and recovered immediately.

古文：当寅之被系也，阖门惶怖曰： 是殆磔死。 
现代文：当寅被囚禁时，看守者惶恐地说 ：怕是要受分尸之刑。 
English: When he was imprisoned, the guard said with trepidation, "I'm afraid I'll have to dismember his body."

古文：既三日，红仗前导还邸舍，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：过了三天，以红仗为先导送寅回邸舍，赏赐甚厚。
English: After three days, he sent Tora back to the mansion with the Red Banner as a guide, and the reward was very rich.

古文：寅与袁忠彻素为东宫所恶，既愈妃疾，而怒犹未解，惧甚。
现代文：寅与袁忠彻素为太子所厌恶，虽治好了张妃的病，而太子的怒未消，寅非常惧怕。
English: Tora and Yuan Zhongche have always been detested by the prince. Although Princess Zhang's illness has been cured, the prince's anger has not gone away. Tora is very afraid.

古文：忠彻晓相术，知仁宗寿不永，密告寅，寅犹畏祸。
现代文：忠彻知相术，知道仁宗寿命不长，密告于寅，寅还是怕大祸临头。
English: Knowing that Rinzong's lifespan was not long, Zhongcheng, who was familiar with the art of matchmaking, tipped off Yu Ying, but Yu Ying was still afraid of the impending disaster.

古文：及仁宗嗣位，求出为南京太医院。
现代文：所以在仁宗即位后请求到南京太医院去了。
English: Therefore, after the enthronement of Emperor Nanzong, he requested to go to the Nanjing Tai Hospital.

古文：宣宗立，召还。
现代文：宣宗即位，召寅回北京。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne and summoned Yin back to Beijing.

古文：正统六年卒。
现代文：正统六年卒。
English: Legitimate six-year-olds.

古文：两京太医院皆祀寅。
现代文：两京太医院都为寅祭祀。
English: Both Kyoto Imperial Hospitals hold Tora-sacrifice ceremonies.

古文：寅弟宏亦精药论，子孙传其业。
现代文：寅弟盛宏也精通医术，其子孙承传其业。
English: His younger brother, Sheng Hong, was also proficient in medicine, and his descendants inherited his profession.

古文：初，寅晨直御医房，忽昏眩欲死，募人疗寅，莫能应。
现代文：以前，寅清晨到御医房值勤，忽昏眩，生命垂危，找人为寅治疗，无人应募。
English: In the past, Tora was on duty at the infirmary in the early morning, suddenly dizzy, life-threatening, looking for someone to treat Tora, but no one responded.

古文：一草泽医人应之，一服而愈。
现代文：有江湖医生应募而来，服一剂药就好了。
English: A quack doctor has been recruited to come and take a dose of medicine.

古文：帝问状，其人曰： 寅空心入药房，猝中药毒。
现代文：帝问是什么病，这位江湖医生说： 寅是空腹入药房，突然中毒。
English: When the emperor asked what the illness was, the quack doctor said: "Tin went to the pharmacy on an empty stomach and was suddenly poisoned.

古文：能和解诸药者，甘草也。 
现代文：能和解的药中，只有甘草。 
English: Among the drugs that can be reconciled, only licorice.

古文：帝问寅，果空腹入，乃厚赐草泽医人。
现代文：帝问寅是否如此，寅点头称是，于是厚赐这位江湖医生。
English: The emperor asked if this was the case with Yin, who nodded yes, and then gave generously to the quack doctor.

古文：皇甫仲和，睢州人。
现代文：皇甫仲和，河南睢州人。
English: Emperor Fu Zhonghe, a native of Ganzhou, Henan Province.

古文：精天文推步学。
现代文：精通天文历算。
English: He is proficient in astronomical calculations.

古文：永乐中，成祖北征，仲和与袁忠彻扈从。
现代文：永乐年间，成祖北征，仲和与袁忠彻扈从。
English: During the Yongle years, Cheng Zu went on the Northern Expedition, and Zhong He and Yuan Zhong Chieh followed.

古文：师至漠北，不见寇，将引还，命仲和占之，言： 今日未申间，寇当从东南来。
现代文：大军至漠北尚不见寇，准备退兵，命仲和卜卦。仲和说： 今日未刻与申刻之间，寇会从东南来。
English: The large army to the north of the desert has not yet seen the robbers, they are preparing to retreat, and they are speculating about the fate of Zhonghe. Zhonghe said: Today, between midnight and midnight, the robbers will come from the southeast.

古文：王师始却，终必胜。 
现代文：王师开始会退却，最后必胜。 
English: Wang Shi will retreat at first, but he will win in the end.

古文：忠彻对如之。
现代文：忠彻也这样说。
English: That's what Tadateru also said.

古文：比日中不至，复问，二人对如初。
现代文：到了日中还不见寇之踪影，再问二人如何，二人还是那样说。
English: By the middle of the day, there was still no sign of the moose. When I asked the two of them how they were, they said the same thing.

古文：帝命械二人，不验，将诛死。
现代文：帝命将二人囚禁起来，若他们的话不灵验，就杀了他们。
English: The emperor ordered the two men to be imprisoned, and if their words did not work, they were to be killed.

古文：顷之，中官奔告曰： 寇大至矣。 
现代文：过了一会儿，太监飞报： 寇大队人马来了。 
English: After a while, the eunuch sent out a flyer: "The brigade of robbers has arrived."

古文：时初得安南神炮，寇一骑直前，即以炮击之，一骑复前，再击之，寇不动。
现代文：当时得到了安南神炮，寇一骑冲上来，便用炮击毙，再来再击，寇按兵不动。
English: At that time, he got Annan's cannon. As soon as Kou rushed up, he was killed by the cannon. He struck again, but Kou did not move.

古文：帝登高望之曰： 东南不少却乎？ 
现代文：帝登高一看，说到： 东南方不是稍退了些吗？ 
English: When Emperor Gao took a look, he said, "Isn't southeastern China a bit backward?

古文：亟麾大将谭广等进击，诸将奋斫马足，寇少退。
现代文：忙指挥大将谭广等进击，诸将奋力战斗，砍敌马足，寇稍退却。
English: He hurriedly commanded General Tan Guang and others to attack. They fought hard, cut off the enemy's horse's foot, and the pirates retreated slightly.

古文：俄疾风扬沙，两军不相见，寇始引去。
现代文：忽然疾风起，沙漠漫天，两不相见，寇才退走。
English: Suddenly, a gale blows up, the desert fills the sky, the two are separated, and the kobolds retreat.

古文：帝欲即夜班师，二人曰： 明日寇必降，请待之。 
现代文：帝欲乘夜班师。仲和、忠彻二人说： 明天寇必来降，请等待。 
English: The emperor wanted to take the night shift. Zhonghe and Zhongchie said, "Tomorrow, Kou will come down. Please wait."

古文：至期果降，帝始神其术，授仲和钦天监正。
现代文：到时寇果然来降，帝始深信仲和的神机妙算，授他为钦天监正。
English: At that time, Kou did indeed abdicate, and Emperor Shi was deeply convinced of Zhonghe's miraculous cunning, awarding him the title of Qin Tianxuan Zheng.

古文：英宗将北征，仲和时已老，学士曹鼐问曰： 驾可止乎？
现代文：英宗也将北征，这时仲和已老，学士曹鼐问仲和： 可劝阻圣驾与否？
English: Yingzong will also march north. At this time, when Zhonghe was already old, the scholar Cao Zheng asked Zhonghe: Can you dissuade the holy ride or not?

古文：胡、王两尚书已率百官谏矣。 
现代文：胡、王两尚书已率百官进谏了。 
English: Hu and Wang have led hundreds of officials into the palace.

古文：曰： 不能也，紫微垣诸星已动矣。 
现代文：仲和说： 不能，紫微垣诸星已动。 
English: Zhonghe said, "No, the stars in the purple and white field have already moved."

古文：曰： 然则奈何？ 
现代文：曹鼐又问： 那如何是好？ 
English: Cao Wei asked again: How is that good?

古文：曰： 盍先治内。 
现代文：仲和说： 何不先治内。 
English: Nakakazu said, "Why don't we start with internal affairs first?"

古文：曰： 命亲王监国矣。 
现代文：曹鼐说 ：命亲王代行朝政。 
English: Cao Pi said: It is up to the crown prince to carry out the government of the dynasty.

古文：曰： 不如立储君。 
现代文：仲和说 ：不如立皇太子。 
English: Nakahe said, "It would be better to appoint a crown prince."

古文：曰： 皇子幼，未易立也。 
现代文：曹鼐说： 皇子尚幼，不容易立。 
English: Cao Wei said, "The prince is still young and it is not easy for him to stand up.

古文：曰： 恐终不免立。 
现代文：仲和说 ：终究是不免要立的。 
English: Nakahe said: After all, it is inevitable to stand up.

古文：及车驾北狩，景帝遂即位。
现代文：英宗北征，兵败被俘，景帝在京城即皇位。
English: Yingzong led the Northern Expedition, was defeated and captured, and Emperor Jing ascended the throne in the capital.

古文：寇之薄都城也，城中人皆哭。仲和曰： 勿忧，云向南，大将气至，寇退矣。 
现代文：寇已逼近北京城下，城中人皆哭，仲和说： 勿忧，云向南，大将将至，寇即退走。 
English: The invasion has approached the city of Beijing. Everyone in the city is crying. Zhonghe said, "Don't worry. The clouds are moving south. The general is approaching. The invasion will retreat immediately."

古文：明日，杨洪等入援，寇果退。
现代文：第二天，杨洪等入援，寇果退。
English: The next day, Yang Hong and others came to help, but Kogoro left.

古文：一日出朝，有卫士请占。
现代文：有天出朝，卫士请他占一卦。
English: One morning, the guards asked him to tell a story.

古文：仲和辞，卫士怒。仲和笑曰： 汝室中妻妾正相斗，可速返。 
现代文：仲和拒绝。卫士怒，仲和笑道： 你的妻妾正在相斗，快回去。 
English: Nakahe refused. The guards were angry, and Nakahe laughed and said, "Your wife and concubine are fighting with each other, hurry back."

古文：寅以筮游公卿贵人间，莫不信重之，然无一语及私。
现代文：此人回家见妻妾正斗得难分难解。有人问仲和何以知道。仲和说 ：他问我时，正看到两鹊在屋上相斗，由此知道。 
English: The man came home to find his wife and concubine fighting. Someone asked Nakaho how he knew. Nakaho said, "When he asked me, he was watching two women fighting on the roof, and that's how he knew."

古文：年几九十乃卒。吴杰，武进人。
现代文：其占卜之灵大都是这样。吴杰，常州府武进人。
English: Most of the diviners are like this. Wu Jie, from Changzhou.

古文：弘治中，以善医征至京师，试礼部高等。
现代文：弘治中，因善医而被召至京师。经礼部考试为高等医师。
English: In the middle of the Heian period, he was called to Kyoto for being a good doctor, and became a high-ranking doctor after passing the examination of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：故事，高等入御药房，次入太医院，下者遣还。
现代文：按惯例高等医生入御药房，次等入太医院，下等遣还。
English: According to the usual practice, senior doctors enter the pharmacy, junior doctors enter the hospital, and junior doctors are sent back.

古文：杰言于尚书曰： 诸医被征，待次都下十余载，一旦遣还，诚流落可悯。
现代文：杰对尚书说： 诸医被征来京师，等待了十余年，一旦遣还，流落可悯。
English: Jie said to Shangshu: The doctors were conscripted to teach in Beijing and waited for more than ten years. Once they were repatriated, their exile was pitiful.

古文：杰愿辞御药房，与诸人同入院。 
现代文：杰愿辞御药房之职，与诸医一同入太医院。 
English: Jie is willing to resign from his position as a pharmacist and join the doctors at Tai Hospital.

古文：尚书义而许之。
现代文：尚书见他重义气，同意了。
English: Shang Shuxu saw that he had a strong sense of loyalty and agreed.

古文：正德中，武宗得疾，杰一药而愈，即擢御医。
现代文：正德年间，武宗得病，杰一剂药就治好了，即提升为御医。
English: During the Zhengde era, Wu Zong fell ill, and Jie cured him with a dose of medicine, that is, he was promoted to the imperial doctor.

古文：自是，每愈帝一疾，辄进一官，积至太医院使，前后赐彪虎衣、绣春刀及银币甚厚。帝每行幸，必以杰扈行。
现代文：一天，帝打猎回来，很疲惫，有病，服杰药便愈，进杰一官。从此以后，每为帝治好一次病便升官一级，直至太医院使，赐赏甚厚。帝每次出行，必使杰扈从。
English: One day, the emperor came back from hunting, very tired and ill. He took medicine to get better and was promoted to a higher rank. From then on, every time the emperor was cured of an illness, he was promoted to the first level, until he was sent to the Tai Hospital. The reward was very rich. Every time the emperor traveled, he had to make Jie follow him.

古文：帝欲南巡，杰谏曰： 圣躬未安，不宜远涉。 
现代文：帝欲南行，杰劝阻道 ：圣体欠安，不宜远行。 
English: The emperor wanted to go south, but Jie dissuaded him, saying, "The Blessed Sacrament is not in good condition, and it is not appropriate to travel far."

古文：帝怒，叱左右掖出。
现代文：帝怒，令左右将杰扶出去。
English: Enraged, the emperor ordered the left and right to help Jie out.

古文：及驾还，渔于清江浦，溺而得疾。
现代文：圣驾还京师，在清江浦钓鱼落水而得病。
English: He returned to Beijing and became ill after falling into the water while fishing in Qingjiangpu.

古文：至临清，急遣使召杰，比至，疾已深，遂扈归通州。
现代文：到临清急派人去召杰来治病。杰赶到时，病已加重，扈送到通州。
English: When they arrived in Linqing, they urgently sent someone to call Jie to treat him. When Jie arrived, his illness had worsened and he was sent to Tongzhou.

古文：时江彬握兵居左右，虑帝晏驾己得祸，力请幸宣府。
现代文：这时江彬掌握兵权在皇帝左右，怕帝晏驾使自己得祸，极力请皇帝去宣府。
English: At this time, Jiang Bin controlled the military power around the emperor. Fearing that the emperor would bring misfortune upon himself, he urged the emperor to go to Xuanfu.

古文：杰忧之，语近侍曰： 疾亟矣，仅可还大内。
现代文：杰为之担忧，对侍臣说： 病很重，只可还京师。
English: Worried about this, Jie said to his vassal: "I am very ill, I can only return to the capital.

古文：倘至宣府有不讳，吾辈宁有死所乎！ 
现代文：倘若去宣府发生不幸，我们将死无葬身之地。 
English: If any misfortune happens to Xuanfu, we will die without a place to bury ourselves.

古文：子希周，进士，户科给事中；希曾，举人。
现代文：近侍害怕了，百方劝帝，才还京师。刚到京便驾崩，江彬被诛，中外晏然无事，有赖吴杰之力。
English: His close attendants were afraid, and it took all kinds of persuasion to persuade the emperor to return to Beijing. Just after he arrived in Beijing, he passed away, and Jiang Bin was arrested. There was no sign of trouble at home or abroad, thanks to Wu Jie's strength.

古文：又有许绅者，京师人。
现代文：杰不久隐退。许绅，北京人。
English: Jie soon retired. Xu Sheng, a Beijing native.

古文：嘉靖初，供事御药房，受知于世宗，累迁太医院使，历加工部尚书，领院事。
现代文：嘉清初在御药房任职，为世宗所重视，调任太医院使，加工部尚书衔，管理太医院事。
English: At the beginning, Jiaqing worked in the pharmacy, which was highly valued by Shizong. He was transferred to the hospital, and the processing department was still a book title. He managed the hospital.

古文：二十年，宫婢杨金英等谋逆，以帛缢帝，气已绝。绅急调峻药下之，辰时下药，未时忽作声，去紫血数升，遂能言，又数剂而愈。
现代文：嘉靖二十年，宫女杨金英等谋叛，用帛勒杀世宗，气已绝，绅忙调大剂量药抢救，辰时下药，未时勿出声，去紫血数升，能讲话了，又服数剂而愈。
English: In the 20th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Yang Jin Ying, a concubine, and others plotted to overthrow the emperor. They used a pestle and mortar to kill the emperor. They were exhausted, so they hurriedly took a large dose of medicine to save their lives. Take the medicine at the right time, do not make a sound before it is too late, remove a few liters of purple blood, be able to speak, and take a few more doses.

古文：帝德绅，加太子太保、礼部尚书，赐赍甚厚。
现代文：帝非常感谢许绅，加官为太子太保、礼部尚书，赏赐甚厚。
English: The emperor was very grateful to Xu Sheng. He was awarded the title of prince's eunuch and the title of etiquette official, which was a great reward.

古文：未几，绅得疾，曰： 吾不起矣。曩者宫变，吾自分不效必杀身，因此惊悸，非药石所能疗也。 
现代文：不久，绅得病，对人说： 我的病治不好了，从前宫廷发生变故，我自己认为若对皇上治疗无效，必有杀身之祸，因此受惊，这不是医药所能治得好的。 
English: Before long, the gentleman fell ill and said to the man: "My illness cannot be cured. There was an incident at the former imperial court. I myself believe that if the treatment is not effective for the emperor, it will be fatal. Therefore, I was frightened. This is not something that can be cured by medicine.

古文：肯堂所著《证治准绳》，为医家所宗，行履详父《樵传》。凌云，字汉章，归安人。
现代文：不久病卒。赐谥恭僖，封其一子为官。明代医生做官最大者只许绅一人。凌云，字汉章，浙江归安人。
English: He died of illness soon after. He bestowed the title of Gong Gongjun and appointed his only son as an official. Only one person was allowed to be the highest-ranking doctor in the Ming Dynasty. Lingyun, Zi Hanzhang, Zhejiang Guianren.

古文：为诸生，弃去。
现代文：曾为生员，后弃学而北游泰山。
English: He was a freshman, but later dropped out of school to travel to Mount Tai.

古文：北游泰山，古庙前遇病人，气垂绝，云嗟叹久之。一道人忽曰： 汝欲生之乎？ 
现代文：在古庙前遇病人，已生命垂危，云嗟叹良久。一道人忽然问他 ：你想使他活吗？ 
English: In front of an ancient temple, he met a patient who had been dying for a long time. A group of people suddenly asked him: "Do you want him to live?"

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：云答 ：自然！ 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：道人针其左股，立苏，曰： 此人毒气内侵，非死也，毒散自生耳。 
现代文：道人在病人左股上用针治疗，病人立即苏醒。道人说： 此人毒气侵入内脏，而不是死，毒散自然活了。 
English: The Taoist treated the patient with a needle on the left thigh, and the patient immediately woke up. Taoist said: This person's poison gas invaded the internal organs, but he did not die. The poison dispersed naturally and he lived.

古文：因授云针术，治疾无不效。
现代文：因授云针疗法，治病无不有效。
English: Due to the cloud needle therapy, the treatment is effective.

古文：里人病嗽，绝食五日，众投以补剂，益甚。
现代文：同里人患咳嗽病，绝食五日，为他看病的医生都是下补药，而咳嗽得更厉害。
English: A fellow villager suffered from a coughing disease and went on a five-day hunger strike. The doctors who treated him were all prescribing tonics, but the cough was even worse.

古文：云曰： 此寒湿积也，穴在顶，针之必晕绝，逾时始苏。 
现代文：云曰 ：这是寒湿所积成疾，针灸头顶穴位，他必晕过去，过些时会醒过来。 
English: Yun said: This is a disease caused by the accumulation of cold and dampness, acupuncture the acupoint on the top of the head, he will faint, and will wake up after a while.

古文：命四人分牵其发，使勿倾侧，乃针，果晕绝。家人皆哭，云言笑自如。
现代文：命四人抓住病人头发，勿使他倾侧，进行针灸，果晕过去，家人皆哭，而云谈笑自如。
English: Order four people to hold the patient's hair, do not make him lean to the side, carry out acupuncture, the dizziness passes, the family members all cry, and the cloud talks and laughs freely.

古文：顷之，气渐苏，复加补，始出针，呕积痰斗许，病即除。
现代文：过一会儿病人复苏过来，再加补药，才拔出针。病人吐出差不多一斗痰，病愈。
English: After a while, the patient was revived and given a tonic before the needle was pulled out. The patient vomited almost a bucket of phlegm and recovered.

古文：有男子病后舌吐。云兄亦知医，谓云曰： 此病后近女色太蚤也。
现代文：有男子病后吐舌头，云之兄也懂医术，对云说： 此人病后近女色太早。
English: There is a man who sticks out his tongue after falling ill. Yun's brother, who is also a doctor, says to Yun: "This man became infatuated with women too soon after falling ill.

古文：舌者心之苗，肾水竭，不能制心火，病在阴虚。
现代文：舌者心之留，肾水竭不能制心火，病在阴虚。
English: The tongue is the residue of one's mind. When the kidneys are exhausted, the heart cannot be controlled. The disease is in the yin and yang.

古文：其穴在右股太阳，是当以阳攻阴。 
现代文：其穴位在右股太阳，应以阳攻阴。 
English: Its acupoint is on the right side of the sun, and it should attack the yin with the yang.

古文：云曰： 然。 如其穴针之，舌吐如故。
现代文：云同意这看法，按照其兄所说的穴位进行针疗，但吐舌如故。
English: Yun agreed with this view, according to his brother said acupuncture needles, but remained silent.

古文：云曰： 此知泻而不知补也。 补数剂，舌渐复故。
现代文：云明白 这只是知泻而不知补的缘故 ，服了几剂补药，再不吐舌了。
English: I knew it was just because I had diarrhea and didn't know how to treat it, so I took a few doses of tonic and didn't throw up again.

古文：淮阳王病风三载，请于朝，召四方名医，治不效。
现代文：淮阳王得风湿病三年，请朝廷召四方名医来治，都无效。
English: Huaiyang Wang had rheumatism for three years and asked the imperial court to call four famous doctors to treat him, but it was all in vain.

古文：云投以针，不三日，行步如故。
现代文：云用针疗，不到三天就行走如故。
English: Yun used acupuncture, and within three days he was walking normally.

古文：金华富家归，少寡，得狂疾，至裸形野立。
现代文：金华富家有一妇人，年轻时就守寡，得狂病，甚至裸体站在野外。
English: There was a woman in a wealthy family in Jinhua who had been widowed at a young age and had become so ill that she even stood naked in the open.

古文：云视曰： 是谓丧心。吾针其心，心正必知耻。
现代文：云诊视后说 ：这是心病，吾对心进行针疗，心正必知耻。
English: After the diagnosis, Yun said, "This is a heart disease. I need acupuncture for my heart. I must be ashamed of my heart."

古文：蔽之帐中，慰以好言释其愧，可不发。 
现代文：把她关在帐中，以好言启发其羞愧之心，病可不发。 
English: Shut her up in a cupboard, enlighten her shame with a kind word, and she will not fall ill.

古文：乃令二人坚持，用凉水喷面，针之果愈。
现代文：令二人把她抓紧，用凉水喷面，进行针疗，其病果然好了。
English: The two of them held her tightly, sprayed her with cold water and performed acupuncture, and her illness was cured.

古文：吴江妇临产，胎不下者三日，呼号求死。
现代文：吴江一妇女临产，三日胎不下，产妇呼喊愿死。
English: In Wujiang, a woman was on the verge of giving birth. Three days later, she still couldn't get the baby out. The woman cried out that she wanted to die.

古文：云针刺其心，针出，儿应手下。
现代文：云以针刺其心，针一拔出，胎儿就呱呱落地了。
English: The cloud pricked its heart with a needle. As soon as the needle was pulled out, the fetus fell to the ground.

古文：主人喜，问故。
现代文：主人高兴得很，问其原因。
English: The owner was very happy and asked why.

古文：曰： 此抱心生也。手针痛则舒。 
现代文：云说： 此抱心生，针刺痛了胎儿的手，他便松手出生了。 
English: Yun said, "This embrace gave birth to a heart, the needle pricked the fetus's hand, and he was born without hands.

古文：取儿掌视之，有针痕。
现代文：看胎儿手掌，果然有针刺的痕迹。
English: Look at the fetus's palm, and sure enough there are pinprick marks.

古文：孝宗闻云名，召至京，命太医官出铜人，蔽以衣而试之，所刺无不中，乃授御医。
现代文：孝宗闻云之名，召至京师，命太医将铜人穿上衣服来考试他，所刺穴位无不准，于是授为御医。
English: When Emperor Xiaozong heard of Yun's fame, he summoned him to Beijing to be his physician. The imperial physician dressed the bronze man in clothes and examined him. The location of the puncture was determined, and he was awarded the title of imperial physician.

古文：年七十七，卒于家。
现代文：享年七十七岁，卒于家中。
English: He was seventy-seven years old and died at home.

古文：子孙传其术，海内称针法者，曰归安凌氏。
现代文：子孙传其医术，海内一提到针疗法者，都称赞归安凌氏。
English: His medical skills have been passed down to his children and grandchildren. When anyone in Hainan mentions acupuncture, they all praise Gui Anling.

古文：有李玉者，官六安卫千户，善针灸。
现代文：李玉，六安卫千户，善于针灸疗法。
English: Li Yu, a resident of Liuanwei County, is good at acupuncture therapy.

古文：或病头痛不可忍，虽震雷不闻。
现代文：有人患头痛病，疼痛难忍，甚至震雷也听不见。
English: Some people suffer from headaches, the pain is unbearable, and even the thunder cannot be heard.

古文：玉诊之曰： 此虫啖脑也。 
现代文：玉诊视后说 ：这是虫在吃脑。 
English: After the examination, Jade said, "It's an insect eating my brain."

古文：合杀虫诸药为末，吹鼻中，虫悉从眼耳口鼻出，即愈。
现代文：把各种杀虫药合研为粉末，吹入鼻中，虫都从眼耳口鼻中出来，病就好了。
English: Combine all kinds of insecticides into a powder, blow into the nose, and the insects will come out of the eyes, ears, mouth and nose, and the disease will be cured.

古文：有跛人扶双杖至，玉针之，立去其仗。
现代文：有人脚跛，扶双杖来求他治疗，玉给他针疗，立即弃杖行走。
English: Some people have shackles on their feet, hold double canes to beg him for treatment, give him acupuncture, and immediately abandon the cane to walk.

古文：两京号 神针李玉 。
现代文：两京称他为 神针李玉 。
English: The two capitals called him the divine needle, Li Yu.

古文：兼善方剂。
现代文：他还善用药方治病。
English: He is also good at using prescriptions to treat illnesses.

古文：或病痿，玉察诸医之方，与治法合而不效，疑之。
现代文：有人患痿病，肢体萎弱，脉搏迟缓。玉查阅诸医之药方，凡与治法合而无效者，深为怀疑。
English: Someone is suffering from rickets, limbs are weak, and pulse is slow. Jade consults the prescriptions of various doctors, and is deeply suspicious of those that are ineffective in combination with the treatment.

古文：忽悟曰： 药有新陈，则效有迟速。
现代文：但忽然明白，认为： 药有新陈之分，则效果有迟速之别。
English: However, it suddenly became clear that: if the medicine is new, the effect will be delayed.

古文：此病在表而深，非小剂能愈。 
现代文：此病深沉，非小剂量可以治好。 
English: The disease is profound and can be cured with a very small dose.

古文：乃熬药二锅倾缸内，稍冷，令病者坐其中，以药浇之，逾时汗大出，立愈。
现代文：于是将两次熬的药合在一缸内，稍冷后令病人坐在缸内，用药浇之，过一会儿，病人大汗，病即痊愈。
English: So he put the twice-boiled medicine in a jar, let it cool a little, and then made the patient sit in the jar and poured it with medicine. After a while, the patient sweated profusely, and the disease was cured.

古文：李时珍，字东璧，蕲州人。
现代文：李时珍，字东璧，蕲州人。
English: Li Shizhen, nicknamed Dong Bi, is from Zhangzhou.

古文：好读医书，医家《本草》，自神农所传止三百六十五种，梁陶弘景所增亦如之，唐苏恭增一百一十四种，宋刘翰又增一百二十种，至掌禹锡、唐慎微辈，先后增补合一千五百五十八种，时称大备。
现代文：好读医书。医书《本草》所载药物，自神农所传止有三百六十五种，梁代陶弘景增加三百六十五种，共七百三十种，唐代苏恭增加一百一十四种，宋代刘翰又增一百二十种，到掌禹锡、唐慎微等人，先后增补，合计一千五百五十八种，当时认为诸药齐备。
English: It is good to read medical books. There are 365 kinds of medicines in the medical book "The Materia Medica" since it was handed down by Shennong, 365 kinds were added in the Liang Dynasty by Tao Hongjing, making a total of 730 kinds, 114 kinds were added in the Tang Dynasty by Su Qiong, another 120 kinds were added in the Song Dynasty by Liu Han, and a total of 1558 kinds were added successively by Palm Yu Xi, Tang Shen Wei and others. At that time, it was believed that all medicines were complete.

古文：然品类既烦，名称多杂，或一物而析为二三，或二物而混为一品，时珍病之。
现代文：然其中品类既繁，名称杂乱，或一物分为二三种名称，或二物混为一种，时珍深以为不当。
English: However, among them, the categories are numerous, the names are confusing, or one thing is divided into two or three names, or two things are mixed into one, and it is rare and deeply considered inappropriate.

古文：乃穷搜博采，芟烦补阙，历三十年，阅书八百余家，稿三易而成书，曰《本草纲目》。
现代文：他又多方采集，删繁补缺，历经三十年，查阅八百余家医书，三易其稿而成书，名为《本草纲目》。
English: He also collected materials from many sources, cut and pasted, and after thirty years, consulted more than eight hundred medical books, and rewrote them three times into a book called "This Thesis."

古文：增药三百七十四种，厘为一十六部，合成五十二卷。
现代文：该书新增药物三百七十四种，分为一十六部，合成五十二卷。
English: The book added 374 kinds of drugs, divided into 16 parts and 52 volumes.

古文：首标正名为纲，余各附释为目，次以集解详其出产、形色，又次以气味、主治附方。书成，将上之朝，时珍遽卒。
现代文：该书集解各种药物之产地、形色、气味，并附主治各种疾病的单方。书成之后还未及进呈朝廷，时珍突然去世。
English: The book is a collection of explanations of the origin, shape, and smell of various drugs, and is accompanied by a one-sided treatment of various diseases. After the book was completed, Shizhen died suddenly before it could be presented to the imperial court.

古文：未几，神宗诏修国史，购四方书籍。其子建元以父遗表及是书来献，天子嘉之，命刊行天下，自是士大夫家有其书。
现代文：不久，神宗诏修国史，收购各地书籍，时珍之子建元将父亲的遗表及《本草纲目》献给朝廷，天子嘉赏，命刊行天下。从此以后，士大夫家中都有这部巨著。
English: Soon after, Shinsong Zhao revised the history of the country and acquired books from all over the country. Shizhen's son Jianyuan presented his father's lost watch and "This Thesis" to the imperial court, which was highly appreciated by the emperor and ordered to be published worldwide. Since then, Shidafu's family has owned this great work.

古文：时珍官楚王府奉祠正，子建中，四川蓬谿知县。
现代文：李时珍曾任楚王府奉祠正，儿子建中任命为四川蓬溪知县。
English: Li Shizhen once served as the head of the Funshi Temple of the King of Chu, and his son Jianzhong was appointed as the head of Fengxi County in Sichuan.

古文：又吴县张颐、祁门汪机、杞县李可大、常熟缪希雍皆精通医术，治病多奇中。
现代文：此外，还有吴县张颐、祁门汪机、杞县李可大、常熟缪希雍等，皆精通医术。
English: In addition, there are Zhang Qian of Wuxian County, Wang Ji of Qimen County, Li Keda of Qian County, and Changshu Muxiyong of Changshu County, all of whom are proficient in medicine.

古文：而希雍常谓《本草》出于神农，朱氏譬之《五经》，其后又复增补别录，譬之注疏，惜朱墨错互。
现代文：缪希雍常说《本草》出于神农，朱氏比喻为《五经》，其后又增补为别录，有如五经之注疏。
English: Muxiyong often said that "The Primordial Herbs" was created by Shennong, and Zhu's metaphor was "The Five Classics," which was later added as a separate record, like a commentary on the Five Classics.

古文：乃沈研剖析，以本经为经，别录为纬，著《本草单方》一书，行于世。
现代文：他潜心研究，以原书《本草》为经，以后人增补之别录为纬，著《本草单方》一书，流行于世。
English: He devoted himself to the study, taking the original book "Hengcao" as the text, and the later additions as the reference, and wrote the book "Hengcao Unilateral," which became popular in the world.

古文：周述学，字继志，山阴人。
现代文：周述学，字继志，浙江山阴人。
English: Zhou Shushu, Zi Jizhi, Zhe Jiang Shan Yin Ren.

古文：读书好深湛之思，尤邃于历学，撰《中经》。用中国之算，测西域之占。
现代文：读书好深思熟虑，尤其对于历学有精深研究，撰有《中经》，用中国之算术检验西域之预测。
English: He was very thoughtful in his reading, especially in his study of history. He wrote the "Middle Classic" and used Chinese arithmetic to test Western predictions.

古文：又推究五纬细行，为《星道五图》，于是七曜皆有道可求。
现代文：又做《星道五图》，知七曜的运动皆有规律可循。
English: He also made "Five Maps of the Star Road," and there are rules to be followed in all the movements of Zhishiyou.

古文：与武进唐顺之论历，取历代史志之议，正其讹舛，删其繁芜。
现代文：他与武进的唐顺之谈论历法，将历代史志中有关历法的议论中的错误，加以纠正，删去繁芜。
English: He discussed the calendar with Tang Shunzhi of Wujin, and corrected the errors in the discussion of the calendar in the history of the past, and deleted the cumbersome.

古文：又撰《大统万年二历通议》，以补历代之所未及。
现代文：还撰有《大统万年二历通议》，以补历代历法中所未触及者。
English: He also wrote the "Great Universal Universal Two-Calendar General Discussion" to supplement those not mentioned in the calendar.

古文：自历以外，图书、皇极、律吕、山经、水志、分野、舆地、算法、太乙、壬遁、演禽、风角、鸟占、兵符、阵法、卦影、禄命、建除、葬术、五运六气、海道针经，莫不各有成书，凡一千余卷，统名曰《神道大编》。
现代文：除历法以外，凡图书、皇极、律吕、山经、水志、分野、舆地、算法、太乙、壬遁、演禽、凤角、鸟占、兵符、阵法、卦影、禄命、建除、葬术、五运六气、海道针经等，莫不各有著述，共一千余卷，统名为《神道大编》。
English: In addition to the calendar, all the books, the Emperor's Rule, the Rule of Lu, the Mountain Sutra, the Water Divination, the Field, the Public Opinion, the Algorithm, the Tai Yi, the Ren Ren, the Game of Birds, the Feng Angle, the Bird Horoscope, the Military Emblem, the Lineage, the Gua Ying, the Life of Lu, the Construction and Removal, the Funerary Art, the Five Movements and the Six Airs, the Road of Needles, and so on, all have their own writings, a total of more than one thousand volumes, collectively called the "Shinto Big Book."

古文：嘉靖中，锦衣陆炳访士于经历沈炼，炼举述学。
现代文：嘉靖年间，锦衣卫的陆炳访求名士于经历沈链，链举荐述学。
English: During the Jiajing Dynasty, Lu Xun of Jin Yi Wei visited famous people to learn about the experience of Shen Zhen and the recommendation of Zhen Zhen.

古文：炳礼聘至京，服其英伟，荐之兵部尚书赵锦。
现代文：炳以礼聘请至京师，佩服其雄才大略，向兵部尚书赵锦推荐。
English: He was invited to Beijing as an instructor, admired his great talent, and recommended Zhao Jin to the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：锦就访边事，述学曰： 今岁主有边兵，应在乾艮。艮为辽东，乾则宣、大二镇，京师可无虞也。 
现代文：锦去拜访，征询对边防的意见。述学说 ：今年边疆有战事，应在乾艮二处，艮为辽东，乾则是宣、大二镇，京师可以无忧无虑。 
English: Jin went to pay a visit to solicit opinions on border defense. Describing the doctrine: this year there is a war on the frontier, it should be in two places in Jianye, Jianye is Liaodong, Jianye is Xuan and Dajie Town, Beijing division can be worry-free.

古文：已而果然。
现代文：其后果然如此。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：锦将荐诸朝，会仇鸾闻其名欲致之，述学识其必败，乃还里。
现代文：锦又准备把述学向朝廷举荐，恰巧这时仇鸾闻述学之名，想把他请去。述学知道仇鸾必败，而不肯去，回到家乡。
English: Kam was also preparing to recommend Shu Xue to the imperial court, but it so happened that Qiu Xuan heard of Shu Xue's name and wanted to invite him. Knowing that Qiu Xue was doomed to defeat, Shu Xue refused to go and returned to his hometown.

古文：总督胡宗宪征倭，招至幕中，亦不能荐，以布衣终。
现代文：总督胡宗宪征讨倭寇，招他于其幕府中，但也未向朝廷举荐，述学终生为一介平民。
English: The governor, Hu Zong, summoned him to the shogunate to discuss the Japanese invaders, but did not recommend him to the imperial court, and he remained a commoner all his life.

