古文：奚康生杨大眼崔延伯
现代文：奚康生，河南洛阳人。
English: He is from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：奚康生，河南洛阳人。
现代文：其祖先是代人，世代为部落大人。
English: Their ancestors are the descendants, and the descendants are the adults of the tribe.

古文：其先代人也，世为部落大人。祖直，平远将军、柔玄镇将。
现代文：祖奚直，官至平远将军、柔玄镇将。
English: Zu Xunzhi, official to General Pingyuan, General Zhuoxuan.

古文：入为镇北大将军，内外三都大官，赐爵长进侯。
现代文：进入朝廷为镇北大将军，内外三都大官，赐爵长进侯。
English: He entered the imperial court as the general of Zhenbei, and was a high-ranking official of the three capitals at home and abroad. He was given a peerage and became a marquis.

古文：卒，赠幽州刺史，谥曰简。
现代文：死后，赠幽州刺史，谥称简。
English: After her death, she was given the posthumous name Yuzhou Zhishi, and was nicknamed Jane.

古文：父普怜，不仕而卒。
现代文：父奚普怜，不仕而卒。
English: His father, Pu Rong, did not want to retire.

古文：太和十一年，蠕蠕频来寇边，柔玄镇都将李兜讨击之。
现代文：太和十一年，蠕蠕频频侵犯边境，柔玄镇都将李兜率部讨伐。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taihe era, the Cree frequently violated the border, and the town of Zhuoxuan was led by Li Dabu.

古文：康生性骁勇，有武艺，弓力十石，矢异常箭，为当时所服。
现代文：奚康生性格骁勇，有武艺，弓力十石，矢异常箭，当时人十分佩服。
English: At that time, people were very impressed by Kang Sheng's courageous personality, martial arts skills, bow strength of ten stones, and exceptional arrows.

古文：从兜为前驱军主，频战陷陈，壮气有闻，由是为宗子队主。
现代文：跟从李兜为前驱军主，冲锋陷阵，壮气闻名，由此为宗子队主。
English: He followed Li Dabu as the leader of the vanguard army, stormed into battle, and was famous for his strength, and thus became the leader of the Zongzi team.

古文：从驾征钟离，驾旋济淮，五将未渡，萧鸾遣将率众据渚，邀断津路。
现代文：跟从帝驾征讨钟离，帝驾很快渡过淮河，而五将未渡，萧鸾派将率众据占滩渚，截断渡口道路。
English: Following the departure of Emperor Gaozong, Emperor Gaozong quickly crossed the Huaihe River, and five days before the crossing, Xiao Yu's faction will lead the crowd to occupy the beach and cut off the ferry road.

古文：高祖敕曰： 能破中渚贼者，以为直阁将军。 
现代文：高祖下命令说： 能破滩渚上的敌人的，朕便任他为直将军。 
English: Gao Zu gave the order: If I can break through the enemy on the beach, I will appoint him as General Zhi.

古文：康生时为军主，谓友人曰： 如其克也，得暢名绩；脱若不捷，命也在天。
现代文：奚康生当时为军主，对友人说： 如能克敌，得畅名绩，假如不行，命也在天。
English: At that time, Gong Kangsheng was the commander of the army, and he said to his friend: If you can defeat the enemy, you will get a good reputation. If you can't, your life will be in the sky.

古文：丈夫今日何为不决！ 
现代文：大丈夫今日为什么不豁出去了。 
English: It's okay, why don't you go out today.

古文：遂便应募，缚筏积柴，因风放火，烧其船舰，依烟直进，飞刀乱斫，投河溺死者甚众。
现代文：于是便一跃而起，缚筏积柴，顺风放火，烧其船舟监，依烟直进，飞刀乱砍，投河溺死的人数很多。
English: As a result, many people jumped up at once, tied up, hoarded firewood, set fire to the wind, burned their boats, followed the smoke straight ahead, slashed wildly with flying knives, and drowned in the river.

古文：乃假康生直阁将军。
现代文：于是高祖假康生直将军。
English: As a result, Gen. Gao Zu and Gen. Fake Kang Sheng Zhi resigned.

古文：后以勋除中坚将军、太子三校、西台直后。
现代文：后又以功除授中坚将军、太子三校、西台直后。
English: Later, he was awarded the Distinguished General, the Prince of the Three Schools, and the West Tower.

古文：吐京胡反，自号辛支王。
现代文：吐京胡反叛朝廷，自称辛支王。
English: Tu Jinghu rebelled against the imperial court, claiming to be the king of Xinjiang.

古文：康生为军主，从章武王彬讨之。
现代文：康生为军主，跟从章武王元彬讨伐叛贼。
English: Kang Sheng was the commander of the army and followed Zhangwu Wang Yuanbin to fight against the traitors.

古文：胡遣精骑一千邀路断截，康生率五百人拒战，破之，追至石羊城，斩首三十级。
现代文：胡派精锐骑兵截断进军道路，康生率领五百人迎战，破敌，追至石阳城，斩敌三十人。
English: The elite cavalry of the Hu faction cut off the advance road, and Kang Sheng led five hundred people to fight, defeated the enemy, chased them to Shiyang City, and killed thirty of the enemy.

古文：彬甲卒七千，与胡对战，分为五军，四军俱败，康生军独全。
现代文：元彬士卒七千，与胡对战，为分五军，四军都败，康生一支独全。
English: The former Bin Shi, with seven thousand soldiers, fought against Hu, and was divided into five armies. The four armies were all defeated, and Kang Sheng was the only one.

古文：迁为统军。
现代文：迁升统军。
English: Moved up to the unified army.

古文：率精骑一千追胡至车突谷，诈为坠马，胡皆谓死，争欲取之。
现代文：率领精兵一千追吐京胡到车突谷，诈做坠马，胡以为他们都死了，争相取其首级。
English: He led a thousand elite soldiers to chase the Jinghu to Chetu Valley. They cheated and fell off the horse. The Hu thought they were all dead and fought for their heads.

古文：康生腾骑奋矛，杀伤数十人，胡遂奔北。
现代文：康生腾身上骑，挥矛杀敌，杀伤数十人，胡于是北逃。
English: Kang Sheng Teng rode on his body, wielding a spear to kill the enemy, killing dozens of people, so Hu fled north.

古文：辛支轻骑退走，去康生百余步，弯弓射之，应弦而死。
现代文：辛支王轻骑退逃，奚康生离他有一百多步远，抽弓便射，辛支王应弦而死。
English: Xinzhi Wang lightly rode back and fled, Yu Kang Sheng was more than a hundred paces away from him, he drew his bow and shot, Xinzhi Wang died in response.

古文：因俘其牛羊驼马以万数。
现代文：因之俘获其牛羊驼马数以万计。
English: As a result, tens of thousands of their cattle, sheep, camels and horses were captured.

古文：萧鸾置义阳□，招诱边民。
现代文：萧鸾设置义阳郡，招诱魏边境民众。
English: Xiao Yao set up Yiyang County to lure people from the Wei border.

古文：康生复为统军，从王肃讨之，进围其城。
现代文：康生又任统军，跟随王肃讨伐敌人，进围其城。
English: Kang Sheng was also in charge of unifying the army and followed Wang Su to fight the enemy and encircle his city.

古文：鸾将张伏护自升城楼，言辞不逊，肃令康生射之。
现代文：萧鸾将张伏护登上城楼，出言不逊，王肃令康生射之。
English: Xiao Yao escorted Zhang Fusheng up to the castle tower and made an insulting remark. Wang Su ordered Kang Sheng to shoot him.

古文：以强弓大箭望楼射窗，扉开即入，应箭而毙。
现代文：康生用强弓大箭望楼射窗，窗开箭入，张伏护应弦而死。
English: Kang Sheng shot the window of the watchtower with a strong bow and arrow. The window was opened and the arrow went in. Zhang Fubei succumbed to the attack.

古文：彼民见箭，皆云狂弩。
现代文：城中百姓见到箭矢，都说是狂驽所射。
English: When the people in the city saw the arrows, they all said that they were shot by a mad dragonfly.

古文：以杀伏护，赏帛一千匹。
现代文：以杀伏护之功，受到帛一千匹的赏赐。
English: He was rewarded with a thousand yakitori for his work of killing and protecting.

古文：又频战再退其军，赏三阶，帛五百匹。
现代文：又频战再退敌军，朝廷赏升三阶，帛五百匹。
English: After frequent battles, the enemy army retreated again, and the imperial court rewarded them with a promotion to the third rank and 500 horses.

古文：萧宝卷将裴叔业率众围涡阳，欲解义阳之急。
现代文：萧宝卷将裴叔业率众围困涡阳，想解除义阳之急。
English: Xiao Bao rolled Pei Shouye rate crowd besieged Vortex Yang, want to relieve the urgency of Yiyang.

古文：诏遣高聪等四军往援之，后遣都督、广陵侯元衍，并皆败退。
现代文：帝诏派高聪等四支军马前往救援，后派都督、广陵侯元衍，都被打败了。
English: The emperor sent Gao Cong and other four horses to the rescue, and later sent the governor and Guangling Hou Yuanyan, but they were all defeated.

古文：时刺史孟表频启告，高祖敕肃遣康生驰往赴援。
现代文：当时刺史孟表频频启告，高祖令王肃派康生驰驱救援。
English: At that time, Zhang Shi Meng frequently announced that Gao Zu ordered Wang Su to send Kang Sheng to drive the rescue.

古文：一战大破之，赏二阶，帛一千匹。
现代文：一战大破敌军，赏赐升阶二级，帛一千匹。
English: After defeating the enemy in World War I, he was rewarded with a promotion to the second grade and a thousand horses.

古文：及寿春来降也，遣康生领羽林一千人，给龙厩马两匹，驰赴寿春。
现代文：等到寿春前来归降，朝廷派奚康生带领一千羽林军，赐给龙厩马两匹，驰奔寿春。
English: When Shuchun came to surrender, the imperial court sent Jikangsheng to lead a thousand forest troops and give two horses to Long Mews to gallop Shuchun.

古文：既入其城，命集城内旧老，宣诏抚赉。
现代文：军队既入寿春城，奚康生下令召集城中旧老，宣读帝诏优抚赏赐。
English: As soon as the army entered Shuchun City, Yu Kang Sheng ordered to call together the elders of the city and read out the imperial edict on the award of preferential treatment.

古文：俄而，萧宝卷将桓和顿军梁城，陈伯之据硖石，民心骇动，颇有异谋。
现代文：不多久，萧宝卷将桓和驻军梁城，陈伯之据守峡石，民心惊动，图谋不轨。
English: Not long after, Xiao Bao rolled Huanhe and the garrison Liangcheng, Chen Bo's stronghold of the gorge stone, the people's hearts were alarmed, and the plot was derailed.

古文：康生乃防御内外，音信不通。
现代文：奚康生于是防御内外，致使音信不通。
English: Kang Sheng was on the defensive both internally and externally, resulting in a communications blackout.

古文：固城一月，援军乃至。
现代文：固守城池一个月，援军才到。
English: They held the castle for a month before reinforcements arrived.

古文：康生出击桓和、伯之等二军，并破走之，拔梁城、合肥、洛口三戍。
现代文：奚康生出击桓和、伯之等二军，击退了他们，攻下梁城、合肥、洛口三处守军营垒。
English: Gong Kangsheng attacked the two armies of Huanhe and Bozhi, repulsed them, and captured the three garrisons of Liangcheng, Hefei and Lokou.

古文：以功迁征虏将军，封安武县开国男，食邑二百户。
现代文：奚康生因功迁升征虏将军、封安武县开国男，食邑二百户。
English: As a result of his meritorious deeds, Gong Kang Sheng was promoted to General of the Conscription Army and named the founding father of Anwu County. He had 200 households in his hometown.

古文：出为南青州刺史。
现代文：出任南青州刺史。
English: Appointed as the first president of South Qingzhou.

古文：后萧衍郁州遣军主徐济寇边，康生率将出讨，破之，生擒济。
现代文：后来萧衍派郁州军主徐济侵犯边境，奚康生率将讨伐，打败敌人，生擒徐济。
English: Later, Xiao Yan sent Xu Jie, the commander of the Yuzhou army, to invade the border. He successfully led the crusade, defeated the enemy, and captured Xu Jie.

古文：赏帛千匹。
现代文：朝廷赏赐帛一千匹。
English: The Imperial Court rewarded him with a thousand stallions.

古文：时萧衍闻康生能引强弓，力至十余石，故特作大弓两张，送与康生。
现代文：当时萧衍听说奚康生能够引强弓。弓力达十石，故意制作大弓两张，送给奚康生。
English: At that time, Xiao Yan heard that Gong Kang Sheng could draw a strong bow. The bow's strength was up to ten stone. He deliberately made two large bows and gave them to Gong Kang Sheng.

古文：康生得弓，便会集文武，乃用平射，犹有余力。
现代文：康生得弓，便会集文武官员，举弓平射，还有余力没有使出来。
English: When Kang Sheng obtained a bow, he would gather military and civilian officials, raise the bow and shoot it flat, but he did not have enough strength to use it.

古文：其弓长八尺，把中围尺二寸，箭粗殆如今之长笛，观者以为希世绝伦。
现代文：这弓长八尺，弓把中间围长一尺二寸，箭粗如今天的长笛一般，观看的人都认为这是稀世绝伦的勇力。
English: This bow is eight feet long, the middle circumference of the bow is one foot two inches long, and the arrow is as thick as today's flute, and people watching think this is a rare and extraordinary courage.

古文：弓即表送，置之武库。
现代文：这弓，奚康生把它们送到了朝廷，放在武库之中。
English: He sent the bow to the imperial court and placed it in the arsenal.

古文：又萧衍遣将宋黑率众寇扰彭城，时康生遭母忧，诏起为别将、持节、假平南将军，领南青州诸军击走之。
现代文：又萧衍派将宋黑率领人马侵扰彭城，当时奚康生恰服母丧，帝下诏起为别将、持节、假平南将军，率领南青州诸路军马击退了敌人。
English: In addition, Xiao Yan sent Song Hei to invade Pengcheng at the head of men and horses. At that time, Gong Kangsheng was in mourning for his mother, and the emperor issued an edict to be a great general, to hold the festival, and to be a fake Pingnan general. He led the troops and horses of South Qingzhou to repel the enemy.

古文：后衍复遣都督、临川王萧宏，副将张惠绍勒甲十万规寇徐州，又假宋黑徐州刺史，领众二万，水陆俱进，径围高冢戍。
现代文：后来萧衍又派都督、临川王萧宏，副将张惠绍率领十万人马侵犯徐州，又借调宋黑为徐州刺史，领军二万，水陆并进，径直围困高土冢戍。
English: Later, Xiao Yan also sent the governor, Linchuan Wang Xiaohong, and vice-general Zhang Huishao to invade Xuzhou with 100,000 troops, and seconded Song Hei to write the history of Xuzhou, leading 20,000 troops, marching on land and sea, and directly besieging Gaodong.

古文：诏授康生武卫将军、持节、假平南将军，为别将，领羽林三千人，骑、步甲士随便割配。
现代文：帝下诏任命奚康生武卫将军、持节、假平南将军，为别将，率领羽林军三千人，骑兵、步兵任其割配。
English: Emperor Taizong appointed Gen. Zou Kangsheng, Gen. Wuwei, Gen. Ji Jie, and Gen. Fu Pingnan as alternate generals, leading 3,000 men of the Ulin Army, with cavalry and infantry assigned to them.

古文：康生一战败之。
现代文：奚康生一战击败敌人。
English: Kang Sheng defeated the enemy in one battle.

古文：还京，召见宴会，赏帛千匹，赐骅骝御胡马一匹。
现代文：还京后，帝召见他赴宴，赏赐帛千匹，赐给骅骝御用胡马一匹。
English: After returning to Beijing, the emperor summoned him to a banquet, rewarded him with a thousand horses, and gave him a horse for imperial use.

古文：出为平西将军、华州刺史，颇有声绩。
现代文：出任平西将军、华州刺史，颇有政绩。
English: He served as the general of Pingxi and the governor of Huazhou, and had quite a number of political achievements.

古文：转泾州刺史，仍本将军。
现代文：转任泾州刺史，仍为本将军。
English: He was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou magistrate, but remained the general.

古文：以辄用官炭瓦为御史所劾，削除官爵。
现代文：因擅自动用官炭瓦被御史弹劾，削除官爵。
English: He was impeached and stripped of his title for using official charcoal bricks without permission.

古文：寻旨复之。
现代文：不久又恢复了官爵。
English: He was soon restored to the peerage.

古文：萧衍直阁将军徐玄明戍于郁州，杀其刺史张稷，以城内附。
现代文：萧衍的直将军徐玄明驻守郁洲，杀其刺史张稷，率城归附。
English: Xiao Yan's general Xu Xuanming garrisoned Yuzhou, killed his rival Zhang Xuan, and annexed the city.

古文：诏遣康生迎接，赐细御银缠槊一张并枣柰果。
现代文：帝下诏派奚康生迎接，赐给御银缠的槊一张，还有一些枣、杏果之类。
English: The emperor sent his emissary to meet Kang Sheng, and gave him a piece of ginger wrapped in silver, as well as some dates, apricots and the like.

古文：面敕曰： 果者，果如朕心；枣者，早遂朕意。 
现代文：面赐说： 果者，果如朕心；枣者，早遂朕意。 
English: He said, "The fruit, the fruit is my heart; the date, the date is my mind.

古文：未发之间，郁州复叛。
现代文：还未出发时，郁洲又叛。
English: Before setting off, Ikusu rebelled again.

古文：时扬州别驾裴绚谋反，除康生平东将军，为别将，领羽林四千讨之，会事平不行。
现代文：当时扬州别驾裴绚谋反，朝廷除康生为平东将军，为别将，领四千羽林军讨伐敌人，逢叛乱平息下来，遂不成行。
English: At that time, Yangzhou Bei drove Pei Hua to plot a rebellion. The imperial court removed Kang Sheng as General Ping Dong, and for the sake of the other generals, led four thousand Lin troops to fight the enemy. When the rebellion subsided, it was not carried out.

古文：遭父忧，起为平西将军、西中郎将。
现代文：父亲丧期满后，朝廷起他为平西将军、西中郎将。
English: After his father's term of office expired, the Imperial Court promoted him to the rank of General Nishi and Vice Admiral Nishi.

古文：是岁，大举征蜀，假康生安西将军，领步骑三万邪趣绵竹。
现代文：这一年，朝廷大举征蜀，朝廷假康生为安西将军，率领步骑三万人赴绵竹。
English: In this year, the imperial court vigorously solicited Shu. The imperial court disguised Kang Sheng as General Anxi and led 30,000 people on horseback to Mianzhu.

古文：至陇右，世宗崩，班师。
现代文：到陇右，世宗逝世，班师回朝。
English: To his right, Sejong passed away, and Banshi returned to the imperial court.

古文：除卫尉卿。
现代文：朝廷除任为卫尉卿。
English: He was dismissed from the Imperial Court and became a Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard.

古文：出为抚军将军、相州刺史。
现代文：出任抚军将军、相州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the general of the Fuzhu army, and the history of Soshu was written.

古文：在州，以天旱令人鞭石虎画像；复就西门豹祠祈雨，不获，令吏取豹舌。
现代文：在州位之上，因发生干旱，奚康生鞭打石虎像；又到西门豹祠祈雨，天仍不下雨，命令吏卒取出西门豹的舌头。
English: Above the state level, due to drought, Yan Kangsheng whipped the stone tiger statue; he also went to the West Gate Leopard Shrine to pray for rain, but it still did not rain, and ordered the officials to take out the tongue of the West Gate Leopard.

古文：未几，二兒暴丧，身亦遇疾，巫以为虎、豹之祟。
现代文：没多久，两个儿子暴病而亡，他也身遭疾病，巫师认为是石虎、西门豹作祟所致。
English: Not long after, his two sons died of violent illness, and he also suffered from illness, which the sorcerer believed to be caused by the stone tiger and the cheetah.

古文：征拜光禄卿，领右卫将军。
现代文：朝廷拜授他为光禄卿，领右卫将军。
English: The imperial court awarded him the title of Guangluqing and the rank of General of the Right Division.

古文：与元义同谋废灵太后。
现代文：奚康生与元叉共同策划废除灵太后。
English: Yu Kang Sheng and Yuan Zhao jointly plotted to abolish the Empress Dowager.

古文：迁抚军大将军、河南尹，仍右卫，领左右。
现代文：迁任抚军大将军、河南尹，仍为右卫，领左右。
English: Henan Yin, who was transferred to the post of general of the army, was still the right guard, leading the left and right.

古文：与子难娶左卫将军侯刚女，即元义妹夫也。
现代文：为儿子奚难娶左卫将军侯刚女儿，即元叉的妹夫。
English: For the sake of his son, Yan Nan married the daughter of General Hou Gang, the brother-in-law of Yuan Zha.

古文：义以其通姻，深相委托，三人率多俱宿禁内，时或迭出。
现代文：元叉因为他家通姻，深相通联，三人大多一起在禁内宿睡，常常结伴出入。
English: Because the three of them were related by marriage, the three of them mostly slept together in the Forbidden City and often went out together.

古文：义以康生子难为千牛备身。
现代文：元叉任命康生的儿子奚难为千牛备身。
English: Yuan Zha appointed Kang Sheng's son, Hao Nan, to prepare for the battle.

古文：康生性粗武，言气高下，义稍惮之，见于颜色，康生亦微惧不安。
现代文：奚康生性格粗犷、蛮武，说话没有轻重，元叉渐渐忌惮他，在脸上表现出来，奚康生也微微有些害怕不安。
English: Yu Kangsheng's temperament is rude and reckless, his speech is unruly, and Yuan Yi is somewhat afraid of him, even showing it on his face. Yu Kangsheng is also somewhat afraid and uneasy.

古文：正光二年三月，肃宗朝灵太后于西林园，文武侍坐，酒酣迭舞。
现代文：正光二年三月，肃宗在西林园朝见灵太后，文武官员侍坐左右。
English: In March of the second year of the reign of Zheng Guang, Su Zong met the Empress Dowager Ling in the morning in the West Forest Garden, with literary and military officials sitting to his right and left.

古文：次至康生，康生乃为力士舞，及于折旋，每顾视太后，举手、蹈足、瞋目、颔首为杀缚之势。
现代文：酒兴浓时，官员们交次舞蹈。轮到奚康生，康生跳起力士舞，腾挪旋转，每每看着灵太后，他举手、蹈脚、瞪目、颌首都作出杀戮绑缚的姿式。
English: When the wine was strong, the officials danced alternately. It was the turn of Gong Kang Sheng. Kang Sheng danced a wrestler's dance, swung and twirled, and every time he looked at the spiritual empress, he raised his hands, stamped his feet, stared, and stamped his head to make a killing and binding posture.

古文：太后解其意而不敢言。
现代文：太后明白了他的意思但不敢形于言表。
English: The empress dowager understood his meaning but did not dare to put it into words.

古文：日暮，太后欲携肃宗宿宣光殿。
现代文：天晚，太后想携肃宗在宣光殿就寝。
English: In the evening, the empress dowager wanted to take Su Zong to bed at the Xuan Guang Palace.

古文：侯刚曰： 至尊已朝讫，嫔御在南，何劳留宿？ 
现代文：侯刚说： 皇上已经朝拜过您，他嫔御在南宫，为什么要留宿？ 
English: Hou Gang said, "The emperor has already paid homage to you, he is staying at the Southern Palace, why should he stay?

古文：康生曰： 至尊，陛下兒，随陛下将东西，更复访问谁？ 
现代文：奚康生说： 皇上，是陛下的儿子，随陛下走东串西，还能访问谁？ 
English: Ying Kang Sheng said: "Emperor, you are the son of His Majesty, you follow His Majesty everywhere, who else can you visit?

古文：群臣莫敢应。
现代文：群臣无人敢应答。
English: Ministers are afraid to speak out.

古文：灵太后自起，援肃宗臂下堂而去。
现代文：灵太后自己起身拉着肃宗的手下堂而去。
English: The Empress Dowager herself got up and led Su Zong's men out of the hall.

古文：康生大呼唱万岁于后，近侍皆唱万岁。
现代文：奚康生大声呼喊，在后面高唱万岁，近臣都喊万岁。
English: Kang Sheng shouted loudly, singing "long live" in the back, and his close ministers all shouted "long live."

古文：肃宗引前入阁，左右竞相排，阁不得闭。
现代文：肃宗在前面进入小门，左右官员竞相拥挤，门不能闭。
English: Su Zong entered the small door in front of him. Officials on both sides crowded around him, and the door could not be closed.

古文：康生夺其子难千牛刀，斫直后元思辅，乃得定。
现代文：奚康生夺过儿子奚难的千牛刀，砍了直后元思辅，局势才安定下来。
English: The situation only settled down after Gong Kang Sheng snatched away his son Gong Nan's thousand-cattle knife and chopped down Yuan Sisuo.

古文：肃宗既上殿，康生时有酒势，将出处分，遂为义所执，锁于门下。
现代文：肃宗上殿，康生当时仍有酒兴，准备出来动作，被元叉捆了起来，锁在门下省。
English: Su Zong Shang Dian, Kang Sheng was still drunk at the time, ready to come out of action, was bundled up by Yuan Xuan and locked under the door.

古文：至晓，义不出，令侍中、黄门仆射、尚书等十余人就康生所讯其事，处康生斩刑，难处绞刑。
现代文：到第二天早上，元叉不出现，命令侍中、黄门、仆射、尚书等十多人审讯康生所犯之事，处康生斩刑，奚难被处以绞刑。
English: In the morning of the next day, Yuan Zha did not appear, and ordered more than ten people, including the chamberlain, Huang Men, Fu Sha, and Shang Shu, to interrogate the crimes committed by Kang Sheng, execute him by beheading, and hang him by hanging.

古文：义与刚并在内矫诏决之。
现代文：元叉与傅刚一起在禁宫内矫诏决定这样做。
English: Yuan Zha and Fu Gang decided to do this together in the Forbidden City.

古文：康生如奏，难恕死从流。
现代文：皇上同意康生受斩刑，奚难则免死流放。
English: The emperor consented to the beheading of Kang Sheng, while Xuan Nan Rong was spared death and banishment.

古文：难哭拜辞父，康生忻子免死，又亦慷慨，了不悲泣，语其子云： 我不及死，汝何为哭也？ 
现代文：奚难哭着与父亲拜别，奚康生庆幸儿子免死，又声气慷慨，一点也不悲泣。对他的儿子说： 我不是因反叛而死，你为什么要哭呢？ 
English: Gong Nan cried and said goodbye to his father. Yan Kangsheng was glad that his son was spared from death, and his voice was generous, not sad at all. He said to his son: I didn't die because of rebellion, why are you crying?

古文：有司驱逼，奔走赴市。
现代文：有关部门驱逼奚康生奔走赶赴刑场。
English: Relevant departments forced Gong Kangsheng to run to the execution site.

古文：时已昏暗，行刑人注刀数下不死，于地刻截。
现代文：当时，天已昏暗，行刑的人砍了奚康生数刀，而他却没死，刽子手便朝倒在地上的奚康生戳刺。
English: At that time, it was already dark, and the executioner slashed him with several knives, but he did not die. The executioner then stabbed him as he fell to the ground.

古文：咸言禀义意旨，过至苦痛。
现代文：人们都说这是元叉的旨意，使他多受些痛苦。
English: People said that it was the will of Yuan Xuan to make him suffer more.

古文：尝食典御奚混与康生同执刀入内，亦就市绞刑。
现代文：尝食典御奚混与康生一起持刀入宫内，也同时就绞刑。
English: The eunuch who tried to take a knife into the palace with Kang Sheng was also hanged at the same time.

古文：武定中，青州开府主簿。
现代文：奚康生久为将领，等到做地方官，经常杀人。
English: Yan Kang was a general for a long time, and when he became a local official, he often killed people.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：而他一贯笃信佛教，几次舍弃自己的住宅建立寺塔。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：刚弟定国，袭康生安武县开国男。
现代文：做过官的四州，都建有佛寺之类。死时，年五十四岁。
English: At the time of his death, he was 54 years old.

古文：杨大眼，武都氐难当之孙也。
现代文：杨大眼，武都氐人杨难当的孙子。
English: Yang Dajian, the grandson of Yang Nandu, a member of the Wudu Yi ethnic group.

古文：少有胆气，跳走如飞。
现代文：大眼少年即有胆识力气，跳跃行走如飞。
English: When I was young, I had the guts to jump away.

古文：然侧出，不为其宗亲顾待，颇有饥寒之切。
现代文：然而，因他为偏房所生，不被其宗族亲人所注目重视，经常有饥寒交迫之苦。
English: However, because he was born to a half-way house, he did not receive much attention from his relatives, and often suffered from hunger and cold.

古文：太和中，起家奉朝请。
现代文：太和年间，奉朝廷邀请做官。
English: During the Taiwa era, he was appointed to serve the Emperor for the first time.

古文：时高祖自代将南伐，令尚书李冲典迁征官，大眼往求焉。
现代文：当时高祖从代州出发向南征伐，命令尚书李冲选拔征伐官员，杨大眼前往求职。
English: At that time, Gaozu set out from Daizhou to conquer the south, ordered Shangshu Li Chong to select the conquest officials, and Yang Dajian to go to Wuxu to look for a job.

古文：冲弗许，大眼曰： 尚书不见知，听下官出一技。 
现代文：李冲不答应，杨大眼说： 尚书大人不了解我，让我为您献上一技。 
English: Li Chong did not agree, Yang Dajian said: Shangshu adults do not understand me, let me offer you a skill.

古文：便出长绳三丈许系髻而走，绳直如矢，马驰不及，见者莫不惊欢。
现代文：便拿出三丈长的绳子系在发髻上面，快步奔走，绳子被扯得直如箭矢，奔驰的马匹都赶不上他的速度，在场的人无不惊叹。
English: Then he took out a three-meter-long rope and tied it to the top of the hairpin. He ran at a fast pace. The rope was pulled straight as an arrow. The galloping horses could not keep up with his speed. Everyone present was amazed.

古文：冲曰： 自千载以来，未有逸材若此者也。 
现代文：李冲说： 自从远古以来，从未有过谁有如此超群的才干。 
English: Li Chong said: Since ancient times, there has never been anyone with such extraordinary talent.

古文：遂用为军主。
现代文：于是任命他为军主。
English: appointed him commander of the army.

古文：大眼顾谓同僚曰： 吾之今日，所谓蛟龙得水之秋。自此一举，终不复与诸君齐列矣。 
现代文：杨大眼环顾同僚们说： 我的今天，正是所谓蛟龙入水之秋，就此一举使得我以后再难与诸君处同一行列了。 
English: Yang Dajian looked around at his colleagues and said: Today is the so-called "fall of the dragon into the water," which makes it difficult for me to be in the same row with you in the future.

古文：未几，迁为统军。
现代文：没多久，升迁为统军。
English: Not long after, he was promoted to the unified army.

古文：从高祖征宛、叶、穰、邓、九江、钟离之间，所经战陈，莫不勇冠六军。
现代文：跟随高祖征讨于宛、叶、穰、邓、九江、钟离之间，所经历的战斗，无不勇冠六军。
English: Following Gao Zu's conquest of Wan, Ye, Handan, Deng, Jiujiang and Zhongli, the battles experienced by the six armies were all courageous.

古文：世宗初，裴叔业以寿春内附，大眼与奚康生等率众先入，以功封安成县开国子，食邑三百户。
现代文：世宗初年，裴叔业以寿春归服朝廷，杨大眼与奚康生等率军马先入寿春接管，因此功被朝廷封为安成县开国子爵位，食邑三百户。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, Pei Xiuye submitted to the imperial court in Shuchun, and Yang Dajian and Nie Kangsheng led the army to take over in Shuchun. As a result, he was awarded the title of Viscount for the founding of Ancheng County by the imperial court, and there were 300 households in Shuchun.

古文：除直阁将军，寻加辅国将军、游击将军。
现代文：升任直将军，很快又加辅国将军、游击将军。
English: Promoted to the rank of general, he was soon promoted to general of the auxiliary state and general of the guerrillas.

古文：出为征虏将军、东荆州刺史。
现代文：大眼出任征虏将军、东荆州刺史。
English: Daeyeon became the general of the conscript army, and Dongjingzhou became the leader of history.

古文：时蛮酋樊秀安等反，诏大眼为别将，隶都督李崇，讨平之。
现代文：当时南蛮酋长樊秀安等人反叛朝廷，皇帝下诏命大眼为别将，隶属于都督李崇，意求平定叛乱。
English: At that time, the Nanban chieftain Zou Xiu'an and others rebelled against the imperial court, and the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Dajian to be the other general, subordinate to the governor Li Chong, in order to quell the rebellion.

古文：大眼妻潘氏，善骑射，自诣军省大眼。
现代文：杨大眼的妻子潘氏，长于骑射，自个儿来到军中看望大眼。
English: Yang Dajian's wife Pan, who is good at riding and shooting, came to the army to visit Dajian.

古文：至于攻陈游猎之际，大眼令妻潘戎装，或齐镳战场，或并驱林壑。
现代文：等到攻阵游猎的时候，杨大眼让妻子潘氏披挂戎装，与他或是一起鏖战沙场，或是齐驱林壑之间。
English: When it's time to go hunting, Yang Daigan lets his wife Pan put on a military uniform, and they either fight together on the battlefield, or drive together through the forest.

古文：及至还营，同坐幕下，对诸僚佐，言笑自得，时指之谓人曰： 此潘将军也。 
现代文：战完回营，一起坐于大帐之下，面对大眼众多幕僚牙将，谈笑自如。当时有人指着她对别人说： 这便是潘将军。 
English: After the war, back at the camp, sitting together under the big table, facing the many wide-eyed staff officers, talking and laughing freely. At that time, someone pointed at her and said to others: This is General Pan.

古文：萧衍遣其前江州刺史王茂先率众数万次于樊雍，招诱蛮夏，规立宛州，又令其所署宛州刺史雷豹狼、军主曹仲宗等领众二万偷据河南城。
现代文：萧衍派遣他的前任江州刺史王茂先率领数万人马驻扎樊、雍，招诱蛮夏，计划建立宛州，又命令他设置的宛州刺史雷豹狼、军主曹仲宗等人率领二万人马偷偷据守在河南城。
English: Xiao Yan dispatched his predecessor, the governor of Jiangzhou, Wang Maosheng, with a force of tens of thousands of cavalrymen, to stay in Yan and Yong, lure the barbarians, and plan to establish Wanzhou. He also ordered the governor of Wanzhou, Lei Jia Wol, and the commander of the army, Cao Zhongzong, with a force of twenty thousand cavalrymen, to secretly stay in Henan City.

古文：世宗以大眼为武卫将军、假平南将军、持节，都督统军曹敬、邴虬、樊鲁等诸军讨茂先等，大破之，斩衍辅国将军王花、龙骧将军申天化，俘馘七千有余，衍又遣其舅张惠绍总率众军，窃据宿豫。
现代文：世宗命杨大眼为武卫将军、假平南将军、持节，带领督使统军曹敬、邴虬、樊鲁等诸路大军讨伐王茂先等部，大破敌军，斩杀萧衍辅国将军王花、龙骧将军申天化，俘获七千余人。萧衍又派遣他的舅舅张惠绍总统大军，偷偷据守宿豫。
English: Shizong ordered Yang Dajian to be the general of Wuwei, the false general of Pingnan, and Jisetsu, and led the great army of Cao Jing, Yao, and Jilu to fight against Wang Maoxian and other departments, defeated the enemy army, killed the general of Xiao Yan Au, Wang Hua, and the general of Longtao, Shen Tianhua, and captured more than seven thousand people. Xiao Yan also sent his uncle Zhang Huishao's presidential army to secretly guard Suyuan.

古文：又假大眼平东将军为别将，与都督邢峦讨破之。
现代文：朝廷又假杨大眼平东将军为别将，与都督邢峦一起征讨敌军，大破之。
English: The imperial court also appointed Yang Dagan as the general of Pingdong. As the second-in-command, he defeated the Nanliang army with the support of the governor.

古文：遂乘胜长驱，与中山王英同围钟离，大眼军城东，守淮桥东西二道。
现代文：于是乘胜追击，长驱直入，与中山王元英一同围困钟离。杨大眼驻军城池东面，把守淮河桥东西两条道路。
English: So he took advantage of the victory to pursue, drove straight in, and besieged Zhongli with Zhongshan Wang Yuanying. Yang Dajian was stationed in the east of the military city, guarding the east and west roads of the Huaihe Bridge.

古文：属水泛长，大眼所绾统军刘神符、公孙祉两军夜中争桥奔退，大眼不能禁，相寻而走，坐徙为营州兵。
现代文：正好碰上淮河涨水泛滥，杨大眼统领的统军刘神符、公孙祉两支军马夜晚争桥奔逃退却，大眼无法禁止，只好跟随而逃，因此被贬成营州兵。
English: Just as the Huai River was rising and flooding, the united army of Liu Shenfu and Gongsun Zhi, led by Yang Dajian, fought for the bridge at night and fled. Dajian could not be banned, so he had to follow and escape. Therefore, he was reduced to a battalion of the National Guard.

古文：永平中，世宗追其前勋，起为试守中山内史。
现代文：永平年间，世宗追述他以前功绩，起用他为试守中山内史。
English: During the Yongping era, Shizong recounted his past exploits and appointed him as a probationer to guard the history of Zhongshan.

古文：时高肇征蜀，世宗虑萧衍侵轶徐扬，乃征大眼为太尉长史、持节、假平南将军、东征别将，隶都督元遥，遏御淮肥。
现代文：当时高肇征讨蜀地，世宗考虑萧衍侵犯徐州、扬州，便征召杨大眼为太尉长史、持节、假平南将军、征东别将，隶属于都督元遥，在淮水、肥水那里阻挡萧衍攻势。
English: At that time, Gao Zhaozhong led a campaign against Shu, and Shizong considered Xiao Yan's invasion of Xuzhou and Yangzhou, so he conscripted Yang Dajian as the captain of Changshi, Jizhe, the false general of Pingnan, and the general of the Eastern Expedition, subordinate to the governor Yuan Yao, to block Xiao Yan's offensive in Huai Shui and Fei Shui.

古文：大眼至京师，时人思其雄勇，喜其更用，台省闾巷，观者如市。
现代文：杨大眼到了京师，当时人们思念他的雄气勇力，高兴他又被起用，台省闾巷之中，观者如市。
English: When Yang Dajian arrived at the Beijing Division, people missed his courage and bravery, and were glad that he was appointed again. In the middle of the narrow streets of Taiwan Province, the audience was ecstatic.

古文：大眼次谯南，世宗崩。
现代文：杨大眼领军驻扎谯州南面，世宗恰在此时驾崩。
English: Yang Dajian led the army stationed in the south of Ganzhou, and it was at this time that Shizong passed away.

古文：时萧衍遣将康绚于浮山遏淮，规浸寿春，诏加大眼光禄大夫，率诸军镇荆山，复其封邑。
现代文：这时萧衍派遣将领康绚在浮山筑堤阻挡淮水，图谋淹灌寿春。朝廷下诏加杨大眼为光禄大夫，率领诸路军马镇守荆山，朝廷又恢复其封邑。
English: At this time, Xiao Yan dispatched the general Kang Hua to build a dike in Fushan to block Huai Shui and attempt to flood Shuchun. Under the imperial court, Yang Dajian was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu and led the troops to guard Jingshan, and the imperial court restored its fief.

古文：后与萧宝夤俱征淮堰，不能克。
现代文：后来，杨大眼与萧宝夤一起征伐淮堰，不能克复。
English: Later, Yang Dajian and Xiao Baojun conquered Huaiyan together, but could not recover.

古文：遂于堰上流凿渠决水而还，加平东将军。
现代文：于是就在堰上决开流凿渠，放水冲敌，军队还朝之后，又加平东将军。
English: As a result, a channel was cut through the weir and water was released to rush the enemy. After the army returned to the capital, General Pingdong was added.

古文：大眼善骑乘，装束雄竦，擐甲折旋，见称当世。
现代文：杨大眼擅长骑马，穿着戎装，雄伟挺拔，穿上盔甲，腾挪跳跃，灵活自如，被世人称道。
English: Yang Dajian is good at riding a horse, wearing military attire, majestic and upright, wearing armor, prancing and jumping, flexible and at ease, and is praised by the world.

古文：抚巡士卒，呼为兒子，及见伤痍，为之流泣。
现代文：巡抚士兵，称呼如子，看到士兵伤病，时常为之落泪伤心。
English: The inspector of soldiers, known as a son, often shed tears when he saw soldiers injured and sick.

古文：自为将帅，恆身先兵士，冲突坚陈，出入不疑，当其锋者，莫不摧拉。
现代文：身为将帅，经常身先士卒，冲突坚固阵地，出入英勇无畏，敌兵碰上他的刀刃者，无不立即身亡。
English: As commander-in-chief, he was always ahead of his soldiers, fought in strong positions, went in and out bravely and fearlessly, and enemy soldiers who encountered his blade were all killed immediately.

古文：南贼前后所遣督将，军未渡江，预皆畏慑。
现代文：南方敌人前后所派遣的督军将帅，听说对手是杨大眼，军队未渡长江，个个都害怕不已。
English: The commander-in-chief sent by the southern enemy before and after, I heard that the opponent was Yang Dajian, and the army did not cross the Yangtze River, everyone was afraid.

古文：传言淮泗、荆沔之间有童兒啼者，恐之云 杨大眼至 ，无不即止。
现代文：甚至传闻，淮泗、荆沔一带民间有孩子啼哭的，父母一说 杨大眼来了 ，全都吓得不敢哭泣了。
English: It is even rumored that people in the Huaiyu and Jingyu areas have children who cry, and when their parents say that Yang Dajian is coming, they are all scared and dare not cry.

古文：王肃弟子秉之初归国也，谓大眼曰： 在南闻君之名，以为眼如车轮？
现代文：王肃弟弟的儿子王秉归国之初，对大眼说： 在南边时听见您的名字，我以为你真的是眼睛如车轮大小。
English: At the beginning of his return to China, Wang Bing, the son of Wang Su's younger brother, said to Big Eyes: When I heard your name in the south, I thought you really had eyes as big as wheels.

古文：及见，乃不异人。 
现代文：今天一见，原来与常人差不多。 
English: Today, at first glance, they are almost like ordinary people.

古文：大眼曰： 旗鼓相望，瞋眸奋发，足使君目不能视，何必大如车轮。 
现代文：大眼说： 两军旗鼓相对，我杨某怒目圆睁，足以使您目不敢视，何必要眼大如车轮。 
English: Big Eyes said: The two armies are facing each other, facing each other, angry eyes wide open, spirited, feet can make your eyes dare not look at me, why do you have to be as big as a wheel?

古文：当世推其骁果，皆以为关张弗之过也。
现代文：当时的人推许杨大眼的骁勇果敢，普遍认为即使关羽张飞也不能超过他。
English: At that time, people praised Yang Dajian's bravery and courage, and it was generally believed that even Guan Yu Zhangfei could not surpass him.

古文：然征淮堰之役，喜怒无常，捶挞过度，军士颇憾焉。
现代文：然而征淮堰一战，杨大眼喜怒无常，过分严酷地鞭打士兵，士兵们很是有些议论。
English: However, when attacking Huaiyan, he was moody, whipped the soldiers excessively, and the soldiers complained a lot.

古文：识者以为性移所致。
现代文：有识之士认为这是杨大眼性情转移所导致的结果。
English: Those who know him say it is the result of a change in his personality.

古文：又以本将军出为荆州刺史。
现代文：后来，杨大眼又以本将军出任荆州刺史。
English: Later, Yang Dajian also served as the general of Jingzhou.

古文：常缚蒿为人，衣以青布而射之。
现代文：任上，经常用蒿草捆扎成草人，给它穿上青布，张弓射击。
English: When he was in office, he would often tie a straw man with reeds, put a blue cloth on it, and shoot it with a bow.

古文：召诸蛮渠指示之曰： 卿等若作贼，吾政如此相杀也。 
现代文：又召来许多蛮人，指着草人对他们说： 你们假如胆敢叛乱投敌，我的办法就是这样射杀掉。 
English: He also summoned many savages and said to them, pointing to the straw men: "If you dare to rebel and join the enemy, this is how I will shoot you down."

古文：又北淯郡尝有虎害，大眼搏而获之，斩其头悬于穰市。
现代文：又北氵育郡曾经有老虎出没为害，杨大眼与之搏斗并擒获了它，割下老虎的脑袋挂在闹市上。
English: In addition, there was once a tiger haunting the streets of Beibuyu County. Yang Dajian fought with it and captured it. He cut off the tiger's head and hung it in the downtown area.

古文：自是荆蛮相谓曰： 杨公恶人，常作我蛮形以射之。
现代文：从此，荆地蛮人互相转告说： 杨公是个恶人，经常以蒿草扎我们形状然后射杀。
English: From then on, the barbarians in the Jingzhou area told each other: Yang Gong was very vicious and often made straw men into the shape of barbarians and shot them with arrows.

古文：又深山之虎尚所不免。 
现代文：连深山老虎都难免噩运。 
English: Even deep-mountain tigers are subject to bad luck.

古文：遂不敢复为寇盗。
现代文：于是他们再也不敢为寇作盗了。
English: He no longer dared to be a thief.

古文：在州二年而卒。
现代文：杨大眼任州官两年，卒于任上。
English: Yang Dajian served as a state official for two years and died in office.

古文：大眼虽不学，恆遣人读书，坐而听之，悉皆记识。
现代文：杨大眼自己虽不看书，经常要人给他读书，自己坐在那里听书，听过之后，全都能记住。
English: Although Yang Dajian doesn't read books himself, he often asks people to read to him. He sits there and listens to books. After listening, he can remember everything.

古文：令作露布，皆口授之，而竟不多识字也。
现代文：上面要他写告示，他都以口授之，所以终于认不得几个字。
English: He dictated all the communiques he wrote, and he never knew many words.

古文：有三子，长甑生，次领军，次征南，皆潘氏所生，气干咸有父风。
现代文：杨大眼有三个儿子，长子甑生、次子领军、小儿子征南，都是潘氏所生，气度才干都有其父气象。
English: Yang Dajian had three sons, the eldest son Zong Sheng, the second son Ling Jun, and the youngest son Zhenan. All of them were born from the Pan clan, and all of them had their father's temperament and talent.

古文：初，大眼徙营州，潘在洛阳，颇有失行。
现代文：当初，大眼流落营州，潘氏在洛阳，行为很是不端。
English: At first, Big Eyes was living in Yingzhou, while Pan was in Luoyang, and his behavior was very inappropriate.

古文：及为中山，大眼侧生女夫赵延宝言之于大眼，大眼怒，幽潘而杀之。
现代文：等到大眼为官中山，大眼侧室所生女儿的丈夫赵延宝跟他说了这件事，大眼愤怒万分，幽闭潘氏，然后把她杀了。
English: When Daemen became the official of Zhongshan, Zhao Yanbao, the husband of the daughter born to Daemen's concubine, told him about the incident. Daemen was furious, locked up Pan, and then killed her.

古文：后娶继室元氏。
现代文：后来杨大眼又娶继室元氏。
English: Later, Yang Dajian married a member of the Yuan family.

古文：大眼之死也，甑生等问印绶所在。时元始怀孕，自指其腹谓甑生等曰： 开国当我兒袭之。汝等婢子，勿有所望！ 
现代文：杨大眼死后，甑生等人询问印绶在哪里，当时元氏刚刚怀孕，指着腹部对甑生等人说： 爵禄当由我儿继承，你们这些人，不要指望！ 
English: After Yang Dajian's death, the twins and others asked where the seal was. At that time, Yuan was just pregnant. Pointing to her abdomen, she said to the twins and others: My son should inherit the peerage, you people, don't expect it!

古文：甑生深以为恨。
现代文：甑生等人咬牙切齿。
English: The twins and others gritted their teeth.

古文：及大眼丧将还京，出城东七里，营车而宿。
现代文：等到杨大眼丧棺将要回京师，在离城七里的城东面，营车露宿。
English: By the time Yang Dayan's coffin is to be returned to Beijing, they will be camping seven miles to the east of the city.

古文：夜二更，甑生等开大眼棺，延宝怪而问之，征南射杀之。
现代文：夜里二更时分，甑生等人打开大眼棺材，延宝奇怪地询问，征南射死了他。
English: At two o'clock in the morning, Zeng Sheng and others opened the coffin, Yan Bao asked strangely, and Zhenan shot him dead.

古文：元怖，走入水，征南又弯弓射之。
现代文：元氏很害怕，奔逃入水，征南又张弓射之。
English: Motouji was very scared and ran into the water. He went south and shot it with a bow and arrow.

古文：甑生曰： 天下岂有害母之人。 
现代文：甑生说： 天下怎能有杀害自己母亲的人。 
English: The son said: How can there be anyone in the world who would kill his own mother?

古文：乃止。
现代文：征南作罢。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：遂取大眼尸，令人马上抱之，左右扶挟以叛。
现代文：于是他们取大眼尸体，骑在马上抱住他，左右随从簇拥他们叛离朝廷。
English: So they took the corpse of the great-eyed man, rode on horseback to embrace him, and left the imperial court with their followers surrounding them.

古文：荆人畏甑生等骁勇，不敢苦追。
现代文：荆地人畏惧甑生等人骁勇善战，不敢苦追。
English: The people of Jing are afraid of the bravery and skillful fighting of the sons of bitterns and others, and do not dare to pursue.

古文：奔于襄阳，遂归萧衍。
现代文：甑生等人奔往襄阳，归顺萧衍。
English: The twins and others rushed to Yangyang and returned to Shun and Xiaoyan.

古文：崔延伯，博陵人也。
现代文：崔延伯，博陵人。
English: Cui Yanbo, from Boling.

古文：祖寿，于彭城陷入江南。
现代文：祖崔寿，在彭城陷入江南政权。
English: Zu Cui Shou, in Pengcheng, fell into the hands of the Jiangnan regime.

古文：延伯有气力，少以勇壮闻。
现代文：崔延伯很有力气，少年即以勇壮闻名。
English: Cui Yanbo is very strong, and the boy is famous for his bravery.

古文：仕萧赜，为缘淮游军，带濠口戍主。
现代文：出仕萧赜，为缘淮游军，带濠口戍主。
English: Xiao Yao, who served as an envoy, was the leader of the Huaiyu army.

古文：太和中入国，高祖深嘉之，常为统帅。
现代文：太和年间进入皇魏，高祖深深嘉许这种行为，常任统帅。
English: When Emperor Taizong entered the Wei Dynasty, Gaozu deeply appreciated this behavior and became the permanent commander.

古文：胆气绝人，兼有谋略，所在征讨，咸立战功。
现代文：胆量勇气过人，兼有谋略，征讨之处，都立下了战功。
English: His courage and bravery were second to none, he had both strategy and the wherewithal to fight, and he achieved great success in battle.

古文：积劳稍进，除征虏将军、荆州刺史，赐爵定陵男。
现代文：积累功劳位次渐进，朝廷除授他为征虏将军、荆州刺史，赐爵定陵男。
English: Accumulating merits one after another, the imperial court awarded him as a conscript general, Jingzhou stabbing history, and a knighthood.

古文：荆州土险，蛮左为寇，每有聚结，延伯辄自讨之，莫不摧殄。由是穰土帖然，无敢为患。
现代文：荆州地形险恶，蛮左寇乱，常有结聚作乱的势力，崔延伯自统军讨伐，无不摧灭，由此穰地安宁，没人再敢捣乱。
English: The terrain of Jingzhou is treacherous, there are violent left-wing riots, and there are often forces that gather to make trouble. Cui Yanbo's United Front Army's crusade is indestructible. As a result, the land is peaceful, and no one dares to make trouble.

古文：永平中，转后将军、幽州刺史。
现代文：永平年间，转任后军将军、幽州刺史。
English: During the Yongping era, he was transferred to the post-army general, Yuzhou Shishi.

古文：萧衍遣其左游击将军赵祖悦率众偷据峡石，诏延伯为别将，与都督崔亮讨之。
现代文：萧衍派他的左游击将军赵祖悦率军偷据峡石，帝下诏让崔延伯为别将，与都督崔亮一起讨伐敌人。
English: Xiao Yan sent his left-wing guerrilla general Zhao Zuyue to lead the army to steal the gorge stone, and the emperor ordered Cui Yanbo to be the other general and fight the enemy together with the governor Cui Liang.

古文：亮令延伯守下蔡。
现代文：崔亮令崔延伯据守下蔡。
English: Cui Liang ordered Cui Yanbo to guard Cai.

古文：延伯与别将伊甕生挟淮为营。
现代文：延伯与别将伊瓮生挟淮造营。
English: Yan Bo and others built Ili into a fortress.

古文：延伯遂取车轮，去辋，削锐其辐，两两接对，揉竹为絙，贯连相属，并十余道，横水为桥，两头施大辘轳，出没任情，不可烧斫。
现代文：崔延伯于是取车轮，去掉外圈，削尖其幅，两两相对，揉竹为绳，贯连不绝，一共十多道，横水为桥，两头安置大辘轳，士兵在里面任情出没，不可烧斫。
English: Cui Yanbo then took the wheel, removed the outer ring, sharpened its width, two two opposite, rubbed bamboo as a rope, continuous, a total of more than ten roads, cross-water as a bridge, placed large rafts at both ends, soldiers were allowed to haunt inside, do not burn rafts.

古文：既断祖悦等走路，又令舟舸不通，由是衍军不能赴救，祖悦合军咸见俘虏。
现代文：崔延伯既断赵祖悦等人后路，又让舟船不能相通，所以萧衍援军不能前往救援，赵祖悦全军都被俘虏。
English: Cui Yanbo not only cut off Zhao Zuyue's and other people's way back, but also made the boats unable to communicate, so Xiao Yan's reinforcements could not go to the rescue, and Zhao Zuyue's entire army was captured.

古文：于军拜平南将军、光禄大夫。
现代文：延伯在军中被拜平南将军、光禄大夫。
English: Yanbo was worshipped by General Pingnan and Doctor Guanglu in the army.

古文：延伯与杨大眼等至自淮阳，灵太后幸西林园，引见延伯等。
现代文：崔延伯与杨大眼等从淮阳来到京城，灵太后在西林园引见崔延伯等。
English: Cui Yanbo and Yang Dajian came to Beijing from Huaiyang, and the Empress Dowager met Cui Yanbo in the West Forest Park.

古文：太后曰： 卿等志尚雄猛，皆国之名将，比平峡石，公私庆快，此乃卿等之功也。
现代文：太后说： 卿等志尚雄猛，都是国中名将，前番平定峡石，上下称快，这乃是卿你的功劳啊。
English: The empress dowager said, "Sir, all of you have strong wills. You are all famous generals in the country. You are the first to level the canyon, and you are praised from top to bottom. This is the merit of you, Sir."

古文：但淮堰仍在，宜须豫谋，故引卿等亲共量算，各出一图以为后计。 
现代文：但是淮河堤堰仍在，应该有所打算，所以招引你们一起商量，各人拿出一套方案以备后用。 
English: However, the Huaihe dike and weir is still in place, so you should have a plan. Therefore, I invite you to discuss together, and each of you should come up with a plan for future use.

古文：大眼对曰： 臣辄谓水陆二道，一时俱下，往无不克。 
现代文：杨大眼说： 臣的主意是从水陆两路，同时并进，这样便可无往而不克。 
English: Yang Dajian said, "The idea of the minister is to advance simultaneously from land and water, so that there is no turning back.

古文：延伯曰： 臣今辄难大眼，既对圣颜，答旨宜实。水南水北各有沟渎，陆地之计如何可前？
现代文：崔延伯说： 为臣今天要小与大眼作难，既对圣颜，答旨应符合实际，淮水水南水北都有沟渠，陆路进攻的计策如何实施？
English: Cui Yanbo said: Today, it is difficult for the minister to be small and big-eyed. Even for the holy face, the answer should be realistic. There are ditches in the north and south of the Huai River, so how should the strategy of land attack be implemented?

古文：愚臣短见，愿圣心愍水兵之勤苦，给复一年，专习水战。脱有不虞，召便可用，往无不获。 
现代文：依臣短见，愿圣心怜悯水兵的勤苦，给他们一年时间，专门练习水上作战，如有意外情况发生，随召可用，无往不克。 
English: In my humble opinion, may the Sacred Heart have mercy on the hard work of the sailors, and give them one year to specifically practice water combat. In the event of an unexpected situation, they can be called upon, without hesitation.

古文：灵太后曰： 卿之所言，深是宜要，当敕如请。 
现代文：灵太后说： 爱卿所说，深中要害，就按你说的办。 
English: The Reverend Mother said, "As Aicheng said, the key is to do as you say.

古文：二年，除安北将军、并州刺史。
现代文：永平二年，朝廷除授他为安北将军、并州刺史。
English: In the second year of Yongping, the imperial court awarded him the title of General of Anbei and the title of State Historian.

古文：在州贪污，闻于远近。
现代文：在州任上贪污官民财物，声名闻于远近。
English: He is famous for embezzling public and private funds during his tenure as a state official.

古文：还为金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：朝廷召还为金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was also called by the imperial court to become a doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：出为镇南将军、行岐州刺史，假征西将军，赐骅骝马一匹。
现代文：出任镇南将军、行岐州刺史、假征西将军，赐给骅骝马一匹。
English: Zhenan general, Xing Guizhou stabbing history, fake Western General, and gave him a horse.

古文：正光五年秋，以往在扬州建淮桥之勋，封当利县开国男，食邑二百户，寻增邑一百户，改封新丰，进爵为子。
现代文：正光五年秋天，因以往在扬州建淮河桥的功劳，封为当利县开国男，食邑二百户，不久又增加食邑一百户，改封新丰，晋爵为子。
English: In the autumn of Zhengguang's fifth year, due to his past contribution to the construction of the Huaihe Bridge in Yangzhou, he was awarded the title of the founding father of Dangli County, with two hundred households, and soon added one hundred households, changed the title to Xinfeng, and became a peer.

古文：时莫折念生兄天生下陇东寇，征西将军元志为天生所擒，贼众甚盛，进屯黑水。
现代文：当时，莫折念生兄天生由陇而下东进犯境，征西将军元志被莫折天生所擒，贼势汹汹，进驻黑水。
English: At that time, Mo Rong's brother Nian Nian went to the East to invade the territory, and the Western Conquest General Yuan Zhi was captured by Mo Rong Nian, and he was stationed in Heishui.

古文：诏延伯为使持节、征西将军、西道都督，与行台萧宝夤讨之。
现代文：帝诏崔延伯为持节、征西将军、西道都督，与行台萧宝夤一起讨伐敌人。
English: Emperor Cui Yanbo was the general of the Western Conquest, the governor of the West Road, and fought the enemy together with Gaotai Xiao Baojun.

古文：宝夤与延伯结垒马嵬，南北相去百余步。
现代文：萧宝夤与崔延伯在马嵬扎下营垒，南北相距百余步。
English: Xiao Baojun and Cui Yanbo camped under the horse's bridle, more than a hundred paces apart from north to south.

古文：宝夤日集督将论讨贼方略，延伯每云： 贼新制胜，难与争锋。 
现代文：萧宝夤每天召集督将讨论打击敌人的方法，崔延伯每说 敌人刚刚胜利，气势正锐，难以与之争锋 。
English: Every day, Xiao Baojun would convene the generals to discuss how to fight the enemy, and Cui Yanbo would always say that the enemy had just won a victory, the momentum was at its peak, and it was difficult to fight against it.

古文：宝夤正色责之曰： 君荷国宠灵，总戎出讨，便是安危所系。每云贼不可讨，以示怯懦，损威挫气，乃君之罪。 
现代文：萧宝夤一脸不高兴： 君你荷国宠惠，总军出讨，国家安危便系于一身，而你每每显示出怯懦之情来，损我皇威，挫军锐气，这是你的罪过。 
English: Xiao Baojun was not happy: You are the favorite of the Netherlands, the general army will come out to negotiate, and the country's safety is linked to one body, and you always show cowardice, undermine my royal authority, and demoralize the army. This is your fault.

古文：延伯明晨诣宝夤自谢，仍云： 今当仰为明公参贼勇怯。 
现代文：崔延伯第二天早晨到萧宝夤那里谢罪，说： 现在我当帮助明公您试探敌人勇怯。 
English: The next morning, Cui Yanbo went to Xiao Baojun to apologize and said, "Now I should help you test the enemy's courage."

古文：延伯选精兵数千，下渡黑水，列陈西进以向贼营；宝夤率众于水东寻原西北，以示后继。
现代文：崔延伯选择精兵数千，下渡黑水，列阵西进向敌营进发，萧宝夤率领部队在水东寻原西北，以示后继。
English: Cui Yanbo selected thousands of elite soldiers, went down to Heishui, marched westward to the enemy battalion, and Xiao Baojun led the troops in the east of the water to find the northwest of the original, to show the succession.

古文：于时贼众大盛，水西一里营营连接。
现代文：当时敌人十分疯狂，在水西一里的地方营营连接。
English: At that time, the enemy was so frantic that they made camp-to-camp contact in a place one mile west of the water.

古文：延伯径至贼垒，扬威胁之，徐而还退。
现代文：崔延伯径至敌营，耀武扬威，威胁敌人，慢慢地回军后退。
English: Cui Yanbo went to the enemy camp, showed off his military prowess, threatened the enemy, and slowly retreated.

古文：贼以延伯众少，开营竞追，众过十倍，临水逼蹙。
现代文：敌人以崔延伯人少，开营竞逐，数量超过延伯军十倍，临水逼迫。
English: The enemy, led by Cui Yanbo, was short of men, so they set up a camp and raced. The enemy outnumbered Yanbo's army tenfold and forced them to the waterfront.

古文：宝夤亲观之，惧有亏损。
现代文：萧宝夤亲自出阵观看，怕延伯有什么亏损。
English: Xiao Baojun personally went out to watch, fearing that Yanbo would suffer losses.

古文：延伯不与其战，身自殿后，抽众东渡，转运如神，须臾济尽，徐乃自渡。
现代文：崔延伯不与敌人交战，亲自殿后，抽军东渡，运转如神，不一会全部渡完，他徐徐自渡。
English: Cui Yanbo did not fight with the enemy, he personally went to the rear of the palace, pulled the army eastward, operated like a god, and soon all the crossing was completed, he slowly self-crossed.

古文：贼徒夺气，相率还营。
现代文：敌人泄气，相继归营。
English: The enemy, deflated, returned to camp one after another.

古文：宝夤大悦，谓官属曰： 崔公，古之关张也。
现代文：萧宝夤大为高兴，对官僚们说： 崔公，是古代的关羽、张飞再世。
English: Xiao Baojun was very happy and said to the bureaucrats: Cui Gong is the reincarnation of the ancient Guan Yu and Zhang Fei.

古文：今年何患不制贼！ 
现代文：今年何愁不能制服敌人。 
English: This year, we will not be able to subdue the enemy.

古文：延伯驰见宝夤曰： 此贼非老奴敌，公但坐看。 
现代文：崔延伯驰马见萧宝夤说： 这些敌人不是老奴对手，公你只管坐等看戏。 
English: Cui Yanbo chanced to see Xiao Baojun and said, "These enemies are not your old rivals. Sir, just sit back and watch the play.

古文：后日，延伯勒众而出，宝夤为后拒。
现代文：后日，崔延伯率众出击，萧宝夤为其殿后。
English: On the following day, Cui Yanbo led the attack, with Xiao Baojun as his empress.

古文：天生悉众来战，延伯申令将士，身先士卒，陷其前锋。
现代文：莫折天生率领全部人马前来迎战，崔延伯申令将士，身先士卒，打乱敌前锋。
English: Cui Yanbo led all the men and horses to come to meet the battle, Cui Yanbo ordered the soldiers, leading the way, to disrupt the enemy forward.

古文：于是勇锐竞进，大破之，俘斩十余万，追奔及于小陇。
现代文：于是大军勇锐精进，大破敌军，俘虏斩杀敌人十多万，追赶到小陇。
English: As a result, the large army bravely and diligently advanced, defeated the enemy army, captured and killed more than one hundred thousand enemies, and chased them to Xiaobao.

古文：秦贼劲强，诸将所惮，朝廷初议遣将，咸云非延伯无以定之，果能克敌。
现代文：秦地敌人英勇顽强，诸将都很害怕，朝廷初议派将，都说非崔延伯无人能平定下来。果然这次战胜了敌人。
English: Qin's enemies were brave and tenacious, and the generals were very afraid. The generals of the Imperial Court's First Deliberation all said that if it were not for Cui Yanbo, no one would be able to settle down. Indeed, this time they defeated the enemy.

古文：授右卫将军。
现代文：朝廷授其为右卫将军。
English: The Imperial Court awarded him the rank of Ue no shogun.

古文：于时万俟丑奴、宿勤明达等寇掠泾州。
现代文：当时，万俟丑奴、宿勤明达等人侵掠泾州。
English: At that time, Wanqin Ugly, Suqin Mingda and others invaded and plundered Zhangzhou.

古文：先是，卢祖迁、伊甕生数将等皆以元志前行之始，同时发雍，从六陌道将取高平。
现代文：这以前，卢祖迁、尹瓮生几名将领都在元志前行之始，同时率军向雍州进发，从六陌道准备攻取高平。
English: Prior to this, several generals, including Lu Zuqian and Yin Yansheng, were at the beginning of the march ahead of Yuan Zhi. At the same time, they led the army to Yongzhou and prepared to capture Gaoping from Liu Miao Road.

古文：志败，仍停泾部。
现代文：元志败，他们仍停军泾水那里。
English: Defeated, they still halted at Surabaya.

古文：延伯既破秦贼，乃与宝夤率众会于安定，甲卒十二万，铁马八千匹，军威甚盛。
现代文：崔延伯打败秦贼之后，便与萧宝夤一起率军在安定与他们会师，兵力一下子增加到十二万，铁马八千匹，军威很盛。
English: After Cui Yanbo defeated the Qin bandits, he and Xiao Baojun led the army in the stable with their division, and the troop strength suddenly increased to one hundred and twenty thousand, eight thousand iron horses, and the military prestige was very prosperous.

古文：丑奴置营泾州西北七十里当原城，时或轻骑暂来挑战，大兵未交，便示奔北。
现代文：丑奴在泾州西北七十里当原城这地方扎下营盘，不时轻骑前来挑战，大兵未交，便奔逃而去。
English: Ugly slave set up camp in Dangyuan City, seventy miles northwest of Zhangzhou. From time to time, he rode lightly to challenge. The soldiers did not surrender, so he ran away.

古文：延伯矜功负胜，遂唱议先驱。
现代文：崔延伯恃功负胜，便要求率军先驱。
English: Cui Yanbo's efforts were unsuccessful, so he asked to lead the army as a pioneer.

古文：伐木别造大排，内为锁柱，教习强兵，负而趋走，号为排城。战士在外，辎重居中，自泾州缘原北上。
现代文：砍树木营造大排，内安锁柱，教练强兵，扛在肩上冲锋，称为排城，战士在外，辎重居中，从泾州缘原北上。
English: Cut down trees to create a large platoon, secure locking posts inside, train strong soldiers, carry them on their shoulders to charge, known as a platoon, soldiers outside, heavy in the middle, from the edge of Luzhou to the north.

古文：众军将出讨贼，未战之间，有贼数百骑，诈持文书，云是降簿，乞且缓师。
现代文：大军准备出营讨伐敌人，还未交战，有数百名敌人，诈持文书，说是投降书，请求大军且慢。
English: A large army is preparing to go out to fight the enemy, but has not yet engaged in battle. There are hundreds of enemies, holding fraudulent documents, saying they are surrender documents, and asking the large army to wait.

古文：宝夤、延伯谓其事实，逡巡未阅。
现代文：萧宝夤、崔延伯认为这是事实，徘徊未发。
English: Xiao Baojun and Cui Yanbo believed this to be the truth, but did not take any action.

古文：俄而宿勤明达率众自东北而至，乞降之贼从西竞下，诸军前后受敌。
现代文：不一会宿勤明达率军从东北而来，乞降敌人从西面冲来，诸军前后受敌。
English: Not long after, Suqin Mingda led the army from the northeast, and the enemy rushed from the west to beg for surrender. All the armies were defeated.

古文：延伯上马突陈，贼势摧挫，便尔遂北，径造其营。
现代文：崔延伯上马突阵，敌人攻势受挫，不一会儿便排山倒海，向北直冲敌营而来。
English: Cui Yanbo mounted his horse and stormed the enemy's camp. The enemy's offensive was thwarted, and in a short time, Cui Yanbo charged the enemy's camp in a northerly direction.

古文：贼本轻骑，延伯军兼步卒，兵力疲怠，贼乃乘间得入排城。
现代文：敌人都是轻骑，而延伯部队兼有步兵，兵力疲惫怠慢，敌人于是乘着间隙进入排城。
English: The enemy were all light cavalry, but the Yanbo troops also had infantry. The troops were tired and sluggish, so the enemy took advantage of the gap to enter the picket.

古文：延伯军遂大败，死伤者将有二万。
现代文：崔延伯军队于是大败，死伤人数将近二万。
English: As a result, Cui Yanbo's army suffered a crushing defeat, with nearly 20,000 killed and wounded.

古文：宝夤敛军退保泾州。
现代文：萧宝夤收拾军马退保泾州。
English: Xiao Baojun gathers his army and retreats to Bozhou.

古文：延伯修缮器械，购募骁勇，复从泾州西进，去贼彭阬谷栅七里结营。
现代文：崔延伯修缮器械，用钱招募骁勇之士，又从泾州西进，在离敌彭抗谷营寨七里的地方扎营。
English: Cui Yanbo repaired the equipment, used the money to recruit brave men, and marched westward from Zhangzhou to set up camp seven miles from the enemy's Pengnan Valley encampment.

古文：延伯耻前挫辱，不报宝夤，独出袭贼，大破之，俄顷间平其数栅。
现代文：崔延伯耻于前番受挫之辱，不报告萧宝夤，便独领军马出营袭击敌人，大破敌军，不一会便踏平几处栅寨。
English: Cui Yanbo, ashamed of the humiliation of the previous defeat, did not report to Xiao Baojun, so he took the lead horse out of the camp to attack the enemy, broke the enemy army, and soon trampled down several stockades.

古文：贼皆逃遁，见兵人采掠，散乱不整，还来冲突，遂大奔败。
现代文：敌人纷纷逃走，延伯看见自己士兵纷纷抢夺财物，散乱不整，便往来奔突制止，于是军队又被打得大败。
English: Enemies fled one after another, and when Yan Bo saw his own soldiers snatching up property one after another and leaving everything in disarray, he rushed back and forth to stop them, whereupon the army was once again defeated.

古文：延伯中流矢，为贼所害，士卒死者万余人。
现代文：崔延伯中流矢，为敌人射死，士兵死的有一万多人。
English: Cui Yanbo, a mid-level archer, shot dead for the enemy, and more than 10,000 soldiers died.

古文：延伯善将抚，能得众心，与康生、大眼为诸将之冠，延伯末路功名尤重。
现代文：崔延伯善于抚慰将士，能得众人之心，与奚康生、杨大眼一起成为诸将中的佼佼者，崔延伯临死时功名尤重。
English: Cui Yanbo was good at soothing generals, and was able to win the hearts of everyone. Together with Nie Kangsheng and Yang Dajian, he became one of the best generals. Cui Yanbo's achievements were especially important when he was dying.

古文：时大寇未平而延伯死，朝野叹惧焉。
现代文：当时大敌未平而崔延伯就死了，朝野人士都叹惜担心。
English: At that time, the great enemy was not defeated and Cui Yanbo died, and people in both the imperial court and the field were worried.

古文：赠使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、定州刺史，谥曰武烈。
现代文：朝廷赠其为使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司、定州刺史，谥称武烈。
English: The Imperial Court presented him with the titles of Envoy, General of Chariots and Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Three Departments of the Imperial Household, and Grand Historian of Dingzhou, and he was nicknamed Wu Rong.

