古文：玉蕊院女仙马士良张云容韦蒙妻慈恩塔院女仙
现代文：玉蕊院女仙马士良张云容韦蒙妻慈恩塔院女仙
English: The Immaculate Heart of Mary, Ma Shiliang, Zhang Yun Rong, Wei Meng, his wife, the Immaculate Heart of Mary, the Immaculate Heart of Mary,

古文：玉蕊院女仙
现代文：玉蕊院女仙
English: The Immaculate Conception

古文：长安安业唐昌观，旧有玉蕊花。
现代文：长安安业唐昌观，旧时有玉蕊花。
English: Chang'an Anye Tang Chang Guan, in the old days, there were jade flowers.

古文：其花每发，若琼林瑶树。
现代文：那花每当开放的时候，就好像琼林瑶树一般。
English: That flower, whenever it opens, is like the Qionglin elm.

古文：唐元和中，春物方盛，车马寻玩者相继。
现代文：唐代元和年间，春天万花正盛，乘车骑马踏青游玩的人接连不断。
English: During the Yuan and Tang Dynasties, the spring flowers were in full bloom, and there were many people riding horses to visit the countryside.

古文：忽一日，有女子年可十七八，衣绿绣衣，垂双髻，无簪珥之饰，容色婉娩，迥出于众。
现代文：忽然有一天，有个女子年约十七八岁，穿着绿色绣花衣裳，垂着双髻，没戴簪珥一类的首饰，脸色柔顺，特别出众。
English: Suddenly, one day, there was a woman about seventeen or eighteen years old, wearing a green embroidered dress, hanging double braids, not wearing jewelry such as bracelets, her face was supple and particularly outstanding.

古文：从以二女冠、三小仆，皆草髻黄衫，端丽无比。
现代文：跟随她的有两个女道士和三个小仆人，都留着草髻穿着黄衫，无比端庄秀丽。
English: She was followed by two female Taoists and three little servants, all of whom wore straw bonnets and yellow shirts, and were incredibly graceful and beautiful.

古文：既而下马，以白角扇障面，直造花所，异香芬馥，闻于数十步外。
现代文：不久，女郎下了马，用白角扇遮住面容，直接到养花的地方，异香浓郁，传到几十步外。
English: Soon, the girl got off the horse, covered her face with a white horn fan, and went directly to the place where the flowers were grown. The fragrance was rich and spread to dozens of steps away.

古文：观者疑出自宫掖，莫敢逼而视之。
现代文：观看的人疑心她们出自宫廷，所以没有人敢逼近去看她们。
English: Onlookers suspected they came from the court, so no one dared approach to see them.

古文：伫立良久，令女仆取花数枝而出。
现代文：女郎伫立了很久，令女仆摘取几枝花就出来了。
English: The girl stood there for a long time, and when she asked the maid to pick a few flowers, they came out.

古文：将乘马，顾谓黄衫者曰： 曩有玉峰之期，自此行矣。 
现代文：将要乘马的时候，女郎回头对穿黄衫的人说： 从前有玉峰之约，从这里前往吧。 
English: When she was about to get on the horse, the girl turned to the man in the yellow shirt and said, "Once there was a treaty with Jade Peak. Let's go from here."

古文：时观者如堵，咸觉烟飞鹤唳，景物辉焕。
现代文：当时观看的人像一堵墙一样，全都觉得烟飞鹤唳，景物放射光彩。
English: At that time, the people watching were like a wall, all of them felt that the smoke was flying, and the scenery was radiant.

古文：举辔百余步，有轻风拥尘，随之而去。
现代文：女郎骑上马刚走一百多步，有股轻轻的风吹起尘土随之而去。
English: The girl just got on the horse and walked more than a hundred steps. A light wind blew the dust away.

古文：须臾尘灭，望之已在半空，方悟神仙之游。
现代文：不一会儿，尘土消失了，望见她们已经在半空中了，这才醒悟是神仙出游。
English: After a while, the dust disappeared and they were seen floating in mid-air, only then did they realize that it was a fairy outing.

古文：余香不散者经月余。
现代文：仙女所留下的余香经久不散，一直经过一个多月才消失。
English: The lingering fragrance left by the fairy lasted for a long time, and it took more than a month for it to disappear.

古文：时严休复、元稹、刘禹锡、白居易俱作玉蕊院真人降诗。
现代文：当时严休复、元稹、刘禹锡、白居易都作了玉蕊院真人降临的诗。
English: At that time, Yan Huifu, Yuan Qi, Liu Yuxi, and Bai Juyi all composed poems about the arrival of the real person in the Jade Emperor's Palace.

古文：严休复诗曰： 终日斋心祷玉宸，魂销眼冷未逢真。
现代文：严休复的诗是： 终日斋心祷玉宸，魂销眼冷未逢真。
English: The poem written by Yan Hui-Fu is: "Pray all day long, and your soul will not be satisfied with what you see."

古文：不如一树琼瑶蕊，笑对藏花洞里人。 
现代文：不如一树琼瑶蕊，笑对藏花洞里人。 
English: It's not as good as a ginseng tree laughing at a person in a camellia cave.

古文：又曰： 香车潜下玉龟山，尘世何由睹蕣颜。
现代文：又有一首是： 香车潜下玉龟山，尘世何由睹蕣颜。
English: Another one is: "A car dives under the Jade Turtle Mountain, why does the world turn a blind eye?"

古文：惟有无情枝上雪，好风吹缀绿玉鬟。 
现代文：惟有无情枝上雪，好风吹缀绿玉鬟。 
English: Only the merciless snow on the branches, the good wind blowing decorated with green jade.

古文：元稹诗云： 弄玉潜过玉树时，不教青鸟出花枝。
现代文：元稹的诗是： 弄玉潜过玉树时，不教青鸟出花枝。
English: Yuan Qi's poem is: When diving through the jade tree with jade, don't teach the blue bird to make flowers and branches.

古文：的应未有诸人觉，只是严郎自得知。 
现代文：的应未有诸人觉，只是严郎自得知。 
English: It was not noticed by others, but Yan Lang found out about it himself.

古文：刘禹锡诗云： 玉女来看玉树花，异香先引七香车。
现代文：刘禹锡的诗是： 玉女来看玉树花，异香先引七香车。
English: Liu Yuxi's poem is: The lady comes to see the jade flowers, and the incense is first led by the seven-spice chariot.

古文：攀枝弄雪时回首，惊怪人间日易斜。 
现代文：攀枝弄雪时回首，惊怪人间日易斜。 
English: I look back when I'm shoveling snow, and I'm amazed at how quickly the sun sets.

古文：又曰： 雪蕊琼葩满院春，羽林轻步不生尘。
现代文：又一首是： 雪蕊琼葩满院春，羽林轻步不生尘。
English: Another one is: Xue Rui Qiong is full of spring, the feather forest is light and does not produce dust.

古文：君王帘下徒相问，长伴吹箫别有人。 
现代文：君王帘下徒相问，长伴吹箫别有人。 
English: The king's attendants ask each other, the long-time companion brags that there is someone else.

古文：白居易诗云： 瀛女偷乘凤下时，洞中暂歇弄琼枝。
现代文：白居易的诗是： 瀛女偷乘凤下时，洞中暂歇弄琼枝。
English: Bai Juyi's poem is: When a young woman sneaks under the phoenix, she pauses in the cave to make love to a branch.

古文：不缘啼鸟春饶舌，青琐仙郎可得知。 
现代文：不缘啼鸟春饶舌，青琐仙郎可得知。 
English: If you're not familiar with Ostrich Spring Rap, you'll know the story of the young fairy godmother.

古文：马士良
现代文：马士良
English: Ma Shiliang

古文：唐元和初，万年县有马士良者，犯事。
现代文：唐代元和初年，万年县有个马士良犯了法。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Tang Dynasties, there was a Ma Shiliang who broke the law.

古文：时进士王爽为京尹，执法严酷，欲杀之。
现代文：当时进士王爽担任京兆尹，他执法严酷，打算杀掉马士良。
English: At that time, Wang Shuang served as Jing Zhaoyun. He enforced the law harshly and planned to kill Ma Shiliang.

古文：士良乃亡命入南山，至炭谷湫岸，潜于大柳树下。
现代文：马士良就逃命进了南山，到了炭谷湫岸，藏在一棵大柳树下。
English: Ma Shiliang fled for his life into the Nanshan Mountains, and hid under a big willow tree on the shore of the Coal Valley.

古文：才晓，见五色云下一仙女于水滨，有金槌玉板，连扣数下，青莲涌出，每蕊旋开。
现代文：天刚亮的时候，他看见从五色云中下来一个仙女落到水边，拿出金槌和玉板，连敲了几下，水里就有青莲冒出来，每朵花蕾都忽然开了。
English: When it was just dawn, he saw a fairy descend from the five-colored clouds, fall to the water's edge, take out a hammer and a jade plate, and knock a few times. There was a blue lotus in the water, and each flower bud suddenly opened.

古文：仙女取擘三四枚食之，乃乘云去。
现代文：仙女就把莲花摘下来三四枚吃了，然后就乘着云彩走了。
English: The fairy plucked three or four of the lotus flowers and ate them, and then she rode away on a cloud.

古文：士良见金槌玉板尚在，跃下扣之。
现代文：马士良看到金槌玉板还在那里，就跳下去也敲了几下。
English: When Ma Shiliang saw that the hammer and the jade plate were still there, he jumped down and knocked a few times.

古文：少顷复出，士良尽食之十数枚，顿觉身轻，即能飞举。
现代文：不一会儿，青莲又从水下冒出来，马士良就把十几枚莲花全吃了。吃过以后，马士良立刻觉得身体轻了，就能飞腾起来。
English: Soon, the blue lotus emerged from the water, and Ma Shiliang ate all the dozen lotuses. After eating, Ma Shiliang immediately felt lighter and could fly.

古文：遂扪萝寻向者五色云所。
现代文：于是他就抓着藤萝寻找刚才出现五色云的地方。
English: So he grabbed a wisteria and looked for the place where the five-coloured cloud had just appeared.

古文：俄见大殿崇宫，食莲女子与群仙处于中。
现代文：猛然看见一座高大的宫殿，吃莲花的那个女子和群仙都在里边。
English: Suddenly, he saw a tall palace. The woman eating the lotus and the fairies were all inside.

古文：覩之大惊，趋下，以其竹杖连击，坠于洪崖涧边。
现代文：仙人看见上来一个凡人，都大吃一惊，赶快走下殿来，用竹杖接连来打马士良。马士良掉下去，摔在洪崖涧边。
English: When the hermit saw a mortal coming up, he was very surprised. He quickly went down to the hall and hit Ma Shiliang with a bamboo cane one after another. Ma Shiliang fell down and landed on the edge of the cliff.

古文：涧水清洁，因惫熟睡。
现代文：涧水很清洁，马士良因为太疲乏就熟睡过去。
English: The water was very clean, and Ma Shiliang fell asleep because he was too tired.

古文：及觉，见双鬟小女磨刀，谓曰： 君盗灵药，奉命来取君命。 
现代文：等他醒来的时候，看到一个梳着双鬟的小女子一边磨刀一边对他说： 你偷盗灵药，我奉命来取您的性命。 
English: When he woke up, he saw a young woman with braided hair sharpening a knife and saying to him, "You stole the elixir. I was ordered to take your life."

古文：士良大惧，俯伏求救解之。
现代文：马士良吓坏了，趴伏在地请求解救他。
English: Terrified, Ma Shiliang fell to the ground and begged for help.

古文：答曰： 此应难免，唯有神液，可以救君。君当以我为妻。 
现代文：小姑娘回答说： 要您的命这事理应难免，只有神液可以救您，但是您得让我作您的妻子。 
English: The little girl replied, "It is inevitable that your life will be taken, only the divine fluid can save you, but you must let me be your wife."

古文：遂去。逡巡持一小碧瓯，内有饭白色，士良尽食，复寝。
现代文：马士良同意了，小姑娘就走了。不一会儿，小姑娘拿来一个小绿盆，里面有白色的饭，马士良把饭全吃光了，又睡下了。
English: Ma Shiliang agreed, and the little girl left. Soon, the little girl brought a small green bowl with white rice in it. Ma Shiliang ate all the rice and went back to sleep.

古文：须臾起，双鬟曰： 药已成矣。 
现代文：不久，马士良起来了，双鬟小姑娘说： 药已经做成了。 
English: Before long, Ma Shi felt better, and Shuangtao said, "The medicine has been made.

古文：以示之，七颗光莹，如空青色。士良喜叹。
现代文：就把药拿给他看，共有七丸药，闪着天青色的光泽，马士良高兴地赞叹。
English: She showed him the medicine, a total of seven pills, shining with a sky-blue luster, and Ma Shiliang happily admired it.

古文：看其腹有似红线处，乃刀痕也。女以药摩之，随手不见。
现代文：马士良看到自己肚子上有像红线似的地方，原来是刀痕，小姑娘用药摩擦那刀痕。刀痕随手就不见了。
English: Ma Shiliang saw a place on his stomach that looked like a red line. It turned out to be a knife mark. The little girl rubbed the knife mark with medicine, and the knife mark disappeared.

古文：戒曰： 但自修学，慎勿语人。
现代文：小姑娘告诫马士良说： 你自己只管修行学道，千万不要把这事告诉别人。
English: The little girl admonished Ma Shiliang, saying, "You should only practice and study the Tao by yourself, and you must not tell others about this.

古文：倘漏泄，腹疮必裂。 
现代文：倘若泄露了，肚子上的刀痕一定要裂开。 
English: If it leaks, the knife marks on her stomach must be ripped open.

古文：遂同住于湫侧。
现代文：于是他们一起住在水池旁边。
English: So they lived together next to the pond.

古文：又曰： 我谷神之女也，守护上仙灵药，故得救君耳。 
现代文：小姑娘又说： 我是谷神的女儿，给上仙守护灵药，所以能救您呀。 
English: The little girl also said, "I am the daughter of the god of the valley, and I guard the elixir for the god, so I can save you."

古文：至会昌初，往往人见。
现代文：到会昌初年的时候，人们还常常看见他们。
English: In the first year of Huichang, people often saw them.

古文：渔者于炭谷湫捕鱼不获，投一帖子，必随斤两数而得。
现代文：打渔的人在炭谷湫捕鱼，如果没有捕到，投进一张帖子，渔人一定会得到按照帖子上要求的斤两数量的鱼。
English: If the fisherman does not catch any fish, he should post a notice, and the fisherman will surely get two catties of fish according to the notice.

古文：张云容
现代文：张云容
English: Zhang Yunrong

古文：薛昭者，唐元和末为平陆尉。
现代文：薛昭在唐朝元和末年当平陆县尉。
English: Xue Zhao was a lieutenant of Pinglu County in the first and last years of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：以气义自负，常慕郭代公、李北海之为人。
现代文：以义气自负，平时景仰郭代公、李北海的为人。
English: He is proud of his loyalty and admires Guo Daigong and Li Beihai.

古文：因夜值宿，囚有为母复仇杀人者，与金而逸之。
现代文：因为夜里值宿，囚犯中有个为母亲报仇而杀了人的，薛昭就给他银钱把他放跑了。
English: Because he was on duty at night, one of the prisoners killed someone to avenge his mother, and Xue Zhao gave him money and let him go.

古文：故县闻于廉使，廉使奏之，坐谪为民于海东。
现代文：因此县里向廉使报告，廉使又向皇上奏本，薛昭被治罪贬到海东为民。
English: Therefore, the county reported to the envoy, the envoy reported to the emperor, and Xue Zhao was sentenced to the East Sea as a commoner.

古文：敕下之日，不问家产，但荷银铛而去。
现代文：圣旨降下的那天，薛昭不顾家产，只扛着一只银锅就走了。
English: On the day the edict was issued, Xue Zhao walked away with nothing but a silver pot, regardless of his family's wealth.

古文：有客田山叟者，或云数百岁矣。
现代文：有个叫作田山叟的客人，有人说他已几百岁了。
English: There was a guest named Tian Yamazaki. Some people said he was hundreds of years old.

古文：素与昭洽，乃赍酒拦道而饮饯之。
现代文：他一向与薛昭关系很好，就带着酒在道上拦住薛昭请，他喝酒为他送行。
English: He has always had a good relationship with Xue Zhao, so he stopped Xue Zhao on the road with wine, and he drank to see him off.

古文：谓昭曰： 君义士也，脱人之祸而自当之，真荆、聂之俦也！
现代文：田山叟对薛昭说： 您是个义士啊！为别人解脱祸患而自己承担罪名，真是荆轲、聂政一类的人物啊！
English: Tian Shanqi said to Xue Zhao, "You are a righteous man! You take the blame for others to get rid of the disaster. You are truly a person like Jing Yao and Hao Zheng."

古文：吾请从子。 
现代文：请让我跟着您。 
English: Please let me go with you.

古文：昭不许，固请乃许之。
现代文：薛昭不同意，田山叟一再请求，薛昭才答应了。
English: Xue Zhao did not agree, Tian Shanjun repeatedly requested, and Xue Zhao agreed.

古文：至三乡夜，山叟脱衣贳酒，大醉，屏左右谓昭曰： 可遁矣。 
现代文：到了三乡那天夜晚，田山叟脱下衣服作抵押赊来了酒，喝得大醉，就把左右的人支开，对薛昭说： 你可以逃跑了。 
English: That night, when they arrived at Sanxiang, Tian Shanzhang took off his clothes to make a deposit and brought wine. He was very drunk, so he separated the right and left people and said to Xue Zhao, "You can run away."

古文：与之携手出东郊，赠药一粒曰： 非唯去疾，兼能绝谷。 
现代文：就与薛昭拉着手出了东郊，又赠给薛昭一粒药，说： 这药不仅能去病，吃了它还能不吃粮食。 
English: He and Xue Zhaola set out for the eastern suburbs, and presented Xue Zhaola with a pill, saying, "This pill can not only cure illness, but if you eat it, you can stop eating grain."

古文：又约曰： 此去但遇道北有林薮繁翳处，可且暂匿，不独逃难，当获美姝。 
现代文：又约定说： 从这里走只要遇到道北有树林、草木丛生繁茂能遮蔽住人的地方，就可以暂时隐藏在那里，不仅能逃避灾难，还能获得美人。 
English: It was also agreed that: From here, as long as you encounter a place in the north of the province where there are trees and thick vegetation that can cover people, you can temporarily hide there, not only to escape disaster, but also to get beauty.

古文：昭辞行，过兰昌宫，古木修竹，四舍其所。
现代文：薛昭告辞走后，路过兰昌宫，那里有古老的大树、高高的竹子，从四面围住了那个地方。
English: After Xue Zhao left, he passed Lanchang Palace, where ancient trees and tall bamboo surrounded the place from all sides.

古文：昭逾垣而入，追者但东西奔走，莫能知踪矣。
现代文：薛昭就跳墙进去，追捕他的人尽管东奔西走，也没能找到他的踪影。
English: Xue Zhao jumped over the wall to get in, and his pursuers couldn't find any trace of him even though they ran everywhere.

古文：昭潜于古殿之西间，及夜，风清月皎，见阶前有三美女，笑语而至，揖让升于花茵，以犀杯酌酒而进之。
现代文：薛昭藏在古殿的西间，到了夜晚，风清月明，看见台阶前有三个美女，说说笑笑地来了，互相作揖，谦让着上了花茵之上，用犀牛角的杯子斟酒喝。
English: Xue Zhao hid in the west hall of the ancient hall. In the evening, when the wind was clear and the moon was bright, he saw three beautiful women in front of the steps. They came talking and laughing, flirting with each other, bowing to each other, and pouring wine into a rhinoceros horn cup.

古文：居首女子酹之曰： 吉利吉利，好人相逢，恶人相避。 
现代文：居于首位的女子把酒洒在地上祷告说： 吉利吉利，好人相逢，恶人想避。 
English: The woman at the head of the line spilled her wine on the ground and prayed: "Good luck, good luck, good people meet, bad people want to avoid."

古文：其次曰： 良宵宴会，虽有好人，岂易逢耶？
现代文：挨着她的那个女子说： 美好的夜晚欢乐的聚会，虽然有好人，哪里容易相逢啊？ 
English: The woman next to her said: "It's a beautiful evening, a happy party, and although there are good people, where is it easy to meet them?

古文：昭居窗隙间闻之，又志田生之言，遂跳出曰： 适闻夫人云，好人岂易逢耶？ 昭虽不才，愿备好人之数。 
现代文：薛昭从窗户缝里听到了这些话，又记住了田山叟关于得到美女的预言，就跳出来说： 刚才听夫人说， 好人哪里容易相逢啊 ，我薛昭虽然不成才，愿充好人之数。 
English: Xue Zhao heard these words from the cracks of the window, and remembered Tian Shanqiu's prophecy about getting a beautiful woman, and jumped out and said: Just now I heard my wife say, "Where is it easy to meet a good person?," I Xue Zhao, although I am not talented, would like to be a good person.

古文：三女愕然良久，曰： 君是何人，而匿于此？ 
现代文：三个美女惊讶了很久，才说： 您是什么人，却隐藏在这里？ 
English: The three beauties were surprised for a long time before they said: Who are you, hiding here?

古文：昭具以实对，乃设座于茵之南。
现代文：薛昭就把实情全对她们说了，女子就在花茵的南边给薛昭摆设了座位。
English: Xue Zhao told them the whole truth, and the woman set up a seat for Xue Zhao on the south side of the flower.

古文：昭询其姓字，长曰云容，张氏；次曰凤台，萧氏；次曰兰翘，刘氏。
现代文：薛昭询问她们的名字，她们告诉了他，大一点的叫云容姓张，其次叫凤台姓萧，再次叫兰翘姓刘。
English: When Xue Zhao asked their names, they told him that the older one was named Yun Rong surnamed Zhang, the second was named Feng Tai surnamed Xiao, and the third was named Lan Gao surnamed Liu.

古文：饮将酣，兰翘命骰子，谓二女曰： 今夕佳宾相会，须有匹偶，请掷骰子，遇采强者，得荐枕席。 
现代文：酒喝得将尽兴的时候，兰翘命人拿骰子，对另两个美女说： 今天晚上佳宾相会，必须有所匹配，请掷骰子，遇到彩头强的，才能侍寝。 
English: When the wine was drunk to the fullest, Lan Zhao ordered someone to take the dice and said to the other two beautiful women: Tonight, the guests will meet, there must be a match, please throw the dice, and if you meet a strong player, you can sleep.

古文：乃遍掷，云容采胜。
现代文：于是三人都掷一遍，云容的彩头赢了。
English: As a result, all three of them threw it once, and Yun Rong's color head won.

古文：翘遂命薛郎近云容姊坐，又持双杯而献曰： 真所谓合卺矣！ 
现代文：兰翘就命薛昭靠近云容姐坐着，又拿双杯给他们敬酒说： 这是所说的交杯酒啊！ 
English: Lanzhao ordered Xue Zhao to sit close to Yun Rong sister, and took two cups to toast them, saying: This is the so-called handing over a cup of wine!

古文：昭拜谢之。遂问： 夫人何许人？
现代文：薛昭向她们称谢，趁便问： 夫人是哪里人？
English: Xue Zhao thanked them and asked: Where is your wife from?

古文：何以至此？ 
现代文：因为什么到这里？ 
English: What brought you here?

古文：容曰： 某乃开元中杨贵妃之侍儿也。
现代文：云容说： 我本是开元年间杨贵妃的侍儿。
English: Yun Rong said: I used to be Yang Guifei's valet in the first year of the year.

古文：妃甚爱惜，常令独舞《霓裳》于绣岭宫。
现代文：贵妃很爱惜我，常让我在绣岭宫独自跳《霓裳舞》。
English: Your Imperial Highness is very fond of me, and often lets me dance the "Clothed Dance" alone at Shuling Court.

古文：妃赠我诗曰：  罗袖动香香不已，红蕖袅袅秋烟里。
现代文：贵妃赠我一首诗，诗中说： 罗袖动香香不已，红蕖袅袅秋烟里。
English: Your empress presented me with a poem, which said: Luosode is fragrant and fragrant, red maple is in the autumn smoke.

古文：轻云岭上乍摇风，嫩柳池边初拂水。 
现代文：轻云岭上乍摇风，嫩柳池边初拂水。 
English: The wind was blowing on the top of the light cloud ridge, and the water was whipping at the edge of the Willow Pond.

古文：诗成，明皇吟咏久之，亦有继和，但不记耳。
现代文：诗写成后，唐明皇吟咏了很久，也有继和的诗，只是我没记住罢了。
English: After the poem was written, Tang Ming Wang chanted for a long time, and there was also a poem to follow, but I just didn't remember it.

古文：遂赠双金扼臂，因此宠幸愈于群辈。
现代文：还赐给我双金扼臂，因此宠幸超过那群同辈之人。
English: He also gave me a pair of golden knuckles, so I was favored over that group of peers.

古文：此时多遇帝与申天师谈道，予独与贵妃得窃听，亦数侍天师茶药，颇获天师悯之。
现代文：那时经常遇到皇帝与申天师谈论学道的事，唯独我和贵妃有机会偷听；又多次侍奉天师吃茶吃药，很得天师怜惜。
English: At that time, I often encountered the emperor and Shen Tianshi talking about the study of Taoism, but only I and Guifei had the opportunity to eavesdrop; I also served Tianshi to eat tea and take medicine many times, and was very pitied by Tianshi.

古文：因闲处，叩头乞药。
现代文：有一次，趁空闲之时，我向天师叩头讨药。
English: Once, in my spare time, I kowtowed to the heavenly master and asked for medicine.

古文：师云： 吾不惜，但汝无分，不久处世。
现代文：天师说： 我不是舍不得给你药，只是你没有缘分，不能久在人世，怎么办呢？ 
English: The heavenly teacher said, "I'm not reluctant to give you medicine, but you don't have a destiny, you can't live long, what should you do?

古文：如何？ 我曰： 朝闻道，夕死可矣。 
现代文：我说： 早晨获知了道理，晚上就死也可以了。 
English: I said: If you learn the truth in the morning, you can die in the evening.

古文：天师乃与绛雪丹一粒曰： 汝但服之，虽死不坏。
现代文：天师就给我一粒绛雪丹，说：你只要吃了它，即使死了身体也不能坏。
English: The heavenly teacher then gave me a piece of hawthorn and said, "As long as you eat it, even if you die, your body will not deteriorate."

古文：但能大其棺、广其穴、含以真玉、疏而有风，使魂不荡空，魄不沉寂。
现代文：只要能把棺材做得大一些，墓穴宽一些，把真玉含在嘴里，坟土疏松而有风，就可以使魂不能飘到空中，魄也不沉寂。
English: As long as you can make the coffin bigger, the grave wider, hold the real jade in your mouth, and the grave loose and windy, you can make the soul not float into the air, and the soul is not silent.

古文：有物拘制，陶出阴阳，后百年，得遇生人交精之气，或再生，便为地仙耳。 
现代文：有物拘制，陶出阴阳，一百年后，遇到活人，得到交配的精气，可能重新活过来，就成为地仙了。 
English: There are objects of restraint, pottery of yin and yang, a hundred years later, encounter a living person, get the essence of mating, may come back to life, and become an earth fairy.

古文：我没兰昌之时，具以白贵妃。
现代文：我在兰昌将死的时候，把天师的这些话全告诉了贵妃。
English: When I was about to die in Lanchang, I told Guifei all these words of the heavenly teacher.

古文：贵妃恤之，命中贵人陈玄造受其事。
现代文：贵妃体恤我，命中贵人陈玄造办理安葬的事。
English: Guifei felt sorry for me and ordered the nobleman Chen Xuanzuo to handle the burial.

古文：送终之器，皆得如约。今已百年矣。
现代文：送终的器具，全都像约定的那样办到了，到现在已经一百年了。
English: All of the equipment for the funeral has been completed as agreed, and it is now one hundred years old.

古文：仙师之兆，莫非今宵良会乎！
现代文：仙师所说的预兆，莫非在今宵良会吗？
English: Isn't this a good omen for tonight's party?

古文：此乃宿分，非偶然耳。 。
现代文：这就是宿缘啊，不是偶然的呀！ 
English: This is the fate, not by chance!

古文：昭因诘申天师之貌，乃田山叟之魁梧也。
现代文：薛昭就问她申天师的相貌，原来就是魁梧的田山叟。
English: Xue Zhao asked her about the appearance of Shen Tianshi, and it turned out to be the burly Tian Shanjun.

古文：昭大惊曰： 山叟即天师明矣！
现代文：薛昭大惊说： 山叟就是天师，这是明摆着的了！
English: Xue Zhao was shocked and said, "Mountaineering is a heavenly teacher, this is obvious!

古文：不然，何以委曲使予符曩日之事哉？ 
现代文：不然，为什么设法让我符合昔日的事情呢？ 
English: Otherwise, why try to make me conform to the things of the past?

古文：又问兰、凤二子。容曰： 亦当时宫人有容者，为九仙媛所忌，毒而死之。
现代文：薛昭又讯问兰翘和凤台两个人的情况，云容说： 她们也是当时宫中有姿色的宫女，被九仙媛所忌恨，把她们毒死了，安葬在我的坟旁。
English: Xue Zhao also inquired about the two people, Lan Zhao and Feng Tai, and Yun Rong said, "They were also the beautiful princesses in the palace at that time. They were hated by the Nine Immortals, who poisoned them to death and buried them next to my grave.

古文：藏吾穴侧，与之交游，非一朝一夕耳。 
现代文：我跟她们交游，不是一朝一夕了。 
English: I didn't become friends with them overnight.

古文：凤台请击席而歌，送昭、容酒歌曰： 脸花不绽几含幽，今夕阳春独换秋。
现代文：凤台要求击席唱歌，送给薛昭、云容酒歌，歌词是： 脸花不绽几含幽，今夕阳春独换秋。
English: Fengdai asked to sing at the banquet, and sent a wine song to Xue Zhao and Yun Rong, the lyrics of which were: The sun sets, the sun rises, and the sun sets.

古文：我守孤灯无白日，寒云陇上更添愁。 
现代文：我守孤灯无白日，寒云陇上更添愁。 
English: There is not a day when I keep the solitary lamp alight, and the cold clouds add more sorrow.

古文：兰翘和口： 幽谷啼莺整羽翰，犀沉玉冷自长叹。
现代文：兰翘的和诗是： 幽谷啼莺整羽翰，犀沉玉冷自长叹。
English: Lan Zhao's poem is: The valley is full of feathers, the ridge is heavy and cold from a long sigh.

古文：月华不忍扃泉户，露滴松枝一夜寒。 
现代文：月华不忍扃泉户，露滴松枝一夜寒。 
English: The moon can't bear to stay in the spring house, and the dew drops from the pine branches are cold overnight.

古文：云容和曰： 韶光不见分成尘，曾饵金丹忽有神。
现代文：云容的和诗是： 韶光不见分成尘，曾饵金丹忽有神。
English: Yun Rong's waka is: The light is not seen, it is divided into dust, the gold is not seen, the gold is not seen, the gold is not seen.

古文：不意薛生携旧律，独开幽谷一枝春。 
现代文：不意薛生携旧律，独开幽谷一枝春。 
English: Unexpectedly, Xue Sheng took the old law and opened a spring in a secluded valley.

古文：昭亦和曰： 误入宫垣漏网人，月华静洗玉阶尘。
现代文：薛昭也和诗说： 误入宫垣漏网人，月华静洗玉阶尘。
English: Xue Zhao also said with a poem: If a netizen enters the palace wall by mistake, the moon will wash away the dust of the steps.

古文：自疑飞到蓬莱顶，琼艳三枝半夜春。 
现代文：自疑飞到蓬莱顶，琼艳三枝半夜春。 
English: Self-doubt flies to the top of Penglai, and the three branches of Qiong Yan spring up in the middle of the night.

古文：诗毕，旋闻鸡鸣。三人曰： 可归室矣。 
现代文：赋诗完毕，便听到鸡叫，三个女子说： 可以归室了。 
English: After the poem was finished, a rooster crowed, and the three women said, "It's time to go home."

古文：昭持其衣，超然而去。
现代文：薛昭就抓着云容的衣服，飘然而行。
English: Xue Zhao grabbed Yun Rong's clothes and floated away.

古文：初觉门户至微，及经阈，亦无所妨。
现代文：开始觉得门户太小，等到经过门槛，却没有什么妨碍。
English: At first I thought the doorway was too small, but when I passed the threshold, there was nothing to get in the way.

古文：兰、凤亦告辞而他往矣。
现代文：兰翘、凤台也告辞，到别的地方去了。
English: Lanzhou and Fengtai also bid farewell and went to other places.

古文：但灯烛荧荧，侍婢凝立，帐帷彩绣，如贵戚家焉。
现代文：只见灯烛发出微弱的光，侍婢凝神站着，帐帷都是绣花的丝绸，像贵戚家里一样。
English: I could only see the dim light emitted by the lamps and candles, the servants and maids were standing still, and the curtains were all embroidered silk, just like in a noble family.

古文：遂同寝处，昭甚慰喜。
现代文：他们就同寝同处，薛昭觉得特别快慰喜悦。
English: They slept together in the same place, and Xue Zhao found it particularly comforting and joyful.

古文：如此数夕，但不知昏旦。
现代文：如此过了几个夜晚，只是不知天黑天亮。
English: After several nights like this, I just don't know when it will get dark.

古文：容曰： 吾体已苏矣，但衣服破故，更得新衣，则可起矣。
现代文：云容说： 我的肉体已经复苏了，只是衣服破旧，再得到新衣服，就可以起来了。
English: Yun Rong said: My body has recovered, but my clothes are worn out. If I get new clothes, I can get up.

古文：今有金扼臂，君可持往近县易衣服。 
现代文：今有金扼臂，您可以拿着到附近县里去换些衣服。 
English: Now there is a golden arm, you can take it to the nearby county to change some clothes.

古文：昭惧不敢去，曰： 恐为州邑所执。 
现代文：薛昭害怕不敢去，说： 我怕被州县抓去。 
English: Xue Zhao was afraid to go, saying: I'm afraid of being arrested by the county.

古文：容曰： 无惮，但将我白绡去，有急即蒙首，人无能见矣。 
现代文：云容说： 不必害怕，只要拿着我的白绡去，有急难就用它蒙上头，就没有人能看见你了。 
English: Yun Rong said, "Don't be afraid. Just take my egret and go. If you are in trouble, put it over your head so that no one can see you."

古文：昭然之，遂出三乡货之。市其衣服，夜至穴，则容已迎门而笑。
现代文：薛昭答应了这件事，就到三乡去卖金扼臂，买来云容需要的衣服，夜里回到墓穴，云容正迎着门笑呢。
English: Xue Zhao agreed to this, and went to the Three Towns to sell the gold armlets, buy the clothes Yun Rong needed, and return to the tomb at night. Yun Rong was smiling at the door.

古文：引入曰： 但启榇，当自起矣。 
现代文：把他领进去，说： 只要打开棺材，我就能自己起来了。 
English: She led him inside and said: "Just open the coffin and I'll be able to get up myself."

古文：昭如其言，果见容体已生。
现代文：薛昭按她所说的去做，果然看到云容的肉体已经活了。
English: Xue Zhao did as she said and saw that Yun Rong's body was alive.

古文：及回顾帷帐，但一大穴，多冥器服玩金玉。
现代文：等到回头再看帷帐，只见到一个大坟墓，有许多冥器和服饰金玉。
English: When I looked back at the curtain, I only saw a large tomb, with many necromancers and costume jewels.

古文：唯取宝器而出，遂与容同归金陵幽栖。至今见在，容鬓不衰，岂非俱饵天师之灵药耳？
现代文：他们只取了宝器就出去了，薛昭就与云容一起回到金陵悄悄住下来，至今还在，从面容和头发看，都没有衰老，难道不是因为都吃了天仙的灵药吗？
English: They only took the treasure and went out. Xue Zhao and Yun Rong returned to Jinling to live quietly. They are still there. Judging from their faces and hair, they have not aged. Isn't it because they have all eaten the heavenly medicine?

古文：申师名元也。
现代文：申天师名叫申元。
English: Shen Tianshi's name is Shen Yuan.

古文：韦蒙妻
现代文：韦蒙妻
English: Waymon's Wife

古文：韦蒙妻许氏，居东京翊善里。
现代文：韦蒙的妻子许氏，住在东京翊善里。
English: Weimong's wife, Ms. Xu, lives in Shuzenri, Tokyo.

古文：自云： 许氏世有神仙，皆上为高真，受天帝重任。 
现代文：她自己说： 老许家每代都有神仙，都成为上天高真，受到天帝重任。 
English: She herself said, "In every generation of the Lao Xu family, there is a divine being. They have all become gods and emperors, and have been entrusted with important duties by the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：性洁净，熟《诗》、《礼》二经，事舅姑以孝闻。
现代文：她性喜洁净，熟习《诗》、《礼》二经。服侍公婆以孝顺闻名。
English: She is kind and pure, and is familiar with the "Poetry" and "Rite" sutras. She is known for her filial piety in serving her in-laws.

古文：蒙为尚书郎，早夭。
现代文：韦蒙任尚书郎，早年死去。
English: Wei Meng was appointed as Shang Shuro and died at an early age.

古文：许舅姑亦亡，唯一女，年十二岁，甚聪慧，已能记《易》及《诗》。
现代文：许氏的公婆也死了。只有一个女儿，年龄十二岁，非常聪明有智慧，已经能诵记《易经》以及《诗经》。
English: Mr. Hui's in-laws also died. He had only one daughter, a 12-year-old girl, who was very clever and wise and could already recite the I Ching and the Book of Songs.

古文：忽无疾而卒。
现代文：女儿忽然没有病就死了。
English: My daughter died suddenly without any illness.

古文：许甚怜之，不忍远葬，殡于堂侧。
现代文：许氏很爱她，不忍心把她葬到远处去，就殡殓在住室旁边。
English: Mr. Xu loved her very much and could not bear to bury her far away, so he buried her next to his living room.

古文：居数月，闻女于殡宫中语。
现代文：过了几个月了，忽然听到女儿在棺材中说话。
English: A few months later, she suddenly heard her daughter talking in the coffin.

古文：许与侍婢总笄，发棺视之，已生矣。
现代文：许氏就和侍婢总笄打开棺材看，女儿已经活了。
English: Mr. Xu opened the coffin with the head servant and maid, and saw that his daughter was already alive.

古文：言初卒之状云： 忽见二青衣童子，可年十二三，持一红幡来庭中，呼某名曰： 韦小真，天上召汝。 
现代文：她叙说刚死的情况说： 忽然看到两个青衣童子，年纪大约有十二三岁，拿着一个红幡来到院子中，喊着我的名说： 韦小真，天上召你。 
English: Describing the circumstances of her recent death, she said: I suddenly saw two boys in blue, about 12 or 13 years old, come into the courtyard with a red flag, shouting my name and saying: Wei Xiaozhen, the sky is calling you.

古文：于是引之升天。
现代文：于是领着我上天。
English: Then he took me up to heaven.

古文：可半日到天上，见宫阙崇丽，天人皆锦绣毛羽五色之衣，金冠玉笏。
现代文：大约半天功夫到了天上，就看见宫阙又高大又壮丽，天上的人都穿着用大彩线绣的羽毛五色衣服，戴着金冠拿着玉简板。
English: After about half a day's effort, he arrived in heaven, where he saw that the emperor was tall and magnificent. The people in heaven were dressed in five-colored feathers embroidered with large colored thread, wearing gold crowns and holding jade tablets.

古文：亦多玉童玉女，皆珠玉五色之衣。
现代文：还有很多玉童玉女，也都穿着珠玉五色的衣服。
English: There are also many jade children and jade women, all of whom are wearing jewel-colored clothes.

古文：花木如琉璃宝玉之形，风动，有声如乐曲，铿锵和雅。
现代文：花木像琉璃宝玉的形状，风一吹动，就发出像乐曲一样的声音，铿锵和谐雅致。
English: The flowers and trees are shaped like crystal gems. As soon as the wind blows, they emit a sound like a piece of music, harmonious and elegant.

古文：既到宫中，见韩君司命曰： 汝九世祖有功于国，有惠及人。近已擢为地下主者，即迁地仙之品。
现代文：到宫中以后，见到韩君司命，他说： 你的九世祖先对国家有功，对人民有恩惠，最近已经提拔为地下的主宰者，立即升迁为地仙的品级。
English: After arriving at the palace, he saw Han Junji's order and said: Your ninth-generation ancestor has made contributions to the country and has been a blessing to the people. He has recently been promoted to the rank of underground ruler, and was immediately promoted to the rank of earth immortal.

古文：汝母心于至道，合陟仙阶，即令延汝于丹陵之阙。
现代文：你母亲心在至道，应当登上仙阶，就请你到丹陵之阙。
English: Your mother's heart is in the right direction, and she invites you to visit the Danling Pagoda.

古文：汝祖考三世，皆已生天矣。 
现代文：你祖上三代，都已经升天了。 
English: All three generations of your ancestors have ascended to heaven.

古文：遂使二童送归。
现代文：就派两个童子把我送回来了。
English: They sent two boys to bring me back.

古文：母便可斋沐，太乙使者即当至矣。 
现代文：母亲现在斋戒沐浴，太乙使者就该到了。 
English: My mother is now fasting and taking a bath, so it's time for the second messenger to arrive.

古文：许持《妙真经》，往往感致异香。及殊常光色。
现代文：许氏平时修行《妙真经》，往往感应招来异香，以及不同寻常的光色。
English: Mr. Hui usually practices the "Miraculous Truth Sutra," which often induces strange scents, as well as unusual light colors.

古文：众共异之。
现代文：大家都觉得这事奇异，已经十多年了。
English: Everyone thinks it's strange, it's been more than 10 years.

古文：已十余年矣，及小真归后三日，果有仙乐之声下其庭中。许与小真、总笄一时升天，有龙虎兵骑三十余人导从而去。
现代文：等到小真回来后三天，果然有仙乐的声音降到她家的庭院中，许氏与小真、总笄同时升天，有龙虎骑兵三十多人在前面开路引导而去。
English: Three days after Xiao Zhen's return, the sound of celestial music was indeed heard in the courtyard of her home. Xu, Xiao Zhen, and Zong Yao ascended to heaven at the same time, with more than 30 dragons and tigers leading the way.

古文：乃长庆之年辛丑岁也。
现代文：这事发生在长庆元年辛丑岁。
English: It happened in the first year of the Changqing Emperor's reign.

古文：慈恩塔院女仙
现代文：慈恩塔院女仙
English: The Immaculate Conception

古文：唐太和二年，长安城南韦曲慈恩寺塔院，月夕，忽见一美妇人，从三四青衣来，绕佛塔言笑，甚有风味。
现代文：唐朝太和二年，在长安城南韦曲的慈恩寺塔院，一天晚上，皓月当空，忽然出现一位美貌妇人，领着三四个青衣婢女，绕着佛塔说说笑笑，很有风趣。
English: In the second year of the Tang Dynasty, in the tower courtyard of Cien Temple in Nanweiqu, Chang'an City, one night, when the moon was full, a beautiful woman suddenly appeared, leading three or four maids in blue, talking and laughing around the stupa. It was very funny.

古文：回顾侍婢曰： 白院主，借笔砚来。 
现代文：美妇人回头对侍婢说： 告诉院主，借笔砚来。 
English: The beautiful woman turned to her servants and said, "Tell the head of the convent to lend me a pen.

古文：乃于北廊柱上题诗曰： 黄子陂头好月明，忘却华筵到晓行。
现代文：借来笔砚后，美妇人就在北边走廊的柱子上题了一首诗，诗中写道： 黄子陂头好月明，忘却华筵到晓行。
English: After borrowing a quill, the beautiful woman inscribed a poem on a pillar in the northern corridor, writing in the poem: Huangzi steamed buns are good for the moonlight, and forget the glitter until dawn.

古文：烟收山低翠黛横，折得荷花赠远生。 
现代文：烟收山低翠黛横，折得荷花赠远生。 
English: The smoke-collecting mountain is low and broad, and the lotus flowers are given to the distant students.

古文：题讫，院主执烛将视之，悉变为白鹤，冲天而去。
现代文：题写完毕，院主拿着灯烛将要看看那诗句，这时，美妇人与侍婢全都变成了白鹤冲天而去。
English: After the inscription was written, the abbot took a candle and was about to look at the verse, when the beautiful woman and her attendants all turned into white cranes and flew into the sky.

古文：书迹至今尚存。
现代文：廊柱上的字迹至今尚存。
English: The handwriting on the pillar still remains.

