古文：周葵，字立义，常州宜兴人。
现代文：周葵字立义，常州宜兴人。
English: Zhou Kwai is from Liji, Changzhou and Yixing.

古文：少力学，自乡校移籍京师，两学传诵其文。
现代文：周葵年少时努力学习，其学籍从地方上的乡校迁到京师，州学、太学两学校的师生都传诵他的文章。
English: When Zhou Kwai was young, he studied hard. His school moved from the local township school to the Beijing school, and teachers and students at the two schools of the state school and the university read his articles.

古文：宣和六年，擢进士甲科。
现代文：宣和六年，考中进士甲科。
English: Six years after the declaration of peace, he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：调徽州推官。
现代文：周葵被调任徽州推官。
English: Zhou Aoi was transferred to the post of Huizhou governor.

古文：高宗移跸临安，诸军交驰境上，葵与判官摄郡事，应变敏速，千里帖然。
现代文：高宗移驾临安，各军在边境上与金交战，周葵与判官主持郡中事，应变迅速，使千里之远的地方都十分稳定。
English: Gao Zong moved to Lin'an, each army fought against Jin on the border, Zhou Kwai and the judge presided over the county affairs, responding quickly, so that places thousands of miles away were very stable.

古文：教授临安府，未上，吏部侍郎陈与义密荐之，召试馆职。
现代文：周葵任临安府教授，未等上任，吏部侍郎陈与义私下推荐他。
English: Zhou Kwai was a professor at Lin'an Prefecture. Before he took office, Chen Youyi, the secretary of the personnel department, privately recommended him.

古文：将试，复引对，高宗曰： 从班多说卿端正。 
现代文：皇上召他试任馆职，将被试用时，皇上又召他回答问题，高宗说： 侍从们都说你品行端正。 
English: The emperor called him to try out for the post of librarian, and when he was about to be put on probation, the emperor also called him to answer questions, and Gaozong said, "The attendants all said that you were of good character."

古文：除监察御史，徙殿中侍御史。
现代文：周葵拜官监察御史，又迁为殿中侍御史。
English: Zhou Kwai-bai, the inspector of history, was also moved to be the attendant of history in the hall.

古文：在职仅两月，言事至三十章，且历条所行不当事凡二十条，指宰相不任责。
现代文：在职仅两个月，他上奏的事情就多达三十章，且排列出施行不当的事情共二十件，指出宰相不称职。
English: In just two months in office, he has issued as many as thirty chapters on the matter, and listed a total of twenty cases of improper implementation, pointing out that the prime minister is incompetent.

古文：高宗变色曰： 赵鼎、张浚肯任事，须假之权，奈何遽以小事形迹之？ 葵曰： 陛下即位，已相十许人，其初皆极意委之，卒以公议不容而去，大臣亦无固志。
现代文：高宗脸色大变说 ：赵鼎、张浚愿意管理政事，我必须给他们权力，怎么可以凭一些琐屑小事而怀疑他们呢？ 周葵说 ：陛下即位以来，已任相十多人，开始都极力委以重任，最终由于不能被公众的议论容忍而免去他的职位，大臣们也没有坚定的意志。
English: Gao Zong said with a dramatic change of face: Zhao Ding and Zhang Jun are willing to manage political affairs, I must give them power, how can I doubt them on the basis of some trifles? Zhou Kui said: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, he has appointed more than ten people, and at first they tried their best to entrust him with important tasks, but eventually he was removed from his post because he could not be tolerated by public discussion, and the ministers did not have a firm will.

古文：假如陛下有过，尚望大臣尽忠，岂大臣有过，而言者一指，乃便为形迹，使彼过而不改，罪戾日深，非所以保全之也。 高宗改容曰： 此论甚奇。 
现代文：假如陛下有过错，还希望大臣们尽忠指出，可是大臣有过而议事者一指出，就指斥为怀疑他们，使他们有过而不加以改正，而罪恶日深，这不是保全他们之策。 高宗脸色缓和些说 ：这种言论很独特。 
English: If His Majesty is at fault, he also hopes that the ministers will faithfully point it out, but if the ministers are at fault and the deliberators point it out, they will be accused of doubting them, causing them to be at fault without correcting them, and the crime is getting worse, which is not a way to protect them.

古文：张浚议北伐，葵三章力言 此存亡之机，非独安危所系。 或言葵沮大计，罢为司农少卿，以直秘阁知信州。
现代文：张浚议定派兵北伐，周葵三次上书力言： 这是关系到国家生死存亡的时候，不仅仅关系到国家的安危。 有人说周葵阻挡计划实施，皇上罢他为司农少卿，以直秘阁身份任信州知州。
English: Zhang Jun agreed to send soldiers to the Northern Expedition, and Zhou Kwai wrote three times to the emperor, saying, "This is a time that concerns the life and death of the country, not just the safety of the country." Some people said that Zhou Kwai blocked the implementation of the plan, and the emperor appointed him as the Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, and he was appointed to Shinshu Zhizhou as the direct cabinet secretary.

古文：未上，鼎罢，陈与义执政，改湖南提刑，以亲老易江东，皆不就。
现代文：未等上任，赵鼎被罢职，陈与义执政，改周葵任提刑官，周葵以双亲年老为由请求换到江东任职，没得到允许。
English: Before taking office, Zhao Ding was removed from office, Chen Youyi came to power, and Zhou Kwai was appointed as the penal officer. Zhou Kwai requested to be transferred to Jiangdong on the grounds of his parents' old age, but was not allowed.

古文：和议已定，被召，论： 为国有道，战则胜，守则固，和则久。
现代文：宋金和议已经订立，周葵被皇上召见，周葵说： 治国有道，那么向敌人发起进攻就会胜利，对敌防守就坚固，和平的时间就会更长。
English: The Song and Jin Peace Treaty had been concluded, and Zhou Kwai was summoned by the emperor. Zhou Kwai said, "If the country is governed in a proper way, then the attack on the enemy will be successful, the defense against the enemy will be solid, and the time of peace will be longer."

古文：不然，三者在人不在我矣。 除太常少卿。
现代文：反之，这三方面就会取决于敌人而不是我们了。 周葵拜官太常少卿。
English: On the contrary, these three aspects will depend on the enemy and not on us.

古文：时秦桧独相，意葵前论事去，必憾赵鼎。
现代文：当时秦桧一人为相，考虑到周葵以前因议论事情被去职，必然有怨恨赵鼎之心。
English: At that time, Qin Hui was the only one to act as a witness. Considering that Zhou Kui had previously been removed from his post for discussing the matter, he must have had a grudge against Zhao Ding.

古文：再降殿中侍御史。
现代文：周葵再次拜官殿中侍御史。
English: Zhou Aoi has once again become a historical figure in the court.

古文：葵语人曰： 元镇已贬，葵固不言，虽门下客亦不及之也。 内降差除四人，奏言： 愿陛下以仁祖为法，大臣以杜衍为法。 桧始不乐。
现代文：周葵对人说： 元镇已被贬职，我根本就不想说什么，即使是我本人也比不上他。 宫内减少差事需裁退四人，周葵上奏说： 希望陛下以仁祖为榜样，大臣以杜衍为榜样。 秦桧开始对他不满。
English: Zhou Kwai said to people: Yuan Zhen has been demoted, I don't want to say anything at all, even I am not as good as him. The reduction of duties within the palace requires the dismissal of four people, Zhou Kwai said: I hope that His Majesty will follow the example of Renzo, and the minister will follow the example of Duyan. Qin Yu began to be dissatisfied with him.

古文：又论国用、军政、士民三弊，高宗曰： 国用当藏之民，百姓足则国用非所患。 又言荐举改官之弊，宜听减举员，诏吏部措置。
现代文：周葵又论及国用、军政、士民三方面的弊端，高宗说： 国用应当藏于百姓家，百姓富足那么国用就不用担心。 周葵又指出荐举改官的弊病，认为应减少荐举官员之数额，皇上诏令吏部安排处理。
English: Zhou Kwai also discussed the drawbacks of the three aspects of national service, military affairs, and civil service, Gao Zong said: National service should be hidden in the homes of the people, and if the people are rich, there is no need to worry about national service. Zhou Kwai also pointed out the drawbacks of recommending officials for promotion, and believed that the amount of recommending officials should be reduced, and the emperor ordered the cadre department to deal with it.

古文：桧所厚权户部尚书梁汝嘉将特赐出身，除两府，汝嘉闻葵欲劾之，谓中书舍人林待聘曰： 副端将论君矣。 待聘乘桧未趋朝，亟告之，桧即奏为起居郎。
现代文：秦桧所倚重的权臣户部尚书梁汝嘉将被特别赐给出身，拜官两府，梁汝嘉听说周葵想弹劾他，就对中书舍人林待聘说 ：侍御史将要弹劾你。 林待聘乘秦桧未去朝廷前，就告诉他此事，秦桧立即上奏让周葵为起居郎。
English: Liang Rujia, a powerful vassal of the household department of Shang Shu, who Qin Hui relied on heavily, would be specially given the honor of being born in and worshipping the two prefectures. When Liang Rujia heard that Zhou Kwai wanted to impeach him, he said to Lin Zhibei, a Chinese scholar who was a retainer of the emperor, "The Grand Historian is going to impeach you." Lin Zhibei told Qin Hui about this before he went to the imperial court, and Qin Hui immediately asked Zhou Kwai to be his chief retainer.

古文：葵方待引，桧下殿谕阁门曰： 周葵已得旨除起居郎。 隔下。
现代文：周葵正在宫外等待被召见，秦桧出殿告诉门说： 周葵已得到圣旨降为起居郎。 
English: Zhou Aoi was waiting outside the palace to be summoned, and Qin Hui came out of the palace to tell the door: Zhou Aoi has received the sacred will to become the chief priest.

古文：八月庚辰也。参政李光拟除吕广问馆职，桧不许。时有诏从官荐士，葵以广问应，初不相知也。
现代文：参政李光打算任吕广问为馆职，秦桧不答应。当时有诏令从官推荐士人，周葵推荐了吕广问，当时他俩互不相识。
English: Li Guangwen, a politician, planned to appoint Lü Guangwen as a librarian, but Qin Hui did not agree. At that time, there was a decree to recommend scholars from officials, and Zhou Kwai recommended Lü Guangwen. At that time, they did not know each other.

古文：光既绌，葵以附会落职，主管玉隆观。
现代文：李光被罢黜后，周葵因为附会李光被革职，被分配主管玉隆观。
English: After Li Guang was ousted, Zhou Kui was assigned to be the head of Yulongguan because Li Guang was dismissed from the affiliated association.

古文：复直秘阁，起知湖州，移平江府。
现代文：周葵又任直秘阁，被起用任湖州知州，改换为平江府知府。
English: Zhou Kwai was also appointed as the direct secretary of the cabinet, and was appointed as the governor of Huzhou Province, and was changed to the governor of Pingjiang Province.

古文：时金使络绎于道，葵不为礼，转运李椿年希桧旨劾之，落职，主管崇道观。
现代文：当时金使络绎不绝于平江道上，周葵见到他们从不行礼，转运使李椿年禀承秦桧意旨弹劾他，周葵又失去职位，被派去主管崇道观。
English: At that time, the Jin envoys were constantly on the Pingjiang Road, and Zhou Kwai saw that they never performed courtesies. The transfer caused Li Chin Nian to follow Qin Hui's intention to impeach him, and Zhou Kwai lost his position and was sent to be in charge of the Taoism.

古文：屏居乡闾，忧患频仍，人不能堪，葵独安之。
现代文：周葵避居乡间，当时国家忧患频仍，人们不堪忍受，周葵独以为安。
English: Zhou Kwai took refuge in the countryside. At that time, the country was still plagued by frequent calamities, and people could not bear it. Zhou Kwai alone was considered safe.

古文：桧死，复直秘阁、知绍兴府。
现代文：秦桧死后，周葵恢复直秘阁、绍兴府知府之职。
English: After Qin Hui's death, Zhou Kwai resumed the posts of Secretary-General and Governor of Shaoxing.

古文：过阙，权礼部侍郎，寻兼国子祭酒。
现代文：周葵经过都城时，皇上任命他为权礼部侍郎，不久又兼任国子祭酒。
English: When Zhou Kwai passed through the capital, the emperor appointed him as the attendant of the ceremonial department, and soon he also served as the leader of the national son's festival.

古文：奏： 科举所以取士。比年主司迎合大臣意，取经传语可谀者为问目，学者竞逐时好。
现代文：周葵上奏说： 科举制是用以选拔士人的，近年之考官迎合大臣的心理，把经传中可以献谀的语句用以出题，学者们竞相追逐时好。
English: Zhou Kwai Shangsoo said: The examination system is used to select scholars. In recent years, examiners have catered to the minister's psychology and used the sentences that can be presented in the scriptures as questions. Scholars are competing to chase the best time.

古文：望诏国学并择秋试考官，精选通经博古之士，置之前列，其穿凿乖谬者黜之。 
现代文：希望诏令国学一同选择秋试考官，精选精通经学、了解古史的士人，把他们放在前几名，对那些牵强附会、投机取巧的人加以废黜。 
English: It is hoped that the imperial edict will order the Chinese Academy of Sciences to select examiners for the autumn examination together, select scholars who are proficient in classics and understand ancient history, put them in the top few, and dethrone those who are far-fetched and opportunistic.

古文：兼权给事中。
现代文：周葵兼权给事中。
English: Zhou Aoi is also in charge of the case.

古文：侍御史汤鹏举言： 葵以魏良臣荐，躐处侍从；吕广问，葵之死党。
现代文：侍御史汤鹏举说 ：周葵由于魏良臣的推荐，一下子窜到侍从的职位；吕广问，周葵的死党。
English: Attendant Shi Tongpeng said: Zhou Kwai was recommended by Wei Liangchen and was suddenly promoted to the position of attendant; Lu Guangqian, Zhou Kwai's best friend.

古文：乞并罢之。 太学生黄作、詹渊率诸生都堂投牒留葵。
现代文：乞求把他俩一同罢免。 太学生黄作、詹渊率领诸生到都堂投书要求留下周葵。
English: The students Huang Zuo and Zhan Yuan, led by the students Huang Zuo and Zhan Yuan, went to the Great Hall of the People to submit a petition asking that Zhou Kuai be allowed to stay.

古文：翌日，博士何俌等言于朝，乞惩戒，诏作、渊皆送五百里外州编管，葵出知信州，随罢。
现代文：第二天，博士何亻甫等对皇上说起此事，请求对太学生们予以警告，皇上诏令把黄作、詹渊流放到五百里外的州编管，周葵离朝任信州知州，随后被罢免。
English: The next day, Dr. He Yifu and others spoke to the emperor about the matter and requested that the students be warned. The emperor ordered Huang Zuo and Zhan Yuan to be exiled to a prefecture 500 miles away. Zhou Kui left the imperial court to serve as the prefect of Shinshu and was subsequently dismissed.

古文：起知抚州，引疾，改提举兴国宫，加直龙图阁、知太平州。
现代文：周葵被起用为抚州知州，因患病，皇上改任他提举兴国宫，加直龙图阁、太平州知州。
English: Zhou Kwai was appointed as Fuzhou Chizhou, due to illness, the emperor changed his post to Zhou Xingguo, Zhaolong Tu Ge, and Taiping Chizhou.

古文：水坏圩堤，悉缮完，凡百二十里。
现代文：州内大水冲坏圩堤，周葵令人全部修复，共长一百二十里。
English: The flood in the state broke the dike, and it was completely repaired, with a total length of one hundred and twenty miles.

古文：傍郡圩皆没，惟当涂岁熟。
现代文：邻郡的圩堤被淹没，只有当涂仍丰收。
English: The reed embankment in a neighboring county was submerged, and only Dangtuo still had a good harvest.

古文：市河久堙，雨旸交病，葵下令城中，家出一夫，官给之食，并力浚导，公私便之。
现代文：市内护城河长久被堵，雨天、晴天都危害州城，周葵下令城中百姓，每家出一男子，官府供应吃的，全力疏通河水，公私都得以便利。
English: The city's moat was blocked for a long time. Rainy days and sunny days were harmful to the state capital. Zhou Kuai ordered the people in the city, one man from each family, the government provided food, and made every effort to clear the river water. Both public and private had to be facilitated.

古文：进集英殿修撰、敷文阁待制、知婺州。
现代文：周葵被提升为集英殿修撰、敷文阁待制、婺州知州。
English: Zhou Kuai was promoted to Shueiden Shuxin, Shibunkaku Pending System, and Zhangzhou Chizhou.

古文：孝宗即位，除兵部侍郎兼侍讲，改同知贡举兼权户部侍郎。
现代文：孝宗即位，周葵拜官兵部侍郎兼侍讲，后改为同知贡举兼权户部侍郎。
English: When Takamune ascended the throne, Zhou Kwai Pai became the attendant of the military department and the attendant speaker, and later he was changed to the attendant of the household department of the same title.

古文：孝宗数手诏问钱谷出入，葵奏： 陛下劳心庶政，日有咨询，若出人意表。
现代文：孝宗多次亲自写诏书问钱谷出入情况，周葵上奏说： 陛下劳心各项政事，每天都有咨询，总是出乎人意。
English: On several occasions, Emperor Xiaozong personally wrote an imperial edict to inquire about the situation in and out of Qianya. Zhou Kui reported: "Your Majesty takes great care in all matters of state, and consults with me every day. I am always impressed.

古文：今皆微文细故，此必有小人乘间欲售其私，不可不察。 盖指龙大渊、曾觌也。
现代文：今天都是隐约讽喻之文和一些小事，这一定有小人乘机想实现他们的私心，不可以不加以调查。 周葵是指龙大渊、曾觌。
English: Today, it's all vaguely satirical texts and trifles, so there must be villains who want to take advantage of the opportunity to realize their selfishness, and we can't help but investigate.

古文：孝宗色为动。
现代文：孝宗为之改容。
English: Takamune changed his appearance for the occasion.

古文：金主亮为其下所毙，张浚自督府来朝，密言： 敌失泗州，其惧罪者皆欲来归，愿遣军渡淮赴之，此恢复之机也。 葵请对，谓不可轻举，累数百言。
现代文：金主完颜亮被他的部下所杀，张浚从督府来到朝廷，秘密地报告皇上： 敌人失去泗州，那些害怕被定罪的人想归顺宋朝，希望派兵渡过淮河进伐，这是恢复国土的时机。 周葵请求对话，说不可以轻举妄动，周葵多次劝说的奏言达数百字。
English: When the gold owner was killed by his subordinates, Zhang Junmao came to the imperial court from the governor's office and secretly reported to the emperor: The enemy has lost Zhangzhou, those who are afraid of being convicted want to return to the Song Dynasty, and hope to send troops across the Huai River to invade, this is the time to restore the country. Zhou Kwai requested dialogue, saying that it was not possible to act rashly, and Zhou Kwai's repeated persuasion speech amounted to hundreds of words.

古文：及遣李显忠、邵宏渊取灵壁、虹二县，败绩。孝宗思其言，拜参知政事。
现代文：等到皇上派遣李显忠、邵宏渊去夺取灵壁、虹二县失败后，孝宗想想周葵的话有道理，任命他为参知政事。
English: After the emperor sent Li Xianzhong and Shao Hongyuan to capture Lingbi and Hongyi counties, and they failed, Xiaozong thought that Zhou Kuai's words were reasonable and appointed him as a political advisor.

古文：葵始终守自治之说。
现代文：周葵始终坚持自治之说。
English: Zhou Kwai has always insisted on autonomy.

古文：兼权知枢密院事。
现代文：周葵兼权知枢密院事。
English: Zhou Ao and Quan Zhi became Privy Councillors.

古文：台谏交章言议和太速，葵与陈康伯、汤思退乞令侍从、台谏集议，众益汹汹，诸公待罪乞罢，不许。
现代文：台谏交替上书说议和太快，周葵与陈康伯、汤思退乞求令侍从、台谏官开会商议，大家争论十分激烈，大臣们呈上辞职书乞求罢职，皇上不答应。
English: The empress dowager alternately wrote a letter saying that the peace was too fast, and Zhou Kwai-pyo, Chen Kangbo, and Tang Siu-tai begged the attendants and the eunuchs to hold a meeting to discuss. Everyone's argument was very fierce. The ministers submitted their resignation letters and begged to resign, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：葵独留身固请，孝宗曰： 卿何请之力也？ 曰： 自预政以来，每与宰相论事，有以为然而从者；有不得以强从者；有绝不肯从者，十常四五。
现代文：周葵单独留下坚持要求罢职，孝宗问： 你为什么这么竭力请求罢职呢？ 周葵回答说： 自从参预政事以来，每天与宰相商量事情，对我提出的建议，有人心中以为然而表示赞同；有人不得已而表示赞同；也有人绝不肯相从，这种情况十次中有四、五次。
English: Zhou Kwai was left alone to insist on resigning, and Xiaozong asked: Why are you so anxious to resign? Zhou Kwai replied: Since taking part in pre-election politics, I have discussed things with the prime minister every day. Some people thought they agreed with the suggestions I made; some people agreed out of necessity; and some people absolutely refused to comply. This happened four or five times out of ten.

古文：洎至榻前，陛下又或不然，大率十事之中，不从者七八，安得不愧于心，此臣所以欲去也。 
现代文：等到呈送到皇上面前，陛下又或认为不是这样的，大概十件事中，不同意的有七八件，我怎能内心不感到惭愧，这就是我想去职的原因。 
English: By the time it is presented to the Emperor, His Majesty may think otherwise. Out of about ten things, I disagree with seven or eight. How can I not feel ashamed in my heart? That is why I want to leave the post.

古文：尝乞召用侍从、台谏，孝宗曰： 安得如卿直谅者。 遂荐李浩、龚茂良，孝宗皆以为佳士，次第用之。
现代文：周葵曾请求召用侍从、台谏，孝宗说 ：如何得到像你那样正直、诚实的人。 于是周葵推荐了李浩、龚茂良，孝宗认为他们都是佳士，将依次重用。
English: Zhou Kwai had requested the appointment of an attendant, a waitress, and Xiaozong said, "How can I get someone as honest and truthful as you?" So Zhou Kwai recommended Li Hao and Zou Maoliang, and Xiaozong thought that they were both excellent and would be reused in turn.

古文：太常奏郊牛毙，葵言： 《春秋》鼷鼠食牛角免郊，况边虞未靖，请展郊以符天意。 诏从之。
现代文：太常奏说郊祀的牛死了，周葵说： 《春秋》载鼷鼠吃牛角要免去郊祀，何况边患未除，边境未安，请求延期举行郊祀，以符合天意。 皇上同意了。
English: Zhou Kui said: "In the Spring and Autumn Period, it was said that the ox of the suburban worship died, so the suburban worship should be exempted. Moreover, the border troubles have not been eliminated, and the border is not stable. The request was made to postpone the holding of the suburban worship to conform to the will of heaven. The emperor agreed.

古文：虞允文、陈康伯相，葵即求退，除资政殿学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：虞允文、陈康伯为宰相，周葵立即请求退职，被任命为资政殿学士、提举洞霄宫。
English: Yu Yunwen and Chen Kangbo were the prime ministers, Zhou Kui immediately asked to retire, was appointed as the vice-president, and promoted Dongxiao Palace.

古文：起知泉州，告老，加大学士致仕。
现代文：周葵被起用任泉州知州，他要求告老还乡，被加上大学士之职退休。
English: Zhou Kwai was appointed to Quanzhou Zhizhou, he asked to return to his hometown, and was added to the post of university scholar to retire.

古文：闲居累年，不以世故萦心。
现代文：周葵闲居数年，不让世事萦绕心中。
English: Zhou Kuai idled for several years, not letting the world's affairs haunt his heart.

古文：淳熙元年正月，薨，年七十有七。
现代文：淳熙元年正月，周葵去世，终年七十七岁。
English: In the first month of the first year of Aung Hee, Zhou Kui died at the age of seventy-seven.

古文：上闻震悼，赠正奉大夫。
现代文：皇上听到后很是震惊，深表哀悼，赠他正奉大夫之职。
English: Upon hearing this, the Emperor was very shocked, expressed his deep condolences, and gave him the position of a doctor.

古文：后以子升朝，累赠太傅。
现代文：后来把他的儿子升为朝官，历赠太傅之职。
English: Later, he promoted his son to a court official and gave him the position of Taifu.

古文：葵孝于事亲，当任子，先孤侄。
现代文：周葵侍奉双亲十分孝顺，恩荫子孙时，他先让给为孤儿的侄子。
English: Zhou Kwai served his parents very dutifully. When he served his grandchildren, he first gave it to his nephew, who was an orphan.

古文：其薨也，幼子与孙尚未命。
现代文：他死时，幼子与孙子还没被命职。
English: At the time of his death, his youngest son and grandson had not yet been appointed.

古文：平生学问不泥传注，作《圣传诗》二十篇、文集三十卷、奏议五卷。
现代文：周葵平生做学问不拘泥于前人的经传、注释；著有《圣传诗》二十篇、文集三十卷、奏议五卷。
English: Zhou Kwai Ping was a scholar who was not constrained by the scriptures and commentaries of his predecessors; he was the author of 20 "Holy Poems," 30 volumes of anthologies, and 5 volumes of speeches.

古文：晚号惟心居士。
现代文：晚年号称惟心居士。
English: In his later years, he was known as a devout Buddhist.

古文：四年，有司请谥，赐谥曰惠简。
现代文：淳熙四年，有关部门为他请求谥号，皇上赠予 惠简 。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Junxi, the relevant departments requested a posthumous name for him, and the emperor gave it to Huijian.

古文：施师点，字圣与，上饶人。
现代文：施师点字圣与，上饶人。
English: He taught Braille to Shenyo and Shangrao.

古文：十岁通《六经》，十二能文。
现代文：他十岁就精通《六经》，十二岁就能写文章。
English: He was fluent in the Six Classics at the age of ten and could write articles at the age of twelve.

古文：弱冠游太学，试每在前列，司业高宏称其文深醇有古风。
现代文：施师点成年后游学太学，每次考试都名列前茅，司业高宏称赞他的文章很朴实，有古代学者的遗风。
English: After reaching adulthood, he went on a study tour to learn from a teacher, and he ranked first in every exam. Siyou Gaohong praised his article as very simple, with the legacy of ancient scholars.

古文：寻授以学职，以舍选奉廷对，调复州教授。未上，丁内艰。
现代文：不久，施师点被授予学职，以上舍身份被选派到朝廷对话，皇上调他任复州教授，未等上任，遭母丧。
English: Soon, he was awarded a teaching position, and was sent to the imperial court for dialogue as a senior scholar. The emperor appointed him as a professor of Fuzhou, but before he could take office, his mother passed away.

古文：服除，为临安府教授。
现代文：服丧期满后，任临安府教授。
English: After the end of the mourning period, he became a professor at Lin'an University.

古文：乾道元年，陈康伯荐，赐对，言： 历年屡下诏恤民，而惠未加浃。
现代文：乾道元年，因陈康伯的推荐，皇上召施师点问话，他说： 历年屡下诏抚恤百姓，而皇上的恩泽并未深入到百姓中间。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, on the recommendation of Chen Kangbo, the emperor summoned the alms-giver to ask a few questions. He said: Over the years, the emperor has repeatedly issued edicts to benefit the people, but the emperor's grace has not penetrated into the middle of the people.

古文：陛下轸念，惟恐一夫失所；郡邑搜求，惟恐财赋不集。
现代文：陛下悲痛思虑，唯恐一人失所；派人到各郡县搜求，唯恐财赋不集中。
English: His Majesty grieved and worried, fearing to lose one person; sent people to all counties to search, fearing that the wealth would not be concentrated.

古文：毋惑乎日降丝纶，恩不沾被。
现代文：请不要被每天所降诏书所迷惑，朝廷所施的恩泽并不深入广泛。
English: Please don't be fooled by the daily decrees. The grace of the Imperial Court is not deep and wide.

古文：细民既困于倍输，又困于非泛，重以岁恶，室且垂磬，租不如期，积多逋负。
现代文：百姓既困于几倍于往常的捐税输纳，又困于朝廷恩泽的不深入广泛，又加上年成不好，屋里的存贮将空，租税不能如期交纳，以致积少成多，百姓往往逃避负担。
English: The common people are not only burdened with several times more taxes than usual, but also with the lack of depth and breadth of the imperial court's favors. In addition, the year is not good, the storage in the house will be empty, and the taxes cannot be paid as scheduled. As a result, less is more, and the common people often avoid the burden.

古文：今明堂肆赦，户自四等以下，逋自四年以前，愿悉除免。 上曰： 非卿不闻此言。 诏从之。
现代文：今天祭祀明堂赦免囚犯，户等从四等以下，拖欠自四年以前的租税，希望朝廷也全部予以免除。 皇上说： 不是你，我听不到这些话。 
English: Today, the Emperor held a memorial service and pardoned prisoners, households from the fourth class and below, and tax defaulters from four years ago, hoping that the Imperial Court would also be completely exempted. The Emperor said, "It's not you, I can't hear these words."

古文：八年，兼权礼部侍郎，除给事中。
现代文：并诏令有关部门遵从这些意见。乾道八年，施师点兼权礼部侍郎，拜官给事中。
English: And ordered the relevant departments to comply with these opinions. After eight years of dry road, he became a teacher and attendant of the ceremonial department, and was in the process of being promoted.

古文：时太子詹事已除，上又特令增员为二，命兼之。
现代文：当时太子詹事已被除去，皇上又特令增加二名东宫官，命令施师点兼任。
English: At that time, Prince Zhan Zhi had already been removed, and the emperor also specially ordered the addition of two East Palace officials and ordered Shi Shi Deng to serve concurrently.

古文：赐对，言： 比年人物骫骳，士气耗薾，当广储人材以待用。 上曰： 观卿所奏，公辅器也。 
现代文：皇上召施师点对话，施师点说 ：近年来人才被屈曲，士气耗尽，应广泛储备人才以待急用。 皇上说 ：看你所奏的意见，可见你有辅佐的才能。 
English: The emperor summoned Shi Shi to a dialogue, and Shi Shi said, "In recent years, talent has been bent and morale depleted, and we should have an extensive reserve of talent for emergency use." The emperor said, "Look at the opinions you have expressed, and you can see that you have the ability to assist.

古文：假翰林学士、知制诰兼侍读使金。
现代文：施师点假借为翰林学士、知制诰兼侍读出使金。
English: The teacher's point is assumed to be a scholar of Hanlin, and the knowledge system and the attendant read out the money.

古文：致命金廷，立班既定，相仪者以亲王将至，命师点退位，师点〈立乞〉立。
现代文：施师点到金廷致辞，金国大臣排列的顺次已定，相仪者以亲王将到为由，令施师点退位，施师点屹立不动。
English: Shi Shi arrived at the imperial court to deliver a speech. The order of succession of the ministers of the State of Kim was already determined. The celebrant, on the grounds that the prince would be arriving, ordered Shi Shi to abdicate and Shi Shi to remain standing.

古文：相仪者请数四，师点正色曰： 班立已定，尚欲何为。 不肯少动。
现代文：相仪者请了四次，施师点庄严地说： 站立顺序已定，还要做什么？ 
English: The celebrant asked four times, and the master said solemnly: The standing order has been decided, what else is there to do?

古文：在廷相顾骇愕，知其有守，不敢复以为请。
现代文：不肯稍稍移动，在朝廷上的人互相看看，深感惊愕，知道他有操守，不敢再以此请。
English: Unwilling to move a bit, the people in the court looked at each other, deeply surprised, knowing that he had integrity and dared not ask for it again.

古文：九年，使还，有言其事于上者，上嘉叹不已。
现代文：乾道九年，施师点出使回朝，有人把这件事告诉皇上，皇上对此称赞不已。
English: After nine years of dry road, Shi Shi sent an envoy back to the North, and someone told the emperor about this, and the emperor praised it.

古文：及后金使贺正旦至阙，问馆伴： 师点今居何官？ 馆伴宇文价于班列中指师点以示之，金使恍然曰： 一见正人，令人眼明。 
现代文：等到后来金使正月初一来到南宋朝廷祝贺时，问馆伴： 施师点现居何官？ 馆伴宇文价从列队站立的人中指出施师点给他看，金使恍然大悟地说： 一看见正直的人，就感到眼前一亮。 
English: Later, when the envoy came to the Southern Song Dynasty to offer congratulations on the first day of the first month of the year, he asked his companion, "How many officials are there now?" His companion, Yu Wencai, pointed out the positions of the officials to him from among the people standing in line. The envoy said with a sudden epiphany, "When I see an honest person, I feel my eyes light up."

古文：十年，除端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
现代文：十年，施师点拜官端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
English: Ten years later, he became a scholar of Duanming Palace and a member of the Privy Council.

古文：入奏，控免，上曰： 卿靖重有守，识虑深远，朕欲用卿久矣。 复诏兼参知政事，除参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：施师点入宫上奏，行礼完毕后，皇上说： 你稳重有操守，考虑问题深远，我早就想重用你了。 皇上又诏令他兼参知政事，拜官参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
English: After the ceremony, the emperor said to Shi: "You are steady and have integrity, and you have considered far-reaching issues. I have long wanted to use you again." The emperor also ordered him to be a member of the prefectural government, and to be a member of the prefectural government and a member of the Privy Council.

古文：师点尝同宰相奏事退，复同枢密周必大进呈，上曰： 适一二事卿等各陈所见，甚关大体。
现代文：施师点曾同宰相一起奏事退朝后，又同枢密使周必大一起进呈奏议，皇上问 ：刚才一二件事你们各陈己见，与国家大体很有关系。
English: Shi Shi Dian had submitted a report together with the prime minister after the emperor's abdication, and also submitted a report together with the privy councilor Zhou Bida. The emperor asked: You have each expressed your own views on one or two things just now, which has a lot to do with the country.

古文：前此宰相奏事，执政不措辞，今卿等如此，深副所望。 必大奏： 祖宗时，宰执奏事自相可否，或至面相切责，退不相衔。
现代文：在这之前宰相来奏事，执政却不开口，现在你们又如此做。大大辜负我的期望。 周必大奏道 ：过去祖宗时，宰相、执政一起奏事互相之间可以否定，甚至当宰相面加以指责，退朝后还能不互相怀恨。
English: Prior to this, the prime minister came to make a speech, but the government did not speak, and now you are doing the same. You have greatly disappointed my expectations. Zhou Bida said: In the past, when the ancestors, the prime minister and the government made speeches together, they could deny each other, and even when the prime minister was criticized, they could not hold grudges against each other after retiring.

古文：自秦桧用事，执政畏避不敢言。
现代文：自从秦桧掌权以来，执政害怕定罪而不敢说出自己的意见。
English: Since Qin Hui took power, those in power have been afraid to voice their opinions for fear of being convicted.

古文：今陛下虚心兼听，若只宰相奏事，何用执政为？ 师点复奏： 臣敢不竭股肱之力。 上因谕之曰： 朕欲天下事日往来胸中，未尝释也。 
现代文：施师点说 ：所做之事将成为天下的危害，只恨不能迅速加以更改。 
English: Shi Shi Dian said: "What has been done will be a great harm to the world, I just hope that it can be changed quickly."

古文：先是，州郡上供或不以时进，立岁终稽考法，及是，主计臣有喜为督促者，乞不待岁终先期行之。
现代文：于是立即追去扣住不发这个命令。枢密周必大举手称赞施师点说 ：天下百姓不受此令危害，是你所恩赐的。 
English: Privy Councilor Zhou Bi raised his hand in praise and said, "The people of the world will not be harmed by this order, it is a gift from you."

古文：画命已下，师点矍然曰： 此策若行，上下逼迫，民不聊生。 或谓： 令已出矣。 师点曰： 事有为天下病，惟恨更之不速。 即追寝其议。
现代文：一天，施师点到后殿与皇上对话，皇上说 ：我以前喝冰水很多，突然严重泻肚，幸好立即好了。 施师点说： 自古以来人君在国家平安无事时，急切地按照自己所想的去做，而忽略了所应当加以警戒的方面，以后没有不后悔的。 皇上深以为然。
English: One day, Shi Shi Ding went to the back hall to have a dialogue with the emperor, and the emperor said: I used to drink a lot of ice water, and suddenly had severe diarrhea, but fortunately I got better immediately. Shi Shi Ding said: Since ancient times, when the country is safe and sound, people eagerly do what they want, and ignore the aspects that should be guarded against, and they never regret it in the future. The emperor was deeply convinced.

古文：枢密周必大举手贺师点曰： 使天下赤子不被其毒者，公之赐也。 一日，入对后殿，上曰： 朕前饮冰水过多，忽暴下，幸即平复。 师点曰： 自古人君当无事时，快意所为，忽其所当戒，其后未有不悔者。 上深然之。十三年，辞兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：淳熙十三年，施师点辞去兼职同知枢密院事。
English: In the thirteenth year of Aung Hee, Shi Shi resigned from his part-time job as a privy councillor.

古文：权提举国史院，权提举《国朝会要》。
现代文：施师点任权提举国史院，权提举《国朝会要》。
English: The National Academy of History has the right to nominate teachers, and the "Important Documents of the Imperial Court" has the right to nominate.

古文：十四年，除知枢密院事。
现代文：十四年，他拜官知枢密院事。
English: Fourteen years later, he rose through the ranks of the Privy Council.

古文：师点惓惓搜访人才，手书置夹袋中，谓蜀去朝廷远，人才难以自见，蜀士之贤者，俾各疏其所知，差次其才行、文学，每有除授，必列陈之。
现代文：施师点诚恳地访求人才，并记下放在夹袋里，认为蜀离朝廷远，人才难以发现，于是对蜀士人中之贤者，让他们各自呈上他们所了解的人，按其才华品行、文学才能排列顺序，每当朝廷有空缺，必定列出他们的名字上报。
English: Shi Shi earnestly visited the talent, and put it down in a bag. He thought that Shu was far away from the imperial court, and talent was difficult to find. Therefore, he asked the sages among the Shu people to present the people they knew, according to their talents, deeds, and literary talents. Whenever there is a vacancy in the imperial court, their names must be listed and reported.

古文：十五年春，以资政殿大学士知泉州，除提举临安府洞霄宫。
现代文：十五年春，施师点以资政殿大学士之职任泉州知州，拜官提举临安府洞霄宫。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, Shi Shi Deng was appointed to Quanzhou Chizhou as a senior scholar of the House of Councillors, and Lin'an Dongxiao Palace was promoted to an official.

古文：绍熙二年，除知隆兴府、江西安抚使。
现代文：绍熙二年，施师点拜官隆兴府知府、江西安抚使。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xiaoxi, he became a tutor to Longxing prefectural governor and Jiangxi pacification envoy.

古文：师点尝谓诸子曰： 吾平生仕宦，皆任其升沉，初未尝容心其间，不枉道附丽，独人主知之，遂至显用。
现代文：施师点曾对他的儿子说 ：我平生做官，都听其自然升降，当初未曾在心中留意，不由意依附权贵，这只有君主知道，于是被提为显贵。
English: Shi Shi Dian once said to his son: I have been an official all my life, I have listened to his natural rise and fall, at first I did not pay attention in my heart, I could not help but cling to power and nobility, only the monarch knows this, so I was promoted to nobility.

古文：夫人穷达有命，不在巧图，惟忠孝乃吾事也。 三年，得疾薨，年六十九。
现代文：人能否在官场上顺利或遭挫折这自有命份，不在于巧思图谋，只有对皇上忠孝才是我的事。 绍熙三年，施师点生病死去，终年六十岁。
English: Whether one can succeed or fail in the official world, which is one's own fate, does not lie in clever thinking and scheming, only loyalty to the emperor is my business.Shao Xi died of illness at the age of sixty, three years after becoming emperor.

古文：赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：皇上赠他金紫光禄大夫之职。
English: The official street presented to Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：有奏议七卷、制槁八卷、《东宫讲议》五卷、《易说》四卷、《史识》五卷、文集八卷。
现代文：施师点著有奏议七卷、制稿八卷、《东宫讲仪》五卷、《易说》四卷、《史识》五卷、文集八卷。
English: Shi Shi points out that there are seven volumes of speeches, eight volumes of manuscripts, five volumes of "Eastern Palace Lectures," four volumes of "Easy to Say," five volumes of "Historical Knowledge," and eight volumes of anthologies.

