古文：○理宗三四年春正月壬寅朔，诏边将毋擅兴暴掠，虐杀无辜，以慰中原遗黎之望。
现代文：淳四年春正月初一，下诏边将不要擅自兴兵暴掠，虐杀无辜，以告慰中原百姓。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of the June, the following edict was issued: "Do not arbitrarily raise troops to loot and kill innocents, in order to comfort the Central Plains people."

古文：帝制《训廉》、《谨刑》二铭，戒饬中外。
现代文：理宗撰制《训廉》、《谨刑》二铭，警戒中外官员。
English: Rizong compiled the two mottos of "Discipline and Punish" and "Respect and Punish" to warn Chinese and foreign officials.

古文：以李鸣复参知政事，杜范同知枢密院事，刘伯正签书枢密院事，余玠华文阁待制、依旧四川安抚制置使、知重庆府兼四川总领财赋，李曾伯宝章阁直学士、依旧淮东安抚制置使、知扬州兼淮西制置使。
现代文：任命李鸣复为参知政事；杜范为同知枢密院事；刘伯正为签书枢密院事；余为华文阁待制，依旧为四川安抚制置使、重庆知府兼四川总领财赋；李曾伯为宝章阁直学士，依旧为淮东安抚制置使、扬州知州兼淮西制置使。
English: Li Mingfu was appointed as a member of the Council of State; Du Fan was appointed as a member of the Privy Council of Tongzhi; Liu Bozheng was appointed as a member of the Privy Council of Signing; Yu was appointed as a member of the Council of State of Huawen, still an envoy of the Sichuan Pacification System, the governor of Chongqing and the leader of Sichuan; Li Zengbo was appointed as a direct bachelor of the Council of State of Baozhang, still an envoy of the East Huai Pacification System, and an envoy of the Yangzhou Chizhou and West Huai Pacification System.

古文：戊午，枢密院言： 四川帅臣余玠，大小三十六战，多有劳效，宜第功行赏。 
现代文：十七日，枢密院说： 四川帅臣余大小三十六战，多有劳效，应该论功行赏。 
English: On the 17th, the Privy Council said: Sichuan's soldiers and ministers have fought more than 36 wars, most of which are labor-intensive, and should be rewarded for their merits.

古文：诏玠趣上立功将士姓名等第，即与推恩。
现代文：下诏余赶快上报立功将士姓名等等，就按照名册施加恩赏。
English: According to the following edict, if you are in a hurry to report the names of meritorious soldiers and so on, you will be rewarded according to the roster.

古文：庚申，以余玠兼四川屯田使。
现代文：十九日，任命余兼四川屯田使。
English: On the 19th, Yu Ken was appointed as the Sichuan Military Attaché.

古文：二月癸酉，出封桩库缗钱各十万，命两淮、京湖、四川制司收瘗频年交兵遗骸，立为义冢。
现代文：二月初二，出封桩库络钱各十万，命令两淮、京湖、四川制司收理近年来与元军作战而死者的遗骨，立为义家。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second month of the year, he ordered the two Huai, Jinghu and Sichuan departments to collect the remains of the dead who had fought against the Yuan army in recent years, and established himself as a righteous family.

古文：夏四月丁丑，有流星大如太白，出于尾。
现代文：夏四月初七，有流星大如太白星，出现在尾宿。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of summer, a meteor as big as a white star appeared in Owake.

古文：癸未，填星守太微垣。
现代文：十三日，填星守太微垣。
English: On the thirteenth day, the star-studded guard was too small.

古文：乙未，祈雨。
现代文：二十五日，祈祷降雨。
English: On the second day of junior high school, I prayed for rain.

古文：五月庚戌，余玠言： 利阆城大获山、蓬州城营山，渠州城大良平，嘉定城旧治，泸州城神臂山，诸城工役，次第就绪。
现代文：五月十一日，余说： 利州、间州城大获山，蓬州城营山，渠州城大良平，嘉定城旧治，沪州城神臂山，各城工役，次第就绪。
English: On May 11, Yu said, "Lizhou and Yanzhou towns of Dahuoshan, Pengzhou town of Yingshan, Quzhou town of Dalianping, Jiading town of Guozhi, Huzhou town of Shimbai Mountain, and all cities of Tongye are gradually ready.

古文：神臂山城成，知泸州曹致大厥功可嘉，乞推赏以励其余。 
现代文：神臂山城成功，沪州知州曹致大功劳可嘉，请求施赏用来激励其他城的修筑。 
English: Shenbai Mountain City was a success, and Huzhou Zhizhou Cao was highly commended for his great contribution. He requested that the reward be used to encourage the construction of other cities.

古文：诏致大带行遥郡刺史。
现代文：下诏曹致大代行遥郡刺史。
English: The following is the history of Cao Zhidai's visit to Yao County.

古文：丁巳，武功大夫、雄威军都统制杨价世守南边，连年调戍播州，捍御勤瘁，诏价转右武大夫、文州刺史。
现代文：十八日，武功大夫、雄威军都统制杨价世代守卫南边，连年调戍播州，勤劳御敌，下诏杨价转右武大夫、文州刺史。
English: On the 18th, Dr. Wukong and the valiant troops were all under the command of Yang Quan's generation to guard the south side. For years, he was transferred to Bozhou and worked hard to defeat the enemy, and then Yang Quan was transferred to Dr. Wukong and Wenzhou.

古文：戊午，大元兵围寿春府。吕文德节制水陆诸军解围有功，诏赴枢密院禀议，发缗钱百万，诣两淮制司犒师。
现代文：十九日，大元军队围攻寿春府，吕文德节制调遣水陆各军解围有功，下诏到枢密院提议建议，发络钱一百万，到两淮制司搞赏军队。
English: On the 19th, the Taiyuan army besieged Shuchunfu, and Lu Wende, who had the merit of dispatching the land and sea forces to relieve the siege, sent an edict to the Privy Council to propose a suggestion to send one million yuan to the two Huaihai departments to reward the army.

古文：庚申，守阙进勇副尉桂虎、进义副尉楚富、吐浑将虞候郑蔡捍御寿春，俱有劳效，诏各官资两转，给缗钱。
现代文：二十一日，宁网进勇副尉桂虎和进义副尉楚富、吐浑将虞候郑蔡，抵抗守卫寿春，都有功劳，下诏各转官两资，赐给一千络钱。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, Ningz Jinyong's lieutenant Guihu and Jinyi's lieutenants Chufu and Tubun, who had served as guards for Zheng Cai and Shuchun respectively, were each awarded 1,000 rupees.

古文：乙丑，前签书枢密院事邹应龙薨，赠少保、监察御史。
现代文：二十六日，前签书枢密院事邹应龙去世，赠少保、监察御史。
English: On the 26th, in response to Long's death, the Privy Council signed a document awarding him the title of Minor Protector and Supervisor of History.

古文：胡清献劾淮西提刑徐敏子三罪，诏削两秩，送江州居住。
现代文：胡清献弹勃淮西提刑徐敏子三罪，下诏削官二级，送往江州居住。
English: Hu Qing gave the go-ahead to sentence Xu Tinsi to three crimes, and sent him to Jiangzhou to live.

古文：六月庚午朔，吕文德依旧侍卫马军副都指挥使兼淮西招抚使、知濠州。
现代文：六月初一，吕文德依旧为侍卫马军副都指挥使兼淮西招抚使、壕州知州。
English: On the first day of June, Lü Wende was still the deputy commander of the Horse Guards and the deputy commander of the Huaixi Sending Mission, and he went to Hezhou and Zhizhou.

古文：乙亥，赐礼部进土留梦炎以下四百二十四人及第、出身有差。
现代文：初六，赐礼部进士留梦炎以下四百二十四人及第、出身不等。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, 424 students from the ceremony club and below were selected, with different grades and backgrounds.

古文：壬午，诏安丰军策应解寿春围将士补转官资有差。
现代文：十三日，下诏：安丰军策应解寿春之围将士补转官资不等。
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued: "Anfeng's military strategy should solve the siege of Shuchun.

古文：诏：寿春一军先涉大海，捣山东胶、密诸州有功，今大元兵围城，能守城不隳，其立功将士皆补转有差。
现代文：下诏：寿春一军先涉大海，进攻山东胶、密等州有功，今元军围城，能够守城不退，立功将士都补转官资不等。
English: The following edict: Shouchun's army first waded into the sea and attacked Shandong Jiaozuo, Miyang and other provinces with great achievements. Ima Yuan's army besieged the city and was able to defend the city without retreating. The meritorious soldiers were all compensated with government funds.

古文：乙未，有流星大如太白，出于毕。
现代文：二十六日，有流星大如太白星出现在毕宿。
English: On the 26th, a meteor as big as the Great White Star appeared in Bi.

古文：丙申，吴潜提举隆兴府玉隆万寿宫，任便居住。
现代文：二十七日，吴潜提举隆兴府玉隆万寿宫，任其便居住。
English: On the 27th, Wu Qian raised Longxingfu Gyulong Wanshou Palace and allowed him to live there.

古文：秋七月己亥朔，祈雨。
现代文：秋七月初一，祈祷降雨。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, pray for rain.

古文：乙卯，招收沿淮失业壮丁为武胜军，以五千人为额。
现代文：十七月，招收沿淮失业壮丁为武胜军，以五千人为定额。
English: On July 17th, the unemployed young men along the Huai River were recruited into the Wu Sheng Army, with a quota of five thousand.

古文：辛酉，盗发永州东安县，飞虎军正将吴龙、统制郑存等讨捕有功，诏补转官资有差。
现代文：二十三日，永州东安县兴发盗贼，飞虎军正将吴龙、统制郑存等讨捕立功，下诏补转官资不等。
English: On the 23rd, Xingfa thieves were caught in Dongan County, Yongzhou, and the Flying Tiger Army was making great efforts to arrest Wu Long and Zheng Cun, the commander-in-chief.

古文：甲子，诏： 故直龙图阁项安世正学直节，先朝名儒，可特赠集英殿修撰。 
现代文：二十六日，下诏： 已故直龙图阁项安世正学直节，是先朝名儒，可特赠集英殿修撰。 
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: The late Zhaolong Tu Gu Xiang An Shi Zheng Xue Zhi, who was a famous Confucian scholar in the previous dynasty, can be presented with the collection compiled by Ying Dian.

古文：八月壬辰，太白昼见。
现代文：八月二十四日，太白星白天显现。
English: On August 24th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：九月癸卯，右丞相史嵩之以父病谒告，许之，诏范钟、刘伯正暂领相事。
现代文：九月初五，右承相史篙之因父亲患病请假看望，答应批准，下诏范钟、刘伯正暂领相事。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month of the year, the heir to the throne, Shi Junzhi, asked for leave to visit his father, who was ill, and was granted permission. Fan Zhong and Liu Bozheng were appointed as the co-princes for the time being.

古文：甲辰，史弥忠卒，赠少师，封郑国公，赐谥文靖。
现代文：初六，史弥忠去世，赠少师，封为郑国公，赐给溢号文靖。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Shi Yizhong died, and was given a young teacher, named Zheng Guogong, and given the posthumous name of Wenjing.

古文：诏史嵩之起复右丞相兼枢密使。
现代文：下诏重新起用史篙之为右承相兼枢密使。
English: The following edict reinstated Shi Yan as Ujishojo (Minister of the Right) and Privy Councilor.

古文：癸丑，荧惑、填星合于轸。
现代文：十五日，荧惑星、填星合于较宿。
English: On the fifteenth day, the fluorescent planet and the filling star coincided with each other.

古文：甲寅，京湖制司言，诸将李福等破申州、蔡州西平县城壁及马家等砦，诏将士各补官推赏有差。
现代文：十六日，京湖制司说：诸将李福等攻破申州、蔡州西平县城壁和马家等寨，下诏将士各补官推赏不等。
English: On the 16th, the Beijing Lake System Division said: "The generals Li Fu and others broke through the city walls of Xiping County in Shenzhou and Caizhou and the villages of Ma Jia and so on, and the subordinate generals were rewarded by various officials.

古文：己未，将作监徐元杰上疏论史嵩之起复，宜许其举执政自代。
现代文：二十一日，将作监徐元杰上疏论史篙之重新起用之事，应允许他举荐执政代替自己。
English: On the twenty-first day, Xu Yuanjie, who will serve as a supervisor, discussed the re-appointment of Shi Yan, and he should be allowed to recommend him to govern instead of himself.

古文：帝不允，遂求去。帝曰： 经筵赖卿规益，何事引去耶？ 癸亥，太白犯斗宿距星。
现代文：理宗不答应，于是请求离去，理宗说： 经筵依赖你帮助和规范，为什么要请求离去呢了二十五日，太白星侵犯斗宿距星。
English: Rizong did not agree, so he asked to leave. Rizong said: After relying on your help and discipline, why did you ask to leave? Twenty-five days later, Taibai Xing invaded Douxing Distant Star.

古文：乙丑，雷。
现代文：二十七日，打雷。
English: On the 27th, there was thunder.

古文：丁卯，雷。
现代文：二十九日，打雷。
English: On the 29th, there was thunder.

古文：台臣言严州及绍兴、萧山等县征商烦苛，诏亟罢之。
现代文：台臣说严州和绍兴、萧山等县，征商烦苛，下诏立即罢除。
English: The Taiwanese minister said that Yanzhou, Shaoxing, Xiaoshan and other counties are too troublesome to solicit business, and they should be removed immediately.

古文：冬十月甲戌，诏庆元府守臣敦谕史嵩之赴阙，嵩之控辞，不允。
现代文：冬十月初七，下诏庆元府守臣敦促史篙之到朝廷，史篙之推辞，没有批准。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of the winter, the governor of Qingyuan Prefecture urged Shi Xizhi to come to the imperial court, but Shi Xizhi's refusal was not approved.

古文：壬辰，杜范、游似提举万寿观兼侍讲。
现代文：二十五日，杜范、游侣提举万寿观兼侍读。
English: On the 25th, Du Fan and You Rui jointly raised the concept of longevity and attended the lecture.

古文：十一月辛丑，诏趣游似、杜范赴阙。
现代文：十一月初四，下诏督促游侣、杜范到朝廷。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, Du Fan and his traveling companions were ordered to go to the imperial court.

古文：戊申，雷。
现代文：十一日，打雷。
English: On the 11th, there was thunder.

古文：庚戌，诏陈韡、李性传赴阙。
现代文：十三日，下诏陈擎、李性传到朝廷。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edicts of Chen Qing and Li Xing were delivered to the imperial court.

古文：十二月庚午，以范钟为左丞相兼枢密使，杜范为右丞相兼枢密使，游似知枢密院事，刘伯正参知政事兼签书枢密院事。
现代文：十二月初四，以范钟为左承相兼枢密使，杜范为右承相兼枢密使，游侣为知枢密院事，刘伯正为参知政事兼签书枢密院事。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, Fan Zhong was appointed as the Left Vice-Minister and the Privy Councilor, Du Fan was appointed as the Right Vice-Minister and the Privy Councilor, You Liao was appointed as the Secretary of the Privy Council, and Liu Bozheng was appointed as the Co-Secretary of the Privy Council and the Signatory of the Letter.

古文：诏戒饬百官。
现代文：下诏整治文武百官。
English: The following edict rectifies the civil and military officials.

古文：许右丞相史嵩之终丧。
现代文：允许右承相史篙之守完父丧。
English: He allowed Ujitsune to watch his father's funeral.

古文：甲戌，以赵葵同知枢密院事。
现代文：初八，以赵葵为同知枢密院事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Zhao Kwai was appointed as the Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：乙亥，郑清之授少保，依旧观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，仍奉朝请，进封卫国公。
现代文：初九，郑清之授为少保，依旧为观文殿大学士、醛泉观使兼侍读，并且逢一日、五日朝见皇帝，进封为卫国公。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, Zheng Qingzhi was awarded the title of Shao Bao, and continued to be a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and an attendant of the Yuan Yuan Emperor, and met the emperor in the morning every day and on the fifth day, and was enthroned as the protector of the country.

古文：五年春正月丁酉朔，诏更新庶政，绥抚中原遗民。
现代文：淳五年春正月初一，下诏更新政事，安抚中原遗民。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Jun, he issued an edict to renew political affairs and appease the survivors of the Central Plains.

古文：丙午，杜范辞免右丞相，不允。
现代文：初十，杜范辞免右承相，没批淮。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Du Fan resigned and was pardoned by Yu Chengxiang, but was not approved by Huai.

古文：己酉，雷。
现代文：十三日，打雷。
English: On the fifteenth day, there was thunder.

古文：乙卯，以李性传签书枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：十九日，任命李性传为签书枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 19th, Li Xichuan was appointed as the Signing Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State.

古文：二月丙寅朔，雨土。
现代文：二月初一，降土。
English: On the first day of February, the earth fell.

古文：甲戌，复五河，诏吕文德进三秩，羊洪进二秩，余有战功者推赏，其阵没人，具姓名赠恤。
现代文：初九，收复五河，下诏：吕文德进三秩，羊洪进二秩，其余有战功者施加恩赏，阵亡者，开列姓名予以慰问抚恤。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, after the recovery of the Five Rivers, the following edict was issued: Lü Wende was promoted to the third rank, Yang Hong was promoted to the second rank, the rest of the war heroes were rewarded, and those who died in the war were listed by name and given a condolence allowance.

古文：丁丑，范钟等上《玉牒》、《日历》及孝宗、光宗《御集》、《经武要略》、《宁宗实录》。
现代文：十二日，范钟等呈上医碟、《日历和哮宗光宗御集、经武要略、泞宗实录。二十七日，太白星白天显现。
English: On the 12th, Fan Zhong and others presented the medical disk, the "Calendar and Collection of Wu Zong Guang Zong," the "Outline of Buddhism and Martial Arts," and the "Real Record of the Han Sect." On the 27th, Taibai Star appeared during the day.

古文：壬辰，太白昼见，经天。三月庚子，诏严赃吏法，仍命有司举行彭大雅、程以升、吴淇、徐敏子纳贿之罪。准淳熙故事，戒吏贪虐、预借、抑配、重催、取赢。
现代文：三月初五，下诏严格执行赃吏法，并且命令有关部门检举彭大雅、程以升、吴淇、徐敏子纳贿罪行。按照淳熙时的规定，戒吏贪虐、预借、抑配、重催、取赢。
English: On the fifth day of the third month of the lunar calendar, he issued an edict to strictly enforce the bribe-taking law, and ordered the relevant departments to report Peng Daya, Cheng Yisheng, Wu Qi, and Xu Minzi for bribe-taking crimes. According to the provisions of the time of Jun Xi, the officials were punished for corruption, borrowing, withholding, urging, and winning.

古文：以缗钱百万犒淮东师。
现代文：以络线一百万搞赏淮东军队。
English: Reward the Huadong army with one million lines.

古文：夏四月甲申，填星犯上相星。
现代文：夏四月二十日，填星侵犯上相星。
English: On the 20th day of the 4th month of the summer, the star-filling invaded the upper phase star.

古文：丙戌，杜范薨，赠少傅，谥清献。
现代文：二十二日，杜范去世，赠少傅，溢号清献。
English: On the 22nd, Du Fan passed away, and was presented with the title of Shao Fu (lesser master) and the title of Yue Zhao Qing Xian.

古文：戊子，余玠言权巴州何震之守城死于兵，诏进赠官三秩，一子与下州文学。
现代文：二十四日，余说暂代巴州守何震之守城死于战阵，下诏进赠官三秩，一个儿子授为下州文学官。
English: On the 24th, Yu said that the provisional governor of Bazhou, He Zhen's castle, died in the battle, and he was awarded three ranks, and one son was awarded the literary officer of the lower state.

古文：京湖制司言： 钤辖王云等袭邓州镇平县灵山，战顺阳铁撅峪，皆有劳效，野战数十合，云等六人被重创死，路钤于江一军力战。 
现代文：京湖制司说： 铃辖王云等袭击邓州镇平县灵山，作战顺阳铁撅峪，都有功劳，作战数十回合，王云等六人遭受重伤，本路铃辖于江一军奋力作战。 
English: Jinghu System said: Wang Yun and others attacked Lingshan in Dengzhou Zhenping County and fought Shunyang Anvil, all of which have merits. They fought dozens of rounds. Wang Yun and six others were seriously injured. This road was fought hard by the army of Lingyu in the river.

古文：诏王云赠三秩，仍官其二子为承信郎。王宽、王立、田秀、董亮、董玉各加赠恤，于江等各转一官资。
现代文：下诏： 王云赠三秩，并且任其二个儿子为承信郎，王宽、王立、田秀、董亮、董玉各加赠恤，于江等各转一官级。 
English: The following edict: Wang Yun bestowed three ranks, and appointed his two sons as Cheng Xin Lang, Wang Kuan, Wang Li, Tian Xiu, Dong Liang, and Dong Yuping, each of whom was given a medal, and Yujiang and others were each promoted to an official rank.

古文：诏李曾伯、余玠、董槐、孟珙、王鉴职事修举，曾伯、玠升阁职，槐、珙、鉴转官，并因其任。
现代文：下诏李曾伯、余、董槐、孟琪、王鉴尽职尽责。李曾伯、余升为职，董槐、孟琪、王鉴转官，并继续担任原来职务。
English: Li Zengbo, Yu, Dong Rong, Meng Qi and Wang Jian are hereby promoted to higher posts, and Dong Rong, Meng Qi and Wang Jian are transferred to other posts and continue to hold their original posts.

古文：五月丁酉，吕文福、夏贵上战功，诏贵官两转，文福带行阁职。
现代文：五月初四，吕文福、夏贵上报战功，诏令夏贵转两官，吕文福带行阁职。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month, Lü Wenfu and Xia Gui reported their war exploits, and Xia Gui was ordered to transfer to two posts, and Lü Wenfu took the cabinet post.

古文：丁未，诏： 沿江、湖南、江西、湖广、两浙制帅漕司及许浦水军司，共造轻捷战船千艘，置游击军壮士三万人，分备捍御。 
现代文：十四日，下诏：沿江、湖南、江西、湖广、两浙制帅槽司和许浦水军司，共造轻捷战船一千艘，设置游击军壮士三万人，分别防备抵御敌军。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: along the Yangtze River, Hunan, Jiangxi, Hukang, and the two Zhejiang provinces, the commander-in-chief and the commander-in-chief of the Xupu River Military Region should build a total of one thousand light and fast warships, and set up a guerrilla army of thirty thousand strong men to guard against the enemy separately.

古文：戊申，日生赤黄背气。
现代文：十五日，太阳旁出现赤黄背气。
English: On the 15th, a reddish-yellow aura appeared next to the sun.

古文：辛亥，诏董槐赴阙。
现代文：十八日，下诏董槐到朝廷。
English: On the 18th, Dong Xuan arrived at the imperial court.

古文：丁巳，淮东制置使李曾伯辞免焕章阁学士，从之。
现代文：二十四日，淮东制置使李曾伯辞免焕章阁学士，理宗批淮了他的请求。
English: On the 24th, Li Zengbo was relieved of his post of Huan Zhangge Baccalaureate by Huadong Institution, and Li Zong approved his request.

古文：六月甲申，祈雨。
现代文：六月二十一日，祈祷降雨。
English: June 21st, praying for rain.

古文：丙戌，工部侍郎徐元杰暴卒，赠四秩。
现代文：二十三日，工部侍郎徐元杰暴死，赠四秩。
English: On the 23rd, Xu Yuanjie, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry, died suddenly, and was awarded four ranks.

古文：置诏狱。
现代文：设置诏狱。
English: The Imperial Prison was established.

古文：秋七月癸巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。早灾。
English: Autumn, the first day of July, a solar eclipse.

古文：旱。辛丑，镇江、常州亢旱，诏监司、守臣及沿江诸郡安集流民。
现代文：初九，镇江、常州干早，下诏监司、守臣和沿江各郡安集流民。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Zhenjiang and Changzhou were dry early, and the overseers, the guards, and the displaced people from Anji in the counties along the river came down.

古文：甲辰，祈雨。
现代文：十二日，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 25th, pray for rain.

古文：乙卯，诏给徐元杰、刘汉弼官田五百亩、缗钱五千恤其家。
现代文：二十三日，下诏给徐元杰、刘汉弼官田五百亩、络钱五千，抚恤其家。
English: On the 23rd, Xu Yuanjie and Liu Hanjun were awarded 500 mu of government-owned farmland and 5,000 rupees, and their families were given a pension.

古文：丁巳，京湖制司言总制亢国用师众战裕州拐河，战黑山，战大神山，皆有劳效。
现代文：二十五日，京湖制司说总制亢国用率军在裕州拐河、黑山、大神山作战，都有战功。
English: On the 25th, the Beijing and Hubei Provincial Bureau of Statistics said that the General Bureau of Statistics of the People's Republic of China led the army to fight in Yuzhou, Qiuhe, Montenegro, and Mount Daishenshan, all of which have war achievements.

古文：诏国用官两转，李山等四十七人官一转。
现代文：下诏亢国用转两官，李山等四十七人转一官。
English: The following 47 people, including Li Shan, will be promoted to a higher position.

古文：吕文德言与大元兵战五河隘口，又战于濠州，大元兵还。
现代文：吕文德报告说在五河隘口与大元军队作战，又在壕州作战，元军退走。
English: Lü Wende reported that he fought against the Yuan army at the Wuhe Pass, and also fought in Nezhou, and the Yuan army retreated.

古文：诏文德屯驻诸军战守将士，推恩有差。
现代文：诏令吕文德：屯驻各军战守将士，施加恩惠不等。
English: The emperor ordered Lü Wende to garrison the soldiers of all the armies, and to grant them various favors.

古文：八月庚辰，范钟再乞归田，不允。
现代文：八月十八日，范钟再次请求解职归田，没有允准。
English: On August 18th, Fan Zhong once again requested to be relieved of his duties and returned to Tianjin, but this request was not granted.

古文：九月甲辰，京湖制置司言： 刘整等率精锐，以云梯四面登镇平县城，入城巷战，焚城中仓库、糗粮、器甲，路将武胜等四人死之；略广阳，焚列屯、砦栅、庐舍凡二十余所；还抵灵山，又力战有功。 
现代文：九月十二日，京湖制置司说： 刘整等率领精锐军队用云梯从四面登上镇平县城，进人城中进行巷战，焚烧城中仓库、模粮、器甲，路将武胜等四人战死；劫掠广阳，焚毁列屯、寨栅、庐舍共二十多处；回军到达灵山，又力战有功。 
English: On September 12th, the Beijing-Hubei Construction Department said: Liu Zheiguo and other elite troops led by Liu Zheiguo ascended the town of Zhenping County from four sides with ladders, entered the city to conduct street battles, burned the city's warehouses, grain molds, containers, and four people died in battle, including the road commander Wu Sheng; looted Guangyang, and burned more than 20 villages, walled cities, and residences; the returning troops reached Lingshan, and were also effective in battle.

古文：诏整官两转，同行蔡贵等二百二十人各官一转。
现代文：诏令刘整转二官，同行蔡贵等二百二十人各转一官。
English: Zhao ordered Liu to be transferred to two posts, and his 220 colleagues, including Cai Gui, were each transferred to one post.

古文：辛亥，祀明堂，奉太祖、太宗、宁宗并侑。
现代文：十九日，祭祀明堂，酬答太祖、太宗和宁宗，大赦。
English: On the 19th, a memorial service was held at Myeongdong, and in return, Taejo, Taejong, and Ningjong were granted amnesty.

古文：大赦。冬十一月乙未，郑清之乞归田，不允。
现代文：冬十一月初四，郑清之请求解职归田，没有允准。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November in winter, Zheng Qing's request to be relieved of his duties and return to the field was not granted.

古文：丙申，诏师弥典伺属籍，职事修举，授太傅，加食邑，依前判大宗正事、嗣秀王。
现代文：初五，下诏：赵师弥典司属籍，职事修举，授为太傅，加食邑，依前判大宗正事、嗣秀王。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: Zhao Shimei was promoted to the position of secretary, and was awarded the title of taifu, the title of kakushokui, the title of daizong zhengji, and the title of sui xiuwang.

古文：壬子，诏：大元兵入蜀，权成都府冯有硕、权汉州王骧、权成都县杨兑、权资州刘永、权潼川府魏霭死于官守，其各赠官三转，仍官其一子。
现代文：二十一日，下诏：元军进人川蜀，暂代成都知府冯有硕、暂代汉州知州王骤、暂代成都知县杨兑、暂代资州知州刘永、暂代撞川知府魏霭在任上战死，分别赠转三官，任其子一人为官。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, the following edict was issued: the Yuan army marched into Sichuan Shu, the provisional Chengdu prefect Feng Yisuo, the provisional Hanzhou Chizhou Wang Qian, the provisional Chengdu Chizhou Yang Dui, the provisional Zizhou Chizhou Liu Yong, and the provisional Qianchuan prefect Wei Wei died in office, respectively, three officials were transferred, and one of their sons was appointed as an official.

古文：癸丑，诏将领关贵、统制白傅才率众复洋州，还遇大元兵交战，将士百五十三人皆阵没，已祔飨闵忠庙，赡恤其家。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：将领关贵、统制白傅才率众收复洋州，回军时遇到元兵交战，将士一百五十三人都阵亡了，已经附飨于阂忠庙，并赡养、抚恤其家。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: General Guan Gui and commander Baifu Cai led the people to recover Yangzhou. When they returned to the army, they encountered Yuan soldiers in battle. One hundred and fifty-three soldiers were killed in battle. They have been enshrined in the Zhaozhong Temple, and their families have been supported and raised.

古文：关贵、白傅才各赠承节郎，官其一子进勇副尉。
现代文：关贵、白傅才各赠承节郎，任其一子为进勇副尉。
English: Guan Gui and Baifu Cai each presented Jie Jielang, and appointed one of their sons as Vice-Lieutenant Jin Yong.

古文：十二月甲戌，诏寿春守臣刘雄飞等以大元兵围城捍御有功，雄飞及吕文福、林子崈等十一人各官三转，刘用等补转官资有差。
现代文：十二月十三日，下诏寿春守臣刘雄飞等因抵抗元军攻城有功，刘雄飞和吕文福、林子击等十一人各转三官，刘用等补转官资不等。
English: On December 13th, Liu Xiongfei, the next Zhao Shuchun's retainer Liu Xiongfei and others were rewarded for their resistance to the Yuan army's siege of the city. Liu Xiongfei, Lu Wenfu, Lin Zihu and eleven others were each promoted to the third rank, and Liu Ying and others were promoted to the third rank.

古文：己卯，以游似为右丞相兼枢密使，郑清之为少师、奉国军节度使，依前醴泉观使兼侍读，仍奉朝请，赐玉带及赐第行在。
现代文：十八日，以游侣为右承相兼枢密使；郑清之为少师、奉国军节度使，依前为醛泉观使兼侍读，并且逢一日、五日朝见皇上，赐给玉带和行在的住宅。
English: On the 18th, Yu Rui was appointed as the right heir to the throne and the envoy of the privy council; Zheng Qing was appointed as the junior teacher, the envoy of the national army festival, and the former was appointed as the envoy and attendant of the Yu Longquan, and met the emperor every day and the morning of the fifth day, and gave him the jade belt and the house where he was staying.

古文：兄与欢换授安德军节度使、开府仪同三司、万寿观使，仍奉朝请；弟嗣沂王贵谦、嗣荣王与芮并加授少保。以赵葵知枢密院事兼参知政事，李性传同知枢密院事，陈韡兼参知政事。
现代文：兄赵与腿换授安德军节度使、开府仪同三司、万寿观使，并且依旧逢一日、五日朝见皇上。弟嗣沂王赵贵谦、嗣荣王赵与丙并加授少保，以赵葵为知枢密院事兼参知政事，李性传为同知枢密院事，陈擎兼参知政事。
English: The elder brother Zhao and his leg were awarded the title of the Andes Military Festival Delegate, the Kaifu Ceremonial and Three Departments, and the Wan Shou Guan Envoy, and continued to see the emperor every day and every morning. The younger brother Zhao Guiqian, the successor of the King of the Dragon, and Zhao and C, the successors of the King of Rong, were also awarded the title of the Minor Protector, with Zhao Kwai as the Privy Councillor and the Councillor of State, Li Shizhong as the Councillor of State, and Chen Qing as the Councillor of State.

古文：壬午，太史奏来岁正旦日当食，诏以是月二十一日避殿减膳，命百司讲行阙政，凡可以消弭灾变者，直言毋隐。
现代文：二十一日，太史上奏来年春节为日食，下诏本月二十一日避殿减膳。命令各个部门讲行缺政，凡是可以消灭灾异的办法，直言不讳。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Grand Historian announced that the next year's Spring Festival would be a solar eclipse, and on the twenty-first day of the month, he issued an edict to evacuate the palace and reduce meals. He ordered all departments to preach the lack of politics, and to be outspoken in any way that could eliminate disasters.

古文：六年春正月辛卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：淳六年春正月初一。日食。
English: June 6, the first day of the first month of spring. Solar eclipse.

古文：置国用所，命赵与为提领官。
现代文：设置国用所，命令赵与袜为提领官。
English: He set up a government office and ordered Zhao and Sock to be the leading officials.

古文：二月戊辰，范钟再乞归田里，诏官三转，观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读。
现代文：二月初八，范钟再次请求解职归田，下诏转三官，观文殿大学士、醛泉观使兼侍读。
English: On the 8th day of the 2nd month of the year, Fan Zhong once again requested to be relieved of his duties and returned to the field, and was transferred to three posts, namely, a scholar of the Academy of Confucius, and a scholar and attendant of Yu Dequan.

古文：己巳，范钟再辞，诏提举洞霄宫，任便居住。
现代文：初九，范钟再辞，下诏提举洞霄宫，任便居住。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, Fan Zhong resigned again, and the next edict was to elevate Dongxiao Palace, and Ren Ren lived there.

古文：庚午，以刘雄飞知寿春府、节制屯田军马。
现代文：初十，以刘雄飞为寿春知府，节制屯田军马。
English: In the early 10th century, with Liu Xiongfei as the governor of Shushun, he restrained the Tonden army.

古文：三月癸巳，日晕周匝，珥气。
现代文：三月初四，太阳周围有光圈环绕，日晕显现。
English: On the 4th of March, the sun is surrounded by an aperture, and a solar halo appears.

古文：夏四月辛酉，太白昼见。
现代文：夏四月初二，太白星白天显现。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of summer, the Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：壬戌，太阴犯太白。
现代文：初三，月亮侵犯太白星。
English: On the third day of the first month, the moon encroaches on the white star.

古文：甲戌，以丘岳兼两淮屯田副使，贾似道兼蕲、黄屯田副使。
现代文：十五日，以丘岳兼两淮屯田副使，贾似道兼薪、黄屯田副使。
English: On the 15th, Yue Yue and Zhuang Huai, deputy envoys to Tunden, and Jia Lian Dao and Huang Tunden, deputy envoys to Tunden, were promoted.

古文：丁丑，日晕周匝。
现代文：十八日，太阳周围有光圈环绕。
English: On the 18th, there was a halo around the sun.

古文：戊寅，诏朱熹门人胡安之、吕焘、蔡模并迪功郎、本州州学教授。
现代文：十九日，下诏： 朱熹门人胡安之、吕煮、蔡模为迪功郎、本州州学教授。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: Zhu Xi's disciples, Juan Zhi, Lyu Ni, and Cai Mo, are Di Gong Lang, professors of Honshu state studies.

古文：给札录其著述，并条具所欲言者以闻。
现代文：给札录其著述，并开列所想说的话上报朝廷。 
English: He was to record his writings in a journal and report to the imperial court what he wanted to say.

古文：闰四月辛卯，李曾伯以台谏论，诏落职予祠，寻罢祠禄。
现代文：闰四月初三，李曾伯因台谏官弹论，下诏免职授给祠禄官，不久罢免祠官。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the leap year, Li Zengbo was relieved of his duties and assigned to the position of ancestral hall official, and was soon removed from the position of ancestral hall official.

古文：戊戌，吕文德言： 今春北兵攻两淮，统制汪怀忠等逆战赵家园，拔还俘获人民；路钤夏贵，知州王成、倪政等帅舟师援安丰军，所至数战，将士阵亡者众。 
现代文：初十，吕文德说： 今春元兵进攻两淮，统制汪怀忠等在赵家园抵抗，夺回俘获的百姓；路铃辖夏贵，知州王成、倪政等，率领水军救援安丰军，所至数战，将士阵亡者很多。 
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Lü Wende said: This spring, Yuan soldiers attacked the two Huai, and Wang Huaizhong and others resisted in Zhao Jiaojia and recaptured the captured people; Lu Ling governed Xia Gui, Chizhou Wang Cheng, Ni Zheng and others, led the navy to rescue the Anfeng army, so there were several battles, and many soldiers died in battle.

古文：诏倪政赠官三转，官一子承信郎；许通、夏珪、孙才江德仙各赠官两转，官其一子下班祗应，给缗钱恤其家；余立功将士恩赏有差。 
现代文：下诏： 倪政赠转三官，官其一子为承信郎；许通、夏盖、孙才、江德仙各赠转两官，官其一子为下班抵应，赐给络钱抚恤其家；其余立功将士恩赏不等。 
English: The following is the edict: Ni Zheng presented three officials, and one of the officials' sons was Cheng Xin Lang; Xu Tong, Xia Gai, Sun Cai, and Jiang De Xian each presented two officials, and one of the officials' sons was off-duty, and was given a sum of money to support his family; the rest of the meritorious service will be rewarded.

古文：辛丑，月晕五重。
现代文：十三日，月亮周围出现五重光圈。
English: On the 13th, a five-fold aperture appeared around the moon.

古文：癸卯，余玠言：北兵分四道入蜀，将士捍御有功者，辄以便宜推赏，具立功等第补转官资以闻。
现代文：十五日，余说： 元军分四道进攻四川，将士抵抗有功者，随时给予恩赏，开列立功等第补转官资上报。 
English: On the fifteenth day, Yu said: The Yuan Army will attack Sichuan in four directions. Those who have made meritorious resistance will be rewarded at any time, and the list of meritorious achievements will be submitted to the government.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令按此办理。
English: He complied.

古文：五月庚申，诏贾似道措置淮西山砦城筑。
现代文：五月初三，下诏贾似道措置淮西修筑山寨。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Jiaxing issued a decree to build a cottage in Huaxi.

古文：壬戌，太白犯权星。
现代文：初五，太白星侵犯权星。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the white star infringes the rights of the star.

古文：己卯，诏诸镇募兵、造舟、置马，帅臣其务奖激将士，以严边防。
现代文：二十二日，下诏各镇募兵、造船、置马，帅臣务必奖励激劝将士，以严边防。
English: On the 22nd, it was decreed that all towns should recruit soldiers, build ships, and place horses, and that handsome ministers must reward and encourage generals to maintain a strict border defense.

古文：六月甲午，保信军节度使希丞薨。
现代文：六月初七，保信军节度使赵希承去世。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, Zhao Xicheng passed away after the Baoxin Army Festival.

古文：丙午，祈雨。
现代文：十九日，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 19th, I prayed for rain.

古文：壬子，以陈韡参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
现代文：二十五日，以陈蒸为参知政事兼同知枢密院事。
English: On the 25th, Chen Mu was appointed as a member of the Council of State and the Privy Council.

古文：乙卯，台臣言李鸣复、刘伯正进则害善类，退则蠹州里。
现代文：二十八日，台臣弹勃说，李鸣复、刘伯正进则陷害好人，退则为害地方。
English: On the 28th, Taizhen Piao Bo said that Li Mingfu and Liu Bo Zhengjin set up good people, and their withdrawal harmed the region.

古文：诏鸣复落职罢宫观，伯正削一秩。
现代文：下诏李鸣复免职罢宫观，刘伯正削夺一秩。
English: Li Mingfu was relieved of his post, and Liu Bo was promoted to a higher rank.

古文：秋七月壬戌，泉州岁饥，其民谢应瑞非因有司劝分，自出私钱四十余万，籴米以振乡井，所全活甚众。诏补进义校尉。
现代文：秋七月初六，泉州岁饥，百姓谢应瑞没等有关部门劝贩，自出私钱四十多万络来米用来贩济乡民，所全活甚众，诏令补进义校尉。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Quanzhou was starving, and the people did not wait for the relevant departments to persuade the vendors. They spent more than 400,000 rupees of their own money to sell rice to help the villagers, and all of them were very popular.

古文：丁卯，太阴犯斗。
现代文：十一日，月亮侵犯斗星。
English: On the 22nd, the moon invaded Douju.

古文：己巳，吕文德言： 北兵围寿春城，州师至黄家穴，总管孙琦、吕文信、夏贵等战龙堽有功。 
现代文：十三日，吕文德说： 元兵围攻寿春城，州军至黄家穴，总管孙琦、吕文信、夏贵等在龙作战，有战功。 
English: On the 13th, Lü Wende said: The Yuan soldiers besieged Shuchun City, the state army went to Huangjia An, and the general managers Sun Qian, Lü Wenshin, and Xia Gui fought in Long, and they had military achievements.

古文：诏文德官一转，余依等第转补；其阵没董先等二十二人、伤者四百三十七人，赠恤恩赏有差。
现代文：下诏吕文德转一官，其余按等级补转官职；阵亡者董先等二十二人，伤者四百三十七人，赠恤恩赏不等。
English: According to the following edict, Lu Wende was transferred to another post, and the rest were transferred to higher posts according to their ranks; among those who died in the battle, there were 22 people such as Dong Xian and 437 people who were injured, and there were various awards and rewards.

古文：癸酉，有流星出自室，大如太白。
现代文：十七日，有流星出自室宿，大如太白星。
English: On the 17th, a meteor came out of Murojuku, as big as a white star.

古文：八月辛卯，太阴犯房。
现代文：八月初五，月亮侵犯房宿。
English: On the fifth day of August, the moon invaded the room.

古文：己酉，赐文士刘克庄进士出身，以为秘书少监兼国史院编修官、实录院检讨官。
现代文：二十三日，赐文士刘克庄进士出身，任命为秘书少监兼国史院编修官、实录院检讨官。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Kezhuang, who was born as a scholar, was appointed as a secretary and junior supervisor, as well as an editor of the Academy of National History and a reviewer of the Academy of Historical Records.

古文：壬子，太白昼见。
现代文：二十六日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 12th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸丑，以刘克庄兼崇政殿说书。
现代文：二十七日，以刘克庄兼崇政殿说书。
English: On the 27th, Liu Kezhuang and Chongzhengden delivered a speech.

古文：枢密院言： 前知普州何叔丁、签书判官杨仁举，淳祐元年冬北兵攻城，两家二十余人死于难，叔丁孙嗣祖、仁举幼子肖翁被俘逃归。 
现代文：枢密院说： 前知普州何叔丁、签书判官杨仁举，淳元年冬元军攻城，两家二十多人死于兵祸，何叔丁孙何嗣祖、杨仁举幼子杨肖翁被俘逃回。 
English: The Privy Council said: He Shuding, the former governor of Puzhou, and Yang Renju, the judge who signed the document, were aware of this. In the first year of A.D., the Dongyuan army besieged the city. More than twenty people from the two families died in a military accident. He Shuding's grandson, He Shizuo, and Yang Renju's young son, Yang Xiao'on, were captured and escaped.

古文：诏叔丁等赠官恤后有差。
现代文：下诏何叔丁等赠官恤后不等。
English: After the next edict, He Shuding and others were given official shirts.

古文：九月甲子，有流星出于斗，大如太白。
现代文：九月初九，有流星显现于斗宿，大如太白星。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, a meteor appeared in Douju, as big as a white star.

古文：戊辰，以贾似道为敷文阁直学士、京湖制置使、知江陵府兼夔路策应使。
现代文：十三日，以贾似道为敷文阁直学士、京湖制置使、江陵知府兼夔路策应使。
English: On the 13th, Jia Li Dao was appointed as the direct scholar of Shibunkaku, the designated envoy of Beijing Lake, and the designated envoy of Gangneung Prefecture.

古文：太白昼见。
现代文：太白星白天显现。
English: Too white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：癸酉，孟珙薨，赠少师。
现代文：十八日，孟琪去世，赠少师。
English: On the 18th, Meng Qi passed away, leaving behind a young teacher.

古文：冬十月己丑，少保、嗣荣王与芮之子赐名孟启，授贵州刺史。
现代文：冬十月初四，少保、嗣荣王赵与丙之子赐名孟启，授为贵州刺史。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of the winter, Zhao, the younger brother and the heir of Rongwang Zhao and the son of C, was given the name Mengqi and was awarded the title of Guizhou historian.

古文：乙未，填星、岁星、荧惑合于亢。
现代文：初十，填星、岁星、荧惑星合于亢宿。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the filling star, the year star, and the fluorescent planet will converge on Oshuku.

古文：己酉，太白入氐。
现代文：二十四日，太白星进人氏宿。
English: On the 24th, Taibai Xing entered Mr. Jin's lodging.

古文：十一月癸亥，岁星入氐。
现代文：十一月初八，岁星进人氏宿。
English: On the 8th day of the 11th month, the New Year's Star came to Jinren's lodging.

古文：甲戌，右丞相游似五请归田里，诏不允。
现代文：十九日，右承相游侣五次请求免职归田，下诏不允准。
English: On the 19th day of the month, Ujisho Uroko made five requests to be relieved of duty and allowed to return to the field, but was not allowed.

古文：辛巳，诏： 北兵入蜀，前四川制置使陈隆之阖家数百口罹害，死不易节，其特赐徽猷阁待制，官其二子，赐谥立庙。
现代文：二十六日，下诏： 元兵进人四少，前四川制置使陈隆之全家数百口遇害，至死不降，特赐为徽酞阁待制，官其二子，赐溢立庙。
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: the number of Yuan soldiers entering the country was too few, the former Sichuan system killed hundreds of Chen Long's entire family, and he would not give up until death. He was specially awarded the Huiyang Pavilion, and his two sons were given the opportunity to build a temple.

古文：死事史季俭、杨戡子各赐官两转，官一子。 
现代文：为国捐躯者史季俭、杨勘子各赐转二官，官其一子。 
English: Those who died for the country, Shi Jizhen and Yang Kanzi, were each given two posts, and one of their sons became an official.

古文：十二月乙未，诏史嵩之依所乞守金紫光禄大夫、观文殿大学士、永国公致仕。
现代文：十二月初十，下诏史篙之依他所请求的，以金紫光禄大夫、观文殿大学士、永国公职衔退休。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, Shi Xizhi retired as he had requested, with the titles of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, Guanwen Temple University Scholar, and Yongguo Public Official.

古文：台谏论史嵩之无父无君，丑声秽行，律以无将之法，罪有余诛，乞寝宫祠，削官远窜。
现代文：台谏弹勃说史篙之无父无君，名声不好，行为污秽，罪有余辜，应当诛杀，请求停免宫祠，削夺官职，流窜远方。
English: It was said that Shi Yan had no father, no prince, a bad reputation, filthy behavior, and many sins. He should be killed, his palace and shrine should be abolished, his official position should be taken away, and he should be exiled to a faraway place.

古文：七年春正月乙卯朔，诏： 间者绌逐非才，收召众正，史嵩之已令致事，示不复用。
现代文：淳七年春正月初一，下诏： 近一段时间朝廷驱逐没有才能的人，召用正直名士，史篙之已经命令退休，表示不再起用。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the seventh year of King Jun, the following edict was issued: Recently, the imperial court has been expelling people with no talent and summoning honest celebrities. Shi Xizhi has been ordered to retire, indicating that he will no longer be used.

古文：咨尔二三大臣，其一乃心，务举实政，以辑宁我邦家。若辞浮于实，玩愒岁月，朕何赖焉。 建资善堂，授孟启宜州观察使，就内小学。
现代文：你们二三位大臣，要同心同德，务举实政，来安定我宋朝江山；如果敷衍应付，不举实事，旷废岁月，肤将依靠什么来治理国家啊广建立资善堂，授赵孟启为宜州观察使，就读宫内小学。
English: You two or three ministers should be of one heart and one mind, and carry out pragmatic policies to stabilize the Song Dynasty. If you do not carry out pragmatic measures, you will waste your time. What will you rely on to govern the country?

古文：二月庚寅，诏： 淮安主簿周子镕，久俘于北，数遣蜡书谍报边事，今遂生还，可改朝奉郎，优与升擢。 
现代文：二月初六，下诏： 淮安主簿周子很久以前就被元军俘虏。他多次送来蜡书，秘密报告边境战事消息，今天终于生还，可改为朝奉郎，优加提升。 
English: On the sixth day of the second month of the year, the following edict was issued: Zhou Zi, the main book of Huai'an, was captured by the Yuan army a long time ago. He repeatedly sent wax books and secretly reported the news of the border war. Today, he is finally alive and can be changed to a court servant and promoted.

古文：己亥，贵妃贾氏薨。
现代文：十五日，贵妃贾氏去世。
English: On the 15th, Guifei Jia passed away.

古文：戊申，日晕周匝。
现代文：二十四日，太阳周围有光圈环绕。
English: On the 24th, the sun is surrounded by a halo.

古文：壬子，诏改潜邸为龙翔宫。
现代文：二十八日，下诏改潜邸为龙翔宫。
English: On the 28th, the imperial edict changed the residence to Longxiang Palace.

古文：三月庚午，祈雨。
现代文：三月十七日，祈祷降雨。
English: March 17th, praying for rain.

古文：夏四月丁亥，填星犯亢。
现代文：夏四月初四，填星侵犯亢宿。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the summer, the star-filled sky invaded Shibuya.

古文：庚子，以王伯大签书枢密院事，吴潜同签书枢密院事。
现代文：十七日，以王伯大为签书枢密院事，吴潜为同签书枢密院事。
English: On the 17th, Wang Boda was appointed as the signing privy councilor, and Wu Qian as the same signing privy councilor.

古文：辛丑，以郑清之为太傅、右丞相兼枢密使，封越国公；游似罢为观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读；赵葵为枢密使兼参知政事，督视江淮、京西、湖北军马；陈韡知枢密院事、湖南安抚大使、知潭州。
现代文：十八日，以郑清之为太傅、右承相兼枢密使，封为越国公；游侣罢为观文殿大学士、醛泉观使兼侍读；赵葵为枢密使兼参知政事，督视江淮、京西、湖北军马；陈擎为知枢密院事、湖南安抚大使、潭州知州。
English: On the 18th, Zheng Qing was appointed as the Taifu, the Minister of the Right and the Privy Envoy, and was given the title of the Governor of Yue Province; You Liao was appointed as the Academician of Guanwen Temple, and Yu Yuquan was appointed as the Envoy and the Attendant; Zhao Kwai was appointed as the Envoy and the Councillor of the Governor, and he supervised the military horses of Jianghuai, West Beijing, and Hubei Province; Chen Qing was appointed as the Councillor of the Privy Council, the Ambassador of Pacification of Hunan Province, and the Councillor of the Governor of

古文：甲辰，赵葵兼知建康府、行宫留守、江东安抚使，应军行调度并听便宜行事；赵希塈礼部尚书、督视行府参赞军事。
现代文：二十一日，赵葵兼知建康府、行宫留守、江东安抚使，行军调度都可自行处理决定；赵希为礼部尚书、督视行府参赞军事。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhao Kwai Kan learned that Jiankang Prefecture, Xinggu Palace, and Jiangdong Pacifying Envoy could make their own decisions on the march scheduling; Zhao Xi was the ceremonial secretary and supervised the Xingfu Military Counselor.

古文：庚戌，出缗钱千万、银十五万两、祠牒千、绢万，并户部银五千万两，付督视行府赵葵调用。
现代文：二十七日，出络钱一千万、银十五万两、祠碟千道、绢万匹，以及户部银五千两，给付督视行府赵葵调用。
English: On the 27th, the outflow of ten million yuan, one hundred and fifty thousand taels of silver, one thousand taels of pottery, ten thousand horses, and five thousand taels of household silver were transferred to Zhao Kwai, the inspector of payment.

古文：五月甲寅，宁淮军统制张忠戍浮山，手搏北将，俱溺水死，赠武略大夫，官一子承信郎，缗钱五千给其家。
现代文：五月初二，宁淮军统制张忠戍守浮山，与元将搏斗，双方溺水而死，赠张忠为武略大夫，任其一子为承信郎，赐给其家五千络钱。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, Zhang Zhong, the commander of the Ninghuai Army, led his troops to defend Fushan. He fought with the former general, and both died of drowning. Zhang Zhong was given the title of Wuliao Doctor, one of his sons was named Chengxin Lang, and his family was given five thousand rupees.

古文：祈雨。
现代文：祈祷降雨。
English: Pray for rain.

古文：壬申，以吴潜兼权参知政事。
现代文：二十日，以吴潜兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 20th, with Wu Qian acting as acting governor.

古文：乙亥，御集英殿策士，诏求直言弭旱。
现代文：二十三日，到集英殿策试士人，下诏寻求直言以消灭早灾。
English: On the 23rd, an envoy came to Shuei-den to seek his candid opinion in order to eliminate the early disaster.

古文：六月癸巳，赐礼部进士张渊微以下五百二十七人及第、出身有差。
现代文：六月十二日，赐礼部进士张渊微以下五百二十七人及第、出身不等。
English: On June 12, five hundred and twenty-seven people from various ranks and backgrounds, including Zhang Yuanwei, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, were conferred the title.

古文：丙申，以旱，避殿减膳。
现代文：十五日，因早灾避殿减膳。
English: On the fifteenth day, due to the early disaster, the temple was evacuated and meals were reduced.

古文：诏中外臣僚士民直陈过失，毋有所讳。
现代文：诏令中外臣僚士民直言朝政过失，不要有所隐讳。
English: In the imperial edict, the foreign ministers, officials and people should speak frankly about the mistakes of the DPRK government, and should not hide anything.

古文：戊申，诏： 旱势未释，两淮、襄、蜀及江、闽内地，曾经兵州县，遣骼暴露，感伤和气，所属有司收瘗之。 
现代文：二十七日，下诏： 早灾势头没有减弱，两淮、襄、蜀和江、闽内地，曾经遭受兵火州县，遗骸暴露，感伤和气，管辖地区内有关部门予以收埋。 
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: The momentum of the early disaster has not weakened, and the two Huai, Xiang, Shu and Jiang rivers and the inland areas of Yunnan have been affected by the Hechu County, the remains are exposed, sentimental and warm, and the relevant departments in the jurisdiction area will be buried.

古文：秋七月己未，太阴犯心。
现代文：秋七月初八，月亮侵犯心宿。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month of autumn, the moon invades the heart.

古文：乙丑，吴潜罢。
现代文：十四日，吴潜被罢免。
English: On the 14th, Wu Qian was dismissed.

古文：丁卯，以别之杰参知政事，郑寀同签书枢密院事。
现代文：十六日，以别之杰为参知政事，郑朋为同签书枢密院事。
English: On the 16th, with Beizhe Jie as the co-chairman of the political affairs, Zheng Peng as the co-signer of the Privy Council.

古文：己卯，吴潜依旧端明殿学士、知福州、福建安抚使。
现代文：二十八日，吴潜依旧为端明殿学士、福州知州、福建安抚使。
English: On the 28th, Wu Qian was still a bachelor of Duanming Palace, Fuzhou Chizhou, and Fujian Pacifying Envoy.

古文：八月甲申，郑寀罢。
现代文：八月初四，郑朋被罢免。
English: On August 4th, Zheng Peng was dismissed.

古文：辛卯，雨。
现代文：十一日，降雨。
English: On the 21st, it rained.

古文：辛丑，前彭州守臣宇文景讷死事，诏赠官、进三秩，官一子下州文学。
现代文：二十一日，前彭州守臣宁文景呐为国战死，下诏赠官、进三秩，任其一子为下州文学官。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Ning Wenjing, the former Pengzhou governor, died in battle for the country. He was awarded an official title and three ranks, and one of his sons was appointed as a literary official of Shimonoshu.

古文：壬寅，诏监司、守臣议荒政以振乏绝，租税合蠲减者具实来上。
现代文：二十二日，下诏监司、守臣讨论荒政贩济贫乏，租税符合减免的情况以实上报。
English: On the 22nd, the next day, the inspector and the courtier discussed the poor and the poor, and reported the tax reduction and exemption.

古文：甲辰，高定子薨，赠少保。
现代文：二十四日，高定子去世，赠少保。
English: On the 24th, Takasada passed away and was given the title of Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：丙午，蔡抗进其父沈《尚书解》。
现代文：二十六日，蔡抗进呈其父蔡沈著淌书解。
English: On the 26th, Cai Nianjin presented his father, Cai Shen, with an explanation of the book.

古文：九月丙辰，有流星出于室。
现代文：九月初六，有流星出现在室宿。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, a meteor appeared in Murojuku.

古文：癸酉，雷。
现代文：二十三日，打雷。
English: On the 23rd, there was thunder.

古文：冬十月辛巳，太白昼见。
现代文：冬十月初二，太白星白天显现。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the Taibai Star appears in the daytime.

古文：己酉，台臣言添差、抽差、摄局、须入、奏辟、改任、荐举、借补、旷职、匿过十弊。
现代文：三十日，台臣议论添差、抽差、摄局、须人、奏辟、改任、荐举、借补、旷职、匿过十弊。
English: On the 30th, the Taishin discussed the ten evils of adding posts, subtracting posts, camera stations, subordinates, reporting, reassigning, recommending, loaning, absenteeism, and hiding.

古文：十一月丁巳，诏： 茶陵知县事黄端卿为郴寇所害，进官三秩，官一子将仕郎，立庙衡州。 
现代文：十一月初八，下诏： 茶陵知县事黄端卿为郴寇所害，进官三级，任其一子为将仕郎，在衡州为他立庙。 
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, the following edict was issued: Huang Duanqing, the prefect of Chaling County, was victimized by a bandit, promoted to the third level, appointed one of his sons as a general, and built a temple for him in Hengzhou.

古文：十二月辛巳，李鸣复卒。
现代文：十二月初二，李鸣复去世。
English: On December 2, Li Mingfu passed away.

古文：壬辰，诏： 太学生程九万自北脱身来归，且条上边事，赐迪功郎。 
现代文：十三日，下诏： 太学生程九万从元军营中脱身来归，而且陈述边事，赐给迪功郎。 
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued: Taisei student Cheng Jiuyuan escaped from the former military camp and returned, and also reported side matters and gave them to Di Gonglu.

古文：八年春二月丁亥，赵葵言吕文德洎诸将解泗州之围有功，诏补转推赏有差。
现代文：淳八年春二月初九，赵葵说吕文德和诸将解泅州之围有功，诏令补转官资、施加恩赏不等。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th year of the Spring, Zhao Kwai said that Lü Wende and other generals had contributed to the relief of the siege of Bozhou, and issued a decree to supplement the transfer of government funds and impose rewards.

古文：戊子，太阴生黄白晕。
现代文：初十，月亮周围出现黄白光圈。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a yellow-white aperture appeared around the moon.

古文：癸巳，雨雹。
现代文：十五日，降冰雹。
English: On the 15th, hail fell.

古文：乙未，福州福安县民罗母年过百岁，特封孺人，复其家。敕有司岁时存问，以厚风化。
现代文：十七日，福州福安县百姓罗氏母亲年过百岁，特封孺人，免除其家赋役，命令有关部门岁时节令慰问抚恤，以厚风化。
English: On the 17th, the people of Fu'an County, Fuzhou, exempted the mother of Luo Shi, who was over 100 years old, from her household service and ordered the relevant departments to give her a seasonal condolence allowance when she was 100 years old.

古文：辛丑，赵葵表： 招、泗断桥，将士用命，兵退。
现代文：二十三日，赵葵上表： 招、泅断桥，将士用命，击退元军。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Kwai wrote on the wall: Recruit, break the bridge, use the lives of soldiers to repel the Yuan army.

古文：陈奕、谭涓玉、王成等战涡河、龟山有劳，闻其步兵多山东人，遂调史用政等袭胶州，复袭高密县，以牵制侵淮之师。 
现代文：陈奕、谭涓玉、王成等在涡河、龟山与元军作战，有战功，听说其中步兵多是山东人，于是调遣史用政等袭击胶州，又袭击高密县，以牵制侵略两淮的元军。 
English: Chen Yi, Tan Yuanyu, Wang Cheng and others fought against the Yuan army in Turuhe and Guishan, and achieved great military feats. It is said that most of the infantrymen were from Shandong. Therefore, they dispatched Shi Yizheng and others to attack Jiaozhou and Gaomi County to deter the Yuan army from invading the two provinces.

古文：诏趣上立功将士等第、姓名推赏。
现代文：下诏尽快上报立功将士等第、姓名施加恩赏。
English: The following edict shall be issued as soon as possible to report the number and name of the meritorious soldiers, etc. to impose a reward.

古文：乙丑，雨雹。
现代文：乙丑日，降冰雹。
English: On the third day of the new year, hail fell.

古文：甲戌，诏： 先锋军统制田智润泗州潮河坝之战，父子俱死于兵，赠智润修武郎，子承节郎，更官其一子承信郎，给缗钱五千恤其家。 
现代文：二十六日，下诏： 先锋军统制田智润在泅州潮河坝作战，父子都死于战场，赠田智润修武郎，其子赠承节郎，另外任其一子为承信郎，给络钱五千抚恤其家。 
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: Tian Zhirong, commander of the vanguard army, fought in the Chaohe Dam in Zhangzhou. Both father and son died on the battlefield. Tian Zhirong gave gifts to Shouwuro, his son gave gifts to Chengjiero, and his other son gave gifts to Chengxinro. He gave 5,000 yuan to his family as a pension.

古文：夏四月庚辰，诏淮东制置司于泗州立庙，祠夏皋及张忠、田智润父子，赐额以旌忠节。
现代文：夏四月初三，诏令淮东制置司在泅州立庙，纪念夏皋和张忠、田智润父子，赐匾额以表彰忠节义士。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, Huai Dong issued a decree to set up an office in the state temple of Lu, to commemorate Xia Yu, Zhang Zhong and Tian Zhirun, and to award a plaque to commend the loyalists of the loyal festival.

古文：丁亥，赠朝奉郎程克己妻王氏同没王事，进赠安人。
现代文：初十，赠朝奉郎程克己妻王氏同死于兵火，进赠安人。
English: At the beginning of the 10th year of the Heian period, he was given the title of Cho hongro by Cheng Kechi, whose wife Wang Shi also died in the war, and he was given the title of Ahnin.

古文：五月癸丑，赵葵进三秩。
现代文：五月十六日，赵葵进升三级。
English: On May 16, Zhao Kwai was promoted to the third grade.

古文：六月乙酉，日生赤黄晕周匝。
现代文：六月初九，太阳周围有赤黄光圈环绕。
English: On the 9th of June, the sun is surrounded by a red-yellow halo.

古文：戊戌，以徐鹿卿为枢密使兼参知政事兼侍讲。
现代文：二十二日，以徐鹿卿为枢密使兼参知政事兼侍讲。
English: On the 22nd, Lord Xu Lu was appointed as a Privy Counsellor, Councillor of State, and Assistant Speaker.

古文：甲辰，有流星出河鼓，大如太白。
现代文：二十八日，有流星出没河鼓星，大如太白星。
English: On the 28th, a meteor appeared in the constellation of the River Drum, as large as the Great White Star.

古文：秋七月戊申，太白入井。
现代文：秋七月初三，太白星进人井宿。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, Tai Bai Xing entered Jinjing Lodge.

古文：辛亥，以王伯大参知政事，应彳繇同知枢密院事，谢方叔签书枢密院事，史宅之同签书枢密院事，赵与资政殿学士，依旧知临安府、浙西安抚使。
现代文：初六，以王伯大参知政事，应租同知枢密院事，谢方叔签书枢密院事，史宅之为同签书枢密院事，赵与袜为资政殿学士，依旧知临安府、浙西安抚使。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Wang Bo, a senior lecturer at the University of Political Science, was appointed to the Privy Council, Xie Fang, an uncle, signed the Privy Council, Shi Zhu, a scholar, signed the Privy Council, and Zhao He, a scholar at the Palace of Capital and Political Affairs, was appointed to the Lin'an Prefecture and the West Zhejiang Pacifying Envoy.

古文：癸酉，王伯大罢为资政殿学士、知建宁府。
现代文：二十八日，王伯大罢为资政殿学士、建宁知府。
English: On the 28th, Wang Boda graduated from the University of Political Science and became an academician of Jianning Prefecture.

古文：九月辛酉，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：九月十七日，祭祀明堂，大赦。
English: On September 17th, the memorial service at Myeongdong ended, and there was a general amnesty.

古文：雷。
现代文：打雷。
English: Thunder.

古文：冬十月甲戌朔，别之杰三疏乞归田里，诏以资政殿大学士知绍兴府。
现代文：冬十月初一，别之杰三次请求解职归田，下诏以资政殿大学士身份知绍兴府。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Beizhijie requested to be relieved of his duties and returned to the field three times, and issued an edict to leave Shaoxing Prefecture as a scholar of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：乙亥，应彳繇、谢方叔并兼参知政事。
现代文：初二，应租、谢方叔为兼参知政事。
English: In the second year of junior high school, it is necessary to rent, and Uncle Xie Fang is also a member of the government.

古文：己卯，余玠言： 都统制张实等以战功，承制便宜与官三转，给刺史象符、金银器二百两、银三百两、缗钱一万，余将士依等第转官，给金银符、钱帛有差。 
现代文：初六，余说： 都统制张实等因立有战功，秉承朝廷命令给他转三官，给刺史象符、金银器二百两、银三百两、络钱一万，其余将士依等第转官，给金银符、钱帛不等。 
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Yu said, "District commander Zhang Si and other generals were promoted to the third rank because of their distinguished war service, and they were given the order of the imperial court to be promoted to the third rank. They were given the historical symbols, 200 taels of gold and silver, 300 taels of silver and 10,000 rupees. The other generals were promoted to the third rank according to their rank, and they were given gold and silver symbols and money bags.

古文：诏命词、给告身付之。
现代文：诏令给付命词和任命书。
English: The imperial edict issued a decree and a letter of appointment.

古文：九年春正月乙巳，孟启授庆远军节度使，进封益国公。
现代文：淳九年春正月初二，赵孟启授为庆远军节度使，进封益国公。
English: On the second day of the first month of the first month of the ninth year of the Spring, Zhao Mengqi was appointed as the Qingyuan Army's festival envoy, and became the governor of Fongyi Province.

古文：庚申，诏周世宗八世孙柴彦颖补承务郎，袭封崇义公。
现代文：十七日，下诏周世宗八世孙柴彦颖补承务郎，袭封崇义公。
English: On the 17th, Zhou Shizong's eighth-generation grandson, Shibahiko Ying, issued the following edict to succeed to the throne of Chongyi.

古文：辛酉，诏两淮、京湖沿江旷土，军民从便耕种，秋成日官不分收，制帅严劝谕觉察。 
现代文：十八日，下诏：两淮、京湖沿江旷土，军民随便耕种，秋成后官府不收租税，制帅官要严格查访。
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued: the two Huai Mountains and the Jinghu along the river are open land, the military and the people can cultivate at will, the government will not collect taxes after the autumn, and the commanding officer should strictly visit.

古文：癸亥，诏给官田五百亩，命临安府创慈幼局，收养道路遗弃初生婴儿，仍置药局疗贫民疾病。
现代文：二十日，下诏给官田五百亩，命令临安府创设慈幼局，收养道路上被遗弃的初生婴儿，并且设置药局治疗贫民疾病。
English: On the 20th, an edict was issued to allocate 500 mu of government-owned land, and Lin'an was ordered to establish a child welfare bureau to adopt newborn babies abandoned on the road, and a pharmacy to treat diseases of the poor.

古文：乙丑，雨雹。
现代文：二十二日，降冰雹。
English: On the third day of the new year, hail fell.

古文：丁卯，许应龙薨。
现代文：二十四日，许应龙去世。
English: On the 24th, Xu Yinglong passed away.

古文：己巳，范钟薨，赠少保，谥文肃。
现代文：二十六日，范钟去世，赠少保，溢号文肃。
English: On the 26th, Fan Zhong passed away. He was awarded the title of "Junior Security Guard" and was awarded the honorary title of "Bunsu."

古文：辛未，诏以官田三百亩给表忠观，旌钱氏功德，仍禁樵采。
现代文：二十八日，下诏给表忠观三百亩官田，表扬钱氏功德，并且禁止樵采。
English: On the 28th, he issued an edict awarding 300 mu of government-owned land to Omochuangun, praising the merits of the Qian clan, and forbidding mining.

古文：闰二月甲辰，以郑清之为太师、左丞相兼枢密使，进封魏国公；赵葵为右丞相兼枢密使；应彳繇、谢方叔并参知政事；史宅之同知枢密院事。
现代文：闰二月初二，以郑清之为太师、左承相兼枢密使，进封魏国公；赵葵为右承相兼枢密使；应租、谢方叔为参知政事；史宅之为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month, Zheng Qing was appointed as the Grand Master, Left Vice-Minister and Privy Envoy, and appointed as the Wei Guogong; Zhao Kwai was appointed as the Right Vice-Minister and Privy Envoy; Ying Rong and Xie Fangxiu were appointed as the Councillors of State; Shizhu was appointed as the Tongzhi Privy Councilor.

古文：乙卯，郑清之五辞免太师，许之。
现代文：十三日，郑清之五次辞免太师，允准。
English: On the 13th, Zheng Qing's fifth resignation from the position of grandmaster was approved.

古文：三月癸未，以贾似道为宝文阁学士、京湖安抚制置大使。
现代文：三月十一日，以贾似道为宝文阁学士、京湖安抚制置大使。
English: On March 11th, Jia Li Dao was appointed as the Baobeng Pavilion Bachelor and the Beijing-Hubei Pacification Ambassador.

古文：乙酉，程元凤江、淮等路都大提点坑冶铸钱公事兼知饶州。
现代文：十三日，程元凤为江、淮等路都大提点坑冶铸钱公事兼知饶州。
English: On the thirteenth day, Cheng Yuanfeng went to Jiangsu, Huai and other provinces to raise funds for public works and to visit Zhiraozhou.

古文：丁亥，诏以四月朔日食，自二十一日避殿、减膳、彻乐。
现代文：十五日，下诏因四月一日日食，从本月二十一日起避殿减膳。夏四月初一，日食。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, due to the solar eclipse on the first day of April, it was decreed that from the twenty-first day of the month, meals would be reduced.

古文：夏四月壬寅朔，日有食之。庚戌，赵葵四辞免右丞相兼枢密使，诏不允。
现代文：初九，赵葵四次辞免右承相兼枢密使，下诏不允。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Zhao Kwai resigned four times from the post of Minister of the Right and Minister of the Privy Council, but was not allowed to resign.

古文：五月己丑，赵葵乞归田里，又不允。
现代文：五月十八日，赵葵请求解职归田，又没批准。
English: On May 18, Zhao Kwai's request to be relieved of his duties and return to the field was not approved.

古文：甲午，郑寀薨。
现代文：二十三日，郑朋去世。
English: On the 23rd, Zheng Peng passed away.

古文：六月壬戌昼，南方有星，急流至浊没，大如太白。
现代文：六月二十二日白天，南方有星，急流至浊宿消失，大如太白星。
English: On June 22nd, during the day, there was a star in the south, and the rapids disappeared as far as Oshuku. It was as big as a white star.

古文：丙寅，诏边郡各立庙一，赐额曰 褒忠 ，凡没于王事忠节显著者并祠焉，守臣春秋致祀。
现代文：二十六日，下诏边郡分别立一庙，赐额为褒忠。凡是为国战死，忠义节气显著者，并祠祀于庙，守臣春秋致祭。
English: On the 26th, a temple was separately established in the lower Zhaobian County, and awards were given to those who were loyal. Those who died for the country in war and showed remarkable loyalty were enshrined in the temple, and Shoucheng held a spring and autumn festival.

古文：秋七月壬辰，诏知吉州李义山更削三秩，监赃钱银纳安边所。
现代文：秋七月二十三日，下诏吉州知州李义山再削官三级，监赃钱银缴纳安边所。
English: On the 23rd day of the 7th month of autumn, Jizhou, Chizhou, and Lishan were further downgraded to third-level officials, and the money and silver tax was paid to Anbian.

古文：癸酉，太白犯进贤星。
现代文：癸酉日，太白星侵犯进贤星。
English: On the third day, Tai Bai Xing encroached on Jin Xian Xing.

古文：八月己酉，以吴潜为资政殿学士、知绍兴府、浙东安抚使。
现代文：八月初十，以吴潜为资政殿学士、绍兴知府、浙东安抚使。
English: On the 10th day of the 8th month, Wu Qian was appointed as the Vice-President of the Academy, the Governor of Shaoxing, and the East Zhejiang Pacifying Envoy.

古文：辛亥，诏趣赵葵治事，命吴渊宣谕赴阙。
现代文：十二日，下诏督促赵葵上任治事，命令吴渊催促赵葵到朝廷。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor issued an edict urging Zhao Kwai to take office and ordered Wu Yuan to urge Zhao Kwai to come to the imperial court.

古文：九月丙子，诏赵与提领户部财用，置新仓，积贮百二十万，名淳祐仓，许辟官四人。
现代文：九月初八，下诏赵与袜提领户部财用，设置新仓，积贮一百二十万石，称淳仓，允许置官四人。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month, Zhao and Sock were appointed to be in charge of the finance of the household department. A new warehouse was set up, storing 1.2 million koku, called Jun Cang, and four officials were allowed to be placed there.

古文：乙未，册命婉容阎氏为贵妃。
现代文：二十七日，册命婉容阎氏为贵妃。
English: On the 27th, her name was recorded as Wan Rong Yan.

古文：冬十月辛丑，太白入氐。
现代文：冬十月初四，太白星进人氏宿。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, Tai Bai Xing entered Mr. Jin's lodging.

古文：丁卯，谏臣周坦言：知建宁府杨栋任成都制幕时，尽载激赏库珍宝先遁，陷丁黼于死，致全蜀生灵涂炭。
现代文：三十日，谏臣周坦说： 建宁知府杨栋任成都制幕时，带走激赏库所有珍宝率先逃跑，陷害丁敞致死，导致四川全境生灵涂炭。 
English: On the 30th, the vassal Zhou Tan said: When Yang Dongren, the governor of Jianning, went to Chengdu to make a curtain, he took away all the treasures of the reward library and took the lead in escaping. He framed Ding Chang to death, causing the whole territory of Sichuan to be charred alive.

古文：诏褫栋阁职，罢新任。
现代文：下诏革除杨栋阁职，罢免新任。
English: The following edict removed Yang Dong from the post of cabinet minister and dismissed the newly appointed one.

古文：十一月辛未，太白入氐。
现代文：十一月初四，太白星进人氏宿。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, Taibai Xing entered Mr. Jin's lodging.

古文：壬申，有流星出自织女星。
现代文：初五，有流星出自织女星。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a meteor came from the star Vega.

古文：丙子，赵与资政殿学士、提领国用、浙西安抚使。
现代文：初九，赵与袜为资政殿学士、提领国用、浙西安抚使。
English: At the age of nine, Zhao and Sox were the scholars of the Capital and Political Affairs Hall, the leaders of the country, and the pacification envoys of Zhejiang and West China.

古文：癸未，应彳繇乞归田里，诏以资政殿学士知平江府。
现代文：十六日，应租请求归回故乡，诏令以资政殿学士知平江府。
English: On the 16th, he returned to his hometown at the request of the rent, and the imperial edict was issued to call Pingjiangfu the capital city.

古文：十二月己亥，以董槐兼侍读。
现代文：十二月初二，以董槐兼侍读。
English: On the second day of December, with Dong Jun and attendant reading.

古文：乙巳，以吴潜同知枢密院事兼参知政事，徐清叟签书枢密院事。
现代文：初八，以吴潜为同知枢密院事兼参知政事，徐清雯为签书枢密院事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wu Qian was appointed as Tongzhi Privy Councillor and Sanzhi Politician, and Xu Qingwen was appointed as Signing Privy Councillor.

古文：戊申，太白昼见。
现代文：十一日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 11th day, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：戊午，史宅之薨，赠少师。
现代文：二十一日，史宅之去世，赠少师。
English: On the 21st day of the month, Shizakucho passed away, leaving behind a young teacher.

古文：十年春正月甲午，应彳繇三乞归田里，与祠禄。
现代文：淳十年春正月二十八日，应租三次请求回到故乡，给与祠禄。
English: On the 28th day of the first month of the spring of the 10th year of the Jun era, he returned to his hometown at the request of the rent three times and was given a shrine stipend.

古文：二月乙卯，雨土。
现代文：二月十九日，降土。
English: On the 19th of February, the earth came down.

古文：三月癸未，赵葵辞，以为观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，奉朝请。
现代文：三月十七日，赵葵辞职，任命为观文殿大学士、醛泉观使兼侍读，依旧逢一日、五日朝见皇帝。
English: On March 17th, Zhao Kwai resigned and was appointed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and as an attendant of the Emperor. He continued to see the emperor in the morning of every fifth day.

古文：庚寅，以贾似道为端明殿学士、两淮制置大使、淮东安抚使、知扬州；余玠龙图阁学士，职任依旧；李曾伯徽猷阁学士、京湖安抚制置使、知江陵府。
现代文：二十四日，以贾似道为端明殿学士、两淮制置大使、淮安东抚使、扬州知州。余为龙图阁学士，职任依旧。李曾伯为徽酞阁学士、京湖安抚制置使、江陵知府。
English: On the 24th, Jia Li Dao was appointed as the academician of Duanming Palace, the ambassador of the two Huaihai Provinces, the ambassador of Huai'an East, and the ambassador of Yangzhou Chizhou. Yu was appointed as the academician of Longtu Pavilion, and his position remained the same. Li Zengbo was appointed as the academician of Huiyang Pavilion, the ambassador of Jinghu Anping Province, and the ambassador of Gangneung Prefecture.

古文：丙申，有流星夕陨。
现代文：三十日，有流星傍晚坠落。
English: On the 30th, a meteor fell in the evening.

古文：夏四月己酉，幸龙翔宫。
现代文：夏四月十三日，到龙翔宫。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of summer, I went to Longxiang Palace.

古文：五月丙寅朔，以福州观察使、提举佑神观善珘为保康军节度使、提举万寿观、嗣濮王；吴渊资政殿学士，依旧职任，与执政恩数。
现代文：五月初一，任命福州观察使、提举佑神观善舟为保康军节度使、提举万寿观、嗣攫王。吴渊为资政殿学士，职任依旧，给予执政待遇。
English: On the first day of May, Fuzhou observation envoy was appointed, Yu Shengkun and Zanzhou were promoted to festival envoys of the People's Liberation Army, Manshukun and King Sui were promoted, and Wu Yuan was appointed as a scholar of the House of Councillors, his position remained the same, and he was given the treatment of a ruler.

古文：癸未，贾似道言王登浚筑江陵城濠有劳，诏登初官选人，减举主三员。
现代文：十八日，贾似道说王登修筑江陵城壕有功劳，下诏王登初官选人，减少举主三人。
English: On the 18th, Jia Lian Dao said that Wang Den had made great contributions to the construction of the moat in Gangneung, and issued an edict to Wang Den to reduce the number of candidates for the post of first secretary by three.

古文：八月甲寅，台州大水。
现代文：八月二十一日，台州发生大水。
English: On August 21st, a big flood occurred in Taizhou.

古文：九月甲子朔，贾似道兼淮西安抚使。
现代文：九月初一，贾似道兼淮西安抚使。
English: On the first day of September, Jia Li Dao, concurrently the Huaixi pacification envoy, arrived.

古文：己巳，赐礼部进士方梦魁以下五百一十三人及第、出身有差。
现代文：初六，赐礼部进士方梦魁以下五百一十三人及第、出身不等。
English: On the 6th day of junior high school, 513 students from Mengkui and below were admitted to the ceremony club, with different grades and backgrounds.

古文：甲戌，进士第一名方梦魁改赐名逢辰。
现代文：十一日，进士第一名方梦魁改赐名逢辰。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Fang Mengkui, the first to be promoted, was renamed Feng Chen.

古文：戊寅，以严州水，复民田租。
现代文：十五日，因严州水灾，免除百姓田租。
English: On the 15th, due to the flood disaster in Yanzhou, the peasants were exempted from land rent.

古文：冬十月丁酉，诏郡邑间有水患，其被灾细民，随处发义仓振之。
现代文：冬十月初五，诏令郡邑间出现水患，遭灾小民，各地随时发义仓米贩济。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, there was a flood among the counties and towns in Daharu County, and the small people who were affected by the disaster were sent from all over the country to the rice warehouse to sell rice.

古文：辛酉，诏诸主兵官今后行罚，毋杖脊以伤人命。
现代文：二十九日，下诏各统帅军队的官员，今后实行处罚，不要杖脊以伤人命。
English: On the 29th, the commander-in-chief of the army issued an edict to the officials, saying that in the future, they should be punished, and they should not injure people's lives.

古文：十一月壬申，赵葵授特进，依旧观文殿大学士、判潭州、湖南安抚大使。
现代文：十一月十一日，赵葵授为特进，依旧为观文殿大学士、判潭州、湖南安抚大使。
English: On November 11th, Zhao Kwai Jiu was promoted to "special promotion" and is still a scholar of Guanwendeng University, a judge of Tanzhou, and a pacification ambassador of Hunan.

古文：壬午，雷。
现代文：二十一日，打雷。
English: On the 21st, there was thunder.

古文：癸未，以雷震非时，自二十四日避殿减膳。
现代文：二十二日，因打雷非时，从本月二十四日起避殿减膳。
English: On the 22nd, due to thunderstorms, from the 24th of this month, meals will be reduced.

古文：诏： 公卿大夫百执事各扬乃职，裨朕不逮。 
现代文：下诏： 公卿大夫百执事分别克尽职守。努力工作，补肤不逮。 
English: The following edict was issued: The hundred deacons of the Kugyo-dokuf were to perform their duties diligently. They should work hard and not be lazy.

古文：参知政事谢方叔、吴潜、签书枢密院事徐清叟并乞解机政，诏不允。
现代文：参知政事谢方叔、吴潜，签书枢密院事徐清雯都请求解除职务，下诏不允。
English: Councillors Xie Fangxiu and Wu Qian, and Privy Councillor Xu Qingwen, both of whom signed the letter, requested to be relieved of their duties, but this was not allowed.

古文：十二月壬辰朔，郑清之乞归田里，诏不允。
现代文：十二月初一，郑清之请求解职归田，下诏不允。
English: On the first day of December, Zheng Qing's request to be relieved of his duties and return to the field was denied.

古文：戊戌，太白、岁星合于危。
现代文：初七，太白星、岁星合于危宿。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Taibai Xing and Guoxing Xing meet in a dangerous place.

古文：丁巳，虹见。
现代文：二十六日，虹显现。
English: On the 26th, the rainbow appeared.

古文：十一年春正月丁卯，诏孟启改赐名孜，依前庆远军节度使，进封建安郡王。
现代文：淳十一年春正月初六，下诏赵孟启改赐名孜，依前为庆远军节度使，进封建安郡王。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 11th year of the Spring, Zhao Mengqi issued an edict to change his name, and he was appointed as the festival envoy of the Qingyuan Army, and became the King of Jian'an County.

古文：己丑，诏沿海沿江州郡，申严水军之制。
现代文：二十八日，下诏沿海沿江州郡，申严水军之制。
English: On the 28th, the coastal areas along Jiangzhou County were ordered to implement a strict naval system.

古文：上嘉纳之。二月乙未，左丞相郑清之等上《玉牒》、《日历》、《会要》及《光宗宁宗宝训》、《宁宗经武要略》。
现代文：监察御史程元凤说，资善堂应该选用重厚笃实之士，理宗高兴地采纳了。二月初五，左承相郑清之等呈上医牌、《日历、会要和优宗宁宗宝切卜、泞宗经武要略。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, the left successor, Zheng Qing, and others presented their medical cards, "Calendar," "Meeting," "Ning Zong Bao Chebu" and "Ning Zong Jingwu" to the Emperor.

古文：丁酉，诏清之等各进秩有差。
现代文：初七，下诏郑清之等分别进秩不等。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Zheng Qing's next edict, and so on, were promoted to different ranks.

古文：庚子，游似乞致仕，诏依旧观文殿大学士、进二秩。
现代文：初十，游侣请求退休，下诏依旧为观文殿大学士，进升二级。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the couple asked to retire, but the lower edict was still that he would be awarded a bachelor's degree from Kumonden University and promoted to the second grade.

古文：甲寅，太白犯昴。
现代文：二十四日，太白星侵犯晶宿。
English: On the 24th, Taibaixing invaded Jingju.

古文：乙卯，太白昼见。
现代文：二十五日，太白星白天显现。
English: Uh-oh, Taibai Star appears during the day.

古文：三月丁卯，少保、保宁军节度使、嗣濮王不擅薨，赠少师，追封新兴郡王。
现代文：三月初七，少保、保宁军节度使、嗣攫王赵不擅去世，赠少师，追封为新兴郡王。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the year, Zhao Nuxuan, Shao Bao, the envoy of the Baoning Military Festival, and the successor of King Zhao Nuxuan, passed away. He was given the title of Shao Shi, and was posthumously named the new county king.

古文：乙亥，雨土。
现代文：十五日，降土。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, rain fell from the sky.

古文：戊寅，以谢方叔知枢密院、参知政事，吴潜参知政事，徐清叟同知枢密院事。
现代文：十八日，任命谢方叔为知枢密院、参知政事，吴潜为参知政事，徐清雯为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 18th, Uncle Xie Fang was appointed to the Privy Council and the post of Councillor, Wu Qian to the post of Councillor, and Xu Qingwen to the post of Councillor of the Privy Council.

古文：辛巳，城宝应，诏移一军戍守。李庭芝进一秩，将士推恩有差。
现代文：二十一日，筑宝应城，下诏移一军戍守；李庭芝进升一级，将士施加恩赏不等。
English: On the twenty-first day, Tsukuba Yingcheng was moved down to a garrison; Li Tingzhi was promoted to the first grade, and rewards were given to his soldiers.

古文：俞兴升成都安抚副使、知嘉定府，任责威、茂、黎、雅边防。
现代文：俞兴升为成都安抚副使、嘉定知府，担任威、茂、黎、雅四州边防重任。
English: He was promoted to the vice-envoy of Chengdu pacification and the governor of Jiading, and served as an important border guard in the four states of Wei, Mao, Lijiang and Ya.

古文：夏四月戊戌，潭州民林符三世孝行，一门义居，福州陈氏，笄年守志，寿逾九袠，诏皆旌表其门。
现代文：夏四月初八，潭州百姓林符三世孝行，一门义居，福州陈氏，初成年时即谨守志节，寿逾九十，下诏表彰其门。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, the people of Tanzhou Lin Fu III were filial, and the Fuzhou Chen clan, who had been keeping their vows since their first year of adulthood and were over 90 years old, were commended by the imperial edict.

古文：丁未，进《淳祐条法事类》凡四百三十篇，郑清之等各进二秩。
现代文：十七日，进呈婷条法事势共四百三十篇，郑清之等各进一级。
English: On the 17th, a total of four hundred and thirty articles of Ting's legal situation were submitted, and all of Zheng Qing's articles were promoted to the first level.

古文：六月甲午，四川余玠奏进北马五百，诏立功将士趣上姓名推恩。
现代文：六月初五，四川余奏进北马五百匹，下诏立功将士尽快上报姓名施加恩赏。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, Sichuan Yu-so sent 500 horses to the north, and issued an edict to reward the meritorious soldiers by reporting their names as soon as possible.

古文：丙申，高达带行遥郡刺史、权知襄阳府、管内安抚、节制屯戍军马。
现代文：初三，高达带行遥郡刺史、代理襄阳知府、管内安抚，节制屯戍军马。
English: On the third day of the first semester, Gao Gao led the expedition to the county of Yao County, acting as the governor of Xiangyang, pacifying the area, and restraining the military horses.

古文：乙巳，诏求遗书并山林之士有著述者，许上进。
现代文：十二日，诏求遗书和山林隐士有著述者，允许向朝廷推荐。
English: On the 12th, those who had written a will and a mountain hermit were allowed to recommend them to the imperial court.

古文：秋七月癸亥，太白昼见。
现代文：秋七月初四，太白星白天显现。
English: On the fourth day of the seventh month of autumn, the white star appears in the daytime.

古文：丙寅，太阴入氐。
现代文：初七，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the moon enters Hitoshi's house.

古文：壬申，太白入井。
现代文：十三日，太白星进人井宿。
English: On the thirteenth day, Taibai Xing entered Jinjing.

古文：丁丑，有流星出于毕，大如太白。
现代文：十八日，有流星出现在毕宿，大如太白星。
English: On the 18th, a meteor appeared in Bi-juku, as big as a white star.

古文：庚辰，前签书枢密院事陈卓薨，赠少师。
现代文：二十一日，前签书枢密院事陈卓去世，赠少师。
English: On the twenty-first day, Chen Zhuo, the former secretary of the Privy Council, passed away and was awarded the title of "Junior Teacher."

古文：八月己丑朔，流星夕陨。
现代文：八月初一，流星傍晚坠落。
English: On the first day of August, a meteor fell in the evening.

古文：癸巳，太阴入氐。
现代文：初五，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the moon enters Hitoshi's house.

古文：丁酉，荧惑入井。
现代文：初九，荧惑星进人井宿。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the fluorescent planet enters the man's house.

古文：丁未，命吕文福庐州驻扎御前诸军都统制。
现代文：十九日，命令吕文福为庐州驻扎御前诸军都统制。
English: On the 19th, he ordered Lü Wenfu to take charge of the troops stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：庚戌，诏以故直龙图阁楼昉所著《中兴小传》百篇、《宋十朝纲目》并《撮要》二书，付史馆誊写，昉追赠龙图阁待制。
现代文：二十二日，下诏把已故直龙图阁楼意所著冲兴小传百篇、宋十朝纲目》和撮要二书交付史馆誊写，楼意被追赠为龙图阁待制。
English: On the 22nd, it was announced that the late Zhaolongtu Loft, author of "One Hundred Short Stories of Chongxing," "Song Dynasty Ten-Dynasty Outline" and two books of abstracts, would be handed over to the History Museum for copying. The building was posthumously donated to the Longtu Loft.

古文：辛亥，诏： 比览林光世《易范》，明《易》推星配象演义，有司其以礼津遣赴阙。 
现代文：二十三日，下诏： 近览林光世踢恋，懂得了易推星配象演义，有关部门以礼把他送到朝廷。 
English: On the 23rd, the following edict was issued: After having a closer look at Lin Guangxing's love life and understanding the meaning of the zodiac, the relevant departments sent him to the imperial court with courtesy.

古文：九月辛未，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：九月十四日，祭祀明堂，大赦。
English: On September 14th, the memorial service at Myeongdong ended, and there was a general amnesty.

古文：闰十月癸丑，太白入氐。
现代文：闰十月初七，太白星进人氏宿。
English: On the 7th day of the 10th month of the leap year, Tai Bai Xing entered Mr. Jin's lodging.

古文：癸酉，吴潜五疏乞罢机政，不允。
现代文：十七日，吴潜五次上疏请求解除职务，没有允准。
English: On the 17th, Wu Qian requested to be relieved of his duties five times, but his request was not granted.

古文：十一月丙申，京湖制司表都统高达等复襄、樊，诏立功将士三万二千七百有二人各官一转，以缗钱三百五十万犒师。
现代文：十一月十一日，京湖制司上表都统高达等收复襄、樊，下诏立功将士三万二千七百零二人分别转一官，以络钱三百五十万搞赏军队。
English: On November 11, the Beijing and Hubei Provincial People's Government announced that 32,700 meritorious soldiers would be promoted to higher ranks, and 3.5 million rupees would be awarded to the troops.

古文：甲辰，郑清之乞解机政，诏依前太傅、保宁军节度使充醴泉观使，封齐国公，仍奉朝请。
现代文：十九日，郑清之请解除职务，下诏依前为太傅、保宁军节度使充任醛泉观使，封为齐国公，依旧逢一日、五日朝见皇帝。
English: On the 19th, at the request of Zheng Qing, he was relieved of his duties. According to the following edict, he was promoted to Taifu, Baoning Army Festival Envoy, and appointed as Yuqing Quan Envoy. He was given the title of Qi Guogong, and still saw the emperor every morning on the 1st and 5th.

古文：己酉，诏承信郎陈思献书籍，赐官一转。
现代文：二十四日，下诏：承信郎陈思献书籍，赐转一官。
English: On the 24th, the following edict was issued: Zhenxin Lang Chen Si presented books and was given a post.

古文：庚戌，太师郑清之薨，赠尚书令，追封魏郡王，谥忠定。
现代文：二十五日，太师郑清之去世，赠尚书令，追封魏郡王，溢号忠定。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Grand Master Zheng Qingzhi passed away, presented Shang Shuling, posthumously named Wei Guo Wang, and awarded the title of Zhongding.

古文：甲寅，以谢方叔为左丞相，吴潜为右丞相。
现代文：二十九日，以谢方叔为左承相，吴潜为右承相。
English: On the 29th, Uncle Xie Fang was chosen as the left successor and Wu Qian as the right successor.

古文：乙卯，以徐清叟参知政事兼同知枢密院事，董槐端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
现代文：三十日，以徐清雯为参知政事兼同知枢密院事，董槐为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
English: On the 30th, Xu Qingwen was appointed as a member of the Council of State and a member of the Privy Council, and Dong Hao was appointed as a member of the Council of State and a member of the Privy Council.

古文：十二月戊辰，诏以八事训饬在廷，曰肃纪纲、用正人、救楮币、固边陲、清吏道、淑士气、定军制、结人心。
现代文：十二月十三日，诏令从八个方面严格要求在朝官员，这就是：肃纲纪、用正人、救褚币、固边防、清吏道、淑士气、定军制、结人心。
English: On December 13th, the imperial edict strictly required officials in the DPRK from eight aspects, namely: strict discipline, using honest people, saving money, strengthening border defense, clearing the way for officials, improving morale, establishing a military system, and winning hearts and minds.

古文：己卯，游似薨，赠少师，谥清献。
现代文：二十四日，游侣去世，赠少师，溢号清献。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Youku passed away, and was presented with the title of Shosho Shishi.

古文：十二年春正月癸巳，武功大夫王坚以复兴元功，转遥郡团练使。
现代文：淳十二年春正月初八，武功大夫王坚因收复兴元府功劳，转遥郡团练使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the spring of the 12th year of King Jun, the martial arts doctor Wang Jian was transferred to be a regimental drill sergeant of Yao County for his contribution to the revival of Yuanfu.

古文：辛丑，太学录杨懋卿以孝行卓异，诏表其门，以其事宣付史馆。
现代文：十六日，太学录杨愈卿因孝行卓异，下诏表彰其门，以其事迹给付史馆。
English: On the 16th day of the month, Yang Yuqing of Taishu Records commended his family for their outstanding filial piety, and presented them with a history museum for their deeds.

古文：癸丑，诏宰执议立方田，开沟浍，自近圻始。
现代文：二十八日，下诏宰执议立方田，开沟侩，从近郊开始。
English: On the 28th, the Lower Dazhao presided over the cubic field and opened the gully, starting from the suburbs.

古文：创置游击军，水步各半。
现代文：创置游击军、水军、步军各半。
English: Half of the guerrilla army, half of the naval army, and half of the infantry army will be created.

古文：二月乙卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse.

古文：巳未，诏陈显伯资善堂翊善，蔡抗资善堂赞读、翁甫资善堂直讲。
现代文：初五，下诏陈显伯为资善堂诩善，蔡抗为资善堂赞读，翁甫为资善堂直讲。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Chen Xianbo's next edict was to be read aloud, Cai Jian's was to be read aloud, and Weng Fu's was to be read aloud.

古文：壬午，诏襄、郢新复州县，赋税复三年。
现代文：二十八日，下诏襄、呈阵新近收复州县，赋税免除三年。
English: On the 28th, the Lower Zhao Xiang and the Upper Zhao Xiang newly conquered Fuzhou County and were exempted from paying taxes for three years.

古文：大元兵数万攻随、郢、安、复，京西马步军副总管马荣率将士战严窦山。
现代文：大元兵数万人进攻随、呈阵、安、复州，京西马步军副总管马荣率将士在严窦山作战。
English: Tens of thousands of Taiyuan soldiers followed the attack and took up positions in An and Fuzhou. Ma Rong, deputy head of the Beijing-Xi Ma Infantry Corps, led the soldiers to fight in Yan Dou Mountain.

古文：癸未，再战铜冶坪。
现代文：二十九日，再战铜冶坪。
English: On the 29th, they fought again at Tongye Ping.

古文：三月丁亥，又战子陵大脊山。
现代文：三月初三，又战于子陵大脊山。
English: On the third day of the third month of March, another battle was fought on Ziling Dajia Mountain.

古文：诏荣兵不满千，能御大难，赏官两转，进州钤，带行阁门祗候，赐金带。
现代文：下诏：马荣军不满千，能抗御大难，赏转两官，进升为州铃辖，带行阎门抵候，赐给金带。
English: The following edict: Ma Rong's army is less than a thousand, it can withstand great difficulties, it will be rewarded with two posts, promoted to Shuzhong jurisdiction, brought to the gate of hell, and given a gold belt.

古文：诸将王成、杨进各官两转升迁，余推恩有差。
现代文：诸将王成、杨进各转两官升迁，其余人施恩不等。
English: Generals Wang Cheng and Yang Jin were each promoted to higher posts, while the rest of the generals were less generous.

古文：丁未，守三氵义口诸将焚北屯积蓄，断其浮梁。
现代文：二十三日，三汉口诸将焚毁元军屯积储蓄，断其浮梁。
English: On the 23rd, the generals of the three Han dynasties burned the accumulated savings of the Yuan army and cut off its pontoons.

古文：夏四月庚申，有流星出自角、亢，大如太白。
现代文：夏四月初七，有流星出现在角宿、亢宿，大如太白星。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of summer, a meteor appeared over Kakunodate and Oita, as big as a white star.

古文：戊辰，诏襄、郢新复州郡，耕屯为急，以缗钱百万命京阃措置，给种与牛。
现代文：十五日，下诏襄、呈阵新近收复州郡，耕屯为主要任务，调拨一百万络钱命京湖统帅措置，给付种子和耕牛。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, under the command of General Zhao Xiang, the newly conquered Fuzhou County was assigned to the army, and the main task was to cultivate the county. One million yuan was allocated to pay for seeds and farm cattle.

古文：壬申，荧惑犯权星。
现代文：十九日，荧惑星侵犯权星。
English: On the 19th, the fluorescent planet violated the rights of the star.

古文：乙亥，葵抗兼侍立修注官。
现代文：二十二日，蔡抗兼侍立修注官。
English: On the 22nd, Cai Jian was also appointed as an attendant official.

古文：丙子，置池州游击水军。
现代文：二十三日，设置池州游击水军。
English: On the 23rd, the Chizhou Guerrilla Naval Force was established.

古文：五月甲申朔，祈雨。
现代文：五月初一，祈祷降雨。
English: On the first day of May, pray for rain.

古文：壬辰，诏申儆江防，每岁以葺战舰、练舟师勤惰为殿最赏罚。
现代文：初九，下诏严格江防，每年以修造战船、训练水军勤惰为官员将帅成绩好坏赏罚的标准。
English: In the ninth month of the lunar calendar, the emperor issued an edict on strict river defense. Every year, the construction of warships and the training of sailors to be diligent were the criteria for rewarding and punishing officials for their good or bad performance.

古文：乙巳，盗起信州玉山县。
现代文：二十二日，信州玉山县发生盗贼。
English: On the 22nd, a theft occurred in Yushan County, Shinshu.

古文：罢诸郡经界。
现代文：罢除各郡经界。
English: The counties' economic boundaries were abolished.

古文：戊申，太阴犯毕。
现代文：二十五日，月亮侵犯毕宿。
English: On the 25th, the moon encroached on the end of the night.

古文：六月癸亥，发米三万石振衢、信饥、玉山寇平。
现代文：六月十一日，发米三万石贩济瞥州、信州饥民。玉山县寇盗平定。
English: On June 11th, 30,000 koku rice traders from Jibetsu and Shinshu distributed rice to the starving people. The bandits in Yushan County were subdued.

古文：丙寅，严、衢、婺、台、处、上饶、建宁、南剑、邵武大水，遣使分行振恤存问，除今年田租。
现代文：十四日，严、瞥、姿、台、处、上饶、建宁、南剑、邵武发生大水，派人分别前往这些地区慰问贩济灾民，免除今年田租。
English: On the 14th, heavy water occurred in Yan, Biao, Zi, Tai, Chu, Shangrao, Jianning, Nanjian and Shaowu, and people were sent to these areas to console and help the victims, and this year's field rent was exempted.

古文：秋七月庚寅，太白、荧惑合于轸。
现代文：秋七月初八，太白星、荧惑星合于较宿。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Taibai Star and the Fluorescent Planet are in conjunction.

古文：八月己未，诏来年省试仍旧用二月一日，殿试用四月十五日以前，庶免滞留远方士子。
现代文：八月初七，下诏来年省试仍定在二月一日，殿试定在四月十五日以前，以免远方士人不能到达。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month, the next year's provincial exam is still scheduled for February 1st, and the hall exam is scheduled before April 15th, so that scholars from far away cannot arrive.

古文：己巳，诏以缗钱四十万振恤在京军民。
现代文：十七日，下诏以络钱四十万贩恤在京军民。
English: On the 17th, the emperor decreed that 400,000 shirt sellers in Beijing would be paid 400,000 rupees in rupees.

古文：丁丑，诏行《会天历》。
现代文：二十五日，下诏实行会天厉。
English: On the 25th, the next imperial edict implementation meeting was held.

古文：辛巳，诏改明年为宝祐元年。
现代文：二十九日，下诏改明年为宝元年。
English: On the 29th, the following edict changed the next year to the first year of the treasure.

古文：九月丁亥，少师、保康军节度使、嗣沂王贵谦薨，赠太傅，追封申王。
现代文：九月初六，少师、保康军节度使、嗣沂王赵贵谦去世，赠太傅，追封申王。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, Zhao Guiqian, a young teacher, the festival envoy of the Baokang Army, and the heir to the throne, passed away. He was given the title of Taifu, and the title of Shen Wang was conferred on him.

古文：戊戌，太白、填星合于箕。
现代文：十七日，太白星、填星合于箕宿。
English: On the 17th, Taibai Xing and Fufeng Xing rendezvoused at Pengshu.

古文：丙午，太白犯斗。
现代文：二十五日，太白星侵犯斗宿。
English: On the 25th, Taibaixing invaded Douxing.

古文：冬十月癸丑，以徐清叟参知政事，董槐同知枢密院事。
现代文：冬十月初二，以徐清雯参知政事，董槐为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 2nd day of October in winter, Xu Qingwen was appointed to the post of the President of the People's Republic of China, and Dong Hao was appointed to the post of the First Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：嗣濮王善珘薨，赠少师、追封咸宁郡王。
现代文：嗣攫王善升去世，赠少师、追封为咸宁郡王。
English: His heir, King Shansheng, died, and he was given the title of Shonshi (junior teacher) and the posthumous title of King of Xianning County.

古文：戊午，濮安懿王长孙善奂福州观察使、提举佑神观、嗣濮王。
现代文：初七，攫安爵王长孙赵善灸授为福州观察使、提举佑神观、嗣攫王。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Zhao Zenshong, the eldest son of the Duke of Anzhu, was awarded the title of Fuzhou Observation Envoy, the title of Yu Shenguan, and the title of the Heir of Anzhu.

古文：壬申，诏襄、樊已复，其务措置屯田，修渠堰。
现代文：二十一日，下诏襄、樊已经收复，重要的是要措置屯田，修筑渠堰。
English: On the twenty-first day, the lower Zhaoxiang and Yunnan have been recovered. It is important to measure the occupied fields and build the canal weir.

古文：十一月庚寅，吴潜罢。
现代文：十一月初十，吴潜被罢免。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month, Wu Qian was dismissed.

古文：丙申夜，临安火；丁酉夜，火乃熄。
现代文：十六日夜，临安发生火灾。十七日夜，火灾消灭。
English: On the evening of the 16th, a fire broke out in Lin'an. On the evening of the 17th, the fire was extinguished.

古文：戊戌，诏避殿减膳。
现代文：十八日，下诏避殿减膳。
English: On the 18th, the emperor decreed a reduction of meals in the palace.

古文：壬寅，诏求直言。
现代文：二十二日，下诏求直言。
English: On the 22nd, he issued the following edict.

古文：十二月乙卯，以吴潜为观文殿大学士、提举江州太平兴国宫。
现代文：十二月初五，以吴潜为观文殿大学士、提举江州太平兴国宫。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, Jiangsu Taiping Xingguo Palace was promoted with Wu Qian as a scholar of Guanwenden University.

古文：己未，诏追录彭大雅创城渝州功，复承议郎，官其子。
现代文：初九，下诏追录彭大雅创筑渝州城之功，恢复为承议郎，任其子为官。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the following edict recorded Peng Daya's contribution to the creation of the city of Chikuyu, reinstated him as a member of the council, and appointed his son as an official.

古文：癸亥，诏海神为大祀，春秋遣从臣奉命往祠，奉常其条具典礼来上。
现代文：十三日，诏令海神为大祀，春秋派遣从臣奉命前往祀祠，陈述祭祀典礼上报。
English: On the 13th, the emperor decreed that the god of the sea would be the main deity, and in the spring and autumn, he sent a vassal to the shrine to report on the sacrificial ceremony.

古文：壬申，太阴入氐。丁丑，立春，雷。
现代文：二十二日，月亮进人氏宿。二十七日，立春，打雷。
English: On the 22nd, the moon entered Mr. Hitoshi's house. On the 27th, the first day of spring, there was thunder.

古文：宝祐元年春正月庚寅朔，诏以艺祖嫡系十一世孙嗣荣王与芮之子建安郡王孜为皇子，改赐名禥，授崇庆军节度使，进封永嘉郡王。
现代文：宝元年春正月庚寅朔，下诏以太祖嫡孙十一世孙嗣荣王赵与丙之子建安郡王赵孜为皇子，改赐名甚，授为崇庆军节度使，进封永嘉郡王。
English: In the first month of the spring of the year of Baoyuan, Geng Yinshuo issued an imperial edict to make his great-great-great-great-great-great-grandson, 11th-generation grandson and heir, Rong Wang Zhao, and his son, Jian'an County King Zhao Ze, princes. He even changed their names and appointed them as festival envoys of the Chongqing Army, and they were given the title of Yongjia County King.

古文：制《资善堂记》赐皇子。
现代文：撰制馈善堂主己赐给皇子。
English: It was given to the prince by the master of the Fuzen-do hall.

古文：戊戌，日生戴气。
现代文：十九日，太阳周围出现戴气。
English: On the 19th, haze appeared around the sun.

古文：癸卯，大元兵渡汉江，屯万州，入西柳关。
现代文：二十四日，元兵渡过汉江，屯驻万州，进人西柳关。
English: On the 24th, the Yuan soldiers crossed the Han River, stationed in Wanzhou, and entered Xiliu Pass.

古文：高达调将士扼河关，上山大战，至鳖坑、石碑港而还。
现代文：高达调遣将士扼守河关，上山大战，至鳖坑、石碑港而回。
English: Gao Da dispatched soldiers to guard the estuary, go to the mountain battle, and return to the pit and the stone monument port.

古文：诏高达、程大元、李和各官两转，余恩赏有差。
现代文：下诏高达、程大元、李和各转两官，其余恩赏不等。
English: Gao Daozhao, Cheng Dayuan, Li He were each promoted to two posts, and the remaining rewards varied.

古文：二月己酉朔，日有食之。戊辰，陈垓贪赃不法，窜潮州。
现代文：二月初一，日食。二十日，陈该贪赃不法，贬窜潮州。
English: On the first day of February, the sun eclipsed. On the 20th, Chen Gai, a corrupt and lawless man, dethroned Chaozhou.

古文：辛未，罢尚书省，创置呈白房。
现代文：二十三日，罢除尚书省，创置呈白房。
English: On the 23rd, the Ministry of Education and Culture was abolished, and the White House was created.

古文：三月戊子，与芮授少师，加食邑七百户；希逦检少傅，加食邑五百户；与欢授少保，加食邑七百户；乃裕保康军节度使，加食邑五百户。
现代文：三月初十，赵与丙授为少师，加食邑七百户；赵希通为检校少傅，加食邑五百户；赵与腿授为少保，加食邑七百户；赵乃裕为保康军节度使，加食邑五百户。
English: At the beginning of March 10th, Zhao and C were awarded as junior teachers, adding 700 households of food; Zhao Xitong was awarded as junior school inspector, adding 500 households of food; Zhao and Leg were awarded as junior guards, adding 700 households of food; Zhao Naiyu was awarded as festival envoy of the Hokang Army, adding 500 households of food.

古文：丙申，别之杰薨，赠少师。
现代文：十八日，别之杰去世，赠少师。
English: On the 18th, Beizhijie passed away and was given the title of Junior Teacher.

古文：夏四月丁巳，有流星大如太白。
现代文：夏四月初十，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of summer, a meteor as big as Taibaixing appeared.

古文：五月甲午，诏余玠赴阙。
现代文：五月十七日，诏令余前往朝廷。
English: On May 17th, he went to the Imperial Court.

古文：乙未，诏侍从、台谏、给舍、制司各举帅才二人。
现代文：十八日，下诏侍从、台谏、给舍、制司分别举荐帅才二人。
English: On the 18th day of the following month, only two men were recommended by the attendant, the steward, the steward, and the steward.

古文：丁酉，荧惑、岁星合在昴。
现代文：二十日，荧惑星、岁星合在晶宿。
English: On the 20th, the fluorescent planet and the new year star coincide in the crystal lodge.

古文：己亥，赐礼部进士姚勉以下及第、出身有差。
现代文：二十二日，赐礼部进士姚勉以下及第、出身不等。
English: On the 22nd, the Ministry of Ceremonies bestowed awards on the following cadres, including Yao Zhen, and their ranks and backgrounds varied.

古文：六月戊申朔，江、湖、闽、广旱。
现代文：六月初一，江、湖、闽、广发生早灾。
English: On the first day of June, an early disaster occurred in Jiangsu, Hubei, Fujian and Guangxi.

古文：庚戌，四川制司言余玠疾革，诏玠资政殿学士，与执政恩数。
现代文：初三，四川制司报告说余患病，下诏余为资政殿学士，给予执政待遇。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Sichuan Bureau of Statistics reported that Yu was ill. The next day, Yu was awarded the title of "Bachelor of Finance and Administration" and was given the treatment of a ruler.

古文：辛亥，以贾似道为资政殿大学士，李曾伯端明殿学士、职任依旧。
现代文：初四，以贾似道为资政殿大学士，李曾伯为端明殿学士，职任依旧。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Jia Li Dao was appointed as a Scholar of Jia Zheng Dian University, and Li Zeng Bo was appointed as a Scholar of Duan Ming Dian University.

古文：庚申，以余晦为司农卿、四川宣谕使。
现代文：十三日，任命余晦为司农卿、四川宣谕使。
English: On the 13th, Yu Yu was appointed as the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and the Envoy to Sichuan.

古文：祈雨。
现代文：祈祷降雨。
English: Pray for rain.

古文：秋七月壬午，王伯大薨。
现代文：秋七月初六，王伯大去世。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, Wang Boda passed away.

古文：丙戌，蔡抗兼资善堂翊善，施退翁兼资善堂直讲。
现代文：初十，蔡抗兼资善堂诩善，施退翁兼资善堂直讲。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Cai Jian and Shizendong gave a speech, and Shi Tieweng and Shizendong gave a speech.

古文：庚寅，温、台、处三郡大水，诏发丰储仓米并各州义廪振之。
现代文：十四日，温、台、处三州发生大水，下诏发丰储仓米和各州义仓贩济饥民。
English: On the 14th, heavy water occurred in three prefectures of Wen, Taizhou and Shandong, and the government issued an order to increase the supply of stored rice and the number of stores in each prefecture to help the hungry.

古文：癸巳，诏余玠以兴元归附之兵分隶本路诸州都统，务抚存之，仍各给良田，制司济以钱粟。
现代文：十七日，下诏余以兴元归附之兵，分别录归本路各州都统，务必安抚慰问，并各给良田，制司济以钱粟。
English: On the seventeenth day of the following month, the soldiers who had been annexed by the Qing Dynasty were separately recorded in the capital cities of all the provinces along the main road. It was necessary to appease the condolences, and to give good fields to each of them, and to subsidize them with money.

古文：甲午，余玠卒，赠官五转。
现代文：十八日，余去世，赠转五官。
English: On the 18th, Yu passed away, and five posts were transferred to him.

古文：庚子，以董槐兼参知政事。
现代文：二十四日，以董槐兼参知政事。
English: On the 24th, he was appointed to the post of vice-premier.

古文：癸卯，诏抚谕四川官吏军民。
现代文：二十七日，下诏抚谕四川官吏军民。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued to the officials, soldiers and people of Sichuan.

古文：八月丁未朔，以马光祖为司农卿、淮西总领财赋。
现代文：八月初一，以马光祖为司农卿、淮西总领财赋。
English: On the first day of August, Ma Guangzu was appointed as the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and the General Manager of Huaxi Province.

古文：甲寅，起居郎萧泰来出知隆兴府。
现代文：初八，起居郎萧泰来出知隆兴府。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, his housemate, Xiao Tai, came to Longxingfu.

古文：先是，起居舍人牟子才与泰来并除，子才四疏辞，极陈泰来奸险汙秽，耻与为伍，泰来不得已，请祠，遂予郡。
现代文：先是起居舍人牟子才与萧泰来一起授官，牟子才四次上疏辞免，极陈萧泰来奸险污秽，耻与为伍，萧泰来不得已请求祠官，于是出知地方官。
English: First of all, it was Muzi, who lived in the same house as Xiao Taira, who was awarded the post together with Xiao Taira. Muzi was dismissed four times. Chen Xiao Taira was the most treacherous, filthy, shameless, and complicit. Xiao Taira had no choice but to ask for an ancestral hall official, and then found out about the local official.

古文：丙辰，以余晦权刑部侍郎、四川安抚制置使、知重庆府兼四川总领财赋。
现代文：初十，任命余晦代理刑部侍郎、四川安抚制置使、重庆知府兼四川总领财赋。
English: At the age of ten, he was appointed as the deputy of the Criminal Investigation Department, the Commissioner of the Sichuan Pacification System, the Governor of Chongqing, and the Chief Treasurer of Sichuan.

古文：乙丑，行皇宋元宝钱。
现代文：十九日，推行皇宋元宝钱。
English: On the 19th, the implementation of the Emperor Song Yuan treasure money.

古文：九月壬午，程元凤升兼侍读，牟子才升兼侍讲。
现代文：九月初六，程元凤升兼侍读，牟子才升兼待讲。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month of the year, Cheng Yuanfeng rose and attended the lecture, while Mu Zi rose and waited for the lecture.

古文：壬辰，城夔门。
现代文：十六日，修筑夔门城。
English: On the 16th, the construction of Shimen Castle began.

古文：太阴入毕。
现代文：月亮进人毕宿。
English: The moon is setting.

古文：冬十月丙午朔，诏出缗钱二百万，振恤京城军民。
现代文：冬十月初一，下诏出络钱二百万，贩恤京城军民。
English: On the first day of October in winter, two million rupees in rupee coins were minted, and the number of soldiers and civilians in the capital who sold hams increased.

古文：十一月丙子朔，诏奖谕襄阳守臣高达。
现代文：十一月初一，下诏奖谕襄阳守臣高达。
English: On the first day of November, the next imperial edict awarded the title of Xiangyang Shoucheng to Gao.

古文：己丑，贾似道献所获良马，赐诏褒嘉，其将士增秩、赏赉有差。
现代文：十四日，贾似道进献所获良马，赐诏书予以表扬，将士增秩赏赐不等。
English: On the 14th, Jia Liang was presented with a fine horse by Dao Jin, and was given an imperial edict to commend the horse. He was also awarded a promotion to the rank of general.

古文：十二月乙卯，册瑞国公主。
现代文：十二月十一日，册封瑞国公主。
English: On December 11th, she was officially crowned Princess of Sweden.

古文：庚申，刘伯正薨，赠五秩。
现代文：十六日，刘伯正去世，赠给五秩。
English: On the 16th, Liu Bozheng passed away, and was given five ranks.

