古文：安思阎皇后讳姬，河南荥阳人也。
现代文：安思阎皇后阎姬，河南荥阳人。
English: An Siyan, Empress of Yanji, a native of Shenyang, Henan Province.

古文：祖父章，永平中为尚书，以二妹为贵人。
现代文：祖父阎章，永平中为尚书，以二妹为贵人。
English: Grandfather Yan Zhang, Yongping Middle is Shangshu, with the second sister as the noblewoman.

古文：章精力晓旧典，久次，当迁以重职，显宗为后宫亲属，竟不用，出为步兵校尉。
现代文：阎章精晓旧典，长久地得不到位次，理当升迁重要的职务，但显宗明帝认为他是后宫亲属，竟然不用，出任步兵校尉。
English: Yan Zhang was well versed in the old classics, and had not been promoted for a long time. He should have been promoted to an important position, but Emperor Xianzong thought that he was a relative of the harem, and he did not have to, he was appointed as an infantry captain.

古文：章生畅，畅生后。
现代文：阎章生阎畅，阎畅生皇后阎姬。
English: Yan Zhang begat Yan Chang, and Yan Chang begat Empress Yan Ji.

古文：后有才色。
现代文：阎姬有才华和美丽的容貌。
English: Yan Ji is talented and beautiful.

古文：元初元年，以选入掖庭，甚见宠爱，为贵人。
现代文：安帝元初元年，因以选入掖庭，很得宠爱，以为贵人。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Andean era, because he was elected to the imperial court, he was very favored and considered a noble.

古文：二年，立为皇后。
现代文：元初二年，立为皇后。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, she became empress.

古文：后专房妒忌，帝幸宫人李氏，生皇子保，遂鸩杀李氏。
现代文：阎皇后一心想独占安帝专宠，深怀妒忌，安帝幸宫人李氏，生皇子刘保，阎皇后就鸩杀李氏。
English: The Empress Yan was so jealous that she wanted to monopolize the favors of Emperor An that she killed Emperor An's concubine Li and his son Liu Bao.

古文：三年，以后父侍中畅为长水校尉，封北宜春侯，食邑五千户。
现代文：元初三年，任阎皇后父亲阎畅侍中为长水校尉，封为北宜春侯，食邑五千户。
English: In the first three years of the Yuan Dynasty, Yan Chang, who served as the queen's father, was appointed as the vice-chancellor of Changshui, and was given the title of North Yichun, with a population of 5,000 households.

古文：四年，畅卒，谥曰文侯，子显嗣。
现代文：元初四年，阎畅去世，谥号为文侯，子阎显继嗣。
English: In the first four years of the Yuan Dynasty, Yan Chang passed away, his posthumous name was Wen Hou, and his son Yan Xian became his successor.

古文：建光元年，邓太后崩，帝始亲政事。
现代文：安帝建光元年，邓太后去世，安帝开始亲理政事。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jiankuang's reign, Empress Dowager Deng died, and Emperor An began to personally manage the affairs of state.

古文：显及弟景、耀、晏并为卿校，典禁兵。
现代文：阎显及弟阎景、阎耀、阎晏都为卿校，掌管禁兵。
English: Yan Xian and his younger brothers, Yan Jing, Yan Yao, and Yan Xuan, were all high-ranking officials in charge of the Imperial Guard.

古文：延光元年，更封显长社候，食邑万三千五百户，追尊后母宗为荥阳君。
现代文：安帝延光元年，改封阎显为长社侯，食邑一万三千五百户，追尊阎皇后母宗为荥阳君。
English: In the first year of An Di's reign, Yan Xian was given the title of Choshu marquis, there were 13,500 households in the food village, and the queen mother of Queen Yan was named Shenyang.

古文：显、景诸子年皆童龀，并为黄门侍郎。
现代文：阎显、阎景的几个儿子都才八岁，并任为黄门侍郎。
English: Several sons of Yan Xian and Yan Jing were only eight years old, and were appointed as Yellow Gate attendants.

古文：后宠既盛，而兄弟颇与朝权，后遂与大长秋江京、中常侍樊丰等共谮皇太子保，废为济阴王。
现代文：阎皇后得到安帝的特别宠爱，兄弟也参与了朝政，阎皇后竟仍与大长秋江京、中常侍樊丰等共同谗害皇太子刘保，使其被废为济阴王。
English: Empress Yan was a special favorite of Emperor An, and her brothers were also involved in court politics. However, Empress Yan, together with the Grand Chancellor Qiu Jiangjing and the Vice-regent Zou Feng, conspired to assassinate the crown prince Liu Bao, causing him to be dethroned as the king of Jiyin.

古文：四年春，后从帝幸章陵，帝道疾，崩于叶县。
现代文：安帝延光四年春，阎皇后跟着安帝到章陵，安帝在途中生病，最后在叶县去世。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of An Di's reign, Empress Yan followed An Di to Zhangling. On the way, An Di fell ill and eventually died in Ye County.

古文：后、显兄弟及江京、樊丰等谋曰： 今晏驾道次，济阴王在内，邂逅公卿立之，还为大害。 乃伪云帝疾甚，徙御卧车。
现代文：阎皇后、阎显兄弟及江京、樊丰等谋划说 ：现在皇上在旅途上死了，济阴王在京城内，公卿们不期碰在一起，把他立为帝，岂不是一大祸害？ 
English: Empress Yan, brother Yan Xian, and the emperors of Jiangjing and Suifeng plotted and said, "Now that the emperor has died on his journey, and the king of Jieyin is in the capital, the nobles have unexpectedly come together and made him emperor. Isn't this a great calamity?"

古文：行四日，驱驰还宫。
现代文：于是谎称安帝病得厉害，抬到卧车上。走了四天，急急忙忙，车马拖载回京。
English: He then falsely claimed that Andi was seriously ill, and carried him to a sleeping car. He walked for four days, hurried, and was dragged back to Beijing.

古文：明日，诈遣司徒刘熹诣郊庙社稷，告天请命。
现代文：第二天，诈派司徒刘熹至郊庙社稷，告天请命。
English: The next day, he sent the fraudulent disciple Liu Ye to the suburban temple, where he pleaded for his life.

古文：其夕，乃发丧。
现代文：这天晚上，为安帝发丧。
English: That evening, a funeral was held for Andi.

古文：尊后曰皇太后。皇太后临朝，以显为车骑将军仪同三司。
现代文：尊阎皇后为皇太后，皇太后临朝，以阎显为车骑将军，仪制同于三公。
English: The Empress Yan is the empress dowager, the empress dowager is Lintao, and Yan Xian is the chariot and cavalry general. The ceremonial system is the same as that of the three princes.

古文：太后欲久专国政，贪立幼年，与显等定策禁中，迎济北惠王子北乡侯懿，立为皇帝。
现代文：阎太后想要长时间的专摄国政，贪立幼年，与阎显等定策禁中，迎济北惠王子北乡侯刘懿，被立为皇帝。
English: The Empress Dowager Yan wanted to be in charge of state affairs for a long time, she was greedy to rule from a young age, and she and Yan Xian were forbidden from making decisions. She welcomed the Prince of Beihui, the Prince of Beixiang, Liu Xuan, and he was made emperor.

古文：显忌大将军耿宝位尊权重，威行前朝，乃风有司奏宝及其党与中常侍樊丰、虎贲中郎将谢惲、惲弟侍中笃、笃弟大将军长史宓、侍中周广、阿母野王君王圣、圣女永、永婿黄门侍郎樊严等，更相阿党，互作威福，探刺禁省，更为唱和，皆大不道。
现代文：阎显等忌鮨大将军耿宝位尊权重，威行于安帝朝，于是微言示意管事人参奏耿宝及其同党中常侍樊丰、虎贲中郎将谢恽、恽弟侍中谢笃、笃弟大将军长史谢宓、侍中周广、和帝乳母野王君王圣、王圣女永、永婿黄门侍郎樊严等，彼此私恩，结党营私，互相作威作福，刺探禁中秘密，呼应唱和，大逆不道。
English: General Geng Bao, who was revered by Yan Xian and others, held a position of great power and authority in the Andean Dynasty. Therefore, the steward suggested that Geng Bao and his fellow party members, including the regular attendant Zou Feng, the middle brother of the tiger Zou Feng, the junior attendant of the tiger Zou Feng, the junior attendant of the tiger Zou Feng, the junior attendant of the great general Zou Guang, the junior attendant of the tiger Zou Feng, and the imperial wet nurse of the wild king, the holy king, the holy king's daughter Yong, and the eternal son-in-law of the yellow gate attend

古文：丰、惲、广皆下狱死，家属徙比景；宓、严减死，髡钳；贬宝为则亭侯，遣就国，自杀；王圣母子徙雁门。
现代文：樊丰、谢恽、周广都下狱死，家属流放比景；谢宓、樊严减去死罪，处以剃去头发，铁圈束颈的刑罚；贬耿宝为则亭侯，遣其就封国，逼耿宝自杀；王圣母子流放雁门。
English: Gongfeng, Xie Rong, and Zhou Guang all went to prison and died, and their families were exiled; Xie Rong and Rong Rong severely reduced the death penalty, and were sentenced to shave their hair and tie their necks with iron collars; they denounced Geng Bao as a prince, sent him to seal the country, and forced Geng Bao to commit suicide; the Queen Mother and her son were exiled to the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：于是景为卫尉，耀城门校尉，晏执金吾，兄弟权要，威福自由。
现代文：于是阎景为卫尉，阎耀为城门校尉，阎晏为执金吾，兄弟都居权要，作威作福，自由自在。
English: As a result, Yan Jing became the guard lieutenant, Yan Yao became the castle gate captain, and Yan Xun became the executioner. The brothers all wanted power and were free to do as they pleased.

古文：少帝立二百余日而疾笃，显兄弟及江京等皆在左右。
现代文：北乡侯刘懿立为皇帝两百多天，就病得很重，阎显兄弟及江京等都在左右。
English: After more than two hundred days as emperor, Liu Xuan, the lord of Beixiang, fell seriously ill. Yan Xian's brothers and Jiangjing were all around him.

古文：京引显屏语曰： 北乡侯病不解，国嗣宜时有定。
现代文：江京拉着阎显避人共语说 ：北乡侯的病是不会解除的，谁继承帝位应当及早定下来。
English: Jiang Jing pulled Yan Xian to avoid people and said together: the illness of Bei Xiang Hou will not be relieved, and who will inherit the throne should be determined as early as possible.

古文：前不用济阴王，今若立之，后必当怨，又何不早征诸王子，简所置乎？ 显以为然。
现代文：前此不立济阴王，现在如果把他立为帝，以后他一定会怀恨在心，何不赶紧征求众多的皇子，选拔一位合适而能继承帝位的呢？ 
English: In the past, he did not make Jijin king, but now if he makes him emperor, he will definitely hold a grudge in the future. Why not quickly solicit a large number of princes and select a suitable one to inherit the throne?

古文：及少帝薨，京白太后，征济北、河间王子。
现代文：阎显听了，觉得说得很对。等到少帝北乡侯去世，江京告诉阎太后，征召济北、河间王子。
English: Yan Xian heard this and thought it was very true. When the young emperor Bei Xianghou died, Jiangjing told Yan Taigo to conscript the princes of Jibei and Hema.

古文：未至，而中黄门孙程合谋杀江京等，立济阴王，是为顺帝。
现代文：但还没有来得及到达京城，而中黄门孙程等合谋杀了江京等，拥立济阴王，是为顺帝。
English: However, they did not have time to reach the capital, and Sun Cheng of the Middle Yellow Gate and others jointly murdered Jiangjing and others, and supported the establishment of King Jiyin, which was Shun Emperor.

古文：显、景、晏及党与皆伏诛，迁太后于离宫，家属徙比景。
现代文：阎显、阎景、阎晏及其同党伏诛，阎太后迁到离宫，家属流放到比景。
English: Yan Xian, Yan Jing, Yan Qi and his fellow party members were exiled to Fuxi, the Empress Yan moved to the Imperial Palace, and her family members were exiled to Qixing.

古文：明年，太后崩。在位十二年，合葬恭陵。
现代文：第二年，阎太后去世，在位十二年，与安帝合葬恭陵。
English: In the second year, Yan Taige passed away, after twelve years on the throne, and was buried together with Emperor An.

古文：帝母李氏瘗在洛阳城北，帝初不知，莫敢以闻。
现代文：顺帝刘保母亲李氏埋在洛阳城北，顺帝原来不知道，也没有哪一个敢告诉他。
English: Emperor Shun did not know that Liu Bao's mother Li was buried in the north of Luoyang City, and no one dared to tell him.

古文：及太后崩，左右白之，帝感悟发哀，亲至瘗所，更以礼殡，上尊谥曰恭愍皇后，葬恭北陵，为策书金匮，藏于世祖庙。
现代文：等到阎太后去世，身边人才告诉他，顺帝感触醒悟，心中悲哀，便亲到葬地，重新举行殡殓礼仪，上尊谥为恭愍皇后，葬恭北陵，为策书金匮，藏于世祖庙。
English: When Empress Yan passed away, the people around him told him that Emperor Shun was deeply moved and saddened, so they went to the burial site and re-held the funeral rites. The highest honor went to Empress Gongjun, and the second highest honor went to Bei Ling, and the third highest honor went to Jinshao, which was hidden in the ancestral temple.

古文：顺烈梁皇后讳妠，大将军商之女，恭怀皇后弟之孙也。
现代文：顺烈梁皇后梁女内，大将军梁商之女，恭怀皇后弟弟的孙女。
English: Shun Rong Liang is the granddaughter of Empress Liang, the daughter of General Liang Shang, and the granddaughter of the Queen's younger brother.

古文：后生，有光景之祥。
现代文：梁女内降生，日月光辉有祥瑞之象。
English: Liang Nieng was born, and the sun and moon shone with auspiciousness.

古文：少善女工。好《史书》，九岁能诵《论语》，治《韩诗》，大义略举。
现代文：梁女内少年时善于女工，好读《史书》，九岁能诵读《论语》，研习韩婴所传《诗经》，书中的大义都能领略。
English: When Liang was a teenager, she was good at women's work, good at reading the "History Book," able to recite the "Analects" at the age of nine, and study the "Song of Songs" passed down by Han Yu, and can appreciate the great meaning in the book.

古文：常以列女图画置于左右，以自监戒。
现代文：经常以列女图画放置于左右，自我监督和警戒。
English: Often with a row of female pictures placed to the left and right, self-supervision and vigilance.

古文：父商深异之，窃谓诸弟曰： 我先人全济河西，所活者不可胜数。
现代文：她父亲梁商十分惊异，暗地对他的弟弟们说 ：我们的祖先成全赈济了河西，存活的老百姓数也数不清。
English: Her father, Liang Shang, was very surprised and secretly said to his younger brothers: "Our ancestors have made great contributions to Hexi, and the number of surviving people is countless.

古文：虽大位不究，而积德必报。
现代文：虽当时皇上没有过问表彰，然积了阴德必然得到好的报应。
English: Although at that time the emperor did not ask for commendation, the accumulated vice inevitably received a good retribution.

古文：若庆流子孙者，倘兴此女乎？ 
现代文：假若吉庆泽被子孙后代，或者会让这个孩子富贵吧！ 
English: If Yoshitaka Kiyosaki is passed down to future generations, maybe he will make this child rich!

古文：永建三年，与姑俱选入掖庭，时年十三，相工茅通见后，惊，再拜贺曰： 此所谓日角偃月，相之极贵，臣所未尝见也。 太史卜兆得寿房，又筮得《坤》之《比》，遂以为贵人。
现代文：顺帝永建三年，梁女内与她姑姑一同选入掖庭，时年十三。相工茅通见了梁女内，吃了一惊，再举手拜贺说： 这叫做日角偃月：前额中央隆起，形状如日；两眉弯弯如半月，是极贵的生相，我从来没有看见过的。 太史用龟甲占得寿房，又用蓍草占得坤卦之变化，比九五，居得其位，显示吉祥。
English: In the third year of Shun Emperor Yongjian's reign, Liang Nieng and her aunt were elected into the imperial court at the age of thirteen. The co-worker Mao saw Liang Nieng, was taken aback, and then raised his hand to offer congratulations and said: This is called the crescent moon: the central bulge of the forehead, shaped like a sun; the two eyebrows curved like a half moon, is an extremely precious birth phase, I have never seen it. Taishi used tortoise shell to occupy the house of death, and also used alfalfa to occupy the change of gonggua, compared to the ninth five, to stay in

古文：常特被引御，从容辞于帝曰： 夫阳以博施为德，阴以不专为义，螽斯则百，福之所由兴也。
现代文：于是顺帝以梁女内为贵人，常常特别受到宠幸。梁贵人从容辞谢并说 ：帝王要像温暖的阳光广泛地施舍才是德，后妃要像螽斯不妒忌不专宠独占才是义，子孙众多，蛰蛰然幸福就由此兴起。
English: As a result, Emperor Shun considered Liang's daughter-in-law to be a noblewoman, and she was often especially favored by him. Liang graciously thanked him and said, "It is virtue for an emperor to give alms as widely as the warm sun. It is righteousness for an empress to be like a muse, without jealousy, without exclusive favors, and to have many children and grandchildren. This is how happiness arises."

古文：愿陛下思云雨之均泽，识贯鱼之次序，使小妾得免罪谤之累。 由是帝加敬焉。
现代文：希望皇上把云雨之恩泽均匀地撒在所有后妃身上，使后妃像鱼一样按先后轮次以进，使得小妾我免遭诽谤之罪。 因而顺帝更加敬重梁贵人了。
English: It is hoped that the emperor will spread the blessings of the rain and clouds evenly over all the concubines, so that the concubines will advance in succession like fish, so that the concubine will be free from the sin of slander.

古文：阳嘉元年春，有司奏立长秋宫，以乘氏侯商先帝外戚，《春秋》之义，娶先大国，梁小贵人宜配天祚，正位坤极。
现代文：顺帝阳嘉元年春，管事人奏立长秋宫，因乘氏侯梁商的祖姑，是章帝贵人，生和帝，《春秋》之义，娶先大国，梁小贵人宜配天赐福，立为皇后，正其内位，居阴德之极。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Shun Emperor Yang Jia, the steward played the role of establishing the Changqiu Palace, because the ancestor of the merchant Wang Liang, was the Zhang Emperor noble, the birth and the emperor, the meaning of the "Spring and Autumn," married the first great country, Liang Xiao noble was suitable for the blessing of heaven, established as the queen, was in the inner position, and lived in the extreme of yin and yang.

古文：帝从之，乃于寿安殿立贵人为皇后。
现代文：顺帝采纳了这个奏议，于寿安殿立贵人梁女内为皇后。
English: Emperor Shun accepted the proposal and installed the noblewoman Liang Nieng as empress at Shouan Palace.

古文：后既少聪惠，深览前世得失，虽以德进，不敢有骄专之心，每日月见谪，辄降服求愆。
现代文：梁皇后少年时很聪惠，深深知晓前世的兴衰得失的道理，她虽以德进于尊位，却不敢有骄横专宠的思想，每当日蚀月蚀，谴见于天，她就解衣素服谢罪，寻求解除过失。
English: When she was a teenager, Empress Liang was very intelligent and deeply knew the reason for the rise and fall of the previous life. Although she advanced to the position of dignity with virtue, she did not dare to have the thought of arrogance. Every time the day eclipsed the lunar eclipse and the punishment was seen in the sky, she solved the crime and sought to remove the fault.

古文：建康元年，帝崩。
现代文：建康元年，顺帝去世。
English: In the first year of Jiankang, Emperor Shun died.

古文：后无子，美人虞氏子炳立，是为冲帝。
现代文：梁皇后无子，美人虞氏子刘炳立，是为冲帝。
English: Empress Liang had no children, and Liu Xingli, the son of the beautiful Lady Yu, was destined to become emperor.

古文：尊后为皇太后，太后临朝。
现代文：尊梁皇后为皇太后，太后临朝。
English: Empress Zongdeng is the empress dowager, and the empress dowager is Lintao.

古文：冲帝寻崩，复立质帝，犹秉朝政。
现代文：冲帝不及一年去世，质帝立，梁太后仍秉朝政。
English: Emperor Chong died less than a year later, and Empress Dowager Liang remained in power.

古文：时，杨、徐剧贼寇扰州郡，西羌、鲜卑及日南蛮夷攻城暴掠，赋敛烦数，官民困竭。
现代文：这个时候，扬州的寇贼和九江盗贼徐凤，侵扰州郡，西羌、鲜卑及日南蛮夷攻城暴掠，田赋税收名目繁多。官民穷困潦倒。
English: At this time, the bandits of Yangzhou and the bandits of Jiujiang, including Xu Feng, invaded Zhoushu County, Xidi, Xianbei and Nichinan barbarians attacked and plundered the city, and there were many fields to tax. The government and the people were impoverished.

古文：太后夙夜勤劳，推心杖贤，委任太尉李固等，拔用忠良，务崇节俭。
现代文：梁太后日夜勤劳，至诚待人，信任上了年纪的贤者，委任太尉李固，选拔忠良之士，务必实行节俭。
English: Empress Dowager Liang worked diligently day and night, treated people with utmost sincerity, trusted elderly sages, appointed Lieutenant Li Gu, selected loyal people, and must practice thrift.

古文：其贪叨罪慝，多见诛废。
现代文：贪财奸慝的败类，多被诛戮或罢免。
English: The money-grubbing, treacherous scum were mostly killed or removed from office.

古文：分兵讨伐，群寇消夷。
现代文：有聚众闹事的寇贼，分兵讨伐，都得以消灭平息。
English: The bandits who had gathered and caused trouble, and the detachment of soldiers to fight them, were all able to be eliminated and calmed down.

古文：故海内肃然，宗庙以宁。
现代文：因此，天下太平，宗庙社稷得以安宁。
English: As a result, the country was at peace, and the ancestral temples and shrines enjoyed tranquility.

古文：而兄大将军冀鸩杀质帝，专权暴滥，忌害忠良，数以邪说疑误太后，遂立桓帝而诛李固。
现代文：然而梁太后的哥哥大将军梁冀竟然鸩杀质帝，专权暴虐，忌恨残害忠良，多次以邪说疑误梁太后，立桓帝杀李固。
English: However, Empress Liang's brother, General Liang Jie, went so far as to assassinate Emperor Qiu, the tyranny of autocracy, hatred and cruelty to the faithful, and repeatedly suspected Empress Liang of heresy, and ordered Emperor Huan to kill Li Gu.

古文：太后又溺于宦官，多所封宠，以此天下失望。
现代文：梁太后又溺爱宦官，封官赐爵，因而天下失望，不得人心。
English: Empress Dowager Liang also doted on eunuchs and knighted them. As a result, the world was disappointed and they were not popular.

古文：和平元年春，归政于帝，太后寝疾遂笃，乃御辇幸宣德殿，见宫省官属及诸梁兄弟。
现代文：和平元年春季，梁太后还政于桓帝，因病情严重，便乘辇到宣德殿，召见皇宫内的尚书、中书等官属及梁氏诸兄弟。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Heian period, Empress Dowager Liang returned to the throne of Emperor Huan. Due to her serious illness, she went to Xuande Hall by carriage and summoned officials such as Shangshu and Zhongshu in the imperial palace, as well as the Liang brothers.

古文：诏曰： 朕素有心下结气，从间以来，加以浮肿，逆害饮食，浸以沉困，比使内外劳心请祷。
现代文：下诏书说： 我有心下结气的旧疾，近日加以浮肿，不爱饮食，越来越沉重困顿，使得内外为我劳心祝祷。
English: The next edict said: "I have an old disease that has been bothering me for a long time. Recently, I have become puffy, I don't like to eat, and I have become more and more burdened. This has made people at home and abroad pray hard for me.

古文：私自忖度，日夜虚劣，不能复与群公卿士共相终竟。
现代文：我思虑后，觉得日夜虚弱，恐不能再与诸公卿士相终始了。
English: After thinking about it, I feel weak day and night, and I'm afraid I won't be able to keep up with the nobles.

古文：援立圣嗣，恨不久育养，见其终始。
现代文：已经立了英明的皇上，继承大统，只遗憾不能长久地教养，尽观其现在未来。
English: A wise emperor has already been appointed to succeed to the throne. It is only a pity that he cannot be educated for a long time to fully appreciate his present and future.

古文：今以皇帝、将军兄弟委付股肱，其各自勉焉。 后二日而崩。
现代文：今以皇帝、将军兄弟委托股肱大臣，希望各自勉励。 后二日，梁太后去世。
English: Now, the emperor, the general brothers and the minister have been entrusted to each other, hoping to encourage each other.Two days later, Empress Dowager Liang passed away.

古文：在位十九年，年四十五。
现代文：在位十九年，享年四十五。
English: He reigned for 19 years and died at the age of 45.

古文：合葬宪陵。
现代文：与顺帝合葬宪陵。
English: He was buried in the same mausoleum as Emperor Shun.

古文：虞美人者，以良家子年十三选入掖庭，又生女舞阳长公主。
现代文：虞美人，以良家女年十三选入掖庭，生下冲帝，又生下一女为舞阳长公主。
English: In the thirteenth year of her life, the daughter of a noble family, Yubijin, was chosen to enter the imperial court, where she gave birth to Emperor Chong, and another daughter, the eldest princess, Muyang.

古文：自汉兴，母氏莫不尊宠。
现代文：从汉代兴立以来，母氏莫不尊宠。
English: Since the rise of the Han Dynasty, the mother's clan has been a favorite.

古文：顺帝既未加美人爵号，而冲帝早夭，大将军梁冀秉政，忌恶他族，故虞氏抑而不登，但称 大家 而已。
现代文：顺帝既未加美人爵号，而冲帝早夭，大将军梁冀摄政，忌惮厌恶其他世族，所以虞氏受到打压而不得升登，但称 大家 而已。
English: Since Emperor Shun did not have the title of Knight of the American Empire, and Emperor Chong died early, the great general Liang Jie, the regent, feared and detested other ethnic groups, so the Yu clan was suppressed and was not allowed to ascend, but it was said that everyone else was.

古文：陈夫人者，家本魏郡，少以声伎入孝王宫，得幸，生质帝。
现代文：陈夫人，家本魏郡，少时以声伎入孝王刘鸿宫，得宠幸，生质帝。
English: Mrs. Chen, whose family hails from Wei County, entered the palace of Liu Hong, the Prince of Xiao, as a young girl, and became the favorite of the emperor.

古文：亦以梁氏故，荣宠不及焉。
现代文：也因为梁氏的缘故，得不到荣宠。
English: Also because of Mr. Liang, he did not get the honor.

古文：熹平四年，小黄门赵祐、议郎卑整上言： 《春秋》之义，母以子贵。
现代文：灵帝熹平四年，小黄门赵祐，议郎卑整上书说： 《春秋》之义，母以子贵。
English: In the fourth year of Ling Di's reign, Xiao Huangmen Zhao Yu and his deputy, Lang Bi, wrote a letter saying: "In Spring and Autumn, mother and child are precious.

古文：隆汉盛典，尊崇母氏，凡在外戚，莫不加宠。
现代文：隆汉盛典，尊崇母氏，凡在外戚，没有不加封荣宠的。
English: In the grand ceremony of the Long and Han Dynasties, there is no one who respects his mother's family, and who is a foreign relative, who does not add a title of honor.

古文：今冲帝母虞大家，质帝母陈夫人，皆诞生圣皇，而未有称号。
现代文：今冲帝母虞大家，质帝母陈夫人，都诞生圣皇，而没有称号。
English: All of us, including Empress Dowager Chen, were born Holy Emperors, but without a title.

古文：夫臣子虽贱，尚有追赠之典，况二母见在，不蒙崇显之次，无以述尊先世，垂示后世也。 帝感其言，乃拜虞大家为宪陵贵人，陈夫人为渤海孝王妃，使中常侍持节授印绶，遣太常以三牲告宪陵、怀陵、静陵焉。
现代文：臣子虽贱，还有追赠的恩典，况二母现在，不享受崇高显贵的位置，没有遵循先世的典则以垂示后世。 灵帝为其言所感，乃封虞大家为宪陵贵人，陈夫人为渤海孝王妃，派中常侍持符节授印绶，遣太常以三牲告祀顺帝宪陵、冲帝怀陵、质帝静陵。
English: Although the vassal is lowly, there is also the grace of posthumous gift, especially the second mother now, does not enjoy the lofty and distinguished position, did not follow the precepts of the past to show the future. Lingdi felt his words, but Fugu everyone is the noble person of the imperial mausoleum, Mrs. Chen is the princess of Bohai Xiao, often attends the ceremony of awarding the imperial seal, and is often sent to worship the imperial mausoleum of Shun Emperor, the imperial mausoleum of Emperor Chong and the imperial mausoleum of Emperor Jing with three sacrifices.

古文：孝崇郾皇后讳明，为蠡吾侯翼媵妾，生桓帝。
现代文：孝崇郾皇后讳明，是蠡吾侯刘翼媵妾，生下桓帝。
English: Emperor Kan was born to Empress Shumei, a concubine of Liu Yingzhu, the son of Emperor Xiaozong.

古文：桓帝即位，明年，追尊翼为孝崇皇，陵曰博陵，以后为博园贵人。
现代文：桓帝即位的第二年，追尊刘翼为孝崇皇，陵墓叫博陵，以后为博园贵人。
English: In the second year of Emperor Kuan's enthronement, Liu Ying was posthumously honored as Emperor Xiaozong, and his mausoleum was called Boling. Later, he was called Boling.

古文：和平元年，梁太后崩，乃就博陵尊后为孝崇皇后。
现代文：桓帝和平元年，梁太后去世，于是就博陵尊皇后为孝崇皇后。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Kantei, the Empress Dowager Liang died, so the Empress Bolingzon became the Empress Xiaozong.

古文：遣司徒持节奉策授玺绶，赍乘舆器服，备法物。
现代文：派司徒持符节奉策书授玺绶，送乘舆器服，具备法物。
English: Devotees holding the symbols of the festival will be given a letter of recommendation, and will be transported in ceremonial clothing, equipped with the Dharma objects.

古文：宫曰永乐。
现代文：宫曰永乐。
English: The palace is called Yongle.

古文：置太仆、少府以下，皆如长乐宫故事。
现代文：设置太仆、少府以下官员，都照长乐宫旧制。
English: The establishment of officials below the rank of Taifu and Shofu is in accordance with the old system of Changle Palace.

古文：又置虎贲、羽林卫士，起宫室，分巨鹿九县为后汤沐邑。
现代文：又设置虎贲、羽林卫士，起宫室，分钜鹿九县为后汤沐邑。
English: In addition, a tiger enclosure, a guardian of the egrets, and a palace chamber were set up, and the nine counties of Elk were divided into Hou Tang Muyun.

古文：在位三年，元嘉二年崩。
现代文：在位三年，元嘉二年去世。
English: He reigned for three years, and died two years later.

古文：以帝弟平原王石为丧主，敛以东园画梓寿器、玉匣、饭含之具，礼仪制度比恭怀皇后。
现代文：以桓帝弟平原王刘石为丧主，殓以东园画梓、寿器、玉匣、饭含之具，礼仪制度比照恭怀皇后。
English: Emperor Kuan's younger brother, the Plain King Liu Shih, was the chief mourner, and the East Garden painting, the coffin, the jade box, and the utensils for the meal were used. The etiquette system was modeled after the one for honoring the empress.

古文：使司徒持节，大长秋奉吊祠，赙钱四千万，布四万匹，中谒者仆射典护丧事，侍御史护大驾卤簿。
现代文：派司徒持符节，大长秋奉行吊唁祭祀，治丧费钱四千万，布四万匹，中谒者仆射掌管护卫丧事，侍御史监护大驾次第。
English: He sent priests and monks to hold the festival of symbols, the Great Chang Qiu Emperor held a condolence sacrifice, the funeral expenses were 40 million yuan, the cloth was 40,000 horses, the middle-ranking officials were in charge of the funeral escort, and the attendants were in charge of the historical escort.

古文：诏安平王豹、河间王建、勃海王悝，长社、益阳二长公主，与诸国侯三百里内者，及中二千石、二千石、令、长、相，皆会葬。
现代文：诏安平王刘豹、河间王刘建、勃海王刘悝、长社、益阳二长公主，与诸国侯三百里内者，及中二千石、二千石、令、长、相都来会葬。
English: Emperor Anping, King Liu Piao, King Liu Jian of Hebei, King Liu Jiao of Bo Hai, Chosha, the two eldest princesses of Yiyang, and the lords of the three hundred provinces, as well as the middle two thousand koku, two thousand koku, Ling, Chang, and Sang, all came to attend the funeral.

古文：将作大匠复土，缮庙，合葬博陵。
现代文：将作大匠复土，缮庙，与蠡吾侯刘翼合葬博陵。
English: He will be a great master of soil restoration and temple decoration, and will be buried together with Liu Ying.

古文：桓帝懿献梁皇后讳女莹，顺烈皇后之女弟也。
现代文：桓帝懿献梁皇后梁女莹，顺烈皇后的妹妹。
English: Emperor Kuan dedicated it to Empress Leung, sister of Empress Shun.

古文：帝初为蠡吾侯，梁太后征，欲与后为婚，未及嘉礼，会质帝崩，因以立帝。
现代文：桓帝初为蠡吾侯，梁太后征召入宫，想将妹妹嫁桓帝。没有来得及举行婚礼，恰值质帝去世，桓帝即帝位。
English: Emperor Huan was at first a vassal lord, and Empress Dowager Liang summoned him to the palace, wanting to marry off his sister to Emperor Huan. The wedding did not take place in time, as Emperor Qiu died, and Emperor Huan ascended to the throne.

古文：明年，有司奏太后曰： 《春秋》迎王后于纪，在涂则称后。
现代文：第二年，管事人奏太后说： 《春秋》祭公迎王后于纪，在涂则称后。
English: In the second year, the steward said to the Empress Dowager: "The Spring and Autumn Festival welcomes Queen Yu Ji, and she is called the Empress.

古文：今大将军冀女弟，膺绍圣善。
现代文：今大将军梁冀妹妹，当嗣贤良聪明的母亲。
English: She is the younger sister of the current General Liang Ji, and the virtuous and clever mother of the heir.

古文：结婚之际，有命既集，宜备礼章，时进征币。
现代文：结婚之际，太后先有令允许结亲，应恭备礼仪章则，按时纳币以成亲。
English: On the occasion of marriage, if the Empress Dowager has given permission to marry, the etiquette should be prepared, and the wedding should be held on time.

古文：请下三公、太常案礼仪。 奏可。
现代文：请令三公、太常案礼仪。 太后批示同意。
English: Please order the three princes to follow the etiquette of the Imperial Court. The Empress Dowager approves.

古文：于是悉依孝惠皇帝纳后故事，聘黄金二万斤，纳采雁、璧、乘马、束帛，一如旧典。
现代文：于是一切依照孝惠皇帝纳皇后的做法，聘礼黄金二万斤，纳采雁璧乘马束帛，一概照前汉的仪礼。
English: So, everything was done in accordance with the practice of Emperor Xiao Hui and Empress Na, with the bride price of 20,000 catties of gold, and the gathering of geese and geese on horse-drawn carriages, all in accordance with the rituals of the former Han Dynasty.

古文：建和元年六月始入掖庭，八月立为皇后。
现代文：建和元年六月，梁女莹始入掖庭，八月立为皇后。
English: In June of the first year of Jianhe, Liang Ying entered the imperial court and became the empress in August.

古文：时，太后秉政而梁冀专朝，故后独得宠幸，自下莫得进见。
现代文：当时梁太后秉政，梁冀专权，所以梁后独得宠幸，自妃嫔以下没有能分享半点皇帝的宠幸的。
English: At that time, Empress Dowager Liang was in power, and Liang Jie had absolute power. Therefore, Empress Dowager Liang was uniquely favored, and there was no one below Empress Dowager Liang who could share half of the emperor's favor.

古文：后借姊兄荫势，恣极奢靡，宫幄雕丽，服御珍华，巧饰制度，兼倍前世。
现代文：梁后凭藉姐姐哥哥的庇荫和势力，便任意奢靡，宫室周彡彩，帷幄华丽，服饰珍贵，用具奢华，成倍地超过以前旧制。
English: With the patronage and influence of her sister and brother, Empress Liang became extravagant in every way. The palace was decorated with beautiful colors, gorgeous draperies, precious clothing, and luxurious utensils, which greatly exceeded the old system.

古文：及皇太后崩，恩爱稍衰。
现代文：等到梁太后去世，桓帝对她的恩爱渐渐衰退。
English: After Empress Dowager Liang died, Emperor Kuan's love for her gradually faded.

古文：后既无子，潜怀怨忌，每宫人孕育，鲜得全者。
现代文：梁后自已没有儿子，暗怀怨恨忌恨，宫人孕育，很少有得以保全的。
English: Empress Liang had no son of her own, harbored resentment and enmity, and was nurtured by courtiers. Very few were preserved.

古文：帝虽迫畏梁冀，不敢谴怒，然见御转稀。
现代文：桓帝虽受逼迫畏惧梁冀，对梁后不敢谴责兴怒，然亲幸梁后日见稀少。
English: Although Emperor Kuan was afraid of Liang Ji due to persecution, he did not dare to condemn Liang Hou's anger, but fortunately Liang Hou's relatives were rare.

古文：至延熹二年，后以忧恚崩，在位十三年，葬懿陵。
现代文：至延熹二年，梁后因忧愁恚恨去世，在位十三年，葬懿陵。
English: In the second year of Yancheng's reign, Liang Hou died of grief and hatred. After thirteen years on the throne, he was buried in the imperial mausoleum.

古文：其岁，诛梁冀，废懿陵为贵人冢焉。
现代文：这年，梁冀受诛，废懿陵为贵人冢。
English: In the same year, Liang Jie was executed and his tomb was declared a noble tomb.

古文：桓帝邓皇后讳猛女，和熹皇后从兄子邓香之女也。
现代文：桓帝邓皇后邓猛女，和熹皇后堂兄子邓香之女。
English: She was the daughter of Emperor Kuan, the daughter of Emperor Deng, the daughter of Empress Deng Meng, and the daughter of Deng Xiang, the cousin of Empress He.

古文：母宣，初适香，生后。
现代文：母名宣，先嫁邓香，生猛女。
English: Her mother's name was Xuan. She married Deng Xiang first and was a fierce woman.

古文：改嫁梁纪，纪者，大将军梁冀妻孙寿之舅也。
现代文：改嫁梁纪，梁纪是大将军梁冀妻子孙寿的舅舅。
English: He remarried to Liang Ji, the uncle of Sun Shou, the wife of General Liang Ji.

古文：后少孤，随母为居，因冒姓梁氏。
现代文：邓猛女少年时丧父，随着母亲到了梁纪家居住，因而冒姓梁。
English: Deng Meng lost her father when she was a teenager, and went to live with her mother at Liang Ji's house, thus taking the surname Liang.

古文：冀妻见后貌美，永兴中进入掖庭，为采女，绝幸。
现代文：梁冀妻子孙寿见邓猛女长得漂亮，桓帝永兴中进入掖庭，为采女，获得桓帝极度的宠爱。
English: Liang Ji's wife, Sun Shou, saw that Deng Meng's daughter was beautiful, and entered the imperial court during the reign of Emperor Yongxing to recruit a daughter, and was extremely favored by Emperor Hun.

古文：明年，封兄邓演为南顿侯，位特进。
现代文：第二年，封邓猛女兄邓演为南顿侯，位特进。
English: In the second year, Deng Meng's elder sister, Deng Yuen, was made the lord of Nantong and promoted to the highest rank.

古文：演卒，子康嗣。
现代文：邓演去世，子邓康为嗣。
English: Deng Yuen passed away, and his son Deng Kang became his heir.

古文：及懿献后崩，梁冀诛，立后为皇后。
现代文：等到懿献梁皇后梁女莹去世，梁冀受诛，邓猛女立为皇后。
English: After the death of Empress Liang Zhenying, Liang Jie was enthroned, and Deng Mengniu became the empress.

古文：帝恶梁氏，改姓为薄，封后母宣为长安君。
现代文：桓帝深恶梁氏，改皇后姓为薄，封邓皇后母宣为长安君。
English: Emperor Kuan deeply detested the Liang clan, so he changed the empress's surname to Bo, and named Empress Deng's mother Xuan as Chang'an Jun.

古文：四年，有司奏后本郎中邓香之女，不宜改易它姓，于是复为邓氏。
现代文：四年，管事人奏邓皇后本郎中邓香之女，不宜改易他姓，於是恢复邓姓。
English: In the fourth year, the steward told the daughter of Deng Xiang, the real son of Empress Deng, that it was not appropriate to change her surname to his, so she restored the surname Deng.

古文：追封赠香车骑将军安阳侯印绶，更封宣、康大县，宣为昆阳君，康为沘阳侯，赏赐巨万计。
现代文：追封邓香车骑将军安阳侯印绶，改封母宣、侄邓康大县，宣为昆阳君，邓康为氵比阳侯，赏赐万万。
English: Deng Xiang's carriage-riding general, Anyang Hou Ying, was posthumously awarded the title of Prince, and his mother, Xuan, and his nephew, Deng Kang Daxian, were posthumously awarded the titles of Kunyang Jun, and Deng Kang was awarded the title of Zhibiyang Hou.

古文：宣卒，赗赠葬礼，皆依后母旧仪。
现代文：宣去世，车马赙钱葬礼，都照皇后母亲后事规格办理。
English: Xuan's death, the carriage and horse funeral, were all handled according to the Queen Mother's after-action specifications.

古文：以康弟统袭封昆阳侯，位侍中；统从兄会袭安阳侯，为虎贲中郎将；又封统弟秉为淯阳侯。
现代文：以邓康弟邓统袭封昆阳侯，位侍中；邓统堂兄邓会袭封安阳侯，为虎贲中郎将；又封邓统弟邓秉为氵育阳侯。
English: Deng Kang's younger brother, Deng Tong, was given the title of Kunyang Marquis, and became a chamberlain; Deng Tong's cousin, Deng Hui, was given the title of Anyang Marquis, and became a vassal general; and Deng Tong's younger brother, Deng Bing, was given the title of Jianyuyang Marquis.

古文：宗族皆列校、郎将。
现代文：邓氏宗族都位列校、郎将。
English: The Deng clan's family members are all ranked as high school graduates and junior generals.

古文：帝多内幸，博采宫女至五六千人，及驱役从使，复兼倍于此。
现代文：桓帝多所宠幸，博采宫女多至五六千人，驱役随从使唤者，更成倍于此数。
English: Emperor Kanto had many favourites, and had as many as five or six thousand concubines at his disposal, and more than double that number of servants.

古文：而后恃尊骄忌，与帝所幸郭贵人更相谮诉。
现代文：邓后依仗自己的尊位骄横忌妒，与桓帝宠幸的郭贵人互相诬陷控诉。
English: Relying on her pride, arrogance and jealousy, Deng Hou and Guo Guijin, the favorite of Emperor Huan, framed and accused each other.

古文：八年，诏废后，送暴室，以忧死。
现代文：延熹八年，桓帝诏令废后，送掖庭内暴室，忧郁死去。
English: Eight years later, after Emperor Huan's edict was abolished, he was sent to the court for domestic violence and died a melancholy death.

古文：立七年。
现代文：立为皇后七年。
English: It's been seven years.

古文：葬于北邙。
现代文：葬于北邙。
English: He was buried in Beilun.

古文：从父河南尹万世及会皆下狱死。
现代文：邓后叔父河南尹邓万世及虎贲中郎将邓会都下狱死。
English: Deng's uncle, Henan Yin Deng Wansei and Tigress's middle brother, both went to prison and died.

古文：统筹亦系暴室，免官爵，归本郡，财物没入县官。
现代文：邓统也拘系于暴室，免去昆阳侯爵位及侍中官位，遣归本郡，财物没收充公。
English: Deng Tong was also detained in the violent room, exempted from the Marquess of Kunyang and the position of the Vice-Admiral, repatriated to this county, and his property was confiscated.

古文：桓思窦皇后讳妙，章德皇后从祖弟之孙女也。父武。
现代文：桓思窦皇后窦妙，章德皇后从祖弟的孙女，父亲窦武。
English: Huan Sidu's Empress Dou Miao, Empress Zhang De's granddaughter from her paternal uncle, her father Dou Wu.

古文：延熹八年，邓皇后废，后以选入掖庭为贵人，其冬，立为皇后，而御见甚稀，帝所宠唯采女田圣等。永康元年冬，帝寝疾，遂以圣等九女皆为贵人。
现代文：桓帝延熹八年，邓皇后邓猛女废，窦妙选入掖庭为贵人，这年冬，立为皇后，而桓帝很少宠幸，桓帝最宠幸的是采女田圣等桓帝永康元年冬，帝卧病，以田圣等九采女为贵人。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Kan's reign, Emperor Deng's queen, Deng Mengniang, died, and Dou Miao was elected to the imperial court as a noblewoman. In the winter of that year, she became the empress. However, Emperor Kan was rarely favored, and Emperor Kan was most fortunate in the winter of Emperor Yongkang's first year, when the emperor was bedridden, and nine noblewomen, including Tian Sheng, were chosen as noblewomen.

古文：及崩，无嗣，后为皇太后。
现代文：桓帝去世，无嗣，窦皇后为皇太后。
English: Emperor Kanto died without an heir, and Empress Dou became Empress Dowager.

古文：太后临朝定策，立解犊亭侯宏，是为灵帝。
现代文：太后临朝定策，立解犊亭侯刘宏，是为灵帝。
English: The empress dowager Lintong made the decision to set up Liu Hong, the prince of Xingting, as the spiritual emperor.

古文：太后素忌忍，积怒田圣等，桓帝梓宫尚在前殿，遂杀田圣。
现代文：窦太后素性忌妒残忍，积怒田圣等，桓帝灵柩尚在前殿，就把田圣杀了。
English: The Dowager Dowager Dou's nature was jealous and cruel, and she was enraged with Tian Sheng. When Emperor Kuan's coffin was still in the vestibule, she killed Tian Sheng.

古文：又欲尽诛诸贵人，中常侍管霸、苏康苦谏，乃止。
现代文：又想把所有贵人都杀掉，中常侍管霸、苏康苦苦劝谏，才没有下手。
English: He also wanted to kill all the nobles, but was dissuaded by the vice-chancellor, Su Kang.

古文：时太后父大将军武谋诛宦官，而中常侍曹节等矫诏杀武，迁太后于南宫云台，家属徙比景。
现代文：这时窦太后父亲窦武阴谋诛杀宦官，而中常侍曹节等诈称灵帝诏书把窦武杀了，把窦太后搬到南宫云台，家属流放到比景。
English: At this time, Dou Wu, the father of Empress Dowager Dou, plotted to kill the eunuch, while Zhong Chang's attendant Cao Jie and others killed Dou Wu with a fraudulent imperial edict, moved Empress Dowager Dou to the Southern Palace of Yuntai, and exiled the family members to Qixing.

古文：窦氏虽诛，帝犹以太后有援立之功，建宁四年十月朔，率群臣朝于南宫，亲馈上寿。
现代文：窦武虽然被诛杀了，灵帝还是念及窦太后援立自己为帝的功劳，建宁四年十月初一，率领群臣朝太后于南宫，亲自奉献祝寿。
English: Although Dou Wu was killed, Emperor Lingdi still thought of Dou Taigo's merit in helping him become emperor. On the first day of October in the fourth year of Jianning, he led a group of courtiers to the Dowager Empress in the South Palace to personally dedicate and celebrate his birthday.

古文：黄门令董萌因此数为太后诉怨，帝深纳之，供养资奉有加于前。
现代文：黄门令董萌，因此多次为太后申诉怨忿，灵帝一一采纳，供养资奉比以前有所增加。
English: Huangmen ordered Dong Meng, so he repeatedly complained about the empress dowager, which was accepted by Lingdi one by one, and the amount of support and maintenance was increased compared to before.

古文：中常侍曹节、王甫疾萌附助太后，诬以谤讪永乐宫，萌坐下狱死。
现代文：中常侍曹节、王甫疾恨董萌依附帮助窦太后，便诬陷他毁谤灵帝母所居永乐宫，董萌因罪下狱死。
English: On the feast day of the middle-ranking attendant, Wang Fu hated Dong Meng's attachment to helping the Dowager Empress Dou, so he framed him for slandering the Yongle Palace, where Emperor Ling's mother lived. Dong Meng died in prison for the crime.

古文：熹平元年，太后母卒于比景，太后感疾而崩。
现代文：熹平元年，窦太后母死于比景，太后患疾去世。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Dou's mother-in-law died of illness, and Dou's mother-in-law passed away.

古文：立七年。
现代文：立七年。
English: It's been seven years.

古文：合葬宣陵。
现代文：与桓帝合葬宣陵。
English: He was buried together with Emperor Kanto in the Imperial mausoleum.

古文：孝仁董皇后讳某，河间人。
现代文：孝仁董皇后，河间人。
English: Empress Xiao Ren Dong, a native of Kawama.

古文：为解犊亭侯苌夫人，生灵帝。
现代文：为解犊亭侯苌夫人，生下灵帝。
English: In order to liberate Lady Houyi, Lingdi was born.

古文：建宁元年，帝即位，追尊苌为孝仁皇，陵曰慎陵，以后为慎园贵人。及窦氏诛，明年，帝使中常侍迎贵人，并征贵人兄宠到京师，上尊号曰孝仁皇后，居南宫嘉德殿，宫称永乐。
现代文：建宁元年，灵帝即位，追尊苌为孝仁皇，陵曰慎陵，以后为慎园贵人，及至窦武诛，第二年，灵帝使中常侍迎贵人，并征召贵人兄董宠到京师，上尊号为孝仁皇后，居南宫嘉德殿，宫称永乐。
English: In the first year of Jianning, Emperor Lingdi ascended the throne, and named Emperor XiaoRen as Emperor XiaoRen. The mausoleum was named ShenRen, and later it was named ShenYuan GuRen, and then DouWuRen. In the second year, Emperor Lingdi sent the middle attendant to welcome the noble, and summoned the noble's brother DongChu to Beijing. The upper honorific title was Empress XiaoRen, and the palace was called the South Palace, the Palace of the Guardians, and the palace was called YongLe.

古文：拜宠执金吾。
现代文：拜董宠为执金吾。
English: Let the favorite of the board of directors be the king.

古文：后坐矫称永乐后属请，下狱死。
现代文：后因假称永乐后属请，下狱后去世。
English: Later, he died after being released from prison for falsely claiming to be a descendant of Emperor Yongle.

古文：及窦太后崩，始与朝政，使帝卖官求货，自纳金钱，盈满堂室。
现代文：等到窦太后去世，孝仁皇后才参与朝政，使帝卖官索取财货，自纳金钱，盈堂满室。
English: It was not until the death of Empress Dowager Dou that Empress Xiaojin became involved in court politics. She had the imperial sales officials solicit goods and money from her, and the palace was filled with money.

古文：中平五年，以后兄子卫尉脩侯重为票骑将军，领兵千余人。
现代文：灵帝中平五年，以孝仁皇后兄子卫尉修侯董重为骠骑将军，领兵千余人。
English: In the 5th year of the reign of Emperor Lingdi Zhongping, Xiaojin's elder brother and son of the Empress, Guard Lieutenant Xiu Hou and Dong Chong, became the cavalry generals, leading more than a thousand soldiers.

古文：初，后自养皇子协，数劝帝立为太子，而何皇后恨之，议未及定而帝崩。
现代文：起先，孝仁皇后自养皇子刘协，多次劝帝立为太子，而何皇后怨恨，议未定而灵帝去世。
English: At first, Empress Xiaojin's self-supporting prince, Liu Xie, repeatedly persuaded the emperor to be crowned prince, but the empress resented, the discussion was undecided, and Emperor Ling died.

古文：何太后临朝，重与太后兄大将军进权势相害，后每欲参干政事，太后辄相禁塞。
现代文：何太后临朝，董重与何太后兄大将军何进权势相矛盾，孝仁皇后每次想参与干涉政事，何太后就禁止阻拦。
English: Empress Dowager He was in charge of the imperial court, and Dong Chong contradicted Empress Dowager He's elder brother, General He Jin, who was in power. Every time Empress Xiaojin wanted to interfere in political affairs, Empress Dowager He forbade her to do so.

古文：后忿恚詈言曰： 汝今辀张，怙汝兄耶？
现代文：孝仁皇后忿怒恚恨骂道 ：你现在这么强横跋扈，依仗你哥哥的权势吗？
English: Empress Takahito scolded with anger and hatred, "Are you now so powerful that you can rely on your brother's power?

古文：当敕票骑断何进头来。 何太后闻，以告进。
现代文：当令骠骑将军砍断何进头来。 何太后听到这话，就告诉何进。
English: When the general of the cavalry was ordered to cut off Ho Jin's head, the empress dowager heard this and told Ho Jin.

古文：进与三公及弟车骑将军苗等奏： 孝仁皇后使故中常侍夏惲、永乐太仆封谞等交通州郡，辜较在所珍宝货赂，悉入西省。
现代文：何进与三公及弟车骑将军何苗等上奏 ：孝仁皇后唆使故中常侍夏恽、永乐太仆封等互相勾结州郡，剥夺所在居处珍宝货赂，悉数归入永乐宫。
English: He Jin and the three princes and his younger brother, the chariot-riding general He Miao and others made a report: the Empress Xiaojin instigated the late middle attendant Xia Yao, Yongle Taifu and others to collude with the state and county, deprive the residence of precious goods and bribe, and all of them were included in Yongle Palace.

古文：蕃后故事不得留京师，舆服有章，膳羞有品。请永乐后迁宫本国。 奏可。
现代文：过去蕃后不得留京师，乘舆服饰有一定的章则，饮食有一定的品位，现在请使永乐后把宫室迁到她的封国去。 皇帝批示 ：可以。 
English: In the past, empress dowager was not allowed to stay in Beijing to teach, there was a certain dress code for empress dowager, and the food had a certain taste. Now, please let Empress Dowager Yongle move her palace to her fiefdom. The emperor ordered: Yes.

古文：何进遂举兵围骠骑府，收重，重免官自杀。
现代文：何进于是派兵围骠骑将军董重府第，拘捕董重，董重免官自杀。
English: He Jin then sent troops to surround the residence of General Dong Chong, arrest him, and he committed suicide.

古文：后忧怖，疾病暴崩，在位二十二年。
现代文：孝仁皇后忧虑恐怖，发病突然死去，在位二十二年。
English: Empress Takahito, worried and terrified, suddenly died of an illness, after 22 years on the throne.

古文：民间归咎何氏。
现代文：这件事民间都归咎何进。
English: This matter has been widely blamed by the public.

古文：丧还河间，合葬慎陵。
现代文：孝仁皇后灵柩归还河间，与刘苌合葬慎陵。
English: The casket of Empress Takahito was returned to Kawama, and she and Liu Ye were buried together.

古文：灵帝宋皇后讳某，扶风平陵人也，肃宗宋贵人之从曾孙也。建宁三年，选入掖庭为贵人。
现代文：灵帝宋皇后，扶风平陵人，肃宗章帝宋贵人从曾孙。灵帝建宁三年，选入掖庭为贵人。
English: Ling Emperor Song Empress, Fu Feng Pingling people, Su Zong Zhang Emperor Song nobles from the great-grandson. Ling Emperor Jianning three years, elected to the court as a noble.

古文：明年，立为皇后。
现代文：第二年，立为皇后。
English: The following year, she was crowned empress.

古文：父酆，执金吾，封不其乡侯。
现代文：父宋酆，执金吾，封不其乡侯。
English: His father, Song Xi, was the ruler of Jinwu, but he was not allowed to live in the village.

古文：后无宠而居正位，后宫幸姬众，共谮毁。
现代文：宋皇后不得灵帝宠而居皇后正位，后宫受宠幸的姬妾很多，联合谗言毁谤宋皇后。
English: Empress Song was favored by Emperor Ling and held the position of empress. There were many concubines who were favored by the imperial court, and they jointly slandered Empress Song.

古文：初，中常侍王甫枉诛勃海王悝及妃宋氏，妃即后之姑也。
现代文：起先，中常侍王甫枉杀勃海王刘悝及妃宋氏，宋妃即宋皇后的姑姑。
English: At first, the middle-ranking attendant Wang Fu unjustifiably killed Bo Hai King Liu Ye and Princess Song, who was the aunt of Empress Song.

古文：甫恐后怨之，乃与太中大夫程阿共构言皇后挟左道祝诅，帝信之。
现代文：王甫恐惧宋皇后怨恨他，就与太中大夫程阿共同捏造谎言诬说宋皇后巫蛊惑众祝诅于神欲降祸于人，灵帝相信。
English: Wang Fu, fearing that Empress Song resented him, fabricated a lie together with Grand Duchess Cheng Ah, falsely saying that Empress Song was a sorceress, and deceived the people into believing that the god wished to bring evil upon people. Ling Di believed it.

古文：光和元年，遂策收玺绶。
现代文：光和元年，下策书，收玺绶。
English: Light and the first year of the year, down the policy book, close the book.

古文：后自致暴室，以忧死。
现代文：宋皇后自己走进掖庭暴室，忧郁而死。
English: Empress Song herself walked into the torture chamber and died of melancholy.

古文：在位八年。
现代文：在位八年。
English: He reigned for eight years.

古文：父及兄弟并被诛。
现代文：父亲及兄弟都被诛戮。
English: His father and brother were both killed.

古文：诸常侍、小黄门在省闼者，皆怜宋氏无辜，共合钱物，收葬废后及酆父子，归宋氏旧茔皋门亭。
现代文：诸常侍、小黄门在禁宫内的，都怜悯宋皇后没有一点过错，共同聚资，收殓埋葬宋皇后及其父子，归宋氏旧茔皋门亭。
English: All the regular attendants and Xiao Huangmen in the Forbidden City all pitied Empress Song without a single fault, jointly raised funds, collected and buried Empress Song and her father and son, and returned to the Song clan.

古文：帝后梦见桓帝怒曰： 宋皇后有何罪过，而听用邪孽，使绝其命？
现代文：灵帝后来梦见桓帝发怒说 ：宋皇后有何罪过，你听从那些邪孽的坏话，使她死去？
English: Ling Di later dreamt that Emperor Huan was angry and said, "What was Empress Song's sin? Did you listen to those evil words and let her die?

古文：勃海王悝既已自贬，又受诛毙。
现代文：勃海王刘悝既已自贬，又受诛毙。
English: The king of Bohai, Liu Bei, had already humiliated himself and was beaten to death.

古文：今宋氏及悝自诉于天，上帝震怒，罪在难救。 梦殊明察。
现代文：今宋氏及刘悝投诉于天，上天震怒，你的罪孽难于挽救。 
English: Now, Mr. Song and Ms. Liu have complained to heaven, and heaven is furious. Your sins are difficult to save.

古文：帝既觉而恐，以事问于羽林左监许永曰： 此何祥？
现代文：这个梦的内容十分明白清楚。灵帝醒来很是恐慌，就把这件事询问羽林左监许永说 ：这是什么不祥之兆？
English: The content of this dream was very clear. When Emperor Lingdi woke up, he was very panicked, and he asked the left overseer of Ulin, Xu Yong, about this, saying, "What is this ominous sign?"

古文：其可攘乎？ 永对曰： 宋皇后亲与陛下共承宗庙，母临万国，历年已久，海内蒙化，过恶无闻。
现代文：可以把它禳除吗？ 许永答说 ：宋皇后与皇上一同继承皇位，以母仪亲临天下，历年已久，四海之内都蒙受她的教化，从来没有听说有什么过失和恶声。
English: Can it be eliminated? Xu Yong replied: Empress Song inherited the imperial throne together with the emperor, and came to the world as a mother. It has been a long time, and all over the world have been educated by her. I have never heard of any mistakes or bad reputation.

古文：而虚听谗妒之说，以致无辜之罪，身婴极诛，祸及家族，天下臣妾，咸为怨痛。
现代文：而皇上偏听谗毁嫉妒的言辞，使她蒙受无辜之罪，身遭诛戮，祸连家族，所有臣妾，都为抱怨痛惜。
English: But the emperor listened to the words of jealousy, so that she suffered the innocent sin, suffered the beating, the family, all the concubines, were sorry for complaining.

古文：勃海王悝，桓帝母弟也。处国奉藩，未尝有过。陛下曾不证审，遂伏其辜。
现代文：勃海王刘悝是桓帝妈妈的弟弟，处理封国之事和作为藩属事奉朝廷，不曾有过错误，陛下没有经过验证审察，就加罪诛杀。
English: Bo Hai King Liu Ye was the younger brother of Emperor Huan's mother. He handled the matter of sealing the country and served the imperial court as a member of the clan. He never made a mistake. His Majesty did not go through verification and examination, so he added the crime of killing.

古文：昔晋侯失刑，亦梦大厉被发属地。天道明察，鬼神难诬。
现代文：从前晋侯梦见大厉鬼，披长发达到地面，是因晋侯杀了厉鬼的祖先。
English: Once upon a time, the prince of Jin dreamed of a great ghost, with long hair reaching the ground. It was because the prince of Jin killed the ancestor of the great ghost.

古文：宜并改葬，以安冤魂。
现代文：天地之间的道义是明白清楚的，鬼神是难于欺骗得了的。
English: The moral between heaven and earth is very clear, and it is difficult to deceive ghosts and gods.

古文：反宋后之徙家，复勃海之先封，以消厥咎。 帝弗能用，寻亦崩焉。
现代文：应当一并改葬，以使冤魂得到安息。让宋皇后流放了的亲族返回原籍，恢复勃海王的封爵，以期消去因此而遭致的咎衍。 灵帝没有听用许永的意见，没有多久灵帝也去世了。
English: They should be reburied together, so that the wrongdoers can rest in peace. Let the relatives of the Queen of Song who were exiled return to their place of origin, and restore the knighthood of King Bo Hai, with a view to eliminating the consequences. Lingdi did not listen to Xu Yong's opinion, and Lingdi died not long after.

古文：灵思何皇后讳某，南阳宛人。
现代文：灵思何皇后，南阳宛城人。
English: Ling Si He Quen, Nanyang Wancheng.

古文：家本屠者，以选入掖庭。
现代文：家里本来是杀猪的，以金帛贿赂选入掖庭。
English: Originally, pigs were slaughtered in the family, but they were bribed with gold ingots to be elected to the imperial court.

古文：长七尺一寸。生皇子辩，养于史道人家，号曰史侯。
现代文：长七尺一寸，生皇子刘辩，养于史道人家，号为史侯。
English: He was seven feet and one inch long. He was born as Prince Liu Fen and raised in the family of Shi Dao. His given name was Shi Hou.

古文：拜后为贵人，甚有宠幸。
现代文：因而拜为贵人，很得灵帝宠幸。
English: As a result, he was worshipped as a noble and was very favored by Ling Di.

古文：性强忌，后宫莫不震慑。
现代文：她性格强梁忌刻，后宫妃嫔没有不怕她的。
English: She has a strong character, and harem concubines are not afraid of her.

古文：光和三年，立为皇后。
现代文：光和三年，立为皇后。
English: She became empress at the age of three.

古文：明年，追号后父真为车骑将军、舞阳宣德侯，因封后母兴为舞阳君。
现代文：第二年，追号她父亲何真为车骑将军、舞阳宣德侯，封她母亲兴为舞阳君。
English: The following year, her father, He Zhen, was given the posthumous title of General of Chariot and Cavalry, and her mother, He Xing, was given the title of Prince of Maiyang.

古文：时王美人任娠，畏后，乃服药欲除之，而胎安不动，又数梦负日而行。
现代文：这时候，王美人怀孕，怕何皇后暗害，于是服打胎药想把胎儿打掉，但胎儿安然不动，而且多次梦见背着太阳行走。
English: At this time, Wang Meiren was pregnant and feared that the queen would assassinate her, so she took birth control pills to try to abort the fetus, but the fetus did not move, and she often dreamed of walking with the sun behind her.

古文：四年，生皇子协，后遂鸩杀美人。
现代文：光和四年，生皇子刘协，何皇后便把王美人鸩杀。
English: When Prince Liu Xie was only four years old, Empress He killed Wang Bijin.

古文：帝大怒，欲废后，诸宦官固请得止。
现代文：灵帝大怒，想把何皇后废掉，众宦官三番五次向灵帝求情才止。
English: Lingdi was furious and wanted to abolish He's empress. The eunuchs had to plead with Lingdi three times.

古文：董太后自养协，号曰董侯。
现代文：董太后亲自抚养刘协，号为董侯。
English: Empress Dowager Dong personally raised Liu Xie, known as Dong Hou.

古文：王美人，赵国人也。
现代文：王美人，赵国人。
English: Wang Bijin, a native of Zhao.

古文：祖父苞，五官中郎将。
现代文：祖父王苞，五官中郎将。
English: His grandfather, Wang Yao, was a five-rank middle-ranking general.

古文：美人丰姿色，聪敏有才明，能书会计，以良家子应法相选入掖庭。
现代文：王美人富有姿色，聪明敏慧有才干，能书能算，以良家子合乎法相选入掖庭。
English: Wang Bijin is rich in appearance, clever, sensitive and talented, can read and calculate, and was legally selected as a good family member to enter the imperial court.

古文：帝愍协早失母，又思美人，作《追德赋》、《令仪颂》。
现代文：灵帝怜愍刘协早早失去母亲，心里又怀念王美人，作《追德赋》、《令仪颂》，寄托哀思。
English: Ling Di pitied Liu Xie for losing his mother at an early age, and also missed Wang Bijin in his heart. He wrote "Chasing Virtue" and "Ode to the Rites" to express his sorrow.

古文：中平六年，帝崩，皇子辩即位，尊后为皇太后。
现代文：中平六年，灵帝去世，皇子刘辩即位，尊何皇后为皇太后。
English: In the sixth year of Zhongping, Emperor Lingdi died, Prince Liu Bei ascended to the throne, and Empress Zunhe became the empress dowager.

古文：太后临朝。
现代文：太后临朝。
English: The Empress Dowager is in charge of state affairs.

古文：后兄大将军进欲诛宦官，反为所害；舞阳君亦为乱兵所杀。
现代文：太后兄大将军何进企图诛杀宦官，何进却反被宦官所害，何太后母舞阳君也被乱兵所杀。
English: The empress dowager's brother general He Jin attempted to kill the eunuch, but He Jin was killed by the eunuch, and the empress dowager's mother, Muyang Jun, was also killed by the soldiers.

古文：并州牧董卓被征，将兵入洛阳，陵虐朝庭，遂废少帝为弘农王而立协，是为献帝。
现代文：并州牧董卓被征召，领兵入洛阳，蹂躏朝廷，废少帝刘辩为弘农王而立刘协，是为献帝。
English: And Zhu Muc Dong Zhuo was conscripted, led the army into Luoyang, ravaged the imperial court, abolished the Young Emperor Liu Yan as the King of Hongnong and established Liu Xie, which was to offer the emperor.

古文：扶弘农王下殿，北面称臣。
现代文：董卓扶弘农王下殿，北面称臣。
English: Dong Zhuo Fu Hong, the lower court of the peasant king, is depicted on the north side as a courtier.

古文：太后鲠涕，群臣含悲，莫敢言。
现代文：何太后哽咽流涕，群臣含悲，都不敢吭气。
English: The empress dowager was choking, the courtiers were sad, and they dared not breathe.

古文：董卓又议太后踧迫永乐宫，至今忧死，逆妇姑之礼，乃迁于永安宫，因进鸩，弑而崩。在位十年。
现代文：董卓又非议何太后逼迫孝仁董皇后于永乐宫，使她忧愤而死，违背了儿媳应当孝顺姑婆之礼，于是把何太后迁于永安宫，并进鸩杀死，在位十年。
English: Dong Zhuo also reproached Empress Dowager He for forcing Empress Dowager Xiao Ren Dong to stay at Yongle Palace, causing her to die of grief and anger, and violating the etiquette that a daughter-in-law should be filial to her grandmother. Therefore, he moved Empress Dowager He to Yongan Palace and killed her, and he reigned for ten years.

古文：董卓令帝出奉常亭举哀，公卿皆白衣会，不成丧也。
现代文：董卓叫献帝到奉常亭举行哀悼，公卿都素服而朝，不书葬，不成丧。
English: Dong Zhuo called Emperor Xian to Fengchang Pavilion to hold a mourning ceremony. The nobles were all subdued and did not participate in the funeral.

古文：合葬文昭陵。
现代文：合葬文昭陵。
English: They will be buried together in the Muncho Mausoleum.

古文：初，太后新立，当竭二祖庙，欲斋，辄有变故，如此者数，竟不克。
现代文：起始，何太后新立，应当拜谒二祖庙，想斋戒，却每有变故，如此者有好几次，以致至终没有搞成。
English: At the beginning, when the Empress Dowager was newly established, she should have worshiped the Second Ancestor Temple and wanted to fast, but there were several changes, so that she did not succeed in the end.

古文：时有识之士心独怪之，后遂因何氏倾没汉祚焉。
现代文：这时，有识之士心里特别奇怪，后来才知道汉家天下就是倾覆于何氏之手啊！
English: At this time, people with insight were particularly puzzled. Only later did they learn that the Han dynasty was overthrown at the hands of Ho!

古文：明年，山东义兵大起，讨董卓之乱。
现代文：第二年，山东义兵大起，讨伐董卓专权乱政。
English: The following year, the Shandong Volunteers rose up to fight against Dong Zhuo's dictatorship and disorderly government.

古文：卓乃置弘农王于阁上，使郎中令李儒进鸩，曰： 服此药，可以辟恶。 王曰： 我无疾，是欲杀我耳！
现代文：董卓便将弘农王安置于阁上，要郎中令李儒进鸩毒，对弘农王说： 服用这个药，可以辟除恶秽。 弘农王说： 我没有疾病，是你想杀我罢了！ 
English: Dong Zhuo then placed King Hongnong on the attic, and asked his second-in-command, Li Rongjin, to poison him, saying to King Hongnong: "By taking this medicine, you can drive away the evil." King Hongnong said: "I don't have a disease, you just want to kill me!"

古文：不肯饮。
现代文：不肯服用。
English: He refused to take it.

古文：强饮之，不得已，乃与妻唐姬及宫人饮宴别。
现代文：董卓强迫他饮用，不得已，乃与妻唐姬及宫人饮宴作别。
English: Dong Zhuo forced him to drink, and as a last resort, he had to bid farewell to his wife Tang Ji and the courtiers at a banquet.

古文：酒行，王悲歌曰： 天道易兮我何艰！
现代文：进行劝酒中，弘农王悲哀地唱道： 天道变了啊我何等艰难！
English: While being persuaded to drink, King Hongnong sang mournfully: The heavens have changed, how difficult it is for me!

古文：弃万乘兮退守蕃。
现代文：丢掉万乘之国啊退守为藩王。
English: Throw away the country of Manjusri and retreat as the king of the domain.

古文：逆臣见迫兮命不延，逝将去汝兮适幽玄！ 因令唐姬起舞，姬抗袖而歌曰： 皇天崩兮后土穨，身为帝兮命夭摧。
现代文：逆臣逼迫啊使我的命不得延长，我将离你而去啊到幽冥玄渺的地方！ 因而叫唐姬起舞，唐姬举袖而歌： 皇天崩塌啊后土倾颓，身为皇帝啊而命短夭摧。
English: Persecuted by my treacherous vassal, my life cannot be prolonged, I will leave you and go to a dark and mysterious place! Therefore, I asked Tang Ji to dance, and Tang Ji raised her sleeves and sang: The sky is falling, the earth is collapsing, and my life as an emperor is short-lived.

古文：死生路异兮从此乖，奈我茕独兮心中哀！ 因泣下呜咽，坐者皆歔欷。
现代文：我和你生死异路啊从此背离。怎奈我孤独一人啊心中哀悲！ 因而泪下涟涟抽抽噎噎，在坐的也都希欠叹气。
English: I and you have lived and died on different paths, and we have drifted apart ever since. How can I be all alone, my heart is sad! Therefore, I am convulsed with tears, and those who are sitting are also overcome with emotion.

古文：王谓姬曰： 卿王者妃，势不复为吏民妻。
现代文：弘农王谓唐姬说： 你是王者的妃子，不可再为一般官吏和平民之妻。
English: King Hongnong called Tang Ji and said, "You are the king's concubine, you can no longer be the wife of ordinary officials and commoners.

古文：自爱，从此长辞！ 遂饮药而死。时年十八。
现代文：希望你自爱，从此永别离！ 弘农王饮鸩而死，时年十八。
English: I hope you love yourself, and never leave me again! King Hongnong drank poison and died at the age of eighteen.

古文：唐姬，颍川人也。
现代文：唐姬，颍川人。
English: Tang Ji, a native of Zhangchuan.

古文：王薨，归乡里。
现代文：弘农王死，回归故里。
English: King Hongnong died and returned to his hometown.

古文：父会稽太守瑁欲嫁之，姬誓不许。
现代文：她父亲会稽太守唐瑁想让她改嫁，唐姬发誓不许。
English: Her father, the Grand Inquisitor Tang Jun, wanted her to remarry, but Tang Ji swore not to allow it.

古文：及李傕破长安，遣兵抄关东，略得姬。
现代文：及李莈破长安，派兵抄检关东，抢得唐姬。
English: And Li Wei broke through Chang'an, sent troops to copy and inspect Guandong, and captured Tangji.

古文：傕因欲妻之，固不听，而终不自名。
现代文：李莈想要她做妻子，唐姬坚决不答应，也不说自己是弘农王之姬。
English: Li Yao wanted her to be his wife, but Tang Ji resolutely refused to do so, nor did she say that she was the concubine of the King of Hongnong.

古文：尚书贾诩知之，以状白献帝。
现代文：尚书贾诩知道了这件事。
English: Shangshu Jiaxuan found out about this.

古文：帝闻感怆，乃下诏迎姬，置园中，使侍中持节拜为弘农王妃。
现代文：告诉了献帝，献帝闻知感动凄怆，便下诏迎接唐姬，安置在园寝中，派侍中持符节封唐姬为弘农王妃。
English: After telling Emperor Xian that Emperor Xian was deeply moved by what he had heard, Emperor Xian issued an edict to welcome Tang Ji, placed her in a garden bed, and sent an attendant to present Tang Ji with a festival seal as the princess of Hongnong.

古文：初平元年二月，葬弘农王于故中常侍赵忠成圹中，谥曰怀王。
现代文：献帝初平元年二月，葬弘农王于故中常侍赵忠现成的圹穴中，谥为怀王。
English: In February of the first year of the Heian period, when the emperor was dedicated, King Hongnong was buried in a coffin prepared by the late Emperor's personal attendant, Zhao Zhong. The coffin was for King Huai.

古文：帝求母王美人兄斌，斌将妻子诣长安，赐第宅田业，拜奉车都尉。
现代文：献帝找到他母亲王美人的哥哥王斌，王斌带着妻子到长安，赏赐第宅田业，拜奉车都尉。
English: Wang Bin, the elder brother of Wang Bijin, who found his mother Wang Bijin to dedicate to the emperor, took his wife to Chang'an, where he was rewarded with the title of the first house, and given the title of chariot captain.

古文：兴平元年，帝加元服。
现代文：兴平元年，献帝加冠于首。
English: In the first year of Xingping, Emperor Xian was crowned.

古文：有司奏立长秋宫。
现代文：管事人奏请立皇后。
English: The steward calls for the empress.

古文：诏曰： 朕禀受不弘，遭值祸乱，未能绍先，以光故典。
现代文：献帝下诏书说 ：我禀赋不太恢宏，又正碰到祸乱降临，没有克绍先人大业，以光耀前朝的典章制度。
English: The imperial edict dedicated to the emperor said: My endowment is not very magnificent, and I am encountering calamity, and there is no great cause of Kesho's ancestors to shine the award system of the former dynasty.

古文：皇母前薨，未卜宅兆，礼章有阙，中心如结。
现代文：我母亲前已去世了，没有起陵寝，礼仪有阙，心中忧结。
English: My mother had passed away before, and she did not go to the mausoleum. The etiquette was not good, and I was sad.

古文：三岁之戚，盖不言吉，且须其后。 于是有司乃奏追尊王美人为灵怀皇后，改葬文昭陵，仪比敬、恭二陵，使光禄大夫持节行司空事奉玺绶，斌与河南尹骆业复土。
现代文：三年服期忧伤，不应提及这件事，暂且等以后再说。 于是管事人奏请追尊王美人为灵怀皇后，改葬文昭陵，礼仪规模比照章帝的敬陵和安帝的恭陵，派光禄大夫持符节执行司空事奉上玺绶，王斌与河南尹骆业复土。
English: The three-year service period is sad, so this matter should not be mentioned, let's wait until later. Therefore, the administrator requested that Wang Mei be revered as a spiritual queen, that the Wen Zhao Mausoleum be reburied, that the etiquette scale be compared to the Zhang Emperor's Respectful Mausoleum and the An Emperor's Respectful Mausoleum, that Dr. Guanglu be sent to carry out the ceremony of flying the coffin, and that Wang Bin and Henan Yin Luo be reinstated.

古文：斌还，迁执金吾，封都亭侯，食邑五百户。
现代文：王斌返还，升任执金吾，封都亭侯，食邑五百户。
English: Wang Bin returned and was promoted to the position of chief of Jinwu, the fief of the capital, and 500 households in the food village.

古文：病卒，赠前将军印绶，谒者监护丧事。
现代文：病死，赠前将军印绶，谒者监护丧事。
English: Illness and death, give the former general a seal, and the deceased will be the guardian of the funeral.

古文：长子端袭爵。
现代文：长子王瑞袭爵。
English: The eldest son, Wang Rui, succeeded to the title.

古文：献帝伏皇后讳寿，琅邪东武人，大司徒湛之八世孙也。
现代文：献帝伏皇后伏寿，琅笽东武人，大司徒伏湛八世孙。
English: He is the eighth generation grandchild of Empress Fuju of Emperor Xianfu, Empress Dongwu of Shandong, and Grand Master Fuchan of Shandong.

古文：父完，沉深有大度，袭爵不其侯，尚桓帝女阳安公主，为侍中。
现代文：父伏完，沉着器度大，袭爵不其侯，娶桓帝女阳安公主，为侍中。
English: After his father's death, he became more composed and did not want to inherit the title, so he married Emperor Kuan's daughter, Princess Yang'an, and became a chamberlain.

古文：初平元年，从大驾西迁长安，后时入掖庭为贵人。
现代文：献帝初平元年，从帝西迁长安，伏寿这时入掖庭为贵人。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Xian moved to Chang'an from the Imperial Capital of Xi'an. At that time, Emperor Fushou entered the imperial court as a noble.

古文：兴平二年，立为皇后，完迁执金吾。
现代文：兴平二年，立为皇后，伏完任执金吾。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, she was made empress, and she served as the regent until her death.

古文：帝寻而东归，李傕、郭汜等追败乘舆于曹阳，帝乃潜夜度河走，六宫皆步行出营。
现代文：不久，献帝东归，李莈、郭汜等追击打败献帝于曹阳，献帝于夜晚偷渡黄河到山西境，六宫妃嫔都步行出营跟随。
English: Soon, Emperor Xian returned to the East, and Li Xi, Guo Xi, and others pursued and defeated Emperor Xian in Caoyang. Emperor Xian secretly crossed the Yellow River to Shanxi Province at night, and the concubines of the Six Courts left the camp on foot to follow.

古文：后手持缣数匹，董承使符节令孙徽以刃胁夺之，杀傍侍者，血溅后衣。
现代文：伏皇后手持细绢数匹，董承叫符节令孙徽持快刀威胁夺下，杀左右侍者，血液飞溅到伏皇后衣上。
English: The Empress of Fuxi was holding several egrets in her hand. When Dong Cheng called for a festival, Sun Hui grabbed the egrets with a sword and threatened to kill the waiters on both sides. Blood splattered onto the Empress of Fuxi's clothes.

古文：既至安邑，御服穿敝，唯以枣栗为粮。
现代文：等到达安邑，献帝穿的衣服都烂了，以枣栗为粮。
English: When they arrived in Anyi, all the clothes they had worn to offer to the emperor had rotted, and they were living on dates and chestnuts.

古文：建安元年，拜完辅国将军，仪比三司。
现代文：建安元年，任伏完为辅国将军，仪制同于三公。
English: In the first year of the Jian'an era, he was promoted to the rank of general of the auxiliary state, with the same ceremonial system as the three princes.

古文：完以政在曹操，自嫌尊戚，乃上印绶，拜中散大夫，寻迁屯骑校尉。
现代文：伏完认为政权全在曹操手，自己嫌自己枉为皇上的外戚，于是把印绶缴上，任中散大夫，不久改任屯骑校尉。
English: Fukan thought that the power was entirely in Cao Cao's hands, and he did not think he was the emperor's relative, so he handed over the seal and was appointed as Zhongshan doctor, and soon he was appointed as a cavalry captain.

古文：十四年卒，子典嗣。
现代文：十四年去世，儿子伏典继嗣。
English: He died fourteen years later and was succeeded by his son, Fushimi.

古文：自帝都许，守位而已，宿卫兵侍，莫非曹氏党旧姻戚。
现代文：献帝迁都许昌，徒然守着虚位，值宿警卫侍兵，没有一个不是曹操的旧党羽和姻亲密戚。
English: There is not a single guard on duty who is not a close relative of Cao Cao's by marriage or a member of his old party.

古文：议郎赵彦尝为帝陈言时策，曹操恶而杀之。
现代文：议郎赵彦曾经向献帝出谋划策，曹操深恶而把他杀了。
English: Cao Cao's son-in-law, Zhao Yan, once proposed a plan to Emperor Xian. Cao Cao was so disgusted that he killed him.

古文：其余内外，多见诛戮。
现代文：其余内外不和曹操一条心的，多数遭到诛戮。
English: Most of the rest, who were not of one mind with Cao Cao inside and outside the country, were killed.

古文：操后以事入见殿中，帝不任其愤，因曰： 君若能相辅，则厚；不尔，幸垂恩相舍。 操失色，俯仰求出。
现代文：曹操后来因事入殿中见到献帝，献帝极端愤怒，因说： 您假使能够辅助我，那么就希望你优厚相待；否则的话，就希望你恩爱相加把我抛弃。 曹操大惊失色，磕头求出。
English: Cao Cao later saw Xian Di in the entrance hall due to the matter, and Xian Di was extremely angry, because he said: If you can assist me, then I hope you will treat me well; otherwise, I hope you will love me and abandon me. Cao Cao was shocked and asked for help.

古文：旧仪，三公领兵朝见，令虎贲执刃挟之。
现代文：旧有的规矩，三公大官领兵朝见皇上，要让虎贲兵员执锐利武器左右相挟。
English: According to the old rules, the three high-ranking officials leading the troops to see the emperor had to let the soldiers of the Tiger Regiment hold their sharp weapons between them.

古文：操出，顾左右，汗流浃背，自后不敢复朝请。
现代文：曹操退出之后，顾盼左右，汗流浃背。自此以后，曹操不敢再这么朝见皇上了。
English: After Cao Cao withdrew, he looked around, sweating profusely. From then on, Cao Cao did not dare to see the emperor again in the morning.

古文：董承女为贵人，操诛承而求贵人杀之。
现代文：董承女为贵人，曹操杀了董承，又要求杀他的女儿贵人。
English: Dong Cheng's daughter was a noblewoman. Cao Cao killed Dong Cheng and demanded that his daughter, a noblewoman, be killed.

古文：帝以贵人有妊，累为请，不能得。
现代文：献帝认为贵人怀孕在身，连连请予免诛，终不能得。
English: Xian Di thought that the noblewoman was pregnant, and asked Lian Lian to be excused, but in the end she could not.

古文：后自是怀惧，乃与父完书，言曹操残逼之状，令密图之。
现代文：伏皇后看了这个情况，从此心怀恐惧。于是给她父亲写信，讲曹操残酷逼迫的凶相，要她父亲秘密地图划铲除曹操。
English: The Empress Fu saw this and was horrified, so she wrote to her father, telling him about Cao Cao's cruel persecution and asking him to draw a secret map to eradicate Cao Cao.

古文：完不敢发，至十九年，事乃露泄。
现代文：伏完不敢动手。至十九年，秘密事泄露了。
English: By the end of the 19th year, the secret was out.

古文：操追大怒，遂逼帝废后，假为策曰： 皇后寿，得由卑贱，登显尊极，自处椒房，二纪于兹。
现代文：曹操追查大怒，便逼着献帝废去伏皇后，并假为策书说： 皇后伏寿，由卑贱而得入宫，以至登上皇后尊位，自处显位，到现在二十四年。
English: Cao Cao was furious, so he forced Emperor Xian to abdicate and abdicate the throne to Empress Fuxu. He also said, "Empress Fuxu, from humble beginnings, rose to the imperial court, and eventually ascended to the position of empress. She has been on the throne for twenty-four years.

古文：既无任、姒徽音之美，又乏谨身养己之福，而阴怀妒害，苞藏祸心，弗可以承天命，奉祖宗。
现代文：既没有文王母、武王母那样的徽音之美，而又缺乏谨慎修身养怡之福，却阴险地怀抱妒害，包藏祸心，不可以承奉天命，祀奉祖宗。
English: They do not have the beauty of the crest like the Queen of Literature and the Queen of Martial Arts, and they do not have the blessing of careful self-cultivation, but they are insidiously envious and evil-minded, and they cannot follow the mandate of heaven and worship their ancestors.

古文：今使御史大夫郗虑持节策诏，其上皇后玺绶，退避中宫，迁于它馆。
现代文：现在派御史大夫郗虑持符节策书诏令，把皇后玺绶缴上来，退去中宫，迁往其他馆舍，唉！
English: Now they are sending the Imperial Historian to take the imperial edict seriously, hand over the empress dowry, withdraw from the Middle Palace, and move to other buildings, alas!

古文：鸣呼伤哉！
现代文：可悲伤啊！
English: How sad!

古文：自寿取之，未致于理，为幸多焉。 又以尚书令华歆为郗虑副，勒兵入宫收后。
现代文：伏寿咎由自取，未受审讯，幸甚幸甚！ 又以尚书令华歆为希阝虑副手，统兵入宫逮捕伏后。
English: Fu Shuxuan took the blame himself and was not put on trial, which was extremely fortunate! He also made Shang Shuling Hua Qian his deputy, and the whole army entered the palace to arrest Fu Guo.

古文：闭户藏壁中，歆就牵后出。
现代文：伏后紧闭门户匿藏墙壁中，华歆伸手将伏后牵出。
English: In the tightly closed doorway hiding behind the wall, Hua Wei reaches out and pulls Fuxao out.

古文：时帝在外殿，引虑于坐。
现代文：时献帝在外殿，引郗虑于座。
English: At the time of the offering, the emperor was in the outer hall.

古文：后被发徒跣行泣过诀曰： 不能复相活邪？ 帝曰： 我亦不知命在何时！ 顾谓虑曰： 郗公，天下宁有是邪？ 遂将后下暴室，以幽崩。
现代文：伏后披发赤脚徒步而行哭泣着经过献帝面前告别说 ：不能再使我活下去吗？ 
English: He put his hair behind his back and walked barefoot, weeping as he passed in front of the emperor, saying goodbye: "Can't you let me live any longer?"

古文：所生二皇子，皆鸩杀之。
现代文：献帝说 ：我也不知我的性命还能延续到何时！ 回头望着郗虑说 ：郗公！
English: The emperor said, "I don't know how long my life will last!" Looking back, he said with concern, "My lord!

古文：后在位二十年，兄弟及宗族死者百余人，母盈等十九人徙涿郡。
现代文：天下难道有这样的事吗？ 于是曹操将伏后下于掖庭暴室，幽禁去世。所生二皇子，都被鸩杀。伏后在位二十年，她的兄弟及宗族株连死者百余人，她母亲盈等十九人流放到涿郡。
English: Is there such a thing in the world? So Cao Cao took Fuguo to the torture chamber of the imperial court, where she died in confinement. The two princes she gave birth to were both killed. During the twenty years of Fuguo's reign, more than a hundred of her brothers and relatives died, and nineteen people, including her mother Ying, were exiled to Shixian.

古文：献穆曹皇后讳节，魏公曹操之中女也。
现代文：献穆曹皇后曹节，是魏公曹操的中女。
English: Queen Cao Jie, who dedicated herself to Cao Mu, was the middle daughter of Cao Cao.

古文：建安十八年，操进三女宪、节、华为夫人，聘以束帛玄纁五万匹，小者待年于国。
现代文：建安十八年，曹操进纳三个女儿曹宪、曹节、曹华为夫人，聘以束帛玄纟熏五万匹，年纪小的留国待年长。
English: In the 18th year of Jian'an, Cao Cao brought in his three daughters, Cao Xian, Cao Jie, and Cao Hua's wife, and hired 50 thousand pigs to be smoked with a bundle of bamboo shoots. The younger ones stayed in the country to wait for the older ones.

古文：十九年，并拜为贵人。
现代文：建安十九年，一同拜为贵人。
English: In the 19th year of Jian'an, they worshiped together as nobles.

古文：及伏皇后被弑，明年，立节为皇后。
现代文：到伏皇后被弑，第二年，立曹节为皇后。
English: The Empress Dowager was arrested, and the following year, she was proclaimed Empress on Cao's Day.

古文：魏受禅，遣使求玺绶，后怒不与。
现代文：魏受汉献帝禅位，派使者索取玺绶，皇后曹节怒而不给。
English: Wei was offered the imperial throne by Han and sent an envoy to ask for the scepter, but Empress Cao was angry and refused to give it.

古文：如此数辈，后乃呼使者人，亲数让之，以玺抵轩下，因涕泣横流曰： 天不祚尔！ 左右皆莫能仰视。
现代文：这样追索玺绶好几次，曹皇后才将使者叫进去，亲自数落责骂，并持玺抛掷轩下，从而涕泣纵横说： 上天是不会让你们延续长久的！ 左右在场的人都不忍抬头仰视曹皇后。
English: After several times of this kind of pursuit, Empress Cao called the envoy in, scolded him several times, and threw him down the hall, crying, "Heaven won't let you continue for long!" Everyone around couldn't bear to look up at Empress Cao.

古文：后在位七年。
现代文：曹皇后在位七年。
English: Empress Cao reigned for seven years.

古文：魏氏既立，以后为山阳公夫人。
现代文：曹魏夺得了帝位以后，以曹皇后为山阳公夫人。
English: After Cao Wei seized the imperial throne, the Empress Cao became Sanyang's wife.

古文：自后四十一年，魏景元元年薨，合葬禅陵，车服礼仪皆依汉制。
现代文：此后四十一年，魏景元元年去世，与献帝合葬禅陵，车服礼仪皆依汉制。
English: After that, in the 41st year, Wei Jingyuan died in the 1st year, and he was buried in the Zen Mausoleum together with Emperor Xian, and the car dress etiquette was all in accordance with the Han system.

古文：论曰：汉世皇后无谥，皆因帝谥以为称。
现代文：史家评论说：汉代皇后没有谥号，都因帝的谥号以为称号。
English: Historians commented: Empresses in the Han Dynasty did not have a nickname, because the emperor's nickname was considered a title.

古文：虽吕氏专政，上官临制，亦无殊号。
现代文：虽高祖吕后专政，昭帝上官皇后临朝，也没有特殊称号。
English: Although Emperor Gaozhu and Empress Lugu ruled the country, Emperor Zhao and Empress Lin did not have any special titles.

古文：中兴，明帝始建光烈之称，其后并以德为配，至于贤愚优劣，混同一贯，故马、窦二后惧称德焉。
现代文：光武中兴，明帝继位，才为其母光武阴皇后建立光烈之称叫光烈阴皇后。其后都以德为配，至于贤愚优劣，混同一贯都是这样，所以明帝马皇后称明德马皇后；章帝窦皇后称章德窦皇后，都以德称。
English: Guangwu Zhongxing, the Ming Emperor's successor, only established the title of Guangling for his mother, the Empress of Guangwu Yin, called the Empress of Guangling Yin. After that, they were all matched by virtue, and as for the superior and inferior, they were always mixed together, so the Empress of Ming Di Ma was called the Empress of Ming De Ma; the Empress of Zhang Di Dou was called the Empress of Zhang De Dou, and they were all called by virtue.

古文：其余唯帝之庶母及蕃王承统，以追尊之重，特为其号，如恭怀、孝崇之比是也。
现代文：其余只有帝之庶母及蕃王承统，以追尊为重，特有称号，如和帝母章帝梁贵人，追尊为恭怀、孝景皇后；桓帝母蠡吾侯刘冀媵妾明，追尊为孝崇皇后便是。
English: The rest are only the Emperor's mother-in-law and the Empress Dowager Sui Wangcheng, with the most important being the title, such as the Empress Dowager Zhang Diliang Guijin, with the most important being the Empress Gonghuai and the Empress Dowager Xiaojing; and the Emperor's mother, the Empress Dowager Liu Jizhe, with the most important being the Empress Dowager Xiaozong.

古文：初平中，蔡邕始追正和熹之谥，其安思、顺烈以下，皆依而加焉。
现代文：献帝初平中，蔡邕始追正和帝邓绥皇后为和熹邓皇后，自此以下，如安帝阎姬皇后为安思阎皇后，顺帝梁女内皇后为顺烈梁皇后，都依此而加谥号。
English: At the beginning of the dedication of the emperor, Cai Yuxi followed Emperor Zhengzong and Empress Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager Dowager.

古文：赞曰：坤惟厚载，阴正乎内《诗》美好逑，《易》称归妹。
现代文：史家赞颂说：坤为地，它的可贵之处就是载得厚重；阴是指女性，她的责任就是正位于内，《诗经》言后妃有关雎之德，才是君子的配偶；《易经》讲归妹之象，少阴而承长阳，悦以动之。
English: Historians praise: Kun is the earth, its precious place is to be loaded with weight; Yin refers to a woman, her responsibility is to be located in it. According to the Book of Songs, the consort is the spouse of a gentleman. According to the Book of Changes, the consort is the consort of a gentleman. According to the Book of Changes, the consort is like a younger sister, the younger Yin is the successor of the elder Yang, and the younger Yin is the successor of the elder Yang.

古文：祁祁皇孋，言观贞淑。
现代文：众多的后妃，配皇为俪，以示忠贞贤淑。
English: Many concubines were married to the emperor to show their loyalty and virtue.

古文：媚兹良哲，承我天禄。
现代文：良哲媚人，承受这天赐的福禄。
English: A good philosopher and a charming person are the first to receive this blessing.

古文：班政兰闺，宣礼椒屋。
现代文：颁布政治于兰闺，宣扬礼教于椒屋。
English: Politics is promulgated in the lantern, and etiquette is preached in the pepper shop.

古文：既云德升，亦曰幸进。身当隆极，族渐河润。
现代文：有的因德操而升高位，如明德马皇后、和熹邓皇后；也有因幸运而跻于尊显，如安思阎皇后、灵思何皇后。身当隆高的极位，家族都得到恩泽。
English: Some were elevated due to their virtue, such as Empress Mindema and Empress Jiaodeng; others were elevated due to their good fortune, such as Empress An Siyan and Empress Ling Sijo. When they were elevated to the highest ranks, their families received grace.

古文：视景争晖，方山并峻。
现代文：看到太阳的影子，便想争得更多的光辉；孤绝的方山，都想耸立峻拔。
English: Seeing the shadow of the sun, they want to compete for more brilliance; lonely mountains all want to stand tall.

古文：乘刚多阻，行地必顺。
现代文：一味乘着刚愎的性格，必定多方受阻；像地一样卑顺行之，无往而不顺畅。
English: Those who ride on the coattails of arrogance are sure to be thwarted in many ways. Like the earth, they walk humbly, but not smoothly.

古文：咎集骄满，福协贞信。
现代文：咎衍是集骄傲自满而来，福禄是协调贞忠诚信而至。
English: Guilt is the result of pride and complacency, and happiness is the result of the harmony of chastity and loyalty.

古文：庆延自己，祸成谁衅。
现代文：吉庆的延续全靠自己，祸患的形成不能归罪于别人的挑衅。
English: The continuation of the auspicious celebration depends entirely on oneself, and the formation of the disaster cannot be blamed on the provocation of others.

