古文：朵尔直班，字惟中，木华黎七世孙。
现代文：朵尔直班字惟中，木华黎七世孙。
English: Dor Zhi Ban Zhe Yu, the seventh grandchild of Mu Huali.

古文：祖曰硕德，父曰别理哥帖木尔。
现代文：祖父名硕德，父名别理哥帖木儿。
English: His grandfather's name was Shuo De, and his father's name was Liege Timur.

古文：朵尔直班甫晬而孤，育于从祖母。
现代文：朵尔直班出生不过百日父亲就去世了，由叔祖父抚育。
English: His father died just 100 days after he was born, and he was brought up by his great-uncle.

古文：拜住，从父也，请于仁宗，降玺书护其家。稍长，好读书。
现代文：叔父拜住奏请仁宗降诏书以保护其家。朵尔直班好读书，十四岁拜见文宗。
English: His uncle, Baizhuo, asked Emperor Nanzong to issue an imperial edict to protect his family. Doer Zhiban was a good student and met Emperor Wenzong at the age of fourteen.

古文：年十四，见文宗，适将幸上都，亲阅御衣，命录于簿，顾左右无能书汉字者，朵尔直班引笔书之。文宗喜曰： 世臣之家乃能知学，岂易得哉！ 
现代文：文宗将御驾上都，亲自视察其御衣，命登于册，但左右没有能写汉字的人，朵尔直班则秉笔书写，文宗大喜曰： 世臣之家只有你能知道学习，真是难得。 
English: Wenzong drove him to the capital, personally inspected his robe, and his life was recorded. However, there was no one around who could write Chinese characters. Dor Zhoban wrote with a pen. Wenzong was overjoyed and said, "It is rare that only you can know how to study in the House of World Statesmen."

古文：命为尚衣奉御，寻授工部郎中。
现代文：任命他为尚衣奉御，不久授工部郎中。
English: He was appointed as Shangyi Bogo, and was soon promoted to junior vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：元统元年，擢监察御史。
现代文：元统元年，提升为监察御史。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to inspector general of history.

古文：首上疏，请亲祀宗庙，赦命不宜数。
现代文：首先上疏请皇帝亲自祭祀宗庙，并提出赦令不应多发。
English: First of all, the emperor was asked to personally sacrifice the ancestral temple, and it was suggested that the pardon should not be issued more than once.

古文：又陈时政五事，其一曰： 太史言三月癸卯望月食既，四月戊午朔，日又食。
现代文：又陈述时政五事：其一， 太史说三月十五有月蚀，四月初一有日蚀。
English: He also stated five current political events: First, history says that there will be a lunar eclipse on March 15 and a solar eclipse in early April.

古文：皇上宜奋乾纲，修刑政，疏远邪佞，颛任忠良，庶可消弭灾变以为祯祥。 
现代文：皇上应整顿朝纲，改进政治和刑法，疏远奸邪小人，专任忠良，这样就可望化灾难为吉祥 。
English: The emperor should rectify the imperial syllabus, improve politics and criminal law, alienate traitors and villains, and devote himself to loyalty. In this way, it is hoped to turn disaster into good luck.

古文：二曰： 亲祀郊庙。 
现代文：其二， 皇上亲祭天地和宗庙 。
English: Secondly, the emperor's relatives dedicated heaven and earth and the ancestral temple.

古文：三曰： 博选勋旧世臣之子，端谨正直之人，前后辅导，使嬉戏之事不接于目，俚俗之言不及于耳，则圣德日新矣。 
现代文：其三， 请端庄正直之人来辅导勋臣故吏的子弟，使他们不好玩耍，不听街巷鄙俗之言，专心学习，则圣贤之道可以发扬光大 。
English: Thirdly, if you ask a dignified and honest person to tutor the children of honored officials, so that they do not play hard, do not listen to the vulgar words of the streets, and concentrate on learning, then the path of sages can be carried forward.

古文：四曰： 枢机之臣固宜尊宠，然必赏罚公，则民心服。 
现代文：其四， 机要之臣固然应该尊敬爱护，但必须赏罚公平，这样才使民心悦服 。
English: Fourthly, although it is true that the important officials should be respected and cared for, they must be fairly rewarded and punished in order to please the people.

古文：五曰： 弭安盗贼，振救饥民。 
现代文：其五 ，消除盗贼，赈救饥民 。
English: Fifth, eliminate thieves and save the hungry.

古文：是时日月薄蚀，烈风暴作，河北、山东旱蝗为灾，乃复条陈九事上之，一曰： 比日幸门渐启，刑罚渐差，无功者觊觎希赏，有罪者侥幸求免。
现代文：届时真有日月蚀，烈风大作，河北、山东发生旱灾和蝗灾。朵尔直班乘机再条陈九事：一曰 近来侥幸之门渐开，刑罚渐渐松弛，无功者企望赏赐，有罪者侥幸求免。
English: At that time, there will really be a solar eclipse, gale force winds, droughts and locust plagues in Hebei and Shandong. Dor Direct Line will take the opportunity to repeat the nine things: one day recently, the door of luck is gradually opening, the punishment is gradually slackening, the non-performers are hoping for rewards, and the guilty are hoping to get away with it.

古文：恐刑政渐隳，纪纲渐紊，劳臣何以示劝，奸臣无所警惧。 
现代文：这样下去，恐刑法渐毁，纲纪渐乱，为国效力之臣如何得到鼓励，奸臣无所警惕畏惧 。
English: If this continues, the criminal law will gradually be destroyed, the system of discipline will gradually be disrupted, and how will the ministers who serve the country be encouraged, and the treacherous ministers will have nothing to be wary of.

古文：二曰： 天下之财皆出于民，民竭其力以佐公上，而用犹不足，则嗟怨之气上干阴阳之和，水旱灾变所由生也。
现代文：二曰 天子之财皆来自人民，人民竭其力来供官府，而官府还感到费用不足，恐官民抱怨之气会影响阴阳之调和，水旱灾害会由此而生。
English: On the second day, all of God's wealth comes from the people. The people do their best to provide for the government, but the government still feels that the expenses are insufficient. It is feared that the complaints of the officials and the people will affect the harmony of yin and yang, and drought disasters will arise from this.

古文：宜颛命中书省官二员，督责户部详定减省，罢不急之工役，止无名之赏赐。 
现代文：应专命中书省派官员二人去督责户部详细拟定减免赋税办法，停止不急需的工役，不进行无名的赏赐 。
English: Two officials from the Ministry of Education and Culture should be sent to the Ministry of Finance to supervise the detailed formulation of tax reduction and exemption measures, stop the unnecessary labor service, and stop the anonymous reward.

古文：三曰： 禁中常作佛事，权宜停止。 
现代文：三曰 宫中常做佛事，应暂时停止 。
English: On the third day, the palace often does Buddhist activities, which should be temporarily stopped.

古文：四曰： 官府日增，选法愈敝，宜省冗员。 
现代文：四曰 官府官吏日增，官吏考选之法日益破坏，应该减少冗员 。
English: On the fourth day, the number of officials in government offices is increasing day by day, and the method of selecting officials is increasingly undermined. Redundancy should be reduced.

古文：五曰均公田。
现代文：五曰 均公田 。
English: On the fifth day, all the public fields are harvested.

古文：六曰铸钱币。
现代文：六曰 铸钱币。 
English: On the sixth day, the minting of coins began.

古文：七曰罢山东田赋总管府。
现代文：七曰 废除山东田赋总管府 。
English: On the seventh day, the Shandong General Administration of the Tianfu was abolished.

古文：八曰蠲河南自实田粮。
现代文：八曰 免除河南自报的田粮。 
English: On the eighth day, the rice crop self-reported by Henan will be exempted.

古文：九曰禁取姬妾于海外。
现代文：九曰 禁止在海外取妾纳姬 。
English: On the 9th, it was forbidden to take concubines overseas.

古文：正月元日，朝贺大明殿，朵尔直班当纠正班次，即上言： 百官逾越班制者，当同失仪论，以惩不敬。 
现代文：正月初一，在大明殿朝贺皇帝，朵尔直班负责纠正官员们列队次序和向皇帝朝拜的顺序，奏请： 百官逾越次序者，应同违反礼节论罪，以惩戒不敬。 
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, the Emperor was congratulated in the Great Hall of the People, and Doer Zhi Ban was responsible for correcting the order of officials lining up and the order of worship to the Emperor. He made a request: If officials exceed the order, they should be convicted of violating etiquette and punished for disrespect.

古文：先是，教坊官位在百官后，御史大夫撒迪传旨俾入正班，朵尔直班执不可。
现代文：以前，管理宫廷乐队的官，其位置排在百官之后，御史大夫撒迪传旨，把他们列入正班，朵尔直班坚持不可。
English: In the past, the officials who managed the court orchestra, whose positions were ranked after the top 100 officials, were ordered by the Grand Historian Sadi to include them in the regular class, and they had to insist on the Dor straight class.

古文：撒迪曰： 御史不奉诏耶？ 
现代文：撒迪说 ：御史不服从皇上诏令吗？ 
English: Sadi said: Did you disobey the Emperor's edict?

古文：朵尔直班曰： 事不可行，大夫宜覆奏可也。 
现代文：朵尔直班说 ：事情不能这样办，大夫应该再去请示皇上的好。 
English: Dor Zhoban said, "Things can't be done this way. The doctor should ask the Emperor's permission again."

古文：西僧为佛事内廷，醉酒失火，朵尔直班劾其不守戒律，延烧宫殿，震惊九重。
现代文：西域僧侣在内廷做佛事，酒醉失火，朵尔直班弹劾僧侣不守戒律，延烧宫殿，震惊天子，应治罪。
English: A monk from the western region did a Buddhist ritual in the Inner Court, got drunk and started a fire, and Dor Zhi Ban impeached the monk for not observing the precepts, burned the palace, shocked the Son of Heaven, and should be punished.

古文：撒迪传旨免其罪，朵尔直班又执不可，一日间传旨者八，乃已。
现代文：撒迪传旨免该僧侣之罪，朵尔直班又坚持不可，一天内传旨八次，这才遵命不治僧侣之罪。
English: Sadi transmitted the order to absolve the monk's sin, and Dor Zhoban insisted on it. He transmitted the order eight times in one day, and only then did he obey the order not to punish the monk's sin.

古文：丞相伯颜、御史大夫唐其势二家家奴怙势为民害，朵尔直班巡历至漷州，悉捕其人致于法，民大悦。
现代文：丞相伯颜和御使大夫唐其势的两家家奴，仗势害民，朵尔直班巡视到氵郭州，将这些家奴一律逮捕法办，百姓拍手称快。
English: The two family slaves of the chancellor Bo Yan and the envoy of the doctor Tang Qizong, who were harmful to the people, made a direct inspection to Ziguozhou, arrested all these family slaves for legal proceedings, and the people clapped their hands.

古文：及还，唐其势怒曰： 御史不礼我已甚，辱我家人，我何面目见人耶？ 
现代文：回朝后，唐其势大发雷霆： 御史对我太不礼貌，侮辱我家人，我有何面目去见别人。 
English: After returning to China, Tang Qizang was furious: Gu Shi was too rude to me, insulted my family, what kind of face do I have to meet others.

古文：答曰： 朵尔直班知奉法而已，它不知也。 
现代文：回答说： 我朵尔直班只知奉法，不知其他。 
English: He replied, "I only know how to practice the Fa, I don't know anything else.

古文：唐其势从子马马沙为钦察亲军指挥使，恣横不法，朵尔直班劾奏之。
现代文：唐其势的侄子马马沙为钦察亲军指挥使，横行霸道，目无法纪，朵尔直班进行弹劾。
English: His powerful nephew, Mamasha, was the commander of the pro-Qin forces in Chincha. He was domineering and undisciplined, and Doel was in charge of impeachment.

古文：马马沙因集无赖子欲加害，会唐其势被诛，乃罢。
现代文：马马沙纠集一帮无赖之徒欲加害朵尔直班，正在此时唐其势被诛，马马沙的暗害未能得逞。
English: Mamasa rallied a gang of ruffians who wanted to harm Dole Zhiban. At this time, Tang Qiye was captured. Mamasa's plot failed.

古文：迁太府监，改奎章阁学士院供奉学士，进承制学士，皆兼经筵官，又升侍书学士、同知经筵事。
现代文：朵尔直班调入太府监，后改任奎章阁学士院供奉学士，又升为承制学士，都兼为经筵官。再升为侍读学士、同知经筵事。
English: Doer was transferred to the Dafu Supervisor in the direct class, and then he was transferred to the Keizhang Academy to serve as a bachelor, and he was promoted to a bachelor, both of whom were eunuchs. He was then promoted to an attendant bachelor and a scholar.

古文：是时朵尔直班甫弱冠，又世家子，乃独以经术侍帝左右，世以为盛事。
现代文：这时，朵尔直班刚二十岁，又是世家子弟，能独以儒家学说侍奉皇帝，人们传为佳话。
English: At this time, Dor Zhiban was just twenty years old, and he was also a member of the imperial family. It was a legend that he could serve the emperor solely with Confucianism.

古文：至正元年，罢学士院，除翰林学士，升资善大夫。
现代文：至正元年，废学士院，任朵尔直班为翰林学士，官阶升为资善大夫。
English: In the first year of Zheng He, the Academy was abolished, and Ren Doer Zhi Ban became Hanlin Baccalaureate, and his official rank was promoted to Senior Physician.

古文：于是经筵亦归翰林，仍命朵尔直班知经筵事。
现代文：于是经筵由翰林负责，仍命朵尔直班为同知经筵事。
English: As a result, it was left to Hanlin to be in charge, and Dor Zhoban was still killed as a result.

古文：是时康里巙巙以翰林学士承旨亦在经筵，在上前敷陈经义，朵尔直班则为翻译，曲尽其意，多所启沃，禁中语秘不传。
现代文：这时康里以翰林学士承旨也在经筵，向皇帝讲解经义，朵尔直班任翻译，讲得透彻，多有开诚忠告之处，但这是宫内的事，秘不外传。
English: At this time, Kangri and Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi were also in the court, explaining the meaning of the sutras to the emperor, and Du'er served as a translator. They spoke thoroughly, and there were many open and sincere advice, but this was a matter within the palace, not a secret.

古文：俄迁大宗正府也可紥鲁火赤，听讼之际，引谕律令，曲当事情。
现代文：不久，调朵尔直班任大宗正府也可扎鲁火赤，在审理诉讼时，援引律令，无有不当。
English: Soon, the chief of the department of regulation, who was directly in charge of Daizong Zhengfu, was also angry. When hearing the lawsuit, he invoked the legal code, which was not improper.

古文：有同僚年老者，叹曰： 吾居是官四十年，见公论事殆神人也。 
现代文：有同僚年老者称赞道 ：我做这方面的官已四十年了，今见公论事完全如神人一般。 
English: An elderly colleague praised: "I have been an official in this field for forty years, and now I see public affairs completely like a god.

古文：宗王有杀其大母者，朵尔直班与同僚拔实力请于朝，必正其罪。时相难之。
现代文：宗王中有杀其祖母的，朵尔直班与同僚拔实极力请朝廷依法治罪，使宰相感到为难。
English: When one of the patriarch's sons killed his grandmother, Dor Zhoban and his colleague Batshit tried their best to get the court to rule the crime according to the law, which made the chancellor feel embarrassed.

古文：出为淮东肃政廉访使。迁江南行台治书侍御史，未行，又迁江西行省左丞，以疾不赴。
现代文：朝廷任命他为淮东肃政廉访使，又调任江南行台治书侍御史，尚未启程又调任江西行省左丞，因病没有赴任。
English: The imperial court appointed him as the visiting envoy of Huai Dong Su Zhengyi, and he was also transferred to the south of the Yangtze River to govern Taiwan, and he was also transferred to the west of the Yangtze River to govern Jiangxi Province, but he did not go to the post due to illness.

古文：北还，养疾黄厓山中。起为资正院使。
现代文：北还，在黄山疗养。后起任资正院使。
English: Bei Yao recuperated in Huangshan. Later, he was appointed as the envoy of the Suzhen General Hospital.

古文：五年，拜中书参知政事、同知经筵事，提调宣文阁。
现代文：至正五年，拜中书参知政事、同知经筵事，领导宣文阁。
English: In the fifth year of the Taisho era, Baizhongshu Sangzhi Zhengji, Tongzhi Jingzhi Zhengji, led Xuanwenge.

古文：时纂集《至正条格》，朵尔直班以谓是书上有祖宗制诰，安得独称今日年号；又律中条格乃其一门耳，安可独以为书名。
现代文：当时正纂集《至正条格》，朵尔直班认为该书上有祖宗制诰，怎能独以今日之年号命名；又指出条格只不过是律令中一种，怎可单独为书名。
English: At that time, he was compiling a collection of "Zi Zheng Jia Ge," and Doer Zhi Ban thought that the book had an ancestor system, so how could it be named exclusively with today's year; he also pointed out that the jia ge was just one of the ritsuryo, so how could it be a book title alone.

古文：时相不能从，唯除制诰而已。
现代文：当时宰相不接受他的意见，只是把其中的制诰去掉。
English: At the time, the prime minister did not accept his opinion, but simply removed the restrictions from it.

古文：有以善音乐得幸者，有旨用为崇文监丞。
现代文：有个善于音乐的人得到皇帝宠爱，诏令此人任崇文监丞。
English: A person who was good at music was favored by the emperor, who ordered him to be appointed as Chongwenjunjo.

古文：朵尔直班它拟一人以闻。帝怒曰： 选法尽由中书省耶？ 
现代文：朵尔直班另荐举一人为崇文监丞，顺帝大怒说： 选拔人才完全由中书省来决定吗？ 
English: Doer Zhiban also recommended that one person be named as Chong Wenjun Rong, Shun Di said angrily: Is the selection of talents entirely decided by the Chinese Book Ministry?

古文：朵尔直班顿首曰： 用幸人居清选，臣恐后世议陛下。
现代文：朵尔直班忙顿首回答说 ：陛下用自己宠幸的人居如此高雅职位，臣恐后有议论。
English: "Your Majesty is using one of his favorites to occupy such a high-ranking position, and I'm afraid there will be arguments among the courtiers.

古文：今选它人，臣之罪也，省臣无与焉。 
现代文：今选他人，是臣一人之罪，与中书省其他臣僚无关。 
English: To choose someone else now is the sin of one minister, and has nothing to do with other ministers of the Ministry of Literature.

古文：帝乃悦。
现代文：听他这样一说，帝才高兴。
English: Hearing him say this, the emperor was delighted.

古文：升右丞，寻拜御史中丞。
现代文：升朵尔直班为右丞，不久拜为御史中丞。
English: Shendor Choban was appointed as Ujo, and soon after, he was appointed as Goshi Chujo.

古文：监察御史劾奏别儿怯不花，章甫上，黜御史大夫懿怜真班为江浙行省平章政事。
现代文：监察御史弹劾别儿怯不花，奏章刚上，便贬御史大夫懿怜真班为江浙行省平章政事。
English: The supervisors of the impeachment of the Imperial Historian were too cowardly to do anything. As soon as the report was issued, they denigrated the Imperial Historian, Zou Erizhenban, as the political affairs of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province.

古文：朵尔直班曰： 若此则台纲安在？ 
现代文：朵尔直班认为 ：像这样则御史台的纲纪何在。 
English: According to Doer Zhiban: "How can you have a historical record like this?"

古文：乃再上章劾奏，并留大夫，不允。台臣皆上印绶辞职。
现代文：便再上章劾奏，并请留懿怜真班为御史大夫，不允，台臣们都交印辞职。
English: He then went to the chapter to make an impeachment report, and asked Remo Ren Zhenban to be the chief historian, but he was not allowed, and the Taiwanese ministers all signed their resignations.

古文：帝谕朵尔直班曰： 汝其毋辞。 
现代文：帝对朵尔直班说 ：你不能辞职。 
English: "You can't resign," Mr. Di said to Ms. Dorr.

古文：对曰： 宪纲隳矣，臣安得独留？ 
现代文：回答说： 纲纪破坏，臣怎能独留。 
English: He replied: How can a vassal be left alone after the destruction of discipline?

古文：帝为之出涕。
现代文：帝不禁落泪。
English: The emperor could not help but shed tears.

古文：朵尔直班即杜门谢宾客。
现代文：朵尔直班辞职回家，杜门谢客。
English: Doerr quit his job and went home, and DuMeng thanked the guests.

古文：寻出为辽阳行省平章政事，阶荣禄大夫。
现代文：不久，出任辽阳行省平章政事，官阶荣禄大夫。
English: Soon, he was appointed to the Liaoyang Provincial Government of Pingzhang Province, with the official rank of Ronglu Doctor.

古文：至官，询民所疾苦，知米粟羊豕薪炭诸货皆藉乡民贩负入城，而贵室僮奴、公府隶卒争强买之，仅酬其半直。
现代文：到任后询问民间疾苦，知该地的米粟、羊豕、薪炭诸货，都是依靠乡民送到城里贩卖，而贵室的僮仆、官府的隶卒，强行购买，仅付半价。
English: After taking office, he inquired about the hardships of the people, and learned that the local rice, millet, and charcoal were all sent to the city for sale by the villagers, while the servants of the nobles and the subordinates of the government bought them by force, paying only half the price.

古文：又其俗编柳为斗，大小不一，豪贾猾侩得以高下其手，民咸病之。
现代文：又知本地习俗，编柳条为斗，大小不一，豪商和狡猾的市侩从中操纵，人民受害。
English: It is also known that the local custom is to weave willows of different sizes. Wealthy merchants and cunning merchants manipulate the willows, and the people suffer.

古文：即饬有司厉防禁，齐称量，诸物乃毕集而价自平。又存恤孤老，平准钱法，清铨选，汰胥吏，慎勾稽，兴废坠，巨细毕举。
现代文：朵尔直班令地方官府严防并禁豪商猾侩操纵市场，统一度量衡。又抚恤孤老，整顿官吏的任免，淘汰多余的胥吏，如此等等。犯罪者，虽是勋臣故吏都不宽恕。
English: Du'er ordered the local government to strictly prevent and prohibit the market manipulation of the wealthy merchants, and to unify the measurement. In addition, the orphaned and the elderly were supported, the appointment and removal of officials were rectified, the superfluous officials were eliminated, and so on. Criminals were not forgiven, even if they were honored officials.

古文：苟有罪，虽勋旧不贷。
现代文：王府及各衙门官吏，无不惧怕。
English: The royal court and officials at all levels of government are not afraid.

古文：王邸百司闻风悚惧。召为太常礼仪院使，俄迁中政使，又迁资正使。会盗起河南，帝忧之。
现代文：朝廷召为太常礼仪院使，不久任命为中政使，又转为资正使。河南人民起义反元，顺帝为之忧虑。
English: He was called by the imperial court to be the envoy of the Imperial Household Agency, and soon he was appointed as the envoy of the Central Government, and then he became the envoy of the State Council. Emperor Shun was worried about the uprising of the people of Henan.

古文：拜中书平章政事，阶光禄大夫。
现代文：拜朵尔直班为中书平章政事，官阶光禄大夫。
English: Baidul Zhiban was a member of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, with the official rank of Guanglu Doctor.

古文：其言颇迕丞相脱脱意。时脱脱倚信左司郎中汝中柏、员外郎伯帖木儿，故两人因擅权用事，而朵尔直班正色立朝，无所附丽。
现代文：他首先提出 治国之道纲常伦理为重 ，因此应该旌表在反人民起义斗争中为忠于朝廷而死难的前西台御史张桓，以此来劝诫后来人；认为应守住荆襄、湖广以绝后患。指出倡乱反元的只是少数人，不能把中华百姓都视为叛逆。他这番议论与丞相脱脱的意见不合。当时脱脱信赖左司郎中汝中柏和员外郎伯帖木儿，此二人专权独断，而朵尔直班为人正直，在朝廷不依附于任何人。
English: He first proposed that the way of governing the country should be based on the principles of ethics. Therefore, Zhang Huan, the former West Taiwanese governor who died for loyalty to the imperial court in the anti-people uprising, should be exhorted to future generations. He believed that Jingxiang and Hukang should be protected as a last resort. It was pointed out that only a few people advocated rebellion, and the Chinese people could not all be regarded as rebellious. His discussion did not agree with the opinion of the emperor. At that time, the emperor did not trust the left-hand man, Zhong Ruzhong Bao, and the outside man, Bo Ti Muer. These two had absolute power,

古文：适陕州危急，因出为陕西行台御史大夫。
现代文：这时陕州危急，朝廷任命朵尔直班为陕西行台御史大夫去加强防御。
English: At this time, Shaanxi was in a critical situation, and the imperial court appointed Dor Zhoban as the official historian of Shaanxi and Taiwan to strengthen the defense.

古文：行至中途，闻商州陷，武关不守，即轻骑昼夜兼程至奉元，而贼已至鸿门。
现代文：行至中途闻商州陷落，武关不守，便立即昼夜赶到奉元，人民起义军已到鸿门。
English: When they heard about the fall of Shangzhou and the failure to defend Wuguan halfway through the journey, they immediately rushed to Fengyuan day and night. The People's Uprising Army had reached Hongmen.

古文：吏白涓日署事，不许，曰： 贼势若此，尚何顾阴阳拘忌哉！ 
现代文：奉元官吏提出要择吉日办理公务，朵尔直班不准，令他们立即入衙办事。
English: Fengyuan officials proposed that they should choose a good day to handle official duties, but Doer did not allow them to work in a straight line, and ordered them to go to work immediately.

古文：即就署。省、台素以举措为嫌，不相聚论事。
现代文：他自己督各军收复商州，修筑奉元城堡，募民为兵，将府库所存白银作为对有战功的人奖赏。
English: He himself led the armies to recover Shangzhou, built the Fengyuan Castle, recruited people as soldiers, and used the silver stored in the government treasury as a reward for those who had distinguished themselves in battle.

古文：朵尔直班曰： 多事如此，恶得以常例论？ 
现代文：御史大夫也先帖木儿在河南为起义军所败，西台御史蒙古鲁海牙、范文等十二人上章弹劾，朵尔直班也在奏章上署名，签名后对左右说： 我将去为湖广平章。 
English: The chief historian, Tamerlane, was also defeated by the rebels in Henan. Twelve people, including the West Taiwan chief historian, Lu Haiga, and Fan Wen, signed the impeachment petition. Dor Zhoban also signed the petition. After signing, he said to the left and right, "I will go and sign the petition for Hukangping."

古文：乃与行省平章朵朵约五日一会集。
现代文：不久，朝廷果下令调他为湖广平章政事。
English: Soon, the imperial court finally ordered him to be transferred to the political affairs of Hukangpingzhang.

古文：寻有旨，命与朵朵便宜同讨贼，即督诸军复商州。
现代文：因为也先帖木儿是丞相脱脱之弟，奏章上后，脱脱大怒，故把朵尔直班调去湖广，其他十二御史也被贬官。朵尔直班临行时关中人含泪送别，依依不舍。
English: Because Timur was also the younger brother of the chancellor, and after the play was written, he lost his temper, so he transferred Dor Zhiban to Hukang, and the other twelve governors were also demoted. When Dor Zhiban was about to leave, the people in the middle of the gate said goodbye with tears and did not give up.

古文：时官廪所储无几，即延州民有粟者，亲予酒谕劝之而贷其粟，约俟朝廷颁钞至即还以直，民无不从者。
现代文：到重庆时，闻江陵失守，道路不通，有人劝稍留等待，他不肯，务必按期到任。湖广行省的省会当时暂在澧州，朵尔直班到任后严肃军纪，献粟者授以官，人心一致。
English: When he arrived in Chongqing, Wenzhongling was out of control and the roads were impassable. Some people advised him to wait a little longer, but he refused and made sure to arrive on schedule. At that time, the provincial capital of Hubei Province was temporarily in Ganzhou. After Doer Zhi Ban took office, he strictly enforced military discipline. The people were unanimous in awarding the post to the person who donated the poppies.

古文：又遣官籴粟河南、四川之境，民闻其名，争输粟以助军饷。
现代文：丞相脱脱命朵尔直班专门供给军粮。当时官仓储粮所剩无几，朵尔直班宴请本州有粮财主，亲自敬酒，劝他们贷粮给官府，将来朝廷颁发钱钞则按值还钱，这些人都答应了。
English: At that time, there was not much grain left in the official storehouses, so Doer Zhi Ban held a banquet to invite the grain rich in the state, personally toasted, and advised them to lend grain to the government, and in the future, when the court issued money, they would repay the money according to its value. These people all agreed.

古文：右丞伯颜不花方总兵，承顺风旨，数侵辱之。朵尔直班不为动。
现代文：他还派人到河南、四川去买粮。右丞伯颜不花总领军队，他遵照脱脱的暗示，多次侮辱朵尔直班，而朵尔直班不为所动。
English: He also sent people to Henan and Sichuan to buy grain. Ujo Boyan, the commander-in-chief of the army, repeatedly insulted Doer Choban in accordance with Doer Choban's suggestion, but Doer Choban was unmoved.

古文：会官军复武昌，至蕲、黄伯颜不花百计征索，无不给之，犹欲言其供需失期。
现代文：官军收复武昌，进军蕲、黄。伯颜不花无休止地向他索取军粮，虽无不给予，但还指责他供给失期。
English: The government army recovered Wuchang and marched into Handan and Huanglong. Bo Yan endlessly asked him for military rations, and although he gave them to him, he also accused him of failing to supply them on time.

古文：达剌罕军帅王不花奋言曰： 平章国之贵臣，今坐不重茵，食无珍味，徒为我曹军食耳。
现代文：达剌罕军帅王不花愤愤不平地说 ：平章是国家贵臣，如今他睡不好，吃不好，为我们军队粮食操劳。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Daganghan army said indignantly: "Hinzhang is a national dignitary, now he does not sleep well, does not eat well, and works hard for our army's food.

古文：完者至，则反加敬礼，语人曰： 平章勋旧之家，国之祥瑞，吾苟伤之，则人将不食吾余矣。 朵尔直班素有风疾，军中感雾露，所患日剧，遂卒于黄州兰溪驿，年四十。
现代文：要什么就立即办理，还要诬陷他，真无人性，我们各自还乡去吧。 脱脱遣国子助教完者到军中来害他。完者到来后，见他为国事操劳，反而敬重他。朵尔直班素有风湿病，在军中受雾露之寒气，病情加重，卒于黄州兰溪驿，年四十岁。
English: If you want to do something, do it immediately. If you want to frame him, that's inhuman. Let's all go back to our hometowns. If you want to get rid of your son-in-law, send your son-in-law to the army to harm him. If you want to get rid of your son-in-law, send your son-in-law to the army to harm him. If you want to get rid of your son-in-law, send your son-in-law to the army to harm him. If you want to get rid of your son-in-law, send your son-in-law to the army to harm him. If

古文：朵尔直班立朝，以扶持名教为己任，荐拔人才而不以为私恩。
现代文：朵尔直班在朝中以提倡儒家的纲常名教为己任，荐拔人才不从私恩出发。
English: Dor Zhoban took it upon himself to promote Confucianism in the court of the emperor. He did not recommend and select talents out of personal favor.

古文：留心经术，凡伊、洛诸儒之书，未尝去手。
现代文：他留心经学，凡程颐、程颢之书，总是手不释卷。
English: He paid attention to the study of scripture, and whenever he read or studied a book, he would never let go of the book.

古文：喜为五言诗，于字画尤精。
现代文：爱好五言诗，尤精于字画。
English: He is fond of five-character poems, and is especially good at calligraphy and painting.

古文：间采前贤遗言，各以类次，为书凡四卷，一曰《学本》，二曰《君道》，三曰《臣职》，四曰《国政》。
现代文：他深深佩服翰林学士承旨临川危素关于 学以安国家、利社稷 的主张。在经筵为皇帝讲学，多陈述大义。空闲时收集古代圣贤遗言，编纂成书四卷，一曰《学本》，二曰《君道》，三曰《臣职》，四曰《国政》。
English: He deeply admired Hanlin's and Linchuan's idea of learning to make the country safe and the society prosperous. When he lectured for the emperor, he often expounded the great principles. In his spare time, he collected the last words of ancient sages and compiled them into four volumes: "Study Book" on the first day, "Royal Way" on the second day, "Vassalage" on the third day, and "National Politics" on the fourth day.

古文：明道、厚伦、制行、稽古、游艺，五者《学本》之目也；敬天、爱民、知人、纳谏、治内，五者《君道》之目也；宰辅、台察、守令、将帅、暬御，五者《臣职》之目也；兴学、训农、理财、审刑、议兵，五者《国政》之目也。
现代文：《学本》包括：明道、厚伦、制行、稽古、游艺这五项；《君道》包括敬天、爱民、知人、纳谏、治内五项；《臣职》包括：宰辅、台察、守令、将帅、暂御五项；《国政》包括：兴学、训农、理财、审刑、议兵五项。
English: The "Study Book" includes five items, namely, "Clear Path," "Dignity," "Conduct," "Practice" and "Entertainment"; "King's Path" includes five items, namely, "Respect Heaven," "Love the People," "Acquaintance," "Acceptance" and "Government"; "Subordinate Duties" includes five items, namely, "Aide-de-camp," "Superintendent," "Commander-in-Chief" and "Provisional Commander"; "National Politics" includes five items, namely, "Going to School," "Training Farmers," "Financial Management," "Sentencing" and "Ar

古文：帝览而善之，赐名曰《治原通训》，藏于宣文阁。
现代文：顺帝看了这书认为很好，赐名为《治原通训》，藏于宣文阁。
English: Emperor Shun read the book and thought it was very good. It was given the name "Jihara's General Instruction" and was kept in the Xuanwen Pavilion.

