古文：面部如命，气色如运。
现代文：如果说面部象征并体现着人的大命，那么气色则象征并体现着人的小运。
English: If the face symbolizes and embodies a person's great fortune, then the appearance symbolizes and embodies a person's small fortune.

古文：大命固宜整齐，小运亦当亨泰。
现代文：大命是由先天生成的，但仍应该与后天遭遇保持均衡，小运也应该一直保持顺利。
English: Great fortune is generated by nature, but it should still be balanced with the encounter of the day after tomorrow, and the small fortune should always remain smooth.

古文：是故光焰不发，珠玉与瓦砾同观；藻绘未扬，明光与布葛齐价。
现代文：所以如果光辉不能焕发出来，即使是珍珠和宝玉，也和碎砖烂瓦没有什么两样；如果色彩不能呈现出来，即使是绫罗和绵绣，也和粗布糙葛没有什么二致。
English: Therefore, if the brilliance cannot shine out, even if it is pearls and precious stones, it is no different from broken bricks and tiles; if the color cannot appear, even if it is brocade and embroidery, it is no different from coarse cloth.

古文：大者主一生祸福，小者亦三月吉凶。
现代文：大命能够决定一个人一生的祸福，小运也能够决定一个人几个月的吉凶。
English: Great fortune can determine the fate of a person's life, and small fortune can also determine the fate of a person for several months.

古文：人以气为主，于内为精神，于外为气色。
现代文：气是一个人自身生存和发展的主要之神，在人体内部表现为人的精神，在人体表面表现为人的气色。
English: Qi is the main god of a person's own survival and development. It manifests itself as the human spirit inside the human body and as the human appearance on the surface of the human body.

古文：有终身之气色， 少淡、长明、壮艳、老素 是也。有一年之气色， 春青、夏红、秋黄、冬白 是也。
现代文：有贯穿一年的气色，这就是俗话说的 春季气色为青色木色，春色，夏季气色为红色火色、夏色，秋季气色为黄色土色、秋色，冬季气色为白色金色、冬色， 就是这种气色。
English: There is an appearance throughout the year, this is the proverbial saying that the appearance of spring is blue wood color, spring color, summer appearance is red fire color, summer color, autumn appearance is yellow earth color, autumn color, winter appearance is white gold color, winter color, this is the appearance.

古文：有一月之气色， 朔后森发，望后隐跃 是也。
现代文：有贯穿一月的气色，这就是俗话说的 每月初一日之后如枝叶盛发，十五日之后则若隐若现 ，就是这种气色。
English: There is a look that runs through the month of January, which is what the saying goes. After the first day of the month, the leaves are in full bloom, and after the fifteenth day, if it looms, it is this look.

古文：有一日之气色， 早青、昼满、晚停、暮静 是也。
现代文：有贯穿一天的气色，这就是俗话说的 早晨开始复苏，白天充盈饱满，傍晚渐趋隐伏，夜间安宁平静 ，就是这种气色。
English: There is an appearance throughout the day, this is the saying that the morning begins to recover, the day is full of fullness, the evening gradually fades away, and the night is peaceful and calm, this is the appearance.

古文：科名中人，以黄为主，此正色也。
现代文：对于追求科名的士人来说，面部气色应该以黄色为主，因为黄色是正色，吉色。
English: For scholars who pursue a degree, the facial appearance should be mainly yellow, because yellow is a positive color, a lucky color.

古文：黄云盖顶，必掇大魁；黄翅入鬓，进身不远；印堂黄色，富贵逼人；明堂素净，明年及第。他如眼角霞鲜，决利小考；印堂垂紫，动获小利，红晕中分，定产佳儿；两颧红润，骨肉发迹。
现代文：如果有一道黄色的彩云覆盖在他头顶，那么可以肯定，这位士子必然会在科考殿试中一举夺魁，高中状元；如果两颧部位各有一片黄色向外扩展，如两只翅膀直插双鬓，那么可以肯定，这位士子登科升官或封爵受禄已经为期不远；如果命宫印堂呈黄色，那么可以肯定，这位士子很快就会获得既能够致富又能够做官的机会；如果明堂部位即鼻子白润而净洁，那么可以肯定，这位士子必能科考入第。
English: If there is a yellow colored cloud covering the top of his head, then it is certain that this scholar will inevitably win the first place in the entrance examination of the palace of science and technology, the first place in high school; if there is a piece of yellow expanding outward in each of the two beak parts, such as two wings directly inserted into the beak, then it is certain that this scholar has been promoted to a scientific promotion or knighted for a short period of time; if the palace of life is yellow, then it is certain that this scholar will soon have the opportunity to both get rich and become an official; if the bright hall part, that is, the nose is white and clean, then it is certain

古文：由此推之，足见一斑矣。色忌青，忌白。
现代文：其他面部气色，如眼角即鱼尾部位红紫二色充盈，其状似绚丽的云霞，那么可以肯定，这位童子参加小考，必然能够顺利考中；命宫印堂，有一片紫色发动，向上注入山根之间，那么可以肯定，此人经常会获得一些钱财之利；如果两眼下方各有一片红晕，而且被鼻梁居中分隔开来从而互不连接，那么可以肯定，此人定会喜得一个宝贝儿子；如果两颧部位红润光泽，那么可以肯定，此人的亲人如父子、叔侄、兄弟等等，必然能够立功显名并发家致富。由此推而广之，足可以窥见面部气色与人的命运的关系的情形。面部气色忌讳青色，也忌讳白色。
English: Other facial features, such as the corner of the eye, that is, the fishtail part, is filled with red and purple, and its shape resembles a gorgeous cloud, then it is certain that the boy will participate in the small exam, and will certainly be able to successfully pass the exam; the hall of fame, there is a piece of purple, injected upwards between the roots of the mountain, then it is certain that this person will often get some financial benefits; if there is a blush under each of the two eyes, and separated by the middle of the bridge of the nose, so that they are not connected, then it is certain that this person will definitely be pleased with a precious son; if the che

古文：青常见于眼底，白常见于眉端。
现代文：青色一般出现在眼睛的下方，白色则经常出现在两眉的眉梢。
English: Blue generally appears below the eyes, while white often appears at the tips of the eyebrows.

古文：然亦不同：心事忧劳，青如凝墨；祸生不测，青如浮烟；酒色惫倦，白如卧羊；灾晦催人，白如傅粉。
现代文：它们的具体情形又有差别：如果是由于心事忧烦困苦而面呈青色，那么这种青色多半既浓且厚，状如凝墨；如果是由于遇到飞来的横祸而面呈青色，那么这种青色一定轻重不均，状如浮烟；如果是由于嗜酒好色导致疲惫倦怠而面呈白色，那么这种白色一定势如卧羊，不久即会消散；如果是由于遭遇了大灾大难而面呈白色，那么这种白色一定惨如枯骨，充满死气。
English: Their specific situations are also different: if the face is blue due to worries, worries and hardships, then this blue is mostly thick and thick, like condensed ink; if the face is blue due to flying cross disasters, then this blue must be uneven in weight, like drifting smoke; if the face is white due to tiredness and fatigue caused by alcoholism and lechery, then this white must be like a lying sheep and will soon dissipate; if the face is white due to a catastrophe, then this white must be as miserable as dead bones and full of death.

古文：又有青而带紫，金形遇之而飞扬，白而有光，土庚相当亦富贵，又不在此论也。
现代文：还有青申带紫之色，如果是金形人遇到这种气色，一定能够飞黄腾达，如果是白润光泽之色，土形兼金形人面呈这种气色，也会获得富贵，这些都是特例，不在以上所论之列。
English: There is also the color of blue with purple, if it is a golden-shaped person who encounters this color, it will definitely be able to soar. If it is a white glossy color, the earth-shaped and golden-shaped person will also be rich and valuable. These are special cases, not included in the above discussion.

古文：最不佳者： 太白夹日月，乌鸟集天庭，桃花散面颊，预尾守地阁。 
现代文：而最为不佳的，则是以下四种气色： 白色围绕眼圈，此相主丧乱；黑气聚集额头，此相主参革；赤斑布满两颊，此相主刑狱；浅赤凝结地阁，此相主凶亡。 
English: But the most unfavorable are the following four colors: white around the eye rims, the subject is in turmoil; black gathers on the forehead, the subject is in mourning; red spots cover the cheeks, the subject is in prison; light red condenses in the attic, the subject is in violent death.

古文：有一于此，前程退落，祸患再三矣。
现代文：以上四相，如果仅具其一，就会前程倒退败落。并且接连遭灾遇祸。
English: If there is only one of the above four phases, the future will be backward and defeated. And it will be hit by disasters one after another.

