古文：牟颖游氏子李云郑总王绍王鲔李戴仁刘璪李矩陶福巴川崔令
现代文：牟颖游氏子李云郑总王绍王鲔李戴仁刘璪李矩陶福巴川崔令
English: Mu Ying You's son, Li Yun Zheng, General Wang Shao, Wang Xuan, Li Dai Ren, Liu Xuan, Li Rui Tao, Fu Bachuan, Cui Yu Ling

古文：冯生
现代文：冯生
English: Feng Sheng

古文：牟颖
现代文：牟颖
English: Muying

古文：洛阳人牟颖，少年时，因醉，误出郊野，夜半方醒，息于路旁。
现代文：洛阳有个叫牟颖的人，少年时有一次喝醉酒胡乱走到城郊野地，睡在路旁。
English: There is a man in Luoyang named Mu Ying. When he was a boy, he once walked drunk to the outskirts of the city and slept on the side of the road.

古文：见一发露骸骨，颖甚伤念之。达曙，躬身掩埋。
现代文：半夜醒来后，发现附近有一具露出坟地的尸骨，心里很可怜它，天明时就用土把那尸骨埋起来了。
English: After waking up in the middle of the night, he found a skeleton of a cemetery nearby. He felt very sorry for it and buried the skeleton with soil at dawn.

古文：其夕，梦一少年，可二十已来，衣白练衣，仗一剑，拜颖曰：我强寇耳，平生咨意杀害，作不平事。
现代文：这天夜里牟颖梦见一个二十来岁的青年人，穿着一身白衣，拿一把剑，向牟颖行礼说，我生前是一名强盗，肆意杀了不少人，干了很多坏事。
English: That night, Muying dreamed of a young man in his twenties, dressed in a white robe, holding a sword, saluting Muying and saying, "I was a robber in my lifetime, I killed a lot of people and did a lot of bad things."

古文：近与同辈争，遂为所害。埋于路旁，久经风雨，所以发露。
现代文：后来因为和同伙争斗被杀死，把我埋在路边，久经风吹，所以才暴骨坟墓之外。
English: Later, because I was killed in a fight with a comrade, I was buried on the side of the road, and it took a long time for the wind to blow me out of the grave.

古文：蒙君复藏，我故来谢君。
现代文：承蒙您的同情把我重新掩埋，我特来致谢。
English: I am here to thank you for your compassion in burying me again.

古文：我生为凶勇人，死亦为凶勇鬼。
现代文：我活着时是个凶汉，死后也是个凶鬼。
English: I was a bad man when I was alive, and I'll be a bad man when I'm dead.

古文：若能容我栖托，但君每夜微奠祭我，我常应君指使。
现代文：您如果能继续庇护我，只要每夜能小小地祭奠我一次就行，使我不受饥渴之苦，我就会随时听您的指使为您效劳。
English: If you can continue to shelter me, as long as you can make a small sacrifice to me once every night, so that I do not suffer from hunger and thirst, I will always listen to your instructions to serve you.

古文：我既得托于君，不至饥渴，足得令君所求狥意也。
现代文：您能满足我这一点愿望吗？牟颖在梦中就答应了那青年鬼魂。
English: Can you grant me this one wish? Mu Ying said yes to the young ghost in her dream.

古文：颖梦中许之。及觉，乃试设祭飨，暗以祀祷祈。
现代文：醒来后，他就摆设了祭祀供品，并暗自祈祷了一番。
English: When he woke up, he set up the sacrificial offerings and prayed in secret.

古文：夜又梦鬼曰：我已托君矣，君每欲使我，即呼赤丁子一声，轻言其事，我必应声而至也。
现代文：当天夜里，牟颖又梦见鬼来说，我已领着了您的祭品和祈祷了。今后，你如需要用我，只要喊一声 赤丁子 并小声说你有什么事要我办，我会应声而至的。
English: That night, Mu Ying had another dream and saw a ghost, saying, "I have already received your offerings and prayers. In the future, if you need to use me, just call me Red Clove and whisper what you want me to do, and I will come to you."

古文：颖遂每潜告，令窃盗，盗人之财物，无不应声遂意，后致富有金宝。
现代文：后来，牟颖就常常偷偷招唤赤丁子，让他偷盗别人的财物，赤丁子每次都能把盗来的财物送给他。
English: Later, Mu Ying often secretly invited Red Clover to steal other people's property, and Red Clover would always give him the stolen property.

古文：一日，颖见邻家妇有美色，之，乃呼赤丁子令窃焉。
现代文：牟颖因此而渐渐成了拥有金银宝物的富人。有一天，牟颖又看见邻家女人很漂亮，动了心，就又让赤丁子去把那女人偷来。
English: As a result, Mu Ying gradually became a rich man with gold and silver treasures. One day, Mu Ying also saw that the woman next door was very beautiful. Moved by this, she asked Chieko Chieko to steal the woman.

古文：邻妇至夜半，忽至外逾垣而至。
现代文：这天半夜，邻家女人忽然翻墙来到牟颖家，牟颖又惊又喜，问她怎么来的。
English: In the middle of the night that day, a neighbor woman suddenly climbed over the wall and came to Mu Ying's house. Mu Ying was surprised and happy, and asked her how she got there.

古文：颖惊起款曲，问其所由来，妇曰：我本无心，忽夜被一人擒我至君室。忽如梦觉，我亦不知何怪也。
现代文：女人说，我根本不想来，是被一个人硬抓到你家来的，像一场恶梦刚醒，我也不知是怎么回事。
English: The woman said, "I didn't want to come at all. I was forced to come to your house by a man. It was like waking up from a nightmare. I don't know what happened."

古文：不知何计，却得还家。
现代文：我不知有什么办法能回到我家去啊！
English: I don't know how I'm going to get home!

古文：悲泣不已，颖甚闵之，潜留数日。
现代文：说罢痛哭起来。牟颖挺可怜她，偷偷留她住了几天。
English: She burst into tears. Mu Ying felt sorry for her and secretly kept her for a few days.

古文：而其妇家人求访甚切，至于告官。
现代文：这时女人家中到处找她，并向官府报告了。
English: At this time, the woman looked for her everywhere in her home and reported it to the authorities.

古文：颖知之，乃与妇人诈谋，令妇人出别墅，却自归，言不知被何妖精取去，今却得回。
现代文：牟颖听说后，就暗地和妇人合谋取得一致，让她自己回到家中，并对她家人说不知被什么妖怪抓去又放回来了。
English: After Mu Ying heard about it, she secretly conspired with the woman to reach an agreement, let her return home on her own, and told her family that she did not know what kind of monster had captured her and released her.

古文：妇人至家后，再每三夜或五夜，依前被一人取至颖家，不至晓，即却送归。
现代文：那女人回到家后，每隔三五天，仍然夜晚被赤丁子背到牟颖家，不到天亮再送回去。
English: After the woman returned home, every three to five days, she was still carried back to Mu Ying's house at night and sent back before dawn.

古文：经一年，家人皆不觉。
现代文：这样达一年，女人家里谁也没发现。
English: This went on for a year, and no one in the woman's family noticed.

古文：妇人深怪颖有此妖术，后因至切，问于颖曰：若不白我，我必自发此事。
现代文：女人看牟颖有这么高明的妖术十分奇怪，就追问牟颖到底是怎么回事，并说如牟颖不说实话，她自己就向别人坦白。
English: The woman thought it was very strange that Mu Ying had such a skillful magic, so she asked Mu Ying what was going on, and said that if Mu Ying did not tell the truth, she would confess to others.

古文：颖遂具述其实，邻妇遂告于家人，共图此患。
现代文：牟颖无奈，就说了实话。女人就把这事告诉了家里人，大家一起商量怎么能除掉这个祸害。
English: Mu Ying was helpless, so she told the truth. The woman told this to her family members, and they discussed together how to get rid of this scourge.

古文：家人乃密请一道流，洁净作禁法以伺之。
现代文：后来，家人请来了一名道士，道士施了法术后等在家中。
English: Later, the family invited a Taoist priest, who waited at home after casting a spell.

古文：赤丁子方夜至其门，见符箓甚多，却反。白于颖曰：彼以正法拒我，但力微耳。
现代文：这天夜里，赤丁子来到那女人家门外，看见门上贴着很多符咒，就回到牟颖家说，她家施了法术阻挡我，但法力并不大。
English: That night, Little Red Riding Hood came to the woman's door and saw a lot of spells on the door. She went back to Mu Ying's house and said that her family had cast a spell to stop me, but the power was not great.

古文：与君力争，当恶取此妇人。此来必须不放回也。
现代文：我想为你力争，用硬手段把那女人弄来，这次她来后，你可别再把她放回去了！
English: I want to fight for you, to get that woman by force, and when she comes this time, don't let her go!

古文：言讫复去。
现代文：说罢就转回去了。
English: He turned back as soon as he had said that.

古文：须臾，邻家飘骤风起。一宅俱黑色，但是符箓禁法之物，一时如扫，复失妇人。
现代文：不一会儿，邻女家院里刮起了黑风，什么都看不见了，贴的所有符咒也都被风刮跑，风停后一看，那女人又没了。
English: Soon, a black wind blew in the yard of the neighboring woman's house. Nothing could be seen, and all the spells were blown away by the wind. When the wind stopped, the woman was gone.

古文：至曙。其夫遂去官，同来颖宅擒捉，颖乃携此妇人逃，不知所之。
现代文：天亮后，女人的丈夫告到官府，官府立刻派人来捉拿牟颖，牟颖就带着那女人逃了，至今也不知跑到什么地方去了。
English: After dawn, the woman's husband reported to the government, and the government immediately sent someone to catch Mou Ying. Mou Ying fled with the woman, and to this day, she doesn't know where she went.

古文：游氏子
现代文：游氏子
English: Yu's son

古文：许都城西之北陬，有赵将军宅，主父既没，子孙流移，其处遂凶，莫敢居者。
现代文：河南许都城西北山坡下，有一座赵将军宅。宅子的主人早已去世，子孙也流离失散，这座宅子就成了凶宅，没有人敢再住进去。
English: At the bottom of a hill northwest of Xuducheng, Henan Province, there is a house belonging to General Zhao. The owner of the house has long since died, and his children and grandchildren have also been displaced. This house has become a haunted house, and no one dares to live in it anymore.

古文：亲近乃榜于里门曰，有居得者，便相奉。
现代文：亲戚就在院门口贴了幅告示，说谁想住这府宅，可以免费奉送。
English: The relative posted a notice at the entrance to the hospital, saying that anyone who wanted to live in the mansion could do so free of charge.

古文：乾符初，许有游氏子者，性刚悍，拳捷过人，见榜曰：仆猛士也，纵奇妖异鬼，必有以制之。
现代文：唐乾符初，许都有一个姓游的人，这人非常强悍，会一手好拳脚，看见告示后说，我是个勇猛的人，什么妖魔鬼怪我都制服得了。
English: At the beginning of the Tang and Qian dynasties, there was a man surnamed Yu, who was very strong and could fight well. After seeing the notice, he said, "I am a brave man, and I can subdue any demon."

古文：时盛夏，既夕，携剑而入。
现代文：当时正值盛夏，一天晚上，游某带着一把宝剑进了赵将军宅。
English: At that time, it was the height of summer. One evening, You Mou took a sword and entered General Zhao's house.

古文：室宇深邃，前庭广袤，游氏子设簟庭中，絺绤而坐。
现代文：进去后只见庭院深深，前庭很大，游某就在院中放了一张床，铺了一块粗麻布坐在床上。
English: After entering, the courtyard was deep and the front yard was large. You put a bed in the courtyard, spread a piece of burlap cloth and sat on the bed.

古文：一鼓尽，闻寂无惊，游氏子倦，乃枕剑面堂而卧。
现代文：一更鼓响过之后，院子里仍然安静无声，游某困倦了，就头枕宝剑面朝着堂屋睡下了。
English: After one more drum beat, the courtyard was still quiet and silent. When Yu became sleepy, he fell asleep with his head on the pillow facing the courtyard.

古文：再鼓将半，忽听轧然开后门声，蜡炬齐列，有役夫数十，于堂中洒扫。辟前轩，张朱帘绣幕，陈筵席宝器，异香馥于檐楹。
现代文：二更过了一半时，忽然听见后门吱嘎一声开了，只见院中忽然亮起了一排排蜡烛火把，有好几十个仆役打扫庭院，打开前门，掀起了朱帘围帐，摆设筵席用的珍贵器具，不时传来一阵阵特殊的香味。
English: When the second half passed, he suddenly heard the back door creak open. Suddenly, rows of candles and torches lit up in the courtyard. Dozens of servants cleaned the courtyard, opened the front door, lifted the vermilion curtain, set up the precious utensils for the banquet, and from time to time a special fragrance came.

古文：游子心谓此小魅耳，未欲迫之，将观其终。
现代文：游某心想这些不过是小妖魅，先不去理它，看看到底能搞出什么名堂。
English: You thought to yourself, "These are just small charms. Let's ignore them for a while and see what kind of reputation they can create."

古文：少顷，执乐器，纡朱紫者数十辈，自东厢升阶，歌舞妓数十辈自后堂出，入于前堂。紫衣者居前，朱绿衣白衣者次之，亦二十许人。言笑自若，揖让而坐。
现代文：过了一阵，又来了几十个穿着大红大紫衣服的人，手拿着乐器从东厢房走来。从后屋又走出来几十名歌舞伎，来到前堂，穿紫衣的在前，后面是穿绿衣和白衣的，都是二十多岁的人，她们谈笑自如地互相让着坐下。
English: After a while, dozens of people wearing bright red and purple clothes came again, walking from the east wing room with musical instruments in their hands. Dozens of Kabuki actors came out of the back room and came to the front hall. The purple-clad people were in the front, and the green- and white-clad people were in the back. They were all in their twenties, and they let each other sit down as they chatted and laughed.

古文：于是丝竹合奏，飞觞举白，歌舞间作。
现代文：这时乐器奏响，宴会上推杯换盏，十分热闹。
English: At this time, musical instruments played, and the banquet was very lively.

古文：游氏子欲前突，擒其渠魁。将起，乃觉髀间为物所压，冷且重，不能兴。
现代文：这时，游某想猛冲过去抓住鬼怪中的头子，但觉得腿上被什么东西重重地压着，又凉又重，根本动不了。
English: At this time, Yu wanted to rush over and grab the head of the monster, but felt that something was pressing heavily on his leg. It was cold and heavy, and he couldn't move at all.

古文：欲大叫，口哆而不能声。但观堂上欢洽，直至严鼓。席方散，灯火既灭，寂尔如初。
现代文：他想大声喊叫，干张嘴却喊不出声，只能看见鬼怪们在堂上兴高采烈地狂欢宴饮，一直到急促的更鼓声传来，灯火就突然熄灭，一切都像什么也没有过那样寂静。
English: He tried to shout, but he couldn't utter a sound. He could only see the ghosts merrily feasting and drinking in the hall, until the hurried drums came, the lights suddenly went out, and everything was as silent as if nothing had happened.

古文：游氏子骇汗心悸，匍伏而出。至里门，良久方能语。
现代文：游某吓得浑身冷汗，连滚带爬出了院门，到了巷口大门，过了好久才能说出话来。
English: Yu was so scared that he was covered in cold sweat. He crawled out of the courtyard door, to the entrance of the alley, and it took him a long time to speak.

古文：其宅后卒无敢居者。
现代文：从那以后，那座赵将军宅就再也没有人敢住进去了。
English: Since then, no one has dared to live in General Zhao's house.

古文：李云
现代文：李云
English: Li Yun

古文：前南郑县尉李云，于长安求纳一姬，其母未许。
现代文：曾经当过南郑县尉的李云，在长安时曾向一位姑娘求婚，她母亲不答应。
English: Li Yun, who was once a lieutenant of Nan Zheng County, once proposed marriage to a girl in Chang'an, but her mother did not agree.

古文：云曰：予誓不婚。
现代文：李云说，如果不能娶她，我今生永不结婚。
English: Li Yun said, if I can't marry her, I will never get married in this life.

古文：乃许之。
现代文：姑娘的母亲就应允了。
English: I said yes.

古文：号姬曰楚宾。
现代文：姑娘的名字叫楚宾。
English: The girl's name is Chubin.

古文：数年后，姬卒。
现代文：结婚几年后，楚宾死了。
English: A few years after their marriage, Trubin died.

古文：卒后经岁，遂婚前南郑令沈氏女。
现代文：第二年，李云又娶了前任南郑县令沈氏的女儿。
English: The following year, Li Yun married the daughter of the former Nan Zheng County magistrate Shen Shi.

古文：及婚日，云及浴于净室，见楚宾执一药来，径前，谓云曰：誓余不婚，今又与沈家作女婚。
现代文：结婚这天，李云正在洗浴时，忽然见楚宾拿着一包药走到面前说，你曾发誓说非我不娶，现在你却又给沈家当了女婿。
English: On the day of the wedding, when Li Yun was taking a bath, he suddenly saw Trubin holding a packet of medicine and said, "You once swore that you would marry me, but now you have become Shen Jia's son-in-law."

古文：无物奉，赠君香一贴，以资浴汤。
现代文：我没有什么好礼品，送你一包药，这是一包香料，给你放在水里吧。
English: I don't have any good gifts. I'll give you a packet of medicine. It's a packet of spices. Put it in water.

古文：泻药末入浴斛中，钗子搅水讫而去。
现代文：说罢将药倒进了澡盆中，并用头上的钗子把水搅匀了，就离去了。
English: After saying this, he poured the medicine into the bathtub, stirred the water with the tweezers on his head, and left.

古文：云甚觉不安，困羸不能出浴，遂卒，肢体如棉，筋骨并散。
现代文：李云顿时觉得心里不安，又困又乏，出不了浴盆，很快就死了。死后肢体像棉花一样柔软，全身的筋骨都被药水泡散了。
English: Li Yun suddenly felt uneasy, sleepy and tired, unable to get out of the bathtub, and soon died. After death, the limbs were as soft as cotton, and the sinews and bones of the whole body were dissolved by the medicinal water.

古文：郑总
现代文：郑总
English: Zheng Zong

古文：进士郑总，以妾病，欲不赴举。
现代文：有位叫郑总的进士，因为爱妾生病不打算进京赶考。
English: There is a scholar named Zheng Zong, who does not plan to go to Beijing to catch up with the examination because his mistress is ill.

古文：既葬旬月后，夜深，偶未寝，闻室外有人行声，开户观之，乃亡妾也。
现代文：妾劝他不能为了一个女人而误了功名大事，坚持让他上路，郑总就动身赴京。这年春天郑总落榜后回家，到家后小妾已经病死。埋葬了一个月后，有天深夜，郑总偶然醒来，听见屋外有声音，开门一看，竟是死去的爱妾，赶快叫进屋来坐下。
English: His concubine advised him not to miss a great achievement for the sake of a woman. Insisting that he go on the road, Zheng Zong set off for Beijing. In the spring of this year, Zheng Zong went home after falling off the list. After arriving home, his concubine had died of illness. One month after the burial, late one night, Zheng Zong accidentally woke up, heard a sound outside, opened the door and saw that it was his dead beloved concubine. He quickly called her into the house to sit down.

古文：召入室而坐，问其所要，但求好茶，总自烹与之。啜讫，总以小儿女也睡，欲呼与相见。妾曰：不可，渠年小，恐惊之。
现代文：问她需要什么，她说只想喝一杯好茶。郑总亲自煮了茶端来，小妾喝完后，郑总想把她已经睡了的小儿女叫醒和她见见面，小妾说，不行，她的年纪小，会吓着她的。
English: When asked what she needed, she said that she only wanted to drink a cup of good tea. Zheng Chong personally prepared the tea and brought it to the concubine. After the concubine had finished drinking, Zheng Chong wanted to wake up her little children, who were already asleep, to meet her. The concubine said that she couldn't, she was too young and it would scare her.

古文：言讫辞去，才出户，不见。
现代文：说罢就告辞了。刚一出门，就看不见她去了哪里。
English: As soon as she left, I couldn't see where she had gone.

古文：王绍
现代文：王绍
English: Wang Shao

古文：明经王绍，夜深读书。
现代文：有一位考取了明经的书生王绍，深夜正在家读书时，听见有人在窗外向他借笔用。
English: Wang Shao, a student who had passed the Ming Dynasty sutra examination, was reading at home late at night when he heard someone borrowing a pen from him outside the window.

古文：有人隔窗借笔，绍借之，于窗上题诗曰：何人窗下读书声，南斗阑干北斗横。
现代文：王绍隔窗把笔递出去后，那人在窗纸上题了一首诗：何人窗下读书声，南斗阑干北斗横。
English: After Wang Shao handed the pen out of the window, the man inscribed a poem on the window paper: How many people are reading under the window, the south is dry and the north is wet.

古文：千里思家归不得，春风肠断石头城。
现代文：千里思家归不得，春风肠断石头城。
English: Longing for home, the spring breeze breaks the stone city.

古文：诗讫，寂然无声，乃知非人也。
现代文：诗题完了，再也没听到声音，这才知道借笔的原来是鬼。
English: After the poem was finished, I didn't hear the voice again, and that's when I knew it was a ghost who had borrowed the pen.

古文：王鲔
现代文：王鲔
English: Wang Yao

古文：凤翔少尹王鲔，礼部侍郎凝之叔父也。
现代文：凤翔府的少尹王鲔，是礼部侍郎王凝之的叔父。
English: Fengxiangfu's Shao Yin Wang Yao was the uncle of the etiquette attendant Wang Genzhi.

古文：年十四五，与童儿辈戏于果园竹林下，见二枯首为粪壤所没，乃令小仆择净地瘗之，祭以酒馔。
现代文：王鲔十四五岁的时候，有一次和孩童们在果园竹林里玩耍，看见粪堆里有两只死人头骨，就让小仆人找了块干净地方埋了，并摆了酒饭祭奠了一番。
English: When Wang Yao was 14 or 15 years old, he was once playing with some children in the bamboo forest of an orchard. When he saw two dead skulls in the dung heap, he asked his little servant to find a clean place to bury them, and set up an offering of food and wine.

古文：其后数夕阴晦，忽闻窗外窸窣有声，良久问之，云：某等受君深恩，免在芜秽，未知所酬，聊愿驱策。尔后凡有吉凶，肸飨间必来报。
现代文：后来连着几个阴天，王鲔忽然听见窗外有异样的声音，就问外面是谁。只听窗外说，我们被你救出了污秽间，实在感激不尽，不知该怎样报答你，唯愿今后随时听你指使，以后只要你有什么祸事，我们会听到声响就来到你面前报答你。
English: Later, after several cloudy days, Wang Yao suddenly heard a strange sound outside the window, and asked who was outside. Just listening to the window, he said, "We were rescued from the filth by you, and we are truly grateful. I don't know how to repay you. I hope to listen to your instructions at any time in the future. In the future, whenever you have any misfortune, we will hear the sound and come to you to repay you."

古文：如此数年，遂与灵物通彻。
现代文：这样过了几年之后，王鲔就和精灵们混得十分熟了。
English: After a few years of this, Wang Yao became very familiar with the elves.

古文：崔珙为度支使，雅知于鲔。
现代文：当时任度支使的崔珙和王鲔志趣相投，是很好的朋友。
English: At that time, Choe Son and Wang Son, who were appointed as vice-premiers, shared the same interests and were very good friends.

古文：一夕，留饮家酿，酒酣稍欢，云：有妓善歌者。
现代文：一天晚上，崔珙留王鲔喝家酿的酒，喝到高兴时，崔珙说，我这里有一个歌妓唱得不错，我叫她来唱一首给咱们助兴吧。
English: One evening, when Cui Biao Liu Wangya drank home-brewed wine until she was happy, Cui Biao said, I have a singer here who sings well, let me ask her to sing a song for our entertainment.

古文：令召之，良久不至，珙自入视之，云：理妆才罢，忽病心痛，请饮汤而出。
现代文：说罢就让人把歌妓叫来。但好半天那歌妓也没有来，崔珙就到后面去看，回来对王鲔说，她梳装刚完事，觉得心口痛，说喝口水就来。
English: As soon as she said that, someone called for the courtesan. However, the courtesan did not come for a long time. Cui Yao went to the back to have a look. When she came back, she said to Wang Yao that she had just finished dressing and felt heartbroken. She said that she would come as soon as she had a drink.

古文：珙复坐。鲔具言歌者仪貌，珙怪问之。
现代文：崔珙坐下以后，王鲔就对他描述那歌女的衣着和长相，崔珙很奇怪，就问王鲔怎么会知道她。
English: After Cui Yao sat down, Wang Yao described the singer's clothes and appearance to him. Cui Yao was very surprised and asked Wang Yao how he knew her.

古文：云：适见一人，著短绫绯衣，控马而去。
现代文：王鲔说，刚才我看见她穿着红绫短衣，骑着一匹马走了。
English: Wang Yao said that just now I saw her wearing a red jacket and riding a horse.

古文：语未毕，家仆报中恶，救不返矣。
现代文：话刚说完，崔珙的仆人就来报告说那歌妓中了邪突然死去。
English: As soon as he had finished speaking, Cui Yao's servant came to report that the singer and prostitute had fallen into evil and died suddenly.

古文：珙甚悲之，鲔密言：有一事或可活之，须得白牛头及酒一斛。
现代文：崔珙听说后非常难过。王鲔就私下对他说，你拿一只白牛头和一斛酒来，我也许能救活她。
English: When Cui Yao heard this, he was very sad. Wang Yao privately said to him, "Bring me a white bull's head and a bottle of wine. I might be able to save her life."

古文：因召左右，试令求觅。
现代文：崔珙立刻叫手下的人快分头去找。
English: Cui Yao immediately ordered his men to quickly split up and search for her.

古文：有度支所由甚干事，以善价取之，不逾时而至。
现代文：恰好度支所里有头白牛，就出了高价买了来杀掉，很快把白牛的头送到崔珙家。
English: Just as there was a white cow in the branch, he bought it at a high price to kill it, and soon sent the head of the white cow to Cui Lan's home.

古文：鲔令扶歌者，置于净室榻上。前以大盆盛酒，横取板，安牛头于其上。设席焚香，密封其户，且诫曰：专伺之，晓鼓一动，闻牛吼。当急开户，可以活矣。
现代文：王鲔就让把那死去的歌妓抬到净室的床上，前面放了一大盆酒，盆上横了一块板子，把白牛头放在板上，摆上供桌烧上香，把门关得严严的，并告诉崔珙在门外专心守候，晨鼓一响，听见牛吼叫声，就立刻把门打开，歌女就能复活了。
English: Wang Yao had the dead geisha carried to the bed of the purification room. A large basin of wine was placed in front of her, and a board was laid on the basin. The white bull's head was placed on the board, placed on the table for burning incense, and the door was tightly closed. He told Cui Yao to wait outside the door attentively. As soon as the morning drum sounded and the cow bellowed, he would immediately open the door, and the geisha would be revived.

古文：鲔遂去。
现代文：交待完之后王鲔就走了。
English: After the interview, Wang Yao left.

古文：数日方能言，云，其夕治汝既毕，有人促召，出门，乘马而行。
现代文：天亮时晨鼓一响，果然那牛头吼叫起来，忙打开门看，见歌妓已能微弱地喘气，那盆酒全干了，牛的两只眼鼓起了老高。
English: At dawn, the morning drum sounded, and sure enough, the ox bellowed, opened the door quickly, and saw that the geisha had been able to breathe weakly, the basin of wine was completely dry, and the two eyes of the cow were bulging.

古文：约数里，见室宇华丽，开筵张乐。四座皆朱紫少年，见歌者至，大喜，致于妓席。
现代文：过了几天后那歌妓才能说话了。据她说，那天晚上梳装刚完，就有人催着召见，她出门后骑上了一匹马，跑了几里地后，见一座华丽的府宅内正大摆筵席，座中都是穿红衣紫衣的少年，看见她来了十分高兴，把她请到歌妓的席位上坐下。
English: A few days later, the singer was able to speak. According to her, that evening, as soon as she had finished dressing, someone urged her to see him. After she left the house, she rode a horse. After running a few miles, she saw a grand banquet being held in an ornate mansion, with young men in red and purple. She was very happy to see her, and invited her to sit in the singer's seat.

古文：欢笑方洽，忽闻有人大呼，声振庭庑，座者皆失色相视，妓乐俱罢。
现代文：大家正在欢笑饮乐时，忽然听见有人大声呼喊，声音震得满院都起了回音，座上的人们大惊失色，歌妓和乐队也停止了演唱。
English: While everyone was laughing and drinking, they suddenly heard someone shouting loudly, the sound shook the whole hall, the people on the stage were shocked and lost their color, and the singer and the band stopped singing.

古文：俄见牛头人，长丈余，执戟径趋前，无不狼狈而走，唯歌者在焉。
现代文：顷刻间，只见一个身高一丈多的牛头怪物，手拿着一把戟来到院中，大伙吓得四散而逃，只有她没动地方。
English: All of a sudden, I saw a monster with a bull's head, more than a meter tall, come into the courtyard with a pickaxe in his hand. Everyone was scared and ran away, only she didn't move.

古文：牛头引于阶前，背负而出，行十数步，忽觉卧于室内。
现代文：那牛头怪物把她领到台阶前，背上她就走。走了十几步，她突然觉得躺在屋里床上，就醒来了。
English: The bull-headed monster led her to the front of the steps, and she got on her back and walked. After walking a dozen steps, she suddenly felt like she was lying on a bed in the house and woke up.

古文：珙后密询其事，鲔终不言。
现代文：崔珙后来偷偷问王鲔倒底是怎么会事，王鲔始终没有说出来。
English: Later, Cui Zhen secretly asked Wang Zhen what the matter was, but Wang Zhen still did not say anything.

古文：李戴仁
现代文：李戴仁
English: Lee Dae-in

古文：江河多伥鬼，往往呼人姓名，应之者必溺，乃死魂者诱之也。
现代文：江河岸边常常有些被虎咬死的鬼，他们往往呼叫人的名字，答应的人必然会被淹死，这是那些伥鬼在引诱他们。
English: On the banks of rivers, there are often ghosts who have been killed by tigers. They often call out people's names. Those who agree are sure to be drowned. It is the ghosts who lure them.

古文：李戴仁尝维舟于枝江县曲浦中，月色皎然，忽见一妪一男子，出水面四顾，失声云：此有生人。
现代文：有个李戴仁，有一次乘船在湖北枝江县的曲浦游玩，晚上把船系在江边。这夜月色皎洁，忽见江面上冒出一个妇女和一个男人，他俩四下看了看，吃惊地说，这里有生人！
English: Once upon a time, a man named Li Dayen took a boat to Qupu in Zhuangjiang County, Hubei Province. At night, he tied the boat to the edge of the river. That night, with the moon shining brightly, he suddenly saw a woman and a man emerge from the surface of the river. They both looked around and said in surprise, "There are people living here!"

古文：遽驰水面，若履平地，登岸而去。
现代文：接着就在江面上跑了起来，就像在平地上一样，很快地登岸而逃了。
English: Then he ran up the river, just as if he were on level ground, quickly got ashore and fled.

古文：当阳令苏汭居江陵，尝夜归，月明中，见一美人被发，所著裾裾，殆似水湿。
现代文：当阳县令苏汭住在江陵时，有一天夜里回家，月光下见一个美女披散着头发，身上的衣裙都是湿的。
English: When Yang Xianling Su Yao was living in Jiangling, he came home one night and saw a beautiful woman in the moonlight with her hair falling out and her dress all wet.

古文：汭戏云：非江伥耶？
现代文：苏汭就开玩笑说，你莫非是江边的伥鬼吧？
English: Su Yao jokingly said, "You must be the ghost of the river, right?"

古文：妇人怒曰：唤我作鬼。
现代文：那女子大怒说，你凭什么把我叫作鬼？
English: The woman said angrily, "Why do you call me a ghost?

古文：奔而逐之，汭走，遇更巡方止，见妇却返所来之路。
现代文：说罢就追赶苏汭。苏汭吓得奔跑起来，直到遇见一个巡夜的更夫才停下来。回头一看，只见那女子又顺原来的路返回江边了。
English: As soon as she said that, she ran after Su Shi. Su Shi was so scared that she ran until she met a night watchman. When she looked back, she saw that the woman had returned to the river along her original path.

古文：刘璪
现代文：刘璪
English: Liu Xuan

古文：汉江北邓州界，地名穴口，本无镇戍。
现代文：汉江北面的邓州地界，有个叫穴口的地方，原本没有军队守卫村镇，只有一条小河向南流入汉江。
English: North of the Han River, on the border of Dengzhou, there is a place called Hukou. Originally, there was no army to guard the villages and towns, only a small river flowing south into the Han River.

古文：有小河，南流入于汉，久为沙拥，水道甚隘。前江陵令刘璪。丙子岁，往彼州访亲知。至穴口，宿旧知韩氏家。
现代文：小河长期被沙石堵塞，河道很窄。丙子那年，前任江陵县令刘璪到邓州去走访亲友，到穴口以后，住在一个姓韩的朋友家。
English: The small river has long been blocked by sand and stones, and the river channel is very narrow. That year, the former governor of Jiangling County, Liu Wei, went to Dengzhou to visit relatives and friends. After arriving at the mouth of the river, he stayed at a friend's house with the surname Han.

古文：家人曰：邻村张家新妇，卒来三日，适来却活。
现代文：韩家的人对他说，邻村张家的新媳妇死了三天又活了，韩氏前去看望。
English: A member of the Han family told him that the new daughter-in-law of the Zhang family in a neighboring village had died for three days and then came back to life. Han went to visit her.

古文：主人暂往省之。至夜，韩家归云，张妇为侧近庙神召去，见其中外亲眷亡者咸在焉。为庙神造军顿，无人作饼，故令召来。
现代文：这天夜里，韩氏回来了，说张家媳妇被附近的庙神召去，看见她家死去的亲属都在那里为庙神作军中需用的饭食，因为没人作饼，所以才把那媳妇召了去。
English: That night, Mr. Han returned and said that the Zhang family's daughter-in-law had been summoned by the nearby temple god. He saw that her family's dead relatives were there to make food for the temple god's army. Since no one was making cakes, he summoned the daughter-in-law.

古文：见厅上门外，将士列坐。言开穴口江水，士卒踣沙，手皆血流。
现代文：去后只见院里门外都是一些将士在坐着，听他们说，他们去挖穴口的水道，挖沙子把手都抠出了血。
English: When I got there, I saw some soldiers sitting outside the gate of the courtyard. I heard them say that they had gone to dig a water channel at the mouth of the cave, and that they had dug sand, and their hands were covered in blood.

古文：供顿毕，乃放回。
现代文：这些士兵吃完饭后，就把那媳妇放回来了。
English: After the soldiers finished their meal, they released the daughter-in-law.

古文：乡里未之信，不久，沙壖相次摧垫，江路乃通。
现代文：村里人起初不相信，不久以后穴口河道的沙堆就都塌了，河水开始畅流无阻。
English: At first, the villagers didn't believe it, but soon the sand dunes in the Anakuchi channel collapsed and the river began to flow freely.

古文：李矩
现代文：李矩
English: Li Rui

古文：成汭镇荆州，有垫江县令崔令，与主簿李矩不协，邻于水火。
现代文：成汭镇守湖北荆州时，当时的垫江县的县令崔令和县里的主簿李矩不和，闹到水火不相容的程度。
English: When Chenglu Town was in charge of Jingzhou, Hubei Province, the then county magistrate of Jiejiang County, Cui Ling, and the county's chief magistrate, Li Jian, were at loggerheads, to the extent that they were incompatible.

古文：一旦群盗劫县，杀崔令。
现代文：有一次盗匪打劫县城，杀了崔令。
English: Once, a bandit robbed the county seat and killed Cui Ling.

古文：贼过后，矩入宅检校，有一厅子方避贼，见矩，以为与贼通，明日，言镇将。
现代文：匪贼们退走以后，李矩赶到崔令家去察看情况，正赶上有一个差役在崔令家躲贼，看见了李矩，误以为他和盗匪相通，第二天就报告了镇将。
English: After the bandits retreated, Li Rong hurried to Cui Ling's home to inspect the situation. Just in time, a policeman was hiding from the bandits in Cui Ling's home. When he saw Li Rong, he mistakenly thought that he was in communication with the bandits, and reported to the town marshal the next day.

古文：众咸知矩与崔失欢，颇疑之。
现代文：人们都知道李矩和崔令不和，对这事也有怀疑，于是就把李矩抓起来送到豫州。
English: People knew that Li Rong and Cui Ling were not on good terms, and they also had doubts about this, so they arrested Li Rong and sent him to Yuzhou.

古文：执送中州，推问不伏。
现代文：经审问，李矩不服，又解送到江陵，关进监狱的右厢房。
English: After interrogation, Li Rui was not satisfied and was sent to Gangneung, where he was put in the right wing of the prison.

古文：遂解送江陵，禁右厢狱，厢吏速于具狱。推吏常某，言于判官范某曰：李矩诋谰，须栲究之。
现代文：典狱官员们急于完案，有个管诉讼的推官常某对范判官说，李矩这人狡辩抵赖，必须动大刑拷打才能招供！
English: The prison officials were in a hurry to finish the case, and one of the supervisors in charge of the proceedings, Chang Mou, said to Judge Fan, "This person, Li Rong, is a cunning denier, and he must be subjected to severe torture in order to confess!"

古文：范固不许，常竟锻炼以成之。
现代文：范判官不同意，常某竟然用刑迫使李矩承招。
English: Judge Fan disagreed, and Chang Mou actually used punishment to force Li Mom to accept the invitation.

古文：矩临刑，戒家人多烧纸笔，讼于地下。
现代文：李矩临刑前告诉家里人，让他们多多焚化纸、笔，准备到了阴间继续申诉控告推官常某。
English: Before he was sentenced, Li Rui told his family members to burn as much paper and pens as possible, so that they would be prepared to continue to appeal and sue the judge in the afterlife.

古文：才一月，常某暴亡。
现代文：果然，一个月后，常某突然暴亡。
English: Sure enough, a month later, Chang Mou suddenly died.

古文：后李矩主簿见身，范见矩至，曰：某受判官深恩，非感造次。但冥府只要为证耳。
现代文：后来李矩现形来见范某，对范某说，我生前得到你的关照，感恩不尽，这次我请你到阴间去决不是恩将仇报，只是冥府需要你去为我作证而已。
English: Later, Li Rui showed up to see Fan Mou, and said to Fan Mou, "I received your care before I died, and I can't thank you enough. This time, when I invited you to the underworld, it wasn't a case of returning the favor, but the underworld needed you to testify for me."

古文：及妻子以诚祈之，乞容旬日，区分家事。
现代文：范某的妻儿老小苦苦哀求，让范某暂缓一个月再去阴间。
English: Fan Mou's wife and children begged Fan Mou to wait one month before going to the underworld.

古文：虽无痛苦，饮食如常，但困惫，逾月而卒。
现代文：在这一个月里，范某处理家务，也能饮食，表面看没什么痛苦，只是感到十分疲惫，没有精神。一个月后，范某果然死去。
English: During this month, Fan dealt with household chores and was able to eat and drink. On the surface, there was no pain, but he felt very tired and had no energy. A month later, Fan died.

古文：陶福
现代文：陶福
English: Tofu

古文：蜀将陶福，少年无赖，偷狗屠牛。
现代文：蜀中将军陶福，少年时是个无赖，偷狗宰牛什么坏事都干。
English: Shuzhong General Tao Fu was a ruffian when he was a boy, stealing dogs and slaughtering cattle, and doing all kinds of bad things.

古文：后立功，至郡守。屯戍兴元府之西县，暴得疾。
现代文：后来他立了功，当上了郡守，驻扎在兴元府的西县。
English: Later, he distinguished himself and became the county governor, stationed in the west county of Xingyuanfu.

古文：急命从人朱军将，诣府迎医李令蔼。
现代文：有一次陶福突然得了急病，忙叫手下的朱军将到州府去请医生李令蔼。
English: Once when Tao Fu suddenly fell ill, he hurriedly ordered his subordinate Zhu Jun to go to the state capital to ask for the doctor Li Ling'an.

古文：令蔼与朱军将连骑驰往。至夜，抵西县近郭诸葛亮庙前，见秉炬三对前导，拥一人步行，荷校挚缚，众人相从。后有陶亲叟，抱衣裘而随之。
现代文：两个人骑马往回奔，晚上抵达西县城郊的诸葛亮庙前，忽然看见有些人提着三对灯笼押送一个犯人步行而来。那犯人被绳索捆着，还戴着枷，后面跟着陶福的父母，抱着衣物跟着。
English: The two of them rode back, and in the evening they arrived in front of the Zhuge Liang Temple on the outskirts of Xi County. Suddenly, they saw some people carrying three pairs of lanterns escorting a prisoner on foot. The prisoner was tied with ropes and wearing shackles, followed by Tao Fu's parents, carrying clothes.

古文：令蔼先未识陶福，朱军将指谓令蔼曰：此是我家太尉，胡为如此？
现代文：李令蔼以前并不认识陶福，这时就听同行的朱军将说，那犯人就是我家主人陶福，他怎么会落到这个地步呢？
English: Li Ling'ai did not know Tao Fu before, when he heard his companion Zhu Junming say that the criminal was my master Tao Fu, how could he fall to this level?

古文：逡巡恐悚，亦疑是鬼。
现代文：两个人又惊又怕，跟前跟后的徘徊了很久，又怀疑是鬼怪。
English: The two men were startled and afraid, and wandered around for a long time, suspecting that it was a ghost.

古文：晓至其营，已闻家人哭声，向来执录，乃福之魂也。巴川崔令
现代文：天亮时，他们赶到陶福家，没进大门就听见传出陶福家人的哭声。原来他们在路上遇见的情形，正是阴间来捉陶福的灵魂。巴川崔令
English: At dawn, they arrived at Taufu's house. Before they entered the gate, they heard the cries of Taufu's family. It turned out that what they encountered on the road was the spirit of the underworld coming to capture Taufu. Bachuan Cui Ling

古文：合州巴川县，乱后官舍残毁，移居塞中，稍可自固。
现代文：四川合州巴川县经过战乱后，官府的房舍十分破败，官员们就移居在城堡寨子里，还比较安全些。
English: After the war in Bachuan County, Hezhou, Sichuan, the buildings of the government were very dilapidated, and the officials moved to the castle, which was safer.

古文：崔某为令，尝有健卒盗寨木，令擒送镇将斩之。
现代文：当时的县令姓崔，曾经把偷盗寨木的兵士捉拿送交镇将斩首。
English: The county magistrate at the time, surnamed Cui, once beheaded a soldier who had been caught stealing timber and sent to the town.

古文：卒家先事壁山神，卒死，神乃与令家为祟，或见形往来，或空中诟骂，掷火毁器。
现代文：这个兵士家里的神龛中一直供奉着山神，兵士被处死后，山神就常常跑到崔某家作怪。有时山神现了原形在崔某家出出进进，有时就在空中高声辱骂，或是扔下火来，毁坏崔家的器物。
English: The mountain deity has been worshipped in the shrine of the soldier's family. After the soldier was executed, the mountain deity often ran to Choi's house to play tricks. Sometimes the mountain deity appeared in its original form in Choi's house, sometimes it shouted insults in the air, or threw down fire and destroyed the Choi family's belongings.

古文：钱帛衣服，无敌遗失，箱匣锁闭如初，其中衣服，率皆剪碎。
现代文：崔家的钱财衣物也常常无故丢失，而且箱子锁着，其中的衣服全被剪碎。
English: The Cui family's money, property and clothes were also often lost without reason, and the boxes were locked, with all the clothes inside cut to pieces.

古文：求方术禳解，都不能制。
现代文：崔某求道士施法术驱妖，也不见效。
English: Cui Mou asked a Taoist priest to cast a spell to drive away the demon, but it did not work.

古文：令罢官还千里，鬼亦随之。
现代文：后来崔某罢官回到千里以外的家乡，鬼怪仍然跟着他。
English: Later, Cui Mou returned to his hometown thousands of miles away, and the ghost still followed him.

古文：又日夕饮食，与人无异。一家承事，不敢有怠。
现代文：这鬼平日吃喝起居和人们一样，崔某全家侍奉着鬼怪，不敢有所怠慢。
English: This ghost eats, drinks and lives like people on weekdays. Cui Mou's whole family serves the ghost and dares not neglect it.

古文：费用甚多，吏力将困。
现代文：养这个鬼花去家中不少钱，实在负担不起。
English: It costs a lot of money to keep this ghost flower at home, and I really can't afford it.

古文：忽一旦，举家闻大鸟鼓翼之声，止于屋。
现代文：有一天，全家都听到有一只大鸟搧动着翅膀停在房上，过了半天，又听见空中大声说，我是大王。
English: One day, the whole family heard a large bird perched on the roof of the house, flapping its wings. Half a day later, they also heard a loud voice in the sky saying, "I am the great king."

古文：久之，空中大呼，自称大王，曰：汝比有灾，值我雍溪兄弟非理，破除汝家活计，损失财物。作诸怪异，计汝必甚畏之，今已遣去矣。
现代文：你们过去注定要有灾祸，那是因为我在雍溪的兄弟对你们不客气，他毁坏你家的器物，使你们损失了不少钱财，干了很多兴妖作怪的事，想必你们很怕他，现在我已把他打发走了，以后你们就祸尽福来了。
English: You were doomed to disaster in the past because my brother in Yongxi was rude to you. He destroyed your family's belongings, caused you to lose a lot of money and property, and did a lot of demonic things. You must have been very afraid of him. Now that I have sent him away, you will have nothing but bad luck in the future.

古文：汝灾尽福生，吾自来暂驻，亦将不久。且借天蓬龛子中居。
现代文：我将到你们家住一段，也不会太久，就住在你家屋外天棚上的神龛里。
English: I'm going to live with you for a while, not too long, in a shrine in the attic outside your house.

古文：此天蓬样极好。借上天，上传写一本，三五日即送来。
现代文：你家的天棚式样很好，我要把它借到天上去，照样画出一个图样，三五天就还给你。
English: The design of the ceiling in your house is very good. I want to borrow it to go up to the sky, draw a design in the same way, and return it to you in three or five days.

古文：数日后，置天蓬于舍檐上。自此日夕常在，恒与主人语。
现代文：几天后，那神把天棚安放在屋檐上，从此它就住在那儿，常常和崔某交谈。
English: A few days later, the god placed the canopy on the eaves, and since then it has been living there, often talking to Cui.

古文：今大小诵诗赋，作音乐，一一随声唱之。
现代文：崔家的人诵读诗赋或奏音乐时，那神也随着唱和。
English: When members of the Cui family recite poems or play music, the god also sings along.

古文：所诵文字，或有谬误，必为改正。
现代文：有时读书读了错字，神就给改正。
English: Sometimes when you read a book and read a misspelled word, God corrects it.

古文：其言多劝人为善，亦令学气术修道。
现代文：它还总劝人行善，还让崔某练气修道。
English: It also always advised people to do good deeds, and also let Cui practice qi cultivation.

古文：或云寻常乘鹤，往来天上。
现代文：那神说他经常骑着鹤往来于天上。
English: The god said that he often rode a crane to and from heaven.

古文：初邑中有群鹤现，神云：数内只有两只真鹤，我所骑来，其余皆常鸟矣。
现代文：有一次，崔某家附近出现了一群鹤，神说其中只有两只是真鹤，是他骑来的，其余都是平常的鸟类。
English: Once, a flock of cranes appeared near Cui's home. God said that only two of them were real cranes, and that he had ridden them, while the rest were ordinary birds.

古文：又自云姓张。每日饮食，与人无异。
现代文：神自己说姓张，每天的饮食和普通人一样。
English: God Himself said that His surname is Zhang, and His daily diet is the same as that of an ordinary person.

古文：有女名锦绣娘，及妻妾。食物所费亦不少。
现代文：还说他有个女儿叫锦绣娘，还有妻妾，家中饮食花费也不小。
English: He also said that he has a daughter named Jinxiu, as well as a wife and concubine, and the food expenses at home are not small.

古文：凡见善人君子，即肯与言。
现代文：还说，他只要遇到君子好人就愿意交谈，对强暴小人一概不理。
English: He also said that he was willing to talk to anyone who met a gentleman and a good person, and would ignore any violent villain.

古文：稍强暴之人，即不与语，亦云上天去，忽有醉僧健卒三人来谒之，言词无度，有所凌毁，因不语。僧去后，徐谓人曰：此僧食狗肉，凶暴无良，不欲共语。
现代文：还说有一次他在天上时，有个醉和尚领着两个士兵来见他，他见那醉和尚言词粗鲁，非常无礼，就一直不说话。和尚走后，他才慢慢地对人说：这和尚吃狗肉，凶暴恶毒，我才不理他呢。
English: He also said that once when he was in heaven, a drunken monk with two soldiers came to see him. He saw that the drunken monk was rude and very impolite, so he did not speak. After the monk left, he slowly said to people: This monk eats dog meat, is violent and vicious, so I just ignored him.

古文：人之所行，善恶灾福，言无不中。
现代文：这神对人们的行为和吉凶祸福都了如指掌。没有说不中的。
English: This god knows everything about people's behavior and their good, evil, misfortune and fortune. There is nothing he cannot say.

古文：至于小名第行，一一皆知。
现代文：甚至人们的兄弟排行，小名叫什么，他都一清二楚。
English: He even knew everyone's brothers and sisters, and what their nicknames were.

古文：细问之，即以他语为对。未知是何神也。
现代文：如果仔细问他，他就避而不答扯些别的，所以人们始终不知道他是一位什么神仙。
English: If you ask him carefully, he avoids answering anything else, so people always don't know what kind of god he is.

古文：遂宁有冯生见鬼，知人吉凶。
现代文：四川遂宁有位冯生，能和鬼交往，所以能预知别人的吉凶祸福。
English: There is a Feng Sheng in Suining, Sichuan, who can communicate with ghosts, so he can predict other people's good luck, bad luck, and misfortune.

古文：颍川陈绚，为武信军留后，而刘知俊代之。
现代文：颖川人陈绚曾在武信的军中担任留后官，后来被刘知俊取代了。
English: Chen Hua, a native of Yingchuan, once served as a second-in-command in the army of Wu Xin, and was later replaced by Liu Zhijun.

古文：捃其旧事，冯谓绚曰：刘公虽号元戎。前无幢节，殆不久乎，幸勿忧也。
现代文：冯生和陈绚谈起旧事时说：刘知俊虽然作了统帅，但我看见冥府并没有派仪仗侍卫保护他，我看他是干不长的，你不用忧愁。
English: When Feng Sheng and Chen Huan talked about the past, he said: Although Liu Zhijun was the commander-in-chief, I saw that the Hades did not send a guard of honor to protect him. I think he is not long, you do not have to worry.

古文：未逾岁而知俊被杀。
现代文：果然不到一年刘知俊就被杀了。
English: Less than a year later, Liu Zhijun was killed.

古文：有林泳者，闽人。常谓其僚友曰：安有生人而终日见鬼乎？无听其袄。
现代文：有个福建人叫林泳，常对同僚们说：我就不信活人能跟鬼交往，别听人们乱造妖言！
English: There is a Fujianese named Lin Yong, who often said to his colleagues: I don't believe that living people can communicate with ghosts, don't listen to people's wild rumors!

古文：冯闻之，对众谓之曰：君为宜多不克终，盖曾杀一女人为祟。
现代文：冯生听说后，就当众对林泳说：你的所作所为使你不会善终，因为你曾杀害过一个女人，这女人会和你作对的。
English: After hearing this, Feng Sheng said to Lin Yong in public: "Your actions will not end well, because you once killed a woman, and this woman will oppose you.

古文：以公禄寿未尽，莫致其便。
现代文：由于你的寿数还没尽，那女人暂时还没有得手。
English: Since you have not yet reached the end of your life, the woman has not been able to succeed for the time being.

古文：我能言其姓名，公信之乎。
现代文：我现在能说出那女人的姓名，你信不信？
English: I can tell you the woman's name now, believe it or not.

古文：于是惭惧。言诚于冯，许为解其冤也。
现代文：林泳听后又害怕又惭愧，就将实情告诉了冯生，并许诺要免解她的冤情。
English: Afraid and ashamed, Lin Yong told Feng Sheng the truth and promised to absolve her grievances.

