古文：◎五行三
现代文：五行三
English: Five elements, three elements

古文：《洪范》曰： 金曰从革。 
现代文：《洪范》上说 金随人改变 。
English: "Hong Fan" said that money changes with people.

古文：金不从革，则失其性矣。
现代文：金不随人改变，便失去了它的自然本性。
English: If gold does not change with people, it will lose its natural nature.

古文：前史多以恒昜、诗妖、毛虫之孽、犬祸、金石之妖、白眚白祥皆属之金，今从之。
现代文：前代历史多把恒旸、诗妖、毛虫之孽、犬祸、金石之妖、白眚白祥都归属于金，现在照此处理。
English: In the history of the previous generation, many people attributed Hengqin, Poetic Demon, Caterpillar's Sin, Dog's Bane, Goldstone's Demon, and Egret's Blessing to gold, and now they are dealt with accordingly.

古文：▲恒蝪
现代文：恒蝪
English: Hengchun

古文：洪武三年，夏旱。
现代文：洪武三年，夏天干旱。
English: Hongwu three years, summer drought.

古文：六月戊午朔，步祷郊坛。
现代文：六月戊午初一，在郊坛进行禹步祈祷以求雨。
English: On the morning of the first day of the month of June, they prayed for rain in the suburbs.

古文：四年，陕西、河南、山西及直隶常州、临濠、北平、河间、永平旱。
现代文：四年，陕西、河南、山西以及直隶常州、临濠、北平、河问永平遭旱灾。
English: In 2004, Shaanxi, Henan, Shanxi, as well as Zhili, Changzhou, Linyi, Beiping and Heping Yongping suffered from drought.

古文：五年夏，山东旱。
现代文：五年夏季，山东遭旱灾。
English: In the summer of 2005, Shandong suffered a drought.

古文：七年夏，北平旱。
现代文：七年夏季，北平遭旱灾。
English: In the summer of 1978, Beiping was hit by a drought.

古文：二十三年，山东旱。
现代文：二十三年，山东遭旱灾。
English: In 233, Shandong suffered a drought.

古文：二十六年，大旱，诏求直言。
现代文：二十六年，遭大旱，下诏访求直言。
English: Twenty-six years later, in the face of a severe drought, he made a visit to the emperor to ask for his opinion.

古文：永乐十三年，凤阳、苏州、浙江、湖广旱。
现代文：永乐十三年，凤阳、苏州、浙江、湖广遭旱灾。
English: In the 13th year of Yongle, Fengyang, Suzhou, Zhejiang and Hunan suffered from drought.

古文：十六年，陕西旱。
现代文：十六年，陕西遭旱灾。
English: It has been 16 years since Shaanxi suffered a drought.

古文：宣德元年夏，江西旱。
现代文：宣德元年夏季，江西干旱。
English: In the summer of the first year of Xuande, Jiangxi suffered from drought.

古文：湖广夏秋旱。
现代文：湖广地区夏秋季干旱。
English: The summer and autumn are dry in the Hukang area.

古文：二年，南畿、湖广、山东、山西、陕西、河南旱。
现代文：二年，南畿、湖广、山东、山西、陕西、河南遭旱灾。
English: Two years ago, Nanki, Hougang, Shandong, Shanxi, Shaanxi and Henan suffered from drought.

古文：七年，河南及大名夏秋旱。
现代文：七年，河南和大名夏秋季干旱。
English: In the past seven years, Henan and Daming have been experiencing droughts in summer and autumn.

古文：八年，南、北畿、河南、山东、山西自春徂夏不雨。
现代文：八年，南畿、北畿、河南、山东、山西从春季到夏季不降雨。
English: In 2008, there was no rainfall from spring to summer in South Kivu, North Kivu, Henan, Shandong and Shanxi provinces.

古文：九年，南畿、湖广、江西、浙江及真定、济南、东昌、兖州、平阳、重庆等府旱。
现代文：九年，南畿、湖广、江西、浙江以及真定、济南、束昌、充州、平阳、重庆等府遭旱灾。
English: In 2009, Nanki, Hukang, Jiangxi, Zhejiang, as well as Zhending, Jinan, Sokchang, Chenzhou, Pingyang, Chongqing and other prefectures suffered from drought.

古文：十年，畿辅旱。
现代文：十年，畿辅干旱。
English: Ten years later, Kiyosu is in drought.

古文：正统二年，河南春旱。
现代文：正统二年，河南春季干旱。
English: In the second year of the orthodoxy, Henan had a drought in the spring.

古文：顺德、兖州春夏旱。
现代文：顺德、充州春夏季干旱。
English: Shunde and Chenzhou suffer from drought in spring and summer.

古文：平凉等六府秋旱。
现代文：平凉等六府秋季干旱。
English: Autumn drought in six prefectures including Pingliang.

古文：三年，南畿、浙江、湖广、江西九府旱。
现代文：三年，南畿、浙江、湖广、江西九府遭旱灾。
English: In the past three years, nine prefectures in Nangui, Zhejiang, Huguang and Jiangxi have been affected by drought.

古文：四年，直隶、陕西、河南及太原、平阳春夏旱。
现代文：四年，直隶、陕西、河南以及太原、平阳春夏季遭旱灾。
English: In four years, Zhili, Shaanxi, Henan, as well as Taiyuan and Pingyang suffered from drought in spring and summer.

古文：五年，江西夏秋旱。
现代文：五年，江西夏秋季干旱。
English: In five years, Jiangxi suffered from drought in summer and autumn.

古文：南畿、湖广、四川府五，州卫各一，自六月不雨至于八月。
现代文：南畿、湖广、四川等五府，州卫各一，从六月不降雨直到八月。
English: Five prefectures, including Nanki, Hukang, and Sichuan, and one health district each, have no rainfall from June to August.

古文：六年，陕西旱。
现代文：六年，陕西干旱。
English: Shaanxi has been in drought for six years.

古文：南畿、浙江、湖广、江西府州县十五，春夏并旱。
现代文：南畿、浙江、湖广、江西十五个府州县，春季和夏季都遭旱灾。
English: Fifteen prefectures and counties in Nanki, Zhejiang, Hukang and Jiangxi suffered from drought in spring and summer.

古文：七年，南畿、浙江、湖广、江西府州县卫二十余，大旱。
现代文：七年，南畿、浙江、湖广、江西二十多个府州县卫遭受大旱灾。
English: In the seventh year, more than 20 prefectures and counties in Nanki, Zhejiang, Hukang and Jiangxi suffered from severe drought.

古文：十年夏，湖广旱。
现代文：十年夏季，湖广干旱。
English: In the summer of the tenth year, the lake was dry.

古文：十一年，湖广及重庆等府夏秋旱。
现代文：十一年，湖广和重庆等府夏秋季节遭旱灾。
English: In the eleventh year, the prefectures of Huguang and Chongqing suffered from drought in the summer and autumn seasons.

古文：十二年，南畿及山西、湖广等府七夏旱。
现代文：十二年，南畿和山西、湖广等七府，夏季干旱。
English: In 2012, seven prefectures, including Nanki, Shanxi and Hukang, experienced drought in the summer.

古文：十三年，直隶、陕西、湖广府州七夏秋旱。
现代文：十三年，直隶、陕西、湖广七府州，夏秋干旱。
English: In the thirteenth year, Zhili, Shaanxi, and Huguang were the seven prefectures, and the summer and autumn were dry.

古文：十四年六月，顺天、保定、河间、真定旱。
现代文：十四年六月，顺天、保定、河间、真定干旱。
English: In June 2014, Shuntian, Baoding, Hema, and Zhending experienced drought.

古文：景泰元年畿辅、山东、河南旱。
现代文：景泰元年畿辅、山东、河南遭干旱。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Kiyosu, Shandong, and Henan suffered from drought.

古文：二年，陕西府四、卫九旱。
现代文：二年，陕西四府、九卫干旱。
English: Two years later, the four prefectures of Shaanxi and Jiuwei were in drought.

古文：三年，江西旱。
现代文：三年，江西干旱。
English: Three years, Jiangxi drought.

古文：四年，南北畿、河南及湖广府三，数月不雨。
现代文：四年，南北畿、河南以及湖广三府，几个月不降雨。
English: In four years, the three prefectures of North, South, and Kii, Henan, and Hukang had no rainfall for several months.

古文：五年，山东、河南旱。
现代文：五年，山东、河南遭旱灾。
English: Five years ago, Shandong and Henan suffered from drought.

古文：六年，南畿及山东、山西、河南、陕西、江西、湖广府三十三、州卫十五皆旱。
现代文：六年，南畿以及山东、山西、河南、陕西、江西、湖广三十三府，十五州卫都遭旱灾。
English: In 2006, the 33 prefectures of Nanki, Shandong, Shanxi, Henan, Shaanxi, Jiangxi, and Hukang, as well as the 15 prefectural capitals, were affected by drought.

古文：七年，湖广、浙江及南畿、江西、山西府十七旱。
现代文：七年，湖广、浙江以及南畿、江西、山西十七个府遭受干旱。
English: In the past seven years, Huguang, Zhejiang and the seventeen provinces of Nangui, Jiangxi and Shanxi have suffered from drought.

古文：天顺元年夏，两京不雨，杭州、宁波、金华、均州亦旱。
现代文：天顺元年夏季，两京不降雨，杭州、宁波、金华、均州也遭旱灾。
English: In the summer of the first year of Tianshun, there was no rainfall in the two capitals, and Hangzhou, Ningbo, Jinhua and Junzhou also suffered from drought.

古文：三年，南北畿、浙江、湖广、江西、四川、广西、贵州旱。四年，济南、青州、登州、肇庆、桂林、甘肃诸府卫夏旱。
现代文：三年，南北畿、浙江、湖广、江西、四川、广西、贵州遭旱灾四年，济南、青州、登州、肇庆、桂林、甘肃等府卫夏季遭旱灾。
English: In the third year, the provinces of North, South, Kinki, Zhejiang, Hukang, Jiangxi, Sichuan, Guangxi and Guizhou suffered from drought for four years, and Jinan, Qingzhou, Dengzhou, Zhaoqing, Guilin and Gansu suffered from drought in the summer.

古文：五年，南畿府四、州一，及锦衣等卫连月旱，伤稼。
现代文：五年，南畿四府、一州，以及锦衣等卫连月干旱，伤害庄稼。
English: In five years, four prefectures and one prefecture in Nanki, as well as Koi and other prefectures, suffered from months of drought, which damaged crops.

古文：七年，北畿旱。
现代文：七年，北畿干旱。
English: In the seventh year, there was a drought in North Kivu.

古文：济南、青州、东昌、卫辉，自正月不雨至于四月。
现代文：济南、青州、东昌、卫辉，从正月直到四月不降雨。
English: In Jinan, Qingzhou, Dongchang and Weihui, there is no rainfall from the first month of the year to April.

古文：成化三年，湖广、江西及南京十一卫旱。
现代文：成化三年，湖广、江西以及南京十一卫干旱。
English: In the past three years, Hubei, Jiangxi and Nanjing have experienced droughts.

古文：四年，两京春夏不雨。
现代文：四年，两京春季和夏季不降雨。
English: For the past four years, there has been no rain in the spring and summer in Beijing.

古文：湖广、江西旱。
现代文：湖广、江西遭旱灾。
English: Huguang and Jiangxi are suffering from drought.

古文：六年，直隶、山东、河南、陕西、四川府县卫多旱。
现代文：六年，直隶、山东、河南、陕西、四川府县卫多遭旱灾。
English: In the sixth year, Zhili, Shandong, Henan, Shaanxi and Sichuan prefectures suffered from drought.

古文：八年，京畿连月不雨，运河水涸，顺德、真定、武昌俱旱。
现代文：八年，京畿连月不降雨，运河水干涸，顺德、真定、武昌都遭旱灾。
English: In the eighth year, Gyeonggi had no rainfall for months on end, the canal water dried up, and Shunde, Jinding and Wuchang all suffered from drought.

古文：九年，彰德、卫辉、平阳旱。
现代文：九年，彰德、卫辉、平阳干旱。
English: In the ninth year, Zhangde, Weihui and Pingyang suffered droughts.

古文：十三年四月，京师旱。
现代文：十三年四月，京城干旱。
English: In April 13th, the capital was in drought.

古文：是岁，真定、河间、长沙皆旱。
现代文：这一年，真定、河间、长沙都遭旱灾。
English: This year, the cities of Jinding, Hema and Changsha all suffered from drought.

古文：十五年，京畿大旱，顺德、凤阳、徐州、济南、河南、湖广皆旱。
现代文：十五年，京畿遭大旱，顺德、凤阳、徐州、济南、河南、湖广都遭旱灾。
English: In the past 15 years, Gyeonggi Province suffered from severe drought, and Shunde, Fengyang, Xuzhou, Jinan, Henan, and Hougang all suffered from drought.

古文：十八年，两京、湖广、河南、陕西府十五、州二旱。
现代文：十八年，两京、湖广、河南、陕西十五个府、二个州遭旱灾。
English: In 2018, droughts hit 15 prefectures and two prefectures in Beijing, Hubei, Henan and Shaanxi.

古文：山西大旱。
现代文：山西遭大旱。
English: Shanxi is suffering from a severe drought.

古文：十九年，复旱。
现代文：十九年，又发生旱灾。
English: In 1919, another drought occurred.

古文：二十年，京畿、山东、湖广、陕西、河南、山西俱大旱。
现代文：二十年，京畿、山东、湖广、陕西、河南、山西都遭受大旱灾。
English: In the past 20 years, Gyeonggi Province, Shandong Province, Hunan Province, Shaanxi Province, Henan Province and Shanxi Province have all suffered from severe droughts.

古文：二十二年六月，陕西旱，虫鼠食苗稼，凡九十五州县。
现代文：二十二年六月，陕西遭旱灾，昆虫老鼠吃禾苗，遭灾达九十五个州县。
English: In June 2002, Shaanxi suffered from drought, insects and mice ate grain seedlings, and as many as ninety-five provinces and counties were affected.

古文：八月，北畿及江西三府旱。
现代文：八月，北畿和江西三府干旱。
English: In August, the three prefectures of North Gyeongsang Province and Jiangxi Province were in drought.

古文：九月，温、台大旱，长沙诸府亦旱。
现代文：九月，温、台遭大旱，长沙等府也发生旱灾。
English: In September, Wen and Taiwan were hit by a severe drought, and drought also occurred in Changsha and other prefectures.

古文：弘治元年，南畿、河南、四川及武昌诸府旱。
现代文：弘治元年，南畿、河南、四川及武昌等府发生干旱。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, droughts occurred in Nanki, Henan, Sichuan and Wuchang prefectures.

古文：三年，两京、陕西、山东、山西、湖广、贵州及开封旱。
现代文：三年，两京、陕西、山东、山西、湖广、贵州以及开封遭受旱灾。
English: In the past three years, Beijing, Shaanxi, Shandong, Shanxi, Hubei, Guizhou and Kaifeng have suffered from drought.

古文：四年，浙江府二，广西府八，及陕西洮州卫旱。
现代文：四年，浙江二府，广西八府，以及陕西洮州卫发生旱灾。
English: In 2004, two prefectures in Zhejiang, eight prefectures in Guangxi, and Bozhou, Shaanxi, experienced droughts.

古文：六年，北直、山东、河南、山西及襄阳、徐州旱。
现代文：六年，北直、山东、河南、山西以及襄阳、徐州遭受旱灾。
English: In the sixth year, Beizhi, Shandong, Henan, Shanxi, as well as Xiangyang and Xuzhou suffered from drought.

古文：七年，福建、四川、山西、陕西、辽东旱。
现代文：七年，福建、四川、山西、陕西、辽东遭受旱灾。
English: In the seventh year, Fujian, Sichuan, Shanxi, Shaanxi and Liaodong suffered from drought.

古文：八年，京畿、陕西、山西、湖广、江西大旱。
现代文：八年，京畿、陕西、山西、塑尘、江西遭受大旱灾。
English: In 2008, Gyeonggi Province, Shaanxi Province, Shanxi Province, Putuo Province and Jiangxi Province suffered from a severe drought.

古文：十年，顺天、淮安、太原、平阳、西安、延安、庆阳旱。
现代文：十年，顺天、淮安、太原、圣腿、西安、延安、庆阳发生旱灾。
English: In the past ten years, droughts have occurred in Shuntian, Huai'an, Taiyuan, Shentian, Xi'an, Yan'an and Qingyang.

古文：十一年，河南、山东、广西、江西、山西府十八旱。
现代文：十一年，河南、山东、广西、江西、山西十八个府遭受干旱。
English: In 2011, 18 prefectures in Henan, Shandong, Guangxi, Jiangxi and Shanxi suffered from drought.

古文：十二年夏，河南四府旱。
现代文：十二年夏季，河南四府发生旱灾。
English: In the summer of 2012, droughts occurred in four provinces of Henan Province.

古文：秋，山东旱。
现代文：秋季，山东遭旱灾。
English: In autumn, Shandong suffered from drought.

古文：十三年，庆阳、太原、平阳、汾、潞旱。
现代文：十三年，庆阳、太原、平阳、汾、潞干旱。
English: In the thirteenth year, Qingyang, Taiyuan, Pingyang, Handan and Handan experienced drought.

古文：十四年，辽东镇春至秋不雨，河沟尽涸。
现代文：十四年，辽东镇从春季到秋季不降雨，河沟全部干涸。
English: In the past 14 years, Liaodong Town has had no rainfall from spring to autumn, and the ditches have all dried up.

古文：十六年夏，京师大旱，苏、松、常、镇夏秋旱。
现代文：十六年夏季，京城遭大旱灾，苏、松、常、镇夏秋季干旱。
English: In the summer of the 16th year, Beijing suffered from a major drought, and Su, Song, Chang and Zhen suffered from droughts in the summer and autumn.

古文：十八年，北京及应天四十二卫旱。
现代文：十八年，北京以及应夭四十二卫受旱灾。
English: In 18 years, Beijing and Yingyao 42 Wei suffered from drought.

古文：正德元年，陕西三府旱。
现代文：正德元年，陕西三府遭旱灾。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, three prefectures in Shaanxi suffered from drought.

古文：二年，贵州、山西旱。
现代文：二年，贵州、山西遭旱灾。
English: Two years ago, Guizhou and Shanxi suffered from drought.

古文：三年，江南、北旱。
现代文：三年，长江南、北遭旱灾。
English: In the third year, the Yangtze River in the south and north suffered from drought.

古文：四年，旱，自三月至七月，陕西亦旱。
现代文：四年，发生旱灾，从三月到七月，陕西也发生旱灾。
English: For four years, droughts have occurred, and from March to July, droughts have also occurred in Shaanxi.

古文：七年，凤阳、苏、松、常、镇、平阳、太原、临、巩旱。
现代文：七年，凤阳、苏、松、常、镇、平阳、太原、临、巩遭旱灾。
English: In the seventh year, Fengyang, Su, Song, Chang, Zhen, Pingyang, Taiyuan, Lin and Gong suffered from drought.

古文：八年，畿辅及开封、大同、浙江六县旱。
现代文：八年，畿辅以及开封、大同、浙江六县遭旱灾。
English: Eight years ago, Kiyosu and six counties in Kaifeng, Datong and Zhejiang suffered from drought.

古文：九年，顺天、河间、保定、庐、凤、淮、扬旱。
现代文：九年，顺天、河间、保定、庐、凤、淮、扬发生旱灾。
English: In the ninth year, droughts occurred in Shuntian, Hema, Baoding, Handan, Feng, Huai and Yang.

古文：十一年，北畿及兖州、西安、大同旱。
现代文：十一年，北畿以及充州、西安、大同遭受旱灾。
English: In 2011, Beigui, as well as Chonju, Xi'an, and Datong, suffered from drought.

古文：十五年，淮、扬、凤阳州县三十六及临、巩、甘州旱。
现代文：十五年，淮、扬、凤阳三十六个州县以及临、巩、甘州发生旱灾。
English: In the past 15 years, droughts occurred in 36 prefectures and counties in Huai, Yang and Fengyang, as well as Lin, Gong and Gansu.

古文：十六年，两京、山东、河南、山西、陕西自正月不雨至于六月。
现代文：十六年，两京、山东、河南、山西、陕西从正月直到六月不降雨。
English: In the past 16 years, Beijing, Shandong, Henan, Shanxi and Shaanxi have had no rainfall from the first month of the year to June.

古文：嘉靖元年，南畿、江西、浙江、湖广、四川、辽东旱。
现代文：嘉靖元年，南畿、江西、浙江、湖广、四川、辽束发生旱灾。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, droughts occurred in Nanki, Jiangxi, Zhejiang, Huguang, Sichuan, and Liaozuo.

古文：二年，两京、山东、河南、湖广、江西及嘉兴、大同、成都俱旱，赤地千里，殍殣载道。
现代文：二年，雨京、山东、河南、湖广、江西以及嘉兴、大同、成都都遭受旱灾，赤地千里，饿死的人遍布于道路。
English: In the second year, Ujing, Shandong, Henan, Hukang, Jiangxi, as well as Jiaxing, Datong and Chengdu suffered from drought, and thousands of miles of red earth, people starving to death all over the road.

古文：三年，山东旱。
现代文：三年，山束发生旱灾。
English: For the third year in a row, there has been a drought in the mountains.

古文：五年，江左大旱。
现代文：五年，江左遭大旱灾。
English: Five years ago, the Yangtze River was hit by a major drought.

古文：六年，北畿四府，河南、山西及凤阳、淮安俱旱。
现代文：六年，北畿四府，河南、山西以及凤阳、淮安都遭受旱灾。
English: In 2006, the four prefectures of North Gyeongsang Province, Henan Province, Shanxi Province, Fengyang Province and Huai'an Province all suffered from drought.

古文：七年，北畿、湖广、河南、山东、山西、陕西大旱。
现代文：七年，北畿、湖广、河南、山东、山西、陕西发生大旱灾。
English: In the seventh year, a severe drought occurred in Beigui, Hukang, Henan, Shandong, Shanxi and Shaanxi.

古文：八年，山西及临洮、巩昌旱。
现代文：八年，山西以及临洮、巩昌发生旱灾。
English: In 2006, droughts occurred in Shanxi, Linyi and Gongchang.

古文：九年，应天、苏、松旱。
现代文：九年，应天、苏、松发生旱灾。
English: In the ninth year, droughts occurred in Yingtian, Su and Song.

古文：十年，陕西、山西大旱。
现代文：十年，陕西、山西发生大旱灾。
English: Ten years ago, a major drought occurred in Shaanxi and Shanxi.

古文：十一年，湖广、陕西大旱。
现代文：十一年，湖广、陕西发生大旱灾。
English: In the eleventh year, a major drought occurred in Hunan, Guangxi and Shaanxi.

古文：十七年夏，两京、山东、陕西、福建、湖广大旱。
现代文：十七年夏季，两京、山东、陕西、福建、湖广遭受大旱灾。
English: In the summer of 1917, Beijing, Shandong, Shaanxi, Fujian, and Guangxi suffered from a severe drought.

古文：十九年，畿内旱。
现代文：十九年，畿内受干旱。
English: In 1919, the Kinai region was affected by drought.

古文：二十年三月，久旱，亲祷。
现代文：二十年三月，长久干旱，皇上亲自祈祷求雨。
English: In March of the year twenty, after a long drought, the emperor himself prayed for rain.

古文：二十三年，湖广、江西旱。
现代文：二十三年，湖广、江西发生旱灾。
English: In the 23rd year, droughts occurred in Guangxi and Jiangxi.

古文：二十四年，南、北畿、山东、山西、陕西、浙江、江西、湖广、河南俱旱。
现代文：二十四年，南北畿、山东、山西、陕西、浙江、江西、湖广、河南都发生旱灾。
English: In 2014, droughts occurred in North and South Kii, Shandong, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Hukang, and Henan.

古文：二十五年，南畿、江西旱。
现代文：二十五年，南畿、江西遭旱灾。
English: Twenty-five years ago, Nanki and Jiangxi suffered from drought.

古文：二十九年，北畿、山西、陕西旱。
现代文：二十九年，北畿、山西、陕西发生旱灾。
English: In the 29th year, droughts occurred in North Gyeongsang, Shanxi and Shaanxi.

古文：三十三年，兖州、东昌、淮安、扬州、徐州、武昌旱。
现代文：三十三年，兖州、束昌、淮安、扬州、徐州、武昌发生旱灾。
English: In 1933, droughts occurred in Zhangzhou, Sokchang, Huai'an, Yangzhou, Xuzhou and Wuchang.

古文：三十四年，陕西五府及太原旱。
现代文：三十四年，陕西五府以及太原遭受旱灾。
English: Thirty-four years ago, the five prefectures of Shaanxi and Taiyuan suffered from drought.

古文：三十五年夏，山东旱。
现代文：三十五年夏季，山东遭旱灾。
English: In the summer of 1935, Shandong suffered a drought.

古文：三十七年，大旱，禾尽槁。
现代文：三十七年，发生大旱灾，禾苗全部枯槁。
English: In 1937, a severe drought occurred, and all the seedlings died.

古文：三十九年，太原、延安、庆阳、西安旱。
现代文：三十九年，太原、延安、庆阳、西安发生旱灾。
English: In 1939, droughts occurred in Taiyuan, Yan'an, Qingyang and Xi'an.

古文：四十年，保定等六府旱。
现代文：四十年，保定等六府发生旱灾。
English: In the last forty years, six prefectures including Baoding have been affected by drought.

古文：四十一年，西安等六府旱。
现代文：四十一年，西安筹六府发生旱灾。
English: In 1941, a drought occurred in six prefectures of Xi'an.

古文：隆庆二年，浙江、福建、四川、陕西及淮安、凤阳大旱。
现代文：隆庆二年，浙江、福建、四川、陕西以及淮安、凤阳遭受大干旱。
English: In the second year of Longqing, Zhejiang, Fujian, Sichuan, Shaanxi, as well as Huai'an and Fengyang suffered from a severe drought.

古文：四年夏，旱，诏诸司停刑。
现代文：四年夏季，发生旱灾，下诏各司停止用刑。
English: In the summer of the fourth year, a drought occurred, and all departments suspended the use of punishment.

古文：六年夏，不雨。
现代文：六年夏季，天不降雨。
English: Six years of summer, no rain.

古文：万历十一年八月庚戌朔，河东盐臣言，解池旱涸，盐花不生。
现代文：万历十一年八月庚戌初一，河东盐臣上言朝廷：解池天旱水涸，盐花不生。
English: On the first day of Geng Zi in August of the eleventh year of the Wanli era, the salt minister of Hedong Province appealed to the imperial court, saying that the brine had dried up and salt flowers would not bloom.

古文：十三年四月戊午，因久旱，步祷郊坛。
现代文：十三年四月戊午日，因为长久干旱，在郊坛举行禹步祈祷。
English: On the afternoon of April 13th, because of the long drought, the Yubo prayer was held in the suburbs.

古文：京师自去秋至此不雨，河井并涸。
现代文：京城从上一年秋到这个时节没有降雨，河水、井水都干涸了。
English: There has been no rainfall in the capital from last autumn to this season, and rivers and wells have dried up.

古文：十四年三月乙巳，以久旱，命顺天府祈祷。
现代文：十四年三月乙巳日，因为长久干旱，朝廷命令顺天府祈祷求雨。
English: On the 14th day of the 3rd month, because of the long drought, the imperial court ordered to pray for rain.

古文：十七年，苏、松连岁大旱，震泽为平陆。
现代文：十七年，苏、松连年遭受大旱灾，震泽变成了陆地。
English: In the seventeenth year, Su and Songlian suffered a major drought, and the tremors turned into land.

古文：浙江、湖广、江西大旱。
现代文：浙江、湖广、江西遭受大旱灾。
English: Zhejiang, Hubei and Jiangxi have been hit by a severe drought.

古文：十八年四月，旱。
现代文：十八年四月，发生旱灾。
English: In April of 18 there was a drought.

古文：二十四年，杭、嘉、湖三府旱。
现代文：二十四年，杭、嘉、湖三府遭受旱灾。
English: In 2004, the three prefectures of Hangu, Jiayu and Huzhou suffered from drought.

古文：二十六年四月，旱。
现代文：二十六年四月，发生旱灾。
English: In April 2016, a drought occurred.

古文：二十七年夏，旱。
现代文：二十七年夏季，发生旱灾。
English: In the summer of 1927, a drought occurred.

古文：二十九年，畿辅、山东、山西、河南及贵州黔东诸府卫旱。
现代文：二十九年，畿辅、山东、山西、河南以及贵州黔束等府卫发生旱灾。
English: In the 29th year, the provinces of Kifu, Shandong, Shanxi, Henan and Guizhou's Handan suffered from drought.

古文：三十年夏，旱。
现代文：三十年夏季，发生旱灾。
English: In the summer of the thirtieth year, a drought occurred.

古文：三十四年夏，亢旱。
现代文：三十四年夏季，发生酷热干旱。
English: In the summer of 34 there was extreme heat and drought.

古文：三十七年，楚、蜀、河南、山东、山西、陕西皆旱。
现代文：三十七年，楚、蜀、河南、山东、山西、陕西都遭受旱灾。
English: In 1937, Chu, Shu, Henan, Shandong, Shanxi and Shaanxi all suffered from drought.

古文：三十八年夏，久旱。济、青、登、莱四府大旱。
现代文：三十八年夏季，长久干旱，济、青、登、莱四府遭受大旱灾。
English: In the summer of 1938, due to a long drought, the four prefectures of Ji, Qing, Deng and Lai suffered from a major drought.

古文：三十九年夏，京师大旱。
现代文：三十九年夏季，京城遭受大旱灾。
English: In the summer of 1939, Kyoto was hit by a severe drought.

古文：四十二年夏，不雨。
现代文：四十二年夏季，天不降雨。
English: In the summer of 1942, there was no rain.

古文：四十三年三月，不雨，至于六月。
现代文：四十三年三月，天不降雨，直到六月。
English: In March of '43, there was no rain until June.

古文：山东春夏大旱，千里如焚。
现代文：山东春季和夏季遭受大旱灾，千里之地如同焚烧。
English: Shandong suffered from a severe drought in the spring and summer, and thousands of miles of land were scorched.

古文：四十四年，陕西旱。
现代文：四十四年，瞳酉发生旱灾。
English: In 1944, a drought occurred in Hitomine.

古文：秋冬，广东大旱。
现代文：秋冬雨季，廑塞遭受大旱灾。
English: During the autumn and winter rainy season, Fuxi suffered from a severe drought.

古文：四十五年夏，畿南亢旱。
现代文：四十五年夏季，蛮直酷热干旱。
English: The summer of 1945 was brutally hot and dry.

古文：四十七年，广西梧州旱，赤地如焚。
现代文：四十七年，尘西擅此遭受旱灾，赤地如同焚烧。
English: Forty-seven years ago, Jianxi suffered a drought, and the red earth was like burning.

古文：泰昌元年，辽东旱。
现代文：泰昌元年，辽东遭受旱灾。
English: In the first year of the Taichang era, Liaodong suffered from drought.

古文：天启元年，久旱。
现代文：天启元年，长久干旱。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, there was a long drought.

古文：五年，真、顺、保、河四府，三伏不雨，秋复旱。
现代文：五月，真、顺、保、河四府，三伏天不降雨，秋季又干旱。
English: In May, the four prefectures of Zhen, Shun, Bao and He had no rainfall for three consecutive days, followed by drought in autumn.

古文：七年，四川大旱。
现代文：七年，四川遭受大旱灾。
English: For the seventh year in a row, Sichuan has suffered from a severe drought.

古文：崇祯元年夏，畿辅旱，赤地千里。
现代文：崇祯元年夏天，畿辅发生旱灾，赤地千里。
English: In the summer of the first year of the Chongzhen era, a drought occurred in Kiyev, and thousands of people were affected.

古文：三年三月，旱，择日亲祷。
现代文：三年三月，发生旱灾，皇帝选择吉日亲自祈祷求雨。
English: In March of the third year, a drought occurred, and the emperor chose a good day to personally pray for rain.

古文：五年，杭、嘉、湖三府自八月至十月七旬不雨。
现代文：五年，杭、嘉、湖三府，从八月到十月，七十天不降雨。
English: In five years, the three prefectures of Hangu, Jiayu and Hubei had no rainfall for 70 days from August to October.

古文：六年，京师及江西旱。
现代文：六年，京城以及江西发生旱灾。
English: In the sixth year, droughts occurred in Beijing and Jiangxi.

古文：十年夏，京师及河东不雨，江西大旱。
现代文：十年夏季，京城以及河东不降雨，江西遭受大旱灾。
English: In the summer of the tenth year, there was no rain in Beijing and Hedong, and Jiangxi suffered from a major drought.

古文：十一年，两京及山东、山西、陕西旱。
现代文：十一年，雨京以及山东、山西、陕西发生旱灾。
English: In the eleventh year, droughts occurred in Ukyo, Shandong, Shanxi and Shaanxi.

古文：十二年，畿南、山东、河南、山西、浙江旱。
现代文：十二年，畿直、山东、河直、山西、浙婆遭受旱灾。
English: In 2012, Guizhou, Shandong, Hebei, Shanxi and Zhejiang provinces suffered from drought.

古文：十三年，两京及登、青、莱三府旱。
现代文：十三年，雨京以及登、青、莱三府遭受旱灾。
English: In 2013, Ukyo and the three prefectures of Deng, Qing and Lai suffered from drought.

古文：十四年，两京、山东、河南、湖广及宣、大边地旱。
现代文：十四年，两京、山东、河直、塑廑以及宣、大边地发生旱灾。
English: In the 14th year, droughts occurred in Beijing, Shandong, Hejia, Shaoshan, as well as Xuan and Dayuan.

古文：十六年五月辛丑，祈祷雨泽，命臣工痛加修省。
现代文：十六年五月辛丑日，祈祷请求天降甘雨，润泽下民，命令群臣百官痛加修，身反省。
English: On the fateful day of May 16, he prayed and asked the heavens for rain and the people for moisture, and ordered his ministers and officials to make great efforts to mend their ways and reflect on themselves.

古文：▲诗妖
现代文：诗妖
English: Poetic Demon

古文：太祖吴元年，张士诚弟伪丞相士信及黄敬夫、叶德新、蔡彦文用事。
现代文：太祖吴元年，张士诚的弟弟伪丞相张士信以及黄敬圭、墓德新、蔡彦文当权。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wu, Zhang Shixin, the younger brother of Zhang Shicheng, the pseudo-minister Zhang Shixin, as well as Huang Jinggui, Cao Dexin, and Cai Yanwen took power.

古文：时有十七字谣曰 丞相做事业，专靠黄、蔡、叶。
现代文：当时有十七字氏谲说： 丞相做事业，专靠黄、蔡、墓。
English: At that time, there were seventeen characters of Ujitsuna saying: "A chancellor's career depends exclusively on Huang, Cai, and Gu."

古文：一朝西风起，乾鳖。 
现代文：一朝西风起，干鳖。 
English: The west wind comes up in the morning, and it's dry.

古文：未几，苏州平，士信及三人者皆被诛，此其应也。
现代文：不久，苏州平定，张士信以及三人都被诛杀，这就是民谣的应验。
English: Soon after, Suzhou was pacified, and Zhang Shixin and the three others were all killed. This was the fulfillment of the folk song.

古文：建文初年，有道士歌于途曰： 莫逐燕，逐燕日高飞，高飞上帝畿。 
现代文：建文初年，有道士在道路上高歌： 莫逐燕，逐燕日高飞，高飞上帝畿。 
English: In the first year of Jianwen, there was a Taoist chanting on the road: Don't fly by swallow, fly by swallow, fly by god.

古文：已忽不见，是靖难之谶也。
现代文：歌罢忽然不见，这是靖难事件的预言。
English: The sudden disappearance of the song is a prophecy of the Yingnan Incident.

古文：正统二年，京师旱，街巷小儿为土龙祷雨，拜而歌曰： 雨帝雨帝，城隍土地。
现代文：正统二年，京城天旱，街巷儿童做土龙祈祷降雨，礼拜而歌： 雨帝雨帝，城隍土地。
English: In the second year of orthodoxy, the capital city was hit by a drought, and children in the streets and alleys made clay dragons to pray for rain, and sang songs of worship: Rain God, Rain God, the city and the land.

古文：雨若再来，还我土地。 
现代文：雨若再来，还我土地。 
English: If it rains again, give me back my land.

古文：说者谓 雨帝 者，与弟也，帝弟同音。 城隍 者，郕王。 再来 、 还土地 者，复辟也。
现代文：解说的人称 雨帝 ，就是 与弟 ，帝和弟同音。 城隍 ，就是郦王。 再来 、 还土地 ，是复辟的意思。
English: The narrator is called Yuedi, which means "brother" or "emperor" and "brother" with the same pronunciation, Chengyu, which means "king of the egrets," and Zengyu, which means "return" or "return of the land," which means "restoration."

古文：万历末年，有道士歌于市曰： 委鬼当头坐，茄花遍地生。 
现代文：万历末年，有道士在集市上歌唱说： 委鬼当头坐，茄花遍地生。 
English: In the last year of the Wanli era, a Taoist sang at the market: "Commissioned ghosts sit at the head, and eggplant flowers sprout everywhere."

古文：北人读客为楷，茄又转音，为魏忠贤、客氏之兆。
现代文：北方人读客为楷，茄又是楷的转音，是魏忠贤、客氏的预兆。
English: The northerners read "guest" as "kai," and "cocoon" is a transliteration of "kai," which is an omen of Wei Zhongxian and the guest.

古文：又成都东门外镇江桥回澜塔，万历中布政余一龙所修也。
现代文：又，成都东门外镇江桥回澜塔是万历年问布政使余一龙所修建。
English: In addition, the tower of Zhenjiang Bridge outside the East Gate of Chengdu was built by Yu Yilong.

古文：张献忠破蜀毁之，穿地取砖，得古碑。
现代文：张献忠攻破蜀地，拆毁其塔，掘地取砖，得到古碑。
English: Zhang Xianzhong invaded Shudi, tore down its tower, dug up the ground to get bricks, and obtained the ancient monument.

古文：上有篆书云： 修塔余一龙，拆塔张献忠。
现代文：上面有篆书说： 修塔余一龙，拆塔张献忠。
English: On it, there is a handwritten message saying: Rebuild tower Yu Yilong, demolish tower Zhang Xianzhong.

古文：岁逢甲乙丙，此地血流红。
现代文：岁逢甲乙丙，此地血流红。
English: This place is as red as blood.

古文：妖运终川北，毒气播川东。
现代文：妖运终川北，毒气播川束。
English: The evil fortune ends in the north of the river, and the poison gas spreads to the riverbanks.

古文：吹箫不用竹，一箭贯当胸。
现代文：吹箫不用竹，一箭贯当胸。
English: You don't need a bamboo to blow a gong, but an arrow through the chest.

古文：汉元兴元年，丞相诸葛孔明记。 
现代文：汉元兴元年，丞相诸葛孔明记。 
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, the chancellor Zhuge Kongming died.

古文：本朝大兵西征，献忠被射而死，时肃王为将。
现代文：清朝大军西征，张献忠被射而死，当时肃王作统军大将。
English: When Zhang Xianzhong was shot and killed during the westward expedition of the Qing Dynasty's great army, Su Wang was the general of the unified army.

古文：又有谣曰： 邺台复邺台，曹操再出来。 
现代文：又有民谲说： 邺台复邺台，曹操再出来。 
English: Some people also said: Cao Cao will come out again.

古文：贼罗汝才自号曹操，此其兆也。
现代文：贼罗汝才自称曹操，这就是其预兆。
English: Thief Luo Ru just called himself Cao Cao, this is his omen.

古文：▲毛虫之孽
现代文：毛虫之孽
English: The Sin of the Caterpillars

古文：弘治九年八月，有黑熊自都城莲池缘城上西直门，官军逐之下，不能获。啮死一人，伤一人。
现代文：弘治九年八月，有黑熊从都城莲池沿着城墙爬上西直门，官军驱逐它下去，不能办到，咬死一人，咬伤一人。
English: In August of the ninth year of the Hongzhi era, a black bear climbed from the capital city of Lianchi along the city wall to the Xizhimen Gate. The government army could not expel it, and it bit one person to death and injured another.

古文：十一年六月，有熊自西直门入城，郎中何孟春曰： 当备盗，亦宜慎火。
现代文：十一年六月，有熊从西直门窜入城中，郎中何孟春说： 应当防备盗贼，也应该谨慎火灾。
English: In June of the eleventh year, a bear broke into the city from the Xizhimen Gate. Brother-in-law He Mengchun said: It is necessary to guard against thieves, and it is also necessary to be cautious of fire.

古文：宋绍兴间熊抵永嘉城，州守高世则以熊字能火，戒郡中慎火，果延烧庐舍，此其兆也。 
现代文：宋绍兴年间，熊至永嘉城，州守官高世则以熊字为能火，告诫郡中谨慎火灾，后来果真蔓延烧毁房屋，这是其预兆。 
English: During the Song and Shaoxing dynasties, the bear came to Yongjia City, and the state governor Gao Shixing used the word "bear" as a beacon to warn the county to be cautious of fire, which later spread to burn down houses. This was an omen.

古文：是年，城内多火灾。
现代文：这一年，城内多次发生火灾。
English: This year, there were several fires in the city.

古文：嘉靖五年七月，南城县有虎，具人手足。
现代文：嘉靖五年七月，南城县有虎，具备人的手足。
English: In July of the 5th year of Jiajing, there was a tiger in Nancheng County with human limbs.

古文：四十五年六月，太医院吏目李乾献兔，体备五色，以为瑞兔。
现代文：四十五年六月，太医院吏目李干进献兔，身体上具备五种颜色，认为是瑞兔。
English: In June 1945, Li Ganjin, the superintendent of Tai Hospital, presented a rabbit with five colors on its body, which was considered to be a lucky rabbit.

古文：▲犬祸
现代文：犬祸
English: Dog accident

古文：嘉靖二十年，民家生一犬，八足四耳四目。
现代文：嘉靖二十年，百姓家中生一条狗，八只足，四个耳朵，四只眼睛。
English: In the 20th year of Jiajing, a dog was born in a commoner's home. It had eight legs, four ears, and four eyes.

古文：万历四十七年七月，怀宁民家产一犬，长五寸，高四寸，一头二身八脚，状如人。
现代文：万历四十七年七月，怀宁百姓家中生一条狗，长五寸，高四寸，一颗头，二个身子，八只脚，形状像人。
English: In July of the 47th year of Wanli, a dog was born in the home of a Huaining citizen. It was five inches long and four inches high, with one head, two bodies, and eight feet. It was shaped like a human.

古文：▲金异
现代文：金异
English: Jin Yixing

古文：洪武十一年正月元旦甲戌，早朝，殿上金钟始叩，忽断为二。
现代文：洪武十一年正月元旦甲戌日，早上朝会，殿上金钟开始敲击，忽然断裂成二截。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eleventh year of Hongwu, the New Year's Day, the morning meeting, the golden bell in the hall began to strike, suddenly breaking into two.

古文：六月丁卯夜，宁夏卫风雨，兜鍪旗槊皆有火光。
现代文：六月丁卯日晚上，宁夏卫刮风降雨，兜鍪、旗帜、枪械都有火光。
English: In the evening of June 18th, Ningxia Wei was windy and rainy. The helmets, flags, and guns were all ablaze.

古文：十二年十二月甲子，徐州卫谯楼铜壶自鸣。
现代文：十二年十二月甲子日，徐州卫更楼的铜壶自然发出鸣响。
English: On December 12, 1999, the copper kettle of Xuzhou Weijian Building naturally rang out.

古文：乙丑，复鸣。
现代文：乙丑日，又鸣响。
English: On the second day of the Ugly Duckling Festival, the bell rang again.

古文：是岁，胡惟庸井中生石笋，去之，笋复旁出者三。
现代文：这一年，胡惟庸家的水井中长出石笋，除掉它，石笋又多次从旁边生出来。
English: In that year, a stalagmite sprouted in the well of Hu Wei Rong's house. When it was removed, the stalagmite sprouted again and again from the side.

古文：次年，惟庸伏诛。
现代文：第二年，胡惟庸被诛杀。
English: The following year, Hu Wei Yong was assassinated.

古文：建文二年四月乙卯，燕王营于苏家桥，兵端火光如球，上下相击，金铁铮铮，弓弦自鸣。
现代文：建文二年四月乙卯日，燕王在苏家桥扎营，兵器尖端火光如球，上下互相搏击，金属铮铮有声，弓弦自然鸣响。
English: In April of the second year of Jianwen, on the second day of the second month, Yan Wang camped in Sujiabashi. The tip of the weapon glowed like a ball, and they fought each other up and down. The metal rattled, and the bow strings naturally sounded.

古文：成化十三年六月壬子，雨钱于京师。
现代文：成化十三年六月壬子日，天空落钱在京城。
English: On Jinsi Day in June of the thirteenth year of Chenghua, the sky fell money in Beijing.

古文：正德四年三月甲寅，盖州卫城楼钟自鸣者三。
现代文：正德四年三月甲寅日，盖州卫城楼的钟多次自然呜响。
English: In March of the fourth year of Zhengde, the bell of the Gezhou Acropolis Tower naturally rang many times.

古文：七年，文登秦始皇庙钟鼓自鸣。
现代文：七年，文登秦始皇庙钟鼓自然鸣响。
English: In the seventh year, the bell and drum of the Wenden Qin Shi Huang Temple naturally rang.

古文：成山卫如之。
现代文：成山卫也像那样。
English: Cheng Shanwei is also like that.

古文：嘉靖六年五月甲午，京师雨钱。
现代文：嘉靖六年五月甲午日，在京城天降钱币。
English: On the afternoon of May 1st, the 6th year of the Jiajing Emperor, coins fell from the sky in Beijing.

古文：隆庆六年七月七日，有物轰轰，飞至直隶华亭海滨坠于地，乃钟也。
现代文：隆庆六年七月七日，有物轰轰发声，飞到直隶华亭海滨坠落于地，乃是钟。
English: On July 7th, the sixth anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China, a bell fell to the ground after making a loud noise and flying to the seaside of Zhili Huating.

古文：铸时年月具在，识者谓其来自闽云。
现代文：钟上铸造的时间都全部存在，博识的人称钟来自闽地。
English: The time of the casting on the bell is all present, and knowledgeable people say that the bell comes from Shunde.

古文：万历二十一年十月甲申，山东督抚令旗及刀枪头皆火出，且有声。
现代文：万历二十一年十月甲申日，山东督抚的令旗以及枪头都有火出现，并且有声音。
English: On October 6 of the 21st year of the lunar calendar, the flag of the governor of Shandong Province and the gun appeared to be on fire, and there was a sound.

古文：二十六年五月庚寅，古浪城楼大钟自鸣者三。
现代文：二十六年五月庚寅日，古浪城楼的大钟多次自然鸣响。
English: On the 26th day of the fifth month of the year, the big bell of the ancient Langcheng Tower rang naturally many times.

古文：天启六年五月丁未，京城石狮掷出城外。
现代文：天启六年五月丁未日，京城的石狮腾跃出城外。
English: On the eve of the 6th day of the 5th month of the 6th year of the Chinese lunar calendar, the stone lion of Beijing leapt out of the city.

古文：银、钱、器皿飘至昌平阅武场中。
现代文：银、钱、器皿飘飞到昌平阅武场中。
English: Silver, money and utensils floated to the battlefield in Changping.

古文：崇祯六年五月癸巳，有铁斧飞落霍山县。
现代文：崇祯六年五月癸巳日，有铁斧飞落在霍山县。
English: On the third day of May in the sixth year of Chongzhen, an iron axe fell in Huoshan County.

古文：八年十二月辛巳，夜四鼓，山东镇南城楼大炮鸣如钟，至黎明，大吼一声乃止。
现代文：八年十二月辛巳日，晚上四鼓时分，山东镇南城楼大炮呜响如钟，到黎明时，大吼一声纔停止。
English: On December 8th, at 4 o'clock in the evening, the cannon of the South Tower of Shandong Town rang like a bell. At dawn, it stopped with a loud roar.

古文：十三年三月丙申，蕲州城隍庙古钟自鸣。
现代文：十三年三月丙申日，崭州城隍庙古钟自然鸣响。
English: On the 13th day of the 3rd month of the year, the ancient bell of the Zhengzhou City God Temple rang naturally.

古文：▲白眚白祥
现代文：白眚白祥
English: Baixiang Baixiang

古文：洪熙元年六月庚戌，中天有白气，东西竟天。
现代文：洪熙元年六月庚戌日，空中有白色氛气，东西向充满天空。
English: On Geng Zi Day in June of the first year of Hongxi, there was a white atmosphere in the air, filling the sky from east to west.

古文：宣德元年六月癸未夜，有苍白气，东西竟天。
现代文：宣德元年六月癸末日夜晚，有苍白色氛气，呈东西向布满天空。
English: On the evening of the last day of June in the first year of Xuande, there was a pale atmosphere that covered the sky in an east-west direction.

古文：八月庚辰，东南有白气，状如群羊惊走。
现代文：八月庚辰日，东南方向有白色氛气，形状像群羊受惊奔跑。
English: On Geng Chen Day in August, there is a white atmosphere in the southeast direction, shaped like a flock of sheep running scared.

古文：既灭，有黑气如死蛇，顷之分为二。
现代文：灭绝之后，有黑色氛气如死蛇，一会儿分成二段。
English: After the extinction, there is a black atmosphere like a dead snake, split into two parts for a while.

古文：弘治五年十二月辛亥夜，东方有白气，南北亘天，去地五丈。
现代文：弘治五年十二月辛亥日晚上，东方有白色氛气，南北向横豆天空，离地五丈高。
English: On the evening of Xinhai Day in December of the fifth year of the Hongzhi era, there was a white atmosphere in the east, a horizontal sky to the north and south, and a height of five meters above the ground.

古文：正德元年三月戊申夜，太原空中见红光，如弯弓，长六七尺。
现代文：正德元年三月戍申日晚上，太原空中出现红光，状如弯弓，长六七尺。
English: On the evening of the first day of the third month of the first year of Zhengde, a red light appeared in the sky of Taiyuan, shaped like a curved bow, with a length of sixty-seven feet.

古文：旋变黄，又变白，渐长至二十余丈，光芒亘天。
现代文：旋刻变成黄色，又变成白色，渐渐长大至二十多丈，光芒充满天空。
English: The swirls turned yellow, then white, and gradually grew to more than twenty feet tall, filling the sky with light.

古文：嘉靖七年十二月望，白气亘天津。
现代文：嘉靖七年十二月十五，白气横豆于天津。
English: On December 15th of the 7th year of Jiajing, Baiqi Yoko Beans were grown in Tianjin.

古文：《洪范》曰： 土爰稼穑。 
现代文：《洪范》上说 土可以从事稼穑 。
English: "Hong Fan" said that the soil can be engaged in making money.

古文：稼穑不成，则土失其性矣。
现代文：稼穑之事不能完成，土便失去了它的本性。
English: If the work of cultivation cannot be accomplished, the soil loses its nature.

古文：前史多以恒风、风霾、晦冥、花妖、虫孽、牛祸、地震、山颓、雨毛、地生毛、年饥、黄眚黄祥皆属之土，今从之。
现代文：前代历史多把恒风、风霾、晦冥、花妖、虫孽、牛祸、地震、山颓、雨毛、地生毛、年饥、黄眚黄祥都归属于土，现在照此处理。
English: In the history of the previous generation, the constant wind, wind and haze, twilight, flowers and demons, insects, cattle accidents, earthquakes, hailstorms, rain, earthworms, famine, and hailstorms were all attributed to the earth, and are now dealt with accordingly.

古文：▲恒风
现代文：恒风
English: Constant wind

古文：宣德六年六月，温州飓风大作，坏公廨、祠庙、仓库、城垣。
现代文：宣德六年六月，温州飓风大发，毁坏官署、祠庙、仓库、城垣。
English: In June of Xuande's sixth year, a major hurricane hit Wenzhou, destroying government offices, temples, warehouses, and city walls.

古文：正统四年七月，苏、松、常、镇四府大风，拔木杀稼。
现代文：正统四年七月，夔、松、常、镇四府刮大风，拔起树木伤害禾稼。
English: In July of the 4th year of the Juche era, the four prefectures of Handan, Song, Chang and Zhen were hit by strong winds, which uprooted trees and damaged crops.

古文：天顺二年二月，暴风拔孝陵松树，懿文陵殿兽脊、梁柱多摧。
现代文：天顺二年二月，暴风拔起孝陵的松树，懿文陵殿的兽脊、梁柱多被摧毁。
English: In February of the second year of Tianshun, a storm uprooted the pine trees of the Xiaoling Mausoleum, and most of the ridges and pillars of the Yuwen Mausoleum were destroyed.

古文：三年四月，顺天、河间、真定、保定、广平、济南连日烈风，麦苗尽败。
现代文：三年四月，顺天、河间、真定、保定、广平、济南连日猛烈刮风，麦苗全部摧败。
English: In April of the third year, Shuntian, Hema, Zhending, Baoding, Guangping and Jinan were hit by strong winds for days on end, destroying all the wheat seedlings.

古文：成化十四年八月丁未，南京大风，拔太庙树。
现代文：成化十四年八月丁末日，南京刮大风，拔起太庙的树木。
English: On the last day of August in the 14th year of Chenghua, a strong wind blew in Nanjing, uprooting the trees of the Great Temple.

古文：十五年八月辛卯，大风拔孝陵木。
现代文：十五年八月辛卯日，大风拔起孝陵的树木。
English: On August 15th, the day of Xinwu, a strong wind uprooted the trees of Xiaoling.

古文：二十一年五月，南京大风拔太庙树，摧大祀殿及皇城各门兽吻。
现代文：二十一年五月，南京大风拔起太庙的树木，摧毁大祀殿以及皇城各门兽吻。
English: In May 21st, a strong wind in Nanjing uprooted the trees of the Great Temple, destroying the Great Hall of Worship and the gates of the imperial city.

古文：弘治三年六月壬午朔，陕西靖虏卫大风，天地昏暗，变为红光如火，久之乃息。
现代文：弘治三年六月壬午初一，陕西靖虏卫刮大风，天地昏暗，变成如火一样的红光，很久纔停息。
English: On the first day of the month of June in the third year of the Hongzhi era, a strong wind blew in Jingruiwei, Shaanxi Province. The sky and the earth were darkened, turning into a red light like fire, and it stopped for a long time.

古文：七年三月己亥，广宁诸卫狂风，沈阳、锦州城仆百余丈。
现代文：七年三月己亥日，广宁等卫刮狂风，沈阳、钟州城墙垮塌一百多丈。
English: In March of the seventh year, on the day of Ji Hai, Guangning and other Wei sent a strong wind, and the city walls of Shenyang and Zhongzhou collapsed more than a hundred meters high.

古文：正德元年六月辛酉，暴风折郊坛松柏，坏大祀殿、斋宫兽瓦。
现代文：正德元年六月辛酉日，暴风吹折郊坛松柏，毁坏大祀殿和斋宫兽瓦。
English: In June of the first year of Zhengde, the storm broke the pine and cypress trees in the suburbs, and destroyed the Great Hall of Worship and the roof tiles of the Temple.

古文：二年闰正月癸亥，卢龙、迁安大风拔树毁屋。
现代文：二年闰正月癸亥日，卢龙、迁安大风拔起树木，毁坏房屋。
English: In the second year of the leap year, on the day of the Chinese New Year, the Lulong and Qian'an gales uprooted trees and destroyed houses.

古文：乙丑，大风坏奉天门右吻。
现代文：乙丑日，大风毁坏奉天门的右吻。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd lunar month, a strong wind destroyed the right side of the Gate of Heaven.

古文：三年二月己丑，大同暴风，屋瓦飞动，三日而止。
现代文：三年二月己丑日，大同刮暴风，屋瓦飞动，三天纔停止。
English: In February of the third year, on a bad day, a storm blew in Datong, the roof tiles flew, and the hail stopped for three days.

古文：九年二月丁巳，长乐大雨雹，狂风震电，屋瓦皆飞。
现代文：九年二月丁巳日，长乐大降冰雹，刮狂风，发雷电。屋瓦都刮飞。
English: On February 9th, Dingshi Day, large hailstones fell in Changle, strong winds blew, and lightning struck. Roof tiles were blown away.

古文：五月戊辰，曲阜暴风毁宣圣庙兽吻。
现代文：五月戊辰，曲阜暴风摧毁宣圣庙的兽吻。
English: In May, a storm in Qufu destroyed the Xuan Sheng Temple.

古文：十二年四月丙辰，来宾大风雨雹，毁官民庐舍，屋瓦皆飞。
现代文：十二年四月丙辰日，来宾刮大风，降冰雹，毁坏官府和平民的房屋，屋瓦都刮飞。
English: On the twelfth day of the fourth month of the twelfth year, the guests were hit by strong winds and hailstorms, destroying the government and civilian houses, and the roof tiles were blown away.

古文：十一月癸巳，南京大风雪，仆孝陵殿前树及围墙内外松柏。
现代文：十一月癸巳日，南京刮大风，降大雪，吹倒孝陵殿前的树木以及围墙内外的松柏。
English: On November 23rd, Nanjing was hit by strong winds and heavy snow, which blew down trees in front of the Xiaoling Mausoleum and pine trees inside and outside the walls.

古文：十二月己酉，大理卫大风，坏城楼。
现代文：十二月己酉日，大理卫刮大风，毁坏城楼。
English: On December 6th, a strong wind blew from Daliwei, destroying the city tower.

古文：十三年三月甲寅，庆符大风雹，坏学宫。
现代文：十三年三月甲寅日，庆符刮大风，降冰雹，毁坏学宫。
English: On the 13th day of the 3rd month of the year, the wind blew, hail fell, and the palace was destroyed.

古文：十六年十二月辛卯，甘肃行都司狂风，坏官民庐舍树木无算。
现代文：十六年十二月辛卯日，甘肃行都司刮狂风，毁坏官府平民的房屋和树木不计其数。
English: On December 16th, Xinwu Day, the capital of Gansu Province was hit by a fierce wind, destroying countless houses and trees of civilians.

古文：嘉靖元年七月己巳，南京暴风雨，郊社、陵寝、宫阙、城垣兽吻、脊栏皆坏，拔树万余株。
现代文：嘉靖元年七月己巳日，南京刮暴风，降暴雨，郊社、陵寝、宫阙、城垣兽吻、脊栏都被毁坏，拔起树木一万多株。
English: On the third day of July in the first year of Jiajing, Nanjing was hit by a storm and torrential rain. Suburbs, tombs, palaces, city walls, and ridges were all destroyed, and more than 10,000 trees were uprooted.

古文：五年，陕西屡发大风，卷掣庙宇、民居百数十家，了无踪迹。
现代文：五年，陕西屡次刮大风，卷拔庙宇、民房一百几十家，全部无踪迹。
English: In the past five years, Shaanxi has repeatedly been hit by strong winds, which have swept away more than 100 temples and houses, leaving no trace.

古文：万历十八年三月甲辰，大名狂风，天色乍黑乍赤。
现代文：万历十八年三月甲辰日，大名刮狂风，天色时黑时赤。
English: On the 1st hour of the 3rd month of the 18th year of Wanli, the daimyo had a strong wind and the sky was red and black.

古文：二十六年十月癸亥，喜峰路台西北楼内，旋风大作，黑气冲天，楼内有火光。
现代文：二十六年十月癸亥，喜峰路台西北楼内，旋风大起，黑色氛气直冲天空，楼内有火光。
English: In October of the twenty-sixth year, in the northwest building of Xifeng Road Station, a whirlwind arose, the black atmosphere rushed straight into the sky, and there was fire in the building.

古文：三十四年七月丙戌，大风拔朝日坛树。
现代文：三十四年七月丙戌日，大风拔起朝日坛的树木。
English: In July of the year thirty-four, a gale uprooted the trees of the morning sun altar.

古文：四十一年八月乙未，青州大风拔树，倾城屋。
现代文：四十一年八月乙末日，青州大风拔起树木，倾覆城屋。
English: On the last day of August in 1941, a gale in Qingzhou uprooted trees and toppled a castle.

古文：天启元年三月辛亥，大风扬尘四塞。
现代文：天启元年三月辛亥日，大风刮起沙尘，充塞四方。
English: At the beginning of the year, in March, Xinhai Day, a gale blew up sand and dust, filling the four directions.

古文：四年五月癸亥，乾清宫东丹墀旋风骤作，内官监铁片大如屋顶者，盘旋空中，陨于西墀，铿訇若雷。
现代文：四年五月癸亥日，干清宫束丹墀旋风突然刮起，内官监大如屋顶的铁片在空中盘旋，坠落在西墀，铿訇之声如打雷。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year in May of the fourth year, a whirlwind suddenly blew up in the palace of the Qing Dynasty, and the supervisor of the inner officials hovered in the air like the iron sheet of the roof, fell on the west tower, and the sound of the thunder was like thunder.

古文：八月戊戌，蓟州寒风杀人。
现代文：八月戊戌日，蓟州刮寒风，伤害人民。
English: In August, the cold wind blew in Bozhou, hurting the people.

古文：崇祯十四年五月，南阳大风拔屋。
现代文：崇桢十四年五月，南阳大风拔起房屋。
English: In May of the 14th year of Chongzheng, a gale in Nanyang blew up houses.

古文：七月乙亥，福州大风，坏官署、民舍。
现代文：七月乙亥日，福州刮大风，毁坏官署、民房。
English: In July, on the day of the Chinese New Year, a strong wind blew in Fuzhou, destroying government offices and private houses.

古文：十五年五月，保定广平诸县怪风，麦禾俱伤。
现代文：十五年五月，堡宣廑平等县刮怪风，麦禾都遭伤害。
English: In May of the fifteenth year, a freak wind blew through Fort Xuanxuan and Byeongdong County, and all the wheat crops were damaged.

古文：十六年正月丁酉，大风，五凤楼前门闩风断三截，建极殿榱桷俱折。
现代文：十六年正月丁酉日，刮大风，五凤楼前门闩被风吹断成三截，建极殿的榱和桷都被折断。
English: On the 16th day of the 1st month of the year, a strong wind blew. The front door lintel of Wufeng Tower was broken into three pieces by the wind, and the lintel and door frame of Jianji Hall were broken.

古文：▲风霾晦冥
现代文：风霾晦冥
English: Wind, haze and gloom

古文：建文元年七月癸酉，燕王起兵，风云四起，咫尺不辨人。
现代文：建文元年七月癸酉日，燕王起兵，风云四起，咫尺之内分不清人。
English: On the third day of July in the first year of Jianwen, Yan Wang raised an army, and all sorts of things happened. You couldn't tell who was who within a few feet.

古文：少焉东方露青天尺许，有光烛地，洞彻上下。
现代文：一会儿，东方露出青天一尺左右，有光照射到地上，照亮天地。
English: For a moment, the east showed a foot or so of blue sky, and light shone onto the ground, illuminating the heavens and earth.

古文：天顺八年二月壬子，风霾昼晦。
现代文：天顺八年二月壬子日，风吹尘沙白天变得晦暗。
English: In February of the eighth year of Tianshun, on the day of Renzi, the wind blew dust and sand, and the day became dark.

古文：成化六年二月丁丑，开封昼晦如夜，黄霾蔽天。
现代文：成化六年二月丁丑日，开封白日晦暗如同夜晚，黄色尘沙遮蔽天空。
English: On February 6th, the day of Ding Chou, the day of the opening of the seal, it was dark as night, and the sky was covered with yellow dust.

古文：三月辛巳，雨霾昼晦。
现代文：三月辛巳日，雨雾迷蒙，白天变得阴暗。
English: It was a rainy and foggy day in March, and the day became gloomy.

古文：九年三月癸未，济南诸府狂风昼晦，咫尺莫辨。
现代文：九年三月癸末日，济南等府狂风吹刮，白天晦暗，咫尺之内分辨不清。
English: On the last day of March in the ninth year, the wind was blowing in Jinan and other prefectures, the day was dark, and it was difficult to distinguish within a short distance.

古文：二十一年三月戊子，大名风霾，自辰迄申，红黄满空，俄黑如夜。
现代文：二十一年三月戊子日，大名风尘昏暗，从辰时到申时，红黄色尘雾弥满天空，一会儿黑如夜晚。
English: On March 21st, the day of the Wu Zi, the daimyo wind and dust began to dim. From the hour of the hour to the hour of the hour of the hour, red and yellow dust filled the sky, and for a while it was dark as night.

古文：已而雨沙，数日乃止。
现代文：随后降沙，几天纔停止。
English: Then the sand fell, and for a few days the rumbling stopped.

古文：京师自正月至三月，风霾不雨。
现代文：京城从正月圣三月，风卷沙尘，天不降雨。
English: From the first month of the year to the third month of the year, the wind blows sand and dust, and there is no rain.

古文：弘治二年二月辛亥，开封昼晦如夜。
现代文：弘治二年二月辛亥日，开封白天晦暗如同夜晚。
English: On the day of Xinhai in February of the second year of the Heian period, the opening day was as dark as night.

古文：三月，黄尘四塞，风霾蔽天者累日。
现代文：三月，黄色沙尘充塞四方，风卷沙尘遮蔽天空达好几天。
English: In March, yellow dust filled the air, and wind-blown dust obscured the sky for several days.

古文：四年八月乙卯，南京晦冥。
现代文：四年八月乙卯日，南京晦暗。
English: On August 1st, 2004, Nanjing was in darkness.

古文：七年三月己亥，广宁诸卫昼晦。
现代文：七年三月己亥日，广宁等卫白天晦暗。
English: In March of the seventh year, on the day of Ji Hai, Guangning and other Wei were dark during the day.

古文：正德五年三月甲子，大风霾，天色晦冥者数日。
现代文：正德五年三月甲子日，刮大风扬起尘沙，天色昏暗逵好几天。
English: On March 1st, the fifth year of Zhengde's reign, a strong wind blew up dust, and the sky was dark and gloomy for several days.

古文：十六年十一月辛酉，甘肃行都司黑风昼晦，翌日方散。
现代文：十六年十一月辛酉日，甘肃行都司刮黑风，白日晦暗，第二天纔散去。
English: On November 16th, the hottest day of the year, a black wind blew through the capital of Gansu Province. The day was dark and gloomy, and the next day the clouds dispersed.

古文：嘉靖元年九月己巳，大风霾，昼晦。
现代文：嘉靖元年九月己巳日，大风扬尘，白日晦暗。
English: It was September of the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, and the wind was blowing and the day was dark.

古文：八年正月戊戌朔，风霾，晦如夕。
现代文：八年正月戊戌初一，风卷沙尘，昏暗如夜晚。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year, the wind rolled sand and dust, dark as night.

古文：二十六年七月乙丑，甘州五卫风霾昼晦，色赤复黄。
现代文：二十六年七月乙丑日，甘州五卫风卷沙尘，白昼晦暗，色呈赤红，又变成黄色。
English: In July of the 26th year, on the day of the second ugly, the wind of the Fifth Wei Dynasty in Ganzhou swept up sand and dust. The day was dark, the color was reddish red, and it turned yellow.

古文：二十八年三月丙申，风霾四塞，日色惨白，凡五日。
现代文：二十八年三月丙申日，风卷沙尘弥漫四方，日色惨淡发白，一共经历五天。
English: On the 28th day of the 3rd month of the year, the wind rolled sand and dust in all directions, and the sun was bleak and white. It lasted for five days.

古文：三十年正月辛卯，大风扬尘蔽天，昼晦。
现代文：三十年正月辛卯日，大风扬起沙尘遮蔽天空，白昼晦暗。
English: On the 30th day of the first month of the year, a gale blew up sand and dust, obscuring the sky and darkening the day.

古文：四十年二月己酉，亦如之。
现代文：四十年二月己酉日，也像那样。
English: Forty years ago, on February Fool's Day, it was like that.

古文：四月癸巳，大风雨，黄土昼晦。
现代文：四月癸巳日，刮大风降大雨，黄土弥空，白日晦暗。
English: It's April Fool's Day, the wind is blowing and the rain is falling, the sky is overcast and the day is dark.

古文：四十三年三月望，异风作，赤黄霾，至二十一日乃止。
现代文：四十三年三月十五，怪风刮起，沙尘赤黄，直到二十一日纔停止。
English: On March 15, 433, a strange wind began to blow, and the sand and dust turned red and yellow, until the hail stopped on the 21st.

古文：隆庆二年正月元旦，大风扬沙走石，白昼晦冥，自北畿抵江、浙皆同。
现代文：隆庆二年正月元旦，大风扬起沙尘吹动石块，白日阴晦昏暗，从北畿抵达江、浙都一样。
English: On the New Year's Day of the first month of the second year of Longqing, the high wind raised the sand and dust and blew the stones. The day was cloudy and gloomy, and it was the same from Beigui to Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：万历十七年正月乙丑，盖州卫风霾昼晦，坏廨宇、庐舍。
现代文：万历十七年正月乙丑日，盖州卫大风扬尘，白画晦暗，损坏官署、房屋。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd month of the 17th year of Wanli, the Gezhouwei wind blew dust, the white painting was darkened, and the government office and houses were damaged.

古文：二十五年二月戊寅，京师风霾。
现代文：二十五年二月戊寅日，京城大风扬起沙尘。
English: On February 25th, the day of Wu Yin, a gale blew up sand and dust in Beijing.

古文：二十九年四月，连日风霾。
现代文：二十九年四月，连日刮风，沙尘弥漫。
English: In April of 1929, the wind blew for days on end, and the sand and dust were thick.

古文：三十八年四月戊戌，崇阳风霾昼晦，至夜转烈，损官民屋木无算。
现代文：三十八年四月戊戌日，崇阳刮风扬尘，白昼晦暗，到夜晚变得更猛烈，损害官府民房树木不计其敷。
English: On April 30, 1938, the wind blew dust in Chongyang. It was gloomy during the day and became more violent at night, damaging government buildings and trees beyond measure.

古文：四十八年八月以前，云南诸府时昼晦。
现代文：四十八年八月以前，云南众府时而白昼晦暗。
English: Before August of 1948, the prefectures of Yunnan were sometimes in darkness.

古文：天启元年四月乙亥午，宁夏洪广堡风霾大作，坠灰片如瓜子，纷纷不绝，逾时而止。
现代文：天启元年四月乙亥中午，宁夏洪广堡风沙大发，坠落灰片如瓜子，纷纷不断，遇了一个时辰纔停止。
English: At noon in April of the first year of the Apocalypse, Ningxia Hongguang Castle was hit by a strong wind, and the falling ash pieces, like melon seeds, continued one after another, but came to a sudden stop.

古文：日将沈，作红黄色，外如炊烟，围罩亩许，日光所射如火焰，夜分乃没。
现代文：太阳将要落山时，呈红黄色，外围如同炊烟，笼罩一亩左右，日光照射如同火焰，半夜纔隐没。
English: When the sun is about to set, it is reddish-yellow, the periphery is like smoke, covering about one mu, the sunlight is like a flame, and the midnight sun disappears.

古文：四年二月辛丑，风霾昼晦，尘沙蔽天，连日不止。
现代文：四年二月辛丑日，风扬沙尘，白昼晦暗，沙麈遮蔽天空，连日不停止。
English: It was a gloomy day in February of the fourth year. The wind was blowing sand and dust. The day was dark and gloomy. Sandstorms covered the sky and did not stop for days.

古文：崇祯元年正月癸亥，永年县昼晦，咫尺不辨人物。
现代文：崇祯元年正月癸亥日，永年县白天晦暗，咫尺之内分不清人物。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Chongzhen, Yongnian County was dark during the day, and people could not be distinguished within a short distance.

古文：七年三月戊子，黄州昼晦如夜。
现代文：七年三月戊子日，黄州白天晦暗如同黑夜。
English: On March 7th, the day in Huangzhou was as dark as night.

古文：十三年闰正月丙申，南京日色晦朦，风霾大作，细灰从空下，五步外不见一物。
现代文：十三年闰正月丙申日，南京日色晦暗迷蒙，风沙大起，微细沙灰从天空降落，五步之外不见一物。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the leap year, the Nanjing sun was dark and gloomy, the wind and sand rose, fine sand and ash fell from the sky, and nothing could be seen five steps away.

古文：后四年三月丙申，风霾昼晦。
现代文：后四年三月丙申日，风卷尘沙，白昼晦暗。
English: In the fourth year of the Heian period, in March, the wind was blowing dust and sand, and the day was dark.

古文：▲花孽
现代文：花孽
English: The Iniquity of Flowers

古文：弘治十六年九月，安陆桃李华。
现代文：弘治十六午九月，安陆桃花盛开。
English: On the 16th day of the 9th month of the Heian period, the peach blossoms in Anlu were in full bloom.

古文：正德元年九月，宛平枣林庄李花盛开。
现代文：正德元年九月，宛平枣林庄李树花盛开。
English: In September of the first year of Zhengde, the lilies of Wanping jujube grove were in full bloom.

古文：其冬，永嘉花尽放。
现代文：逭年冬天，永嘉花全部开放。
English: In the winter of the year of the rooster, the Yongjia flowers were all open.

古文：六年八月，霸州桃李华。
现代文：六年八月，霸州桃李开花。
English: In August of the sixth year, Bazhou peach and plum blossomed.

古文：▲虫孽
现代文：虫孽
English: Worms and worms

古文：景泰五年三月，畿南五府有虫食桑，春蚕不育。
现代文：景泰五年三月，畿南五府有虫吃桑叶，春蚕无法养。
English: In March of the 5th year of Jing Tai, there were insects eating mulberry leaves in five prefectures in South Gyeongsang Province, and spring silkworms could not be raised.

古文：弘治六年八月己巳，临晋雨虫如雪。
现代文：弘治六年八月己巳日，临晋降虫如同雪花。
English: In August of the sixth year of the Hongzhi era, insects fell like snowflakes in Linjin.

古文：七年三月，广宁诸卫有黑虫堕地，大如蝇，久之入于土。
现代文：七年三月，广宁众卫有黑虫坠落地下，大如苍蝇，很久之后钻入土中。
English: In March of the seventh year, Guangning Zhongwei had a black worm fall to the ground, as big as a fly, and after a long time it burrowed into the soil.

古文：▲牛祸
现代文：牛祸
English: Cow disease

古文：正德十二年，徐州牛产犊，一头二舌，两尾八足。
现代文：正德十二年，徐州牛生小犊，一颗头，二个舌，两条尾，八只足。
English: In the 12th year of Zhengde, Xuzhou Niu Sheng Xiao Yao, one head, two tongues, two tails, eight feet.

古文：嘉靖五年七月，南阳牛产犊，一首两身。
现代文：嘉靖五年七月，南阳牛生小犊，一颗头，两个身子。
English: In July of the fifth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Nanyang Niu gave birth to a calf with one head and two bodies.

古文：六年十一月，漳浦有牛产犊，三目三角。
现代文：六年十一月，漳浦有牛生小犊，三只眼，三只角。
English: In November of the sixth year, there was a calf with three eyes and three horns.

古文：十一年二月，铜仁黄牸产犊，满身有纹，即死。
现代文：十一年二月，面生黄母牛生小犊，满身有花纹，生下便死去。
English: In February of the eleventh year, a yellow heifer gave birth to a young calf, which was covered in patterns and died at birth.

古文：十二年，山东平山卫牛犊有纹，前两足及尾悉具鳞甲，中皆毳毛。
现代文：十二年，山东平山卫牛犊有花纹，前面两只足和尾巴都有鳞甲，里面都有毳毛。
English: In the 12th year, Shandong Pingshanwei beef brisket has a pattern, the front two legs and tail have scales, and there are bristles inside.

古文：万历十三年九月，光山牛产一物，火光满地，鳞甲森然，一夕毙。
现代文：万历十三年九月，光山牛生一物，火光满地，鳞甲丰厚严整，一个晚上便死去。
English: In September of the thirteenth year of Wanli, Guangshan Niu gave birth to a calf. It was full of fire and had a thick and well-formed carapace. It died one night.

古文：三十七年五月，历城、高苑二县牛各产犊，双头三眼，两鼻二口。
现代文：三十七年五月，历城、高苑二县牛各生小犊，两颗头，三只眼，两个鼻子，二张口。
English: In May of the year thirty-seven, cows in two counties of Licheng and Gaoyuan each gave birth to calves with two heads, three eyes, two noses, and two mouths.

古文：三十八年三月，获嘉牛产犊，一身两头，四眼四耳，两口两足，一尾。
现代文：三十八年三月，获嘉牛生小犊，一个身子，两颗头，四只眼睛，四个耳朵，两张口，两只足，一条尾巴。
English: In March of the 38th year, a calf was born, with one body, two heads, four eyes, four ears, two mouths, two legs, and a tail.

古文：三十九年二月，汲县牛产犊，一膊两头，两口四眼，两耳七蹄。
现代文：三十九年二月，汲县牛生小犊，一只膊，两颗头，两张口，四只眼，两个耳朵，七只蹄。
English: In February of the year 39, a calf was born in Niu County. It had one arm, two heads, two mouths, four eyes, two ears, and seven hooves.

古文：四月降夷部牛产犊，人头羊耳。
现代文：四月，降夷部牛生小犊呈人头，羊耳。
English: In April, the lower part of the cow's calf showed a human head and sheep's ears.

古文：四十五年八月，开州牛产犊，两口三眼。
现代文：四十五年八月，开州牛生小犊，两张口，三只眼。
English: In August, 1945, a calf was born in Kaizhou, with two mouths and three eyes.

古文：天启元年十月，会宁牛产异兽，遍体鳞甲，有火光。
现代文：天启元年十月，会宁牛生怪兽，遍体长着鳞甲，有火光。
English: At the apocalypse in October of the first year of the Heian period, a cow-born monster, covered with scales and armor and glowing with fire, was born.

古文：三年十月，沅陵牸生犊，一身两头三尾。
现代文：三年十月，沅陵母牛生小犊，一个身子，两颗头，三条尾巴。
English: In October of the third year, a cow in Fuling gave birth to a calf with one body, two heads and three tails.

古文：七年三月，莒州牛产犊如麟。
现代文：七年三月，莒州牛生小犊如麒麟。
English: In March of the seventh year, Yanzhou Niu Sheng Xiao Yao was like a unicorn.

古文：崇祯十三年，襄阳牛产犊，两头二日。
现代文：崇祯十三年，襄阳牛生小犊，两颗头，二只眼。
English: In the thirteenth year of Chongzhen, a calf was born in Yangyang, with two heads and two eyes.

古文：▲地震
现代文：地震
English: Earthquake

古文：洪武四年正月己丑。巩昌、临洮、庆阳地震。
现代文：洪武四年正月己丑日，巩昌、临洮、庆阳发生地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Hongwu, an earthquake occurred in Gongchang, Linyi and Qingyang.

古文：五年四月戊戌，梧州府苍梧、贺州、恭城、立山等处地震。
现代文：五年四月戊戌日，梧州府苍梧、贺州、恭城、立山等处发生地震。
English: On April 30, 2005, an earthquake occurred in Cangwu, Hezhou, Gongcheng, and Tateyama in Wuzhou Prefecture.

古文：六月癸卯，太原府阳曲县地震。
现代文：六月癸卯日，太原府阳曲县发生地震。
English: On the last day of June, an earthquake occurred in Yangqu County, Taiyuan Prefecture.

古文：七月辛亥，又震。
现代文：七月辛亥日，又发生地震。
English: In July, on Xinhai Day, another earthquake occurred.

古文：壬戌，京师风雨地辰。
现代文：壬戌日，京城刮风降雨，发生地震。
English: On the day of the Dragon Boat Festival, wind and rain swept through Beijing, and an earthquake occurred.

古文：八月癸未，太原府徐沟县西北中有声如雷，地震凡三日。
现代文：八月癸末日，太原府徐沟县西北空中有聋音如响雷，地震，共连续三天。
English: On the last day of August, there was a deafening sound like thunder and an earthquake in the northwest sky of Xugou County, Taiyuan Prefecture, for three consecutive days.

古文：戊戌，阳曲县地又震。
现代文：戊戌日，阳曲县又发生地震。
English: On the day of the earthquake, another earthquake occurred in Yangqu County.

古文：九月壬戌，又震者再。
现代文：九月壬戌日，又两次发生地震。
English: In September, two more earthquakes occurred on the same day.

古文：十月戊寅、辛卯，复震。
现代文：十月戊寅日、辛卯日又发生地震。
English: In October, another earthquake occurred on the day of Wu Yin and the day of Xin Wu.

古文：是年，阳曲地凡七震。
现代文：这一年，阳曲一共七次地震。
English: This year, there were a total of seven earthquakes in Yangqu.

古文：自六年至十四年，复八震。
现代文：从六年至十四年，又八次地震。
English: From 2006 to 2014, there were eight more earthquakes.

古文：八年七月戊辰，京师地震。
现代文：八年七月戊辰日，京城发生地震。
English: On July 8th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：十二月戊子，又震。
现代文：十二月戊子日，又发生地震。
English: On December 31, another earthquake occurred.

古文：十一年四月乙巳，宁夏地震，坏城垣。
现代文：十一年四月乙巳日，宁夏发生地震，毁坏城垣。
English: On April 11th, an earthquake occurred in Ningxia, destroying the city walls.

古文：十三年二月甲戌，福州府、广州府、河州地震。
现代文：十三年十二月甲戌日，福州府、广州府、河州发生地震。
English: On December 13, Jiaxuan Day, an earthquake occurred in Fuzhou, Guangzhou and Hezhou.

古文：十九年六月辛丑，云南地震。
现代文：十九年六月辛丑日，云南发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Yunnan on June 19, 1989.

古文：十一月己卯，复震，有声。
现代文：十一月己卯日，又发生地震，有声响。
English: On the same day in November, another earthquake occurred and there was a loud noise.

古文：二十三年正月庚辰，山东地震。
现代文：二十三年正月庚辰日，山东发生地震。
English: On the 23rd day of the first month of the year, an earthquake occurred in Shandong.

古文：建文元年三月甲午，京师地震，求直言。
现代文：建文元年三月甲午日，京城发生地震，皇帝下诏访求直言。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of March in the first year of Jianwen, an earthquake occurred in Beijing, and the emperor issued an edict to visit and speak frankly.

古文：永乐元年十一月甲午，北京地震。
现代文：永乐元年十一月甲午日，北京发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of November 1st, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：山西、宁夏亦震。
现代文：山西、宁夏也发生地震。
English: Earthquakes also occurred in Shanxi and Ningxia.

古文：二年十一月癸丑，京师、济南、开封并震，有声。
现代文：二年十一月癸丑日，京城、济南、开封一同发生地震，有声响。
English: In November of the second year, on the day of Ugly, an earthquake occurred in Beijing, Jinan, and Kaifeng, and there was a loud noise.

古文：六年五月壬戌、十一年八月甲子，京师复震。
现代文：六年五月壬戌日、十一年八月甲子日，京城又发生地震。
English: On May 6th, and again on August 11th, another earthquake hit Kyoto.

古文：十三年九月壬戌、十四年九月癸卯，京师地震。
现代文：十三年九月壬戌日、十四年九月癸卯日，京城发生地震。
English: On September 13th, 2013 and September 14th, 2014, an earthquake hit Kyoto.

古文：十八年六月丙午，北京地震。
现代文：十八年六月丙午日，北京发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of June 18, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：二十二年六月壬申，南京地震。
现代文：二十二年六月壬申日，南京发生地震。
English: On June 22nd, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：洪熙元年二月戊午，六安卫地震，凡七日。
现代文：洪熙元年二月戊午日，六安卫发生地震，前后共七天。
English: On the afternoon of February 3 in the first year of Hongxi, an earthquake occurred in Lu'anwei, lasting a total of seven days.

古文：是岁，南京地震，凡四十有二。
现代文：这一年，南京发生地震，一共四十二次。
English: That year, there were a total of 42 earthquakes in Nanjing.

古文：宣德元年七月癸巳，京师地震，有声，自东南迄西北。
现代文：宣德元年七月癸巳日，京城发生地震，有声响从东南至于西北。
English: In July of the 1st year of Xuande, an earthquake occurred in Beijing, and there were sounds from the southeast to the northwest.

古文：是岁，南京地震者九。二年春，复震者十。
现代文：这一年，南京九次发生地震。二年春季，又十次地震。
English: There were nine earthquakes in Nanjing that year, and another ten earthquakes in the spring of the following year.

古文：三年，复屡震。
现代文：三年，又屡次发生地震。
English: Three years later, there were more earthquakes.

古文：四年，两京地震。
现代文：四年，两京发生地震。
English: In 2004, an earthquake hit Kyoto and Osaka.

古文：五年正月壬子，南京地震。
现代文：五年正月壬子日，南京发生地震。
English: On the first day of January in the fifth year, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：辛酉，又震。
现代文：辛酉日，又发生地震。
English: On the morning of the second day, another earthquake occurred.

古文：正统三年三月己亥，京师地震。
现代文：正统三年三月己亥日，京城发生地震。
English: Traditionally, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto on March 3rd, the day of the year of the pig.

古文：庚子，又震。
现代文：庚子日，又发生地震。
English: On the day of Geng Zi, another earthquake occurred.

古文：甲辰，又震者再。
现代文：甲辰日，又两次发生地震。
English: On the same day, two more earthquakes occurred.

古文：四年六月乙未，复震。
现代文：四年六月乙末日，又发生地震。
English: On the last day of June 2004, another earthquake occurred.

古文：八月己亥，又震。
现代文：八月己亥日，又地震。
English: In August, on the day of the Chinese New Year, there was another earthquake.

古文：五年十月庚午朔，兰州、庄浪地震十日。
现代文：五年十月庚午初一，兰州、庄浪发生地震连续十天。
English: On the morning of the first day of the fifth year of October, an earthquake occurred in Lanzhou and Zhuanglang for ten consecutive days.

古文：十月、十一月屡震，坏城堡庐舍，压死人畜。
现代文：十月、十一月多次地震，毁坏城堡、房屋，压死人口、牲畜。
English: In October and November, there were many earthquakes, destroying castles and houses, and crushing people and livestock.

古文：十年二月丁巳，京师地震。
现代文：十年二月丁巳日，京城发生地震。
English: On February 10th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：景泰二年七月癸丑，京师地震。
现代文：景泰二年七月癸丑日，京城发生地震。
English: In July of the second year of King Tae's reign, an earthquake occurred in the capital.

古文：三年七月，永新珠坑村地陷十七所。
现代文：三年七月，永新珠坑村地面下陷十七处。
English: In July of the third year, the ground of Yongxin Zhukeng Village sank 17 places.

古文：是年，南京地震。
现代文：这一年，南京发生地震。
English: That year, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：五年十月庚子，京师地震，有声，起西北迄东南。
现代文：五年十月庚子日，京城发生地震，有声响，起自西北直到东南。
English: In October of the fifth year, on the day of Geng Zi, an earthquake occurred in Beijing, and there was a loud noise from the northwest to the southeast.

古文：六年二月甲午，安福大雷雨。
现代文：六年二月甲午日，安福打大雷降大雨。
English: On the afternoon of February 6, Anfu was hit by thunder and heavy rain.

古文：白泉陂羊塘地陷二，一深三丈，广十余丈，一深六尺，广一丈有奇。
现代文：白柬陂羊塘地面下陷二处，一处深三丈，宽十多丈，一处深六尺，宽一丈有余。
English: There are two depressions on the ground of Baikamdusan Yangtang. One is three meters deep and more than ten meters wide, and the other is six meters deep and more than one meter wide.

古文：天顺元年十月乙巳，南京地震。
现代文：天顺元年十月乙巳日，南京发生地震。
English: In October of the first year of Tianshun, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：成化元年四月甲申，钧州地震，二十三日乃止。
现代文：成化元年四月甲申日，钩州地震二十三天纔停止。
English: In April of the first year of the Jinhua era, on the day of Jiaxian, the earthquake in Huzhou lasted for 23 days.

古文：三年，四川地震，凡三百七十五。
现代文：三年，四川发生地震，一共三百七十五处。
English: Three years ago, an earthquake occurred in Sichuan, with a total of 375 aftershocks.

古文：五月壬申，宣府、大同地震，有声，威远、朔州亦震，坏墩台墙垣，压伤人。
现代文：五月壬申，宣府、大同发生地震，有声响，威远、朔州也发生地震，毁坏墩台墙垣，压伤人民。
English: In May, an earthquake occurred in Jinshin, Xuanfu and Datong, and there was a loud noise. An earthquake also occurred in Wiyuan and Shuozhou, destroying the walls of Xingtai and crushing the people.

古文：四年八月癸巳，京师地震，有声。
现代文：四年八月癸巳日，京城地震，有声响。
English: On August 3, 2004, the capital city was shaken by an earthquake, which was followed by loud noises.

古文：十二月戊戌，湖广地震。
现代文：十二月戊戌日，湖广发生地震。
English: On December 30, an earthquake occurred in Hukang.

古文：五年十二月丙辰，汝宁、武昌、汉阳、岳州同日地震。
现代文：五年十二月丙辰日，汝宁、武昌、汉阳、岳州同日发生地震。
English: On December 5th, an earthquake occurred in Ruining, Wuchang, Hanyang and Yuezhou on the same day.

古文：六年正月丁亥，河南地震。
现代文：六年正月丁亥日，河南发生地震。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, on Dinghai Day, an earthquake occurred in Henan.

古文：是年，湖广亦震。
现代文：这一年，湖广也地震。
English: This year, Huguang was also hit by an earthquake.

古文：十年四月壬午，鹤庆地震。
现代文：十年四月壬午日，鹤庆发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of April 10, an earthquake occurred in Heqing.

古文：九月己巳，自寅至申，复十五震，坏廨舍民居，伤人畜。
现代文：九月己巳日，从寅时到申时，又发生十五次地震，毁坏官署和民房，伤害人口和牲畜。
English: On the third day of September, from the morning of the third day of the month to the evening of the fourth day of the month, another 15 earthquakes occurred, destroying government offices and houses, and injuring people and livestock.

古文：十月丁酉，灵州大沙井驿地震，有声如雷。
现代文：十月丁酉日，灵州大沙井驿发生地震，有声音如同雷鸣。
English: On October 24, an earthquake occurred in Dashaizhou, Lingzhou, with a sound like thunder.

古文：自后昼夜屡震，至十一月甲寅，一日十一震，城堞房屋多圮。
现代文：从此之后昼夜多次地震，到十一月甲寅日，一天发生十一次地震。城堞、房屋多垮塌。
English: Since then, there have been many earthquakes day and night, and by November, the 11th day of the month, there was an 11th earthquake in one day. Many city gates and houses collapsed.

古文：十二年正月辛亥，南京地震。
现代文：十二年正月辛亥日，南京发生地震。
English: In the first month of the twelfth year, on the day of Xinhai, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：十月辛巳，京师地震。
现代文：十月辛巳日，京城发生地震。
English: On the first day of October, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：十三年正月己巳，凤阳、临淮地震，有声。
现代文：十三年正月己巳日，凤阳、临淮发生地震，有声响。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the year, an earthquake occurred in Fengyang and Linhuai, and there was a loud noise.

古文：闰二月癸卯，临洮、巩昌地震，城有颓者。
现代文：闰二月癸卯，临洮、巩昌发生地震，城墙有被震垮的。
English: In late February, an earthquake occurred in Linfen and Gongchang, and some city walls were collapsed by the shock.

古文：四月戊戌，甘肃地裂，又震，有声。
现代文：四月戊戌日，甘肃地面崩裂，又发生地震，伴有声音。
English: In April, the ground in Gansu cracked and another earthquake occurred, accompanied by sound.

古文：榆林、凉州亦震。
现代文：榆林、凉州也发生地震。
English: Earthquakes also occurred in Yulin and Liangzhou.

古文：宁夏大震，声如雷。
现代文：宁夏发生大地震，声如雷鸣。
English: A large earthquake occurred in Ningxia, the sound of which was like thunder.

古文：城垣崩坏者八十三处。
现代文：城垣崩塌毁坏八十三处。
English: Eighty-three places were destroyed by the collapse of the city walls.

古文：甘州、巩昌、榆林、凉州及沂州、郯城、滕、费、峄等县，同日俱震。
现代文：甘州、巩昌、榆林、凉州以及沂州、郯城、滕、费、蝉等县，同天都发生地震。
English: On the same day, earthquakes occurred in Ganzhou, Gongchang, Yulin, and Liangzhou, as well as in Bozhou, Lucheng, Teng, Fei, and Cicada counties.

古文：九月甲戌，京师地三震。
现代文：九月甲戌日，京城三次发生地震。
English: On September 6th, there were three earthquakes in Beijing.

古文：十四年六月，广西太平府地震，至八月乙巳，凡七震。
现代文：十四年六月，广西太平府发生地震，到八月乙巳日，共发生七次地震。
English: In June 14th, an earthquake occurred in Taiping Prefecture, Guangxi, and by August 21st, a total of seven earthquakes had occurred.

古文：七月，四川盐井卫地连震，廨宇倾覆，人畜多死。
现代文：七月，四川盐井卫连续地震，房屋倾覆，人口牲畜多有死亡。
English: In July, a series of earthquakes in Yanjingwei, Sichuan, caused houses to collapse and many people and livestock to die.

古文：十六年八月丁巳，四川越巂卫一日七震，越数日连震。
现代文：十六年八月丁巳日，四川越仑卫一日发生七次地震，过了数日连续地震。
English: On August 16th, Dingshi Day, seven earthquakes occurred in Sichuan Yuelunwei in one day, and after a few days there were continuous earthquakes.

古文：十七年二月甲寅，南京、凤阳、庐州、淮安、扬州、和州、兖州及河南州县，同日地震。
现代文：十七年二月甲寅日，南京、凤阳、庐州、淮安、扬州、和州、兖州以及迩直州县，同日发生地震。
English: On February 17th, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing, Fengyang, Zhangzhou, Huai'an, Yangzhou, Hezhou, Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou on the same day.

古文：五月戊戌，直隶蓟州遵化县地震。
现代文：五月戊戌日，直隶蓟州遵化县发生地震。
English: In May, an earthquake occurred in Zunhua County, Zhili Prefecture.

古文：六月甲辰，又震，日三次。
现代文：六月甲辰曰，又地震，一日发生三次。
English: In the first hour of June, there was another earthquake, which occurred three times a day.

古文：永平府及辽东宁远卫亦三震。
现代文：永平府以及辽东宁远卫也三次地震。
English: Yongping Prefecture and Liaodong Ningyuanwei also experienced three earthquakes.

古文：二十年正月庚寅，京师及永平、宣府、辽东皆震。
现代文：二十年正月庚寅日，京城以及永平、宣府、辽东都发生地震。
English: On the 20th day of the first month of the year, an earthquake occurred in Beijing, Yongping, Xuanfu and Liaodong.

古文：宣府地裂，涌沙出水。
现代文：宣府地面崩裂，涌出沙和水。
English: The ground of Xuanwu cracked and sand and water gushed out.

古文：天寿山、密云、古北口、居庸关城垣墩堡多摧，人有压死者。
现代文：天寿山、密云、古北口、居庸关城垣墩堡多被摧毁，有人被压死。
English: Tianshoushan, Miyun, Gubeikou, Juyongguan city wall fortresses were mostly destroyed, and some people were crushed to death.

古文：五月甲寅，代州地七震。
现代文：五月甲寅日，代州发生七次地震。
English: On May 1st, seven earthquakes occurred in Daizhou.

古文：九月辛巳，费县地陷，深二尺，纵横三丈许。
现代文：九月辛巳日，费县地面下陷，深二尺，纵横三丈左右。
English: On September 23rd, the ground in Fei County sank to a depth of two feet and a length and width of about three meters.

古文：二十一年二月壬申，泰安地震。
现代文：二十一年二月壬申日，泰安发生地震。
English: On February 21, Jinshin Day, an earthquake occurred in Tai'an.

古文：三月壬午朔，复震，声如雷，泰山动摇。
现代文：三月壬午初一，又地震，声如雷鸣，泰山动摇。
English: On the first day of the month of March, there was another earthquake, which sounded like thunder and shook Mount Tai.

古文：后四日复微震，癸巳、乙未、庚子连震。
现代文：此后四日又发生轻微地震，癸巳日、乙未日、庚子日连续地震。
English: After that, a minor earthquake occurred on the fourth day, followed by consecutive earthquakes on the third day, the second day, and the fourth day.

古文：闰四月癸未，巩昌府、固原卫及兰、河、洮、岷四州，地俱震，有声。
现代文：闰四月癸末日，巩昌府、固原卫以及兰、河、洮、岷四州都发生地震，有声响。
English: On the last day of April, an earthquake occurred in Gongchang Prefecture, Guyuanwei, and the four prefectures of Lanzhou, He, Handan and Handan, causing noises.

古文：癸巳，蓟州遵化县地震，有声，越数日复连震，城垣民居有颓仆者。
现代文：癸巳日，蓟州遵化县发生地震，伴有声响，过了几日又连续地震，城垣和民房有倒塌的。
English: On the same day, an earthquake occurred in Zunhua County, Luzhou, accompanied by noise. A few days later, there were continuous earthquakes, and the city walls and houses collapsed.

古文：五月壬戌，京师地再震。
现代文：五月壬戌，京城两次地震。
English: In May, there were two earthquakes in Beijing.

古文：九月丙辰，廉州、梧州地震，有声，连震者十六日。
现代文：九月丙辰日，廉州、梧州发生地震，伴有声响，连续地震十六天。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month, an earthquake occurred in Lianzhou and Wuzhou, accompanied by sound, and there were sixteen consecutive days of earthquakes.

古文：十一月丙寅，京师地震。
现代文：十一月丙寅日，京城发生地震。
English: On November 3rd, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：二十二年六月壬辰，汉中府及宁羌卫地裂，或十余丈，或六七丈。
现代文：二十二年六月壬辰日，汉中府以及宁羌卫地面裂陷，有的十多丈，有的六七丈。
English: In June 1922, Hanzhong Prefecture and Ningyongwei suffered a crack in the ground, some of which were more than 10 meters high, while others were 6-7 meters high.

古文：宝鸡县裂三里，阔丈余。
现代文：宝鸡县地面裂开长三里，宽一丈多。
English: The crack in the ground in Baoji County is three miles long and more than a foot wide.

古文：九月辛亥，成都地日七八震，俱有声。
现代文：九月辛亥日，成都一天发生七八次地震，都有声响。
English: On the day of Xinhai in September, Chengdu was hit by seven or eight earthquakes in one day, all of which were seismic.

古文：次日，复震。
现代文：第二天，又地震。
English: The next day, another earthquake.

古文：弘治元年八月壬寅，汉、茂二州地震，仆黄头等寨碉房三十七户，人口有压死者。
现代文：弘治元年八月壬寅日，汉、茂二州发生地震，黄头等寨碉房三十七户倒塌，有人被压死。
English: In August of the first year of the Hongzhi era, an earthquake occurred in Han and Maozhou. Thirty-seven households in the walled city of Huangtuo collapsed, and some people were crushed to death.

古文：戊申，宣府葛峪堡地陷深三尺，长百五十步，阔一丈。
现代文：戊申日，宣府葛峪堡地面陷下深三尺，长一百五十步，宽一丈。
English: On the day of Boshin, the ground of Xuanfu Gejun Fort sank to a depth of three feet, with a length of one hundred and fifty paces and a width of one height.

古文：沙河中涌疄，高一尺，长七十步。
现代文：沙河中涌出田垄，高一尺，长七十步。
English: A ridge of fields rises from the sand, a foot high and seventy paces long.

古文：十二月辛卯，四川地震，连三日。
现代文：十二月辛卯日，四川发生地震，连续三日。
English: In December, an earthquake occurred in Sichuan for three consecutive days.

古文：二年五月庚申，成都地震，连三日，有声。
现代文：二年五月庚申日，成都发生地震，连续三天，伴有声响。
English: In May of the second year, the earthquake occurred in Chengdu, three days in a row, accompanied by noise.

古文：三年十二月己未，京师地再震。
现代文：三年十二月已末日，京城两次发生地震。
English: At the end of December of the third year, there were two earthquakes in Beijing.

古文：四年六月辛亥，复三震。
现代文：四年六月辛亥日，又三次地震。
English: In June of the same year, there were three more earthquakes.

古文：八月乙卯，南京地震，屋宇皆摇。
现代文：八月乙卯日，南京发生地震，屋宇都产生摇动。
English: On August 1st, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing, causing buildings to shake.

古文：淮、扬二府同日震。
现代文：淮、扬府同日发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Huai and Yangfu on the same day.

古文：六年三月，宁夏地震，连三年，共二十震。
现代文：六年三月，宁夏发生地震，连续三年，共地震二十次。
English: In March of the sixth year, an earthquake occurred in Ningxia, and for three consecutive years, there were a total of twenty earthquakes.

古文：四月甲辰，开封、卫辉、东昌、兖州同日地震，有声。
现代文：四月甲辰日，开封、卫辉、东昌、兖州同日发生地震，有声响。
English: On the first hour of April, an earthquake occurred in Kaifeng, Weihui, Dongchang, and Zhangzhou on the same day, and there was a loud noise.

古文：七年二月丁丑，曲靖地震，坏房屋，压死军民。
现代文：七年月丁丑，曲靖发坐地震，毁坏房屋，压死军人和平民。
English: In the seventh year of Dingushi, Qujing was hit by an earthquake, destroying houses and crushing soldiers and civilians.

古文：是岁，两京并六震。
现代文：这一年，两京都六次地震。
English: That year, there were six earthquakes in Kyoto in two years.

古文：八年三月己亥，宁夏地震十二次，声如雷，倾倒边墙、墩台、房屋，压伤人。
现代文：八年三月己亥日，宁夏地震十二次，声如雷鸣，边墙、墩台、房屋倒塌，压伤人民。
English: In March of the eighth year, on Ji Hai Day, there were twelve earthquakes in Ningxia, the sound was like thunder, and the side walls, platforms, and houses collapsed, crushing the people.

古文：九月甲午至辛丑，安南卫地十二震。
现代文：九月甲午日到辛丑日，安南卫发生十二次地震。
English: From the afternoon of September 1st to the evening of September 2nd, twelve earthquakes occurred in Annanwei.

古文：十月壬戌至甲子，海州九震。
现代文：十月壬戌日到甲子日，海州九次地震。
English: From October 23rd to October 24th, there were nine earthquakes in Haizhou.

古文：是岁，南京地再震。
现代文：这一年，南京两次地震。
English: This year, Nanjing was hit by two earthquakes.

古文：九年，两京地震者各二次。
现代文：九年，两京发生地震各二次。
English: In 2009, two earthquakes occurred in Kyoto and two earthquakes occurred in Osaka.

古文：十年正月戊午，京师、山西地震。
现代文：十年正月戊午日，京城、山西发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the tenth lunar month, an earthquake occurred in Beijing and Shanxi.

古文：六月乙亥，海丰地震，声如雷，数日乃止。
现代文：六月乙亥日，海丰发生地震，声如雷鸣，数日纔停止。
English: In June, the earthquake occurred in Haifeng. The sound was like thunder and lasted for several days.

古文：是岁，真定、宁夏、榆林、镇番、灵州、太原皆震。
现代文：这一年，真定、宁夏、榆林、镇番、灵州、太原都发生地震。
English: In this year, earthquakes occurred in Zhending, Ningxia, Yulin, Zhenban, Lingzhou and Taiyuan.

古文：屯留尤甚，如舟将覆，屋瓦皆落。
现代文：屯留特别严重，像船将倾覆，屋瓦都被震落。
English: The settlement is particularly serious, like a ship about to capsize, the roof tiles have all been shaken off.

古文：十一年六月丙子，桂林地有声若雷，旋陷九处，大者围十七丈，小者七丈或三丈。
现代文：十一年六月丙子日，桂林地下有声响如雷鸣，随即陷落九处，大的环围十七丈，小的七丈或者三丈。
English: On June 11, the third day of the third month, there was a sound like thunder in the underground of Guilin, followed by the fall of nine places, with a large circumference of 17 meters and a small one of 7 meters or 3 meters.

古文：十三年七月己巳，京师地震。
现代文：十三年七月己巳日，京城发生地震。
English: On July 13th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：十月戊申，两京、凤阳同时地震。
现代文：十月戊申日，两京、凤阳同时发生地震。
English: On October 6th, an earthquake occurred simultaneously in Chongqing and Fengyang.

古文：十四年正月庚戌朔，延安、庆阳二府，同、华诸州，咸阳、长安诸县，潼关诸卫，连日地震，有声如雷。
现代文：十四年正月庚戌初，延安、庆阳二府，同、华各州，咸阳、长安各县，潼关各卫，连日发生地震，有声如雷鸣。
English: At the beginning of the first month of the 14th year of the Geng era, earthquakes occurred in Yan'an and Qingyang two prefectures, Tongzhou and Huazhou, Xianyang and Chang'an counties, and Shaoguan and Wei counties for several days. The sound was like thunder.

古文：朝邑尤甚，频震十七日，城垣、民舍多摧，压死人畜甚众。
现代文：朝邑尤甚严重，频繁地震十七日，城垣、民房多被摧毁，压死人口、牲畜很多。
English: The morning of the 17th was particularly severe, with frequent earthquakes. Most of the city walls and houses were destroyed, crushing many people and livestock.

古文：县东地拆，水溢成河。
现代文：县东地面裂开，水溢出流成河。
English: The ground in the eastern part of the county cracked, and water overflowed into a river.

古文：自夏至冬，复七震。
现代文：从夏季到冬季，又七次地震。
English: From summer to winter, there were seven more earthquakes.

古文：是日，陕州，永宁、卢氏二县，平阳府安邑、荣河二县，俱震，有声。
现代文：这天，陕州，永宁、卢氏二县，平阳府安邑、荣河二县都发生地震，伴有声响。
English: On this day, an earthquake occurred in Yongning and Lu counties of Shaanxi Province, as well as in Anyi and Ronghe counties of Pingyang Prefecture, accompanied by loud noises.

古文：蒲州自是日至戊午连震。
现代文：蒲州从这一天到戊午日连续地震。
English: There were continuous earthquakes in Bushu from that day to the afternoon of the same day.

古文：丁丑，福、兴、泉、漳四府地俱震。
现代文：丁丑日，福、兴、泉、漳四府都发生地震。
English: On the day of Dingushi, earthquakes occurred in the four prefectures of Fuxing, Xing, Quan and Handan.

古文：二月乙未，蒲州地又震，至三月癸亥，凡二十九震。
现代文：二月乙末日，蒲州又发生地震，到三月癸亥日，一共发生二十九次地震。
English: At the end of February, another earthquake occurred in Puzhou. By the end of March, a total of 29 earthquakes had occurred.

古文：八月癸丑，四川可渡河巡检司地裂而陷，涌泉数十派，冲坏桥梁、庄舍，压死人畜甚众。
现代文：八月癸丑日，四川可渡河巡检司地面坼裂而沉陷，涌出泉水敷十股，冲坏桥梁、村庄房屋，压死人口和牲畜非常多。
English: In August, on the day of the Ugly Duckling, the ground of the Sichuan River Crossing Inspection Station cracked and sank, and ten streams of spring water gushed out, destroying bridges and village houses, and crushing a large number of people and livestock.

古文：癸酉，贵州地三震。
现代文：癸酉日，贵州三次发生地震。
English: On the same day, three earthquakes occurred in Guizhou.

古文：十月辛酉，南京地震。
现代文：十月辛酉日，南京发生地震。
English: On the last day of October, an earthquake hit Nanjing.

古文：十五年九月丙戌，南京、徐州、大名、顺德、济南、东昌、兖州同日地震，坏城垣、民舍。
现代文：十五年九月丙戌，南京、徐州、大名、顺德、济南、束昌、兖州同日发生地震，毁坏城垣、民房。
English: In September 15th, an earthquake occurred in Pingyao, Nanjing, Xuzhou, Daming, Shunde, Jinan, Sokchang, and Zhangzhou on the same day, destroying city walls and houses.

古文：濮州尤甚，地裂涌水，压死百余人。
现代文：濮州尤甚严重，地面坼裂，泉水涌出，压死一百多人。
English: Zhangzhou was particularly serious. The ground was cracked and springs gushed out, crushing more than a hundred people to death.

古文：是日，开封、彰德、平阳、泽、潞亦震。
现代文：这一天，开封、彰德、平阳、泽、潞也发生地震。
English: On the same day, earthquakes also occurred in Kaifeng, Zhangde, Pingyang, Ze and Handan.

古文：十月甲子，山西应、朔、代三州，山阴、马邑、阳曲等县，地俱震，声如雷。
现代文：十月甲子日，山西应、朔、代三州，山阴、马邑、阳曲等县，都发生地震，声如雷鸣。
English: On October 1st, an earthquake occurred in Ying, Shuo, and Dayi counties of Shanxi Province, as well as in Shanyin, Mayi, and Yangqu counties. The sound was like thunder.

古文：丁卯，南京地震。
现代文：丁卯日，南京发生地震。
English: On the day of Dingwu, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：十六年二月庚申，南京地震。
现代文：十六年二月庚申日，南京发生地震。
English: On February 16th, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：十八年六月癸亥，宁夏地震，声如雷，城倾圮。
现代文：十八年六月癸亥日，宁夏发生地震，声如雷鸣，城墙倒塌。
English: In June 18th, the earthquake occurred in Ningxia, the sound was like thunder, and the city wall collapsed.

古文：九月癸巳，杭、嘉、绍、宁四府地震，有声。
现代文：九月癸巳日，杭、嘉、绍、宁四府发生地震，伴有声响。
English: On September 30th, an earthquake occurred in the four prefectures of Hang, Jia, Shao and Ning, accompanied by noise.

古文：甲午，南京及苏、松、常、镇、淮、扬、宁七府，通、和二州，同日地震。
现代文：甲午日，南京以及苏、松、常、镇、淮、扬、宁七府，通、和二州同日发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of January 1, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing and the seven prefectures of Su, Song, Chang, Zhen, Huai, Yang, Ning, Tong, and Nanzhou on the same day.

古文：辛丑，蒲、解二州，绛、夏、平陆、荣河、闻喜、芮城、猗氏七县地俱震，有声。
现代文：辛丑日，蒲、解二州，绛、夏、平陆、荣河、闻喜、芮城、猗氏七县都发生地震，伴有声响。
English: On the day of Xinqiu, earthquakes occurred in the seven counties of Pu, Jie, Erzhou, Zou, Xia, Pinglu, Ronghe, Wuxi, Shicheng and Jiu, accompanied by sound.

古文：而安邑、万全尤甚，民有压死者。
现代文：而安邑、万全特别严重，有人被压死。
English: And in Anyi and Wanquan, the situation is particularly serious, with some people being crushed to death.

古文：正德元年二月癸酉至乙亥，觔阳地震者十余，有声如雷。
现代文：正德元年二月癸酉日到乙亥日。合阳发生十多次地震，有声音如雷鸣。
English: From February 3rd to February 4th in the first year of Zhengde, more than ten earthquakes occurred in Hanyang, with sounds like thunder.

古文：四月癸丑，云南府连日再震。
现代文：四月癸丑，云南府连日两次地震。
English: In April, Yunnan Province was hit by two earthquakes in quick succession.

古文：木密关地震如雷凡五，坏城垣、屋舍，压伤人。
现代文：木密关共五次地震如雷，毁坏城垣、房屋，压伤人民。
English: A total of five earthquakes thundered in Mithiguan, destroying the city walls and houses and injuring the people.

古文：八月丁巳，莱州府鳌山卫地震，声如雷，城垛坏，以后屡震。
现代文：八月丁巳日，莱州府鳖山卫发生地震，声如雷鸣，城垛毁坏，以后多次地震。
English: On August 23rd, an earthquake occurred in Lushanwei, Laizhou Province. The sound was like thunder, the city was destroyed, and there were many earthquakes in the future.

古文：莱州自九月至十二月，地震四十五，俱有声如雷。
现代文：莱州从九月到十二月，发生地震四十五次，都有声音如雷鸣。
English: From September to December, there were 45 earthquakes in Laizhou, all of which sounded like thunder.

古文：二年九月庚午，云南府安州、新兴州三日连震，摇撼民居，人有死者。
现代文：二年九月庚午日，云南府安州、新兴州三天连续地震，摇撼民房，有死亡的人。
English: On the afternoon of September 2, Anzhou and Xinxingzhou in Yunnan Province were hit by three consecutive earthquakes, shaking houses and killing people.

古文：四年三月甲寅，广宁大兴堡地陷，长四尺，宽三尺，深四丈余。
现代文：四年三月甲寅日，广宁大兴堡地面下陷，长四尺，宽三尺，深四丈多。
English: In March of the fourth year, the ground of Guangning Daxing Fort sank, with a length of four feet, a width of three feet, and a depth of four feet.

古文：五月己亥夜，武昌见碧光如电者六，有声如雷，已而地震。
现代文：五月己亥晚上，武昌六次出现闪电一样的碧光，有声音如雷鸣，随后发生地震。
English: In the evening of May Ji Hai, Wuchang six times appeared lightning-like blue light, there was a sound like thunder, followed by an earthquake.

古文：六年四月乙未，楚雄地三日五震，至明年五月又连震十三日。
现代文：六年四月乙末日，楚雄三日之内发生五次地震，到第二年五月又连续地震十三天。
English: On the last day of April in 2006, five earthquakes occurred within three days in Chuxiong. By May of the following year, there were thirteen consecutive days of earthquakes.

古文：十月甲辰，大理府邓川州、剑川州、洱海卫地震。
现代文：十月甲辰日，大理府邓川州、剑川州、洱海卫发生地震。
English: On October 1st, an earthquake occurred in Dengchuan, Jianchuan and Bohaiwei of Dali Prefecture.

古文：鹤庆、剑川尤甚，坏城垣、房廨，人有压死者。
现代文：鹤庆、剑川尤其严重，毁坏城垣、房屋，有的人被压死。
English: Crane Qing and Jianchuan were particularly serious, destroying city walls and houses, and some people were crushed to death.

古文：十一月戊午，京师地震。
现代文：十一月戊午日，京城发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of November 3rd, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：保定、河间二府及八县三卫，山东武定州，同日皆震。
现代文：保定、河间二府以及八县三卫，山东武定州同日都发生地震。
English: On the same day, earthquakes occurred in Baoding, two prefectures of Hema, eight counties of Sanwei, and Shandong Wudingzhou.

古文：霸州连三日十九震。
现代文：霸州连续三天地震十九次。
English: There were nineteen earthquakes in three consecutive days in Bozhou.

古文：七年五月壬子，楚雄府自是日至甲子，地连震，声如雷。
现代文：七年五月壬子日，楚雄府从这一天到甲子日，连续发生地震，声如雷鸣。
English: In May of the seventh year, on Jinsi Day, Chuxiong Prefecture experienced a series of earthquakes from this day to Jinsi Day, which sounded like thunder.

古文：八月己巳，腾冲卫地震两日，坏城楼、官民廨宇。
现代文：八月己巳日，腾卫两日发生地震，毁坏城楼、官府和平民房屋。
English: In August, an earthquake occurred on the third day and the second day of Tengwei, destroying the city tower, government offices and civilian houses.

古文：赤水涌出，田禾尽没，死伤甚众。
现代文：赤水涌出，田中禾苗全部被淹没，死伤很多人。
English: Red water gushed out, all the rice seedlings in Tanaka were submerged, and many people were killed and injured.

古文：八年十二月戊戌，成都、重庆二府，潼川、邛二州，地俱震。
现代文：八年十二月戊戌日，成都、重庆二府，潼川、邛二州，都发生地震。
English: On December 8th, the earthquake occurred in Chengdu, Chongqing two prefectures, Beichuan and Beizhou two prefectures.

古文：九年六月甲辰，凤阳府地震有声。
现代文：九年六月甲辰日，凤阳府发生地震，伴有声响。
English: On June 9, Jia Chen Day, an earthquake occurred in Fengyang Prefecture, accompanied by noise.

古文：八月乙巳，京师大震。
现代文：八月乙巳日，京城发生大地震。
English: On August 21st, a major earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：十月壬辰，叙州府，太原府代、平、榆次等十州县，大同府应州山阴、马邑二县，俱地震，有声。
现代文：十月壬辰日，叔州府、太原府代、平、榆次等十州县，大同府应州山阴、马邑二县都发生地震，伴有声响。
English: On October 31st, an earthquake occurred in 10 prefectures including Shuzhou, Taiyuan, Pingyao and Ganzi, as well as two prefectures of Datong, Yingzhou and Mayi, accompanied by loud noises.

古文：十年五月壬辰，云南赵州永宁卫地震，逾月不止，有一日二三十震者。
现代文：十年五月壬辰日，云南赵州永宁卫发生地震，超过一个月而不停止，有一天地震二三十次的情况。
English: On the tenth day of the fifth lunar month, an earthquake occurred in Yongningwei, Zhaozhou, Yunnan. It lasted for more than a month without stopping. One day, there were twenty to thirty earthquakes.

古文：黑气如雾，地裂水涌，坏城垣、官廨、民居不可胜计，死者数千人，伤倍之。
现代文：黑色氛气如雾，地面坼裂，泉水涌出，毁坏城垣、官署、民房不可胜计，死亡数千人，受伤的人加倍。
English: The black atmosphere was like fog, the ground was cracked, springs gushed out, the destruction of city walls, government offices, and private houses was incalculable, thousands of people died, and the number of injured people doubled.

古文：八月丁丑，大理府地震，至九月乙未，复大震四日。
现代文：八月丁丑日，大理府发生地震，到九月乙末日，又连续四天发生大地震。
English: In August, an earthquake occurred in Dali Prefecture, and by the end of September, a major earthquake occurred for four consecutive days.

古文：十一年八月戊辰，南京地震，武昌府亦震。
现代文：十一年八月戊辰日，南京发生地震，武昌府也发生地震。
English: On August 11, the day of Pentecost, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing, and an earthquake also occurred in Wuchang Prefecture.

古文：十二月己未，楚雄、大理二府，蒙化、景东二卫俱震。
现代文：十二月己末日，楚雄、大理二府，蒙化、景束二卫都发生地震。
English: At the end of December, earthquakes occurred in Chuxiong, Dali Second Prefecture, Menghua, and Jingshuku Second Division.

古文：十二年四月甲子，抚州府及余干、丰城二县，泉州府，俱地震。
现代文：十二年四月甲子日，抚州府和余干、丰城二县，泉州府都发生地震。
English: On April 12, an earthquake occurred in Fuzhou, Yugang, Fengcheng and Quanzhou.

古文：浙江金乡卫自是日至七月己丑，凡十有五震。
现代文：浙江金乡卫从这一天到七月己丑日，共有十五次地震。
English: In Jinxiangwei, Zhejiang Province, there were a total of 15 earthquakes from that day to July Fool's Day.

古文：六月戊辰，云南新兴州及通海、河西、峨诸县地震，坏城楼、房屋，民有压死者。
现代文：六月戊辰日，云南新兴州以及通海、河西、胁峩各县发生地震，毁坏城楼、房屋，人民有的被压死。
English: In June, on the day of the Pentecost, an earthquake occurred in Yunnan Xinxingzhou and Tonghai, Hexi and Jiaozuo counties, destroying buildings and houses, and some people were crushed to death.

古文：九月己卯，济、青、登、莱四府地震。
现代文：九月己卯日，济、青、登、莱四府发生地震。
English: On the same day in September, an earthquake occurred in the four prefectures of Ji, Qing, Deng and Lai.

古文：是岁，泉州二月至六月，金华二月至七月，皆数震。
现代文：这一年，泉州从二月到六月，金华从二月到七月，都多次发生地震。
English: This year, Quanzhou experienced multiple earthquakes from February to June, and Jinhua from February to July.

古文：十三年六月己巳，大理府及赵、邓川二州，浪穹县地震。
现代文：十三年六月己巳日，大理府以及赵、邓川二州，浪穹县发生地震。
English: On June 13, an earthquake occurred in Dali Prefecture, Zhao and Dengchuan two prefectures, and Langyong County.

古文：是日，蒙化府亦震。
现代文：这一天，蒙化府也发生地震。
English: On the same day, an earthquake also occurred in Monhua Prefecture.

古文：十月甲午、十一月癸卯，又震。
现代文：十月甲午日、十一月癸卯日，又发生地震。
English: Another earthquake occurred on the afternoon of October 1 and the evening of November 2.

古文：十四年二月丁丑，京师地震。
现代文：十四年二月丁丑日，京城发生地震。
English: On February 14th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：九月丙午，昌平州、宣府、开平等卫亦震。
现代文：九月丙午日，昌平州、宣府、开平等卫也发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of September 3rd, earthquakes also occurred in Changping Prefecture, Xuanfu, and Kaiyuan County.

古文：丙辰，福、兴、泉三府地震。
现代文：丙辰日，福、兴、泉三府发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in the three prefectures of Fuxing, Xing and Quan on the same day.

古文：十五年三月丙申，安宁、姚安、宾州、蒙化、鹤庆俱地震。
现代文：十五年三月丙申日，安宁、姚安、宾州、蒙化、鹤庆都发生地震。
English: On March 15th, the earthquake occurred in Anning, Yao'an, Pengzhou, Menghua and Heqing.

古文：蒙化震二日，仆城垣、庐舍，民有压死者。
现代文：蒙化地震二日，倒塌城垣、房屋，人民有的被压死。
English: On the second day of the Menghua earthquake, the city walls and houses collapsed, and some people were crushed to death.

古文：八月辛酉，景东卫地震，声如雷。
现代文：八月辛酉日，景东卫发生地震，声如雷鸣。
English: On the hottest day of August, an earthquake occurred in Jingdongwei, the sound of which was like thunder.

古文：摇仆城墙、廨宇，地多拆裂。
现代文：播倒城墙、房屋，地面多坼裂。
English: The city walls and houses have been knocked down, and the ground is often cracked.

古文：乙丑，济南、东昌、开封地震。
现代文：乙丑日，济南、束昌、开封发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Jinan, Sokchang and Kaifeng on the 2nd day of the 4th lunar month.

古文：嘉靖二年正月，南京、凤阳、山东、河南、陕西地震。
现代文：嘉靖二年正月，南京、凤阳、山东、河南、陕西发生地震。
English: In the first month of the second year of Jiajing, earthquakes occurred in Nanjing, Fengyang, Shandong, Henan and Shaanxi.

古文：七月壬申，浙江定海诸卫地震，城堞尽毁。
现代文：七月壬申日，浙江定海各卫发生地震，城堞全部毁坏。
English: In July, on Jinshin Day, an earthquake occurred in Jiahui, Dinghai, Zhejiang, and the city was completely destroyed.

古文：三年正月丙寅朔，两畿、河南、山东、陕西同时地震。
现代文：三年正月丙寅初一，两畿、河南、山东、陕西同时发生地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year, an earthquake occurred simultaneously in the two Kis, Henan, Shandong and Shaanxi.

古文：二月辛亥，苏、常、镇三府地震。
现代文：二月辛亥日，苏、常、镇三府发生地震。
English: In February, Xinhai Day, an earthquake occurred in the three prefectures of Su, Chang and Zhen.

古文：是年，南京震者再。
现代文：这一年，南京两次地震。
English: This year, Nanjing was hit by two earthquakes.

古文：四年八月癸卯，徐州、凤阳一卫三州县及怀庆、开封二府俱地震，声如雷。
现代文：四年八月癸卯日，徐州、凤阳一卫三州县以及怀庆、开封二府都发生地震，声如雷鸣。
English: On August 24th, 2004, an earthquake occurred in Xuzhou, Fengyang and Weizhou counties, as well as in the two prefectures of Huaiqing and Kaifeng. The sound was like thunder.

古文：九月壬申，凤阳、徐州及开封二县复震。
现代文：九月壬申日，凤阳、徐州以及开封二县又地震。
English: In September, on Jinshin Day, Fengyang, Xuzhou and Kaifeng 2 counties were hit by another earthquake.

古文：五年四月癸亥，永昌、腾冲、腾越同日地震。
现代文：五年四月癸亥日，永昌、腾冲、腾越同日发生地震。
English: In April of the fifth year, the earthquake occurred in Yongchang, Tengchong and Tengyue on the same day.

古文：贵州安南卫地震，声如雷。坏城垣。
现代文：贵州安南卫发生地震，声如雷鸣，毁坏城垣。
English: An earthquake occurred in Annanwei, Guizhou, with a sound like thunder, destroying the city walls.

古文：壬申，复震。
现代文：壬申日，又地震。
English: On Jinshin day, another earthquake.

古文：六年十月戊辰，京师地震。
现代文：六年十月戊辰日，京城发生地震。
English: In October of the sixth year, on the day of Pentecost, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：十二年八月丁酉，京师地震。
现代文：十二年八月丁酉日，京城发生地震。
English: On August 12th, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：十五年十月庚寅，京师地震。
现代文：十五年十月庚寅日，京城发生地震。
English: On October 15th, the earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：顺天、永平、保定、万全都司各卫所，俱震，声如雷。
现代文：顺天、永平、保定、万全都司各卫所都发生地震，声如雷鸣。
English: An earthquake occurred in Shuntian, Yongping, Baoding, and all health stations of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and the sound was like thunder.

古文：十六年九月癸酉，云南地震。
现代文：十六年九月癸酉日，云南发生地震。
English: On September 30, 2016, an earthquake occurred in Yunnan.

古文：十八年七月庚寅，楚雄、临安、广西地震。
现代文：十八年七月庚寅日，楚雄、临安、广西发生地震。
English: In July 18th, the earthquake occurred in Chuxiong, Lin'an and Guangxi.

古文：十九年四月庚午，洮州、甘肃俱震。
现代文：十九年四月庚午日，洮州、甘肃都发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of April 19, an earthquake occurred in Ganzhou and Gansu.

古文：二十一年九月甲戌，平阳、固原、宁夏、洮州同日地震，有声。
现代文：二十一年九月甲戌日，平阳、固原、宁夏、洮州同日发生地震，伴有声响。
English: On September 21, 2001, Jiaxuan Day, an earthquake occurred in Pingyang, Gouyuan, Ningxia, and Zhangzhou on the same day, accompanied by noise.

古文：十一月丁巳，巩昌、固原、西安、凤翔地震。
现代文：十一月丁巳日，巩昌、固原、西安、凤翔发生地震。
English: On November 23rd, an earthquake occurred in Gongchang, Guyuan, Xi'an, and Fengxiang.

古文：二十二年三月乙巳，太原地震，有声，凡十日。
现代文：二十二年三月乙巳日，太原发生地震，伴有声响，共十天。
English: On March 22nd, an earthquake occurred in Taiyuan, accompanied by noise, for a total of ten days.

古文：明年三月，复如之。
现代文：第二年三月，又像那样。
English: The following March, it happened again.

古文：四月庚辰，福、兴、泉、漳四府地震。
现代文：四月庚辰日，福、兴、泉、漳四府发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in four prefectures of Fuxing, Xing, Quan and Handan on the day of Geng Chen in April.

古文：二十三年三月朔，太原地震有声者十日。
现代文：二十三年三月初一，太原发生地震伴有声音的情况达到十天。
English: On the first day of March in the year 233, an earthquake occurred in Taiyuan, which was accompanied by sound for ten days.

古文：二十七年七月戊寅，京师地震，顺天、保定二府俱震。
现代文：二十七年七月戊寅日，京城发生地震，顺天、保定二府都发生地震。
English: On July 27, the earthquake occurred in Beijing, Shuntian and Baoding.

古文：八月癸丑，京师复震，登州府及广宁卫亦震。
现代文：八月癸丑日，京城又地震，登州府以及尘宁卫乜发生地震。
English: In August, on the day of the Ugly Duckling, there was another earthquake in Beijing, and another earthquake occurred in Dengzhou and Jining.

古文：三十年九月乙未，京师地震，有声。
现代文：三十年九月乙末日，京城发生地震，伴有声响。
English: On the last day of September 30th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto, accompanied by noise.

古文：三十一年二月癸亥，凤阳府地震，有声。
现代文：三十一年二月癸亥日，凤阳府发生地震，伴有声响。
English: An earthquake occurred in Fengyang Prefecture on February 31st, accompanied by loud noises.

古文：三月丙戌，山西地震，有声。
现代文：三月丙戌日，山西发生地震，伴有声响。
English: On the third day of March, an earthquake occurred in Shanxi, accompanied by loud noises.

古文：三十四年十二月壬寅，山西、陕西、河南同时地震，声如雷。
现代文：三十四年十二月壬寅，山西、陕西、河南同时发生地震，声如雷鸣。
English: An earthquake occurred simultaneously in Shanxi, Shaanxi and Henan in December of the year 34. The sound was like thunder.

古文：渭南、华州、朝邑、三原、蒲州等处尤甚。
现代文：渭南、华州、朝邑、三原、蒲州等地尤其严重。
English: The situation is particularly serious in southern Hunan, Huazhou, Chaoyu, Mihara, and Puzhou.

古文：或地裂泉涌，中有鱼物，或城郭房屋，陷入地中，或平地突成山阜，或一日数震，或累日震不止。
现代文：有的地面崩裂，泉水涌出，水中有鱼类，有的城郭房屋陷入地中，有的平地突起形成山丘，有的一天几次地震，有的连日地震不停。
English: Some ground cracks, springs gush out, fish swim in the water, some fortified houses sink into the ground, some flatlands rise up to form hills, sometimes there are several earthquakes a day, and sometimes there are continuous earthquakes.

古文：河、渭大泛，华岳、终南山鸣，河清数日。
现代文：黄河、渭河大泛滥，华岳、终南山呜响，黄河水清数日。
English: The Yellow River and the Min River were flooded, the Huayue Mountain and the South Mountain resounded, and the water of the Yellow River was clear for several days.

古文：官吏、军民压死八十三万有奇。
现代文：官吏、军人、百姓被压死八十三万有余。
English: More than 830,000 government officials, soldiers and civilians were crushed to death.

古文：三十七年正月庚申，陕西地震。
现代文：三十七年正月庚申日，陕西发生地震。
English: On the 37th day of the first month of the year, an earthquake occurred in Shaanxi.

古文：三月丁丑，昌平州地震。
现代文：三月丁丑日，昌平州发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Changping Prefecture on March 21st.

古文：五月丁卯，蒲州地连震三日，声如雷。
现代文：五月丁卯日，蒲州连续地震三天，声响如雷。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, the earthquake in Puzhou lasted for three consecutive days, and the noise was deafening.

古文：六月甲申，又震。
现代文：六月甲申日，又发生地震。
English: On June 6th, another earthquake occurred.

古文：十月丙午，华州地震，声如雷。
现代文：十月丙午日，华州发生地震，声如雷鸣。
English: On the afternoon of October 3rd, an earthquake occurred in Huazhou, the sound of which was like thunder.

古文：至壬子又震，戊午复大震，倾陷庐舍甚多。
现代文：到壬子日又地震，戊午日又发生大地震，倾覆塌陷房屋很多。
English: There was another earthquake on the day of Jinsi, and another big earthquake on the day of Wu, and many houses were toppled and collapsed.

古文：三十八年七月辛巳，南京地震，有声。
现代文：三十八年七月辛巳日，南京发生地震，伴有声响。
English: On July 30, 1938, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing, accompanied by loud noises.

古文：三十九年四月，嘉兴、湖州地震，屋庐摇动如帆。
现代文：三十九年四月，嘉兴、湖州发生地震，房屋摇动如行船。
English: In April of 1939, an earthquake occurred in Jiaxing and Huzhou, and houses shook like a ship.

古文：河水撞激，鱼皆跃起。
现代文：河水冲刷激荡，鱼都跳起来。
English: The river washes and swells, and the fish jump up.

古文：四十年二月戊戌，甘肃山丹卫地震，有声，坏城堡庐舍。
现代文：四十年二月戊戌日，甘肃山丹卫发生地震，伴有声响，毁坏城堡、房屋。
English: On February 30, 40 years ago, an earthquake occurred in Danwei, Gansu, accompanied by noise, destroying the castle and houses.

古文：六月壬申，太原、大同、榆林地震，宁夏、固原尤甚。城垣、墩台、府屋皆摧，地涌黑黄沙水，压死军民无算，坏广武、红寺等城。
现代文：六月壬申日，太原、大同、榆林发生地震，室夏、固原尤其严重，城垣、墩台、府屋都被摧毁，地下涌出黑黄色的沙水，压死军人、平民不计其敷，毁坏广武、红寺等城墙。
English: On Jinshin Day in June, an earthquake occurred in Taiyuan, Datong and Yulin. The earthquake was particularly severe in Muroxia and Guyuan. The city walls, Xingtai and prefectural government buildings were all destroyed. Black and yellow sand and water gushed out from the ground, crushing soldiers and civilians regardless of their location, and destroying the city walls of Guangwu and Hongji.

古文：四十一年正月丙申，京师地震。
现代文：四十一年正月丙申日，京城发生地震。
English: In the first month of the 41st year, on the 6th day of the month, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：是岁，宁夏地震，圮边墙。
现代文：这一年，窒夏发生地震，边墙垮塌。
English: This year, there was an earthquake in Jixia, and the boundary wall collapsed.

古文：四十五年正月癸巳，福建福、兴、泉三府同日地震。
现代文：四十五年正月癸巳日，福建福、兴、泉三府同日发生地震。
English: On the 30th day of the first month of the 45th year, an earthquake occurred in Fujian's Fu, Xing and Quan prefectures on the same day.

古文：隆庆二年三月甲寅，陕西庆阳、西安、汉中、宁夏，山西蒲州、安邑，湖广郧阳及河南十五州县，同日地震。
现代文：隆庆二年三月甲寅日，陕西庆阳、西安、漠中、宁夏，山西蒲州、安邑，湖广鄙阳以及河南十五个州县同日发生地震。
English: In March of the second year of Longqing, the earthquake occurred in Qingyang, Xi'an, Muzhong, Ningxia in Shaanxi, Puzhou, Anyi in Shanxi, Danyang in Guangxi and 15 counties in Henan on the same day.

古文：戊寅，京师地震。
现代文：戊寅日，京城鸾生地震。
English: On the day of Wu Yin, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：是日，山东登州、四川顺义等县同日震。
现代文：这一天，山东登州、四川顺义等县同日地震。
English: On this day, the same day of the earthquake in Shandong Denzhou, Sichuan Shunyi and other counties.

古文：乐亭地裂三丈余者二，黑沙水涌出。
现代文：乐亭地面二处坼裂三丈多，黑色沙水涌出。
English: The ground of the pavilion is cracked in two places, with black sand and water gushing out.

古文：宁远城崩。
现代文：宁速城墙崩塌。
English: The city walls crumbled quickly.

古文：四月癸未，怀庆、南阳、汝宁、宁夏同日地震。
现代文：四月癸末日，怀庆、南阳、汝宁、宁夏同日地震。
English: On the last day of April, earthquakes occurred in Huaiqing, Nanyang, Ruining and Ningxia on the same day.

古文：乙酉，凤翔、平凉、西安、庆阳地震，坏城伤人。
现代文：乙酉日，凤翔、平凉、西安、庆阳发生地震，毁坏城墙，伤害人民。
English: On the day of Yixuan, earthquakes occurred in Fengxiang, Pingliang, Xi'an and Qingyang, destroying city walls and injuring people.

古文：七月辛酉，陵川地裂三十余步。
现代文：七月辛酉日，陵川地面裂开三十多步。
English: On a bitterly cold day in July, the ground of Neungcheon cracked open more than thirty paces.

古文：三年十一月庚辰，京师地震。
现代文：三年十一月庚辰日，京城发生地震。
English: On November 3rd, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：四年四月戊戌，京师地震。
现代文：四年四月戊戌日，京城发生地震。
English: On April 30, 2004, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：五年二月丙午，广西靖江王府及宗室所居、布政司官署，俱地陷。
现代文：五年二月丙午日；广西靖江王府以及宗室的住房、布政司的官署都地面下陷。
English: On the afternoon of February 5th, Guangxi Jingjiang King's Palace, as well as the family's house and the political secretary's office, all fell to the ground.

古文：六月辛卯朔，京师地震者三。
现代文：六月辛卯初一，京城多次发生地震。
English: In June, on the first day of Xinwu, there were several earthquakes in Beijing.

古文：万历元年八月戊申，荆州地震，至丙寅方止。
现代文：万历元年八月戊申日，剂州发生地震，到丙寅日纔停止。
English: In August of the first year of Wanli, on the day of Boshin, an earthquake occurred in Jangzhou, and on the day of Yin and Yang, the hail stopped.

古文：二年二月癸亥，长汀地震，裂成坑，陷没民居。
现代文：二年二月癸亥日，长汀发生地震，坼裂成坑，陷役平民住房。
English: On February 2nd of this year, an earthquake occurred in Changting, splitting the valley into pits and trapping civilians in their homes.

古文：三年二月甲戌，湖广、江西地震。
现代文：三年二月甲戌日，湖广、江西发生地震。
English: In February of the third year, on the day of Jiaxuan, an earthquake occurred in Huguang and Jiangxi.

古文：五月戊戌朔，襄阳、郧阳及南阳府属地震三日。
现代文：五月戊戌初一，襄阳、鄙阳以及南阳府辖地发生地震，连续三日。
English: On the first day of May, an earthquake occurred in Xiangyang, Mianyang and Nanyang Prefecture for three consecutive days.

古文：己亥，信阳亦震。
现代文：己亥日，信阳也发生地震。
English: On the same day, an earthquake also occurred in Shinyang.

古文：六月戊子，福、汀、漳等府及广东之海阳县俱地震。
现代文：六月戊子日，福、汀、漳等府以及廑塞的海阳县都发生地震。
English: On June 30, an earthquake occurred in the prefectures of Fu, Ting, and Handan, as well as in Haiyang County in Handan.

古文：九月戊午，京师地震。
现代文：九月戊午日，京城地震。
English: On the afternoon of September 3rd, the capital city was hit by an earthquake.

古文：十月丁卯，又震。
现代文：十月丁卯日，又发生地震。
English: In October, another earthquake occurred.

古文：己卯，岷州卫地震。
现代文：己卯日，岷州卫发生地震。
English: On the same day, an earthquake occurred in Luzhou.

古文：己丑至壬午，连百余震。
现代文：己丑至壬午日，连续发生地震一百多次。
English: From Jiugou to Renpo, there were more than a hundred consecutive earthquakes.

古文：四年二月庚辰，蓟、辽地震。
现代文：四年二月庚辰日，蓟、辽发生地震。
English: In February of the fourth year, on the day of Geng Chen, an earthquake occurred in Shandong and Liao Provinces.

古文：辛巳，又震。
现代文：辛巳日，又发生地震。
English: On the following day, another earthquake occurred.

古文：五年二月辛巳，腾越地二十余震，次日复震。山崩水涌，坏庙庑、仓舍千余间，民居圮者十之七，压死军民甚众。
现代文：五年二月辛巳日，腾越地震二十多次，第二天又地震，山体崩塌，泉水涌出，毁坏庙庶、仓房一千多间，民房倒塌十分之七，压死很多军人、平民。
English: On February 5th, Xinmi Day, there were more than 20 earthquakes in Tengyue. The next day there was another earthquake, the mountain collapsed, and the spring water gushed out, destroying more than a thousand temples and warehouses, collapsing seven out of ten houses, and crushing many soldiers and civilians.

古文：六年二月辛卯，临桂村田中青烟直上，随裂地丈余，鼓声轰轰，民居及大树石皆陷。
现代文：六年二月辛卯日，临桂田野中青畑直升天空，随着地面裂开一丈多，鼓声轰轰作响，民房以及大树、石头都陷没下去。
English: On the day of Xinwu in February of the sixth year, the blue fields in the fields of Lingui soared into the sky. As the ground cracked, the drums thundered, and the houses, trees, and stones all sank.

古文：七年七月戊午，京师地震。
现代文：七年七月戊午日，京城发生地震。
English: In the afternoon of July 7th, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：八年五月壬午，遵化数震，七日乃止。
现代文：八年五月壬午日，遵化多次地震，七天纔停止。
English: On the afternoon of May 8th, there were several earthquakes in Zunhua, and the hail stopped for seven days.

古文：七月甲午，井坪路地大震，摧城垣数百丈。
现代文：七月甲午日，井坪路发生大地震，摧毁城垣数百丈。
English: On the afternoon of July 1st, a major earthquake occurred on Jiping Road, destroying hundreds of meters of city walls.

古文：九年四月己酉，蔚州地震，声如雷。房屋震裂。
现代文：九年四月己酉日，蔚州发生地震，声如雷鸣，房屋被震裂。
English: On April 9th, an earthquake occurred in Ulshu. The sound was like thunder, and houses were shattered.

古文：大同镇堡各州县，同时地震，有声。
现代文：大同镇堡各州县同时发生她震，伴有声响。
English: The earthquake occurred simultaneously in Datong town and county, accompanied by loud noises.

古文：十一年二月戊子，承天府地震。
现代文：十一年二月戊子日，承天府发生地震。
English: On February 11th, an earthquake occurred in Chengdu.

古文：十二年二月丁卯，京师地震。
现代文：十二年二月丁卯日，京城发生地震。
English: On February 12th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：五月甲午，又震。
现代文：五月甲午日，又发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of May 1st, another earthquake occurred.

古文：十三年二月丁未，淮安、扬州、庐州及上元、江宁、江浦、六合俱地震。江涛沸腾。
现代文：十三年二月丁末日，淮安、扬州、庐州以及上元、江宁、江浦、六合都发生地震，江涛沸腾。
English: On the last day of February in the 13th year of Ding, earthquakes occurred in Huai'an, Yangzhou, Zhangzhou, Shangyuan, Jiangning, Jiangpu and Liuhe, and the Yangtze River was boiling.

古文：三月戊寅，山西山阴县地震，旬有五日乃止。
现代文：三月戊寅日，山西山阴县发生地震，十五天纔停止。
English: On March 4th, an earthquake occurred in Shanxi Shanyin County, and the tremors stopped after 15 days.

古文：八月己酉，京师地震。
现代文：八月己酉日，京城发生地震。
English: On August 6, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：十四年四月癸酉，又震。
现代文：十四年四月癸酉日，又发生地震。
English: On the 3rd of April, another earthquake occurred.

古文：十五年三月壬辰，开封府属地震者三，彰德、卫辉、怀庆同日震。
现代文：十五年三月壬辰日，开封府辖地三次发生地震，彰德、卫辉、怀庆同日发生地震。
English: On the 15th day of March, three earthquakes occurred in the area under the jurisdiction of Kaifeng Prefecture, and earthquakes occurred in Changde, Weihui, and Huaiqing on the same day.

古文：五月，山西地震。
现代文：五月，山西发生地震。
English: In May, an earthquake occurred in Shanxi Province.

古文：十六年六月庚申，京师地再震。
现代文：十六年六月庚申日，京城两次发生地震。
English: On the 16th day of the 6th month of the year, there were two earthquakes in Beijing.

古文：十七年七月己未，杭州、温州、绍兴地震。
现代文：十七年七月己末日，杭州、温州、绍兴发生地震。
English: At the end of July 17th, an earthquake occurred in Hangzhou, Wenzhou and Shaoxing.

古文：十八年六月丙子，甘肃临洮地震，坏城郭、庐舍，压死人畜无算。
现代文：十八年六月丙子日，甘肃临洮发生地震，毁坏城郭、房屋，压死人口牲畜不计其数。
English: On the third day of June in the 18th year, an earthquake occurred in Linyi, Gansu, destroying the city walls and houses, and crushing countless people and livestock.

古文：八月，福建地屡震。
现代文：八月，福建屡次发生地震。
English: In August, earthquakes repeatedly occurred in Fujian.

古文：十九年闰三月己巳，昌平州地震。
现代文：十九年闰三月己巳日，昌平州发生地震。
English: On the 19th day of leap March, an earthquake occurred in Changping Prefecture.

古文：十月戊戌，山丹卫地震，坏城垣。
现代文：十月戊戌日，山丹卫地震，毁坏城垣。
English: On October 30th, the earthquake in Shandanwei destroyed the city walls.

古文：二十三年五月丁酉，京师地震。
现代文：二十三年五月丁酉，京城发生地震。
English: In May 23rd, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：十二月癸亥，陕西地震，声若雷。
现代文：十二月癸亥日，陕西发生地震，声若雷鸣。
English: In December, the earthquake occurred in Shaanxi Province. It sounded like thunder.

古文：二十四年十一月，福建地震。
现代文：二十四年十一月，福建发生地震。
English: In November 2004, an earthquake occurred in Fujian.

古文：二十五年正月壬辰朔，四川地震三日。
现代文：二十五年正月壬辰初一，四川地震连续三日。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 25th year of Imjin, the Sichuan earthquake lasted for three consecutive days.

古文：八月己卯，辽阳、广宁诸卫地震，涌水三日。
现代文：八月己卯日，辽阳、广宁等卫发生地震，涌出泉水达三天。
English: On the same day in August, earthquakes occurred in Liaoyang, Guangning and other provinces, and spring water gushed out for three days.

古文：甲申，京师地震，宣府、蓟镇等处俱震。
现代文：甲申日，京城地震，宣府、蓟镇等处都发生地震。
English: On the day of the Jiaxing earthquake, the earthquake occurred in Beijing, Xuanfu, Handan and other places.

古文：十二月乙酉，京师地震。
现代文：十二月乙酉日，京城发生地震。
English: On December 21st, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：二十六年正月丁亥朔，宁夏地震。
现代文：二十六年正月丁亥初一，窒基地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of Dinghai in the twenty-sixth year, there was an earthquake at the base of the mountain.

古文：次日，长乐地陷五丈。
现代文：第二天，长乐地面沉陷五丈。
English: The next day, the ground in Changle sank five meters.

古文：八月丁丑，京师地震，有声。
现代文：八月丁丑日，京城发生地震，伴有声响。
English: In August, on the day of Dingushi, an earthquake occurred in Beijing, accompanied by loud noises.

古文：二十七年七月辛未，承天、沔阳、岳州地震。
现代文：二十七年七月辛未日，承天、沔阳、岳州发生地震。
English: In July of the 27th year, on the day of Xinwei, an earthquake occurred in Chengdu, Shenyang and Yuezhou.

古文：二十八年二月戊寅，京师地震，自艮方西南行，如是者再。
现代文：二十八年二月戊寅日，京城发生地震，从东北向西南延伸，这种情况出现了两次。
English: In February 28th, the earthquake occurred in Beijing, extending from the northeast to the southwest. This situation occurred twice.

古文：三十一年四月丙午，承天府钟祥县地震，房屋摧裂。
现代文：三十一年四月丙午日，承天府锺祥县发生地震，房屋被摧毁破裂。
English: On the afternoon of the 3rd day of April, 31st, an earthquake occurred in Minxiang County, Chengdian Prefecture. Houses were destroyed and cracked.

古文：五月戊寅，京师地震。
现代文：五月戊寅日，京城发生地震。
English: On May 30, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：三十二年闰九月庚辰，巩昌及醴泉地一日十余震，城郭民居并摧。
现代文：三十二年闰九月庚辰日，巩昌以及醴泉一天发生地震十多次，城郭、民房都被摧毁。
English: Thirty-two years ago, on the day of Geng Chen in leap September, more than ten earthquakes occurred in Gongchang and Jiuquan in one day, and the castle and houses were all destroyed.

古文：白阳、吴泉界地裂三丈，溢出黑水，搏激丈余。
现代文：白阳、昊泉地界地面坼裂三丈，黑水流出，激荡一丈多高。
English: Baiyang, Haoquan, the boundary of the ground is cracked by three feet, black water flows out, and the turbulence is as high as one foot.

古文：三十三年五月辛丑，陆川地震，有声，坏城垣、府屋，压死男妇无算。
现代文：三十三年五月辛丑日，陆川发生地震，伴有声响，毁坏城垣、府库、住房，压死男女不计其数。
English: On the fateful day of May, 33rd, an earthquake occurred in Lu River, accompanied by loud noises, destroying the city walls, the prefectural treasury, and houses, crushing countless men and women to death.

古文：六月庚午，灵川社坛有声，陷地十余丈，深丈余。
现代文：六月庚午日，灵川的社坛有声响，地面有十多丈沉陷，深一丈多。
English: On the afternoon of June 6th, there was a loud noise in the Shatan of Lingchuan. The ground sank more than ten meters, and the depth was more than one meter.

古文：九月丙申，京师地震者再，自东北向西南行。
现代文：九月丙申日，京城两次发生地震，从东北延伸向西南。
English: On September 9th, two earthquakes occurred in Beijing, extending from the northeast to the southwest.

古文：三十四年六月丙辰，陕西地震。
现代文：三十四年六月丙辰日，陕西发生地震。
English: On June 30, an earthquake occurred in Shaanxi Province.

古文：三十五年七月乙卯，松潘、茂州、汶川地震数日。
现代文：三十五年七月乙卯日，松潘、茂州、汶川地震连续几天。
English: On July 1st, 1935, the earthquakes in Songpan, Muzhou and Wenchuan lasted for several days.

古文：三十六年二月戊辰，京师地震。
现代文：三十六年月戊辰日，京城发生地震。
English: On the 36th day of the 1st month of the 1st lunar month, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：七月丁酉，又震。
现代文：七月丁酉日，又发生地震。
English: In July, on the day of Dinglong, another earthquake occurred.

古文：三十七年六月辛酉，甘肃地震，红崖、清水诸堡压死军民八百四十余人，圮边墩八百七十里，裂东关地。
现代文：三十七年六月辛酉日，甘肃发生地震，红崖、清水等堡压死军人平民八百四十多人，边墩倒塌八百七十里，束关地面坼裂。
English: On June 30, 1937, an earthquake occurred in Gansu. More than 840 soldiers and civilians were crushed to death in the Red Cliff, Clear Water and other fortresses. 870 miles of the border wall collapsed, and the ground in Shouguan cracked.

古文：四十年二月乙亥，云南大理、武定、曲靖地大震，次日又震。
现代文：四十年二月乙亥日，云南大理、武定、曲靖发生大地震，第二天又地震。
English: In February of the year 40 A.D., a major earthquake occurred in Dali, Wuding, and Qujing in Yunnan Province, followed by another earthquake the next day.

古文：缅甸亦震。
现代文：缅甸也发生地震。
English: There was also an earthquake in Myanmar.

古文：五月戊戌，云南大理、曲靖复大震，坏房屋。
现代文：五月戊戌日，云南大理、曲靖又发生大地震，毁坏房屋。
English: In May, a major earthquake struck Dali and Qujing in Yunnan Province, destroying houses.

古文：四十二年九月庚午，山西、河南地震。
现代文：四十二年九月庚午日，山西、河南发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of September 42, an earthquake occurred in Shanxi and Henan.

古文：四十三年二月己卯，扬州地震。狼山寺殿坏塔倾。
现代文：四十三年二月己卯日，塑渊发生地震，狼山昼殿宇毁坏佛塔倒塌。
English: In February 43rd, an earthquake occurred in Suiyuan, and the Wolf Mountain Temple was destroyed and the pagoda collapsed.

古文：八月乙亥，楚雄地震如雷，人民惊殒。
现代文：八月乙亥日，楚雄地震。响声如雷，人民受惊而死。
English: In August, the Chuxiong earthquake occurred. The noise was so loud that people were scared to death.

古文：十月辛酉，京师地震。
现代文：十月辛酉日，京城发生地震。
English: On the last day of October, an earthquake hit Kyoto.

古文：四十五年五月甲戌，凤阳府地震。
现代文：四十五年五月甲戌日，凤阳府发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Fengyang Prefecture on May 6th, 1945.

古文：乙亥，复震。
现代文：乙亥日，又地震。
English: On the day of the Chinese lunar new year, another earthquake.

古文：八月，济南地裂者二。
现代文：八月，济南有二处地面坼裂。
English: In August, there were two cracks in the ground in Jinan.

古文：四十六年六月壬午，京师地震。
现代文：四十六年六月壬午日，京城发生地震。
English: In the afternoon of June 46, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：九月乙卯，京师地再震，畿辅、山西州县一十有七及紫荆关，马水、沿河二口，偏头、神池同日皆震。
现代文：九月乙卯日，京城两次发生地震，畿辅、山西州县十七个以及紫剂关，马水、沿河二口，偏头、神池同一天都发生地震。
English: On September 1st, there were two earthquakes in Beijing. On the same day, there were earthquakes in 17 counties in Kifu and Shanxi, as well as in Ziyangguan, Mashui, Erkou along the river, Bihu and Shenchi.

古文：四十八年二月庚戌，云南及肇庆、惠州、荆州、襄阳、承天、沔阳、京山皆地震。
现代文：四十八年二月庚戌日，云南以及肇庆、惠州、荆州、襄阳、承天、沔阳、京山都发生地震。
English: On February 48th, the earthquake occurred in Yunnan, as well as Zhaoqing, Huizhou, Jingzhou, Yangyang, Chengdu, Shenyang and Beijing.

古文：天启元年四月癸丑，延绥孤山城陷三十五丈，入地二丈七尺。
现代文：天启元年四月癸丑日，延绥孤山城墙塌陷三十五丈，坠入地下二丈七尺。
English: On April Fool's Day in the first year of the Apocalypse, the walls of Yancheng Lone Mountain collapsed 35 meters and fell 2 meters and 7 feet into the ground.

古文：二年二月癸酉，济南、东昌、河南、海宁地震。
现代文：二年二月癸酉日，济南、束昌、河南、海宁发生地震。
English: On February 2nd, an earthquake occurred in Jinan, Sokchang, Henan and Haining.

古文：三月癸卯，济南、东昌属县八，连震三日，坏民居无数。
现代文：三月癸卯日，济南、束昌所辖八个县地震连续三天，毁坏民房不计其数。
English: On the last day of March, earthquakes in eight counties under the jurisdiction of Jinan and Sokcho occurred for three consecutive days, destroying countless houses.

古文：九月甲寅，平凉、隆德诸县，镇戎、平虏诸所，马刚、双峰诸堡，地震如翻，坏城垣七千九百余丈，屋宇万一千八百余区，压死男妇万二千余口。
现代文：九月甲寅日，平凉、隆德等县，镇戎、平虏等所，马刚、双峰等堡，地震如同翻一个面，毁坏城垣七千九百多丈，房屋一万一千八百多问，压死男女一万二千多人。
English: On the first day of September, Pingliang, Lund and other counties, towns such as Rong, Pingru and other places, Magang, Twin Peaks and other castles, the earthquake was like turning a page, destroying more than 7,900 city walls, more than 11,800 houses, and crushing more than 12,000 men and women.

古文：十一月癸卯，陕西地震。
现代文：十一月癸卯日，陕西发生地震。
English: In November, an earthquake occurred in Shaanxi Province.

古文：三年四月庚申朔，京师地震。
现代文：三年四月庚申初一，京城发生地震。
English: On April 3rd, the first day of the Year of the Goat, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：十月乙亥，复震。
现代文：十月乙亥日，又发生地震。
English: On October 21st, another earthquake occurred.

古文：闰十月乙卯，云南地震。
现代文：闰十月乙卯日，云南发生地震。
English: On leap October, an earthquake occurred in Yunnan.

古文：十二月丁未，南畿六府二州俱地震，扬州府尤甚。
现代文：十二月丁末日，南畿六个府二个州都发生了地震，扬州府尤其严重。
English: On the last day of December, earthquakes occurred in two prefectures of the six prefectures of Nanki, with Yangzhou prefecture being particularly affected.

古文：是月戊戌，京师地又震。
现代文：这一月戊戌日，京城又发生地震。
English: On the third day of this month, another earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：四年二月丁酉，蓟州、永平、山海地屡震，坏城郭庐舍。
现代文：四年二月丁酉日，蓟州、永平、山海屡次发生地震，毁坏城郭、房屋。
English: On February 4, Ding'an Day, earthquakes repeatedly occurred in Zhangzhou, Yongping, Shanhai, destroying the city walls and houses.

古文：甲寅，乐亭地裂，涌黑水，高尺余。
现代文：甲寅日，乐亭地面坼裂，涌出黑水，高一尺多。
English: On the day of the moon, the ground of Leting cracked, black water gushed out, more than a foot high.

古文：京师地震，宫殿动摇有声，铜缸之水，腾波震荡。
现代文：京城地震，宫殿动摇，发出声响，铜缸里的水，掀起波浪，震动涤荡。
English: The capital city was shaken by an earthquake, the palace swayed and made a noise, the water in the copper tank made waves, and the shaking was deafening.

古文：三月丙辰、戊午，又震。
现代文：三月丙辰日、戊午日，又发生地震。
English: In March, on the 4th and 5th, another earthquake occurred.

古文：庚申，又震者三。
现代文：庚申日，又多次发生地震。
English: On Koshin day, there were more earthquakes.

古文：六月丁亥，保定地震，坏城郭，伤人畜。
现代文：六月丁亥日，保定发生地震，毁坏城郭，伤害人口、牲畜。
English: In June, on Dinghai Day, an earthquake occurred in Baoding, destroying the city walls and injuring people and livestock.

古文：八月己酉，陕西地震。
现代文：人月己酉日，陕西发生地震。
English: On the same day, an earthquake occurred in Shaanxi.

古文：十二月癸卯，南京地震。
现代文：十二月癸卯日，南京地震。
English: December 23rd, Nanjing earthquake.

古文：六年六月丙子，京师地震。济南、东昌及河南一州六县同日震。
现代文：六年六月丙子日，京城发生地震，济南、束昌以及河南一州六县同日地震。
English: On the third day of June in the sixth year, an earthquake occurred in Beijing, and an earthquake occurred in Jinan, Sokchang and six counties in Henan Province on the same day.

古文：天津三卫、宣府、大同俱数十震，死伤惨甚。
现代文：天津三卫、宣府、大同都数十次地震，死伤十分悲惨。
English: There have been dozens of earthquakes in Tianjin Sanwei, Xuanfu and Datong, and the deaths and injuries are very tragic.

古文：山西灵丘昼夜数震，月余方止。
现代文：山西灵丘昼夜多次地震，一个多月纔停止。
English: Shanxi Lingqiu experienced multiple earthquakes day and night, and the tremors stopped for more than a month.

古文：城郭、庐舍并摧，压死人民无算。
现代文：城郭、庐舍都被摧毁，压死人民不计其数。
English: Castles and houses were destroyed, crushing countless people to death.

古文：七月辛未，河南地震。
现代文：七月辛末日，河南发生地震。
English: At the end of July, an earthquake occurred in Henan Province.

古文：九月甲戌，福建地震。
现代文：九月甲戌日，福建发生地震。
English: On September 6th, an earthquake occurred in Fujian.

古文：十二月戊辰，宁夏石空寺堡地大震。礌山石殿倾倒，压死僧人。
现代文：十二月戊辰日，宁夏石空寺堡发生大地震，磘山的石殿倒塌，压死僧人。
English: On the day of Pentecost in December, a major earthquake occurred at Shikku Fortress in Ningxia. The stone hall of Shaoshan collapsed, crushing a monk to death.

古文：是年，南京地亦震。
现代文：这一年，南京也发生地震。
English: In the same year, an earthquake also occurred in Nanjing.

古文：七年，宁夏各卫营屯堡，自正月己巳至二月己亥，凡百余震，大如雷，小如鼓如风，城垣、房屋、边墙、墩台悉圮。
现代文：七年，宁夏各个卫营屯堡，从正月己巳日到二月己亥日，一共一百多次地震，大的如雷鸣，小的如擎鼓、如刮风，城垣、房屋、边墙、墩台全部垮塌。
English: In the past seven years, there have been more than a hundred earthquakes in various Weiying cantonments in Ningxia from the first day of the first month to the second day of the second month. The large ones are like thunder, the small ones are like drums, and the wind is like blowing. The city walls, houses, side walls, and battlements have all collapsed.

古文：十月癸丑，南京地震，自西北迄东南，隆隆有声。
现代文：十月癸丑日，南京发生地震，从西北到东南，发出隆隆声。
English: In October, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing, sending a rumbling sound from the northwest to the southeast.

古文：崇祯元年九月丁卯，京师地震。
现代文：崇祯元年九月丁卯日，京城发生地震。
English: In September of the first year of Chongzhen, an earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：三年九月戊戌，南京地震。
现代文：三年九月戊戌日，南京发生地震。
English: On September 3, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：四年六月乙丑，临洮、巩昌地震，坏庐舍，损民畜。
现代文：四年六月乙丑日，临洮、巩昌发生地震，毁坏房屋，伤害人民、牲畜。
English: In June 2004, on the day of the second lunar month, an earthquake occurred in Linyi and Gongchang, destroying houses and injuring people and livestock.

古文：五年四月丁酉，南京、四川地震。
现代文：五年四月丁酉日，南京、四川发生地震。
English: On April 5th, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing and Sichuan.

古文：十月丁卯，山西地震。
现代文：十月丁卯日，山西发生地震。
English: In October, an earthquake occurred in Shanxi Province.

古文：十一月甲寅，云南地震。
现代文：十一月甲寅日，云南发生地震。
English: On November 1, an earthquake occurred in Yunnan.

古文：六年正月丁巳，镇江地裂数丈。
现代文：六年正月丁巳日，镇江地面裂开敷丈。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year, the ground of Zhenjiang River was cracked.

古文：七月戊戌，陕西地震。
现代文：七月戊戌日，陕西发生地震。
English: In July, an earthquake occurred in Shaanxi Province.

古文：八年冬，山西地震。
现代文：八年冬季，山西发生地震。
English: In the winter of 2008, an earthquake occurred in Shanxi Province.

古文：九年三月戊辰，福建地震。
现代文：九年三月戊辰日，福建发生地震。
English: On March 9th, an earthquake occurred in Fujian.

古文：七月丁未，清江城陷。
现代文：七月丁末日，清江城陷落。
English: At the end of July, Qingjiang City fell.

古文：十年正月丙午，南京地震。
现代文：十年正月丙午日，南京发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the first month of the tenth year, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：七月壬午，云南地震。
现代文：七月壬午日，云南发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Yunnan on the afternoon of July 13.

古文：十月乙卯，四川地震。
现代文：十月乙卯日，四川发生地震。
English: On October 1st, an earthquake occurred in Sichuan.

古文：十二月，陕西西安及海剌同时地震，数月不止。
现代文：十二月，陕西西安以及海刺同时发生地震，数月不停止。
English: In December, an earthquake occurred simultaneously in Xi'an and Haizhou, Shaanxi Province, and did not stop for several months.

古文：十一年九月壬戌，辽东地震。
现代文：十一年九月壬戌日，辽束发生地震。
English: On September 11th, an earthquake occurred in Liaocheng.

古文：十二年二月癸巳，京师地震。
现代文：十二年二月癸巳日，京城发生地震。
English: On February 12th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：十三年十一月戊子，南京地震。
现代文：十三年十一月戊子日，南京发生地震。
English: On November 13th, an earthquake occurred in Nanjing.

古文：十四年三月戊寅，福建地震。
现代文：十四年三月戊寅日，福建发生地震。
English: On March 14, an earthquake occurred in Fujian.

古文：四月丙寅，湖广地震。
现代文：四月丙寅日，湖广发生地震。
English: In April, an earthquake occurred in Hubei Province.

古文：五月戊子，甘肃地震。
现代文：五月戊子日，甘肃发生地震。
English: In May, an earthquake occurred in Gansu.

古文：六月丙午，福建地震。
现代文：六月丙午日，福建发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of June 3rd, an earthquake occurred in Fujian.

古文：九月甲午，四川地震。
现代文：九月甲午日，四川发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of September 1, an earthquake occurred in Sichuan.

古文：十五年五月丙戌，两广地震。
现代文：十五年五月丙戌日，两广发生地震。
English: On May 15th, an earthquake occurred in Liangguang.

古文：七月甲申，山西地震。
现代文：七月甲申日，山西发生地震。
English: On July 6th, an earthquake occurred in Shanxi Province.

古文：十六年九月，凤阳地屡震。
现代文：十六年九月，凤阳屡次发生地震。
English: In September 2016, Fengyang was repeatedly hit by earthquakes.

古文：十一月丙申，山东地震。
现代文：十一月丙申日，山塞发生地震。
English: On November 6th, an earthquake occurred in Shanxi Province.

古文：明年正月庚寅朔，凤阳地震。
现代文：第二年正月庚寅初一，凤阳发生地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year, an earthquake occurred in Fengyang.

古文：乙卯，南京地震。
现代文：乙卯日，南京发笙地震。
English: On the second day of the month, Nanjing was hit by an earthquake.

古文：三月辛卯，广东地震。
现代文：三月辛卯日，魔塞发生地震。
English: In March, an earthquake hit Morse.

古文：▲山颓
现代文：山颓
English: Yamazaki

古文：洪武六年正月壬戌夜，伏羌高山崩。
现代文：洪武六年正月壬戌日晚上，伏羌高山山体崩塌。
English: On the evening of the first day of the sixth lunar month of Hongwu, the mountain of Fuxi collapsed.

古文：正统八年十一月，浙江绍兴山移于平田。
现代文：正统八年十一月，浙江绍兴山滑移到平地的田中。
English: In November of the eighth year of orthodoxy, Zhejiang Shaoxing Mountain slid to the flatland of Tanaka.

古文：是岁，陕西二处山崩。
现代文：这一年，陕西二处山体崩塌。
English: This year, two mountains in Shaanxi Province collapsed.

古文：十三年，陕西夏秋霪雨，通渭、平凉、华亭三县山倾，军民压死者八十余口。
现代文：十三年，陕西夏秋季长久降雨，通渭、平凉、华亭三县山体倾倒，军人和平民被压死八十多人。
English: Thirteen years ago, prolonged rainfall in summer and autumn in Shaanxi Province caused landslides in the three counties of Tonglu, Pingliang and Huating. More than 80 soldiers and civilians were crushed to death.

古文：天顺四年十月，星子山裂。
现代文：天顺四年十月，星子山体坼裂。
English: In October of the 4th year of Tianshun, the Xingzi Mountain cracked.

古文：成化八年七月，陇州北山吼三日，裂成沟，长半里，寻复合。
现代文：成化八年七月，陇州北山吼呜三天，崩裂成山沟，长半里，不久又合拢。
English: In July of the 8th year of Chenghua, the Beishan Mountains in Zhangzhou roared for three days, cracked into a ravine, half a mile long, and soon closed again.

古文：十六年四月壬子，巨津州金沙江北岸白石雪山断裂里许，两岸山合，山上草木如故。
现代文：十六年四月壬子日，巨津州金沙江北岸白石雪山断裂一里左右，两岸山体合拢，山上草木如故。
English: On April 16th, the Mizi Day, the Baishi Snow Mountain on the north bank of the Jinsha River in Jiuquan, Jiuquan County, broke off about one mile, the mountains on both sides closed, and the plants and trees on the mountain remained as before.

古文：下塞江流，禾黍尽没。
现代文：下面堵塞沙水，庄稼全被淹没。
English: Below, the sand and water clogged up, and the crops were completely submerged.

古文：久之其下渐开，水始泄。
现代文：很久之后，下面渐渐开通，水纔得以泄出。
English: After a long time, the bottom gradually opened and the leeches were able to escape.

古文：六月，长乐平地出小阜，人畜践之辄陷。
现代文：六月，长乐平地出现小山丘，人畜踏在上面便陷落下去。
English: In June, small hills appeared on the plain of Changle, and people and animals stepped on them and fell down.

古文：明年，复涌一高山。
现代文：第二年又涌出一座高山。
English: The next year, another mountain emerged.

古文：十七年十二月辛丑，寿阳县城南山崩，声如牛吼。
现代文：十七年十二月辛丑日，寿阳县城南山体崩塌，响声如同牛吼岛。
English: On the fateful day of December 17th, Shouyang County's Seongnam Mountain collapsed, making a noise like a cow bellowing.

古文：弘治三年六月乙巳，河州山崩地陷。
现代文：弘治三年六月乙巳日，河州山体崩塌，平地陷落。
English: On the 23rd day of the 6th month of the 3rd year of Hongzhi, the mountain of Hezhou collapsed and fell flat.

古文：九年六月庚寅，山阴、萧山二县同日大雨山崩。
现代文：九年六月庚寅日，山阴、萧山二县同日降大雨，山体崩塌。
English: In June of the ninth year, on the day of Geng Yin, heavy rain fell in the two counties of Shanyin and Xiaoshan on the same day, and the mountain collapsed.

古文：十四年闰七月，乌撒军民府大雨山崩。
现代文：十四年闰七月，乌撒军民府降大雨，山体崩塌。
English: In July of the 14th year of the leap year, heavy rain fell on the headquarters of the U.S.A. army, and the mountain collapsed.

古文：十五年八月戊申，宣府合河口石山崩。
现代文：十五年八月戊申日，宣府合河口石山崩塌。
English: On August 15th, the day of the Wu Xun, the stone mountain of Xuanfu and Hekou collapsed.

古文：十八年六月丙子，河州沙子沟夜大雷雨，石岸山崩，移七八里，崩处裂为沟，田庐民畜俱陷。
现代文：十八年六月丙子日，河州沙子沟晚上打大雷，降大雨，石岸山崩塌，滑移七八里，崩塌处裂开成山沟，田园、房屋、人民、牲畜都陷落。
English: In the evening of June 18, on the third day of the third month, there was a thunderstorm and heavy rain in Shazi Ditch, Hezhou. Shikang Mountain collapsed and slid seven or eight miles. The collapse cracked into a ravine, and the farmland, houses, people, and livestock all fell.

古文：正德元年十二月癸亥，即墨三表山石崩。
现代文：正德元年十二月癸亥日，即墨三表山石头崩塌。
English: In December of the first year of Zhengde, on the day of the Boar, that is, the three-faced mountain stone collapsed.

古文：四年三月甲寅，辽东东山大家峪山崩二处，约丈余。
现代文：四年三月甲寅日，辽东束山大家峪山体崩塌二处，约一丈多。
English: In March of the fourth year, on the day of Jia Ting, the Liaodong Sucrose Mountain collapsed in two places, about one level higher.

古文：五年六月癸巳，秦州山崩，伤室庐、禾稼甚众。
现代文：五年六月癸巳日，秦州山体崩塌，损伤很多房屋、庄稼。
English: On June 30, 2005, a mountain collapsed in Qinzhou, damaging many houses and crops.

古文：龙王沟口山亦崩。
现代文：龙王沟口山体也崩塌。
English: The mountain of Longwanggoukou also collapsed.

古文：六年七月丙寅，夔州獐子溪骤雨，山崩。
现代文：六年七月丙寅日，夔州獐子溪突降暴雨，山体崩塌。
English: In July of the sixth year, on the day of Yin Yin, there was a sudden rainstorm in Luzi Creek, Luzhou, and the mountain collapsed.

古文：十三年五月癸亥，云南黑盐井山崩，井塞。
现代文：十三年五月癸亥日，云直墨玺井山体崩塌，井被堵塞。
English: On the 13th day of the fifth month of the year of the pig, the mountain of Yunzhi inkwell collapsed and the well was blocked.

古文：十五年八月丁丑，云南赵州大雨，山崩。
现代文：十五年八月丁丑日，云南赵州降大雨，山体崩塌。
English: On August 15th, Dingwushi Day, heavy rain fell in Zhaozhou, Yunnan, and the mountain collapsed.

古文：嘉靖四年七月乙酉，清源贾家山崩。
现代文：嘉靖四年七月乙酉日，清源页家山崩塌。
English: In July of the 4th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Qingyuan's Jiajia Mountain collapsed.

古文：五年四月壬申，贵州歹苏屯山崩。
现代文：五年四月壬申日，贵州歹苏屯山体崩塌。
English: In April of the fifth year, on Jinshin Day, the Guizhou Gangsu Tun Mountain collapsed.

古文：十九年十二月己巳，峨眉宋皇观山鸣，震裂，涌泉水八日。
现代文：十九年十二月己巳日，蛾眉宋皇观山体呜吼，地震坼裂，涌出泉水连续八天。
English: On December 19th, the day of the snake, the moth-browed Song Wangguan mountain body howled, the earthquake cracked, and the spring water gushed for eight consecutive days.

古文：二十一年六月乙酉，归州沙子岭大雷雨，崖石崩裂，塞江流二里许。
现代文：二十一年六月乙酉日，归州沙子岭打大雷降大雨，崖石崩裂，堵塞江流二里左右。
English: On June 21st, Guizhou Shaziling was hit by thunder and heavy rain, and the cliff collapsed, blocking the flow of the river for about two miles.

古文：二十六年七月癸酉，澄城麻陂山界头岭，昼夜吼数日。山忽中断，移走，东西三里，南北五里。
现代文：二十六年七月癸酉日，澄城麻陂山界头岭昼夜吼鸣数日，山体忽然中断，滑移开去，东西三里，南北五里。
English: On the third day of July, twenty-six years ago, the top ridge of the Chengcheng Maotai Mountains roared day and night for several days. The mountain suddenly broke off, sliding away, three miles east to west, five miles north to south.

古文：隆庆二年五月庚戌，永宁州山崩。
现代文：隆庆二年五月庚戌日，丞室刿山体崩塌。
English: In May of the second year of Longqing, the mountain collapsed.

古文：是岁，乐亭地裂三处，俱涌黑沙水。
现代文：这一年，乐亭地面裂开三处，都涌出黑色涉水。
English: This year, the ground of the pavilion cracked in three places, and black water gushed out.

古文：四年八月，湖州山崩，成湖。
现代文：四年八月，湖州山体崩塌，形成湖泊。
English: In August of the same year, a mountain in Huzhou collapsed, forming a lake.

古文：万历二十五年六月，泰山崩。
现代文：万历二十五年六月，泰山崩塌。
English: In June of the 25th year of Wanli, Mount Tai collapsed.

古文：二十七年八月甲午，狄道城东山崩，其下冲成一沟。山南耕地涌出大小山五，高二十余丈。
现代文：二十七年八月甲午日，狄道城束山体崩塌，其下面冲成一条山沟，山南耕地中涌出大小山五座，高二十多丈。
English: On the afternoon of August 27th, the mountain of Dido Castle Collapsed, and a ravine was formed below it. Five large and small mountains, more than 20 meters high, gushed out from the cultivated land in Shannan.

古文：三十三年八月丙午，镇江西南华山裂二三尺。
现代文：三十三年八月丙午日，镇江西南华山坼裂二三尺。
English: On the afternoon of August 30th, 33 years ago, the Huashan cliff in the southwest of Zhenjiang River cracked by 23 feet.

古文：三十七年六月辛酉，甘肃南山崩。
现代文：三十七年六月辛酉日，甘肃南山崩塌。
English: On June 30, 1937, Nanshan Mountain in Gansu Province collapsed.

古文：天启三年闰十月乙卯，仁寿长山声震如雷，裂七里，宽三尺，深不可测。
现代文：天启三年闰十月乙卯日，仁寿长山声响震动如雷鸣，坼裂七里，宽三尺，深不可测。
English: On the day of the third leap year of the apocalypse, October 1st, the sound vibration of Renshou Changshan Mountain was like thunder. The crack was seven miles long, three feet wide, and unfathomable.

古文：崇祯九年十二月，镇江金鸡岭土山崩。
现代文：崇祯九年十二月，镇江金鸡岭土山崩塌。
English: In December of the ninth year of the Chongzhen Emperor, a landslide occurred in Jinqiling, Zhenjiang.

古文：后八年，秦州有二山，相距甚远，民居其间者数百万家。
现代文：此后八年，秦州有二座山，相距很远，处于两山之间的民房有数百万家。
English: Eight years later, Qinzhou has two mountains, far apart, and there are millions of houses between the two mountains.

古文：一日地震，两山合，居民并入其中。
现代文：有一天地震，两山合拢，居民都陷入其中。
English: One day, an earthquake caused the two mountains to close, and the residents were caught in the quake.

古文：▲雨毛、地生毛
现代文：雨毛、地生毛
English: Rain hair, ground hair

古文：洪武十九年九月丙子，天雨絮。
现代文：洪武十九年九月丙子日，天空降落絮花。
English: In September of the 19th year of Hongwu, on the third day of the ninth month, the sky rained down flakes.

古文：宣德元年七月甲午，地生毛，长尺余。
现代文：宣德元年七月甲午日，地上长出毛，长一尺多。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of the first year of Xuande, on the afternoon of the first day of the month, hair grew on the ground, more than a foot long.

古文：正统八年，浙江地生白毛。
现代文：正统八年，浙江地上长出白毛。
English: In the eighth year of orthodoxy, white hair sprouted on the ground in Zhejiang.

古文：成化十三年四月，甘肃地裂，生白毛。
现代文：成化十三年四月，甘肃地面坼裂，长出白毛。
English: In April of the thirteenth year of Chenghua, the ground in Gansu cracked and white hairs sprouted.

古文：十五年五月，常州地生白毛。
现代文：十五年五月，常州地上长出白毛。
English: In May of the fifteenth year, white hair sprouted on the ground in Changzhou.

古文：十七年四月，南京地生白毛。
现代文：十七年四月，南京地上长出白毛。
English: In April 17th, white hair sprouted on the ground in Nanjing.

古文：弘治元年五月丙寅，泸州长宁县雨毛。
现代文：弘治元年五月丙寅日，泸州量宁县天空降毛。
English: In May of the first year of the Hongzhi era, the sky in Jiaoning County, Ganzhou, turned red.

古文：正德十二年四月，金华地生黑白毛，长尺余。
现代文：正德十二年四月，金华地上长出黑毛和白毛，长一尺多。
English: In April of the 12th year of Zhengde, black hair and white hair sprouted on the ground of Jinhua, more than a foot long.

古文：▲年饥
现代文：年饥
English: Years of hunger

古文：洪武二年，湖广、陕西饥。
现代文：洪武二年，湖广、陕西发生饥荒。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, there was a famine in Guangxi and Shaanxi.

古文：四年，陕西洊饥。
现代文：四年，陕西再次发生饥荒。
English: Four years later, famine struck Shaanxi again.

古文：五年，济南、东昌、莱州大饥，草实树皮，食为之尽。
现代文：五年，济南、柬昌、莱州发生大饥荒，野草果实和树皮都被吃光。
English: In the fifth year, a great famine occurred in Jinan, Camchang and Laizhou, and the wild grasses, fruits and tree bark were all eaten up.

古文：六年，苏州、扬州、真定、延安饥。
现代文：六年，苏州、扬州、真定、延安发生饥荒。
English: In the sixth year, famine occurred in Suzhou, Yangzhou, Zhending and Yan'an.

古文：七年，北平所属州县三十三饥。
现代文：七年，北平所辖三十三个州县遭受饥荒。
English: In the seventh year, 33 counties and prefectures under the jurisdiction of Peiping suffered from famine.

古文：十五年，河南饥。
现代文：十五年，河南发生饥荒。
English: Fifteen years ago, a famine occurred in Henan.

古文：十九年春，河南饥。
现代文：十九年春季，河南发生饥荒。
English: In the spring of 1919, a famine occurred in Henan.

古文：夏，青州饥。
现代文：夏季，青州发生饥荒。
English: In the summer, there was a famine in Qingzhou.

古文：二十年，山东三府饥。
现代文：二十年，山东三个府遭受饥荒。
English: For twenty years, three prefectures in Shandong suffered from famine.

古文：二十三年，湖广三府、二州饥。
现代文：二十三年，湖广三府、二州遭受饥荒。
English: In 233, three prefectures and two prefectures in Hukang suffered from famine.

古文：二十四年，山东及太原饥，徐、沛民食草实。
现代文：二十四年，山东和太原发生饥荒，徐州、沛州人民吃野草果实。
English: In 1924, famine occurred in Shandong and Taiyuan, and the people of Xuzhou and Peizhou ate wild grasses and fruits.

古文：二十五年，山东洊饥。
现代文：二十五年，山东再次遭受饥荒。
English: Twenty-five years later, Shandong suffered another famine.

古文：永乐元年，北畿、山东、河南及凤阳、淮安、徐州、上海饥。
现代文：永乐元年，北畿、山东、河南以及凤阳、淮安、徐州、上海发生饥荒。
English: In the first year of Yongle, famine occurred in Beigui, Shandong, Henan, as well as Fengyang, Huai'an, Xuzhou and Shanghai.

古文：二年，苏、松、嘉、湖四府饥。
现代文：二年，苏、松、嘉、湖四府发生饥荒。
English: Two years later, famine occurred in the four prefectures of Su, Song, Jia and Hubei.

古文：四年，南畿、浙江、陕西、湖广府州县卫十四饥。
现代文：四年，南畿、浙江、陕西、湖广十四个府州县卫发生饥荒。
English: Four years ago, famine occurred in 14 prefectures and counties in Nanki, Zhejiang, Shaanxi, and Hougang.

古文：五年，顺天、保定、河间饥。
现代文：五年，顺天、保定、河间发生饥荒。
English: In the fifth year, famine occurred in Shuntian, Baoding and Hema.

古文：十年，山东饥。
现代文：十年，山束发生饥荒。
English: For the past ten years, there has been a famine in the mountains.

古文：十二年，直省州县二十四饥。
现代文：十二年，直隶省二十四个州县发生饥荒。
English: In 2012, famine occurred in 24 counties in Zhili Province.

古文：十三年，顺天、青州、开封三府饥。
现代文：十三年，顺天青州、开封三府发生饥荒。
English: In the thirteenth year, a famine occurred in Shuntian, Qingzhou and Kaifeng.

古文：十四年，平阳、大同二府饥。
现代文：十四年，平阳、大同二府发生饥荒。
English: In 1914, famine occurred in the two prefectures of Pingyang and Datong.

古文：十八年，青、莱二府大饥。
现代文：十八年，青、莱二府发生大饥荒。
English: In the 18th year, a great famine occurred in Qing and Lai provinces.

古文：时皇太子赴北京，过邹县，命亟发官粟以赈。
现代文：当时皇太子到北京，经邹县，命令立即开官仓发放粮食以赈救灾荒。
English: At that time, the crown prince arrived in Beijing and, after passing through Handan County, ordered the immediate opening of official warehouses to distribute grain to relieve the famine.

古文：洪熙元年，北畿饥。
现代文：洪熙元年，北畿发生饥荒。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, there was a famine in North Kivu.

古文：山东、河南、湖广及南畿州县三十四饥。
现代文：山东、河南、湖广以及南畿三十四个州县发生饥荒。
English: Famine occurred in Shandong, Henan, Hukang, and the thirty-four prefectures and counties of South Korea.

古文：宣德元年，直省州县二十九饥。
现代文：宣德元年，直隶省二十九个州县遭受饥荒。
English: In the first year of Xuande, 29 counties in Zhili Province suffered from famine.

古文：二年，直省县十四饥。
现代文：二年，直隶省十四个县遭受饥荒。
English: Two years later, fourteen counties in Zhili Province suffered from famine.

古文：三年，直省州县十五饥。
现代文：三年，直隶省十五个州县遭受饥荒。
English: In three years, 15 counties in Zhili Province suffered from famine.

古文：六年直省县十饥。
现代文：六年，直隶省十个县遭受饥荒。
English: In six years, ten counties in Zhili Province suffered from famine.

古文：八年，以水旱告饥者，府州县七十有六。
现代文：八年，有七十六个府州县报告因水灾和旱灾造成饥荒。
English: In 2008, 76 prefectures and counties reported famine caused by floods and droughts.

古文：九年，南畿、山东、浙江、陕西、山西、江西、四川多告饥，湖广尤甚。
现代文：九年，南畿、山东、浙江、陕西、山西、江西、四川多报告遭受饥荒，湖广尤其严重。
English: In 1997, famine was reported in Nanki, Shandong, Zhejiang, Shaanxi, Shanxi, Jiangxi, and Sichuan, with Huguang being particularly affected.

古文：十年，扬、徐、滁、南昌大饥。
现代文：十年，扬、徐、滁、南昌发生严重饥荒。
English: Ten years ago, severe famine occurred in Yang, Xu, Handan and Nanchang.

古文：正统三年春，平凉、凤翔、西安、巩昌、汉中、庆阳、兖州七府及南畿三州、二县，江西、浙江六县饥。
现代文：正统三年春季，平凉、凤翔、西安、巩昌、汉中、庆阳、兖州七个府以及南畿三个州、二个县，江西、浙江六个县遭受饥荒。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Juche revolution, seven prefectures including Pingliang, Fengxiang, Xi'an, Gongchang, Hanzhong, Qingyang and Ganzhou as well as three prefectures and two counties in Nangui and six counties in Jiangxi and Zhejiang suffered from famine.

古文：四年，直省州县卫十八及山西隰州、大同、宣府、偏头诸关饥。
现代文：四年，直隶省州县卫十八个以及山西隰州、大同、宣府、偏头等关遭受饥荒。
English: In four years, eighteen provinces, prefectures and counties directly under the central government, as well as Shanxi Bozhou, Datong, Xuanfu and Yehotou, suffered from famine.

古文：五年，直省十府、一州、二县饥。
现代文：五年，直隶省十府、一州、二县发生饥荒。
English: In five years, famine occurred in ten prefectures, one prefecture and two counties in Zhili Province.

古文：陕西大饥。
现代文：陕西遭受严重饥荒。
English: Shaanxi suffered from severe famine.

古文：六年，直省州县二十六饥。
现代文：六年，直隶省州县二十六个遭受饥荒。
English: In six years, 26 counties in Zhili Province suffered from famine.

古文：八年夏，湖南饥。
现代文：八年夏天，湖南发生饥荒。
English: In the summer of 1978, famine broke out in Hunan.

古文：秋，应天、镇江、常州三府饥。
现代文：秋天，应天、镇江、常州三个府遭受饥荒。
English: In autumn, the three prefectures of Yingtian, Zhenjiang and Changzhou suffered from famine.

古文：九年春，苏州府饥。
现代文：九年春季，苏州府发生饥荒。
English: In the spring of 1989, a famine occurred in Suzhou.

古文：是岁，云南、陕西乏食。
现代文：这一年，云南、陕西缺乏粮食。
English: This year, Yunnan and Shaanxi were short of grain.

古文：十年，陕西、山西饥。
现代文：十年，陕西、山西发生饥荒。
English: Ten years ago, famine occurred in Shaanxi and Shanxi.

古文：十二年夏，淮安、岳州、襄阳、荆州、郴州俱洊饥。
现代文：十二年夏季，淮安、岳州、襄阳、荆州、郴州都再次发生饥荒。
English: In the summer of 2012, famine occurred again in Huai'an, Yuezhou, Xiangyang, Jingzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：十三年，宁、绍二府及州县七饥。
现代文：十三年，窒、绍二府以及七个州县遭受饥荒。
English: Thirteen years ago, two prefectures of Nian and Shao, as well as seven prefectures, suffered from famine.

古文：景泰元年，大名、顺德、广平、保定、处州、太原、大同七府饥。
现代文：景泰元年，大名、顺德、广平、保定、处州、太原、大回七个府遭受饥荒。
English: In the first year of King Taejo, seven prefectures including Daimyo, Shunde, Guangping, Baoding, Wenzhou, Taiyuan and Dahui suffered from famine.

古文：二年，大名、广平又饥。
现代文：二年，大名、卢壬又发生饥荒。
English: Two years later, famine struck again in Daming and Luren.

古文：顺天、保定、西安、临洮、太原、大同、解州饥。
现代文：顺天、保定、西安、临洮、太原、大国、解州遭受饥荒。
English: Shuntian, Baoding, Xi'an, Linyi, Taiyuan, Dadu and Leshou suffered from famine.

古文：三年，淮、徐大饥，死者相枕藉。
现代文：三年，淮、徐遭受严重饥荒，死去的人纵横遍地。
English: In three years, Huai and Xu suffered from severe famine, and people died all over the country.

古文：四年，徐州洊饥。
现代文：四年，徐州再次遭受饥荒。
English: Four years later, Xuzhou suffered another famine.

古文：河南、山东及凤阳饥。
现代文：河南、山东以及凤阳发生饥荒。
English: Famine occurred in Henan, Shandong and Fengyang.

古文：五年，两畿十府饥。
现代文：五年，两畿十个府发生饥荒。
English: In the fifth year, famine occurred in twenty provinces and ten prefectures.

古文：六年春，两畿、山东、山西、浙江、江西、湖广、云南、贵州饥，苏、松尤甚。
现代文：六年春季，两畿、山东、山西、浙江、江西、湖魔、云南、贵州遭受饥荒，苏、松尤其严重。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the two Kis, Shandong, Shanxi, Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Humao, Yunnan, and Guizhou suffered from famine, and Su and Song were particularly serious.

古文：七年，北畿、山东、江西、云南又饥。河南亦饥。
现代文：七年，北畿、山塞、婆西、云南又发生饥荒，河南也遭受饥荒。
English: In the seventh year, famine occurred again in Beigui, Shansei, Bosi and Yunnan, and Henan also suffered from famine.

古文：天顺元年，北畿、山东并饥，发茔墓，斫道树殆尽。父子或相食。
现代文：天顺元年，北几、山塞都遭受饥荒，挖掘坟墓，道路边的树木几乎砍光，有的甚至父吃子或者子吃父。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Beidaihe and Shanxi suffered from famine, graves were dug, roadside trees were almost cut down, and some even father ate son or son ate father.

古文：二年，长沙、辰州、永州、常德、岳州五府及铜鼓、五开诸卫饥。
现代文：二年，长沙、辰州、永州、常德、岳州五府以及铜鼓、五开各卫遭受饥荒。
English: In the second year, the five prefectures of Changsha, Chenzhou, Yongzhou, Changde and Yuezhou as well as Tonggu and Wukai suffered from famine.

古文：四年，湖广及镇远府，都匀、平越诸卫饥。
现代文：四年，湖广以及镇远府，都匀、平越等卫遭受饥荒。
English: In four years, Hukang and Zhenyuanfu, Duyun, Pingyue and Wei suffered from famine.

古文：六年，陕西饥。
现代文：六年，陕西发生饥荒。
English: Six years ago, a famine occurred in Shaanxi.

古文：成化元年，两畿、浙江、河南饥。
现代文：成化元年，两畿、浙江、河南发生饥荒。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, famine occurred in the two Kis, Zhejiang, and Henan.

古文：二年，南畿饥。
现代文：二年，南畿发生饥荒。
English: Two years later, famine broke out in Nanki.

古文：四年，两畿、湖广、山东、河南无麦。
现代文：四年，两畿、湖广、山东、河南麦无收。
English: In the past four years, there has been no wheat harvest in the two Kis, Hukang, Shandong and Henan provinces.

古文：凤阳及陕西、宁夏、甘、凉饥。
现代文：凤阳以及陕西、宁夏、甘、凉发生饥荒。
English: Famine occurred in Fengyang, as well as in Shaanxi, Ningxia, Gansu, and Liang.

古文：五年，陕西洊饥。
现代文：五年，陕西再次遭受饥荒。
English: Five years later, Shaanxi suffered another famine.

古文：六年，顺天、河间、真定、保定四府饥，食草木殆尽。
现代文：六年，顺天、河间、真定、保定四府发生饥荒，草木几乎被吃光。
English: In the sixth year, famine occurred in the four prefectures of Suncheon, Kawama, Jinding and Baoding, and almost all the plants and trees were eaten up.

古文：山西、两广、云南并饥。
现代文：山西、两魔、云南都发生饥荒。
English: Famine occurred in Shanxi, Shandong and Yunnan.

古文：八年，山东饥。
现代文：八年，山束发生饥荒。
English: Eight years later, famine broke out in the mountains.

古文：九年，山东又大饥，骼无余胔。
现代文：九年，山东又遭受严重饥荒，骨头无余肉。
English: Nine years later, Shandong suffered another severe famine, and there was no meat left on the bones.

古文：十三年，南畿、山东饥。
现代文：十三年，南畿、山束发生饥荒。
English: Thirteen years ago, famine broke out in Nanki and Yamazu.

古文：十四年，北畿、湖广、河南、山东、陕西、山西饥。
现代文：十四年，北畿、湖广、河南、山东、陕西、山西遭受饥荒。
English: In the 14th year, Beigui, Hukang, Henan, Shandong, Shaanxi and Shanxi suffered from famine.

古文：十五年，江西饥。
现代文：十五年，江西发生饥荒。
English: Fifteen years ago, a famine occurred in Jiangxi Province.

古文：十六年，北畿、山东、云南饥。
现代文：十六年，北畿、山东、云南发生饥荒。
English: Sixteen years ago, famine broke out in North Kivu, Shandong, and Yunnan.

古文：十八年，南畿、辽东饥。
现代文：十八年，南畿、辽束发生饥荒。
English: In 18th year, famine occurred in Nanki and Liaozuke.

古文：十九年，凤阳、淮安、扬州三府饥。
现代文：十九年，凤阳、淮塞、握州三府遭受饥荒。
English: In 1919, the three prefectures of Fengyang, Huaixie and Jiaozhou suffered from famine.

古文：二十年，陕西饥，道殣相望。
现代文：二十年，陕西发生饥荒，道路上饿死的人到处都能看见。
English: Twenty years ago, there was a famine in Shaanxi, and people starving to death on the roads could be seen everywhere.

古文：畿南及山西平阳饥。
现代文：畿南和山西平阳发生饥荒。
English: Famine broke out in Pingyang, Gyeongnam and Shanxi.

古文：二十一年，北畿、山东、河南饥。
现代文：二十一年，北畿、山东、河南遭受饥荒。
English: In the 21st year, Beigui, Shandong and Henan suffered from famine.

古文：二十三年，陕西大饥。
现代文：二十三年，陕西发生严重饥荒。
English: In 233, a severe famine occurred in Shaanxi.

古文：武功民有杀食宿客者。
现代文：武功有杀死住宿的旅客而吃的人。
English: Martial arts have been linked to the killing of hotel guests and the eating of human flesh.

古文：淮北、山东亦饥。
现代文：淮北、山东也发生饥荒。
English: Famine also occurred in Huaibei and Shandong.

古文：弘治元年，应天及浙江饥。
现代文：弘治元年，应天以及浙江遭受饥荒。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, Yingtian and Zhejiang suffered from famine.

古文：六年，山东饥。
现代文：六年，山束发生饥荒。
English: For six years, there was a famine in the mountains.

古文：七年，保定、真定、河间三府饥。
现代文：七年，保定、真定、河间三府发生饥荒。
English: In the seventh year, famine broke out in the three prefectures of Baoding, Jinding and Hema.

古文：八年，苏、松、嘉、湖四府饥。
现代文：八年，苏、松、嘉、湖四府遭受饥荒。
English: Eight years ago, the four prefectures of Su, Song, Jia and Hubei suffered from famine.

古文：十四年，顺天、永平、河间、河南四府饥。
现代文：十四年，顺天、永平、河问、河南四府遭受饥荒。
English: In the 14th year, Shuntian, Yongping, Hefen and the four provinces of Henan suffered from famine.

古文：辽东大饥。
现代文：辽束发生严重饥荒。
English: Severe famine occurs in Liao Zhou.

古文：十五年，辽东洊饥。
现代文：十五年，辽东再次遭受饥荒。
English: Fifteen years later, Liaodong suffered another famine.

古文：兖州饥。
现代文：兖州发生饥荒。
English: A famine broke out in Zhangzhou.

古文：十六年，浙江、山东及南畿四府、三州饥。
现代文：十六年，浙江、山东以及南畿四府、三州遭受饥荒。
English: Sixteen years ago, Zhejiang, Shandong, and the four prefectures and three prefectures of Nanki suffered from famine.

古文：十七年，淮、扬、庐、凤洊饥，人相食，且发瘗胔以继之。
现代文：十七年，淮、扬、庐、凤再次遭受饥荒，人吃人，并且挖掘埋葬的死尸继续吃。
English: In the seventeenth year, Huai, Yang, Yao, and Feng once again suffered from famine, people ate people, and dug up the buried dead bodies to continue eating.

古文：十八年，延安诸府饥。
现代文：十八年，延安各府发生饥荒。
English: In 18th year, famine occurred in Yan'an prefectures.

古文：正德三年，庐、凤、淮、扬四府饥。
现代文：正德三年，庐、凤、淮、扬四府发生饥荒。
English: In the third year of Zhengde, famine occurred in the four prefectures of Handan, Feng, Huai and Yang.

古文：四年，苏、松、常、镇四府饥。
现代文：四年，苏、松、常、镇四府发生饥荒。
English: In four years, famine occurred in four prefectures of Su, Song, Chang and Zhen.

古文：五年，山东饥。
现代文：五年，山束发生饥荒。
English: Five years later, famine broke out in the mountains.

古文：七年，嘉兴、金华、温、台、宁、绍六府乏食。
现代文：七年，嘉兴、金华、温、壹、室、绍六府缺乏食物。
English: In the past seven years, Jiaxing, Jinhua, Wen, Yi, Muro, and Shao six prefectures have been short of food.

古文：八年，河间、保定饥。
现代文：八年，河问、保定发生饥荒。
English: Eight years later, there was a famine in Kawagoe and Baoding.

古文：九年春，永平诸府饥，民食草树殆尽，有阖室死者。
现代文：九年春季，永平等府发生饥荒，人民几乎吃尽野草和树木，宥的全家死光。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, a famine occurred in Yongnianfu, the people almost ate up the wild grass and trees, and Yu's whole family died.

古文：秋，关、陕亦饥。
现代文：秋季，关、陕也发生饥荒。
English: In autumn, famine also occurred in Guan and Shaanxi.

古文：十一年，顺天、河间饥。
现代文：十一年，顺天、河问发生饥荒。
English: In the eleventh year, famine broke out in Shuntian and Kawang.

古文：河南大饥。
现代文：河南遭受严重饥荒。
English: Henan suffered a severe famine.

古文：十二年春，顺天、保定、永平饥。
现代文：十二年春季，顺天、保定、永平发生饥荒。
English: In the spring of the 12th year, famine occurred in Suncheon, Baoding and Yongping.

古文：十三年，苏、松、庐、凤、淮、扬六府饥。
现代文：十三年，苏、松、庐、凤、淮、扬六府发生饥荒。
English: In the 13th year, famine occurred in the six prefectures of Su, Song, Handan, Feng, Huai and Yang.

古文：十四年冬，辽东饥，南畿、淮、扬诸府尤甚。
现代文：十四年冬季，辽束发生饥荒，南畿、淮、扬等府饥荒尤其严重。
English: In the winter of 1914, famine occurred in Liaozuke, and the famine was particularly severe in Nanki, Huai and Yang prefectures.

古文：十六年，辽东饥。
现代文：十六年，辽束发生饥荒。
English: Sixteen years ago, a famine occurred in Liaozuke.

古文：嘉靖二年，应天及滁州大饥。
现代文：嘉靖二年，应天以及滁州遭受严重饥荒。
English: In the second year of Jiajing, Yingtian and Zhangzhou suffered from severe famine.

古文：三年，湖广、河南、大名、临清饥。
现代文：三年，湖广、河南、大名、临清发生饥荒。
English: In the third year, famine occurred in Hukang, Henan, Daming, and Linqing.

古文：南畿诸郡大饥，父子相食，道殣相望，臭弥千里。
现代文：南畿等郡遭受严重饥荒，父吃子或子吃父，道路上饿死之人到处能见，臭味弥散千里。
English: Nanki and other counties suffered from severe famine, father ate son or son ate father, people starving to death on the roads could be seen everywhere, and the stench spread for thousands of miles.

古文：四年，河间、沈阳、大同三卫饥。
现代文：四年，河间、渖阳、大同三卫发生饥荒。
English: In four years, famine occurred in Kawama, Shenyang, and Datong and Sanwei.

古文：五年，顺天、保定、河间三府大饥。
现代文：五年，顺天、保定、河间三府遭受严重饥荒。
English: Five years ago, Shuntian, Baoding and Hema suffered from severe famine.

古文：六年，辽东大饥。
现代文：六年，辽东遭受严重饥荒。
English: In the sixth year, Liaodong suffered a severe famine.

古文：八年，真定、庐、凤、淮、扬五府，徐、滁、和三州及山东、河南、湖广、山西、陕西、四川饥，襄阳尤甚。
现代文：八年，真定、庐、凤、淮、扬五府，徐、滁、和三州以及山东、河南、湖广、山西、陕西、四川发生饥荒，襄阳尤其严重。
English: In the eighth year, famine occurred in the five prefectures of Shandong, Henan, Guangxi, Shanxi, Shaanxi and Sichuan, as well as Shandong, Henan, Guangxi, Shanxi, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei, Shanxi, Hebei, Hebei, Shanxi, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei, Shanxi, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei, Shanxi, Hebei, Hebei, Hebei, Shanxi, Hebei, Shanxi, Hebei, Hebei, Shanxi, Hebei

古文：九年，畿内、河南、湖广、山东、山西大饥。
现代文：九年，畿内、河南、湖广、山东、山西遭受严重饥荒。
English: In the ninth year, the Kinai region, Henan province, Hukang province, Shandong province and Shanxi province suffered from severe famine.

古文：十二年，北畿、山东饥。
现代文：十二年，北畿、山束发生饥荒。
English: In 1912, famine broke out in North Gyeongsang Province and Shanshu.

古文：十五年，湖广大饥。
现代文：十五年，湖魔发生严重饥荒。
English: Fifteen years later, a severe famine occurred in Huma.

古文：十七年，北畿饥。
现代文：十七年，北畿发生饥荒。
English: In 1917, famine broke out in North Kivu.

古文：河南、郧阳、襄阳三府饥。
现代文：河南、鄙阳、襄阳三府发生饥荒。
English: The three prefectures of Henan, Mianyang and Xiangyang suffered from famine.

古文：二十年，保定、辽东饥。
现代文：二十年，保定、辽东发生饥荒。
English: Twenty years ago, famine occurred in Baoding and Liaodong.

古文：二十一年，顺天、永平饥。
现代文：二十一年，顺天、永平发生饥荒。
English: In the 21st year, a famine occurred in Yongping.

古文：二十四年，又饥。
现代文：二十四年，又遭受饥荒。
English: Twenty-four years of famine followed.

古文：南畿亦饥。
现代文：南畿也发生饥荒。
English: Famine also occurred in Nanki.

古文：二十五年，顺天饥，江西亦饥。
现代文：二十五年，顺天发生饥荒，江西也遭受饥荒。
English: Twenty-five years ago, a famine occurred in Shuntian, and Jiangxi also suffered from famine.

古文：二十七年，巩昌、汉中大饥。
现代文：二十七年，巩昌、汉中发生严重饥荒。
English: In the 27th year, a severe famine occurred in Gongchang and Hanzhong.

古文：三十一年，宣、大二镇大饥，人相食。
现代文：三十一年，宣、大二镇遭受严重饥荒，人吃人。
English: In the 31st year, the towns of Xuan and Dajie suffered a severe famine, and people began to eat each other.

古文：三十二年，南畿、庐、凤、淮、扬、山东、河南、陕西并饥。
现代文：三十二年，南畿、庐、凤、淮、扬、山东、河南、陕西都遭受饥荒。
English: In the 32nd year, Nanki, Handan, Feng, Huai, Yang, Shandong, Henan and Shaanxi all suffered from famine.

古文：三十三年，顺天及榆林饥。
现代文：三十三年，顺天以及榆林发生饥荒。
English: Thirty-three years ago, there was a famine in Shuntian and Yulin.

古文：三十六年，辽东大饥，人相食。
现代文：三十六年，辽东遭受大饥荒，人吃人。
English: In 1936, Liaodong suffered a great famine, and people were eating each other.

古文：三十九年，顺天、永平饥。
现代文：三十九年，顺天、永平发生饥荒。
English: In the 39th year, a famine occurred in Suncheon and Yongping.

古文：四十年，两畿、山西饥。
现代文：四十年，两畿、山西发生饥荒。
English: In the past forty years, famine has occurred in the two Kansai provinces and Shanxi Province.

古文：四十三年，北畿、山东大饥。
现代文：四十三年，北畿、山东遭受严重饥荒。
English: In 1943, Beigui and Shandong suffered a severe famine.

古文：四十四年，顺天饥。
现代文：四十四年，顺天发生饥荒。
English: Forty-four years later, famine broke out.

古文：四十五年，淮、徐饥。
现代文：四十五年，淮、徐发生饥荒。
English: In the 45th year, famine occurred in Huai and Xu.

古文：隆庆元年，苏、松二府大饥。
现代文：隆庆元年，苏、松二府发生严重饥荒。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, a severe famine occurred in the two prefectures of Su and Song.

古文：二年，湖广饥。
现代文：二年，湖广发生饥荒。
English: Two years later, there was a famine in Hukang.

古文：万历元年，淮、凤二府饥，民多为盗。
现代文：万历元年，淮、凤二府发生饥荒，人民很多沦为盗贼。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, famine occurred in Huai and Feng two prefectures, and many people became thieves.

古文：十年，延安、庆阳、平凉、临洮、巩昌大饥。
现代文：十年，延安、庆阳、平凉、临洮、巩昌遭受严重饥荒。
English: Ten years ago, Yan'an, Qingyang, Pingliang, Linyi and Gongchang suffered from severe famine.

古文：十三年，湖广饥。
现代文：十三年，湖广发生饥荒。
English: In the thirteenth year, there was a famine in Hukang.

古文：十五年七月，黄河以北，民食草木。
现代文：十五年七月，黄河以北人民吃野草树木。
English: In July 1915, people north of the Yellow River began to eat wild plants and trees.

古文：富平、蒲城、同官诸县，有以石为粮者。
现代文：富平、蒲城、囤官各县，有人用石头作为粮食。
English: In the counties of Buping, Pucheng, and Yiguan, some people use stones as food.

古文：十六年，河南饥，民相食。
现代文：十六年，河南发生饥荒，人吃人。
English: Sixteen years ago, Henan suffered a famine, and people were eating each other.

古文：苏、松、湖三府饥。
现代文：苏、松、湖三府发生饥荒。
English: Famine occurred in the three prefectures of Su, Song and Hubei.

古文：二十二年，河南大饥，给事中杨明绘《饥民图》以进，巡按陈登云进饥民所食雁粪，帝览之动容。
现代文：二十二年，河南遭受严重饥荒，给事中杨明绘制《饥民图》进里朝廷，巡按陈登云进呈饥民所吃的雁粪，皇帝看后，露出忧戚表情。
English: In 1922, Henan suffered from a severe famine. During the event, Yang Ming, who had drawn the "Picture of the Starving People," entered the imperial court. Chen Dengyun inspected and presented the goose droppings eaten by the starving people. When the emperor saw it, he showed a sorrowful expression.

古文：二十八年，山东及河间饥。
现代文：二十八年，山东以及河问发生饥荒。
English: In 1928, famine occurred in Shandong and Hebei.

古文：二十九年，两畿饥。
现代文：二十九年，两畿发生饥荒。
English: In 1929, famine broke out in the two Kinki regions.

古文：阜平县饥，有食其稚子者。
现代文：阜平县发生饥荒，有人吃掉自己的幼子。
English: Famine occurred in Fuping County, and some people ate their young children.

古文：苏州饥，民殴杀税使七人。
现代文：苏州发生饥荒，人民打死收税人员七人。
English: A famine occurred in Suzhou, and the people killed seven tax collectors.

古文：三十七年，山西饥。
现代文：三十七年，山西发生饥荒。
English: In 1937, a famine occurred in Shanxi.

古文：四十年，南畿洊饥，凤阳尤甚。
现代文：四十年，南畿再次遭受饥荒，凤阳特别严重。
English: Forty years later, Nanki once again suffered from famine, which was particularly severe in Fengyang.

古文：四十三年，浙江饥。
现代文：四十三年，浙江发生饥荒。
English: In 1943, a famine occurred in Zhejiang.

古文：四十四年，山东饥甚，人相食。
现代文：四十四年，山东饥荒严重，出现人吃人。
English: In 1944, the famine in Shandong was so severe that people began to eat each other.

古文：河南及淮、徐亦饥。
现代文：河南以及淮、徐也发生饥荒。
English: Henan as well as Huai and Xu also experienced famine.

古文：四十五年，北畿民食草木，逃就食者，相望于道。
现代文：四十五年，北畿人民吃野草树木，逃荒去寻找食物的人，在道路上随处可见。
English: In the 45th year, the people of Beigai eat wild grasses and trees, and people fleeing from the desert to find food can be seen everywhere on the road.

古文：山东属邑多饥。
现代文：山东所辖之邑很多遭受饥荒。
English: Many villages under the jurisdiction of Shandong suffered from famine.

古文：四十六年，陕西饥。
现代文：四十六年，陕西发生饥荒。
English: In 1946, a famine occurred in Shaanxi.

古文：四十八年，湖广大饥。
现代文：四十八年，塑魔遭受严重饥荒。
English: In the year 48, the Plastic Demons suffered a severe famine.

古文：崇祯元年，陕西饥，延、巩民相聚为盗。
现代文：崇祯元年，陕西遭受饥荒，延、巩人民聚集起来成为盗贼。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, Shaanxi suffered from famine, and the people of Yan and Gong gathered to become thieves.

古文：二年，山西、陕西饥。
现代文：二年，山西、陕西发生饥荒。
English: Two years later, famine broke out in Shanxi and Shaanxi.

古文：五年，淮、扬诸府饥，流殍载道。
现代文：五年，淮、扬各府发生饥荒，逃荒饿死者遍布于道路。
English: Five years ago, famine occurred in the provinces of Huai and Yang, and the dead who fled the famine were all over the roads.

古文：六年，陕西、山西大饥。淮、扬洊饥，有夫妻雉经于树及投河者。
现代文：六年，陕西、山西遭受严重饥荒，淮、扬再次发生饥荒，有的夫妻在树上上吊自杀或者投河自杀。
English: Six years ago, Shaanxi and Shanxi suffered from severe famine, and famine occurred again in Huai and Yang. Some couples hanged themselves from trees or committed suicide by jumping into rivers.

古文：盐城教官王明佐至自缢于官署。
现代文：盐城教官王明佐竟然在官署自缢而死。
English: Yancheng instructor Wang Mingsao actually hanged himself at the government office.

古文：七年，京师饥，御史龚廷献绘《饥民图》以进。
现代文：七年，京城发生饥荒，御史龚廷献绘制《饥民图》进呈朝廷。
English: In the seventh year, a famine occurred in the capital, and Emperor Go-Shikotsu presented his "Picture of the Starving People" to the Imperial Court.

古文：太原大饥，人相食。
现代文：太原遭受严重饥荒，人吃人。
English: Taiyuan suffered from severe famine, and people were eating each other.

古文：九年，南阳大饥，有母烹其女者。
现代文：九年，南阳遭受严重饥荒，有母亲烹食其女的现象。
English: In the ninth year, Nanyang suffered from severe famine, and a mother cooked her daughter.

古文：江西亦饥。
现代文：江西也发生饥荒。
English: Famine also occurred in Jiangxi.

古文：十年，浙江大饥，父子、兄弟、夫妻相食。
现代文：十年，浙江发生严重饥荒，父舆子、兄与弟、夫与妻互相吃。
English: Ten years ago, a severe famine occurred in Zhejiang. Father and son, brother and brother, husband and wife ate each other.

古文：十二年，两畿、山东、山西、陕西、江西饥。
现代文：十二年，两畿、山束、山西、陕西、江西遭受饥荒。
English: In the 12th year, the two Kis, Yanshu, Shanxi, Shaanxi and Jiangxi suffered from famine.

古文：河南大饥，人相食，卢氏、嵩、伊阳三县尤甚。
现代文：河南遭受严重饥荒，人吃人，卢氏、嵩、伊阳三县尤其严重。
English: Henan suffered from severe famine, and people were eating each other, especially in the three counties of Lu, Song and Iyang.

古文：十三年，北畿、山东、河南、陕西、山西、浙江、三吴皆饥。
现代文：十三年，北畿、山东、河南、陕西、山西、浙江、三昊都发生饥荒。
English: In the 13th year, famine occurred in Beigui, Shandong, Henan, Shaanxi, Shanxi, Zhejiang and Sanhao.

古文：自淮而北至畿南，树皮食尽，发瘗胔以食。
现代文：从淮向北直到畿南，树皮吃光，挖掘埋葬的死尸作为食物。
English: From Huaihe in the north to Guinan in the south, they eat tree bark and dig up buried corpses for food.

古文：十四年，南畿饥。
现代文：十四年，南畿发生饥荒。
English: In 1914, a famine occurred in Nanki.

古文：金坛民于延庆寺近山见人云，此地深入尺余，其土可食。
现代文：金坛百姓在延庆噎近山处见到有人说，这个地方深入一尺多，其泥土可以食用。
English: The people of Jintan saw someone near the mountain in Yanqing County, who said that this place was more than a foot deep, and its soil was edible.

古文：如言取之，淘磨为粉粥而食，取者日众。
现代文：按照他的话取出泥土，淘洗后磨成粉，熬成粥吃，取土的人一天天多起来。
English: According to his words, they take out the soil, wash it, grind it into powder, boil it into porridge and eat it. The number of people taking out soil is increasing day by day.

古文：又长山十里亦出土，堪食，其色青白类茯苓。
现代文：又，长山十里也出产这种泥土，可以食用，其颜色呈青白色，像茯苓。
English: In addition, Nagayama Shuri also produces this kind of soil, which can be eaten, and its color is bluish-white, like straw.

古文：又石子涧土黄赤，状如猪肝，俗呼 观音粉 ，食之多腹痛陨坠，卒枕藉以死。
现代文：又，石子涧泥土呈黄赤色，形状像猪肝，俗称 观音粉 ，吃了它多腹痛倒地，终究相继而死。
English: In addition, the reddish-yellow soil from the gravel pit, shaped like a pig's liver, is commonly known as Guanyin powder. People who ate it often fell to the ground with abdominal pain, and eventually died one after another.

古文：是岁，畿南、山东洊饥。
现代文：这一年，畿南、山东再次遭受饥荒。
English: In the same year, the southern part of Gyeonggi Province and Shandong Province once again suffered from famine.

古文：德州斗米千钱，父子相食，行人断绝。大盗滋矣。
现代文：德州一斗米值一千钱，父吃子，子吃父，路上行人断绝，大盗发生。
English: In Texas, a barrel of rice is worth a thousand dollars, father eats son, son eats father, pedestrians are cut off on the road, and robberies occur.

古文：▲黄眚黄祥
现代文：黄眚黄祥
English: Huang Qi, Huang Xiang

古文：正统十一年二月辛酉，有异气现华盖殿金顶及奉天殿鸱吻之上。
现代文：正统十一年二月辛酉日，有怪异的氛气出现在华盖殿金顶以及奉天殿的鸱吻之上。
English: On the day of February on the 11th, a strange atmosphere appeared on the golden roof of the Huagai Hall and the kiss of the Bongtian Hall.

古文：成化九年四月乙亥，两京雨土。
现代文：成化九年四月乙亥日，两京降尘土。
English: In April of the ninth year of the Heian period, the two capitals were covered in dust.

古文：十三年四月戊戌，陕西、甘肃冰厚五尺，间以杂沙，有青红黄黑四色。
现代文：十三年四月戊戌日，陕西、甘肃结冰厚五尺，杂入各色沙粒，有青红黄黑四种颜色。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the 4th month, the ice in Shaanxi and Gansu is five feet thick, mixed with sand particles of various colors, and has four colors of blue, red, yellow and black.

古文：弘治十年三月己酉，雨土。
现代文：弘治十年三月己酉日，天降尘土。
English: On the last day of March in the tenth year of the Hongzhi era, dust fell from the sky.

古文：十一年四月辛巳，雨土。
现代文：十一年四月辛已日，天降尘土。
English: In April of the eleventh year, it was already a hot day, and dust was falling from the sky.

古文：十七年二月甲辰，郧阳、均州雨沙。
现代文：十七年二月甲辰日，鄙阳、均州天降黄沙。
English: On February 17th, the day of the first hour, the sun and the sky of Junzhou fell into the yellow sand.

古文：嘉靖元年正月丁卯，雨黄沙。
现代文：嘉靖元年正月丁卯日，天降黄沙。
English: On the first day of the month of Dingwu in the first year of Jiajing, the sky fell yellow sand.

古文：十三年二月己未，雨微土。
现代文：十三年二月已末日，天降细微泥土。
English: February 13 is the last day of the year, and fine mud is falling from the sky.

古文：二十一年，象山雨黄雾，行人口耳皆塞。
现代文：二十一年，象山降黄雾，行人口、耳之中都堵塞。
English: In the twenty-first year, a yellow fog descended from the Elephant Mountain, and people's ears were blocked.

古文：隆庆元年三月甲寅，南郑雨土。
现代文：隆庆元年三月甲寅日，南郑天空降土。
English: In March of the first year of Longqing, the South Zheng sky fell to the earth.

古文：万历二十五年二月癸亥，湖州雨黄沙。
现代文：万历二十五年二月癸亥日，湖州降黄沙。
English: In February of the 25th year of Wanli, on the day of the boar, the yellow sand fell in Huzhou.

古文：四十六年三月庚午，暮刻，雨土，濛濛如雾如霰，入夜不止。
现代文：四十六年三月庚午日，黄昏时刻，天降泥土，蒙蒙如雾如霰，入夜不停。
English: In the afternoon of March 46th, at dusk, the sky was covered with mud, and it was as foggy as sleet. The night kept falling.

古文：四十七年二月甲戌，从未至酉，尘沙涨天，其色赤黄。
现代文：四十七年二月甲戌日，从未时到酉时，尘沙充满天空，其颜色赤黄。
English: On the day of Jiaxing in February in the 47th year, from the beginning of the year to the end of the year, the sky was full of dust and sand, and its color was red and yellow.

古文：四十八年，山东省城及泰安、肥城皆雨土。
现代文：四十八年，山东省城以及泰安、肥城都天降泥土。
English: In the 48th year, the cities of Shandong Province, as well as Tai'an and Fucheng, all received mud from the sky.

古文：崇祯十二年二月壬申，浚县有黑黄云起，旋分为二。顷之四塞。
现代文：崇祯十二年二月壬申日，浚县有黑黄色的云彩兴起，随即分成二团，顷刻弥满天空。
English: On Jinshin Day in February of the 12th year of Chongzhen, black and yellow clouds appeared in Jian County. They immediately split into two groups and filled the sky in an instant.

古文：狂风大作，黄埃涨天，间以青白气。
现代文：狂风大发，黄色尘埃充塞天空，杂以青白氛气。
English: A strong wind blew, filling the sky with yellow dust mixed with a bluish-white atmosphere.

古文：五步之外，不辨人踪，至昏始定。
现代文：五步以外，不能分辨人的踪迹，到黄昏时停下来。
English: Five paces away, it is impossible to distinguish the tracks of a person, and it stops at dusk.

古文：十四年正月壬寅，黄埃涨天。
现代文：十四年正月壬寅日，黄色尘埃弥满天空。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the year, the yellow dust filled the sky.

