古文：韩琦，字稚圭，相州安阳人。
现代文：韩琦字稚至，相州安阳人。
English: Han Xing is a child, and he is from Anyang, Xiangzhou.

古文：父国华，自有传。
现代文：父亲韩国华，自有传。
English: His father, Korean Hua, is a self-taught singer.

古文：琦风骨秀异，弱冠举进士，名在第二。
现代文：韩琦风骨秀异，刚成年就推举为进士，排名第二。
English: Han Xuan's character was outstanding, and he was elected as an academician as soon as he was an adult, ranking second.

古文：方唱名，太史奏日下五色云见，左右皆贺。
现代文：正公布排名时，太史上奏说日落五色云彩出现，左右大臣都庆贺。
English: When the rankings were being announced, the five-colored clouds of the sunset appeared, and the ministers on both sides celebrated.

古文：授将作监丞、通判淄州，入直集贤院、监左藏库。
现代文：韩琦被授予将作监丞、通判淄州，入直集贤院、监左藏库。
English: Han Zheng was awarded the title of Censor-in-Chief and Censor-in-Chief of Zhangzhou, and was admitted to Zhishixian Academy and Censor-in-Chief of Zuozang Library.

古文：时方贵高科，多径去为显职，琦独滞筦库，众以为非宜，琦处之自若。
现代文：这时显贵之子和进士考中高科的，大多直接担任显要之职，韩琦独独留下来管理仓库，人们都认为不适宜，而韩琦却像没事一样。
English: At this time, most of the sons of nobles and those who entered the middle and high school entrance examinations directly held important positions. People thought it was inappropriate for Han Zheng to be left alone to manage the warehouse, but Han Zheng acted as if nothing was wrong.

古文：禁中需金帛，皆内臣直批旨取之，无印可验，琦请复旧制，置传宣合同司，以相防察。
现代文：宫中需要金银布帛，都是内臣直接批准进入仓库自取，没有印章可检验，韩琦请求恢复过去的制度，设置传宣合同司，以便相互监督核察。
English: The gold and silver cloth brocades needed in the palace are all approved directly by the vassals to enter the warehouse for self-collection. There is no seal to inspect. Han Zheng requested to restore the past system and set up a propaganda contract department for mutual supervision and inspection.

古文：又每纲运至，必俟内臣监莅，始得受，往往数日不至，暴露庑下。
现代文：每次纲运到时，一定要等到内臣前来监管，才接受，内臣往往许多天不来，于是纲云就暴露在屋檐下。
English: Each time the documents arrived, they had to wait until the vassal came to supervise before accepting them. The vassal often did not come for many days, so the documents were exposed under the eaves.

古文：衙校以为病，琦奏罢之。
现代文：衙校认为这样不好，韩琦上奏请求废除这一办法。
English: The school thought that this was not good, and Han Min appealed to the Supreme People's Court to request the abolition of this measure.

古文：历开封府推官、三司度支判官，拜右司谏。
现代文：韩琦担任过开封府推官、三司度支判官，授职右司谏。
English: Han Qi served as the deputy of Kaifeng Prefecture, the deputy judge of the Third Division, and the right deputy of the Third Division.

古文：时宰相王随、陈尧佐，参知政事韩亿、石中立，在中书罕所建明，琦连疏其过，四人同日罢。
现代文：这时宰相王随、陈尧佐，参知政事韩亿、石中立，在中书任职没有什么建树，韩琦不断上疏指出他们的过失，结果四人同一天被免职。
English: At this time, the Prime Minister Wang Sui, Chen Bingzao, and the co-chairs of the government, Han Yi and Shi Zhonglian, had nothing to show for their positions in the Chinese government, and Han Wei constantly pointed out their mistakes. As a result, the four were dismissed on the same day.

古文：又请停内降，抑侥幸。
现代文：又请求停止宫中降旨，抑制侥幸奸佞之人。
English: He also requested to stop the decrees from being issued by the imperial court and to restrain those who had the chance to commit treason.

古文：凡事有不便，未尝不言，每以明得失、正纪纲、亲忠直、远邪佞为急，前后七十余疏。
现代文：只要事情有不方便之处，韩琦没有不上奏的，每次上奏都是将察明得失、端正纲纪、亲近忠诚正直、疏远邪恶奸佞作为重要内容，前前后后共上奏七十余次。
English: As long as things are inconvenient, Han Zheng did not fail to play, and each time he played, he took the detection of gains and losses, correct discipline, closeness, loyalty and honesty, and alienation of evil traitors as important content, and played a total of more than seventy times.

古文：王曾为相，谓之曰： 今言者不激，则多畏顾，何补上德？
现代文：王曾任宰相，对韩琦说： 如今上奏之人言辞不激烈，有许多担心和顾虑，对皇帝政德又有什么用呢？
English: Wang, who once served as the prime minister, said to Han Zheng: Nowadays, the person who plays the role of the emperor is not fiery, but has many worries and concerns. What use is it to the emperor's political virtue?

古文：如君言，可谓切而不迂矣。 曾闻望方崇，罕所奖与，琦闻其语，益自信。
现代文：像你一样的上奏，可以说是切中时弊而又不迂腐啊。 这时王曾声望正高，很少表扬奖励别人，韩琦听了他的话后，更加坚信自己所做的一切对朝廷有益。
English: At this time, Wang had a high reputation and rarely praised and rewarded others. After listening to his words, Han Zheng was even more convinced that everything he did was beneficial to the imperial court.

古文：权知制诰。
现代文：暂代知制诰。
English: The temporary chieftaincy system ends.

古文：益、利岁饥，为体量安抚使。
现代文：益州、利州这年发生饥荒，韩琦任体量安抚使。
English: Famine occurred in Yizhou and Lizhou that year, and Han Xuan was appointed as a pacifying envoy.

古文：异时郡县督赋调繁急，市上供绮绣诸物不予直，琦为缓调蠲给之，逐贪残不职吏，汰冗役数百，活饥民百九十万。
现代文：过去郡县催促赋调频繁急迫，市上供给的丝织品等其他物品都不给钱，韩琦为了缓解赋调在这年免除了赋调并让老百姓自己拥有，驱逐不称职的官吏和贪婪残暴的官，减少数百种多余的劳役，救活饥民一百九十万。
English: In the past, counties and counties frequently and urgently urged the transfer of funds, and did not pay for other goods such as silk fabrics supplied by the market. In order to alleviate the transfer of funds, Han Zheng exempted the transfer of funds this year and let the people own it, expelled incompetent officials and greedy and cruel officials, reduced hundreds of redundant labor services, and saved 1.9 million hungry people.

古文：赵元昊反，琦适自蜀归，论西师形势甚悉，即命为陕西安抚使。
现代文：赵元昊叛乱，韩琦刚好从蜀州归来，论说西边军队的情形十分熟悉，当即被任命为陕西安抚使。
English: After the rebellion of Zhao Yuanhao, Han Wei just returned from Shuzhou and said that he was very familiar with the situation of the western army. He was immediately appointed as the Shaanxi pacification envoy.

古文：刘平与贼战，败，为所执，时宰入他诬，收系平子弟，琦辨直其冤。
现代文：刘平与敌贼交战，战败，被敌人俘获，这时宰相听信了别人对他的诬蔑，于是捉拿了刘平的家属，韩琦辩白了他蒙受的冤屈。
English: Liu Ping fought with the enemy, was defeated, and was captured by the enemy. At this time, the prime minister believed the slander against him, so he arrested Liu Ping's family members, and Han Zheng defended the grievances he suffered.

古文：进枢密直学士，副夏竦为经略安抚、招讨使。
现代文：担任枢密直学士，辅助夏竦为经略安抚使、招讨使。
English: He served as a privy councilor, and assisted Xia Yao as a mediator, pacifier, and recruiter.

古文：诏遣使督出兵，琦亦欲先发以制贼，而合府固争，元昊遂寇镇戎。
现代文：诏令派遣人督促出兵，韩琦也打算发兵来制服敌贼，但枢密院坚决反对，赵元昊于是进攻镇戎。
English: The Emperor issued a decree to dispatch people to urge the dispatch of troops, and Han Xuan also planned to send troops to subdue the enemy, but the Privy Council resolutely opposed it, and Zhao Yuanhao then attacked Zhen Rong.

古文：琦画攻守二策驰入奏，仁宗欲用攻策，执政者难之。
现代文：韩琦筹划了进攻和防守二套方案派人骑快马上奏朝廷，仁宗准备采用进攻的方案，但遭到了执政者的反对。
English: Han Xuan planned two sets of offensive and defensive plans and sent people to ride fast horses to report to the imperial court. Renzong was ready to adopt an offensive plan, but was opposed by the rulers.

古文：琦言： 元昊虽倾国入寇，众不过四五万人，吾逐路重兵自为守，势分力弱，遇敌辄不支。
现代文：韩琦说 ：赵元昊虽然动用全部兵力进犯我们，但兵力不过四五万人，我们分路派兵各自把守的话，必然分散兵力削弱力量，遇到敌人就会无法抵抗。
English: Han Zheng said: Although Zhao Yuanhao used all of his forces to attack us, his forces were only 450,000 strong. If we sent our troops in separate directions to defend ourselves, our forces would inevitably be dispersed and weakened, and we would be unable to resist the enemy.

古文：若并出一道，鼓行而前，乘贼骄惰，破之必矣。 乃诏鄜延、泾原同出征。
现代文：如果将所有兵力合并起来，形成一股，击鼓前行，趁敌人骄纵松懈之际，一定能打败敌人。 于是朝廷诏令延、泾原共同出兵征讨。
English: If all the troops were combined to form a single force, marching forward to the beat of drums, and taking advantage of the enemy's arrogance and laxity, they would surely defeat the enemy.

古文：既还营，元昊来求盟。
现代文：回到军营后，赵元昊派人请求议和。
English: After returning to the military camp, Zhao Yuanhao sent someone to request peace talks.

古文：琦曰： 无约而请和者，谋也。 命诸将戒严，贼果犯山外。
现代文：韩琦说： 没有约定而请求讲和，这是一种计谋。 命令大将们严阵以待，敌人果然进犯山外。
English: Han Zheng said: It is a trick to ask for peace without an agreement. The generals were ordered to stand by, and the enemy did invade outside the mountain.

古文：琦悉兵付大将任福，令自怀远城趋德胜砦出贼后，如未可战，即据险置伏，要其归。
现代文：韩琦将兵力全部交付给大将任福，命令任福从怀远城直趋德胜砦绕到敌人背后，如果不能与敌人交战，就占据险要位置设下埋伏，拦截敌人的退路。
English: Han Zheng handed over all the troops to General Ren Fu, and ordered Ren Fu to go straight from Huayuan City to Desheng Fort to go around the back of the enemy. If he could not fight with the enemy, he would occupy a critical position and set up an ambush to intercept the enemy's escape route.

古文：及行，戒之至再。
现代文：到出发时，再三告诫他。
English: When it's time to leave, remind him again and again.

古文：又移檄申约，苟违节度，虽有功，亦斩。
现代文：又传递檄文申述规定，如果违背节度，即使有功，亦要被斩首。
English: In addition, it was passed on that if a person violated the regulations, even if he was meritorious, he would be beheaded.

古文：福竟为贼诱，没于好水川。
现代文：任福终因被敌人诱惑，在好水川全军覆没。
English: In the end, Renfu was seduced by the enemy, and his entire army was annihilated in the Battle of Kosuikawa.

古文：竦使人收散兵，得琦檄于福衣带间，言罪不在琦。
现代文：夏竦派人收集散兵游勇，在任福的衣带间得到了韩琦签署的檄文，说过错不在韩琦。
English: Xia Yao sent someone to collect the stragglers, and in Renfu's waistband, he got a letter signed by Han Yao, saying that the mistake was not Han Yao's.

古文：琦亦上章自劾，犹夺一官，知秦州，寻复之。
现代文：韩琦亦上疏自行检讨，还是被剥夺一官，任秦州知州，不久又官复原职。
English: Han Zheng also went on a self-examination, but he was still deprived of a post, appointed to Qinzhou and Zhizhou, and was soon reinstated.

古文：会四路置帅，以琦兼秦凤经略安抚、招讨使。
现代文：正好四路设置将帅，以韩琦兼任秦凤经略安抚使、招讨使。
English: Exactly four routes were set up, with Han Zheng concurrently serving as Qin Fengjing's emissary for appeasement and solicitation.

古文：庆历二年，与三帅皆换观察使，范仲淹、庞籍、王沿不肯拜，琦独受不辞。
现代文：庆历二年，其他三帅都换职为观察使，范仲淹、庞籍、王沿都不肯接受，韩琦一个人接受了没有辞谢。
English: In the second year of Qingli, the other three commanders all changed their posts to become observers. Fan Zhongyun, Pang Zi and Wang Yan refused to accept, while Han Zheng alone accepted without resignation.

古文：未几，还旧职，为陕西四路经略安抚、招讨使，屯泾州。
现代文：不久，恢复原来的官职，任陕西四路经略安抚使、招讨使，驻扎泾州。
English: Soon, he resumed his original official position, and served as the Shaanxi four-way economic pacification envoy and recruitment envoy, stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：琦与范仲淹在兵间久，名重一时，人心归之，朝廷倚以为重，故天下称为 韩范 。
现代文：韩琦与范仲淹在军中很长时间，名声显赫，人心归向，朝廷依靠他们作为重臣，因此天下人称之为 韩范 。
English: Han Xuan and Fan Zhongtang were in the army for a long time, their reputations were prominent, and people were attracted to them. The imperial court relied on them as senior officials, so people around the world called them Han Fan.

古文：东兵从宿卫来，不习劳苦，琦奏增土兵以代戍，建德顺军以蔽萧关、呜沙之道。
现代文：东兵从宿卫来，不习惯劳苦，韩琦上奏增加士兵来代替戍守，设置德顺军来保护萧关、鸣沙通道。
English: The Eastern soldiers came from Sui and Wei, and were not used to hard work. The Han Dynasty increased the number of soldiers to replace the garrison, and set up the Deshun Army to protect Xiaoguan and Mingsha Channel.

古文：方谋取横山，规河南，而元昊称臣，召为枢密副使。
现代文：正计划夺取横山，谋划河南，而赵元昊称臣，韩琦奉召任枢密副使。
English: He was planning to capture Hengshan and plan for Henan, while Zhao Yuanhao was a minister, and Han Zheng was called to serve as a vice-envoy.

古文：元昊介契丹为援，强邀索无厌，宰相晏殊等厌兵，将一切从之。
现代文：赵元昊依靠契丹作为外援，强行索要贪得无厌，宰相晏殊等讨厌战争，因此一切听从赵元昊。
English: Zhao Yuanhao relied on the Khitan Empire for foreign aid, and was insatiably greedy in demanding it by force. The prime minister and others hated war, so they all obeyed Zhao Yuanhao.

古文：琦陈其不便，条所宜先行者七事：一曰清政本，二曰念边计，三曰擢材贤，四曰备河北，五曰固河东，六曰收民心，七曰营洛邑。
现代文：韩琦上疏陈述这样做的害处，逐条陈述应当先办的七件事：一是清政本，二是考虑边境之事，三是选拔贤才，四是在河北设防，五是固守河东，六是争取民心，七是经营洛邑。
English: Han Xuan Shangsu explained the harm of doing so, and explained the seven things that should be done first, one by one: First, clear the political foundation, second, consider the border, third, select talents, fourth, set up defenses in Hebei, fifth, adhere to the east of the river, sixth, win the hearts of the people, and seventh, operate Luoyang.

古文：继又陈救弊八事，欲选将帅，明按察，丰财利，遏侥幸，进能吏，退不才，谨入官，去冗食。
现代文：在此之后又上疏陈述补弊端的八件事，要选拔将帅，严明按察，使财利丰厚，遏制侥幸之徒，任用有才能的官吏，斥退没有才能的官吏，谨慎地选入官吏，除去多余的人。
English: After this, he went on to explain the eight things to remedy the drawbacks, including the selection of generals, strict supervision, making wealth rich, curbing the lucky ones, appointing talented officials, rejecting untalented officials, carefully selecting officials, and removing superfluous people.

古文：谓： 数者之举，谤必随之，愿委计辅臣，听其注措。 帝悉嘉纳。
现代文：说 ：这些举动，一定会有人反对，希望将计谋托付给辅佐大臣，让他们自行决定。 
English: "There are bound to be people who object to these moves and want to entrust the strategy to the assistant minister so that they can decide for themselves," he said.

古文：遂宣抚陕西，讨平群盗张海、郭邈山；禁卒羸老不任用者，悉汰之；尽修鄜延城障，须敌悉归所侵地，乃许和。
现代文：仁宗对此十分赞赏并全部采纳。于是韩琦宣抚陕西，讨伐平定群盗张海、郭邈山，禁卒老弱未被任用的，全部淘汰掉。将延城的屏障全部修复，一定要敌人将所有侵占之地全部归还才允许讲和。
English: Renzong appreciated this very much and accepted it in its entirety. Therefore, Han Zong proclaimed the subjugation of Shaanxi, fought and pacified the bandits of Zhanghai and Guo Lushan, and eliminated all the old and weak guards who had not been appointed. The barrier of Yancheng was completely repaired, and the enemy must return all the occupied land before it was allowed to make peace.

古文：归陈西北四策，以为： 今当以和好为权宜，战守为实务。请缮甲厉兵，营修都城，密定讨伐之计。 
现代文：回来后陈述了防守西北的四条策略，认为： 如今应当以和好作为权宜之计，攻战和防守是重要事务，请求修缮兵器训练士兵，修建都城，暗中决定讨伐的计谋。 
English: After returning, he stated four strategies for the defense of the northwest, and believed that: Today, reconciliation should be used as a stopgap measure, attack and defense are important matters, request the repair of weapons to train soldiers, build the capital, and secretly decide on the strategy of crusade.

古文：时二府合班奏事，琦必尽言，虽事属中书，亦指陈其实。
现代文：这时二府合班上奏言事，韩琦一定言尽所知之事，虽然事情属于中书，也指陈其实情。
English: At this time, the two governments jointly made a speech on the matter, and Han Zheng must say everything he knows, although the matter belongs to the Chinese book, it also refers to the actual situation.

古文：同列或不悦，帝独识之，曰： 韩琦性直。 琦与范仲淹、富弼皆以海内人望，同时登用，中外跂想其勋业。
现代文：同僚们有的不高兴，仁宗却偏偏赏识他，说： 韩琦性情率直。 韩琦与范仲淹、富弼都由于身孚众望，被朝廷同时任用，朝廷内外人士都仰慕他们的功业。
English: Some of his colleagues were not happy, but Rinzong appreciated him, saying, "Han Zheng has a straightforward temperament. Han Zheng, Fan Zhongran, and Fu Zheng were all appointed by the imperial court at the same time due to their popularity. People both inside and outside the imperial court admired their work.

古文：仲淹等亦以天下为己任，群小不便之，毁言日闻。
现代文：范仲淹等人也把天下作为己任，一些小人认为对他们不方便，于是诋毁他们的言论一天天多起来。
English: Fan Zhongyun and others also regard the world as their own responsibility. Some villains think it is inconvenient for them, so the comments slandering them are increasing day by day.

古文：仲淹、弼继罢，琦为辨析，不报。
现代文：范仲淹、富弼相继被罢免，韩琦替他们辩解，没有得到答复。
English: Fan Zhongyun and Fuxi were successively removed from their posts, and Han Zheng defended them, but received no reply.

古文：尹洙与刘沪争城水洛事，琦右洙，朝论不谓然。
现代文：尹洙与刘扈互相争论在水洛筑城，韩琦偏袒尹洙，朝廷人士不以为然。
English: Yin Zheng and Liu Zheng argued with each other in the city of Shuiluo, Han Zheng sided with Yin Zheng, and the imperial court was not impressed.

古文：乃请外，以资政殿学士知扬州，徙郓州、成德军、定州。兼安抚使，进大学士，又加观文殿学士。
现代文：韩琦于是请求离开京师，以资政殿学士知扬州，调往郓州、成德军、定州，兼任安抚使，进任大学士，又兼任观文殿学士。
English: Han Zheng then asked to leave the Beijing Division, and he was transferred to Zhangzhou, Chengde Army, and Dingzhou as a scholar of the Academy of the Palace of the Grand Historian. He also served as a pacification envoy, a university scholar, and a scholar of the Academy of the Palace of the Grand Historian.

古文：初，定州兵狃平贝州功，需赏赉，出怨语，至欲噪城下。
现代文：起初，定州士兵贪平定贝州之功，索要赏赐，发出怨言，以至于打算到城下喧哗。
English: At first, Dingzhou soldiers coveted Dingbei's achievements, demanded rewards, and complained so much that they planned to make noise outside the city.

古文：琦闻之，以为不治且乱，用军制勒习，诛其尤无良者。
现代文：韩琦听说了这件事，认为不治理将发生混乱，要运用军法进行约束，诛杀那些行为十分不良的人。
English: Han Zheng heard about this and thought that if there was no governance, there would be chaos, and that it was necessary to use military law to restrain and kill those whose behavior was very bad.

古文：士死攻战，则赏赙其家，籍其孤嫠继禀之，威恩并行。
现代文：士兵死于攻战，则奖赏资助他的家人，将其孤寡的姓名进行登记并提供救济，威严恩爱并重。
English: When a soldier dies in battle, his family is rewarded with financial support, his name is registered, and relief is provided.

古文：又仿古三阵法，日月训齐之，由是中山兵精劲冠河朔。
现代文：又仿照古代三阵法，每日进行训练，这样中山军队的精锐强劲超过河朔。
English: They also imitated the ancient three-battalion method and trained every day, so that the elite of Zhongshan's army was stronger than that of Heshaku.

古文：京师发龙猛卒戍保州，在道为人害，至定，琦悉留不遣，易素教者使之北，又振活饥民数百万。
现代文：京师调遣龙猛卒戍守保州，沿途成为百姓的祸害，到定州，韩琦将他们全部留下不再派遣，让素有训练者到北方，又赈济救活饥民数百万。
English: The Beijing division dispatched dragons and fierce soldiers to defend Bozhou, and became a scourge to the people along the way. When they arrived in Dingzhou, Han Zheng left them all behind and no longer sent them. He sent experienced trainers to the north, and helped to save the lives of millions of starving people.

古文：玺书褒激，邻道视以为准。
现代文：仁宗颁布诏书进行褒奖，其他各路都以此作为标准。
English: Renzong issued an edict to reward, and all other roads are based on this as a standard.

古文：拜武康军节度使、知并州。
现代文：授职武康军节度使、知并州。
English: Awarded the post of the military commander of the Wu-Kang Army and the post of the military governor of Zhizhou.

古文：承受廖浩然，怙中贵势贪恣，既诬逐前帅李昭亮，所为益不法，琦奏还之，帝命鞭诸本省。
现代文：承受廖浩然依仗有权势的太监贪婪不已，又诬蔑逐走前帅李昭亮，所作所为更加不守法度，韩琦上奏归回，仁宗指示韩琦在本省对廖浩然进行鞭责。
English: After suffering Liao Haoran's insatiable greed to rely on powerful eunuchs, and his slandering and driving away former commander Li Zhaoliang, his actions were even more illegal. Han Xuan returned home, and Ren Zong instructed Han Xuan to scourge Liao Haoran in the province.

古文：契丹冒占天池庙地，琦召其酋豪，示以曩日彼所求修庙檄，无以对，遂归我斥地。
现代文：契丹突然占领了天池庙地区，韩琦召见契丹首领和豪强，将他们以前所写的请求修建庙宇的文书拿给他们看，契丹无言以对，于是归还了所有侵占之地。
English: The Khitans suddenly occupied the area of the Temple of Heaven Pool. Han Zheng summoned the Khitans' leaders and warriors and showed them the document they had previously written requesting the construction of the temple. The Khitans were speechless, so they returned all the occupied land.

古文：既又侵耕阳武砦地，琦凿堑立石以限之。
现代文：不久又侵占阳武砦耕地，韩琦挖沟立石碑来进行限制。
English: Soon, they invaded the cultivated land of Yangwu Fort, and Han Yu dug a ditch and erected a stone monument to restrict them.

古文：始，潘美镇河东，患寇钞，令民悉内徙，而空塞下不耕，于是忻、代、宁化、火山之北多废壤。
现代文：开始，潘美镇守河东，担心敌人掠夺，让老百姓全部内迁，将塞外之地空闲不耕种，这样沂州、代州、宁化、火山以北有许多废弃的土地。
English: At the beginning, Panme Town guarded the east of the river, worried about the enemy's plunder, and let the people all move inside, leaving the land outside the block idle and not cultivated. As a result, there are many abandoned lands in Zhangzhou, Daizhou, Ninghua, and north of the volcano.

古文：琦以为此皆良田，今弃不耕，适足以资敌，将皆为所有矣。
现代文：韩琦认为这些都是良田，如今弃置不耕种，刚好资助敌人，使这些土地都被敌人占有。
English: Han Zheng thought that these were good fields, now abandoned and not cultivated, just funded the enemy, so that these lands were occupied by the enemy.

古文：遂请距北界十里为禁地，其南则募弓箭手居之，垦田至九千六百顷。
现代文：于是请求距离北界十里作为禁地，南面则招募弓箭手驻扎，开垦田地达九千六百顷。
English: As a result, he requested a prohibited area ten miles away from the northern boundary, and archers were recruited to stay in the south, reclaiming up to 9,600 hectares of farmland.

古文：久之，求知相州。
现代文：很长一段时间后，请求任相州知州。
English: After a long period of time, he asked to be appointed to the post of Sangju Zhizhou.

古文：嘉祐元年，召为三司使，未至，迎拜枢密使。
现代文：嘉祐元年，奉召任三司使，未到任，又授职枢密使。
English: In the first year of Jiayu, he was appointed as the Third Divisional Envoy, but before taking office, he was also appointed as the Privy Envoy.

古文：三年六月，拜同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：嘉三年六月，授职同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: In June of the third year of Jia, he was awarded the post of junior high school teacher Shimohei Zhangji and Shixianden University scholar.

古文：六年闰八月，迁昭文馆大学士、监修国史，封仪国公。
现代文：嘉六年闰八月，升任昭文馆大学士、监修国史，封为仪国公。
English: In August of the sixth year of Jia's reign, he was promoted to the post of Shouwenguang University Scholar, Supervisor of National History, and was appointed as Yi Guogong.

古文：帝既连失三王，自至和中病疾，不能御殿。
现代文：仁宗已连续失去三王，到至和年间，仁宗患病，不能亲自上殿。
English: Ninsong had already lost three kings in a row, and by the year of the Go and Wa, Ninsong fell ill and was unable to go to the temple in person.

古文：中外惴恐，臣下争以立嗣固根本为言，包拯、范镇尤激切。
现代文：朝廷内外都惶恐不安十分担忧，大臣们都争先上奏要选定继位人来固定朝廷命运，包拯、范镇的言论尤其激烈。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court were very worried and anxious. The ministers were all scrambling to select a successor to fix the fate of the imperial court. The remarks of Bao Zheng and Fan Zhen were particularly fierce.

古文：积五六岁，依违未之行，言者亦稍怠。
现代文：过了五六年，犹豫不决没有选定继位人，上书言说此事的人也少了。
English: After five or six years, no successor has been chosen without hesitation, and there are fewer people who say this in their letters.

古文：至是，琦乘间进曰： 皇嗣者，天下安危之所系。
现代文：到这时候，韩琦乘机进言说： 皇位的继承人，是天下安危之所在。
English: At this time, Han Wei took the opportunity to say: The heir to the throne is the place where the world is in danger.

古文：自昔祸乱之起，皆由策不早定。
现代文：以前祸乱的出现，都是由于决策没有早点决定下来。
English: In the past, disasters occurred because decisions were not made earlier.

古文：陛下春秋高，未有建立，何不择宗室之贤者，以为宗庙社稷计？ 帝曰： 后宫将有就馆者，姑待之。 已又生女。
现代文：陛下年岁已高，还没有皇太子，为什么不选择宗族中的贤能者，来为国家考虑呢？ 仁宗说： 后宫将有人分娩，暂且等等。 结果又生一女。
English: His Majesty is very old, and there is no crown prince yet, so why not choose a capable person from the clan to consider for the country?Rinzong said: Someone in the harem will give birth, wait for a while, and another daughter was born.

古文：一日，琦怀《汉书·孔光传》以进，曰： 成帝无嗣，立弟之子。
现代文：一天，韩琦携带《汉书·孔光传》以进读，说： 成帝没有后代，立其弟之子。
English: One day, Han Zheng was carrying the "Hanshu Kongguang Biography" for further reading, saying: Emperor Cheng had no descendants, but was the son of his younger brother.

古文：彼中材之主，犹能如是，况陛下乎。
现代文：成帝并不是贤明的君主，还能如此做，何况陛下呢？
English: Emperor Cheng is not a wise monarch, how could he do such a thing, let alone His Majesty?

古文：愿以太祖之心为心，则无不可者。 又与曾公亮、张昇、欧阳修极言之。
现代文：希望陛下以太祖之心为心，就没有什么不可以的了。 又与曾公亮、张日弁、欧阳修极力进言，正好司马光、吕诲都有所请求，韩琦进读他们的上疏，还没有来得及开封，仁宗就说： 朕有这个意向很久了，谁能作为继承人呢？ 
English: There was nothing that His Majesty could not do if he had the heart of his ancestor in mind. Zeng Gongliang, Zhang Riben and Ouyang Xiu also tried their best to have a word with Zeng Gongliang, just as Sima Guang and Lu Yao had a request. Han Xuan read through their records, but before he could open the seal, Renzong said: I have had this intention for a long time, who can be the heir?

古文：会司马光、吕诲皆有请，琦进读二疏，未及有所启，帝遽曰： 朕有意久矣，谁可者？ 琦皇恐对曰： 此非臣辈所可议，当出自圣择。 帝曰： 宫中尝养二子，小者甚纯，近不慧，大者可也。 琦请其名，帝以宗实告。
现代文：韩琦惶恐地对答说 ：这不是做臣下的所能议论的，应当由陛下自己选择决定。 仁宗说： 宫中曾收养二个男孩，小的很纯洁，但最近不太聪明，大的可以。 韩琦请问他的名字，仁宗告诉韩琦他的名字为宗实。
English: Han Yan replied with trepidation, "This is not something a subject can discuss, it should be decided by His Majesty's own choice." Rinzong said, "There were two boys who were once adopted in the palace, the younger one was very pure, but recently he was not very smart, but the older one was fine. Han Yan, please ask him his name, Rinzong told Han Yan that his name was Munjong.

古文：宗实，英宗旧名也。
现代文：宗实，是英宗的旧名。
English: Zongshi is the old name of Yingzong.

古文：琦等遂力赞之，议乃定。
现代文：韩琦等极力称赞此事，于是议论决定了。
English: Han Zheng and others praised this matter as much as possible, so the discussion was decided.

古文：英宗居濮王丧，议起知宗正。
现代文：英宗为濮王守丧，建议起任知宗正。
English: Yingzong held a memorial service for Shao Wang and suggested that Zhizong Zheng be appointed.

古文：琦曰： 事若行，不可中止。
现代文：韩琦说 ：决定了要办的事，不能中途停止，陛下决断不应怀疑，希望从宫中批出圣旨。 
English: Han Zheng said, "I have decided on what I want to do, and I cannot stop halfway. Your Majesty should not doubt my decision, and I hope that you will issue the imperial edict from the palace."

古文：陛下断自不疑，乞内中批出。 帝意不欲宫人知，曰： 只中书行足矣。 命下，英宗固辞。
现代文：仁宗不打算让宫中人知道，说： 只要中书行文就足矣。 诏令下达后，英宗坚决辞谢。
English: Ninsong did not intend to let the people in the palace know, saying, "Just writing in Chinese is enough." After the edict was issued, Yingzong firmly declined.

古文：帝复问琦，琦对曰： 陛下既知其贤而选之，今不敢遽当，盖器识远大，所以为贤也。
现代文：仁宗又问韩琦，韩琦应对说 ：陛下既然知道英宗贤能而选为继承人，如今英宗不敢马上担当，是由于见识远大，贤能的缘故。
English: Rinzong also asked Han Zang, to which Han Zang replied, "Since His Majesty knew that Yingzong was a wise man and chose him as his successor, Yingzong does not dare to take over immediately, because of his far-sightedness and wisdom."

古文：愿固起之。 英宗既终丧，犹坚卧不起。
现代文：希望坚决起用他。 英宗服丧完后，还坚决卧床不起。
English: After the funeral of Emperor Yingzong, he was still bedridden.

古文：琦言： 宗正之命初出，外人皆知必为皇子，不若遂正其名。 乃下诏立为皇子。
现代文：韩琦说 ：知宗正的任命刚一发出，朝外人士都知道英宗一定成为皇太子，还不如正其名。 于是下诏立英宗为皇太子。
English: Han Zheng said: As soon as the appointment of Zhizong Zheng was issued, people in and outside the DPRK knew that Yingzong would definitely become the crown prince, and it would be better to use his real name. Therefore, Yingzong was made the crown prince.

古文：明年，英宗嗣位，以琦为仁宗山陵使，加门下侍郎，进封卫国公。
现代文：第二年，英宗即位，以韩琦为仁宗山陵使，兼门下侍郎，进封卫国公。
English: The following year, when Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, Han Zheng was appointed as the messenger of the Nanzong Mausoleum, and also as a footman, and became the Prince of the Imperial Guard.

古文：琦既辅立英宗，门人亲客，或从容语及定策事，琦必正色曰： 此仁宗圣德神断，为天下计，皇太后内助之力，臣子何与焉。 英宗暴得疾，太后垂帘听政。
现代文：韩琦已经辅佐策立英宗，门下亲戚宾客，有的闲谈中谈及策立之事，韩琦一定严肃地说： 这是仁宗的英明决断，为国家考虑，皇太后内助之力，臣子有什么参予呢？ 英宗突然得病，太后垂帘听政。
English: Han Zheng had already assisted Ying Zong, a relative and guest of his, in setting up the government. During some of the small talk about setting up the government, Han Zheng must have said seriously, "This is a wise decision by Ren Zong. For the sake of the country, the empress dowager has the power to help, so why should the courtier participate?" Ying Zong suddenly fell ill, and the empress dowager was forced to listen to the government.

古文：帝疾甚，举措或改常度，遇宦官尤少恩。
现代文：英宗病重，动作有时反常，对宦官尤其缺少恩爱。
English: Yingzong was seriously ill, his movements were sometimes abnormal, and he was particularly unkind to eunuchs.

古文：左右多不悦者，乃共为谗间，两宫遂成隙。
现代文：左右之人多不高兴，于是互相进谗言离间，两宫于是有了仇恨。
English: Many people on both sides were not happy, so they quarreled with each other, and the two palaces became hostile.

古文：琦与欧阳修奏事帘前，太后呜咽流涕，具道所以。
现代文：韩琦与欧阳修在太后帘前上奏言事，太后痛哭流泪，具体地叙说事情的由来。
English: Han Xuan and Ouyang Xiu made a speech in front of the empress dowager, and the empress dowager cried bitterly and shed tears, specifically describing the origin of the matter.

古文：琦曰： 此病固尔，病已，必不然。
现代文：韩琦说 ：这病十分难治，病好，是不可能的。
English: Han Zheng said: "This disease is very difficult to cure, it is impossible to get well.

古文：子疾，母可不容之乎？ 修亦委曲进言，太后意稍和，久之而罢。
现代文：儿子患病，母亲能不宽容吗？ 欧阳修也详细进言，太后意气逐渐缓和，过了一段时间就不再言说此事了。
English: Can a mother be intolerant of her son's illness? Ouyang Xiu also spoke in detail, and the empress dowager's mood gradually eased. After a while, she stopped talking about the matter.

古文：后数日，琦独见上，上曰： 太后待我无恩。 琦对曰： 自古圣帝明王，不为少矣。
现代文：以后数天，韩琦单独进见英宗，英宗说： 太后对我无恩。 韩琦对答说： 自古以来圣明的帝王，人数不少。
English: A few days later, Han Yan went to see Ying Zong alone. Ying Zong said, "The Empress owed me no favors." Han Yan replied, "Since ancient times, there have been many emperors of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：然独称舜为大孝，岂其余尽不孝耶？
现代文：但唯独说舜是大孝子，难道其余的全部不孝吗？
English: But is it unfilial to say only that Zhai is a great filial son?

古文：父母慈爱而子孝，此常事不足道；惟父母不慈，而子不失孝，乃为可称。
现代文：父母慈爱而儿子孝顺，这是正常之事不足称道；惟父母不慈爱，儿子不失去孝顺，才值得称道。
English: It is normal for parents to be loving and for sons to be filial, but this is not praiseworthy. However, it is praiseworthy for parents not to be loving and for sons not to be filial.

古文：但恐陛下事之未至尔，父母岂有不慈者哉。 帝大感悟。
现代文：只担心陛下之事不能办到，父母岂有不慈爱的。 英宗大受感动并得到启发。
English: He was only worried that he would not be able to do His Majesty's work, how could his parents not love him.

古文：及疾愈，琦请乘舆因祷雨具素服以出，人情乃安。太后还政，拜琦右仆射，封魏国公。
现代文：到疾病痊愈时，韩琦请求皇帝乘车祈雨穿上白衣服出去，人心才安定，太后执政，授予韩琦右仆射，封为魏国公。
English: When he recovered from the illness, Han Xuan asked the emperor to go out by car to pray for rain, put on white clothes, and the people's hearts would be stable. The empress dowager ruled, awarded Han Xuan the title of Right Servant of the Emperor, and made him the Prince of Wei.

古文：夏人寇大顺，琦议停岁赐，绝和市，遣使问罪。
现代文：夏人进犯大顺，韩琦建议停止岁赐，断绝双方的和市，派遣使者向夏人问罪。
English: When the Xia people attacked Dashun, Han Zheng proposed to stop the gift of life, sever the peace and market between the two sides, and send an envoy to the Xia people to ask for punishment.

古文：枢密使文彦博难之，或举宝元、康定事，琦曰： 谅祚，狂童也，非有元昊智计，而边备过当时远甚。
现代文：枢密使文彦博责难他，有的列举宝元、康定之事，韩琦说： 谅祚，是一位狂童，没有元昊那样的智谋计略，但边防军队大大超过以前。
English: The confidential envoy, Fumihiko Bo, reprimanded him, sometimes listing the cases of Bao Yuan and Kangding. Han Zheng said: Excuse me, I am a crazy child, I don't have the wit and strategy of Yuan Hao, but the border troops are much larger than before.

古文：亟诘之，必服。 既而谅祚上表谢，帝顾琦曰： 一如所料。 帝寝疾，琦入问起居，言曰： 陛下久不视朝，愿早建储，以安社稷。 帝颔之，即召学士草制，立颍王。
现代文：严厉地责问夏人，一定折服。 不久谅祚上表致谢，英宗对韩琦说： 完全像所预料的一样。 英宗卧床不起，韩琦入宫询问起居情况，并上言说： 陛下很久不亲自上朝，希望尽早设立皇储，来安定社稷。 英宗点头称赞，立即召学士起草制定，立颍王。
English: After a while, Emperor Yingzong pardoned him and thanked him, and Emperor Yingzong said to Emperor Han, "It's just as expected." Emperor Yingzong was bedridden, and Emperor Han went to the palace to inquire about the living conditions, and said, "It's been a long time since Your Majesty came to the palace in person, and I hope to establish a crown prince as soon as possible to stabilize society." Emperor Yingzong nodded and praised, and immediately called on the scholars to draft and formulate, and to establish a crown prince.

古文：神宗立，拜司空兼侍中，为英宗山陵使。
现代文：神宗即位，韩琦授职司空兼侍中，为英宗山陵使。
English: Shenzong ascended to the throne, and Han Xizong was appointed to the post of empty-handed secretary and attendant, and became Yingzong's mausoleum envoy.

古文：琦执政三世，或病其专。
现代文：韩琦执政三朝，有人担忧他专权。
English: Han Xuan ruled three dynasties, and some people are worried about his absolute power.

古文：御史中丞王陶劾琦不赴文德殿押班为跋扈。
现代文：御史中丞王陶弹劾韩琦不赴文德殿为跋扈。
English: Historian Wang Tao impeached Han Zheng for not going to the Palace of Literature and Art.

古文：琦请去，帝为黜陶。
现代文：韩琦请求离职，神宗为此将王陶贬职。
English: Han Zheng requested to leave his post, for which Shenzong demoted Wang Tao.

古文：永厚陵复土，琦不复入中书，坚辞位。
现代文：永厚陵复土，韩琦不再入中书任职，坚决辞去官位。
English: After the Yonghu Mausoleum was rebuilt, Han Zheng was no longer assigned to the Chinese Academy of Letters and resolutely resigned from his post.

古文：除镇安武胜军节度使、司徒兼侍中、判相州。
现代文：授职镇安武胜军节度使、司徒兼侍中、判相州。
English: Zhen Anwu, the commander of the victorious army, was awarded the post of the festival envoy, the secretary and the chamberlain, and the judge was awarded the post of the provincial governor.

古文：入对，帝泣曰： 侍中必欲去，今日已降制矣。 赐兴道坊宅一区，擢其子忠彦秘阁校理。
现代文：入朝言对，神宗流着泪说： 侍中一定要辞去，今天已经降制了。 赐予兴道坊住宅一区，提拔他的儿子韩忠彦为秘阁校理。
English: Upon entering the Imperial Court, Shintsong said through tears, "The chamberlains must resign, and today they have been demoted. He has been given the first district of the Xing Daobo residence, and his son, Han Tadahiko, has been promoted to secret keeper.

古文：琦辞两镇，乃但领淮南。
现代文：韩琦辞去两镇之职，就只兼任淮南之职。
English: After resigning from the post of the two towns, Han Wei only concurrently held the post of Huainan.

古文：帝召之，琦曰： 臣前日备员政府，所当共议。
现代文：正遇种谔擅自攻取绥州，西部边境开始骚扰，改任永兴军判官，经略陕西。韩琦说 ：边境守臣随意妄为，抛弃盟约埋下动乱的祸根，希望召集二府立即决断此事。 
English: At the time, the Western Frontier began to be harassed, and the Yongxing Army was appointed as the judge to administer Shaanxi. Han Zheng said: The border guards acted arbitrarily, abandoned the treaty, and planted the root cause of the turmoil. He hoped to convene the two governments to resolve the matter immediately.

古文：今日，藩臣也，不敢预闻。 又言： 王陶指臣为跋扈，今陛下乃举陕西兵柄授臣，复有劾臣如陶者，则臣赤族矣。 帝曰： 侍中犹未知朕意邪？ 琦初言绥州不当取，已而夏人诱杀杨定，琦复言，贼既如此，绥今不可弃。 枢密院以初议诘之，琦具论其故，卒存之。
现代文：韩琦入朝辞谢，曾公亮等正上奏言事，希望与韩琦一起言事。神宗召见他们，韩琦说： 臣下从前是朝中官员，应当与他们共同议事。如今，是守卫之臣，不敢再参预闻听。 又说： 王陶指责臣下跋扈，如今陛下将陕西用兵之权授予臣下，又有像王陶一样弹劾臣下的人，这样臣下将会成为灭族之人。 神宗说： 侍中还不明白我的意图吗？ 韩琦起初说绥州不应当攻取，不久夏人诱杀杨定，韩琦又说： 敌人既然如此，绥州如今不能放弃。 枢密院用韩琦开始的言论责难他，韩琦具体地叙述了其中的理由，最后终于保住了绥州。
English: Han Xuan's resignation to the imperial court, Zeng Gongliang, and others were making speeches, hoping to speak with Han Xuan. Shentong summoned them, and Han Xuan said: The vassals used to be officials of the imperial court and the Chinese court, and they should discuss matters with them. Nowadays, they are vassals of the guards, and they dare not listen to the forecast. He also said: Wang Tao accused the vassals of treachery, and now His Majesty has granted the right to use troops in Shaanxi to the vassals, and there are also people who impeach the vassals like Wang Tao, so the vassals will become

古文：熙宁元年七月，复请相州以归。
现代文：熙宁元年七月，再次请求从相州告归。
English: In July of the first year of Xining, he once again requested to return from Xiangzhou.

古文：河北地震、河决，徒判大名府，充安抚使，得便宜从事。
现代文：河北地震，黄河决口，调任大名府，充任安抚使，允许自己决断事情。
English: Hebei earthquake, Yellow River breach, transferred to the daimyofu, served as a pacifying envoy, allowed himself to decide things.

古文：王安石用事，出常平使者散青苗钱。琦亟言之。
现代文：王安石任宰相时，派遣常平使散发青苗钱，韩琦极力上言此事。
English: When Wang Anshi was appointed prime minister, he dispatched Changping to distribute seedling money, and Han Zheng vigorously raised the issue.

古文：帝袖其疏以示宰臣，曰： 琦真忠臣，虽在外，不忘王室。
现代文：神宗拿出他的上疏给宰相大臣们看，说： 韩琦是真正的忠臣，虽然人在朝外，仍不忘记朝廷之事。
English: Shenzong took out his epitaph and showed it to the prime ministers and ministers, saying, "Han Xuan was a true loyal subject. Although he was outside the imperial court, he never forgot the things of the imperial court.

古文：朕始谓可以利民，今乃害民如此。
现代文：朕起初认为对老百姓有利，没想到会这样祸害老百姓。
English: At first, I thought it would be beneficial to the people, but I didn't expect it to be such a scourge to the people.

古文：且坊郭安得青苗，而亦强与之乎？ 安石勃然进曰： 苟从其欲，虽坊郭何害。 明日，称疾不出。
现代文：况且坊郭怎能实行青苗，却也强行实施这一办法呢？ 王安石气愤地上奏说 ：如果是顺从他们的愿望，即使是坊郭又有什么害处。 第二天，声称有病不上朝。
English: Moreover, how could the guilds carry out seedlings, but also forcibly implement this method? Wang Anshi angrily said: If it is to comply with their wishes, even if it is the guilds, what is the harm? The next day, he claimed that he was ill and would not go to the court.

古文：当是时，新法几罢，安石复出，持前议益坚。
现代文：在这时，新法几乎废除，王安石又出任宰相，更加坚决地坚持自己的意见。
English: At this time, the new law was almost abolished, and Wang Anshi became the prime minister again, insisting on his opinion more resolutely.

古文：琦又恳奏，安石下之条例司，令其属疏驳，刊石颁天下。
现代文：韩琦又恳切地上奏，王安石将其上疏交给条例司，让其他官员上疏进行驳斥，刊石颁行天下。
English: Han Zheng earnestly played it again, Wang Anshi handed it over to the regulations department, let other officials refute it, and issued it to the world.

古文：琦申辨愈切，不克从。
现代文：韩琦更加恳切地申辩，最后仍不依从。
English: Han Zheng argued more earnestly, but still did not comply.

古文：于是请解四路安抚使，止领一路，安石欲沮琦，即从之。
现代文：这样韩琦请求解除四路安抚使，只兼管一路，王安石想阻止韩琦，立即允许了他的要求。
English: In this way, Han Zheng requested to dismiss the four-way pacifying envoy, and only concurrently manage one way. Wang Anshi wanted to stop Han Zheng and immediately allowed his request.

古文：六年，还判相州。
现代文：熙宁六年，回到京师任相州知州。
English: In the sixth year of Xi Ning, he returned to Beijing to serve as the teacher of Soshu Chizhou.

古文：契丹来求代北地，帝手诏访琦，琦奏言：
现代文：契丹派遣使者要索求代北之地，神宗亲自书写诏书询问韩琦，韩琦上奏说：
English: The Khitan sent an envoy to claim the northern land, and Shintsong personally wrote an edict to inquire of Han Yan. Han Yan replied:

古文：臣观近年以来，朝廷举事，似不以大敌为恤。
现代文： 臣下观察近年以来，朝廷考虑事情，好像不以大敌为忧虑。
English: In recent years, as observed by his subjects, the Imperial Court has been taking things into consideration, and does not seem to be worried about the great enemy.

古文：彼见形生疑，必谓我有图复燕南意，故引先发制人之说，造为衅端。
现代文：契丹见此情形一定产生怀疑，一定会认为我们有图谋收复燕南的意图，因此引用先发制人的办法，来制造祸端。
English: When the Khitan saw this, they must have been suspicious and must have thought that we were plotting to recapture Yan'nan, so they used pre-emptive measures to create a disaster.

古文：所以致疑，其事有七：高丽臣属北方，久绝朝贡，乃因商舶诱之使来，契丹知之，必谓将以图我。
现代文：导致契丹怀疑的理由，大致有七个方面：高丽臣属北方，断绝朝贡很长时间，现在以商船引诱而使之前来，契丹知道此事后，一定认为将要图谋他们。
English: There are roughly seven reasons for the suspicion of the Khitan: the Koreans belong to the north, they have been refusing tribute for a long time, and now they have been lured by merchant ships. When the Khitan knew about this, they must have thought they were going to plot against them.

古文：一也。
现代文：这是第一个方面。
English: So he gave it a thumbs down.

古文：强取吐蕃之地以建熙河，契丹闻之，必谓行将及我。
现代文：强行夺取吐蕃的土地来建置熙河，契丹听说后，一定认为不久就要侵占他们的土地。
English: After hearing about the forcible seizure of land in Tubo to build Heihe, the Khitan must have thought that they would soon occupy their land.

古文：二也。
现代文：这是第二个方面。
English: That's two.

古文：遍植榆柳于西山，冀其成长以制蕃骑。
现代文：在西山广泛种植榆柳，希望让这些榆柳成长起来，用来抵制敌人的骑兵行动。
English: Egrets were widely planted in the West Hills, and it was hoped that these egrets would grow up and be used to resist enemy cavalry operations.

古文：三也。
现代文：这是第三个方面。
English: That's three.

古文：创团保甲。四也。
现代文：建立保甲制，这是第四方面。
English: The fourth aspect is to establish an armour-plating system.

古文：诸州筑城凿池。五也。
现代文：各州县修筑城池，这是第五方面。
English: Every prefecture and county is building castle ponds. This is the fifth aspect.

古文：置都作院，颁弓刀新式，大作战车。六也。
现代文：设置都作院，颁布弓刀新样式，大造战车，这是第六方面。
English: This is the sixth aspect: setting up academies, promulgating new styles of bows and swords, and building large chariots.

古文：置河北三十七将。七也。
现代文：在河北设置三十七将，这是第七方面。
English: Thirty-seven generals will be set up in Hebei, which is the seventh aspect.

古文：契丹素为敌国，因事起疑，不得不然。
现代文：契丹一直是我们的敌对国家，由于这些事情而产生怀疑，不得不这样。
English: The Khitans have always been our enemy, and we have to be suspicious because of these things.

古文：臣昔年论青苗钱事，言者辄肆厚诬，非陛下之明，几及大戮。
现代文： 臣下以前论说青苗钱事，谏官大肆诬蔑，如果不是陛下英明，几乎被砍头。
English: In the past, vassals used to discuss the affairs of young seedlings and money, and slander eunuchs. If it were not for His Majesty's wisdom, they would almost be beheaded.

古文：自此，闻新法日下，不敢复言。
现代文：从此以后，听说新法一天天颁行，不敢再论说。
English: Since then, I have heard that the new law is being implemented day by day, and I dare not discuss it any further.

古文：今亲被诏问，事系安危，言及而隐，死有余罪。
现代文：如今被陛下亲自召见询问，事情关系到国家的安危，论及此事而有所隐瞒，死有余辜。
English: Now that His Majesty has personally summoned me for questioning, the matter is related to the safety of the country, and there is a lot of guilt in discussing the matter and concealing it.

古文：臣尝窃计，始为陛下谋者，必曰治国之本，当先聚财积谷，募兵于民，则可以鞭笞四夷。
现代文：臣下曾经私自考虑，开始替陛下谋划时，必须说治国的根本，这个根本一定要首先积聚财富和谷物，在老百姓中招募士兵，这样就可以打击四方边境的少数民族。
English: When starting to plan for his majesty, the vassal once privately considered, it is necessary to say the fundamental of governing the country. This fundamental must first accumulate wealth and grain, and recruit soldiers among the common people. In this way, it is possible to crack down on ethnic minorities on the four sides of the border.

古文：故散青苗钱，使民出利；为免役之法，次第取钱；迨置市易务，而小商细民，无所措手。
现代文：因此发散青苗钱，损失老百姓的利益，实行免役法，按照户等收取现钱；到设置市易务，小商小民，手足无措。
English: As a result, young people's money will be dispersed, the interests of the common people will be lost, the exemption law will be implemented, and cash will be collected according to households. When it comes to setting up the municipal exchange service, small merchants and small people are helpless.

古文：新制日下，更改无常，官吏茫然，不能详记，监司督责，以刻为明。
现代文：新制每天都在颁行，不断更改没有常制，官吏茫然不知，不能详细记载，监司督察责难，以严峻刻薄作为英明。
English: The new system is issued every day, there is no permanent system, officials are at a loss, cannot be recorded in detail, supervisors and inspectors are reprimanded, and severe vitriol is used as wisdom.

古文：今农怨于甽亩，商叹于道路，长吏不安其职，陛下不尽知也。
现代文：如今在农田中农民有埋怨，在商道上商人有感叹，官吏不安心本职，陛下不全部知道。
English: Nowadays, in the farmland, the farmers have complaints, in the commercial road, the merchants have sighs, the officials are uneasy about their duties, and His Majesty does not know everything.

古文：夫欲攘斥四夷，以兴太平，而先使邦本困摇，众心离怨，此则为陛下始谋者大误也。
现代文：想抗击四方边境的少数民族，来使国家出现太平，却首先使国家的根本动摇，众人埋怨离心离德，这是替陛下开始谋划的最大失误。
English: If you want to fight against the ethnic minorities on the four sides of the border to make the country appear peaceful, you will first shake the country fundamentally, and people will complain about the separation of the country from Germany. This is the biggest mistake in the beginning of planning for His Majesty.

古文：臣今为陛下计，谓宜遣使报聘，具言向来兴作，乃修备之常，岂有他意；疆土素定，悉如旧境，不可持此造端，以隳累世之好。
现代文： 臣下现在替陛下考虑，应该向契丹派遣使者友好往来，具体地说明以前所作的一切，都是平常的修防设备之举，没有其他的用意；疆界早就确定了，完全依照过去的边界，不能坚持这点来制造战乱，从而破坏多少代以来的友好关系。
English: Your subjects should now consider, on behalf of Your Majesty, sending an envoy to Khitan to establish friendly relations, and explain in detail that everything that has been done so far is nothing more than the usual repair of fortifications, with no other purpose; the borders have long been determined, completely in accordance with the past borders, and it is not possible to insist on this in order to create war, and thus destroy the friendly relations that have existed for many generations.

古文：以可疑之形，如将官之类，因而罢去。
现代文：一些可疑的举动，如设置将官之类，都因此免掉。
English: Some dubious actions, such as the appointment of generals, have thus been avoided.

古文：益养民爱力，选贤任能，疏远奸谀，进用忠鲠，使天下悦服，边备日充。
现代文：更加爱抚百姓，选择贤能之士，疏远奸佞谄谀之徒，任用忠诚耿直的大臣，使天下高兴服帖，边境防备一天比一天充实。
English: Caring more for the people, selecting capable people, distancing traitors, appointing loyal ministers, making the world happy to obey, and strengthening border defense day by day.

古文：若其果自败盟，则可一振威武，恢复故疆，摅累朝之宿愤矣。
现代文：如果契丹自己破坏盟约，这样就能够一举动用军队，收复原来的土地，发泄多少代以来的愤怒。 
English: If the Khitans themselves break the covenant, they will be able to use the army in one move to recover the original land and vent the anger that has been brewing for generations.

古文：疏上，会安石再入相，悉以所争地与契丹，东西七百里，论者惜之。
现代文：奏疏进上，正好王安石再次任宰相，将所争夺的土地全部割让给契丹，东西七百里宽广，谏者认为十分可惜。
English: As the story progressed, Wang Anshi happened to be reappointed as prime minister, and he ceded all the land he had fought for to Khitan. It was seven hundred miles wide from east to west, which was considered a great pity.

古文：八年，换节永兴军，再任，未拜而薨，年六十八。
现代文：熙宁八年，改任节制永兴军，再次上任，没有授职就死了，终年六十八岁。
English: In the eighth year of Xining, he was reassigned to the Yongxing Army, and took up the post again. He died without being appointed, at the age of sixty-eight.

古文：前一夕，大星陨于治所，枥马皆惊。
现代文：在死前的一天傍晚，在官署附近落下了一颗大星，马槽里的马都被惊了。
English: On the evening of the day before his death, a large star fell near the government office, startling all the horses in the stable.

古文：帝发哀苑中，哭之恸。
现代文：神宗在苑中致哀，哭得十分悲痛。
English: Shenzong mourned in the courtyard, weeping bitterly.

古文：辍朝三日，赐银三千两，绢三千匹，发两河卒为治冢，篆其碑曰 两朝顾命定策元勋 。
现代文：停止上朝三天，赏赐银三千两，绢三千匹，分发给两河的士兵来建造坟墓，篆写墓碑叫作 两朝顾命定策元勋 。
English: He suspended the Shang Dynasty for three days, awarded 3,000 taels of silver and 3,000 horses, and distributed them to soldiers of the two rivers to build tombs. The inscribed tombstone is called "Two Dynasties Guiding the Destiny."

古文：赠尚书令，谥曰忠献，配享英宗庙庭。
现代文：追赠尚书令，谥号叫作 忠献 ，配享英宗庙庭。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Shang Shuling, his posthumous name was Zhong Xian, and he was given the Ying Zong Temple Garden.

古文：常令其子若孙一人官于相，以护丘墓。
现代文：常年让其儿子以及孙子一人在相州任官，来保护他的坟墓。
English: He always had his son and one of his grandsons serve as officials in Sangju to protect his grave.

古文：故事，三省长官，惟尚书令为尤重，赠者必兼他官。
现代文：按以往的规定，三省的长官，只有尚书令尤其重要，追赠的人一定要兼任其他官职。
English: According to the previous regulations, the governors of the three provinces, only Shang Shuling is particularly important, and those who follow suit must also hold other official positions.

古文：至琦，乃单赠。
现代文：到韩琦时，只单独追赠一职。
English: When it came to Han Zheng, only one post was awarded separately.

古文：后又诏，虽当追策，不复更加师保，盖贵之也。
现代文：后来，又发布诏令，虽然应当追加策用，不再加用师保，这是认为韩琦高贵的缘故。
English: Later, an imperial edict was issued stating that although additional measures should be used, the use of teachers and bodyguards should no longer be used. This was due to the fact that Han Yu was considered noble.

古文：琦蚤有盛名，识量英伟，临事喜愠不见于色，论者以重厚比周勃，政事比姚崇。
现代文：韩琦早有盛名，见识气量远大，遇事喜怒不表现在脸面上，评论者认为他深沉稳重可与周勃相比，在政事方面可与姚崇相比。
English: Han Zheng has long been famous for his far-sightedness and far-sightedness, and his joy and anger do not show on his face in times of trouble. Commentators believe that he is deep and stable and can be compared with Zhou Bo, and can be compared with Yao Chong in politics.

古文：其为学士临边，年甫三十，天下已称为韩公。
现代文：他成为学士戍守边关，才刚刚三十岁，天下人已将他称作韩公。
English: He became a bachelor border guard when he was just thirty years old, and people around the world have already called him Han Gong.

古文：嘉祐、治平间，再决大策，以安社稷。
现代文：嘉、治平年间，再次决定国家大事，来安定社稷。
English: During the Jia and Jiping years, national affairs were once again decided to stabilize the society.

古文：当是时，朝廷多故，琦处危疑之际，知无不为。
现代文：在这时，朝廷有许多变故，韩琦处在危难猜疑的时候，知道的无所不做。
English: At this time, there were many changes in the imperial court. When Han Xuan was in danger and suspicious, he did everything he knew.

古文：或谏曰： 公所为诚善，万一蹉跌，岂惟身不自保，恐家无处所。 琦叹曰： 是何言也。
现代文：有人规劝他说： 您所做的确实是好事，万一有所差错，不但自身不能被保护，恐怕家人也无处生存。 韩琦感叹说 ：这是什么话。
English: Someone advised him, "What you are doing is really a good thing. If something goes wrong, not only will you not be able to protect yourself, but I'm afraid your family will have nowhere to live." Han Yan lamented, "What kind of words are these?"

古文：今臣尽力事君，死生以之。
现代文：作为人臣尽力服务于君主，生死都不计较。
English: As a courtier, I will do my best to serve the monarch, regardless of life and death.

古文：至于成败，天也，岂可豫忧其不济，遂辍不为哉。 闻者愧服。
现代文：至于成功失败，是天意，怎能预先担忧不成功，而停止不干呢。 听到这话的人都感到惭愧叹服。
English: As far as success or failure is concerned, it is the will of heaven, so how can you worry about not succeeding in advance and stop working?

古文：在魏都久，辽使每过，移牒必书名，曰： 以韩公在此故也。 忠彦使辽，辽主问知其貌类父，即命工图之，其见重于外国也如此。
现代文：在魏都很长时间，辽国使者每次经过，递交文书都写上姓名，说： 由于韩公在这里的缘故。 韩忠彦出使辽国，辽国君主询问得知他的相貌像他的父亲，就命令工匠画下来，韩琦在国外就是如此被看重。
English: It took a long time in Wei, and each time the Liao emissaries passed by, they wrote their names on the documents they submitted, saying: Because Han Gong is here. Han Tadahiko sent an envoy to Liao, and the Liao monarch inquired and learned that he looked like his father, and ordered the craftsman to paint it down. Han Yu is so valued abroad.

古文：琦天资朴忠，折节下士，无贱贵，礼之如一。
现代文：韩琦天生朴实忠诚，礼贤下士，无论贵贱，都一样以礼相待。
English: Han Zheng was simple and loyal by nature. Corporals, whether high or low, treated each other with the same courtesy.

古文：尤以奖拔人才为急，傥公论所与，虽意所不悦，亦收用之，故得人为多。
现代文：尤其以奖励提拔人才作为急务，如果舆论一致推举某人，即使心中不高兴，也接纳使用，因此深受众人爱戴。
English: In particular, it is urgent to reward and promote talents. If the public opinion unanimously nominates someone, even if they are not happy, they will accept it, so they are deeply loved by everyone.

古文：选饬群司，皆使奉法循理。其所建请，第顾义所在，无适莫心。
现代文：选举官员，都依靠法律遵循事理，他的建议请求，只要义理所在，从不迎合某人的心意。
English: Election officials rely on the law to be reasonable, and his requests for advice, as long as they are reasonable, never pander to anyone's wishes.

古文：在相位时，王安石有盛名，或以为可用，琦独不然之。
现代文：担任宰相时，王安石有盛名，有人认为可以使用他，唯独韩琦认为不可以。
English: When he served as prime minister, Wang Anshi was well-known. Some people thought that he could be used, but Han Yu thought that he could not.

古文：及守相，陛辞，神宗曰： 卿去，谁可属国者，王安石何如？ 琦曰： 安石为翰林学士则有余，处辅弼之地则不可。 上不答。
现代文：到任相州太守，向皇帝辞别，神宗说： 你离开了，谁可以主持国事，王安石怎么样？ 韩琦说： 王安石任翰林学士力量有余，处在辅弼之臣的地位则不行。 神宗没有回答。
English: When he resigned from the position of Sangju Dazhong and said goodbye to the emperor, Shenzong said: You have left, who can preside over state affairs, how about Wang Anshi? Han Zheng said: Wang Anshi has more than enough power as a scholar of Hanlin, but not in the position of an assistant minister. Shenzong did not answer.

古文：其镇大名也，魏人为立生祠。
现代文：他驻守大名时，魏人替他建立生祠。
English: When he was stationed at Daimyo, the Wei people built an ancestral shrine for him.

古文：相人爱之如父母，有斗讼，传相劝止，曰： 勿挠吾侍中也。 与富弼齐名，号称贤相，人谓之 富韩 云。
现代文：相州人像爱戴父母一样爱戴他，遇到争斗诉讼，互相劝止，说： 不要扰乱我们的侍中。 与富弼齐名，号称贤明之相，世人称之为 富韩 。
English: The people of Sangju loved him as much as they loved their parents, and when they encountered disputes and lawsuits, they tried to dissuade each other, saying, "Don't disturb our attendants."

古文：徽宗追论琦定策勋，赠魏郡王。
现代文：徽宗追论韩琦定策功勋，追赠魏郡王。
English: Huizong chased after Han Zheng's merits in dynastic politics and posthumously rewarded him with the title of Wei County King.

古文：子五人：忠彦、端彦、纯彦、粹彦、嘉彦。
现代文：有子五人：韩忠彦、韩端彦、韩纯彦、韩粹彦、韩嘉彦。
English: He had five children: Han Tadahiko, Han Tabahiko, Han Junhiko, Han Tsuchihiko, and Han Yoshihiko.

古文：端彦右赞善大夫。
现代文：韩端彦为右赞善大夫。
English: Han Tabahiko is Dr. Uzumasa.

古文：纯彦官至徽猷阁直学士。
现代文：韩纯彦官至徽猷阁直学士。
English: Han Junhan official to Huiyangge direct bachelor.

古文：忠彦世济其美，继登相位，宜矣。
现代文：韩粹彦为吏部侍郎，终龙图阁学士。
English: Han Tsuchihiko was a clerk in the personnel department and eventually graduated from Longtouge Academy.

古文：曾公亮，字明仲，泉州晋江人。
现代文：韩嘉彦与神宗之女齐国公主攀婚，拜职为驸马都尉，终瀛海军承宣使。曾公亮字明仲，泉州晋江人。
English: Han Jiahong married Princess Qigong, the daughter of Shenzong, and served as a captain of the imperial horse, eventually becoming a naval envoy. Zeng Guoliang was a native of Jinjiang, Quanzhou.

古文：举进士甲科，知会稽县。
现代文：推举为进士甲科，知会稽县。
English: He was recommended for promotion to Jikei, Chikaiji County.

古文：民田镜湖旁，每患湖溢。
现代文：老百姓在镜湖旁种田，每每担心镜湖泛滥。
English: The common people are worried about the flooding of Jinghu Lake because they grow crops next to the lake.

古文：公亮立斗门，泄水入曹娥江，民受其利。
现代文：曾公亮设置斗门，将湖水泄入曹娥江，老百姓享受到他的好处。
English: Zeng Guoliang set up a sluice gate to release the lake water into the Cao'e River, and the people enjoyed his benefits.

古文：坐父买田境中，谪监湖州酒。
现代文：由于父亲在会稽境内买田而犯有过失，贬官监湖州酒。
English: As a result of his father's negligence in buying a field within the territory of the association, he was demoted to supervisor of Huzhou liquor.

古文：久之，为国子监直讲，改诸王府侍讲。
现代文：很久以后，成为国子监侍讲，改为诸王府侍讲。
English: After a long time, he became the tutor of the son of the state, and changed to the tutor of the royal court.

古文：岁满，当用故事试馆职，独献所为文，授集贤校理、天章阁侍讲、修起居注。
现代文：一年后，应当按照旧例考试馆职，单独进献自己所写的文章，授集贤校理、天章阁侍讲、修起居注。
English: A year later, they should follow the old practice of the examination hall, and submit their own articles separately, awarding the collection of scholars, the Tianzhangge attendant lecture, and the revision of the residential note.

古文：擢天章阁待制，赐金紫。
现代文：提升天章阁待制，赐予金紫衣。
English: He was awarded the Order of the Heavenly Star and Gold and Purple Robe.

古文：先是，待制不改服。
现代文：在这之前，待制不改变服装。
English: Until then, stand by for no costume changes.

古文：仁宗面锡之，曰： 朕自讲席赐卿，所以尊宠儒臣也。 遂知制诰兼史馆修撰，为翰林学士、判三班院。
现代文：仁宗当面赐给曾公亮金紫衣，说： 朕于讲席赏赐你，是由于尊重宠爱儒臣。 于是主管制诰兼史馆修撰，为翰林学士、判三班院。
English: In the presence of Zeng Gongliang, Rinzong gave him a gold and purple robe, saying, "I am awarding you with this award because I respect and love Confucianism." Thus, he was in charge of the imperial edict and the compilation of the history museum, and he was the scholar of Hanlin and the judge of the Third Class Academy.

古文：三班吏丛猥，非赇谢不行，贵游子弟，多倚势请谒。
现代文：三班院的属吏都很鄙陋，不贿赂就辞谢不可，贵族子弟，大多依靠势力请求拜见。
English: The subordinate officials of Sanban-in are all despicable. It is impossible to resign without bribery. The sons of aristocrats mostly rely on their power to ask for an audience.

古文：公亮掇前后章程，视以从事，吏不能举手。
现代文：曾公亮选取前后章程，依据情况办事，属吏不能插手。
English: Zeng Guoliang selected the pre- and post-constitution, according to the situation, subordinate officials can not intervene.

古文：以端明殿学士知郑州，为政有能声，盗悉窜他境，至夜户不闭。
现代文：以端明殿学士知郑州，治理政事有才能因而声名在外，盗贼全部逃窜到其他州县，以至于晚上不关闭大门。
English: All the thieves fled to other states and counties, so much so that they did not close the gate at night.

古文：尝有使客亡橐中物，移书诘盗，公亮报： 吾境不藏盗，殆从者之廋耳。 索之，果然。
现代文：曾经有过客丢失橐中财物，发布文书诘查盗贼，曾公亮上报 ：我所辖境不窝藏盗贼，恐怕是同行的人隐藏起来了吧。 
English: We once had a guest who lost his belongings in the luggage, issued a document to investigate the thief, and publicly reported: My jurisdiction does not harbor thieves, I'm afraid it's my colleagues who are hiding.

古文：复入为翰林学士、知开封府。
现代文：进行搜查，果然如此。又任职翰林学士、知开封府。
English: Conducted a search, sure enough. Also served as a Hanlin scholar, Chikaifu.

古文：未几，擢给事中、参知政事。
现代文：不久，升为给事中、参知政事。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of middle-ranking official and a member of the Council of State.

古文：加礼部侍郎，除枢密使。
现代文：兼任礼部侍郎，升为枢密院。
English: He also served as a chamberlain of the Ceremonial Department and was promoted to Privy Councillor.

古文：嘉祐六年，拜吏部侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：嘉六年，授职吏部侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: In the sixth year of Jia's reign, he became a chamberlain of the conferment of posts, a disciple of the same school, and a scholar of the Jixian Palace University.

古文：公亮明练文法，更践久，习知朝廷台阁典宪，首相韩琦每咨访焉。
现代文：曾公亮明练文法，任职以后，熟悉懂得了朝廷台阁的规章，首相韩琦经常咨询访问他。
English: He had practiced grammar openly, and after taking office, he was familiar with and understood the rules of the Imperial Table. Prime Minister Han Kuo often consulted and visited him.

古文：仁宗末年，琦请建储，与公亮等共定大议。
现代文：仁宗末年，韩琦请求设置皇储，与曾公亮等共同商定大计。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Nenzong, Han Zheng requested to set up a crown treasury, and together with Zeng Gongliang and others, they agreed on a plan.

古文：密州民田产银，或盗取之，大理当以强。
现代文：密州民田盛产银子，有人偷取银子，大理寺把他们当作强盗。
English: The rice paddies of Mizhou are rich in silver. Someone stole the silver, and Dali Temple treated them as robbers.

古文：公亮曰： 此禁物也，取之虽强，与盗物民家有间矣。 固争之，遂下有司议，比劫禁物法，盗得不死。
现代文：曾公亮说： 这是禁物，偷取银子虽然是强盗行为，与从百姓家中盗取财物有区别。 为此事展开争论，于是就下达给有司议论，比照抢劫盗窃财物的法律，盗取银子不判死刑。
English: Zeng Gongliang said: "This is a forbidden thing, although stealing silver is a robbery, it is different from stealing property from people's homes." After a debate on this matter, it was ordered to have a judge discuss, according to the law of robbery and theft of property, stealing silver is not punishable by death.

古文：初，东州人多用此抵法，自是无死者。
现代文：起初，东州人大多因此法被处死刑，从这以后就没有死刑了。
English: At first, most of the Dongzhou people were sentenced to death because of this law, and since then there has been no death penalty.

古文：契丹纵人渔界河，又数通盐舟，吏不敢禁，皆谓：与之校，且生事。
现代文：契丹指使人在界河捕鱼，又多次开通盐船，官吏不敢禁止，都说：和他们较量，将要生事。
English: The Khitan ordered people to fish in the Jiehe River, and repeatedly opened salt boats. Officials did not dare to ban them, saying: "If you try to compete with them, there will be trouble."

古文：公亮言： 萌芽不禁，后将奈何？
现代文：曾公亮说： 刚开始时不禁止，以后将怎么办呢？
English: Zeng Guoliang said: If it is not prohibited at the beginning, what will happen in the future?

古文：雄州赵滋勇而有谋，可任也。 使谕以指意，边害讫息。
现代文：雄州赵滋勇敢有计谋，能够胜任。 派人告诉赵滋，边境祸害终于平息了。
English: Xiongzhou Zhao Zi is brave, resourceful and competent. Send someone to tell Zhao Zi that the border scourge has finally subsided.

古文：英宗即位，加中书侍郎兼礼部尚书，寻加户部尚书。
现代文：英宗即位，任中书侍郎兼礼部尚书，不久兼任户部尚书。
English: When Emperor Eiso ascended to the throne, he was appointed chushijiro (chamberlain) and Shosho (honorary secretary) of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and soon also Shosho (honorary secretary) of the Ministry of Household.

古文：帝不豫，辽使至不能见，命公亮宴于馆，使者不肯赴。
现代文：仁宗身体不适，辽国使者到来不能接见，让曾公亮在馆中设宴，使者不愿赴宴。
English: Renzong was unwell and could not receive the Liao envoy when he arrived, so Zeng Guoliang held a banquet in the hall, but the envoy did not want to go to the banquet.

古文：公亮质之曰： 锡宴不赴，是不虔君命也。
现代文：曾公亮质问使者说： 赐宴不赴，这是对君主的不恭敬。
English: Zeng Guoliang questioned the messenger and said, "It is disrespectful to the sovereign to refuse to attend the banquet.

古文：人主有疾，而必使亲临，处之安乎？ 使者即就席。
现代文：君主有病，却一定要让他亲自设宴，能处之安然吗？ 使者于是赴宴。
English: The monarch is ill, but he must be allowed to host the banquet himself. Will he be able to handle it well? The envoy therefore goes to the banquet.

古文：神宗即位，加门下侍郎兼吏部尚书。
现代文：神宗即皇位，加门下侍郎兼吏部尚书。
English: Shinso, i.e. the imperial throne, was accompanied by his attendant and official, Shosho.

古文：熙宁二年，进昭文馆大学士，累封鲁国公。
现代文：熙宁二年，任昭文馆大学士，累封为鲁国公。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he was appointed as a scholar of the Shobunkwan University, and was awarded the title of Prince of Lu.

古文：以老避位，三年九月，拜司空兼侍中、河阳三城节度使、集禧观使。
现代文：由于年老请求离职，熙宁三年九月，授职司空兼侍中、河阳三城节度使、集禧观使。
English: Due to his request to leave the post due to his old age, in September of the third year of Xi Ning, he was awarded the post of air vice marshal and attendant, the festival envoy to the three cities of Heyang, and the jubilee observation envoy.

古文：明年，起判永兴军。
现代文：第二年，判永兴军。
English: The following year, Yongxingjun was sentenced to death.

古文：先是，庆卒叛，既伏诛，而余党越佚，自陕以西皆警备。
现代文：在这之前，庆州士兵叛乱，被诛杀，但余党到处逃跑，从陕西以西都警惕戒备。
English: Prior to this, Gyeongju soldiers rebelled and were beaten to death, but the rest of the party fled everywhere, and everyone from Shaanxi to the west was on alert.

古文：阅义勇，益边兵，移内地租赋，人情骚然。
现代文：检阅义勇，增加边境守兵，移内地租赋，人情骚动。
English: There was a review of volunteers, an increase in border guards, the transfer of land leases to the interior, and social unrest.

古文：公亮一镇以静，次第奏罢之，专务裁抑冗费。
现代文：曾公亮镇静对待，依次上奏罢免，专门裁减抑制多余的费用。
English: Zeng Guoliang calmly treated, successively promoted and dismissed, and specially reduced and curbed unnecessary expenses.

古文：长安豪喜造飞语，声言营卒怨减削，谋以上元夜结外兵为乱，邦人大恐。
现代文：长安豪强喜欢制造谣言，声称士兵埋怨削减费用，打算在元宵夜勾结其他军队发动叛乱，邦人十分恐慌。
English: Chang'an Haoqiang liked to create rumors, claiming that soldiers complained about cost cuts and planned to collude with other armies to launch a rebellion on the night of the Lantern Festival. The people were very panicked.

古文：或劝毋出游，公亮不为动，张灯纵观，与宾佐竟夕乃归。
现代文：有人劝曾公亮不要出游，曾公亮不为所动，张灯尽情观赏，和宾客佐僚直到傍晚才回来。
English: Some people advised Zeng Guoliang not to travel, Zeng Guoliang was not moved, Zhang Lan watched as much as possible, and the guests and advisors did not return until the evening.

古文：居一岁，还京师。旋以太傅致仕。
现代文：任职一年，回到京师，很快就以太傅致仕。
English: After serving for one year, he returned to the Beijing division and was soon promoted to ether fu division.

古文：元丰元年卒，年八十。
现代文：元丰元年，去世，终年八十岁。
English: He died at the age of eighty in the first year of Fengyuan.

古文：帝临哭，辍朝三日，赠太师、中书令，谥曰宣靖，配享英宗庙庭。
现代文：神宗临丧哭泣，停止上朝三天，追赠太师、中书令，谥号为宣靖，配享英宗庙庭。
English: The Shenzong wept at the funeral, stopped worshipping the emperor for three days, posthumously bestowed the title of Grand Master, the Chinese Calligraphy Order, the posthumous name of Xuanjing, and enjoyed the temple garden of the Yingzong.

古文：及葬，御篆其碑首曰 两朝顾命定策亚勋之碑 。
现代文：到下葬时，神宗亲自篆写了碑首叫作 两朝顾命定策亚勋之碑 。
English: At the time of the burial, Shenzong personally inscribed the head of the monument, which is called the Monument of the Two Dynasties.

古文：公亮方厚庄重，沈深周密，平居谨绳墨，蹈规矩；然性吝啬，殖货至钜万，帝尝以方张安世。
现代文：曾公亮端庄忠厚深沉，办事细致周密，平时谨守礼仪，遵守规矩，但性情吝啬，积累财富达巨万，神宗曾经将他比作张安世。
English: Once he was a public figure, dignified, loyal, profound, meticulous and thorough in his work, usually adhering to etiquette and rules, but he had a stingy temperament and accumulated huge wealth. Shenzong once compared him to Zhang Anshi.

古文：初荐王安石，及同辅政，知上方向之，阴为子孙计，凡更张庶事，一切听顺，而外若不与之者。
现代文：起初推荐王安石，到和他一起辅政，才察知神宗正袒护王安石，暗中替子孙谋划，大凡改变行事计划，都听从王安石，朝外人士似乎并不赞成。
English: At first, he recommended Wang Anshi, and only when he joined him in supporting the government did he discover that Shenzong Zhengjun protected Wang Anshi, secretly planned for his children and grandchildren, and obeyed Wang Anshi whenever he changed his action plan. People outside the DPRK did not seem to approve of this.

古文：尝遣子孝宽参其谋，至上前略无所异，于是帝益信任安石。
现代文：曾派遣他的儿子曾孝宽为其谋划，到神宗面前陈述与王安石没有什么差别，这样神宗更加信任王安石。
English: He had sent his son, Zeng Xiaokuan, to present to the Shenzong that there was no difference between him and Wang Anshi, so that the Shenzong would trust Wang Anshi more.

古文：安石德其助己，故引擢孝宽至枢密以报之。
现代文：王安石为了感激他帮助自己，因而引见提拔曾孝宽到枢密院来报答他。
English: Wang Anshi thanked him for helping him and rewarded him by promoting Zeng Xiaokuan to the Privy Council.

古文：论功，进显谟阁直学士，又加龙图阁学士。
现代文：苏轼曾经严肃地责备曾公亮不能救正补弊，曾公亮说： 神宗和王介甫就像一个人，这是天意。 
English: Su Shi once seriously reproached Zeng Gongliang for not being able to remedy the shortcomings. Zeng Gongliang said: Shenzong and Wang Jiefu are like one person, this is the will of heaven.

古文：卒，年六十五，赠通议大夫。
现代文：世人讥讽曾公亮用这种办法保持禄位和宠幸。儿子曾孝宽，侄子曾孝广、曾孝蕴。
English: The world ridiculed Zeng Gongliang for using this method to maintain his position and favors. His son was Zeng Xiaokang, and his nephews were Zeng Xiaokang and Zeng Xiaokun.

古文：陈升，之字暘叔，建州建阳人。
现代文：陈升之字硃叔，建州建阳人。
English: Chen Shengzhi's character is uncle, Jianzhou Jianyang people.

古文：举进士，历知封州、汉阳军，入为监察御史、右司谏，改起居舍人、知谏院。
现代文：推举为进士，历知封州、汉阳军，入京师任监察御史、右司谏，改任起居舍人、知谏院。
English: He was elected as a member of the Jin Shi, and served in the Zhifuzhou and Hanyang armies. He entered Beijing as an inspector of imperial history and the right secretary, and was reappointed as a resident of Zhishu and Zhishuin.

古文：时俗好藏去交亲尺牍，有讼，则转相告言，有司据以推诘。
现代文：当时风俗喜欢拿走给亲属的书信，遇有诉讼，则辗转互相告发，有司就依此加以推理诘查。
English: At that time, the custom was to take away letters to relatives. In the event of a lawsuit, they would turn around and inform on each other, and the division would use this as a basis for further investigation.

古文：升之谓： 此告讦之习也，请禁止之。 又言： 三馆为搢绅华途，近者用人益轻，遂为贵游进取之阶，请严其选。 诏自今臣僚乞子孙恩者，毋得除馆阁。
现代文：陈升之说： 这是告奸的习俗，请求禁止它。 又说： 三馆是士大夫们光明的前途，近来用人更加轻率，于是成了贵族高门进取的台阶，请严格进行选举。 诏令从今以后臣僚乞请子孙恩荫者，不得授以馆阁之职。
English: Chen Shengzhi said, "This is the custom of telling treason, and we request that it be prohibited." He also said, "The three mansions are a bright future for the scholars and magistrates. Recently, the employment of people has become more reckless, so it has become a step for the aristocrats to advance. Please conduct the election strictly." The edict decreed that from now on, the ministers who begged the favor of their children and grandchildren would not be awarded the post of the cabinet.

古文：著作佐郎王瓘遇殿帅郭承祐于道，诃怒不下马，执送府。
现代文：著作佐郎王馞在路上与殿帅郭承相遇，郭诃责怒骂王馞没下马行礼，将他抓送官府。
English: In the book "Saro," Wang Yao met with the courtier Guo Cheng on the road. Guo Yao scolded Wang Yao for not dismounting and saluting, and sent him to the government office.

古文：升之言，京官不宜为节度使下马，因劾承祐骄恣，解其任。
现代文：陈升之说 ：京官不应给节度使下马。 于是弹劾郭承骄横任行，解除其所任官职。
English: Chen Shengzhi said, "Beijing officials should not give up the reins of power to Xi Jinping," so he impeached Guo Chengyao for acting arrogantly and relieved him of his official duties.

古文：张尧佐缘后宫亲，为三司使，寻为宣徽使；内侍王守忠领两镇留后，求升正班；御史张昪补郡，久不召；彭思永论事，令穷问所从来；唐介击宰相，斥岭南：升之皆极谏。
现代文：张尧佐由于与后宫亲近，任三司使，不久任宣徽使；内侍王守忠统领两镇留后，请求升为正班；御史张补任郡官，长久不被召见；彭思永论事，让询问事情的详细原委；唐介攻击宰相，被贬斥岭南；陈升之都极力进谏。
English: Because of his closeness to the harem, Zhang Xunzu was appointed as the Third Divisional Envoy, and soon became the Envoy of the Great Seal; after the inner servant Wang Shou Zhong stayed to lead the two towns, he requested to be promoted to the regular class; the historian Zhang was appointed as a county official, and was not called for a long time; Peng Siyong discussed the matter, and let the detailed original committee inquire about the matter; Tang Jie attacked the prime minister, and was rebuked by Lingnan; Chen Xunzidu tried his best to advance.

古文：迁侍御史知杂事。
现代文：升任侍御史知杂事。
English: He was promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：凡任言责五年，所上数十百事，然持论不坚，以故不尽施用。
现代文：总共担任言官五年，上奏数十百件事，但持论不坚决，因此没有全部实施采用。
English: In total, he served as a speaker for five years and reported on tens of hundreds of issues, but his views were not firm, so he did not implement all of them.

古文：擢天章阁待制、河北都转运使，知瀛州、真定府，加龙图阁直学士，复知谏院。
现代文：升任天章阁待制、河北都转运使，知瀛州、真定府，兼龙图阁直学士，又知谏院。
English: He was promoted to Tianzhangge Waiting System, Hebei Capital Transfer Envoy, Zhishangzhou, Zhendingfu, and Longtuge Direct Bachelor, and Zhishangyuan.

古文：上言： 天下州县治否，朝廷不能周知，悉付之转运使。
现代文：仁宗说： 天下州县是否得到了治理，朝廷不能完全清楚，将这些全部交给转运使管理。
English: Nanzong said: The imperial court cannot be completely clear whether the world's prefectures and counties have been governed, and all of them should be handed over to the management of the transit envoy.

古文：今选用不精，又无考课，非暗滞罢懦，则凌肆刻薄，所以疾苦愁叹，雍圩上闻。
现代文：如今选用的人才不精干，又没有考核督查，不是愚昧无能懦弱，就是任意欺凌刻薄之徒，因此疾苦忧愁叹息，都被阻塞，皇帝不能听到。
English: Nowadays, the talents selected are not competent, and there is no assessment and supervision. They are either stupid, incompetent, cowardly, or arbitrarily bullying and mean. Therefore, their sufferings, sorrows, and sighs are blocked, and the emperor cannot hear them.

古文：必欲垂意元元，宜从此始。 乃诏翰林学士承旨孙抃、权御史中丞张昪，与升之同领磨勘转运使及提点刑狱功务。
现代文：一定要向全国民众显示朝廷的主张，应该从这里开始。 于是诏令翰林学士承旨孙扌卞、权御史中丞张，与陈升之同时主管磨勘转运使及提点刑狱事务。
English: It is necessary to show the people of the whole country what the imperial court stands for, and this is where we should start. Therefore, Hanlin Biao was ordered by the emperor to succeed Sun Yat-sen and Zhang Zhongzheng, and to be in charge of the inspection and transportation of prisoners and the establishment of penal institutions.

古文：升之初为谏官时，尝请抑绝内降，诏许有司执奏勿下。
现代文：陈升之初任谏官时，曾经请求抑制断绝由宫内降旨，诏令允许有司执掌上奏不下达。
English: When Chen Sheng was first appointed as eunuch, he had requested the suppression of the imperial edict from the court, and the imperial edict allowed the emperor to hold the reins of power and not to issue the edict.

古文：至是，申言之。
现代文：到这时，进一步申明论说。
English: At this point, further assertions are made.

古文：诏委三省劾正其罪，仍揭于朝堂。
现代文：诏令委托三省揭发纠正其罪行，仍然在朝堂揭露。
English: The imperial edict entrusted the three provinces to expose and rectify their crimes, and they are still being exposed in the imperial court.

古文：文彦博乞罢相，升之虑枢密使贾昌朝复用，疏论其邪，昌朝卒罢去。
现代文：文彦博乞求免除宰相职务，陈升之担心枢密使贾昌朝再被任用，上疏论述其邪恶，贾昌朝终于罢官免职。
English: Fumihiko Bo begged to be relieved of the post of prime minister, Chen Shengzhi worried that the confidential envoy Jia Changchun would be reappointed, Shangsuo discussed his evil, and Jia Changchun was finally dismissed.

古文：迁枢密直学士、知开封府。
现代文：升任枢密院直学士、知开封府。
English: Promoted to the post of Privy Council Direct Bachelor, Chikaifu.

古文：岁余，拜枢密副使。
现代文：年底，授职枢密副使。
English: At the end of the year, he was appointed Deputy Privy Counsellor.

古文：于是谏官御史唐介、范师道、吕诲、赵抃、王陶交章论升之阴结宦者，故得大用。
现代文：这样谏官御史唐介、范师道、吕诲、赵扌卞、王陶相继上章议论陈升之暗中交结宦官，因此得到重用。
English: In this way, the eunuchs Goshi Tangsuke, Fan Shidao, Lu Yan, Zhao Zi, and Wang Tao successively discuss Chen Sheng's secret relationship with eunuchs in the last chapter, and therefore get heavy use.

古文：仁宗以示升之，升之丐去。
现代文：仁宗将这些上章拿给陈升之看，陈升之乞求离职。
English: Rinzong showed these chapters to Chen Shengzhi, and Chen Shengzhi begged to resign.

古文：帝谓辅臣曰： 朕选用执政，岂容内臣预议邪。 乃两罢之。
现代文：仁宗对辅佐大臣说 ：朕选用执政者，怎能容许内臣干预议论邪恶。 于是双方都被罢免。
English: Nintsune said to the assistant minister, "I have chosen the person in power, how can I allow a vassal to interfere and speak evil?" and both of them were dismissed.

古文：以升之为资政殿学士、知定州，徙太原府。
现代文：以陈升之为资政殿学士、知定州，调往太原府。
English: Chen Sheng was assigned to Taiyuan Prefecture as a scholar of the Academy of Capital and Political Affairs and a scholar of Dingzhou.

古文：治平二年，复拜枢密副使。
现代文：治平二年，又授职枢密副使。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he was also appointed as a Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：神宗立，以母老请郡，为观文殿学士、知越州。
现代文：神宗即位，以母亲年老为由请求回归郡县，为观文殿学士、知越州。
English: Shinso ascended to the throne, pleaded to return to the county on the grounds of his mother's old age, and became a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and the Chihetsu Province.

古文：熙宁元年，徙许，中道改大名府，过阙，留知枢密院。
现代文：熙宁元年，调往许州，中道改任大名府，路过京师，留在京师知枢密院。
English: In the first year of Xining, he was transferred to Huzhou, and the middle way was changed to the daimyofu. He passed by the Beijing division and stayed in the Beijing division of the Privy Council.

古文：故事，枢密使与知院事不并置。
现代文：按照旧例，枢密院与知院事不共同设置。
English: According to the old practice, the Privy Council and the Governor-in-Council are not set up jointly.

古文：时文彦博、吕公著既为使，帝以升之三辅政，欲稍异其礼，故特命之。
现代文：这时文彦博、吕公弼已为枢密院使，神宗以陈升之辅政，想逐步变异一些礼仪，因而特地加以任命。
English: At this time, Fumihiko and Ryukongyo had already become envoys of the Privy Council, and Shinso wanted to gradually change some of the etiquette with the help of Chen Sheng, so he specially appointed him.

古文：明年，同制置三司条例司，与王安石共事。
现代文：第二年，同制置三司条例司，和王安石共同处理朝事。
English: In the second year, the same system set up the three departments of the regulations department, and Wang Anshi jointly dealt with the imperial court affairs.

古文：数月，拜中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：数月后，授职中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: A few months later, Shumon Shitai Shoji and Shikenden Daigaku Shoshi were conferred.

古文：升之既相，遂请免条例司，其说以为宰相无所不统，所领职事，岂可称司。
现代文：陈升之任宰相后，就请求免掉条例司，认为宰相无所不统，所统职事，又怎能称司。
English: After Chen Shengzhi was appointed prime minister, he requested to get rid of the regulations department, believing that the prime minister is all-encompassing, all-encompassing, and how can it be called a department.

古文：安石曰： 古之六卿，即今之执政，有司马、司徒、司空，各名一职，何害于理？ 升之曰： 若制置百司条例则可，但今制置三司一官，则不可。 由是忤安石，称疾归卧逾十旬，帝数敦谕，乃出。
现代文：王安石说 ：古代的六卿，就是如今的宰相，有司马、司徒、司空，各占一职，于事理有什么危害呢？ 陈升之说 ：如果制置百司条例是可以的，但如今设置的是制置三司官职，则不行。 由此得罪了王安石，声称有病回家休养三个多月，神宗多次敦促告谕，才重新归职。
English: Wang Anshi said, "In ancient times, the six nobles, that is, today's chancellors, Sima, Sitou, and Siku, each occupied one post, so what is the harm in the matter?" Chen Shenzhi said, "If it is possible to establish the regulation of the hundred officials, but it is not possible to establish the three official posts. Wang Anshi was offended by this, claiming that he was sick and went home to recuperate for more than three months, and Shenzong repeatedly urged him to give notice before returning to his post.

古文：会母丧，去位；终制，召为枢密使。
现代文：正好母亲去世需服丧，离职回家；服丧完后，奉召任枢密使。
English: Just as his mother died, he had to go home for the funeral. After the funeral, he was called to serve as a Privy Counsellor.

古文：足疾不能立朝，七年，冬祀，又不能相礼。
现代文：因有脚病不能站立上朝，熙宁七年，冬季祭祀，陈升之又不能赞礼。
English: Due to a foot disease, he could not stand up for the winter sacrifice in the 7th year of the Shang Dynasty and the 7th year of the Xining Dynasty.

古文：拜镇江军节度使、同平章事、判扬州，封秀国公。
现代文：授职镇江军节度使、同平章事、判扬州，封为秀国公。
English: He was awarded the post of Zhenjiang Military Commander, Tongping, Yangzhou, and named Hsiu Guogong.

古文：卒，年六十九。赠太保、中书令，谥曰成肃。
现代文：去世，终年六十九岁，追赠太保、中书令，谥号叫作成肃。
English: He died at the age of sixty-nine, posthumously awarded the title of Taibo and Chushirei, and his posthumous name was Zuoxi Su.

古文：升之深狡多数，善傅会以取富贵。
现代文：陈升之老谋深算很有心计，善于逢迎以取悦富贵。
English: Chen Sheng's strategy is very clever, and he is good at pleasing the rich.

古文：王安石用事，患正论盈庭，引升之自助。
现代文：王安石任宰相，担心议论满廷，引见陈升之辅佐自己。
English: Wang Anshi was appointed prime minister, worried about the discussion in the court, and introduced himself as Chen Sheng's assistant.

古文：升之心知其不可，而竭力为之用，安石德之，故使先己为相。
现代文：陈升之心里明白不能胜任，却尽力为王安石所用，王安石为了感激他，因而让他比自己先任宰相。
English: Chen Shengzhi knew in his heart that he was not competent, but he tried his best to be used by Wang Anshi. In order to thank him, Wang Anshi made him prime minister ahead of himself.

古文：甫得志，即求解条例司，又时为小异，阳若不与之同者。
现代文：刚一受到重用，就请求解除条例司，又不时的产生一些小分歧，表面上看来与王安石有矛盾。
English: As soon as he was reappointed, he requested the dissolution of the regulations department, and from time to time there were some minor disagreements. On the surface, there seems to be a contradiction with Wang Anshi.

古文：世以是讥之，谓之 筌相 。
现代文：世人因此讥讽他，称他为 筌相 。
English: As a result, the world mocked him and called him a phony.

古文：升之初名旭，避神宗嫌名，改焉。
现代文：陈升之起初叫陈旭，由于避神宗名之讳，改为升之。
English: At first, Chen Sheng was called Chen Xu, but he changed his name to Sheng because he wanted to avoid the stigma of being a member of a religious sect.

古文：吴充，字冲卿，建州浦城人。
现代文：吴充字冲卿，建州浦城人。
English: Wu Chongzhi Chongqing, a native of Jianzhou Pucheng.

古文：未冠举进士，与兄育、京、方皆高第。
现代文：还未成年，就推举为进士，与其兄长吴育、吴京、吴方都考中高榜。
English: When he was still a minor, he was elected as a junior scholar, and he and his older brothers Wu Yu, Wu Jing, and Wu Fang all ranked high in the middle school entrance examination.

古文：调谷熟主簿，入为国子监直讲、吴王宫教授。
现代文：调任谷熟主簿，进入京师任国子监直讲、吴王宫教授。
English: He was transferred to the main book of Gu Rong, entered the Beijing division as a direct lecturer of Gu Zi Guan, and became a professor of Wu Wang Gong.

古文：等辈多与宗室狎，充齿最少，独以严见惮，相率设席受经。充作《六箴》以献，曰视，曰听，曰好，曰学，曰进德，曰崇俭。
现代文：与他年纪相当的人大多和宗室玩狎，显得不庄重，吴充年龄最小，却由于严肃而使人敬畏，相继设席受经，吴充作《六箴》进献朝廷，叫作视、听、好、学、进德、崇俭。
English: Most people of the same age as him played pranks on the family, appearing undignified. Wuchong was the youngest, but he was revered for his seriousness. He successively set up a seat to receive scriptures. Wuchong presented the "Six Precepts" to the imperial court, called "Look, listen, be good, learn, be virtuous, and be frugal."

古文：仁宗命缮写赐皇族，英宗在藩邸，书之坐右。
现代文：仁宗让人缮写赐给皇族子弟，英宗在藩邸，将《六箴》书写在左右。
English: Ninsong had a copy of the book given to the royal children, while Yingzong wrote the "Six Precepts" on the right and left sides of the book at the residence of the clan.

古文：除集贤校理、判吏部南曹。
现代文：升任集贤校理、判吏部南曹。
English: He was promoted to the position of Jixian proofreader and Nanzao of the judge department.

古文：选人胡宗尧者，翰林学士宿之子，坐小累，不得改京官。
现代文：选用了胡宗尧，他是翰林学士胡宿之子，由于犯有小的过失，不能改任京官。
English: He chose Hu Zongyao, the son of Hanlin Scholar Hu Shuku, who could not be reappointed as Beijing official due to a minor fault.

古文：判铨欧阳修为之请，仇家谮修以为党宿，诏出修同州。
现代文：主管官吏选拔的欧阳修替他求情，一些仇家诬陷欧阳修，认为他袒护胡宿，诏令欧阳修离开京师到同州任职。
English: Ouyang Xiu, who was selected by the officials in charge, interceded on his behalf. Some enemies framed Ouyang Xiu, believing that he was protecting Huju, and ordered Ouyang Xiu to leave Beijing to serve in the same state.

古文：充言： 修以忠直擢侍从，不宜用谗逐。
现代文：吴充说 ：欧阳修由于忠诚正直得以提拔为侍从，不应当相信谗言而驱逐出京师。
English: Wu Chong said: Ouyang Xiu was promoted to attendant because of his loyalty and honesty. He should not believe the insults and be expelled from the Beijing Division.

古文：若以为私，则臣愿与修同贬。 于是修复留，而充改知太常礼院。
现代文：如果认为这是偏袒欧阳修的话，臣下愿意与欧阳修一起被贬。 这样欧阳修又留在京师，吴充改知太常礼院。
English: If this was seen as favoring Ouyang Xiu, the vassals were willing to be demoted together with Ouyang Xiu, so that Ouyang Xiu would remain in Beijing and Wuchong would be transferred to the Chizhang Academy.

古文：张贵妃薨，治丧越式，判寺王洙命吏以印纸行文书，不令同僚知。
现代文：张贵妃死，办理丧事的规模超过了既定的等级，判寺王洙让属吏用印纸来发布文书，不让其他同僚知道。
English: After the death of Zhang Guifei, the scale of the funeral exceeded the established level, and Wang Yao of the temple ordered his subordinates to use printed paper to issue documents without letting other colleagues know.

古文：充移开封治吏罪，忤执政意，出知高邮军。
现代文：吴充下移文于开封府惩治王洙属吏之罪，违背了执政者的意图，离开京师知高邮军。
English: Wu Chenggong transferred the document to Kaifeng to punish the crime of Wang Xi's subordinate officials, violating the intention of the ruling party and leaving the Beijing Shizhi High Post Army.

古文：还为群牧判官、开封府推官，历知陕州，京西、淮南、河东转运使。
现代文：回京师后任群牧判官、开封府推官，相继知陕州、京西、淮南、河东转运使。
English: After returning to Beijing, he served as the judge of the Qunmu and the governor of Kaifeng, and successively served as the transfer envoy of Shaanxi, West Beijing, Huainan and Hedong.

古文：英宗立，数问充所在，会入觐，语其为吴王宫教授时事，嘉劳之。
现代文：英宗即位，多次问吴充在哪里，正好入朝觐见英宗，说到他曾经任吴王宫教授之事，嘉奖慰抚他。
English: When Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, he repeatedly asked where Wu Cheng was. Just as he entered the imperial court, he met Emperor Yingzong, who told him that he had once been a professor at King Wu's palace, and consoled him with praise.

古文：寻权盐铁副使。
现代文：不久暂代盐铁副使。
English: Soon he became the temporary vice-envoy for salt and iron.

古文：熙宁元年，知制诰。
现代文：熙宁元年，知制诰。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Chisei was founded.

古文：神宗谕以任用意，曰： 先帝知卿久矣。
现代文：神宗告知将要任用他的意思，说： 先帝了解你很久了。 
English: Shenzong announced his intention to appoint him, saying: The late emperor has known you for a long time.

古文：遂同知谏院。
现代文：于是同知谏院。
English: As a result, Tongzhi Yaoin came into being.

古文：言： 士大夫亲没，或藁殡数十年，伤败风化，宜限期使葬。 诏著为令。
现代文：吴充说 ：士大夫亲人死后，有的用稻草停放灵柩达数十年，败坏风俗有伤教化，应当规定期限让他们埋葬。 诏令吴充写成律令。
English: Wu Chong said: After the death of a scholar-official's relative, some people have used straw to park the coffin for decades, corrupting customs and undermining education, and a time limit should be set for them to be buried.

古文：河北水灾、地震，为安抚使。
现代文：河北发生水灾、地震，吴充任安抚使。
English: Floods and earthquakes occurred in Hebei, and Wu Zheng was appointed as a pacifying envoy.

古文：使还，王安石参知政事，充子安持，其婿也，引嫌解谏职，知审刑院，权三司使，为翰林学士。
现代文：后回到京师，王安石任参知政事，吴充的儿子吴安持，是王安石的女婿，为避免嫌疑解除谏职，知审刑院，暂代三司使，任翰林学士。
English: After returning to Beijing, Wang Anshi was appointed to the post of political adviser to the governor, Wu Anzhi, the son of Wu Chong, was the son-in-law of Wang Anshi, and in order to avoid suspicion, he was relieved of his duties, he was transferred to the Criminal Court of the People's Republic of China, temporarily became the third envoy, and was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：三年，拜枢密副使。
现代文：熙宁三年，授职枢密副使。
English: In the third year of Xi Ning, he was promoted to the post of Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：王韶取洮州，蕃酋木征遁去，充请招还故地，縻以爵秩，使自领所部，永为外臣，无庸列置郡县，殚财屈力。
现代文：王韶夺取洮州，部族酋长木征逃离，吴充请求收回旧地，用官爵来加以安抚，让他们各自统领自己的部落，永远为外臣，不要建置郡县，耗尽财物和力量。
English: Wang Qian captured Zhangzhou, the tribal chief Mu Zheng fled, Wu Chong requested the return of the old land, and used the nobility to appease them. Let them each lead their own tribe, and always be a foreign minister. Do not build counties and counties, and exhaust wealth and strength.

古文：时方以开拓付韶，充言不用。
现代文：这时正将开拓洮州交付给王韶，吴充的建议没有采用。
English: At this time, the development of Ganzhou was being handed over to Wang Qi, and Wu Zheng's suggestion was not adopted.

古文：八年，进检校太傅、枢密使。
现代文：熙宁八年，任检校太傅、枢密使。
English: In the eighth year of the Heian period, he was appointed inspector of schools and privy councilor.

古文：充虽与安石连姻，而心不善其所为，数为帝言政事不便。
现代文：吴充与王安石虽然是姻亲关系，但心中并不认为王安石所做都好，曾多次向神宗说王安石执政办事的不妥。
English: Although Wu Chong and Wang Anshi were relatives by marriage, he did not think that everything Wang Anshi did was good in his heart. He had repeatedly said to Shentong that Wang Anshi's governance was not appropriate.

古文：帝察其中立无与，欲相之，安石去，遂代为同中书门下平章事、监修国史。
现代文：神宗察知他不偏袒任何一方完全中立，想让他任宰相，王安石去宰相职，就让吴充代为同中书门下平章事、监修国史。
English: Shenzong sensed that he did not favor any side and was completely neutral, and wanted him to be appointed prime minister, and Wang Anshi to be prime minister, so he asked Wu Chengdao to be a scholar at the same time and supervise the national history.

古文：充欲有所变革，乞召还司马光、吕公著、韩维、苏颂，乃荐孙觉、李常、程颢等数十人。
现代文：吴充想要有所变化革新，乞求召回司马光、吕公著、韩维、苏颂，于是推荐孙觉、李常、程颢等数十人。
English: Wu Chong wanted to make some changes and innovations, and begged for the recall of Sima Guang, Lyu Gongzhu, Han Wei, Su Song, and recommended Sun Jue, Li Chang, Cheng Yao and dozens of others.

古文：光亦以充可告语，与之书曰： 自新法之行，中外汹汹。
现代文：司马光也认为吴充可以以言相告，给他写信说： 从新法实行后，朝廷内外怨声载道。
English: Sima Guang also thought that Wu Chong could tell him by word of mouth, and wrote to him saying: After the new law was implemented, there was a lot of grumbling inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：民困于烦苛，迫于诛敛，愁怨流离，转死沟壑。
现代文：老百姓受到各种苛捐杂税的重负，被迫自杀死亡，愁苦埋怨到处流浪，辗转死在山沟深谷。
English: The common people were burdened with all kinds of harsh taxes and surcharges, forced to commit suicide and die, wandered everywhere in sorrow and complaint, and died in the deep ravines of the mountains.

古文：日夜引领，冀朝廷觉悟，一变敝法，几年于兹矣。
现代文：日日夜夜翘首以待，希望朝廷能够觉察醒悟，一举改变这种坏法，像这样将近一年了。
English: I've been waiting for this day and night, hoping that the imperial court would wake up and change this bad law. It's been like this for almost a year.

古文：今日救天下之急，苟不罢青苗、免役、保甲、市易，息征伐之谋，而欲求成效，犹恶汤之沸，而益薪鼓橐也。
现代文：如今要挽救天下的危机，如果不能罢除青苗、免役、保甲、市易，停止征伐的打算，却想收有成效，好像不想让水开，却不断地添柴鼓动风箱一样。
English: Nowadays, if we want to save the crisis of the world, if we can't get rid of young seedlings, exemption from military service, guarantee of armor, and easy market, the plan to stop the conquest, but want to get results, it seems that we don't want to let the water boil, but constantly add firewood to agitate the bellows.

古文：欲去此五者，必先别利害，以悟人主之心。
现代文：要罢免这五项措施，必须先分别利害，从而使神宗心里觉悟。
English: In order to revoke these five measures, it is necessary to distinguish the interests first, so as to awaken the mind of the Shinzō.

古文：欲悟人主之心，必先开言路。
现代文：要做到让神宗觉悟，必须打开上言之路。
English: In order to achieve the enlightenment of Shenzong, it is necessary to open the road to Shangzheng.

古文：今病虽已深，犹未至膏肓，失今不治，遂为痼疾矣。 充不能用。
现代文：如今危害虽然十分严重，但还没有到无法挽救的地步，如果失去了现在的机会不进行整治，就会成为难以治愈的顽疾。 吴充没有采用。
English: Today, although the harm is very serious, it has not yet reached the point of being unsalvageable. If the current opportunity is lost without rectification, it will become an incurable disease. Wu Chong did not adopt.

古文：王珪与充并相，忌充，阴掣其肘。
现代文：王珪与吴充共同担任宰相，嫉妒吴充，暗中牵制吴充。
English: Wang Qian and Wu Chong jointly served as prime minister, jealous of Wu Chong, secretly restraining Wu Chong.

古文：而充素恶蔡确，确治相州狱，捕安持及亲戚、官属考治，欲钩致充语，帝独明其亡他。
现代文：吴充向来讨厌蔡确，蔡确审理相州官司，捕捉吴安持及其亲戚，官吏进行拷打审问，想以此来让吴充求情说话，神宗心中明白吴充没有什么事。
English: Wu Chong has always hated Cai Zhengyi, Cai Zhengyi tried the Xiangzhou lawsuit, captured Wu Anzhi and his relatives, officials tortured and interrogated, and wanted to use this to make Wu Zhengyi plead for mercy. Shenzong knew in his heart that Wu Zhengyi had nothing to do with it.

古文：及确预政，充与议变法于前，数为所诎。
现代文：到蔡确参预朝政时，吴充与蔡确在神宗面前议论变法，多次被蔡确枉曲。
English: When Cai Ji took part in pre-dynastic politics, Wu Chong and Cai Ji argued about changing the law in front of Shenzong, and were repeatedly outwitted by Cai Ji.

古文：安南师出无功，知谏院张璪又谓充与郭逵书，止其进兵，复置狱。
现代文：安南军出征没有建立战功，知谏院张又说吴充给郭逵书信，让他停止进兵，于是重新又审理。
English: The Annan Army's departure for the war did not establish its war exploits. Zhisheng Zhang also said that Wu Chong sent a letter to Guo Gan, asking him to stop sending troops, so the case was reopened.

古文：充既数遭同列困毁，素病瘤，积忧畏，疾益侵。
现代文：吴充多次受到同僚们的诋毁，身上一直长有病瘤，由于忧虑担心，毒瘤更加侵蚀身体。
English: Wu Chong has been repeatedly slandered by his colleagues. He has always had a tumor on his body. Due to his anxiety, the cancer has further eroded his body.

古文：元丰三年三月，舆归第，罢为观文殿大学士、西太一宫使。
现代文：元丰三年三月，乘车回归府第，免职为观文殿大学士、西太一宫使。
English: In March of the third year of the Yuanfeng era, he returned to his hometown by car, and was dismissed as a scholar of the University of Guanwen and an envoy of the Western Taichung Imperial Palace.

古文：逾月，卒，年六十。
现代文：一个月后，去世，终年六十岁。
English: He died a month later, aged 60.

古文：赠司空兼侍中，谥曰正宪。
现代文：追赠司空兼侍中，谥号 叫正宪 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Jikku (司空) and Samurai (侍中), and his posthumous name was Zheng Xian (正憲).

古文：充内行修饬，事兄甚谨。
现代文：吴充对内持修谨慎，侍奉兄长十分小心。
English: Wu Chong is cautious about his inner cultivation, and is very careful in serving his elder brother.

古文：为相务安静。
现代文：任宰相时务求安静不扰民。
English: When appointed as prime minister, he should keep quiet and not disturb the people.

古文：性沉密，对家人语，未尝及国家事，所言于上，人莫知者。
现代文：性情深沉细密，对家人说话，也未尝谈及国家之事，凡给朝廷进言之事，别人都不知道。
English: His disposition is deep and subtle. He speaks to his family, but has never spoken about state affairs. No one else knows what he has to say to the imperial court.

古文：将终，戒妻子勿以私事干朝廷，帝益悲之。
现代文：临死前，告诫妻子家小不要以私事来求朝廷，神宗更加悲痛。
English: Before his death, he admonished his wife, Jia Xiao, not to ask the imperial court for private matters, which made Shenzong even more sad.

古文：世谓充心正而力不足，讥其知不可而弗能勇退也。
现代文：世人说吴充心术端正但能力不够，讥刺他知道自己无能却不能勇于退让。
English: The world said that Wu Chengxin's technique was correct but his ability was not enough, and ridiculed him for knowing that he was incompetent but not daring to give in.

古文：子安诗、安持。
现代文：儿子吴安诗、吴安持。
English: His sons, Wu Anshi and Wu Anzhi, are also involved.

古文：安诗在元祐时为谏官、起居郎。
现代文：吴安诗在元时任谏官、起居郎。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Wu Anshi served as a eunuch and kijiro.

古文：安持为都水使者，迁工部侍郎，终天章阁待制。
现代文：吴安持为都水使者，升任工部侍郎，终天章阁待制。
English: Wu Anzhi was the water messenger of the capital, was promoted to the position of the chamberlain of the engineering department, and was awarded the Order of the Rising Sun.

古文：安诗子储、安持子侔，官皆员外郎，坐与妖人张怀素通谋，诛死。
现代文：吴安诗儿子吴储、吴安持儿子吴侔，都官至员外郎，由于与妖人张怀素互相通谋，被诛杀致死。
English: Wu Anshi's son, Wu Yuan, and Wu Anchi's son, Wu Yao, both of whom were high-ranking officials, were killed for conspiring with the demon Zhang Huai Su.

古文：王珪，字禹玉，成都华阳人，后徙舒。
现代文：王珪字禹玉，成都华阳人，后来迁移舒州。
English: Wang Xizhi Yu Yu, Chengdu Huayang people, later moved to Shuzhou.

古文：曾祖永，事太宗为右补阙。
现代文：曾祖王永，事奉太后任右补阙。
English: Zeng Zu Wang Yong, served the empress dowager as the right assistant regent.

古文：吴越纳土，受命往均赋，至则悉除无名之算，民皆感泣。
现代文：吴越奉献土地，王珪受命前去平均赋税，到后全部免除各种没有名目的赋税，老百姓都感激涕零。
English: Wu Yue dedicated the land, Wang Hui was ordered to go to the average tax, and after arriving, all were exempted from all kinds of taxes without a name, and the people were grateful.

古文：使还，或言其多弛赋租。
现代文：回到京师，有人说他废除了许多赋税地租。
English: Back in Beijing, some people said that he had abolished many taxes and land rents.

古文：帝诘之，对曰： 使新附之邦，蒙天子仁恩，臣虽得罪，死不恨。 帝大悦。
现代文：太宗质问他，他对答说 ：让新依附的邦国，蒙受天子的仁德恩惠，臣下虽然因此获罪，至死也不遗憾。 
English: Emperor Taizong questioned him, and he replied, "Let the newly-annexed state receive the benevolence and grace of the Son of Heaven. Although his vassals were punished for this, they will not regret it to the end of their lives."

古文：珪弱岁奇警，出语惊人。
现代文：太宗十分高兴。王珪很小就奇异警敏，语出惊人。
English: Taizong was very happy. Wang Yao was unusually alert when he was very young, and his speech was amazing.

古文：从兄琪读其所赋，唶曰： 骐骥方生，已有千里之志，但兰筋未就耳。 举进士甲科，通判扬州。
现代文：从兄王琪读他所作之赋，赞叹说： 骏马刚出生，就有千里的志向，只是还未强壮罢了。 推举进士甲科，通判扬州。
English: Reading from his elder brother Wang Qi about the gift he made, he said admiringly: "Hangma was just born, he has a thousand-mile aspiration, but he is not yet strong.

古文：吏民皆少珪，有大校嫚不谨，捽置之法。
现代文：官吏和老百姓都小看他，有大校轻慢不谨慎者，王珪将其捉拿伏法。
English: Government officials and ordinary people all looked down on him. If there was a senior official who was imprudent or imprudent, Wang Yao would catch him and bring him to justice.

古文：王伦犯淮南，珪议出郊掩击之，贼遁去。
现代文：王伦进犯淮南，王珪建议出兵郊外偷袭他，敌贼逃走。
English: Wang Lun invaded Huainan. Wang Yao suggested sending troops to attack him secretly in the suburbs. The enemy bandits fled.

古文：召直集贤院，为盐铁判官、修起居注。
现代文：奉召任直集贤院，为盐铁判官、修起居注。
English: He was called to serve as a member of the Jishixian Academy, a judge of salt and iron, and a preceptor of cultivation.

古文：接伴契丹使，北使过魏，旧皆盛服入。
现代文：接待陪伴契丹使者，经过魏地，旧例都是穿着正服进入。
English: For the reception of the accompanying Khitan envoys, who passed through Wei, the old custom was for them to enter wearing formal attire.

古文：至是，欲便服，妄云衣冠在后乘。
现代文：到这时，使者想穿着便服进入，并谎称衣帽都在后面的车里。
English: By this time, the emissary wanted to enter in civilian clothes and falsely claimed that his clothes and hat were in the car behind.

古文：珪命取授之，使者愧谢。
现代文：王珪让使者取来给他，使者惭愧称谢。
English: Wang Yao asked the messenger to fetch it for him, and the messenger was ashamed to thank him.

古文：遂为贺正旦使。
现代文：于是任贺正旦使。
English: As a result, He Zhengdan was appointed envoy.

古文：进知制诰、知审官院，为翰林学士、知开封府。
现代文：又任知制诰、知审官院，为翰林学士、知开封府。
English: He was also appointed to the Chisei Academy, the Chiseikan Academy, the Hanlin Academy, and the Chikaifu Academy.

古文：遭母忧，除丧，复为学士，兼侍读学士。
现代文：遇到母亲谢世守丧，丧期满后，又为学士，兼侍读学士。
English: Encountered his mother's funeral, and after the funeral, he was also a bachelor and an attendant bachelor.

古文：先是，三圣并侑南郊，而温成庙享献同太室。
现代文：在这之前，三位先帝都在南郊享受祭祀，而温成庙祭享奉献与太室一样。
English: Prior to this, the three former emperors all enjoyed sacrificial rites in the southern suburbs, while the Wencheng Temple enjoyed the same dedication as the imperial family.

古文：珪言： 三后并配，所以致孝也，而渎乎飨帝。
现代文：王珪说： 三位皇后并置配列，是为了尽孝，但亵渎了先帝。
English: Wang Yao said: The juxtaposition of the three empresses is for the sake of filial piety, but it has desecrated the former emperor.

古文：后宫有庙，所以广恩也，而僣乎飨亲。 于是专以太祖侑于郊，而改温成庙为祠殿。
现代文：第二天请对，说： 全国很久以来就希望皇上这样了，果真是皇上本人的意思吗？ 仁宗说 ：朕的意向已决定了。 
English: The next day, he said, "The whole country has been wishing for the Emperor to do this for a long time. Is it really the Emperor's will?" Ninsong said, "My will has already been decided."

古文：嘉祐立皇子，中书召珪作诏，珪曰： 此大事也，非面受旨不可。 明日请对，曰： 海内望此举久矣，果出自圣意乎？ 仁宗曰： 朕意决矣。 珪再拜贺，始退而草诏。
现代文：王珪再次跪拜称贺，开始退朝而起草诏书。
English: Wang Yao once again knelt down to offer congratulations and began to withdraw from the imperial court to draft an imperial edict.

古文：欧阳修闻而叹曰： 真学士也。 帝宴宝文阁，作飞白书分侍臣，命珪识岁月姓名。
现代文：欧阳修听后感叹说 ：真正的学士。 仁宗在宝文阁设宴，作飞白书分给侍臣，让王珪记载年月姓名。
English: Ouyang Xiu sighed after listening and said, "He is a true scholar. Rinzong held a banquet at the Bawen Pavilion, and made a flying white book to give to his attendants, and asked Wang Yao to record the year, month and name.

古文：再宴群王，又使为序，以所御笔、墨、笺、砚赐之。
现代文：又在群玉殿设宴，让王珪写序，将自己用的笔、墨、笺、砚赐予王珪。
English: He also held a banquet at the Hall of the Jade Buddha, and asked Wang Yao to write the preface, and gave Wang Yao his own pen, ink, ink stone, and ink stone.

古文：英宗立，当撰先帝谥，珪言： 古者贱不诔贵，幼不诔长，故天子称天以诔之，制谥于郊，若云受之于天者。
现代文：英宗即位，应当撰写先帝的谥号，王珪说： 古时候贫贱的人不为高贵的写哀祭文，年少的不为年长的写哀祭文，因此天子自称天来哀祭，在郊外制定谥号，好像说是受之于天。
English: When Emperor Yingzong ascended the throne, it was necessary to write down the former emperor's posthumous name, Wang Qi said: In ancient times, the poor and lowly did not write mourning rituals for the noble, and the young did not write mourning rituals for the elderly. Therefore, the Son of Heaven claimed to have come from heaven and established the posthumous name in the suburbs, as if it was received from heaven.

古文：近制，唯词臣撰议，庶僚不得参闻，颇违称天之义。
现代文：近来，由词臣撰写议定，大臣们不得参与，大大违背了天子自称天的含义。
English: Recently, it was agreed that the ministers should not participate, which was written by the eulogist, which greatly violated the meaning of the Son of Heaven claiming to be Heaven.

古文：请令两制共议。 从之。
现代文：请求让两制共同议定。 
English: The request for the two systems to work together was agreed.

古文：濮王追崇典礼，珪与侍从、礼官合议宜称皇伯，三夫人改封大国，执政不以为然。
现代文：英宗听从了。濮王的追崇典礼，王珪与侍从、礼官共同商议认为应当称皇伯，三夫人改封大国，执政认为不正确。
English: Emperor Yingzong obeyed. The ceremony for the veneration of Emperor Xizong was held. Emperor Xizong, together with his attendants and etiquette officials, agreed that he should be called Emperor Xizong, and the three empresses changed their titles to Great Powers. They believed that it was not correct to govern.

古文：其后三夫人之称，卒如初议。
现代文：这以后三夫人之称，最后还是像开始议定时一样。
English: After this, the three ladies said that in the end it was the same as when they first agreed.

古文：始，珪之请对而作诏也，有密谮之者。
现代文：开始，王珪请对而起草诏书，有人暗中诬陷他。
English: At the beginning, Wang Yao was asked to draft the imperial edict, but someone secretly framed him.

古文：英宗在位之四年，忽召至蕊珠殿，传诏令兼端明殿学士，锡之盘龙金盆，谕之曰： 秘殿之职，非直器卿于翰墨间，二府员缺，即出命矣。
现代文：英宗在位第四年，突然在蕊珠殿召见王珪，发布诏书令兼任端明殿学士，赏赐盘龙金盆，并告谕王珪说： 秘殿的职务，并不是把你安置在翰墨之中，二府缺员，就立即任命了你。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Yingzong's reign, he suddenly summoned Wang Qian in Ruizhu Palace, issued an imperial edict to concurrently serve as an academician of Duanming Palace, rewarded him with a dragon pot of gold, and told Wang Qian: "The position of the secret palace is not to place you in the middle of the chaos. There are vacancies in the two prefectures, so I immediately appointed you.

古文：曩有谗口，朕今释然无疑。 珪谢曰： 非陛下至明，臣死无日矣。 神宗即位，迁学士承旨。
现代文：以前有人进谗言，朕今天全部消除没有任何怀疑了。 王珪跪谢说： 不是陛下十分英明，臣下就活不了几天了。 神宗即位，升任学士承旨。
English: In the past, some people have said that I have eliminated all doubts today. Wang Yao knelt down and said, "Unless Your Majesty is very wise, your vassal will not live for more than a few days." Shenzong ascended the throne and was promoted to the post of bachelor.

古文：珪典内外制十八年，最为久次，尝因展事斋宫，赋诗有所感，帝见而怜之。
现代文：王珪制定朝廷内外制度十八年，任职最久，曾经因在斋宫视事，有感而作诗，神宗见后怜惜他。
English: Wang Xi worked out the internal and external systems of the imperial court for eighteen years, the longest time in office. He once wrote a poem because he was moved by what he saw in the palace. Shensong felt sorry for him after meeting him.

古文：熙宁三年，拜参知政事。
现代文：熙宁三年授职参知政事。
English: Xi Ning has been appointed to the post of governor for three years.

古文：九年，进同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：九年，授同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: In the ninth year, he was awarded the title of Shimohei Shokuji and the title of Shikenden Daigaku Shoshi.

古文：元丰官制行，由礼部侍郎超授银青光禄大夫。
现代文：元丰年间颁布官制，王珪由礼部侍郎破格授职银青光禄大夫。
English: During the Yuan and Feng Dynasties, the official system was promulgated, and Wang Qi was given the unprecedented post of silver Qingguanglu doctor by the etiquette officer.

古文：五年，正三省官名，拜尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，以蔡确为右仆射。
现代文：元丰五年，正三省官名，授尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，以蔡确为右仆射。
English: In the fifth year of Yuanfeng, he was given the official title of the third province, and was awarded the title of the left servant and the servant of the door, with Cai Ji as the right servant.

古文：先是，神宗谓执政曰： 官制将行，欲新旧人两用之。 又曰： 御史大夫，非司马光不可。 珪、确相顾失色。
现代文：在这之前，神宗对执政者说： 官制将实行，打算新旧人共同任用。 又说： 御史大夫，非司马光不行。 王珪、蔡确互相观看面容变色。
English: Prior to this, Shenzong said to the ruler: The official system will be implemented, and it is planned to appoint new and old people together. He also said: Mr. Historian, it is not possible to be Sima Guang. Wang Qian and Cai Jie watched each other's faces change color.

古文：珪忧甚，不知所出。
现代文：王珪十分担忧，不知道这是怎样决定的。
English: Wang Yao is very worried and doesn't know how this was decided.

古文：确曰： 陛下久欲收灵武，公能任责，则相位可保也。 珪喜，谢确。
现代文：蔡确说 ：陛下早就想收复灵武，你如果能承担责任，这样就可以保住相位了。 王珪高兴，向蔡确道谢。
English: Cai Zhengyi said, "Your Majesty has long wanted to recover Lingwu, if you can assume the responsibility, then you can keep the position." Wang Zhengyi was happy and thanked Cai Zhengyi.

古文：帝尝欲召司马光，珪荐俞充帅庆，使上平西夏策。
现代文：神宗曾想召见司马光，王珪推荐俞充统率庆州，让他敬献平定西夏的谋略。
English: Shenzong had wanted to summon Sima Guang, and Wang Xi recommended that Zoucheng lead Gyeongju, so that he could offer a strategy to pacify Western Xia.

古文：珪意以为既用兵深入，必不召光，虽召，将不至。
现代文：王珪认为派兵深入敌境，一定会不召见司马光，即使被召见，也将不会前来。
English: Wang Yao believed that sending soldiers deep into the enemy territory would definitely not summon Sima Guang, and even if summoned, he would not come.

古文：已而光果不召。
现代文：不久司马光果然不奉召。
English: Soon after, Sima Guang was indeed not called.

古文：永乐之败，死者十余万人，实珪启之。
现代文：永乐兵败，死者十余万人，实际上是由王珪开启的。
English: The defeat at Yongle, with more than 100,000 dead, was actually started by Wang Xi.

古文：八年，帝有疾，珪白皇太后，请立延安郡王为太子。
现代文：元丰八年，神宗身患有病，王珪告诉皇太后，请求立延安郡王为太子。
English: In 8th year of Yuanfeng, Emperor Shenzong was ill, and Wang Xi told the empress dowager to request Yan'an County's king to be made the crown prince.

古文：太子立，是为哲宗。
现代文：太子继立，这就是哲宗。
English: Prince Jiri, this is Tetsuzo.

古文：进珪金紫光禄大夫，封岐国公。
现代文：任王珪为金紫光禄大夫，封岐国公。
English: Wang Xi was appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu and the prince of Fuqi Province.

古文：五月，卒于位，年六十七。
现代文：五月，王珪死在任上，终年六十七岁。
English: In May, Wang Hui died in office at the age of 67.

古文：特辍朝五日，赙金帛五千，赠太师，谥曰文恭。
现代文：哲宗特地停止上朝五天，资助五千金帛办丧事，追赠太师，谥号为 文恭 。
English: Zhezong specially stopped the visit to the emperor for five days, funded five thousand gold ingots to carry out the funeral, and posthumously awarded him the title of grandmaster. His nickname was Wengong.

古文：赐寿昌甲第。
现代文：赐予寿昌上等的住宅。
English: Shuchang was given a first-class residence.

古文：珪以文学进，流辈咸共推许。其文闳侈瑰丽，自成一家，朝廷大典策，多出其手，词林称之。
现代文：王珪以文学进用，同辈都共同推崇赞许他，他的文章气魄宏大华丽，自成一家，朝廷重大的典制策令，多出自于他的手，词林人士都称赞他。
English: Wang Yao's use of literature has been widely praised by his peers. His articles are bold, magnificent, and self-contained. Most of the important ceremonial decrees issued by the imperial court were written by him. People in the literary world have praised him.

古文：然自执政至宰相，凡十六年，无所建明，率道谀将顺。
现代文：但官任到宰相，共十六年，没有多少建树，大多是谄谀歌颂之词。
English: However, in the 16 years since he was appointed to the post of prime minister, he has not accomplished much, and most of his speeches have been nothing more than eulogies.

古文：当时目为 三旨相公 ，以其上殿进呈，云 取圣旨 ；上可否讫，云 领圣旨 ；退谕禀事者，云 已得圣旨 也。
现代文：当时被人视为 三旨相公 ，由于王珪上殿进呈，叫作 取圣旨 ；皇上决定后，叫 领圣旨 ；退朝告诉禀事的人，叫作 已得圣旨 。
English: At that time, it was considered that the three wills were the same, and since the king presented the imperial edict to the emperor, it was called taking the imperial edict; after the emperor made a decision, it was called receiving the imperial edict; and the person who returned to the palace and told the anecdote was called having received the imperial edict.

古文：绍圣中，邢恕谤起，黄履、叶祖洽、刘拯交论珪元丰末命事，以为当时两府大臣，尝议奏请建储，珪辄语李清臣云： 他自家事，外庭不当管。 恕又诱教高遵裕子士京上奏，言珪欲立雍王，遣士京故兄士充，传道言语于禁中。
现代文：绍圣年间，邢恕造谣，黄履、叶祖洽、刘拯相继议论王珪元丰末年命事，以为当时两府大臣，曾经议论奏请设立皇储，王珪就对李清臣说 ：皇帝自己家中事，外人不应当管。 邢恕又唆使高遵裕的儿子高士京上奏，说王珪想立雍王，派遣高士京已故的兄长高士充，在宫中散布谣言。
English: During the reign of Emperor Shoshen, Zou Shou fabricated a rumor that Huang Li, Ye Zu Ci, and Liu Zheng successively discussed the death of Wang Xuanfeng at the end of the year, thinking that the ministers of the two prefectures at that time had discussed and requested the establishment of a crown prince, Wang Zhou said to Li Qingchen: "The emperor's own family affairs should not be controlled by outsiders." Zou Shou also instigated Gao Zunyu's son Gao Shi to perform in Beijing, saying that Wang Zhou wanted to establish King Yong, and sent Gao Shi's deceased brother Gao Shicheng to spread rumors in

古文：珪由是得罪，追贬万安军司户参军，削诸子籍。
现代文：王珪因此而获罪，贬为万安军司户参军，削夺诸子官籍。
English: As a result, Wang Yao was found guilty and demoted to the position of Wan'an military governor. He joined the army and stripped his sons of their official status.

古文：徽宗即位，还其官封。
现代文：徽宗即位，归还他所封之官。
English: Huizong ascended to the throne and returned the officials he had appointed.

古文：蔡京秉政，复夺赠谥。
现代文：蔡京执掌朝政，又剥夺追回所赠谥号。
English: Cai Jing is in charge of the imperial government, and has been stripped of the regalia he was awarded.

古文：政和中，又复之。
现代文：政和年间，又恢复。
English: It was restored again during the period of political peace.

古文：珪季父罕，从兄琪。
现代文：王珪叔父王罕，从兄王琪。
English: Wang Qian's uncle Wang Han, from his brother Wang Qi.

