古文：虢公梦在庙，有神人面白毛虎爪，执钺立于西阿，公惧而走。
现代文：虢公梦见在宗庙里，有一个神脸上长着白毛还有老虎一样的爪，拿着斧站在西边的屋檐下，虢公吓得逃走了。
English: Zeng Gong dreamed that in the ancestral temple, there was a god with white hair on his face and claws like a tiger, standing under the eaves on the west side with an axe. Zeng Gong was so scared that he ran away.

古文：神曰： 无走！
现代文：神说： 不要走！
English: God said, "Don't go!"

古文：帝命曰： 使晋袭于尔门 。 
现代文：上天命令说： 让晋国进入你的国门 。 
English: Heaven's order said: Let Jin Province enter your gate.

古文：公拜稽首，觉，召史嚚占之，对曰： 如君之言，则蓐收也，天之刑神也，天事官成。 
现代文：虢公下拜磕头后，梦醒，召来史嚚占问这个梦的吉凶。回答说： 像你所叙述的，那么这个神就是西方之神蓐收了。他是天上主管刑杀的神，上天命令的事情都是由神完成的。 
English: After bowing his head in homage, he awoke from his dream and summoned Shi Yan to inquire about the fortunes of the dream. He replied, "As you have described, then this god is the god of the West. He is the god in charge of the sky, and the things ordered by the sky are done by the gods."

古文：公使囚之，且使国人贺梦。
现代文：虢公下令把史嚚囚禁起来，并且要国人祝贺他这个梦是吉利的。
English: Lord Zou ordered that Shi Xuan be imprisoned, and asked the Chinese people to congratulate him on this auspicious dream.

古文：舟之侨告诸其族曰： 众谓虢亡不久，吾乃今知之。
现代文：舟之侨告诉他同族的人说： 大家都说虢国不久会灭亡，我今天才知道了这个道理。
English: An expatriate from Zhou told his compatriots, "Everyone says that our country will soon perish, but I only learned this truth today.

古文：君不度而贺大国之袭，于已也何瘳？吾闻之曰： 大国道，小国袭焉曰服。
现代文：国君不认真考虑神的意思，反而要国人去祝贺晋国的进入，这难道能减轻自己的灾祸吗？我听说： 大国正义，小国进入叫顺服。
English: The sovereign did not seriously consider the will of God, but instead asked the Chinese people to congratulate the entry of Jin. Can this alleviate his own disaster? I heard: Great nations are righteous, and small nations enter to obey.

古文：小国傲，大国袭焉曰诛。 
现代文：小国傲慢，大国进入叫诛伐。 
English: When small countries are arrogant, big countries enter the fray.

古文：民疾君之侈也，是以遂于逆命。
现代文：民众痛恨国君的奢侈，就会违拒他的命令。
English: The people hate the extravagance of the sovereign, and will disobey his orders.

古文：今嘉其梦，侈必展，是天夺之鉴而益其疾也。
现代文：如今他认为自己的梦吉祥，他的奢侈必然会更甚，这是上天夺去他用来省察自己的镜子而加重他的毛病啊。
English: Now he thinks that his dream is auspicious, and his extravagance is bound to increase. This is because the heavens have taken away the mirror he used to examine himself and aggravated his problems.

古文：民疾其态，天又诳之；大国来诛，出令而逆；宗国既卑，诸侯远己。
现代文：民众痛恨他的所作所为，上天又迷惑他的良知；大国一旦来诛伐，他下的命令没有人服从；公族已经衰败，诸侯又对他疏远。
English: The people detest what he has done, and heaven has deceived his conscience; when a great power attacks, no one obeys his orders; the common people have decayed, and the princes are estranged from him.

古文：内外无亲，其谁云救之？
现代文：内外都没有人亲近他，还谈得上谁来拯救呢？
English: No one, inside or outside, is close to him. Who can be said to save him?

古文：吾不忍俟也！ 
现代文：我不忍心等着看到国家的灭亡！ 
English: I can't wait to see the country destroyed!

古文：将行，以其族适晋。
现代文：于是带领他的家族离开虢国到晋国去。
English: So he led his family to leave Shan State and go to Jin State.

古文：六年，虢乃亡。
现代文：过了六年，虢国就灭亡了。
English: Six years later, the country was no more.

