古文：◎世祖四七年春正月辛丑朔，高丽国王王禃遣使来贺。
现代文：至元七年春，正月初一，高丽国王王礻直派遣使臣前来恭贺新年。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, the King of Korea, Wang Xizhi, sent an envoy to congratulate the New Year.

古文：丙午，耶律铸、廉希宪罢。
现代文：初六，耶律铸、廉希宪被罢官。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Ye Rujing and Lian Xixian were dismissed.

古文：立尚书省，罢制国用使司。以平章政事忽都答儿为中书左丞相，国子祭酒许衡为中书左丞，制国用使阿合马平章尚书省事，同知制国用使司事张易同平章尚书省事，制国用使司副使张惠、签制国用使司事李尧咨、麦术丁并参知尚书省事。
现代文：建立尚书省，撤销制国用使司，任命平章政事忽都答儿为中书左丞相，任命国子祭酒许衡为中书左丞，命制国用使司使阿合马谋划尚书省事务，制国用使司同知张易参与谋划尚书省事务，制国用使司副使张惠、制国用使司佥事李尧咨、麦术丁共同参与掌管尚书省事务。
English: He established Shangshu Province, revoked the state-appointed envoy, appointed Pingzhang Chengjihutu Daer to be the minister of the left side of the central government, appointed Guo Zixihuan to be the minister of the left side of the central government, ordered the state-appointed envoy Ahoma to plan the affairs of Shangshu Province, the state-appointed envoy Tongzhi Zhang Yi to participate in the planning of the affairs of Shangshu Province, the state-appointed envoy Zhang Hui, the vice-envoy of the state-appointed envoy, and the state-appointed envoys Li Bingzhi and Mei

古文：己酉，太阴犯毕。
现代文：初九，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the lunar year, the great yin star committed a crime and went to heaven.

古文：敕诸投下官隶中书省。
现代文：敕令各投下州的官员隶属于中书省。
English: According to the imperial edict, the officials of each province are subordinate to the Ministry of Literature.

古文：壬子，敕驿卷无印者不许乘传。
现代文：十二日，敕令：没有加盖印章的驿券不许乘坐驿传。
English: On the 12th, the government issued an order: tickets without a stamp are not allowed to travel.

古文：甲寅，高丽国王王禃遣使来言： 比奉诏臣已复位，今从七百人入觐。 
现代文：十四日，高丽国王派遣使臣来说： 近来接到皇上的诏令，我已经恢复王位，现在打算带领七百人入朝觐见。 
English: On the 14th, King Goryeo sent an envoy to say: I have recently received the Emperor's edict, I have resumed the throne, and now I intend to lead seven hundred people to the imperial court.

古文：诏令从四百人来，余留之西京。
现代文：皇上下诏，命他带四百人来，其余的留在高丽的西京。
English: The emperor issued an edict ordering him to bring four hundred people with him, and the rest to stay in the beautiful city of Saikyo.

古文：诏高丽西京内属，改东宁府，画慈悲岭为界。
现代文：下诏把高丽的西京划属于内地，改为东宁府，以慈悲岭作为边界。
English: The next imperial edict designated the western part of Goryeo as belonging to the mainland and changed it to Dongning Prefecture, with Renminling as the border.

古文：丁巳，以蒙哥都为安抚高丽使，佩虎符，率兵戍其西境。
现代文：十七日，派蒙哥都为高丽安抚使，佩戴虎符，率兵戍守其西部的国境。
English: On the 17th, Pai Meng Guodu was sent as a pacifying envoy to Korea, wearing a tiger emblem and leading troops to guard its western border.

古文：戊午，均、房州总管孙嗣擒宋统制朱兴祖等。
现代文：十八日，均州、房州总管孙嗣生擒宋军统制朱兴祖等。
English: On the 18th, Sun Shisheng, the governor-general of Junzhou and Fangzhou, sent Zhu Xingzu, the commander-in-chief of the Song army.

古文：丙寅，赈兀鲁吾民户钞。
现代文：二十六日，以钱钞赈济兀鲁吾的民户。
English: On the 26th, households in Luwu were given money in the form of banknotes.

古文：丁卯，定省、院、台文移体式。
现代文：二十七日，确定中书省、枢密院、御史台文书的体制、格式。
English: On the 27th, the system and format of the documents of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the Privy Council, and the Office of the Historian were determined.

古文：二月辛未朔，以前中书右丞相伯颜为枢密副使。
现代文：二月初一，任命前中书右丞相伯颜为枢密副使。
English: On the first day of February, Bo Yan, the former Vice-Minister of the Central Government, was appointed as a Privy Vice-Minister.

古文：甲戌，筑昭应宫于高梁河。
现代文：初四，在高梁河修建昭应宫。
English: In the fourth year of his junior high school, he built Shouying Palace in Gaoliang River.

古文：丙子，帝御行宫，观刘秉忠、孛罗、许衡及太常卿徐世隆所起朝仪，大悦，举酒赐之。
现代文：初六，皇帝驾临行宫，观看刘秉忠、孛罗、许衡，以及太常卿徐世隆所制定的朝廷礼仪，极为高兴，举酒赐给他们。
English: On the sixth day of the first lunar month, the emperor arrived at the palace and watched Liu Bingzhong, Yao Luo, Xu Heng, and the imperial etiquette formulated by the First Secretary Xu Shilong. He was very pleased and gave them wine.

古文：丁丑，以岁饥罢修筑宫城役夫。
现代文：初七，因为年岁饥馑，免除修筑宫城民夫的徭役。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, because he was famished, he was exempted from the labor of building the palace.

古文：甲申，置尚书省署。
现代文：十四日，建置尚书省官署。
English: On the 14th, the government office of Shangshu Province was built.

古文：乙酉，立纸甲局。
现代文：十五日，建立纸甲局。
English: On the 15th, the Paper Cup Bureau was established.

古文：申严畜牧损坏禾稼桑果之禁。
现代文：申令严格禁止牧放牲畜损害庄稼、桑树、果木。
English: The decree strictly prohibits the grazing of livestock from damaging crops, mulberry trees and fruit trees.

古文：壬辰，立司农司，以参知政事张文谦为卿，设四道巡行劝农司。
现代文：二十二日，设立司农司，任命参知政事张文谦任司农司卿，设立四道巡行劝农司。
English: On the 22nd, the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs was established, and Zhang Wenqian, a political advisor to the governor, was appointed as the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, and a four-way tour to persuade the Ministry of Agriculture was established.

古文：乙未，宋襄阳出步骑万余人、兵船百余艘，来趣万山堡，万户张弘范、千户脱脱击却败之，事闻，各赐金纹绫有差。
现代文：二十五日，宋军从襄阳派出步兵骑兵共一万多人、兵船一百多艘前来进攻万山堡，万户张弘范、千户脱脱击败宋军，迫使他们退却。
English: On the 25th, the Song Army sent a total of more than 10,000 infantry and cavalry and more than 100 warships from Xiangyang to attack Wanshan Fort. Wanshu Zhang Hongfan and Wanshu Zhuodu defeated the Song Army and forced them to retreat.

古文：高丽国王王禃来朝，求见皇子燕王，诏曰： 汝一国主也，见朕足矣。 
现代文：事情奏闻皇帝以后，各赐给不同数量的金纹绫绢。高丽国王王礻直前来朝见，请求觐见皇子燕王，皇帝诏命说 ：你是一国之主，见我就够了。 
English: After the matter was reported to the emperor, each was given a different number of gold-embroidered cormorants. The king of Korea, Wang Ye, came straight to see the emperor and asked to see the prince, Yan Wang. The emperor gave the following command: "You are the ruler of a country. Seeing me is enough."

古文：禃请以子愖见，从之。
现代文：王礻直请求让儿子王忄甚见燕王，皇上同意。
English: Wang Xizhi requested that his son Wang Xizhi be allowed to see Yan Wang, and the emperor agreed.

古文：诏谕禃曰： 汝内附在后，故班诸王下。
现代文：皇上下诏晓谕王礻直说： 你归附内地比较迟，所以上朝的班次排在诸侯王之后。
English: The imperial edict told Wang Xizhi that: You were late in annexing the inland, so the schedule of the emperor ranked behind that of the princes.

古文：我太祖时亦都护先附，即令齿诸王上，阿思兰后附，故班其下，卿宜知之。 
现代文：我朝太祖时，亦都护就率先归附了，就让他排在诸侯王的前面，阿思兰在他后面归附，所以排在他的后面，你应当知道这些情况。 
English: In the time of my great-grandfather, Yidogo was the first to join, so he was put in front of the princes, and Athalan joined after him, so he was put behind him. You should know these things.

古文：又诏令国王头辇哥等举军入高丽旧京，以脱朵儿、焦天翼为其国达鲁花赤，护送禃还国。
现代文：又下诏派蒙古国王头辇哥等人率军进入高丽的旧京，任命脱朵儿、焦天翼为该国的镇守官，护送王礻直回国。
English: The emperor also sent the Mongolian king, Tuancheng, and others to lead the army into the old capital of Goryeo, appointed Tudor and Jiao Tianyi as the country's town guards, and escorted Wang Xi straight back to the country.

古文：仍下诏： 林衍废立，罪不可赦。
现代文：并下诏说： 林衍废旧主立新王，其罪行不可宽赦。
English: And the next edict said: Lin Yan abolished the old ruler and set up a new king, and his crime cannot be pardoned.

古文：安庆公淐本非得已，在所宽宥。
现代文：安庆公王氵昌本来就是迫不得已，就地实行宽大。
English: Prince Anqing Binchang had no choice but to exercise leniency on the spot.

古文：有能执送衍者，虽旧在其党，亦必重增官秩。 
现代文：有能够抓获林衍押送来朝的，即使原来是他的旧党，也一定再增加他的官职俸禄。 
English: If anyone is able to capture Lin Yan and bring him to the DPRK, even if it is his former party, his official salary will definitely be increased.

古文：世子愖奏乞随朝及尚主，不许，命随其父还国。
现代文：世子王忄甚上奏请求随侍在朝廷并娶公主为妻，皇上不许，命他跟随他的父亲回国。
English: The heir to the throne, Wang Xizhong, begged the prince to accompany him to the court and marry the princess, but the emperor would not allow it and ordered him to return to China with his father.

古文：三月庚子朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of March, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：改河南等路及陕西五路西蜀四川、东京等路行中书省为行尚书省。
现代文：把河南等路以及陕西五路、西蜀、四川、东京等路的行中书省改为行尚书省。
English: Renaming the Henan and other routes, as well as the Shaanxi Fifth Road, West Shuxi, Sichuan, Tokyo and other routes, as the Yangshao and Shangshao routes.

古文：尚书省臣言： 河西和籴，应僧人、豪官、富民一例行之。 
现代文：尚书省大臣进言 ：河西路平价购买粮食，僧人、豪官、富民应该同样售出。 
English: Shang Shuxu, the minister of the province, suggested that grain should be purchased at the same price on Hexi Road, and that monks, wealthy officials, and rich people should be sold at the same price.

古文：制可。
现代文：决定照此实行。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：甲寅，车驾幸上都。
现代文：十五日，皇帝驾临上都。
English: On the 24th, the emperor's carriage drove to the capital.

古文：丙辰，浚武清县御河。
现代文：十七日，疏浚武清县御河的河道。
English: On the 17th, the dredging of the river channel of Okawa in Wuching County was completed.

古文：丁巳，定医官品从。
现代文：十八日，确定医官的品阶。
English: On the 18th, the rank of the medical officer was determined.

古文：戊午，益都、登、莱蝗旱，诏减其今年包银之半。
现代文：十九日，益都、登州、莱州发生蝗灾和旱灾，皇帝下诏，减免这些地方今年包银税的一半。
English: On the 19th, locusts and droughts occurred in Yidu, Danzhou and Laizhou, and the emperor issued an edict to reduce and exempt half of this year's silver tax in these places.

古文：阿术与刘整言： 围守襄阳，必当以教水军、造战舰为先务。 
现代文：阿术和刘整进言： 围攻、防守襄阳，必须把训练水军，建造战船作为首要任务。 
English: Ashu and Liu Jianjin said: To besiege and defend Yangyang, we must take the training of the navy and the construction of warships as the primary task.

古文：诏许之。
现代文：皇上下诏同意。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving it.

古文：教水军七万余人，造战舰五千艘。
现代文：训练水军七万多人，建造战舰五千艘。
English: He trained more than 70,000 sailors and built 5,000 warships.

古文：夏四月壬午，檀州陨黑霜二夕。
现代文：夏季，四月十三日，檀州下了三个晚上的黑霜。
English: In the summer, on April 13th, three nights of black frost fell in Danzhou.

古文：设诸路蒙古字学教授。
现代文：设置各路蒙古文字学校教授。
English: To set up Mongolian writing schools to teach Mongolian.

古文：敕： 诸路达鲁花赤子弟荫叙充散府诸州达鲁花赤，其散府诸州子弟充诸县达鲁花赤，诸县子弟充巡检。 
现代文：敕令说： 各路镇守官的子弟，承父祖荫庇可授职为各州府的镇守官；各州府镇守官的子弟则可授职为各县镇守官；各县镇守官的子弟则充任巡检。 
English: The imperial edict said: the children of the town guards of each road, the successor of the father Zou Ying Pi, can be appointed as the town guards of each prefecture; the children of the town guards of each prefecture can be appointed as the town guards of each county; the children of the town guards of each county will serve as patrols.

古文：改御史台典事为都事。
现代文：把御史台典事改为都事。
English: To change the name of the Goshidai ceremony to the Miyako ceremony.

古文：癸未，定军官等级，万户、总管、千户、百户、总把以军士为差。
现代文：十四日，确定军官的等第品级，万户、总管、千户、百户、总把，以至军士，分别其等级班次。
English: On the 14th, the rank and grade of officers were determined, starting with 10,000 households, general manager, 1,000 households, 100 households, general manager, and sergeant, respectively.

古文：己丑，省终南县入盩厔，复真定赞皇县、太原乐平县。
现代文：二十日，撤销终南县，其土地划入銩稨县，恢复真定路的赞皇县、太原路的乐平县。
English: On the 20th, Zhanan County was revoked, and its land was transferred to Handan County, and Zhanwang County on Zhending Road and Leping County on Taiyuan Road were restored.

古文：高丽行省遣使来言： 权臣林衍死，其子惟茂擅袭令公位，为尚书宋宗礼所杀。岛中民皆出降，已迁之旧京。
现代文：高丽行省派遣使臣来说 ：权臣林衍已经死亡，他的儿子林惟茂擅自承袭了他父亲的职位，被尚书宋宗礼杀死，岛上的百姓都出来投降了，已经把他们迁回旧京。
English: Goryeo dispatched an envoy to the province to say: the powerful minister Lin Yan has died, his son Lin Wei Mao took over his father's position without authorization and was killed by Shang Shu Song Zongli, the people on the island have surrendered and have moved them back to the old Beijing.

古文：衍党裴仲孙等复集余众，立禃庶族承化侯为王，窜入珍岛。 
现代文：林衍的党羽裴仲孙等人又重新聚集余部，拥立王礻直的宗族承化侯为国王，已经逃窜到珍岛去了。 
English: Lin Yan's henchman Pei Zhongsun and others re-gathered the rest of the party, supported Wang Xizhi's clan to succeed Huo as king, and fled to Jindo Island.

古文：五月辛丑，怀州河内县大雨雹。
现代文：五月初二，怀州河内县天降大雨雹。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, heavy rain fell from the sky in Ha Noi County, Waizhou.

古文：癸卯，陕西签省也速带儿、严忠范与东西川统军司率兵及宋兵战于嘉定、重庆、钓鱼山、马湖江，皆败之，拔三寨，擒都统牛宣，俘获人民及马牛战舰无算。
现代文：初四，陕西佥省也速带儿、严忠范和东西川统军司率军在嘉定、重庆、钓鱼山、马湖江和宋军接战，全都击败了宋军，攻下了三个堡寨，生擒宋军都统牛宣，俘获人口、马牛和战舰不计其数。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Yan Zhudao, Yan Zhongfan, and the East-West and South-East Military Commanders of Shaanxi Yunnan Province led their troops to fight against the Song Army in Jiading, Chongqing, Diaoyu Mountain, and the Malu River. They all defeated the Song Army and captured three fortresses. The fledgling Song Army was unified in Niu Xuan and captured countless people, horses, cattle, and warships.

古文：甲辰，威州汝凤川番族八千户内附，其酋长来朝，授宣命，赐金符。
现代文：初五，威州、汝凤川的番族八千户归附内地，其酋长前来朝见，朝廷授予委任书，赐给金符。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, eight thousand families of the Wizhou and Ru Fengchuan clans were annexed to the mainland. Their chiefs came to see the emperor, and the imperial court granted a letter of appointment and a gold medal.

古文：丁未，东京路饥，兼运粮造船劳役，免今年丝银十之三。
现代文：初八，东京路发生饥荒，同时担负运粮造船的劳役，减免今年丝税银的十分之三。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, a famine occurred in Tokyo Road, and at the same time, he was responsible for the labor of grain transportation and shipbuilding, and he was exempted from three-tenths of this year's silk tax.

古文：以同知枢密院事合答为平章政事。
现代文：任命枢密院同知合答为平章政事。
English: The appointment of Privy Councillor Tong Zhigang was a political matter.

古文：乙卯，复平滦路抚宁县，以海山、昌黎入之。
现代文：十六日，恢复平滦路的抚宁县，把海山、昌黎两县划入。
English: On the 16th, Fuxing County, where Pingyao Road was restored, was divided into Haishan County and Changli County.

古文：丙辰，括天下户。
现代文：十七日，调查统计全国的户口。
English: On the 17th, a survey was conducted to count the number of household registrations nationwide.

古文：尚书省臣言： 诸路课程，岁银五万锭，恐疲民力，宜减十分之一。
现代文：尚书省大臣上奏说： 各路的赋税，每一年为五万锭银子，恐怕百姓过于疲困，应当减少十分之一。
English: Shang Shuxu, the minister of the province, said in his report: The tax for each road is 50,000 taels of silver per year. I am afraid that the people are too tired, and it should be reduced by one tenth.

古文：运司官吏俸禄，宜与民官同，其院务官量给工食，仍禁所司多取于民，岁终，较其增损而加黜陟。
现代文：转运司官吏的俸禄，应该和一般管民官相同，其中院务官酌量给予伙食津贴。同时禁止官府多向百姓征收钱粮，年底的时候，比较各官员增加或减少征收，而对他们进行贬黜或提拔。
English: The salary of the officials of the Transportation Division should be the same as that of the general people's administrators, of which the administrator should give food allowance at his discretion. At the same time, the government should be prohibited from collecting more money and grain from the people. At the end of the year, the officials should be compared to increase or decrease the collection, and they should be demoted or promoted.

古文：上都地里遥远，商旅往来不易，特免收税以优之，惟市易庄宅、奴婢、孳畜，例收契本工墨之费。
现代文：上都地域遥远，商旅不容易往返，特地免收该地区赋税以示优待，只须买卖田庄房屋、奴仆婢女、牲畜，按常例收取契约的工本费。
English: The Shangdu region is far away, and it is not easy for business travelers to travel back and forth. To show their preferential treatment, they were specifically exempted from paying taxes in the region. All they had to do was to buy and sell grange houses, servants, and livestock, and collect the labor cost of the contract as usual.

古文：管民官迁转，以三十月为一考，数于变易，人心苟且，自今请以六十月迁转。
现代文：管民官的升迁、调动，原以三十个月为一个阶段进行考核。由于变化太多，人心怠惰马虎，希望从现在开始以六十个月为一个阶段升迁调动一次。
English: The promotion and transfer of the people's administrators were originally assessed in 30 months. Due to too many changes and the laziness of the people, it is hoped that from now on, the promotion and transfer will be carried out in 60 months.

古文：诸王遣使取索诸物及铺马等事，自今并以文移，毋得口传教令。 
现代文：诸侯王派遣使者索取各种物品和驿马之类的事，从今以后都凭官府的公文，不能够只凭口信传达的命令。 
English: Princes and lords sent emissaries to ask for various goods and horses. From now on, they had to rely on official documents from the government, and could not rely on orders conveyed by message only.

古文：并从之。
现代文：皇上全部允从。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：改宣徽院为光禄司，秩正三品，以宣徽使线真为光禄使。
现代文：把宣徽院改为光禄司，品秩为正三品，任命宣徽使线真为光禄司使。
English: He changed the title of Xuanhui Academy to Guangluo Division, and the rank of honor was raised to the third-highest. He also appointed Xuanhui Envoy Lin Zhen as Guangluo Division Envoy.

古文：庚申，命枢密院阅实军数。
现代文：二十一日，命令枢密院核查落实军队的人数。
English: On the 21st, he ordered the Privy Council to verify the implementation of the number of troops.

古文：壬戌，东平府进瑞麦，一茎二穗、三穗、五穗者各一本。
现代文：二十三日，东平府进献瑞麦，一株生两穗、一株生三穗、一株生五穗。
English: On the 23rd, Dongping Prefecture presented Reimai, a plant with two ears, a plant with three ears, and a plant with five ears.

古文：省中都打捕鹰坊总管府入工部。
现代文：撤销中都的打捕鹰坊总管府，把打捕鹰坊划入工部。
English: The central government's head office for the fight against Yingfang was revoked, and Yingfang was assigned to the Ministry of Industry.

古文：大名、东平等路桑蚕皆灾，南京、河南等路蝗，减今年银丝十之三。
现代文：大名、东平等路的桑树和养蚕都受到灾害，南京、河南等路发生蝗灾，减免今年丝税银的十分之三。
English: The mulberry trees and silkworms on Daming Road and Dongping Road have suffered disasters, and locusts have occurred in Nanjing, Henan and other roads, reducing and exempting three-tenths of this year's silk tax and silver.

古文：六月丙子，敕西夏中兴市马五百匹。
现代文：六月初八，敕令在西夏中兴府购买五百匹马。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th lunar month, the imperial edict went out to purchase 500 horses in Zhongxing Prefecture in Western Xia.

古文：庚辰，敕： 戍军还，有乏食及病者，令所过州城村坊主者给饮食医药。 
现代文：十二日，敕令： 戍边的士兵返回的时候，有缺粮或生病的，命令他们所经过的州城、村落、坊市的主人供给他们饮食医药。 
English: On the 12th day of the month, the imperial edict: When the soldiers from the border areas return, if they are short of food or sick, the masters of the cities, villages and towns they have passed through are ordered to provide them with food and medicine.

古文：丁亥，罢各路洞冶总管府，以转运司兼领。
现代文：十九日，撤销各路的洞冶总管府，令转运司兼管洞冶事务。
English: On the 19th, the Dongye General Administration Office of each road was revoked, and the Transportation Division was also put in charge of Dongye affairs.

古文：徙谦州甲匠于松山，给牛具。
现代文：把谦州制造衣甲的匠户迁移到松山，供给他们耕牛农具。
English: To relocate the craftsmen in Qianzhou who make clothing armor to Matsuyama, and to provide them with cattle farming tools.

古文：赐皇子南木合马六千、牛三千、羊一万。
现代文：赐给皇子南木合马六千匹、牛三千头、羊一万头。
English: He gave the prince six thousand Namgu horses, three thousand head of cattle, and ten thousand sheep.

古文：赐北边戍军马二万、牛一千、羊五万。
现代文：赐给北部边境的戍军马二万匹、牛一千头、羊五万头。
English: Twenty thousand horses, one thousand head of cattle and fifty thousand sheep were given to the Shan army on the northern border.

古文：丙申，立籍田大都东南郊。禁民擅入宋境剽掠。
现代文：二十八日，在大都的东南郊建立征用民力耕种的籍田。
English: On the 28th, in the southeastern suburb of the metropolis, homestead fields cultivated by requisitioned people were established.

古文：秋七月辛丑，设上林署。
现代文：禁止百姓擅自进入宋朝境内进行抢劫。秋季，七月初三，设立上林署。
English: It was forbidden for commoners to enter Song territory without permission to commit robbery. In autumn, on the third day of the first month of July, the Forestry Administration was established.

古文：乙卯，赐诸王拜答寒印及海青、金符二。
现代文：十七日，赐予诸侯王拜答寒印信及海东青符、金符二枚。
English: On the seventeenth day, the princes were given the cold seal letter and the East Sea blue and gold flags.

古文：庚申，初给军官俸。
现代文：七月二十二日，开始发给军中的官员俸禄。
English: On July 22nd, officials in the military began to be paid.

古文：壬戌，签诸道回回军。
现代文：二十四日，签征各道回回军士卒。
English: On the 24th, he signed up as a conscript sergeant.

古文：乙丑，阅实诸路炮手户。
现代文：二十七日，核查落实各路制造火器的炮手户。
English: On the 27th, the verification of the implementation of each way to manufacture firearms gunner home.

古文：都元帅也速带儿等略地光州，败宋兵于金刚台。
现代文：都元帅也速带儿等攻取光州的土地，在金刚台击败宋军。
English: The Marshal of the Capital also rushed to conquer the land of Gwangju and defeated the Song Army in the Diamond Plateau.

古文：以辽东开元等路总管府兼本路转运司事。
现代文：命令辽东、开元等路的总管府兼管本路的转运司事务。
English: Liaodong, Kaiyuan and other roads of the General Administration of State Road Administration also in charge of this road of the Department of Transportation Affairs.

古文：山东诸路旱蝗。
现代文：山东各路发生旱灾和蝗灾。
English: Droughts and locust plagues occurred all over Shandong.

古文：免军户田租，戍边者给粮。命达鲁花赤兀良吉带给上都扈从畋猎粮。
现代文：免除军户的田租，戍守边境的军户赐给粮食，命令镇守官兀良吉带供给上都的侍从卫队狩猎的粮食。
English: He exempted the field rent of the military households, gave the military households guarding the border grain, and ordered the town guard official, Han Liangji, to supply the guards of Shangdu with grain for hunting.

古文：八月戊辰朔，筑环城以逼襄阳。
现代文：八月初一，修筑环城的堡寨以逼近襄阳。
English: On the first day of August, build a fortress around the city to approach Yangyang.

古文：己巳，赈应昌府饥。
现代文：初二，赈济应昌府饥荒。
English: On the second day of the junior high school year, the city of Handan responded to the famine in Changfu.

古文：诸王拜答寒部曲告饥，命有车马者徙居黄忽儿玉良之地，计口给粮，无车马者就食肃、沙、甘州。
现代文：诸侯王拜答寒的部众陈告饥荒，皇帝命令有车马的人移居到黄忽儿玉良地方，按照人口的数量供给粮食，没有车马的人到肃州、沙州、甘州就食。
English: The vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals of the vassals.

古文：戊寅，隆兴府总管昔剌斡脱以盗用官钱罢。
现代文：十一日，隆兴府总管昔剌斡脱因为盗用官钱而被撤职。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the head of Longxing Prefecture, Xixi Yude, was removed from his post for embezzling public funds.

古文：庚辰，以御史大夫塔察儿同知枢密院事，御史中丞帖只为御史大夫。
现代文：十三日，任命御史大夫塔察儿为枢密院同知，由御史中丞帖只任御史大夫。
English: On the 13th, he appointed the goshi daifu, Tacharo, as a privy councilor, and the goshi chujo tetsu only as a goshi daifu.

古文：高丽世子王愖来贺圣诞节。
现代文：高丽国的世子王忄甚前来恭贺皇上寿诞佳节。
English: The heir to the throne of Goryeo, King Minjong, came to congratulate the Emperor on his birthday.

古文：辛巳，设应昌府官吏。
现代文：十四日，设置应昌府的官吏。
English: On the 14th, the officials of Yingchang Prefecture were set up.

古文：辛卯，保定路霖雨，伤禾稼。
现代文：二十四日，保定路天降大雨，伤害了庄稼。
English: On the 24th, heavy rain fell on Baoding Road, damaging crops.

古文：九月庚子，敕僧、道、也里可温有家室不持戒律者，占籍为民。
现代文：九月初三，敕令： 凡是有妻小家室而不遵守教规的僧人、道士、天主教士，一律入籍为民户。 
English: On the third day of the first month of September, the imperial edict was issued: All monks, Taoists, and Catholic priests who have wives and small families and do not abide by the rules of the church will be naturalized as private households.

古文：丁巳，太阴犯井。
现代文：二十日，太阴星干犯井宿天区。
English: On the 20th day, the sun was too dark and the stars were too dim.

古文：丙寅，括河西户口，定田税。
现代文：二十九日，统计河西的民户人口数目，厘定田税。
English: On the 29th, the number of households in Hexi was counted, and the field tax was determined.

古文：宋将范文虎以兵船二千艘来援襄阳，阿术、合答、刘整率兵逆战于灌子滩，杀掠千余人，获船三十艘，文虎引退。
现代文：宋军将领范文虎率领二千艘兵船前来救援襄阳，阿术、合答、刘整率军在灌子滩迎战宋军，杀死、俘获敌军一千多人，缴获战船三十艘，范文虎引军退却。
English: Fan Wenhu, the general of the Song Army, led 2,000 warships to come to the rescue of Xiangyang. The army led by Ah Shu, Heda and Liu Hei met the Song Army at Ganzi Beach, killed and captured more than 1,000 enemy troops, captured 30 warships, and Fan Wenhu led the army to retreat.

古文：西京饥，敕诸王阿只吉所部就食太原。
现代文：西京发生饥荒，皇上敕命诸侯王阿只吉的部众到太原就食。
English: There was a famine in Saikyo, and the emperor ordered the vassals of the vassal king, Adukichi, to go to Taiyuan to eat.

古文：山东饥，敕益都、济南酒税以十之二收粮。
现代文：山东发生饥荒，皇上敕命益都、济南的酒税以十分之二征收粮食。
English: Famine occurred in Shandong, and the imperial government levied grain at two-tenths of the liquor tax in Jinan.

古文：冬十月戊辰朔，敕两省以已奏事报御史台。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，敕令中书省尚书省把已经上奏的事项陈报御史台。
English: In the winter, on the first day of October, the Emperor ordered the Ministry of Education and Culture to report the matters that had already been reported to the History Channel.

古文：庚午，太白犯右执法。
现代文：初三，金星干犯右执法星官。
English: On the third day of junior high school, Venus committed a crime and became a star law enforcement officer.

古文：癸酉，敕宗庙祭祀祝文，书以国字。
现代文：初六，皇上敕令宗庙里祭祀、祝祷的文章用蒙古文字书写。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an order to write the articles on the rituals and prayers in the temple in Mongolian characters.

古文：乙亥，宋人攻莒州。
现代文：初八，宋军进攻莒州。
English: In the eighth month of the year, the Song army attacked Bozhou.

古文：乙酉，享于太庙。
现代文：十八日，在太庙举行祭祀大典。
English: On the 18th, a grand ceremony was held at the temple.

古文：丁亥，以南京、河南两路旱蝗，减今年差赋十之六。
现代文：二十日，因为南京、河南两路发生旱灾和蝗灾，减免今年科差赋税的十分之六。
English: On the 20th, because of droughts and locust plagues in Nanjing and Henan Province, six-tenths of this year's Keshi tax was reduced and exempted.

古文：发清、沧盐二十四万斤，转南京米十万石，并给襄阳军。
现代文：调发清州、沧州的盐二十四万斤，转调南京的米十万石，全部运给襄阳军中。
English: Two hundred and forty thousand catties of salt from Qingzhou and Cangzhou were transferred, and one hundred thousand kilos of rice from Nanjing were transferred, all of which were transported to the Xiangyang Army.

古文：己丑，敕来年太庙牲牢，勿用豢豕，以野豕代之，时果勿市，取之内园。
现代文：二十二日，敕令明年太庙祭祀用的牺牲，不要用圈养的猪，而用野猪代替，不要去买时令的果品，而从皇宫的果园中摘取。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial edict ordered that the sacrificial animals for the next year's grand temple should be wild boars instead of captive-bred pigs, and the seasonal fruits should be picked from the palace's orchard instead of buying them.

古文：车驾至自上都。
现代文：皇上的车驾从上都来到。
English: The emperor's car drove from the capital to the capital.

古文：降兴中府为州。
现代文：把隆兴府降格为州。
English: to downgrade Longxing Prefecture to a prefecture.

古文：赈山东淄莱路饥。
现代文：赈济山东淄莱路的饥民。
English: Starving people on Bailai Road in eastern Shanxi Province.

古文：十一月壬寅，荧惑犯太微西垣上将。
现代文：十一月壬寅日，荧惑星干犯太微西垣天区的上将星官。
English: In November, the day of Ren Yin, the fluorescent planet interfered with the general star official of the Taiwu Xigatian District.

古文：壬子，河西诸郡诸王顿舍，僧、民协力供给。
现代文：壬子日，在河西各郡诸侯王止宿的地方，僧侣、百姓协力供应给养。
English: On Jinsi Day, monks and commoners worked together to supply provisions to the princes and queens of the various counties in the west of the river.

古文：丁巳，敕益兵二千，合前所发军为六千，屯田高丽，以忻都及前左壁总帅史枢，并为高丽金州等处经略使，佩虎符，领屯田事。
现代文：丁巳日，敕令增兵两千人，连原来所派的军队共六千人在高丽屯田，任命忻都和前左壁总帅史枢同任高丽金州等处的经略使，佩戴虎符，管辖屯田的事务。
English: On the same day, the Emperor ordered to increase the number of troops by two thousand, bringing the total number of troops originally sent to Korea to six thousand in Tonden. He appointed Xindu and the former left-wing general, Shi Zu, who was also the economic envoy of Korea's Gyeongju and other places, to wear the tiger emblem and supervise the affairs of Tonden.

古文：仍诏谕高丽国王立侍仪司。
现代文：同时下诏给高丽国王，命他设立侍仪司。
English: At the same time, he issued an edict to the King of Goryeo, ordering him to set up a Chamberlain's Office.

古文：安南国王陈光昞遣使来贡，优诏答之。
现代文：安南国王陈光日丙派遣使臣前来进贡，皇上特赐优诏答谢。
English: Annan King Chen Guang Rong sent envoys to pay tribute to the court, and the emperor issued a special edict to thank him.

古文：复赈淄莱路饥。
现代文：再度赈济淄莱路饥民。
English: He once again helped the starving people in Bulai Road.

古文：闰月丁卯朔，高丽世子王愖还，赐王禃至元八年历。
现代文：闰十一月初一，高丽国王的世子王忄甚返回，皇帝赐给高丽国王王礻直至元八年的历书。
English: On the first day of the eleventh month of the leap year, King Goryeo's heir-apparent, Wang Ye, returned. The emperor gave King Goryeo's heir-apparent, Wang Ye, the almanac up to the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：戊辰，禁缯段织日月龙虎，及以龙犀饰马鞍者。
现代文：初二，禁止在彩帛缎匹上织日月龙虎的图案，以及用龙和犀牛的图纹装饰马鞍。
English: In the second year of junior high school, it is forbidden to weave the pattern of the sun, moon, dragon and tiger on the horse, and to decorate the saddle with the pattern of the dragon and rhinoceros.

古文：己巳，给河西行省钞万锭，以充岁费。
现代文：初三，赐给河西行省钱钞一万锭，以充一年的用费。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, he gave 10,000 baht of money-saving banknotes to the Hexi line to cover one year's expenses.

古文：以义州隶婆娑府。
现代文：把义州隶属于婆娑府。
English: to subordinate Yishu to Pahang.

古文：癸未，诏谕西夏提刑按察司管民官，禁僧徒冒据民田。
现代文：十七日，下诏，令西夏提刑按察司管民官禁止僧人贪占百姓的田地。
English: On the 17th, an edict was issued, ordering Xixia Ti, the procurator, to ban the monks from seizing the people's fields.

古文：壬辰，申明劝课农桑赏罚之法。
现代文：二十六日，颁行鼓励学习种田养蚕并实行奖惩的办法。
English: On the 26th, a method of encouraging the study of farming and raising silkworms and implementing rewards and punishments was issued.

古文：诏设诸路脱脱禾孙。
现代文：下诏设立诸路的巡查官。
English: I hereby decree the establishment of inspectors on all roads.

古文：十二月丙申朔，改司农司为大司农司，添设巡行劝农使、副各四员，以御史中丞孛罗兼大司农卿。
现代文：十二月初一，把司农司改为大司农司，增设巡行的劝农使、副使官职，各设四人，任命御史中丞孛罗兼领大司农卿。
English: On the first day of December, the position of the Secretary of Agriculture was changed to that of the Chief Secretary of Agriculture, and the positions of the Agricultural Envoy and Deputy Envoy were added, each of which had four members.

古文：安童言孛罗以台臣兼领，前无此例。
现代文：安童说以御史台的官员兼任其他官署职务，从前没有这个先例。
English: Ando said it was unprecedented for an official of the Imperial Household Agency to also hold other government posts.

古文：有旨： 司农非细事，朕深谕此，其令孛罗总之。 
现代文：皇上有旨说： 管理农业不是一件小事，我深深地懂得这一点，所以才叫孛罗负总责。 
English: The emperor said: "The management of agriculture is not a small matter, I deeply understand this, so I asked Zhao Luo to take overall responsibility.

古文：命陕西等路宣抚使赵良弼为秘书监，充国信使，使日本。
现代文：任命陕西等路宣抚使赵良弼为秘书监，充任国信使出使日本。
English: Zhao Liangyao was appointed as the secretary and overseer of the Shaanxi and other provinces, and served as the national messenger to Japan.

古文：敕岁祀太社、太稷、风师、雨师、雷师。
现代文：敕令每年祭祀太社、太稷、风师、雨师、雷师。
English: According to the imperial edict, annual sacrifices were made to Taisha, Taiko, Wind Master, Rain Master, and Thunder Master.

古文：戊戌，徙怀孟新民千八百余户居河西。
现代文：初三，把怀孟新归附的百姓一千八百多户迁居到河西。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, more than 1,800 households of the people newly annexed by Huai Meng moved to Hexi.

古文：壬寅，升御史大夫秩正二品。
现代文：初七，把御史大夫的秩禄提升为正二品。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, he raised the rank of goshi taifu to Shonibin.

古文：降河南韶州为渑池县。
现代文：把河南的韶州降格为渑池县。
English: Henan's Ganzhou was downgraded to Zouchi County.

古文：宋重庆制置朱禩孙遣谍者持书榜来诱安抚张大悦等，大悦不发封，并谍者送致东川统军司。
现代文：宋朝的重庆制置使朱祀孙派遣间谍带着官府的告示前来诱降安抚使张大悦等人，张大悦不打开封口，连间谍和信一起送到东川统军司。
English: The Song Dynasty's Chongqing System caused Zhu Shisun to send spies to lure and pacify Zhang Dayue and others with a notice from the government. Zhang Dayue did not open the seal, and even sent the spies and the letter to the East River United Military Department.

古文：丁未，金齿、骠国三部酋长阿匿福、勒丁、阿匿爪来内附，献驯象三、马十九匹。
现代文：十二日，金齿、骠国等三个部族的酋长阿匿福、勒丁、阿匿爪前来归附朝廷，呈献驯象三头，马十九匹。
English: On the twelfth day, the chiefs of three tribes, Anifu, Leting, and Anizaw, including Jinzu and Shan, came to join the imperial court, presenting three tame elephants and nineteen horses.

古文：己酉，鱼通路知府高曳失获宋谍者，诏赏之。
现代文：十四日，鱼通路知府高曳失抓获宋朝的间谍，皇上下诏奖赏他。
English: On the 14th, the governor of Yutong Road, Gao Hui, lost and captured a spy of the Song Dynasty, and the emperor rewarded him with an edict.

古文：辛酉，以都水监隶大司农司。
现代文：二十六日，把都水监隶属于大司农司管辖。
English: On the 26th, the Metropolitan Water Supervision Bureau was placed under the jurisdiction of the Department of Agriculture.

古文：以诸王伯忽儿为札鲁忽赤之长。
现代文：任命诸侯王伯忽儿为首席大断事官。
English: Appointed Prince Wang Bochun as the chief adjudicator.

古文：建大护国仁王寺于高良河。敕更定僧服色。
现代文：在高良河建造大护国仁王寺。敕令改定僧侣的服色。
English: The Grand Protector of the Nation, Nio-ji Temple, is built in Gora-gawa River. The imperial decree changes the color of the monks' robes.

古文：是岁，天下户一百九十二万九千四百四十九。
现代文：这一年全国共有一百九十三万九千四百四十九户。
English: In that year, there were a total of 1,939,449 households nationwide.

古文：赐先朝后妃及诸王金、银、币、帛如岁例。
现代文：按照每年的常例赐给先朝的后妃以及诸侯王黄金、白银、钱钞和绢帛。
English: In accordance with the annual tradition, the empresses and princes of the previous dynasty were given gold, silver, banknotes and ingots.

古文：断死刑四十四人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪犯共四十四人。
English: A total of 44 criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

古文：八年春正月乙丑朔，高丽国王王禃遣其秘书监朴恒、郎将崔有淹来贺，兼奉岁贡。
现代文：至元八年春，正月初一，高丽国王王礻直派遣他的秘书监朴恒、郎将崔有蔞前来恭贺新年，兼呈献年贡礼品。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, King Wang Xizhi of Goryeo sent his secretary, Guan Pak Heng, and his son-in-law, Choe U Son, to congratulate the new year and present gifts.

古文：丙寅，太阴犯毕。
现代文：初二，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the lunar year, the great yin star committed a crime and went to heaven.

古文：己卯，以同佥河南等路行中书省事阿里海牙参知尚书省事。
现代文：十五日，任命河南等路行中书省同佥阿里海牙参与掌管尚书省事务。
English: On the 15th, he appointed his colleague from Henan Province and other provinces, Ali Hague, to participate in the management of the affairs of Shangshu Province.

古文：中书省臣言： 前有旨令臣与枢密院、御史台议河南行省阿里伯等所置南阳等处屯田，臣等以为凡屯田人户，皆内地中产之民，远徙失业，宜还之本籍。其南京、南阳、归德等民赋，自今悉折输米粮，贮于便近地，以给襄阳军食。
现代文：中书省大臣进言 ：先前有旨，令臣和枢密院、御史台商议河南行省的阿里伯等人所设置的南阳屯田的事务，臣等认为：凡是屯田的民户都是内地具有中等资产的百姓，远远地搬迁到别的地方，就会失去赖以生活的产业，应该让他们返回原籍，有关南京、南阳、归德等地的民赋，从现在起全部折合成米粮上交，贮存在近便的地方，以供给襄阳的军粮。
English: The Minister of the People's Republic of China's Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said, "Previously, there was an intention that the ministers and the Privy Council and the State Historian's Office should discuss the affairs of the Nanyang Tonden set up by Alibe and others in Henan Province. The ministers and others believed that all the households in the Tonden were people with medium assets in the mainland. If they moved far away to other places, they would lose the industry on which they lived. They should be allowed to return to their place of origin. From now on, all the people's wealth in Nanjing, Nanyang, Gui De and other places should be converted into

古文：前所屯田，阿里伯自以无效引伏，宜令州郡募民耕佃。 
现代文：原来军队的屯田，阿里伯自己认为无力管领农耕，应当令各州郡政府招募农户租佃给他们耕种。 
English: Originally the army's military cantonment, Ali Bo himself believed that he was powerless to control farming, and should order the state and county governments to recruit farmers to lease land to them for farming.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：史天泽告老，不允。
现代文：史天泽请求告老退休，未蒙允准。
English: Shi Tianze's request to retire was not approved.

古文：敕： 前筑都城，徙居民三百八十二户，计其直偿之。 
现代文：皇上敕令 ：前时为修筑皇都城垣，搬迁了居民三百八十二户，应当计算其价值补偿他们。 
English: Imperial edict: Previously, in order to build the imperial city wall, 382 households were relocated, and their value should be calculated to compensate them.

古文：设枢密院断事官。
现代文：设置枢密院断事官。
English: The post of Privy Counsellor was created.

古文：遣兀都蛮率蒙古军镇西方当当。
现代文：派遣兀都蛮率领蒙古军队镇抚西方的当当。
English: He sent the Mongolian army under the command of Shidu Ban to pacify the Western Dangdang.

古文：丙戌，高丽安抚阿海略地珍岛，与逆党遇，多所亡失。
现代文：二十二日，高丽安抚使阿海占领珍岛的土地，和叛党遭遇，伤亡的士卒较多。
English: On the 22nd, Goryeo's pacifier Ahai occupied the land of Jindo, and encountered the rebels. There were many casualties among the soldiers.

古文：中书省臣言： 谍知珍岛余粮将竭，宜乘弱攻之。 
现代文：中书省大臣上奏说： 据间谍察知，珍岛剩余的粮食将尽，应当乘他们虚弱时进攻。 
English: The Minister of the Chinese Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy said: According to the spy's observation, Jindo's remaining grain will be exhausted, and it is necessary to take advantage of their weakness to attack.

古文：诏不许，令巡视险要，常为之备。
现代文：皇上下诏不准，命令巡察其险要的地方，做经常的防备。
English: The emperor did not approve of the edict, and ordered to inspect the dangerous places and make regular preparations.

古文：丁亥，管如仁、费正寅以国机事为书，谋遣崔继春、贾靠山、路坤入宋，事觉穷治，正寅、如仁、继春皆正典刑，靠山、坤并流远方。
现代文：二十三日，管如仁、费正寅把国家机密大事写成信件，策划派崔继春、贾靠山、路坤送往宋朝，事情被发觉，进行穷究，费正寅、管如仁、崔继春都依法被处以死刑，贾靠山、路坤均被流放到远方。
English: On the 23rd, Guan Ruren and Fei Zhengyin wrote a letter about a state secret and planned to send Cui Jichun, Jia Jianshan and Lu Kun to the Song Dynasty. The matter was discovered and investigated thoroughly. Fei Zhengyin, Guan Ruren and Cui Jichun were all sentenced to death in accordance with the law, and Jia Jianshan and Lu Kun were all exiled to a distant place.

古文：壬辰，敕： 诸路鳏寡孤独疾病不能自存者，官给庐舍、薪米。 
现代文：二十八日，皇上敕令： 各路的鳏寡孤独以及患病而生计无着，无法生活的人，由官府供给屋舍和柴米。 
English: On the 28th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: Widows and widowers of all walks of life, the lonely, and those who are ill and have no means of livelihood, unable to live, will be provided with houses and firewood by the government.

古文：高丽国王王禃遣使奉表，为世子愖请昏。
现代文：高丽国王王礻直派遣使臣奉上表章，为世子王忄甚请求婚姻。
English: The King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhong, sent an envoy to present the medal, and even requested a marriage for his heir, Wang Jianzhong.

古文：诏禁边将受赂放军及科敛。
现代文：下诏禁止边将接受贿赂，放任士卒逃避兵役和巧立名目进行聚敛。
English: The following edict forbade the frontier generals to accept bribes, to allow the officers and men to evade military service, and to collect money under false pretenses.

古文：赈北京、益都饥。
现代文：赈济北京、益都的饥民。
English: to help the starving people in Beijing.

古文：二月乙未朔，定民间婚聘礼币，贵贱有差。
现代文：二月初一，规定民间婚嫁聘礼的银钱数量，身份贵贱有一定区别。
English: On the first day of February, the number of silver coins for civil wedding gifts was stipulated, and there was a certain difference between high and low status.

古文：丁酉，发中都、真定、顺天、河间、平滦民二万八千余人筑宫城。
现代文：初三，遣发中都、真定、顺天、河间、平滦的民夫二万八千多人修筑宫城。
English: On the third day of the first month, more than 28,000 people from Zhongdu, Zhending, Shuntian, Hema and Pingyao were sent to build the palace city.

古文：己亥，罢诸路转运司入总管府。
现代文：初五，撤销各路转运司，归并到总管府。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Division of Road Transportation was abolished and merged into the General Administration Office.

古文：以尚书省奏定条画颁天下。
现代文：令尚书省奏报确定条例颁行于全国。
English: The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology issued a notice to confirm that the regulations will be issued nationwide.

古文：移陕蜀行中书省于兴元。
现代文：把陕蜀行中书省的府署迁移到兴元。
English: Moved the prefectural office of Shaanxi and Shandong to Xingyuan.

古文：癸卯，四川行省也速带儿言： 比因饥馑，盗贼滋多，宜加显戮。 
现代文：初九，四川行中书省也速带儿上奏说： 近来因为发生饥馑，盗贼逐渐增多，应当明正典刑，公开处死。 
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, during a trip to Sichuan, the Ministry of Education and Culture also hastily issued a report saying: Recently, because of the famine, the number of thieves has gradually increased, and they should be given a clear and formal punishment and publicly executed.

古文：诏令群臣议，安童以为： 强窃盗贼，一皆处死，恐非所宜。
现代文：皇上下诏令群臣讨论，安童认为： 强抢暗偷的盗贼，一律都处以死刑恐怕不够妥当。
English: The Emperor issued an edict to discuss among the courtiers, and Ando thought: It is probably not appropriate to impose the death penalty on all thieves who rob and steal.

古文：罪至死者，仍旧待命。 
现代文：即使犯了死罪的，也应该照原来那样等朝廷批准。 
English: Even if they have committed a capital crime, they should wait for the imperial court's approval as before.

古文：以中书左丞、东京等路行尚书省事赵璧为中书右丞。
现代文：任命中书左丞、执掌东京等路行尚书省事务的赵璧为中书右丞。
English: Zhao Bi, who is in charge of the affairs of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology in Tokyo and other places, was appointed as the Second Secretary of the Central Secretariat.

古文：甲辰，添设监察御史六员。
现代文：初十，增设六名监察御史。
English: On the tenth day of the new year, six new inspectors were appointed.

古文：命忽都答儿持诏招谕高丽林衍余党裴仲孙。
现代文：命令忽都答儿带着诏书去招降高丽权臣林衍的余党裴仲孙。
English: The order was given to the son of a provincial governor to go with an imperial edict to recruit and demote the remaining party member, Bae Jung-sun, who was a minister of the Goryeo government.

古文：乙巳，大理等处宣慰都元帅宝合丁、王傅阔阔带等，协谋毒杀云南王，火你赤、曹桢发其事，宝合丁、阔阔带及阿老瓦丁、亦速夫并伏诛，赏桢、火你赤及证左人金银有差。
现代文：十一日，大理等处的宣慰都元帅宝合丁、云南王太傅阔阔带等人合谋毒死云南王，火你赤、曹桢揭发了这件事，宝合丁、阔阔带及阿老瓦丁、亦速夫全都被处死，赏给曹桢、火你赤以及左近旁证的人员不同数额的金银。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Marshal Bao Haoding, Yunnan King Taifu Kuo Kuo and others in Dali and other places conspired to poison the king of Yunnan, and Huo Youkai and Cao Jie exposed the matter. Bao Haoding, Kuo Kuo and others were all executed, and different amounts of gold and silver were awarded to Cao Jie, Huo Youkai and the people who were close to them.

古文：以沙州、瓜州鹰坊三百人充军。
现代文：命令沙州、瓜州鹰坊的三百个猎户参军服役。
English: He ordered three hundred hunters from Shazhou and Yingfang in Guazhou to join the army.

古文：戊申，诏以治事日程谕中外官吏。
现代文：十四日，下诏把朝廷办事的日程告谕朝内朝外的官吏。
English: On the 14th, the imperial edict announced the schedule of the imperial court to the officials inside and outside the court.

古文：敕往畏吾儿地市米万石。
现代文：敕令到畏吾儿人地区购买粮米一万石。
English: The imperial edict ordered 10,000 koku of grain and rice to be purchased in the region of the Daigo children.

古文：庚戌，申严东川井盐之禁。
现代文：十六日，申令严禁东川私贩井盐。
English: On the 16th, a decree was issued to strictly prohibit the private sale of salt in Dongchuan.

古文：己未，敕军官佩金银符，其民官、工匠所佩者，并拘入，勿复给。
现代文：二十五日，敕令军官可以佩戴金银牌符，那些民官及工匠而佩戴金银符的，全部拘禁入狱，不再免除徭役。
English: On the 25th, the imperial command allowed officers to wear gold and silver badges. Those civil servants and craftsmen who wore gold and silver badges were all detained in prison and no longer exempted from forced labor.

古文：敕海青符用太祖皇帝御署。
现代文：敕命海东青牌符用太祖皇帝的御笔签署。
English: The death-defying Haidongqing plaque was signed with the Emperor Taizu's signature.

古文：庚申，奉御九住旧以梳栉奉太祖，奉所落须发束上，诏椟之，藏于太庙夹室。
现代文：二十六日，奉御九住以前曾经侍奉太祖皇帝梳头，捧着太祖落下的胡须和头发一束献上，皇上诏令用木匣盛放，珍藏在太庙的夹室中。
English: On the 26th day of the ninth month of the reign of Emperor Go-Shirakawa, Tsuru, who had served the great-grandfather emperor before, combed his hair and presented a bunch of beard and hair that had fallen from the great-grandfather. The emperor ordered it to be placed in a wooden box and stored in a compartment of the temple.

古文：辛酉，敕： 凡讼而自匿及诬告人罪者，以其罪罪之。 
现代文：二十七日，皇上敕令： 凡属刑事诉讼中隐瞒自己的罪行，以及诬告别人罪行的，就以其所诬告的罪行处罚他。 
English: On the 27th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: Any criminal who conceals his own crimes and falsely accuses others of crimes in criminal proceedings will be punished for the crimes he falsely accused.

古文：分归德为散府，割宿、亳、邳、徐等州隶之。
现代文：把归德路划出为散府，分割宿州、亳州、邳州、徐州等州隶属于它。
English: Gui De Road was marked out as a scattered province, and the provinces of Suizhou, Zhangzhou, Ganzhou and Xuzhou were divided and subordinated to it.

古文：升申州为南阳府，割唐、邓、裕、嵩、汝等隶之。
现代文：把申州升格为南阳府，分割唐州、邓州、裕州、嵩州、汝州等州隶属于它。
English: Shenzhou was upgraded to Nanyang Prefecture, and Tangzhou, Dengzhou, Yuzhou, Songzhou, Ruzhou and other prefectures were divided and subordinated to it.

古文：赈西京饥。
现代文：赈济西京的饥民。
English: To help the starving people in West Beijing.

古文：三月乙丑，增治河东山西道按察司，改河东陕西道为陕西四川道，山北东西道为山北辽东道。
现代文：三月初二，增设河东山西道按察司；把河东陕西道改为陕西四川道，把山北东、西道改为山北辽东道。
English: On the second day of March, the Inspection Division of the Western Shandong-Hedong Highway was added; the Western Shandong-Hedong Highway was changed to the Western Shaanxi-Sichuan Highway, and the Eastern and Western Shandong-Hedong Highway was changed to the Western Shandong-Hedong Highway.

古文：甲戌，敕： 元正、圣节、朝会，凡百官表章、外国进献、使臣陛见、朝辞礼仪，皆隶侍仪司。 
现代文：十一日，敕令 ：每年正月初一，皇帝寿诞、朝见皇帝的日子，以及凡是百官奉上表章、外国进献贡品、使臣朝见皇帝、辞别朝廷赴外，全部属于侍仪司掌管。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial edict was issued: On the first day of the first month of each year, the emperor's birthday, the day when the emperor is received by the court, as well as all the days when hundreds of officials present medals, foreign countries offer tributes, envoys meet the emperor, and leave the court to go abroad, all belong to the Office of the Master of Ceremonies.

古文：丙子，改山东、河间、陕西三路盐课都转运司为都转运盐使司。
现代文：十三日，把山东、河间、陕西三路的盐课都转运司改为都转运盐使司。
English: On the 13th, the Salt Transportation Division of Shandong, Hebei and Shaanxi was changed to the Salt Transportation Division.

古文：乙卯，中书省臣言： 高丽叛臣裴仲孙乞诸军退屯，然后内附；而忻都未从其请，今愿得全罗道以居，直隶朝廷。 
现代文：十六日，中书省大臣上奏说 ：高丽国的叛臣裴仲孙请求朝廷的各路人马退兵驻守，然后他将归顺朝廷；但忻都没有同意他的请求，现在他希望能够占有全罗道以居留，直接隶属于朝廷管辖。 
English: On the 16th, the Minister of the Ministry of the People's Republic of China made a report, saying: The traitor of Goryeo, Bae Jong-sun, requested all the people of the imperial court to withdraw their soldiers and stay, and then he would submit to the imperial court; but no one agreed to his request, and now he hopes to occupy Jeolla Province to stay and be directly subordinated to the jurisdiction of the imperial court.

古文：诏以其饰词迁延岁月，不允。
现代文：皇上的诏令认为他只是用假话来拖延时间，不答应他的请求。
English: The emperor's edict considered that he was only using lies to delay the time and did not grant his request.

古文：辛巳，复立夏邑县，以砀山入焉。
现代文：十八日，重新设置夏邑县，把砀山划入该县。
English: On the 18th, Xiayi County was re-established, and Shaoshan was added to the county.

古文：省谷熟入睢阳。
现代文：撤销谷熟建制，把地方划入睢阳。
English: The establishment of Guju was revoked, and the area was transferred to Shenyang.

古文：滨棣万户韩世安，坐私储粮食、烧毁军器、诈乘驿马及擅请诸王塔察儿益都四县分地等事，有司屡以为言，诏诛之，仍籍其家。
现代文：滨棣万户韩世安，因私自储藏粮食、烧毁武器、骗乘驿站车马和擅自请求把诸侯王塔察儿益都等四县的封地分给他而犯下罪行，官府多次提及此事，皇上下诏将他处死，并抄没他的家产。
English: The government repeatedly mentioned the case of Han Shian, who committed crimes by storing grain without permission, burning weapons, defrauding passengers, and requesting the allocation of fiefs in four counties to him. The emperor had him put to death and confiscated his family property.

古文：甲申，车驾幸上都。
现代文：二十一日，皇上驾临上都。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor arrived in the capital.

古文：乙酉，许衡以老疾辞中书机务，除集贤大学士、国子祭酒，衡纳还旧俸，诏别以新俸给之。
现代文：二十二日，许衡因年老多病辞去中书省机要政务，除了集贤殿大学士、国子祭酒的俸禄之外，许衡交还其他旧俸给朝廷，皇帝下诏以另外的新俸给他。
English: On the 22nd, because of old age and illness, Xu Heng resigned from the important government affairs. In addition to the salary of Jixian palace scholar and Kuniko sacrifice wine, Xu Heng returned other old salaries to the imperial court, and the emperor issued a decree to give him another new salary.

古文：命设国子学，增置司业、博士、助教各一员，选随朝百官近侍蒙古、汉人子孙及俊秀者充生徒。
现代文：皇帝命令设立国子学，增设司业、博士、助教各一名，挑选随朝百官、近侍的蒙古人、汉人的子孙，以及优秀的人才充当学生。
English: The emperor ordered the establishment of the National Children's School, the addition of a division of studies, a doctor, and an assistant teacher, and the selection of hundreds of officials, Mongolians, descendants of Han Chinese, and outstanding talents to serve as students.

古文：丁亥，荧惑犯太微西垣上将。
现代文：二十四日，火星干犯太微西垣天区的上将星官。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Mars interfered with the general astral officer in the west ridge of the sky.

古文：己丑，立西夏中兴等路行尚书省，以趁海参知行尚书省事。
现代文：二十六日，设立西夏中兴路等路的行尚书省，任命趁海参与执掌行尚书省的事务。
English: On the 26th, the Ministry of Education and Culture of Zhongxing Road and other roads in Western Xia was established, and the appointment was made to participate in the affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：命尚书省阅实天下户口，颁条画，谕天下。
现代文：命令尚书省核实全国的户籍人口，颁布条例，并晓谕全国。
English: It ordered Shangshu Province to verify the registered population of the whole country, promulgate regulations, and announce them to the whole country.

古文：赈益都等路饥。
现代文：赈济益都等路的饥民。
English: and help the starving people along the way.

古文：敕： 有司毋留狱滞讼，以致越诉，违者官民皆罪之。 
现代文：敕令 ：各级官府不得积压狱讼官司，以致引起越级告状的事，凡是违犯的官民，双方都予以治罪。 
English: Royal Decree: Government agencies at all levels must not have a backlog of court cases involving prison cases, which may result in complaints that exceed the level of the government. Any violation by government officials or private citizens will be punished by both sides.

古文：制封皇子燕王乳母赵氏豳国夫人，夫巩德禄追封德育公。
现代文：决定封皇子燕王的乳母赵氏为豳国夫人，其丈夫巩得禄追封为德育公。
English: It was decided to appoint Zhao, the nanny of the prince Yan Wang, as the wife of Shandong Province, and her husband, Gong Deru, was posthumously appointed as the moral education minister.

古文：夏四月壬寅，高丽凤州经略司忻都言： 叛臣裴仲孙，稽留使命，负固不服，乞与忽林赤、王国昌分道进讨。 
现代文：夏季，四月初九，高丽凤州经略使忻都上奏说： 高丽叛臣裴仲孙，延挨朝廷的命令，仗恃其顽固而不归服，请求和忽林赤、王国昌分路进行讨伐。 
English: In the summer, on the 9th day of the 4th month of the 4th month, the Goryeo-Phoenix-Province economic envoy sent a report to the capital of Goryeo, saying: Goryeo's traitor Pei Zhongsun, following the order of the imperial court, defied its stubbornness and refused to submit, and asked for a separate road to be used for the crusade against the Ku-Lin-Chang and the Guo-Wang-Chang.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：平滦路昌黎县民生子，中夜有光，诏加鞠养。
现代文：平滦路昌黎县一个百姓家出生儿子，半夜时有亮光，皇上下诏加以抚养。
English: Pingyao Road, Changli County, a commoner's family gave birth to a son. There was a bright light in the middle of the night, and the emperor had to raise him.

古文：或以为非宜，帝曰： 何幸生一好人，毋生嫉心也。 
现代文：有人认为不合适，皇上说： 生下一个儿子多么幸运啊，不要有嫉妒心罢！ 
English: Some people thought it was inappropriate, and the emperor said: "How lucky you are to have a son. Don't be jealous!"

古文：命高丽签军征珍岛。
现代文：命令高丽签征军队讨伐珍岛的叛逆。
English: Ordered the Koryo conscript army to fight the rebels on Jindo.

古文：癸卯，给河南行中书省岁用银五十万两，仍敕襄樊军士自今人月给米四斗。
现代文：初十，给予河南行中书省一年的经费五十万两银子，并敕命襄樊的军士从现在起每人每月发给四斗米。
English: On the 10th day of the first lunar month, the Henan Province of the People's Republic of China was granted a one-year grant of 500,000 taels of silver. From now on, the soldiers who died in the battle of Xiangfan were each given four buckets of rice per month.

古文：甲辰，签壮丁备宋。
现代文：十一日，签征年轻的丁男为军，防备宋军。
English: On the 11th day, young Ding Man was conscripted into the army to guard against the Song army.

古文：戊午，阿术率万户阿剌罕等与宋将范文虎等战于湍滩，败之，获统制朱胜等百余人，夺其军器，赏阿术、阿剌罕等金帛有差。
现代文：二十五日，阿术率领万户阿剌罕等和宋将范文虎等在湍滩交战，击败了宋军，俘获宋军统制朱胜等一百多人，夺取了他们的武器，皇帝赏赐阿术、阿剌罕等不同数量的金帛。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, Ah Shou, led by Wanhu Ayi Han and others, and Song general Fan Wenhu and others fought in Fengtan. They defeated the Song army, captured more than a hundred people including Zhu Sheng, the Song army commander, and seized their weapons. The emperor rewarded Ah Shou, Ayi Han and others with different amounts of gold ingots.

古文：以至元七年诸路灾，蠲今岁丝料轻重有差。
现代文：因为至元七年各路都发生了天灾，不同程度地免除今年的丝料税。
English: Because natural disasters occurred in all areas in the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, this year's silk tax was exempted to varying degrees.

古文：五月乙丑，以东道兵围守襄阳，命赛典赤、郑鼎提兵，水陆并进，以趋嘉定，汪良臣、彭天祥出重庆，札剌不花出泸州，曲立吉思出汝州，以牵制之。
现代文：五月初三，派东路军围困襄阳，命令赛典赤、郑鼎率军两路并进以进逼嘉定，命汪良臣、彭天祥由重庆出兵，札剌不花由泸州出兵，曲立吉思由汝州出兵，以牵制宋军。
English: On the third day of the first month of May, he sent the Eastern Route Army to besiege Xiangyang, and ordered Sai Dianchi and Zheng Ding to lead the army to advance two routes at the same time to force Jiading. He ordered Wang Liangchen and Peng Tianxiang to send troops from Chongqing, Fudan to send troops from Bozhou, and Qu Li Jisi to send troops from Ruzhou to divert the Song Army.

古文：改签省也速带儿、郑鼎军前行尚书事，赛典赤行省事于兴元，转给军粮。
现代文：把佥省也速带儿、郑鼎改为军前代行尚书省事务，赛典赤在兴元执掌中书省事务，转运军粮。
English: Zheng Ding was quickly put in charge of Shandong Province, and Zheng Ding was put in charge of Shandong Affairs before the war, while Sai Dianchi was put in charge of Shandong Affairs during the war, and the transshipment of military grain.

古文：丙寅，牢鱼国来贡。
现代文：初四，牢鱼国前来进贡。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the prison fish country came to pay tribute.

古文：己巳，修佛事于琼华岛。
现代文：初七，皇上在琼花岛修习佛事。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, the emperor began to practice Buddhism on Qionghua Island.

古文：辛未，分大理国三十七部为三路，以大理八部蛮酋新附，降诏抚谕。
现代文：初九，把大理国的三十七个部落分为三个路，因为大理国八个部落的蛮族酋长新近归附，皇上下诏抚慰。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the thirty-seven tribes of Dali Province were divided into three groups, because the barbarian chiefs of the eight tribes of Dali Province had recently been annexed, and the emperor issued an edict to appease them.

古文：壬申，造内外仪仗。
现代文：初十，制造朝内朝外的仪仗。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, a ceremonial battle was waged between the imperial court and the outside world.

古文：丁丑，赈蔚州饥。
现代文：十五日，赈济蔚州的饥民。
English: On the 15th, the starving people in Wuzhou were fed.

古文：乙卯，命史天泽平章军国重事。
现代文：十七日，命令史天泽谋划军国重大事务。
English: On the 17th, he ordered Shi Tianze to plan major military affairs.

古文：升太府监为正三品。
现代文：把太府监的品级升格为正三品。
English: To upgrade the grade of the superintendent to the third-highest grade.

古文：忻都、史枢表言珍岛贼徒败散，余党窜入耽罗。
现代文：忻都、史枢上表说珍岛的叛贼徒众失败逃散，残余的党羽窜入耽罗。
English: According to the capital and the historical pivot, the traitors of Jindo were defeated and dispersed, and the remnants of the party fled to Tamra.

古文：辛巳，赐河西行省金符、银海青符各一。
现代文：十九日，赐给河西行中书省金符、银海东青符各一面。
English: On the 19th, he gave one side each of the Hexi Xingzhong Shu Shuo Jin Fu and the Yinhai Dong Qing Fu.

古文：令蒙古官子弟好学者，兼习算术。
现代文：命令好学的蒙古官员子弟兼学算术。
English: He ordered the studious sons of Mongolian officials to learn arithmetic as well.

古文：癸未，升济州为济宁府。
现代文：二十一日，把济州升格为济宁府。
English: On the 21st, Jeju was upgraded to Jining Prefecture.

古文：以玉宸院棣宣徽院。
现代文：把玉宸院隶属于宣徽院。
English: To subordinate Tamakazura-in to Xuanhui-in.

古文：高丽国王王禃遣使贡方物。
现代文：高丽国王王礻直派遣使臣贡奉地方特产。
English: The King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhi, dispatched envoys to pay tribute to local special products.

古文：六月甲午，敕枢密院： 凡军事径奏，不必经由尚书省，其干钱粮者议之。 
现代文：六月初二，皇上敕令枢密院： 凡属军事方面的事直接上奏皇帝，不必经过尚书省，有关钱粮的问题写成奏议。 
English: On the 2nd day of the 6th month, the emperor issued an order to the Privy Council: All military matters should be reported directly to the emperor, without having to go through the Ministry of Defense, and issues related to money and grain should be written into a report.

古文：上都、中都、河间、济南、淄莱、真定、卫辉、洺磁、顺德、大名、河南、南京、彰德、益都、顺天、怀孟、平阳、归德诸州县蝗。
现代文：上都、中都、河间、济南、淄莱、真定、卫辉、氵名磁、顺德、大名、河南、南京、彰德、益都、顺天、怀孟、平阳、归德各州县发生蝗灾。
English: Locust plagues occurred in the prefectures of Shangdu, Zhongdu, Hema, Jinan, Minlai, Jinding, Weihui, Shunmagic, Shunde, Daimyo, Henan, Nanjing, Changde, Yidu, Shuntian, Huai Meng, Pingyang, and Guide.

古文：癸卯，宋将范文虎率苏刘义、夏松等舟师十万援襄阳，阿术率诸将迎击，夺其战船百余艘，敌败走。
现代文：十一日，宋军将领范文虎率领苏刘义、夏松等人的十万名水军救援襄阳，阿术率领诸将迎战，夺取了宋军一百多艘战船，敌军败逃而去。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Song general Fan Wenhu led Su Liuyi, Xia Song and others to rescue Xiangyang with a hundred thousand naval troops, while Ah Shou led the generals to fight, captured more than a hundred warships of the Song army, and the enemy army fled in defeat.

古文：平章合答又遣万户解汝楫等邀击，擒其总管朱日新、郑皋，大破之。
现代文：平章政事合答又派万户解汝楫等人半路拦击，擒获了宋军的总管朱日新、郑皋，大破宋军。
English: Pingzhang also sent Wanhu Jie Rong and others to intercept halfway, and captured Zhu Rixin, the general manager of the Song Army, and Zheng Yao, greatly defeating the Song Army.

古文：辛亥，敕： 凡管民官所领钱谷公事，并俟年终考较。 
现代文：十九日，皇上敕令： 凡是管民官领取钱粮的公务，等到年终时一起核查。 
English: On the 19th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: All the official duties of the people's commissary to receive money and grain should be checked at the end of the year.

古文：乙卯，招集河西、斡端、昂吉呵等处居民。
现代文：二十三日，招引、聚集河西、斡端、昂吉呵等地的居民。
English: On the 23rd, residents from Hexi, Yuduantang, and Anguilla were invited and gathered.

古文：己未，山东统军司塔出、董文炳侦知宋人欲据五河口，请筑城守之，既而坐失事机，宋兵已树栅其地。
现代文：二十七日，山东统军使塔出、董文炳侦察到宋军想要占据五河口，请求筑城垣守卫。后来白白地失去了机会，宋军已经在那个地方树立了栅栏。
English: On the 27th, the envoys of the Shandong United Army came out of the tower, and Dong Wenjun scouted that the Song Army wanted to occupy the mouth of the five rivers and asked to build a city wall guard. Later, the opportunity was lost in vain, and the Song Army had already erected a fence in that place.

古文：事闻，敕决罚塔出、文炳等有差。
现代文：事情传到皇上耳中，下令给塔出、董文炳不同程度的处罚。
English: The matter came to the emperor's ears, and he ordered that the pagoda and Dong Wenjun be punished to varying degrees.

古文：辽州和顺县、解州闻喜县虸蚄生。
现代文：辽州的和顺县、解州的闻喜县农田发生粘虫灾害。
English: Agricultural fields in Liaozhou's Heshun County and Liaozhou's Wensi County suffered from armyworm infestation.

古文：秋七月壬戌朔，尚书省请增太原盐课，岁以钞千锭为额，仍令本路兼领，从之。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，尚书省请求增加太原的盐税，一年以一千锭钱钞为限额，仍旧令太原本路兼管此事，皇上允从。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, Shangshu Province requested to increase the salt tax in Taiyuan, with a limit of one thousand baht banknotes per year, but still ordered Taiyuan to take charge of the matter, and the emperor agreed.

古文：设回回司天台官属，以札马剌丁为提点。签女直、水达达军。
现代文：设置回回司天台的职官，任命札马剌丁为司天台提点，签征女真族、水达达族士卒。
English: Set up officials to return to the Tiantai, appoint Zama Ding as the Tiantai point, and conscript female Zhen and Shuidada soldiers.

古文：以郑元领祠祭岳渎，授司禋大夫。
现代文：派郑元负责祭祀五岳四渎的神灵，授予他司大夫之职。
English: He assigned Zheng Yuan to be in charge of offering sacrifices to the gods of the Five Mountains and the Four Deities, and gave him the post of chief physician.

古文：丁卯，南人李忠进言，运山侍郎张大悦尝与宋交通，以其事无实，诏谕大悦： 宋善用间，朕不轻信，毋怀疑惧。 
现代文：初六，南边人李忠进言说 ：运山侍郎张大悦曾经和宋朝往来。 因为这件事没有证据，皇上下诏晓谕张大悦说： 宋朝善于用反间计，我不会轻信的，你不要有什么疑虑恐惧。 
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Li Zhong, a man from the south, said: Zhang Dayue, the servant of Yunnan Mountain, once had dealings with the Song Dynasty. Because there was no evidence of this, the emperor ordered Zhang Dayue to say: The Song Dynasty is good at using countermeasures, I will not be gullible, you should not have any doubts or fears.

古文：以国王头辇哥行尚书省于北京、辽东等路。
现代文：任命国王头辇哥在北京、辽东掌管尚书省的事务。
English: He appointed the king's eldest son in Beijing, Liaodong to be in charge of the affairs of Shangshu Province.

古文：辛未，置左、右、中三卫亲军都指挥使司。
现代文：初十，设置左、右、中三卫亲军都指挥使司。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the left, right, and middle three guards were set up to command the envoy.

古文：乙亥，巩昌、临洮、平凉府、会、兰等州陨霜杀禾。
现代文：十四日，巩昌府、临洮府、平凉府、会州、兰州等地降下霜冻，冻死禾苗。
English: On the 14th, frosts fell in Gongchang Prefecture, Linyi Prefecture, Pingliang Prefecture, Huizhou, Lanzhou and other places, freezing the seedlings to death.

古文：乙酉，宋将来兴国攻百丈山营，阿术击破之，追至湍滩，斩首二千余级。
现代文：二十四日，宋军将领来兴国攻击百丈山营垒，阿术击败了他们，追击敌人到湍滩，斩首二千多人。
English: On the 24th, the generals of the Song Army came to Xingguo to attack the Baizhang Mountain camp. Ah Shou defeated them, chased the enemy to Fentan, and beheaded more than two thousand people.

古文：高丽世子王愖入质，珍岛胁从民户来降。
现代文：高丽国王的世子王忄甚入朝做人质，珍岛上被叛党胁从的民户前来归降。
English: King Goryeo's son-in-law, King Minjong, was taken hostage by the North Korean government, and the people on Jindo Island who had been coerced by the rebels came to surrender.

古文：八月壬辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of August, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：癸巳，敕： 军站户地四顷以上，依例输租。 
现代文：初三，皇上敕令 ：军队中占有土地四顷以上的站户，按照常例交纳租税。 
English: On the third day of the first month, the emperor issued an imperial edict: station households in the army that owned more than four hectares of land had to pay taxes as usual.

古文：己亥，诏招谕宋襄阳守臣吕文焕。
现代文：初八，皇上下诏招降宋朝的襄阳守将吕文焕。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the emperor issued an imperial edict calling for the surrender of Lu Wenhuan, the Yangyang governor of the Song Dynasty.

古文：壬子，车驾至自上都。
现代文：二十一日，皇上的车驾从上都抵达。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor's carriage arrived from Shangdu.

古文：迁成都统军司于眉州。
现代文：把成都统军司迁移到眉州。
English: Relocate the Chengdu Military Region to Meizhou.

古文：己未，圣诞节，初立内外仗及云和署乐位。
现代文：二十八日，皇上寿诞，开始设立内外仪仗和掌音乐的云和署。
English: On the 28th, the Emperor's birthday, the Yunhe Station for ceremonial war and palm music at home and abroad was established.

古文：东川统军司引兵攻宋铜钹寨，守寨总管李庆等降，以庆知梁山军事。
现代文：东川统军司率军进攻宋军的铜钹寨，守寨的总管李庆等投降，任命李庆掌管梁山军的事务。
English: The Dongchuan United Army led the army to attack the Tonglu village of the Song Army, and the general manager of the village, Li Qing, surrendered and appointed Li Qing to be in charge of the affairs of the Liangshan Army.

古文：九月壬戌朔，敕都元帅阿术以所部兵略地汉南。
现代文：九月初一，皇上敕命都元帅阿术率领他部下的士卒前去攻取江南。
English: On the first day of September, the emperor ordered Marshal Ah Xiu to lead his soldiers to attack the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：癸亥，高丽世子王愖辞归，赐国王王禃西锦，优诏谕之。
现代文：初二，高丽国王的世子王忄甚辞朝返回，皇帝赐给高丽国王王礻直西锦，并以优诏抚慰他。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, King Goryeo's heir-apparent, King Minjong, returned to the imperial court. The emperor gave King Goryeo's heir-apparent, King Minjong, the brocade and consoled him with an imperial edict.

古文：甲子，赐刘整钞五百锭、邓州田五百顷，整辞，改赐民田三百户，科调如故。
现代文：初三，赐给刘整五百锭钱钞和邓州田五百顷，刘整推辞，改赐民田三百户，科差的调发和原来一样。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, Liu Jizhe was given 500 baht banknotes and 500 hectares of Dengzhou fields. Liu Jizhe refused to resign and instead gave 300 households of people's fields. The transfer of examination points was the same as before.

古文：给河南行省岁用钞二万八千六百锭。
现代文：赐给河南行省一年的经费二万八千六百锭钱钞。
English: The one-year funding given to Henan Province totals 28,600 baht.

古文：丙寅，罢陕西五路西蜀四川行尚书省，以也速答儿行四川尚书省事于兴元，京兆等路直隶尚书省。
现代文：初五，撤销陕西五路、西蜀、四川的行尚书省，派也速答儿在兴元执掌四川行尚书省的事务，把京兆等路直接隶属于尚书省。
English: On the 5th day of the first month of the year, he revoked the administration of the five provinces of Shaanxi, West Shuxi and Sichuan, and sent his son to take charge of the administration of Sichuan Province in Xingyuan, and directly subordinated Jingzhao and other provinces to the administration of the five provinces.

古文：败宋军于涡河。
现代文：在涡河击败宋军。
English: Defeated the Song army at the Turu River.

古文：戊辰，升成都府德阳县为德州，降虢州为虢略县。
现代文：初七，把成都府的德阳县升格为德州，把虢州降格为虢略县。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Deyang County in Chengdu Prefecture was upgraded to Dezhou, and Ganzhou was downgraded to Jialiao County.

古文：壬申，选胄子脱脱木儿等十人肄业国学。
现代文：十一日，挑选贵族子弟脱脱木儿等十人到国子学去学习。
English: On the 11th day of the month, ten children of aristocrats were selected to go to Kuniko to study.

古文：癸酉，益都府济州进芝二本。
现代文：十二日，益都府洛州进献灵芝二株。
English: On the 12th, two strains of Ganoderma lucidum were donated from Lozhou, Yidu Prefecture.

古文：甲戌，签西夏回回军。
现代文：十三日，签征西夏的回回士卒。
English: On the 13th, the returning soldiers from Western Xia were conscripted.

古文：太庙殿柱朽坏，监察御史劾都水刘晸监造不敬，晸以忧卒。
现代文：太庙的殿柱朽烂，监察御史指控都水监刘监造不认真，刘忧急而死。
English: The pillars of the Great Temple were rotting, and the inspector of imperial history accused the water inspector Liu Juncao of not being serious. Liu was worried and died.

古文：张易请先期告庙，然后完葺，从之。
现代文：张易请求提前祭告太庙，然后再完成修葺的工程，皇上允从。
English: Zhang Yi requested that the temple be announced in advance, and then the repair work would be completed. The emperor agreed.

古文：丙子，敕今岁享太庙毋用牺牛。
现代文：十五日，敕令今年祭祀太庙不要用牛作为牲礼。
English: On the 15th, the imperial edict was issued that no cattle should be used as sacrificial gifts for this year's temple festival.

古文：太阴犯毕。
现代文：太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: If the moon is too dark, the stars will not be able to shine.

古文：庚辰，右卫亲军都指挥使忽都等言： 五河城堡已成，唯庐舍未完，凡材甓皆出宋境，请率精兵分道抄掠。 
现代文：十九日，右卫亲军都指挥使忽都等进言 ：五河的城堡已经修筑完成，只是居住的房屋还没有修好，所有的木材和砖瓦都出在宋朝境内，请允许我们率领精锐的兵卒分几路前去夺取。 
English: On the 19th, the commander of the Right Guards and the pro-imperial troops gave a speech: the castle in the Five Rivers has been completed, but the residential houses have not yet been repaired. All the wood and bricks are in the territory of the Song Dynasty. Please allow us to lead the elite soldiers a few miles to seize it.

古文：从之。壬午，山东路统军司言宋兵攻胶州，千户蒋德等逆战败之，俘统制范广等五十余人，获战船百艘。
现代文：皇上允从，二十一日，山东路统军司报告说 ：宋军进攻胶州，千户蒋德等人迎战，击败了宋军，俘获了宋军统制范广等五十余人，缴获战船一百艘。 
English: Emperor Yunzong, on the 21st day of the month, the Shandong Road Union Army Division reported: The Song Army attacked Jiaozhou, and Qianhu Jiangde and others went to war, defeated the Song Army, captured more than fifty people such as the Song Army commander Fan Guang, and captured one hundred warships.

古文：癸未，诏忙安仓失陷米五千余石，特免征，仍禁诸王非理需索。
现代文：二十二日，诏令：因忙安仓失陷粮米五千余石，特免向该仓征调粮米，并禁止诸侯王不合理的需求索取。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial decree was issued: Due to the loss of more than 5,000 koku of grain and rice in the busy and safe warehouse, the collection of grain and rice from this warehouse was exempted, and the unreasonable demand of the princes was prohibited.

古文：诏以四川民力困弊，免茶盐等课税，以军民田租给沿边军食。
现代文：诏令：因为四川百姓的财力困顿凋敝，免征四川的茶盐等赋税，把军民的田租供给边境地区的军队食用。
English: Imperial edict: Because the financial resources of the people of Sichuan are exhausted, the tea salt and other taxes of Sichuan are exempted, and the farm rents of the military and civilians are provided to the troops in the border areas for consumption.

古文：仍敕： 有司自今有言茶盐之利者，以违制论。 
现代文：同时下敕令 ：官员中从现在起有谈论茶盐利益的，以违法论处。 
English: At the same time, an edict was issued: from now on, if any officials talk about the benefits of tea and salt, they will be punished for breaking the law.

古文：冬十月癸巳，大司农臣言： 高唐州达鲁花赤忽都纳、州尹张廷瑞、同知陈思济劝课有效，河南府陕县尹王仔怠于劝课，宜加黜陟，以示劝惩。 
现代文：冬季，十月初三，大司农臣进言 ：高唐州镇守官忽都纳、州尹张廷瑞、同知陈思济勉励农耕有功，河南府陕县县尹王仔勉励农耕怠惰不力，应当分别给以提拔或贬黜，以表示有奖有罚。 
English: In the winter, on the third day of October, the Chief Secretary of the Agricultural Ministers proposed that the town guards of Gaotang Prefecture should be promoted or demoted, respectively, to show that there are rewards and punishments.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：丁酉，享于太庙。
现代文：初七，在太庙举行祭祀典礼。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, offerings are made to the Imperial Temple.

古文：己未，檀、顺等州风潦害稼。
现代文：二十九日，檀州、顺州等州的大风和渍水损害庄稼。
English: On the 29th, high winds and waterlogging in Danzhou, Shunzhou and other provinces damaged crops.

古文：赐高丽至元九年历。
现代文：赐给高丽至元九年的历书。
English: The calendar book given to Goryeo in the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：十一月辛酉朔，敕品官子孙儤直，敕遣阿鲁忒儿等抚治大理。
现代文：十一月初一，皇帝敕令有品阶的官员的子孙到官府值班。敕命派遣阿鲁忒儿等镇抚、治理大理。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the emperor ordered the sons and grandsons of dignified officials to be on duty at the government office.

古文：壬戌，罢诸路交钞都提举司。
现代文：初二，撤销各路的交钞都提举司。
English: On the second day of the first semester, the revocation of the payment of banknotes in all directions was raised.

古文：乙亥，刘秉忠及王磐、徒单公履等言： 元正、朝会、圣节、诏赦及百官宣敕，具公服迎拜行礼。 
现代文：十五日，刘秉忠和王磐、徒单公履等进言 ：正月初一，朝见皇帝，皇帝寿诞，下诏大赦天下以及向百官宣读诏书，大臣都应该穿上朝服面对皇帝行叩拜的礼节。 
English: On the 15th, Liu Bingzhong, Wang Bang and Tutan Gonglu made the following suggestions: On the first day of the first month of the year, the emperor should be seen in the morning, the emperor's birthday should be celebrated, the emperor should be pardoned and the imperial edict should be read to all officials, and the ministers should wear imperial robes to face the emperor and perform the etiquette of kowtowing.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：禁行金《泰和律》。
现代文：禁止实行金国的《泰和律》。
English: The implementation of the "Thai Peace Law" of the People's Republic of China is prohibited.

古文：建国号曰大元，诏曰：
现代文：建立国号为 大元 ，诏令说：
English: The country's founding name was Daiyuan, and the imperial edict said:

古文：诞膺景命，奄四海以宅尊；必有美名，绍百王而纪统。
现代文： 获得了天命，就会拥有四海而居于尊位；要继承百代的帝业，纪录天下的统一，就必须有一个美名。
English: If one obtains the Mandate of Heaven, one will possess the four seas and live in a dignified position; if one wants to inherit the empire of a hundred generations and record the unification of the world, one must have a good name.

古文：肇从隆古，匪独我家。
现代文：从远古以来都是这样，并不仅只是我一家如此。
English: It's been that way since time immemorial, and it's not just my family.

古文：且唐之为言荡也，尧以之而著称；虞之为言乐也，舜因之而作号。
现代文：再说 唐 这个字是 广大 的意思，尧却凭着它而闻名于世； 虞 这个字是 娱乐 的意思，舜却借它作为自己的名号。
English: In addition, the word "Tang" means "vast," but Yu is famous for it in the world; "Yu" means "entertainment," but Yu uses it as his name.

古文：驯至禹兴而汤造，互名夏大以殷中。
现代文：渐进到夏禹兴起，商汤创业，分别取名为 夏 和 殷 。
English: Gradually to the rise of Xia Yu, Shang Tang entrepreneurship, respectively named Xia and Yin.

古文：世降以还，事殊非古。
现代文：时世推移到如今，事情发生了变化，不同于往古了。
English: Times have moved on, things have changed, things are different now.

古文：虽乘时而有国，不以利而制称。
现代文：虽然借助于时势而占有了国家，却不从字义出发来取名。
English: Although they took over the country with the help of the current situation, they did not take the name from the literal meaning.

古文：为秦为汉者，著从初起之地名；曰隋曰唐者，因即所封之爵邑。
现代文：之所以称为 秦朝 ，称为 汉 ，只是依照刚开始兴起时所据有的地名。称为 隋朝 、 唐朝 的原因，只是俯从了所封爵邑的名号。
English: The reason why they are called the Qin Dynasty and the Han Dynasty is simply based on the place names that existed when they first arose. The reason why they are called the Sui Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty is simply due to the name of the knighted county.

古文：是皆徇百姓见闻之狃习，要一时经制之权宜，概以至公，不无少贬。
现代文：这都是曲就了百姓们见闻的习惯，主要是一时间建立法制的权宜之计，虽然是出于极公允的考虑，但多少是一种贬低。
English: All of this is a habit of the people, mainly a temporary measure to establish a legal system. Although it is a very fair consideration, it is somewhat of a disparagement.

古文：我太祖圣武皇帝，握乾符而起朔土，以神武而膺帝图，四震天声，大恢土宇，舆图之广，历古所无。
现代文： 我朝太祖圣武皇帝握有皇天的符命而崛起于北方，凭着神授的武功而获得了帝业，盛大的名声震动四方，疆土广大辽阔。版图的宽广，是自古以来所没有的。
English: My great-great-grandfather, Emperor Shenwu, rose to power in the north with a heavenly mandate, and gained imperial power with martial arts skills bestowed by the gods. His great fame shook the four quarters, and his territory was vast and wide. The breadth of the territory was unprecedented since ancient times.

古文：顷者耆宿诣庭，奏章申请，谓既成于大业，宜早定于鸿名。
现代文：近日前辈老臣前来朝廷，奉上奏章陈述请求，说是既然已经成就了立国的大业，就应该早日确定王朝的美名。
English: Recently, a senior minister came to the imperial court with a request to submit a report, saying that since the great cause of founding the country had been accomplished, the reputation of the dynasty should be determined as soon as possible.

古文：在古制以当然，于朕心乎何有。
现代文：按照古制，这是理所当然的，我的心里也不难接受。
English: According to the old system, this is a matter of course, and it is not difficult for me to accept.

古文：可建国号曰大元，盖取《易经》 乾元 之义。
现代文：所以建立国号叫作 大元 ，这是取的《易经》上 乾元 的含义。
English: Therefore, the establishment of the national anthem is called the Great Yuan, which is the meaning of the Qianyuan in the I Ching.

古文：兹大冶流形于庶品，孰名资始之功；予一人底宁于万邦，尤切体仁之要。
现代文：这就像精于铸造的铁工能把他的技艺赋予万类一样。怎样才能表示帮助创始的功效呢？我一个人怎么能使万方得以安宁，因此尤其要深刻地体察仁德的要义。
English: Just as a skilled ironworker can impart his skills to all kinds of things, how can I express the effect of helping the founder? How can I alone bring peace to the world, so I must deeply understand the essence of benevolence.

古文：事从因革，道协天人。
现代文：事情从因袭沿革而来，道义协调着天人的关系。
English: Things come from heredity and evolution, and morality coordinates the relationship between heaven and man.

古文：於戏！称义而名，固匪为之溢美；孚休惟永，尚不负于投艰。
现代文：唉，称赏字义而作为本朝的名称决不是为了誉美；只有获得永久的信用和荫庇，才不会辜负所经历的艰难。
English: Alas, it is by no means for the sake of fame that the name of this dynasty has been chosen as the name of the word "appreciation"; it is only by gaining eternal trust and shade that it will not fail to live up to the hardships it has experienced.

古文：嘉与敷天，共隆大号。
现代文：吉庆铺陈于普天之下，共同尊崇这大号。 
English: The auspicious festival is spread all over the world, and everyone reveres this great trumpet.

古文：丙戌，置四川省于成都。
现代文：二十六日，在成都设置四川行中书省。
English: On the 26th, the Sichuan-bound China Book Ministry was set up in Chengdu.

古文：上都万安阁成。
现代文：上都的万安阁建成。
English: Shangdu's Wan'an Pavilion is completed.

古文：十二月辛卯朔，诏天下兴起国字学。
现代文：十二月初一，皇上下诏全国兴办蒙古文字学校。
English: On the first day of December, the emperor issued an imperial edict to establish Mongolian script schools throughout the country.

古文：宣徽院请以阑遗、漏籍等户淘金，帝曰： 姑止，毋重劳吾民也。 
现代文：宣徽院请求以无主的驱口或漏登册籍的民户去淘金。皇帝说 ：暂时停止，不要让我的百姓过于劳累了。 
English: The Emperor said, "Stop for the time being, don't let my people get too tired."

古文：乙巳，减百官俸。
现代文：十五日，减少官员们的俸禄。
English: On the 15th, officials' salaries were reduced.

古文：括西夏田。
现代文：统计西夏的田亩。
English: Counting the number of acres in Western Xia.

古文：召塔出、董文炳赴阙。
现代文：征召塔出、董文炳前来朝廷。
English: After being called up, Dong Wenyi came to the imperial court.

古文：辛亥，并太常寺入翰林院，宫殿府入少府监。
现代文：二十一日，把太常寺并入翰林院，宫殿府并入少府监。
English: On the twenty-first day, Taizho-ji Temple was merged into Hanlin-in Temple, and the Imperial Palace was merged into the Junior Prefectural Government.

古文：甲寅，诏尚书省迁入中书省。
现代文：二十四日，下诏把尚书省迁入中书省。
English: On the 24th, the next imperial edict moved Shangshu Province into Zhongshu Province.

古文：是岁，天下户一百九十四万六千二百七十。
现代文：这一年，全国共有一百九十四万六千二百七十户。
English: In that year, there were a total of 1,946,270 households across the country.

古文：赐先朝后妃及诸王金、银、币、帛如岁例，赐囊家等羊马价钞万千一百六十七锭。
现代文：按照每年的常例赐给先朝的后妃以及诸侯王黄金、白银、钱钞、绢帛，赐给囊家等人羊马价钱钞一万一千一百六十七锭。
English: In accordance with the annual tradition, gold, silver, banknotes and ingots were given to the empresses of the previous dynasties and princes, and 11,167 guilders worth of bills were given to collectors.

古文：断死罪一百五人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪犯共一百零五人。
English: A total of 105 criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

古文：九年春正月庚申朔，高丽国王王禃遣其臣礼宾卿宣文烈来贺，兼奉岁贡。
现代文：至元九年春，正月初一，高丽国王王礻直派遣他的使臣、礼宾卿宣文烈前来恭贺新年，兼奉献每年的常例贡品。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, on the first day of the first month of the year, the King of Korea, Wang Xizhi, sent his envoy, the Lord of Protocol, Xuan Wenliang, to come to congratulate the New Year and also to offer the annual tribute.

古文：甲子，并尚书省入中书省，平章尚书省事阿合马、同平章尚书省事张易并中书平章政事，参知尚书省事张惠为中书左丞，参知尚书省事李尧咨、麦术丁并参知中书政事。
现代文：初五，把尚书省并入中书省，尚书省平章政事阿合马、尚书省同平章事张易均任中书省平章政事，尚书省参知政事张惠任中书省左丞，尚书省参知政事李尧咨、麦术丁均任中书省参知政事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Shangshu Province was merged into Zhongshu Province, Pingzhang of Shangshu Province was appointed to Ahma, Tongping of Shangshu Province was appointed to Pingzhang of Shangshu Province, Zhang Hui of Shangshu Province was appointed to Zuo of Shangshu Province, Li Jianzhe of Shangshu Province and Mei Juting of Shangshu Province were appointed to Zhongshu Province.

古文：罢给事中、中书舍人、检正等官，仍设左右司，省六部为四，改称中书。
现代文：撤销给事中、中书舍人、检正等官职，仍旧设置左右司，把六部减少为四部，改称为中书省。
English: It revoked the appointment of officials such as the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, and the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, and still set up the Left and Right Departments, reduced the six departments to four, and renamed it the Ministry of the People's Republic of China.

古文：丙寅，诏遣不花及马璘谕高丽具舟粮助征耽罗。
现代文：初七，下诏派遣不花及马王谕令高丽国准备舟船粮食，协助征讨耽罗。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the king issued an edict ordering the Koryo Kingdom to prepare a shipload of grain to assist in the conquest of Tanro.

古文：河南省请益兵，敕诸路签军三万。
现代文：河南省请求增兵，皇帝敕令各路签征兵卒三万人。
English: Henan Province requested an increase in troops, and the emperor issued an order for the enlistment of 30,000 soldiers.

古文：丁丑，敕皇子西平王奥鲁赤、阿鲁帖木儿、秃哥及南平王秃鲁所部与四川行省也速带儿部下，并忙古带等十八族、欲速公弄等土番军，同征建都。
现代文：十八日，敕令皇子西平王奥鲁赤、阿鲁帖木儿、秃哥以及南平王秃鲁所率领的部众和四川行省的也速带儿的部下，加上忙古带等十八个部族、欲速公弄等土番军，共同征伐建都。
English: On the 18th day of the month, he ordered the prince Xiping Wang Oluka, Aru Timur, and Bald Eagle, as well as the members led by Nanping King Bald Eagle and the subordinates of Sichuan Province, together with the eighteen tribes such as Hegu, and the local troops such as Zhiguang, to jointly conquer and build the capital.

古文：新安州初隶雄州，诏为县入顺天。
现代文：新安州刚刚隶属于雄州，皇上下诏改为县，划入顺天。
English: Xin'an County was just subordinated to Xiongzhou, and the imperial edict was changed to county, and it was transferred to Shuntian.

古文：庚辰，改北京、中兴、四川、河南四路行尚书省为行中书省。
现代文：二十一日，把北京、中兴、四川、河南四个路的行尚书省改为行中书省。
English: On the 21st, the four provinces of Beijing, Zhongxing, Sichuan and Henan were renamed as the provinces of the book.

古文：京兆复立行省，仍命诸王只必帖木儿设省断事官。
现代文：京兆府重新建立行中书省，并命令诸侯王只必帖木儿设置行省断事官。
English: Jingzhao Prefecture re-established the Guanzhong Book Ministry, and ordered the princes to set up a Guanzhong adjudicator.

古文：给西平王奥鲁赤马价弓矢，赐南平王秃鲁银印及金银符各五。
现代文：给予西平王奥鲁赤马价银、弓矢。赐给南平王秃鲁银印及金银牌符各五枚。
English: King Olu of the Western Plain was given a red horse, silver and a bow and arrow, and King Baloo of the Southern Plain was given a silver seal and five gold and silver tokens.

古文：辛巳，移凤州屯田于盐、白二州。
现代文：二十二日，把凤州的屯田移到盐州、白州二州。
English: On the 22nd, the military camps in Fengzhou were moved to Yanzhou and Baizhou.

古文：敕董文炳时巡掠南境，毋令宋人得立城堡。
现代文：敕令董文炳随时巡查、劫掠南方的边境，不许让宋军得以建立城堡。
English: He ordered Dong Wenjun to patrol and plunder the southern border at any time, and not to allow the Song Army to build castles.

古文：敕： 军民讼田者，民田有余则分之军，军田有余亦分之民。
现代文：敕令 ：军民之间为农田而发生纠纷，百姓的田地有多的，就把田地分给军队，军队的田地有多的，就分给百姓。
English: Imperial edict: In the event of a dispute between the military and the people over farmland, if the people have more fields, the fields will be allocated to the military, and if the military has more fields, they will be allocated to the people.

古文：仍遣能臣听其直，其军奴入民籍者，还正之。 
现代文：还要派遣有能力的大臣听取他们的理由，那些划入了民户的军奴，仍然把他们划回军户。 
English: It is also necessary to send competent ministers to listen to their reasons, and those military slaves who have been assigned to civilian households should still be assigned back to military households.

古文：敕燕王遣使持香幡，祠岳渎、后土、五台兴国寺。
现代文：敕命燕王派遣使者带着香烛和旗旌前去祭祀山神、水神、土地神、五台山兴国寺。
English: In his dying breath, King Yan sent an envoy with incense and flags to worship the mountain gods, water gods, earth gods, and Mount Wutai at Xingguo Temple.

古文：命刘整总汉军。
现代文：命令刘整统领汉军。
English: He ordered Liu Hei to lead the Han army.

古文：壬午，改山东东路都元帅府统军司为行枢密院，以也速带儿、塔出并为行枢密院副使。
现代文：二十三日，把山东东路都元帅府统军司改为行枢密院，任命也速带儿、塔出共同担任行枢密院副使。
English: On the 23rd, he changed the Shandong Donglu Du Marshal's Office of the Central Military Commission to the Executive Privy Council, and appointed Ya Huxiao Er and Tade to jointly serve as deputy envoys of the Executive Privy Council.

古文：乙酉，定受宣敕官礼仪。
现代文：二十六日，确定接受宣命的官员的礼仪。
English: On the 26th, the etiquette of the officials receiving the proclamation was determined.

古文：诏元帅府统军司、总管万户府阅实军籍。
现代文：下诏令元帅府统军司和总管万户府核实军队的名册。
English: He issued an order to the marshal of the prefectural army and the general manager of the prefectural army to verify the army's roster.

古文：二月庚寅朔，奉使日本赵良弼遣书状官张铎同日本二十六人，至京师求见。
现代文：二月初一，奉命出使日本的赵良弼派遣书状官张铎，同日本方面的二十六个人到京师求见皇上。
English: On the first day of February, Zhao Liangyao, who was sent by Japan, was ordered to send Zhang Yao, a document officer, and 26 people from the Japanese side to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：辛卯，诏： 札鲁忽赤乃太祖开创之始所置，位百司右，其赐银印，立左右司。 
现代文：初二，皇帝的诏命说 ：大断事官乃是太祖皇帝开创帝业初期所设置的，地位在百官之上，应该赐给银印，设立左右司。 
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the emperor's edict said: the great adjudicator was set up in the early days of the founding of the empire by the great-grandfather emperor, the position is above a hundred officials, the silver seal should be given, and the left and right departments should be set up.

古文：壬辰，高丽国王王禃遣其臣齐安侯王淑来贺改国号。
现代文：初三，高丽国王王礻直派遣他的大臣齐安侯王淑来恭贺更改国号。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the king of Goryeo, Wang Xizhi, sent his minister, the lord of Qian, Wang Shu, to congratulate the change of the country's name.

古文：改中都为大都。
现代文：把中都改名为大都。
English: Rename Zhongdu to Datou.

古文：甲午，命阿术典蒙古军，刘整、阿里海牙典汉军。
现代文：初五，命令阿术执掌蒙古军，刘整、阿里海牙执掌汉军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he ordered Ah Shu to take charge of the Mongolian army, and Liu Zhengyi and Ali Haiga to take charge of the Chinese army.

古文：戊戌，以去岁东平及西京等州县旱蝗水潦，免其租赋。
现代文：初九，因为去年东平及西京等州县发生旱灾、蝗灾、水灾，免征这些地方的租税。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, because droughts, locust plagues and floods occurred in counties such as Dongping and Xijing last year, these places were exempted from tax.

古文：庚子，复唐州泌阳县。
现代文：十一日，恢复设置唐州泌阳县建制。
English: On the 11th, the establishment of Tangzhou Xuyang County was resumed.

古文：建中书省署于大都。
现代文：在大都建立中书省衙署。
English: In most of the provinces, the Central Publishing Office has been established.

古文：戊申，始祭先农如祭社之仪。
现代文：十九日，开始像祭祀社稷神仪式一样地祭祀神农氏。
English: On the 19th, the Shinnong clan began to be worshipped in the same way as the Shinto ritual.

古文：诏诸路开浚水利。
现代文：诏令各路疏浚、兴修水利设施。
English: He ordered all roads to be dredged and water conservancy facilities to be built.

古文：车驾幸上都。
现代文：皇上的车驾抵达上都。
English: The emperor's car drove to Shangdu.

古文：三月乙丑，谕旨中书省，日本使人速议遣还。
现代文：三月初七，下谕旨给中书省，日本派来的使者，立即决定遣发他们返回本国。
English: On the seventh day of the third month, an order was issued to the Ministry of Chinese Literature, the envoy sent by Japan, to immediately decide to send them back to their home country.

古文：安童言： 良弼请移金州戍兵，勿使日本妄生疑惧。
现代文：安童进言： 赵良弼请求转移金州的守军，不要使得日本随便产生怀疑和恐惧。
English: Ando's advice: Zhao Liangyao requested that the defenders of Jinzhou be moved, and that Japan should not be made to feel suspicious and fearful.

古文：臣等以为金州戍兵，彼国所知，若复移戍，恐非所宜。
现代文：臣等认为：金州驻有守军是日本国早就知道的，如果重新转移戍守的地方恐怕不大合适。
English: The vassals believed that Japan had known for a long time that a garrison was stationed in Jinzhou, and it would not be appropriate to relocate the garrison.

古文：但开谕来使，此戍乃为耽罗暂设，尔等不须疑畏也。 
现代文：只要开导晓谕来使：这些守军是为了对付耽罗而暂时设置的，你们不必产生怀疑和畏惧。 
English: Let this be a lesson to you: these guards have been temporarily set up to deal with Tamro, and you need not have any doubts or fears.

古文：帝称善。
现代文：皇帝认为很好。
English: Wen Di thought it was right.

古文：甲戌，括民间《四教经》，焚之。
现代文：十六日，收缴民间的《四教经》，将它们焚毁。
English: On the 16th, they confiscated the folk "Four Teachings" and burned them.

古文：蒙古都元帅阿术、汉军都元帅刘整、阿里海牙督本军破樊城外郛，斩首二千级，生擒将领十六人，增筑重围守之。
现代文：蒙古军都元帅阿术，汉军都元帅刘整、阿里海牙督率本军攻破樊城的外城，斩杀二千名敌人，生擒宋军将领十六人，增修重重围栅以防备宋军。
English: The Mongolian army's Grand Marshal Ah Zh, the Chinese army's Grand Marshal Liu Ching and Ali Hague led the army to break through the outer city of Gancheng, killing two thousand enemies, killing sixteen generals of the Song Army, and repairing more and more fences to prevent the Song Army.

古文：赈济南路饥。
现代文：赈济济南路的饥民。
English: Starving people on Jinan Road in Handan.

古文：诏免医户差徭。
现代文：下诏免除医户的科差徭役。
English: The following edict exempts medical institutions from the duty of grading.

古文：夏四月己丑，诏于土番、西川界立宁河驿。
现代文：夏季，四月初二，下诏在土蕃、西川的边界设立宁河驿。
English: In the summer, on the second day of April, it was decreed that the Ninghe Pass would be established at the border of the Tuyun and the West River.

古文：辛卯，赐皇子爱牙赤所部马。
现代文：初四，赐予皇子爱牙赤部下马匹。
English: On the fourth day of the school year, Prince Aizu was given a pair of red horses.

古文：丙午，给西平王奥鲁赤所部米。
现代文：十九日，赐给西平王奥鲁赤的部下粮米。
English: On the 19th, grain and rice were given to the subordinates of King Oroqen of Xiping.

古文：甲寅，赈大都路饥。
现代文：二十七日，赈济大都路的饥民。
English: On the 27th, the starving people of Datu Road in Handan were helped.

古文：五月戊午朔，立和林转运司，以小云失别为使，兼提举交钞使。
现代文：五月初一，设立和林转运司，任命小云失别为转运司使，兼任提举交钞使。
English: On the first day of May, the Warim Transportation Department was established, and Xiao Yunbu was appointed as the envoy of the Transportation Department, and also served as the envoy of raising and handing in banknotes.

古文：己未，给阔阔出海青银符二。
现代文：初二，赐给阔阔出海东青银符二枚。
English: On the second day of the new year, two East Qing silver coins were given to Kuo Kuo for going to sea.

古文：辛酉，罢签回回军。
现代文：初四，停止签征回回军。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, stop signing up for the army.

古文：癸亥，敕拔都军于怯鹿难之地开渠耕田。
现代文：初六，敕命勇士军在怯鹿难地方开挖水渠种田。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the brave soldiers dug canals to grow crops in the area.

古文：丙寅，签徐、邳二州丁壮万人戍邳州。
现代文：初九，签征徐州、邳州两州的丁壮一万人为军，戍守邳州。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, Ding Zhuang of Xuzhou and Zhangzhou recruited 10,000 soldiers to defend Zhangzhou.

古文：庚午，减铁冶户，罢西蕃秃鲁干等处金银矿户为民。禁汉人聚众与蒙古人斗殴。
现代文：十三日，减少铁冶户。停止把西蕃秃鲁干等处的金银矿户改为民户，禁止汉人聚众与蒙古人斗殴。
English: On the 13th, the number of iron smelting households was reduced, the conversion of gold and silver mining households into private households in West Luzon and other places was stopped, and it was forbidden for Han people to gather and fight with Mongolians.

古文：诏议取耽罗及济州。
现代文：下诏决定攻取耽罗和济川。
English: Under the imperial edict, it was decided to capture Tamro and Jichuan.

古文：辛巳，敕修筑都城，凡费悉从官给，毋取诸民，并蠲伐木役夫税赋。
现代文：二十四日，敕令修筑京师的城垣，所有的费用全部由官府供给，不得向百姓们索取，同时免除砍伐木料的民工的赋税。
English: On the 24th, the imperial edict ordered the construction of the city walls of Beijing Division. All expenses were provided by the government, and could not be requested from the people. At the same time, the taxes of the migrant workers who cut wood were exempted.

古文：甲申，敕诸路军户驱丁，除至元七年前从良入民籍者当差，余虽从良，并令助本户军力。
现代文：二十七日，敕令各路军户中的军奴，除了至元七年以前脱离奴籍编入民户的当差之外，其余的即使脱离了奴籍，仍然令他们帮助本军出力应征。
English: On the 27th day of the month, the emperor ordered the slaves in all military households, except those who had left the slave class before the 7th year of the Yuan Dynasty and were assigned to private households, even if they had left the slave class, they were still required to help the army to conscript.

古文：乙酉，太白犯毕距星。
现代文：二十八日，金星干犯毕宿的距星。
English: On the 28th, Venus became the last of the distant stars.

古文：宫城初建东西华、左右掖门。
现代文：宫城初建东华门、西华门、左掖门、右掖门。
English: The East China Gate, the West China Gate, the Left Gate and the Right Gate were built for the first time in Miyagi.

古文：诏安集答里伯所部流民。
现代文：下诏安抚、收聚答里伯所部的流民。
English: The following edict was issued to pacify and gather together the displaced people in the Tobosho area.

古文：六月壬辰，遣高丽国西京属城诸达鲁花赤及质子金镒等归国。
现代文：六月初六，遣发高丽国西京属城的各镇守官和做人质的子弟金镒等回国。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：减乞里吉思屯田所入租，仍遣南人百名，给牛具以往。
现代文：减征乞里吉思屯田所收入的田租，并派遣一百个南方人，供给他们耕牛、农具前往。
English: He reduced the tax on the farm rents received by the tented farm in Qirigis, and sent a hundred southerners, providing them with oxen and farm tools.

古文：是夜，京师大雨，坏墙屋，压死者众。
现代文：当夜京师天降大雨，损坏了墙屋，压死了很多人。
English: That night, heavy rain fell in Kyoto, damaging the masonry houses and killing many people.

古文：癸巳，敕以籍田所储粮赈民，不足，又发近地官仓济之。
现代文：初七，敕令用官府公田所储备的粮食赈济饥民，储备粮不够，又打开附近地区的官仓赈济灾民。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Emperor ordered that the grain stored in the public fields of the government should be used to feed the hungry, but the grain reserves were not enough, and the government warehouses in the nearby areas were opened to help the victims.

古文：甲午，高丽告饥，转东京米二万石赈之。
现代文：初八，高丽奏报饥荒的情况，从东京转运二万石米去赈济他们。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Goryeo reported on the famine situation and transported 20,000 koku of rice from Tokyo to help them.

古文：己亥，山东路行枢密院塔出于四月十三日遣步骑趋涟州，攻破射龙沟、五港口、盐场、白头河四处城堡，杀宋兵三百余人，虏获人牛万计，第功赏赉有差。
现代文：十三日，山东路行枢密院塔出于四月十三日派遣步兵骑兵前往涟州，攻破宋军射龙沟、五港口、盐场、白头河四处城堡，杀死宋军士兵三百多人，俘获的人口耕牛数以万计，按照功劳的等第给以不同数量的赏赐。
English: On the 13th, the Privy Council Tower of Shandong Province sent infantry and cavalry to Zhangzhou on April 13 to break the four castles of the Song Army, including Xialonggou, Wuhang, Yanchang and Baotouhe, killed more than 300 Song Army soldiers, captured tens of thousands of cattle, and gave different amounts of rewards according to the degree of merit.

古文：辛亥，高丽国王王禃请讨耽罗余寇。
现代文：二十五日，高丽国王王礻直请求讨伐耽罗残余的贼寇。
English: On the 25th, the King of Goryeo, Wang Jianzhi, requested that the remaining bandits in Tham Luo be defeated.

古文：秋七月丁巳朔，河南省臣言： 往岁徙民实边屯耕，以贫苦悉散还家。
现代文：秋季，七月初一，河南行省的官员上奏说： 往年迁徙百姓充实边境实行屯垦，把其中贫困的全部遣散回老家。
English: In the autumn, on the first day of July, the officials of Henan Province made a report saying: In previous years, the migrating people should enrich the border, carry out settlement, and send all the poor back to their hometowns.

古文：今唐、邓、蔡、息、徐、邳之民，爱其田庐，仍守故屯，愿以丝银准折输粮，而内地州县转粟饷军者，反厌苦之。
现代文：现在唐州、邓州、蔡州、息州、徐州、邳州的老百姓，爱恋他们的田亩庐舍，仍然守着他们原先的屯田，愿意用丝税银按一定的标准折合成粮食上交，而内地转运粮食来供应军粮的州县，反而对此很怨恨。
English: Now, the people of Tangzhou, Dengzhou, Caizhou, Xizhou, Xuzhou, and Ganzhou are in love with their farmlands, still guarding their original farmlands, and are willing to use silk tax and silver to produce grain according to a certain standard. However, the states and counties that transship grain from the mainland to supply military grain are very resentful.

古文：臣议今岁沿边州郡，宜仍其旧输粮，内地州郡，验其户数，俾折钞就沿边和籴，庶几彼此交便。 制曰： 可。 
现代文：我们认为今年沿边境地区的州郡，仍然应当按照原来的办法交纳粮食，内地的州郡，查实他们的户数，令他们折合成钱钞，就近在沿边境地区实行平价购买，这样彼此近乎于互相有利了。 皇上决定说 ：可以。 
English: We think that this year, the counties along the border areas should still pay grain according to the original method, and the counties in the mainland should verify their household numbers, convert them into banknotes, and implement parity purchase in the border areas, so that they are close to each other and mutually beneficial.

古文：拘括开元、东京等路诸漏籍户。
现代文：聚集登记开元、东京等路户籍时漏登的民户。
English: Gather together the private households that were not registered at the time of registration, such as those in Tokyo.

古文：禁私鬻《回回历》。
现代文：禁止私自售卖回回历书。
English: It is forbidden to sell and resell the lunar calendar book.

古文：赈水达达部饥。
现代文：赈济水达达部落的饥民。
English: To bring water to the hungry people of the Dada tribe.

古文：戊寅，赐诸王八八部银钞。
现代文：二十二日，赐给诸侯王八八部属银两和银钞。
English: On the twenty-second day, eighty-eight pieces of silver and silver banknotes were given to the princes.

古文：集都城僧诵《大藏经》九会。
现代文：集合京师的僧侣诵《大藏经》，共九次。
English: The assembled monks of the Beijing Division recited the "Great Tibetan Scriptures" a total of nine times.

古文：壬午，和礼霍孙奏： 蒙古字设国子学，而汉官子弟未有学者，及官府文移犹有畏吾字。 
现代文：二十六日，和礼霍孙上奏说： 以蒙古文字设立了国子学，而汉族官员的子弟却没有学习蒙古文字的，官府的公文也还有用畏吾儿文字的。 
English: On the 26th, He Lihuosun said: Mongolian script was used to establish the education of the sons of the country, but the sons of Han officials did not learn the Mongolian script, and the official documents of the government also used the dreaded Mongolian script.

古文：诏自今凡诏令并以蒙古字行，仍遣百官子弟入学。乙酉，免徙大罗镇居民，令倍输租米给鹰坊。
现代文：下诏：从现在起，凡是朝廷的诏令同时用蒙古文字颁行。二十九日，停止迁移大罗镇的居民，令他们加倍交纳租米给鹰坊。
English: The following edict was issued: From now on, all imperial edicts were to be issued in Mongolian at the same time. On the 29th, the relocation of the residents of Dara Town was to be stopped, and they were to pay double the rent of rice to Yingfang.

古文：诏分阅大都、京兆等处探马赤奴户名籍。
现代文：下诏分别核查大都、京兆等处探马赤军奴户的名册。
English: The following is a list of the names of Red Army slave households that were separately inspected in the capital, Beijing, and other places.

古文：八月丙戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of August, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：戊子，立群牧所，掌牧马及尚方鞍勒。
现代文：初三，建立群牧所，掌管牧马和皇室所用马鞍和嚼勒的事务。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he established a herd ranch and took charge of the saddles and bridles used by wranglers and the royal family.

古文：壬辰，敕忙安仓及靖州预储粮五万石，以备弘吉剌新徙部民及西人内附者廪给。
现代文：初七，敕令忙安仓及净州预储五万石粮食，以备弘吉剌部落新迁徙的部民，以及西边内附人口的供给。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the year, the king ordered that 50,000 koku of grain be pre-stored in Ancang and Chingzhou to prepare for the newly migrated members of the Hongjitai tribe, as well as the supply of the population in the west.

古文：调兵增戍全罗州。
现代文：调兵增强对全罗州的戍守。
English: Troops were transferred to strengthen the defense of Jeolla Province.

古文：乙未，禁诸人以己事辄呼至尊称号者。
现代文：初十，禁止所有的人因为自己的私事而随便呼喊皇帝的称号。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, it is forbidden for anyone to casually shout the title of emperor because of their private affairs.

古文：丁酉，立斡脱所。
现代文：十二日，设立官商所。
English: On the 12th, a government trading office was established in Chongqing.

古文：己亥，诸王阔阔出请以分地宁海、登、莱三州自为一路，与他王比，岁赋惟入宁海，无输益都，诏从之。
现代文：十四日，诸侯王阔阔出请求把分封给他的宁海、登州、莱州三州自成为一路，和其他诸侯王相近，每年的赋税只收进宁海，不交纳给益都，皇上下诏允从。
English: On the 14th day of the month, the prince requested that the three provinces of Ninghai, Dengzhou and Laizhou, which had been assigned to him, be made into one province, similar to other princes. The annual tax would only be collected in Ninghai, and would not be paid to Yiwu. The emperor agreed.

古文：癸卯，千户崔松败宋襄阳援兵，斩其将张顺，赐松等将士有差。
现代文：十八日，千户崔松击败宋军派往襄阳的援兵，斩杀宋将张顺，赐给崔松等将士不同数量的奖赏。
English: On the 18th, Qianhu Cui Song defeated the reinforcements sent to Xiangyang by the Song army, killed Song general Zhang Shun, and gave different amounts of rewards to Cui Song and other soldiers.

古文：乙巳，车驾至自上都。
现代文：二十日，皇上的车驾从上都来到京师。
English: On the 20th, the emperor's chariot came from Shangdu to the capital.

古文：丁未，改延州为延津县，与阳武同隶南京。
现代文：二十二日，把延州改为延津县，和阳武县共属于南京。
English: On the 22nd, Yanzhou was changed to Yanzin County, and both Yangtze County and Yangwu County belonged to Nanjing.

古文：癸丑，赈辽东等路饥。
现代文：二十八日，赈济辽东等地的饥民。
English: On the 28th, starving people in Liaodong and other places were given food.

古文：九月甲子，宋襄阳将张贵以轮船出城，顺流突战，阿术、阿剌海牙等举烽燃火，烛江如昼，率舟师转战五十余里，至柜门关，生获贵及将士二千余人。
现代文：九月初九，宋军襄阳守将张贵乘坐轮船出城，顺流而下进行突击，阿术、阿剌海牙等燃起烽火，把江面照耀得如同白昼，率领水师转战五十余里，一直到柜门关，生擒张贵和宋军将士二千余人。
English: At the beginning of September 9th, Zhang Gui, the Yangyang governor of the Song Army, took a steamer out of the city and went down the river to carry out a surprise attack. Ah Shu, Ah Haiga, and others lit bonfires and shined the river surface like daylight. He led the sailors to fight for more than fifty miles, all the way to the cabinet gate. Zhang Gui and more than two thousand Song Army soldiers were killed.

古文：丙寅，敕枢密院： 诸路正军帖户及同籍亲戚奴仆，丁年既长，依诸王权要以避役者，并还之军，惟匠艺精巧者以名闻。 
现代文：十一日，敕命枢密院： 各路的正军户、贴军户以及同一户的亲戚、奴仆，男丁长大以后，依赖诸侯王权豪势要以逃避兵役的，一律返回军中，只把技艺精巧的匠人的名字报上。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Privy Council decreed that all households of regular soldiers and households of soldiers' dependents, as well as relatives and servants of the same household, should return to the army, and only the names of skilled craftsmen should be reported.

古文：癸酉，同签河南省事崔斌讼右丞阿里妄奏军数二万，敕杖而罢之。
现代文：十八日，同佥河南省事崔斌控告右丞阿里谎报军队人数两万人，敕令处以杖刑而罢免其职务。
English: On the 18th, his colleague, the Henan provincial governor Cui Bin, accused U-jo Ali of lying about the number of soldiers in the army being 20,000, and the imperial command dismissed him from his post with a caning.

古文：甲戌，罢水军总管府。
现代文：十九日，撤销水军总管府。
English: On the 19th, the General Administration of the Navy was abolished.

古文：东川元帅李吉等略地开州，拔石羊寨，擒宋将一人。统军使合剌等兵掠合州及渠江口，获战船五十艘，赏银币有差。
现代文：东川元帅李吉等攻略开州地区，占领石羊寨，擒获宋军将领一人；统军使合剌等人的军队掳掠合州及渠江口，俘获战船五十艘，朝廷赏赐给他们不同数量的银两、钱钞。
English: Dongchuan Marshal Li Ji and others attacked the Kizhou area, occupied Shiyangzhai, and captured one general of the Song Army; the United Army sent the army of Hapi and others to capture and plunder Kizhou and the mouth of the Dujiang River, captured fifty warships, and the court awarded them different amounts of silver and banknotes.

古文：丙子，民夫三千人伐巨木辽东，免其家徭赋。
现代文：二十一日，调遣民工三千人到辽东砍伐巨木，免征他们家庭的徭役、赋税。
English: On the 21st, 3,000 migrant workers were dispatched to Liaodong to cut down huge trees, and their families were exempted from labor and taxes.

古文：戊寅，太阴犯御女。
现代文：二十三日，太阴星干犯御女星座。
English: On the 23rd, the Great Yin star will enter the Virgo constellation.

古文：赈益都路饥。
现代文：赈济益都路饥民。
English: To help the hungry in Yidu Road.

古文：冬十月丙戌朔，封皇子忙哥剌为安西王，赐京兆为分地，驻兵六盘山。
现代文：冬季，十月初一，晋封皇子忙哥剌为安西王，把京兆府赐给他作为分地，在六盘山驻扎军队。
English: In the winter, on the first day of October, Emperor Jinfeng's son, Busy Brothers, became the king of Anxi, and gave him Jingzhao Prefecture as a parcel of land, and stationed troops in Liupanshan.

古文：遣使持诏谕扮卜、忻都国。
现代文：派遣使臣带着诏书去招降扮卜、忻都国。
English: He dispatched envoys with an imperial edict to lure Kubu into surrendering his capital.

古文：壬辰，享于太庙。
现代文：初七，在太庙举行祭祀典礼。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, a tribute was paid to the Imperial Temple.

古文：癸巳，赵璧为平章政事，张易为枢密副使。
现代文：初八，赵璧担任平章政事，张易担任枢密副使。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Zhao Bi served as the political affairs of Pingzhang, and Zhang Yi served as the deputy envoy of the Privy Council.

古文：乙未，筑浑河堤。
现代文：初十，修筑浑河的堤防。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the embankment of the Hun River was built.

古文：戊戌，荧惑犯填星。
现代文：十三日，火星干犯土星。
English: On the 13th, Mars will collide with Saturn.

古文：己亥，敕自七月至十一月终听捕猎，余月禁之。
现代文：十四日，敕令：从七月到十一月底可以任凭百姓捕猎，其余的月份禁止。
English: On the 14th, the royal decree: from July to the end of November, the people can be allowed to hunt, and the remaining months are prohibited.

古文：癸卯，立文州。
现代文：十八日，建立文州。
English: On the 18th, Wenzhou was established.

古文：初立会同馆。
现代文：开始设立会同馆。
English: Began setting up the Society's museum.

古文：十一月乙卯朔，诏以至元十年历赐高丽。
现代文：十一月初一，下诏把至元十年的历书赐给高丽。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the Emperor issued the following edict to bestow the calendar book of the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty to Goryeo.

古文：壬戌，发北京民夫六千，伐木乾山，蠲其家徭赋。
现代文：初八，调发北京的民夫六千人到乾山砍伐木料，免除他们家庭的徭役赋税。
English: On the first day of the eighth lunar month, six thousand people from Beijing were sent to Qianshan to cut wood, exempting their families from taxes.

古文：诸王只必帖木儿筑新城成，赐名永昌府。
现代文：诸侯王只必帖木儿修筑新城完工，皇上赐名为永昌府。
English: Princes and princes only had to wait for the construction of the new city to be completed, and the emperor gave it the name Yongchangfu.

古文：丙寅，蠲昔剌斡脱所负官钱。
现代文：十二日，免除昔剌斡脱所欠官府的钱钞。
English: On the 12th, the money owed to the government was waived.

古文：丁卯，太阴犯毕。
现代文：十三日，太阴星干犯毕宿天区。
English: On the fifteenth day, the great Yin star committed a crime and went to heaven.

古文：城光州。
现代文：修筑光州城垣。
English: Construction of the Gwangju castle walls.

古文：遣无籍军掠宋境。
现代文：派遣没有入籍的士卒掳掠宋朝地方。
English: He dispatched soldiers without naturalization to capture and plunder the Song Dynasty's provinces.

古文：己巳，敕发屯田军二千、汉军二千、高丽军六千，仍益武卫军二千，征耽罗。
现代文：十五日，敕令调遣屯田军二千人、汉军二千人、高丽军六千人，并增添武卫军二千人征伐耽罗。
English: On the 15th, the imperial command dispatched 2,000 soldiers from the Tonden Army, 2,000 soldiers from the Han Army, 6,000 soldiers from the Koryo Army, and an additional 2,000 soldiers from the Imperial Guard to conquer Tamra.

古文：辛未，召高陵儒者杨恭懿，不至。
现代文：十七日，征召高陵儒士杨恭懿，杨恭懿不到。
English: On the 17th, the Gaoling Confucian Yang Jiongjun was conscripted, but Yang Jiongjun could not be drafted.

古文：癸酉，以前拔樊城外郛功，赏千户刘深等金银符。
现代文：十九日，因为先前攻下樊城外城的功劳，赏赐刘深等人金、银牌符。
English: On the 19th, Liu Sheng and others were awarded gold and silver medals for their achievements in capturing the city outside of Handan.

古文：己卯，并中书省左右司为一。宋荆湖制置李庭芝为书，遣永宁僧赍金印、牙符，来授刘整卢龙军节度使，封燕郡王。
现代文：二十七日，把中书省左右司合并为一个机构，宋朝的京湖制置使李庭芝写了一封信，派永宁的一个僧人带着金印、衙符前来授予刘整卢龙军节度使之职，并封他为燕郡王。
English: On the 27th, Li Tingzhi wrote a letter to consolidate the left and right departments of China's book provinces into one organization, and sent a monk from Yongning with a gold seal and a badge to award Liu Jilulu the Dragon Army Festival and make him the king of Yan County.

古文：僧至永宁，事觉，上闻，敕张易、姚枢杂问。
现代文：僧人到了永宁，事情被发觉了。皇上听了这件事，命张易、姚枢共同勘问。
English: When the monk arrived in Yongning, the matter was discovered. When the emperor heard about it, he ordered Zhang Yi and Yao Zu to jointly investigate.

古文：适整至自军中，言： 宋患臣用兵襄阳，欲以是杀臣，臣实不知。 
现代文：正好刘整从军中来到，说道 ：宋朝怕我带兵攻打襄阳，想用这个手段杀掉我，我确实不知道。 
English: Just then, Liu Zhengyi came from the army and said, "The Song Dynasty is afraid that I will lead troops to attack Xiangyang, and they want to use this means to kill me. I really don't know."

古文：敕令整为书复之，赏整，使还军中，诛永宁僧及其党友。
现代文：敕命刘整写一封信答复李庭芝，赏赐了刘整，让他返回军中，把永宁僧人和他的同党处死。
English: He ordered Liu Zhengyi to write a letter in reply to Li Tingzhi, rewarded Liu Zhengyi, let him return to the army, and executed the Yongning monk and his fellow party members.

古文：参知行省政事阿里海牙言： 襄阳受围久未下，宜先攻樊城，断其声援。 
现代文：行省参知政事阿里海牙说 ：襄阳被围困了很久都没有攻下，应当先攻下樊城，以切断襄阳的援兵。 
English: Ali Hague, the political advisor to the governor of the province, said: "Xiangyang has been besieged for a long time and has not been conquered. We should first conquer Lucheng to cut off the reinforcements from Xiangyang.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上允从。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：回回亦思马因创作巨石炮来献，用力省而所击甚远，命送襄阳军前用之。
现代文：回回族的亦思马因创造了巨石炮前来进献，这种炮用力很省而射程很远，命令送往襄阳前线军中使用。
English: Yi Sima of the Hui ethnic group came forward to make a donation because he created a megalithic cannon. This kind of cannon is very power-saving and has a long range. The order was sent to the front-line army in Xiangyang for use.

古文：十二月乙酉朔，诏诸路府州司县达鲁花赤管民长官，兼管诸军奥鲁。
现代文：十二月初一，诏命各路、府、州、司、县的镇守官、管民官兼管中军的辎重老营。
English: On the first day of December, the imperial edict ordered the town guards and people's administrators of all provinces, prefectures, states, divisions, and counties, as well as the senior officials in charge of the central army, to leave.

古文：丁亥，立肃州等处驿。
现代文：初三，建立肃州等处的驿站。
English: On the third day of the first month, set up stations in Suzhou and other places.

古文：以东平府民五万余户复为东平路。
现代文：因为东平府有了五万多民户，重新恢复为东平路。
English: Because there are more than 50,000 private households in Dongping Prefecture, it has been restored to Dongping Road.

古文：辛丑，诸王忽剌出拘括逃民高丽界中，高丽达鲁花赤上其事，诏高丽之民犹未安集，禁罢之。
现代文：十七日，诸侯王忽剌出在高丽国界内拘禁逃民，高丽镇守官把这件事上奏皇上，皇上下诏说： 高丽的百姓还没有安定、聚拢。
English: On the seventeenth day, the vassal king suddenly came out to detain the fugitives within the borders of Goryeo. The Goryeo town warden reported the matter to the emperor, and the emperor issued an edict saying: The people of Goryeo have not yet stabilized and gathered.

古文：遣宋议互市使者南归。
现代文：命令停止拘禁他们。 派遣到宋朝去商议互市贸易的使臣从南方返回。
English: The envoys sent to the Song Dynasty to negotiate mutual market and trade returned from the south.

古文：戊午，赐北平王南木合军马一万二千九百九十一、羊六万一千五百三十一，及诸王塔察儿军币帛。
现代文：二十二日，赐给北平王南木合军马一万二千九百九十一匹、羊六万一千五百三十一头，并赐给诸侯王塔察儿军绢帛。
English: On the 22nd, 12,991 horses and 61,531 sheep were given to the king of Peiping, Nanmu Hejun, as well as the war booty to the prince Tachara.

古文：辛亥，宋将昝万寿来攻成都，签省严忠范出战失利，退保子城，同知王世英等八人弃城遁。
现代文：二十七日，宋将昝万寿前来进攻成都，佥省严忠范出城迎战失利，退兵戍守内城，同知王世英等八人弃城逃跑。
English: On the 27th, Song general Zou Wanshou came to attack Chengdu. Yan Zhong Fan of Zou Province went out of the city to meet the defeat, retreated to defend the inner city, and eight people including Wang Shiying abandoned the city and fled.

古文：诏以边城失守，罪在主将，世英虽遁，与免其罪，惟遣使缚忠范至京师。
现代文：皇上诏令认为边城失守，罪责在主将身上，王世英即使逃跑，也免除他的罪责，只派遣使臣把严忠范捆缚到京师来。
English: The Emperor's edict held that the border town had been lost and that the blame rested with the commander-in-chief. Even if Wang Shiying had fled, he would have been absolved of his guilt. Instead, he sent an envoy to bring Yan Zhongfan to the capital in chains.

古文：癸丑，升拱卫司为拱卫直都指挥使司。
现代文：二十九日，把拱卫司升格为拱卫直都指挥使司。
English: On the 29th, the Arch Guards Division was upgraded to the Arch Guards Division.

古文：是岁，天下户一百九十五万五千八百八十。
现代文：这一年，全国共有一百九十五万五千八百八十户。
English: In that year, a total of one million nine hundred and fifty-five thousand eight hundred and eighty households were added nationwide.

古文：赐先朝后妃及诸王金、银、币、帛如岁例。
现代文：按照每年的常例赐予先朝的后妃和诸侯王黄金、白银、钱钞、绢帛。
English: In accordance with the annual tradition, the empresses and princes of the previous dynasty were given gold, silver, banknotes and ingots.

古文：断死罪三十九人。
现代文：全年判处死刑的罪犯共有三十九人。
English: A total of 39 criminals were sentenced to death throughout the year.

古文：建大圣寿万安寺。
现代文：建成大圣寿万安寺。
English: Daishoju Ban'an-ji Temple was built.

