古文：夫人含天地阴阳之灵，有哀乐喜怒之情。
现代文：人类包含着天地阴阳之间的灵气，有着悲哀欢乐喜悦愤怒的情感。
English: Human beings contain the aura between heaven and earth, yin and yang, and have the emotions of sadness, joy, joy and anger.

古文：乃圣垂范，以为民极，节其骄淫，以防其暴乱；崇高天地，虔敬鬼神，列尊卑之序，成夫妇之义，然后为国为家，可得而治也。
现代文：圣人传下典范，作为人民的准则。节制他们的骄淫，来防止他们暴乱；崇拜天地，虔心敬奉鬼神，排列尊卑位序，定下夫妇道义，然后对国家对家族，就能够治理好了。
English: The saints set forth the example as the standard for the people, restraining their pride and licentiousness to prevent them from rioting; worshipping heaven and earth, devoutly venerating ghosts and gods, arranging the order of superiority and inferiority, establishing the morality of husband and wife, and then governing the country and the family.

古文：《传》曰： 一日克己复礼，天下归仁。 
现代文：《传》说： 一日克己复礼，天下归仁。 
English: "Biography" said: One day of self-restraint and reproach, the world will return to benevolence.

古文：若乃太一初分，燧人钻火，志有暢于恭俭，情不由乎玉帛，而酌玄流于春涧之右，焚封豕于秋林之外，亦无得而阙焉。
现代文：至于从开天辟地以来，燧人氏钻木取火，志向重在谦恭俭朴，情怀不在乎玉帛财物，而是在春天的溪涧岸边酌饮清流，在秋天的森林附近放火驱赶封豕，也没有什么不完美的地方。
English: As for since the dawn of time, there is nothing imperfect about the Hayato clan, who drill wood to make fire. Their aspiration is to be modest and frugal, and they do not care about money and possessions. Instead, they drink clear streams on the banks of streams in spring, and set fires near forests in autumn to drive away badgers.

古文：轩顼依神，唐虞稽古，逮乎隆周，其文大备。
现代文：轩辕颛顼依从神灵，唐尧虞舜查考古制，传到兴隆的周朝，典章制度大为完备。
English: Xuanwu adhered to the gods, and the Tang Dynasty's Guzheng archaeological investigation system was passed down to the prosperous Zhou Dynasty, and the award system was very complete.

古文：或垂百官之范，置不刊之法；或礼经三百，威仪三千，皆所以弘宣天意，雕刻人理。
现代文：既留下了设置百官的榜样，制定了不可更改的法规；又有关于礼的规章三百条，各种仪式三千种，都是用来弘扬传布上天的意旨，调整规范人类的行为。
English: He not only left behind the example of setting up a hundred officials, but also formulated unchangeable laws and regulations; there are also three hundred rules on etiquette and three thousand kinds of ceremonies, all of which are used to promote the propagation of God's will and adjust and standardize human behavior.

古文：叔代浇讹，王风陵谢，事睽光国，礼亦愆家。
现代文：周代末期世风浇薄讹变，王道衰微，事情违背了美好国家的传统，礼仪中连治家之道也已丧失。
English: At the end of the Zhou Dynasty, the social climate changed, the royal way declined, things went against the tradition of a beautiful country, and the etiquette of family management was also lost.

古文：赵简子问太叔以揖让周旋之礼，对曰： 盖所谓仪而非礼也。 
现代文：趟简子向太叔询问揖让周旋的礼节，回答说： 那祇能叫做仪式而不是真正的礼。 
English: Wabi Janzi asked his great-uncle about the etiquette of giving and receiving gifts, to which he replied, "That can only be called a ceremony, not a real gift."

古文：天经地义之道，自兹尤缺。
现代文：天经地义的道理，从此更加无人理会。
English: From then on, the principles of natural justice were ignored even more.

古文：哀公十一年，孔子自卫反鲁，迹三代之典，垂百王之训，时无明后，道噎不行。
现代文：哀公十一年，孔子从卫国回到鲁国，探究三代的典范，传写百王的教训，当时没有明君，他的主张无法施行。
English: In the eleventh year of the Emperor's mourning period, Confucius returned from the Great Patriotic War to the State of Lu to explore the model of the three generations and to write down the lessons of the hundred kings. At that time, there was no Emperor Ming and his proposal could not be implemented.

古文：若夫情尚分流，堤防之仁是弃；浇讹异术，洙泗之风斯泯。
现代文：如果任情发展，则仁必然被抛到一边；如果听任异端作怪，则儒学之风可能被排斥在外。
English: If left to its own devices, benevolence is bound to be cast aside; if left to its own devices, Confucianism may be marginalized.

古文：是以汉文罢再期之丧，中兴为一郊之祭，随时之义，不其然欤！
现代文：因此汉文帝废除了两年的丧制，光武帝将郊祀并成一次进行。
English: Therefore, Emperor Hanwen abolished the two-year mourning system, and Emperor Guangwu combined the suburban shrines into one.

古文：而西京元鼎之辰，中兴永平之日，疏璧流而延冠带，启儒门而引诸生，两京之盛，于斯为美。
现代文：这种迎合时俗的做法，是不值得肯定的可是西汉元鼎年间，束汉永平时代，推行教化尊重士绅，倡导儒学任用儒生，两漠时代的兴盛，在造时期最为美好。
English: This practice of catering to the times and customs is not worthy of affirmation, but during the Western Han Dynasty's Yuan Dynasty, the Han Yongping era, the implementation of enlightenment and respect for the gentry, the promotion of Confucianism and the appointment of Confucians, the prosperity of the two deserts era, the most beautiful in the making period.

古文：及山鱼登俎，泽豕睽经，礼乐恆委，浮华相尚，而郊禋之制，纲纪或存。
现代文：到后来山中小鱼成了庙堂的供品，沼泽的野猪也一反常规，礼乐制度长期被弃，世风崇尚浮华，不过祭祀的礼仪，大体上还保存着。
English: Later, small and medium-sized fish from the mountains became temple offerings, wild boars from the swamps were also contrary to the norm, the ritual system was abandoned for a long time, and the world's style was extravagant, but the ritual etiquette was generally preserved.

古文：魏氏光宅，宪章斯美。
现代文：曹魏时期，典章制度很好。
English: During the Cao Wei period, the award system was very good.

古文：王肃、高堂隆之徒，博通前载，三千条之礼，十七篇之学，各以旧文增损当世，岂所谓致君于尧舜之道焉。
现代文：王盛、高堂隆等人，博学通晓前人的记载，像三千条的《周礼》，十七篇的仪礼等学问，分别根据旧有的文献整理后行于当世，这岂不是常称道的帮助国君遵循尧舜的原则吗。
English: Wang Sheng, Gaotang Long and others were well-versed in the records of their predecessors, and their erudition, such as the 3,000-article "Weekly Rituals" and the 17-article "Rites and Ceremonies," respectively, were compiled according to the old documents and practiced in the contemporary world. Isn't this often praised for helping the sovereign to follow the principle of discipline?

古文：世属雕墙，时逢秕政，周因之典，务多违俗，而遗编残册，犹有可观者也。
现代文：人们希望天下大治，可当时赶上的却不是善政，周代传下的典章，行用太多就违反了当时的习俗，但是残留下来的篇章典册裹还是有可供参考的东西的。
English: People hoped for world peace, but it was not good governance that caught up with them at that time. The edicts handed down by the Zhou Dynasty violated the customs of the time if they were used too much, but there were still things to refer to in the remaining book of edicts.

古文：景初元年，营洛阳南委粟山以为圆丘，祀之日以始祖帝舜配，房俎生鱼，陶樽玄酒，非搢绅为之纲纪，其孰能兴于此者哉！
现代文：景初元年，在洛阳南边的委粟山营造圆丘，祭祀的那天用始祖帝舜配飨，玉制的祭器中盛着鲜鱼，陶制的容器中装着清水，不是士大夫们为他策划，那么谁能够做到这些事呢!
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Jing Dynasty, a round mound was built on the south side of Luoyang, and on the day of the sacrifice, the ancestor's imperial scepter was used to match the scepter. The ritual vessel made of jade was filled with fresh fish, and the ceramic container was filled with clear water. It was not the scholars who planned for him, so who could do these things?

古文：宣景戎旅，未遑伊制。
现代文：宣帝景帝戎马征战，没来得及制定造方面的制度。
English: Emperor Xuan, Emperor Jing and Emperor Wusong went to war on horseback, but they did not have time to formulate a system for construction.

古文：太康平吴，九州共一，礼经咸至，乐器同归，于是齐鲁诸生，各携缃素。
现代文：立尘年间平定呈玺，九州统一，礼仪典籍都集中了，乐器祭器归属一处，于是齐鲁一带的儒生们各自携带著书籍来投奔。
English: In the early years of the Heian period, when the Heian period ended and Kyushu was unified, the books on etiquette and etiquette were all centralized, and the musical instruments and sacrificial vessels belonged to one place. As a result, the Confucian scholars from the Qilu area each brought their own books to the capital.

古文：武皇帝亦初平寇乱，意先仪范。
现代文：武皇帝也因为平定寇盗祸乱，想要提倡礼仪规范。
English: Emperor Wu also wanted to promote the norms of etiquette in order to quell the plague of robberies.

古文：其吉礼也，则三茅不翦，日观停瑄；其凶礼也，则深衣布冠，降席撤膳。
现代文：那时的祭祀吉礼中，使用的三脊菁茅不加修剪，在日观峰祭天不用大的碹玉；那时的丧葬凶礼中，穿深衣戴布冠，撤宴减膳。
English: In the auspicious rituals of that time, the three ridges of the lime tree were used without pruning, and in the Nikun peak festival, there was no need for a large bead; in the funeral ceremonies of that time, they wore dark clothes and cloth crowns, and the banquet was shortened.

古文：明乎一谦三益之义，而教化行焉。
现代文：宣扬了一谦三益的道理，教化就推行开来了。
English: He preached the principle of "one humility, three benefits," and the enlightenment began to spread.

古文：元皇中兴，事多权道，遗文旧典，不断如发。
现代文：元帝中兴晋朝时，事务有很多要权宜处置，从前的典章制度，几乎消亡。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhongxing of the Yuan Dynasty, there were many matters that needed to be dealt with expediently, and the previous award system was almost extinct.

古文：是以常侍戴邈诣阙上疏云： 方今天地更始，万物权舆，荡近世之流弊，创千龄之英范。
现代文：因此常侍戴邈上朝呈递表章说： 当今天地更新，万物开始兴盛，扫荡近代的流弊，创立千年的表率。
English: Therefore, the attendant presented the watch chapter to the emperor, saying: Today, the earth is renewed, all things begin to flourish, sweep away the modern ups and downs, and create a model for a thousand years.

古文：是故双剑之节崇，而飞白之俗成；挟琴之容饰，而赴曲之和作。 
现代文：因此崇尚忠义的节操，成就文教的风俗；整理好弹琴的仪容，就能引出和谐的共鸣。 
English: Therefore, advocating the integrity of loyalty, achieving the customs of literature and education; arranging the appearance of playing the piano, can lead to a harmonious resonance.

古文：其所以兴起礼文，劝帝身先之也。
现代文：他是要用这些来倡导礼仪文明，鼓励皇帝以身作则的。
English: He wanted to use these to promote etiquette and encourage the emperor to lead by example.

古文：穆哀之后，王猷渐替，桓温居揆，政由己出，而有司或曜斯文，增晖执事，主威长谢，臣道专行。
现代文：以后，王道衰落，里过掌权，政令由他自己发出，而有关官员玷污斯文，粉饰权臣，皇帝威风扫地，大臣为所欲为。
English: Later, when the king's power declined and the emperor came to power, he issued decrees by himself, while the relevant officials sullied the honor, whitewashed the powerful ministers, the emperor swept away the prestige, and the ministers did whatever they wanted.

古文：《记》曰， 苟无其位，不可以作礼乐 ，岂斯之谓欤！晋始则有荀顗、郑冲裁成国典，江左则有荀崧、刁协损益朝仪。
现代文：《记》说： 如果没有名位，就不可能推行礼乐。 难道说的就是这种情况吗置开始有苞塑、堑迚制定出国家典章，墓置时期有苞盗、王协修订朝廷礼仪。
English: "Record" said: "If there is no place, it is impossible to promote ritual music." Is this really the case? At the beginning of the Ming Dynasty, there was the making of the imperial seal, the establishment of the national charter, the tomb-setting period, there was the theft of the imperial seal, and the revision of the imperial etiquette by Wang Xie.

古文：《周官》五礼，吉凶军宾嘉，而吉礼之大，莫过祭祀，故《洪范》八政，三日祀。
现代文：《周官》中的五种礼，吉礼、凶礼、军礼、宾礼、嘉礼，其中吉礼中最重要的，莫过于祭祀，所以《洪范》中的八政，第三位的叫做祀。
English: Among the five kinds of rites in "Zhou Guan" - auspicious, unlucky, military, auspicious and auspicious - the most important one is sacrifice. Therefore, in "Hong Fan," the third one is called worship.

古文：祀者，所以昭孝事祖，通于神明者也。
现代文：祀，就是用来表达孝心事奉祖先，和神明沟通的方式。
English: Worship is a way to express filial piety, to serve ancestors, and to communicate with the gods.

古文：汉兴，承秦灭学之后，制度多未能复古。
现代文：汉朝建立，在秦摧残儒学之后，制度上有很多方面还没有能够恢复古代的样子。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty and the destruction of Confucianism by the Qin Dynasty, many aspects of the system have not been able to restore the ancient appearance.

古文：历东、西京四百余年，故往往改变。
现代文：历经东京、西京四百多年，故有不少改变。
English: After more than 400 years in Tokyo and Nishikyo, there have been many changes.

古文：魏氏承汉末大乱，旧章殄灭，命侍中王粲、尚书卫顗草创朝仪。
现代文：魏室接着汉末的大乱，旧的典章被破坏干净，下令侍中王粲、尚书卫觊起草拟定朝廷礼仪。
English: Following the great turmoil at the end of the Han Dynasty, the Wei dynasty ordered the courtier Wang Qian and Shang Shuhei to draft and formulate the imperial court etiquette.

古文：及晋国建，文帝又命荀顗因魏代前事，撰为新礼，参考今古，更其节文，羊祜、任恺、庾峻、应贞并共刊定，成百六十五篇，奏之。
现代文：到晋国建立，文帝又命令荀颉接着魏代做过的事，撰修新的礼仪制度，参考当时情况和古代遣制，更改其中的章节条文，羊枯、任恺、庾峻、应贞共同审定，成为一百六十五篇，奏献给皇上。
English: When Jin was established, Emperor Wen also ordered Zheng to follow the example of the Wei Dynasty and write a new etiquette system, refer to the situation at that time and the ancient imperial system, and change the provisions of the chapters, which were jointly approved by Yang Kui, Ren Zheng, Zheng Jun and Ying Zhen, and became one hundred and sixty-five articles, which were presented to the emperor.

古文：太康初，尚书仆射硃整奏付尚书郎挚虞讨论之。
现代文：太康初年，尚书仆射朱整上奏请求交付尚书郎挚虞推敲。
English: In the first year of Taikang, Shang Shulun's servant, Shao Zhujie, requested that Shang Shulun be handed over to Shang Shulong for careful consideration.

古文：虞表所宜损增曰：臣典校故太尉顗所撰《五礼》，臣以为夫革命以垂统，帝王之美事也，隆礼以率教，邦国之大务也，是以臣前表礼事稽留，求速讫施行。
现代文：挚虞就其当改之处上奏章说：臣整理已故太尉荀频所修撰的《五礼》，臣认为开创帝业而传诸后世，是帝王的美事；使礼仪兴隆来引导教化，是治理邦国的大事。因此臣以前上表陈述礼仪方面事宜而被延滞，请尽速施行。
English: Zhengyu said in the above-mentioned chapter about the place where it should be changed: "The minister is sorting out the "Five Rites" compiled by the late Taiyi Zoufang. The minister believes that creating an empire and passing it on to future generations is a beautiful thing for the emperor; making etiquette flourish to guide enlightenment is an important matter for governing the state. Therefore, the minister's previous statement on etiquette matters has been delayed, please implement it as soon as possible.

古文：又以《丧服》最多疑阙，宜见补定。
现代文：又认为《丧服》部分疑缺的最多，应当补充并确定。
English: It is also believed that the part of "Funeral Robe" that is in doubt is the largest, and should be supplemented and confirmed.

古文：又以今礼篇卷烦重，宜随类通合。
现代文：又认为现在的礼制篇幅太多，应当归类合并。
English: He also believes that the current etiquette system is too broad and should be classified and merged.

古文：事久不出，惧见寝嘿。
现代文：奏章很久没有得到批示，因而害怕受到忽视。
English: The score hadn't been commissioned for a long time, so there was a fear of neglect.

古文：盖冠婚祭会诸吉礼，其制少变；至于《丧服》，世之要用，而特易失旨。
现代文：凡是冠婚祭会一类的吉礼，有关的制度变化很少；至于《丧服》，生活中很常用，但特别容易丧失要旨。
English: As for auspicious events such as ceremonial weddings, there have been few changes in the relevant system; as for "funeral attire," it is very common in life, but it is particularly easy to lose the essence.

古文：故子张疑高宗谅阴三年，子思不听其子服出母，子游谓异父昆弟大功，而子夏谓之齐衰，及孔子没而门人疑于所服。
现代文：所以子张怀疑高宗居丧三年而不说话的事，子思不允许他的儿子为已被休弃的生母服丧，子游认为异父兄弟之间服大功，可是子夏认为应该服齐衰，到孔子去世后门人就不明白如何服丧了。
English: Therefore, Zi Zhang suspected that Gao Zong had lived in mourning for three years without speaking, Zi Si did not allow his son to mourn for the abandoned birth mother, Zi You thought that the half-brother and half-sister had done a great service, but Zi Xia thought that they should mourn together. After the death of Confucius, the disciples did not understand how to mourn.

古文：此等皆明达习礼，仰读周典，俯师仲尼，渐渍圣训，讲肄积年，及遇丧事，尤尚若此，明丧礼易惑，不可不详也。
现代文：这些人都是聪明通达研习礼制，上读周朝典章，下从师仲尼，浸润在圣人训诫中，讲习钻研了很多年，可是遇到丧事，仍然还是这样，这说明丧礼容易糊涂，不能不仔细对待。
English: These people are all intelligent and well-versed in the study of the ritual system. They have read the Zhou Dynasty's ordinances, and they have learned from their teacher Zhong Ni. They have been immersed in the teachings of saints, and they have studied the teachings for many years. However, when they encounter a funeral, they are still like this. This shows that funerals are easily confused and must be handled carefully.

古文：况自此已来，篇章焚散，去圣弥远，丧制诡谬，固其宜矣。
现代文：何况从那以后，典章被焚毁散失，离圣人更远，丧制中的错谬，就是很自然的了。
English: Moreover, since then, the ordinances have been burned and dispersed, further away from the saints, and the error in the system is very natural.

古文：是以《丧服》一卷，卷不盈握，而争说纷然。
现代文：因此《丧服》一卷，卷帙不足一握，可是争论解说纷然繁多。
English: Therefore, one volume of "Mourning Clothes" is less than a handful, but there are many controversial interpretations.

古文：三年之丧，郑云二十七月，王云二十五月。
现代文：三年的丧期，郑玄说二十七个月，王肃说二十五个月。
English: The three-year mourning period, Zheng Xuan said 27 months, Wang Su said 25 months.

古文：改葬之服，郑云服缌三月，王云葬讫而除。
现代文：改葬后的丧服，郑玄说穿三个月鳃服，王肃说葬事一结束就不穿了。
English: As for the funeral attire after the reburial, Zheng Xuan said that he would wear it for three months, while Wang Su said that he would not wear it once the funeral was over.

古文：继母出嫁，郑云皆服，王云从乎继寄育乃为之服。
现代文：改嫁了的继母去世后，郑玄说应该服丧，王肃说跟着继母寄居别人家中得到养育后才为她服丧。
English: After the death of his stepmother, who had remarried, Zheng Xuan said that she should be mourned, and Wang Su said that she should be mourned only after she had been brought up with her stepmother in someone else's home.

古文：无服之殇，郑云子生一月哭之一日，王云以哭之日易服之月。
现代文：对于不满八岁而夭折的孩子，郑玄说孩子生下后满了一个月就哭他一天，王卢说把哭的日敷改成服丧一个月。
English: For children under the age of eight who died prematurely, Zheng Xuan said that he would cry for a month after the child was born, and Wang Lu said that he would change the crying day to a mourning month.

古文：如此者甚众。
现代文：像这样的情况很多。
English: There are many cases like this.

古文：《丧服》本文省略，必待注解事义乃彰；其传说差详，世称子夏所作。
现代文：《丧服》的本文很简略，必须有注解才能弄明白它的内容；后人的解释欠详，世人说是子夏作的。
English: The text of "The Funeral Robe" is very concise, and it must be annotated in order to understand its content; the explanation of later generations is not detailed, and people say that it was made by Zixia.

古文：郑王祖《经》宗《传》，而各有异同，天下并疑，莫知所定，而顗直书古《经》文而已，尽除子夏《传》及先儒注说，其事不可得行。
现代文：郑玄王肃以《经》和《传》为本，却各有异同，天下人都弄不清楚，没有谁明白哪个正确。然而荀题衹写下古代的《经》文而已，完全删除了王夏的《传》和前代大儒的注解，那样做是不可能施行的。
English: Zheng Xuan Wang Su based his work on the "Ching" and "Zhuan," but they are all different and similar. The whole world cannot figure it out, and no one understands which is correct. However, he only wrote down the ancient "Ching" text, completely deleting Wang Xia's "Zhuan" and the annotation of the previous generation of great scholars. It is impossible to do that.

古文：及其行事，故当还颁异说，一彼一此，非所以定制也。
现代文：到了应用到具体事情上时，自然还要出现不同的解释，一个那样说一个这样说，不能用它来确定制度。
English: When it comes to applying it to concrete matters, different interpretations will naturally emerge. One says this way and another says that way. It cannot be used to determine the system.

古文：臣以为今宜参采《礼记》，略取《传》说，补其未备，一其殊义。
现代文：臣认为现在应当参考《礼记》，适当选取《传》的说法，弥补它的不足，统一其中不同的地方。
English: The minister thought that it was time to refer to the "Ryoki" and appropriately select the language of the "Biography" to make up for its shortcomings and unify the different parts.

古文：可依准王景侯所撰《丧服变除》，使类统明正，以断疑争，然后制无二门，咸同所由。
现代文：可以依照王星堡所撰写的《丧服变除》，使事类条例明白无误，以此根除疑问争端，然后使制度没有两种形式，全都根据同样的规定。
English: It is possible, in accordance with the "Regulations for the Removal of Mourning Clothes" written by Plutarch, to make the regulations clear and unmistakable, so as to eradicate doubts and disputes, and then make the system have no two forms, all according to the same provisions.

古文：又此礼当班于天下，不宜繁多。
现代文：另外遣部礼规要在天下颁行，所以不应该太繁琐。
English: In addition, the etiquette of the dispatching department should be issued all over the world, so it should not be too cumbersome.

古文：顗为百六十五篇，篇为一卷，合十五余万言，臣犹谓卷多文烦，类皆重出。
现代文：苞题定为一百六十五篇，每篇为一卷，共十五万多字，臣仍然认为卷数多文辞繁，大部分都是重复的。
English: The title was set at one hundred and sixty-five articles, each of which was a volume, with a total of more than one hundred and fifty thousand words. The minister still believed that the number of volumes was too voluminous, and most of them were duplicates.

古文：案《尚书·尧典》祀山川之礼，惟于东岳备称牲币之数，陈所用之仪，其余则但曰 如初 。
现代文：试看《尚书尧典》祭祀山川的礼，祇对东岳详细列出了牺牲和币物的数目，陈说了应用的仪式，其余的就祇是说 如初 。
English: Take a look at "Shang Shuxuan" to see the ritual of sacrificing mountains and rivers. Only for Dongyue, the number of sacrifices and coins are listed in detail, and the ceremony of application is described. The rest is just like the beginning.

古文：《周礼》祀天地五帝享先王，其事同者皆曰 亦如之 ，文约而义举。
现代文：《周礼》中记载祭祀天地五帝和供享先王的礼，对事情相同的都衹说 也和它一样 ，文辞简约而意思明了。
English: In the "Weekly Rituals" it is recorded that sacrifices were made to the five kings of heaven and earth and offerings were made to the kings of the past. Tudor's explanation of the same thing is also the same, the wording is concise and the meaning is clear.

古文：今礼仪事同而名异者，辄别为篇，卷烦而不典。
现代文：如今礼仪情况相同而名称不同的，就另立成篇，卷帙繁多而不明白。
English: Nowadays, if the etiquette situation is the same but the name is different, it will be made into a separate article, and the volume is too numerous to understand.

古文：皆宜省文通事，随类合之，事有不同，乃列其异。
现代文：都应该省略文辞沟通事类，根据情况合并它们，事情不同，就列出它们的不同处。
English: You should omit the words "communication" and "affairs" and combine them according to the situation. If things are different, list their differences.

古文：如此，所减三分之一。
现代文：像这样的话，减去的有三分之一。
English: As such, the deduction is one-third.

古文：虞讨论新礼讫，以元康元年上之。
现代文：垫虞将新的礼规推敲完毕后，在元康元年呈上。
English: After the new rules of etiquette were finalized, they were presented in the first year of the reign of Emperor Kangxi.

古文：所陈惟明堂五帝、二社六宗及吉凶王公制度，凡十五篇。
现代文：他提出的衹有明堂五帝、二社六宗以及吉凶王公方面的制度，共十五篇。
English: He proposed the system of five emperors, six sects of two sects, and good and evil kings, a total of fifteen articles.

古文：有诏可其议。
现代文：有诏令下来批准了他的提议。
English: A royal decree came down approving his proposal.

古文：后虞与傅咸缵续其事，竟未成功。中原覆没，虞之《决疑注》，是其遗事也。
现代文：后来垫廛和坛盛接着从事这件工作，最终没有告成。中原陷落了，挚虞的《决疑注》，就成了那时的遣事。
English: Later, Matanagi and Tanmori continued to work on this project, which ultimately did not come to fruition. When Nakahara fell, the much-feared "Decision Notes" became the task of the day.

古文：逮于江左，仆射刁协、太常荀崧补缉旧文，光禄大夫蔡谟又踵修其事云。
现代文：到了东晋时期，仆射刁协、太常苞盛补充整理旧时文献，光禄大夫蔡谟又接着做过这方面的工作。
English: During the Eastern Jin Dynasty, the servants Zhaoxie and Taizhong supplemented and sorted out the old-time documents, and the Guanglu doctor Zhaimu continued to do this work.

古文：魏明帝太和元年正月丁未，郊祀武帝以配天，宗祀文帝于明堂以配上帝。
现代文：魏明帝太和元年正月丁未，郊祀武帝来配享上天，在明堂宗祀文帝来配享上天。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of the Wei and Ming dynasties, Emperor Wu was worshiped in the suburbs to share the heaven, and Emperor Wen was worshiped in the Ming Hall to share the heaven.

古文：于是时，二汉郊禋之制具存，魏所损益可知。
现代文：在当时，两汉郊里的制度都留存着，魏对它进行的增损情况很清楚。
English: At that time, both Han suburb systems were still in place, and Wei's additions and subtractions to them were very clear.

古文：四年八月，天子东巡，过繁昌，使执金吾臧霸行太尉事，以特牛祠受禅坛。
现代文：四年八月，天子到东部巡枧，路过繁昌，派执金吾臧霸代行太尉的事，用公牛祭受禅坛。
English: In August of the fourth year, the Son of Heaven went on a patrol to the east, passing through Hanchang, and sent Jin Wuxuanba to act as captain, and received the zen altar with a bull festival.

古文：景初元年十月乙卯，始营洛阳南委粟山为圜丘。
现代文：景初元年十月乙卯，开始在洛阳南面的委粟山营造圆丘。
English: At the beginning of the year, in October, they began to build a round mound on the south side of Luoyang.

古文：诏曰： 昔汉氏之初，承秦灭学之后，采摭残缺，以备郊祀。
现代文：韶令说： 西汉初年，正值秦朝焚书坑儒之后，收集残存的文献，以供祭天祀地之用。
English: The imperial edict said: In the first year of the Western Han Dynasty, just after the Qin Dynasty burned the book pit of Confucius, collect the remaining documents for the use of the place of worship.

古文：自甘泉后土，雍宫五畤，神祗兆位，多不经见，并以兴废无常，一彼一此，四百余年，废无禘礼，古代之所更立者，遂有阙焉。
现代文：从甘泉的后土，到雍的五峙，神祇的祭坛和方位，很多都不常见，都因为设置和废除没有常规，一时那样一时这样，四百多年，没有了梢祭的礼仪，古时候历代都有的事，竟然有了缺漏。
English: From the hinterland of Ganquan, to the five stands of Yong, the altars and positions of the deities, many are not common, all because there is no routine for setting up and abolishing, one moment this way, one moment that way, for more than four hundred years, there is no etiquette for the Spring Festival, a thing that has existed throughout the ages in ancient times, and there are even omissions.

古文：曹氏世系，出自有虞氏。
现代文：直压的世系，是从查廛压传下来的。
English: The lineage of direct pressure is passed down from the Jiaxing pressure.

古文：今祀圜丘以始祖帝舜配，号圜丘曰皇皇帝天。
现代文：现在祭礼圆丘用始祖帝舜配享，称号圆丘为皇皇帝天。
English: Now the round mound of the festival is decorated with the imperial family crest of the founder, and the title of the round mound is Emperor Heaven.

古文：方丘所祭曰皇皇后地，以舜妃伊氏配。
现代文：在方丘祭祀的叫皇皇后地，用舜的妃子伊氏配享。
English: In the place called the Emperor's Empress, where the Fangqiu Festival is held, the imperial concubines of the Yi clan are distributed.

古文：天郊所祭曰皇天之神，以太祖武皇帝配。
现代文：在天郊祭祀的叫皇天之神，用太祖武皇帝配享。
English: The deity worshipped in the outskirts of heaven is called the God of the Emperor, and is shared with the Emperor Taizu.

古文：地郊所祭曰皇地之祗，以武宣皇后配。
现代文：在地郊祭祀的叫皇地之祇，用武宣皇后配享。
English: The deities that are worshipped in the suburbs are called "Imperial deities," and they are allotted to Empress Buxun.

古文：宗祀皇考高祖文皇帝于明堂，以配上帝。 
现代文：在明堂宗祀皇考高祖文皇帝，用来配享上天。 
English: In Myeongdong, the Imperial Examination College enshrines Emperor Zuwen, and is used to distribute the blessings of heaven.

古文：十二月壬子冬至，始祀皇皇帝天于圜丘，以始祖有虞帝舜配。
现代文：十二月壬子冬至日，首次在圆丘祭祀皇皇帝天，用始祖直处帝爱配享。
English: On the day of the winter solstice in December, for the first time, Emperor Tian was sacrificed in the round mound, and the imperial love was shared with the ancestors.

古文：自正始以后，终魏世不复郊祀。
现代文：从正盘以后，直到魏世结束都不再有郊祀。
English: From the beginning until the end of the Wei Dynasty, there were no more suburban shrines.

古文：魏元帝咸熙二年十二月甲子，使持节侍中太保郑冲、兼太尉司隶校尉李憙奉皇帝玺绶策书，禅位于晋。
现代文：魏元帝咸熙二年十二月甲子，使持节侍中太保壑迚、兼太尉司隶校尉奎台捧着皇帝的玉玺和策书，禅位给晋。
English: In December of the second year of Wei-Yuan Emperor Han Xi's reign, the Emperor sent the attendant of the middle eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the eunuch, the e

古文：丙寅，武皇帝设坛场于南郊，柴燎告类于上帝，是时尚未有祖配。
现代文：丙寅，武皇帝在南郊设立坛场，烧柴祭天向上天报告，当时还没有用祖先配享。
English: In ancient times, Emperor Wu set up an altar in the southern suburb to burn firewood and report the festival to heaven. At that time, there was no way to share it with ancestors.

古文：泰始二年正月，诏曰： 有司前奏郊祀权用魏礼，朕不虑改作之难，令便为永制，众议纷互，遂不时定，不得以时供飨神祗，配以祖考。
现代文：泰始二年正月，韶令说： 有司以前奏议郊祀时权且应用魏的礼仪，朕想到重新制定很难，便把它作为定制执行，以至于议论纷纭，没有及时确定，不能够按时供飨神衹，用祖考配享。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Taizhi era, the imperial edict said: There was a division that had previously proposed the right of time for suburban worship and the use of Wei's etiquette. I thought it would be difficult to reformulate it, so I implemented it as a customization, so that the discussion was divisive, it was not determined in time, and it was not possible to provide the sacred relics on time and use the ancestral examination to allocate them.

古文：日夕难企，贬食忘安，其便郊祀。 
现代文：时间流逝就难以追上，减少了对神灵祖先的供飨就难以心安，还是马上郊祀。 
English: If time passes, it will be difficult to catch up, and if the offerings to the ancestors of the gods are reduced, it will be difficult to feel at ease, and it will be better to worship in the suburbs immediately.

古文：时群臣又议，五帝即天也，王气时异，故殊其号，虽名有五，其实一神。
现代文：当时群臣又讨论，五帝就是天，王气因时而异，所以称号不一样，其实是同一个神。
English: At that time, the ministers also discussed that the five emperors were the heavens, and the king's energy varied from time to time, so the title was different, but it was actually the same god.

古文：明堂南郊，宜除五帝之坐，五郊改五精之号，皆同称昊天上帝，各设一坐而已。
现代文：在明堂宗祀和在南郊祭天，应当除去五帝的神位，五郊时改掉关于五方之星的五精的称号，都共同称为昊天上帝、各设一个神位就可以了。
English: In the Myeongdong religious service and the Nanjiao Festival, the five gods should be removed, and the title of the five spirits of the Five-Sided Star should be changed. They should all be called Haotian God, and one god should be set up in each place.

古文：地郊又除先后配祀。
现代文：地郊时又除去用先后配祀的做法。
English: When it comes to the suburbs, the practice of using a succession of places of worship has been eliminated.

古文：帝悉从之。
现代文：帝一概同意了。
English: All the emperors agreed.

古文：二月丁丑，郊礼宣皇帝以配天，宗祀文皇帝于明堂以配上帝。
现代文：二月丁丑，郊祀宣皇帝用以配享天，在明堂宗祀文皇帝用以配享上帝。
English: In February, the Emperor Xuan is worshipped in the suburbs to enjoy heaven, and the Emperor Wen is worshipped in the Ming Hall to enjoy God.

古文：是年十一月，有司又议奏，古者丘郊不异，宜并圆丘方丘于南北郊，更修立坛兆，其二至之祀合于二郊。
现代文：这一年的十一月，有司又奏上一个提议，说古时候营造丘和进行郊祀是一致的，应该在南郊北郊都营造圆丘和方丘，另外修建坛场，将夏至冬至时的祭祀合并到二郊去。
English: In November of the same year, there was another proposal, saying that in ancient times, building a hill was the same as performing suburban worship, and that round and square hills should be built in both the southern and northern suburbs, and an altar should be built to combine the summer solstice and winter solstice worship in the two suburbs.

古文：帝又从之，一如宣帝所用王肃议也。
现代文：帝又同意了，完全和宣帝采用王卢的提议一样。
English: The emperor agreed again, exactly the same as Emperor Xuan's adoption of Wang Lu's proposal.

古文：是月庚寅冬至，帝亲祠圆丘于南郊。
现代文：这个月的庚寅日是冬至，帝亲自在南郊祭天。
English: This month's Geng Yin Day is the winter solstice, and the emperor himself is in the southern suburbs to celebrate the day.

古文：自是后，圆丘方泽不别立。
现代文：从此以后，圆丘和方泽不再分别设置。
English: From now on, the round mound and square pond will no longer be set up separately.

古文：太康三年正月，帝亲郊祀，皇太子、皇子悉侍祠。
现代文：太康三年正月，帝亲自在郊祭祀，皇太子、皇子们全都侍从祭祀。
English: In the first month of the 3rd year of Taikang, the emperor himself held a religious service in the suburbs, and the crown prince and princes all attended the service.

古文：十年十月，又诏曰： 《孝经》 郊祀后稷以配天，宗祀文王于明堂以配上帝。 
现代文：十年十月，又下诏说 《孝经》说 郊祀时用后稷来配享上天，宗祀时在明堂用塞王来配享上天 。
English: In October of the tenth year, he issued another edict, saying, "The Book of Filial Piety" says, "When worshipping in the suburbs, use the broom to enjoy heaven, and when worshipping in the main hall, use the broom to enjoy heaven."

古文：而《周官》云 祀天旅上帝 ，又曰 祀地旅四望 。
现代文：可是《周官》说 祀天时位列上帝，又说 祀地时位列四方山川。
English: However, "Zhou Guan" said that worshipping heaven ranked as God, and worshiping earth ranked as the four-sided mountains and rivers.

古文：望非地，则明堂上帝不得为天也。
现代文：山川不等于地，那么明堂上帝就不能是等于天的。
English: Mountains and rivers are not equal to the earth, so obviously God cannot be equal to the heavens.

古文：往者众议除明堂五帝位，考之礼文不正。
现代文：以往众人提议去除明堂中的五帝神位，根据礼仪文献考察是不正确的。
English: In the past, many people proposed to remove the Five Immortal Gods from Myeongdong. According to the examination of liturgical documents, this is incorrect.

古文：且《诗序》曰 文武之功，起于后稷 ，故推以配天焉。
现代文：况且《诗序》说 塞王亘逗的功业，是从后墨开始的，因此推出他来配享上天。
English: Moreover, the "Sequence of Poems" says that the work of Sai Wang Wazu started from the back of the ink, so he was promoted to share the sky.

古文：宣帝以神武创业，既已配天，复以先帝配天，于义亦所不安。
现代文：宣帝凭神武创业，已经配享上天了，又用先帝来配享上天，从道理上来说是不合适的。
English: It is logically inappropriate to say that Emperor Xuanzong, who started his business on the basis of martial arts, has already enjoyed the blessings of heaven, while using the previous emperor to enjoy the blessings of heaven.

古文：其复明堂及南郊五帝位。
现代文：还是恢复明堂和南郊的五帝的神位。 
English: or to restore the divine status of the Five Emperors in Myeongdong and the southern suburbs.

古文：愍帝都长安，未及立郊庙而败。
现代文：堕童在旦塞建都，还没来得及建立郊庙就败亡了。
English: The Fallen Children built the capital in Dansai, but before they could build the suburb temple, they were defeated.

古文：元帝渡江，太兴二年始议立郊祀仪。
现代文：五童渡辽以后，主兴二年才开始商议设立郊祀仪规。
English: After the five children arrived in Liao, it took two years for Shuxing to begin discussing the establishment of a suburb ritual.

古文：尚书令刁协、国子祭酒杜夷议，宜须旋都洛邑乃修之。
现代文：尚书令刁协、国子祭酒杜夷提议，应当等回到首都盗昼之后再设置。
English: Shang Shuling, Yu Xie and Guo Zi Festival liquor Du Yi proposed that it should be set up after returning to the capital.

古文：司徒荀组据汉献帝都许即便立郊，自宜于此修奉。
现代文：司徒苞塑根据选麸查一迁都尽量就设立郊祀，认为自然应当在当地施行奉祀。
English: According to the selection, investigation and relocation, Sztoplast tried to set up a suburban shrine as much as possible, and believed that it was natural to carry out the worship in the local area.

古文：骠骑王导、仆射荀崧、太常华恆、中书侍郎庾亮皆同组议，事遂施行，立南郊于已地。
现代文：骠骑将军王导、仆射荀崧、太常华垣、中书侍郎厘壶都同意茎组的提议，于是这件事情就施行了，在巳地设立南郊。
English: Wang Du, the commander of the cavalry, Fu Shaojun, Taizhang Huaguan, and Lang Liyuan, the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, all agreed to the proposal of the stem group, so this matter was implemented, and the southern suburb was established in the meadow.

古文：其制度皆太常贺循所定，多依汉及晋初之仪。
现代文：当时的制度都是太常贺遁制定的，大部分依照坠和晋初的仪规。
English: The systems at that time were all formulated by Taizhang He, and most of them were in accordance with the etiquette of the fall and the beginning.

古文：三月辛卯，帝亲郊祀，飨配之礼一依武帝始郊故事。
现代文：二月辛卯，帝亲自郊祀，飨配方面的礼规一概依从以前亘竖童首次郊祀的情况。
English: In February, the emperor himself held a suburb worship, and the etiquette of the wedding ceremony followed the previous situation of the first suburb worship of Watashi Shido.

古文：是时尚未立北坛，地祗众神共在天郊。
现代文：当时还没有设立北坛，地衹等神明都和天神放在一起。
English: At that time, the North Altar had not yet been set up, and the deities such as the mantle were placed together with the celestial gods.

古文：明帝太宁三年七月，始诏立北郊，未及建而帝崩。
现代文：三年七月，才下诏设立北郊，还没来得及建立而明帝就去世了。
English: In July of the third year, the northern suburb was only established by imperial decree, and Emperor Ming died before it could be established.

古文：及成帝咸和八年正月，追述前旨，于覆舟山南立之。
现代文：到成帝咸和八年正月，追念前代的旨意，在覆舟山南边设立了它。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of Emperor Chengxian's reign, in memory of the will of the previous generation, it was established on the south side of Fuzhou Mountain.

古文：天郊则五帝之佐、日月、五星、二十八宿、文昌、北斗、三台、司命、轩辕、后土、太一、天一、太微、句陈、北极、雨师、雷电、司空、风伯、老人，凡六十二神也。
现代文：祭天时有五帝和其他的神：日月、五星、二十八宿、文昌、北斗、三台、司命、轩辕、后土、太一、天一、太微、句陈、北极、雨师、雷电、司空、风伯、老人，共是六十二位神。
English: At the time of the festival, there were five emperors and other gods: the sun, the moon, the five stars, the twenty-eight mansions, Wenchang, Beidou, Sandai, Simin, Xuanwu, Houtu, Taichi, Tianichi, Taimiao, Gu Chen, the North Pole, Yushi, Raiden, Sikuo, Fengbo, and the old man, a total of sixty-two gods.

古文：地郊则五岳、四望、四海、四渎、五湖、五帝之佐、沂山、岳山、白山、霍山、医无闾山、蒋山、松江、会稽山、钱唐江、先农，凡四十四神也。
现代文：祭地时有五岳、四望、四海、四渎、五湖、五人帝、五人帝的佐臣、沂山、岳山、白山、霍山、医无题山、蓝山、查巡、盒登山、钱卢辽、先农，共是四十四位神。
English: At the time of the festival, there were five mountains, four vistas, four seas, four defilements, five lakes, five emperors, five emperors of Sason, Lushan, Yaksan, Baishan, Huoshan, Iwuzhishan, Blue Mountain, Inspection, Box Mountaineering, Qianlu Liao, Pioneer Farmers, a total of forty-four gods.

古文：江南诸小山，盖江左所立，犹如汉西京关中小水皆有祭秩也。
现代文：江南各座小山的神位，都是束晋时期设立的，正像汉代西京时期关中的小河流都有祭祀的位次一样。
English: The deities of the small mountains in the south of the Yangtze River were all established during the Sokjin period, just as the small rivers in Guanzhong during the Xijing period of the Han Dynasty had the same order of sacrifice.

古文：是月辛未，祀北郊，始以宣穆张皇后配，此魏氏故事，非晋旧也。
现代文：这个月辛未，在北郊祭祀，开始用宣穆张皇后配享，这是魏时就有的先例，不是晋的旧制。
English: This month, Xinwei, in the northern suburb of the sacrificial rites, began to use Xuan Mu Zhang Empress to share. This is a precedent from the Wei Dynasty, not the old system of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：康帝建元元年正月，将北郊，有疑议。
现代文：康帝建元元年正月，打算在北郊祭祀，有表示疑惑的议论。
English: In the first month of the first year of Kangdi Jianyuan, it was planned to hold a religious service in the northern suburbs, but there were doubts about this.

古文：太常顾和表： 泰始中，合二至之礼于二郊。
现代文：太常顾和上表说： 泰始年间，将冬夏二至的祭礼合并到天地二祀的郊祀中去。
English: Too often, Gu and the above table said: During the reign of Emperor Taizhi, the festival of the winter and summer solstice was merged into the suburb worship of the two temples of heaven and earth.

古文：北郊之月，古无明文，或以夏至，或同用阳月。
现代文：北郊的时间，古代没有明文规定传下来，有的在夏至，有的在阳气复归的冬至。
English: In ancient times, there was no explicit regulation of the time of the northern suburbs, some in the summer solstice, some in the winter solstice of the return of the yang.

古文：汉光武正月辛未，始建北郊，此则与南郊同月。
现代文：汉光武正月辛未，开始行北郊礼，逭就和南郊礼同在一个月。
English: In the first month of Han Guangwu's reign, the Northern Suburbs Festival began, and the Southern Suburbs Festival followed a month later.

古文：及中兴草创，百度从简，合七郊于一丘，宪章未备，权用斯礼，盖时宜也。
现代文：到中兴后，各种制度都从简，将七种郊祀礼合并在一处进行，宪章规制还没有完全制定出来，权且应用这样的礼仪，也是随时合宜的事。
English: After ZTE, all kinds of systems have been simplified, and seven kinds of suburban worship ceremonies have been combined and carried out in one place. The charter regulation has not been fully formulated, and the right to apply such a ceremony is also appropriate at any time.

古文：至咸和中，议别立北郊，同用正月。
现代文：到咸和年问，议定另外设立北郊，同在正月进行。
English: At the time of the Hamon New Year, it was agreed that the northern suburb would be set up separately, which was carried out in the first month of the year.

古文：魏承后汉，正月祭天以地配。
现代文：魏继承继的制度，在正月祭天而用地配享。
English: Wei inherited the system of succession, and in the first month of the year, the land was allotted to the highest bidder.

古文：时高堂隆等以为礼祭天不以地配，而称《周礼》三王之郊一用夏正。 
现代文：当时高堂建等人认为按照礼规祭天时不用地配享，并称道《周礼》中三王的郊祀一概用的是夏历。 
English: At that time, Kodo Jian and others believed that according to the rules of etiquette, it was best to distribute the gifts according to the time of the year, and said that the suburban worship of the Three Kings in the "Weekly Rituals" generally used the summer calendar.

古文：于是从和议。
现代文：于是采纳题塑的提议。
English: Therefore, the proposal of the theme sculpture was adopted.

古文：是月辛未南郊，辛已北郊，帝皆亲奉。
现代文：当月辛未进行南郊礼，辛巳进行北郊礼，皇帝全都亲自参与行祭。
English: That month, Xin Wei performed the Southern Suburbs Rite and Xin Si performed the Northern Suburbs Rite, and the emperor personally participated in all of them.

古文：安帝元兴三年，刘裕讨桓玄，走之。已卯，告义功于南郊。
现代文：三年，窒蜒讨伐但宝，打跑了他。己卯，在南郊以大功祭告于天。
English: In the third year, he fought hard against Danbao and defeated him. In the southern suburb, he was rewarded with a great achievement.

古文：是年，帝蒙尘江陵未反。
现代文：这一年，帝落难到没有返回。
English: This year, it was so difficult for the emperor to leave that he did not return.

古文：其明年应郊，朝议以为宜依《周礼》，宗伯摄职，三公行事。
现代文：第二年应该进行郊祀礼，朝中意见认为应该依照《周礼》，由宗伯代行主祭，由三公执行祭事。
English: In the second year, the suburb ritual should be held, and the opinion of the central government was that the main ritual should be performed by the patriarch on behalf of the three princes in accordance with the "Weekly Ritual."

古文：尚书左丞王纳之独曰： 既殡郊祀，自是天子当阳，有君存焉，禀命而行，何所辩也。
现代文：衹有尚书左丞王纳之说： 既然要祭天，自然是天子南面而治的时候，有国君在那裹，禀承旨意去执行，有什么可讨论的。
English: Wang Nanzhi said: Since it is necessary to offer sacrifices to Heaven, it is natural that when the Son of Heaven rules from the south, there is a sovereign there to carry out His will. What is there to discuss?

古文：郊之兴否，岂如今日之比乎！ 
现代文：是否应该郊祀，哪裹能像今天这样商议决定呀! 
English: Whether there should be a suburban shrine or not, how can it be decided by deliberation like today!

古文：议者又云： 今宜郊，故是承制所得令三公行事。 
现代文：提议的人又说： 现在就应当郊祀，所以承奉以前的礼制而可以让三公代行其事。 
English: The proposer also said: Now it is time for suburban worship, so we can let the three kings act on behalf of the previous etiquette.

古文：又 郊天极尊，惟一而已，故非天子不祀也。
现代文：纳之又说： 祭天为至尊之事，衹能由一人为之，所以不是天子不能祭祀。
English: Nanzhi also said, "Sacrificing to Heaven is the most important thing, and it can only be done by one person, so it is not the Son of Heaven who cannot be sacrificed.

古文：庶人以上，莫不蒸尝，嫡子居外，介子执事，未有不亲受命而可祭天者。 
现代文：庶人以上的人，没有不是衹行蒸祭尝祭礼的。嫡子在外，就由庶子执行，还没有不是亲身接受丫上天的使命却可以去祭天的人。 
English: There is no one over the age of a commoner who does not perform the steaming ceremony and taste the sacrificial rites. If there is no legitimate son, it is carried out by the commoner, and there is no one who does not personally accept the mission of the gods but can go to the gods.

古文：纳之又曰： 武皇受禅，用二月郊，元帝中兴，以三月郊。
现代文：纳之又说： 武皇接受禅让，在二月郊祀；元帝中兴，在三月郊祀。
English: Na also said: Emperor Wu accepted Zen Zhen and was enshrined in the suburbs in February; Emperor Yuan and Emperor Zhongxing were enshrined in the suburbs in March.

古文：今郊时未过，日望舆驾，无为欲速，而使皇舆旋反，更不得亲奉也。 
现代文：如今郊祀的时候还没有过去，天天盼望皇帝回来，不要做那种提前的事，以致皇帝返回以后，再不能亲自奉祭。 
English: Now that the time for suburban worship has not yet passed, they look forward to the emperor's return every day. They should not do things ahead of time so that they can no longer personally offer sacrifices after the emperor returns.

古文：于是从纳之议。
现代文：于是听从了纳之的意见。
English: So he listened to Naeko's advice.

古文：郊庙牲币璧玉之色，虽有成文，秦世多以骝驹，汉则但云犊，未辩其色。
现代文：郊祀庙祭时用的牺牲币帛玉璧玉器的颜色，虽有明文规定，但是秦多用赤毛黑鬣的聊驹，汉却衹说用牛犊，不管它的颜色。
English: The color of the sacrificial coins, jade beads, and jade vessels used in the suburban temple festival, although there is a clear stipulation, but Qin mostly used red-haired and black yakitori, while Han said that they used beef yakitori, regardless of its color.

古文：江左南北郊同用玄牲，明堂庙社同以赤牲。
现代文：束晋时期南郊祀和北郊祀都用玄色牲口，明堂祭和庙祭社祭都用赤色牺牲。
English: During the Sokjin period, both the Southern Suburbs Ritual and the Northern Suburbs Ritual used dark-colored animals, and the Myeongdong Festival and the temple festival used red sacrifices.

古文：礼，有事告祖祢宜社之文，未有告郊之典也。
现代文：礼规中有如果有事要告诉祖先应该在社庙祭告的条文，没有在郊庙祭告的规章。
English: In the etiquette, there is a provision that if there is something to tell the ancestors, it should be announced in the temple, but there is no regulation for announcing in the suburban temple.

古文：汉仪，天子之丧，使太尉告谥于南郊，他无闻焉。
现代文：漠代的仪典中说，天子去世后，让太尉在南郊把给他的谧号祭告给上天和亡灵，其他的就没有听说了。
English: According to the ceremony of the desert era, after the death of the heavenly son, let the captain announce the nickname given to him in the southern suburbs to heaven and the dead, and the rest did not hear about it.

古文：魏文帝黄初四年七月，帝将东巡，以大军当出，使太常以一特牛告祠南郊。
现代文：魏文童董翅四年七月，帝将要去东方巡视，因为大军要出发，派太常用一头大公牛到南郊祭天。
English: In July of the fourth year of Wei Wen Tong's reign, the emperor was about to go on a tour of the East, because the great army was about to set out. He often sent a big bull to the southern suburbs to sacrifice to the heavens.

古文：及文帝崩，太尉钟繇告谥南郊，皆是有事于郊也。
现代文：到塞童崩后，太尉钟逊在南郊告谧于天，都是因为有大事而郊祀。
English: After the death of Saedong, Taifu Zhongxun passed away in the southern suburbs, all because of major events and suburb worship.

古文：江左则废。
现代文：东晋时期废置了这些礼仪。
English: During the Eastern Jin Dynasty, these rituals were abolished.

古文：礼，春分祀朝日于东，秋分祀夕月于西。
现代文：礼的规定，春分时早晨在束边祭太阳，秋分时黄昏在西边祭月亮。
English: According to the rules of the rite, in the morning of the vernal equinox, the sun is celebrated in Sokobe, and in the evening of the autumnal equinox, the moon is celebrated in the west.

古文：汉武帝郊泰畤，平旦出竹宫，东向揖日，其夕西向揖月。
现代文：汉武帝在泰时祭天，清晨从笪宣出门，朝东向太阳行揖礼，当天黄昏朝西向月亮行揖礼。
English: Emperor Hanwu celebrated the festival of heaven in Thailand. In the morning, he went out of the gate from Xuancheng, bowed to the sun in the east, and bowed to the moon in the west in the evening.

古文：既郊明，又不在东西郊也。
现代文：利用郊祀的日子，并不到柬边或西边去行祭祀礼。
English: They take advantage of the days of suburban worship and do not go to the Cambodian side or the western side to perform sacrificial rites.

古文：后遂旦夕常拜。
现代文：以后就在清晨和黄昏进行经常性的拜礼。
English: From then on, regular prayers were held in the morning and at dusk.

古文：故魏文帝诏曰： 汉氏不拜日于东郊，而旦夕常于殿下东西拜日月，烦亵似家人之事，非事天神之道也。 
现代文：所以魏文帝的诏书说： 汉氏不在东郊拜祭太阳，而是早晨或黄昏在宫殿的前边朝东或朝西拜祭太阳月亮，烦琐粗俗像是普通人家做的事，不是事奉上天和神交往的正道。 
English: Therefore, Emperor Weiwen's edict said: The Han Dynasty does not worship the sun in the eastern suburbs, but worships the sun and the moon in the morning or evening in front of the palace facing east or west. It is tedious and vulgar to do things like ordinary people, and it is not the right way to serve heaven and God.

古文：黄初二年正月乙亥，祀朝日于东门之外，又违礼二分之义。
现代文：黄初二年正月乙亥，在东门的外面朝祭太阳，逭又违背了在二分的时候祭拜日月的礼规。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Yellow Emperor, the morning sun was worshiped outside the east gate, and the eunuch violated the etiquette of worshiping the sun and moon at the time of two minutes.

古文：魏明帝太和元年二月丁亥，祀朝日于东郊，八月己丑，祀夕月于西郊，始得古礼。
现代文：魏明帝太和元年二月丁亥，在东边的郊外朝祭太阳，八月己丑，在西边的郊外夕祭月亮，这才符合古礼。
English: Emperor Ming of the Wei Dynasty and Emperor Dinghai in February of the first year, in the eastern suburbs, the morning festival of the sun, in August, the ugly, in the western suburbs, the evening festival of the moon, this is in line with the ancient rite.

古文：及武帝太康二年，有司奏，春分依旧请车驾祀朝日，寒温未适，可不亲出。
现代文：到了亘逊左尘二年，有司奏报说，春分时依照旧例皇帝要去朝祭太阳，因为气候冷暖不合适，可以不必亲自出城。
English: In the second year of Wang Xunzu's reign, an official report said that the emperor would go to the morning sun sacrifice according to the old custom at the spring equinox, because the weather was not suitable for cold and warm, and he did not have to go out of the city in person.

古文：诏曰： 礼仪宜有常，若如所奏，与故太尉所撰不同，复为无定制也。
现代文：诏书说： 礼仪应当持之以恒，如果像奏告的那样做了，和已故太尉撰定的礼规不同，又成了没有定制了。
English: The edict said: The etiquette should be adhered to, and if it is done as reported, it is different from the etiquette written by the late captain, and it is no longer customized.

古文：间者方难未平，故每从所奏，今戎事弭息，惟此为大。 
现代文：以前正逢国难还没有平定，所以常常听从你们的奏议，如今战事已经结束，祇有这些事是最重要的。 
English: In the past, when the national calamity was not yet settled, I often listened to your appeals, but now that the war is over, only these matters are the most important.

古文：案此诏，帝复为亲祀朝日也。
现代文：根据这道韶书，皇帝又亲自朝祭太阳。
English: According to this imperial edict, the emperor also personally sacrificed the sun in the morning.

古文：此后废。
现代文：这一条后来给废止了。
English: This was later repealed.

古文：礼， 郊祀后稷以配天，宗祀文王于明堂以配上帝。 
现代文：礼的规定， 郊祀后稷来配享上天，在明堂宗祀文王来配享上帝 。
English: According to the rules of the rite, people in the suburbs worship Hou Yi to share the blessings of heaven, while people in the Ming Hall worship King Wen to share the blessings of God.

古文：魏文帝即位，用汉明堂而未有配。
现代文：魏文帝即位后，用汉代的明堂礼仪却没有配享的。
English: After Emperor Weiwen ascended the throne, he used the Myeongdong etiquette of the Han Dynasty, but did not share it.

古文：明帝太和元年，始宗祀文帝于明堂，齐王亦行其礼。
现代文：明帝太和元年，才在明堂宗祀文帝，齐王也实行这种礼仪。
English: It was not until the first year of the reign of Emperor Ming that Emperor Wen was enshrined in the Ming Hall, and King Qi also practiced this ritual.

古文：晋初以文帝配，后复以宣帝，寻复还以文帝配，其余无所变革。
现代文：晋朝初年用文帝配享，后来又用宣帝，不久又用文帝配享，其他方面没有什么变革。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Wen was used for distribution, later Emperor Xuan was used, and soon Emperor Wen was used for distribution. There were no other changes.

古文：是则郊与明堂，同配异配，参差不同矣。
现代文：这样看来郊祀和明堂的礼仪中，在配享方面，情况是不一致的。
English: In this way, it seems that the situation is inconsistent in terms of the distribution of gifts in the rituals of suburban shrines and Myeongdong.

古文：挚虞议以为： 汉魏故事，明堂祀五帝之神。
现代文：挚虞的意见认为： 汉魏的旧例，在明堂祭祀五帝的神灵。
English: Zhengyu's opinion is that: the old example of the Han and Wei dynasties, the deities of the Five Emperors are sacrificed in the Ming Hall.

古文：新礼，五帝即上帝，即天帝也。
现代文：新礼的规定，五帝就是上帝，就是天帝。
English: According to the regulations of the New Rite, the Five Emperors are God and the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：明堂除五帝之位，惟祭上帝。
现代文：在明堂中去除五帝的神位，衹祭上帝。
English: In the Ming Hall, the five emperors were dethroned and the god was sacrificed.

古文：案仲尼称 郊祀后稷以配天，宗祀文王于明堂以配上帝。 《周礼》，祀天旅上帝，祀地旅四望。
现代文：案仲尼说 郊祀后稷来配享天，在明堂宗祀文王来配享上帝，《周礼》上规定，祀天时旅祭上帝，祀地时旅祭四望。
English: Danzhongni said that the suburb worships Houyi to enjoy heaven, and the Myeongdong worships King Wen to enjoy God. The "Weekly Ritual" stipulates that the god of travel is worshipped in heaven, and the god of travel is worshipped in earth.

古文：望非地，则上帝非天，断可识矣。
现代文：望不等于地，那么上帝不等于天，就完全可以清楚了。
English: If the eye is not equal to the earth, then God is not equal to the sky, which is perfectly clear.

古文：郊丘之祀，扫地而祭，牲用茧栗，器用陶匏，事反其始，故配以远祖。
现代文：在郊外圆丘的祭祀，扫干净一块地方就地设祭，贡奉的牺牲用的是蚕茧和栗子，器皿用的是陶器之类，事物返回到它开始的样子，所以用远祖配享。
English: In the sacrifice of the round mound in the suburbs, sweep a clean place and set up a festival on the spot, the sacrifice of the tribute uses cocoon and chestnut, the utensils use pottery and the like, things return to the way it started, so use the distant ancestors to share.

古文：明堂之祭，备物以荐，玉牲并陈，笾豆成列，礼同人鬼，故配以近考。
现代文：明堂的祭祀，陈列各种物品作为供品，玉器牺牲都献上，篷豆祭器成行成列，礼仪方面人间和鬼神没有区别，所以用较近的祖辈配享。
English: In the rituals of Myeongdong, various items are displayed as offerings, jade offerings are offered, taro offerings are lined up in rows, and there is no difference between humans and ghosts and gods in terms of etiquette, so the closest ancestors are used to share.

古文：郊堂兆位，居然异体，牲牢品物，质文殊趣。
现代文：郊丘明堂祭坛神位，居然不一样，牺牲牢畜祭品器物，粗劣和精细完全不同。
English: The altars and altars of Myeongdong in the suburbs are completely different. The sacrificial animals and sacrificial objects are completely different in terms of quality and fineness.

古文：且祖考同配，非谓尊严之美，三日再祀，非谓不黩之义，其非一神，亦足明矣。
现代文：而且用祖辈一同配享，不是说尊重庄严的美德，三天裹两次祭祀，不是说不过分的道理。那不是一个神，也就很清楚了。
English: Moreover, to share with one's ancestors does not mean to respect solemn virtue, and to offer sacrifices twice a day for three days does not mean to be reasonable. It is not a god, that much is clear.

古文：昔在上古，生为明王，没则配五行，故太昊配木，神农配火，少昊配金，颛顼配水，黄帝配土。
现代文：以往在上古时期，活着是明王，去世后就和五行相配，所以太吴和木相配，神农和火相配，少吴和金相配，颛顼和水相配，黄帝和土相配。
English: In the past, in ancient times, the king of Ming was alive, and after his death, he was matched with the five elements, so Tai Wu was matched with wood, Shennong was matched with fire, Shao Wu was matched with gold, Zou and water were matched, and Huangdi was matched with soil.

古文：此五帝者，配天之神，同兆之于四郊，报之于明堂。
现代文：这五位帝王，是配享上天的神，一同在四郊祭祀，在明堂报祭。
English: These five emperors are gods who are worthy of heaven, and they are worshipped together in the four suburbs and reported in Myeongdong.

古文：祀天，大裘而冕，祀五帝亦如之。
现代文：祀天的时候，穿大裘而戴冕，祀五帝的时候也像这样。
English: When worshipping the heavens, they wear a great gown and crown, and it's the same when worshipping the five emperors.

古文：或以为五精之帝，佐天育物者也。
现代文：有人认为主宰五精的帝王，是辅佐上天化育万物的。
English: Some people believe that the emperor, who presides over the five elements, is a helper to the heavens in the creation and nurture of all things.

古文：前代相因，莫之或废，晋初始从异议。
现代文：前代相传下来，没有人废除它，晋的初期才听从了不同的意见。
English: Passed down from previous generations, no one abolished it, and it was only in the early days of the Jin Dynasty that different opinions were listened to.

古文：《庚午诏书》，明堂及南郊除五帝之位，惟祀天神，新礼奉而用之。
现代文：《庚午韶书》规定，明堂祭祀和南郊祭祀时去除五帝的神位，衹祭祀天神，新的礼规采用了它。
English: According to the "Kengo Shoshu," the five gods were removed from the Myeongdong and Nanjiao sacrifices, and the gods were sacrificed instead, and the new etiquette adopted it.

古文：前太医令韩杨上书，宜如旧祀五帝。
现代文：以前太史令韩杨上书提议，应该照旧例祭祀五帝。
English: In the past, Grand Historian Han Yang proposed in a letter that the Five Emperors should be worshipped as usual.

古文：太康十年，诏已施用。
现代文：太康十年，韶令已经施行。
English: After ten years of Taikang, the royal decree has been implemented.

古文：宜定新礼，明堂及郊祀五帝如旧。 
现代文：应该制定新的礼规，在明堂和郊祀时祭祀五帝就和旧仪一样。 
English: New rules of etiquette should be drawn up, and the five emperors should be worshipped in the main hall and in the suburbs in the same way as in the old rites.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：韶令批准了他的意见。
English: He complied.

古文：江左以后，未遑修建。
现代文：束晋时期，没有顾得上施行。
English: During the Sokjin period, it was not enforced.

古文：汉仪，太史每岁上其年历，先立春、立夏、大暑、立秋、立冬常读五时令，皇帝所服，各随五时之色。
现代文：汉的礼仪规定，太史每年呈上当年的年历，在立春、立夏、大暑、立秋、立冬之前常常要宣读关于五时的政令，皇帝穿的服装，分别依从五时的颜色。
English: According to the etiquette of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Taishi presented the annual calendar of the year every year. Before the beginning of spring, summer, summer, autumn and winter, the decree on five o'clock was often read out, and the clothes worn by the emperor were in accordance with the color of five o'clock.

古文：帝升御坐，尚书令以下就席位，尚书三公郎以令置案上，奉以入，就席伏读讫，赐酒一卮。
现代文：皇帝就坐，尚书令以下官员各就各位，尚书三公郎将令放在案上，捧着进去，在各自的席位上读完后，赐给一卮酒。
English: The emperor then sat down. Shang Shuxin ordered the following officials to take their places. Shang Shuxin's three sons placed the order on the case, took it inside, and after reading it at their respective seats, gave them a bottle of wine.

古文：魏氏常行其礼。
现代文：魏氏常常施行这种礼。
English: The Wei often perform this ritual.

古文：魏明帝景初元年，通事白曰： 前后但见读春夏秋冬四时令，至于服黄之时，独阙不读，今不解其故。 
现代文：魏明帝景初元年，通事官说： 现在衹看到读春夏秋冬四时的政令，至于穿黄色服装的时令，单单缺了没有演，不知道是什么原因。 
English: At the beginning of the first year of Emperor Jing of the Wei and Ming Dynasties, the communication officer said: "Nowadays, I see the government order of reading spring, summer, autumn and winter at four o'clock. As for the season of wearing yellow clothing, it is simply missing and there is no performance. I don't know what the reason is.

古文：散骑常侍领太史令高堂隆以为 黄于五行，中央土也，王四季各十八日。
现代文：散骑常侍领太史令高堂隆认为 黄色在五行当中，是代表中央土的，在四季中各有十八天。
English: Gao Donglong, a rider who often accompanies Tai Shi, believes that yellow is among the five elements, representing the central earth, and there are eighteen days in each of the four seasons.

古文：土生于火，故于火用事之末服黄，三季则否。
现代文：土生于火，所以在火主事的末期穿黄色服装，其他三个季节就不这么做。
English: Born of fire, they wear yellow at the end of the fire cycle, but not for the other three seasons.

古文：其令则随四时，不以五行为令也，是以服黄无令。 
现代文：有关的政令就随着四季发布，不根据五行来发布，因此穿黄色服装却没有政令 。
English: Relevant decrees are issued according to the four seasons, not according to the five elements, so there is no decree to wear yellow clothing.

古文：斯则魏氏不读大暑令也。
现代文：这说明魏氏的时候不读大暑令。
English: This shows that Mr. Wei did not read the Great Heat Decree at the time.

古文：及晋受命，亦有其制。
现代文：到置承受天命，也有那些制度。
English: There are also those systems that are predestined to receive the Mandate of Heaven.

古文：傅咸云： 立秋一日，白路光于紫庭，白旗陈于玉阶。 
现代文：傅咸说： 立秋这一天，白色的车辆在宫廷中闪耀，白色的旌旗在玉阶前陈列。 
English: Fu Xian said: On the day of the beginning of autumn, white vehicles shone in the court, and white flags were displayed in front of the jade steps.

古文：然则其日旗路皆白也。
现代文：那么那一天的旌旗和车辆都是白色的了。
English: So that day, the flags and vehicles were all white.

古文：成帝咸和五年六月丁未，有司奏读秋令。
现代文：成帝咸和五年六月丁未。有司奏请读秋季的政令。
English: Emperor Chengxian and June Dingwei of the fifth year. If there is a sitar, please read the autumn decree.

古文：兼侍中散骑常侍荀奕、兼黄门侍郎散骑侍郎曹宇驳曰： 尚书三公曹奏读秋令，仪注旧典未备。
现代文：兼侍中散骑常侍荀奕、兼黄门侍郎散骑侍郎曹宇反驳说： 尚书三公曹奏请读秋季政令，仪式方面的旧有典章中没有这样的规定。
English: Zou Yi, a regular attendant, and Cao Yu, an attendant of the Yellow Gate, retorted: "Please read the autumn decree for the performance of the Three Noble Kinsmen. There is no such provision in the old regulations regarding the ceremony.

古文：臣等参议光禄大夫臣华恆议，武皇帝以秋夏盛暑，常阙不读令，在春冬不废也。
现代文：臣等人根据光禄大夫臣华恒的提议商议，武皇帝因为秋夏盛暑，常常空缺而不读政令，在春冬季节就不取消这一活动。
English: According to the proposal of Guanglu's doctor Hua Heng, Emperor Wu did not cancel this activity in the spring and winter because of the hot autumn and summer, when there were often vacancies and government decrees were not read.

古文：夫先王所以顺时读令者，盖后天而奉天时，正服尊严之所重。
现代文：先王之所以随着季节读政令，是因为在天时到来时遵奉天时，是使服色正确并表示尊敬庄严的大事。
English: The reason why the former king read the government decree according to the season is because it is important to dress correctly and show respect and dignity when the time comes.

古文：今服章多阙，加比热隆赫，臣等谓可如恆议，依故事阙而不读。 
现代文：如今服饰典章多半已不合旧礼，加上天气炎热异常，臣等认为可以按照华恒的提议，依从旧例不读政令。 
English: Nowadays, most of the dress codes are no longer in line with the old rites. Coupled with the unusually hot weather, ministers and others believe that they can follow Hua Heng's suggestion and follow the old practice of not reading government decrees.

古文：诏可。
现代文：韶令批准了。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：六年三月，有司奏 今月十六日立夏。
现代文：六年三月，有司上奏说 本月十六立夏。
English: In March of the sixth year, there was a report from the chief priest that the 16th day of the 16th month was the first day of summer.

古文：今正服渐备，四时读令，是祗述天和隆杀之道，谓今故宜读夏令。 
现代文：如今正服逐渐完备，四季都读政令，这是敬述天和使国家兴隆的方法，因此提议现在应当读夏季的政令 。
English: Now that formal attire is gradually becoming more complete, the decrees are read in all four seasons, which is a way to respect the heavens and make the country flourish, so it is proposed that the summer decrees should be read now.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏议被批准了。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：《礼》，孟春之月， 乃择元辰，天子亲载耒耜，措之于参保介之御间，帅三公九卿诸侯大夫躬耕帝藉 。
现代文：《礼》书上讲孟春之月， 于是选择吉日良辰，天子亲自背着耒耜，把它们放置在副车的车夫旁边，率领三公九卿诸侯大夫躬耕藉田 。
English: The book "Ritual" talks about the month of Mengchun, so he chose the auspicious day, the heavenly son himself carried the plough, placed them next to the driver of the second car, and led the three princes and nine lords and doctors to plough the fields.

古文：至秦灭学，其礼久废。
现代文：到台毁灭学术，那些礼仪长时间被废止。
English: With the destruction of academia in Taiwan, those rituals have long been abolished.

古文：汉文帝之后，始行斯典。
现代文：汉文帝以后，才实行这一典礼。
English: This ceremony was only introduced after Emperor Hanwen.

古文：魏之三祖，亦皆亲耕藉田。
现代文：魏的前三位皇帝，也都亲自耕作藉田。
English: The first three emperors of the Wei Dynasty also cultivated their own fields.

古文：及武帝泰始四年，有司奏耕祠先农，可，令有司行事。
现代文：到武帝泰始四年，有司奏请在开始耕作时要祠祭先农神，可以让有司执行这件事。
English: At the beginning of the fourth year of Emperor Wu's reign, Arisao requested that the ancestral hall be dedicated to the farmer god before starting farming. Arisao was allowed to carry out this task.

古文：诏曰： 夫国之大事，在祀与农。
现代文：诏令说： 国家的大事，在祭祀和农事方面。
English: The edict said: The important affairs of the state, in terms of sacrificial rites and agricultural affairs, come first.

古文：是以古之圣王，躬耕帝藉，以供郊庙之粢盛，且以训化天下。
现代文：因此古代的圣王，亲耕藉田，用来作为郊祀庙祭时的供品，并且以自己的行动来教育感化天下的人。
English: Therefore, the ancient holy kings, personally cultivated and borrowed fields to be used as offerings during the suburb worship temple festival, and used their own actions to educate and inspire people around the world.

古文：近世以来，耕藉止于数步之中，空有慕古之名，曾无供祀训农之实，而有百官车徒之费。
现代文：近代以来，耕种藉田祇限于下地走几步，空有慕古之名，并无供奉祭祀鼓励农耕之实，不过是兴师动众徒费钱财。
English: Since modern times, farming with borrowed fields has been limited to walking a few steps from the bottom of the earth. It has the empty name of ancient times, and there is no offering of sacrifices to encourage the fruits of farming, but it is to motivate people to spend money.

古文：今修千亩之制，当与群公卿士躬稼穑之艰难，以率先天下。
现代文：如今遵循千亩藉田的周代制度，要和群公卿士们亲自体会务农的艰难，来为天下人做表率。
English: Today, following the system of a thousand mu of leased land per generation, it is necessary to personally experience the difficulties of farming with a group of noblemen to set an example for the people of the world.

古文：主者详具其制，下河南，处田地于东郊之南，洛水之北。
现代文：主办的人详细修定有关制度，去河南，在束郊的南面，洛水的北面找好田地。
English: The organizer revised the relevant system in detail, went to Henan, and searched for good fields in the south of Sokou and the north of Luoshui.

古文：若无官田，随宜使换，而不得侵人也。 
现代文：如果没有官田，就根据情况调整更换，不许侵占百姓的田地。 
English: If there is no government land, it will be adjusted and replaced according to the situation, and it is not allowed to occupy the fields of the people.

古文：于是乘舆御木辂以耕，以太牢祀先农。
现代文：于是皇帝乘坐木辖车去耕作，用太牢祭祀先农神。
English: As a result, the emperor took a wooden cart to go farming, and used the dungeon to worship the first farmer god.

古文：自惠帝之后，其事便废。
现代文：从惠帝以后，这些事就废置了。
English: After Emperor Hui, these things were abolished.

古文：江左元帝将修耕藉，尚书符问 藉田至尊应躬祠先农不 ？
现代文：时期五童打算恢复耕种藉田的制度，尚书台下文书征询 耕种藉田时皇帝是否应该亲自祠祭先农神 ?
English: During the Five Dynasties period, the government planned to restore the system of cultivating and renting farmland, and a document was drafted to solicit opinions on whether the emperor should personally hold an ancestral shrine festival for the farmer gods when cultivating and renting farmland.

古文：贺循答： 汉仪无，止有至尊应自祭之文。然则《周礼》王者祭四望则毳冕，祭社稷五祀则絺冕，以此不为无亲祭之义也。
现代文：贺循回答说： 选的礼仪中没有关于至尊应该亲自祭祀的条文，但是《周礼》说王者祭祀四望时穿毳衣戴冕，祭祀社稷和五祀时戴有绣饰的礼帽，根据这点不能说没有亲祭的道理。
English: He Xun replied: There is no provision in the selected etiquette for the Supreme Being to personally perform the sacrifice, but the "Weekly Ritual" says that the king should wear a robe and crown when performing the sacrifice, and wear an embroidered ceremonial hat when performing the sacrificial rite and the five rites. According to this, it cannot be said that there is no reason for the pro-sacrifice.

古文：宜立两仪注。 
现代文：应该增订两条礼仪规定。 
English: Two additional etiquette rules should be added.

古文：贺循等所上仪注又未详允，事竟不行。
现代文：贺循等人奏上的条文又不够周详得当，事情终于没有施行。
English: The provisions presented by He Xun and others were not sufficiently detailed and proper, and the matter was finally not implemented.

古文：后哀帝复欲行其典，亦不能遂。
现代文：后来哀帝又想实行那种仪式，也没有能够如愿。
English: Later, Emperor Ai wanted to perform the same ceremony, but was unable to do so.

古文：汉仪，县邑常以乙未日祠先农，乃耕于乙地，以丙戌日祠风伯于戌地，以已丑日祠雨师于丑地，牲用羊豕。
现代文：礼仪规定，县邑一级的地方上通常在乙未这天祠祭先农神，并在乙方田地上耕作。在丙戌这天到戌方田地上祠祭风伯，在己丑这天到丑方田地上祠祭雨师，牺牲都用羊和猪。
English: According to the rules of etiquette, in places at the level of counties and townships, it is customary to make offerings to the farmer deities at the ancestral hall on the first day of the eighteenth lunar month, and to farm in the fields on the second day of the eighteenth lunar month. On the second day of the eighteenth lunar month, it is customary to make offerings to the wind god at the ancestral hall on the first day of the eighteenth lunar month, and on the second day of the eighteenth lunar month, it is customary to make offerings to the rain god at the ancestral hall on the first day of the eighteenth lunar month. The sacrifices are made of sheep and

古文：立春之日，皆青幡帻迎春于东郊外野中。
现代文：立春逭一天，都打着青色旗戴着青色头巾到束郊外的田野中举行迎春祭礼。
English: On the first day of spring, they all carried blue flags and wore blue headscarves to hold a spring festival in the fields outside Sokcho.

古文：迎春至自野中出，则迎拜之而还，弗祭。
现代文：迎春的人向他祭拜后回城，不敬献祭品。
English: The people of the Spring Festival paid homage to him and then returned to the city to offer sacrifices.

古文：三时不迎。
现代文：其他三个季节不迎。
English: The other three seasons are not welcome.

古文：魏氏虽天子耕藉，籓镇阙诸侯百亩之礼。
现代文：虽然天子行耕种藉田的礼，各藩镇却没有遵行诸侯要耕种百亩藉田的礼。
English: Although the Son of Heaven performed the rite of cultivating a rented field, the feudal towns did not follow the rite of the lords to cultivate a hundred mu of rented land.

古文：及武帝末，有司奏： 古诸侯耕藉田百亩，躬执耒以奉社稷宗庙，以劝率农功。
现代文：到武帝末期。有司上奏说： 古代诸侯耕种百亩藉田，亲自执掌耒耜生产来供奉社稷宗庙，以此鼓励倡导从事农业生产。
English: Towards the end of Emperor Wu's reign, there was a report from a superior officer: Ancient princes cultivated 100 mu of rented land, and personally supervised the production of straw to be offered to the Shifang family temple, thereby encouraging and advocating agricultural production.

古文：今诸王临国，宜依修耕藉之义。 
现代文：现在各王治理自己的王国，应该依照古礼实行耕种藉田的制度。 
English: Now that each king governs his own kingdom, the system of cultivating rented land should be implemented in accordance with ancient rites.

古文：然竟未施行。
现代文：但是最终没有施行。
English: However, it was ultimately not implemented.

古文：《周礼》，王后帅内外命妇享先蚕于北郊。
现代文：《周礼》规定，王后带领命妇们在北郊祭蚕。
English: According to the "Weekly Ritual," the queen led the women in the northern suburbs to celebrate the silkworms.

古文：汉仪，皇后亲桑东郊苑中，蚕室祭蚕神，曰苑窳妇人、寓氏公主，祠用少牢。
现代文：运的礼仪规定，皇后亲自到束郊的苑中采桑，在蚕室祭蚕神，叫做苑菰妇人、寓氏公主。祠祭时用少牢做牺牲。
English: According to the etiquette of the yun, the empress herself went to the middle of the garden in the suburbs to pick mulberry, and in the silkworm room to celebrate the silkworm god, called the woman of the garden and the princess of the family.

古文：魏文帝黄初七年正月，命中宫蚕于北郊，依周典也。
现代文：魏文帝黄初七年正月，命中宫皇后在北郊祭蚕神，是依照周代的典章。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang of the first year of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Wen, the empress of the palace was killed in the northern suburbs of the festival of the silkworm god, in accordance with the ceremony of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：及武帝太康六年，散骑常侍华峤奏： 先王之制，天子诸侯亲耕藉田千亩，后夫人躬蚕桑。
现代文：到武帝太康六年，散骑常侍华娇上奏说： 先王的制度，天子诸侯亲自耕种千亩藉田，皇后夫人亲自从事养蚕采桑。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Wu Taikang, the horseback riding attendant Hua Jiao recited: "Under the previous king's system, the princes cultivated a thousand mu of leased land, and the empress herself engaged in raising silkworms and harvesting mulberry.

古文：今陛下以圣明至仁，修先王之绪，皇后体资生之德，合配乾之义，而坤道未光，蚕礼尚缺。
现代文：如今陛下凭着圣明至仁，遵循先王的传统，皇后体现资生大德，合于辅助乾纲的道义，然而坤道还没有光大，蚕礼还有不足。
English: Today, His Majesty, by virtue of his wisdom and benevolence, follows the tradition of the previous kings, and the Empress embodies the great virtue of scholarship, which is in line with the moral principles of the supplementary curriculum. However, the gong road is not yet brilliant, and the silkworm ritual is still insufficient.

古文：以为宜依古式，备斯盛典。 
现代文：因此认为应该依从古代的先例，实行逭一盛典。 
English: Therefore, it is believed that it is necessary to follow the ancient precedent and carry out a grand ceremony.

古文：诏曰： 昔天子亲藉，以供粢盛，后夫人躬蚕，以备祭服，所以聿遵孝敬，明教示训也。
现代文：诏令说： 以往天子亲自耕种藉田，用来供奉神明，后夫人亲自养蚕，用来准备祭祀时的礼服，是用这些行为来遵行孝敬，宣扬教化。
English: The edict said: In the past, the heavenly son himself cultivated and rented fields to be used for offering to the gods, and the empress herself raised silkworms to prepare the ceremonial dress for the time of sacrifice. These actions were used to observe filial piety and promote enlightenment.

古文：今藉田有制，而蚕礼不修，由中间务多，未暇崇备。
现代文：现在藉田已有制度，可是蚕礼没有施行，是由于宫内事务繁多，没有顾得上施行。
English: Now there is a system for renting land, but the silkworm ceremony is not performed, because of the many affairs within the palace, and there is no time to perform it.

古文：今天下无事，宜修礼以示四海。
现代文：如今天下太平无事，应该遵行礼仪来昭示四海。
English: If there is no trouble today, you should follow the etiquette to show the four seas.

古文：其详依古典，及近代故事，以参今宜，明年施行。 
现代文：将仔细依从古代的典章，加上近代的先例，来考虑现在的情况，明年施行。 
English: It will be implemented next year, carefully following ancient precepts and modern precedents to take into account the current situation.

古文：于是蚕于西郊，盖与藉田对其方也。
现代文：于是在西郊行蚕礼，这是要和行藉田礼的方位相对。
English: Therefore, the silkworm rite is performed in the western suburbs, which is the opposite direction to that of the rice field rite.

古文：乃使侍中成粲草定其仪。
现代文：就让侍中成粲草拟有关仪式的条文。
English: Let the chamberlains draft the relevant provisions of the ceremony.

古文：先蚕坛高一丈，方二丈，为四出陛，陛广五尺，在皇后采桑坛东南帷宫外门之外，而东南去帷宫十丈，在蚕室西南，桑林在其东。
现代文：先蚕坛高一丈，边长二丈，向四方伸出台阶，台阶宽五尺，在皇后采桑坛东南方向的帷宫外门的外面，而往东南距离帷宫十丈，在蚕室的西南，桑林在它的束面。
English: First, the silkworm altar is one story high, the sides are two stories long, and the front steps, five feet wide, extend in all directions. It is outside the outer gate of the curtain palace in the southeast direction of the Queen's Mulberry Picking Altar, and it is ten stories away from the curtain palace to the southeast. In the southwest of the silkworm room, the mulberry forest is on its surface.

古文：取列侯妻六人为蚕母。
现代文：选择列侯的妻子共六人担任蚕母。
English: A total of six wives of vassals were selected to serve as serpents.

古文：蚕将生，择吉日，皇后著十二笄步摇，依汉魏故事，衣青衣，乘油画云母安车，驾六騩马。
现代文：蚕将要出生的时候，挑选吉，皇后戴十二笄步摇，按照汉魏先例，穿青衣，乘坐以油彩描绘的云母安车，用六匹浅黑色马驾车。
English: When the silkworm is about to be born, it will choose the auspicious day, and the queen will wear a twelve-step crane. According to the precedent of Han and Wei Dynasties, it will wear a blue dress, ride in a mica carriage painted in oil, and drive with six light black horses.

古文：女尚书著貂蝉佩玺陪乘，载筐钩。
现代文：女尚书戴着貂蝉佩玺陪着乘坐，车上装着筐钩。
English: A woman wearing a cicada brooch accompanied them on the ride, and the car was equipped with a basket hook.

古文：公主、三夫人、九嫔、世妇、诸太妃、太夫人及县乡君、郡公侯特进夫人、外世妇、命妇皆步摇、衣青，各载筐钩从蚕。
现代文：公主、三夫人、九嫔、世妇、诸太妃、太夫人和县乡君、郡公侯特进夫人、外世归、命妇都戴着步摇，穿青色衣裳，各自装载着筐钩随从行蚕礼。
English: The princess, the three wives, the nine concubines, the world's concubines, the great concubines, the great concubines, the county governors, the wives of the county dukes, and the wives of the deceased, all wore brogues, wore blue dresses, and each carried a basket hook to accompany the silkworm ritual.

古文：先桑二日，蚕室生蚕著薄上。
现代文：采桑前两天，蚕宫生的蚕放在薄上。
English: Two days before the mulberry picking, the silkworms from the silkworm cocoon are placed on a sheet.

古文：桑日，皇后未到，太祝令质明以一太牢告祠，谒者一人监祠。
现代文：采桑这一天，皇后还没到，太祝令在天刚亮的时候用一太牢告祭，由一名谒者监祭。
English: On the day of the mulberry picking, the queen had not yet arrived, so the chief celebrant ordered that the sacrifice be announced at first light, using a tall steeple, with an eunuch overseeing the ceremony.

古文：祠毕撤馔，班余胙于从桑及奉祠者。
现代文：告祭完毕撤去供品，将剩余下来的供品分发给随从采桑和侍奉告祭的人。
English: After the end of the offering ceremony, the offerings are removed and the remaining offerings are distributed to the attendants who picked the mulberry and those who served the offering.

古文：皇后至西郊升坛，公主以下陪列坛东。
现代文：皇后到西郊登上先蚕坛，公主以下的人陪伴排列在坛的束侧。
English: When the queen arrives in the western suburbs, she is the first to ascend the silkworm altar. The princess and her entourage line up on the bundled side of the altar.

古文：皇后东面躬桑，采三条，诸妃公主各采五条，县乡君以下各采九条，悉以桑授蚕母，还蚕室。
现代文：皇后面向束亲自采桑，采三条桑枝的桑叶，妃嫔和公主们各采五条桑枝的桑叶，县邑君以下的各采九条桑枝的桑叶，都将桑叶交给蚕母，回到蚕室。
English: The queen personally picked mulberry for the bunch, picked mulberry leaves from three mulberry branches, the concubines and princesses each picked mulberry leaves from five mulberry branches, and the mulberry leaves from each of the nine mulberry branches below the county head, handed the mulberry leaves to the female silkworm and returned to the silkworm room.

古文：事讫，皇后还便坐，公主以下乃就位，设飨宴，赐绢各有差。
现代文：事情完毕，皇后回来坐下后，公主以下的人才就座，设宴席，按等级赏赐绢。
English: When the event was over and the queen had returned and sat down, the talented people below the princess took their seats, a banquet was set up, and stars were awarded according to their rank.

古文：前汉但置官社而无官稷，王莽置官稷，后复省。
现代文：前汉衹设置官社而没有官稷，王莽设置官稷，后又撤销了。
English: Before the Han Dynasty, there was no official seal but an official shrine was set up. Wang Mang set up an official seal, which was later revoked.

古文：故汉至魏但太社有稷，而官社无稷，故常二社一稷也。
现代文：所以漠到魏时期衹有太社有稷神，而官社没有稷神，所以常常是两个社神一个稷神。
English: Therefore, until the Wei period, there was a god in the Taisha, but there was no god in the Kansha, so there were often two gods and one god.

古文：晋初仍魏，无所增损。
现代文：晋初仍用魏制，没有增减。
English: At the beginning of the Jin Dynasty, the Wei system was still used, and there was no increase or decrease.

古文：至太康九年，改建宗庙，而社稷坛一庙俱徙。
现代文：到太康九年，改建宗庙，而将社稷坛和宗庙一起迁址。
English: In the ninth year of Taikang, the ancestral temple was rebuilt, and the shrine altar and the ancestral temple were relocated together.

古文：乃诏曰： 社实一神，其并二社之祀。 
现代文：于是下诏说： 社神其实是一个神，现合并两个社到一处祭祀。 
English: So the following edict was issued: The shrine god is actually one god, and now the two shrines will be merged into one place of worship.

古文：于是车骑司马傅咸表曰：《祭法》王社太社，各有其义。
现代文：于是车骑司马傅咸上表说：《祭法》对王社和太社，分别有相应的叙述。
English: As a result, Fu Xian, the chariot and horse rider, said at the table: "The Law of Sacrifice" has a corresponding description for the King's Company and the Grand Company.

古文：天子尊事郊庙，故冕而躬耕。
现代文：天子要恭敬地从事郊祀和庙祭，所以戴着帝冕而亲自耕作。
English: The heavenly son should respectfully engage in suburban worship and temple festivals, so he wears an imperial crown and personally cultivates.

古文：躬耕也者，所以重孝享之粢盛。
现代文：亲自耕作的原因，就是表示重视祭祀的供品。
English: The reason for the personal cultivation is to express the importance of the sacrificial offerings.

古文：亲耕故自报，自为立社者，为藉田而报者也。
现代文：亲自耕作所以亲自供奉，为自己立的社庙，是要耕种藉田来供奉的。
English: He cultivated the land himself, so he had to offer the sacrifice himself. The shrine and temple he built for himself had to cultivate and borrow land to offer the sacrifice.

古文：国以人为本，人以谷为命，故又为百姓立社而祈报焉。
现代文：国家以人为根本，人以粮食为命根子，所以又为百姓立社庙来祈祷供奉。
English: The country is based on people, and people depend on grain for their livelihood. Therefore, shrines and temples were built for the people to pray and worship.

古文：事异报殊，此社之所以有二也。
现代文：情况不同供奉也不一样，造就是为什么有两个社庙的原因。
English: Offerings are not the same in different circumstances, which is why there are two community temples.

古文：王景侯之论王社，亦谓春祈藉田，秋而报之也。
现代文：王景侯论议王社的时候，也说是春季祈祷藉田丰收，秋季将收成供奉给神明。
English: When Wang Jinghou discussed the royal shrine, he also said that he would pray for a good harvest in the spring and offer the harvest to the gods in the fall.

古文：其论太社，则曰王者布下圻内，为百姓立之，谓之大社，不自立之于京都也。
现代文：论议太社时，却说王者关心畿内，为百姓立社庙，称为太社，不再在京城为自己立社庙。
English: When discussing Taisha, however, it was said that the king was concerned about the Kinai region and established a shrine and temple for the people, which was called Taisha, and no longer established a shrine and temple for himself in the capital.

古文：景侯此论据《祭法》。
现代文：景侯的这种观点是根据《祭法》提出的。
English: This view of Jinghong is based on the "Law of Sacrifice."

古文：《祭法》： 大夫以下成群立社，曰置社。 
现代文：条法》： 大夫以下的人到一定数量后就立社庙，叫做置社。 
English: "Regulations": After a certain number of people below the rank of doctor have gathered, they will establish a shrine and temple, which is called setting up a shrine.

古文：景侯解曰， 今之里社是也 。
现代文：景侯解释说： 就是现今的里社。 
English: Jing Hou explained: It is the present-day Lisha.

古文：景侯解《祭法》，则以置社为人间之社矣。
现代文：景侯解释《祭法》，是将置社作为人间的社了。
English: Jinghou explained that the "sacred law" is to set up a company as a company in the world.

古文：而别论复以太社为人间之社，未晓此旨也。
现代文：可是在别的讨论中又将太社作为人间的社，不明白他这是什么意思。
English: But in other discussions, he referred to Taisha as a human society. I don't understand what he means by this.

古文：太社，天子为百姓而祀，故称天子社。
现代文：太社，是天子替百姓去祭祀，所以称为天子社。
English: Taisha, it is the son of heaven who goes to sacrifice for the people, so it is called Tenshi-sha.

古文：《郊特牲》曰： 天子太社，必受霜露风雨。 
现代文：《郊特牲》说： 天子在太社祭祀，必然会受到霜露风雨。 
English: "Countryside Special Animal" said: If the Son of Heaven is sacrificed in Taisha, he will inevitably be exposed to frost and dew.

古文：以群姓之众，王者通为立社，故称太社也。
现代文：由于各种姓氏的人很多，王者就统一为他们立社庙，所以称作太社。
English: Since there are many people with various surnames, the king unified them to establish a temple, so it is called Taisha.

古文：若夫置社，其数不一，盖以里所为名，《左氏传》盟于清丘之社是也。
现代文：如果是置社，那数量是不一致的，大致是用里的地名作为名称，《左传》中提到的在清丘的社结盟就是这种情况。
English: If it is a case of the establishment of a shrine, the number is inconsistent, and the names of places in the country are generally used as names. This is the case with the alliance of shrines in Qingqiu mentioned in Zuo Zhuan.

古文：众庶之社，既已不称太矣，若复不立之京都，当安所立乎！
现代文：普通民众的社庙，既然已经不称作 太 了，如果又不在京城立庙，那到什么地方立呀!
English: Since ordinary people's shrines and temples are no longer called shrines and temples, if they are not built in the capital, then where should they be built?

古文：《祭法》又曰，王为群姓立七祀，王自为立七祀。
现代文：《祭法》又说，王为各姓立七祀，王为自己立七祀。
English: The "Sacred Law" also says that the king sets up seven deities for each family name, and the king sets up seven deities for himself.

古文：言自为者，自为而祀也；为群姓者，为群姓而祀也。
现代文：说为自己，就是为自己去祭祀；为各姓，就是为各姓去祭祀。
English: If you say you are for yourself, it means you are sacrificing for yourself; if you say you are for every family, it means you are sacrificing for every family.

古文：太社与七祀其文正等。
现代文：太社和七祀在记录的行文上看正好是一样的。
English: Taisha and Shichishi are exactly the same in terms of the written record.

古文：说者穷此，因云坟籍但有五祀，无七祀也。
现代文：解释者对这一点没了办法，于是说坟典古籍当中是衹有五祀，没有七祀的。
English: The interpreter was at a loss to explain this, so he said that in the ancient books of funerary texts, there are only five deities, not seven.

古文：案祭，五祀国之大祀，七者小祀。
现代文：我认为祭礼中，五祀是国家的大祀，七祀就是小祀。
English: I think that in the festival, the five rites are the major rites of the country, and the seven rites are the minor rites.

古文：《周礼》所云祭凡小祀，则墨冕之属也。
现代文：《周礼》上提到的祭礼中凡是小祀，就都是玄冕一类的冕服。
English: In the rites mentioned in the "Weekly Rituals," all minor rites are ceremonial robes of the same type as the imperial crown.

古文：景侯解大厉曰， 如周杜伯，鬼有所归，乃不为厉 。
现代文：景侯解释大厉时说： 就像周时的杜伯，鬼魂如果有了归宿，就不会成为厉鬼。 
English: As Jing Hou explained, "Like Zhou Tu Bo, if a ghost has a home, it will not become a fierce ghost.

古文：今云无二社者称景侯，《祭法》不谓无二，则曰 口传无其文也 。
现代文：如今说没有二社的人声称是景侯的主张，《祭法》不说没有二社，却说 是传说而没有有关的文字记载 。
English: Nowadays, people who say that there are no two shrines claim to be the opinion of Jing Hou. The "Law of Sacrifice" does not say that there are no two shrines, but says that it is a legend and there is no relevant written record.

古文：夫以景侯之明，拟议而后为解，而欲以口论除明文，如此非但二社当见思惟，景侯之后解亦未易除也。
现代文：凭景侯的明达，尚且用比拟的方式来进行解释，而有人想要凭口头的意见废除有明文规定的典章，像这样就不仅是二社应当受到重视，景侯所作的解释也是不能轻易废除的。
English: According to the insight of Jing Hou, the interpretation is still carried out in a comparative manner, and some people want to abolish the regulations with explicit provisions based on verbal opinions. In this way, not only the two companies should be valued, but also the interpretation made by Jing Hou cannot be easily abolished.

古文：前被敕，《尚书·召告》乃社于新邑，惟一太牢，不二社之明义也。
现代文：不久前接受到敕令，《尚书召诰》就在新邑进行了社祭，衹用一套太牢作祭品，正是不进行二社的明证。
English: Not long ago, after receiving the imperial edict, "Shang Shu Zhao Zi" held a company festival in Xin Yue. Using a set of taifeng as an offering is a clear proof of not carrying out the second company.

古文：案《郊特牲》曰社稷太牢，必援一牢之文以明社之无二，则稷无牲矣。
现代文：考《郊特牲》说社稷祭祀用太牢，如果一定要援引一套太牢的记载来证明社祭中没有二社之说，那么稷祭中就没有用牺牲了。
English: According to the "Countryside Special Sacrifice," the sacrificial offering of the community is too strong. If a set of too strong records must be cited to prove that there are no two communities in the community sacrifice, then there is no sacrifice in the community sacrifice.

古文：说者曰，举社则稷可知。
现代文：解释的人说，举出社祭了那么稷祭的情况就可以知道。
English: The person who explained said that the situation of the sacrificial offering could be known after the social sacrifice was brought up.

古文：苟可举社以明稷，何独不举一以明二？
现代文：如果可以举出社祭来说明稷祭，为什么不可以举出一个祭礼来说明二社之礼呢?
English: If it is possible to cite a company festival to illustrate the alum festival, why is it not possible to cite a festival to illustrate the ritual of the two companies?

古文：国之大事，在祀与戎。
现代文：邦国的大事，就在祭祀和戎事上。
English: The important things of a nation are in its religious services and military affairs.

古文：若有二而除之，不若过而存之。
现代文：如果有二社的祭礼却废除一个，不如多祭来保存它。
English: If there are two festivals but only one is abolished, it is better to have more festivals to preserve it.

古文：况存之有义，而除之无据乎？
现代文：何况保存它有依据，而废除它没有依据呢?
English: Moreover, there is a basis for preserving it, but not for abolishing it.

古文：《周礼》封人掌设社壝，无稷字。
现代文：《周礼》中记载封人执掌设立社祭坛四周的矮土墙，没有提到稷。
English: In the "Weekly Rituals" it is recorded that the sealers presided over the construction of a low earthen wall around the shrine altar, but there is no mention of the yoke.

古文：今帝社无稷，盖出于此。
现代文：如今帝王的社庙中不设稷神，大概就根据这个记载。
English: According to this record, there are no yakitori gods in the emperor's shrines and temples.

古文：然国主社稷，故经传动称社稷。
现代文：然而国家主祭社稷，所以经传文献中动不动就提到社稷。
English: However, the main festival of the country is Sheshan, so Sheshan is constantly mentioned in the literature.

古文：《周礼》王祭社稷则絺冕，此王社有稷之交也。
现代文：《周礼》中记载王祭祀社稷时就戴绪冕，这是王的社庙有稷神的明文。
English: It is recorded in the "Weekly Rituals" that the king wore a crown of thorns when he offered sacrifices to the gods, which is a clear indication that the king's shrine had a god of thorns.

古文：封人所掌社壝之无稷字，说者以为略文，从可知也。
现代文：在封人执掌社坛的记载中没有提到稷，解释的人认为是省略行文，根据上文就可以推理出来。
English: In the record of the person in charge of the community forum, there is no mention of Zhai, and the person who explains it is considered to be an omitted sentence, which can be deduced from the above.

古文：谓宜仍旧立二社，而加立帝社之稷。
现代文：建议应当仍旧设立二社，而在帝社中增设稷神。
English: It was suggested that the two shrines should still be established, but that a god of thunder should be added to the Imperial Shrine.

古文：时成粲义称景侯论太社不立京都，欲破郑氏学。
现代文：当时成粲提出景侯论述遇太社不立在京都，想要推翻郑氏的学说。
English: At that time, Cheng Hui proposed the Jinghong discourse on the case of Tai Sha not standing in Kyoto, trying to overthrow Zheng's doctrine.

古文：咸重表以为： 如粲之论，景侯之解文以此坏。
现代文：傅咸再次上表认为： 要按照成粲的说法，那么景侯的解释就会因此而被破坏。
English: Fu Xian once again believes that: If it is in accordance with Cheng Yao's argument, then Jing Hou's explanation will be destroyed.

古文：《大雅》云 乃立冢土 ，毛公解曰， 冢土，大社也。 
现代文：《大雅》说 于是就设立冢土 ，毛公解释说， 冢土，就是太社 。
English: "Daya" said, "That's why we set up Shodo," and Mao Gong explained that Shodo is Taisha.

古文：景侯解《诗》，即用此说。
现代文：景侯解释《诗经》，就采用了逭一说解。
English: Jing Hou's interpretation of the "Song of Songs" adopted the interpretation of the "Song of Songs."

古文：《禹贡》 惟土五色 ，景侯解曰， 王者取五色土为太社，封四方诸侯，各割其方色土者覆四方也 。如此，太社复为立京都也。
现代文：《禹贡》中睦土五色 一句，景侯解释说， 王者取用五种颜色的土做成太社，分封四方的诸侯时，分别用其方位颜色的土以示割土分封，照这么说，太社又是设在京都了。
English: There is a sentence in "Yugon" about the five colors of soil, and Jing Hou explained that the king used five colors of soil to make Taisha, and when the lords of the four directions were divided, they used the soil of their azimuth color to show the division of the soil. According to this, Taisha was again located in Kyoto.

古文：不知此论何从而出，而与解乖，上违经记明文，下坏景侯之解。
现代文：不知道所谓景侯的论述是从什么地方找出来的，竟然和景侯的解释乖离不合，上违反了经典记录中的明文，下破坏了景侯的解释。
English: I don't know where the so-called exposition of Jinghou was found from, but it actually deviates from the explanation of Jinghou, violates the plain text in the classic record, and undermines the explanation of Jinghou.

古文：臣虽顽蔽，少长学门，不能默已，谨复续上。 
现代文：臣虽然顽劣不开窍，但是从小求学，不能沉默，谨再次上表。 
English: Although the vassal does not know the ins and outs, he has been studying since he was a child and cannot remain silent. I would like to go to the table again.

古文：刘寔与咸议同。
现代文：刘塞和傅咸的意见相同。
English: Liu Sai and Fu Xian are of the same opinion.

古文：诏曰： 社实一神，而相袭二位，众议不同，何必改作！
现代文：诏令说： 社神本来是一个神，可是相沿成了两位，众人意见不同，没有必要改变!
English: The edict said: The social god was originally one god, but it has become two, and people have different opinions. There is no need to change it!

古文：其便仍旧，一如魏制。 
现代文：还是依照旧例，完全和魏的制度一样。 
English: It is still in accordance with the old example, completely the same as the Wei system.

古文：其后挚虞奏，以为： 臣案《祭法》 王为群姓立社曰太社，王自 为立社曰王社。 《周礼》大司徒 设其社稷之壝 ，又曰 以血祭祭社稷 ，则太社也。
现代文：后来挚虞上奏，认为： 臣案《祭法》说 王为各姓立社叫做太社，王为自己立社叫做王社，《周礼》讲大司徒负责 设立其社稷坛四周的矮土墙，又说 用血祭来祭社稷 ，说的就是太社。
English: Later, Zhi Gong played up the argument, saying that: The "Law of Sacrifice" of the subject said that the king established the shrine for each family was called Taisha, and the king established the shrine for himself was called Wangsha. The "Weekly Ritual" said that the chief priest was responsible for setting up the low earth wall around the altar of his shrine, and also said that the shrine was sacrificed with blood sacrifice, which is called Taisha.

古文：又曰 封人掌设王之社壝 ，又有军旅宜乎社，则王社也。
现代文：又说 封人掌管修建王之社坛 ，又提到军旅应当在社祭坛进行有关仪式，说的就是王社。
English: He also said that the fong person was in charge of building the king's altar, and mentioned that the military brigade should carry out the relevant ceremony on the altar of the shrine, saying that it was the king's shrine.

古文：太社为群姓祈报，祈报有时，主不可废。
现代文：在太社替百姓祈祷告知天神，这种祈祷报告有一定的时候，主持的人不能不遵行。
English: In Taisha, praying for the people is to inform the gods, and there is a certain time when the person who presides over this prayer report cannot but follow it.

古文：故凡祓社衅鼓，主奉以从是也。
现代文：所以凡是祓除灾殃祭祀社神杀生祭军鼓等，主持者都在这裹恭行其事。
English: Therefore, the hosts of all exorcisms, sacrificial rites, shrines, gods, life-killing rituals, war drums, etc. are all carried out here.

古文：此皆二社之明文，前代之所尊。
现代文：这些都是有二社的明文记载，前代王朝一直尊奉的规矩。
English: These are all clearly documented by two companies, and the previous dynasty has always respected the rules.

古文：以《尚书·召告》社于新邑三牲各文，《诗》称 乃立冢土 ，无两社之交，故废帝社，惟立太社。
现代文：因为《尚书召诰》上的用三牲在新邑祭社神的记载，《诗经》上说的 于是就设立冢土 ，都没有提到两社。所以废置帝社，衹设立太社。
English: Because the record in "Shang Shu Zhao Zi" that the three animals were used to worship the god of the Shin-eup, and the record in "Shijing" that "therefore the earth was created" did not mention the two shrines. Therefore, the Imperial Shrine was abolished and the Taisha Shrine was established.

古文：《诗书》所称，各指一事，又皆在公旦制作之前，未可以易《周礼》之明典，《祭法》之正义。
现代文：《诗》《书》上讲的，各指一件事情，又都产生在周公旦制定礼乐制度以前，不能用来改变《周礼》中的明文典章、《祭法》中的正式规定。
English: The things mentioned in the "poem" and "book" each refer to one thing, and they all originated before Zhou Gongdan established the ritual music system. They cannot be used to change the clear-text ordinances in the "Zhou Ritual" and the formal provisions in the "Sacrificial Law."

古文：前改建庙社，营一社之处，朝议斐然，执古匡今。
现代文：以前改建庙和社，营造一处社祭的地方，朝中议论纷纷，拿古礼来匡正今制。
English: In the past, when temples and shrines were rebuilt and a place for a shrine festival was built, there was much discussion in the Imperial Court about using ancient rites to uphold the current system.

古文：世祖武皇帝躬发明诏，定二社之义，以为永制。
现代文：世祖武皇帝亲自发出明智的诏命，肯定了二社的制度，作为长久不变的制度。
English: The ancestor Emperor Wu personally issued a wise edict, affirming the two-society system as a long-term and unchanging system.

古文：宜定新礼，从二社。 
现代文：应当确定新的礼规，依从二社的规制。 
English: New rules of etiquette should be established, and the regulations of the two companies should be followed.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：韶令听从了他的意见。
English: He complied.

古文：至元帝建武元年，又依洛京立二社一稷。
现代文：到元帝建武元年，又在洛京设立二社和一稷的祭祀场所。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jianwu of the Yuan Dynasty, two shrines and a sacrificial site were established in Luojing.

古文：其太社之祝曰： 地德普施，惠存无疆。
现代文：那时的太社的祝说： 地德无私，恩惠无疆。
English: The congratulatory message from Taisha at that time said: Local morality is selfless, and benevolence is boundless.

古文：乃建太社，保佑万邦。
现代文：设立太社，保佑万邦。
English: The establishment of the Grand Shrine will bless all nations.

古文：悠悠四海，咸赖嘉祥。 
现代文：悠悠四海，无不安康。 
English: Yoyo around the world, no worries.

古文：其帝社之祝曰： 坤德厚载，邦畿是保。
现代文：那时的帝社的祝说： 坤德深厚，国家无忧。
English: At that time, the Emperor's congratulatory message said, "With profound virtue, the country is worry-free."

古文：乃建帝社，以神地道。明祀惟辰，景福来造。 
现代文：设立帝社，地道发扬，按时祭奉，幸福普降。 
English: The establishment of the imperial shrine, the development of the real way, the worship on time, and the general decline of happiness.

古文：汉仪，每月旦，太史上其月历，有司侍郎尚书见读其令，奉行其正。
现代文：汉代的礼仪规定，每月初一的早晨，太史要呈上当月的历表，各有关部门的侍郎尚书们静听宣读政令，照历表按时执行。
English: The etiquette of the Han Dynasty stipulated that on the morning of the first day of each month, the Taishi should present the calendar of the month, and the attendants of the relevant departments should silently read out the decrees and implement them on time according to the calendar.

古文：朔前后二日，牵牛酒至社下以祭日。
现代文：初一的前后两天，牵羊持酒到社神前祭太阳神。
English: On the two days before and after the first day of the new year, the sheep are led with wine to the Sun God festival in front of the shrine.

古文：日有变，割羊以祠社，用救日变。
现代文：太阳如果有变故，就杀羊来祠祭社神，以此来救发生变故的太阳。
English: If there is a change in the sun, he will kill a sheep to come to the shrine to sacrifice the shrine god, in order to save the sun that has changed.

古文：执事者长冠，衣绛领袖缘中衣、绛缘以行礼，如故事。
现代文：主持人戴长冠，穿领子袖口有绛色边饰的中衣、绛色裤子和袜子来行礼，就像以往的做法一样。
English: The host wore a long crown, a collared shirt with navy trim at the cuffs, navy trousers and socks to perform the salute, as he has done in the past.

古文：自晋受命，日月将交会，太史乃上合朔，尚书先事三日，宣摄内外戒严。
现代文：自从晋建国后，日月将要交会时，太史便报告合朔的情况，尚书在事前三天，宣布并负责宫内宫外的戒严。
English: Since the founding of the Jin Dynasty, when the sun and the moon were about to meet, Taishi would report the situation. Shangshu announced and was responsible for the martial law inside and outside the palace three days in advance.

古文：挚虞《决疑》曰： 凡救日蚀者，著赤帻，以助阳也。
现代文：挚虞的《决疑》中说： 凡是救日食的，都戴赤色帧巾，用来助长阳的力量。
English: He said in "Decision," which is full of fear: Anyone who saves the eclipse will wear a red scarf, which is used to promote the power of the rising sun.

古文：日将蚀，天子素服避正殿，内外严警。
现代文：日食将要发生时，天子穿素色衣服离开正殿，宫内宫外严密警戒。
English: When a solar eclipse is about to occur, the heavenly son wears plain clothes and leaves the main hall. The inner and outer court are on high alert.

古文：太史登灵台，伺侯日变，便伐鼓于门。
现代文：太史登上灵台，等到太阳的变故发生，就在宫门敲鼓。
English: Taishi ascended the platform, and waited for the sun to change, and then beat the drum at the palace gate.

古文：闻鼓音，侍臣皆著赤帻，带剑入侍。
现代文：听到鼓声，侍奉的臣子都戴上赤色帧巾，佩带宝剑进宫侍卫。
English: Upon hearing the sound of the drums, the courtiers all put on red scarves and swords to enter the palace.

古文：三台令史以上皆各持剑，立其户前。
现代文：三台令史以上的官员都各自拿剑，站在他们机构的门前。
English: Each of the three officials above the rank of general stood in front of their offices, each holding a sword.

古文：卫尉卿驱驰绕宫，伺察守备。
现代文：卫尉卿骑马环绕宫城，巡察戒备，周而复始。
English: The Lord-Lieutenant of the Guards rode around Miyagi on horseback, inspecting the defences, over and over again.

古文：周而复始，亦伐鼓于社，用周礼也。
现代文：同时也在社庙敲鼓，用的是周朝的礼。
English: At the same time, they also beat drums in the shrine and temple, using the Zhou Dynasty rite.

古文：又以赤丝为绳以系社，祝史陈辞以责之。
现代文：又用赤色丝线编成绳来系住社神，祝史对社神陈辞来责备它。
English: He also used red silk thread to weave a rope to tie the shrine god, and congratulated the history of the shrine god to rebuke it.

古文：社，勾龙之神，天子之上公，故陈辞以责之。
现代文：社神就是勾龙神，是天子的上公，所以陈辞来责备它。
English: The god of the community is the god of the dragon, the father of the son of heaven, so Chen Ji came to reproach him.

古文：日复常，乃罢。 
现代文：太阳恢复常态，这才作罢。 
English: Only when the sun returns to normal does this stop.

古文：汉建安中，将正会，而太史上言，正旦当日蚀。
现代文：汉代建安中期，将要在元旦朝会群臣，可是太史报告，元旦那天正值日食。
English: In the mid-Jianan period of the Han Dynasty, a group of courtiers would gather on New Year's Day, but according to historical records, New Year's Day coincided with a solar eclipse.

古文：朝士疑会否，共谘尚书令荀彧。
现代文：朝臣们不知道是否应该朝会，共同向尚书令荀或请教。
English: The courtiers did not know whether they should convene the imperial court and jointly issue an order to Shang Shuling or ask for advice.

古文：时广平计吏刘邵在坐，曰： 梓慎、裨灶，古之良史，尤占水火，错失天时。
现代文：当时广平的计吏刘邵在座，说： 梓慎、裨宠，是古代的良史，但是在预测水灾火灾方面，有时还会错过天时。
English: At that time, Liu Shao, the surveyor of Guangping, was present and said: Zi Shen, Bu Ji, is a good history of ancient times, but in terms of predicting floods and fires, it sometimes misses the time.

古文：《礼》，诸侯旅见天子，入门不得终礼者四，日蚀在一。
现代文：《礼》书上规定，诸侯们一起朝见天子时，进了门却不能进行完礼仪的原因有四种，日食是其中一种。
English: According to the "Rite" book, there are four reasons why the princes cannot complete the etiquette when they enter the door to see the Son of Heaven, and the solar eclipse is one of them.

古文：然则圣人垂制，不为变异豫废朝礼者，或灾消异伏，或推术谬误也。 
现代文：然而圣人传下的制度，不因为有变故异象就事先取消朝会的礼仪，这是因为有时灾异自行消失而不发生，有时推算会有错误。 
English: However, the system handed down by the sages does not cancel the ceremony of the imperial court meeting in advance because of a change or a vision. This is because sometimes the calamity disappears on its own and does not occur, and sometimes there is an error in the calculation.

古文：彧及众人咸善而从之，遂朝会如旧，日亦不蚀，邵由此显名。
现代文：荀或和大家都认为有道理而听从了他的意见，于是照旧朝会，也没有发生日食，刘邵因为这件事而出了名。
English: Liu Shao and everyone thought it was reasonable and followed his advice, so there was no eclipse of the sun, and Liu Shao became famous for this.

古文：至武帝咸宁三年、四年，并以正旦合朔却元会，改魏故事也。
现代文：到武帝咸宁三年、四年，都因为元旦赶上合朔而取消元旦的朝会，是改变了魏的旧制。
English: In the three or four years of Emperor Wu's reign, the New Year's Day imperial court banquet was cancelled because the New Year's Day was too close to the New Year's Day. This was a change from the old Wei system.

古文：元帝太兴元年四月，合朔，中书侍郎孔愉奏曰： 《春秋》，日有蚀之，天子伐鼓于社，攻诸阴也；诸侯伐鼓于朝，臣自攻也。
现代文：元帝太兴元年四月，合朔，中书侍郎孔愉上奏说： 《春秋》上说，有日食的时候，天子在社庙击鼓，是向阴进攻；诸侯在朝堂击鼓，是向自己进攻。
English: In April of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Taixing was crowned, and the attendant of the Chinese book, Kong Yu, said: "In Spring and Autumn, it is said that when there is a solar eclipse, the Son of Heaven beats the drum in the shrine and temple, it is an attack on the yin; the princes beat the drum in the court, it is an attack on themselves.

古文：案尚书符，若日有变，便击鼓于诸门，有违旧典。 
现代文：根据尚书台发出的符令，如果太阳有变故，就在各门前击鼓，这是违反售有典章规定的。 
English: According to the order issued by Shang Shudai, if there is a change in the sun, drums will be beaten in front of each door, which is a violation of the provisions of the sale and purchase regulations.

古文：诏曰： 所陈有正义，辄敕外改之。 
现代文：诏令说： 陈述的问题是符合正道的，立即传令外面改变原来的布置。 
English: The edict said: "The issue of the statement is in line with the righteous path, immediately order the outside to change the original layout."

古文：至康帝建元元年，太史上元日合朔，后复疑应却会与否。
现代文：到康帝建元元年，太史报告说元旦将合朔，后来又不清楚是否应该取消朝会。
English: In the first year of Kangdi Jianyuan, Taishi reported that the New Year's Day would be a new year, and later it was unclear whether the imperial meeting should be canceled.

古文：庾冰辅政，写刘邵议以示八坐。
现代文：庾冰正辅佐朝政，写了刘邵的议论出示给位至八座的高级官员们看。
English: Zou Bingzheng, an aide to the government, wrote Liu Shao's speech and showed it to eight high-ranking officials.

古文：于时有谓邵为不得礼意，荀彧从之，是胜人之一失。
现代文：当时有人说刘邵的意见不符合礼的精神，荀或听从他，那是高明的人一时的过失。
English: At that time, some people said that Liu Shao's opinion did not conform to the spirit of etiquette, and that it was a momentary lapse of a clever person to listen to or follow him.

古文：故蔡谟遂著议非之，曰： 邵论灾消异伏，又以梓慎、裨灶犹有错失，太史上言，亦不必审，其理诚然也。
现代文：因此蔡谟就写了论文批评刘邵，说： 刘邵提出的灾异自行消失而不发生，又认为连梓慎、裨灶都有失误，所以对太史的报告，也不必十分当真，这些道理自然是对的。
English: Therefore, Cai Mu wrote a paper criticizing Liu Shao, saying: The calamities proposed by Liu Shao disappear on their own and do not occur, and he also believed that even Zishen and Zibo had mistakes, so the report on Tai Shi did not have to be taken very seriously, these principles are naturally correct.

古文：而云圣人垂制，不为变异豫废朝礼，此则谬矣。
现代文：可是他说圣人传下的制度，不因为会有灾变异象而事先取消朝会的礼仪，这就错了。
English: However, he was wrong to say that the system handed down by sages does not cancel the etiquette of the imperial court meeting in advance because of the possibility of natural disasters.

古文：灾祥之发，所以谴告人君，王者之所重诫，故素服废乐，退避正寝，百官降物，用币伐鼓，躬亲而救之。
现代文：灾祥的发生，是为了谴责并告知人君，是王者很重视的上天的告诫，所以穿素色服装而停止奏乐，退避出正寝，百官穿素色服装，奉上供品并击鼓，亲自去救它。
English: The calamity occurred in order to condemn and inform the people. It was a heavenly admonition that the king attached great importance to, so he wore plain clothes and stopped playing music, avoiding sleeping. The officials wore plain clothes, offered offerings and beat drums, and personally went to rescue it.

古文：夫敬诫之事，与其疑而废之，宁慎而行之。
现代文：凡是敬神接受上天告诫的事，与其怀疑而取消它，不如谨慎地奉行它。
English: Whatever is divinely admonished, it is better to heed it than to doubt and set it aside.

古文：故孔子、老聃助葬于巷党，以丧不见星而行，故日蚀而止柩，曰安知其不见星也。
现代文：所以孔子、老聃在乡里帮人行葬礼时，因为丧事要在不见星星的情况下进行，所以发生日食时就停下灵柩，说是怎么能知道不会出现星星呢。
English: Therefore, when Confucius and Lao Zi were helping people with funerals in the countryside, because the funeral had to be carried out without seeing the stars, they stopped the coffin when there was a solar eclipse and said, "How can we know that the stars will not appear?"

古文：而邵废之，是弃圣贤之成规也。
现代文：可是刘邵取消了这种礼，这是抛弃圣贤的成规呀。
English: But Liu Shao cancelled this ceremony, which is the norm for abandoning sages.

古文：鲁桓公壬申有灾，而以乙亥尝祭，《春秋》讥之。
现代文：鲁桓公壬申日遇到灾，却在三天后的乙亥日举行尝祭，《春秋》书中批评了他。
English: Lu Huan Gong Jinshin encountered a disaster on the same day, but held a tasting festival three days later on the day of Yihai. He was criticized in the book "Spring and Autumn."

古文：灾事既过，犹追惧未已，故废宗庙之察，况闻天眚将至，行庆乐之会，于礼乖矣。
现代文：灾事已经过去，仍然感到恐惧不止，所以取消宗庙的祭事，何况得知天眚将要到来，而举行欢庆娱乐的聚会，就违背礼了。
English: The calamity has passed, but I am still filled with fear. Therefore, it would be a breach of etiquette to cancel the festival at my ancestral temple, let alone hold a party to celebrate and have fun when I know the heavenly messenger is coming.

古文：《礼记》所云诸侯入门不得终礼者，谓日官不豫言，诸侯既入，见蚀乃知耳，非先闻当蚀而朝会不废也。
现代文：《礼记》所说的诸侯进门后不能完成礼仪的情况，指的是曰官没有预告，诸侯进去之后，见到日食发生才知道，不是先得知会有日食而不取消朝会。
English: The situation of not being able to complete the etiquette after the lords entered the door mentioned in the "Rituals" refers to the fact that the officials did not announce it in advance. After the lords entered, they did not know until they saw the solar eclipse. It is not possible to cancel the imperial meeting without first knowing that there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：引此，可谓失其义旨。
现代文：引用这条，可以称得上是失去了它的本意。
English: By quoting this passage, it can be said to have lost its original meaning.

古文：刘邵所执者《礼记》也，夫子、老聃巷党之事，亦《礼记》所言，复违而反之，进退无据。
现代文：刘邵依据的是《礼记》，夫子、老聃在乡里的事，也是《礼记》上说的，却违反了它，取舍都没有根据。
English: Liu Shao is based on the "Rituals," and the matter of Fuzi and Laozi in the countryside is also said in the "Rituals," but it violates it, and there is no basis for the choice.

古文：然荀令所善，汉朝所从，遂使此言至今见称，莫知其误矣，后来君子将拟以为式，故正之云尔。 
现代文：可是荀令称道，汉朝奉行，于是使得这些说法到今天仍被称引，没有人明白它的错误，将来的君子们会根据它来作为法式，故此要纠正它。 
English: However, the imperial edict praised it and the Han Dynasty followed it, so these sayings are still quoted today, no one understands its error, future gentlemen will use it as a French style, so it is necessary to correct it.

古文：于是冰从众议，遂以却会。
现代文：于是庾冰听从众人的意见，因此就取消了朝会。
English: Therefore, Hao Bing listened to everyone's opinions and cancelled the imperial meeting.

古文：至永和中，殷浩辅政，又欲从刘邵议不却会。
现代文：至永和年间，殷浩辅佐朝政，又想采纳刘邵的主张而不取消朝会。
English: During the Yonghe period, Yin Hao, an aide to the imperial court, also wanted to adopt Liu Shao's proposal without canceling the imperial court.

古文：王彪之据咸宁、建元故事，又曰： 《礼》云诸侯旅见天子，不得终礼而废者四，自谓卒暴有之，非为先存其事，而侥幸史官推术缪错，故不豫废朝礼也。 
现代文：王彪之依据咸宁、建元时的旧例，又说： 《礼》书说诸侯一同朝见天子，不能完成礼而中止的原因有四种，自认为是指突然发生意外，而不是指事先知道那些事件会发生，却寄希望于史官推算失误，所以不预先取消朝会的礼仪。 
English: Wang Biao based on the old example of Xianning and Jianyuan, and also said: "The "Rite" book says that the princes go to see the emperor together, and there are four reasons for not being able to complete the ceremony and stop it. He thinks that it refers to a sudden accident, rather than knowing in advance that those events will happen, but hoping for the historian's calculation error, so he does not cancel the etiquette of the imperial meeting in advance.

古文：于是又从彪之议。
现代文：于是又听从了彪之的意见。
English: So he followed Biao Zhou's advice.

古文：《尚书》 禋于六宗 ，诸儒互说，往往不同。
现代文：《尚书》的 向六宗里祭 造句话，儒生们说解纷纭，往往不一样。
English: "Shangshu"'s "Xiangliu Zongli Festival" is a phrase, and Confucians have different interpretations, often different.

古文：王莽以《易》六子，遂立六宗祠。
现代文：王莽根据《易经》中提到的 六子 ，就设立了六宗祠。
English: Wang Mang established six ancestral shrines according to the six sons mentioned in the "I Ching."

古文：魏明帝时疑其事，以问王肃，亦以为易六子，故不废。
现代文：魏明帝在位时怀疑这件事，询问王肃，王肃也认为是《易经》说的六子，所以没有取消。
English: When Emperor Wei Ming was on the throne, he doubted the matter and asked Wang Su. Wang Su also thought it was the six sons mentioned in the I Ching, so it was not cancelled.

古文：及晋受命，司马彪等表六宗之祀不应特立新礼，于是遂罢其祀。
现代文：到晋承受天命之后，司马彪等人上表说明六宗的祭祀不应该特别设立新的礼规，于是就停止了那些祭祀。
English: After Jin received the Mandate of Heaven, Sima Biao and others went to the table to explain that the rituals of the six sects should not specially establish new etiquette, so they stopped those rituals.

古文：其后挚虞奏之，又以为： 案舜受终， 类于上帝，系于六宗，望于山川 ，则六宗非上帝之神，又非山川之灵也。
现代文：后来挚虞就这件事上奏，又认为： 考察舜承受帝位时， 类祭上帝，里祭六宗，望祭山川，那么六宗不是上帝的神名，又不是山的神灵。
English: Later, Zhengyu wrote about this matter, and also believed that: When examining the succession to the imperial throne, if there are six kinds of offerings to God, six kinds of offerings to the mountains and rivers, and six kinds of offerings to the mountains and rivers, then the six kinds of offerings are not God's divine name, nor are they the gods of the mountains.

古文：《周礼》肆师职曰： 用牲于社宗。 
现代文：《周礼》关于肆师的职责中说： 在祭祀社宗时掌管用牲。 
English: "Zhou Li" said about the duties of the sorcerer: In charge of the sacrificial animals during the ritual of the Shazong.

古文：党正职曰： 春秋祭禜亦如之。 
现代文：关于党正的职责中说： 春秋的祭荣也像这样。 
English: Regarding the duties of the party secretary, he said: The spring and autumn festivals are also like this.

古文：肆师之宗，与社并列，则班与社同也。
现代文：肆师职责中说的宗，和社并列，那么等级是和社相同的。
English: If the sect mentioned in the teacher's duties is on the same level as the company, then the grade is the same as that of the company.

古文：党正之禜，文不系社，则神与社异也。
现代文：党正职责中说的荣祭，行文没有涉及社，那么这个神是和社不同的。
English: The Rong Festival mentioned in the duties of the Party General Secretary, the wording does not involve the company, so this god is different from the company.

古文：周之命祀，莫重郊社，宗同于社，则贵神明矣。
现代文：周朝的祭祀，没有比郊社更重要的，宗同等于社，那么它是重要的神就很清楚了。
English: The Zhou Dynasty's sacrificial rites were no more important than those of the suburban shrines, and the Zongtong is equal to the shrines, so it is clear that it is an important god.

古文：又，《月令》孟冬祈于天宗，则《周礼》祭禜，《月令》天宗，六宗之神也。
现代文：此外，《月令》讲孟冬时向天宗祈祷，那么《周礼》的祭荣，《月令》的天宗，就是六宗的神。
English: In addition, "The Lunar Calendar" tells of Meng Dong praying to the Heavenly Patriarchs, so the festival glory of "The Lunar Calendar" and the Heavenly Patriarchs of "The Lunar Calendar" are the gods of the six deities.

古文：汉光武即位高邑，依《虞书》禋于六宗。
现代文：汉光武在高邑即位，依照《虞书》里祭六宗。
English: Han Guangwu ascended to the throne in Gaoyu, according to the "Book of the State," there are six festivals.

古文：安帝元初中，立祀乾位，礼同太社。
现代文：安帝元初年间，在干的方位上设立祭祀场所，礼仪和太社相同。
English: In the first year of the Andean era, a place of worship was established in the direction of the stem, with the same etiquette as Taisha.

古文：魏氏因之，至景初二年，大议其神，朝士纷纭，各有所执。
现代文：魏继承了这一制度，到景初二年，对这个神进行广泛讨论，朝臣们议论纷纭，各持己见。
English: Wei inherited this system, and in the first two years of the reign of King Jing, there were extensive discussions about this god, with courtiers discussing various things and each holding their own opinions.

古文：惟散骑常侍刘邵以为万物负阴而抱阳，冲气以为和。
现代文：衹有散骑常侍刘邵认为万物都包涵着阴阳两种相反相成之气，二者互相激荡而产生中和之气。
English: Liu Shao believed that everything contains the two opposing energies of yin and yang, and the two excite each other to produce a neutral atmosphere.

古文：六宗者，太极冲和之气，为六气之宗者也。
现代文：六宗，就是太极冲和的气，是作为六气的宗的。
English: The six sects, that is, the qi of Taiji and the six sects, are the sects of the six qi.

古文：《虞书》谓之六宗，《周书》谓之天宗。
现代文：《虞书》称为六宗，《周书》称为天宗。
English: "Gushu" refers to six sects, and "Zhoushu" refers to the Heavenly Sect.

古文：是时考论异同，而从其议。
现代文：当时考察研究了有关的各种异同的情况，就听从了他的意见。
English: At that time, the inspection team studied the relevant differences and similarities, and listened to his opinion.

古文：汉魏相仍，著为贵祀。
现代文：汉魏相沿用，成为重要的祭祀。
English: It was used during the Han and Wei dynasties and became an important ritual.

古文：凡崇祀百神，放而不至，有其兴之，则莫敢废之。
现代文：凡是崇仰奉祀百神，一旦放纵不祀神就不来保佑，已经设立了的，就没有人敢取消它。
English: No one dares to abolish what has already been established, that is, the worship of hundreds of gods, which will not be blessed if they are not worshipped.

古文：宜定新礼，祀六宗如旧。 
现代文：应该制定新的礼规，祭祀六宗就像从前一样。 
English: A new etiquette should be established, and the six rites should continue as before.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令听从了他的意见。
English: He complied.

古文：《礼》，王为群姓立七祀，曰司命、中霤、国门、国行、大厉、户、灶。
现代文：《礼》书上说，王为各姓设立七祀，叫做司命、中霤、国门、国行、大厉、户、灶。
English: According to the "Rite" book, the king set up seven shrines for each family name, called Simei, Zhongye, Guomen, Guogyong, Dali, Hou and Zhao.

古文：仲春玄鸟至之日，以太牢祀高禖。
现代文：仲春月玄乌到的那一天，用太牢祭祀高梅神。
English: On the day of the arrival of Zhongchun Yue Xuanwu, the dungeon was used to worship Gaomei.

古文：《毛诗》《丝衣篇》，高子曰灵星之尸。
现代文：在《毛诗》的《丝衣篇》中，高子提到了灵星。
English: In the "Silk Cloth" section of "Mao Shi," Takako mentioned the spirit star.

古文：汉兴，高帝亦立灵星祠。
现代文：汉朝建立后，高帝也设立灵星祠。
English: After the establishment of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gao also set up a spiritual star shrine.

古文：及武帝，以李少君故，始祠灶；及生戾太子，始立高禖。
现代文：到武帝时，因为李少星的缘故，开始祠祭灶；到生了戾太子，开始设立高梅神。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, because of Li Shaoxing, the ancestral hall began to worship the hearth; when the crown prince was born, the establishment of the high plum god began.

古文：《汉仪》云，国家亦有五祀，有司行事，其礼颇轻于社稷，则亦存其典矣。
现代文：《汉仪》说，国家也有五祀，有司进行有关祭祀事宜的时候，礼仪要比社稷方面的祭祀简单一些，那也是保存了有关的典章制度了。
English: "Han Yi" says that the country also has five religious rites, and when a priest conducts the relevant religious rites, the etiquette is simpler than the religious rites of the society, which is also the preservation of the relevant award system.

古文：又云，常以仲春之月，立高禖祠于城南，祀以特牲。
现代文：又说，经常在仲春的月份裹，到城南设立高梅祠，用特牲奉祀。
English: He also said that often in the middle of spring, they would go to the south of the city to set up a high plum tree shrine and use special animals to worship.

古文：又，是月也，祠老人星于国都南郊老人星庙。
现代文：另外，也是在这个月，在国都南郊的老人星庙祠祭老人星。
English: In addition, it is also in this month that the Star of the Elderly Temple and Shrine Festival of the Star of the Elderly takes place in the southern suburbs of the national capital.

古文：立夏祭灶，季秋祠心星于城南坛心星庙。
现代文：立夏时祭灶，季秋时在城南坛心星庙祠祭心星。
English: At the beginning of summer, the festival is held, and in the autumn, the heart star festival is held in the south of the city.

古文：元康时，洛阳犹有高禖坛，百姓祠其旁，或谓之落星。
现代文：元康年间，洛阳还有高梅坛，百姓在它旁边祠祭，有人称之为落星。
English: During the Yuan and Kang dynasties, Luoyang still had a high plum altar, and the people held a shrine festival next to it. Some people called it a falling star.

古文：是后诸祀无闻，江左以来，不立七祀，灵星则配飨南郊，不复特置焉。
现代文：这以后就没听说过有上述各种祭祀。束晋以后，不设立七祀，将灵星放在南郊配飨，不再特别设立神位。
English: After Sokjin, the seven deities were not established, the spirit star was placed in the southern suburb, and there were no more special deities.

古文：左氏传 龙见而雩 ，经典尚矣。
现代文：《左氏传》讲的 龙见而雩 ，经典中早就有了。
English: "The Tale of the Left-Handed Man" tells the story of a dragon who meets a dragon and disappears, which has long existed in the classics.

古文：汉仪，自立春到立夏，尽立秋，郡国尚旱，郡县各扫除社稷。
现代文：龃目的礼仪，从立春到立夏，直到立秋，郡国久旱，郡县就各自打扫社稷神庙。
English: From the beginning of spring to the beginning of summer, until the beginning of autumn, the county had a long drought, and the counties cleaned the shrines and temples independently.

古文：其旱也，公卿官长以次行雩礼求雨，闭诸阳，衣皁，兴土龙，立土人，舞僮二佾，七日一变，如故事。
现代文：旱的时候，公卿官长们按等级进行雩礼来求雨，关闭各种属性为阳的事物，穿皂色服装，抬着土龙，树立土人，用舞僮两行，七天一换，像旧例一样。
English: When there is a drought, the court nobles and officials will perform the rite of purification according to their ranks to pray for rain, close all kinds of things with masculine attributes, wear soap-colored clothing, carry the soil dragon, set up the native people, and use two lines of dance gongs, and change them every seven days, as in the past.

古文：武帝咸宁二年，春久旱。
现代文：亘递盛空二年，春季久旱。
English: Two years of unprecedented prosperity, followed by a long drought in the spring.

古文：四月丁已，诏曰 诸旱处广加祈请 。
现代文：四月丁巳，下韶说 各个有旱情的地方要广泛进行祈神请雨的仪式 。
English: In April, the lower court said that all places with drought conditions should widely carry out the ritual of praying to God for rain.

古文：五月庚午，始祈雨于社稷山川。
现代文：五月庚午，开始向社稷山的神灵祈求降雨。
English: In the late afternoon of May, I began to pray for rain to the deities of Sheshan Mountain.

古文：六月戊子，获澍雨。
现代文：六月戊子，天降及时雨。
English: June Boshi, the sky falls and the rain falls.

古文：此雩之旧典也。
现代文：这是雩祭的旧典。
English: This is the old text of the burnt offering.

古文：太康三年四月，十年二月，又如之。
现代文：塞毖三年四月，十年二月，又像这样做了。
English: In April of 2003, and again in February of 2010, he did the same.

古文：其雨多则禜祭，赤帻硃衣，闭诸阴，硃索萦社，伐硃鼓焉。
现代文：雨要是多了就举行萦祭，穿戴赤色帧巾朱色衣服，关闭各种属性为阴的事物，用朱色绳索绕在社神身上，敲击朱色的鼓。
English: If there is too much rain, they will hold a burnt offering, wear red cloth and scarlet clothes, close all kinds of things with yin attributes, wrap scarlet ropes around the body of the social god, and beat scarlet drums.

古文：《周礼》，王者祭昊天上帝、日月星辰、司中司命、风伯雨师、社稷、五土、五岳、山林川泽、四方百物，兆四类四望，亦如之。
现代文：《周礼》上讲，王者祭祀昊天上帝、曰月星辰、司中司命、风伯雨师、社神稷神、五土、五盘、山林川泽、四方百物，象征性地祭祀四类和四望时，也用相同的礼仪。
English: According to the "Weekly Rituals," the king would offer sacrifices to the God of Heaven, the God of the Moon, the God of the Stars, the God of the Gods, the God of the Winds, the God of the Rain, the God of the Gods, the God of the Five Lands, the God of the Five Mountains, the God of the Forests, the God of the Rivers, and the God of the Four Directions. The same ritual was also used when symbolically offering sacrifices to the Four Classes and the Four Views.

古文：魏文帝黄初二年六月庚子，初礼五岳四渎，咸秩群祀，瘗沈珪璧。
现代文：魏文帝黄初二年六月庚子，首次以礼祭祀五岳四渎，将群祀一一排列，将珪和璧或埋入土中或沉入水中作为供品。
English: In June of the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Weiwen made the first ritual offering of the Five Mountains and Four Deities, arranging the group offerings one by one, and burying the skull and crossbones into the ground or sinking them into the water as offerings.

古文：六年七月，帝以舟军入淮。
现代文：六年七月，帝率领水军进入淮河。
English: In July of the sixth year, the emperor led the navy into the Huai River.

古文：九月壬戌，遣使者沈璧于淮。
现代文：九月壬戌，派使者将璧沉入淮河。
English: In September, the emperor sent an envoy to sink the stone into the Huai River.

古文：魏明帝太和四年八月，帝东巡，遣使者以特牛祠中岳。
现代文：魏明帝太和四年八月，帝到东方巡视，派使者用特牛祠祭中岳。
English: In August of the fourth year of the Wei and Ming dynasties, the emperor went on a tour of the East and sent an envoy to Zhongyue with a special cow shrine.

古文：魏元帝咸熙元年，行幸长安，使使者以璧币礼祠华山。
现代文：魏元帝咸熙元年，巡行到长安，派使者用璧和币以礼祠祭茎山。
English: In the first year of the Wei and Yuan Dynasties, Emperor Han Xi marched to Chang'an and sent an emissary to use coins and coins to hold a ceremony at the ancestral shrine.

古文：及穆帝升平中，何琦论修五岳祠曰： 唐虞之制，天子五载一巡狩，顺时之方，柴燎五岳，望于山川，遍于群神，故曰，因名山升中于天，所以昭告神祗，飨报功德。
现代文：到穆帝升平年间，何琦议论恢复对五岳的祠祭说： 唐尧虞舜的制度，天子五年巡狩一次，按照时令对应的方位，烧柴燎祭五岳，望祭山，遍及群神，所以说，藉名山向上天表告成功，用以昭示告诉神祇，祭飨汇报功德。
English: During the years of the ascension of the Emperor Mu, He Zi discussed the restoration of the ancestral shrine festival of the Five Mountains and said: the system of Tang Dynasty, the heavenly son made a hunting tour once every five years, according to the position corresponding to the season, burning firewood and sacrificing the Five Mountains, watching the sacrificial mountain, and covering the gods. Therefore, the famous mountain was used to show the success to the heavens, to show and tell the gods, and to report the merits of the sacrificial mountain.

古文：是以灾厉不作，而风雨寒暑以时。
现代文：因此灾害疫厉不发生，而风雨寒暑随着时令来。
English: Therefore, disasters and epidemics do not occur, while wind, rain, cold and heat come with the seasons.

古文：降及三代，年数虽殊，而其礼不易，五岳视三公，四渎视诸侯，著在经纪，所谓 有其举之，莫敢废也。 及秦汉都西京，泾、渭、长水，虽不在祀典，以近咸阳故，尽得比大川之祠，而正立之祀可以阙哉！自永嘉之乱，神州倾覆，兹事替矣。
现代文：传到三代那时候，相隔的年数虽然不同，可是那些礼仪没有改变，将五岳视为三公，将四渎视为诸侯，著录在经典传记中，就是常说的 有就奉行，没人敢废除它，到秦漠建都西京，泾、渭、长丞，虽然没记载在祭祀的文献中，因为靠近咸堕，都得以有了像对待大河流一样的祠祭，那本来设立的祭祀还能被取消吗自从永嘉动乱以后，神州天翻地覆，这些事也就没有了。
English: When it was passed down to the third generation, although the number of years was different, the etiquette did not change. The five mountains were regarded as the three princes, and the four mountains were regarded as the lords. It was recorded in the classic biography, that is, it was often said that it was practiced, and no one dared to abolish it. When the Qin Dynasty built the capital of Xijing, although it was not recorded in the sacrificial literature, because it was close to the Han Dynasty, it was possible to have a shrine festival like the one for the great rivers. Can the originally established sacrifice be canceled? Since the Yongjia Disturbance, the Divine Land has been over

古文：惟灊之天柱，在王略之内也，旧台选百户吏卒，以奉其职。
现代文：惟有洒地的丢挂山，在王统辖的地区内，旧时由台省选百来尸吏员卒役，奉行有关的事情。
English: However, in the area under the jurisdiction of the king, there is a hill with a lot of land. In the old days, Taiwan Province selected hundreds of cadaver officers to carry out related matters.

古文：中兴之际，未有官守，庐江郡常遣大吏兼假四时祷赛，春释寒而冬请冰。
现代文：中兴的时候，没有负责的官员，庐江郡常常派大官兼管四季的祈祷和酬神，春季感谢寒气消解而冬季祈请收藏大冰。
English: At the time of ZTE, there was no responsible official. Lijiang County often sent a high-ranking official to be in charge of the four seasons' prayers and the god of reward. In spring, thank the cold for dissolving, and in winter, pray for the collection of big ice.

古文：咸和迄今，又复隳替。
现代文：盛和年间至今，又再一次毁掉了这些制度。
English: From the Heian period to the present, it has once again destroyed these systems.

古文：计今非典之祠，可谓非一。
现代文：估计如今不合旧典章的祠祭，可以说不止一两种。
English: It is estimated that there are more than one or two ancestral shrine festivals that do not conform to the old regulations.

古文：考其正名，则淫昏之鬼；推其糜费，则百姓之蠹。
现代文：考察它们的本名，是越礼昏昧的鬼物；推究其中的浪费，是黎民百姓的蠹虫。
English: If we examine their real names, we will find that they are vaguely demonic; if we investigate their waste, we will find that they are the maggots of the Li people.

古文：而山川大神更为简缺，礼俗穨紊，人神杂扰，公私奔蹙，渐以繁滋。
现代文：然而山的大神更加缺乏供奉，礼俗颓败紊乱，入神关系杂乱混扰，公家私人处境紧张迫促，渐渐地就日益败坏下去。
English: However, the great god of the mountain was even more lacking in worship, the rituals and customs were in disarray, the relationship to the god was chaotic and confusing, and the public and private situations were tense and urgent, gradually deteriorating day by day.

古文：良由顷国家多难，日不暇给，草建废滞，事有未遑。
现代文：造自然是由于国家遭逢很多灾难，顾不上处理这些事务，草创或建设都已停止，许多事情没有时间料理。
English: The creation of nature is due to the fact that the country has suffered many disasters, there is no way to deal with these matters, pioneering or construction has stopped, and there is no time to do many things.

古文：今元憝已歼，宜修旧典。
现代文：如今元凶已经被歼灭，应当重行奉行旧有的典章制度。
English: Now that the culprit has been annihilated, the old disciplinary system should be reintroduced.

古文：岳渎之域，风教所被，来苏之众，咸蒙德泽。
现代文：岳渎一带，是风俗教化很好的地方，获得新生的民众，都蒙受德泽。
English: The area around Yuege is a place where customs are well-educated, and the people who have been reborn have all received merit.

古文：而神明禋祀，未之或甄，巡狩柴燎，其废尚矣。
现代文：然而对哪些神明以及如何里祀，还没有确定，巡狩的制度和烧柴燎祭的做法，已经荒废很久了。
English: However, it has not yet been determined which deities and how they should be enshrined, and the system of hunting tours and the practice of burning firewood and offering sacrifices have been abandoned for a long time.

古文：崇明前典，将俟皇舆北旋，稽古宪章，大厘制度。
现代文：崇尚明确从前的典章，要等到皇帝北归，考查古代的典章制度，全面制定制度。
English: It is necessary to wait for the emperor to return to the north, examine the ancient award system, and comprehensively formulate the system.

古文：俎豆牲牢，祝嘏文辞，旧章靡记，可令礼官作式，归诸诚简，以达明德馨香，如斯而已。
现代文：俎豆中供放的牲牢，祝嘏们祭祀时的文辞，旧的文献中没有记载，可以让礼官们制定一些条例，力求诚心诚意而又简便易行，用来表达明德馨香的本旨，像这样就可以了。
English: There is no record in the old documents of the animal dungeons that were provided and released in the middle of the peas, and the words of the priests at the time of the sacrifice, so that the etiquette officials can formulate some regulations, strive to be sincere and simple, and use them to express the true meaning of Mingdexiang, like this.

古文：其诸袄孽，可粗依法令，先去其甚，俾邪正不黩。 
现代文：其余各种妖孽鬼物，可以大致依照法令，首先废除其中最不好的，以使邪鬼和正神不至于混淆。 
English: The remaining various kinds of evil spirits can be abolished in accordance with the law, starting with the worst of them, so that evil spirits and righteous gods will not be confused.

古文：时不见省。
现代文：当时没有受到重视。
English: It was not taken seriously at the time.

古文：昔武王入殷，未及下车而封先代之后，盖追思其德也。
现代文：从前武王进入殷，没有等到下车就分封了前朝的后代，那是因为追思前朝的德行。
English: In the past, when King Wu entered Yin, he did not wait until he got off the train to separate the descendants of the former dynasty, because he was thinking about the virtues of the former dynasty.

古文：孔子以大圣而终于陪臣，未有封爵。
现代文：孔子作为大圣人却始终是个陪臣，没有得到封号爵位。
English: Confucius, as a great sage, was always a vassal, and did not receive a title.

古文：至汉元帝，孔霸以帝师赐爵，号褒成君，奉孔子后。
现代文：到漠元帝时期，孔霸身为帝师而获得颁赐爵位，号为褒成君，奉为孔子的后人。
English: By the time of Emperor Wuyuan, Confucius was given a title of nobility for being the emperor's teacher. He was called Baochengjun, and was worshipped as the descendant of Confucius.

古文：魏文帝黄初二年正月，诏以议郎孔羡为宗圣侯，邑百户，奉孔子祀，令鲁郡修旧庙，置百户吏卒以守卫之。
现代文：魏文帝黄初二年正月，韶令封议郎孔羡为宗圣侯，受封邑百户，奉孔子的香火，下令鲁郡修建旧有的庙，设置百户的吏卒来守卫它。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wei Wen decreed that the vassal lord Confucius should be the sacred lord of the county, and ordered the construction of an old temple in Lu County and the establishment of a hundred officials to guard it.

古文：及武帝泰始三年十一月，改封宗圣侯孔震为奉圣亭侯。
现代文：到武帝泰始三年十一月，改封宗圣侯孔震为奉圣亭侯。
English: In November of the third year of Emperor Wu's reign, he changed his title from Zong Sheng Hou Kong Zhen to Feng Sheng Ting Hou.

古文：又诏太学及鲁国，四时备三牲以祀孔子。
现代文：又下诏给太学和鲁国，让四时备齐三牲来供祀孔子。
English: He also issued an edict to Taichi and Lu Province to prepare three sacrificial animals at four o'clock to worship Confucius.

古文：明帝太宁三年，诏给奉圣亭侯孔亭四时祠孔子祭直，如泰始故事。
现代文：明帝太宁三年，下诏让奉圣亭侯孔亭四时祠祭孔子时主持祭祀，像泰始的旧例那样。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taining of the Ming Dynasty, it was decreed that Feng Shengting Hou Kongting should preside over the four-hour Confucius Shrine Festival, just like the old example of Taishi.

古文：礼，始立学必先释奠于先圣先师，及行事必用币。
现代文：礼仪规定，开始建立学校一定要向先圣先师置酒馔祭奠，到行礼时一定要用币作供品。
English: According to the rules of etiquette, when a school is first established, it is necessary to make a libation of wine to the previous saint and teacher, and it is necessary to make an offering of coins at the time of the ceremony.

古文：汉世虽立学，斯礼无闻。
现代文：汉世虽然设立学校，但这种礼仪没听说实行了。
English: Although the Han Dynasty set up schools, this kind of etiquette was never practiced.

古文：魏齐王正始二年二月，帝讲论语通，五年五月，讲《尚书》通，七年十二月，讲《礼记》通，并使太常释奠，以太牢祠孔子于辟雍，以颜回配。
现代文：魏齐王正始二年二月，帝学完《论语》，五年五月，学完《尚书》，七年十二月，学完《礼记》，都派遣太常置酒馔祭奠，用太牢在辟雍祠祭孔子，用颜回配享。
English: In February of the second year of the reign of King Wei of Qi, after studying "Analects," in May of the fifth year, after studying "Shang Shu," and in December of the seventh year, after studying "Rituals," they all sent too often to set up a wine jar for sacrifice, and used too firmly to celebrate Confucius at the Yongxiao Shrine, and enjoyed it with Yan.

古文：武帝泰始七年，皇太子讲《孝经》通。
现代文：武帝泰始七年，皇太子学完《孝经》。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Wu's reign, the crown prince finished studying the Book of Filial Piety.

古文：咸宁三年，讲《诗》通，太康三年，讲《礼记》通。
现代文：咸宁三年，学完《诗经》，太康三年，学完《礼记》。
English: Xianning spent three years studying the Book of Songs, while Taikang spent three years studying the Book of Rites.

古文：惠帝元康三年，皇太子讲《论语》通。
现代文：惠帝元康三年，皇太子学完《论语》。
English: In the third year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, the crown prince finished studying "Analects."

古文：元帝太兴二年，皇太子讲《论语》通。
现代文：元帝太兴二年，皇太子学完《论语》。
English: In the second year of the reign of the Yuan Emperor Taixing, the crown prince finished studying the Analects.

古文：太子并亲释奠，以太牢祠孔子，以颜回配。
现代文：太子都亲自置酒馔祭奠，用太牢祠祭孔子，用颜回配享。
English: The princes all personally set up a sake lees offering, used the Taiji Temple to celebrate Confucius, and used Yanbei to share.

古文：成帝咸康元年，帝讲《诗》通。
现代文：成帝咸康元年，帝学完《诗经》。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jiankang's reign, the emperor finished studying the Book of Songs.

古文：穆帝升平元年三月，帝讲《孝经》通。
现代文：穆帝升平元年三月，帝学完《孝经》。
English: In March of the first year of Mu Di's ascension to the throne, Tei finished studying the "Book of Filial Piety."

古文：孝武宁康三年七月，帝讲《孝经》通。
现代文：孝武宁康三年七月，帝学完《孝经》。
English: In July of the third year of Xiaowu Ningkang's reign, the emperor finished studying the "Xiaojing."

古文：并释奠如故事。穆帝、孝武并权以中堂为太学。
现代文：都按旧例置酒馔祭奠，穆帝、孝武都暂且把中堂作为太学。
English: According to the old custom, they all placed sake lees and held a memorial service, and both Mu Di and Xiao Wu temporarily used the middle hall as a hall of learning.

古文：故事，祀皋陶于廷尉寺，新礼移祀于律署，以同祭先圣于太学也。
现代文：旧例，在廷尉寺祭祀奉迪，新的礼规将祭祀移到律署进行，来等同于在太学祭祀先圣。
English: The old practice was to hold the offering at Tingyi Temple, but the new rules of etiquette moved the offering to the Justice Department, making it the same as the offering at Taigaku.

古文：故事，祀以社日，新礼改以孟秋之月，以应秋政。
现代文：旧例，在社日祭祀，新的礼规改在孟秋之月，来顺应秋季的政务。
English: The old custom was to hold the ritual on the day of the company, but the new etiquette was changed to the month of Mengqiu to accommodate the autumn government affairs.

古文：挚虞以为： 案《虞书》，皋陶作士师，惟明克允，国重其功，人思其当，是以狱官礼其神，系者致其祭，功在断狱之成，不在律令之始也。
现代文：垫卢认为： 考之《虞书》，塞琼设立士师掌管刑狱，明察秋毫，国家看重他的功绩，人民思念他的公正，因此狱官敬奉他的神位，囚犯向他献祭，功绩在于断狱的成就上，不在刚刚制定律令的时候。
English: Mat-Lu thought: According to the "Book of Fortune," it was Sejong who set up a judge to be in charge of the prison. Looking back, the country valued his merits, and the people thought about his justice. Therefore, the prison officials worshiped his divinity, and the prisoners offered sacrifices to him. The merit was in the achievement of breaking the prison, not in the time when the regulation was just made.

古文：大学之设，义重太常，故祭于太学，是崇圣而从重也。
现代文：太学的设立，本旨是重视太常，所以在太学设祭，这是尊崇圣人而又照顾到所重视的。
English: The establishment of Taixue, the original intention is to attach importance to the deities, so the establishment of a festival in Taixue, this is to respect the saints and take care of what is important.

古文：律署之置，卑于廷尉，移祀于署，是去重而就轻也。
现代文：律署的机构，比廷尉级别低，将祭祀移到署内，这是去重而就轻。
English: The organization of the Justice Department, which is lower than the rank of lieutenant, moved the sacrificial rites to the department, which is not a big deal.

古文：律非正署，废兴无常，宜如旧祀于廷尉。
现代文：律不是正式官署，废置或设置没有常规，应该像旧例那样在廷尉祭祀。
English: The Ritsuryo is not an official government agency, and there is no rule for abolishing or setting it up. It should be held at the Imperial Palace as in the past.

古文：又，祭用仲春，义取重生，改用孟秋，以应刑杀，理未足以相易。
现代文：另外，祭祀在仲春进行，本旨是取其中重视生命的涵意，改在孟秋，来顺应刑罚杀戮，道理上还不足以用来改易旧制。
English: In addition, the sacrificial rites are held in mid-spring, the original intention is to take the connotation of valuing life and change it to mid-autumn, to comply with the punishment of killing, which is not enough to change the old system.

古文：宜定新礼，皆如旧。 制： 可。 
现代文：应该制定新的礼规，完全像旧制一样。 制命： 同意。 
English: A new code of etiquette should be established, exactly like the old one.

古文：岁旦常设苇茭桃梗，磔鸡于宫及百寺之门，以禳恶气。
现代文：每年元旦常常设置苇索和桃梗，在宫城和各官署的门前杀鶸，用来禳除恶气。
English: Every New Year's Day, cords and peach stalks are often set up to kill flies in front of the doors of Miyagi and various government offices to remove evil spirits.

古文：案汉仪则仲夏设之，有桃印，无磔鸡。
现代文：考察漠仪中则是在仲夏设置这些，有桃印，没有杀鸡。
English: These were set up in midsummer during the inspection of the desert, with peach blossoms and no killing of chickens.

古文：及魏明帝大修禳礼，故何晏禳祭议鸡特牲供禳衅之事。
现代文：到魏明帝大兴禳礼，所以何晏就禳祭提议用鶸特牲来供禳衅之类的祭祀时用。
English: By the Wei and Ming Dynasties, the Daxing sacrificial rites had become very popular, so He Yu proposed to use the special sacrificial animal for the sacrificial rites such as provocation.

古文：磔鸡宜起于魏，桃印本汉制，所以辅卯金，又宜魏所除也。
现代文：杀鸡应该是起始于魏，桃印本来出自汉朝制度，用来辅助卯金，又应该是被魏废除的。
English: The killing of chickens should have started in the Wei Dynasty. The peach stamp originally came from the Han Dynasty system and was used to supplement the yakitori. It should have been abolished by the Wei Dynasty.

古文：但未详改仲夏在岁旦之所起耳。
现代文：衹是不清楚将仲夏改为元旦是根据什么。
English: However, it is not clear on what basis the mid-summer date was changed to New Year's Day.

古文：魏明帝青龙元年，诏郡国，山川不在祀典者勿祠。
现代文：魏明帝青龙元年，诏令各郡国，凡是没有记载在祭祀典章中的山都不要去祠祭。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Emperor Ming of the Wei Dynasty ordered all counties and states not to go to the ancestral shrine festival in any mountain that was not recorded in the sacrificial ceremony.

古文：武帝泰始元年十二月，诏曰： 昔圣帝明王修五岳四渎，名山川泽，各有定制，所以报阴阳之功故也。
现代文：武帝泰始元年十二月，诏令说： 从前圣帝明王敬奉五岳四渎，名山泽，各自有一定的制度，用来报告阴阳变化谐调的情况。
English: In December of the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, the imperial edict said: In the past, the Holy Emperor Mingwang revered the Five Mountains and Four Forests, each of which had a certain system to report the changes in the harmony of yin and yang.

古文：然以道莅天下者，其鬼不神，其神不伤人，故祝史荐而无愧辞，是以其人敬慎幽冥而淫祀不作。
现代文：然而用道统治天下的人，那儿的鬼不灵验，神也不会伤害人，所以祝史们祭告时没有令心中惭愧的言辞，因此那时的人虽然谨慎敬奉幽冥中的神明却没有淫祀产生。
English: However, the people who ruled the world with the Tao did not succeed in controlling the demons there, and the gods would not harm people. Therefore, the congratulatory historians did not use words that would make people feel ashamed when they preached. Therefore, although the people at that time were careful to worship the gods in the dark, there was no sexual immorality.

古文：末世信道不笃，僭礼渎神，纵欲祈请，曾不敬而远之，徒偷以求幸，袄妄相煽，舍正为邪，故魏朝疾之。
现代文：末世的人信奉道不笃实，僭越礼规亵渎神明，随心所欲地祈祷请求，一点也不敬而远之，一味寻求苟且侥幸，妖妄互相助长，舍弃正道而走上邪路，所以魏朝很不满意这方面。
English: The people of the last days believe in a way that is not true, go beyond the rules and regulations to blaspheme the gods, pray and ask for whatever they want, are not at all respectful and far away, blindly seek to be lucky, and help each other, abandon the right path and go down the wrong path, so the Wei Dynasty is very dissatisfied with this aspect.

古文：其案旧礼具为之制，使功著于人者必有其报，而袄淫之鬼不乱其间。 
现代文：他们考察旧礼详细制定制度，使神明功绩显示在人间的就一定会得到报谢，而妖妄无度的鬼不能在这中间捣乱。 
English: They examined the old rituals and worked out a detailed system, so that if the gods' merits were displayed in the human world, they would certainly be rewarded, and the demons could not interfere.

古文：二年正月，有司奏春分祠厉殃及禳祠，诏曰： 不在祀典，除之。 
现代文：二年正月，有司奏请春分时祠祭厉殃以及进行攘除恶气的祠祭，诏令说： 不在祭祀的典章裹，废除它们。 
English: In the first month of the second year, there was a prelate who requested that the ancestral hall festival be held at the time of the vernal equinox and that the ancestral hall festival be carried out to drive away evil spirits. The imperial edict said: If it is not included in the ceremony of the ritual, abolish it.

古文：《王制》，天子七庙，诸侯以下各有等差，礼文详矣。
现代文：《王制》规定，天子设七庙，诸侯以下的各按等级而有不同，礼制方面的记载很详细。
English: The "Royal System" stipulates that the emperor set up seven temples, each of which is different according to the level below the princes, and the records of the ceremonial system are very detailed.

古文：汉献帝建安十八年五月，以河北十郡封魏武帝为魏公。
现代文：汉献帝建安十八年五月，将河北的十个郡封给魏武帝为魏公。
English: In May of the 18th year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Jianan awarded ten counties in Hebei to Emperor Wu of Wei as Wei Gong.

古文：是年七月，始建宗庙于鄴，自以诸侯礼立五庙也。
现代文：当年七月，开始在邺建立宗庙，自己根据诸侯的礼规设立五庙。
English: In July of that year, he began to build a family temple in Handan, and he set up five temples according to the etiquette of the princes.

古文：后虽进爵为王，无所改易。
现代文：后来虽然进封爵号为王，没有改变。
English: Later, although he was ennobled and given the title of king, he did not change.

古文：延康元年，文帝继王位，七月，追尊皇祖为大王，丁夫人曰大王后。
现代文：延康元年，文帝继任王位，七月，追尊皇祖的称号为大王，丁夫人被称作大王后。
English: In the first year of the Yan Kang era, Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne, and in July, the title of the Emperor's ancestor was named the Great King, and Mrs. Ding was called the Great Queen.

古文：黄初元年十一月受禅，又追尊大王曰大皇帝，皇考武王曰武皇帝。
现代文：黄初元年十一月接受禅位，又追尊大王为大皇帝，皇考武王为武皇帝。
English: In November of the first year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, he accepted the position of Zen, and he also followed the great king as the great emperor, and the king of the imperial examination as the emperor.

古文：二年六月，以洛京宗庙未成，乃祠武帝于建始殿，亲执馈奠，如家人礼。
现代文：二年六月，由于洛京内的宗庙还没有落成，于是在建始殿祠祭武帝，亲自捧着供品祭奠，和在家中行礼一样。
English: In June of the second year, since the ancestral temple in Luojing had not yet been completed, Emperor Wu was held in the newly built ancestral hall, and he personally held the offering ceremony, just as he did at home.

古文：案《礼》将营宫室，宗庙为先，庶人无庙，故祭于寝，帝者行之非礼甚矣。
现代文：考察《礼》书中规定将要营造宫室，首先建造宗庙，庶人没有庙，所以在寝室中奉祭，身为帝王的人这样做，就很不合乎礼规了。
English: An examination of the "Rite" book stipulates that the palace room will be built, and the family temple will be built first. Commoners do not have a temple, so they offer sacrifices in the bedroom. For an emperor to do so is very out of line with etiquette.

古文：明帝太和三年六月，又追尊高祖大长秋曰高皇，夫人吴氏曰高皇后，并在鄴庙。
现代文：明帝太和三年六月，又追尊高祖大长秋为直皇，夫人吴氏为高皇后，都供在邺的宗庙裹。
English: In June of the 3rd year of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Ming and Empress Wu honored Gaozhu Dajangqiu as Emperor Gao and his wife as Empress Gao, both of which were offered to the ancestral temple in Handan.

古文：庙所祠，则文帝之高祖处士、曾祖高皇、祖大皇帝共一庙，考太祖武皇帝特一庙，百世不毁，然则所祠止于亲庙四室也。
现代文：庙中祠祭的，是文帝的高祖处士、曾祖高皇、祖大皇帝共在一庙，考太祖武皇帝单为一庙，百代不毁，然而所祠祭的衹不过是亲庙中的四室。
English: The ancestral hall festival in the temple is that the great-great-grandfather of Emperor Wen, the great-great-great-grandfather of Emperor Gao, and the great-great-grandfather of the emperor are all in one temple, and the great-great-great-grandfather of Emperor Kautai is only one temple and will not be destroyed for hundreds of generations. However, the ancestral hall festival is only four rooms in the family temple.

古文：其年十一月，洛京庙成，则以亲尽迁处士主置园邑，使行太傅太常韩暨、行太常宗正曹恪持节迎高皇以下神主，共一庙，犹为四室而已。
现代文：这一年十一月，洛京的宗庙落成，因为亲情已经尽到了就将处士的神位迁置到园邑，派行太傅太常韩暨、行太常宗正曹恪持节迎取高皇以下神位，共在一庙，仍然是四室而已。
English: In November of the same year, the ancestral temple in Loking was completed. Because the family relationship had been exhausted, the priest's god was relocated to the garden village. Taifu Taichanghan Ji, and Taichang Zong Zheng Cao were sent to welcome the god below the emperor on the festival day. They were all in one temple, still only four rooms.

古文：至景初元年六月，群公有司始更奏定七庙之制，曰： 大魏三圣相承，以成帝业。
现代文：到景初元年六月，群公和有司才又奏请制定七庙的制度，说： 大垫的三位圣主相承，因而成就帝业。
English: In June of the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Qun Gong and Shi Cai also petitioned for the establishment of a seven-temple system, saying, "The three holy lords of Dadin have succeeded each other, thus achieving imperial succession.

古文：武皇帝肇建洪基，拨乱夷险，为魏太祖。
现代文：武皇帝创建宏大的基业，拨乱平险，称为魏太祖。
English: Emperor Wu created a grand foundation, called Wei Taizu.

古文：文皇帝继天革命，应期受禅，为魏高祖。
现代文：文皇帝承受天意革除濩命，顺应时势接受惮位，称为魏高担。
English: Emperor Wen accepted the will of heaven and accepted the position of the emperor in accordance with the current situation, known as Wei Gaotan.

古文：上集成大命，清定华夏，兴制礼乐，宜为魏烈祖。
现代文：皇上完成大命，平定华夏，重新制定礼乐，应该称为魏烈祖。
English: The emperor fulfilled his great mission, pacified China, and reformulated the ritual music. He should be called Wei Lei Zu.

古文：于太祖庙北为二祧，其左为文帝庙，号曰高祖昭祧，其右拟明帝，号曰烈祖穆祧。
现代文：在太祖的神庙北边设立二祧，左侧是文壹的神庙，号为高祖昭桃，右边拟为明童，号为烈祖穆祧。
English: On the north side of the great ancestor's temple, there are two shrines. On the left side is the temple of Wen Yi, called Gao Zu Zhaotao, and on the right side is intended to be Ming Tong, called the great ancestor Mu Xi.

古文：三祖之庙，万世不毁。
现代文：遣三祖的神庙，莴世不毁。
English: The divine temple of the three founding fathers will never be destroyed.

古文：其余四庙，亲尽迭迁，一如周后稷、文武庙祧之礼。 
现代文：其余的四庙，亲情已经尽到了就更替迁移，完全按照周朝的后稷、文王武王的庙祧的礼规。 
English: For the remaining four temples, family ties have been exhausted, and they will be relocated in turn, in full accordance with the etiquette of the Zhou Dynasty's Houyi and King Wenwu's Miao Wei.

古文：文帝甄后赐死，故不列庙。
现代文：文帝的甄皇后被赐死，所以不列在庙中。
English: Emperor Wen's Empress Zhen was put to death, so she is not listed in the temple.

古文：明帝即位，有司奏请追谥曰文昭皇后，使司空王朗持节奉策告祠于陵。
现代文：明帝即位，有司奏请追谧为文昭皇后，派司空王朗持节奉策书到陵前告祠。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, a scribe was asked to track down the Empress Wen Zhao, and he sent the scribe Kuang Lang to deliver the imperial edict to the mausoleum.

古文：三公又奏曰： 自古周人归祖后稷，又特立庙以祀姜嫄。
现代文：三公又上奏说： 自古因人认丘墨为祖，又单独立庙来祭祀差面。
English: The three princes also made a report, saying: Since ancient times, people have regarded Qumo as their ancestor, and they have set up separate temples to worship Qumo.

古文：今文昭皇后之于后嗣，圣德至化，岂有量哉！夫以皇家世妃之尊，神灵迁化，而无寝庙以承享祀，非以报显德，昭孝敬也。
现代文：如今的文昭皇后对于后嗣们，留下圣德和极大的教益，哪裹是有限量的呀说起来凭皇家世妃的尊贵，灵魂变化成神之后，却没有寝庙来承受享祀，这不是报答显德，昭示孝敬。
English: Today's Empress Wen Zhao has left her heirs with sacred virtues and great benefits, but there is a limit to how much she can leave behind. In other words, with the dignity of the royal world empress, after the soul changes into a god, there is no sleeping temple to receive worship. This is not a reward for virtue and a sign of filial piety.

古文：稽之古制，宜依周礼，别立寝庙。 
现代文：考察古代的制度，应当依照周朝的礼规，另外设立寝庙。 
English: When examining the ancient system, it is necessary to set up a sleeping temple in accordance with the etiquette of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏章被批准。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：太和元年二月，立庙于鄴。
现代文：太和元年二月，在邺建立庙。
English: In February of the first year of the Taiwa era, a temple was built in Handan.

古文：四月，洛邑初营宗庙，掘地得玉玺，方一寸九分，其文曰 天子羡思慈亲。 
现代文：四月，洛邑开始营建宗庙，挖地时发现玉玺，边长一寸九分，上面的印文是 天子羡思慈亲 。
English: In April, Luoyang began to build the ancestral temple. When digging the ground, they found a jade pillar with a side length of one inch and nine minutes, and the above seal was Tianzi Zenshi Cixin.

古文：明帝为之改容，以太牢告庙。
现代文：明帝看到印文后激动得变了脸色，用太牢到庙中告祭。
English: When Emperor Ming saw the seal, he was so excited that his face turned pale. He went to the temple to make an offering.

古文：至景初元年十二月己未，有司又奏文昭皇后立庙京师，永传享祀，乐舞与祖庙同，废鄴庙。
现代文：到景初元年十二月己未，有司又奏请为文昭皇后在京师立庙，永远进行享祀，音乐和歌舞的规格与祖庙的相同，撤销在邺的庙。
English: At the beginning of December of the first year after the arrival of the scene, there was another request for the establishment of a temple for the Empress Wen Zhao in Beijing, and it was revoked for the temple in Handan. The specifications of music and song and dance were the same as those of the ancestral temple.

古文：魏元帝咸熙元年，进文帝爵为王，追命舞阳宣文侯为宣王，忠武侯为景王。
现代文：魏元帝咸熙元年，晋封文帝爵号为王，追命舞阳宣文侯为宣王，忠武侯为景王。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Han of the Wei-Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Wen of the Jin Dynasty was the king, Emperor Wu of the Wu Dynasty was the king, and Emperor Zhongwu was the king.

古文：是年八月，文帝崩，谥曰文王。
现代文：这一年八月，文帝崩，谧号为文王。
English: In August of that year, Emperor Wen passed away, and his posthumous name was King Wen.

古文：武帝泰始元年十二月丙寅，受禅，丁卯，追尊皇祖宣王为宣皇帝，伯考景王为景皇帝，考文王为文皇帝，宣王妃张氏为宣穆皇后，景王夫人羊氏为景皇后。
现代文：武帝泰始元年十二月丙寅，接受禅位。丁卯，追尊皇祖宣王为宣皇帝，伯考景王为景皇帝，考文王为文皇帝，宣王妃张氏为宣穆皇后，景王夫人羊氏为景皇后。
English: In December of the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, Xun Yin accepted the position of Zen. Ding Wu followed his ancestor, Emperor Xuan Wang, as Emperor Xun, King Bercow as Emperor Xing, King Kovun as Emperor Wen, Princess Xun Wang Zhang as Empress Xuan Mu, and Lady Wang Yang as Empress Xing.

古文：二年正月，有司奏置七庙。
现代文：二年正月，有司上奏请求设置七庙。
English: In the first month of the second year, there was a request to set up seven temples.

古文：帝重其役，诏宜权立一庙。
现代文：帝认为工程太大，韶令应当权且设立一庙。
English: The emperor thought that the project was too large and that the imperial edict should have the power to establish a temple.

古文：于是群臣议奏： 上古清庙一宫，尊远神祗。
现代文：于是群臣上奏提议： 上古的时候宗庙祇有一宫，尊奉始祖神祇。
English: So the group of retainers made a proposal: In ancient times, there was only one main hall in the main temple, which was dedicated to the gods of the ancestors.

古文：逮至周室，制为七庙，以辩宗祧。
现代文：到了周室，定为七庙，用来区别宗亲远祖。
English: When it came to the weekly room, it was determined to be seven temples, which was used to distinguish between distant ancestors and relatives.

古文：圣旨深弘，远迹上世，敦崇唐虞，舍七庙之繁华，遵一宫之远旨。
现代文：圣上的本旨深刻弘大。效仿远古的时代，虔敬地崇奉唐尧虞舜的作风，舍弃七庙的繁盛荣华，遵行一宫的古风意旨。
English: In imitation of ancient times, it reverently reveres the style of the Tang and Yu Dynasties, renounces the prosperity and glory of the Seven Temples, and follows the ancient style of the First Palace.

古文：昔舜承尧禅，受终文祖，遂陟帝位，盖三十载，月正元日，又格于文祖，遂陟帝位，此则虞氏不改唐庙，因仍旧宫。
现代文：从前舜承接尧的禅让，受命于天，于是登上帝位，经三十载，月正元旦等历法，又恪守文祖的制度，逭就是卢氏不改变唐尧的宗庙，沿用旧有的宫室。
English: Once upon a time, he was ordered by heaven to ascend to the throne of heaven, and after thirty years, the month was the New Year's Day and so on, and he also adhered to the system of the founder. That is to say, the Lu clan did not change the ancestral temple of Tang Xuan, and continued to use the old palace.

古文：可依有虞氏故事，即用魏庙。 
现代文：可以依照有虞氏的旧例，就用魏的宗庙。 
English: You can follow the old example of the Ariyu clan and use Wei's ancestral temple.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏章被批准。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：于是追祭征西将军、豫章府君、颍川府君、京兆府君，与宣皇帝、景皇帝、文皇帝为三昭三穆。
现代文：于是追祭征西将军、豫章府君、颖川府君、京兆府君，以及宣皇帝、景皇帝、文皇帝为三昭三穆。
English: As a result, the general of the Western Expedition, the governor of Yuzhang Prefecture, the governor of Yingchuan Prefecture, the governor of Jingzhao Prefecture, as well as the Emperor Xuan, the Emperor Jing, and the Emperor Wen are the three Zhaozhanmu.

古文：是时宣皇未升，太祖虚位，所以祠六世，与景帝为七庙，其礼则据王肃说也。
现代文：当时宣皇帝神主没有就位，太祖神位是虚设的，所以祠祭的有六世，加上景帝共是七庙，有关的礼是依据王肃的解释。
English: At that time, Emperor Xuan's deity did not take its place, and the position of the great-grandfather deity was set up in vain. Therefore, there were six generations of the ancestral shrine festival, and together with Emperor Jing, there were seven temples. The related rituals were based on Wang Su's interpretation.

古文：七月，又诏曰： 主者前奏，就魏旧庙，诚亦有准。
现代文：七月，又下诏说： 主事的人不久前上奏，利用魏的旧有的庙堂，诚然也是有道理的。
English: In July, he issued another edict, saying: "The person in charge started to play music not long ago, and it is indeed reasonable to use Wei's old temple.

古文：然于祗奉神明，情犹未安，宜更营造。 
现代文：不过对于敬奉神明，情感上还是觉得不合适，应该另外营造庙堂。 
English: However, for the worship of gods, I still feel that it is emotionally inappropriate, and a temple should be built separately.

古文：于是改创宗庙。
现代文：于是另外建造宗庙。
English: As a result, a separate ancestral temple was built.

古文：十一月，追尊景帝夫人夏侯氏为景怀皇后。
现代文：十一月，追尊景帝夫人夏侯氏为景怀皇后。
English: In November, Xia Hou, the wife of Emperor Jing, was crowned as the Empress of Jinghai.

古文：任茂议以为夏侯初嫔之时，未有王业。
现代文：任蓬提出异议认为夏堡当初为嫔的时候，还没有王业。
English: Ren Peng objected that when the Summer Palace was originally built, there was no Wangye.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：帝不听从。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：太康元年，灵寿公主修丽祔于太庙，周汉未有其准。
现代文：太康元年，灵寿公主修丽被拊祭在太庙，厘还礼制中没有这样的情况。
English: In the first year of Taikang, Ling Shou Princess Shuli was sacrificed in the temple, but there was no such situation in the ritual system.

古文：魏明帝则别立平原主庙，晋又异魏也。
现代文：魏明帝另外设立平原主的祭庙。晋又不同于魏了。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei also set up a festival temple for the Lord of the Plain. Jin was different from Wei.

古文：六年，因庙陷，当改修创，群臣又议奏曰： 古者七庙异所，自宜如礼。 
现代文：八年，由于宗庙沉陷，需要另外修造，群臣又商议上奏说： 古时候七庙不设立在同一处，自然应当按照古礼办。 
English: In the eighth year, because the ancestral temple had sunk, it was necessary to build another one, and the ministers discussed and reported: In ancient times, the seven temples were not set up in the same place, so naturally they should be run according to ancient etiquette.

古文：诏又曰： 古虽七庙，自近代以来皆一庙七室，于礼无废，于情为叙，亦随时之宜也。
现代文：诏令又说： 古时候虽然说是七庙，从近代以来却都是一庙七室，在礼制上没有废除什么，在亲情的表达上也比较顺，也是随着时代的不同所采取的相宜的做法。
English: The edict also said: Although it was said that there were seven temples in ancient times, it has been one temple with seven rooms since modern times. Nothing has been abolished in the etiquette, and it is relatively smooth in the expression of affection. It is also an appropriate approach adopted with the different times.

古文：其便仍旧。 
现代文：还是利用原来的地方吧。 
English: Let's use the original place.

古文：至十年，乃更改筑于宣阳门内，穷极壮丽，然坎位之制犹如初尔。
现代文：到太康十年，才另外改建在宣阳门内，极其壮丽，不过设在坎位的制度还是和当初一样的。
English: It was not until the 10th year of Taikang that it was rebuilt inside the Xuanyang Gate, which is extremely magnificent, but the system of placing it on a pedestal is still the same as it was originally.

古文：庙成，帝用挚虞议，率百官迁神主于新庙，自征西以下，车服导从皆如帝者之仪。
现代文：宗庙落成，帝采纳挚虞的意见，率领百官将神主迁到新庙，从征西以下的各个神主，所用的车马服饰先导随从都按照帝王的仪仗规格办。
English: After the completion of the ancestral temple, the emperor, adopting the opinion of the zealous, led hundreds of officials to relocate the deity to the new temple. The chariot and horse costumes used by the various deities from the Western Conquest onward were made according to the emperor's ceremonial specifications.

古文：及武帝崩则迁征西，及惠帝崩又迁豫章。
现代文：到武帝崩就迁走征西的神主，到惠帝崩又迁走豫章的神主。
English: When Emperor Wu died, the deity of Western Conquest moved away, and when Emperor Hui died, the deity of Yuzhang moved away.

古文：而惠帝世愍怀太子、太子二子哀太孙臧、冲太孙尚并祔庙，元帝世，怀帝殇太子又祔庙，号为阴室四殇。
现代文：惠帝的时候愍怀太子、太子的两个儿子哀太孙司马臧、冲太孙司马尚都拊祭在宗庙裹，元帝的时候，怀查的殇太子又拊祭在宗庙裹，号称为阴室四殇。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hui, Prince Huai and the two sons of Prince Hui, Grand Prince Sima Yi and Grand Prince Chong, were both enshrined in the ancestral temple. During the reign of Emperor Yuan, the Grand Prince Huai and the two sons of Prince Hui were also enshrined in the ancestral temple. They were known as the "Four Emperors of the Netherworld."

古文：怀帝初，又策谥武帝杨后曰武悼皇后，改葬峻阳陵侧，别祠弘训宫，不列于庙。
现代文：怀帝初年，又策命武帝杨后谧号为武悼皇后，改葬到峻阳陵的旁边，另外在弘训宫祠祭，不列在宗庙裹。
English: In the first year of Emperor Huai, he also ordered Emperor Wu Yang Houyi to be buried next to the Yongyang Mausoleum, in addition to the Hongxun Palace Ancestral Hall Festival, and not listed in the ancestral temple.

古文：元帝既即尊位，上继武帝，于元为祢，如汉光武上继元帝故事也。
现代文：元帝即尊位以后，继承上面的武帝，将武帝作为补祭的神主，这是仿照汉光帝继承上面的汉元帝的旧例。
English: After Emperor Yuan ascended the throne, he succeeded Emperor Wu above him and made Emperor Wu the god of the offering, which was modeled on the old example of Emperor Han of the Han Dynasty succeeding Emperor Wu above him.

古文：是时，西京神主，堙灭虏庭，江左建庙，皆更新造。
现代文：当时，在西京的神主，毁灭在敌人手中，东晋建造宗庙，全部重新营建。
English: At that time, the main shrine in Xijing was destroyed at the hands of the enemy, and the Eastern Jin Dynasty built the ancestral temple, and all of them were rebuilt.

古文：寻以登怀帝之主，又迁颍川，位虽七室，其实五世，盖从刁协以兄弟为世数故也。
现代文：不久后由于供上了怀帝的神主，又迁走了颖府君的神主，神位虽然有七室，其实祇是五代，这是采纳了刁按将兄弟也计入王朝代数的意见的原故。
English: Soon after, the deities of Emperor Huai were offered to the emperor, and the deities of Emperor Yingfu were moved away. Although the throne has seven chambers, there are actually only five generations. This is the reason for adopting the opinion that brothers should also be included in the dynastic algebra.

古文：于时百度草创，旧礼未备，毁主权居别室。
现代文：在当时各项制度都刚开始制定，原来的礼仪还没有完全恢复，落难皇帝们的神主权且安置在另外的室中。
English: At that time, various systems were just beginning to be developed, the original etiquette had not yet been fully restored, and the divine sovereignty of the fallen emperors was placed in another room.

古文：至太兴三年正月乙卯，诏曰： 吾虽上继世祖，然于怀、愍皇帝皆北面称臣。
现代文：到太兴三年正月乙卯，下诏说： 我虽然是继承上面的武帝，但是对后来的怀、愍皇帝全都北面称遇臣。
English: In the first month of the second month of the third year of Taixing, the following edict said: Although I am the successor of the above Emperor Wu, but for the later Emperor Huai and Emperor Zou, all the north side is called the subject.

古文：今祠太庙，不亲执觞酌，而令有司行事，于情礼不安。
现代文：现在在太庙祠祭，不亲自奉酒行礼，而让有司去行祭，从情理礼规上讲不合适。
English: Now, at the temple festival, it is inappropriate from the point of view of etiquette not to personally offer wine and perform the ritual, but to have a priest perform the ritual.

古文：可依礼更处。 
现代文：应该依照礼规重新安排这件事。 
English: The matter should be rearranged according to the rules of propriety.

古文：太常恆议： 今圣上继武皇帝，宜准汉世祖故事，不亲执觞爵。 
现代文：太常华恒提议： 如今皇上继承上面的武皇帝，应当比照汉世祖的先例，不亲自奉酒行礼。 
English: Taizhang Huaheng proposed: Emperor Wu, who is now the emperor's successor, should follow the example of the Han Dynasty's ancestors and not personally perform the ritual.

古文：又曰： 今上承继武帝，而庙之昭穆，四世而已，前太常贺循、博士傅纯，并以为惠、怀及愍，宜别立庙。
现代文：又说： 当今圣上承嗣武童，可是祖庙中的昭穆，祇有四世，前任太常贺握、博士坛钟，都认为对墓、坏和整，应当另外设立祭庙。
English: He also said, "Today, we are the heirs and successors of the saint, but in the ancestral temple of Shomu, there is only the fourth generation, the predecessor, Taizhong He Jia, the doctor, and the altar bell, all believe that for the tomb, the bad and the whole, there should be another temple.

古文：然臣愚谓庙室当以容主为限，无拘常数。
现代文：然而臣愚以为凡是庙室就应该容纳神主，不必拘泥于规定的数目。
English: However, Zengwu thought that any temple room should accommodate the deities, and there was no need to stick to the prescribed number.

古文：殷世有二祖三宗，若拘七室，则当祭祢而已。
现代文：殷世有二祖三宗，如果拘泥于七室，就祇要补祭父亲就行了。
English: There are two ancestors and three sects in the Yin Dynasty. If you stick to the seventh house, you only need to make up the sacrifice to the father.

古文：推此论之，宜还复豫章、颍川，全祠七庙之礼。 
现代文：推究这点来考虑的话，应当恢复对豫章、颖川的祭祀，完善祠祭七庙的礼规。 
English: If we consider this point, we should restore the sacrifices to Yuanzhang and Yingchuan, and improve the etiquette of the seven temple festivals.

古文：骠骑长史温峤议： 凡言兄弟不相入庙，既非礼文，且光武奋剑振起，不策名于孝平，务神其事，以应九世之谶，又古不共庙，故别立焉。
现代文：骠骑长史温崤提议： 通常说的兄弟不能一同进入祖庙受祭，已经不合礼规，况且光武奋剑振兴漠室，不将名字系在孝子之后，务使他的事业显得神奇非凡，来应验谶语中说的九世，加上古制不能共处一庙，所以另外设立祭祀的地方。
English: The chief of the imperial cavalry, Shi Wenqi, proposed: The commonly said brothers cannot enter the ancestral temple together to receive the sacrifice, which is not in accordance with the etiquette. Moreover, the brothers should work hard to revitalize the temple, and should not be named after the filial son, so as to make his cause appear magical and extraordinary. In order to meet the ninth generation in the slang, and the ancient system cannot coexist in a temple, so another place of sacrifice should be set up.

古文：今上以策名而言，殊于光武之事，躬奉蒸尝，于经既正，于情又安矣。
现代文：当今圣上在策名的问题上，不同于光武的情况，亲自主持燕尝祭祀。既符合道理，又符合情理。
English: As opposed to the situation in Guangwu, today's Holy Father personally presides over the Yancheng sacrificial rites when it comes to the issue of naming. This is both logical and reasonable.

古文：太常恆欲还二府君，以全七世，峤谓是宜。 
现代文：太常华恒想要恢复二位府君在祖庙中的位置，来完善七世同庙的礼规，温堕认为这是对的。 
English: The Emperor Huaheng wanted to restore the position of the two prefects in the ancestral temple to improve the etiquette of the seventh generation of the same temple, and Wen Kui thought that this was right.

古文：骠骑将军王导从峤议。
现代文：骠骑将军王导同意温堕的意见。
English: General Wang Du, the commander of the cavalry, agreed with Wen Pu's opinion.

古文：峤又曰： 其非子者，可直言皇帝敢告某皇帝，又若以一帝为一世，则不祭祢，反不及庶人。 
现代文：又说： 如果不是父子关系，祭祀时可以直接说皇帝敢告某皇帝，如果将一位皇帝算作一世的话，就会出现不祭自己的父亲的情况，那反倒不如普通老百姓了。 
English: He also said: If it is not a father-son relationship, when making a sacrifice, it can be directly said that the emperor dared to sue a certain emperor. If an emperor is counted as a lifetime, there will be a situation of not sacrificing one's own father, which is not as good as ordinary people.

古文：帝从峤议，悉施用之。
现代文：帝听从了温崤的意见，全部采纳施行了。
English: The emperor listened to Wen Jiabao's opinions and adopted and implemented all of them.

古文：于是乃更定制，还复豫章、颍川于昭穆之位，以同惠帝嗣武故事，而惠、怀、愍三帝自从《春秋》尊尊之义，在庙不替也。
现代文：于是就重新确定礼制，恢复了邃童、堕贝的昭穆的位置，来仿效廛童承嗣亘造时的旧例，而对廛、怀、鳖三位皇帝自然依从《春秋经》上的尊尊的道理，保留在祖庙中不再改动。
English: As a result, the ceremonial system was re-determined, and the positions of Zou Tong and Zou Bei were restored to follow the old example of Zou Tong inheriting the throne, while the three emperors, Zou, Huai and Zou, naturally followed the principle of respect in the "Spring and Autumn Classic" and were retained in the ancestral temple.

古文：及元帝崩，则豫章复迁。
现代文：到亘童驾崩，于是逸童又被迁出。
English: When Wotong passed away, Yidong was moved out again.

古文：然元帝神位犹在愍帝之下，故有坎室者十也。
现代文：然而互童的神位还是在星睦的下位，所以有十个坎室。到旦嬷驾崩，题剀又被迁出，还是十个坎室。
English: However, the position of the god of mutual children was still in the lower position of the star, so there were ten rooms. When the god died, the inscription was moved out again, and there were still ten rooms.

古文：至明帝崩，而颖川又迁，犹十室也。
现代文：在当时扩建太庙，所以三个迁出的神主都归到西储，称为祧，以此作为远庙。
English: At that time, the Imperial Temple was being expanded, so the three relocated deities were all returned to the west reserve, known as, as a distant temple.

古文：于时续广太庙，故三迁主并还西储，名之曰祧，以准远庙。成帝咸康七年五月，始作武悼皇后神主，祔于庙，配飨世祖。
现代文：成帝咸康七年五月，初立武悼皇后的神主，拊祭在庙中，配飨世祖。
English: In May of the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Chengxiankang, at the beginning of the war to mourn the queen's god, the hail sacrifice was held in the temple, with the hail god as the ancestor.

古文：成帝崩而康帝承统，以兄弟一世，故不迁京兆，始十一室也。
现代文：盛壶崩而尘壹继承大统，由于兄弟算一世，所以没有迁出塞韭的神主，开始有十一室了。
English: As the brothers are counted as one generation, the lord of the god did not move out of Saigon, and there are now eleven rooms.

古文：至康帝崩，穆帝立，永和二年七月，有司奏： 十月殷祭，京兆府君当迁祧室。
现代文：到逸童驾崩，檀童即位，一年七月，有司上奏说： 十月的殷祭举行时，京兆府君应当迁入祧室。
English: When Yitong passed away and Dangdang ascended the throne, in July of the same year, a superior officer said, "When the October Yin Festival is held, the Prince of Jingzhao Prefecture should move into the throne room."

古文：昔征西、豫章、颍川三府君毁主，中兴之初权居天府，在庙门之西。
现代文：从前、盏睦、题川三府君神主被毁，中兴初期暂居天府，在庙门的西侧。
English: Once upon a time, the chief deities of the three prefectures of Marimutu and Tiechuan were destroyed. In the early days of ZTE, they temporarily resided in Tianfu, on the west side of the temple gate.

古文：咸康中，太常冯怀表续奉还于西储夹室，谓之为祧，疑亦非礼。
现代文：咸康年间，太常上表提出奉归到西储夹室，称为祧，可能也是不合礼制的。
English: During the Han and Kang dynasties, it was often suggested that the emperor should be sent to the Western Storage Room, known as the Shackle Room, which may also be inappropriate.

古文：今京兆迁入，是为四世远祖，长在太祖之上。
现代文：如今京兆的神主迁了进去，造就是四世远祖，总是位于太祖的上位。
English: Now, the god of Jing Zhao has moved in. Zou is the fourth generation ancestor, always higher than the great ancestor.

古文：昔周室太祖世远，故迁有所归。
现代文：从前旦窒的太祖世代久远，所以迁走而有所归宿。
English: The great-grandparents of the previous generation are long gone, so they have a place to return to after moving away.

古文：今晋庙宣皇为主。而四祖居之，是屈祖就孙也；殷祫在上，是代太祖也。 
现代文：如今置的宗庙裹韭为主，可是四祖被放在一边，这是委屈先祖而迁就孙子；殷祭夹祭时放在上位，这就是替代太祖。 
English: Nowadays, the main place is occupied by the ancestral temple, but the four ancestors are put aside, which is an injustice to the ancestors and a concession to the grandchildren; when the Yin Festival is held, it is placed higher, which is a substitute for the great ancestors.

古文：领司徒蔡谟议： 四府君宜改筑别室，若未展者，当入就太庙之室，人莫敢卑其祖，文武不先不窋。
现代文：领司徒蔡谟提议： 对四位府君应当另造别的庙室，如果不能实施，就应当迁入安置在太庙裹面。谁也不敢小看他的祖先，文王武王不在不宙的前面。
English: The leader of the scribes, Zaimu, proposed: For the four prefects, another temple should be built, and if this is not possible, they should be moved and placed in the Great Temple. No one dares to look down on his ancestors, King Wenwu is not in front of the world.

古文：殷祭之日，征西东面，处宣皇之上。
现代文：殷祭那天，征西的神主朝东设置，位于宣皇的上位。
English: On the day of the Yin Festival, the god of conquering the West was placed in the East, higher than the emperor.

古文：其后迁庙之主，藏于征西之祧，祭荐不绝。 
现代文：自他以后迁出庙的神主，藏在征西的桃祭的地方，祭祀供奉不可间断。 
English: Since he moved out of the temple, the deity of the temple has been hidden in the place of the peach festival of the Western Conquest, and the sacrifice and worship cannot be interrupted.

古文：护军将军冯怀议： 礼，无庙者为坛以祭，可立别室藏之，至殷禘则祭于坛也。 
现代文：护军将军冯怀提议： 礼规说：没有庙的就设坛来祭祀。可以设在其他的室中，到殷柿大祭时就在坛上祭祀。 
English: Feng Huai, the general of the escort, proposed: The etiquette says: If there is no temple, set up an altar for sacrifice. It can be set up in other rooms, and when it comes to the Yinxi Grand Festival, it will be sacrificed on the altar.

古文：辅国将军谯王司马无忌等议： 诸儒谓太王、王季迁主，藏于文武之祧。
现代文：辅国将军谯王司马无忌等提议： 儒生们认为太王、王季神主迁出，藏在文王武王的祧祭的地方。
English: The general of the Auxiliary Province, Wang Sima Wu Boi, proposed: The Confucians believed that the Great King, Wang Ji Shennushi, had moved out and was hidden in the place of King Wenwu's burnt offering.

古文：如此，府君迁主宜在宣帝庙中。
现代文：根据这个，府君的迁出的神主应当在宣帝的庙中。
English: According to this, the deity of the ruler of the capital should be in the temple of Emperor Xuan.

古文：然今无寝室，宜变通而改筑。
现代文：可是如今没有放置神主的房间，应当有所变通而另外建造。
English: However, now there is no room for the god, so it should be modified and built separately.

古文：又殷祫太庙，征西东面。 
现代文：此外在太庙举行殷夹大典时，征西的神主应面东设置。 
English: In addition, when the grand ceremony was held in Taimiao, the god who conquered the West should face the East.

古文：尚书郎孙绰与无忌议同，曰： 太祖虽位始九五，而道以从暢，替人爵之尊，笃天伦之道，所以成教本而光百代也。 
现代文：尚书郎孙绰和无忌的意见相同，说： 太祖虽然首先登上九五尊位，可是道路是要顺着去走才会畅通的，替代了人爵中最尊贵的，追求天伦的道义，是用来形成教化的基础而光耀百代的。 
English: Shang Shulang and Sun Zhuo shared the same opinion with the unscrupulous, saying: Although the great-grandfather first ascended to the ninety-fifth place of honor, the road is smooth only if it is followed. It replaced the most honorable of the peerage, the pursuit of the morality of the heavenly family, and is used to form the foundation of enlightenment and shine for hundreds of generations.

古文：尚书郎徐禅议： 《礼》 去祧为坛，去坛为墠 ，岁祫则祭之。
现代文：尚书郎徐禅提议： 《礼》 去桃为坛，去坛为蝉 ，逢夹祭的时候才祭祀他。
English: Shang Shulang Xu Zhen proposed: "Rite" Go to the peach altar, go to the altar for the cicada, and only sacrifice him at the time of the festival.

古文：今四祖迁主，可藏之石室，有祷则祭于坛墠。 
现代文：如今四祖的神主迁出，可以保存在石室中，有祷告的时候就在坛蝉一类的地方设祭。 
English: Now that the deities of the four ancestors have moved out, they can be kept in the stone room, and when there is a prayer, a shrine can be set up in a place such as the altar.

古文：又遣禅至会稽，访处士虞喜。
现代文：又派徐禅到会稽，拜访处士虞喜。
English: He also sent Xu Zen to the auditorium to visit the clerk, Yu Xi.

古文：喜答曰： 汉世韦玄成等以毁主瘗于园，魏朝议者云应埋两阶之间。
现代文：虞喜回答说： 汉代韦玄成等人将被毁的神主埋在园子裹，魏朝的研究者说应该埋在两阶的中间。
English: Yu Xi replied: Han Dynasty Wei Xuancheng and others buried the destroyed god in the garden, Wei Dynasty researchers said it should be buried in the middle of the two steps.

古文：且神主本在太庙，若今别室而祭，则不如永藏。
现代文：况且神主本来设在太庙，如果现在设在其他的室中进行祭奉，就不如永久地收藏起来。
English: Moreover, the deity was originally located in the ancient temple, if it is now located in other rooms for worship, it is better to permanently collect it.

古文：又四君无追号之礼，益明应毁而无祭。 
现代文：另外这四君又不合追加尊号的礼制，更加说明应该毁去而不要祭奉。 
English: In addition, these four princes do not meet the requirements of the additional honorific title, which further indicates that they should be destroyed rather than enshrined.

古文：是时简文为抚军、与尚书郎刘邵等奏： 四祖同居西祧，藏主石室，禘祫及祭，如先朝旧仪。 
现代文：当时简文任抚军，和尚书郎刘邵等人上奏： 四祖同居在西祧，将神主收藏在石室中，摘祭夹祭时才祭奉，就像前朝旧有的礼仪一样。 
English: At that time, Jianwen Ren Fuzhong, the monk and scholar Liu Shao and others played: the four ancestors lived together in Xidi, the god was stored in the stone room, and the sacrifice was only offered when the sacrifice was collected, just like the old etiquette of the former dynasty.

古文：时陈留范宣兄子问此礼，宣答曰： 舜庙所祭，皆是庶人，其后世远而毁，不居舜上，不序昭穆。
现代文：当时陈留人范宣的哥哥的儿子向他询问这方面的礼，范宣回答说： 舜的庙裹祭奉的，都是庶人，后来世代久远就撤销了，不放在舜的上位，不按照昭穆的顺序排位次。
English: At that time, the son of Fan Xuan's elder brother asked him about this aspect of the ritual. Fan Xuan replied, "The offerings in the temple of Zou are all commoners. Later, they were revoked a long time ago. They are not placed in the upper ranks of Zou, and they are not ranked according to the order of Shomu.

古文：今四君号犹依本，非以功德致祀也。
现代文：如今四君说起来还是本源，却不是凭功德获得祀奉的。
English: Nowadays, the four princes are said to be the origin, but they are not worshipped based on their merits.

古文：若依虞主之瘗，则犹藏子孙之所；若依夏主之埋，则又非本庙之阶。
现代文：如果依照虞舜将神主埋在园中的做法，那就好比是埋藏子孙的地方；如果依照夏人埋藏神主的做法，却又不适合现在祖庙的阶的情况。
English: If the practice of burying the deity in the garden according to the yuans, it would be like a place to bury the descendants; if the practice of burying the deity according to the Xia people, it would not be suitable for the current situation of the ancestral temple.

古文：宜思其变，则筑一室，亲未尽则禘祫处宣帝之上，亲尽则无缘下就子孙之列。 
现代文：应该考虑变通的办法，那就是筑一个专用宫室，亲情没有尽的就在樯祭拾祭时放置在宣帝的上位，亲情已尽就没有理由放到下位的子孙的行列中来。 
English: A workaround should be considered, that is, to build a special palace room. Those who have not exhausted their kinship will be placed in the higher ranks of Emperor Xuan when picking up offerings, and those who have exhausted their kinship have no reason to be placed in the ranks of the descendants of the lower ranks.

古文：其后太常刘遐等同蔡谟议。
现代文：后来太常刘遐等人和蔡谟意见相同。
English: Later, too often, Liu Ye and others shared the same opinion with Zaimu.

古文：博士张凭议： 或疑陈于太祖者，皆其后之毁主，凭案古义无别前后之文也。
现代文：博士张凭提议： 有人怀疑陈列在太祖庙中的，都是后来撤销了的神主，我认为古代的道理中没有区别前后的条文记载。
English: Dr. Zhang Biao proposed: Some people suspect that the deities displayed in the Great Ancestor's Temple were all revoked later. I think that in ancient times, there was no distinction between the previous and subsequent provisions.

古文：禹不先鲧，则迁主居太祖之上，亦何疑也。 
现代文：禹不在鲧的上位，那么迁神主到太祖的上位，又有什么可怀疑的呢? 
English: If Yu is not in the upper echelon of the eunuchs, then how can there be any doubt about the transfer of God to the upper echelon of the ancestors?

古文：于是京兆迁入西储，同谓之祧，如前三祖迁主之礼，故正室犹十一也。
现代文：于是京兆的神位被迁入西储，同样称作祧，和前三位祖先神主被迁出的礼仪一样，所以正室还是十一个。
English: As a result, the seat of the deities of Jing Zhao was moved to the west reserve, also known as Jiu, and the same ceremony as the previous three ancestors of the deities was moved out, so there are still eleven legitimate wives.

古文：穆帝崩而哀帝、海西并为兄弟，无所登除。
现代文：穆帝驾崩而哀帝、海西都是他的兄弟，就没有出入迁移的事。
English: When Mu Di died and was mourned, Haisi was his brother, so there was no migration.

古文：咸安之初，简文皇帝上继元皇，世秩登进，于是颍川、京兆二主复还昭穆之位。
现代文：咸安的初年，简文皇帝对上承继元皇，世系的顺序进上了，于是颖川、京兆二神主又恢复昭穆的位次。
English: In the first year of Xian'an, Emperor Jianwen succeeded the Yuan Emperor, and the line of succession moved forward. As a result, Yingchuan and Jingzhao two deities restored Shomu's rank.

古文：至简文崩，颍川又迁。
现代文：到简文驾崩，颖川又被迁出。
English: By the time of Jianwen's death, Yingchuan was moved out again.

古文：孝武帝太元十二年五月壬戌，诏曰： 昔建太庙，每事从俭，太祖虚位，明堂未建。
现代文：孝武帝太元十二年五月壬戌，下诏说： 以往建造太庙，各方面都从俭，太祖的神位虚设，没有建造明堂。
English: Emperor Xiaowu came to the throne in May of the twelfth year of the Taiyuan Dynasty, and issued the following edict: In the past, the construction of the Great Temple was frugal in all aspects. The god of the Great Ancestor was false, and the Ming Hall was not built.

古文：郊祀国之大事，而稽古之制阙然，便可详议。 
现代文：郊祀是国家的大事，可是在遵循古制方面有很多不足，应该周详地议论一下。 
English: Suburban worship is an important matter for the country, but there are many shortcomings in following the old system, which should be discussed in detail.

古文：祠部郎中徐邈议： 圆丘郊祀，经典无二，宣皇帝尝辩斯义，而检以圣典。
现代文：祠部郎中徐邈提议： 圆丘郊祀，经典上没有不同的记载，宣皇帝曾经辨明其中的意义，而用圣典来规范。
English: The priest of the ancestral hall, Xu Xi, proposed: There are no different records in the classics for the worship of the round hill. Emperor Xuan once discerned the meaning and used the scriptures to standardize it.

古文：爰及中兴，备加研极，以定南北二郊，诚非异学所可轻改也。
现代文：到中兴以后，研究得更加完备充分，由此确定了南北二郊，的确不是其他的学说可以轻易改移的。
English: After coming to ZTE, the research was more complete and sufficient, and thus the two suburbs in the north and south were determined. It is true that other theories cannot be easily changed.

古文：谓仍旧为安。
现代文：应当遵循旧制才是合适的。
English: It is appropriate that the old system should be followed.

古文：武皇帝建庙六世，祖三昭三穆。
现代文：武皇帝建立六代的宗庙，祖先为三昭三穆。
English: Emperor Wu established six generations of ancestral temples, with ancestors including San Zhao and San Mu.

古文：宣皇帝创基之主，实惟太祖，亲则王考。
现代文：宣皇帝是创立基业的，实际上应作为太祖，亲情上实际是王考。
English: Emperor Xuan is the founder of the foundation, and in fact should be regarded as the great-grandfather. In terms of kinship, it is actually Wang Kao.

古文：四庙在上，未及迁世，故权虚东向之位也。
现代文：四庙在上位，还没有赶上迁移传代，所以权且虚设朝束的神位。
English: The four temples in the upper ranks have not yet caught up with the migration of generations, so they have the right to set up the morning dress of the god.

古文：兄弟相及，义非二世。
现代文：兄弟之间传位，道理上不是两代。
English: In principle, the succession between brothers does not go back two generations.

古文：故当今庙祀，世数未足，而欲太祖正位，则违事七之义矣。
现代文：所以当今的庙祀，代的数目还不够，如果想让太祖居于正位，就违背了事奉七代的规矩。
English: Therefore, in today's temple worship, the number of generations is not enough. If you want the great-grandfather to live in the right position, it violates the rule of serving seven generations.

古文：又《礼》曰庶子王亦禘祖立庙，盖谓支胤援立，则亲近必复。
现代文：此外《礼》上说庶子为王之后也要樯祭祖先并设立庙位，说的是旁支的后代继承统绪后，那么他的亲近的人一定要恢复地位。
English: In addition, the "Ritual" says that after the illegitimate son becomes king, he must also sacrifice the ancestors and set up a temple. It says that after the descendants of the other branches inherit the unification, then his close people must restore their status.

古文：京兆府君于今六世，宜复立此室，则宣皇未在六世之上，须前世既迁，乃太祖位定耳。
现代文：京兆府君至今已有六代，应当恢复设立这一神位，那么宣皇就还没有超出六代之外，要等前代迁移之后，才能定下太祖的神位。
English: There have been six generations of Kyoshofukun so far, and the establishment of this god should be restored, so the proclamation of the emperor has not exceeded six generations, and it is necessary to wait for the previous generation to migrate before establishing the god's throne.

古文：京兆迁毁宜藏主于石室，虽禘祫犹弗及。
现代文：京兆的神位被迁走后，应当保存在石室中，即使是椅祭夹祭时都不必涉及。
English: After the shrine of Jing Zhao is moved away, it should be kept in a stone room, even if it is not necessary to be involved in the chair festival.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：传称毁主升合乎太祖，升者自下之名，不谓可降尊就卑也。
现代文：文献上说迁走的神主升到和太祖放到一起。升就是从下往上的意思，不是说可以将尊者降低到和卑者一样的地位。
English: The literature says that the relocated deity ascended to be placed together with the great-grandfather. Ascending means from the bottom up, not that the venerable can be reduced to the same status as the lowly.

古文：太子太孙，阴室四主，储嗣之重，升祔皇祖，所配之庙，世远应迁，然后从食之孙，与之俱毁。
现代文：夭折的太子太孙，即阴室四主，因为有皇储这样的重要身份，附在皇祖神位旁受祭，当他们所附的祭庙神主，由于世代疏远而应该迁走时，这些拊祭的子孙，就和皇祖的神位一起撤去。
English: The great-great-grandchildren of the prince who died young, that is, the four lords of the mortuary chamber, because they have such an important status as the crown prince, are attached to the imperial ancestor's throne to receive the sacrifice. When the temple god they are attached to should move away due to generation estrangement, these descendants of the burnt offering will be removed together with the imperial ancestor's throne.

古文：明堂方圆之制，纲领已举，不宜阙配帝之祀。
现代文：明堂方面的各种制度，已经将纲领要点概括到了，不应该在配享的祭祀礼仪方面有所缺漏。
English: The various systems of Myeongdong have already summarized the main points of the program, and there should not be any gaps in the distribution of sacrificial rituals.

古文：且王者以天下为家，未必一邦，故周平、光武无废于二京也。
现代文：况且称王的人以天下为家，不一定局限在一个邦国中，所以周平王、光武帝没有废除二京时期的君主神位。
English: Moreover, those who claim to be kings have the whole world as their home and are not necessarily limited to one country, so King Zhou Ping and Emperor Guangwu did not abolish the divine right of kings during the Nijing period.

古文：明堂所配之神，积疑莫辩。
现代文：在明堂礼制中对于配享的神主，一直存有疑惑而没弄明白。
English: In the Myeongdong ritual system, there has always been a doubt about the deity of the distribution, but it has not been understood.

古文：案《易》 殷荐上帝，以配祖考 ，祖考同配，则上帝亦为天，而严父之义显。
现代文：考察《易经》上的 大祭上帝，来配享祖考 ，祖和考同为配享，那么上帝也就是天，从而使尊父的道理一目了然。
English: If we examine the Great Offering to God in the I Ching to match the ancestral examination, and the ancestral examination to match the ancestral examination, then God is heaven, thus making the principle of honoring the father clear at a glance.

古文：《周礼》旅上帝者，有故告天，与郊祀常礼同用四圭，故并言之。
现代文：《周礼》说旅祭上帝的时候，有事情要告诉天，就和郊祀时的通常礼仪一样用四块圭玉，所以放在一起谈它们。
English: "Zhou Li" says that when traveling to worship God, there is something to tell the heavens, just like the usual etiquette for suburban worship with four pieces of jade, so put them together and talk about them.

古文：若上帝是五帝，《经》文何不言祀天旅五帝，祀地旅四望乎？ 
现代文：如果上帝指的是五帝，《经》上为什么不说祀天旅祭五帝，祀地旅祭四望呢? 
English: If God refers to the Five Emperors, why doesn't the sutra say that the Five Emperors of Heaven and the Five Emperors of Earth should be worshipped?

古文：侍中车胤议同。
现代文：侍中车胤意见相同。
English: Samurai Chusho Kuratane shares the same opinion.

古文：又曰： 明堂之制，既其难详，且乐主于和，礼主于敬，故质文不同，音器亦殊。
现代文：又说： 明堂的制度，既然那么不容易搞清楚，况且音乐的目的是使人和睦，礼制的目的是使人谦敬，所以繁简不同，乐器和礼器也不一样。
English: He also said: Since the system of Ming-tang is so difficult to understand, and since the purpose of music is to make people peaceful and the purpose of etiquette is to make people humble, the complex and simple are different, and the musical instruments and ceremonial instruments are also different.

古文：既茅茨广夏，不一其度，何必守其形范，而不弘本从俗乎？
现代文：既然有茅草房又有宽阔高大的房屋，不能统一它们的规格，那何必死守着条条框框，而不去弘扬本质的精神来适应现代的民情呢?
English: Since there are thatched cottages and broad, tall houses, and it is not possible to unify their specifications, then why do we have to stick to the rules and not promote the spirit of the essence to adapt to modern people's feelings?

古文：九服咸宁，河朔无尘，然后明堂辟雍可崇而修之。 
现代文：各地都太平了，河朔问没有战争，那时候再尊奉施行明堂辟雍的礼仪吧。 
English: There is peace everywhere, and there is no war in the country. At that time, let's honor and carry out the Ming-Tang-Bai-Yong ceremony.

古文：时朝议多同，于是奉行，一无所改。
现代文：当时朝廷官员多数都同意这个意见，于是奉行原有的制度，一点没有改动。
English: At that time, most of the imperial officials agreed with this opinion, so they followed the original system and did not change at all.

古文：十六年，始改作太庙殿，正室十四间，东西储各一间，合十六间，栋高八丈四尺。
现代文：十六年，才改建太庙的大殿，有十四间正室，东西储各有一间，共十六间，屋栋高八丈四尺。
English: It took 16 years to reconstruct the main hall of the ancient temple. There are 14 regular rooms, one for each of the east and west storerooms, a total of 16 rooms, and the building is 8 feet high and 4 feet wide.

古文：备法驾迁神主于行庙，征西至京兆四主及太子太孙各用其位之仪服。
现代文：备好法驾将神主迁到行庙，从征西到京兆的四个神主以及太子太孙都各用舆他们的神位相应的礼仪服饰。
English: Preparations were made to move the deities to the line of temples, and the four deities from the Western Conquest to the Beijing Zodiac, as well as the prince's great-grandchildren, all wore the ceremonial clothing corresponding to their divine status.

古文：四主不从帝者之仪，是与太康异也。
现代文：对四神主不采用对有帝号的人的仪式，这是和太康年问不同的。
English: For the four gods, they do not use the ceremony for people with the emperor's name, which is different from the Taikang year.

古文：诸主既入庙，设脯醢之奠。
现代文：各神主进入庙后，设置脯和醢来祭奠。
English: After the deities enter the temple, they are set up with urns and palanquins to pay their respects.

古文：及新庙成，神主还室，又设脯醢之奠。
现代文：到新庙落成，神主回到室中，又设置脯醢来祭奠。
English: When the new temple was completed, the deity returned to the room, and the urns were set up to pay homage.

古文：十九年二月，追尊简文母会稽太妃郑氏为简文皇帝宣太后，立庙太庙道西。
现代文：十九年二月，追尊简文的母亲会稽太妃郑氏为简文皇帝宣太后，在太庙的道路西侧设立她的庙。
English: In February 1919, the mother of the revered Emperor Jianwen, Empress Dowager Zheng, who was the Empress Dowager of Emperor Jianwen, set up her temple on the west side of the road.

古文：及孝武崩，京兆又迁，如穆帝之世四祧故事。
现代文：到孝武驾崩，京兆的神主又被迁出，就像穆帝时的四祧的先例一样。
English: By the time of the death of Emperor Xiaowu, the patron deities of Beijing and Zhao had been moved out, just like the precedent of the Four Emperors at the time of Emperor Mu.

古文：义熙九年四月，将殷祠，诏博议迁毁之礼。
现代文：义熙九年四月，将要大祠祭，诏令广泛讨论有关迁移撤走神位的礼规。
English: In April of the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Yixi, when the Grand Ancestral Shrine Festival was about to take place, the imperial edict was issued to widely discuss the etiquette of moving and removing the deity.

古文：大司马琅邪王德文议： 泰始之初，虚太祖之位，而缘情流远，上及征西，故世尽则宜毁，而宣帝正太祖之位。
现代文：大司马琅邪王德文提议： 泰始初年，虚设太祖的神位，但是追溯亲情源流久远，上到征西，所以代数到了就应当撤走神位，于是宣帝正式设立太祖的神位。
English: Grand Master Ma Zhe proposed in German: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, the god of the great ancestor was set up in vain, but the family relationship was traced back a long time to the Western Conquest, so when the algebra arrived, the god should be removed, so Emperor Xuan formally established the god of the great ancestor.

古文：又汉光武移十一帝主于洛邑，则毁主不设，理可推矣。
现代文：另外汉光武移十一位皇帝的神主到洛邑，那么没有设立撤走神位的制度，依理就可以推知了。
English: In addition, Han Guangwu transferred eleven emperors to Luoyang, so there was no established system for withdrawing the divine throne, which can be deduced by reason.

古文：宜筑别室，以居四府君之主，永藏而弗祀也。 
现代文：应该筑造另外的庙室，用来安置四位府君的神主，永久地保存而不必祭祀。 
English: An additional temple room should be built to house the four deities of Fuchun, so that they can be preserved forever without having to be sacrificed.

古文：大司农徐广议： 四府君尝处庙堂之首，歆率土之祭，若埋之幽壤，于情理未必咸尽。
现代文：大司农徐广提议： 四位府君曾经处于庙堂的首位，歆享天下的祭祀。如果埋放到深幽的地中，在情理上不一定完全合适。
English: Head farmer Xu Guang proposed: The four prefects were once at the top of the temple, enjoying the sacrifices of the world. If they are buried in deep ground, it may not be completely appropriate.

古文：谓可迁藏西储，以为远祧，而禘飨永绝也。 
现代文：可以迁移保存在西储，作为远祧，但是永不再进行柿祭供享了。 
English: It can be moved and kept in the West Reserve, as a distant gourd, but the persimmon festival will never be held again.

古文：太尉谘议参军袁豹议： 仍旧无革，殷祠犹及四府君，情理为允。 
现代文：太尉谘议参军袁豹提议： 沿用旧制不要更改，大祠祭时还是要祭四位府君，从情理上说比较合适。 
English: The captain advised Yuan Bao to join the army and proposed: Don't change the old system. It's more appropriate to hold a grand shrine festival with the four prefectural governors.

古文：时刘裕作辅，意与大司马议同，须后殷祠行事改制。
现代文：当时刘裕辅政，意向和大司马的提议相同，等到了以后大祠祭时再行礼改变旧制。
English: At that time, Liu Yu-suke, with the same intention as the proposal of the Grand Sima, waited until the time of the Grand Ancestor's Festival to change the old system.

古文：会安帝崩，未及禘而天禄终焉。
现代文：正逢安帝驾崩，没等到梢祭天禄就终止了。
English: It coincided with the death of Emperor Andi, and the tassel festival, Tenroku, came to an end before it was over.

古文：武帝咸宁五年十一月己酉，弘训羊太后崩，宗庙废一时之祀，天地明堂去乐，且不上胙。
现代文：武帝咸宁五年十一月己酉，弘训羊太后驾崩，宗庙停止当时的祭祀，天地明堂撤去音乐，并且不供胙品。
English: Emperor Wu Xianning died in November of the fifth year, and Empress Dowager Hongxun died. The ancestral temple stopped the sacrificial rites at that time, the Temple of Heaven and Earth removed the music, and did not provide counterfeit products.

古文：穆帝升平五年十月己卯，殷祀，以帝崩后不作乐。
现代文：穆帝升乎五年十月己卯，大祭祀，因为是帝驾崩之后所以不奏乐。
English: Emperor Mu ascended to the throne in October of the fifth year of his reign, and a great ritual was held. Since it was after the emperor's death, no music was played.

古文：孝武太元十一年九月，皇女亡，及应烝祠，中书侍郎范奏： 案《丧服传》有死宫中者三月不举祭，不别长幼之与贵贱也。
现代文：孝武太元十一年九月，皇女亡故，到应该行燕祠祭礼时，中书侍郎茎向上奏： 考《丧服传》中有死了宫中人就三个月不能举行祭祀仪式，不论年纪长幼或是身份贵贱。
English: In September of the eleventh year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, when the imperial princess died and it was time to hold the Yan's ancestral shrine festival, the attendants of the Chinese book played the following tune: According to the "Funeral Costume Biography," if there is a dead person in the palace, it is not possible to hold a sacrificial ceremony for three months, regardless of age or status.

古文：皇女虽在婴孩，臣窃以为疑。 
现代文：皇女虽然是婴儿，臣窃以为值得考虑。 
English: Although the princess was a baby, the vassal thought it was worth considering.

古文：于是尚书奏使三公行事。
现代文：于是尚书奏请派三公去主持祭祀的事情。
English: Therefore, Shang Shuxiao asked the three princes to preside over the ritual.

古文：武帝泰始七年四月，帝将亲祠，车驾夕牲，而仪注还不拜。
现代文：尽壹壶盘七年四月，帝将要亲自去祠祭，在祭祀的前夕查看牺牲，可是仪注上规定不必行拜礼。
English: In April of the seventh year, the emperor will personally go to the ancestral shrine festival and inspect the sacrifice on the eve of the ritual, but the ceremony notes stipulate that there is no need to perform a prayer.

古文：诏问其故，博士奏历代相承如此。
现代文：下韶询问其中的原故，博士奏告说历代相承就是这么做的。
English: When he inquired about the reason, the doctor reported that this was the way it had been done for generations.

古文：帝曰： 非致敬宗庙之礼也。 
现代文：帝说： 这不是向宗庙表示敬意的礼规。 
English: The emperor said, "This is not the etiquette for showing respect to the ancestral temple.

古文：于是实拜而还，遂以为制，夕牲必躬临拜，而江左以来复止。
现代文：于是行了拜礼才回来，从此成为制度，凡是祭祀前夕察看牲具必定亲自临拜，到束晋以后才又废止。
English: As a result, they only came back after performing the ritual. From then on, it became a rule that anyone who inspected the animals and equipment on the eve of the ritual must pay homage in person, and this was only abolished after Sokjin.

古文：魏故事，天子为次殿于庙殿之北东，天子入自北门。
现代文：魏的旧例，天子在庙殿的东北建造次殿，天子从北门进去。
English: According to the old example of Wei Dynasty, Tianzi built the second hall in the northeast of the temple hall, and Tianzi entered through the north gate.

古文：新礼，设次殿于南门中门外之右，天子入自南门。
现代文：新礼规是，在南门中门外的右侧设次殿，天子从南门进去。
English: The new etiquette is to set up the second hall on the right side outside the middle gate of the south gate, and the heavenly son enters from the south gate.

古文：挚虞以为： 次殿所以为解息之处，凡适尊以不显为恭，以由隐为顺，而设之于上位，入自南门，非谦厌之义。
现代文：挚虞认为： 次殿是用来休息的地方，凡是到尊长那儿去以不显示自己为恭敬，以经由不显眼的地方去为恭顺，现在却设在上首的位置，从南门进入，不是谦恭的态度。
English: Zhengyu thought: The Second Hall is a place to rest. When you go to your elders, it is respectful not to show yourself, and it is deferential to go through an inconspicuous place. However, it is now located at the top, and it is not a humble attitude to enter from the south gate.

古文：宜定新礼，皆如旧说。 
现代文：应该制定新的礼规，全部按照旧的说法办。 
English: New etiquette should be developed, and everything should be done according to the old saying.

古文：从之。
现代文：听从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：礼，大事则告祖祢，小事则特告祢，秦汉久废。
现代文：礼，有大事就告祭祖弥，有小事就衹告祭弥，秦汉以来废置了很久。
English: Since the Qin and Han dynasties, it has been abandoned for a long time.

古文：魏文帝黄初四年七月，将东巡，以大军当出，使太常以特牛告南郊。
现代文：魏文帝黄初四年七月，将要东巡，由于大军就要出发，派太常用特牛到南郊告祭。
English: In July of the 4th year of Emperor Wen of Wei and Huang He, he was about to go on an eastward tour. Since a large army was about to set out, he often sent special cattle to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：及文帝崩，又使太尉告谥策于南郊。
现代文：到文帝驾崩，又派太尉到南郊告祭关于谧策的情况。
English: When Emperor Wen passed away, he sent a captain to the southern suburbs to report on the situation of the policy.

古文：自是迄晋相承，告郊之后仍以告庙，至江左其礼废。
现代文：从遣以后直到晋都相沿下来，告郊之后接着告庙，到东晋以后那些礼才废掉。
English: From the time of the Emperor's visit to the Eastern Jin Dynasty, those courtesies were abolished.

古文：至成帝咸和三年，苏峻覆乱京都，温峤等立行庙于白石，复行其典。
现代文：到盛三年，麸些颠覆祸乱京都，逼岖等人在直至设立行庙，又施行那些礼仪。
English: In the first three years of the Meiji era, some subversive people in Kyoto, such as the Kugyaku and others, continued to practice those rituals until the establishment of the temple.

古文：告先君及后曰： 逆臣苏峻，倾覆社稷，毁弃三正。污辱海内。
现代文：向先君和皇后告祭说： 叛逆的臣子苏峻，倾覆社稷，毁坏抛弃了三正，污辱整个天下。
English: He offered a sacrifice to the former emperor and empress, saying: The traitorous vassal, Su Jun, overthrew the social order, destroyed and abandoned the Three Represents, and disgraced the whole world.

古文：臣侃、臣峤、臣亮等手刃戎首，龚行天罚。
现代文：臣陶侃、臣温堕、臣厘台等亲手杀掉了敌人的首领，恭敬地执行了上天的处罚。
English: Emperor Taokan, Emperor Wenpo, Emperor Lida and others killed the enemy leaders with their own hands and respectfully carried out the punishment of heaven.

古文：惟中宗元皇帝、肃祖明皇帝、明穆皇后之灵，降鉴有罪，剿绝其命，翦此群凶，以安宗庙。
现代文：希望中宗元皇帝、肃祖明皇童、明穆皇后的英灵，明察有罪的人，根除他们，消灭这些凶徒，以安定宗庙。
English: It is hoped that Emperor Zhongzongyuan, Emperor Su, Emperor Ming's son, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming's daughter, Emperor Ming

古文：臣等虽陨首摧躯，犹生之年。 
现代文：臣等即使掉了头颅碎了身躯，也好比活着的时候一样。 
English: Even if a vassal's head falls off and his body is broken, it's just like when he was alive.

古文：魏明帝太和三年，诏曰： 礼，王后无嗣，择建支子，以继大宗，则当纂正统而奉公义，何得复顾私亲哉！
现代文：魏明帝太和三年，下韶说： 礼，王后没有子嗣，选择立一个支系的儿子，来继承大宗，就应当继承掌握正统而奉行公道，怎么能再顾念自己的亲情呢!
English: In the third year of Emperor Wei Ming's reign, the lower court said: Li, the queen has no children, choose to set up a branch son to inherit the bulk, you should inherit the mastery of orthodoxy and pursue justice, how can you think about your own family!

古文：汉宣继昭帝后，加悼考以皇号。
现代文：汉宣承继昭帝之后，给悼考加封皇号。
English: Han Xuancheng, succeeding Emperor Zhao, added the imperial title to the mourning examination.

古文：哀帝以外籓援立，而董宏等称引亡秦，惑误朝议，遂尊恭皇，立庙京师。
现代文：塞童作为外面的藩臣被立，可是董宏等人却称引亡台的先例，蛊惑迷误朝臣的看法，于是尊奉茎皇，在京师建立庙室。
English: Seto was set up as an outside vassal of the domain, but Dong Hong and others claimed that it was a precedent of bringing down the throne and misled the courtier's opinion, so they revered the emperor and built a temple room in Beijing.

古文：又宠籓妾，使比长信，僭差无礼，人神弗佑。
现代文：又宠幸藩镇来的侍妾，让她和垦值的地位一样，僭越等级不合礼规，人民神灵都不帮助他。
English: He also favored a concubine from a favored domain and town, giving her the same status as his vassal. It was not proper for a vassal to exceed his rank, and the people's deities would not help him.

古文：非罪师丹忠正之谏，用致丁傅焚如之祸。
现代文：对师丹忠正的意见表示反对和怪罪，结果招致丁氏傅氏受王莽焚如之刑。
English: He objected to the opinion of his teacher, Tan Zhongzheng, and blamed him. As a result, Ding Fu was sentenced to be burned at the stake.

古文：自是之后，相踵行之。
现代文：从此以后，相沿施行。
English: Since then, it has been implemented in parallel.

古文：其令公卿有司，深以前世为戒。后嗣万一有由诸侯入奉大统，则当明为人后之义。
现代文：特令公卿和有关部门，将前代的事作为深刻的教训，往后的继承人万一要有从诸侯中来承接大统的，就应当说明作为前人后嗣的道理。
English: He ordered the court nobles and relevant departments to take the events of the previous generation as a profound lesson. In the unlikely event that future heirs should succeed to the throne from among the princes, they should explain the principle of being the heirs of their predecessors.

古文：敢为佞邪导谀君上，妄建非正之号，谓考为皇，称妣为后，则股肱大臣诛之无赦。
现代文：胆敢谄佞邪僻引诱阿谀君上，妄立非分的称号，称考为皇，称母为后的，辅佐大臣要对其诛而不赦。
English: If anyone dares to be perverse and seduce the Grandmother, and arrogantly claims the title of Emperor and Mother, the Vice-Minister of State shall not forgive him.

古文：其书之金策，藏之宗庙。 
现代文：特书写在金策上，保存在宗庙裹。 
English: The special letter was written on a piece of gold and kept in the family temple.

古文：是后高贵、常道援立，皆不外尊。
现代文：此后高贵、常道被立，都不尊奉外系。
English: Since then, nobles and ordinary people have been established, but they do not respect the foreign lineage.

古文：及愍帝建兴四年，司徒梁芬议追尊之礼，帝既不从，而左仆射索綝等亦称引魏制，以为不可，故追赠吴王为太保而已。
现代文：到星睦玉塑四年，司徒凿查提出行追尊的礼，不仅帝不听从，而且左仆射索绋等人也称引蕴的制度，认为不可以，所以衹追赠吴王为太保罢了。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, the emperor not only did not listen, but his left-hand man, Shaoshu, and others also said that the system of inducement was not acceptable. Therefore, Shaoshu presented the king of Wu to the emperor as a gift.

古文：元帝太兴二年，有司言琅邪恭王宜称皇考。
现代文：五童友兴二年，有司说堕邪恭王应该被称作皇考。
English: In the second year of Wudong Youxing, You Si said that the fallen evil king should be called the imperial examination.

古文：贺循议云： 礼典之义，子不敢以己爵加其父号。 
现代文：贺循提议说： 礼典的道理，儿子不敢把自己的爵位加在他的父亲身上作为称号。 
English: He Xun proposed: According to the principle of the ceremony, the son does not dare to add his title to his father as a title.

古文：帝又从之。
现代文：帝又听从了他。
English: The emperor again obeyed him.

