古文：四年春，王正月，大雨雹。
现代文：四年春季，周历正月，下大冰雹。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, there was a large hailstorm.

古文：夏，楚子、蔡侯、陈侯、郑伯、许男、徐子、滕子、顿子、胡子、沈子、小邾子、宋世子佐、淮夷会于申。
现代文：夏季，楚子、蔡侯、陈侯、郑伯、许男、徐子、滕子、顿子、胡子、沈子、小邾子、宋世子佐、淮夷在申地会见。
English: In the summer, Chu Zi, Cai Hou, Chen Hou, Zheng Bo, Xu Man, Xu Zi, Teng Zi, Tong Zi, Hu Zi, Shen Zi, Xiao Zi Zi, Song Shizi Zuo, and Huai Yi met in Shendi.

古文：楚人执徐子。
现代文：楚国人抓住了徐国的国君。
English: The people of Chu captured the sovereign of Xu.

古文：秋七月，楚子、蔡侯、陈侯、许男、顿子、胡子、沈子、淮夷伐吴。
现代文：秋季七月，楚子、蔡侯、陈侯、许男、顿子、胡子、沈子、淮夷一起攻打吴国。
English: In the autumn of July, Chu Zi, Cai Hou, Chen Hou, Xu Man, Tong Zi, Beard, Shen Zi, and Huai Yi attacked Wu together.

古文：执齐庆封杀之。
现代文：拘捕了齐国的庆封，并将其杀死。
English: He arrested Qingfeng of Qi and killed him.

古文：遂灭赖。
现代文：接着又灭掉了赖国。
English: Next, it eliminated Lai Guo.

古文：九月，取鄫。
现代文：九月，占取了鄫国。
English: In September, they occupied Shandong Province.

古文：冬十有二月乙卯，叔孙豹卒。
现代文：冬季十二月乙卯日，叔孙豹去世。
English: On the second day of December in winter, Uncle Sun Leopard passed away.

古文：四年春，王正月，许男如楚，楚子止之，遂止郑伯，复田江南，许男与焉。
现代文：四年春季，周历正月，许悼公到楚国，楚灵王留下了他，也就留下郑简公，再次到江南打猎，许悼公参加了。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, Xu Yigong went to the State of Chu. King Chuling left him behind, and so did Zheng Jiangong. They went hunting in the south of the Yangtze River again, and Xu Yigong took part.

古文：使椒举如晋求诸侯，二君待之。椒举致命曰： 寡君使举曰，日君有惠，赐盟于宋曰，晋、楚之从，交相见也。
现代文：楚灵王派椒举去到晋国去求得诸侯的拥护，郑简公、许悼公在这里等待，椒举传达楚灵王的命令说： 寡君派遣举前来的时候说：从前蒙贵君的恩惠，赐给敝邑在宋国结盟，说： 从前跟从晋国和楚国的国家互相朝见。 
English: King Chuling sent Zhaozhou to Jin to seek the support of the princes. Zheng Jian Gong and Xu You Gong waited here. Zhaozhou conveyed the order of King Chuling, saying: When the prince sent Zhaozhou to come, he said: In the past, he received the favor of the noble prince and gave the alliance to the county in Song. He said: In the past, he met with the countries from Jin and Chu.

古文：以岁之不易，寡人愿结欢于二三君。使举请间。
现代文：由于近年来多难，寡人愿意讨取几位国君的欢心，派举前来请您在闲空时听取寡人的请求。
English: Due to the difficulties in recent years, many people are willing to win the favor of several sovereigns, and send them to come and ask you to listen to their requests in your spare time.

古文：君若苟无四方之虞，则愿假宠以请于诸侯。 
现代文：您如果对四方边境没有忧患，那么就希望借您的影响向诸侯请求。 
English: If you are not worried about the four-sided border, then you hope to use your influence to make a request to the princes.

古文：晋侯欲勿许。
现代文：晋平公不想允许。
English: Emperor Jinpyeong did not want to allow it.

古文：司马侯曰： 不可。
现代文：司马侯说： 不行。
English: Sima Hou said, "No."

古文：楚王方侈，天或者欲逞其心，以厚其毒而降之罚，未可知也。
现代文：楚灵王做事正在胡作妄为的时侯，上天也许是想让他满足愿望，以增加他的劣迹，然后给他降下惩罚，这是说不定的。
English: When King Chuling was behaving recklessly, Heaven may have wanted to grant him a wish to increase his bad deeds and then punish him. This is uncertain.

古文：其使能终，亦未可知也。
现代文：或者让他得以善终，这也是说不定的。
English: Or let him have a good end, which is also uncertain.

古文：晋、楚唯天所相，不可与争。
现代文：晋国和楚国的霸业只有靠上天的帮助，而不是彼此可以争夺的。
English: The hegemony of Jin and Chu can only be achieved with the help of heaven, not by competing with each other.

古文：君其许之，而修德以待其归。
现代文：君王还是允许他，而修明德行以等待他的结局。
English: The king still allowed him, and Shuming did not hesitate to wait for his fate.

古文：若归于德，吾犹将事之，况诸侯乎？
现代文：如果归结到德行，我们还要去事奉他，何况诸侯？
English: If it comes down to virtue, do we still have to serve him, let alone princes?

古文：若適淫虐，楚将弃之，吾又谁与争？ 
现代文：如果走到荒淫暴虐，楚国自己会抛弃他，我们又与谁去争夺？ 
English: If it comes to barbarism and tyranny, the state of Chu itself will abandon him. Who are we going to fight with?

古文：公曰： 晋有三不殆，其何敌之有？
现代文：晋平公说： 晋国有三条可以免于危险，还有谁能和我们相比？
English: Jin Ping Gong said, "There are three ways to avoid danger in Jin Province. Who else can compare with us?

古文：国险而多马，齐、楚多难。
现代文：国家的地势险要而多产马匹，齐国、楚国祸难又多。
English: The country's terrain is precarious and prolific horses, Qi and Chu countries have many disasters.

古文：有是三者，何乡而不济？ 
现代文：有这三条，到哪儿不成功？ 
English: With these three, where is it not successful?

古文：对曰： 恃险与马，而虞邻国之难，是三殆也。
现代文：司马侯回答说： 仗着地势险要和马匹，而对邻国幸灾乐祸，这是三条危险。
English: Sima Hou replied, "There are three dangers of riding horses against the terrain and gloating over the neighboring countries.

古文：四岳、三涂、阳城、大室、荆山、中南，九州之险也，是不一姓。
现代文：四岳、三涂、阳城、太室、荆山、中南，都是九州中的险要地方，它们并不属于一姓所有。
English: Shidake, Sandu, Yangcheng, Taimuro, Jingshan, and Zhongnan are all important places in Kyushu, and they do not belong to one family.

古文：冀之北土，马之所生，无兴国焉。
现代文：冀州的北部，是出产马的地方，并没有新兴的国家。
English: The northern part of Jizhou is a place where horses are produced, and there is no emerging country.

古文：恃险与马，不可以为固也，从古以然。
现代文：仗着地势险要和马匹，不能巩固，从古以来就是这样。
English: With the help of the terrain, it is almost necessary to lead horses, and it cannot be consolidated, which has been the case since ancient times.

古文：是以先王务修德音以亨神人，不闻其务险与马也。
现代文：因此国君致力于修明德行来沟通神和人，没有听说他致力于地形险要和马匹的。
English: Therefore, the sovereign devoted himself to the cultivation of virtue to communicate with God and man, and did not hear that he devoted himself to the terrain and the horses.

古文：邻国之难，不可虞也。
现代文：邻国的祸难，是不能以此来高兴的。
English: One cannot rejoice at the misfortune of one's neighbour.

古文：或多难以固其国，启其疆土；或无难以丧其国，失其守宇。
现代文：或者是由于多有祸难而巩固了国家，开辟了疆土。或者是由于没有祸难而丧失了国家，失掉了疆土，怎么能幸灾乐祸？
English: Either because of the many disasters, the country has been consolidated and the territory has been opened up, or because of the lack of disasters, the country has been lost and the territory has been lost, how can we gloat?

古文：若何虞难。齐有仲孙之难而获桓公，至今赖之。
现代文：齐国发生了仲孙的祸难，因而桓公得为霸主，到今天齐国还靠着他的余荫。
English: The calamity of the middle son happened in Qi, and therefore Huan Gong became the overlord. To this day, Qi is still relying on his shadow.

古文：晋有里、丕之难而获文公，是以为盟主。
现代文：晋国发生了里克、丕郑的祸难因而文公回国，因此当了盟主。
English: In Jin, the calamities of Rik and Yao Zheng occurred, which caused Wengong to return to Jin, and thus he became the leader of the alliance.

古文：卫、邢无难，敌亦丧之。
现代文：卫国、邢国没有祸难，敌人也就灭了它们。
English: If there is no calamity in the motherland or the fatherland, the enemy will destroy them.

古文：故人之难，不可虞也。
现代文：所以别人的祸难是不能去高兴的。
English: Therefore, we cannot rejoice in the misfortune of others.

古文：恃此三者，而不修政德，亡于不暇，又何能济？
现代文：依仗这三条，而不去修明政事和德行，挽救危亡还来不及，又怎么能够成功？
English: Relying on these three articles, without rectifying the political affairs and moral conduct, it is too late to save the peril, and how can it be successful?

古文：君其许之！
现代文：您还是允许他们。
English: You still let them in.

古文：纣作淫虐，文王惠和，殷是以陨，周是以兴，夫岂争诸侯？ 
现代文：殷纣王淫乱暴虐，文王仁慈和蔼。殷朝因此灭亡，周朝因此兴起，难道只是在于争夺诸侯？ 
English: The Yin Dynasty perished as a result, and the Zhou Dynasty arose as a result. Was it just a matter of competing for the lordships?

古文：乃许楚使。使叔向对曰： 寡君有社稷之事，是以不获春秋时见。
现代文：晋平公就允许了楚国使者的请求，派叔向回答说： 寡君因为有国家大事，所以不能在春秋两季按时进见。
English: Prince Jinping allowed the request of the envoy from the State of Chu, and Uncle Pai replied: Because of national events, it is not possible for the prince to visit the state on time in the spring and autumn.

古文：诸侯，君实有之，何辱命焉。 
现代文：至于诸侯，他们本来就跟着君王，何必再惠赐命令呢？ 
English: And as for the princes, they follow the king: wherefore should they give commandment any more?

古文：椒举遂请昏，晋侯许之。
现代文：椒举就为楚灵王求婚，晋平公答应了婚事。
English: He proposed to King Chuling with a feather, and King Jinping agreed to the marriage.

古文：楚子问于子产曰： 晋其许我诸侯乎？ 
现代文：楚灵王向子产询问说： 晋国会允许诸侯归服我国吗？ 
English: King Chuling inquired of Zizang, "Will the State of Jin allow the lords to submit to our country?"

古文：对曰： 许君。
现代文：子产说： 会允许君王的。
English: The progeny said: The king will be allowed to go.

古文：晋君少安，不在诸侯。
现代文：晋平公贪图小的安逸，志向不在于诸侯。
English: Jin and Ping coveted small comforts, and their aspirations did not lie with the princes.

古文：其大夫多求，莫匡其君。
现代文：他的大夫们多所需求，不能帮助国君。
English: His doctors have too many demands on their time to help him.

古文：在宋之盟，又曰如一，若不许君，将焉用之？ 
现代文：在宋国的盟约又说两国友好如同一国。如果不允许君王，哪里用得着在宋国的盟约？ 
English: The alliance in the Song Dynasty also said that the friendship between the two countries is like a single country. If the monarch is not allowed, what is the use of the alliance in the Song Dynasty?

古文：王曰： 诸侯其来乎？ 
现代文：楚灵王说： 诸侯会来吗？ 
English: King Chuling said, "Will the princes come?"

古文：对曰： 必来。
现代文：子产说： 一定来。
English: The child said, "I'll definitely come."

古文：从宋之盟，承君之欢，不畏大国，何故不来？
现代文：服从在宋国的盟约，取得君王的欢心，不害怕晋国，为什么不来？
English: Obey the covenant in the Song Dynasty, win the favor of the king, do not be afraid of the Jin Dynasty, why not come?

古文：不来者，其鲁、卫、曹、邾乎？
现代文：不来的国家，大约是鲁、卫、曹、邾几个国家吧！
English: The countries that don't come are probably Lu, Wei, Cao, and Yao.

古文：曹畏宋，邾畏鲁，鲁、卫偪于齐而亲于晋，唯是不来。
现代文：曹国害怕宋国，邾国害怕鲁国，鲁国、卫国为齐国所逼迫而亲近晋国，因此不来。
English: Cao was afraid of Song, Han was afraid of Lu, and Lu and Wei were forced by Qi to be close to Jin, so they did not come.

古文：其馀，君之所及也，谁敢不至？ 
现代文：其余的国家，是君王的威力所能达到的，谁敢不来？ 
English: The rest of the country is as far as the power of the monarch can reach. Who would dare not to come?

古文：王曰： 然则吾所求者，无不可乎？ 
现代文：楚灵王说： 那么我所要求的没有不行的了？ 
English: King Chuling said, "Then there is nothing I cannot do?"

古文：对曰： 求逞于人，不可。
现代文：子产回答说： 在别人那里求取快意，不行。
English: Zi Zi replied, "You can't seek pleasure from others.

古文：与人同欲，尽济。 
现代文：和别人愿望相同，都能成功。 
English: If you have the same aspirations as others, you can be successful.

古文：大雨雹。
现代文：天下大冰雹。
English: Lower the large braid.

古文：季武子问于申豐曰： 雹可御乎？ 
现代文：季武子向申丰询问说： 冰雹可以防止吗？ 
English: Ji Wu Zi asked Shen Feng: Can hail be prevented?

古文：对曰： 圣人在上，无雹，虽有，不为灾。
现代文：申丰说： 圣人在上面，没有冰雹。即使有也不成灾。
English: Shenfeng said: The saint is up there, there is no hail. Even if there is, it will not be a disaster.

古文：古者，日在北陆而藏冰；西陆，朝觌而出之。
现代文：在古代，太阳在虚宿和危宿的位置上就藏冰，昴宿和毕宿在早晨出现就把冰取出来。
English: In ancient times, when the sun appeared in the morning, it hid ice in the position of the false and dangerous lodgings, and when the false and dangerous lodgings appeared in the morning, it took out the ice.

古文：其藏冰也，深山穷穀，固阴冱寒，于是乎取之。
现代文：当藏冰的时候，深山穷谷，凝聚着阴寒之气，就在这里凿取。
English: When the ice is hidden, the deep valleys of the mountains, condensing the cold atmosphere, are chiseled here.

古文：其出之也，朝之禄位，宾食丧祭，于是乎用之。
现代文：当把冰取出来的时候，朝廷上有禄位的人，迎宾、用膳、丧事、祭祀，就在这里取用。
English: When the ice is taken out, it is used by people with positions at the Imperial Court for welcoming guests, meals, funerals, and religious services.

古文：其藏之也，黑牡、秬黍，以享司寒。
现代文：当收藏冰的时候，用黑色的公羊和黑色的黍子来祭祀司寒之神。
English: When collecting ice, a black ram and a black mule are sacrificed to the god of cold.

古文：其出之也，桃弧、棘矢，以除其灾。
现代文：当把冰取出的时候，门上挂上桃木弓、荆棘箭，来消除灾难。
English: When removing the ice, peach wood bows and thorn arrows are hung on the door to eliminate the disaster.

古文：其出入也时，食肉之禄，冰皆与焉。大夫命妇，丧浴用冰。
现代文：冰的收藏取出都按一定的时令。凡是禄位足以吃肉的官吏，都是有资格用冰的。
English: The collection of ice is taken out according to a certain season. Any official whose salary is enough to eat meat is eligible to use ice.

古文：祭寒而藏之，献羔而启之，公始用之。
现代文：大夫和妻子死后洗擦身体要用冰。祭祀司寒之神而加以收藏，奉献羔羊祭祖打开冰室，国君最早使用。
English: After the death of the doctor and his wife, the body should be washed and wiped with ice. Sacrifice to the god of cold and collect it, dedicate the lamb to the ancestor and open the ice room. The sovereign was the first to use it.

古文：火出而毕赋。自命夫、命妇，至于老疾，无不受冰。
现代文：大火星出现而分配完毕，从大夫和他们的妻子以至于老弱的生病的，没有人不分到冰。
English: When the Great Martian appeared and allotments were filled, from doctors and their wives to the old and infirm, no one was without ice.

古文：山人取之，县人传之，舆人纳之，隶人藏之。
现代文：小官在深山中凿取冰，县正运输，舆人交付，隶人收藏。
English: Minor officials are chiseling ice in the deep mountains, the county is transporting, the public is delivering, and the subordinates are collecting.

古文：夫冰以风壮，而以风出。
现代文：冰由于寒风而坚固，而由于春风而取出使用。
English: The ice is strengthened by the cold wind, and is taken out for use by the spring wind.

古文：其藏之也周，其用之也徧，则冬无愆阳，夏无伏阴，春无凄风，秋无苦雨，雷出不震，无菑霜雹，疠疾不降，民不夭札。
现代文：它的收藏周密，它的使用普遍，那就冬天没有温暖，夏天没有阴寒，春天没有凄风。秋天没有苦雨，雷鸣不伤人，霜雹不成灾，瘟疫不流行，百姓不死于传染病。
English: Its collection is meticulous, its use is widespread, then there is no warmth in winter, no cold in summer, no gloomy wind in spring, no bitter rain in autumn, thunder does not hurt people, frost does not become a disaster, plague is not prevalent, and people do not die of infectious diseases.

古文：今藏川池之冰，弃而不用。风不越而杀，雷不发而震。雹之为菑，谁能御之？
现代文：现在收藏着河川池塘的冰放在那里不用，风不散而草木凋零，雷不鸣而畜伤亡，冰雹成灾，谁能够防止它？
English: Now the ice of rivers and ponds is collected and put there to be used, the wind does not disperse and the plants wither, the thunder does not sound and the animals are killed and injured, the hailstorm is a disaster, who can prevent it?

古文：《七月》之卒章，藏冰之道也。 
现代文：《七月》这首诗的最后一章，就是藏冰的道理。 
English: The last chapter of the poem "July" is about how to hide ice.

古文：夏，诸侯如楚，鲁、卫、曹、邾不会。
现代文：夏季，诸侯到楚国去，鲁国、卫国、曹国、邾国不参加会见。
English: In the summer, the princes went to Chu, but Lu, Wei, Cao and Yao did not attend the meeting.

古文：曹、邾辞以难，公辞以时祭，卫侯辞以疾。
现代文：曹国、邾国用国内不安定来推辞，鲁昭公用祭祖来推辞，卫襄公用生病来推辞。
English: Cao Guo and Shao Guo used domestic instability to excuse themselves, Lu Zhao publicly used ancestor worship to excuse themselves, and Wei Xiang publicly used illness to excuse themselves.

古文：郑伯先待于申。
现代文：郑简公先在申地等待。
English: Zheng Jian Gong first waited at the place of appeal.

古文：六月丙午，楚子合诸侯于申。
现代文：六月十六日，楚灵王在申地会合诸侯。
English: On June 16th, King Chuling led a meeting of lords in Shenshi.

古文：椒举言于楚子曰： 臣闻诸侯无归，礼以为归。
现代文：椒举对楚灵王说： 下臣听说，诸侯不归服于别的，只归服于有礼。
English: Zhaoju said to King Chuling, "Your vassal has heard that princes do not submit to others, but only to the courteous.

古文：今君始得诸侯，其慎礼矣。
现代文：现在君王开始得到诸侯，对礼仪要谨慎啊。
English: Now that the king is beginning to get princes, be careful about etiquette.

古文：霸之济否，在此会也。
现代文：霸业的成功与否，都在这次会见了。
English: The success or failure of hegemony is determined by this meeting.

古文：夏启有钧台之享，商汤有景亳之命，周武有孟津之誓，成有岐阳之蒐，康有酆宫之朝，穆有涂山之会，齐桓有召陵之师，晋文有践土之盟。
现代文：夏启有钧台的宴享，商汤有景亳的命令，周武王有孟津的盟誓，成王有岐阳的田猎，康王有鄷宫的朝觐，穆王有涂山的会见，齐桓公有召陵的会师，晋文公有践土的会盟。
English: At the beginning of the summer, there was a banquet in Xingtai, Shang Tang had an order from Jing Tao, King Zhou Wu had an oath from Meng Tian, King Cheng had a hunting trip to Qiyang, King Kang had a pilgrimage to the Palace of the Grand Empress Dowager, King Mu had a meeting to paint the mountains, King Qi Kuan had a meeting to call the mausoleum, and King Jinwen had a meeting to trample the soil.

古文：君其何用？
现代文：君王打算采用哪一种？
English: Which one is the king going to use?

古文：宋向戌、郑公孙侨在，诸侯之良也，君其选焉。 
现代文：宋国的左师、郑国的子产在这里，他们是诸侯大夫中的能干人物，君王可以加以挑选。 
English: The left-hand man of Song and the son of Zheng are here. They are capable figures among the princes' doctors, and the monarch can choose them.

古文：王曰： 吾用齐桓。 
现代文：楚灵王说： 我采用齐桓公的方式。 
English: King Chuling said, "I'll use the method of King Qigong."

古文：王使问礼于左师与子产。
现代文：楚灵王派人向左师和子产询问礼仪。
English: King Chuling sent someone to inquire about the etiquette of Zuo Shi and Zi Yuan.

古文：左师曰： 小国习之，大国用之，敢不荐闻？ 
现代文：左师说： 小国学习礼仪，大国使用礼仪，岂敢不进献所听到的？ 
English: Zuo Shi said: Small countries learn etiquette, big countries use etiquette. How dare they not practice what they hear?

古文：献公合诸侯之礼六。
现代文：献上公侯会合诸侯的礼仪六项。
English: Six items of etiquette from the Princes' Meeting of Princes were presented.

古文：子产曰： 小国共职，敢不荐守？ 
现代文：子产说： 小国以事奉大国作为职责，岂敢不进献所该做的？ 
English: Zi Yuan said: A small country takes it as its duty to serve a big country. How dare it not do what it should do?

古文：献伯、子、男会公之礼六。
现代文：献上伯爵、子爵、男爵会见公爵的礼仪六项。
English: Counts, viscounts and barons are presented with six items of etiquette when meeting a duke.

古文：君子谓合左师善守先代，子产善相小国。
现代文：君子认为左师善于保持前代的札仪，子产善于辅佐小国。
English: Nobles believed that Zuoshi was good at maintaining the previous generation's paper money, and Kozo was good at assisting small countries.

古文：王使椒举侍于后，以规过。卒事，不规。
现代文：楚灵王让椒举侍从在身后，以便纠正错误，到事情结束，没有任何纠正。
English: King Chuling asked the attendant to stand behind him in order to correct the mistake. By the end of the matter, there was no correction.

古文：王问其故，对曰： 礼，吾所未见者有六焉，又何以规？ 
现代文：楚灵王问他什么缘故，椒举回答说： 礼仪，我没有见到的有六项，又怎么纠正？ 
English: King Chuling asked him what the reason was, and he replied with a flourish: "In terms of etiquette, there are six things I haven't seen, and how can I correct them?

古文：宋大子佐后至，王田于武城，久而弗见。
现代文：宋国的太子佐晚到，楚灵王在武城打猎，很久没有接见他。
English: Prince Sa of the Song Dynasty arrived late. King Chuling was hunting in Wucheng and did not meet him for a long time.

古文：椒举请辞焉。
现代文：椒举请楚灵王辞谢他。
English: He asked King Chuling to thank him.

古文：王使往曰： 属有宗祧之事于武城，寡君将堕币焉，敢谢后见。 
现代文：楚灵王派使者前去，说： 在武城正有祭祀宗庙的事情，寡君将要把财礼敬献给宗庙，谨为不能及时接见您而致意。 
English: King Chuling sent an emissary to say, "There is a ritual at the ancestral temple in Wucheng, and your majesty is going to pay tribute to the ancestral temple. I'm sorry I can't see you in time.

古文：徐子，吴出也，以为贰焉，故执诸申。
现代文：徐国的国君，是吴国女子生的，楚灵王认为他有二心，所以在申地把他逮捕了。
English: The sovereign of the State of Xu was born to a woman from the State of Wu. King Chuling thought that he had two hearts, so he arrested him in Shenshi.

古文：楚子示诸侯侈，椒举曰： 夫六王、二公之事，皆所以示诸侯礼也。诸侯所由用命也。
现代文：楚灵王向诸侯显示出骄纵。椒举说： 六王、二公的事情，都是以此向诸侯显示礼仪，诸侯也因此而听命。
English: King Chuling showed arrogance to the lords. Pepper said: The six kings and two lords are all ways to show etiquette to the lords, and the lords are therefore obedient.

古文：夏桀为仍之会，有缗叛之。
现代文：夏桀举行仍地的会见，有缗背叛了他。
English: Xia Yao held a face-to-face meeting, but someone betrayed him.

古文：商纣为黎之蒐，东夷叛之。
现代文：商纣举行黎地打猎，东夷背叛了他。
English: Shangguan held a hunting party in Lijiang, and Dongyi betrayed him.

古文：周幽为大室之盟，戎狄叛之。
现代文：周幽王举行太室的盟会，戎狄背叛了他。
English: Zhou Yu Wang held the conclave of the imperial concubine, and Eun Di betrayed him.

古文：皆所以示诸侯汰也，诸侯所由弃命也。
现代文：都是以此向诸侯显示骄纵所造成的，诸侯也因此而违命。
English: All of this was caused by showing arrogance to the lords, and the lords disobeyed orders as a result.

古文：今君以汰，无乃不济乎？ 
现代文：现在君王过于骄纵，恐怕不会成功吧！ 
English: Now the king is too arrogant, I'm afraid it won't work!

古文：王弗听。
现代文：楚灵王不听。
English: Guoxi Wang did not listen.

古文：子产见左师曰： 吾不患楚矣，汰而愎谏，不过十年。 
现代文：子产见到左师说： 我不担心楚国了。骄纵又不听劝谏，不超过十年。 
English: When Zi Yuan saw Zuo Shi, he said, "I am no longer worried about the State of Chu. He is arrogant and does not listen to advice. He will not last more than ten years."

古文：左师曰： 然。
现代文：左师说： 对。
English: Zuo Shi said, "That's right.

古文：不十年侈，其恶不远，远恶而后弃。
现代文：不是十年的骄纵，他的邪恶不会远播。邪恶远播然后被抛弃。
English: Not ten years of indulgence, his evil will not spread far. Evil spread far and then abandoned.

古文：善亦如之，德远而后兴。 
现代文：善也像恶一样，德行远播然后兴盛。 
English: Good, like evil, spreads and thrives.

古文：秋七月，楚子以诸侯伐吴。宋大子、郑伯先归。
现代文：秋季，七月，楚灵王带领诸侯进攻吴国，宋国太子佐、郑简公先行回国。
English: In the autumn, in July, King Chuling led the princes to attack the State of Wu, and the crown prince of the State of Song, Zheng Jiangong, returned to China first.

古文：宋华费遂、郑大夫从。
现代文：宋国的华费遂、郑国的大夫跟从军队。
English: Song's Hua Fei and Zheng's doctors followed the army.

古文：使屈申围朱方，八月甲申，克之。执齐庆封而尽灭其族。
现代文：派屈申包围朱方，八月某日，攻下了朱方，逮住了齐国的庆封而把他的族人全部消灭。
English: Zhu Fang was besieged by the Juxin faction, and on a certain day in August, they captured Zhu Fang, captured Qingfeng of Qi, and exterminated all of his people.

古文：将戮庆封。椒举曰： 臣闻无瑕者可以戮人。
现代文：将要诛戮庆封，椒举说： 臣听说没有缺点的人才可以诛杀别人。
English: He said, "I have heard that only those who have no shortcomings can fight and kill others.

古文：庆封唯逆命，是以在此，其肯从于戮乎？
现代文：庆封就因为违逆君命，才在这里，他肯不吭一声地被杀戮吗？
English: It was here that Qingfeng was killed for disobeying the king's order. Was he willing to be killed without a word?

古文：播于诸侯，焉用之？ 
现代文：如果丑事在诸侯中宣扬，为什么要那么做呢？ 
English: If scandals are propagated among princes, why do it?

古文：王弗听，负之斧钺，以徇于诸侯，使言曰： 无或如齐庆封，弑其君，弱其孤，以盟其大夫。 
现代文：楚灵王不听，让庆封背上大斧头，在诸侯军队中巡行示众，让他说： 不要有人像齐国的庆封那样杀死他的国君，削弱国君的孤儿，来和他的大夫会盟！ 
English: King Chuling didn't listen, so he made Qingfeng carry a large axe on his back and parade it among the armies of the princes. Let him say: Let no one kill his sovereign like Qingfeng of Qi, weaken the sovereign's orphans, and ally with his doctor!

古文：庆封曰： 无或如楚共王之庶子围，弑其君兄之子麇而代之，以盟诸侯。 
现代文：庆封说： 不要有人像楚共王的庶子围，杀死他的国君一一哥哥的儿子麇而取代他，来和诸侯盟会！ 
English: Qingfeng said: Let no one be like the bastard son of the king of Chu, who killed his brother's son and replaced him, to make an alliance with the princes!

古文：王使速杀之。
现代文：楚灵王赶快让人把他杀了。
English: King Chuling quickly had someone kill him.

古文：遂以诸侯灭赖。
现代文：楚灵王于是就带领诸侯灭亡赖国。
English: King Chuling then led the vassals to perish for the sake of the country.

古文：赖子面缚衔璧，士袒，舆榇从之，造于中军。
现代文：赖国的国君两手反绑，嘴里叼着玉璧，士袒背，抬着棺材跟从，到了中军之中。
English: The sovereign of Lai, with his hands tied behind his back, his mouth covered with jade, his back covered with armor, and carrying a coffin, followed the Chinese army.

古文：王问诸椒举。对曰： 成王克许，许僖公如是，王亲释其缚，受其璧，焚其榇。 
现代文：楚灵王向椒举询问，椒举回答说： 成王攻克许国，许僖公就像这样。成王亲手解除他的捆绑，接受了他的玉璧，烧掉了他的棺材。 
English: King Chuling asked Zhaojue about this, and Zhaojue replied, "Cheng Wang conquered Xu Province, and Prince Xu Rong was like this. Cheng Wang personally released his bonds, accepted his jade gems, and burned his coffin.

古文：王从之。
现代文：楚灵王听从了他的意见。
English: King Qin agreed to Wang Yao's request.

古文：迁赖于鄢。
现代文：把赖国迁移到鄢地。
English: Relocate Lai Guo to Handan.

古文：楚子欲迁许于赖，使鬥韦龟与公子弃疾城之而还。
现代文：楚灵王想要把许国迁移到赖国内，派鬬韦龟和公子弃疾为许国筑了城后才回国。
English: King Chuling wanted to move Xu Province to Lai Province, so he sent Wei Turtle and his son to build a city for Xu Province before returning to China.

古文：申无宇曰： 楚祸之首，将在此矣。
现代文：申无宇说： 楚国祸难的开始将会在这里了。
English: Shen Wuyu said: The beginning of the disaster of Chu will be here.

古文：召诸侯而来，伐国而克，城竟莫校。王心不违，民其居乎？
现代文：召集诸侯就前来，攻打别国就得胜，在边境筑城诸侯没有人争论，国君的愿望都能如意，百姓能够安居吗？
English: Convene the lords and they will come, attack other countries and win, build a city on the border and the lords will not argue, can the wishes of the sovereign be fulfilled, and can the people live in peace?

古文：民之不处，其谁堪之？
现代文：百姓不能安居，谁能够受得了？
English: People can't live in peace, who can stand it?

古文：不堪王命，乃祸乱也。 
现代文：不能忍受国君的命令，就是祸乱。 
English: If you can't bear the command of the sovereign, it's a calamity.

古文：九月，取鄫，言易也。
现代文：九月，取得鄫国，这是说事情很容易。
English: In September, the acquisition of Shandong Province, which means that things are easy.

古文：莒乱，著丘公立而不抚鄫，鄫叛而来，故曰取。
现代文：莒国发生动乱，莒丘公即位而不安抚鄫国，鄫国背叛而来，所以说 取 。
English: There was turmoil in his country, and he was uneasy about his accession to the throne, so he betrayed his country, so he said, "Take it."

古文：凡克邑不用师徒曰取。
现代文：凡是攻下城邑，不使用兵力叫做 取 。
English: When a city is taken without using force, it is called a takedown.

古文：郑子产作丘赋。国人谤之曰： 其父死于路，己为虿尾。以令于国，国将若之何？ 
现代文：郑国的子产制订丘赋的制度，国内的人们指责他，说： 他的父亲死在路上，他自己做蝎子的尾巴，还在国内发布命令，国家将要怎么办？ 
English: Zheng's son-in-law set up the system of yakufu, and people in the country blamed him, saying: His father died on the road, he made the tail of the scorpion himself, and still issued orders in the country, what will the country do?

古文：子宽以告。
现代文：子宽把话告诉子产。
English: Zihang told his words to Zibo.

古文：子产曰： 何害？
现代文：子产说： 有什么妨害？
English: The midwife said, "What's the problem?"

古文：苟利社稷，死生以之。
现代文：如果有利于国家，生死都不计较。
English: If it's good for the country, it doesn't matter if you live or die.

古文：且吾闻为善者不改其度，故能有济也。
现代文：而且我听说做好事的不改变他的法制，所以能够有所成功。
English: And I've heard that doing good things doesn't change his legal system, so he can be successful.

古文：民不可逞，度不可改。
现代文：百姓不能放纵，法制不能更改。
English: The people cannot be indulged, and the legal system cannot be changed.

古文：《诗》曰： 礼义不愆，何恤于人言。 
现代文：《诗》说： 在礼义上没有过错，为什么怕别人说的话。 
English: "Poem" said: There is no fault in etiquette, why be afraid of what others say.

古文：吾不迁矣。 
现代文：我不改变了。 
English: I haven't changed.

古文：浑罕曰： 国氏其先亡乎！
现代文：子宽说： 国氏恐怕要先灭亡吧！
English: Zihang said, "I'm afraid the Kuomintang will have to perish first!"

古文：君子作法于凉，其敝犹贪，作法于贪，敝将若之何？
现代文：君子在不厚道的基础上制订法令，它的后果尚且是贪婪。在贪婪的基础上制定法令，后果将会怎么样？
English: A gentleman enacts a law on the basis of wickedness, and the result is greed. Enact a law on the basis of greed, and what will be the result?

古文：姬在列者，蔡及曹、滕其先亡乎！
现代文：姬姓的国家，蔡国和曹国、滕国大约是要先灭亡的吧！
English: The countries with the names of Hime, Cai, Cao, and Teng will probably perish first!

古文：偪而无礼。
现代文：因为它们逼近大国而没有礼仪。
English: They have no manners because they are approaching a great power.

古文：郑先卫亡，偪而无法。
现代文：郑国在卫国之前灭亡，因为它逼近大国而没有法度。
English: Zheng Guo perished before the defense of the country, because it was approaching a great power and there was no law.

古文：政不率法，而制于心；民各有心，何上之有？ 
现代文：政策不遵循法度，而由自己的意志来决定。百姓各人有各人的意志，哪里能够尊敬上面的人？ 
English: Policy does not follow the law, but is determined by one's own will. The people each have their own will, where can one respect those above?

古文：冬，吴伐楚，入棘、栎、麻，以报朱方之役。
现代文：冬季，吴国进攻楚国，进入棘地、栎地、麻地，以报复朱方这次战役。
English: In the winter, the State of Wu attacked the State of Chu, entering the Thorny Ground, the Roasted Ground, and the Ashen Ground to take revenge on the Zhu side for this battle.

古文：楚沈尹射奔命于夏汭，箴尹宜咎城钟离，薳启彊城巢，然丹城州来。
现代文：楚国的沈尹射到夏汭奔赴应命，箴尹宜咎在钟离筑城，薳启彊在巢地筑城，然丹在州来筑城。
English: Shen Yin of the State of Chu rushed to Xiazhuang to answer the order, Zhen Yin Yi of the State of Chu to build a city in Zhongli, Zou Qi of the State of Chu to build a city in Xizhu, and Yan Dan to build a city in Zhou.

古文：东国水，不可以城，彭生罢赖之师。
现代文：东部地区发生水灾，不能筑城。彭生停止了赖地的筑城任务。
English: Floods occurred in the eastern region, and it was impossible to build the city. Peng Sheng stopped the city-building task.

古文：初，穆子去叔孙氏，及庚宗，遇妇人，使私为食而宿焉。
现代文：当初，穆子离开宗族叔孙氏，到达庚宗，碰到一个女人，让她私下弄点东西吃了以后就和她私通。
English: At first, after Mu Zi left the Uncles and Sons clan and arrived in Geng Zong, he met a woman, asked her to secretly make something to eat, and then fornicated with her.

古文：问其行，告之故，哭而送之。
现代文：女人问他的行动，穆子把原因告诉她，她哭着送走了穆子。
English: The woman asked him about his actions, Muzi told her the reason, and she sent Muzi away crying.

古文：適齐，娶于国氏，生孟丙、仲壬。
现代文：去到齐国，在国氏那里娶了妻子，生了孟丙、仲壬。
English: He went to Qi Province, married a woman from the local clan, and gave birth to Meng Huan and Zhong Ren.

古文：梦天压己，弗胜。顾而见人，黑而上偻，深目而豭喙，号之曰 牛助余 ，乃胜之。
现代文：穆子梦见天塌下来压着自己，要顶不住了，回头一看，见到一个人，黑皮肤，驼背，抠眼睛，猪嘴巴，就喊叫说： 牛，来帮我！ 
English: Mu Zi dreamed that the sky had fallen down and was crushing him. He couldn't stand it. Looking back, he saw a man with dark skin, a hunched back, narrow eyes, and a pig's mouth. He shouted, "Cow, come help me!"

古文：旦而皆召其徒，无之。
现代文：这才顶住了。早晨召见手下人，没有像梦中见到的人，就说： 记住这个人！ 
English: In the morning he summoned his men, and when none of them resembled the man he had seen in his dream, he said, "Remember this man!"

古文：且曰： 志之。 
现代文：等到宣伯逃亡到齐国，穆子送给他食物。
English: When Xuan Bo fled to Qi, Mu Zi gave him food.

古文：及宣伯奔齐，馈之。宣伯曰： 鲁以先子之故，将存吾宗，必召女。召女何如？ 
现代文：宣伯说： 鲁国由于我们先人的缘故，将会保存我们的宗族，一定会召你回去。
English: Xuan Bo said: "Because of our ancestors, Lu will preserve our clan and will definitely call you back."

古文：对曰： 愿之久矣。 
现代文：要是召你回去，怎么样？ 
English: What if they call you back?

古文：鲁人召之，不告而归。
现代文：穆子回答说： 早就愿意了。 鲁国人召他回去，他不告诉宣伯就走了。
English: Mu Zi replied, "I've wanted to leave for a long time. The Lu people called him back, and he left without telling Xuan Bo.

古文：既立，所宿庚宗之妇人，献以雉。
现代文：穆子立为卿以后，在庚宗和他睡觉的女人献上野鸡。
English: After Mu Zi was elevated to nobility, he presented pheasants to Geng Zong and the woman he was sleeping with.

古文：问其姓。对曰： 余子长矣，能奉雉而从我矣。 
现代文：穆子问他儿子的情况，回答说： 我儿子长大了，能够捧着野鸡跟着我了。 
English: Muzi asked him how his son was and he replied, "My son is old enough to hold a pheasant and follow me.

古文：召而见之，则所梦也。
现代文：把孩子召来一看，就像穆子所梦见的人。
English: Call the child to have a look, it's just like the person Muco dreamed of.

古文：未问其名，号之曰 牛 ，曰 唯 。
现代文：穆子没有问他的名字，就喊他叫 牛 ，孩子回答说： 唯。 
English: Muzi did not ask his name, but called him "Cow," to which the child replied: "Wai."

古文：皆召其徒，使视之，遂使为竖。
现代文：穆子把手下人都召来让他们看这个孩子，就让他做了小臣。
English: Muzi called all his men to come and see the child, and made him a vassal.

古文：有宠，长使为政。
现代文：牛受到宠信，大了以后就让他主管家政。
English: Cows are favored, and when they grow up, they are put in charge of housekeeping.

古文：公孙明知叔孙于齐，归，未逆国姜，子明取之。
现代文：穆子在齐国的时候公孙明和他很友好，穆子回国，没有去接国姜，公孙明娶了她。
English: When Mu Zi was in Qi, Gongsun Ming was very friendly with him. When Mu Zi returned to China, he did not go to pick up Guo Jiang. Gongsun Ming married her.

古文：故怒其子，长而后使逆之。
现代文：穆子生气妻子已改嫁，等两个儿了长大以后才派人去接回鲁国。
English: Mu Zi was angry that his wife had remarried, and waited until their two sons had grown up before sending someone to take them back to Lu.

古文：田于丘莸，遂遇疾焉。
现代文：穆子在丘莸打猎，便得了病。
English: Muzi got sick while hunting in the foothills.

古文：竖牛欲乱其室而有之，强与孟盟，不可。
现代文：竖牛想要搅乱他的家室而自己占有，一定要和孟丙盟誓，孟丙不同意。
English: If the yakitori wants to disturb his family and take possession of it, he must swear an oath with Meng Bing. Meng Bing does not agree.

古文：叔孙为孟钟，曰： 尔未际，飨大夫以落之。 
现代文：穆子为孟丙铸造了一口钟，说： 你还没有入正式交际场合，在为大夫们举行享礼的时候，举行钟的落成典礼。 
English: Mu Zi cast a bell for Meng Ping, saying: You have not yet entered a formal social occasion, when holding a ceremony for doctors, hold a bell inauguration ceremony.

古文：既具，使竖牛请日。
现代文：孟丙将享礼准备好了，让竖牛请穆子定了日期。
English: Meng Hien has prepared the feast, and let the cow invite Mu Zi to set the date.

古文：入，弗谒。
现代文：竖牛进去了，不报告这件事。
English: A bull enters and does not report it.

古文：出，命之日。
现代文：出来，假说穆子的命令定了日期。
English: Let's say that Muzo's order sets a date.

古文：及宾至，闻钟声。
现代文：等到宾客来到，穆子听到钟声。
English: While waiting for the guests to arrive, Mu Zi heard the bell ring.

古文：牛曰： 孟有北妇人之客。 
现代文：竖牛说： 孟丙那里有北边女人的客人。 
English: "Meng Xi has a guest from the north, a woman.

古文：怒，将往。牛止之。
现代文：穆子发怒，准备前去，竖牛阻止了他。
English: Muzi was angry and ready to go, but the bull stopped him.

古文：宾出，使拘而杀诸外。
现代文：客人出去以后，穆子派人拘禁了孟丙而在外边把他杀了。
English: After the guest left, Mu Zi sent someone to detain Meng Hii and killed him outside.

古文：牛又强与仲盟，不可。
现代文：竖牛硬要和仲壬盟誓，仲壬不同意。
English: Zhuang Niu insisted on taking an oath with Zhong Ren, but Zhong Ren did not agree.

古文：仲与公御莱书观于公，公与之环，使牛入示之。
现代文：仲壬和昭公的御者莱书在公宫游玩，昭公赐给他玉环。仲壬让竖牛送去给穆子看。
English: Chūrin and Shōkō's charioteer, Raishū, visit the Imperial Palace, where Shōkō gives him a jade ring. Chūrin has a yakitori sent to Musō.

古文：入，不示。
现代文：竖牛进去了不给他看。
English: When the bull entered, they did not show it to him.

古文：出，命佩之。
现代文：出来，假说穆子的命令让仲壬佩戴。
English: Come out, let's say that Muzo's order is to let Zhongren wear it.

古文：牛谓叔孙： 见仲而何？ 叔孙曰： 何为？ 
现代文：竖牛对穆子说： 让仲壬进见国君怎么样？ 穆子说： 为什么？ 
English: The cow said to Muzi, "How about letting Zhongren in to see the sovereign?" Muzi said, "Why?

古文：曰： 不见。既自见矣，公与之环而佩之矣。 
现代文：竖牛说： 不让他进见，他自己已经去见过了，国君给了他玉环佩在身上了。 
English: "Don't let him see it," said the standing bull, "he has already seen it, the sovereign has given him a ring of jewels to wear on his body."

古文：遂逐之，奔齐。
现代文：穆子就把仲壬赶走了，仲壬逃亡到齐国。
English: Mu Zi drove Zhong Ren away, and Zhong Ren fled to Qi Province.

古文：疾急，命召仲，牛许而不召。
现代文：穆子病危，命令召仲壬回来，竖牛虽答应了，却不去召他回来。
English: Mu Zi was critically ill and ordered that Zhong Ren be called back. Although Zhe Niu agreed, he did not call him back.

古文：杜洩见，告之饥渴，授之戈。
现代文：杜泄进见，穆子告诉他自己又饥又渴，把戈交给杜泄让他去杀死竖牛。
English: When Du Jie saw him, Mu Zi told him that he was hungry and thirsty. He gave the goat to Du Jie and asked him to kill a cow.

古文：对曰： 求之而至，又何去焉？ 
现代文：杜泄回答说： 找他他来了，为什么又要去掉他？ 
English: Du Jie replied: "I came to look for him, why do you want to kill him?

古文：竖牛曰： 夫子疾病，不欲见人。 
现代文：竖牛说： 他老人家病得很重，不想见人。 
English: "He's a very sick old man and doesn't want to see anyone," the cowherd said.

古文：使寘馈于个而退。
现代文：让别人把送来的食物放在厢房里，就退出去。
English: Let someone else put the delivered food in the guest room, and then leave.

古文：牛弗进，则置虚，命彻。
现代文：竖牛不把食物送进去，就倒掉了，让人撤走食具。
English: If the cows did not bring the food inside, they tipped it out and the utensils were taken away.

古文：十二月癸丑，叔孙不食。
现代文：十二月二十六日，穆子不吃东西，二十八日死。
English: On December 26, Mu Zi stopped eating and died on the 28th.

古文：乙卯卒。
现代文：竖牛立了昭子并辅佐他。
English: Kakehi raised Akiko and supported him.

古文：牛立昭子而相之。公使杜洩葬叔孙。竖牛赂叔仲昭子与南遗，使恶杜洩于季孙而去之。
现代文：鲁昭公派杜泄安葬穆子，竖牛把财货送给叔仲昭子和南遗，让他们在季孙那里说杜泄的坏话，而去掉他。
English: Lu Zhaogong sent Du Jie to bury Mu Zi, and sent money and goods to his uncles, Zhong Zhaogu and Nan Zi, so that they could say bad things about Du Jie to Ji Sun and get rid of him.

古文：杜洩将以路葬，且尽卿礼。
现代文：杜泄准备用路车随葬，并且全部按照卿的礼仪安葬。
English: Du Jie is prepared to be buried with a road vehicle, and all will be buried in accordance with the etiquette of the lord.

古文：南遗谓季孙曰： 叔孙未乘路，葬焉用之？
现代文：南遗对季孙说： 叔孙没有乘坐过路车，怎么能用它安葬？
English: Nan Yu said to Ji Sun, "Uncle Sun did not take the bus, how can he be buried with it?

古文：且冢卿无路，介卿以葬，不亦左乎？ 季孙曰： 然。 
现代文：而且正卿没有路车，副卿用来随葬，不也是不正当吗？ 季孙说： 对。 
English: Moreover, since Zhengqing did not have a carriage, wouldn't it be improper for Zhengqing to be buried with him? Ji Sun said: That's right.

古文：使杜洩舍路。
现代文：让杜泄不要使用路车。
English: Don't use public transport to relieve yourself.

古文：不可。曰： 夫子受命于朝，而聘于王。王思旧勋而赐之路。复命而致之君。
现代文：杜泄不同意，说： 他老人家在朝廷上接受命令，而到天子那里聘问，天子念他过去的功勋而赐给他路车，回来复命时把它上交国君。
English: Du Jie disagreed, saying: His old man received orders from the imperial court, and went to consult the heavenly son. The heavenly son gave him a carriage for his past merits, and when he returned, he handed it over to the sovereign.

古文：君不敢逆王命而后赐之，使三官书之。
现代文：国君不敢违逆天子的命令而再次赐给他，让他三个官员记载这件事。
English: The sovereign did not dare to disobey the order of the Son of Heaven and gave it to him again, letting his three officials record the matter.

古文：吾子为司徒，实书名。
现代文：您做司徒，记载姓名。
English: If you are an apprentice, write down your name.

古文：夫子为司马，与工正书服。
现代文：他老人家做司马，让工正记载车服。
English: He's an old man, and he's got a mechanic taking notes on the car's livery.

古文：孟孙为司空，以书勋，今死而弗以，是弃君命也。
现代文：孟孙做司空，以记载功勋。现在他死了而不用路车，这是丢掉国君的命令。
English: Meng Sun worked as a flight attendant to record his feats. Now that he is dead, he no longer needs a carriage. This is an order to discard the sovereign.

古文：书在公府而弗以，是废三官也。
现代文：记载藏在公府而不实行，这是废弃三个官员。
English: Records are hidden away in government offices and not enforced, according to three disgraced officials.

古文：若命服，生弗敢服，死又不以，将焉用之？ 
现代文：如果国君命令使用的车服，活着时不敢用，死了又不用来随葬，哪里还用得着它？ 
English: If the Emperor ordered the use of the car, but did not dare to use it when he was alive, and did not use it to be buried with him when he died, where else could it be used?

古文：乃使以葬。
现代文：季孙这才让他用路车随葬。
English: It was only then that Ji Sun allowed him to use a road vehicle to accompany the funeral.

古文：季孙谋去中军，竖牛曰： 夫子固欲去之。 
现代文：季孙策划去掉中军。竖牛说： 他老人家本来就要去掉它了。 
English: Ji Sun is planning to get rid of the Chinese army. Zhe Niu said: His old man was going to get rid of it.

