古文：武王克殷，乃立王子禄父，俾守商祀。建管叔于东，建蔡叔于殷，俾监殷臣。
现代文：武王灭殷以后，就立纣王儿子禄父，使他维守商人的祭祀，立管叔于殷东，让蔡叔、霍叔在殷都，使他们监视殷商旧臣。
English: After King Wu eliminated Yin, he set up his son, King Lu's father, to maintain the merchant's sacrificial rites, set up his uncle in the east of Yin, and set up Uncle Cai and Uncle Huo in the capital of Yin, so that they could keep an eye on the former ministers of Yin.

古文：武王既归，乃岁十二月，崩，镐肂于岐周。
现代文：武王回到宗周以后，那年的十二月在镐京离世，棺柩暂殡于周庙。
English: After King Wu returned to Zong Zhou, he passed away in Beijing in December of that year, and his coffin was temporarily buried in Zhou Temple.

古文：周公立相，天子三叔及殷东徐奄及熊盈以略。
现代文：周公执政，辅佐天子，三叔及禄父，殷东徐戎、奄国及熊姓盈姓族因此叛乱。
English: Zhou Gong was in power, assisted by Tian Zi, the third uncle and the stepfather, and Yin Dong Xu Rong, Ami Guo and Xiong Ying's family revolted as a result.

古文：周公、召公内弭父兄，外抚诸侯。元年夏六月，葬武王于毕。
现代文：周公与召公内安父子兄弟，外抚诸侯方国，成王元年夏六月，安葬武王在毕。
English: Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong, the father and son brothers of Nai'an, the governors of the princes of Fang Province, became kings in the summer and June of the first year of the year. The funeral of King Wu is over.

古文：二年，又作师旅，临卫政殷，殷大震溃。
现代文：二年，又兴师开赴殷东卫地征伐殷人。殷人大为恐惧，迅速溃散。
English: Two years later, the Xing Division went to conquer the Yin people in Yin Dongwei. The Yin people were very afraid and quickly dispersed.

古文：降辟三叔，王子禄父北奔，管叔经而卒，乃囚蔡叔于郭凌。
现代文：于是将三叔治罪。王子禄父逃往北方，缢杀管叔，把蔡叔囚禁在郭凌。
English: The prince's father fled to the north, killed Uncle Guan, and imprisoned Uncle Cai in Guoling.

古文：凡所征熊盈族十有七国，俘维九邑。
现代文：总共征服熊盈族有十七国，虏回七个城邑的人。
English: In total, the Xiong Ying people conquered seventeen countries and took back seven cities.

古文：俘殷献民，迁于九毕。
现代文：俘虏殷朝的士大夫，迁往洛阳以北。
English: Shi Dafu, a prisoner of the Yin Dynasty, moved to the north of Luoyang.

古文：俾康帅宇于殷，俾中旄父宇于东。
现代文：使康叔居在殷都，使中旄父居在殷东。
English: Let Uncle Kang live in Yingdu, and let his father live in Yindong.

古文：周公敬念于后，曰： 予畏同室克追，俾中天下。 
现代文：周公认真地为后世谋虑，说道： 我担心周室不能长久，就让都城建在天下之中心地。 
English: Zhou Gong seriously thought about the future, saying, "I'm worried that Zhou Dynasty won't last long, so let the capital city be built in the center of the world."

古文：及将致政，乃作大邑成周于中土。
现代文：到了即将返政成王之时，就在国土中央营建大都邑成周。
English: When he was about to return to power, Cheng Zhou built most of the capital cities in the center of the country.

古文：城方千七百二十丈，郛方七十里。南系于洛水，北因于郏山，以为天下之大凑。
现代文：筑内城墙方一千七百二十丈，筑外城方七十里，南连洛水，北靠邙山，把它作为天下的大都会。
English: The inner city wall is 1,720 meters high, the outer city wall is 70 miles high, the south is Loushui, and the north is Lushan, making it the world's metropolis.

古文：制郊甸，方六百里，国西土，为方千里。
现代文：制定郊甸之制，方六百里，连着西土共方千里，分为一百县。
English: The suburban system was established, with a 600-mile perimeter and a 1,000-mile perimeter along the west coast, divided into 100 counties.

古文：分以百县，县有四郡，郡有四鄙，大县城方王城三之一，小县立城，方王城九之一。
现代文：每县分四郡，每郡分四鄙。大县筑城比王城的三分之一，小县筑城比王城的九分之一。
English: Each county is divided into four counties, and each county is divided into four sub-counties. The large county Chikuzen is one-third larger than Wangcheng, and the small county Chikuzen is one-ninth of Wangcheng.

古文：都鄙不过百室，以便野事。
现代文：都邑不超过一百家，以便利耕作。
English: There should be no more than 100 households in each county to facilitate farming.

古文：农居鄙，得以庶士，士居国家，得以诸公大夫。
现代文：农夫能管理一鄙，就可用为庶士；士能管一国或一家，就可用为诸公或大夫。
English: If a farmer can manage a field, he can be used as a steward; if a steward can manage a country or a family, he can be used as a nobleman or a doctor.

古文：凡工贾胥市臣仆州里，俾无交为。
现代文：凡工匠、商贾、庶士、奴仆，各州里不使他们交杂混居。
English: All artisans, merchants, commoners, and servants, in all the states, are not to be mixed and mingled.

古文：乃设丘兆于南郊，以祀上帝，配以后稷，日月星辰先王皆与食。
现代文：又在南郊设立祭坛、划定范围，用以祭祀上天，以先祖后稷配享。日月星辰与五帝都同时受飨。
English: In addition, altars were set up in the southern suburbs, and areas were delineated to be used for offering sacrifices to the heavens, to be shared between ancestors and descendants. The sun, moon, and stars and the five emperors were all enshrined at the same time.

古文：封人社遣，诸侯受命于周，乃建大社与国中，其遣东青土，南赤土，西白土，北骊土，中央亹以黄土，将建诸侯，凿取其方，一面之土，焘以黄土，苴以白茅，以为土封。故曰，受列土于周室。
现代文：封入主管社坛。天下诸侯从周王室命，就在都城中建立大社。社坛的东面是青土，南面赤土，西面自土，北面黑土，中央与各方交接处用黄土。要立诸侯的时候，凿取其所在方位一边的土，用黄土包上，放在白茅之上，以此作为分封的象征，所以就说从周王室受到裂土。
English: The feudal lords of the world were ordered by the Zhou royal family to build a grand shrine in the capital city. The eastern side of the shrine is blue soil, the southern side is red soil, the western side is self-soil, the northern side is black soil, and the central and all sides of the junction are made of loess. When the feudal lords were to be established, the soil on the side where they were located was dug up, covered with loess, and placed on top of the white maypole as a symbol of division, so it is said that the soil was split from the Zhou royal family.

古文：乃位五宫、大庙、宗宫、考宫、路寝、明堂，咸有四阿，反坫，亢重、郎、常累、复格藻棁，设移旅楹舂常画旅。
现代文：又立五宫，指太庙、宗宫、考宫、路寝、明堂。都是四角曲檐，两柱间有放置礼器、酒具的土台。还有重梁、两庑、栏杆、双斗、绘彩短柱。
English: In addition, five palaces were built, referring to the imperial temple, the ancestral palace, the examination palace, the roadbed, and the Ming hall. They are all square-curved pillars, with a base for placing ceremonial objects and wine utensils between the two pillars. There are also heavy beams, two beams, railings, double doors, and painted short pillars.

古文：内阶玄阶，堤唐山廧，应门库台玄阃。
现代文：大堂旁有小屋，有排柱，藻井画有日月，门上横梁也绘彩。
English: Next to the lobby, there is a small hut, a row of columns, a painting of the sun and the moon by Moroi, and the crossbeam above the door is also painted.

