古文：云中守孟舒，坐虏大入云中免。
现代文：云中太守孟舒，因为匈奴攻进云中而被罢免。
English: Meng Shu, the grand tutor of Yunzhong, was deposed because the Xiongnu invaded Yunzhong.

古文：田叔对文帝曰： 匈奴来为边寇，孟舒知士卒罢敝，不忍出言，士争临城死敌，如子为父，以故死者数百人。
现代文：田叔对文帝说： 匈奴侵犯边境，孟舒知道战士疲惫，不忍心下令抵抗，但战士们争先恐后地上城拼死对敌，就像儿子保护父亲一样，因此死了几百人。
English: Uncle Tian said to Emperor Wen: The Huns invaded the border. Meng Shu knew that the soldiers were tired and could not bear to order resistance, but the soldiers scrambled to the city to fight to the death against the enemy, just like a son protects his father, so hundreds of people died.

古文：孟舒岂驱之哉！ 
现代文：这哪里是孟舒强迫他们去死呢！
English: Where is Meng Shu to force them to die!

古文：上曰： 贤哉孟舒！ 
现代文：汉文帝说： 孟舒真是个贤才啊！ 
English: Han Wenti said: Meng Shu is really a genius!

古文：复召以为云中守。
现代文：于是又让他做了云中太守。
English: And let him be the keeper of the clouds.

古文：又冯唐对文帝曰： 魏尚为云中守，虏尝一入，尚率车骑击之。
现代文：另外，冯唐对汉文帝说： 魏尚任云中太守，匈奴曾经进犯，魏尚率领军队反击。
English: In addition, Feng Tang said to Emperor Hanwen: Wei Shang was the governor of Yunzhong, the Xiongnu once attacked, Wei Shang led the army to counterattack.

古文：士卒终日力战。
现代文：战士整天鏖战。
English: The soldiers fought all day.

古文：上功幕府，坐首虏差六级，下吏削爵。
现代文：魏尚上书将军府记功，因为多报了六颗首级，就被削去官爵并打入大牢。
English: Wei Shang submitted a letter to the general's office to record his achievements, but because he reported six more heads, he was stripped of his title and sent to the dungeon.

古文：臣以为陛下罚太重。 
现代文：我认为陛下处罚得太重。 
English: I think Your Majesty's punishment is too severe.

古文：上赦魏尚，复以为云中守。
现代文：汉文帝便赦免了魏尚，仍让他回云中任太守。
English: Emperor Hanwen then pardoned Wei Shang, but still allowed him to return to Yunnan to serve as the de facto ruler.

古文：按，孟舒、魏尚，皆以文帝时为云中守，皆坐匈奴入寇获罪，皆得士死力，皆用他人言复故官，事切相类，疑其只一事云。
现代文：孟舒和魏尚都在汉文帝时任云中太守，都是因为匈奴进犯而获罪，都得到战士的拼死力战，最后又都因为别人为他们说话而复官，事情极其相似，我怀疑这是同一件事。
English: Both Meng Shu and Wei Shang were acting as Emperors at the time of the Han Emperor, both were punished for the invasion of the Xiongnu, both were defeated by the soldiers' desperate battle, and finally both were reinstated because others spoke for them. Things are extremely similar, I doubt this is the same thing.

