古文：南匈奴落尸逐鞮单于比者，呼韩邪单于之孙，乌珠留若鞮单于之子也。
现代文：南匈奴酷落尸逐千单于名叫比，是呼韩邪单于的孙子，乌珠留若千单于的儿子。
English: Nan Xiongnu coolly fell dead one by one in the name of Bi, is the grandson of Han Han, the son of Wu Zhu, the son of Wu Zhu.

古文：自呼韩邪后，诸子以次立，至比季父孝单于舆时，以比为右薁鞬日逐王，部领南边及乌桓。
现代文：自呼韩邪以后，他的儿子们按照次序担任单于，到比的最小的叔父孝单于舆时，任命比担任石奠鞑逐王，统领南部边境和乌桓。
English: After calling himself Han Zhe, his sons, in order, served as Shan Yu, and his youngest uncle, Xiao Shan Yu, appointed Bi to serve as Shijian Zhe Wang, commanding the southern border and Wuhuan.

古文：建武初，彭宠反畔于渔阳，单于与共连兵，因复权立卢芳，使入居五原。光武初，方平诸夏，未遑外事。
现代文：建武初年，彭宠在渔阳反叛，单于同彭宠联合兵力，接着又权且立卢芳为天子，要他进入五原居住，光武初年正忙着平定中原，没时间处理境外的事情。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, Peng Jia rebelled in Yuyang, and he and Peng Jia made a joint force, and then he had the right to establish Lu Fang as the son of heaven, and asked him to live in Wuhuan. In the first year of Guangwu, he was busy pacifying the Central Plains, and had no time to deal with matters outside the country.

古文：至六年，始令归德侯刘飒使匈奴，匈奴亦遣使来献，汉复令中郎将韩统报命，赂遗金币，以通旧好。
现代文：到建武六年，才命令归德侯刘飒出使匈奴，匈奴也派使者前来进贡，汉又派中郎将韩统回访匈奴，赠给匈奴黄金钱币，用来接续从前的友好。
English: It was not until the sixth year of Jianwu's reign that the returning vassal Liu Bei was ordered to send an envoy to the Xiongnu. The Xiongnu also sent an envoy to pay tribute. Han also sent Zhonglang to return Han's visit to the Xiongnu and give the Xiongnu gold coins to continue the previous friendship.

古文：而单于骄踞，自比冒顿，对使者辞语悖慢，帝待之如初。
现代文：然而单于骄傲自大，将自己比作冒顿，对汉使者说话狂妄轻慢，但天子仍像往常一样对待匈奴。
English: However, out of sheer arrogance, he likened himself to a presumptuous person and spoke arrogantly to the Han envoy, but the Son of Heaven still treated the Xiongnu as usual.

古文：初，使命常通，而匈奴数与卢芳共侵北边。
现代文：起初，双方使者经常往来，可匈奴多次与卢芳一道侵犯北部边境。
English: At first, envoys from both sides frequently visited each other, but the Huns repeatedly violated the northern border together with Lu Fang.

古文：九年，遣大司马吴汉等击之。经岁无功，而匈奴转盛，抄暴日增。
现代文：九年，皇帝派大司马吴漠等人攻打匈奴，历时一年未建功绩，匈奴反而变得更加强盛，抄掠残暴日益增多。
English: In the ninth year, the emperor sent the general secretary Ma Wumo and others to attack the Xiongnu, which lasted for one year without any achievements. On the contrary, the Xiongnu became more powerful, and the pillage and brutality increased day by day.

古文：十三年，遂寇河东，州郡不能禁。
现代文：十三年，匈奴就入侵河东，州郡无力制止。
English: In the thirteenth year, the Huns invaded Hedong, and the prefecture was powerless to stop them.

古文：于是渐徙幽、并边人于常山关、居庸关已东，匈奴左部遂复转居塞内。
现代文：于是将幽州、并州边境的人口逐步迁徙到常山关、居庸关以束，但匈奴左部接着又迁入塞内。
English: As a result, the population of Yuzhou and the adjacent state borders gradually migrated to Changshan Pass and Juyong Pass, but the left part of the Xiongnu then moved into Senai.

古文：朝廷患之，增缘边兵郡数千人，大筑亭候，修烽火。
现代文：朝廷对此很忧虑，给边区各郡每郡增加几千士兵，大量修建用于监视敌情的岗亭，设置烽火。
English: The imperial court was very worried about this, adding several thousand soldiers to each county in the border areas, building a large number of guard posts for monitoring the hostile situation, and setting bonfires.

古文：匈奴闻汉购求卢芳，贪得财帛，乃遣芳还降，望得其赏。
现代文：匈奴听说汉悬赏捉拿卢芳，贪图获得财物布帛，于是打发卢芳回来投降，指望得到赏赐。
English: The Xiongnu heard that the Han Dynasty was offering a reward for the capture of Lu Fang, and were eager to obtain the treasure cloth, so they sent Lu Fang back to surrender, hoping to receive a reward.

古文：而芳以自归为功，不称匈奴所遣，单于复耻言其计，故赏遂不行。
现代文：但卢芳衹说自己归来的功劳，不说是匈奴所派，单于又耻于说出自己的计谋，所以朝廷就没给匈奴赏赐。
English: However, Lu Fangyao said that the merit of his return was not that he was sent by the Xiongnu, but that he was ashamed to say his own strategy, so the court did not reward the Xiongnu.

古文：由是大恨，入寇尤深。二十年，遂至上党、扶风、天水。
现代文：因此匈奴大为恼火，入侵向纵深推进二十年，匈奴就侵掠到上党、扶风、天水。
English: As a result, the Xiongnu were very angry, and pushed the invasion to a depth of twenty years. The Xiongnu invaded and plundered Shangdang, Fufeng, and Tianshui.

古文：二十一年冬，复寇上谷、中山，杀略抄掠甚众，北边无复宁岁。
现代文：二十一年冬天，匈奴又入侵上谷、中山，被他们杀害掳掠的人口和抄掠去的东西非常多，北方边境再没有安定的年月。
English: In the winter of 1921, the Huns invaded Shangguan and Zhongshan again. They killed and plundered a large number of people and things. The northern border was never stable again.

古文：初，单于弟右谷蠡王伊屠知牙师以次当为左贤王。
现代文：当初，单于的弟弟石谷蠡王伊屠知牙师按顺序应该为左贤王。
English: At first, Shanyu's younger brother, Shigu Shao Wang Yi Tuo, was supposed to be Zuoxian Wang.

古文：左贤王即是单于储副。
现代文：左贤王就是单于的继承人。
English: Zuoxian Wang is the heir of Zhan Yu.

古文：单于欲传其子，遂杀知牙师。
现代文：单于想传位给自己的儿子，就将知牙师杀了。
English: He killed the dentist just because he wanted to pass on his knowledge to his son.

古文：知牙师者，王昭君之子也。昭君字嫱，南郡人也。
现代文：知牙师是王昭君的儿子。昭君字嫱，是南郡人。
English: The dentist is the son of Wang Zhaojun, surnamed Zhaojun, a native of Nan County.

古文：初，元帝时，以良家子选入掖庭。
现代文：当初在元帝时昭君以良家女子身份被选入后宫。
English: At the time of Emperor Yuan, Zhaojun was chosen as a noblewoman to enter the imperial harem.

古文：时，呼韩邪来朝，帝敕以宫女五人赐之。
现代文：当时呼韩邪前来朝见，皇帝吩咐以五名宫女赐给呼韩邪。
English: At that time, Hwang Hanjae came to see the emperor, and the emperor ordered that five maids of honor be given to Hwang Hanjae.

古文：昭君入宫数岁，不得见御，积悲怨，乃请掖庭令求行。
现代文：昭君进宫几年，没有被皇帝御幸，悲愤郁积，就通过掖庭令请求去匈奴。
English: A few years after Akihito entered the imperial palace, he was not blessed by the emperor and, filled with grief and indignation, he requested to go to the Xiongnu through a court order.

古文：呼韩邪临辞大会，帝召五女以示之。
现代文：呼韩邪临行时朝廷举行盛大聚会，皇帝宣召五名宫女给呼韩邪看。
English: The imperial court held a grand gathering when Huan Ye was about to leave, and the emperor summoned five maids of honor to watch Huan Ye.

古文：昭君丰容靓饰，光明汉宫，顾景裴回，竦动左右。
现代文：昭君容貌丰美，妆扮靓丽，她的美貌辉映了整个皇宫。昭君顾盼徘徊，惊动了皇帝身边所有的人。
English: Zhaojun looked beautiful and was dressed up beautifully. Her beauty reflected the entire imperial palace. Zhaojun wandered around and alarmed everyone around the emperor.

古文：帝见大惊，意欲留之，而难于失信，遂与匈奴。
现代文：皇帝一见大惊，心中想留下昭君，但又没法失信，祇好把昭君给了匈奴。
English: The emperor was shocked at first sight and wanted to keep Zhaojun in his heart, but he could not betray his trust, so he gave Zhaojun to the Xiongnu.

古文：生二子。
现代文：昭君生有两个儿子。
English: Akihito has two sons.

古文：及呼韩邪死，其前阏氏子代立，欲妻之，昭君上书求归，成帝敕令从胡俗，遂复为后单于阏氏焉。
现代文：呼韩邪死后，前一位辟氏的儿子继位，想娶昭君为妻，昭君上书给朝廷请求回来，成帝要昭君顺从胡人的习俗，于是昭君又成了后单于板氏。
English: After the death of Huan Ye, the son of the previous Hui clan succeeded to the throne and wanted to marry Zhaojun. Zhaojun sent a letter to the court requesting to return, and Emperor Cheng asked Zhaojun to follow the customs of the Hu people. As a result, Zhaojun became a member of the Huan Ye clan.

古文：比见知牙师被诛，出怨言曰： 以兄弟言之，右谷蠡王次当立；以子言之，我前单于长子，我当立。 
现代文：比见到知牙师被杀，埋怨说： 按照兄弟次序来说，右谷蠡王应当继位；按照儿子的身份来说，我是前任单于的长子，我应当继位。 
English: Seeing that the dentist had been killed, Bi complained, "According to the order of brothers, King Uguisu should succeed to the throne; according to the identity of sons, I am the eldest son of the predecessor, Shan Yu, and I should succeed to the throne.

古文：遂内怀猜惧，庭会稀阔。
现代文：因而心裹猜忌害怕，很少参预王庭聚会。
English: As a result, he was full of suspicion and fear, and rarely attended pre-royal court gatherings.

古文：单于疑之，乃遣两骨都侯监领比所部兵。
现代文：单于对他产生怀疑，就派去两名骨都侯监视比统领的军队。
English: As soon as doubts arose about him, he sent two vassals to keep an eye on Bi's army.

古文：二十二年，单于舆死，子左贤王乌达鞮侯立为单于。
现代文：二十二年，单于舆死去，舆的儿子左贤王乌达千侯当上单于。
English: Twenty-two years later, Shanyu died, and Shanyu's son, Zuoxian Wang Uda Qianhou, became Shanyu.

古文：复死，弟左贤王蒲奴立为单于。
现代文：乌达千侯又死了，他的弟弟左贤王蒲奴立为单于。
English: Uda Qianhou died again, and his brother Zuoxian Wang Punu was left alone.

古文：比不得立，既怀愤恨。
现代文：比未能当上单于，已经心怀愤恨。
English: He was already resentful of not being able to be the only one.

古文：而匈奴中连年旱蝗，赤地数千里，草木尽枯，人畜饥疫，死耗太半。
现代文：而且匈奴国内连续几年出现干旱和蝗虫，几千里的土地变得光秃秃的，草木全都枯死，人口和牲畜没有吃的，加上瘟疫，人！死亡和损耗过半。
English: Moreover, droughts and locusts occurred in the Huns for several years in a row, thousands of miles of land became bare, all the plants and trees died, the population and livestock had no food, plus the plague, people! Death and loss of more than half.

古文：单于畏汉乘其敝，乃遣使诣渔阳求和亲。
现代文：单于害怕汉利用自己的衰弱，就派遣使者到渔阳请求和亲。
English: Out of fear that Han might take advantage of his own weakness, he sent an envoy to Yuyang to ask for a reconciliation.

古文：于是遣中郎将李茂报命。
现代文：于是朝廷派中郎将李茂回访匈奴。
English: As a result, the imperial court sent a middle-ranking official to bring Li Mao back to visit the Xiongnu.

古文：而比密遣汉人郭衡奉匈奴地图，二十三年，诣西河太守求内附。
现代文：但比秘密派汉人郭衡拿了匈奴地图，在建武二十三年到西河太守处要求归顺汉。
English: However, he secretly sent Guo Heng, a Han Chinese, with a map of the Xiongnu, to Xihe Taishou in the 23rd year of Jianwu to demand submission to the Han.

古文：两骨都侯颇觉其意，会五月龙祠，因白单于，言薁鞬日逐夙来欲为不善，若不诛，且乱国。
现代文：两位骨都侯渐渐察觉出比的意图，正好五月份在龙城举行祭祀，就向单于禀告，说奠鞑日逐王一向想做对单于不利的事情，如果不将他杀掉，就会使国家发生祸乱。
English: The two feudal lords gradually became aware of Bi's intentions, and just as a religious service was to be held in Longcheng in May, they sent an obituary notice to Shan Yu, saying that they had always wanted to do something unfavorable to Shan Yu. If they did not kill him, it would bring disaster to the country.

古文：时，比弟渐将王在单于帐下，闻之，驰以报比。
现代文：此时比的弟弟渐将王在单于身边，听到以后，立刻快马向比报告。
English: At this time, Bi's younger brother gradually left Wang alone by his side. After hearing this, he immediately reported to Bi.

古文：比惧，遂敛所主南边八部众四五万人，待两骨都侯还，欲杀之。
现代文：比很害怕，于是聚集自己统管的南部边境八部人马，有四五万人，打算等两位骨都侯回来，杀了他们。
English: Bi was very afraid, so he gathered 450,000 people from eight provinces along the southern border, which he controlled, and planned to wait for the two boneheads to return and kill them.

古文：骨都侯且到，知其谋，皆轻骑亡去，以告单于。
现代文：骨都侯快要到时，发现了比的计谋，都只身骑马逃走，将情况报告单于。
English: When they were about to arrive at the capital, they discovered Bi's scheme and fled on horseback, leaving the situation report alone.

古文：单于遣万骑击之，见比众盛，不敢进而还。
现代文：单于派一万骑兵攻打比，见到比人多势众，未敢进兵就退回去了。
English: Alone, he sent ten thousand cavalry to attack Bi, but when he saw that Bi was outnumbered, he retreated before daring to enter the army.

古文：二十四年春，八部大人共议立比为呼韩邪单于，以其大父尝依汉得安，故欲袭其号。
现代文：建武二十四年春，八部大人一道商量立比为呼韩邪单于，由于比的祖父曾经归顺汉得以安宁，所以打算袭用呼韩邪单于的名号。
English: In the spring of the 24th year of the Jianwu era, the adults of the Eight Divisions discussed together whether to call him Han Zidan Yu. Since Bi's grandfather had once surrendered to Han for peace, they planned to use the name of Han Zidan Yu.

古文：于是款五原塞，愿永为籓蔽，扞御北虏。
现代文：于是比来到五原塞，表示愿意做汉的屏障，抵御北部的敌虏。
English: As a result, Bi came to Wuhan and expressed his willingness to act as a barrier against the northern invaders.

古文：帝用五官中郎将耿国议，乃许之。
现代文：皇帝采纳五宫中郎将耿国的意见，就同意了。
English: The emperor adopted the opinion of Geng Guo, the 5th concubine, and agreed.

古文：其冬，比自立为呼韩邪单于。
现代文：逭年冬天，比自立为呼韩邪单于。
English: In the winter of the year of the rooster, it is better to call Han Han and single than to be independent.

古文：二十五年春，遣弟左贤王莫将兵万余人击北单于弟薁鞬左贤王，生获之；又破北单于帐下，并得其众，合万余人，马七千匹、牛羊万头。
现代文：二十五年春，单于派弟弟左贤王莫率领一万多兵力攻打北单于的弟弟奠鞑左贤王，活捉了奠鞑左贤王；又打败了北单于帐下的军队，合并了北单于部众一万多人，获得七千匹马、一万头牛羊。
English: In the spring of the 25th year, Shanyu sent his younger brother Zuoxian Wang Mo to lead more than ten thousand troops to attack the younger brother of Bei Shanyu, Dianlu Zuoxian Wang, and captured Dianlu Zuoxian Wang alive; he also defeated the army under the account of Bei Shanyu, merged more than ten thousand people of Bei Shanyu, and obtained seven thousand horses and ten thousand cattle and sheep.

古文：北单于震怖，却地千里。
现代文：北单于很惊恐，后退了一千里。
English: Panicked, Beidan retreated a thousand miles.

古文：初，帝造战车，可驾数牛，上作楼橹，置于塞上，以拒匈奴。
现代文：起初，皇帝制造战车，可以用几头牛驾车，车上造有望楼，放在塞上，用以抵挡匈奴。
English: At first, the emperor made a chariot that could be driven by a few oxen. A watchtower was built on the chariot and placed on the plug to fend off the Xiongnu.

古文：时人见者或相谓曰： 谶言汉九世当却北狄地千里，岂谓此邪？ 及是，果拓地焉。
现代文：当时见到战车的人相互谈论说： 谶语说汉第九代时将会使北狄退却千里，难道说的就是这件事情吗？ 
English: At that time, people who saw the chariot talked to each other and said: Slang said that the ninth generation of Han would make Bei Di retreat a thousand miles, is this what is being said?

古文：北部薁鞬骨都侯与右骨都侯率众三万余人来归南单于，南单于复遣使诣阙，奉籓称臣，献国珍宝，求使者监护，遣侍子，修旧约。
现代文：到这时候，果然开拓了疆域。北部的奠鞑骨都侯与右骨都侯率领三万多部众前来投奔南单于，南单于再次派使者到朝廷，以藩国之礼称臣，献上国内的珍宝，请求派使者督察保护，派儿子到朝廷侍奉，缔结从前的盟约。
English: By this time, the territory had been truly opened up. The northern crown prince and right crown prince led more than 30,000 people to come to Nan Shan Yu. Nan Shan Yu again sent an envoy to the imperial court, praised the vassal with the courtesy of the feudal state, presented the domestic treasures, requested to send an envoy to inspect the protection, sent his son to serve the imperial court, and concluded the previous covenant.

古文：二十六年，遣中郎将段郴、副校尉王郁使南单于，立其庭，去五原西部塞八十里。
现代文：二十六年，皇帝派中郎将段郴、副校尉王郁出使南单于，立于南单于庭，这裹距五原西部边塞八十里远。
English: In the twenty-sixth year, the emperor sent Zhong Lang to send Duan Xuan and vice-captain Wang Yu to Nanshan and set up in Nanshan Court, which is eighty miles away from the western border of Wuhuan.

古文：单于乃延迎使者。
现代文：单于于是延请迎接汉使者。
English: Only then was he invited to meet the Han emissaries.

古文：使者曰： 单于当伏拜受诏。 
现代文：使者说： 单于应当趴在地上拜接诏书。 
English: The messenger said, "You should only prostrate yourself on the ground to receive the edict."

古文：单于顾望有顷，乃伏称臣。
现代文：单于来回看看，好一会儿，才趴在地上称臣。
English: Just look back and forth, for a while, before lying on the ground and praising the minister.

古文：拜讫，令译晓使者曰： 单于新立，诚惭于左右，愿使者众中无相屈折也。 
现代文：拜完以后，单于要翻译晓谕使者说： 单于刚刚即位，在手下人面前实在感到羞惭，希望使者不要当着众人的面让单于屈尊。 
English: After the prostration, Shan Yu asked the translator to tell the envoy: Shan Yu has just ascended the throne, I really feel ashamed in front of my subordinates, I hope the envoy will not let Shan Yu condescend in front of everyone.

古文：骨都侯等见，皆泣下。
现代文：骨都侯等人见此情形，都流下眼泪。
English: When Otsuho and the others saw this, they all shed tears.

古文：郴等反命，诏乃听南单于入居云中。
现代文：段郴等人回来覆命，皇帝下韶书听随南单于住进云中。
English: Duan Yu and others came back to claim their lives, and the emperor issued an edict to follow Nan Shan and live in the clouds.

古文：遣使上书，献骆驼二头，文马十匹。
现代文：单于派使者上书，献来两头骆驼、十匹毛色有纹彩的马。
English: He sent a messenger with a letter, who brought two camels and ten horses with brightly colored coats.

古文：夏，南单于所获北虏薁鞬左贤王将其众及南部五骨都侯合三万余人畔归，去北庭三百余里，共立薁鞬左贤王为单于。
现代文：夏天，南单于所俘获的北部敌虏奠鞑左贤王率领部众和南部的五位骨都侯合起来三万多人，叛变北归，在距北单于庭三百多里的地方，一同立奠鞑左贤王为单于。
English: In the summer, more than thirty thousand people in the south rebelled against the north and returned to the north, led by the captured northern enemy and the five hereditary princes of the south. At a distance of more than three hundred miles from the court of the north, they stood together to pay tribute to King Zuoxian.

古文：月余日，更相攻击，五骨都侯皆死，左贤王遂自杀，诸骨都侯子各拥兵自守。
现代文：一个多月以后，他们互相攻打，五位骨都侯都死了，左贤王接着自杀，这些骨都侯的儿子们各自拥兵自守。
English: More than a month later, they fought against each other, and the five Bone Dukes all died. Prince Zuoxian then committed suicide, and the sons of these Bone Dukes each took up arms to defend themselves.

古文：秋，南单于遣子入侍，奉奏诣阙。
现代文：秋天，南单于派儿子入朝侍奉，到朝廷奉上奏章。
English: In the autumn, Nan Dan Yu sent his son to serve in the imperial court, and presented him with the imperial rescript.

古文：诏赐单于冠带、衣裳、黄金玺、緺绶，安车羽盖，华藻驾驷，宝剑弓箭，黑节三，驸马二，黄金、锦绣、缯布万匹，絮万斤，乐器鼓车，戟甲兵，饮食什器。
现代文：皇帝下诏书赐给单于冠带、衣服、黄金制作的印玺、青绿色的绶带、可以乘坐的小车及用翠羽装饰的车盖，用四匹马驾的华丽马车，宝剑和弓箭，三副黑色符节，两辆副车，又有黄金、精美的丝帛、一万匹绸帛、一万斤丝绵，还有乐器、鼓车、柒戟、锁甲、武器、饮食以及各种杂物。
English: The imperial edict gave the emperor a coronation sash, clothes, gold-plated seals, a turquoise ribbon, a carriage that could be ridden and a lid decorated with green feathers, a magnificent carriage with four horses, swords and bows, three pairs of black talismans, two side cars, gold, fine silk, ten thousand silk cocoons, ten thousand pounds of silk, musical instruments, drum cars, gongs, armor, weapons, food and various miscellaneous items.

古文：又转河东米二万五千斛。牛、羊三万六千头，以赡给之。
现代文：又从河东转运了二万五千斛米面，三万六千头牛羊，用来救济南匈奴。
English: In addition, twenty-five thousand glutinous rice noodles and thirty-six thousand head of cattle and sheep were transported from Hedong to help the Southern Xiongnu.

古文：令中郎将置安集掾史将弛刑五十人，持兵弩随单于所处，参辞讼，察动静。
现代文：命令中郎将下面设立安集掾史，由安集掾史率领五十名被解除枷锁的刑徒，拿着兵器弓箭跟随单于，参预处理诉讼案件，侦察动静。
English: He ordered the middle-ranking official to set up the following Anji Shanshi, led by Anji Shanshi, fifty prisoners who were released from the shackles, followed Shan Yu with weapons and bows and arrows, participated in the preliminary handling of litigation cases, and monitored the situation.

古文：单于岁尽辄遣使奉奏，送侍子入朝，中郎将从事一人将领诣阙。
现代文：单于年终总是派人呈送奏章，送儿子入朝侍奉，由中郎将手下一名从事带到朝廷。
English: At the end of the year, however, someone was always sent to present the musical scores, to send the son to serve in the imperial court, and for the middle son to take one of his subordinates to the imperial court.

古文：汉遣谒者送前侍子还单于庭，交会道路。
现代文：朝廷也派谒者护送前一名入朝侍奉的儿子回单于庭，双方在路上相遇。
English: The imperial court also sent an escort to escort the son of a former imperial servant back to court, and the two sides met on the road.

古文：元正朝贺，拜祠陵庙毕，汉乃遣单于使，令谒者将送，赐彩缯千匹，锦四端，金十斤，太宫御食酱及橙、橘、龙眼、荔支；赐单于母及诸阏氏、单于子及左右贤王、左右谷蠡王、骨都侯有功善有，缯彩合万匹。
现代文：正月初一朝廷举行朝拜庆贺，在拜祭陵墓和宗庙以后，汉就打发单于使者回去，命令谒者护送，赐给单于一千匹彩色丝帛，四端锦帛，十斤金，还有太官为皇帝制作的酱以及橙子、橘子、龙眼和荔枝；赐给单于的母亲和各位辟氏、单于的儿子和左右贤王、左右谷蠡王、骨都侯中有功德的人各种彩色丝帛，合起来有一万匹。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year, the imperial court held a worship celebration. After paying homage to the mausoleum and ancestral temple, the Han Dynasty sent the envoys back to the envoys and ordered them to escort. They gave a thousand colored silk cocoons, four-sided brocade, ten pounds of gold, and the sauce made by the eunuchs for the emperor, as well as oranges, tangerines, longan and lychees; they gave a variety of colored silk cocoons to the mother of the emperor and the Bai clan, the sons of the emperor and the kings of the right and left, the kings of the right and left

古文：岁以为常。
现代文：每年作为常例。
English: It happens every year as a matter of routine.

古文：匈奴俗，岁有三岁祠，常以正月、五月、九月戊日祭天神。
现代文：匈奴习俗，每年有三次龙祠，一般在正月、五月、九月的戊曰祭祀天神。
English: According to the custom of the Xiongnu, there are three dragon shrines every year, generally in the first month, May, and September.

古文：南单于既内附，兼祠汉帝，因会诸部议国事，走马及骆驼为乐。
现代文：南单于既然归顺汉，就同时祭祀汉皇帝，藉此机会召集各部，商量国家事务，举行赛马和赛骆驼，以此为乐。
English: Since Nan Shan had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, he also offered sacrifices to the Han Emperor. He used this opportunity to convene various ministries, discuss national affairs, and hold horse and camel races for fun.

古文：其大臣贵者左贤王，次左谷蠡王，次右贤王，次右谷蠡王，谓之四角；次左右日逐王，次左右温禺鞮王，次左右渐将王，是为六角；皆单于子弟，次第当为单于者也。
现代文：匈奴大臣中尊贵的是左贤王，其次是左谷蠡王，其次是右贤王，其次是右谷蠡王，这称为 四角 ；其次是左右日逐王，其次是左右温禺千王，其次是左右渐将王，这称为 六角 ：他们都是单于的儿子兄弟，按照顺序将要当单于的人。
English: Among the ministers of the Xiongnu, the most honorable are Zuoxian Wang, followed by Zuoguxian Wang, followed by Zuoxian Wang, followed by Zuoguxian Wang, followed by Zuoguxian Wang, followed by Zuoguxian Wang, followed by Zuoguxian Wang, which is called the Four Corners; followed by Zuoguxian Wang, followed by Zuoguxian Wang, followed by Zuoguxian Wang, followed by Zuoguxian Wang, this is called the Six Corners: they are all the sons and brothers of Duan Yu, and they will be the people of Duan Yu in order.

古文：异姓大臣：左右骨都侯，次左右尸逐骨都侯，其余日逐、且渠、当户诸官号，各以权力优劣、部众多少为高下次第焉。
现代文：异姓大臣有左右骨都侯，其次是左右尸逐骨都侯，其他又有日逐、且渠、当产各种官号，各以权力的大小、部众的多少确定职位高低和次序。
English: For ministers with different surnames, there are left and right capital cities, followed by left and right capital cities one after another, and others have various official titles, each with the size of power and the number of subordinates to determine the position level and order.

古文：单于姓虚连题。
现代文：单于姓虚连题。
English: The name alone is a false link.

古文：异姓有呼衍氏、须卜氏、丘林氏、兰氏四姓，为国中名族，常与单于婚姻。
现代文：异姓有呼衍氏、须卜氏、丘林氏、兰氏四个姓，他们是匈奴国内名族，经常与单于通婚。
English: There are four different surnames, Huyan, Subu, Qulin and Lan, which are famous families in the Huns and often intermarried with Shan.

古文：呼衍氏为左，兰氏、须卜氏为右，主断狱听讼，当决轻重，口白单于，无文书簿领焉。
现代文：呼衔氏为左，兰氏、须卜氏为右，他们负责判决案件，受理诉讼，他们将判决的轻重，口头告诉单于，那裹没有文书和记事的簿册。
English: Khotong on the left, Lan and Sub on the right. They are responsible for adjudicating cases and accepting lawsuits. They will verbally tell the weight of the judgment to the judge, who does not have a document and a book of records.

古文：冬，前畔五骨都侯子复将其众三千人归南部，北单于使骑追击，悉获其众。
现代文：二十六年冬，以前叛变的五位骨都侯的儿子又率部众三千人投奔南部，北单于派骑兵追击，将他们全部俘获。
English: In the winter of the twenty-sixth year, the five sons of the bone-marquess, who had previously rebelled, also led 3,000 people to the south, and Beidan sent cavalry to chase them and captured them all.

古文：南单于遣兵拒之，逆战不利。
现代文：南单于派军队抵御，迎战不利。
English: Nan Shan Yu sent troops to resist, but they were at a disadvantage.

古文：于是复诏单于徙居西河美稷，因使中郎将段郴及副校尉王郁留西河拥护之，为设官府、从事、掾史。
现代文：朝廷于是又下韶书要单于迁到西河美稷居住，并派中郎将段郴和副校尉王郁留在西河保护单于，为单于设置官府、从事、掾史。
English: As a result, the imperial court issued an imperial edict that Duan Yu should move to the West River and live in Meili, and sent a middle-ranking official to keep Duan Yu and Vice-Colonel Wang Yu in the West River to protect Duan Yu, and to set up an official office, engage in business, and write history for Duan Yu.

古文：令西河长史岁将骑二千、弛刑五百人，助中郎将卫护单于，冬屯夏罢。
现代文：又命令西河长生每年率领二千骑兵，五百被解除枷锁的刑徒，帮助中郎将护卫单于，冬天驻守，夏天撤销，自此以后作为常例。
English: He also ordered Xihe Changsheng to lead two thousand cavalrymen and five hundred prisoners released from the shackles every year, and help Zhonglang to escort the guards alone in the winter, stationed in the winter, and withdrawn in the summer. Since then, it has been a regular practice.

古文：自后以为常，及悉复缘边八郡。南单于既居西河，亦列置诸部王，助为扞戍。
现代文：又免去沿边八个郡的全部租税和劳役。南单于住进西河以后，也设置各部侯王，帮助汉抵御戍边。
English: In addition, all taxes and labor service were exempted from the eight counties along the border. After Nan Dan moved into the West River, he also set up various princes to help Han resist the border.

古文：使韩氏骨都侯屯北地，右贤王屯朔方，当于骨都侯屯五原，呼衍骨都侯屯云中，郎氏骨都侯屯定襄，左南将军屯雁门，栗籍骨都侯屯代郡，皆领部众为郡县侦罗耳目。
现代文：南单于派韩氏骨都侯驻守北地，右贤王驻守朔方，当于骨都侯驻守五原，呼衍骨都侯驻守云中，郎氏骨都侯驻守定襄，左南将军驻守雁门，栗籍骨都侯驻守代郡，他们都统领部众替郡县当耳目侦察动静。
English: Nan Shan sent Han's Bone Capital to guard the North, Uxian Wang's Bone Capital to guard the South, Dang's Bone Capital to guard the Five Plains, Huyan's Bone Capital to guard Yunchu, Lang's Bone Capital to guard Dingxiang, Zuo Nan's General to guard Ganmen, and Li's Bone Capital to guard Daishun. They all led the troops to scout the county.

古文：北单于惶恐，颇还所略汉人，以示善意。
现代文：北单于很惶恐，送还了被掳掠去的许多汉人，以表示友好。
English: Beidan Yu was very alarmed and sent back many Han people who had been abducted and plundered to show his friendship.

古文：抄兵每到南部下，还过亭候，辄谢曰： 自击亡虏薁鞬日逐耳，非敢犯汉人也。 
现代文：他们出来抄掠的军队每次经过南部附近，或回头经过漠兵侦察敌情的岗亭，总是道歉说： 我们打的是逃亡的奠鞑曰逐王，并非胆敢侵犯汉人。 
English: Every time their raiding army passed near the south, or turned back past the sentry post where the enemy was scouting, they always apologized and said, "We are fighting the fleeing enemy, not daring to encroach on the Han people."

古文：二十七年，北单于遂遣使诣武威求和亲，天子召公卿廷议，不决。
现代文：二十七年，北单于于是派使者到武威请求和亲，天子召集公卿大臣在殿庭商议，决定不下来。
English: In the 27th year, Beidan then sent an envoy to Wuwei to request a reconciliation, and Tianzi convened the nobles and ministers to discuss in the palace, and decided not to come down.

古文：皇太子言曰： 南单于新附，北虏惧于见伐，故倾耳而听，争欲归义耳。
现代文：皇太子说： 南单于刚刚归顺，北部的敌虏害怕被攻打，所以侧耳而听，争着想归附正义。
English: The crown prince said: Nan Dan has just surrendered, and the enemies in the north are afraid of being attacked, so they listen to each other and strive to return to justice.

古文：今未能出兵，而反交通北虏，臣恐南单于将有二心，北虏降者且不复来矣。 
现代文：现在朝廷不能出兵，却反而和北部敌虏往来，臣恐怕南单于将会生出二心，愿意投降的北部敌虏将不会再来投降了。 
English: Now that the imperial court cannot send troops, but instead has dealings with the northern enemy, I am afraid that Nan Shan will have second thoughts, and the northern enemy who is willing to surrender will not surrender again.

古文：帝然之，告武威太守勿受其使。
现代文：皇帝认为有道理，就告知武威太守不要接纳北单于的使者。
English: The emperor thought it was reasonable, so he told Wuwei Taizhong not to accept Beidan Yu's envoy.

古文：二十八年，北匈奴复遣使诣阙，贡马及裘，更乞和亲，并请音乐，又求率西域诸国胡客与俱献见。帝下三府议酬答之宜。
现代文：二十八年，北匈奴又一次派使者到朝廷，进献马匹和皮裘，重新乞求和亲，并想求得汉的音乐，又请求率领西城各国的胡人一道前来进贡朝拜，皇帝将此事交给三公府去讨论应酬答覆的事宜。
English: In the 28th year, the Northern Xiongnu once again sent an envoy to the imperial court, offering horses and furs, again begging for peace and friendship, and wanting to obtain Han music, and requesting to lead the Hu people of the West City countries to come to pay tribute and worship together. The emperor handed the matter over to the three public offices to discuss the matter of response.

古文：司徒掾班彪奏曰：臣闻孝宣皇帝敕边守尉曰； 匈奴大国，多变诈。
现代文：司徒掾班彪上书说：臣听说孝宣皇帝吩咐守卫边境的将尉说： 匈奴是大国，多变化和欺诈。
English: "I have heard that Emperor Xiaoxuan ordered the general guarding the border to say, 'The Xiongnu is a big country, full of change and deception.

古文：交接得其情，则却敌折冲；应对入其数，则反为轻欺。 
现代文：交往合情得体，就可以谈判取胜；应答中了他们的计谋，就反过来被他们轻视欺侮。 
English: If you deal with them in a proper manner, you can negotiate and win; if you respond to their tricks, you will be despised and bullied by them.

古文：今北匈奴见南单于来附，惧谋其国，故数乞和亲，又远驱牛、马与汉合市，重遣名王，多所贡献。斯皆外示富强，以相欺诞也。
现代文：现在北匈奴见南单于前来归顺，害怕我们设谋对付他们，所以多次乞求和亲，又从远方赶来牛马与汉做生意，重复派遣有名的王侯，进贡很多东西，这都是用来向外显示富强，为的是欺骗我们。
English: Now that the Northern Huns see the Southern ones coming to submit, they are afraid that we are plotting against them, so they have repeatedly begged for friendship, and have come from afar to trade with the Han, repeatedly sending famous princes, and paying tribute to many things, all of which are used to show wealth and strength to the outside world, in order to deceive us.

古文：臣见其献益重，知其国益虚，归亲愈数，为惧愈多。
现代文：臣看到匈奴贡献的东西越多，就知道匈奴国内越空虚，要求归附亲近越急迫，他们的恐惧就越厉害。
English: The more the courtiers saw of the Hun's contribution, the more they knew that the emptier the Hun's country became, the more urgent the demand for annexation became, and the greater their fear.

古文：然今既未获助南，则亦不宜绝北，靶縻之义，礼无不答。
现代文：然而现在既然未能帮助南部，那么也不宜和北部断绝联系，按照怀柔笼络的原则，于礼数不能没有回覆。
English: However, now that it has failed to help the south, it is not appropriate to sever ties with the north. In accordance with the principle of "courtesy and conciliation," there can be no reply without courtesy.

古文：谓可颇加赏赐，略与所献相当，明加晓告以前世呼韩邪、郅支行事。
现代文：臣以为可以给他们一些赏赐，大致与他们所献来的东西价值相当，公开将前代的呼韩邪和郅支行事的结果晓谕告知他们。
English: The vassal thought that he could give them some reward, roughly equivalent to the value of what they had offered, and publicly announced to them the results of the previous generation's calling Han Zi and Zi Zhi.

古文：报答之辞，令必有适，今立稿草并上，曰： 单于不忘汉恩，追念先祖旧约，欲修和亲，以辅身安国，计议甚高，为单于嘉之。
现代文：答覆的言辞，一定要得体。现在将起草的文稿一并呈上，说： 单于不忘汉的恩德，追怀念及先祖从前的盟约，打算和汉建立和亲，为的是辅助自身，安定国家，计策非常高明，我们对单于表示赞赏。
English: The wording of the reply must be appropriate. Now the drafted document will be submitted together, saying: "Singapore does not forget the kindness of Han, remembers the past covenants with its ancestors, intends to establish peace with Han, in order to help itself, stabilize the country, the strategy is very clever, we appreciate Singapore.

古文：往者，匈奴数有乖乱，呼韩邪、郅支自相仇隙，并蒙孝宣皇帝垂恩救护，故各遣侍子称籓保塞。
现代文：过去，匈奴多次反叛作乱，呼韩邪、郅支互相仇视，一同蒙孝宣皇帝垂降恩德，救援保护，所以各派儿子入朝侍奉，并以藩国名义守保边关。
English: In the past, the Xiongnu rebelled many times and wreaked havoc, calling the Han evil and the Shan and Zhizhi hostile to each other. Together, Emperor Xiaoxuan lowered the Ende, rescue and protection, so they sent their sons to serve in the imperial court, and guarded the border in the name of the domain.

古文：其后郅支忿戾，自绝皇泽；而呼韩附亲，忠孝弥著。
现代文：在这以后，郅支怀恨悖逆，自己割断朝廷对他的恩泽，但呼韩归附亲近，忠孝愈加显著。
English: After this, Xizhi held a grudge and rebelled, cutting off the imperial court's favor to him, but calling Han to be close, and his loyalty and filial piety became more and more obvious.

古文：及汉灭郅支，遂保国传嗣，子孙相继。
现代文：到汉消灭郅支，呼韩氏最终保全国家，传位后代，子孙相互继承大位。
English: In Han Dynasty, the Han clan was called upon to finally preserve the country, pass the throne to future generations, and the descendants would inherit the throne from each other.

古文：今南单于携众南向，款塞归命。
现代文：现在南单于率领部众归顺南方，叩关归漠。
English: Now Nan Shan Yu is leading the troops to surrender to the south, knocking Guan back to the desert.

古文：自以呼韩嫡长，次第当立，而侵夺失职，猜疑相背，数请兵将，归扫北庭，策谋纷纭，无所不至。
现代文：他自以为呼韩氏是正嫡长子，按次序应当立为单于，反而被剥夺职位，遭猜疑以相背弃，他曾多次请求漠派兵遣将，回头扫除北单于王庭，各种各样的计策，全都提了出来。
English: He considered himself to be the legitimate eldest son of the Han clan, and should have been placed first in the order of succession. Instead, he was deprived of his position and betrayed by suspicion. He had repeatedly requested the dispatch of soldiers to the desert to sweep away the Beidan from the royal court. All kinds of strategies were proposed.

古文：惟念斯言不可独听，又以北单于比年贡献，欲修和亲，故拒而未许，将以成单于忠孝之义。
现代文：朝廷考虑不可听信一面之辞，又因为北单于连年进贡，想建立和亲，所以拒绝了南单于的要求而未同意，目的是成全单于的忠孝想法。
English: The imperial court considered that it was not possible to listen to the words of one side, and because Beidan refused Nandan's request and did not agree because Beidan had paid tribute to Nandan for years and wanted to establish a friendly relationship. The purpose was to fulfill Nandan's idea of loyalty and filial piety.

古文：汉秉威信，总率万国，日月所照，皆为臣妾。
现代文：汉凭藉威武和信义，统率万国，衹要是月照到的地方，那裹的人都是漠的臣妾。
English: Han, by virtue of his power and loyalty, leads all nations, but wherever the moon shines, the people are like mistresses in the desert.

古文：殊俗百蛮，义无亲疏，服顺者褒赏，畔逆者诛罚，善恶之效，呼韩、郅支是也。
现代文：众多习俗不同的蛮族，在道义上没有亲疏分别，服从归顺者给以称赞赏赐，背叛违逆者给予消灭处罚，行善和作恶得到的结果，呼韩邪和郅支就是例子。
English: Many barbarians with different customs have no moral difference between them. Those who obey and submit are praised, those who betray and disobey are punished, and those who do good and evil are rewarded.

古文：今单于欲修和亲，款诚已达，何嫌而欲率西域诸国俱来献见？
现代文：现在单于想和亲，已经表达了诚意，为什么又猜疑而想率领西域各国都来进贡朝见呢？
English: Now, just because he wants to make peace with his relatives, he has already expressed his sincerity. Why is he suspicious and wants to lead all the countries in the western region to pay tribute to the imperial court?

古文：西域国属匈奴，与属汉何异？
现代文：西域的国家属于匈奴，与属于汉有何分别呢？
English: What is the difference between the countries in the western region belonging to the Huns and those belonging to the Han?

古文：单于数连兵乱，国内虚耗，贡物裁以通礼，何必献马裘？
现代文：单于连续多次发生兵乱，国内空虚耗尽，贡品仅够用来通礼节，何必进献马匹皮裘呢？
English: Just because there have been many consecutive military riots, the domestic emptiness has been exhausted, and the tribute is only enough to pass the etiquette, why do you have to donate horse fur?

古文：今赍杂缯五百匹，弓鞬韥丸一，矢四发，遣遗单于。
现代文：现在派人带去五百匹彩色丝帛，一副收藏弓箭的器具，四支箭，送给单于。
English: Now send someone to bring five hundred colored silk cocoons, a set of bow and arrow collection equipment, four arrows, and give them to Shan Yu.

古文：又赐献马左骨都侯、右谷蠡王杂缯各四百匹，斩马剑各一。
现代文：并赐给献马的左骨都侯和右谷蠡王每人各四百匹彩色丝帛，一柄斩马剑。
English: He also gave each of the left-bone duke and the right-bone eunuch four hundred colored silk cocoons and a horse-chopping sword.

古文：单于前言先帝时所赐呼韩邪竽、瑟、空侯皆败，愿复栽赐。
现代文：单于前面说到先帝赐给呼韩邪的竽、瑟、箜篌都已损坏，希望再得到赏赐。
English: As mentioned earlier, the scepter, sickle, and gong given by the former emperor to Huan Zhao have all been damaged, and it is hoped that they will be given again.

古文：念单于国尚未安，方厉武节，以战攻为务，竽瑟之用，不如良弓利剑，故未以赍。
现代文：考虑到单于国内尚未安定，正砥砺为武之道，以攻战作为当务之急，竽瑟的用途不如良弓利剑，所以没有带去。
English: Considering the fact that the country was not yet stable, and war was the only way to fight, with offensive warfare as the top priority, the use of the crossbow was not as good as the bow and sword, so it was not brought.

古文：朕不爱小物，于单于使宜所欲，遣驿以闻。 
现代文：朕不是对单于吝惜小物品，而是考虑所要的东西合乎时用，使者将情况告知单于。 
English: Instead of being stingy with small items, I consider what I want to be timely, and the messenger will inform me of the situation.

古文：帝悉纳从之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了班彪的全部意见。
English: The emperor accepted all of Ban Biao's suggestions.

古文：二十九年，赐南单于羊数万头。
现代文：二十九年，赐给南单于几万头羊。
English: In the 29th year, tens of thousands of sheep were given to Nan Shan Yu.

古文：三十一年，北匈奴复遣使如前，乃玺书报答，赐以彩缯，不遣使者。
现代文：三十一年，北匈奴像前面一样再次派来使者，皇帝以玺书回覆单于，赐给他彩色丝帛，不派使者。
English: In the thirty-first year, the Northern Xiongnu again sent an envoy, as before. The emperor replied to him in writing, giving him a piece of colored silk and refusing to send an envoy.

古文：单于比立九年薨，中郎将段郴将兵赴吊，祭以酒米，分兵卫护之。
现代文：比立为单于九年以后逝世，中郎将段郴率领部队前往吊唁，用酒和米祭奠，分派兵力护卫南匈奴。
English: When Bilibin died nine years later, Zhong Lang sent Duan Xuan and his troops to pay their respects with wine and rice, and assigned troops to protect the Southern Xiongnu.

古文：比弟左贤王莫立，帝遣使者赍玺书镇慰，拜授玺绶，遗冠帻，绛单衣三袭，童子佩刀、绲带各一，又赐缯彩四千匹，令赏赐诸王、骨都侯已下。
现代文：比的弟弟左贤王莫立为单于，皇帝派使者带玺书前去镇抚慰问，授给他印绶，赠给冠和头巾，三套深红色的单衣，一把小孩子佩带的刀和一根织带，又赐给四千匹彩色丝帛，让赏给王和骨都侯以下的各位官员。
English: In response, the emperor sent an envoy with a letter of condolence to his brother, Zuoxian Wang Moli, and presented him with a seal, a crown and a turban, three sets of crimson robes, a child's knife and a ribbon, as well as four thousand colored silk cocoons, which were given to the king and officials below the prince.

古文：其后单于薨，吊祭慰赐，以此为常。
现代文：自此以后每当单于去世，汉去吊唁祭奠，慰问赏赐，以此作为常例。
English: Since then, whenever a single died, Han went to offer condolences, condolences and rewards, as a rule.

古文：丘浮尤鞮单于莫，中元元年立，一年薨，弟汗立。
现代文：丘浮尤千单于莫，中元元年继位，一年后逝世，他的弟弟汗立为单于。
English: His younger brother, Khan Li, succeeded him in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, but died a year later.

古文：伊伐于虑鞮单于汗，中元二年立。
现代文：伊伐于虑千单于汗，中元二年立为单于。
English: Yiwu was founded in the year of the rooster, while Zhongyuan was founded in the second year of the rooster.

古文：永平二年，北匈奴护于丘率众千余人来降。
现代文：永乎二年，北匈奴护于丘率领部众一千多人前来投降。
English: Two years later, the Northern Xiongnu, Guo Yuqiu, led a group of more than a thousand people to surrender.

古文：南部单于汗立二年薨，单于比之子立。
现代文：南部单于汗在位两年逝世，单于比的儿子适继位。
English: Nanbu Shanyu Khan died two years into his reign, and Shanyu Bi's son succeeded to the throne.

古文：僮尸逐侯鞮单于，永平二年立。
现代文：隘僮尸逐侯千单于适，丞垩二年立为单于。
English: The corpses of thousands of people were found in each of the villages, and it took two years to find the bodies.

古文：五年冬，北匈奴六七千骑入于五原塞，遂寇云中，至原阳。南单于击却之，西河长史马襄赴救，虏乃引去。
现代文：五年冬天，韭包抠六七千骑兵进入互愿塞，接着入侵云生，攻到愿腥，被南单于击退，酉回长史区塞赶去援救，敌虏造才退走。
English: In the winter of the fifth year, the 6 or 7 thousand cavalrymen of the Zhubo army entered the Mutual Wishing Post, then invaded Yunsheng, attacked the Wishing Post, were repulsed by the Nan Shan, rushed back to the Long History Post for rescue, and only retreated because of the enemy.

古文：单于立四年薨，单于莫子苏立，是为丘除车林鞮单于。
现代文：单于适在位四年去世，单于墓的儿子藓立为单于，就是丘除车林千单于。
English: A son of a king who died four years into his reign and is buried in a tomb is called a deity of deities, and there are thousands of deities of deities.

古文：敏月复薨，单于之弟长立。
现代文：几个月以后鏊又去世，单于适的弟弟长立为单于。
English: A few months later, Zou passed away again, leaving Shan Yu Shi's younger brother Chang Li as the sole survivor.

古文：胡邪尸逐侯鞮单于长，永平六年立。
现代文：胡邪尸逐侯千单于长，永平六年立为单于。
English: Hu's evil corpse has been in power for a thousand years, and Yongping has been in power for six years.

古文：时北匈奴犹盛，数寇边，朝廷以为忧。
现代文：当时北匈奴仍然强大，多次入侵边境，朝廷对此感到忧虑。
English: At that time, the Northern Huns were still powerful and repeatedly invaded the border, which worried the court.

古文：会北单于欲合市，遣使求和亲，显宗冀其交通，不复为寇，乃许之。
现代文：正好北单于想通贸易，派使者请求和亲，显宗希望与他们来往，不再入侵，就同意了和亲。
English: It just so happened that the North was thinking about trade and sent an envoy to ask for peace, and Emperor Xuanzong agreed to peace because he hoped to have intercourse with them and not invade them again.

古文：八年，遣越骑司马郑众北使报命，而南部须卜骨都侯等知汉与北虏交使，怀嫌怨欲畔，密因北使，令遣兵迎之。
现代文：八年，显宗派越骑司马郑众出使北部作为回访，但南部的须卜骨都侯等人知道汉同北部敌虏互派使者，必怀猜疑和怨恨，打算反叛，秘密通过北匈奴的使者，要北匈奴派军队迎接自己。
English: In the eighth year, the Hsien sect sent the envoys of the Yue riding Sima Zhengzong to the north as a return visit, but the people of Subb Bone in the south knew that the Han Dynasty and the northern enemy sent envoys to each other. They must have harbored suspicion and resentment, planned to rebel, secretly passed the envoys of the Northern Huns, and wanted the Northern Huns to send troops to meet them.

古文：郑众出塞，疑有异，伺候果得须卜使人，乃上言宜更置大将，以防二虏交通。
现代文：郑众出塞，怀疑情况有变，暗中侦察果然抓住了须卜的使者，于是上书说最好重新设置大将，以防止南北二虏勾结。
English: Zheng Zheng, suspecting that the situation had changed, surreptitiously caught Subu's envoy, and wrote that it would be best to re-establish the general to prevent the north and south from colluding.

古文：由是始置度辽营，以中郎将吴棠行度辽将军事，副校尉来苗、左校尉阎章、右校尉张国将黎阳虎牙营士，屯五原曼柏。
现代文：自此开始设立度辽军营，以中郎将吴棠兼管度辽将军的事情，任命副校尉来苗、左校尉阎章、右校尉张国率领黎阳的虎牙营的士兵在五原曼柏驻守。
English: Since then, the Duduliao military camp has been established, with the middle brother Wu Tang also in charge of the affairs of General Duduliao, and the soldiers of the Huya Camp in Liyang were stationed in Wuhuan Manbai, led by the deputy captain Lai Miao, the left captain Yan Zhang, and the right captain Zhang Guo.

古文：又遣骑都尉秦彭将兵屯美稷。
现代文：又派骑都尉秦彭率领部队在美稷驻守。
English: He also sent the cavalry captain Qin Peng to lead the troops stationed in Meili.

古文：其年秋，北虏果遣二千骑候望朔方，作马革船，欲度迎南部畔者，以汉有备，乃引去。
现代文：这年秋天，北部敌虏果然派出二千骑兵到朔方侦察，用马皮做成船只，想接渡南部反叛的人，因为汉有防备，就引兵退走了。
English: In the autumn of that year, the northern enemy sent two thousand cavalrymen to the Shuo side to reconnoitre, and they made boats out of horse skins in order to pick up the southern rebels. Because the Han were prepared, they withdrew the troops.

古文：复数寇抄边郡，焚烧城邑，杀略甚众，河西城门昼闭，帝患之。
现代文：他们又多次入侵抄掠边疆郡县，放火烧毁城邑，被他们杀害掳去的人非常多，河西一带城门白天紧闭。皇帝很忧虑。
English: They also invaded and plundered the border counties and counties many times, set fire to and burned down towns, killed and captured a lot of people, and closed the city gates around Hexi during the day. The emperor was very worried.

古文：十六年，乃大发缘边兵，遣诸将四道出塞，北征匈奴。
现代文：十六年，天子于是大规模征调沿边各郡的兵力，派众将分四路出塞，北征匈奴。
English: In the 16th year of the Joseon Dynasty, Emperor Taejo ordered a large-scale conscription of troops from all counties along the border, and sent them to march out of the citadel in four directions, and to conquer the Huns in the north.

古文：南单于遣左贤王信随太仆祭肜及吴棠出朔方高阙，攻皋林温禺犊王于涿邪山。
现代文：南单于派左贤王信跟随太仆祭肜和吴棠由朔方高阙出境，攻打在涿邪山的皋林温禺犊王。
English: Nan Dan Yu dispatched Zuoxian Wangxin to accompany the eunuchs Saiguo and Wu Tang from Shuo Fang Gaojun to attack the king of Yulin and Wenzhong in Shanzhai Mountain.

古文：虏闻汉兵来，悉度漠去。肜、棠坐不至涿邪山免，以骑都尉来苗行度辽将军。
现代文：敌虏得知汉军打来，全都越过沙漠逃走了，祭肜和吴棠因为未到涿邪山被坐罪免官，朝廷任命骑都尉来苗兼摄度辽将军。
English: When the enemy captives learned that the Chinese army had come, they all fled across the desert. Sacrifices and Wu Tang were exonerated because they did not reach the evil mountain, and the court appointed a cavalry captain to come to Miao and photograph General Liao.

古文：其年，北匈奴入云中，遂至渔阳，太守廉范击却之。
现代文：这一年，北匈奴进入云中，接着到达渔阳，太守廉范击退了敌人。
English: In this year, the Northern Xiongnu entered the clouds, then reached Yuyang, and the Great Guardian Liangfan repelled the enemy.

古文：诏遣使者高弘发三郡兵追之，无所得。
现代文：天子下诏书派使者高弘征调三郡的军队追赶，但一无所获。
English: Emperor Taizong sent an envoy, Gao Hong, to send troops from three counties to chase them, but nothing was found.

古文：建初元年，来苗迁济阴太守，以征西将军耿秉行度辽将军。
现代文：建初元年，来苗调任济阴太守，朝廷任命征西将军耿秉兼摄度辽将军。
English: At the beginning of the first year of Jian, Lai Miao was transferred to be the governor of Jiyin, and the imperial court appointed Geng Bing, the general of the Western Expedition, as well as Liao, the general of photography.

古文：时皋林温禺犊王复将众还居涿邪山，南单于闻知，遣轻骑与缘边郡及乌桓兵出塞击之，斩首数百级，降者三四千人。
现代文：当时皋林温禺犊王又率领部众回到涿邪山居住，南单于得知后，派轻装骑兵和沿边各郡以及乌桓的军队出塞攻打来苗，杀死了几百人，投降的有三四千人。
English: At that time, King Wenjun of Yulin led his people back to live in Shanzhanshan. After learning of this, Nan Dan sent light cavalry and troops from the counties along the border and Wuhuan to attack Miao, killing several hundred people, while three or four thousand surrendered.

古文：其年，南部苦蝗，大饥，肃宗禀给其贫人三万余口。
现代文：这一年，匈奴南部为蝗虫所苦，出现严重饥荒，肃宗给南部三万多贫困的人救济粮食。
English: In that year, the southern part of Hunnu suffered from locusts and severe famine, and Su Zong gave relief grain to more than thirty thousand poor people in the south.

古文：七年，耿秉迁执金吾，以张掖太守邓鸿行度辽将军。
现代文：七年，耿秉调任执金吾，朝廷任命张掖太守邓鸿兼摄度辽将军。
English: In the seventh year, Geng Bing was transferred to the position of acting King Wu, and the imperial court appointed Zhang Ye as the de facto ruler of Denghong and commander of Liao.

古文：八年，北匈奴三木楼訾大人稽留斯等，率三万八千人、马二万匹、牛、羊十余万，款五原塞降。
现代文：八年，北匈奴三木楼訾首领稽留斯等人率领三万八千人、带了两万匹马、十多万头牛羊，和五原边关投降。
English: In the eighth year, the Northern Xiongnu, the leader of the Three Wooden Towers, the leader of the Qilius, and others led thirty-eight thousand people, brought twenty thousand horses, more than one hundred thousand cattle and sheep, and surrendered to the Wuhara Border.

古文：元和元年，武威太守孟云上言北单于复愿与吏人合市，诏书听云遣驿使迎呼慰纳之。
现代文：元和元年，武威太守孟云上书说北单于又想与官吏百姓聚集贸易，天子下韶书听任孟云派遣驿使迎接招呼、慰问接纳北单于的人。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the Wuwei Dynasty, Meng Yun, the governor of Wuwei, wrote in a letter that Beidanyu also wanted to gather trade with officials and people, and the emperor sent an envoy to meet the greetings and condolences of the people who accepted Beidanyu.

古文：北单于乃遣大且渠伊莫訾王等，驱牛、马万余头来与汉贾客交易。
现代文：于是北单于派遣大且渠伊莫訾王等人赶着一万多头牛马前来同汉的商人互相交易。
English: As a result, the Northern Song Dynasty sent more than ten thousand oxen and horses to the Han merchants to trade with them.

古文：诸王大人或前至，所在郡县为设官邸，赏赐待遇之。
现代文：众王侯首领有时前来，他们所到的郡县为他们准备官舍，给他们赏赐和优待。
English: Princes and princes sometimes came, and the counties they visited prepared official residences for them, and gave them rewards and preferential treatment.

古文：南单于闻，乃遣轻骑出上郡，遮略生口，抄掠牛、马，驱还入塞。
现代文：南单于得知后，就派出轻装骑兵由上郡出发，拦截掠夺人口，抄掠牛马，驱赶入塞。
English: After learning of this, Nan Shan dispatched light cavalry from Shang County to intercept the plundering population, capture the cattle and horses, and drive them into the city.

古文：二年正月，北匈奴大人车利、涿兵等亡来入塞，凡七十三辈。
现代文：二年正月，北匈奴首领车利、涿兵等人逃亡入塞，总共有七十三起。
English: In the first month of the second year, the leaders of the Northern Huns, Che Li and He Bing, and others fled into Serbia, a total of 73 cases.

古文：时北虏衰耗，党众离畔，南部攻其前，丁零寇其后，鲜卑击其左，西域侵其右，不复自立，乃远引而去。
现代文：当时北部敌虏衰弱耗损，部众叛离，南部匈奴在前方攻打，丁零入侵他们的后方，鲜卑在左侧进攻，西域在右侧侵犯，北匈奴无法自立，只好远远地退走了。
English: At that time, the enemy in the north was weak and worn out, the troops were defecting, the southern Huns were attacking in the front, Ding Zi invaded their rear, Xianbei attacked on the left side, the western region invaded on the right side, the northern Huns could not stand on their own, and had to retreat far away.

古文：单于长立二十三年薨，单于汗之子宣立。
现代文：单于长在位二十三年去世，单于汗的儿子宣继位。
English: Shan Yuchang died in the 23rd year of his reign, and was succeeded by Shan Yuhan's son Xuan.

古文：伊屠於闾鞮单于宣，元和二年立。
现代文：伊屠于闾千单于宣，元和二年继位。
English: Itu died at the age of eighty-one, and was succeeded by Xuan in the first and second years of his reign.

古文：其岁，单于遣兵千余人猎至涿邪山，卒与北虏温禺犊王遇，因战，获其首级而还。
现代文：遣一年，单于派一千多士兵打猎，到了涿邪山，突然与北部温禺犊王相遇，因此双方交战，获得温禺犊王的首级回来。
English: One year later, he sent more than a thousand soldiers to hunt alone, and when he arrived at Shanzha Mountain, he suddenly met with the northern King of Wenzhou, so the two sides fought, and the head of King of Wenzhou came back.

古文：冬，孟云上言： 北虏以前既和亲，而南部复往抄掠，北单于谓汉欺之，谋欲犯塞，谓宜还南所掠生口，以慰安其意。 
现代文：冬天，孟云上书说： 北部敌虏以前已经和亲，但南部又去抄掠，北单于认为汉欺骗他们，商量想攻打边塞，臣认为最好将南部所抄掠去的人口归还北部，以便在心理上给他们安慰。 
English: In winter, Meng Yun wrote: The northern enemies had been friendly before, but the southern ones went to plunder again. The northern ones thought that Han deceived them and discussed attacking the border fortress. The minister thought that it was best to return the population plundered by the southern ones to the north in order to give them psychological comfort.

古文：肃宗从太仆袁安议，许之。
现代文：肃宗采纳太仆袁安的意见，同意了孟云的上书。
English: Su Zong adopted the opinion of the eunuch Yuan An and agreed to Meng Yun's petition.

古文：乃下诏曰： 昔猃狁、獯粥之敌中国，其所由来尚矣。
现代文：于是天子下诏书说： 从前殓狁、獯粥同中原大国敌对，从那以来很久了。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict issued by the emperor said: It has been a long time since, 粥 and the Central Plains countries became enemies.

古文：往者虽有和亲之名，终无丝发之效。
现代文：从前虽然有和亲的名义，最终没有丝毫的功效。
English: In the past, although there was the name of reconciliation, in the end it did not have the slightest effect.

古文：墝埆之人，屡婴涂炭。父战于前，子死于后。
现代文：生活在险要之处的百姓，多次遭受艰难困苦，父亲在前面作战，儿子在后面死去。
English: The people living in the most dangerous places have suffered many hardships, with fathers fighting in front and sons dying behind.

古文：弱女乘于亭障，孤兒号于道路。
现代文：柔弱的女子登上了边塞的岗亭堡垒，失去父母的孩子在路边号哭。
English: An effeminate woman climbed onto the guardhouse fort of the border fortress, and children who had lost their parents wailed on the roadside.

古文：老母寡妻设虚祭，饮泣泪，想望归魂于沙漠之表，岂不哀哉！
现代文：年老的母亲和寡居的妻子虚设祭祀，咽下泪水，想念盼望在沙漠之外的魂魄归来，难道不令人哀痛吗！
English: Isn't it sad to see an old mother and a widowed wife making false sacrifices, swallowing their tears, and longing for the return of the soul outside the desert!

古文：传曰： 江海所以能长百川者，以其下之也。 
现代文：书传说： 长江、大海所以能够成为百川的领袖，是因为长江、大海比其他河流都低下的缘故。 
English: Book legend: The reason why the Yangtze River and the sea can become the leader of a hundred rivers is because the Yangtze River and the sea are lower than other rivers.

古文：少加屈下，尚何足病？
现代文：稍许受屈卑下，有什么值得认为是耻辱呢？
English: What is there to be ashamed of in a little humiliation?

古文：况今与匈奴君臣分定，辞顺约明，贡献累至，岂宜违信，自受其曲？
现代文：何况现在与匈奴的君臣名分已经确定，匈奴言辞顺从，誓约明确，多次送来贡品，我们怎么能够违背信义，自己充当理亏的一面呢？
English: What's more, now that the sovereign's and vassal's status with the Xiongnu has been determined, the Xiongnu's words are obedient, the oath is clear, and the tribute has been sent many times, how can we violate the principle of good faith and act as the side that is at a disadvantage?

古文：其敕度辽及领中郎将庞奋倍雇南部所得生口，以还北虏。
现代文：敕令度辽将军和领中郎将庞奋将南部所获得的俘虏加倍偿还北部。
English: He ordered General Du Liao and his lieutenant to redouble their efforts to repay the North for the prisoners they had taken from the South.

古文：其南部斩首获生，计功受赏如常科。 
现代文：南部的人杀死北虏、获得俘虏，仍像往常的规定根据功劳给予奖赏。 
English: The southerners killed the northerners, took prisoners, and were still rewarded according to their merits as usual.

古文：于是南单于复令薁鞮日逐王师子将轻骑数千出塞掩击北虏，复斩获千人。
现代文：于是南单于又命令奠鞑逐王师子率领几千轻装骑兵出塞袭击北部敌虏，又杀死并俘获一千人。
English: Therefore, Nan Shan Yu also ordered Dian Rong Chuan Wang Shi Zi to lead several thousand light cavalry out of Tibet to attack the northern enemy, and killed and captured another thousand people.

古文：北虏众以南部为汉所厚，又闻取降者岁数千人。
现代文：北部的敌众认为南部被汉厚待，又听说每年都有几千人被俘获投降。
English: The enemy in the north believed that the south had been treated well by the Han, and it was said that several thousand people were captured and surrendered every year.

古文：章和元年，鲜卑入左地击北匈奴，大破之，斩优留单于，取其匈奴皮而还。
现代文：章和元年，鲜卑进入左部地区进攻北匈奴，大败北匈奴，杀了优留单于，剥下单于的皮带了回去。
English: In the first year of Zhang He, Xianbei entered the left area to attack the Northern Xiongnu, defeated the Northern Xiongnu, killed the superior one, and peeled off the belt of the Northern Xiongnu.

古文：北庭大乱，屈兰、储卑、胡都须等五十八部，口二十万，胜兵八千人，诣云中、五原、朔方、北地降。
现代文：北单于庭大乱，屈兰、储卑、胡都须等五十八部，二十万人口，其中能当兵作战的有八千人，到云中、五原、朔方、北地投降。
English: Beidanzan was in a great turmoil, Qu Lan, Zhubei, and Huduzu were in fifty-eight provinces, with a population of two hundred thousand, of which eight thousand were able to fight as soldiers, and they surrendered to Yunchu, Wuhuan, Shuo Fang, and Hokkien.

古文：单于宣立三年薨，单于长之弟屯屠何立。
现代文：单于宣在位三年去世，单于长的弟弟屯屠何立为单于。
English: Sun Yat-sen died three years into his reign, and Sun Yat-sen's younger brother, Tun Tuo, succeeded him.

古文：休兰尸逐侯鞮单于屯屠何，章和二年立。
现代文：休兰尸逐侯辊单于屯屠何，章和二年继位。
English: Shulan's corpse was found in Tuen Tu Ho, and he succeeded to the throne two years later.

古文：畤北虏大乱，加以饥蝗，降者前后而至。
现代文：当时北部敌虏大乱，加上蝗虫和饥饿，前来投降的人不断。
English: At that time, the enemy in the north was in chaos, with locusts and hunger, and people kept coming to surrender.

古文：南单于将并北庭，会肃宗崩，窦太后临朝。
现代文：南单于准备吞并北单于庭，正赶上肃宗去世，窦太后行使皇帝权力。
English: Nan Shan Yu was preparing to annex North Shan Yu Court, just in time for the death of Su Zong, and Empress Dowager Dou was exercising the power of the emperor.

古文：其年七月，单于上言：臣累世蒙恩，不可胜数。
现代文：这年七月，单于上书说：臣世代蒙受朝廷恩德，无法计算。
English: In July of the same year, Shan Yu wrote: "The number of vassals who have been favored by the imperial court cannot be counted.

古文：孝章皇帝圣思远虑，遂欲见成就，故令乌桓、鲜卑讨北虏，斩单于首级，破坏其国。
现代文：孝章皇帝谋虑深远，想建立功业，所以命令乌桓、鲜卑攻打北部敌虏，砍下单于的脑袋，进攻破坏他们的国家。
English: Emperor Xiaozhang had far-reaching considerations and wanted to build up his career, so he ordered Wuhuan and Xianbei to attack the northern enemy, cut off the head of Shan Yu, and attack and destroy their country.

古文：今所新降虚渠等诣臣自言： 去岁三月中发虏庭，北单于创刈南兵，又畏丁令、鲜卑、遁逃远去，依安侯河西。
现代文：现在刚刚投降的虚渠等人自己到臣这裹说： 去年三月中旬攻打北虏王庭，北单于被南部军队重创，又害怕丁令、鲜卑，就远远逃走，依傍安侯河西岸。
English: Now, those who have just surrendered, such as Wukong and others, came to me and said: In the middle of March last year, the North attacked the South's palace, and the North was badly hit by the South's army, and they were afraid of Dingling and inferiority, so they fled far away and stayed on the west bank of the Anhou River.

古文：今年正月，骨都侯等复共立单于异母兄右贤王为单于，其人以兄弟争立，并各离散。 
现代文：今年正月，骨都侯等人又一同立单于的异母兄右贤王为单于，北部的人因为兄弟争夺单于职位，都各自离心溃散。 
English: In the first month of this year, the half-brother Uxian Wang, who stood alone with Bone Du Hou and others, also stood alone, and the people in the north were separated from each other because the brothers were competing for the position.

古文：臣与诸王骨都侯及新降渠帅杂议方略，皆曰宜及北虏分争，出兵讨伐，破北成南，并为一国，令汉家长无北念。
现代文：臣同诸王、骨都侯以及刚刚投降来的首领一起商议谋略，都说应该趁着北部敌虏分裂争夺，出兵讨伐，击败北部，成全南部，合并为一个国家，使漠家永远不再为北方担忧。
English: The vassals discussed the strategy with the kings, feudal lords, and leaders who had just surrendered. They all said that they should take advantage of the northern enemy to divide and conquer, send troops to fight, defeat the north, complete the south, and merge into one country, so that the Mo family would never worry about the north.

古文：又今月八日，新降右须日逐鲜堂轻从虏庭远来诣臣，言北虏诸部多欲内顾，但耻自发遣，故未有至者。
现代文：又这个月的初八，刚投降的右须日逐鲜堂轻装从北单于庭远道前来投奔臣，说北部敌虏各部大多想归顺朝廷，但耻于自己主动投奔，所以没有人前来。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of this year, the right-hand side, which had just surrendered, came to the court from Beidan and Ting a long way in light clothing. They said that most of the enemy troops in the north wanted to surrender to the court, but they were ashamed of themselves for running away, so no one came.

古文：若出兵奔击，必有响应。
现代文：如果派兵急驰攻打，必然有人响应。
English: If you send troops to attack at breakneck speed, someone is bound to respond.

古文：今年不往，恐复并壹。
现代文：今年不派军队去，恐怕他们又合为一个整体。
English: They won't be sending troops this year, I'm afraid they're all back together again.

古文：臣伏念先父归汉以来，被蒙覆载，严塞明侯，大兵拥护，积四十年。
现代文：臣考虑先父投奔漠以来，蒙受朝廷恩德，为我们严守边关，设立侦候，派大军护持，长达四十年。
English: Considering that it has been forty years since my father fled to the desert, I have been favored by the imperial court, strictly guarded the border for us, set up reconnaissance, and sent a large army to escort.

古文：臣等生长汉地，开口仰食，岁时赏赐，动辄亿万，虽垂拱安枕，惭无报效之地。
现代文：臣等在汉地方长大，张口就吃到粮食，一年四季得到的赏赐，动辄用亿万计算，虽然垂衣拱手，安然入睡，但惭愧的是，没有根据义报答并效力于朝廷。
English: The vassals who grew up in the Han region ate food with open mouths, and the rewards they received throughout the year were often calculated in the hundreds of millions. Although they threw off their robes and fell asleep peacefully, they were ashamed that they had no basis to repay their kindness and serve the imperial court.

古文：愿发国中及诸部故胡、新降精兵，遣左谷蠡王师子、左呼衍日逐王须訾将万骑出朔方，左贤王安国、右大且渠王交勒苏将万骑出居延，期十二月同会虏地。
现代文：臣愿意征调国内以及各部原属胡人的刚投降的精兵，派左谷蠡王师子、左呼衍日逐王须訾率领一万多骑兵由朔方出发，左贤王安国、右大且渠王交勒苏率领一万骑兵由居延出发，约定在十二月份一起在北匈奴会合。
English: The minister is willing to conscript the elite soldiers who have just surrendered in the country and in various departments originally belonging to the Hu people, and send more than 10,000 cavalrymen led by Zuo Gu Shao Wang Shizi and Zuo Hu Yan Ri to leave from the Shuo side, and Zuo Xian Wang An Guo, and Zuo Dai and Qu Wang Jia Le Su led 10,000 cavalrymen to leave from Jiyan, and agreed to meet together in North Hun in December.

古文：臣将余兵万人屯五原、朔方塞，以为拒守。
现代文：臣率领剩下的一万兵力驻守五原、朔方边关，作为抵御和防守。
English: The vassal led the remaining ten thousand troops stationed in Wuhuan and Shuofang Border Pass, as a defense and defense.

古文：臣素愚浅，又兵众单少，不足以防内外。
现代文：臣素来愚昧浅薄，加上兵力缺乏，不足以防守内外。
English: The vassals have always been stupid and shallow, and the lack of troops is not enough to defend both inside and outside.

古文：愿遣执金吾耿秉、度辽将军邓鸿及西河、云中、五原、朔方、上郡太守并力而北，令北地、安定太守各屯要害，冀因圣帝威神，一举平定。
现代文：希望朝廷派执金吾耿秉、度辽将军邓鸿以及西河、云中、五原、朔方、上郡太守合力北征，使北地太守和安定太守各自驻守要害地方，希望能凭藉圣明皇帝的神威，一举平定北部。
English: It is hoped that the imperial court will send Jinwu Gengbing, Du Liao's general Deng Hong, and the governors of Xihe, Yunzhong, Wuhuan, Shuo Fang, and Shanggun to join forces in the Northern Expedition, so that the governor of the North and the governor of stability will each be stationed in key areas. It is hoped that with the authority of Emperor Shengming, the north will be pacified at one stroke.

古文：臣国成败，要在今年。
现代文：臣之国家的胜败，基本就在今年。
English: The victory or defeat of a vassal state is basically due to this year.

古文：已敕诸部严兵马，讫九月龙祠，悉集河上。
现代文：臣已经吩咐各部整肃兵马，到九月祭祀天神的时候，全部在黄河岸边集结。
English: The minister has ordered all departments to clean up the soldiers and horses, and by the time of the September worship of the gods, they will all be assembled on the banks of the Yellow River.

古文：唯陛下裁哀省察！
现代文：希望陛下体察哀情予以裁断！
English: I hope His Majesty will judge them with compassion!

古文：太后以示耿秉。
现代文：太后将单于的奏章给耿秉看。
English: The empress dowager showed Geng Bing the score of the solo.

古文：秉上言： 昔武帝单极天下，欲臣虏匈奴，未遇天时，事逐无成，宣帝之世，会呼韩来降，故边人获安，中外为一；生人休息，六十余年。
现代文：耿秉进言说： 从前武帝穷极天下的力量，想使匈奴臣服，没有赶上好的时机，事情最终没有成功。宣帝时代，正好呼韩邪前来投降，所以边境的百姓得到安宁，内外成为一家，百姓得以休养生息六十多年。
English: Geng Bing said, "Once upon a time, Emperor Wu used all the power in the world to subjugate the Xiongnu, but he did not have a good time, and things did not work out in the end. In the era of Emperor Xuan, it was just the right time to call on the Han Dynasty to surrender, so the people on the border enjoyed peace and became one family both at home and abroad, and the people were able to rest and recuperate for more than 60 years.

古文：及王莽篡位，变更其号，耗扰不止，单于乃畔。
现代文：到王莽篡位，改变匈奴的称号，无休止地消耗骚扰他们，单于遣才背叛。
English: He usurped the throne to Wang Mang, changed the title of Xiongnu, harassed them endlessly, and only betrayed them by sending them away.

古文：光武受命，复怀纳之，缘边坏郡得以还复。
现代文：光武禀受天命，又对匈奴安抚接纳，沿边被破坏的各郡才得以恢复。
English: The counties along the border that were destroyed were only able to recover after Guangwu Yao accepted the mandate of heaven and appeased the Xiongnu.

古文：乌桓、鲜卑，咸胁归义。威镇四夷，其效如此。
现代文：乌桓、鲜卑都想归顺德义，威震四方的夷人，其功效达到如此境地。
English: Wuhuan, Xianbei all want to return to Shun Deyi, and the powerful four-sided barbarian, its effect has reached such a situation.

古文：今幸遭天授，北虏分争，以夷伐夷，国家之利，宜可听许。 
现代文：现在幸运的是赶上天赐良机，北部的敌虏分裂相争，以夷攻夷，对国家有利，应该答应。 
English: Now, fortunately, we have a heaven-sent opportunity to catch up. The enemies in the north are divided and fighting each other. It is good for the country to fight with the barbarians, and we should agree to it.

古文：秉因自陈受恩，分当出命效用。
现代文：耿秉接着自己说受到恩遇，按理应该为国家献身出力。
English: Geng Bing went on to say that he was favored and should have devoted himself to the country.

古文：太后从之。
现代文：太后同意了他的请求。
English: The Queen Mother complied.

古文：永元元年，以秉为征西将军，与车骑将军窦宪率骑八千，与度辽兵及南单于众三万骑，出朔方击北虏，大破之。
现代文：永元元年，任命耿秉为征西将军，与车骑将军窦宪率领八千骑兵，加上度辽将军的部队以及南单于的部众有三万骑兵，出朔方进攻北部敌虏，大败北匈奴。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, Geng Bing was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition, and he and the cavalry general Dou Xian led eight thousand cavalrymen, plus the troops of General Du Liao and the troops of Nan Shan Yu had thirty thousand cavalrymen. They attacked the enemy in the north and defeated the Northern Huns.

古文：北单于奔走，首虏二十余万人。
现代文：北单于逃走，被俘获的有二十多万人。
English: Beidan fled, and more than two hundred thousand people were captured.

古文：事已具《窦宪传》。
现代文：事情已经详细记载在《窦宪传》。
English: The matter has been recorded in detail in the Dou Xianzhong.

古文：二年春，邓鸿迁大鸿户，以定襄太守皇甫棱行度辽将军。
现代文：二年春天，邓鸿升为大鸿胪，朝廷任命定襄太守皇甫棱兼摄度辽将军。
English: In the spring of the second year, Deng Hongsheng was promoted to Dahongye, and the imperial court appointed Ding Xiang as the dean of the imperial court and the general of Liao.

古文：南单于复上求灭北庭，于是遣左谷蠡王师子等将左右部八千骑出鸡鹿塞，中郎将耿谭遣从事将护之。
现代文：南单于又上书请求消灭北单于庭，于是派左谷蠡王师子等人率领左部和右部的八千骑兵由鶸鹿塞出境，中郎将耿谭派从事卫护南匈奴的军队。
English: Nan Shan Yu also sent a letter requesting the annihilation of Bei Shan Yu Court, so he sent Zuo Gu Shao Shi Zi and others to lead the left and right eight thousand cavalry out of the country by the mule, and the middle man sent Geng Tan to engage in the defense of the southern Hun army.

古文：至涿邪山，乃留辎重，分为二部，各引轻兵两道袭之。
现代文：到涿邪山，他们就留下辎重，分为两部，各自带轻装部队分两路袭击。
English: When they arrived at Shanzhai Mountain, they left behind the heavy baggage train and divided it into two parts, each with light-armed troops to attack in two directions.

古文：左部北过西海至河云北，右部从匈奴河水西绕天山，南度甘微河，二军俱会，夜围北单于。
现代文：左部向北经过西海到达河云北面，右部从匈奴河的西面绕过天山，向南渡过甘微河，两军相会，夜间包围了北单于。
English: The left side went north through the West Sea to the northern side of the He Yun River, and the right side went around Tian Shan from the western side of the Xiongnu River and crossed the Gan Wei River to the south. The two armies met and surrounded Beidanwu at night.

古文：单于大惊，率精兵千余人合战。
现代文：北单于大惊，率领一千多精兵会战。
English: Beidan was stunned and led more than a thousand elite soldiers into battle.

古文：单于被创，堕马复上，将轻骑数十遁走，仅而免脱。
现代文：单于受伤落马，但又上马，率领几十名骑兵轻装逃走，仅能脱逃而已。
English: He was wounded and fell off his horse, but he got back on and led dozens of lightly armed cavalrymen to escape. He was only able to escape.

古文：得其玉玺，获阏氏及男女五人，斩首八千级，生虏数千口而还。
现代文：获得单于的玉玺，抓住了板氏及其五个儿女，杀死八千人，俘虏了几千人回来。
English: Obtained the Jade Scepter of Zanyu, captured the Ban and his five sons and daughters, killed eight thousand people, captured several thousand people and returned.

古文：是时南部连克获纳降，党众最盛，领户三万四千，口二十三万七千三百，胜兵五万一百七十。故事：中郎将置从事二人，耿谭以新降者多，上增从事十二人。
现代文：当时南部连续获胜，得到俘虏，接纳投降的人，所以部众最为强盛，统管着三万四千户，人口达二十三万七千三百人，能够当兵作战的有五万零一百七十人旧例中郎将下面设两名从事，耿谭因为新投降的人很多，上书要求增加从事到十二人。
English: At that time, the south won consecutive victories, captured prisoners, and accepted those who surrendered, so the army was the most powerful. It controlled 34,000 households, with a population of 237,300 people. There were 50,170 people who could fight as soldiers. In the old case, two middlemen would be engaged below, but because there were many new surrenders, Geng Tan requested to increase the number of people engaged to twelve.

古文：三年，北单于复为右校尉耿夔所破，逃亡不知所在。
现代文：三年，北单于再次被右校尉耿夔打败，不知逃到什么地方去了。
English: In the third year, Bei Shan Yu was once again defeated by Right Lieutenant Geng Yao, and I don't know where he fled to.

古文：其弟右谷蠡王於降鞬自立为单于，将右温禺鞬王、骨都侯已下众数千人，止蒲类海，遣使款塞。
现代文：他的弟弟右谷蠡王于隆缰自立为单于，率领右温禺鞑王、骨都侯以下的部众有几千人，住在蒲类海，派使者叩关归附。
English: His younger brother, Ugu Ying Wang, established himself in Yulongyi. He led several thousands of followers, including Uwen Ying Wang and Bone Du Hou, who lived in Putuohai and sent envoys to annex Baiguan.

古文：大将军窦宪上书，立於除鞬为北单于，朝廷从之。
现代文：大将军窦宪上书，要求立于除鞑为北单于，朝廷采纳了这个意见。
English: The general Dou Xian wrote a letter, demanding the removal of the shackles and the unification of the north and the south, and the court accepted this opinion.

古文：四年，遣耿夔即授玺绶，赐玉剑四具，羽盖一驷，使中郎将任尚持节卫护屯伊吾，如南单于故事。
现代文：四年，派耿夔前去授给单于玺绶，赏给他四把玉剑，一辆四马驾的马车，上有翠羽作装饰的车盖，并且像南单于时的旧例一样，派中郎将任尚持符节驻守伊吾，保护北单于。
English: In the fourth year, he sent Geng Yao to bestow four jade swords and a four-horse carriage with a decorated lid on Shan Yu to Shan Yu, and as was the case with Nan Shan Yu, he sent Zhong Lang to stay in Igu to protect Bei Shan Yu.

古文：方欲辅归北庭，会窦宪被诛。
现代文：正想帮助单于回到北单于庭，赶上窦宪被杀。
English: He was just trying to help Shan Yu return to the North Shan Yu Court and catch up with Dou Xian when he was killed.

古文：五年，於除鞬自畔还北，帝遣将兵长史王辅以千余骑与任尚共追，诱将还斩之。破灭其众。
现代文：五年，于除鞑自己反叛回到北部，皇帝派将兵长史玉盐率一千多骑兵和任尚一同追赶，将于除鞑引诱带回，杀了他，消灭了他的部众。
English: In the fifth year, after Zhu Di rebelled and returned to the north, the emperor sent the commander Shi Yuyan with more than a thousand cavalry to chase and lure Zhu Di back, killing him and eliminating his subordinates.

古文：单于屯屠何立六年薨，单于宣弟安国立。
现代文：单于屯屠何在位六年去世，单于宣的弟弟安国继位。
English: Shan Yu Tun Tu He died after six years on the throne and was succeeded by Shan Yu Xuan's younger brother, An Guo.

古文：单于安国，永远五年立。
现代文：单于安国，永元五年立为单于。
English: Alone in An Guo, Yongyuan five years established as alone in.

古文：安国初为左贤王而无称誉。
现代文：安国起初担任左贤王但不被人赞誉。
English: At first, An Guo served as Zuoxian King, but he was not praised.

古文：左谷蠡王师子素勇黠多知，前单于宣及屯屠何皆爱其气决，故数遣将兵出塞，掩击北庭，还受赏赐，天子亦加殊异。
现代文：左谷蠡王师子一向勇猛聪慧，多智谋，前任单于宣和屯屠何都喜爱他的果敢有魄力，所以多次派他率兵出塞袭击北单于庭，他回来后就受到赏赐，天子也对他另眼看待。
English: Zuo Gu Shao Wang Shi Zi has always been brave, intelligent, and resourceful. His predecessor Shan Yu Xuan and Tun Tuo loved him for his courage and bravery. Therefore, he repeatedly sent him and his soldiers to attack Beidan and the court. He was rewarded after his return, and the Son of Heaven also looked at him differently.

古文：是以国中尽敬师子，而不附安国。
现代文：所以国内的人都敬重师子，而不归附安国。
English: Therefore, people in the country respect their teachers and students, but do not attach themselves to An Guo.

古文：安国由是疾师子，欲杀之。
现代文：安国因此忌恨师子，想杀掉他。
English: As a result, An Guo hated his mentor and wanted to kill him.

古文：其诸新降胡初在塞外，数为师子所驱掠，皆多怨之。
现代文：那些刚投降的胡人当初在塞外，多次受到师子的驱赶抄掠，大多也怨恨师子。
English: Those Hu people who had just surrendered had been driven out and plundered many times by their mentors outside of Tibet, and most of them also resented their mentors.

古文：安国因是委计降者，与同谋议。
现代文：安国因此委用投降来的人，和他们一同密谋计议。
English: Therefore, An Guo appointed some people who had surrendered to conspire and discuss with them.

古文：安国既立为单于，师子以次转为左贤王，觉单于与新降者有谋，乃别居五原界。
现代文：安国已经立为单于，师子按顺序改为左贤王，他发觉单于和刚投降的人有阴谋，于是另外住到五原边境。
English: An Guo had already been set up for Shanyu, and his teachers and students were changed to Zuoxian Wang in order. He discovered that Shanyu had a conspiracy with the people who had just surrendered, so he also lived on the Wuhuan border.

古文：单于每龙会议事，师子辄称病不往。
现代文：单于每次龙庭聚会商量事情，师子总是藉口生病不去。
English: However, at every Dragon Courtyard gathering to discuss matters, the master and disciple always use the excuse of being ill.

古文：皇甫棱知之，亦拥护不遣，单于怀愤益甚。
现代文：皇甫棱知道后，也保护他，不派他去，单于更加怀恨。
English: When the Empress Dowager Ren found out, she also protected him and did not send him, which only made him more resentful.

古文：六年春，皇甫棱免，以执金吾朱徽行度辽将军。
现代文：六年春天，皇甫棱被免去职位，朝廷任命执金吾朱徽兼摄度辽将军。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Emperor Furen was removed from his post, and the imperial court appointed General Liao, who was in charge of Jinwuzhu and photography.

古文：时单于与中郎将杜崇不相平，乃上书告崇，崇讽西河太守令断单于章，无由自闻。
现代文：当时单于与中郎将杜崇不和，就上书告杜崇，杜崇暗示西河太守，要他扣下单于的奏章，使他没办法让朝廷听到他的意见。
English: At that time, Shanyu was at odds with his middle brother, Du Chong, and sent a letter to Du Chong. Du Chong hinted to the governor of the West River that he should withhold Shanyu's petition, so that he would not be able to let the court hear his opinion.

古文：而崇因与朱徽上言： 南单于安国疏远故胡，亲近新降，欲杀左贤王师子及左台且渠刘利等。
现代文：杜崇却趁机与朱徽上书说： 南单于安国疏远原有的胡人，同刚投降的人亲近，想杀掉左贤王师子以及左台且渠刘利等人。
English: Du Chong, however, took the opportunity to write a letter to Zhu Hui, saying: Nan Shan in An Guo has alienated the original Hu people, is close to those who just surrendered, and wants to kill Zuo Xian Wang's disciple and Zuo Tai and Qu Liu Li and others.

古文：又右部降者谋共迫胁安国，起兵背畔，诸西河、上郡、安定为之儆备。 
现代文：而且右部投降的人谋划一同胁迫安国起兵背叛，请西河、上郡、安定作好防备。 
English: Moreover, those on the right who had surrendered were planning to conspire to force An Guo to raise an army and betray the state, and they asked Xihe, Shangguan, and Ding'an to be on the alert.

古文：和帝下公卿议，皆以为 蛮夷反覆，虽难测知，然大兵聚会，必未敢动摇。
现代文：和帝将奏章交给公卿大臣商议，大家都认为 蛮夷反覆无常，虽然难于推测知悉，但大军聚集，他们必定不敢乱动。
English: And the emperor handed the record to the nobles and ministers for discussion. Everyone thought that the barbarians were capricious. Although it was difficult to speculate, they knew that a large army had gathered, and they must not dare to move.

古文：今宜遣有方略使者之单于庭，与杜崇、朱徽及西河太守并力，观其动静。
现代文：现在最好派有谋略的使者到单于庭，与杜崇、朱徽及西河太守合力察看其动静。
English: Now it is best to send an emissary with a strategy to Shan Yu Court, and work with Du Chong, Zhu Hui and Xihe Taishou to observe its movements.

古文：如无它变，可令崇等就安国会其左右大臣，责其部众横暴为边害者，共平罪诛。
现代文：如果没有其他变故，可以命令杜崇等人到安国处，召集单于身边的大臣，责备单于部众中为害边境的残暴之徒，共同评议他们的罪行。
English: If there are no other changes, Du Chong and others can be ordered to go to the State Security Office, call together the ministers who are alone, blame the cruel people who harm the border among the ministers, and jointly discuss their crimes.

古文：若不从命，令为权时方略，事毕之后，裁行客赐，亦足以威示百蛮 。
现代文：如果他们不肯听从，要杜崇他们采用权变的方法，等事情结束以后，以主客的礼节考虑给以赏赐，这也可以向百蛮展示声威 。
English: If they don't listen, encourage them to use the power of persuasion, and reward them after the event with the courtesy of the host and guest, which can also show respect to the barbarians.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了这个意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：于是徽、崇遂发兵造其庭。
现代文：于是朱徽、杜崇就发兵抵达单于庭。
English: As a result, Zhu Hui and Du Chong sent troops and arrived in Shan Yu Court.

古文：安国夜闻汉军至，大惊，弃帐而去，因举兵及将新降者欲诛师子。
现代文：安国夜裹听说汉军到达，大为震惊，丢下帐篷离去，接着率领军队和刚投降的胡人想去杀掉师子。
English: On the night of the arrival of the Han army, An Guo was shocked, left his tent and left, and then led the army and the Hu people who had just surrendered to kill his mentor.

古文：师子先知，乃悉将庐落入曼柏城。
现代文：师子事先得知，就率领整个部落进入曼柏城。
English: Knowing this in advance, the disciple led the entire tribe into Manpo City.

古文：安国追到城下，门闭不得入。
现代文：安国追到城下，城门关闭，没法进城。
English: An Guo chased them to the foot of the city. The city gate was closed, and they were unable to enter the city.

古文：朱徽遣吏晓譬和之，安国不听。
现代文：朱徽派官吏晓谕安国，为他们和解，安国不理。
English: Zhuhui sent officials to tell An Guo to reconcile with them, but An Guo ignored them.

古文：城既不下，乃引兵屯五原。
现代文：既然攻不下曼柏城，安国就率兵驻守五原。
English: Since Manpo Castle could not be taken, An Guo led his troops to garrison Wuhuan.

古文：崇、徽因发诸郡骑追赴之急，众皆大恐，安国舅骨都侯喜为等虑并被诛，乃格杀安国。
现代文：杜崇、朱徽因此征调各郡的骑兵追赶安国，追得很紧，安国的部众都非常恐慌，安国的舅舅骨都侯喜为等人担心一道被杀，就将安国给格杀了。
English: Du Chong and Zhu Hui therefore conscripted and dispatched cavalry from all counties to chase An Guo. The chase was very tight, and An Guo's subordinates were very panicked. An Guo's uncle and uncle, Bone Prince Xi, and others were worried that they would be killed together, so they killed An Guo.

古文：安国立一年，单于之子师子立。
现代文：安国在位一年，单于适的儿子师子继位。
English: After one year of An Guo's reign, Shan Yu Shi's son Shizi succeeded to the throne.

古文：亭独尸逐侯鞮单于师子，永元六年立。
现代文：亭独尸逐侯千单于师子，永元六年立为单于。
English: The sole corpse of Ting was found in every ten thousand villages, and Yongyuan was established in the sixth year of the year.

古文：降胡五六百人夜袭师子，安集掾王恬将卫护士与战，破之。
现代文：投降来的五六百胡入夜间偷袭师子，安集掾王恬率领护卫单于的士兵与他们交战，打败了他们。
English: Five or six hundred capricious soldiers who had surrendered attacked their masters at night, and the soldiers of Andijan Wangye, who led the escort, fought with them and defeated them.

古文：于是新降胡遂相惊动，十五部二十余万人皆反畔，胁立前单于屯屠何子薁鞬日逐王逢侯为单于，遂杀略吏人，燔烧邮亭庐帐，将车重向朔方，欲度漠北。
现代文：逭时新投降的胡人就互相惊动，十五部二十多万人全都反叛，强迫立前任单于屯屠何的儿子奠鞑逐王逢侯为单于，接着就杀害掠夺官吏百姓，烧毁驿馆和帐篷，带了辎重向朔方方向进发，打算北越沙漠。
English: At that time, the newly-surrendered Hu people startled each other, and more than 200,000 people in 15 provinces all rebelled, forced the son of the previous ruler, Tuan Yu, Tuan Tu Ho, to be the ruler of the North Vietnamese desert, and then killed and plundered officials and people, burned down the Tuan Pavilion and tents, and set off with heavy loads in the direction of Shuo Fang, intending to desert the North Vietnamese desert.

古文：于是遣行车骑将军邓鸿、越骑校尉冯柱、行度辽将军朱徽将左右羽林、北军五校士及郡国积射、缘边兵，乌桓校尉任尚将乌桓、鲜卑，合四万人讨之。
现代文：朝廷于是派行车骑将军邓鸿、越骑校尉冯柱、行度辽将军朱徽率领左右羽林军、北军五校的士兵和郡国的寻迹追捕兵、沿边各郡的部队，乌桓校尉任尚率领乌桓、鲜卑的部队，合起来有四万人，攻打叛军。
English: The imperial court then sent the cavalry general Deng Hong, the cavalry captain Feng Zhu of the Yue, and the general Zhu Hui of the general Liao to lead the left and right Ulin army, the soldiers of the five schools of the Northern Army, the tracing soldiers of the county, and the troops of the counties along the border, and the Wuhuan captain Ren Shang led the Wuhuan and Xinbei troops, with a total of 40,000 people, to attack the rebels.

古文：时南单于及中郎将杜崇屯牧师城，逢侯将万余骑攻围之，未下。
现代文：当时南单于和中郎将杜崇驻守牧师城，逢侯率领一万多骑兵进攻包围牧师城，攻不下来。
English: At that time, Nan Shan Yu and Zhong Lang stationed Du Chong in the vicarage, and Feng Hou led more than ten thousand cavalry to attack and encircle the vicarage, but could not conquer it.

古文：冬，邓鸿等至美稷，逢侯乃乘冰度隘，向满夷谷。
现代文：冬天，邓鸿等人到达美稷，逢侯于是由冰上越过险要处，向满夷谷退去。
English: In winter, Deng Hong and others arrived at Meilun, and then they crossed the dangerous place on the ice and retreated to Mengyi Valley.

古文：南单于遣子将万骑，及杜崇所领四千骑，与邓鸿等追击逢侯于大城塞，斩首三千余级，得生口及降者万余人。
现代文：南单于派儿子率领一万骑兵以及杜崇所统领的四千骑兵，与邓鸿等人追击在大城塞的逢侯，杀死三千多人，掳获的以及投降的有一万多人。
English: Nan Shan Yu sent his son to lead ten thousand cavalry and Du Chong led four thousand cavalry. Together with Deng Hong and others, they pursued the rendezvous in the citadel, killed more than three thousand people, and captured and surrendered more than ten thousand people.

古文：冯柱复分兵追击其别部，斩首四千余级。
现代文：冯柱又分兵追击逢侯的其他部，又杀死四千多人。
English: Fengzhu's detachments also pursued Feng Hou's other troops, killing more than four thousand people.

古文：任尚率鲜卑大都护苏拔、乌桓大人勿柯八千骑，要击逢侯于满夷谷，复大破之。
现代文：任尚率领鲜卑大都护苏拔魔、乌桓首领勿柯的八千骑兵，拦截在满夷谷的逢侯，又一次大败敌人。
English: Eight thousand cavalrymen led by Ren Shang, who guarded Su Bajiao, the capital of Xianbei Province, and Wuhuan, the leader of Wuhuan, intercepted the ambush in Mengyi Valley, and once again defeated the enemy.

古文：前后凡斩万七千余级。
现代文：前后一共杀敌一万七千多人。
English: In total, more than 17,000 people were killed.

古文：逢侯遂率众出塞，汉兵不能追。
现代文：逢侯于是率领部众出塞，汉军没法追赶。
English: As a result, Feng Hou led his troops out of the fortress, and the Chinese army was unable to catch up.

古文：七年正月，军还。
现代文：七年正月，大军班师。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, the large-scale military class division was formed.

古文：冯柱将虎牙营留屯五原，罢遣鲜卑、乌桓、羌胡兵、封苏拔为率众王，又赐金、帛。
现代文：冯柱率领虎牙营留在五原驻守，遣散鲜卑、乌桓、羌胡的部队，封苏拔魔为率众王，又赏赐给他金帛。
English: Feng Zhu led the Tiger's Tooth Battalion to stay in Wuhan and stationed there, dismissed the troops of Xianbei, Wuhuan, and Yanhu, made Su Badu the leader of the kings, and rewarded him with gold ingots.

古文：邓鸿还京师，坐逗留失利，下狱死。后帝知朱徽、杜崇失胡和，又禁其上书，以致反畔，皆征下狱死，以雁门太守庞奋行度辽将军。
现代文：邓鸿回到京师，由于逗留而失去战机，被下在狱中而死，后来皇帝得知朱徽、杜崇和胡人不和，又阻止单于上书，造成单于反叛，将他们都征召到京，下在狱中而死，朝廷任命雁门太守庞奋兼摄度辽将军。
English: Deng Hong returned to the Beijing Division, lost his fighter plane due to his stay, and was sentenced to death in prison. Later, the emperor learned that Zhu Hui, Du Chong and Hu did not get along, and prevented Shan Yu from writing a letter, causing Shan Yu to rebel. They were all conscripted to Beijing and sentenced to death in prison. The court appointed Ganmen Taishou Pang Fen and shot General Liao.

古文：逢侯于塞外分为二部，自领右部，屯涿邪山下。左部屯朔方西北，相去数百里。
现代文：逢侯在境外分为两部，他自己统领右部驻守涿邪山下，左部驻扎在朔方的西北，两部相距几百里。
English: Feng Hou was divided into two parts outside the country. He himself commanded the right part, stationed at the foot of Mount Qi, and the left part was stationed in the northwest of Shuo Fang. The two parts are several hundred miles apart.

古文：八年冬，左部胡自相疑畔，还入朔方塞，庞奋迎受，慰纳之。
现代文：八年冬天，左部的胡人相互猜疑而背叛，回到朔方塞，庞奋迎接他们并对他们慰问接纳。
English: In the winter of eight years ago, the Hu people on the left betrayed each other out of mutual suspicion and returned to Shuo Fang Ce. They were greeted enthusiastically and received with condolences.

古文：其胜兵四千人，弱小万余口，悉降，以分处北边诸郡。
现代文：其中能够作战的有四千人，体弱年幼的有一万多口，全都投降，朝廷将他们分别安置在北部边境的各个郡。
English: Four thousand of them were able to fight, and more than ten thousand were frail and young. All of them surrendered, and the imperial court placed them separately in various counties along the northern border.

古文：南单于以其右温禺犊王乌居战始与安国同谋，欲考问之。乌居战将数千人遂复反畔，出塞外山谷间，为吏民害。
现代文：南单于因为右温禺犊王乌居战起初与安国同谋，想拷问乌居战，乌居战因此率领几千人再次反叛，到塞外的居泉逃 鲭太山谷间，为害官吏百姓。
English: Nan Shan initially conspired with An Guo to torture Wu Juan, because he was a right-wing warlord. Wu Juan led thousands of people to rebel again, and fled to Jiuquan outside the Soviet Union, between the valleys of the Yangtze River, to harm officials and the people.

古文：秋，庞奋、冯柱与诸郡兵击乌居战，其众降，于是徙乌居战众及诸还降者二万余人于安定、北地。
现代文：秋天，庞奋、冯柱与各郡的部队攻打乌居战，乌居战的部众投降，于是将乌居战的部众以及其他回来投降的二万多人迁移到安定、北地居住。
English: In the autumn, Pangfen, Fengzhu and the troops from various counties fought the Battle of Wuji, and the subordinates of the Battle of Wuji surrendered, so the subordinates of the Battle of Wuji and other more than 20,000 people who came back to surrender were relocated to the stable and lived in the north.

古文：冯柱还，迁将作大匠。
现代文：冯柱回来后，升任将作大匠。
English: After Fengzhu's return, he will be promoted to the position of grandmaster.

古文：逢侯部众饥穷，又为鲜卑所击，无所归，窜逃入塞者骆驿不绝。
现代文：逢侯的部众饥饿穷困，又遭到鲜卑攻打，走投无路，逃进塞内的人骆驿不绝。
English: The followers of Feng Hou were starving and impoverished, and they were also attacked by the lowly. They were cornered, and those who fled into the Seine were inundated with people.

古文：单于师子立四年薨，单于长之子檀立。
现代文：单子师子在位四年去世，单于长的儿子檀继位。
English: Shan Zi Shi Zi died four years into his reign, and was succeeded by Shan Yu Long's son, Dan.

古文：万氏尸逐鞮单于檀，永元十年立。
现代文：万氏尸逐千单于檀，永元十年立为单于。
English: Thousands of Man's corpses were piled up in the sandalwood, and in the 10th year of Yongyuan, they were piled up again.

古文：十二年，庞奋迁河南尹，以朔方太守王彪行度辽将军。
现代文：十二年，庞奋调任河南尹，朝廷任命朔方太守王彪兼摄度辽将军。
English: In the 12th year, Pang Fen was transferred to Yin of Henan Province, and the imperial court appointed Wang Biao, the governor of Shuo Province, as well as Liao, the general in charge of photography.

古文：南单于比岁遣兵击逢侯，多所虏获，收还生口前后以千数，逢侯转困迫。
现代文：南单于连续几年派兵攻打逢侯，获得很多俘虏和其他东西，前后收回来的人口用千计算，逢侯变得越发窘迫。
English: Nan Shan sent troops to attack Fenhou for several years in a row, gained a lot of prisoners and other things, the population recovered before and after was calculated in thousands, and Fenhou became more and more distressed.

古文：十六年，北单于遣使诣阙贡献，愿和亲，修呼韩邪故约。
现代文：十六年，北单于派使者到朝廷进献贡品，想和亲，缔结呼韩邪从前的盟约。
English: Sixteen years later, the Northern Song Dynasty sent an envoy to the imperial court to offer tribute, and wanted to make peace and conclude the old alliance with South Korea.

古文：和帝以其旧礼不备，未许之，而厚加赏赐，不答其使。
现代文：和帝因为从前的礼数不具备，没有答应，但给北单于很多赏赐，不派使者作为答礼。
English: Emperor He did not grant the former number of courtesies, but gave Beidan a lot of rewards and did not send an envoy as a reply.

古文：元兴元年，重遣使诣敦煌贡献，辞以国贫未能备礼，愿请大使，当遣子入侍。
现代文：元兴元年，北单于隆重派使者到敦煌进献物品，说国家贫穷，不能准备丰足的礼物，希望朝廷派出大使，他将派儿子入朝侍奉。
English: In the first year of the era of prosperity, Beidan sent an envoy to Dunhuang to present gifts, saying that the country was poor and could not prepare rich gifts. He hoped that the imperial court would send an ambassador, who would send his son to serve the imperial court.

古文：时邓太后临朝，亦不答其使，但加赐而已。
现代文：当时邓太后掌管朝廷权力，也没有应答北单于的使者，衹给予赏赐而已。
English: At that time, Empress Dowager Deng was in charge of the power of the imperial court, and she did not respond to the envoys of Beidan Yu, but only gave rewards.

古文：永初三年夏，汉人韩琮随南单于入朝，既还，说南单于云： 关东水潦，人民饥饿死尽，可击也。 
现代文：永初三年夏天，汉人韩琮跟随南单于入朝，回去以后，他游说南单于道： 关东发生大水灾，老百姓全都饿死了，可以趁机进攻。 
English: In the summer of the 3rd year of the Yongzheng era, Han Zheng, a Han Chinese, followed Nanshan Yu into the imperial court. After returning home, he lobbied Nanshan Yu: A great flood occurred in Kanto, and the common people all died of starvation, so they could take advantage of the opportunity to attack.

古文：单于信其言，遂起兵反畔，攻中郎将耿种于美稷。
现代文：单于相信了他的话，就发兵反叛，攻打在美稷的中郎将耿种。秋天，王彪去世。
English: Just because he believed his words, he sent troops to rebel and attack Geng Zeng, the middle-ranking official in Meili. In the autumn, Wang Biao died.

古文：秋，王彪卒。冬，遣行车骑将军何熙、副中郎将庞雄击之。
现代文：冬天，朝廷派行车骑将军何熙、副中郎将庞雄攻打单于。
English: In winter, the imperial court sent the chariot-riding general He Xi and the vice-governor to attack Pang Xiong singly.

古文：四年春，檀遣千余骑寇常山、中山，以西域校尉梁行度辽将军，与辽东太守耿夔击破之。
现代文：四年春天，檀派一千多骑兵入侵常山、中山，朝廷以西域校尉梁懂兼摄度辽将军，与辽东太守耿夔打败了敌人。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, more than a thousand cavalrymen were sent to invade Changshan and Zhongshan. The imperial court sent Lieutenant Liang Guan (梁懂) from the western region to supervise General Liao, and he defeated the enemy with Liao Dong Taishu (遼东太守) Geng Yao.

古文：事已具《》、《夔传》。
现代文：事情已经详细记载在《梁懂传》和《耿夔传》。
English: The events have been recorded in detail in the "Biographies of Liang Guotong" and "Biographies of Geng Xuan."

古文：单于见诸军并进，大恐怖，顾让韩琮曰： 汝言汉人死尽，今是何等人也？ 
现代文：单于看到汉军队各路同时推进，非常恐怖，回头责问韩琮说： 你说汉人都死光了，现在都是从哪来的人？ 
English: Just seeing the Han army advancing on all roads at the same time was very scary. He turned around and scolded Han Yu, saying, "You said that all the Han people are dead. Where are all the people coming from now?"

古文：乃遣使乞降，许之。
现代文：于是派使者乞求投降，汉军同意了。
English: So they sent an envoy to beg for surrender, and the Han army agreed.

古文：单于脱帽徒跣，对庞雄等拜，陈道死罪。
现代文：单于脱去帽子，光着双脚，对着庞雄等人跪拜，说自己犯了死罪。
English: He just took off his hat, barefoot, and bowed down to Pang Xiong and others, saying that he had committed a capital crime.

古文：于是赦之，遇待如初，乃还所抄汉民男女及羌所略转卖入匈奴中者，合万余人。
现代文：朝廷于是赦免了单于，仍像当初一样对待他，单于将掳掠去的汉男女百姓和被羌人掳掠去而辗转卖到匈奴的汉人合起来有一万多人归还汉。
English: The imperial court then pardoned Shan Yu and still treated him the same way as before. More than 10,000 Han men and women who had been abducted and sold to the Xiongnu were returned to Han.

古文：五年，梁免，以云中太守耿夔行度辽将军。
现代文：五年，梁懂被免去官职，朝廷任命云中太守耿夔兼行度辽将军。
English: In the fifth year, Liang Guan was removed from his official position, and the imperial court appointed Yunzhong Daju Geng Yao concurrently as Du Liao general.

古文：无初元年，夔免，以乌桓校尉邓遵为度辽将军。
现代文：元初元年，耿夔被免去职务，朝廷任命乌桓校尉邓遵为度辽将军。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Geng Yao was relieved of his duties, and the imperial court appointed Wu Huan's lieutenant, Deng Zun, as General Du Liao.

古文：遵，皇太后之从弟，故始为真将军焉。
现代文：邓遵是皇太后的堂弟，所以才成为真正的度辽将军。
English: Deng Zun was the cousin of the Empress Dowager, so he became the real General Du Liao.

古文：四年，逢侯为鲜卑所破，部众分散，皆归北虏。
现代文：四年，逢侯被鲜卑打败，部众分散，都投奔北部。
English: In four years, Feng Hou was defeated by Xianbei, his followers dispersed, and they all fled to the north.

古文：五年春，逢侯将百余骑亡还，诣朔方塞降，邓遵奏徙逢侯于颍川郡。
现代文：五年春天，逢侯率领一百多骑兵逃了回来，到朔方边关投降，郑遵上书将逢侯迁到颖川郡居住。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Feng Hou led more than a hundred cavalrymen to escape and returned to surrender at the Shuo Fang border, and Zheng Zun wrote to move Feng Hou to live in Yingchuan County.

古文：建光元年，邓遵免，复以耿夔代为度辽将军。
现代文：建光元年，邓遵被免去职位，朝廷再次以耿夔接任度辽将军。
English: In the first year of Jianguang, Deng Zun was dismissed from his post, and the imperial court once again appointed Geng Yao to succeed General Du Liao.

古文：时鲜卑冠边，夔与温禺犊王呼尤徽将新降者连年出塞，讨击鲜卑。
现代文：当时鲜卑入侵边境，耿夔同温禺犊王呼尤徽率领刚投降的人连年出边关征讨鲜卑。
English: At that time, the Xianbei invaded the border, and Geng Xuan, together with Wen Xuan Wang and Hu Youhui, led the people who had just surrendered to go abroad for several years to collect the Xianbei.

古文：还，复各令屯列冲要。
现代文：班师以后，又命令各部把守险要的地方。
English: After the formation, he also ordered the various departments to guard the necessary places.

古文：而耿夔征发烦剧，新降者皆悉恨谋畔。
现代文：但耿夔频繁征调这些人，所以新投降的人都心怀怨恨，商量反叛。
English: However, Geng Xuan frequently conscripted and transferred these people, so the newly-surrendered people harbored resentment and discussed rebellion.

古文：单于檀立二十七年薨，弟拔立。
现代文：单于檀在位二十七年去世，他的弟弟拔立为单于。
English: Dang Shan died in the 27th year of his reign, and his younger brother Bu Li became Dang Shan.

古文：耿夔复免，以太原太守法度代为将军。
现代文：耿夔再次被免职，朝廷任命太原太守法度接任度辽将军。
English: Geng Yao was dismissed again, and the imperial court appointed Taiyuan Taizhong Du to succeed General Du Liao.

古文：乌稽侯尸逐鞮单于拔。延光三年立。
现代文：乌稽侯尸逐凝单于拔，延光三年立为单于。
English: The corpse of Uchi Hou was gradually condensed into a single block, and the three-year extension was a single block.

古文：夏，新降一部大人阿族等遂反畔，胁呼尤徽欲与俱去。呼尤徽曰： 我老矣，受汉家恩，宁死不能相随！ 
现代文：夏天，刚投降的一部首领阿族等人反叛，胁迫呼尤徽，想要他一道离开，呼尤徽说： 我已经老了，蒙受汉的恩德，我宁愿死也不能跟你们走！ 
English: In the summer, a group of ethnic Albanian leaders who had just surrendered rebelled and tried to coerce Khuyuhi into leaving with them. Khuyuhi said, "I'm too old, I've been blessed by Han, I'd rather die than go with you!"

古文：众欲杀之，有救者，得免。
现代文：那些人想杀掉他，有人相救，呼尤徽得以免死。
English: Those people wanted to kill him, someone came to his rescue, and he was able to avoid death.

古文：阿族等遂将妻子辎重亡去，中郎将马翼遣兵与胡骑追击，破之，斩首及自投河死者殆尽，获马、牛、羊万余头。
现代文：阿族等人于是率领妻子儿女和辎重逃走，中郎将马翼派部队和胡人的骑兵追击阿族，打败了阿族，阿族的人马差不多全部被杀或者自己投河而死。获得的马、牛、羊有一万多头。
English: The Albanians and others then led their wives and children and their baggage to flee. The middlemen chased the horse-winged troops and the cavalry of the Hu people against the Albanians and defeated the Albanians. Almost all the Albanian men and horses were killed or died themselves by falling into the river. More than 10,000 horses, cattle and sheep were obtained.

古文：冬，法度卒。
现代文：冬天，法度去世。
English: In the winter, Fatou passed away.

古文：四年，汉阳太守傅众代为将军。
现代文：四年，汉阳太守傅众接任将军。
English: Four years later, Hanyang governor Fu Zong took over as general.

古文：其冬，傅众复卒。
现代文：这年冬天傅众又去世。
English: This winter, Fu Zong passed away again.

古文：永建元年，以辽东太守庞参代为将军。
现代文：永建元年，朝廷任命辽东太守庞参接任将军。
English: In the first year of the Yongjian era, the imperial court appointed the governor of Liaodong Province, Pang San, to succeed him as general.

古文：先是，朔方以西障塞多不修复，鲜卑因此数冠南部，杀渐将王。
现代文：在此以前朔方以西的堡垒要塞大多没有修复，因此鲜卑多次入侵南部，杀害了渐将王。
English: Prior to this, most of the fortresses to the west of Shuo Fang had not been repaired, so Xianbei repeatedly invaded the south and killed Emperor Qian.

古文：单于忧恐，上言求复障塞，顺帝从之。
现代文：单于担忧恐惧，上书要求恢复堡垒要塞，顺帝同意了。
English: Out of sheer concern and fear, he wrote a letter asking for the fortress to be restored, and Emperor Shun agreed.

古文：乃遣黎阳营兵出屯中山北界，增置缘边诸郡兵，列屯塞下，教习战射。
现代文：于是朝廷派黎阳营的部队外出驻守中山北部边界，给边境各郡增设部队，在边塞布列屯兵，教士兵们练习打仗射箭。
English: As a result, the imperial court sent troops from the Liyang Battalion to garrison the northern border of Zhongshan, added troops to the border counties, stationed soldiers at the border, and taught soldiers to practice fighting and archery.

古文：单于拔立四年薨，弟休利立。
现代文：单于拔在位四年去世，他的弟弟休利继位。
English: Zangba died four years into his reign, and was succeeded by his brother Huili.

古文：去特若尸逐就单于休利，永建三年立。
现代文：去特若尸逐就单于休利，永建三年立为单于。
English: If the corpse is taken away, it will be left alone in Xuli, and if it is built for three years, it will be left alone in Zeng.

古文：四年，庞参迁大鸿胪，以东平相宋汉代为度辽将军。
现代文：四年，庞参升为大鸿胪，朝廷任命束平相宋汉接任度辽将军。
English: In the fourth year, Pang Sang-sheng was promoted to Da Hongtao, and the imperial court appointed Sok Ping-sang Song Han to succeed General Du Liao.

古文：阳嘉二年，汉迁太仆，以乌桓校尉耿晔代为度辽将军。
现代文：阳嘉二年，宋汉升为太仆，朝廷任命乌桓校尉耿晔接任度辽将军。
English: In the second year of Yang Jia, Song Han was promoted to the position of eunuch, and the imperial court appointed Wu Huan's lieutenant Geng Yao to succeed General Du Liao.

古文：永和元年，晔病征，以护羌校尉马续代为度辽将军。
现代文：永和元年，耿晔因病被朝廷征召，护羌校尉马续接任度辽将军。
English: In the first year of the Yonghe era, Geng Yao was called up by the imperial court due to illness, and Colonel Ma Zouyi successively took over as General Du Liao.

古文：五年夏，南匈奴左部句龙王吾斯、车纽等背叛，率三千余骑寇西河，因复招诱右贤王，合七八千骑围美稷，杀朔方、代郡长史。
现代文：五年夏天，南匈奴左部句龙王吾斯、车纽等人反叛，率领三千多骑兵入侵西河，接着又招引右贤王，合起来有七八千骑兵包围美稷，杀害了朔方和代郡的长史。
English: In the summer of the fifth year of the Southern Xiongnu, the left wing of the Southern Xiongnu rebelled, led more than three thousand cavalrymen to invade the West River, and then attracted the right-hand king. A total of seven or eight thousand cavalrymen surrounded Meili and killed the long history of Shuo Fang and Dayi County.

古文：马续与中郎将梁并、乌桓校尉王元，发缘边兵及乌桓、鲜卑、羌胡，合二万余人，掩击破之。
现代文：马续与中郎将梁并、乌桓校尉王元征调边境的部队以及乌桓、鲜卑、羌胡的兵力合起来有二万多人，出其不意，袭击并打败了敌人。
English: Ma Zhe and his lieutenant Liang Bin, Wu Huan's lieutenant Wang Yuan and the border troops, as well as Wu Huan's, Xianbei's and Yan Hu's troops, totaled more than 20,000 people, and attacked and defeated the enemy by surprise.

古文：吾斯等遂更屯聚，攻没城邑。
现代文：吾斯等人接着重新聚集，攻陷城邑。
English: Us and the others then regrouped and attacked the city.

古文：天子遣使责让单于，开以恩义，令相招降。
现代文：天子派使者责备单于，宣明恩德和信义，要单于招叛军投降。
English: The Son of Heaven sent an envoy to reproach Shan Yu, to proclaim benevolence and righteousness, and to invite the rebels to surrender.

古文：单于本不豫谋，乃脱帽避帐，诣并谢罪。
现代文：单于并未参加谋划，他脱去帽子，让出帐篷，到梁并处请罪。
English: However, he did not participate in the plan. He took off his hat, gave up his tent, and went to Liang to plead guilty.

古文：并以病征，五原太守陈龟代为中郎将。
现代文：梁并因为被征召，五原太守陈龟接任中郎将。
English: As Liang was conscripted, Chen Gui, the 5th Dalai Lama, took over as the second-in-command.

古文：龟以单于不能制下，逼迫之，单于及其弟左贤王皆自杀。
现代文：陈龟认为单于未能管好部下，就逼迫单于，单于和弟弟左贤王都自杀了。
English: Chen Zhe believed that if he failed to manage his subordinates well, he would persecute them, and both he and his brother Zuoxian Wang committed suicide.

古文：单于林利立十三年。
现代文：单于休利在位十三年。
English: He was only 13 years into his reign.

古文：龟又欲徙单于近亲于内郡，而降者遂更狐疑。
现代文：陈龟又想将单于的近亲迁到内地郡县，因而投降的人就更加起疑。
English: Chen Zhe also wanted to move the close relatives of Shan Yu to the inland counties, which made the surrendering people even more suspicious.

古文：龟坐下狱免。
现代文：陈龟因此被下在狱中，免去职位。
English: As a result, Chen Zhe was sent to prison and removed from his post.

古文：大将军梁商以羌胡新反，党众初合，难以兵服，宜用招降，乃上表曰： 匈奴寇畔，自知罪极。穷鸟困兽，皆知救死，况种类繁炽，不可单尽。今转运日增，三军疲苦，虚内给外，非中国之利。
现代文：大将军梁商认为羌胡新近反叛，徒众刚刚聚合，很难用武力制服。最好用招降的办法，于是呈上奏章说： 匈奴入侵反叛，知道自己犯了死罪，鸟兽走投无路的时候，都知道救自己的性命，何况匈奴种族繁衍兴旺，不可能全部被消灭现在粮食转运日益增多，三军疲惫劳苦，使国内空虚而用在境外，这对中原没有好处。
English: General Liang Shang thought that it was difficult to use force to subdue the newly-rebellious Xiong Hu, and that it was best to use the method of inviting surrender, so he submitted a report saying: The Huns invaded and rebelled, knowing that they had committed a capital crime. When the birds and beasts were cornered, they all knew how to save their own lives. Moreover, the Huns were a thriving race, and it was impossible for all of them to be wiped out. Now that grain transportation was increasing, and the three armies were exhausted, it was no good for the Central Plains to empty the country and use it abroad.

古文：窃见度辽将军马续素有谋谟，且典边日久，深晓兵要，每得续书，与臣策合。
现代文：臣看度辽将军马续一向有谋略，而且长期负责边境，深通用兵的精要，每次接到马续的信，他都与臣的计策相合。
English: According to the vassal, General Ma Zhe always has a strategy, and has been in charge of the border for a long time. Every time he receives a letter from Ma Zhe, he is in line with the vassal's strategy.

古文：宜令续深沟高壁，以恩信招降，宣示购赏，明其期约。
现代文：最好命令马续挖深壕沟，增高壁垒，用恩德和信义招降匈奴，公开悬赏，讲明共同信守的事项。
English: It is best to order the horses to dig deep trenches, increase the height of the barriers, invite the Huns to surrender with benevolence and good faith, publicly offer rewards, and clarify the matters of common adherence.

古文：如此，则丑类可服，国家无事矣。 
现代文：这样，就能使这些种族归服，国家就可平安无事了。 
English: In this way, these races can be subdued, and the country can be safe.

古文：帝从之，乃诏续招降畔虏。
现代文：天子采纳了他的意见，于是下诏书要马续招降反叛的匈奴人。
English: The emperor accepted his opinion, and issued an edict to recruit rebellious Huns.

古文：商又移书续等曰： 中国安宁，忘战日久。
现代文：梁商又致信给马续等人说： 中原安定，忘记打仗已经很长时间了。
English: Liang Shang also sent a letter to Ma Cui and others saying: Central Plains is stable, and it has been a long time since the war was forgotten.

古文：良骑野合，交锋接矢，决胜当时，戎狄之所长，而中国之所短也。
现代文：精良的骑兵在野外会合，兵刃格斗，箭矢相接，当下决定胜负，这是戎狄的擅长但却是中原士卒的短处。
English: Excellent cavalrymen meet in the field, fight with swords and arrows, and decide the outcome at the moment. This is the strength of the army, but it is the weakness of the soldiers in Central Plains.

古文：强弩乘城，坚营固守，以待其衰，中国之所长，而戎狄之所短也。
现代文：使用强劲的弓弩，登越城墙，凭藉牢固的营垒进行坚守，等待敌人衰弱，这是中原士卒的擅长但却是戎狄的短处。
English: Using strong bows and arrows, climbing over city walls, holding out against a strong fortress, and waiting for the enemy to weaken are the strengths of Nakahara's soldiers, but the weaknesses of the army.

古文：宜务先所长，以观其变，设购开赏，宣示反悔，勿贪小功，以乱大谋。 
现代文：应该先尽力发挥自己的长处，以观察对方的变化，设立悬赏并公开赏赐，向匈奴人宣明展示他们可以悔改，不要贪图小的功绩，而破坏了大的谋略。 
English: One should first try to use one's own strengths to observe the changes in the other side, set up a reward and publicly reward, show the Huns that they can repent, and do not covet small merits, but destroy the big strategy.

古文：续及诸郡并各遵行。
现代文：马续和各郡都按照梁商的话去做。
English: In succession, all counties followed Liang Shang's words.

古文：于是右贤王部抑鞮等万三千口诣续降。
现代文：这样，右贤王的部属抑鞑等一万三千人前来向马续投降。
English: In this way, thirteen thousand people, including the subordinates of King Ugyen, came forward to surrender to Ma sequentially.

古文：秋，句龙吾斯等立句龙王车纽为单于。
现代文：秋天，句龙吾斯等人立句龙王车纽为单于。
English: In the autumn, Gu Longwu and others set up the Gu Longwang cart as a single unit.

古文：东引乌桓，西收羌戎及诸胡等数万人，攻破京兆虎牙营，杀上郡都尉及军司马，遂寇掠并、凉、幽、冀四州。
现代文：吾斯向东招引乌桓，向西收聚羌戎和各部胡人，总共有几万人，打败了京兆的虎牙营，杀害了上郡的都尉和军司马，接着入侵抄掠并州、凉州、幽州、冀州四个州。
English: Wuxi recruited Wuhuan to the east, and gathered Qiong Rong and various Hu people to the west, a total of tens of thousands of people, defeated the Huya camp of Jing Zhao, killed the captain and secretary of the army of Shang County, and then invaded and plundered the four states of Anhui, Liangzhou, Yuzhou and Jizhou.

古文：乃徙西河治离石，上郡治夏阳，朔方治五原。
现代文：于是朝廷将西河的郡府移到离石，上郡的郡府移到夏阳，朔方的郡府移到五原。
English: As a result, the imperial court moved the county seat of Xihe to Shishi, the county seat of Shang to Xiayang, and the county seat of Shuofang to Wuhuan.

古文：冬，遣中郎将张耽将幽州乌桓诸郡营兵，击畔虏车纽等，战于马邑，斩首三千级，获生口及兵器、牛、羊甚众。
现代文：冬天，派中郎将张耽率领幽州乌桓的部队和各郡兵营的部队，攻打叛敌车纽等人，在马邑交战，杀敌三千人，俘获的人口、武器和牛羊非常多。
English: In winter, he sent Zhong Lang to Zhang Tan to lead the troops of Yuzhou Wu Huan and the troops of the county barracks to attack the traitor Chenyu and others, and fought in Mayi, killing three thousand of the enemy, and captured a large number of people, weapons, cattle and sheep.

古文：车纽等将诸豪帅骨都侯乞降，而吾斯犹率其部曲与乌桓寇抄。
现代文：车纽等人率领各部首领、骨都侯乞求投降，但吾斯仍然率领部众与乌桓人马入侵边境，进行抄掠。
English: Chenyu and others led the leaders of the various ministries and the bone capital to beg for surrender, but Gus still led the ministry and the Wuhuan people to invade the border and plunder.

古文：六年春，马续率鲜卑五千骑到穀城击之，斩首数百级。
现代文：六年春天，马续率领五千鲜卑骑兵到谷城攻打吾斯，杀了几百人。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, Ma Henan led five thousand cavalry to Gu Cheng to attack Gus, killing several hundred people.

古文：张耽性勇锐，而善抚士卒，军中皆为用命。
现代文：张耽生性勇猛果敢，又善于抚恤士兵，所以军中士兵都愿意为他卖命。
English: Zhang Dangsheng is brave and courageous, and is good at nursing soldiers, so soldiers in the army are willing to work for him.

古文：遂绳索相悬，上通天山，大破乌桓，悉斩其渠帅，还得汉民，获其畜生财物。
现代文：他们用绳索连结，彼此悬吊上去，直通翻过天山，大败乌桓，将他们的主要首领全部杀死，夺回汉朝的百姓，获得很多牲畜财物。
English: They tied ropes together, suspended themselves from each other, climbed straight up the Tianshan Mountain, defeated Wuhuan, killed all their main leaders, recaptured the Han people, and obtained many livestock and property.

古文：夏，马续复免，以城门校尉吴武代为将军。
现代文：夏天，马续再次被免职，朝廷任命城门校尉吴武接任将军。
English: In the summer, Ma Zhi was dismissed again, and the imperial court appointed Shingmen Lieutenant Wu Wu to succeed him as general.

古文：汉安元年秋，吾斯与薁鞮台耆、且渠伯德等复掠部。
现代文：汉安元年秋天，吾斯与奠千台耆、且渠伯德等人又一次抄掠并州地区。
English: In the autumn of Han'an in the first year of the Heian period, we, together with Dian Qian Taiyu and Qiu Baode, once again plundered and annexed the prefecture.

古文：呼兰若尸逐就单于兜楼储先在京师，汉安二年立之。
现代文：呼兰若尸逐就单于兜楼储以前在京师，漠安二年被立为单于。
English: Hulan Ruo Zhi Bi was established in Beijing before it was stored in a warehouse, while Muan Ruo Bi was established two years later.

古文：天子临轩，大鸿胪持节拜授玺绶，引上殿。
现代文：天子亲临殿堂，大鸿胪持符节拜授单于玺绶，引他上殿。
English: The Son of Heaven himself came to the hall of fame, and the Great Dragon, holding the Festival of the Characters, worshipped the Great Dragon and led him to the hall of fame.

古文：赐青盖驾驷、鼓车、安车、驸马骑、玉具刀剑、什物，给彩布二千匹。
现代文：天子赐给单于有青色车篷四马驾驭的马车、鼓车、可以坐着的小车、副车马匹、柄身和用白玉制成的刀剑以及各种杂物，给予二千匹彩帛。
English: The Son of Heaven bestowed on the four-horse carriage with a blue canopy, the drum car, the carriage that can be sat in, the horses of the second carriage, the hilt and the sword made of white jade, as well as various miscellaneous items, and gave two thousand colored horses.

古文：赐单于阏氏以下金锦错杂具，軿车马二乘。
现代文：赐给单于辟氏以下的人金、彩色丝帛和各种器具，还有两辆供妇女乘坐四周有屏蔽的车子及马匹。
English: Money, coloured silk scarves and various utensils, as well as two covered carts and horses for women, were given to those below the rank of Shan Yubi.

古文：遣行中郎将持节护送单于归南庭。
现代文：又派行中郎将持符节护送南单于回到南单于庭。
English: In addition, a middle-ranking official was dispatched to escort Nan Shan back to Nan Shan's court.

古文：诏太常、大鸿胪与诸国侍子于广阳城门外祖会，飨赐作乐，角抵百戏。
现代文：天子下诏书要太常、大鸿胪与各国的侍子在广阳城门外面聚会送行，举行宴会赏赐，演出歌舞，和角抵百戏。
English: According to the emperor's edict, it is very important that the great dragon dragon and the attendants from all over the world gather outside the gate of Guangyang City to see them off, hold a banquet to reward them, perform songs and dances, and arrive at a hundred plays.

古文：顺帝幸胡桃宫临观之。
现代文：顺帝亲临胡桃宫观看。
English: Emperor Shun came to the Walnut Palace to watch the performance.

古文：冬，中郎将马寔募刺杀句龙吾斯，送首洛阳。
现代文：冬天，中郎将马塞招募人刺杀了句龙吾斯，将他的首级送到洛阳。
English: In winter, Zhong Lang assassinated Gu Longwu, the recruiter of Ma Xie, and sent his head to Luoyang.

古文：建康元年，进击余党，斩首千二百级。
现代文：建康元年，马塞进兵攻打吾斯的其他同伙，杀敌一千二百人。
English: In the first year of Jiankang, Ma Xie marched into the army and attacked other comrades of Gus, killing twelve hundred of the enemy.

古文：乌桓七十万余口皆诣寔降，车重、牛、羊，不可胜数。
现代文：乌桓七十多万人口都来向马窠投降，带来的辎重和牛羊无法计算。
English: More than 700,000 people from Wuhu and Hunan came to surrender to Ma'an, bringing an incalculable amount of grain, cattle and sheep.

古文：单于兜楼储立五年薨。
现代文：单于兜楼储在位五年去世。
English: He died just five years into his reign.

古文：伊陵尸逐就单于居车兒，建和元年立。
现代文：伊陵尸逐就单于居车儿，建和元年立为单于。
English: The removal of the dead bodies from Yiling was done by Juche alone, and the establishment of Jianhe in the first year of the Heian period was done by Juche alone.

古文：至永寿元年，匈奴左薁鞬台耆、且渠伯德等复畔，寇抄美稷、安定，属国都尉张奂击破降之。
现代文：到永寿元年，匈奴左奠千台耆、且渠伯德等人又一次反叛，入侵抄掠美稷、安定，属国都尉张奂击败了台耆、伯德，迫其投降。
English: In the first year of Yongshu, the Xiongnu Zuo Dian Qian Taiwu, Qiu Baode and others once again rebelled, invaded and plundered the beauty and stability, and the vassal captain Zhang Qian defeated the Taiwu and Baode and forced them to surrender.

古文：事已具《奂传》。
现代文：事情已记载在《张奂传》。
English: The incident has been recorded in the "Zhang Yuxuan."

古文：延熹元年，南单于诸部并畔，遂与乌桓、鲜卑寇缘边九郡，以张奂为北中郎将讨之，单于诸部悉降。
现代文：延熹元年，南单于各部全都反叛，接着与乌桓、鲜卑入侵沿边的九个郡朝廷任命张奂为北中郎将征讨敌人，单于各部全部投降。
English: In the first year of Yancheng, Nan Shan rebelled in all provinces, and then, with Wuhuan and Xinbei invading the nine counties along the border, the imperial court appointed Zhang Ye as the Northern Middle Lord to conquer the enemy, and all provinces surrendered.

古文：奂以单于不能统理国事，乃拘之，上立左谷蠡王。
现代文：张奂以为单子没有能力统管治理国家事务，就把他关了起来，上书请立左谷蠡王为单于。
English: Zhang Ye thought that the list did not have the ability to supervise and manage state affairs, so he locked him up, and sent a letter to request the establishment of Zuo Guo Wang as a list.

古文：桓帝诏曰： 《春秋》大居正，居车一心向化，何罪而黜！
现代文：桓帝下韶书说： 《春秋》推崇遵循正道，居车儿一心归服，有什么罪而遭废黜！
English: Emperor Kuan's imperial edict said: "Spring and Autumn" advocated following the right path, the villagers surrendered wholeheartedly, what is the crime and was dethroned!

古文：其遣还庭。 
现代文：希望将他送还单于庭。 
English: They hope to send him back to solitary confinement.

古文：单于居车立二十五年薨，子某立。
现代文：单于居车儿在位二十五年去世，他的儿子继位。
English: His son succeeded him after the death of his father, who had reigned for 25 years.

古文：屠特若尸逐就单于某，熹平元年立。
现代文：屠特若尸逐就单于某，熹平元年立为单于。
English: If the death of Tu Te Rong was due to a single event, the death of Xing Ping in the first year of the year was due to a single event.

古文：六年，单于与中郎将臧出雁门击鲜卑檀石槐，大败而还。
现代文：六年，单于与中郎将臧曼由雁门出关攻打鲜卑的檀石槐，结果大败而归。
English: In the sixth year, Sanyu and Churo sent Shiman out of the wild goose gate to attack the inferior sandalwood raft, but were soundly defeated.

古文：是岁，单于薨，子呼徵立。
现代文：造一年，单于去世，他的儿子呼征继位。
English: He died a year later and was succeeded by his son.

古文：单于呼徵，光和元年立。
现代文：单于呼征，光和元年立为单于。
English: Alone in the call, the light and the first year stand alone.

古文：二年，中郎将张脩与单于不相能，脩擅斩之，更立右贤王羌渠为单于。
现代文：二年，中郎将张脩与单于合不来，擅自杀掉了呼征，改立右贤王羌渠为单于。
English: In the second year, the middle brother couldn't reconcile Zhang Ye with Shan Yu, so he killed himself without permission, and replaced Uxian Wang Xuanqiu with Shan Yu.

古文：脩以不先请而擅诛杀，槛车征诣廷尉抵罪。
现代文：张脩因为不事先请示而擅自杀死单于，朝廷用囚车召他到廷尉那裹接受治罪。
English: Zhang Ye killed himself because he did not ask for permission in advance, and the court summoned him in a prison van to the palace to be punished.

古文：单于羌渠，光和二年立。
现代文：单于羌渠，光和二年立为单于。
English: Alone in the canal, light and two years stand alone.

古文：中平四年，前中山太守张纯反畔，遂率鲜卑寇边郡。
现代文：中平四年，前任中山太守张纯反叛，接着率领鲜卑人马入侵边郡。
English: In the fourth year of Zhongping, the predecessor Zhongshan Taishou Zhang Chun rebelled, and then led the Xianbei people to invade Bian County.

古文：灵帝诏发南匈奴兵，配幽州牧刘虞讨之。
现代文：灵帝下诏书征调南匈奴的兵力，调给幽州牧刘虞率领，攻打张纯。
English: Emperor Ling issued an edict to conscript the troops of the Southern Xiongnu and sent them to Yuzhou, led by Liu Yu, to attack Zhang Chun.

古文：单于遣左贤王将骑诣幽州。国人恐单于发兵无已，五年，右部落与休著各胡白马铜等十余万人反，攻杀单于。
现代文：单于派左贤王率骑兵前往幽州国内的人害怕单于没完没了的发兵，在中平五年，右郡酽落和休着各胡白马铜等十多万人反叛，进攻杀害了单于。
English: The people in Yuzhou were afraid of the endless dispatching of troops by the king Zuoxian alone. In the middle of the Five Years' War, more than one hundred thousand people rebelled and attacked and killed the king Zuoxian alone.

古文：单于羌渠立十年，子右贤王於扶罗立。
现代文：单于羌渠在位十年，他的儿子右贤王于扶罗继位。
English: His son, King Ugyen, who reigned for ten years, succeeded to the throne in Guro.

古文：持至尸逐侯单于於扶罗，中平五年立。国人杀其父者遂畔，共立须卜骨都侯为单于，而於扶罗诣阙自讼。
现代文：持至尸逐侯单于于扶罗，中平五年立为单于国内的人反叛，杀害了他的父亲，一同立须卜骨都侯为单于。于扶罗自己到朝廷上诉。
English: Holding up the corpse, he chased away the vassal lord in Furo, Zhongping five years later rebelled against the vassal lord in the country, killed his father, and together they rebelled against the vassal lord in Furo. In Furo, he himself appealed to the imperial court.

古文：会灵帝崩，天下大乱，单于将数千骑与白波贼合兵寇河内诸郡。
现代文：正赶上灵帝去世，天下大乱，单于率几千骑兵与白波贼寇进犯河内各郡。
English: Just in time for the death of Emperor Lingdi, the world was in turmoil, and he alone led several thousand cavalry and White Wave bandits to invade the counties of Hanoi.

古文：时民皆保聚，抄掠无利，而兵遂挫伤。
现代文：当时百姓都聚众防守，须卜抄掠未得到好处，兵力反而受到挫伤。
English: At that time, the people were all gathered to defend themselves. They did not benefit from the looting and pillaging, but the troops were injured.

古文：复欲归国，国人不受，乃止河东。
现代文：须卜又想回国，但国内的人不接受，他只好住在河东。
English: Sub also wanted to return home, but the people in the country did not accept it, so he had to live in Hedong.

古文：须卜骨都侯为单于一年而死，南庭遂虚其位，以老王行国事。
现代文：须卜骨都侯当了一年单于就死了，南单于庭因此单于位置空缺，由年老的王侯掌管国内事务。
English: Subotsu died a year later, leaving the position vacant and the elderly prince in charge of domestic affairs.

古文：单于於扶罗立七年死，弟呼厨泉立。
现代文：单于于扶罗在位七年死去，他的弟弟呼厨泉继位。
English: When Fu Luo died after seven years on the throne, his younger brother Hukouquan succeeded to the throne.

古文：单于呼厨泉，兴平二年立。
现代文：单于呼厨泉，兴平二年立为单于。
English: Singly in Hokkien Spring, and singly in Xingping for two years.

古文：以兄被逐，不得归国，数为鲜卑所抄。
现代文：由于其兄于扶罗被驱逐，无法回国，因而多次受到鲜卑的抄掠。
English: Since his brother was expelled from Guro and was unable to return to China, he was repeatedly subjected to despicable pillage.

古文：建安元年，献帝自长安东归，右贤王去卑与白波贼帅韩暹等待卫天子，拒击李、郭汜。
现代文：建安元年，献帝从长安东归，右贤王去卑与白波贼帅韩暹等人护卫天子，抵抗攻打李催、郭汜。
English: In the first year of Jian'an, Emperor Xian returned from Chang'an to the east, and the Right Wise King and the White Thief Han Siem and others escorted Tianzi and resisted the attack of Li Xai and Guo Wei.

古文：及车驾还洛阳，又徙迁许，然后归国。
现代文：等天子回到洛阳，又迁都到许县，去卑这才回国。
English: When Tianzi returned to Luoyang, he moved the capital to Xu County, and only then did he return to China.

古文：二十一年，单于来朝，曹操因留于鄴，而遣去卑归监其国焉。
现代文：二十一年，单于前来朝拜，曹操趁机将他留在邺县，而派去卑回国管理南匈奴。
English: In the twenty-first year, when Duan came to pay homage, Cao Cao took the opportunity to keep him in Jixian and sent him back to China to manage the Southern Xiongnu.

古文：论曰： 汉初遭冒顿凶黠，种众强炽。
现代文：论曰：汉初，赶上冒顿凶残狡猾，种族强盛兴旺。
English: It said: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, the brutality and cunning caught up with the arrogance, and the race was strong and prosperous.

古文：高祖威加四海，而窘平城之围。
现代文：高祖威震天下，然而在平城被围受窘。
English: Gaozu was the most powerful man in the world, yet he was surrounded and humiliated in Pingcheng.

古文：太宗政邻刑措，不雪愤辱之耻。
现代文：太宗政治清干，刑罚得当，没有去雪洗耻辱，发泄愤怒。
English: Too much politics, not enough punishment, not enough washing of shame, not enough venting of anger.

古文：逮孝武亟兴边略，有志匈奴，赫然命将，戎旗星属，候列郊甸，火通甘泉，而犹鸣镝扬尘，出入畿内，至于穷竭武力，单用天财，历纪岁以攘之。
现代文：到孝武皇帝屡次开拓边疆，立志攻打匈奴，奋然任命将帅，战旗像群星罗列，列置候兵于近郊畿内，烽火直通甘泉宫，然而匈奴军队仍然响箭穿空，尘土飞扬，出入边境，以至于武帝穷尽国家的军事实力，耗尽天下的财物，历经十多年时间击退匈奴。
English: Emperor Xiaowu repeatedly explored the frontier, determined to attack the Xiongnu, appointed generals, the battle flags were lined up like stars, the waiting soldiers were lined up in the suburbs of Kinai, and the bonfires went straight to Ganquan Palace. However, the Xiongnu army still shot arrows through the air, the dust was flying, and they went in and out of the border, so much so that Emperor Wu exhausted the country's military strength, exhausted the world's wealth, and defeated the Xiongnu after more than ten years.

古文：寇虽颇折，而汉之疲耗略相当矣。
现代文：敌寇虽然损失惨重，但漠的疲惫损耗和匈奴也大体相当了。
English: Although the enemy raiders suffered heavy losses, the exhaustion of the desert and the loss of the Xiongnu were roughly equivalent.

古文：宣帝值虏庭分争，呼韩邪来臣，乃权纳怀柔，因为边卫，罢关徼之儆，息兵民之劳。
现代文：宣帝赶上敌虏王庭内部分裂相争，呼韩邪前来臣服，于是权且接纳匈奴，对其实行怀柔，就此用他们守卫边境，撤去边关的警卫，让劳苦的军队和百姓得以休养。
English: When Emperor Xuan caught up with his enemy and quarrelled about the internal division of the royal court, he called on the Korean evil to come to submit, so the government accepted the Xiongnu and made concessions to them, and then used them to guard the border, removed the guards at the border, and let the hard-working army and people rest and recuperate.

古文：龙驾帝服，鸣钟传鼓于清渭之上，南面而朝单于，朔、易无复匹马之踪，六十余年矣。
现代文：骏马拉着皇帝的车驾，在清澈的渭水岸边鸣钟击鼓，天子面向南方，接受单于的朝拜，朔方、易水再没有匈奴骑兵的踪迹，达六十多年。
English: The horse-drawn carriage of the emperor, the bells ringing and drums beating on the clear shore of Surabaya, the Son of Heaven facing south, receiving the worship of Shan Yu, and the Hun cavalrymen of Shuo Fang and Yishui have not been seen for more than sixty years.

古文：后王莽陵篡，犹动戎夷，续以更始之乱，方夏幅裂。
现代文：后来王莽犯上篡位，搅扰戎夷，接着又是更始之乱，华夏犹如绸帛一样撕裂。
English: Later, Wang Mang committed the crime of usurping the throne, disturbing the troops, and then the chaos of the beginning, tearing apart Huaxia like silk.

古文：自是匈奴得志，狼心复生，乘间侵佚，害流傍境。
现代文：匈奴自此得志，再次萌生贪婪狠毒之心，他们趁机入侵袭击，为害边境。
English: The Huns were inspired by this and once again became greedy and vicious. They took the opportunity to invade and attack, harming the border.

古文：及中兴之初，更通旧好，报命连属，金币载道，而单于骄踞益横，内暴滋深。
现代文：到中兴初期，匈奴又继续从前的友好，使者回访连续不断，路上常有满载金帛的车马。然而单于骄傲自大，更加蛮横，对内地的侵暴益严重。
English: In the early days of ZTE, the Huns continued their previous friendship. Envoys visited them continuously, and there were often carriages loaded with gold ingots on the road. However, pride and arrogance alone made them more insolent, and their violence against the mainland was serious.

古文：世祖以用事诸华，未遑沙塞之外，忍愧思难，徒报谢而已。
现代文：世祖因为忙着平定中原，没时间顾及沙漠和塞外的敌人，所以忍着羞愧，虑及危难，衹是写信向其谢罪而已。
English: The patriarch was so busy pacifying the Central Plains that he did not have time to think about the desert and the enemies outside of Tibet. Therefore, he endured the shame and thought about the danger, but only wrote a letter of apology to them.

古文：因徒幽、并之民，增边屯之卒。
现代文：接着迁徙幽州、并州的百姓，增加驻守边境的兵力。
English: Then the people of Yuzhou and Bianzhou migrated, increasing the number of troops stationed at the border.

古文：及关东稍定，陇、蜀已清，其猛夫扞将，莫不顿足攘手，争言卫、霍之事。
现代文：等到关东逐渐平定，陇、蜀已经太平，那些勇猛强悍的将领，无不以脚跺地，捋袖伸臂，争着进言卫青、霍去病的事情。
English: By the time the Kanto region was gradually pacified, and Shantou and Shou were already at peace, those brave and powerful generals were all pounding the ground with their feet, stretching out their arms, and fighting for the defense of the young and the cure of diseases.

古文：帝方厌兵，闲修文政，未之许也。
现代文：皇帝正厌倦打仗，抓紧时间整治文德，没有同意。
English: The emperor, who was tired of fighting wars and was in a hurry to rectify the situation, did not agree.

古文：其后匈奴争立，日逐来奔，愿修呼韩之好，以御北狄之中，奉籓称臣，永为外扞。
现代文：以后匈奴争夺单于之位，逐王前来归顺，愿意像呼韩邪一样结成友好，挡住北狄的要道，并以藩国名义称臣，答应永远成为汉境的屏障。
English: Later, the Xiongnu fought for the position of being alone, came to submit to the king, and were willing to form a friendship like calling Korea evil, blocking the important path of the north, and calling themselves a vassal in the name of the domain, promising to forever become a barrier to Han territory.

古文：天子总揽群策，和而纳焉。
现代文：天子综合各种计策，友好接纳了曰逐王。
English: Tianzi integrated all kinds of strategies and amicably accepted the king-chasing.

古文：乃诏有司，开北鄙，择肥美之地，量水草以处之。
现代文：于是天子下诏书给有关官员，开放北部边境，挑选肥沃的土地和有水草的地方给他们居住。
English: Therefore, the emperor issued an edict to the relevant officials to open the northern border and select fertile land and places with aquatic plants for them to live.

古文：驰中郎之使，尽法度以临之。
现代文：迅即派遣中郎将作为使者，用严整的法度治理匈奴。
English: He immediately dispatched a middle man who would act as an emissary to govern the Xiongnu with strict laws.

古文：制衣裳，备文物，加玺绂之绶，正单于之名。
现代文：为他们制作衣服，完备礼乐典章制度，赐给单于印绶，确立单于的名分。
English: They made clothes for them, perfected the ceremonial music award system, gave them a seal, and established a name point for them.

古文：于是匈奴分破，始有南北二庭焉。
现代文：于是匈奴分裂，开始有南北两个王庭。
English: As a result, the Huns split, and there began to be two royal courts, one in the north and one in the south.

古文：仇衅既深，互同便隙，控弦抗戈，觇望风尘，云屯鸟散，更相驰突，至于陷溃创伤者，靡岁或宁，而汉之塞地晏然矣。
现代文：南北之间仇恨已深，就相互窥伺对方的空隙，引弓举戈，侦察对方动静，像云一样聚集，又像乌一样四散，相互进兵迅速攻击，弄到攻陷溃散重创死伤的地步，没有一年能够安定，但汉的边境地区都安然无事了。
English: The hatred between the north and the south is already deep, so they spy on each other's gaps, draw bows and arrows, spy on each other's movements, gather like clouds, and scatter like black clouds, quickly attack each other's troops, and get to the point of attacking, breaking and scattering heavy casualties. No year can be stable, but Han's border areas are safe and sound.

古文：后亦颇为出师，并兵穷讨，命窦宪、耿夔之徒，前后并进，皆用果谲，设奇数，异道同会，究掩其窟穴，蹑北追奔三千余里，遂破龙祠，焚罽幕，坑十角，梏阏氏，铭功封石，倡呼而还。
现代文：以后也经常出兵，联合兵力穷追征讨匈奴，命令窦宪、耿夔等人，前后同时并进，都采用果敢多变的计策，制订出其不意的战术，分几路会师，尽一切可能袭击敌人的巢穴，追赶战败逃跑的敌人，追赶三千多里，终于打败了举行龙祠的匈奴，烧毁了他们用毛织品制作的帐篷，埋葬了匈奴的 十角 ，拘系了关氏，刻石记功，唱着歌欢呼班师。
English: In the future, he often sent out troops. He ordered Dou Xian, Geng Yao and others to go forward and backward at the same time. They all adopted bold and changeable strategies, developed their own unexpected tactics, divided into several routes, attacked the enemy's lair in every possible way, chased the defeated and fleeing enemy, chased more than three thousand miles, and finally defeated the Huns who held the dragon shrine, burned their tents made of woolen fabrics, buried the Huns' ten corners, detained Guan, carved stones, and sang songs.

古文：单于震慑，屏气蒙氈，遁走于乌孙之地，而漠北空矣。
现代文：单于震惊恐惧，不敢喘息，蒙着毛毡逃到乌孙境内，从而沙漠以北再无匈奴踪迹了。
English: Alone in shock and fear, not daring to breathe, he fled to the territory of the Ussun, covered with felt, so that there was no trace of the Xiongnu north of the desert.

古文：若因其时势，及其虚旷，还南虏于阴山，归西河干内地，上申光武权宜之略，下防戎羯乱华之变，使耿国之算不谬于当世，袁安之议见从于后王，平易正直，若此其弘也。
现代文：如果趁此机会和形势，趁着匈奴空虚，将南部敌虏放回阴山，将黄河以西收归国内，上可以申用光武的权宜谋略，下可以防范戎羯给中原带来变乱，使得耿国的计策在当世不至虚妄，袁安的意见能够被后代的天子采纳，其计浅近简易公正刚直，要是做到这些，功业就宏大了。
English: If we take advantage of this opportunity and situation, take advantage of the emptiness of the Xiongnu, return the southern enemy captives to the gloomy mountains, and return the west of the Yellow River to the country, we can apply the light and military expedient strategy on the one hand, and prevent the army from bringing turmoil to the Central Plains on the other hand, so that Geng Guo's strategy is not false in the present world, Yuan An's opinion can be adopted by future generations of heavenly sons, and his plan is shallow, simple, fair and upright. If we can do these things, our work will be magnificent.

古文：而窦宪矜三捷之效，忽经世之规，狼戾不端，专行威惠。遂复更立北虏，反其故庭，并恩两护，以私己福，弃蔑天公，坐树大鲠。
现代文：然而窦宪自负于多次获得的胜利，不顾治理天下的谋略，凶狠不正，一味专擅威权恩惠，于是重新立北部单于，让他回到从前的王庭，同时给予南北两部恩惠和保护，用来谋取个人好处，不顾蔑视天子，结果坐树大敌。
English: However, Dou Xian was conceited of his many victories, disregarded the strategy of governing the world, was vicious and unjust, and was obsessed with granting favors. Therefore, he re-established the Northern Solitary, let him return to the former royal court, and at the same time granted favors and protection to the North and South to seek personal benefits, disregarding the Son of Heaven, and as a result, he became a great enemy.

古文：永言前载，何恨愤之深乎！
现代文：论及从前的事情，还有这么深的愤恨啊！
English: There is so much bitterness when it comes to the past.

古文：自后经纶失方，畔服不一，其为毒，胡可单言！
现代文：自此以后谋划不当，匈奴时而背叛，时而归顺，所造成的毒害，哪裹能够说得完呢！
English: What can I say about the poison caused by the improper planning, the Hun's occasional betrayal, and the Hun's occasional submission?

古文：降及后世，玩为常俗，终于吞噬神乡，丘墟帝宅。呜呼！
现代文：延续到后代，沿袭成为经常的习惯，终于使神州遭到吞灭，帝都成为废墟。呜呼！
English: Continued to the next generation, the inheritance became a regular habit, and finally the divine state was swallowed up, and the imperial capital became ruins.

古文：千里之差，兴自毫端，失得之源，百世不磨矣。
现代文：千里之差，发端于毫厘；得失的根源，百代不能磨灭啊！
English: The difference of a thousand miles begins with a milliliter; the root cause of gain and loss cannot be erased for a hundred generations!

古文：赞曰：匈奴既分，羽书稀闻。
现代文：赞日：包躯既然分裂，告急的文书很少奏闻。
English: Zangni: Since Baoshan was divided, urgent documents were rarely reported.

古文：野心难悔，终亦纷纭。
现代文：但其野心难以改变，最终回到混乱的状态。
English: But its ambitions are hard to change, and it eventually returns to a state of chaos.

