古文：和峤性至俭，家有好李，王武子求之，与不过数十。
现代文：和峤本性极为吝啬，自己家有良种李树，王武子去讨要，他只给了不过几十个。
English: He was extremely stingy by nature. His family had a good variety of plum trees, but when Wang Wu Zi went to ask for them, he only gave him a few dozen.

古文：王武子因其上直，率将少年能食之者，持斧诣园，饱共啖毕，伐之，送一车枝与和公。问曰： 何如君李？ 
现代文：王武子趁他去值班，带着一班喜欢吃李子的小伙子，拿着斧子到果园里去，饱饱地吃了一顿后，把李树砍掉了，给和峤送去一车树枝。并且问道： 比你家的李树好不好？ 
English: Wang Wu Zi took advantage of his shift to go to the orchard with a group of young men who liked to eat plums. He took an axe and went to the orchard. After eating a full meal, he cut down the plum tree and sent a carload of branches to He Yao. And he asked: Is it better than your family's plum tree?

古文：和既得，唯笑而已。
现代文：和峤收下了树枝，只是笑一笑罢了。
English: When he took the branch, he just smiled.

古文：王戎俭吝，其从子婚，与一单衣，后更责之。
现代文：王戎很吝啬，他的侄儿成亲，他只送一件单衣作为贺礼，后来又讨要回去。
English: Wang Rong is very stingy. When his nephew got married, he only sent a single piece of clothing as a congratulatory gift. Later, he asked for it back.

古文：司徒王戎，既贵且富，区宅僮牧，膏田水碓之属，洛下无比。
现代文：司徒王戎，既显贵，又富有。房屋、仆役、良田、水碓之类，洛阳城里没有人能和他相提并论。
English: There is no one in Luoyang City who can compare with him in terms of prestige and wealth, houses, servants, good fields, water wells, and so on.

古文：契疏鞅掌，每与夫人烛下散筹筭计。
现代文：家中契约帐簿很多，他常常和妻子在烛光下摆开筹码，仔细计算财务。
English: There are a lot of ledgers at home, and he and his wife often open the chips under the candlelight and carefully calculate the finances.

古文：王戎有好李，卖之，恐人得其种，恒钻其核。
现代文：王戎家有良种李子，卖李子时，怕别人得到他家的良种，总是先把李子核钻破再卖。
English: Wang Rong's family has a good variety of plums. When selling plums, for fear of others getting his family's good varieties, he always breaks the core of the plums before selling them.

古文：王戎女适裴頠，贷钱数万。
现代文：王戎的女儿嫁给裴頠，裴頠曾向王戎借了几万钱。
English: Wang Rong's daughter married Pei Yao. Pei Yao had borrowed tens of thousands of yuan from Wang Rong.

古文：女归，戎色不说。女遽还钱，乃释然。
现代文：女儿回到娘家，王戎的脸色就很不好看；女儿赶快把钱还给他，王戎这才心平气和了。
English: When his daughter returned to her mother's house, Wang Rong's face looked very bad; his daughter quickly returned the money to him, and Wang Rong calmed down.

古文：卫江州在寻阳，有知旧人投之，都不料理，唯饷 王不留行 一斤。
现代文：江州刺史卫展在得阳时，有知交和老朋友投奔他，他一概不帮助，只是送一斤王不留行。
English: When Jiangzhou Jishi Wei Zhan was in Deyang, some acquaintances and old friends rushed to him. He did not help at all, but sent a kilogram of gold to the king.

古文：此人得饷，便命驾。
现代文：这些人拿到东西之后就起身走了。
English: The men got the items and then got up and left.

古文：李弘范闻之曰： 家舅刻薄，乃复驱使草木。 
现代文：李弘范听到这件事，说： 我舅父太刻薄了，竟然差使草木为他说话。 
English: When Li Hongfan heard about this, he said, "My uncle is so mean that he sent plants and trees to speak for him.

古文：王丞相俭节，帐下甘果，盈溢不散。
现代文：丞相王导本性节俭，幕府中的美味水果堆得满满的，也不分给大家。
English: The chancellor Wang Tao was naturally frugal, and the delicious fruits in the shogunate were piled high and were not distributed to everyone.

古文：涉春烂败，都督白之，公令舍去。曰： 慎不可令大郎知。 
现代文：到了春天就腐烂了，卫队长禀报王导，王导叫他扔掉，嘱咐说： 千万不要让大郎知道！ 
English: When spring came, it had rotted away. The captain of the guards reported this to Wang Du, who told him to throw it away, instructing him: "Don't let the eldest brother know!

古文：苏峻之乱，庾太尉南奔见陶公。陶公雅相赏重。
现代文：苏峻叛乱的时候，太尉庾亮南逃去见陶侃，陶侃很赞赏并器重他。
English: At the time of Su Jun's rebellion, Tai Liang Nan fled to see Tao Kan. Tao Kan appreciated and valued him very much.

古文：陶性俭吝，及食，啖薤，庾因留白。
现代文：陶侃本性吝啬，有次吃饭的时候吃到薤，庾亮留下根部白色的一截。
English: Tao Kan is stingy by nature. Once, when he was having dinner, he ate a radish, and the radish left a white section of the root.

古文：陶问： 用此何为？ 
现代文：陶侃问他： 留下这个东西做什么？ 
English: Tao Kan asked him: What's the point of keeping this thing?

古文：庾云： 故可种。 
现代文：庾亮说： 这个仍旧可以种 。
English: Hao Liang said: This can still be planted.

古文：于是大叹庾非唯风流，兼有治实。
现代文：于是陶侃极力赞叹庾亮不仅风雅，同时有治国的实际才能。
English: As a result, Tao Kan strongly praised Shao Liang not only for his style and elegance, but also for his actual ability to govern the country.

古文：郗公大聚歛，有钱数千万。
现代文：郗愔大肆搜刮钱财，有几千万钱，其子郗超与他观念很不同。
English: He is a money-grubbing scoundrel, with tens of millions of money. His son, Yu Chao, has a very different concept from him.

古文：嘉宾意甚不同，常朝旦问讯。
现代文：有一天清晨，郗超去向郗愔请安。
English: One morning, Zou Chao went to greet Zou.

古文：郗家法：子弟不坐。因倚语移时，遂及财货事。郗公曰： 汝正当欲得吾钱耳！ 
现代文：按照郗家的规矩，晚辈不能坐着，于是郗超站着跟老爹扯了好大一会儿，终于把话题牵到了钱财方面。郗愔说： 你只是想要我的钱而已！ 
English: According to the rules of the Yu family, the younger generation cannot sit, so Yu Chao stood and argued with his father for a long time, and finally brought the topic to money. Yu said: You just want my money!

古文：迺开库一日，令任意用。
现代文：于是打开钱库一天，让儿子任意取用。
English: So he opened the vault for a day and let his son take what he wanted.

古文：郗公始正谓损数百万许。嘉宾遂一日乞与亲友，周旋略尽。
现代文：郗愔起先以为郗超最多花掉几百万，谁知他竟然在一日之中，把钱财都分赠亲朋好友，差不多分完了。
English: At first, he thought that Gong Chao had spent a few million at most. Who knows, he actually gave away all the money to his relatives and friends in one day. It was almost finished.

古文：郗公闻之，惊怪不能已已。
现代文：郗愔听说后，惊讶叹息，不能自已。
English: After hearing this, Zou sighed in surprise, unable to control himself.

