古文：杜元颖朱道士郑生赵士宗曹朗秄儿李约张缜马举韦琛张谋孙李黄宋洵张氏子僧十朋宜春人朱从本周本王宗信薛老峰欧阳璨
现代文：杜元颖朱道士郑生赵士宗曹朗秄儿李约张缜马举韦琛张谋孙李黄宋洵张氏子僧十朋宜春人朱从本周本王宗信薛老峰欧阳璨
English: Du Yuanying Zhu Daoist Zheng Sheng Zhao Shizong Cao Lang's son Li You Zhang Ye Ma Jiu Wei Wei Zhang Mu Sun Li Huang Song Jie Zhang's son monk ten peng Yichun people Zhu Zong this week's King Zongxin Xue Lao Feng Ouyang

古文：杜元颖
现代文：杜元颖
English: Du Yuanying

古文：杜无颖镇蜀年，资州方丈大石走行，盘礴数亩。
现代文：杜元颖镇守蜀地的时候，资州有一块一丈见方的大石头能跑能走，盘据了几亩地的地方。
English: When Du Yuanying was in charge of Shu, Zhizhou had a large square stone that could run and walk, and it occupied several acres of land.

古文：新都县大道观老君旁泥人须生数寸，拔之，俄顷又出。
现代文：新都县大道观老君旁边的泥人长出了几寸的胡须，把它拔了，过一会儿又长出来。
English: The mud man next to the old man on Shintou County's Dao Guan Road grew a few inches of beard, pulled it out, and it grew back a little while later.

古文：都下诸处有栗树，树叶结实。食之，味如李。
现代文：都城各地有栗子树，树叶上结果实，吃它，味道象李子。
English: There are chestnut trees all over the capital. The leaves bear fruit. Eat it. It tastes like plums.

古文：鹿头寺泉水涌出，及猫鼠相乳之妖。
现代文：鹿头寺的泉水涌出来，还有猫鼠互相吃奶的怪事。
English: The spring water of Deer Head Temple gushed out, and there were strange stories of cats and mice suckling each other's milk.

古文：蛮欲围城，城西门水，有人见一龙与水牛斗，俄顷皆灭。
现代文：蛮夷想要围城，城西门发水，有人见一条龙和水牛打斗，不一会儿全都消失。
English: Barbarians want to besiege the city, the west gate of the city is flooded, someone sees a dragon and a buffalo fight, and soon they all disappear.

古文：又说，李树上皆得木瓜，而空中不实。
现代文：又说，李子树上都结了木瓜，但是里边是空的，没有瓤。
English: He also said that there were papayas on the plum trees, but the inside was empty and there were no buds.

古文：朱道士
现代文：朱道士
English: Zhu Daoshi

古文：朱道士者，大和八年，常游庐山。
现代文：朱道士大和八年曾经游庐山。
English: Zhu Daoshi used to travel to Lushan in the eighth year of the Yamato era.

古文：憩于涧石，忽见蛇虵如堆缯锦，俄变为巨龟。
现代文：他在涧石间歇憩，忽然看到一条大蛇蟠在那里象一堆丝绸，顷刻间变成了一头大龟。
English: He was resting among the flints when he suddenly saw a huge snake coiled there like a pile of silk, which in an instant turned into a large turtle.

古文：访之山叟，云是玄武。
现代文：他打听山上的老翁，老翁说那是玄武帝君。
English: He asked an old man on the mountain, and the old man said that it was Emperor Xuanwu.

古文：朱道士又曾游青城山丈人观。
现代文：朱道士还曾经游青城山的丈人观。
English: Zhu Daoshi also once toured the father-in-law view of Qingcheng Mountain.

古文：至龙桥，见岩下有枯骨，背石平坐，接手膝上。鉤鏁，附苔络蔓，色白如雪。
现代文：他走到龙桥，见岩下有一具枯骨，背着石头平坐在那里，把手放在双膝上，钩曲成锁，附着有苔藓和藤蔓，颜色白得象雪。
English: He went to Long Qiao and saw a dead skeleton under the rock, carrying a stone and sitting there, his hands on his knees, crooked into a lock, with moss and vines attached, white as snow.

古文：云，祖父已常见。
现代文：他说他祖父已经常常见过。
English: He said his grandfather had seen it often.

古文：郑生
现代文：郑生
English: Zheng Sheng

古文：俗传人之死，凡数日，当有禽自柩中而出者，曰杀。
现代文：民间传说人死了，大约几天内，会有鸟从灵柩中飞出来，那鸟叫杀。
English: According to folklore, when a person dies, a bird will fly out of the coffin within a few days.

古文：大和中，有郑生者，常于韅川，与郡官略于野。
现代文：大和年间，有一位姓郑的年轻人，曾经在韅川和郡官到野外打猎。
English: During the Yamato era, there was a young man surnamed Zheng who used to go hunting in the wild in Shukawa and Gunkan.

古文：有网得一巨鸟，色苍，高五尺余。
现代文：有人网到一只大鸟，苍色羽毛，五尺多高。
English: Someone netted a large bird, pale feathers, more than five feet tall.

古文：主将命解而视之，忽无所见。
现代文：主将让人把它解开看看，它忽然就不见了。
English: The Lord will have it unraveled, and it will suddenly disappear.

古文：生惊，即访里中民，讯之，民有对者曰：里中有人死，且数日。卜人言，今日 杀 当去。
现代文：郑生很是吃惊，就到乡民那里打听。有的乡民说：乡里有一个人死了将近几天，占卜的人说，今天 杀 会离去的。
English: Zheng Sheng was very surprised and went to the villagers to ask. Some villagers said: There is a man in the village who has been dead for nearly a few days. The fortuneteller said that he would die today.

古文：其家伺而视之，有巨鸟色苍，自柩中出。
现代文：这一家等候在那里看着，有一只苍色大鸟，从灵柩中飞出来。
English: As the family waited and watched, a large pale bird flew out of the coffin.

古文：君之所获，果是乎。
现代文：你所捕获的，就是这只鸟吧！
English: That's the bird you caught!

古文：天宝中，京兆尹崔光远因游略，常遇一妖鸟，事与此同也。
现代文：天宝年间，京兆尹崔光远因为打猎，曾经遇到一只妖鸟，情形和这相同。
English: During the Tenpo era, Jing Zhao Yin Cui Guangyuan once encountered a monster bird due to hunting. The situation is the same as this.

古文：赵士宗
现代文：赵士宗
English: Zhao Shizong

古文：会昌元年，戎州水涨，浮木塞江。
现代文：会昌元年，戎州涨水，水上的浮木堵塞了江流。
English: In the first year of the Heisei era, the water level in Ebisuchu rose, and floating trees on the water blocked the river flow.

古文：刺史赵士宗召水军接木段。
现代文：刺史赵士宗让水军把木段打捞上来。
English: Zhang Shi Zhao Shizong asked the navy to salvage the wood.

古文：公署卑小地窄，不复用，因并修开元寺。
现代文：公署低矮窄小，不再使用，就一块去修开元寺。
English: The low-slung, narrow public office is no longer in use, so it will be repaired together with Kaiyuan Temple.

古文：后月余日，有夷人，逢一人，如猴，著故青衣，亦不辩何制。
现代文：后来过了一个多月，有一个夷人碰到一个人，这个人像猴，穿旧青色衣服，也辨不出是何种服制。
English: Later, after more than a month had passed, one of the barbarians came across a man who resembled a monkey, wearing old blue clothes, and it was impossible to tell what kind of dress code he was wearing.

古文：云：关将军遣来采木，被此州接去，不知为计，要须明年却来收。
现代文：这人说：关将军派我来采木头，被这州接了去，没有办法，要明年回来收。
English: The man said, "General Guan sent me to collect wood, but I was taken away by this state. I can't do anything, I have to come back next year to collect it."

古文：夷人说于州人。
现代文：夷人把这事报告给州人。
English: The barbarians reported the matter to the prefectural people.

古文：至二年七月，天欲曙，忽暴水至。
现代文：到了第二年七月，天将亮，忽然大水来了。
English: In July of the following year, just as dawn was about to break, the flood came.

古文：州城临江枕山，每大水，犹去州五十余丈。
现代文：州城一面临水，一面靠山，每次发大水，还离州城五十多丈。
English: The state capital faces the water on one side and the mountains on the other. Every time there is a big flood, it is still more than 50 meters away from the state capital.

古文：其时水高百丈，漂二十余人。
现代文：这时候水高一百多丈，漂走二十多人。
English: At this time, the water was more than a hundred feet high, and more than twenty people had drifted away.

古文：州基地有陷十丈外，大石如三间屋者，积堆于州基。
现代文：州基地有陷下去十丈的地方。大石头象三间房子那么大，堆积在州基上。
English: The state's base has sunk several stories, with boulders as large as three houses piled atop the foundation.

古文：水黑而腥，至晚方退。
现代文：水又黑又腥，到了晚上才退。
English: The water is dark and murky, and only recedes in the evening.

古文：知州官虞藏玘及吏，才及船投岸。
现代文：知州官虞藏玘和其他官吏们，这时候才来到船上，投向岸边。
English: It was only at this time that the Chizhou official, Yuzang Yao, and other officials came on board and headed for the shore.

古文：旬月后，州水方干。
现代文：十天后，州城里的水才干。
English: Ten days later, the water in the state capital had dried up.

古文：除大石外，更无一物。唯开元寺玄宗真容，去旧处十余步，卓立沙上。
现代文：除了大石头以外，没有别的东西了，只有开元寺唐玄宗的雕像，离开旧地方十几步，直立在沙上。
English: Apart from the large stones, there is nothing else, only the statue of Tang Xuan Zong of Kaiyuan Temple, a dozen steps away from the old place, standing upright on the sand.

古文：其他铁石，一无有者。
现代文：其它铁石器物，全都没有了。
English: All the other iron and stone artifacts are gone.

古文：曹朗
现代文：曹朗
English: Cao Lang

古文：进士曹朗，文宗时任松江华亭令。秩将满，于吴郡置一宅。
现代文：进士曹朗，文宗的时候任松江华亭县县令，任期将满的时候，在吴郡购置一处宅院。
English: At the time of Emperor Wenzong, Cao Lang was the county magistrate of Huating County, Songjiang Province. When his term of office was about to expire, he purchased a mansion in Wuxu County.

古文：又买小青衣，名曰花红云。
现代文：又买了一个小婢女，名叫花红。
English: He also bought a maidservant named Huahong.

古文：其价八万，貌甚美，其家皆怜之。
现代文：她的价钱是八万，容貌非常美，这一家人全部爱怜她。
English: She is worth eighty thousand, she is very beautiful, and the whole family is in love with her.

古文：至秋受代。令朗将其家人入吴郡宅。
现代文：到了秋天，官职被别人接替，县令曹朗就将他全家人迁入吴郡宅子里。
English: In the autumn, when the official position was taken over by someone else, the county magistrate Cao Lang moved his entire family into the Wu County residence.

古文：后逼冬至，朗缘新堂修理未毕，堂内西间，贮炭二百斤。
现代文：后来将近冬至，曹朗因为新堂的修理没有完毕，在堂内的西间，存放了二百斤炭。
English: Later, near the winter solstice, Cao Lang stored two hundred kilograms of coal in the west hall of the new hall because the repairs were not completed.

古文：东间窗下有一榻，新设茵席，其上有修车细芦席十领。
现代文：东间窗下有一张床，新铺设的席子，那上面有修车的细芦苇席十领。
English: There is a bed under the east window, a newly laid mat, and there is a thin reed seat with ten collars on it.

古文：东行，南厦。西廊之北一房，充库。
现代文：往东走是南厦，西廊的北面有一房，当库房用。
English: To the east is the South Building, and to the north of the West Corridor is a room used as a storeroom.

古文：一房即花红及乳母，一间充厨。
现代文：一房是花红和乳母的住处。一间是厨房。
English: One room is the living space for Hua Hong and the nanny. The other is the kitchen.

古文：至除前一日，朗姊妹乃亲，皆办奠祝之用。
现代文：到除夕的前一天，曹朗的姊妹和母亲都亲自动手置办奠祝用的东西。
English: By the day before New Year's Eve, Cao Lang's sister and mother had all set out to make offerings.

古文：铛中及煎三升许油，旁堆炭火十余斤。妹作饼，家人并在左右，独花红不至。
现代文：平底锅里煎着三升左右的油，旁边堆着十几斤炭火，妹妹做饼，家人都在左右，只有花红没到。
English: There are about three liters of oil frying in the pan, and more than ten pounds of charcoal are piled up next to it. My sister is making a cake, and my family members are all around. Only Huahong has not arrived.

古文：朗亲意其惰寝，遂召之至，又无所执作。
现代文：曹朗的母亲以为她在睡懒觉，就把她找了来。她又没什么事做。
English: Cao Lang's mother thought she was sleeping late, so she went to find her. She didn't have anything to do.

古文：朗怒，笞之，便云头痛。
现代文：曹朗生气了，用鞭子打她。她便说她头痛。
English: Cao Lang got angry and whipped her. She said she had a headache.

古文：忽有大砖飞下，几中朗亲。
现代文：忽然有一块大砖飞下来，差一点打中曹朗的母亲。
English: Suddenly, a large brick flew down and almost hit Cao Lang's mother.

古文：俄又一大砖击油铛，于是惊散。厨中食器，乱在阶下。
现代文：不一会儿又有一块大砖砸到油锅里。于是人们惊散，厨房里的食器在阶下乱作一团。
English: Soon after, another large brick smashed into an oil pan, sending people scattering and leaving kitchen utensils strewn at the foot of the stairs.

古文：日已晚，俱入西舍，遂移入堂，并将小儿。
现代文：天已经晚了，人们都来到西屋，于是就移到堂上，都抱着小孩。
English: It was late in the day, and people had all come to the west wing, so they moved to the hall, all holding children.

古文：及扃堂门，子母相依而坐，汗流如水，不谕其怪。
现代文：关上堂门，母子相依而坐，汗流如水，不明白是怎么回事。
English: Close the door, mother and son sit together, sweating profusely, not understanding what's going on.

古文：朗取炭数斤燃火，俄又空中轰榻之声，火又空中上下。
现代文：曹朗拿来几斤炭生上火。顷刻间空中又有轰塌的声音，火又自己在空中上下飞动。
English: Cao Lang brought a few pounds of charcoal to start a fire. Suddenly, there was a roaring sound in the air, and the fire itself flew up and down in the air.

古文：忽见东窗下床上，有一女子，可年十四五。作两髻，衣短黄襦裤，跪于床，似效人碾茶。
现代文：忽然看到东窗下的床上，有一位女子，年龄能有十四五岁，梳两个发髻，穿黄色短衣，跪在床上，好象模仿人碾茶。
English: Suddenly I saw on the bed under the east window a woman, who could have been fourteen or fifteen years old, combing her hair in two pigtails, wearing a short yellow dress, kneeling on the bed, as if imitating someone making tea.

古文：朗走起擒之，绕屋不及。
现代文：曹朗跑过去捉拿她，绕着屋子追也追不上她。
English: Cao Lang ran to catch her, but he couldn't catch up with her even if he chased her around the house.

古文：逡巡，匿芦席积中。朗又踏之，啾然有声，遂失所在。
现代文：她迅速地藏到芦席堆中，曹朗又上去用脚踏她，踹得她啾啾有声，于是就消失了。
English: She quickly hid in a pile of reed mats, and Cao Lang stepped on her to make her scream, and then disappeared.

古文：坐以至旦，鸡鸣，方敢开门。
现代文：大家坐着到了天明。听到鸡叫，才敢开门。
English: Everyone sat there until dawn. They only dared to open the door when they heard a chicken crowing.

古文：乳母花红熟寝于西室。
现代文：乳母和花红在西屋熟睡。
English: The nanny and Hanahong are fast asleep in the west room.

古文：朗召玉芝观顾道士作法。
现代文：曹朗让玉芝观的顾道士来家作法。
English: Cao Lang let Yu Zhiguo's Gu Taoist come to the house to practice.

古文：数日，有人长吁曰：吾是梁苑客枚皋。前因节日，求食于此。君家不知云何见捕。
现代文：几天后，有一个人长叹说：我是从梁苑来的客人，我叫枚皋，以前趁着节日，我到这来要饭吃，你家不知为什么把我捉起来了？
English: A few days later, one person said with a long sigh: "I am a guest from Liangyuan. My name is Mudao. I used to take advantage of the festival to come here to ask for food. I don't know why your family caught me.

古文：朗具茶酒。引之与坐。
现代文：曹朗准备了菜和酒，拉枚皋入坐。
English: Cao Lang prepared the food and wine and sat down with a bowl of noodles.

古文：皋谓朗曰：吾元和初，游上元瓦棺阁。第二层西隅壁上，题诗一首。
现代文：枚皋对曹朗说：我元和初年游过上元瓦棺阁，阁的第二层西墙壁上，题有一首诗。
English: Sheba said to Cao Lang: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, I visited the Shangyuan casket pavilion. On the west wall of the second floor of the pavilion, there was a poem.

古文：朗苦请，皋曰：方心事无悰，幸相悉。
现代文：曹朗苦苦请求枚皋告诉他那首诗的内容。枚皋说：你正有心事不快乐，仍有幸相互了解。
English: Cao Lang painstakingly pleaded with Huanqian to tell him the content of the poem. Huanqian said: You are not happy because of something in your heart, but you still have the luck to understand each other.

古文：他日到金陵，可自录之。
现代文：以后到了金陵，你可以抄录。
English: Later, when you get to Jinling, you can transcribe it.

古文：足下之祟，非吾所为。
现代文：你家妖怪作祟，不是我干的。
English: I didn't do it.

古文：其人不远，但问他人，当自知。
现代文：那人离此不远，只要问一问别人，你会知道的。
English: He's not far from here, just ask anyone and you'll find out.

古文：朗遂白顾道士，舍之。
现代文：曹朗就把这事告诉了顾道士。顾道士就舍弃不干了。
English: Cao Lang told this to Gu Daoshi. Gu Daoshi gave up and quit.

古文：里中有女巫朱二娘，又召令占。
现代文：乡间有一个女巫叫朱二娘。曹朗又去求她占卜。
English: There is a witch in the countryside called Zhu Er's daughter. Cao Lang went to ask her for a divination.

古文：巫悉召家人出，唯花红头痛未起。
现代文：女巫让家人全都出去，只有花红头痛没起来。
English: The witch let the whole family go out, only Huahong's headache didn't come up.

古文：巫强呼之出，责曰：何故如此？
现代文：女巫硬把她叫起来撵出去，责备她说：为什么这样呢？
English: The sorceress called her out and scolded her: "Why is this happening?

古文：娘子不知，汝何不言。
现代文：娘子不知道，你咋不说？
English: My daughter doesn't know. Why don't you tell her?

古文：遂拽其臂，近肘有青脉寸余隆起。
现代文：于是就来拽她的胳膊。她的胳膊近肘处隆起一寸多长的青脉。
English: So he came and tugged at her arm, which had a blue vein more than an inch long near the elbow.

古文：曰：贤圣宅于此。夫人何故惊之？
现代文：女巫说：贤圣就住在这儿，夫人为什么吃惊了？
English: The witch said, "The sage lives here. Why is the lady surprised?"

古文：花红拜，唯称不由己。
现代文：花红下拜，连说自己是身不由己。
English: Huahong bowed down, and even said that she couldn't help herself.

古文：朗惧，减价卖之。
现代文：曹朗害怕了，把她减价卖给了别人。
English: Cao Lang got scared and sold her to someone else at a reduced price.

古文：历二家，皆如此。
现代文：她经过两家，都这样。
English: She passed two houses, both like this.

古文：遂放之。
现代文：于是就把她放了。
English: So they let her go.

古文：无所容身，常于诸寺纫针以食。
现代文：她无处容身，常到各寺院去做些针线活维持生计。
English: With nowhere to stay, she often goes to temples to do some needlework to make ends meet.

古文：后有包山道士申屠千龄过，说花红本是洞庭山人户，共买人家一女，令守洞庭山庙。
现代文：后来有一个叫申屠千龄的包山道士打此路过，说花红本来是洞庭山人家共同买的一个女子，让她守洞庭山庙。
English: Later, a Baoshan Taoist monk named Shen Tu Qianling passed by and said that Hua Hong was originally a woman who was jointly bought by the people of Dongting Mountain and allowed her to keep the Dongting Mountain Temple.

古文：后为洞庭观拓北境二百余步，其庙遂除。
现代文：后来因为洞庭观向北拓展了二百多步，那座庙就废除了。
English: Later, because Dongting expanded more than 200 paces to the north, that temple was abolished.

古文：人户卖与曹时用，庙中山魅无所依，遂与其类巢于其臂。
现代文：那些人家把她卖给曹朗时，庙中的山妖鬼怪无所依存，就和它们的同类们在她的胳膊上巢居下来。
English: When those people sold her to Cao Lang, the mountain devils and ghosts in the temple had nothing to do with her, and they settled down with their kind on her arm.

古文：东吴人尽知其事。
现代文：东吴的人们都知道这件事。
English: People in Eastern Wu all know about this.

古文：秄儿
现代文：秄儿
English: 兒

古文：彭城刘剌夫，会昌中，进士上第。大中年，授鄠县尉卒。
现代文：彭城的刘剌夫，会昌年间考中进士，大中年授鄠县县尉他就死了。
English: Liu Weifu of Pengcheng was awarded the title of county lieutenant in his senior year of high school, and he died in his senior year of college.

古文：妻王氏，归其家，居洛阳敦化里第，礼堂之后院。
现代文：妻子王氏回到老家，住在洛阳敦化里的宅第的后院。
English: Mr. Wang's wife returned to her hometown and lived in the backyard of a house in Dunhua, Luoyang.

古文：咸通丁亥岁，夜聚诸子侄藏鉤，食煎饼。
现代文：咸通丁亥年，夜间聚集各位子侄来做藏钩的游戏，吃煎饼。
English: In the year of the boar, all the nephews and nieces gathered at night to play hide-and-seek and eat pancakes.

古文：厨在西厢。
现代文：厨房在西厢。
English: The kitchen is in the west wing.

古文：小童秄儿，持器下食。
现代文：小僮秄儿，拿着食器来送饭。
English: Xiao Yu'er, take the dishes and bring the food.

古文：时月晦云惨，指掌莫分。
现代文：当时月色昏暗乌云低垂，伸手不见五指。
English: At that time, the moon was dim and dark clouds hung low, and I couldn't see my five fingers.

古文：秄儿者，忽失声仆地而绝。
现代文：秄儿忽然失声摔倒而气绝。
English: My daughter suddenly lost her voice, fell down and passed out.

古文：秉炬视之，则体冷面黑，口鼻流血矣。
现代文：人们拿来灯烛一看，只见他身体冰冷，面色发黑，口鼻流血。
English: When people took a candle and looked at him, they saw that his body was cold, his face was black, and his nose and mouth were bleeding.

古文：擢发炙指，少顷而苏。
现代文：经过针灸拍打，过了一会他才苏醒过来。
English: After acupuncture and slapping, it took him a while to wake up.

古文：复令数夫束缊火循廊之北。
现代文：又让几个男子捆绑破麻做成火把，顺着廊檐向北去寻找。
English: He also asked several men to tie up broken hemp to make torches and follow the corridor to the north to look for them.

古文：于仓后得所持器。
现代文：在库房后边找到了秄儿所拿的食器。
English: In the back of the storeroom, I found the crockery that my daughter had taken.

古文：仓西则大厕。
现代文：库房的西头就是大厕所。
English: At the west end of the warehouse is a large toilet.

古文：厕上得一煎饼，溷中复有一饼焉。李约
现代文：在厕所找到了一张煎饼。粪坑里还有一张煎饼。李约
English: Found a pancake in the toilet. There's another pancake in the cesspit.

古文：咸通丁亥岁，陇西李夷遇为邠州从事。
现代文：咸通丁亥年，陇西李夷遇是邠州从事。
English: In the Year of the Snake and the Boar, Li Yi of Shaanxi Province went to Bozhou.

古文：有仆曰李约，乃夷遇登第时所使也。
现代文：他有个仆人叫李约，李约是李夷遇考中进士的时候就使用的仆人。
English: He had a servant named Li Yao. Li Yao was the servant that Li Yi used when he met the junior high school entrance examination candidates.

古文：愿捷善行，故常令邮书入京。
现代文：朴实敏捷还善于走路，所以李夷遇常让他进京城送信。
English: Simple and agile, he is also good at walking, so Li Yi often lets him enter the capital to send messages.

古文：其年秋七月，李约自京还邠，早行数坊，鼓始绝。
现代文：那年秋天七月，李约从京城回邠州，早早起来，走过几个住宅区，更鼓才不响了。
English: In July of that autumn, Li You returned to Zhangzhou from Beijing. He got up early, walked through several residential areas, and the drums did not sound.

古文：倦憩古槐下。
现代文：他很疲倦，在一棵古槐树下休息。
English: He was very tired and rested under an old elm tree.

古文：时月映林杪，余光尚明。
现代文：当时月亮映在林梢，余光还比较明亮。
English: At that time, the moon was reflected in the treetops, and the afterglow was still relatively bright.

古文：有一父皤然，伛而曳杖，亦来同止。既坐而呻吟不绝。
现代文：有一个白头发老头，弯着腰拄着拐杖，也来到槐树下停下来，坐下之后还呻吟不止。
English: An old man with white hair, bent over and on crutches, also came to a halt under an elm tree, sitting down and groaning.

古文：良久谓约曰：老夫欲至咸阳，则蹒跚不能良行。若有义心，能负我乎？
现代文：过了好一会儿，他对李约说：老汉我想到咸阳去，但是脚步不灵不能长时间走路，你要是有义心，能背我吗？
English: After a while, he said to Li You: "Old man, I want to go to Xianyang, but I can't walk for a long time. If you have a righteous heart, can you carry me?

古文：约怒不应，父请之不已。
现代文：李约很生气，坚决不答应。老头不停地求请。
English: Li You was very angry and resolutely refused to agree. The old man kept begging.

古文：约乃谓曰：可登背。
现代文：李约就对他说：你可以趴到我背上来啦！
English: Li You said to him, "You can lie down on my back and come up!"

古文：父欣然而登。
现代文：老头高兴地趴到他背上。
English: The old man happily lay down on his back.

古文：约知其鬼怪也，阴以所得哥舒棒，自后束之而趋。
现代文：李约知道他是鬼怪，暗中把带在身边的哥舒棒拿出来，从后边把他绑住往前走。
English: Li You knew that he was a ghost and secretly took out his brother's stick, which he had with him, and tied him from behind and walked forward.

古文：时及开远门，东方明矣。
现代文：当时到了开远门，东方已经放亮了。
English: At the time of the opening of the Far Gate, the East was already bright.

古文：父数请下，约谓曰：何相侮而见登？
现代文：老头几次请求下来。李约对他说：你为什么欺侮我而骑到我身上？
English: The old man asked him several times to come down. Li You said to him: "Why did you bully me and ride on me?

古文：何相惮而欲舍？
现代文：为什么害怕我又要离去？
English: Why are you afraid I'm leaving again?

古文：束之愈急。
现代文：捆绑得更紧了。
English: Tied up tighter.

古文：父言语无次，求哀请命。
现代文：老头语无伦次，苦苦地哀求。
English: The old man spoke incoherently, pleading painfully.

古文：约不答。
现代文：李约就是不答应。
English: Li You did not agree.

古文：忽觉背轻，有物坠地。
现代文：忽然觉得背上变轻了，有东西坠落到地上。
English: All of a sudden I felt a lightness on my back, something fell to the ground.

古文：视之，乃败柩板也，父已化去。
现代文：一看，是一块烂棺材板子。老头已变化而去。
English: At first glance, it is a rotten coffin board. The old man has changed and left.

古文：掷于里垣下，后亦无咎。
现代文：李约把棺材板子扔到里巷墙下，后来也没什么灾祸。
English: Li You threw the coffin board under the wall of the alley, and later there was no disaster.

古文：张缜
现代文：张缜
English: Zhang Ye

古文：处士张缜，多能善琴。
现代文：处士张缜，有许多专长，尤其善于弹琴。
English: Officer Zhang Qian has many specialties, and is particularly good at playing the piano.

古文：其妻早亡于江陵，纳妾甚丽。
现代文：他的妻子早亡在江陵，又纳了一个妾，非常美丽。
English: His wife died young in Gangneung, and he took another concubine, a very beautiful one.

古文：未旬日，主庖小青衣于灶下得一铜人，长可一寸，色如火。
现代文：不到十天，负责做饭的小丫环在灶下拾到一个小铜人，约有一寸来高，颜色像火。
English: Less than ten days later, the maidservant in charge of cooking found a small bronze figure under the stove, about an inch tall and the color of fire.

古文：须臾渐大，长丈余，形状极异。
现代文：不一会就渐渐长大，一丈多高，形状容貌极其特别。
English: After a while, he gradually grew taller and taller, and his shape and appearance were very special.

古文：走入缜室，取其妾食之，毛发皆尽。
现代文：它跑到李缜的屋里，抓住李缜的爱妾就吃，连头发都吃光了。
English: It ran into Li Yao's house, grabbed Li Yao's mistress and ate her, even eating her hair.

古文：食讫渐小，复如旧形，入灶下而失。
现代文：吃完了它就渐渐变小，又象原来那么大，回到灶下就消失了。
English: After eating, it gradually becomes smaller, and then as big as it was before, and disappears when it returns to the stove.

古文：马举马举，常为山南步奏官。
现代文：马举马举，常为山南步奏官。
English: Ma hoo ma hoo, he is often the Shannan marching band leader.

古文：间道入蜀，时兵后僻路，绝无人烟。
现代文：间道入蜀，时兵后僻路，绝无人烟。
English: There is no one on the way to Shu, and no one on the way back from the soldiers.

古文：夜至一馆，闻东廊下有人语声，因往告之。
现代文：夜至一馆，闻东廊下有人语声，因往告之。
English: At the end of the night, I heard someone talking under the east corridor of the first hall, so I went to report it.

古文：有应者云： 中堂有床，自往宿去。 
现代文：有应者云：中堂有床，自往宿去。
English: Respondent: There is a bed in the middle of the hall, let's go and stay there.

古文：举至中堂，唯有土榻。
现代文：举至中堂，唯有土榻。
English: Up to the middle hall, only tatami mats remain.

古文：求火，答云，无火。
现代文：求火，答云，无火。
English: Ask for fire, get clouds, no fire.

古文：求席，隔屋掷出一席，可重十余斤。
现代文：求席，隔屋掷出一席，可重十余斤。
English: Ask for a seat, the partition throws out a seat, which can weigh more than ten pounds.

古文：举亦壮士，殊不介意。
现代文：举亦壮士，殊不介意。
English: I don't mind being called a hero.

古文：中夜，有一物如猴，升榻而来。
现代文：中夜，有一物如猴，升榻而来。
English: In the middle of the night, a thing like a monkey came to stay.

古文：举以铁椎急击之，叫呼而走。
现代文：举以铁椎急击之，叫呼而走。
English: He gave it a quick whack with his iron spine, shouted and walked away.

古文：及明告别，其人怒去。
现代文：及明告别，其人怒去。
English: and said good-bye, he left angrily.

古文：更云： 夜来见伊独处，令儿子往伴，打得几死。 
现代文：更云：夜来见伊独处，令儿子往伴，打得几死。举推其门，不可开。
English: More clouds: I came to see Yi alone at night, so that my son could go with me, and I beat him to death. I held the door open, but I couldn't open it.

古文：举推其门，不可开。自隙窥之，积壤而已。
现代文：马举去推那门，推不开。从门缝往里一看，只是土堆而已。
English: The horse lifted up to push the door, but it could not be pushed. Looking through the cracks in the door, it was just a mound of earth.

古文：举后为太原大将，官至淮南节度使。
现代文：马举后来是太原大将，官位到淮南节度使。
English: Maju was later promoted to Taiyuan General, and his official rank was sent to the Huainan Festival.

古文：韦琛
现代文：韦琛
English: Wei Xuan

古文：昭义从事韦琛，幼年时，尚在学院。
现代文：昭义从事韦琛，幼年的时候，他还在学校读书。
English: When he was a child, he was still studying at school.

古文：冬节夜，捧书以归。及寝堂，绝无人，独厨中有篝火烹油之所。
现代文：冬至节那天晚上，他捧着书回家，走到寝堂里，一个人也没有，只有厨房里有笼火烹油的地方。
English: On the evening of the winter solstice, he came home with a book and went to his bedroom. There was no one there, only a fire in the kitchen.

古文：因窥之，则铛长数尺，久而复低，如是者三四。
现代文：于是他就向厨房里窥视，就见到有一个几尺高的平底锅。时间久了，这锅又变低了。如此多次。
English: So he peered into the kitchen and saw a saucepan several feet high. After a long time, the pan became low again. So many times.

古文：琛大恐，奔出于门，方见其家。
现代文：韦琛很害怕，就跑出门来，这才看到自己的家。
English: Wei Wei was very scared and ran out of the door, only to see his own home.

古文：悉于外寝，营享奠之所矣。
现代文：家人都集中在外寝，开始布置祭奠的场所了。
English: The family members have all concentrated on sleeping outside and have begun to set up a place of worship.

古文：琛神色惨栗，且告之故。
现代文：韦琛的神情凄惨悸栗。他就向家人述说了刚才的事。
English: Wei Yao's face was gloomy. He told his family about what had just happened.

古文：家人咸叱之，以为稚子妄语也。
现代文：家人全都呵叱他，以为是小孩子胡说八道。
English: His family all scolded him, thinking he was a child talking nonsense.

古文：俄顷，厨中有主庖青衣，就铛作食。仍映小儿于怀抱间。
现代文：片刻之间，厨房里有一个负责做饭的婢女，在平底锅前做饭，还映现一个小男孩在她怀抱间。
English: Moments later, a maid is in the kitchen, preparing food in front of a frying pan, and a little boy appears in her arms.

古文：儿踊身索哺，因误坠铛中。沸油涌溢，青衣大叫。
现代文：小孩蹦蹦达达地要吃奶，于是就掉到平底锅里。沸腾的油溢出来，婢女大叫。
English: The child leaped for the milk, and fell into the pan, and the boiling oil overflowed, and the maid cried out.

古文：火已及屋，长幼奔救。
现代文：火已经烧到房子上了，男女老少都跑来救火。
English: The fire had reached the house, and men, women and children were all running to put out the fire.

古文：或沃以水，焰则转炽，盖膏水相激也。
现代文：有的人用水浇，火焰却变旺了，大概是油水相激的原因。
English: Some people pour water on it, but the flame becomes strong, which is probably the reason why the oil and water are irritated.

古文：乃杂掷瓮盎茵毯之类，久之方灭。
现代文：于是就乱扔一些瓶子、罐子、垫子、毯子之类的东西，老半天才救灭。
English: So they started throwing bottles, cans, cushions, blankets and other things, and it took them half a day to put it out.

古文：火灭，儿已焦矣。
现代文：火灭了，那个小孩也烧焦了。
English: The fire went out and the child was scorched.

古文：阖室惊怖，为之罢节。
现代文：全家人吃惊恐惧，因此不过节了。
English: The whole family was shocked and scared, so they didn't celebrate the holiday.

古文：青衣亦以此发悸而死。
现代文：那婢女也因此惊悸成病而死。
English: The maidservant also fell ill and died.

古文：张谋孙
现代文：张谋孙
English: Zhang Mousun

古文：广州副使张谋孙，虽出于阘葺，有口辩，善心计，累为王府参佐。
现代文：广州副节度使张谋孙，虽然出身贫寒，但是有口才，善心计，连连出任王府参佐。
English: Zhang Mousun, deputy governor of Guangzhou, was born in a poor family, but he was eloquent and good-natured, and successively served as a royal palace counselor.

古文：咸通初。从交广辟，遂为元寮。
现代文：咸通初年，他广泛地交游，于是成为幕僚。
English: In the first year of Hamdang Tong, he traveled widely and became a staff member.

古文：性贪侈，聚敛不倦。
现代文：他性情贪婪奢侈，聚敛无厌。
English: His nature is greedy and extravagant, and he is an insatiable hoarder.

古文：南海多奇货，若犀象珠贝之类，不可胜计。
现代文：南海一带奇货很多，比如犀角、象牙、珍珠之类，多得不可胜数。
English: Around the South China Sea, there are many exotic goods, such as rhinoceros horn, ivory, pearls, and so on.

古文：及府罢北归，止于汝坟。
现代文：等到他任期已满，北归故里，走到汝坟便止步。
English: When his term of office is over, he will return to his hometown in the north. When he comes to your grave, he will stop.

古文：于郡西三十里，郁阳驿南，汝水之上，构别业，穷极华敞。
现代文：他在郡西三十里，郁阳驿站之南，汝水之上，建造了别墅，豪华至极。
English: Thirty miles west of the county, south of Yuyang Railway Station, on the water, he built a villa, luxurious to the extreme.

古文：常凿一池，欲北引官渠水涨之。
现代文：他曾经凿一水池，想要从北面引官渠里的水灌满它。
English: He once dug a pool and tried to fill it with water from the canal from the north.

古文：或曰：此处今年太岁所在也。
现代文：有人说：这地方今年是太岁所在的地方。
English: Some people said, "This place is where the old man is this year."

古文：谋孙诫役夫曰：掘得太岁则止。
现代文：张谋孙告诉为他干活的工匠们说：挖到太岁就停止。
English: Zhang Musun told the craftsmen who worked for him: stop digging when you are too old.

古文：明日及泉，获一土囊。
现代文：第二天挖到黄泉，得到一个土囊。
English: The next day I dug to the bottom of the well and got a soil bag.

古文：破之，中有物升余，色白，如粟粒，忽跳跃四散而隐。
现代文：打破一看，里边有一种东西，数量一升多一点，颜色是白的，象谷粒，忽然跳跃着四散而隐没。
English: At a glance, there is something inside, the quantity is a little more than a liter, the color is white, like grains, suddenly jumping and disappearing.

古文：谋孙遂中暴病，信宿而死。
现代文：张谋孙于是得了暴病，两宿就死了。
English: As a result, Zhang Mousun fell violently ill and died two days later.

古文：李黄
现代文：李黄
English: Li Huang

古文：渠州刺史李黄，夏日憩于小厅。见鼠穴中有一人，长数寸，执篲，扫穴前而入。
现代文：渠州刺史李黄，夏天在小厅里休息，看到耗子洞里有一个小人，几寸高，拿着扫帚，扫完了洞前就回去了。
English: Li Huang, a painter from Quzhou, was resting in a small hall in the summer when he saw a small man, a few inches tall, holding a broom in a rat hole. He swept the hole and then went back.

古文：有二人，亦长三二寸，舁一镬，添水爨薪。
现代文：又有两个人，也是二三寸高，抬着一口锅，添上水，点上火。
English: Two other men, also two or three inches tall, were carrying a pan, adding water and lighting it.

古文：须臾，镬前有一夜叉，执铁杈，叉一人。
现代文：不一会儿，锅前有一个夜叉，拿着铁叉，叉起一个人。
English: A moment later, there is a fork in front of the pot. Take the fork and fork up a person.

古文：披紫袍，执象笏，长三二寸，形色状貌，乃李也。
现代文：这个人穿着紫色袍子，拿着象牙笏板，高二三寸，身形、神色、状貌，是李黄。
English: This man, wearing a purple robe and holding an ivory cutting board, is two or three inches tall, and his body, appearance, and features are those of Li Huang.

古文：黄虽惧而不敢惊之。
现代文：李黄虽然害怕，但是不敢惊扰。
English: Although Li Huang was scared, he didn't dare to startle him.

古文：乃咄黄脱衣，入镬中，须臾而出。
现代文：夜叉呵叱李黄脱去衣服，进到锅里，一会儿又出来。
English: Li Huang undressed, went into the pot, and came out again a moment later.

古文：黄衣服而入穴中。
现代文：李黄穿衣就进入洞中。
English: Li Huang dressed and went into the cave.

古文：又见一妇人出火中，乃黄之孀妇，寓岳州久矣。
现代文：又看见一个妇人从火中出来，此人是李黄守寡的妻子，住在岳州很久了。
English: He also saw a woman come out of the fire. This woman was the wife of Li Huang Shouyu, who had lived in Yuezhou for a long time.

古文：主镬者挹黄娣入镬中，须臾，又出。
现代文：看锅的把李黄的小妾叉到锅里，不多时又出来了。
English: Looking at the pot, he forks Li Huang's concubine into the pot, and it comes out again after a while.

古文：娣服衣亦入穴中。
现代文：小妾的衣服也进到洞中。
English: The concubine's clothes also went into the hole.

古文：主镬者亦入。
现代文：看锅的也进去了。
English: The cook also went in.

古文：又二人舁镬入。
现代文：又有二人抬着锅进洞里。
English: Two more people carrying pots crawled into the hole.

古文：而拥篲者又扫去其灰尽。
现代文：拿扫帚的人又扫去那些灰烬。
English: The man with the broom sweeps away the ashes.

古文：数日如此。
现代文：几天都是这样。
English: It's been like this for days.

古文：黄大忧。
现代文：李黄很愁。
English: Li Huang is very sad.

古文：遣访其娣。亦无恙。数年方卒。
现代文：派人打听他的小妾，也安全无恙，几年后才死。
English: His concubine was also found safe and well, and died a few years later.

古文：黄十余年方卒。
现代文：李黄是十几年之后才死的。
English: Li Huang died a dozen years later.

古文：宋洵
现代文：宋洵
English: Song Tao

古文：进士宋洵，下第南归。
现代文：进士宋洵，当年落第之后取道向南回故乡。
English: Entered into the Song Dynasty, he took the road to the south to return to his hometown after he was defeated.

古文：兄波，为金州石泉令。
现代文：他的哥哥宋波，是金州石泉县县令。
English: His brother, Song Bo, is the county magistrate of Shiquan County, Jinzhou.

古文：洵以县邑喧杂，于县东数里葺一山居。
现代文：宋洵因为县邑里喧闹嘈杂，在县东几里的地方盖一所山居。
English: Because the county town was noisy and noisy, Song Tao built a mountain residence a few miles east of the county.

古文：未毕，役者闻山石中有妇人语云：宋三郎来矣！
现代文：还没有盖完，干活的人们听到山石里有一个妇人说道：宋三郎来了！
English: Before the building was finished, the workers heard a woman in the rocks say, "Song Saburo is coming!"

古文：及洵居之，因月夜，于书堂侧屣步。又自闻石中云：宋三郎来矣！
现代文：等到宋洵住进去之后，趁着月夜，在书堂旁边散步，又自己听到石中说：宋三郎来了！
English: After waiting for Song Tao to move in, he took advantage of the moonlit night to take a walk next to the study hall, and heard the stone say: Song Sanrong is coming!

古文：驻步听之，石门忽开。
现代文：他停步一听，石门忽然就开了。
English: He paused to listen, and the stone door suddenly opened.

古文：见妇人数辈，再拜笑曰：请三郎入来。
现代文：他看到里边有好几位妇人。妇人们连连下拜，笑着说：请三郎进来吧！
English: He saw several women inside. They bowed one after another and said with a smile: "Please let Saburo in!"

古文：洵欲走，为数辈所擒。
现代文：宋洵想要跑开，被妇人们捉住了。
English: Song Tao tried to run away, but was caught by the women.

古文：入其室，石门遂闭。
现代文：进到里边，石门就关上了。
English: Once inside, the stone door slams shut.

古文：仆夫急告波。穿石求之，终不能得。
现代文：仆人们急忙告诉宋波，宋波凿穿石头寻找，始终没能找到。
English: The servants hurriedly told Song Bo that Song Bo had chiseled through the stone to look for the crane, but had not been able to find it.

古文：张氏子
现代文：张氏子
English: Zhang Shi Zi

古文：唐文德中，京官张，忘其名，寓苏台。
现代文：唐朝文德年间，有一个姓张的京官，寓居在苏台。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wende in the Tang Dynasty, there was a Beijing official surnamed Zhang who lived in the Soviet Union.

古文：子弟少年，时往文人陆评事院往来，为一美人所悦。
现代文：与一些少年子弟，时常往来于文人陆平事的院子，被一个美人喜欢上了。
English: With some young boys, often in the courtyard of the literati Lu Ping, he was liked by a beautiful woman.

古文：来往多时，心疑之，寻病瘠。
现代文：来往很长时间了，他心里犯疑，不久便病得消瘦了。
English: He had been coming here for a long time, he had doubts in his mind, and soon he became sick and thin.

古文：遇开元观道士吴守元，云，有不祥之气。
现代文：遇上开元观的道士吴守元，他说有不祥之气。
English: When he met Wu Shouyuan, a Taoist monk at the opening ceremony, he said that there was an ominous atmosphere.

古文：授一以符，果一盟器婢子，背书红英字。
现代文：他把一张符交给张氏。张氏一看，符上画有一件盟器和一位婢女，背面写了一个红色的英字。
English: He gave Mr. Zhang a piece of paper. Mr. Zhang looked at it and saw that there was a cupbearer and a maid painted on it, and a red English word was written on the back.

古文：在空舍柱穴中。
现代文：地点是在空屋柱子的洞穴中。
English: The location is in the cavern of an empty house pillar.

古文：因焚之，其妖乃绝。
现代文：于是就把符烧了，那妖就绝灭了。
English: So they burned the charm, and the demon was destroyed.

古文：闻于刘山甫。
现代文：这是从刘山甫那里听来的。
English: This is what I heard from Liu Shanfu.

古文：僧十朋
现代文：僧十朋
English: The Ten Monks

古文：刘建封寇豫章，僧十朋，与其徒奔分宁，宿澄心僧院。
现代文：刘建封进犯豫章时，僧人十朋和他的弟子们跑到分宁，宿到澄心僧院里。
English: When Liu Jianfeng invaded Yuzhang, the monk Shimen and his disciples fled to Buning and stayed at the Chengxin Monastery.

古文：初夜，见窗外有光。
现代文：刚入夜，他们看见窗外有光。
English: Just after nightfall, they saw a light outside the window.

古文：视之，见团火，高广数尺。
现代文：一看，见到一团火，高和宽各有几尺。
English: At a glance, I saw a ball of fire, several feet high and wide.

古文：中有金车子，与火俱行。呕轧有声。
现代文：火中有辆饰金的车子，和火一块行走，呕呕呀呀地发出响声。
English: In the middle of the fire, there was a gold-plated car. It was walking along with the fire, making a gurgling noise.

古文：十朋始惧。其主人云：见之数年矣。
现代文：十朋一开始时很害怕，僧院主人说：这种现象出现多年了。
English: At first, the ten friends were afraid. The head of the monastery said: "This phenomenon has been going on for years.

古文：每夜，必出于僧堂西北隅地中，绕堂数周，复没于此。
现代文：每天夜里，必定出现在僧堂西北的墙边上，绕着僧堂走几圈，再在那地方熄灭。
English: Every night, it must appear on the edge of the northwest wall of the monastery hall, walk around the monastery hall a few times, and then go out in that place.

古文：以其不为祸福，故无掘视之者。
现代文：因为它不做祸事，所以没有人挖开地看它是怎么回事。
English: Because it does no harm, no one digs it up to see what it's all about.

古文：宜春人
现代文：宜春人
English: People from Yichun

古文：天祐初，有人游宜春，止空宅中。
现代文：天祐初年，有一个人游宜春，住在一所空宅子里。
English: In the first year of Tenyu, there was a traveler in Yichun, who lived in an empty house.

古文：兵革之后，井邑芜没。
现代文：战乱之后，城乡荒芜破落。
English: After the war, the city and countryside were devastated.

古文：堂西至梁上，有小窗，窗外隙荒数十亩。
现代文：从堂西墙到梁上，有一个个窗。窗外是几十亩荒地。
English: From the west wall of the hall to the beams, there is a window. Outside the window is dozens of acres of wasteland.

古文：日暮，窗外有一物，正方，自下而上。
现代文：天黑之后，窗外有一个东西，正方形，从下边往上来。
English: After dark, there was something outside the window, a square shape, coming up from below.

古文：顷之，全蔽其窗。
现代文：顷刻之间，把窗全挡上了。
English: In an instant, the window was completely blocked.

古文：其人引弓射之，应弦而落。
现代文：这人拉弓射它，它随着弓弦声落下去了。
English: The man drew his bow and shot it, and it fell at the sound of the bowstring.

古文：时已夕，不能即视。
现代文：当时已是夜间，不能马上出去看。
English: It was already nighttime, so I couldn't go out to look right away.

古文：明旦寻之，西百余步，有方杉板，带一矢，即昨所射也。
现代文：第二天早晨一找，向西走了一百多步，有一块方形杉木板，带着一支箭。这就是昨夜他射中的东西。
English: The next morning he looked for it, and more than a hundred paces to the west there was a square cedar board with an arrow on it, which was what he had shot last night.

古文：朱从本
现代文：朱从本
English: Zhu Congben

古文：李遇为宣州节度使，军政委大将朱从本。
现代文：李遇是宣州节度使，军政大事都委托大将朱从本去办。
English: Li Yu was the envoy to the Xuanzhou Festival, and entrusted the military and political affairs to General Zhu Congbon.

古文：本家厩中畜猴。
现代文：朱从本家马厩里养着一只猴子。
English: Zhu keeps a monkey from the family's stables.

古文：圉人夜起秣马，见一物如驴，黑而毛，手足皆如人。
现代文：养马的人夜里起来喂马，看到一个东西象驴，身上黑色而长毛，手脚都象人。
English: A horseman got up in the night to feed his horses and saw something that looked like a donkey. It was black and hairy and had hands and feet like a man.

古文：据地而食此猴，见人乃去，猴已食其半。
现代文：那东西在那里吃那只猴子，见有人来就离开了。猴子已吃掉了一半。
English: The thing was there eating the monkey, saw someone coming and left. The monkey had already eaten half of it.

古文：明年，遇族诛。
现代文：第二年，他家遭到灭族的灾难。
English: The following year, his family suffered the disaster of genocide.

古文：宣城故老云。郡中常有此怪。每军城有变。此物辄出。
现代文：宣城的老人们说：郡里常有这种怪物，每当军变城陷的时候，这东西就出现。
English: The old people of Xuancheng said: There is often such a monster in the county. Whenever the army changes the city, this thing appears.

古文：出则满城皆臭。
现代文：一出现就满城都臭。
English: As soon as they appear, the whole city stinks.

古文：田頵将败，出于街中。
现代文：田頵将要败落的时候，它出现在街上。
English: It appeared on the street when Tianyu was about to fall.

古文：巡夜者见之，不敢逼。
现代文：巡夜的看见了，不敢走近它。
English: The night watchman saw it and dared not go near it.

古文：旬月祸及。
现代文：十来天祸就来临。
English: Disaster will come at any time.

古文：周本
现代文：周本
English: Zhou Ben

古文：信州刺史周本入觐扬都，舍于邸第。
现代文：信州刺史周本到扬都去觐见皇帝，住在官署里。
English: Shinshu bard Zhou originally went to Yangdu to meet the emperor and lived in the government office.

古文：遇私讳日，独宿外斋，张灯而寐。
现代文：遇上家讳的日子，独自宿在外屋，他点着灯睡觉。
English: On days when he is housebound, he sleeps alone in an outhouse and sleeps with a light on.

古文：未熟，闻室中有声划然。
现代文：还没有睡熟，听到屋里有声划过。
English: While I was still half asleep, I heard a rustling sound in the room.

古文：视之，见火炉冉冉而升，直傅于屋，良久乃下，飞灰勃然。
现代文：一看，见火炉慢慢地升起来，一直附着到屋顶上，很久才下来。飞灰纷纷扬起。
English: At a glance, you can see that the stove is slowly rising and has been attached to the roof for a long time before it comes down. The ashes are flying.

古文：明日，满室浮埃覆物，亦无他怪。
现代文：第二天，满屋浮灰覆盖着东西，也没发生别的什么怪事。
English: The next day, the house was covered in ash and nothing else strange happened.

古文：王宗信
现代文：王宗信
English: Wang Zongxin

古文：唐末，蜀人攻岐还，至于白石镇，裨将王宗信止普安禅院僧房。
现代文：唐朝末年，蜀人攻打岐山回来，走到白石镇，裨将王宗信住在普安禅院僧房里。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, the Shu people returned from attacking Qishan and went to Baishi Town, where they helped Wang Zongxin to live in the monk's quarters of Pu'an Zen Monastery.

古文：时严冬，房中有大禅炉，炽炭甚盛。
现代文：当时正是严冬，房中有一个大禅炉，炭火烧得很旺。
English: It was the dead of winter, and there was a large Zen stove in the room with a roaring charcoal fire.

古文：信拥妓女十余人，各据僧床寝息。
现代文：王宗信拥抱十几个妓女，各自占好床位睡下。
English: Wang Zongxin hugged more than a dozen prostitutes, each of whom occupied a bed and fell asleep.

古文：信忽见一姬飞入炉中，宛转于炽炭之上。
现代文：王宋信忽然看到一位女子飞进炉里，在炭火上扭曲翻滚。
English: Wang Songxin suddenly saw a woman fly into the furnace, twisting and tumbling over the coals.

古文：宗信忙遽救之。
现代文：王宗信急忙上去救她。
English: Wang Zongxin hurried up to save her.

古文：及离火，衣服并不焦灼。
现代文：等到离开火一看，她的衣服并没烧焦。
English: When she looked up from the fire, her clothes weren't burned.

古文：又一姬飞入如前，又救之。
现代文：又一位女子飞进去，又救出来。
English: Another woman flew in and rescued her.

古文：顷之，诸妓或出或入，各迷闷失音。
现代文：顷刻之间，妓女们有的飞进去，有的被救出来，一个个迷惑憋闷而失声呻吟。
English: In an instant, some of the prostitutes flew in, some were rescued, and one by one, bewildered and depressed, lost their voices and groaned.

古文：有亲吏隔驿墙，告都招讨使王宗俦。
现代文：有一位亲随的小吏隔着驿墙告诉都招讨使王宗俦。
English: One of the minor officials who accompanied Wang Zongyao told him across the courtyard wall that he should summon Wang Zongyao.

古文：宗俦至，则徐入，一一提臂而出。
现代文：王宗俦来到，就慢慢进屋，一一地提着胳膊拽出来。
English: When Wang Zongyao arrived, he slowly entered the house and pulled the ropes out one by one.

古文：视之，衣裾纤毫不毁，但惊悸不寐。
现代文：一看，衣服裙子丝毫也没烧坏，只是吓得不能睡觉。
English: At first glance, her clothes and skirt were not burned at all, but she was too scared to sleep.

古文：有周和尚者，身长貌胡。
现代文：问她们，她们说，是被一个胡僧提进火里的。她们看到的都相同。
English: Ask them and they say they were carried into the fire by a goth monk. They all saw the same thing.

古文：皆曰，是此也。宗信遂鞭之数百，云有幻术。
现代文：王宗信大怒，把所有的僧人都找来站在眼前，让妓女们认一认。有一个姓周的僧人，身高相貌象胡人，妓女们都说是他。王宗信就打了他几百鞭子，说他有幻术。
English: Wang Zongxin was so angry that he called all the monks to stand in front of him and asked the prostitutes to identify him. There was a monk named Zhou, who was as tall as a goose and looked like a goose, and the prostitutes all said it was him. Wang Zongxin then beat him with hundreds of whips, saying that he had magic.

古文：此僧乃一村夫，新落发，一无所解。
现代文：这个僧人其实是一个村民，刚落发当了和尚，什么都不懂。
English: This monk is actually a villager who just became a monk and doesn't understand anything.

古文：又缚手足，欲取炽炭爇之。
现代文：王宗信又捆了他的手脚，想要拿炭火烧他。
English: Wang Zongxin also tied his hands and feet and tried to burn him with charcoal.

古文：宗俦知其屈，遂解之使逸。
现代文：王宗俦知道他冤屈，就把他解开让他跑了。
English: Wang Zongyao knew of his grievances, so he untied him and let him run away.

古文：讫不知何妖怪。
现代文：到底也不知道那是什么妖怪。
English: I don't even know what kind of monster it is.

古文：薛老峰
现代文：薛老峰
English: by Xue Laofeng

古文：福州城中有鸟石山，山有峰，大凿三字，曰薛老峰。
现代文：福州城中有一座鸟石山，山上有一座峰，峰上凿了三个大字，叫薛老峰。
English: In the city of Fuzhou, there is a bird-rock mountain, and on the mountain there is a peak, on which three large characters have been chiseled, called Xue Lao Feng.

古文：癸卯岁，一夕风雨，闻山上如数千人喧噪之声。
现代文：癸卯年，一天晚上风雨大作，人们听到山上好象有几千人喧哗吵闹的声音。
English: In the year of the Rooster, one stormy night, people heard what sounded like thousands of noisy voices on the mountain.

古文：及旦，则薛老峰倒立，峰字反向上。
现代文：等到天亮，一看，原来是薛老峰倒立了。峰上的字反过来向上了。
English: At dawn, it turned out that Xue Laofeng was upside down. The characters on the peak were upside down.

古文：城中石碑，皆自转侧。
现代文：城里的石碑，全都自己转换了方向。
English: The city's stone monuments have all changed direction on their own.

古文：其年闽亡。
现代文：这一年闽国灭亡了。
English: This was the year of the fall of the State of Min.

古文：欧阳璨
现代文：欧阳璨
English: Ouyang Xuan

古文：三传欧阳璨，住徐州南五十里。
现代文：博知古事能写会唱的欧阳璨，家住在徐州南五十里的地方。
English: Ouyang Yao, who can write and sing about ancient history, lives 50 miles south of Xuzhou.

古文：有故到城，薄晚方回。
现代文：他有事到城里去，天傍晚才回来。
English: He had to go to the city on business and did not return until late in the afternoon.

古文：不一二里，已昏瞑矣。
现代文：走出不到一二里，天就已经昏暗了。
English: Less than a mile or two out, the sky was already dark.

古文：是夕阴晦。
现代文：这天晚上是阴天。
English: It was a cloudy night.

古文：约行三十里，则夏雨大澍，雷电震发。
现代文：大约走了三十里，就夏雨滂沱，雷电大作。
English: After walking for about thirty miles, the summer rain and thunderstorms hit.

古文：路之半，有山林夹道，密林邃谷，而多鸷兽。
现代文：路的一半处，有山林夹着道路，林密谷深，鸷禽猛兽很多。
English: Halfway along the road, there is a mountain forest sandwiching the road, the forest is deep, and there are many birds and beasts of prey.

古文：生怖惧不已。
现代文：欧阳璨恐怖的心情不能自已。
English: Ouyang Yao's mood of terror could not be contained.

古文：既达山路，两势弥盛。
现代文：走上山路之后，雨势更大。
English: After walking up the mountain road, the rain became heavier.

古文：俄见巨物出于面前，裁十余步。
现代文：忽然见一个庞大的东西出现在面前，才离他十几步远。
English: Suddenly, he saw a huge thing appear in front of him, and it was only a dozen steps away from him.

古文：长丈余，色正白，亦不辨首足之状，但导前而行。
现代文：那东西一丈多高，纯白色，也看不清手脚是什么样子。
English: It was tall, pure white, and I couldn't make out its hands and feet.

古文：生恐悸尤极，口常讽大悲神咒，欲朗讽之，口已噤矣，遂心存念之，三数遍则能言矣。
现代文：它只是在他前面引导着他往前走。他更加害怕，口里常常念道着大悲神咒。他想要大声念，口已经念不出来了，于是只好在心里默默地念。念了三五遍就能说话了。
English: He was even more afraid, and often recited the Great Compassion Mantra. He wanted to recite it out loud, but he couldn't, so he had to recite it silently in his heart. After three or five times, he could speak.

古文：诵之不辍，俄失其妖。
现代文：他就不停地大声念。片刻就不见了那妖物。
English: He kept reading aloud, and in a moment the monster was gone.

古文：去家渐近，雨亦稍止。
现代文：离家渐渐近了，雨也渐渐停了。
English: As I got closer to home, the rain gradually stopped.

古文：自尔，昏暝则不敢出庭户之间矣。
现代文：从此，他一黑天就不敢出门了。
English: Since then, he has not dared to go out in the dark.

