古文：敬王十年，刘文公与苌弘欲城周，为之告晋。
现代文：周敬王十年，刘文公与苌弘打算为周王居住的地方筑建城墙，为此求助于晋国。
English: In the tenth year of King Zhou's reign, Liu Wengong and Zhi Hong planned to build a city wall for the place where King Zhou lived, and turned to Jin Province for help.

古文：魏献子为政，说苌弘而与之，将合诸侯。
现代文：当时晋国的政务是由魏献子主持，他对苌弘有感而答应了他要求，预备邀集诸侯共同营筑。
English: At that time, the political affairs of Jin were presided over by Wei Xianzi, who had a feeling for Zou Hong and agreed to his request, preparing to invite the princes to jointly build.

古文：卫彪傒适周，闻之，见单穆公曰： 苌、刘其不殁乎？
现代文：卫国的彪傒来到周，听说了这件事情，谒见单穆公说： 苌弘、刘文公将不得好死了吧。
English: When Liu Biao, the defender of the country, came to Zhou and heard about this matter, he saw Shan Mucong and said: "It's too bad that Xing Hong and Liu Wengong will die.

古文：周诗有之曰： 天之所支，不可坏也。
现代文：周诗上说： 上天所支持的，谁也破坏不了；上天想毁坏的，谁也支撑不住。 
English: Zhou said in a poem: What Heaven supports, no one can destroy; what Heaven wants to destroy, no one can support.

古文：其所坏，亦不可支也。 昔武王克殷而作此诗也，以为饫歌，名之曰支，以遗后之人，使永监焉。
现代文：过去武王灭亡商朝作了这首诗，把它作为王公宴飨时的乐歌，名为 支 ，以留传后代，使他们永远记住这个道理。
English: This poem was composed in the past, after the death of King Wu and the rise of the Shang Dynasty, and it was used as a musical song at the royal banquet, called "Zhi," to be passed down to future generations so that they would always remember this truth.

古文：夫礼之立成者为饫，昭明大节而已，少典与焉。
现代文：王公们站着宴饮的礼仪为饫，主要显扬大的节度，所配的乐曲不多。
English: The etiquette of the kings and queens standing at the banquet is ceremonial, the main thing is to show off the festival, and there are not many pieces of music.

古文：是以为之日惕，其欲教民戒也。
现代文：因此为之天天戒惧，这是要教育民众警惕。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to educate the public to be vigilant.

古文：然则夫《支》之所道者，必尽知天地之为也，不然不足以遗后之人。
现代文：可见，《支》这首诗所说的，就是一定要完全领会天地的意图，否则不足以留传于后人。
English: It can be seen that what the poem "Zhi" says is that we must fully understand the intentions of heaven and earth, otherwise it will not be enough to be passed down to future generations.

古文：今苌、刘欲支天之所坏，不亦难乎？
现代文：现在苌弘、刘文公要支持上天所破坏的，不是很困难吗？
English: Now, isn't it very difficult for Gong Hong and Liu Wengong to support what Heaven has destroyed?

古文：自幽王而天夺之明，使迷乱弃德，而即慆淫，以亡其百姓，其坏之也久矣。
现代文：自从周幽王被上天剥夺了辨别是非的能力，使他迷惑淫乱而毁弃德行，耽于享乐，丢掉了自己的百姓，王室遭到毁坏已经很久了。
English: It has been a long time since Heaven deprived King Zhou Yu of his ability to distinguish right from wrong, caused him to indulge in debauchery, abandon virtue, indulge in pleasure, and abandon his people.

古文：而又将补之，殆不可矣！
现代文：他们又要补救，那恐怕是不行的。
English: They want to fix it again, but I'm afraid that won't work.

古文：水火之所犯犹不可救，而况天乎？
现代文：水火所造成的灾祸尚不能挽救，更何况是上天降下的灾祸？
English: The disasters caused by floods and fires cannot be saved, let alone the disasters sent down from heaven?

古文：谚曰： 从善如登，从恶如崩。 
现代文：谚语说： 行善若登山，作恶如土崩。 
English: A proverb says: "Doing good is like climbing a mountain, while doing evil is like falling into a hole."

古文：昔孔甲乱夏，四世而陨；玄王勤商，十有四世而兴；帝甲乱之，七世而陨；后稷勤周，十有五世而兴。
现代文：过去孔甲扰乱夏政，延续了四代就灭亡了；玄王振兴商族，延续了十四代才成功；帝甲扰乱殷政，延续了七代就灭亡；后稷振兴周族，延续十五代才获得成功。
English: In the past, Kong Jia disrupted Xia Zheng and lasted for four generations before perishing; Xuan Wang revitalized the merchant class and lasted for fourteen generations before succeeding; Di Jia disrupted Yin Zheng and lasted for seven generations before perishing; Hou Yi revitalized the Zhou family and lasted for fifteen generations before succeeding.

古文：幽王乱之十有四世矣，守府之谓多，胡可兴也？
现代文：幽王扰乱周政以来已经十四代了，能守住现在的家业已经是十分幸运，怎么还会兴盛呢？
English: It has been fourteen generations since Yu Wang disturbed Zhou Zheng. It is very fortunate to be able to keep the current family business. How can it still prosper?

古文：夫周，高山、广川、大薮也，故能生是良材，而幽王荡以为魅陵、粪土、沟渎，其有悛乎？ 
现代文：周室犹如高山、长河和大泽，所以能出来如此多的优秀人才，而幽王把它破坏成秃陵、水沟和浅潭，还会培养出俊杰来吗？ 
English: Zhouzhuang is like a high mountain, a long river and a large lake, so it can produce so many outstanding talents, but Yu Wang has destroyed it into a valley, a ditch and a shallow pool. Will it still cultivate outstanding talents?

古文：单子曰： 其咎孰多？ 
现代文：单穆公说： 他们两个谁的罪过多？ 
English: Shanmukong said, "Which of the two of them has committed more sins?"

古文：曰： 苌叔必速及，将天以道补者也。
现代文：彪傒说： 苌弘必定会很快遭殃，因为他要修补上天所毁坏的东西。
English: Biao Yao said, "He Hong will surely suffer soon, because he wants to mend what Heaven has destroyed.

古文：夫天道导可而省否，苌叔反是，以诳刘子，必有三殃：违天，一也；反道，二也；诳人，三也。
现代文：天道是支持可行而排斥不可行的，苌弘的行为与此相反，而且还诳惑刘文公，因而必定会遭到三方面的灾殃：一是违背上天，二是逆转常度，三是诳惑他人。
English: Heaven's way is to support the feasible and reject the unfeasible. Gong Hong's behavior is contrary to this, and he also seduces Liu Wengong. As a result, he will inevitably suffer three kinds of disasters: one is to violate heaven, the second is to reverse the norm, and the third is to seduce others.

古文：周若无咎，苌叔必为戮，虽晋魏子亦将及焉。
现代文：周若要免除灾难，苌弘一定会被处罚，即使是晋国的魏献子也将受牵累。
English: If Zhou wanted to avoid disaster, Yan Hong would certainly be punished, and even Wei Xianzi of Jin would be implicated.

古文：若得天福，其当身乎？
现代文：如果得到天降福祉，恐怕其自身仍不能幸免。
English: If they receive welfare from heaven, I'm afraid they still won't be spared.

古文：若刘氏，则必子孙实有祸。
现代文：至于刘文公，一定是他的子孙来承担祸患。
English: As for Liu Wengong, it must be his descendants who bear the burden.

古文：夫子而弃常法，以从其私欲，用巧变以崇天灾，勤百姓以为己名，其殃大矣。 
现代文：作为王公大夫而抛弃常法，以顺从他们的私欲，耍小手腕来加重天灾，劳顿百姓来为自己树立名望，这罪过就很大了。 
English: It is a great sin to abandon the common law as the prince's doctor, to obey their selfish desires, to play tricks to aggravate the natural disaster, and to make the people work hard to build their reputation.

古文：是岁也，魏献子合诸侯之大夫于狄泉，遂田于大陆，焚而死。
现代文：这一年，魏献子在狄泉召集各诸侯的大夫，于是到大陆泽田猎，被火烧死。
English: In this year, Wei Xianzi gathered the doctors of all the princes in Diquan, and then went to the mainland to hunt in Sawada, and was burned to death.

古文：及范、中行之难，苌弘与之，晋人以为讨，二十八年，杀苌弘。
现代文：到范氏、中行氏作乱时，苌弘参予此事，晋人以此向周问罪。周敬王二十八年，苌弘被杀。
English: When the Fan and Zhongxing clans rioted, Yan Hong took part in the matter, and the Jin people used this to incriminate Zhou. In the 28th year of King Zhou's reign, Yan Hong was killed.

古文：及定王，刘氏亡。
现代文：到了周定王时，刘氏被灭族。
English: By the time of King Zhou Ding, the Liu clan had been exterminated.

