古文：平与皋斩硃泚使者，间走奉天上功，擢万年尉。平子正贯，字公理，少孤，皋谓能大其门，名曰臧孙。
现代文：韦正贯是韦皋的弟弟韦平的儿子，字公理，年幼时父亲就死了，韦皋认为他能光大韦家门户，取名叫臧孙。
English: Wei Zhenggang was the son of Wei Ping, the younger brother of Wei Xuan. His father died when he was young. Wei Xuan thought that he could become the head of the Wei family and was named the grandson of Wei Xuan.

古文：推廕为单父尉，不得意，弃官去，改今名。
现代文：朝廷因他先辈是功臣，封他为单父县尉。正贯认为不得志，辞去了官，离开了单父县，把原名改成现在这个名字。
English: The Imperial Court, because his forebear was a meritorious subject, appointed him to the rank of single father county lieutenant. He always thought that he was not good enough, resigned from his post, left single father county, and changed his original name to his current name.

古文：举贤良方正异等，除太子校书郎，调华原尉。
现代文：正贯被选到贤良方正异等科，任命为太子校书郎，调出任华原县尉。
English: He was consistently selected into the virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous, virtuous.

古文：后又中详闲吏治科，迁万年主簿，擢累司农卿。坐尚食乏供，贬均州刺史。
现代文：后来又考中详闲吏治科，升万年县主簿，连续升到司农卿，犯了掌管皇帝膳食缺乏供应的罪，降任均州刺史。
English: Later, he was promoted to the head of the county for ten thousand years, and successively promoted to the Secretary of Agriculture. He committed the crime of controlling the lack of supply of the emperor's meals, and was demoted to the position of the governor of Junzhou.

古文：久之，进寿州团练使。
现代文：过了很久，升任寿州团练使。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to Shoushu regimental drill sergeant.

古文：宣宗立，以治当最，拜京兆尹、同州刺史。
现代文：宣宗即位，因韦正贯政绩好，升任京兆尹、同州刺史。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, and because of Wei Zhengran's good performance in politics, he was promoted to the post of Jing Zhaoyun and made history in the same province.

古文：俄擢岭南节度使。
现代文：不久升岭南节度使。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of the Southern Song Dynasty envoy.

古文：南海舶贾始至，大帅必取象犀明珠，上珍而售以下直。
现代文：原先，南海商人一到，大帅一定索取象牙、犀角、明珠、上等珍品而压低价。
English: Originally, as soon as the South Sea merchants arrived, the general would ask for ivory, rhinoceros horns, pearls, and high-class treasures to keep the price low.

古文：正贯既至，无所取，吏咨其清。
现代文：正贯到任后，一尘不染，官吏赞叹他清廉。
English: After Zheng Rong took office, he was spotless, and officials praised him for his cleanliness.

古文：南方风俗右鬼，正贯毁淫祠，教民毋妄祈。
现代文：南方风俗尊崇魔鬼，正贯拆毁供奉魔鬼的庙祠，教育百姓不要胡乱祈祷。
English: Southern customs venerate the devil, and temples and shrines dedicated to the devil are being systematically demolished to teach the people not to pray in a disorderly manner.

古文：会海水溢，人争咎撤祠事，以为神不厌，正贯登城沃酒以誓曰： 不当神意，长人任其咎，无逮下民。 
现代文：有一次碰到海潮泛滥，百姓都争着归罪于拆毁了供奉魔鬼的庙祠，认为神不满意。正贯登城洒酒宣誓说： 不合神的心意，我当官的承担错误，不要祸及百姓。 
English: On one occasion, when there was a tidal wave, the people all blamed the demolition of the temple and shrine dedicated to the devil, believing that God was not satisfied. He went to the city to sprinkle wine and swore: "It is not in accordance with God's will, I am responsible for the mistakes of the officials, do not harm the people."

古文：俄而水去，民乃信之。
现代文：不久海潮退去，百姓才相信他的教化。
English: It was not long before the tide went out and the people believed in his reformation.

古文：居镇三岁，既病，遗令无厚葬，无用鼓吹，无请谥。
现代文：在岭南任职三年，病重，留下遗嘱：不要厚葬，不用乐队奏乐，不要请朝廷赠谥号。
English: He served in Lingnan for three years, fell seriously ill, and left a will: Do not have a lavish funeral, do not have a band play music, and do not ask the court to give you a posthumous name.

古文：卒，年六十八，赠工部尚书。
现代文：病故，享年六十八岁，追封为工部尚书。
English: He died of illness at the age of sixty-eight and was posthumously awarded the title of Shosho of the Ministry of Industry.

古文：刘辟者，字太初，擢进士宏词科，佐韦皋府，迁累御史中丞、支度副使。
现代文：刘辟字太初，选拔为进士宏词科，任韦皋府中幕僚，连续升官，任御史中丞、支度副使。
English: At the beginning of his career, Liu Bijie was selected to be a member of the Hongye School of Chinese Language and Literature. He was appointed as a staff member of the Weiwu government, and was promoted successively. He was appointed as the Vice-Minister of History and the Vice-Minister of Preparedness.

古文：皋卒，辟主后务，讽诸将徼旄节，宪宗以给事中召之，不奉诏。
现代文：韦皋死了，刘辟主持善后事务，暗示诸将向朝廷求取旄节。宪宗召他回朝任给事中，他不接受朝廷的命令。
English: Wei Zheng died, Liu Bei presided over the aftermath, hinting that Zhu would ask the imperial court for a pardon. He did not accept the order of the imperial court when Emperor Xianzong called him back to the imperial court.

古文：时帝新即位，欲静镇四方，即拜检校工部尚书、剑南西川节度使。
现代文：当时皇帝刚即位，想让国家宁静，就任命他为检校工部尚书，剑南、西川节度使。
English: At that time, the emperor had just ascended to the throne, and he wanted to keep the country calm, so he appointed him as the inspector of the inspection department, the secretary of the Jianan and the West River.

古文：辟意帝可动，益骜蹇，吐不臣语，求统三川，欲以所善卢文若节度东川，即以兵取梓州。
现代文：刘辟认为可以迫使皇帝改变决定，更加骄横不法，说出了背叛皇帝的话，要求统领三川，想任用与他感情好的卢文若任东川节度使，就派兵攻取梓州。
English: Liu Pi thought that he could force the emperor to change his decision and become more arrogant and lawless. He uttered the words of betraying the emperor and demanded to command the Three Rivers. If Lu Wen, who was on good terms with him, wanted to be appointed as the Dongchuan Festival envoy, he would send troops to capture Zizhou.

古文：且以术家言五福、太一舍于蜀，乃造大楼以祈祥。
现代文：并且借口掌管天文历法的官员说五福神、太一神住在四川，竟然建筑高楼来求吉祥。
English: Moreover, on the pretext that the officials in charge of the astronomical calendar said that the Five Gods of Fortune and the One God lived in Sichuan, they even built a high-rise to seek good luck.

古文：帝始重征讨，而宰相杜黄裳劝帝，且言： 辟，妄书生耳，可鼓而俘也。 
现代文：皇帝这才重视征讨，但宰相杜黄裳劝皇帝，并且说： 刘辟不过是一个狂妄的书生，可以一交战就活捉过来。 
English: Only then did the emperor attach importance to the conquest, but Prime Minister Du Huangxiao advised the emperor, and said: Liu Bi is nothing more than an arrogant scholar who can be captured alive in a battle.

古文：荐高崇文、李元弈等将神策行营兵皆西，使严砺、李康掎角之。
现代文：推荐高崇文、李元弈等率领神策军行营的部队向西进军，派严砺、李康夹攻刘辟。
English: Gao Chongwen, Li Yuanying and other troops led by Shen Zuo marched westward, and sent Yan Qi and Li Kang to attack Liu Bei.

古文：诏许自新，辟不听。崇文取东川，帝乃下诏夺其官，进破鹿头关，遂下成都。
现代文：朝廷下诏书准许他悔过自新，刘辟不听，高崇文攻取东川，皇帝下诏书削去刘辟的官职爵位，进军攻破鹿头关，顺利地攻占成都。
English: The imperial rescript issued by the imperial court allowed him to repent and reform, but Liu Bei did not listen, Gao Chongwen captured Dongchuan, the imperial rescript stripped Liu Bei of his official title and rank, marched to break through Shuto Pass, and successfully captured Chengdu.

古文：辟从数十骑走，至羊灌田，自投水，不能死，骑将郦定进禽之。文若先杀其族，缒石自沈于江，失其尸。
现代文：刘辟带几十个骑兵逃到洋灌田，投水自杀，又没有淹死，骑将郦定进活捉了他，卢文若先杀了自己的全族人，身上绑石头自己沉到长江里，没有找到尸体。
English: Liu Bi fled with dozens of cavalrymen to Yangwu Tian, threw himself into the water, but did not drown. The cavalry commander Lu Dingjin caught him alive. Lu Wen killed his whole family first, tied a stone to his body and sank into the Yangtze River, but his body was not found.

古文：槛车送辟京师，尚冀不死，食饮于道晏然。
现代文：用囚车把刘辟送往京城，他还希望不处死，在路上高兴地吃喝。
English: Liu Bi was sent to the capital in a prison van. He still hoped that he would not be executed, and happily ate and drank on the way.

古文：将至都，神策以兵迎之，系其首，曳而入，惊曰： 何至是邪？ 
现代文：快到京城，神策军派兵接着押送，用铁练套着他的头，拉进城，刘辟吃惊地说： 怎么到了这地步了？ 
English: As he neared the capital, the Shenzhao Army sent soldiers to escort him, put an iron chain around his head, and pulled him into the city. Surprised, Liu Bei said, "How did it come to this?

古文：帝御兴安楼受俘，诏诘反状，辟曰： 臣不敢反，五院子弟为恶，不能制。 
现代文：皇帝亲临兴安楼行受俘礼，接收俘虏，皇帝审讯他谋反的罪状，刘辟说 ：我不敢造反，是五院的子弟做坏事，我制止不住。 
English: The emperor himself came to Xing'an Tower to perform the rite of taking prisoners and receive prisoners. The emperor interrogated him about the crime of rebellion. Liu Bei said: I dare not rebel. It is the children of the Fifth Court who do bad things. I can't stop them.

古文：诏问： 遣使赐节何不受？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：派使者赐给的符节为什么不接受？ 
English: The emperor said, "Why don't you accept the symbols given to you by the emissary?"

古文：乃伏罪。
现代文：刘辟这才认罪。
English: Only then did Liu Qi plead guilty.

古文：献庙社，徇于市，斩于城西南独柳下。
现代文：献给社稷宗庙后，在大街上示众，在城西南独柳下杀死了他。
English: After dedicating it to the Shifang Zongji Temple, he paraded it in the streets and killed him in the southwest of the city, under the willow tree.

古文：子超郎等九人，与部将崔纲以次诛。
现代文：儿子超郎等九人，与部将崔纲先后处死。
English: Son Chao Lang and nine others were executed in succession, along with General Choi Gang.

古文：性乐士，贤不肖游其门者礼必均，故其往如归。
现代文：当初，刘辟曾经病重，见到探病的人，必定要把手送入他口中，刘辟就张嘴咬。
English: At first, Liu Bei was seriously ill. When he saw someone who was looking for him, he was sure to put his hand in his mouth. Liu Bei opened his mouth to bite him.

古文：许孟容、韩愈皆奏署幕府，有文章传于时。
现代文：只有卢文若来了，才与平常一样，所以更加与他亲密，结果都被杀了全族。
English: Only when Lu Wenlu came, it was the same as usual, so they were more intimate with him. As a result, the whole family was killed.

古文：子愔，始以廕补虢州参军事。
现代文：张建封的儿子叫张愔。当初因为是功臣的儿子任命为虢州参军的职务。
English: Zhang Jianfeng's son was named Zhang Jun. At the beginning, because he was the son of a meritorious subject, he was appointed to the post of military officer in Zhangzhou.

古文：建封卒，府佐郑通诚者摄留事，畏其军乱，因浙西戍兵过徐，谋引以为援。
现代文：建封去世后，节度府的属官郑通诚代理节度府留后，害怕他的军队发生兵乱，趁浙西的守卫部队经过徐州，打算请求留下作为自己的援军。
English: After the death of Jianfeng, Zheng Tongcheng, a subordinate official of the Jiedu Prefecture and the deputy of the Jiedu Prefecture, feared that his army would cause a mutiny, and took advantage of the west Zhejiang guard troops passing through Xuzhou to request to stay as his reinforcements.

古文：举军怒，斧库取兵，环府大噪，杀通诚及大将数人，乃表于朝，请愔为留后，假旄节。
现代文：全军愤怒，劈开武器库取出兵器，围绕着府衙大声鼓噪呐喊，杀死郑通诚和大将多人，于是向朝廷送上表章，请求任张忄音为徐州留后，给予旌节，皇帝不答应。
English: The whole army was enraged, split open the arsenal to take out the weapons, and shouted loudly around the palace, killing Zheng Tongcheng and many generals, so they sent a watch badge to the court, requesting that Zhang Yuyin be given a knighthood after staying for Xuzhou. The emperor did not agree.

古文：帝不许，披濠、泗隶淮南，诏杜佑讨徐乱。泗州刺史张伾以兵攻埇桥，与徐军遇，伾大败。帝未有以制，乃授愔右骁卫将军、徐州刺史，知留后。
现代文：分濠州、泗州隶属于淮南，命令杜佑征讨徐州的乱军，泗州刺史张亻丕带兵攻打土甬桥，与徐州的军队作战，张亻丕被打得大败，皇帝没有办法制服，于是任命张忄音为右骁卫将军、徐州刺史，主持留后的工作。
English: Du Yu ordered Du Yu to recruit and fight against the rebel army of Xuzhou, and Zhang Xizhi of Zhangzhou to lead the troops to attack the Duchi Bridge and fight against the army of Xuzhou. Zhang Xizhi was defeated, and the emperor had no way to subdue him, so he appointed Zhang Yuyin as the right guard general and Zhang Xizhi of Xuzhou to preside over the work left behind.

古文：以伾为泗州留后，杜兼为濠州留后。
现代文：任命张亻丕为泗州留后，杜佑兼任濠州留后。
English: After the appointment of Zhang Ye as the governor of Zhangzhou, Du You also served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：俄进愔武宁军节度使。
现代文：不久，升张忄音为武宁军节度使。
English: Soon after, Zhang Xuanyin was promoted to the Military Governor of Wu Ning Army.

古文：元和初，以疾求代，召为工部尚书，以王绍节度武宁，还濠、泗隶徐。徐人喜，遂不敢乱，而愔得行。
现代文：元和初年，因生病请求朝廷派人代替他，皇帝召他回朝任工部尚书，用王绍任武宁节度使，把濠州、泗州仍划归徐州，徐州人很高兴，于是不敢作乱，因而张忄音得以离开徐州，还没有走出徐州地界，就去世了。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, due to illness, he asked the imperial court to send someone to replace him. The emperor called him back to the imperial court to serve as Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and used Wang Shao as the commander of the Wu Ning Festival to assign Bozhou and Bozhou to Xuzhou. The people of Xuzhou were very happy, so they did not dare to make trouble. As a result, Zhang Huiyin was able to leave Xuzhou, and he died before he could leave the territory of Xuzhou.

古文：未逾境，卒。愔治徐七年，其政称治。
现代文：张忄音治理徐州七年，他的政事都处理得好，境内太平。
English: Zhang Yuyin has governed Xuzhou for seven years. His political affairs have been well handled, and the territory is peaceful.

古文：赠尚书右仆射。
现代文：追封为尚书右仆射。
English: The posthumous award goes to Shoshu's right-hand man, Sho.

