古文：丧服，斩衰裳，苴絰杖，绞带，冠绳缨，菅屦者。
现代文：丧服：把粗麻布斩裁做成上衰下裳，用粗麻做成麻带，用黑色竹子做成孝杖，用黑麻编成绞带。用六升布做丧冠，用枲麻做冠带，用菅草编成草鞋。《传》说：斩是什么？
English: Funeral attire: cut the coarse linen cloth into the upper and lower gowns, use the coarse linen to make the linen belt, use the black bamboo to make the filial cane, and use the black hemp to make the twine. Use the six-liter cloth to make the funeral crown, use the nettle to make the crown belt, and use the sedge to make the straw shoes. "Legend" says: What is chop?

古文：诸侯为天子，君，父为长子，为人后者。
现代文：是丧服不缝边。苴绖，是用结籽的麻做成的麻带，系在头上的麻带的长短为九寸。
English: It was a mourning robe without a seam, and it had a fringe of fine twined linen, and the length of the fringe of fine twined linen was nine cubits.

古文：妻为夫，妾为君，女子子在室为父，布总，箭笄，髽，衰，三年。子嫁，反在父之室，为父三年。
现代文：麻根放在左耳上边，从额前绕到项后，再回到左耳上边，把麻尾与麻根相接，麻根搭在麻尾上，根朝外。把斩衰的头带裁去五分之一就是斩衰的腰带。
English: Put the hemp root on the upper left ear, from the front of the forehead to the back of the collar, and then back to the upper left ear, connect the hemp tail with the hemp root, the hemp root is on the hemp tail, and the root is facing outward. Cut off one-fifth of the headband is the waistband.

古文：公士、大夫之众臣，为其君布带、绳屦。
现代文：齐衰的头带和斩衰的腰带长短相同。把齐衰的头带裁去五分之一就是齐衰的腰带。
English: The length of the headband is the same as that of the loincloth, and the loincloth is the same length as the headband. The loincloth is one-fifth the length of the headband.

古文：疏衰裳齐，牡麻絰，冠布缨，削杖，布带，疏屦三年者，父卒则为母，继母如母，慈母如母，母为长子。
现代文：大功的头带和齐衰的腰带长短相同，把大功的头带裁去五分之一就是大功的腰带。小功的头带与大功的腰带的长短相同。
English: The headband of the Great Gong is the same length as the waistband of the Qi Zhen. If you cut the headband of the Great Gong by one-fifth, it will be the waistband of the Great Gong. The headband of the Small Gong is the same length as the waistband of the Great Gong.

古文：疏衰裳齐，牡麻絰，冠布缨，削杖，布带，疏屦，期者，父在为母，妻，出妻之子为母。
现代文：把小功的头带裁去五分之一就是小功的腰带。缌麻的头带和小功的腰带长短相同，把缌麻的头带裁去五分之一就是缌麻的腰带。父亲去世，用竹子做孝杖，母亲去世，用桐木做孝杖。
English: If one-fifth of Xiaogong's headband is cut off, it is Xiaogong's belt. Nettle's headband is the same length as Xiaogong's belt, and if one-fifth of nettle's headband is cut off, it is Nettle's belt. When his father died, he used bamboo to make a filial cane, and when his mother died, he used paulownia wood to make a filial cane.

古文：出妻之子为父后者则为出母无服。
现代文：孝杖的高度与孝者胸部平齐，都是根部在下。
English: The height of the stick of filial piety is the same as the height of the filial person's chest, and the roots are at the bottom.

古文：父卒，继母嫁，从，为之服，报。不杖，麻屦者。
现代文：孝杖是什么？
English: What is a filial cane?

古文：祖父母，世父母，叔父母；大夫之适子为妻，昆弟；为众子，昆弟之子；大夫之庶子为适昆弟适孙。为人后者，为其父母，报。
现代文：是爵位。没有爵位而拿孝杖的是什么人？
English: It is a title of nobility. Without a title of nobility, who is the one who takes the stick of filial piety?

古文：女子子适人者为其父母、昆弟之为父后者，继父同居者，为夫之君。
现代文：为父亲服斩衰。《传》说：为什么为父亲服斩衰？因为父亲是家中至尊的人。诸侯为天子服斩衰。
English: "Biography" said: "Why do you dress for your father? Because the father is the most important person in the family. Princes dress for the son of heaven.

古文：姑、姊妹、女子子适人无主者，姑、姊妹报。
现代文：《传》说：天子是天下至尊的人。为国君服斩衰。《传》说：国君是国中至尊的人。
English: "Legend" says: "The Son of Heaven is the most honorable person in the world. He wears the robes of the sovereign." "Legend" says: "The sovereign is the most honorable person in the country."

古文：为君之父、母、妻、长子、祖父母。
现代文：父亲为嫡长子服斩衰。《传》说：为什么三年呢？
English: The father was heartbroken for his eldest son. "Biography" said: Why three years?

古文：妾为女君。
现代文：服丧三年。
English: Three years of mourning.

