古文：昔时贤文，诲汝谆谆。
现代文：古代圣贤的名言，谆谆教诲着我们。
English: The sayings of the ancient sages remind us of this.

古文：集韵增广，多见多闻。
现代文：经过大量的搜集，扩大篇章，使我们的见闻有所增加。
English: After a large amount of collection, we have expanded the chapter, so that our knowledge has increased.

古文：观今宜鉴古，无古不成今。知己知彼，将心比心。酒逢知己饮，诗向会人吟。
现代文：把总结古人的经验教训作为我们今天处世行事的指导，因为古今是一个传承关系，今天是古代的延续。遇到事情应该了解自己还要了解别人，对他人应设身处地去体谅。酒应当与知心朋友一起饮，诗应当对能理解的人吟诵。
English: Summarize the experience and lessons of the ancients as a guide for our actions in the world today, because the past and the present are a relationship of inheritance, and today is the continuation of ancient times. When things happen, you should understand yourself and understand others, and you should put yourself in the shoes of others to understand. Wine should be drunk with close friends, and poetry should be recited to people who can understand.

古文：相识满天下，知心能几人？
现代文：认识的人很多，但是称得上是知心朋友的又能有几个呢？
English: You know a lot of people, but how many of them can be called close friends?

古文：相逢好似初相识，到老终无怨恨心。
现代文：与人相处总像初次相见那样谦恭，不论时过多久，也不要产生怨恨之心。
English: Always treat people with the same courtesy as if you were meeting them for the first time. No matter how long it takes, don't hold grudges.

古文：近水知鱼性，近山识鸟音。
现代文：接近水才能知道鱼的习性，靠近山才能识辨鸟的声音。
English: Close to the water to know the habits of fish, close to the mountain to identify the sound of birds.

古文：易涨易退山溪水，易反易覆小人心。
现代文：山中的溪水时涨时退，卑鄙的人经常反复无常。
English: Mountain streams ebb and flow, and despicable people are often capricious.

古文：运去金成铁，时来铁似金。
现代文：机遇走了，黄金也会变成烂铁，时来运转的时候，即使生铁也会贵如黄金。
English: When the opportunity is gone, gold will also turn into rotten iron. When time comes to run, even raw iron will be as precious as gold.

古文：读书须用意，一字值千金。
现代文：读书应当用心去体会，每一个字都价值千金。
English: Reading should be experienced with the heart, every word is worth a lot of money.

古文：逢人且说三分话，未可全抛一片心。
现代文：与他人说话时，要留有余地，别把心里想说的全部讲出来。
English: When talking to others, leave room for more than what you really want to say.

古文：有意栽花花不发，无心插柳柳成荫。
现代文：用心栽的花往往并不开，无意插的柳树却常常能够长成绿荫。
English: Flowers that are planted with care often do not open, but willows that are unintentionally planted can often grow into green shade.

古文：画虎画皮难画骨，知人知面不知心。
现代文：画虎的形态很容易，但画出骨骼却很难；熟悉人的面貌很容易，但了解一个人的内心却很难。
English: It is easy to draw the shape of a tiger, but it is difficult to draw a skeleton; it is easy to get familiar with a person's face, but it is difficult to understand a person's heart.

古文：钱财如粪土，仁义值千金。
现代文：钱财犹如粪土，仁义才价值千金。
English: Money and wealth are like dung. It takes a lot of benevolence to be worth a lot of money.

古文：流水下滩非有意，白云出岫本无心。
现代文：流水与云的变化都不是自己的本意，而是自然变化，并非本意可以阻挡。
English: The changes in the flow of water and the clouds are not their own intention, but are natural changes that cannot be blocked by intention.

古文：当时若不登高望，谁信东流海洋深？
现代文：如果不是当年登高远眺，谁也不会知道河水一直东流到浩瀚大海。
English: If it wasn't for the view from up high, no one would know that the river flows all the way east to the vast ocean.

古文：路遥知马力，日久见人心。
现代文：走的路途遥远才能知道马的气力大小，经过的事情多了才能知晓人心的好坏。
English: It takes a long journey to know the strength of a horse. It takes a lot of experiences to know the goodness and badness of the human heart.

古文：两人一般心，无钱堪买金；一人一般心，有钱难买针。
现代文：两个同心协力办事，就算没有钱也可以完成大事。如果一人一个心思，就算有钱也买不了一根针。
English: If two people work together, they can accomplish great things even if they have no money. If one person is single-minded, even if they have money, they can't buy a needle.

古文：相见易得好，久住难为人。
现代文：初次相见容易相处得很好，长久居住在一起，人就很难友好相处。
English: It is easy to get along well when you meet for the first time, but when you live together for a long time, it is difficult for people to get along well.

古文：马行无力皆因瘦，人不风流只为贫。
现代文：马太瘦就跑不起来，人穷了就不能扬眉吐气。
English: If a horse is too thin, it can't run. If a man is poor, he can't raise his eyebrows.

古文：饶人不是痴汉，痴汉不会饶人。
现代文：能宽恕别人的人不是傻瓜，而傻瓜总是斤斤计较，从来不知道宽恕别人。
English: Those who can forgive others are not fools, but fools are always calculating and never know how to forgive others.

古文：是亲不是亲，非亲却是亲。
现代文：有些人是亲戚却不像亲人，而有的人不是亲戚却比亲人还亲近。
English: Some people are relatives but not like relatives, and some people are not relatives but are closer than relatives.

古文：美不美，乡中水；亲不亲，故乡人。
现代文：无论甜不甜，家乡的水总是最好喝的；不管是不是亲戚，家乡的人总是最亲近的。
English: Whether sweet or not, the water in one's hometown is always the best to drink; whether relatives or not, the people in one's hometown are always the closest.

古文：莺花犹怕春光老，岂可教人枉度春？
现代文：美丽的花都会害怕时光流逝自己慢慢变老，怎么可以教人虚度光阴呢？
English: Beautiful flowers are afraid of the passage of time and grow old slowly. How can you teach people to waste time?

古文：相逢不饮空归去，洞口桃花也笑人。
现代文：朋友相逢如果不饮酒畅谈，空空而归，就连洞口的桃花也会笑话他们。
English: When friends meet, if they do not drink and talk freely, but return empty-handed, even the peach blossoms at the mouth of the cave will laugh at them.

古文：红粉佳人休使老，风流浪子莫教贫。
现代文：不要让美丽的女子衰老，不要让风流倜傥的才子贫穷。
English: Don't let a beautiful woman grow old, and don't let a charming and talented man become poor.

古文：在家不会迎宾客，出门方知少主人。
现代文：在家不知道怎么接待客人，出了门才知道很少有人会接待你。
English: At home, you don't know how to receive guests. When you go out, you only know that few people will receive you.

古文：黄芩无假，阿魏无真。
现代文：黄芩很难有假的，阿魏之类的药材却很少有真货。
English: Astragalus is difficult to fake, but medicinal herbs such as mugwort are rarely genuine.

古文：客来主不顾，自是无良宾。
现代文：家里有客人来了而不知道接待照顾，可能就没有客人喜欢来这里了。
English: If there are guests at home who come and do not know how to receive and take care of them, there may be no guests who like to come here.

古文：良宾方不顾，应恐是痴人。
现代文：主人见客人来了不去打招呼，恐怕这只能是愚人。
English: If a host does not greet his guests when they arrive, I am afraid he is a fool.

古文：贫居闹市无人问，富在深山有远亲。
现代文：贫穷时，即使住在闹市也无人理睬；人富贵了，即使住在深山也有人登门认亲。
English: When you are poor, even if you live in a busy city, no one pays attention to you; when you are rich, even if you live deep in the mountains, people come to your door to recognize your relatives.

古文：谁人背后无人说，哪个人前不说人？
现代文：有谁背后不被他人议论，又有谁在他人面前没议论过别人？
English: Who hasn't been gossiped about by others behind their back, and who hasn't gossiped about others in front of others?

古文：有钱道真语，无钱语不真。
现代文：有钱人不管说什么，别人都奉承他说的是真的，而穷人说的话，别人都不相信是真话。
English: Whatever a rich man says, others flatter him that it is true, but what a poor man says, others do not believe to be true.

古文：不信但看筵中酒，杯杯先劝有钱人。
现代文：如果不相信，请看一看宴席上的美酒，每一杯都是先敬给有钱的人。
English: If you don't believe me, take a look at the fine wine at the banquet. Every glass is first given to the rich.

古文：闹里挣钱，静处安身。
现代文：喧闹繁华的地方有钱可赚，偏僻幽静的地方最适宜安身。
English: There is money to be made in noisy and bustling places, and secluded and quiet places are most suitable for settling down.

古文：来如风雨，去似微尘。
现代文：来时像狂风暴雨，退去的时候似微尘飘落。
English: When it comes, it's like a raging storm, and when it recedes, it's like fine dust.

古文：长江后浪推前浪，世上新人赶旧人。
现代文：长江水总是后浪推着前浪，世上新人层出不穷追赶着旧人。
English: The water of the Yangtze River is always pushed forward by the backwash, and the new people in the world are chasing the old people.

古文：近水楼台先得月，向阳花木早逢春。
现代文：接近水的楼台能最先看到月亮的投影，迎着阳光的花木最早接受春天的润泽。
English: Floors close to the water are the first to see the moon's projection, and flowers and trees facing the sun are the first to receive spring's moisture.

古文：古人不见今时月，今月曾经照古人。
现代文：古人看不见今天的月亮，今天的月亮却曾经照耀过古人。
English: The ancients could not see today's moon, but today's moon once shone on the ancients.

古文：先到为君，后到为臣。
现代文：抢先一步能当君主，后到一步只有称臣。
English: One step ahead can be a monarch, one step behind can only be a vassal.

古文：莫道君行早，更有早行人。
现代文：不要觉得你走得早，还有比你走得更早的人。
English: Don't feel like you left early, there are people who left earlier than you.

古文：莫信直中直，须防仁不仁。
现代文：不要轻易相信那些表面十分正直的人，更要提防那些假仁假义的人。
English: Don't easily believe those who appear to be very honest, and beware of those who pretend to be benevolent.

古文：山中有直树，世上无直人。
现代文：山里有长得笔直的树，世上却罕见真正的正直之人。
English: There are upright trees in the mountains, but true and honest people are rare in the world.

古文：自恨枝无叶，莫怨太阳偏。
现代文：树应该遗憾自己的枝头长不出叶子，而不是去埋怨太阳偏心眼。
English: The tree should regret that its branches do not grow leaves, instead of complaining about the sun's eccentricity.

古文：一切都是命，半点不由人。
现代文：一切都是命里安排，由不得自己控制。
English: Everything is arranged by fate and cannot be controlled by oneself.

古文：一年之计在于春，一日之计在于寅。一家之计在于和，一生之计在于勤。责人之心责己，恕己之心恕人。
现代文：对于一个家庭最重要的是和睦，对于人的一生最重要的是勤奋。应该用责备别人的态度来责备自己，用宽恕自己的态度去对待别人。
English: The most important thing for a family is harmony, and the most important thing for a person's life is diligence. You should blame yourself with the attitude of blaming others, and treat others with the attitude of forgiving yourself.

古文：守口如瓶，防意如城。
现代文：控制自己不随便讲话就如同塞紧的瓶口，摒除私心杂念就像坚守城堡防备敌人。
English: Controlling oneself from speaking carelessly is like closing the mouth of a bottle, and getting rid of selfish thoughts is like defending a castle from enemies.

古文：宁可人负我，切莫我负人。
现代文：宁肯让别人辜负我，也决不让自己去辜负别人。
English: I would rather let others fail me than let myself fail others.

古文：再三须慎意，第一莫欺心。
现代文：做事要再三考虑，慎重对待，做人最重要的是不要欺骗自己的良心。
English: You should think twice before doing things, treat them carefully, and the most important thing in life is not to deceive your conscience.

古文：虎身犹可近，人毒不堪亲。
现代文：老虎虽然危险，靠近了倒也未必有杀身之祸；而人心狠毒起来，就千万不能接近了。
English: Although tigers are dangerous, it is not necessarily fatal to get close to them; but if people's hearts are poisonous, they must not get close.

古文：来说是非者，便是是非人。
现代文：前来对你议论别人是非的人，其实他就是一个制造是非的人。
English: A person who comes to you to discuss the rights and wrongs of others is actually a person who creates rights and wrongs.

古文：远水难救近火，远亲不如近邻。
现代文：相距很远的水源无法扑救近处的烈火，住得很远的亲戚不如近处的邻居。
English: Distant water sources cannot extinguish a nearby fire, and distant relatives are not as good as close neighbors.

古文：有茶有酒多兄弟，急难何曾见一人？
现代文：平时吃酒吃茶的朋友很多，但是一旦出了事情，危难时刻一个出来帮忙的人的都没有。
English: There are many friends who usually drink wine and eat tea, but once something happens, there is no one to come out to help in times of crisis.

古文：人情似纸张张薄，世事如棋局局新。
现代文：世俗人的感情好比一张张纸，张张都是一样薄；人世间的事情好比一盘棋，一局更比一局新。
English: The worldly people's feelings are like a piece of paper, and each piece is equally thin; worldly affairs are like a game of chess, and each game is newer than the previous one.

古文：山中也有千年树，世上难逢百岁人。
现代文：山中有生长千年的古树，世上难遇活了百岁的老人。
English: There are ancient trees in the mountains that have been growing for a thousand years, and it is rare to find a hundred-year-old man in the world.

古文：力微休负重，言轻莫劝人。
现代文：身体单薄无力，就不要去背负重物。说话没有分量，就不要去规劝别人。
English: If your body is weak, don't carry heavy things on your back. If your speech is weak, don't try to persuade others.

古文：无钱休入众，遭难莫寻亲。
现代文：没有钱就不要到人群中去，遭遇困难的时候千万别去寻求亲戚的帮助。
English: If you don't have money, don't go among the crowd. If you encounter difficulties, don't go to your relatives for help.

古文：平生不做皱眉事，世上应无切齿人。
现代文：一生当中不做自己不应当做的事情，世界上就不会有痛恨你的人。
English: If you never do anything you shouldn't do in your life, there will never be anyone in the world who hates you.

古文：士者国之宝，儒为席上珍。
现代文：读书的有识之士是国家的栋梁、财富，儒家学者就像宴席上珍贵的美味一样。
English: Knowledgeable people who read books are the backbone and wealth of the country, and Confucian scholars are like precious delicacies at a banquet.

古文：若要断酒法，醒眼看醉人。
现代文：倘若想得到最好的戒酒方法，就要用清醒之人的眼光看醉酒人的行为。
English: If you want to know the best way to stop drinking, look at a drunk person's behavior with the eyes of a sober person.

古文：求人须求大丈夫，济人须济急时无。
现代文：求助人就要求那些胸怀坦荡、乐于助人的人，给人帮助就要在人最困难的时候。
English: The person asking for help asks those who are open-hearted and willing to help, to give help in the most difficult time.

古文：渴时一滴如甘露，醉后添杯不如无。
现代文：干渴的时候一滴水也会像甘露一样甜美，酒醉之后，再喝酒就不如不喝。
English: When thirsty, a drop of water will be as sweet as nectar. After getting drunk, it is better not to drink.

古文：久住令人贱，频来亲也疏。
现代文：在亲朋好友家住久了关系再好也会被厌烦，亲戚间频繁的往来反而会导致关系的疏远。
English: After living with relatives and friends for a long time, no matter how good the relationship is, it will be bored. On the contrary, frequent contacts between relatives will lead to the alienation of the relationship.

古文：酒中不语真君子，财上分明大丈夫。
现代文：在喝酒时不胡言乱语才是真正有修养的人，在钱财上分得很清楚才是能做大事的人。
English: A person who does not talk nonsense while drinking is a truly cultivated person, and a person who can do great things is a person who is very clear about money.

古文：出家如初，成佛有余。
现代文：修行之人如果能够保持最初的那份虔诚之心，那么就算成为佛祖都是绰绰有余的。
English: If a practitioner can maintain that initial piety, then even becoming a Buddha is more than enough.

古文：积金千两，不如明解经书。
现代文：积蓄很多金钱，不如多买几本书留给后代，使他们明解事理。
English: Instead of saving a lot of money, it is better to buy a few more books to leave for future generations so that they can understand the truth.

古文：养子不教如养驴，养女不教如养猪。
现代文：养儿子不教育同养驴没有什么区别，养女儿不教育和养猪没什么区别。
English: There is no difference between raising a son without education and raising a donkey. There is no difference between raising a daughter without education and raising a pig.

古文：有田不耕仓廪虚，有书不读子孙愚。
现代文：有田不去耕种，仓库里无储备，当然空虚了。有书不去读，子孙当然愚昧了。
English: If there are fields that are not cultivated and warehouses that have no reserves, of course they are empty. If there are books that are not read, of course the children and grandchildren will be ignorant.

古文：仓廪虚兮岁月乏，子孙愚兮礼仪疏。
现代文：粮仓里没有粮食，日子就艰难；儿孙愚昧，礼义就匮乏。
English: If there is no grain in the granary, the days will be hard; if the children and grandchildren are ignorant, there will be a lack of courtesy.

古文：听君一席话，胜读十年书。
现代文：与对方交谈的时间虽然很短，但是受益很大。
English: Although the time spent talking to the other person is very short, the benefits are great.

古文：人不通今古，马牛而襟裾。
现代文：人不知道古往今来的历史变迁，就像马牛穿上人的衣服。
English: People do not know the historical changes from ancient times to the present, just like a horse cow putting on human clothes.

古文：茫茫四海人无数，哪个男儿是丈夫？
现代文：茫茫四海人无数，哪个男儿才是真正的男子汉大丈夫？
English: Countless people from all over the world, which man is the real man, okay?

古文：白酒酿成缘好客，黄金散尽为收书。
现代文：酿酒是因为好客，钱财散尽是为了购买书籍。
English: Wine is made for hospitality, money is spent for books.

古文：救人一命，胜造七级浮屠。
现代文：为死去的人造塔，毕竟不如 救人一命 的功德更大，更有意义。
English: An artificial tower for the dead, after all, is not as great and meaningful as the merit of saving a human life.

古文：城门失火，殃及池鱼。
现代文：城门失火，大家都到护城河取水，水用完了，鱼也死了。
English: The city gate caught fire, everyone went to the moat to fetch water, the water ran out, and the fish died.

古文：庭前生瑞草，好事不如无。
现代文：门前长了棵瑞草，这其实是招来忌妒或觊觎，这是危险的事。
English: If there is a weed growing in front of the door, it is actually to arouse envy or jealousy, which is a dangerous thing.

古文：欲求生富贵，须下死工夫。
现代文：如果想得到荣华富贵，必须付出拼死的努力。
English: If you want to be rich and prosperous, you must work hard.

古文：百年成之不足，一旦败之有余。
现代文：做一件事，百年时间未必成功；要失败一天时间都有余。
English: If you do one thing, you may not succeed for a hundred years; if you fail, you have more than one day.

古文：人心似铁，官法如炉。
现代文：心即使顽固得像铁一样，国家律法也能像火炉一样熔化它。
English: Though the heart be as hard as iron, the law of the state can melt it like a furnace.

古文：善化不足，恶化有余。
现代文：通过教育不能感化的话，就得通过法律来强制改造。
English: If you can't influence people through education, you have to force them to change through the law.

古文：水至清则无鱼，人太急则无智。
现代文：水如果太清澈就不会有鱼，人脾气太急躁就不会有智谋。
English: If the water is too clear, there will be no fish. If people's temper is too quick, there will be no wisdom.

古文：知者减半，愚者全无。
现代文：世上的聪明人若减少一半，那么愚笨的人也就没有了。
English: If the number of intelligent people in the world were cut in half, there would be no stupid people.

古文：在家由父，出嫁从夫。
现代文：女子在家里要听从父亲，出嫁后要服从丈夫。
English: A woman should obey her father at home and her husband after marriage.

古文：痴人畏妇，贤女敬夫。
现代文：平庸痴心的男人怕老婆，贤惠有德的女子尊敬自己的夫君。
English: A mediocre and foolish man is afraid of his wife, while a virtuous woman respects her husband.

古文：是非终日有，不听自然无。
现代文：议论是非的话时常会有，不听自然就没有。
English: Arguments about what is right and what is wrong often occur, but they would not occur without listening to nature.

古文：竹篱茅舍风光好，道院僧房终不如。
现代文：简朴的竹篱茅草屋景色很好，寺院再好怎么能比得上它。
English: The simple bamboo hedge thatched cottage is a beautiful sight, but how can a temple be compared to it, no matter how good it is?

古文：宁可正而不足，不可邪而有余。
现代文：为人宁愿正直地安贞守拙，也不可靠邪门歪道谋取赢余。
English: People would rather be honest and keep their chastity, but they can't rely on evil and crooked ways to win more.

古文：宁可信其有，不可信其无。
现代文：宁愿相信这件事情确实发生过的，是存在有的，也不愿意相信这没有。
English: I'd rather believe that this thing really happened, that it exists, than that it doesn't.

古文：命里有时终须有，命里无时莫强求。
现代文：命里该有的迟早会到，命里没有的别去强求。
English: What you should have in your life will come sooner or later. Don't ask for what you don't have in your life.

古文：道院迎仙客，书堂隐相儒。
现代文：寺院迎接的是仙游四方的客人，书斋里隐居的是未来的高官或学者。
English: Temples welcome guests from far and wide, while future high-ranking officials or scholars live in seclusion in study halls.

古文：庭栽栖凤竹，池养化龙鱼。
现代文：庭院里栽种凤凰栖息的竹子，池塘里养育将化为龙的鱼。
English: Phoenix-dwelling bamboo is planted in the courtyard, and fish that will turn into dragons are raised in the pond.

古文：结交须胜己，似我不如无。
现代文：结交朋友必须胜过自己，否则，不如不结交朋友。
English: Make friends must be better than yourself, otherwise, it is better not to make friends.

古文：但看三五日，相见不如初。
现代文：往往同友人交往三五天后，见面的印象就没有刚见到时那么好了。
English: Often, three to five days after meeting a friend, the impression is not as good as it was when you first met.

古文：人情似水分高下，世事如云任卷舒。
现代文：人的情意像水一样有高有下，不必去计较；世上的事像云一样，任凭它变化多端。
English: A man's affections, like water, ebb and flow, and are not to be reckoned with; the affairs of this world, like clouds, are subject to change.

古文：会说说都是，不会说无理。
现代文：会说话的人嘴上功夫几乎到了颠倒是非的能力，不会说话的人讲的都是屋里屋外的琐事。
English: People who can speak work hard on their lips, almost to the point of being able to invert right and wrong. People who can't speak talk about trivial matters inside and outside the house.

古文：磨刀恨不利，刀利伤人指；
现代文：磨刀时怕不锋利，而太锋利的刀容易伤人手指。
English: When sharpening a knife, beware of not being sharp, and knives that are too sharp can easily injure fingers.

古文：求财恨不多，财多害自己。
现代文：追求钱财时，唯恐钱不够多，可是钱财多了反会害了自己。
English: When pursuing money and wealth, they are afraid of not having enough money, but if they have more money and wealth, they will harm themselves.

古文：知足常足，终身不辱；
现代文：持盈保泰，自知满足，一辈子也不会遭到屈辱；
English: To be self-sufficient, self-satisfied, and never be humiliated in life;

古文：知止常止，终身不耻。
现代文：留有余地，适可而止，一辈子也不会蒙受羞耻。
English: There's room for improvement, but only if necessary, and you won't be shamed for the rest of your life.

古文：有福伤财，无福伤己。
现代文：有福之人遭到不幸只是损失钱财，无福之人遭遇不幸则会伤及性命。
English: If a fortunate person suffers misfortune, it is only a loss of money, but if an unlucky person suffers misfortune, it is a loss of life.

古文：差之毫厘，失之千里。
现代文：开始时虽然相差很微小，结果会造成很大的错误。
English: Although the difference is very small at the beginning, it will result in a large error.

古文：若登高必自卑，若涉远必自迩。
现代文：就好像是走远路，必须从近处开始，就如同是登高，必须从低处开始。
English: As if to go far, one must begin near, as if to climb high, one must begin low.

古文：三思而行，再思可矣。
现代文：凡事应三思而后行，但通常考虑两遍就差不多了。
English: You should always think twice before you act, but often thinking twice is almost enough.

古文：动口不如亲为，求人不如求己。
现代文：动口说指挥别人去做，却不如自己亲自去做；求人帮助还不如依靠自己的努力。
English: It is better to do it yourself than to command others to do it; it is better to rely on your own efforts to ask for help.

古文：小时是兄弟，长大各乡里。
现代文：小时在一起玩耍时是好兄弟，长大成人后就各奔东西了。
English: When they play together for an hour, they are good brothers, but when they grow up, they go their separate ways.

古文：嫉财莫嫉食，怨生莫怨死。
现代文：嫉妒别人的钱财，但不要嫉妒别人的食物；埋怨自己的出生，不要埋怨自己的死亡。
English: Be jealous of other people's money, but don't be jealous of other people's food; complain about your birth, don't complain about your death.

古文：人见白头嗔，我见白头喜。
现代文：别人发现头发白了就很生气，我见了却时很高兴。
English: Other people get angry when they see grey hair, but I'm happy when I see it.

古文：多少少年郎，不到白头死。
现代文：多少人在少年时就死去了，还没有活到头发白的时候。
English: How many have died in their youth, before reaching the grey hairs.

古文：墙有缝，壁有耳。
现代文：隔着一道墙，也有人偷听。
English: Across the wall, someone was also eavesdropping.

古文：好事不出门，坏事传千里。
现代文：好事不容易被人知道，坏事却传播得又快又广。
English: Good things are not easily known, but bad things spread quickly and widely.

古文：若要人不知，除非己莫为。
现代文：要想别人不知道自己做的事情，除非自己不去做。
English: To think that others do not know what you do, unless you do not do it.

古文：为人不做亏心事，半夜敲门心不惊。
现代文：做人不要干有亏良心的事情，半夜有人敲门心里也不惊慌。
English: Don't do things that violate your conscience, and don't panic if someone knocks on your door in the middle of the night.

古文：贼是小人，智过君子。
现代文：盗贼虽然品行低劣，但机智却超过德才出众的人。
English: A thief, though of low moral character, is wiser than a man of superior virtue.

古文：君子固穷，小人穷斯滥矣。
现代文：君子即使穷途末路，依然固守节操和本分，小人身处逆境，就容易想入非非，胡作非为。
English: Even if a gentleman is at his wit's end, he will still adhere to discipline and duty. If a small person is in adversity, it is easy to dream up and do something wrong.

古文：富贵多忧，贫穷自在。
现代文：富贵的人的人有很多忧愁烦心的事，贫穷的人反而过得自在。
English: The rich man has many troubles, but the poor man is at ease.

古文：不以我为德，反以我为仇。
现代文：不但不感激我的高行大德，反而以怨报德把我当作仇人。
English: Instead of being grateful for my high morals, he treated me as an enemy and repaid me with grudges.

古文：宁可直中取，不可曲中求。
现代文：宁愿正当地求取，决不卑屈地苟求。
English: I'd rather ask for what I deserve than beg for what I deserve.

古文：人无远虑，必有近忧。
现代文：人一直没有长远的考虑，那忧患一定近在眼前。
English: People have not been thinking about the long term, and that sorrow must be close at hand.

古文：知我者谓我心忧，不知我者谓我何求？
现代文：能够理解我的人，说我是心中忧愁。不能理解我的人，问我把什么寻求。
English: Those who know me say that I'm sad. Those who don't know me ask me what I'm looking for.

古文：晴天不肯去，直待雨淋头。
现代文：天气好时不愿前去，直到大雨淋头时才开始行动，这时候已经晚了。
English: When the weather is good, they don't want to go, and they don't start until it's raining heavily, by which time it's too late.

古文：成事莫说，覆水难收。
现代文：事情已经成为事实了，就像泼在地上的水难以收回，说了也没用。
English: Things have become a fact, just like water spilled on the ground is difficult to recover, it is useless to say.

古文：是非只为多开口，烦恼皆因强出头。忍得一时之气，免得百日之忧。
现代文：多说话会惹是生非，争强好胜会招惹烦恼。忍得了一时冲动，能避免将来许多烦恼。
English: Talking too much will cause quarrels, and being competitive will cause troubles. If you can tolerate the momentary impulse, you can avoid many troubles in the future.

古文：近来学得乌龟法，得缩头时且缩头。
现代文：人要像乌龟学习，在局势不利的情况下，就该将头缩到壳子中去。
English: One should learn to be like a turtle, and when the situation is unfavorable, one should withdraw one's head into the shell.

古文：惧法朝朝乐，欺公日日忧。
现代文：敬畏法律，每天心地坦然；欺瞒公庭，天天提心吊胆。
English: Fear the law, and be at ease every day; deceive the court, and be apprehensive every day.

古文：人生一世，草长一春。
现代文：人的一生，就像草生一春一秋一样短暂。
English: A person's life is as short as a blade of grass.

古文：黑发不知勤学早，转眼便是白头翁。
现代文：年少时不知道勤学苦读，弹指间就会变成白发老翁！
English: If you don't study hard when you're young, you'll turn into a white-haired old man in no time!

古文：月过十五光明少，人到中年万事休。
现代文：如同月亮过了十五光亮就逐渐减少一样，人到了中年，就错过了年龄优势，一切事情只好罢休。
English: Just as the brightness of the moon gradually decreases after the fifteenth day, when people reach middle age, they miss the age advantage, and everything has to stop.

古文：儿孙自有儿孙福，莫为儿孙做马牛。
现代文：儿孙后辈的幸福要由他们自己去奋斗创造，不必为他们做马做牛去劳作操心。
English: The happiness of their children and grandchildren should be created by their own efforts. There is no need to worry about being a horse or a cow for them.

古文：人生不满百，常怀千岁忧。
现代文：人的一生常常都不到百岁，但是却常常忧愁千岁后的事情。
English: People's lives are often less than a hundred years old, but they often worry about things after a thousand years.

古文：今朝有酒今朝醉，明日愁来明日忧。
现代文：今天有酒就今天喝醉，明天的烦愁就明天再烦忧。
English: Today's wine is today's drunk, tomorrow's worries are tomorrow's worries.

古文：路逢险处难回避，事到临头不自由。
现代文：行路遇到险峻的地方很难回避，有时困难的事情落到身上必须面对。
English: It is difficult to avoid the steep places on the journey, and sometimes difficult things must be faced.

古文：人平不语，水平不流。
现代文：人心平气和就不必诉说，犹如水平了就不流动。
English: There is no need to appeal to people's peace of mind, as if it is level, it will not flow.

古文：一家养女百家求，一马不行百马忧。
现代文：一家养了一个好女儿，就有上百家人登门求亲，一匹马如果不走，就会导致一群马跟着不走。
English: If a family has a good daughter, there will be hundreds of family members coming to the door to ask for marriage. If a horse does not go, it will lead to a group of horses not following.

古文：有花方酌酒，无月不登楼。
现代文：有花观赏才值得饮酒，无月观赏不值得登楼。
English: It's worth drinking alcohol to see flowers, but it's not worth climbing the stairs to see the moon.

古文：三杯通大道，一醉解千愁。
现代文：三杯酒下肚可以通晓道理，喝醉之后可以解除各种烦愁。
English: After three glasses of wine, you can understand the truth, and you can get rid of all kinds of worries after getting drunk.

古文：深山毕竟藏猛虎，大海终须纳细流。
现代文：深山之中藏匿着凶猛的老虎；大海需要吸纳涓涓细流。
English: Deep in the mountains hide ferocious tigers; the sea needs to absorb the trickle.

古文：惜花须检点，爱月不梳头。
现代文：清净高雅的人行为要检点，冰清玉洁的人要洁身自好。
English: People who are pure and elegant should be careful in their behavior, and those who are ice-cold and pure should keep themselves clean.

古文：大抵选她肌骨好，不搽红粉也风流。
现代文：大概是因为他容貌、气质好，即使不打扮也是很英俊的。
English: Probably because of his good looks and temperament, he is very handsome even without dressing up.

古文：受恩深处宜先退，得意浓时便可休。
现代文：人在最受宠爱的时候应该考虑功成身退，而在最春风得意的时候也要懂得及时罢休。
English: People should consider retirement when they are most favored, and they should also know how to retire in time when they are at their best.

古文：莫待是非来入耳，从前恩爱反为仇。
现代文：千万不要等到是非传入耳内，致使过去的恩爱变成怨仇。
English: Don't wait for the pros and cons to sink in before turning a past love into a grudge.

古文：留得五湖明月在，不愁无处下金钩。
现代文：保养好身体、保留了力量或掌握了知识、本领，就不愁达不到目的。
English: If you maintain your body well, retain your strength, or master your knowledge and skills, you will not be afraid to achieve your goal.

古文：休别有鱼处，莫恋浅滩头。
现代文：不要轻易离开有鱼的地方，不要留恋在那些没有鱼的浅滩河沟旁边。
English: Don't easily leave the place where there are fish, and don't linger around the shallows and ditches where there are no fish.

古文：去时终须去，再三留不住。
现代文：该离去的终究要离去，再三挽留也是留不住的。
English: After all, when it's time to leave, you have to leave. You can't hold on to something for too long.

古文：忍一句，息一怒，饶一着，退一步。
现代文：忍着少说一句就可以平息一次怒火，让人一步，别人就会也后退一步。
English: With a little patience and a few words, it is possible to calm one's anger. If one person takes a step, others will also take a step back.

古文：三十不豪，四十不富，五十将来寻死路。生不认魂，死不认尸。
现代文：大多数人活着的时候，不能正面、正确地认识自己的灵魂或精神成分；死了之后继续流浪、轮回，容易投入新的境界，而忘记自己原来的肉体。
English: When most people are alive, they cannot positively and correctly recognize their soul or spiritual component; after death, they continue to wander and reincarnate, and easily plunge into a new realm, forgetting their original body.

古文：一寸光阴一寸金，寸金难买寸光阴。
现代文：一寸光阴和一寸长的黄金一样昂贵，而一寸长的黄金却难以买到一寸光阴。
English: An inch of time is as precious as an inch of gold, but an inch of gold will not buy an inch of time.

古文：父母恩深终有别，夫妻义重也分离。
现代文：比喻时间十分宝贵。父母的恩情再深终究要与你分别，夫妻的情义再重难免一朝分手。
English: Metaphorically speaking, time is very precious. No matter how deep your parents' affection is, they will eventually have to part ways with you, and no matter how much affection a husband and wife have, they will inevitably break up one day.

古文：人生似鸟同林宿，大难来时各自飞。
现代文：人们生活像鸟儿在一树林中居住，大难来临时各自逃离飞去。
English: People live like birds in a forest, and when disaster strikes, they all fly away.

古文：人善被人欺，马善被人骑。
现代文：人过于善良就会很容易被人欺负，而马过于和善则容易被人当作坐骑来骑。
English: A person who is too kind is easily bullied, while a horse that is too kind is easily ridden as a mount.

古文：人无横财不富，马无夜草不肥。
现代文：人没有意外之财不会富有，马没有夜食不会肥。
English: A man can't be rich without a windfall, and a horse can't be fat without a late meal.

古文：人恶人怕天不怕，人善人欺天不欺。善恶到头终有报，只盼来早与来迟。
现代文：善有善报，恶有恶报，行善和作恶都必然会有报应，只不过有报应来得时间是早一些还是晚一些。
English: Good is rewarded with good, evil is rewarded with evil, doing good and doing evil will inevitably have retribution, but whether the time for retribution comes sooner or later.

古文：黄河尚有澄清日，岂能人无得运时？
现代文：黄河尚且有澄清的一天，人怎么会没有走运、得意的时候。
English: The Yellow River still has a clear day, how can people not be lucky, when they are good at it.

古文：得宠思辱，居安思危。念念有如临敌日，心心常似过桥时。
现代文：人在得到荣誉的时候，应考虑到可能遭受的耻辱；平安无事的时候，则要想到可能发生的危险。每一个瞬间都如面临大敌，心里总像过独木桥时那样紧张。
English: When one is honored, one should think of the disgrace one may suffer; when one is safe, one should think of the danger one may encounter; every moment is like facing a great enemy, and one's heart is always as tense as when crossing a wooden bridge.

古文：英雄行险道，富贵似花枝。
现代文：豪杰所走的道路充满艰险，荣华富贵如同花枝一样容易凋谢，成为过眼烟云。
English: The road taken by the heroes is full of hardships, and the glory and wealth are as easy to fade away as the flowers and twigs, becoming a passing cloud.

古文：人情莫道春光好，只怕秋来有冷时。
现代文：人情关系并不总是如同春光一样美好，只怕也有像秋天一样冷清的时候。
English: Human relations are not always as beautiful as spring, but there are also times when they are as cold as autumn.

古文：送君千里，终有一别。
现代文：朋友间的离别情，尽管伴送千里也终有分别之时。
English: The parting between friends, although accompanied by thousands of miles, will eventually be separated.

古文：但将冷眼观螃蟹，看你横行到几时。
现代文：只用冷眼看螃蟹，看你能横着爬到什么时候。
English: Just look at the crab with cold eyes and see how long you can crawl sideways.

古文：见事莫说，问事不知。
现代文：看到什么事不要说出来，问你什么事都说不知道。
English: If you see something, don't say anything. If you're asked anything, say you don't know.

古文：闲事莫管，无事早归。
现代文：任何闲事都不要去管，没有事做及早回家去。
English: Don't meddle in other people's business. If you have nothing to do, go home early.

古文：假缎染就真红色，也被旁人说是非。
现代文：假的绸缎即使染成象真绸缎一样的红色，也还是会被人看出来其是假的绸缎，从而会被旁人说三道四。
English: Even if the fake satin is dyed red like the real satin, it will still be seen as a fake satin, which will be criticized by others.

古文：善事可做，恶事莫为。
现代文：好事可以做，坏事不能去做。
English: You can do good things, but you cannot do bad things.

古文：许人一物，千金不移。
现代文：假如答应了给人某样东西，即便有其他人用千金来换，也不能后悔。
English: If you agree to give someone something, you can't regret it, even if someone else offers you thousands of dollars in exchange.

古文：龙生龙子，虎生虎儿。
现代文：什么样的父母就会养出什么样的孩子。
English: What kind of parents will raise what kind of children.

古文：龙游浅水遭虾戏，虎落平原被犬欺。
现代文：龙若是搁浅了会遭到河虾的戏弄，虎若是到了平原会被狗欺负。
English: If the dragon is stranded, it will be teased by the river shrimp, and if the tiger is on the plain, it will be bullied by the dog.

古文：一举首登龙虎榜，十年身到凤凰池。
现代文：一次科举考试，名字就登上了龙虎榜，苦读十年，终于获得了大展宏图的机会。
English: Once he took the imperial examination, his name appeared on the dragon and tiger list. After ten years of hard work, he finally got the opportunity to show his ambition.

古文：十年寒窗无人问，一举成名天下知。
现代文：读书人长期攻读诗书默默无闻，一旦考取功名，就名扬天下。
English: Readers study poetry books for a long time in obscurity, and once they win a merit, they are famous all over the world.

古文：酒债寻常处处有，人生七十古来稀！
现代文：到处都欠着酒债，那是寻常小事，人能够活到七十岁，古来也是很少的了。
English: People everywhere are in debt for alcohol, which is a trivial matter. People can live up to seventy years of age, which was rare in ancient times.

古文：养儿防老，积谷防饥。
现代文：养育孩子以防老年无依无靠，保存谷物为防备饥荒。
English: Raising children to prevent old age helpless, save grain to prevent famine.

古文：鸡豚狗彘之畜，无失其时，数口之家，可以无饥矣。
现代文：鸡、猪、狗的畜养，不要耽误它们的繁殖时机，数口之家，就不会有饥饿的时候。
English: If you keep chickens, pigs, and dogs, do not delay their breeding time. If you have a family of several members, there will be no time of hunger.

古文：当家才知盐米贵，养子方知父母恩。
现代文：理家主事之后才知道钱财的来之不易，生儿育女之后才理解父母的养育之恩。
English: It is only after running a household that one knows that money is hard to come by, and it is only after having children that one understands the benefits of parental upbringing.

古文：常将有日思无日，莫把无时当有时。
现代文：应该常常在有吃穿的时候想到没有吃穿的日子，别等到没有吃穿的时候才想念有吃穿的日子。
English: You should always think about the days when you have food and clothing when you think about the days when you don't have food and clothing. Don't wait until you don't have food and clothing to miss the days when you have food and clothing.

古文：树欲静而风不止，子欲养而亲不待。
现代文：树想要静止，风却不停地刮动它的枝叶；子女希望尽孝双亲时，父母却已经亡故。
English: A tree wants to be still, but the wind keeps shaking its branches and leaves; a child wants to honor his parents, but his parents are dead.

古文：时来风送滕王阁，运去雷轰荐福碑。
现代文：交好运的时候，风会送你到滕王阁扬名；没运气的时候，要临摹荐福碑，碑却被雷轰毁。
English: If you are lucky, the wind will carry you to Tengwang Pavilion to make a name for yourself; if you are unlucky, you should copy and recommend the blessing monument, but the monument was destroyed by thunder.

古文：入门休问荣枯事，且看容颜便得知。
现代文：进别人家门，无须问日子过得怎么样，只要观察他们的容颜气色就知道了。
English: When you walk into someone's house, you don't have to ask how their day is going, just look at their face and figure it out.

古文：官清司吏瘦，神灵庙祝肥。
现代文：清廉的为官者，他的下级吏员都很清瘦；供奉的神仙如果显灵，看管香火的人一定肥胖。
English: If the official is clean and upright, his subordinate officials are clean and thin; if the immortal god he worships appears, the person in charge of the incense must be fat.

古文：息却雷霆之怒，罢却虎狼之威。
现代文：做官的人应该平息雷霆般的愤怒，去掉虎狼般的威风。
English: Officials should calm down the thunderous anger and get rid of the tiger-wolf-like dignity.

古文：饶人算之本，输人算之机。
现代文：能饶恕别人是处世的根本，能忍让别人是处世的关键。
English: To be able to forgive others is the foundation of one's life, and to be able to tolerate others is the key to one's life.

古文：好言难得，恶语易施。
现代文：对人有益的话很难听到，伤人的话容易说出。
English: Good words are hard to hear, but hurtful words are easy to say.

古文：一言既出，驷马难追。
现代文：一句话说出口，四匹马驾的车都追不回。
English: In other words, a four-horse carriage cannot be chased back.

古文：道吾好者是吾贼，道吾恶者是吾师。
现代文：说我好话的人是害我的人，讲我缺点的人是我的老师。
English: The person who speaks well of me is the one who harms me, and the person who speaks of my shortcomings is my teacher.

古文：路逢侠客须呈剑，不是才人莫献诗。
现代文：在路上遇到了侠客应该呈上宝剑，如果对方不是才子就不该献上诗篇。
English: If you meet a knight on the road, you should present him with a sword. If the other party is not a genius, you should not present him with a poem.

古文：三人行必有我师焉。
现代文：三人同行，其中一定有能做我老师的人。
English: Three people walking together, there must be someone who can be my teacher.

古文：择其善者而从之，其不善者而改之。
现代文：对他们的长处要虚心学习，对他们的缺点也可借鉴改正。
English: I choose his good aspects to learn from him, and see his bad aspects to correct my shortcomings against myself.

古文：欲昌和顺须为善，要振家声在读书。
现代文：想要家庭和顺美满，就要多做好事；要想振兴家族名声，就要刻苦读书。
English: If you want a happy family, you should do more good deeds; if you want to revitalize your family's reputation, you should study hard.

古文：少壮不努力，老大徒伤悲。
现代文：年少力壮的时候不知道努力，到年老体衰的时候就只能空自伤心了。
English: When you are young and strong, you don't know how to work hard. When you are old and weak, you can only be sad.

古文：人有善愿，天必佑之。
现代文：人如果有善良的愿望，上天也会帮助他的。
English: If a person has good wishes, heaven will also help him.

古文：莫饮卯时酒，昏昏醉到酉。
现代文：不要在清晨时饮酒，那样会昏昏沉沉直到傍晚。
English: Don't drink in the morning, you'll be groggy until the evening.

古文：莫骂酉时妻，一夜受孤凄。
现代文：不可在傍晚骂妻子，那样一夜都会孤独凄凉。
English: Don't scold your wife in the evening, you'll be lonely and desolate all night.

古文：种麻得麻，种豆得豆。
现代文：种下麻籽会收获麻，播下豆种会收获豆。
English: If you plant hemp seeds, you will get hemp, and if you plant bean seeds, you will get beans.

古文：天眼恢恢，疏而不漏。
现代文：天像宏大的网，虽然网眼稀疏却不会漏掉一切坏人、坏事。
English: The heavens are like a vast net. Although the mesh is sparse, it will not miss all the bad people and bad things.

古文：见官莫向前，作客莫在后。
现代文：见长官时不能靠前，以免被挑剔；做客时不能靠后，以免被冷落。
English: When meeting a superior, do not lean forward to avoid being criticized; when being a guest, do not lean back to avoid being left out in the cold.

古文：宁添一斗，莫添一口。
现代文：宁愿多添一斗粮，也不要多生一个娃。
English: I'd rather have an extra bucket of grain than an extra child.

古文：螳螂捕蝉，岂知黄雀在后？
现代文：螳螂只顾捕捉眼前的蝉，没想到黄雀正在它身后准备吃它。
English: The cockroach only cared about catching the cicada in front of it, but did not expect the yellow finch to be behind it, preparing to eat it.

古文：不求金玉重重贵，但愿儿孙个个贤。
现代文：不追求家中有贵重的金银珠宝，只愿家中的儿孙个个贤能。
English: Do not pursue the precious gold and silver jewelry at home, but wish the children and grandchildren in the family to be virtuous.

古文：一日夫妻，百世姻缘。
现代文：能成为夫妻，是百世的缘分。
English: To be able to become husband and wife is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

古文：百世修来同船渡，千世修来共枕眠。
现代文：百世修来的缘分才能同乘一条船，千年修来的缘分才可以做同床共枕的夫妻。
English: It takes a hundred generations of fate to be able to ride on the same boat, and a thousand years of fate to be able to sleep in the same bed.

古文：杀人一万，自损三千。
现代文：打仗时即使杀了对方很多人，自己损伤也不少。
English: In war, even if you kill a lot of people on the other side, you will still have a lot of injuries.

古文：伤人一语，利如刀割。
现代文：一句伤害人的话，给他人带来的痛苦就跟被刀割伤了一样！
English: A hurtful word, the pain caused to others is like being cut with a knife!

古文：枯木逢春犹再发，人无两度再少年。
现代文：枯萎了的树木到了春天还能再次发芽，人生却不会有两次少年时光。
English: Withered trees can sprout again in the spring, but life does not have two boyhoods.

古文：未晚先投宿，鸡鸣早看天。
现代文：出门在外天没黑就应找旅店投宿，天明鸡叫了就要抓紧时间赶路。
English: If you go out before dark, you should find a hotel to stay. If the rooster crows, you should hurry.

古文：将相顶头堪走马，公侯肚内好撑船。
现代文：将军宰相应能承担大事，头顶宽绰得可以跑马；王公贵族应当宽宏大量，肚里宽广得可以撑船。
English: The generalissimo should be able to assume great responsibilities, with a head so broad that he can run a horse; princes and nobles should be magnanimous, with a belly so broad that they can hold a boat.

古文：富人思来年，穷人想眼前。
现代文：有钱人总考虑明年的事，穷人却只能顾及眼前的温饱。
English: Rich people always think about the next year, but poor people can only think about the immediate food and clothing.

古文：世上若要人情好，赊去物品莫取钱。
现代文：在世上要想取得好人缘，除非赊给别人东西不要钱。
English: In the world, if you want to gain goodwill, don't give money unless you give something to others.

古文：生死有命，富贵在天。
现代文：人的生死是命中注定的，能不能富贵全在天意。
English: A person's life and death are predetermined by fate. Whether one can be rich or not depends entirely on God's will.

古文：击石原有火，不击乃无烟。
现代文：敲打石头就会产生火花，不敲打连烟都不会冒出。
English: If you strike a stone, sparks will appear, but if you don't strike it, not even smoke will come out.

古文：人学始知道，不学亦徒然。
现代文：努力学习才会懂得道理，不去学习就什么知识都得不到。
English: If you study hard, you will understand the truth. If you don't study, you won't get any knowledge.

古文：莫笑他人老，终须还到老。
现代文：不要去笑话别人衰老，因为自己也会有衰老的一天。
English: Don't make fun of others aging, because you will also have an aging day.

古文：和得邻里好，犹如拾片宝。
现代文：同邻里相处得好，如同捡到一块宝贝一样可贵。
English: Getting along well with your neighbors is as valuable as finding a piece of treasure.

古文：但能守本分，终身无烦恼。
现代文：只要能本分做人，一生都不会有烦恼。
English: As long as you can do your duty, you will never have any troubles in life.

古文：大家做事寻常，小家做事慌张。
现代文：大户人家做起事情来处之泰然，小户人家遇到事情慌里慌张。
English: Large households do things calmly, and small households panic when they encounter things.

古文：大家礼义教子弟，小家凶恶训儿郎。
现代文：大户人家用礼义教育子女，小户人家却用粗暴言行训斥子孙。
English: Large families educate their children in etiquette, but small families scold their children and grandchildren with harsh words and actions.

古文：君子爱财，取之有道。
现代文：品德高尚的君子也喜欢钱财，但要用正当的手段去求取；
English: A gentleman of high moral character also likes money, but he must use legitimate means to obtain it;

古文：贞妇爱色，纳之以礼。
现代文：女子都喜欢美丽，但要按照礼仪规范。
English: Women like to be beautiful, but they have to follow the rules of etiquette.

古文：善有善报，恶有恶报。
现代文：做善事就一定有好报，做恶事应会有恶报；
English: There must be a good reward for doing good things, and a bad reward for doing bad things;

古文：不是不报，时候未到。
现代文：不是不报，只因时机未到。
English: It's not that they don't report it, it's just that the time hasn't come.

古文：万恶淫为首，百行孝当先。
现代文：世上最大的恶，就是控制不住自己的欲望，各种行为当中以孝顺最为重要。
English: The greatest evil in the world is not being able to control one's own desires. Among all kinds of behaviors, filial piety is the most important.

古文：人而无信，不知其可也。
现代文：一个人如果不讲信用，真不知道他是否可以做成事。
English: If a person is not trustworthy, I really don't know if he can get things done.

古文：一人道虚，千人传实。
现代文：一个人说的话可能没人相信，上千人传播时人们就会相信它是真的。
English: What one person says may not be believed, but when thousands of people spread it, people will believe it's true.

古文：凡事要好，须问三老。
现代文：要想办好一切事情，必须请教德高望重的老人。
English: If you want to do everything well, you must consult a highly respected old man.

古文：若争小利，便失大道。
现代文：一个人如果一味地争夺个人小利，就会损害全局利益，有违道德标准。
English: If a person competes for small personal gains, it will damage the overall interests and violate moral standards.

古文：家中不和邻里欺，邻里不和说是非。
现代文：家庭内部不和睦，就会受到邻里的欺负；邻里之间不和睦，就会经常发生口角。
English: If there is disharmony within the family, it will be bullied by the neighbors; if there is disharmony between neighbors, there will often be quarrels.

古文：年年防饥，夜夜防盗。
现代文：每一年都要预防饥荒，夜夜都须防备盗贼，凡事都要有备无患。
English: Famine must be prevented every year, thieves must be guarded against night and day, and everything must be prepared for.

古文：学者是好，不学不好。学者如禾如稻，不学如草如蒿。
现代文：能够成为知识渊博的人，这是喜欢读书的结果，不能成为知识渊博的人，一般不喜欢读书。爱好学习的人就像田里的禾苗与稻谷，总是有用的；不爱学习的人恰似田里的蒿草一样，只能当柴烧。
English: If you can become a knowledgeable person, it is the result of liking reading. If you can't become a knowledgeable person, you generally don't like reading. People who love to learn are like the seedlings and rice in the field, they are always useful; people who don't love to learn are like the weeds in the field, they can only be used as firewood.

古文：遇饮酒时须饮酒，得高歌处且高歌。
现代文：遇到有酒饮时就饮酒，能高歌时就放声歌唱。
English: When there is alcohol, drink alcohol, and when you can sing, sing loudly.

古文：因风吹火，用力不多。
现代文：凭借风势吹火，不需要太多力气。
English: With the wind blowing, it doesn't take much to start a fire.

古文：不因渔夫引，怎能见波涛？
现代文：没有渔夫的指引，又怎么能见到江河的波涛汹涌？
English: Without the guidance of a fisherman, how can you see the turbulent waves of the river?

古文：无求到处人情好，不饮任他酒价高。
现代文：不到处求人的人，人缘就好；不饮酒的人，就不管酒价的高低。
English: People who do not go around soliciting are more popular; people who do not drink alcohol do not care about the price of alcohol.

古文：知事少时烦恼少，识人多处是非多。
现代文：知道的事情少，烦恼也就会少；认识的人多，招惹的是非也一定多。
English: The fewer things you know, the fewer troubles you will have; the more people you know, the more troubles you will have.

古文：进山不怕伤人虎，只怕人情两面刀。
现代文：进山不怕伤害人的老虎，生活中就怕人情险恶、两面三刀。
English: Tigers that go into the mountains are not afraid of hurting people. In life, they are afraid of people's sinister feelings, and are two-faced and three-edged.

古文：强中更有强中手，恶人须用恶人磨。
现代文：本领高强的人中必定会有更强的对手，作恶多端的人最后也会受到恶人的折磨。
English: Among those with strong skills, there will certainly be a stronger opponent, and those who do a lot of evil will eventually be tortured by evil people.

古文：会使不在家富豪，风流不用衣着佳。
现代文：善于使用财物不在于家中贫富，风流潇洒不用自己衣服华丽。
English: It is not the rich and poor in the family who are good at using property, and it is not their own clothes that make them elegant.

古文：光阴似箭，日月如梭。
现代文：光阴就像射出去的箭一样快，日月就像纺织机上的梭的速度一样快。
English: Time is as fast as an arrow shot out, the sun and the moon are as fast as the speed of a shuttle on a textile machine.

古文：天时不如地利，地利不如人和。黄金未为贵，安乐值钱多。
现代文：有利于作战的天气、时令，比不上有利于作战的地理形势，有利于作战的地理形势，比不上作战中的人心所向、内部团结。黄金并不算贵重，安乐的价值更高。
English: The weather and the season that are favorable to the war are not as good as the geographical situation that is favorable to the war, the geographical situation that is favorable to the war, and the inclination of the human heart and internal unity during the war. Gold is not precious, but the value of happiness is higher.

古文：为善最乐，作恶难逃。
现代文：做好人做好事最使人快乐，做坏人做坏事罪责难逃。
English: To be a good person and do good things is the happiest. To be a bad person and do bad things is a crime.

古文：羊有跪乳之恩，鸦有反哺之义。
现代文：羊羔有跪下接受母乳的感恩行为，小乌鸦有衔食反喂母鸦的情义。
English: Lambs have the grateful behavior of kneeling down to receive mother's milk, and baby crows have the emotion of feeding on the mother crow.

古文：孝顺还生孝顺子，忤逆还生忤逆儿。
现代文：孝顺的人生的孩子也孝顺，忤逆不孝的人生的孩子也会是逆子。
English: The child of a filial life is also filial, and the child of an unfilial life will also be a traitor.

古文：不信但看檐前水，点点滴滴旧窝池。
现代文：如果不相信，只要看看屋檐滴下的水，一点一滴都流进了旧坑里。
English: If you don't believe it, just look at the water dripping from the eaves, every drop of which has flowed into the old pit.

古文：隐恶扬善，执其两端。
现代文：不说别人的坏处，多说别人的好处。
English: Don't talk about other people's bad points, talk more about other people's benefits.

古文：妻贤夫祸少，子孝父心宽。
现代文：妻子如果贤惠，丈夫就少遭祸患；儿子如果孝顺，父亲就心情舒畅。
English: If the wife is virtuous, the husband will suffer fewer disasters; if the son is filial, the father will be in a good mood.

古文：已覆之水，收之实难。
现代文：泼出去的水，想全部收回来根本不可能。
English: It is simply impossible to recover all the water that has been spilled.

古文：人生知足时常足，人老偷闲且是闲。
现代文：人一辈子也没有知足的时候，老了挤点时间清闲一下吧。
English: When a person has not been content all his life, when he is old, squeeze some time to relax.

古文：处处绿杨堪系马，家家有路通长安。
现代文：只要有杨柳树就可以拴马，处处都有路通向长安。
English: As long as there are willow trees, you can ride a horse, and there are roads leading to Chang'an everywhere.

古文：既坠釜甑，反顾何益。
现代文：既然釜和甑都已经碎了，再回头看它还有什么用处？
English: Now that the kettle and the ladle are broken, what is the use of looking back?

古文：见者易，学者难。
现代文：在旁边看别人做觉得很容易，一旦真正学起来就感觉很难。
English: It's easy to watch other people do it, but once you really learn it, it's hard.

古文：厌静还思喧，嫌喧又忆山。
现代文：厌烦了安静还思念着喧闹，嫌弃喧闹又记忆起深山的安静。
English: Tired of the quiet and still miss the noise, hate the noise and remember the silence of the mountains.

古文：自从心定后，无处不安然。
现代文：自从心境安定了，任何处境都能安然面对。
English: Since my mind is stable, I can face any situation with peace of mind.

古文：莫将容易得，便作等闲看。
现代文：不要把容易得到的东西，看得平凡而不知珍惜。
English: Don't take things that are easy to get and treat them as ordinary without knowing how to cherish them.

古文：用心计较般般错，退后思量事事宽。
现代文：过于用心计较就会认为每件事都做得不对，退一步想想，一切事都容易处理了。
English: If you try too hard, you will think that everything is not done right. Take a step back and think about it. Everything is easy to handle.

古文：道路各别，养家一般。
现代文：虽然大家从事的职业不同，但都是为了养家糊口。
English: Although everyone is engaged in different occupations, they are all in order to support their families.

古文：由俭入奢易，从奢入俭难。
现代文：从节俭到奢侈容易做到，从奢侈到节俭就十分困难了。
English: From frugality to extravagance is easy; from extravagance to frugality is hard.

古文：知音说与知音听，不是知音莫与谈。
现代文：领悟音乐的话只有对能领悟音乐的人说，对方不懂得欣赏音乐就不要对他弹琴。
English: Only say words of musical understanding to someone who can understand music. If the other person does not know how to appreciate music, do not play the piano for him.

古文：点石化为金，人心犹未足。
现代文：即使能够点石成金，人的欲望依然不会满足。
English: Even if it were possible to turn stone into gold, people's desires would still not be satisfied.

古文：信了肚，卖了屋。他人观花，不涉你目。他人碌碌，不涉你足。
现代文：随心所欲地吃吃喝喝，不加节制，最后则要吃穷喝穷，乃致倾家荡产。花花世界，就像没有看见；他人忙忙碌碌，也不关你事。
English: Eat and drink as much as you want, without restraint, and in the end you will have to eat and drink poor, but you will end up bankrupt. The world is like you don't see it; others are busy, and it's none of your business.

古文：谁人不爱子孙贤，谁人不爱千钟粟。
现代文：没有人不喜欢子孙后代贤能，没有人不喜欢无比优厚的俸禄。
English: No one dislikes the merit of future generations, no one dislikes the incomparably generous salary.

古文：奈五行，不是这般题目。
现代文：只是无奈五行八字中没有那样的运气。
English: It's just that I didn't have that kind of luck.

古文：莫把真心空计较，儿孙自有儿孙福。
现代文：不要一门心思空打算，子孙自然会有他们自己的福分。
English: Don't set your heart on vain thoughts. Your children and grandchildren will naturally have their own share of happiness.

古文：书到用时方恨少，事非经过不知难。
现代文：到实际使用时才懊恨书读得太少，没有亲身经历过不知事情的艰难。
English: By the time of actual use, I regretted that I had read too few books and had not personally experienced the difficulties of not knowing things.

古文：天下无不是的父母，世上最难得者兄弟。
现代文：天下没有不好的父母，人生最难得的是骨肉兄弟。
English: There are no bad parents in the world. The rarest thing in life is a brother or sister.

古文：与人不和，劝人养鹅；与人不睦，劝人架屋。
现代文：如果与别人合不来，请去养一群鹅；如果与别人不和睦，要想想古人盖房子通力合作的精神。
English: If you can't get along with others, please go and raise a flock of geese; if you don't get along with others, think about the spirit of cooperation of the ancients to build a house.

古文：但行好事，莫问前程。
现代文：一心去做好事，不计较前途怎么样。
English: To do good with one's whole heart, no matter what the future holds.

古文：不交僧道，便是好人。
现代文：不与僧道打交道，就是好人。
English: He is a good man if he doesn't have any dealings with Buddhism.

古文：河狭水激，人急计生。
现代文：河道变窄，水流就会湍急，人在紧急关头，就会想出好的对策。
English: If the river becomes narrow, the water flow will be rapid, and people will come up with good countermeasures in an emergency.

古文：明知山有虎，莫向虎山行。
现代文：明知道山中有老虎，就不要向有虎的山中去了。
English: If you know there are tigers in the mountains, don't go to the mountains where there are tigers.

古文：路不铲不平，事不为不成。
现代文：道路不走就不会到达目的地，事情不去做就不能成功。
English: If you don't travel, you won't reach your destination. If you don't do things, you won't succeed.

古文：无钱方断酒，临老始读经。
现代文：有些人悔悟得太晚，没有钱了才不喝酒，到了老年才读佛经。
English: Some people repent too late, they don't drink when they have no money, and they don't read Buddhist scriptures when they are old.

古文：点塔七层，不如暗处一灯。
现代文：为七层佛塔都点上灯，不如在暗处点一盏灯对人更加有益。
English: It would be more beneficial for people to light up the seven-story pagoda, rather than lighting a lamp in the dark.

古文：堂上二老是活佛，何用灵山朝世尊。
现代文：家中的双亲就是活菩萨，何必非要去灵山朝拜如来佛祖。
English: The parents at home are living Bodhisattvas, so why not go to Lingshan Mountain to worship the Buddha.

古文：万事劝人休瞒昧，举头三尺有神明。
现代文：劝人做任何事不要隐瞒真情，因为头顶上就有神灵在看着。
English: Convince anyone to do anything, don't hide the truth, because there is a god watching over your head.

古文：但存方寸土，留与子孙耕。
现代文：存下善良的心，留给子孙去继承吧！
English: Save your kind heart and leave it to your children and grandchildren to inherit!

古文：灭却心头火，剔起佛前灯。
现代文：灭掉心头的欲火，剔亮佛前的明灯，多做好事，常常警觉。
English: Extinguish the fire of desire in your heart, turn off the bright lights in front of the Buddha, do more good deeds, and always be alert.

古文：惺惺多不足，蒙蒙作公卿。
现代文：绝顶聪慧的人往往得不到施展才能的机会，昏庸愚蠢之辈却总能做朝廷高官。
English: The most intelligent people are often denied the opportunity to display their talents, while the dim-witted and stupid are always able to become high-ranking officials in the imperial court.

古文：众星朗朗，不如孤月独明。
现代文：群星闪闪发光，不如一个月亮那么明亮。
English: The stars glittered, but not as brightly as the moon.

古文：兄弟相害，不如友生。
现代文：兄弟之间互相伤害，竟不如普通朋友了。
English: Brothers who hurt each other are no better than ordinary friends.

古文：合理可作，小利不争。
现代文：符合情理的事情可以去做，蝇头小利就不要去争。
English: Reasonable things can be done, so don't fight over small gains.

古文：牡丹花好空入目，枣花虽小结实多。
现代文：牡丹花开得艳丽却只能观赏，枣树的花虽小却能结出果实。
English: Peony flowers bloom brightly but can only be admired, while the flowers of the jujube tree are small but can bear fruit.

古文：欺老莫欺小，欺人心不明。
现代文：欺负老人也不要欺负少年人，因为他们来日方长。
English: Don't bully the elderly, and don't bully the young, because they come to Japan for a long time.

古文：勤奋耕锄收地利，他时饱暖谢苍天。
现代文：发挥地利，按照节令耕作农田，收获时还要感谢苍天的保佑。
English: Give full play to the geographical location, cultivate farmland according to the seasons, and thank the heavens for their blessing when harvesting.

古文：得忍且忍，得耐且耐，不忍不耐，小事成灾。
现代文：能忍就忍，能耐就耐。倘若不忍耐，小事就会酿成大灾。
English: If you have patience, you can endure. If you don't have patience, small things can lead to big disasters.

古文：相论逞英豪，家计渐渐退。
现代文：假如同别人争强比富，家产必定会被逐渐败坏掉。
English: If you compete with others to be stronger than others, your family property will inevitably be gradually ruined.

古文：贤妇令夫贵，恶妇令夫败。
现代文：贤惠的妻子能帮助丈夫成功，不好的妻子只会使丈夫失败。
English: A virtuous wife can help her husband succeed, a bad wife will only make her husband fail.

古文：一人有庆，兆民咸赖。
现代文：把握权力的人，他一个人有了值得庆贺的事情，很多百姓都会从中得到好处。
English: The person who grasps power, he alone has something worth celebrating, and many people will benefit from it.

古文：人老心未老，人穷志莫穷。
现代文：人的年纪老了，思想不应当随之衰老；人即使生活贫穷，但志气却不应穷尽。
English: When people grow old, their thoughts should not grow old with them; even if people live in poverty, their aspirations should not be exhausted.

古文：人无千日好，花无百日红。黄蜂一口针，橘子两边分。
现代文：人生在世，总会遇到各种挫折，要想有一千个好日子是很难的；就像花儿一样，它的美不能持久，最久也不过百日。黄蜂的针很毒，橘子都会分为两半。
English: It is difficult for a camel to have a thousand good days. Just like a flower, its beauty cannot last for more than a hundred days. A wasp's sting is very poisonous, and an orange will split in half.

古文：世间痛恨事，最毒淫妇心。
现代文：世界上最痛恨的事，就是生活放荡的人的毒心。
English: The most hated thing in the world is the poisonous heart of a dissolute person.

古文：杀人可恕，情理不容。
现代文：如果杀了人还可以被宽恕的话，那在情理上实在说不过去。
English: If you can be forgiven for killing someone, that's really beyond reason.

古文：乍富不知新受用，乍贫难改旧家风。
现代文：生活刚刚由穷变富时还不会享受，刚刚由富变穷时还改不掉挥霍浪费的旧习气。
English: When life has just changed from poor to rich, it will not enjoy it, and when it has just changed from rich to poor, it will not change the old habit of extravagance and waste.

古文：座上客常满，杯中酒不空。
现代文：宴会上的客人经常满座，杯中的美酒总也不空。
English: The guests at the banquet are often full, and the glass of fine wine is always full.

古文：屋漏更遭连夜雨，行船又遇打头风。
现代文：屋顶漏了却又遇上连夜大雨，船正行驶却遭遇逆风。
English: The roof was leaking, but it rained heavily overnight. The boat was sailing, but the wind was against it.

古文：笋因落箨方成竹，鱼为奔波始化龙。
现代文：笋因为外壳层层脱落才逐渐长成竹子，鱼由于经历了奔波才变成蛟龙。
English: The bamboo shoots gradually grow into bamboo because the outer shell is peeled off, and the fish becomes a dragon because of the rushing waves.

古文：记得少年骑竹马，转眼又是白头翁。
现代文：还记得少年时玩骑竹马游戏时的情景，转眼之间，现在已是白发苍苍的老人。
English: I still remember the scene when I was a boy playing the game of riding a bamboo horse. In the blink of an eye, I am now a white-haired old man.

古文：礼义生于富足，盗贼出于赌博。
现代文：礼义是在富足生活基础上形成的，往往因为赌博才使人沦为盗贼，走上犯罪的道路。
English: Etiquette is formed on the basis of an affluent life, and it is often because of gambling that people become thieves and go down the road of crime.

古文：天上众星皆拱北，世间无水不朝东。士为知己者死，女为悦己者容。
现代文：指君子自甘贫穷，乐观豁达的人顺从天命，他们都不以外部环境的变化而改变自己的节操和志趣。
English: Refers to a gentleman who is willing to be poor, and an optimistic and open-minded person who obeys the fate of heaven. They do not change their self-discipline and ambition due to changes in the external environment.

古文：色即是空，空即是色。君子安贫，达人知命。良药苦口利于病，忠言逆耳利于行。
现代文：有效的药物吃着虽然苦，却对治病有利，批评的话语尽管听着刺耳，却对自己行事有所帮助。
English: Taking effective medicine, although painful, is beneficial to the treatment of diseases, and critical words, although harsh to the ear, are helpful to one's own actions.

古文：顺天者昌，逆天者亡。
现代文：顺从自然规律的才能生存，违背自然规律的人和事必然灭亡。
English: Only those who obey the laws of nature can survive, and those who violate the laws of nature will inevitably perish.

古文：有缘千里来相会，无缘对面不相逢。
现代文：有缘就是远隔千里也终有一天会相见，无缘就是对面也会相互不认识。
English: Even if they are thousands of miles apart, if they are destined to meet, they will eventually meet. If they are not destined to meet, they will not know each other.

古文：有福者昌，无福者亡。
现代文：有福气的人一生会繁荣昌盛，没有福气的人注定会消亡。
English: Those who are blessed will prosper in life, while those who are not are doomed to die.

古文：人为财死，鸟为食亡。
现代文：人为生计、钱财而死，鸟为觅食而亡。
English: People die for their livelihood, money, and birds die for food.

古文：夫妻相和好，琴瑟与笙簧。
现代文：夫妻之间亲密和睦，就像琴瑟笙簧齐奏时一样和谐。
English: The intimate harmony between husband and wife is as harmonious as when the harps of the harp are played in unison.

古文：红粉易妆娇态女，无钱难作好儿郎。
现代文：女子随便装扮就是娇态可人的美人，没钱的男子很难做个好儿郎。
English: A woman who dresses casually is a delicate and charming beauty, a man without money is difficult to be a good boy.

古文：有子之人贫不久，无儿无女富不长。
现代文：有了孩子，日子就不会永远贫困；没有孩子，富裕也不会长久。
English: If you have children, you won't be poor forever; if you don't have children, you won't be rich for long.

古文：善必寿老，恶必早亡。
现代文：好人是会长寿的，恶人则会早早去世。
English: The good live long, the wicked die young.

古文：爽口食多偏作病，快心事过恐遭殃。
现代文：美味可口的事物吃多了反而会得病，高兴的事情过多恐怕灾难要临头。
English: If you eat too many delicious and tasty things, you will get sick, and if you have too many happy things, I'm afraid disaster will come.

古文：富贵定要依本分，贫穷不必再思量。
现代文：富贵之后还须遵守本分，贫穷了也不要胡思乱想。
English: If you are rich, you must still abide by your duty. If you are poor, don't think too much.

古文：画水无风空作浪，绣花虽好不闻香。
现代文：画上的水即使有风也不会突起波浪，绣出的花尽管好看却没有花香。
English: Even if there is wind, the water on the painting will not cause waves, and the embroidered flowers, although beautiful, do not have a floral scent.

古文：贪他一斗米，失却半年粮。
现代文：贪图别人一斗米，却失掉了自己吃用的半年粮食。
English: He covets a barrel of rice from others, but loses half a year's worth of grain for his own use.

古文：争他一脚豚，反失一肘羊。
现代文：为了与别人争一只猪脚，反而丢掉了半边羊。
English: In order to compete with others for a pig's foot, he instead lost half a sheep.

古文：龙归晚洞云犹湿，麝过春山草木香。
现代文：龙在晚上返回洞里时，云还是湿的；麝跃过春天的山上时，草都带着香气。
English: When the dragon returns to the cave at night, the cloud is still wet; when the dragonfly leaps over the spring mountain, the grass is fragrant.

古文：平生只会说人短，何不回头把己量？
现代文：一生只会议论别人的缺点，为什么不回头找自身的毛病？
English: All his life, he would only talk about the shortcomings of others. Why not look back and find his own faults?

古文：见善如不及，见恶如探汤。
现代文：看到善的行为，就唯恐自己达不到；看到不善的行为，就好像把手伸到开水中一样赶快避开。
English: If you see a good deed, you will be afraid that you will not be able to achieve it; if you see a bad deed, it is like putting your hand in boiling water and quickly avoiding it.

古文：人穷志短，马瘦毛长。
现代文：人穷志气就不高，马瘦毛就显得长了。
English: If people's aspirations are not high, the horse's thin hair will appear long.

古文：自家心里急，他人未知忙。
现代文：家里有事，自己心里焦急不安，别人仍旧会不慌不忙。
English: If there's something going on at home and you're anxious, others will still be relaxed.

古文：贫无达士将金赠，病有高人说药方。
现代文：人穷时不会有人来给你送钱财，但患病时，倒有人来告诉你治病的药方。
English: When you are poor, no one will come to give you money, but when you are sick, someone will come to tell you the cure.

古文：触来莫与竞，事过心清凉。
现代文：有人触犯你时，不要在气头上与他争执，等事情过去了，你你的心情就会舒畅。
English: When someone offends you, don't argue with him in anger. When the matter is over, your mood will be comfortable.

古文：秋来满山多秀色，春来无处不花香。
现代文：秋天到时，满山一片秀丽之色；春天来临时，到处一片花香。
English: When autumn arrives, the whole mountain is covered with beautiful colors; when spring comes, there is a scent of flowers everywhere.

古文：凡人不可貌相，海水不可斗量。
现代文：对所有的人都不能只凭外貌去判断，大海的水也无法用升斗来衡量。
English: All men are not to be judged by their outward appearance, nor is the water of the sea to be measured by the bucket.

古文：清清之水为土所防，济济之士为酒所伤。
现代文：清清的河水被土堤拦挡，众多有才学的人被酒伤身。
English: The clear water of the river was blocked by an earthen dike, and many talented people were injured by alcohol.

古文：蒿草之下或有兰香，茅茨之屋或有侯王。
现代文：蒿草的下面可能有芳香的兰花，住在茅屋里的人也能成为达官贵人。
English: There may be fragrant orchids under the reeds, and people who live in huts can also become dignitaries.

古文：无限朱门生饿殍，几多白屋出公卿。
现代文：有许多豪门大户子弟最后成了饿死鬼，有许多平民百姓家中培养出了高官。
English: There are many children of wealthy families who eventually starved to death, and there are many high-ranking officials who were brought up in the homes of ordinary people.

古文：酒里乾坤大，壶中日月长。
现代文：醉酒以后觉得世界比平时要广大，进到神仙的酒壶里又是另一番天地。
English: After getting drunk, I feel that the world is wider than usual, and it's another world to get into the god's wine jug.

古文：拂石坐来春衫冷，踏花归去马蹄香。
现代文：拂拭了石头坐在上面，隔着衣服都还感觉到寒冷，骑着马儿在归去的途中踩踏了路上的春花，马蹄上也留下了花儿的香气。
English: After wiping the stone and sitting on it, I still felt cold through my clothes. On the way back, I stepped on the spring flowers on the road while riding the horse, and the aroma of flowers was left on the horse's hoof.

古文：万事前身定，浮生空自忙。
现代文：许多事情都是命中注定的，人们奔波一生却可能是空忙了一场。
English: Many things are predestined, people rush through life but may be busy.

古文：叫月子规喉舌冷，宿花蝴蝶梦魂香。
现代文：对着月亮叫的杜鹃鸟舌头是冷的，在花上住的蝴蝶做梦很香。
English: The tongue of the cuckoo that calls to the moon is cold, and the butterflies that live on flowers dream sweetly.

古文：一言不中，千言不用。
现代文：劝慰他人的时候，有一句话不中被劝人的心意，说一千句一万句话都没有作用。
English: When consoling others, there is a word that is not persuasive, and saying a thousand or ten thousand words has no effect.

古文：一人传虚，百人传实。
现代文：一个人传出没有根据的事，众多的人跟着传播，就被当作实有的事了。
English: For one man proclaims a thing which has no foundation, and many concur, and it is established as true.

古文：万金良药，不如无疾。
现代文：价值万金的好的药材，都不如一个健康的身体。
English: Good medicinal herbs, which are worth a lot of money, are not as good as a healthy body.

古文：千里送鹅毛，礼轻情义重。
现代文：不远千里送一根毫毛，礼物尽管轻，情义却很重。
English: It is not far to send a millimeter, although the gift is light, the sentiment is very heavy.

古文：世事如明镜，前程暗似漆。
现代文：世上的事如镜子一样清楚，但自己的前途却看不清楚。
English: The things in the world are as clear as a mirror, but I can't see my own future clearly.

古文：君子怀刑，小人怀惠。
现代文：君子心中想的是法，小人心中想的是侥幸。
English: A gentleman thinks about the law, a villain thinks about luck.

古文：架上碗儿轮流转，媳妇自有做婆时。
现代文：厨架上的碗碟轮流转用，再年轻的媳妇也有当婆婆的时候。
English: The bowls and dishes on the kitchen shelf are used in rotation, and the youngest daughter-in-law also has time to be a mother-in-law.

古文：人生一世，如驹过隙。
现代文：人活一辈子，就像白驹过隙般转瞬即逝。
English: A person's whole life, like a white egret passing through a gap, is fleeting.

古文：良田万顷，日食一升。
现代文：有万顷良田的人，每天也不过吃三升米；
English: People with ten thousand hectares of good farmland only eat three liters of rice a day;

古文：大厦千间，夜眠八尺。
现代文：有大厦千间的人，每晚也不过睡八尺的地方。
English: A person with a thousand rooms in a building has only eight feet of space to sleep in every night.

古文：千经万典，孝义为先。
现代文：千万种经典讲的都是一个道理，孝顺父母、友爱兄弟应是最先做到的。
English: Tens of thousands of classics all speak of the same principle: filial piety and brotherly love should be the first to be achieved.

古文：天上人间，方便第一。
现代文：办任何事情，都要考虑 方便 两字，既使自己方便，又为别人提供方便。
English: In doing anything, we must consider "convenience," both to make ourselves convenient and to provide convenience for others.

古文：一字入公门，九牛拔不出。
现代文：一张即使只有一字的状纸被送入衙门，也要身遭讼累，难以脱身。
English: Even if a piece of paper with only one word is submitted to the court, it will be subject to litigation and it will be difficult to escape.

古文：八字衙门向南开，有理无钱莫进来。
现代文：八字形的衙门口朝向南方，有理没钱的人别想在那胜诉。
English: At the entrance of the figure-eight gate facing south, those who have reason but no money should not expect to win their case there.

古文：欲求天下事，须用世间财。
现代文：想要干成大的事，就得动世间的钱财。
English: If you want to do big things, you have to move the world's money.

古文：富从升合起，贫因不算来。
现代文：财富是一点点积蓄起来的，贫穷是因为不会算计造成的。
English: Wealth is accumulated little by little, poverty is caused by not being able to calculate.

古文：近河不得枉使水，近山不得枉烧柴。
现代文：靠近河流也不要浪费水，靠近大山也不要浪费柴木。
English: Don't waste water near rivers, and don't waste firewood near mountains.

古文：家无读书子，官从何处来？
现代文：家中若没有读书的子弟，又怎么能出做官的人呢？
English: If you don't have a child who studies at home, how can you become an official?

古文：慈不掌兵，义不掌财。
现代文：心地慈善，掌管不了兵权；仁义好施，掌不得财权。
English: If you are charitable at heart, you cannot control military power; if you are benevolent and generous, you cannot control financial power.

古文：一夫当关，万夫莫开。
现代文：山势又高又险，一个人把着关口，上万人也打不进来
English: The mountain is high and dangerous. One person can reach the pass, but tens of thousands of people can't

古文：万事不由人计较，一生都是命安排。
现代文：凡事不要太计较，许多事情都是命里安排好的。
English: Don't worry too much about everything, many things are arranged by fate.

古文：白云本是无心物，却被清风引出来。
现代文：事情无意之中被本不相关的人或事引发出来。
English: An incident is unintentionally triggered by an unrelated person or event.

古文：慢行急行，逆取顺取。命中只有如许财，丝毫不可有闪失。
现代文：不管是紧赶，还是慢赶，人生前程都是这么多的路途；不管是顺拿，还是逆拿，命数决定此生就有这些资粮。人生中所拥有的财富要保护好，不可以出现闪失。
English: Whether it is a rush or a slow rush, the future of life is so many roads; whether it is a pass or a fail, the fate determines that there are these resources in this life. The wealth possessed in life should be protected well, and there should be no flash loss.

古文：人间私语，天闻若雷。
现代文：人们之间的窃窃私语，在上天听来也像雷一样响亮、清晰。
English: The whispers between people also sound loud and clear like thunder in the sky.

古文：暗室亏心，神目如电。一毫之恶，劝人莫作。
现代文：在暗室所做的亏心事，神的眼睛会像电光一样看得清清楚楚。
English: The eyes of God will see the evil deeds done in the darkroom as clearly as lightning.

古文：一毫之善，与人方便。
现代文：一丝一毫的坏事，劝人们也不要去做。
English: People are advised not to do even the slightest bad thing.

古文：亏人是祸，饶人是福，天眼恢恢，报应甚速。
现代文：再微小的好事，也会给别人带来方便。欺骗别人迟早会有灾祸，宽恕他人早晚会带来幸福。苍天的眼睛十分明亮，报应来得极为神速。
English: Even the smallest good deed will bring convenience to others. Deceiving others will sooner or later bring disaster, forgiving others will sooner or later bring happiness. Heaven's eyes are very bright, and retribution comes very quickly.

古文：圣贤言语，神钦鬼服。
现代文：圣贤讲的话，连神鬼都钦佩。
English: The words spoken by sages are admired even by gods and demons.

古文：人各有心，心各有见。
现代文：每个人都有自己的心，每颗心都会有自己的见解。
English: Everyone has their own heart, and each heart will have its own opinion.

古文：口说不如身逢，耳闻不如目见。
现代文：只是嘴里说不如亲身去经历，耳朵听见的不如亲眼所看到的。
English: It's just that what you say is not as good as what you experience, and what you hear is not as good as what you see with your own eyes.

古文：见人富贵生欢喜，莫把心头似火烧。
现代文：看到别人得到富贵了应该替别人感到由衷的高兴，不能看见别人活得好，心里头就好似火烧一样难受。
English: Seeing others get rich should make you feel genuinely happy for others. If you can't see others live well, your heart feels as if it's on fire.

古文：养兵千日，用在一时。
现代文：培养士兵需要很多年，使用士兵却只在一时。
English: It takes many years to train soldiers, but they are only used for a short time.

古文：国清才子贵，家富小儿娇。
现代文：国家政治清明，有才学的人就会受到尊重；但家庭富裕了，小孩子就会娇生惯养。
English: When a country's politics are clear, talented people will be respected; but when a family is rich, children will be pampered.

古文：利刀割体疮犹使，恶语伤人恨不消。
现代文：利剑割破皮肤，伤口会渐渐愈合；恶毒的语言伤害了人，积下的仇恨很难消失。
English: A sharp sword cuts the skin, but the wound will gradually heal; vicious words hurt people, and the accumulated hatred is difficult to disappear.

古文：公道世间唯白发，贵人头上不曾饶。
现代文：只有衰老是人世间最公道的，即使达官贵人也改变不了。
English: Only aging is the most fair in the world, even dignitaries cannot change it.

古文：有才堪出众，无衣懒出门。
现代文：有的人相貌出众，但是没有像样的衣服，连门也不愿意出。
English: Some people are good-looking, but they don't have decent clothes and don't even want to go out.

古文：为官须作相，及第必争先。
现代文：做官应努力做到宰相，考中科举也要越早越好。
English: Officials should work hard to become prime minister, and the examination should be completed as early as possible.

古文：苗从地发，树由枝分。
现代文：禾苗在土地里发芽，大树是由枝干上分杈。
English: Grain seedlings germinate in the soil, and large trees grow from branch to trunk.

古文：宅里燃火，烟气成云。
现代文：家庭里生火做饭，烟气就行成了天上的云。
English: When a fire is lit in the home for cooking, the smoke rises into the sky.

古文：以直报怨，知恩报恩。
现代文：用正直来报答怨恨，用恩德来报答恩德。
English: Use honesty to repay resentment, use kindness to repay kindness.

古文：红颜今日虽欺我，白发他时不放君。
现代文：你们这些少年人，今天虽然仗着年少气盛来欺压我这老头子，但是你们可别忘记，白发也是一样不会放过你们的！
English: You young people, although today you use your youthful exuberance to oppress me, an old man, do not forget that white hair will not let you go either!

古文：借问酒家何处有，牧童遥指杏花村。
现代文：询问当地之人何处买酒浇愁？牧童笑而不答指了指杏花深处的村庄。
English: Asking the local people where to buy wine for pouring sorrows, the herd boy laughed without answering and pointed to the village deep in the apricot blossoms.

古文：父子和而家不退，兄弟和而家不分。
现代文：父子亲近，家道就不会衰退；兄弟和睦相处，家庭就不会分裂。
English: If the father and son are close, the family will not decline; if the brothers live in harmony, the family will not be divided.

古文：一片云间不相识，三千里外却逢君。
现代文：曾经同处一地却互不相识，在这千里之外却意外相逢。
English: Once they were in the same place but did not know each other, but unexpectedly met each other thousands of miles away.

古文：官有公法，民有私约。
现代文：国家有国家的法律，民间有私人之间的契约。
English: The state has national laws, and the people have contracts between individuals.

古文：平时不烧香，临时抱佛脚。
现代文：在空闲的时候不做准备，危急的时候却临时抱佛脚寻求帮助。
English: In their free time, they don't prepare, but in times of crisis, they put their hands in their pockets and ask for help.

古文：幸生太平无事日，恐防年老不多时。
现代文：有幸生在太平无事的年月，恐怕没多久就会衰老。
English: If you are lucky enough to be born in peaceful and trouble-free times, you will probably grow old before long.

古文：国乱思良将，家贫思良妻。
现代文：国家发生战乱时，才想到有名的将领；家庭贫困时才希望能有个贤惠的妻子。
English: When the country is at war, only famous generals come to mind; when the family is poor, only a virtuous wife can be hoped for.

古文：池塘积水须防旱，田土深耕足养家。
现代文：池塘里应提前储水预防干旱，田地应该深耕细作才能养活家庭。
English: Water should be stored in ponds in advance to prevent drought, and fields should be ploughed thoroughly to feed families.

古文：根深不怕风摇动，树正何愁月影斜。
现代文：树根扎得深就不用怕狂风，树干长得直就不怕月影倾斜。
English: If the roots of a tree are deep, there is no need to be afraid of the wind. If the trunk is straight, there is no need to be afraid of the moon's shadow.

古文：争得猫儿，失却牛脚。
现代文：抢到了猫，却失去了牛。
English: They got the cat, but lost the cow.

古文：愚者千虑，必有一得，智者千虑，必有一失。
现代文：聪明的人在上千次考虑中，总会有一次失误；愚蠢的人在上千次考虑中，总会有一次收获。
English: A wise man, out of a thousand considerations, will always make one mistake; a stupid man, out of a thousand considerations, will always make one gain.

古文：始吾于人也，听其言而信其行。
现代文：当初我对于别人，是听到他的话就相信了他的行为；
English: At first, I believed in other people's actions only after hearing their words;

古文：今吾于人也，听其言而观其行。
现代文：现在我对于别人，是听到他的话还要观察他的行为。
English: Now, with others, I listen to what they say and watch their actions.

古文：学在一人之下，用在万人之上。
现代文：从一个人那里学到的知识，可以运用在成千上万人的身上。
English: What you learn from one person can be applied to thousands.

古文：一日为师，终生为父。
现代文：只要从别人那里获得过点滴知识，就要终身像尊敬父亲那样尊敬他。
English: As long as you have obtained a little knowledge from others, you should respect him for life as you respect your father.

古文：忘恩负义，禽兽之徒。
现代文：忘恩负义的人，如同禽兽一般。
English: An ungrateful person is like an animal.

古文：劝君莫将油炒菜，留与儿孙夜读书。
现代文：奉劝父母不要将油用来炒菜，而要留给儿孙们夜间点灯读书。
English: Parents are advised not to use the oil for cooking, but to leave it to their children and grandchildren to light a lamp at night to read.

古文：书中自有千钟粟，书中自有颜如玉。
现代文：书中有功名利禄，书中有娇妻美妾。
English: In the book, there is the story of fame and fortune, and there is the story of a beautiful wife and concubine.

古文：莫怨天来莫怨人，五行八字命生成。
现代文：不要去怨天尤人，每个人的遭遇与命运都是上天注定的。
English: Don't go blaming others, everyone's fate and destiny are predetermined by heaven.

古文：莫怨自己穷，穷要穷得干净；莫羡他人富，富要富得清高。
现代文：不要埋怨自己贫穷，穷要穷得清清白白；不要羡慕他人富有，富要富得纯洁高尚。
English: Don't blame yourself for being poor. If you want to be poor, you have to be pure and innocent. Don't envy others for being rich. If you want to be rich, you have to be pure and noble.

古文：别人骑马我骑驴，仔细思量我不如，
现代文：别人骑马我骑驴，仔细想想我是比不上人家，
English: Others ride horses, I ride a donkey. If you think about it, I'm no better than anyone else.

古文：待我回头看，还有挑脚汉。
现代文：但当我回过头来看看后面，原来还有不如我的徒步挑之人。
English: But when I turned around and looked behind me, there was someone who was not as good as my pick on foot.

古文：路上有饥人，家中有剩饭。
现代文：路上有饥饿的乞讨之人，如果家里有剩余的饭菜。
English: There are hungry beggars on the road, if there are leftover meals at home.

古文：积德与儿孙，要广行方便。
现代文：不如拿来积德行善，将食物送给他们，行些方便。
English: It would be better to do good with the accumulated virtue, give them food, and do something convenient.

古文：作善鬼神钦，作恶遭天遣。
现代文：做善事能使鬼神钦敬，做坏事必会遭到老天的惩处。
English: Doing good things can make ghosts and gods respect you, and doing bad things will surely be punished by God.

古文：积钱积谷不如积德，买田买地不如买书。
现代文：积攒钱粮不如多做善事广积阴德，买田置地不如多买书籍。
English: Accumulating money and grain is not as good as doing more good deeds and accumulating virtue. Buying more land is not as good as buying more books.

古文：一日春工十日粮，十日春工半年粮。
现代文：春耕至关重要，一天的春耕能多收可供十天食用的粮食，十天春耕能多收可供半年食用的粮食。
English: Spring ploughing is very important. One day of spring ploughing can harvest more grain that can be eaten for ten days, and ten days of spring ploughing can harvest more grain that can be eaten for half a year.

古文：疏懒人没吃，勤俭粮满仓。
现代文：人如果懒散就会缺吃少穿，如果勤俭就会钱粮满仓。
English: If people are lazy, they will eat less and wear less. If they are frugal, they will have a full storehouse of money and grain.

古文：人亲财不亲，财利要分清。
现代文：亲人虽亲但钱财不亲，因此，即使是亲人之间，钱财利益也要分清楚。
English: Although relatives are close, money is not. Therefore, even between relatives, financial interests should be clearly distinguished.

古文：十分伶俐使七分，常留三分与儿孙，
现代文：十分的聪明只要用上七分就可以了，剩下三分留给子孙。
English: As long as you are smart enough, you can use seven points. The remaining three points are left for your children and grandchildren.

古文：若要十分都使尽，远在儿孙近在身。
现代文：如果要将十分聪明全都使出来，反而会适得其反，近的害了自己，远的害了儿孙。
English: If you want to make full use of your intelligence, it will backfire, harming yourself in the near future and harming your children and grandchildren in the distant future.

古文：君子乐得做君子，小人枉自做小人。
现代文：高尚者以高尚为乐，卑鄙者自甘卑鄙。
English: The superior man delights in being superior, while the mean man delights in being mean.

古文：好学者则庶民之子为公卿，不好学者则公卿之子为庶民。
现代文：爱学习的人，即使是平民之子，也可以做大官；不爱学习的人，即便是官宦子弟，日后也会落魄成为平民。
English: Those who love to learn, even if they are the sons of commoners, can become high-ranking officials; those who do not love to learn, even if they are the sons of officials, will become commoners in the future.

古文：惜钱莫教子，护短莫从师。
现代文：吝惜钱财就不要教育子女，袒护缺点就不要从师学习。
English: If you don't care about money, don't educate your children. If you don't take care of your shortcomings, don't study under a teacher.

古文：记得旧文章，便是新举子。
现代文：记得住过去圣贤们的文章，就能够考取今天的举人。
English: If you remember the articles written by the sages of the past, you will be able to pass today's exam.

古文：人在家中坐，祸从天上落。
现代文：足不出户、端坐家中，祸患却从天而降。
English: They do not go out, but sit at home, while calamity falls from the sky.

古文：但求心无愧，不怕有后灾。
现代文：只要问心无愧，就不怕日后招来灾祸。
English: As long as one's conscience is clear, there is no fear of inviting disaster in the future.

古文：只有和气去迎人，哪有相打得太平。
现代文：只有待人和气才能生活和美、安宁，怎么可能在经常吵闹打骂中过上太平日子？
English: You can only live a peaceful and beautiful life if you are kind to others. How is it possible to live a peaceful life in the midst of constant shouting and cursing?

古文：忠厚自有忠厚报，豪强一定受官刑。
现代文：忠厚老实的人自然会得到好的回报，横行霸道的人必定会受到法律的制裁。
English: Loyal and honest people will naturally get a good return, and those who are domineering will certainly be punished by the law.

古文：人到公门正好修，留些阴德在后头。
现代文：人做了官正好可以修炼自己，为日后积些阴德。
English: Once you become an official, you can cultivate yourself and accumulate some virtue for the future.

古文：为人何必争高下，一旦无命万事休。
现代文：做人何必一定要争个高低上下，一旦失去生命就什么都没有了。
English: Why do people have to fight for the top and bottom, once you lose your life, you have nothing.

古文：山高不算高，人心比天高。
现代文：山再高也不能算高，因为人心比天还高。
English: No matter how high the mountain is, it cannot be considered high, because the human heart is higher than the sky.

古文：白水变酒卖，还嫌猪无糟。
现代文：将白水当成酒卖给别人，还埋怨自家猪没有酒糟吃。
English: He sold white water to others as wine, and complained that his own pigs did not eat the lees.

古文：贫寒休要怨，宝贵不须骄。
现代文：家里贫寒不要怨天尤人，家中富贵切勿骄纵狂妄。
English: If you are poor at home, don't complain about the weather. If you are rich at home, don't be arrogant.

古文：善恶随人作，祸福自己招。
现代文：好事与坏事，是我们自己做的；是祸是福全都是自己招来的。
English: Good things and bad things are our own doing; whether it is misfortune or good fortune, it is all self-inflicted.

古文：奉劝君子，各宜守己。
现代文：奉劝各位有才德的人，各自坚守本分。
English: I advise all talented people to stick to their duties.

古文：只此呈示，万无一失。
现代文：只要按照以上的准则行事，就不会有闪失。
English: As long as you follow the above guidelines, there will be no slip-ups.

