古文：焦芳，泌阳人。
现代文：焦芳，泌阳人。
English: Jiaofang, a yang person.

古文：天顺八年进士。
现代文：天顺八年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in Tianshun eight years ago.

古文：大学士李贤以同乡故，引为庶吉士，授编修，进侍讲。
现代文：大学士李贤因他是同乡，把他引荐为庶吉士，后授予编修官，进行侍讲。
English: Because he was a fellow villager, Li Xian, a university scholar, recommended him as an associate professor, and later awarded him the post of editor, and he gave a guest lecture.

古文：满九年考，当迁学士。
现代文：任满九年后，应当晋升学士。
English: After serving for nine years, they shall be promoted to bachelor.

古文：或语大学士万安： 不学如芳，亦学士乎？ 
现代文：有人对大学士万安说： 像焦芳这种不学无术的人，也是学士吗？ 
English: Someone said to Wan An, a university scholar: Is an uneducated person like Jiao Fang also a scholar?

古文：芳闻大恚曰： 是必彭华间我也。
现代文：焦芳听说后非常愤怒，说： 这肯定是彭华在离间我。
English: After hearing this, Jiao Fang was very angry and said, "This must be Peng Hua trying to drive a wedge between us."

古文：我不学士，且刺华长安道中。 
现代文：我如当不上学士，就要将他刺杀在长安道中。 
English: If I don't get a bachelor's degree, I'll stab him to death in Chang'an Road.

古文：华惧，言于安，乃进芳侍讲学士。
现代文：彭华害怕了，便向万安说明，焦芳于是进升为侍讲学士。
English: Peng Hua was afraid, so he explained to Wan'an. Jiao Fang was then promoted to associate lecturer.

古文：先是，诏纂《文华大训》，进讲东宫，其书皆华等所为。芳耻不与，每进讲，故摘其疵，扬言众中。
现代文：原先，诏令修纂《文华大训》，给东宫太子讲解。此书都是彭华等人所编写，焦芳羞于没有参与，所以每次进讲时，便故意挑毛病，在众人中大声宣扬。
English: Originally, the edict was issued to revise the "Great Teaching of the Chinese Culture" and explain it to the East Palace Prince. This book was written by Peng Hua and others, and Jiao Fang was ashamed of not participating, so every time he went to lecture, he deliberately picked out the faults and loudly preached among the crowd.

古文：翰林尚文采，独芳粗陋无学识，性阴很，动辄议讪，人咸畏避之。
现代文：翰林们都崇尚文采，唯独焦芳粗鄙而没有学识，又个性阴狠，动辄对别人进行诽谤，所以人们都害怕而躲避他。
English: The Hanlin people all advocate literature, but Jiao Fang is rude and uneducated, and his personality is malicious. He often slanders others, so people are afraid of him and avoid him.

古文：尹旻之罢也，芳与其子龙相比，谪桂阳州同知。
现代文：尹被罢免时，焦芳因为与他的儿子尹龙相勾结，被贬为桂阳府同知。
English: When Yin was ousted, Jiao Fang was relegated to being a confidant of Guiyang for colluding with his son, Yin Long.

古文：芳知出华、安二人指，衔次骨。
现代文：焦芳知道这是出于彭华、万安两人的主意，更对他恨之入骨。
English: Jiao Fang knew that this was the idea of Peng Hua and Wan An, and she hated him to the bone.

古文：弘治初，移霍州知州，擢四川提学副使，调湖广。
现代文：弘治初年，焦芳调任霍州知州，升四川提学副使，再调任湖广。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, Jiao Fang was transferred to Hozhou Chizhou, promoted to Sichuan Vice Minister of Education, and then transferred to Hougang.

古文：未几，迁南京右通政，以忧归。
现代文：不久，升任南京右通政，因亲丧回家。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Nanjing U-turn politician, but had to return home due to a family bereavement.

古文：服阕，授太常少卿兼侍讲学士，寻擢礼部右侍郎。
现代文：守孝期满后，授为太常卿兼侍讲学士，不久升任礼部右侍郎。
English: After the expiration of his term of filial piety, he was awarded the title of Taijōkyō and the title of Samurai Lecturer, and was soon promoted to the post of Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：怨刘健尼己，日于众中嫚骂。
现代文：他恨刘健压制自己，便每天当众谩骂他。
English: He hated Liu Jian for suppressing him, so he abused him in public every day.

古文：健判牒不可意，即引笔抹去，不关白尚书。
现代文：刘健的批文不合他的心意，便提笔抹去，不禀报尚书。
English: Liu Jian's letter of criticism did not meet his wishes, so he took out his pen to erase it.

古文：俄改吏部，转左侍郎。
现代文：不久调吏部，转任左侍郎。
English: He was soon transferred to the clerk's department and then to the position of the left-hand waiter.

古文：马文升为尚书，芳辄加姗侮，阴结言官，使抨击素所不快及在己上者。
现代文：马文升任尚书，焦芳经常对他进行诽谤和侮辱，还暗中勾结言官，让他们抨击那些自己素来不喜欢以及地位在自己之上的人。
English: When Marvin was promoted to the position of senior clerk, Jiao Fang often slandered and insulted him, and also secretly colluded with the spokesmen to let them criticize those who they did not like and who were in a higher position.

古文：又上言御边四事以希进用，为谢迁所抑，尤憾迁。
现代文：他又上书提出御边的四条意见，企望能被采纳，但被谢迁压了下来，所以他尤其恨谢迁。
English: He also submitted four opinions to the imperial court, hoping that they would be accepted, but he was suppressed by Xie Qian, so he especially hated Xie Qian.

古文：每言及余姚、江西人，以迁及华故，肆口诟詈。
现代文：每提到余姚、江西人，因为谢迁和彭华的缘故，焦芳常破口大骂。
English: Whenever Yuyao and Jiangxi people were mentioned, because of Xie Qian and Peng Hua, Jiao Fang often cursed loudly.

古文：芳既积忤廷臣，复锐进，乃深结阉宦以自固，日夜谋逐健、迁，代其位。
现代文：焦芳既然已一再忤逆廷臣，又想锐意进取，于是便与阉官深相勾结，以巩固自己的地位，日夜图谋逐出刘健、谢迁，取代他们的位置。
English: Since Jiao Fang had repeatedly rebelled against the courtiers and wanted to forge ahead, he deeply colluded with the eunuchs to consolidate his position, day and night plotting to oust Liu Jian and Xie Qian and replace them.

古文：正德初，户部尚书韩文言会计不足。
现代文：正德初年，户部尚书韩文说财税不足。
English: In the first year of Zhengde, the head of the household, Shang Shu, said in Korean that there was not enough money and taxes.

古文：廷议谓理财无奇术，唯劝上节俭。
现代文：廷臣意见认为理财无奇术，唯有劝皇上节俭。
English: In the opinion of the courtiers, there is no magic in financial management, and the only way is to advise the emperor to be frugal.

古文：芳知左右有窃听者，大言曰： 庶民家尚须用度，况县官耶？
现代文：焦芳知道左右有人窃听，便大声说 ：百姓家庭尚需要费用，何况皇上！
English: Jiao Fang knew that there were people eavesdropping around, so she said loudly: People's families still need expenses, let alone the emperor!

古文：谚云 无钱拣故纸 。
现代文：谚语说 没钱就捡旧纸 。
English: There is a saying that if you don't have money, you can pick up used paper.

古文：今天下逋租匿税何限，不是检索，而但云损上何也？ 
现代文：现在天下拖欠隐漏的租税不知有多少，为何不去检查追索。而只说要削减国家开支？ 
English: Now that there are an unknown number of delinquent and hidden taxes, why not check for recourse, instead of just talking about cutting government spending?

古文：武宗闻之大喜。
现代文：武宗听后非常高兴。
English: Takemune was very happy after hearing this.

古文：会文升去，遂擢为吏部尚书。
现代文：正好马文升辞职，于是升焦芳为吏部尚书。
English: Just as Ma Wensheng resigned, So Zheng Jiao Fang became the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：韩文将率九卿劾刘瑾，疏当首吏部，以告芳。
现代文：韩文将要率九卿弹劾刘瑾，奏疏应当首列吏部之名，便将此事告诉焦芳。
English: Han Wen was going to lead nine nobles to impeach Liu Bei, and Song So should be the first official to tell Jiao Fang about this.

古文：芳阴泄其谋于瑾。
现代文：焦芳偷偷地把这一计划泄漏给了刘瑾，刘瑾于是驱逐了韩文以及刘健、谢迁等人。
English: Jiao Fang secretly leaked the plan to Liu Bei, who then expelled Han Wen, Liu Jian, Xie Qian and others.

古文：瑾遂逐文及健、迁辈，而芳以本官兼文渊阁大学士，入阁辅政，累加少师、华盖殿大学士。
现代文：而焦芳得以本官兼任文渊阁大学士，入阁辅政，累升少师、华盖殿大学士。
English: Jiao Fang, on the other hand, was able to serve concurrently as a member of the Cabinet of the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, and as a member of the Cabinet of the Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

古文：居内阁数年，瑾浊乱海内，变置成法，荼毒缙绅，皆芳导之。
现代文：他在内阁多年，刘瑾搅乱天下，变更成法，荼毒缙绅之士，都是他所引导。
English: He has been in the cabinet for many years. He is the one who led Liu Bei to disrupt the world, change it into law, and poison the gentry.

古文：每过瑾，言必称千岁，自称曰门下。
现代文：他每次拜访刘瑾，言必称千岁，而自称为门下。
English: Every time he visits Liu Bei, he claims to be a thousand years old and calls himself his disciple.

古文：裁阅章奏，一阿瑾意。
现代文：批阅奏章，全都迎合刘瑾的心意。
English: The reading of the musical scores all catered to Liu Yao's wishes.

古文：四方赂瑾者先赂芳。
现代文：四方来贿赂刘瑾的，都先贿赂焦芳。
English: When the four parties came to bribe Liu Ye, they all bribed Jiao Fang first.

古文：子黄中，亦傲很不学，廷试必欲得第一。
现代文：他的儿子黄中，也傲慢凶狠，不学无术，但廷试时却一定要得第一名。
English: His son, Huang Zhong, is also arrogant and ferocious, uneducated and unskilled, but he must win the first place in the court trial.

古文：李东阳、王鏊为置二甲首，芳不悦。
现代文：李东阳、王鏊将他列在二甲第一名，焦芳很不高兴。
English: Li Dongyang and Wang Qi listed him as the first place in the second division, and Jiao Fang was very unhappy.

古文：言于瑾，径授翰林检讨，俄进编修。
现代文：他告诉了刘瑾，径自给儿子授为翰林检讨，不久进升编修。
English: He told Liu Yao, and gave his son a review of Hanlin, and soon promoted him to editor.

古文：芳以黄中故，时时詈东阳。
现代文：焦芳因黄中的缘故，时时骂李东阳。
English: Because of Huangzhong, Jiao Fang always scolded Li Dongyang.

古文：瑾闻之曰： 黄中昨在我家试石榴诗，甚拙，顾恨李耶？ 
现代文：刘瑾听到后说： 黄中昨天在我家试做石榴诗，很拙劣，你还能恨李东阳吗？ 
English: After hearing this, Liu Ye said: Huang Zhong tried to make a pomegranate poem at my home yesterday, but it was very poor. Can you still hate Li Dongyang?

古文：瑾怒翰林官傲己，欲尽出之外，为张彩劝沮。
现代文：刘瑾恨翰林官对他太傲慢，想把他们全部赶出去，被张彩劝阻。
English: Liu Yu hated that the forester was too arrogant to him and wanted to drive them all out, but was dissuaded by Zhang Cai.

古文：及修《孝家实录》成，瑾又持前议，彩复力沮。
现代文：到《孝宗实录》修成时，刘瑾又重提先前的打算，张彩又极力劝阻。
English: By the time of the completion of "The True Record of the Filial Piety Sect," Liu Yao once again brought up the previous plan, and Zhang Cai again tried to dissuade him.

古文：而芳父子与检讨段炅辈，教瑾以扩充政事为名，乃尽出编修顾清等二十余人于部曹。
现代文：而焦芳父子和检讨段炅等人，教刘瑾以扩充政事为名，将编修顾清等二十余人全部赶到了各部衙门。
English: Meanwhile, more than 20 people, including Jiao Fang's father and son, the reviewer Duan Yu and others, and the editor-in-chief Xiu Guqing, all rushed to the gate of each ministry to teach Liu Yu in the name of expanding government affairs.

古文：有司应诏举怀材抱德之士，以余姚人周礼、徐子元、许龙，上虞人徐文彪四人名上。
现代文：有关官员响应诏令荐举才德兼备之士，将余姚人周礼、徐子元、许龙和上虞人徐文彪四人推荐了上去。
English: In response to the imperial edict to recommend people with both talent and virtue, the relevant officials recommended Yu Yao, Zhou Li, Xu Ziyuan, Xu Long and Shangyu citizen Xu Wenbiao.

古文：瑾以礼等皆迁乡人，而诏草出健，因下四人诏狱，欲并逮健、迁。
现代文：刘瑾以周礼等人都是谢迁的同乡，而诏令又是刘健所起草，因而将这四人投进诏狱，还想将刘健、谢迁一并逮捕。
English: Liu Qianyi, Zhou Li and others were all Xie Qian's fellow villagers, and the edict was drafted by Liu Jian, so he put these four people in the imperial prison, and also wanted to arrest Liu Jian and Xie Qian together.

古文：东阳力解之。
现代文：李东阳极力调解。
English: Li Dongyang tried his best to mediate.

古文：芳厉声曰： 纵贳其罪，不当除名耶？ 
现代文：焦芳厉声说道 ：纵然赦免他们的罪行，难道不应该将他们除名吗？ 
English: Jiao Fang said sharply, "Even if their crimes are pardoned, shouldn't they be expelled?"

古文：乃黜健、迁为民，而榜逐余姚人之为京官者。
现代文：于是将刘健、谢迁废为平民，而张榜驱逐担任京官的余姚人。
English: As a result, Liu Jian and Xie Qian were abolished as civilians, and Zhangbang expelled Yu Yao, who served as a Beijing official.

古文：满剌加使臣亚刘，本江西万安人，名萧明举。以罪叛入其国，与其国人端亚智等来朝。
现代文：满剌加的使臣亚刘，本是江西万安人，名叫萧明举，因犯罪叛逃到满剌加，与其国人端亚智来朝见。
English: The envoy of Manchukuo, Ya Liu, originally from Wan'an, Jiangxi Province, named Xiao Mingji, defected to Manchukuo due to crime, and came to the imperial court with his compatriot Duan Yazhi.

古文：既又谋入浡泥国索宝，且杀亚智等。
现代文：后来他又图谋进入氵孛泥国索宝，并杀死了亚智等人。
English: Later, he plotted to enter the muddy country of Sopao, and killed Yazhi and others.

古文：事闻，方下所司勘奏。芳即署其尾曰： 江西土俗，故多玩法，如彭华、尹直、徐琼、李孜省、黄景等，多被物议。
现代文：事情报到朝廷后，正要让所在官员调查上报，焦芳却在后面补充写道：江西的土俗，人民多散漫不认真，像彭华、尹直、徐琼、李孜省、黄景等人，多被人们所议论。
English: After the information was reported to the imperial court, it was about to let the officials in charge investigate and report, but Jiao Fang added in the back: Jiangxi's folk customs, people are more casual and not serious, like Peng Hua, Yin Zhi, Xu Qiong, Li Ze, Huang Jing and others, are mostly discussed by people.

古文：宜裁减解额五十名，通籍者勿选京职，著为令。 
现代文：应当裁减江西乡试名额五十名，初做官的人也不要选为京职，并将这一条颁布为法令。 
English: It is necessary to reduce the number of Jiangxi township probationers by fifty, and the first-time officials should not be elected to the Beijing post, and this article should be promulgated as a decree.

古文：且言： 王安石祸宋，吴澄仕元，宜榜其罪，使他日毋得滥用江西人。 
现代文：他还说： 王安石贻祸于宋朝，吴澄为元朝做官，应张榜公布他们的罪行，使以后不要滥用江西人。 
English: He also said: Wang Anshihong, who was a disaster in the Song Dynasty, and Wu Cheng, who was an official in the Yuan Dynasty, should publish a list of their crimes, so that they would not abuse Jiangxi people in the future.

古文：杨廷和解之曰： 以一盗故，祸连一方，至裁解额矣。
现代文：杨廷和劝解说 ：因一人为盗，而祸及一方，甚至还裁减乡试名额。
English: Yang Tinghe said: Because one person was a thief, and the misfortune fell on one side, even the number of township examinations was reduced.

古文：宋、元人物，亦欲并案耶？ 
现代文：宋元时期的人物，难道也要拉来一同判罪吗？ 
English: Should figures from the Song and Yuan dynasties be brought in for sentencing as well?

古文：乃止。
现代文：焦芳这才罢了。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：芳深恶南人，每退一南人，辄喜。
现代文：焦芳非常厌恶南方人，每斥退一个南方人，他便很高兴。
English: Jiao Fang hates southerners very much, and he is happy whenever he repels a southerner.

古文：虽论古人，亦必诋南而誉北，尝作《南人不可为相图》进瑾。
现代文：即使是谈论古人，他也一定诋毁南方人而赞誉北方人。他还曾做一幅《南人不可为相图》，献给刘瑾。
English: Even when talking about the ancients, he would certainly denigrate the southerners and praise the northerners. He also once made a painting, "Southerners Must Not Be Photoshopped," dedicated to Liu Bei.

古文：其总裁《孝宗实录》，若何乔新、彭韶、谢迁皆肆诬诋，自喜曰： 今朝廷之上，谁如我直者。 
现代文：他担任《孝宗实录》一书的总裁官时，对何乔新、彭韶、谢迁肆意进行诬陷和诽谤，还得意地说： 当今朝廷之上，有谁像我这样正直！ 
English: When he served as the president of the book "The True Record of the Filial Piety," he arbitrarily framed and slandered He Qiaoxin, Peng Rong and Xie Qian, and said proudly: "In today's imperial court, who is as honest as me!

古文：始张彩为郎时，芳力荐以悦瑾，觊其为奸利。
现代文：当初张彩任郎官时，焦芳极力推荐他以取悦于刘瑾，希图获得奸利。
English: At first, when Zhang Aya was appointed as a vassal, Jiao Fang strongly recommended him to please Liu Ye, hoping to gain profits.

古文：比彩为尚书，芳父子荐人无虚日，彩时有同异，遂有隙。
现代文：到张彩当尚书时，焦芳父子没有一天不推荐人，张彩与他的看法有时相同而有时相反，两人遂有了矛盾。
English: By the time Zhang Cai was a scholar, Jiao Fang and his son did not have a day without recommending someone. Zhang Cai and his opinion were sometimes the same and sometimes the opposite, and the two finally had a contradiction.

古文：而段炅见瑾暱彩，芳势稍衰，转附彩，尽发芳阴事于瑾。
现代文：而段炅见刘瑾亲近张彩，焦芳势力稍衰，便转而依附张彩，将焦芳的阴私全部告诉了刘瑾。
English: But when Duan Yu saw that Liu Yu was close to Zhang Cai and that Jiao Fang's power was waning, he turned to Zhang Cai and told Liu Yu all of Jiao Fang's dirty secrets.

古文：瑾大怒，数于众中斥芳父子。
现代文：刘瑾大怒，多次当众斥骂焦芳父子。
English: Liu Yao was furious and repeatedly scolded Jiao Fang and his son in public.

古文：芳不得已，乃乞归。
现代文：焦芳不得已，便请求辞官归乡。
English: As a last resort, Jiao Fang asked the official to return home.

古文：黄中頠阁荫，以侍读随父还。
现代文：黄中请求阁臣庇荫，以侍读职衔随父还乡。
English: Huang Zhong requested the courtier to protect the shadow, and returned to his hometown with his father with the title of attendant.

古文：瑾败，给事、御史交劾，削其官，黜黄中为民。
现代文：刘瑾败后，给事中、御史纷纷弹劾焦芳父子，削夺了他的官衔，将黄中废为平民。
English: After Liu Bei's defeat, in the middle of the matter, the imperial historian impeached Jiao Fang and his son one after another, stripped him of his official title, and abolished Huang Zhongru as a commoner.

古文：久之，芳使黄中赍金宝遗权贵，上章求湔雪复官，为吏科所驳。
现代文：后来，焦芳派黄中用金钱宝物贿赂权贵，上书请求洗刷先前的罪名，恢复官衔，但被吏科驳斥。
English: Later, Jiao Fang sent Huang Zhong to bribe dignitaries with money and valuables, and petitioned for the previous charges to be cleared and the official title to be restored, but this was refuted by the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：于是吏部覆奏，请械系黄中法司，以彰天讨。
现代文：于是吏部又奏请将黄中逮捕，押送法司，以昭示上天对他的惩罚。
English: As a result, the officials also requested that Huang Zhong be arrested and escorted to the legal department to show the punishment to him.

古文：黄中狼狈遁走。
现代文：黄中狼狈逃走。
English: The wolverine ran away.

古文：芳居第宏丽，治作劳数郡。
现代文：焦芳府第很宏丽，建造时劳动了几个郡。
English: Jiao Fang Prefecture is very magnificent, and it took several counties to build it.

古文：大盗赵鐩入泌阳，火之，发窖多得其藏金，乃尽掘其先人冢墓，杂烧以牛马骨。
现代文：大盗赵钅遂进入泌阳，火烧了他的府第，挖开了地窖，获得不少藏金，于是赵钅遂将焦芳先人的坟墓全部掘开，将挖出的骨头与牛马骨头一起烧掉。
English: The great robber Zhao Xuan then entered Xuryang, set fire to his mansion, dug up the cellar, and obtained a lot of hidden gold. So Zhao Xuan then dug up all the graves of Jiao Fang's ancestors, and burned the excavated bones together with the bones of cattle and horses.

古文：求芳父子不得，取芳衣冠被庭树，拔剑斫其首，使群盗糜之，曰： 吾为天子诛此贼。 
现代文：他遍寻焦芳父子不得，便将焦芳的衣冠挂在院子里的树上，拔剑砍掉他的头，让群盗将其剁碎。他说 ：我为天子诛杀此贼。 
English: Unable to find Jiao Fang and his son, he hung Jiao Fang's crown on a tree in the courtyard, drew his sword, cut off his head, and let the bandits chop it up. He said, "I will kill this thief for the sake of Heaven."

古文：鐩后临刑叹曰： 吾不能手刃焦芳父子以谢天下，死有余恨！ 
现代文：赵钅遂后来在临刑时叹道： 我不能亲手杀死焦芳父子以谢天下，死有余恨！ 
English: Later, on his deathbed, Zhao Shuxui lamented, "I can't kill Jiao Fang and his son with my own hands to show my gratitude to the world. I hate to die!"

古文：瑾从孙二汉当死，亦曰： 吾死固当，第吾家所为，皆焦芳与张彩耳。
现代文：刘瑾的侄孙二汉应被处死，他也说： 我死固然应当，但我家的所作所为，都是焦芳和张彩所指使。
English: Liu Yao's nephew Erhan should be put to death, he also said: I certainly deserve to die, but the actions of my family are all directed by Jiao Fang and Zhang Cai.

古文：今彩与我处极刑，而芳独晏然，岂非冤哉。 
现代文：现在张彩和我被处以极刑，而焦芳却唯独安然无事，岂不是冤枉！ 
English: Now Zhang Cai and I have been sentenced to capital punishment, but Jiao Fang is safe and sound. Isn't that an injustice?

古文：张彩，安定人。
现代文：焦芳父子竟得良死。张彩，安定人。
English: Jiao Fang and his son actually had a good death. Zhang Cai, a stable person.

古文：弘治三年进士。授吏部主事，历文选司郎中。
现代文：弘治三年中进士，被授予吏部主事，历任文选司郎中。
English: He was promoted to junior high school in the third year of the Koji era, and was awarded the position of the head of the personnel department.

古文：彩议论便利，善伺权贵指。
现代文：张彩善于议论，言辞犀利，还善于窥探权贵的旨意。
English: Zhang Cai is good at talking, sharp words, and is also good at spying on the will of the powerful.

古文：初矫饰彻声誉，尚书马文升等皆爱之。
现代文：他初时粉饰自己，以博取声誉，尚书马文升等人都喜欢他。
English: At the beginning, he embellished himself in order to gain reputation. Shangshu Ma, Wensheng and others all liked him.

古文：给事中刘郤尝劾其颠倒选法数事，文升悉为辩析，且誉其聪明刚正，为上下所推服。
现代文：给事中刘瑾曾经弹劾他颠倒选才法等事，马文升都为他辩解，并且还称赞他聪明刚正，受到上下人等的推崇。
English: In this matter, Liu Wei once impeached him for reversing the law of selection of talents, etc. Ma Wensheng defended him, and also praised him for being smart and upright, and was respected by his superiors and subordinates.

古文：诏令办事如故。
现代文：诏令他依旧办事。
English: The Emperor ordered him to continue his duties.

古文：彩即五疏移疾去，文升固留不得，时论称之。
现代文：张彩便五次上疏称病辞职，马文升极力挽留，没能把他留住，当时舆论都称赞他。
English: Zhang Cai resigned five times, saying he was ill. Ma Wensheng tried his best to retain him, but was unable to retain him. At that time, the public praised him.

古文：越数日，给事李贯荐彩有将略。
现代文：过了几天，给事中李贯推荐张彩有将略。
English: A few days later, in the middle of the matter, Li Gang recommended Zhang Cai as a potential candidate.

古文：杨一清总制三边，亦荐彩自代。
现代文：杨一清总制三边军务，也推荐张彩来代替自己。
English: Yang Yixing, head of the trilateral military affairs department, also recommended Zhang Cai to replace himself.

古文：而焦芳以彩与刘瑾同乡，力荐于瑾。
现代文：而焦芳因张彩与刘瑾是同乡，也极力向刘瑾推荐他。
English: However, Jiao Fang is a fellow villager of Zhang Cai and Liu Jie, and she strongly recommends him to Liu Jie.

古文：瑾欲致之，因著令，病过期不赴者，斥为民。
现代文：刘瑾想把他召来，便下令，如果他过期不到，便斥为平民。
English: When Liu Bei wanted to summon him, he issued an order that if he did not complete his term, he would be dismissed as a commoner.

古文：彩乃就道。
现代文：张彩于是上路。
English: Zhang Aya then hit the road.

古文：既见瑾，高冠鲜衣，貌白晳修伟，须眉蔚然，词辩泉涌。
现代文：他去见刘瑾时，戴着高帽、穿着鲜艳服装，他脸色白皙，身材修长俊美，须眉浓密，词辩如泉涌。
English: When he went to see Liu Bei, he was wearing a tall hat and bright clothes. His face was white, his body was slender and handsome, his mustache was thick, and his speech was like a spring.

古文：瑾大敬爱，执手移时，曰： 子神人也，我何以得遇子！ 
现代文：刘瑾非常敬佩和喜欢，握着他的手多时，说： 你真是神人，我何幸得以遇到你！ 
English: Liu Ye admired and liked him very much. He held his hand for a long time and said, "You are truly a man of God. How lucky I am to have met you!"

古文：时文选郎刘永已迁通政，次当验封郎石确。
现代文：当时文选司郎中刘永已升为通政使，依次应排列验封司郎中石确进文选司。
English: At that time, Liu Yongzhong, the secretary of anthology, was promoted to the political envoy, and the secretary of seal inspection, Zhong Shi, was promoted to the secretary of anthology.

古文：疏既入，瑾令尚书许进追原疏，以彩易之。
现代文：这奏疏呈入后，刘瑾令尚书许进追回原疏，换上张彩。
English: After the score was submitted, Liu Bei ordered Shang Shuxin to recover the original score and replace it with Zhang Cai.

古文：彩自是一意事瑾。
现代文：张彩从此一心追随刘瑾。
English: Zhang Aya followed Liu Ye wholeheartedly from then on.

古文：瑾恶进不附己，彩因媒孽去进，以刘宇代之。
现代文：刘瑾厌恶许进不依附他，张彩便挑拨是非，将许进陷害挤走，以刘宇来取代他。
English: Liu Yao detested Xu Jin for not adhering to him, so Zhang Cai picked a fight, pushed Xu Jin out of the way, and replaced him with Liu Yu.

古文：宇虽为尚书，铨政率由彩，多不关白宇，即白宇，宇必温言降接。
现代文：刘宇虽是尚书，选官之权都归张彩，多不汇报刘宇，即使汇报了，刘宇也一定温言接受。
English: Although Liu Yu is a Shangshu, the power of selecting officials all belongs to Zhang Cai. He mostly does not report to Liu Yu, and even if he does, Liu Yu will certainly accept it warmly.

古文：彩抱案立语，宇俯偻不敢当。
现代文：张彩抱着卷宗，站着说话，刘宇俯首哈腰说不敢当。
English: Zhang Cai held the dossier and stood up to speak. Liu Yu bowed his head and did not dare to speak.

古文：居文选半载，擢左佥都御史，与户部右侍郎韩鼎同廷谢。
现代文：他在文选司半年，升为左佥都御史，与户部侍郎韩鼎同廷谢恩。
English: After half a year in the anthology department, he was promoted to the post of Zuoying Metropolitan Historian, and he received the thanks of the court together with Han Ding, a chamberlain of the household.

古文：鼎老，拜起不如仪，为谷大用、张永辈所窃笑。
现代文：韩鼎老了，起拜行礼不合规矩，被谷大用、张永等人讥笑。
English: Han Ding is old, and his bowing and curtsying are not in accordance with the rules. He was ridiculed by Gu Daiyong, Zhang Yong and others.

古文：瑾方惭，而彩丰采英毅，大用等皆称羡，瑾乃喜。
现代文：刘瑾正在惭愧，看到张彩风采照人，英气勃发，谷大用等人都很羡慕，这才高兴。
English: Liu Yao was ashamed. He was happy to see Zhang Cai's style shining brightly, and his energy bursting out. Gu Dayong and others were very envious.

古文：越二日罢鼎，而彩逾年超拜吏部右侍郎。
现代文：过了两天罢免韩鼎，而张彩过了一年被超升为吏部右侍郎。
English: After two days, Han Ding was dismissed, and Zhang Cai was promoted to the right hand man of the cadre department after one year.

古文：鼎，合水人。
现代文：韩鼎，合水人。
English: Han Ding, a man of water.

古文：弘治时，为给事中，负直声。
现代文：弘治时期，任给事中，有刚直的名声。
English: During the Kōji period, when he was appointed to the post, he had a reputation for being firm.

古文：后迁右通政，治水安平有劳绩，以通政使家居。
现代文：后升任右通政使，在安平治水有功，以通政使之职离休回家。
English: After that, he was promoted to the post of Utsu Political Envoy. He made great contributions to water control in Anping, and left his post to return home.

古文：至是为瑾所引，复挫归，遂失其素望。
现代文：到此受刘瑾的引荐，但又挫败而归，从此失去素有的声望。
English: He was recommended by Liu Bei, but he returned home defeated and lost his reputation.

古文：瑾欲大贵彩，乃命刘宇入内阁，以彩代之。
现代文：刘瑾想让张彩大贵，于是命刘宇进入内阁，以张彩代替他。
English: Liu Bei wanted to make Zhang Cai very expensive, so he ordered Liu Yu to enter the cabinet and replace him with Zhang Cai.

古文：一岁中，自郎署长六卿。
现代文：一年之内，他由一个部郎升到六卿。
English: Within a year, he rose from a subordinate to a six-star general.

古文：僚友守官如故，咸惴惴白事尚书前，彩厉色无所假借。
现代文：同僚们却仍在原职，他们惴惴不安地在尚书面前汇报，而张彩一本正经地对待他们，毫不客气。
English: His colleagues, however, remain at their original posts. They anxiously report in front of Shang Shu, while Zhang Cai treats them seriously and unceremoniously.

古文：寻加太子少保。
现代文：不久他加封为太子少保。
English: Soon after, he was given the additional title of Crown Prince Junior Protector.

古文：每瑾出休沐，公卿往候，自辰至哺未得见。
现代文：每逢刘瑾出宫休假，公卿们前去拜访，从上午八九点到下午四五点都不得接见。
English: Whenever Liu Bei leaves the palace for vacation, the nobles visit him, and he is not allowed to receive them from 8 or 9 a.m. to 4 or 5 p.m.

古文：彩故徐徐来，直入瑾小阁，欢饮而出，始揖众人。
现代文：张彩故意徐徐而来，直接进入刘瑾的小阁，欢饮一顿而出，这才与众人作揖相见。
English: Zhang Cai deliberately came slowly, directly entered Liu Yao's small pavilion, and went out for a drink, only to meet with everyone.

古文：众以是益畏彩，见彩如瑾礼。
现代文：众人因此更加害怕张彩，见到张彩所行的礼就像见到刘瑾一般。
English: As a result, people are even more afraid of Zhang Cai. Seeing Zhang Cai perform a salute is like seeing Liu Xuan in general.

古文：彩与朝臣言，呼瑾为老者。
现代文：张彩与朝中大臣言谈，称刘瑾为老者。
English: Zhang Cai talked with the Minister of the DPRK and China and called Liu Ye an old man.

古文：凡所言，瑾无不从。
现代文：凡他所说的话，刘瑾无不听从。
English: Liu Bei listened to everything he said.

古文：因不时考察内外官，纠摘严急，间一用薄罚，而诸司台谏谪辱日甚。
现代文：他便不时地考察内外官员，纠察弹劾很严，间或也用薄惩，各部门以及台谏官员被贬和折辱的一天比一天严重。
English: He inspected officials at home and abroad from time to time. The picketing and impeachment were very strict, and occasionally used light punishments. The disparagement and humiliation of various departments and Taiwanese officials became more serious day by day.

古文：变乱旧格，贿赂肆行，海内金帛奇货相望涂巷间。
现代文：他变乱旧制，贿赂公行，海内的金帛奇物络绎不绝地运来。
English: He disrupted the old system, bribed officials, and brought in a never-ending stream of exotic gold ingots from overseas.

古文：性尤渔色。
现代文：他尤其喜欢美色。
English: He is particularly fond of beauty.

古文：抚州知府刘介，其乡人也，娶妾美。
现代文：抚州知府刘介，是他的同乡，娶有美妾。
English: Liu Jie, the governor of Fuzhou, is his countryman, married to a beautiful concubine.

古文：彩特擢介太常少卿，盛服往贺曰： 子何以报我？ 
现代文：张彩特地将刘介升为太常寺少卿，然后穿着盛装前往道贺说 ：你怎么报答我？ 
English: Zhang Cai specially promoted Liu Jie to Shaoqing of Taizhong Temple, and then dressed up to go to Doha to say: How do you repay me?

古文：介皇恐谢曰： 一身外，皆公物。 
现代文：刘介惶恐地感谢道： 我一身之外，都是您的。 
English: Liu Jie thanked him with trepidation: "Apart from me, everything is yours."

古文：彩曰： 命之矣。 
现代文：张彩说 ：这就遵命。 
English: Zhang Aya said, "This is just following orders."

古文：即使人直入内，牵其妾，舆戴而去。
现代文：便派人直入内室，牵出他的妾，车载而去。
English: He then sent someone straight into the inner room, took out his concubine and drove away.

古文：又闻平阳知府张恕妾美，索之不肯，令御史张禴按致其罪，拟戍。
现代文：他又听说平阳知府张恕妾美，便去索求，张恕不肯，他就令御史张龠考察，将他治罪，拟遣去戍边。
English: He also heard that the governor of Pingyang, Zhang Shumei, had a concubine, so he went to ask for her, but Zhang Shumei refused, so he ordered the governor to investigate Zhang Shumei, punish him, and plan to send him to Lijiang.

古文：恕献妾，始得论减。
现代文：张恕献出爱妾，才得减刑。
English: Zhang Shou had to give up his mistress in order to have his sentence reduced.

古文：彩既衔瑾恩，见瑾擅权久，贪冒无厌，天下怨之，因乘间说曰： 公亦知贿入所自乎？
现代文：张彩既欠刘瑾的恩德，则刘瑾专权日久，贪求冒赏无厌，天下都怨恨他，便找机会劝他说 ：您知道这些贿赂从哪儿来吗？
English: Zhang Cai not only owed Liu Wei's benevolence, but Liu Wei's monopoly lasted for a long time. He was insatiable for rewards. The whole world resented him, so he looked for an opportunity to persuade him: Do you know where these bribes come from?

古文：非盗官帑，即剥小民。
现代文：不是盗取国库，就是剥削小民。
English: Either stealing the treasury or exploiting the common people.

古文：彼借公名自厚，入公者未十一，而怨悉归公，何以谢天下， 瑾大然之。
现代文：他们借您之名肥了自己，送给您的不到十分之一，而怨愤却集中您一身，您怎么向天下交代？ 刘瑾非常赞同他的意见。
English: They have enriched themselves in your name, giving you less than one-tenth of their income, but you are the only one who is resentful. How do you explain this to the world? Liu Ye very much agrees with his opinion.

古文：会御史胡节巡按山东还，厚遗瑾。
现代文：正好御史胡节巡按山东回来，送给刘瑾很丰厚。
English: Just as the Gu Shi Hu Festival patrol returned from Shandong, it was a very rich gift for Liu Wei.

古文：瑾发之，捕节下狱。
现代文：刘瑾将他揭发，并逮捕他入狱。
English: Liu Ye exposed him, arrested him and sent him to prison.

古文：少监李宣、侍郎张鸾、指挥同知赵良按事福建还，馈瑾白金二万。
现代文：少监李宣、侍郎张鸾、指挥同知赵良巡视福建回来，献给刘瑾白金两万。
English: After returning from their inspection tour of Fujian, the junior inspector Li Xuan, the chamberlain Zhang Ye, and the conductor Zhao Liang presented Liu Ye with 20,000 yuan in platinum.

古文：瑾疏纳金于官，而按三人罪。
现代文：刘瑾上疏将白金交给国家，而将三人治罪。
English: Liu Ying Shang So handed over the platinum to the state, and the three were prosecuted.

古文：其他因贿得祸者甚众。
现代文：其他因贿赂他而得祸的很多。
English: There are many others who got into trouble for bribing him.

古文：乃以瑞图、宗道与顾秉谦、冯铨等坐赎徒为民，而立极、凤来、景辰落职闲住。崔呈秀，蓟州人。
现代文：苛刻的聚敛为之减少，内外人士便有的称赞张彩能引导刘瑾做善事。到刘瑾被诛，张彩以交结皇上贴身宦官之罪被判死刑，遇上大赦应当免罪。于是将他改判为同刘瑾谋反。他死于狱中，仍将他拖到市场坐刂尸，抄他的家，妻儿流放到海南。崔呈秀，蓟州人。
English: When Liu Ye was arrested, Zhang Cai was sentenced to death for the crime of befriending the emperor's personal eunuch, and should be pardoned if there was an amnesty. Therefore, his sentence was changed to conspiring with Liu Ye. He died in prison, but his corpse was still dragged to the market, his house was plundered, and his wife and children were exiled to Hainan. Cui Chengxiu, a native of Zhangzhou.

古文：万历四十一年进士。授行人。
现代文：万历四十一年中进士，授予行人官。
English: In the 41st year of Wanli, he was promoted to the rank of middle-ranking officer, and was awarded the title of pedestrian officer.

古文：天启初，擢御史，巡按淮、扬。
现代文：天启初年，升任御史，巡按淮安、扬州两府。
English: In the first year of Tianqi, he was promoted to the position of imperial historian, and inspected Huai'an and Yangzhou.

古文：卑污狡狯，不修士行。
现代文：他卑鄙狡猾，品行不修。
English: He's sneaky, he's devious, he's dishonest.

古文：见东林势方盛，将出都，力荐李三才，求入其党，东林拒不纳。
现代文：他见东林党势力正盛，在将要离开京城时，便极力向李三才自荐，请求加入东林党，被东林党拒绝。
English: He saw that the Donglin Party was flourishing, and when he was about to leave Beijing, he tried his best to recommend himself to Li Sancai and asked to join the Donglin Party, but was rejected by the Donglin Party.

古文：在淮、扬，赃私狼籍。
现代文：在淮安和扬州，他任意贪污。
English: In Huai'an and Yangzhou, he engaged in indiscriminate corruption.

古文：霍丘知县郑延祚贪，将劾之，以千金贿免。
现代文：霍丘知县郑延祚贪污，崔呈秀将弹劾他，郑延祚以一千两黄金贿赂他而获免。
English: Choe Chun Hee will impeach Chung Yeon-soo for corruption. Chung Yeon-soo was acquitted after bribing him with 1,000 taels of gold.

古文：延祚知其易与，再行千金，即荐之。
现代文：郑延祚知道他好对付，便再献上一千两黄金，即受到他推荐。
English: Zheng Yanqi knew that he was good at dealing with, so he offered another one thousand two gold, which was recommended by him.

古文：其行事多类此。
现代文：崔呈秀做事多像这样。
English: This is how Cui Chengxiu does most of his work.

古文：四年九月还朝，高攀龙为都御史，尽发其贪污状。
现代文：四年九月崔呈秀回京，高攀龙当时任都御史，将他贪污情况全部揭发。
English: In September of the same year, Cui Chengxiu returned to Beijing, where Gao Panglong was then the governor of the capital, and exposed all of his corruption.

古文：吏部尚书赵南星议戍之，诏革职候勘。
现代文：吏部尚书赵南星建议罚他戍边，诏令将他革职，等候检查。
English: Zhao Nansing, the secretary of the Personnel Department, suggested that he should be punished, and ordered him to be dismissed, pending an inspection.

古文：呈秀大窘，夜走魏忠贤所，叩头乞哀，言攀龙、南星皆东林，挟私排陷，复叩头涕泣，乞为养子。
现代文：崔呈秀大为窘迫，连夜跑到魏忠贤的住处，叩头乞怜，说高攀龙、赵南星都是东林党，他们挟私怨排挤和陷害他，然后他又叩头流涕，乞求做魏忠贤的养子。
English: Cui Chengxiu was in great distress. He ran to Wei Zhongxian's residence overnight, prostrated himself and begged for mercy, saying that Gao Panglong and Zhao Nansing were Donglin Party members, and that they were using personal grudges to oust and frame him. Then he prostrated himself and begged to be Wei Zhongxian's adopted son.

古文：当是时，忠贤为廷臣交攻，愤甚，方思得外廷为助。
现代文：当时，魏忠贤被廷臣轮番攻击，非常愤怒，正想得外廷大臣相助。
English: At that time, Wei Zhongxian was attacked by courtiers in turn, was very angry, and was trying to get the Foreign Minister's help.

古文：涿州人冯铨，少年官侍从家居，与熊廷弼有隙，遗书魏良卿劝兴大狱。
现代文：涿州人冯铨，正当少年，以侍从一职住在家里，与熊廷弼有矛盾，他投书给魏良卿，劝他制造大案。
English: Feng Yu, a legitimate boy from Zhangzhou, lived at home as an attendant, and had conflicts with Xiong Tingyu. He wrote to Wei Liangqing and advised him to create a big case.

古文：忠贤冀假事端倾陷诸害己者，得呈秀，恨相见晚，遂用为腹心，日与计画。
现代文：魏忠贤正想借事端排挤陷害那些害他的人，这时得了崔呈秀，相见恨晚，遂用他为心腹，每天与他谋划。
English: Wei Zhongxian was trying to take advantage of the situation to squeeze and trap those who harmed him. At this time, he met Cui Chengxiu, who was late to see him, so he used him as a confidant and plotted with him every day.

古文：明年正月，给事中李恒茂为呈秀讼冤。
现代文：第二年正月，给事中李恒茂为崔呈秀诉冤。
English: In the first month of the second year, Li Hengmao sued Cui Shengxiu.

古文：中旨即言呈秀被诬，复其官。
现代文：圣旨即说崔呈秀被诬陷，恢复了他的官衔。
English: The edict said Cui Chengxiu had been framed and restored his official title.

古文：呈秀乃首疏荐张鹤鸣、申用懋、王永光、商周祚、许弘纲等；而再疏请令京官自陈，由是清流多屏斥。
现代文：崔呈秀于是首先上疏推荐张鹤鸣、申时懋、王永光、商周祚、许弘纲等人，而后又上疏请令京官自己述职，由此清流之士多被斥退。
English: Cui Chengxiu then first recommended Zhang Heming, Shin Shihong, Wang Yongguang, Shang Zhouyi, Xu Honggang and others to Shang Suo, and then asked Shang Suo to order the Beijing officials to report for duty, as a result of which most of the clear stream people were expelled.

古文：寻督三殿工，忠贤以阅工故，日至外朝。
现代文：不久他监督三殿工程，魏忠贤以检查工程为名，每天到外朝。
English: Soon he was supervising the construction of the Third Palace. Wei Zhongxian went to the Outer Court every day in the name of inspecting the construction.

古文：呈秀必屏人密语，以间进《同志》诸录，皆东林党人。
现代文：这时崔呈秀便屏退他人，与他密谈，借机献上《同志录》等册子，上面都是东林党人名单。
English: At this time, Cui Chengxiu screened others, talked with him in secret, and took the opportunity to present "Comrades" and other brochures, all of which are the list of Donglin party members.

古文：又进《天鉴录》，皆不附东林者。令忠贤凭以黜陟，善类为一空。
现代文：他又献《天鉴录》，上面列的都是不依附东林党的人，让魏忠贤凭这些定升降，结果朝中好人为之一空。
English: He also presented the "Diary of Heaven," the above-listed people were not affiliated with the Donglin Party, and Wei Zhongxian was allowed to rise and fall according to these rules. As a result, the good people of the DPRK and the People's Republic of China were empty.

古文：暮夜乞怜者，莫不缘呈秀以进，绳集蚁附，其门如市。
现代文：晚上来乞怜的人，无不通过崔呈秀来引进，那些人蝇集蚁附，崔呈秀门庭若市。
English: People who come to beg for mercy in the evening are all introduced by Cui Zhenxiu. Those people attract flies and ants, and Cui Zhenxiu is very popular.

古文：累擢工部右侍郎并兼御史，督工如故。
现代文：他累升为工部右侍郎兼御史，仍监督工程。
English: He rose through the ranks to become the right-hand man of the engineering department as well as its president, and still oversaw the project.

古文：御史田景新言，侍郎兼御史非便，请改佥都御史，从之。
现代文：御史田景新说，侍郎兼御史不便，请改为佥都御史。皇上听从了。
English: The chief steward, Tian Jingshin, said that it was inconvenient to be both a steward and a chief steward, so please change it to Shedu chief steward. The emperor obeyed.

古文：忠贤尝修乡县肃宁城，呈秀首上疏称美。
现代文：魏忠贤曾修建家乡肃宁县城，崔呈秀首先上疏赞美。
English: Wei Zhongxian once built the county seat of Suning, his hometown, and Cui Hengxiu was the first to praise him.

古文：六年二月，复疏颂忠贤督工功，请赐敕奖谕，末言： 臣非行媚中官者，目前千讥万骂，臣固甘之。 
现代文：六年二月，他又上疏歌颂魏忠贤监督工程之功，请求赐给敕令褒奖，奏疏最后说道： 臣并非向宦官献媚，就有千讥万咒，臣也甘愿承受。 
English: In February of the sixth year, he also went to the imperial court to sing the praises of Wei Zhongxian's supervision of the project, and requested that he be given the imperial order award. The imperial court finally said: The minister is not flattering the eunuch, there are a thousand ridicules and curses, and the minister is willing to bear them.

古文：疏出，朝野轰笑。
现代文：奏疏传出后，朝野人士轰然大笑。
English: After the announcement of the reshuffle, members of the government and opposition burst into laughter.

古文：阁臣顾秉谦辈撰敕八百余言，褒忠贤，极口扬诩，前代九锡文不能过也。
现代文：内阁大臣顾秉谦之辈撰写八百余字的敕令，褒奖魏忠贤，极力吹捧，古代九锡之文也不过如此。
English: Cabinet Minister Gu Bingqian and his contemporaries wrote more than eight hundred words of imperial edicts, praising Wei Zhongxian and touting him. This was also the case with the ancient Jiuxi text.

古文：自是，中外章疏，无不颂忠贤德者矣。
现代文：此后，内外大臣的章奏，无不颂扬魏忠贤的功德。
English: Since then, the posts of the Minister of the Interior and the Minister of the Interior have all praised the merits of Wei Zhongxian.

古文：时方创《三朝要典》，呈秀疏陈耍典之源，追论并封、妖书、之藩三事，凡拥卫光宗者，悉加丑诋。
现代文：当时正开始修《三朝令典》，崔呈秀上疏陈述本书的起源，追论 三王并封 、 妖书案 和 就藩 三件事，凡拥护光宗的，都加以诋毁。
English: At that time, the revision of the "Three Dynasties Decree" was just beginning. Cui Chengxiu presented the origin of the book, and discussed the three things of the three kings' merger, the demon book case, and the feudal domain. Anyone who supported Guangzong was slandered.

古文：忠贤悦，宣付史馆。
现代文：魏忠贤很高兴，吩咐交给史馆。
English: Wei Zhongxian was very pleased and gave the order to hand it over to the history museum.

古文：其年七月，进本部尚书。
现代文：这年七月，崔呈秀升本部尚书。
English: In July of this year, Cui Chengxiong was promoted to head of the General Office of the Communist Party of China.

古文：十月，皇极殿成，加太子太保兼左都御史，仍督大工。
现代文：十月，皇极殿建成，加封为太子太保兼左都御史，仍监督大工程。
English: In October, the Imperial Throne Hall was completed, and he was given the additional title of Crown Prince, Imperial Protector, and Metropolitan of the Left, and he continued to supervise major projects.

古文：母死，不奔丧，夺情视事。
现代文：他母亲去世，他不回家奔丧，而引 夺情 留任。
English: When his mother died, he didn't go home to mourn, but stayed on the job.

古文：呈秀负忠贤宠，嗜利弥甚。
现代文：崔呈秀受魏忠贤宠爱，更加贪利。
English: Cui Chengxiu was favored by Wei Zhongxian and was even more greedy.

古文：朝士多拜为门下士，以通于忠贤。
现代文：朝中士大夫多拜他，做他的门下士，以便能靠上魏忠贤。
English: The morning sergeant doctor worshipped him more and served as his corporal, so that he could rely on Wei Zhongxian.

古文：其不附己及势位相轧者，辄使其党排去之，时有 五虎 之目，以呈秀为魁。
现代文：凡不依附于魏忠贤以及争夺权势而相互倾轧的人，魏忠贤都派他的党羽将他们排挤出去，当时所谓的 五虎 ，就是以崔呈秀为首。
English: All those who did not cling to Wei Zhongxian and fight for power, Wei Zhongxian sent his party to push them out. At that time, the so-called Five Tigers were led by Cui Chengxiu.

古文：请所倾陷，不可悉数，虽其党亦深畏之。
现代文：受到排挤陷害的人，不可胜数，即使是他的党羽，也深深地畏惧他。
English: The number of people who have been ousted and framed is countless, and even his party members are deeply afraid of him.

古文：子铎不能文，属考官孙之獬，获乡荐。
现代文：他的儿子崔铎不能做文章，他便嘱咐考官孙之獬，获得了乡荐。
English: His son, Cui Yao, couldn't write an essay, so he instructed the examiner, Sun Zi Yao, and received a recommendation from the township.

古文：用其弟凝秀为浙江总兵官，女夫张元芳为吏部主事，妾弟优人萧惟中为密云参将，所司皆不敢违。
现代文：他用弟弟崔凝秀为浙江总兵官，女婿张元芳为吏部主事，妾弟戏子萧惟中为密云参将，有关部门都不敢违抗。
English: He used his brother, Cui Jingshu, as the chief military officer of Zhejiang, his son-in-law, Zhang Yuanfang, as the head of the personnel department, and his brother-in-law, the actor Xiao Weizhong, as the general of Miyun. The relevant departments did not dare to disobey.

古文：明年八月冒宁、锦功，加太子太傅。
现代文：第二年八月他冒领宁远、锦州的功劳，被加封为太子太傅。
English: In August of the following year, he took the credit for the achievements of Ningyuan and Jinzhou, and was awarded the title of Prince Taifu.

古文：俄叙三殿功，加少傅，世荫锦衣指挥佥事。
现代文：不久记三殿功，加封为少傅，庇荫世袭锦衣卫指挥佥事。
English: Not long after, he was awarded the title of "Junior Master" for his services to the Third Palace, and was also awarded the title of "Junior Master" for his services to the Third Palace.

古文：其月迁兵部尚书，仍兼左都御史，并绾两篆，握兵权宪纪，出入烜赫，势倾朝野。
现代文：这一月他升为兵部尚书，仍兼左都御史，并挂两枚印章，掌握兵权和监察权，出入煊赫，权倾朝野。
English: In this month, he was promoted to Hyobusho, still concurrently the Left Capital Imperial Historian, and hung two seals, mastered military power and supervision power, went in and out of the palace, and had power over the court.

古文：无何，熹宗崩，廷臣入临。
现代文：不久，熹宗去世，廷臣入宫告别遗体。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong died, and courtiers entered the palace to bid farewell to his body.

古文：内使十余人传呼崔尚书甚急，廷臣相顾愕眙。
现代文：十几个宦官使者传呼崔呈秀很急，廷臣们相顾愕然。
English: More than a dozen eunuch emissaries hurriedly summoned Cui Chengxiu, and the courtiers looked at each other in consternation.

古文：呈秀入见忠贤，密谋久之，语秘不得闻。
现代文：崔呈秀进去见魏忠贤，密谋了很久，但他们太隐秘，所谈的内容不得而知。
English: Cui Chengxiu went to see Wei Zhongxian and plotted for a long time, but they were too secretive and the content of the discussion is unknown.

古文：或言忠贤欲篡位，呈秀以时未可，止之也。
现代文：有人说魏忠贤想篡位，崔呈秀认为时机不合，阻止了他。
English: Some people said that Wei Zhongxian wanted to usurp the throne, but Cui Chengxiu thought that the timing was not right and stopped him.

古文：庄烈帝即位，其党知忠贤必败，内相携。
现代文：庄烈帝即位后，魏忠贤的党羽知道他必败，内部产生了分裂。
English: After Emperor Zhuang was enthroned, Wei Zhongxian's followers knew that he would be defeated, and there was a split within the party.

古文：副都御史杨所修首请允呈秀守制，御史杨维垣、贾继春相继力攻，呈秀乞罢。
现代文：副都御史杨所修首先请崔呈秀守孝，御史杨维垣、贾继春相继极力攻击他，崔呈秀请求辞职。
English: First of all, the vice-governor of the capital, Shi Yang, asked Cui Zhenxiu to attack Shou Xiaotong, and the vice-governors of the capital, Yang Weigaki and Jia Jichun, attacked him one after another, and Cui Zhenxiu asked him to resign.

古文：帝犹慰留。
现代文：皇上仍安慰挽留他。
English: The emperor still consoled him to stay.

古文：章三上，温旨令乘传归。
现代文：他上了三封奏章，皇上温语令他乘邮车回家。
English: He played three pieces, and the emperor sent him home by mail train.

古文：已而言者劾呈秀及工部尚书吴淳夫、兵部尚书田吉、太常卿倪文焕、副都御史李夔龙，号称 五虎 ，宜肆市朝。
现代文：后来人们弹劾崔呈秀和工部尚书吴淳夫、兵部尚书田吉、太常寺卿倪文焕、副都御史李夔龙，这五人号称 五虎 ，宜将他们处死，陈尸于集市。
English: Later, people impeached Cui Chengxiu and Wu Junfu, Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry, and Tianji, Shangshu of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Ni Wenhuan, Lord of Taizhong Temple, and Li Yulong, Vice-Governor of the Capital. These five people are known as the Five Tigers. It is appropriate to put them to death and display their bodies in the bazaar.

古文：诏逮治，籍其赀。
现代文：诏令将他逮捕治罪，将他的财产抄没入官。
English: He was arrested and prosecuted, and his property was confiscated by the government.

古文：时忠贤已死，呈秀知不免，列姬妾，罗诸奇异珍宝，呼酒痛饮，尽一卮即掷坏之，饮已自缢。
现代文：当时魏忠贤已死，崔呈秀知道不可避免，便排列姬妾，将奇珍异宝都摆出来，狂呼痛饮，喝完一杯便将杯子摔碎，饮完后便上吊自杀。
English: At that time, Wei Zhongxian had already died, and Cui Hengxiu knew that it was inevitable, so he lined up his concubines, put out all the rare treasures, shouted and drank, broke the cup after drinking, and hanged himself after drinking.

古文：诏戮其尸，子铎除名，弟凝秀遣戍。
现代文：诏令将他戮尸，他的儿子崔铎被除名，弟弟凝秀被遣去戍边。
English: The imperial edict ordered his body to be dismembered, his son Cui Wei was expelled, and his brother, Genshu, was sent to Lijiang.

古文：后定逆案，以呈秀为首。
现代文：后来定逆案，崔呈秀列为首犯。
English: Later, the case was reversed and Cui Chengxiu was listed as the first offender.

古文：方忠贤败时，庄烈帝纳廷臣言，将定从逆案。
现代文：当魏宗贤失败时，庄烈帝采纳了廷臣的意见，将要定参与谋逆的案件。
English: When Wei Zongxian failed, Zhuang Rongdi adopted the opinion of the courtiers and decided to take part in the treason case.

古文：大学士韩爌、李标、钱锡不欲广搜树怨，仅以四五十人上。
现代文：大学士韩火广、李标、钱龙锡不想广泛搜查，以免树怨太多，仅提出了四五十个人。
English: College students Han Huiguang, Li Biao and Qian Longxi didn't want to search far and wide, so as not to arouse too much resentment, and only came up with forty or fifty people.

古文：帝少之，令再议，又以数十人上。
现代文：皇上嫌少了，令他们再议，他们又提出了几十个人。
English: The emperor's displeasure was not enough, so they reconsidered, and they proposed dozens more people.

古文：帝不怿，令以赞导、拥戴、颂美、谄附为目，且曰： 内侍同恶者亦当入。 
现代文：皇上不高兴了，令他们按照 出谋划策 、 拥戴 、 颂美 、 奉承依附 这四项来搜寻逆党，并且说 ：一起为恶的宦官也应当列入。 
English: The emperor was not pleased, and ordered them to search for the traitors according to the four items of scheming, supporting, glorifying, flattering, and adhering, and said, "Eunuchs who are evil together should also be included."

古文：爌等以不知内侍对，帝曰： 岂皆不知，特畏任怨耳。 
现代文：韩火广等人说不知道宦官情况，皇上说： 怎能都不知道，你们不过是害怕被人怨恨而已。 
English: Han Huiguang and others said that they did not know the situation of eunuchs, and the emperor said: How can you not know, you are just afraid of being resented.

古文：阅日，召入便殿，案有布囊，盛章疏甚夥，指之曰： 此皆奸党颂疏，可案名悉入。 
现代文：过了几天，皇上将他们招入便殿，桌子上有一布袋，里面装着很多奏疏，皇上指着袋子说 ：这些都是奸党歌功颂德的奏疏，你们可找出他们的姓名，全部列入逆党。 
English: A few days later, the emperor invited them into the hall. On the table was a cloth bag containing many records. Pointing to the bag, the emperor said, "These are records of the praises of the traitors. You can find out their names and include them all in the list of traitors."

古文：爌等知帝意不可回，乃曰： 臣等职在调旨，三尺法非所习。 
现代文：韩火广等人知道皇上心意已不可改变，便说 ：臣等的职责是起草圣旨，法律不是臣等所熟悉。 
English: Han Huiguang and others knew that the emperor's will could not be changed, so they said, "The duty of ministers is to draft the will, and ministers are not familiar with the law."

古文：帝召吏部尚书王永光问之，永光以不习刑名对，乃诏刑部尚书乔允升、左都御史曹于汴同事，于是案名罗列无脱遗者。
现代文：皇上招吏部尚书王永光来问，王永光不熟悉刑法。皇上于是令刑部尚书乔允升、左都御史曹于汴一起办理，于是他们按名罗列，没有人能脱漏。
English: Wang Yongguang from the Emperor's Recruiting Department came to inquire, but Wang Yongguang was not familiar with criminal law. The Emperor then ordered the Penal Department's Shangshu Qiao Yunsheng and Zuo Guo Shi Cao Yu Yao to work together, so they were listed by name, and no one could miss out.

古文：崇祯二年三月上之，帝为诏书颁示天下。
现代文：崇祯二年三月他们呈上逆党名单，皇上制成诏书颁示天下。
English: In March of the second year of Chongzheng, they submitted a list of rebel parties, and the emperor made an imperial edict to present it to the world.

古文：首逆凌迟者二人：魏忠贤，客氏。
现代文：首犯被判凌迟处死的有两人：魏忠贤、客氏。
English: The first criminal sentenced to death by lingzhi included two people: Wei Zhongxian and Kake.

古文：首逆同谋决不待时者六人：呈秀及魏良卿，客氏子都督侯国兴，太监李永贞、李朝钦、刘若愚。
现代文：首犯的同谋、被判随时处决的有六人：崔呈秀和魏良卿，客氏的儿子都督侯国兴，太监李永贞、李乾钦、刘若愚。
English: There were six accomplices of the first criminal who were sentenced to be executed at any time: Cui Chengxiu and Wei Liangqing, the son of Hakka governor Hou Guoxing, and eunuchs Li Yongzhen, Li Qianqin, and Liu Ruogu.

古文：交结近侍秋后处决者十九人：刘志选、梁梦环、倪文焕、田吉、刘诏、薛贞、吴淳夫、李夔龙、曹钦程，大理寺正许志吉，顺天府通判孙如冽，国子监生陆万龄，丰城侯李承祚，都督田尔耕、许显纯、崔应元、杨寰、孙云鹤、张体乾。
现代文：交结贴身宦官、被判秋后处决的有十九人：刘志选、梁梦环、倪文焕、田吉、刘诏、薛贞、吴淳夫、李夔龙、曹钦程，大理寺正许志吉，顺天府通判孙如冽，国子监生陆万龄，丰城侯李承祚，都督田尔耕、许显纯、崔应元、杨寰、孙云鹤、张体乾。
English: There were nineteen eunuchs with close personal connections who were sentenced to execution after the autumn: Liu Zhizhen, Liang Menghuan, Ni Wenhuan, Tianji, Liu Zhao, Xue Zhen, Wu Junfu, Li Yulong, Cao Qincheng, Dali Temple's Zheng Xu Zhijie, Shun Tianfu's Tong Zhan Sun Ruzhen, Guo Zi's son-in-law Lu Wanling, Fengcheng's lord Li Chengtao, and the governors of Tian Erkoo, Xu Xianjun, Cui Yingyuan, Yang Hui, Sun Yunhe, and Zhang Tie

古文：结交近侍次等充军者十一人：魏广微、周应秋、阎呜泰、霍维华、徐大化、潘汝祯、李鲁生、杨维垣、张讷，都督郭钦，孝陵卫指挥李之才。
现代文：交结贴身宦官第二等、被判充军的有十一人：魏广微、周应秋、阎鸣泰、霍维华、徐大化、潘汝祯、李鲁生、杨维垣、张讷，都督郭钦，孝陵卫指挥使李之才。
English: There were eleven second-class eunuchs who were sentenced to military service: Wei Guangwei, Zhou Yingqiu, Yan Mingtai, How Weihua, Xu Dahua, Pan Ruxuan, Li Lusheng, Yang Vigaki, Zhang Ne, Governor Guo Qin, and Xiaolingwei commander Li Zhicai.

古文：交结近侍又次等论徒三年输赎为民者：大学士顾秉谦、冯铨、张瑞图、来宗道，尚书王绍徽、郭允厚、张我续、曹尔祯、孟绍虞、冯嘉会、李春晔、邵辅忠、吕纯如、徐兆魁、薛风翔、孙杰、杨梦衮、李养德、刘廷元、曹思诚，南京尚书范济世、张朴，总督尚书黄运泰、郭尚友、李从心，巡抚尚书李精白等一百二十九人。
现代文：交结贴身宦官第三等、被判三年徒刑、允许自赎为民的有：大学士顾秉谦、冯铨、张瑞图、来宗道，尚书王绍徽、郭允厚、张我续、曹尔祯、孟绍虞、冯嘉会、李春晔、邵辅忠、吕纯如、徐兆魁、薛凤翔、孙杰、杨梦衮、李养德、刘廷元、曹思诚，南京尚书范济世、张朴，总督尚书黄运泰、郭尚友、李从心，巡抚尚书李精白等一百二十九人。
English: The third-class eunuchs with close personal connections who were sentenced to three years of imprisonment and allowed to redeem themselves for the people were: the university scholars Gu Bingqian, Feng Yu, Zhang Ritu, Lai Zongdao, Shang Shu Wang Shaohui, Guo Yunhou, Zhang Ihong, Cao Erqian, Meng Shaogu, Feng Jiakai, Li Chunqian, Shao Fuzhong, Lv Chunru, Xu Zhaokui, Xue Fengxiang, Sun Jie, Yang Mengtao, Li Yande, Liu Tingyuan, Cao Shicheng, Nanjing Shang Shu Fan Jisei

古文：交结近侍减等革职闲住者，黄立极等四十四人。
现代文：交结贴身宦官、被减刑革职闲住的，有黄立极等四十四人。
English: Forty-four people, including Huang Lijie, who were eunuchs, had their sentences commuted, or were dismissed from their posts, lived idly.

古文：忠贤亲属及内官党附者又五十余人。
现代文：魏忠贤的亲属以及依从他的宦官，又有五十余人。
English: There were also more than fifty relatives of Wei Zhongxian and eunuchs who followed him.

古文：案既定，其党日谋更翻，王永光、温体仁阴主之，帝持之坚，不能动。
现代文：定案之后，魏忠贤的党羽每天都图谋翻案，王永光、温体仁暗中主谋，但皇上态度坚决，他们不敢行动。
English: After the case was decided, Wei Zhongxian's partisans plotted every day to overturn the case. Wang Yongguang and Wen Tiao Ren were secretly the masterminds, but the emperor's attitude was resolute, and they dared not act.

古文：其后，张捷荐吕纯如，被劾去。
现代文：后来，张捷推荐吕纯仁，被弹劾而去。
English: Later, Zhang Jie recommended Lü Chunren and was impeached.

古文：唐世济荐霍维华，福建巡按应喜臣荐部内闲住通政使周维京，罪至谪戍。
现代文：唐世济推荐霍维华，福建巡抚应喜臣推荐部内闲住的通政使周维京，都被加罪，遣去戍边。
English: Tang Shiji recommended Huo Weihua, and Fujian's governor responded to Heisenberg's recommendation by appointing Zhou Wei Jing, a political envoy who had been idle in the ministry, both of whom were punished and sent to Lijiang.

古文：其党乃不敢言。
现代文：他的党羽才不敢言语。
English: His supporters are speechless.

古文：福王时，阮大铖冒定策功，起用，其案始翻。
现代文：福王时期，阮大铖冒领确定国策之功，被起用，这案才翻了过来。
English: During King Fu's time, Nguyn Đc took the credit for determining national policy and was appointed, but the case was overturned.

古文：于是太仆少卿杨维垣、徐景濂，给事中虞廷陛、郭如暗，御史周昌晋、陈以瑞、徐复阳，编修吴孔嘉，参政虞大复辈相继而起，国亡乃止。
现代文：于是太仆寺少卿杨维垣、徐景濂，给事中虞廷陛、郭如暗，御史周昌晋、陈以瑞、徐复阳，编修吴孔嘉，参政虞大复之辈相继获得起用，直到国亡才算了结。
English: As a result, Yang Weigaki and Xu Jingyao, who were junior secretaries of the Daju Temple, were appointed successively, followed by Guo Dingzhi, Guo Ruan, Zhou Changjin, Chen Yirui, Xu Fuyang, editor Wu Kongjia, and members of the political party Yu Daifu, until the end of the country.

古文：刘志选，慈谿人。
现代文：刘志选，慈溪人。
English: Liu Zhizheng, from Cixi.

古文：万历中，与叶向高同举进士。
现代文：万历年间，与叶向高同年考中进士。
English: During the Wanli years, he was promoted to junior high school in the same year as Ye Xianggao.

古文：授刑部主事，偕同官刘复初、李懋桧争郑贵妃、王恭妃册封事。
现代文：被授予刑部主事，与同僚刘复初、李懋桧就郑贵妃、王恭妃册封一事上书论争。
English: He was awarded the post of the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, and argued with his colleagues Liu Fuchu and Li Yan over the issue of Zheng Guifei and Wang Gongifei.

古文：后懋桧因给事中邵庶请禁诸曹言事，抗疏力争，贬二秩。
现代文：后来因为给事中邵庶请求禁止各部官员上书议论政事，李懋桧上疏极力反对，被降级二等。
English: Later, because of Shao Shao's request to ban officials from various ministries from writing about political affairs, Li Xuan Shangxo strenuously objected and was demoted to the second grade.

古文：志选言： 陛下谪懋桧，使人箝口结舌，蒙蔽耳目，非国家福也。 
现代文：志选说： 陛下贬李懋松，将使人闭口结舌，从而蒙蔽皇上耳目，这不是国家之福。 
English: Zhi Xuan said, "Your Majesty's disparagement of Li Yansong will make people hold their tongues, thus blinding the emperor's eyes and ears. This is not a blessing for the country.

古文：帝怒，谪福宁州判官。
现代文：皇上生气了，将他贬为福宁州判官。
English: The emperor became angry and demoted him to judge of Funing.

古文：稍迁合肥知县，以大计罢归，家居三十年。
现代文：后来逐渐升到合肥知县，因没通过三年一度的考核，被罢免回家，在家住了三十年。
English: Later, he was gradually promoted to Hefei Zhixian, but because he failed to pass the triennial assessment, he was sent home and lived at home for more than thirty years.

古文：光宗、熹宗相继立，诸建言得罪者尽起，志选独以计典不获与。
现代文：光宗、熹宗相继即位，那些因为提建议而得罪的人纷纷获得起用，唯独志选因先前没通过考核而不被起用。
English: Gwangjong and Jeongjong ascended to the throne one after another, and those who had offended others by making suggestions were appointed one after another. However, Jeongseon was not appointed because he had previously failed the examination.

古文：会向高赴召，道杭州，志选与游宴弥月。
现代文：正好叶向高赴京应召，经过杭州，志选与他游玩了个把月。
English: Just as Ye Xianggao went to Beijing to answer the call, after passing through Hangzhou, Zhi Xuan played with him for a month.

古文：还朝，用为南京工部主事，进郎中，时已七十余，嗜进弥锐，上疏追论 红丸 ，极诋孙慎行不道。
现代文：叶向高回朝廷后，他被任为南京工部主事，后升为郎中。当时他已七十多岁了，却更积极地往上爬，上疏追论 红丸 一案，极力诋毁孙慎行不道德。
English: After Ye Xianggao returned to the imperial court, he was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Engineering Department, and later he was promoted to the middle son. At that time, he was more than seventy years old, but he was more active in climbing up, pursuing the Red Maru case, and trying his best to discredit Sun Sheng for immorality.

古文：魏忠贤喜，天启五年九月召为尚宝少卿。
现代文：魏忠贤很高兴，天启五年九月招他任尚宝寺少卿。
English: Wei Zhongxian was very pleased. In September of the fifth year of the Apocalypse, he was appointed as the Shaoqing of Shangbao Temple.

古文：在道，复力攻慎行，遂并及向高。
现代文：在进京途中，他又极力攻击孙慎行，还连及叶向高。
English: On his way to Beijing, he also attacked Sun Shengxing, and even attacked Ye Xianggao.

古文：忠贤益喜，出两疏宣史馆。
现代文：魏忠贤更高兴，将这两篇奏疏交给史馆。
English: Wei Zhongxian was even more pleased and handed over the two pieces of music to the history museum.

古文：明年擢顺天府丞。
现代文：第二年志选升任顺天府丞。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to Shuntenfu no jo.

古文：冬十月遂上疏劾张国纪。
现代文：冬十月他便上书弹劾张国纪。
English: In the winter of October, he wrote a letter to impeach Zhang Guoji.

古文：国纪者，后父也。
现代文：张国纪就是皇后的父亲。
English: Zhang Guoji is the father of the empress.

古文：忠贤忌后贤明，欲倾之。
现代文：魏忠贤顾忌皇后贤明，想把她弄倒。
English: Wei Zhongxian was jealous of Empress Xianming and wanted to overthrow her.

古文：会有张匿名榜于厚载门者，列忠贤反状，并其党七十余人。
现代文：正好有人在厚载门张贴匿名榜，罗列魏忠贤的反状，还包括了他的党羽七十多人。
English: Just at that time, someone posted an anonymous list on the door of the warehouse, listing Wei Zhongxian's opponents, including more than seventy of his followers.

古文：忠贤疑出国纪及被逐诸人手。
现代文：魏忠贤怀疑它是出于张国纪和那些被逐出的人之手。
English: Wei Zhongxian suspected it was at the hands of Zhang Guoji and those who were expelled.

古文：邵辅忠、孙杰谋因此兴大狱，尽杀东林诸人，而借国纪以摇中宫，事成则立魏良卿女为后，草一疏，募人上之。
现代文：邵辅忠、孙杰图谋借此造大案，将东林党人杀尽，并借张国纪来扳倒中宫皇后，事成之后则立魏良卿的女儿为皇后，他们起草了一篇奏疏，找人呈递上去。
English: Shao Shuozhong and Sun Jietu planned to use this to make a big case, kill all the Donglin Party members, and use Zhang Guoji to overthrow the Empress of the Middle Court, and after the success, set Wei Liangqing's daughter as the Empress. They drafted a report and found someone to submit it.

古文：诸人虑祸不敢承。
现代文：但那些人都害怕得祸而不敢答应。
English: But those people were too afraid of getting into trouble to say yes.

古文：志选惑家人言，谓己老必先忠贤死，竟上之。
现代文：志选被家人的话所迷惑，以为自己年纪大，一定比魏忠贤先死，竟然将那篇奏疏递了上去。
English: Zhi Xuan was confused by his family's words, thinking that he was older and would certainly die before Wei Zhongxian, and he even submitted that essay.

古文：极论国纪罪，而末言 毋令人訾及丹山之穴，蓝田之种。 
现代文：奏疏中极力论列张国纪的罪行，最后还说 不要让人非议为 丹山之穴，蓝田之种 。 
English: In the report, Zhang Guoji's crimes were listed as much as possible, and at the end it was said that people should not be criticized for being the pit of Danshan and the seed of Lantian.

古文：盖前有死囚孙二言张后己所生，非国纪女也。
现代文：说这话是因为先前有一个死囚叫孙二说张皇后是他所生，不是张国纪的女儿。
English: He said this because a death row inmate named Sun Er had previously said that Empress Zhang was born to him, not the daughter of Zhang Guoji.

古文：疏上，事叵测。
现代文：奏疏上呈后，后果难料。
English: After the report was submitted, the consequences were difficult to predict.

古文：帝伉俪情笃，但令国纪自新而已。
现代文：皇上因伉俪情深，只是令张国纪自新而已。
English: The emperor was deeply in love with him, but he only reformed Zhang Guoji.

古文：后为故司礼刘克敬所选，忠贤迁怒克敬，谪发凤阳，缢杀之。
现代文：皇后是原司礼监太监刘克敬所选，魏忠贤迁怒于他，将他贬往凤阳，绞杀了他。
English: The empress was chosen by Liu Keking, the former eunuch and ceremonial supervisor. Wei Zhongxian became angry with him, demoted him to Fengyang and hanged him.

古文：未几，志选疏颂《要典》，言： 命德讨罪，无微不彰，即尧、舜之放四凶，举元、恺，何以加焉，洵游、夏无能赞一词者。 
现代文：不久，志选上疏歌颂《要典》，言该书 颂扬圣德，讨伐罪恶，无微不彰，就是拿尧、舜流放四凶，推举元、恺来比，也不过如此，诚然游、夏也不能赞一词。 
English: Soon after, Zhi Xuan wrote a poem in praise of the "Important Text," saying that the book is the best in extolling virtue and fighting evil, and it is nothing more than praising the four evils, namely, taking the yakitori and banishing the yakitori, and comparing the yakitori and banishing the yakitori. Of course, Yu and Xia could not praise the book.

古文：因力诋王之寀、孙慎行、杨涟、左光斗，而极誉刘廷元、岳骏声、黄克缵、徐景濂、范济世、贾继春并及傅櫆、陈九畴。
现代文：他因而极力诋毁王之肕、孙慎行、杨涟、左光斗，而极端赞誉刘廷元、岳骏声、黄克缵、徐景濂、范济世、贾继春以及傅魁、陈九畴。
English: As a result, he tried his best to discredit Wang Zhisheng, Sun Shengxing, Yang Qian and Zuo Guangdou, while he highly praised Liu Tingyuan, Yue Yuxing, Huang Kechuan, Xu Jingyao, Fan Jisei, Jia Jichun, Fu Kui and Chen Jiuquan.

古文：且言： 慷慨忧时，力障狂澜于既倒者，魏广微也，当还之揆席，以继五臣之盛事。
现代文：并说 ：慷慨忧患时局，力挽狂澜于既倒的，是魏广微，应当恢复他内阁大臣的地位，以继承五臣的盛事。
English: He also said that it was Wei Guangwei who was generous in the troubled times and made great efforts to turn back the tide. He should resume his position as a cabinet minister to inherit the five ministers' event.

古文：赤忠报国，弼成巨典于不日者，厂臣也，当增入简端，以扬一德之休风。 
现代文：赤心报国，帮助编成不朽的巨典的，是东厂臣僚，应当增入简端，以杨一德之休风。 
English: It is the ministers of the East Factory who report to the country with a pure heart and help compile the immortal masterpiece. They should add a brief ending and take a break from Yang Yide.

古文：又言： 之寀宜正典刑，慎行宜加谪戍。 
现代文：他又说： 对王之肕宜将他正法，孙慎行宜贬去戍边。 
English: He also said: It is appropriate for Wang Zhengyi to correct him, and it is appropriate for Sun Shengyi to degrade him.

古文：忠贤大悦，于是骏声等超擢，之寀被逮，慎行遣戍，悉如志选言。
现代文：魏忠贤非常高兴，于是岳骏声等人被越级提升，王之肕被逮捕，孙慎行被遣去戍边。这些都正如志选所言。
English: Wei Zhongxian was very happy, so Yue Yongsheng and others were promoted to higher ranks, Wang Zhiyao was arrested, and Sun Shengxing was sent to Lijiang. These are all just as Zhi Xuan said.

古文：七年擢右佥都御史，提督操江。
现代文：七年，志选升为右佥都御史，提督操江。
English: In the seventh year, Zhi Xuan was promoted to the Right Hand of the Capital, Admiral Guojiang.

古文：其年，熹宗崩，忠贤败，言官交劾，诏削籍。
现代文：这一年，熹宗去世，魏忠贤败，言官纷纷弹劾他，诏令将他除名。
English: In the same year, Emperor Taizong died, Emperor Wei Zhongxian was defeated, the speech officials impeached him one after another, and the imperial edict removed his name.

古文：曹钦程，江西德化人。举进士。授吴江知县，赃污狼籍，以淫刑博强项声。
现代文：后来定逆案，法律没有撼动国母的条文，便依以子骂母的条文来判处他，将他和梁梦环判了死刑。志选先上吊了。曹钦程，江西德化人。中进士，被授予吴江知县。他任意贪污，以滥用刑罚博得刚正不屈的名声。
English: Later, it was decided to reverse the case. The law did not shake the provisions of the mother of the country, so he was sentenced according to the provisions of using a son to abuse his mother, and he and Liang Menghuan were sentenced to death. Zhi Xuan hanged himself first. Cao Qincheng, a Germanized person from Jiangxi Province, was awarded Wu Jiangchi County. He was arbitrarily corrupt and gained a reputation for being upright and unyielding by abusing punishment.

古文：巡抚周起元劾之，贬秩，改顺天教授，调国子助教。
现代文：巡抚周起元弹劾他，结果他被贬职，改任顺天府教授，调任国子监助教。
English: Supervisor Zhou Qimuan impeached him, as a result of which he was demoted, reassigned to Shuntianfu Professor, and transferred to the State Supervisor of Education as an assistant professor.

古文：谄附汪文言，得为工部主事。
现代文：他巴结汪文言，得以任为工部主事。
English: He played along with Wang Wenyan and was appointed as the head of the engineering department.

古文：及文言败，钦程力挤之，由座主冯铨父事魏忠贤，为 十狗 之一。
现代文：到汪文言败后，钦程又极力排挤他，通过座主冯铨把魏忠贤当作父亲一般来侍候，成为 十狗 之一。
English: After the defeat of Wang Wenyan, Qincheng tried his best to oust him, and through the host Feng Jun, he served Wei Zhongxian as a father, and became one of the Ten Dogs.

古文：铨欲害御史张慎言、周宗建，令李鲁生草疏，属钦程上之，因及李应升、黄尊素，而荐鲁生及傅櫆、陈九畴、张讷、李蕃、李恒茂、梁梦环辈十余人。
现代文：冯铨想陷害御史张慎言、周宗建，令李鲁生起草奏疏，嘱咐钦程递上去，趁机将李应升、黄尊素牵连上，并推荐李鲁生以及傅木魁、陈九畴、张讷、李蕃、李恒茂、梁梦环之辈十余人。
English: Feng Yu wanted to frame the imperial historians Zhang Shingyan and Zhou Zongjian. He ordered Li Rusheng to draft a report, ordered Qin Cheng to submit it, took the opportunity to implicate Li Ying Sheng and Huang Zun Su, and recommended more than ten people including Li Rusheng, Fu Mu Kui, Chen Juzheng, Zhang Ne, Li Xi, Li Hengmao, and Liang Menghuan.

古文：慎言等四人并削籍。
现代文：张慎言等四人都被除名。
English: Zhang Shengyan and the other four were all removed from the list.

古文：钦程于群小中尤无耻，日夜走忠贤门，卑谄无所不至，同类颇羞称之。
现代文：钦程在群小人中尤其无耻，他日夜登魏忠贤的门，卑躬屈膝，阿谀奉承，无所不至，同类颇羞与他为伍。
English: Qincheng is particularly shameless among the group of villains. He climbs up to the doors of Wei Zhongxian day and night, grovels, flatters, and does everything, and his peers are quite ashamed to be with him.

古文：钦程顾骄众人以忠贤亲己。
现代文：钦程却在众人面前很傲慢，以显示魏忠贤亲爱他。
English: However, Kincheng was arrogant in front of everyone to show that Wei Zhongxian loved him dearly.

古文：给事中吴国华劾之，忠贤怒，除国华名，钦程益得志。
现代文：给事中吴国华弹劾他，魏忠贤大怒，将吴国华除名，钦程更加得志。
English: During the incident, Wu Guohua impeached him, Wei Zhongxian was furious and removed Wu Guohua from the list, and Qincheng was even more motivated.

古文：给事中杨所修缘忠贤指，力荐其贤，遂由员外郎擢太仆少卿。
现代文：给事中杨所遵循魏忠贤的旨意，极力推荐钦程贤能，于是他由员外郎升为太仆寺少卿。
English: In the matter, Yang followed Wei Zhongxian's will and strongly recommended Kincheng Xianeng, so he was promoted from a member of the Outer Clan to the Young Master of the Taipu Temple.

古文：后忠贤亦厌之，六年正月为给事中潘士闻所劾。
现代文：后来魏忠贤也讨厌他了，六年正月他被给事中潘士闻弹劾。
English: Later, Wei Zhongxian also disliked him. In the first month of the sixth year, he was impeached by the Central Committee.

古文：忠贤责以败群，削其籍。
现代文：魏忠贤指责他败群，将他除名。
English: Wei Zhongxian accused him of being a loser and expelled him.

古文：濒行犹顿首忠贤前曰： 君臣之义已绝，父子之恩难忘。 
现代文：他临行之前还在魏忠贤面前叩头说： 君臣之义已绝，父子之恩难忘。 
English: Before his departure, he also prostrated himself in front of Wei Zhongxian and said, "The righteousness of princes and ministers is dead, but the grace of father and son is unforgettable."

古文：絮泣而去。
现代文：他泪流不止而去。
English: He left in floods of tears.

古文：忠贤诛，入逆案首等，论死。
现代文：魏忠贤被诛后，他被列入逆案第一等，判了死罪。
English: After Wei Zhongxian was arrested, he was listed as a first-class traitor and sentenced to death.

古文：系狱久之，家人不复馈食，钦程掠他囚余食，日醉饱。
现代文：在狱中关了很久，家人不再给他供应饮食，钦程抢其他囚犯的剩饭吃，每天都醉饱。
English: Locked up in prison for a long time, his family no longer provided him with food and drink. Qincheng scrounged leftover food from other prisoners and got drunk every day.

古文：李自成陷京师，钦程首破狱出降。
现代文：李自成攻陷京师后，钦程首先破狱出来投降。
English: After Li Zicheng captured the capital, Qincheng was the first to break out of prison and surrender.

古文：王绍徽，咸宁人，尚书用宾从孙也。
现代文：李自成失败后，他随李自成西去，不知所终。福王时期，定依从贼人案，钦程又被列为首等。王绍徽，咸宁人，尚书王用宾的从孙。
English: After Li Zicheng's defeat, he followed Li Zicheng to the West, and I don't know where he ended up. During the period of King Fu, Ding Yiyi followed the thief case, and Qincheng was also listed as the first. Wang Shaohui, a person from Xianning, is the descendant of Shangshu Wang Yibin.

古文：举万历二十六年进士。授邹平知县，擢户科给事中。
现代文：考中万历二十六年进士，被授予邹平县知县，后升任户科给事中。
English: He passed the middle school entrance examination in the 26th year of Wanli, and was awarded the county magistrate of Fenping County. Later, he was promoted to the middle school of household science.

古文：居官强执，颇以清操闻。
现代文：他为官刚直不屈，颇以品行清廉而闻名。
English: He was an unyielding official and was known for his integrity.

古文：汤宾尹号召党与，图柄用。
现代文：汤宾尹拉帮结党，企图掌权用事。
English: Tang Bin Yinla helped to unite the party and attempted to seize power.

古文：吏部尚书孙丕扬以绍徽其门生，用年例出为山东参议，绍徽辞疾不就。
现代文：吏部尚书孙丕扬因绍徽是汤宾尹的门生，便引用年例让绍徽出任山东参议，绍徽称病不去。
English: Because Shaohui was a protégé of Tang Binyin, the head of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, Shangshu Sun Qiangyang, cited the annual tradition to let Shaohui serve as Shandong Councilor. Shaohui said that he would not go due to illness.

古文：泰昌时，起通政参议，迁太仆少卿，被劾引疾。
现代文：泰昌时期，他起任通政司参议。又升任太仆寺少卿，被弹劾，称病而去。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taichang, he was appointed as the Councillor of the General Secretary of the State Council. He was also promoted to the Junior Secretary of the Taigu Temple. He was impeached and left the country, claiming to be ill.

古文：寻以拾遗罢。
现代文：不久他因规谏皇上，被罢官。
English: He was soon dismissed from his post for defying the emperor.

古文：天启四年冬，魏忠贤既逐去左光斗，即召绍徽代为左佥都御史。
现代文：天启四年冬，魏忠贤逐去左光斗后，便招绍徽代为左佥都御史。
English: In the winter of the fourth year of the Apocalypse, after Wei Zhongxian had banished Zuo Guangdou, he invited Shaohui to replace him as Zuo Gongdu Imperial Historian.

古文：明年六月进左副都御史。
现代文：第二年六月升任左副都御史，不久晋升户部侍郎，督理仓场。
English: In June of the following year, he was promoted to deputy governor of the capital, and soon after, he was promoted to the position of household attendant and supervisor of the warehouse.

古文：寻进户部侍郎，督仓场，甫视事，改左都御史。
现代文：他刚上任理事，又改任左都御史。
English: He had just taken up his post as a director, and was also appointed to the post of Sadogoto Imperial Historian.

古文：十二月拜吏部尚书。
现代文：十二月拜为吏部尚书。
English: In December, he was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：忠贤为从子良卿求世封，绍徽即为奏请良卿封伯。
现代文：魏忠贤为从子魏良卿求世袭封爵，绍徽即上书为他奏请封魏良卿为伯爵。
English: Wei Zhongxian asked for a hereditary knighthood for his son Wei Liangqing, and Shaohui wrote to him to request that Wei Liangqing be made a count.

古文：请推崇其三世，绍徽亦议如其言。
现代文：请求推崇魏忠贤三代祖宗时，绍徽也上书建议准其所请。
English: When a request was made to honor the third generation of ancestors of Wei Zhongxian, Shaohui also sent a letter to suggest that the request be granted.

古文：至忠贤遣内臣出镇，绍徽乃偕同官陈四不可。
现代文：到魏忠贤派遣宦官出外镇守时，绍徽才与同僚一起上书提出有四不可行。
English: It was not until Wei Zhongxian sent eunuchs to guard towns abroad that Shaohui and his colleagues submitted a letter suggesting that there were four impossibilities.

古文：王恭厂、朝天宫并灾，绍徽言诛罚过多。
现代文：王恭厂、朝天宫都失火，绍徽说是因为诛罚过多造成的。
English: Wang Qiong's factory and the Asatian Palace both caught fire, which Shaohui said was caused by excessive punishment.

古文：忤忠贤意，得谯让。
现代文：他因忤逆了魏忠贤，受到谴责。
English: He was condemned for rebelling against Wei Zhongxian.

古文：已复上言： 四方多事，九边缺饟，难免催科，乞定分数，宽年限，以缓急之宜付抚按。
现代文：过后他又上书说： 四方多事，九边缺饷，难免发生催征赋税之事，乞请确定各边塞分额，宽给年限，将权衡缓急之权交给巡按官员。
English: Later, he also wrote: "The four sides are busy, the nine sides are short of funds, and it is inevitable that tax collection will occur. Please determine the amount of each side, give a wide range of years, and give the power to weigh and prioritize to the inspection officials.

古文：正殿既成，两殿宜缓，请敕工部裁省织造、瓷器诸冗费，用佐大工。
现代文：正殿修成后，另外两殿的工程宜延缓，请敕令工部裁省织造、瓷器等方面的冗费，用来资助大的工程。
English: After the completion of the main hall, the construction of the other two halls should be delayed. Please order the Ministry of Works to cut the redundant costs of weaving, porcelain and other aspects, and use them to fund major projects.

古文：奸党削除已尽，恐藏祸蓄怨，反受中伤。
现代文：奸党被削除已尽，但恐他们藏祸蓄怨，反受中伤。
English: It is too late for the traitors to be removed, but they may be harboring evil and harboring grudges, and on the contrary, they may be slandered.

古文：逮系重刑，加于封疆、显过、三案巨奸，则人心悦服，余宜少宽贷。 
现代文：对于封疆、显过、三案方面的巨奸，宜加以逮捕，处以重刑，使人心悦服，至于其他的人，应该宽大处理。 
English: As for the great traitors in the three cases of sealing the borders, revealing the past, it is appropriate to arrest them and impose a heavy sentence to make people happy. As for other people, they should be dealt with leniently.

古文：复忤忠贤意。
现代文：这次又触忤了魏忠贤的意愿。
English: This time, Wei Zhongxian's will was thwarted.

古文：初，绍徽在万历朝，素以排击东林为其党所推，故忠贤首用居要地。
现代文：当初，绍徽在万历一朝中，素以排挤攻击东林党而得到其同党的推崇，所以魏忠贤首先用他掌管要害部门。
English: At the beginning, during the reign of Emperor Wanli, Shaohui used to attack the Donglin Party by crowding it out and was respected by the same party, so Wei Zhongxian first used him to control the key departments.

古文：绍徽仿民间《水浒传》，编东林一百八人为《点将录》，献之，令按名黜汰，以是益为忠贤所喜。
现代文：绍徽仿民间的《水浒传》，将东林党一百零八人编成《点将录》，献给魏忠贤，让他按名加以黜退，他因此更受魏忠贤喜爱。
English: Shaohui imitated the folk "Water Margin" and compiled the 108 members of the Donglin Party into "Point Record," dedicated to Wei Zhongxian, and let him retire by name, which made him even more popular with Wei Zhongxian.

古文：既而奸党转盛，后进者求速化，妒诸人妨己，拟次第逐之。
现代文：后来奸党势力转盛，后进的人想要早日晋升，妒嫉那些人妨碍自己，便计划逐个将他们赶出。
English: Later, when the influence of the scoundrels became strong, the laggards wanted to be promoted as soon as possible, and they were jealous of those who hindered them, so they planned to drive them out one by one.

古文：孙杰乃谋使崔呈秀入阁，先击去绍徽，令御史袁鲸、张文熙诋绍徽朋比。
现代文：孙杰于是图谋让崔呈秀入阁，先赶走绍徽，令御史袁鲸、张文熙诋毁绍徽朋比为奸。
English: Sun Jie then plotted to have Cui Chengxiu enter the cabinet, and first drove away Shaohui, and ordered the imperial historian Yuan Jia and Zhang Wenxi to slander Shaohui Pengpi as a traitor.

古文：崇祯初，起按浙江，被劾罢。
现代文：袁鲸又上疏历述他卖官的秽状，绍徽遂被撤职，而以周应秋取代他。
English: Yuan Jiu went on to recount the sordid details of his time as a corrupt official. He was eventually removed from his post in Shaohui and replaced by Zhou Yingqiu.

古文：兄弟并丽逆案。
现代文：逆案判定后，绍徽被从官籍中除名，判了徒刑。
English: After the reverse case was adjudicated, Shaohui was removed from the official register and sentenced to imprisonment.

古文：霍维华，东光人。
现代文：霍维华，东光人。
English: Huo Weihua, from Dongguang.

古文：万历四十一年进士。除金坛知县，徵授兵科给事中。
现代文：万历四十一年中进士，被授予金坛县知县，又被征回任兵科给事中。
English: In the 41st year of Wanli, he was promoted to middle school, was awarded the title of Jintan county magistrate, and was drafted back into the military.

古文：天启元年六月，中官王安当掌司礼监印，辞疾居外邸，冀得温旨即视事。
现代文：天启元年六月，宦官王安应执掌司礼监印，他称病推辞住在外邸，希望得到温旨劝慰即起来理事。
English: In June of the first year of the Apocalypse, the eunuch Wang An was supposed to be in charge of the ceremonial seal. He said that he was ill and refused to live in the residence, hoping to receive warm consolation and immediately became a director.

古文：安与魏忠贤有隙，阉人陆荩臣者，维华内弟也，侦知之以告。
现代文：王安与魏忠贤有矛盾，阉人陆荩臣是霍维华的内弟。探知这一情况后告诉了维华。
English: Wang An had a conflict with Wei Zhongxian, who was the brother-in-law of Huo Weihua. After discovering this situation, he told Wei Hua.

古文：维华故与忠贤同郡交好，遂乘机劾安，忠贤辄矫旨杀之。
现代文：维华原与魏忠贤同郡交好，便趁机弹劾王安，魏忠贤即假传圣旨杀了王安。
English: Wei Hua Yuan was friends with Wei Zhongxian, so he took the opportunity to impeach Wang An. Wei Zhongxian killed Wang An, that is, he falsely transmitted the holy will.

古文：刘一燝、周嘉谟咸恶维华，用年例出为陕西佥事。
现代文：刘一火景、周嘉谟都厌恶维华，便用年例让维华出任陕西佥事。
English: Liu Yiguo and Zhou Jiamo both detested Weihua, so they used the annual election to appoint Weihua to the post of Shaanxi Anecdote.

古文：其同官孙杰言，维华三月兵垣无过失，一燝、嘉谟仰王安鼻息，故摈于外。
现代文：维华的同僚孙杰说，维华在兵科任职三月并无过失，是刘一火景、周嘉谟仰承王安的鼻息，故意将他排挤到外地。
English: Sun Jie, a colleague of Weihua, said that Weihua did not make a mistake in March when he was appointed to the Military Science Research Institute. It was Liu Yiguo and Zhou Jiaomu who followed Wang An's lead and deliberately pushed him out of the country.

古文：忠贤大喜，立逐两人，而维华亦以外艰归。
现代文：魏忠贤大喜，立即将刘、周二人逐出，而维华也因遭父丧归家。
English: Wei Zhongxian was overjoyed and immediately expelled Liu and Zhou, while Wei Hua also returned home due to her father's death.

古文：四年冬，朝事大变，南京御史吕鹏云以外转请告。
现代文：四年冬，朝事大变，南京御史吕鹏云将自己受外转一事上告朝廷。
English: In the winter of the fourth year, there was a major change in the Imperial Court, and the governor of Nanjing, Lü Pengyun, reported his transfer to the Imperial Court.

古文：忠贤传旨令与被察徐大化、年例外转孙杰俱擢京卿，维华及王志道、郭兴治、徐景濂、贾继春、杨维垣并复故官。
现代文：魏忠贤传圣旨将他和被检查的徐大化、年例外转的孙杰都升为京卿，维华和王志道、郭兴治、徐景濂、贾继春、杨维垣并得恢复原官。
English: Wei Zhongxian issued a sacred edict to promote him and Xu Dahua, who had been under investigation, and Sun Jie, who had been promoted to the post of Beijing Lord, and to restore Wei Hua, Wang Zhidao, Guo Xingji, Xu Jingyao, Jia Jichun, and Yang Weigaki to their original posts.

古文：维华得刑科。
现代文：维华得任刑科给事中。
English: Wei Hua has been transferred to the criminal investigation department.

古文：诸为赵南星斥者，竞起用事。
现代文：那些被赵南星斥退的人，竞相起来任事。
English: Those who were rejected by Zhao Nanxing competed with each other for positions.

古文：维华益锐意攻东林，劾罢御史刘璞、南京御史涂世业、黄公辅、万言扬。
现代文：维华更锐意攻击东林党，弹劾御史刘璞、南京御史涂世业、黄公辅、万言扬，使他们被罢免。
English: Weihua attacked the Donglin Party even more fiercely, impeached the imperial historian Liu Xuan, the Nanjing imperial historian Tu Shiye, Huang Gongfu and Wan Genyang, and had them removed from office.

古文：追论三案，痛诋刘一燝、韩爌、孙慎行、张问达、周嘉谟、王之寀、杨涟、左光斗，而誉范济世、王志道、汪庆百、刘廷元、徐景濂、郭如楚、张捷、唐嗣美、岳骏声、曾道唯。
现代文：他追论三案，痛诋刘一火景、韩火广、孙慎行、张问达、周嘉谟、王之肕、杨涟、左光斗，而赞誉范济世、王志道、汪庆百、刘廷元、徐景濂、郭如楚、张捷、唐嗣美、岳骏声、曾道唯。
English: He followed up on three cases, denouncing Liu Yiguo, Han Huoguang, Sun Shengxing, Zhang Qida, Zhou Jiaomu, Wang Zhiyao, Yang Jie and Zuo Guangdou, while praising Fan Jise, Wang Zhidao, Wang Qingbai, Liu Tingyuan, Xu Jingyao, Guo Ruchu, Zhang Jie, Tang Shimei, Yue Yuxing and Zeng Daowei.

古文：请改《光宗实录》，宣其疏史馆。
现代文：他还请改编《光宗实录》，向史馆宣示他的奏疏。
English: He also asked to adapt "Kwangjong Jitsuroku" and announced his recitation to the history museum.

古文：忠贤立传旨削一燝等五人籍，逮之寀，免李可灼戍，擢济世巡抚、志道等京卿，嗣美以下悉起用，实录更撰，而以阁臣言免一燝等罪。
现代文：魏忠贤立即传圣旨将刘一火景等五人除名，逮捕王之肕，免除李可灼的遣戍，提升范济世为巡抚，王志道等人为京卿，唐嗣美以下各人也都被起用，并重修《实录》，但因阁臣之言免了刘一火景等人之罪。
English: Wei Zhongxian immediately issued a decree to expel five people, including Liu I Huoqing, arrest Wang Zhixuan, exempt Li Keqiang from demotion, promote Fan Jise to governor, Wang Zhidao and others to Beijing, and Tang Semei and others were also appointed, and revise the "Real Record," but Liu I Huoqing and others were exempted from the crime due to the words of the cabinet minister.

古文：寻言，总督张我续宜罪，尚书赵彦宜去，御史方震孺不宜逮，韩敬宜复官，汤宾尹宜雪。
现代文：不久维华说，总督张我续宜加罪，尚书赵彦宜斥退，御史方震孺不宜逮捕。韩敬宜复官，汤宾尹宜平反昭雪。
English: Soon after, Weihua said that Governor Zhang I should be punished, Shangshu Zhao Yan should be expelled, Gu Shi Fang should not be arrested, Han Jing should be reinstated, and Tang Bin Yin should be purged.

古文：忤忠贤意，传旨谯责之。
现代文：这触忤了魏忠贤的意志，被传圣旨谴责。
English: This touched the will of Wei Zhongxian and was condemned by the sacred edict.

古文：五年冬擢太仆少卿。明年擢本寺卿。
现代文：五年冬维华升为太仆寺少卿，第二年升为本寺卿。
English: In the fifth year, Dong Weihua was promoted to Dapu-ji Shokei, and in the second year he was promoted to Honji-kyo.

古文：寻擢兵部右侍郎，署部事。
现代文：不久升为兵部右侍郎，代理兵部事务。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of the right-hand man of the military department, acting for the military department.

古文：每陈奏，必颂忠贤。
现代文：他每次陈奏，必定歌颂魏忠贤。
English: Every time he performs, he is sure to sing the praises of Wei Zhongxian.

古文：七年，延绥奏捷，进右都御史，荫子锦衣千户。
现代文：七年，延绥奏捷，维华升为右都御史，庇荫儿子为锦衣卫千户。
English: In the seventh year of Yan Xuan's reign, Wei Hua was promoted to the right capital imperial historian, and his son was the leader of the thousand households of Jin Yi Wei.

古文：宁、锦叙功，进兵部尚书，视侍郎事，荫子如之。
现代文：宁远、锦州叙功，维华晋升兵部尚书，掌侍郎职权内事务，仍照前例庇荫儿子。
English: Ningyuan and Jinzhou made meritorious contributions, Weihua was promoted to the military department of Shangshu, and was in charge of the affairs within his authority, still following the precedent of protecting his son.

古文：俄叙三殿功，加太子太保。
现代文：不久叙三殿功，维华加封为太子太保。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of San-dono gong, and Vivian was given the additional title of Prince Taibo.

古文：维华性憸邪，与崔呈秀为忠贤谋主。
现代文：维华个性邪佞，与崔呈秀做魏忠贤的谋主。
English: Weihua's personality is perverse, and he is the mastermind of Wei Zhongxian with Cui Zhenshu.

古文：所亲为近侍，宫禁事皆预知，因进仙方灵露饮。
现代文：他所亲近的都是皇上贴身宦官。所以宫闱秘事他都预先知道，因而他向皇上进献仙方灵露之饮。
English: He was close to the emperor's closest eunuchs, so he knew all the palace secrets in advance, so he offered the emperor a drink of immortelle dew.

古文：帝初甚甘之，已渐厌。
现代文：皇上最初很喜欢吃，后来逐渐讨厌了。
English: At first, the emperor liked to eat it, but later he grew to hate it.

古文：及得疾，体肿，忠贤颇以咎维华。
现代文：到后来皇上得病，身体浮肿，魏忠贤颇以此归咎于维华。
English: Later, the emperor fell ill and his body became swollen, which Wei Zhongxian blamed on Wei Hua.

古文：维华甚惧，而虑有后患，欲先自贰于忠贤，乃力辞宁、锦恩命，让功袁崇焕，乞以己荫授之。
现代文：维华非常害怕，又担心有后患，便想先主动背叛魏忠贤，于是他极力辞去宁远、锦州功劳的加恩，将功劳推让给袁崇焕，乞请将给自己的庇荫转授给袁崇焕。
English: Wei Hua was very scared and worried about the consequences, so he wanted to take the initiative to betray Wei Zhongxian first, so he tried his best to resign from Ningyuan and Jinzhou's credit, give the credit to Yuan Chonghuan, and beg him to transfer his patronage to Yuan Chonghuan.

古文：忠贤觉其意，降旨颇厉。
现代文：魏忠贤察觉出他的心意，便传圣旨严厉斥责。
English: Wei Zhongxian sensed his intentions and issued a stern rebuke.

古文：无何，熹宗崩，忠贤败，维华与杨维垣等弥缝百方。
现代文：不久，熹宗逝世，魏忠贤败，维华和杨维垣等人千方百计地弥补漏政。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong died, Wei Zhongxian was defeated, and Wei Hua and Yang Vigaki and others tried their best to make up for the loss of power.

古文：其年十月，以兵部尚书协理戎政。
现代文：这一年十月，维华以兵部尚书协理军政事务。
English: In October of that year, Weihua was promoted to the position of deputy director of military and political affairs in the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：崇祯改元，附珰者多罢去，维华自如。
现代文：崇祯改元后，依附于魏忠贤的人多被罢免，维华依旧在职。
English: After the reform of the Yuan Dynasty, most of the people who were attached to Wei Zhongxian were dismissed, but Wei Hua was still in office.

古文：辽东督师王之臣免，代者袁崇焕未至，维华谋行边自固。
现代文：辽东督师王之臣被免职，继任的袁崇焕还没到任，维华图谋行边以巩固自己的地位。
English: Liaodong Inspector Wang Zhichen was dismissed, and his successor, Yuan Chonghuan, had not yet taken office. Wei Hua tried to consolidate his position.

古文：帝已可之，给事中颜继祖极论其罪，言 维华狡人也，珰炽则借珰，珰败则攻珰。
现代文：皇上已批准了，给事中颜继祖极力论奏维华的罪行，他说： 维华为人狡猾，宦官势力旺盛时便借助宦官，宦官势力一倒便攻击宦官。
English: The emperor has approved, and in the matter Yan's step-grandfather strongly criticized Weihua's crime, saying: Weihua people are cunning, when the eunuch's power is strong, they will use the eunuch, and the eunuch's power will attack the eunuch.

古文：击杨、左者，维华也。
现代文：攻击杨涟、左光斗的，是维华。
English: It was Wei Hua who attacked Yang Hui and Zuo Guangdou.

古文：杨、左逮，而阳为救者，亦维华也。
现代文：杨、左被逮捕后，假装救助他们的，也是维华。
English: After Yang and Zuo were arrested, Weihua also pretended to rescue them.

古文：以一给事中，三年躐至尚书，无叙不及，有赉必加，即维华亦难以自解。 
现代文：他以一名给事中，三年便升到尚书，每次叙功，他都有份，每有赏赐，他必得加封，就是他维华本人也难以自解。 
English: He was promoted to Shangshu three years after he was appointed to the post. Every time he was awarded a merit, he had a share. Every award he received, he had to add a seal. Even he, Weihua, found it difficult to understand himself.

古文：乃寝前命。
现代文：皇上于是收回先前的命令。
English: The Emperor then revoked the previous order.

古文：顷之，言者踵至，维华乃引退。
现代文：不久，弹劾维华的人接踵而至，维华于是引退。
English: Impeachment of Vivas soon followed and he retired.

古文：逆案既定，维华戍徐州，气势犹盛。
现代文：逆案判定后，维华遣戍徐州，但气势犹盛。
English: After the reverse case was decided, Weihua was sent to Xuzhou, but the momentum is still strong.

古文：七年，骆马湖淤，维华言于治河尚书刘荣嗣，请自宿迁抵徐州，穿渠二百余里，引黄河水通漕，冀叙功复职。
现代文：七年，骆马湖淤塞，维华向沿河的尚书刘荣嗣建议，请从宿迁到徐州开一条长二百余里的水渠，引黄河水来通漕运，期望得叙功复职。
English: Seven years ago, when the Luoma Lake was silted up, Weihua suggested to Liu Rongzi, a Shangshu along the river, that he should open a 200-mile-long canal from Suqian to Xuzhou to divert the Yellow River water for transportation. He hoped to be reinstated.

古文：荣嗣然其计，费金钱五十余万，工不成，下狱论死，维华意乃沮。
现代文：刘荣嗣采纳他的建议，耗费金钱五十余万，结果工程不成，刘荣嗣被下狱判了死罪，维华这才丧气。
English: Liu Rongzhi accepted his suggestion and spent more than half a million yuan. As a result, the project was not completed. Liu Rongzhi was sentenced to death, which made Weihua very sad.

古文：九年，边事急，都御史唐世济荐维华边才，至，下狱遣戍。
现代文：九年，边事紧急，都御史唐世济推荐维华有治边之才，维华到后，被下狱遣戍。
English: Nine years later, when there was an emergency on the border, the governor of the capital, Shi Tang Shiji, recommended that Wei Hua have the ability to govern the border. After Wei Hua arrived, he was sent to prison.

古文：维华遂忧愤死。
现代文：维华于是忧愤而死。
English: Vivi died of grief and anger.

古文：福王时，杨维坦翻逆案，为维华等讼冤，章下吏部。
现代文：福王时期，杨维垣翻逆案，为维华等人诉冤，他的奏章下到了吏部。
English: During the period of King Fu, Yang Weigaki overturned the treason case and sued for the grievances of Weihua and others, and his report was sent to the cadre department.

古文：尚书张捷重述三朝旧事，力称维华等忠，追赐恤典。
现代文：尚书张捷重述三朝旧事，极力称赞维华等人忠诚，给他们追赐给恤典。
English: Shangshu Zhang Jie recounted the history of the three dynasties, praised Wei Hua and others for their loyalty, and gave them a posthumous award.

古文：赠荫祭葬谥全者，维华及刘廷元、吕纯如、杨所修、徐绍吉、徐景濂六人。
现代文：赠给庇荫和祭葬、谥号俱全的，有维华和刘廷元、吕纯如、杨所修、徐绍吉、徐景濂六人。
English: Six people, including Wei Hua, Liu Tingyuan, Lv Chunru, Yang Shoshu, Xu Shaoji and Xu Jingyao, were given the full set of patronage, funeral and posthumous names.

古文：赠荫祭葬不予谥者，徐大化、范济世二人。
现代文：赠给庇荫和祭葬，但不给谥号的，有徐大化、范济世二人。
English: There were two people, Xu Dahua and Fan Jise, who were given the patronage and funeral, but not the honorary title.

古文：赠官祭葬者，徐扬先、刘廷宣、岳骏声三人。
现代文：赐给官衔和祭葬的，有徐扬先、刘廷宣、岳骏声三人。
English: Three people, Xu Yangxian, Liu Tingxuan and Yue Yuxuan, were given official titles and funerals.

古文：鲁生遣戍，蕃、恒茂赎徒为民。
现代文：恢复官衔但不赐予抚恤的，有王绍徽、徐兆魁、乔应甲三人。
English: Three people, Wang Shaohui, Xu Zhaokui and Qiao Yingjia, had their titles restored but were not given a pension.

古文：阎鸣泰，清苑人。
现代文：阎鸣泰，清苑人。
English: Yan Ming Tai, from Qingyuan.

古文：万历中进士。除户部主事，屡迁辽东参政，拾遗被劾罢归。
现代文：万历年间中进士，被授予户部主事，累升到辽东参政，后因规谏皇帝被弹劾罢免归家。
English: During the Wanli years, he was promoted to junior high school, was awarded the head of the household department, and was promoted to Liaodong to participate in politics. Later, he was impeached and dismissed due to the emperor's rule and returned home.

古文：久之，起佥事，分巡辽海。
现代文：后来，又被起用为佥事，分巡辽海地区。
English: Later, he was assigned to patrol the Liaohai region.

古文：开原既失，经略熊廷弼遣抚沈阳，半道恸哭而返。
现代文：开原失陷后，经略熊廷弼派他抚治沈阳，鸣泰半道恸哭而返。
English: After the fall of Kaiyuan, Emperor Xiong Tiang sent him to govern Shenyang, but Mingtai returned crying.

古文：寻托疾谢归。
现代文：不久他托病辞归。
English: He soon left on sick leave.

古文：天启二年，起故官，监军山海关。
现代文：天启二年鸣泰被起任原官，到山海关监军。
English: In the second year of the apocalypse, Ming Tai was appointed as the original officer and went to the Shanhaiguan Customs to supervise the troops.

古文：旋进副使，受知孙承宗，屡疏推荐，而鸣泰实无才略，工谄佞，以虚词罔上而已。
现代文：不久他进升为副使，受知于孙承宗，孙承宗屡次上疏推荐他，而鸣泰实无才略，不过是工于谄佞，以虚词讨好上司而已。
English: Soon he was promoted to vice-envoy, known to Sun Chengzong. Sun Chengzong repeatedly recommended him to Shangshu, while Mingtai had no talent, but was just a puppet, using false words to please his boss.

古文：其年八月，廷推鸣泰辽东经略，会承宗自请督师，乃擢右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
现代文：这一年八月，朝廷公推鸣泰任辽东经略，正值孙承宗自请督师，便升鸣泰为右佥都御史，巡抚辽东。
English: In August of the same year, the imperial court publicly promoted Mingtai to the post of Liaodong Economic Delegate, and at the same time that Sun Chengzong asked for a supervisor, Mingtai was promoted to the post of the right-hand governor of the capital, the governor of Liaodong.

古文：自王化贞弃地后，巡抚罢不设。
现代文：自从王化贞丢弃该地后，巡抚停罢不设。
English: Since Wang Huazhen abandoned the place, the governor has not stopped.

古文：至是承宗以重臣当关，事权独操，鸣泰不能有所为。
现代文：至此孙承宗以重臣身份当关，事权独揽，鸣泰无法有所作为。
English: At this point, Sun Chengzong, as a senior vassal, was in charge and had sole power, and Mingtai was unable to make a difference.

古文：明年五月复移疾去，家居三年。
现代文：第二年五月鸣泰称病辞去，在家住了三年。
English: In May of the following year, Ming Tai resigned, claiming illness, and lived at home for three years.

古文：魏忠贤窃柄，鸣泰潜结之，用御史智铤荐，召为兵部右侍郎。
现代文：魏忠贤窃权时，鸣泰暗中与他勾结，受御史智铤的推荐，被召为兵部右侍郎。
English: When Wei Zhongxian stole the power, Ming Tai secretly colluded with him, and was recommended by Mi Shi Zhisheng to be called as the right attendant of the military department.

古文：六年正月，宁远告警，畿辅震惊。
现代文：六年正月，宁远告警，畿辅震惊。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, Ningyuan sounded the alarm, and Kifu was shocked.

古文：内阁顾秉谦等以顺天巡抚吴中伟非御侮才，荐鸣泰代之。
现代文：内阁大臣顾秉谦等人认为顺天巡抚吴中伟不具御侮之才，举荐鸣泰来取代他。
English: Cabinet Minister Gu Bingqian and others believed that Shuntian's governor Wu Zhongwei was not worthy of contempt, and recommended Ming Tai to replace him.

古文：未几，代王之臣总督蓟、辽、保定军务。
现代文：不久，鸣泰取代王之臣总督蓟、辽、保定军务。
English: Soon after, Ming Tai replaced Wang's vassal governors Zou, Liao, and Baoding in military affairs.

古文：宁远叙功，进本部尚书。
现代文：宁远评功，鸣泰进升本部尚书。
English: Ningyuan praised, Mingtai promoted to the headquarters of Shangshu.

古文：以缮修山海关城，进太子太傅。
现代文：因修缮山海关城，鸣泰进升为太子太傅。
English: Due to the renovation of Shanhaiguan Customs City, Ming Tai Jin was promoted to Prince Taifu.

古文：寻召还，协理戎政。
现代文：不久被召回，协理军事事务。
English: He was soon recalled and became assistant director of military affairs.

古文：叙锦州功，加少保。
现代文：评锦州之功，鸣泰加封为少保。
English: In recognition of his contribution to Jinzhou, Ming Tai was awarded the additional title of Junior Security Officer.

古文：三殿成，加少师兼太子太师。
现代文：三殿修成，鸣泰又加封为少师兼太子太师。
English: The third hall was completed, and Ming Tai was also awarded the title of junior teacher and prince's teacher.

古文：熹宗崩，代崔呈秀为兵部尚书。
现代文：熹宗驾崩，鸣泰取代崔呈秀任兵部尚书。
English: Shanzong passed away, and Ming Tai replaced Cui Chengxiu as Hyobu Shangshu.

古文：鸣泰由忠贤再起，专事谄谀。
现代文：鸣泰靠魏忠贤得以再被起用，从此便专事谄谀。
English: Ming Tai relied on Wei Zhongxian to be re-appointed, and since then he has been working exclusively for Mao.

古文：比疏至，熹宗已崩，庄烈帝且阅且笑。
现代文：每次陈言边防事务，他必对魏忠贤歌颂功德，并在蓟、辽一带为魏忠贤建生祠，多达七所。
English: Every time he makes a speech on border defense affairs, he will surely sing the praises of Wei Zhongxian's merits, and build as many as seven shrines for Wei Zhongxian in the areas of Yunnan and Liao.

古文：忠贤觉其意，具疏伪辞，帝辄报允。
现代文：他对魏忠贤的歌颂，曾有 民心依归，即天心向顺 之语，闻者为之咋舌。
English: His eulogy of Wei Zhongxian once had the words "people's hearts are inclined to follow, that is, the heart of heaven is inclined to follow," which made the listener's mouth water.

古文：无何，忠贤诛，诸祠悉废，凡建祠者概入逆案云。
现代文：崇祯初年，他被言官弹劾罢免。后来被打进逆案，遣戍而死。
English: In the first year of his reign, he was impeached and removed from office by the speaker. Later, he was convicted of treason and died in exile.

古文：贾继春，新乡人。
现代文：贾继春，新乡人。
English: Jia Jichun, from Xinxiang.

古文：万历三十八年进士。
现代文：万历三十八年中进士。
English: In the thirty-eighth year of Wanli, he became a priest.

古文：历知临汾、任丘二县，入为御史。
现代文：历任临汾、任丘知县，后入京为御史。
English: He successively held the posts of Linyi and Yuchi County, and then entered Beijing as imperial historian.

古文：李选侍移哕鸾宫，一时颇逼迫，然故无恙也。
现代文：李选侍移居哕鸾宫，一时处境颇为窘迫，但仍然无恙。
English: Li Xuanzhi moved to the Palace of the Grand Empress. For a while, he was in a rather difficult situation, but he was still fine.

古文：继春听流言，上书内阁方从哲等，略言： 新君御极，首导以违忤先皇，逼逐庶母，通国痛心。
现代文：继春听信流言，上书内阁方从哲等人，大略说 ：新君登基，便违忤先皇，逼逐庶母，举国痛心。
English: Jichun believed the rumor, and sent a letter to the cabinet, which was read by Fong Zhe and others, saying, in summary, "When the new emperor ascended the throne, he disobeyed the former emperor, forced his mother-in-law out of the country, and the whole country was heartbroken."

古文：昔孝宗不问昭德，先皇优遇郑妃，何不辅上取法？
现代文：当年孝宗不问昭德妃子之罪，先皇优遇郑贵妃，今皇上何不效法祖先？
English: In those days, Emperor Xiaozong did not ask about the sins of Empress Zhao De, and the first emperor met Empress Zheng Gui. Why does the current emperor not follow the example of his ancestors?

古文：且先皇弥留，面以选侍谕诸臣，而玉体未寒，爱妾莫保。
现代文：况且先皇弥留之际，曾以选侍面谕群臣，而今先皇玉体未寒，爱妾不保。
English: Moreover, on the occasion of the death of the former emperor, he had ordered his courtiers to choose a consort, but now the former emperor's body is not cold, and his love for a concubine is not guaranteed.

古文：忝为臣子，夫独何心。 
现代文：忝为臣子，夫独何心！ 
English: Don't be a vassal, don't be a husband!

古文：给事中周朝瑞驳之，继春再揭，谓 选侍雉经，皇八妹入井 ，至称选侍为未亡人。
现代文：给事中周朝瑞驳斥他，继春再次上书，说 选侍自经，皇八妹投井 ，甚至称李选侍为未亡人。
English: In the middle of the matter, Zhou Chao Rui refuted him, and Jichun wrote again, saying that the election was self-serving, and the eight sisters of the emperor threw themselves into the well, and even called Li Qianzhong a widow.

古文：杨涟乃上移宫始末疏，谓： 宸宫未定，先帝之社稷为重，则平日之宠爱为轻。
现代文：杨涟于是上呈移宫始末疏，说： 皇帝寝宫未定，应以先帝的社稷为重，则先帝平日的宠爱为轻。
English: Yang Xuan then went on to explain the ins and outs of moving the palace, saying: If the emperor's bedchamber is undecided, the social status of the former emperor should be given more weight, while the former emperor's daily favors should be given less weight.

古文：及宸居已安，既尽臣子防危之忠，即当体圣主如天之度。
现代文：到皇帝居室安定后，则既然尽臣子防危之忠，便当体解圣主如灭之度。
English: After the emperor's residence was stabilized, since all vassals were loyal to prevent danger, it was time to understand the degree of the death of the Lord.

古文：臣所以请移宫者如此。
现代文：这是臣请求移宫的原因。
English: This is the reason why the vassal requested to move the palace.

古文：而蜚语谓选侍踉跄徒跣，屡欲自裁，皇妹失所投井。
现代文：而蜚语却说选侍踉跄赤脚而走，还屡次想自裁，皇妹失所投井。
English: The slang, however, says that she went barefoot to choose her attendants, and that she repeatedly wanted to dress herself, but the empress lost her way and threw herself into a well.

古文：恐酿今日之疑端，流为他年之实事。 
现代文：这些谣传，恐怕酿成今之疑端，还可能流为他年之事实。 
English: These rumours, I'm afraid, have led to today's suspicions, but they could also turn out to be true.

古文：帝于是宣敕数百言，极言选侍无状，严责廷臣党庇。时继春出按江西，便道旋里，驰疏自明上书之故，中有 威福大权，莫听中涓旁落 语。
现代文：皇上于是宣布敕令数百言，严斥廷臣相互包庇。当时继春出京按察江西，顺便归乡，他飞骑传疏自述先前上书的原因，其中有 赏罚大权，不要听任旁落宦官手中 之语。
English: The emperor then issued hundreds of edicts, severely reprimanding courtiers for covering up for each other. At that time, after leaving Beijing in the spring to visit Jiangxi Province, he returned to his hometown. He recounted the reasons for the previous letter, including "the power to reward and punish" and "don't listen to the words of the eunuchs who have fallen by the wayside."

古文：王安激帝怒，严旨切责，令陈状。
现代文：王安激怒皇上，传旨严厉斥责继春，令他说明情况。
English: Wang An infuriated the emperor and sent an order to severely reprimand Ji Chun, ordering him to explain the situation.

古文：于是御史张慎言、高弘图连章为求宽。
现代文：于是御史张慎言、高弘图接连上书请求宽贷继春。
English: As a result, the eminent historians Zhang Shengang and Gao Hongtu successively petitioned for leniency.

古文：帝益怒，下廷臣杂议。
现代文：皇上更加愤怒，交由廷臣杂议。
English: The Emperor was even more furious and referred the matter to courtiers for discussion.

古文：尚书周嘉谟等言： 臣等意陛下笃念圣母，不能忘选侍。
现代文：尚书周嘉谟等人说 ：臣等意以为陛下笃念圣母，不能忘掉选侍。
English: His Eminence Chou Chia-Mou and others said, "We think that Your Majesty remembers the Virgin Mary very much and cannot forget to choose a consort.

古文：及诵敕谕，知圣心自体恤。
现代文：到读过敕谕后，知道陛下圣心自会体恤选侍。
English: After reading the encyclical, I knew that His Majesty the Sacred Heart would be sympathetic to the selection of a consort.

古文：而继春误听风闻，慎言等又连疏渎奏。
现代文：而继春误听风闻之语，慎言等人又连疏渎奏。
English: However, Ji Chun misheard the rumor, and others such as Shen Yan also played it carelessly.

古文：然意本无他，罪当宥。 
现代文：但他们本意没有别的用心，其罪当宥。 
English: But they did not intend to do anything else, and their sins should be forgiven.

古文：未报。
现代文：未见回报。
English: There was no response from the Imperial Court.

古文：御史王大年、张捷、周宗建、刘廷宣，给事中王志道、倪思辉等交章论救，给事、御史复合词为请，诸阁臣又于讲筵救之，乃停慎言、弘图、大年俸，宥志道等。
现代文：御史王大年、张捷、周宗建、刘廷宣，给事中王志道、倪思辉纷纷上疏论救，给事中、御史又合词请求，各阁臣又在讲筵上说情相救，皇上于是停张慎言、高弘图、大年的俸禄，宽宥王志道等人。
English: Wang Zhidao and Ni Sihui of the Imperial Historians Wang Datian, Zhang Jie, Zhou Zongjian, and Liu Tingxuan came to discuss the rescue in the middle of the matter. In the middle of the matter, the Imperial Historians also made a request for a joint speech, and the cabinet ministers also said that they would help each other in the speech. The emperor then suspended Zhang Shenyan, Gao Hongtu, Datian's salary, and pardoned Wang Zhidao and others.

古文：既而继春回奏，词甚哀，且隐 雉经、入井 二语。
现代文：随后继春回奏，语词甚哀，并隐有 自尽、投井 二语。
English: This is followed by the spring chorus, the lyrics of which are very sad, and contain references to suicide and throwing oneself into a well.

古文：帝严旨穷诘，令再陈。
现代文：皇上严旨穷加质问，令他再次陈奏。
English: The emperor sternly questioned him, forcing him to play again.

古文：嘉谟等复力救，帝不许。
现代文：周嘉谟等又极力相救，皇上不许。
English: Zhou Jia Mu and others tried their best to save him, but the emperor would not allow them to do so.

古文：继春益窘，惶恐引罪，言得之风闻。
现代文：继春更加窘困，惶恐引罪，说自己的话是得之于风闻。
English: Ji Chun was even more embarrassed, panicked and offended, saying that his words were based on hearsay.

古文：乃除名永锢，时天启元年四月也。
现代文：于是将他除名，永远禁锢，这是在天启元年四月。
English: As a result, he was expelled and imprisoned forever, this was in April of the first year of the Apocalypse.

古文：其后言者屡请召还，帝皆不纳。
现代文：后来议论的人屡次请把他召回，皇上都不听。
English: Later, those who were arguing repeatedly asked him to call back, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：四年冬，魏忠贤既逐杨涟等，即以中旨召复官。
现代文：四年冬，魏忠贤逐出杨涟等人后，即以中旨召继春复官。
English: In the winter of the fourth year, after Wei Zhongxian drove out Yang Xuan and others, he summoned Ji Chun to return to his post.

古文：至则重述移宫事，极言： 涟与左光斗目无先皇，罪不容死。
现代文：继春到京后重述移宫之事，极力论说道： 杨涟和左光斗目无先皇，罪不容死。
English: After Ji Chun went to Beijing, he recounted the matter of moving the palace, and said emphatically: Yang Hui and Zuo Guangdou had no first emperor, and it was a crime not to die.

古文：且涟因傅櫆发汪文言事，知祸及，故上劾内疏，先发制人，天地祖宗所必殛。
现代文：并且杨涟借傅鏥揭发汪文言，知道祸将到来，所以他上疏弹劾内宫，先发制人，这种人真是天地祖宗所必诛。
English: Moreover, Yang Xuan used Fu Xuan to expose Wang Wenyan, knowing that the disaster would come, so he went to impeach the Inner Court and pre-empted the people. This kind of person is really a must for the ancestors of heaven and earth.

古文：而止坐纳贿结党，则涟等当死之罪未大暴天下。
现代文：而他只被判纳贿结党之罪，这样杨涟当死之罪并没有大暴于天下。
English: However, he was only convicted of accepting bribes and forming a political party, so Yang Hui's death was not a great shock to the world.

古文：宜速定爰书布中外，昭史册，使后世知朝廷之罪涟等以不道无人臣礼也。 
现代文：宜速定刑书，颁布中外，昭示于史册，使后世知道朝廷判处杨涟等人犯了不道和无人臣礼之罪。 
English: It is appropriate to promptly issue a written sentence, publish it both at home and abroad, and show it in the annals of history, so that future generations will know that the imperial court sentenced Yang Xuan and others for the crime of immorality and lack of courtesies.

古文：疏娓娓数百言，且请用杨所修言，亟修《三朝要典》，忠贤大喜。
现代文：他的奏疏娓娓数百言，并请采纳杨所修的建议，尽快编修《三朝会典》，魏忠贤非常高兴。
English: Wei Zhongxian was very pleased with his performance, in which he memorized hundreds of words, and asked him to adopt Yang Xiu's suggestion and compile the "Three Dynasties Canon" as soon as possible.

古文：庄烈帝即位，继春方督学南畿，知忠贤必败，驰疏劾崔呈秀及尚书田吉、顺天巡抚单明诩、副都御史李夔龙，群小始自贰。
现代文：庄烈帝即位，继春正在南畿督学，他知道魏忠贤必败，便飞骑传疏弹劾崔呈秀和尚书田吉、顺天巡抚单明诩、副都御史李夔龙，群小开始相互离心了。
English: Zhuge Liang ascended to the throne, while Jichun was supervising the Nanking Incident. He knew that Wei Zhongxian was doomed to defeat, so he flew to the scene of the rumored impeachment of Cui Chengxiu, the monk Shu Tianji, Sun Tian's procurator, Shan Mingjie, and the vice-governor of the capital, Li Yulong. The small groups began to alienate themselves from each other.

古文：旋由太常少卿进左佥都御史，与霍维华辈力扼正人。
现代文：不久继春由太常寺卿升任左佥都御史，与霍维华之辈极力压制正人。
English: Soon after, Jichun was promoted from the lord of Taejoji Temple to the governor of Zuoying, and he and Hovihua tried their best to suppress Masato.

古文：崇祯改元五月，给事中刘斯球极言其反覆善幻，乃自引归。
现代文：崇祯改元五月，给事中刘斯球极力论奏继春反复无常，善于伪装，继春于是自请引退归乡。
English: In May of the first year of the new era, in the middle of the matter, Liu Shulong tried his best to play the capriciousness of the spring and was good at disguise. The spring then voluntarily retired and returned home.

古文：已，杨涟子之易疏讦之，诏削籍。
现代文：后来，杨涟之子杨之易攻击他，诏令削去继春官籍。
English: Later, Yang Zhi's son Yang Zhi's son Yang Zhi's son Yang Zhi's son Yang Zhi's son Yang Zhi's son Yang Zhi's son Yang Zhi's son Yang Zhi's son Yang Zhi's son Yang Zhi's son attacked him.

古文：初，继春以移宫事诋涟结王安图封拜，后见公议直涟，畏涟向用，俯首乞和，声言疏非己意。
现代文：当初，继春以移宫事件诋毁杨涟，勾结王安希图封拜，后来见公议支持杨涟，他怕杨涟得进用，便俯首求和，声言奏疏并非出于自己之意。
English: At first, Ji Chun slandered Yang Hui with the palace-moving incident and colluded with Wang Anxitu to block him. Later, when he saw the public opinion in support of Yang Hui, he was afraid that Yang Hui would be used, so he bowed his head and begged for peace. It was not his intention to be careless.

古文：还朝则极诋涟。
现代文：回朝后他又极力诋毁杨涟。
English: After returning to China, he tried his best to slander Yang Hui.

古文：及忠贤殛，又极誉高弘图之救涟，且荐韩爌、倪元璐，以求容于清议。
现代文：魏忠贤伏诛后，他又极力赞誉高弘图之救杨涟，并推荐韩火广、倪元璐，以求为清议所容。
English: After Wei Zhongxian's death, he praised Gao Hongtu's rescue of Yang Qi, and recommended Han Huiguang and Ni Yuanqi, in order to be accepted by the Qing.

古文：帝定逆案，继春不列名，帝问故。
现代文：皇上定逆案，不见继春列名其中，便问原因。
English: The emperor decided to reverse the case, but did not see Jichun listed among them, so he asked the reason.

古文：阁臣言继春虽反覆，持论亦可取。
现代文：阁臣说继春虽然反复，但他所持的立场亦还可取。
English: The cabinet minister said that although Jichun repeated this, the position he held was also desirable.

古文：帝曰： 惟反覆，故为真小人。 
现代文：皇上说： 惟其反复，才是真小人。 
English: The emperor said, "He who repeats himself is a real rascal."

古文：遂引交结近侍律，坐徒三年，自恨死。
现代文：于是引结交皇帝近身宦官的条律，判继春三年徒刑。继春自恨而死。
English: As a result, the eunuchs who were close to the emperor were punished, and Jichun was sentenced to three years in prison. Jichun hated himself and died.

古文：田尔耕，任丘人，兵部尚书乐孙也。
现代文：田尔耕，任丘人，兵部尚书田乐之孙。
English: He was a farmer in the field, a resident of the hills, and the grandson of Hyobusho Shoda Raku.

古文：用祖荫，积官至左都督。
现代文：他靠祖父的庇荫，累官到左都督。
English: Under the patronage of his grandfather, he rose through the ranks to become the left-wing governor.

古文：天启四年十月代骆思恭掌锦衣卫事。
现代文：天启四年十月他取代骆思恭执掌锦衣卫事务。
English: In October 2004, he replaced Luo Sicong in charge of brocade clothing and hygiene affairs.

古文：狡黠阴贼，与魏良卿为莫逆交。
现代文：尔耕狡黠阴贼，与魏良卿结为莫逆之交。
English: He was a cunning and crafty thief, and had a close friendship with Wei Liangqing.

古文：魏忠贤斥逐东林，数兴大狱。
现代文：魏忠贤斥逐东林党，屡兴大狱。
English: Wei Zhongxian expelled the Donglin Party and repeatedly launched the Great Terror.

古文：尔耕广布侦卒，罗织平人，锻练严酷，入狱者率不得出。
现代文：尔耕广布侦缉人员，罗织平人，施用锻炼等酷刑，入狱者大都不得出来。
English: Detectives and ordinary people are widely recruited, and torture such as exercise is used. Most of the prisoners are not allowed to come out.

古文：宵人希进者，多缘以达于忠贤，良卿复左右之，言无不纳，朝士辐辏其门。
现代文：希图进用的宵小之人，多通过他通达于魏忠贤，魏良卿又从中左右，因此尔耕的话魏忠贤无不采纳，朝中人士多会聚在他的门前。
English: Most of the young people who wanted to use him reached Wei Zhongxian through him, and Wei Liangqing was in the middle. Therefore, Wei Zhongxian accepted his words, and many people in the DPRK and China gathered in front of his door.

古文：魏广微亦与缔姻，时有 大儿田尔耕 之谣。
现代文：魏广微也与他结成姻亲，当时有 大儿田尔耕 的歌谣。
English: Wei Guangwei also formed a marriage with him. At that time, there was a song called "Daerdian Erkoo."

古文：又与许显纯、崔应元、杨寰、孙云鹤有 五彪 之号。
现代文：他与许显纯、崔应元、杨寰、孙云鹤并有 五虎 之号。
English: He, along with Xu Xianzhun, Cui Yingyuan, Yang Hui, and Sun Yunhe, is also known as the Five Tigers.

古文：累加至少师兼太子太师，荫锦衣世职者数人，岁时赏赉不可胜纪。
现代文：他累次加封，被拜为少师兼太子太师，庇荫锦衣卫世职数人，岁时所得赏赐不可胜计。
English: He has been repeatedly awarded additional seals, was worshipped as a young teacher and prince teacher, patronized by several people in the Imperial Guards, and received countless rewards when he was young.

古文：显纯等加官亦如之。
现代文：许显纯等人和他一样获得加官。
English: Like him, Xu Xianjun and others were promoted.

古文：忠贤败，言者交劾，下吏论死。崇祯元年六月与显纯并伏诛。
现代文：魏忠贤败后，言论者纷纷弹劾他，被下狱判了死罪，崇祯元年六月与许显纯一起伏诛。
English: After Wei Zhongxian's defeat, commentators impeached him one after another, he was sentenced to death, and in June of the first year of the Chongzheng Emperor, he was executed together with Xu Xianjun.

古文：显纯，定兴人，驸马都尉从诚孙也。
现代文：许显纯，定兴人，驸马都尉许从诚之孙。
English: Xu Xianchun, Ding Xingren, the grandson of the commander Xu Congzheng.

古文：举武会试，擢锦衣卫都指挥佥事。
现代文：他考取武会试，升为锦衣卫都指挥佥事。
English: He took the exam for the martial arts association and was promoted to the commanding officer of the Jinling Garrison.

古文：天启四年，刘侨掌镇抚司，治汪文言狱，失忠贤指，得罪，以显纯代之。
现代文：天启四年，刘侨执掌镇抚司，治理汪文言一案，因失魏忠贤旨意而得罪，由许显纯取代了他。
English: In the fourth year of the Apocalypse, Liu Qiao, who was in charge of the town's magistrate, presided over the case of Wang Wenyan, and was found guilty of violating the will of Wei Zhongxian. He was replaced by Xu Xianchun.

古文：显纯略晓文墨，性残酷，大狱频兴，毒刑锻练，杨涟、左光斗、周顺昌、黄尊素、王之寀、夏之令等十余人，皆死其手。
现代文：显纯略晓文墨，性情残酷，他频兴大狱，用锻炼等毒刑，杨涟、左光斗、周顺昌、黄尊素、王之肕、夏之令等十余人，都死在他的手中。
English: He was known for his purity, knowledge of literature and calligraphy, and cruel temperament. He frequently promoted the use of torture, and used torture as a form of exercise. More than ten people, including Yang Zheng, Zuo Guangdou, Zhou Shunchang, Huang Zongsu, Wang Zhiyao, and Xia Rongling, all died at his hands.

古文：诸人供状，皆显纯自为之。
现代文：这些人的供状，全都是显纯所造。
English: The confessions of these people are all fabricated.

古文：每谳鞫，忠贤必遣人坐其后，谓之听记，其人偶不至，即袖手不敢问。
现代文：每次审问，魏忠贤必派人来坐在他的后面，称为听记，其人偶尔不到，显纯即袖手不敢问。
English: Every time he was interrogated, Wei Zhongxian would send someone to sit behind him, known as listening. Occasionally, the person would not come, and Xianchun did not dare to ask.

古文：应元，大兴人。
现代文：崔应元，大兴人。
English: Cui Yingyuan, Daxing person.

古文：市井无赖，充校尉，冒缉捕功，积官至锦衣指挥。
现代文：他是个市井无赖，充任校尉，因冒领缉捕之功，积官升到锦衣卫指挥。
English: He was a rogue in the city, appointed as a school captain, and because of his brazen arrest, he was promoted to the command of the Jinling Guards.

古文：云鹤，霸州人，为东厂理刑官。
现代文：孙云鹤，霸州人，是东厂理刑官。
English: Sun Yunhe, a resident of Bazhou, is a criminal justice officer at the East Factory.

古文：寰，吴县人。隶籍锦衣，为东司理刑。
现代文：杨寰，吴县人，他隶籍于锦衣卫，是东司理刑官。
English: Yang Hao, a native of Wuxian County, belongs to the Jin Yi Wei and is a Dongsiri criminal officer.

古文：凡显纯杀人事，皆应元等共为之。
现代文：凡是许显纯杀人之事，都是崔应元等人共同为之。
English: All of Xu Xianren's murders were committed jointly by Cui Yingyuan and others.

古文：而寰为田尔耕心腹。
现代文：而杨寰还是田尔耕的心腹。
English: And Yang Mi is still Tian Erko's confidant.

古文：及显纯论死，法司止当应元、云鹤、寰戍。
现代文：到许显纯被判死罪，法司只判崔应元、孙云鹤、杨寰应当遣戍。
English: While Xu Xianzhun was sentenced to death, only Cui Yingyuan, Sun Yunhe and Yang Hui were sentenced to exile.

古文：后定逆案，三人并论死，寰先死戍所。
现代文：后来定逆案，三人都判了死罪，而杨寰已先死于戍守之地。
English: Later, the reverse case was decided, and all three were sentenced to death, while Yang Hui had already died in the first place.

