古文：韦安道
现代文：韦安道
English: Wai On Road

古文：京兆韦安道，起居舍人真之子。
现代文：京兆郡有个人叫韦安道，他是起居舍人韦真的儿子。
English: In Jingzhao County, there is a man named Wei An Dao. He is the son of Wei Zhen, a layman.

古文：举进士，久不第。
现代文：他想考进士，始终没有中第。
English: He wanted to take the entrance examination, but he never made it.

古文：唐大定年中，于洛阳早出，至慈惠里西门，晨鼓初发，见中衢有兵仗，如帝者之卫。
现代文：唐代大定年间，他住在洛阳城里。一天清早出来，到慈惠里西门时，晨鼓刚响。这时，只见前面大路中央有士兵组成的仪仗队，像是帝王的卫士。
English: He lived in the city of Luoyang during the Dading Dynasty of the Tang Dynasty. He came out early one morning, and when he arrived at the West Gate of Cihui, the morning drum had just sounded. At this time, he saw a guard of honor made up of soldiers in the middle of the road in front of him, like the emperor's guards.

古文：前有甲骑数十队，次有官者，持大杖，衣画袴袽，夹道前驱，亦数十辈。
现代文：前面是戴着甲胄的骑兵，共几十队；接着，是官员，都拿着棍棒，穿着新鲜的上衣和带花纹的裤子，夹道开路，也有几十个人。
English: In front of them there were dozens of cavalrymen in armor; then there were dozens of officials, all carrying clubs, dressed in crisp jackets and patterned trousers, blocking the way.

古文：又见黄屋左纛，有月旗而无日旗。
现代文：又看见以黄缯为里的车盖左边的大旗，只有月旗而没有日旗。
English: He also saw a large flag on the left side of the hood with a yellow star in it. It was a moon flag, not a sun flag.

古文：又有近侍才人宫监之属，亦数百人。
现代文：还有近侍才人宫女太监等，也有几百人。
English: There are also close attendants such as court eunuchs, and there are also several hundred people.

古文：中有飞伞，伞下见衣珠翠之服，乘大马，如后之饰，美丽光艳，其容动人。
现代文：队伍中间，有一飞伞，伞下可以看见镶嵌着翠珠的衣服。这个人骑着高头大马，完全是皇后的装饰。她美丽光艳，容貌动人。
English: In the middle of the procession, there is a parachute, under the umbrella you can see a dress inlaid with emerald beads. This person is riding a tall horse, completely the decoration of the queen. She is beautiful and bright, with a charming appearance.

古文：又有后骑，皆妇人才官，持钺，负弓矢，乘马从，亦千余人。
现代文：后面一些骑马的人，全是嫔妃和女官，举着像大斧一样的兵器，背着弓箭，乘马紧随其后，也有一千多人。
English: Behind them, a number of horsemen, all concubines and maids of honour, followed closely on horseback, holding weapons like large axes and carrying bows and arrows. There were also more than a thousand people.

古文：时天后在洛，安道初谓天后之游幸。
现代文：时当则天皇后住在洛阳，韦安道开始以是她出去巡行游玩。
English: At that time, the empress dowager lived in Luoyang, and Wei'an Road began with her going out for a parade.

古文：时天尚未明，问同行者，皆云不见。
现代文：这时天还没有亮，韦安道问跟自己一起走的人，都说没看见。
English: At this time, it was not yet dawn. Wei Andao asked the people who were walking with him, and they all said they did not see it.

古文：又怪衢中金吾街吏，不为静路。
现代文：又责怪起这里的街吏金吾，怪他没有静路。
English: He also blames Kingo, a street official here, for not having a quiet road.

古文：久之渐明，见其后骑一宫监，驰马而至。
现代文：过了好长时间，天渐渐亮了。这时，一个宫中的太监骑着马从后面赶上来，到了韦安道身边。
English: After a long time, the sky gradually brightened. At this time, a eunuch in the palace rode up from behind and came to Wei'an Road.

古文：安道因留问之：前所过者，非人主乎？
现代文：韦安道喊住他问道：前面过去的，不是咱们的君主吗？
English: Wei An shouted at him and asked: "Wasn't it our monarch who passed away before?

古文：宫监曰：非也。
现代文：太监说：不是呵。
English: The eunuch said, "No."

古文：安道请问其事，宫监但指慈惠里之西门曰：公但自此去，由里门，循墙而南，行百余步，有朱扉西向者，扣之问其由，当自知矣。
现代文：韦安道请他说说这是怎么回事，太监只是指指慈惠里的西门说：你尽管从那往前走，由里门再顺墙向南行一百多步，就会看见一道朝西的红门，你上前敲门问其根由，就知道了。
English: Wei An asked him to tell him what was going on. The eunuch only pointed to Simon of Zhi Hui and said, "If you walk forward from there, through the inner gate and then walk south along the wall for more than a hundred paces, you will see a red door facing west. If you knock on the door and ask about its origin, you will know."

古文：安道如其言扣之。
现代文：韦安道照他说的那样走到朝西的红门前，敲了起来。
English: Wei An Dao walked to the west-facing red door as he said and knocked on it.

古文：久之，有朱衣官者出应门曰：公非韦安道乎？
现代文：好长时间，走出一个穿红衣服的官员应声问道：你就是韦安道吗？
English: For a long time, an official dressed in red came out and asked: Are you Wei'an Dao?

古文：曰：然。
现代文：韦安道说：对。
English: The general said yes.

古文：官者曰：后土夫人相候已久矣。
现代文：那位官员说：后土夫人等候你很长时间了。
English: The official said, "Mrs. Houchi has been waiting for you for a long time.

古文：遂延入。
现代文：随即把他请了进去。
English: Then he invited him in.

古文：见一大门如戟门者，官者入通，顷之，又延入。
现代文：韦安道看见一道大门，像一道立戟的宫门，那位官员走进去通报。
English: Wei An Dao saw a gate, like a gate of a palace, and the official went inside to report.

古文：有紫衣宫监，与安道叙语于庭，延一宫中，置汤沐。
现代文：有顷，又把他请了进去，有位穿紫衣服的宫监，同韦安道在庭前叙谈起来。随后，把他请到一座宫中，备好热水让他沐浴。
English: Suddenly, he was invited inside again. A palace guard dressed in purple started talking to Wei Andao in front of the court. Then, he was invited to a palace, and hot water was prepared for him to bathe in.

古文：顷之，以大箱奉美服一袭，其间有青袍牙笏绶及巾靴毕备，命安道服之。
现代文：有顷，有人用大箱子送来一套华美的衣服，里面有青袍、象牙笏板、绶带以及头巾、靴子等，十分齐全，让韦安道穿戴好。
English: One day, someone sent a large box with a set of gorgeous clothes, including a blue robe, an ivory chopping board, an umbilical cord, as well as a headscarf and boots, all of which were perfect for Wei An Dao to wear.

古文：宫监曰：可去矣。
现代文：那位宫监说：这回可以去了。
English: The palace supervisor said, "You can go this time."

古文：遂乘安道以大马，女骑道从者数人。
现代文：随即让韦安道骑上高头大马，还有几个骑马的女子随行。
English: Afterwards, Wei'an Dao was allowed to ride on a tall horse, and several women on horseback accompanied him.

古文：宫监与安道联辔，出慈惠之西门，由正街西南，自通利街东行，出建春门。
现代文：宫监与他并马而行，出了慈惠里西门，由正街转向西南，再从通利街往东走，出了建春门，再向东北走。
English: The palace inspector walked with him, out of the West Gate of Cihulisi, turned southwest from Zhengjie Street, then east from Tongli Street, out of Jianchun Gate, and then northeast.

古文：又东北行，约二十余里，渐见夹道成守者，拜于马前而去。
现代文：大约走出二十多里，远远看见卫兵们夹道而立，不时有人向他下拜后又回到原来的位置。
English: After walking more than twenty miles, he saw the guards standing side by side in the distance. From time to time, someone bowed to him and then returned to his original position.

古文：凡数处，乃至一大城，甲士守卫甚严，如王者之城。
现代文：这样的地方有好几处。接着，他们来到一座大城，士兵们穿戴着甲胄，守卫很严，仿佛皇宫一般。
English: There were several such places, and then they came to a large city, heavily guarded by soldiers in armor, like a royal palace.

古文：凡经数重，遂见飞楼连阁，下有大门，如天子之居，而多宫监。
现代文：一共经过好几道岗，随即看见了飞楼连阁，气势非凡。楼阁下面还有一道大门，如皇帝的寝宫。这里有不少宫女和太监。
English: After passing through several guard posts, they immediately saw the castle tower, which was extremely imposing. Below the tower, there was also a gate, like the emperor's bedchamber. There were many maids of honor and eunuchs.

古文：安道乘马，经翠楼朱殿而过，又十余处，遂入一门内。
现代文：韦安道骑着马，经过翠楼朱殿，又走了十余处地方，进入一道大门里，走了一百来步，又看见一座大殿。
English: Wei An Dao rode a horse, passed the Chu Lou Zhu Hall, walked more than ten places, entered a gate, walked about a hundred steps, and saw a large hall.

古文：行百步许，复有大殿，上陈广筵重乐，罗列罇俎，九奏万舞，若钧天之乐。
现代文：殿上摆下了盛宴，准备了隆重的舞乐，美酒佳肴，琳琅满目。九奏万舞，像天上的音乐。
English: A feast was laid out in the hall, with grand dance music, fine food and wine, and a dazzling array of delicacies. Nine thousand dances were performed, like heavenly music.

古文：美妇人十数，如妃主之状，列于筵左右。
现代文：有十几个美女，像是妃子的样子，站立在筵席两侧。
English: There are a dozen beautiful women, like concubines, standing on both sides of the table.

古文：前所与同行宫监，引安道自西阶而上。
现代文：那位与韦安道同行的宫监，领着他从西边的台阶走上去。
English: The palace inspector, who was traveling with Wei An Dao, led him up the steps on the west side.

古文：顷之，见殿内宫监如赞者，命安道西间东向而立。
现代文：一会儿，只见殿上的宫监唱歌般地让韦道安到西边殿堂朝东站好。
English: After a while, the palace overseer in the palace was seen singing to Wei Dao'an to go to the west side of the palace and stand in the east.

古文：顷之，自殿后门，见卫从者，先罗主殿中，乃微闻环珮之声。
现代文：有顷，从大殿的后门走出不少侍卫和随从，按顺序站在殿中，这时就隐隐听见珮玉的声响，走出一位美丽端庄的女人。
English: Suddenly, many attendants and attendants came out from the back door of the main hall and stood in the hall in order. At this time, the sound of the cymbals was faintly heard, and a beautiful and dignified woman came out.

古文：有美妇人，备首饰袆衣，如谒庙之服，至殿间西向，与安道对立，乃是昔于慈惠西街飞伞下所见者也。
现代文：从她戴着的首饰和穿着的服饰看，如到庙里拜谒一般。她来到殿堂朝西边站好，与韦安道迎面而视。她就是方才在慈惠西街飞伞下见到的那个女人。
English: Judging from the jewelry she was wearing and the clothes she was wearing, it was as if she was visiting a temple. She came to the hall of fame and stood facing west, facing Wei An Dao. She was the woman I had just seen under the flying umbrella on Cihui West Street.

古文：宫监乃赞曰：后土夫人，乃冥数合为匹偶。
现代文：宫监唱念道：后土夫人，按冥间的定数应当婚配了！
English: The palace overseer chanted, "Lady Houchi, according to the fixed number in the underworld, you should be married!"

古文：命安道拜，夫人受之；夫人拜，安道受之，如人间宾主之礼。
现代文：他让韦安道揖拜，夫人接受了；夫人揖拜，韦安道也接受了，就像人世间行的宾主之礼。
English: He asked Wei Andao to prostrate, and his wife accepted; his wife prostrated, and Wei Andao also accepted, just like the host's greeting in the human world.

古文：遂去礼服，与安道对坐于筵上。前所见十数美妇人，亦列坐于左右，奏乐饮馔，及昏而罢。
现代文：接着，脱去礼服，二人对坐在席上，前面见到的那十几个美丽的女人，也列坐在他们身边。一边奏乐一边饮酒吃饭，一直到傍晚才完事。
English: Then, taking off their ceremonial robes, they sat in pairs at the table, and the dozen beautiful women they had seen in front of them also sat next to them. While playing music, they drank and ate, and they didn't finish until the evening.

古文：则以其夕偶之，尚处子也。
现代文：韦安道就在这天晚上，与后土夫人结为夫妻，并发现她竟还是个处女。
English: On this very night, Wei An Dao married Lady Hou Tuo and discovered that she was still a virgin.

古文：如此者盖十余日，所服御饮馔。皆如帝王之家。
现代文：就这样一共住了十多天，韦安道所穿所吃，全都像住在帝王家中一般。
English: In this way, we stayed for a total of more than ten days. What Wei An Dao wore and ate was all like living in an emperor's home.

古文：夫人因谓安道曰：某为子之妻，子有父母，不告而娶，不可谓礼。
现代文：夫人终于对韦安道说：我做了你的妻子，可你有父有母，没告诉他们就娶了我，这不能称为有 礼 吧？
English: Finally, his wife said to Wei An Dao: "I have become your wife, but you have a father and a mother. You married me without telling them. This cannot be called polite, right?"

古文：愿从子而归，庙见尊舅姑，得成妇之礼，幸也。
现代文：我愿意跟你一块回去，拜见尊敬的公婆，完成我做媳妇的礼仪，这是一件幸事呵。
English: I would like to go back with you, meet my respected in-laws, and complete the etiquette of being a daughter-in-law, which is a blessing.

古文：安道曰：诺。
现代文：韦安道说：好。
English: Wei An said: Good.

古文：因下令，命车驾即日告备。
现代文：后土夫人于是命令手下人准备车马，当天就准备停当了。
English: Mrs. Houchi then ordered her subordinates to prepare the horses and chariots, and they were ready to stop on the same day.

古文：夫人乘黄犊之车，车有金翠瑶玉之饰，盖人间所谓库车也。
现代文：后土夫人坐着黄牛拉的车，车上由黄金和美玉装饰一新，就是人世间所说的库车呵。
English: Mrs. Houdo sits in a cart pulled by a cowherd. The cart is newly decorated with gold and precious stones. It is what is known as a "Kooka" in the world.

古文：上有飞伞覆之，车徒傧从，如慈惠之西街所见。
现代文：车上有飞伞遮盖，后面跟着众多的侍从，如同在慈惠西街见到的一样。
English: The vehicle was covered with a parachute and was followed by a large number of attendants, as seen on Cihui West Street.

古文：安道乘马，从车而行，安道左右侍者十数人，皆材官宦者之流。
现代文：韦安道骑着马，跟在车的后面朝前走。韦安道身旁的侍从也有十个人，全是些作材官和太监之流。
English: Wei'an Dao rode a horse and followed the back of the car. There were also ten attendants at Wei'an Dao's side, all of whom were officials and eunuchs.

古文：行十余里，有朱幕城供帐，女吏列后，乃行宫供顿之所。
现代文：走了十多里，有人便陈设帷帐以供行旅，如同建起一座红色的大幕城。女官们站在后面，就象宫中一样摆上酒宴。
English: After walking more than ten miles, someone set up curtains for the journey, as if building a red curtain city. The ladies stood behind, like in a palace, and put on a wine banquet.

古文：夫人遂入供帐中，命安道与同处，所进饮馔华美。
现代文：夫人随即回到陈设的帷帐中，让韦安道跟她住在一起，所吃的食品相当精美。
English: The lady then returned to the furnished curtain, let Wei Ando live with her, and the food she ate was quite exquisite.

古文：顷之，又去。
现代文：有顷，又向前走。
English: At one point, he started to walk forward again.

古文：下令命所从车骑，减去十七八，相次又行三数里，复下令去从者。
现代文：夫人下令把跟随而来的车马人员，减十分之七八。接着又走了三五里地，夫人再次下令减掉随从人员。
English: The lady ordered the attendants to be reduced by seventy-eight tenths. Then they walked another thirty-five miles, and the lady again ordered the attendants to be reduced.

古文：乃至建春门，左右才有二十骑人马，如王者之游。
现代文：等到了建春门时，夫人身边还有二十骑人马，如君王出游。
English: When the Jianchun Gate was built, there were still twenty horsemen around her, like a king on a trip.

古文：既入洛阳，欲至其家，安道先入，家人怪其车服之异。
现代文：当天进了洛阳城，快到韦安道家时，韦安道先行一步，家里人对他的车马和衣服颇感惊异。
English: On the same day, when he entered Luoyang City and was about to reach his home in Wei'an Road, Wei'an Road was one step ahead, and his family members were quite surprised by his car, horse and clothes.

古文：安道遂见其父母。
现代文：韦安道立即去拜见父母。
English: Wei An immediately went to see his parents.

古文：二亲惊愕久之，谓曰：不见尔者，盖月余矣，尔安适耶？
现代文：二位亲人见状，惊愕地张大嘴巴，且张了好久，对他说：一个多月，没有见到你了，你近来可否平安、舒心？
English: Two relatives saw the letter, opened their mouths wide in surprise, and kept them open for a long time, and said to him: "I haven't seen you for more than a month. Have you been feeling safe and comfortable lately?"

古文：安道拜而明言曰：偶为一家迫以婚姻。
现代文：韦安道再次跪拜并且直言相告：我无意之中被一家人强迫成婚。
English: Wei Andao knelt down again and told the truth: I was unintentionally forced into marriage by my family.

古文：言新妇即至，故先上告。
现代文：并说新婚妻子已经到了，因此先来禀告父母一声。
English: He also said that his new wife had arrived, so he wanted to tell his parents first.

古文：父母惊问未竟，车骑已及门矣。
现代文：父母吃了一惊，刚要继续发问，车马已到前门。
English: The parents were taken aback and were about to continue asking questions when the coach and horses arrived at the front door.

古文：遂有侍婢及阉奴数十辈，自外正门，敷绣茵绮席，罗列于庭，及以翠屏画帷，饰于堂门，左右施细绳床一，请舅姑对坐。
现代文：随即有几十个侍婢及太监，从正门外铺进来绣着花草的丝席，一直铺在庭前，并把一些绿屏风、画卷、帷帐布置于堂上，左右各安放一个用细绳编的坐榻，请韦安道的父母迎面而坐。
English: Immediately, dozens of servants, maids, and eunuchs came in from outside the main gate and spread silk seats embroidered with flowers and plants all the way to the front of the courtyard. They also placed some green screens, picture scrolls, and curtain fabric on the hall, and placed a seat made of twine on each side, inviting Wei's parents to sit face to face.

古文：遂自门外，设二锦步幛，夫人衣礼服，垂珮而入。
现代文：接着又在门外安置两个锦绣的屏幕，用以遮蔽风尘或外人的视线。后土夫人穿着礼服，垂着珮玉款款而入，行新媳妇拜见公婆的大礼。
English: Next, two brocade screens were placed outside the door to block the wind and dust or the view of outsiders. Lady Houchi entered wearing a gown with an emerald pendant, and the new daughter-in-law made a grand entrance to meet her in-laws.

古文：修妇礼毕，奉翠玉金瑶罗绔，盖十数箱，为人间贺遗之礼，置于舅姑之前。
现代文：然后，献上一大批绿玉黄金绫罗绸缎，共有十几箱，作为见面礼，放在公婆面前。
English: Then, he presented a large number of green jade, gold and silk brocades, a total of more than a dozen boxes, as a welcome gift, placed in front of his parents-in-law.

古文：爰及叔伯诸姑家人，皆蒙其礼。
现代文：接着，韦安道的兄弟姐妹各家人，也都得到了礼物。
English: Next, the brothers and sisters of Wei'an Road and their families also received gifts.

古文：因曰：新妇请居东院。
现代文：公婆终于说：请儿媳住在东院吧。
English: The in-laws finally said, "Let's ask your daughter-in-law to live in the East Hospital."

古文：遂又有侍婢阉奴。持房帷供帐之饰，置于东院，修饰甚周，遂居之。
现代文：随即，又有一些侍婢太监，拿着帷帐屏风等装饰物，安放在东院，布置得十分周密，讲究。
English: Immediately afterwards, some eunuchs and maidservants, holding curtains, screens and other decorations, were placed in the East Courtyard, which was very carefully and elaborately decorated.

古文：父母相与忧惧，莫知所来。
现代文：后土夫人和韦安道便住了进去。
English: Mrs. Houtou and Wei Ando moved in.

古文：是时天后朝，法令严峻，惧祸及之，乃具以事上奏请罪。
现代文：韦安道的父母都感到十分忧虑可怕，不知道这位儿媳妇是从哪里来的。当时，武则天皇后临朝执政，法令十分严酷，他们担心发生祸事连累自己，就把这件事向则天皇后禀报了并请求赐罪。
English: Wei An Dao's parents were very worried and fearful, not knowing where this daughter-in-law came from. At that time, Emperor Wu Zetian was in power and the laws were very harsh. They were worried that something bad would happen and they would be implicated, so they reported the matter to Emperor Wu Zetian and asked for forgiveness.

古文：天后曰：此必魅物也，卿不足忧。
现代文：则天皇后说：这一定是住在深山老林中的鬼怪了。
English: Then the empress dowager said, "This must be a ghost living in the deep mountains and old forests."

古文：朕有善咒术者，释门之师，九思、怀素二僧，可为卿去此妖也。
现代文：你不要害怕，我有九思、怀素两位神僧，他们出身佛门，有很高超的法术，能够为你除掉此妖。
English: Don't be afraid, I have two divine monks, Jiuxi and Huai Su, who are from the Buddhist sect and have superior magic to be able to get rid of this demon for you.

古文：因诏九思、怀素往，僧曰：此不过妖魅狐狸之属，以术去之易耳。
现代文：于是，她派九思、怀素随韦安道之父韦真前去。这两位和尚说：这不过是深山中的鬼怪或狐狸精之类，用法术除掉它是很容易的。
English: So she sent Jiu Si and Huai Su to accompany Wei Zhen, the father of Wei An Dao. The two monks said, "This is just a ghost or a fox spirit in the deep mountains, and it is easy to get rid of it with magic."

古文：当先命于新妇院中设馔，置坐位，请期翌日而至。
现代文：你应当先让这位新媳妇在院中安排好饭菜，放好坐椅，告诉她我们明天就去。
English: You should first let the new daughter-in-law arrange the meals in the hospital, put the chairs, and tell her that we will go tomorrow.

古文：真归，具以二僧之语命之，新妇承命，具馔设位，辄无所惧。
现代文：韦真回到家中，全按照那两个和尚说的让新媳妇去做，新媳妇答应下来，立即准备饭菜，布置坐椅，一点也没有害怕的样子。
English: Wei Zhen returned home and let the new daughter-in-law do everything according to what the two monks said. The new daughter-in-law agreed and immediately prepared the meal and arranged the chairs. She didn't look scared at all.

古文：明日，二僧至，既毕馔端坐，请与新妇相见，将施其术。
现代文：第二天，两个和尚到了，吃完饭端端正正地坐好，请求说要与新媳妇见见面，准备施展巫木。
English: The next day, the two monks arrived, sat down after the meal, and asked to meet their new daughter-in-law. They were preparing to cast the sacred wood.

古文：新妇遽至，亦致礼于二僧。
现代文：新媳妇很快就来了，也向这两位和尚致礼问候。
English: The new daughter-in-law soon arrived and also greeted the two monks.

古文：二僧忽若物击之，俯伏称罪，目眦鼻口流血。
现代文：忽然，这两位和尚仿佛被什么东西击中了要害，趴在地上连连自称有罪，眼角和鼻孔都流出血来。
English: Suddenly, the two monks, as if they had been hit by something, lay on the ground and repeatedly confessed their guilt, with blood streaming from the corners of their eyes and nostrils.

古文：又具以事上闻。天后问之。
现代文：他们急忙跑回宫中，把这件事如实讲给则天皇后听。
English: They hurried back to the palace and told the truth to the Empress Dowager.

古文：二僧对曰：某所以咒者，不过妖魅鬼物，此不知其所从来，想不能制。
现代文：则天皇后再三询问，两位和尚回答说：我们以为所要咒服的，不过是深山中的鬼怪罢了，却不知竟这么厉害！这东西不知道究竟是从哪里来的，想必是制服不了啦。
English: The empress then asked repeatedly, and the two monks replied: "We thought that the one we wanted to put under a spell was just a ghost in the deep mountains, but we didn't know it was so powerful! We don't know where this thing came from, and we certainly can't subdue it."

古文：天后曰：有正谏大夫明崇俨，以太一异术制录天地诸神祗，此必可使也。
现代文：则天皇后说：有位正谏大夫叫明崇俨，他用太一异术可以制服天地间各位神仙，这一招一定好使。
English: Then the empress dowager said, "There is a real witch doctor named Ming Chongyu. He can subdue all the gods and goddesses in heaven and earth with his magic. This trick is sure to work well."

古文：遂召崇俨。
现代文：随即召见明崇俨。
English: He was immediately summoned to see Ming Chongzhen.

古文：崇俨谓真曰：君可以今夕，于所居堂中，洁诚坐，以候新妇所居室上，见异物至而观。
现代文：明崇俨对韦真说：你可以在今天晚间，在你所住的房间里，洁身静心，虔诚地坐好。等到新媳妇所居住的房顶上出现什么异物时，你要留心观察。
English: Ming Chongyong said to Wei Zhen: You can stay in your room tonight, clean yourself, meditate, and sit piously. When something strange appears on the roof of the house where the new daughter-in-law lives, you should pay attention and observe.

古文：其胜则已，或不胜，则当更以别法制之。
现代文：那异物打胜了则已，倘若打不胜，就得再想别的办法制服她。
English: If the foreign object is defeated, it's over. If it's not defeated, we'll have to find another way to subdue it.

古文：真如其言，至甲夜，见有物如飞云，赤光若惊电，自崇俨之居，飞跃而至。
现代文：韦真照他所说的去做了。第一天晚上，他看见有个奇怪的东西如同一朵云彩，闪着雷电般的红光，从明崇俨家里飞跃而来，径直落在新媳妇屋顶。
English: Wei Zhen did as he was told. On the first night, he saw a strange thing like a cloud, flashing red light like lightning, leaping from Ming Chongyao's home and landing directly on his new daughter-in-law's roof.

古文：及新妇屋上，忽若为物所扑灭者，因而不见。
现代文：忽然，这仿佛被什么扑灭，因而便看不见了。
English: All of a sudden, it was as if it was extinguished by something, so I couldn't see it.

古文：使人候新妇，乃平安如故。
现代文：韦真派人去儿媳房中侦察，只见她平安如常。
English: Wei Zhen sent someone to investigate his daughter-in-law's room and found that she was safe as usual.

古文：乙夜，又见物如赤龙之状，拿攫喷毒，声如群鼓，乘黑云有光者，至新妇屋上，又若为物所扑，有呦然之声而灭。
现代文：第二天晚上，他又看见一个怪物从明崇俨家中飞跃而出，像一条红色的龙，张牙舞爪地喷着毒气，发出的声音如同群鼓齐敲，驾着黑云闪着光亮，落到儿媳的屋顶。又仿佛被什么东西扑了一下，它像鹿那样叫了几声便不见了。
English: The next night, he saw a monster leaping out of Ming Chongyu's home, like a red dragon, spraying poison gas with its claws and teeth, emitting a sound like drums beating in unison, driving a dark cloud with a flash of light, and falling onto his daughter-in-law's roof. It also seemed to be hit by something, and it cried like a deer for a few times before disappearing.

古文：使人候新妇，又如故。
现代文：韦真派人再去儿媳房中侦察，又跟上次一样平安如常。
English: Wei Zhen sent someone to reconnoiter his daughter-in-law's room, and it was as safe as usual.

古文：又至子夜，见有物朱发锯牙，盘铁轮，乘飞雷，轮铓角呼奔而至，既及其屋，又如物所杀，称罪而灭。
现代文：第三天半夜，韦真又看见有个怪物长着红头发和锯齿般的牙，坐在铁轮上，铁轮闪烁着光芒，它乘着滚动的雷声，像公野鸡那样呼叫着而来，落到儿媳的屋顶。结果，又仿佛遭到什么东西的扑杀，它连称自己有罪有罪而销声匿迹。
English: In the middle of the night of the third day, Wei Zhen again saw a monster with red hair and serrated teeth, sitting on an iron wheel, the iron wheel shimmering with light, it rode the rolling thunder, calling like a rooster, and fell to the roof of his daughter-in-law. As a result, it seemed to be killed by something, and it even said that he was guilty and disappeared.

古文：既而质明，真怪惧，不知其所为计，又具以事告。
现代文：随即天就亮了。韦真又惊诧又害怕。不知道明崇俨之计如何，便把自己所见又对他讲了。
English: The sky immediately lit up. Wei Zhen was surprised and scared. Not knowing what Ming Chongjun's plan was, he told him what he had seen.

古文：崇俨曰：前所为法，是太乙符箓法也，但可摄制狐魅耳，今既无效，请更赜之。
现代文：明崇俨说：前几次我所做的法术，是 太一符箓法 呵，凭空就可制服狐精之类的鬼怪；现在既然不见效果，那只好另想办法了。
English: Ming Chongyao said, "The previous spells I did were too one-trick pony spells, which could subdue ghosts such as foxes out of thin air; now that they don't work, I have to find another way.

古文：因致坛醮之箓，使征八纮厚地，山川河渎，丘墟水木，主职鬼魅之属，其数无缺，崇俨异之。
现代文：于是便设坛举行祷神的祭礼，召来八维之天和厚重之地间所有主管山川河流、荒丘水木的鬼怪，从数字上看一个都不缺。明崇俨疑惑不解。
English: As a result, an altar was set up to hold a festival to pray to the gods, summoning all the ghosts of mountains, rivers, barren hills, and trees between the eight-dimensional sky and the thick land. Judging by the numbers, there is no shortage of them.

古文：翌日，又征人世上天界部八极之神，其数无缺。
现代文：第二天，又召来人世与天界间八极之神，结果也是一个不缺。
English: The next day, he summoned the god of the eight poles between the human world and the heavenly world, and the result was also satisfactory.

古文：崇俨曰：神祗所为魅者，则某能制之，若然，则不可得而知也！
现代文：明崇俨说：神仙变鬼怪做坏事的，我能够制服它；可现在神仙全部在位，那我可就不知道它究意是怎么回事了。
English: Ming Chongyao said, "If a fairy turns into a ghost and does bad things, I can subdue it; but now that all the fairies are in power, then I don't know what it's all about."

古文：请试自见而颐之。
现代文：他请求先见这新媳妇一面试探试探。
English: He asked to see the new daughter-in-law for an interview.

古文：因命于新妇院设馔，请崇俨。
现代文：韦真便让儿媳在院中摆好饭菜，宴请明崇俨。
English: Wei Zhen then asked her daughter-in-law to prepare meals in the hospital and invite Ming Chongyu.

古文：崇俨至坐，请见新妇，新妇方肃答，将拜崇俨，崇俨又忽若为物所击，奄然斥倒，称罪请命，目眦鼻口流血于地。
现代文：明崇俨来后便入座，提出要看一看新媳妇。韦真的儿媳妇刚恭恭敬敬地应了一声，正要朝明崇俨跪拜时，他也忽然像被什么东西击中要害，猛然倒在地上。明崇俨连称有罪并请求饶命，眼角和鼻孔的血喷流到地上。
English: After Ming Chongzhen arrived, he sat down and asked to have a look at his new daughter-in-law. Wei Zhen's daughter-in-law politely and respectfully responded. Just as Ming Chongzhen was about to kneel, he suddenly fell to the ground as if he had been hit by something. Ming Chongzhen pleaded guilty and asked for his life to be spared. Blood from the corners of his eyes and nostrils gushed onto the ground.

古文：真又益惊惧，不知所为。
现代文：韦真更加惊恐害怕，不知道该怎么办。
English: Wei Zhen was even more scared and did not know what to do.

古文：其妻因谓真曰：此九思、怀素、明正谏，所不能制也，为之奈何？
现代文：于是，他的妻子对他说：连九思、怀素和明宗俨都不能制服她，拿她有什么办法？
English: Then his wife said to him, "Even Jiu Si, Huai Su and Ming Zong Yao can't subdue her. What can we do with her?"

古文：闻昔安道初与偶之时，云是后土夫人，此虽人间百术，亦不能制之。
现代文：听说，当初咱们的儿子刚跟她成婚时，都叫她后土夫人。那几位虽然使出人世间的各种法术，也未能把这个后土夫人制服。
English: I heard that when our son first married her, they called her Lady Houchi. Although they used all kinds of magic, they were unable to subdue this Lady Houchi.

古文：今观其与安道夫妇之道，亦甚相得，试使安道致词，请去之，或可也。
现代文：现在，我看她与咱们安道恩恩爱爱，颇合夫妻之道，再说也很相配能否让安道去跟她说说试试，请她自己主动离去，也许能行吧？
English: Now, I see that she and our Ando are kind and affectionate, quite compatible with the way of husband and wife, and moreover, very compatible. Can we let Ando go and talk to her, try, ask her to leave on her own initiative, maybe it can work?

古文：真即命安道谢之曰：某寒门，新妇灵贵之神，今幸与小子伉俪，不敢称敌；又天后法严，惧因是祸及，幸新妇且归，为舅姑之计。
现代文：韦真当即让安道向妻子道歉说：我出身寒门，而你做为尊贵的神女，今天与我结为夫妻，我感到十分幸运，但却实在配不上你呵。再说，则天皇后法令甚为严酷，我怕因此而祸及全家。
English: Wei Zhen immediately asked Ando to apologize to his wife, saying, "I was born in a poor family, and you, as a noble goddess, are married to me today. I feel very lucky, but I really don't deserve you. Furthermore, the Empress Dowager's decree is very harsh, and I'm afraid it will bring disaster to the whole family.

古文：语未终，新妇泣涕而言曰：某幸得配偶君子，奉事舅姑，夫为妇之道，所宜奉舅姑之命，今舅姑既有命，敢不敬从。
现代文：为替父母考虑，希望你能够暂且回去话没说完，妻子泪流满面地说：我有幸得到你作为自己的丈夫，十分高兴，准备好好侍奉公婆，好好行妇道，最要紧的是服从公婆的意志。现在公婆既然有话，我怎敢不听？好吧，我今天就摆驾回宫。
English: For the sake of your parents, I hope you can go back for the time being. Before the speech was over, my wife said with tears streaming down her face, "I am fortunate to have you as my husband, I am very happy, I am ready to serve my in-laws, I will do my duty well, and the most important thing is to obey my in-laws' will. Now that my in-laws have spoken, how dare I not listen? Well, I will drive back to the palace today."

古文：因以即日命驾而去，遂具礼告辞于堂下。因请曰：新妇女子也，不敢独归，愿得与韦郎同去。
现代文：到了建春门外，开始跟去的车马侍从也全赶来了，夫人住的都城里仆使卫兵全跟从前一样。
English: When they arrived outside the Jianchun Gate, all the attendants who had started to follow them also arrived, and all the servants and guards in the capital city where his wife lived were the same as before.

古文：真悦而听之，遂与安道俱行，至建春门外，其前时车徒悉至，其所都城仆使兵卫悉如前。
现代文：回城后的第二天，后土夫人穿着礼法规定的服装，坐在大殿之上，像皇帝上朝的样子。
English: On the second day after returning to the city, Lady Houdo, wearing the dress prescribed by etiquette, sat on top of the main hall, looking like the emperor ascending to the throne.

古文：至城之明日，夫人被法服，居大殿中，如天子朝见之像，遂见奇容异人之来朝，或有长丈余者，皆戴华冠长剑，被朱紫之服，云是四海之内，岳渎河海之神。
现代文：接着，就看见一些奇形怪状的异人上前朝拜。走在最前面的那几个人有一丈多高，全戴着华丽的帽子，佩着长剑，穿着朱紫色的衣服，说是四海之内的山神、洞神、河神和海神。
English: Next, they saw some strange-looking aliens come forward to pay homage. Those who walked in the forefront were several feet tall, all wearing magnificent hats, carrying long swords, wearing vermilion clothes, saying that they were mountain gods, cave gods, river gods and sea gods within the four seas.

古文：次有数千百人，云是诸山林树木之神而已。
现代文：接着有几千人走上前去，说是各个山林中的树木之神。
English: Then several thousand people came forward, claiming to be the gods of the trees in the various mountains and forests.

古文：又乃天下诸国之王悉至。
现代文：一会儿，天下各国的君王全到了。
English: In a moment, all the kings of the world arrived.

古文：时安道与夫人坐侧，置一小床，令观之。
现代文：这时，韦安道于妻子坐椅的旁边，放了一张小坐榻。
English: At this time, Wei Andao placed a small sofa next to his wife's chair.

古文：因最后通一人，云：大罗天女。安道视之，天后也。
现代文：后土夫人让他坐在上面，认真观看。因为最后上来一个人，自称是大罗天女，韦安道一看，原来是财天皇后呵。
English: Mrs. Houchi asked him to sit on it and watch it carefully. Because at the end, a person came up, claiming to be Dara Tianya. When Wei An saw her, she turned out to be the Empress Dowager Cai.

古文：夫人乃笑谓安道曰：此是子之地主，少避之。
现代文：后土夫人于是笑着对韦安道说：这是你们国家的君主，你暂时回避一下。
English: Mrs. Houchi then smiled and said to Wei Andao: This is the monarch of your country, you should step aside for a moment.

古文：令安道入殿内小室中。
现代文：她让韦安道走进殿后的小屋。
English: She let Wei Andao walk into the hut behind the palace.

古文：既而天后拜于庭下，礼甚谨。
现代文：随即，则天皇后拜倒在殿下，大礼行得十分恭谨。
English: Immediately afterwards, the Empress prostrated herself before His Imperial Highness, and the grand ceremony was performed with great respect.

古文：夫人乃延天后上，天后数四辞，然后登殿，再拜而坐。
现代文：夫人便请天后上前，天后推辞几次然后登上大殿，又朝夫人拜谢而尘。
English: The lady then asked the Queen Mother to come forward, the Queen Mother declined several times and then ascended to the main hall, and then bowed to the lady.

古文：夫人谓天后曰：某以有冥数，当与天后部内一人韦安道者为匹偶，今冥数已尽，自当离异，然不能与之无情。
现代文：夫人对天后说：我因为命中定数和你们国内一个叫韦安道的人结为夫妻，现在天数已尽，自然应当离异。但是，我不能对他无情。
English: His wife said to the Queen of Heaven, "I married a man named Wei An Dao in your country because of the fixed number of days in my life. Now that the number of days is up, I should naturally divorce him. However, I cannot be cruel to him.

古文：此人苦无寿。
现代文：这个人命苦而无长寿。
English: This man had a hard life and did not live long.

古文：某当在某家，本愿与延寿三百岁，使官至三品，为其尊父母厌迫。不得久居人间，因不果与成其事。
现代文：我住在他的家中，本想给他延长三百年的阳寿，并使他升至三品官。可我被他的父母逼迫，不能够在人世间久住，因此没办法把他的这两件事情完成。
English: I was living in his home, and I wanted to extend his three-hundred-year longevity and raise him to the third grade, but I was forced by his parents to live on earth for a long time, so I couldn't accomplish these two things for him.

古文：今天女幸至，为与之钱五百万，与官至五品，无使过此，恐不胜之，安道命薄耳。
现代文：今天有幸看到你来此，那么就请你给他五百万钱，再给他个五品官吧。官职不能超过五品，高了恐怕他难以胜任韦安道命薄呵！
English: Today I have the honor to see you here, so please give him five million money and give him a five-grade official. The official position cannot exceed five grades, and if it is too high, I am afraid he will not be able to fulfill Wei'an Road's destiny!

古文：因而命安道出，使拜天后。
现代文：于是，后土夫人把韦安道叫出来，教他拜见则天皇后。
English: As a result, Lady Houchi called Wei Ando out and told him to meet the Empress Dowager.

古文：夫人谓天后曰：此天女之属部人也，当受其拜。
现代文：夫人又对天后说：这人是天女的部属呵，应当受他一拜。
English: The lady also said to the Queen of Heaven: "This man is a subordinate of the Queen of Heaven, he should be worshipped.

古文：天后进退，色若不足而受之。于是诺而去。
现代文：天后进退两难，神情不大愿意地接受了韦安道的礼拜，应允下来之后转身离去。
English: Faced with a dilemma, the Empress reluctantly accepted the Wei'an prayer, agreed to it, and then turned around and left.

古文：夫人谓安道曰：以郎常善画，某为郎更益此艺，可成千世之名耳。
现代文：夫人对韦安道说：因为你善于绘画，所以我想让你的技艺提高一步，以至能够千古留名。
English: His wife said to Wei Andao, "Because you are good at painting, I want you to improve your skills so that you can be famous forever."

古文：因居安道于一小殿，使垂帘设幕，召自古帝王及功臣之有名者于前，令安道图写。
现代文：接着，她把韦安道安置在一座小殿堂内，派人设置帘帐帷幕，将自古以来的帝王及功臣中的佼佼者召至面前，让韦安道画像。
English: Next, she placed Wei'an Road in a small hall, sent someone to set up a curtain curtain, and invited emperors and heroes from ancient times to come to the front and let Wei'an Road be painted.

古文：凡经月余，悉得其状，集成二十卷，于是安道请辞去。夫人命车驾，于所都城西，设离帐祖席，与安道诀别。
现代文：一共过了一个多月，这些人的容貌全被韦安道描画下来，集成了整整二十卷。于是，韦安道请求离去，夫人派了车马，于都城西边，派人安设饯行的帷帐和席筵，与安道诀别。
English: After a total of more than a month, these people's faces were all drawn down by Wei An Dao, integrating a full twenty volumes. Therefore, Wei An Dao asked to leave, and his wife sent a carriage and horse to the west of the capital, and sent someone to set up the curtains and mats to bid farewell to Ando.

古文：涕泣执手，情若不自胜，并遗以金玉珠宝，盈载而去。
现代文：夫人拉着韦安道的手泪流满面，情意绵绵不能自已，并赠送不少金玉珠宝，让他满载而归。
English: His wife held Wei'an Dao's hand with tears streaming down her face, unable to contain herself, and presented him with a lot of gold and jade jewelry so that he could return home with a full load.

古文：安道既至东都，入建春门，闻金吾传令，于洛阳城中访韦安道，已将月余。
现代文：韦安道回到洛阳，刚进建春门，就听见金吾传令说：天后派人在洛阳城里寻访韦安道，已经快一个月了。
English: Wei'an Road returned to Luoyang, and as soon as he entered Jianchun Gate, he heard Kingu's message saying: "It's been almost a month since the Queen of Heaven sent someone to Luoyang City to search for Wei'an Road.

古文：既至，谒天后。
现代文：韦安道急忙进宫拜谒天后。
English: Wei'an Road rushed into the palace to pay homage to the queen.

古文：坐小殿见之，且述前梦，与安道所叙同，遂以安道为魏王府长史，赐钱五百万。
现代文：天后坐在一座小殿里接见了他，并将自己不久前作的一个梦向他述说了一遍，与安道所讲的完全相同。当即，她便任命韦安道为魏王府长史，赐赏五百万钱。
English: The Empress Dowager sat in a small hall to receive him and told him about a dream she had recently had, which was exactly the same as what Ando had told her. Immediately, she appointed Wei Ando as the chief historian of the Wei royal court and rewarded him with five million yuan.

古文：取安道所画帝王功臣图视之，与秘府之旧者皆验，至今行于代焉。
现代文：她拿过韦安道所画的帝王功臣图仔细观赏一番，认为与秘阁中所珍藏的旧画图完全一样。
English: She took a close look at Wei An Dao's painting of the emperor and his meritorious soldiers, and thought that it was exactly the same as the old painting treasured in the secret cabinet.

古文：天策中，安道竟卒于官。
现代文：武周天策年间，韦安道竟然死于长史任上。
English: During Wu Zhou's reign of terror, Wei An Dao actually died while he was in charge of Changshi.

