古文：○硃守殷硃守殷，少事唐庄宗为奴，名曰会兒。庄宗读书，会兒常侍左右。
现代文：朱守殷，年轻时事奉唐庄宗为奴仆，名叫会儿，唐庄宗读书，会儿常在一旁侍奉。
English: Zhu Shouyin, when he was young, served Tangzhuangzong as a slave, his name was Po, Tangzhuangzong studied, Po often served on the side.

古文：庄宗即位，以其厮养为长直军，以守殷为军使，故未尝经战阵之用。
现代文：唐庄宗即位，把他收养的人编为长直军，任命朱守殷焉军使，因此不曾经历战阵的考验。
English: When Tang Zhuangzong ascended the throne, he organized his adopted people into the Changzhi Army and appointed Zhu Shou Yin Yan as the military envoy. Therefore, he did not experience the test of battle.

古文：然好言人阴私长短以自结，庄宗以为忠，迁蕃汉马步军都虞候，使守德胜。
现代文：但他喜好谈论别入的隐私长短来取信庄宗，唐庄宗认为他忠诚，升任蕃汉马步军都虞候，派他守德胜。
English: However, he liked to talk about the length of time he spent in seclusion to win the trust of Zhuang Zong. Tang Zhuang Zong considered him to be loyal and promoted him to the position of commander of the horse cavalry and infantry of the Han Dynasty, and sent him to guard Desheng.

古文：王彦章攻德胜，守殷无备，遂破南城，庄宗骂曰： 驽才，果误予事！ 
现代文：王彦章攻打德胜，朱守殷没有防备，于是南城失守，唐庄宗骂他说： 蠢才，果然误了我的事！ 
English: Wang Yanzhang attacked Desheng, Zhu Shouyin was unprepared, so Nancheng was lost, and Tang Zhuangzong scolded him: "You fool, you really missed my point!"

古文：明宗请以守殷行军法，庄宗不听。
现代文：唐明宗请求对朱守殷施行军法，唐庄宗不接受。
English: Tang Mingzong requested that military law be enforced against Zhu Shouyin, but Tang Zhuozong did not accept this.

古文：同光二年，领镇武军节度使。
现代文：同光二年，朱守殷兼任镇武军节度使。
English: In the second year of Tongguang, Zhu Shouyin also served as the festival envoy of the town military.

古文：是时，庄宗初入洛，守殷巡检校京师，恃恩骄恣，凌侮勋旧，与伶人景进相为表里。
现代文：这时，唐庄宗刚进洛阳，朱守殷巡逻检查京师，仗恃恩宠骄横放肆，凌辱功臣元老，与伶人景进里外相应。
English: At this time, Tang Zhuangzong had just entered Luoyang, and Zhu Shouyin was patrolling and inspecting the Beijing division. He was arrogant and presumptuous, and insulted the meritorious veterans, corresponding to the entry and exit of Xuanrenjing.

古文：魏王继岌已杀郭崇韬，进诬硃友谦与崇韬谋反，庄宗遣守殷围其第而杀之。
现代文：魏王李继岌杀掉郭崇韬后，景进诬陷朱友谦和郭崇韬谋反，唐庄宗派遣朱守殷包围朱友谦的家把他杀掉。
English: After Wei King Li killed Guo Chongxuan, Jingjin framed Zhu Youqian and Guo Chongxuan for plotting a rebellion. Tang Zhuozong sent Zhu Shouyin to surround Zhu Youqian's home and kill him.

古文：是时，明宗自镇州来朝，居于私第。
现代文：适时，唐明宗从镇州前来朝拜，住在自己家中。
English: At the right time, Tang Mingzong came from Zhenzhou to worship and lived in his own home.

古文：庄宗方惑群小，疑忌大臣，遣守殷伺察明宗动静。
现代文：唐庄宗正受众多小人的蛊惑，猜忌大臣，就派朱守殷窥视唐明宗的动静。
English: Tangzhuang Sect was under the spell of many villains. Suspicious of the minister, he sent Zhu Shouyin to spy on the activities of Tangming Sect.

古文：守殷阴使人告明宗曰： 位高人臣者身危，功盖天下者不赏，公可谓位高而功著矣。
现代文：朱守殷暗中派人告诉唐明宗说： 职位太高的臣子自身危险，功劳倾盖天下的人受不到奖赏，你可说是位高功颢了。
English: Zhu Shouyin secretly sent someone to tell Tang Mingzong, "A vassal with too high a position is a danger to himself. Those who have made great contributions to the world cannot receive rewards. You can be said to be a high achiever."

古文：宜自图归籓，无与祸会也！ 
现代文：应当自己谋划返回藩镇，不要去碰灾祸！ 了。
English: You should make your own plans to return to the hanzhen, don't go and meet with disaster!

古文：明宗曰： 吾洛阳一匹夫尔，何能为也！ 
现代文：应当自己谋划返回藩镇，不要去碰灾祸！ 能做什么！ 
English: You should make your own plans to return to the town, don't go to meet disaster! What can you do!

古文：既而明宗卒反于魏。
现代文：不久唐明宗终于在魏州反叛。
English: Not long after, Tang Mingzong finally rebelled in Weizhou.

古文：庄宗东讨，守殷将骑军阵宣仁门外以俟驾。
现代文：唐庄宗去柬面讨伐，朱守殷率骑兵在宣仁门外候驾。
English: Tang Zhuangzong went to Cambodia to fight, Zhu Shouyin led the cavalry to wait outside Xuanren Gate.

古文：郭从谦作乱，犯兴教门以入，庄宗亟召守殷等军，守殷按军不动。
现代文：郭从谦作乱，攻破兴教门入城，唐庄宗急召朱守殷等军，朱守殷按兵不动。
English: Guo Congxian made a disturbance, broke through the Xingjiao Gate and entered the city. Tang Zhuozong urgently summoned Zhu Shouyin and other troops, and Zhu Shouyin did not move.

古文：庄宗独与诸王宦官百馀人射贼，守殷等终不至，方移兵憩北邙山下，闻庄宗已崩，即驰入宫中，选载嫔御、宝货以归，纵军士劫掠，遣人趣明宗入洛。
现代文：唐庄宗独自和各位王子宦官一百多人射杀贼军，朱守殷等人始终没去。朱守殷正移兵在北邙山下休息，听说唐庄宗已死，随即驰马到宫中，选载嫔妃、财宝而回，放纵士兵劫掠，派人催唐明宗进入洛阳。
English: Tang Zhuozong alone and all the princes and eunuchs shot more than a hundred thieves, but Zhu Shouyin and others never went. Zhu Shouyin was moving the soldiers to rest at the foot of Beilun Mountain. When he heard that Tang Zhuozong was dead, he immediately rode to the palace, picked up his concubines and treasures, and returned. He allowed the soldiers to plunder and sent someone to urge Tang Mingzong to enter Luoyang.

古文：明宗即位，拜守殷同中书门下平章事、河南尹、判六军诸卫事。
现代文：唐明宗登位，拜授朱守殷为同中书门下平章事、河南尹、判六军诸卫事。
English: The Tang and Ming dynasties ascended to the throne, and Zhu Shouyin was awarded the title of Ping Zhangji, Henan Yin, and the six military guards.

古文：明年，迁宣武军节度使。
现代文：第二年，升任宣武军节度使。
English: In the following year, he was promoted to the post of the Xingwu army's festival envoy.

古文：九月，明宗诏幸汴州，议者喧然，或以为征吴，或以为东诸侯有屈强者，将制置之。
现代文：九月，唐明宗下韶临幸汴州，议事的人议论纷纷，有的认为是征昊，有的认为是束面的诸侯有太倔强的，将要处置他们。
English: In September, the Tang and Ming dynasties made an official visit to Xingyanzhou, and the people in charge of the meeting had a lot of discussions. Some thought it was Zhao Hao, while others thought that the feudal lords were too stubborn, and that they would be dealt with.

古文：守殷尤不自安，乃杀都指挥使马彦超，闭城反。
现代文：朱守殷尤其不安，于是杀掉指挥使马彦超，关闭城门反叛。
English: Zhu Shouyin was particularly uneasy, so he killed the commanding officer, Ma Yanchao, and closed the city gate to the rebels.

古文：明宗行至京水，闻守殷反，遣范延光驰兵傅其城。汴人开门纳延光，守殷自杀其族，乃引颈命左右斩之。
现代文：唐明宗走到京水，听说朱守殷反叛，派范延光率兵飞驰逼近城下，汴州人开门放进范延光，朱守殷亲手杀掉他的族人，于是伸长脖子命令手下人杀掉他。
English: Tang Mingzong walked to Jingshui, heard that Zhu Shouyin was rebelling, sent Fan Yanguang and his soldiers to approach the city. The Zhangzhou people opened the door and let Fan Yanguang in. Zhu Shouyin killed his people with his own hands, so he stretched his neck and ordered his men to kill him.

古文：明宗至汴州，命鞭其尸，枭首于市七日，传徇洛阳。
现代文：唐明宗到达汴州，下令鞭打他的尸体，割下头颅在街上示众七天，送回洛阳示众。
English: When Tang Mingzong arrived in Zhangzhou, he ordered his corpse to be flogged and his severed head to be paraded in the streets for seven days before being sent back to Luoyang.

古文：守殷之将反也，召都指挥使马彦超与计事，彦超不从，守殷杀之。
现代文：朱守殷将要反叛时，召都指挥使马彦超和他商议，马彦超不从命，朱守殷杀掉他。
English: When Zhu Shouyin was about to rebel, he summoned the commander of the capital to have Ma Yanchao consult with him. Ma Yanchao did not follow his orders, and Zhu Shouyin killed him.

古文：明宗怜彦超之死，以其子承祚为洺州长史。
现代文：唐明宗哀怜马彦超的死，任命他的儿子马承柞为沼州长史。
English: Tang Mingzong mourned the death of Ma Yanchao and appointed his son Ma Chengyu as the governor of Numa.

古文：○董璋
现代文：董璋，不知他的祖先是谁。
English: I don't know who his ancestors were.

古文：董璋，不知其世家何人也。少与高季兴、孔循俱为汴州富人李让家僮。
现代文：小时候和高季兴、孔循都是汴州富人李让的家僮。
English: When he was a child, Gao Jixing and Kong Cun were the children of Li Zhan, a rich man from Zhangzhou.

古文：梁太祖镇宣武，养让为子，是为硃友让。
现代文：梁太祖镇守宣武，收养李让作儿子，造就是朱友让。
English: Liang Taizu, the warlord of Xuanwu, adopted Li Zhan as his son, creating Zhu You Zhan.

古文：其僮奴以友让故，皆得事梁太祖，璋以军功为指挥使。
现代文：他的僮奴因朱友让的缘故，都得以事奉梁太祖。董璋因军功担任指挥使。
English: His vassals were able to serve Liang Taizu because of Zhu Youjan. Dong Hao served as a commander because of his military service.

古文：晋李继韬以潞州叛降梁，末帝遣璋攻下泽州，即以璋为刺史。
现代文：晋李继韬以潞州反叛向梁投降，梁末帝派董璋攻克泽州，就任董璋为刺史。
English: Jin-Li-Ji'an surrendered to Liang with the Bozhou Rebellion, and Liang sent Dong Qi to invade Khezhou. Dong Qi became the leader of the rebellion.

古文：梁亡，璋事唐为邠宁节度使，与郭崇韬相善。
现代文：梁灭亡，董璋在唐任郇宁节度使，和郭崇韬相友善。
English: After Liang's death, Dong Xuan was appointed as the special envoy of Suining in Tang Dynasty. He was friendly with Guo Chongxuan.

古文：崇韬伐蜀，以璋为行营右厢马步军都虞候，军事大小，皆与参决。
现代文：郭崇韬伐蜀，任董璋为行营右厢马步军都虞候，军中事无论大小，都和他商量。
English: Guo Chongyi was in charge of the Shu siege, while Dong Xi was in charge of the right flank of the cavalry and infantry. He was consulted on all military matters, large and small.

古文：蜀平，以为剑南东川节度使，孟知祥镇西川。
现代文：蜀平定，任他为剑南束川节度使，孟知祥镇守西川。
English: Shu Pingding, appointed him as the Jiannan Sokchuan Setsudo envoy, and Meng Zhixiang as the guard of the West River.

古文：其后，二人有异志。
现代文：后来，两人有二心。
English: Later, the two had a falling out.

古文：安重诲居中用事，议者多言知祥必不为唐用，而能制知祥者璋也，往往称璋忠义，重诲以为然，颇优宠之，以故璋益横。
现代文：安重诲在朝中专权，议事的人多说孟知祥必定不能替唐出力，而能制服孟知祥的人是董璋，常常称赞董璋的忠义，安重诲认为是那样，很优宠他，因此董璋更加骄横。
English: An Chong Chao had absolute power in the court, and most of the people in the deliberation said that Meng Zhixiang could not work for Tang, but the person who could subdue Meng Zhixiang was Dong Xuan. He often praised Dong Xuan's loyalty. An Chong Chao thought that was the case and favored him very much, so Dong Xuan was even more arrogant.

古文：天成四年，明宗祀天南郊，诏两川贡助南郊物五十万，使李仁矩赍安重诲书往谕璋，璋诉不肯出，只出十万而已。
现代文：天成四年，唐明宗在南郊祭天，下韶书让两川进贡用于南郊的财物五十万，派李仁矩带着安重诲的信前去告诉董璋，董璋诉苦不愿拿出财物，只肯出十万而已。
English: In the fourth year of Tiancheng, when the Tang and Ming dynasties offered sacrifices to the heavens in the southern suburb, they issued an edict that the tributes from the two rivers should be used for 500,000 yuan worth of property in the southern suburb. They sent Li Ren Rong to go with a letter of reassurance to tell Dong Xuan that Dong Xuan did not want to take out the property, but was only willing to give 100,000 yuan.

古文：又因事欲杀仁矩，仁矩涕泣而免，归言璋必反。
现代文：又因事想杀掉李仁矩，李仁矩哭泣哀求得以幸免，回去说董璋必定反叛。
English: He also wanted to kill Li Renki for some reason. Li Renki cried and begged to be spared, and went back to say that Dong Ye would definitely rebel.

古文：其后使者至东川，璋益倨慢，使者还，多言璋欲反状。
现代文：后来使臣到东川，董璋更加傲慢，使臣回去，大多讲述董璋想要反叛的情况。
English: Later, when the envoys went to Dongchuan, Dong Xuan was even more arrogant. When the envoys returned, they mostly talked about how Dong Xuan wanted to rebel.

古文：重诲患之，乃稍择将吏为两川刺史，以精兵为其牙卫，分布其诸州。
现代文：安重诲对此担忧，于是逐渐挑选将吏担任两川刺史，以精兵为刺史牙卫，分布在各州。
English: An Chongyuan was worried about this, so he gradually selected generals to serve as the history of the two rivers, with elite soldiers as the guards of the history of the history, distributed in each state.

古文：又分阆州置保宁军，以仁矩为节度使，遣姚洪将兵千人从仁矩戍阆州。
现代文：又分割板州设置保宁军，任命李仁矩为节度使，派姚洪率兵一千人随李仁矩戍守阀州。
English: He also divided Banzhou and set up the Boryeong Army, appointed Li Renki as the commander of the army, and sent Yao Hong and a thousand soldiers to guard Banzhou with Li Renki.

古文：璋及知祥觉唐疑己，且削其地，遂连谋以反。
现代文：董璋和孟知祥察觉唐疑心自己，而且割削他们的土地，于是合谋反叛。
English: Dong Xuan and Meng Zhixiang, sensing that Tang was suspicious of them and cutting off their land, conspired to rebel.

古文：璋因为其子娶知祥女以相结。
现代文：董璋因而替他的儿子娶孟知祥的女儿以便相互结交。
English: As a result, Dong Jun married Meng Zhixiang's daughter to his son in order to make friends with each other.

古文：又遣其将李彦钊扼剑门关为七砦，于关北增置关，号永定。
现代文：又派遣部将李彦钊扼守剑门关，建七个寨子，在关北增设关卡，号称永定。
English: The dispatching department also sent Li Yanqi to guard Jianmen Pass, built seven stockades, and added a checkpoint in the north of the pass, known as Yongding.

古文：凡唐戍兵东归者，皆遮留之，获其逃者，覆以铁笼，火炙之，或刲肉钉面，割心而啖。
现代文：凡是束归的唐守兵，都拦留他们，抓获逃跑的人，用铁笼关起来，用火烤他们，或者割肉钉脸，挖心来吃。
English: All the Tang guards who were returning home stopped them, captured the escapees, locked them in iron cages, roasted them with fire, or cut their faces and gouged their hearts to eat.

古文：长兴元年九月，知祥攻陷遂州，璋攻陷阆州执李仁矩、姚洪，皆杀之。
现代文：长兴元年九月，孟知祥攻陷遂州，董璋攻陷阗州，抓获李仁矩、姚洪，把他们全部杀掉。
English: In September of the first year of Changxing, Meng Zhixiang invaded Suizhou, and Dong Xuan invaded Zhangzhou, captured Li Renki and Yao Hong, and killed them all.

古文：初，璋等反，唐独诛璋家属，知祥妻子皆在成都，其疏属留京师者皆不诛。
现代文：当初，董璋等人反叛，唐只是诛杀董璋的家属，孟知祥的妻子儿女都在成都，他留在京师的速亲都没有被杀。
English: At first, when Dong Xuan and others rebelled, the Tang Dynasty only killed Dong Xuan's family members. Meng Zhixiang's wife and children were all in Chengdu, and none of his immediate relatives who remained in Beijing were killed.

古文：石敬瑭讨璋等，兵久无功，而自关以西馈运不给，远近劳敝，明宗患之。
现代文：石敬瑭讨伐董璋等人，很久没有建功，而剑门关以西运送军需不足，远近劳困，唐明宗对此很忧虑。
English: Shi Jingyao's crusade against Dong Yao and others had not been successful for a long time, and there was a shortage of military supplies to the west of Jianmen Pass, resulting in labor shortages. Tang Mingzong was very worried about this.

古文：安重诲自往督军，敬瑭不纳，重诲遂得罪死，敬瑭亦还。
现代文：安重诲亲自前去督军，石敬瑭不接纳，安重诲于是获罪被处死，石敬瑭也返回了。
English: An Chongyi personally went to the governor's army, but Shi Jingyi did not accept, so An Chongyi was convicted and executed, and Shi Jingyi also returned.

古文：明宗乃遣西川进奏官苏愿、东川军将刘澄西归，谕璋等使改过。
现代文：唐明宗于是派遣西川进奏官苏愿、东川军将刘澄西归，开导董璋等人让他们改过。
English: Tang Mingzong then dispatched the West River marching officer Su Wanyi and the East River army commander Liu Chengxi to the west, and the enlightener Dong Xi and others to let them change their ways.

古文：知祥遣人告璋，欲与俱谢过自归，璋曰： 唐不杀孟公家族，于西川恩厚矣。
现代文：孟知祥派人告诉董璋，想和他一起向朝廷负剂请罪，董璋说： 唐没有杀你孟公的家属，对西川的恩德深厚啊。
English: Meng Zhixiang sent someone to tell Dong Qi that he wanted to join him in pleading guilty to the imperial court. Dong Qi said: Tang did not kill your family members of Meng Gong, and he was deeply grateful to Xichuan.

古文：我子孙何在？
现代文：我的子孙在哪里？
English: Where are my children and grandchildren?

古文：何谢之有！ 
现代文：有什么可告罪的！ 
English: There's a case to answer!

古文：璋由此疑知祥卖己。
现代文：董璋因此跹心孟知祥出卖自己。
English: As a result, Dong Hao felt compelled to betray Meng Zhixiang.

古文：三年四月，以兵万人攻知祥，战于弥牟，璋大败，还走梓州。
现代文：三年四月，率兵一万人进攻孟知祥，在弥牟交战，董璋大败，逃回梓州。
English: In April of the third year, he led ten thousand soldiers to attack Meng Zhixiang and fought in Yimou. He was soundly defeated and fled back to Zizhou.

古文：初，唐陵州刺史王晖代还过璋，璋邀留之。
现代文：当初，唐陵州刺史王晖被人代职回朝途中拜访董璋，董璋拦留他。
English: At first, Wang Yao, the governor of Tangling Prefecture, was sent to visit Dong Yao on his way back to the DPRK, but Dong Yao stopped him.

古文：至是，晖执璋杀之，传其首于知祥。
现代文：到适时，王晖抓获董璋杀掉，把他的头送给孟知祥。
English: At the right time, Wang Yao captured and killed Dong Xuan, and gave his head to Meng Zhixiang.

古文：○范延光范延光，字子瑰，相州临漳人也。
现代文：范延光字子坏，相州临漳人。
English: Fan Yanguang's character is bad. He is from Linyi, Jiangsu Province.

古文：唐明宗为节度使，置延光麾下，而未之奇也。
现代文：唐明宗任节度使，把范延光安置在手下，但并未觉得他有非凡之处。
English: Tang Mingzong appointed Fan Yanguang as a ceremonial envoy and placed him under his command, but he did not think there was anything extraordinary about him.

古文：明宗破郓州，梁兵方扼杨刘，其先锋将康延孝阴送款于明宗。
现代文：唐明宗攻破郫州，梁兵正扼守杨刘，梁的先锋将康延孝暗中向唐明宗投诚。
English: Tang Mingzong invaded Zhangzhou, Liang soldiers were guarding Yang Liu, and Liang's vanguard secretly made Kang Yanxiao pledge allegiance to Tang Mingzong.

古文：明宗求可以通延孝款于庄宗者，延光辄自请行，乃怀延孝蜡丸书，西见庄宗致之，且曰： 今延孝虽有降意，而梁兵扼杨刘者甚盛，未可图也，不如筑垒马家口以通汶阳。 
现代文：唐明宗寻求能够把康延孝的诚意送达唐庄宗的人，范延光主动请求前往，于是怀揣康延孝的蜡丸书，往西拜见唐庄宗将书呈上，并且说： 如今康延孝虽有投降的打算，但扼守杨刘的梁兵很强大，不可打他的主意。不如在马家口修筑堡垒以便联络汶阳。 
English: Tang Mingzong was looking for someone who could convey Kang Yanxiao's sincerity to Tang Zhuangzong. Fan Yanguang took the initiative to request a visit, so he carried Kang Yanxiao's wax ball book and went west to meet Tang Zhuangzong to present the book, and said: Although Kang Yanxiao has the intention of surrendering, the Liang soldiers who hold Yang Liu are very powerful and cannot defeat his idea. It would be better to build a fortress in Majiakou to contact Wenyang.

古文：庄宗以为然。
现代文：唐庄宗同意他的看法。
English: Tang Zhuozong agreed with him.

古文：垒成，梁遣王彦章急攻新垒。
现代文：堡垒建成，梁派王彦章急攻新垒。
English: When the fortress was completed, Liang sent Wang Yanzhang to storm the new fortress.

古文：明宗使延光间行求兵，夜至河上，为梁兵所得，送京师，下延光狱，搒掠数百，胁以白刃，延光终不肯言晋事。
现代文：唐明宗派范延光从小路去求援兵，晚上到达黄河，被梁兵抓获，送到京师，投进狱中，拷打几百次，用》威胁，范延光始终不肯吐露晋的情况。
English: Fan Yanguang, a member of the Tang and Ming sects, took a back road to call for reinforcements and reached the Yellow River in the evening. He was captured by Liang soldiers, sent to the Beijing Division, imprisoned, tortured hundreds of times, and threatened. Fan Yanguang always refused to reveal the situation in Jin.

古文：系之数月，稍为狱吏所获。
现代文：拘囚几个月后，他逐渐受到狱吏的保护。
English: After several months in custody, he gradually came under the protection of prison officers.

古文：庄宗入汴，狱吏去其桎梏，拜而出之。
现代文：唐庄宗进入汴州，狱吏去掉他的枷锁，迎拜并放了他。
English: When Tang Zhuozong entered Zhangzhou, the prison officers removed his shackles, bowed to him and released him.

古文：庄宗见延光，喜，拜检校工部尚书。
现代文：唐庄宗见到范延光，很高兴，拜任检校工部尚书。
English: Tang Zhuangzong was very happy to see Fan Yanguang. He was appointed as inspector of the school's engineering department.

古文：明宗时，为宣徽南院使。
现代文：唐明宗时，范延光担任宣徽南院使。
English: During the Tang and Ming dynasties, Fan Yanguang served as the envoy of the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：明宗行幸汴州，至荥阳，硃守殷反，延光曰： 守殷反迹始见，若缓之使得为计，则城坚而难近。
现代文：唐明宗去汴州，到达荣阳时，朱守殷反叛，范延光说： 朱守殷反叛的事刚刚暴露，如果不赶紧攻击，让他作好了准备，那么城池坚固将难以靠近。
English: When Tang Mingzong went to Zhangzhou and arrived in Rongyang, Zhu Shouyin rebelled. Fan Yanguang said, "The matter of Zhu Shouyin's rebellion has just been exposed. If we don't attack quickly and let him make preparations, then it will be difficult to approach the fortified city.

古文：故乘人之未备者，莫若急攻，臣请骑兵五百，驰至城下，以神速骇之。 
现代文：因此趁人没有防备时攻击，没有比急攻更好的，我请求给我五百骑兵，飞驰到城下，以神速震骇他。 
English: Therefore, when one is unprepared, it is better to attack, and there is nothing better than a sudden attack. I ask you to give me five hundred cavalry, to rush to the foot of the city and shake it at lightning speed.

古文：乃以骑兵五百，自暮疾驰至半夜，行二百里，战于城下。
现代文：于是率骑兵五百人，从傍晚急驰到半夜，行军二百里，在朱守殷的城下交战。
English: So he led five hundred cavalrymen, galloped from dusk to midnight, marched two hundred miles, and fought under the city of Zhu Shouyin.

古文：迟明，明宗亦驰至，汴兵望见天子乘舆，乃开门，而延光先入，犹巷战，杀伤甚众，守殷死，汴州平。
现代文：黎明，唐明宗也飞驰而到，汴州军队望见天子的卓驾，于是打开城门，而范延光先进城，还在巷战，杀伤很多，朱守殷死，汴州平定。
English: At dawn, Tang Mingzong also arrived at high speed. The Zhangzhou army saw the celestial son's speedy ride and opened the city gate. Fan Yanguang advanced to the city, still fighting in the streets, with many casualties. Zhu Shou Yan died, and Zhangzhou was pacified.

古文：明年，迁枢密使，出为成德军节度使。
现代文：第二年，升任枢密使，出任成德军节度使。
English: The following year, he was promoted to the position of Privy Counsellor, and he served as the military attaché to the German army.

古文：安重诲死，复召延光与赵延寿并为枢密使。
现代文：安重诲死，又召范延光和赵延寿同任枢密使。
English: After the death of An Chongyue, Fan Yanguang and Zhao Yanshou were also appointed to the same post of envoy.

古文：明宗问延光马数几何，对曰 骑军三万五千。 
现代文：唐明宗问范延光马匹有多少回答说： 骑兵有三万五千匹马。 
English: When Tang Mingzong asked Fan Yanguang how many horses he had, he replied, "The cavalry has 35,000 horses.

古文：明宗抚髀叹曰： 吾兵间四十年，自太祖在太原时，马数不过七千，庄宗取河北，与梁家战河上，马才万匹。
现代文：唐明宗摸着腿感叹说： 我在军队中四十年，唐太祖在太原时，马匹不过七千，唐庄宗攻取河北，和梁家在黄河交战，马纔一万匹。
English: Tang Mingzong touched his leg and sighed: I have been in the army for forty years. When Tang Taizu was in Taiyuan, there were only seven thousand horses. Tang Zhuozong conquered Hebei and fought with the Liang family in the Yellow River, with ten thousand horses.

古文：今有马三万五千而不能一天下，吾老矣，马多奈何！ 
现代文：如今有马三万五千匹却不能统一天下，我老了，马多又怎么样呢！ 
English: Now there are thirty-five thousand horses, but they can't be unified. I'm old, what about the horses?

古文：延光因曰： 臣尝计，一马之费，可养步卒五人，三万五千匹马，十五万兵之食也。 
现代文：范延光乘机说： 我曾计算遇，一匹马的花费，能养步兵五人，三万五千匹马，吃掉十五万士兵的粮食。 
English: Fan Yanguang took the opportunity to say: I once calculated that the cost of a horse could feed five infantrymen, thirty-five thousand horses, and the food of one hundred and fifty thousand soldiers.

古文：明宗曰： 肥战马而瘠吾人，此吾所愧也！ 
现代文：唐明宗说： 喂肥了战马而饿瘦了我的士兵，这是我感到羞愧的！ 
English: Tang Mingzong said, "I am ashamed to have fattened my horses while starving my soldiers!"

古文：夏州李仁福卒，其子彝超自立而邀旄节。
现代文：夏州李仁福死，他的儿子李彝超自立而希望做节度使。
English: Li Renfu of Xiazhou died, and his son, Li Yingchao, became independent and hoped to become a regent.

古文：明宗遣安从进代之，彝超不受代。
现代文：唐明宗派安从进代替他，李彝超不接受代任的命令。
English: Tang Ming Sect sent Zongjin An to replace him, and Li Yuchao did not accept the order to take his place.

古文：以兵攻之，久不克。
现代文：用兵攻打他，很久不能攻克。
English: Attack him with soldiers and you won't be able to defeat him for a long time.

古文：隰州刺史刘遂凝驰驿入见献策，言绥、银二州之人，皆有内向之意，请除二刺史以招降之。
现代文：隰州刺史刘遂凝驾着驿马进见献策，说绥、银二州的人，都有归顺朝廷的意思，请求任命两个刺史以便招降他们。
English: Liu Sui, the statesman of Zhangzhou, rode his horse to offer advice. He said that the people of Zhangzhou and Yinzhou both wanted to submit to the imperial court, and asked for the appointment of two statesmen in order to recruit them.

古文：延光曰： 王师问罪，本在彝超，夏州已破，绥、银岂足顾哉！
现代文：范延光说： 朝廷大军问罪，原本针对李彝超，夏州被攻破后，绥、银二州难道值得担忧！
English: Fan Yanguang said: The imperial court troops asked for punishment. Originally, it was aimed at Li Yuchao. After Xiazhou was breached, is it worth worrying about the rise of Handan and Yinzhou?

古文：若不破夏州，虽得绥、银，不能守也。 
现代文：如不攻破夏州，即使得到绥、银二州，也不能够把守。 
English: If we don't break through Xiazhou, even if we get the yang and silver, we won't be able to hold on to Yizhou.

古文：遂凝又请自驰入说彝超使出降，延光曰： 一遂凝，万一失之不足惜，所惜者朝廷大体也。 
现代文：刘遂凝又请求亲自驰马去说服李彝超让他出来投降，范延光说： 一个刘遂凝，万一失去，不值得可惜，可惜的是朝廷的体统。 
English: Liu Sui Rong also requested that he personally ride out to persuade Li Ying Chao to let him come out and surrender. Fan Yan Guang said: If Liu Sui Rong were to be lost, it would not be a pity, but it would be a pity for the dignity of the imperial court.

古文：是时，王淑妃用事，遂凝兄弟与淑妃有旧，方倚以蒙恩宠，所言无不听，而大臣以妃故，多不敢争，独延光从容沮止之。
现代文：这时，王淑妃专权，刘遂凝兄弟和淑妃有旧交，正依仗她蒙受恩宠，所有建议无不采纳，而大臣们因淑妃的缘故，大多不敢争执，只有范延光从容自如地阻止他。
English: At this time, Wang Shuxi had exclusive power, Liu Suiqing's brother and Shuxi had an old friendship, and they were relying on Shuxi to be favored. All suggestions were accepted, and most of the ministers did not dare to argue because of Shuxi. Only Fan Yanguang was able to stop him.

古文：明宗有疾，不能视朝，京师之人，汹汹异议，藏窜山谷，或寄匿于军营，有司不能禁。
现代文：唐明宗患病，不能管理朝政，京师的人，各种议论喧扰不安，有的逃窜到山谷中，有的寄藏在军营裹，官府不能禁止。
English: The Tang and Ming dynasties fell ill, unable to manage the imperial government, and the people of Beijing were distracted by all kinds of noisy and restless discussions. Some fled to the valley, some hid in military camps, and the government could not prohibit them.

古文：或劝延光以严法制之，延光曰： 制动当以静，宜少待之。 
现代文：有人劝范延光用严厉的刑法制止他们，范延光说： 应当以静制动，可以稍作等待。 
English: Some people advised Fan Yanguang to use the strict criminal law to stop them. Fan Yanguang said: You should use static braking, you can wait a little.

古文：已而明宗疾少间，京师乃定。
现代文：不久唐明宗的病势有所缓解，京师纔安定下来。
English: Soon, Tang Mingzong's illness eased, and the situation in Beijing stabilized.

古文：是时，秦王握兵骄甚，宋王弱而且在外，议者多属意于潞王。
现代文：适时，秦王手握兵权十分骄横，宋王软弱而且不在京师，议事的人多归心于潞王。
English: At the right time, the Qin king was very arrogant in holding the military power, the Song king was weak and was not in Beijing, and most of the people in the meeting were loyal to the king.

古文：延光惧祸之及也，乃求罢去。
现代文：范延光担心大祸临头，于是请求罢职离去。
English: Fan Yanguang was worried about the impending disaster, so he asked to resign and leave.

古文：延寿阴察延光有避祸意，亦遽求罢。
现代文：趟延寿暗中窥察范延光有避祸的想法，也急忙请求罢职。
English: At the time of Yan Shou's death, Fan Yan Guang had the idea of avoiding disaster, and also hastily requested to resign.

古文：明宗再三留之，二人辞益恳至，继之以泣。
现代文：唐明宗再三挽留他们，两人的言辞更加恳切，跟着哭起来。
English: Tang Mingzong repeatedly restrained them, and the two men's words became more earnest, followed by crying.

古文：明宗不得已，乃皆罢之，延光复镇成德，而用硃弘昭、冯赟为枢密使。
现代文：唐明宗迫不得已，就把他们两人都罢免了。范延光又镇守成德，而任命朱弘昭、冯赞做枢密使。
English: As a last resort, Emperor Mingzong dismissed both of them. Fan Yankuang kept Chengde and appointed Zhu Hongzhao and Feng Zhan as Privy Councilors.

古文：已而秦王举兵见诛，明宗崩，潞王反，杀愍帝，唐室大乱，弘昭、赟皆及祸以死。
现代文：不久秦王起兵被杀，唐明宗死，潞王反叛，杀掉唐愍帝，唐室大乱，朱弘昭、冯宝都遇祸而死。
English: Soon after, King Qin raised an army and was killed, Emperor Mingzong of Tang died, King Gong rebelled and killed Emperor Qian of Tang, the Tang dynasty was in turmoil, and Zhu Hongzhao and Feng Bao both died in accidents.

古文：末帝复诏延光为枢密使，拜宣武军节度使。
现代文：唐末帝又下诏书让范延光担任枢密使，拜任宣武军节度使。
English: The last emperor of the Tang Dynasty also issued an edict to make Fan Yanguang serve as a privy envoy, and to be appointed as the envoy of the Xuanwu army.

古文：天雄军乱，逐节度使刘延皓，遣延光讨平之，即以为天雄军节度使。
现代文：天雄军作乱，驱逐节度使刘延皓，朝廷派范延光讨伐平定了他们，就任命他焉天雄军节度使。
English: Tianxiong's army made a disturbance, and the expulsion of the festival made Liu Yanqi leave. The imperial court sent Fan Yanguang to fight and pacify them, and appointed him as the envoy of Tianxiong's army to the festival.

古文：延光常梦大蛇自脐入其腹，半入而掣去之，以问门下术士张生，张生赞曰： 蛇，龙类也，入腹内，王者之兆也。 
现代文：范延光曾经梦见大蛇从肚脐钻进他腹中，进去一半而拉出它，拿这事问他手下的术士张生，张生颂扬说： 蛇，和龙同类，进入你的腹中，这是称王的预兆。 
English: Fan Yanguang once dreamt that a big snake had entered his belly through his navel. He pulled it out halfway through. He asked his sorcerer Zhang Sheng about this. Zhang Sheng praised him and said, "A snake, the same kind as a dragon, entering your belly, this is the omen of being crowned king."

古文：张生自延光微时，言其必贵，延光素神之，常置门下。言多辄中，遂以其言为然，由是颇畜异志。
现代文：张生自从范延光微贱时，就预言他必定富贵，范延光素来觉得他神奇，常把他安置在身边，预言大多说中，因此认为他的话正确，从此颇有二心。
English: Zhang Sheng had been predicting that Fan Yanguang would be rich since he was very young. Fan Yanguang always thought he was magical and often placed him around him. Most of his predictions were right, so he thought his words were correct. Since then, he has been rather ambivalent.

古文：当晋高祖起太原，末帝遣延光以兵二万屯辽州，与赵延寿掎角。
现代文：当晋高祖在太原起兵时，唐末帝派范延光率兵二万人屯驻辽州，和赵延寿相应夹击敌人。
English: When Jin Gaozu raised an army in Taiyuan, the late Tang Emperor sent Fan Yanguang with 20,000 soldiers to Liaozhou, and Zhao Yanshou accordingly attacked the enemy.

古文：既而延寿先降，延光独不降。
现代文：不久趟延寿率先投降，范延光偏不投降。
English: Soon after, Yan Shou surrendered first, but Fan Yan Guang refused to surrender.

古文：高祖即位，延光贺表又颇后诸侯至，又其女为末帝子重美妃，以此遂怀反侧。
现代文：晋高祖登位，范延光的贺表又远在诸侯之后到达，而且他的女儿又是唐末帝儿子李重美的妃子，因此就心怀不安。
English: When Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, Fan Yanqing's congratulatory letter arrived long after the princes, and his daughter was the concubine of Emperor Tang's son, Li Chungmei, so he was worried.

古文：高祖封延光临清王以慰其心。
现代文：晋高祖加封范延光为临清王以使他安心。
English: In order to reassure him, the high-ranking ancestor added the title of Fan Yanguang to the Linqing King.

古文：有平山人秘琼者，为成德军节度使董温其衙内指挥使，后温其为契丹所虏，琼乃悉杀温其家族，瘗之一穴，而取其家赀巨万计，晋高祖入立，以琼为齐州防御使，橐其赀装，道出于魏。
现代文：有个平山人秘琼，担任成德军节度使董温其的衙内指挥使，后来董温其被契丹俘虏，秘琼就把董温其的家族全部杀掉，埋在一个坑裹，夺得他的家财以万计。晋高祖登位，任命秘琼为齐州防御使，秘琼带着他夺得的财产，取道魏州出来。
English: There was a man from Pingshan, Hijong, who served as the commander of the Chengde German army and made Dong Wenqi the commander of the imperial guard. Later, Dong Wenqi was captured by the Khitan. Hijong killed all of Dong Wenqi's family, buried them in a pit, and robbed his family of tens of thousands of dollars. When Emperor Gaozhu ascended to the throne, he appointed Hijong as the defense envoy of Chizhou. Hijong took his stolen property and left through Weizhou.

古文：延光阴遣人以书招之，琼不纳，延光怒，选兵伏境上，伺琼过，杀之于夏津，悉取其赀，以戍逻者误杀闻。
现代文：范延光暗中派人致信招纳他，秘琼不接受，范延光发怒，挑选士兵埋伏在疆界上，等秘琼经过，在夏津杀掉他，夺了他的全部资财，以戍守巡逻的士兵误杀了他上报。
English: Fan Yanguang secretly sent a letter to recruit him, but Pei Qiong did not accept it. Fan Yanguang became angry, selected soldiers to ambush on the border, waited for Pei Qiong to pass, killed him in Xiajin, took all his assets, and mistakenly killed him with the soldiers on patrol.

古文：由是高祖疑其必为乱，乃幸汴州。
现代文：因此晋高祖怀疑他势必作乱，于是前往汴州。
English: Therefore, Jin Gaozu suspected that he was bound to make trouble, so he went to Zhangzhou.

古文：天福二年六月，延光遂反，遣其牙将孙锐、澶州刺史冯晖，以兵二万距黎阳，掠滑、卫。
现代文：天福二年六月，范延光终于反叛，派遣牙将孙锐、澶州刺史冯晖，率兵二万人到黎阳，征战滑、卫二州。
English: In June of the second year of Tianfu, Fan Yanguang finally rebelled and dispatched Sun Rui, the commander-in-chief of the Fang, and Feng Qi, the governor of Zhangzhou, to lead 20,000 soldiers to Liyang to fight in Lishui and Weizhou.

古文：高祖以杨光远为招讨使，引兵自滑州渡胡梁攻之。
现代文：晋高祖任命杨光速为招讨使，率兵从滑州渡过胡梁攻打他。
English: Jin Gaozu appointed Yang Guanghui as his envoy, and led his troops across the Huliang River from Luzhou to attack him.

古文：锐轻脱无谋，兵行以娼女十余自随，张盖操扇，酣歌饮食自若。军士苦大热，皆不为用。
现代文：孙锐轻佻没有计谋，行军中随身带着十多个娼妓，打着伞拿着扇，一面酣唱，一面饮食，神态自如，士兵苦于天热，都不为他出力。
English: Sun Rui was frivolous and reckless. During the march, he took more than ten prostitutes with him. He carried an umbrella and a fan. While he was singing, he was eating. His demeanor was relaxed. The soldiers were suffering from the heat of the day and did not work hard for him.

古文：光远得谍者，询得其谋，诱锐等渡河，半济而击之，兵多溺死，锐、晖退走入魏，闭壁不复出。
现代文：杨光速捉到一个探子，探听到他们的情况，就引诱孙锐等人横渡黄河，渡了一半时攻打他们，士兵很多被沲死，孙锐、冯晖逃进魏州，关闭营垒不再出战。
English: Yang Guanghui caught a scout, heard about their situation, lured Sun Rui and others to cross the Yellow River, and attacked them when they were halfway across. Many soldiers were strangled to death. Sun Rui and Feng Xi fled to Weizhou, closed the camp and no longer went to war.

古文：初，延光反意未决，而得暴疾不能兴，锐乃阴召晖入城。迫延光反，延光惶惑，遂从之。
现代文：当初，范延光还未决意反叛时，而得暴病不能起来，孙锐于是暗中召冯晖进城，逼迫范延光反叛，范延光惶惑小安，就听从了他们。
English: At the beginning, when Fan Yanguang was still undecided about rebelling, and he was seriously ill and could not get up, Sun Rui secretly called Feng Xuan into the city to force Fan Yanguang to rebel. Fan Yanguang panicked and obeyed them.

古文：高祖闻延光用锐等以反，笑曰： 吾虽不武，然尝从明宗取天下，攻坚破强多矣。
现代文：晋高祖听说范延光用孙锐等人反叛，笑着说： 我虽说不会打仗，也曾随唐明宗夺取天下，攻坚破强的事经历很多了。
English: Jin Gaozu heard that Fan Yanguang used Sun Rui and others to rebel, and said with a smile: Although I will not fight, I have also conquered the world with the Tang Ming Dynasty, and I have experienced a lot of things.

古文：如延光已非我敌，况锐等兒戏邪？
现代文：像范延光已不是我的对手，何况孙锐等人的儿戏呢？
English: Like Fan Yanguang is no longer my rival, let alone the child's play of Sun Rui and others?

古文：行取孺子尔！ 
现代文：很快就要捕获逭小子了！ 
English: It's time to capture Toad Boy!

古文：乃决意讨之。
现代文：于是决意讨伐他们。
English: So he decided to fight them.

古文：延光初无必反意，及锐等败，延光遣牙将王知新赍表自归，高祖不见，以知新属武德司。
现代文：范延光当初并没有必定反叛的打算，孙锐等人被打败，范延光派牙将王知新带着奏表自愿归顺，晋高祖不接见，把王知新交付武德司。
English: Fan Yanguang did not have the intention to rebel at the beginning. Sun Rui and others were defeated. Fan Yanguang sent Wang Zhixin to voluntarily surrender with a report form. He did not meet with the founder of Jinguang University and handed Wang Zhixin over to the Department of Martial Arts.

古文：然魏城坚难下，攻之逾年不克，师老粮匮。
现代文：范延光又依附杨光速上表请求投降，没有答复，范延光于是坚守。
English: Fan Yanguang also adhered to Yang Guanghui's request to surrender, but there was no reply, so Fan Yanguang held out.

古文：宗正丞石帛上书极谏，请赦延光，愿以单车入说而降之。
现代文：晋用两百支箭射信到城中，全部赦免魏州人，招募能斩杀范延光的人。但魏州城坚尽，宗正丞石昂上书极力谏阻，请求赦免范延光，希望驾单车进城说服他投降。
English: Jin shot a letter with two hundred arrows into the city, pardoned all the people of Weizhou, and recruited people who could kill Fan Yanguang. However, the city of Weizhou was strong, and Zong Zheng Rong Shihang's letter strongly resisted, requesting a pardon for Fan Yanguang, hoping to drive a bicycle into the city to convince him to surrender.

古文：高祖亦悔悟。
现代文：晋高祖也悔悟了。
English: The founder of Jin Gao also repented.

古文：三年九月，使谒者入魏赦延光，延光乃降，册封东平郡王、天平军节度使，赐铁券。
现代文：三年九月，派人进入魏州城赦免范延光，范延光于是投降，册封为柬平郡王、天平军节度使，赐给铁券。
English: In September of the third year, he sent someone to enter the city of Weizhou to pardon Fan Yanguang. Fan Yanguang then surrendered and was awarded the title of the King of Kamping County and the Festival Envoy of the Tianping Army, and was given iron coupons.

古文：居数月来朝，因惭请老，以太子太师致仕。
现代文：遇了几个月前来朝见，因羞惭告老回家，以太子太师的职位辞官。
English: A few months ago, he came to see the emperor, but he was so ashamed that he had to go home, and he became the post-dictator of the Grand Empress Dowager Etheria.

古文：初，高祖赦降延光，语使者谓之曰： 许卿不死矣，若降而杀之，何以享国？ 
现代文：当初，晋高祖赦免范延光让他投降，告诉使臣对他说： 许你不死，如果投降而又杀掉你，我怎么能享有帝位？ 
English: At first, Emperor Gaozu pardoned Fan Yanguang and let him surrender, telling the envoy to say to him: "May you not die. If I surrender and kill you, how can I enjoy the imperial throne?"

古文：延光谋于副使李式，式曰： 主上敦信明义，许之不死，则不死矣。 
现代文：范延光和他的副使李式商议，李式说： 主上敦厚诚信明了大义，许诺不杀你，就不会杀你。 
English: Fan Yanguang and his vice-envoy, Li Shih, had a discussion. Li Shih said, "Lord Dunhuang is honest and knows what is right. If he promises not to kill you, he will not kill you."

古文：乃降。
现代文：于是投降。
English: So they surrendered.

古文：乃致仕居京师，岁时宴见，高祖待之与群臣无间，然心不欲使在京师。
现代文：等到辞官住在京师时，一年四时宴见宾客，晋高祖对他和对群臣一样，但心里不愿让他留在京师。
English: When the lexicographer came to live in Beijing Division, he was invited to a banquet at four o'clock every year. Jinguo Zu treated him the same as he did the other ministers, but in his heart he did not want him to stay in Beijing Division.

古文：岁馀，使宣徽使刘处让载酒夜过延光，谓曰： 上遣处让来时，适有契丹使至，北朝皇帝问晋魏博反臣何在，恐晋不能制，当锁以来，免为中国后患。 
现代文：一年多后，派宣徽使刘处让带着酒在晚上拜访范延光，对他说： 皇上派我刘处让来时，恰逢契丹的使臣到来，北朝皇帝询问晋魏博的反臣在哪里，怕晋不能控制他，应当锁上送来，以免成为中原的后患。 
English: More than a year later, Emperor Xuanzong sent Liu Chengzang to visit Fan Yanguang with wine in the evening and said to him: "When the emperor sent me Liu Chengzang, it coincided with the arrival of the Khitan envoys. The Northern Emperor asked where the anti-minister of Jin Weibo was. If Jin could not control him, he should lock him up and send him, so as not to become the scourge of the Central Plains.

古文：延光闻之泣下，莫知所为。
现代文：范延光听了哭起来，不知所措。
English: Fan Yanguang burst into tears and was at a loss for words.

古文：处让曰： 当且之洛阳，以避契丹使者。 
现代文：刘处让说： 你应当暂且去洛阳，藉以避开契丹使臣。 
English: Liu Shanjian said: You should go to Luoyang temporarily to avoid the Khitan envoys.

古文：延光曰： 杨光远留守河南，吾之仇也。
现代文：范延光说： 杨光速留守河南，他是我的仇人。
English: Fan Yanguang said: Yang Guangrui quickly left Henan, he is my enemy.

古文：吾有田宅在河阳，可以往乎？ 
现代文：我有田：乞在河旸，可以去那里吗？ 
English: I have a field: I'm begging in the river, can I go there?

古文：处让曰： 可也。 乃挈其帑归河阳。其行辎重盈路，光远利其赀，果图之。
现代文：刘处让说： 可以， 于是带着他的钱财回河阳，回去时包裹行李满路，杨光速贪图他的资财，果然算计他。
English: Liu Duanzhang said: Yes, so he took his money and went back to Heyang. When he returned, he packed his luggage all the way. Yang Guanghui coveted his wealth and really counted on him.

古文：因奏曰： 延光反覆奸臣，若不图之，非北走胡则南走吴越，请拘之洛阳。 高祖犹豫未决。
现代文：因而上奏说： 范延光是反复无常的奸臣，如果不除掉他，那他不是北逃到胡地就是南逃到昊越，请求把他拘囚在洛阳 普高祖犹豫不决。
English: Therefore, the report said: Fan Yanguang is a capricious traitor. If he is not eliminated, he will either flee north to Hudi or south to Haowei. Pu Gaozhu hesitated to request that he be detained in Luoyang.

古文：光远兼镇河阳，其子承勋知州事，乃遣承勋以兵胁之使自裁。
现代文：杨光速兼镇河阳，他的儿子杨承勋知州事，于是派杨承勋率兵胁迫他自杀。
English: Yang Guangkai was also the mayor of Heyang, and his son Yang Chengxun knew the state affairs, so he sent Yang Chengxun and his soldiers to coerce him to commit suicide.

古文：延光曰： 天子赐我铁券，许之不死，何得及此？ 
现代文：范延光说： 天子赐给我铁券，许诺不杀我，怎么能这样？ 
English: Fan Yanguang said, "God has given me a golden ticket and promised not to kill me. How can this be?

古文：乃以壮士驱之上马，行至浮桥，推堕水溺死，以延光自投水死闻，因尽取其赀。
现代文：杨承勋就让强壮的士兵逼他上马，走到浮桥上时，把他推落到河中淹死，以范延光投水自杀上报，因而夺得他的全部财产。
English: Yang Chengxun let the strong soldiers force him to mount a horse, and when he reached the pontoon bridge, he pushed him down into the river and drowned him. He committed suicide by throwing himself into the water to report to Fan Yanguang, thus seizing all of his property.

古文：高祖以适会其意，不问，为之辍朝，赠太傅。
现代文：晋高祖因正合心意，并不追间，为他的去世停止上朝，赠官为太傅。
English: Due to the fact that it was his heart's desire, Emperor Gaozong did not follow suit, and because of his death, Emperor Gaozong did not ascend to the throne. Emperor Gaozong bestowed Taifu to Emperor Gaozong.

古文：水运军使曹千获其流尸于缪家滩，诏许归葬相州。已葬，墓辄崩，破其棺椁，头颅皆碎。
现代文：水运军使曹干在缪家滩找到范延光漂流的尸体，下诏准许送回相州安葬，安葬后，墓就塌了，砸破了棺材，头颅全被砸碎了。
English: The water transport army sent Cao Gan to find Fan Yanguang's drifting corpse on Mijia Beach, and issued a decree to allow it to be sent back to Xiangzhou for burial. After the burial, the tomb collapsed, breaking the coffin, and the head was completely crushed.

古文：初，秘琼杀董温其取其赀，延光又杀琼而取之，而终以赀为光远所杀，而光远亦不能免也。
现代文：当初，秘琼杀死董温其夺取他的资财，范延光又杀死秘琼夺取资财，而最终因资财被杨光速杀死，而杨光速也不能幸免。
English: At first, He Qiong killed Dong Wenqi to seize his wealth, Fan Yanguang killed He Qiong to seize his wealth, and finally he was killed by Yang Guangji for his wealth, and Yang Guangji could not be spared.

古文：当延光反时，有李彦珣者，为河阳行军司马，张从宾反河阳，彦珣附之，从宾败，彦珣奔于魏，延光以为步军都监，使之守城。
现代文：当范延光反叛时，有个叫李彦殉的人，担任河阳行军司马，张从宾在河阳反叛，李彦殉归附他，张从宾失败，李彦殉逃奔到魏州，范延光任命他为步军都监，派他守城。
English: When Fan Yanguang rebelled, there was a man named Li Yanjie, who served as the Sima of the march of Heyang, Zhang Congbin rebelled in Heyang, Li Yanjie joined him, Zhang Congbin failed, Li Yanjie fled to Weizhou, Fan Yanguang appointed him as the inspector of the marching army and sent him to defend the city.

古文：招讨使杨光远知彦珣邢州人也，其母尚在，乃遣人之邢州，取其母至城下，示彦珣以招之，彦珣望见，自射杀之。
现代文：招讨使杨光速知道李彦殉是邢州人，他的母亲还在邢州，就派人到邢州，抓来他的母亲带到城下，让李彦殉看，以便招降他，李彦殉望见母亲，亲自把母亲射死。
English: The solicitation made Yang Guanghui know that Li Yanjie was a native of Zhangzhou, and his mother was still in Zhangzhou. He sent someone to Zhangzhou to capture his mother and take her to the outskirts of the city to let Li Yanjie see him in order to recruit him. Li Yanjie wanted to see his mother and personally shot his mother to death.

古文：及延光出降，晋高祖拜彦珣房州刺史，大臣言彦珣杀母当诛，高祖以谓赦令已行，不可失信。
现代文：等到范延光出城投降时，晋高祖拜任李彦殉为房州刺史，大臣们说李彦殉杀死母亲应当处死，晋高祖认为赦令已传出，不能失信。
English: By the time Fan Yanguang left the city to surrender, Jin Gao Zu Bai Ren Li Yan Jie was the history of Fangzhou. The ministers said that Li Yan Jie should be put to death for killing his mother. Jin Gao Zu believed that the pardon order had been issued and could not lose faith.

古文：后以坐赃诛。
现代文：后来李彦殉犯贪污罪被杀。
English: Li Yan was later killed as a martyr for the crime of corruption.

古文：呜呼，甚哉，人性之慎于习也！
现代文：啊，人的本性必须警惕流于习俗是多么重要啊！
English: Ah, how important it is for human nature to beware of drifting into custom!

古文：故圣人于仁义深矣，其为教也，勤而不怠，缓而不迫，欲民渐习而自趋之，至于久而安以成俗也。
现代文：因此圣人对于仁义有很深的理解，他们进行教化，勤勉而不懈怠，舒缓而不急迫，想使百姓逐渐习惯而自己趋向仁义，以至于时间一久就相安成俗。
English: Therefore, sages have a deep understanding of benevolence and righteousness. They carry out enlightenment, diligent but not slack, soothing but not urgent, and want to make the people gradually get used to and tend to benevolence and righteousness themselves, so that over time they will become accustomed to each other.

古文：然民之无知，习见善则安于为善，习见恶则安于为恶。
现代文：但百姓无知，经常见到善就安于行善，经常见到恶就安于作恶。
English: But the people are ignorant; they often see good and are content to do good, and they often see evil and are content to do evil.

古文：五代之乱，其来远矣。
现代文：五代的动乱，由来已速。
English: Five generations of turmoil have come and gone.

古文：自唐之衰，干戈饥馑，父不得育其子，子不得养其亲。
现代文：自从唐朝衰落，兵祸饥荒不断，父亲不能养育儿子，儿子不能赡养他的父母。
English: Since the decline of the Tang Dynasty, the military disaster and famine have continued, the father cannot raise his son, and the son cannot support his parents.

古文：其始也，骨肉不能相保，盖出于不幸，因之礼义日以废，恩爱日以薄，其习久而遂以大坏，至于父子之间，自相贼害。
现代文：开始的时候，骨肉之间不能互相保护，大概是事出不幸，因此礼义日益废弃，恩爱日益浅薄，这种习俗长久了就导致风气大坏，纵致父子之间自相残害。
English: At the beginning, the flesh and blood could not protect each other, probably due to misfortune. As a result, etiquette became more and more obsolete, and love became more and more shallow. If this custom lasted for a long time, it would lead to a very bad culture, including the self-mutilation between father and son.

古文：五代之际，其祸害不可胜道也。
现代文：五代的时候，这样的祸害说都说不完。
English: In five generations, there is no end to the tales of such evil.

古文：夫人情莫不共知爱其亲，莫不共知恶于不孝，然彦珣弯弓射其母，高祖从而赦之，非徒彦珣不自知为大恶，而高祖亦安焉不以为怪也，岂非积习之久而至于是欤！《语》曰： 性相近，习相远。 
现代文：人之常情没有人不懂得爱他的亲人，没有人不懂得憎恶不孝，但李彦殉弯弓射死他的母亲，晋高祖随后又赦免了他，不只是李彦殉自己不懂得这是最大的罪恶，而晋高祖也对此心安理得不以为怪，难道不是积习太久纔导致这样的吗！《论语》说： 性相近，习相速。 
English: No one does not know how to love his relatives, no one does not know how to hate the filial piety, but Li Yan Jie shot his mother with a curved bow, and Jinguo Zu subsequently pardoned him. It is not only Li Yan Jie himself who does not understand that this is the greatest sin, but Jinguo Zu is also not surprised by this peace of mind. Is it not the accumulation of learning for too long that has led to this? "Analects" said: Sex is similar, learning is fast.

古文：至其极也，使人心不若禽兽，可不哀哉！
现代文：到达极点，使得人心不如禽兽，能不悲哀吗！
English: Can it not be sad to reach the extreme, making the human heart not as good as a beast!

古文：若彦珣之恶，而恬然不以为怪，则晋出帝之绝其父，宜其举世不知为非也。
现代文：像李彦殉这样的罪恶，而心安理得不以为怪，那么晋出帝杀死父亲，也难怪普天下都不知道这是大逆不道了。
English: It's not surprising that Li Yanjie would commit such a crime when he was at peace with himself, so it's no wonder that the whole world doesn't know that Emperor Jinzhi killed his father.

古文：○娄继英
现代文：娄继英，不知是哪里人。
English: Hao Jieying, I don't know who he is.

古文：娄继英，不知何许人也。历梁、唐，为绛、冀二州刺史、北面水陆转运使、耀州团练使。晋高祖时，为左监门卫上将军。
现代文：在梁、唐做官，任绛、冀二州刺史、北面水陆转运使、耀州团练使。晋高祖时，任左监门卫上将军。
English: He served as an official in Liang and Tang Dynasties, and was appointed as the chief historian of Min, Jizhou, Humen, and Yaozhou. When he was promoted to Gaozu, he was appointed as the superior general of the left guard.

古文：继英子妇，温延沼女也，自明宗时诛其父韬，延沼兄弟废居于许，心常怨望。
现代文：娄继英的儿媳，是温延沼的女儿，自从唐明宗诛杀他的父亲温韬，温延沼兄弟就被免官居住在许州，心中常怀怨恨。
English: Zou Jieying's daughter-in-law was the daughter of Wen Yan Numa. Ever since Tang Mingzong assassinated his father, Wen Yan Numa, the brothers of Wen Yan Numa were dismissed from their posts and resided in Huzhou, harboring resentment in their hearts.

古文：及范延光反，继英有弟为魏州子城都虞候，延光遣人以蜡书招继英，继英乃遣延沼入魏见延光，延光大喜，与之信箭，使阴图许。
现代文：等到范延光反叛时，娄继英有个弟弟任魏州子城都虞候，范延光派人带着蜡书招纳娄继英，娄继英于是派温延沼进魏州见范延光，范延光非常高兴，让他暗中谋取许州。
English: When Fan Yanguang rebelled, Fan Jieying had a younger brother named Huizhou Zicheng Dudu. Fan Yanguang sent someone with a wax book to recruit Fan Jieying. Fan Jieying then sent Wen Yanmu into Wei Zhou to meet Fan Yanguang. Fan Yanguang was very happy and let him secretly seek out Huzhou.

古文：延沼与其弟延浚、延衮募不逞之徒千人，期以攻许。
现代文：温延沼和弟弟温延浚、温延衮招募一千不得志的人，期望用他们攻取许州。
English: Wen Yan Numa and his younger brothers, Wen Yan Jun and Wen Yan Jie, recruited a thousand people who had no ambition, hoping to use them to conquer Huzhou.

古文：而许州节度使苌从简以延光之反，疑有应者，为备甚严。
现代文：而许州节度使苌从简因范延光的反叛，担心有响应的人，防备很严。
English: However, the Xuzhou Festival has caused the rebellion of Fan Yanguang, who is worried about the response, and the defense is very strict.

古文：延沼未及发，延光蜡书事泄于京师，继英惶恐不自安，乃出奔许。
现代文：温延沼还没来得及出兵，范延光蜡书的事泄露到京师，娄继英惶恐不安，于是出逃到许州。
English: Wen Yan Numa did not have time to send troops, the matter of Fan Yan Guang's wax book was leaked to the Beijing division, Zou Ji Ying was panicked and uneasy, so he fled to Xuzhou.

古文：高祖下诏招慰之，使复位，继英惧不敢出。
现代文：酱高祖下诏招降抚慰他，让他官复原位，娄继英害怕而不敢出来。
English: So Gaozhu issued an edict to appease him and restore him to his original position. He was afraid and did not dare to come out.

古文：温氏兄弟谋杀继英以自归，延沼以其女故不忍。
现代文：温氏兄弟谋划杀掉娄继英而主动归顺，温延沼因他女儿的缘故不忍心。
English: Wen's brothers plotted to kill Zou Jiying and voluntarily surrendered, but Wen Yanmu could not bear to do so because of his daughter.

古文：张从宾反于洛阳，延沼兄弟乃与继英俱投从宾于汜水。
现代文：张从实在洛阳反叛，温延沼兄弟于是和娄继英都去汜水投奔张从宾。
English: Zhang Zicheng rebelled against Luoyang, so the Wen Yanmo brothers and Zou Jieying all went to Surabaya to join Zhang Zongbin.

古文：继英知温氏之初欲杀己也，反谮延沼兄弟于从宾，从宾杀之。
现代文：娄继英得知温氏最初想杀掉自己，就向张从宾诬告温延沼兄弟，张从宾就把他们杀掉了。
English: When Zou Jieying learned that Wen initially wanted to kill himself, he falsely accused Zhang Congbin of the Wen Yanuma brothers, and Zhang Congbin killed them.

古文：从宾败，继英为杜重威所杀。
现代文：张从宾失败，娄继英被杜重威杀死。
English: Zhang Congbin failed, and Gong Jieying was killed by Du Chongwei.

古文：○安重荣安重荣，小字铁胡，朔州人也。
现代文：安重荣，小字铁胡，朔州人。
English: An Chung Rong, Xiaozhe Tiehu, Shuozhou people.

古文：祖从义，利州刺史。
现代文：祖父安从义，利州刺史。
English: His grandfather, An Congyi, was a history buff from Lishu.

古文：父全，胜州刺史、振武马步军都指挥使。
现代文：父亲安全，胜州刺史、振武马步军都指挥使。
English: His father was safe, and the Shenzhou Sashishi and Zhenwu horse-marching army were under his command.

古文：重荣有力，善骑射，为振武巡边指挥使。
现代文：安重荣有力气，擅长骑马射箭，任振武巡边指挥使。
English: An Chulong Rong was energetic, good at horse riding and archery, and was appointed as the commander of the Zhenwu patrol.

古文：晋高祖起太原，使张颖阴招重荣，其母与兄皆以为不可，重荣业已许颖，母、兄谋共杀颖以止之，重荣曰： 未可，吾当为母卜之。 
现代文：晋高祖在太原起兵，派张颖暗中招纳安重荣，安重荣的母亲和兄弟都认为不行，安重荣已经答应了张颖，母亲、兄弟商量一同杀掉张颖以便阻止安重荣，安重荣说： 不行，我应当为母亲占卜。 
English: Jin Gaozu raised an army in Taiyuan and sent Zhang Ying to secretly recruit An Chung Rong. An Chung Rong's mother and brother both thought it was a bad idea. An Chung Rong had already promised Zhang Ying. The mother and brother discussed killing Zhang Ying together in order to stop An Chung Rong. An Chung Rong said, "No, I should tell fortunes for my mother."

古文：乃立一箭，百步而射之，曰： 石公为天子则中。 
现代文：于是竖起一支箭，距离一百步射它，说： 石公做天子就射中。 
English: So he set up an arrow and shot it at a distance of a hundred paces, saying, "Ishigong, the son of heaven, has hit it."

古文：一发辄中；又立一箭而射之，曰： 吾为节度使则中。 
现代文：一箭就中；又立一支箭来射，说： 我做节度使就射中。 
English: He shoots with one arrow and misses; then he shoots with another arrow and says, "I aimed it well, and it went in."

古文：一发又中，其母、兄乃许，重荣以巡边千骑叛入太原。
现代文：一箭又中。他的母亲、兄弟纔同意，安重荣率一千巡边骑兵反叛进入太原。
English: His mother and brother Yan agreed, and An Chong Rong led a thousand cavalry to rebel and enter Taiyuan.

古文：高祖即位，拜重荣成德军节度使。
现代文：晋高祖登位，拜任安重荣为成德军节度使。
English: Emperor Gaozong ascended to the throne, and An Chongrong was appointed as the chief envoy of the Chengdu German Army.

古文：重荣虽武夫，而晓吏事，其下不能欺。
现代文：安重荣虽是武夫，但通晓做官吏的事务，下面的人不能骗他。
English: Although An Chong Rong is a military man, he is familiar with the affairs of government officials. The people below him cannot deceive him.

古文：有夫妇讼其子不孝者，重荣拔剑授其父，使自杀之，其父泣曰： 不忍也！ 
现代文：有一对夫妇控告他们的儿子不孝，安重荣拔出剑交给那位父亲，让他自己杀掉儿子，那位父亲哭着说： 不忍心！ 
English: There was a couple who accused their son of being unfilial. An Chong Rong pulled out his sword and handed it to the father, telling him to kill his son himself. The father cried and said, "I can't bear it!

古文：其母从傍诟骂，夺其剑而逐之，问之，乃继母也，重荣叱其母出，后射杀之。
现代文：他的母亲在一旁大骂，夺下他的剑追杀儿子，问她，纔知道是继母，安重荣呵斥他的继母出去，随后把她射死。
English: His mother shouted abuse from the sidelines, grabbed his sword and chased after her son, asking her if she knew who his stepmother was. An Chong Rong chased his stepmother out and then shot her to death.

古文：重荣起于军卒，暴至富贵，而见唐废帝、晋高祖皆自籓侯得国，尝谓人曰： 天子宁有种邪？
现代文：安重荣出身行伍，突然富贵，又见唐废帝、晋高祖都从藩侯夺得国家，曾对人说： 天子难道有种吗？
English: An Chung Rong, who was born in the military, suddenly became rich and powerful. He also saw that Emperor Tang and Emperor Jingu conquered the country from the feudal lords. He once said to people, "Is there such a thing as a son of heaven?"

古文：兵强马壮者为之尔！ 
现代文：兵强马壮的人就能做天子！ 
English: A man with a strong army can become the son of heaven!

古文：虽怀异志，而未有以发也。
现代文：虽然怀有二心，但没有表露出来。
English: Although he harbored ambivalence, he did not show it.

古文：是时，高祖与契丹约为父子，契丹骄甚，高祖奉之愈谨，重荣愤然，以谓 诎中国以尊夷狄，困已敝之民，而充无厌之欲，此晋万世耻也！ 
现代文：这时，晋高祖和契丹约定为父子，契丹很骄横，晋高祖对他们更加谨慎，安重荣愤愤不平，认为 委屈中原而尊奉夷狄，使已经穷困的百姓更加贫乏，而满足契丹贪得无厌的欲望，这是晋的万世耻辱 ！
English: At this time, Jin Gaozu and Khitan agreed to be father and son. Khitan was very arrogant, and Jin Gaozu was more cautious towards them. He was angry and indignant, believing that he had wronged the Central Plains and honored the Yidi, making the already poor people even poorer, while satisfying the insatiable greed of Khitan. This was Jin's eternal shame!

古文：数以此非诮高祖。
现代文：多次拿逭些话指责讥诮晋高祖。
English: Repeatedly, some words were used to accuse and ridicule Jin Gaozu.

古文：契丹使者往来过镇州，重荣箕踞慢骂，不为之礼，或执杀之。
现代文：契丹使臣往来经过镇州，安重荣张开两腿坐着护骂他们，不给他们行礼，有时还捕杀他们。
English: When Khitan envoys came and went through Zhenzhou, An Chong Rong sat with his legs open and scolded them, refused to give them a salute, and sometimes even hunted them down.

古文：是时，吐浑白氏役属契丹，苦其暴虐，重荣诱之入塞。
现代文：这时，吐潭白氏臣服归属契丹，受契丹残暴虐待，安重荣引诱他们入塞。
English: At this time, the Tutan Bai's submission belonged to the Khitan, and they were brutally abused by the Khitan, and An Chongrong lured them into the fortress.

古文：契丹数遣使责高祖，并求使者，高祖对使者鞠躬俯首，受责愈谨，多为好辞以自解，而姑息重荣不能诘。
现代文：契丹多次派使臣责问晋高祖，并索求被杀的使巨，晋高祖对使臣鞠躬低头，受到责备却更加恭谨，多说好话替自己开脱，而姑息安重荣不加责问。
English: The Khitans repeatedly sent envoys to interrogate Jingao Zu, and asked for the killed envoy. Jingao Zu bowed his head to the envoys, but was more respectful when he was rebuked. He said more good words to exonerate himself, and did not reprimand Jingao Zu.

古文：乃遣供奉官张澄以兵二千搜索并、镇、忻、代山谷中吐浑，悉驱出塞。
现代文：于是派供奉官张澄率兵雨千搜索并、镇、忻、代四州山谷中的吐浑人，把他们全部驱逐出塞。
English: Therefore, the tributary officer Zhang Cheng and his soldiers were sent to search for the Tuhun people in the valley of Shizhou, the town, the county and the county, and expel them all from the county.

古文：吐浑去而复来，重荣卒纳之，因招集亡命，课民种稗，食马万匹，所为益骄。因怒杀指挥使贾章，诬之以反。章女尚幼，欲舍之，女曰： 吾家三十口皆死于兵，存者特吾与父尔，今父死，吾何忍独生，愿就死！ 
现代文：吐潭离去后又来，安重荣最终接纳了他们，乘机招聚逃命的人，督促百姓种稗草，养马一万匹，所作所为更加骄横因发怒杀死指挥使贾章，诬陷他反叛，贾章的女儿还年幼，想放过她，她说： 我家三十口都死于兵乱，活着的只有我和父亲，如今父亲已死，我怎忍心独自活着，情愿去死！ 
English: After the departure of Tutan, they came again, and An Chong Rong finally accepted them. He took the opportunity to gather those who fled for their lives, urged the people to grow rushes, and raise ten thousand horses. What he did was even more arrogant, because he was angry, he killed the commander Jia Zhang, and framed him for rebellion. Jia Zhang's daughter was still young and wanted to let her go. She said: Thirty members of my family died in the war, and only my father and I are alive. Now my father is dead, how can I bear to live alone, I would rather die!

古文：遂杀之。镇人于是高贾女之烈，而知重荣之必败也。
现代文：于是杀了她镇州人因此赞赏贾章女儿的刚烈，而知道安重荣必定失败。
English: As a result, the people of Zhenzhou killed her. As a result, they appreciated the bravery of Jia Zhang's daughter, but knew that An Chongrong would certainly fail.

古文：重荣既僭侈，以为金鱼袋不足贵，刻玉为鱼佩之。
现代文：安重荣很不安分地追求享乐，认为金鱼袋不够珍贵，就把玉刻成鱼形来佩戴。
English: An Chong Rong is very anxious to pursue pleasure. He thinks that the goldfish bag is not precious enough, so he carves the jade into a fish shape to wear it.

古文：娶二妻，高祖因之并加封爵。
现代文：娶两个妻子，晋高袒顺从他并加以封爵。
English: He married two wives, promoted Gao Jun to be his subordinate and knighted him.

古文：天福六年夏，契丹使者拽剌过镇，重荣侵辱之，拽剌言不逊，重荣怒，执拽剌，以轻骑掠幽州南境之民，处之博野。
现代文：玉福六年夏，契丹使臣拽刺经过镇州，安重荣威逼羞辱他，拽刺出言不逊，安重荣恼怒，抓住拽刺，率领轻骑掠夺幽州南境的百姓，安置在博野。
English: In the summer of the sixth year of Yufu, the Khitan envoy dragged the thorn through Zhenzhou, An Chong Rong Wei forced him to humiliate him, dragged the thorn to speak insolently, An Chong Rong was angry, grabbed the thorn, led the light horse to plunder the people of the southern border of Yuzhou, and placed it in Bono.

古文：上表曰： 臣昨据熟吐浑白承福、赫连功德等领本族三万馀帐自应州来奔，又据生吐浑、浑、契苾、两突厥三部南北将沙陀、安庆、九府等各领其族、牛羊、车帐、甲马七八路来奔，具言契丹残害，掠取生口羊马，自今年二月已后，号令诸蕃，点阅强壮，办具军装，期以上秋南向。
现代文：上表说： 我在昨天得悉熟吐浑白承福、赫连功德等人率领本族三万多帐从应州前来投奔，又得悉生吐浑、浑、契蕃、两突厥三部南北将沙陀、安庆、九府等各率本族、牛羊、车帐、甲马分七八路前来投奔，都说契丹残害他们，掠夺他们的奴隶羊马，从今年二月以后，号令各蕃部，点阅身强力壮的人，备办军装，约定初秋向南来。
English: The above table says: Yesterday, I learned that Tuqun Bai Chengfu, Khelian Gongde and others led more than 30,000 people of their own tribe to flee from Yingzhou. I also learned that Tuqun, Hun, Qichun, and two Turkic tribes from the north and south led their own tribes, cattle and sheep, carts and horses to flee from Shado, Anqing, Jiufu and other provinces. They all said that the Khitan had mutilated them and plundered their slaves, sheep and horses. From February this year, they ordered all departments to select strong men, prepare military uniforms, and agreed to come to the south in early autumn.

古文：诸蕃部诚恐上天不祐，败灭家族，愿先自归，其诸部胜兵众可十万。
现代文：各蕃部确实惧怕上天不保佑，导致家族败灭，希望先来归附，他们各部的强兵可连十万。
English: Each faction really feared that the heavens would not bless them, leading to the destruction of their families. They hoped to be the first to be annexed, and their strong soldiers of each faction could be as many as one hundred thousand.

古文：又据沿河党项、山前后逸越利诸族首领皆遣人送契丹所授告身、敕牒、旗帜来归款，皆号泣告劳，愿治兵甲以报怨。
现代文：又得悉黄河沿岸的党项、山前山后的逸、越利各族的首领都派人送上契丹授给他们的告身、敕牒、旗帜前来投诚，都哭泣诉苦，希望整治武器报仇。
English: It was also learned that the leaders of various ethnic groups along the Yellow River, in front of the mountains, behind the mountains, and in Yue and Li, all sent people to come and surrender with the oaths of allegiance, ultimatums, and flags given to them by the Khitan. They were all crying and complaining, hoping to rectify the weapons and take revenge.

古文：又据朔州节度副使赵崇杀节度使刘山，以城来归。
现代文：又得悉朔州节度副使赵崇杀掉节度使刘山，以城归附。
English: It was also learned that Zhao Chong, the vice-envoy of the Shuozhou Festival, killed Liu Shan, the deputy of the festival, and the city was annexed.

古文：窃以诸蕃不招呼而自至，朔州不攻伐而自归，虽系人情，尽由天意。
现代文：我认为各蕃部不招自来，朔州不攻自归，虽然出自人们的愿望，但也都出白天意。
English: I think that although it comes from people's wishes, it also comes from the will of the day.

古文：又念陷蕃诸将等，本自勋劳，久居富贵，没身虏塞，酷虐不胜，企足朝廷，思归可谅，苟闻传檄，必尽倒戈。 
现代文：又考虑到身陷蕃地的将领们，原本都各有功劳，久处富贵，陷身敌境，受不了残酷虐待，企足盼望朝廷，思归之心可以理解，假使听到朝廷讨伐契丹的檄文，必定全部倒戈相助。 
English: In addition, considering that the generals who are in prison, originally all have their own merits, have been rich for a long time, are trapped in enemy territory, can not stand cruel abuse, are looking forward to the imperial court, and their homesickness is understandable, if they hear the imperial court's obituary of the war against the Khitan, they will all help.

古文：其表数千言。
现代文：他的表文有几千字。
English: His manifesto runs to thousands of words.

古文：又为书以遗朝廷大臣、四方籓镇，皆以契丹可取为言。
现代文：又写信给朝廷大臣、四方藩镇，都说可以攻取契丹。
English: He also wrote to the minister of the imperial court and the four provinces and towns, saying that it was possible to capture Khitan.

古文：高祖患之，为之幸鄴，报重荣曰： 前世与虏和亲，皆所以为天下计，今吾以天下臣之，尔以一镇抗之，大小不等，无自辱焉！ 
现代文：晋高祖对此担忧，为此驾临邺都，回答安重荣说： 前代和契丹和亲，都是为天下考虑，如今我以天下向他们称臣，你以一个藩镇抗拒他们，大小不称，不要自取羞辱！ 
English: Jin Gaozu was worried about this, so he went to the capital of Shandong Province and replied to An Chong Rong: The previous generation and Khitan and relatives were all considered for the world, now I praise them for the world, you resist them with a town, large or small, don't humiliate yourself!

古文：重荣谓晋无如我何，反意乃决。重荣虽以契丹为言，反阴遣人与幽州节度使刘晞相结。契丹亦利晋多事，幸重荣之乱，期两敝之，欲因以窥中国，故不加怒于重荣。
现代文：安重荣认为晋不能把他怎么样，于是决意反叛，安重荣虽拿契丹作借口，但暗中派人和幽州节度使刘晞相勾结，契丹也认为后晋多事对自己宥利，庆幸安重荣作乱，希望他们两败俱伤，想借机窥伺中原，因此没有对安重荣发怒。
English: An Chongrong thought that Jin could not treat him well, so he decided to rebel. Although An Chongrong used Khitan as an excuse, he secretly sent people to Yuzhou Festival to collude with Liu Xuan. Khitan also thought that after Jin, many things were beneficial to himself. He was glad that An Chongrong made a disturbance. He hoped that both of them would be hurt. He wanted to take the opportunity to spy on the Central Plains, so he did not get angry with An Chongrong.

古文：重荣将反也，其母又以为不可，重荣曰： 为母卜之。 
现代文：安重荣将要反叛时，他的母亲又认为不行，安重荣说： 为母亲占卜。 
English: When An Chong Rong was about to rebel, his mother thought it was not possible. An Chong Rong said: Divination for my mother.

古文：指其堂下幡竿龙口仰射之，曰： 吾有天下则中之。 
现代文：指着他堂下幡竿上的龙口仰首射箭，说： 我据有天下就射中。 
English: Pointing to the dragon's mouth on his flagpole, he raised his head to shoot an arrow and said, "I'm sure I'll hit it."

古文：一发而中，其母乃许。
现代文：一箭射中，他的母亲就同意了。
English: After one shot, his mother agreed.

古文：饶阳令刘岩献水鸟五色，重荣曰： 此凤也。 
现代文：饶阳令刘岩进献五色水鸟，安重荣说： 这是凤。 
English: Raoyang ordered Liu Yan to present five-colored water birds, and An Chongrong said: This is a phoenix.

古文：畜之后潭。
现代文：把它养在后潭中。
English: Keep it in the backyard pond.

古文：又使人为大铁鞭以献，诳其民曰： 鞭有神，指人，人辄死。 
现代文：又派人铸造大铁鞭进献，诳骗他的百姓说： 鞭有神，指着人，人就死。 
English: And he sent and fetched a great iron whip, and deceived his people, saying, The rod of God is upon man, and he shall die.

古文：号 铁鞭郎君 ，出则以为前驱。
现代文：号称 铁鞭郎君 ，外出就拿铁鞭作前驱。
English: He is known as the Iron Whip Boy, and when he goes out, he takes the iron whip as a forerunner.

古文：镇之城门抱关铁胡人，无故头自落，铁胡，重荣小字，虽甚恶之，然不悟也。其冬，安从进反襄阳，重荣闻之，乃亦举兵。
现代文：镇州城门守关的铁制胡人，无缘无故掉下头来，铁胡，是安重荣的小名，虽然他很忌讳此事，但没有醒悟这年冬天，安从进在襄阳反叛，安重荣获知，于是也举兵反叛。
English: The iron hu-man guarding the gates of the city of Zhenzhou dropped his head for no reason. The iron hu-man was the nickname of An Chong Rong. Although he was very taboo about it, he did not wake up this winter. An Cong Jin rebelled in Xiangyang, An Chong Rong learned about it, so he also raised an army to rebel.

古文：是岁，镇州大旱、蝗，重荣聚饥民数万，驱以向鄴，声言入觐。
现代文：这年，镇州大旱，又阀蝗灾。安重荣招聚饥民几万人，驱迫他们去邺都，声称朝见天子。
English: In that year, there was a drought in Zhenzhou and a plague of locusts. An Chong Rong gathered tens of thousands of starving people and forced them to go to Shidu, claiming to see the Son of Heaven in the morning.

古文：行至宗城破家堤，高祖遣杜重威朔之，兵已交，其将赵彦之与重荣有隙，临阵卷旗以奔晋军，其铠甲鞍辔皆装以银，晋国不知其来降，争杀而分之。
现代文：走到宗城破家堤，晋高祖派杜重威迎战，交战后，部将趟彦之和安重荣有矛盾，临阵卷旗投奔晋军，他的镗甲、马鞍、马缰绳都用银装饰，晋军不知他前来投降，都争着砍杀瓜分银子。
English: When he came to the ancestral city, he broke through the dike, and the ancestors of Jin Gao sent Du Chongwei to meet the battle. After the battle, there was a conflict between the commanders Tibianzhi and An Chongrong, and he ran to the Jin army with a banner. His armor, saddle, and bridle were all decorated with silver. The Jin army did not know that he had come to surrender, and they all fought to cut and divide the silver.

古文：重荣闻彦之降晋，大惧，退入于辎重中，其兵二万皆溃去。
现代文：安重荣听说趟彦之向晋投降，十分恐惧，退入辎重中，他的士兵二万人都四散逃走。
English: When An Chong Rong heard that Watanehiko had surrendered to Jin, he was so frightened that he retreated into the jungle, and his twenty thousand soldiers scattered and fled.

古文：是冬大寒，溃兵饥冻及见杀无孑遗，重荣独与十馀骑奔还，以牛马革为甲，驱州人守城以待。
现代文：这年冬天大寒，溃逃的士兵饥寒而死及被杀，没有留下一个。安重荣独自和十多个骑兵逃回，用牛马皮做镗甲，逼迫州人守城而待敌。
English: This winter was very cold, and the soldiers who fled died of hunger and cold and were killed, leaving no one behind. An Chong Rong alone fled back with more than ten cavalrymen, using cow and horse skins to make armor, forcing the people of the state to defend the city and wait for the enemy.

古文：重威兵至城下，重荣裨将自城西水碾门引官军以入，杀守城二万馀人。
现代文：杜重威兵临城下，安重荣的副将从城西水碾门引官军进城，杀死守城的二万多人。
English: Du Chongwei's soldiers came to the city, and An Chong Rong's deputy would lead the official army into the city from the west gate of the city, killing more than 20,000 people who defended the city.

古文：重荣以吐浑数百骑守牙城，重威使人擒之，斩首以献，高祖御楼受馘，命漆其首送于契丹。
现代文：安重荣率吐浑几百名骑兵守牙城，杜重威派人抓获他，斩下他的头进献，晋高祖登楼接受他的左耳，下令将首级漆好送给契丹。
English: An Chong Rong led several hundred cavalrymen from Tuhun to defend the city. Du Chong Wei sent people to capture him and cut off his head as an offering. Jinguo Zu went upstairs to receive his left ear and ordered the head to be given to Khitan.

古文：改成德军为顺德，镇州曰恒州，常山曰恒山云。
现代文：改成德军为顺德，镇州为恒州，常山为恒山。
English: It was changed to Shunde for the German army, Zhenzhou for Hengzhou, and Changshan for Hengshan.

古文：○安从进安从进，振武索葛部人也。
现代文：安从进，振武索葛部人。
English: An Zongjin, Zhen Wuso and Ge Ge.

古文：祖、父皆事唐为骑将。
现代文：祖父、父亲都在唐任骑将。
English: Both his grandfather and father served as cavalry generals in Tang.

古文：从进初从庄宗于兵间，为护驾马军都指挥使，领贵州刺史。
现代文：安从进最初随唐庄宗在军中，任护驾马军都指挥使，领贵州刺史。
English: An Zongjin initially followed Tang Zhuangzong in the army, and commanded both the escort and cavalry troops, leading Guizhou's history.

古文：明宗时，为保义、彰武军节度使，未尝将兵征伐。
现代文：唐明宗时，任保义、彰武军节度使，不曾率兵征伐。
English: During the Tang and Ming Dynasties, he was appointed as the festival envoy of the Guoyi and Zhangwu armies, but he never led the army to conquer.

古文：李彝超自立于夏州，从进尝一以兵往，卒亦无功。愍帝即位，徙领顺化，为侍卫马军都指挥使。
现代文：李彝超在夏州自立，安从进曾一人率兵前去，最终也没有战功唐愍帝登位，调任顺他，任侍卫马军都指挥使。
English: Li Yingchao became independent in Xiazhou, and An Zongjin went there alone leading an army. In the end, there was no war merit, and Emperor Tang Jun ascended the throne. He was transferred to Shun, and served as the commander and envoy of the guards and horse army.

古文：潞王反凤翔，从进巡检京城，杀枢密使冯赟，送款于从珂。愍帝出奔，从珂将至京师，从进率百官班迎于郊。
现代文：潞王在凤翔反叛，安从进巡检京师，杀掉枢密使冯餮，向李从珂投诚唐愍帝出逃，李从珂将到京师，安从进率领百官在郊外列队迎接。
English: Shao Wang rebelled in Fengxiang, An Zong marched into the inspection division of Beijing, killed the confidential envoy Feng Yao, fled to Li Zong from Ke Tucheng, Li Zong marched to the Beijing division, and An Zong marched with hundreds of officials to meet him in the suburbs.

古文：清泰中，徙镇山南东道。
现代文：清泰中，调任镇守山南柬道。
English: In the mid-Qing Dynasty, he was transferred to the post of town guard of Shannan Cam Road.

古文：晋高祖即位，加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：晋高祖登位，加官同中书门下平章事。
English: When Gaozu ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the same position as Zhongshumen.

古文：高祖取天下不顺，常以此惭，籓镇多务，过为姑息，而籓镇之臣，或不自安，或心慕高祖所为，谓举可成事，故在位七年，而反者六起，从进最后反，然皆不免也。
现代文：晋高祖攻取天下不顺利，常因此感到羞愧，藩镇多事，对他们过于放纵，而藩镇的臣子，有的心怀不安，有的羡慕晋高祖的作为，认为反叛就能成大业，因此在位匕年，而反叛的事发生六次，安从进最后反叛，但都不能幸免。
English: Emperor Jinguo's conquest of the world did not go well, and he often felt ashamed of it. He had many affairs in his domains and was too indulgent with them. Some of the vassals in his domains were uneasy, and some envied Emperor Jinguo's actions, believing that rebellion could be a great career. As a result, he was in his twelfth year of reign, and there were six rebellions. Emperor Anzong finally rebelled, but none of them were spared.

古文：自范延光反鄴，从进已畜异志，恃江为险，招集亡命，益置军兵。
现代文：自从范延光在邺都反叛，安从进就已有二心，依仗江河天险，招集亡命之徒，增置军队武器。
English: Ever since Fan Yanguang rebelled in Shandong, An Zongjin has been double-minded, relying on rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers, rivers,

古文：南方贡输道出襄阳者，多擅留之，邀遮商旅，皆黥以充军。
现代文：南方运送进贡的财物途经襄阳的，多擅自留用，阻截商人行客，把他们都刺脸充军。
English: In the south, the wealth and property of the tributes transported through Xiangyang were mostly retained without authorization, blocking the merchants and travelers, and they were all stabbed in the face.

古文：与安重荣阴相结托，期为表裹。
现代文：和安重诲暗中勾结相互依托，约定里外相应。
English: and secretly colluding with each other and relying on each other, corresponding to each other.

古文：高祖患之，谋徙从进，使人谓曰： 东平王建立来朝，愿还乡里，已徙上党。
现代文：晋高祖对此担忧，考虑调动安从进，派人对他说： 束平王建立前来朝拜，希望回到乡里，已经调他去上党。
English: Jin Gaozu was worried about this and considered transferring An Zongjin, and sent someone to say to him: "King Sokping has come to pay homage and hopes to return to the countryside. He has been transferred to the party."

古文：朕虚青州以待卿，卿诚乐行，朕即降制。 
现代文：我空出青州的职位等你去，你如果确实愿去，我就下制诏。 
English: I will vacate my position in Qingzhou and wait for you to go. If you really want to go, I will issue an edict.

古文：从进报曰： 移青州在汉江南，臣即赴任。 
现代文：安从进回答说： 把青州移到汉江南面，我就赴任。 
English: An Congjin replied: If you move Qingzhou to the south of the Han River, I will take the post.

古文：高祖亦优容之。
现代文：晋高祖也宽容他。
English: His father also tolerated him.

古文：其子弘超为宫苑副使，居京师，从进请赐告归，遂不遣。
现代文：他的儿子安弘超任官苑副使，住在京师，安从进请求赐他休假，回来后就不让他再去。
English: His son, An Hongchao, a vice-envoy of the Imperial Court, lived in Beijing. An Congjin asked him to give him a vacation, but he would not let him go back after he returned.

古文：王令谦、潘知麟者，皆从进牙将也，常从从进最久，知其必败，切谏之。
现代文：王令谦、潘知麟，都是安从进的牙将，跟随安从进最久，知道他必定失败，恳切地劝阻他。
English: Wang Lingqian and Pan Chilin, both of whom had followed An for the longest time, knew that he would fail and tried to dissuade him.

古文：从进遣子弘超与令谦游南山，酒酣，令人推堕崖死。
现代文：安从进让儿子安弘超和王令谦游南山，酒兴正浓时，让人把王令谦推下山崖摔死。
English: An Congjin let his son An Hongchao and Wang Lingqian travel to Nanshan. When the wine was strong, someone pushed Wang Lingqian down the cliff and killed him.

古文：天福六年，安重荣执杀契丹使者，反迹见，高祖为之幸鄴，郑王重贵留守京师。
现代文：天福六年，安重荣捕杀契丹使臣，反叛的迹象表露，晋高祖因此驾临邺都，郑王石重贵留守京师。
English: In the sixth year of Tianfu, An Chongrong captured and killed the Khitan envoy, and the signs of rebellion were revealed. As a result, Jin Gaozu went to the capital of Yunnan, and Zheng Wangshi Chonggui stayed in Beijing.

古文：宰相和凝曰： 陛下且北，从进必反，何以制之？ 
现代文：宰相和凝说： 陛下将要北去，安从进必定反叛，拿什么制服他？ 
English: The prime minister and the conciliator said: His Majesty is about to go to the north, and An Zongjin will certainly rebel. What should we do to subdue him?

古文：高祖曰： 卿意奈何？ 
现代文：晋高祖说： 你的意见如何呢？ 
English: Jin Gaozu said, "What is your opinion?"

古文：凝曰： 臣闻兵法，先人者夺人，愿为空名宣敕十数通授郑王，有急则命将以往。 
现代文：和凝说： 我从兵法上得知，先于他人的就能取胜于人希望用空白敕书十多道交给郑王，有危急就指派将领前去讨伐。 
English: He said, "I learned from the art of war that if you are ahead of others, you can win. I hope to give King Zheng more than a dozen blank orders, and if there is a crisis, I will assign generals to go to the front to fight.

古文：从进闻高祖北，遂杀知麟以反。
现代文：安从进获知晋高祖北去，就杀掉潘知麟反叛。
English: An killed the rebel Pan Chirin when he went to the north from the north.

古文：降襄阳为防御，赠令谦忠州刺史，知麟顺州刺史。
现代文：郑王以空白敕书命令李建崇、郭金海等人讨伐他，安从进率兵进攻邓州，没有攻克，行进到湖阳，碰上李建崇等人，十分惊骇，认为太神速，又被野火焚烧，于是大败。
English: Zheng Wang ordered Li Jianchong, Guo Jinhai and others to fight against him with a blank letter. An led the soldiers to attack Dengzhou, but failed to conquer it. They marched to Hoyang, where they encountered Li Jianchong and others. They were very shocked, thought it was too fast, and were burned by wildfires, so they were defeated.

古文：○杨光远杨光远，字德明，其父曰阿噔啜，盖沙陀部人也。光远初名阿檀，为唐庄宗骑将，从周德威战契丹于新州，折其一臂，遂废不用。
现代文：安从进率几十个骑兵逃回襄阳，晋高祖派高行周包围他，过了一年粮食耗尽，安从追自焚而死抓获他的儿子安弘受及其将佐四十三人送到京师，晋高祖登楼接受献俘，在街上示众后杀掉他们杨光速字德明，父亲叫阿噎啜，大概是沙陀部人。杨光速原名阿檀，任唐庄宗的骑将，跟随周德威在新州和契丹交战，断了一只手臂，于是被废置不用。
English: An Zong advanced with dozens of cavalrymen and fled back to Xiangyang. Jinguang Zou sent Gao Xing Zhou to surround him. After a year, the grain ran out. An Zong chased and caught his son An Hongzhu, who died of self-immolation, and sent him and his forty-three followers to the capital. Jinguang Zou went up to the palace to receive the prisoners and killed them after a demonstration in the street. Yang Guanghui was named Deming. His father's name was Agong Su, and he was probably a member of the Sado sect. Yang Guanghui's original name was Adan. He was a cavalry

古文：久之，以为幽州马步军都指挥使，戍瓦桥关。
现代文：过了很久，任命他为幽州马步军都指挥使，戍守瓦桥关。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as the commanding officer of the Yuzhou Horse and Foot Troops to guard the Tile Bridge Pass.

古文：光远为人病秃折臂，不通文字，然有辨智，长于吏事。
现代文：杨光速秃头断臂，不识文字，但明辨多智，长于吏事。
English: Yang Guanghui has a bald head and a broken arm. He is illiterate, but he is discerning and intelligent, and is good at administrative work.

古文：明宗时，为妫、瀛、冀、易四州刺史，以治称。初，唐兵破王都于中山，得契丹大将荝剌等十馀人。
现代文：唐明宗时，任蚂、瀛、冀、易四州刺史，以善于治理著称当初，唐兵在中山攻破王都，抓获契丹大将蓟剌等十多人。
English: At the time of the Ming Dynasty of Tang Dynasty, the four prefectures of An, Zhou, Hebei, and Yi made history, and were known for their good governance. At the beginning, Tang soldiers broke through the capital in Zhongshan and captured more than ten people such as Qidan General Zou.

古文：已而契丹与中国通和，遣使者求荝剌等，明宗与大臣议，皆欲归之，独光远不可，曰： 荝剌皆北狄善战者，彼失之如去手足；且居此久，熟知中国事，归之岂吾利也！ 
现代文：不久契丹和中原和好，派使臣索求蓟剌等人，唐明宗和大臣们商议，都打算把他们归还契丹，惟独杨光速不同意，说： 荆剌等都是北狄善战的人，他们失去蓟剌等人就像失去了手脚一样；而且他们在这里住了很久，熟知中原的情况，送他们回去难道对我们有利吗？ 
English: Soon, the Khitan and the Central Plains were reconciled. Tang Mingzong sent envoys to the Central Plains to request the return of Jing and others. Tang Mingzong and the ministers discussed and planned to return them to the Khitan, but Yang Guanghui disagreed, saying, "Jing and others are good fighters in the North, and their loss of Jing and others is like losing a limb; moreover, they have lived here for a long time and are familiar with the situation in the Central Plains. Is it beneficial for us to send them back?"

古文：明宗曰： 蕃人重盟誓，已与吾好，岂相负也？ 
现代文：唐明宗说： 蕃人看重盟约，既然已跟我们和好，难道会对不住我们？ 
English: Tang Mingzong said, "Han people value the covenant. Since they have made peace with us, will they not be able to tolerate us?

古文：光远曰： 臣恐后悔不及尔！ 
现代文：杨光速说： 我怕后悔来不及啊！ 
English: Yang Guanghui said: I'm afraid I'm too late to regret it!

古文：明宗嘉其说，卒不遣荝剌等。
现代文：唐明宗赞赏他的意见，最终没有送回蓟刺等人。
English: Emperor Mingzong appreciated his opinion and ultimately did not send Xing Zang and the others back.

古文：光远自易州刺史拜振武军节度使。
现代文：杨光速从易州刺史升任振武军节度使。
English: Yang Guanghui was promoted from the Yizhou Provincial Historian to the Zhenwu Army Commander.

古文：清泰二年，徙镇中山，兼北面行营都虞候，御契丹于云、应之间。晋高祖起太原，末帝以光远佐张敬达为太原四面招讨副使，为契丹所败，退守晋安寨。
现代文：清泰二年，调任镇守中山，兼北面行营都虞候，在云、应二州之间抵御契丹晋高祖在太原起兵，唐末帝派杨光速协助张敬达，任太原四面招讨副使，被契丹打败，退守晋安寨。
English: In the second year of the Qing dynasty, he was transferred to the town guard of Zhongshan, and was also the commander of the northern camp. Between Yun and Yingzhou, he resisted the Khitan Emperor Gaozu from raising an army in Taiyuan. At the end of the Tang Dynasty, the emperor sent Yang Guanghui to assist Zhang Jingda, and appointed him as the deputy envoy to Taiyuan. He was defeated by the Khitan Emperor and retreated to Jin'an Village.

古文：契丹围之数月，人马食尽，杀马而食，马尽，乃杀敬达出降。
现代文：契丹包围他们几个月，人食马料都光了，就杀马来吃，马杀光了，就杀掉张敬达出来投降。
English: The Khitan besieged them for several months. When they ran out of food and horses, they killed horses to eat. When they ran out of horses, they killed Zhang Jingda and surrendered.

古文：耶律德光见之，靳曰： 尔辈大是恶汉兒。 
现代文：耶律德光见到了他们，奚落说： 你们真是恶漠儿。 
English: And when Jerudimiel saw them, he was wroth, and said, Surely ye are worthless fellows.

古文：德光曰： 吾国无土地官爵以居汝，汝等勉事晋。 晋高祖以光远为宣武军节度使、侍卫马步军都指挥使。
现代文：杨光速和将领们开始不懂得他在讥诮他们，还用谦恭的话回答他，耶律德光说： 不吃盐和奶酪，吃了一万匹战马，难道不是恶汉儿吗！ 杨光速等人羞惭得低下头，耶律德光阀道： 怕不怕？ 都说： 很怕。 问： 怕什么？ 
English: Yang Guangji and the generals began to not understand that he was mocking them, and answered him with humble words. Yeludeguang said, "Isn't it a villain who doesn't eat salt and cheese, but has eaten ten thousand war horses?" Yang Guangji and the others bowed their heads in shame. Yeludeguang said, "Afraid or not afraid?" They all said, "Very afraid." Q: Afraid of what?

古文：光远进见，佯为悒悒之色，常如有所恨者，高祖疑其有所不足，使人问之，对曰： 臣于富贵无不足也，惟不及张生铁死得其所，此常为愧尔！ 
现代文：网答说： 怕你带我们进入蕃地 耶律德光说： 我的国家没有土地官爵安置你们，你们盎力事奉晋吧， 晋高祖任命杨光速为宣武军节度使、侍卫马步甲都指挥使，杨光速进见，假装问闷不乐的样子，像足有所追憾，晋高祖疑心他有什么不满足的，派人间他，回答说： 我对富贵没有什么不满足，只是不如张生铁死得其所，为此我常常羞愧罢了！ 
English: The net replied, "I'm afraid you'll take us into the badlands." Yelu Deguang said, "My country doesn't have any land for you to live on. You should serve Jin with all your strength." Jinguo Ancestor appointed Yang Guanghui as the commander of the proclamation army and the commander of the guards and horse guards. Yang Guanghui asked questions, pretending to be unhappy, as if he had some regrets. Jinguo Ancestor suspected that he was not satisfied, sent him to the world, and replied, "I'm not dissatisfied with wealth, but I'm not as satisfied as Zhang Shengtie. I'm often ashamed of

古文：由是高祖以为忠，颇亲信之。
现代文：因此晋高祖认为他忠诚，十分亲近信任他。
English: As a result, Jang Gaozu considered him to be loyal and trusted him very closely.

古文：范延光反，以为魏府都招讨使，久之不能下，高祖卒用佗计降延光。而光远自以握重兵在外，谓高祖畏己，始为恣横。高祖每优容之，为选其子承祚尚长安公主，其次子承信等皆超拜官爵，恩宠无比。
现代文：范延光反叛，任命他为魏府部招讨使，很久不能攻克，晋高祖就用别的计策降服范延光而杨光速自己觉得手握重兵在外，以为晋高祖惧怕自己，开始放肆骄横，晋高祖每每宽容他，挑选他的儿子杨承祚娶长安公主，他的次子杨承信等都越级拜授官爵，恩宠无比。
English: Fan Yanguang rebelled and appointed him as the recruiting envoy of the Wei government, which could not be defeated for a long time. Jingao Zou used other strategies to surrender to Fan Yanguang, but Yang Guanghui felt that he did not have enough soldiers. He thought that Jingao Zou was afraid of himself and began to be arrogant. Jingao Zou was very tolerant of him. He chose his son Yang Chengyi to marry Princess Chang'an, and his second son Yang Chengxin was promoted to the rank of peer. His grace was incomparable.

古文：枢密使桑维翰恶之，数以为言。光远自魏来朝，屡指维翰擅权难制。
现代文：枢密使桑维翰讨厌他，多次谈论他的不是杨光速从魏府前来朝拜，一再指责桑维翰专权难以控制。
English: The privy council made San Weihan hate him. Yang Guanghui, who repeatedly talked about him, came from Wei Prefecture to pay homage. He repeatedly accused San Weihan of being difficult to control.

古文：高祖不得已，罢出维翰于相州，亦徙光远西京留守，兼镇河阳，夺其兵职。光远始大怨望，阴以宝货奉契丹，诉己为晋疏斥。所养部曲千人，挠法犯禁河、洛之间，甚于寇盗。
现代文：晋高祖迫不得已，将桑维翰免职外放相州，也将杨光速调任西京留守，兼镇河阳，剥夺他的军权杨光速开始十分怨恨起来，暗中用财宝笼络契丹，诉说自己被晋疏远排斥他养的军队一千人，在河、洛间违法犯禁，比寇盗还厉害。
English: As a last resort, Jin Gaozu dismissed San Weihan from his post and exiled him to Sangzhou. He also transferred Yang Guanghui to stay in West Beijing, and also to the town of Heyang. Yang Guanghui began to be very resentful when he was deprived of his military power. He secretly used his treasure to entice the Khitan, telling them that he had been alienated by Jin and excluded from the army of a thousand people he had raised. He broke the law and violated the ban between He and Luo. He was worse than a thief.

古文：天福五年，徙镇平卢，封东平王。
现代文：天福五年，调任镇守平卢，封为束平王。
English: In the fifth year of Tianfu, he was transferred to the post of the town guard of Pinglu and was given the title of King of Sokping.

古文：光远请其子以行，乃拜承祚单州刺史，承勋莱州防御使，父子俱东，车骑连属数十里。
现代文：杨光速请求让他的儿子随行，于是拜任杨承柞为单州刺史，杨承勋为莱州防御使，父子一起束去，车骑相连几十里。
English: Yang Guanghui asked for his son to accompany him, so Yang Chengjun, who was appointed as the single-state historian, and Yang Chengxun, who was the Laizhou defense envoy, went together with his father and son, riding for dozens of miles.

古文：出帝即位，拜太师，封寿王。
现代文：晋出帝登位，拜为太师，封为寿王。
English: He was promoted to emperor and enthroned, and was given the title of Taishi and Shouwang.

古文：是时，晋马少，括天下马以佐军，景延广请取光远前所借官马三百匹，光远怒曰： 此马先帝赐我，安得复取，是疑我反也！ 
现代文：这时，晋的马少，靠搜括天下马匹充实军队，景延广请求取回杨光速以前借的官马三百匹，杨光速发怒说： 这些马是先帝赐给我的，怎能又拿回去，这是怀疑我反叛！ 
English: At this time, Jin's horses were few, and he relied on collecting horses from all over the world to replenish his army. Jing Yanguang requested the return of the three hundred official horses that Yang Guanghui had previously borrowed. Yang Guanghui became angry and said: These horses were given to me by the First Emperor, how can I take them back, this is suspicion of my rebellion!

古文：遂谋为乱。
现代文：于是策划作乱。
English: So they plotted to create a disturbance.

古文：而承祚自单州逃归，出帝即以承祚为淄州刺史，遣使者赐以玉带、御马以慰安之，光远益骄，乃反。
现代文：而杨承祚从单州逃回，晋出帝就任命杨承祚为淄州刺史，派使臣赐给玉带、御马安慰他，杨光速更加骄横，于是反叛。
English: But Yang Chengyao fled back from Shanzhou, and Emperor Jin appointed Yang Chengyao as the governor of Shanzhou, and sent envoys to give him a jade belt and a horse to comfort him. Yang Guanghui was more arrogant, so he rebelled.

古文：召契丹入寇，陷贝州。
现代文：招引契丹进犯，攻陷贝州。
English: Invite Khitan to invade and capture Bozhou.

古文：博州刺史周儒亦叛降契丹。
现代文：博州刺史周儒也叛降契丹。
English: Zhou Ru, the governor of Bozhou, also rebelled against Khitan.

古文：是时，出帝与耶律德光相距澶、魏之间，郓州观察判官窦仪计事军中，谋曰： 今不以重兵大将守博州渡，使儒得引契丹东过河与光远合，则河南危矣！ 
现代文：这时，晋出帝和耶律德光在澶、魏二州间相拒，郸州观察判官窦仪在军中商计事情，出谋说： 现在不用重兵大将把守博州渡，假使周儒得以引契丹束遇黄河和杨光速会合，河南就危险了！ 
English: At this time, Emperor Jin and Yelu Deguang opposed each other between the two states of Shandong and Wei, and the judge Dou Yi of Shandong observed and discussed the matter in the army, and came up with a plan: Now it is not necessary for the general of the army to guard Bozhudu. If Zhou Ru could lead the Dan bunch to meet the Yellow River and Yang Guang and quickly meet, Henan would be in danger!

古文：出帝乃遣李守贞、皇甫遇以兵万人沿河而下。
现代文：晋出帝于是派李守贞、皇甫遇率兵一万沿黄河而下。
English: The newly crowned emperor then sent Li Shuzhen and Emperor Fu Rong to lead ten thousand soldiers down the Yellow River.

古文：儒果引契丹自马家渡济河，方筑垒，守贞等急击之，契丹大败，遂与光远隔绝。
现代文：周儒果然引契丹军从马家渡横渡黄河，正在修筑营垒，李守贞等人猛攻他们，契丹大败，龄是和杨光远隔绝。
English: Zhou Rong really led the Khitan army across the Yellow River from Majiadu and was building a camp. Li Shouzhen and others attacked them fiercely. The Khitan army was defeated and Yang Guang was cut off for a long time.

古文：德光闻河上兵大败，与晋决战戚城，亦败。
现代文：耶律德光听说黄河上军队大败，就和晋在戚城决战，也被打败。
English: When Yerutde Guang heard that the army on the Yellow River had suffered a great defeat, he and Jin fought a decisive battle in Qicheng and were also defeated.

古文：契丹已北，出帝复遣守贞、符彦卿东讨，光远婴城固守，自夏至冬，城中人相食几尽。
现代文：契丹北去后，晋真，帝又派李守贞、符彦卿束讨杨光速，杨光速据城坚守，从夏到冬，城中人吃人差不多快吃完了。
English: After Khitan went to the north, Jin Zhen, the emperor, sent Li Shouzhen and Fu Yanqing to investigate Yang Guangrao. Yang Guangrao held fast to the city, and from summer to winter, the people in the city were almost finished eating each other.

古文：光远北望契丹，稽首以呼德光曰： 皇帝误光远耶！ 其子承勋等劝光远出降，光远曰： 我在代北时，尝以纸钱祭天池，投之辄没，人言我当作天子，宜且待时，毋轻议也。 
现代文：杨光速北望契丹，叩头呼叫耶律德光说： 皇帝误了我杨光速啊： 他的儿子杨承勋等劝他出去投降，杨光速说： 我在代北时，曾用纸钱祭天池，投进去就沉了，人们说我该做天子，姑且等待时机，不要随便议论。 
English: Yang Guanghui looked to the north for Qidan, bowed his head and called to Yelu Deguang and said: The emperor has missed me. Yang Guanghui: His son Yang Chengxun and others advised him to go out and surrender. Yang Guanghui said: When I was in charge of the north, I used paper money to sacrifice Tianchi, threw it in and it sank. People said I should be the son of heaven. Let's wait for the right time and not talk about it casually.

古文：承勋知不可，乃杀节度判官丘涛、亲将杜延寿、杨瞻、白延祚等，劫光远幽之，遣人奉表待罪。
现代文：杨承勋知道不行，于是杀掉节度判官丘涛、亲将杜延寿、杨瞻、白延祚等人，劫持杨光速把他幽禁起来，派人送降表等待治罪。
English: Yang Chengxun knew he couldn't do it, so he killed the judge of the festival, Qiu Tao, the generals Du Yanshou, Yang Zhan, Bai Yanjun, and others, kidnapped Yang Guanghui, imprisoned him, and sent someone to wait for the punishment.

古文：承信、承祚皆诣阙自归，而光远亦上章请死。
现代文：杨承信、杨承祚都到京城自己请罪，杨光速也上章请求一死。
English: Yang Chengxin and Yang Chengyao both went to Beijing to plead guilty, and Yang Guanghui also pleaded for death in the last chapter.

古文：出帝以其二子为侍卫将军，赐光远昭书，许以不死，群臣皆以为不可，乃敕李守贞便宜处置。
现代文：晋出帝任命他的两个儿子为侍卫将军，赐给杨光速诏书，许诺不处死他，臣子们都认为不行，于是下令让李守贞随意处置。
English: Emperor Jinzhi appointed two of his sons as bodyguard generals, gave Yang Guang a hasty edict and promised not to execute him, but the courtiers thought it was not possible, so he ordered Li Shouzhen to be disposed of at will.

古文：守贞遣客省副使何延祚杀之于其家。
现代文：李守贞派客省副使何延祚把他杀死在家中。
English: Li Shouzhen sent He Yanjun, the vice-envoy of Hakka Province, to kill him in his home.

古文：延祚至其第，光远方阅马于厩，延祚使一都将入谓之曰： 天使在门，欲归报天子，未有以藉手。 
现代文：何延祚到他家时，杨光速正在马厩察看马匹，何延祚派一个都将进去对他说： 天子的使臣在门口，想回去报告天子，但没有进贡的东西。 
English: When He Yanqi arrived at his home, Yang Guanghui was inspecting the horses in the stables. He Yanqi sent an envoy to enter and said to him: The envoy of the Son of Heaven is at the door, he wants to go back and report to the Son of Heaven, but there is no tribute.

古文：光远曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：杨光速说： 什么意思？ 
English: Yang Guanghui said: What do you mean?

古文：曰： 愿得大王头尔！ 
现代文：回答说： 希望得到你的头而已！ 
English: He replied, "I just want your head!"

古文：光远骂曰： 我有何罪？
现代文：杨光速骂道： 我有什么罪？
English: Yang Guanghui scolded: What is my crime?

古文：昔我以晋安寨降契丹，使尔家世世为天子，我亦望以富贵终身，而反负心若此！ 
现代文：过去我献晋安寨向契丹投降，使得你家代代做天子，我也希望终身富贵，反而如此负心！ 
English: In the past, I offered Jin Anzai to surrender to the Khitan, making your family a godson for generations. I also hoped to be rich for life, but it was so negative!

古文：遂见杀，以病卒闻。
现代文：于是被杀以病死上报。
English: So he was killed and his death was reported as an illness.

古文：承勋事晋为郑州防御使，德光灭晋，使人召承勋至京师，责其劫父，脔而食之，乃以承信为平卢节度使。
现代文：杨承勋在晋任郑州防御使，耶律德光灭晋，派人召杨承勋到京师，斥责他劫持父亲，把他切成肉块吃了，于是任命杨承信焉平卢节度使。
English: After Yang Chengxun was promoted to Zhengzhou Defense Envoy, Yelu De Guangzhi sent someone to summon Yang Chengxun to Beijing to reprimand him for kidnapping his father, cutting him into pieces of meat and eating him, and then appointed Yang Chengxin as Pinglu Festival Envoy.

古文：汉高祖赠光远尚书令，封齐王，命中书舍人张正撰光远碑铭文赐承信，使刻石于青州。
现代文：漠高祖追赠杨光速为尚书令，封为齐王，命令中书舍人张正撰写杨光速墓碑铭文赐给杨承信，让他在青州刻石。
English: Mogao's great-great-grandfather posthumously bestowed Yang Guanghui with the title of Shang Shuling (尚書令) and the title of Qi Wang (齐王), and ordered the scribe Zhang Zheng to write Yang Guanghui's tombstone inscription and give it to Yang Chengxin to carve in Qingzhou.

古文：碑石既立，天大雷电，击折之。
现代文：石碑立起后，天降大雷，击断了石碑。
English: After the stone monument was erected, the sky fell heavy thunder, breaking the stone monument.

古文：阿噔啜初非姓氏，其后改名瑊而姓杨氏。
现代文：阿瞪啜原本不是姓氏，后来改名城而姓杨。
English: Originally, Agatsuso was not a surname, but later changed his name from Cheng to Yang.

古文：光远初名檀，清泰二年，有司言明宗庙讳犯偏傍者皆易之，乃赐名光远云。
现代文：杨光速原名檀，清泰二年，官府建议把犯唐明宗庙名讳偏旁的都改名，于是赐名光速。
English: Yang Guanghui's original name was Dan. In the second year of the Qing Dynasty, the government suggested changing the names of those who had violated the name of the Tang and Ming Dynasty temples, so he was given the name Guanghui.

古文：光远既病秃，而妻又跛其足也，人为之语曰： 自古岂有秃疮天子、跛脚皇后邪？ 
现代文：杨光速既是秃头，而他的妻子又是跛子，人们因此说： 从古到今难道有秃头天子、跛脚皇后吗？ 
English: Yang Guanghui is a bald man, and his wife is a cripple, so people say: Has there ever been a bald prince or a lame queen?

古文：相传以为笑。
现代文：相传为笑柄。
English: Legend has it that he was a laughing stock.

古文：然而召夷狄为天下首祸，卒灭晋氏，疮痍中国者三十馀年，皆光远为之也。
现代文：然而招来夷狄成为天下最大的灾祸，最终消减晋氏，创伤中原三十多年，都是杨光速造成的。
English: However, Zhaolai Yidi became the world's greatest disaster, eventually reducing the Jin clan, and the trauma of the Central Plains for more than thirty years was caused by Yang Guanghui.

