古文：昔周监于二代，三圣制法，立爵五等，封国八百，同姓五十有余。
现代文：过去周朝吸取夏、商两代的教训，文王、武王及周公制定法规，立公、侯、伯、子、男五等爵位，分封八百诸侯国，其中与天子同姓的有五十多个。
English: In the past, the Zhou Dynasty learned the lessons of the Xia and Shang dynasties. King Wen, King Wu and Zhou Gong enacted laws and decreed five ranks of nobility, namely, prince, lord, noble, son and son, and divided them into eight hundred vassal states, among which there were more than fifty with the same surname as Tianzi.

古文：周公、康叔建于鲁、卫，各数百里；太公于齐，亦五侯九伯之地。
现代文：周公、康叔建藩于鲁国、卫国，方圆各有数百里；姜太公在齐国建藩，也是五等诸侯、九州之长的地方。
English: Zhou Gong and Kang Shu built their domains in the states of Lu and Wei, each with a radius of several hundred miles; Jiang Taigong built his domain in the state of Qi, which was also the location of the five great princes and the head of Kyushu.

古文：《诗》载其制曰： 介入惟籓，大师惟垣。
现代文：《诗经》里记载那时的制度说： 把军队作为藩篱，把太师作为垣墙。
English: The system at that time, as recorded in the Book of Songs, said: Use the army as a barrier and the grandmaster as a wall.

古文：大邦惟屏，大宗惟翰。
现代文：把大国诸侯作为屏障，把王室同姓作为柱干。
English: Take the great powers and princes as a barrier, and the royal family with the same name as a pillar.

古文：怀德惟宁，宗子惟城。
现代文：能够合乎德政天下就安宁，分封宗室之子城堡就坚固。
English: If it can conform to German politics, the world will be at peace, and the castle will be strong.

古文：毋俾城坏，毋独斯畏。 
现代文：城堡不可以毁坏，宗室不可以孤立。如不那样，畏惧不安就来了。 
English: The castle must not be destroyed, the family must not be isolated, otherwise, fear and anxiety will come.

古文：所以亲亲贤贤，褒表功德，关诸盛衰，深根固本，为不可拨者也。
现代文：所以亲人和贤人一并受封，褒扬表彰有功德之人，这是关系到国家盛衰、天下稳定的根本，是不能更改的。
English: Therefore, relatives and sages are awarded together, and people with merits are praised and commended. This is fundamental to the rise and fall of the country and the stability of the world, and cannot be changed.

古文：故盛则周、邵相其治，致刑错；衰则五伯扶其弱，与共守。
现代文：因而周朝强盛时有周公、邵公参与治国，达到无人犯法、刑法搁置不用的境界；衰落时有五霸扶助，一同保守天下。
English: Therefore, when the Zhou Dynasty was strong, Zhou Gong and Shao Gong participated in the governance of the country, reaching a state where no one broke the law and criminal law was not used; when the Zhou Dynasty was in decline, it was supported by the Five Dynasties, and together they protected the world.

古文：自幽、平之后，日以陵夷，至虖厄区河洛之间，分为二周，有逃责之台，被窃铁之言。
现代文：自从幽王、平王之后，国家一天天衰微，甚至落到夹在强大的诸侯国之间不安，本身也分裂成东周与西周两个小国，有天子逃债避难的高台，有象征王权的铡刀被偷取藏匿的传言。
English: Since the reigns of Yu Wang and Ping Wang, the country has been declining day by day, even to the point of being caught between powerful vassal states. It has also split into two small countries, East Zhou and West Zhou. There are rumors that the emperor fled to a hill to escape debts, and that the scythe, a symbol of royal power, was stolen and hidden.

古文：然天下谓之共主，强大弗之敢倾。
现代文：然而天下仍称之为共同的主人，强大的诸侯也不敢灭它。
English: However, the world still calls it a common master, and powerful lords do not dare to destroy it.

古文：历载八百余年，数极德尽，既于王赧，降为庶人，用天年终。
现代文：历经八百余年，功德总算失尽，王位也止于赧王，天子被降为庶人，自然亡故。
English: After more than eight hundred years, the merits were finally exhausted, the throne also stopped at the king, the heavenly son was reduced to a commoner, and died of natural causes.

古文：号位已绝于天下，尚犹枝叶相持，莫得居其虚位，海内无主，三十余年。
现代文：虽然称号和王位在天下之内失去，仍有枝叶维持似的，无人敢占据空虚的王位，海内没有天子，有三十余年。
English: Although titles and thrones have been lost throughout the world, there are still branches and leaves that seem to be maintained. No one dares to occupy the empty throne. There is no heavenly son in the sea for more than thirty years.

古文：秦据势胜之地，骋狙诈之兵，蚕食山东，壹切取胜。
现代文：秦朝凭借优越的地势，驱驰着诡诈的军队，吞并崤山以东六个诸侯国，一鼓气取得了胜利。
English: The Qin Dynasty, by virtue of its superior geographical position, drove the treacherous army, annexed six principalities east of Mount Lushan, and won a victory.

古文：因矜其所习，自任私知，姗笑三代，荡灭古法，窃自号为皇帝，而子弟为匹夫，内亡骨肉本根之辅，外亡尺土籓翼之卫。
现代文：因而它夸赞自己熟知天下，自以为一人晓立国之业，毁谤嘲笑三代，清除消灭古代之法，偷偷地将皇帝的称号给了自己，可子弟却是平民，在内没有同本同根的骨肉相辅佐，在外没有有土有地的藩邦相拱卫。
English: Therefore, he boasted that he was familiar with the world, thought that he alone knew the cause of founding the country, slandered and ridiculed three generations, eliminated and eliminated the ancient law, and secretly gave himself the title of emperor. However, his son was a commoner, and there was no bone and flesh with the same root to support each other, and there was no feudal minister with land outside the country.

古文：陈、吴奋其白挺，刘、项随而毙之。
现代文：陈胜、吴广以一根木棍奋起，刘邦、项籍随即灭亡了秦朝。
English: Chen Sheng and Wu Guang stood up with a wooden stick, and Liu Bang and Xiang Qu immediately perished in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：故曰，周过其历，秦不及期，国势然也。
现代文：因此说，周朝享国太久，秦朝没有达到百年，都是国势造成的呀。
English: Therefore, it is said that the Zhou Dynasty ruled the country for too long, and the Qin Dynasty did not reach a hundred years, both of which were caused by the national situation.

古文：汉兴之初，海内新定，同姓寡少，惩戒亡秦孤立之败，于是剖裂疆土，立二等之爵。
现代文：汉朝兴起初年，天下刚刚平定，同姓宗室稀少，高祖吸取灭亡的秦朝因孤立无援而败亡的教训，于是开始割裂疆土，立王侯二等爵。
English: In the first year of the rise of the Han Dynasty, when the country had just been pacified and there were few families with the same surname, Gao Zu learned the lesson of the Qin Dynasty's defeat due to its isolation and lack of support. Therefore, he began to split the territory and establish the title of Prince Second Class.

古文：功臣侯者百有余邑，尊王子弟，大启九国。
现代文：功臣封侯者有一百余座城邑，王室子弟更为尊贵，拥有比九国还大的领地。
English: There are more than a hundred townships of meritorious vassals, and the royal children are even more distinguished, with a territory larger than the Nine Kingdoms.

古文：自雁门以来，尽辽阳，为燕、代。
现代文：自雁门往东，到辽水北岸，是燕国和代国。
English: From the wild goose gate to the east, to the north shore of Liaoshui, is the country of the swallow and the country of the generation.

古文：常山以南，太行左转，度河、济，渐于海，为齐、赵。
现代文：常山往南，太行山往东，过河水与济水，一直入海，是齐国和赵国。
English: Changshan to the south, Taihang Mountain to the east, across the river and Jishui, all the way to the sea, are the countries of Qi and Zhao.

古文：穀、泗以往，奄有龟、蒙，为梁、楚。
现代文：谷水、泅水一带包括龟山和蒙山，是梁、楚二国。
English: The Guishui and Surabaya areas include Mount Kameyama and Mount Mengshan, which are the peaks of Liang and Chu.

古文：东带江、湖，薄会稽，为荆、吴。
现代文：东含江、湖，靠近会稽，是吴国。
English: East of the Yangtze River and the lake, close to Hefei, is Wuzhong.

古文：北界淮濒，略庐、衡，为淮南。
现代文：北临淮河，包括庐山与衡山，是淮南国。
English: North of the Huai River, including Lushan and Hengshan, is South Huai Province.

古文：波汉之阳，亘九嶷，为长沙。
现代文：汉水往南，到九嶷山，是长沙国。
English: If you follow the Han River south to Jiuyuan Mountain, you will arrive in Changsha.

古文：诸侯比境，周匝三垂，外接胡、越。
现代文：各诸侯国一个连一个，环绕在北、束、南三边，外接胡地和南越。
English: Each vassal state one after the other, encircled on the north, west and south sides, and bordered by Hudi and South Vietnam.

古文：天子自有三河、东郡、颍川、南阳，自江陵以西至巴、蜀，北自云中至陇西，与京师内史凡十五郡，公主、列侯颇邑其中。
现代文：天子自己则有河东、河南、河内、东郡、颖川、南阳，从江陵往西到巴蜀，北边从云中到陇西，包括京师共十五郡，其中又有公主、列侯的封邑。
English: Tianzi himself had Hedong, Henan, Hanoi, Donggun, Yingchuan, and Nanyang, from Jiangling to the west to Bashu, and from Yunchu to the west of Shaanxi in the north, including Beijing Division, a total of fifteen counties, among which there were princesses and vassal fiefs.

古文：而籓国大者夸州兼郡，连城数十，宫室百官同制京师，可谓挢枉过其正矣。
现代文：大的藩国跨几州兼有几郡，连接数十城，宫室、百官制度同京师一样，可以说是矫枉过正了。
English: The great domain spanned several states and several counties, connected dozens of cities, and the imperial household and one-hundred-officials system was the same as that of Beijing. It can be said that it was an overcorrection.

古文：虽然，高祖创业，日不暇给，孝惠享国又浅，高后女主摄位，而海内晏加，亡狂狡之忧，卒折诸吕之难，成太宗之业者，亦赖之于诸侯也。
现代文：即使这样，高祖创立基业，一天也没有闲暇，惠帝在位又短，高后以女人摄政，海内却安然无恙，没有偏激可忧，后来摧毁吕氏的祸难，成就文帝的帝业，也是依赖于诸侯之力量。
English: Even so, Gao Zu founded the foundation, and did not have a day of leisure. Hui Di's reign was short, and Gao Po was reigned by a woman. However, the country was safe and sound, and there was nothing to worry about. Later, the disaster that destroyed the Lü Dynasty and the achievement of Emperor Wen's imperial career also depended on the power of the princes.

古文：然诸侯原本以大，末流滥以致溢，小者淫荒越法，大者睽孤横逆，以害身丧国。
现代文：然而诸侯本来就国大势大，末流也泛滥四溢。小一些的荒淫违法，大一点的横行无道，以致害了自己和国家。
English: However, the princes originally had great power over the country, and the end-streams also overflowed. The smaller ones were licentious and illegal, and the larger ones were lawless, resulting in harm to themselves and the country.

古文：故文帝采贾生之议分齐、赵，景帝用晁错之计削吴、楚。
现代文：因此文帝采用贾谊的建议分割齐国和赵国，景帝采用晁错的计谋削弱吴、楚等国。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wen used Jia Rui's suggestion to divide Qi and Zhao, and Emperor Jing used the wrong strategy to weaken Wu, Chu and other countries.

古文：武帝施主父之册，下推恩之令，使诸侯王得分户邑以封子弟，不行黜陡。而籓国自析。
现代文：武帝实施主父的策划，下达推恩令，使诸侯王得以分一部分户数和城邑封给子弟，不用废黜迁徙，藩国自己就分崩离析了。
English: Emperor Wu implemented his father's plan and issued a decree of grace, so that the princes could give a part of the number of households and townships to their children, without having to depose and migrate, and the domain itself would fall apart.

古文：自此以来，齐分为七，赵分为六，梁分为五，淮南分为三。
现代文：自此以后，齐国分成七个小国，赵国分成六个，梁国分成五个，淮南国分成三个。
English: Since then, the inspection has been divided into seven, the trip has been divided into six, the chisel has been divided into five, and Huainan has been divided into three.

古文：皇子始立者，大国不过十余城。
现代文：皇子开始封为王时，大一点的不超过十座城池。
English: When the prince began to be crowned king, there were no more than ten castles.

古文：长沙、燕、代虽有旧名，皆亡南北边矣。
现代文：长沙、燕、代等国虽还有旧名，都没有以前南北的边界了。
English: Although the countries of Changsha, Yan and Dai still have their old names, they no longer have their former north-south borders.

古文：景遭七国之难，抑损诸侯，减黜其官。
现代文：景帝遭受七国灾难，就抑制削弱诸侯，减少罢黜各国官吏。
English: When Emperor Jing suffered the disaster of the Seven Kingdoms, he restrained and weakened the princes, and reduced and dismissed the officials of various countries.

古文：武有衡山、淮南之谋，作左官之律，设附益之法，诸侯惟得衣食税租，不与政事。
现代文：武帝时有衡山、淮南二王的谋反，就设立诸侯官吏的法律，严惩违法之徒，各诸侯只能得到衣食税租，不能参与政事。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu, Hengshan and Huainan two kings conspired to rebel, so he established the law of officials in the provinces and severely punished those who violated the law. Each province could only receive clothing, food, taxes and fees, and could not participate in political affairs.

古文：至于哀、平之际，皆继体苗裔，亲属疏远，生于帷墙之中，不为士民所尊，势与富室亡异。
现代文：到了哀帝、平帝的时候，诸侯都是继承先世的后裔，同天子关系疏远，生在宫室之中，不被士人百姓尊崇，势力与富家无异了。
English: By the time of Emperor Yue and Emperor Ping, the princes were all descendants of the previous generation, estranged from the heavenly son, born in the palace, not respected by the people, and their power was no different from that of the rich.

古文：而本朝短世，国统三绝，是故王莽知汉中外殚微，本末俱弱，亡所忌惮，生其奸心；因母后之权，假伊、周之称，颛作威福庙堂之上，不降价序而运天下。
现代文：而天子又都早逝，连续三朝没有子嗣，所以王莽知道汉朝里外都岌岌可危，本末俱弱，就无所顾忌，生出奸心；凭着姑母太后的权威，假称周公欺骗人心，在朝堂上作威作福，不下台阶就使天下运转。
English: However, all the heavenly sons died early, and there was no heir for three consecutive dynasties. Therefore, Wang Mang knew that the Han Dynasty was in a precarious situation both inside and outside, and was weak at the end of the day, so he had no scruples and had a treacherous heart. With the authority of his aunt, the empress dowager, he pretended to be Zhou Gong to deceive the hearts of the people, and acted as a tyrant and a blessing in the imperial court, and made the world operate without stepping down.

古文：诈谋既成，遂据南面之尊，分遣五威之吏，驰传天下，班行符命。
现代文：奸诈的计谋一成，就篡夺皇帝的尊位，分别遣送官吏迅速传遍天下，颁布皇帝命令。
English: As soon as the treacherous scheme was complete, he usurped the emperor's dignity, dispatched officials separately, quickly spread throughout the world, and promulgated the emperor's order.

古文：汉诸侯王厥角稽首，奉上玺韨，惟恐在后，或乃称美颂德，以求容媚，岂不哀哉！
现代文：汉朝诸侯王慑于淫威，都匍匐在地奉上玉玺绶带，惟恐落在后面，有的还歌功颂德，献媚讨好，真可悲啊！
English: The princes and kings of the Han Dynasty were afraid of arrogance. They all wore jade sashes on the ground, fearing to be left behind. Some of them also sang praises of their achievements and courted flattery. What a pity!

古文：是以究其终始强弱之变，明监戒焉。
现代文：所以我查明诸侯从头至尾由强到弱的变化，以作为惩戒。
English: Therefore, I determined the changes of the lords from strong to weak from beginning to end as a punishment.

