古文：张步弟蓝，将精兵二万守西安，而诸郡合万人守临淄。相距四十里。
现代文：原文汉光武帝时期，张步的弟弟张蓝率领两万精兵据守在西安县，而其他各个郡县则集结了一万人在临淄防守，两城之间相距有四十里远。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Guangwu, Zhang Bu's younger brother Zhang Lan led 20,000 elite soldiers to defend Xi'an County, while other counties gathered 10,000 people to defend Linyi. The distance between the two cities is 40 miles.

古文：耿弇进军二城之间，视西安城小而坚，临淄虽大实易取，乃下令，后五日攻西安。
现代文：汉将耿弇率领军队来到两城之间，发现西安县城虽然很小，但是守备非常坚固；临淄虽然是个大城，但是防守松懈，很容易就被攻占。于是下令，五天后进攻西安县。
English: Han general Geng Xuan led his army to the area between the two cities, and found that although Xi'an County was small, it was well-defended; while Linyi was a large city, it was poorly defended and could be easily captured. He therefore ordered an attack on Xi'an County five days later.

古文：蓝闻，日夜警备。
现代文：张蓝听说耿弇将要率兵攻城，于是日夜加紧严密戒备。
English: Zhang Lan heard that Geng Xuan was going to lead an army to attack the city, so he stepped up his vigilance day and night.

古文：至期，夜半，弇敕诸将皆蓐食，及旦，径趋临淄。半日拔其城，蓝惧，弃城走。
现代文：到了约定的日子，耿弇下令全体士兵天不亮就吃饭，快天亮的时候，抄小路急行军，来到临淄城，只用半天的时间就攻占了临淄。张蓝惊恐之下，竟然弃守西安县城逃逸。
English: On the agreed day, Geng Qian ordered all the soldiers to have dinner before dawn, and when it was almost dawn, they marched to Linyi City, taking only half a day to capture Linyi. Zhang Lan was so frightened that he abandoned the city of Xi'an and fled.

古文：诸将曰： 敕攻西安而乃先临淄，竟并下之，何也？ 
现代文：事后诸将问耿弇： 开始时下令要进攻西安县，可是却发兵攻打临淄城，结果两城却一起攻下了，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Afterwards, the generals asked Geng: Why did you order the attack on Xi'an County at the beginning, but sent troops to attack Linyi City, but ended up capturing both cities at the same time?

古文：弇曰： 西安闻吾攻，必严守具；临淄出不意而至，必自警扰，攻之，必立拔；拔临淄则西安孤，此击一而得二也!
现代文：耿弇说： 西安县城听说我军将要进攻他们，必定会加强防备，但是我军出其不意地进攻临淄城，临淄的守兵一定会因为没有料到而惊慌失措，因此能立即破城。临淄城一破，西安城就陷入了孤立无援的境地，这也就是为什么只攻一城而得到两城的原因。
English: Geng Yao said: Xi'an County heard that our army was going to attack them, so they would strengthen their defenses. However, our army attacked Linyi City unexpectedly. Linyi's defenders must have panicked because they didn't expect it, so they were able to break the city immediately. Once Linyi City was broken, Xi'an City fell into a helpless situation, which is why they only attacked one city and got two cities.

古文：若先攻西安，顿耿弇兵坚城，死伤必多，即拔之，吾深入其地，后乏转输，旬月间不自困乎？ 
现代文：如果先攻打西安县，西安县城坚兵强，难以夺取，双方交战，我军死伤必定惨重，即使获胜，我军深入敌境作战，后方补给不容易，十天半月之后，难保不会自己陷入困境之中。 
English: If we attack Xi'an County first, the city of Xi'an County has strong soldiers and is difficult to capture. If the two sides fight, our army's casualties will be heavy. Even if we win, our army will fight deep into the enemy territory. It is not easy to supply the rear. After ten days and a half months, it will be difficult to get into trouble.

古文：诸将皆服。
现代文：诸将听了之后，都大为佩服。
English: After listening to the generals, they were greatly impressed.

