古文：栾怀子之出，执政使栾子之臣勿从，从栾氏者为大戮施。
现代文：栾盈出奔到楚国，执政的范宣子下令栾氏的家臣不得随从，随从栾氏的一律杀戮，陈尸示众。
English: Zou Ying fled to the State of Chu. The ruling Fan Xuan Zi ordered the Zou family's vassals not to follow him, and all those who followed the Zou family were to be killed and their bodies displayed to the public.

古文：栾氏之臣辛俞行，吏执之，献诸公。
现代文：栾氏的家臣辛俞追随栾盈出奔，被官吏抓住，献给了晋平公。
English: Xin Qi, a retainer of the Zou clan, followed Yu Ying and ran away. He was caught by officials and given to Jin Ping.

古文：公曰： 国有大令，何故犯之？ 
现代文：平公说： 国家有禁令，你为什么要触犯它？ 
English: Ping Gong said: The country has a ban, why do you violate it?

古文：对曰： 臣顺之也，岂敢犯之？
现代文：辛俞回答说： 我是服从命令，那里敢触犯它呢？
English: Hsin-tao replied, "I am obeying an order, who would dare to violate it?"

古文：执政曰 无从栾氏而从君 ，是明令必从君也。
现代文：执政说 不要跟从栾氏，而要跟从国君 ，这是明确规定必须服从国君。
English: The ruling said, "Don't follow the Gong clan, but follow the sovereign," which is a clear stipulation that the sovereign must be obeyed.

古文：臣闻之曰： 三世事家，君之；再世以下，主之。 
现代文：我听说： 三代为大夫的家臣，要事奉大夫如国君，两代以下，要事奉大夫如主人。 
English: I have heard it said that if you are a retainer of a doctor for three generations, you should serve the doctor like a sovereign, and if you are younger than two generations, you should serve the doctor like a master.

古文：事君以死，事主以勤，君之明令也。
现代文：事奉国君要不惜以死殉职，事奉主人要勤勉尽责，这是国君明确的命令。
English: It is a clear order of the sovereign that those who serve the sovereign should not hesitate to die in the line of duty, and those who serve their masters should be diligent and conscientious.

古文：自臣之祖，以无大援于晋国，世隶于栾氏，于今三世矣，臣故不敢不君。
现代文：从我的祖父起，因为在晋国没有多大的依靠，世代隶属于栾氏，到现在已经三代了，我因此不敢不把栾氏当作国君来看待。
English: Since my grandfather, because there is not much to rely on in Jin, generations have been subordinate to the Shun clan, and now there are three generations, so I dare not look at the Shun clan as the king.

古文：今执政曰 不从君者为大戮 ，臣敢忘其死而叛其君，以烦司寇。 
现代文：如今执政说 不随从国君的要杀戮 ，我怎敢忘悼死而背叛我的君主，来麻烦司法官呢？ 
English: How dare I forget to mourn the death of my sovereign and betray him by troubling the magistrate?

古文：公说，固止之，不可，厚赂之。辞曰： 臣尝陈辞矣，心以守志，辞以行之，所以事君也。
现代文：平公听了很高兴，一再制止他跟随栾氏，辛俞不肯，便用厚礼来笼络他，辛俞辞谢说： 我已经陈述过了，人心是用来守住志向的，言辞要付诸实行，这样才能事奉君主。
English: Ping Gong was very pleased to hear this. He repeatedly stopped him from following Yu. Xin Yao refused, so he enticed him with generous gifts. Xin Yao thanked him and said: I have already stated that people's hearts are used to keep their aspirations, and words must be put into practice in order to serve the monarch.

古文：若受君赐，是堕其前言。
现代文：如果接受了您的赏赐，那就毁坏了我先前说过的话。
English: If I accept your reward, it will ruin what I said before.

古文：君问而陈辞，未退而逆之，何以事君？ 
现代文：您问起来我是这样陈述的，还未退下就违背了它，那凭什么来事奉您呢？ 
English: You ask, if I make such a statement, and break it before I resign, why should I serve you?

古文：君知其不可得也，乃遣之。
现代文：平公知道不可能得到辛俞，于是便放他走了。
English: Knowing that it was impossible to get hold of Hsin-tao, Ping-gong let him go.

