古文：樗里子者，名疾，秦惠王之弟也，与惠王异母。
现代文：樗里子，名叫疾，是秦惠王的弟弟，他与惠王不是同一个母亲生的。
English: Qin Hui Wang's younger brother, Zhi, was not born to the same mother as Hui Wang.

古文：母，韩女也。
现代文：他的母亲是韩国女子。
English: His mother is Korean.

古文：樗里子滑稽多智，秦人号曰 智囊 。
现代文：樗里子待人接物能说会道，足智多谋，所以秦人都称他为 智囊 。
English: The Qin people called him a "brain" because of his ability to deal with people and things, and his resourcefulness.

古文：秦惠王八年，爵樗里子右更，使将而伐曲沃，尽出其人，取其城，地入秦。
现代文：秦惠王八年，樗里子封为右更爵位，秦王派他带兵攻打魏国的曲沃，他把那里的人全部赶走，占领了城邑，曲沃周围的土地便并入了秦国。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Qin Hui, Qili Zifeng was promoted to the peerage. The king of Qin sent him to lead an army to attack Quwo in Wei. He drove out all the people there and occupied the towns. The land around Quwo was merged into Qin.

古文：秦惠王二十五年，使樗里子为将伐赵，虏赵将军庄豹，拔蔺。
现代文：秦惠王二十五年，秦王任命樗里子为将军攻打赵国，俘虏了赵国将军庄豹，攻取了蔺邑。
English: In the 25th year of the reign of Qin Hui Wang, the king of Qin appointed Jia Li Zi as a general to attack Zhao Province, captured the general of Zhao Province, Zhuangbao, and captured Jieyi.

古文：明年，助魏章攻楚，败楚将屈丐，取汉中地。
现代文：第二年，他又协助魏章攻打楚国，战败楚将屈丐，夺取了汉中地区。
English: In the following year, he assisted Wei Zhang in attacking the State of Chu. He defeated Chu Zheng and conquered the Hanzhong region.

古文：秦封樗里子，号为严君。
现代文：秦王赐封樗里子，封号是严君。
English: The King of Qin bestowed the title of "Yanjun" (严君) on him.

古文：秦惠王卒，太子武王立，逐张仪、魏章，而以樗里子、甘茂为左右丞相。
现代文：秦惠王死后，太子武王即位，驱逐了张仪和魏章，任命樗里子和甘茂为左右丞相。
English: After the death of Qin Hui Wang, the Crown Prince Wu Wang ascended to the throne, expelled Zhang Yi and Wei Zhang, and appointed Zou Lizi and Gan Mao as the left and right prime ministers.

古文：秦使甘茂攻韩，拔宜阳。使樗里子以车百乘入周。
现代文：秦王派甘茂进攻韩国，一举拿下宜阳，同时派樗里子率领百辆战车进抵周朝都城。
English: King Qin sent Ganmao to attack South Korea, taking Yiyang in one fell swoop. At the same time, he sent Balizi to lead a hundred chariots into the capital city of Zhou Dynasty.

古文：周以卒迎之，意甚敬。
现代文：周王派士兵列队迎接他，态度非常恭敬。
English: King Zhou sent soldiers to line up to greet him, and they were very respectful.

古文：楚王怒，让周，以其重秦客。
现代文：楚王得知后怒不可遏，就责骂周王，因为周王不应当这么敬重秦国的不速之客。
English: When King Chu learned of this, he was furious and scolded King Zhou, because King Zhou should not have so much respect for the uninvited guest from Qin.

古文：游腾为周说楚王曰： 知伯之伐仇犹，遗之广车，因随之以兵，仇犹遂亡。
现代文：对此，游腾替周王劝说楚王道： 先前知伯攻打仇犹时，用赠送大车的办法，趁机让军队跟在后面，结果仇犹灭亡了。
English: In this regard, Yu Teng persuaded King Chu on behalf of King Zhou: Previously, when Zhibo attacked Qiuyu, he took the opportunity to let the army follow behind by giving them a cart. As a result, Qiuyu was destroyed.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：无备故也。
现代文：就是没有防备的缘故啊。
English: It's because they didn't prepare.

古文：齐桓公伐蔡，号曰诛楚，其实袭蔡。
现代文：齐桓公攻打蔡国时，声称是诛罚楚国，其实是偷袭蔡国。
English: When Qi Kuan Gong attacked Cai Guo, he claimed that he was punishing Chu Guo, but in fact he was secretly attacking Cai Guo.

古文：今秦，虎狼之国，使樗里子以车百乘入周，周以仇犹、蔡观焉，故使长戟居前，彊弩在後，名曰卫疾，而实囚之。
现代文：现在秦国，是个如虎似狼的国家，派樗里子带着百辆战车进入周都，居心叵测，周王是以仇犹、蔡国的教训来看待这件事的，所以派手持长戟的兵卒位于前面，让佩带强弓的军士列在后面，表面说是护卫樗里子，实际上是把他看管起来，以防不测。
English: Now Qin, a country like a tiger and a wolf, sent Xilingzi with a hundred chariots into the Zhou capital, deliberately miscalculating. The Zhou king looked at the matter from the perspective of hatred of the Jews and the lessons of Cai Guo. Therefore, he sent soldiers with long swords in the front and sergeants with strong bows in the back, ostensibly to guard Xilingzi, but in fact to keep an eye on him to prevent accidents.

古文：且夫周岂能无忧其社稷哉？
现代文：再说，周王怎能不担忧周朝的天下呢？
English: Besides, how could King Zhou not be worried about the world of the Zhou Dynasty?

古文：恐一旦亡国以忧大王。 
现代文：恐怕一旦亡国会给大王您带来麻烦。 
English: I'm afraid that if you were to die, you would cause trouble for the king.

古文：楚王乃悦。
现代文：楚王听后才高兴起来。
English: Chu Wang only became happy after hearing this.

古文：秦武王卒，昭王立，樗里子又益尊重。
现代文：秦武王去世后，昭王即位，樗里子更加受到尊重了。
English: After the death of King Qinwu, King Zhao ascended to the throne, and Qilian was even more respected.

古文：昭王元年，樗里子将伐蒲。
现代文：昭王元年，樗里子率兵攻打卫国的蒲城。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Zhao, Yao Li Zi led an army to attack the city of Pucheng in defense of the country.

古文：蒲守恐，请胡衍。
现代文：蒲城的长官十分恐惧，便请求胡衍出主意。
English: The magistrate of Pucheng was very frightened and asked Huyan to come up with an idea.

古文：胡衍为蒲谓樗里子曰： 公之攻蒲，为秦乎？为魏乎？
现代文：胡衍便出面替蒲城长官对樗里子说： 您攻打蒲城，是为了秦国呢，还是为了魏国？
English: Hu Yan then came forward on behalf of the governor of Pucheng and said to Yao Lici: Did you attack Pucheng for the sake of Qin or for the sake of Wei?

古文：为魏则善矣，为秦则不为赖矣。
现代文：如果是为了魏国，那当然好了；如果是为了秦国，那就不算有利了。
English: If it's for Wei, then of course it's good; if it's for Qin, then it's not so good.

古文：夫卫之所以为卫者，以蒲也。
现代文：卫国之所以成为卫国，就是由于有蒲城存在。
English: The reason why the country became a protectorate was because of the existence of Pucheng.

古文：今伐蒲入於魏，卫必折而从之。
现代文：现在您攻打它迫使它被划入魏国的版图，整个卫国就会屈服并依附魏国。
English: Now, if you attack it and force it to be included in the territory of Wei, the whole country will succumb and adhere to Wei.

古文：魏亡西河之外而无以取者，兵弱也。
现代文：魏国丧失了西河之外的城邑却没有办法夺回来，就在于兵力太弱。
English: Wei lost the cities and towns beyond the West River, but there was no way to recapture them, because the military force was too weak.

古文：今并卫於魏，魏必彊。
现代文：现在攻打蒲城使卫国并入魏国，魏国就一定会变得强大。
English: If we attack Pucheng now and merge Wei into Wei, then Wei will definitely become strong.

古文：魏彊之日，西河之外必危矣。
现代文：魏国强大的时候，也就是贵国所占城邑的危险之时。
English: When Wei was strong, that is, when the cities occupied by your country were in danger.

古文：且秦王将观公之事，害秦而利魏，王必罪公。 
现代文：况且，秦王要察看您的此次行动，若有害于秦国而让魏国得利，秦王定要加罪于您。 
English: Moreover, the Qin King wants to inspect this action of yours. If it is harmful to Qin and beneficial to Wei, the Qin King will definitely punish you.

古文：樗里子曰： 柰何？ 
现代文：听了这番话，樗里子若有所思地说： 怎么办才好呢？ 
English: After hearing these words, Yuriko said thoughtfully, "What should I do?

古文：胡衍曰： 公释蒲勿攻，臣试为公入言之，以德卫君。 樗里子曰： 善。 
现代文：胡衍顺势便说： 您放弃蒲城不要进攻，我试着替您到蒲城说说这个意思，让卫国国君不忘您给予他的恩德。 樗里子说： 好吧。 
English: Hu Yan said as a matter of course, "Don't attack if you give up Pucheng, I will try to go to Pucheng to say this for you, so that the Emperor won't forget the kindness you have shown him."

古文：胡衍入蒲，谓其守曰： 樗里子知蒲之病矣，其言曰必拔蒲。
现代文：胡衍进入蒲城后，就对那个长官说： 樗里子已经掌握蒲城困厄的处境了，他声言一定拿下蒲城。
English: After Hu Yan entered the city of Putuo, he said to the magistrate: "Ying Li Zi has already mastered the difficult situation in the city of Putuo. He said that he would definitely win the city of Putuo.

古文：衍能令释蒲勿攻。 
现代文：不过，我胡衍能让他放弃蒲城，不再进攻。 
English: However, I was able to get him to give up Pucheng and stop attacking.

古文：蒲守恐，因再拜曰： 原以请。 
现代文：蒲城长官十分恐惧，听了胡衍的话，象是见到了救星，拜了又拜连声说： 求您施恩救助。 
English: The governor of the city of Pucheng was very frightened. After listening to Hu Yan's words, it was as if he had seen a savior. He bowed and bowed again and again, saying, "Please grant us your grace and help us."

古文：因效金三百斤，曰： 秦兵苟退，请必言子於卫君，使子为南面。 
现代文：于是献上黄金三百斤，又表示说： 秦国军队真的撤退了，请让我一定把您的功劳报告给卫国国君，让您享受国君一样的待遇。 
English: He then offered 300 catties of gold and said, "Qin's army has really retreated, please let me report your achievement to Emperor Wei, so that you can enjoy the same treatment as the Emperor."

古文：故胡衍受金於蒲以自贵於卫。
现代文：因此，胡衍从蒲城得到重金而使自己在卫国成了显贵。
English: As a result, Hu Yan received a large sum of money from Puteng, which made him a prominent person in the motherland.

古文：於是遂解蒲而去。还击皮氏，皮氏未降，又去。
现代文：这时，樗里子已解围撤离了蒲城，回兵去攻打魏国城邑皮氏，皮氏没投降，便又撤离了。
English: At this time, Yili Zi had lifted the siege and evacuated Pucheng, and returned to attack the Pi clan in Wei Guocheng. The Pi clan did not surrender, and then withdrew.

古文：昭王七年，樗里子卒，葬于渭南章台之东。
现代文：昭王七年，樗里子去世，葬在渭水南边章台之东。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of King Zhao, Yili Zi died and was buried in the east of Zhangdai, south of Surabaya.

古文：曰： 後百岁，是当有天子之宫夹我墓。 
现代文：他临终前曾预言说： 百年之后，这里会有天子的宫殿夹着我的坟墓。 
English: Before his death, he had prophesied: "A hundred years from now, there will be a palace of the Son of Heaven here, holding my grave.

古文：樗里子疾室在於昭王庙西渭南阴乡樗里，故俗谓之樗里子。
现代文：樗里子嬴疾的家在昭王庙西边渭水之南的阴乡樗里，因此人们俗称他为樗里子。
English: His home was in the gloomy countryside south of Surabaya on the west side of the Zhao Wang Temple, so people commonly called him "Romeo of Surabaya."

古文：至汉兴，长乐宫在其东，未央宫在其西，武库正直其墓。
现代文：到了汉朝兴起，所建长乐宫就在他坟墓的东边，而未央宫则在他坟墓的西边，武库正对着他的坟墓，果如所言。
English: When the Han Dynasty arose, the Changle Palace was built on the east side of his grave, while the Weiyang Palace was on the west side of his grave, and the arsenal was facing his grave, as was said.

古文：秦人谚曰： 力则任鄙，智则樗里。 
现代文：秦国人有句谚语说： 力气大要算任鄙，智谋多要算樗里。 
English: Qin people have a saying: "Great strength should be reckoned as reckless, and great wisdom should be reckoned as wise."

古文：甘茂者，下蔡人也。
现代文：甘茂，是下蔡人。
English: Kammao is the next Tsaijin.

古文：事下蔡史举先生，学百家之术。
现代文：曾侍奉下蔡的史举先生，跟他学习诸子百家的学说。
English: Mr. Shih Ju, who once served under Cai, studied the teachings of the hundreds of scholars with him.

古文：因张仪、樗里子而求见秦惠王。
现代文：后来通过张仪、樗里子的引荐得到拜见秦惠王的机会。
English: Later, through the introduction of Zhang Yi and Zou Lizi, he got the opportunity to visit Qin Hui Wang.

古文：王见而说之，使将，而佐魏章略定汉中地。
现代文：惠王接见后，很喜欢他，就派他带兵，去帮助魏章夺取汉中地区。
English: After Hui Wang received him, he liked him very much and sent him to lead an army to help Wei Zhang seize the Hanzhong region.

古文：惠王卒，武王立。
现代文：惠王死后，武王即位。
English: After the death of King Hui, King Wu ascended the throne.

古文：张仪、魏章去，东之魏。
现代文：当时张仪、魏章已离开秦国，跑到东边的魏国。
English: At that time, Zhang Yi and Wei Zhang had already left Qin and fled to Wei in the east.

古文：蜀侯煇、相壮反，秦使甘茂定蜀。
现代文：不久，秦公子蜀侯辉和他的辅相陈壮谋反，武王就指派甘茂去平定蜀地。
English: Soon after, the Qin prince Shu Hou Hui and his aide Chen Zhuang plotted a rebellion, and King Wu assigned Gan Mao to pacify Shu.

古文：还，而以甘茂为左丞相，以樗里子为右丞相。
现代文：返回秦国后，武王任命甘茂为左丞相，任命樗里子为右丞相。
English: After returning to Qin, King Wu appointed Ganmao as the Minister of the Left and appointed Qilian as the Minister of the Right.

古文：秦武王三年，谓甘茂曰： 寡人欲容车通三川，以窥周室，而寡人死不朽矣。 
现代文：秦武王三年，武王对甘茂说： 本人有个心愿想乘着垂帷挂幔的车子，通过三川之地，去看一看周朝都城，即使死去也算心满意足了。 
English: In the third year of the reign of King Wu of Qin, King Wu said to Gan Mao: I myself have a wish to take a carriage with a hanging curtain, pass through the land of the Three Rivers, and see the capital of the Zhou Dynasty. Even if I die, I will be satisfied.

古文：甘茂曰： 请之魏，约以伐韩，而令向寿辅行。 
现代文：甘茂心领神会，便说： 请允许我出使魏国，与魏国相约去攻打韩国，并请让向寿辅助我一同前往。 
English: When Ganmao's heart was calmed, he said, "Please allow me to send an envoy to Wei, and make an appointment with Wei to attack Korea, and please let Xiangshou assist me to go with him."

古文：甘茂至，谓向寿曰： 子归，言之於王曰 魏听臣矣，然原王勿伐 。
现代文：武王应许了甘茂的请求。甘茂到魏国后，就对向寿说： 您回去，把出使的情况报告给武王说 魏国听从我的主张了，但我希望大王先不要攻打韩国。
English: King Wu granted his request. After he arrived in Wei, Kammao said to Xiang Shou, "Go back and report to King Wu that Wei has listened to my suggestion, but I hope the king will not attack Korea first."

古文：事成，尽以为子功。 
现代文：事成之后，全算作您的功劳。 
English: When it's all over, you'll get all the credit.

古文：向寿归，以告王，王迎甘茂於息壤。
现代文：向寿回到秦国，把甘茂的话报告给武王，武王到息壤迎接甘茂。
English: Xiang Shou returned to Qin and reported Kamo's words to King Wu, who came to meet Kamo.

古文：甘茂至，王问其故。
现代文：甘茂抵达息壤，武王问他先不攻打韩国是什么缘故。
English: When Gammao arrived at his resting place, King Wu asked him why he did not attack Korea first.

古文：对曰： 宜阳，大县也，上党、南阳积之久矣。
现代文：甘茂回答说： 宜阳，是个大县，上党、南阳财赋的积贮经时很久了。
English: Ganmao replied, "Yiyang is a large county, and it has been a long time since the party and Nanyang's wealth were accumulated.

古文：名曰县，其实郡也。
现代文：名称叫县，其实是个郡。
English: It's called a county, but it's actually a county.

古文：今王倍数险，行千里攻之，难。
现代文：现在大王离开自己所凭据的几处险要关隘，远行千里去攻打它们，取胜有很大困难。
English: Now the great king has left several places where his credentials are almost too narrow, and he has traveled thousands of miles to attack them, and it is very difficult to win.

古文：昔曾参之处费，鲁人有与曾参同姓名者杀人，人告其母曰 曾参杀人 ，其母织自若也。
现代文：从前，曾参住在费邑，鲁国有个与曾参同姓同名的人杀了人，有人告诉曾参的母亲说 曾参杀了人 ，他的母亲正在织布神情泰然自若。
English: Once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time, once upon a time

古文：顷之，一人又告之曰 曾参杀人 ，其母尚织自若也。
现代文：过了一会儿，一个人又来告诉他的母亲说 曾参杀了人 ，他的母亲仍然织布神情不变。
English: After a while, another man came to tell his mother that he had been involved in a murder, but his mother remained impassive.

古文：顷又一人告之曰 曾参杀人 ，其母投杼下机，逾墙而走。
现代文：不一会，又有一个人告诉他的母亲说 曾参杀了人 ，他的母亲扔下梭子，走下织布机，翻墙逃跑了。
English: Soon after, another man told his mother that he had participated in a murder, and his mother threw down the shuttle, stepped off the loom, climbed over the wall and ran away.

古文：夫以曾参之贤与其母信之也，三人疑之，其母惧焉。
现代文：凭着曾参的贤德与他母亲对他的深信不疑，有三个人怀疑他，还使他母亲真的害怕他杀了人。
English: With Zeng Zeng's virtue and his mother's deep belief in him, three people doubted him, and his mother was really afraid that he had killed someone.

古文：今臣之贤不若曾参，王之信臣又不如曾参之母信著参也，疑臣者非特三人，臣恐大王之投杼也。
现代文：现在我的贤能比不上曾参，大王对我的信任也不如曾参的母亲信任曾参，可是怀疑我的决非只是三个人，我唯恐大王也象曾母投杼一样，怀疑我啊。
English: Now my ability is not as good as Zeng Zeng's, and the great king's trust in me is not as good as Zeng Zeng's mother's trust in Zeng Zeng. However, it is by no means just three people who doubt me. I am afraid that the great king will also doubt me like his great-grandmother did.

古文：始张仪西并巴蜀之地，北开西河之外，南取上庸，天下不以多张子而以贤先王。
现代文：当初，张仪在西边兼并巴蜀的土地，在北面扩大了西河之外的疆域，在南边夺取了上庸，天下人并不因此赞扬张仪，而是认为大王贤能。
English: At first, Zhang Yi annexed the land of Bashu in the west, expanded the territory beyond the West River in the north, and seized Shangyong in the south. People around the world did not praise Zhang Yi for this, but thought that the great king was virtuous.

古文：魏文侯令乐羊将而攻中山，三年而拔之。
现代文：魏文侯让乐羊带兵去攻打中山国，打了三年才攻下中山。
English: Wei Wenhou let Le Yang lead the troops to attack Zhongshan Province, and it took three years to conquer Zhongshan.

古文：乐羊返而论功，文侯示之谤书一箧。
现代文：乐羊回到魏国论功请赏，而魏文侯把一箱子告发信拿给他看。
English: When Le Yang returned to Wei, he asked for a reward, and Wei Wenhou showed him a box of letters.

古文：乐羊再拜稽首曰： 此非臣之功也，主君之力也。 
现代文：吓得乐羊一连两次行跪拜大礼说： 这可不是我的功劳，全靠主上的威力啊。 
English: Terrified, Le Sheep bowed twice in a row and said, "This is not my doing, it is all by the power of the Lord."

古文：今臣，羁旅之臣也。
现代文：如今我是个寄居此地的臣僚。
English: Now I'm a minister living here.

古文：樗里子、公孙奭二人者挟韩而议之，王必听之，是王欺魏王而臣受公仲侈之怨也。 
现代文：樗里子和公孙大奭二人会以韩国国力强为理由来同我争议攻韩的得失，大王一定会听从他们的意见，这样就会造成大王欺骗魏王而我将遭到韩相公仲侈怨恨的结果。 
English: The two of them would argue with me about the merits and demerits of attacking Korea on the grounds of Korea's national strength, and the king would certainly listen to their opinions. This would result in the king deceiving the Wei king, and I would be subjected to the resentment of the Korean king.

古文：王曰： 寡人不听也，请与子盟。 
现代文：武王说： 我不听他们的，请让我跟您盟誓。 
English: King Wu said, "I will not listen to them, please let me swear with you."

古文：卒使丞相甘茂将兵伐宜阳。
现代文：终于让丞相甘茂带兵攻打宜阳。
English: Finally, he allowed the chancellor, Kanmao, to lead an army to attack Yiyang.

古文：五月而不拔，樗里子、公孙奭果争之。
现代文：打了五个月仍然拿不下宜阳，樗里子和公孙奭果然提出反对意见。
English: After five months of fighting, they still couldn't take Yiyang. Zou Lizi and Gongsun Yao finally raised their objections.

古文：武王召甘茂，欲罢兵。
现代文：武王召甘茂回国，打算退兵不攻了。
English: King Wu summoned Kammao to return to the country, intending to withdraw and not attack.

古文：甘茂曰： 息壤在彼。 王曰： 有之。 
现代文：甘茂说： 息壤就在那里，您可不要忘记 武王说： 有过盟誓。 
English: Ganmao said, "The resting place is right there. Don't forget, King Wu said, 'There was an oath.

古文：因大悉起兵，使甘茂击之。斩首六万，遂拔宜阳。
现代文：于是调集了全部兵力，让甘茂进攻宜阳，斩敌六万人，终于拿下了宜阳。
English: As a result, all the troops were mobilized, so that Ganmao attacked Yiyang, defeated sixty thousand enemies, and finally won Yiyang.

古文：韩襄王使公仲侈入谢，与秦平。
现代文：韩襄王派公仲侈到秦国谢罪，同秦国讲和。
English: King Han Xiang sent Gongzhong to Qin to apologize and make peace.

古文：武王竟至周，而卒於周。
现代文：武王终于通过了三川之地到了周都，最后死在了那里。
English: King Wu finally passed through the land of Mikawa to Zhou, and finally died there.

古文：其弟立，为昭王。
现代文：武王的弟弟即位，就是昭王。
English: King Wu's younger brother acceded to the throne, that is, King Zhao.

古文：王母宣太后，楚女也。
现代文：昭王的母亲宣太后是楚国女子。
English: Emperor Zhao's mother, Empress Dowager Xuan, was a woman from the State of Chu.

古文：楚怀王怨前秦败楚於丹阳而韩不救，乃以兵围韩雍氏。
现代文：楚怀王由于怨恨从前秦国在丹阳打败楚国的时候，韩国坐视不救，于是就带兵围攻韩国雍氏。
English: Due to his grudge, when the former Qin State defeated the State of Chu in Danyang, the King of Chu Hui allowed South Korea to sit back and watch helplessly, so he led his troops to besiege the Korean Yong Dynasty.

古文：韩使公仲侈告急於秦。
现代文：韩王派公仲侈到秦国告急求援。
English: King Han sent Gongzhong to Qin to appeal for help.

古文：秦昭王新立，太后楚人，不肯救。
现代文：秦昭王刚刚即位，太后又是楚国人，所以不肯出兵救援。
English: Qin Zhao Wang had just ascended to the throne, and the empress dowager was a native of Chu, so she refused to send troops to the rescue.

古文：公仲因甘茂，茂为韩言於秦昭王曰： 公仲方有得秦救，故敢扞楚也。
现代文：公仲侈就去托付甘茂，甘茂便替韩国向秦昭王进言说： 公仲侈正是因为渴望得到秦国援救，所以才敢于抵抗楚国。
English: Gongzhong Li went to entrust Ganmao, and Ganmao advised Qin Zhaowang on behalf of South Korea, saying: It is precisely because Gongzhong Li is eager to be rescued by Qin that he dares to resist Chu.

古文：今雍氏围，秦师不下殽，公仲且仰首而不朝，公叔且以国南合於楚。
现代文：眼下雍氏被围攻，秦军不肯出殽山救援，公仲侈将会轻蔑秦国不来朝见了。
English: At the moment, the Yong Dynasty was besieged, the Qin Army refused to come out to rescue Lushan, and Gongzhong Luxi would despise the Qin State for not coming to see him in the morning.

古文：楚、韩为一，魏氏不敢不听，然则伐秦之形成矣。
现代文：韩公叔也将会让韩国向南同楚国联合，楚国和韩国一旦联合在一起，魏国就不敢不听它的摆布，这样一来，攻打秦国的形势就会形成了。
English: Uncle Han will also let South Korea unite with Chu to the south. Once Chu and South Korea are united, Wei will not dare not to listen to its manipulation. In this way, the situation of attacking Qin will be formed.

古文：不识坐而待伐孰与伐人之利？ 秦王曰： 善。 
现代文：您看坐等别人进攻与主动进攻别人相比，哪样有利？ 秦昭王说： 好。 
English: Compared with waiting for others to attack and actively attacking others, which is more advantageous? Qin Zhaowang said: Good.

古文：乃下师於殽以救韩。
现代文：于是就让军队下殽山去救韩国。
English: So the army was sent down to Lushan to save South Korea.

古文：楚兵去。
现代文：楚国军队随即撤离。
English: The Chu troops then withdrew.

古文：秦使向寿平宜阳，而使樗里子、甘茂伐魏皮氏。
现代文：秦王让向寿去平定宜阳，同时派樗里子和甘茂去攻打魏国皮氏。
English: The Qin king sent Xiangshou to subdue Yiyang, and at the same time sent Yan Lizi and Gan Mao to attack the Wei Guo Pi clan.

古文：向寿者，宣太后外族也，而与昭王少相长，故任用。
现代文：向寿，是宣太后的娘家亲戚，与昭王从少年时就很要好，所以被昭王任用。
English: Xiang Shou, a relative of Empress Dowager Xuan's daughter, had been very close to King Zhao since he was a boy, so he was appointed by King Zhao.

古文：向寿如楚，楚闻秦之贵向寿，而厚事向寿。
现代文：向寿先到了楚国，楚王听说秦王十分敬重向寿，便优厚地礼遇向寿。
English: Xiang Shou arrived in Chu first, and the King of Chu heard that the King of Qin respected Xiang Shou very much, and treated him with great courtesy.

古文：向寿为秦守宜阳，将以伐韩。
现代文：向寿替秦国驻守宜阳，准备据此攻打韩国。
English: Xiang Shou was stationed in Yiyang on behalf of Qin and prepared to attack Korea.

古文：韩公仲使苏代谓向寿曰： 禽困覆车。
现代文：韩相公仲侈派苏代对向寿说： 野兽被围困急了是能撞翻猎人车子的。
English: Han Sang Gongzhong, a member of the pro-Soviet faction, said to Xiang Shou: "When a beast is in a hurry, it can overturn a hunter's car.

古文：公破韩，辱公仲，公仲收国复事秦，自以为必可以封。
现代文：您攻破韩国，虽使公仲侈受辱，但公仲侈仍可收拾韩国局面再去事奉秦国，他会自认为一定可以得到秦国的封赐。
English: Although you defeated South Korea and humiliated Gongzhong Luxu, Gongzhong Luxu can still clean up the situation in South Korea and then serve Qin. He will think that he can definitely get the title of Qin.

古文：今公与楚解口地，封小令尹以杜阳。
现代文：现在您把解口送给楚国，又把杜阳封给下小令尹，使秦、楚交好。
English: Now, you are sending the answer to the State of Chu, and also giving the Duyang seal to the lower-ranking Yin, so that Qin and Chu can be reconciled.

古文：秦楚合，复攻韩，韩必亡。
现代文：秦、楚联合，无非是再次攻打韩国，韩国肯定要灭亡。
English: The Qin and Chu alliance is nothing more than another attack on South Korea, and South Korea will surely perish.

古文：韩亡，公仲且躬率其私徒以阏於秦。
现代文：韩国要灭亡，公仲侈必将亲自率领他的私家徒隶去顽强抗拒秦国。
English: If Korea were to perish, Gongzhong Luxi would certainly personally lead his private army to stubbornly resist Qin.

古文：原公孰虑之也。 
现代文：希望您深思熟虑。 
English: I hope you have thought this through.

古文：向寿曰： 吾合秦楚非以当韩也，子为寿谒之公仲，曰秦韩之交可合也。 
现代文：向寿说： 我联合秦、楚两国，并不是对付韩国的，您替我把这个意思向公仲侈申明，说秦国与韩国的关系是可以合作的。 
English: Xiang Shou said: I am uniting the two countries of Qin and Chu, and I am not against South Korea. You should clarify this meaning to Gongzhong for me, and say that the relationship between Qin and South Korea can be cooperative.

古文：苏代对曰： 原有谒於公。
现代文：苏代回答说： 我愿意向您进一言。
English: The Sudetenland replied: I would like to say a few words to you.

古文：人曰贵其所以贵者贵。
现代文：人们说尊重别人所尊重的东西，才能赢得别人对自己的尊重。
English: It is said that respect for what others respect earns respect for oneself.

古文：王之爱习公也，不如公孙奭；其智能公也，不如甘茂。
现代文：秦王亲近您，比不上亲近公孙奭；秦王赏识您的智慧才能，也比不上赏识甘茂。
English: The King of Qin is not as close to you as he is to Gongsun Yao; the King of Qin is not as appreciative of your wisdom and talent as he is of Gan Mao.

古文：今二人者皆不得亲於秦事，而公独与王主断於国者何？
现代文：可是如今这两个人都不能直接参与秦国大事，而您却独能与秦王对秦国大事作出决策，这是什么原因呢？
English: But now, neither of these two people can directly participate in the great events of Qin, and you are the only one who can make decisions on the great events of Qin with the Qin king. What is the reason for this?

古文：彼有以失之也。
现代文：是他们各有自己失去信任的地方啊。
English: They each have their own reasons for losing trust.

古文：公孙奭党於韩，而甘茂党於魏，故王不信也。
现代文：公孙奭偏向韩国，而甘茂偏袒魏国，所以秦王不信任他们。
English: King Sun Quan favored Korea, while King Gan Mao favored Wei, so King Qin did not trust them at all.

古文：今秦楚争彊而公党於楚，是与公孙奭、甘茂同道也，公何以异之？
现代文：现在秦国与楚国争强，可是您却偏护楚国，这是与公孙奭、甘茂走的同一条路。
English: Now Qin and Chu are competing for strength, but you prefer to protect Chu. This is the same path as Gongsun Rong and Ganmao.

古文：人皆言楚之善变也，而公必亡之，是自为责也。
现代文：您靠什么来与他们相区别呢？人们都说楚国是个善于权变的国家，您一定会在与楚国结交上栽跟头，这是自惹麻烦。
English: What do you rely on to distinguish yourself from them? People say that Chu is a country that is good at coups, and you will certainly fall into the trap of making friends with Chu, which is self-inflicted trouble.

古文：公不如与王谋其变也，善韩以备楚，如此则无患矣。
现代文：您不如与秦王谋划对付楚国权变的策略，与韩国友善而防备楚国，这样就没有忧患了。
English: You might as well plan a strategy to deal with the coup d'etat in Ch'u with King Qin, and be friendly with South Korea to prevent the coup in Ch'u. Then there will be no worries.

古文：韩氏必先以国从公孙奭而後委国於甘茂。
现代文：韩国与秦国结好必定先把国家大事交给公孙奭，听从他的处理意见，而后会把国家托付给甘茂。
English: If South Korea and Qin were to make peace, they would first entrust the affairs of the country to Gongsun Qian and listen to his advice, and then entrust the country to Gan Mao.

古文：韩，公之雠也。
现代文：韩国，是您的仇敌。
English: South Korea is your enemy.

古文：今公言善韩以备楚，是外举不僻雠也。 
现代文：如今您提出与韩国友好而防备楚国，这就是外交结盟不避仇敌啊。 
English: Now you are proposing to be friendly with South Korea and guard against Chu, which is a diplomatic alliance that does not avoid enemies.

古文：向寿曰： 然，吾甚欲韩合。 
现代文：向寿说： 是这样，我是很想与韩国合作的。 
English: Xiang Shou said: That's right, I really want to cooperate with South Korea.

古文：对曰： 甘茂许公仲以武遂，反宜阳之民，今公徒收之，甚难。 
现代文：苏代回答说： 甘茂曾答应公仲侈把武遂还给韩国，让宜阳的百姓返回宜阳，现在您一味想着收回武遂，很难办到。 
English: Sudai replied, "Ganmao had promised Gongzhongli to return Wusui to Korea and let the people of Yiyang return to Yiyang, but now you are only thinking about taking back Wusui, which is difficult to do.

古文：向寿曰： 然则奈何？
现代文：向寿说： 既然如此，那该怎么办呢？
English: Xiang Shou said, "In that case, what should we do?"

古文：武遂终不可得也？ 
现代文：武遂就终究不能得到了？ 
English: So Wu Sui couldn't get it after all?

古文：对曰： 公奚不以秦为韩求颍川於楚？
现代文：苏代回答说： 您为什么不借重秦国的声威，替韩国向楚国索回颍川呢？
English: Sudai replied, "Why don't you use the prestige of Qin to ask Chu for the return of the Min River for Korea?

古文：此韩之寄地也。公求而得之，是令行於楚而以其地德韩也。
现代文：颍川是韩国的寄托之地，您若索取并得到它，这是您的政令在楚国得到推行而拿楚国的地盘让韩国感激您。
English: Yeoncheon is a place of trust for South Korea. If you ask for it and receive it, this is your decree being implemented in Choo and taking Choo's land for South Korea to be grateful to you.

古文：公求而不得，是韩楚之怨不解而交走秦也。
现代文：您若索取而得不到它，这样韩国与楚国的怨仇不能化解就会交相巴结秦国。
English: If you ask for it and don't get it, then if the enmity between Korea and Chu cannot be resolved, you will have to deal with Qin.

古文：秦楚争彊，而公徐过楚以收韩，此利於秦。 
现代文：秦楚两国争强，您一点一点地责备楚国来使韩逐渐向您靠拢，这大大有利于秦国。 
English: The two countries of Qin and Chu are competing for strength. You are gradually bringing Korea closer to you by reproaching Chu little by little, which is greatly beneficial to Qin.

古文：向寿曰： 柰何？ 
现代文：向寿听了后，掂量着利弊，一时下不了决心，便顺口说出： 怎么办好呢？ 
English: After listening to Xiang Shou, he weighed up the pros and cons. Unable to make up his mind for a moment, he casually said: What should I do?

古文：对曰： 此善事也。
现代文：苏代立即答道： 这是件好事啊。
English: Sudai immediately replied: This is a good thing.

古文：甘茂欲以魏取齐，公孙奭欲以韩取齐。
现代文：甘茂想要借着魏国的力量去攻打齐国，公孙奭打算凭着韩国的势力去攻打齐国。
English: Gammao wanted to use the power of Wei to attack Qi, while Gongsun Jun intended to use the power of Korea to attack Qi.

古文：今公取宜阳以为功，收楚韩以安之，而诛齐魏之罪，是以公孙奭、甘茂无事也。 
现代文：现在您夺取了宜阳作为功劳，又取得了楚国和韩国的信任并使它们安定下来，进而再诛罚齐国、魏国的罪过，由于这样做了，公孙奭和甘茂的打算便都将化为泡影，他们在秦国的权势也就会进一步削弱。
English: Now that you have seized Yiyang as a merit, gained the trust of Chu and South Korea and stabilized them, and then punished the sins of Qi and Wei, by doing so, the plans of Gongsun Rong and Ganmao will be reduced to nothing, and their power in Qin will be further weakened.

古文：甘茂竟言秦昭王，以武遂复归之韩。
现代文：甘茂终于向秦昭王提出，把武遂归还给韩国。
English: Kammao finally proposed to King Qin Zhaowang that Wusui be returned to Korea.

古文：向寿、公孙奭争之，不能得。
现代文：向寿和公孙奭竭力反对这么做，但没有成功。
English: Xiang Shou and Gong Sun Yao tried their best to oppose this, but failed.

古文：向寿、公孙奭由此怨，谗甘茂。
现代文：向寿和公孙奭因此而怨愤，常在昭王面前说甘茂的坏话。
English: As a result, Xiang Shou and Gongsun Yao became resentful and often spoke ill of Gan Mao in front of King Zhao.

古文：茂惧，辍伐魏蒲阪，亡去。
现代文：甘茂恐惧，怕有不测，便停止攻打魏国的蒲阪，乘机逃亡而去。
English: Fearful and apprehensive, Ganmao stopped attacking the Wei kingdom of Busan and took the opportunity to flee.

古文：樗里子与魏讲，罢兵。
现代文：樗里子与魏国和解，撤兵作罢。
English: Hailishi reconciled with Wei and called off the withdrawal.

古文：甘茂之亡秦奔齐，逢苏代。
现代文：甘茂逃出秦国跑到齐国，路上恰巧碰上苏代。
English: Kammao escaped from Qin and ran to Qi. On the way, he happened to run into Su Dai.

古文：代为齐使於秦。
现代文：当时，苏代正替齐国出使秦国。
English: At that time, the Soviet dynasty was sending an envoy to Qin in place of Qi.

古文：甘茂曰： 臣得罪於秦，惧而遯逃，无所容迹。
现代文：甘茂说： 我在秦国获罪，怕遭殃祸便逃了出来，现在还没有容身之地。
English: Ganmao said, "I was convicted of a crime in Qin, but I fled out of fear of being harmed, and now there is no place for me.

古文：臣闻贫人女与富人女会绩，贫人女曰： 我无以买烛，而子之烛光幸有馀，子可分我馀光，无损子明而得一斯便焉。 
现代文：我听说贫家女和富家女在一起搓麻线，贫家女说： 我没有钱买蜡烛，而您的烛光幸好有剩余，请您分给我一点剩余的光亮，这无损于您的照明，却能使我同您一样享用烛光的方便。 
English: I heard that a poor woman and a rich woman were weaving a nettle thread together, and the poor woman said: I have no money to buy a candle, but your candlelight fortunately has a surplus, please give me a little surplus light, which does not harm your lighting, but allows me to enjoy the convenience of candlelight like you.

古文：今臣困而君方使秦而当路矣。
现代文：现在我处于困窘境地，而您正出使秦国，大权在握。
English: Now I am in a difficult situation, and you are the envoy of Qin, and the power is in your hands.

古文：茂之妻子在焉，原君以馀光振之。 
现代文：我的妻子儿女还在秦国，希望您拿点余光救济他们。 
English: My wife and children are still in Qin. I hope you can spare some time to help them.

古文：苏代许诺。遂致使於秦。
现代文：苏代应承下来，于是出使到达秦国。
English: The Su Dynasty should take over, so the envoy arrived in Qin.

古文：已，因说秦王曰： 甘茂，非常士也。
现代文：完成任务后，苏代借机劝说秦王道： 甘茂，是个不平常的士人。
English: After completing the task, Su Dai took the opportunity to persuade Qin Wang: Ganmao is an unusual scholar.

古文：其居於秦，累世重矣。自殽塞及至鬼谷，其地形险易皆明知之。
现代文：他在秦国居住多年，连续三代受到重用，从殽塞至鬼谷，全部地形何处险要何处平展，他都了如指掌。
English: He has lived in Qin for many years, and has been heavily used for three consecutive generations. He knows all the terrain, from Yuxi to Devil's Valley, where it is almost flat.

古文：彼以齐约韩魏反以图秦，非秦之利也。 
现代文：如果他依靠齐国与韩国、魏国约盟联合，反过来图谋秦国，对秦国可不算有利呀。 
English: If he relied on the alliance of Qi with Korea and Wei, and in turn plotted against Qin, it would not be beneficial to Qin.

古文：秦王曰： 然则柰何？ 
现代文：秦王说： 既然这样，那么该怎么办呢？ 
English: Qin Wang said, "Since this is the case, what should we do?"

古文：苏代曰： 王不若重其贽，厚其禄以迎之，使彼来则置之鬼谷，终身勿出。 秦王曰： 善。 
现代文：苏代说： 大王不如送他更加贵重的礼物，给他更加丰厚的俸禄，把他迎回来，假使他回来了，就把他安置在鬼谷，终身不准出来。 秦王说： 好。 
English: Sudai said, "It would be better for the king to give him a more valuable gift, give him a more generous salary, and welcome him back. If he comes back, he will be placed in the Devil's Valley and not allowed to leave for the rest of his life." King Qin said, "Good."

古文：即赐之上卿，以相印迎之於齐。
现代文：随即赐给甘茂上卿官位，并派人带着相印到齐国迎接他。
English: He immediately gave Kammao the title of Shangjing, and sent someone to meet him in Qi with a seal.

古文：甘茂不往。
现代文：甘茂执意不回秦国。
English: Ganmao was determined not to return to Qin.

古文：苏代谓齐湣王曰： 夫甘茂，贤人也。
现代文：苏代对齐湣王说： 那个甘茂，可是个贤人。
English: Sudai said to King Qianlong: That Ganmao is a wise man.

古文：今秦赐之上卿，以相印迎之。
现代文：现在秦国已经赐给上卿官位，带着相印来迎接他了。
English: Now Qin has given Shangqing the official rank, and has come to greet him with the seal.

古文：甘茂德王之赐，好为王臣，故辞而不往。
现代文：由于甘茂感激大王的恩赐，喜欢做大王的臣下，因此推辞邀请不去秦国。
English: Since Gan Mao was grateful for the great king's gift and liked to be the great king's vassal, he declined the invitation to go to Qin.

古文：今王何以礼之？ 齐王曰： 善。 
现代文：现在大王您拿什么来礼遇他？ 齐王说： 好。 
English: Now, great king, what do you treat him with? King Qi said, "Good."

古文：即位之上卿而处之。
现代文：立即安排他上卿官位，把他留在了齐国。
English: They immediately arranged for him to be promoted to the position of Shangnian and left him in Qi.

古文：秦因复甘茂之家以市於齐。
现代文：秦国也赶快免除了甘茂全家的赋税徭役来同齐国争着收买甘茂。
English: Qin also quickly exempted the entire family of Ganmao from paying taxes to compete with Qi for the purchase of Ganmao.

古文：齐使甘茂於楚，楚怀王新与秦合婚而驩。
现代文：齐国派甘茂出使楚国，楚怀王刚刚与秦国通婚结亲，对秦国亲热得很。
English: The State of Qi sent an envoy, Ganmao, to the State of Chu. King Chu Huai had just married into the State of Qin, and was very fond of the State of Qin.

古文：而秦闻甘茂在楚，使人谓楚王曰： 原送甘茂於秦。 
现代文：秦王听说甘茂正在楚国，就派人对楚王说： 希望把甘茂送到秦国来。 
English: When King Qin heard that Kamo was in Chu, he sent a messenger to King Chu saying, "I hope you will send Kamo to Qin."

古文：楚王问於范蜎曰： 寡人欲置相於秦，孰可？ 
现代文：楚王向范蜎询问说： 我想在秦国安排个丞相，您看谁合适？ 
English: King Chu asked Fan Rong: I want to arrange a chancellor in Qin, who do you think is suitable?

古文：对曰： 臣不足以识之。 
现代文：范蜎回答说： 我的能力不够，看不准谁合适。 
English: Fan Ye replied: My ability is not enough, I can't see who is suitable.

古文：楚王曰： 寡人欲相甘茂，可乎？ 
现代文：楚王说： 我打算让甘茂去任丞相，合适吗？ 
English: King Chu said, "I plan to appoint Gan Mao as chancellor, is that appropriate?"

古文：对曰： 不可。
现代文：范蜎回答道： 不合适。
English: Fan Ye replied, "It's not appropriate."

古文：夫史举，下蔡之监门也，大不为事君，小不为家室，以苟贱不廉闻於世，甘茂事之顺焉。
现代文：那个史举，是下蔡的城门看守，大事不能事奉国君，小事不能治理好家庭，他以苟且活命，人格低下，节操不廉闻名世，可是甘茂事奉他却很恭顺。
English: That historical figure is the gatekeeper of the lower Cai, big things can not serve the sovereign, small things can not govern the family well, he is famous for his hard work, low personality, and integrity, but Ganmao served him very obediently.

古文：故惠王之明，武王之察，张仪之辩，而甘茂事之，取十官而无罪。
现代文：因此，就惠王的明智，武王的敏锐，张仪的善辩来说，甘茂能够一一奉事他们，取得十个官位而没有罪过，这是一般士人难以做到的。
English: Therefore, as far as Hui Wang's wisdom, Wu Wang's acumen, and Zhang Yi's eloquence are concerned, Ganmao can serve them one by one and obtain ten official positions without any fault, which is difficult for ordinary people to achieve.

古文：茂诚贤者也，然不可相於秦。
现代文：甘茂的确是个贤才，但不能到秦国担任丞相。
English: Kammao was indeed a genius, but he couldn't go to Qin to serve as chancellor.

古文：夫秦之有贤相，非楚国之利也，且王前尝用召滑於越，而内行章义之难，越国乱，故楚南塞厉门而郡江东。
现代文：秦国有贤能的丞相，对楚国来说不是好事。况且大王先前曾把召滑推荐到越国任职，他暗地里鼓动章义发难，搞得越国大乱，因此楚国才能够开拓疆域，以厉门为边塞，把江东作郡县。
English: It is not a good thing for Chu to have a capable chancellor from Qin. Moreover, the great king had previously recommended the appointment of Qian to Yue. He secretly incited Zhang Yi to make trouble and caused chaos in Yue. Therefore, Chu was able to expand its territory, using Limen as a border fortress, and making Jiangdong as a county.

古文：计王之功所以能如此者，越国乱而楚治也。
现代文：我考虑大王的功绩所以能够达到如此辉煌的地步，其原因就是越国大乱，而楚国大治。
English: I consider that the reason why the exploits of the great king have been able to reach such a brilliant level is that the Yue Kingdom was in turmoil, while the Chu Kingdom was at the height of its power.

古文：今王知用诸越而忘用诸秦，臣以王为钜过矣。
现代文：现在大王只知道把这种谋略用于越国却忘记用于秦国，我认为您派甘茂到秦国任相是个重大的过失。
English: Now the great king only knows how to use this strategy for Yue, but forgets to use it for Qin. I think it is a serious mistake for you to send Ganmao to Qin as the prime minister.

古文：然则王若欲置相於秦，则莫若向寿者可。
现代文：话再说回来，您若打算在秦国安置丞相，那就不如安置向寿这样的人更为合适。
English: Then again, if you plan to install a prime minister in Qin, it would be more appropriate to install someone like Xiang Shou.

古文：夫向寿之於秦王，亲也，少与之同衣，长与之同车，以听事。
现代文：向寿对于秦王来说，是亲戚关系，少年时与秦王同穿一件衣服，长大后同乘一辆车子，因此能够直接参与国政。
English: For Qin Wang, Xiangshou is a relative relationship. When he was a boy, he and Qin Wang wore the same clothes, and when he grew up, they rode in the same car, so he could directly participate in national politics.

古文：王必相向寿於秦，则楚国之利也。 
现代文：大王一定要安置向寿到秦国任相，那就是楚国的好事了。 
English: The great king must place Xiangshou as the minister of Qin, which is a good thing for Chu.

古文：於是使使请秦相向寿於秦。
现代文：于是楚王派使臣去请求秦王让向寿在秦国任相。
English: Therefore, King Chu sent an envoy to request King Qin to appoint Xiangshou as a minister in Qin.

古文：秦卒相向寿。
现代文：秦国终于让向寿担任了丞相。
English: Qin finally appointed Xiangshou as chancellor.

古文：而甘茂竟不得复入秦，卒於魏。
现代文：甘茂最终也没能够再到秦，后来死在魏国。
English: In the end, Kam Mao was not able to return to Qin, and later died in Wei.

古文：甘茂有孙曰甘罗。
现代文：甘茂有个孙子叫甘罗。
English: Gan Mao has a grandson named Gan Luo.

古文：甘罗者，甘茂孙也。
现代文：甘罗是甘茂的孙子。
English: Ganluo is the grandson of Ganmao.

古文：茂既死後，甘罗年十二，事秦相文信侯吕不韦。
现代文：甘茂死去的时候，甘罗才十二岁，奉事秦国丞相文信侯吕不韦。
English: When Kammao died, Gan Luo was only twelve years old, serving Qin Guozheng's minister, Wenxin Hou Lü Buwei.

古文：秦始皇帝使刚成君蔡泽於燕，三年而燕王喜使太子丹入质於秦。
现代文：秦始皇派刚成君蔡泽到燕国，三年后燕国国君喜派太子丹到秦国作人质。
English: Qin Shi Huang sent Gangcheng Cai Ze to Yan, and three years later Yan sent Prince Dan to Qin as a hostage.

古文：秦使张唐往相燕，欲与燕共伐赵以广河间之地。
现代文：秦国准备派张唐去燕国任相，打算跟燕国一起进攻赵国来扩张河间一带的领地。
English: Qin was preparing to send Zhang Tang as minister to Yan, and planned to attack Zhao together with Yan to expand the territory around He.

古文：张唐谓文信侯曰： 臣尝为秦昭王伐赵，赵怨臣，曰： 得唐者与百里之地。 
现代文：张唐对文信侯说： 我曾经为昭王进攻过赵国，因此赵国怨恨我，曾称言说： 能够逮住张唐的人，就赏给他百里方圆的土地。 
English: Zhang Tang said to Wenxin Hou, "I once attacked Zhao Province on behalf of King Zhao, so Zhao Province resented me, and once boasted, 'Anyone who can capture Zhang Tang will be rewarded with a hundred-square-mile land.'

古文：今之燕必经赵，臣不可以行。 
现代文：现在去燕国必定要经过赵国，我不能前往。 
English: Now I have to go through Zhao Province to get to Yan Province. I can't go there.

古文：文信侯不快，未有以彊也。
现代文：文信侯听了怏怏不乐，可是没有什么办法勉强他去。
English: Wenxin Hou did not like what he heard, but there was no way to force him to go.

古文：甘罗曰： 君侯何不快之甚也？ 
现代文：甘罗说： 君侯您为什么闷闷不乐得这么厉害？ 
English: Ganro said, "Prince, why are you so unhappy?"

古文：文信侯曰： 吾令刚成君蔡泽事燕三年，燕太子丹已入质矣，吾自请张卿相燕而不肯行。 
现代文：文信侯说： 我让刚成君蔡泽奉事燕国三年，燕太子丹已经来秦国作人质了，我亲自请张卿去燕国任相，可是他不愿意去。 
English: Wenxin Hou said: I asked Gangchengjun Cai Ze to serve Yan Guo for three years, Yan Taizi Dan has come to Qin Guo as a hostage, I personally asked Zhang Qing to go to Yan Guo as a minister, but he did not want to go.

古文：甘罗曰： 臣请行之。 
现代文：甘罗说： 请允许我说服他去燕国。 
English: Ganluo said: Please allow me to persuade him to go to Yan's country.

古文：文信侯叱曰： 去！
现代文：文信侯呵叱说： 快走开！
English: Wenxin Houro scolded: "Go away!

古文：我身自请之而不肯，女焉能行之？ 
现代文：我亲自请他去，他都不愿意，你怎么能让他去？ 
English: I personally asked him to go and he didn't want to. How could you let him go?

古文：甘罗曰： 大项橐生七岁为孔子师。
现代文：甘罗说： 项橐七岁就作了孔子的老师。
English: Gan Luo said: Xiang Yao became a teacher of Confucius at the age of seven.

古文：今臣生十二岁於兹矣，君其试臣，何遽叱乎？ 
现代文：如今，我已经满十二岁了，您还是让我试一试。何必这么急着呵叱我呢？ 
English: Now that I am twelve years old, you still let me try it. Why are you in such a hurry to scold me?

古文：於是甘罗见张卿曰： 卿之功孰与武安君？ 
现代文：于是文信侯就同意了。甘罗去拜见张卿说： 您的功劳与武安君白起相比，谁的功劳大？ 
English: So Wenxin agreed. Gan Luo went to see Zhang Jing and said, "Compared to Wu Anjun Baiqi, who has done more for you?

古文：卿曰： 武安君南挫彊楚，北威燕、赵，战胜攻取，破城堕邑，不知其数，臣之功不如也。 
现代文：张卿说： 武安君在南面挫败强大的楚国，在北面施威震慑燕、赵两国，战而能胜，攻而必克，夺城取邑，不计其数，我的功劳可比不上他。 
English: Zhang Qing said: Wu Anjun defeated the powerful state of Chu in the south, and threatened and deterred the two countries of Yan and Zhao in the north. He was able to win the war, attacked and defeated, captured the city and won the town. There are countless, and my merit is not comparable to him.

古文：甘罗曰： 应侯之用於秦也，孰与文信侯专？ 
现代文：甘罗又说： 应侯范睢在秦国任丞相时与现在的文信侯相比，谁的权力大？ 
English: Gan Luo also said: Compared with the current Wenxin Hou, who has more power than the Hou Fan Rong when he was the prime minister of Qin?

古文：张卿曰： 应侯不如文信侯专。 
现代文：张卿说： 应侯不如文信侯的权力大。 
English: Zhang Xing said, "The power of Ying Hou is not as great as that of Wenxin Hou.

古文：甘罗曰： 卿明知其不如文信侯专与？ 
现代文：甘罗进而说： 您确实明了应侯不如文信侯的权力大吗？ 
English: Gan Luo then said, "Are you sure you have understood that the power of Ying Hou is not as great as that of Wenxin Hou?"

古文：曰： 知之。 
现代文：张卿说： 确实明了这一点。 
English: Zhang Qing said: I really understand this.

古文：甘罗曰： 应侯欲攻赵，武安君难之，去咸阳七里而立死於杜邮。
现代文：甘罗接着说： 应侯打算攻打赵国，武安君故意让他为难，结果武安君刚离开咸阳七里地就死在杜邮。
English: Gan Luo went on to say: Ying Hou planned to attack Zhao Province, and Wu Anjun deliberately put him in a difficult situation. As a result, Wu Anjun died in Du Post just seven miles away from Xianyang.

古文：今文信侯自请卿相燕而不肯行，臣不知卿所死处矣。 
现代文：如今文信侯亲自请您去燕国任相而您执意不肯，我不知您要死在什么地方了。 
English: Now that Wenxin Hou has personally asked you to go to Yan Guo to take up the post of prime minister and you persistently refuse, I don't know where you are going to die.

古文：张唐曰： 请因孺子行。 
现代文：张唐说： 那就依着你这个童子的意见前往燕国吧。 
English: Zhang Tang said, "Then follow the advice of this boy and go to Yan's country."

古文：令装治行。
现代文：于是让人整治行装，准备上路。
English: As a result, people were ordered to tidy up, pack and get ready for the road.

古文：行有日，甘罗谓文信侯曰： 借臣车五乘，请为张唐先报赵。 
现代文：行期已经确定，甘罗便对文信侯说： 借给我五辆马车，请允许我为张唐赴燕先到赵国打个招呼。
English: The date of the trip had already been determined, so Gan Luo said to Wen Xin Hou: Lend me five carriages, please allow me to say hello to Zhang Tang for his trip to Zhao.

古文：文信侯乃入言之於始皇曰： 昔甘茂之孙甘罗，年少耳，然名家之子孙，诸侯皆闻之。
现代文：文信侯就进宫把甘罗的请求报告给秦始皇说： 过去的甘茂有个孙子甘罗，年纪很轻，然而是著名门第的子孙，所以诸侯们都有所闻。
English: Wenxin marquis went to the palace to report Ganluo's request to Qin Shi Huang and said: In the past, Ganmao had a grandson, Ganluo. He was very young, but he was the descendant of a famous family, so the princes all heard about it.

古文：今者张唐欲称疾不肯行，甘罗说而行之。
现代文：最近，张唐想要推托有病不愿意去燕国，甘罗说服了他，使他毅然前往。
English: Recently, Zhang Tang wanted to postpone his unwillingness to go to Yan Guo due to illness, but Gan Luo convinced him to go.

古文：今原先报赵，请许遣之。 
现代文：现在甘罗愿意先到赵国把张唐的事通报一声，请答应派他去。 
English: Now, Ganluo is willing to go to Zhao first to inform Zhang Tang about the matter. Please agree to send him.

古文：始皇召见，使甘罗於赵。
现代文：秦始皇召见了甘罗，就派他去赵国。
English: Emperor Qin summoned Ganluo and sent him to Zhao.

古文：赵襄王郊迎甘罗。
现代文：赵襄王到郊外远迎甘罗。
English: Zhao Xiangwang went to the suburbs to welcome Ganluo.

古文：甘罗说赵王曰： 王闻燕太子丹入质秦欤？ 
现代文：甘罗劝说赵王，问道： 大王听说燕太子丹到秦国作人质吗？ 
English: Gan Luo persuaded Zhao Wang and asked: Did the king hear that Yan Taizi Dan went to Qin as a hostage?

古文：曰： 闻之。 
现代文：赵王回答说： 听说这件事了。 
English: Zhao Wang replied, "I heard about it.

古文：曰： 闻张唐相燕欤？ 
现代文：甘罗又问道： 听说张唐要到燕国任相吗？ 
English: Gan Luo also asked: Have you heard that Zhang Tang is going to become the minister of state of Yan Guo?

古文：曰： 闻之。 
现代文：赵王回答说： 听说了。 
English: Zhao Wang replied, "I heard about it.

古文： 燕太子丹入秦者，燕不欺秦也。
现代文：甘罗接着说： 燕太子丹到秦国来，说明燕国不欺骗秦国。
English: Gan Luo went on to say: Prince Yan Dan came to Qin to show that Yan would not deceive Qin.

古文：张唐相燕者，秦不欺燕也。
现代文：张唐到燕国任相，表明秦国不欺骗燕国。
English: Zhang Tang went to Yan as minister of state to show that Qin would not deceive Yan.

古文：燕、秦不相欺者，伐赵，危矣。
现代文：燕、秦两国互不相欺，显然是要共同攻打赵国，赵国就危险了。
English: Yan and Qin did not deceive each other. It was clear that they wanted to jointly attack Zhao, and Zhao was in danger.

古文：燕、秦不相欺无异故，欲攻赵而广河间。
现代文：燕、秦两国互不相欺，没有别的缘故，就是要攻打赵国来扩大自己在河间一带的领地。
English: Yan and Qin did not deceive each other, and there was no other reason but to attack Zhao to expand their territory in the Hema area.

古文：王不如赍臣五城以广河间，请归燕太子，与彊赵攻弱燕。 
现代文：大王不如先送给我五座城邑来扩大秦国在河间的领地，我请求秦王送回燕太子，再帮助强大的赵国攻打弱小的燕国。 
English: The great king might as well give me five cities and towns to expand the territory of Qin in Hebei. I asked Qin to send back the Prince of Yan, and then help the powerful Zhao to attack the weak Yan.

古文：赵王立自割五城以广河间。
现代文：赵王立即亲自划出五座城邑来扩大秦国在河间的领地。
English: King Zhao immediately personally designated five cities and towns to expand the territory of Qin in Hebei.

古文：秦归燕太子。赵攻燕，得上谷三十城，令秦有十一。
现代文：秦国送回燕太子，赵国有恃无恐便进攻燕国，结果得到上谷三十座城邑，让秦国占有其中的十一座。
English: Qin sent back the Prince of Yan, and Zhao attacked Yan without fear. As a result, he gained 30 towns in Shangguan and let Qin occupy 11 of them.

古文：甘罗还报秦，乃封甘罗以为上卿，复以始甘茂田宅赐之。
现代文：甘罗回来后把情况报告了秦王，秦王于是封赏甘罗让他做了上卿，又把原来甘茂的田地房宅赐给了甘罗。
English: After Ganluo returned, he reported the situation to the Qin King. The Qin King then rewarded Ganluo and made him a noble, and gave the original Ganmao farmhouse to Ganluo.

古文：太史公曰：樗里子以骨肉重，固其理，而秦人称其智，故颇采焉。
现代文：太史公说： 樗里子因为是秦王的骨肉兄弟而受到重用，这本来是常理，但秦国人称颂他的才智，因此较多地采录了他的事迹。
English: Taishigong said, "It is common knowledge that because he was the half-brother of the King of Qin, he was given more responsibilities. However, the people of Qin praised his talent, so they recorded more of his deeds.

古文：甘茂起下蔡闾阎，显名诸侯，重彊齐楚。
现代文：甘茂出身于下蔡平民，名声显扬于诸侯，为强大的齐国、楚国所推重。
English: Kammao was born to a commoner in Lower Cai, became famous among the princes, and was promoted by the powerful states of Qi and Chu.

古文：甘罗年少，然出一奇计，声称後世。
现代文：甘罗年纪很轻，然而献出一条妙计，名垂后世。
English: Ganluo was very young, but he came up with a clever plan that would be famous for generations to come.

古文：虽非笃行之君子，然亦战国之策士也。
现代文：虽然他算不上品行忠厚的君子，但也是战国时代名副其实的谋士。
English: Although he was not a loyal gentleman, he was a true strategist during the Warring States period.

古文：方秦之彊时，天下尤趋谋诈哉
现代文：须知，秦国强盛起来的时候，天下更加趋于追求权变谋诈之术呢！
English: It should be noted that when the Qin state became powerful, the world was more inclined to pursue the art of power change and deception!

