古文：夏禹，名曰文命。
现代文：夏禹，名叫文命。
English: Xia Yu, his name is Wen Ming.

古文：禹之父曰鲧，鲧之父曰帝颛顼，颛顼之父曰昌意，昌意之父曰黄帝。
现代文：禹的父亲是鲧，鲧的父亲是帝颛顼，颛顼的父亲是昌意，昌意的父亲是黄帝。
English: Yu's father was Yao, Yao's father was Di, Yao's father was Changyi, Changyi's father was Huangdi.

古文：禹者，黄帝之玄孙而帝颛顼之孙也。
现代文：禹，是黄帝的玄孙，颛顼帝的孙子。
English: Yu is the great-great-grandson of the Yellow Emperor and the grandson of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：禹之曾大父昌意及父鲧皆不得在帝位，为人臣。
现代文：禹的的曾祖父昌意和父亲鲧都没有登临帝位，而是给天子做大臣。
English: Yu's great-grandfather Changyi and father Zou did not ascend to the throne, but served as ministers to Tianzi.

古文：当帝尧之时，鸿水滔天，浩浩怀山襄陵，下民其忧。
现代文：当尧帝在位的时候，洪水滔天，浩浩荡荡，包围了高山，漫上了丘陵，百姓都为此非常忧愁。
English: When Emperor Qian was on the throne, the floods were enormous, surrounded the mountains and covered the hills. The people were very sad about this.

古文：尧求能治水者，群臣四岳皆曰鲧可。
现代文：尧寻找能治理洪水的人，四岳群臣都说鲧可以。
English: Looking for someone who can control the flood, all four ministers said they could.

古文：尧曰： 鲧为人负命毁族，不可。 
现代文：尧说： 鲧这个人违背天命，毁败同族，用不得。 
English: Zou said, "It is useless for this person to go against the destiny of heaven and destroy his compatriots.

古文：四岳曰： 等之未有贤于鲧者，愿帝试之。 
现代文：四岳都说： 比较起来，众大臣还没有谁比他更强，希望您让他试试。 
English: Shidake said, "Compared to other ministers, there is no one who is better than him. I hope you will let him try."

古文：于是尧听四岳，用鲧治水。
现代文：于是尧听从了四岳的建议，任用鲧治理洪水。
English: So he followed the suggestion of the four mountains and appointed a cormorant to control the flood.

古文：九年而水不息，功用不成。
现代文：九年时间过去，洪水仍然泛滥不息，治水没有取得成效。
English: Nine years later, the floods are still raging, and flood control measures have not been effective.

古文：于是帝尧乃求人，更得舜。
现代文：这时尧帝另求他人治水，又找到了舜。
English: At this time, Emperor Zou also asked others to control the water, and again found Zou.

古文：舜登用，摄行天子之政，巡狩。
现代文：舜被举用，代行天子的政务，到四方巡视。
English: He was appointed to act on behalf of the emperor and went on a four-way inspection tour.

古文：行视鲧之治水无状，乃殛鲧于羽山以死。
现代文：舜在巡视途中，看到鲧治理洪水没有功效，就在羽山诛杀了鲧。
English: On the way of inspection, he saw that the flood control measures were not effective, so he killed the toad in Hasan.

古文：天下皆以舜之诛为是。
现代文：天下人都认为舜对鲧的惩罚是正确的。
English: People all over the world think that the punishment of  against  is correct.

古文：于是舜举鲧子禹，而使续鲧之业。
现代文：舜又举用了鲧的儿子禹，让他来继续他父亲鲧治水的事业。
English: Zhai also appointed Zhai's son Yu to continue his father's water-control work.

古文：尧崩，帝舜问四岳曰： 有能成美尧之事者使居官？ 
现代文：尧逝世以后，舜帝问四岳说： 有能够很好地完成尧的事业、担任官职的人吗？ 
English: After the death of Gong, Emperor Gong asked the four mountains: Is there anyone who can well complete Gong's career and serve as an official?

古文：皆曰： 伯禹为司空，可成美尧之功。 
现代文：都说： 如果让伯禹做司空，一定能很好地完成尧的勋业。 帝舜说： 嗯！
English: They all said, "If we let Bo Yu be the deputy commander, he will surely be able to complete the distinguished career of Gong well." Emperor Gong said, "Hmm!

古文：舜曰： 嗟，然！ 
现代文：就这样吧！ 
English: That's it!

古文：命禹： 女平水土，维是勉之。 
现代文：因此就任命禹说： 你去平定水土，好好努力！ 
English: Therefore, he appointed Yu to say: You go to level the land and water, do your best!

古文：禹拜稽首，让于契、后稷、皋陶。
现代文：禹下叩头拜谢，谦让给契、后稷、皋陶。
English: Yu bowed his head in thanks, and humbly conceded to Che, Hou Yi, and Jintao.

古文：舜曰： 女其往视尔事矣。 
现代文：舜说： 你还是快去办理你的事吧！ 
English: Zou said, "You'd better go and take care of your business."

古文：禹为人敏给克勤，其德不违，其仁可亲，其言可信：声为律，身为度，称以出；亹亹穆穆，为纲为纪。
现代文：禹的为人聪明机智，办事敏捷又勤奋，他遵守道德，仁爱可亲，他讲的话诚实可信，发声合乎音律，举止合乎法度，权衡标准以禹为准制定。
English: Yu is a clever and witty person, he is quick and diligent in his work, he abides by morality, he is kind and amiable, his words are honest and trustworthy, his voice is in tune, his behavior is in accordance with the law, and the weighting standard is based on Yu.

古文：禹乃遂与益、后稷奉帝命，命诸侯百姓兴人徒以傅土，行山表木，定高山大川。
现代文：他勤奋而严肃，是百官的典范。禹接受了舜帝的命令，与益、后稷一起到任，命令诸侯百官征集民夫，展开平治水土工作。他一路随着山势树立标识，测定高山大川的状貌。
English: He is diligent and serious, and is a model of a centurion. Yu accepted the order of Emperor Qian and arrived at the post together with Yi and Houyi. He ordered the centurions of the provinces to recruit people to carry out water and soil management work. He set up signs along with the mountains and measured the shape of the Gaoshan River.

古文：禹伤先人父鲧功之不成受诛，乃劳身焦思，居外十三年，过家门不敢入。
现代文：禹因父亲鲧治水无功被杀而难过，因此不顾劳累，殚精竭虑，在外十三年，几次经过自己家门也不敢进。
English: Yu was saddened by his father's death due to his ineffectual efforts to control the water. Therefore, despite his exhaustion and exhaustion, he did not dare to enter his own house several times during his thirteen years abroad.

古文：薄衣食，致孝于鬼神。
现代文：他吃穿都很简朴，尽力敬奉鬼神。
English: He ate and dressed very simply and tried his best to worship ghosts and gods.

古文：卑宫室，致费于沟淢陆行乘车，水行乘船，泥行乘橇，山行乘檋左准绳，右规矩，载四时，以开九州，通九道，陂九泽，度九山。
现代文：居住的屋室简陋，把钱财用于修渠挖沟等水利工程。他在陆地上赶路坐车，走水路坐船，走泥泞的路就坐木橇，走山路就穿上有齿的鞋。他左手拿着准和绳，右手拿着规和矩，还装载着测四时定方向的仪器，用以从事于开发九州，辟通九州道路，修筑九州湖泽堤障，计度九州山岳脉络。
English: He lives in a humble house and spends his money on water conservancy projects such as repairing canals and digging ditches. He travels by car on land, by boat on water, by raft on muddy roads, and by wearing shoes with teeth on mountain roads. He holds a standard rope in his left hand and a standard line in his right hand, and is also loaded with instruments for measuring the four-hour direction, which are used to develop Kyushu, open Kyushu roads, build Kyushu Lake dike barriers, and measure Kyushu mountain ranges.

古文：令益予众庶稻，可种卑湿。
现代文：他叫伯益发放稻种，教导群众在低洼潮湿的地方种植。
English: He asked Bo Yi to distribute rice seeds and teach the masses to plant in low-lying and humid areas.

古文：命后稷予众庶难得之食。
现代文：后来又让后稷赈济难以保证温饱的民众。
English: Later, they made it difficult for the people of Houyi to ensure food and clothing.

古文：食少，调有余相给，以均诸侯。
现代文：粮食匮乏的地方，就让一些地区把余粮调济给缺粮地区，以便使各诸侯境内都有粮食吃。
English: Where there is a shortage of grain, let some regions transfer surplus grain to grain-deficit regions, so that there is grain to eat in all provinces.

古文：禹乃行相地宜所有以贡，及山川之便利。
现代文：禹又巡视各地所特有的物产以定其贡赋，还视察了各地山川交通的便利情况。
English: Yu also inspected the unique properties of various regions to determine their tribute, and also inspected the convenience of mountain and river transportation in various regions.

古文：禹行自冀州始。
现代文：禹督导治水的行程是从冀州开始。
English: The water control trip led by Governor Yu started from Jizhou.

古文：冀州：既载壶口，治梁及岐。
现代文：冀州：已治理了壶口，接着治理梁山及其支脉。
English: Jizhou: Hukou has been controlled, followed by Liangshan and its tributaries.

古文：既修太原，至于岳阳。
现代文：治理好太原后，接着修整到太岳山之南。
English: After the management of Taiyuan, it will be repaired to the south of Mount Taiyue.

古文：覃怀致功，致于衡漳。
现代文：治理好覃怀后，又继续到了衡水和漳水一带。
English: After the good management of Xionghuai, it continued to Hengshui and Surabaya.

古文：其土白壤。赋上上错，田中中。
现代文：冀州的土质色白而松软，这里的赋税属上上，即第一等，有时也杂有第二等，田地属于中中，即第五等。
English: The soil of Jizhou is white and soft. The taxation here is the highest, that is, the first class, sometimes mixed with the second class. The fields belong to the middle and middle, that is, the fifth class.

古文：常、卫既从，大陆既为。
现代文：常水、卫水疏通了，大陆泽周围土地都可耕作了。
English: Changshui and Weishui have been dredged, and the land around the main lake can be cultivated.

古文：鸟夷皮服。夹右碣石，入于海。
现代文：东北的鸟夷族贡纳供贵族服用的珍奇异兽皮毛。
English: The rare and exotic animal pelts used by the aristocrats of the northeastern Torii tribe are highly prized.

古文：济、河维沇州：九河既道，雷夏既泽，雍、沮会同，桑土既蚕，于是民得下丘居土。
现代文：他们遵海路入贡，在沿海岸向南航行的航道上，看到右拐角处的碣石便据以转而向西航驶，直驶入黄河航道。
English: They paid tribute by following the sea route, and when sailing south along the coast, they saw the ocher stone at the right corner, so they turned west and sailed straight into the Yellow River channel.

古文：其土黑坟，草繇木条。田中下，赋贞，作十有三年乃同。
现代文：济水和黄河之间是兖州：这个地区的九条河道都已畅通了，雷夏蓄积成了一个大湖，雍水、沮水也都会同流到这个湖中，土地上种了桑，养了蚕，于是人民得以从躲避洪水迁居的高地下到平地居住。
English: Between the Jishui River and the Yellow River is Ganzhou: the nine river channels in this region have all been unblocked. The Lixia River has accumulated into a large lake, and both the Yongshui River and the Deshui River will flow into this lake. Mulberry trees have been planted on the land, and silkworms have been raised, so the people have been able to move from the highlands to the plains to avoid floods.

古文：其贡漆、丝，其篚织文。
现代文：兖的土壤发黑肥沃，它上面的草木长得很茂盛，树木高大。
English: The salty soil is dark and rich, and the plants grow luxuriantly and the trees are tall.

古文：浮于济、漯，通于河。
现代文：这里田地列在第六等，赋税则为第九等。
English: Here, the fields are ranked sixth, and the taxes are ranked ninth.

古文：海岱维青州：堣夷既略，潍、淄其道。
现代文：经过十三年的农作耕耘，才能与其他州一样。
English: It took 13 years of farming to be able to compete with other states.

古文：其土白坟，海滨广潟，厥田斥卤。
现代文：这里的土质色白而且肥美，海滨一带宽广含碱，田地多是盐碱地。
English: The soil here is white and fertile, the coastal area is widely alkaline, and the fields are mostly saline.

古文：田上下，赋中上。
现代文：田地属上下，即第三等，赋税属中上，即第四等。
English: The fields belong to the lower and upper classes, that is, the third class, and the taxation belongs to the middle and upper classes, that is, the fourth class.

古文：厥贡盐絺，海物维错，岱畎丝、枲、铅、松、怪石，莱夷为牧，其篚酓丝。
现代文：这一地区的贡物是盐、细葛布、海产品以及磨玉的砺石，还有泰山谷地里出的丝、麻、铅、松、似玉之石，莱夷地区可以放牧，所以，那里进贡畜牧产品，还有用筐盛着用来作琴弦的柞蚕丝。
English: The tributes in this area are salt, fine combed cloth, seafood, and polished zircon, as well as silk, hemp, lead, pine, and jade-like stone from the Tai Valley. The Laiyi area can be grazed, so there are tribute livestock products there, as well as cocooned silk, which is used to make strings.

古文：浮于汶，通于济。
现代文：它的进贡路线是由汶水船运直达济水。
English: Its tribute route is to be transported by ship from Wenshui to Jishui.

古文：海岱及淮维徐州：淮、沂其治，蒙、羽其艺。
现代文：东边沿海，北边至泰山，南边至淮水之间的地域是徐州。这个地区的淮水和沂水都已经治理，蒙山、羽山地方也都能种植作物了。
English: The area between the eastern coast, Mount Tai in the north, and Huai Shui in the south is Xuzhou. Both Huai Shui and Lushui in this area have been managed, and crops can also be grown in Mengshan and Hasan.

古文：大野既都，东原厎平。
现代文：大野泽已经汇积成湖泊，东原地区的水已经退去，地已平复。
English: Onozawa has accumulated into a lake, the water in the Higashihara area has receded, and the land has been leveled.

古文：其土赤埴坟，草木渐包。
现代文：这里的土壤呈红色，有粘性而且肥沃，生长在这里的草木非常繁茂。
English: The soil here is red, sticky and fertile, and the plants that grow here are very lush.

古文：其田上中，赋中中。
现代文：田地列在第二等，赋税则为第五等。
English: Fields are in the second class, and taxes are in the fifth class.

古文：贡维土五色，羽畎夏狄，峄阳孤桐，泗滨浮磬，淮夷蠙珠臮鱼，其篚玄纤缟。
现代文：这一地区的贡品是天子筑坛祭天用的五色土，羽山谷中所出的五色雉羽，峄山南面特产的可用以制琴瑟的孤生桐，泗水之滨的浮磐石，和淮夷的珍珠贝及鱼产，还有用竹筐盛着的纤细洁净的黑白丝绸。
English: The tributes of this area are the five-colored soil used for the altar built by the Son of Heaven, the five-colored cormorants from the Valley of the Feather, the lone cormorant that can be used to make a harp from the special products of the southern part of Lushan Mountain, the floating rock of the coast of Surabaya, and the pearl shell and fishery products of Huai'i, as well as the fine and clean black and white silk held in a bamboo basket.

古文：浮于淮、泗，通于河。
现代文：它进贡路线是水路，从淮水运入泗水，再转入菏水。
English: Its tribute route is a waterway, transported from Huai Shui into Surabaya, and then transferred to Surabaya.

古文：淮海维扬州：彭蠡既都，阳鸟所居。
现代文：北起淮河，东南到海之地是扬州。彭蠡之域已经汇成了湖泊，作为每年鸿雁南归的栖息之地。
English: Yangzhou stretches from the Huaihe River in the north to the sea in the southeast. The Pengye region has merged into lakes, which serve as the habitat of the wild geese that migrate south every year.

古文：三江既入，震泽致定。
现代文：松江、钱塘江、浦阳江在那里入海，太湖水域也就获得了安定。
English: The Songjiang River, the Qiantang River and the Poyang River flow into the sea there, and the waters of the Taihu Lake have also been stabilized.

古文：竹箭既布。其草惟夭，其木惟乔，其土涂泥。田下下，赋下上上杂。
现代文：现在遍地长满竹林，到处尽见美盛的芳草、高大苍翠的乔木。这里的土壤湿润，田地列在第九等，赋税则为第七等，有时可以居第六等。
English: Now, bamboo groves grow everywhere, and beautiful grasses and tall green trees can be seen everywhere. The soil here is moist, the fields are ranked ninth, the taxes are seventh, and sometimes they can be sixth.

古文：贡金三品，瑶、琨、竹箭，齿、革、羽、旄，岛夷卉服，其篚织贝，其包橘、柚锡贡。
现代文：这一州的贡品是三种成色的铜，以及瑶、琨等美玉和宝石，还有竹材、象牙、异兽之革、珍禽之羽、旌牛之尾和岛夷族所献的一种称为 卉服 的服饰，以及装在筐子里进贡的贝形花纹的锦缎，和妥加包装进贡的橘子、柚子。
English: The state's tribute consisted of copper in three colors, as well as precious stones and gems such as jade and emeralds, as well as bamboo, ivory, exotic animal leather, rare bird feathers, snail tails, and a kind of clothing called "huei clothing" offered by the Shimaishi people, as well as a tribute of shell-shaped brocade in a basket, and a tribute of oranges and yuzu packed in a toga.

古文：均江海，通淮、泗。
现代文：这些贡品都经由大海、长江进入淮河、泗水。
English: These tributes have entered the Huai River and Surabaya via the sea and the Yangtze River.

古文：荆及衡阳维荆州：江、汉朝宗于海。
现代文：荆山到衡山的南面是荆州：这个地区有长江、汉水注入大海。
English: To the south of Jingshan to Hengshan is Jingzhou: in this area, the Yangtze River and the Han River flow into the sea.

古文：九江甚中，沱、涔已道，云土、梦为治。
现代文：长江的众多支流大都有了固定的河道，沱水、涔水业已疏导，云泽、梦泽也治理好了。
English: Most of the numerous tributaries of the Yangtze River have a fixed river channel. Surabaya and Surabaya have been diverted, and Yunze and Mengze have been well managed.

古文：其土涂泥。田下中，赋上下。
现代文：这里的土质湿润，田地属下中，即第八等，赋税居上下，即第三等。
English: The soil here is moist, the fields belong to the middle class, that is, the eighth class, and the taxes are at the top and bottom, that is, the third class.

古文：贡羽、旄、齿、革，金三品，杶、榦、栝、柏，砺、砥、砮、丹，维箘簬、楛，三国致贡其名，包匦菁茅，其篚玄纁玑组，九江入赐大龟。
现代文：进贡的物品是羽毛、旄牛尾、象牙、皮革、三色铜，以及椿木、柘木、桧木、柏木，还有粗细磨石，可做箭头的砮石、丹砂，特别是可做箭杆的竹子箘簬和楛木是汉水附近三个诸侯国进贡的最有名的特产，还有包裹着和装在匣子里的供祭祀时滤酒用的青茅，用竹筐盛着的彩色布帛，以及穿珠子用的丝带。有时根据命令进贡九江出产的大龟。
English: The tribute items were feathers, yakitori, ivory, leather, tri-colored copper, as well as camellia, birch, beech, and cypress, as well as coarse and fine grinding stones, flints that can be used as arrows, red sand, especially bamboo shoots that can be used as arrow shafts, and birch, the most famous specialty of the three principalities near the Hanshui River, as well as the lime tree wrapped and placed in a box for filtering wine during sacrifices, colorful cloth baskets filled with bamboo baskets, and ribbons for wearing beads. Sometimes, according to orders, large turtles produced in Jiujiang

古文：浮于江、沱、涔、汉，逾于雒，至于南河。
现代文：进贡时，经由长江、沱水、涔水、汉水，转行一段陆路再进入洛水，然后转入南河。
English: When paying tribute, it passes through the Yangtze River, Surabaya, Surabaya, and Hanshui, and then takes an overland route to enter Luoshui, and then turns into the South River.

古文：荆、河惟豫州：伊、雒、瀍、涧既入于河，荥播既都，道荷泽，被明都。
现代文：荆州和黄河之间是豫州：伊水、洛水、瀍水、涧水都已疏通注入黄河，荥播也汇成了一个湖泊，还疏浚了荷泽，修筑了明都泽的堤防。
English: Between Jingzhou and the Yellow River is Yuzhou: the Yishui, Luoshui, Shishui, and Shishui have all been dredged and injected into the Yellow River, and the silting has also merged into a lake, and the lotus pond has been dredged and the embankment of the Mingdu Lake has been built.

古文：其土壤，下土坟垆。
现代文：这里的土质松软肥沃，低地则是肥沃坚实的黑土。
English: The soil here is soft and fertile, while the lowlands are fertile and solid black soil.

古文：田中上，赋杂上中。
现代文：田地属中上，即第四等，赋税居上中，即第二等，有时居第一等。
English: The fields belong to the middle and upper class, that is, the fourth class, and the taxes are in the upper middle, that is, the second class, and sometimes the first class.

古文：贡漆、丝、絺、纻，其篚纤絮，锡贡磬错。浮于雒，达于河。
现代文：进贡漆、丝、细葛布、麻，以及用竹筐盛着的细丝絮，有时按命令进贡治玉磬用的石头，进贡时走水路，经洛水进入黄河。
English: The tribute of lacquer, silk, linen, and hemp, as well as the fine silk filings held in bamboo baskets, and sometimes the stones used for the tribute of jade, according to the order, take the waterway and enter the Yellow River through Luoshui.

古文：华阳黑水惟梁州：汶、嶓既艺，沱、涔既道，蔡、蒙旅平，和夷厎绩。
现代文：华山南麓到黑水之间是梁州：汶山、嶓冢山都可以耕种了，沱水、涔水也已经疏通，蔡山、蒙山的道路已经修好，在和夷地区治水也取得了成效。
English: Between the southern foot of Huashan Mountain and Heishui is Liangzhou: Wenshan and Lushan can be cultivated, Lushui and Lushui have also been cleared, the roads of Cai Mountain and Mengshan have been repaired, and water control in Heyi area has also achieved results.

古文：其土青骊。田下上，赋下中三错。
现代文：这里的土质是青黑色的，田地属下上，即第七等，赋税居下中，即第八等，有时也居第七等或第九等。
English: The soil here is bluish-black, the fields belong to the lower class, that is, the seventh class, and the taxes are in the middle, that is, the eighth class, and sometimes the seventh or ninth class.

古文：贡璆、铁、银、镂、砮、磬，熊、罴、狐、貍。
现代文：贡品有美玉、铁、银、可以刻镂的硬铁、可以做箭头的砮石、可以制磬的磬石，以及熊、罴、狐狸。
English: Tributes included precious stones, iron, silver, hard iron that could be chiseled, flint that could be made into arrows, flint that could be made into ploughshares, as well as a bear, a badger and a fox.

古文：织皮西倾因桓是来，浮于潜，逾于沔，入于渭，乱于河。
现代文：织皮族的贡品由西戎西倾山经桓水运出，再从潜水船运，进入沔水，然后走一段山路进入渭水，最后横渡黄河到达京城。
English: The tributes of the Weavers were transported from Xiling Mountain in Xi'an to Huanshui, then from the diving boat to Surabaya, then along a mountain road to Surabaya, and finally across the Yellow River to Beijing.

古文：黑水西河惟雍州：弱水既西，泾属渭汭漆、沮既从，沣水所同。
现代文：黑水与黄河西岸之间是雍州：弱水经治理已向西流去，泾水汇入了渭水。漆水、沮水跟着也汇入渭水，还有沣水同样汇入渭水。
English: Between the Black Water and the west bank of the Yellow River is Yongzhou: the weak water has flowed to the west after treatment, and the brackish water has flowed into the brackish water. The lacquered water and the depressed water have also flowed into the brackish water, and the brackish water has also flowed into the brackish water.

古文：荆、岐已旅，终南、敦物至于鸟鼠。
现代文：荆山、岐山的道路业已开通，终南山、敦物山一直到鸟鼠山的道路也已竣工。
English: The roads of Jingshan and Qishan have been opened, and the roads of Nanshan and Dunwu Mountain all the way to Bird and Mouse Mountain have also been completed.

古文：原隰厎绩，至于都野。
现代文：高原和低谷的治理工程都取得了成绩，一直治理到都野泽一带。
English: The management project of the plateau and the valley has achieved results, and has been managed all the way to the Tonosawa area.

古文：三危既度，三苗大序。
现代文：三危山地区可以居住了，三苗族也大为顺服。
English: The Sanguishan area can be inhabited, and the Sanmiao people are also very obedient.

古文：其土黄壤。田上上，赋中下。
现代文：这里的土质色黄而且松软肥沃，田地属上上，即第一等，赋税居中下，即第六等。
English: The soil here is yellow in color and soft and fertile. The fields belong to the upper class, that is, the first class, and the taxes are in the middle and lower class, that is, the sixth class.

古文：贡璆、琳、琅玕浮于积石，至于龙门西河，会于渭汭织皮昆仑、析支、渠搜，西戎即序。
现代文：贡品是美玉和美石。进贡时从积石山下走水路，顺流到达龙门山间的西河，会集到渭水湾里。织皮族居住在昆仑山、枝支山、渠搜山等地，那时西戎各国也归服了。
English: Tributes were made in the form of gems and precious stones. When paying tribute, they would take the water route under the Jishi Mountains and travel downstream to the West River between the Longmen Mountains, where they would gather in the Surabaya Bay. The Weavers lived in the Kunlun Mountains, the Branch Mountains, and the Guso Mountains, and other places. At that time, the countries of western Ryukyu also submitted.

古文：道九山：汧及岐至荆山，逾于河；壶口、雷首至于太岳；砥柱、析城至于王屋；太行、常山至于碣石，入于海；西倾、朱圉、鸟鼠至于太华；熊耳、外方、桐柏至于负尾；道嶓冢，至于荆山；内方至于大别；汶山之阳至衡山，过九江，至于敷浅原。
现代文：禹开通了九条山脉的道路：一条从汧山和岐山开始一直开到荆山，越过黄河；一条从壶口山、雷首山一直开到太岳山；一条从砥柱山、析城山一直开到王屋山；一条从太行山、常山一直开到碣石山，进入海中与水路接通；一条从西倾山、朱圉山，鸟鼠山一直开到太华山；一条从熊耳山、外方山、桐柏山一直开到负尾山；一条从嶓冢山一直开到荆山；一条从内方山一直开到大别山；一条从汶山的南面开到衡山，越过九江，最后到达敷浅原山。
English: Yu opened nine mountain roads: one from Shaoshan and Qishan to Jingshan, crossing the Yellow River; one from Hukou Mountain and Leshou Mountain to Taiyue Mountain; one from Tianzhu Mountain and Seicheng Mountain to Wangya Mountain; one from Taihang Mountain and Changshan Mountain to Shishi Mountain, entering the sea and connecting with the waterway; one from Xiling Mountain, Zhulun Mountain, and Bird Mouse Mountain to Taihua Mountain; one from Xiong'er Mountain, Waifang Mountain, and Tongbai Mountain to Nianwei Mountain; one from Shaoshan Mountain to Jingshan Mountain; one from Inner Fangshan Mountain to Dabie Mountain

古文：道九川：弱水至于合黎，余波入于流沙。
现代文：禹疏导了九条大河：把弱水疏导至合黎，使弱水的下游注入流沙。
English: Yu diverted nine major rivers: diverting weak water to the confluence of the Yangtze and the Li, and injecting quicksand downstream of weak water.

古文：道黑水，至于三危，入于南海。
现代文：疏导了黑水，经过三危山，流入南海。
English: The dredge channeled the black water past the Three Dangerous Mountains and into the South China Sea.

古文：道河积石，至于龙门，南至华阴，东至砥柱，又东至于盟津，东过雒汭，至于大邳，北过降水，至于大陆，北播为九河，同为逆河，入于海。
现代文：疏导黄河，从积石山开始，到龙门山，向南到华阴，然后东折经过砥柱山，继续向东到孟津，再向东经过洛水入河口，直到大邳；转而向北经过降水，到大陆泽，再向北分为九条河，这九条河到下游又汇合为一条，叫做逆河，最后流入大海。
English: The dredging of the Yellow River, starting from the Jishi Mountain, to the Longmen Mountain, southward to Huayin, then eastward through the pillar mountain, continue eastward to Mengjin, then eastward through the Luoshui into the estuary, until the Dalat; turn northward through the precipitation, to the mainland lake, and then northward into nine rivers, these nine rivers to the downstream and merge into one, called the reverse river, and finally flow into the sea.

古文：嶓冢道漾，东流为汉，又东为苍浪之水，过三澨，入于大别，南入于江，东汇泽为彭蠡，东为北江，入于海。
现代文：从嶓冢山开始疏导漾水，向东流就是汉水，再向东流就是苍浪水，经过三澨水，到大别山，南折注入长江，再向东与彭蠡泽之水会合，继续向东就是北江，流入大海。
English: From Lushan, the diversion of Lushan Water begins. The eastward flow is Han Water, and then the eastward flow is Canglang Water. After passing through Sanlushan Water, it flows into the Yangtze River at Dabie Mountain, turns south, and then meets the water of Penghu Lake to the east. The Beijiang River continues to the east and flows into the sea.

古文：汶山道江，东别为沱，又东至于醴，过九江，至于东陵，东迆北会于汇，东为中江，入于海。
现代文：从汶山开始疏导长江，向东分出支流就是沱水，再往东到达醴水，经过九江，到达东陵，向东斜行北流，与彭蠡泽之水会合，继续向东就是中江，最后流入大海。
English: From Wenshan, the Yangtze River begins to be diverted, and the tributary branching out to the east is the Surabaya, and then to the east to Surabaya, passing through Jiujiang, reaching Dongling, the north stream slants eastward to meet the water of Penghu Lake, and continues to the east is the Middle River, and finally flows into the sea.

古文：道沇水，东为济，入于河，泆为荥，东出陶丘北，又东至于荷，又东北会于汶，又东北入于海。
现代文：疏导沇水，向东流就是济水，注入黄河，两水相遇，溢为荥泽，向东经过陶丘北面，继续向东到达荷泽，向东北与汶水会合，再向北流入大海。
English: The dredging of Surabaya water, the eastward flow is Jishui, the injection of the Yellow River, the two waters meet, the overflow is Surabaya, the east passes the north side of Taoqiu, continues eastward to Heze, meets the northeast with Wenshui, and then flows northward into the sea.

古文：道淮自桐柏，东会于泗、沂，东入于海。
现代文：从桐柏山开始疏导淮水，向东与泗水、沂水会合，再向东流入大海。
English: From Tongbai Mountain, the dredging of the Huai Water begins, and it meets the Surabaya Water and Surabaya Water to the east, and then flows into the sea to the east.

古文：道渭自鸟鼠同穴，东会于沣，又东北至于泾，东过漆、沮，入于河。
现代文：疏导渭水，从鸟鼠同穴山开始，往东与沣水会合，又向东与泾水会合，再往东经过漆水、沮水，流入黄河。
English: The dredging of the Huangshui River started from the Bird and Mouse Mountain, eastward to meet the Huangshui River, eastward to meet the Huangshui River, and then eastward through the Lacquer Water and Desolation Water to flow into the Yellow River.

古文：道雒自熊耳，东北会于涧、瀍，又东会于伊，东北入于河。
现代文：疏导洛水，从熊耳山开始，向东北与涧水、瀍水会合，又向东与伊水会合，再向东北流入黄河。
English: The dredging of Luoshui, starting from Mount Xiong'er, northeast to the junction of Luoshui and Luoshui, and east to the junction of Yishui, and then northeast to the Yellow River.

古文：于是九州攸同，四奥既居，九山刊旅，九川涤原，九泽既陂，四海会同。
现代文：所有的山川河流都治理好了，从此九州统一，四境之内都可以居住了，九条山脉开出了道路，九条大河疏通了水源，九个大湖筑起了堤防，四海之内的诸侯都可以来京城会盟和朝觐了。
English: All the mountains, rivers and streams have been well managed, and Kyushu has been unified. People can now live in all four regions. Nine mountain ranges have opened up roads, nine major rivers have cleared their water sources, and nine large lakes have built dikes. Princes and queens from all four seas can now come to the capital city to hold meetings and make pilgrimages.

古文：六府甚脩，众土交正，致慎财赋，咸则三壤成赋。中国赐土姓： 祗台德先，不距朕行。 
现代文：赋税职掌各尽其责，各地均要征收赋税，征缴赋税要谨慎，以土地肥瘠为标准，在中国九州之内征取。在九州中分封诸侯，赐给土地和姓氏，并命令说： 要以崇敬我的德业为先，不得违背我的各种措施。 
English: The officials in charge of taxation shall perform their duties. All regions shall collect taxes, and the collection of taxes shall be prudent. The land fertility shall be taken as the standard, and the taxes shall be collected within the Kyushu region of China. In Kyushu, princes shall be assigned, land and surnames shall be given, and it shall be ordered that: My virtuous deeds shall be revered first, and my various measures shall not be violated.

古文：今天子之国以外五百里甸服：百里赋纳总，二百里纳铚，三百里纳秸服，四百里粟，五百里米。甸服外五百里侯服：百里采，二百里任国，三百里诸侯。
现代文：绥服以外五百里的地区为要服，即受天子约束服从天子的地区：靠近绥服三百里以内要遵守教化，和平相处；往外二百里以内为流放犯人的地方。
English: The area five hundred miles outside of Yufu is Yufu, that is, the area that is subject to the Son of Heaven's discipline and obeys the Son of Heaven: within three hundred miles of Yufu, it is necessary to abide by enlightenment and live in peace; within two hundred miles, it is a place where criminals are exiled.

古文：侯服外五百里绥服：三百里揆文教，二百里奋武卫。绥服外五百里要服：三百里夷，二百里蔡。要服外五百里荒服：三百里蛮，二百里流。
现代文：要服以外五百里的地区为荒服，即为天子守卫远边的荒远地区：靠近要服三百里以内荒凉落后，那里的人来去不受限制；再往外二百里以内为流放犯人的地方。
English: The area five hundred miles away from Wufu is Wufu, that is, the far-flung desolate areas guarded by the Son of Heaven: within three hundred miles from Wufu, it is desolate and backward, and people come and go there without restriction; further out, within two hundred miles, it is a place where prisoners are exiled.

古文：东渐于海，西被于流沙，朔、南暨：声教讫于四海。
现代文：这样，东临大海，西至沙漠，从北方到南方，天子的声威教化达到了四方荒远的边陲。
English: In this way, from the east to the sea, from the west to the desert, from the north to the south, the son of heaven's voice and enlightenment have reached the four corners of the desolate frontier.

古文：于是帝锡禹玄圭，以告成功于天下。天下于是太平治。
现代文：于是舜帝为表彰禹治水有功而赐给他一块代表水色的黑色圭玉，向天下宣告治水成功。天下从此太平安定。
English: As a result, Emperor Yao, in recognition of Yu's contribution to water control, gave him a piece of black jade representing the color of water, proclaiming to the world the success of water control. The world has been peaceful and stable ever since.

古文：皋陶作士以理民。
现代文：皋陶担任执法的士这一官职，治理民众。
English: Xuntao served as a law enforcement officer, governing the people.

古文：帝舜朝，禹、伯夷、皋陶相与语帝前。
现代文：舜帝上朝，禹、伯夷、皋陶一块儿在舜帝面前谈话。
English: In the reign of Emperor Xian, Yu, Bo Yi, and Xing Tao had a conversation together in front of Emperor Xian.

古文：皋陶述其谋曰： 信其道德，谋明辅和。 
现代文：皋陶申述他的意见说： 遵循道德确定不移，就能做到谋略高明，臣下团结。 
English: Zou Tao expressed his opinion, saying, "If you adhere to morality and remain steadfast, you will be able to achieve superior strategy and unity among your subjects.

古文：禹曰： 然，如何？ 
现代文：禹说： 很对，但应该怎样做呢？ 
English: Yu said: That's right, but how should we do it?

古文：皋陶曰： 於！慎其身修，思长，敦序九族，众明高翼，近可远在已。 禹拜美言，曰： 然。 
现代文：皋陶说： 哦，要谨慎对待自身修养，要有长远打算，使各部族敦厚亲爱，顺从有序，这样，众多有见识的人就都会努力辅佐你，由近处可以推及到远处，一定要从自身做起。 禹拜谢皋陶的善言，说： 对。 
English: Xun Tao said, "Oh, you should be careful with your self-cultivation, have a long-term plan, make the tribes strong, kind, obedient and orderly, in this way, many knowledgeable people will try to assist you, from near to far, you must start from yourself." Yu Bai Xie Xun Tao's kind words, said: Yes.

古文：皋陶曰： 於！在知人，在安民。 禹曰： 吁！
现代文：皋陶说： 哦，还有成就德业就在于能够了解人，能够安抚民众。 禹说： 呵！
English: Zhai Tao said, "Oh, there are also achievements; virtue lies in being able to understand people, and being able to appease the public." Yu said, "Oh!

古文：皆若是，惟帝其难之。
现代文：都像这样，即使是尧帝恐怕也会感到困难的。
English: It's all like this, and I'm afraid that even Emperor Gong will find it difficult.

古文：知人则智，能官人；能安民则惠，黎民怀之。
现代文：能了解人就是明智，就能恰当地给人安排官职；能安抚民众就是仁爱，黎民百姓都会爱戴你。
English: To be able to understand people is to be wise, and to be able to properly arrange official positions for people; to be able to appease the people is to be benevolent, and the people will love you.

古文：能知能惠，何忧乎驩兜，何迁乎有苗，何畏乎巧言善色佞人？ 
现代文：如果既能了解人，又能仁惠，还忧虑什么驩兜，何必流放有苗，何必害怕花言巧语伪善谄媚的小人呢？ 
English: If you can both understand people and be benevolent, and still worry about what to do, why do you have to exile seedlings, why do you have to be afraid of small talk, hypocrisy and flattery?

古文：皋陶曰： 然，於！
现代文：皋陶说： 对，是这样。
English: Xintao said, "Yes, that's right.

古文：亦行有九德，亦言其有德。 
现代文：检查一个人的行为要根据九种品德，现在就来谈谈这九德。 
English: There are nine virtues by which a man's conduct is to be judged, and of these let us now speak.

古文：乃言曰： 始事事，宽而栗，柔而立，愿而共，治而敬，扰而毅，直而温，简而谦，刚而实，强而义，章其有常吉哉。
现代文：他接着说道： 九德始于行事，宽厚而又威严，温和而又坚定，诚实而又恭敬，有才能而又小心谨慎，善良而又刚毅，正直而又和气，平易而又有棱角，果断而又讲求实效，强势而又讲道理，发扬这九德，并长期坚持，那就好了！
English: He went on to say, "The nine virtues are: to act, to be gracious and dignified, to be gentle and firm, to be honest and respectful, to be capable and prudent, to be kind and firm, to be honest and kind, to be easy-going and tactful, to be decisive and pragmatic, to be forceful and reasonable. It is good to carry forward these nine virtues and persist in them for a long time.

古文：日宣三德，蚤夜翊明有家。
现代文：能每日宣明其中三种品德，早晚谨行努力，卿大夫就能保有他的采邑。
English: If he can daily proclaim three of these virtues, and sooner or later make a conscientious effort, he will be able to keep his hometown.

古文：日严振敬六德，亮采有国。
现代文：每日严肃地恭敬实行六种品德，认真辅佐王事，诸候就可以保有他的封国。
English: If he earnestly and respectfully practices the six moral virtues every day, and conscientiously assists the king in his duties, he can retain his title to the state.

古文：翕受普施，九德咸事，俊乂在官，百吏肃谨。
现代文：能全部具备这九种品德并普遍施行，就可以使有才德的人都居官任职，使所有的官吏都严肃认真办理自己的政务。
English: If these nine virtues can be possessed in their entirety and practiced universally, it will be possible to have people of talent and virtue hold public office, and to have all officials seriously and conscientiously handle their own government affairs.

古文：毋教邪淫奇谋。
现代文：不要让歪门邪道诡计得逞。
English: Don't let crooked tricks succeed.

古文：非其人居其官，是谓乱天事。
现代文：如果让不合适的人居于官位，就叫做扰乱上天所命的大事。
English: If you put the wrong people in office, it's called disturbing the order of heaven.

古文：天讨有罪，五刑五用哉。
现代文：上天惩罚有罪的人，用五种刑罚分别惩处。
English: Heaven punishes the guilty with five separate punishments.

古文：吾言厎可行乎？ 
现代文：我讲的大抵可以行得通吧？ 
English: Most of what I'm saying can work, right?

古文：禹曰： 女言致可绩行。 
现代文：禹说： 如果按你的话行事，一定会做出成绩的。 
English: Yu said, "If I act according to your words, I will surely achieve results."

古文：皋陶曰： 余未有知，思赞道哉。 
现代文：皋陶说： 我才智浅薄，只是希望有助于推行治天下之道。 
English: Zou Tao said: I am a shallow intellect, but I hope to help promote the way of ruling the world.

古文：帝舜谓禹曰： 女亦昌言。 
现代文：舜帝对禹说： 来吧，禹，你也说说你的高见。 
English: Hao Di said to Yu: Come on, Yu, you should also talk about your high opinion.

古文：禹拜曰： 於，予何言！
现代文：禹谦恭地行了拜礼，说： 哦，我说什么呢？
English: "Oh, what am I saying?

古文：予思日孳孳。 
现代文：我整天考虑的是勤恳努力的工作。 
English: I think about hard work all day.

古文：皋陶难禹曰： 何谓孳孳？ 
现代文：皋陶追问道： 怎样才叫勤恳努力？ 
English: Zou Tao asked: How can one make diligent efforts?

古文：禹曰： 鸿水滔天，浩浩怀山襄陵，下民皆服于水。
现代文：禹说： 洪水滔天，浩浩荡荡，环绕着高山，淹没了丘陵，百姓深受水害。
English: Yu said: "The floods were huge and raging. They surrounded the high mountains and submerged the hills. The people were deeply affected by the floods.

古文：予陆行乘车，水行乘舟，泥行乘橇，山行乘檋，行山刊木。
现代文：我在陆地上行走乘车，在水中行走乘船，在泥沼中行走乘木橇，在山路上行走就穿上带铁齿的鞋，翻山越岭，树立木桩，在山上作了标志。
English: I walked on the land by car, walked in the water by boat, walked in the mud by raft, put on iron-toothed shoes when walking on the mountain road, climbed over the mountains, set up wooden stakes, and made signs on the mountains.

古文：与益予众庶稻鲜食。
现代文：我和益一起，给黎民百姓稻粮和新鲜的肉食。
English: Together with Yik, I gave rice and fresh meat to the Lebanese people.

古文：以决九川致四海，浚畎浍致之川。
现代文：疏导九条河道引入大海，又将田间沟渠引入河道。
English: Nine river channels were diverted into the sea, and field ditches were diverted into river channels.

古文：与稷予众庶难得之食。
现代文：和稷一起赈济吃粮都困难的百姓。
English: Together with the cormorants, they feed the people who have difficulty eating grain.

古文：食少，调有余补不足，徙居。
现代文：粮食匮乏的时候，从有富余粮食的地区调济粮食给粮食匮乏的地区，或者叫百姓迁到有粮食的地区居住。
English: When there is a shortage of grain, grain is transferred from regions with surplus grain to regions with a shortage of grain, or the people are asked to move to regions with grain.

古文：众民乃定，万国为治。 
现代文：民众安定下来了，各诸侯国也都治理好了。 
English: The people had settled down, and all the principalities were well governed.

古文：皋陶曰： 然，此而美也。 禹曰： 於，帝！
现代文：皋陶说： 是啊，这些是你的巨大业绩。 禹说： 啊，帝！
English: Zhaotao said, "Yes, these are your great achievements." Yu said, "Ah, God!

古文：慎乃在位，安尔止。辅德，天下大应。
现代文：作为万民之主，您可要谨慎，举止要稳妥恰当，辅之以德，天下人都会响应拥护您。
English: As the Lord of all people, you should be prudent, your manners should be steady and appropriate, supplemented by virtue, and the world will respond and support you.

古文：清意以昭待上帝命，天其重命用休。 
现代文：您用清静之心奉行上天的命令，上天将一再赐给你好运。 
English: If you follow God's orders with a pure heart, God will give you good luck again and again.

古文：帝曰： 吁，臣哉，臣哉！
现代文：舜帝说： 啊，得力之臣呀，得力之臣！
English: Emperor Xuan said, "Ah, a capable minister, a capable minister!

古文：臣作朕股肱耳目。
现代文：得力之臣是我的臂膀和耳目。
English: My arms, ears, and eyes are my best assets.

古文：予欲左右有民，女辅之。
现代文：我想帮助天下民众，你们要辅助我。
English: I want to help people all over the world. You have to help me.

古文：余欲观古人之象，日月星辰，作文绣服色，女明之。
现代文：我要观察古人的形象及日月星辰，制作服饰上的等级图案，你们要仔细辨明。
English: I want to observe the image of the ancients and the sun, moon and stars, and make the grade patterns on the costumes. You should carefully identify the patterns.

古文：予欲闻六律五声八音，来始滑，以出入五言，女听。
现代文：我想通过聆听六律、五声、八音，以此来考察那里政治是否荒废，以便取舍各方的意见，你们要仔细地辨听。
English: I want to listen to the six tones, five tones, and eight tones to see if the politics there is useless, so that I can listen to the opinions of all parties. You should listen carefully.

古文：予即辟，女匡拂予。
现代文：我的言行如有不正当的地方，你们要纠正我。
English: If there is anything improper in what I say or do, you must correct me.

古文：女无面谀，退而谤予。
现代文：你们不要当面奉承，回去之后却又指责我。
English: Don't flatter me to my face and then blame me when you get back.

古文：敬四辅臣。
现代文：我敬重前后左右辅佐大臣。
English: I respect all the vice-ministers.

古文：诸众谗嬖臣，君德诚施皆清矣。 禹曰： 然。
现代文：至于那些搬弄是非的佞臣，只要君主的德政真正施行，他们就会被清除了。 禹说： 对。
English: As for those meddlesome courtiers, they will be eliminated as soon as the monarch's German policy is truly implemented.Yu said: Right.

古文：帝即不时，布同善恶则毋功。 
现代文：您如果不这样，好人坏人全都混同起来不分，那就不会成就大事。 
English: If you don't do this, if good people and bad people are all mixed up and don't differentiate, then you won't achieve much.

古文：帝曰： 毋若丹朱傲，维慢游是好，毋水行舟，朋淫于家，用绝其世。予不能顺是。 
现代文：舜帝说： 你们不要学丹朱那样桀傲骄横，只顾放浪游乐，在无水的陆地上行船，聚众在家里干淫乱之事，以致再不能继承帝位。
English: Emperor Xuan said, "Don't be arrogant and haughty like Tangzhu. Don't just wander and have fun, sail on land that has no water, and gather people at home to commit adultery, so that you can no longer inherit the imperial throne.

古文：禹曰： 予娶涂山，癸甲，生启予不子，以故能成水土功。
现代文：对这种人我决不听之任之。 禹说： 我娶涂山氏的女儿时，只经四天婚期就又去治水了，我的孩子启从生下来我未曾抚育过，所以才能使平治水土的工作取得成功。
English: When I married the daughter of the Tu Shan clan, I went back to water control after only four days of marriage, and I have never nursed my child since he was born, so I can make the work of water and soil control successful, said Yu.

古文：辅成五服，至于五千里，州十二师，外薄四海，咸建五长，各道有功，苗顽不即功，帝其念哉。 
现代文：我帮助帝王设置了五服，范围达到五千里，天下十二州都任命了长官，疆域外近四海，在每五个诸侯国中设立一个首领，他们各尽职守，都有功绩，只有三苗凶顽，没有功绩，希望帝王您记着这件事。 
English: I helped the emperor to set up the Five Offices, the scope of which reached five thousand miles. Twelve states in the world have appointed officials, and there are nearly four seas outside the territory. A leader has been set up in each of the five principalities. They all perform their duties and have merits. Only the three fierce seedlings have no merits. I hope you remember this, emperor.

古文：帝曰： 道吾德，乃女功序之也。 
现代文：舜帝说： 用我的德教来开导，那么凭你的工作就会使他们归顺的！ 
English: Emperor Qian said, "Use my moral teaching to enlighten them, then your work will make them submit!"

古文：皋陶于是敬禹之德，令民皆则禹。
现代文：皋陶由此敬重禹的功德，命令天下都学习禹。
English: As a result, Juntao respected Yu's merits and ordered the whole world to study Yu.

古文：不如言，刑从之。
现代文：对于不听从命令的，就施以刑法。
English: Criminal law will be applied to those who do not obey the order.

古文：舜德大明。
现代文：因此，舜的德教得到了更大地发扬。
English: As a result, the moral teachings of Xing were further promoted.

古文：于是夔行乐，祖考至，群后相让，鸟兽翔舞，《箫韶》九成，凤凰来仪，百兽率舞，百官信谐。
现代文：这时，夔奏起音乐，祖先之灵降临欣赏，诸侯们相互礼让，鸟兽在宫殿周围飞翔、起舞，《箫韶》奏完九遍，凤凰被召来了。群兽都舞起来，百官忠诚合谐。
English: At this time, the gongs began to play music, the spirits of the ancestors came down to enjoy, the princes were courteous to each other, the birds and beasts flew around the palace and danced. After the "Gong" was played nine times, the phoenix was summoned. The beasts all danced, and the officials were loyal and harmonious.

古文：帝用此作歌曰： 陟天之命，维时维几。 
现代文：舜帝于是歌唱道： 奉行天命，施行德政，顺应天时，谨微慎行。 
English: Emperor Qian then sang: to pursue the mission of heaven, to practice virtue, to conform to the times, and to be cautious.

古文：乃歌曰： 股肱喜哉，元首起哉，百工熙哉！ 
现代文：又唱道： 股肱大臣精神昂扬，天子奋发向上啊，百官事业也兴盛啊！ 
English: He also sang, "The Minister of Finance is in high spirits, the heavenly son is striving upward, and the career of the centurion is also flourishing!"

古文：皋陶拜手稽首扬言曰： 念哉，率为兴事，慎乃宪，敬哉！ 
现代文：皋陶作揖叩首高声说道： 您可记住啊，要带头努力尽职，谨慎对待您的法度，认真办好各种事务！ 
English: The potter said in a loud voice, "You can remember, you should take the lead in doing your duty, be careful with your rules, and do a good job in various matters!"

古文：乃更为歌曰： 元首明哉，股肱良哉，庶事康哉！ 
现代文：于是也接着唱道： 天子英明有方啊，股肱大臣都贤良啊，天下万事都兴旺啊！ 
English: Then he also went on to sing: The Son of Heaven is wise, the ministers are virtuous, and all things in the world are prosperous!

古文：又歌曰： 元首丛脞哉，股肱惰哉，万事堕哉！ 
现代文：又唱道： 天子胸中无大略啊，股肱大臣就懈怠啊，天下万事都败坏啊！ 
English: He also sang: There is no grand plan in the heart of the Son of Heaven, the Minister of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the Ministry of the

古文：帝拜曰： 然，往钦哉！ 
现代文：舜帝拜答说： 对！以后我们都要努力办好各自的事务！ 
English: Hao Di Bai replied, "Yes! In the future, we must all work hard to run our own affairs well!"

古文：于是天下皆宗禹之明度数声乐，为山川神主。
现代文：这时候天下都推崇禹精于尺度和音乐，尊奉他为山川众神之主，意思就是能代山川之神施行号令的帝王。
English: At this time, the whole world revered Yu as a master of scale and music, and worshiped him as the lord of the gods of mountains and rivers, meaning that he was the emperor who could carry out the orders of the gods of mountains and rivers.

古文：帝舜荐禹于天，为嗣。
现代文：舜帝把禹推荐给上天，让他作为帝位的继承人。
English: Emperor Qian recommended Yu to Heaven, making him the heir to the throne.

古文：十七年而帝舜崩。
现代文：十七年之后，舜帝逝世。
English: Seventeen years later, Emperor Xuan died.

古文：三年丧毕，禹辞辟舜之子商均于阳城。
现代文：服丧三年完毕，禹为了把帝位让给舜的儿子商均，躲避到阳城。
English: After three years of mourning, Yu fled to Yangcheng in order to cede the imperial throne to Han's son Shangjun.

古文：天下诸侯皆去商均而朝禹。
现代文：但天下诸侯都不去朝拜商均而来朝拜禹。
English: However, all the princes in the world did not go to worship Shangjun, but came to worship Yu.

古文：禹于是遂即天子位，南面朝天下，国号曰夏后，姓姒氏。
现代文：禹这才继承了天子之位，南面接受天下诸侯的朝拜，国号为夏后，姓姒氏。
English: It was only then that Yu succeeded to the position of the Son of Heaven, and accepted the worship of the princes of the world in the south. His country name was Xiao, and his surname was Yu.

古文：帝禹立而举皋陶荐之，且授政焉，而皋陶卒。
现代文：禹帝立为天子后，举用皋陶为帝位继承人，把他推荐给上天，并把国政授给他，但是皋陶没有继任就死了。
English: After Emperor Yu established himself as the Son of Heaven, he appointed Juntao as the heir to the imperial throne, recommended him to Heaven, and bestowed state affairs on him, but Juntao died without a successor.

古文：封皋陶之后于英、六，或在许。
现代文：禹把皋陶的后代封在英、六两地，有的封在许地。
English: Yu sealed the descendants of Juntao in Ying and Li two places, and some sealed in Xu.

古文：而后举益，任之政。
现代文：后来又举用了益，把国政授给他。
English: Later, he raised Ying Yi again and gave him the state affairs.

古文：十年，帝禹东巡狩，至于会稽而崩。
现代文：过了十年，禹帝到东方视察，到达会稽，在那里逝世。
English: Ten years later, Emperor Yu went to the East to inspect the situation, arrived at the imperial court, and died there.

古文：以天下授益。
现代文：把天下传给益。
English: To pass on the world to benefit.

古文：三年之丧毕，益让帝禹之子启，而辟居箕山之阳。
现代文：服丧三年完毕，益又把帝位让禹的儿子启，自己到箕山之南去躲避。
English: After three years of mourning, Yik gave the throne to Yu's son, Kai, and went to the south of Lushan to hide.

古文：禹子启贤，天下属意焉。
现代文：禹的儿子启贤德，天下人心都归向于他。
English: Yu's son, Kai Xiande, won the hearts of people all over the world.

古文：及禹崩，虽授益，益之佐禹日浅，天下未洽。
现代文：等到禹逝世，虽然把天子位传给益，但由于益辅佐禹时间不长，天下并不顺服他。
English: After Yu's death, although the position of the Son of Heaven was passed on to Yi, because Yi assisted Yu for a short time, the world did not obey him.

古文：故诸侯皆去益而朝启，曰 吾君帝禹之子也。 
现代文：所以，诸侯还是都离开益而去朝拜启，说： 我们让禹帝的儿子做君王。 
English: Therefore, the princes still left Yik and went to worship Kai, saying, "Let us make the son of Yu the king."

古文：于是启遂即天子之位，是为夏后帝启。
现代文：于是启就继承了天子之位，这就是夏后帝启。
English: As a result, Kai inherited the position of the son of heaven, which is the Emperor Kai after the summer.

古文：夏后帝启，禹之子，其母涂山氏之女也。
现代文：夏后帝启，是禹的儿子，他的母亲是涂山氏的女子。
English: Xiao Hou Diqi was Yu's son, and his mother was a woman from the Tu Shan clan.

古文：有扈氏不服，启伐之，大战于甘。
现代文：启登临帝位后，有扈氏不来归从，启前往征伐，在甘地大战一场。
English: After Emperor Akihito ascended to the throne, the Min clan did not come to submit, and Emperor Akihito went on a campaign, leading to a great war with Gandhi.

古文：将战，作《甘誓》，乃召六卿申之。启曰： 嗟！
现代文：战斗开始之前，启作了一篇誓辞叫做《甘誓》，召集来六军将领进行训诫。启说： 嗟！
English: Before the battle began, Kai wrote an oath called "Sweet Vow" and summoned the generals of the Six Armies to admonish them. Kai said: "Shame!

古文：六事之人，予誓告女：有扈氏威侮五行，怠弃三正，天用剿绝其命。
现代文：六军将领们，我向你们宣布誓言：有扈氏蔑视仁、义、礼、智、信五常的规范，背离天、地、人的正道，因此上天要断绝他的大命。
English: Generals of the Six Armies, I declare an oath to you: There is Shun who has flouted the norms of benevolence, righteousness, etiquette, wisdom, and belief in the five constants, and has deviated from the right path of heaven, earth, and man. Therefore, heaven will cut off his great life.

古文：今予维共行天之罚。
现代文：如今我恭敬地执行上天对他的惩罚。
English: Now I respectfully carry out Heaven's punishment on him.

古文：左不攻于左，右不攻于右，女不共命。
现代文：战车左边的射手不从左边射击敌人，车右的剑手不从右边击杀敌人，就是不服从命令。
English: If the archer on the left of the chariot does not shoot the enemy from the left, and the swordsman on the right of the chariot does not kill the enemy from the right, he is disobeying orders.

古文：御非其马之政，女不共命。
现代文：驭手不能使车马阵列整齐，也是不服从命令。
English: If the driver cannot keep the line of horses and carts in order, he is not obeying orders.

古文：用命，赏于祖；不用命，僇于社，予则帑僇女。 
现代文：听从命令的，我将在祖先神灵面前奖赏他；谁不听从命令，就在社神面前杀掉他，而且要把他们的妻子儿女一起杀掉。 
English: Whoever obeys the order, I will reward him in front of the ancestral gods; whoever disobeys the order, I will kill him in front of the gods, and I will kill their wives and children together.

古文：遂灭有扈氏。天下咸朝。
现代文：于是消灭了有扈氏，天下都来朝拜。
English: As a result, the Arata clan was wiped out, and the whole world came to pay homage.

古文：夏后帝启崩，子帝太康立。
现代文：夏后帝启逝世后，他的儿子帝太康继位。
English: After Emperor Xiaoqi died, his son Emperor Taikang succeeded to the throne.

古文：帝太康失国，昆弟五人，须于洛汭，作《五子之歌》。
现代文：帝太康整天游玩打猎，不顾民事，结果被羿放逐，丢了国家，他的五个弟在洛水北岸等待他没有等到，作了《五子之歌》。
English: Emperor Taikang spent all day hunting, disregarding the civil law. As a result, he was banished and lost his country. His five younger brothers were waiting for him on the north bank of the Luoshui River. He did not wait and composed "Song of the Five Sons."

古文：太康崩，弟中康立，是为帝中康。帝中康时，羲、和湎淫，废时乱日。
现代文：太康逝世后，他的弟弟中康继位，这就是中康帝，中康帝在位的时候，掌管天地四时的大臣羲氏、和氏沉湎于酒，把每年的四季、日子的甲乙都搞乱了。
English: After the death of Taikang, his younger brother Zhongkang succeeded to the throne. This was the rise of Emperor Zhongkang. When Emperor Zhongkang was on the throne, the four o'clock ministers of heaven and earth, Zou and He, indulged in wine, and disrupted the four seasons and the days of the year.

古文：胤往征之，作《胤征》。
现代文：胤奉命去征讨他，作了《胤征》。
English: Tane was ordered to recruit him and made "Tane's Recruitment."

古文：中康崩，子帝相立。
现代文：中康逝世以后，他的儿子帝相继位。
English: After the death of Zhongkang, his son, Emperor He, succeeded to the throne.

古文：帝相崩，子帝少康立。
现代文：帝相逝世，他的儿子帝少康继位。
English: Emperor Xiang died, and his son Emperor Shao Kang succeeded to the throne.

古文：帝少康崩，子帝予立。
现代文：帝少康逝世，他的儿子帝予继位。
English: Emperor Shoko died and was succeeded by his son, Emperor Showa.

古文：帝予崩，子帝槐立。
现代文：帝予逝世，他的儿子帝槐继位。
English: Emperor Yao died and was succeeded by his son, Emperor Xizong.

古文：帝槐崩，子帝芒立。
现代文：帝槐逝世，他的儿子帝芒继位。
English: Emperor Yao died and was succeeded by his son Emperor Mang.

古文：帝芒崩，子帝泄立。
现代文：帝芒逝世，他的儿子帝泄继位。
English: Emperor Man died, and his son Emperor Jie succeeded to the throne.

古文：帝泄崩，子帝不降立。
现代文：帝泄逝世，他的儿子帝不降继位。
English: When Emperor Gaozong died, his son Emperor Niu took the throne.

古文：帝不降崩，弟帝扃立。
现代文：帝不降逝世，弟弟帝扃继位。
English: Emperor Wu died and was succeeded by his younger brother Emperor Yao.

古文：帝扃崩，子帝廑立。
现代文：帝扃逝世，他的儿子帝廑继位。
English: The emperor died, and his son, Emperor Wu, succeeded him.

古文：帝廑崩，立帝不降之子孔甲，是为帝孔甲。
现代文：帝谨逝世，立帝不降的儿子孔甲为帝，这就是帝孔甲。
English: Emperor Jian died, and Emperor Kongjia, the son of Emperor Jian who would not abdicate, became emperor. This is Emperor Kongjia.

古文：帝孔甲立，好方鬼神，事淫乱。
现代文：帝孔甲继位后，喜好鬼神方术，干淫乱的事。
English: After Emperor Kongjia succeeded to the throne, he was fond of ghosts and gods, and did lewd things.

古文：夏后氏德衰，诸侯畔之。
现代文：夏后氏的威德日渐衰微，诸侯相继背叛了他。
English: Xia Hou's virtue was fading day by day, and the princes betrayed him one after another.

古文：天降龙二，有雌雄，孔甲不能食，未得豢龙氏。
现代文：上天降下两条神龙，一雌一雄，孔甲喂养不了它们，也没有找到能够饲养的人。
English: Heaven sent down two divine dragons, one female and one male, but Kong Jia could not feed them, nor could he find anyone who could.

古文：陶唐既衰，其后有刘累，学扰龙于豢龙氏，以事孔甲。
现代文：陶唐氏已经衰败，有个后代叫刘累，从会养龙的人那里学会了驯龙，就去侍奉孔甲。
English: The Tao-Tang Clan had fallen into decline, and a descendant named Liu Lei, who had learned to tame dragons from a dragon breeder, went to serve Kong Jia.

古文：孔甲赐之姓曰御龙氏，受豕韦之后。
现代文：孔甲赐给他姓御龙氏，让他来接受豕韦氏后代的封地。
English: Kong Jia gave him the surname of the Goryu clan and let him accept the fief of the descendants of the Wei clan.

古文：龙一雌死，以食夏后。
现代文：后来那条雌龙死了，刘累偷偷做成肉酱拿来献给孔甲吃。
English: Later, the female dragon died, and Liu Lei secretly made meat sauce to give to Kong Jia to eat.

古文：夏后使求，惧而迁去。
现代文：夏后孔甲派人来要龙，刘累害怕，逃走了。
English: After the summer, Kong Jia sent someone to get the dragon. Liu Lei was afraid and ran away.

古文：孔甲崩，子帝皋立。
现代文：孔甲逝世后，他的儿子帝皋继位。
English: After Kong Jia's death, his son, Emperor Gaozong, succeeded to the throne.

古文：帝皋崩，子帝发立。
现代文：帝皋逝世后，他的儿子帝发继位。
English: After the death of Emperor Xizong, his son Emperor Fa took the throne.

古文：帝发崩，子帝履癸立，是为桀。
现代文：帝发逝世，他的儿子帝履癸继位，这就是桀。
English: Emperor Fa passed away, and his son Emperor Lushan succeeded to the throne. This is the Dragon Boat Festival.

古文：帝桀之时，自孔甲以来而诸侯多畔夏，桀不务德而武伤百姓，百姓弗堪。
现代文：帝桀在位时，因为自从孔甲在位以来，诸侯就有很多相继叛离了夏，而桀又不修德行而用武力伤害百官，百官不堪忍受。
English: When Emperor Qian was on the throne, because since Kong Jia was on the throne, many lords have successively defected from Xia, and Qian did not practice virtue and used force to hurt hundreds of officials, and the hundreds of officials were unbearable.

古文：乃召汤而囚之夏台，已而释之。
现代文：桀召来汤，把他囚禁在夏台，后来又放了他。
English: He summoned Tang, imprisoned him in Xatai, and later released him.

古文：汤修德，诸侯皆归汤，汤遂率兵伐夏桀。桀走鸣条，遂放而死。
现代文：汤修行德业，诸侯都来归附，汤就率兵去征讨夏桀，夏桀逃到鸣条，最后流放而死。
English: Tang practised virtue, and all the lords came to join him. Tang then led an army to recruit Xia Yao. Xia Yao fled to Mingtang, and was eventually exiled and died.

古文：桀谓人曰： 吾悔不遂杀汤于夏台，使至此。 
现代文：桀对人说： 我后悔当初没有索性把汤杀死在夏台，以致使我落到这个下场。 
English: "I regret that I didn't have the guts to kill Tang in Xatai in the first place, and that I ended up like this," Zou said.

古文：汤乃践天子位，代夏朝天下。
现代文：这样，汤就登上了天子之位，取代了夏朝，领有天下。
English: In this way, Tang ascended to the position of the Son of Heaven, replacing the Xia Dynasty and dominating the world.

古文：汤封夏之后，至周封于杞也。
现代文：汤封了夏的后代，到周朝时，把他们封在杞地。
English: The soup sealed Xia's descendants, and by the time of the Zhou Dynasty, they were sealed in Shunde.

古文：太史公曰：禹为姒姓，其后分封，用国为姓，故有夏后氏、有扈氏、有男氏、斟寻氏、彤城氏、褒氏、费氏、杞氏、缯氏、辛氏、冥氏、斟、戈氏。
现代文：太史公说：禹是姒姓，他的后代被分封在各地，用国号为姓，所以有夏后氏、有扈氏、有男氏、斟鄩氏、彤城氏、褒氏、费氏、杞氏、缯氏、辛氏、冥氏、斟戈氏。
English: Taishikong said, "Yu is the surname of Yu, and his descendants were assigned to various places, using the country name as the surname, so there are Xia Guo clan, Yu Guo clan, Yu Man clan, Rui Guo clan, Ruicheng clan, Bo clan, Fei clan, Rui Guo clan, Zou clan, Xin clan, Mei clan, Rui Guo clan.

古文：孔子正夏时，学者多传《夏小正》云。
现代文：据说孔子曾校正夏朝的历书，学者们有许多传习《夏小正》的。
English: It is said that Confucius once corrected the almanac of the Xia Dynasty, and scholars have a lot to learn from "Xia Xiaozheng."

古文：自虞、夏时，贡赋备矣。
现代文：从虞舜、夏禹时代开始，进贡纳赋的规定已完备。
English: From the era of Yu Xi and Xia Yu, the provisions of the tribute have been complete.

古文：或言禹会诸侯江南，计功而崩，固葬焉，命曰会稽。
现代文：有人说禹在长江南会聚诸侯，因为是在考核诸侯功绩时死的，就葬在那里了，所以，把埋葬禹的苗山改名为会稽山。
English: Some people said that Yu gathered the princes in the south of the Yangtze River, because he died when he was assessing the merits of the princes, and was buried there. Therefore, the Miao Mountain where Yu was buried was renamed the Kechi Mountain.

古文：会稽者，会计也。
现代文：会稽就是会计的意思。
English: Kikaku means accountant.

