古文：何乔新，字廷秀，江西广昌人。
现代文：何乔新，字廷秀，江西广昌人。
English: He Qiaoxin, surnamed Tingxiu, from Guangchang, Jiangxi Province.

古文：父文渊，永乐十六年进士。
现代文：父亲何文渊，是永乐十六年进士。
English: His father, He Wenyuan, entered the priesthood in the 16th year of Yongle.

古文：授御史，历按山东、四川。
现代文：授御史职，历任山东巡按、四川巡按。
English: He was awarded the post of imperial historian, and successively held the posts of Shandong patrol and Sichuan patrol.

古文：乌蒙奸民什伽私其知府禄昭妻，惧诛，诬昭反。诏发军讨。
现代文：乌蒙奸民什伽与知府禄昭妻子私通，他害怕被杀，诬告禄昭反叛，朝廷下诏发兵讨伐。
English: Shiga, a traitor to the Umong people, had an illicit affair with the wife of the governor Luo Zhao. He was afraid of being killed, falsely accused Luo Zhao of rebellion, and the imperial court ordered an army to fight.

古文：文渊檄止所调军，而白其诬。
现代文：文渊下檄文停止调遣军队，而且替禄昭澄清冤屈。
English: Under Wen Yuan, Yanwen stopped dispatching troops and clarified grievances on behalf of Luo Zhao.

古文：宣德五年用顾佐荐，赐敕知温州府。
现代文：宣德五年，经顾佐推荐，皇帝任命他为温州知府。
English: In the fifth year of Xuan De, the emperor appointed him as the governor of Wenzhou upon Gu Zuo's recommendation.

古文：居六年，治最，增俸赐玺书。
现代文：任职六年，政绩突出，皇帝给他增加俸禄、赐玺书。
English: After six years in office, his political achievements were outstanding, and the emperor gave him an increase in salary and a certificate of merit.

古文：以胡滢荐，擢刑部右侍郎，督两淮盐课。
现代文：由胡氵荧推荐，提升刑部右侍郎，督察两淮盐税。
English: Recommended by Hu Yuxuan, he was promoted to the right-hand man of the criminal department and the inspector of two salt taxes.

古文：正统三年，两议狱不当，与尚书魏源下狱，皆得释。
现代文：正统三年，因为两次对官司发表意见不得当，与尚书魏源一起被下狱，后都被释放。
English: After three years of orthodoxy, because it was improper to express opinions on the lawsuit twice, he was sent to prison together with Shangshu Wei Yuan, and then they were all released.

古文：朝议征麓川，文渊疏谏曰： 麓川徼外弹丸地，不足烦大兵。
现代文：朝廷商量出征麓川，文渊上疏劝谏道 ：麓川是境外弹丸大的地方，不值出征大军。
English: The imperial court discussed sending troops to the Luchuan River, but Wen Yuan was dissuaded and advised that the Luchuan River was too large to send a large army.

古文：若遣云南守将屯金齿，令三司官抚谕之，远人获更生，而朝廷免调兵转饷，策之善者也。 
现代文：如果派遣云南守将于金齿驻军，再令三司官安慰抚恤，那么麓川人获得再生，而朝廷免去调兵运粮，这是上策。 
English: If the Yunnan governor is sent to garrison Jinzu, and the three officers are sent to comfort and support, then the people of Luchuan will be regenerated, and the imperial court will be exempted from deploying troops to transport grain. This is the best strategy.

古文：帝下其议，廷臣多主用兵。
现代文：皇帝将此建议下给群臣讨论，廷臣大多主张用兵。
English: The emperor sent this suggestion to his courtiers for discussion, and most courtiers advocated the use of troops.

古文：于是西南骚动，仅乃克之，而失亡多。
现代文：于是西南动乱不安，仅只攻克麓川，然而自己伤亡很惨。
English: As a result, the southwestern part of the country was in turmoil and unrest. They only managed to conquer the Luchuan River, but they suffered heavy casualties.

古文：其冬，以疾乞归。
现代文：这年冬天，文渊因为有病自请返乡。
English: This winter, Wen Yuan voluntarily returned home due to illness.

古文：景帝即位，起吏部左侍郎，寻进尚书，佐王直理部事。
现代文：景帝即位，起用文渊为吏部左侍郎，不久升为尚书，辅佐王直处理政事。
English: When Emperor Jing ascended the throne, he appointed Wen Yuan as the left attendant of the cadre department, and soon he was promoted to Shangshu, and assisted Wang Zhi to deal with political affairs.

古文：东宫建，加太子太保。
现代文：立太子，文渊被加封太子太保。
English: The crown prince was enthroned, and Wen Yuan was given the additional title of crown prince.

古文：灾异见，给事中林聪等劾文渊憸邪。
现代文：出现灾异，给事中林聪等弹劾文渊奸猾。
English: A disaster occurred, leading to the impeachment of Lin Cong and the treachery of Wen Yuan.

古文：左庶子周旋疏言其枉，聪并劾旋。
现代文：左庶子周旋上疏为他辩白，林聪同时又弹劾周旋。
English: Zhou Zhou, Lin Cong's son-in-law, barely defended him, while Lin Cong impeached Zhou Zhou.

古文：御史曹凯复廷争之，遂与旋俱下狱。
现代文：御史曹凯又在朝廷为文渊争辩，曹凯与周旋都被下狱。
English: In the imperial court, Cao Kai argued for Wen Yuan, and both Cao Kai and Zhou Yuan were sent to prison.

古文：聪疏有 嘱内臣 语，太监兴安请诘主名。聪不敢坚对，乃释文渊命致仕。
现代文：林聪疏文上有 嘱内臣 的话，太监兴安要求追问主使者的名字，林聪不敢回答，文渊才被释放，而令他退休。
English: The eunuch Xing'an demanded to know the name of the main messenger. Lin Cong did not dare to answer, so Wen Yuan was released and retired.

古文：英宗复位，削其加官。
现代文：英宗复位，削去文渊被加封的官职。
English: Yingzong was reinstated, and the official post that Wen Yuan had been given was removed.

古文：而景泰中易储诏书 父有天下传之子 ，语出文渊，或传朝命逮捕，惧而自缢。
现代文：而景泰年间代宗的易储诏书中 父有天下传之子 语出自文渊，有人传言朝廷下令逮捕文渊，文渊害怕自缢而死。
English: However, in the I Ching Imperial Rescript issued by Emperor Taizong during the reign of King Jingtai, the phrase "father has a son who is handed down from generation to generation" was attributed to Wenyuan. It was rumored that the imperial court had ordered the arrest of Wenyuan, and that Wenyuan was afraid of committing suicide.

古文：时乔新已登景泰五年进士，官南京礼部主事，奔丧归里。
现代文：这时乔新已考中景泰五年进士，任南京礼部主事，回乡奔丧。
English: At this time, Qiao Xin had been admitted to the Jing Tai Middle School for five years, and was the head of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department. He returned home to mourn.

古文：里人故侍郎揭稽尝受业文渊，而与乔新兄弟不协，奏文渊死实诸子迫之自经，又逼嫁父所爱妾。
现代文：同乡人曾任侍郎的揭稽曾经师从文渊，而与乔新兄弟不和，他就诬奏文渊死实际是由于被诸子逼迫而自杀，又逼嫁父亲爱妾。
English: A fellow villager, who had served as a waiter, once learned from Wenyuan, but he did not get along with Qiao Xin's brothers. He falsely claimed that Wenyuan died because he was forced by his sons to commit suicide. He was also forced to marry his father's mistress.

古文：乔新亦讦稽为巡抚时，尝荐黄〈王厷〉，且代草易储疏。
现代文：乔新也揭发揭稽任巡抚时曾经举荐黄，并且代为起草易换皇储疏。
English: Qiao Xin also revealed that he had recommended Huang Rong when he was appointed as an inspector, and drafted the replacement of the imperial storehouse on his behalf.

古文：皆被征比对簿。
现代文：两人都被受审。
English: Both are on trial.

古文：父妾断指，为诸郎讼冤，狱得少解。
现代文：文渊妾为此断指，为乔新兄弟诉冤，官司得以缓和。
English: Wen Yuan's concubine severed her finger for this, sued for the grievances of Qiao Xin's brothers, and the lawsuit was mitigated.

古文：帝亦以事经赦，释不问。
现代文：英宗也以揭稽所犯之事先前已赦免，就释放他不再问罪。
English: Yingzong also released him without charge on the grounds that he had previously been pardoned for the crime he had committed.

古文：已，复丁母忧。服除，改刑部主事，历广东司郎中。
现代文：事完以后，乔新又为母亲守丧，守丧期满，改任刑部主事，调任广东司郎中。
English: After the incident was over, Qiao Xin again held a memorial service for his mother. When the mourning period was over, he was reassigned as the head of the criminal justice department and transferred to the Guangdong Shilang Middle School.

古文：锦衣卫卒犯法，捕治不少贷。
现代文：锦衣卫兵犯法，何乔新按律处理，一点也不宽恕。
English: The brocade-clad guards broke the law, and He Qiaoxin dealt with them according to the law, and did not forgive them at all.

古文：都指挥袁彬有所嘱，执不从。
现代文：都指挥袁彬托他办事，乔新执意不从。
English: They all ordered Yuan Bin to do his work, but Qiao Xin stubbornly refused.

古文：彬怒，使人捃摭无所得。
现代文：袁彬发怒，派人找诬告他的把柄，一无所得。
English: Enraged, Yuan Bin sent someone to find the source of the false accusation, but nothing came of it.

古文：由是名大起。
现代文：由此乔新名声大震。
English: As a result, Joe's new-found fame went into overdrive.

古文：成化四年迁福建副使。
现代文：成化四年，他调升福建副使。
English: Four years later, he was promoted to vice-envoy of Fujian Province.

古文：所属寿宁银矿，盗采者聚众千余人，所过剽掠，募兵击擒其魁。
现代文：所辖寿宁的银矿被非法开采，聚众千余人，到处劫掠，乔新募兵出去，擒获其首领。
English: The silver mine under the jurisdiction of Shuning was illegally mined, more than a thousand people gathered and looted everywhere. Qiao Xin went out to recruit soldiers and captured their leader.

古文：福宁豪尤氏杀人，出入随兵甲，拒捕者二十年。
现代文：福宁豪族尤氏杀人，出入带着保镖和武器，拒捕二十年。
English: The You clan of the Fu Ning Gao ethnic group committed murder, went in and out with bodyguards and weapons, and resisted arrest for twenty years.

古文：福清薛氏时出诸番互市，事觉，谋作乱。
现代文：福清薛氏经常出海与异国商人做生意，事发后，策谋叛乱。
English: Mr. Fu Qing Xue often went to sea to do business with foreign merchants. After the incident, he plotted a rebellion.

古文：皆捕杀之。
现代文：都被乔新捕捉杀掉。
English: They were all caught and killed by Qiao Xin.

古文：福安、宁德银矿久绝，有司责课，民多破产。
现代文：福安、宁德银矿很久就无矿可开，有关部门仍征收矿税，很多百姓以致破产。
English: The Fu'an and Ningde silver mines have been out of operation for a long time, and the relevant departments still levy mineral taxes, causing many people to go bankrupt.

古文：乔新以为言，减三之二。
现代文：乔新出来说话，减税三分之二。
English: Joe's new talking point is a two-thirds tax cut.

古文：兴化民自洪武初受牛于官，至是犹岁课其租，奏免之。
现代文：兴化百姓自洪武初曾向官府租用耕牛，直到这时每年仍要求纳租税，乔新上奏予以免除。
English: Since the early days of Hongwu, the people of Xinghua had rented oxen from the government. Until then, they still required to pay taxes every year, but Qiao Xin was exempted.

古文：清流归化里介沙县、将乐间，恃险不供赋，白都御史置归化县，其民始奉要束。
现代文：清流、归化里界于沙县、将乐之间，依恃地势险要，而不交赋税，乔新告诉都御史设置归化县，此地百姓才开始受到约束。
English: Clear stream, naturalization in the border between Shaxian and Zhao Le, clinging to the land, without paying taxes, Qiao Xin told the Metropolitan Government to set up a naturalization county, and the people here began to be constrained.

古文：迁河南按察使。
现代文：乔新调升河南按察使。
English: Qiao Xin was promoted to Henan as an inspector.

古文：岁大饥，故事，振贷迄秋止，乔新曰： 止于秋，谓秋成可仰也，今秋可但已乎？ 
现代文：河南发生大饥荒，按旧例，救济借贷到秋季为止，乔新说： 秋季，是说可以依靠秋收，今年秋季能依靠吗？ 
English: Henan suffered a great famine, and according to the old practice, relief loans were extended until the autumn. Qiao Xin said: Autumn means that we can rely on the autumn harvest. Can we rely on this autumn?

古文：振至明年麦熟乃止。
现代文：于是救济到第二年麦熟才停止。
English: As a result, the relief did not stop until the second year of wheat ripening.

古文：都御史原杰以招抚流民至南阳，引乔新自助。
现代文：都御史原杰到南阳招抚流民，带乔新前去协助。
English: The metropolitan governor, Shi Yuanjie, went to Nanyang to appease the displaced people and brought Qiao Xin to assist.

古文：初，项忠驱流民过当，民闻杰至，益窜山谷。
现代文：以前，项忠驱赶流民过头，流民一听说原杰到了，更是躲进山谷。
English: In the past, Xiang Zhong drove the exiles too far, and as soon as the exiles heard that Yuan Jie had arrived, they even hid in the valley.

古文：乔新躬往招之，附籍者六万余户。
现代文：乔新亲自前往招抚，登记簿籍的有六万多户。
English: Qiao Xin went to Zhaofu in person, and more than 60,000 households were registered.

古文：迁湖广右布政使。
现代文：升任湖广右布政使。
English: He was promoted to the post of political envoy of Hubei Province.

古文：荆州民苦徭役，验丁口贫富，列为九等，民便之。
现代文：荆州百姓为徭役所苦，乔新验实人口贫富，分为九等，使百姓得到好处。
English: The people of Jingzhou are suffering from the yakitori ban. Qiao Xin verified the real population of rich and poor, divided into nine classes, so that the people can benefit.

古文：十六年擢右副都御史，巡抚山西。
现代文：十六年，乔新被提升为都察院右副御史，巡抚山西。
English: Sixteen years later, Qiao Xin was promoted to the right vice-president of the history of the Capital Inspection, and the governor of Shanxi.

古文：边地军民每出塞伐木捕兽，乔新言： 此辈苟遇敌，必输情求生，皆贼导也。
现代文：边地军民总是出塞伐木捕兽，他说： 这些人一旦遇到敌人，必定泄露边防情况以求生都是敌贼的向导。
English: The soldiers and civilians in border areas always go out to cut trees and hunt animals, he said: Once these people encounter the enemy, they will certainly reveal the border defense situation in order to survive. They are all guides for the enemy.

古文：宜毋听阑出，犯者罪守将。 
现代文：应该不许擅自出塞，有违犯的罪及守将。 
English: It should not be allowed to go out of the block without permission, there is a violation of the crime and the keeper.

古文：诏可。
现代文：宪宗下诏同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：敌犯塞，偕参将支玉伏兵灰沟营，击斩甚众，进左副都御史。
现代文：敌人侵犯边塞，乔新同参将支玉在灰沟营设埋伏，击斩大量敌人，升左副都御史。
English: When the enemy invaded the border fortress, Qiao Xin and his colleagues set up an ambush in the gray ditch camp and defeated a large number of enemies. He was promoted to vice-governor of the capital.

古文：岁饥，奏免杂办及户口盐钞十之四。
现代文：年成不好，乔新奏免杂税以及户口盐税的十分之四。
English: In a bad year, Qiao Xinso is exempt from miscellaneous taxes and four-tenths of the household salt tax.

古文：劾佥事尚敬、刘源稽狱，请敕天下断狱官，淹半载以上者悉议罪。
现代文：他弹劾佥事尚敬、刘源拖延调查审判，请求皇帝命令天下审判官员，案件拖延半年以上的要论官员之罪。
English: He impeached the anecdote of Shang Jing, Liu Yuan delayed the investigation and trial, requested the emperor to order the world to try officials, and the case was delayed for more than half a year to discuss the crime of officials.

古文：帝称善，亟从之。
现代文：宪宗称好，立即下诏。
English: Kenzong said yes and immediately issued an edict.

古文：召拜刑部右侍郎。
现代文：召乔新任刑部右侍郎。
English: Zhao Qiao was newly appointed as the Right Attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：山西大饥，人相食。
现代文：山西发生严重饥荒，出现人吃人的惨剧。
English: Famine in Shanxi, people eating leftovers.

古文：命往振，活三十余万人，还流冗十四万户。
现代文：乔新受命前去赈济，求活三十万多人，安置十四万户流离失所的人家。
English: Qiao Xin was ordered to go to the aid of more than 300,000 people and resettle 140,000 displaced families.

古文：还朝，会安宁宣抚使杨友欲夺嫡弟播州宣慰使爱爵，诬爱有异谋。
现代文：回朝，正逢发生安宁宣抚使杨友想夺嫡弟播州宣慰使杨爱的爵位，而诬告杨爱有异谋的事件。
English: When he returned to the imperial court, there was an incident that Anning Xuanfu made Yang You want to take away the peerage of his brother-in-law, Banzhou Xuanfu, and falsely accused Yang Ai of having a plot.

古文：乔新往勘，与巡抚刘璋共白爱诬。
现代文：乔新前去调查，与巡抚刘璋一起洗清杨爱的冤屈。
English: Qiaoxin went to investigate and cleared up Yang Ai's grievances together with the inspector Liu Wei.

古文：友夺官安置他府，播人遂安。
现代文：杨友被削官安置他府，播州人于是相安无事。
English: Yang You was removed by officials and resettled in another prefecture. As a result, the people of Banzhou were left in peace.

古文：孝宗嗣位，万安、刘吉等忌乔新刚正，出为南京刑部尚书。
现代文：孝宗即位，万安、刘吉等憎恨乔新刚直正派，将其调到南京任刑部尚书。
English: When Xiaozong ascended to the throne, Wan'an, Liu Ji and others hated Qiao Xin's upright and honest faction and transferred him to Nanjing to serve as the head of the Penal Department.

古文：沿江芦洲率为中官占夺，托言备进奉费，乔新奏还之民。初，乔新之出，中官怀恩不平。
现代文：沿江的芦洲全被宦官侵占，假托给皇帝备办进用之费，乔新被调离朝廷，宦官怀恩觉得这事不公平。
English: The whole of Lushou along the river was occupied by eunuchs, and the emperor was entrusted with the cost of preparing and using it. Qiao Xin was transferred from the imperial court. The eunuch Wai En felt that this was unfair.

古文：一日以事诣阁言： 新君践阼，常用正人，胡为出何公？ 
现代文：一天因事到内阁中说 ：新君登位，应当任用正直的人，为什么调走何公？ 
English: One day, he came to the cabinet and said, "The new emperor has ascended to the throne, and honest people should be appointed. Why was He Gong transferred?"

古文：安等默然。
现代文：万安等无话可说。
English: There's nothing to say about security.

古文：既而刑部尚书杜铭罢，群望属乔新，而吉代安为首辅，终忌之，久不补。
现代文：不久刑部尚书杜铭被罢免，众人都认为应由乔新代替，而刘吉代替万安任首辅，始终憎恨乔新，许久不以他补任刑部尚书。
English: Soon after, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shangshu Du Ming, was dismissed. Everyone thought that Qiao Xin should replace him, while Liu Ji replaced Wan'an as the first assistant. He always hated Qiao Xin and did not replace him as the head of the Criminal Investigation Department for a long time.

古文：弘治改元，用王恕荐，始召乔新代铭。
现代文：改年号为弘治后，采用王恕的举荐，才召乔新代替杜铭。
English: After the name of the year was changed to Hongzhi, the recommendation of Wang Shou was adopted, and Qiaoxin was summoned to replace Du Ming.

古文：奏言： 旧制遣官勘事及逮捕，必赍精微批文，赴所在官司验视乃行。
现代文：乔新奏道： 旧制，派遣官员调查案情，以及实行逮捕，必须携带详细批文，到所在官府验察后才执行。
English: Qiao Xinsao said: Under the old system, the dispatch of officials to investigate the case, as well as the implementation of arrests, must carry detailed approval documents, and only be implemented after inspection at the relevant government office.

古文：近止用驾帖不合符，宜复旧制，以防矫诈。 
现代文：近来只用一般传帖而不合符契。应该恢复旧制，以防矫诈。 
English: Recently, only general postings have been used, which is not in accordance with the contract. The old system should be restored to prevent fraud.

古文：帝立报许。
现代文：孝宗立即批准了。
English: Takamune immediately approved.

古文：时吉仇正人，频兴大狱，乔新率据法直之。
现代文：这时刘吉仇视正直人士，频繁制造大案件，乔新一律依据法律纠正。
English: At this time, Liu Ji was hostile to honest people and frequently fabricated major cases, which Qiao Xinlin corrected in accordance with the law.

古文：吉愈衔恨，数摭他事夺俸。
现代文：刘吉愈加仇恨他。几次寻找借口削去乔新俸禄。
English: Liu Ji hated him more and more. Several times he looked for an excuse to cut Qiao Xin's salary.

古文：二年夏，京城大水，乔新请恤被灾者家，又虑刑狱失平，条上律文当更议者数事，吉悉格不行。
现代文：二年夏季，京城大水，乔新请求抚恤受灾人家，又考虑到刑法失平，奏陈律文当变更的几件事，刘吉一概加以阻拦而不实行。
English: In the summer of the second year, when the capital city was flooded, Qiaoxin requested that the victims of the disaster be compensated, and taking into account the imbalance of the criminal law, Liu Ji blocked and did not implement several things that should be changed.

古文：大理丞阙，御史邹鲁觊迁，而乔新荐郎中魏绅。
现代文：大理丞官职缺人，御史邹鲁图谋升迁此官，而乔新推荐郎中魏绅。
English: There was a shortage of candidates for the post of Darijo, and Goshiro tried to promote him, but Qiao Xin recommended Langzhong Wei Sheng.

古文：会乔新外家与乡人讼，鲁即诬乔新受赇曲庇。
现代文：时逢乔新舅家与乡人打官司，邹鲁即诬告乔新接受贿赂包庇舅家人。
English: When Qiao Xin's uncle's family sued the villagers, Zhao Lu falsely accused Qiao Xin of accepting bribes to protect his uncle's family.

古文：吉取中旨下其外家诏狱，乔新乃拜疏乞归。
现代文：刘吉从宫中取旨将其舅家人下诏狱，乔新于是上疏要求返乡。
English: Liu Ji received an order from the imperial court to imprison his uncle, and Qiao Xin then asked Shangsu to return home.

古文：顷之，穷治无验，鲁坐停俸，乔新亦许致仕。
现代文：不久，追根究底终归拿不出证据，邹鲁因诬告被停发俸禄，也同意乔新退休。乔新为人清廉。
English: Soon after, when all was said and done, there was no evidence to be found. He Lu was suspended from salary for making false accusations, and he also agreed to retire with Qiao Xin. Qiao Xin was a man of integrity.

古文：乔新性廉介，观政工部时，尝使淮西。巢令阎徽少学于文渊，以金币馈。
现代文：他在工部负责时，曾去淮西视察。巢湖县令阎徽年青时从师于文渊，就赠乔新金币。
English: When he was in charge of the Ministry of Industry, he once went to Huaxi to inspect. When Chaohu County's Ling Yanhui was young and apprenticed to Wenyuan, he gave Qiao a new gold coin.

古文：乔新却之，阎曰： 以寿吾师耳。 
现代文：乔新不收，阎徽说 ：这是为我师祝寿的。 
English: Qiao Xin did not accept, Yan Hui said: This is to wish my teacher a happy birthday.

古文：乔新曰： 子欲寿吾亲，因他人致之则可，因吾致之则不可。 
现代文：乔新说 ：你要为我父亲祝寿，通过他人送给父亲可以，通过我送给父亲则不行。 
English: Qiaoxin said, "If you want to wish my father a happy birthday, you can give it to him through others, but not through me."

古文：卒不受。
现代文：终究不接。
English: In the end, there was no answer.

古文：福建市舶中官死，镇守者分其赀遗三司，乔新独固辞。
现代文：福建市舶宦官死了，镇守者将其资财分送三司，独有乔新坚持不收。
English: After the death of the governor of Hakuou in Fujian, the town's defenders sent their assets to three companies, but Qiaoxin alone refused to accept them.

古文：不得，输之于库。
现代文：不得已，送交国库。
English: I had to send it to the treasury.

古文：既家居，杨爱遣使厚致赠，且献良材可为榇者，乔新坚却之。
现代文：辞官在家时，杨爱遣使赠送厚礼，并且献做棺材的上好木料，乔新坚决不收。
English: When the judge was at home, Yang Ai sent an envoy to present a gift, and offered the fine wood for the coffin, but Qiao Xin resolutely refused to accept it.

古文：乔新年十一时，侍父京邸。修撰周旋过之，乔新方读《通鉴续编》。
现代文：乔新十一岁时，随父在京城居住，修撰周旋来访，乔新正在读《通鉴续编》。
English: When Qiao Xin was eleven years old, he lived with his father in Beijing and visited the capital to work on a novel. Qiao Xin was reading the "Sequel to the Classic."

古文：旋问曰： 书法何如《纲目》？ 
现代文：周旋问他 ：此书比起《纲目》在取材和对人物评价上有什么不同？ 
English: Zhou Zhou asked him: What is the difference between this book and "Outline" in terms of coverage and character evaluation?

古文：对曰： 吕文焕降元不书叛，张世杰溺海不书死节，曹彬、包拯之卒不书其官，而纪羲、轩多采怪妄，似未有当也。 
现代文：乔新回答 ：吕文焕向元朝投降而不写叛变，张世杰投海殉国不说是死节；曹彬、包拯之死不写其官职，而记述伏羲、轩辕多采怪诞，似乎不恰当。 
English: Qiaoxin replied: Lvwenhuan surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty without writing about the mutiny, Zhang Shijie went to sea and was martyred without writing about his death, Cao Bin and Bao Zheng's death did not write about their official positions, and it seems inappropriate to write about Fuxi and Xuan Xuan's many bizarre stories.

古文：旋大惊异。
现代文：周旋大为吃惊。
English: Zhou Xuan was very surprised.

古文：比长，博综群籍，闻异书辄借钞，积三万余帙，皆手较雠，著述甚富。
现代文：长大成人之后，博览群书，听说有珍奇的书总是借来抄，积累三万余函，都是经他自己校雠，著述甚多。
English: After he became an adult, he read a lot of books, and when he heard that there were rare books, he always borrowed them and copied them. He accumulated more than 30,000 letters, all of which were proofread by himself, and he wrote a lot.

古文：与人寡合，气节友彭韶，学问友邱濬而已。
现代文：不大与人来往，气节与彭韶相投，学问与丘浚谈得来而已。
English: They do not have much contact with people, their temperament is similar to that of Peng Yao, and they can only talk about culture with Qiu Jun.

古文：罢归后，巡按江西御史陈诠奏： 乔新始终全节，中间只以受亲故馈遗之嫌，勒令致仕，进退黯昧，诚为可惜。
现代文：罢归后，巡按江西御史陈诠上奏： 乔新始终保持节操，中间只有接受亲戚送礼之嫌疑，而被勒令辞官，这样进退不明的处理实在可惜。
English: After returning from exile, Chen Yanjun, a historian of Jiangxi Province, said: Qiaoxin always maintained discipline. In the middle, he was suspected of accepting gifts from relatives, and he was ordered to resign from the post. It is really a pity that he was treated in such an unclear manner.

古文：乞行勘，本官如无疾则行取任用，有疾则加慰劳，以存故旧之恩，全进退之节。 
现代文：请前往调查，如该官无病则予以任用，如有病就加以慰劳，以留存对故旧的恩惠，保全进退的节操。 
English: Please go to investigate, if the officer is not ill, then appoint him, if he is ill, then comfort him, in order to retain the old favors and preserve the integrity of the advance and retreat.

古文：不许。
现代文：孝宗不答应。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：后中外多论荐，竟不复起。
现代文：后来朝廷内外许多官员上疏推荐何乔新，孝宗始终不再起用。
English: Later, many officials inside and outside the imperial court recommended He Qiaoxin to Shang Shou, but he never used him again.

古文：十五年卒，年七十六。
现代文：十五年乔新去世，终年七十六岁。
English: Fifteen years later, Qiao Xin passed away at the age of 76.

古文：江西巡抚林俊为彭韶及乔新请谥，吏部覆从之。
现代文：江西巡抚林俊为彭韶及何乔新请求赐谥号，吏部也提出此请求。
English: Lin Jun, the governor of Jiangxi Province, requested that Peng Yao and He Qiaoxin be given honorary titles, and the cadre department also made this request.

古文：有旨令上乔新致仕之由，给事中吴世忠言： 乔新学行、政事莫不优，忠勤刚介，老而弥笃。
现代文：孝宗下旨令呈报乔新退职的原因，给事中吴世忠说 ：乔新的学行、施政办事都很不错，忠诚，勤奋，刚正耿直，年龄越大越如此。
English: Xiaozong issued an order to report the reason for Qiao Xin's retirement, to which Wu Shizhong said: Qiao Xin's study and government affairs are very good, loyal, diligent, upright, and the older he gets, the more so.

古文：御史邹鲁挟私诬劾，一辞不辨，恬然退归。杜门著书，人事寡接，士大夫莫不高其行。
现代文：御史邹鲁挟私仇诬告他，他一词不辩，坦然退职归乡，闭门著书，少与人来往，士大夫没有谁不赞赏他的品行。
English: Goshiro falsely accused him of having a personal vendetta against him. He did not dispute the accusation, resigned from his post and returned to his hometown. He wrote his books behind closed doors and rarely socialized with others. There was no scholar who did not appreciate his conduct.

古文：韶嗜学，公暇手不释书。正德初，林俊言韶谥不副行，乞如魏骥、吴讷、叶盛，改谥文。
现代文：如果一定要考察退职的原因，怀疑表彰贤才原则的误用，那就像宋代蒋之奇曾经诬奏欧阳修，胡之辈曾诬奏朱熹，未听说以一个人的私情而废万世公论。 事情终究未成。正德十一年，广昌知县张杰又为乔新说话，才赠封乔新为太子太保，准予其子袭乔新官爵。第二年赐谥号文肃。
English: If we must examine the reasons for the resignation and suspect the misuse of the principle of commending talents, it would be like the Song Dynasty, when Chiang Ziqi falsely accused Ouyang Xiu, and Hu Zhi's generation falsely accused Zhu Xi. It was unheard of to use a person's private feelings to abolish universal public opinion. After all, things did not work out. In the 11th year of Zhengde, Zhang Jie of Guangchang Zhixian again spoke for Qiaoxin, only to give Qiaoxin the title of Crown Prince Taibo and allow his son to inherit Qiaoxin's official title. The next year, he was given the

古文：竟不行。周经，字伯常，刑部尚书瑄子也。天顺四年进士。
现代文：周经，字伯常，是刑部尚书周蠧的儿子。天顺四年，考中进士。
English: Zhou Jing, also known as Bo Chang, was the son of the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shang Shu Zhou Jie. He entered the Middle School Examination in Tianshun four years later.

古文：改庶吉士，授检讨。
现代文：为庶吉士，授检讨职。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the review of the awarding of the position is now over.

古文：成化中，历侍读、中允，侍孝宗于东宫。
现代文：成化年间，历任侍读、中允等官职，侍奉东宫太子即后来的孝宗。
English: During Chenghua's reign, successive attendants held positions such as reader and vice-commander, and served the Crown Prince of the Eastern Court, later known as Xiaozong.

古文：讲《文华大训》，太子起立，阁臣以为劳，议请坐听。
现代文：讲解《文华大训》，太子站立听讲，阁臣怕太子劳累，商议坐着听。
English: "The Great Precepts of the Chinese Culture" was explained. The crown prince stood up to listen. The cabinet ministers, fearing that the crown prince was tired, sat down to listen.

古文：经与诸讲官皆不可，乃已。
现代文：周经与诸讲官都不同意，阁臣提议才作罢。
English: Zhou Jing and all the lecturers disagreed, and the cabinet minister's proposal was rejected.

古文：孝宗立，进太常少卿兼侍读。
现代文：孝宗即位，周经升为太常少卿兼侍读。
English: Xiaozong ascended to the throne, and Zhou Jing was promoted to Taizhong Shaoqing (太常少卿) and attendant.

古文：弘治二年擢礼部右侍郎。
现代文：弘治二年，提升礼部右侍郎。
English: In the second year of the Koji era, he was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Division.

古文：中官请修黄村尼寺，奉祀孝穆太后。
现代文：宦官请修黄村尼姑寺，祭祀孝穆太后。
English: The eunuch requested that the Huangcun Nunnery Temple be repaired and dedicated to the Empress Dowager Xiaomu.

古文：土鲁番贡狮子不由甘肃，假道满剌加，浮海至广东。
现代文：吐鲁番进贡狮子不从甘肃走，借道满刺加，通过海路到广东。
English: The tributary lions of Turpan did not leave Gansu, but took the road full of thorns and thistles to go to Guangdong by sea.

古文：经倡议毁其寺，却贡不与通。
现代文：周经提议毁掉其寺庙，拒绝入贡不与吐鲁番来往。
English: Zhou Jing proposed to destroy his temple, refused to pay tribute and refused to have any dealings with Turpan.

古文：改吏部，进左侍郎。
现代文：周经改任吏部，升左侍郎。
English: Zhou Jing was transferred to the cadre department and promoted to the position of the left attendant.

古文：通政经历沈禄者，皇后姑婿也。
现代文：通政经历沈禄是皇后姑父。
English: Political experience Shen Lu is the queen's uncle.

古文：尚书王恕在告，中官传旨擢禄本司参议。
现代文：尚书王恕休假，宦官传旨提升沈禄为通政司参议。
English: Shang Shou Wang was allowed to take a leave of absence, and the eunuch passed the order to promote Shen Luo to the position of Vice-Minister of State for Foreign Affairs.

古文：经言非面承旨，又无御札，不敢奉诏，复与恕疏争之。
现代文：周经说不是当面接旨，又无皇帝的诏令，不敢奉诏，又与王恕一起上疏争辩此事。
English: Zhou Jing said that it was not the time to receive the imperial edict, and there was no imperial edict, he did not dare to receive the imperial edict, and he and Wang Shou argued the matter together.

古文：事虽不能止，朝论韪焉。
现代文：这件事虽未停办，朝中舆论都认为周经说得对。
English: Although the case has not been closed, public opinion in both North Korea and China believes that Zhou Jinglu was right.

古文：灵寿奸民献地于中官李广，户部持不得。
现代文：灵寿奸民给宦官李广献地，户部阻止无结果。
English: Ling Shou's traitors offered land to the eunuch Li Guangzhu, but there was no result in preventing it.

古文：经倡九卿疏争，卒罪献地者。
现代文：周经带领九卿上疏争辩，终于罪及献地的人。
English: Zhou Jing led the nine lords to argue, and finally the sin and the person who offered the land.

古文：尝上言： 外戚家无功求迁，无劳乞赏，兼斋醮游宴，滥费无纪，致帑藏殚虚，宜大为撙节。
现代文：周经曾上言说 ：外戚家无功劳而求升官，没出力而求赏赐，加上举办斋醮游玩宴乐浪费无度，致使国库空虚，应该大力抑制。
English: Zhou Jing once said: "Relatives of relatives seek promotion without merit, seek reward without effort, and waste a lot of money on holding feasts and banquets, resulting in an empty treasury, which should be vigorously suppressed."

古文：近例，预备仓积粟多者，守令赐诰敕，不次迁官，遂致剥下干进。
现代文：近来规定，对粮仓屯积粟米多的人，太守县令赐诰敕可不按年序升官，这就使大小官吏盘剥下民以求晋升。
English: Recently, it has been stipulated that for those who have accumulated a large amount of corn and rice in their granaries, they may not be promoted according to the order of the year by the order of the governor of the county. This has made officials of all ranks strip the people in order to seek promotion.

古文：请如洪武间例，悉出官帑平籴，毋夺民财，考绩毋专以积粟为能。
现代文：请如洪武年间的成例，全部拿出官府钱币平价收购，毋夺百姓财产，考核政绩不专门以积粟为标准。
English: Please, as was the case during the Hongwu era, purchase all government coins at parity, without taking people's property, and do not use the accumulation of poppies as the standard for assessing government performance.

古文：至清军之弊，洪熙以前在旗校，宣德以后在里胥。
现代文：至于清理军队的弊病，洪熙年间以前在旗校，宣德年间以后在乡吏。
English: As for cleaning up the army's ills, before the Hongxi era, it was in the banner school, and after the Xuande era, it was in the village officials.

古文：弊在旗校者，版籍犹存，若里胥则并版籍而淆乱之，宜考故册洗奸弊。
现代文：弊在旗校的，户口册还在，如乡吏则连户口册也混淆搞乱，应该查核故册清理奸弊。
English: If we are in the flag school, the household registration book is still there, if the township officials are confused with the household registration book, we should check the old book to clean up the fraud.

古文：灾伤民，乞省恤。
现代文：灾害损害百姓，请节省耗费，抚恤灾民。
English: If a disaster harms the people, please save expenses and pay compensation to the victims.

古文：惜薪司薪炭约支数年，灾荒郡县，宜尽与停免。四方颜料杂办亦然。此救民急务也。 
现代文：惜薪司的薪炭约可够支付几年，对受灾的郡县，应该全都停免征收，同时四方颜料也应停止征收，这是救济灾民的当务之急。 
English: The charcoal saved by the firemen can be enough to pay for several years. For the counties and counties affected by the disaster, the collection should all be suspended. At the same time, the collection of four-way pigments should also be stopped. This is an urgent task for the relief of the victims.

古文：帝多采纳之。
现代文：建议大多被孝宗采纳。
English: His views were largely adopted by the Sect.

古文：八年，文武大臣以灾异陈时政，经为具奏草，而斥戏乐一事，语尤切直。帝密令中官廉草奏者，尚书耿裕曰： 疏首吏部，裕实具草。 
现代文：弘治八年，文武大臣因为灾异上奏章陈述时政，周经代为起草奏章，在指责嬉戏娱乐一事上语气尤其深切直率，孝宗密令宦官查访起草奏章的人，尚书耿裕说： 疏首先由吏部发起，耿裕实为起草人。 
English: In the eighth year of the Hongzhi era, the Minister of Education and Culture and the Minister of Military Affairs, because of the disaster, wrote a report on the current situation, and Zhou Jingde drafted the report. The tone was particularly blunt in accusing the play and entertainment. Xiaozongmi ordered the eunuch to visit the person who drafted the report. Shangshu Geng Yu said: The investigation was first initiated by the cadre department, and Geng Yushi was the drafter.

古文：经曰： 疏草出经手，即有罪，罪经。 
现代文：周经说： 疏文由周经起草，即使有罪，应该罪我周经。 
English: Zhou Jing said: Zhou Jing drafted the epistle. Even if I am guilty, Zhou Jing should be blamed.

古文：世两贤之。
现代文：世人对两位勇于承担责任的品格很赞赏。
English: The world is full of praise for the two men's courage to take on responsibility.

古文：明年，代叶淇为户部尚书。
现代文：第二年，周经代替叶淇为户部尚书。
English: In the second year, Zhou Jing replaced Ye Qi as the head of the household.

古文：时孝宗宽仁，而户部尤奸蠹所萃，挟势行私者不可胜纪。
现代文：这时孝宗宽厚仁慈，而户部尤为奸诈人所集聚，挟势行私的人不可胜数。
English: At this time, Xiaozong was generous and benevolent, while Hube was particularly treacherous. There were countless blackmailers.

古文：少不如意，谗毁随之。
现代文：哪个稍微不合他们的心意，诽谤马上就来了。
English: Whichever one is a little out of their league, the slurs come immediately.

古文：经悉按祖宗成宪，无所顾。
现代文：周经一切按照祖宗法规无所顾忌。
English: Everything is done in accordance with the laws of the ancestors without any scruples.

古文：宽逋缓征，裁节冗滥。四方告灾，必覆奏蠲除。每委官监税课，入多者与下考，苛切之风为之少衰。
现代文：宽延拖欠、缓征赋税、裁减繁多杂乱的税收，哪里受灾，他必定奏免赋税，每次委派官员监督税收，对超额多收的将其考核为下等，因此苛剥多收之风有所扭转。
English: Delaying arrears, delaying tax collection, and reducing taxes, which are complicated and complicated, where there is a disaster, he will certainly pay tax exemption. Each time, officials are appointed to supervise tax collection, and those who overcharge will be assessed as inferior. Therefore, the trend of overcharging and overcharging has been reversed.

古文：奉御赵瑄献雄县地为东宫庄。
现代文：奏御赵蠧献雄县地作为东宫庄田。
English: Zhao Xi Xianxiong County was chosen as the site of the eastern palace, Shoda.

古文：经等劾瑄违制，下诏狱。
现代文：周经等弹劾赵蠧违制将其下诏狱。
English: Zhou Jing and others impeached Zhao Wei for violating the system and sent him to prison.

古文：而帝复从镇抚司言遣官勘实。经等复争之曰： 太祖、太宗定制，闲田任民开垦。
现代文：而孝宗又听信镇抚司意见派遣官员查实，周经等又争辩道 ：太祖、太宗定制，闲田任民开垦。
English: However, Takamune also listened to the opinion of Zhen Fusi and dispatched officials to verify it, and Zhou Jing and others also argued: Taizu, Taizong customization, idle fields, and people.

古文：若因奸人言而籍之官，是土田予夺，尽出奸人口，小民无以为生矣。 
现代文：如果因为奸人的话而没收为官田，那么土地取舍，尽由居心叵测者说了算，那么小小老百姓就无法为生。 
English: If government-owned land is confiscated because of a traitor, then the choice of land will be left to the discretion of those who deliberately miscalculated, and ordinary people will not be able to make a living.

古文：既而勘者及巡抚高铨言闲田止七十顷，悉与民田错。
现代文：不久，去调查的官员以及巡抚高铨说闲田只有七十顷，全都与民田交错。
English: Soon, the officials who went to investigate, as well as the inspector Gao Jun, said that idle land was only seventy hectares, all of which intersected with private land.

古文：于是从经言仍赋之民，治瑄罪。
现代文：于是孝宗同意周经的意见，将田还给百姓，治赵蠧的罪。
English: As a result, Xiaozong agreed with Zhou Jing's opinion, returned the fields to the people, and punished Zhao Yao's crime.

古文：中官何鼎劾外戚张鹤龄下狱，经疏救之，忤旨切责。
现代文：宦官何鼎因弹劾外戚张鹤龄被下狱，周经上疏救何鼎，违背圣上旨意遭到孝宗严厉的斥责。
English: The eunuch He Ding was sent to prison for impeaching his maternal relative Zhang He Ling. Zhou Jing came to He Ding's rescue and was severely reprimanded by Xiaozong for violating the will of the emperor.

古文：雍王祐枟乞衡州税课司及衡阳县河泊所，经言不可许。
现代文：雍王木云请求收取衡州税课司及衡阳县河泊所的税钱，周经说不能答应。
English: Yong Wang Muyun requested to collect the tax money from the Hengzhou Tax Division and Hengyang County Heping Station. Zhou Jing said that he could not agree.

古文：帝纳之，命自今四方税课，王府不得请。
现代文：孝宗接受周经的意见，并命令从现在开始对于各地税收，王府不得提出请收的要求。
English: Xiaozong accepted Zhou Jing's opinion and ordered that from now on, the royal court must not request the collection of taxes from other regions.

古文：中官织造者，请增给两浙盐课二万引，经等言： 盐筴佐边，不宜滥给。
现代文：负责织造的宦官要求增加供应两浙盐税二万引。周经等说 ：盐税是辅助边地的，不宜随便发给。
English: The eunuch in charge of weaving asked for an increase in the supply of two Zhejiang salt taxes of twenty thousand. Zhou Jing and others said: The salt tax is an auxiliary marginal tax, and it is not appropriate to give it out casually.

古文：且祖宗朝织染诸局供御有常数，若曰取用有加，则江南、两浙已例外嘱造，若曰工匠不足，则仰食公家不下千余人，所为何事。
现代文：况且祖宗朝织染诸局供应是有定数的，如果说取用增加，那么江南、两浙已属例外增造。如果说工匠不足，则靠朝廷养活的不下千余人，他们是做什么的呢？
English: Moreover, the supply of weaving and dyeing to the various bureaus of the ancestral dynasty is fixed. If it is said that the use has increased, then the south of the Yangtze River and the two Zhejiang provinces have been exceptionally increased. If it is said that there is a shortage of craftsmen, then there are more than a thousand people who are supported by the imperial court. What are they doing?

古文：是知供用未必缺，而徒导陛下以劳民伤财之事也。 
现代文：因此说供应花费未必缺少，而仅仅是引导陛下劳民伤财罢了。 
English: Therefore, the supply expenditure is not necessarily a shortage, but merely a guide to His Majesty's labor and wealth.

古文：帝不从。
现代文：孝宗不听。
English: The emperor does not obey.

古文：经恐岁以为常，再疏请断其后，乃命岁予五千引。
现代文：周经担心由此成为常规，第二次上疏要求下不为例，孝宗才令每年给五千引。
English: Zhou Jing was worried that this would become a regular practice, and the second time he asked for a reduction was not an example, and only then did Xiaozong order him to deduct five thousand yuan a year.

古文：先是，仓场监督内官依成化末年例裁减。
现代文：先前，仓场监督内官按照成化末年例子裁减人员。
English: Previously, the warehouse supervisor had reduced the number of employees in accordance with the example of the last years of Chenghua.

古文：十一年秋，帝复增用少监莫英等三人。
现代文：十一年秋，孝宗又增加少监莫英等三人。
English: In the autumn of the eleventh year, Xiaozong added three more junior supervisors, including Mo Ying.

古文：经上疏力争，帝以已遣不听。
现代文：周经上疏极力规劝，孝宗以已派遣为由而不听。
English: Zhou Jing Shangso tried his best to persuade, but Xiaozong did not listen on the grounds that he had already been dispatched.

古文：内灵台请锦衣余丁百人供洒扫，经等谏，不纳。
现代文：内灵台要求派锦衣百名以供清扫，周经等劝谏，孝宗不理。
English: Neilingtai requested that 100 people in brocade be sent to clean up, but Zhou Jing and others advised him not to do so, and Xiaozong ignored them.

古文：经曰： 祖宗设内台，其地至密。
现代文：周经说： 祖宗设内台，这个地方事关机密。
English: Zhou Jing said: Ancestors set up an inner station, this place is related to secrets.

古文：今一旦增百人，将必有漏泄妄言者。 
现代文：现在一旦增加一百人，将必定会有随意泄密的人。 
English: Now, if you add a hundred people, there will inevitably be people who leak information at will.

古文：帝悟，立已之。
现代文：孝宗醒悟，立刻停派。
English: When he came to his senses, he immediately quit the sect.

古文：崇王见泽乞河南退滩地二十余里，经言不宜予。
现代文：崇王见泽请求河南退滩地二十余里，周经说不宜给。
English: Zhou Jing said that it was not appropriate to give Chongwang Mizeze more than 20 miles of Henan's beachhead.

古文：兴王祐杬前后乞赤马诸河泊所及近湖地千三百余顷，经三疏争之，竟不许。
现代文：兴王木元前后要求赐赤马诸河泊所以及近湖地一千三百余顷，周经连上三疏规劝，孝宗最终没同意他的意见。
English: Xingwang Muyuan repeatedly asked to be given the Red Horse River Berth and more than 1,300 hectares of land near the lake. Zhou Jing was repeatedly persuaded, but in the end, Xiaozong did not agree with his opinion.

古文：帝以肃宁诸县地四百余顷赐寿宁侯张鹤龄，其家人因侵民地三倍，且殴民至死，下巡抚高铨勘报。
现代文：孝宗把肃宁诸县四百余顷土地赐给寿宁侯张鹤龄，其家人借此侵夺民田的数超过所赐的三倍，并且将百姓殴打致死，孝宗命巡抚高铨调查后汇报。
English: Xiaozong gave more than 400 hectares of land in Suining counties to Shuning marquis Zhang Hailing, and his family members used this to seize more than three times the number of people's fields, and beat people to death, according to the report of Gaojun, the inspector of Xiaozong's life.

古文：铨言可耕者无几，请仍赋民，不许。
现代文：高铨汇报说可以耕种者不多，要求将田仍还给百姓，孝宗不同意。
English: Takatsuki reported that there were not many people who could farm, and asked that the fields still be returned to the people, but Takamune disagreed.

古文：时王府、勋戚庄田例亩征银三分，独鹤龄奏加征二分，且概加之沙碱地。
现代文：这时王府、贵戚的庄田每亩征税三分银，独张鹤龄上奏要再增加二分银，并且都增加在沙碱地上。
English: At this time, the royal court and the estates of noble relatives were taxed three silver coins per mu, and Zhang Heling's report called for another two silver coins to be added, and they were all added to the sandy and alkaline land.

古文：经抗章执奏，命侍郎许进偕太监朱秀覆核。
现代文：周经上书直言，孝宗命侍郎许进同太监朱秀复核。
English: Zhou Jing's petition was forthright, and the eunuch Zhu Xiu reviewed it with the eunuch Xu Jin, the attendant of Emperor Xiaozong.

古文：经言： 地已再勘，今复遣使，徒滋烦扰。
现代文：周经说 ：土地已经核对两次，现在又派使复核，白白地多些麻烦。
English: Zhou Jing said, "The land has already been checked twice, and now they have sent an inspector to check it again, causing more trouble in vain."

古文：昔太祖以刘基故减青田赋，征米五合，欲使基乡里子孙世世颂基。
现代文：以前太祖由于刘基的原因而减青田的赋税，征米五合，想使刘基乡里子孙世世颂扬刘基。
English: In the past, the great-great-grandfather reduced the tax on rice fields and levied a five-percent rice tax because of Liu Ji. He wanted the descendants of Liu Ji's hometown to praise Liu Ji for generations to come.

古文：今兴济笃生皇后，正宜恤民减赋，俾世世戴德，何乃使小民衔怨无已也。 
现代文：现在兴济幸生皇后，正宜体恤百姓，减租税，使此地百姓世代对皇后感恩戴德，怎使百姓怨恨不已呢？ 
English: Now that the empress has been born, it is appropriate to sympathize with the people, reduce taxes, and make the people here grateful to the empress for generations. How can the people be so resentful?

古文：顷之，进等还言此地乃宪庙皇亲柏权及民恒产，不可夺。
现代文：不久，许进等返回说此地是宪庙皇亲柏权以及百姓的固定财产，不能没收。
English: Soon, Xu Jin and others returned to say that this place is the constitutional temple of the emperor's relatives and the fixed property of the people, and cannot be confiscated.

古文：帝竟予鹤龄，如其请加税，而命偿权直，除民租额。
现代文：孝宗竟给了张鹤龄，同意其加税的要求，而令他补偿柏权土地的折价，免除百姓租额。
English: Xiaozong actually gave Zhang Hailing the upper hand, agreeing to his demand for a tax increase, and ordered him to compensate for the discount on the land and exempt the people from the rent.

古文：经等复谏曰： 东宫、亲王庄田征税自有例，鹤龄不宜独优。
现代文：周经等又进谏说 ：东宫、亲王的庄田征税向来有条规，张鹤龄不应该单独享受优待。
English: Zhou Jing et al. also said: the East Palace and the Prince's village taxation have always had rules, Zhang Heling should not enjoy preferential treatment alone.

古文：权先帝妃家，亦戚畹也，名虽偿直，实乃夺之。
现代文：柏权是先帝妃子的家，也是外戚，名义上是补偿田价，实际是掠夺。
English: Pak Kwon was the home of the former emperor's concubine, and also a maternal relative. In name, it was compensation for farmland prices, but in reality, it was plunder.

古文：天下将谓陛下惟厚椒房亲，不念先朝外戚。 
现代文：天下将说陛下只优待皇后的亲戚，不念及先朝外戚。 
English: The world will say that His Majesty only favors the relatives of the Queen, and does not care about the relatives of the previous emperor.

古文：帝终不纳。
现代文：孝宗终究不接受周经等意见。
English: After all, Xiaozong did not accept Zhou Jing's and other opinions.

古文：大同缺战马，马文升请太仓银以市。
现代文：大同缺战马，马文升请求用太仓银买马。
English: Datong was short of war horses, and Ma Wensheng requested that the money be used to buy horses.

古文：经言： 粮马各有司存。
现代文：周经说： 粮、马各有各的部门管理。
English: Zhou Jing said: Grain and horses each have their own departmental management.

古文：祖训六部毋相压，兵部侵户部权，非祖训。 
现代文：祖训，六部不能相互越权，兵部侵户部的权，不合祖训。 
English: According to the ancestral precepts, the six military departments should not encroach on each other's rights, and the military department's encroachment on the rights of the household department is not in line with the ancestral precepts.

古文：帝为改拨太仆银给之。
现代文：孝宗因此改拨太仆寺的银两供应马文升。
English: As a result, Takamune reallocated two silver coins from Taipo-ji Temple to supply Ma Wensheng.

古文：给事中鲁昂请尽括税役金钱输太仓，经曰： 不节织造、赏赉、斋醮、土木之费，而欲括天下财，是舛也。 
现代文：给事中鲁昂要求将尽数搜刮税金交给太仓，周经说： 不节制织造、赏赐、斋醮、土木的费用，而想搜刮天下的资财是不合常理。 
English: In response to Rouen's request to hand over as much of the tax money as possible to Taicang, Zhou Jing said: It is not normal to want to scrounge the world's wealth without controlling the expenses of weaving, reward, fasting, and civil engineering.

古文：内官传旨索太仓银三万两为灯费，持不与。
现代文：内官传旨索取太仓三万两银做灯费，周经坚持不给。
English: Zhou insisted that he would not pay the 30,000 taels of silver requested by the eunuch to pay for lighting in Taicang.

古文：经刚介方正，好强谏，虽重忤旨不恤。宦官、贵戚皆惮而疾之。
现代文：周经刚直正派，好竭力进谏，即使大大地违背皇帝的旨意也在所不惜，宦官、贵戚对他又怕又恨。
English: Zhou Jing was upright and honest, so he tried his best to enter the imperial court, even if he greatly violated the emperor's will. Eunuchs and noble relatives feared and hated him.

古文：太监李广死，帝得朝臣与馈遗簿籍，大怒。
现代文：太监李广死后，孝宗得到朝臣赠送李广资财的登记本。孝宗大怒。
English: After the death of the eunuch Li Guang, Xiaozong received a certificate of registration of Li Guang's assets as a gift from a courtier. Xiaozong was furious.

古文：科道因劾诸臣交通状，有及经者。经上疏曰： 昨科道劾廷臣奔竞李广，阑入臣名。虽蒙恩不问，实含伤忍痛，无以自明。
现代文：都察院衙门和监察御史因此弹劾诸臣相互往来的情形，有涉及到周经的，周经上疏说： 昨天科道弹劾廷臣巴结李广，将臣的名字框入其中，虽然蒙恩未被审问，实在感到委屈，自己无法辩白。
English: As a result, the gatekeeper of the Imperial Procuratorate and the inspector of imperial history impeached the mutual dealings of the courtiers, and there was a situation involving Zhou Jing. Zhou Jing said: Yesterday, the Imperial Procuratorate impeached the courtier Ba Jie Li Guang, and framed the name of the courtier in it. Although he was not interrogated, he really felt aggrieved and could not defend himself.

古文：夫人奔竞李广，冀其进言左右，图宠眷耳。
现代文：人们巴结李广，是希望他在旁边帮忙说好话，以图得到宠幸罢了。
English: People fawn over Li Guang, hoping that he will help them say nice things on the side in order to get favors.

古文：陛下试思广在时，曾言及臣否。
现代文：陛下试想李广在时，曾经在陛下面前提及过臣没有？
English: Your Majesty, do you think that Li Guang, when he was alive, ever mentioned the subject of Zhou in front of Your Majesty?

古文：且交结馈遗簿籍具在，乞检曾否有臣姓名。
现代文：尚且交结赠送的登记本都在，请检查里面是否有臣的姓名。
English: In addition, the registration books for the delivery of gifts are all in, please check if there is a minister's name in it.

古文：更严鞫广家人，臣但有寸金、尺帛，即治臣交结之罪，斩首市曹，以为奔竞无耻之戒。
现代文：再严厉地审问李广的家人，臣只要有寸金、尺帛送李广的，请立刻治臣勾结之罪，斩首于市，来警告巴结无耻之徒。
English: If there is a vassal who has sent Li Guang money or money, please immediately behead the vassal for the crime of collusion in the city to warn the shameless people.

古文：若无干涉，亦乞为臣洗雪，庶得展布四体，终事圣明。
现代文：如果毫无牵连，也请为臣洗清冤屈，以望施展身手，始终侍奉圣明。
English: If there is no implication, please also clear up the grievances for your vassals, show your skills with hope, and always serve the sacred.

古文：若令含污忍垢，即死填沟壑，目且不瞑。 
现代文：如果令臣含冤忍屈，就是死了，眼睛也不闭上。 
English: If a vassal bears his wrongs patiently, even if he dies, his eyes will not close.

古文：帝慰答之。
现代文：孝宗下旨对他予以安慰。
English: Takamune sent word to comfort him.

古文：十三年，星变，自陈乞休。
现代文：十三年，星相有变，周经自己上疏请求退休。
English: In the thirteenth year, the stars changed, and Zhou was asked to retire by himself.

古文：报许，赐敕驰驿，加太子太保，以侣钟代。
现代文：孝宗同意了，赐他敕书、马车，加封太子太保，用侣钟代替周经。
English: Xiaozong agreed and gave him a scribe, a carriage, the title of crown prince, and a clock to replace the Zhou calendar.

古文：廷臣争上章留之，中外论荐者至八十余疏，咸报寝。
现代文：廷臣争相上奏章要求挽留周经，朝内外推荐周经的有八十余疏，都无结果。
English: The courtiers clamored for the retention of Zhou Jing, and there were more than eighty suggestions for recommending Zhou Jing both inside and outside the imperial court, all of which were fruitless.

古文：武宗即位，言官复荐，召为南京户部尚书，遭继母忧未任。
现代文：武宗即位，言官又推荐周经，下诏封他为南京户部尚书，因遇到继母去世而未到任。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, the speech officer recommended Zhou Jing, and he was appointed as the head of the Nanking household. However, he did not take up the post due to the death of his stepmother.

古文：正德三年，服阕。经婿兵部尚书曹元方善刘瑾，言经虽老尚可用，乃召为礼部尚书。
现代文：正德三年，服满，周经女婿兵部尚书曹元正与刘瑾关系不错，他说周经虽年纪大但仍可任用，才召周经为礼部尚书。
English: After Zhengde completed his three-year service, Cao Yuanzheng, Zhou Jing's son-in-law and the head of the military department, had a good relationship with Liu Bei. He said that although Zhou Jing was old, he could still be appointed. It was only after Zhou Jing was appointed as the head of the ceremonial department.

古文：自奉澹泊。两世贵盛，而家业萧然，父子并以名德称。
现代文：周经坚决推辞得不到允准，只好勉强赴任，任职几个月就称病离去。
English: Zhou Jing's resolute refusal to resign was not approved, and he had to take the post reluctantly. He left the post a few months later, claiming to be ill.

古文：九年正月卒，年六十七。
现代文：五年三月去世，终年七十一岁。
English: He died in March 2005, at the age of 71.

古文：赠太保，谥文恪。
现代文：赠太保，赐谥号文端。
English: Bestow the title of grand marshal, bestow the title of grand marshal, bestow the title of general.

古文：倪岳，字舜咨，上元人。
现代文：倪岳，字舜咨，上元人。
English: Ni Yue, Zi Zi Zi, Shang Yuan Ren.

古文：父谦，奉命祀北岳，母梦绯衣神入室，生岳，遂以为名。
现代文：父亲倪谦，奏命祭祀北岳时，母亲梦见红衣仙人进入房间，就生下了儿子，于是以 岳 为名。
English: When Ni Qian, the father, was sacrificing his life to worship Bei Yue, his mother dreamed that a red-clothed fairy entered the room and gave birth to a son, who was named Yue.

古文：谦终南京礼部尚书，谥文僖。
现代文：倪谦死时任南京礼部尚书，谥号文僖。
English: At the time of Ni Qian's death, he was still in charge of the Nanjing etiquette department, and his posthumous name was Wen Yao.

古文：岳，天顺八年进士。
现代文：倪岳考中天顺八年进士。
English: Ni Yue passed the junior high school entrance examination in Tianshun eight years ago.

古文：改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：任庶吉士，授编修职。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the post of editor was no longer conferred.

古文：成化中，历侍读学士，直讲东宫。
现代文：成化年间，历任侍读学士，到东宫当值讲学。
English: During the Chenghua years, successive attendants of the bachelor's degree went to the East Palace to lecture.

古文：二十二年擢礼部右侍郎，仍直经筵。
现代文：二十二年，提升为礼部右侍郎，仍在御前讲席当值侍讲。
English: In 1922, he was promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, and he was still on duty as an attendant speaker in front of the throne.

古文：弘治初，改左侍郎。
现代文：弘治初年，改为左侍郎。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Kōji, he was changed to the Left Attendant.

古文：岳好学，文章敏捷，博综经世之务。
现代文：倪岳好学，文思敏捷，广泛综览经世之务。
English: Ni Yue is eager to learn, quick-witted, and has a broad overview of worldly affairs.

古文：尚书耿裕方正持大体，至礼文制度率待岳而决。
现代文：尚书耿裕为人方正，秉持大礼，以致礼文制度都要倪岳决断。
English: Shangshu Geng Yu was a man of rectitude, upholding the great ritual, so that the ritual system should be determined by Ni Yue.

古文：六年，裕改吏部，岳遂代为尚书。
现代文：六年，耿裕调到吏部，由倪岳代任礼部尚书。
English: In the sixth year, Geng Yu was transferred to the personnel department, and Ni Yue took the place of the ceremonial department.

古文：诏召国师领占竹于四川，岳力谏，帝不从。
现代文：孝宗从四川召国师领占竹来京，倪岳极力劝谏，孝宗不听。
English: Xiaozong called Zhan Zhu, a statesman from Sichuan, to come to Beijing. Ni Yue tried to persuade him, but Xiaozong would not listen.

古文：给事中夏昂、御史张祯等相继争之，事竟寝。
现代文：给事中夏昂、御史张祯等相继规劝，此事最终被停止。
English: The matter was eventually stopped after Xia'an and the imperial historian Zhang Ye successively advised against it.

古文：时营造诸王府，规制宏丽，逾永乐、宣德之旧。岳请颁成式。
现代文：当时建造诸王府的规模宏大华丽，超过永乐年间、宣德年间的王府，倪岳奏请颁布统一的规格。
English: At that time, the scale of the royal palaces built was magnificent and magnificent, exceeding the royal palaces built during the Yongle period and the Xuande period. Ni Yuexao asked for the promulgation of unified specifications.

古文：又以四方所报灾异，礼部于岁终类奏，率为具文，乃详次其月日，博引经史征应。
现代文：他又把全国各地呈报上来的灾异，要礼部在每年年终分类奏报，一律用文字记下来，并详细按灾异发生的年月顺序排列，广泛引证于经史资料。
English: He also reported the disasters and calamities that occurred across the country, and asked the Ministry of Ceremonies to record them all in writing in the annual year-end classification report, and arrange them in detail according to the chronological order in which the disasters and calamities occurred, extensively citing historical materials.

古文：劝帝勤讲学，开言路，宽赋役，慎刑罚，黜奸贪，进忠直，汰冗员，停斋醮，省营造，止滥赏。
现代文：劝勉孝宗勤于讲学，广开言路，宽免赋役，慎施刑罚，罢黜奸贪，接纳忠诚正直人士，淘汰冗员，停办斋醮，减少营造，停止滥赏。
English: He advised Xiaozong to be diligent in lecturing, to be open-minded, to be forgiving and obliging, to be prudent in imposing punishments, to banish covetousness, to accept loyal and honest people, to eliminate redundant personnel, to stop holding banquets, to reduce construction, and to stop excessive rewards.

古文：帝颇采纳焉。
现代文：孝宗大都予以采纳。
English: Takamune adopted most of them.

古文：左侍郎徐琼与后家有连，谋代岳。
现代文：左侍郎徐琼与皇后家有姻亲关系，图谋取代倪岳的官职。
English: The left-hand man, Xu Qiong, who was related to the empress by marriage, plotted to take over Ni Yue's official position.

古文：九年，南京吏部缺尚书，廷推琼。
现代文：九年，南京吏部缺尚书，廷臣推荐徐琼。
English: In the ninth year, the Nanjing cadre department was short of Shangshu, and the courtiers recommended Xu Qiong.

古文：诏加岳太子太保，往任之，而琼果代岳。
现代文：而皇帝下诏加倪岳为太子太保往南京赴任，而徐琼果然代替倪岳。
English: However, the emperor decreed that Ni Yue be sent to Nanjing as the prince's guardian, and Xu Qiong did indeed replace Ni Yue.

古文：寻改岳南京兵部参赞机务。
现代文：不久调倪岳任南京兵部尚书，参谋协助处理机要事务。
English: Ni Yue was soon transferred to the Nanjing Military Department as a staff officer to assist in handling important matters.

古文：还，代屠滽为吏部尚书，严绝请托，不徇名誉，铨政称平。
现代文：倪岳回到北京后，代替屠氵庸为吏部尚书，他严禁托人说情，不沽名钓誉，吏部政务处理公平。
English: After Ni Yue returned to Beijing, he replaced Tu Youyou as the Secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. He strictly forbade anyone to intercede, did not steal the reputation of others, and handled the affairs of the Ministry of Civil Affairs fairly.

古文：岳状貌魁岸，风采严峻，善断大事。
现代文：倪岳身材魁梧，表情冷峻严肃，善于决断大事。
English: Ni Yue is a burly man with a cold and serious expression. He is good at making important decisions.

古文：每盈廷聚议，决以片言，闻者悦服。
现代文：每当满朝大臣共议某事而众说纷纭时，他只说短短几句话，就使听者心悦诚服。
English: Whenever a cabinet minister is discussing something and the opinions differ, he only says a few words to make the listener feel happy and satisfied.

古文：同列中，最推逊马文升，然论事未尝苟同。
现代文：在同级官吏中，倪岳最推崇马文升，然而在论事时并非无原则附合。
English: Among the officials of the same level, Ni Yue is the most respected by Ma Wensheng. However, when discussing the matter, he is not unprincipled.

古文：前后陈请百余事，军国弊政剔抉无遗。
现代文：他前后奏陈一百多件事，把军政中的弊端一一清理揭发。
English: He recounted more than a hundred incidents, clearing up and exposing the evils in the military government one by one.

古文：疏出，人多传录之。
现代文：疏文出来，人们纷纷传抄。
English: When the edict came out, people copied it one after another.

古文：论西北用兵害尤切，其略云：
现代文：他对西北用兵之害论述尤为深刻，其疏大略说：
English: His discussion of the harm caused by the use of troops in the Northwest was particularly profound, and he said roughly:

古文：近岁毛里孩、阿罗忽、孛罗出、癿加思兰大为边患。
现代文： 近年来毛里孩、阿罗忽、孛罗出、加思兰成为边境大患。
English: In recent years, guinea fowl, peregrine falcons, peregrine falcons, and Atlantic peregrine falcons have become major border problems.

古文：盖缘河套之中，水草甘肥，易于屯牧，故贼频据彼地，拥众入掠。
现代文：他们都沿着河套活动，河套地区水草肥美，宜于屯牧，因此敌人频繁占据这块地方，不断率部入侵。
English: They all move along the river loop. The water and grass in the river loop area are fertile and suitable for livestock grazing. Therefore, the enemy frequently occupies this place and constantly leads the invasion.

古文：诸将怯懦，率婴城自守。
现代文：诸将怯懦，大都闭城自守。
English: The generals were cowardly, and most of them closed the city to protect themselves.

古文：苟或遇敌，辄至挫衄。
现代文：如果遇到敌人，总是被其打败。
English: If you meet the enemy, you will always be defeated.

古文：既莫敢折其前锋，又不能邀其归路。
现代文：既不敢阻挡其前锋，又不能截断其归路。
English: Neither daring to block its advance, nor able to cut off its retreat.

古文：敌进获重利，退无后忧，致兵锋不靖，边患靡宁。
现代文：敌人进可以获得重利，退也没有后顾之忧，以致战事不断，边患不息。
English: The enemy can gain heavy profits when advancing, and there is no worry when retreating, so that the war is incessant and the border troubles are unceasing.

古文：命将徂征，四年三举，绝无寸功。
现代文：朝廷遣将征伐，四年三次出兵，竟没有取得些许功劳。
English: The imperial court sent generals to fight in the war, and sent troops three times in four years, but they didn't get any credit.

古文：或高卧而归，或安行以返。析圭担爵，优游朝行，辇帛舆金，充牣私室。
现代文：出征将领或者高卧而归，或者平安回返，他们却优闲自得地活动在朝廷之上，不断获得军功封赏，并以车载金帛充塞私人家室。
English: The generals who went off to fight either went home lying on their backs or returned safely, but they continued to enjoy their activities at the top of the imperial court, constantly received military awards, and filled their private homes with truckloads of gold bullion.

古文：且军旅一动，辄报捷音，赐予滥施，官秩轻授。
现代文：而军队一有行动，总是传来捷报，滥行赏赐，将官的品级随意授予。
English: But as soon as there is an action in the army, there are always reports of success, rewards for indiscriminate actions, and ranks of generals are awarded at will.

古文：甚至妄杀平民，谬称首级。
现代文：甚至妄杀平民，谎称为敌人首级。
English: They even went so far as to kill civilians, falsely claiming that they were beheading the enemy.

古文：敌未败北，辄以奔遁为辞。
现代文：敌人还未被打败，就假称敌人已溃败逃走。
English: The enemy had not yet been defeated, so they pretended that the enemy had been defeated and fled.

古文：功赏所加，非私家子弟，即权门厮养。
现代文：能得到记功赏赐的，不是士大夫子弟，就是豪门随从。
English: It is not the scholar and scholar's son who can receive the award of merit, but the follower of the wealthy family.

古文：而什伍之卒，转饷之民，则委骨荒城，膏血野草。
现代文：而普通战士、运粮的百姓则抛尸荒城，血沃野草。
English: But ordinary soldiers and the people who transported grain left the corpses in the deserted city, and the bloody weeds grew.

古文：天怒人怨，祸几日深，非细故也。
现代文：天怒人怨，祸兆越积越深，不可等闲视之。
English: The wrath of heaven and the anger of man, the evil signs are accumulating deeper and deeper, and cannot be ignored.

古文：京营素号冗怯。
现代文： 京营素以兵冗将怯见称。
English: The Kyoto camp was known for its cowardly soldiers.

古文：留镇京师，犹恐未壮根本，顾乃轻于出御，用亵天威。
现代文：留镇守京师，恐怕还起不到保卫京城的作用，而如果轻率出师将有失天威。
English: If you stay in town to guard the capital, you will probably not be able to play a role in defending the capital, and if you rashly send out a division, you will lose the power of heaven.

古文：临阵辄奔，反堕边军之功，为敌人所侮。
现代文：而临阵即逃，反而会失掉边军已有之功绩，被敌人轻视侮辱。
English: On the other hand, if they run away from the battlefield, they will lose the achievements already made by the border troops and will be despised and insulted by the enemy.

古文：且延绥边也，去京师远；宣府、大同亦边也，去京师近。彼有门庭之喻，此无陛楯之严，可乎？
现代文：况且延绥是边地，离京师很远，宣府、大同也是边地，离京师较近，它好比京师的门庭，这里没有执循守卫的戒备行吗？
English: Moreover, Yancheng is a borderland, far away from the Beijing Division, Xuanfu and Datong are also borderlands, closer to the Beijing Division, it is like the gate of the Beijing Division, is there no guarding line?

古文：顷兵部建议：令宣府出兵五千，大同出兵一万，并力以援延绥，而不虑其相去既远，往返不逮，人心苦于转移，马力疲于奔轶。
现代文：前不久兵部建议：令宣府出兵五千，大同出兵一万，一起援助延绥，而不考虑到互相间距离很远，往返援救不及，人们苦于辗转行军，马匹疲于奔走。
English: Not long ago, the Ministry of Military Affairs proposed: Let Xuanfu dispatch five thousand soldiers, Datong dispatch ten thousand soldiers, and help Yan'an together, without considering that the distance between each other is very far, round-trip assistance can not be saved, people are struggling to march, and horses are tired of running.

古文：夫声东击西者，贼寇之奸态也。捣虚批亢者，兵家之长策也。
现代文：声东击西是贼寇的一贯伎俩。避实就虚，攻击要害，是兵家的上策。
English: It has always been the tactic of the bandits to strike east and west. It is the soldiers' best strategy to avoid the truth and attack the key.

古文：精锐既尽乎西，老弱乃留于北。万一北或有警，而西未可离，首尾衡决，远近坐困，其可为得计哉？
现代文：精锐军队全都集中到西部，老弱士卒才留在北边，万一北边出现战情，而在西边的军队一下又离不开，首尾脱节，远近都被困住，这合算吗？
English: The elite troops are all concentrated in the west, and the old and weak soldiers stay in the north. In case there is a war situation in the north, and the troops in the west cannot be separated from each other, they are disjointed, and they are trapped far and near. Is this cost-effective?

古文：至于延绥士马屯集，粮糗不赀，乃以山西、河南之民任飞刍转粟之役。
现代文： 至于延绥兵马屯集，粮草供应不足就让山西、河南的百姓承担运送粮草的劳役。
English: As for the Yancheng Terracotta Warriors and Horses, the shortage of grain and grass supply made the people of Shanxi and Henan undertake the labor of transporting grain and grass.

古文：徒步千里，夫运而妻供，父挽而子荷，道路愁怨，井落空虚。
现代文：送粮草的百姓徒步千里，丈夫输运，妻子在家供应粮草，父亲拉车，儿子肩担，沿路都是愁怨的人们，村落空虚。
English: The people who deliver grain and grass walk thousands of miles, the husband transports, the wife supplies grain and grass at home, the father pulls the car, the son shoulders, along the road are sad people, the village is empty.

古文：幸而得至，束刍百钱，斗粟倍直；不幸遇贼，身且毙矣，他尚何云。
现代文：有幸送到目的地，一束草值一百钱，一斗粟价格翻了一倍，万一遇到敌贼，性命也丢了，其他还说什么？
English: If you are lucky enough to make it to your destination, a bunch of grass is worth a hundred dollars, a bucket of poppies has doubled in price, and if you meet an enemy thief, you will lose your life. What else is there to say?

古文：输将不足则有轻赍，轻赍不足又有预征。
现代文：运送不足则有额外损耗加征的，这些还不够的话又有预征。
English: If transportation is insufficient, there will be additional losses and additional charges, and if these are not enough, there will be pre-charges.

古文：水旱不可先知，丰歉未能逆卜，征如何其可预也。
现代文：水灾旱灾不可先知，年成的好坏不能预知，征收的定额怎能事先定下？
English: Floods and droughts cannot be predicted, the quality of the harvest cannot be predicted, how can the quota of the levy be set in advance?

古文：又令民输刍粟补官，而媚权贵私亲故者，或出空牒以授，仓庾无升合之入。
现代文：又令百姓交粮草以补任官职，而那些依附权贵、包庇亲友的人，有的拿出空头文书发给百姓，官府仓库没有增加一升一合。
English: In addition, the people were ordered to pay grain and grass to supplement the official position, and those who depended on the powerful and protected their relatives and friends, some took out short-headed documents to send to the people, and the government warehouse did not increase by one liter and one match.

古文：至若输粟给盐，则豪右请托，率占虚名鬻之，而商贾费且倍蓰。
现代文：至于缴纳粟米发给盐引，又有豪门私相嘱托，大都以纳粟空名将盐引发卖，而商人要花费几倍价格。
English: As for the payment of millet to the salt collector, there are also high-end private consignments, most of which are sold with the empty name of millet, and merchants have to spend several times the price.

古文：官爵日轻，盐法日沮，而边储之不充如故也。
现代文：因此官爵越来越被人轻视，盐法一天比一天败坏，而边境储积不足依然如故。
English: As a result, government officials are increasingly despised, the salt law is deteriorating day by day, and the shortage of border reserves remains the same.

古文：又朝廷出帑藏给边，岁为银数十万。
现代文： 另外朝廷拿出国库资金供应边地，每年几十万两银子。
English: In addition, the imperial court took out state treasury funds to supply marginal lands, amounting to several hundred thousand taels of silver per year.

古文：山西、河南输轻赍于边者，岁不下数十万。
现代文：山西、河南向边地缴纳损耗加征银两每年不下几十万。
English: In Shanxi and Henan provinces, the amount of losses and taxes paid to outlying areas has increased by several hundred thousand every year.

古文：银日积而多则银益贱，粟日散而少则粟益贵。
现代文：银子积累多了则银子价值更加贱，米粟天天减少则米粟价格更贵。
English: If more silver is accumulated, the value of silver will be lower, and if the price of rice is decreasing day by day, the price of rice will be more expensive.

古文：而不知者，遂于养兵之中，寓养狙之术。
现代文：而不知情的人，就在养兵之中行朝三暮四之术。
English: And those who don't know about it are practicing the art of raising troops in the midst of raising troops.

古文：或以茶盐，或以银布，名为准折粮价，实则侵克军需。
现代文：有的用茶盐，有的用银、布，名为折算粮价，实际是克扣军需。
English: Some use tea and salt, others use silver and cloth. They are called converted grain prices, but they are actually deductions from military supplies.

古文：故朝廷有糜廪之虞，军士无果腹之乐。
现代文：由此朝廷担心粮食烂在仓库，军士却连肚子也吃不饱。
English: As a result, the imperial court was worried that the grain was rotting in the warehouse, but the sergeant couldn't even get enough to eat.

古文：至兵马所经，例须应付。
现代文：至兵马经过，按例必须应付。
English: When the soldiers and horses pass by, we have to deal with them as usual.

古文：居平，人日米一斗，马日刍一束。追逐，一日之间或一二堡，或三四城，岂能俱给哉？
现代文：一般情况，每人给米一斗，马给草一束，驰逐作战，一天之间有的经过二堡，有的经过三四个城，岂能都给呢？
English: Under normal circumstances, each person gives a bucket of rice, a horse gives a bunch of grass, and they gallop to battle. Some go through two castles, and some go through three or four cities in a day. Can they all be given?

古文：而典守者巧为窃攘之谋，凡所经历悉有开支，罔上行私，莫此为甚。
现代文：而镇守者巧立名目，凡所经过的都有开支，欺骗上司，摄取私利，再没有比这厉害的。
English: But the town's defenders have cleverly set up a name, and everything they go through has expenses, deceiving their bosses, and taking personal gain. There is nothing more powerful than this.

古文：及访御敌之策，则又论议纷纭。
现代文： 到问起御敌之策，则又议论纷纭。
English: When it comes to the question of the enemy's strategy, there is also a lot of discussion.

古文：有谓复受降之故险，守东胜之旧城，使声援交接，犄角易制。
现代文：有说要恢复受降城的险要，防守东胜的旧城，使其在交战时互相声援，呈犄角之势共同制敌。
English: It is said that it is necessary to restore the vital importance of the defeated city, defend the old city of Dongsheng, make it support each other during the war, and jointly defeat the enemy.

古文：夫欲复城河北，即须塞外屯兵。
现代文：要收复黄河以北的城镇，就必须在塞外集聚军队。
English: In order to recover the towns north of the Yellow River, it is necessary to gather troops from outside the country.

古文：出孤远之军，涉荒漠之地，辎重为累，馈饷惟艰。
现代文：派出长途跋涉的军队，进入荒漠之地，辎重拖累，粮饷困难。
English: He sent his army far away into the desert, where they were hard-pressed for food.

古文：彼或抄掠于前，蹑袭于后。旷日持久，军食乏绝。
现代文：敌人可从前面包抄，或者从背后袭击。旷日持久，军粮断绝。
English: The enemy can encircle from the front, or attack from behind. Prolonged, military food is cut off.

古文：进不得城，退不得归，一败而声威大损矣。
现代文：进又得不到城镇，退又无归路，一旦造成失败就会声威大损。
English: Entering and not getting the town, retreating and having no way back, once the failure is caused, the prestige will be greatly damaged.

古文：又有谓统十万之众，裹半月之粮，奋扬武威，扫荡窟穴，使河套一空。
现代文：又有人说统率十万军队，带半月的粮食，高扬士气，扫荡敌人窟穴，将其赶出河套。
English: Others said that he commanded 100,000 troops, brought half a month's supply of grain, boosted morale, swept the enemy's caves and drove them out of the river.

古文：事非不善也。
现代文：这种说法并非不好。
English: That's not a bad thing.

古文：然帝王之兵，以全取胜；孙、吴之法，以逸待劳。
现代文：然而帝王之兵，要获全胜；孙吴兵法说要以逸待劳。
English: However, the emperor's soldiers must win a complete victory; Sun Wu's art of war says that they must work hard.

古文：今欲鼓勇前行，穷搜远击，乘危履险，觊万一之幸。
现代文：现在要鼓足勇气前行，穷搜远击，一路冒险深入，以求万一的侥幸。
English: Now we must muster the courage to move forward, search far and wide, and take risks all the way, in the hope of a fluke.

古文：赢粮远随则重不及事，提兵深入则孤不可援。
现代文：担着粮食随军远征则辎重难行，率军长驱直入则孤立难以得到援救。
English: It is very difficult to go on an expedition with the army while carrying grain, and it is difficult to be rescued when driving straight in with the commander.

古文：且其间地方千里，无城郭之居，委积之守。
现代文：况且这地方千里，无城镇可居，无储备之积。
English: Moreover, this place is thousands of miles away, there is no town to live in, and there is no reserve.

古文：彼或往来迁徙，罢我驰驱。
现代文：敌人或者往来迁徙，使我军疲于驰逐。
English: Enemies or migrations make our army tired of running.

古文：我则情见势屈，为敌所困。
现代文：我军则受客观形势所限，为敌人所困。
English: Our army, on the other hand, is limited by the objective situation and is trapped by the enemy.

古文：既失坐胜之机，必蹈覆没之辙。
现代文：既坐失获胜之机，必蹈覆没的老路。
English: If you miss the opportunity to win, you will go down the same road.

古文：其最无策者，又欲弃延绥勿守，使兵民息肩，不知一民尺土皆受之祖宗，不可忽也。向失东胜，故今日之害萃于延绥，而关陕震动。
现代文：其中最失策的是又要放弃延绥不守，名义上使兵民卸去负担，不知百姓每寸土地都受之祖宗，不可不看重，以前东胜失守，而今日的敌害聚集于延绥，而关东陕西震动。
English: One of the biggest blunders was to give up the idea of not defending Yancheng, and to nominally relieve the soldiers and people of the burden. I don't know whether the ancestors, to whom the people owe every inch of land, should not be valued. In the past, East Sheng was not defended, but today's enemy attacks are concentrated in Yancheng, while Guandong and Shaanxi are shaken.

古文：今弃延绥，则他日之害钟于关陕，而京师震动。
现代文：现在放弃延绥，那么往后的祸患集中于关东陕西，使京师受到震动。
English: If Yan'an is abandoned now, the disasters in the future will be concentrated in Guandong and Shaanxi, which will shake Beijing.

古文：贼愈近而祸愈大矣。
现代文：贼离得愈近祸害就愈大。 
English: The closer the thief is, the greater the evil.

古文：因陈重将权、增城堡、广斥堠、募民壮、去客兵、明赏罚、严间谍、实屯田、复边漕数事。
现代文：倪岳接着陈述要重视将权，增建城堡、增加哨兵、招募壮丁、调走客籍军士、赏罚分明、严查间谍、充实屯田、恢复边漕几件事。
English: Ni Yue went on to state that it is necessary to attach importance to generalship, build more castles, increase the number of sentries, recruit young men, transfer guest sergeants, clearly reward and punish, strictly investigate spies, enrich the military cantonments, and restore the military cantonments.

古文：时兵部方主用兵，不能尽用也。
现代文：当时由于兵部正在主张用兵，不能全部采纳倪岳的建议。
English: At that time, Ni Yue's proposal could not be fully adopted because the Ministry of Military Affairs was advocating the use of soldiers.

古文：十四年十月卒，年五十八。
现代文：十四年十月，倪岳去世，享年五十八岁。
English: On October 14th, Ni Yue passed away at the age of 58.

古文：赠少保，谥文毅。
现代文：追赠少保，赐谥号文毅。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Shao Bao, and given the posthumous title of Wen Yi.

古文：明世父子官翰林，俱谥文，自岳始。
现代文：明朝时期父子官于翰林院，谥号中都有 文 字，是自倪岳开始的。
English: During the Ming Dynasty, both father and son were officials at Hanlin Academy, and both had Chinese characters in their surnames, beginning with Ni Yue.

