古文：○真宗二六年春二月戊寅，幸飞山雄武营，观发机石、连弩，遂宴射潜龙园。
现代文：咸平六年春二月十八日，到飞山雄武营，观看发机石、连弩，于是在潜龙园设宴射箭。
English: On the 18th day of February in the spring of the sixth year of Xianping, he went to the Xiongwu camp in Feishan to watch the starting stone and the continuous anchor, so he set up a banquet for archery in the submarine dragon park.

古文：己卯，以京东西、淮南水灾，遣使振恤贫民，平决狱讼。
现代文：十九日，因为京东西和淮南水灾，派遣使臣贩济抚恤贫民，公正处理狱案。
English: On the 19th, because of the floods in the eastern and western parts of Beijing and Huainan, envoys were sent to help the poor, and the prison case was handled fairly.

古文：幸北宅视德润疾。
现代文：到北宅探视赵德润病情。
English: Visited Zhao Derun at his home in the north to check on his condition.

古文：庚辰，以西凉府六谷首领潘罗支为朔方军节度、灵州西面都巡检使。
现代文：二十日，任命西凉府六谷首领潘罗支为朔方军节度使、灵州西南都巡检使。
English: On the 20th, he appointed Pan Luo Zhi, the leader of West Liangfu's Liugu, as the military envoy of the Shuo side and the patrol envoy of the southwest capital of Lingzhou.

古文：甲申，封贤懿长公主为郑国长公主。
现代文：二十四日，封贤爵长公主为郑国长公主。
English: On the 24th, the eldest princess was named the eldest princess of Zheng Guo.

古文：蕃部叶市族啰埋等内附。
现代文：蕃部叶市族锣埋等内附朝廷。
English: The imperial court was buried in the family tombs of the Hattori family.

古文：己丑，德润卒。
现代文：二十九日，赵德润去世。
English: On the 29th, Zhao Derun passed away.

古文：庚寅，屯田员外郎盛梁坐受赇枉法，流崖州。
现代文：三十日，屯田员外郎盛梁因为受贿枉法，流放崖州。
English: On the 30th, because of the bribery law, Tongtian member Gaorang Shengliang was exiled to Yazhou.

古文：三月辛卯朔，钦州言交州八州使黄庆集等来归。
现代文：三月初一，钦州报告说交州八州使黄庆集等来归附。
English: On the first day of March, Qinzhou reported that the eight states of Jiaozhou sent Huang Qingji and others to annex it.

古文：石、隰都巡检使言绥州东山蕃部军使拽臼等内属。
现代文：石州、曝州都巡检使报告说绥州东山蕃部军使拽臼等内属。
English: The inspection envoys of Shizhou and Jianzhou reported that the military envoys of Dongshan and Hebe in Zhangzhou were pulling the mill and other subordinates.

古文：己酉，钱种放还山。
现代文：十九日，为种放回终南山饯别。
English: On the 19th, the seeds were sent back to Nanshan for the final farewell.

古文：乙卯，幸惟吉第视疾。
现代文：二十五日，到赵惟吉家探视病情。
English: On the 25th, he went to Zhao Weiji's home to check on his condition.

古文：戊午，幸元份宫视疾。
现代文：二十八日，到赵元份宫探视病情。
English: On the 28th, he went to Zhao Yuanpeng's palace to check on her condition.

古文：四月，李继迁寇洪德砦，蕃官庆香、庆等击走之。
现代文：四月，李继迁攻打洪德寨，蕃官庆香、拳庆等打退他们。
English: In April, Li Jiquan attacked Hong Dezhai, and eunuchs such as Qingxiang and Fenqing repulsed them.

古文：以庆香等领刺史。
现代文：任命庆香等领刺史。
English: The appointment of Qing Xiang and other leaders is history.

古文：契丹来侵，战望都县，副都部署王继忠陷于敌，发河东广锐兵赴援。
现代文：契丹来侵犯，在望都县作战，副都部署王继忠陷于敌阵，派河东广锐兵前往救援。
English: The Khitan invaded and fought in Wangdu County. Vice-governor Wang Jizhong deployed Wang Jizhong, who was trapped in the enemy's lines, and sent soldiers from Guangdong to rescue him.

古文：辛巳，信国公玄祐薨。
现代文：二十二日，信国公赵玄去世。
English: On the 22nd, Prince Zhao Xuan passed away.

古文：五月甲午，太白昼见。
现代文：五月初五，太白星白天出现。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：辛亥，录望都战没将士子孙。
现代文：二十二日，录用望都战死将士子孙。
English: On the 22nd, the descendants of the soldiers who died in the battle of Bodu were hired.

古文：癸丑，镇州副都部署李福坐望都之战临阵退衄，削籍流封州。
现代文：二十四日，镇州副都部署李福因望都之战临阵退兵，被削籍流放封州。
English: On the 24th, Li Fu, deputy commander of Zhenzhou, withdrew from the front due to the Battle of Wangdu and was demoted and exiled to Fuzhou.

古文：京城疫，分遣内臣赐药。
现代文：京城流行疾疫，分别派内臣赐药。
English: There was an epidemic in the capital, and the vassals were sent out to give medicine.

古文：六月丁卯，诏命官流窜没岭南者，给缗钱归葬。
现代文：六月初九，下诏命官流放岭南去世者，给络钱归葬。
English: On the 9th day of the 6th month, the next imperial edict ordered the official to exile the deceased in Lingnan and to give the money to be buried.

古文：丰州瓦窑没剂、如罗、昧克等族以兵济河击李继迁，败之。
现代文：丰州瓦窑没剂、如罗、昧克等族出兵渡河攻击李继迁，打败他。
English: Fuzhou tile kiln, Ruo, Maike and other tribes sent troops to cross the river to attack Li Jiqian and defeat him.

古文：丁丑，陇山西首领秃逋等贡马，愿附大兵击贼。
现代文：十九日，陇山西首领秃通等进贡马，愿跟随大军进攻贼军。
English: On the 19th, the western leader of Lushan, Baldong, and others paid tribute and were willing to follow the large army to attack the thief army.

古文：丁亥，寇准为三司使。
现代文：二十九日，寇准为三司使。
English: On the 29th, Kou Jun became the third envoy.

古文：复盐铁、度支、户部副使。
现代文：恢复盐铁、度支、户部副使。
English: The vice-ministers of salt, iron and steel, and household affairs were reinstated.

古文：秋七月癸丑，兖王元杰薨。
现代文：秋七月二十五日，充王赵元杰逝世。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhao Yuanjie passed away.

古文：八月庚午，太白昼见。
现代文：八月十三日，太白星白天出现。
English: On August 13th, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：辛未，原、渭等州言西蕃八部二十五族纳质来归。
现代文：十四日，原、渭等州报告说西蕃八部二十五族送来人质归附朝廷。
English: On the 14th, states such as Hara and Goryeo reported that twenty-five tribes from eight parts of Western Goryeo had sent hostages to the imperial court.

古文：丙子，诏环、庆秋田经寇践伤者，顷赐粟十五斛，民被掠者，口赐米一斛。
现代文：十九日，下诏：环庆一带秋苗被敌军践踏损坏者，每顷赐粟十五解；百姓被劫掠者每口赐米一解。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: Those whose autumn seedlings in the Huanqing area were trampled and damaged by the enemy army would be given 15 grains of millet per hectare; those who were looted would be given one grain of rice per mouth.

古文：蠲棣州民租十之三。
现代文：免除棣州百姓十分之三的租税。
English: exempt the people of Zhangzhou from three-tenths of the tax.

古文：九月己丑，蒲端国献红鹦鹉。
现代文：九月初二，蒲端国进献红鹦鹉。
English: On the second day of the first month of September, the red parrot was presented by the State of Putang.

古文：丙申，出内府缯帛，市谷实边。
现代文：初九，拿出内府增帛，买谷充实边储。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Inner Prefectural Government increased the supply of rice and bought grain to replenish the reserve.

古文：甲辰，以吕蒙正为太子太师、莱国公。
现代文：十七日，以吕蒙正为太子太师、莱国公。
English: On the 17th, Lv Meng Zheng was crowned the prince of Lai.

古文：十月丁丑，狐出皇城角楼，获之。
现代文：十月二十一日，狐出现在皇城角楼，被捕获。
English: On October 21st, the fox appeared at the Imperial City Corner Building and was captured.

古文：戊寅，给军中传信牌。
现代文：二十二日，发给各军传信牌。
English: On the 22nd, a telegram was sent to all the armies.

古文：十一月癸巳，虑囚，杂犯死罪以下递减一等，杖释之。
现代文：十一月初七，讯问记录囚犯罪状，杂犯死罪以下递减一等，杖刑释放。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of November, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, and the minor offender was reduced to the first class below the death penalty, and was released with a cane.

古文：苦寒，令诸路休役兵。
现代文：特别寒冷，命令各路士兵休息。
English: It was particularly cold, and the soldiers were ordered to rest.

古文：己亥，阅捧日军士教三阵于崇政殿。壬寅，幸大相国寺。
现代文：十三日，在崇政殿检阅捧日军士教三阵。十六日，到大相国寺。
English: On the 13th, they held a review of the three phalanxes of Japanese soldiers and cadets at the Suisho-den. On the 16th, they went to the Daisho-koku-ji Temple.

古文：庚戌，雨木冰。
现代文：二十四日，降木冰。
English: On the 24th, the snow began to fall.

古文：甲寅，有星孛于井、鬼。
现代文：二十八日，彗星进人井宿、鬼宿。
English: On the 28th, the comet entered Jinjingjuku and Onishuku.

古文：十二月庚申，遣使西北，劳赐将士。
现代文：十二月初五，派人到西北慰劳赏赐将士。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, someone was sent to the northwest to reward the soldiers.

古文：甲子，诏求直言。
现代文：初九，诏求直言。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, let's speak frankly.

古文：西面部署言李继迁攻西凉，知府丁维清没焉。
现代文：西面部署报告说李继迁进攻西凉，知府丁维清战死。
English: The western deployment reported that Li Jiquan attacked Xilang, and the governor Ding Weiqing died in the battle.

古文：庚午，以李继隆为山南东道节度使。
现代文：十五日，任命李继隆为山南东道节度使。
English: On the 15th, Li Jilong was appointed as the envoy of Shannan to host the festival.

古文：甲戌，万安太后不豫，诏求良医。
现代文：十九日，万安太后身体不适，诏求良医。
English: On the 19th, Empress Dowager Wan'an felt unwell and sent for a good doctor.

古文：戊寅，赦天下，死罪减一等，流以下释之。
现代文：二十三日，赦免天下，死罪减轻一等，流刑以下释放。
English: On the 23rd, the whole world was pardoned, the death penalty was commuted to the first degree, and those sentenced to exile or less were released.

古文：是岁，西凉府暨龙野马族、三佛齐、大食国来贡。
现代文：这一年，西凉府暨龙野马族、三佛齐国、大食国来进贡。
English: In this year, Xiliangfu, Longyong, Mustang and Horse Tribes, the Three Buddhas and Qi Kingdoms, and the Great Food Kingdoms came to pay tribute.

古文：河北、兴元府、遂、郢州大熟。
现代文：河北、兴元府、遂州、呈阵州大丰收。
English: Hebei, Xingyuanfu, Suizhou and Zhangyanzhou had a bumper harvest.

古文：景德元年春正月丙戌朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：景德元年春正月初一，大赦，改元。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Jingde, the amnesty and the change of the era began.

古文：丁亥，麟府路言契丹言泥族拔黄三百余帐内属。
现代文：初二，麟府路报告说契丹言垄族拔黄三百多帐内属。
English: On the second day of the first grade, Linfu Road reported that there were more than 300 accounts belonging to the Khitan-speaking Reng people.

古文：癸巳，幸天驷监，赐从官马。
现代文：初八，到天驯监，赐给从官马。
English: At the age of eight, he was given the title of journeyman to the emperor.

古文：丙申，京师地震。
现代文：十一日，京师发生地震。
English: On the 11th day of the month, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：辛丑，诏民间天象器物、谶候禁书，并纳所司焚之，匿不言者死。
现代文：十六日，下诏：民间天象器物戳候禁书，一律交给有关部门焚烧，隐匿不报者处以死罪。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: all banned books and folk celestial objects were to be handed over to the relevant departments for incineration, and those who concealed or failed to report were to be sentenced to death.

古文：石、隰州言河西蕃部四十五族首领率属内附。
现代文：石、曝州报告说河西蕃部四十五族首领率部内附朝廷。
English: Shi and Zengzhou reported that the leaders of the 45 ethnic groups in Hebei Province led by the imperial court.

古文：京师地再震。
现代文：京师又发生地震。
English: Another earthquake has occurred in Kyoto Prefecture.

古文：乙巳，废高州。
现代文：二十日，废罢高州。
English: On the 20th, Gaozhou was abolished.

古文：丁未，京师地复震。
现代文：二十二日，京师再次发生地震。
English: On the 22nd, another earthquake occurred in Beijing.

古文：壬子，开定州河通漕。
现代文：二十七日，开凿定州河通槽运。
English: On the 27th, the channel of the Denzhou River was excavated.

古文：二月，环、庆部署言西凉府潘罗支集六谷蕃部合击李继迁，败之，继迁中流矢死。
现代文：二月，环庆部署报告说西凉府潘罗支会合六谷蕃部共同打败李继迁，李继迁中流矢而死。
English: In February, the Huanqing deployment reported that the West Liangfu Pan Luo branch of the Rokkoku branch jointly defeated Li Jiquan, and Li Jiquan died in the middle of the stream.

古文：罗支使来献捷。
现代文：潘罗支派人来告捷。
English: The tribe of Penrhos sent a man to claim the victory.

古文：戊寅，太常卿张齐贤为兵部尚书。
现代文：二十四日，太常卿张齐贤为兵部尚书。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Qixian, the First Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, was appointed as the secretary of the Military Department.

古文：冀、益、黎、雅州地震。
现代文：冀、益、黎、雅州地震。
English: Hebei, Yixi, Lijiang and Yazhou earthquakes.

古文：三月，威虏军守将破契丹于长城口，追北过阳山，斩获甚众。
现代文：三月，威虏军守将在长城口打败契丹军，向北追过阳山，斩获甚多。
English: In March, the defenders of the Tyrian army defeated the Khitan army at the entrance to the Great Wall and chased it northward past Yangshan, gaining a great deal.

古文：柳谷川蕃部入寇、麟，府击败之，擒千余人。
现代文：柳谷川蕃部来进攻，麟府打退他们，擒获一千多人。
English: Yanagidagawa Shibu came to attack, Linfu beat them back and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：己亥，皇太后崩。
现代文：十五日，皇太后逝世。
English: On the 15th, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：辛丑，群臣三上表请听政，不允。
现代文：十七日，大臣三次上表请真宗治理国事，没同意。
English: On the seventeenth day, the minister asked Shinshong to govern the country for the third time, but he did not agree.

古文：乙巳，李沆等诣宫门，见帝毁瘠过甚，退上五表求见，言西北军事方殷，力请听政，从之。
现代文：二十一日，李杭等到宫门，看见真宗过于悲痛，退后五次上表请求朝见，说西北军事正紧张，坚决请求上殿听政，真宗同意。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Hang waited at the palace gate, saw that Zhenzong was too sad, retreated five times to the table to request a meeting with the emperor, said that the northwest military was tense, and firmly requested to go to the palace to listen to politics. Zhenzong agreed.

古文：麟府路言败西人于神堆，破其砦栅。
现代文：麟府路报告说在神堆打败西夏人，攻破寨栅。
English: Linfu Road reported that they had defeated the Xixia people in Shentuo and breached the Walled City.

古文：己酉，帝始于崇政殿西庑衰服恸哭见群臣。
现代文：二十五日，真宗在崇政殿西厅穿丧服哭着会见大臣。
English: On the 25th, Shinso, wearing mourning clothes and weeping, met with the minister in the west hall of the Suisho-den.

古文：夏四月甲寅，上大行皇太后谥曰明德。
现代文：夏四月初一，上皇太后溢号为明德。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the former empress dowager's posthumous name was Mingde.

古文：群臣三请御正殿，从之。
现代文：大臣三次请求真宗到正殿理事，采纳了大臣的意见。
English: The minister requested three times that Shinshong come to the director of the main hall, and the minister's opinion was adopted.

古文：丙辰，邢州地震不止。
现代文：初三，邢州地震不停。
English: On the third day of the new year, the earthquake in Zhangzhou continued.

古文：以溪蛮宁息，民多复业，蠲澧州石门县租二年。
现代文：因溪蛮平息，民多复业，免除遭州石门县二年租税。
English: Due to the rapid subsidence of the creek, many people resumed their businesses and were exempted from the two-year tax imposed by Shimen County.

古文：丁卯，以隆暑，休北边役兵。
现代文：十四日，因盛暑，休北边役兵。
English: On the 14th, due to the hot weather, the soldiers stationed in the northern border were absent.

古文：瀛州地震。
现代文：赢州发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Yingzhou.

古文：五月甲申，邢州地连震不止，赐民租之半。
现代文：五月初一，邢州连续地震不停，免百姓租税一半。
English: On the first day of May, Zhangzhou was hit by a series of earthquakes, and people were exempted from paying half of their taxes.

古文：蒲端国遣使来贡。
现代文：蒲端国来进贡。
English: The tribute came from the country of Buda.

古文：丁巳，诏诸路转运使代还日，在任兴除利害、升黜能否，凡所经画事，悉条上以闻。
现代文：丁巳日，下诏：各路转运使任满离职时，任内兴除利害、升降能否，凡属所经办的事全部陈述上报。
English: On the same day, the following edict was issued: Upon the expiration of the term of office of each road transfer agent, whether it is possible to remove interests and promotion or demotion during the term of office, all matters handled shall be reported.

古文：六月己未，幸北宅视德钦疾。
现代文：六月初六，到北宅探视赵德钦病情。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of June, he went to the North House to visit Zhao Deqin's illness.

古文：洪德砦言继迁部将都尾等率属归附。
现代文：洪德寨报告说李继迁部将都尾等率部归附。
English: Hong Dezhai reported that the Li Suiqian Department would attach the Duwei Equivalent Rate Department.

古文：甲子，诏罢川峡、闽、广州军贡承天节，自今三千里外者罢之。
现代文：十一日，下诏废罢川峡、闽、广州军进贡承天节，以后三千里外的地方不进贡。
English: On the 11th day of the month, it was decreed that the tributes of the Sichuan Gorge, Yunnan and Guangzhou armies would be abolished, and no tributes would be paid to places 3,000 miles away in the future.

古文：镇戎军言败戎人于石门川。
现代文：镇戎军报告说在石门川打败戎人。
English: The town army reported that they had defeated the army in Shimen River.

古文：庚午，德钦卒。
现代文：十七日，赵德钦去世。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Deqin passed away.

古文：洪德砦言蕃部罗泥天王本族诸首领各率属归附。
现代文：洪德寨报告说蕃部罗泥天王本族各首领分别率部归附朝廷。
English: Hong Dezhai reported that all the leaders of the Xibe Luo Di Tianwang and their respective clans had been subordinated to the imperial court.

古文：赵保忠卒。
现代文：赵保忠去世。
English: Zhao Baozhong passed away.

古文：壬午，暑甚，罢京城工役，遣使赐暍者药。
现代文：二十九日，天太热，废除京城工役，派人赐给中暑者药。
English: On the 29th, the weather was too hot, so the Beijing Municipal Labor Service was abolished and someone was sent to give medicine to those suffering from heatstroke.

古文：秋七月癸未，班用兵诛赏格。
现代文：秋七月初一，颁布用兵诛赏标准。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the standards for awarding military decorations were promulgated.

古文：丙戌，李沆薨。
现代文：初四，李杭逝世。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Li Hang passed away.

古文：庚寅，以翰林侍读学士毕士安为吏部侍郎、参知政事。
现代文：初八，任命翰林侍读学士毕士安为吏部侍郎、参知政事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the school year, Hanlin appointed Bishian, a baccalaureate in attendance, as a clerk of the personnel department and a political advisor.

古文：庚子，益都民李仁美、国凝母皆百余岁，诏赐粟帛。
现代文：十八日，益州百姓李仁美、国凝母都一百多岁，下诏赐给粟帛。
English: On the 18th, the people of Yizhou, Li Renmei and Guo Jingmai, both more than a hundred years old, issued an edict to Maojun.

古文：八月，泾原部署言击万子军主族帐，斩首二百余级。
现代文：八月，径原部署报告说进攻万子军主族帐，斩首二百余级。
English: In August, the original deployment report reported that the main family of the Wanzhong Army was attacked and more than 200 people were beheaded.

古文：己未，以毕士安、寇准并平章事，宣徽南院使王继英为枢密使，同知枢密院事冯拯、陈尧叟并签署枢密院事。
现代文：初七，任命毕士安、寇准并为平章事，宣徽南院使王继英为枢密使，同知枢密院事冯拯、陈尧雯并为签署枢密院事。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Bi Shian and Kou Jun were appointed as the signatories of the Treaty of Pingzhang, Wang Jieying, the envoy of the Southern Yuan of the State Council of Hunan, was appointed as the envoy of the Privy Council, and Feng Zheng and Chen Yuwen, the co-sages of the Privy Council, were appointed as the signatories of the Privy Council.

古文：壬申，诏常参官二人共举州县官可任幕职者一人。
现代文：二十日，下诏常参官二人共同推举州县官可以担任幕职者一人。
English: On the 20th day of the following month, the two officials jointly elected one person from the prefectural and county officials who could serve as a shogun.

古文：丙子，以保平军节度石保吉为武宁军节度、同平章事。
现代文：二十四日，任命保平军节度使石保吉为武宁军节度使、同平章事。
English: On the twenty-fourth day of the month, Baoping appointed Shi Baoji as the military envoy of the Wu Ning Army, and made him a peer.

古文：庚辰，遣使广南东、西路疏决系囚，犒劳军校父老，访民间便宜。
现代文：二十八日，派遣使臣到广南东西路处理积滞狱案，搞劳军校父老，访问民间利弊事件。
English: On the 28th, the envoy was dispatched to the East-West Road of Guangnan to deal with the backlog of prison cases, to engage in the labor of military school parents, and to visit the people's advantages and disadvantages.

古文：九月癸未，罢北面赍御剑内臣，以剑属主将。
现代文：九月初二，废除北面责御剑内臣，把剑给主将。
English: On the 2nd day of the 9th month of the year, the northern command was abolished, and the sword was given to the commander.

古文：丙戌，令诸路转运使考察官吏能否，己丑，诏翰林学士承旨宋白等举文武官可任藩郡者各一人。
现代文：初五，命令各路转运使考察官吏贤能与否。初八，下诏翰林学士承旨宋白等推举文武官可以任职藩郡者各一人。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month, it was ordered to send envoys to all provinces to investigate whether officials were capable or not. On the 8th day of the 1st month, it was decreed that the Hanlin Baccalaureate would appoint one person from each province and county to be the civil and military officer nominated by Song and Bai.

古文：丁酉，召宰相议亲征。
现代文：十六日，召宰相讨论亲征。
English: On the 16th, the prime minister was called in to discuss conscription.

古文：契丹耶律吴欲来降。
现代文：契丹耶律吴欲来投降。
English: The Khitan leader Wu Xi came to surrender.

古文：宋州汴水决。
现代文：宋州汁水决口。
English: Songzhou Juishui Breech.

古文：乙巳，置祁州。
现代文：二十四日，设置祈州。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the prayer state was set up.

古文：河决澶州，遣使具舟济民，给以粮饷。
现代文：黄河在擅州决口，派人准备好舟船济渡百姓，给以粮晌。
English: At the junction of the Yellow River and the Xizhou River, he sent people to prepare boats to help the people cross the river and give them grain.

古文：闰月乙卯，诏河北吏民杀契丹者，所至援之，仍颁赏格。
现代文：闰九月初四，下诏河北吏民杀契丹者，所至援助，并颁降奖赏标准。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, Hebei officials and citizens who killed Qidan were granted assistance and the reward standard was lowered.

古文：壬申，江南旱，遣使决狱，访民疾苦，祠境内山川。
现代文：二十一日，江南早灾，派遣使臣处理狱案，访问百姓疾苦，祠祀境内山川。
English: On the 21st day of the month, the south of the Yangtze River was hit by an early disaster, and envoys were dispatched to deal with the prison case, visit the suffering of the people, and visit the temples and shrines of the mountains and rivers in the territory.

古文：癸酉，明德皇太后殡沙台。
现代文：二十二日，明德皇太后葬于沙台。
English: On the 22nd, Empress Dowager Mingde was buried in Shatai.

古文：北平砦、威虏军合兵大破契丹。
现代文：北平寨、威虏军联合出兵打败契丹军。
English: Beipingzhai, the Tyrian army jointly dispatched troops to defeat the Khitan army.

古文：乙亥，参知政事王钦若判天雄军府兼都部署。
现代文：二十四日，参知政事王钦若判天雄军府兼都部署。
English: On the 24th, Wang Qinruo, the political advisor to the prefectural governor, ordered the deployment of Tianxiong's military headquarters and capital.

古文：契丹统军挞览率众攻威虏、顺安军，三路都部署击败之，斩偏将，获其辎重。
现代文：契丹统军挞览率军进攻威虏军、顺安军，三路都部署打败契丹军，斩杀副将，缴获瑙重。
English: The Khitan unified army led the army to attack the Tyrian army and the Shunan army, and deployed in three directions to defeat the Khitan army, kill the vice-general, and capture Naw Chow.

古文：又攻北平砦及保州，复为州、砦兵所败。
现代文：契丹又进攻北平寨和保州，又被宋军打败。
English: The Khitan also attacked Beipingzhai and Bozhou, and were again defeated by the Song army.

古文：挞览与契丹主及其母并众攻定州，宋兵拒于唐河，击其游骑。
现代文：挞览与契丹主及其母亲率领军队进攻定州，宋军在唐河抵抗，攻击其游骑。
English: The Song army resisted in the Tang River and attacked the cavalry of the Qidan lord and his mother leading the army to attack Dingzhou.

古文：契丹驻阳城淀，因王继忠致书于莫州石普以讲和。
现代文：契丹军驻扎阳城淀，通过王继忠向莫州石普致书请求讲和。
English: The Khitan army was stationed in Yangcheng Yodo and sent a letter to Mozhou Shipu through Wang Jizhong to request peace.

古文：丙子，以天雄军都部署周莹为驾前贝、冀路都部署，侍卫马军都指挥使葛霸为驾前邢、洺路都部署。
现代文：二十五日，任命天雄军都部署周莹为驾前贝冀路都部署，侍卫马军都指挥使葛霸为驾前邢洛路都部署。
English: On the 25th, Zhou Ying was appointed to deploy Tianxiong's army to Beiji Road ahead of Zhou Ying's arrival, and Ge Ba was appointed to command the guards of Ma's army to deploy to Minluo Road ahead of Zhou Ying's arrival.

古文：己卯，高继勋率兵击败契丹数万骑于岢岚军。
现代文：二十八日，高继勋率军在奇岚军打败契丹数万骑军。
English: On the 28th, Gao Jixun led the army to defeat tens of thousands of Khitan cavalry in the Qizhi army.

古文：冬十月壬午，诏修葺历代圣贤陵墓。
现代文：冬十月初二，下诏修缮历代圣贤陵墓。
English: On the second day of the first month of October in winter, the mausoleum of the sages of all ages will be renovated.

古文：癸未，麟府路率部兵入朔州，破大狼水砦。
现代文：初三，麟府路率部进人朔州，攻破大狼水寨。
English: On the third day of the first month, the Linfu road leading unit entered Shuozhou and broke through the big wolf water village.

古文：乙酉，令漕运所经州军长吏兼辇运事。
现代文：初五，命令槽运所经州军长吏兼管辈运事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the order was given for the tank transport office to be run by the state military commander and manager.

古文：戊子，祔明德皇后于太庙。
现代文：初八，在太庙附祭明德皇后。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, there is a memorial service for Empress Mingde at the Imperial Temple.

古文：庚寅，命张齐贤兼青、淄、潍安抚使，丁谓兼郓、齐、濮安抚使。
现代文：初十，命令张齐贤兼青、淄、潍安抚使，丁谓兼邪、齐、攫安抚使。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he ordered Zhang Qixian to be conciliator of Qing, Han, and Zhou, and Ding to be conciliator of Zhao, Qi, and Zhou.

古文：癸巳，幸故郑国长公主第。
现代文：十三日，到已故郑国长公主府第。
English: On the 13th, to the late Princess Zheng Guo's residence.

古文：乙未，诏王超等率兵赴行在。
现代文：十五日，下诏王超等率兵前往行在。
English: On the fifteenth day, Wang Chao and other soldiers marched there.

古文：丁酉，诏魏能、张凝、田敏屯定州。
现代文：十七日，下诏魏能、张凝、田敏驻屯定州。
English: On the 17th, Wei Neng, Zhang Jian and Tian Min were stationed in Dingzhou.

古文：癸卯，以厮铎督为朔方军节度、灵州西面巡检、西凉府六谷大首领。
现代文：二十三日，任命厮铎督为朔方军节度、灵州西面巡检、西凉府六谷大首领。
English: On the 23rd, he was appointed as the military commander of the Shuo army, the inspector of the west side of Lingzhou, and the great leader of the West Liangfu Rokkoku.

古文：保、莫州、威虏、岢岚军及北平砦皆击败契丹。
现代文：保州、莫州、威虏军、奇岚军、北平寨都击败契丹军。
English: Bozhou, Mozhou, Wairu Army, Qizhi Army, Beipingzhai all defeated the Khitan Army.

古文：既而王继忠上言契丹请和，命阁门祗候曹利用往答之。
现代文：不久王继忠上言契丹请求讲和，命令阎门抵侯曹利用前往回答。
English: Wang Jizhong soon appealed to Khitan to make peace and ordered Yanmen to go to Hou Cao to reply.

古文：丁未，以雍王元份为东京留守。
现代文：二十七日，任命雍王赵元份为东京留守。
English: On the 27th, Yong Wang Zhao Yuanfen was appointed to stay in Tokyo.

古文：己酉，置龙图阁待制。
现代文：二十九日，设置龙图阁待制。
English: On the 29th, Longtu Pavilion was put on standby.

古文：十一月辛亥，太白昼见。
现代文：十一月初一，太白星白天出现。
English: On the first day of November, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：乙卯，遣使抚河北。
现代文：初五，派遣使臣安抚河北。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he sent envoys to pacify Hebei Province.

古文：契丹攻瀛州，知州李延渥率兵败之，杀伤十余万众，遁去。
现代文：契丹进攻赢州，知州李延握率兵打败契丹军，杀伤十余万人，契丹军退走。
English: The Khitan attacked Wenzhou, and Li Yanjie of Zhizhou led the troops to defeat the Khitan army, killing more than 100,000 people, and the Khitan army retreated.

古文：官吏进秩、赐物有差。
现代文：官吏升官、赐物不等。
English: Officials were promoted and received gifts.

古文：己未，遣使安抚河东诸州。
现代文：初九，派遣使臣安抚河东诸州。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, he sent envoys to pacify the states east of the river.

古文：契丹逼冀州，知州王屿击走之。
现代文：契丹军进逼冀州，被知州王屿打退。
English: The Khitan army pushed into Jizhou and was repulsed by the Chizhou Wangyu.

古文：甲子，校猎近郊。
现代文：十四日，在近郊狩猎。
English: On the 14th, they went hunting in the suburbs.

古文：丙寅，遣使安集河北流民。
现代文：十六日，派遣使臣安抚河北流民。
English: On the 16th, an envoy was sent to pacify the Hebei refugees.

古文：戊辰，以山南东道节度、同平章事李继隆为驾前东面排阵使，武宁军节度、同平章事石保吉为驾前西面排阵使。
现代文：十八日，任命山南东道节度使、同平章事李继隆为驾前东面排阵使，武宁军节度使、同平章事石保吉为驾前西面排阵使。
English: On the 18th, he appointed Li Jilong, the Shannan Host and Tongping Commander-in-Chief, as the commander-in-chief of the Eastern Front, and Wu Ning Army Commander-in-Chief and Tongping Commander-in-Chief Shi Boji as the commander-in-chief of the Western Front.

古文：石州地震。
现代文：石州地震。
English: The earthquake in Shizuoka.

古文：庚午，车驾北巡。
现代文：二十日，真宗北巡。
English: On the 20th, the Shinshu Northern Tour began.

古文：司天言：日抱珥，黄气充塞，宜不战而却。
现代文：司天监说：太阳被光晕所环抱，黄气充塞，应该不战而退。
English: Siyuan said: "The sun is surrounded by a halo, filled with yellow gas, and should retreat without a fight.

古文：癸酉，驻跸韦城县。
现代文：二十三日，真宗停留韦城县。
English: On the 23rd, the Shinshu sect stopped in Weicheng County.

古文：甲戌，寒甚，左右进貂帽毳裘，却之曰： 臣下皆苦寒，朕安用此？ 王继忠数驰奏请和，帝谓宰相曰： 继忠言契丹请和，虽许之，然河冰已合，且其情多诈，不可不为之备。 
现代文：二十四日，特别寒冷，左右向真宗进献貂帽和毛皮大衣，真宗推辞说： 臣下都很冷，肤怎么能用这个！  王继忠多次来上奏请和，真宗对宰相说： 王继忠说契丹请求讲和，肤虽然答应了，但黄河已经结冰，而且契丹诈伪无常，不可不为之防备。 
English: On the twenty-fourth day, it was particularly cold, and hats and fur coats were presented to Zhenzong from left and right. Zhenzong said, "My subjects are all cold, how can I use this!" Wang Jizhong repeatedly came to appeal for peace, and Zhenzong said to the prime minister, "Wang Jizhong said that the Khitan asked for peace, and although Zhenzong agreed, the Yellow River has frozen, and the Khitan is deceptive and fickle, and we must be prepared for it."

古文：契丹兵至澶州北，直犯前军西阵，其大帅挞览耀兵出阵，俄中伏弩死。
现代文：契丹军队到达擅州北，直犯宋前军西阵，契丹大帅挞览率兵出阵，不久中矢而死。
English: The Khitan army reached the north of Shanzhou, directly offending the Western Front of the Song Dynasty's former army. The Khitan general Guan Shan led his soldiers into battle, and soon died from an arrow.

古文：丙子，帝次澶州。渡河，幸北砦，御城北楼，召诸将抚慰。
现代文：二十六日，真宗到达擅州，渡过黄河，到北寨，登上城北楼，召诸将抚恤慰问。
English: On the 26th, Zhenzong arrived in Shanzhou, crossed the Yellow River, went to Beizhai, ascended the north tower of the city, and summoned generals for condolences.

古文：郓州得契丹谍者，斩之。
现代文：军仔州抓获契丹间谍，斩杀。
English: A Khitan spy was captured and beheaded in Wuzhizhou.

古文：戊寅，曹利用使契丹还。
现代文：二十八日，曹利用出使契丹军回来。
English: On the 28th, Cao Cao sent an envoy to lead the Khitan army back.

古文：十二月庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of December, a solar eclipse.

古文：契丹使韩巳来讲和。
现代文：契丹使臣韩祀来讲和。
English: As far as the Khitan envoy Han Rong is concerned, it is peace.

古文：辛巳，遣使安抚河北、京东。
现代文：初二，派遣使臣安抚河北、京东。
English: On the second day of the first month, he dispatched envoys to pacify Hebei and East Beijing.

古文：壬午，幸城南临河亭，赐凿凌军绵襦。
现代文：初三，到城南临河亭，赐给凿凌军棉衣。
English: On the third day of junior high school, he went to Linhe Pavilion in the south of the city and gave the soldiers of the Chiseling Army cotton clothes.

古文：癸未，幸北砦，又幸李继隆营，命从官将校饮，犒赐诸军有差。
现代文：初四，到北寨，又到李继隆营，命令从官将校宴饮，搞赐各军不等。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, he went to Beizhai and then to Li Jilong's camp. He ordered officials and officers to have a banquet and give gifts to the troops.

古文：诏谕两京以将班师。
现代文：诏谕两京将领班师。
English: The commanding officers of the two capitals have been dispatched.

古文：甲申，契丹使姚东之来献御衣、食物。
现代文：初五，契丹使臣姚东之来献纳御衣食物。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Khitan envoy Yao Dong came to offer food to the emperor.

古文：乙酉，御行营南楼观河，遂宴从官及契丹使。
现代文：初六，到行营南楼观赏黄河，于是宴饮从官和契丹使臣。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, they went to the camp's south building to view the Yellow River, whereupon a banquet was held for officials and Khitan envoys.

古文：丙戌，遣使抚谕怀、孟、泽、潞、郑、滑等州，放强壮归农。
现代文：初七，派遣使臣抚谕怀、孟、泽、潞、郑、滑等州，放回强壮归农。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, he sent envoys to advise Huai, Meng, Ze, Zou, Zheng, Nian and other prefectures to let the strong return to the farmers.

古文：遣监西京左藏库李继昌使契丹定和，戒诸将勿出兵邀其归路。
现代文：派遣监西京左藏库李继昌出使契丹确定讲和，警告各将领不要出兵阻止契丹军归路。
English: Li Jichang, the inspector of the Western Capital of Tibet, sent an envoy to Khitan to confirm the peace talk, and warned the generals not to send troops to prevent the Khitan army from returning.

古文：丁亥，遣使安集河北流民，瘗暴骸。
现代文：初八，派遣使臣安抚河北流民，掩埋尸体。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he sent envoys to pacify the Hebei refugees and bury the bodies.

古文：以阁门祗候曹利用为东上阁门使、忠州刺史。
现代文：任命阎门抵侯曹利用为东上阎门使、忠州刺史。
English: The appointment of Yanmen arrived at Hou Cao's use as the eastward Yanmen envoy, Chungju stabbed history.

古文：戊子，幸北砦劳军，召李继隆、石保吉宴射行宫西亭。
现代文：初九，到北寨慰劳军队。召李继隆、石保吉在行宫西亭设宴射箭。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, he went to Beizhai to comfort the labor army. Li Jilong and Shi Baoji were summoned to set up a banquet and archery in the west pavilion of the palace.

古文：壬辰，赦河北诸州死罪以下，民经蹂践者给复二年，死事官吏追录子孙。
现代文：十三日，赦免河北各州死罪以下囚犯，被践踏的百姓免除二年赋役，追录为国捐躯者的子孙。
English: On the 13th, prisoners with less than capital crimes from all the states of Hebei were pardoned, and the trampled people were exempted from two years of forced labor, and were recorded as the descendants of those who died for the country.

古文：癸巳，雍王元份疾，命参知政事王旦权东京留守。
现代文：十四日，雍王赵元份患病，命令参知政事王旦暂代东京留守。
English: On the 14th, the Yong Wang, Zhao Yuanfen, fell ill and ordered Wang Dan, the political advisor to the governor, to stay in Tokyo for the time being.

古文：甲午，车驾发澶州，大寒，赐道傍贫民襦裤。
现代文：十五日，真宗从擅州出发，特别寒冷，赐给道路旁百姓衣裤。
English: On the fifteenth day, Shinsong set out from Gansu, it was particularly cold, and gave clothes and trousers to the people on the roadside.

古文：乙未，契丹使丁振以誓书来。
现代文：十六日，契丹使臣丁振带来讲和誓书。
English: On the 16th, the Khitan envoy, Ding Zhen, came to deliver a speech and an oath.

古文：丁酉，契丹兵出塞。
现代文：十八日，契丹兵退回到塞外。
English: On the 18th, the Khitan soldiers retreated to outside the country.

古文：戊戌，至自澶州。
现代文：十九日，真宗回到京城。
English: On the 19th, Shinso returned to Kyoto.

古文：己亥，幸雍王元份宫视疾。
现代文：二十日，到雍王赵元份宫里探视病情。
English: On the 20th, he went to the palace of Yong Wang Zhao Yuanfen to visit the sick.

古文：辛丑，录契丹誓书颁河北、河东诸州。
现代文：二十二日，转录契丹誓书颁降到河北、河东各州。
English: On the 22nd, the transcription of the Qidan Oath was issued to the provinces of Hebei and Hedong.

古文：癸卯，遣使抚问河北东、西路官吏将卒，访察功状。
现代文：二十四日，派遣使臣抚问河北东西路官吏将卒，访问考察他们的治绩和功劳情况。
English: On the 24th, envoys were sent to inquire about the officials and soldiers of Hebei East-West Road, visit and inspect their performance and merits.

古文：甲辰，改威虏诸军名。
现代文：二十五日，改威虏各军名。
English: On the 25th, the names of the armies were changed.

古文：戊申，诏恤河北伤残。
现代文：二十九日，下诏抚恤河北伤残者。
English: On the 29th, the Hebei injured and disabled people will be given a stipend.

古文：是岁，交州、西凉府、西、高、丰、甘、沙州、占城、大食、蒲端、龟兹国来贡。
现代文：这一年，交州、西凉府、西州、高州、丰州、甘州、沙州、占城、大食、蒲端、龟兹来进贡。
English: This year, tributes came from Jiaozhou, Xiliangfu, Xizhou, Gaozhou, Fuzhou, Ganzhou, Shazhou, Zhancheng, Daxing, Putan and Kezi.

古文：江南东、西路饥，陕、滨、棣州蝗害稼，命使振之。
现代文：江南东西路饥荒，陕州、滨州、棣州蝗虫损害庄稼，命令使臣贩济。
English: Famine in the east and west of the Yangtze River, locusts damage crops in Shaanxi, Binzhou and Ganzhou, and the emperor orders his vassals to sell grain.

古文：二年春正月庚戌朔，以契丹讲和，大赦天下，非故斗杀、放火、强盗、伪造符印、犯赃官典、十恶至死者悉除之。
现代文：景德二年春正月初一，因契丹讲和，大赦天下，除故意斗杀、放火、强盗、伪造符印、贪赃枉法、十恶至死者外，其他囚犯都赦免。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of King Jingde's reign, peace was declared by Khitan, and the world was amnestied. All prisoners were pardoned, except for those who committed intentional homicide, arson, robbery, forgery of seals, corruption, and ten evils, including the dead.

古文：壬子，放河北诸州强壮归农，令有司市耕牛给之。
现代文：初三，河北各州强壮放归农业，命令有关部门买耕牛授给他们。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the states of Hebei released the strong into agriculture and ordered the relevant departments to buy and give them farm cattle.

古文：癸丑，罢诸路行营，合镇、定两路都部署为一。
现代文：初四，废罢各种行营，镇、定两路都部署合而为一。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, all the camps were abolished, and the towns and villages were merged into one.

古文：乙卯，罢北面部署、钤辖、都监、使臣二百九十余员。
现代文：初六，废罢北面部署、铃辖、都监、使臣二百九十多人。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, more than 290 people from the northern deployment, the bell jurisdiction, the city supervisor, and the envoy went on strike.

古文：振河北饥。
现代文：贩济河北饥民。
English: Traffickers help starving people in Hebei.

古文：遣监察御史朱抟赴德清军收瘗战没遗骸，致祭。
现代文：派遣监察御史朱传前往德清军收埋战死将士的尸骸，致祭。
English: Zhu Chuan, the inspector, was dispatched to the German-Qing army to bury the dead bodies of the dead soldiers and make a sacrifice.

古文：罢江、淮、荆、浙增榷酤钱。
现代文：废罢江、淮、荆、浙增加榷酣钱。
English: Wasted resources in Jiangsu, Huai, Jing and Zhejiang will increase the cost.

古文：丙辰，幸雍王元份宫视疾。
现代文：初七，到雍王赵元份宫探视病情。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he went to the Yong Wang Zhao Yuanfen Palace to visit the sick.

古文：甲子，诏淮南以上供军储振饥民。
现代文：十五日，下诏淮南用上供军储贩济饥民。
English: On the fifteenth day of the following month, Huainan used the surplus to feed the hungry.

古文：戊辰，以天平军节度使王超为崇信军节度。
现代文：十九日，任命天平军节度使王超为崇信军节度使。
English: On the 19th, Wang Chao, the commander of the Tianping Army, was appointed as the commander of the Chongxin Army.

古文：省河北戍兵十之五，缘边三之一。
现代文：裁减河北戍兵十分之五，沿边戍兵裁减三分之一。
English: The number of soldiers stationed in Hebei Province will be reduced by five-tenths, and those stationed along the border will be reduced by one-third.

古文：所在量军储馈给，勿调民飞輓。
现代文：各地视军储赠给，不得调民运输粮食。
English: All regions shall regard the military reserve as a gift, and shall not transfer people to transport grain.

古文：癸酉，幸李继隆第视疾。
现代文：二十四日，到李继隆家探视病情。
English: On the 24th, he went to Li Jilong's home to check on his condition.

古文：京西民转送军储者赐租十二。
现代文：京西百姓转运军储者免税租十分之二。
English: People in the western part of Beijing who transport and store military supplies are entitled to two-tenths of the tax-free rent.

古文：丁丑，诏河北转运使察官属不任职者以名闻。
现代文：二十八日，下诏河北转运使核察不称职的官属上报朝廷。
English: On the 28th, the Hebei Transportation Department ordered the inspection of incompetent officials to be reported to the Imperial Court.

古文：戊寅，取淮、楚间踏犁式颁之河朔。二月，嘉、邛州铸大铁钱。
现代文：二十九日，向河朔地区颁布淮、楚地区踏犁的样式。二月嘉州、邓州铸造大铁钱。
English: On the 29th, the Huai and Chu regions promulgated the pattern of stamping ingots to the Hexuo region. In February, Jiazhou and Dengzhou minted large iron coins.

古文：置霸州、安肃军榷场。
现代文：设置霸州、安肃军榷场。
English: Bozhou and Ansu are set as the battlegrounds.

古文：癸未，李继隆卒。
现代文：初五，李继隆去世。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Li Jilong passed away.

古文：甲申，定入粟实边授官等级。
现代文：初六，确定人粟实边授官等级。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, determine the official rank of the person.

古文：乙酉，遣使安抚交州。
现代文：初七，派遣使臣安抚交州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he dispatched envoys to pacify Goseong.

古文：甲午，诏缘边得契丹马牛，悉纵还之，没蕃汉口归业者，给资粮。
现代文：十六日，下诏边境人得到契丹马牛，全部放回；没蕃汉人归业者，供给资粮。
English: On the 16th, the next day, the border people got the Qidam horse and cattle, and all of them were put back; those who did not invite the Han people to return to work were supplied with grain.

古文：弛边民铁禁。
现代文：解除边民铁禁。
English: Lift the railway ban for border residents.

古文：环州言戎人入寇，击走之，俘其军主。
现代文：环州报告说戎人来侵犯，被打退，俘获其军主。
English: Huanzhou reported that the soldiers came to invade, were repulsed, and captured their commander.

古文：癸卯，遣太子中允孙仅等使契丹。
现代文：二十五日，派遣太子中允孙仅等出使契丹。
English: On the 25th, the prince's middle son, Yun Sun, was dispatched to dispatch the envoy to Khitan.

古文：丁未，吕蒙正对便殿。
现代文：二十九日，吕蒙正在便殿回答真宗的问题。
English: On the 29th, Lv Meng was answering questions about the True Sect in the hall.

古文：三月甲寅，御试礼部贡举人。
现代文：三月初六，御试礼部贡举人。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the year, the Tribute Club started to pay tribute.

古文：戊午，郑州防御使魏能坐归师不整，责授右羽林将军。
现代文：初十，郑州防御使魏能因归师不整，贬为右羽林将军。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the defense of Zhengzhou caused Wei Neng to be demoted to General Ulin due to his failure to return to his division.

古文：庚申，禁边民入外境掠夺。
现代文：十二日，禁止边民到境外掠夺。
English: On the 12th, the border residents were prohibited from going abroad to plunder.

古文：夏四月，赐进士李迪等琼林宴。
现代文：夏四月，赐进士李迪等宴饮琼林苑。
English: In the summer of April, Qiong Lin Yuan hosted a banquet for Li Di and other recruits.

古文：丁酉，枢密直学士刘师道责授忠武军行军司马，右正言、知制诰陈尧咨单州团练使，俱坐考试不公。
现代文：二十日，枢密直学士刘师道贬为忠武军行军司马，右正言、知制浩陈尧咨降为单州团练使，都因为主持考试时不公正。
English: On the 20th, Liu Shidao, a Privy Councilor, was demoted to the position of the marshal of the loyal army, and Yu Zhengyan and Hao Chen Rongzhi, both of them were demoted to the position of the single-state regimental drill sergeant, all because of the injustice of presiding over the examination.

古文：己亥，葺河北城池。
现代文：二十二日，修筑完善河北城池。
English: On the 22nd, the construction and improvement of the Hebei city pond was completed.

古文：癸卯，置资政殿学士，以王钦若为之。冯拯为参知政事。
现代文：二十六日，设置资政殿学士，任命王钦若担任，冯拯为参知政事。
English: On the 26th, he set up the Vice-President of the Academy of Sciences, and appointed Wang Qinruo as the Vice-President and Feng Zheng as the Vice-President.

古文：甲辰，以宁国军留后、驸马都尉吴元扆为武胜军节度。
现代文：二十七日，任命宁国军留后、驹马都尉吴元为武胜军节度使。
English: On the 27th, after the Ningguo Army stayed behind, Wu Yuan, the commander of the horse cavalry, was appointed as the festival envoy of the victorious army.

古文：戎人寇环州，击败之，执其酋庆，请戮之，诏释其罪，配淮南。
现代文：戎人攻打环州，被打退，俘获其首领耀多，请杀他，下诏免其罪，流放淮南。
English: The imperial army attacked Huanzhou, was repulsed, captured its leader Yao Duo, killed him, pardoned him, and exiled him to Huainan.

古文：五月戊申，幸国子监。
现代文：五月初一，到国子监。
English: On the first day of May, he was sent to the National Children's Supervisor.

古文：丁巳，司天少监史序上《乾元宝典》。
现代文：初十，司天少监史序呈上乾坤宝典。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the historical sequence of Shitenshōken was presented as a masterpiece.

古文：己未，幸元份宫视疾。
现代文：十二日，到赵元份宫探视病情。
English: On the 12th, he went to Zhao Yuanpeng's palace to check on his condition.

古文：庚申，御试河北举人。
现代文：十三日，亲自策试河北举人。
English: On the 13th, he personally tried to raise people from Hebei Province.

古文：丁卯，宴近臣于资政殿。饯种放游嵩山。
现代文：二十日，在资政殿宴饮近臣。为种放游篙山饯别。
English: On the 20th, he held a banquet for his close vassals at the Capital Governor's Palace.

古文：癸酉，诏天下榷利勿增羡为额。
现代文：二十六日，下诏天下榷场不得增收额外收人为定额。
English: On the 26th, it was decreed that the world's market should not increase the amount of extra income.

古文：六月丁丑，诏劝学。
现代文：六月初一，下诏劝学。
English: On the first day of June, he issued an edict to dissuade them from studying.

古文：幸诸王宫。
现代文：到诸王宫。
English: To the palaces of kings.

古文：己卯，命法直官用士人。
现代文：初三，命令法直官用士人。
English: On the third day of the new year, he ordered the magistrates to employ laymen.

古文：己丑，曹州民赵谏、赵谔以恐喝赃钜万伏诛。
现代文：十三日，曹州百姓赵谏、赵愕因恐吓贪赃巨万络钱被处死。
English: On the 13th, Caozhou citizens Zhao Yu and Zhao Appen were executed for intimidation and embezzlement of huge sums of money.

古文：辛卯，以赵德明归款，谕河西诸蕃各守疆界。
现代文：十五日，因赵德明纳款归顺，告谕河西各少数民族谨守疆界。
English: On the 15th, because of Zhao Deming's surrender, he ordered all ethnic minorities in Hexi to respect the border.

古文：高琼求板本经史，诏给之。
现代文：高琼请求板本经史，下诏给经史。
English: Gao Qiong asked for a copy of the textbook, and gave it to him.

古文：秋七月庚戌，刘质进《兵要论》，召试中书。
现代文：秋七月初四，刘质进献兵要你，召试中书。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Liu Qianjin called for you to be drafted into the army.

古文：甲子，诏复贤良方正能直言极谏等六科。
现代文：十八日，下诏恢复贤良方正能直言极谏等六科。
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued to restore six disciplines, including the virtuous virtue of being able to speak frankly.

古文：八月戊寅，雍王元份薨。
现代文：八月初二，雍王赵元份逝世。
English: On the second day of August, the Yong Wang Zhao Yuanren passed away.

古文：丙戊，有司上新定权衡法。
现代文：初十，有关部门呈上新定权衡法。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the relevant departments presented a new set of trade-offs.

古文：遣内臣奉安太祖圣容于扬州建隆寺。
现代文：派遣内臣恭敬安置太祖遗像于扬州建隆寺。
English: The vassal was dispatched to respectfully place the great-grandfather's relic in Yangzhou Jianlong Temple.

古文：丁亥，翰林学士晁迥先为郓王元份留守官属，坐辅导无状，责授右司郎中。
现代文：十一日，翰林学士晃迥原来是邪王赵元份任留守时的官属，因辅导没有成绩，贬降为右司郎中。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Hanlin Scholar Jiao Jiao, who was originally an official subordinate of the evil king Zhao Yuanren when he was away, was demoted to junior secretary of the Right Division due to his poor performance in tutoring.

古文：辛丑，幸南宫及恭孝太子宫。
现代文：二十五日，到南宫和恭孝太子宫。
English: On the 25th, they went to the Southern Palace and Prince Yasutaka's palace.

古文：有星孛于紫微。
现代文：彗星进人紫微垣。
English: The comet enters the purple micro hedge.

古文：九月丁未，以向敏中为鄜延路都部署。
现代文：九月初二，任命向敏中为延路都部署。
English: On the second day of September, Xiang Minzhong was appointed to be deployed to Yanlu.

古文：庚戌，淮南旱，诏转运使疏理系囚。
现代文：初五，淮南早灾，下诏转运使处理积滞狱案。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Huainan was hit by an early disaster.

古文：癸亥，三司上《新编敕》。
现代文：十八日，三司呈上渐编初。
English: On the 18th, the three departments submitted to the Supreme People's Procuratorate.

古文：群臣三表上尊号，不允。
现代文：大臣三次上表上尊号，真宗都没同意。
English: The minister presented the honorific title three times, but Shinshu did not agree.

古文：庚午，幸兴国寺传法院观新译经。
现代文：二十五日，到相国寺传法院观看新译经。
English: On the 25th, they went to Shokoku-ji Temple to see the newly translated sutras.

古文：辛未，命近臣虑开封府系囚。
现代文：二十六日，命令近臣讯问记录开封府囚犯罪状。
English: On the 26th, he ordered his close vassals to interrogate and record the criminal status of the prisoners in Kaifeng.

古文：壬申，诏荆湖溪峒民为蛮人所掠而归者，勿限年月，给还旧产。
现代文：二十七日，下诏：荆湖溪酮百姓为蛮人所掠而归者，不限年月，还给旧产。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued: The people of Jinghu Creek Ketone, who were captured by the barbarians and returned, will be returned to the old property for an unlimited number of years.

古文：冬十月庚辰，丁谓上《景德农田编敕》。
现代文：冬十月初五，丁谓呈现上景德农田编初。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of October in winter, Ding Zuo presented the first edition of Shangjingde Farmland.

古文：乙酉，毕士安薨。
现代文：初十，毕士安去世。
English: At the age of ten, Beasley died.

古文：丙戌，遣职方郎中韩国华等使契丹。
现代文：十一日，派遣职方郎中韩国华等出使契丹。
English: On the 11th day of the month, officials from China, South Korea and other countries sent envoys to Khitan.

古文：十一月戊申，诏翰林侍讲学士邢昺等举堪为学官者十人。
现代文：十一月初四，下诏翰林侍讲学士邢簌等推举可以担任学官者十人。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the following ten people who can serve as academicians will be elected.

古文：丙辰，享太庙。
现代文：十二日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, a festival is held at the Imperial Palace.

古文：丁巳，祀天地于圜丘，大赦。庚申，大宴含光殿。
现代文：十三日，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦。十六日，大宴含光殿。
English: On the 13th, the heavens and earth will be sacrificed at the round mound, and there will be a general amnesty. On the 16th, a grand banquet will be held at the Hall of Light.

古文：癸亥，寇准加中书侍郎兼工部尚书，楚王元佐为右卫上将军，彭城郡王元偓进封宁王，安定郡王元称进封舒王，曹国公元俨进封广陵郡王，安定郡公惟吉加同平章事。
现代文：十九日，寇准加中书侍郎兼工部尚书，楚王赵元佐为右卫上将军，彭城郡王赵元握进封为宁王，安定郡王赵元翱进封为舒王，曹国公赵元俨进封为广陵郡王，安定郡公赵惟吉加同平章事。
English: On the 19th, Guo Junjian was promoted to the position of the attendant of the Central Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of

古文：癸酉，契丹使来贺承天节。
现代文：二十九日，契丹使臣来祝贺承天节。
English: On the 29th, Khitan envoys came to congratulate the Jomtien Festival.

古文：十二月辛巳，置资政殿大学士，以王钦若为之。
现代文：十二月初七，设置资政殿大学士，任命王钦若担任。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, the post of Senior Scholar of the Presidential Palace was established, and Wang Qinruo was appointed to the post.

古文：癸未，以高琼为忠武军节度，葛霸为昭德军节度。
现代文：初九，任命高琼为忠武军节度使，葛霸为昭德军节度使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Gao Qiong was appointed as the commander of the loyal troops, and Ge Ba was appointed as the commander of the Shao Te Army.

古文：对京畿父老于长春殿，赐帛有差。
现代文：京瓷父老在长春殿接受真宗召对，赐帛不等。
English: Kyocera's founder received the true religious vocation at the Chosun-den, and was given a number of titles.

古文：契丹遣使贺明年正旦。
现代文：契丹派遣使臣来祝贺明年新春。
English: Khitan sends envoys to congratulate next year's new spring.

古文：是岁，夏州、西凉府、邛部川蛮来贡。
现代文：这一年，夏州、西凉府、邓部川蛮来进贡。
English: In this year, Xiazhou, Xiliangfu and Dengbechuan were the first to pay tribute.

古文：淮南、两浙、荆湖北路饥，京东蝻生，闽飓风不害稼，遣使分振。
现代文：淮南、两浙、荆湖北路饥荒，京东出现幼蝗虫，闽刮起咫风但没有损害庄稼，派遣使臣分别前往贩济。
English: Famine in Huainan, the two Zhejiang Provinces, and North Jinghu Road, locusts appeared in Jingdong, and hailstorms blew but did not damage crops. Envoys were dispatched to sell grain.

古文：三年春正月丁巳，亲释逋负系囚。
现代文：景德三年春正月十四日，亲自释放在押囚犯和拖欠钱物。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Jingde, he personally released the prisoners and the arrears of money and goods.

古文：振畿县贫民，收瘗遗骸。
现代文：贩济瓷县贫民，收埋遗骸。
English: The trafficker helped the poor in the porcelain county and buried the remains.

古文：丁卯，诏缘边归业民给复三年。
现代文：二十四日，下诏免除沿边归业农民三年赋役。
English: On the 24th, the next edict exempted the returning farmers along the border from three years of forced labor.

古文：辛未，置常平仓。
现代文：二十八日，设置常平仓。
English: On the 28th, the regular closing of warehouses was set up.

古文：二月甲戌，幸北宅省德恭疾。
现代文：二月初一，到北宅看望患病的赵德恭。
English: On the first day of February, I went to the North House to visit Zhao Deqong, who was ill.

古文：乙亥，诏京东西、淮南、河北振乏食客户。
现代文：初二，下诏京东西、淮南、河北贩济贫乏客户。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, vendors in the eastern and western parts of Beijing, Huainan and Hebei Province will help poor customers.

古文：己卯，谒明德皇后攒宫，赐守奉人缗帛。
现代文：初六，朝拜明德皇后殡宫，赐给守奉人络帛。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, in the morning, he visited Empress Mingde's Funeral Palace and bestowed the title of "Guardian Servant."

古文：甲申，禁民开近陵域地。
现代文：十一日，禁止百姓开辟皇陵附近地方。
English: On the 11th, the people were prohibited from opening up areas near the imperial mausoleum.

古文：以宋州为应天府。
现代文：以宋州为应天府。
English: Songzhou is the capital of Yingtian.

古文：丁亥，王继英卒。
现代文：十四日，王继英去世。
English: On the 14th, Wang Jieying passed away.

古文：戊戌，以中书侍郎兼工部尚书、平章事寇准为刑部尚书，左丞、参知政事王旦为工部尚书、平章事。
现代文：二十五日，任命中书侍郎、兼工部尚书、平章事寇准为刑部尚书，左承、参知政事王旦为工部尚书、平章事。
English: On the 25th, he appointed Zhongshu's chamberlain, concurrently the secretary of the Ministry of Works and the secretary of the Ministry of Justice as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice, and Wang Dan, the left successor and the assistant to the governor, as the secretary of the Ministry of Works and the secretary of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：己亥，王钦若、陈尧叟并知枢密院事。
现代文：二十六日，王钦若、陈尧雯并为知枢密院事。
English: On the 26th, Wang Qinruo and Chen Yuwen were appointed to the Privy Council.

古文：翰林学士赵安仁参知政事。
现代文：翰林学士赵安仁为参知政事。
English: Zhao Anren, a scholar of Hanlin, is a member of the Council of State.

古文：枢密都承旨韩崇训、马知节并签署枢密院事。
现代文：枢密都承旨韩崇训、马知节为签署枢密院事。
English: Han Chongxun and Ma Ji Jie are the first to sign the Privy Council.

古文：三月乙巳，客星出东南。
现代文：三月初三，客星出现在东南方向。
English: On the third day of March, a guest star appeared in the southeast direction.

古文：辛亥，免随州光化民贷粮。
现代文：初九，免除随州和光化百姓贷粮。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, the people of Suizhou and Guanghua were exempted from grain loans.

古文：己未，诏儆谏臣悉心献替。
现代文：下诏告诫谏臣要忠于职守，净言进谏。
English: The following edict admonished the courtiers to be loyal to their duties and keep their word.

古文：夏四月癸酉，幸秦国长公主第。
现代文：夏四月初二，到秦国长公主家。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of summer, I went to the home of the First Princess of Qin.

古文：丙子，幸开宝寺，遂幸御龙直班院，观教阅弓刀。
现代文：初五，到开宝寺，于是到御龙直班院，观赏教阅弓刀。
English: In the fifth year of junior high school, he went to Kaiboji Temple, and then to Goryonchoban Academy to watch and teach the reading of bows and swords.

古文：又幸左骐骥院，赐从官马、群牧使等器币。
现代文：又到左琪骥院，赐给从官马匹、群牧使等器币。
English: He also went to Zuoqianyuan to give votive coins to officials, horses, herdsmen and others.

古文：还，幸崇文院观图籍，赐编修官金帛有差。
现代文：回来时到崇文院观赏书籍，赐给编修官金帛不等。
English: When he came back, he went to the Chongwen Academy to look at the books, and gave the editor-in-chief a lot of money.

古文：己卯，置清平、宣化二军。
现代文：初八，设置清平、宣化二军。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the two armies of Qingping and Xuanhua were established.

古文：乙酉，置河北缘边安抚使、副、都监于雄州。
现代文：十四日，在雄州设置河北缘边安抚使副、都监。
English: On the 14th, the deputy of the Hebei border pacification envoy and the metropolitan supervisor were set up in Xiongzhou.

古文：壬辰，命使巡抚益、利、梓、夔、福建诸路，决狱及犒设将吏、父老。
现代文：二十一日，命令使臣巡视安抚益、利、梓、夔、福建各路，处理狱案，搞劳将吏和父老。
English: On the twenty-first day, he ordered the envoys to inspect all roads in Fujian, including Anpu, Yixi, Lixi, Zi, Handan and Fujian, to deal with prison cases, and to engage labor officers and parents.

古文：乙未，种放赐告归终南山。
现代文：二十四日，种放被赐告回终南山。
English: On the 24th, the seed release was announced back to Nanshan.

古文：己亥，遣使巡抚江、浙路。
现代文：二十八日，派遣使臣巡视安抚江、浙路。
English: On the 28th, envoys were dispatched to inspect the areas along the Anzu River and Zhejiang Road.

古文：五月壬寅，日当食不亏。
现代文：五月初一，日食，没有出现亏缺现象。
English: On the first day of May, the solar eclipse, there was no shortage.

古文：周伯星见。
现代文：周伯星出现。
English: Zhou Bo Xing appeared.

古文：辛亥，置京东五路巡检。
现代文：初十，设置京东五路巡检。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, a five-way inspection of JD.com was set up.

古文：丁巳，幸北宅视德恭疾。
现代文：十六日，到北宅探视赵德恭病情。
English: On the 16th, he went to the North House to visit Zhao Degyang's illness.

古文：己未，德恭卒。
现代文：十八日，德恭去世。
English: On the 18th, Degyong passed away.

古文：西凉府厮铎督部落多疾，赐以药物。
现代文：西凉府厮铎督部落多疾病，赐给药物。
English: West Liangfu Yidu Tribe has a lot of diseases, so they are given medicine.

古文：渭川妙娥族三千余帐内附。
现代文：渭州妙娥族三千多帐内附朝廷。
English: More than three thousand accounts of Zhangzhou Myo'e people were attached to the imperial court.

古文：复置高州。
现代文：重新设置高州。
English: Reset the high state.

古文：六月丙子，群臣固请听乐，从之。
现代文：六月初六，大臣坚决请求听乐，真宗答应。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, the minister firmly requested to listen to music, and Shinso agreed.

古文：诏三班考较使臣以七年为限。
现代文：下诏三班考核使臣以七年为限。
English: According to the following edict, the examination of the three classes of envoys is limited to seven years.

古文：知广州凌策请发兵定交止乱，帝以黎桓素修职贡，不欲伐丧，命遵前诏安抚。
现代文：广州知州凌策请求出兵攻讨交趾叛乱，真宗因黎桓历来与朝廷修好进贡，不想讨伐它，命令遵照前诏进行安抚。
English: Guangzhou, Zhizhou, Lingze requested to send troops to attack the rebellion in Jiaozuo. Since Li Huan had always paid tribute to the imperial court and did not want to fight against it, the True Sect ordered to pacify it in accordance with the previous edict.

古文：戊寅，罢两川税课金二分。
现代文：初八，罢除两川税课金二分。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, the two-river tax levy of two cents will be abolished.

古文：乙未，汴水暴涨，赐役兵钱。
现代文：二十五日，汁水暴涨，赐给役兵钱。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the juice and water soared, and money was given to the soldiers.

古文：丙申，遣使振应天府水灾及瘗溺死者。
现代文：二十六日，派遣使臣贩济应天府水灾灾民和淹死者。
English: On the 26th, envoys and merchants were sent to Tianfu to help the flood victims and the drowned.

古文：秋七月壬寅，减鄜延戍兵。
现代文：秋七月初二，裁减延戍兵。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, the reduction of Yancheng soldiers began.

古文：乙巳，太白昼见。
现代文：初五，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：庚戌，诏渭州、镇戎军收获蕃部牛送给内地耕民。
现代文：初十，下诏渭州、镇戎军收获蕃部牛送给内地耕民。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, under the command of Bozhou, the town's military force harvested and sent the cow to the mainland farmers.

古文：壬子，赐广南《圣惠方》，岁给钱五万，市药疗病者。
现代文：十二日，赐给广南怪惠办，每年供给钱五万，用来购买药品治疗疾病。
English: On the 12th, it was given to the Guangnan Strange and Favourable Office to provide 50,000 yuan per year to purchase drugs to treat diseases.

古文：邵晔上邕州至交阯水陆路及控制宜州山川等图，帝曰： 祖宗辟土广大，唯当慎守，不必贪无用地，苦劳兵力。 
现代文：邵哗呈上琶州至交趾水陆路和控制宜州山川等地图，真宗说： 祖宗拓土广大，唯当慎守，不应该贪图无用之地，劳苦兵力。 
English: Shao Wula presented a map of the land route from Shangwazhou to Jiaozuo and the control of the mountains and rivers in Yizhou. Shensong said: The ancestors expanded the land, but they should be cautious. They should not covet useless land and labor.

古文：甲子，大宴含光殿，始用乐。
现代文：二十四日，大宴含光殿，开始用乐。
English: On the 24th, the grand banquet was held in the Hall of Light, and the music began.

古文：丙寅，大风，遣中使视稼。
现代文：二十六日，刮大风，派遣中使视察庄稼。
English: On the 26th, a strong wind blew and the envoy was sent to inspect the crops.

古文：八月甲戌，阅太常新集雅乐。
现代文：八月初四，阅视太常新集雅乐。
English: On the fourth day of the eighth lunar month, the Taizhang New Collection of Classical Music was read aloud.

古文：丁丑，幸宝相院。
现代文：初七，到宝相院。
English: On the seventh day of junior high school, I went to Hosoin.

古文：戊寅，诏川峡戍兵二年者代之。
现代文：初八，下诏川峡戍兵二年一换。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the soldiers of the Lower Zhao River Gorge were changed every two years.

古文：庚辰，工部侍郎董俨坐躁竞倾狡，责授山南东道行军司马。
现代文：初十，工部侍郎董俨因躁竞倾狡，贬降为山南东道行军司马。
English: In his early 20s, Dong Hao, a waiter at the Ministry of Industry, was demoted to the rank of Sima, the host of the march in Shannan, because of his impatience and cunning.

古文：九月甲寅，宴射含芳园。
现代文：九月十五日，在含芳园设宴射箭。
English: On September 15, a banquet was held in Ganfangyuan for archery.

古文：丙辰，御试贤良方正直言极谏科。
现代文：十七日，亲自策试贤良方正直言极谏科。
English: On the 17th, he personally tested the virtuous side of honesty.

古文：壬戌，幸元偓宫视疾。
现代文：二十三日，到赵元握宫第探视病情。
English: On the 23rd, he went to Zhao Yuanjigong Palace to visit the sick.

古文：甲子，置诸陵斋宫。
现代文：二十五日，设置各陵斋宫。
English: On the 25th, the mausoleums were set up.

古文：乙丑，放西州纳质人。
现代文：二十六日，释放西州纳质人。
English: On the 26th, the Naxi people of Xizhou were released.

古文：夏州赵德明奉表归款。
现代文：夏州赵德明奉表归顺朝廷。
English: Xiazhou Zhao Deming submitted to the imperial court.

古文：冬十月庚午，以赵德明为定难军节度兼侍中，封西平王。
现代文：冬十月初一，任命赵德明为定难军节度使兼侍中，封为西平王。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Zhao Deming was appointed as the commander of the Dingan Army and was named the King of Xiping.

古文：甲午，两浙转运使姚铉坐不法除名，为连州文学。
现代文：二十五日，两浙转运使姚铰因不法行为被除名，贬为连州文学。
English: On the 25th, the two Zhejiang transshipments caused Yao Wei to be removed from the list due to illegal behavior and downgraded to Lianzhou Literature.

古文：丁酉，葬明德皇后。
现代文：二十八日，葬明德皇后。
English: On the 28th, Empress Mingde was buried.

古文：十一月壬寅，周伯星再见。
现代文：十一月初三，周伯星再次出现。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, Zhou Bo Xing reappeared.

古文：十二月癸酉，太白昼见。
现代文：十二月初五，太白星白天出现。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：戊寅，高琼卒。
现代文：初十，高琼去世。
English: In her early teens, Gao Qiong passed away.

古文：乙酉，狩近郊，以亲获兔付有司荐庙。
现代文：十七日，在近郊狩猎，用亲自猎获的兔付给有关部门当作祭品进献庙庭。
English: On the seventeenth day, he hunted in the suburbs and used the rabbit he personally hunted to pay the relevant departments as an offering to the temple garden.

古文：戊子，诏牛羊司畜有孳乳者放牧勿杀。
现代文：二十日，下诏牛羊司畜有孽乳者放牧勿杀。
English: On the 20th, it was decreed that cattle and sheep should not be killed for grazing.

古文：辛卯，朝陵，缘路禁乐。
现代文：二十三日，朝拜陵墓，沿路禁止用乐。
English: On the 23rd, they paid their respects at the mausoleum. Music was banned along the route.

古文：壬辰，幸秦国长公主第，又幸北宅视德钧疾。
现代文：二十四日，到秦国长公主家，又到北宅探视赵德钧病情。
English: On the 24th, he went to the home of the First Princess of Qin, and then to the North House to visit Zhao Deyu's illness.

古文：是岁，西凉府龛谷十族、高溪州、风琶溪洞诸蛮酋来贡。
现代文：这一年，西凉府完谷十族和高州、溪州、风琶溪洞各蛮酋长来进贡。
English: In this year, the Xiliangfu Wanggu Ten Tribes and the barbarian chiefs of Gaozhou, Xizhou and Fengwa Xidong came to pay tribute.

古文：京东西、河北、陕西饥，振之。
现代文：京东西、河北、陕西饥荒，贩济饥民。
English: Famine in eastern and western Beijing, Hebei and Shaanxi, and the sale of food to the starving.

古文：博州蝝，不为灾。
现代文：博州出现没生翅的蝗虫，没有造成灾害。
English: The appearance of wingless locusts in Bozhou did not cause any disasters.

古文：四年春正月己亥朔，御朝元殿受朝。
现代文：景德四年春正月初一，到朝元殿接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of King Jingde's reign, he went to the Imperial Palace to receive morning greetings.

古文：诏京畿系囚流以下减一等。
现代文：下诏：京瓷关押囚犯流刑以下减一等。
English: The following edict: Kyocera prisoners sentenced to exile or less will be reduced by one rank.

古文：甲辰，以陈尧叟为东京留守。
现代文：初六，任命陈尧雯为东京留守。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Chen Yuwen was appointed to stay in Tokyo.

古文：德钧卒。
现代文：赵德钧去世。
English: Zhao Deyu passed away.

古文：乙巳，契丹使辞归国。
现代文：初七，契丹使臣告辞归国。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Khitan envoys left for home.

古文：以丁谓为随驾三司使。
现代文：任命丁谓为随驾三司使。
English: Ding Zhe was appointed as the accompanying three envoys.

古文：己未，车驾发京师。
现代文：二十一日，真宗一行从京城出发。
English: On the 21st, Shinso and his party set out from Kyoto.

古文：庚申，次中牟县，除逋负，释系囚，赐父老衣币，所过如之。
现代文：二十二日，到达中牟县，免除拖欠钱物，释放关押罪人，赐给父老衣币，所经过之处都如此。
English: On the 22nd, he arrived in Zhongmou County, waived the arrears of money and goods, released the imprisoned criminals, and gave his father clothing money. This was the case everywhere he passed.

古文：王显卒。
现代文：已面去世。
English: He has since passed away.

古文：丙寅，次永安镇。
现代文：二十八日，到达永安镇。
English: On the 28th, they arrived at Yongan Town.

古文：丁卯，帝素服诣诸陵。
现代文：二十九日，真宗穿素服到诸陵。
English: On the 29th, Shinshong wore plain clothes to the tombs.

古文：减西京及诸路系囚罪，如己亥诏。
现代文：减轻西京及各路关押囚犯，如初一所下诏令。
English: Ease the confinement of prisoners in West Beijing and other areas, as decreed in the first imperial edict.

古文：置永安县及三陵副使、都监。
现代文：设置永安县和三陵副使都监。
English: Yong'an County and Sanling Deputy Commissioner were set up.

古文：二月己巳，幸西京，经汉将军纪信冢、司徒鲁恭庙，赠信太尉、恭太师。
现代文：二月初二，到西京，经过汉朝将军纪信家和司徒鲁恭庙，分别赠给他们太尉和太师职衔。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, he went to Xijing, passed the Han Dynasty generals Jixin and Stulugong, and gave them the titles of lieutenant and teacher respectively.

古文：命吏部尚书张齐贤祭周六庙。
现代文：命令吏部尚书张齐贤祭祀后周六庙。
English: After ordering the cadres to sacrifice Zhang Qixian, they went to the Saturday Temple.

古文：诏从官先茔在洛者赐告祭拜。
现代文：下诏随从官员先祖坟墓在洛阳者允许祭祀朝拜。
English: Under the edict, those who follow the tomb of officials' ancestors in Luoyang are allowed to worship.

古文：癸酉，诏西京建太祖神御殿。
现代文：初六，下诏西京建太祖神御殿。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 1st year of his junior high school, he issued an edict to build the Taizoshin Palace in Nishikyo.

古文：置国子监、武成王庙。
现代文：设置国子监、武成王庙。
English: A provincial overseer was set up, and the King Wucheng Temple was built.

古文：甲戌，幸上清宫。
现代文：初七，到上清宫。
English: On the seventh day of junior high school, I went to the Upper Qing Palace.

古文：诏赐酺三日。
现代文：下诏赐酣三天。
English: The following edict decreed three days of mourning.

古文：辛巳，录唐白居易孙利用为河南府助教。
现代文：十四日，录用唐朝白居易子孙，利用为河南府助教。
English: On the 14th, the descendants of Tang Dynasty Bai Juyi were hired as teaching assistants in Henan Province.

古文：壬午，幸吕蒙正第。
现代文：十五日，到吕蒙正府第。
English: On the 15th, he went to Liumeng Zhengfu.

古文：甲申，御五凤楼观酺，召父老五百人，赐饮楼下。
现代文：十七日，到五凤楼观赏聚饮，召父老五百人，在楼下赐饮。
English: On the seventeenth day, they went to Wu Feng Lou to watch the drinking party, and invited five hundred old men and women to give them drinks downstairs.

古文：丁亥，幸元偓宫。
现代文：二十日，到赵元握宫。
English: On the 20th, he went to Zhao Yuan's palace.

古文：戊子，葺周六庙。加号列子。
现代文：二十一日，整修后周六庙，加号列子。
English: On the twenty-first day, after the renovation, the Saturday temple, plus a row of children.

古文：增封唐孝子潘良瑗及其子季通墓，仍禁樵采。
现代文：增封唐孝子潘良缓及其子季通墓，并且禁止打柴。
English: Tang's son and heir, Pan Liang, was given an additional title, his son's tomb was eased, and he was forbidden to collect firewood.

古文：庚寅，诏河南府置五代汉高祖庙。
现代文：二十三日，下诏河南府设置五代汉高祖庙。
English: On the 23rd, Henan Province announced the establishment of a five-generation ancestral temple of the Han Dynasty.

古文：辛卯，车驾发西京。
现代文：二十四日，真宗一行从西京出发。
English: On the 24th, Shinso and his party set out from Saikyo.

古文：甲午，次郑州，遣使祀中岳及周嵩、懿二陵。
现代文：二十七日，到达郑州，派遣使臣祀祠中岳和周朝篙、靓二陵。
English: On the 27th, he arrived in Zhengzhou and dispatched envoys to Zhongyue Shrine and the two mausoleums of Zhou Dynasty.

古文：丁酉，赐隐士杨璞缯帛。
现代文：三十日，赐给隐士杨璞增帛。
English: On the thirtieth day, the hermit Yang Xizeng was given a lot of money.

古文：三月己亥，至自西京。
现代文：三月初二，从西京回到朝廷。
English: On the second day of March, he returned to the Imperial Court from Saikyo.

古文：甲辰，谒启圣院太宗神御殿。
现代文：初七，朝拜启圣院太宗神御殿。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the school year, the morning worship at the Imperial Palace of Emperor Taizong began.

古文：癸丑，赵德明遣使来谢廪给，因贡驼马，优赐答之。
现代文：十六日，赵德明派人来感谢朝廷的恩赏，于是进贡驼马，优加赏赐作为报答。
English: On the 16th, Zhao Deming sent someone to thank the imperial court for the reward, so the tribute camel was brought in, and the reward was added as a reward.

古文：丁巳，诏天下收瘗遗骸，致祭。
现代文：二十日，下诏全国收埋尸骨，予以祭奠。
English: On the 20th, it was decided to bury the bones across the country and pay tribute to them.

古文：庚申，蠲河南府仓库吏逋负刍粮缗帛四十五万。
现代文：二十三日，免除河南府仓库吏拖欠草粮络帛四十五万。
English: On the 23rd, the warehouse officials of Henan Province were exempted from the arrears of grass grain of 450,000 yuan.

古文：夏四月癸酉，诏岭南官除赴以时，以避炎瘴。
现代文：夏四月初七，下诏岭南官按时授给赴任，以避炎瘴。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, the next Lingnan official was assigned to the post on time to avoid the flames.

古文：辛巳，皇后郭氏崩。
现代文：十五日，皇后郭氏逝世。
English: On the 15th, Empress Guo passed away.

古文：甲午，诏榷酤不得增课。
现代文：二十八日，下诏榷酣不得增加课税。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: no increase in taxation.

古文：五月丙申朔，日有食之。辛亥，有司上大行皇后谥曰庄穆。
现代文：五月初一，日食。十六日，有关部门敬上皇后溢号为庄穆。
English: On the first day of May, there was a solar eclipse. On the 16th, the relevant departments paid their respects to the empress and gave her the posthumous title of Shomu.

古文：减并、代戍兵屯河东，以省馈运。
现代文：减少并州、代州戍兵，驻屯河东，用来减少运送粮草。
English: The number of soldiers stationed in He Dong was reduced, which was used to reduce the transportation of grain and grass.

古文：戊午，幸元偁宫视疾。
现代文：二十三日，到赵元翱宫探病。
English: On the 23rd, he went to Zhao Yuancheng's palace to check on his health.

古文：兖州增二千户守孔子坟。
现代文：充州增加二千户守孔子坟。
English: The number of Confucius cemeteries in Chongzhou has increased by 2,000.

古文：闰月戊辰，减剑、陇等三十九州军岁贡物，夔、贺等二十七州军悉罢之。
现代文：闰五月初三，减少剑州、陇州等三十九州军每年贡物，夔州、贺州等二十七州军全部废除。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, the annual tribute of the thirty-nine state armies such as Jianzhou and Zhangzhou was reduced, and the twenty-seven state armies such as Zhangzhou and Hezhou were all abolished.

古文：己巳，幸秦国长公主第省疾。
现代文：初四，到秦国长公主家探病。
English: On the fourth day of his junior year, he went to the home of the first princess of Qin to check on her.

古文：壬申，御试制科举人。
现代文：初七，亲自策试制科举人。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, I personally set up a trial system for selecting students.

古文：丙戌，诏张齐贤等各举供奉官、侍禁、殿直有谋略武干知边事者二人。
现代文：二十一日，下诏张齐贤等分别推举供奉官、侍禁、殿直有谋略知晓边事者二人。
English: On the 21st, Zhang Qixian and others issued the following edict to separately nominate two persons to serve as officials, attendants, and palace officials who had knowledge of the situation.

古文：癸巳，诏开封府断狱，虽被旨，仍覆奏。
现代文：二十八日，下诏：开封府断决狱案，即使得到圣旨仍要上奏复核。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: Even if the imperial edict is issued, the Kaifeng government should still submit the case to the emperor for reconsideration.

古文：六月，盛暑，减京城役工日课之半。
现代文：六月，盛暑，减京城役工每天工作量的一半。
English: In June, when the heat is at its peak, the daily workload of the city's public servants is reduced by half.

古文：丁未，令翰林讲读、枢密直学士各举常参官一人充御史。
现代文：十三日，命令翰林讲读、枢密直学士各自推举常参官一人担任御史。
English: On the thirteenth day, Hanlin was ordered to lecture, and the Privy Direct Bachelors were each to nominate one regular staff officer to serve as the imperial historian.

古文：司天监言五星聚而伏于鹑火。
现代文：司天监报告说五大行星聚在鹑火，不久消失。
English: The chief astronomer reported that the five planets gathered in a bonfire and soon disappeared.

古文：乙卯，葬庄穆皇后。
现代文：二十一日，葬庄穆皇后。
English: On the 21st, the funeral of Empress Zhuangmu began.

古文：秋七月丁卯，庄穆皇后祔别庙。
现代文：秋七月初三，庄穆皇后附祭别庙。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, the Zhuangmu Empress's memorial service will be held at another temple.

古文：庚午，置灵台令。
现代文：初六，设置灵台令。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, a memorial service was held.

古文：壬申，增置开封府判官、推官各一员。
现代文：初八，增置开封府判官、推官各一人。
English: On the first day of the eighth month, one judge and one magistrate from Kaifeng were added.

古文：甲戌，宜州兵乱，军校陈进杀知州刘永规等，劫判官卢成均为首。
现代文：初十，宜州士兵叛乱，军校陈进杀知州刘永规等，劫夺判官卢成均为首。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Yizhou soldiers rebelled, the military school Chen Jin killed Liu Yongbin of Chizhou, and the judge Lu Cheng was robbed.

古文：诏阁门使曹利用等讨之。
现代文：下诏阎门使曹利用等攻讨。
English: In the following, Yanmen sent Cao to use and discuss.

古文：乙亥，交州来贡，赐黎龙廷《九经》及佛氏书。
现代文：十一日，交州来进贡，赐给黎龙廷仇经和佛教书籍。
English: On the 11th day, Jiaozhou came to pay tribute, and gave Lirongting the Vengeance Sutra and Buddhist books.

古文：辛巳，以龙廷为静海军节度、交阯郡王，赐名至忠。
现代文：十七日，任命黎龙廷为静海军节度使、交趾郡王，赐名至忠。
English: On the 17th, Li Longting was appointed as the naval envoy of Jing and the king of Jiaozi County, and was given the name Zhizhong.

古文：癸巳，复置诸路提点刑狱。
现代文：二十九日，重新设置各路提点刑狱。
English: On the 29th, each road was re-established as a penal colony.

古文：八月壬寅，幸大相国寺，遂幸崇文院观书，赐修书官器币。
现代文：八月初九，到大相国寺，于是到崇文院阅览书籍，赐给修书官器币。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, he went to Daxianguo Temple, and then went to Chongwen Academy to read books and give money to the librarian.

古文：又幸内藏库。
现代文：又到内藏库。
English: I went to the inner repository again.

古文：丁未，中书门下言庄穆皇后祥除已久，秋宴请举乐，不允。
现代文：十四日，中书门下说庄穆皇后样除已久，秋宴请求用乐，没有答应。
English: On the 14th, Zhongshu said that it had been a long time since Empress Zhuangmu had been here, and asked for music for the autumn banquet, but they did not agree.

古文：己酉，颁宜州立功将士赏格。
现代文：十六日，颁发宜州立功将士奖赏标准。
English: On the 16th, the award standard for the meritorious soldiers of Yizhou Province was issued.

古文：益州地震。
现代文：益州发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Yishu.

古文：辛亥，赐文宣王四十六世孙圣佑同学究出身。
现代文：十八日，赐给文宣王四十六世孙孔圣佑同学究出身。
English: On the 18th, it was given to the 46th Sun Kong Shengyu, the grandson of King Mun Xuan.

古文：壬子，邢昺加工部尚书。
现代文：十九日，邢簌加官工部尚书。
English: On the 19th, the official of the Ministry of Industry and Trade of the People's Republic of China was appointed.

古文：中书门下再表请秋宴听乐，又不允。
现代文：中书门下再次上表请求秋宴用乐，又没答应。
English: Zhongshu once again asked the table for autumn banquet music, but they did not agree.

古文：丙辰，泾原路言瓦亭砦地震。
现代文：二十三日，径源路报告说瓦亭寨发生地震。
English: On the 23rd, Jianyuan Road reported that there was an earthquake in Watting Village.

古文：丁巳，诏王旦、杨亿等修太祖、太宗史。
现代文：二十四日，下诏王旦、杨亿等修撰太祖、太宗史。
English: On the 24th, Wang Tan and Yang Yi wrote the history of Taizu and Taizong.

古文：置龙图阁直学士，以右谏议大夫杜镐为之。
现代文：设置龙图阁直学士，任命右谏议大夫杜镐担任。
English: He set up the Longtu Pavilion for the direct bachelor, and appointed the right-hand doctor Du Xuan to serve.

古文：丁谓上《景德会计录》。
现代文：丁谓呈上景德会计录。
English: Ding Zuo presented the record of Jingdezhen.

古文：九月己巳，赐交阯郡王印及安南旌节。
现代文：九月初六，赐给交趾郡王印和安南族节。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th lunar month, the Wangyin and Annan Nationalities Festival was held in Jiaozi County.

古文：壬申，赐畿县《圣惠方》。丁亥，幸舒王宫视疾。
现代文：初九，赐给瓷县怪惠办。二十四日，到舒王宫探病。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, he was given the title of "Ceramic County Weird Favors Official." On the 24th day, he went to the Shuwang Palace to check on his health.

古文：辛卯，赐监修国史王旦宴。
现代文：二十八日，赐给监修国史王旦宴。
English: On the 28th, a banquet was given to Wang Dan, the superintendent of national history.

古文：壬辰，日上有五色云。
现代文：二十九日，太阳上出现五色云。
English: On the 29th, five-colored clouds appeared on the sun.

古文：冬十月甲午朔，日当食，云阴不见。
现代文：冬十月初一，应当有日食出现，因阴云密布没有显现。
English: On the first day of October in winter, there should have been a solar eclipse, but it did not appear because of the thick overcast.

古文：曹利用破贼于象州，擒卢成均，斩陈进。
现代文：曹利用在象州攻破盗贼，俘获卢成均，斩杀陈进。
English: Cao Rui defeated the thieves in Xiangzhou, captured Lu Chengjun, and killed Chen Jin.

古文：优赐将士，利用等进秩、赐物有差。
现代文：优赐将士，曹利用等升官赐物不等。
English: The gifts of promotion, such as the bestowal of generals and the use of Cao, vary.

古文：乙巳，颁考试进士新格。
现代文：十二日，颁布考试进士新标准。
English: On the 12th, the new standards for entrance examinations were promulgated.

古文：祠祭置监祭使二员，以御史充。
现代文：祠祭设置祭使二员，任命御史担任。
English: For the ancestral hall festival, two festival messengers will be set up, and an official historian will be appointed.

古文：诏翰林学士晁迥等举常参官可知大藩者二人。
现代文：下诏翰林学士晃迥等推举常参官可以担任大藩者二人。
English: According to the following edict, Hanlin Baccalaureate Jiao Jiao and other elected regular staff officers can serve as two members of the grand clan.

古文：丁未，升象州为防御。
现代文：十四日，升象州为防御。
English: On the 14th, Xiangzhou was put on the defensive.

古文：甲寅，诏：宜、柳、象州、怀远军死罪以下，非十恶、谋故斗杀、官吏犯枉法赃者，并原之。广南东、西路杂犯死罪以下递减一等，胁从受署者勿理。
现代文：二十一日，下诏： 宜州、柳州、象州、怀远军死罪以下囚犯，除十恶、谋故斗杀、官吏犯贪赃枉法者外，都予赦免；广南东西路杂犯死罪以下递减罪刑一等，被迫胁从者不予追究。
English: On the 21st, the following edict was issued: Inmates of Yizhou, Liuzhou, Xiangzhou, and Huaiyuan Army who had committed crimes punishable by death or less, except those who had committed the Ten Evils, attempted murder, and officials who had committed bribery, were all pardoned; miscellaneous prisoners of Guannan East-West Road who had committed crimes punishable by death or less were given the first class of decreasing punishment, and those who had been forced to obey were not prosecuted.

古文：蠲宜、柳、象州、怀远军丁钱及夏秋租，桂、昭州秋租。乙卯，毁诸道官司非法讯囚之具。
现代文：免除宜州、柳州、象州、怀远军丁钱和夏秋租税。 二十二日，毁废各道官府非法讯囚刑具。
English: Yizhou, Liuzhou, Xiangzhou, and Huaiyuan were exempted from the military tax of Dingchen and Xiaqiu, and on the 22nd, the torture equipment for illegal prisoners was abolished in all provincial government offices.

古文：十一月戊辰，日南至，御朝元殿受朝。
现代文：十一月初五，冬至，到朝元殿接受朝贺。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, the winter solstice, he went to the Asamoto-den to receive morning greetings.

古文：曹利用等言招安贼党，其馈贼食物者，请追捕减死论，诏释不问。
现代文：曹利用等报告说招安贼党，有给盗贼送食物者，请求追捕减死论处，下诏释放不追究。
English: Cao took advantage of reports that the party was recruiting thieves, and that some people had sent food to the thieves, to request that they be pursued and sentenced to death, and that they be released without further investigation.

古文：十二月己亥，赐近臣、契丹锦绮绫縠等物。
现代文：十二月初七，赐近臣、契丹锦绮绩拢等物。
English: On the seventh day of the twelfth month of the lunar calendar, he bestowed on his close vassals, the Khitan people, and others such things as the best of the best.

古文：癸卯，废兖州铁冶。
现代文：十一日，废除充州铁冶。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Choshu Iron and Steel Works was abolished.

古文：己未，甘州僧翟大秦等献马，给其直。
现代文：二十七日，甘州僧翟大秦等进献马，给付其钱。
English: On the 27th, Ganzhou monk Zou Daqin and others donated horses and paid their money.

古文：是岁，河西六谷、夏州、沙州、大食、占城、蒲端国、西南蕃溪峒蛮来贡。
现代文：这一年，河西六谷、夏州、沙州、大食、占城、蒲端国、西南蕃溪酮蛮来进贡。
English: In this year, Hexi Rokkoku, Xiazhou, Shazhou, Daxing, Zhancheng, Putang and Southwest Binxi Ketone came to pay tribute.

古文：雄州、安肃、广信饥。
现代文：雄州、安肃、广信饥荒。
English: Hungry in Xiongzhou, Ansu and Guangxin.

古文：宛丘、东阿、须城县蝗，不为灾。
现代文：宛丘、东阿、须城有蝗虫，不为灾害。
English: There are locusts in Wanqiu, Dong'a and Sucheng, but they are not a disaster.

古文：诸路丰稔，淮、蔡间麦斗十钱，粳米斛二百。
现代文：各路丰收，淮、蔡间麦每斗十钱，粳米每解二百钱。
English: There was a bumper harvest in all areas. Wheat and barley between Huai and Cai earned 10 yuan per bucket, and glutinous rice 200 yuan per solution.

古文：大中祥符元年春正月乙丑，有黄帛曳左承天门南鸱尾上，守门卒涂荣告，有司以闻。
现代文：大中样符元年春正月初三，有黄帛牵挂在左承天门南鹤尾上，守门士卒涂荣说后，有关部门上报朝廷。
English: On the third day of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：上召群臣拜迎于朝元殿启封，号称天书。
现代文：真宗召大臣在朝元殿拜迎启封，号称天书。
English: The Shinshu Sect summoned the minister to pay homage at the Asamoto-den to welcome the opening of the seal, known as the heavenly letter.

古文：丁卯，紫云见，如龙凤覆宫殿。
现代文：初五，出现紫云，像龙凤一样覆盖宫殿。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a purple cloud appeared, covering the palace like a dragon and phoenix.

古文：戊辰，大赦，改元，群臣加恩，赐京师酺。
现代文：初六，大赦，改元，大臣加恩封赏，赐京师聚宴。
English: The sixth day of the new year, amnesty, change of era, reward for minister Gahn, and a banquet for teachers in Beijing.

古文：幽州旱，求市麦种；夏州饥，请易粟，并许之。
现代文：幽州早灾，求购麦种；夏州饥荒，请求易粟，都答应了。
English: Yuzhou early disaster, asked to buy wheat seeds; Xiazhou famine, asked for millet, all agreed.

古文：己巳，诏黎、雅、维、茂四州官以瘴地二年一代。
现代文：初七，下诏：黎、雅、维、茂四州官因为炎瘴二年一换。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the following edict was issued: The governors of the four prefectures of Lih, Ya, Wei, and Mao would be changed every two years because of the raging fire.

古文：甲戌，大雪，停汴口、蔡河夫役。
现代文：十二日，大雪，停止汁口、蔡河夫役劳作。
English: On the 12th, heavy snowfall stopped the work of the juice outlet and Caihefu.

古文：戊寅，蠲畿内贷粮。
现代文：十六日，免除瓷县内贷粮。
English: On the 16th, the loan grain in Jiao County was exempted.

古文：己卯，诏以天书之应，申儆在位。
现代文：十七日，下诏因天书降下，重新命令告诫各在位官员。
English: On the 17th, the imperial rescript was issued, and a new order was issued to admonish all officials in office.

古文：乙酉，制加交阯郡王黎至忠功臣食邑。
现代文：二十三日颁发加交趾郡王黎至忠功臣食邑制书。
English: On the 23rd, the award was given to Wang Lizhi, a loyal and meritorious subject of Jiaozuo County, for his book production.

古文：二月壬辰，御乾元门观酺，赐父老千五百人衣服、茶彩。
现代文：二月初一，到乾元门观看臣民聚饮，赐给父老一千五百人衣服、茶彩。
English: On the first day of February, he went to the Qianyuan Gate to watch the subjects gather and drink, and gave 1,500 people clothes and tea.

古文：丁酉，分遣中使六人锡边臣宴。
现代文：初六，分别派遣中使六人赐边臣饮宴。
English: The first six, six envoys were sent separately to give the border minister a banquet.

古文：丙午，申明非命服勿服销金及不许以金银为箔之制。
现代文：十五日，申明不是皇上按等级赐给的制服不得用金银装饰，不许用金银为箔。
English: On the 15th, it was stated that uniforms not given by the emperor according to rank must not be decorated with gold and silver, and must not use gold and silver as foils.

古文：三月甲戌，兖州父老千二百人诣阙请封禅；丁卯，兖州并诸路进士等八百四十人诣阙请封禅；壬午，文武官、将校、蛮夷、耆寿、僧道二万四千三百七十余人诣阙请封禅，不允。
现代文：三月十三日，充州父老一千二百人到朝廷请求封禅。丁卯日，充州和各路进士等八百四十人到朝廷请求封禅。二十一日，文武官、将校、蛮夷、鲁寿、僧道二万四千三百七十多人到朝廷请求封禅，都没有答应。
English: On the 13th of March, 1,200 people from all walks of life in Choshu went to the Imperial Court to request the fief of Zen. On the 18th of March, 840 people from Choshu and all walks of life went to the Imperial Court to request the fief of Zen. On the 21st of March, more than 24,370 people from the civil and military officials, officers, barbarians, Rus, and monks went to the Imperial Court to request the fief of Zen, but they were not granted.

古文：自是表凡五上。
现代文：从此共五次上表请求封禅。
English: Since then, there have been a total of five requests for the seal.

古文：夏四月甲午，诏以十月有事于泰山，遣官告天地、宗庙、岳渎诸祠。
现代文：夏四月初四，诏令十月祭祀泰山，派遣官员告诉天地、宗庙、岳读各祠。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：乙未，以知枢密院事王钦若、参知政事赵安仁为泰山封禅经度制置使。
现代文：初五，任命知枢密院事王钦若、参知政事赵安仁为泰山封禅经度制置使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Wang Qinruo, Secretary of the Privy Council, and Zhao Anren, Councillor and Secretary of the State Council, were appointed as envoys for the establishment of the longitude of Mount Tai.

古文：丙申，以王旦为封禅大礼使，冯拯、陈尧叟分掌礼仪使。
现代文：初六，任命王旦为封禅大礼使，冯拯、陈尧雯分掌礼仪使。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Wang Dan was appointed as the grand envoy of Feng Zhen, and Feng Zheng and Chen Yuwen were appointed as the ceremonial envoys.

古文：庚子，幸元偁宫视疾。
现代文：初十，到赵元翱宫探病。
English: At the age of ten, he went to Zhao Yuancheng's palace to seek treatment.

古文：壬寅，御试礼部贡举人。
现代文：十二日，亲自策试礼部贡举人。
English: On the 22nd, he personally organized a tribute from the Ministry of Rehearsal.

古文：丙午，作昭应宫。
现代文：十六日，建造昭应宫。
English: On the 16th, the construction of the Zhaoying Palace began.

古文：戊申，幸秦国长公主第省疾。
现代文：十八日，到秦国长公主府第探病。
English: On the 18th, he went to the First Princess of Qin Province's residence to check on his health.

古文：又幸晋国、鲁国长公主第，并赐白金千两、彩二千匹。
现代文：又到晋国、鲁国长公主府第，赐给每人白金千两、彩二千匹。
English: They also went to Jin Province and the First Princess' residence in Lu Province, and each person was given a thousand taels of platinum and two thousand horses.

古文：曹、济州、广济军耆老二千二百人诣阙请临幸。
现代文：曹州、济州、广济军鲁老二千二百人到朝廷请求皇上大驾光临。
English: Two thousand two hundred soldiers from Caozhou, Jeju, and Guangxi went to the imperial court to request the emperor's visit.

古文：五月壬戌，王钦若言泰山醴泉出，锡山苍龙见。
现代文：五月初三，王钦若报告说泰山醛泉出现，锡山苍龙显现。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Wang Qinluo reported the appearance of the Taishan aldehyde spring and the appearance of the Xishan celandine.

古文：丙子，诏瘗汴、蔡、广济河流尸暴骸，仍致祭。
现代文：十七日，下诏掩埋汁、蔡、广济河漂流尸体遗骸，并予以祭奠。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued to bury the remains of the bodies of Ju, Cai, and those who drifted in the Guangji River, and to pay tribute to them.

古文：丁丑，幸南宫视惟能疾。
现代文：十八日，到南宫探视赵惟能病况。
English: On the 18th, he went to the Southern Palace to visit Zhao Wei Neng's illness.

古文：壬午，诏缘路行宫旧屋止加涂塈，毋别创。
现代文：二十三日，下诏沿路行宫旧屋只加涂刷，不要另外造建。
English: On the 23rd, it was decreed that the old houses of the palace along the road should only be painted, and should not be built separately.

古文：癸未，置天书仪卫使副、扶侍使都监、夹侍，凡有大礼即命之。
现代文：二十四日，设置天书仪卫使副、扶持使都监、夹侍，凡有大礼即命令他们办理。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the deputy of the heavenly calligraphy guard, the governor of the capital, and the attendant were set up, and they were ordered to handle any big gift.

古文：诏离京至封禅以前不举乐，所经州县勿以声伎来迓。
现代文：下诏离开京师到封禅以前不用乐，所经过州县不用声伎来迎接。
English: According to the following edict, there is no need to play music before leaving Beijing for Fuzhen, and there is no need to play music when passing through prefectures.

古文：甲申，放后宫一百二十人。
现代文：二十五日，释放后宫一百二十人。
English: On the 25th, one hundred and twenty people from the harem were released.

古文：戊子，诏：除乘舆供帐，存于礼文者如旧，自今宫禁中外进奉物，勿以销金文绣为饰。
现代文：二十九日，下诏：除乘舆供帐，为礼法记存下来的依旧外，从今以后宫廷中从外进奉的贡物，不要用金银文绣装饰。
English: On the 29th, the following edict was issued: From now on, tributes from outside the court should not be decorated with gold and silver embroidery, except for those that are still preserved for the records of etiquette.

古文：六月乙未，天书再降于泰山醴泉北。
现代文：六月初六，天书又一次降在泰山醛泉北。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month.

古文：丁酉，诏宫苑皇亲臣庶第宅饰以五彩，及用罗制幡胜、缯帛为假花者，并禁之。
现代文：初八，诏令宫苑和皇亲臣庶府第不要以五彩装饰，禁止罗制蟠胜、增帛为假花。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed that the palace gardens and the private residences of the emperor's relatives and retainers should not be decorated with five colors, and it was forbidden to make fake flowers.

古文：壬寅，迎泰山天书于含芳园，云五色见，俄黄气如凤驻殿上。
现代文：十三日，在含芳园迎接泰山天书，出现五色云，不久，黄气象凤驻留殿上。
English: On the 13th day, the five-colored clouds appeared to welcome Taishan Tianshu in Ganfangyuan, and soon, the yellow meteorological phoenix was stationed in the hall.

古文：庚戌，曲赦兖州系囚流罪以下。
现代文：二十一日，赦免充州关押囚犯流刑以下者。
English: On the 21st, those who are under the sentence of exile will be pardoned.

古文：辛亥，群臣表上尊号曰崇文广武仪天尊道宝应章感圣明仁孝皇帝。
现代文：二十二日，大臣奉表上尊号为崇文广武仪天尊道宝应章感圣明仁孝皇帝。
English: On the 22nd, the minister was presented with the honorary title of Chongwen Guangwu Yi Tian Zun Daobao Yingzhang Kan Sheng Ming Ren Xiao Emperor.

古文：秋七月庚申，太白昼见。
现代文：秋七月初二，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of autumn, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丙寅，诏诸州市上供物，非土地所宜者罢之。
现代文：初八，下诏：各州市买上供物品，不是本地所产废除。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: all states and cities were to buy goods for supply, not locally produced goods, and it was abolished.

古文：八月己丑，上太祖尊谥曰启运立极英武圣文神德玄功大孝皇帝，太宗曰至仁应道神功圣德文武大明广孝皇帝。
现代文：八月初一，上太祖尊溢为启运立极英武圣文神德玄功大孝皇帝，太宗为至仁应道神功圣德文武大明广孝皇帝。
English: On the first day of August, the great-great-grandfather was the emperor who launched the campaign to establish the supreme virtue of the martial arts, Shenwenshu De Xuan Gong, and the great-great-grandfather was the emperor of the supreme virtue of the martial arts, Shenwenshu De Wenshu De Xuan Gong.

古文：庚寅，诏东封道路军马毋犯民稼，开封府毋治道役民。
现代文：初二，下诏东向封禅道路军马不要损害百姓庄稼，开封府不要治道役民。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued the following edict: "Don't damage the people's crops with military horses on the road to Feng Zhen," and "Don't govern the people as Taoists in Kaifeng."

古文：庚子，置河东缘边安抚司。
现代文：十二日，设置河东沿边安抚司。
English: On the 12th, the Department of Pacification along the Eastern River was set up.

古文：乙巳，黔州言磨嵯、洛浦蛮首领龚行满等率族二千三百人内附。
现代文：十七日，黔州报告说磨岐、洛浦蛮首领龚行满等率族人二千三百名内附朝廷。
English: On the 17th, Zhangzhou reported that 2,300 local people, including the leaders of the Maki and Luopu clans, Zou Xingman and others, had joined the imperial court.

古文：己酉，王钦若献芝草八千余本。
现代文：二十一日，王钦若献进芝草八千余本。
English: On the 21st, Wang Qinruo presented more than 8,000 pieces of turf grass.

古文：九月戊午，令有司勿奏大辟案。
现代文：九月初一，命令有关部门不要上奏死刑案件。
English: On the first day of September, the relevant departments were ordered not to file death penalty cases.

古文：岳州进三脊茅。
现代文：岳州进献三脊茅。
English: Yuezhou presented three ridges of thatch.

古文：庚申，以向敏中权东京留守。
现代文：初三，任命向敏中代理东京留守。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he was appointed as a substitute for Xiang Minzhong while he was away in Tokyo.

古文：甲子，奉天书告太庙，悉陈诸州所上芝草、嘉禾、瑞木于仗内。
现代文：初七，奉上天书祭告太庙，把各州所进献芝草、嘉禾、瑞木全部陈列在仗内。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the temple was told of the heavenly book festival, and all the sesame seeds, precious herbs, and auspicious trees donated by various states were displayed during the war.

古文：戊辰，幸元偓宫视疾。
现代文：十一日，到赵元侵宫探病。
English: On the 11th day, he went to Zhao Yuan's palace to check on him.

古文：壬申，知晋州齐化基坐贪暴削籍，流崖州。
现代文：十五日，晋州知州齐化基因贪暴削籍，流放崖州。
English: On the 15th, Jinzhou Chizhou Qihua Gene was expelled for corruption and banished to Yazhou.

古文：乙亥，幸潜龙园宴射。
现代文：十八日，到潜龙园设宴射箭。
English: On the 18th, a banquet was held at the Hidden Dragon Park, and archery competitions were held.

古文：丁丑，幸惟吉宫视疾。
现代文：二十日，到赵惟吉宫探病。
English: On the 20th, he went to Zhao Weiji Palace to check on his health.

古文：戊寅，西京诸州民以车驾东巡贡献召对，劳赐之。
现代文：二十一日，西京各州百姓因皇上东巡贡献物品，召对他们，然后给予赏赐。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the people of all the prefectures in western Beijing were summoned and rewarded for their contributions to the emperor's eastern tour.

古文：己卯，以马知节为行宫都部署。
现代文：二十二日，任命马知节为行宫都部署。
English: On the 22nd, the Magi Festival was designated as the imperial procession.

古文：庚辰，赵安仁献五色金玉丹、紫芝八千七百余本。
现代文：二十三日，赵安仁进献五色金玉丹、紫芝八千七百多本。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Anren presented more than 8,700 pieces of five-color jade and purple grass.

古文：乙酉，亲习封禅仪于崇德殿。冬十月戊子，上御蔬食。
现代文：二十八日，在崇德殿亲自练习封禅仪。冬十月初一，真宗吃蔬食。
English: On the 28th, he practiced the sealing ceremony in person at the Chungdeokgung Palace. In winter, on the first day of October, he began to eat vegetables.

古文：庚寅，以巡幸，置考制度使、副，凡巡幸则命之。
现代文：初三，因巡幸设置考制度使副，凡巡幸则命令使副经理。
English: In the third year of junior high school, due to the examination system set up for inspectors, the deputy manager was appointed, and the deputy manager was ordered to be appointed for inspectors.

古文：是夕，五星顺行同色。
现代文：这天晚上，五星顺行同色。
English: On this night, the five stars are in the same color.

古文：辛卯，车驾发京师，扶侍使奉天书先道。
现代文：初四，真宗从京城出发，扶持使奉天书先行。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the Shinshu sect set out from the capital, with the support of Bong Tianshu leading the way.

古文：丙申，次澶州，宴周莹于行宫。
现代文：初九，到达擅州，在行宫宴饮周莹。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, Zhou Ying arrived in Soshu and feasted at the imperial palace.

古文：戊戌，许、郓、齐等州长吏赴泰山陪位。
现代文：十一日，许、军仔、齐等州长吏到泰山陪位。
English: On the 11th day, Xu, Junzai, Qi and other prefectural officials came to accompany Taishan.

古文：辛丑，驻跸郓州，神光起昊天玉册上。
现代文：十四日，停留邪州，神光起昊天玉册上。
English: On the 14th, staying in Yanzhou, Shenguang was listed in the Jade Book of Heaven.

古文：甲辰，诏扈从人毋坏民舍、什器、树木。
现代文：十七日，下诏息从人不要损坏民舍、什器、树木。
English: On the 17th, a warning was issued for people not to damage houses, furniture and trees.

古文：丁未，法驾入乾封县奉高宫。
现代文：二十日，法驾进人乾封县奉高宫。
English: On the 20th, the procession entered Fenggaogu, Qianfeng County.

古文：戊申，王钦若等献泰山芝草三万八千余本。
现代文：二十一日，王钦若等进献泰山芝草三万八千多根。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wang Qinruo and others presented more than thirty-eight thousand roots of Mount Tai.

古文：己酉，五色云起岳顶。
现代文：二十二日，五色云起自岳顶。
English: On the 22nd, five-colored clouds rose from the top of Mt.

古文：庚戌，法驾临山门，黄云覆辇，道经险峻，降辇步进。
现代文：二十三日，法驾临近山门，黄云覆盖车举，道经险要，下车步行前进。
English: On the 23rd, the legal driver approached the mountain gate, the yellow cloud covered the car, the road was dangerous, get off the car and walk forward.

古文：先夕大风，至是顿息。
现代文：前一天晚上大风，到这时立刻停止。
English: The night before it had been very windy, but then it stopped immediately.

古文：辛亥，享昊天上帝于圜台，陈天书于左，以太祖、太宗配。
现代文：二十四日，在圆台祭享昊天上帝，把天书放置左边，配以太祖、太宗。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, in the round table festival, enjoy Hao Tian God, put the heavenly book on the left, and match it with the ancestor and the founder.

古文：帝衮冕奠献，庆云绕坛，月有黄光。命群臣享五方帝诸神于山下封祀坛，上下传呼万岁，振动山谷。
现代文：真宗穿礼服奠献，庆云绕坛，月有黄光；命令大臣在山下封祀坛祭享各方帝神，上下传呼万岁，振动山谷。
English: True believers wear ceremonial clothes to make offerings, clouds circle the altar in celebration, and the moon shines yellow; the minister is ordered to seal the altar at the foot of the mountain to offer sacrifices to the gods of all parties, and to shout "long live" up and down, vibrating the valley.

古文：降谷口，日有冠戴，黄气纷郁。
现代文：降谷口，太阳有冠戴，黄气纷郁。
English: At the mouth of the valley, the sun is crowned, and the yellow atmosphere is rich.

古文：壬子，禅社首，如封祀仪。
现代文：二十五日，封禅社首，像封祀仪礼。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the sealing of the head of the Zen Society, like the sealing ceremony, ended.

古文：紫气下覆，黄光如星绕天书匣。
现代文：紫气下覆，黄光像星星一样环绕天书匣。
English: Purple gas underlies, yellow light like stars surround the celestial bookcase.

古文：纵四方所献珍禽奇兽。
现代文：放释四方所献珍禽奇兽。
English: Release the rare birds and animals donated by the four parties.

古文：还奉高宫，日重轮，五色云见。
现代文：回到奉高宫，太阳重轮，出现五色云。
English: Back at the Bonggao Palace, the sun sets and the five-colored clouds appear.

古文：作会真宫。
现代文：建造会真宫。
English: The construction will be a real palace.

古文：癸丑，御朝觐坛之寿昌殿，受群臣朝贺。
现代文：二十六日，真宗到朝勤坛寿昌殿，接受大臣朝贺。
English: On the 26th, Shinsong went to the morning service altar, Shuchang Hall, to receive the minister's morning greetings.

古文：大赦天下，常赦所不原者咸赦除之。
现代文：大赦天下，常赦得不到原谅者全部赦免。
English: There is universal amnesty, and those who cannot be pardoned are all pardoned.

古文：文武并进秩。
现代文：文武官员都升官晋爵。
English: Civil and military officials have all been promoted to higher ranks.

古文：赐致仕官本品全奉一季，京朝官衣绯绿十五年者改赐服色。
现代文：赐给退休官员本品职位一个季度的全棒，京朝官衣绊绿十五年者改赐服色。
English: The retired officials of this post will be given a quarter of the whole stick, and those who have been in Beijing for fifteen years will be given a green suit.

古文：令开封府及所过州军考送服勤词学、经明行修举人，其怀材抱器沦于下位，及高年不仕德行可称者，所在以闻。
现代文：命令开封府和所经过州军考送服勤词学、经明行修举人，怀才不遇和有德行的高年者，所在各地上报朝廷。
English: He ordered to report to the imperial court from all over the country the location of Kaifeng Prefecture and the elderly people who had passed the state military examination, who had been sent to serve and study, who had been promoted, and who were talented and virtuous.

古文：三班使臣经五年者与考课。
现代文：三班使臣经历五年者予以考课。
English: Three classes of envoys who have been in the position for five years will take the examination.

古文：两浙钱氏、泉州陈氏近亲，蜀孟氏、湖南马氏、荆南高氏、广南河东刘氏子孙未食禄者，听叙用。
现代文：两浙钱氏、泉州陈氏近亲、蜀孟氏、湖南马氏、荆南高氏、广南河东刘氏子孙没有得到官棒的，允许录用为官。
English: Two close relatives of the Qian clan of Zhejiang, the Chen clan of Quanzhou, the Shu-Meng clan, the Ma clan of Hunan, the Jing-Nan Gao clan, and the Liu clan of Guangdong did not get the official stick, and were allowed to be hired as officials.

古文：赐天下酺三日。
现代文：赐全国聚饮三天。
English: Give the subjects of the world three days to gather and drink.

古文：改乾封县为奉符县。
现代文：改乾封县为奉符县。
English: Qianfeng County was changed to Fengfu County.

古文：泰山七里内禁樵采。
现代文：泰山七里内禁止打柴。
English: It is forbidden to collect firewood within seven miles of Mount Tai.

古文：大宴穆清殿。
现代文：大宴穆清殿。
English: A grand banquet at the Muqing Palace.

古文：又宴近臣、泰山父老于殿门，赐父老时服、茶帛。
现代文：又在殿门宴请近臣和泰山父老，赐给父老时服、茶帛。
English: He also held a banquet for his close vassals and Taishan's father and grandfather at the palace gate, and gave his father and grandfather ceremonial robes and tea caddies.

古文：甲寅，复常膳。
现代文：二十七日，恢复饮食。
English: On the 27th, he resumed eating.

古文：次太平驿，赐从官辟寒丸、花茸袍。
现代文：到达太平骚，赐给从官辟寒丸、花茸袍。
English: Arriving in Taiping County, he was given cold pills and a flower and mushroom robe from officials.

古文：丙辰，次兖州，以州为大都督府。
现代文：二十九日，到达充州，以州为大都督府。
English: On the 29th, he arrived in Chenzhou, which became the capital.

古文：十一月戊午，幸曲阜县，谒文宣王庙，靴袍再拜。
现代文：十一月初一，到曲阜县，朝拜文宣王庙，靴袍再拜。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, I went to Qufu County to pay homage to the Temple of King Wenxuan.

古文：幸叔梁纥堂。
现代文：到叔梁给堂。
English: Let's go to Shuliang.

古文：近臣分奠七十二弟子。
现代文：近臣分别奠祭七十二弟子。
English: The seventy-two disciples were led by their close vassals to the memorial service.

古文：遂幸孔林，加谥孔子曰玄圣文宣王，遣官祭以太牢，给近便十户奉茔庙，赐其家钱三十万，帛三百匹。
现代文：于是到孔林，加溢孔子为玄圣文宣王，派遣官员祭以太牢，给近便十户奉莹庙，赐给他们家钱三十万，帛三百匹。
English: Therefore, he went to Confucius' hometown of Konglin, extolled Confucius as the King of Confucianism, sent officials to offer sacrifices to the deities, gave offerings to ten temples in the vicinity, and gave them 300,000 yuan and 300 yakitori.

古文：以四十六世孙圣佑为奉礼郎，近属授官、赐出身者六人。
现代文：以孔子四十六世孙孔圣佑为奉礼郎，近属授官、赐出身者六人。
English: The 46th-generation grandson of Confucius, Kong Sheng Yu, will serve as the officiant, and there will be six people from his immediate family who will be bestowed with an official post or a title.

古文：追谥齐太公曰昭烈武成王，令青州立庙；周文公曰文宪王，曲阜县立庙。
现代文：追溢齐太公为昭烈武成王，命令青州立庙；周文公为文宪王，命令曲阜县立庙。
English: The overflowing Qi Taigong was the illustrious Wu Cheng Wang and ordered the establishment of the Qing State Temple; Zhou Wenguang was the King of the Constitution and ordered the establishment of the Qufu County Temple.

古文：辛酉，赐诸蕃使袍笏。
现代文：初四，赐给诸蕃使臣袍易。
English: On the 4th day of the first month, he gave the envoys robes and uniforms.

古文：壬戌，次中都县，幸广相寺。
现代文：初五，到达中都县，到广相寺。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, I arrived in Zhongdu County and went to Guangxiao Temple.

古文：癸亥，次郓州，幸开元寺。
现代文：初六，到达邪州，到开元寺。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, he arrived in Yanzhou and went to Kaiyuan Temple.

古文：丁卯，赐曲阜孔子庙经史。
现代文：初十，赐给曲阜孔子庙经史。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the Confucius Temple in Qufu was given a copy of the Confucian classics.

古文：辛未，幸河渎庙，加封。
现代文：十四日，到河读庙，加封。
English: On the 14th, it was sealed at the He Yue Temple.

古文：癸酉，曲宴永清军节度使周莹，赐兵士缗钱。
现代文：十六日，曲宴永清军节度使周莹，赐给兵士络钱。
English: On the 16th, Zhou Ying, the leader of the Yongqing Army Festival, gave soldiers money.

古文：丁丑，帝至自泰山，奉天书还宫。
现代文：二十日，真宗从泰山回到京城，奉天书回宫廷。
English: On the 20th, Shinshu returned from Mount Taishan to the capital, and returned to the court with the imperial edict.

古文：壬午，诏以正月三日为天庆节。
现代文：二十五日，下诏以正月三日为天庆节。
English: On the 25th, the following edict declared the 3rd day of the first month as Tianqing Festival.

古文：甲申，命王旦奉上太祖、太宗谥册，亲享太庙。
现代文：二十七日，命令王旦奉上太祖、太宗溢册，亲享太庙。
English: On the 27th, he ordered Wang Dan to give him a copy of the Taizu and Taizong, so that he could personally enjoy the temple.

古文：乙酉，大宴含光殿。
现代文：二十八日，在含光殿大宴。
English: On the 28th, a grand banquet was held at the Hall of Illumination.

古文：十二月辛卯，御乾元殿受尊号。
现代文：十二月初五，到乾元殿接受尊号。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month, he went to the Qianyuan Hall to receive the honorary title.

古文：庚子，葛霸卒。
现代文：十四日，葛霸去世。
English: On the 14th, Ge Ba passed away.

古文：辛丑，王旦加中书侍郎兼刑部尚书，楚王元佐加太傅，宁王元偓为护国军节度，舒王元偁为平江、镇江军节度，并兼侍中；广陵郡王元俨进封荣王，安定郡公惟吉为威德军节度，余进秩有差。
现代文：十五日，王旦加中书侍郎兼刑部尚书，楚王赵元佐加衔太傅，宁王赵元握为护国军节度使，舒王赵元翱为平江、镇江军节度使，都兼为侍中，广陵郡王赵元俨进封荣王，安定郡公赵惟吉为威德军节度使，其他人升官晋爵不等。
English: On the 15th, Wang Dangjia was promoted to the position of the attendant of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee and the General Secretary of the Criminal Investigation Department, King Chu Zhao Yuanzaka was promoted to the position of the Taifu, King Ning Zhao Yuanjia was promoted to the position of the festival delegate of the National Defense Force, King Shu Zhao Yuanjia was promoted to the position of the festival delegate of the Pingjiang and Zhenjiang armies and was also promoted to the position of the attendant of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, King Guangling County Zhao Yuanjia was promoted to the position of the Fong Rongwang, and King

古文：癸卯，幸上清宫、景德开宝寺。
现代文：十七日，到上清宫、景德开宝寺。
English: On the 17th, he went to Shangqing Palace and Jingdekaibao Temple.

古文：王钦若加礼部尚书。
现代文：王钦若加衔礼部尚书。
English: If Wang Qin were to be promoted to the title of minister of etiquette, it would be a great achievement.

古文：甲辰，张齐贤为右仆射，温仲舒、寇准并为户部尚书，王化基、邢昺、郭贽并为礼部尚书。
现代文：十八日，张齐贤为右仆射，温仲舒和寇准都为户部尚书，王化基和邢簌、郭赞都为礼部尚书。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Qixian was appointed as the right-hand man, Wen Zhongshu and Kou Jun were appointed as the head of the household, and Wang Huaji and Guo Zan were appointed as the heads of the ceremonial department.

古文：诏天下宫观陵庙，名在地志，功及生民者，并加崇饰。
现代文：下诏：天下宫观陵庙，名在地志，功及生民者，一律加以崇饰。
English: The following edict: the world's palaces and mausoleums, famous in local history, achievements and people, are all to be revered.

古文：戊申，以德雍、德文、德存、惟正、惟忠、惟叙、惟和、惟宪并领诸州刺史，允升、允言、允成、允宁、允中并为各卫将军。
现代文：二十二日，任命德雍、德文、德存、惟正、惟忠、惟叙、惟和、惟宪并领各州刺史，允升、允言、允成、允宁、允中并为各卫将军。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed De Yong, De Wen, De Cun, Du Zheng, Du Zhong, Du Xiu, Du He and Du Xian to be the generals in charge of each province, and promoted Du Xiu, Du Yan, Du Cheng, Du Ning and Du Zhong to be the generals in charge of each garrison.

古文：庚戌，幸元偁宫视疾。
现代文：二十四日，到赵元簌宫探病。
English: On the 24th, he went to Zhao Yuancheng's palace to check on his health.

古文：又幸元偓宫。
现代文：又到赵元握宫。
English: I went to Zhao Yuan's palace again.

古文：辛亥，交阯郡王黎至忠加同平章事。
现代文：二十五日，交趾郡王黎至忠加衔同平章事。
English: On the 25th, King Li Zhizhong of Jiaozi County was promoted to the same rank.

古文：壬子，幸元偁宫。
现代文：二十六日，到赵元翱宫。
English: On the 26th, they arrived at the Zhao Yuanjun Palace.

古文：契丹使上将军萧智可等来贺。
现代文：契丹使上将军萧智可等来祝贺新春。
English: Khitan general Xiao Zhi can wait to congratulate the New Year.

古文：是岁，西凉府、甘州、三佛齐、大食国、西南蕃等来贺封禅。
现代文：这一年，西凉府、甘州、三佛齐、大食国、西南蕃等来祝贺封禅。
English: This year, Xilangfu, Ganzhou, Sanfo Qi, Daxing Guo, and Xianyang Jie all came to congratulate Feng Zhen.

古文：诸路言岁稔，米斗七八钱。
现代文：各路报告说丰收，米每斗七八钱。
English: All roads reported a bumper harvest, with rice fetching seven or eight yuan per dowel.

古文：二年春正月癸亥，以封禅庆成，赐宗室、辅臣袭衣、金带、器币。
现代文：大中样符二年春正月初七，因封禅成功庆祝，赐给宗室、辅臣套装、金带、器币。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Daizhong Sampu, in celebration of the success of the Fuzhen, a set of clothes, a gold belt, and coins were given to the family and the vassals.

古文：乙丑，置内殿承制。
现代文：初九，设置内殿承制。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the inner shrine was set up.

古文：戊辰，诏： 诱人子弟析家产，或潜举息钱，辄坏坟域者，令所在擒捕流配。 
现代文：十二日，下诏： 诱劝人家子弟分析家产，或潜举息钱，经常破坏坟域者，命令所在各地逮捕流配。 
English: On the 12th day of the month, the following edict was issued: Those who induce others to analyze their family assets, or secretly raise interest money, and frequently destroy cemeteries, are ordered to be arrested in all regions.

古文：庚午，诏： 读非圣之书及属辞浮靡者，皆严谴之。
现代文：十四日，下诏： 不读圣贤之书和写文章浮靡者，都要严厉谴责。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: Those who do not read the books of sages and sages and those who are lazy in writing articles should be severely condemned.

古文：已镂板文集，令转运司择官看详，可者录奏。 
现代文：已经刻版的文集，命令转运司看样检查，通过者录奏。 
English: The already engraved anthology, ordered the forwarding department to see the sample inspection, and those who passed were recorded.

古文：乙酉，以陕西民饥，遣使巡抚。
现代文：二十九日，因陕西百姓饥荒，派遣使臣巡视安抚。
English: On the 29th, due to the famine of the people in Shaanxi, envoys were sent to inspect and pacify.

古文：二月己丑，改定入内内侍省内侍名职。
现代文：二月初三，改定人内内侍省内侍名职。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, the title of "Minister of the Interior" was changed to "Minister of the Interior."

古文：壬辰，诏立曲阜县孔子庙学舍。
现代文：初六，下诏立曲阜县孔子庙学舍。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, the Confucius Temple School House in Qufu County was established.

古文：乙未，赐抚州高年黄泰粟帛。
现代文：初九，赐给抚州高年黄泰粟帛。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, Fuzhou senior citizen Huang Taizhong was given a poppy seed.

古文：甲辰，蠲同、华民租。
现代文：十八日，免除同州、华州百姓租税。
English: On the 18th, the people of Tongzhou and Huazhou were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：乙巳，幸大相国等寺、上清宫祈雨。
现代文：十九日，到大相国寺等寺和上清宫祈祷降雨。
English: On the 19th, they went to temples such as Daxianguo Temple and the Shangqing Palace to pray for rain.

古文：戊申，遣使祠太乙，祀玄冥。
现代文：二十二日，派遣使臣祠祭太一宫，祭祀水神。
English: On the 22nd, the envoys' ancestral shrine, Taichung, was dispatched to worship the god of water.

古文：己酉，雨。
现代文：二十三日，降雨。
English: On the 23rd, it rained.

古文：癸丑，禁毁金宝塑浮屠像。
现代文：二十七日，禁止毁坏金宝塑造浮屠像。
English: On the 27th, it was forbidden to destroy the gold and silver statues.

古文：甲寅，以丁谓为三司使。
现代文：二十八日，任命丁谓为三司使。
English: On the 28th, Ding Zuo was appointed as the third envoy.

古文：三月丙辰，日当食，阴晦不见。
现代文：三月初一，日当食亏，阴晦而没有显现。
English: On the first day of March, the sun was eclipsed and did not appear.

古文：辛未，赐京城酺。
现代文：十六日，赐京城臣民聚饮。
English: On the 16th, he gave permission for the citizens of Kyoto to drink together.

古文：己卯，左屯卫将军允言坐称疾不朝，降太子左卫率。
现代文：二十四日，左屯卫将军允言因称病不朝，降为太子左卫率。
English: On the 24th, General Zuo Tunwei said that he would not ascend the throne due to illness, and was demoted to Prince Zuo Wei.

古文：夏四月戊子，升州火，遣御史访民疾苦，蠲被火屋税。
现代文：夏四月初三，升州火灾，派遣御史访问民众疾苦，免除遭火灾屋税。
English: On the third day of the fourth month of the summer, after the fire in Shengzhou, the imperial historian was dispatched to visit the people suffering from the fire and exempted from the fire house tax.

古文：己丑，饯种放还山。
现代文：初四，为种放回山饯别。
English: On the fourth day of the school year, the seeds are returned to the mountain pasture.

古文：乙未，河北旱，遣使祠北岳。
现代文：初十，河北早灾，派遣使臣祠祭北岳。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Hebei Province was hit by an early disaster, and the dispatch of envoys' ancestral hall festival Beidake began.

古文：己亥，以丁谓为修昭应宫使。
现代文：十四日，任命丁谓为修建昭应宫使。
English: On the 14th, Ding Zetian was appointed as the envoy for the construction of Zhaoying Palace.

古文：壬寅，诏禁中外群臣非休暇无得群饮废职。
现代文：十七日，诏令禁中外大臣非休假不得群聚宴饮失职。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict forbade Chinese and foreign ministers to gather for banquets and drinks without taking a vacation.

古文：诏医官院处方并药赐河北避疫边民。
现代文：下诏医官院处方和药赐给河北避役边民。
English: He issued an edict to give prescriptions and medicines from the medical academy to the border residents of Hebei to avoid forced labor.

古文：丙午，试服勤词学、经明行修国监生。
现代文：二十一日，考试服勤词学、经明行修国监生。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the exam-taking, diligent, word-learning, clear-thinking, and national supervision students left.

古文：丁未，振陕西民饥。
现代文：二十二日，贩济陕西饥民。
English: On the 22nd, he sold food to starving people in Shaanxi Province.

古文：五月乙卯，追封孔子弟子七十二人。
现代文：五月初一，追封孔子弟子七十二人。
English: On the first day of May, seventy-two disciples of Confucius were exiled.

古文：罢韶州献频婆果。
现代文：废罢韶州进献频婆果。
English: Abolition of the caste system in Guizhou has resulted in frequent donations.

古文：丁卯，遣使陕西决狱，流罪以下减一等，死罪情可悯者上请。
现代文：十三日，派使臣到陕西处理狱案，流刑罪犯以下减刑一等，死罪情节值得怜悯者可以上奏请求重新处理。
English: On the 13th, an envoy was sent to Shaanxi to deal with the prison case. The sentence of exiled criminals and below was reduced to the first degree, and those who deserved mercy for the crime of capital punishment could appeal for re-processing.

古文：庚辰，陕西旱，遣使祷太平宫、后土、西岳、河渎诸祠。
现代文：二十六日，陕西早灾，派遣使臣祈祷太平宫、后土、西岳、河读各祠。
English: On the 26th, Shaanxi was hit by an early disaster, and envoys were sent to pray at the shrines of Taiping Palace, Houtu, Xidake, and Heyuan.

古文：代州地震。
现代文：代州发生地震。
English: An earthquake occurred in Daizhou.

古文：六月乙酉，颁幕职、州县官招集户口赏条。
现代文：六月初二，颁布幕职、州县官招集户口奖赏条例。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, the regulations on rewarding the recruitment of hukou by the shogunate, state and county officials were promulgated.

古文：甲午，幸昭应宫，赐修宫使器币。
现代文：十一日，到昭应宫，赐给修宫使器币。
English: On the 11th day, he went to the Zhaoying Palace and gave the messenger coins to the palace.

古文：辛卯，保州增屯田务兵三百人。
现代文：辛卯日，保州增加屯田务兵三百人。
English: On the day of Xinwu, Bozhou increased the number of garrison soldiers by three hundred.

古文：戊戌，麟府言社庆族依唐龙镇为援，数扰别部，请出兵袭之。
现代文：十五日，麟府报告说社庆族依托唐龙镇为援，数次骚扰其他部族，请求出兵袭击。
English: On the 15th, Linfu reported that the Sheqing people, relying on Tanglong Town for assistance, harassed other tribes several times and requested the dispatch of troops to attack.

古文：帝曰： 均吾民也。 
现代文：真宗说： 都是我的人民啊。 
English: Shinso said, "They are all my people."

古文：不许。
现代文：没有批准。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：壬寅，诏量留五坊鹰鹘，备诸王从时展礼，余悉纵之。
现代文：十九日，诏令适当保留五坊鹰鹊，作为诸王从时展礼备用，其余的全部放走。
English: On the 19th, it was decreed that the five eagle cocoons should be properly preserved as a reserve for the kings to use during the exhibition, and all the rest should be released.

古文：罢邕、宜州岁贡药箭。
现代文：废除琶、宜州每年进贡药箭。
English: The lute was abolished, and Yizhou paid tribute to the medicinal arrow every year.

古文：庚戌，御试东封路服勤词学、经明行修贡举梁固等九十二人。
现代文：二十七日，亲自策试东封路服勤词学、经明行修贡举梁固等九十二人。
English: On the 27th, he personally tested 92 people from Dongfeng Road, including those in the fields of etiquette, etiquette and etiquette.

古文：秋七月甲寅，诏张齐贤等各举才堪御史者一人。
现代文：秋七月初一，诏令张齐贤等分别推举可以担任御史者一人。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, Zhang Qixian and others were elected separately to serve as a historian.

古文：丁巳，置纠察在京刑狱司。
现代文：初四，设置纠察在京刑狱司。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, a picket was set up at the Beijing Detention Center.

古文：辛酉，复以万安宫为滋福殿。
现代文：初八，又以万安宫为滋福殿。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wan'an Palace was used as Shifu-den.

古文：己巳，幸惟吉宫视疾。
现代文：十六日，到赵惟吉宫探病。
English: On the 16th, he went to Zhao Weiji Palace to check on his health.

古文：辛未，以昭应宫为玉清昭应宫。
现代文：十八日，以昭应宫为玉清昭应宫。
English: On the 18th, the Zhaoying Palace was renamed the Jade Qing Zhaoying Palace.

古文：乙亥，蠲京东徐、济七州水灾田租。
现代文：二十二日，免除京东徐、济七州水灾田租。
English: On the 22nd, Jingdong Xu and Jishu seven prefectures were exempted from the flood disaster field rent.

古文：戊寅，诏孔子庙配享鲁史左丘明等十九人加封爵。
现代文：二十五日，诏令孔子庙配享鲁史左丘明等十九人加封爵。
English: On the 25th, the Emperor ordered that the Confucius Temple be endowed with nineteen people, including Xinglu Shi and Zuo Qiuming.

古文：庚辰，蠲天下封禅赦前逋负千二百六十六万缗。
现代文：二十七日，免除全国封禅赦前拖欠钱物一千二百六十六万络。
English: On the 27th, 12.66 million rupees in arrears of money and goods were waived before the national amnesty.

古文：八月丙戌，京东惠民河溢，居民避水所过津渡，戒有司勿算。
现代文：八月初四，京东惠民河水溢出，居民避水所过津渡，告诫有关部门不得课税。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month, the Jingdong Huimin River overflowed, and the residents' water shelter passed Tsundu, warning the relevant departments not to levy taxes.

古文：甲辰，西南蕃龙汉尧来贡，贺东封，加汉尧宁德大将军。
现代文：二十二日，西南蕃龙汉尧来进贡，祝贺东封，加汉尧为宁德大将军。
English: On the 22nd, the southwestern dragon Han Ye came to pay tribute and congratulate Dongfeng, and Han Ye became the great general of Ningde.

古文：九月戊午，赐秦州被水民粟，人一斛。
现代文：九月初七，赐给秦州遭水灾百姓粟每人一解。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, the people of Qin State who suffered from the floods were given one grain of millet per person.

古文：壬戌，合镇、定部署为一。
现代文：十一日，合镇州、定州部署为一。
English: On the 11th, Hechenzhou and Dingzhou were deployed as one.

古文：甲子，浚汴口。
现代文：十三日，疏浚汁口。
English: On the 13th, dredge the spout.

古文：命工部侍郎冯起为契丹国信使。
现代文：命令工部侍郎冯起为契丹国信使。
English: He ordered Feng Qi, the chamberlain of the engineering department, to become the messenger of Khitan.

古文：乙丑，幸潜龙园宴射。
现代文：十四日，到潜龙园设宴射箭。
English: On the 14th, a banquet was held at the Submerged Dragon Park, and archery was performed.

古文：甲戌，遣使赐戎、泸军民辟瘴药。
现代文：二十三日，派遣使臣赐给戎州、沪州军民辟瘴药物。
English: On the 23rd, envoys were dispatched to give anti-epileptic drugs to soldiers and civilians in Wuzhou and Huzhou.

古文：乙亥，无为军言大风拔木，坏城门、营垒、民舍，压溺者千余人。
现代文：二十四日，无为军报告说大风拔树，毁坏城门、营垒、民舍，一千多人压死。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the helpless army reported that the gale had uprooted trees, destroyed the city gates, fortifications, and dwellings, and more than a thousand people were crushed to death.

古文：诏内臣恤视，蠲来年租，收瘗死者，家赐米一斛。
现代文：下诏内臣抚恤视察，免除来年租税，收埋死者，每家赐米一解。
English: Under the edict, the vassal was granted a pension inspection, tax exemption for the next year, the dead were buried, and rice was given to each family.

古文：丁丑，发官廪振凤州水灾。
现代文：二十六日，开官仓贩济凤州水灾百姓。
English: On the 26th, the opening of the official warehouse trader brought relief to the flood-stricken people of Jifengzhou.

古文：冬十月癸未，优赏宁朔军士。
现代文：冬十月初二，优赏宁朔军士。
English: On the second day of October in winter, Ningshuo Sergeant was awarded.

古文：戊子，诏江、浙运粮兵卒经冬停役两月。
现代文：初七，下诏江、浙运粮士兵冬季停役两个月。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, soldiers of the Lower Zhaojiang River and Zhejiang Grain Transportation were suspended for two months in winter.

古文：甲午，诏天下置天庆观。
现代文：十三日，诏令全国设置天庆观。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor issued a decree to set up the Tianqing outlook across the country.

古文：甲辰，兖州霖雨害稼，振恤其民。
现代文：二十三日，充州连绵不断的雨水损害庄稼，贩济抚恤其地百姓。
English: On the 23rd, the continuous rain in Chenzhou damaged the crops, and the merchants came to support the local people.

古文：十一月丙辰，作《文武七条》戒官吏。
现代文：十一月初五，作次武七争告诫官吏。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, officials were admonished for the Second Wushu Seven Controversy.

古文：甲子，诏诸路官吏蠹政害民，转运使、提点刑狱官不举察者坐之。
现代文：十三日，下诏：各路官吏蠢政害民，转运使、提点刑狱官不举报觉察者要连坐治罪。
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued: officials from all walks of life who harmed the people with their stupid policies, and those who did not report to the transportation and transportation commissioners, and those who did not report to the penal officers should be punished.

古文：癸酉，蕃部阿黎等来朝贡，授阿黎怀化司戈。
现代文：二十二日，蕃部阿黎等来朝贡，授给阿黎怀化司戈。
English: On the 22nd, Xibe Alili and others came to pay tribute to the imperial court, awarding Alili Huaihua Sogo.

古文：十二月辛巳，诏：晋国大长公主丧，罢承天节上寿及明年元旦朝会。
现代文：十二月初一，下诏：晋国大长公主去世，废除承天节祝寿和明年元旦朝会。
English: On the first day of December, the following edict was issued: the eldest princess of Jin passed away, and the celebration of the Choten Festival and the New Year's Day imperial meeting were abolished.

古文：交州黎至忠贡驯犀。
现代文：交州黎至忠进贡驯犀。
English: Lai Zhizhong from Jiaozhou paid tribute to train the rhinoceros.

古文：乙未，幸惟吉宫视疾。
现代文：十五日，到赵惟吉宫探病。
English: On the 15th, he went to Zhao Weiji Palace to check on his health.

古文：辛丑，丁谓上《封禅朝觐祥瑞图》，刘承珪上《天书仪仗图》。
现代文：二十一日，丁谓呈上封禅朝勤样瑞图》，刘承圭呈上沃书仪仗图》。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Ding Zuo presented a copy of the "Zen Morning Ritual" and Liu Chenggui presented a copy of the "Woshu Ritual."

古文：甲辰，幸惟吉宫视疾。
现代文：二十四日，到赵惟吉宫探病。
English: On the 24th, he went to Zhao Weiji Palace to check on his health.

古文：契丹国母萧氏卒，辍视朝。
现代文：契丹国母萧氏去世，停止处理朝政。
English: The mother of the Khitan nation, Mrs. Xiao, passed away and stopped handling the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：是岁，于阗、西凉府、西南蕃罗岩州蛮来贡。
现代文：这一年，于闻、西凉府、西南蕃罗嚣州蛮来进贡。
English: This year, Yuwen, West Liangfu, and Southwest Liaoning Province came to pay tribute.

古文：雄州虫食苗即死，遣使振恤。
现代文：雄州虫吃苗即死，派遣使臣贩济抚恤。
English: Xiongzhou worms die as soon as they eat seedlings, and envoys are dispatched to sell seedlings to raise funds.

古文：三年春正月丁巳，赐建安军父老江禹锡粟帛。
现代文：大中样符三年春正月初七，赐给建安军父老江禹锡粟帛。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 6th year of the 6

古文：二月乙酉，丁谓请承天节禁屠宰刑罚，从之。
现代文：二月初五，丁谓请承天节禁止屠宰刑罚，真宗答应了这个请求。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Ding called for a ban on slaughtering on the Day of Heaven, and Zhenzong agreed to the request.

古文：癸巳，交州黎至忠卒，大校李公蕴自称留后。
现代文：十三日，交州黎至忠去世，大校李公蕴自称留后。
English: On the 13th, Jiaozhou Li Zhizhong passed away, and the senior Li Gongyun claimed to stay behind.

古文：已亥，禁方春射猎，每岁春夏，所在长吏申明之。
现代文：十九日，禁止春季射猎，每年春夏各地长吏明文规定这项制度。
English: On the 19th, spring shooting was banned. Every spring and summer, governors around the country explicitly stipulate this system.

古文：辛丑，以张齐贤判河阳。
现代文：二十一日，以张齐贤判河阳。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhang Qixian was sentenced to Kheyang.

古文：闰月辛亥，帝御文德殿，群臣入阁。
现代文：闰二月初一，真宗到文德殿，大臣人阁。
English: On the first day of the second month of the leap year, Shinso arrived at the Emperor's Residence, the Cabinet of Ministers.

古文：甲寅，冬官正韩显符上新造铜候仪。
现代文：初四，冬官正韩显符呈上新造铜候仪。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the winter official, Zheng Han Xianpu, presented a newly made bronze weather vane.

古文：乙卯，诏转运司贷恤黎州夷人。
现代文：初五，下诏转运司贷恤黎州夷人。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Li Zhou Yiren received a letter of credit from the Forwarding Department.

古文：丁卯，幸开封府射堂宴射，赐开封府将吏器币。
现代文：十七日，到开封府射堂设宴射箭，赐给开封府将吏器币。
English: On the 17th, a banquet was held at the Kaifeng prefectural hall of archery, and the governor of Kaifeng was given a piece of money.

古文：戊辰，诏东京、畿内死罪以下递减一等。将吏逮事太宗藩府者并赐予。
现代文：十八日，下诏： 东京瓷内死罪以下递减一等，将吏侍奉太宗藩府者一并赐给钱物。
English: On the 18th, the following edict was issued: The punishment for the crime of capital murder in Tokyo porcelain would be reduced by one grade, and officials who served the Taizong government would also be given money and goods.

古文：赤县父老本府宴犒，年九十者授摄官，赐粟帛终身；八十者爵一级。
现代文：赤县父老本府宴搞，九十岁者授为摄官，赐给粟帛终身，八十岁者赐爵一级。 
English: The parents and elders of Akechi County held a banquet in the capital, and the 90-year-old was awarded the post of regent, the lifetime award of the poppy, and the first-class knighthood for the 80-year-old.

古文：甲戌，以射堂为继照堂。
现代文：二十四日，以射堂为继照堂。
English: On the 24th, Sho-do Hall was built as a successor to Sho-do Hall.

古文：丁丑，召宰臣于宜圣殿，谒太宗圣容、玉皇像。
现代文：二十七日，在宜圣殿召集宰臣，朝拜太宗圣容、玉皇像。
English: On the 27th, the vassals were summoned to the Yishi-den to pay homage to Taizong's holy face and the statue of the Jade Emperor.

古文：戊寅，幸韩国长公主第视疾。
现代文：二十八日，到韩国长公主府第探病。
English: On the 28th, he went to visit the First Lady's residence in South Korea.

古文：三月壬辰，以权静海军留后李公蕴为静海军节度，封交阯郡王，赐衣带、器币。
现代文：三月十三日，任命代理静海军留后李公蕴为静海军节度使，封为交趾郡王，赐给衣带器币。
English: On March 13th, after the appointment of the acting Jing navy, Li Gongyun was appointed as the Jing navy festival envoy, sealed as the king of Jiaozuo County, and given the belt money.

古文：丙申，幸石保吉第视疾。
现代文：十七日，到石保吉府第探病。
English: On the 17th, he went to Ishibokichi Prefecture to check on his health.

古文：辛丑，诏戎、泸州给复一年，艰食者振之。
现代文：二十二日，诏令戎、沪州免除赋役一年，乏食者予以贩济。
English: On the 22nd, the Emperor issued an edict exempting Rong and Huzhou from forced labor for one year, and those who lacked food were allowed to sell it.

古文：夏四月辛亥，左屯卫将军允言坐狂率，责授太子左卫副率。
现代文：夏四月初二，左屯卫将军赵允言因狂妄自大降为太子左卫副率。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, General Zhao Yunyan of the Left Tunwei was demoted to the vice-head of the Prince of the Left Tunwei because of his arrogance.

古文：壬子，石保吉卒。
现代文：初三，石保吉去世。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Iwabokichi passed away.

古文：乙卯，陕西民疫，遣使赍药赐之。
现代文：初六，陕西百姓患疫病，派遣使臣带去药品赐给他们。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the people of Shaanxi suffered from an epidemic and sent envoys to bring medicine and give it to them.

古文：丁巳，诏中书以五月一日进中外文武升朝官及奉使岁举官名籍。
现代文：初八，下诏中书以五月一日进呈中外文武升朝官和奉使每年推举官员的姓名册。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the following imperial edict stated that the name list of Chinese and foreign officials to be promoted to the imperial court and officials to be promoted annually would be submitted on May 1.

古文：辛酉，赐泰山隐士秦辨号贞素先生，放还山。
现代文：十二日，赐泰山隐士秦辨号贞素先生，放回山。
English: On the twelfth day, he bestowed upon the hermit of Mount Taishan, Mr. Qin Bin Guo Zhen Su, and returned him to the mountain.

古文：甲子，契丹国母葬，废朝，禁边城乐。
现代文：十五日，契丹国母下葬，废朝，禁止边城用乐。
English: On the 15th, the mother of the Khitan nation was buried, the dynasty was abolished, and the use of music in border towns was prohibited.

古文：甲戌，加王旦兵部尚书，知枢密院事王钦若户部尚书，陈尧叟工部尚书。
现代文：二十五日，加王旦兵部尚书、知枢密院事，王钦若加衔户部尚书，陈尧雯加为工部尚书。
English: On the 25th, Wang Dan was promoted to the Ministry of Military Affairs and the Privy Council, Wang Qinra was promoted to the Ministry of Household Affairs, and Chen Yuwen was promoted to the Ministry of Industry.

古文：五月己卯，幸惟吉宫视疾。
现代文：五月初一，到赵惟吉宫探病。
English: On the first day of May, he went to Zhao Weiji Palace to check on his health.

古文：壬午，以西凉府觅诺族瘴疫，赐药。
现代文：初四，因西凉府觅诺族瘴疫流行，赐给药品。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, because of the epidemic of Yannuo plague in Xiliangfu, he was given medicine.

古文：丙戌，惟吉卒。
现代文：初八，赵惟吉去世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Zhao Weijing passed away.

古文：辛丑，京师大雨，平地数尺，坏庐舍，民有压死者，赐布帛。
现代文：二十三日，京师大雨，平地数尺，冲坏庐舍，赐给压死百姓布帛。
English: On the 23rd, heavy rain in Beijing caused several feet of flat ground to be washed away, ruining people's homes and giving them rags.

古文：六月庚戌，边臣言契丹饥，来市籴，诏雄州籴粟二万石振之。
现代文：六月初三，边臣报告说契丹饥荒，前来市来粮食，下诏雄州来粟二万石予以贩济。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the frontier minister reported a famine in Khitan, came to the city to buy grain, and then came to Xiongzhou to sell 20,000 koku of millet.

古文：河中府父老千余人请祀后土，不许。
现代文：河中府父老一千多人请求祠祀后土，没答应。
English: More than a thousand people in Kawakuchu prefecture have requested that the ancestral shrine be built on reclaimed land, but this has not been granted.

古文：丙辰，颁天下《释奠先圣庙仪》并《祭器图》。诏前岁陕西民饥，有鬻子者，官为购赎还其家。
现代文：初九，向全国颁发释奠先圣庙协和漂器卧。下诏：前年陕西百姓饥荒，有卖子的人，官府购赎还给其家。
English: On the 9th day of the first lunar month, the following edict was issued to the whole country: the previous year, the people of Shaanxi suffered from famine, and those who had children to sell were purchased by the government and returned to their families.

古文：壬戌，幸邢昺第视疾，赐金帛。
现代文：十五日，到邢簌家探病，赐给金帛。
English: On the fifteenth day, he went to Zhang's home to inquire about his health, and gave him the gold ingot.

古文：乙丑，幸元偁宫视疾。
现代文：十八日，到赵元翱宫探病。
English: On the 18th, he went to Zhao Yuancheng's palace to check on his health.

古文：秋七月丙申，温仲舒卒。
现代文：秋七月十九日，温仲舒去世。
English: On the 19th day of the 7th month, Wen Zhongshu passed away.

古文：己亥，以右丞向敏中为工部尚书、资政殿大学士。
现代文：二十二日，任命右承向敏中为工部尚书、资政殿大学士。
English: On the 22nd, Ujong Xiangmin, a junior high school student, was appointed as a senior scholar of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce and a scholar of the University of Finance and Administration.

古文：置龙图阁学士，以直学士杜镐为之。
现代文：设置龙图阁学士，以直学士杜镐担任。
English: Set up the Longtu Pavilion for the baccalaureate, with the direct baccalaureate Cuckoo as the post.

古文：诏南宫北宅大将军以下，各勤讲肄，诸子十岁以上并受经学书，勿令废惰。
现代文：下诏南宫北宅大将军以下，各勤讲习，儿子十岁以上都接受学习经学书籍，不要让其荒废。
English: According to the following edict, from the Southern Palace to the Northern Palace, everyone should study diligently, and sons over the age of ten should receive study books, and do not let them go to waste.

古文：辛丑，文武官、将校等三上表请祠汾阴后土。
现代文：二十四日，文武官、将校等三次上表请求祠祀汾阴后土。
English: On the 24th, the military attaché, officers, and others came to the table three times to request that the ancestral shrine be worshiped after the lunar new year.

古文：八月丁未朔，诏明年春有事于汾阴，州府长吏勿以修贡助祭烦民。
现代文：八月初一，下诏：明年春将到汾阴祭祀，州府长吏不要因修贡助祭烦扰百姓。
English: On the first day of August, the following edict was issued: next spring, there will be a gongyin sacrifice, and the prefectural governors should not disturb the people by paying tribute to help the sacrifice.

古文：戊申，陈尧叟为祀汾阴经度制置使。
现代文：初二，陈尧雯为祀汾阴经度制置使。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, Chen Yuwen was assigned to worship the Yin and Yang meridian system.

古文：己酉，王旦为祀汾阴大礼使，王钦若为礼仪使。
现代文：初三，王旦为祀祠汾阴大礼使，王钦若为礼仪使。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Wang Dan was the grand messenger of the shrine, and Wang Qin Ruo was the ceremonial messenger.

古文：庚戌，诏汾阴路禁弋猎，不得侵占民田，如东封之制。
现代文：初四，下诏汾阴地区禁止狩猎，不得侵占民田，如东封之制。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the following edict prohibited hunting in the Jinyin area, and people's fields must not be occupied, such as the Dongfeng system.

古文：辛亥，以江南旱，诏转运使决狱。
现代文：初五，因江南早灾，下诏转运使处理狱案。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, due to the early disaster in the south of the Yangtze River, the transfer envoy was sent to deal with the prison case.

古文：壬子，幸元偁宫视疾。升、洪、润州屡火，遣使存抚，祠境内山川。
现代文：初六，到赵元翱宫探病，升、洪、润州多次发生火灾，派遣使臣慰问安抚，祠祀境内山川。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he went to Zhao Yuanzhang's palace to investigate the illness, there were many fires in Sheng, Hong and Renzhou, he sent envoys to comfort and pacify, and the ancestral hall worshiped the mountains and rivers in the territory.

古文：戊午，赐占城国主马及器甲。
现代文：十二日，赐给占城国主马和器甲。
English: On the twelfth day, horses and armor were given to the lord of the city.

古文：庚申，幸天驷监，赐从官马。
现代文：十四日，到天驯监，赐从官马匹。
English: On the fourteenth day of the month, the tamer came to heaven and gave horses to the officials.

古文：解州池盐不种自生。
现代文：解州池盐不种自生。
English: The Xiezhou Pond salt does not grow naturally.

古文：辛酉，给郓州牧马草地还民。
现代文：十五日，把邪州牧马草地还民。
English: On the 15th, the Yanzhou Horse Pasture was returned to the people.

古文：甲子，罢江、淮和籴，所在系囚递减一等，盗谷食者量行论决。
现代文：十八日，废除江淮和来，所在各地关押囚犯递减罪刑一等，盗窃粮食者量行处理。
English: On the 18th, the Jianghuai and He Lai Dynasties were abolished, and prisoners in all regions where they were located had their sentences reduced by one degree, and those who stole grain were dealt with in accordance with their weight.

古文：丁卯，群臣五表上尊号，不许。
现代文：二十一日，大臣五次奉表上尊号，没有答应。
English: On the twenty-first day, the minister received the honorific title five times, but did not accept it.

古文：戊辰，诏升、洪、扬、庐州长吏兼安抚使。
现代文：二十二日，下诏升、洪、扬、庐州长吏兼安抚使。
English: On the 22nd, the governors and pacification commissioners of Sheng, Hong, Yang and Handan were appointed.

古文：甲戌，以澄州团练使朱能为左龙武军大将军。
现代文：二十八日，任命澄州团练使朱能为左龙武军大将军。
English: On the 28th, Zhu Rong was appointed as the General of the Left Dragon Army.

古文：乙亥，河中府父老千七百人来迎，上劳问之，赐以缗帛。
现代文：二十九日，河中府父老一千七百人来迎接，真宗慰问他们，赐给络帛。
English: On the 29th, 1700 people from all over the prefecture came to welcome him. Shinshu offered his condolences and gave him a straw hat.

古文：九月癸未，赐钱三十万给故卢多逊子葬其父母。
现代文：九月初八，赐给钱三十万给已故卢多逊子葬其父母。
English: On the eighth day of the ninth month, he gave 300,000 yuan to the late Ludo Sun Zi to bury his parents.

古文：丁亥，作《宗室座右铭》赐诸王。
现代文：十二日，作宗室座右锻赐给诸王。
English: On the twelfth day, the right forge of the throne room was given to the kings.

古文：华州言父老二千余人请幸西岳。
现代文：华州报告说父老二千多人请真宗到华山。
English: Huazhou reported that more than 2,000 people invited Zhenzong to Huashan.

古文：癸巳，杖杀入内高品江守恩于郑州，知州俞献卿坐论救削一任。
现代文：十八日，在郑州杖杀人内高品江守恩，知州俞献卿因论救他被削夺一任。
English: On the 18th, Gao Pinjiang Shouen was killed in Zhengzhou Jie, and Chizhou Shuxianqing was deprived of his post because of his rescue.

古文：乙未，幸崇真资圣院视吴国长公主疾。
现代文：二十日，到崇真资圣院探视吴国长公主病情。
English: On the 20th, he went to the Chongzhenzi Convent to visit the sick Princess Wu.

古文：甲辰，内出《绥抚十六条》，颁江、淮南安抚使。
现代文：二十九日，内出绥抚十六条颁发给江淮南安抚使。
English: On the 29th, the 16th Article of Inner Appeasement was issued to the Jianghuainan Pacifying Envoy.

古文：冬十月辛亥，契丹使耶律宁告征高丽。
现代文：冬十月初六，契丹使臣耶律宁来报告征讨高丽。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, the Khitan envoy, Yeruning, came to report on the conquest of Korea.

古文：河中民获《灵宝真文》。
现代文：河中百姓得到灵宝真办。
English: The people in the middle of the river got a real treat.

古文：庚申，丁谓等上《大中祥符封禅记》。
现代文：十五日，丁谓等呈上大中样符封禅主己。
English: On the fifteenth day, Ding Zetian and others presented the large and medium-sized samples to the zen master.

古文：十一月庚寅，遣内臣奉安宣祖、太祖圣容于二陵。
现代文：十一月十五日，派遣内臣恭敬安置宣祖、太祖圣容于二陵。
English: On November 15th, they dispatched a vassal to respectfully place Emperor Xuanzu and Emperor Taizu Sheng Rong in the two mausoleums.

古文：乙未，甘州回鹘来贡。
现代文：二十日，甘州回给来进贡。
English: On the 20th, Gansu returned the tribute.

古文：己亥，幸太一宫。
现代文：二十四日，到太一宫。
English: On the 24th, I went to Taichung.

古文：陕州黄河清。
现代文：陕州黄河清澈见底。
English: The bottom of the Yellow River in Shaanxi is crystal clear.

古文：十二月，陕州黄河再清。
现代文：十二月，陕州黄河又一次澄清。
English: In December, the situation of the Yellow River in Shaanxi Province was once again clarified.

古文：庚戌，集贤校理晏殊献《河清颂》。
现代文：初六，集贤校理晏殊献上河清场。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of junior high school, Ji Hyun, the principal of the school, gave a special presentation on the river clearing.

古文：癸丑，诏天下贫民及渔采者过津渡勿算。
现代文：初九，下诏全国贫民和从事渔业者过津渡不交税。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, it was decreed that the poor and those engaged in fishing across the country would not pay taxes when crossing the Tsu River.

古文：乙卯，告太庙。
现代文：十一日，祭告太庙。
English: On the 11th day, the temple was consecrated.

古文：诏自今谒庙入东偏门。
现代文：下诏从今以后朝拜庙由东偏门进。
English: The following edict decreed that from now on, worshippers should enter the temple through the east gate.

古文：以资政殿大学士向敏中权东京留守。
现代文：任命资政殿大学士向敏中代理东京留守。
English: Appointed a representative of the Vice-President of the University, Professor Xiang Minzhong, to stay in Tokyo.

古文：丁巳，翰林学士李宗谔等上《诸道图经》。
现代文：十三日，翰林学士李宗愕等呈上诸道图经。
English: On the 13th, Hanlin Scholar Li Zongpeng and others presented the sutras of the Tao.

古文：辛酉，谒玉清昭应宫。
现代文：十七日，朝拜玉清昭应宫。
English: On the 17th, the morning worship of the Jade Emperor Zhao Ying Palace began.

古文：丙寅，诏沙门岛流人特给口粮。
现代文：二十二日，下诏沙门岛流放的人特别供给口粮。
English: On the 22nd, special food rations were provided to the exiles on Zhashamen Island.

古文：己巳，作《奉天庇民述》示宰相。
现代文：二十五日，作捧天庇民沙给宰相看。
English: On the 25th, the prime minister watched the performance of Tianpi Minsha.

古文：禁扈从人燔道路草木。
现代文：禁止启从焚烧道路上的草木。
English: It is prohibited to burn plants and trees on the road.

古文：辛未，以太宗御书赐交州李公蕴。
现代文：二十七日，以太宗御书赐给交州李公蕴。
English: On the 27th, the Book of Ethereal Sect was bestowed on Jiaozhou Li Gongyun.

古文：是岁，龟兹、占城、交州来贡。
现代文：这一年，龟兹、占城、交州来进贡。
English: This year, Guizi, Zhancheng and Jiaozhou came to pay tribute.

古文：陕西饥。
现代文：陕西饥荒。
English: Famine in Shaanxi.

古文：江、淮南旱。
现代文：江、淮南旱灾。
English: Jiangsu and Huainan suffered from drought.

