古文：索湘，字巨川，沧州盐山人。
现代文：索湘，字巨川，沧州盐山人。
English: People from Soxiang, Juchuan and Yanshan in Cangzhou.

古文：开宝六年进士，释褐郓州司理参军。
现代文：宋开宝六年中进士举，授官郓州司理参军。
English: In the sixth year of Song Kibo's reign, he was promoted to the rank of officer and was given the post of secretary of Bozhou to join the army.

古文：齐州有大狱，连逮者千五百人，有司不能决。湘受诏推鞫，事随以白。
现代文：齐州有大案件，牵连被抓者一千五百人，官吏不能判决，索湘受诏命考察审讯，案事随即审清楚了。
English: There was a big case in Chizhou, involving 1,500 people who were arrested. Officials could not make a decision. Sohang was ordered to investigate and investigate. The case was immediately cleared up.

古文：太平兴国四年，转运使和岘荐其能，迁太仆寺丞，充度支巡官。
现代文：太平兴国四年，转运使和岘向朝廷推荐索湘的才能，索湘升任太仆寺丞，充任度支巡官。
English: In the fourth year of Taiping Xingguo, the transit envoy and the magistrate recommended Soshuang's talent to the imperial court, and Soshuang was promoted to the position of the chief clerk of the temple, and was appointed to the position of the degree support inspector.

古文：改太子右赞善大夫，转殿中丞，充推官，拜监察御史。
现代文：改任太子右赞善大夫，转任殿中丞，充任推官，拜官监察御史。
English: He was reassigned to the position of Prince Uzumasa's doctor, to the position of palace junior secretary, to the position of shogun, and to the position of inspector of imperial history.

古文：九年，河决，坏民田，命与户部推官元玘同按行。
现代文：太平兴国九年，黄河决堤，毁坏百姓之田，朝廷命令索湘与户部推官元王己同往考察巡视。
English: In the ninth year of the Taiping Restoration, when the Yellow River burst its banks and destroyed the people's fields, the imperial court ordered Suo Xiang to go on an inspection tour with the head of the household department, Yuan Wang.

古文：会诏下东封，与刘蟠同知泰山路转运事，又为河北转运副使。
现代文：适逢皇帝下诏东封泰山，索湘与刘蟠一起知泰山路转运使，他又任河北转运副使。
English: At the right time, the emperor issued an edict to the East to enclose Mount Tai. Soxiang, together with Liu Bei, became the envoy for the transit of Mount Tai. He also served as the deputy envoy for the transit of Hebei.

古文：湘经度供馈，以能干闻。
现代文：索湘经管供给，以能干闻名。
English: Sohang manages the supply, and is known for its ability to grow.

古文：事集，加屯田员外郎。
现代文：事情完成后，他增职任屯田员外郎。
English: After the matter was completed, he was given the additional post of Tondenkanshiro.

古文：明年，契丹入寇，王师衄于君子馆，敌兵乘胜据中渡桥，塞土门，将趋镇州。
现代文：第二年，契丹入侵，宋军败于君子馆，敌军乘胜占据中渡桥，阻塞土门，就要直趋镇州。
English: In the second year, the Khitan invaded, the Song army was defeated at the Gentleman's Pavilion, and the enemy army took advantage of the victory to occupy the Zhongdu Bridge and block the earthen gate, and it was necessary to go straight to Zhenzhou.

古文：诸将计议未定，湘为田重进画谋，结大阵东行，声言会高阳关兵，敌以为然，即拥众邀我于平虏城。
现代文：宋军诸将商议计策未定下，索湘替田重进出计谋，宋军连接成大队东行，声明要去会合高阳关的宋兵，契丹信以为然，立即结集于平虏城拦截宋军。
English: The Song generals discussed the plan but did not decide on it. So Xiang came up with a plan to re-enter and leave Tian. The Song army linked up into a large group and headed east. They announced that they were going to meet the Song soldiers at Gaoyang Pass. Qidanxin believed this and immediately gathered in Pingru City to intercept the Song army.

古文：夜二鼓，率兵而南，径入镇阳，据唐河，乘其无备破砦栅。及敌兵觉，悉遁走。
现代文：夜晚二鼓，宋兵转而南进，直入镇阳，占据唐河，乘契丹不备攻破砦栅，等到契丹兵发觉，全部逃走。
English: At dusk, the Song soldiers turned south and went straight into Zhenyang, occupied the Tang River, and used the Khitan soldiers to break through the fortification. When the Khitan soldiers found out, they all fled.

古文：雍熙中，召为盐铁判官，改驾部员外郎。
现代文：雍熙年间，皇帝下诏命索湘任盐铁判官，改任驾部员外郎。
English: During the reign of the Yongxi Emperor, the emperor issued an edict to appoint So Xiang as the judge of salt and iron, and he was changed to the driver, Gairo.

古文：端拱二年，河北治方田，命副樊知古为招置营田使。
现代文：端拱二年，河北治理方田，命令索湘辅助樊知古，任招置营田使。
English: In the second year of Duan Gong, he governed Fangda in Hebei Province, ordered Suo Xiang to assist Shichigu, and appointed Yingtan Envoy.

古文：会议罢，复为河北转运使。
现代文：恰逢朝廷商议停治方田，索湘又任河北转运使。
English: It coincided with the Imperial Court's deliberation to suspend the administration of Fangdian, and So Xiang was appointed as the Hebei transfer envoy.

古文：转虞部郎中，选为将作少监。
现代文：转任虞部郎中，选任将作少监。
English: He will be transferred to the position of Junior Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Justice, and will be appointed as a junior inspector.

古文：居无何，有讼其擅易库缣以自用者，坐授膳部员外郎、知相州。
现代文：索湘任职没多久，有人告他擅自拿官库中的缣自己用，索湘因罪降任膳部员外郎、知相州。
English: Not long after Sosho took office, someone accused him of taking money from the treasury without permission and using it for himself. For his crime, Sosho was demoted to the position of a member of the catering department.

古文：时有群盗聚西山下，谋断澶州河桥，入攻磁、相州，援旗伐鼓，白昼抄劫。
现代文：当时有百姓聚集于西山下，图谋切断澶州河桥入攻磁州、相州，他们摇旗击鼓，白天进行劫夺。
English: At that time, some people gathered at the foot of the West Mountain, plotting to cut off the Zhangzhou River Bridge into the Zhengzhou and Xiangzhou, they waved flags and played drums, and carried out robberies during the day.

古文：邻郡发兵千人捕逐，无敢近。
现代文：邻郡派兵一千多人捕捉，无人敢接近他们。
English: The neighboring county sent more than a thousand soldiers to catch them, but no one dared to approach them.

古文：湘择州军得精锐三百人，侦其入境，即掩击而尽擒之。
现代文：索湘选择州中军士得三百精锐，侦探到这些人进入相州境，立即乘其不备攻击，全部捉住他们。
English: Soxiang selected three hundred elite sergeants and sergeants in the state. Detectives went to these people to enter the state border, immediately took advantage of their unprepared attack, and caught them all.

古文：转运使王嗣宗以状闻，诏复旧官，命为河东转运使。
现代文：转运使王嗣宗把其事报告皇帝，皇帝诏令恢复索湘原官级，命索湘任河东转运使。
English: The transfer made Wang Shizong report the matter to the emperor, and the emperor issued a decree to restore Soshuang to his former official rank, and ordered Soshuang to be appointed as the Hedong Transfer Envoy.

古文：湘以忻州推官石宗道、宪州录事胡则为干职，命以自随，所至州郡，勾检其簿领焉。
现代文：索湘认为忻州推官石崇道、宪州录事胡则很胜任其职，命令他们跟随自己，他所到州郡，检查他们的簿领。
English: Soxiang believed that the prefect of Zhangzhou, Shi Chongdao, and the prefect of Gyeongju, Hu Zheng, were very competent in their duties, and ordered them to follow him. He went to the prefecture and county to check their books.

古文：二人后皆历清要。
现代文：石、胡二人后来都官任要职。
English: Both Shi and Hu were later appointed to important posts.

古文：明年，王超等率师趋乌白池，抵无定河。
现代文：第二年，王超等人率领宋军去乌白池，抵达无定河。
English: In the second year, Wang Chao and others led the Song army to Wubai Pond and arrived at Muding River.

古文：水源涸绝，军士渴乏。
现代文：水源涸绝，宋兵干渴疲乏。
English: The water source dried up, leaving the Song soldiers thirsty and exhausted.

古文：时湘已辇大锹千枚至，令凿井，众赖以济。
现代文：这时索湘已经用车运一千多把大铁锹，令用之凿水井，宋兵得以渡过难关。
English: At this time, Suo Xiang had already transported more than a thousand large iron hoes by car, and ordered the wells to be dug, so that Song soldiers could get through the difficulties.

古文：真宗即位，入为右谏议大夫。
现代文：宋真宗即位，索湘入朝任右谏议大夫。
English: Song Zhenzong ascended to the throne, and So Xiang entered the imperial court as the doctor of the right imperial court.

古文：复充河北转运使，属郡民有干酿，岁输课甚微，而不逞辈因之为奸盗。
现代文：又充任河北转运使，所属郡百姓有人主管酿酒，每年向朝廷纳税甚少，而那些不法之人趁机为奸作盗。
English: He also served as the Hebei transshipment envoy, and the people of his county had someone in charge of brewing, and paid very little tax to the imperial court every year, while those illegals took advantage of the opportunity to steal.

古文：湘奏废之。
现代文：索湘奏请朝廷废除掉该制度。
English: Sosho appealed to the Imperial Court to abolish the system.

古文：德州旧赋民马以给驿，又役民为步递，湘代以官马兵卒，人皆便之。
现代文：德州旧时征调百姓的马供驿站，且役使百姓步行传递信函，索湘用军马和士兵代替之，百姓都便当多了。
English: In the old days, people's horses were requisitioned and transferred to supply post stations in Dezhou, and people were made to deliver letters on foot. In Suxiang, military horses and soldiers were used instead, and the number of people increased.

古文：会内殿崇班阎日新建议，请于静戎、威虏两军置场鬻茶，收其利以资军用。
现代文：适逢内殿崇班阎日新建议，请求在静戎、威虏两军置场专卖茶叶，收茶利资补军队费用。
English: This coincided with a new proposal from the Inner Palace's chancellor, Zongban Yan, requesting that the two armies set up stores in Jing Rong and Wairu to exclusively sell tea and collect tea rents to cover the army's expenses.

古文：湘言非便，遂止。
现代文：索湘上书说这不便当，此议遂停止执行。
English: Sohang wrote that this was inconvenient, and the proposal was suspended.

古文：又言事者请许榷场商旅以茶药等物贩易于北界，北界商旅许于雄、霸州市易，资其懋迁，庶息边患。
现代文：又有议事者请求朝廷同意榷场的商人旅客把茶药等物品贩卖于北方边界，允许北方商人旅客到雄州、霸州市场交易，资助其交易，可能平息边患。
English: Another deliberator asked the imperial court to allow merchants and travelers from the north to trade tea and other goods at the northern border, and to allow northern merchants and travelers to trade at the Xiongzhou and Bazhou markets, and to subsidize their transactions, which may quell the border problems.

古文：诏湘详议以闻，乃上言曰： 北边自兴置榷场，商旅辐凑，制置深得其宜。
现代文：皇帝诏令索湘详细计议报告上去，索湘于是上书说： 北边自从置榷场以来，商人旅客从四方聚集到此，旧制置榷场很合时宜。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered Soshuang to submit a detailed plan report, and Soshuang then submitted a letter saying: In the north, since the pier was built, merchants and travelers from all over the country have gathered here. The old pier was very timely.

古文：今若许其交相贩易，则沿边商人深入戎界，窃为非便。
现代文：现在若允许他们互相来往买卖，那么我沿边商人深入少族民族界内，我私下认为不便当。
English: Now, if they are allowed to trade with each other, then I think it would be inconvenient for merchants along the border to go deep into the ethnic minority community.

古文：又北界商人若至雄、霸，其中或杂奸伪，何由辨明？
现代文：况且北方商人如果来到雄州、霸州，他们中间或许混杂别有用心之人，这从哪里来辨明？
English: Moreover, if northern merchants come to Xiongzhou and Baizhou, they may be mixed with people with ulterior motives. How can this be identified?

古文：况边民易动难安，蕃戎之情宜为羁制。
现代文：况且边境百姓容易动而难于安居，少数民族的情形适合羁縻牵制。
English: Moreover, the border people are easy to move but difficult to live safely, and the situation of ethnic minorities is suitable for control.

古文：望且仍旧为便。 会有诏规度复修定州新乐、蒲阴两县，湘以其地迫窄，非屯兵之所，遂奏罢之。
现代文：希望仍按原制办较为便当。 恰逢皇帝有令计划重修定州新乐、蒲阴两县，索湘认为其地十分窄小，不是驻兵的地方，于是奏请罢停之。
English: Hoping that it would be more convenient to continue to operate according to the original system, when the emperor issued an order to renovate the two counties of Dingzhou, Xinle and Puyin, Sohang thought that the land was too narrow and was not a place for soldiers to be stationed, so he asked the emperor to stop it.

古文：湘少文而长于吏事，历边部，所至必广储畜为备豫计，出入军旅间，颇著能名。
现代文：索湘读书不多却擅长于吏事，历任边境地区官职。他所到处一定储备好物资作为将来的备用，他出入军队中，颇以能干著名。
English: Sohang didn't study much, but he was good at administrative work. He held various posts in border regions. He made sure to stock up on supplies as a backup for the future. He was in and out of the military, and was known for his ability.

古文：先是，边州置榷场，与蕃夷互市，而自京辇物货以充之，其中茶茗最为烦扰，复道远多损败。
现代文：先前，宋在边境各州设置榷场，与少数民族互市交易，却从京城车运货物于此用以交易，其中茶叶最为烦扰，且路途遥远多有损坏。
English: Previously, Song set up marketplaces in border states to trade with ethnic minorities, but goods were transported by car from Beijing to be traded here. Tea was the most troublesome, and the journey was long and often damaged.

古文：湘建议请许商贾缘江载茶诣边郡入中，既免道途之耗，复有征算之益。
现代文：索湘建议朝廷允许沿江运茶到边郡入榷场中，既免去路途的损耗，又有赋税的收益。
English: So Xiang suggested that the imperial court allow the tea to be transported along the river to the border county market, which would not only avoid the loss of the journey, but also the tax revenue.

古文：又威虏、静戎军岁烧缘边草地以虞南牧，言事者又请于北砦山麓中兴置银冶，湘以为召寇，亦奏罢之。
现代文：又威虏、静戎两军每年烧边境草地用以防备少数民族南侵，议事者又请求在北砦山脚下开置冶银矿所，索湘认为这会招致敌人，也奏请朝廷罢停此议。
English: In addition, the two armies of the Taiping and Jing Rong burned the border meadows every year to prevent the southern invasion of ethnic minorities. The deliberators also requested to open a silver mine at the foot of the North Fort Hill. Sohang believed that this would attract enemies, and also requested the court to stop this discussion.

古文：咸平二年，入为户部使。
现代文：咸平二年，索湘入朝任户部使。
English: In the second year of Xianping, Sohang entered the imperial court as a household envoy.

古文：受诏详定三司编敕，坐与王扶交相请托，擅易板籍，责授将作少监。
现代文：他受皇命详细编定三司编敕，他因与王扶互相请托，擅自交换板籍，受责降职将作少监。
English: He was ordered by the emperor to compile the details of the three divisions of the cadres, and because he and Wang Fu asked each other for mutual trust, he exchanged ranks without authorization, and was ordered to demote to junior superintendent.

古文：子琚、璩、琦，并进士及第。
现代文：咸平三年，他出任知许州，徙任荆南。
English: In the third year of Xianping, he was appointed to Zhishuzhou and moved to Jingnan.

古文：琦相英宗、神宗，自有传。
现代文：再任右谏议大夫、知广州。
English: He was reappointed to the post of doctor of the Right Division of the Supreme People's Procuratorate, Guangzhou.

古文：何蒙，字叔昭，洪州人。
现代文：咸平四年，他死去，皇帝下诏他的儿子索希颜护丧运回乡里安葬。何蒙，字叔昭，洪州人。
English: In the fourth year of Xianping, he died, and the emperor decreed that his son, Suo Xi Yan Gu, be transported back to his hometown for burial. He Meng, surnamed Shuzhao, was from Hongzhou.

古文：少精《春秋左氏传》。
现代文：他年少精于《春秋左氏传》。
English: In his younger years, he was good at "The Spring and Autumn Legend of Zuo Shi Huang."

古文：李煜时，举进士不第，因献书言事，署录事参军。
现代文：南唐李煜时，他举试进士落第，于是进献书议论政事，被授录事参军。
English: During the Southern Tang Dynasty, he failed to pass the entrance examination, so he submitted a book to discuss political affairs and was awarded a certificate to join the army.

古文：入宋，授洺州推官。
现代文：入宋朝，得授氵名州推官。
English: Entered the Song Dynasty, and was awarded the title of "famous prefectural governor."

古文：太平兴国五年，调遂宁令。
现代文：太平兴国五年，他调任遂宁令。
English: In the fifth year of Taiping Xingguo, he was transferred to Suining.

古文：时太宗亲征契丹还，作诗以献。
现代文：当时宋太宗亲征契丹班师回朝，他作诗进献。
English: At that time, Song Taizong personally recruited Khitan teachers to return to the North, and he wrote poems for them.

古文：召见赏叹，授右赞善大夫，三迁至水部员外郎、通判庐州。
现代文：宋太宗召见他表示欣赏赞叹，授官右赞善大夫。经三次升迁至水部员外郎，通判庐州。
English: Song Taizong summoned him to express his appreciation and admiration, and he was awarded the post of Dr. Uzenzen. After being promoted three times to the post of water department member, he was awarded the post of Zhangzhou.

古文：时郡中火燔廨舍，榷务俱尽。
现代文：当时大火烧毁官舍，官府专营收入全都烧尽。
English: At that time, the fire burned down the official residence, and the government's franchise income was all burned out.

古文：蒙假民器，贷邻郡曲米为酒，既而课增倍。
现代文：何蒙借用百姓的器物，向邻郡借贷麦米酿酒，既而课税成倍增加。
English: He Meng borrowed people's utensils, borrowed wheat and rice from neighboring counties to make wine, and the tax was doubled.

古文：户部使上其状，诏赉缗钱奖之。
现代文：户部使向皇帝汇报这一情况，皇帝下令给缗钱奖励何蒙。
English: The household envoy reported the situation to the emperor, who ordered the reward to be given to He Meng.

古文：稍迁司门。
现代文：不久何蒙升任司门。
English: Soon after, He Meng was promoted to the position of secretary.

古文：巡抚使潘慎修荐其材敏，驿召至京，因面对，访以江、淮茶法，蒙条奏利害称旨，赐绯鱼及钱十万。
现代文：巡抚使潘慎修向朝廷推荐他有才敏捷，快马召何蒙到京城，于是面见皇帝对答，皇帝询问江、淮茶法情况，何蒙逐条奏答其利弊合皇帝心意，得赏绯鱼和钱十万。
English: The governor asked Pan Shenxiu to recommend to the imperial court that he was talented and agile, and quickly summoned He Meng to Beijing. He then met with the emperor for a reply. The emperor inquired about the situation of Jiang and Huai tea methods, and He Meng replied step by step about their advantages and disadvantages in line with the emperor's will. He was awarded 100,000 baht and 100 thousand yuan.

古文：后二日复对，又上淮南酒榷便宜，特改库部，复赐钱二十万，因命至淮右提总其事，自是岁有羡利。
现代文：过后二天再次对答皇帝，他又上言在淮南由官府专营酒业很适宜，皇帝特令他改任库部，再赏他钱二十万，于是命令他到淮右总管专卖酒的事务，从此每年有剩余利润。
English: Two days later, he again replied to the emperor. He also said that it was very appropriate for the government to run the liquor industry in Huainan. The emperor specially ordered him to be transferred to the treasury department and rewarded him with another 200,000 yuan. He was then ordered to head the liquor sales business in Huaiyuan. Since then, there has been a surplus profit every year.

古文：使还，知温州，未行，留提举在京诸司库务。
现代文：他出使回来，升任温州知州，他还没成行，又被留京任提举在京诸司库务。
English: He returned from his mission and was promoted to Wenzhou Zhizhou. Before he left, he was appointed to be treasurer in Beijing.

古文：求外任，复命知温州。
现代文：他请求外地任职，朝廷再次任命他为温州知州。
English: He requested to serve outside the country, and the imperial court reappointed him to Wenzhou Zhizhou.

古文：坐举人不当，削一官。
现代文：他因荐举人才不当之罪，被削去一级官职。
English: He was stripped of his first-class official post for the crime of improperly recommending talent.

古文：真宗即位，复前资，因上言请开淮南盐禁。
现代文：宋真宗即帝位，恢复何蒙以前的资历，他于是上书陈言请求开放淮南的盐禁。
English: Song Zhenzong, i.e. the emperor, restored He Meng's previous qualifications, and he then petitioned for the opening of Huainan's salt ban.

古文：时卞衮、杨允恭辈方以禁盐为便，共排抑之，出知梧州。
现代文：当时，卞衮、杨允恭一班人正认为禁盐适宜，共同排挤压抑何蒙，何蒙出任梧州知州。
English: At that time, Zhai, Yang Yunqiong and others were of the opinion that the ban on salt was appropriate, and they worked together to oust and suppress He Meng, and He Meng became the leader of Wuzhou Zhizhou.

古文：顷之，改水部郎中，上所著《兵机要类》十卷。
现代文：不久，改任水部郎中。何蒙向皇帝献上他所著的《兵机要类》十卷。
English: Soon, he was appointed as a junior aide to the Minister of Water Resources. He Meng presented his ten-volume "Important Class of Military Machinery" to the emperor.

古文：时审官拟知汉阳军，及引对，改知鄂州。
现代文：当时审官院拟定他任知汉阳军，等到引见皇帝对答，又改任他为鄂州知州。
English: At that time, the Supreme People's Procuratorate proposed that he be appointed as the commander of the Hanyang Army, and when he was introduced to the emperor's reply, he was reappointed as the commander of Ezhou.

古文：大中祥符初，转库部。
现代文：大中祥符初年，他转任库部。
English: In the first year of high school, he was transferred to the treasury department.

古文：四年，加太府少卿。
现代文：大中祥符四年，他加官太府少卿。
English: In the fourth year of high school, he was promoted to Taifu Shosho.

古文：未几，知太平州，又知袁州。
现代文：没多久，任太平州知州，又任袁州知州。
English: Not long after, he was appointed to Taiping prefecture and Yuzhou prefecture.

古文：州民多采金，蒙建议请以代租税。
现代文：州中百姓大多开采金矿，何蒙向朝廷建议请求让百姓用金代替租税。
English: Most of the people in the state mined gold, and He Meng proposed to the imperial court to request that the people use gold instead of taxes.

古文：上曰： 若此则农废业矣。 不许。
现代文：皇帝说 ：如果这样那农田就会荒废了。 
English: The emperor said, "In that case, the farmland will be wasted."

古文：俄徙濠州。
现代文：不同意何蒙所请。不久，调任濠州。
English: He did not agree to the request of He Meng. Soon, he was transferred to Zhangzhou.

古文：六年，上表谢事，授光禄少卿致仕，命未下，卒，年七十七。
现代文：大中祥符六年，何蒙上书汇报事务，将被授光禄少卿职务，任命还没下，他已死去，终年七十七岁。
English: In the sixth year of the Great Middle Xiangfu, He Mengshu wrote a report on the affairs and will be awarded the post of Luku Shaoqing. Before the appointment, he died at the age of seventy-seven.

