古文：起阏逢摄提格，尽旃蒙单阏，凡二年。孝成皇帝下绥和二年
现代文：起，止，一共两年。汉成帝绥和二年春季，正月，成帝前往甘泉，在泰祭天。
English: It lasted for a total of two years. In the spring and the first month of the second year of Emperor Han Zhengde's reign, Emperor Zhengde went to Ganquan to celebrate the New Year in Thailand.

古文：春，正月，上行幸甘泉，郊泰畤。二月，壬子，丞相方进薨。
现代文：二月，壬子，丞相翟方进去世。
English: In February, Jinshi, the chancellor, Shifang Jin, passed away.

古文：时荧惑守心，丞相府议曹平陵李寻奏记方进，言： 灾变迫切，大责日加，安得但保斥逐之戮！
现代文：当时星象显示火星停留在心宿。丞相府议曹平陵人李寻向翟方进上呈文说： 灾害天变逼迫，严厉的谴责天天增加，怎样才能做到只受斥逐的惩罚！
English: At that time, the stars showed that Mars was staying in the heart. Li Xuan, the mausoleum of Cao Ping, who led the discussion at the Prime Minister's Office, submitted a document to the Yongfang, saying: "Disasters are forced by natural changes, severe condemnation is increasing every day, how can we only be punished by expulsion!

古文：阖府三百馀人，唯君侯择其中，与尽节转凶。 
现代文：整个丞相府有三百余人，请您从中挑选合适的人与他一起尽节，转移凶险。 
English: There are more than three hundred people in the entire chancellor's office. Please select the right person from among them to finish the festival with him and transfer the danger.

古文：方进忧之，不知所出。
现代文：翟方进感到忧愁，不知如何是好。
English: Fangjin is very worried about this and doesn't know what to do.

古文：会郎贲丽善为星，言大臣宜当之。
现代文：正好郎官贲丽精通天文星象，说大臣应当代替天子身当灾祸。
English: He said the minister should take on this responsibility, as Ms. Lang is good at observing the stars.

古文：上乃召见方进。
现代文：于是成帝召见翟方进。
English: The emperor then summoned Fangjin.

古文：还归，未及引决，上遂赐册，责让以政事不治，灾害并臻，百姓穷困，曰： 欲退君位，尚未忍，使尚书令赐君上尊酒十石，养牛一，君审处焉！ 
现代文：翟方进从宫里回来，还没来得及自裁，成帝就下策书，斥责他把国家政事管理得乱七八糟，天灾人祸同时并作，百姓穷困。并说： 本打算把你免职，但尚未忍心，派尚书令赐与你上等好酒十石，肥牛一头，你好自为之！ 
English: When Yan Fangjin returned from the palace, he had not yet had time to judge himself. Emperor Cheng then issued a decree, reprimanding him for his chaotic management of state affairs, natural and man-made disasters at the same time, and the poverty of the people. He also said: I had planned to remove you from office, but I did not have the heart to do it, so I sent Shang Shuling to give you ten kilos of fine wine and a fat cow. You can do it yourself!

古文：方进即日自杀。
现代文：翟方进即日自杀。
English: Fangjin committed suicide the same day.

古文：上秘之，遣九卿册赠印绶，赐乘舆秘器、少府供张，柱槛皆衣素。
现代文：成帝对此事保密，派九卿拿着皇帝的策书，赠翟方进印信绶带，赐御用冥器，由少府供设帷帐，房柱和栏杆都裹以白布。
English: Emperor Cheng kept the matter confidential, and sent nine emperors to take the emperor's policy book, presented the emperor with the letter and ribbon, and gave the emperor the necromancer. The young emperor provided the curtains, and the pillars and railings were wrapped in white cloth.

古文：天子亲临吊者数至，礼赐异于它相故事。
现代文：成帝数次亲临吊唁，礼仪之隆重，赏赐之多，不同于其他丞相，前所未有。
English: The Emperor went to pay his condolences in person many times, which was different from the old practice of presenting gifts to other prime ministers.

古文：臣光曰：晏婴有言： 天命不慆，不贰其命。 
现代文：臣司马光曰：晏婴有句话说： 天命不容怀疑，命运只有一个，无法改变。 
English: Vassal Sima Guang said, "There is a saying in Xinying: The destiny of heaven cannot be doubted, there is only one destiny, which cannot be changed.

古文：祸福之至，安可移乎！
现代文：祸福降临，难道可以转移吗？
English: When misfortune and good fortune come, can they be shifted?

古文：昔楚昭王、宋景公不忍移灾于卿佐，曰： 移腹心之疾，寘诸股肱，何益也！ 
现代文：从前楚昭王、宋景公不忍将灾祸转移到大臣身上，说： 把心腹的疾患，转移到四肢，有什么好处呢！ 
English: Once upon a time, King Chu Zhao and Song Jing Gong could not bear to transfer the disaster to the minister, saying: What is the benefit of transferring the disease of the heart to the limbs?

古文：藉其灾可移，仁君犹不肯为，况不可乎！
现代文：假如灾祸可以转移，仁慈的君王还不忍心那样做，何况不可转移呢！
English: If the calamity could be averted, the merciful monarch would not have had the heart to do it, let alone avert it!

古文：使方进罪不至死而诛之，以当大变，是诬天也；方进有罪当刑，隐其诛而厚其葬，是诬人也；孝成欲诬天、人而卒无所益，可谓不知命矣。
现代文：假使翟方进罪不至死而诛杀了他，以承当天变，这是诬蔑上天；假使翟方进有罪应当处以死刑，却秘密诛杀，又赐以厚葬，这是欺骗人心。孝成皇帝想欺天、欺人，但最后并没有好处，可以说是不知天命。
English: If Shifang committed a crime and killed him without dying, but changed his mind later, this was slandering heaven; if Shifang committed a crime and should have been sentenced to death, but secretly killed him and gave him a good burial, this was deceiving the people. Emperor Xiaocheng wanted to deceive heaven and deceive people, but in the end there was no benefit, it can be said that he did not know the fate of heaven.

古文：三月，上行幸河东，祠后土。
现代文：三月，成帝前往河东，祭祀后土神。
English: In March, Emperor Chengdi went to the eastern part of the river to offer sacrifices to the deity of soil.

古文：丙戌，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：丙戌，成帝在未央宫驾崩。
English: On March 18th, Emperor Chengde passed away at the Miyang Palace.

古文：帝素强无疾病。
现代文：成帝一向身体强壮，没有疾病。
English: Emperor Chengdu has always been physically strong and disease-free.

古文：是时，楚思王衍、梁王立来朝，明旦，当辞去，上宿供张白虎殿；又欲拜左将军孔光为丞相，已刻侯印，书赞。
现代文：当时，楚王刘衍、梁王刘立来京朝见，第二天早晨就要辞行归国。
English: At that time, Chu King Liu Yan and Liang King Liu Li came to Beijing to see the imperial court, and the next morning they would resign and return to China.

古文：昏夜，平善，乡晨，傅绔袜欲起，因失衣，不能言，昼漏上十刻而崩，民间讙哗，咸归罪赵昭仪。
现代文：成帝铺设帷帐，宿于白虎殿。成帝又想拜左将军孔光为丞相，已刻好侯爵的印信，准备了封拜诏书。黄昏和夜间，还一切平静如常，清晨，成帝穿裤袜要起床，突然衣服滑落，不能言语，当计时的昼漏到十刻时，成帝驾崩。民间喧哗，都归罪于赵昭仪。
English: Emperor Cheng laid the curtain and stayed in the White Tiger Hall. Emperor Cheng also wanted to bow to the left general Kong Guang as the prime minister. He had engraved the marquis's seal and prepared the imperial decree. At dusk and at night, everything was calm as usual. In the morning, Emperor Cheng wanted to get up in his pants and socks. Suddenly, his clothes slipped off and he couldn't speak. When the time of noon slipped to ten o'clock, Emperor Cheng passed away. People blamed Zhao Zhaoyi for the noise.

古文：皇太后诏大司马莽杂与御史、丞相、廷尉治，问皇帝起居发病状；赵昭仪自杀。
现代文：皇太后诏令大司马王莽，与御史、丞相、廷尉一起追究审理，查问成帝起居和发病的情况。赵昭仪自杀。
English: The empress dowager ordered the grand secretary, Ma Wang Mang, to investigate the trial together with the imperial historian, the chancellor, and the courtier, and to inquire into the circumstances of Emperor Cheng Rong's residence and illness. Zhao Zhaoyi committed suicide.

古文：班彪赞曰：臣姑充后宫为婕妤，父子、昆弟侍帷幄，数为臣言： 成帝善修容仪，升车正立，不内顾，不疾言，不亲指，临朝渊嘿，尊严若神，可谓穆穆有天子之容者矣。
现代文：班彪赞曰：我的姑母曾在后宫充当婕妤，她的父亲、兄弟都在宫廷皇帝身边侍奉，他们多次对我说： 成帝善于修饰仪表。上车后端正地站立，不向内回顾，说话不急，不指指划划。临朝时仪态深沉、平静，象神一样尊严，可称之为肃穆温和的天子之容。
English: Ban Biao Zhan said: My aunt once served as a concubine in the harem, and her father and brothers all served alongside the emperor in the court. They told me many times: Emperor Cheng is good at decorating the appearance. After getting on the train, he stands upright, does not look inward, does not speak hastily, and does not point. When he is in the presence of the emperor, his posture is deep, calm, and dignified like a god. It can be called the solemn and gentle face of the son of heaven.

古文：博览古今，容受直辞，公卿奏议可述。
现代文：成帝博览群书，融贯古今，对臣下直率的言辞，能宽容接受，公卿的奏议有可称道的内容。
English: Emperor Chengxuan is well-read, has a deep understanding of the past and the present, and is tolerant and receptive to the forthright words of his subjects. The noblemen's petition has commendable content.

古文：遭世承平，上下和睦。
现代文：正逢承平之世，上下和睦。
English: It was the era of Johei, and there was harmony between the upper and lower classes.

古文：然湛乎酒色，赵氏乱内，外家擅朝，言之可为于邑！ 
现代文：然而，他耽于酒色，使赵氏秽乱于内宫，外戚擅权于朝廷，说起来令人叹息！ 
English: However, he indulged in alcohol, causing the Zhao clan to run amok in the inner palace, and his relatives to wield power in the imperial court. It's breathtaking to say the least!

古文：建始以来，王氏始执国命，哀、平短祚，莽遂篡位，盖其威福所由来者渐矣！
现代文：建始元年以来，王氏开始执掌国家命运，哀帝、平帝都短命，于是王莽篡夺了皇位。王氏的威福有一个逐渐发展的过程。
English: Since the beginning of the founding era, the Wang clan began to manipulate the national character. The reigns of Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping were not long, and Wang Mang was able to usurp the throne. It is likely that the power of the royal family was gradually formed from the beginning of the emperor.

古文：是日，孔光于大行前拜受丞相、博山侯印绶。
现代文：成帝驾崩当天，孔光在大行皇帝灵柩前，拜受丞相、博山侯印信、绶带。
English: On the day of Emperor Chengdu's death, Kong Guang bowed before the coffin of Emperor Da Xing and received the imperial letter, the imperial seal and the imperial sash.

古文：富平侯张放闻帝崩，思慕哭泣而死。
现代文：富平侯张放听到成帝驾崩的消息，追思仰慕哭泣，悲痛而死。
English: Upon hearing the news of Emperor Chengdu's death, Fuping marquis Zhang Fang wept in admiration and died of grief.

古文：荀悦论曰：放非不爱上，忠不存焉。
现代文：荀悦论曰：张放并非不爱成帝，而是光有爱，没有忠。
English: Zou Yue's theory says: Zhang Pang is not a person who does not love Emperor Chengdu, but a person who only has love and no loyalty.

古文：皇太后诏南、北郊长安如故。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙午，太子即皇帝位。
English: In summer, in April, on the afternoon of the third day of the fourth month, the crown prince becomes emperor.

古文：夏，四月，丙午，太子即皇帝位，谒高庙；尊皇太后曰太皇太后，皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：拜谒汉高祖刘邦的祭庙。尊皇太后为太皇太后，皇后为皇太后。
English: It is a temple to worship Liu Bang, the great ancestor of the Han Dynasty. The revered empress dowager is the great empress dowager, and the empress is the great empress dowager.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：哀帝初立，躬行俭约，省减诸用，政事由己出，朝廷翕然望至治焉。
现代文：哀帝即位之初，亲自厉行节俭，减省各项费用，政事由自己裁决处理，朝廷上下一致希望能天下大治。
English: At the beginning of Emperor Ai's ascension to the throne, he personally enforced frugality, reduced various expenses, and handled political affairs by his own ruling. The imperial court unanimously hoped for the rule of the world.

古文：己卯，葬教成皇帝于延陵。
现代文：己卯，葬孝成皇帝于延陵。
English: Emperor Xiaocheng was buried in the Yanling Mausoleum.

古文：太皇太后令傅太后、丁姬十日一至未央宫。
现代文：太皇太后下诏，命傅太后、丁姬每十天一次到未央宫探望皇帝。
English: The empress dowager issued an edict ordering Fu, the empress dowager, and Ding Ji to visit the emperor at Weiyang Palace once every ten days.

古文：有诏问丞相、大司空： 定陶共王太后宜当何居？ 
现代文：哀帝下诏询问丞相、大司空： 定陶共王太后应当居住在什么地方才合适？ 
English: The emperor asked the prime minister and the grand secretary Ku: What is the most suitable place for the empress dowager to live?

古文：丞相孔光素闻傅太后为人刚暴，长于权谋，自帝在襁褓，而养长教道至于成人，帝之立又有力；光心恐傅太后与政事，不欲与帝旦夕相近，即议以为： 定陶太后宜改筑宫。 
现代文：丞相孔光素来听说傅太后为人刚强暴烈，工于心计，善于弄权，哀帝在襁褓中时，便由她抚养教导，以至成人，哀帝能继位，她又出了大力，孔光担心傅太后会干预政事，不想使她与皇帝早晚接近，于是就建议说： 定陶太后应另行修筑宫室居住。 
English: The chancellor, Kong Guang Su, heard that Empress Dowager Fu was tough and violent, scheming, and good at gaining power. When Emperor Yingtao was in her infancy, she raised and taught him until he became an adult. Emperor Yingtao could succeed to the throne, and she made great efforts. Kong Guang was worried that Empress Dowager Fu would interfere in political affairs, and did not want her to get close to the emperor sooner or later. So he suggested that: Empress Dowager Dingtao should build a separate palace room to live in.

古文：大司空何武曰： 可居北宫。 
现代文：大司空何武却说： 可以住在北宫。 
English: Daishi Kuho Takeshi said, "You can live in Hokugu."

古文：上从武言。
现代文：哀帝听从何武的建议。
English: The emperor obeyed He Wu's words.

古文：北宫有紫房复道通未央宫，傅太后果从复道朝夕至帝所，求欲称尊号，贵宠其亲属，使上不得由直道行。
现代文：北宫有紫房复道通到未央宫，傅太后果然从复道早晚去哀帝住所，请求哀帝加封她尊号，提拔宠信她的亲属，使哀帝无法以正道行事。
English: There is a purple room in the North Palace, which leads to the Weiyang Palace. Fu Taizhong went to the residence of Emperor Ai from the road, and asked Emperor Ai to add her honorific title and promote her relatives, so that Emperor Ai could not act in a righteous way.

古文：高昌侯董宏希指，上书言： 秦庄襄王母本夏氏，而为华阳夫人所子，及即位后，俱称太后。
现代文：高昌侯董宏迎合哀帝、傅太后的心意，上书说： 秦庄襄王的母亲，本来是夏氏，后来庄襄王被华阳夫人认为嗣子。等到继位后，夏氏、华阳夫人都被尊称为太后。
English: Gaochang Hou Donghong catered to the wishes of Emperor Ai and Empress Dowager Fu, writing: The mother of Qin Zhuang Xiang Wang was originally Xia, and later Zhuang Xiang Wang was considered the heir by Lady Huayang. After the succession, both Xia and Lady Huayang were honored as empress dowager.

古文：宜立定陶共王后为帝太后。 
现代文：应该尊定陶共王后为帝太后。 
English: The Queen of Tao should be honored as the Empress Dowager.

古文：事下有司，大司马王莽，左将军、关内侯、领尚书事师丹劾奏宏： 知皇太后至尊之号，天下一统，而称引亡秦以为比喻，诖误圣朝，非所宜言，大不道！ 
现代文：哀帝把此奏章交给有关官署讨论，大司马王莽、左将军、关内侯、主管尚书事师丹联合上奏弹劾董宏说： 董宏明知皇太后是最为尊贵的称号，现今天下一统，他却援引亡秦的事例作为比喻，贻误圣朝，这不是应该说的话，犯了大逆不道之罪。 
English: Emperor Ai submitted this petition to the relevant government office for discussion. The grand secretary Ma Wang Mang, the left general, Guan Nei Hou, and the supervisor Shang Shuxi Shi Dan jointly submitted a petition to impeach Dong Hong, saying: Dong Hong knows that the empress dowager is the most honorable title, and today is the next general, but he invoked the case of the death of Qin as a metaphor. This is not what should be said, and he committed the crime of high treason.

古文：上新立，谦让，纳用莽、丹言，免宏为庶人。
现代文：哀帝新继位，态度谦让，采纳了王莽、师丹的意见，把董宏免官，贬为平民。
English: The newly enthroned emperor was very humble and accepted Wang Mang's and Shi Dan's words, dismissing Dong Hong as a commoner.

古文：傅太后大怒，要上，欲必称尊号。
现代文：傅太后勃然大怒，要挟哀帝，非要称崐尊号不可。
English: The Empress Dowager Fu flew into a rage and threatened to mourn the emperor, demanding that he be given the title of Emperor.

古文：上乃白太皇太后，令下诏尊定陶恭王为恭皇。
现代文：哀帝于是转告太皇太后，太皇太后同意下诏尊定陶恭王为恭皇。
English: Emperor A then told the Grand Empress Dowager that the Grand Empress Dowager agreed to issue an imperial decree to designate King Tao as the new King.

古文：五月，丙戌，立皇后傅氏，傅太后从弟晏之子也。
现代文：五月，丙戌，立傅氏为皇后，她是傅太后堂弟傅晏的女儿。
English: In May, the pro-Qing dynasty made Fu Shi the empress. She was the daughter of Fu Shi, a cousin of the Empress Dowager Fu.

古文：诏曰： 《春秋》，母以子贵。
现代文：哀帝下诏说： 《春秋》说，母以子贵。
English: The emperor said: "Spring and Autumn" says that the mother is more precious than the child.

古文：宜尊定陶太后曰恭皇太后，丁姬曰恭皇后，各置左右詹事，食邑如长信宫、中宫。 
现代文：所以应尊定陶太后为恭皇太后，尊丁姬为恭皇后。各自设置左右詹事，采邑如同长信宫皇太后和中宫皇后。 
English: Therefore, the Dowager Empress Dowager Tao should be designated as the Dowager Empress Dowager, and the Dowager Empress Dowager Ding Ji should be designated as the Empress Dowager. Each of them should set up the right and wrong things, and the choice is like that of the Dowager Empress Dowager and the Empress Dowager of Changxin Palace.

古文：追尊傅父为崇祖侯，丁父为褒德侯；封舅丁明为阳安侯，舅子满为平周侯，皇后父晏为孔乡侯，皇太后弟、侍中、光禄大夫赵钦为新城侯。
现代文：同时追尊傅太后的父亲为崇祖侯，丁姬的父亲为褒德侯。封哀帝舅父丁明为阳安侯，舅父的儿子丁满为平周侯，傅皇后的父亲傅晏为孔乡侯。又封皇太后赵飞燕的弟弟、侍中、光禄大夫赵钦为新城侯。
English: At the same time, the father of the revered Fu Empress Dowager was given the title of Chong Zuo Hou, the father of Ding Ji was given the title of Bao De Hou, the uncle of the Empress Dowager Ding Ming was given the title of Yang An Hou, the uncle's son Ding Man was given the title of Ping Zhou Hou, the father of the Fu Empress Dowager Fu Xi was given the title of Kong Xiang Hou, and the younger brother of the Empress Dowager Zhao Feiyan, the chamberlain and the doctor of Guanglu, Zhao Qin, was given the title of Xincheng Hou.

古文：太皇太后诏大司马莽就第，避帝外家；莽上疏乞骸骨。
现代文：太皇太后王政君诏令大司马王莽离开朝廷，回到府第，以避开哀帝的外戚。王莽上书请求退休。
English: Grand Empress Dowager Wang Zhengjun ordered the chief steward Ma Wang Mang to leave the imperial court and return to the capital to avoid the emperor's grieving relatives. Wang Mang submitted a letter requesting retirement.

古文：帝遣尚书令诏起莽，又遣丞相孔光、大司空何武、左将军师丹、卫尉傅喜白太皇太后曰： 皇帝闻太后诏，甚悲！
现代文：哀帝派尚书令持诏书命令王莽出来任职。又派丞相孔光、大司空何武、左将军师丹、卫尉傅喜向太皇太后报告说： 皇上听到太皇太后的诏书，十分悲痛！
English: Emperor Ai sent Shang Shu Rong to issue an imperial decree ordering Wang Mang to take office. He also sent the chancellor Kong Guang, the grand secretary Ku He Wu, the left general Shidan, and the guard lieutenant Fu Xi to report to the great empress dowager: The emperor was very sad to hear the great empress dowager's imperial decree!

古文：大司马即不起，皇帝即不敢听政！ 
现代文：如果大司马不出来任职，皇上就不敢听政了。 
English: If the grand secretary Ma does not come out to take office, the emperor will not dare to listen to the government.

古文：太后乃复令莽视事。
现代文：太皇太后于是又命令王莽上朝处理政事。
English: The empress dowager then ordered Wang Mang to go to the court to deal with political affairs.

古文：成帝之世，郑声尤甚，黄门名倡丙强、景武之属富显于世，贵戚至与人主争女乐。
现代文：汉成帝时代，靡靡之音特别盛行。以致黄门名倡丙强、景武之流，都以富有闻名于世。皇亲国戚甚至与天子竞赛女乐。
English: In the era of Emperor Han Zheng, the sound of sweeping was particularly prevalent. As a result, the Huang family was famous for advocating He Qiang and the Jingwu school, both of which were famous for being rich. Relatives of the emperor and relatives of the country even competed with Tianzi for female music.

古文：帝自为定陶王时疾之，又性不好音，六月，诏曰： 孔子不云乎： 放郑声，郑声淫。 
现代文：哀帝在当定陶王时，就对这种风气十分厌恶，生性又不喜好音乐，于是在六月下诏说： 孔子不是说过吗： 抛弃郑国音乐，郑国音乐太淫荡。 
English: When he was the king of Dingtao, Lai Di was very disgusted with this culture and did not like music by nature, so he issued an edict at the end of June saying: Didn't Confucius say: Abandon Zheng Guo music, Zheng Guo music is too lewd.

古文：其罢乐府官；郊祭乐及古兵法武乐在《经》，非郑、卫之乐者，条奏别属他官。 
现代文：兹撤销乐府官。经书上记载的郊祀大典的音乐以及古代兵法武乐，不属于郑国、卫国的音乐，由其他官署管理。 
English: The music of the suburban religious ceremony and the ancient martial music recorded in the scriptures do not belong to the music of Zheng Guo or the national defense, and are managed by other government departments.

古文：凡所罢省过半。
现代文：裁减人员超过一半。
English: The number of employees has been reduced by more than half.

古文：然百姓渐渍日久，又不制雅乐有以相变，豪富吏民湛沔自若。
现代文：但是百姓受靡靡之音熏染的时间很长了，又没有制定其他高雅的音乐来替换，因此富有的官吏百姓，依然沉湎其中，一如往昔。
English: But the people have been subjected to the sound of the popular music for a long time, and there is no other elegant music to replace it, so the rich officials and the people are still immersed in it, as in the past.

古文：王莽荐中垒校尉刘歆有材行，为侍中，稍迁光禄大夫，贵幸；更名秀。
现代文：王莽举荐中垒校尉刘歆，说他有才干德行，任命为侍中，逐步升为光禄大夫，地位显贵，受到皇帝宠信。
English: Wang Mang recommended Liu Wei, the captain of the middle school, saying that he was talented and virtuous. He was appointed as an attendant, and gradually rose to the rank of doctor of Guanglu, a prominent position, and was favored by the emperor.

古文：上复令秀典领《五经》，卒父前业；秀于是总群书而奏其七略，有《辑略》、有《六艺略》、有《诸子略》、有《诗赋略》、有《兵书略》、有《术数略》、有《方技略》。
现代文：哀帝又命令刘秀负责审核校对儒学《五经》，完成其父刘向未完成的事业。刘秀于是汇总群书，编成七略上奏，有《辑略》、《六艺略》、《诸子略》、《诗赋略》、《兵书略》、《术数略》、《方技略》。
English: Emperor Ai also ordered Liu Xiu to be responsible for reviewing and proofreading the Confucianism "Five Classics" and to complete the unfinished business of his father Liu Xiang. Liu Xiu then summarized the group of books and compiled seven abridgments, including "Abbreviations," "Six Arts Abbreviations," "Children's Abbreviations," "Poetry Abbreviations," "Army Abbreviations," "Magic Abbreviations" and "Fantasy Abbreviations."

古文：凡书六略，三十八种，五百九十六家、万三千二百六十九卷。
现代文：记录书目的共有六略，包括三十八种、五百九十六家、一万三千二百六十九卷。
English: There are a total of six records, including thirty-eight kinds, five hundred and ninety-six schools, and thirteen thousand two hundred and sixty-nine volumes.

古文：其叙诸子，分为九流：曰儒，曰道，曰阴阳，曰法，曰名，曰墨，曰从横，曰杂，曰农，以为： 九家皆起于王道既微，诸侯力政，时君世主好恶殊方，是以九家之术蜂出并作，各引一端，崇其所善，以此驰说，取合诸侯，其言虽殊，譬犹水火相灭，亦相生也；仁之与义，敬之与和，相反而皆相成也。
现代文：其中叙述诸子的，分为九大流派：儒家、道家、阴阳家、法家、名家、墨家、纵横家、杂家、农家。他认为： 九家都兴起于王道已经衰微、诸侯以实力为政的时代，当时的君主们的喜好厌恶大不相同，因此九家学派同时兴起，各持一端，推崇所喜好的学说，并用这些学说去游崐说各国，争取诸侯的赞同。主张虽然不同，但就象水火相灭，同时也相生一样，它们也是相反相成的。比如仁与义，敬与和，虽然相反，但也都是相成的。
English: In it, the sons are described as being divided into nine major schools: Confucianism, Taoism, Yin and Yang, Law, Noble, Mohism, Vertical and Horizontal, Miscellaneous, and Agrarian. He believed that: The nine schools all arose in the era when the royal road had declined and the princes ruled by force. The likes and dislikes of the monarchs at that time were very different. Therefore, the nine schools arose at the same time, each holding one end, advocating the preferred doctrines, and using these doctrines to lobby the countries and win the approval of the princes. Although different, they are opposite. For example, benevolence and righteousness, respect and

古文：《易》曰： 天下同归而殊涂，一致而百虑。 
现代文：《易经》说： 天下人都回到同一个地方，但走的路不同；天下的道理是一致的，但人们却有许多种思虑。 
English: Yi said: The world has the same destination but different paths, the same thoughts but different thinking.

古文：今异家者推所长，穷知究虑以明其指，虽有蔽短，合其要归，亦《六经》之支与流裔；使其人遭明王圣主，得其所折中，皆股肱之材已。仲尼有言： 礼失而求诸野。 
现代文：而今，各个不同学派的人推崇自己学派的长处，如果深入研究，弄清它们的宗旨，虽然都有掩蔽短处的现象，但综合各家学说的主要内容和宗旨，也不过是儒学《六经》的支派或末流。倘若这些人能遇到圣王明主，将他们的主张折中修正，那么他们都可成为栋梁之才。孔子说： 礼仪失传，到乡野去寻找。 
English: Nowadays, people from various schools of thought are praising the strengths of their own schools. If you study them in depth and find out their purposes, although there is a phenomenon of covering up shortcomings, the main contents and purposes of each school of thought are nothing more than a branch or the last stream of the "Six Classics" of Confucianism. If these people can meet the Lord of Wisdom and modify their ideas, then they can all become pillars of strength. Confucius said: The etiquette is lost, go to the countryside to find it.

古文：方今去圣久远，道术缺废，无所更索，彼九家者，不犹愈于野乎！
现代文：现在距闻圣人的时代，已经很久远了，当时的道术不是缺失，就是废止了，无处追寻，这九家学派，不是胜过乡野吗！
English: Now, it has been a long time since the era of the sages. The Daoism of that time is either missing or abolished, and there is nowhere to look for it. These nine schools are better than the countryside!

古文：若能修《六艺》之术而观此九家之言，舍短取长，则可以通万方之略矣。 
现代文：如果能钻研儒学《六艺》，再参考这九家学说，舍弃短处，采取精华，就可以精通万种方略了。 
English: If you can study Confucianism's "Six Arts" and then refer to these nine doctrines, discard the shortcomings and adopt the essence, you can master all kinds of strategies.

古文：河间惠王良能修献王之行，母太后薨，服丧如礼；诏益封万户，以为宗室仪表。
现代文：河间王刘良，能学习献王的高尚品行，母亲王太后去世，他完全按照礼仪的规定服丧。哀帝下诏褒奖，增加采邑万户，使他成为宗室奉行礼仪的表率。
English: King Liu Liang of Kawama was able to learn the noble behavior of offering gifts to the king. When his mother, the empress dowager, passed away, he conducted his funeral in full accordance with the rules of etiquette. The emperor sent a congratulatory message to the deceased emperor, and all households in the imperial capital were increased, making him a model for the imperial family to follow etiquette.

古文：初，董仲舒说武帝，以 秦用商鞅之法，除井田，民得卖买，富者田连阡陌，贫者亡立锥之地，邑有人君之尊，里有公侯之富，小民安得不困！
现代文：早先，董仲舒曾劝说汉武帝： 秦国采用商鞅之法，废除井田，人民可以买卖土地，造成富者田地一望无际，贫者没有立锥之地。县邑有尊贵如君王一样的人，乡里有富比公侯的财主，小民怎能不困乏呢？
English: Earlier, Dong Zhongshu had persuaded Emperor Han Wu: Qin State adopted the method of negotiation and abolished the well field. People could buy and sell land. As a result, the fields of the rich were boundless, and the poor had no place to stand. There were people as noble as kings in counties and towns, and there were rich princes in the countryside. How could the common people not be poor?

古文：古井田法虽难卒行，宜少近古，限民名田以赡不足，塞并兼之路；去奴婢，除专杀之威；薄赋敛，省繇役，以宽民力，然后可善治也！ 
现代文：古代的井田法现在虽然难以仓猝实行，但也应该少有恢复，应限制人民占田的数额，将多余的土地补给不足者，堵塞兼并土地的途径。取消奴婢，除去主人可以随便杀害奴婢的特权。减少赋税，减轻徭役，使人民得以休息。然后才可把国家治理好。 
English: Although it is difficult to implement the ancient Iden Law in haste, it should be restored to a certain extent. The amount of land occupied by the people should be limited, the surplus land should be supplied to those who lack it, and the way of land annexation should be blocked. Slaves and maids should be abolished, and the privilege that the master can kill slaves and maids at will should be removed. Taxes should be reduced, labor service should be alleviated, and the people should be able to rest. Only then can the country be governed well.

古文：及上即位，师丹复建言： 今累世承平，豪富吏民訾数巨万，而贫弱愈困，宜略为限。 
现代文：等到哀帝即位，师丹又建议说： 而今连续几代的太平盛世，豪有的吏民的家产数目达数万万，而贫弱的人却愈加困乏，应该略为限制一下占田数额。 
English: When Emperor Ai came to the throne, Shi Dan also suggested, "Now that successive generations of peace and prosperity have begun, the number of wealthy officials and people's family estates has reached tens of millions, while the poor and weak have become more and more impoverished. It is necessary to slightly limit the amount of land occupied.

古文：天子下其议，丞相光、大司空武奏请： 自诸侯王、列侯、公主名田各有限；关内侯、吏、民名田皆毋过三十顷；奴婢毋过三十人。
现代文：哀帝把这个奏议让大家讨论。丞相孔光、大司空何武上奏，请求： 从诸侯王开始，诸侯王、列侯、公主占田各定限额。关内侯、官吏、庶民占田都不得超过三十顷。奴婢人数不得超过三十人。
English: Emperor Ai brought the proposal to the table for everyone to discuss. Confucius, the prime minister, and Ku He Wu, the grand secretary, made the following request: Starting with the princes, the princes, vassals, and princesses should occupy a fixed amount of land. The princes, officials, and commoners in Guanai should not occupy more than thirty hectares of land. The number of slaves should not exceed thirty.

古文：期尽三年。犯者没入宫。 
现代文：期限定为三年，三年后有违犯规定的，财产没收入官。 
English: The deadline is set at three years, and if there is a violation of the regulations after three years, the property will not be returned to the revenue officer.

古文：时田宅、奴婢贾为减贱，贵戚近习皆不便也，诏书： 且须后。 
现代文：这一来，造成一时田宅、奴婢的价格下跌，皇帝贵戚和天子的亲信都感到对自己不利，于是哀帝就下诏书说： 暂且等待以后再说。 
English: As a result of this, the prices of rice fields, slaves and maids fell for a while, and the emperor's noble relatives and close friends of the heavenly son all felt disadvantageous to themselves, so Emperor Ai issued an edict saying: Let's wait for a while and talk about it later.

古文：遂寝不行。
现代文：这个办法遂停止不行。
English: This practice cannot be allowed to continue.

古文：又诏齐三服官： 诸官织绮绣，难成、害女红之物，皆止，无作输。除任子令及诽谤诋欺法。掖廷宫人年三十以下，出嫁之；官奴婢五十以上，免为庶人，益吏三百石以下俸。 
现代文：哀帝又下诏： 设于齐国的三服官以及其他主管皇家服装的官署，由于绮罗的纺织刺绣，十分艰难，因而全部停止不再制作和向京师运送；废除二千石官员可以保荐子弟当官的任子令以及诽谤诋欺法；掖庭宫女年龄在三十岁以上的，令其出宫嫁人；官奴婢年龄在五十岁以上的，免除奴婢身份，成为庶民；增加官秩在三百石以下的官吏的俸禄。 
English: Emperor A also issued the following decrees: the three officials in charge of the imperial clothing and other government offices in charge of the imperial clothing, located in Qi, were very difficult due to the textile embroidery of Jiao Luo, so they all stopped producing and shipping to Beijing; the appointment order and the slander and defamation law were abolished; the palace maids over the age of thirty were allowed to marry outside the palace; the servants over the age of fifty were exempted from the status of slaves and became commoners; and the salaries of officials under the rank of three hundred koku were increased.

古文：上置酒未央宫，内者令为傅太后张幄，坐于太皇太后坐旁。
现代文：哀帝在未央宫摆设酒席，内者令把傅太后的座位设在太皇太后座位旁边。
English: Emperor Ai set up a banquet table in the Weiyang Palace, and ordered the seat of Empress Dowager Fu to be placed next to the seat of Empress Dowager Zhou.

古文：大司马莽按行，责内者令曰： 定陶太后，籓妾，何以得与至尊并！ 
现代文：大司马王莽巡视后，斥责内者令说： 定陶太后不过是藩王妃而已，怎配跟至尊的太皇太后并排而坐！ 
English: After the inspection, the chief steward, Ma Wang Mang, reprimanded the insider, saying: "The Dowager Empress Ding Tao is only the princess of the clan, how can she sit side by side with the supreme Empress Dowager!

古文：彻去，更设坐。
现代文：下令撤去原先的座位，重新摆放。
English: The order was given to remove the original seats and reposition them.

古文：傅太后闻之，大怒，不肯会，重怨恚莽；莽复乞骸骨。
现代文：傅太后听说崐后，大怒，不肯赴宴会，极端愤恨王莽。王莽再次上书请求退休。
English: When the Empress Dowager Fu heard about this, she was furious, refused to go to the banquet, and was extremely angry with Wang Mang. Wang Mang once again sent a letter requesting retirement.

古文：秋，七月，丁卯，上赐莽黄金五百斤，安车驷马，罢就第。
现代文：秋季，七月，丁卯，哀帝赐给王莽黄金五百斤、四匹马驾的安车一辆，让他辞官回到府邸。
English: In the autumn, in July, Dingwu, the Emperor gave Wang Mang five hundred jin of gold and a four-horse carriage to Wang Mang, and let him return to the mansion.

古文：公卿大夫多称之者，上乃加恩宠，置中黄门，为莽家给使，十日一赐餐。
现代文：公卿大夫大多称赞王莽，哀帝于是给予他更多的恩宠，特意派中黄门到王莽家，以供差使。每隔十天，哀帝赐餐一次。
English: Most of the court nobles and doctors praised Wang Mang, and Emperor Pai then gave him more favors. He specifically sent Zhonghuangmen to Wang Mang's home as an envoy. Every ten days, Emperor Pai gave him a meal.

古文：又下诏益封曲阳侯根，安阳侯舜，新都侯莽，丞相光，大司空武邑户各有差。
现代文：又下诏，增加曲阳侯王根、安阳侯王舜、新都侯王莽、丞相孔光、大司空何武采邑人户各不等。
English: He also issued an edict to increase the number of Quyang Hou Wanggen, Anyang Hou Wang Ye, Xindu Hou Wang Mang, Chancellor Kong Guang, and Senior Secretary Kuo He Wu from various households.

古文：以莽为特进、给事中、朝朔望，见礼如三公。
现代文：赐王莽为特进、给事中，每月一日和十五日可以朝见皇帝，朝见时的礼节一如三公。
English: Wang Mang was given a special promotion, and on the first and fifteenth day of each month, he was allowed to meet the emperor. The etiquette at the meeting was the same as that of the three princes.

古文：又还红阳侯立于京师。
现代文：又召回红阳侯王立，使居京师。
English: He also recalled Hongyang marquis Wang Li and sent him to live in Beijing.

古文：傅太后从弟右将军喜，好学问，有志行。
现代文：傅太后的堂弟、右将军傅喜，喜好学问，有大志德行。
English: Empress Dowager Fu's cousin, the Right General Fu Xi, was fond of learning and had great aspirations.

古文：王莽既罢退，众庶归望于喜。
现代文：王莽既已罢职退下，大众希望傅喜接替王莽的位置。
English: Since Wang Mang has resigned, the public hopes that Fu Xi will take over Wang Mang's position.

古文：初，上之官爵外亲也，喜独执谦称疾；傅太后始与政事，数谏之；由是傅太后不欲令喜辅政。
现代文：当初，哀帝加封外戚官爵，唯独傅喜自称有病而谦让推辞。傅太后刚开始干预政事，傅喜就多次进言规谏，因此傅太后不想让傅喜辅政。
English: At first, Emperor Ai conferred a title of nobility on his maternal relative, but Fu Xi humbly declined, claiming to be ill. As soon as Empress Dowager Fu began to intervene in political affairs, Fu Xi repeatedly intervened, so Empress Dowager Fu did not want Fu Xi to assist in politics.

古文：庚午，以左将军师丹为大司马，封高乡亭侯；赐喜黄金百斤，上右将军印绶，以光禄大夫养病；以光禄勋淮阳彭宣为右将军。
现代文：庚午，任命左将军师丹为大司马，封高乡亭侯。赐傅喜黄金百斤，缴还右将军的印信绶带、以光禄大夫的身份在家养病。任命光禄勋、淮阳人彭宣为右将军。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, he appointed the left general Shidan as the grand steward and the high-ranking general Gao Xiangting as the high-ranking general. He gave Fu Xi 100 catties of gold, returned the right general's seal ribbon, and recuperated at home as the doctor of Guanglu. He appointed Guanglu Xun and Peng Xuan, a native of Huaiyang, as the right general.

古文：大司空何武、尚书令唐林皆上书言： 喜行义修洁，忠诚忧国，内辅之臣也。
现代文：大司空何武、尚书令唐林都上书说： 傅喜行事仁义，品德高尚廉洁，忠诚忧国，适宜做内朝辅弼大臣。
English: Daishi Ku He Wu and Shang Shuling Tanglin both wrote: Fu Xi acted with benevolence and righteousness, his moral character was high and incorruptible, he was loyal and concerned about the country, and he was suitable to be an assistant minister of the Inner Court.

古文：今以寝病一旦遣归，众庶失望，皆曰： 傅氏贤子，以论议不合于定陶太后，故退， 百寮莫不为国恨之。
现代文：现在以有病为借口，突然被遣返回家，使大众感到失望，都说： 傅氏是贤能之人，只因见解与定陶太后不合，因此被斥退。 百官没有不为国深深痛惜的。
English: Now, under the pretext of illness, he was suddenly repatriated home, which made the public feel disappointed, and they all said: Mr. Fu is a man of virtue, and he was only rejected because his opinion was not in line with Empress Dowager Ding Tao.

古文：忠臣，社稷之卫。
现代文：忠臣是国家的卫士。
English: Loyal subjects are the guardians of the state.

古文：鲁以季友治乱，楚以子玉轻重，魏以无忌折冲，项以范增存亡。
现代文：春秋时，鲁国因任用季友，治理好了混乱；楚国以子玉是否活着，决定被别国看重或轻视；魏国依仗有公子无忌，才能战胜强敌；项羽则由范增决定他的生存与灭亡。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, the State of Lu managed the chaos by appointing Ji You; the State of Chu decided whether to be valued or despised by other countries based on whether Zidama was alive or not; the State of Wei relied on the fact that there were nobles who had no scruples in order to defeat a strong enemy; and Xiang Yu's survival and death were decided by Fan Zeng.

古文：百万之众，不如一贤，故秦行千金以间廉颇，汉散黄金以疏亚父。
现代文：百万人之众，不如一个贤才。因此秦国用千金去离间廉颇和赵王的关系；汉高祖散万金使项羽疏远范增。
English: A million people are not as good as one wise man. Therefore, the Qin Dynasty used thousands of gold to separate the relationship between the emperor and the king of Zhao; the ancestors of the Han Dynasty used thousands of gold to alienate Xiang Yu from Fan Zeng.

古文：喜立于朝，陛下之光辉，傅氏之废兴也。 
现代文：傅喜能担当朝廷大任，是陛下的光辉，也是决定傅氏兴废的关键。 
English: The fact that Fu Xi remains in the imperial court is your majesty's honor and a sign of Fu Shi's prosperity.

古文：上亦自重之，故寻复进用焉。
现代文：哀帝自己也很器重傅喜，因此，不久就再次征召任用他。
English: Aidi himself was also very fond of Fu Xi, so he soon recruited him again.

古文：建平侯杜业上书诋曲阳侯王根、高阳侯薛宣、安昌侯张禹而荐硃博。
现代文：建平侯杜业上书诋毁曲阳侯王根、高阳侯薛宣、安昌侯张禹，而推荐朱博。
English: Jianping Hou Duye wrote a letter denigrating Quyang Hou Wang Gen, Gaoyang Hou Xue Xuan, Anchang Hou Zhang Yu, and recommended Zhu Bo.

古文：帝少而闻知王氏骄盛，心不能善，以初立，故且优之。
现代文：哀帝小时候就听说王氏骄横，心里对他们没有好感。因为继位时间短，因此对他们暂且优待。
English: When Emperor Ai was a child, he heard that the Wang clan was arrogant, and he did not like them in his heart. Because the succession time was short, he treated them favorably for the time being.

古文：后月馀，司隶校尉解光奏： 曲阳侯，先帝山陵未成，公聘取故掖庭女乐五官殷严、王飞君等置酒歌舞，及根兄子成都侯况，亦聘取故掖庭贵人以为妻，皆无人臣礼，大不敬，不道！ 
现代文：杜业上书一个多月后，司隶校尉解光上奏说： 曲阳侯王根，在先帝还没入陵安葬之时，就公然聘娶后宫女乐五官殷严、王飞君等，在家置酒歌舞。王根的侄子、成都侯王况，也公然聘娶先帝后宫的贵人为妻。他们都没有人臣之礼，犯了大不敬、不道之罪！ 
English: More than a month after Du Ye's letter was submitted, the lieutenant of Sili said: Quyang Prince Wang Gen, when the former emperor had not yet been buried in the tomb, openly hired and married the five harem female music officials Yin Yan, Wang Feijun, etc., and set up a wine song and dance at home. Wang Gen's nephew, Chengdu Prince Wang Quan, also openly hired and married a noblewoman from the former emperor's harem. They did not have the courtesy of a subject, and committed the crime of great disrespect and immorality!

古文：于是天子曰： 先帝遇根、况父子，至厚也，今乃背恩忘义！ 
现代文：于是天子说： 先帝对待王根、王况叔侄，极为优厚，现在他们竟背恩忘义！ 
English: Then the heavenly son said, "The former emperor treated Wang Gen and Wang Zhou, his uncle and nephew, very generously, but now they have forgotten his kindness!"

古文：以根尝建社稷之策，遣就国，免况为庶人，归故郡。
现代文：由于王根曾有立定陶王为太子的建议，因此仅遣送回封国。王况被夺爵，贬为平民，遣归原郡。
English: Since Wang Gen had a suggestion to make Ding Tao the crown prince, he was only sent back to the feudal state. Wang Zhou was stripped of his title, reduced to a commoner, and sent back to his original county.

古文：根及况父商所荐举为官者皆罢。
现代文：由王根以及王况的父亲王商所举荐而当官的人，全部罢免。
English: All officials who were recommended by Wang Gen and Wang Zheng's father, Wang Shangrui, were dismissed.

古文：九月，庚申，地震，自京师到北边郡国三十馀处，坏城郭，凡压杀四百馀人。
现代文：九月，庚申，发生地震。自京师至北边郡国，有三十余处地方毁坏了城郭，共压死四百余人。
English: In September, an earthquake occurred in Goshun. From Beijing Division to Beibei County, more than thirty places destroyed the castle, and more than four hundred people were crushed to death.

古文：上以灾异问待诏李寻，对曰： 夫日者，众阳之长，人君之表也。
现代文：哀帝因为发生灾异而询问待诏李寻，他崐回答说： 太阳，是所有阳性物质的主宰，是君王的象征。
English: When the emperor asked the attendant Li Xun about the cause of the calamity, he replied, "The sun is the master of all masculine substances and the symbol of the king.

古文：君不修道，则日失其度，晻昧亡光。
现代文：君王不行正道，则太阳会失去常度，暗淡无光。
English: If the ruler does not follow the right path, the sun will lose its constancy and become dim.

古文：间者日尤不精，光明侵夺失色，邪气珥，蜺数作。
现代文：最近，太阳尤其不明亮，光彩被侵夺而失去原来的颜色，邪气插入，晕霓屡次出现。
English: Recently, the sun has been particularly dim, its brilliance has been robbed and it has lost its original color, evil spirits have entered, and fainting has repeatedly appeared.

古文：小臣不知内事，窃以日视陛下，志操衰于始初多矣。
现代文：我地位卑微，不了解内廷的情况，只以太阳的变化来观察陛下，志节和行为都比即位初期大为衰退了。
English: In my humble position, I do not know the situation of the Inner Court, I only observe His Majesty with the changes of the sun, and my ambition and behavior have greatly declined from the early days of my accession to the throne.

古文：唯陛下执乾刚之德，强志守度，毋听女谒、邪臣之态；诸保阿、乳母甘言悲辞之托，断而勿听。
现代文：请陛下振奋阳刚之气，意志坚决，严守法度，不听女人的请求，不受邪臣的摆布，那些保姆乳娘甜言卑辞的请托，绝不要听。
English: I ask Your Majesty to invigorate your masculine spirit, to be resolute, to strictly abide by the law, not to listen to women's requests, not to be manipulated by evil ministers, and never to listen to those nannies' mealy-mouthed entreaties.

古文：勉强大谊，绝小不忍；良有不得已，可赐以货财，不可私以官位，诚皇天之禁也。
现代文：努力实现大义，不要在小处不忍。实在不得已时，可以赐予他们钱财珍宝，不可用官职去殉私情，因为这实在是皇天之大忌！
English: Try your best to do what should be done, don't do what is petty and small; if you really have to, you can give them some money and goods, but you can't give them official positions in private. These are truly Heaven's prohibitions.

古文： 臣闻月者，众阴之长，妃后、大臣、诸侯之象也。
现代文： 我听说，月亮是阴性物质的主宰，是后妃、大臣、诸侯的象征。
English: I have heard that the moon is the master of the feminine substance, the symbol of queens, ministers and princes.

古文：间者月数为变，此为母后与政乱朝，阴阳俱伤，两不相便；外臣不知朝事，窃信天文，即如此，近臣已不足杖矣。
现代文：近来，月亮多次发生变异，这显示母后干政乱朝，阴阳俱伤，两相妨碍。外臣不知朝廷大事，我只是相信天象。如果应对天象这样解释，那么陛下所亲近的大臣已不足依赖。
English: Recently, the moon has mutated many times, which shows that the queen mother is in political turmoil, the yin and yang are injured, and the two phases are hindered. The foreign minister does not know the important events of the court, I just believe in the celestial body. If the celestial body is to be explained in this way, then the minister close to His Majesty is not enough to rely on.

古文：唯陛下亲求贤士，无强所恶，以崇社稷，尊强本朝！
现代文：陛下应亲自另行寻求贤能之士，不要使邪恶之人的势力强大起来，这样才能使国家昌盛，汉王朝强大。
English: His majesty should personally search for other virtuous people, and not strengthen the power of evil people, so that the country can prosper and the Han Dynasty can be strong.

古文： 臣闻五行以水为本，水为准平，王道公正修明，则百川理，落脉通；偏党失纲，则涌溢为败。
现代文： 我听说五行以水为根本，水是公平的标准。实行王道，政治公平修明，则会百川治理，脉络畅通。如果政治偏离正道，失去了纲常，则会江河泛滥成灾。
English: I have heard that the Five Elements are based on water, and water is the standard of fairness. If the royal road is implemented and political fairness is clarified, then all rivers will be governed and the flow will be smooth. If politics deviates from the right path and loses its standard, then rivers will flood into disaster.

古文：今汝、颍漂涌，与雨水并为民害，此《诗》所谓 百川沸腾 ，咎在皇甫卿士之属。
现代文：而今汝水、颍水腾涨漫溢，与雨水一起肆虐，给人民造成危害。这正象《诗经》里所说的 百川沸腾 ，这些灾害应归咎于外戚之类。
English: But now, the water of the rivers and streams is surging and overflowing, raging together with the rainwater, causing harm to the people. This is just like the boiling of the rivers and streams mentioned in the "Song of Songs," these disasters should be blamed on relatives and the like.

古文：唯陛下少抑外亲大臣！
现代文：请陛下稍稍抑制外戚大臣！
English: Your Majesty, please restrain the Minister for Maternal Relatives!

古文： 臣闻地道柔静，阴之常义也。
现代文： 我听说大地行事温柔平静，这是阴性事物的正常状态。
English: I have heard that the real way is gentle and tranquil, which is the common sense of Yin.

古文：间者关东地数震，宜务崇阳抑阴以救其咎，固志建威，闭绝私路，拔进英隽，退不任职，以强本朝！
现代文：近来关东地区多次发生地震，为了挽救上天怪罪而降下的灾祸，应该崇阳抑阴。陛下要坚定意志，建树威严，关闭断绝私下请托之路，提拔引进英俊人才，罢退不称职的官吏，使本朝强大！
English: Recently, earthquakes have occurred several times in the Kanto region. In order to save the disaster that fell as a result of the sin of God, it is necessary to exalt the sun and suppress the shade. His Majesty should strengthen his will, build a majestic tree, close and cut off the road of private solicitation, promote the introduction of handsome talents, dismiss incompetent officials, and make this dynasty strong!

古文：夫本强则精神折冲；本弱则招殃致凶，为邪谋所陵。
现代文：根本强大了，就会精神振奋，所向无敌；根本衰弱了，则招灾惹祸，被邪恶的阴谋侵凌危害。
English: If it is fundamentally strong, it will be invigorated and invincible; if it is fundamentally weak, it will invite disaster and be harmed by evil conspiracies.

古文：闻往者淮南王作谋之时，其所难者独有汲黯，以为公孙弘等不足言也。
现代文：听说当年淮南王谋反之时，他所害怕的只有汲黯一个人，认为公孙弘等都不值得一提。
English: It is said that when King Huainan was plotting a rebellion, he was afraid of only one person, and thought that Gongsun Hong and others were not worth mentioning.

古文：弘，汉之名相，于今亡比，而尚见轻，何况亡弘之属乎！
现代文：公孙弘是汉朝的名相，今天没有人可以比得上，他尚且被人看轻，何况今天连公孙弘之辈都没有呢！
English: Gongsunhong was the face of the Han Dynasty. Today, no one can match him. In fact, he was looked down upon. What's more, today there are no descendants of Gongsunhong!

古文：故曰朝廷亡人，则为贼乱所轻，其道自然也。 
现代文：所以说，朝廷无人，就会被乱臣贼子轻视，这是自然的道理。 
English: Therefore, it is a very natural reason to say that if there are no wise men in the imperial court, they will be despised by those who commit theft and disorder.

古文：骑都尉平当使领河堤，奏： 九河今皆窴灭。
现代文：骑都尉平当，被委派主管治理河堤事务。他上奏说： 古代的九河，现在全都堙灭难寻。
English: Cavalry Captain Ping Dang, who was appointed to be in charge of managing river embankment affairs, said in his report: The ancient nine rivers are now all gone.

古文：按经义，治水有决河深川而无堤防壅塞之文。
现代文：查考儒学经义，治水有决开堵塞的河道、深挖河床等方法，而没有高筑堤防、约束水流的记载。
English: According to the Confucian classics, there are methods of water control such as breaking through blocked channels and digging up riverbeds, but there is no record of building high dikes and restricting water flow.

古文：河从魏郡以东北多溢决，水迹难以分明，四海之众不可诬。
现代文：黄河从魏郡以东多次发生泛滥决口，水道难以确定，四海之内那么多人，是欺骗不得的。
English: The Yellow River has flooded several times east of Wei County, and the waterway is difficult to determine. There are so many people in the four seas, it is impossible to deceive.

古文：宜博求能浚川疏河者。 
现代文：应该广泛征求有浚川疏河能力的人。 
English: People with the ability to dredge rivers should be widely sought after.

古文：上从之。
现代文：哀帝听从他的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：待诏贾让奏言： 治河有上、中、下策。
现代文：待诏贾让上奏说： 治河有上、中、下三策。
English: Waiting for the edict, Jia Zhan said: There are three measures for controlling the river: upper, middle and lower.

古文：古者立国居民，疆理土地，必遗川泽之分，度水势所不及。
现代文：古人修筑城郭，使人民定居，划定疆界进行垦殖经营时，一定放弃在川泽之水汇聚之处，而要选择在估计水势不能到达的地方。
English: When the ancients built castles, settled people, and delineated boundaries for reclamation, they must give up the place where the waters of the river converge, and choose a place where the estimated water potential cannot reach.

古文：大川无防，小水得入，陂障卑下，以为污泽，使秋水多得其所休息，左右游波宽缓而不迫。
现代文：大河不修堤防，而小河小溪可以流入，在地势低下的地方，利用山坡修筑围坝，形成湖泊池泽，秋季可以利用它蓄水，水面宽阔，水流缓慢不急迫。
English: Large rivers do not build dikes, but small rivers and streams can flow into them. In low-lying areas, mountainsides are used to build dams to form lakes and ponds. In autumn, it can be used to store water. The water surface is wide, and the water flow is slow and not urgent.

古文：夫土之有川，犹人之有口也，治土而防其川，犹止儿啼而塞其口，岂不遽止，然其死可立而待也。
现代文：大地上有河流，就象人有口一样，用土石修筑堤防来阻止河水，就象塞住小孩的嘴制止他啼哭一样。难道不是很快就止住了吗？但是孩子的死期也跟着到了。
English: There are rivers on the earth like the mouths of men; they use earth and stone to stop their flow, as a child's mouth is stopped from crying. Is it not soon stopped? But the time of the child's death has come.

古文：故曰： 善为川者决之使道，善为民者宣之使言。 
现代文：所以说： 优秀的治水专家，决开堤防，疏导水势；杰出的政治家，使人民心中的想法宣泄出来，畅所欲言。 
English: Therefore, he said: An excellent flood control expert can break through the dike and divert the water potential; an outstanding politician can make the people's thoughts come out and speak freely.

古文：盖堤防之作，近起战国，雍防百川，各以自利。
现代文：堤防的修筑，历时未久，兴起于战国时代。各自为了本国利益，修筑堤防，堵塞百川。
English: The construction of dykes probably began in the Warring States period, to block a hundred rivers, each for their own benefit.

古文：齐与赵、魏以河为竟，赵、魏濒山，齐地卑下，作堤去河二十五里，河水东抵齐堤则西泛赵、魏；赵、魏亦为堤，去河二十五里，虽非其正，水尚有所游荡。
现代文：齐国与赵、魏以黄河为界，赵、魏这边是山，而齐国地势低下，于是齐国在距黄河二十五里处修筑堤防。河水东下到达齐国堤防，受阻，则向西岸泛滥，使赵、魏遭受水灾。赵、魏也在距黄河二十五里处修筑堤防，虽然采取的不是正确的方法，但当时河床宽，足以容纳。
English: The boundary between Qi and Zhao and Wei is the Yellow River. Zhao and Wei are bordered by mountains, while Qi is low-lying. Therefore, Qi built a dike at a distance of 25 miles from the Yellow River. When the river water reached the dike of Qi to the east, it was blocked, and then it flooded to the west coast, causing flooding to Zhao and Wei. Zhao and Wei also built a dike at a distance of 25 miles from the Yellow River. Although it was not the correct method, the river bed was wide enough to accommodate it at that time.

古文：时至而去，则填淤肥美，民耕田之；或久无害，稍筑宫宅，遂成聚落；大水时至，漂没，则更起堤防以自救，稍去其城郭，排水泽而居之，湛溺自其宜也。
现代文：洪水时常到来，又走了，淤泥沉积成为肥沃的土壤，人民在上面耕种，或许赶上很久都没有发生水灾，于是陆续在这里兴建住宅，遂成村落。若洪水经常泛滥成灾，漂没田宅人畜，为了自救，就把堤防修筑得更高、更多，然后把城镇稍作迁移，排除积水，居住下来。
English: Floods often come and go, silt deposits become fertile soil, people cultivate on it, and perhaps there is no flood for a long time, so they build houses here one after another to become a village. If floods often flood, drowning people and animals, in order to save themselves, they will build higher and more dikes, and then move the town a little, remove standing water, and live.

古文：今堤防，狭者去水数百步，远者数里，于故大堤之内复有数重，民居其间，此皆前世所排也。
现代文：在这种状况下，自然就会经常发生被洪水冲没淹死的惨剧。而今黄河堤防，近的距河仅数百步，远的有数里，在旧有的大堤之内又修筑数重堤防，人们居住其间，这都是前代的排水设施。
English: In this situation, it is natural that the tragedy of being flooded and drowned will often occur. And now the Yellow River embankment, close to the river is only a few hundred steps, far away is several miles, and several heavy embankments are built within the old embankment, and people live in them. These are all drainage facilities of the previous generation.

古文：河从河内黎阳至魏郡昭阳，东西互有石堤，激水使还，百馀里间，河再西三东，迫厄如此，不得安息。今行上策，徙冀州之民当水冲者，决黎阳遮害亭，放河使北入海；河西薄大山，东薄金堤，势不能远泛滥，期月自定。
现代文：黄河从河内、黎阳至魏郡、昭阳，东西两岸都互有石筑的堤防，疾驰的洪峰受到石堤的阻挡，急剧回转，百余里之间，黄河两次向西猛拐、三次向东弯折，挤迫到这种程度，自然不得安宁。 如今若实行上策，则迁移冀州洪泛区人民，决开黎阳遮害亭的堤坝，放黄河向北溃决，流入渤海。黄河西邻大山，东近金堤，依水势不会流得太远。洪水泛滥一个月，自然就会稳定下来。
English: The Yellow River runs from Hanoi and Liyang to Wei County and Zhaoyang. There are stone dikes on both the east and west sides of the river. The rushing flood peak is blocked by the stone dike and turns sharply. Between more than 100 miles, the Yellow River turns west twice and bends east three times. It is natural that there is no peace when it is squeezed to such an extent. If the best policy is implemented today, the people of the Jizhou floodplain area will be relocated, the dam of the Liyang shelter will be broken, and the Yellow River will be allowed to break through to the north and flow into the Bohai Sea. The Yellow River

古文：难者将曰： 若如此，败坏城郭、田庐、冢墓以万数，百姓怨恨。 
现代文：有人将会诘难说： 如果这样，势必毁坏数以万计的城市、田地、房舍、坟墓，人民会怨恨的。 
English: Someone will object: If this happens, tens of thousands of cities, fields, houses, and graves will be destroyed, and the people will be resentful.

古文：昔大禹治水，山陵当路者毁之，故凿龙门，辟伊阙，析厎柱，破碣石，堕断天地之性，此乃人功所造，何足言也！
现代文：从前大禹治水，山陵挡路，则摧毁山陵，因此凿通龙门、打开伊阙、劈分底柱、击破碣石，使天地的原貌改观。而城郭、田舍、坟墓不过是人工所造，何值得提起！
English: In the past, Dayu controlled the water, and the mountains blocked the way, and destroyed the mountains, so he chiseled through the gantry, opened the Yili, split the bottom column, and broke the flint to change the original appearance of heaven and earth. And the castle, the farmhouse, and the grave are just man-made, what is worth mentioning!

古文：今濒河十郡，治堤岁费且万万；及其大决，所残无数。
现代文：现在濒临黄河的十郡，每年整修河堤的费用，将近万万钱，一旦发生大的决口，将毁坏无数。
English: At present, the ten counties bordering the Yellow River spend nearly ten million yuan every year to repair river embankments. In the event of a major breach, countless lives will be ruined.

古文：如出数年治河之费以业所徙之民，遵古圣之法，定山川之位，使神人各处其所而不相奸；且以大汉方制万里，岂其与水争咫尺之地哉！
现代文：如果拿出数年治河的费用，可以安置迁移的人民，遵照古代圣贤的作法，确定山川的位置，使神和人都各得其所，互不相扰。况且大汉国土广阔万里，何必与黄河去争那一点土地呢！
English: If the cost of several years of river management is taken out, the displaced people can be resettled, and the location of mountains and rivers can be determined in accordance with the practice of ancient sages, so that gods and people can have their own place and do not disturb each other. Moreover, the Han territory is vast, so why fight with the Yellow River for that bit of land!

古文：此功一立，河定民安，千载无患，故谓之上策。若乃多穿漕渠于冀州地，使民得以溉田，分杀水怒，虽非圣人法，然也救败术也。
现代文：这计划一旦实现，黄河稳定，人民安居乐业，千年没有水患，因此称为上策。 至于在冀州地区大量修筑运河渠道，一方面可使人民用来灌溉良田，另一方面又可分减水势。虽然不是圣人的作法，但也是挽救危局的良策。
English: Once this plan is realized, the Yellow River will be stable, the people will live and work in peace, and there will be no floods for a thousand years, so it is called the best policy. As for the construction of a large number of canal channels in the Jizhou region, on the one hand, it can be used by the people to irrigate good fields, and on the other hand, it can reduce the water potential. Although it is not a saint's practice, it is also a good strategy to save the dangerous situation.

古文：可从淇口以东为石堤，多张水门。
现代文：可从淇口开始，往东修筑石堤，多设水门。
English: It is possible to start from the mouth of the river and build a stone embankment to the east, with more sluice gates.

古文：恐议者疑河大川难禁制，荥阳漕渠足以卜之。
现代文：恐怕有人会怀疑，黄河这样的大河，用渠道水门难以控制得住，而荥阳粮道运河的功能，就足可以验证。
English: I am afraid that some people will suspect that a large river such as the Yellow River is difficult to control with channel locks, but the function of the Poyang Grain Canal can be sufficiently verified.

古文：冀州渠首尽，当仰此水门，诸渠皆往往股引取之：旱则开东方下水门，溉冀州；水则开西方高门，分河流，民田适治，河堤亦成。
现代文：冀州灌溉水渠，从头到尾，正应仰赖于这种水门。各个水渠往往都要从这里取水分流。天旱则打开东方下水门，使冀州田地得以灌溉；一旦洪水到来，则打开西方高处的水门，分散水流。这种方法，可使民田得到适当管理，河堤也不会毁坏。
English: Jizhou's irrigation canals, from beginning to end, should rely on this gate. All canals often have to draw water flow from here. The drought opens the eastern gate to allow irrigation of Jizhou's fields; in the event of a flood, the western high water gate is opened to disperse the water flow. This method allows the people's fields to be properly managed, and the river embankment will not be destroyed.

古文：此诚富国安民、兴利除害，支数百岁，故谓之中策。
现代文：这实在是富国安民、兴利除害、能控制水患数百年的办法。
English: This is really a way to enrich the country, keep the people safe, benefit the people, eliminate harm, and control floods for hundreds of years.

古文：若乃缮完故堤，增卑倍薄，劳费无已，数逢其害，此最下策也。 
现代文：因此称为中策。 至于只是修理完善原有的堤防，把低的地方增高，薄的地方加厚，消耗人力物力没有止境，却仍然频繁地遭受洪灾。因此这是最下策。 
English: If you just repair the old dike, fill the lowland up, and thicken the thin place, there is no end to the effort and expense, and you will repeatedly suffer from its harm. This is the lowest strategy.

古文：孔光、何武奏： 迭毁之次当以时定，请与群臣杂议。 
现代文：孔光、何武上奏说： 应撤除的亲情已尽的祖先祭庙的名次，应当及时确定下来。请陛下与群臣讨论。 
English: Kong Guang and He Wu said: The order of the ancestor temple that should be removed should be determined in a timely manner. Please discuss with your ministers.

古文：于是光禄勋彭宣等五十三人皆以为： 孝武皇帝虽有功烈，亲尽宜毁。 
现代文：当时光禄勋彭宣等五十三人都认为： 孝武皇帝虽然功勋卓著，但亲情已尽，应撤除祭庙。 
English: At that time, fifty-three people including Guanglu Xun and Peng Xuan believed that although Emperor Xiaowu had made outstanding contributions, he was no longer a close relative, and the temple should be removed.

古文：太仆王舜、中垒校尉刘歆议曰： 《礼》，天子七庙。
现代文：太仆王舜、中垒校尉刘歆却提出异议，说： 按照《礼记》，天子的祭庙应有七座。
English: However, the eunuch Wang Qian and the captain of the middle block Liu Qian raised objections, saying: According to the "Rituals," there should be seven temples of the Son of Heaven.

古文：七者其正法数，可常数者也。
现代文：七是正规的数量，可以作为常数。
English: Seven is a normal number and can be used as a constant.

古文：宗不在此数中，宗变也。
现代文：被尊为 宗 的，不在此数中，宗是变数。
English: Those who are respected as Zong are not included in this number, and Zong is a variable.

古文：苟有功德则宗之，不可预为设数。
现代文：如果有功德，就被尊为 宗 ，因此不可预先规定宗的数量。
English: If there is merit, it is honored as a sect, so the number of sects cannot be predetermined.

古文：臣愚以为孝武皇帝功烈如彼，孝宣皇帝崇立之如此，不宜毁。 
现代文：我们愚昧地认为，孝武皇帝的功勋那样大，而孝宣皇帝又如此地尊崇他，不应该撤除他的祭庙！ 
English: We believe that Emperor Xiaowu's achievements were so great, and Emperor Xiaoxuan revered him so much, that Emperor Wu's temple should not be destroyed.

古文：上览其议，制曰： 太仆舜、中垒校尉歆议可。 
现代文：哀帝观看奏议后，指示说：太仆王舜、中垒校尉刘歆的建议可行。 
English: After the Emperor watched the report, he gave the following instructions: the suggestions made by the Great Footman Wang Qian and the Middle Lieutenant Liu Qian are feasible.

古文：何武后母在蜀郡，遣吏归迎；会成帝崩，吏恐道路有盗贼，后母留止。
现代文：何武的后母在蜀郡，何武派府吏回家乡去接她。正逢成帝驾崩，府吏恐怕道上有盗贼，就留下没有继续赶路。
English: He Wu's stepmother was in Shu County, and He Wu sent government officials to her hometown to pick her up. It was the time of Emperor Chengdu's death, and the government officials were afraid that there would be thieves on the road, so they did not continue their journey.

古文：左右或讥武事亲不笃，帝亦欲改易大臣，冬，十月，策免武，以列侯归国。
现代文：哀帝左右亲信有人指摘何武奉养后母不厚道，哀帝也想更换大臣，于是在冬季，十月，颁策书罢免何武官职，命以列侯身份回到封国。
English: Some people close to and around Emperor Ai pointed out that it was not good manners for He Wu to take care of his stepmother. Emperor Ai also wanted to change the minister, so in the winter, October, he was dismissed from the post of military attaché and ordered to return to the feudal state as a vassal lord.

古文：癸酉，以师丹为大司空。
现代文：癸酉，任命师丹为太司空。
English: , appointed Shi Dan as Taisikong.

古文：丹见上多所匡改成帝之政，乃上书言： 古者谅暗不言，听于冢宰，三年无改于父之道。
现代文：师丹见哀帝对成帝的施政措施多有更改，就上书说： 古代，新君居丧期间沉默不语，国家大事，悉听宰相处理。三年之中，不能改变先父的主张。
English: When Shidan saw that Emperor Ai had made many changes to Emperor Chengdu's governance measures, he wrote a letter saying: In ancient times, the new emperor was silent during the mourning period, and national affairs were handled by the prime minister. In three years, he could not change his father's opinion.

古文：前大行尸柩在堂，而官爵臣等以及亲属，赫然皆贵宠，封舅为阳安侯，皇后尊号未定，豫封父为孔乡侯；出侍中王邑、射声校尉王邯等。
现代文：先前，先帝的尸体棺柩尚在灵堂，就给我们这些臣属以及亲属任官封爵，全都赫然显贵荣宠起来。如封舅父为阳安侯，皇后的尊号还未确定，就预先封她父亲为孔乡侯，并解除侍中王邑、射声校尉王邯等的职务等等。
English: Previously, when the coffin of the former emperor's body was still in the funeral hall, he gave these vassals and relatives of ours official knighthoods, and they all became very distinguished and honored. If the uncle was Yang An Hou, and the honorary title of the empress was not yet determined, he pre-sealed her father as Kong Xiang Hou, and dismissed the duties of the attendant Wang Yu, the vocal lieutenant Wang Yao, and so on.

古文：诏书比下，变动政事，卒暴无渐。
现代文：诏书连下，政事变动仓猝突然，急剧得没有逐渐发展的过程。
English: The imperial edict is frequently issued, the government changes, and sudden changes cannot be made gradually.

古文：臣纵不能明陈大义，复曾不能牢让爵位，相随空受封侯，增益陛下之过。
现代文：我固然不能公开表明大义，又不能坚决辞让爵位，随波逐流，凭空接受封侯，更增加了陛下的过失。
English: Even if I can't make a clear statement of righteousness, I can't insist on pushing the knighthood you gave me, and along with the empty knighthood, I have increased your fault.

古文：间者郡国多地动水出，流杀人民，日月不明，五星失行，此皆举错失中，号令不定，法度失理，阴阳溷浊之应也。
现代文：最近，郡国多次发生地震，涌出大水，淹死人民。太阳和月亮昏暗没有光彩，五星也失去正常的运行。这都是举措失当，号令不定，法令制度悖于常理，阴阳混浊不清的反映。
English: Recently, there have been many earthquakes in the county, and large amounts of water have gushed out, drowning people. The sun and the moon are dim and lack luster, and the five stars have lost their normal operation. These are all reflections of improper measures, uncertain orders, the legal system is contrary to common sense, and the yin and yang are unclear.

古文： 臣伏惟人情无子，年虽六七十，犹博取而广求。
现代文： 我看人之常情，若没有儿子，年纪虽然六七十了，仍然多娶妻妾广为求子。
English: I thought that it was human nature not to have children, so even though I am sixty or seventy years old, I still want to marry more concubines and look for children.

古文：孝成皇帝深见天命，烛知至德，以壮年克己，立陛下为嗣。
现代文：孝成皇帝深刻认识天命，明了陛下有至高的德行，以壮年之身，为公去私，立陛下为嗣子。
English: Emperor Xiaocheng, deeply perceiving the will of heaven and seeing your supreme virtue, restrained himself in his prime and made Your Majesty the heir to the throne.

古文：先帝暴弃天下，而陛下继体，四海安宁，百姓不惧，此先帝圣德，当合天人之功也。
现代文：先帝突然抛弃天下，陛下继位，四海安宁，百姓不惊，这是先帝的圣德，正合天人合一的功效。
English: The former emperor suddenly abandoned the world, His Majesty succeeded to the throne, the four seas were at peace, and the people were not alarmed. This was the saintly virtue of the former emperor and was in line with the effect of the unity of heaven and man.

古文：臣闻 天威不违颜咫尺 ，愿陛下深思先帝所以建立陛下之意，且克己躬行，以观群下之从化。
现代文：我听说： 不要违逆天帝的威严，因为他离你只有咫尺之远。 愿陛下深思先帝之所以选择你为继承人的深意，暂且克制自己，亲自实行新君不言的古制，观察群臣如何从善向化。
English: I have heard it said: Don't disobey the majesty of the heavenly emperor, for he is only a few feet away from you. May His Majesty ponder the profound meaning of why the former emperor chose you as his successor, restrain himself for the time being, personally implement the ancient system that the new prince did not say, and observe how his ministers change from good to better.

古文：天下者，陛下之家也，胏附何患不富贵，不宜仓卒若是，其不久长矣！ 
现代文：天下者，是陛下的私产，陛下的亲属亲信们又何愁不会富贵起来，不应该如此仓猝、迫不急待，那样也不会长久。 
English: Those who are born under heaven are His Majesty's private property, and His Majesty's relatives and intimates will not become rich, no matter how anxious they are. They should not be so hasty and impatient, and it will not last long.

古文：丹书数十上，多切直之言。
现代文：师丹上书数十次，言词多是痛切直率。
English: Shidan submitted the letter dozens of times, and his words were mostly blunt and direct.

古文：傅太后从弟子迁在左右，尤倾邪，上恶之，免官，遣归故郡。
现代文：傅太后的堂侄傅迁，侍奉在哀帝左右，特别阴险奸邪，哀帝很厌恶他，就下令免去他的官职，遣回原郡。
English: Empress Dowager Fu's cousin Fu Qian, who served at the side of Emperor An, was particularly insidious and treacherous. Emperor An detested him so much that he ordered him to be relieved of his official position and sent back to his original county.

古文：傅太后怒；上不得已，复留迁。
现代文：傅太后知道后，大怒，哀帝不得已，只好又留下傅迁。
English: After the Empress Dowager Fu learned of this, she was furious and felt so sorry for the emperor that she had no choice but to leave Fu Qian behind.

古文：丞相光与大司空丹奏言： 诏书前后相反，天下疑惑，无所取信。
现代文：丞相孔光与大司空师丹上奏说： 两个诏书的内容，前后相反，使天下人疑惑，无法取信于民。
English: "The contents of the two imperial edicts are contrary to each other, making the world suspicious and unable to gain the trust of the people," said the prime minister, Kong Guang, and the grand secretary of the Kuomintang, Tan Shangsoo.

古文：臣请归迁故郡，以销奸党。 
现代文：请陛下仍把傅迁遣回原郡，以清除奸党。 
English: Please, Your Majesty, still send Fu back to the original county to purge the traitors.

古文：卒不得遣，复为侍中，其逼于傅太后，皆此类也。
现代文：但傅迁终于没有被遣归，而且恢复了侍中的官职。哀帝受傅太后逼迫的窘况，都类乎此。
English: However, Fu Qian was finally not repatriated, and his official position as an attendant was restored. The plight of Emperor Ai, who was persecuted by Empress Dowager Fu, is similar to this.

古文：议郎耿育上书冤讼陈汤曰： 甘延寿、陈汤，为圣汉扬钩深致远之威，雪国家累年之耻，讨绝域不羁之君，系万里难制之虏，岂有比哉！
现代文：议郎耿育上书为陈汤鸣冤，说： 甘延寿、陈汤为大汉在边远的异域血战扬威，雪洗了国家多年的耻辱，讨伐绝域不服从中国的君主，捕捉万里之外难以制服的强虏，难道有谁的功劳可与他们相比！
English: Councilor Geng Yu wrote a letter to express his grievances for Chen Tang, saying: Gan Yanshou and Chen Tang were great men who fought bloody battles in remote foreign lands, washed away the country's years of shame, fought against the monarchs who did not obey China, and captured the strong captives who were difficult to subdue thousands of miles away. Is there anyone whose merit can be compared with them?

古文：先帝嘉之，仍下明诏，宣著其功，改年垂历，传之无穷。
现代文：先帝赞美他们，因而发布公开诏书，突出宣扬他们的功绩，为此而更改年号，使英雄的事绩，传之无穷。
English: The previous emperor commended them, issued several wise decrees, publicized their merits, changed the year, and recorded their merits.

古文：应是，南郡献白虎，边垂无警备。
现代文：与此相合，南郡贡献白虎，边陲再无警报，不用戒备。
English: In line with this, Nan County contributed a white tiger, and there was no alert in the border counties, so there was no need to be alert.

古文：会先帝寝疾，然犹垂竟不忘，数使尚书责问丞相，趣立其功；独丞相匡衡排而不予，封延寿、汤数百户，此功臣战士所以失望也。
现代文：当先帝卧病在床，可是仍然念念不忘，多次派尚书责问丞相，催促他们迅速拟定功劳等级。唯独丞相匡衡，从中排斥阻扰，仅封甘延寿、陈汤数百户的采邑，使功臣战士大失所望。
English: When the former emperor was ill in bed, but still remembered, he repeatedly sent Shang Shu to question the prime ministers, urging them to quickly draft a merit rating. However, the prime minister, Kuang Heng, excluded interference from this, and only awarded several hundred households of Gan Yan Shou and Chen Tang, which greatly disappointed the meritorious soldiers.

古文：孝成皇帝承建业之基，乘征伐之威，兵革不动，国家无事，而大臣倾邪，欲专主威，排妒有功，使汤塊然被冤拘囚，不能自明，卒以无罪老弃。
现代文：孝成皇帝继承的是前人已功成业就的基业，乘讨伐战胜之威，不须动一兵一卒，而国家安宁。可是大臣倾轧邪恶，意欲独专朝廷的权威，排挤嫉妒有功之人，使陈汤只身被拘入狱，无法向陛下剖白辩冤，终于以无罪年老之身，被抛弃在边陲。
English: Emperor Xiaocheng inherited the legacy of his predecessors, who had already achieved great success. With the power of conquest and victory, there was no need to move a single soldier, and the country was at peace. However, the minister indulged in evil, wanted to monopolize the authority of the imperial court, and crowded out those who were jealous of those who had meritorious deeds. Chen Tang was detained in prison, unable to explain and defend his grievances to His Majesty, and finally, as an innocent old man, he was abandoned at the border.

古文：敦煌正当西域通道，令威名折冲之臣，旋踵及身，复为郅支遗虏所笑，诚可悲也！
现代文：敦煌正当前往西域的通道，从前威震远方战无不胜的名将，现在一转眼却成了罪徒，还要遭受郅支单于残部的讥笑，实在可悲！
English: Dunhuang is currently the gateway to the western region. Formerly, it was a powerful and invincible war hero, but now it has become a criminal in the blink of an eye. It is really sad that it has to suffer the ridicule of being supported by the remnants.

古文：至今奉使外蛮者，未尝不陈郅支之诛以扬汉国之盛。
现代文：至今奉命出使各国的使节，无不用击杀郅支单于的事情来宣扬汉朝的强盛。
English: To this day, there is no one who has been sent to the barbarians without telling the story of the Xizhi people who were killed to promote the prosperity of the Han Dynasty.

古文：夫援人之功以惧敌，弃人之身以快谗，岂不痛哉！
现代文：借助英雄的功绩去威吓敌人，却抛弃英雄本人，使进谗之人称心快意，难道不令人痛心吗！
English: How can it not be sad to threaten one's enemies with one's own merits, and to make one's detractors happy by discarding others?

古文：且安不忘危，盛必虑衰，今国家素无文帝累年节俭富饶之畜，又无武帝荐延枭俊禽敌之臣，独有一陈汤耳！
现代文：况且安定不可忘记危险，强盛必须忧虑衰弱。而今国家平时没有文帝累年节俭积蓄的大量财富，又没有武帝延揽的众多勇猛善战令敌胆寒的名将，所有的，只是一个陈汤而已！
English: Moreover, when you are in a stable situation, do not forget the danger. When you are strong, you should think about decay. Nowadays, the country usually does not have the savings that Emperor Wen spent years and years to make the country rich, and does not have the courageous wit and the minister who captured the enemy, who was recommended and appointed by Emperor Wu. There is only a stale soup!

古文：假使异世不及陛下，尚望国家追录其功，封表其墓，以劝后进也。
现代文：假使陈汤已经过世，没有赶上陛下当政的时代，尚且希望国家追录他的功劳，聚土高筑他的坟墓，以鼓励后来的仁人志士。
English: If Chen Tang died before the time of His Majesty, we hope that the state will add his merit and erect a tombstone for his grave to encourage people in the future.

古文：汤幸得身当圣世，功曾未久，反听邪臣鞭逐斥远，使亡逃分窜，死无处所。
现代文：陈汤有幸得逢圣世，现在距他立功的时间又不太久，如果再听信奸臣的谗言，用鞭子把他驱逐到偏远的边塞，使他家破人亡，死无葬身之地，有远见之人莫不思量，认为陈汤的功劳，几世以来无人可及，而陈汤的过错却是人情难免。
English: Chen Tang was fortunate to be able to live in the present era of enlightenment. It did not take long for his achievements to be established. Instead, he allowed the treacherous minister to expel him far away, causing him to flee into exile and die without a place to bury him.

古文：远览之士，莫不计度，以为汤功累世不可及，而汤过人情所有，汤尚如此，虽复破绝筋骨，暴露形骸，犹复制于脣舌，为嫉妒之臣所系虏耳。此臣所以为国家尤戚戚也。 书奏，天子还汤，卒于长安。
现代文：陈汤尚且落到如此下场，那么我辈之人纵使粉身碎骨，疆场捐躯，仍免不了还会受制于奸臣的口舌，被嫉妒之臣陷害成罪徒。这正是我为国家特别忧愁的地方。 奏章呈上去后，哀帝下令让陈汤回到长安，后来就在长安去世。
English: Even though Chen Tang ended up like this, it is inevitable that our generation, even if we are crushed and die on the battlefield, will still be subject to the words of treacherous vassals and framed as criminals by jealous vassals. This is where I am particularly sad for the country. After the report was submitted, the Emperor ordered Chen Tang to return to Chang'an, and later he died in Chang'an.

古文：孝哀皇帝上
现代文：孝哀皇帝上
English: Filial piety to the emperor

古文：孝成皇帝下建平元年
现代文：汉哀帝建平元年
English: Emperor Hanai in the first year of Jianping

古文：春，正月，陨石于北地十六。
现代文：春季，正月，北地坠落十六颗陨石。
English: Sixteen meteorites fell on the North Pole in the spring and New Year.

古文：赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Pardons all around.

古文：司隶校尉解光奏言： 臣闻许美人及故中宫史曹宫皆御幸孝成皇帝，产子。子隐不见。
现代文：司隶校尉解光奏报说： 我听说许美人和前中宫史曹宫，都曾蒙孝成皇帝召幸而生下儿子，而两个孩子下落不明。
English: "I heard that both Xu Mei and the former Empress Dowager Shi Cao had been blessed by Emperor Xiaocheng to have a son, but the whereabouts of the two children are unknown," said Sili Lieutenant Xie Guangsong.

古文：臣遣吏验问，皆得其状：元延元年，宫有身；其十月，宫乳掖庭牛官令舍。
现代文：我派官员追查，他们都报告说：元延元年，曹宫怀孕，同年十月，在掖庭牛官令舍生下一个孩子。
English: I sent officials to investigate, and they all reported: In the first year of Yuan Yan, Cao Gong was pregnant, and in October of the same year, she gave birth to a child at the Yingting Niu official residence.

古文：中黄门田客持诏记与掖庭狱丞籍武，令收置暴室狱， 毋问儿男、女，谁儿也！ 
现代文：中黄门田客将皇帝手诏拿给掖庭狱丞籍武，命令他把曹宫关到暴室狱，并吩咐说： 不许问她生的是男孩，还是女孩！
English: In the middle of the Yellow Gate, Tianke brought the Emperor's edict to Gaoting Prisoner of War, ordered him to close Cao Palace to the storm cell prison, and ordered: Do not ask whether she was born a boy or a girl!

古文：宫曰： 善臧我儿胞，丞知是何等儿也！ 
现代文：也不许问是谁的孩子！ 曹宫说： 请把我儿子的胞衣好好藏起来，你知道我儿是什么人吗？ 
English: Do not ask whose child it is! Cao Gong said, "Please hide my son's shirt well. Do you know who my son is?

古文：后三日，客持诏记与武，问： 儿死未？ 武对： 未死。 
现代文：三天后，田客又拿着皇帝手诏给籍武，并说： 男孩死了没有？ 籍武回答： 没死。 
English: Three days later, Tian Ge again took the emperor's hand and gave it to Zekiwu, saying, "Is the boy dead?" Zekiwu replied, "He is not dead."

古文：客曰： 上与昭仪大怒，奈何不杀！ 
现代文：田客说： 皇上和昭仪大怒，你为什么不动手杀掉？ 
English: Tian Ke said: The Emperor and Zhao Yi are furious, why don't you kill them?

古文：武叩头啼曰： 不杀儿，自知当死；杀之，亦死！ 
现代文：籍武叩头大哭说： 不杀这个男孩，自知难逃一死；杀了，也是死！ 
English: He bowed his head and wept, saying, "If you do not kill this child, you should know that it is a capital crime; if you kill him, you will die!"

古文：即因客奏封事曰： 陛下未有继嗣，子无贵贱，唯留意！ 
现代文：便让田客代为呈递密封奏书，说： 陛下还未有嗣子，儿子不分贵贱，请陛下留意三思！ 
English: He then asked Tian Ke to present the sealed record on his behalf, saying: Your Majesty does not yet have an heir, and sons are of all ranks, so please think twice!

古文：奏入，客复特诏记取儿，付中黄门王舜。
现代文：密奏呈上去后，田客又拿着皇帝的手诏来取走了孩子，把小孩交给中黄门王舜。
English: After the secret report was submitted, Tian Ge also took the emperor's edict to take away the child and give the child to Zhonghuangmen Wang Yao.

古文：舜受诏，内儿殿中，为择乳母，告 善养儿，且有赏，毋令漏泄！ 
现代文：王舜接受手诏，把孩子带到宫中，为他挑选官婢张弃做乳娘，并告诉她说： 好好喂养这个男孩，会有赏赐的。千万不可泄漏消息！ 
English: Wang Yao accepted the handshake, took the child to the palace, selected officials and maidservants to act as wet nurses for him, and told her: "If you feed this boy well, you will be rewarded. Do not divulge the news!"

古文：舜择官婢张弃为乳母。后三日，客复持诏记并药以饮宫。宫曰： 果也欲姊弟擅天下！
现代文：三天后，田客又拿着皇帝的手诏和毒药，让曹宫自尽。曹宫说： 果然，她姐妹俩想独擅天下！
English: Three days later, Tian Ge again took the emperor's edict and poison and told Cao Gong to commit suicide. Cao Gong said: Sure enough, her two sisters want to dominate the world!

古文：我儿，男也，额上有壮发，类孝元皇帝。
现代文：我的孩子，是个男孩，额上有 壮发 ，跟他祖父孝元皇帝一样。
English: My child, a boy, has a full head of hair, just like his grandfather, Emperor Xiaoyuan.

古文：今儿安在？
现代文：现在我儿在哪里？
English: Where is the child now?

古文：危杀之矣！
现代文：她们会害他、杀他的！
English: have been killed by them!

古文：奈何令长信得闻之？ 
现代文：怎样才能让太后知道呢？ 
English: How can you let the Queen know you're having an affair?

古文：遂饮药死。
现代文：遂饮毒药而死。
English: He then drank poison and died.

古文：弃所养儿十一日，宫长李南以诏书取儿去，不知所置。
现代文：张弃喂养那个男孩，刚十一天，宫长李南就拿着皇帝的诏书，把孩子抱走了。
English: Zhang Guo fed the child for eleven days. The palace governor, Li Nan, took the child away with an edict and placed him somewhere.

古文：许美人元延二年怀子，十一月乳。
现代文：此后就再不知下落。 许美人元延二年怀孕，十一月生下一个男孩。
English: After that, her whereabouts were unknown. Xu Bijin Yuan was pregnant for two years and gave birth to a boy in November.

古文：昭仪谓成帝曰： 常绐我言从中宫来。即从中宫来，许美人儿何从生中！
现代文：赵昭仪对成帝说： 你常常欺骗我，说从中宫皇后那里来，既然从中宫来，许美人的孩子从哪里生出来！
English: Zhao Zhaoyi said to Emperor Chengdi: You have often deceived me, saying that you came from the Empress of the Middle Court. Since you came from the Middle Court, where did the child of Xu Bijin come from?

古文：许氏竟当复立邪！ 
现代文：难道许氏竟然要重当皇后吗！ 
English: Mr. Xu is actually on the rise again!

古文：怼，以手自捣，以头击壁户柱，从床上自投地，啼泣不肯食，曰： 今当安置我，我欲归耳！ 
现代文：赵昭仪十分怨恨，用手捶打自己，用头撞墙壁和门柱，还从床上自己跌到地下，哭泣不肯进食。哭叫着说： 你现在就得安排我，我要回家！ 
English: Zhao Zhaoyi was very resentful. She beat herself with her hands, banged her head against walls and doorposts, and fell from the bed to the ground, crying and refusing to eat. She cried and said: You have to arrange me now, I want to go home!

古文：帝曰： 今故告之，反怒为，殊不可晓也！ 
现代文：成帝说： 我今天特地告诉你，你反而发怒吗，真不懂你这是为什么！ 
English: Chengdi said, "I'm telling you specifically today, are you getting angry instead? I really don't understand why!

古文：帝亦不食。
现代文：成帝也不吃饭。
English: Emperor Cheng also refused to eat.

古文：昭仪曰： 陛下自知是，不食何为！
现代文：昭仪说： 陛下既然自认为对，为什么不吃饭！
English: Shouyi said, "Since Your Majesty thinks he is right, why don't you eat?"

古文：陛下尝自言： 约不负女！ 
现代文：陛下曾亲口说： 决不负你！ 
English: His Majesty himself once said: I will never fail you!

古文：今美人有子，竟负约，谓何？ 
现代文：现在许美人生了孩子，终究负约背誓，还有什么话可说？ 
English: Now that Xu Mei has given birth to a child, after all, what else can be said?

古文：帝曰： 约以赵氏，故不立许氏，使天下无出赵氏上者，毋忧也！ 
现代文：成帝说： 我是说因为赵氏的缘故，所以不立许氏，使天下没有人能在赵氏之上。你不用忧虑！ 
English: Emperor Cheng said, "I am saying that because of the Zhao clan, I will not establish the Xu clan, so that no one in the world can be above the Zhao clan. You don't have to worry!

古文：后诏使中黄门靳严从许美人取儿去，盛以苇箧，置饰室帘南去。
现代文：后来成帝下诏派中黄门靳严从许美人那里把男孩子取走，装在苇草编的小箱子里，放到饰室门帘的南边。
English: Later, Emperor Chengzhao sent the middle-ranking Huangmen Qian Yan to take the boy away from Xu Meiren, put him in a small box made of rushes, and placed it on the south side of the door curtain of the decoration room.

古文：帝与昭仪坐，使御者于客子解箧缄，未已，帝使客子及御者皆出，自闭户，独与昭仪在。
现代文：成帝与昭仪坐着，命侍者于客子解开苇箱绳子。一会儿，成帝令于客子和侍者都退出去，自己关闭门户，单独和昭仪留下。
English: Emperor Cheng was sitting with Zhaoyi, and ordered the waiter to untie the cord of the trunk from the guest. After a while, Emperor Cheng ordered both the guest and the waiter to leave, closed the gate himself, and left Zhaoyi alone.

古文：须臾开户，呼客子使缄封箧，及诏记令中黄门吴恭持以与籍武曰： 告武，箧中有死儿，埋屏处，勿令人知！ 
现代文：一会儿，打开门，呼叫于客子，让他封好箱子，并写下手诏，命中黄门吴恭拿着手诏和箱子去给籍武，并说： 告诉籍武，箱子里有死孩子，把他埋在隐蔽处所，不许让人知道！ 
English: After a while, he opened the door, called for his guest, asked him to seal the box, and wrote a handwritten note. He hit the yellow door. Wu Qiong took the handwritten note and the box to give it to Qiwu, and said: Tell Qiwu, there is a dead child in the box, bury him in a hidden place, and don't let anyone know!

古文：武穿狱楼垣下为坎，埋其中。
现代文：籍武在狱楼墙下挖了个坑，把死孩子掩埋了。
English: Keng Wu dug a hole under the wall of the cell block and buried those things in the shroud.

古文：其它饮药伤堕者无数事，皆在四月丙辰赦令前。
现代文：其他饮药伤坠者无数事，皆在四月丙辰赦令前。
English: There were countless other cases of people who fell victim to drinking and drugging, all of which occurred before April's amnesty.

古文：臣谨案：永光三年，男子忠等发长陵傅夫人冢。事更大赦，孝元皇帝下诏曰： 此朕所不当得赦也。 
现代文：臣谨按：永光三年，男子忠等发长陵傅夫人冢，事更大赦，孝元皇帝下诏曰： 此朕所以不当得赦也！ 
English: According to the vassal: In the three years of Yongguang, men such as men's loyalties, such as women's loyalties, were more forgiving. Emperor Xiaoyuan issued an edict saying: This is why I am not worthy of forgiveness!

古文：穷治，尽伏辜。
现代文：穷治，尽伏辜。
English: Poor governance, full of hypocrisy.

古文：天下以为当。
现代文：天下以为当。
English: The world thinks it is.

古文：赵昭仪倾乱圣朝，亲灭继嗣，亲属当伏天诛。
现代文：赵昭仪倾乱全朝，亲灭继嗣，家属当伏天诛。
English: Zhao Zhaoyi threw the whole dynasty into turmoil, personally eliminated his heirs, and his family members were put under house arrest.

古文：而同产亲属皆在尊贵之位，迫近帷幄，群下寒心，请事穷竟！ 
现代文：可是她的同母兄弟姐妹都处在显贵的位置，迫近皇帝，使天下人寒心。请陛下严厉追究此事。 
English: However, her brothers and sisters of the same mother are all in prominent positions, close to the emperor, and make the world cold.

古文：丞相以下议正法，帝于是免新成侯赵钦、钦兄子成阳侯皆为庶人，将家属徙辽西郡。
现代文：丞相及以下朝臣议决，认为应该依法制裁。于是哀帝罢免了新成侯赵钦和其侄子咸阳侯赵的爵位，全都贬为平民。将赵氏家属迁移到辽西郡。
English: The prime minister and the following courtiers deliberated and decided that sanctions should be imposed according to the law. Therefore, Emperor Ai removed the peerage of the new prince Zhao Qin and his nephew Xianyang Prince Zhao, all of whom were reduced to civilians. He moved the Zhao family members to Liaoxi County.

古文：议郎耿育上疏言： 臣闻继嗣失统，废適立庶，圣人法禁，古今至戒。
现代文：议郎耿育上书说： 我听说，皇位继承顺序失去准则，废嫡立庶，这是圣人立法严厉禁止，也是古今绝对不能容许的事。
English: I have heard that the order of succession to the imperial throne has lost its standard, and that illegitimacy and illegitimacy have been abolished. This is strictly prohibited by the legislation on saints, and is something that is absolutely impermissible from ancient times to the present.

古文：然太伯见历知適，逡循固让，委身吴、粤，权变所设，不计常法，致位王季，以崇圣嗣，卒有天下，子孙承业七八百载，功冠三王，道德最备，是以尊号追及太王。
现代文：但是，太伯发现季历适合当王位继承人，便退下来，坚决辞让，甚至逃到吴、粤。
English: However, his father-in-law found that the calendar was suitable for being the heir to the throne, so he withdrew, resolutely resigned, and even fled to Wu and Guangdong.

古文：故世必有非常之变，然后乃有非常之谋。
现代文：这是特殊情况下的权宜应变之法，不应算作常法。
English: Therefore, there must be extraordinary changes in the world, and then there is an extraordinary strategy.

古文：孝成皇帝自知继嗣不以时立，念虽末有皇子，万岁之后未能持国，权柄之重，制于女主，女主骄盛则耆欲无极，少主幼弱则大臣不使，世无周公抱负之辅，恐危社稷，倾乱天下。
现代文：太伯把嫡子的地位让给季历，以尊崇圣嗣，结果姬昌终于统一天下，子孙承业，达七八百年之久，功勋居三王之首，道德最为完备，因此尊号追加到始祖，称为太王。所以，世上必有非常的变化，然后才有非常的决策。孝成皇帝自知早年没有及时生下嗣子，考虑到，虽然暮年也有可能得皇子，但自己去世之后，孩子年幼，未能掌握国家权力，重要的权柄，必然控制在母后之手，母后过于骄横，就会贪欲无边，无所不为。少主幼弱，则大臣也不会俯首从命，那时如果没有周公那样的大臣忠心辅佐，恐怕将会危害国家，倾覆扰乱天下。
English: Emperor Xiaocheng himself knew that he would not be able to appoint an heir at the right time, and he also considered that even if he had a prince in his later years, he would not be able to take charge of the imperial government after his death. The power of the state would be controlled in the hands of the empress. If the empress was arrogant, she would do everything. Young monarchs, small and weak ministers would not obey his orders. People who did not have the same ambition as Zhou Gong to assist King Cheng would probably harm the country and bring disaster to the world.

古文：知陛下有贤圣通明之德，仁孝子爱之恩，怀独见之明，内断于身，故废后宫就馆之渐，绝微嗣祸乱之根，乃欲致位陛下以安宗庙。
现代文：先帝知道陛下有贤圣明达的品德，仁爱孝顺的恩义，独具慧眼，暗下决心，因此就不再去后宫美人们的住所，断绝了由于主幼而带来祸乱的根苗，一心想把皇位传给陛下，以保证汉家宗庙的安定。
English: Knowing that His Majesty possesses the virtue of wisdom, benevolence, filial piety, and generosity, and is able to make decisions with his unique insight, he intends to pass the throne to His Majesty in order to stabilize the world by preventing the harem from taking power and eliminating the root cause of disasters caused by the absence of heirs.

古文：愚臣既不能深援安危，定金匮之计，又不知推演圣德，述先帝之志，乃反覆校省内，暴露私燕，诬污先帝倾惑之过，成结宠妾石媢之诛，甚失贤圣远见之明，逆负先帝忧国之意！
现代文：有些愚昧的臣子，既不能全力挽救国家的安危，制定长远大计，又不知推广圣王的恩德，遵循先帝的志向，却反复在禁宫内调查审讯，暴露宫闱的陷私生活。诬蔑先帝有惑于美色的过失，造成宠妾因妒嫉杀人。这样便大大地抹煞了先帝圣贤远见的英明，违背辜负了先帝忧国的本意！
English: Some foolish courtiers, unable to do their best to save the safety of the country and formulate a long-term plan, and unaware of the need to promote the benevolence of the holy king and follow the aspirations of the former emperor, repeatedly investigated and interrogated in the Forbidden City, exposing the private life of the imperial concubine. They slandered the former emperor for the fault of being bewitched by beauty, causing the concubine to kill because of jealousy. In this way, they greatly erased the wisdom of the foresight of the sage of the former emperor, and violated the original intention of the former emperor to worry about the country!

古文：夫论大德不拘俗，立大功不合众，此乃孝成皇帝至思所以万万于众臣，陛下圣德盛茂所以符合于皇天也，岂当世庸庸斗筲之臣所能及哉！
现代文：论大德，就不能拘于世俗的见解；立大功，不必与众人相合。这正是孝成皇帝高明的思维胜过众臣万万倍的原因，这也是陛下圣德广大正符合皇天选择的缘故。这岂是当世庸碌短识之臣所能理解的道理呢！
English: Those who pay attention to great virtue do not have to stick to the secular view, and those who have made great contributions must have their own opinions. This is the reason why Emperor Xiaocheng's thoughts are far superior to those of ministers, and the reason why His Majesty's holiness is in line with heaven. How can these mediocre, short-sighted ministers of today understand this?

古文：且褒广将顺君父之美，匡救销灭既往之过，古今通义也。
现代文：况且赞美发扬遵循君父的美德，补救消除已往的过失，这是古今共同的大义。
English: Moreover, it has been a general rule since ancient times that the virtues of the monarch should be praised and promoted, while past faults should be remedied.

古文：事不当时固争，防祸于未然，各随指阿从以求容媚；晏驾之后，尊号已定，万事已讫，乃探追不及之事，讦扬幽昧之过，此臣所深痛也！
现代文：事情发生时，不在当时坚持力争，防患于未然，反而各自顺从迎合，阿谀献媚。等到先帝去世后，尊号已定，万事都已完毕，才开始深究无法挽回的往事，攻击宣扬宫闱幽深昏暗处谁也说不清的过错，这实在令我深深痛心！
English: When the incident occurred, instead of insisting on struggling at that time and preventing problems in advance, they all obeyed and pandered to each other. It was not until after the death of the former emperor, when the honorary title had been decided and everything was over, that they began to investigate the irreparable past, attack and propagate the mistakes that no one could tell in the deep and dark place of the palace, which really made me deeply sad!

古文：愿下有司议，即如臣言，宜宣布天下，使咸晓知先帝圣意所起。
现代文：希望陛下把这件事交付主管官署讨论，假如正如我所说，就应该公开向天下宣布，使小民都知道先帝神圣旨意的起因。
English: I hope that His Majesty will refer this matter to the competent authority for discussion. If, as I said, it should be publicly announced to the world, so that the common people know the cause of the sacred will of the former emperor.

古文：不然，空使谤议上及山陵，下流后世，远闻百蛮，近布海内，甚非先帝托后之意也。
现代文：不然的话，白白地让诽谤言论伤害到先帝坟陵，再流传到后世，远达边疆蛮族和外国，近则传遍海内，这与先帝将后事托付给陛下的本意，大相径庭了。
English: Otherwise, those slanderous words would be allowed to implicate the emperor and spread to future generations, far and wide, near and far, no one knows, no one knows, completely deviating from the original intention of the former emperor's entrustment.

古文：盖孝子，善述父之志，善成人之事，唯陛下省察！ 
现代文：孝顺的人，善于遵照先父的遗志，善于完成先人未竟的事业。请陛下考虑。 
English: Those who are filial, good at following the wishes of their forefathers, and good at completing the unfinished business of their forefathers. Please consider it, Your Majesty.

古文：帝亦以为太子颇得赵太后力，遂不竟其事。
现代文：哀帝也认为，当年能被立为太子，赵太崐后出了大力，也就不再追究此事。
English: Emperor Ai also believed that Zhao Taibing had exerted great efforts to become crown prince, so he would no longer investigate the matter.

古文：傅太后恩赵太后，赵太后亦归心，故太皇太后及王氏皆怨之。
现代文：傅太后感激赵太后当年的厚恩，赵太后也倾心相结，因此太皇太后以及王氏家族都感到怨恨。
English: Empress Dowager Fu was grateful for Empress Dowager Zhao's kindness that year, and Empress Dowager Zhao also fell in love with her, so Empress Dowager Fu and the Wang family all felt resentment.

古文：丁酉，光禄大夫傅喜为大司马，封高武侯。
现代文：丁酉，任命光禄大夫傅喜为大司马，封高武侯。
English: Ding Xi, appointed Guanglu doctor Fu Xi as the chief steward, with the title of Gao Wuhou.

古文：秋，九月，甲辰，陨石于虞二。
现代文：秋季，九月，甲辰，虞地坠落两颗陨石。
English: Two meteorites fall in autumn, September, Jia Chen, and Zhudi.

古文：郎中令泠褒、黄门郎段犹等复奏言： 定陶共皇太后、共皇后，皆不宜复引定陶籓国之名，以冠大号；车马、衣服宜皆称皇之意，置吏二千石以下，各供厥职；又宜为共皇立庙京师。 
现代文：郎中令泠褒、黄门郎段犹等又上奏说： 定陶共皇太后、共皇后都不应再把定陶藩国的名称，加到尊号之上。车马、衣裳服饰也都应与 皇 的身份相称。应设置二千石以下官员在那里供职。还应为共皇在京师建立祭庙。 
English: His second-in-command, Zou Bo, and Huangmen's third-in-command, Yu Yu, also made a report, saying: Neither the Dowager Empress nor the Empress of the Jingtao Clan should add the name of the Jingtao Clan to the honorific title. The chariot, horse, and clothing should also be commensurate with the status of the emperor. Officials of less than 2,000 koku should be set up to serve there. A temple should also be built for the emperor in Beijing.

古文：上复下其议，群下多顺指言： 母以子贵，宜立尊号以厚孝道。 
现代文：哀帝又将此建议交付臣下讨论，大多数官员都承顺哀帝的旨意说： 母以子贵，应该建立尊号，以重孝道。 
English: Emperor Aye also submitted this suggestion to his subjects for discussion, and most officials obeyed Emperor Aye's will and said, "Mothers and children are precious, and it is necessary to establish honorific titles and emphasize filial piety."

古文：唯丞相光、大司马喜、大司空丹以为不可。
现代文：只有丞相孔光、大司马傅喜、大司空师丹认为不可以。
English: Only the chancellor, Kong Guang, the grand secretary, Ma Fu Rong, and the grand secretary, Ku Shidan, thought it was unacceptable.

古文：丹曰： 圣王制礼，取法于天地。
现代文：师丹说： 圣王制定礼，是取法于天地。
English: Shidan said, "When the holy king decrees a ritual, he is taking the law from heaven and earth.

古文：尊卑者，所以正天地之位，不可乱也。
现代文：上尊下卑的原则，是摆正天地位置的依据，不可以混乱。
English: Superiority and inferiority are used to rectify the position of heaven and earth, and cannot be disturbed.

古文：今定陶共皇太后、共皇后以 定陶共 为号者，母从子，妻从夫之义也。
现代文：现在定陶共皇太后、共皇后以 定陶共 为号，表示母从子、妻从夫的。
English: Now, the dowager empress and empress of the Dingtao Clan all use the name Dingtao Clan, indicating that mother follows son and wife follows husband.

古文：欲立官置吏，车服与太皇太后并，非所以明 尊无二上 之义也。
现代文：要建立官属，设置官吏，车马衣裳服饰与太皇太后一样，是无法表明 至尊不能有二 的原则的。
English: To establish officials, set up officials, chariots, horses, clothes and clothing are the same as the great empress dowager, it is impossible to show that the Supreme cannot have two principles.

古文：定陶共皇号谥已前定，义不得复改。
现代文：定陶共皇的尊号、谥号前已确定，从大义出发，不能再改动。
English: The surname of Emperor Jingtao has been determined in the past, and should not be changed again.

古文：礼： 父为士，子为天子，祭以天子，其尸服以士服 ，子无爵父之义，尊父母也。
现代文：《礼记》说： 父亲是士，儿子成了天子，祭祀父亲时，虽可使用天子的祭仪，但父亲的殡服仍必须穿士的服装。 说明儿子没有给父亲封爵的道理，是表示尊重父母。
English: "The Book of Rites" says: "The father is a knight, the son has become the son of heaven, and although the rites of the son of heaven can be used when sacrificing the father, the father's funeral attire must still wear the clothing of a knight.

古文：为人后者为之子，故为所后服斩衰三年，而降其父母期，明尊本祖而重正统也。
现代文：成为人家的后嗣，也就成为人家的儿子，因此要为人家穿不缝边的粗麻衣服守三年孝，而对生身父母，则要缩短守孝期，用以表明尊崇被继承人的祖先，重视正统。
English: As the latter is a man's son, he should show three years of filial piety for the person he inherits, but reduce the period of filial piety for his parents to the first anniversary. This is a clear case of honoring one's ancestors and attaching importance to orthodoxy.

古文：孝成皇帝圣恩深远，故为共王立后，奉承祭祀，令共皇长为一国太祖，万世不毁，恩义已备。
现代文：孝成皇帝圣恩深远，特意为共皇选定继承人，以承奉共皇一脉的祭祀，使共皇能长久为藩国的太祖，祭庙香火万世不灭，恩义已经备至。
English: Emperor Xiaocheng's divine grace is far-reaching, and he has specially selected an heir for the common emperor, so that the common emperor can serve as the ancestor of the domain for a long time, and the temple's incense will never die, and the gratitude has been prepared.

古文：陛下既继体先帝，持重大宗，承宗庙、天地、社稷之祀，义不可复奉定陶共皇祭入其庙。
现代文：陛下既为先帝的继承人，身居嫡系大宗，承袭了宗庙、天地、社稷的祭祀，从大义出发，就不能再承奉定陶共皇，到共皇祭庙去祭祀。
English: Since His Majesty is the heir of the former emperor, is a direct descendant of the great lineage, and has inherited the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple, heaven and earth, and the social order, from the perspective of justice, he can no longer accept the position of Ding Tao Emperor and go to the Emperor's temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：今欲立庙于京师，而使臣下祭之，是无主也。
现代文：现在要在京师为共皇立庙，派臣下去祭祀，这是无主的祭祀。
English: Now he wants to build a family temple in Kyoto and have his vassals worship him.

古文：又，亲尽当毁。
现代文：再有，皇帝的祭庙，当亲情已尽时，就应当撤除。
English: Moreover, the emperor's temple should be removed when the family relationship is over.

古文：空去一国太祖不堕之祀，而就无主当毁不正之礼，非所以尊厚共皇也。 
现代文：白白放弃一个藩国太祖万世不堕的祭祀，而去趋就一个既无主，将来应撤除，又不符合正道的祭祀，这不是尊崇厚待共皇的作法。 
English: It is not the way to respect and treat the common emperor, to give up in vain a sacrificial rite that the great ancestor of the domain and the country will never fall, and to tend to a sacrificial rite that has no owner, should be removed in the future, and does not conform to the righteous path.

古文：丹由是浸不合上意。
现代文：师丹从此渐渐不称哀帝的心意。
English: As a result, Shidan gradually became dissatisfied with the emperor's intentions.

古文：会有上书言： 古者以龟、贝为货，今以钱易之，民以故贫，宜可改币。 
现代文：正巧，有人上书说： 古代用龟甲、贝壳作为货币，而今改成钱币，小民因此贫困，应该改变货币。 
English: Coincidentally, someone submitted a letter saying: In ancient times, tortoiseshells and shells were used as currency, but now they have been changed into coins. As a result, the common people are poor, and the currency should be changed.

古文：上以问丹，丹对言可改。
现代文：哀帝问师丹的意见，师丹回答可以改。
English: The emperor asked Shidan about this matter, and Shidan replied that it could be changed.

古文：章下有司议，皆以为行钱以来久，难卒变易。
现代文：于是把奏章交付主管官署讨论，主管官员都认为，使用钱币的时间已很长，难以仓猝地改变。
English: All of them agreed that the use of copper money has been around for a long time, and it is difficult to change it immediately.

古文：丹老人，忘其前语，复从公卿议。
现代文：师丹人老神衰，忘记了他以前说过的话，就又去附合公卿们的意见。
English: Shidan was so tired that he forgot what he had said before, and went back to agree with the nobles.

古文：又丹使吏书奏，吏私写其草。
现代文：此崐外，师丹让属吏书写奏章，属吏私自抄写了一份草稿。
English: In addition to this, the teacher and the scholar let the subordinate clerk write the musical score, and the subordinate clerk copied a draft.

古文：丁、傅子弟闻之，使人上书告 丹上封事，行道人遍持其书。 
现代文：丁、傅两家子弟知道了，派人出面控告师丹说： 师丹呈上的密封奏书，街上行路之人都拿着副本。 
English: When the children of the Ding and Fu families found out, they sent someone to sue Shidan, saying, "Everyone on the street has a copy of the sealed record presented by Shidan.

古文：上以问将军、中朝臣，皆对曰： 忠臣不显谏。大臣奏事，不宜漏泄，宜不廷尉治。 
现代文：哀帝问将军和宫廷官员的看法，都回答说： 忠臣不会显示他对君王的劝谏，大臣奏事的内容不应该泄漏。应该将师丹交廷尉治罪。 
English: Emperor Aye asked the generals and court officials for their opinions, and they all replied: A loyal retainer would not reveal his advice to the monarch, the content of a minister's report should not be leaked, and Shidan should be punished as a courtier.

古文：事下廷尉，劾丹大不敬，事未决，给事中、博士申咸、炔钦上书言： 丹经行无比，自近世大臣能若丹者少。
现代文：此案交付廷尉审理，廷尉弹劾师丹犯了大不敬罪。事情还未最后裁决，给事中、博士申咸、炔钦上书说： 师丹的经学和品行没人能赶得上。自近世以来，大臣能象师丹那样的很少了。
English: The case was handed over to a court officer for trial, and the court officer impeached Shi Dan for committing the crime of great disrespect. The matter has not yet been finally adjudicated, and during the case, Drs. Shen Xian and Yu Qin wrote a letter saying: No one can catch up with Shi Dan's study and conduct. Since the modern era, there have been few ministers who can be like Shi Dan.

古文：发愤懑，奏封事，不及深思远虑，使主簿书，漏泄之过不在丹，以此贬黜，恐不厌众心。 
现代文：由于师丹心中愤懑，呈递密奏，来不及深思熟虑，而命主簿书写，泄露的过错不在师丹。用这个理由把他贬黜，恐怕不能令众人心服。 
English: Due to the fact that Shi Dan was angry in his heart and submitted the secret music, it was too late to deliberate, and the order was written in the master's book. The fault of leaking was not Shi Dan's. Using this reason to disparage him, I'm afraid I can't convince everyone.

古文：上贬咸、钦秩各二等。
现代文：哀帝命将申咸、炔钦的官秩各降二等。
English: Emperor An decreed that the official ranks of Shen Xian and Su Qin would be reduced by two ranks each.

古文：遂策免丹曰： 朕惟君位尊任重，怀谖迷国，进退违命，反覆异言，甚为君耻之！
现代文：接着下策书罢免师丹说： 朕见你官位尊贵，责任重大，却怀诈惑国，言行违抗诏令，反复无常，言词矛盾，朕深为你感到羞耻！
English: Then, he said, "I see that you hold a high-ranking official position with great responsibilities, yet you are intent on deceiving the country, your words and actions defy the edict of the emperor, you are capricious, and your words are contradictory. I am deeply ashamed of you!

古文：以君尝托傅位，未忍考于理，其上大司空、高乐侯印绶，罢归！ 
现代文：由于你曾担任过朕的师傅，不忍心将你依法究治。今交还大司空、高乐侯的印信、绶带，罢官免爵回家。 
English: Since you once served as my teacher, I can't bear to investigate you according to the law. I now return the seal letter and sash of Daishi Ku, Gao Le Hou, and go home without a title.

古文：尚书令唐林上疏曰： 窃见免大司空丹策书，泰深痛切！
现代文：尚书令唐林上书说： 我看了罢免大司空师丹的策书，深深地感到痛心。
English: Shang Shuling Tanglin said in his letter: I read the proposal for the dismissal of Daishi Ku Shidan and felt deeply saddened.

古文：君子作文，为贤者讳。
现代文：君子作文章时，会为贤者讳言过失。
English: When writing an article, a gentleman will conceal his faults for a wise man.

古文：丹，经为世儒宗，德为国黄耇，亲傅圣躬，位在三公；所坐者微，海内未见其大过。
现代文：师丹精通五经，是儒学一代宗师，品德高洁，是国家的老前辈，亲自教导辅佐陛下，位列三公，而所犯下的过失极其微小，海内之人都没见他有什么大错。
English: Shidan is well versed in the Five Classics of Confucianism. He is a great teacher of Confucianism. He is a man of high moral character. He is an elder statesman. He personally taught and assisted His Majesty. He was ranked as one of the Three Princes. The mistakes he committed were extremely minor, and people at home did not see any major mistakes on his part.

古文：事既以往，免爵太重；京师识者咸以为宜复丹爵邑，使奉朝请。
现代文：事情既然已成过去，免爵的处罚太重。京师有见识的人，都认为应恢复师丹的封爵采邑，使他有机会朝见陛下。
English: Now that the incident is in the past, the punishment of being stripped of his knighthood is too heavy. People with insight in Beijing all believe that Shidan's knighthood should be restored, so that he has the opportunity to meet His Majesty.

古文：唯陛下裁览众心，有以尉复师傅之臣！ 
现代文：请陛下考虑大家的心愿，用以安慰报答当过师傅的大臣。 
English: I would like to ask His Majesty to consider everyone's wishes and use them to comfort and reward the minister who has been a master.

古文：上从林言，下诏，赐丹爵关内侯。
现代文：哀帝听从了唐林的意见，下诏封师丹为关内侯。
English: Emperor Ai listened to Tanglin's advice and made Shidan the Lord of Guanai.

古文：上用杜业之言，召见硃博，起家复为光禄大夫；迁京兆尹。
现代文：哀帝采纳杜业的建议，召见朱博，恢复他的官职，任命为光禄大夫。不久，又升迁京兆尹。
English: Aitei accepted Duye's suggestion, summoned Zhu Bo, restored his official position, and appointed him as Guanglu's doctor. Soon, he promoted Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：冬，十月，壬午，以博为大司空。
现代文：冬季，十月，壬午，任命朱博为大司空。
English: In winter, in October, at noon, Zhu Bo was appointed as the chief of the Air Force.

古文：中山王箕子，幼有眚病，祖母冯太后自养视，数祷祠解。
现代文：中山王刘箕子，幼年就患有眼病，祖母冯太后亲自抚养看护，不断祈祷，求神免去他的病灾。
English: Liu Zizi, the king of Zhongshan, suffered from an eye disease at a young age. His grandmother, Empress Dowager Feng, personally raised and cared for him, praying constantly and asking God to remove his illness.

古文：上遣中郎谒者张由将医治之。
现代文：哀帝派遣中郎谒者张由去医治刘箕子的病。
English: The emperor sent Zhang Yu, a middle-ranking eunuch, to treat Liu Xizi's illness.

古文：由素有狂易病，病发，怒去，西归长安。
现代文：张由一直患有疯狂变态病，到中山国后，突然犯病，狂怒而离开中山国，西行返回长安。
English: Zhang Yu had been suffering from a crazy degenerative disease. After arriving in Zhongshan, he suddenly fell ill and left Zhongshan in a rage, heading west to return to Chang'an.

古文：尚书簿责由擅去状，由恐，因诬言中山太后祝诅上及傅太后。
现代文：尚书用文簿一一责问张由擅自离开中山的原因，张由恐惧，就编造谎言，说中山国冯太后诅咒皇帝及傅太后。
English: Shang Shu asked Zhang Yu the reason for leaving Zhongshan without permission. Zhang Yu was afraid, so he made up a lie, saying that Empress Dowager Feng of Zhongshan cursed the emperor and Empress Dowager Fu.

古文：傅太后与冯太后并事元帝，追怨之，因是遣御史丁玄案验；数十日，无所得。
现代文：傅太后与冯太后都是汉元帝的妃子，傅太后追想旧恨，于是派遣御史丁玄去追查，调查数十天，没有结果，就又派中谒者令史去追查究治。
English: Both Empress Dowager Fu and Empress Dowager Feng were concubines of Emperor Han Yuan. Empress Dowager Fu recalled the old hatred, so she dispatched Lady Shi Dingxuan to investigate and investigate for dozens of days. There was no result, so she also sent the middle-ranking person to order Shi to investigate and investigate.

古文：更使中谒者令史立治之；立受傅太后指，冀得封侯，治冯太后女弟习及弟妇君之，死者数十人，诬奏云： 祝诅，谋杀上，立中山王。 
现代文：史立接受傅太后的旨意，希图能因此立功封侯，于是究治冯太后的妹妹冯习以及弟媳君之，严刑拷问之下，死者竟达数十人。随后史立诬告上奏说： 冯太后进行诅咒，阴谋害死皇上，好另立中山王。 
English: Shi Li accepted the will of Empress Dowager Fu, hoping to be able to make a contribution to the enthronement of Empress Dowager Feng, so he investigated Empress Dowager Feng's sister, Feng Xi, and her brother and sister-in-law, and under severe torture, dozens of people died. Subsequently, Shi Li falsely reported: Empress Dowager Feng cursed and plotted to kill the emperor, so that he could set up the Zhongshan King.

古文：责问冯太后，无服辞。
现代文：但审问冯太后时，并没有认罪的供辞。
English: They questioned Empress Dowager Feng, but she refused to be persuaded.

古文：立曰： 熊之上殿何其勇，今何怯也！ 
现代文：史立说： 当年熊扑上殿时，你何等勇敢，今天又害怕什么呢？ 
English: Shi Li said, "How brave the bear was when he ran to the palace, and how scared he is now!

古文：太后还谓左右： 此乃中语，前世事，吏何用知之？
现代文：冯太后回宫后对左右说： 挡熊之事，是旧时宫中的话，这个官吏怎么会知道了？
English: When the empress dowager returned, she said to the waiters on her right and left, "This is a palace matter, an old matter from the previous dynasty. How can the officials know about it?"

古文：欲陷我效也！ 
现代文：这是宫中有人要陷害我的证明！ 
English: This is proof that someone in the palace is trying to frame me!

古文：乃饮药自杀。
现代文：于是服毒自杀。
English: He took poison and committed suicide.

古文：宜乡侯参、君之、习夫及子当相坐者，或自杀，或伏法，凡死者十七人。
现代文：宜乡侯冯参、君之、冯习和她的丈夫、儿子，凡被牵连进此案的，或自杀，或受刑被诛，死者共十七人。
English: Feng San, Junzhi, Feng Xi, the lord of Yixiang Township, and her husband and son, all of whom were implicated in the case, either committed suicide or were imprisoned. There were a total of seventeen deaths.

古文：众莫不怜之。
现代文：人们无不对此感到哀怜。
English: People can't help but feel sad about this.

古文：司隶孙宝奏请覆治冯氏狱，傅太后大怒曰： 帝置司隶，主使察我！
现代文：司隶孙宝奏请重新审理冯氏一案，傅太后怒气冲冲地说： 皇帝设置司隶崐，是用来追查我！
English: Sun Baosong, the magistrate, please re-examine the case of Mr. Feng. Empress Dowager Fu said angrily: The emperor set up the magistrate to investigate me!

古文：冯氏反事明白，故欲擿抉以扬我恶，我当坐之！ 
现代文：冯氏谋反事实明白，孙宝却故意要挑剔，来宣扬我的过错，我应当被治罪！ 
English: Mr. Feng knew the truth, but Sun Bao deliberately wanted to be picky, to proclaim my fault, I should be punished!

古文：上乃顺指，下宝狱。
现代文：哀帝顺从傅太后的旨意，把孙宝关进监狱。
English: In obedience to the will of Empress Dowager Fu, Emperor Ai put Sun Bao in prison.

古文：尚书仆射唐林争之，上以林朋党比周，左迁敦煌鱼泽障候。
现代文：尚书仆射唐林为孙宝争辩，哀帝却认为唐林营私结党，把他贬为敦煌鱼泽障候。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant Sho Tanglin disputed the matter, and the emperor thought that Tanglin was a partisan and demoted him to the post of Dunhuang Yuzawa.

古文：大司马傅喜、光禄大夫龚胜固争，上为言太后，出宝，复官。
现代文：大司马傅喜、光禄大夫龚胜，坚持为孙宝辩护，哀帝把情况禀告傅太后，才释放孙宝，官复原职。
English: Daishi Ma Fuxi and Guanglu doctor Yan Sheng insisted on defending Sun Bao, and the Emperor told the Empress Dowager Fu about the situation, only to release Sun Bao and reinstate him.

古文：张由以先告，赐爵关内侯；史立迁中太仆。
现代文：张由因首先揭发逆案的功劳，赐爵关内侯。擢升史立为中太仆。
English: Zhang Yu was given the title of Lord of Guanai and promoted to the position of Middle Palace Attendant for his efforts in first exposing the treacherous case.

