古文：颜杲卿字昕，与真卿同五世祖，以文儒世家。
现代文：颜杲卿字昕，与颜真卿同五世祖，出身书香门第。
English: Yan Zhenqing, the fifth generation ancestor of Yan Zhenqing, was born in Shuxiang.

古文：父元孙，有名垂拱间，为濠州刺史。
现代文：父元孙，在垂拱年间颇负盛名，曾任濠州刺史。
English: His father, Yuan Sun, was quite famous during the years of the Hanging Arch, and once served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：杲卿以廕调遂州司法参军。
现代文：杲卿凭父功名任遂州司法参军。
English: On the strength of his father's achievements, Zouqing was appointed to the Suizhou Judiciary and joined the army.

古文：性刚正，莅事明济。
现代文：性格刚强正直，处事明达有效。
English: Strong and honest character, dealing with things wisely and effectively.

古文：尝为刺史诘让，正色别白，不为屈。
现代文：曾受刺史责难，严肃辩白，不受屈辱。
English: He has been censured by history, earnestly defended, and not humiliated.

古文：开元中，与兄春卿、弟曜卿并以书判超等，吏部侍郎席豫咨嗟推伏。
现代文：开元年间与兄春卿、弟曜卿同以写作判词评为超等，吏部侍郎席豫赞叹推许。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, he and his elder brother, Haru-kyo, and younger brother, Yasu-kyo, were both rated as superlative in their writing judgment, and were highly praised and recommended by the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：再以最迁范阳户曹参军。
现代文：又以最优升为范阳户曹参军。
English: He was also promoted to Fanyang Household Cao with the best promotion.

古文：安禄山闻其名，表为营田判官，假常山太守。
现代文：安禄山闻其名，表奏他任营田判官，代理常山太守。
English: An Lushan became famous, and he was appointed as the judge of Yingtian, acting as the governor of Changshan.

古文：禄山反，杲卿及长史袁履谦谒于道，赐杲卿紫袍，履谦绯袍，令与假子李钦凑以兵七千屯土门。
现代文：安禄山反叛，杲卿与长史袁履谦晋见安禄山于途中，禄山赐给杲卿紫袍、履谦红袍，命令他们与自己的义子李钦凑率兵七千驻扎土门。
English: An Lushan rebelled, and Lord Zou and Chief Historian Yuan Luqian Jin saw Lord An Lushan on the way. Lord Luqian gave Lord Zou a purple robe and Lord Zou a red robe, and ordered them to station 7,000 soldiers with their son-in-law Li Qin at Tu Men.

古文：杲卿指所赐衣谓履谦曰： 与公何为著此？ 
现代文：杲卿指着安禄山所赐衣对履谦说： 我与您为什么要穿这个？ 
English: Pointing to the robe given to him by Mount Anlu, Lord Zou said to Lu Qian: "Why do you and I have to wear this?

古文：履谦悟，乃与真定令贾深、内丘令张通幽定谋图贼。
现代文：履谦醒悟，就与真定县令贾深、内丘领张通幽谋划对付叛贼。
English: When Lu Qian woke up, he plotted with Jia Sheng, the commander of Zhending County, and Zhang Tong, the leader of Neiqiu County, to deal with the traitors.

古文：杲卿称疾不视事，使子泉明往返计议，阴结太原尹王承业为应，使平卢节度副使贾循取幽州。
现代文：杲卿托病不理事，使儿子颜泉明居中往来商议，暗中约定太原尹王承业为内应，使平卢节度副使贾循攻取幽州。
English: Gongqing feigned illness and did not attend the meeting, so that his son Yanquan Ming stayed in the middle of the discussion, secretly agreed that Taiyuan Yin Wang Chengye would be the internal correspondence, and made Jia Xun, the deputy envoy of Pinglu Jiedu, capture Yuzhou.

古文：谋泄，禄山杀循，以向润客、牛廷玠守。
现代文：计谋泄露，安禄山杀了贾循，派向润客、牛廷守幽州。
English: When the plot leaked out, An Lushan killed Jia Xun and sent Xiang Runke and Niu Ting to guard Yuzhou.

古文：杲卿阳不事事，委政履谦，潜召处士权涣、郭仲邕定策。
现代文：颜杲卿表面上还是不管事，政务委托履谦处理，暗中召集处士权涣、郭仲邕制订计谋。
English: On the surface, Yan Xuanqing still did not care about the matter. He entrusted the government affairs to Shuxian to deal with, and secretly convened the officials Quan Xuan and Guo Zhongyao to formulate a plan.

古文：时真卿在平原，素闻贼逆谋，阴养死士为拒守计。
现代文：此时颜真卿在平原，早就听说安贼叛逆图谋，秘密蓄养了一批敢死之士做抵抗坚守之计。
English: At this time, Yan Zhenqing was in the plain. He had already heard about the anti-thief rebellion plot, and secretly raised a group of brave men to resist and hold fast.

古文：李憕等死，贼使段子光传首徇诸郡，真卿斩子光，遣甥卢逖至常山约起兵，断贼北道。
现代文：李忄登等人被杀，叛贼命段子光将李忄登等首级传送各郡示众，颜真卿杀了段子光，派外甥卢逖到常山约颜杲卿发兵，切断叛贼北路。
English: Li Shouden and others were killed. The traitor ordered Duan Ziguang to send the heads of Li Shouden and others to all counties for public display. Yan Zhenqing killed Duan Ziguang and sent his nephew Lu Wei to Changshan to dispatch troops to Yan Ziqing and cut off the northern road of the traitor.

古文：杲卿大喜，以为兵掎角可挫贼西锋。乃矫贼命召钦凑计事，钦凑夜还，杲卿辞城门不可夜开，舍之外邮；使履谦及参军冯虔、郡豪翟万德等数人饮劳，既醉，斩之，并杀其将潘惟慎，贼党歼，投尸滹沱水。
现代文：杲卿大喜，认为与颜真卿屯兵相掎角可以挫败叛贼西路锋芒，就假借安贼命令召李钦凑议事，钦凑夜还常山，杲卿推说夜间不可开城门，让他在城外驿舍就宿；派袁履谦及参军冯虔、郡中豪士翟万德等数人陪饮慰劳，待李钦凑醉后，杀了他，并杀了李钦凑的部将潘惟慎，这伙贼党被歼灭，投尸于滹沱河。
English: Yan Zhenqing was overjoyed, and thought that fighting with Yan Zhenqing's garrison could defeat the traitor Xi Lu Feng Meng, so he ordered Li Qinqin to hold a meeting under the guise of a traitor. Qinqin was still in the mountains at night, and Yan Xing suggested that he should not open the city gate at night, and let him stay in a lodge outside the city. He sent Yuan Lucheng and several people such as Feng Qian, a member of the army, and Zou Wande, a hero of the county, to accompany Li Qinqin. When Li Qinqin was drunk, he killed him, and

古文：履谦以首示杲卿，则喜且泣。
现代文：袁履谦以所斩的李钦凑的首级给颜杲卿看，杲卿喜极泪流。
English: Yuan Luqian showed Yan Yuqing the severed head of Li Qinqiao, and Yan Yuqing shed tears of joy.

古文：先是，禄山遣将高邈召兵范阳未还，杲卿使匋城尉崔安石图之。
现代文：原先，安禄山派属将高邈到范阳征召兵马还没返回，颜杲卿命橐城县尉崔安石逮捕他。
English: Originally, the An Lushan faction sent Gao Yao to Fanyang to recruit soldiers and horses, but before he returned, Yan Yaoqing ordered Qi Cheng County Lieutenant Cui Anshi to arrest him.

古文：邈至满城，虔、万德皆会传舍，安石绐以置酒，邈舍马，虔叱吏缚之。
现代文：高邈到满城，冯虔、翟万德都会集在客舍，崔安石骗说要备酒款待，高邈下马，冯虔命吏人捆绑了他。
English: Gao Yao went all over the city, Feng Qian and Gong Wan De would gather at the guest house, Cui Anshi lied that he wanted to prepare wine and hospitality, Gao Yao dismounted, Feng Qian ordered the officials to tie him up.

古文：而贼将何千年自赵来，虔亦执之。
现代文：贼将何千年从赵来，冯虔也抓住了他。
English: Thieves have been coming from Zhao for thousands of years. Feng Qian also caught him.

古文：日未中，送二贼。
现代文：未到中午，就押送高、何两贼见颜杲卿。
English: Before noon, Gao and several other thieves were escorted to see Yan Xuanqing.

古文：杲卿乃遣万德、深、通幽传钦凑首，械两贼送京师，与泉明偕。
现代文：杲卿就派翟万德、贾深、张通幽传送李钦凑首级，并铐送两贼至京城，与颜泉明一起上路。
English: Lord Zou then sent Gong Wande, Jia Sheng, and Zhang Tongyu to transfer Li Qin to the capital, and sent the two thieves to the capital to go on the road with Yan Quanming.

古文：至太原，王承业欲自以为功，厚遣泉明还，阴令壮士翟乔贼于路。
现代文：到达太原，王承业想邀为己功，就厚赠颜泉明财物，让他返回，而暗地里派壮士翟乔在中途杀害他。
English: When he arrived in Taiyuan, Wang Chengye wanted to take credit for the invitation, so he generously gave Yanquan Ming property to let him return, and secretly sent the strongman Zou Qiao to kill him in the middle of the way.

古文：乔不平，告之故，乃免。
现代文：翟乔心里不平，告诉了颜泉明，泉明才得以免祸。
English: Yan Qiao felt uneasy and told Yan Quanming, who was able to avoid the calamity.

古文：玄宗擢承业大将军，送吏皆被赏。
现代文：玄宗提升王承业为大将军，押送吏人都得到赏赐。
English: Xuanzong promoted Wang Chengye to the rank of general, and the escort officers were rewarded.

古文：已而事显，乃拜杲卿卫尉卿兼御史中丞，履谦常山太守，深司马。
现代文：后来，王承业冒功之事暴露，玄宗就任命颜杲卿为卫尉卿兼御史中丞、袁履谦为常山太守、贾深为司马。
English: Later, when Wang Chengye's exploits were exposed, Emperor Xuanzong appointed Yan Xuanqing as the captain of the imperial guards and the vice-president of imperial history, Yuan Lucheng as the governor of Changshan, and Jia Sheng as Sima.

古文：即传檄河北，言王师二十万入土门，遣郭仲邕领百骑为先锋，驰而南，曳柴扬尘，望者谓大军至。
现代文：立即传讨贼檄文于河北，声言朝廷兵马二十万进入土门，派郭仲邕率一百骑兵为先锋，驰骋南去，马尾都拖上树枝，扬起漫天尘土，望见的人都说大军到了。
English: A proclamation was immediately issued in Hebei Province, proclaiming that two hundred thousand soldiers and horses of the imperial court had entered the Dumen, and Guo Zhongya, leading a hundred cavalrymen, was sent as the vanguard to gallop south. The horses' tails were dragged up on the branches of trees, raising dust that filled the sky, and everyone who saw it said that a large army had arrived.

古文：日中，传数百里。
现代文：到中午，消息传了几百里。
English: By midday, the news had spread hundreds of miles.

古文：贼张献诚方围饶阳，弃甲走。
现代文：贼将张献诚正在围困饶阳，闻讯弃甲而逃。
English: The thief Zhang Xiancheng is besieging Raoyang. He heard the news and fled.

古文：于是赵、钜鹿、广平、河间并斩伪刺史，传首常山。
现代文：于是赵、钜鹿、广平、河间等地都杀了伪刺史，并将首级传送到常山。
English: As a result, Zhao, Menglu, Guangping, Hema and other places all killed the fake stabber and sent the severed head to Changshan.

古文：而乐安、博陵、上谷、文安、信都、魏、鄴诸郡皆自固。
现代文：而乐安、博陵、上谷、文安、信都、魏、邺诸郡都坚守各自城池。
English: However, Le'an, Boling, Shanggu, Wen'an, Xindu, Wei and Zhouzhu counties all held on to their respective cities.

古文：杲卿兄弟兵大振。
现代文：颜杲卿兄弟军威大振。
English: The military power of Yan Xuanqing's brothers was greatly enhanced.

古文：禄山至陕，闻兵兴，大惧。
现代文：安禄山至陕，闻颜杲卿兄弟兵威，十分恐惧。
English: From the Anlu Mountains to the Shaanxi Province, they are very afraid of the military might of Yan Yuxing's brothers.

古文：使史思明等率平卢兵度河攻常山，蔡希德自怀会师。
现代文：派史思明等率平卢兵渡河攻打常山，蔡希德自怀州来与史会师。
English: Shi Siming and others led the Pinglu soldiers to cross the river to attack Changshan, and Cai Xide came from Huaizhou to join the historical meeting.

古文：不涉旬，贼急攻城。
现代文：不到十天，贼兵加紧攻城。
English: Less than ten days later, the bandits intensified their attack on the city.

古文：兵少，未及为守计，求救于河东，承业前已攘杀贼功，兵不出。
现代文：颜杲卿兵少，来不及做防守准备，向河东求救。王承业前已窃取杀贼功劳，不肯出兵。
English: Yan Xuanqing had too few soldiers to prepare for defense and appealed to Hedong for help. Wang Chengye had stolen the honor of killing thieves before and refused to send troops.

古文：杲卿昼夜战，井竭，粮、矢尽，六日而陷，与履谦同执。
现代文：颜杲卿昼夜作战，井水干，矢尽粮竭，六天城破，与袁履谦一起被俘。
English: Yan Bingqing fought day and night, the well was dry, the arrow ran out of food, the city was broken in six days, and he was captured together with Yuan Lucheng.

古文：贼胁使降，不应。
现代文：贼胁迫投降，颜杲卿不理。
English: The thieves coerced him into surrendering, but Yan Xuanqing ignored them.

古文：取少子季明加刃颈上曰： 降我，当活而子。 
现代文：贼押来颜杲卿小儿子颜季明，把刀架在季明脖上说： 投降，就让你儿子活命。 
English: The thief pushed Yan Jieming, the youngest son of Yan Jieming, and put a knife to his neck, saying: "Surrender, and your son will live."

古文：杲卿不答。
现代文：颜杲卿不回答。
English: Yan Xuanqing did not answer.

古文：遂并卢逖杀之。
现代文：于是贼杀了颜季明与卢逖。
English: As a result, the thief killed Yan Ji Ming and Lu Yao.

古文：杲卿至洛阳，禄山怒曰： 吾擢尔太守，何所负而反？ 
现代文：颜杲卿被押至洛阳，安禄山愤怒地说： 我提升你为太守，哪点对不起你，你却反我？ 
English: When Yan Xuanqing was sent to Luoyang, An Lushan angrily said, "I promoted you to governor-general. What am I sorry for, that you turned against me?"

古文：杲卿瞋目骂曰： 汝营州牧羊羯奴耳，窃荷恩宠，天子负汝何事，而乃反乎？
现代文：颜杲卿瞪眼骂说： 你不过是营州放羊的羯奴而已，深受朝廷恩宠，天子哪点对不起你，为何要反叛？
English: Yan Xuanqing glared and scolded: "You are nothing more than a serf in Yingzhou who is herding sheep. You are deeply favored by the imperial court. I'm sorry for what? Why do you want to rebel?

古文：我世唐臣，守忠义，恨不斩汝以谢上，从从尔反耶？ 
现代文：我家世代是唐朝臣子，恪守忠义，恨不能杀你以报答皇上，岂能跟你造反吗？ 
English: My family has been loyal to the Tang Dynasty for generations. I wish I could kill you to repay the Emperor, but how can I rebel against you?

古文：禄山不胜忿，缚之天津桥柱，节解以肉啖之，骂不绝，贼钩断其舌，曰： 复能骂否？ 
现代文：安禄山愤恨不已，绑颜杲卿于天津桥柱上，肢解并吃他的肉，颜杲卿骂不绝口，叛贼钩断了他的舌头，说： 看你还能骂吗？ 
English: Enraged, An Lushan tied Yan Xuan on the pillar of Tianjin Bridge, dismembered and ate his flesh. Yan Xuan cursed incessantly. The traitor cut off his tongue with a hook, saying: "See, can you still curse?

古文：杲卿含胡而绝，年六十五。
现代文：颜杲卿在含糊不清的骂声中死去，时年六十五岁。
English: Yan Xuanqing died at the age of sixty-five, amidst vague curses.

古文：履谦既断手足，何千年弟适在傍，咀血喷其面，贼脔之，见者垂泣。
现代文：袁履谦被砍断了手足，何千年弟正在旁边，履谦含血唾在他的脸上。
English: Yuan Luqian's limbs were chopped off, and his brother of thousands of years was by his side, spitting blood on his face.

古文：杲卿宗子近属皆被害。
现代文：贼兵乱刀砍死了履谦，看见的人都流泪。颜杲卿的长子近亲都被杀害。
English: Thieves and soldiers hacked Lu Qian to death with knives, and everyone who saw it shed tears. The eldest son and close relatives of Yan Xuanqing were all killed.

古文：杲卿已虏，诸郡复为贼守。
现代文：颜杲卿被俘后，各郡又沦陷于贼手。
English: After Yan Xuanqing was captured, all counties fell into the hands of thieves.

古文：张通幽以兄相贼，谮杲卿于杨国忠，故不加赠。
现代文：张通幽因为他的哥哥辅佐安禄山，在杨国忠面前说颜杲卿的坏话，所以没有追封颜杲卿。
English: Zhang Tongyu did not pursue Yan Xuanqing because his brother, the assistant of An Lushan, spoke ill of Yan Xuanqing in front of Yang Guozhong.

古文：肃宗在凤翔，真卿表其枉，会通幽为普安太守，上皇杖杀之。
现代文：肃宗在凤翔时，颜真卿上表为颜杲卿辩冤，时值张通幽为普安太守，太上皇用杖刑杀了他。
English: When Su Zong was in Fengxiang, Yan Zhenqing went to the court to plead for Yan Xuanqing. At that time, Zhang Tongyu was the governor of Pu'an, and the emperor killed him with a cane.

古文：李光弼、郭子仪收常山，出杲卿、履谦二家亲属数百人于狱，厚给遗，令行丧。
现代文：李光弼、郭子仪收复常山，把颜杲卿、袁履谦两家亲属数百人释放出狱，厚赠钱物，让他们治丧。
English: Li Guangyao and Guo Ziyi recovered Changshan, released hundreds of relatives from the two families of Yan Yuqing and Yuan Lucheng from prison, and generously gave them money and goods so that they could mourn.

古文：乾元初，赠杲卿太子太保，谥曰忠节，封其妻崔清河郡夫人。
现代文：乾元年初，追封颜杲卿为太子太保，定谥号为 忠节 ，封其妻崔氏为清河郡夫人。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Qian Dynasty, Yan Xuanqing was posthumously appointed as the Crown Prince and Protector of the Empress Dowager, and his wife Cui was appointed as the wife of Qinghe County.

古文：初，博士裴郡以杲卿不执政，但谥曰忠，议者不平，故以二惠谥焉。
现代文：起初，博士裴郁认为杲卿不在朝执政，只给谥号为 忠 ，参加讨论的人为之不平，所以用 忠节 两字作为谥号。
English: At first, Dr. Pei Yu thought that Lord Zou was not ruling the country, and only gave him the nickname "Zhong," but the participants in the discussion were not happy about it, so they used the two words "Zhongjie" as the nickname.

古文：逖、季明及宗子等皆赠五品官。
现代文：卢逖、颜季明及长子等都追封为五品官。
English: Lu Wei, Yan Ji Ming and the eldest son were all posthumously appointed to the Fifth Rank.

古文：建中中，又赠杲卿司徒。
现代文：建中年间，又追封颜杲卿为司徒。
English: During his junior high school years, he was also made a disciple of Yan Xuanqing.

古文：初，杲卿被杀，徇首于衢，莫敢收。
现代文：当初，颜杲卿被杀，首级在大街上示众，没有敢收葬的。
English: At first, when Yan Xuanqing was killed, his head was displayed on the street, and no one dared to take it away.

古文：有张凑者，得其发，持谒上皇。
现代文：有一个叫张凑的人，得到了颜杲卿的头发，拿着去拜见太上皇。
English: A man named Zhang Zhan obtained the hair of Yan Xuanqing and took it to visit the emperor.

古文：是昔见梦，帝寤，为祭。
现代文：这天晚上，肃宗梦见了颜杲卿，醒后为之设祭。
English: That night, Su Zong had a dream about Yan Xuanqing, and after he woke up, he held a festival for him.

古文：后凑归发于其妻，妻疑之，发若动云。
现代文：后来张凑将头发归还杲卿妻，崔氏有点怀疑，而头发看起来像在动。
English: Later, Zhang Qian returned the hair to Gong's wife. Cui was a bit suspicious, and the hair looked like it was moving.

古文：后泉明购尸将葬，得刑者言，死时一足先断，与履谦同坎瘗。
现代文：以后颜泉明买下其父遗体将要安葬，从行刑的刽子手得知，杲卿死时一脚先被砍断，与袁履谦埋在一起。
English: Later, Yan Quanming bought his father's body to be buried, and learned from the executioner that when Yan died, he was cut off one foot at a time and buried with Yuan Lucheng.

古文：指其域得之，乃葬长安凤栖原。
现代文：指出埋处，发掘得之，遂葬于长安凤栖原。
English: He pointed out the burial place, excavated it, and then buried it in Fengsuyuan, Chang'an.

古文：季明、逖同茔。
现代文：季明与卢逖同一墓穴安葬。
English: Ji Ming and Lu Yao were buried in the same grave.

古文：泉明有孝节，喜振人之急。
现代文：颜泉明讲孝道、有节操，喜欢急人之难。
English: Yan Quanming preaches filial piety, has self-discipline, and likes to make things difficult for others.

古文：既为承业所遣，未至而常山陷，故客寿阳。
现代文：当初被王承业遣回，未到家而常山失陷，所以客居寿阳。
English: At first he was sent back by Wang Chengye, but before he could get home, he got lost in the mountains, so he stayed in Shouyang.

古文：史思明围李光弼，获泉明，裹以革，送幽州，间关得免。
现代文：史思明围困李光弼时，俘获颜泉明，用皮革裹着，送往幽州，因道路艰险，得以乘机逃脱。
English: When Li Guangyao was besieged by Shi Siming, Yan Quanming was captured, wrapped in leather and sent to Yuzhou. Due to the difficult road, he was able to escape.

古文：思明归国，而真卿方为蒲州刺史，令泉明到河北求宗属。
现代文：史思明归顺朝廷，而颜真卿正任蒲州刺史，令颜泉明到河北寻找族人亲属。
English: Shi Siming returned to the imperial court, while Yan Zhenqing was in charge of the history of Puzhou, so Yan Quanming went to Hebei to look for relatives of the tribe.

古文：始，一女及姑女并流离贼中，及是并得之，悉钱三万赎姑女还，取赀复往，则己女复失之。
现代文：过去，一个女儿及姑母之女一起离散在叛贼中，至此就都找到了。颜泉明尽其囊中所有的三万钱赎买了姑母之女回来，然后带了钱再去，自己的女儿又找不到了。
English: In the past, a daughter and her aunt's daughter were scattered among the traitors together, and now they have both been found. Yan Quanming used all the thirty thousand money in his pocket to ransom his aunt's daughter back, and then went back with the money, and his daughter could not be found.

古文：履谦及父故将妻子奴隶尚三百余人，转徙不自存，泉明悉力赡给，分多匀薄，相扶挟度河托真卿。
现代文：袁履谦及自己父亲旧部的妻子奴隶还有三百余人，转徙流离无以为生，颜泉明尽力资助，分多以济少，互相扶助渡河托付给颜真卿。
English: Yuan Lucheng and his father's former wife's slaves numbered more than three hundred people. They were displaced and had no way to make a living. Yan Quanming did his best to support them, sharing more with less, and helping each other to cross the river. He entrusted it to Yan Zhenqing.

古文：真卿随所归资送之。
现代文：真卿对这些人随来随即予以资助送回。
English: These people were immediately sponsored and sent back by Lord Makoto.

古文：泉明之殡父，与履谦分柩，护还长安。
现代文：颜泉明殡殓父亲，是与袁履谦分棺而殓，护灵回长安。
English: When Yan Quanming buried his father, he and Yuan Luqian separated the coffins and escorted the spirit back to Chang'an.

古文：履谦妻疑敛具俭狭，发视之，与杲卿等，乃号踊，待泉明如父。
现代文：袁履谦之妻怀疑自己丈夫装殓俭薄，开棺一看，发现与颜杲卿是一样的，感动得顿足号哭，像父亲那样对待颜泉明。
English: Yuan Luqian's wife suspected that her husband was a cheapskate. When she opened the coffin, she found that it was the same as that of Yan Quanqing. She was moved to tears and treated Yan Quanming like her father.

古文：肃宗拜泉明郫令，政化清明，诛宿盗，人情翕然。
现代文：肃宗任命颜泉明为郫县令，他施政清明，捕杀惯盗，人心和顺。
English: Su Zong appointed Yan Quanming as the magistrate of Jixian County. His administration was clear, he caught and killed habitual thieves, and the hearts of the people were in harmony.

古文：卒，帝思其质直，赠尚书左仆射，以实户三百封其家。
现代文：成都府尹考核他的政绩为第一，升为彭州司马。家贫，居官清廉，年幼孤儿相依者百口，稀粥都吃不饱，也无怨言。
English: Chengdu Yin appraised his political performance as the first, and he was promoted to Pengzhou Sima. His family was poor, the officials were clean, the young orphans were dependent on each other, the porridge was not enough to eat, and there were no complaints.

古文：张巡字巡，邓州南阳人。
现代文：服母丧期间，哀伤至骨瘦如柴。他的义行，世人以为十分难得。张巡字巡，邓州南阳人。
English: During his mother's funeral, he was so grief-stricken that his bones were as thin as wood. The world thought his act of charity was very rare. Zhang Junzha, from Nanyang, Dengzhou.

古文：博通群书，晓战阵法。
现代文：博览群书，通晓兵法。
English: He has read a lot of books and is familiar with military law.

古文：气志高迈，略细节，所交必大人长者，不与庸俗合，时人叵知也。
现代文：志向高远，不拘小节，交游的都是君子长者，不与庸俗之辈合流，当时人不了解他。
English: Aiming high and far, regardless of the details, his companions were all gentlemen and elders, and he did not merge with the vulgar generation. At that time, people did not understand him.

古文：开元末，擢进士第。
现代文：开元末年，考中进士。
English: At the end of the first year of the 21st century, he passed the middle school entrance examination.

古文：时兄晓已位监察御史，皆以名称重一时。
现代文：此时其兄张晓已位居监察御史，兄弟都名重一时。
English: At this time, his brother Zhang Xiao was already in the position of inspector of history, and both brothers were famous for a while.

古文：巡由太子通事舍人出为清河令，治绩最，而负节义，或以困厄归者，倾赀振护无吝。
现代文：张巡由太子舍人的京官，外放为清河县令，政绩突出，有气节讲义气，有因困难来依者，倾囊相助无吝色。
English: Zhang Jun was promoted from the Prince's official in Beijing to the Qinghe County magistrate. He had outstanding achievements in politics. He had a strong sense of duty and loyalty. When he was in need of help, he was generous with his money.

古文：秩满还都。
现代文：任期届满返回京城。
English: At the end of his term, he returned to Kyoto.

古文：于是杨国忠方专国，权势可炙。
现代文：此时，杨国忠正专权，权势炙手可热。
English: At this time, Yang Guozhong was in absolute power, and his influence was very strong.

古文：或劝一见，且显用，答曰： 是方为国怪祥，朝宦不可为也。 
现代文：有人劝张巡晋见他，将可得到重用，张巡回答： 这正是国家的怪事，京官不可当啊。 
English: Some people urged Zhang Junjin to see him so that he could be reused. Zhang Jun replied: This is a strange state of affairs. You can't be a Beijing official.

古文：更调真源令。
现代文：又调任真源县令。
English: He was also transferred to be the magistrate of Mayuan County.

古文：土多豪猾，大吏华南金树威恣肆，邑中语曰： 南金口，明府手。 
现代文：县内多强横狡猾的不法之徒，县衙大吏华南金作威作福、专横跋扈，县民谣说： 南金口，明府手。 
English: There are many strong, cunning and cunning criminals in the county. The county magistrate, South Huanan Jin, is arrogant and domineering. The county folk song says: South Kinkou, Mingfu hand.

古文：巡下车，以法诛之，赦余党，莫不改行迁善。
现代文：张巡刚到任，就依法处决了他，而赦免了余党，这些人无不改邪归正。
English: As soon as Zhang Jun took office, he executed him in accordance with the law, and pardoned the rest of the party. These people have all been reformed.

古文：政简约，民甚宜之。
现代文：为政简略，民众很称道。
English: The people are very impressed with the simplicity of the government.

古文：安禄山反，天宝十五载正月，贼酋张通晤陷宋、曹等州，谯郡太守杨万石降贼，逼巡为长史，使西迎贼军。
现代文：安禄山反叛，天宝十五年正月，叛贼头目张通晤攻陷宋、曹等州，谯郡太守杨万石降贼，强迫张巡任该郡长史，并令他西迎贼军。
English: Anlu Mountain rebelled. In the first month of the 15th year of the Heavenly Treasure, the leader of the rebels, Zhang Quanzhong, invaded Song, Cao and other states. Yang Wanshi, the governor of Min County, surrendered to the rebels, forced Zhang Quanzhong to serve as the governor of the county, and ordered him to meet the rebels in the west.

古文：巡率吏哭玄元皇帝祠，遂起兵讨贼，从者千余。
现代文：张巡率领属吏哭于玄元皇帝祠，于是起兵讨贼，追随者千余人。
English: Zhang Jun led his subordinate officers to cry at the Emperor Xuanyuan's Ancestral Hall, and then raised an army to hunt down the thieves, with more than a thousand followers.

古文：初，灵昌太守嗣吴王祗受诏合河南兵拒禄山，有单父尉贾贲者，阆州刺史璇之子，率吏称吴王兵，击宋州。
现代文：当初，灵昌太守吴王李受皇帝命联合河南兵马抵抗安禄山，单父县尉贾贲乃阆州刺史贾之子，率部属号称是吴王兵马，攻打宋州。
English: At first, the Lingchang governor Wu Wang Li was ordered by the emperor to unite the soldiers and horses of Henan Province to resist Anlu Mountain. His single father, the county lieutenant Jia Qian, was the son of Jizhou Jishi Jia, and led the troops, known as the soldiers and horses of Wu Wang, to attack Songzhou.

古文：通晤走襄邑，为顿丘令卢韺所杀。
现代文：张通晤逃往襄邑，被顿丘县令卢音英杀死。
English: Zhang Tongmei fled to Xiangyi and was killed by Lu Yinying, the ruler of Dongqiu County.

古文：贲引军进至雍丘，巡与之合，有众二千。
现代文：贾贲率军进驻雍丘，张巡与他会合，有兵两千。
English: Jia Kun led the army into Yongqiu, Zhang Jun joined him, with two thousand soldiers.

古文：是时雍丘令令狐潮举县附贼，遂自将东败淮阳兵，虏其众，反接在廷，将杀之，暂出行部。
现代文：此时雍丘县令令狐潮以全县投靠逆贼，就自己带兵向东击败淮阳兵，俘虏了许多人，反绑双手囚于院中，准备杀掉，暂时出去巡视部队。
English: At this time, the fox tide of Yongqiu County ordered the whole county to support the traitors, and he led his own troops to the east to defeat the Huaiyang soldiers, captured many people, tied his hands in the courtyard, prepared to kill, and temporarily went out to inspect the troops.

古文：淮阳囚更解缚，起杀守者，迎贲等入。潮不得归，巡乃屠其妻子，砾城上。
现代文：淮阳俘虏相互解开绳索，杀死守卫，迎接贾贲等人的军队入城，令狐潮不能回城，张巡就杀死了令狐潮的妻子，碎尸于城头。
English: The Huaiyang captives unraveled the ropes, killed the guards, and welcomed the army of Jia Jun and others into the city, so that the fox tide could not return to the city. Zhang Jun killed the wife of the fox tide, and the corpse was crushed at the top of the city.

古文：祗闻，承制拜贲监察御史。
现代文：李奏明皇上，奉诏任命贾贲为监察御史。
English: Emperor Li Songming, by imperial edict, appointed Jia Jun as the inspector of imperial history.

古文：潮怨贲，还攻雍丘，贲趋门，为众躏死。
现代文：令狐潮怨恨贾贲，还军攻雍丘，贾贲奔向城门，被乱兵踏死。
English: The fox tide resented Jia Jia, the army attacked Yongqiu, Jia Jia ran to the city gate, and was trampled to death by the soldiers.

古文：巡驰骑决战，身被创不顾，士乃奉巡主军。
现代文：张巡纵马决战，受伤也不顾，将士们就拥戴张巡主持军务。
English: Zhang Junlong presided over the decisive battle, and regardless of the injuries, the soldiers supported Zhang Junlong to preside over the military affairs.

古文：间道表诸朝，腾笺祗府，祗乃举兗以东委巡经略。
现代文：情况从小道表奏于朝廷，传送报告于吴王李官邸，李就将兖州以东各地交付张巡治理。
English: The situation was reported to the imperial court from the small road table, and the report was transmitted to the official residence of Wu Wang Li. Li then handed over Zhangxun governance to all parts east of Zhangzhou.

古文：潮以贼众四万薄城，人大恐。
现代文：令狐潮率贼军四万兵临城下，人心大为惶恐。
English: The fox tide led a bandit army of forty thousand soldiers to the city, and the people were very frightened.

古文：巡谕诸将曰： 贼知城中虚实，有轻我心。
现代文：张巡训示诸将说 ：贼知城中虚实，有轻敌之心。
English: Zhang Junxun instructed the generals to say: Thieves know the truth in the city, and have the heart of a light enemy.

古文：今出不意，可惊而溃也，乘之，势必折。 
现代文：现在出其不意，可使其受惊而溃败，乘势而击之，必能杀其气焰。 
English: If you take it by surprise now, you can make it panic and collapse, and if you take advantage of the situation and attack it, you will surely kill its pride.

古文：诸将曰： 善。 
现代文：诸将说 ：很好。 
English: The generals said: very good.

古文：巡乃分千人乘城，以数队出，身前驱，直薄潮军，军却。
现代文：张巡就分兵千人登城防卫，另派几支队伍出击，身先士卒，直逼令狐潮军队，敌军退却。
English: Zhang Jun sent a thousand soldiers to defend the city, and sent several other teams to attack, leading the way, pushing the Fox Tide army, and the enemy army retreated.

古文：明日贼攻城，设百楼，巡栅城上，束刍灌膏以焚焉，贼不敢向，巡伺击之。
现代文：第二天贼军攻城，广设登城的战具，张巡设栅栏于城上，扎草灌油而焚烧，贼兵不敢接近，张巡乘机攻击敌军。
English: On the second day, the bandits attacked the city. They set up a wide range of military equipment to attack the city. Zhang Jun set up a fence on the city, planted grass and poured oil on it and burned it. The bandits did not dare to approach. Zhang Jun attacked the enemy army by plane.

古文：积六旬，大小数百战，士带甲食，裹疮斗，潮遂败走，追之，几获。
现代文：历时六十天，大小数百次战斗，士卒吃饭不卸甲，裹伤而战，令狐潮败逃，张巡乘胜追击，几乎抓住令狐潮。
English: It lasted for sixty days, hundreds of battles were fought, the soldiers ate without removing their armor, fought with wounds, defeated and fled the fox tide, and Zhang Xuancheng successfully pursued and almost caught the fox tide.

古文：潮怒，复率众来。
现代文：令狐潮恼怒，又率兵来。
English: To the chagrin of the fox tide, he came again with an army.

古文：然素善巡，至城下，情语巡曰： 本朝危蹙，兵不能出关，天下事去矣。
现代文：但素来与张巡友善，到城下，动情地对张巡说 ：唐朝形势危急，兵不能出潼关，大势已去。
English: However, he had always been friendly with Zhang Jun. When he got to the outskirts of the city, he said to Zhang Jun with emotion: The situation in the Tang Dynasty is critical, soldiers cannot leave Shaoguan, the general trend has gone.

古文：足下以羸兵守危堞，忠无所立，盍相从以苟富贵乎？ 
现代文：您以弱兵守危城，无从尽忠，何不跟随我们以求富贵呢？ 
English: You defend a dangerous city with a weak army, unable to be loyal, why not follow us to seek wealth?

古文：巡曰： 古者父死于君，义不报。
现代文：张巡说 ：古制父被君杀，按理不该报复。
English: Zhang Jun said, "The ancient patriarch was killed by the king, and it is unreasonable to take revenge.

古文：子乃衔妻孥怨，假力于贼以相图，吾见君头干通衢，为百世笑，奈何？ 
现代文：而你却因妻儿而怀怨，借叛贼之力图报复，我将见到你的头颅在大街上示众，为后世耻笑，你怎么办呢？ 
English: And you, angry with your wife and children, seek revenge through treachery. I will see your head displayed in the street, for posterity to laugh at. What will you do?

古文：潮赧然去。
现代文：令狐潮羞惭而去。
English: Shame on you, Fox Tide.

古文：当此时，王命不复通，大将六人白巡以势不敌，且上存亡莫知，不如降。
现代文：这时，朝廷音讯断绝，有六员大将对张巡说，己方势单力薄，敌不过贼兵，而且皇上生死不明，不如投降。
English: At this time, communication with the imperial court was cut off, and six generals told Zhang Jun that his own side was weak and could only be defeated by the bandits, and since the emperor's life and death were unknown, it was better to surrender.

古文：六人者，皆官开府、特进。
现代文：这六人都是开府、特进等官。
English: These six people are all Kaifu, Tokujin and other officials.

古文：巡阳许诺，明日堂上设天子画像，率军士朝，人人尽泣。
现代文：张巡表面答应，次日在大堂上挂天子画像，率领军士朝拜，人人都哭泣。
English: Zhang Junfeng agreed, and the next day, a portrait of Tianzi was hung in the lobby. The sergeant led the worship, and everyone was crying.

古文：巡引六将至，责以大谊，斩之。
现代文：张巡召引六将到，用大义谴责后杀之。
English: Zhang Junzhao brought six generals to the scene, condemned them with great righteousness, and then killed them.

古文：士心益劝。
现代文：军心更加受到激励。
English: The military spirit has been further stimulated.

古文：会粮乏，潮饷贼盐米数百艘且至，巡夜壁城南，潮悉军来拒，巡遣勇士衔枚滨河，取盐米千斛，焚其余而还。
现代文：张巡军适逢缺粮，令孤潮运送给贼兵的载盐米的几百条船将到，张巡夜间设营垒于城南，令狐潮倾巢来抵御，巡派勇士悄然到河边，夺取盐米千斛，烧掉了余下的盐米而回。
English: The Zhang patrol coincided with the grain shortage, causing hundreds of ships carrying salt rice transported by the lonely tide to the thief soldiers to arrive. The Zhang patrol set up a camp in the south of the city at night, making the fox tide nest to resist. The patrol sent warriors quietly to the river, captured thousands of salt rice, burned the remaining salt rice and returned.

古文：城中矢尽，巡缚藁为人千余，被黑衣，夜缒城下，潮兵争射之，久，乃藁人；还，得箭数十万。
现代文：城中箭用完了，张巡命士兵扎草人千余，裹上黑衣，夜间用绳索垂吊城下，令狐潮兵竞相发箭，射了许久，才发现是草人；收回草人，得箭数十万支。
English: The city ran out of arrows. Zhang's patrol soldiers tied more than a thousand straw men, wrapped them in black clothes, and hung them under the city with ropes at night. The soldiers of the Fox Tide competed to shoot arrows. It took a long time to find out that they were straw men; hundreds of thousands of arrows were needed to recover the straw men.

古文：其后复夜缒人，贼笑，不设备，乃以死士五百斫潮营，军大乱，焚垒幕，追奔十余里。
现代文：后来又在夜间往城下吊人，贼笑其故伎重演，不加防备，于是用五百敢死之士偷袭令狐潮军营，敌军大乱，烧其营帐，追击十余里。
English: Later, he went to the city at night to hang people. The thief laughed at the repetition of his old trick and did not take precautions, so he used five hundred daredevils to raid the Fox Tide military camp, causing chaos in the enemy army, burning its camp and chasing it for more than ten miles.

古文：贼惭，益兵围之。
现代文：贼因败而惭恨，增兵围城。
English: Embarrassed by their defeat, the thieves besieged the city with additional troops.

古文：薪水竭，巡绐潮： 欲引众走，请退军二舍，使我逸。 
现代文：城内柴水尽，张巡骗令狐潮说，想带领部队离城，请退兵六十里，让我逃走。
English: When the firewood and water in the city ran out, Zhang Zonghuang ordered the fox tide to say that if he wanted to lead the troops out of the city, please retreat sixty miles and let me escape.

古文：潮不知其谋，许之。
现代文：令狐潮不知是计，答应了。
English: I don't know if it's a trick to make the fox tide go away, but I agreed.

古文：遂空城四出三十里，撤屋发木而还为备。
现代文：张巡就空着城向四面走出三十里，拆房屋取木材回城加强工事。
English: Zhang Jun left the city empty and walked thirty miles in all directions, tearing down houses to take wood back to the city to strengthen the construction.

古文：潮怒，围复合。
现代文：令狐潮怒，又围城。
English: This made the fox furious and he besieged the city again.

古文：巡徐谓潮曰： 君须此城，归马三十匹，我得马且出奔，请君取城以藉口。 
现代文：张巡从容地对令狐潮说： 您要这座城，请送我三十匹马，我有了马就出逃，您就可以占领此城作为报偿。 
English: Zhang Jun calmly said to Ling Fuchao, "If you want this city, please send me thirty horses. If I have a horse, I will run away. You can occupy this city as a reward."

古文：潮归马，巡悉以给骁将，约曰： 贼至，人取一将。 
现代文：令狐潮给了马，张巡全部发给勇将，并约定说： 贼兵一到，你们一人要抓一贼将。 
English: Ling Foxtide gave the horse, Zhang Jun sent all the horses to the brave general, and agreed that: As soon as the thief soldiers arrive, one of you must catch a thief general.

古文：明日，潮责巡，答曰： 吾欲去，将士不从，奈何？ 
现代文：次日，令狐潮责备张巡，张巡回答说： 我是想走，但将士不听命，怎么办呢？ 
English: The next day, the fox tide reproached Zhang Jun, and Zhang Jun replied: I want to go, but the generals do not obey orders, what should I do?

古文：潮怒欲战，阵未成，三十骑突出，禽将十四，斩百余级，收器械牛马。
现代文：令狐潮发怒想打，阵势还未摆好，三十勇士纵马冲出，俘获贼将十四人，斩首百余级，缴获一批兵器牛马。
English: The fox tide was enraged and wanted to fight, but the formation was not yet ready. Thirty warriors rushed out, captured fourteen thieves, beheaded more than a hundred, and captured a number of weapons.

古文：潮遁还陈留，不复出。
现代文：令狐潮逃回陈留，不再出来了。
English: Let the fox tide escape back to Chen Rui, and no longer come out.

古文：七月，潮率贼将瞿伯玉攻城，遣伪使者四人传贼命诏巡，巡斩以徇，余絷送祗所。
现代文：七月份，令狐潮又率贼将翟伯玉攻城，派遣伪使者四人传贼命招降张巡，张巡斩使者示众，剩下的捆送吴王李处。
English: In July, the fox tide led the thieves to attack the city of Zibo Yu, and sent four false messengers to summon Zhang Jun to surrender, Zhang Jun beheaded the messenger, and the rest were sent to Wu Wang Li.

古文：围凡四月，贼常数万，而巡众才千余，每战辄克。
现代文：围城四个月，贼兵经常是几万人，而张巡兵才千余人，每战总能制胜。
English: During the four months of the siege, the robber soldiers were often tens of thousands, while Zhang's patrol soldiers were only more than a thousand, and they could always win every battle.

古文：于是河南节度使嗣虢王巨屯彭城，假巡先锋。
现代文：于是河南节度使虢王李巨驻扎彭城，命张巡为代理先锋。
English: As a result, the Henan Festival ordered the dragonfly king Li Jiu to stay in Pengcheng, and he was appointed as the acting pioneer.

古文：俄而鲁、东平陷贼，济阴太守高承义举郡叛，巨引兵东走临淮。
现代文：不久，鲁与东平被贼占领，济阴太守高承义全郡叛变，李巨领兵东奔到临淮。
English: Soon after, Lu and Dongping were occupied by thieves, the Jiyin governor Gao Chengyi led the whole county in a mutiny, and Li Jiu led his soldiers to Linhuai.

古文：贼将杨朝宗谋趋宁陵，绝巡饷路。
现代文：贼将杨朝宗计划挥师宁陵，以断绝张巡的粮道。
English: Thieves stole Yang Chaozong's plan to conquer Ningling in order to cut off Zhangxun's food supply.

古文：巡外失巨依，拔众保宁陵，马裁三百，兵三千。
现代文：张巡外面失掉了李巨的依托，就率兵保宁陵，马只三百匹，兵三千人而已。
English: Zhang Jun lost the support of Li Jiu outside, so he led the soldiers to Baoning Mausoleum. There were only three hundred horses and three thousand soldiers.

古文：至睢阳，与太守许远、城父令姚訚等合。
现代文：到睢阳，与太守许远、城父县令姚门言等会合。
English: He went to Shenyang to meet with the governor Xu Yuan and the county magistrate Yao Mengyan.

古文：乃遣将雷万春、南霁云等领兵战宁陵北，斩贼将二十，杀万余人，投尸于汴，水为不流。
现代文：派遣将领雷万春、南霁云等领兵与贼战于宁陵之北，斩贼将二十人，杀贼兵万余人，投尸于汴水，河水阻塞不流。
English: He dispatched generals Lei Wanchun, Nan Xiyun and other leading soldiers to fight against the bandits in the north of Ningling, killed twenty bandits and more than ten thousand bandits, and threw the bodies into the river, blocking the flow of the river.

古文：朝宗夜去。
现代文：杨朝宗乘夜逃走。
English: Yang Chaozong fled by night.

古文：有诏拜巡主客郎中，副河南节度使。
现代文：肃宗下诏任命张巡为主客郎中、副河南节度使。
English: Under the edict of Emperor Suzong, Zhang Jun was appointed as the chief guest attendant and deputy Henan Festival envoy.

古文：巡籍将士有功者请于巨，巨才授折冲、果毅。
现代文：张巡将有功将士名单抄报虢王李巨，李巨只授予折冲、果毅等小官。
English: Zhang Jun sent a copy of the list of meritorious soldiers to Li Jiu, the king of Zhai, but Li Jiu only awarded Zhou, Gu Yi and other minor officials.

古文：巡谏曰： 宗社尚危，围陵孤外，渠可吝赏与赀？ 
现代文：张巡直言规劝说： 社稷还处在危险中，历代先帝陵寝尚在护守之外，怎能吝惜对功臣的赏赐呢？ 
English: Zhang Jun said bluntly and persuasively: The society is still in danger, the imperial tombs of past generations are still outside the protection, how can we begrudge the reward to the heroes?

古文：巨不听。
现代文：李巨不听。
English: Li Jiu did not listen.

古文：至德二载，禄山死，庆绪遣其下尹子琦将同罗、突厥、奚劲兵与朝宗合，凡十余万，攻睢阳。
现代文：至德二年，安禄山死，安庆绪派其部将尹子琦率领同罗、突厥、奚等族劲旅与杨朝宗会合，总计十余万人，进攻睢阳。
English: Two years after the death of An Lushan, An Qingxu sent his subordinate Yin Zixu to lead a strong force of Luo, Turkic and Qiang people to join Yang Chaozong, totaling more than 100,000 people, to attack Fenyang.

古文：巡励士固守，日中二十战，气不衰。
现代文：张巡激励将士坚守，一日作战二十次，士气不衰。
English: Zhang Jun inspired his soldiers to stand firm, fighting twenty times a day, and their morale never faltered.

古文：远自以材不及巡，请禀军事而居其下，巡受不辞，远专治军粮战具。
现代文：许远自以为才能不及张巡，请张巡主持军事而自己甘居其下，张巡受而不辞，许远则专门筹集军粮、整修作战器械。
English: Xu Yuan thought that his talent was not as good as Zhang Jun, so he asked Zhang Jun to preside over the military parade, and he was willing to live under him. Zhang Jun accepted and did not refuse. Xu Yuan specially raised military rations and repaired combat equipment.

古文：前此，远将李滔救东平，遂叛入贼，大将田秀荣潜与通。
现代文：在此之前，许远属将李滔在援救东平时，背叛加入贼军，大将田秀荣暗中与李滔通消息。
English: Prior to this, General Xu Yuan betrayed Li Tao and joined the rebel army during the rescue of Dongping, and General Tian Xiu Rong secretly communicated with Li Tao.

古文：或以告远曰： 晨出战，以碧帽为识。 
现代文：有人向许远告发说 ：田秀荣早晨出战时，戴碧色帽作为标识。 
English: Someone reported to Xu Yuan that: When Tian Xiu Rong went out to fight in the morning, he wore a turquoise hat as a sign.

古文：视之如言，尽覆其众。还辄曰： 我诱之也。 
现代文：许远留意一看，果然如此，作战结果是全队覆灭。回来就说 ：我是引诱敌人。 
English: Looking far and wide, he noticed that this was indeed the case, and the result of the battle was the destruction of the entire team. When he returned, he said, "I was luring the enemy."

古文：请以精骑往，易锦帽。
现代文：并请求率精锐骑兵出战，换着锦帽。
English: And he requested the rate of elite cavalry to go to war, in exchange for a brocade hat.

古文：远以告巡，巡召登城，让之，斩首示贼。
现代文：许远将此事告诉了张巡，张巡叫田秀荣上城，斥责了他，并斩首给贼看。
English: Xu Yuan told the matter to Zhang Jun. Zhang Jun called Tian Xiu Rong to the city, reprimanded him, and beheaded him for the thief to see.

古文：因出薄战，子琦败，获车马牛羊，悉分士，秋豪无入其家。
现代文：因而亲自领兵与敌作战，尹子琦兵败，缴获的车马牛羊，全部分给将士，一点也不拿回家。
English: As a result, he personally led the troops into battle with the enemy. Yin Zixuan was defeated, and all the captured horses, cattle and sheep were given to the soldiers, and they did not take any of them home.

古文：有诏拜巡御史中丞，远侍御史，訚吏部郎中。
现代文：皇上下诏书，任命张巡为御史中丞，许远为侍御史，姚门言为吏部郎中。
English: According to the imperial edict, Zhang Jun was appointed as the vice-president of the imperial history department, Xu Yuan as the vice-president of the imperial history department, and Yao Mengyan as the vice-minister of the imperial history department.

古文：巡欲乘胜击陈留，子琦闻，复围城。
现代文：张巡想乘胜攻击陈留，尹子琦得知，又围城。
English: Zhang Junxuan wanted to take advantage of the victory to attack Chen Liu. When Yin Zixuan learned of this, he besieged the city again.

古文：巡语其下曰： 吾蒙上恩，贼若复来，正有死耳。
现代文：张巡对部属说： 我受皇上恩典，贼兵如再来，我当以死报国。
English: Zhang Jun said to his subordinates: "I am by the grace of the emperor. If the robber soldiers come again, I shall die for the country."

古文：诸君虽捐躯，而赏不直勋，以此痛恨！ 
现代文：各位虽然为国献身，而赏赐不能酬劳你们的功勋，我感到很痛心！ 
English: Ladies and gentlemen, although you have dedicated your lives to the country, I feel very sad that I cannot reward you for your merits!

古文：闻者感概。
现代文：听到的人都很感慨。
English: Everyone who heard it was very moved.

古文：乃椎牛大飨，悉军战。
现代文：于是杀牛设宴，犒劳将士，率军出战。
English: So he slaughtered a cow, held a banquet, rewarded the soldiers for their hard work, and led his army into battle.

古文：贼望兵少，大笑。
现代文：贼兵看见张巡兵少，大加嘲笑。
English: When the bandits saw that Zhang's patrol was small, they laughed at him.

古文：巡、远亲鼓之，贼溃，追北数十里。
现代文：张巡、许远亲自擂鼓指挥进攻，贼兵溃败，追击了数十里。
English: Zhang Jun and Xu Yuan personally beat the drum and directed the attack. The bandits were defeated and pursued for dozens of miles.

古文：其五月，贼刈麦，乃济师。
现代文：五月份，贼兵割麦，增加了兵力。
English: In May, the bandits cut wheat and increased their forces.

古文：巡夜鸣鼓严队，若将出。
现代文：张巡夜间击鼓整队，像要出击的样子。
English: Zhang Xun drummed the whole team at night, as if they were going to attack.

古文：贼申警。
现代文：贼兵报警。
English: Thieves call the police.

古文：俄自鼓，贼觇城上兵休，乃弛备。
现代文：一会儿不敲鼓了，贼窥视到城上兵解散了，就松弛了戒备。
English: After a while, when the drums stopped beating, the thieves peered up and saw that the soldiers on the castle wall had dispersed, so they relaxed their guard.

古文：巡使南霁云等开门径抵子琦所，斩将拔旗。
现代文：张巡命南霁云等人开城门径直奇袭尹子琦营帐，杀贼将砍军旗。
English: Zhang Jun ordered Nan Xiyun and others to open the city gate and directly attack Yin Zixuan's camp. The killers would cut down the military flag.

古文：有大酋被甲，引拓羯千骑麾帜乘城招巡。
现代文：有一个贼兵大头目身披铠甲，领拓羯族骑兵千人挥旗要登城向张巡招降。
English: There was a bandit leader dressed in armor, leading a thousand cavalrymen of the Tuobao nationality waving flags to enter the city to invite Zhang Jun to surrender.

古文：巡阴缒勇士数十人隍中，持钩、陌刀、强弩，约曰： 闻鼓声而奋。 
现代文：张巡暗中用绳索吊下几十名勇士于城壕中，拿着铁钩、长刀、强弩，与他们约定： 听见鼓声就奋起战斗。 
English: In the middle of a scouting patrol, he suspended dozens of warriors from ropes in a trench, holding iron hooks, long swords, and strong plowshares, and made an agreement with them: When they hear the sound of drums, they will rise up and fight.

古文：酋恃众不为备，城上噪，伏发禽之，弩注矢外向，救兵不能前。
现代文：贼头目依仗自己人多不加防备，城上鼓噪起来，埋伏的士兵突然袭击，抓获了贼兵头目，并以弩发箭向外射，救兵不能靠前。
English: The bandit leader relied on his own people and did not take precautions. The city was noisy. The ambushed soldiers suddenly attacked, captured the bandit leader, and shot him with a crossbow. The rescuers could not advance.

古文：俄而缒士复登陴，贼皆愕眙，乃按甲不出。
现代文：一会儿，城壕中的战士又登上城，贼兵都惊愕得瞪大了眼睛，都按甲不动。
English: A moment later, the soldiers in the trench ascended the city again, and the robber soldiers stared wide-eyed in amazement and did not move.

古文：巡欲射子琦，莫能辨，因剡蒿为矢，中者喜，谓巡矢尽，走白子琦，乃得其状。
现代文：张巡想箭射尹子琦，但辨别不清谁是，于是削蒿草为箭，中箭者发现是草箭就很高兴，以为张巡箭用完了，跑去报告尹子琦，这样就知道了尹的所在。
English: Zhang Jun wanted to shoot Yin Zixuan with an arrow, but it was not clear who was the arrowhead, so he cut the rushes into arrows. The archer was happy to find that it was a grass arrow. He thought that Zhang Jun's arrows were used up and ran to report to Yin Zixuan, so he knew where Yin was.

古文：使霁云射，一发中左目，贼还。
现代文：命令南霁云射他，一箭射中尹子琦的左眼，贼退兵。
English: He ordered Nan Zhiyun to shoot him, and one arrow hit Yin Ziqi's left eye, and the thief retreated.

古文：七月，复围城。
现代文：七月份，又围城。
English: In July, there was another siege.

古文：初，睢阳谷六万斛，可支一岁，而巨发其半餫濮阳、济阴，远固争，不听。
现代文：当初，睢阳储谷六万斛，可够一年食用，而李巨调发了一半送给濮阳、济阴两地，许远力争，李巨不听。
English: At first, Poyang's reserve was 60,000 baht, which was enough for a year's consumption, but Li Jiu sent half of it to Poyang and Jiyin. Xu Yuan tried hard, but Li Jiu would not listen.

古文：济阴得粮即叛。
现代文：而济阴得粮后就叛变了。
English: But Jixin rebelled after getting grain.

古文：至是食尽，士日赋米一勺，龁木皮、煮纸而食，才千馀人，皆癯劣不能彀，救兵不至。
现代文：至此粮食用完，每天只能发给士兵一小把米，只得啃树皮、煮纸充饥，仅剩千余人，都瘦弱不堪，而救兵又不到。
English: At this point, the grain was exhausted, and only a small handful of rice could be given to the soldiers every day. They had to eat tree bark and boiled paper to satisfy their hunger. There were only more than a thousand people left, all emaciated, and there were no rescuers.

古文：贼知之，以云冲传堞，巡出钩铭干拄之，使不得进，篝火焚梯。
现代文：贼兵知道这个情况，用云梯、冲车攻城，张巡用钩干顶住，使它不能前进，然后用铁笼罩火烧梯。
English: The robber soldiers knew this situation, and attacked the city with ladders and rushing vehicles. Zhang Jun blocked it with a hook, so that it could not advance, and then covered the ladder with iron and set it on fire.

古文：贼以钩车、木马进，巡辄破碎之。
现代文：贼以钩车、木马进攻，张巡都击毁了它。
English: The thief attacked with a hook cart and a wooden horse, and Zhang Jun destroyed it.

古文：贼服其机，不复攻，穿壕立栅以守。
现代文：贼兵威服于他的机智，不再进攻，挖壕沟树栅栏以防守。
English: The bandits bowed to his wit and stopped attacking, digging trenches and fences to defend themselves.

古文：巡士多饿死，存者皆痍伤气乏。
现代文：张巡的士兵多饿死，活着的也都是伤病疲惫。
English: Most of Zhang Guan's soldiers starved to death, and those who survived were injured and exhausted.

古文：巡出爱妾曰： 诸君经年乏食，而忠义不少衰，吾恨不割肌以啖众，宁惜一妾而坐视士饥？ 
现代文：张巡牵出自己的爱妾说 ：各位将士终年缺粮，而忠义之志一点也不减弱，我恨不得割下我的肉给大家吃，难道还爱惜一妾而坐视士兵挨饿？ 
English: Zhang Jun brought out his beloved concubine and said: "You soldiers have been short of food all year round, but your loyalty has not weakened at all. I can't help but cut off my meat for everyone to eat. Do you still cherish a concubine while watching soldiers starve?

古文：乃杀以大飨，坐者皆泣。
现代文：就杀妾来犒赏大家，在座者都哭泣。
English: He killed a concubine to reward everyone, and everyone present wept.

古文：巡强令食之，远亦杀奴僮以哺卒，至罗雀掘鼠，煮铠弩以食。
现代文：张巡强令大家吃，许远也杀自己的奴仆作为士兵食物，以至于捕雀挖鼠，煮战袍、弓弩来吃。
English: Zhang Junqiang ordered everyone to eat, and also killed his own servants as soldiers' food, so much so that he caught sparrows, dug up mice, and boiled battle robes and bow and arrow to eat.

古文：贼将李怀忠过城下，巡问： 君事胡几何？ 
现代文：贼将李怀忠经过城下，张巡问他： 你效力胡人多久了？ 
English: The thief took Li Huaizhong to the outskirts of the city. Zhang Qian asked him: How long have you been working for Hu Ren?

古文：曰： 二期。 
现代文：李答： 两年。 
English: Li A: Two years.

古文：巡曰： 君祖、父官乎？ 
现代文：张巡又问 ：你的祖父、父亲是做官的吗？ 李答： 是的。 
English: Zhang Jun also asked: Was your grandfather or father an official? Li A: Yes.

古文：曰： 然。 君世受官，食天子粟，奈何从贼，关弓与我确？ 
现代文：巡说： 你家世代为官，吃天子的饭，为什么要跟随叛贼，剑拔弩张地与我斗呢？ 
English: The inspector said, "Your family has been officials for generations, and you eat the food of the sons of heaven. Why should you follow a traitor and fight me with swords and shields?"

古文：怀忠曰： 不然，我昔为将，数死战，竟殁贼，此殆天也。 
现代文：怀忠说： 不对，我过去为将，几次拼死战，竟为贼俘，这大概是天意吧。 
English: Huaizhong said, "No, it was probably God's will that I should be a prisoner of war after having fought to the death several times.

古文：巡曰： 自古悖逆终夷灭，一日事平，君父母妻子并诛，何忍为此？ 
现代文：张巡说 ：自古叛逆终究是要被消灭的，一旦叛乱平定，你的父母妻子都要被杀，你怎能忍心干这样的事呢？ 
English: Zhang Jun said, "After all, the ancient rebellion must be eliminated. Once the rebellion is put down, your parents and wife will all be killed. How can you bear to do such a thing?"

古文：怀忠掩涕去，俄率其党数十人降。
现代文：李怀忠掩面流泪而去，不一会儿，带着他的几十人来降。
English: Li Huaizhong covered his face with tears and left. Soon, he came down with dozens of people.

古文：巡前后说降贼将甚多，皆得其死力。
现代文：张巡先后说服收降的贼军将领很多，都得到他们拼死效力。
English: Zhang Jun has successively persuaded many generals of the Kleptocratic Army to surrender, and they have all been effective.

古文：御史大夫贺兰进明代巨节度，屯临淮，许叔冀、尚衡次彭城，皆观望莫肯救。
现代文：御史大夫贺兰进明接替李巨为节度使，驻扎临淮，许叔冀、尚衡驻彭城，都持观望态度不肯救睢阳之围。
English: The chief historian, He Lan Jinming, succeeded Li Jiu as the festival envoy, stationed in Linhuai, and Xu Shuji and Shang Heng in Pengcheng. They all held a wait-and-see attitude and refused to save the siege of Fenyang.

古文：巡使霁云如叔冀请师，不应，遣布数千端。
现代文：张巡命南霁云到许叔冀那里请发救兵，叔冀不答应，只送布数千匹。
English: Zhang Jun ordered Nan Xingyun to go to Xu Shuji and ask him to send rescuers, but Shuji did not agree and only sent thousands of cloth cranes.

古文：霁云嫚骂马上，请决死斗，叔冀不敢应。
现代文：霁云谩骂于马上，要求拼死决斗，叔冀不敢回答。
English: Zhai Yun immediately swore at him and demanded a duel to the death, but Shu Jie did not dare to answer.

古文：巡复遣如临淮告急，引精骑三十冒围出，贼万众遮之，霁云左右射，皆披靡。
现代文：张巡又派霁云至临淮告急，率精锐骑兵三十突围出城，贼兵上万阻挡，霁云左右开弓，贼兵都溃败下去。
English: Zhang Jun also sent Gongyun to Linhuai to express his urgency. He led thirty elite cavalry to break out of the city, blocking tens of thousands of bandits. Gongyun opened his bow left and right, and the bandits were defeated.

古文：既见进明，进明曰： 睢阳存亡已决，兵出何益？ 
现代文：南霁云见到了贺兰进明，进明说 ：睢阳存亡之事已定，出兵又有什么用处呢？ 
English: When Nan Yuyun met Helan Jinming, Jinming said, "The fate of Shenyang has already been decided, so what is the use of sending troops?

古文：霁云曰： 城或未下。如已亡，请以死谢大夫。 
现代文：南霁云说 ：城也许尚未陷落，如已失守，我就以死向您谢罪。 
English: Nan Xiyun said, "The city may not have fallen yet, but if it has been lost, I will thank you with my death."

古文：叔冀者，进明麾下也，房琯本以牵制进明，亦兼御史大夫，势相埒而兵精。
现代文：许叔冀其人，是贺兰进明的部下，房本来是以他来牵制贺兰进明的，也兼任了御史大夫，权势相当而兵更精锐。
English: Xu Shuji was a subordinate of Helan Jinming. Fang originally used him to hold back Helan Jinming. He also served as the chief historian, with equal power and more elite soldiers.

古文：进明惧师出且见袭，又忌巡声威，恐成功，初无出师意。
现代文：贺兰进明怕出兵后会被许叔冀袭击，又妒忌张巡声名威望，本来就没有出兵的意思。
English: He Lanjin was afraid that he would be attacked by Xu Shuji after sending troops, and he was jealous of Zhang Jun's fame and prestige. Originally, he had no intention of sending troops.

古文：又爱霁云壮士，欲留之。
现代文：又爱南霁云这位壮士，想留下他。
English: He also loved Nan Xiyun, the strong man, and wanted to keep him.

古文：为大飨，乐作，霁云泣曰： 昨出睢阳时，将士不粒食已弥月。
现代文：大设酒宴招待，音乐声起，南霁云哭着说 ：昨天冲出睢阳时，将士已整月吃不到粮食了。
English: After a grand reception with wine and music, Nan Xiyun cried and said: "When I rushed out of Shenyang yesterday, the soldiers had not eaten grain for a whole month.

古文：今大夫兵不出，而广设声乐，义不忍独享，虽食，弗下咽。
现代文：现在您不出兵，而设宴奏乐，从大义上讲我不忍心独自享受，虽然吃了，也咽不下去。
English: Now, instead of joining the army, you are holding a banquet and playing music. In all fairness, I can't bear to enjoy it alone. Even though I have eaten, I can't swallow it.

古文：今主将之命不达，霁云请置一指以示信，归报中丞也。 
现代文：现在主将交给我的任务没完成，我请求留下一个指头已示信用，回去向中丞报告吧。 
English: Now the task given to me by the master has not been completed. I ask you to leave a tip for me. Go back and report to the junior high master.

古文：因拔佩刀断指，一座大惊，为出涕。
现代文：说罢就拔佩刀砍断一根手指，满座都大惊，为之流泪。
English: As soon as he said it, he drew his knife and chopped off a finger. The entire audience was shocked and in tears.

古文：卒不食去。
现代文：终于不吃而去。
English: Finally, he left without eating.

古文：抽矢回射佛寺浮图，矢著砖，曰： 吾破贼还，必灭贺兰，此矢所以志也！ 
现代文：抽箭回头射佛寺的宝塔，箭射进砖中，说： 我破灭叛贼回来，定要消灭贺兰进明，这支箭就是我誓言的标志！ 
English: He drew an arrow and shot back at the pagoda of the Buddhist temple, the arrow shot into the bricks, saying: I will destroy the traitors and come back, I will definitely destroy Helan Jinming, this arrow is the sign of my oath!

古文：至真源，李贲遗马百匹；次宁陵，得城使廉坦兵三千，夜冒围入。
现代文：到了真源，李贲送马百匹；在宁陵宿营时，得到城使廉坦兵三千人，乘夜突围入城。
English: When he arrived at Zhenyuan, Li Xi sent a hundred horses; when he was camping in Ningling, he got the city to send three thousand soldiers from Liantan to break into the city at night.

古文：贼觉，拒之，且战且引，兵多死，所至才千人。
现代文：贼兵发觉，加以阻挡，南霁云边战边进，士兵大多战死，到达的才千人。
English: The robber soldiers discovered it and blocked it. Nanlu entered the battlefield on the edge of the clouds. Most of the soldiers were killed in battle, and only a thousand arrived.

古文：方大雾，巡闻战声，曰： 此霁云等声也。 
现代文：正遇大雾，张巡听到战斗的声音，说 ：这是霁云等的声音。 
English: Faced with heavy fog, Zhang Jun heard the sound of battle and said: This is the sound of clouds.

古文：乃启门，驱贼牛数百入，将士相持泣。
现代文：就打开城门，霁云军赶着获自贼军的几百头牛入城，将士们执手哭泣。
English: He opened the city gate, and the Qinyun army rushed into the city with hundreds of cattle obtained from the thief army. The soldiers wept uncontrollably.

古文：贼知外援绝，围益急。
现代文：贼军知睢阳已无外援，围攻更急。
English: The bandit army knew that there was no foreign aid for Fenyang, and the siege became more urgent.

古文：众议东奔，巡、远议以睢阳江、淮保障也，若弃之，贼乘胜鼓而南，江、淮必亡。
现代文：大家议论向东转移，张巡、许远认为睢阳是江、淮屏障，如放弃，贼兵就会乘胜鼓噪南窜，江、淮必亡。
English: The discussion shifted to the east. Zhang Jun and Xu Yuan believed that Fenyang was a barrier to Jiang and Huai. If they gave up, the bandits would take advantage of the victory drum to make noise in the south, and Jiang and Huai would perish.

古文：且帅饥众行，必不达。
现代文：而且带领饥饿士兵行军，必然到不了目的地。
English: And if you lead hungry soldiers on a march, you will inevitably fail to reach your destination.

古文：十月癸丑，贼攻城，士病不能战。
现代文：十月初九，贼攻城，将士伤病不能作战。
English: At the beginning of October, thieves attacked the city, and the general was injured and unable to fight.

古文：巡西向拜曰： 孤城备竭，弗能全。臣生不报陛下，死为鬼以疠贼。 
现代文：张巡向西叩拜说 ：孤城防卫之计已穷，不能保全了，臣活着不能报告陛下，死当为鬼以杀贼。 
English: Zhang Jun bowed to the West and said: The defense plan of the lonely city is poor and cannot be preserved, the vassal cannot report to his majesty while he is alive, and he should die as a ghost to kill thieves.

古文：城遂陷，与远俱执。
现代文：城被攻陷，与许远一起被俘。
English: The city was captured and he was taken prisoner together with Xu Yuan.

古文：巡众见之，起且哭，巡曰： 安之，勿怖，死乃命也。 
现代文：张巡的将士见到了，起立而哭，张巡说 ：大家镇静，不要怕，死是命中注定的。 
English: When Zhang Jun's soldiers saw this, they stood up and cried. Zhang Jun said, "Everyone calm down, don't be afraid, death is predestined.

古文：众不能仰视。
现代文：大家都不能仰面正视。
English: Everyone can't look straight ahead.

古文：子琦谓巡曰： 闻公督战，大呼辄眦裂血面，嚼齿皆碎，何至是？ 
现代文：尹子琦对张巡说 ：听说您督战时，大声呼喊，往往眼眶破裂血流满面，牙也咬碎，何至于这样呢？ 
English: Yin Zixuan said to Zhang Jun: I heard that when you were in charge of the war, you shouted loudly, often your eyelids burst and blood flowed all over your face, and your teeth were broken. What about this?

古文：答曰： 吾欲气吞逆贼，顾力屈耳。 
现代文：张巡答说 ：我要用正气消灭逆贼，只是力不从心而已。 
English: Zhang Jun replied, "I want to use my righteous spirit to eliminate the traitors, but I can't do it.

古文：子琦怒，以刀抉其口，齿存者三四。
现代文：尹子琦怒，用刀撬开他的口，发现只剩三、四颗牙齿。
English: Furious, Yin Zi pried his mouth open with a knife and found only three or four teeth left.

古文：巡骂曰： 我为君父死，尔附贼，乃犬彘也，安得久！ 
现代文：张巡骂着说： 我为君父而死，你投靠叛贼，乃是猪狗，怎能长久！ 
English: Zhang Qiu scolded: "I died for my father. You are a pig and a dog for siding with a traitor. How can you last long?"

古文：子琦服其节，将释之。
现代文：尹子琦佩服他的气节，想要释放他。
English: Yin Zixuan admired his stamina and wanted to release him.

古文：或曰： 彼守义者，乌肯为我用？
现代文：有人说： 他是谨守节义的人，怎肯为我所用？
English: Some said, "He is a righteous man; how can he do this to me?"

古文：且得众心，不可留。 
现代文：而且他得军心，不可留。 
English: Besides, he has won the hearts and minds of the soldiers, so he can't stay.

古文：乃以刃胁降，巡不屈。
现代文：于是以刀胁迫投降，张巡不屈服。
English: As a result, he was forced to surrender with the threat of a sword, but Zhang You did not give in.

古文：又降霁云，未应。
现代文：又逼霁云降，霁云未应声。
English: He also forced the clouds to descend, but they did not respond.

古文：巡呼曰： 南八！男儿死尔，不可为不义屈！ 
现代文：张巡呼叫： 南八，男儿一死而已，不能向不义的人投降！ 
English: Zhang Jun called out: Nanba, the boy is only dead once, you can't surrender to the unjust!

古文：霁云笑曰： 欲将有为也，公知我者，敢不死！ 
现代文：霁云笑说： 想有所作为啊，您是了解我的，岂敢不死！ 
English: Hao Yun said with a smile, "If you want to make a difference, if you understand me, how dare you not die!"

古文：亦不肯降。乃与姚訚、雷万春等三十六人遇害。
现代文：也不肯投降，于是与姚门言、雷万春等三十六人一同遇害。
English: He also refused to surrender, so he was killed along with thirty-six others, including Yao Menyan and Lei Wanchun.

古文：巡年四十九。
现代文：张巡时年四十九岁。
English: Zhang Jun was 49 years old.

古文：初，子琦议生致五人庆绪所，或曰： 用兵拒守者，巡也。 
现代文：起初，尹子琦的意见是生俘一人送到安庆绪那里去，有人说： 指挥军队守城抵抗的是张巡。 
English: At first, Yin Zixuan's opinion was that only one prisoner should be sent to Anqingxu. Some people said: It was Zhang Jun who commanded the army to defend the city and resist.

古文：乃送远洛阳，至偃师，亦以不屈死。
现代文：于是押送许远到洛阳，许远走到偃师，也以不肯屈服而死。
English: So he was escorted far away to Luoyang, and far away to Jinshi, where he also died because he refused to give in.

古文：巨之走临淮，巡有姊嫁陆氏，遮王劝勿行，不纳，赐百缣，弗受，为巡补缝行间，军中号 陆家姑 ，先巡被害。
现代文：以前李巨撤至临淮时，张巡有一个嫁给陆家的姐姐，拦着李巨劝他别走，巨不听，赐给细绢百匹，她不接受，在张巡军中缝缝补补，军中称为 陆家姑 ，在张巡之前被害。
English: In the past, when Li Jiu retreated to Linhuai, Zhang Jun had a sister who was married to Lu Jia, who stopped Li Jiu and advised him not to go. He did not listen to her and gave her a hundred fine horses. She did not accept it. In Zhang Jun's army, she patched up the seams. She was called Lu Jia Gu in the army and was killed before Zhang Jun.

古文：巡长七尺，须髯每怒尽张。
现代文：张巡身长七尺，每逢发怒，胡须就都张开。
English: Zhang Jun is seven feet tall. Whenever he gets angry, his whiskers flare up.

古文：读书不过三复，终身不忘。
现代文：读书不过三遍，就终身不忘。
English: If you read a book no more than three times, you will never forget it.

古文：为文章不立稿。
现代文：写文章不打草稿。
English: Write articles without making drafts.

古文：守睢阳，士卒居人，一见问姓名，其后无不识。
现代文：防守睢阳时，士兵百姓，见面就问姓名，以后没有不认识的。
English: When defending Fenyang, the soldiers asked the common people for their names when they met, and there was no one they didn't know.

古文：更潮及子琦，大小四百战，斩将三百、卒十余万。
现代文：从令狐潮到尹子琦，大小四百次战斗，斩贼将三百、士卒十余万。
English: From Ling Xuchao to Yin Zixuan, there were 400 battles of all sizes, 300 battles against bandits, and more than 100,000 soldiers.

古文：其用兵未尝依古法，勒大将教战，各出其意。
现代文：他用兵不曾遵依古法，命令大将教习战法时，按各自的意图。
English: He did not use soldiers in accordance with the ancient law, and ordered generals to act according to their own intentions when teaching the law of war.

古文：或问之，答曰： 古者人情敦朴，故军有左右前后，大将居中，三军望之以齐进退。
现代文：有人问为什么，张巡答说： 古时人情敦厚朴实，所以军阵分左右前后，大将在中间，三军望之以统一进退。
English: When asked why, Zhang Jun replied, "In ancient times, people were simple and unpretentious, so the military formations were around and around, the general was in the middle, and the three armies advanced and retreated in a unified manner.

古文：今胡人务驰突，云合鸟散，变态百出，故吾止使兵识将意，将识士情，上下相习，人自为战尔。 
现代文：现在胡人搞的是快速驰骋突击，聚如云合，分如鸟散，变化百出，所以我只是使士兵领会将领意图，将领了解士兵情绪，上下互相熟习，人自为战罢了。 
English: Now the Hu people are engaged in fast galloping assault, gathering like clouds, separating like birds, and changing a lot, so I just make the soldiers understand the generals' intentions, the generals understand the soldiers' emotions, and get to know each other up and down, and people fight for themselves.

古文：其械甲取之于敌，未尝自脩。
现代文：他的兵器甲胄都是取之于敌，未曾自己修造。
English: His weapons and armor were taken from the enemy, and he had never made them himself.

古文：每战，不亲临行阵，有退者，巡已立其所，谓曰： 我不去此，为我决战。 
现代文：每次战斗，并不亲临军阵中，有退却的，张巡早已站在那里，说： 我决不离开这里，去为我决战。 
English: In every battle, he did not personally go to the front of the army, and some retreated. Zhang Jun had already stood there and said, "I will never leave here, go to the decisive battle for me."

古文：士感其诚，皆一当百。
现代文：士兵为其诚意所感，无不以一当百。
English: The soldiers were impressed by his sincerity.

古文：待人封锁所疑，赏罚信，与众共甘苦塞暑，虽厮养，必整衣见之，下争致死力，故能以少击众，未尝败。
现代文：待人不猜忌，赏罚严明，与大家同甘苦共冷暖，虽是奴仆，也必定穿戴整齐才见面，下属争着为他拼死效力，所以能够以少击多，未曾败过。
English: Treat people without suspicion, reward and punishment are strict, share the joys and sorrows with everyone, although he is a slave, he must be neatly dressed to meet, subordinates compete for him to work hard, so he can do more with less, and has never been defeated.

古文：被围久，初杀马食，既尽，而及妇人老弱凡食三万口。
现代文：被围日久，开始时是杀马吃，马吃完了，又杀妇女老弱，共吃三万人。
English: After being surrounded for a long time, at the beginning they killed horses to eat, and when they had finished eating the horses, they killed women, the old and the weak, and ate a total of thirty thousand people.

古文：人知将死，而莫有畔者。
现代文：人们知道将要死去，但没有背叛的。
English: People know they're going to die, but they don't turn.

古文：城破，遣民止四百而已。
现代文：城破之日，剩下的老百姓只四百人而已。
English: On the day of the city's fall, only four hundred people remained.

古文：始，肃宗诏中书侍郎张镐代进明节度河南，率浙东李希言、浙西司空袭礼、淮南高适、青州邓景山四节度掎角救睢阳，巡亡三日而镐至，十日而广平王收东京。
现代文：原先，肃宗下诏命中书侍郎张镐接替贺兰进明为河南节度使，率浙东李希言、浙西司空袭礼、淮南高适、青州邓景山四位节度使互为掎角之势，以救睢阳。张巡死后三天张镐兵到，十天后广平王收复东京洛阳。
English: Originally, Su Zong issued an edict under the command of Zhang Ye, the scribe, to succeed He Lan Jinming as the Henan Festival envoy, and led the four festival envoys of East Zhejiang Li Xiyan, West Zhejiang Air Raid Ceremony, Huainan Gaoshu, and Qingzhou Deng Jingshan to save Luoyang. Three days after Zhang Jun's death, Zhang Ye's soldiers arrived, and ten days later Guangping Wang regained Tokyo Luoyang.

古文：镐命中书舍人萧昕诔其行。
现代文：张镐命中书舍人萧昕为张巡做悼词。
English: Xiao Wei, the bookstore owner who was hit by Zhang Jun, gave a eulogy for Zhang Jun.

古文：时议者或谓：巡始守睢阳，众六万，既粮尽，不持满按队出再生之路，与夫食人，宁若全人？
现代文：当时议政者中有人认为：张巡开始守睢阳时，有兵六万，既然粮尽，不保存实力率队出城求再生之路，与其吃人，何如保全人？
English: At that time, some of the decision-makers thought: When Zhang Jun began to guard Fenyang, there were sixty thousand soldiers. Since the grain was exhausted, instead of preserving the strength to lead the team out of the city to seek the road of regeneration, instead of eating people, how about preserving people?

古文：于是张澹、李纾、董南史、张建封、樊晁、硃巨川、李翰咸谓巡蔽遮江、淮，沮贼势，天下不亡，其功也。
现代文：但是张澹、李纾、董南史、张建封、樊晃、朱巨川、李翰等都认为张巡护卫江、淮，挫贼气焰，天下不亡，是他的功劳。
English: However, Zhang Qian, Li Qian, Dong Nan Shi, Zhang Jianfeng, Zou Jiao, Zhu Juchuan, Li Han, etc. all believed that Zhang Junguo guarded the Wei River and Huai River, defeated the arrogance of the thieves, and the world did not die, which was his merit.

古文：翰等皆有名士，由是天下无异言。
现代文：李翰等都是名士，从此天下没有异议。
English: Li Han and others are celebrities, and there has been no objection from the world.

古文：天子下诏，赠巡扬州大都督，远荆州大都督，霁云开府仪同三司、再赠扬州大都督，并宠其子孙。
现代文：天子下诏书，追封张巡为扬州大都督，许远为荆州大都督，南霁云为开府仪同三司，再追封为扬州大都督，并对他们的子孙加以恩宠。
English: According to the imperial edict issued by the Son of Heaven, Zhang Jun was appointed as Yangzhou Grand Governor, Xu Yuan was appointed as Jingzhou Grand Governor, Nan Xiyun was appointed as Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, and then he was appointed as Yangzhou Grand Governor, and he bestowed grace on their children and grandchildren.

古文：睢阳、雍丘赐徭税三年。
现代文：睢阳、雍丘免徭役税收三年。
English: Fenyang and Yongqiu will be exempted from taxation for three years.

古文：巡子亚夫拜金吾大将军，远子玖婺州司马。
现代文：张巡之子张亚夫被任为金吾大将军，许远之子许玫被任为婺州司马。
English: Zhang Yafu, the son of Zhang Jun, was appointed as Kingu Grand General, and Xu Mei, the son of Xu Yuan, was appointed as Zhangzhou Sima.

古文：皆立庙睢阳，岁时致祭。
现代文：在睢阳分别为张巡、许远立庙，每年按时祭祀。
English: In Shenyang, the Zhangxuan and Xuyuan temples were built, and the annual rituals were held on time.

古文：德宗差次至德以来将相功效尤著者，以颜杲卿、袁履谦、卢弈及巡、远、霁云为上。
现代文：德宗为至德以来的将相功绩显著者安排等级次序，以颜杲卿、袁履谦、卢弈及张巡、许远、南霁云为上等。
English: De Zong arranged the rank order for those who have made significant achievements since the founding of the school, with Yan Yingqing, Yuan Lucheng, Lu Yi and Zhang Jun, Xu Yuan and Nan Yingyun as the highest ranks.

古文：又赠姚訚潞州大都督，官一子。
现代文：又追封姚门言为潞州大都督，给他的一个儿子赐官。
English: He also posthumously made Yao Mengyan the grand governor of Zhangzhou and gave an official position to one of his sons.

古文：贞元中，复官巡它子去疾、远子岘。
现代文：贞元年间，又给张巡的另一子张去疾、许远之子许岘赐官。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhengyuan, another son of Zhang Guan, Zhang Dezi, and Xu Yuan, the son of Xu Yuan, were also given official positions.

古文：赠巡妻申国夫人，赐帛百。
现代文：追封张巡之妻为申国夫人，赐绸百匹。
English: The wife of Zhang Jun, who was exiled, became the wife of Shen Guo, and was given a hundred pieces of silk.

古文：自是讫僖宗，求忠臣后，无不及三人者。
现代文：从此以至僖宗，寻求忠臣后代，没有不包括这三人的。
English: From then on, even Emperor Taizong, in his search for descendants of loyal subjects, did not exclude these three men.

古文：大中时，图巡、远、霁云像于凌烟阁。
现代文：大中年间，画张巡、许远、南霁云之像于凌烟阁。
English: During his college and junior high school years, he painted the portraits of Zhang Xuan, Xu Yuan and Nan Xunyun at Lingyan Pavilion.

古文：睢阳至今祠享，号 双庙 云。
现代文：睢阳二人祠庙至今享受香火，号称 双庙 。
English: The two-person ancestral temple in Shenyang still enjoys incense, known as the double temple.

古文：许远者，右相敬宗曾孙。宽厚长者，明吏治。
现代文：许远，乃右相许敬宗之曾孙，是一位宽厚长者，为政清明。
English: Xu Yuan, the great-grandson of Xu Jingzong, the Minister of the Right, was a generous elder with a clear political vision.

古文：初客河西，章仇兼琼辟署剑南府，欲以子妻之，固辞。
现代文：早年客居河西，章仇兼琼征召他来代理剑南府太守，想以女儿许配给他，许远坚决推辞。
English: In his early years as a guest in Hexi, Zhang Qianqian recruited him to act as the deputy governor of Jianan Prefecture. He wanted to marry his daughter to him, but Xu Yuan firmly refused.

古文：兼琼怒，以事劾贬高要尉。
现代文：章仇兼琼恼怒，借口有过加以弹劾，降为高要县尉。
English: Zhang Qianqian and Qiong were so angry that they tried to impeach him on some pretext, and he was demoted to the rank of high-ranking county lieutenant.

古文：更赦还。
现代文：后遇赦回。
English: He was later pardoned.

古文：会禄山反，或荐远于玄宗，召拜睢阳太守。
现代文：适逢安禄山叛变，有人向玄宗推荐许远，被任命为睢阳太守。
English: At the time of the An Lushan Rebellion, someone recommended Xu Yuan to Xuanzong, and he was appointed the governor of Shenyang.

古文：远与巡同年生而长，故巡呼为兄。
现代文：许远与张巡同年而大月份，所以张巡呼之为兄。
English: Xu Yuan and Zhang Jun were born in the same year and the same month, so Zhang Jun called him his elder brother.

古文：大历中，巡子去疾上书曰： 孽胡南侵，父巡与睢阳太守远各守一面。
现代文：大历年中，张巡子去疾向代宗上书说 ：逆胡南侵时，我父亲张巡与睢阳太守许远各守城的一面。
English: In the middle of the year of the great calendar, Zhang Junzi hurriedly wrote to the daizong and said: During the counter-Hunan invasion, my father Zhang Jun and the Shenyang daimyo were far away from each other guarding one side of the city.

古文：城陷，贼所入自远分。
现代文：城破之日，贼兵进城之处从许远防区划分。
English: On the day the city was breached, the place where the robber soldiers entered the city was divided from the distant defense zone.

古文：尹子琦分郡部曲各一方，巡及将校三十余皆割心剖肌，惨毒备尽，而远与麾下无伤。
现代文：尹子琦将睢阳守军分为两部分，张巡及下属将校三十余人都被挖心割肌，惨毒之极，而许远与其部下却没受到伤害。
English: Yin Zixuan divided the defense force of Fenyang into two parts. Zhang Jun and more than 30 subordinate officers were brutally tortured, but Xu Yuyuan and his subordinates were not harmed.

古文：巡临命叹曰： 嗟乎，人有可恨者！ 
现代文：张巡临死时叹息说： 唉，有人非常可恨！ 
English: When Zhang Jun was about to die, he sighed and said: Alas, someone is very hateful!

古文：贼曰： 公恨我乎？ 
现代文：贼酋说： 您恨我吗？ 
English: The thief said: Do you hate me?

古文：答曰： 恨远心不可得，误国家事，若死有知，当不赦于地下。 
现代文：张巡回答说 ：我恨许远人心难测，贻误国事，如我死后有知，在九泉之下也是不会饶恕他的。 
English: Zhang Jun replied, "I hate him for being so far away and so unpredictable, and for interfering in state affairs. If I knew after my death, I would not forgive him under any circumstances."

古文：故远心向背，梁、宋人皆知之。
现代文：所以许远究竟心向何处，梁、宋的人们都知道。
English: Therefore, everyone in Liang and Song knew where Xu Yuan's heart was.

古文：使国威丧衄，巡功业堕败，则远于臣不共戴天，请追夺官爵，以刷冤耻。 
现代文：他导致国威丧失，张巡功业毁坏，臣与许远不共戴天，请陛下追夺他的官爵，以辨冤雪耻。 
English: He led to the loss of national prestige, the destruction of Zhang Jun's career, and the minister and Xu Yuanzhang did not share the sky, and asked His Majesty to seize his official title in order to identify the grievance.

古文：诏下尚书省，使去疾与许岘及百官议。
现代文：代宗下诏书给尚书省，命张去疾与许岘及百官共议。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an imperial edict to Shangshu Province, ordering Zhang to go and discuss the matter with Xu Xi and hundreds of officials.

古文：皆以去疾证状最明者，城陷而远独生也。
现代文：大家都认为张去疾提出的证据最明显的，就是城破后许远独自活着。
English: Everyone agrees that the most obvious evidence presented by Zhang Deji is that he lived alone for a long time after leaving the city.

古文：且远本守睢阳，凡屠城以生致主将为功，则远后巡死不足惑。
现代文：许远本来就是睢阳太守，凡破城后的屠杀中都以生俘主将为大功，那么许远死于张巡之后用不着怀疑。
English: Xu Yuan was originally the governor of Fenyang. In all the massacres after the city was destroyed, the living captor would be given great credit. Therefore, there is no need to doubt that Xu Yuan died after the inspection of Zhang.

古文：若曰后死者与贼，其先巡死者谓巡当叛，可乎？
现代文：如果说后死者就是附贼，那么先于张巡而死者说张巡一定叛逆，可以吗？
English: If it is said that the later deceased is an accomplice of the thief, then can the deceased who preceded Zhang Jun and said that Zhang Jun must be a traitor?

古文：当此时去疾尚幼，事未详知。
现代文：当时张去疾还年幼，不了解详情。
English: At that time, Zhang was too young to have the disease and did not know the details.

古文：且艰难以来，忠烈未有先二人者，事载简书，若日星不可妄轻重。
现代文：而且自国家遭难以来，讲忠烈没有超过张巡、许远这两人的，事载史册，像日月星辰一样，不可妄加轻重。
English: Moreover, since the national calamity, there have been no more loyalists than Zhang Junjun and Xu Yuan, both of whom are recorded in the annals of history. Like the sun, moon and stars, they should not be overemphasized.

古文：议乃罢。
现代文：于是此议作罢。
English: Therefore, this motion is withdrawn.

古文：然议者纷纭不齐。
现代文：然而仍存在议论纷纭的情况。
English: However, there is still room for debate.

古文：元和时，韩愈读李翰所为巡传，以为阙远事非是。
现代文：元和年间，韩愈读李翰所写的张巡传，认为没有写许远事迹是不对的。
English: During the Yuan and He years, Han Yu read the biography of Zhang Youxuan written by Li Han and thought that it was wrong not to write about Xu Yuan's deeds.

古文：其言曰： 二人者，守死成名，先后异耳。
现代文：韩愈说： 张、许两人，以死殉国成名，只是死的时间有先后而已。
English: Han Yu said: Zhang and Xu are two people who became famous by dying for the country, but they died at different times.

古文：二家子弟材下，不能通知其父志，使世疑远畏死而服贼。
现代文：两家子弟才能低下，不能熟知父辈的志向，使世人怀疑许远怕死而降贼。
English: The talent of the two sons is low, and they cannot be familiar with the aspirations of their parents, which makes the world suspect that they are afraid of death and surrender to the thief.

古文：远诚畏死，何苦守尺寸地，食其所爱之肉，抗不降乎？
现代文：许远如果真的怕死，何苦要守尺寸之地，吃其所爱者之肉，抵抗而不投降呢？
English: Far away, if you are really afraid of death, why do you have to keep the land of dimensions, eat the flesh of your loved one, resist and not surrender?

古文：且见援不至，人相食而犹守，虽其愚亦知必死矣，然远之不畏死甚明。 
现代文：而且见援兵不到，饥饿至人吃人还要坚守，虽再愚笨也知必死无疑，由此看出许远之不怕死是很清楚的。 
English: Moreover, seeing that reinforcements are not coming, that hunger is so great that people will eat each other, and that even the most stupid will undoubtedly die, it is clear that they are far from being afraid of death.

古文：又言： 城陷自所守，此与儿童之见无异。
现代文：韩愈又说 ：城破从两人所守之处划分，这简直是儿童之见。
English: Han Yu also said: The division of the city from the place defended by two people is simply a child's view.

古文：且人之将死，其脏腑必有先受病者；引绳而绝之，其绝必有处。
现代文：人之将死，他的脏器必有先染病的，拉断一根绳子，必有断绝之处。
English: When a man is about to die, his internal organs must first become diseased. When a rope is broken, there must be a place of severance.

古文：今从而尤之，亦不达于理矣。 
现代文：现据此谬论而责难许远，也是太不通情理了。 
English: It is too far-fetched and too unreasonable to make accusations based on this fallacy.

古文：愈于褒贬尤慎，故著之。
现代文：韩愈对于褒贬人和事是非常谨慎的，所以记下他的话。
English: Han Yu is very cautious about praising and criticizing people and things, so make a note of his words.

古文：南霁云者，魏州顿丘人。
现代文：南霁云是魏州顿丘县人。
English: Nan Rongyun is from Dongqiu County, Weizhou.

古文：少微贱，为人操舟。
现代文：少年时贫贱，替人驾船。
English: When he was a boy, he was poor and drove a boat for someone else.

古文：禄山反，钜野尉张沼起兵讨贼，拔以为将。
现代文：安禄山反叛，钜野县尉张沼起兵讨贼，提拔他为军官。
English: Mount Anlu rebelled, and Zhang Numa, a lieutenant from Qinyang County, raised an army to fight the bandits and was promoted to officer.

古文：尚衡击汴州贼李廷望，以为先锋。
现代文：尚衡攻打汴州贼将李廷望，用他为先锋。
English: Shang Heng attacked the Bozhou thief Li Tingwang and used him as a spearhead.

古文：遣至睢阳，与张巡计事。
现代文：被派遣到睢阳，与张巡商议事情。
English: He was sent to Shenyang to discuss the matter with Zhang Jun.

古文：退谓人曰： 张公开心待人，真吾所事也。 
现代文：退下来后对人说 ：张公开诚布公待人，真是我应该追随的人。 
English: After stepping down, he said to people: Zhang openly and sincerely treats people, it is really the person I should follow.

古文：遂留巡所。
现代文：于是留在张巡处。
English: So he stayed at Zhang's patrol office.

古文：巡固劝归，不去。
现代文：张巡坚持劝他回去，也不走。
English: Zhang Jun insisted on persuading him to go back, but he would not go.

古文：衡赍金帛迎，霁云谢不受，乃事巡，巡厚加礼。
现代文：尚衡携带金银布帛来迎接，霁云谢绝不受，于是侍奉张巡，张巡厚加礼遇。
English: Shang Heng brought gold and silver cloth bags to meet, but was not accepted, so he served Zhang Jun, and Zhang Jun was treated with great courtesy.

古文：始被围，筑台募万死一生者，数日无敢应。
现代文：开始城被围时，筑台招募敢死之士，几天了都没人敢应征。
English: At the beginning of the siege of the city, Tsukudai began to recruit those who dared to die. For several days, no one dared to enlist.

古文：俄有喑鸣而来者，乃霁云也。
现代文：不久，有人忍痛吞声悲泣而来，原来是霁云。
English: Soon, someone came crying in pain. It turned out to be Hao Yun.

古文：巡对泣下。
现代文：张巡与之相对流泪。
English: Zhang Jun was in tears.

古文：霁云善骑射，见贼百步内乃发，无不应弦毙。
现代文：南霁云擅长骑马射箭，见到贼兵要近到百步以内才发射，无不应声而倒毙。
English: Nan Rongyun was good at riding a horse and shooting arrows. When he saw the bandits, he had to get within a hundred paces before he could fire. Without a word, he fell dead.

古文：子承嗣，历涪州刺史。
现代文：子南承嗣，曾任涪州刺史。
English: He is the heir of Zonan, and was once the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：刘辟叛，以无备谪永州。
现代文：刘辟反叛，因疏于防范而被贬到永州。
English: Liu Pi rebelled and was banished to Yongzhou for failing to take precautions.

古文：雷万春者，不详所来，事巡为偏将。
现代文：雷万春其人，来历不详，在张巡部下任偏将。
English: Lei Wanchun, whose background is unknown, rose to the rank of general under Zhang Jun.

古文：令狐潮围雍丘，万春立城上与潮语，伏弩发六矢著面，万春不动。
现代文：令狐潮围雍丘时，雷万春在城上与令狐潮说话，埋伏的弩弓发六箭射中雷万春的脸，雷万春岿然不动。
English: When Lingfuchao surrounded Yongqiu, Lei Wanchun spoke with Lingfuchao at the top of the city. The ambushed crossbow shot six arrows into Lei Wanchun's face, and Lei Wanchun remained motionless.

古文：潮疑刻木人，谍得其实，乃大惊。
现代文：令狐潮怀疑是雕刻的木头人，探子探得实情，就大为吃惊。
English: The scouts were very surprised when they found out the truth, as they suspected that the fox tide was a carved wooden man.

古文：遥谓巡曰： 向见雷将军，知君之令严矣。 
现代文：令孤潮远远地对张巡说： 前见雷将军，就深知您的军令之严。 
English: Letting the lonely tide far away said to Zhang Jun: Seeing General Lei in front, I am well aware of the severity of your military order.

古文：潮壁雍丘北，谋袭襄邑、宁陵。
现代文：令狐潮在雍丘城北建罕垒，打算袭击襄邑、宁陵。
English: Letting the fox tide build a stronghold in the north of Yongqiu City, intending to attack Xiangyue and Ningling.

古文：巡使万春引骑四百压潮，先为贼所包。巡突其围，大破贼，潮遁去。
现代文：张巡命令雷万春领骑兵四百压制令狐潮，却先被贼兵包围，张巡突破围兵，大破贼军，令狐潮逃走。
English: Zhang Jun ordered Lei Wanchun to lead four hundred cavalry to suppress the fox tide, but he was first surrounded by thieves, Zhang Jun broke through the besiegers, broke the thieves, and let the fox tide escape.

古文：万春将兵，方略不及霁云，而强毅用命。
现代文：雷万春带兵，谋略上不如霁云，但坚决果敢执行命令。
English: Lei Wanchun led the troops, but his strategy was not as good as Shanyun's, but he resolutely carried out the order.

古文：每战，巡任之与霁云钧。
现代文：每次战斗，张巡使用他与使用南霁云一样。
English: In every battle, Zhang Jun used him in the same way as he used Nan Xunyun.

