古文：张孟谈既固赵宗，广封疆，发五百，乃称简之涂以告襄子曰： 昔者，前国地君之御有之曰： 五百之所以致天下者，约两主势能制臣，无令臣能制主。
现代文：张孟谈巩固了赵国的地位以后，扩大边境，发扬五霸的精粹，向赵襄子称赞赵简子的遗训说： 从前，筒子统治赵圈时有这样的话： 五霸之所以得到天下诸侯拥护的原因是约束得当，使君主的权势能控制臣下，不使臣下的权势能控制君主。
English: Zhang Meng said that after consolidating the status of Zhao, he expanded the border and promoted the essence of the Five Bullies, and praised Zhao Xiangzi for Zhao Jianzi's last words, saying: Once upon a time, when Tsutsuji ruled the Zhao Circle, there was this saying: The reason why the Five Bullies were supported by the princes of the world was because they were properly restrained, so that the power of the monarch could control the subjects, but not so that the power of the subjects could control the monarch.

古文：故贵为列侯者，不令在相位，自将军以上，不为近大夫。
现代文：所以尊贵为列侯的人，不让他任相国，有将军以上地位的武官，不让他担任近大夫。 
English: Therefore, people who are distinguished as vassals are not allowed to serve as vassals, military attachés with the status of general or higher are not allowed to serve as near-doctors.

古文：今臣之名显而身尊，权重而众服，臣愿捐功名、去权势以离众。 
现代文：如今隐下名声显赫而身体尊贵，权力重大而众人服从，逮下愿意捐弃功名，抛弃权势而离开众人。 
English: Nowadays, he is secretly famous and dignified, has great power and is obeyed by everyone. When he is caught, he is willing to give up his fame, give up his power and leave everyone.

古文：襄子悢然曰： 何哉？
现代文：赵襄子悲伤地说。 这是为什么呢？
English: Zhao Xiangzi said sadly. Why is this?

古文：吾闻辅主者名显，功大者身尊，任国者权重，信忠在己而众服焉。
现代文：我听说辅佐君主的人名声显赫，功劳大的人身体尊贵，担任相国的人权力重要，自己忠诚讲信用众人就会服从。
English: I have heard that those who assist the monarch are renowned, those who have made great contributions are respected, those who have served the country are powerful, and those who are loyal and trustworthy will be obeyed.

古文：此先圣之所以集国家、安社稷乎！
现代文：这是古代圣贤协调驾驭国家，安定国家的办法呀！
English: This is the method of the ancient sages to coordinate and control the country and stabilize the country!

古文：子何为然？ 
现代文：您为什么不这样做？ 
English: Why don't you do that?

古文：张孟谈对曰： 君主所言，成功之美也。
现代文：张孟谈国答说： 君王所说的，是成就功名的美好。
English: Zhang Meng said about the state reply: What the monarch said is the beauty of achievement and fame.

古文：臣之所谓，持国之道也。
现代文：臣下所说的，是保守国家的方法。
English: What the vassal said is the way to preserve the country.

古文：臣观成事，闻往古，天下之美同，臣主之权均之能美，未之有也。
现代文：臣下观察成功的事业，听古代的传说，天下美好的事情是相同的，但是臣下君主的权力平均起来都能美好，是没有这种事的。
English: Subjects observe successful undertakings, listen to ancient legends, and the good things in the world are the same, but the power of a subject monarch can be good on average, there is no such thing.

古文：前事之不忘，后事之师。
现代文：记住过去的经验教训，可作以后行事的借鉴。
English: Remember the lessons of the past, which can be used as a reference for future actions.

古文：君若弗图，则臣力不足。 
现代文：君王如果不考虑，那么臣下是没有这个力量的。 
English: If the monarch does not consider it, then the vassal does not have this power.

古文：怆然有决色。
现代文：张孟谈的面容显出悲伤诀别的样子。
English: Zhang Mengdan's face showed a look of sad farewell.

古文：襄子去之。
现代文：赵襄子让他离开。
English: Zhao Xiangzi let him go.

古文：卧三日，使人谓之曰： 晋阳之政，臣下不使者何如？ 
现代文：张孟谈躺了三天，派人对襄子说： 晋阳的政事，臣下不从命怎么办？ 
English: Zhang Meng lay in bed for three days and sent someone to say to Xiangzi, "What should we do if our vassal does not follow orders in the political affairs of Jinyang?

古文：对曰： 死僇。 
现代文：赵襄子手下人回答说： 杀掉。 
English: Zhao Xiangzi's men replied, "Kill him."

古文：张孟谈曰： 左司马见使于国家，安社稷，不避其死，以成其忠，君其行之。 
现代文：张孟谈说： 左司马被国家使用，安定了国家，不躲避死亡，以成就他的忠诚，君王还是动手吧。 
English: Zhang Meng said: Zuo Sima was used by the state, stabilized the country, did not avoid death, to achieve his loyalty, the king should do it.

古文：君曰： 子从事。 
现代文：赵襄子说： 您还是去做您想做的事情。 
English: Zhao Xiangzi said: You still have to do what you want to do.

古文：乃许之。
现代文：于是就答应了他。
English: I said yes.

古文：张孟谈便厚以便名，纳地释事以去权尊，而耕于负亲之丘。
现代文：张孟谈心安理得地去掉重权和美名而更加巩固了自己的名声，他交纳封地，放弃政事离开尊贵的权位，而耕种在负亲之丘。
English: Zhang Meng was at peace with the fact that he had been able to get rid of the weight of power and fame, which further strengthened his reputation. He handed over his fiefdom, gave up politics and left his noble position of power, and farmed on the hill of his relatives.

古文：故曰，贤人之行，明主之政也。
现代文：所以说，张孟谈的行为是贤明人的行为，赵襄子的政治是英明君主的政治。
English: Therefore, Zhang Mengyan's behavior is the behavior of a wise man, and Zhao Xiangzi's politics is the politics of a wise monarch.

古文：耕三年，韩、魏、齐、燕负亲以谋赵。襄子往见张孟谈而告之曰： 昔者知氏之地，赵氏分则多十城，复来，而今诸侯孰谋我，为之奈何? 
现代文：张孟谈种了三年地，韩国、魏国、齐国、楚国背叛了过去的联盟而谋划进攻赵国，赵襄子前来会见张盂谈并告诉他说： 从前智伯的土地，赵氏分得多到十个城邑，他们再来，如今诸侯是谋划进攻我们，对这件事怎么办？ 
English: Zhang Meng talked about three years of planting land. South Korea, Wei, Qi and Chu betrayed the past alliance and planned to attack Zhao. Zhao Xiangzi came to meet Zhang Rong and told him: In the past, the land of Zhibo was divided into ten cities by the Zhao clan. They will come again. Now the princes are planning to attack us. What should we do about this?

古文：张孟谈曰： 君其负剑而御臣以之国，舍臣于庙，授吏大夫，臣试计之。 
现代文：张孟谈说： 君王还是背着剑为臣下驾驶车辆回到都城，让臣下住在宗庙里，把任命官吏大夫的权力交给我，臣下为您试着谋划对策。 赵襄子说， 好。 
English: Zhang Meng said: The king still drove a vehicle back to the capital city with a sword on his back for his vassals, let his vassals live in the ancestral temple, and gave me the power to appoint officials and doctors. The vassals tried to plan countermeasures for you. Zhao Xiangzi said, Good.

古文：君曰： 诺。 张孟谈乃行，其妻之楚，长子之韩，次子之魏，少子之齐。
现代文：张盂谈才上路，他的妻子到楚国去，长子到韩国去，次子到魏国去，少予到齐困去。
English: Zhang Qian only went on the road, his wife went to Chu, the eldest son went to Korea, the second son went to Wei, and the youngest son went to Qi.

古文：四国疑而谋败。
现代文：四国产生疑心而计谋失败。
English: The four countries became suspicious and the plot failed.

