古文：自卫过曹，曹共公亦不礼焉，闻其骿肋，欲观其状，止其舍，谍其将浴，设微薄而观之。
现代文：重耳一行自卫国经过曹国，曹共公也不以礼相待，听说重耳的肋骨生得连成一片，因此就很想看看是什么样子，便将重耳等安排在旅舍里，打听到重耳准备洗澡，张了很薄的帐幕偷偷观看。
English: Jie Er's self-defence group passed through Cao's country, but Cao Conggong did not treat them with courtesy. He heard that Jie Er's ribs were fused into one piece, so he really wanted to see what it looked like. He arranged Jie Er and others in the hostel, found out that Jie Er was preparing to take a bath, and opened a very thin tent to secretly watch.

古文：僖负羁之妻言于负羁曰： 吾观晋公子贤人也，其从者皆国相也，以相一人，必得晋国。得晋国而讨无礼，曹其首诛也。
现代文：曹国大夫僖负羁的妻子对她丈夫说： 我看晋公子是个贤人，他的随从都是国相的人才，辅佐晋公子一人，将来必定能回到晋国即位，等到晋国讨伐无礼的国家，曹国就会是他最先拿来开刀的了。
English: The wife of Dr. Cao Guo said to her husband, "I think that Prince Jin is a wise man. His attendants are all talented ministers of state. One of his assistants, Prince Jin, will certainly be able to return to the throne of the State of Jin in the future. When the State of Jin fights against disrespectful countries, Cao Guo will be the first to be attacked by him.

古文：子盍蚤自贰焉？ 
现代文：你为什么不早一点表示自己的不同态度呢？ 
English: Why didn't you express your dissent earlier?

古文：僖负羁馈飧，置璧焉。公子受飧反璧。
现代文：僖负羁便馈赠了一盘食品给重耳，盘底还放着一块璧。
English: He presented a plate of food to the heavy ear, and there was also a piece of stone at the bottom of the plate.

古文：负羁言于曹伯曰： 夫晋公子在此，君之匹也，不亦礼焉？ 
现代文：重耳接受了食物，退回了璧。僖负羁对曹共公说： 晋公子现在经过此地，和君王的地位相当，难道不应该以礼相待吗？ 
English: Chong Er accepted the food and returned to Bi. He said to Cao Gong Gong, "Jin Gong Son is passing through here now, and his status is equivalent to that of a king. Shouldn't we treat each other with courtesy?"

古文：曹伯曰： 诸侯之亡公子其多矣，谁不过此！
现代文：曹共公回答说： 诸侯各国在外逃亡的公子多了，谁不经过此地呢？
English: Cao Zongguo replied: There are many princes and princes of various countries who have fled abroad, who would not pass through this place?

古文：亡者皆无礼者也，余焉能尽礼焉！ 
现代文：逃亡的人都没有什么礼节可言，我怎么能全都以礼相待呢？ 
English: None of the escapees had any manners to speak of, so how could I treat them all with courtesy?

古文：对曰： 臣闻之：爱亲明贤，政之干也。
现代文：僖负羁回答说： 我听说，爱护亲属，尊重贤人，是政事的主干。
English: He replied, "I have heard that love for relatives and respect for the wise are the backbone of politics.

古文：礼宾矜穷，礼之宗也。
现代文：以礼待客，同情穷困，是礼仪的根本。
English: Treating guests with courtesy and sympathizing with poverty are the fundamentals of etiquette.

古文：礼以纪政，国之常也。
现代文：用礼来治理国政，是国家的常道。
English: Using etiquette to govern state affairs is a common practice in the country.

古文：失常不立，君所知也。
现代文：失去了常道，就不能自立，这是君主所理解的道理。
English: If you lose your way, you can't stand on your own. This is a principle that the monarch understands.

古文：国君无亲，以国为亲。
现代文：对国君来说没有私亲，以国为亲。
English: For the sovereign, there is no such thing as a personal relationship, but a relationship with the country.

古文：先君叔振，出自文王，晋祖唐叔，出自武王，文、武之功，实建诸姬。
现代文：我们的祖先叔振，是周文王的儿子，晋国的祖先唐叔，是周武王的儿子，周文王、武王的功劳，在于建立了许多姬姓的封国。
English: Our ancestor, Uncle Zhen, was the son of King Zhouwen, and the ancestor of Jin, Uncle Tang, was the son of King Zhouwu. The merit of King Zhouwen and King Wu is that they established many fiefdoms with the name of Hime.

古文：故二王之嗣，世不废亲。
现代文：所以二王的后代，世代都不抛弃相亲相爱的关系。
English: Therefore, the descendants of the two kings, generations do not abandon the relationship of love.

古文：今君弃之，不爱亲也。
现代文：如今国君丢弃了这一传统，是不爱亲属。
English: Now the sovereign has discarded this tradition and does not love his relatives.

古文：晋公子生十七年而亡，卿材三人从之，可谓贤矣，而君蔑之，是不明贤也。
现代文：晋公子十七岁流亡国外，三个具有卿相之才的人追随他，可称得上是贤人了，而君王轻视他，是不尊重贤人。
English: When Prince Jin went into exile at the age of seventeen, he was followed by three men of noble birth who could be called sages. However, the emperor despised him and did not respect the sages.

古文：谓晋公子之亡，不可不怜也。
现代文：说起晋公子出逃流亡，不可以不加怜悯。
English: When it comes to Jin Gongzi's flight into exile, it is impossible not to feel pity.

古文：比之宾客，不可不礼也。
现代文：即使将他比作宾客，也不可不以礼相待。
English: Even if he is compared to a guest, he must be treated with courtesy.

古文：失此二者，是不礼宾，不怜穷也。
现代文：如果失去了这两者，那就是不以礼待客，不怜悯穷困了。
English: If you lose these two, it means that you don't treat your guests with courtesy, and you don't have compassion for the poor.

古文：守天之聚，将施于宜。
现代文：守着上天所聚集的财富，应当施行于符合道义的事。
English: Safeguarding the wealth accumulated by the heavens should be carried out in a moral manner.

古文：宜而不施，聚必有阙。
现代文：符合道义的事而不能舍施，那么聚敛一定会缺失。
English: If we can't give up what is morally right, then there will be a lack of concentration.

古文：玉帛酒食，犹粪土也，爱粪土以毁三常，失位而阙聚，是之不难，无乃不可乎？
现代文：玉帛和酒食，如同粪土一般，爱重粪土而毁弃三种立国的常道，那就会失去君位，丢掉聚集起来的财富，这样做是不难的，但恐怕不可以吧？
English: Tamakazura and wine and food are like dung. They cherish dung and destroy the three ways of founding a country. Then they will lose their dignity and throw away the wealth they have gathered. It is not difficult to do this, but I am afraid it is not possible, is it?

古文：君其图之。 
现代文：希望国君好好想一想。 
English: Think about it carefully!

古文：公弗听。
现代文：曹共公不听从僖负羁的劝告。
English: Zhuang didn't listen.

