古文：思静振胜，允文维记。
现代文：想要安定并巩固胜利，要用文德作为纲纪。
English: In order to stabilize and consolidate the victory, it is necessary to use morality as a discipline.

古文：昭告周行，维旌所在。
现代文：安民告示到处张贴、悬挂。
English: Public safety notices have been posted and hung everywhere.

古文：收武释贿，无迁厥里，官校属职，因其百吏。
现代文：收缴武器，发放财物，不要让百姓迁徙。文官武将接续原有职务，沿用所有小吏。
English: Collect weapons, distribute property, and do not allow people to migrate. Civil officers and generals will continue their original duties, and all minor officials will continue to be used.

古文：公货少多，振赐穷士，救瘠补病，赋均田布。
现代文：官府所有财物，全都用来赈赐穷士，救济贫穷病弱，做到徭役与田土均衡。
English: All the wealth of the government was used to give to the poor, to help the poor, the sick and the weak, and to achieve a balance between labor and land.

古文：命夫复服，用损忧耻，孤寡无告，获厚咸喜。
现代文：让大夫恢复其命服，以消除他们的忧伤与羞辱。使孤儿寡母无所求，众人因收获丰厚而皆大欢喜。
English: Let the doctor be clothed with sackcloth, that their grief and shame may be wiped away; the fatherless and widowed may lack nothing, and everyone rejoice in the abundance of their produce.

古文：咸问外戚，书其所在，迁同氏姓，位之宗子。
现代文：寻访所有的外戚，记下他们的住处。选择同姓同氏者，立为各氏族的宗子。
English: Search for all your relatives and write down where they live. Choose people with the same family name and clan, and make them the head of each clan.

古文：率用十五，绥用□安，教用显允，若得父母。
现代文：年十五以上作为服役的标准，成年男女都得以婚配。以光明诚实进行教育，百姓如同得到父母。
English: Fifteen years of age and above as the service standard, adult men and women are allowed to marry. With bright and honest education, the people are like getting parents.

古文：宽以政之，孰云不听，听言靡悔，遵养时晦。
现代文：用宽和办法治理百姓，谁能不顺从?顺从而敢有悔恨，还会安守本分而供养糊涂君王。
English: To govern the people in a broad and harmonious way, who can not obey? Obey and dare to have remorse, and will keep the duty and provide for the muddle-headed king.

古文：晦明遂语，于时允武，死思复生，生思复所。
现代文：君王英明就会作教诫，在这时候还要进行武教。这样，死了的也想再生，活着的想再任旧职。
English: A wise king will give a warning, and at this time he will also carry out martial arts. In this way, the dead also want to be reborn, and the living want to resume their old positions.

古文：人知不弃，爱守正户，上下和协，靡敌不下。
现代文：百姓知道不被抛弃，就会珍惜家居不远离。做到上下和协，就没有攻不下的敌人。
English: If the people know that they will not be abandoned, they will cherish their homes and stay close to them. If there is harmony between the upper and lower classes, there will be no enemy that cannot be defeated.

古文：执彼玉慓，以居其宇，庶民咸畊，童壮无辅，无拂其取，通其疆土。
现代文：达官贵人手执玉器，住在他们的殿宇。老百姓人人耕种，老幼无有欺诈。不违背他们的心意，国内通行无阻。
English: Dignitaries hold jade utensils in their hands and live in their palaces. The common people all cultivate, and there is no fraud among the old and the young. It does not go against their will, and there is no obstacle to domestic traffic.

古文：民之望兵，若待父母。
现代文：民众盼望我军，如同等待父母。
English: People look forward to our military like they do their parents.

古文：是故天下，一旦而定有四海。
现代文：所以，天下一日就可平定，从而包有四海。
English: Therefore, the whole world can be pacified in one day, thus covering the four seas.

