古文：《齐民要术》：崔寔曰：正月，自朔暨晦，可移诸树杂木。
现代文：《齐民要术》：崔寔说：正月，从初一到月底可移栽各种树木和各种杂木。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": Cui Yao said: In the first month, from the first day to the end of the month, all kinds of trees and miscellaneous trees can be transplanted.

古文：唯有果实者，及望而止。望谓十五日。
现代文：只有各种果树必须在望日以前移栽；望是指十五日。
English: Only all kinds of fruit trees must be transplanted before the hope date; hope refers to the fifteenth day.

古文：过十五日，则果少实。
现代文：过了十五日移栽的，便会结实少。
English: After fifteen days of transplanting, it will be less solid.

古文：《食经》云：种名果法：三月上旬，斫取直好枝如大拇指，长五尺，《类要》云：一尺五寸。
现代文：《食经》说：种植各种名果的方法：应在三月上旬，剪取好的枝条，大拇指粗细、长五尺，《类要》说：一尺五寸长。
English: "Shokugeki" says: the method of planting various famous fruits: it should be in early March, cut good branches, the thumb is thick and thin, five feet long, "Doyo" says: one foot and five inches long.

古文：内著芋头中种之。无芋，大芜菁根亦可。
现代文：插入芋头中种下去；没有芋头的时候，用大芜菁根代替也可以。
English: Insert it into the taro and plant it; if you don't have taro, you can also use radish root instead.

古文：《类要》云：萝卜亦得。
现代文：《类要》说：用萝卜也可以。
English: "Classroom Essentials" says: You can also use radishes.

古文：胜种核，核三四年乃如此大耳。可得行种。
现代文：采用这样的扦插法，要比培育实生苗要好，实生苗要经过三四年才可以长到这样大，而且可以得到好的品种。
English: Using such a grafting method is better than cultivating seedlings. It takes three or four years for seedlings to grow to such a large size, and good varieties can be obtained.

古文：凡五果，正月一日鸡鸣时，把火遍照其下，则无虫灾。
现代文：凡是各种果树，正月初一夜间鸡叫时，用火在树下照一遍，便不会有虫害发生。
English: For all kinds of fruit trees, when the rooster crows one night at the beginning of the first month, use fire to shine it under the tree, and there will be no insect damage.

古文：《博闻录》：柳子厚《郭橐駞传》：所种树，或移徙，无不活，且硕茂早实以蕃。
现代文：《博闻录》：柳子厚所撰《郭橐駞传》一文说：橐驼种的树，或者移植的树，没有不成活的；而且长得高大茂盛，果实结得早而且多。
English: "Houwen Biographies": An article entitled "The Biography of Guo Zi Hou" written by Liu Zi Hou said: "There is no camelid tree or transplanted tree that does not survive; moreover, it grows tall and luxuriantly, and bears fruit early and abundantly.

古文：有问之，对曰： 凡植木之性，其本欲舒，其培欲平，其土欲故，其筑欲密。既然已，勿动勿虑，去不复顾。
现代文：有人问他种树种得好的原因，他回答说： 我并不能使树木活得长久而且长得很快，不过是能够顺应树木的自然生长规律，使它的本性充分发展而已。凡是种植的树木，它的本性是：树木的树根要舒展，它的培土要平均，它根下的土要用原来培育树苗的土，根周围的捣土要紧实。这样做了之后，就不要再动，不要再忧虑它，离开后就不再管它。
English: When someone asked him why he was so good at planting trees, he replied, "I can't make trees live long and grow fast, but I can conform to the natural growth laws of trees and fully develop their nature. The nature of all planted trees is: the roots of trees should be stretched, its cultivation soil should be average, the soil under its roots should be used to originally cultivate seedlings, and the tamped soil around the roots should be firm. After doing this, don't move again, don't worry about it anymore, and don't take care of it after leaving.

古文：其莳也，若子，其置也，若弃；则其天者全，而其性得矣。
现代文：栽种时要像对待子女一样细心，栽好后要像丢弃它一样放在一边，那么树木的天性就得以保全，它的本性也就能够得到充分发展。
English: When planting, you should be as careful as you are with your children, and after planting, you should put it aside as if you were discarding it, so that the nature of the tree can be preserved and its nature can be fully developed.

古文：他植者则不然，根拳而土易；其培之也，若不过焉，则不及。
现代文：所以我只不过不妨碍它的生长罢了，并不是有能使它长得高大茂盛的办法；只不过不抑制、减少它的结果罢了，也并不是有能力使它果实结得早又多。
English: Therefore, I only do not interfere with its growth, and I do not have the means to make it grow tall and lush; I only do not suppress or reduce its results, and I do not have the ability to make it bear fruit early and more.

古文：苟有能反是者，则又爱之太恩，忧之太勤，旦视而暮抚，已去而复顾。
现代文：如果有能够和这种做法相反的人，就又太过于吝惜它们了，担心它太过分了；早晨去看了，晚上又去摸摸，已经离开了，又回来望望。
English: If there are people who can do the opposite of this practice, they are too stingy with them, worried that it is too much; in the morning they went to see, in the evening they went to feel, they have left, and came back to look.

古文：甚者，爪其肤，以验其生枯；摇其本，以观其疏密；而木之性日以离矣。
现代文：更严重的，甚至掐破树皮来观察它是死是活着，摇动树的根部来看培土是松还是紧，这样树木的天性就一天天远去了。
English: Worse still, by even breaking the bark of a tree to see if it is dead or alive, and shaking the roots of the tree to see if the soil is loose or tight, the natural character of the tree is being eroded day by day.

古文：虽曰爱之，其实害之；虽曰忧之，其实仇之。
现代文：虽然说是喜爱它，这实际上是害它；虽说是担心它，这实际上是仇视它。
English: Although they say they love trees, they actually harm trees; although they say they are worried about trees, they actually treat trees as enemies.

古文：故不我若也。 
现代文：所以他们种植的树都不如我！ 
English: That's why they don't grow as many trees as me!

古文：凡木皆有雌雄，而雄者多不结实。可凿木作方寸穴，取雌木填之，乃实。
现代文：通常木类皆分雌雄，雄树多数不结果实，可以在树上凿一个一寸见方的小孔穴，将雌树上的木块填入穴中，便可结实。
English: Usually, all trees are divided into male and female, and most male trees do not bear fruit. You can drill a small hole one inch square in the tree, and fill the hole with a piece of wood from the female tree to make it strong.

古文：以银杏雄树试之便验。
现代文：可用雄性的银杏树试验一下，一定会灵验。
English: You can try it with a male ginkgo tree, and it will definitely work.

古文：社日，以杵舂百果树下，则结实牢。
现代文：社日，用木杵在各种果树脚下面舂捣，果实便会长得很牢固。
English: On the seventh day of the Chinese New Year, the fruit of various fruit trees will grow very strong if they are rubbed under the feet with wooden rakes.

古文：不实者亦宜用此法。
现代文：有的果树不结实，亦可采用这一方法。
English: Some fruit trees are not strong, so this method can also be used.

古文：果木有虫蠹者，用杉木作钉，塞其穴，虫立死。
现代文：果树生蠹虫，可用杉木作成木钉把虫穴用钉塞住，虫便立刻死掉。
English: Fruit trees produce aphids. Sugi wood can be used to make wooden nails to plug the wormhole with nails, and the insects will die immediately.

古文：树木有虫蠧，以芫花纳孔中，或纳百部叶。
现代文：树木生虫蠹，用芫花填塞穴孔中，或将百部叶塞进去。
English: Trees produce aphids, fill holes with thistles, or stuff a hundred leaves into them.

古文：《岁时广记》：《遁斋闲览》 凡果木久不实者，以祭社余酒洒之，则繁茂倍常。
现代文：《岁时广记》引用《遁斋闲览》的话说： 所有各种果树，如果长时间不结果，用祭祀剩余的酒往树上喷洒，树便会加倍的茂盛。
English: "Year of the Year," quoting from the Analects of Confucius, said: "All kinds of fruit trees, if they do not bear fruit for a long time, can be sprayed with the leftover wine from the ritual, and the trees will become twice as lush.

古文：用人发挂枝上，则飞鸟不敢近。
现代文：用人的头发挂在树枝上，各种鸟类便不敢飞近树。
English: With human hair hanging on the branches, all kinds of birds dare not fly near the tree.

古文：结实时，最忌白衣人过其下，则其实尽落。 
现代文：果树正在坐果时，最忌讳穿白衣服的人从树下走过，会使树上的果实全部都掉光。 
English: When a fruit tree is in the process of bearing fruit, it is taboo for a person wearing white clothes to walk under the tree, causing all the fruit on the tree to fall off.

