古文：王僧孺，字僧孺，东海郯人，魏卫将军肃八世孙。
现代文：王僧孺字僧孺，是东海郯人，魏朝卫将军王肃的第八代孙。
English: Wang Xiangyu, the eighth generation grandson of the Wei Dynasty general Wang Su, was born in the East China Sea.

古文：曾祖雅，晋左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：曾祖父名王雅，在晋朝任左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
English: His great-grandfather, Mei Wangya, served as the doctor of the Left Guanglu and the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies during the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖准，宋司徒左长史。
现代文：祖父名王准，在宋任司徒左长史。
English: His grandfather, Myeongwangjun, was appointed to the post of chief historian of the Song Dynasty.

古文：僧孺年五岁，读《孝经》，问授者此书所载述，曰： 论忠孝二事。 
现代文：僧孺五岁读《孝经》，问授课先生此书所载述的内容，先生说： 是论说忠孝二事。 
English: When the five-year-old Sangye read "Filial Piety" and asked the teacher about the contents of the book, the teacher said, "It's about two things: loyalty and filial piety."

古文：僧孺曰： 若尔，常愿读之。 
现代文：僧孺说： 像这样，我愿意常读它。 
English: The monk said, "In this way, I would like to read it often."

古文：六岁能属文，既长好学。
现代文：六岁时能写文章，长大好学。
English: At the age of six, he was able to write articles, and grew up to be eager to learn.

古文：家贫，常佣书以养母，所写既毕，讽诵亦通。
现代文：家贫，常靠替别人抄书以奉养母亲，书抄完之后，就能很通畅地背诵。
English: His family was poor, and he often relied on copying books for others to support his mother. After he finished copying books, he was able to recite them fluently.

古文：仕齐，起家王国左常侍、太学博士。
现代文：在齐朝作官，从家中征召出来任王国左常侍、太学博士。
English: He served as an official in the Qi Dynasty, and was recruited from his family to serve as the Left-Handed Attendant of the Kingdom and the Doctor of Theology.

古文：尚书仆射王晏深相赏好。
现代文：尚书仆射王晏非常欣赏喜欢他。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant, Sha Wangtao, likes him very much.

古文：晏为丹阳尹，召补郡功曹，使僧孺撰《东宫新记》。
现代文：王晏任丹阳尹，召补郡功曹，让他编撰《东宫新记》。
English: Wang Qian appointed Danyang Yin, summoned the county gong Cao, and asked him to compile the "Eastern Palace Chronicle."

古文：迁大司马豫章王行参军，又兼太学博士。
现代文：迁任大司马豫章王行参军，又兼太学博士。
English: Ma Yuanzhang Wang Xing, who was transferred to the position of the general secretary, joined the army, and also became a doctor of science.

古文：司徒竟陵王子良开西邸招文学，僧孺亦游焉。
现代文：司徒竟陵王子良开设西邸招致有文学才能的人，僧孺也在其中。
English: The opening of the Western Residence of Prince Sutou Qingtongliang attracted people with literary talent, including monks and nuns.

古文：文惠太子闻其名，召入东宫，直崇明殿。
现代文：文惠太子闻其名，召入束宫，在崇明殿值勤。
English: Prince Wen Hui heard of his fame and was summoned to Sok Palace, where he was on duty at the Chongming Palace.

古文：欲拟为宫僚，文惠薨，不果。
现代文：打算让他作太子宫属，因文惠太子去世，此事终于没有实行。
English: It was planned to make him crown prince, but due to the death of Crown Prince Wen Hui, the plan was never carried out.

古文：时王晏子德元出为晋安郡，以僧孺补郡丞，除候官令。
现代文：当时王晏的儿子德元出任晋安郡守，以僧孺补郡丞，授候官令。
English: At that time, Wang Yao's son, De Yuan, served as the governor of Jin'an County, and he was awarded the title of county magistrate.

古文：建武初，有诏举士，扬州刺史始安王遥光表荐秘书丞王暕及僧孺曰： 前候官令东海王僧孺，年三十五，理尚栖约，思致悟敏，既笔耕为养，亦佣书成学。
现代文：建迭初年，有诏令荐举人才，荡州刺史始安王逻光上表荐举秘书丞型奎及仅逦说： 前任侯官令东海王僧孺，三十五岁，志趣爱好简约，思想意趣聪慧敏悟，以笔代耕维持生活，在替别人抄书中完成学业，以至于到了照萤映雪，将蒲叶编订成册，柳木制成书简这样艰辛刻苦的地步。
English: In the first year of construction, there was a decree to recommend talents, and the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of

古文：至乃照萤映雪，编蒲缉柳，先言往行，人物雅俗，甘泉遗仪，南宫故事，画地成图，抵掌可述；岂直鼮鼠有必对之辩，竹书无落简之谬，访对不休，质疑斯在。 
现代文：对于先世贤人的言行，人物的雅俗，甘泉宫中实施的礼仪，南宫中发生的政事，都很熟悉，到了在地上刻画便能成圃，指着手掌便能一一陈述的程度。岂止是能辩解像鼹鼠那样的疑难问题，使竹书没有记载的错误，而且不断地回答皇帝的咨询，有疑难问题就向他请教。 
English: He was very familiar with the words and deeds of the sages of the past, the elegant customs of the characters, the etiquette implemented in the Ganquan Palace, and the political events that occurred in the South Palace, to the extent that he could describe them on the ground and explain them one by one with the palm of his hand. Not only was he able to solve difficult questions like the mole, and make mistakes that were not recorded in the bamboo book, but he also constantly answered the emperor's inquiries and asked him for advice if there were difficult questions.

古文：除尚书仪曹郎，迁治书侍御史，出为钱唐令。
现代文：授尚书仪曹郎，迁任治书侍御史，出任钱唐令。
English: He was awarded the title of Cao Rong (曹郎) of Shuxi (書儀) and transferred to the post of Jishi (治書侍) of Guishi (御史) and served as Qian Tangling (錢唐令).

古文：初，僧孺与乐安任昉遇竟陵王西邸，以文学友会，及是将之县，昉赠诗，其略曰： 惟子见知，惟余知子。
现代文：当初，僧噩与碧!室人任堕相遇在童陆王的酉塑，以文学友会，现在要去垄卢任职，任堕赠诗给他，其略曰： 您受到恩遇，我深深地了解您。
English: At first, the evil monk met Ren Po, the wife of Bi, at the sculpture of King Tonglu, with the Literature Friends Association. Now he is going to work in Ren Lu. Ren Po gave him a poem, which is an abbreviation of: You are favored, I deeply understand you.

古文：观行视言，要终犹始。
现代文：观枧到您的品行言论，始终如一。
English: Always be consistent in what you say and do.

古文：敬之重之，如兰如芷。
现代文：敬佩您尊重您，您像兰草像白芷。
English: Admire you respect you, you are like a bluegrass like egrets.

古文：形应影随，曩行今止。
现代文：形体舆影子互相跟随，过去相行今日分离。
English: Shapes and shadows follow each other, past and present separate.

古文：百行之首，立人斯著。
现代文：众多品行之首，立身最为显著。
English: It is the first of many actions, and the most significant.

古文：子之有之，谁毁谁誉。
现代文：这些您都具有，谁能毁誉您。
English: All these things you have, and who is he that will harm you?

古文：修名既立，老至何遽。
现代文：美名已树立，年老又何妨。
English: A good name has been established, but old age is nothing to fear.

古文：谁其执鞭，吾为子御。
现代文：谁为您执鞭，我为您御车。
English: Whoever holds the whip for you, I will drive the car for you.

古文：刘《略》班《艺》，虞《志》荀《录》，伊昔有怀，交相欣勖。
现代文：刘歆的《七略》，班玺的《艺文志》，卢翅的《周说》，董坦的《漠记》，过去您有所识，我们互相欣赏勉励。
English: Liu Ye's "Seven Sketches," Ban Ye's "Art and Literature," Lu Wing's "Zhou Dynasty," Dong Tan's "Description of the Desert," you have knowledge in the past, we appreciate and encourage each other.

古文：下帷无倦，升高有属。
现代文：在家苦读书，作官有撰述。
English: He studied hard at home and wrote a lot of essays.

古文：嘉尔晨灯，惜余夜烛。 
现代文：称赞您的晨灯，珍惜我的夜烛。 
English: Applaud your morning light, cherish my evening candle.

古文：其为士友推重如此。
现代文：他被友人推重就像这样。
English: He was pushed by a friend just like this.

古文：天监初，除临川王后军记室参军，待诏文德省。
现代文：天监初年，授临川王后军记室参军，待诏文德省。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Supervision, he was awarded the Military Record Office of the Queen of Linchuan and joined the army.

古文：寻出为南海太守。
现代文：不久出任南海太守。
English: He soon became the governor of Nankai Province.

古文：郡常有高凉生口及海舶每岁数至，外国贾人以通货易。旧时州郡以半价就市，又买而即卖，其利数倍，历政以为常。
现代文：郡裹常有被贩卖的高速人及海船每岁数至，外国商人来通贸易，过去州郡以很低的价钱在市场贩卖，又买又卖，从中获取敷倍的利益，历来官员都这样习以为常。
English: There are often trafficked high-speed people and seagoing vessels in the county, and foreign merchants come to trade. In the past, the state and county sold at a very low price in the market, bought and sold, and obtained double profits from it. Officials have always been accustomed to this.

古文：僧孺乃叹曰： 昔人为蜀部长史，终身无蜀物，吾欲遗子孙者，不在越装。 
现代文：僧彊于是感叹说： 昔人作蜀部长史，终身不从蜀地掠取财物，我想要留给子孙的，不在越地置办行装。 
English: So, the monk lamented, "In the past, when people made the history of Shu, they never plundered property from Shu. What I want to leave to my children and grandchildren, I don't want to do it in Yue.

古文：并无所取。
现代文：卢涂的财物一无所取。
English: Nothing was taken from Lu Tu's belongings.

古文：视事期月，有诏征还，郡民道俗六百人诣阙请留，不许。
现代文：任职一月，诏令征他回京师，郡襄百姓道俗六百人到朝廷请求留任他，朝廷不许。
English: In January of his term of office, the imperial edict ordered him to return to Beijing. Six hundred people from Xiang County went to the imperial court to request that he remain in office, but the court did not allow it.

古文：既至，拜中书郎、领著作，复直文德省，撰《中表簿》及《起居注》。
现代文：回到朝廷，授中书郎、领着作，再次在塞坛宣当值，编撰《中表簿》及起居注》。
English: Returning to the imperial court, he was awarded the title of "second-rank scholar" and "leading writer," and was once again on duty at the Temple of Heaven, compiling the "Middle Table Book" and the "Resident's Note."

古文：迁尚书左丞，领著作如故。
现代文：迁任尚书左丞，领著作如旧。
English: He was transferred to the post of Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.

古文：俄除游击将军，兼御史中丞。
现代文：不久授游击将军，兼御史中丞。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of guerrilla general, and also to the rank of goshi chujo.

古文：僧孺幼贫，其母鬻纱布以自业，尝携僧孺至市，道遇中丞卤簿，驱迫沟中。
现代文：僧孺幼年家贫，母亲以卖纱布维持生活，曾带僧孺到市上去，路上遇到中丞出行前导的仪仗骑从，把他们驱迫到沟中。
English: His family was poor when he was young, and his mother made a living by selling gauze. Once, she took him to the city. On the way, they encountered the ceremonial cavalry of the junior high school student's tour guide, who drove them into a ditch.

古文：及是拜日，引驺清道，悲感不自胜。
现代文：到了自己拜授中丞的造天，引鹑在前面清道，悲痛伤感不能控制。
English: When it comes to the creation of the sky that he teaches junior high school students, he leads them to clear the way in front of them, and the grief and sadness cannot be controlled.

古文：寻以公事降为云骑将军，兼职如故，顷之即真。
现代文：后来因公事降任云骑将军，兼职照旧，不久兼职改为实任。
English: Later, due to his official duties, he was demoted to the position of General Yunjie, working part-time as before, and soon his part-time position was changed to a full-time position.

古文：是时高祖制《春景明志诗》五百字，敕在朝之人沈约已下同作，高祖以僧孺诗为工。
现代文：遣时高祖写了《春景明志诗》五百字，让在朝官员沈约以下都和韵同作，产担认为仅噩作的诗最精巧。
English: Emperor Gaozhu wrote "Spring View Mingzhi Poem" with 500 characters, and had all officials of the dynasty, including Shen Yu, write the same poem with the same rhyme. The procurator thought that the poem with only bad words was the most exquisite.

古文：迁少府卿，出监吴郡。
现代文：迁任少府卿，出监呈盛。
English: He was transferred to the position of Shofu-kyo, and his release from prison was a success.

古文：还除尚书吏部郎，参大选，请谒不行。
现代文：回朝后授尚书吏部郎，参与官员的考察铨选，想到他遣裹走门路的人都不能如愿。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was awarded the title of Shuliriburo, and participated in the inspection and selection of officials. Those who thought of him being sent away could not get their wish.

古文：出为仁威南康王长史，行府、州、国事。
现代文：出任仁威南康王长史，行府、州、藩国事。
English: He assumed the post of Jinwei Nankang Wangchangshi, and was in charge of the affairs of the prefecture, prefecture, and domain.

古文：王典签汤道愍昵于王，用事府内，僧孺每裁抑之，道愍遂谤讼僧孺，逮诣南司。
现代文：王典签荡道壁被王亲昵，在王府专横，僧孺经常裁抑他，道愍于是谤讼僧孺，将他逮捕送到御史台。
English: He was despised by the king, and he was a tyrant in the king's palace. The monks often repressed him, and he was arrested and sent to the imperial court for slander.

古文：奉笺辞府曰： 下官不能避溺山隅，而正冠李下，既贻疵辱，方致徽绳，解箓收簪，且归初服。
现代文：僧孺在辞别南康王的信札中说： 我不能躲避沉溺在山隅，反而在李树下正冠，既留下疵辱，以致被囚禁，交出簿籍收去冠簪，又穿上未入仕时的衣服。
English: In his farewell letter to King Nankang, the monk said: "I cannot avoid indulging in the mountains, but instead I crown myself under the plum tree, leaving behind insults, resulting in imprisonment, handing over the books to collect the crowns, and wearing clothes that were not finished.

古文：窃以董生伟器，止相骄王；贾子上才，爰傅卑土。
现代文：我私下认为董仲舒有担负重任的才能，但衹辅佐了骄王；买谊具有上才，却辅佐卑下的诸侯王。
English: I privately believe that Dong Zhongshu has the talent to shoulder heavy responsibilities, but Zou assisted the arrogant king; Buyai has superior talent, but assists the lowly prince.

古文：下官生年有值，谬仰清尘，假翼西雍，窃步东阁，多惭袨服，取乱长裾，高榻相望，直居坐右，长阶如画，独在僚端。
现代文：我平生碰上好机会，能追随在贤人后面，在天子的太学中开始走上仕途，也曾作为宰相的座上客受到接待，很惭愧穿上盛服，长袖交错，在众多高高的坐榻边，我径直居坐右边尊位，官员们整齐的队列如画，我独排在同僚的最前面。
English: Throughout my life, I have had the good fortune to follow in the footsteps of sages, to begin my career at the Imperial Academy, and to be received as a guest of the Prime Minister. I am ashamed to put on a grand robe, with long sleeves interlaced. On many high couches, I sit directly on the right side of the seat, the officials are neatly lined up, and I am the only one in front of my colleagues.

古文：借其从容之词，假以宽和之色，恩礼远过申、白，荣望多厕应、徐。
现代文：您以镇静沉着的言词，宽厚温和的神色对待我，我得到的恩礼远远超过申不害、白起，荣誉及声望可置于应劭、徐谬之列。
English: You have treated me with calm and composed words, and a generous and gentle countenance. I have received far more graces than I deserve. Honor and reputation can be placed in the category of deserving and undeserving.

古文：厚德难逢，小人易说。
现代文：这样厚重的恩德难以遇到，而小人却有不同的说法。
English: Such a heavy blessing is hard to come by, but villains have a different story to tell.

古文：方谓离肠陨首，不足以报一言；露胆披诚，何能以酬屡顾。
现代文：我想即使肝脑涂地，不足以报答您的一言；披露肝胆竭尽忠诚，何能酬谢您多次的照顾。
English: I don't think I can thank you enough for your kind words, even if I'm completely heartbroken; I can't thank you enough for your many kindnesses, even if I'm completely loyal.

古文：宁谓罻罗裁举，微禽先落；阊阖始吹，细草仍坠。
现代文：竟是捕纲才举，小鸟就被捕获；西风始吹，细草就坠落。
English: It is only when the net is raised that the small birds are caught; when the west wind blows, the grass falls.

古文：一辞九畹，方去五云。
现代文：一辞种兰的地方，离开皇帝的宫殿。
English: A place to grow orchids, away from the emperor's palace.

古文：纵天网是漏，圣恩可恃，亦复孰寄心骸，何施眉目。
现代文：纵令国家的法律宽大，圣恩可依恃，又到哪裹去寄托我的心身，有何面目去见人呢?
English: Even if the laws of the country are lenient and grace can be embraced, where can I wrap my heart and body, and what kind of face should I show to others?

古文：方当横潭乱海，就鱼鳖而为群；披榛扪树，从虺蛇而相伍。
现代文：真应去沉潭蹈海，与鱼鳖合群；砍伐攀缘丛杂的树木，同毒蛇为伍。
English: Should really go to sink into the sea, with the fish swarming; felling climbing clumps of trees, with the vipers.

古文：岂复仰听金声，式瞻玉色。
现代文：哪能再去仰听您美好的声音，瞻望您美好的容貌。
English: How can I listen to your beautiful voice and look at your beautiful face?

古文：顾步高轩，悲如霰委；踟蹰下席，泪若绠縻。 
现代文：远视您高敞的马车，心中悲痛如雪珠落地；徘徊在我卑下的坐席前，泪如绳索。 
English: Looking far and wide at your lofty carriage, my heart is saddened like snowdrops falling to the ground; wandering in front of my humble seat, my tears are like ropes.

古文：僧孺坐免官，久之不调。
现代文：僧孺获罪被罢官，很久没有升调。
English: After being convicted of a crime, he was dismissed from his post and was not promoted for a long time.

古文：友人庐江何炯犹为王府记室，乃致书于炯，以见其意。
现代文：朋友庐江人何炯仍然为王府记室，于是写信给何炯，以表达己意。
English: A friend from the Li River, He Qian, was still the registrar of the royal court, so he wrote to He Qian to express his opinion.

古文：曰：
现代文：信中说：
English: The inscription reads:

古文：近别之后，将隔暄寒，思子为劳，未能忘弭。
现代文：最近分别后，差不多不通问候，想念您而忧伤，使我真是难忘。
English: Recently, after we separated, I almost didn't say hello to you, and I was sad because I missed you, which made me really unforgettable.

古文：昔李叟入秦，梁生适越，犹怀怅恨，且或吟谣；况歧路之日，将离严网，辞无可怜，罪有不测。
现代文：昔日李叟入秦国，梁竦徙越地，尚怀怅恨，且或吟谣；何况今日走到歧路，将要遭遇严厉的法纲，没有值得怜悯的讼辞，而罪罚不可意料。
English: In the past, Li Xun entered Qin, Liang Xun migrated across the country, still harboring hatred, and perhaps chanting rumors; moreover, if you go astray today, you will encounter a strict legal framework, there is no argument worthy of pity, and the punishment is unpredictable.

古文：盖画地刻木，昔人所恶，丛棘既累，于何可闻，所以握手恋恋，离别珍重。
现代文：入狱受讯，过去的人都很厌恶，我被捆绑拘禁，又从哪裹听闻您的消息，所以握手恋恋，离别互道珍重。
English: People in the past were disgusted when I was imprisoned and interrogated, I was tied up and detained, and from where I heard your news, so I shook hands and fell in love, and parting was treasured.

古文：弟爱同邹季，淫淫承睫，吾犹复抗手分背，羞学妇人。
现代文：您对我的友爱如同邹长倩对公孙弘，我眼裹含着滚动的泪水，但还是举手异道而行，羞于像妇人那样啼哭。
English: Your love for me is like the love of a mother for her son. My eyes are filled with rolling tears, but I still raise my hand and walk a different path, ashamed to cry like a woman.

古文：素钟肇节，金飚戒序，起居无恙，动静履宜。
现代文：您向来看重节候，秋风已经来临，起居无恙，行动适宜吧。
English: From your perspective, it's a new season, the autumn wind has arrived, there's nothing to worry about, it's a good time to act.

古文：子云笔札，元瑜书记，信用既然，可乐为甚。
现代文：您有扬雄书信、阮玛记事那样的文才，被信用已经如此，可以极为欢乐。
English: You have the literary talent of Yang Xiong's letters and Ruan Ma's diaries, and you have been trusted, so you can be extremely happy.

古文：且使目明，能祛首疾。
现代文：且使目明，又能除去因思念而引起的头痛。
English: It also clears the eyes and can remove the headache caused by thinking.

古文：甚善甚善。
现代文：甚善甚善。
English: Very good, very good.

古文：吾无昔人之才而有其病，癫眩屡动，消渴频增。
现代文：我没有过去那些贤人的才能却有他们的疾病，神经错乱两眼昏花的情形屡次出现，消渴病更加严重。
English: I don't have the talents of those sages in the past, but I do have their diseases. I've had repeated episodes of nervous disorders and blurred vision, and my thirst-quenching disease is even more severe.

古文：委化任期，故不复呼医饮药。但恨一旦离大辱，蹈明科，去皎皎而非自污，抱郁结而无谁告。丁年蓄积，与此销亡，徒窃高价厚名，横叨公器人爵，智能无所报，筋力未之酬，所以悲至抚膺，泣尽而继之以血。
现代文：顺从自然的变化听凭死期到来，因此不再看病吃药，祇是遗憾这次突然遭受极大耻辱，干犯明文规定的法令条规，离开了光明洁净而自己不能洗去污秽，怀有烦冤而没有人可告诉，自青壮年至今蓄积的成就，舆此一起消亡，白白地窃取显贵的身份舆崇高的声誉，意外地得到官职和爵位，今后我的智慧才能没有可以报效的地方，精神气力没有应用的机会，想起这些我悲痛填膺，眼泪流尽而继之以血。
English: Obeying the changes of nature, I accepted the fact that my time to die had come, so I no longer saw a doctor or took medicine. I only regret that this time I suddenly suffered great humiliation, violated the laws and regulations clearly stipulated, left the bright and clean without being able to wash away the filth, harbored a grudge that no one could tell me about, the achievements accumulated from my youth to the present, all died together, stole my noble status and lofty reputation in vain, and unexpectedly received a government post and a knighthood. In the future, there is no place where my wisdom and talent can be rewarded, and there is no opportunity to apply my spiritual strength. When I think

古文：顾惟不肖，文质无所底，盖困于衣食，迫于饥寒，依隐易农，所志不过钟庾。
现代文：衹是因为不才，文采舆禀性都很平庸，衣食困乏，迫于饥寒，依违于政事和隐居之间改而从事农耕，所希望的不过是多得谷物。
English: It is because of incompetence, mediocre literary talent, poor food and clothing, forced by hunger and cold, and contrary to government affairs and seclusion, they are engaged in farming. All they want is to get more grain.

古文：久为尺板斗食之吏，以从皁衣黑绶之役，非有奇才绝学，雄略高谟，吐一言可以匡俗振民，动一议可以固邦兴国。
现代文：久为俸禄少地位低的小官，从事下级僚吏的差使，没有奇特的才能超群的学问，雄略高谋，并非说一句话可以匡俗振民，提一建议可以固邦兴国。
English: For a long time, he was a minor official with a small salary and low status, engaged in the dispatch of lower-level officials, had no special talent, superior knowledge, and a strong strategy. It is not that saying a word can strengthen the people, but that making a suggestion can strengthen the country.

古文：全璧归赵，飞矢救燕，偃息籓魏，甘卧安郢，脑日逐，髓月支，拥十万而横行，提五千而深入，将能执圭裂壤，功勒景钟，锦绣为衣，硃丹被毂，斯大丈夫之志，非吾曹之所能及已。
现代文：把和氏璧完整带回趟国，用匕首刺秦王救燕国，隐居魏国使魏不被秦国侵害，甘于立秦廷请兵使楚厘坚壑安全，使包趣人脑碎，使旦直入骨髓流出，拥有十万大军纵横驰骋所向无阻，带领五千士兵深入列国，他们将能执圭裂土封侯，功劳刻在景公钟上，锦绣做衣，朱红涂车，这是大丈夫的志向，不是我等之辈所能做到的。
English: To bring back the complete "Washi Bi" to the country, to stab the "Qin Wang" with a dagger to save the "Yan Country," to live in seclusion in the "Wei Country" so that the "Wei" will not be infringed by the "Qin Country," to be willing to establish the "Qin Court" to invite soldiers to make the "Chuli" strong and safe, to make the "Package of Interesting People" brain-breaking, to make the "Dang" flow directly into the bone marrow, to have a hundred thousand army galloping across the country unimpeded, to lead five thousand soldiers deep into the countries, they will be

古文：直以章句小才，虫篆末艺，含吐缃缥之上，翩跹樽俎之侧，委曲同之针缕，繁碎譬之米盐，孰致显荣，何能至到。
现代文：仅有章句小才，虫篆小技，徜徉在书卷之间，流连在杯酒之中，像妇人那样屈身折节，如同米盐那样烦碎，哪裹能得到显贵荣华。
English: Only a small talent, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill, a small skill

古文：加性疏涩，拙于进取，未尝去来许、史，遨游梁、窦，俯首胁肩，先意承旨。是以三叶靡遘，不与运并，十年未徙，孰非能薄。
现代文：加上我性格疏散说话迟钝，拙于进取，不曾与许劭、皇迩一类人物交往，在陋、宣垒一类人中遨游，低首缩肩，驯服听命，揣摩上官的意志，奉承恭顺，以博取他们的欢心，所以三代人都没有交上好运，十年没有徙移，哪能说不是才能低微。
English: In addition, I have the character of being evasive, slow to speak, unskilled in forging ahead, have never interacted with figures such as Xu Rong and Wang Yao, wandered among people of low class and Xuan Rong, shrugged my shoulders, obediently obeyed orders, guessed the will of superiors, flattered and flattered, and won their favor. Therefore, three generations have not been lucky, and there has been no migration for ten years. Which can be said to be low talent.

古文：及除旧布新，清晷方旦，抱乐衔图，讼讴有主，而犹限一吏于岑石，隔千里于泉亭，不得奉板中涓，预衣裳之会，提戈后劲，厕龙豹之谋。
现代文：等到除旧布新，旭日东升，大家欢天喜地，歌颂国家有了新主，而我却还在一个小官吏的职位上困顿不前，阻隔在千里之外，不能手持朝笏作皇帝的亲近侍从官，参与以礼相交的盟会，或者手执兵器，厕身在行伍之中。
English: By the time the old cloth was replaced with a new one and the sun rose in the east, everyone was rejoicing and singing the praises of the country having a new master, but I was still stuck in the position of a minor official, separated by thousands of miles, unable to hold the hajj, serve as the emperor's close attendant, participate in the alliance meeting of ritual intercourse, or hold weapons, and go to the toilet in the army.

古文：及其投劾归来，恩均旧隶，升文石，登玉陛，一见而降颜色，再睹而接话言，非藉左右之容，无劳群公之助。
现代文：等到我引罪自责辞官归来，皇帝的恩泽均沾到旧时的小官员，我登上皇宫的殿阶，皇帝一见我就给好脸色，再见面又与我亲切交谈，我得到的荣宠不是藉助皇帝左右侍从的容纳，也不用王公大臣帮助。
English: By the time I returned from my self-condemnation and resignation, the emperor's favor had been extended to all the minor officials of the old days. I ascended the steps of the imperial palace, and the emperor was pleased to see me. He met me again and had a cordial conversation with me. I did not receive the honor of being accommodated by the emperor's right and left attendants, nor did I need the prince's minister's help.

古文：又非同席共研之夙逢，笥饵卮酒之早识，一旦陪武帐，仰文陛，备聃、佚之柱下，充严、硃之席上，入班九棘，出专千里，据操撮之雄官，参人伦之显职，虽古之爵人不次，取士无名，未有蹑影追风，奔骤之若此者也。
现代文：也不是同席共砚的旧交，或酒席宴会上的旧识。一旦在武帐文阶间陪侍皇帝，配备老聃、史佚般的柱下史，充当严助、朱博般的席上宾客，入则居于朝廷九卿之列，出则独断千里地方的政务，占据了朝廷的要职，虽然古代也有不按寻常次序封人爵位，选拔人才不考虑一定的名分，还没有像我这样好比骑着追风马追日影那样升迁得如此快速的。
English: It is not the old friends who sit together at the same table, or the old knowledge at the banquet. Once you accompany the emperor in the military account, equipped with a pillar of history like Lao Zi and Shi Zi, act as a guest at the table like Yan Sui and Zhu Bo, enter the ranks of the nine nobles of the imperial court, and dictate the political affairs of thousands of miles away, occupying the important position of the imperial court. Although there were knighthoods in an unusual order in ancient times, the selection of talents did not consider a certain rank, and there has not been such a rapid promotion as I did, like riding a horse chasing the wind and chasing the sun.

古文：盖基薄墙高，途遥力踬，倾蹶必然，颠匐可俟。
现代文：地基浅薄墙体高危，路途遥远力量困顿，倾覆颠仆是必然的，坠落倒地是预料中的事情。
English: The foundation is shallow, the wall is high risk, the road is far away, the power is difficult, the overturning is inevitable, and the falling down is an expected thing.

古文：竟以福过灾生，人指鬼瞰，将均宥器，有验倾卮，是以不能早从曲影，遂乃取疑邪径。
现代文：最终因为福过多而灾生，人指鬼望，想要及时调节宥坐之器的水位，使之不要太遇或不及，以验证鼓器防止倾覆，是以不能早从曲影，终竞走上被怀疑的小路。
English: In the end, because of too much blessing and disaster, people point to the ghost, want to timely adjust the water level of the drum, so that it does not meet or fall short, to verify the drum to prevent overturning, so that it can not be early from the shadow, and finally go to the suspected path.

古文：故司隶懔懔，思得应弦，譬县厨之兽，如离缴之鸟，将充庖鼎，以饵鹰鹯。
现代文：因此司隶官严正地对待我，想将我当成射箭的靶子，我好比悬挂在厨房裹的走兽，又像被箭射中的鸟，将放置在庖鼎，或用来喂饱鹰鹊。
English: Therefore, the magistrate treated me severely and wanted to use me as a target for archery, I was like a beast hanging in the kitchen, and like a bird shot by an arrow, I would be placed in a vise, or used to feed eagles.

古文：虽事异钻皮，文非刺骨，犹复因兹舌杪，成此笔端，上可以投畀北方，次可以论输左校，变为丹赭，充彼舂薪。
现代文：虽然事情和那种钻皮出羽极意被夸饰的现象不同，文辞也并不深刻，我还是将这些言辞，写成这样的文章，我的罪最重的处罚是被投放到极远的北方。次一等可能送左校劳作，成了穿红衣服的罪人，充当捣谷打柴的仆隶。
English: Although the matter is different from the phenomenon that is exaggerated, and the words are not profound, I still write these words into such an article. The heaviest punishment for my crime is to be sent to the far north. The second class may be sent to the left school to work, and become a sinner in red clothes, and serve as a servant to beat the grain and collect firewood.

古文：幸圣主留善贷之德，纡好生之施，解网祝禽，下车泣罪，愍兹■诟，怜其觳觫，加肉朽胔，布叶枯株，辍薪止火，得不销烂。所谓还魂斗极，追气泰山，止复除名为民，幅巾家巷，此五十年之后，人君之赐焉。
现代文：幸亏圣主有宽免罪人的德行，实施爱惜生灵不事杀戮的恩惠，打开罗网给予生路，像大禹哀怜罪人而哭泣那样，哀愍我缺乏志气节操，可怜我的恐惧，使朽骨生出新肉，枯枝长出绿叶，辍薪止火，使我得以不销烂，好像从北极星那边返回灵魂，从泰山那裹追回气息，衹将我削职为民，悠闲地住在家乡的巷子裹，从此到五十年以后，都是君主所赐予的。
English: Fortunately, the Holy Lord had the virtue of forgiving and pardoning sinners, implementing the grace of caring for the living and not killing, opening the net to give a way of life, like the great Yu pitying sinners and crying, lamenting my lack of self-discipline, pitying my fear, making the dead bones grow new flesh, the dead branches grow green leaves, and stopping the fire, so that I could not be destroyed, as if returning the soul from the North Star, recovering the breath from Mount Tai, and cutting me off as a citizen and living leisurely in the alley of my hometown. From then to fifty years later, it was all given by the monarch.

古文：木石感阴阳，犬马识厚薄，员首方足，孰不戴天？
现代文：木石能感到天地阴阳的转变，犬马能识别对它的厚薄，圆首方足的百姓，谁不立于天地之间?
English: Wood and stone can feel the transformation of the yin and yang of heaven and earth, dogs and horses can recognize the thick and thin, round-headed and square-footed people, who do not stand between heaven and earth?

古文：而窃自有悲者，盖士无贤不肖，在朝见嫉；女无美恶，入宫见妒。
现代文：而私下有悲伤，是因为士无论贤或不肖，在朝被人妒嫉；女人不论美或丑，入宫受人嫉妒。
English: Privately, however, there is sadness, because whether a man is wise or not, he is envied in the morning; whether a woman is beautiful or ugly, she is envied when she enters the palace.

古文：家贫，无苞苴可以事朋类，恶其乡原，耻彼戚施，何以从人，何以徇物？
现代文：我家裹贫寒，没有礼物可以馈赠给友朋，厌恶伪善者，耻于那些人的谄谀献媚，为什么服从别人，为什么顺随时俗?
English: My family is poor, we have no gifts to give to our friends, we detest hypocrites, we are ashamed of their flattery, why do we obey others, why do we conform to the world?

古文：外无奔走之友，内乏强近之亲。是以构市之徒，随相媒糵。
现代文：外无为我奔走的朋友，内乏较为亲近的亲戚，所以挑拨离间的人，随相构陷诬害我。
English: I don't have any friends who are running for me, and I don't have any close relatives, so those who sow discord are framing and slandering me.

古文：及一朝捐弃，以快怨者之心，吁！可悲矣。
现代文：当一朝被罢黜，使怨恨我的人称心如意，唉，可悲啊!
English: Alas, woe to me, when I am deposed in one day, so that those who hate me may rejoice!

古文：盖先贵后贱，古富今贫，季伦所以发此哀音，雍门所以和其悲曲。
现代文：先显贵后卑贱，古富贵今贫穷，季伦所以发出此哀音，雍门人所以和应韩娥的悲曲。
English: First noble, then lowly, once rich, now poor. That is why Qilian uttered this lament, and why the people of Yongmen sang Han'e's sad song.

古文：又迫以严秋杀气，具物多悲，长夜展转，百忧俱至。
现代文：又受到严秋阴寒气势的逼迫，万物多悲伤，长夜辗转，百忧俱至。
English: They are also persecuted by the severe autumn gloom and cold momentum, everything is sad, the night is long and the worries are everywhere.

古文：况复霜销草色，风摇树影。
现代文：何况又是霜打草色，风摇树影。
English: Moreover, the frost is grass-colored, and the wind is shaking the shadows of the trees.

古文：寒虫夕叫，合轻重而同悲；秋叶晚伤，杂黄紫而俱坠。
现代文：寒虫夕叫，高低强弱合聚而同悲；秋叶晚伤，黄紫相杂而俱坠。
English: The chilblains howl in the evening, the high and the low, the strong and the weak come together in the same sorrow; the autumn leaves are late, and the yellow and purple are mixed together.

古文：蜘蛛络幕，熠耀争飞，故无车辙马声，何闻鸣鸡吠犬。
现代文：蜘蛛结网，萤火虫争飞，长久没有车辙马声，怎能听到鶸鸣犬吠。
English: Spiders spin webs, fireflies compete for flight, there is no sound of horse-drawn carriages for a long time, how can you hear the barking of hounds?

古文：俯眉事妻子，举手谢宾游。
现代文：低头侍奉妻子，举手谢绝宾客。
English: He bowed his head to serve his wife and raised his hand to thank the guests.

古文：方与飞走为邻，永用蓬蒿自没。
现代文：仅祇与飞禽走兽为邻，永把自己埋没在蓬蒿之间。
English: Only to be neighbors with the birds and beasts, never burying themselves between the hills.

古文：忾其长息，忽不觉生之为重。
现代文：感叹这长久的宁静，忽不觉生命的重要。
English: Lamenting this long period of tranquility, we suddenly realize the importance of life.

古文：素无一廛之田，而有数口之累。
现代文：平素无一廛土地，而有数口人的连累。
English: Normally, there is not a single plot of land, but several people are involved.

古文：岂曰匏而不食，方当长为佣保，糊口寄身，溘死沟渠，以实蝼蚁。悲夫！
现代文：难道说不为时用，便应长做雇工，糊口寄身，忽然死在沟渠裹，以喂蝼蚁，可悲呀!
English: Is it to be said that if it is not of immediate use, one should grow up to be a hired hand, work for a living, and suddenly die, wrapped in a ditch, to feed the ants, how sad!

古文：岂复得与二三士友，抱接膝之欢，履足差肩，摛绮縠之清文，谈希微之道德。
现代文：哪能再舆二三士友，抱有促膝相谈的欢乐，履足差肩，写出思绪起伏多彩的清丽文章，谈论虚无玄妙的道德。
English: How can two or three friends, with the joy of stimulating conversation, walk side by side, write colorful and beautiful articles, and talk about the mysterious morality of nothingness.

古文：唯吴冯之遇夏馥，范彧之值孔嵩，愍其留赁，怜此行乞耳。
现代文：衹有吴冯遇到夏馥，范式逢着孔嵩，怜悯他受雇当街卒，同情他行乞的事。
English: When Wu Feng met Xia Yao, the paradigm met Kong Song, pitied him for being employed as a street peddler, and sympathized with him for begging.

古文：傥不以垢累，时存寸札，则虽先犬马，犹松乔焉。
现代文：倘若不认为我的耻辱会连累您，而时加顾念赐以简短的书信，则虽先前身患疾病，仍能像赤松子、王子乔那样长寿。
English: If you do not think that my shame will burden you, and if you are careful to give a short letter, you can still live as long as Red Pine and Prince Joe, despite previous illness.

古文：去矣何生，高树芳烈。
现代文：去矣何生，高树了流芳的功绩。
English: No matter how many lifetimes have passed, Gaoshu has achieved the merits of Liu Fang.

古文：裁书代面，笔泪俱下。
现代文：作此书信以代面会，笔舆泪俱下。
English: I am writing this letter on your behalf with tears in my eyes.

古文：久之，起为安西安成王参军，累迁镇右始兴王中记室，北中郎南康王谘议参军，入直西省，知撰谱事。
现代文：很久以后，被起用任安西安成王参军，累经升迁任镇右堕县王中记室，北中郎宜尘王谘议参军，入西省当值，掌管撰写谱表的事情。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as the Anxi Ancheng Wang to join the army, and after promotion and transfer, he was appointed as the town of the right-falling county Wang Zhongji office, and the North Zhong Lang advised the King to join the army, and entered the West Province on duty, in charge of writing the score.

古文：普通三年，卒，时年五十八。
现代文：普通三年去世，时年五十八岁。
English: He died three years later, at the age of 58.

古文：僧孺好坟籍，聚书至万余卷，率多异本，与沈约、任昉家书相埒。
现代文：僧孺喜好古代典籍，聚书多至万余卷，大多是珍本，与沈约、任防家藏书相等。
English: Monks and nuns are fond of ancient classics. They have collected more than 10,000 volumes, mostly rare books, which is equal to the collections of Shen Yao and Ren Bao.

古文：少笃志精力，于书无所不睹。
现代文：年轻时笃志精力，于书无所不读。
English: When he was young, he was full of energy and read everything.

古文：其文丽逸，多用新事，人所未见者，世重其富。
现代文：文章写得华丽飘逸，多记载新鲜事，是别人所未见过的，世人看重他知识丰富。
English: His articles are gorgeously written, often documenting new things that others have never seen before, and the world values his wealth of knowledge.

古文：僧孺集《十八州谱》七百一十卷，《百家谱集》十五卷，《东南谱集抄》十卷，文集三十卷，《两台弹事》不入集内为五卷，及《东宫新记》，并行于世。
现代文：僧孺集《十八州谱》七百一十卷，《百家谱集》十五卷，《东南谱集抄》十卷，文集三十卷，《两台弹事》不入集内为五卷，及《东宫新记》，并在世间流传。
English: Seven hundred and ten volumes of "Eighteen State Genealogies," fifteen volumes of "Hundred Family Genealogies," ten volumes of "Southeast Genealogies," thirty volumes of anthologies, five volumes of "Two Dynasties" not included in the anthology, and "Eastern Palace Chronicles" have been passed down to the world.

古文：张率，字士简，吴郡吴人。
现代文：张率字士简，是吴郡吴人。
English: Zhang Ruzhi, also known as Jane, is a native of Wu County, Wuxi.

古文：祖永，宋右光禄大夫。
现代文：祖父张永，在宋朝任右光禄大夫。
English: His grandfather, Zhang Yong, served as Uguanglu's doctor during the Song Dynasty.

古文：父瑰，齐世显贵，归老乡邑，天监初，授右光禄，加给事中。
现代文：父亲张瓖，在齐朝地位颢贵，归家乡养老，天监初年，授任右光禄，加给事中。
English: Zhang Ye's father, who held a high position in the Qi Dynasty, returned to his hometown to retire, and in the first year of Tianjing, he was awarded Uguanglu and promoted to the highest rank.

古文：率年十二，能属文，常日限为诗一篇，稍进作赋颂，至年十六，向二千许首。
现代文：张率十二岁时，就能写文章，经常是每日限定写诗一首，稍有长进就写赋颂，到十六岁，大约写有二千多首。
English: At the age of twelve, Zhang Rui was able to write articles, often limited to writing one poem a day. If he grew a little, he would write a Fu Song. By the age of sixteen, he had written more than two thousand poems.

古文：齐始安王萧遥光为扬州，召迎主簿，不就。
现代文：齐朝始安王萧遥光任扬州刺史，召迎他任主簿，他没有就任。
English: Xiao Yaoguang, the King of An at the beginning of the Qi Dynasty, was appointed as Yangzhou chief historian. He was summoned to serve as chief bookkeeper, but he did not take office.

古文：起家著作佐郎。
现代文：起家任著作佐郎。
English: The founder of the family was the writer Saro.

古文：建武三年，举秀才，除太子舍人。
现代文：建武三年，举秀才，授任太子舍人。
English: In the third year of Jianwu's reign, he promoted outstanding talents and appointed Prince Xuanren.

古文：与同郡陆倕幼相友狎，常同载诣左卫将军沈约，适值任昉在焉，约乃谓昉曰： 此二子后进才秀，皆南金也，卿可与定交。 
现代文：舆同郡人陆棰年幼时就很亲近友好，经常一同乘车去左卫将军沈约家，有一次恰巧遇到任防在座，沈约便对任防说： 这两人是后辈中的才秀，都是南方杰出人才，您可与他们结为朋友。 
English: When Lu Yao, a resident of Meitong County, was young, they were very close and friendly. They often rode together to the home of the Left Guard General Shen You. Once, they happened to meet Ren Bao in the audience. Shen You said to Ren Bao, "These two are the most talented people in the younger generation. They are outstanding talents in the south. You can make friends with them."

古文：由此与昉友善。
现代文：由此舆任嘘很友善。
English: So far, the response has been very positive.

古文：迁尚书殿中郎。
现代文：张率迁任尚书殿中郎。
English: Zhang Rui was transferred to the post of Vice-Minister of the Imperial Household.

古文：出为西中郎南康王功曹史，以疾不就。
现代文：出任西中郎南塞王功曹史，因疾未就任。
English: Nansai Wang Gong Cao Shi, who was appointed West Middle Manager, did not take office due to illness.

古文：久之，除太子洗马。
现代文：久之，授任太子洗马。
English: After a long time, Prince Saima was appointed.

古文：高祖霸府建，引为相国主簿。
现代文：高祖建藩王府邸时，进用他作相国主簿。
English: When Gao Zu built the residence of the king of the domain, he used him as the main book of the country.

古文：天监初，临川王已下并置友、学。
现代文：天监初年，临川王以下均设置友、学官，任张率为塑眶友。
English: In the first year of the celestial supervisor, all the friends and academic officials from Linchuan Wang onward were set up, and the appointment rate was high.

古文：以率为鄱阳王友，迁司徒谢朏掾，直文德待诏省。敕使抄乙部书，又使撰妇人事二十余条，勒成百卷。使工书人琅邪王深、吴郡范怀约、褚洵等缮写，以给后宫。
现代文：迁任司徒谢脑掾，当值塞彊待韶省，下敕让他抄写乙部书籍，又让他撰写妇人事二十余条，写成百卷，派擅长书法的琅邪人王深、吴邓人茎堡钓、鲨迪等缮写，送给后宫妃嫔。
English: Xie Mengyao, who had been transferred to the position of the tutor, was on duty at the provincial capital of Xi'an. He was asked to copy the second part of the book, and he was also asked to write more than 20 articles on women's affairs, which were written into hundreds of volumes. He was assigned to write the evil Wang Sheng, the Wu Deng people, the stem castle fishing, and the shark fishing, who were good at calligraphy, and sent them to the harem princess.

古文：率又为《待诏赋》奏之，甚见称赏。手敕答曰： 省赋殊佳。
现代文：张率又写《待韶赋》奏上，极被高祖称赏，亲笔写敕书答道： 仔细阅读感到非常好。
English: Zhang Zizhi also wrote "Waiting for the Gift" and played it, which was highly praised by Gao Zu. He wrote the eulogy himself and replied, "I feel very good after reading it carefully."

古文：相如工而不敏，枚皋速而不工，卿可谓兼二子于金马矣。 
现代文：司马相如赋写得工整但不敏捷，枚皋写得敏捷但不工整，卿可以说在金马门待诏学士中，兼有二人长处。 
English: Sima Xiang is like Fu Rong, who writes neatly but is not agile, and Shei Yao, who writes quickly but is not neat. It can be said that he has two strengths in Jinma Gate.

古文：又侍宴赋诗，高祖乃别赐率诗曰： 东南有才子，故能服官政。
现代文：又在陪侍酒宴作诗时，高祖于是另赐张率诗说： 东南有才子，故能服官政。
English: In addition, when writing a poem to accompany the wine banquet, Gao Zu then gave Zhang Rui another poem, saying: Southeast has talent, so it can serve the government.

古文：余虽惭古昔，得人今为盛。 
现代文：我虽惭古昔，得人今为盛。 
English: Although I was a shy person in the past, I am a successful person now.

古文：率奉诏往返数首。
现代文：张率奉韶写诗回应数首。
English: Zhang Zizhi wrote poems in response to several poems.

古文：其年，迁秘书丞，引见玉衡殿。
现代文：遣年，迁任秘书丞，在玉衡殿受接见。
English: In the following year, he was transferred to the position of secretary-general and received an audience at Tamahira-den.

古文：高祖曰： 秘书丞天下清官，东南胄望未有为之者，今以相处，足为卿誉。 
现代文：高祖说： 秘书丞是天下清官，东南帝王贵族后代没有任此职的，现让卿处在这位子，足可以使卿有美誉。 
English: Gao Zu said: The secretary is a Qing official in the world, and the descendants of Southeast imperial nobles have not held this position. Now let the lord be in this position, so that the lord can have a good reputation.

古文：其恩遇如此。
现代文：他受到的恩遇就像这样。
English: This is how generous Gaozu was to him.

古文：四年三月，禊饮华光殿。
现代文：四年三月，在华光殿临水修楔聚宴。
English: In March of the fourth year, a wedge-making party was held in front of the water at the Hua Guang Palace.

古文：其日，河南国献舞马，诏率赋之，曰：
现代文：逭天，回卖厘贡献舞马，诏令旦胫为此事作赋，说：
English: On the day of the re-enactment of the horse dance, the emperor ordered Dang Xi to make a report on the matter, saying:

古文：臣闻 天用莫如龙，地用莫如马。 
现代文：臣闻 天用没有比过龙的，地用没有比过马的 。
English: There is nothing in heaven that is stronger than a dragon, and nothing on earth that is stronger than a horse.

古文：故《礼》称骊騵，《诗》诵骝骆。
现代文：所以《礼》称美马为骊騵，《诗经》颂扬马为骝骆。
English: Therefore, "Li" called the beautiful horse a dragonfly, and "Shijing" praised the horse as a camel.

古文：先景遗风之美，世所得闻；吐图腾光之异，有时而出。
现代文：能跑在日影之前的遣风骏马的美妙，是世间所能听到的；龙马衔圃出河光华四溢的奇异事，会在一定时机出现。
English: The wondrous beauty of the wind-driven horse that can run before the shadow of the sun is what the world can hear; the strange thing of the dragon horse's groom coming out of the shining river will appear at a certain time.

古文：洎我大梁，光有区夏，广运自中，员照无外，日入之所，浮琛委贽，风被之域，越险效珍，軨服乌号之骏，篸駼豢龙之名。
现代文：到我銮朝，广有诸夏，土地从中央伸延四方，统治天下无一例外，日落之地，风被之地的人们，越险献珍宝，将此作为见面礼，有车马良弓乌号的俊美，有驹騌豢龙的名声。
English: During my reign, there were many summers, the land stretched from the center to the four directions, ruling the world without exception. People in the land of the sunset and the land of the wind offered precious treasures as a welcome gift. There was the beauty of the horse-drawn chariot, the bow and arrow, and the famous dragon.

古文：而河南又献赤龙驹，有奇貌绝足，能拜善舞。
现代文：而河南又贡献赤龙驹，有奇貌和无以伦比的四足，能拜礼善跳舞。
English: And Henan also contributed the red dragon dragon, which has a marvelous appearance and unparalleled four legs, and can worship and dance well.

古文：天子异之，使臣作赋，曰：
现代文：天子诧异，使臣作赋，说：
English: Surprised, the emperor sent an envoy to the emperor and said:

古文：维梁受命四载，元符既臻，协律之事具举，胶庠之教必陈，檀舆之用已偃，玉辂之御方巡。
现代文：梁朝建国四年，大的祥瑞已经降临，协调吕律的事情全都兴办，学校的教诲必定敷布，兵车的用处已经消失，皇帝的玉辖将出发巡视。
English: In the fourth year of the founding of the Liang Dynasty, the great Xiang Rui has arrived, the coordination of Lu Lu has been fully established, the teachings of the school must be laid, the use of the chariot has disappeared, and the emperor's jade jurisdiction will set off on a tour.

古文：考帝文而率通，披皇图以大观。
现代文：考帝文而全部相通，披览河图而盛大壮观。
English: All of them are connected with each other through the examination of ancient texts, and they are grand and spectacular with the river view.

古文：庆惟道而必先，灵匪圣其谁赞。
现代文：奖赏以道德为首要，神灵不赞扬圣人赞扬谁。
English: Reward with morality as the first priority, the gods do not praise the saints praise who.

古文：见河龙之瑞唐，瞩天马之祯汉。
现代文：龙马衔图出河是唐尧的瑞兆，望到天马是漠代的吉祥。
English: The dragon and horse are auspicious signs of the Tang Dynasty, and the heavenly horse is the auspicious sign of the desert.

古文：既叶符而比德，且同条而共贯。
现代文：既符合祥瑞的征兆又合乎道德，而且事理相通脉络连贯。
English: It is both auspicious and ethical, and it is coherent.

古文：询国美于斯今，迈皇王于曩昔。
现代文：查考今天国家的美誉，超过在往昔的圣王。
English: Look at the reputation of the country today, surpassing that of the holy kings of yore.

古文：散大明以烛幽，扬义声而远斥。
现代文：月放射光芒照亮幽暗，播扬德义的名声而达到远方。
English: The radiant light of the moon illuminates the dark, and spreads the fame of virtue and reaches far and wide.

古文：固施之于不穷，谅无所乎朝夕。
现代文：坚持施惠没有穷尽，表示诚意无所乎朝夕。
English: Insist on giving benefits without exhausting, and express sincerity all morning and evening.

古文：并承流以请吏，咸向风而率职。
现代文：并顺势而请设官吏，都闻风仰慕而奉守职务。
English: And in line with the trend, officials were set up, all of whom were admired by the public and fulfilled their duties.

古文：纳奇贡于绝区，致龙媒于殊域。
现代文：从绝区交纳奇贡，由殊域送来骏马。
English: From the outlying areas, they were sent to Natchigon, and from the special areas, they were sent to Tsang Ma.

古文：伊况古而赤文，爰在兹而硃翼。
现代文：驰远古而有赤文，现在它有着红色的两翼。
English: In ancient times it was red, now it has red wings.

古文：既效德于炎运，亦表祥于尚色。
现代文：既在莲塑呈献了功德，也以崇尚的颜色表示祥瑞。
English: Both in the lotus sculpture presented the merit, but also with the advocating color to express the auspiciousness.

古文：资皎月而载生，祖河房而挺授。
现代文：凭藉皎洁的月光而诞生，祖授河龙而刚健挺拔。
English: By virtue of the bright moonlight, it was born, and the ancestors of the river dragon were strong and vigorous.

古文：种北唐之绝类，嗣西宛之鸿胄。
现代文：是北方唐尧的绝异种类，是西域左面的强健后代。
English: It is a unique species of the northern Tang Dynasty, and is a robust descendant of the western left-hand crane.

古文：禀妙足而逸伦，有殊姿而特茂。
现代文：禀承了漂亮的四足超过同类，有不同寻常的姿态特别出众。
English: He inherited the beautiful four-legged more than the same, there is an unusual posture particularly outstanding.

古文：善环旋于荠夏，知蹈飖于金奏。
现代文：善于在长满蒺藜的土地上周旋，知道在钟钹声中起舞。
English: He is good at twirling in the reed-filled land, and knows how to dance in the sound of bells.

古文：超六种于周闲，逾八品于汉厩。
现代文：超过了在周天子马厩中的六种马，胜过了在汉朝马厩中的八个品种。
English: More than the six kinds of horses in Zhou Tianzi's stables, and more than the eight kinds of horses in the Han Dynasty stables.

古文：伊自然之有质，宁改观于肥瘦。
现代文：自然而有天赋的个性，肥瘦岂能改变它的容貌。
English: Natural and gifted personality, fat and thin can not change its appearance.

古文：岂徒服皁而养安，与进驾以驰骤。
现代文：难道仅仅让官吏安逸地饲养它，应当去驾着马车驰骋。
English: Should it just be allowed to be raised in comfort by officials and go for a ride in a horse-drawn carriage?

古文：尔其挟尺县凿之辨，附蝉伏兔之别，十形五观之姿，三毛八肉之势，臣何得而称焉，固已详于前制。
现代文：它能有挟尺悬凿的分辨，能知附蝉伏兔的区别，有十形五观的姿态，有三毛八肉的气势，臣何得而去称赞它，在前人的著作中本来已做了详细的描述。
English: It can tell the difference between a chisel and a chisel, it can tell the difference between a cicada and a hare, it has the posture of ten shapes and five views, and it has the momentum of thirty-eight pieces of meat. How can a minister praise it? It has already been described in detail in the works of predecessors.

古文：徒观其神爽，视其豪异，轶跨野而忽逾轮，齐秀麒而并末驷。
现代文：观它精神俊爽，视它与众不同的豪放，奔跨田野不在意逾轮马，匹配秀骐而摒除驷马。
English: Viewing it as a spirited and vigorous horse, seeing it as a unique and boisterous horse, running across fields without worrying about overrunning horses, matching beautiful horses and eliminating horses.

古文：贬代盘而陋小华，越定单而少天骥。
现代文：贬斥代盘马而鄙视小华马，超越定单而轻视天骥。
English: To disparage the substitute horses and despise the small horses, to exceed the order and despise the gods.

古文：信无等于漏面，孰有取于决鼻。
现代文：相信没有同等的马露面，那些马可称是它的祖先。
English: Believed to have no equine equivalent, these horses are said to be its ancestors.

古文：可以迹章、亥之所未游，逾禹、益之所未至。
现代文：可以走大章、竖亥未游亡地，踏逾禹、益未到之地。
English: It is possible to go to the land of the dead, to the land of the dead, to the land of the dead, to the land of the dead.

古文：将不得而屈指，亦何暇以理辔。
现代文：将不能用手指计算里程，哪有空闲整理马缰。
English: You won't be able to count the miles with your fingers, and you won't have time to sort out your horse's mane.

古文：若迹遍而忘反，非我皇之所事。
现代文：如果踏遍前人足迹而忘却返回，逭不是我皇要做的事情。
English: If you walk through the footsteps of your predecessors and forget to return, that is not what I want to do.

古文：方润色于前古，邈深文而储思。
现代文：将给前古的文字做润色，超越精深的文辞而积蓄了丰富的思绪。
English: It will polish the ancient characters and accumulate rich thoughts beyond the profound words.

古文：既而机事多暇，青春未移。
现代文：不久国家枢机大事之余多有闲暇，春秀还没有移去。
English: Soon after the national cardinal event, there was more leisure, and Chunxiu had not yet moved.

古文：时惟上巳，美景在斯。
现代文：时间是三月初三，美景全在逭时。
English: It was the third day of the third month of March, and the beautiful scenery was in full bloom.

古文：遵镐饮之故实，陈洛宴之旧仪。
现代文：遵循武王在镐京君臣同饮的旧例，陈列垩王在匡旦宴饮的旧仪。
English: Following the old example of Emperor Wu's drinking with his courtiers in Beijing, the exhibition shows the old ceremony of Emperor Wu's banqueting in Kuangdan.

古文：漕伊川而分派，引激水以回池。
现代文：拓宽漕渠在芝业分流，引导激流让它迥旋于池中。
English: Widen the channel to divert the current in Shibei, and guide the torrent so that it swirls in the pool.

古文：集国良于民俊，列树茂于皇枝。
现代文：集民间的俊秀为国家良才，造就皇帝支属中的优秀人才。
English: The collection of people's talents is the country's talent, creating outstanding talents in the emperor's branch.

古文：纷高冠以连衽，锵鸣玉而肩随。
现代文：戴着高冠襟连襟，佩玉锵呜肩随肩。
English: Wearing a high-crowned lapel with a collar, wearing a jade bracelet with a shoulder strap.

古文：清辇道于上林，肃华台之金座。
现代文：在上挞茎清扫行车大道，整肃华台的皇帝宝座。
English: On the upper stalk, sweep the roadway and clean up the emperor's throne of Huatai.

古文：望发色于绿苞，伫流芬于紫裹。听磬寔之毕举，聆《韶》、《夏》之咸播。
现代文：在绿苞中探望发出的光色，穿着的紫衣也贮满了香气。听到磬鍀齐奏，又听《韶乐》、《夏乐》的播扬。
English: Look at the light emitted by the green ferns, the purple clothes worn are also full of fragrance. Hear the gongs play in unison, and listen to the play of "Songs of Summer" and "Summer Song."

古文：承六奏之既阕，及九变之已成。
现代文：承接六奏已终了。接着九变已完成。
English: The succession of sextet has ended. Then the nine changes have been completed.

古文：均仪禽于唐序，同舞兽于虞庭。
现代文：舆唐序的凤凰均等，与虞庭的舞兽相同。
English: The phoenix of the Ming and Tang dynasties is the same as the dancing beast of the Yuan and Tang dynasties.

古文：怀夏后之九代，想陈王之紫骍。
现代文：怀念夏后的九代马，思慕陈王的紫骝马。
English: I miss the nine generations of horses after the summer, and think of the purple horse of King Chen.

古文：乃命涓人，效良骏，经周卫，入钩陈。言右牵之已来，宁执朴而后进。
现代文：便令宫中内侍，试良马，经过宫庭的周围，进入后宫，报告右牵进献的马已到，竟执鞭击挞而后进。
English: He then ordered the palace's equerry, Probing Horse, to pass around the palace courtyard and enter the harem. He reported that the horse presented to him had arrived, but instead he whipped it and marched on.

古文：既倾首于律同，又蹀足于鼓振。
现代文：既能随着音律倾首，又能按着鼓点踏脚。
English: They can not only bow their heads to the music, but also step on their feet to the beat of the drum.

古文：擢龙首，回鹿躯，睨两镜，蹙双凫。
现代文：耸起龙头，回转鹿身，两眼斜视，收拢像两只水鸟般的耳朵。
English: The head of the dragon is raised, the body of the deer is rotated, the eyes are squinted, and the ears, which look like two water birds, are closed.

古文：既就场而雅拜，时赴曲而徐趋。
现代文：既在场高雅地拜礼，又跟着曲子慢慢前行。
English: He was not only present at the elegant worship service, but also walked slowly forward to the music.

古文：敏躁中于促节，捷繁外于惊桴。
现代文：在急促的节拍中扰动内心敏捷应和，在迅疾的鼓声中迅速地变换着繁多动作。
English: Disturbing the quick rhythm of the heart in the rapid beat, quickly changing a variety of movements in the rapid drumbeat.

古文：骐行骥动，虎发龙骧；雀跃燕集，鹄引凫翔。
现代文：骐骥行动，虎龙腾越；雀跃燕集，天鹅引颈，水鸟飞翔。
English: When the dragon moves, the tiger soars; when the swallow gathers, the swan leads; when the water bird flies.

古文：妍七盘之绰约，陵九剑之抑扬。
现代文：可比美七盘舞的柔姿，可超过九剑的抑扬顿挫。
English: Comparable to the beauty of the seven-dance soft posture, can exceed the nine-sword iambic pentameter.

古文：岂借仪于褕袂，宁假器于髦皇。
现代文：它的仪容哪裹是藉助美丽的衣裳，宁可说是藉助于堂皇的马鬣。
English: Its appearance is covered with beautiful clothes, or rather, with the help of a majestic stallion.

古文：婉脊投颂，俯膺合雅。
现代文：漂亮的脊柱与仪容相合，俯首于胸前高雅不俗。
English: The beautiful spine matches the appearance, and the bowing of the head in front of the chest is very elegant.

古文：露沫歕红，沾汗流赭。
现代文：口露唾沫喷出红色气体，浸湿的汗水也流出红色。
English: Mouthwash spit spews red gas, soaking wet sweat also flows out red.

古文：乃却走于集灵，驯惠养于豊夏。
现代文：于是从祭神的集灵宫退走，在水草茂盛的夏天用仁爱之，养它。
English: So he retreated from the Jiringu Palace, which was dedicated to the god, and raised it with love in the summer, when the aquatic plants were in full bloom.

古文：郁风雷之壮心，思展足于南野。
现代文：使它蕴结风雷般的壮心，想去南方旷野展足驰骋。
English: So that it contains thunder and lightning-like courage to want to go to the southern wilderness and gallop.

古文：若彼符瑞之富，可以臻介丘而昭卒业，搢绅群后，诚希末光，天子深穆为度，未之访也。
现代文：至若吉兆大量显现，可以去大山明告大业的完成，揞绅群后，真诚地希望得到末光，而天子以肃静端庄为限度，还没有去拜访。为什么?
English: If the auspicious signs appear in large numbers, you can go to the mountains to announce the completion of the great cause, and after the crowd, sincerely hope to get the twilight, but the heavenly son has not visited with the limit of quiet and dignified. Why?

古文：何则？进让殊事，岂非帝者之弥文哉。
现代文：封禅的进取与谦让是特殊的事情，如果去拜访，难道不是皇帝弥加文饰吗?
English: The progressiveness and modesty of Fuzan are special things. If you go to visit, isn't the Emperor Mikawen decorated?

古文：今四卫外封，五岳内郡，宜弘下禅之规，增上封之训，背清都而日行，指云郊而玄运。
现代文：今四卫以外封诸侯，五岳纳入境内，更应该大下封禅的规定，增加呈上封挥的训令，离开皇宫而行，向着天外前进而敬承天命。
English: Now that Shibu is outside the territory of the feudal lords, and Gogaku is included in the territory, it is even more important to increase the provisions of the lower feudal zen, increase the order to present the seal, leave the imperial palace, advance towards the outside world and respect the heavenly destiny.

古文：将绝尘而弭辙，类飞鸟与駏驴。
现代文：驾驭绝尘骏马车无痕迹，如同鸟飞与驱驴奔驰。
English: Driving a dust-free horse-drawn carriage without a trace, like a bird flying and a donkey driving.

古文：总三才而驱骛，按五御而超摅。
现代文：总揽天地人三才纵横驱驰，放纵五驾马车超然腾跃。
English: It only takes three people to conquer the world and drive it vertically and horizontally, and it is indulgent for the five-horse carriage to make a transcendental leap.

古文：翳卿云于华盖，翼条风于属车。
现代文：在皇帝的车驾上遮盖着祥瑞的五色云，在侍从车上护翼着春天的东北风。
English: On the emperor's chariot, the auspicious five-colored clouds are covering, and on the attendant's chariot, the spring northeasterly wind is blowing.

古文：无逸御于玉轸，不泛驾于金舆。
现代文：皇帝的车没有超群出众的驭手，马也不因有逸气而不循轨辙。
English: The emperor's carriage does not have an outstanding driver, and the horse does not follow the ruts because of its eccentricity.

古文：饰中岳之绝轨，营奉高之旧墟。
现代文：修饰中岳中断的道路，营建奉高祭祀泰山的旧地。
English: Modify the road interrupted by Zhongyue, and build the old place of worshiping Mount Tai.

古文：训厚况于人神，弘施育于黎献。
现代文：遵循厚赐人神的典则，对众多的贤人给以培养。
English: He followed the rules of the gods and gave training to many sages.

古文：垂景炎于长世，集繁祉于斯万，在庸臣之方刚，有从军之大愿。
现代文：留下的大德与世长存，聚集繁多的福祉，在庸臣锐气方刚，有从军效力的大愿。
English: The great virtue left behind will last forever, gather a variety of well-being, and have a strong will to serve in the army.

古文：必自兹而展采，将同畀于庖煇。
现代文：一定从现在展示风采，将来同样送到厨房烧烤。
English: From now on, be sure to show off your style, and in the future, you will also be sent to the kitchen for grilling.

古文：悼长卿之遗书，悯周南之留恨。
现代文：追念司马相如的遗书，怜悯周南的遗憾。
English: In memory of Sima Xiangru's suicide note, pity Zhou Nan's regret.

古文：时与到洽、周兴嗣同奉诏为赋，高祖以率及兴嗣为工。
现代文：当时与到洽、周兴嗣同奉韶令作赋，高祖认为张率及兴嗣写得工整。
English: At that time, he and Zhu Dacao and Zhou Xingzi were commissioned to write the play, and Gao Zu believed that Zhang Rui and Xingzi had written it well.

古文：其年，父忧去职。
现代文：逭年，他居父亲丧离职。
English: Three years later, he left the company after his father died.

古文：其父侍妓数十人，善讴者有色貌，邑子仪曹郎顾玩之求娉焉，讴者不愿，遂出家为尼。
现代文：他父亲的侍妓有数十人，有一妓善唱歌有色貌，同邑人仪曹郎顾玩之求娶她为妻，此妓不愿意，便出家为尼姑。
English: There were dozens of courtesans of his father. One courtesan was good at singing and had a beautiful face. A fellow villager, Cao Lang Gu Yanzhi, asked him to marry her. This courtesan did not want to, so she became a nun.

古文：尝因斋会率宅，玩之乃飞书言与率奸，南司以事奏闻，高祖惜其才，寝其奏，然犹致世论焉。
现代文：她曾趁斋会去昼匡空家，远之就写匿名信说此妓与亟空通奸，御史台将此事上奏，高祖爱惜他的才能，就把奏章搁置起来，然而还是招致世人的议论。
English: She once took advantage of a fasting meeting to go to the empty house of the lord of the day, and wrote an anonymous letter from afar saying that this prostitute had committed adultery with the sky. The official history channel played up the matter. Gaozu cherished his talent and put the record on hold, but it still attracted the world's discussion.

古文：服阕后，久之不仕。
现代文：服丧期满除服后，很久没有做官。
English: He did not become an official for a long time after he was discharged at the end of the mourning period.

古文：七年，敕召出，除中权建安王中记室参军，预长名问讯，不限日。
现代文：七年，皇帝下韶书征召他出仕，授任中权建安王中记室参军，参预长名榜的问讯，不限时日。
English: In the seventh year, the emperor issued an imperial edict summoning him to serve, and he was assigned to the Central Power Jianan Wang Middle Records Office to join the army, and to participate in the inquiry of the prefect list, for an unlimited period of time.

古文：俄有敕直寿光省，治丙丁部书抄。
现代文：不久有韶书让他在寿光省当值，负责子、集部书的抄写。
English: Soon after, he was asked to be on duty in Shouguang Province and was put in charge of copying children's and children's books.

古文：八年，晋安王戍石头，以率为云麾中记室。
现代文：八年，晋安王镇守石头，任张率为云麾中记室。
English: In the eighth year, Jinan Wang Zhen kept the stone, and the appointment rate was the highest in the middle of the cloud.

古文：王迁南兗州，转宣毅谘议参军，并兼记室。
现代文：王迁任南兖州刺史，张率转任宣毅谘议参军，并兼记室。
English: Wang Qian was appointed as the chief historian of South Luzhou, and Zhang Rui was appointed as the adviser of Xuan Yi to join the army, and also served as the secretary.

古文：王还都，率除中书侍郎。
现代文：王回到京师，张率被授任中书侍郎。
English: Wang returned to Beijing as a teacher, and Zhang Rui was appointed as a junior secretary.

古文：十三年，王为荆州，复以率为宣惠谘议，领江陵令。
现代文：十三年，王任荆州刺史，再任张率为宣惠谘议，领江陵令。
English: In the thirteenth year, Wang was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou, and the re-appointment of Zhang Zhou was subject to the consultation of Xuan Hui, and the order of Jiangling was issued.

古文：王为江州，以谘议领记室，出监豫章、临川郡。
现代文：王府迁往江州，张率以谘议领记室，出监豫章、临川郡。
English: The royal residence was moved to Jiangzhou, and Zhang was assigned to the consultation and registration office, and to the supervision of Yuzhang and Linchuan County.

古文：率在府十年，恩礼甚笃。
现代文：张率在王府十年，受到极厚的恩惠礼遇。
English: Zhang Zizhi has been in the royal palace for ten years and has been treated with great courtesy.

古文：还除太子仆，累迁招远将军、司徒右长史、扬州别驾。
现代文：回到京师授任太子仆，累经升迁任招远将军、司徒右长史、扬州别驾。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was awarded the title of Prince's Servant, and was promoted to Zhaoyuan General, Szeto U Changshi, and Yangzhou Beidou.

古文：率虽历居职务，未尝留心簿领，及为别驾奏事，高祖览牒问之，并无对，但奉答云 事在牒中 。
现代文：张率虽然多年担任职务，但从不留心公文簿的事，当任别驾向上奏事时，高祖阅呈文问他事情，他都回答不上来，衹能对答说 事情全写在呈文中 。
English: Although Zhang Zizhi held the position for many years, he never paid attention to the official document book. When Ren Bei drove up to report the matter, Gao Zu read the submission and asked him about the matter. He could not answer, but he could say that the matter was all written in the submission.

古文：高祖不悦。
现代文：高祖听了不高兴。
English: Gaozu was not happy to hear this.

古文：俄迁太子家令，与中庶子陆倕、仆射刘孝绰对掌东宫管记，迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：不久迁任太子家令，与中庶子陆任、太子仆刘孝绰共同掌管束宫管记，迁任黄门侍郎。
English: He was soon transferred to serve as a member of the prince's household, and together with his middle illegitimate son, Lu Ren, and the prince's servant, Liu Xiaochuo, he was put in charge of the Imperial Household Agency and transferred to the position of Huangmen chamberlain.

古文：出为新安太守，秩满还都，未至，丁所生母忧。
现代文：出任新安太守，任职期满回都城，未至，遭遇亲生母亲丧事。
English: He was appointed as the new governor of An, returned to the capital at the end of his term of office, and suffered the death of his own mother.

古文：大通元年，服未阕，卒，时年五十三。
现代文：大通元年，服丧期未满，去世，时年五十三岁。
English: In the first year of Datong, before the mourning period was over, he died, at the age of fifty-three.

古文：昭明太子遣使赠赙，与晋安王纲令曰： 近张新安又致故。
现代文：昭明太子遣使者赠送办理丧事所用的财物，与晋安王萧纲称赞他说： 新近张率又故去了。
English: Prince Zhaoming sent an emissary to present the property used to handle the funeral, and the Jinan King Xiao Gang praised him, saying: Recently, Zhang Quan has gone too far.

古文：其人才笔弘雅，亦足嗟惜。
现代文：遣人文才高雅，真让人嗟叹惋惜。
English: It's a shame because he's a very talented and elegant person.

古文：随弟府朝，东西日久，尤当伤怀也。
现代文：跟随弟的官府，从束到西时间很久，就更使人伤怀。
English: The fact that he followed his younger brother to the government, and that it took a long time for him to reach the West, is even more saddening.

古文：比人物零落，特可潸慨，属有今信，乃复及之。 
现代文：近来一些有才德名望的人死去，特别使人感慨落泪，接着又听到这个消息，便又感悲伤。 
English: The recent deaths of some of the most talented and distinguished people have been particularly moving and saddening to hear about.

古文：率嗜酒，事事宽恕，于家务尤忘怀。
现代文：张率喜欢喝酒，处事宽容，家务事更不介意。
English: Zhang Rui likes to drink, is tolerant, and doesn't mind housework.

古文：在新安，遣家僮载米三千石还吴宅，既至，遂秏太半。
现代文：在新安时，派家僮载米三千石送还家乡吴宅，家僮至吴，米少了大半。
English: When he was in Xin'an, he sent 3,000 koku of rice to his hometown, Wuzhai. When he returned to Wuzhou, he had lost most of the rice.

古文：率问其故，答曰： 雀鼠秏也。 
现代文：张率问原因，家僮回答说： 雀鼠吃了。 
English: Zhang Zi asked the reason, and Jia Yao replied, "The squirrel ate it."

古文：率笑而言曰： 壮哉雀鼠。 
现代文：张率笑着说： 雀鼠吃得真快呀。 
English: Zhang Zizhi said with a smile: "Squirrels eat so fast."

古文：竟不研问。
现代文：竟然不再追问。
English: He actually stopped pursuing the question.

古文：少好属文，而《七略》及《艺文志》所载诗赋，今亡其文者，并补作之。
现代文：年轻时喜欢写文章，而且《七略》以及艺文志》中所著绿的诗赋，当今其文已佚失的，他都补作了。
English: When he was young, he liked to write articles, and he made up for the green poems in the "Seven Sketches" and "Art and Literature" that have been lost today.

古文：所著《文衡》十五卷，文集三十卷，行于世。
现代文：他所著《文衡》十五卷，文集三十卷，在世上流传。
English: His 15 volumes of "Wenheng" and 30 volumes of anthology have been circulated around the world.

古文：子长公嗣。
现代文：子名长公继嗣。
English: His son Nagakimi succeeded him.

古文：刘孝绰，字孝绰，彭城人，本名冉。
现代文：刘孝绰字孝绰，是彭城人，原名冉。
English: Liu Xiaoqiao, also known as Xiaoqiao, is originally from Pengcheng.

古文：祖勔，宋司空忠昭公。
现代文：祖父名刘勔，是宋朝司空忠昭公。
English: His grandfather's name was Liu Xuan, and he was the Song Dynasty's second-in-command, Ku Zhong Zong.

古文：父绘，齐大司马霸府从事中郎。
现代文：父亲名绘，在齐朝任大司马霸府从事中郎。
English: His father was a famous painter, and he served as the grand secretary of Mahefu in the Qi Dynasty.

古文：孝绰幼聪敏，七岁能属文。
现代文：孝绰小时候聪明机灵，七岁就能写文章。
English: When he was a child, Xiaoqiao was smart and clever. He could write articles at the age of seven.

古文：舅齐中书郎王融深赏异之，常与同载适亲友，号曰神童。
现代文：舅舅齐朝中书郎王融对他深加赞赏，认为他很奇特，经常带他乘车去拜访亲友，大家称他神童。
English: His uncle, Wang Rong, a scholar in the Qi Dynasty, deeply appreciated him, thought he was very special, and often took him by car to visit relatives and friends. Everyone called him a child prodigy.

古文：融每言曰： 天下文章，若无我当归阿士。 
现代文：王融经常说： 天下的文章，写得好的如果不是我的，那就应当归属阿士。 
English: Wang Rong often said: The world's articles are well written, if not mine, then they should belong to Ashi.

古文：阿士，孝绰小字也。
现代文：阿士，是孝绰的乳名。
English: Ashi is a pet name for Takachika.

古文：绘，齐世掌诏诰。
现代文：刘绘，在齐朝负责起草韶诰。
English: Liu Bing was in charge of drafting the edict in the Qi Dynasty.

古文：孝绰年未志学，绘常使代草之。
现代文：孝绰还不满十五岁，刘绘就经常让他代为草拟。
English: As Xiaoqiao was not yet fifteen years old, Liu Bing often asked him to draft on his behalf.

古文：父党沈约、任昉、范云等闻其名，并命驾先造焉，昉尤相赏好。
现代文：父亲的朋党沈约、任防、范云等听闻他的名声，并立即驾车去拜访他，任防对他格外欣赏友好。
English: His father's friends, including Shen Yu, Ren Fang and Fan Yun, heard of his fame and immediately drove to visit him. Ren Fang was particularly appreciative and friendly to him.

古文：范云年长绘十余岁，其子孝才与孝绰年并十四五，及云遇孝绰，便申伯季，乃命孝才拜之。
现代文：范云比刘绘还大十多岁，他的儿子孝才与孝绰都是十四五岁，当范云遇见孝绰时，便申明二人为兄弟，就命孝才给他行拜见礼。
English: Fan Yun is more than ten years older than Liu Ping. His sons, Xiao Cai and Xiao Yao, are both 14 and 15 years old. When Fan Yun met Xiao Yao, he affirmed that the two were brothers, and ordered Xiao Yao to give him a bow.

古文：天监初，起家著作佐郎，为《归沐诗》以赠任昉，昉报章曰： 彼美洛阳子，投我怀秋作。
现代文：天监初年，起家任著作佐郎，作《归沐诗》赠送任叻，任防回赠他的诗说： 您是洛阳美好男子，投赠我怀秋之作。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Supervision, the founder of the family gave the book to Saro, the poem "Going Back to the Soul" to Ren Zheng, and Ren Fang gave him back his poem saying: You are a beautiful man from Luoyang, give me a poem for the autumn.

古文：讵慰耋嗟人，徒深老夫托。
现代文：遣哪襄是慰问老年人，竟是给我深刻的嘱托。
English: It was a way of consoling the elderly, and it was actually a profound recommendation to me.

古文：直史兼褒贬，辖司专疾恶。
现代文：秉笔直书兼就褒贬，任职专憎恶坏人。
English: Adhering to straightforward writing and praising and criticizing, he detests bad people.

古文：九折多美疹，匪报庶良药。
现代文：屡受挫折成为良医，您的告知就是好药方。
English: Having suffered repeated setbacks to become a good doctor, your advice is a good prescription.

古文：子其崇锋颖，春耕励秋获。 
现代文：您的文章推崇锋颖，春天勉力耕种秋天取得收获。 
English: Your article praises Feng Ying, cultivating in the spring and harvesting in the fall.

古文：其为名流所重如此。
现代文：他被名流推重就像这样。
English: He's been thrust into the limelight like this.

古文：迁太子舍人，俄以本官兼尚书水部郎，奉启陈谢，手敕答曰： 美锦未可便制，簿领亦宜稍习。 
现代文：迁任太子舍人，不久以本任职官兼尚书水部郎，启奏谢恩，皇帝手敕答道： 美锦不可立即制成，公文簿的事情也应慢慢熟习。 
English: After he was transferred to the position of the prince's son-in-law, he was soon appointed to the post of this official and also the minister of books and water. When he was thanked, the emperor replied: The brocade cannot be made immediately, and the matter of the official document book should also be familiarized slowly.

古文：顷之即真。
现代文：不久兼职改为实授。
English: It was soon changed from part-time to full-time.

古文：高祖雅好虫篆，时因宴幸，命沈约、任昉等言志赋诗，孝绰亦见引。
现代文：高祖极喜好虫书，也因时亲临宴饮，命沈约、任防等人言志赋诗，孝绰也被引见。
English: Gao Zu is very fond of insect books, and also because of the time to come to the banquet, the life-saving appointment, the defense and other people's words and poems, and the filial piety are also introduced.

古文：尝侍宴，于坐为诗七首，高祖览其文，篇篇嗟赏，由是朝野改观焉。
现代文：曾侍奉宴饮，于座中写诗七首，高祖阅其文，篇篇都赞赏，由此朝野人士对他的看法有了改变。
English: He once served at a banquet, where he wrote seven poems. Gaozu read his poems and appreciated them from start to finish, which changed the way people in the court and outside the court viewed him.

古文：寻有敕知青、北徐、南徐三州事，出为平南安成王记室，随府之镇。
现代文：不久有命令让孝绰执掌青、北徐、南徐三州政事，出任平南安成王记室，随王府到镇守地。
English: Soon, there was an order to let Xiao Cao take charge of the political affairs of the three states of Qing, North Xu and South Xu, serve as the king's record office of Pingnan Ancheng, and follow the king's palace to the township.

古文：寻补太子洗马，迁尚书金部侍郎，复为太子洗马，掌东宫管记。
现代文：不久补授太子洗马，迁任尚书金部郎，又任太子洗马，掌束宫管记。
English: Soon he was given the additional title of Prince Saima, and was transferred to the post of Shosho Kaneburo, and was also appointed Prince Saima, and was in charge of the palace administration.

古文：出为上虞令，迁除秘书丞。高祖谓舍人周舍曰： 第一官当用第一人。 
现代文：出任上虞令，还京师授任秘书丞，高祖对舍人周舍说： 第一重要的职官当任用第一流的人才。 
English: Gao Zu said to Zhou Xie, who had been appointed as Shang Yu's deputy and the secretary of the Beijing Division, "The most important officials should be appointed by first-class talents."

古文：故以孝绰居此职。
现代文：因此任命孝绰担任此职。
English: Therefore, the appointment of Xiao Zhuo to this position.

古文：公事免。
现代文：因公事被免职。
English: He was removed from his post for misconduct in office.

古文：寻复除秘书丞，出为镇南安成王谘议，入以事免。
现代文：不久又授任秘书丞，出任镇南安盛王谘议，回京城又因事被免职。
English: Soon after, he was appointed secretary-general, and served as an adviser to the mayor of the town of Nan'an, but was removed from his post after returning to Beijing.

古文：起为安西记室，累迁安西骠骑谘议参军，敕权知司徒右长史事，迁太府卿、太子仆，复掌东宫管记。
现代文：起用任安西记室，累经升迁任安西骠骑谘议参军，敕令权知司徒右长史事，迁任太府卿、太子仆，再掌东宫管记。
English: He was appointed to the Anxi Records Office, and after promotion, he was appointed to the Anxi Cavalry Consultation and Joined the Army, and was appointed to the Governor of the State Council, the Governor of the State Council, the Governor of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, the Governor of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, the Governor of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, the Governor of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, the Governor of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：时昭明太子好士爱文，孝绰与陈郡殷芸、吴郡陆倕、琅邪王筠、彭城到洽等，同见宾礼。
现代文：当时昭明太子好士爱文，孝绰与陈郡人殷芸、吴郡人陆任、琅邪人王筠、彭城人到洽等，同被以上宾之礼相待。
English: At that time, Prince Shouming, the good man Ai Wen, and Prince Xiaozhuo came to negotiate with the people of Chen County, Yin Yi, Wu County, Lu Ren, the wicked man Wang Qi, and the people of Pengcheng, and they were treated with the courtesy of the above guests.

古文：太子起乐贤堂，乃使画工先图孝绰焉。
现代文：太子兴建乐贤堂，便让画工先给孝绰画像。
English: When the prince was building the Le Xian Hall, he asked the painter to draw a picture of Xiao Xiao first.

古文：太子文章繁富，群才咸欲撰录，太子独使孝绰集而序之。
现代文：太子写的文章很多，许多有文才的人都想为他编集子，太子独让孝绰编集子并写了序言。
English: There are many articles written by the prince, and many people with literary talent want to compile the anthology for him. The prince asked Takaaki to compile the anthology and wrote the preface.

古文：迁员外散骑常侍，兼廷尉卿，顷之即真。
现代文：迁任员外散骑常侍，兼廷尉卿，随即改为实授。
English: He was transferred to the position of non-commissioned officer, riding horseback as a regular attendant, and also as a court lieutenant, and was immediately promoted to full professor.

古文：初，孝绰与到洽友善，同游东宫。
现代文：当初，孝绰与到洽友善，共同与太子交游。
English: At first, Takachika and Tsuchika were friendly and traveled together with the prince.

古文：孝绰自以才优于洽，每于宴坐，嗤鄙其文，洽衔之。
现代文：孝绰自认才能胜过到洽，每次宴坐，便讥笑到洽的文章，到洽很怨恨他。
English: Xiao Zhuo thought his talent was better than Zhuo Jia. Every time they had a banquet, he would ridicule Zhuo Jia's articles. Zhuo Jia resented him very much.

古文：及孝绰为廷尉卿，携妾入官府，其母犹停私宅。
现代文：当孝绰任廷尉卿时，带妾进入官府，而他的母亲仍住在家襄。
English: When Takaakira was appointed as a courtier, he brought his concubine into the government office, while his mother still lived at home.

古文：洽寻为御史中丞，遣令史案其事，遂劾奏之，云： 携少妹于华省，弃老母于下宅。 
现代文：到洽不久任御史中丞，派掌文书的官吏查究此事，立即劾奏，说： 携带少妹住在高级馆舍，丢弃老母亲在下等的住宅。 
English: Soon after, the Imperial Historian Chujo arrived, and the official sent by the clerk to investigate the matter, immediately filed a complaint, saying: Carrying the younger sister to live in a high-class building, abandoning the old mother in a lower-class house.

古文：高祖为隐其恶，改 妹 为 姝 。
现代文：高祖为他隐瞒恶劣行为，改 妹 为 姝 字。
English: Gao Zu concealed his bad behavior for him and changed 妹 to.

古文：坐免官。
现代文：坐事被免官。
English: He was relieved of his duties.

古文：孝绰诸弟，时随籓皆在荆、雍，乃与书论共洽不平者十事，其辞皆鄙到氏。
现代文：孝绰诸弟，当时都各自跟随藩王在荆州、雍州，便给他们写信论述到洽不公平的事总共十件，信中言辞都是鄙视到氏的。
English: At that time, all the brothers of the filial piety followed the king of the clan in Jingzhou and Yongzhou, and wrote to them a total of ten things about the unfair negotiation. The words in the letter were despised by the clan.

古文：又写别本封呈东宫，昭明太子命焚之，不开视也。
现代文：又另写信密封呈送柬宫，昭明太子命令将信烧了，没有打开看。
English: He also wrote another letter, sealed and sent to the Cambodian palace. Prince Akiming ordered the letter to be burned, but did not open it.

古文：时世祖出为荆州，至镇，与孝绰书曰： 君屏居多暇，差得肆意典坟，吟咏情性，比复稀数古人，不以委约而能不伎痒；且虞卿、史迁由斯而作，想摛属之兴，益当不少。
现代文：当时世祖出任荆州刺史，至镇守地给孝绰写信说： 君隐居有许多空闲，尚可任意翻览古代文籍，歌咏诗章抒发情怀，反复比较少数古人，不会因为疲病穷困而能没有写作的欲望吧；况且虞卿、司马迁都是由于这个原因而著作的，想写文章的兴趣，更应该不少。
English: At that time, the ancestor served as a historian of Jingzhou, and wrote to Xiao Qiao from the town to say: You have a lot of free time in your seclusion, you can still browse through ancient literature at will, songs and poems express feelings, repeatedly compare a few ancient people, you will not have the desire to write because of fatigue and poverty; moreover, Yuqing and Sima Qian are all written for this reason, and there should be a lot of interest in writing articles.

古文：洛地纸贵，京师名动，彼此一时，何其盛也。
现代文：洛阳因有好文章而纸贵，京师因作者大名而引起震动，往昔与现在如同一时，这是多么兴盛呀。
English: Luoyang is expensive because of good articles, and Beijing is shocked because of the author's name. In the past and now, this is how prosperous it is.

古文：近在道务闲，微得点翰，虽无纪行之作，颇有怀旧之篇。
现代文：近日在路途政务清闲，稍微挥笔写点文章，虽然没有记叙旅途见闻的作品，却很有一些思古念旧的篇章。
English: Recently, I've been taking some time off from government work to write a few articles. Although I haven't written anything about what I've seen on my travels, there are a lot of nostalgic chapters.

古文：至此已来，众诸屑役。
现代文：到遣襄以来，有许多繁杂琐碎的公务。
English: Since arriving in Yangshuo, there have been many tedious and trivial official duties.

古文：小生之诋，恐取辱于庐江；遮道之奸，虑兴谋于从事。
现代文：无名文人的毁谤，恐怕是在庐江受到侮辱；拦路的奸计，思虑是从事官兴谋的。
English: The slander of an unknown writer is probably insulted in the Li River; the treachery of the roadblock, the concern is engaged in official intrigue.

古文：方且褰帷自厉，求瘼不休，笔墨之功，曾何暇豫。
现代文：正要掀开帷幕以自我勉励，不断地探求为政中的弊病，研墨动笔的功夫，哪襄还有闲暇参与。
English: I am about to raise the curtain with self-encouragement, continuous exploration of the ills in politics, the effort of studying and writing, which also includes leisure participation.

古文：至于心乎爱矣，未尝有歇，思乐惠音，清风靡闻。
现代文：至于内心对它的喜爱，未曾有过间断，喜欢看到您的来信，但衹有清风却没有消息。
English: As for my heart's affection for it, there has never been a break, I like to see your letter, but there is no news.

古文：譬夫梦想温玉，饥渴明珠，虽愧卞、随，犹为好事。
现代文：好比梦想得到和润的玉石，渴望得到夜明之珍珠，虽然羞愧不如卞和与随侯，但还算是喜好此事。
English: It's like dreaming of the jade of harmony and longing for the pearls of the twilight. Although shame is not as good as peace and contentment, it's still a matter of preference.

古文：新有所制，想能示之。
现代文：最近有新的制作，希望能出示给我。
English: Recently there has been a new production that I would like to be shown.

古文：勿等清虑，徒虚其请。
现代文：不要等到思虑我时再惠寄，让我白白地请求。
English: Don't wait until you are worried about me to send me a favor, let me ask in vain.

古文：无由赏悉，遣此代怀。
现代文：没有什么可赠您知道的，写遣封信代表我对您的怀念。
English: There's nothing to give you know, writing a letter is my way of saying I miss you.

古文：数路计行，迟还芳札。 
现代文：查点路程计算行期，迟迟才给您覆信。 
English: The time it takes to check the waypoint and calculate the route is too long, and it takes too long to get back to you.

古文：孝绰答曰： 伏承自辞皇邑，爰至荆台，未劳刺举，且摛高丽。
现代文：孝绰回信说： 自从您辞别京师，到达荆州台府，还没有劳您直言举发我的过失，且已写出高雅清丽的文章。
English: Xiaoqiao wrote back: Since you left the Beijing division and arrived in Jingzhou Taifu, you have not bothered to point out my mistakes, and you have written an elegant and beautiful article.

古文：近虽预观尺锦，而不睹全玉。
现代文：最近虽然预先看到您文字秀美的信札，但没有见到您写的全部作品。
English: Although I have recently seen your beautifully written letter in advance, I have not seen all the works you have written.

古文：昔临淄词赋，悉与杨修，未殚宝笥，顾惭先哲。
现代文：昔日临淄侯写的词赋，全部交舆杨脩，未能全部珍藏在箱箧，面对前代哲人自己感到羞愧。
English: The words written by Linyi Hou in the past were all handed over to Yang Zhen, and they could not all be treasured in the box, and they felt ashamed in the face of the previous generation of philosophers.

古文：渚宫旧俗，朝衣多故，李固之荐二邦，徐珍之奏七邑，威怀之道，兼而有之。
现代文：渚宫旧俗，朝廷官员多患难，李固推荐两位贤人，徐谬上奏弹劾五个郡守，威服与怀柔的治理方法，在遣裹兼而有之。
English: According to the old customs of the Nagisa Palace, the imperial officials had many hardships, Li Gu recommended two wise men, Xu Muxiang impeached five county governors, and the governance methods of boldness and moderation were combined in the envoy.

古文：当欲使金石流功，耻用翰墨垂迹。
现代文：应当铸金刻石流布功德，耻于用写文章留下手迹。
English: You should cast gold, engrave stone, stream cloth merit, and be ashamed of leaving handprints with writing articles.

古文：虽乖知二，偶达圣心。
现代文：虽然这种看法衹知其一不知其二，但偶尔也有通达圣心的时候。
English: Although this view is one-sided, there are times when the Sacred Heart is revealed.

古文：爰自退居素里，却扫穷闬，比杨伦之不出，譬张挚之杜门。
现代文：自从我退居寒素的家乡，就在穷巷闭门谢客，像后汉杨伦那样拒不出仕，如汉朝张挚那样闭门不作官。
English: Since I retired to my cold hometown, I have been thanking guests behind closed doors in the poor alley, refusing to serve as Yang Lun did in the Han Dynasty, and not serving as an official behind closed doors as Zhang Jing did in the Han Dynasty.

古文：昔赵卿穷愁，肆言得失；汉臣郁志，广叙盛衰。
现代文：昔日赵国的虞卿穷困愁绝，放言谈论治国的得失；汉臣司马迁郁郁不得志，广泛叙述历史的兴衰。
English: Once upon a time, the poverty-stricken and distraught Yuqing of Zhao State talked freely about the gains and losses of governing the country; Han Zhen Sima Qian, depressed and discouraged, extensively described the rise and fall of history.

古文：彼此一时，拟非其匹。
现代文：往昔与现在如同一时，但估量我不能同他们相比。
English: It was the same then as it is now, but I don't think I can be compared to them.

古文：窃以文豹何辜，以文为罪。
现代文：我私下认为豹皮上的纹彩有什么罪，而以这纹彩给定罪。
English: I privately thought that the pattern on the leopard's skin had something to do with the crime, and I was convicted by this pattern.

古文：由此而谈，又何容易。
现代文：由此而谈，又何容易。
English: How easy it is to talk about this.

古文：故韬翰吮墨，多历寒暑，既阙子幼南山之歌，又微敬通渭水之赋，无以自同献笑，少酬褒诱。
现代文：所以我搁笔不再写文章，已过了许多年，既缺杨惮对南山的歌咏，又无冯衍在渭水所写的赋，没有自认为可献出来博取大家一笑的作品，稍稍酬答对我的鼓励和奖掖。
English: So I put down my pen and stopped writing articles. Many years have passed, and there is no Yang Shuo's poem about Nanshan, no Fu written by Feng Yan in Surabaya, no work that I think I can present to make everyone laugh, and little reward for my encouragement and reward.

古文：且才乖体物，不拟作于玄根；事殊宿诺，宁贻惧于硃亥。
现代文：况且才能有违于体察物情，也不打算写出谈玄说道的作品；事实舆预先的诺言不相同，宁可把恐惧遗留在朱亥那裹。
English: Moreover, the talent is contrary to the observation of the situation, and does not intend to write a work that talks about the mysteries; the facts are different from the previous promises, and it is better to leave the fear in Zhuhai.

古文：顾己反躬，载怀累息。
现代文：回枧自己，反躬自问，满怀恐惧舆喘息。
English: He recoiled, questioned himself, and gasped in horror.

古文：但瞻言汉广，邈若天涯，区区一心，分宵九逝。
现代文：但仰望谈论漠广，遥远地好像在天涯，小小的一颗心，分开九重云霄而逝去。
English: But looking up and talking about the vastness of the desert, far away as if at the end of the world, a small heart, separated by nine clouds, passed away.

古文：殿下降情白屋，存问相寻，食椹怀音，矧伊人矣。 
现代文：殿下把情谊降临到我这平民百姓的屋中，不断地关怀问讯，飞鹄吃桑椹能改恶声为好音，何况人哩。 
English: His Royal Highness has brought friendship to the house of me, a commoner, and constantly cares and asks for information. It is said that flying kites and eating mulberries can change a bad reputation into a good one, not to mention people.

古文：孝绰免职后，高祖数使仆射徐勉宣旨慰抚之，每朝宴常引与焉。
现代文：孝绰被免职后，高祖多次派仆射徐勉宣旨慰抚他，每有朝宴经常让他参与。
English: After Takaakira was dismissed from his post, Emperor Gaozu repeatedly sent his servant Sho Xu to comfort him, and often invited him to participate in every morning banquet.

古文：及高祖为《籍田诗》，又使勉先示孝绰。
现代文：当高祖作《籍田诗》，又让徐勉先送给孝绰看。
English: When Gao Zu wrote "Homeland Poem," he asked Xu Mian to give it to Xiao Qiao first.

古文：时奉诏作者数十人，高祖以孝绰尤工，即日有敕，起为西中郎湘东王谘议。
现代文：同时奉韶作诗的人有几十位，高祖认为孝绰写得最精巧，即日下命令，起用他任西中郎湘东王谘议。
English: At the same time, there were dozens of people who wrote poems for Bongye. Gaozu thought that Xiaoqiao's poem was the most elaborately written, so he ordered to appoint him as the West Middle Elder to consult with the East King of Hunan.

古文：启谢曰： 臣不能衔珠避颠，倾柯卫足，以兹疏幸，与物多忤。
现代文：孝绰上启答谢说： 臣不能衔珠报恩而躲避跌倒，不会砍除枝叶护卫根基，因为这样粗疏侥幸，舆诸事多相抵触。
English: Xiao Yao said in his reply: "A minister cannot repay a favor by avoiding a fall, and he will not cut off the foundation of the branches and leaves of the guard, because this is a rough chance, and many things conflict with each other.

古文：兼逢匿怨之友，遂居司隶之官，交构是非，用成萋斐。
现代文：又加上遇到在心襄怀恨我而表面又与我做朋友的人，他在担任司隶之官后，构陷是非，罗织成我的罪名。
English: In addition, I met a person who hated me in his heart but was my friend on the surface. After serving as a subordinate officer, he framed me and fabricated my crime.

古文：日月昭回，俯明枉直。
现代文：日月光辉，鉴明是非。
English: The sun and the moon shine brightly, revealing right and wrong.

古文：狱书每御，辄鉴蒋济之冤；炙发见明，非关陈正之辩。
现代文：陛下每每看到狱中文书，立即就会审明蒋济般的冤案；烧发判明是非，是与陈正的辩才无关。
English: Whenever His Majesty sees a prison book, he will immediately judge the Jiang Ji-like injustice; it has nothing to do with Chen Zheng's argument.

古文：遂漏斯密网，免彼严棘，得使还同士伍，比屋唐民，生死肉骨，岂侔其施。
现代文：终于让我逃脱遣密网，避免关进那个牢狱，使我得以回到士子的队伍，比邻都是唐尧时代一样的居民，死而复生白骨生肉，哪裹用求得他的施与。
English: Finally, I was able to escape the network of traitors and avoid being locked up in that prison, and I was able to return to the ranks of the scholars. My neighbors were all the same inhabitants as in the time of Tang Jun. They died and came back to life as white bones and raw meat, which they used to seek his bounty.

古文：臣诚无识，孰不戴天。
现代文：臣确实没有见识，谁不可以顶天生在人世间。
English: The minister really has no idea, who can not be born into the world.

古文：疏远亩陇，绝望高阙，而降其接引，优以旨喻，于臣微物，足为荣陨。
现代文：遥远地农耕，断绝了进入宫阙的期望，然而朝廷颁布旨令引进接见我，给予特殊的谕旨，对于臣下这微小的人物，足为天降荣誉。
English: Farming in a faraway land cut off my hopes of entering the imperial court. However, the imperial court issued an order to bring me in for an audience and gave me a special decree. For this tiny person of a vassal, it was enough to be an honor from heaven.

古文：况刚条落叶，忽沾云露；周行所置，复齿盛流。
现代文：比方刚劲的枝条干枯落叶，忽然给它浸润许多露水；大道填塞丁东西，又变得繁盛流畅。
English: For example, a vigorous branch with withered and fallen leaves is suddenly impregnated with a lot of dew; the avenue is filled with sediment and becomes prosperous and smooth again.

古文：但雕朽杇粪，徒成延奖；捕影系风，终无效答。 
现代文：但朽木与粪土不可雕琢粉刷，白白地被延誉和奖掖；捕影系风难有所得，最终无由报效答谢。 
English: However, dead wood and dung cannot be chiseled and whitewashed, and they are praised and awarded in vain; it is difficult for a film-capture style to gain something, and ultimately there is no way to repay the favor.

古文：又启谢东宫曰： 臣闻之，先圣以 众恶之，必察焉；众好之，必察焉 。岂非孤特则积毁所归，比周则积誉斯信？
现代文：又启谢皇太子说： 臣听说，先圣以 众人厌恶他，一定要考察；众人喜爱他，也一定要去考察，难道不是孤傲特殊则成了众毁所归，结党营私则众誉变得可信?
English: The crown prince also said, "The minister heard that the first saint was detested by the people, so he must investigate; the people loved him, so he must also investigate. Isn't it true that the arrogant and special one became the ruin of the people, and the party and the private one became credible?

古文：知好恶之间，必待明鉴。
现代文：知道好与恶之间，必须等待明白察检。
English: To know the difference between good and evil, we must wait for a clear inspection.

古文：故晏婴再为阿宰，而前毁后誉。
现代文：所以晏婴再次任阿地长官，而从前毁谤他的人现在称誉他。
English: As a result, he has been reappointed as governor of Aden, and his former detractors are now praising him.

古文：后誉出于阿意，前毁由于直道。
现代文：后来称誉他是出自对他的阿谀，以前对他的毁谤则是由于直道。
English: Later, he was praised by his grandma, and before, he was slandered because of his uprightness.

古文：是以一犬所噬，旨酒贸其甘酸；一手所摇，嘉树变其生死。
现代文：所以一只狗所咬，美酒改变了它的甜与酸；一只手所摇，好端端的树改变了它的生舆死。
English: Therefore, when a dog bites, the wine changes its sweetness and sourness; when a hand shakes, the tree changes its life and death.

古文：又邹阳有言，士无贤愚，入朝见嫉。
现代文：又邹阳有流言，士人无论贤愚，一进入朝廷就会被人嫉妒。
English: There is also a rumor in Shenyang that no matter how wise or foolish a judge is, he will be envied as soon as he enters the imperial court.

古文：至若臧文之下展季，靳尚之放灵均，绛侯之排贾生，平津之陷主父，自兹厥后，其徒实繁。
现代文：至于像臧文氏罢黜柳下惠，靳尚流放屈原，周勃排挤贾谊，公孙弘陷害主父偃，从逭以后，像这类人实在很多。
English: As for people like Yu Wen who ousted Liu Shih-hui, Yu Shang who exiled Qu Yuan, Zhou Bo who ousted Jia Yi, and Gongsun Hong who framed his master Yu, there are many people like this after Yu.

古文：曲笔短辞，不暇殚述，寸管所窥，常由切齿。
现代文：徇情的曲笔诽谤人的短辞，没有空闲去尽述，笔下所窥见的，常使我痛恨得咬牙切齿。
English: I have no leisure to recite all the slanderous phrases of a sentimental songwriter, and what I see in the pen often makes me hate it with gritted teeth.

古文：殿下诲道观书，俯同好学，前载枉直，备该神览。
现代文：殿下诲道观览书籍，俯同好学，前人记载的冤枉曲直，全部留心阅览。
English: His Royal Highness is fond of reading books, is eager to learn, and carefully reads all the wrongdoings recorded by his predecessors.

古文：臣昔因立侍，亲承绪言，飘风贝锦，譬彼谗慝，圣旨殷勤，深以为叹。
现代文：臣昔日因立侍身旁，亲自承受绪言，暴起的风诬陷他人，明白他们是恶言歹意的邪恶之人，圣旨情意周到，令人深深感叹。
English: The minister once stood beside me and personally received the preamble, the wind of the uprising framed others, knowing that they were evil people with evil intentions, and the holy will was thoughtful and deeply regrettable.

古文：臣资愚履直，不能杜渐防微，曾未几何，逢訧罹难。
现代文：臣下天资愚蠢操守正直，不能防微杜渐，未曾过多少时间，就遇到指责遭到灾难。
English: The vassal's talent is stupid, his integrity is honest, and he can't prevent minor mistakes. It didn't take much time before he was criticized and suffered a disaster.

古文：虽吹毛洗垢，在朝而同嗟；而严文峻法，肆奸其必奏。
现代文：虽然吹开皮毛洗去所藏污垢，在朝廷的人为此同慨叹；然而严酷的条文峻厉的法律，恣行奸恶的人他们必然上奏。
English: Although blowing open the fur to wash away the hidden dirt, the people in the imperial court lamented about it; however, the harsh provisions of the law, the arbitrariness of the wicked, they are bound to play.

古文：不顾卖友，志欲要君，自非上帝运超己之光，昭陵阳之虐，舞文虚谤，不取信于宸明，在缧婴纆，幸得蠲于庸暗。
现代文：不顾出卖朋友，目的是要挟君主，正是上帝运用超己的光芒，揭示出陵阳的暴虐，舞弄笔墨专事诽谤的人，在圣明的君主那裹得不到信任，在牢狱中被绳索捆绑的罪人，在庸暗中幸运得到宽免。
English: Notwithstanding the betrayal of a friend for the purpose of blackmailing a prince, it is God who, by the use of a transcendent light, reveals the tyranny of the evil one; the slanderer who plays with pen and ink is not trusted by the prince of light; the sinner who is bound with cords in prison is fortunately pardoned in the darkness.

古文：裁下免黜之书，仍颁朝会之旨。
现代文：才颁下免除废黜的诏书，便又颁下参加朝会的圣旨。
English: It was only after the imperial edict exempting him from dethronement was issued that he also issued the imperial decree to attend the Imperial Court Assembly.

古文：小人未识通方，絷马悬车，息绝朝觐。
现代文：小人未识通达的道术，而是拴缚马停住车子，拒绝去朝见君主。
English: The villain did not know the way of Taoism, but tied the horse to stop the car and refused to go to see the monarch.

古文：方愿灭影销声，遂移林谷。
现代文：正希望销声匿迹，于是迁徙到林谷中。
English: He was hoping to disappear, so he moved to a wooded valley.

古文：不悟天听罔已，造次必彰，不以距违见疵，复使引籍云陛。
现代文：没有醒悟君主的视听是无穷的，急遽地一定要彰明，不以违拗谕旨被非议，又让门使引导入朝廷。
English: Monarchs who have not woken up to the fact that audio-visual resources are infinite must urgently make this clear, lest they be accused of disobeying the Emperor's edict, and let themselves be led into the Imperial Court by courtiers.

古文：降宽和之色，垂布帛之言，形之千载，所蒙已厚；况乃恩等特召，荣同起家，望古自惟，弥觉多忝。
现代文：给以宽厚温和的脸色，留下布帛般柔软的言语，显示出难得的机会，所受到的恩惠已经很丰厚了；更何况您给的恩惠舆特召相等同，受到的荣誉与起家任职相等同，仰望古人我自己思考，更觉得有许多羞愧。
English: Giving a generous and gentle face, leaving a cloth-like soft speech, showing a rare opportunity, the favors received are already very rich; moreover, the favors you give are equal to the special call, the honor received is equal to the starting position, looking up to the ancients to think for myself, I feel a lot of shame.

古文：但未渝丹石，永藏轮轨，相彼工言，构兹媒諓。
现代文：但没有改变赤诚和坚定，永藏轮轨，然而察看他的花言巧语，仍在制造谗言诬害别人。
English: However, he has not changed his sincerity and firmness. He still keeps his wheels on the track, but if you look at his rhetoric, he is still making slanderous remarks and slandering others.

古文：且款冬而生，已凋柯叶，空延德泽，无谢阳春。 
现代文：而且凌冬而生，已凋谢了枝叶，白白地迎到德惠恩泽，无以报谢阳春。 
English: Moreover, it was born in the winter, and its branches and leaves have already withered. It has welcomed the blessing of virtue and benevolence in vain, and has nothing to thank the spring for.

古文：后为太子仆，母忧去职。
现代文：后来任太子仆，居母亲丧离职。
English: Later, he was appointed the prince's footman, but left the post after his mother's death.

古文：服阕，除安西湘东王谘议参军，迁黄门侍郎，尚书吏部郎，坐受人绢一束，为饷者所讼，左迁信威临贺王长史。
现代文：服丧期满除服，授任安西湘束王谘议参军，迁任黄门侍郎，尚书吏部郎，因接受别人馈赠的一束绢，被馈赠的人诉讼，降职任信威临贺王长史。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was relieved of his duties, appointed to the Anxi Xiangzhu Wang to advise and join the army, transferred to the Huangmen waiter, Shangshu official, because of accepting a bunch of gifts from others, the person who was given the gift sued, and was demoted to the position of Xinwei Linhe Wang Changshi.

古文：顷之，迁秘书监。
现代文：不久，迁任秘书监。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of secretary supervisor.

古文：大同五年，卒官，时年五十九。
现代文：大同五年，在官任上去世，时年五十九岁。
English: He died in office five years later, at the age of fifty-nine.

古文：孝绰少有盛名，而仗气负才，多所陵忽，有不合意，极言诋訾。
现代文：孝绰年轻时有盛名，然而他仗恃才学任性使气，对人多加欺凌轻慢，有不合心意的，便夸大其辞加以毁谤。
English: When he was young, Xiaoqiao was famous. However, he learned from others to be self-willed. He bullied and belittled many people. If he did not like someone, he exaggerated his words and slandered them.

古文：领军臧盾、太府卿沈僧杲等，并被时遇，孝绰尤轻之。
现代文：领军咸盾、太府卿沈僧呆等人，都被君主赏识，而孝绰格外轻视他们。
English: The leader of the army, Xian Dun, the Grand Prefect, Shen Zengdi, and others were all appreciated by the monarch, but Xiaozhuo despised them in particular.

古文：每于朝集会同处，公卿间无所与语，反呼驺卒访道途间事，由此多忤于物。
现代文：每当在朝廷集会同处时，公卿之间没有他可与之说话的人，反而呼来仆隶向他们打听道途间的传言，由此得罪了许多人。
English: Whenever there was a meeting in the court, the nobles had no one to talk to, so they called their servants to ask them about the rumors, which offended many people.

古文：孝绰辞藻为后进所宗，世重其文，每作一篇，朝成暮遍，好事者咸讽诵传写，流闻绝域。
现代文：孝绰的辞藻被后辈推崇效法，当世的人很看重他的文章，每作一篇，早上写成晚上就会传遍，好事的人都加以讽诵传写，文章能流闻到很远的区域。
English: His words of filial piety were revered and imitated by the younger generation. People in the modern world highly valued his articles. Each article he wrote in the morning would be passed around in the evening. People would recite and write about his good deeds, and his articles could be heard far and wide.

古文：文集数十万言，行于世。
现代文：文集有数十万言，在当世流传。
English: The anthology contains hundreds of thousands of words and has been passed down to this day.

古文：孝绰兄弟及群从诸子侄，当时有七十人，并能属文，近古未之有也。
现代文：孝绰兄弟及群从诸子侄，当时有七十人，都能写文章，近代没有这样的。
English: At that time, there were seventy people who were able to write articles, including the Takaaki brothers and a group of their sons and nephews. This is unprecedented in modern times.

古文：其三妹适琅邪王叔英、吴郡张嵊、东海徐悱，并有才学；悱妻文尤清拔。
现代文：他的三个妹妹分别嫁给琅邪人王叔英、吴郡人张嵊、东海人徐悱，她们都有才学；徐悱的妻子文辞格外清秀脱俗。
English: His three younger sisters were married to Wang Shuying, a wicked person from Shandong Province, Zhang Luo, a person from Wu County, and Xu Yao, a person from the East China Sea. They were all talented students; Xu Yao's wife's writing was exceptionally clear and distinguished.

古文：悱，仆射徐勉子，为晋安郡，卒，丧还京师，妻为祭文，辞甚忄妻怆。
现代文：徐悱，是仆射徐勉的儿子，任晋安郡太守，死后，遗体送回京师，妻子为他写祭文，文辞极其悲伤。
English: After the death of Xu Zhen, the son of the minion Xu Zhen, who was appointed the governor of Jinan County, his body was sent back to the capital, and his wife wrote an offering for him, the wording of which was extremely sad.

古文：勉本欲为哀文，既睹此文，于是阁笔。
现代文：徐勉本想为儿子写哀文，看到她的祭文，便搁笔不写了。
English: Xu Mian originally wanted to write a lament for his son, but when he saw her offering, he put down his pen and did not write.

古文：孝绰子谅，字求信。
现代文：孝绰儿子谅，字求信。
English: Filial piety, forgiveness of one's son, and asking for a letter are not enough.

古文：少好学，有文才，尤博悉晋代故事，时人号曰 皮里晋书 。
现代文：年轻时好学，有文才，尤其博知置伐典故，时人称呼他 皮裹置书 。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn and a talented writer. He was especially well-versed in historical allusions. At that time, people called him "Pig-in-a-poke."

古文：历官著作佐郎，太子舍人，王府主簿，功曹史，中城王记室参军。
现代文：历任著作佐郎，太子舍人，王府主簿，功曹史，宣城王记室参军。
English: Successively authored the books "Saro," "Daisho Shojin," "Kofu Mainsho," "Gonzoshi," and "Senshiro King's Diary" before joining the army.

古文：王筠，字元礼，一字德柔，琅邪临沂人。
现代文：王筠字元礼，又字德柔，是琅邪临沂人。
English: Wang Qian, also known as De Rong, is a member of the Linyi people.

古文：祖僧虔，齐司空简穆公。
现代文：祖父名僵卢，曾任蛮曲司空个垄公。
English: My grandfather's name was Jianlu, and he was once the ruler of the Song Dynasty.

古文：父楫，太中大夫。
现代文：父亲名担，任太中大夫。
English: His father was a well-known official, and was appointed to the post of Vice-Minister of Education.

古文：筠幼警寤，七岁能属文。
现代文：王筠幼时机敏聪慧，七岁就能写文章。
English: As a child, Wang Yao had a keen sense of timing and was able to write articles at the age of seven.

古文：年十六，为《芍药赋》，甚美。
现代文：十六岁时，作《芍药赋》，写得极美。
English: At the age of sixteen, he wrote the poem "Drug Fu," which is extremely beautiful.

古文：及长，清静好学，与从兄泰齐名。
现代文：长大后，心性纯正恬静，喜欢学习，与堂兄王泰名望相等。
English: After he grew up, his temperament was pure and calm, he liked to study, and his reputation was equal to that of his cousin Wang Tai.

古文：陈郡谢览，览弟举，亦有重誉，时人为之语曰： 谢有览举，王有养炬。 
现代文：陈郡人谢览，谢览弟谢举，也有极高的声誉，时人因此说： 谢有览举，王有养炬。 
English: Chen County people Xie Xuan, Xie Xuan's younger brother Xie Jiu, also have a very high reputation. Therefore, people at that time said: Xie has Xian Jiu, Wang has Yang Jiao.

古文：炬是泰，养即筠，并小字也。
现代文：炬是泰，养就是筠，均是两人的小名。
English: 炬 is Tai,养 is, both are diminutives of the two.

古文：起家中军临川王行参军，迁太子舍人，除尚书殿中郎。
现代文：起家任中军临川王行参军，迁任太子舍人，授任尚书殿中郎。
English: The founder of the family joined the army of the Linchuan Wang Xing, was transferred to the position of the prince's son, and was awarded the position of the middle son of Shang Shudong.

古文：王氏过江以来，未有居郎署者，或劝逡巡不就，筠曰： 陆平原东南之秀，王文度独步江东，吾得比踪昔人，何所多恨。 
现代文：王氏过长江以来，没有人任郎署官职的，有人劝他还是退避不要去任职，王筠说： 陆机是东南的优秀人才，王坦之是江东独一无二的人才，吾能得以与昔人齐步并驾，哪有太多的怨恨。 
English: Since Mr. Wang crossed the Yangtze River, no one has been appointed to the official post of the Lang Department. Some people advised him to avoid taking up the post. Wang Yao said: Lu Ji is an outstanding talent in Southeast Asia, Wang Tan is a unique talent in the East of the Yangtze River. I can keep pace with the ancients. There is too much resentment.

古文：乃欣然就职。
现代文：于是欣然就职。
English: So he gladly took up his post.

古文：尚书令沈约，当世辞宗，每见筠文，咨嗟吟咏，以为不逮也。
现代文：尚书令沈约，被当世人敬仰为辞宗，每当他看见王筠的文章，赞叹吟咏，认为自己都不如。
English: Shang Shuling was admired by the world. Whenever he saw Wang Yao's article, he praised Jing Yao and thought that he was not as good as him.

古文：尝谓筠： 昔蔡伯喈见王仲宣称曰： 王公之孙也，吾家书籍，悉当相与。 仆虽不敏，请附斯言。
现代文：曾经对王筠说： 昔日墓邕看见王整称赏说： 您是王公的孙子，我家的书籍，全部送给您，我虽不聪慧，请附赠造句话。
English: He once said to Wang Yao: Once upon a time, a tomb raider saw Wang Zhengyou and said: You are the grandson of the prince, all the books of my family are given to you, although I am not clever, please add a gift sentence.

古文：自谢朓诸贤零落已后，平生意好，殆将都绝，不谓疲暮，复逢于君。 
现代文：自从谢跳诸位贤人故去之后，平生要好的朋友，几乎全都没有了，没想到在衰老之年，又与君相逢。 
English: Since the passing of all the sages of Xiejian, I have lost almost all of my lifelong friends. I did not expect to meet you again in my old age.

古文：约于郊居宅造阁斋，筠为草木十咏，书之于壁，皆直写文词，不加篇题。
现代文：选曲在他郊外的居宅修造阁斋，玉篷作草木十诗，写在墙壁上，都是直写词文，不加篇题。
English: He built a pavilion in his suburban home to select songs, and made a canopy for plants and trees. Ten poems were written on the walls, all of which were directly written words, without adding a title.

古文：约谓人云： 此诗指物呈形，无假题署。 
现代文：选钓对人说： 这些诗都是指明事物描绘出它们的形状，不需要藉用题目加以说明。 
English: These poems are all about pointing out things and depicting their shapes, and there is no need to explain them with a title.

古文：约制《郊居赋》，构思积时，犹未都毕，乃要筠示其草，筠读至 雌霓连蜷 ，约抚掌欣抃曰： 仆尝恐人呼为霓。 
现代文：这垫作《郊居赋》，构思很久，还不能完成，便邀请王塑向他出示草稿，王蟹读至 雌霓读音为五激反连踡 ，选塾高兴地拍着手说： 我曾担心人将霓读为五鶸反。 
English: Wang Shou was invited to show him the draft of this "Suburban Fuxu," which had been conceived for a long time and could not yet be completed. Wang Crab read until the female cormorant was pronounced as the five-excited anti-continuous cormorant, and Xuan Ju happily clapped his hands and said: I was worried that people would read the cormorant as the five-excited anti-continuous cormorant.

古文：次至 坠石磓星 ，及 冰悬坎而带坻 。筠皆击节称赞。
现代文：又读到 坠石槌星 及 冰悬坎而带坻 ，王筠都击节称赞。
English: Wang Yao also read "The Falling Rock Hammer Star" and "The Ice Hanging Over the Cliff and the Dragonfly," both of which Wang Yao praised.

古文：约曰： 知音者希，真赏殆绝，所以相要，政在此数句耳。 
现代文：沈约说： 知音者少，真正能欣赏诗的人几乎没有了，我所以邀请您诵诗，正是在这几句上。 
English: Shen Yu said: There are few people who know the sound, and there are almost no people who can really appreciate the poem, so I invite you to recite the poem, it is in these few sentences.

古文：筠又尝为诗呈约，即报书云： 览所示诗，实为丽则，声和被纸，光影盈字。
现代文：王筠曾作诗呈送选面，这钓立即回信说： 览所示诗，确实华美典雅，诗的音律覆盖纸上，风光景物充满字裹行间。
English: Wang Qian had written a poem to present the selection, and this fish immediately replied: The poem shown in the exhibition is indeed gorgeous and elegant, the poem's melody covers the paper, and the scenery is full of words and lines.

古文：夔、牙接响，顾有余惭；孔翠群翔，岂不多愧。
现代文：夔、值夏的乐声相继，舆您的诗相比还有余惭；孑雀翠鸟群翔，难道不有许多羞愧。
English: The music of the summer in succession, compared to your poem, there is still more shame; the chaffinches and kingfishers fly in flocks, is there not a lot of shame.

古文：古情拙目，每伫新奇，烂然总至，权舆已尽。
现代文：思古之情见识短浅，每当积储了新颖奇特的思绪，光明灿烂一齐到来，但刚一开头就全用尽了。
English: Nostalgia is short-sighted. Whenever new and strange thoughts are accumulated, the bright and brilliant come together, but they are all exhausted at the very beginning.

古文：会昌昭发，兰挥玉振，克谐之义，宁比笙簧。
现代文：会当兴盛隆昌，荣光焕发，贤能的人振奋有为，和谐的意义，宁可比成笙与簧片。
English: It is better to be a reed and a reed, than to be a reed and a reed.

古文：思力所该，一至乎此，叹服吟研，周流忘念。
现代文：思维能力完备丰富，到了如此地步，叹服吟研，周详浏览忘掉杂念。
English: The thinking ability is complete and rich, to such an extent, sighing, studying, thoroughly browsing and forgetting the distractions.

古文：昔时幼壮，颇爱斯文，含咀之间，倏焉疲暮。
现代文：昔时我年少体健，很喜爱这样的文辞，品味之间，忽然到了衰老之年。
English: Once upon a time, when I was young and healthy, I was very fond of such words. Between tastes, I suddenly reached the age of aging.

古文：不及后进，诚非一人，擅美推能，实归吾子。
现代文：不如后辈，确实不衹一人，推举才能独享美名，实归于你。
English: As opposed to the younger generation, there is indeed no one who can be elected to enjoy the good name, which really belongs to you.

古文：迟比闲日，清觏乃申。 
现代文：慢慢地等到闲暇之，佳构才得以申舒。 
English: Slowly wait until the leisure time, good structure to be able to Shenshu.

古文：筠为文能压强韵，每公宴并作，辞必妍美。
现代文：王筠写诗赋能用生僻少用的韵，每次公宴一起写作，他的文辞一定很妍美。
English: Wang Qian is able to write poems with rhymes that are rare and rarely used. He writes together with every public banquet. His words must be very beautiful.

古文：约常从容启高祖曰： 晚来名家，唯见王筠独步。 
现代文：沈约常从容启禀高祖说： 晚来的名家，惟见王筠是独一无二的。 
English: Shen Yotong said to Gao Zu, "The famous family came late, but Wang Yao is unique.

古文：累迁太子洗马，中舍人，并掌东宫管记。
现代文：累经升迁任太子洗马，中舍人，并掌束宫管记。
English: He was promoted to the position of crown prince, and was appointed to wash horses, attend court, and be in charge of the palace administration.

古文：昭明太子爱文学士，常与筠及刘孝绰、陆倕、到洽、殷芸等游宴玄圃，太子独执筠袖抚孝绰肩而言曰： 所谓左把浮丘袖，右拍洪崖肩。 
现代文：昭明太子喜爱有文学才能的人，常舆王筠及刘孝绰、陆便、到洽、殷芸等人在玄圃游宴，太于唯独拉着王筠的衣袖抚摸孝绰的肩说： 造就称作左把浮丘袖，右拍洪崖肩。 
English: Prince Zhaoming loved people with literary talent. Wang Yao and Liu Xiaoqiao, Lu Bin, Zu Cha, Yin Yun and others often held banquets in the meadow. He was the only one to pull Wang Yao's sleeve and touch Xiao Qiao's shoulder and said: "The creation is called the left arm of the pontoon sleeve, the right arm of the cliff shoulder."

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：他被推重就像这样。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：筠又与殷芸以方雅见礼焉。
现代文：王筠又舆殷芸因诗文旨意方正风雅受到礼遇。
English: Wang Yao and My Yin Yi were treated with courtesy because of their poetic intention and formal style.

古文：出为丹阳尹丞、北中郎谘议参军，迁中书郎。
现代文：出任丹阳尹丞、北中郎谘议参军，迁任中书郎。
English: Danyang Yinzheng and Kitanakuro were appointed to advise on joining the army, and then transferred to the position of Chushuro.

古文：奉敕制《开善寺宝志大师碑文》，词甚丽逸。
现代文：奉敕作《开善寺实志大师碑文》，文词极华丽清逸。
English: "Kaisennji Shishi Master's Inscription" by Bongye, the words are extremely gorgeous and elegant.

古文：又敕撰《中书表奏》三十卷，及所上赋颂，都为一集。
现代文：又敕撰《中书表奏》三十卷，以及所奏上的赋颂，都编为一集。
English: He also transcribed the thirty volumes of "Chu Shushifuo," and the eulogies that were played were compiled into a single volume.

古文：俄兼宁远湘东王长史，行府、国、郡事。
现代文：不久兼任宁远湘束王长史，行府、藩国、郡事。
English: Soon, he also served as the governor of Ningyuan Xiangzhu Wangchangshi, and was in charge of the administration of the prefecture, the province, and the county.

古文：除太子家令，复掌管记。
现代文：授任太子家令，复掌管记。
English: He was given the title of Prince's Household Order, and resumed control of the family register.

古文：普通元年，以母忧去职。
现代文：普通元年，居母亲丧离职。
English: In the first year of the year, after the death of his mother, he left his job.

古文：筠有孝性，毁瘠过礼，服阕后，疾废久之。
现代文：王筠对母亲很孝顺，服丧超过常礼，因哀伤过度而消瘦，服丧期满除服后，得病很久。
English: Wang Yao was very filial to his mother. He went through more than the usual mourning rituals, and lost weight due to excessive grief. After the mourning period was over, he fell ill for a long time.

古文：六年，除尚书吏部郎，迁太子中庶子，领羽林监，又改领步兵。
现代文：六年，授任尚书吏部郎，迁任太子中庶子，领羽林监，又改任领步兵。
English: In the sixth year, he was given the post of Shoshriiburo, transferred to the position of the prince's middle child, the leader of the forest inspectors, and was also reappointed as the leader of the infantry.

古文：中大通二年，迁司徒左长史。
现代文：中大通二年，迁任司徒左长史。
English: In the second year of junior high school, he was transferred to the position of Shitusa Chosho.

古文：三年，昭明太子薨，敕为哀策文，复见嗟赏。
现代文：三年，昭明太子去世，敕令王筠写哀策文，又被人们赞叹欣赏。
English: Three years later, after the death of Crown Prince Shouming, Zou ordered Wang Hui to write a lamentation, which was admired and appreciated by the people.

古文：寻出为贞威将军、临海太守，在郡被讼，不调累年。
现代文：不久出任贞威将军、临海太守，在郡被人讼诉，职务没有调升有好几年。
English: He was soon appointed General Zhenwei and Linhai Dazhong, but was sued in the county and was not promoted for several years.

古文：大同初，起为云麾豫章王长史，迁秘书监。
现代文：大同初年，起任云麾豫章王长史，迁任秘书监。
English: In the first year of Datong, he was transferred to the position of secretary-supervisor.

古文：五年，除太府卿。
现代文：五年，授太府卿。
English: Five years later, he was given the title of daifu-kyo.

古文：明年，迁度支尚书。
现代文：次年，迁任度支尚书。
English: The following year, the transfer was approved.

古文：中大同元年，出为明威将军、永嘉太守，以疾固辞，徙为光禄大夫，俄迁云骑将军、司徒左长史。
现代文：中大同元年，出任明威将军、永嘉太守，因病坚决辞任，就移任光禄大夫，不久迁任云骑将军、司徒左长史。
English: In the first year of junior high school, he was appointed as Mingwei general and Yongjia governor. He resigned due to illness and was transferred to Guanglu doctor. He was soon transferred to Yunjie general and Szuzu Changshi.

古文：太清二年，侯景寇逼，筠时不入城。
现代文：太清二年，侯景侵逼京城，王筠当时不入城内。
English: In the second year of the Taiching Dynasty, Houjing invaded and besieged the capital, and Wang Xi did not enter the city at that time.

古文：明年，太宗即位，为太子詹事。
现代文：次年，太宗即位，任太子詹事。
English: The following year, Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, and Prince Zhan Zhi was appointed.

古文：筠旧宅先为贼所焚，乃寓居国子祭酒萧子云宅，夜忽有盗攻之，惊惧坠井卒，时年六十九。
现代文：王筠的旧宅先前被贼所烧焚，便借住在国子祭酒萧子云家，夜间忽有盗贼进攻住宅，王箠惊惧坠井而死，时年六十九岁。
English: Wang Yao's old house had previously been burned down by thieves, so he rented a room in the home of Xiao Ziyun, the son of a provincial official. At night, thieves suddenly attacked the house. Wang Yao panicked and fell into a well, where he died at the age of 69.

古文：家人十余人同遇害。
现代文：家人有十多人同时遇害。
English: More than a dozen members of his family were killed at the same time.

古文：筠状貌寝小，长不满六尺。
现代文：王整长相丑个子小，身高不满六尺。
English: Wang Zhengyi is ugly, short and less than six feet tall.

古文：性弘厚，不以艺能高人，而少擅才名，与刘孝绰见重当世。
现代文：性情宽大忠厚，不因有技艺而高人一等，然而年轻时就具有才华享有名声，舆刘孝绰同被当世人推重。
English: Generous and loyal in nature, he is not superior because of his skills, but when he was young, he had the talent to enjoy a reputation, and he was highly regarded by the world.

古文：其自序曰： 余少好书，老而弥笃。虽偶见瞥观，皆即疏记，后重省览，欢兴弥深，习与性成，不觉笔倦。
现代文：他写的自序说： 我年轻时喜好读书，老了更加专心，虽然是偶尔观览，也全部分条记下，以后重新观览，欢兴更深，习惯与性情已养成了，不觉得用笔疲倦。
English: He wrote in his autobiography: When I was young, I liked to read. When I got older, I was more attentive. Although I only read occasionally, I wrote down all the passages. Later, when I re-read them, I enjoyed them more. My habits and disposition had already developed, and I didn't feel tired of using a pen.

古文：自年十三四，齐建武二年乙亥至梁大同六年，四十载矣。
现代文：从十三四岁，也就是齐朝建武二年乙亥开始，至梁朝大同六年，四十六年了。
English: From the age of thirteen and four, that is, the beginning of the second year of Jianwu in the Qi Dynasty, to the sixth year of Datong in the Liang Dynasty, it has been forty-six years.

古文：幼年读《五经》，皆七八十遍。
现代文：幼年时读《五经》，都读了七八十遍。
English: When I read the Five Classics as a child, I read them all seventy or eighty times.

古文：爱《左氏春秋》，吟讽常为口实，广略去取，凡三过五抄。
现代文：喜爱《左氏春秋》，它成了经常议论、诵读的内容，广略去取，凡三遇五抄。
English: He loved "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo Shi," which became a frequent topic of discussion and recitation. He would make broad sketches and then make five copies.

古文：余经及《周官》、《仪礼》、《国语》、《尔雅》、《山海经》、《本草》并再抄。
现代文：其余的经书以及《周官》、《仪礼》、《国语》、《尔雅》、《山海经》、《本草》都抄过两遍。
English: The rest of the scriptures, as well as "Zhou Guan," "Rite," "National Language," "Rya," "Sanhai Jing" and "Honcao" were copied twice.

古文：子史诸集皆一遍。
现代文：子史诸集皆抄遇一遍。
English: All the children's history anthologies have been copied and rewritten.

古文：未尝倩人假手，并躬自抄录，大小百余卷。
现代文：未曾藉助别人的手，都是亲自抄录，大小有百余卷。
English: I have never used the help of others, and I have copied everything myself. There are more than a hundred volumes.

古文：不足传之好事，盖以备遗忘而已。 
现代文：不值得传给好事的人，衹是用它备遗忘罢了。 
English: It is not worth passing on good things to people, it is only used to prepare them for forgetting.

古文：又与诸儿书论家世集云： 史传称安平崔氏及汝南应氏，并累世有文才，所以范蔚宗云崔氏 世擅雕龙 。
现代文：又给诸儿的信中论述家世集说： 史书人物传记称安平人崔压及涂亩人尘压，都历代出现有文才的人，所以蓝坠说崔旦 世代雕龙 。
English: In his letter to the children, he also discussed the genealogy: According to the biographies of historical figures, Anping Cui De and Tu Mu Cui De were both people with literary talent throughout the ages, so the Blue Pendant said that Cui Dan was the generation of dragon carving.

古文：然不过父子两三世耳；非有七叶之中，名德重光，爵位相继，人人有集，如吾门世者也。
现代文：然而不过是父子两三代罢了，没有七世之中，名德光辉相承，爵位连续继承，人人有文集，像吾门家世的了。
English: However, it is only two or three generations of father and son, and there is no seventh generation in which the name and virtue are passed down, the title is continuously inherited, and everyone has a collection of works, like my family.

古文：沈少傅约语人云： 吾少好百家之言，身为四代之史，自开辟已来，未有爵位蝉联，文才相继，如王氏之盛者也。 汝等仰观堂构，思各努力。 
现代文：少傅选面对人说： 我年轻时喜好百家之言，亲自编撰了四个朝代的史书，自开辟以来，没有爵位蝉联，有文才的人连续不绝，像王氏这样兴盛的，你们要仰观祖先的遣业，思考各自的努力。 
English: Shao Fu Xuan said to the person in front of him: When I was young, I liked the words of a hundred families. I personally compiled a history book of four dynasties. Since it was opened, there has been no peerage, and people with literary talent have been continuous. If you are prosperous like Mr. Wang, you should look up to your ancestors and think about your own efforts.

古文：筠自撰其文章，以一官为一集，自洗马、中书、中庶子、吏部佐、临海、太府各十卷，《尚书》三十卷，凡一百卷，行于世。
现代文：王筻自己编撰文集，以任一官时写的文章为一集，从洗马、中书郎、中庶子、吏部郎、左佐、堕涂太守至太府卿，各为十卷，度支尚书三十卷，共一百卷，在当世流传。
English: Wang Xi himself compiled a collection of essays, with the articles written by any official as a set, from the washing horse, the middle school teacher, the middle child, the secretary, the left assistant, the dethroned governor to the prefect, each of which is ten volumes, and thirty volumes of the book, a total of one hundred volumes, which are passed down to the present day.

古文：史臣陈吏部尚书姚察曰：王僧孺之巨学，刘孝绰之词藻，主非不好也，才非不用也，其拾青紫，取极贵，何难哉！
现代文：史臣陈吏部尚书面塞说：王僧噩的鸿大学问，刘耋镗的华美词藻，君主不是不喜好，他们的才能不是不用，他们穿上贵官服装，取得极重要地位，有什么难的呀!
English: Historian and scholar Chen Li said in a written note: Wang Sangyak's Hung Da University asked, Liu Ye's flowery words, the monarch is not disliked, their talents are not useless, they put on dignitaries' clothing and obtain a very important position, what is difficult!

古文：而孝绰不拘言行，自踬身名，徒郁抑当年，非不遇也。
现代文：然而孝绰不拘束自己的言行，自己使地位名誉受到挫辱，白白地忧懑压抑于当年，不是没有恩遇呀。
English: However, the filial piety did not restrain his words and deeds, he let his status and honor be humiliated, and suppressed his worries and anxieties in vain that year. It was not without a stroke of luck.

