古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：人焉受气？
现代文：黄帝问岐伯说：人是从什么地方得到的精气？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked Qibo, "Where does a person get the essence from?"

古文：阴阳焉会？
现代文：阴阳是在哪里交会？
English: Where does yin and yang meet?

古文：何气为营？
现代文：什么气为营气？
English: What is the spirit of the camp?

古文：何气为卫？
现代文：什么气为卫气？
English: What is the spirit of the age?

古文：营安从生？
现代文：营卫二气是从哪里生成的？
English: Where did Yingwei Erqi come from?

古文：卫于焉会？
现代文：卫气又是如何与营气交会的？
English: How did the spirit of the age meet the spirit of the camp?

古文：老壮不同气，阴阳异位，愿闻其会。
现代文：老人和壮年人气的盛衰不相同，营卫二气的运行部位也不同，我想知道他们是如何会合的。
English: The rise and fall of the popularity of the elderly and the middle-aged is different, and the operation sites of the two airs are also different. I want to know how they meet.

古文：岐伯答曰：人受气于谷，谷入于胃，以传与肺，五脏六腑，皆以受气，其清者为营，浊者为卫，营在脉中，卫在脉外，营周不休，五十而复大会，阴阳相贯，如环无端。
现代文：岐伯回答说：人身的营卫之气是由水谷产生的，水谷进入胃中，化生为水谷精气，水谷精气传至肺，再借肺气的输布功能传送周身，从而五脏六腑皆可接受水谷精气。其水谷精气中清轻而富于营养作用者为营气，其中重浊而剽悍者为卫气，营气循行在经脉之中，卫气行于经脉之外，营卫二气没有休止地循行运转，一昼夜运行人体五十周次，然后会合一次。由此，沿着阴经、阳经交替循环运转，没有终止。
English: Qi Bo replied: The human body's yingwei qi is produced by the trough. The trough enters the stomach and is transformed into the yingwei qi. The yingwei qi is transmitted to the lungs, and then transported around the body by means of the pulmonary air transport function, so that all the organs can receive the yingwei qi. Among the yingwei qi in the trough, the light and nutritious one is the yingwei qi, and the heavy and vigorous one is the yingwei qi. The yingwei qi follows the meridian, the yingwei qi goes outside the meridian, and the y

古文：卫气行于阴二十五度，行于阳二十五度，分为昼夜，故气至阳而起，至阴而止。
现代文：卫气的循行是夜间行于内脏二十五周，白天循行于阳经也是二十五周，以此而分出了昼夜。卫气行于阳经时，人便醒来开始活动；夜间气行于内脏时，人体就进入睡眠状态了。
English: The flow of qi in the internal organs is 25 weeks during the night, and 25 weeks during the day, thus separating day and night. When the qi flows in the internal organs during the day, people wake up and begin to move; when the qi flows in the internal organs during the night, the human body enters a sleep state.

古文：故曰，日中而阳陇为重阳，夜半而阴陇为重阴。
现代文：中午的时候，因为卫气都从内脏运转到了阳经，阳经的卫气最盛，故称为重阳；夜半时因为卫气都从阳经转运到了内脏，内脏的卫气最盛而称为重阴。
English: At noon, because the qi is transported from the internal organs to the yang jing, the qi of the yang jing is at its peak, so it is called the heavy yang; at midnight, because the qi is transported from the yang jing to the internal organs, the qi of the internal organs is at its peak, so it is called the heavy yin.

古文：故，太阴主内，太阳主外，各行二十五度，分为昼夜。夜半为阴陇，夜半后而为阴衰，平旦阴尽而阳受气矣。
现代文：营气行于脉中，起于手太阴肺经又终于手太阴肺经，因此说太阴经主持营气的运行；卫气行于脉外，始于足太阳膀胱经又止于足太阳膀胱经，所以说太阳经主持卫气的运行。营气周流十二经，昼夜各二十五周次，卫气昼行于阳，夜行于阴，亦各二十五周次，划分昼夜各半。夜半阴气最盛为阴陇，夜半过后则阴气渐衰，待到黎明时阴气已衰尽，而阳气渐盛。
English: The ying qi flows in the veins, starting from the palm of the hand and ending with the palm of the hand, so it is said that the ying qi presides over the movement of the ying qi; the yin qi flows outside the veins, starting from the foot and ending at the foot, so it is said that the ying qi presides over the movement of the ying qi. The ying qi circulates through twelve meridians, twenty-five times a day and night, and the yin qi circulates in the sun during the day and in the shade during the night, also twenty-five times a day and night, dividing the day and night into

古文：日中而阳陇，日西而阳衰，日入阳尽而阴受气矣。
现代文：中午阳气最盛为阳陇，夕阳西下时阳气渐衰，黄昏之时阳气已衰尽，而阴气渐盛。
English: At noon, the yang energy is at its peak, and when the sun sets, the yang energy gradually fades. At dusk, the yang energy has faded, and the yin energy is gradually on the rise.

古文：夜半而大会，万民皆卧，命曰合阴，平旦阴尽而阳受气，如是无已，与天地同纪。
现代文：夜半时，营气和卫气皆在阴分运行，正是二者相互会合的时候，人在这时都已经入睡了，因此称为合阴。
English: In the middle of the night, the ying qi and the yin qi are both in the yin phase. It is when the two meet each other that people have fallen asleep at this time, so it is called the yin phase.

古文：黄帝曰：老人之不夜瞑者，何气使然？
现代文：到黎明的时候内脏卫气衰尽，而阳经卫气开始运行。
English: By dawn, the visceral chakra is exhausted, and the yang chakra begins to function.

古文：少壮之人，不昼瞑者，何气使然？
现代文：就是这样没有终止，如同天地日月一样有规律。黄帝说：老人在夜里睡眠不安是什么原因造成的呢？
English: Just like that, there is no end, just as regular as the heavens and the earth, the sun and the moon. Huang Di said: What is the cause of the old man's sleep anxiety at night?

古文：岐伯答曰：壮者之气血盛，其肌肉滑，气道通，营卫之行不失其常，故昼精而夜瞑。
现代文：年轻人白天精力充沛，又是什么原理呢？岐伯回答说：年轻力壮的人气血盛满，肌肉滑利，气道就通畅，营气和卫气就能很正常的运行，因此白天能精力充沛，夜里睡眠也安稳。
English: Young people are full of energy during the day, and what is the principle? Qibao replied: young and strong people are full of blood, smooth muscles, smooth airways, and can run very normally. Therefore, they can be full of energy during the day and sleep well at night.

古文：老者之气血衰，其肌肉枯，气道涩，五脏之气相抟，其营气衰少而卫气内伐，故昼不精，夜不瞑。
现代文：而老年人气血衰弱，肌肉枯槁，其气道就艰涩不通，五脏之气不能相互沟通和协调，营气衰少，卫气内扰，营卫失调，不能以正常规律运行，因此表现为白天精力不充沛，而夜里难以入睡。
English: On the other hand, the elderly have weak qi and blood, the muscles are withered, the airway is difficult and impassable, the five viscera cannot communicate and coordinate with each other, the qi decreases, the qi is disturbed, and the qi is out of balance, and cannot operate in a normal manner. Therefore, the performance is not energetic during the day, and it is difficult to fall asleep at night.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻营卫之所行，皆何道从来？
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道营气和卫气，都是从什么地方发出的呢？
English: Huang Di said, "I want to know where the camp spirit and the spirit of the guard come from."

古文：岐伯答曰：营出于中焦，卫出于上焦。
现代文：岐伯回答说：营气出自于中焦，卫气出自于上焦。
English: Qibo replied: The camp spirit comes from the middle coke, and the spirit comes from the upper coke.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻三焦之所出。
现代文：黄帝说：我想听您说说三焦之气从何而起，又是如何运行的呢？
English: Huang Di said, "I would like to hear from you about where the three-focal point energy comes from and how it works.

古文：岐伯答曰：上焦出于胃上口，并咽以上，贯膈，而布胸中，走腋，循太阴之分而行，还至阳明，上至舌，下足阳明，常与营俱行于阳二十五度，行于阴亦二十五度，一周也。故五十度而复大会于手太阴矣。
现代文：岐伯回答说：上焦之气起于胃的上口，走咽部上行并布散于胸中，经过腋下，沿手太阴肺经的走向运行，在手指尖交会于手阳明大肠经，向上到达舌，又交会于足阳明胃经而循经运行。上焦之气通常与营气并行于阳二十五周，行于阴也是二十五周，一个昼夜是一个循环，共行五十周，而后又回到手太阴肺经完成一个循环。
English: Qibo replied, "The qi of the upper burn starts from the upper mouth of the stomach, travels up the pharynx and spreads to the chest, passes under the armpit, runs along the direction of the palmar-pancreatic meridian, crosses the palmar-pancreatic meridian at the tip of the finger, reaches the tongue, and crosses the palmar-pancreatic meridian at the foot. The qi of the upper burn usually runs parallel to the camp qi for twenty-five weeks in the sun, and for twenty-five weeks in the shade. A day and night is a cycle of fifty weeks, and then it returns to the palmar

古文：黄帝曰：人有热饮食下胃，其气未定，汗则出，或出于面，或出于背，或出于身半，其不循卫气之道而出，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：有的人食用很热的饮食，刚刚吃下，还没有转化为水谷精气，就已经出汗了，有的是面部出汗，有的是背部出汗，有的是半身出汗，都不是按照卫气的化生和循行的通路，这是什么原因呢？
English: Huang Di said: Some people eat very hot food, and just after eating, they have not yet been converted into water valley essence, and they are already sweating. Some people sweat on their face, some sweat on their back, and some sweat on their body. They are not following the path of qi transformation and walking. What is the reason for this?

古文：岐伯曰：此外伤于风，内开腠理，毛蒸理泄，卫气走之，固不得循其道，此气慓悍滑疾，见开而出，故不得从其道，故命曰漏泄。
现代文：岐伯说：这是由于在外受到了风邪的侵袭，在内又受食热之气的影响导致腠理开泄，毛孔张大而汗液蒸腾，在肌表腠理疏松的地方，卫气流泄，也就不能按照原来的通路循行了。卫气的性质为彪悍滑利，行走迅速，遇到开放的孔道就会流泄而出，这种情况下就不能沿卫气本来循行的通路运行，这就命名为漏泄。
English: Qi Bo said: This is due to the fact that it has been attacked by wind and cold outside, and it has been affected by the influence of the heat of food inside, causing the pores to open, the pores to expand and sweat to evaporate. In places where the surface of the skin is loose, the gas will leak, and it will not be able to follow the original path. The nature of the gas is brisk and smooth, and it will leak out when it encounters an open channel. In this case, it is not possible to run along the original path of the gas, which is called leakage.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻中焦之所出。
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道中焦之气是从什么地方发出呢？
English: Huang Di said, "I want to know where the gas emitted from the middle of the coke comes from."

古文：岐伯答曰：中焦亦并胃中，出上焦之后，此所受气者，泌糟粕，蒸津液，化其精微，上注于肺脉，乃化而为血，以奉生身，莫贵于此，故独得行于经隧，命曰营气。
现代文：岐伯回答说：中焦之气也是出自胃的上口，位置在上焦的下面，中焦所受的水谷之气，经过排泌糟粕、蒸发津液，而将化生出精微的物质，上行注于肺脉，同时将水谷化生的精微物质化为血液，以濡养全身。这种气是人身上最珍贵的物质，能够独自通行于十二经脉之中，名为营气。
English: Qi Bo replied, "The qi of the middle coke also comes from the upper mouth of the stomach, which is located below the upper coke. The qi of the water valley received by the middle coke, through the excretion of waste and the evaporation of fluid, will be transformed into a fine substance, and the upstream will be poured into the pulmonary artery. At the same time, the fine substance of the water valley will be transformed into blood, and the whole body will be wet. This qi is the most precious substance in the human body, and it can independently pass through the twelve meridians. It is called ying qi.

古文：黄帝曰：夫血之与气，异名同类。
现代文：黄帝说：血和气，虽然名字不同，但却是同一类物质，这是什么意思呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Blood and qi, although they have different names, are the same kind of substance. What does this mean?

古文：何谓也？岐伯答曰：营卫者，精气也。血者，神气也。故血之与气，异名同类焉。
现代文：岐伯回答说：营气和卫气都是源自水谷精气，血是神气的物质基础，也是水谷精气化生，因此血与营卫之气，只是不同名，却是同一类的物质。
English: Qibo replied: Yingqi and Weiqi are both derived from Mizutani Jingqi. Blood is the material basis of Shenqi, and it is also the transformation of Mizutani Jingqi. Therefore, blood and Yingwei Qi are just different names, but they are the same type of substance.

古文：故夺血者无汗，夺汗者无血，故人生有两死而无两生。
现代文：因此说血液耗伤过度的人不能再发其汗，因为汗脱则卫气亦伤；脱汗而伤卫气的人也不能再用活血、放血的疗法。所以，如果既脱汗又亡血则死，仅有脱汗或仅有失血则尚存生机。
English: Therefore, it is said that people with excessive blood loss can no longer perspire, because if they lose sweat, their health will also be damaged; people who lose sweat and injure their health can no longer use live blood or bloodletting therapy. Therefore, if they lose both sweat and blood, they will die, but if they only lose sweat or blood, they will still be alive.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻下焦之所出。
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道下焦之气所发出的地方。
English: Huang Di said, "I want to know the place from which the scorching gas is emitted."

古文：岐伯答曰：下焦者，别回肠，注于膀胱而渗入焉。
现代文：岐伯回答说：下焦之气出在胃的下口，沿大肠曲折下行，又将水液注入膀胱，逐渐渗泄。
English: Qibo replied, "The scorched gas comes out from the lower mouth of the stomach and meanders down the large intestine. The liquid is then injected into the bladder and gradually seeps out.

古文：故水谷者，常并居于胃中，成糟粕，而俱下于大肠，而成下焦，渗而俱下，济泌别汁，循下焦而渗入膀胱焉。
现代文：所以水谷等饮食物质，经常贮存在胃中，经过消化，形成的糟粕向下输送至大肠，受到下焦之气的控制，并将其中的水液在大肠中泌分清、浊，清者由下焦之气送入膀胱，浊者排出体外。
English: Therefore, drinking food substances such as water troughs are often stored in the stomach. After digestion, the residue formed by the distillation is transported down to the large intestine, controlled by the charred gas, and the liquid in the large intestine is separated into clear and turbid, the clear one is sent to the bladder by the charred gas, and the turbid one is excreted.

古文：黄帝曰：人饮酒，酒亦入胃，谷未熟而小便独先下，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：人饮酒的时候，酒也是与水谷一起入胃的，但是为什么水谷尚未运化完，而小便已经先下来了呢？
English: Huangdi said: When a person drinks alcohol, the alcohol also enters the stomach with the urine, but why has the urine not yet been transported, but the urine has come down first?

古文：岐伯答曰：酒者，熟谷之液也。其气悍以清，故后谷而入，先谷而液出焉。
现代文：岐伯回答说：酒是粮食酿造出来的液体，其气强劲而且滑利，所以即使是在水谷之后而食入，却能在食物消化完之前就成为水液排出了。
English: Qi Bo replied, "Wine is a liquid made from grain. Its gas is strong and slippery, so even if it is ingested after a meal, it can be excreted as a liquid before the food is digested.

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：很对！
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：余闻上焦如雾，中焦如沤，下焦如渎，此之谓也。
现代文：我曾听说，人体内上焦的作用为升化蒸腾，就像天空的雾露一样，轻清弥漫；中焦的作用为腐熟谷物，就像在水中沤浸一样能使食物之发生变化；下焦的作用为决渎流通，就像沟渠一样，不断地将水液和糟粕排出体外，就是这个道理。
English: I have heard that in the human body, the role of the upper coke is to sublimate and transmute, just like the mist of the sky, light and diffuse; the role of the middle coke is to ripen grains, just like soaking in water can change the food; the role of the lower coke is to break the circulation, just like a ditch, constantly expel the liquid and waste out of the body, this is the reason.

