古文：典命掌诸侯之五仪诸臣之五等之命。
现代文：典命掌管诸侯的五等礼仪，以及王的诸臣的五等礼仪。
English: The emperor ordered to administer the five-class etiquette of the princes, as well as the five-class etiquette of the king's vassals.

古文：上公九命为伯，其国家、宫室、车旗、衣服、礼仪，皆以九为节。侯伯七命，其国家、宫室、车旗、衣服、礼仪，皆以七为节。子男五命，其国家、宫室、车旗、衣服、礼仪，皆以五为节。
现代文：上公九命担任伯，其都城、宫室、车旗、衣服、礼仪的规格都以九为节度；侯伯七命，其都城、宫室、车旗、衣服、礼仪的规格都以七为节度；子男五命，其都城、宫室、车旗、衣服、礼仪的规格都以五为节度。
English: Shanggu nine lives served as Bo, and the specifications of its capital city, palace room, chariot flag, clothes, and etiquette were all nine; Houbo seven lives, its capital city, palace room, chariot flag, clothes, and etiquette were all seven; Zimeng five lives, its capital city, palace room, chariot flag, clothes, and etiquette were all five.

古文：王之三公八命，其卿六命，其大夫四命，及其出封，皆加一等，其国家、宫室、车旗、衣服、礼仪，亦如之。
现代文：王的三公为八命，王的卿为六命，王的大夫为四命，到他们出封王畿之外，都加一等，其都城、宫室、车旗、衣服、礼仪的规格也依命数为节度。
English: The king's three princes have eight lives, the king's nobles have six lives, and the king's doctors have four lives. In addition to the kings and queens they have appointed, they are all given a higher rank. Their capital city, palace, banner, clothes, and etiquette are also set according to the number of their lives.

古文：凡诸侯之适子誓於天子，摄奇牸，则下其君之礼一等。未誓，则以皮帛继子男。
现代文：凡诸侯的嫡长子被天子命为太子，代理他的国君朝聘天子时，就比国君的礼仪降一等；未被天子所命，朝聘天子时就拿着用皮裹饰的束帛继子男之后行礼。
English: When the eldest legitimate son of a vassal lord is appointed as crown prince by the heavenly son, and the ruler of the country acting on his behalf hires the heavenly son, it is one step lower than the etiquette of the sovereign; when the heavenly son is not appointed by the heavenly son, he holds a leather-wrapped corsage and bows after his stepson.

古文：公之孤四命，以皮帛，眡小国之君。其卿三命，其大夫再命，其士壹命，其宫室、车旗、衣服、礼仪，各目氐其命之数。
现代文：公的孤卿的等级是四命，朝聘天子时手拿用皮裹饰的束帛而比照小国之君的礼仪；公的卿三命，公的大夫再命，公的士一命；他们的宫室、车旗、衣服、礼仪的规格，各依他们的命数为节度。
English: The rank of a public lonely lord is four lives. When a prince is appointed to the imperial court, he holds a leather-wrapped sash in his hand, in accordance with the etiquette of a prince of a small country; a public lord has three lives, a public doctor has another life, and a public official has one life; their palace room, car flag, clothes, and etiquette specifications are all based on their number of lives.

古文：侯伯之聊、大夫、士，亦如之。
现代文：侯伯的卿、大夫、士也一样。
English: The same applies to the lord of the manor, the doctor and the magistrate.

古文：子男之卿再命，其大夫壹命，其士不命，其宫室、车旗、衣服、礼仪，各眡其命之数。
现代文：子男的卿的等级是再命，子男的大夫一命，子男的士不命，他们的宫室、车旗、衣服、礼仪的规格，各依他们的命数为节度。
English: The rank of the son's lord is re-life, the son's doctor is one life, the son's taxi driver is not life, their palace, car flag, clothes, etiquette specifications, each according to their number of lives for the festival.

古文：司服掌王之吉、凶衣服，辨其名物与其用事。
现代文：司服掌管王行吉礼或凶礼所当穿的衣服，辨别这些衣服的名称和种类，以及所适用的礼事。
English: The steward is in charge of the clothes to be worn by the king for auspicious or inauspicious ceremonies, distinguishing the names and types of these clothes, as well as the applicable rituals.

古文：王之吉服，祀昊天上帝，则服大裘而冕；祀五帝，亦如之。享先生，则衮冕；享先公、飨、射，则鷩冕；祀四望山川，则毳冕；祭社稷五祀，则希冕；祭群小祀，则玄冕。凡兵事，韦弁服；眡朝，则皮弁服。
现代文：王行吉礼穿的服装：祭祀昊天上帝就穿大裘而戴冕，祭祀五帝的穿戴也一样；祭祀先公、举行飨礼、射礼就穿鳖服而戴冕；祭祀四方名山大川和一般的山川就穿毳服而戴冕；祭祀社稷和五行之神就穿希服而戴冕；祭祀各种小神就穿玄服而戴冕；凡军事穿韦服而戴韦弁；处理朝政就穿白布衣裳而戴皮弁；凡田猎穿缁衣白裳而戴玄冠。
English: The costumes worn by Wang Xingjili: for the sacrifice of Haotian, the god will wear a large gown and wear a crown, and for the sacrifice of the five emperors, the same will be worn; for the sacrifice of the forefather, the holding of the funeral and the shooting ceremony, they will wear a gown and wear a crown; for the sacrifice of the famous mountains and rivers in the four directions, they will wear a gown and wear a crown; for the sacrifice of the gods of the community and the five elements, they will wear a dress and wear a crown; for the sacrifice of various small gods, they will wear a black dress and wear a crown; for the

古文：凡甸，冠弁服。
现代文：凡丧事戴丧冠、穿丧服。
English: For all funerals, wear a mourning crown and dress in mourning clothes.

古文：凡凶事，服弁服。
现代文：凡吊唁的事戴爵弁加环经，穿吊服。
English: When it comes to condolences, speak in a dignified tone, recite the sutra, and wear a hanging robe.

古文：凡吊事，弁绖服。凡丧，为天王斩衰，为王后齐衰。王为三公六卿锡衰，为诸侯缌衰，为大夫士疑衰，其，服皆弁绖。
现代文：凡服丧，为天王服斩衰丧，为王后服齐衰丧；王为三公、六卿服丧穿锡衰，为诸侯穿缌衰，为大夫、士穿疑衰，头上戴的都是爵弁加环经。
English: Everyone wears mourning clothes. The king wears mourning clothes for the emperor, and the queen wears mourning clothes for the empress. The king wears mourning clothes for the three princes and six nobles, and the princes wear mourning clothes, and the doctors and scholars wear mourning clothes.

古文：大札、大荒、大灾，素服。
现代文：发生大瘟疫、大饥荒、大灾害，君臣都穿戴白色的衣帽。
English: In the event of a great plague, great famine, or great disaster, the monarchs and ministers all wear white caps.

古文：公之服，自衮冕而下，如王之服。侯伯之服，自鷩冕而下，如公之服。子男之服，自毳冕而下，如侯伯之服。孤之服，自希冕而下，如子男之服。卿大夫之服，自玄冕而下，如孤之服。其凶服，加以大功、小功。士之服，自皮弁而下，如大夫之服。其凶服，亦如之。其齐服，有玄端、素端。
现代文：公的服装，从衮冕以下如同王的服装；侯伯的服装，从氅冕以下如同公的服装；子男的服装，从毳冕以下如同侯伯的服装；孤的服装，从希冕以下如同子男的服装；卿大夫的服装，从玄冕以下如同孤的服装，他们的丧服，还要加上大功服和小功服；士的服装，从皮弁服以下如同大夫的服装，他们的丧服还要加上大功服、小功服以及缌麻服，他们斋戒的服装有玄端和素端。
English: The public dress, from the crown down, is like the king's dress; the servant's dress, from the crown down, is like the servant's dress; the son-in-law's dress, from the crown down, is like the servant's dress; the orphan's dress, from the crown down, is like the son-in-law's dress; the doctor's dress, from the crown down, is like the orphan's dress; the doctor's dress, from the cape down, is like the doctor's dress; the doctor's dress, from the cape down, is like the doctor's dress; the doctor's dress, from

古文：凡大祭祀、大宾客共其衣服而奉之。
现代文：王亲自参加祭祀或招待来朝诸侯，供给所需的礼服并奉送到王那里。
English: The king himself participated in the sacrifice or invited the princes to come to the court, supplied the required ceremonial dress and sent it to the king.

古文：大丧，共其复衣服、敛衣服、奠衣服、廞衣服，皆掌其陈序。
现代文：有大丧，供给招魂所用的衣服，大敛、小敛所用的衣服，奠祭死者所用的衣服，以及用于陈列的明衣，掌管所有这些衣服陈列的次序。
English: There is the great mourning, which provides the clothes used for summoning spirits, the clothes used for great and small mourning, the clothes used for offering the dead, and the plain clothes used for display, and controls the order of all these clothes.

古文：典祀掌外祀之兆守，皆有域，掌其禁令。
现代文：典祀掌管外祭祀坛位的守护，都有一定的范围，掌管此范围内的禁令。
English: The guardianship of the sacrificial altar outside the control of the ceremony and worship has a certain scope, and the ban within this scope is in charge.

古文：若以时祭祀，则帅其属而修除，征役于司隶而役之。
现代文：如果是按季举行的祭祀，就率领属下对祭祀坛场进行扫除，并从司隶那里征调徒役以供役使。
English: If the sacrificial rites are held on a quarterly basis, he will lead his subordinates to sweep the sacrificial altar, and recruit and transfer disciples from the priests to serve.

古文：及祭，帅其属而守其厉禁而跸之。
现代文：到祭祀那天，率领属下守护警戒而禁止闲人通行。
English: On the day of the sacrifice, he led his subordinates to keep a vigil and prohibit the passage of idlers.

古文：守祧掌守先王、先公之庙祧，其遗衣服藏焉。
现代文：守祧掌管守护先王、先公之庙，并负责把先王、先公遗留的衣服收藏在庙中。
English: Shouyu is in charge of guarding the temple of the first king and first prince, and is responsible for collecting the clothes left by the first king and first prince in the temple.

古文：若将祭祀，则各以其服授尸，其庙则有司修除之，其祧则守祧黝垩之。
现代文：如果将举行祭祀，就把各庙所藏的衣服授给各庙的尸。将举行祭祀的宗庙就由宗伯负责扫除，由守祧负责把墙涂白、把地涂黑。
English: If a religious service is to be held, the clothes hidden in each temple will be given to the corpse of each temple. If a religious service is to be held in the ancestral temple, the ancestral priest will be responsible for cleaning, and the guardian will be responsible for painting the walls white and the ground black.

古文：既祭，则藏其隋与其服。
现代文：祭祀结束，就把尸用以行食前祭礼的食物收藏起来，并把尸穿的衣服收藏起来。
English: At the end of the ritual, the food used for the pre-feast ritual is collected from the corpse, and the clothes worn by the corpse are collected.

古文：世妇掌妇宫之宿戒，及祭祀，比其具，诏王后之礼事。
现代文：世妇掌祭祀前三日重申对女宫的告诫，到祭祀那天，依次具备祭祀器物。告教王后行祭礼的事。
English: On the third day before the ritual of offering the palms of the hands of women, the emperor reiterated his warning to the empress. On the day of the ritual, he ordered the ritual objects to be prepared in order. He instructed the empress to perform the ritual.

古文：帅六宫之人共齍盛，相外内宗之礼事。
现代文：率领六宫的人供奉祭祀所用的谷物。协助外宗和内宗行祭礼的事。
English: Leading the people of Rokugo to offer grain for the sacrificial rites, and to assist the outer and inner sects in performing the rites.

古文：大宾客之飨食，亦如之。
现代文：为招待来朝诸侯而举行飨礼和食礼时也这样做。
English: This is also done when the imperial banquet and meal are held in order to invite princes to the imperial court.

古文：大丧，比外、内命妇之朝莫哭，不敬者而苛罚之。
现代文：有大丧，依尊卑次序排列外、内命妇的朝夕哭位，有不恭敬的就加以责罚。
English: There is a great mourning, according to the order of dignity and inferiority, the women's morning and evening crying places are arranged outside and inside, and those who are disrespectful will be punished.

古文：凡王后有拜事於妇人，则诏相。
现代文：凡王后拜谢前来吊丧的夏殷二王后代国君夫人，就告教并协助行拜礼事。
English: All the wives of the kings and queens of the descendants of King Xia Yin II, who came to pay their respects at the funeral, advised and assisted in the worship service.

古文：凡内事有达於外官者，世妇掌之。
现代文：凡内宫的事有需要通知宫外官府的，就由世妇负责。
English: If there is a need to inform the government offices outside the Imperial Palace about the affairs of the inner palace, the courtesan will be responsible for it.

古文：内宗掌宗庙之祭祀，荐加豆笾。及以乐彻，则佐傅豆笾。
现代文：内宗掌管宗庙祭祀时向尸进献加豆、加笾，到依照音乐的节奏彻除祭品时，就协助传递彻下的豆、笾。
English: When the Naizong presided over the rituals of the ancestral temple, they would add beans and yakitori to the corpse, and when they removed the offerings according to the rhythm of the music, they would help to pass on the beans and yakitori.

古文：宾客之飨食，亦如之。
现代文：招待宾客举行飨礼、食礼时也这样做。
English: This is also done when inviting guests to hold a gift-giving ceremony or a meal.

古文：王后有事，则従。
现代文：王后有事就随从前往。
English: The Queen's attendants always go with her.

古文：大丧，序哭者。
现代文：有大丧，依尊卑次序排列妇人的哭位。
English: When there is a great mourning, the women's weeping places are arranged in order of dignity and inferiority.

古文：哭诸侯，亦如之。
现代文：哭诸侯也这样做。
English: The crying princes did the same.

古文：凡卿大夫之丧，掌其吊临。
现代文：凡王的卿大夫的丧事，就代王后掌吊唁临哭的事。
English: The mourning of the king's nobles, the mourning of the queen's consort.

古文：外宗掌宗庙之祭祀，佐王后荐玉豆。眡豆笾，及以乐彻，亦如之。
现代文：外宗掌管宗庙祭祀时协助王后向尸进献玉豆、玉笾，进献前要察看豆笾所盛的食物，到依照音乐的节奏彻除祭品的时候，也协助王后彻豆笾。
English: When Gaozong was in charge of the rituals of the ancestral temple, he assisted the queen in presenting the yamame and tamago to the corpse. Before the offering, the food in the yamago should be inspected. When it was time to remove the offerings according to the rhythm of the music, he also assisted the queen in removing the yamame.

古文：王后以乐羞齍，则赞。
现代文：王后依照音乐节奏向尸进黍稷时就协助王后。
English: He assisted the Queen as she walked to the coffin in time with the music.

古文：凡王后之献，亦如之。
现代文：凡王后向尸献酒，也协助王后。
English: If the queen offered wine to the corpse, it would also help the queen.

古文：王后不与，则赞宗伯。
现代文：王后因故不参加宗庙祭祀，就协助代理王后的宗伯行祭礼。
English: For some reason, the queen did not participate in the ancestral temple ritual, so she assisted the acting queen in the ancestral priest's ritual.

古文：小祭祀，掌事。
现代文：王后举行小祭祀，就为王后掌管祭事。
English: When the queen holds a small religious service, she is in charge of the ceremony.

古文：宾客之事，亦如之。大丧，则叙外内朝莫哭者。
现代文：接待宾客，也掌管须由王后参与的有关事宜有大丧，就依照尊卑次序排列外内宗和外内命妇朝夕哭的哭位。
English: In the reception of guests, and also in the management of relevant matters that require the participation of the queen, if there is a great mourning, the weeping places of the outer and inner dynasties and the weeping places of the outer and inner empresses in the morning and evening will be arranged according to the order of superiority and inferiority.

古文：哭诸侯，亦如之。
现代文：哭诸侯也这样做。
English: The crying princes did the same.

古文：冢人掌公墓之地，辨其兆域而为之图。先王之葬居中，以昭、穆为左右。
现代文：冢人掌管王的墓地，辨别墓地的范围而绘制地图，先王的墓葬处在中间，子孙们按照昭穆的次序分葬左右。
English: Three people are in charge of the king's cemetery, and they draw a map by distinguishing the scope of the cemetery. The former king's tomb is in the middle, and his descendants are buried around it according to the order of Shomu.

古文：凡诸侯居左、右以前，卿大夫士居后，各以其族，凡死於兵者，不入兆域。
现代文：凡做诸侯的子孙葬在王墓的左右前方，做卿、大夫、士的子孙葬在王墓的左右后方，各依他们所出之王安排前后左右。凡死于战争的人，不葬入王族墓地。
English: The sons and daughters of princes are buried in front and to the right and to the left of the royal tomb, and the sons and daughters of nobles, doctors, and nobles are buried in front and to the left and to the right of the royal tomb, respectively. All those who died in the war are not buried in the royal cemetery.

古文：凡有功者居前，以爵等为丘封之度，与其树数。
现代文：凡有功者葬在王墓的前边，按照他们爵位的等级来决定所起坟的高度和种树的多少。
English: Those who had meritorious deeds were buried in front of the king's tomb, and the height of the grave and the number of trees planted were decided according to their rank.

古文：大丧，既有日，请度甫，遂为之尸。
现代文：有大丧，已经确定了葬期，就请求开始度量挖墓穴的地方，葬毕祭墓地就充当尸。
English: If there is a great mourning, and the funeral period has been determined, it is requested to start measuring the place of digging the grave, and after the funeral, the cemetery will serve as the corpse.

古文：及以度为丘隧，共丧之窆器。
现代文：到挖墓穴时，度量建造坟丘和墓道的规模，供给丧事下葬所需的器物。
English: When digging a grave, measure the size of the grave mound and the cemetery path, and provide the necessary equipment for the funeral and burial.

古文：及葬，言鸾车、象人。
现代文：到出葬那天，告诉随葬的鸾车和人偶上路。
English: On the day of the funeral, tell the hearse and puppets to be on their way.

古文：及窆，执斧以莅。遂人藏凶器，正墓位。跸墓域，守墓禁。
现代文：到下葬的时候，手执斧在旁督察，接着便将明器藏入椁中，然后规正墓位，禁止闲人进入墓区，守护好墓区的地界。
English: When it was time for the burial, the inspector stood by with an axe in his hand. He then hid the revealing tool in the urn, and then regulated the gravesite, forbidding anyone to enter the cemetery and guarding the cemetery's boundaries.

古文：凡祭墓、为尸。
现代文：凡祭墓地之神就充当尸。
English: The gods of all cemeteries serve as corpses.

古文：凡诸侯及诸臣葬於墓者，授之兆，为之跸，均其禁。墓大夫掌凡邦墓之地域，为之图。
现代文：凡王的同姓或异姓诸侯及诸臣要葬入墓地的，就划给墓葬区域，为之禁止闲人通行，并使守护墓地界域的人劳逸均等。墓大夫掌管王国中民间墓地的地域，绘制成图。
English: If princes and courtiers of the same or different surnames of the king want to be buried in the cemetery, they are assigned to the burial area, for which no one is allowed to pass, and the people who guard the cemetery boundary are made equal in work and rest. The gravedigger controls the area of the folk cemetery in the kingdom and draws it into a map.

古文：令国民族葬，而掌其禁令。
现代文：令国中民众聚族而葬而掌管有关的禁令。
English: The government has imposed a ban on people gathering for funerals in the country.

古文：正其位，掌其度数，使皆有私地域。
现代文：指导民众排正昭穆位置，掌管其中依爵位所定墓葬规模的大小，并使各族都有本族私有的墓葬地域。
English: To guide the people in arranging the positions of the honored dead, to control the size of the tombs according to their ranks, and to enable all ethnic groups to have their own private burial areas.

古文：凡争墓地者，听其狱讼。
现代文：凡有争夺墓地的，评断他们的争讼。
English: If there is a dispute over a burial place, judge their case.

古文：帅其属而巡墓厉，居其中之室而守之。
现代文：率领下属巡视各墓地的地界，在墓地中央的办公处指挥下属分守各处墓地。
English: He led his subordinates to inspect the boundaries of each cemetery, and in the office at the center of the cemetery, he commanded his subordinates to guard the cemeteries.

古文：职丧掌诸侯之丧。及卿、大夫、士凡有爵者之丧，以国之丧礼莅其禁令，序其事。
现代文：职丧掌管王畿内诸侯的丧事，以及卿、大夫、士等凡有爵位者的丧事，依照国家规定的丧礼，亲临督察他们执行禁令，安排丧事的先后次序。
English: He was in charge of the funerals of the princes of the Kingdom of Kinai, as well as the funerals of nobles, doctors, and nobles, and in accordance with the state-mandated funeral, he personally inspected them to enforce the ban and arrange the order of the funerals.

古文：凡国有司以王命有事焉，则诏赞主人。
现代文：凡王国的官吏依照王的命令前来行吊丧礼事，就告教并协助主人接受赠物。
English: All the officials of the kingdom who, by order of the king, had come to perform the funeral rites, reported to him and helped him to receive the gifts.

古文：凡其丧祭，诏其号，治其礼。
现代文：凡主人举行丧祭，就告教所用牲、谷等的名号，预习有关的礼仪。
English: Whenever the owner holds a funeral rite, the names of the animals, valleys, etc. used for teaching should be announced, and the relevant etiquette should be rehearsed.

古文：凡公有司之所共，职丧令之趣其事。
现代文：凡王国官吏按规定当对丧家有所赠送的，由职丧告令他们，并催促办理。
English: All officials of the Kingdom who, in accordance with regulations, are to make gifts to the bereaved family, should inform the bereaved of their duties, order them to do so, and urge them to do so.

