古文：黄帝问曰：五脏六腑，寒热相移者何？
现代文：黄帝问道：五脏六腑的寒热互相转移的情况是怎样的？
English: Huang Di asked: What is the situation of the cold and heat transfer between the five viscera?

古文：岐伯对曰：肾移寒于肝，痈肿、少气。
现代文：岐伯说：肾移寒于脾，则病痈肿和气虚。
English: Qi Bo said: If the kidney is colder than the spleen, then the disease is abscess and qi deficiency.

古文：脾移寒于肝，痈肿、筋挛。
现代文：脾移寒于肝，则痈肿和筋脉拘挛。
English: If the spleen is colder than the liver, the abscess and myocardial infarction will occur.

古文：肝移寒于心，狂，隔中。
现代文：肝移寒于心，则病发癫狂和胸中隔塞不畅。
English: If the liver is colder than the heart, the patient will become delirious and suffer from a blockage in the chest.

古文：心移寒于肺，肺消。肺消者，饮一溲二，死不治。
现代文：心移寒于肺，则为 肺消 ；肺消病的症状是饮水一分，小便要排二分，属无法治疗的死症。
English: If the heart passes cold to the lungs, it is pulmonary erosions; the symptoms of pulmonary erosions are drinking water for one minute, and urinating for two minutes, which is a fatal disease that cannot be treated.

古文：肺移寒于肾，为涌水。涌水者，按腹不坚，水气客于大肠，疾行则鸣濯濯，如囊裹浆，水之病也。
现代文：肺移寒于肾，则为 涌水 ；涌水病的症状是腹部按之不甚坚硬，但因水气留居于大肠，故快走时肠中濯濯鸣响，如皮袋子装水一样，这是水液代谢不正常引发的疾病。
English: If the cold moves from the lungs to the kidneys, it is gushing water. The symptom of gushing water disease is that the abdomen is not very hard, but because the water vapor remains in the large intestine, when walking fast, there is a ringing in the intestine, like a leather bag filled with water. This is a disease caused by abnormal water metabolism.

古文：脾移热于肝，则为惊衄。
现代文：脾移热于肝，则病惊骇和流鼻血。
English: If the spleen is hotter than the liver, the patient will be shocked and have a nosebleed.

古文：肝移热于心，则死。
现代文：肝移热于心，则引起死亡。
English: If the liver metastasizes to the heart, it causes death.

古文：心移热于肺，传为鬲消。
现代文：心移热于肺，日久则为 膈消 。
English: The heat of the heart is transferred to the lungs, and the heat dissipates over time.

古文：肺移热于肾，传为柔痓。
现代文：肺移热于肾，日久则为 柔庢 。
English: The lungs are hotter than the kidneys, and the days are longer.

古文：肾移热于脾，传为虚，肠澼，死不可治。
现代文：肾移热于脾，日久渐成虚损；若再演变为肠澼，便容易成为无法治疗的死症。
English: The kidney is transferred to the spleen, gradually becoming a malformation; if it evolves into intestinal fistula, it is easy to become an incurable death.

古文：胞移热于膀胱，则癃，溺血。
现代文：胞宫移热于膀胱，则病小便不利和尿血。
English: If the heat of the uterus is transferred to the bladder, the patient will urinate unfavorably and urinate blood.

古文：膀胱移热于小肠，鬲肠不便，上为口糜。
现代文：膀胱移热于小肠，使肠道堵塞，大便不通，热气上行以至口舌糜烂。
English: The bladder transfers heat to the small intestine, causing blockage of the intestine, obstruction of the stool, rising of hot air, and even corrosion of the tongue.

古文：小肠移热于大肠，为虙瘕，为沉。
现代文：小肠移热于大肠，则热结不散，成为 伏瘕 ，再下行则病发痔疮。
English: If the heat of the small intestine is transferred to the large intestine, the hot knot will not be dispersed, and it will become pus, and if it travels down, hemorrhoids will develop.

古文：大肠移热于胃，善食而瘦，又谓之食亦。
现代文：大肠移热于胃，则使人饮食增加而体瘦无力，病称为 食亦 。
English: The heat transfer from the large intestine to the stomach causes people to eat more and become thin and weak. The disease is also called gastroschisis.

古文：胃移热于胆，亦曰食亦。
现代文：胃移热于胆，也发生食亦病。
English: The stomach is hotter than the gallbladder, and food poisoning also occurs.

古文：胆移热于脑，则辛頞鼻渊，鼻渊者，浊涕下不止也，传为衄蔑、瞑目。
现代文：胆移热于脑，则鼻梁内感觉酸痛而成为 鼻渊 ；鼻渊的症状，是鼻常流浊涕不止，日久可至鼻中流血，两目不明。
English: If the gallbladder is hotter than the brain, the pain in the bridge of the nose will increase and become a nasal fissure; the symptoms of a nasal fissure are a constant flow of mucus, which can bleed into the nose for a long time, and the eyes are unclear.

古文：故得之气厥也。
现代文：以上各种病症，皆由于寒热之气厥逆，在脏腑中互相移动和传变而引起。
English: The above-mentioned various diseases are all caused by the reversal of cold and heat, which move and transform each other in the internal organs.

