古文：速不台速不台，蒙古兀良合人。
现代文：速不台，蒙古兀良合人，哈班之次子，骁勇善骑射。
English: In spite of his speed, the Mongolian was a good horseman, the second son of Haban, and was good at riding and shooting.

古文：速不台请行，帝壮而许之。乃选裨将阿里出领百人先行，觇其虚实。
现代文：太祖七年蒙古大军攻金国之桓州，速不台首先破城而入。十一年太祖于秃兀剌河之黑林召集诸将议会，问 谁能为我征伐灭里吉？ 
English: In the seventh year of King Taejo's reign, the Mongolian army attacked Hanzhou in the Jin Kingdom, and soon the first to break through the city entered. In the eleventh year, King Taejo convened the council of generals in the black forest of the Vulture River and asked, "Who can conquer and destroy Liji for me?"

古文：速不台继进。
现代文：速不台请战。
English: It's time to go to war.

古文：又至阿里吉河，与斡罗思部大、小密赤思老遇，一战降之，略阿速部而还。
现代文：十四年，率蒙古军至蟾河，与灭里吉大战，俘获二将，其余皆降。十七年太祖征回回国，国王灭里逃亡，速不台与只别奉命统兵万人，由不罕川之必里罕城追赶。
English: In the fourteenth year, he led the Mongolian army to the Li River and fought against the Li River, capturing two generals, and the rest all surrendered. In the seventeenth year, the great-grandfather was conscripted back to the country, the king fled to the Li River, and he was ordered to lead ten thousand soldiers and pursue them from the Li River of the Li River.

古文：钦察之奴来告其主者，速不台纵为民。
现代文：灭里逃入海，不久病死。速不台缴获灭里所弃珍宝献给太祖，太祖大加称赞奖赏。
English: Zhi Li fled into the sea and soon died of illness. The treasure abandoned in Zhi Li was quickly captured and presented to the great-grandfather, who praised and rewarded it.

古文：还，以闻。帝曰： 奴不忠其主，肯忠他人乎？ 
现代文：十八年速不台奏请征讨钦察，领兵绕宽定吉思海，辗转至太和岭，凿石开道，出其不意，攻其不备，大败酋长玉里吉及塔塔哈儿于不租河。
English: In the eighteenth year, he hastened to call for the recruitment of Qincha, led the troops around the width of Dingji Sea, turned to Taihe Ridge, cut the stone road, surprised them, attacked them unprepared, and defeated the chieftains Yuliji and Tatahar in not renting the river.

古文：遂戮之。又奏以灭里吉、乃蛮、怯烈、杭斤、钦察诸部千户，通立一军，从之。
现代文：后又奏请将灭里吉、乃蛮、怯烈、杭斤、钦察诸部千户合为一军。太祖允准。
English: Later, he also requested that the thousands of households in the provinces of Zhurijie, Naimang, Qiu Rong, Hangjin, and Qincha be combined into one army. Taizu agreed.

古文：略也迷里霍只部，获马万匹以献。
现代文：其后又率军征也迷里霍只部，获马万匹献给太祖。
English: After that, he led the army to march to the only part of the castle, and received 10,000 horses to dedicate to his great-grandfather.

古文：己丑，太宗即位，以秃灭干公主妻之。从攻潼关，军失利，帝责之。
现代文：太祖西征，速不台奏请随大军出战。二十一年，速不台攻下撒里畏吾、特勤、赤闵等部及德顺、镇戎、兰、会、洮、河诸州。二十二年闻太祖崩，班师回朝。太宗即位，速不台娶秃灭干公主为妻，并从太宗攻潼，出师不利。
English: In the twenty-first year, Emperor Taizu went to the West, and invited Emperor Taizong to go to war with the great army. In the twenty-first year, Emperor Taizu conquered the provinces of Sarri-Chaowo, Secret Service, and Akasaka, as well as the provinces of Deshun, Zhen Rong, Lan, Hui, Ye, and He. In the twenty-second year, Emperor Taizu died, and his tutors returned to the North. Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne, Emperor Taizu married Princess Balshuang as his wife, and Emperor Taizong became Emperor Taizong's tutor.

古文：睿宗时在藩邸，言兵家胜负不常，请令立功自效。
现代文：睿宗奏请报效国家，太宗命速不台领兵随睿宗征河南。
English: Ruizong requested to serve the country, and Taizong hastened to lead the troops to conquer Henan with Ruizong.

古文：师集三峰山，金兵围之数匝。会风雪大作，其士卒僵仆，师乘之，杀戮殆尽。自是金军不能复振。
现代文：蒙军出牛头关，遇金将合达率步骑兵数十万严阵以待，睿宗征询作战方略，速不台说 ：守城军士最怕劳苦，我军不时挑战，使他们疲劳不堪，然后可战而取胜。 
English: The Mongolian army is at a crossroads. If gold is found, it will be enough. Hundreds of thousands of infantry and cavalry are lined up waiting. Ruizong inquired about the battle strategy and said without hesitation: The soldiers guarding the city are most afraid of hard work. Our army challenges them from time to time, making them tired, and then they can fight and win.

古文：壬辰夏，睿宗还驻官山，留速不台统诸道兵围汴。
现代文：蒙军屯于三峰山，金兵围困重重。这时风雪漫天，金兵不堪寒冷，蒙军乘机杀出，金军损失惨重。太宗四年夏，睿宗率军屯驻官山，命速不台统率都道兵围攻汴梁。
English: In the summer of Taizong's fourth year, Ruizong and his army were stationed in Guanshan, and they were besieged by the Taoist soldiers under the command of the Tai-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung-tung.

古文：癸巳，金主渡河北走，追败之于黄龙冈，斩首万余级。
现代文：五年，金哀宗渡黄河北逃，速不台追到黄龙冈，斩杀金兵万余人。
English: In the fifth year, Jin Aizong fled to the north of the Yellow River and quickly chased to Huanglonggang, killing more than 10,000 Jin soldiers.

古文：金主复南走归德府，未几，复走蔡州。
现代文：金哀宗复南走归德府，不久又逃往蔡州。
English: Jin Aizong went south to return to Defu, and soon fled to Caizhou.

古文：八赤蛮闻速不台至，大惧，逃入海中。
现代文：速不台攻下汴梁后，进围蔡州。太宗六年蔡州被攻下，哀宗自焚而死。汴梁因战争日久，大闹饥荒，速不台下令让百姓北渡黄河自寻生路。
English: After Huanwutai conquered Yanliang, it encircled Caizhou. In the sixth year of Taizong's reign, Caizhou was conquered, and Aizong self-immolated and died. In Yanliang, due to the long duration of the war and widespread famine, Huanwutai ordered the people to cross the Yellow River to the north to find a way out.

古文：辛丑，太宗命诸王拔都等讨兀鲁思部主也烈班，为其所败，围秃里思哥城，不克。
现代文：太宗七年命拔都西征八赤蛮，以速不台为先锋。八赤蛮听说速不台领大军来战，恐惧万状，逃入海中。十三年命拔都讨伐兀鲁思部酋长也烈班，蒙军战败；围秃里思哥城，亦未克。
English: In the seventh year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Emperor Baidu ordered the Western Expedition of the Eight Red Barbarians, with Shandong as the vanguard. When the Eight Red Barbarians heard that Shandong was leading a large army to fight, they were terrified and fled into the sea. In the thirteenth year of Emperor Baidu's reign, the Mongolian army was defeated in the Battle of Yeluxi, and the siege of Baldric's Castle also failed.

古文：拔都奏遣速不台督战，速不台选哈必赤军怯怜口等五十人赴之，一战获也烈班。进攻秃里思哥城，三日克之，尽取兀鲁思所部而还。
现代文：拔都奏请太宗派速不台督战。速不台挑选哈必赤军怯怜口等五十人来参战，俘虏也烈班；进攻秃里思哥城，只经三日战斗便攻下该城，兀鲁思部归附蒙古。
English: The Taizong faction was asked to supervise the battle. The Taizong faction selected fifty people from the Habi Red Army to participate in the battle, and the captives were also fierce; the city of Baldrisco was attacked, and after only three days of fighting, the city was captured, and the Pelusium was annexed to Mongolia.

古文：经哈咂里山，攻马札儿部主怯怜。
现代文：蒙军又经哈咂里山，进攻马札儿部酋长怯怜。
English: The Mongolian army also passed through the Harari Mountains and attacked the chiefs of the Mazar Department.

古文：速不台为先锋，与诸王拔都、吁里兀、昔班、哈丹五道分进。
现代文：以速不台为先锋，与诸王拔都、吁里兀、昔班、哈丹等，兵分五路前进。
English: With Suo Bu Tai as the vanguard, and with the kings of Baidu, Huli, Shuban, Hadan, etc., the soldiers advanced in five directions.

古文：速不台出奇计，诱其军至漷宁河。
现代文：速不台用奇计把怯怜军诱至氵郭宁河。
English: He used a trick to lure the cowardly army to the Ninghe River in Shiguo.

古文：诸王军于上流，水浅，马可涉，中复有桥。下流水深，速不台欲结筏潜渡，绕出敌后。
现代文：诸王军从上游渡河进攻，上游水浅，且有桥，人马易过；速不台军从下游渡河，水深无桥，须造木筏偷渡，绕于敌后。
English: The king's army crossed the river from the upstream to attack, the upstream water was shallow, and there was a bridge, so it was easy for people and horses to pass; if the Taiwan army did not cross the river from the downstream, the water was deep and there was no bridge, they had to build rafts to sneak across and go around behind the enemy.

古文：未渡，诸王先涉河与战。拔都军争桥，反为所乘，没甲士三十人，并亡其麾下将八哈秃。
现代文：上游诸王先渡河与怯怜军接仗，拔都军因争桥而为怯怜军袭击，损失甲士三十人，大将八哈秃阵亡。
English: The kings in the upper reaches crossed the river first to join the Cowardly Army, and the Batu Army attacked the Cowardly Army because of the bridge dispute, losing thirty armored soldiers, and General Baha Bald died in battle.

古文：丙午，定宗即位，既朝会，还家于秃剌河上。
现代文：诸王军渡河后见敌军甚多，要速不台回师，再谋进攻策略。速不台不肯，声称： 你们自己回去，我不到秃纳河马茶城决不收兵。 
English: After the king's army crossed the river, they saw a large number of enemy troops, and they had to quickly return to their division and plan an offensive strategy. They were reluctant to do so, saying, "You should go back by yourselves, I will never call up troops until I reach Zaona Hippo Tea Town."

古文：戊申卒，年七十三。
现代文：蒙古诸军终于攻下了马茶城，推速不台为首功。
English: The Mongolian army finally captured the horse tea city, pushing the speed to the top.

古文：赠效忠宣力佐命功臣、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封河南王，谥忠定。
现代文：定宗即位，速不台请求辞官返归秃剌河家乡，定宗三年卒，年七十三岁，赠效忠宣力佐命功臣、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封河南王，谥 忠定 。
English: Dingzong ascended to the throne, and immediately requested the retired officials to return to their hometown of Zhugehe. Dingzong was three years old and 73 years old. He presented his allegiance and proclamations to the great vassals, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, the Shangzhu Province, and the crown prince of Henan Province, Zou Zhongding.

古文：子兀良合台。
现代文：兀良合台，速不台之子。
English: He is the son of 良合台 and 速不台.

古文：兀良合台，初事太祖。
现代文：初侍奉太祖。
English: He served his grandfather for the first time.

古文：时宪宗为皇孙，尚幼，以兀良合台世为功臣家，使护育之。
现代文：当时，宪宗为皇孙，年幼，兀良合台因出身于世代功臣之家，受命保护宪宗，并分管近卫军。
English: At that time, Emperor Kenzong was a young grandson of the emperor, and Emperor Goryo, because he came from a family of generational heroes, was ordered to protect Emperor Kenzong and was in charge of the Imperial Guard.

古文：宪宗在潜邸，遂分掌宿卫。岁癸巳，领兵从定宗征女真国，破万奴于辽东。
现代文：太宗五年，领兵随定宗征讨女真国，击败万奴于辽东。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, the leader of the army, Su Dingzong, went to invade Yezhen and defeated Wanu in Liaodong.

古文：继从诸王拔都征钦察、兀鲁思、阿速、孛烈儿诸部。
现代文：随后又随拔都征钦察、兀鲁思、阿速、孛烈儿诸部。
English: Subsequently, the departments of Qincha, Jiluth, Ahow, and Qinre'er were also promoted.

古文：丙午，又从拔都讨孛烈儿乃、捏迷思部，平之。
现代文：定宗元年，再次随拔都征服孛烈儿乃、捏迷思部。
English: In the first year of the Jodo sect, he once again followed the procession and conquered both the Joryeon sect and the Jishu sect.

古文：己酉，定宗崩。拔都与宗室大臣议立宪宗，事久未决。
现代文：定宗后元年，定宗崩，拔都与宗室大臣商议立宪宗为帝，但久久不能决定。
English: In the first year after the death of Emperor Jingsong, Emperor Jingsong and the minister of the imperial household discussed whether Emperor Jingsong should be enthroned, but the decision could not be made for a long time.

古文：四月，诸王大会，定宗皇后问所宜立，皆惶惑，莫敢对。兀良合台对曰： 此议已先定矣，不可复变。 
现代文：该年四月诸王大会，定宗皇后问立谁为帝，都不敢回答，唯兀良合台起而对曰： 已议定立蒙哥为帝，不可再变。 
English: In April of that year, at the meeting of the kings, when the Empress Dingzong asked who should be the emperor, they did not dare to answer. However, when they got together, they said, "It has been agreed to establish Mungo as the emperor, and it cannot be changed again."

古文：拔都曰： 兀良合台言是也。 
现代文：拔都也说 ：兀良合台的话是对的。 
English: Badu also said: 良合台's words are right.

古文：议遂定。
现代文：于是决定立宪宗。
English: The matter was settled.

古文：宪宗即位之明年，世祖以皇弟总兵讨西南夷乌蛮、白蛮、鬼蛮诸国，以兀良合台总督军事。
现代文：宪宗即位后第二年，世祖领兵讨西南之乌蛮、白蛮、鬼蛮诸国，以兀良合台总督军事。
English: In the second year after the enthronement of King Gensong, King Sejong led an army to fight against the barbarian, barbarian, and barbarian nations in the southwest, with the military commander as the governor of Gotae.

古文：其鬼蛮，即赤秃哥国也。
现代文：鬼蛮即赤秃哥国。
English: Ghostly barbarism is the country of the red-haired brother.

古文：癸丑秋，大军自旦当岭入云南境。
现代文：宪宗三年秋，大军自旦当岭入云南境。
English: In the autumn of the third year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, a large army entered Yunnan from Dangling.

古文：摩些二部猷长唆火脱因、塔裹马来迎降，遂至金沙江。
现代文：摩、些二部酋长唆火脱因、塔里马开关投降，大军得以顺利地进抵金沙江。
English: However, these two chieftains averted the fire and the talima surrendered, and the large army was able to successfully enter the Jinsha River.

古文：兀良合台率精锐立炮攻之。阿塔剌遣人来拒，兀良合台遣其子阿术迎击之，寨兵退走。
现代文：兀良合台领一支人马入察罕章，相继攻占一些山寨，唯有阿塔剌所据之半空和寨，依山临江，地势险峻，牢不可破。兀良合台遣人探清出入路径，先断其取水之路，然后率精锐军发炮进攻，终于克复。
English: Qiliangdaigou led a troop of men and horses into Chahanzhang and successively captured a number of villages. The only thing that could not be broken was the half-empty and half-timbered village where Atahualpa was based, which was perched on a mountain and bordered by a river. Qiliangdaigou sent people to explore the entry and exit routes, first cut off their water supply routes, then led an elite army to launch an artillery attack, and finally defeated them.

古文：遂并其弟阿叔城俱拔之。进师取龙首关，翊世祖入大理国城。
现代文：又进取龙首关，辅助世祖入大理国城。
English: He also advanced to the first pass of the dragon and assisted the ancestor to enter Dali National City.

古文：甲寅秋，复分兵取附都善阐，转攻合剌章水城，屠之。
现代文：宪宗四年秋，蒙古军分兵攻取善阐，转攻合剌章之水城，杀居民无数。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, a detachment of the Mongolian army attacked Shanying, and then attacked Shuicheng in Gansu Province, killing countless residents.

古文：合剌章。
现代文：合剌章即乌蛮。
English: The combination of the two is called "Uban."

古文：盖乌蛮也。前次罗部府，大酋高升集诸部兵拒战，大破之于洟可浪山下，遂进至乌蛮所都押赤城。
现代文：大军进抵罗部府，乌蛮酋长高升会集诸兵抵御，蒙军大破之于氵夷可浪山下，进至乌蛮首府押赤城。
English: The large army entered Labe Prefecture, and the Mongolian chieftain Gaosheng gathered all the soldiers to resist, and the Mongolian army broke through at the foot of the Qijianglang Mountain and entered the capital of the Mongolian barbarians, Oshikecheng.

古文：环城立炮，以草填堑，众军始集，阿术已率所部搏战城上，城遂破。
现代文：该城滨滇池，三面皆水，既险且坚。蒙军炮攻、火攻，连续七日。
English: The city is located on the shore of Dianchi Lake, surrounded by water on three sides, and is both dangerous and strong. The Mongolian army attacked by artillery and fire for seven consecutive days.

古文：乙卯，攻不花合因、阿合阿因等城，阿术先登，取其三城。又攻赤秃哥山寨，阿术缘岭而战，遂拔之。
现代文：兀良合台遣其子阿术于夜五更率军偷袭入城，乱斫乱杀，高升军大败，兀良合台追至昆泽，擒乌蛮国段兴智及元帅马合剌昔，又命副将也里、脱伯、押真从右路，合台护尉从左路合围尚依山抵抗的乌蛮余众，他自己率其子阿术及二百骑兵进击，攻陷纤寨。蒙军至乾德哥城，兀良合台因病将军队指挥权交阿术。阿术以炮攻破乾德哥城。
English: In the evening of the 5th day of the 5th month of the 5th year of the 5th month of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 5th year

古文：乘胜击破鲁厮国塔浑城，又取忽兰城。
现代文：宪宗五年，阿术连连攻克不花合因、阿合阿因二城和赤秃哥山寨，又乘胜击破鲁鲁厮国之塔浑城、忽兰城。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Ah Lianlian conquered the two cities of Fuxiaheyin and Ah Heyin and the Red Bald Goat's Cottage, and took advantage of the victory to break through the towers of Lulun Province, Huncheng and Hulancheng.

古文：鲁鲁厮国大惧，请降。
现代文：鲁鲁厮国大惧，摇旗投降。
English: Lulu, trembling with fear, waved his flag and surrendered.

古文：阿伯国有兵四万，不降。
现代文：阿伯国有兵四万，不肯降，被阿术攻克。
English: There were forty thousand soldiers in Aba, who refused to surrender, and they were defeated by the Achi.

古文：诏以便宜取道，与铁哥带儿兵合，遂出乌蒙，趋泸江，刬秃剌蛮三城，却宋将张都统兵三万，夺其船二百艘于马湖江，斩获不可胜计。遂通道于嘉定、重庆，抵合州，济蜀江，与铁哥带儿会。
现代文：阿术又攻克阿鲁山寨及阿鲁城。蒙军出师西南二年内，平定大理五城、八府、四郡及乌蛮、白蛮等三十七部，大军所至，无不诚心归附。宪宗六年，蒙军征服了白蛮国、波丽国，在马湖江打退宋将张都统所率三万宋军，夺取船二百艘，打通东至重庆，北至嘉定的通道，大军进抵合州，渡过蜀江，与铁哥带儿所领蒙军会合。
English: Within two years of the Mongolian army's departure from the southwest, it had subdued the five cities of Dali, eight prefectures, four counties, and thirty-seven departments such as Wuban and Baiban, and the large army arrived, and there was no dishonesty attached to it. In the sixth year of the Kenzong Dynasty, the Mongolian army conquered the Baibang country and Poli country, defeated the 30,000 Song army led by the Song general Zhang Du Tong in the Malu River, captured two hundred ships, and opened a passage to Chongqing in the east and Jiading in the north. The army entered Heshou, crossed the Shu River, and met with the

古文：丁巳，以云南平，遣使献捷于朝，且请依汉故事，以西南夷悉为郡县，从之。
现代文：云南平定后，宪宗七年，兀良合台遣使向朝廷报捷，并建议将西南地区划为郡县进行管理。
English: After the pacification of Yunnan, in the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the envoy of the Qiliangdaigou was sent to report the victory to the imperial court, and suggested that the southwest region be divided into counties for management.

古文：赐其军银五千两、彩币二万四千匹，授银印，加大元帅。
现代文：朝廷采纳这个建议，赐其军银五千两、彩缎二万四千匹，加兀良合台为大元帅，授与银印，镇守大理。
English: The imperial court accepted this suggestion and gave his army 5,000 taels of silver and 24,000 taels of horses, making him a grand marshal, awarding him a silver seal, and making him the town's guardian.

古文：还镇大理，遂经六盘山至临洮府，与大营合。
现代文：以后兀良合台经六盘山至临洮府，与蒙军大营会合。
English: Later, the Qiliang Hetai marched through the Liupanshan Mountains to Linyi Prefecture, where it met with a large Mongolian army battalion.

古文：月余，复西征乌蛮。
现代文：一月后复征乌蛮。
English: One month later, he was re-enlisted in the army.

古文：宋陈兵六万以俟。
现代文：是年九月，因交趾不服，兀良合台领兵征讨。
English: In September of the same year, due to the dissatisfaction of his friends, Aira Hotta was conscripted into the army.

古文：遣阿术与四王潜自间道冲其中坚，大败之，尽杀其众。
现代文：大军进入交趾，纪律严明，秋毫无犯。交趾国王陈日请求归附蒙古王朝。宪宗八年，兀良合台奉命引兵入宋境，因不适应南方气候，军士皆病。
English: A large army entered Koji, with strict discipline and no crimes committed. King Chen of Koji requested to be annexed to the Mongolian dynasty. In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Ailiangdai was ordered to lead troops into the Song territory. Because they did not adapt to the southern climate, the sergeants were all ill.

古文：大小十三战，杀宋兵四十余万，擒其将大小三人。其州又遣兵来攻，追至门濠，掩溺殆尽，乃不敢复出。
现代文：宪宗遣使传旨，约于翌年正月会师长沙。于是兀良合台与阿术率四五骑兵三千及蛮、覺等族万人，连破横山寨、老苍关，攻占宋朝国土，大败宋军六万人。乘胜占领贵州、象州，入静江府，连破辰、沅二州，直抵潭州城下。
English: In the first month of the following year, Emperor Xianzong sent an envoy to Changsha. Then, with the help of four or five horsemen of 3,000, and ten thousand people from the Barbarian and Jue ethnic groups, Qin Liang and Tai and Ah Jiu defeated Hengshan Zhai and Laozangguan in succession, occupied the Song Dynasty's territory, and defeated the Song Army of 60,000 people. With the victory, they occupied Guizhou and Xiangzhou, entered Jingjiang Prefecture, defeated Chen and Shandong two states in succession, and arrived at the city of Tanzhou.

古文：壁城下月余。
现代文：潭州出二十万宋兵以截断蒙军归路。
English: Tanzhou dispatched 200,000 Song soldiers to cut off the Mongols' escape route.

古文：时世祖已渡江驻鄂州，遣也里蒙古领兵二千人来援，且加劳问。
现代文：兀良合台遣阿术与大纳、玉龙帖木儿为前军，自与四王为后军前后夹击，大破宋军。围攻潭州城，月余不下。这时，世祖已渡江驻鄂州，遣也里蒙古领兵二千来援。
English: Hailiang and Taiyuan sent Ahshu and Dana and Yulong Timur as the front army, and then clashed with the four kings as the rear army, and defeated the Song army. They besieged the city of Tanzhou for more than a month. At this time, the ancestor had crossed the river and stationed in Ezhou, and sent 2,000 Mongolian soldiers to help.

古文：遂自鄂州之浒黄洲北渡，与大军合。
现代文：兀良合台遂自鄂州之浒黄洲渡江，北与大军会合。
English: The Qiliang Hetai then crossed the Yangtze River from the Qiliang Yangtze in Ezhou, and met with the large army in the north.

古文：庚申，世祖即位。
现代文：中统元年，世祖即位。
English: In the first year of unified China, the founder ascended to the throne.

古文：夏四月，兀良合台至上都。
现代文：是年四月，兀良合台至上都。
English: It was April of the year, and Aira-gotai was at the top of the world.

古文：后十二年卒，年七十二。
现代文：至大二年六月十日卒，年八十一。
English: He was 81 years old as of June 10, his sophomore year.

