古文：张仪为秦连横，说赵王曰： 弊邑秦王使臣敢献书于大王御史。
现代文：张仪为秦国推行连横主张，游说赵武王道： 敝国国君派我通过御史给大王献上国书。
English: Zhang Yi lobbied King Zhao of Qin to promote the idea of succession, saying, "The king of Qin sent me to present the imperial edict to the great king through the imperial history.

古文：大王收率天下以摈秦，秦兵不敢出函谷关十五年矣。
现代文：大王率领天下诸侯对抗秦国，导致秦国不敢出函谷关已经有十五年了。
English: It has been fifteen years since the Great King led the princes of the world to fight against Qin. As a result, Qin did not dare to leave Hakodate.

古文：大王之威，行于天下山东。弊邑恐惧慑伏，缮甲厉兵，饰车骑，习驰射，力田积粟，守四封之内，愁居慑处，不敢动摇，唯大王有意督过之也。
现代文：大王的威信通行于天下和崤山以东的六个国家，我秦国对此非常恐惧，于是便修缮铠甲磨励兵器，整顿战车，苦练骑射，勤于耕作，聚积粮食，严守四面边疆，过着忧愁恐惧的日子，不敢轻举妄动，惟恐大王有意责备我们的过错。
English: The authority of the great king is spread throughout the world and the six countries east of Mount Lushan. We, the Qin, were very afraid of this, so we repaired the armor and weapons, rectified the chariots, practiced riding and shooting, worked hard at farming, accumulated grain, strictly guarded the four-sided borders, lived in sorrow and fear, and did not dare to act rashly, for fear that the great king would intentionally blame us for our mistakes.

古文：今秦以大王之力，西举巴蜀，并汉中，东收两周而西迁九鼎，守白马之津。
现代文：现在秦国仰仗大王的力量，西面收复巴、蜀，兼并汉中，东面征服东、西两周，把象征天子的九鼎运移到西方，镇守白马渡口。
English: Now, the Qin State relies on the power of the great king. In the west, it recovered Ba and Shu and annexed Hanzhong. In the east, it conquered the east and west for two weeks. It moved the Jiu Dingyun, a symbol of the Son of Heaven, to the west and guarded the Baima Ferry.

古文：秦虽辟远，然而心忿悁含怒之日久矣。
现代文：秦国虽然地处偏远，但是心怀愤恨的时间已经很久了。
English: Although Qin is a remote place, it has been harboring resentment for a long time.

古文：今宣君有微甲钝兵，军于渑池，愿渡河逾漳，据番吾，迎战邯郸之下。
现代文：如今敝国秦王只有敝甲钝兵，驻扎在渑池，希望渡过黄河，越过漳水占领番吾，与赵军会战于邯郸城下。
English: Nowadays, the Qin King of the State of Yao only has armored blunt soldiers, stationed in Yaoqi, hoping to cross the Yellow River, cross the Surabaya to occupy Fango, and fight with the Zhao Army under the city of Yao.

古文：愿以甲子之日合战，以正殷纣之事。
现代文：希望在甲子之日和赵军会战，以仿效武王伐纣的故事。
English: It is hoped that the Zhao Army will fight on the Day of the Goat to emulate the story of King Wu's felling of the goose.

古文：敬使臣先以闻于左右。
现代文：秦王特派我将此事事先敬告大王陛下。
English: The King of Qin specially sent me to inform His Majesty of this matter in advance.

古文： 凡大王之所信以为从者，恃苏秦之计。
现代文：大王之所以听信合纵政策，原因就在于依靠的是苏秦的计谋。
English: The reason why the Great King listened to Su Qin's stratagem was that he relied on Su Qin's stratagem.

古文：荧惑诸侯，以是为非，以非为是。欲反复齐国而不能，自令车裂于齐之市。
现代文：苏秦惑乱诸侯，颠倒是非。他想要覆灭齐国却没有做到，反而使自己被车裂在齐国的集市上。
English: Su Qin bewitched the princes and reversed the rights and wrongs. He wanted to destroy Qi, but failed to do so. Instead, he let himself be crushed by a cart in the bazaar of Qi.

古文：夫天下之不可一亦明矣。
现代文：天下各国的诸侯是无法联合在一起的。
English: The impossibility of unification of all the principalities in the world is obvious.

古文：今楚与秦为昆弟之国，而韩、魏称为东蕃之臣，齐献鱼盐之地，此断赵之右臂也。
现代文：如今楚国和秦国结为兄弟国家，韩、魏两国也自称是秦国的东方附属，齐国献出了出产鱼盐的土地，这就相当于切断了赵国的右臂。
English: Today, Chu and Qin have become fraternal countries, Han and Wei have also claimed to be the eastern affiliates of Qin, and Qi has offered land for the production of fish salt, which is equivalent to cutting off the right arm of Zhao.

古文：夫断右臂而求与人斗，失其党而孤居，求欲无危，岂可得哉?
现代文：一个被割断了右臂的人去和人进行打斗，就失去了同盟而孤立无援，所以想要不发生危险，怎么可能呢？
English: How is it possible for a man whose right arm has been cut off to go and fight with others, he has lost his allies and is alone, so he does not want to be in danger?

古文：今秦发三将军，一军塞午道，告齐使兴师渡清河，军于邯郸之东；一军军于成皋，敺韩、魏而军于河外严一军军于渑池。
现代文：现在秦国已经派出了三路大军：一路堵塞午道，通知齐国让它发动军队渡过清河，驻扎在邯郸以东；一路驻扎在成皋，韩、魏两国联军，驻扎在河外；一路军队驻扎在渑池。
English: Now Qin has dispatched three large armies: blocking the Mido Road all the way, informing Qi to let it launch an army to cross the Qing River and stationed in the east of Handan; stationed all the way in Chengdu, the Korean and Wei allied forces stationed outside the river; stationed all the way in Handan.

古文：约曰，四国为一以攻赵，破赵而四分其地。
现代文：几路大军盟誓说： 四国团结一致攻打赵国，灭掉赵后由四个国家瓜分赵国的土地。 
English: Several armies swore an oath: The four countries will unite to attack Zhao, and after Zhao is eliminated, the land of Zhao will be divided among the four countries.

古文：是故不敢匿意隐情，先以闻于左右。
现代文：因此我不敢隐瞒真相，预先通知大王和左右的人。
English: Therefore, I did not dare to hide the truth and informed the king and those around him in advance.

古文：臣切为大王计，莫如与秦遇于渑池，面相见而身相结也。
现代文：我私下里为大王考虑，大王不如和秦王在渑池相会，相见之后商议两国联合起来。
English: Privately, I was thinking about what would be best for the great king. It would be better for the great king to meet with King Qin at Dianchi, and after the meeting, the two countries should discuss uniting.

古文：臣请案兵无攻，愿大王之定计。 
现代文：我请求秦王不去进攻赵国，希望大王尽快决定计划。 
English: I asked King Qin not to attack Zhao, and hoped that he would decide on a plan as soon as possible.

古文：赵王曰： 先王之时，奉阳君相，专权擅势，蔽晦先王，独断官事。
现代文：赵武王说： 先王在位的时候，奉阳君做相国，他为人专权跋扈，蒙蔽先王，独断朝政。
English: Zhao Wu Wang said: When the previous king was on the throne, Bongyangjun was the ruler of the country. He was an autocrat, blinded the previous king, and dictated the policy of the dynasty.

古文：寡人宫居，属于师傅，不能与国谋。
现代文：而我深居宫中，不能参与国家大事的谋划。
English: But I live deep in the palace and cannot participate in the planning of national events.

古文：先王弃群臣，寡人年少，奉祠祭之日浅，私心固窃疑焉。
现代文：当先王丢下群臣离开人间的时候，寡人年纪还小，在位的时间不长，但内心却非常疑惑。
English: When the previous king left the world, leaving his ministers behind, most of them were still young and had not been on the throne for long, but their hearts were full of doubts.

古文：以为一从不事秦，非国之长利也。
现代文：与各诸侯订立合纵之盟抗拒秦国，根本不是治国安邦的长久之计。
English: It is not at all a long-term strategy to govern the country and secure the peace by concluding an alliance with various lords to resist Qin.

古文：乃且愿变心易虑，剖地谢前过以事秦。
现代文：因此正想重新考虑，改变战略国策，向秦割地，对以前参加合纵的错误表示谢罪，希望与秦国友好。
English: Therefore, he is thinking of reconsidering, changing the strategic national policy, dividing the land to Qin, expressing his gratitude for the previous mistake of participating in the merger, and hoping to be friendly with Qin.

古文：方将约车趋行，而适闻使者之明诏。 
现代文：我正准备车马要到秦国去时，适逢您到来，使我能够领受教诲。 
English: I was preparing my chariot and horses to go to Qin when you arrived, so that I could receive your teachings.

古文：于是乃以车三百乘入朝渑池，割河间以事秦。
现代文：于是赵武王率领三百领战车到渑池去朝见秦惠王，并把河间之地献给秦国。
English: As a result, King Zhao Wu led three hundred chariots to Qin Hui's court at Dianchi, and dedicated the land between the rivers to Qin.

