古文：孝和皇帝讳肇，肃宗第四子也。
现代文：孝和皇帝名肇，肃宗第四子。
English: He was the fourth son of Emperor Nanzhao and Emperor Su Zong.

古文：母梁贵人，为窦皇后所谮，忧卒，窦后养帝以为己子。
现代文：母梁贵人，被窦皇后诬陷，忧郁而死，窦后养帝以为己子。
English: His mother, Liang Guijin, was framed by Empress Dou and died a melancholy death. Dou Hou Yingdi thought he was her son.

古文：建初七年，立为皇太子。
现代文：建初七年，立为皇太子。
English: He was crown prince for the first seven years of the dynasty.

古文：章和二年二月壬辰，即皇帝位，年十岁。
现代文：章和二年二月三十日，即皇帝位，时年十岁。
English: Zhang He was ten years old when he ascended to the throne on February 30, 2002.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后，太后临朝。
现代文：尊皇后为皇太后，太后临朝听政。
English: The revered empress is the empress dowager, and the empress dowager rules the imperial court.

古文：三月丁酉，改淮阳为陈国，楚郡为彭城国，西平并汝南郡，六安复为庐江郡。
现代文：三月初五，改淮阳为陈国，楚郡为彭城国，西平并入汝南郡，六安复为庐江郡。
English: On March 5, Huaiyang was changed to Chen County, Chu County was changed to Pengcheng County, Xiping County was merged into Runan County, and Lu'an County was changed back to Minjiang County.

古文：遗诏徙西平王羡为陈王，六安王恭为彭城王。
现代文：遗诏徙调西平王刘羡为陈王，六安王刘恭为彭城王。
English: According to the imperial edict, King Liu En of Xiping became King Chen, and King Liu Gong of Li'an became King Pengcheng.

古文：癸卯，葬孝章皇帝于敬陵。
现代文：十一日，葬孝章皇帝于敬陵。
English: On the 11th day, Emperor Xiaozhang was buried in the Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：庚戌，皇太后诏曰：
现代文：十八日，皇太后诏令说：
English: On the 18th, the Empress Dowager issued the following edict:

古文：先帝以明圣，奉承祖宗至德要道，天下清静，庶事咸宁。
现代文： 先帝明圣，继承祖宗至德大道，天下清静，庶务安宁。
English: Emperor Ming Sheng, inheriting the ancestral road to virtue, the world is calm, and the general affairs are peaceful.

古文：今皇帝以幼年，茕茕在疚，朕且佐助听政。
现代文：今皇帝年幼，茕茕忧病，我暂且辅助听政。
English: Now that the emperor is young and suffers from depression, I will temporarily assist him in listening to the government.

古文：外有大国贤王并为蕃屏，内有公卿大夫统理本朝，恭己受成，夫何忧哉！
现代文：外有大国贤王屏藩，内有公卿大夫统理朝政，拱手受成，还有什么要担心？
English: There is a great power outside, the Xian Wangping Clan, and there is a noble doctor inside, who is in charge of the imperial government. What else is there to worry about?

古文：然守文之际，必有内辅以参听断。
现代文：然遵守成法，一定要有内辅以参听断。
English: However, in order to comply with the law, there must be internal reinforcement.

古文：侍中宪，朕之元兄，行能兼备，忠孝尤笃，先帝所器，亲受遗诏，当以旧典辅斯职焉。
现代文：侍中窦宪是我的大哥，行能兼备，忠孝尤笃，为先帝所器重，亲受遗诏，当按旧典担此重任。
English: The chamberlain Dou Xian is my elder brother. He is both capable and loyal. He was important to the former emperor and received the imperial edict personally. He should carry out this important duty according to the old rules.

古文：宪固执谦让，节不可夺。
现代文：窦宪坚持谦让，节不可夺。
English: Dou Xian insisted on modesty and not to be taken advantage of.

古文：今供养两宫，宿卫左右，厥事已重，亦不可复劳以政事。
现代文：现供养帝宫、太后宫，担任夜间警卫，担子已经很重，也不可再以政事相劳。
English: Now providing for the Imperial Palace and the Empress Dowager's palace, and serving as a night guard, the burden is already very heavy, and it is no longer possible to work with politics.

古文：故太尉邓彪，元功之族，三让弥高，海内归仁，为群贤首，先帝褒表，欲以崇化。
现代文：故太尉邓彪，元功的后代，让弟弟继承爵位，风格高尚，海内以仁相敬，为群贤第一，先帝褒赏表扬，是想大家效化。
English: The late First Lieutenant Deng Biao, a descendant of Yuan Gong, let his younger brother inherit the title. His style was noble, he was respected for his benevolence at home and abroad, he was the first in the group of sages, and he was rewarded and praised by the First Emperor. He wanted everyone to be effective.

古文：今彪聪明康强，可谓老成黄耇矣。
现代文：现在邓彪耳聪目明，身体康强，可谓老成干练。
English: Now Deng Biao's ears and eyes are clear, his body is strong, and he can be described as an old and capable person.

古文：其以彪为太傅，赐爵关内侯，录尚书事，百官总己以听，朕庶几得专心内位。
现代文：今任邓彪为太傅，爵封关内侯，总领尚书事，百官职事都听他的，我就可以专心于内位了。
English: The current Deng Biao is the Taifu, the Jiefu Guanzhong, the General Shang Shujie, and the hundred officials all listen to him, so I can concentrate on the inner position.

古文：於戏！
现代文：啊！
English: Alas!

古文：群公其勉率百僚，各修厥职，爱养元元，绥以中和，称朕意焉。
现代文：群公应勉励百僚，做好本职工作，爱护老百姓，万物各得其所，国家安定和谐，那就称我的心了。 
English: A group of officials should encourage hundreds of colleagues, do a good job of their duties, love the people, everything has its place, the country is stable and harmonious, that is my heart.

古文：巍巍荡荡，莫与比隆。《周颂》曰： 于穆清庙，肃雍显相。请上尊庙曰肃宗，共进《武德》之舞。 制曰： 可。 癸亥，陈王羡、彭城王恭、乐成王党、下邳王衍、梁王畅始就国。
现代文：二十九日，有关部门奏报： 孝章皇帝恢宏帝业，道德教化普及和洽，关心黎民，重视农业，文化传播异域，武功威震远方，界惟人面，没有不归附的。巍巍荡荡，没有能相比的。《周颂》说： 多美的文王朝啊，礼仪既敬且和。 请上庙号肃宗，共进《武德》之舞。 帝批示： 可以。 癸亥，陈王刘羡、乐成王刘党、彭城王刘恭、下邳王刘衍、梁王刘畅，开始到封地。
English: On the 29th, the relevant departments reported: Emperor Xiaozhang expanded the empire, spread moral enlightenment and harmony, cared for the people, attached importance to agriculture, and spread culture to foreign regions. Martial arts are powerful and far-reaching, and there is nothing in the world that does not belong to the human face. There is no swinging, and there is nothing that can be compared. "Zhou Song" said: How beautiful the Wen Dynasty is, the etiquette is both respectful and friendly. Please go to the temple and enter the "Wu De" dance. The emperor ordered: Yes. In the morning, Chen Wang Liu Qian, Le Cheng Wang Liu Dang, Peng Cheng

古文：夏四月丙子，谒高庙。
现代文：夏四月十五日，拜谒高庙。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, the worship of Gonggao Temple began.

古文：丁丑，谒世祖庙。
现代文：十六日，拜谒世祖庙。
English: On the 16th, they visited the Temple of the Ancestors of the Ancestors of the Ancestors.

古文：戊寅，诏曰： 昔孝武皇帝致诛胡、越，故权收盐铁之利，以奉师旅之费。
现代文：十七日，诏令说： 从前孝武皇帝讨伐胡、越，因而暂且没收盐铁之利，作为供给军需的费用。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict said: Since the former Emperor Xiaowu fought against Hu and Yue, the profits from salt and iron were temporarily confiscated as the cost of supplying military supplies.

古文：自中兴以来，匈奴未宾，永平末年，复修征伐。
现代文：自中兴以来，匈奴没归附，永平末年，又发生战事。
English: Since the ZTE, the Xiongnu has not been annexed, and in the last years of Yongping, there was another war.

古文：先帝即位，务休力役，然犹深思远虑，安不忘危，探观旧典，复收盐铁，欲以防备不虞，宁安边境。
现代文：先帝即位，一心想让劳力多休息。但仍然深思远虑，安不忘危，检查旧的规章制度，再行没收盐铁之利，以防不测，安定边境。
English: When the former emperor ascended the throne, he was intent on giving laborers more rest. However, he was still thoughtful, not forgetting the dangers, checking the old rules and regulations, and confiscating the profits from salt and iron, in order to prevent accidents and stabilize the border.

古文：而吏多不良，动失其便，以违上意。
现代文：而吏多不良，举措不当，以致违背了皇上的本意。
English: However, many of the officials were bad and the measures were improper, so that they violated the emperor's original intention.

古文：先帝恨之，故遗戒郡国罢盐铁之禁，纵民煮铸，入税县官如故事。其申敕刺史、二千石，奉顺圣旨，勉弘德化，布告天下，使明知朕意。 
现代文：先帝十分痛恨，遗诏告诫郡国免去盐铁的禁令，放开让百姓煮盐铸铁，按先前的规定纳税天子，现敕令刺史二千石，顺从皇上旨意努力发扬道德风尚，布告天下，让大家明了我意。 
English: The former emperor hated it very much. In his last will and testament, he admonished the county and the country to exempt themselves from the ban on salt and iron, to let the people boil salt and cast iron, to pay taxes according to the previous regulations, and now he has ordered to collect 2,000 koku, to obey the emperor's will, to strive to promote morality, and to announce to the world, so that everyone knows what I mean.

古文：五月，京师旱。
现代文：五月，京师旱灾。
English: In May, there was a drought in Kyoto.

古文：诏长乐少府桓郁侍讲禁中。
现代文：诏令长乐少府桓郁陪皇帝侍讲于宫中。
English: The imperial edict ordered Chôle Shôfu Kanku to accompany the emperor as an attendant and speak in the palace.

古文：冬十月乙亥，以侍中窦宪为车骑将军，伐北匈奴。
现代文：冬十月十七日，任侍中窦宪为车骑将军，讨伐北匈奴。
English: On the 17th day of October in winter, Dou Xian was appointed as the general of cavalry and cavalry to fight the Northern Xiongnu.

古文：安息国遣使献师子、扶拔。
现代文：安息国派使者献狮子、无角麟。
English: The country of peace sent an envoy to offer a lion, but no unicorn.

古文：永元元年春三月甲辰，初令郎官诏除者得占丞、尉，以比秩为真。
现代文：永元元年春三月十八日，初令郎官出补丞、尉，可以自己上报，以比秩为真。
English: On the 18th day of March in the spring of the first year of the Yongyuan era, the first-ranked vassal was issued to the second-ranked vassal, and the second-ranked vassal could submit his own report, and the higher-ranked vassal's report was the true one.

古文：夏六月，车骑将军窦宪出鸡鹿塞，度辽将军邓鸿出稒阳塞，南单于出满夷谷，与北匈奴战于稽落山，大破之，追至私渠比鞮海。
现代文：夏六月，车骑将军窦宪出兵鸡鹿塞、度辽将军邓鸿出兵禾固阳塞、南单于出兵满夷谷，与北匈奴战于稽落山，大败敌军，追至私渠比海。
English: In the summer of June, the cavalry general Dou Jian dispatched troops to Jixian, the general Deng Hong of Du Liao dispatched troops to Guyang, and Nan Shan dispatched troops to Mengyi Valley, and fought with the Northern Xiongnu in Jizhongshan, defeated the enemy army, and chased them to the sea.

古文：窦宪遂登燕然山，刻石勒功而还。
现代文：窦宪登燕然山，刻石记功而还。
English: Dou Xian climbed Yanran Mountain, carved a stone to record his achievements, and returned.

古文：北单于遣弟右温禺鞮王奉奏贡献。
现代文：北单于派弟右温禺鞮王，上书入贡。
English: Beidan sent his younger brother, Yuwen Qianwang, to collect the tribute.

古文：秋七月乙未，会稽山崩。
现代文：秋七月十一日，会稽山崩裂。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of autumn, the mountain collapsed.

古文：闰月丙子，诏曰： 匈奴背叛，为害久远。
现代文：闰七月二十二日，诏令说： 匈奴背叛，为害久远。
English: On the 22nd of leap July, the imperial edict said: "The Hun's betrayal is long overdue.

古文：赖祖宗之灵，师克有捷，丑虏破碎，遂扫厥庭，役不再籍，万里清荡，非朕小子眇身所能克堪。
现代文：全靠祖宗之灵，出师告捷，丑虏破碎，扫穴犁庭，役不再兴，万里边疆，扫荡干净，这不是渺小的我所能做到的。
English: Relying entirely on the spirit of our forefathers, succeeding where others have failed, crushing the vile, sweeping away the bad, no longer prospering where others have failed, sweeping the vast frontier clean, this is not something small that I can do.

古文：有司其案旧典，告类荐功，以章休烈。 
现代文：有关官员应按旧制，以功祭告于天，表彰美善英烈。 
English: Relevant officials should, according to the old system, tell the world of their achievements and commend the virtuous and heroic.

古文：九月庚申，以车骑将军窦宪为大将军，以中郎将刘尚为车骑将军。
现代文：九月初七，任车骑将军窦宪为大将军，中郎将刘尚为车骑将军。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, Dou Xian, the general of chariot and cavalry, became the grand general, and Liu Shang, the junior general, became the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：冬十月，令郡国弛刑输作军营，其徙出塞者，刑虽未竟，皆免归田里。
现代文：冬十月，命令郡国将解除枷锁的刑徒，发配军营作苦工。迁移到塞外的，服刑虽然未完，都免刑归田里。
English: In the winter of October, the county and state were ordered to release the prisoners from the shackles and assign them to the military camp for hard labor. Although they had not finished serving their sentences, they were all released and returned to the fields.

古文：庚子，阜陵王延薨。
现代文：十八日，阜陵王刘延逝世。
English: On the 18th, Liu Yan, King of Fulin, passed away.

古文：是岁，郡国九大水。
现代文：这年，郡国九处发大水。
English: This year, nine places in the county experienced major flooding.

古文：二年春正月丁丑，大赦天下。
现代文：二年春正月二十六日，大赦天下。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the second year of spring, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：二月壬午，日有食之。
现代文：二月初二，日蚀。
English: On the second day of February, a solar eclipse.

古文：己亥，复置西河、上郡属国都尉官。
现代文：十九日，再度设置西河、上郡属国都尉官。
English: On the 19th, the provincial governors of Xihe and Shang County were set up again.

古文：夏五月庚戌，分太山为济北国，分乐成、涿郡、勃海为河间国。
现代文：夏五月初一，分太山为济北国，分乐成、涿郡、勃海为河间国。
English: On the first day of May in the summer, Taishan was divided into North Jeju Province, and Lecheng, Ye County and Bo Hai were divided into Ha Noi Province.

古文：丙辰，封皇弟寿为济北王，开为河间王，淑为城阳王，绍封故淮阳王昞子侧为常山王。赐公卿以下至佐史钱、布各有差。
现代文：初七，封皇弟刘寿为济北王、刘开为河间王、刘淑为城阳王，诏封故淮阳王刘日丙子刘侧为常山王，分别赐公卿以下至佐史钱布各不等。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Liu Shou, the younger brother of the emperor, was given the title of King of Zhibei, Liu Kai was given the title of King of Hebei, Liu Shu was given the title of King of Chengyang, and Liu Nichibin, the son of the late King of Huaiyang, was given the title of King of Changshan.

古文：己未，遣副校尉阎磐讨北匈奴，取伊吾卢地。
现代文：初十，派副校尉阎盘讨伐北匈奴，取伊吾卢地。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he sent Vice-Colonel Yan Pan to fight against the Northern Xiongnu and take the land of Iguru.

古文：丁卯，绍封故齐王晃子无忌为齐王，北海王睦子威为北海王。
现代文：十八日，诏封故齐王刘晃子刘无忌为齐王，北海王刘睦子刘威为北海王。
English: On the 18th, Liu Mu Boi, the son of the late Qian Qian Liu Qian, became the Qian King, and Liu Mutsong, the son of the North Sea King Liu Wei, became the North Sea King.

古文：车师前后王并遣子入侍。
现代文：车师前后王都派儿子入侍宫中。
English: Both the king and the coachman sent their sons to the palace.

古文：月氏国遣兵攻西域长史班超，超击降之。
现代文：月氏国派兵攻西域长史班超，班超反击使敌人投降。
English: Yue's state sent troops to attack Banchao, the governor of the western region. Banchao counterattacked and forced the enemy to surrender.

古文：六月辛卯，中山王焉薨。
现代文：六月十二日，中山王刘焉逝世。
English: On June 12, Liu Yan, the King of Zhongshan, passed away.

古文：秋七月乙卯，大将军窦宪出屯凉州。
现代文：秋七月初七，大将军窦宪出兵屯驻凉州。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the autumn and the 7th month of the 7th month of the year, the general Dou Xian sent troops to stay in Liangzhou.

古文：九月，北匈奴遣使称臣。
现代文：九月，北匈奴派使前来称臣。
English: In September, the Northern Xiongnu sent an envoy to Mongolia to pay homage.

古文：冬十月，遣行中郎将班固报命南单于。
现代文：冬十月，派代理中郎将班固回访南单于。
English: In the winter of October, he sent his agent, Zhongro, to pay a return visit to Nandan.

古文：遣左谷蠡王师子出鸡鹿塞，击北匈奴于河云北，大破之。
现代文：派左谷蠡王师子出兵鸡鹿塞，击北匈奴于河云北，大败北匈奴。
English: He sent Zogu Shao Wang Shizi to dispatch troops and defeated the Northern Xiongnu in the northern part of Hebei Province, defeating the Northern Xiongnu.

古文：三年春正月甲子，皇帝加元服，赐诸侯王、公、将军、特进、中二千石、列侯、宗室子孙在京师奉朝请者黄金，将、大夫、郎吏、从官帛。
现代文：三年春正月十九日，皇帝加冠于首。赏赐侯王、公、将军、特进、中二千石、列侯、宗室子孙在京师奉朝请的黄金，将、大夫、郎吏、从官帛。
English: On the 19th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Spring, the emperor crowned his head, and rewarded the lords, princes, generals, special envoys, junior vassals of 2,000 koku, vassals, and descendants of the imperial family in Beijing with gold, generals, doctors, servants, and officials.

古文：赐民爵及粟帛各有差，大酺五日。
现代文：赐民爵及粟帛各不等，饮酒娱乐五天。
English: Awarded the title of people's honor and the rank of corn poppy, five days of drinking and entertainment.

古文：郡国中都官系囚死罪赎缣，至司寇及亡命，各有差。
现代文：郡国中都官系死囚死罪赎缣，至司寇及亡命各不等。
English: The officials of the county capital ranged from death row convicts to embezzlers and exiles.

古文：庚辰，赐京师民酺，布两户共一匹。
现代文：庚辰，赏赐京师人民酒食，布两户共一匹。
English: Geng Chen, rewarded the people of Beijing Division with wine and food, and the two households together had one horse.

古文：二月，大将军窦宪遣左校尉耿夔出居延塞，围北单于于金微山，大破之，获其母阏氏。
现代文：二月，大将军窦宪派左校尉耿夔出兵居延塞，在金微山围攻北单于，大破之，捉获北单于母阏氏。
English: In February, the general Dou Xian sent the left lieutenant Geng Yao to Yansei and besieged Beidanwu in Jinwu Mountain. He defeated Beidanwu and captured Beidanwu.

古文：夏六月辛卯，尊皇太后母比阳公主为长公主。
现代文：夏六月十八日，尊称皇太后母比阳公主为长公主。
English: On the 18th day of the 6th month of the summer, Princess Biyang, the mother of the Empress Dowager, was given the honorary title of the eldest princess.

古文：辛丑，阜陵王种薨。
现代文：二十八日，阜陵王刘种逝世。
English: On the 28th, Liu Zong, King of Fulin, passed away.

古文：冬十月癸未，行幸长安。
现代文：冬十月十二日，帝到长安。
English: In winter, on October 12, the emperor arrived in Chang'an.

古文：诏曰： 北狄破灭，名王仍降，西域诸国，纳质内附，岂非祖宗迪哲重光之鸿烈欤？
现代文：诏令说： 北狄破灭，名王一个个降服，西域各国纳质内附，这难道不是祖宗灵气照耀所完成的大业吗？
English: The imperial edict said: "The Northern Dynasties have been destroyed, the great kings have surrendered one by one, and the Western countries have been enriched. Isn't this the great cause accomplished by the shining of the ancestral spirit?

古文：寤寐叹息，想望旧京。其赐行所过二千石长吏已下及三老、官属钱帛，各有差；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人三斛。 
现代文：我寤寐感叹，想望旧京，今赏赐行在所过二千石长吏以下及三老，属官钱帛各不等；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、穷得不能活下去的，每人发三斛粟。
English: I sighed in my sleep, longing for the old Beijing. Now, rewards and rewards are given to the less than two thousand koku officials and the three olds who have passed through, the official money varies; widows, widowers, orphans, the terminally ill, and those who are too poor to live, each receive three poppies.

古文：十一月癸卯，祠高庙，遂有事十一陵。
现代文：十一月初二，参谒高庙，祭祀十一陵。
English: On the second day of the first month of November, he went to the Gao Temple to pay homage to the Eleven Mausoleums.

古文：诏曰： 高祖功臣，萧、曹为首，有传世不绝之义。
现代文：诏令说： 高祖功臣，首推萧何、曹参，有流芳百世而不致淹没的重大意义。
English: The imperial edict said: Gao Zu's meritorious service, first promoted by Xiao He and Cao San, is of great significance that has been passed down for a hundred generations without drowning.

古文：曹相国后容城侯无嗣。
现代文：曹相国后代容城侯无后人。
English: There are no descendants of Cao Xiangguo in Yongcheng.

古文：朕望长陵东门，见二臣之垅，循其远节，每有感焉。
现代文：我望长陵东门，见二臣冢墓，追思远节，每有感动。
English: I looked at the east gate of the Changling Mausoleum, saw the tombs of the two ministers, and thought about the distant festival. I was deeply moved.

古文：忠义获宠，古今所同。
现代文：忠义获宠，古今所同。
English: Loyalty is favored, now and in the past.

古文：可遣使者以中牢祠，大鸿胪求近亲宜为嗣者，须景风绍封，以章厥功。 
现代文：命使者以猪羊相祭祀，大鸿胪征求近亲适宜做后代的，在景风到来之际，继续封爵，以表彰功勋。 
English: The messenger of destiny is sacrificed in the form of a pig or a sheep, and the great dragon calls for close relatives who are suitable to be the next generation. When the wind comes, they will continue to be knighted in recognition of their merits.

古文：十二月，复置西域都护、骑都尉、戊己校尉官。
现代文：十二月，复设置西域都护、骑都尉、戊己校尉官。
English: In December, the posts of West Regional Capital Protector, Cavalry Captain, and Captain Wu Ji were reinstated.

古文：庚辰，至自长安，减弛刑徒从驾者刑五月。
现代文：初十，帝自长安回，解除枷锁的囚徒跟皇帝随行的减刑五月。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the emperor returned from Chang'an, and the prisoners who were released from the shackles and the emperor accompanied the commutation of the sentence in May.

古文：四年春正月，北匈奴右谷蠡王於除鞬自立为单于，款塞乞降。
现代文：四年春正月，北匈奴右谷蠡王於除革建自立为单于，通好求降。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, the North Huns, the Right Valley, and the King of the North Huns were independent in the suppression of the revolution and construction, and they were willing to go down.

古文：遣大将军左校尉耿夔授玺绶。
现代文：派大将军左校尉耿夔授玺印。
English: General Zhao sent Lieutenant Colonel Geng Yao to confer the imperial seal.

古文：三月癸丑，司徒袁安薨。闰月丁丑，太常丁鸿为司徒。
现代文：三月十四月，司徒袁安逝世，闰三月初九，任太常丁鸿为司徒。
English: On the 14th of March, the disciple Yuan An passed away, and on the 9th day of the 3rd month, Tai Chang Ding Hong was appointed as the disciple.

古文：夏四月丙辰，大将军窦宪还至京师。
现代文：夏四月十八日，大将军窦宪回到京师。
English: On the 18th day of the 4th month of the summer, General Dou Xian returned to the capital.

古文：丙辰，郡国十三地震。
现代文：六月初一，日蚀。十九日，郡国十三地震。
English: On the first day of June, there was a solar eclipse. On the 19th, there was an earthquake.

古文：窦宪潜图弑逆。
现代文：窦宪阴谋杀帝叛逆。
English: Dou Xianyin committed treason by murdering the emperor.

古文：庚申，幸北宫。
现代文：二十三日，帝到北宫。
English: On the 23rd, the emperor arrived at the Northern Palace.

古文：诏收捕宪党射声校尉郭璜，璜子侍中举，卫尉邓叠，叠弟步兵校尉磊。皆下狱死。
现代文：诏令逮捕窦宪党羽射声校尉郭璜，郭璜子侍中郭举、卫尉邓叠、邓叠弟步兵校尉邓磊都监死狱中。
English: The imperial edict ordered the arrest of the Dou Constitutional Party's Lieutenant Guo Jun, Lieutenant Guo Jiu, Lieutenant Deng Lai, and Deng Lai's younger brother, Lieutenant Deng Lei, all of whom were sentenced to death in prison.

古文：使谒者仆射收宪大将军印绶，遣宪及弟笃、景就国，到皆自杀。
现代文：派谒者仆射收缴窦宪大将军印绶，遣窦宪及弟窦笃、窦景到封国，一到都自杀了。
English: The person who sent the letter sent a servant to collect the seal of General Dou Xian, and sent Dou Xian and his brothers Dou Tu and Dou Jing to the feudal state, where they all committed suicide.

古文：是夏、旱、蝗。
现代文：这年夏，旱灾、蝗灾。
English: This summer, droughts and locust plagues.

古文：秋七月己丑，太尉宋由坐党宪自杀。
现代文：秋七月二十三日，太尉宋由因系窦宪叛党自杀。
English: On the 23rd day of the 7th month of the autumn, Song Yu, a courtier, committed suicide because he was a Dou Xian rebel.

古文：八月辛亥，司空任隗薨。
现代文：八月十五日，司空任隗逝世。
English: On August 15th, Siku Rinpoche passed away.

古文：癸丑，大司农尹睦为太尉，录尚书事。
现代文：十七日，任大司农尹睦为太尉，总领尚书事。
English: On the 17th, Nong Yin Moo, who was appointed as the chief secretary, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant and became the chief secretary.

古文：丁巳，赐公卿以下至佐史钱、谷各有差。
现代文：二十一日，赏赐公卿以下至佐史钱谷各不等。
English: On the 21st, the rewards ranged from nobles down to Sashi Chiengoku.

古文：冬十月己亥，宗正刘方为司空。
现代文：冬十月初四，任宗正刘方为司空。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, Zongzheng Liu Fang was appointed as the second-in-command.

古文：十二月壬辰，诏： 今年郡国秋稼为旱、蝗所伤，其什四以上勿收田租、刍稿；有不满者，以实除之。 
现代文：十二月壬辰，诏令说： 今年郡国秋粮因旱灾、蝗灾歉收，损失十分之四以上的，不收田租、柴草；其他有损失不到十分之四的，按实际数免除。 
English: In December, the imperial edict said: This year, the county's autumn grain harvest suffered from drought and locust plagues, with a loss of more than four-tenths, no field rent and firewood and grass were collected; others with a loss of less than four-tenths were exempted according to the actual number.

古文：武陵零陵澧中蛮叛。烧当羌寇金城。
现代文：武陵零陵澧中蛮叛乱，烧当羌寇掠金城。
English: In the middle of the rebellion in Wuling, there was a rebellion in Wuling, and it was burned when the bandits plundered Jincheng.

古文：五年春正月乙亥，宗祀五帝于明堂，遂登灵台，望云物。
现代文：五年春正月十一日，宗祀五帝于明堂，登灵台，看天地云物气象。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, the five emperors were enshrined in the Ming Hall, and they ascended the platform to see the sky and clouds and the weather.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：戊子，千乘王伉薨。
现代文：二十四日，千乘王刘伉逝世。
English: On the 24th, Liu Ye, the King of the Thousand Rides, passed away.

古文：辛卯，封皇帝万岁为广宗王。
现代文：二十七日，封皇弟刘万岁为广宗王。
English: On the 27th, Liu Wanli, the younger brother of the emperor, was enthroned as the Guangzong Emperor.

古文：二月戊戌，诏有司省减内外厩及凉州诸苑马。
现代文：二月初五，诏令有司减少内外马厩及凉州马苑和马匹。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, a division was ordered to reduce the number of stables and horses inside and outside, as well as in the horse park in Liangzhou.

古文：自京师离宫果园上林广成囿悉以假贫民，恣得采捕，不收其税。
现代文：自京师离宫果园上林、广成囿全部给予贫民，任其采捕，不收税。
English: Since the Beijing division left the palace orchard to go to the forest, the Guangcheng gourd was all given to the poor, and they were allowed to harvest and catch, and no tax was collected.

古文：丁未，诏曰： 去年秋麦入少，恐民食不足。
现代文：十四日，诏令说： 去年秋麦收成少，恐民食不足。
English: On the 14th, the imperial edict said: Last year, the autumn barley harvest was small, and there was a fear that the people would not have enough food.

古文：其上尤贫不能自给者户口人数。
现代文：着上报特别贫困不能自给的户口人数。
English: The number of households reporting that they are extremely poor and unable to provide for themselves.

古文：往者郡国上贫民，以衣履釜鬵为赀，而豪右得其饶利。
现代文：过去郡国上报贫民，以衣履釜曾瓦为财产，计算其贫穷程度，贫民怕加重负担，为避科税，便将这些东西出卖，豪右以贱价买进，大得其利。
English: In the past, the county reported the poor to the state, and the degree of poverty was calculated by taking the clothes, shoes, pottery and tiles as the property. The poor were afraid of increasing the burden, and in order to avoid the science tax, they sold these things. The rich bought them at a low price and made a great profit.

古文：诏书实核，欲有以益之，而长吏不能躬亲，反更征召会聚，令失农作，愁扰百姓。
现代文：诏令核实，想有益于贫民，而长吏不能躬亲公办，反而征召会聚议论，以致耽误农时，扰乱百姓。
English: The imperial edict verified that it would be beneficial to the poor, but the officials could not do public affairs themselves, but instead convened a meeting to discuss, delaying the farming time and disturbing the people.

古文：若复有犯者，二千石先坐。 甲寅，太傅邓彪薨。
现代文：现在若再有这样胡搞的，首先拿二千石论罪。 二十一日，太傅邓彪逝世。
English: Now, if there is any more such nonsense, the first thing to do is to take two thousand stones as a crime.On the twenty-first day, Deng Biao passed away.

古文：戊午，陇西地震。
现代文：二十五日，陇西地震。
English: On the 25th, the Shaanxi earthquake.

古文：三月戊子，诏曰： 选举良才，为政之本。
现代文：三月二十五日，诏令说： 选拔好的人才，为治政的根本。
English: On March 25th, the edict said: "Selecting good talent is the foundation of governance.

古文：科别行能，必由乡曲。
现代文：分别品类德行技艺，一定要由基层举荐。
English: Each category of virtue and skill must be recommended by the grassroots.

古文：而郡国举吏，不加简择，故先帝明敕在所，令试之以职，乃得充选。
现代文：然而郡国推举官吏，不加选择，所以先帝明白命令有关部门，要在实际工作中试用，合格的才肯任用。
English: However, the prefectural government does not select officials, so the first emperor clearly ordered the relevant departments to try them in actual work, and only those who are qualified are willing to be appointed.

古文：又德行尤异，不须经职者，别署状上。
现代文：又品德特别好的，不须经过试用，可另外上报。
English: And if the character is particularly good, it does not need to be tested, and can be reported separately.

古文：而宣布以来，出入九年，二千石曾不承奉，恣心从好，司隶、刺史讫无纠察。
现代文：然而宣布以来，前后九年，二千石竟不按指示办事，一心只照自己的爱好，司隶、刺史从来没有检查纠正。
English: However, in the nine years since the announcement, the 2,000-koku leader has not acted according to instructions, but only according to his own inclinations. The chief vassal and the chief historian have never checked and corrected.

古文：今新蒙赦令，且复申敕，后有犯者，显明其罚。
现代文：现在新颁布了赦令，对过去了的不加追究，并且重新申明赦令，以后有犯这种错误的，就一定加以惩罚。
English: Now that a new pardon order has been issued, the past will not be investigated, and the pardon order will be re-affirmed. If such a mistake is made in the future, it will definitely be punished.

古文：在位不以选举为忧，督察不以发觉为负，非独州郡也。
现代文：在职的不把推荐人才当一回事，督察的不以发觉这种错误作为本身职责，这种情况不仅仅州郡如此。
English: It's not just state and local governments that don't take referrals seriously, and inspectors don't see it as their job to catch such mistakes.

古文：是以庶官多非其人。下民被奸邪之伤，由法不行故也。 庚寅，遣使者分行贫民，举实流冗，开仓赈禀三十余郡。
现代文：所以很多的官员不称职，老百姓受他们奸诈邪恶的伤害，是由于法制得不到执行的缘故。 二十七日，派使者分别巡察贫民区，按实际流散人数，开仓赈济粮食的有三十余郡。
English: Therefore, many officials are incompetent, and it is because the legal system is not enforced that the people are harmed by their treachery and evil.On the 27th, envoys were sent to inspect the slums separately, and according to the actual number of displaced people, more than 30 counties opened warehouses to provide food.

古文：夏四月壬子，封阜陵王种兄鲂为阜陵王。
现代文：夏四月二十日，封阜陵王刘种兄刘鲂为阜陵王。
English: On the 20th day of the 4th month of the summer, Liu Zeng's brother Liu Wei, the king of Fufu, became the king of Fufu.

古文：六月丁酉，郡国三雨雹。
现代文：夏六月初六，郡国三次下冰雹。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of summer, the county was hit by hail three times.

古文：秋九月辛酉，广宗王万岁薨，无子，国除。
现代文：秋九月初一，广宗王刘万岁逝世，无子，封国撤销。
English: In autumn, on the first day of September, Guangzong King Liu Wanling passed away, without a son, and the state was revoked.

古文：匈奴单于於除鞬叛，遣中朗将任尚讨灭之。
现代文：匈奴单于於除革建叛变，派中郎将任尚把他消灭掉。
English: The Xiongnu alone rebelled against the revolutionaries, and dispatched General Ren to eliminate him.

古文：壬午，令郡县劝民蓄蔬食以助五谷。
现代文：二十二日，命令郡县劝导平民积蓄蔬菜食物，以贴补五谷。
English: On the 22nd, it ordered counties to advise civilians to accumulate vegetable food to supplement grain rations.

古文：其官有陂池，令得采取，勿收假税二岁。冬十月辛未，太尉尹睦薨。
现代文：官府的池塘，让平民采伐捕捞，两年不要收租税。冬十月辛未，太尉尹睦逝世。
English: The pond of the government office, let the civilians harvest and fish, and do not collect taxes for two years. In the winter of October, Lieutenant Yin Mu passed away.

古文：十一月乙丑，太仆张酺为太尉。
现代文：十一月初六，任太仆张酉甫为太尉。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, Zhang Xifu, who had been appointed as the eunuch, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：是岁，武陵郡兵破叛蛮，降之。
现代文：这年，武陵郡兵打败叛蛮，并降服他们。
English: This year, the soldiers of Wuling County defeated the rebels and subdued them.

古文：护羌校尉贯友讨烧当羌，羌乃遁去。
现代文：护羌校尉贯友讨伐烧当羌，羌逃走。
English: The school captain and his fellow cadets tried to fight and burn the cormorant, but the cormorant fled.

古文：南单于安国叛，骨都侯喜斩之。
现代文：南单于安国叛变，骨都侯喜把他杀掉。
English: Nan Shan rebelled against An Guo, and the feudal lord wanted to kill him.

古文：六年春正月，永昌徼外夷遣使译献犀牛、大象。
现代文：六年春正月，永昌界外夷人派使者译通言语，献犀牛、大象。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year, the barbarians outside Yongchang sent an envoy to translate and present rhinoceroses and elephants.

古文：己卯，司徒丁鸿薨。
现代文：二十一日，司徒丁鸿逝世。
English: On the 21st, Szu Dinghong passed away.

古文：二月乙未，遣谒者分行禀贷三河、兖、冀、青州贫民。
现代文：二月初八，派谒者分别巡视，将仓廪储谷借给三河、兖、冀、青州贫民。
English: On the 8th day of the 2nd month of the year, the person who sent the money made a separate inspection, and lent the warehouse to the poor people of the three rivers, Shandong, Hebei and Qingzhou.

古文：许阳侯马光自杀。
现代文：许阳侯马光自杀。
English: Xuyang Houma Guang committed suicide.

古文：丁未，司空刘方为司徒，太常张奋为司空。
现代文：二十日，任司空刘方为司徒，太常张奋为司空。
English: On the 20th day, Liu Fang, who was appointed as the secretary of the Air Force, became the secretary of the Air Force, and Zhang Fen, who was too often appointed as the secretary of the Air Force.

古文：三月庚寅，诏流民所过郡国皆实禀之，其有贩卖者勿出租税，又欲就贱还归者，复一岁田租、更赋。
现代文：三月庚寅，诏令流民所过郡国都按实际以仓廪积谷赈济，流民有贩卖的不要收税，有想回老家的，免除一年田租，一年代役税。
English: In March, Emperor Gao Yin issued the edict that all the displaced people should go through the county and the country to collect grain from storehouses according to the actual situation. The displaced people should not collect taxes if they want to sell, and if they want to return to their hometown, they should be exempted from the one-year field rent and the one-year service tax.

古文：丙寅，诏曰： 朕以眇末，承奉鸿烈。
现代文：初九，诏令说： 我本渺小微末，继承伟大的帝业。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the imperial edict said: I am originally small and insignificant, inheriting the great imperial cause.

古文：阴阳不和，水旱违度，济、河之域，凶馑流亡，而未获忠言至谋，所以匡救之策。
现代文：阴阳不调和，水旱都超过往日，济水黄河流域，饥馑流亡，但没有获得好建议好计谋，用以进行挽救。
English: Yin and yang are not reconciled, floods and droughts are more frequent than in the past, the Yellow River Basin is water-starved, and people are fleeing from famine, but there is no good advice or strategy to save them.

古文：寤寐永叹，用思孔疚。
现代文：日夜长叹，忧思急切。
English: Day and night, long sighs, anxious thoughts.

古文：惟官人不得于上，黎民不安于下，有司不念宽和，而竞为苛刻，覆案不急，以妨民事，甚非所以上当天心，下济元元也。
现代文：当官的在上面干的不好，黎民百姓就在下面不安。管事的人不讲宽和，竞相苛刻，反覆审理不急之务，妨碍民间农事，这完全是上面不能符合天帝的心意，下面不能让老百姓得点好处。
English: The officials at the top are not doing a good job, and the people at the bottom are uneasy. The people in charge do not talk about peace and harmony, compete with each other, repeatedly review non-urgent tasks, and hinder private farming. This is entirely because the top cannot meet the will of the emperor, and the people at the bottom cannot get any benefit.

古文：思得忠良之士，以辅朕之不逮。
现代文：想得到忠良志士，来帮助我的不足。
English: I want to get a loyal person to help me with my shortage.

古文：其令三公、中二千石、二千石、内郡守相举贤良方正、能直言极谏之士各一人。昭岩穴，披幽隐，遣诣公车，朕将悉听焉。 帝乃亲临策问，选补郎吏。
现代文：现令三公、中二千右、二千石、内郡守相推荐贤良方正，能说直话肯批评的人士各一人，将穷乡僻壤，幽居隐逸，有才华的能人请出来，送到公车门，我将亲自听取他们的意见。 于是皇上亲临策问，选补郎吏。
English: I hereby order the three princes, the chancellor of the middle two thousand right, the governor of the inner county and the governor of the inner county to recommend one person each of the virtuous Fang Zheng, the person who can speak frankly and is willing to criticize, to invite the talented person from the remote countryside, the secluded place and the talented person to the bus gate, and I will personally listen to their opinions.

古文：夏四月，蜀郡徼外羌率种人遣使内附。
现代文：夏四月，蜀郡边外羌族率领所属种人派使者内附。
English: In the summer of April, the Yao people outside Shu County led by their kindred sent an envoy.

古文：五月，城阳王淑薨，无子，国除。
现代文：五月，城阳王刘淑逝世，无子，封国撤销。
English: In May, Liu Shu, the King of Chengyang, died childless, and the state was revoked.

古文：六月己酉，初令伏闭尽日。
现代文：六月二十三日，以 伏日万鬼行 ，开始下令静闭终日，不干他事。
English: On the 23rd of June, he ordered the whole country to shut down and not to do anything else.

古文：秋七月，京师旱。诏中都官徒各除半刑，谪其未竟，五月已下皆免遣。
现代文：秋七月，京师干旱，诏令中都官服徒刑的犯人各免半刑，没有完的徒刑实行流放，刑不足五月的一律免刑遣散。
English: In the autumn and July, when the capital was in drought, the imperial edict ordered that the prisoners who were sent to the capital to serve their sentences would each be exempted from half of the sentence, and those who did not complete their sentences would be exiled, and those whose sentences were less than five months would be exempted from punishment and discharged.

古文：丁巳，幸洛阳寺，录囚徒，举冤狱。
现代文：初二，帝到洛阳官舍，查视记载囚徒情况，检举平反冤狱。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the emperor went to the Luoyang Government House, inspected the recorded prisoner situation, and reported the unjust imprisonment.

古文：收洛阳令下狱抵罪，司隶校尉、河南尹皆左降。
现代文：收洛阳令下狱抵罪，司隶校尉、河南尹都贬官降职。
English: Luo Yang was ordered to go to prison to atone for his crime, and the captain of Sili and Yin of Henan were demoted.

古文：未及还宫而澍雨。
现代文：帝未及还宫，得及时雨。
English: If the emperor does not return to the palace, it will rain in time.

古文：西域都护班超大破焉耆、尉犁，斩其王。
现代文：西域都护班超大败焉耆、尉犁，杀掉他们的首领。
English: The Western Capital Guard Team suffered a huge defeat, and their leaders were killed.

古文：自是西域降服，纳质者五十余国。
现代文：从此西域降服，纳贡钱物、派人质的有五十余国。
English: From this western region, more than fifty countries surrendered, paid tribute and sent hostages.

古文：南单于安国从弟子逢侯率叛胡亡出塞。
现代文：南单于安国堂弟儿子逢侯率领叛变的胡人逃往塞外。
English: Nan Shan and An Guo's cousin's son, Feng Hou, led the mutinous Hu people to flee outside of Serbia.

古文：九月癸丑，以光禄勋邓鸿行车骑将军事，与越骑校尉冯柱、行度辽将军朱徽、使匈奴中郎将杜崇讨之。
现代文：九月癸丑，令光禄勋邓鸿代理车骑将军职务，与越骑校尉冯柱、代理度辽将军朱徽、使匈奴中郎将杜崇去讨伐。
English: At the end of September, Guang Lu Xun appointed Deng Hong as the acting cavalry general, and sent Du Chong to the crusade with the Vietcong cavalry lieutenant Feng Zhu, the acting Du Liao general Zhu Hui, and the Xiongnu middlemen.

古文：冬十一月，护乌桓校尉任尚率乌桓、鲜卑，大破逢侯，冯柱遣兵追击，复破之。
现代文：冬十一月，护乌桓校尉任尚率领乌桓、鲜卑，大败逢侯，冯柱派兵追击，再次打败他们。
English: In the winter of November, Wuhuan was defeated by Wuhuan and Xianbei, led by Wuhuan's lieutenant Ren Shang, and Fengzhu sent troops to chase and defeat them again.

古文：诏以勃海郡属冀州。
现代文：诏令将勃海郡归属冀州。
English: The imperial edict assigned Bohai County to Jizhou.

古文：武陵溇中蛮叛，郡兵讨平之。
现代文：武陵溇中蛮叛变，郡兵将他讨平。
English: There was a violent mutiny in Wuling County, and the county soldiers tried to quell it.

古文：七年春正月，行车骑将军邓鸿、度辽将军朱徽、中郎将杜崇皆下狱死。
现代文：七年春正月，代理车骑将军邓鸿、度辽将军朱徽、中郎将杜崇都监死狱中。
English: In the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, the acting cavalry general Deng Hong, the general Zhu Hui of Du Liao, and the middle man Du Chong were all imprisoned in prison.

古文：夏四月辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日蚀。
English: Summer, first day of April, solar eclipse.

古文：帝引见公卿问得失，令将、大夫、御史、谒者、博士、议郎、郎官会廷中，各言封事。
现代文：帝召见公卿问国政的得失，命将、大夫、御史、谒者、博士、议郎、郎官集会宫廷中，各奏议机密事。
English: The emperor summoned the nobles to ask about the merits and demerits of national politics. The commander-in-chief, the doctor, the historian, the eunuch, the doctor, the mediator, and the steward gathered in the court to discuss confidential matters.

古文：诏曰： 元首不明，化流无良，政失于民，谪见于天。
现代文：诏令说： 天子不英明，感化流俗没有上策，政事不得民心，上天也进行谴责。
English: The edict said: God is not wise, there is no best way to influence people, politics is not popular, and God also condemns.

古文：深惟庶事，五教在宽，是以旧典因孝廉之举，以求其人。
现代文：深深想到庶民百事，父义、母慈、兄友、弟恭、子孝五教的中心在于宽恕，因此旧典用举孝廉的方式，想找到德才兼备的能人。
English: Deeply thinking of the common people's Pepsi, the center of the five teachings of fatherly righteousness, motherly kindness, brotherly friendship, brotherly respect, and filial piety lies in forgiveness, so the old classics used the way of raising filial piety to find capable people who are both virtuous and talented.

古文：有司详选郎官宽博有谋、才任典城者三十人。 既而悉以所选郎出补长、相。
现代文：管事的人仔细全面地选出郎官中宽博有谋才能胜任一方官职的三十人。 并立即将所选郎官都补充为县长、侯相。
English: The person in charge carefully and comprehensively selected thirty people from the vassals who were capable of holding one of the official posts, and immediately added the selected vassals as the county head and the prince's minister.

古文：五月辛卯，改千乘国为乐安国。
现代文：五月十一日，改千乘国为乐安国。
English: On May 11th, the name of the country was changed from Senjo to Leian.

古文：六月丙寅，沛王定薨。
现代文：六月十六日，沛王刘定逝世。
English: On June 16, Pei Wang Liu Ding passed away.

古文：秋七月乙巳，易阳地裂。
现代文：秋七月二十六日，易阳地裂。
English: On the 26th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Iyang ground cracked.

古文：九月癸卯，京师地震。
现代文：九月二十五日，京师地震。
English: September 25th, Beijing earthquake.

古文：八年春二月己丑，立贵人阴氏为皇后。
现代文：八年春二月己丑，立贵人阴氏为皇后。
English: In the spring and February of the eighth year, she became ugly, and the noblewoman Yin became the empress.

古文：赐天下男子爵，人二级，三老、孝悌、力田三级，民无名数及流民欲占者一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃，贫不能自存者粟，人五斛。
现代文：赏赐天下男子爵位，每人二级，三老、孝悌、力田三级，平民无户籍及流民自首的各一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、穷得不能活命的，每人发粟五斛。
English: Reward the world's men with peerages, each person second-class, three-year-olds, filial piety, and power fields third-class, civilians without household registration and exiles surrendering all first-class; widows, widowers, orphans, the terminally ill, and those who are too poor to live, each person will receive five corns.

古文：夏四月癸亥，乐成王党薨。
现代文：夏四月十八日，乐成王刘党逝世。
English: On the 18th day of the 4th month of the summer, Liu Dang, the King of Le Chengg, passed away.

古文：甲子，诏赈贷并州四郡贫民。
现代文：十九日，诏令赈济借贷并州四郡贫民。
English: On the 19th, the prefectural government issued an order to provide loans and loans to the poor in four counties in the prefecture.

古文：五月，河内、陈留蝗。
现代文：五月，河内、陈留蝗灾。
English: In May, locusts infested Hanoi and Chenliu.

古文：南匈奴右温禺犊王叛，为寇。
现代文：南匈奴右温禺犊王叛变，入寇。
English: The Southern Xiongnu rebelled against the right-wing Emperor Wen and became invaders.

古文：秋七月，行度辽将军庞奋、越骑校尉冯柱追讨之，斩右温禺犊王。
现代文：秋七月，代理度辽将军庞奋、越骑校尉冯柱，追击讨伐，斩右温禺犊王。
English: In autumn and July, the acting general of Du Liao, Pang Fen, and the cavalry captain of Yue, Feng Zhu, pursued the crusade and killed the right-hand king of Wenzhou.

古文：车师后王叛，击其前王。
现代文：车师后王叛变，攻击他的前王。
English: The king of the chariots rebelled and attacked his predecessor.

古文：八月辛酉，饮酎。
现代文：八月初八，饮正月做八月成的酎酒。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month of the 8th month.

古文：诏郡国中都官系囚减死一等，诣敦煌戍。
现代文：诏郡国中都官对在押囚犯减死罪一等，送敦煌戍边。
English: The central government of Zhao County reduced the death sentence of the prisoner to the first degree and sent him to Dunhuang.

古文：其犯大逆，募下蚕室；其女子宫。
现代文：犯大逆斩首的，关进蚕室，实施腐刑。女子实施宫刑。
English: Those who committed high treason and beheaded were locked up in the silkworm room and subjected to corruption. Women were subjected to palace punishment.

古文：自死罪已下，至司寇及亡命者入赎，各有差。
现代文：自死罪以下，至司寇逃亡的赎罪，分别入赎各有等差。
English: From the crime punishable by death and below, to the expiation of escaping scouts, there is a difference in the amount of expiation.

古文：九月，京师蝗。
现代文：九月，京师蝗灾。
English: In September, a plague of locusts hit Kyoto.

古文：吏民言事者，多归责有司。
现代文：官吏平民议论的，多归咎管事的人。
English: When officials and commoners argue, they mostly blame the person in charge.

古文：诏曰： 蝗虫之异，殆不虚生，万方有罪，在予一人，而言事者专咎自下，非助我者也。
现代文：诏令说： 蝗灾的变异，不是无缘无故发生的，万方有罪，根源在我一人，而批评的专归咎在下面，这不是帮助我。
English: The edict said: "The changes in locust plagues did not happen for no reason. All parties are guilty. The root cause is me alone, and the criticism is solely attributed to me. This is not helping me.

古文：朕寤寐恫矜，思弭忧衅。
现代文：我日夜惶恐，思想紧张。
English: Day and night I live in fear, my mind is on edge.

古文：昔楚严无灾而惧，成王出郊而反风。
现代文：从前楚庄无灾，向天求过，成王怀疑周公，天刮大风；举行郊祭，风反吹起来，倒了的禾得以转正。
English: Once upon a time, Chuzhuang was disaster-free, and prayed to the heavens, but Chengwang doubted Zhou Gong, and the sky blew a gale; a suburb festival was held, and the wind blew back, and the fallen grain was able to turn positive.

古文：将何以匡朕不逮，以塞灾变？
现代文：大家将怎样帮助我的不够，来弥补灾害？
English: How will you help me make up for the disaster?

古文：百僚师尹，勉修厥职，刺史、二千石详刑辟，理冤虐，恤鳏寡，矜孤弱，思惟致灾兴蝗之咎。 庚子，复置广阳郡。
现代文：百官师尹勉力做好本职工作，刺史、二千石仔细审理罪犯，平反冤错假案，抚恤鳏、寡、孤、独，矜怜弱小，反省招灾兴蝗的罪衍。 二十八日，恢复设置广阳郡。
English: The centurion, Yin, tried his best to do his job well, wrote a history, carefully tried the criminals with a total of two thousand stones, redressed the wrongs and false cases, granted pensions to the widows, orphans, and the poor, and reflected on the sins of inviting disasters and locusts. On the 28th, Guangyang County was restored.

古文：冬十月乙丑，北海王威有罪自杀。
现代文：冬十月二十三日，北海王刘威有罪自杀。
English: In the winter of October 23rd, the king of the North Sea, Liu Wei, committed suicide.

古文：十二月辛亥，陈王羡薨。
现代文：十二月初十，陈王刘羡逝世。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month, Chen Wang Liu Qian passed away.

古文：丁巳，南宫宣室殿火。
现代文：十六日，南宫宣室殿火灾。
English: On the 16th, a fire broke out in the South Palace's Nobushitsu-den.

古文：九年春正月，永昌徼外蛮夷及掸国重译奉贡。
现代文：九年春正月，永昌边外蛮夷及掸国，经辗转翻译，通言语纳贡物。
English: In the first month of the spring of the ninth year, the barbarians outside Yongchang and the country of Yunnan, after being translated and translated, passed through the language tribute.

古文：三月庚辰，陇西地震。
现代文：三月初十，陇西地震。
English: On the 10th day of March, the Shaanxi earthquake occurred.

古文：癸巳，济南王康薨。
现代文：二十三日，济南王刘康逝世。
English: On the 23rd, King Liu Kang of Jinan passed away.

古文：西域长史王林击车师后王，斩之。
现代文：西域长史王林攻打车师后王，把他杀掉。
English: Shi Wanglin, the governor of the western region, attacked the driver, Hou Wang, and killed him.

古文：夏四月丁卯，封乐成王党子巡为乐成王。
现代文：夏四月二十八日，封乐成王刘党子刘巡为乐成王。
English: On the 28th day of the 4th month of the summer, Liu Jun, the son of Liu Gang, the king of Lecheng, was appointed as the king of Lecheng.

古文：六月，蝗、旱。
现代文：六月，蝗灾、旱灾。
English: In June, locust plagues and droughts.

古文：戊辰，诏： 今年秋稼为蝗虫所伤，皆勿收租、更、刍稿；若有所损失，以实除之，余当收租者亦半入。
现代文：二十九日，诏令说 ：今年秋收为蝗虫所伤，都不要收田租、更赋、刍稿，所有损失，照实际情况免除。其余应当收租的，也只收半租。
English: On the 29th, the imperial edict said, "This year's autumn harvest should not be affected by locusts, and all losses such as farmland rent, land tax, and tax should be exempted according to the actual situation. The rest that should be collected will only be charged half rent."

古文：其山林饶利，陂池渔采，以赡元元，勿收假税。 
现代文：山林富利，陂池渔采，以养平民，不收租税。 
English: The mountains and forests are rich and fertile, and the fishing and mining in Dianchi Lake are good for raising civilians, and no tax is collected.

古文：秋七月，蝗虫飞过京师。
现代文：秋七月，蝗虫飞过京师。
English: In autumn and July, locusts flew over the capital.

古文：八月，鲜卑寇肥如，辽东太守祭参下狱死。
现代文：八月，鲜卑寇掠肥如，辽东太守祭参监死狱。
English: In August, a fresh-off-the-boat robber, who plundered manure, participated in the Liaodong Empress Dowager Festival and was sentenced to death.

古文：闰月辛巳，皇太后窦氏崩。
现代文：闰八月十四日，皇太后窦氏逝世。
English: On August 14, Empress Dowager Dou passed away.

古文：丙申，葬章德皇后。
现代文：二十九日，葬章德皇后。
English: On the 29th, the funeral of Empress Zhengde took place.

古文：烧当羌寇陇西，杀长吏，遣行征西将军刘尚、越骑校尉赵世等讨破之。
现代文：烧当羌寇掠陇西，杀长吏，派代理征西将军刘尚、越骑校尉赵世等讨伐打败了他们。
English: They defeated them by setting fire to the cormorants, raiding the west of Yunnan, killing the officials, and sending agents such as the general Liu Shang and the Vietcong cavalry captain Zhao Shiyu to fight.

古文：九月庚申，司徒刘方策免，自杀。
现代文：九月二十四日，司徒刘方被帝策书免职，自杀。
English: On September 24th, Liu Fang was removed from his post and committed suicide.

古文：甲子，追尊皇妣梁贵人为皇太后。
现代文：二十八日，追尊皇妣梁贵人为皇太后。
English: On the 28th, she became the empress dowager.

古文：冬十月乙酉，改葬恭怀梁皇后于西陵。
现代文：冬十月十九日，改葬恭怀梁皇后于西陵。
English: In the winter, on October 19th, the reburial of Empress Gonghuai Liang took place in the West Mausoleum.

古文：十一月癸卯，光禄勋河南吕盖为司徒。
现代文：十一月初八，任光禄勋河南吕盖为司徒。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of November, Guanglu Huanan Lugei was appointed as a disciple.

古文：十二月丙寅，司空张奋罢。
现代文：十二月初一，司空张奋罢去。
English: On the first day of December, Siku Zhangfen resigned.

古文：壬申，太仆韩棱为司空。
现代文：初七，任太仆韩眣为司空。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he was appointed as the second-in-command, and Han Min became the third-in-command.

古文：己丑，复置若庐狱官。
现代文：二十四日，恢复设置若卢狱官。
English: On the 24th, the appointment of prison officers in Walu was resumed.

古文：十年春三月壬戌，诏曰： 堤防沟渠，所以顺助地理，通利壅塞。
现代文：十年春三月二十八日，诏令说： 堤防沟渠，是用来理顺帮助地理，使障塞通达。
English: On March 28, the 10th day of spring, the imperial edict said: The dike and ditch are used to rationalize and help the geography, and to make the obstacles passable.

古文：今废慢懈弛，不以为负。
现代文：今废弃懈怠，不认为有所失误。
English: Now discard the slack, do not think there is a mistake.

古文：刺史、二千石其随宜疏导。
现代文：刺史、二千石应随时疏导。
English: Two thousand koku of history should be guided at any time.

古文：勿因缘妄发，以为烦扰，将显行其罚。 
现代文：但不得藉此妄自征发人力物力，反增烦扰，否则将根据情况论处。 
English: However, they must not use this to solicit manpower and material resources to increase the disturbance, otherwise they will be dealt with according to the situation.

古文：夏五月，京师大水。
现代文：夏五月，京师大水。
English: In the summer of May, the Beijing Teachers' Day Water Festival was held.

古文：秋七月己巳，司空韩棱薨。
现代文：秋七月二十七日，司空韩眣逝世。
English: On the 27th day of the 7th month of autumn, Siku Han-soo passed away.

古文：八月丙子，太常太山巢堪为司空。
现代文：八月十五日，太常太山巢堪为司空。
English: On August 15th, Taichang Taishan's nest was empty.

古文：九月庚戌，复置廪牺官。
现代文：九月十九日，恢复设置廪牺官。
English: On September 19th, the establishment of the "sacrifice officer" was resumed.

古文：冬十月，五州雨水。
现代文：冬十月，五州雨水多。
English: In winter and October, more rain fell in the five prefectures.

古文：十二月，烧当羌豪迷唐等率种人诣阙贡献。
现代文：十二月，烧当羌豪强迷唐等率领部族到朝廷进贡。
English: In December, the Ku-Dang-Dao, Qiang-Fan-Tang and other leading tribes came to the imperial court to pay tribute.

古文：戊寅，梁王畅薨。
现代文：十九日，梁王刘畅逝世。
English: On the 19th, Liang Wang Liu Chang passed away.

古文：十一年春二月，遣使循行郡国，禀贷被灾害不能自存者，令得渔采山林池泽，不收假税。
现代文：十一年春二月，派使者巡视郡国，将仓廪储粮借贷给受灾害不能生活的，并令可以在山林池泽，打柴捕鱼，不收租税。
English: In the spring and February of the eleventh year, an emissary was sent to inspect the county and lend the grain stored in warehouses to those who could not live due to disasters, and ordered that they could play firewood and fish in the mountains, forests and ponds without paying taxes.

古文：丙午，诏郡国中都官徒及笃癃老小女徒各除半刑，其未竟三月者，皆免归田里。
现代文：十二日，诏令郡国中都官对判处劳役及患绝症和老小女徒各减去半刑，还有三月刑期未完的，都免刑放归田里。
English: On the 12th, the county vice-governor decreed that those who were sentenced to forced labor, those who were terminally ill, and old and young female apprentices would each have their sentences reduced by half, and those whose sentences had not been completed by March would be released without punishment to return to the fields.

古文：夏四月丙寅，大赦天下。
现代文：夏四月初九，大赦天下。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：己巳，复置右校尉官。
现代文：十二日，恢复设置右校尉官。
English: On the 12th, the position of right lieutenant was reinstated.

古文：秋七月辛卯，诏曰： 吏民逾僣，厚死伤生，是以旧令节之制度。
现代文：秋七月初五，诏令说： 官民超越自己的身份，举行厚葬，对生者不利，因而旧的政令，规定了限制的制度。
English: On the 5th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the imperial edict said: "Officials and citizens overstep their status and hold large funerals, which is unfavorable to the living. Therefore, the old decree stipulated a restricted system.

古文：顷者贵戚近亲，百僚师尹，莫肯率从，有司不举，怠放日甚。
现代文：近来贵戚近亲，各级官员，没有带头执行，管事人也不举报制止，放任自流，一天比一天严重。
English: Recently, close relatives and officials at all levels have not taken the lead in implementation, and the administrators do not report and stop, and they are left to their own devices, which is becoming more and more serious every day.

古文：又商贾小民，或忘法禁，奇巧靡货，流积公行。
现代文：又商人小民，有法不依，有禁不止，贩卖奇巧及伪劣商品，公然屯积居奇。
English: There are also merchants and commoners who do not abide by the law, do not stop at prohibitions, sell fanciful and shoddy goods, and openly occupy strange places.

古文：其在位犯者，当先举正。
现代文：官吏犯禁者应当首先改正。
English: Officials who violate the ban should be corrected first.

古文：市道小民，但且申明宪纲，勿因科令，加虐羸弱。 
现代文：市道小民，只要申明法纪，加强教育，不得依据条例法令，对老弱病残进行虐待。 
English: As long as the city affirms legal discipline and strengthens education, it is not allowed to abuse the old, weak and sick according to regulations and laws.

古文：十二年春二月，旄牛徼外白狼、貗薄夷率种人内属。
现代文：十二年春正月，旄牛边外白狼、豸娄薄夷人率领部族归附内地。
English: In the first month of the 12th year of the Spring, the tribes led by the White Wolf and the Yan Boi led the tribes to annex the inland.

古文：诏贷被灾诸郡民种粮。
现代文：诏令贷给受灾诸郡平民种粮。
English: The imperial edict lent grain to the civilians in the disaster-affected counties.

古文：赐下贫、鳏、寡、孤、独、不能自存者，及郡国流民，听入陂池渔采，以助蔬食。
现代文：赏赐下贫、鳏、寡、孤、独、不能活命的及郡国流民，放开让他们到陂池捕捞采伐，好补足蔬食。
English: Reward the poor, the destitute, the widowed, the lonely, the isolated, those unable to make a living, and the displaced people of the county, and let them go fishing and logging in Dianchi, so as to supplement their vegetable diet.

古文：三月丙申，诏曰： 比年不登，百姓虚匮。京师去冬无宿雪，今春无澍雨，黎民流离，困于道路。
现代文：三月十四日，诏令说： 几年来收成不好，百姓衣食缺乏，京师去年冬天没有下雪，今春没有及时雨，老百姓流离失所，颠沛道路。
English: On March 14, the imperial edict said: "For several years, the harvest has been poor, the people lack food and clothing, the capital did not have snow last winter, there was no timely rain this spring, the people were displaced, and the roads were bumpy.

古文：朕痛心疾首，靡知所济。瞻仰昊天，何辜今人？ 
现代文：我痛心疾首，不知有什么救济的方法。 老天啊，老百姓有什么罪呢，为什么要让他们受饥寒？ 
English: My heart aches, and I don't know how to help. Oh my God, what is wrong with the people, why do they have to suffer from hunger and cold?

古文：三公，朕之腹心，而未获承天安民之策。
现代文：三公是我的心腹，但没有拿出一套秉承天意治理天下的策略。
English: The Three Wise Men are my confidants, but they have not come up with a strategy for governing the world in accordance with God's will.

古文：数诏有司，务择良吏。
现代文：多次诏令，管事的人务必选择好官员。
English: The person in charge must be sure to choose a good official.

古文：今犹不改，竞为苛暴，侵愁小民，以求虚名，委任下吏，假势行邪。
现代文：现在还不改，竞为苛刻暴戾，侵害小民，为求虚名，让下面的小官吏，假借权势，行使邪恶。
English: It is still the same, competing to be the harshest and the most violent, infringing on the little people, and letting the minor officials below, pretending to be powerful, carry out evil in order to gain a false reputation.

古文：是以令下而奸生，禁至而诈起。
现代文：所以命令一下，奸恶随生；禁条宣布，诈骗纷起。
English: So give an order, and evil will follow; declare a ban, and fraud will follow.

古文：巧法析律，饰文增辞，货行于言，罪成乎手，朕甚病焉。
现代文：曲解法律，增饰文辞，说话就要贿赂，普通百姓动辄犯罪，我十分头痛。
English: Misinterpretation of the law, embellishment of words, bribery when speaking, ordinary people committing crimes at every turn, I have a very bad headache.

古文：公卿不思助明好恶，将何以救其咎罚？
现代文：公卿不考虑明白是非，这样怎能挽救咎罚？
English: The Lord Chancellor does not consider right and wrong, so how can he save the punishment?

古文：咎罚既至，复令灾及小民。
现代文：咎罚既然出现，小民就又只能遭殃了。
English: Now that the punishment has appeared, the little people can only suffer.

古文：若上下同心，庶或有廖。
现代文：如果上下一心，共同来进行纠正，应该是能够搞好的。
English: If we make a concerted effort to make corrections together, we should be able to get it right.

古文：其赐天下男子爵，人二级，三老、孝悌、力田三级，民无名数及流民欲占者人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人三斛。 壬子，赐博士员弟子在太学者布，人三匹。
现代文：现在赏赐天下男子爵，每人两级，三老、孝悌、力田三级，平民无户籍及流民自归首的每人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、穷得不能活下去的，每人发粟三斛。 三十日，博士员弟子在太学中的每人赏赐布三匹。
English: At present, every male peer in the world is awarded two grades, every elderly person, every filial son and every able-bodied person is awarded three grades, every commoner without a household registration and every displaced person is awarded one grade, and every widower, widow, orphan, hermit, terminally ill person and person who is too poor to live is awarded three millets.

古文：夏四月，日南象林蛮夷反，郡兵讨破之。
现代文：夏四月，日南象林蛮夷反叛，郡兵把他打败。
English: In the summer of April, Nichinan Xianglin rebelled against the barbarians, and the county soldiers defeated him.

古文：闰月，赈贷敦煌、张掖、五原民下贫者谷。
现代文：闰五月，赈济贷予敦煌、张掖、五原平民中最穷的粮食。
English: At the end of May, the most impoverished people in Dunhuang, Zhangye, and Wuhuan were given grain loans.

古文：戊辰，秭归山崩。
现代文：十七日，秭归山崩。
English: On the 17th, he was killed in a landslide.

古文：六月，舞阳大水，赐被水灾尤贫者谷，人三斛。
现代文：六月，舞阳大水，赐遭水灾最穷的每人谷三斛。
English: In June, the Maiyang Floods, the poorest people who were affected by the floods were given three rupees each.

古文：秋七月辛亥朔，日有食之。九月戊午，太尉张酺免。
现代文：秋七月初一，日蚀。九月初九，太尉张酉甫免职。
English: On the 1st day of the 7th month of autumn, there was a solar eclipse. On the 9th day of the 9th month, Zhang Yifu was relieved of his duties.

古文：丙寅，大司农张禹为太尉。
现代文：十七日，任大司农张禹为太尉。
English: On the seventeenth day, Zhang Yu, who was appointed as the director of agriculture, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：冬十一月，西域蒙奇、兜勒二国遣使内附，赐其王金印紫绶。
现代文：冬十一月，西域蒙奇、兜勒两国派使者内附、赐二国王金印紫绶。
English: In the winter of November, the two countries sent envoys to the western provinces of Mengqi and Dule, and presented the two kings with the golden seal and purple ribbon.

古文：是岁，烧当羌复叛。
现代文：这年，烧当羌再次叛变。
English: In the same year, Burnt Tonglu rebelled again.

古文：十三年春正月丁丑，帝幸东观，览书林，阅篇籍，博选术艺之士以充其官。
现代文：十三年春正月三十日，帝到东观，参观书林，翻阅篇籍，广选通经术技艺之士充当官员。
English: On the 30th day of the first month of the 13th year of the Spring, the emperor went to Dongguan, visited the book forest, read the books, and selected people with academic skills to serve as officials.

古文：二月，任城王尚薨。
现代文：二月，任城王刘尚逝世。
English: In February, the king of the city, Liu Shang, passed away.

古文：丙午，赈贷张掖、居延、朔方、日南贫民及孤、寡、羸弱不能自存者。
现代文：二十九日，赈济贷给张掖、居延、朔方、日南贫民及孤、独、羸弱不能活下去的钱物。
English: On the 29th, loans were given to Zhang Ye, Ju Yan, Shuo Fang, Nichinan poor people and orphans, Germans, and the infirm who could not live.

古文：秋八月，诏象林民失农桑业者，赈贷种粮，禀赐下贫谷食。
现代文：秋八月，诏令象林平民无力从事农桑业的，赈济贷给种粮，赐最贫的仓廪积谷。
English: In the autumn and August, Zhao Lin ordered the civilians who were unable to engage in agriculture and mulberry industry to lend money to grow grain and give grain to the poorest.

古文：己亥，北宫盛馔门阁火。
现代文：二十五日，北宫盛馔门阁起火。
English: On the 25th, a fire broke out in the gatehouse of the North Palace.

古文：护羌校尉周鲔击烧当羌，破之，荆州雨水。
现代文：护羌校尉周鲔击烧当羌，把他打败。荆州雨水多。
English: Zhou Qi, the captain of the cadre of cadets, defeated him by striking him with a burning dagger. There was a lot of rain in Jingzhou.

古文：九月壬子，诏曰： 荆州比岁不节，今兹淫水为害，余虽颇登，而多不均浃，深惟四民农食之本，惨然怀矜。
现代文：九月初九，诏令说： 荆州连年天时不好，今又淫水为害，虽然有的有些收成，但好坏不匀洽，想到士农工商农食为本，不禁悲惨矜怜，现令天下今年田租刍稿，收一半。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the imperial edict said: The weather in Jingzhou has been bad for years, and now it is also harmed by water. Although there are some harvests, the good and bad are not uniform. It is sad and pitiful to think that farmers, businesses, and industries should be based on agricultural food. The world is now ordered to collect half of this year's field rent.

古文：其今天下半入今年田租、刍稿；有宜以实除者，如故事。
现代文：有应按实际情况免除的，就照例免除。贫民借的种子口粮，不要追讨。 
English: Those who should be exempted according to the actual situation will be exempted as usual. Do not recover the seed rations borrowed by the poor.

古文：贫民假种食，皆勿收责。冬十一月，安息国遣使献师子及条枝大爵。
现代文：冬十一月，安息国派人献狮子及条枝驼鸟。
English: In the winter of November, Saba sent people to sacrifice a lion and a camel.

古文：丙辰，诏曰： 幽、并、凉州户口率少，边役众剧，束脩良吏，进仕路狭。
现代文：十四日，诏令说： 幽、并、梁州户口少，边役繁多，好的官吏，引荐路狭。
English: On the 14th, the imperial edict said: Yu, Bian and Liangzhou have few hukou, a large number of subordinates, good officials, and a narrow road of introduction.

古文：抚接夷狄，以人为本。
现代文：安抚接待外族，全靠适当人选。
English: To appease and receive foreigners, it all depends on the right person.

古文：其令缘边郡口十万以上，岁举孝廉一人；不满十万，二岁举一人；五万以下，三岁举一人。 鲜卑寇右北平，遂入渔阳，渔阳太守击破之。
现代文：现着令边远地区人口十万以上的郡，每年推举孝廉一人，不满十万人口的，两年推举一人，五万人口以下的郡三年推举一人。 鲜卑寇掠右北平，侵入渔阳，渔阳太守将鲜卑打败。
English: At present, counties with a population of more than 100,000 in remote areas are required to nominate one filial piety person each year, counties with a population of less than 100,000 are required to nominate one person every two years, and counties with a population of less than 50,000 are required to nominate one person every three years.

古文：戊辰，司徒吕盖罢。
现代文：二十八日，司徒吕盖免职。
English: On the 28th, Lugei was relieved of his duties.

古文：十二月丁丑，光禄勋鲁恭为司徒。
现代文：十二月初五，任光禄勋鲁恭为司徒。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, Ren Guanglu became a disciple.

古文：辛卯，巫蛮叛，寇南郡。
现代文：十九日，巫蛮反叛，寇掠南郡。
English: On the 19th, the Wuban rebels invaded Nan County.

古文：十四年春二月乙卯，东海王政薨。
现代文：十四年春二月乙卯，东海王刘政逝世。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, Liu Zheng, the king of the East Sea, passed away.

古文：缮修故西海郡，徙金城西部都尉以戍之。
现代文：修缮原西海郡，调遣金城西部都尉戍守。
English: He repaired the former Sihai County, and dispatched the western capital of Jincheng to guard it.

古文：三月戊辰，临辟雍，飨射，大赦天下。
现代文：三月二十七日，帝临辟雍，飨食宾客，与诸侯射菟首。大赦天下。
English: On March 27th, Emperor Lin Pi Yong, feasting guests, and shooting daggers with the lords. The world is amnestied.

古文：夏四月，遣使者督荆州兵讨巫蛮，破降之。
现代文：夏四月，派使者监督荆州兵讨伐巫蛮，打败并使他们投降。
English: In the summer of April, he sent an envoy to supervise the Jingzhou soldiers to fight against the Wushu barbarians, defeat them and force them to surrender.

古文：庚辰，赈贷张掖、居延、敦煌、五原、汉阳、会稽流民下贫谷，各有差。
现代文：初十，赈济贷给张掖、居延、敦煌、五原、汉阳、会稽流民及最穷的谷物各不等。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, loans were made to Zhangye, Juyan, Dunhuang, Wuhuan, Hanyang, Huiqi and the poorest people for grain.

古文：五月丁未，初置象林将兵长史官。
现代文：五月初七，初次设置象林将兵长史官。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month, the first-time setting up of the Zanglin will be the chief historian.

古文：六月辛卯，废皇后阴氏，后父特进纲自杀。
现代文：六月十二日，废皇后阴氏，皇后父特进阴纲自杀。
English: On June 12th, after the abolition of the Empress Yin clan, the Empress's father, Tejin Yin, committed suicide.

古文：秋七月甲寅，诏复象林县更赋、田租、刍稿二岁。
现代文：秋七月十五日，诏令免除象林县更赋、田租、刍稿两年。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of autumn, the imperial edict exempted Xianglin County from land tax, field rent and land tax for two years.

古文：壬子，常山王侧薨。
现代文：十三日，常山王刘侧逝世。
English: On the 13th, King Liu Xiang of Changshan passed away.

古文：是秋，三州雨水。
现代文：这年秋三州雨水多。
English: There was a lot of rain in the three prefectures in autumn this year.

古文：冬十月甲申，诏： 兖、豫、荆州今年水雨淫过，多伤农功。
现代文：冬十月十七日，诏令说： 兖、豫、荆州今年水雨为灾，大伤农功。
English: On the 17th day of winter in October, the imperial edict said, "The floods and rains in Handan, Henan and Jingzhou this year have been disastrous, causing great damage to agricultural production.

古文：其令被害什四以上皆半入田租、刍稿；其不满者，以实除之。 辛卯，立贵人邓氏为皇后。
现代文：今令收成只十分之四以上的都纳入田租、刍稿的半数，不满这数目的，按实际免除。 二十四日，立贵人邓氏为皇后。
English: According to this decree, only four-tenths or more of the harvest will be included in the field rent and half of the tax, and those who are not satisfied with this number will be exempted according to the actual situation.On the 24th, the noble Deng family was established as the empress.

古文：丁酉，司空巢堪罢。
现代文：三十日，司空巢堪罢官。
English: On the 30th, Secretary Kuok Chao resigned.

古文：十一月癸卯，大司农徐防为司空。
现代文：十一月初六，任大司农徐防为司空。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of November, Xu Bao, who was appointed as the Chief Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture, became the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：是岁，初复郡国上计补郎官。
现代文：这年，恢复置郡国上计补郎官。
English: In the same year, he was reinstated as the county's highest-ranking official.

古文：十五年春闰月乙未，诏流民欲还归本而无粮食者，过所实禀之，疾病加致医药；其不欲还归者，勿强。
现代文：十五年春闰正月三十日，诏令流民要回本籍而无粮食的，由所经过的地方按实发给仓廪储粮，有病的加给医药，不想回本籍的，不要强迫。
English: On the 30th day of the 1st month of the 15th year of the Spring Leap, the imperial edict ordered that if the displaced people wanted to return to their hometowns and had no grain, they should be sent to storehouses to store grain from the places they passed through. If they were sick, they should be given medicine. If they did not want to return to their hometowns, they should not be forced.

古文：二月，诏禀贷颍川、汝南、陈留、江夏、梁国、敦煌贫民。
现代文：二月，诏令以仓廪储粮贷给颍川、汝南、陈留、江夏、梁国、敦煌贫民。
English: In February, the Emperor issued an order to lend grain stored in storehouses to the poor people of Beichuan, Runan, Chenliu, Jiangxia, Liangguo and Dunhuang.

古文：夏四月甲子晦，日有食之。五月戊寅，南阳大风。
现代文：夏四月三十日，日蚀。五月十四日，南阳大风。
English: Summer April 30th, solar eclipse. May 14th, Nanyang blizzard.

古文：六月，诏令百姓鳏、寡渔采陂池，勿收假税二岁。
现代文：六月，诏令百姓鳏、寡可以在陂池捕捞采伐，两年不收租税。
English: In June, it was decreed that the common people, including widows and orphans, could fish and harvest in Dianchi Lake, and no tax would be collected for two years.

古文：秋七月丙寅，济南王错薨。
现代文：秋七月初三，济南王刘错逝世。
English: On the third day of the seventh month of autumn, King Liu Zhe of Jinan passed away.

古文：复置涿郡故安铁官。
现代文：恢复设置涿郡故安铁官。
English: The establishment of the former Anzhi County Railway Station was resumed.

古文：九月壬午，南巡狩，清河王庆、济北王寿、河间王开并从。
现代文：九月二十日，帝视察南方，清河王刘庆、济北王刘寿、河间王刘开随从。
English: On September 20, the emperor inspected the south, accompanied by Liu Qing, Liu Shou, and Liu Kai.

古文：赐所过二千石长吏以下、三老、官属及民百年者钱、布，各有差。
现代文：赏赐所过地二千石长吏以下、三老、官属及民百岁的钱和布，分别不等。
English: The money and cloth given to the elders of less than 2,000 koku, the three elders, the officials and the people aged 100 years old, respectively, vary.

古文：是秋，四州雨水。
现代文：这年秋，四州雨水多。
English: In the autumn of this year, there was a lot of rain in Shishu.

古文：冬十月戊申，幸章陵，祠旧宅。
现代文：冬十月十七日，帝到章陵，参拜旧宅。
English: In winter, on October 17th, the emperor went to Zhangling to visit the old house.

古文：癸丑，祠园庙，会宗室于旧庐，劳赐作乐。
现代文：二十二日，祭祀园庙，会集宗室于旧宅，慰劳赏赐作乐。
English: On the 22nd, there will be a memorial service for the garden and temple, and the family will gather in the family's old house to make music as a reward for hard work.

古文：戊午，进幸云梦，临汉水而还。
现代文：二十七日，帝进到云梦，到达汉水边而返。
English: On the 27th, the emperor entered Yunmeng, reached the Han River and returned.

古文：十一月甲申，车驾还宫，赐从臣及留者公卿以下钱、布，各有差。
现代文：十一月二十三日，帝还宫，赏赐随从和留守的公卿以下钱和布，分别不等。
English: On November 23rd, the emperor returned to the palace, and rewarded the attendants and the remaining nobles with money and cloth, respectively.

古文：十二月庚子，琅邪王宇薨。
现代文：十二月初十，琅笽王刘宇逝世。
English: On the 10th day of the 12th month, Liu Yu passed away.

古文：有司奏，以为夏至则微阴起，靡草死，可以决小事。
现代文：管事人奏请，因为夏至到了，阴生，靡草死，可以断薄刑，决小罪。
English: Please report to the steward, because the summer solstice has arrived, the weather is cloudy, and the grass is dying, you can cut off the light punishment and decide the minor crime.

古文：是岁，初令郡国以日北至案薄刑。
现代文：这年，第一次令郡国以夏至判处薄刑。
English: This year, for the first time, the county issued a light sentence on the summer solstice.

古文：十六年春正月己卯，诏贫民有田业而以匮乏不能自农者，贷种粮。
现代文：十六年春正月十九日，诏令贫民有田业因匮乏无力耕作的，贷给种粮。
English: On the 19th day of the first month of the 16th year of the Spring, the emperor decreed that the poor who had land but were unable to cultivate it due to poverty should be given loans to grow grain.

古文：二月己未，诏兖、豫、徐、冀四州比年雨多伤稼，禁沽酒。
现代文：二月三十日，诏令兖、豫、徐、冀四州连年雨多歉收，禁止酿酒。
English: On February 30th, the four prefectures of Handan, Henan, Hebei and Xuzhou had poor harvests due to consecutive years of rain, and prohibited the brewing of wine.

古文：夏四月，遣三府掾分行四州，贫民无以耕者，为雇犁牛直。
现代文：夏四月，派三府掾分别视察四州，贫民无力耕种的，为雇犁牛农具。
English: In the summer of April, the three prefectural governors were sent to inspect the four prefectures separately, and the poor were unable to cultivate, so they hired yakitori as farm tools.

古文：五月壬午，赵王商薨。
现代文：五月二十四日，赵王刘商逝世。
English: On May 24, Zhao Wang Liu Shang passed away.

古文：秋七月，旱。
现代文：秋七月，天旱。
English: In July, there was a drought.

古文：戊午，诏曰： 今秋稼方穗而旱，云雨不沾，疑吏行惨刻，不宣恩泽，妄拘无罪，幽闭良善所致。
现代文：初一，诏令说 ：今年秋禾刚抽穗遭旱，云雨没有一点润泽，疑是官员行为惨酷刻薄，不宣扬朝廷恩泽，随便捕捉无辜，幽闭好人的报应。
English: On the first day of the new year, the edict said: "This year, just after the autumn wheat was harvested, there was a drought, and the clouds and rain did not have any moisture. It is suspected that the officials acted cruelly and meanly, did not publicize the grace of the imperial court, arbitrarily captured innocent people, and confined good people.

古文：其一切囚徒于法疑者勿决，以奉秋令。
现代文：应将一切囚徒中，根据法律判罪还有疑问的，不要决断，等到秋天再说。
English: Of all the prisoners, those whose conviction according to the law is still in doubt should not be decided until the autumn.

古文：方察烦苛之吏，显明其罚。 辛酉，司徒鲁恭免。
现代文：考察烦扰苛刻的官员，明白无误的给以处罚。 初四，司徒鲁恭免职。
English: Investigate officials who are annoying and harsh, and clearly punish them. On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Stulukong was dismissed.

古文：庚午，光禄勋张酺为司徒。
现代文：十三日，任光禄勋张酉甫为司徒。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Shenfu, who was awarded the Order of the Star, became a disciple.

古文：辛巳，诏今天下皆半入今年田租、刍稿；其被灾害者，以实除之。
现代文：二十四日，诏令天下今年田租、刍稿只纳一半，遭了灾的核实照免。
English: On the 24th, the emperor decreed that the country would only pay half of this year's field rent and land tax, and that those who were affected by the disaster would be exempted.

古文：贫民受贷种粮及田租、刍稿，皆勿收责。
现代文：贫民受贷给的种粮及田租、刍稿都不要追讨。
English: The poor should not have to pay back loans for grain, farm rents, and loans for manuscripts.

古文：八月己酉，司徒张酺薨。
现代文：八月二十二日，司徒张酉甫逝世。
English: On August 22nd, the disciple Zhang Yefu passed away.

古文：冬十月辛卯，司空徐防为司徒，大鸿胪陈宠为司空。
现代文：冬十月初五，任司空徐防为司徒，大鸿胪陈宠为司空。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, Xu Bao, who was appointed as the secretary of the Air Force, became the secretary of the Air Force, and Chen Ji, who was appointed as the president of the Air Force, became the secretary of the Air Force.

古文：十一月己丑，行幸缑氏，登百岯山，赐百官从臣布，各有差。
现代文：十一月己丑，帝到缑氏，登百坯山，分别赏赐百官随从人员布匹不等。
English: In November, the emperor went to the Jiu clan and climbed Mount Baijiao, and rewarded 100 officials and their attendants with cloth and goods respectively.

古文：北匈奴遣使称臣贡献。
现代文：北匈奴派使者称臣纳贡。
English: The Northern Xiongnu sent an envoy to demand tribute.

古文：十二月，复置辽东西部都尉官。
现代文：十二月，恢复设置辽东西部都尉官。
English: In December, the post of lieutenant of the eastern and western regions of Liao was restored.

古文：元兴元年春正月戊午，引三署郎召见禁中，选除七十五人，补谒者、长、相。
现代文：元兴元年春正月初四，引三署郎召见宫中，选拔七十五人，任谒者、长、相。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Genko era, the three chief officials were summoned to the palace, and seventy-five people were selected to be appointed as officials, chiefs, and ministers.

古文：高句骊寇郡界。
现代文：高句骊寇掠郡界。
English: Gao Guo, the bandit, raided the county.

古文：夏四月庚午，大赦天下，改元元兴。
现代文：夏四月庚午，大赦天下，改元元兴。
English: On the afternoon of the fourth day of the fourth month of the summer, the world was amnestied and the Yuan Dynasty was reborn.

古文：宗室以罪绝者，悉复属籍。
现代文：宗室因罪断绝宗属关系的一律恢复属籍。
English: If a family severed the family relationship due to a crime, the family status will be restored.

古文：五月癸酉，雍地裂。
现代文：五月二十一日，雍地崩裂。
English: On the 21st of May, the mountain collapsed.

古文：秋九月，辽东太守耿夔击貊人，破之。
现代文：秋九月，辽东太守耿夔击貊人，把他们打败。
English: In the autumn and September, Liaodong's governor Geng Yao attacked and defeated the Xiongnu.

古文：冬十二月辛未，帝崩于章德前殿，年二十七。
现代文：冬十二月二十二日，帝在章德前殿逝世，年二十七。
English: On the 22nd day of the 12th month of winter, the emperor died in front of the Zhangde Hall, at the age of 27.

古文：立皇子隆为皇太子。赐天下男子爵，人二级，三老、孝悌、力田人三级，民无名数及流民欲占者人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人三斛。
现代文：立皇子刘隆为皇太子，赐天下男子爵位，每人二级，三老、孝悌、力田每人三级，民无户籍及流民归首的每人一级；鳏寡、孤、独、患绝症及穷得不能活命的每人发粟三斛。
English: He established the prince Liu Long as the crown prince, and gave the world men's titles of nobility, two levels per person, three levels per person of the three elders, filial piety, and virtue, one level per person of people without household registration and displaced people; widows, lonely, alone, terminally ill and poor people who can't live.

古文：自窦宪诛后，帝躬亲万机。
现代文：自窦宪畏罪自杀后，帝亲理国政。
English: Since Dou Xianwei committed suicide, the emperor has been in charge of state affairs.

古文：每有灾异，辄延问公卿，极言得失。
现代文：每有灾异，往往咨询公卿，畅谈得失。
English: Whenever there is a calamity, he often consults the nobles and talks about the gains and losses.

古文：前后符瑞八十一所，自称德薄，皆抑而不宣。
现代文：前后祥符瑞兆八十一所，都自称薄德，不作宣扬。
English: There are eighty-one auspicious signs and auspicious signs, and they all claim to be poor in virtue, and do not make propaganda.

古文：旧南海献龙眼、荔支，十里一置，五里一候，奔腾阻险，死者继路。
现代文：南海献龙眼。荔枝，十里一驿，五里一堠，由驿马昼夜传送，奔腾阻险，死者继路。
English: The South China Sea offers dragon's eye. Lychee, ten miles a stalk, five miles a stalk, transported by pack horse day and night, galloping to prevent danger, the dead follow the path.

古文：时临武长汝南唐羌，县接南海，乃上书陈状。
现代文：这时临武县长汝南人唐羌，因县接南海，了解实情，便上书说明此种情况。
English: At this time, Tang Jun, the head of Linwu County, who was from the south of the country, because the county was connected to the South China Sea, learned the truth and sent a letter to explain the situation.

古文：帝下诏曰： 远国珍羞，本以荐奉宗庙，苟有伤害，岂爱民之本。
现代文：帝下诏说： 远方的山珍海味，本来是荐奉宗庙祭祠的。如果因此而有伤害，不合爱民的本意。
English: The imperial edict said: Faraway mountains and rare seafood were originally recommended to be offered to ancestral temples and shrines. If there is harm as a result, it is not in line with the intention of loving the people.

古文：其敕太官勿复受献。 由是遂省焉。
现代文：现命令太官莫再接受这种奉献。 从此把运送荔枝、龙眼的差事省却了。
English: Now, the eunuch has been ordered not to accept this kind of offering again, and the task of transporting lychees and longan has been eliminated.

古文：论曰：自中兴以后，逮于永元，虽颇有弛张，而俱存不扰，是以齐民岁增，辟土世广。
现代文：史家评论说：汉自中兴后，一直到永元年代，国事虽有张有弛，却没有出现什么纷扰，所以人口年年增加，开辟疆土，世泽广被。
English: Historians commented: Since the rise of the Han Dynasty, until the Yongyuan era, although there was tension and slackness in national affairs, there was no disturbance, so the population increased year by year, the territory was opened up, and the world was vast.

古文：偏师出塞，则漠北地空；都护西指，则通译四万。岂其道远三代，术长前世？
现代文：偏师出塞，匈奴逃去，漠北地空；都护远征西域，降五十余国，语言通译四万里，难道他们的治道超过了三代，他们的治术比前世高明？
English: The partial teacher left the fortress, the Xiongnu fled, and the north-to-north air and ground battle took place; the tutelary deity led an expedition to the western region, descended to more than fifty countries, and translated forty thousand miles of language. Did their way of governance exceed three generations, and were their management skills more sophisticated than in previous lifetimes?

古文：将服叛去来，自有数也？
现代文：或者服叛去来，其中有天数决定吗？
English: Or is it a matter of days before they decide to defect?

古文：孝殇皇帝讳隆，和帝少子也。
现代文：孝殇皇帝名隆，和帝幺儿子。
English: He was the son of Emperor Nangong and Emperor Gaozong.

古文：元兴元年十二月辛未夜，即皇帝位，时诞育百余日。
现代文：元兴元年十二月二十二日夜，即皇帝位，这时他生下才百余日。
English: He was just over 100 days old when he was born on the evening of December 22nd, the first year of the reign of Emperor Yuanxing.

古文：尊皇后曰皇太后，太后临朝。
现代文：尊皇后为皇太后，太后临朝执政。
English: The revered empress is the empress dowager, and the empress dowager rules the imperial court.

古文：北匈奴遣使称臣，诣敦煌奉献。
现代文：北匈奴派使者称臣，到敦煌进贡。
English: The Northern Xiongnu sent envoys to pay tribute to Dunhuang.

古文：延平元年春正月辛卯，太尉张禹为太傅。
现代文：延平元年春正月十三日，任太尉张禹为太傅。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yanping, Zhang Yu was appointed as Tai Fu.

古文：司徒徐防为太尉，参录尚书事，百官总己以听。
现代文：任司徒徐防为太尉，参与总领尚书事，百官各统己职，听他的指挥。
English: Ren Sittu Xu Bao was a captain, participated in the general Shang's correspondence, and the hundred officials all had their own duties and listened to his command.

古文：封皇兄胜为平原王。
现代文：封皇兄刘胜为平原王。
English: Liu Sheng, the emperor's brother, was crowned the king of the plain.

古文：癸卯，当禄勋梁鲔为司徒。
现代文：二十五日，任光禄勋梁鲔为司徒。
English: On the 25th, Ren Guanglu awarded Liang Ye with the title of disciple.

古文：三月甲申，葬孝和皇帝于慎陵，尊庙曰穆宗。
现代文：三月初五，葬孝和皇帝于慎陵，尊庙号为穆宗。
English: On the 5th day of the 3rd month, the funeral of Emperor Xiaohe was held at the Shenling Mausoleum, and the temple's honorific name was Mu Zong.

古文：丙戌，清河王庆、济北王寿、河间王开、常山王章始就国。
现代文：初七，清和王刘庆、济北王刘寿、河闻王刘开、常山王刘章才初到封国。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Liu Qing, Liu Shou, Liu Wei, and Liu Zhang, the kings of the Qing and Northern Dynasties respectively, arrived in Hunan for the first time.

古文：夏四月庚申，诏罢祀官不在祀典者。
现代文：夏四月十三日，诏令罢去不在祀典的祀官。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, the imperial edict dismissed the officiating officer who was not present at the ceremony.

古文：鲜卑寇渔阳，渔阳太守张显追击，战没。
现代文：鲜卑寇掠渔阳，渔阳太守张显追击，张显战死。
English: The Xianbei corsairs plundered Yuyang, Yuyang's governor Zhang Xian pursued them, and Zhang Xian was killed in the battle.

古文：丙寅，以虎贲中郎将邓骘为车骑将军。
现代文：十九日，任虎贲中郎将邓骘为车骑将军。
English: On the 19th day of the month, Ren Huqin, the middle brother of Ren Huqin, promoted Deng Yu to the general of chariot and cavalry.

古文：司空陈宠薨。
现代文：司空陈宠逝世。
English: Siku Chenchong passed away.

古文：五月辛卯，皇太后诏曰： 皇帝幼冲，承统鸿业，朕且权佐助听政，兢兢寅畏，不知所济。
现代文：五月十五日，皇太后诏令说： 皇帝年幼，继承大业，我暂且辅佐政事，兢兢业业，不知怎样才能把事业搞得好。
English: On May 15, the empress dowager issued a decree saying: The emperor is young and inherits a great cause, I will temporarily assist in political affairs, conscientiously work hard, and I do not know how to do a good job.

古文：深惟至治之本，道化在前，刑罚在后。将稽中和，广施庆惠，与吏民更始。
现代文：深深考虑到治国安邦的根本，引导教化在前，用刑惩罚在后，我将考究中庸之道，广施实惠，与吏民共同前进。
English: Deeply considering the fundamentals of running a peaceful country, guiding and educating first, and punishing with punishment later, I will study the middle way, provide extensive benefits, and advance together with officials and the people.

古文：其大赦天下。
现代文：今大赦天下。
English: It is time for a general amnesty.

古文：自建武以来诸犯禁锢，诏书虽解，有司持重，多不奉行，其皆复为平民。 壬辰，河东垣山崩。
现代文：自建武年间以来禁锢的犯人，诏令虽让解放，但管事人特别持重，多不执行，今一律恢复为平民。 十六日，河东垣县山崩。
English: Since the Jianwu era, all the prisoners who had been incarcerated since then have been reinstated as civilians. Although the imperial edict was issued to release them, most of them were not carried out. On the 16th, there was a landslide in Hedongqi County.

古文：六月丁未，太常尹勤为司空。
现代文：六月初一，任太常尹勤为司空。
English: On the first day of June, Ren Taizhang and Yin Qin were promoted to air marshals.

古文：郡国三十七雨水。
现代文：郡国三十七处雨水多。
English: Thirty-seven places in the county have received a lot of rain.

古文：己未，诏曰： 自夏以来，阴雨过节，暖气不效，将有厥咎。
现代文：十三日，诏令说： 自入夏以来，阴雨过多，暖气不足，是由于当政者有咎戾。
English: On the 13th, the edict said: Since the beginning of summer, the excessive rain and lack of heating is due to the fault of those in power.

古文：寤寐忧惶，未知所由。
现代文：我日夜忧惶，不知怎样才好。
English: I'm worried day and night, I don't know what to do.

古文：昔夏后恶衣服，菲饮食，孔子曰 吾无间然 。
现代文：从前夏后氏粗衣淡饭，孔子说 ，我对这没有意见 。
English: Confucius said, "I have no objection to this."

古文：今新遭大忧，且岁节未和，彻膳损服，庶有补焉。
现代文：最近遭到大的忧患。且时节不和，撤去削减衣食方面的浪费，或者有所补益。
English: Recently, it has been plagued by serious problems, and it is not a good time to remove or reduce the waste of food and clothing, or to make up for it.

古文：其减太官、导官、尚方、内署诸服御珍膳靡丽难成之物。 
现代文：着减去太官、导官、尚方、内署各种服御珍膳奢侈难得办到的事物。 
English: It is a rare thing to be able to do something so extravagant with all the trappings of the imperial family, minus the eunuchs, officials, courtiers and courtiers.

古文：丁卯，诏司徒、大司农、长乐少府曰： 朕以无德，佐助统政，夙夜经营，惧失厥衷。
现代文：二十一日，诏令司徒、大司农、长乐少府说 ：我以薄德之身，佐助皇帝统理政务，日夜经营，惟恐失职。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he issued an edict to Sito, Daisho Nong and Chole Shofu, saying, "I, as a man of great virtue, Emperor Sasuke, am in charge of government affairs, and I am running the government day and night, but I am afraid of losing my position.

古文：思惟治道，由近及远，先内后外。
现代文：考虑治国的方法，应由近及远，先内部后外部。
English: In considering the methods of governing the country, we should start from the near and the far, first from within and then from without.

古文：自建武之初以至于今，八十余年，宫人岁增，房御弥广。
现代文：从建武初年到现在，八十余年，宫人年年增加，房屋建筑更多了。
English: From the first year of Jianwu to the present, more than 80 years, the number of palace people has increased year by year, and more houses have been built.

古文：又宗室坐事没入者，犹托名公族，甚可愍焉。
现代文：又宗室因犯罪没入宫的，犹托名公族，是很可怜的。
English: Moreover, it is very pitiful that his father's family did not enter the imperial palace due to crime, even though they were well-known public figures.

古文：今悉免遣，及掖庭宫人，皆为庶民，以抒幽隔郁滞之情。
现代文：今一律免除遣散，以及后宫的宫人，都为庶民，以舒展他们幽隔郁滞的苦情。
English: Now they are all exempt from dismissal, and the courtiers of the harem are commoners, in order to extend their complaints of seclusion and depression.

古文：诸官府、郡国、王侯家奴婢姓刘及疲癃羸老，皆上其名，务令实悉。 
现代文：各官府、郡国、王侯家奴婢姓刘的及疲病衰老的都报上名单，务必全部落实。 
English: All government offices, counties and provinces, and the servants and maids of princes and queens surnamed Liu, as well as those who are tired, ill or old, are reported on the list, and must all be implemented.

古文：秋七月庚寅，敕司隶校尉、部刺史曰： 夫天降灾戾，应政而至。
现代文：秋七月十五日，命令司隶校尉、部刺史说 ：天降灾戾，是由于政事不良招致的。
English: On the 15th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the commanding officer, Lieutenant Colonel Li, said: "The natural disaster was caused by bad government affairs.

古文：间者郡国或有水灾，妨害秋稼。
现代文：近来郡国或有水灾，妨害秋稼。
English: Recently, there have been floods in the county, hindering the autumn harvest.

古文：朝廷惟咎，忧惶悼惧。
现代文：朝廷有咎，忧惶恐惧。
English: The imperial court is to blame, panic and fear are on the rise.

古文：而郡国欲获丰穰虚饰之誉，遂覆蔽灾害，多张垦田，不揣流亡，竞增户口，掩匿盗贼，令奸恶无惩，署用非次，选举乖宜，贪苛惨毒，延及平民。
现代文：然而郡国只图获得大丰收的虚誉，于是掩盖灾害，多报播种田亩，不估计流亡人数，浮报户口，掩匿盗贼，使得奸恶没有惩罚，任用官吏不是依序迁升，选举推荐人才不当，贪婪苛刻凄惨毒辣，恶及好人。
English: However, the county and state only tried to gain the false reputation of a bumper harvest, so they covered up disasters, over-reported the number of acres sown, did not estimate the number of exiles, over-reported the number of households, and covered up thieves, so that there was no punishment for treachery, officials were not appointed and promoted in order, election recommendation talents were improper, greed was harsh, miserable, poisonous, evil, and good people.

古文：刺史垂头塞耳，阿私下比， 不畏于天，不愧于人 。
现代文：刺史垂头塞耳，上下勾结，不怕天谴，不怕对不起人。
English: Zhishi hangs his head and shuts his ears, colluding up and down, not afraid of God's punishment, not afraid of disappointing people.

古文：假贷之恩，不可数恃，自今以后，将纠其罚。
现代文：小恩小惠，是不可能长久笼络人心的。从今以后，将进行纠正而加以惩罚。
English: It is impossible to win people's hearts with small favors for a long time. From now on, it will be corrected and punished.

古文：二千石长吏其各实核所伤害，为除田租，刍稿。 
现代文：二千石长吏应各核实灾害情况，免除田租、刍稿。 
English: The 2,000-koku chieftains should each verify the situation of the disaster and waive the field rent and land tax.

古文：八月辛亥，帝崩。
现代文：八月初六，帝逝世。
English: On August 6, the emperor died.

古文：癸丑，殡于崇德前殿。年二岁。
现代文：初八，殡于崇德前殿，年二岁。
English: He was in his eighth year of junior high school and was buried in the front hall of Chongde. He was two years old.

古文：赞曰： 孝和沈烈，率由前则。
现代文：史家颂赞说： 和帝沉着刚烈，是由于遵从祖先传统的结果。
English: Historians praise: His calmness and fortitude are the result of following the traditions of his ancestors.

古文：王赫自中，赐命强慝。
现代文：赫然发怒惩办大恶，窦宪这样的奸逆就制服了。
English: Dou Xian overcame such treachery by fiercely punishing and punishing the great evil.

古文：抑没祥符，登显时德。
现代文：不宣扬祥符瑞兆，能选贤任能用邓彪这样众望所归的人才。
English: If you don't promote auspicious signs and auspicious signs, you can pick and choose the most talented people, such as Deng Biao.

古文：殇世何早，平原弗克。
现代文：殇帝早夭，像平原王刘胜一样不能承担重任而享有天下。 
English: Emperor Qian died at an early age. Like Liu Sheng, the king of the plain, he could not take on heavy responsibilities and enjoyed the world.

