古文：一曰：孟冬之月，日在尾，昏危中，旦七星中。
现代文：孟冬孟冬之月，太阳的位置在尾宿。初昏时刘，危宿出现在南方中天。
English: In the winter months, the position of the sun is in the trailing quarter. In the early twilight, Liu, the dangerous quarter appears in the southern sky.

古文：其日壬癸，其帝颛顼，其神玄冥，其虫介，其音羽，律中应钟。
现代文：拂晓时刻，星宿出现在南方中天。孟冬于天干属壬癸，它的主宰之帝是颛顼，佐帝之神是玄冥，应时的动物是龟鳖之类的甲族，相配的声音是羽音，音律与应钟相应。
English: At the time of dawn, the stars appear in the southern sky. Mengdong belongs to the constellations of the constellations of the constellations of the constellations of the constellations of the constellations of the constellations of the constellations of the constellations of the constellations of the constellations.

古文：其数六，其味咸，其臭朽，其祀行，祭先肾。
现代文：这个月的数字是六，味道是咸味，气味是朽气，要举行的条祀是行祭，祭祀时祭品以肾脏为尊。
English: The number of this month is six, the taste is saltiness, the smell is rottenness, the sacrifice to be held is the procession, and the sacrificial offering is the kidney.

古文：水始冰，地始冻，雉入大水为蜃。虹藏不见。
现代文：这个月水开始结冰，地开始封冻，雉钻起家淮水变成了蛤蜊，彩虹消失不再出现。
English: This month, the moon's water began to freeze, the ground began to freeze, the water drilled into the house turned into ice, and the rainbow disappeared and no longer appeared.

古文：天子居玄堂左个，乘玄辂，驾铁骊，载玄旂，衣黑衣，服玄玉，食黍与彘，其器宏以弇。
现代文：天子住在北向明堂的左侧室，乘坐黑色的车，车前驾着黑色的马，车上插着黑色的绘有龙皱的旗帜，天子穿着黑色的衣服，佩带着黑色的饰玉。吃的食物是黍米和猪肉，使用的器物宏大而敛口。
English: Tianzi lives in the left room of the North-facing Ming Hall. He rides in a black car, with a black horse in front of the car, and a black flag with dragon wrinkles on it. Tianzi wears black clothes and black ornaments. The food he eats is glutinous rice and pork, and the utensils he uses are large and narrow.

古文：是月也，以立冬。先立冬三日，太史谒之天子曰： 某日立冬，盛德在水。 
现代文：这个月有立冬的节气，立冬前三天，太史向天子禀告说； 某天立冬，大德在于水。 
English: This month has the winter solstice. Three days before the winter solstice, Taishi announced to Tianzi that; One day, the winter solstice, great virtue lies in water.

古文：天子乃斋。
现代文：于是天子斋戒，准备迎冬。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven fasted and prepared for the autumn.

古文：立冬之日，天子亲率三公九卿大夫，以迎冬于北郊。
现代文：立冬那天，天子亲自率领三公九卿大夫，到北郊去迎接冬的降临。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, the emperor himself led the three princes and nine noble doctors to the northern suburbs to welcome the arrival of winter.

古文：还，乃赏死事，恤孤寡。
现代文：迎冬回来，赏赐为国捐躯的大臣的子孙，抚恤救挤这些大臣遗留韵孤儿寡妇。
English: He came back in the winter to reward the children and grandchildren of ministers who died for the country, and to support and save the orphans and widows left behind by these ministers.

古文：是月也，命太卜祷祠龟策，占兆审卦吉凶。
现代文：这个月，命令掌管卜筮的太卜，祈祷于龟策，看兆象，算卦数，来考察吉凶。
English: This month, the goddess in charge of Buju was ordered to pray at the gyratory, watch the omens, count the numbers, and investigate the auspicious and inauspicious.

古文：于是察阿上乱法者则罪之，无有揜蔽。
现代文：这时候，要察访那些曲意逢碰上司而扰乱法制的人，判他们的罪，不得有所隐藏。
English: At this time, it is necessary to investigate and convict those who disturb the rule of law by offending their superiors, and nothing must be hidden.

古文：是月也，天子始裘，命有司曰： 天气上腾，地气下降，天地不通，闭而成冬。 
现代文：这个月，天子开始穿皮农。命令主管官吏说。 天气上腾，地气下降，天地之间不再相通，封闭而形成冬天。 
English: This month, the Son of Heaven began to wear the pinon, the commanding officer said. The weather rose, the earth's atmosphere fell, and there was no longer a connection between heaven and earth, which closed and formed winter.

古文：命百官谨盖藏。
现代文：命令百官谨慎对待仓虞府库之事。
English: He ordered the officials to pay special attention to the collection of the prefectural treasury.

古文：命司徒循行积聚，无有不敛；坿城郭，戒门闾，修楗闭，慎关籥，固封玺，备边境，完要塞，谨关梁，塞蹊径，饬丧纪，辨衣裳，审棺椁之厚薄，营丘垄之小大、高卑、薄厚之度，贵贱之等级。
现代文：命令司徒击各地巡视积聚的情况，不得有没积聚的谷物。要加高加固城墙，警戒城门里门，维修门栓门鼻，小心钥匙锁头，加圈印封，守备边境，修葺要塞，谨慎关卡桥粱，堵塞田间小路，饬正丧事的规格，分别随葬的衣服，营建坟墓的大小，高低、厚薄的标准，都要按照贵贱的等级。
English: He ordered the magistrates to inspect the situation of grain accumulation in all parts of the country, and there must not be any grain that has not been accumulated. It is necessary to increase the height of the reinforced city wall, guard the inner door of the city gate, repair the door bolt nose, be careful with the key lock head, add a circle seal, guard the border, repair the fortress, be careful with the checkpoints and bridges, block the field paths, and check the specifications of the funeral, the clothes to be buried separately, the size of the grave to be built, and the standards of height and thickness, all according to the noble and low level.

古文：是月也，工师效功，陈祭器，按度程，无或作为淫巧，以荡上心，必功致为上。
现代文：这个月，俞夸工师献上百工制作的器物，考核工效，摆出他们制作的祭器，看是否依照法度程式。不得制作过于奇巧的器物来摇动在上位者的奢侈之心，一定要以精密为佳。
English: This month, Zou Kua craftsmen presented objects made by a hundred craftsmen, assessed the work efficiency, and displayed the sacrificial objects they made to see if they were in accordance with the legal procedures. It is not allowed to make objects that are too fancy to shake the extravagant hearts of those in power, and precision must be preferred.

古文：物勒工名，以考其诚；工有不当，必行其罪，以穷其情。
现代文：器物要刻上工匠的名字，以此来考察他们是否信诚。如果有不精细之处，一定要给予处罚，来追究他们的诈巧之情。
English: The name of the craftsmen should be engraved on the utensils to check whether they are trustworthy. If there are any imperfections, they must be punished to investigate their fraudulent feelings.

古文：是月也，大饮蒸，天子乃祈来年于天宗。
现代文：这个月，天子诸侯与群臣在蒸祭之后，举行盛大的宴饮，排列次序。天子向包月星辰等在天之神祈求明年五谷丰登。
English: This month, after the steaming ceremony, the sons of heaven, the lords and the courtiers held a grand banquet and arranged the order. The son of heaven prayed to the god of the moon and stars to pray for the abundance of grain next year.

古文：大割，祠于公社及门闾，飨先祖五祀，劳农夫以休息之。
现代文：大杀牺牲，在官社及门闾祈祷，然后飨先祖，五祀，慰劳农夫，使他们好好休息。
English: After the great sacrifice, prayers were offered at the official shrine and gate, and then the ancestors, the five deities, consoled the farmers, so that they could rest well.

古文：天子乃命将率讲武，肄射御、角力。
现代文：天子命令将帅讲习武事，教军士练习射箭、驾车，比试体力。
English: Heaven's Son ordered the commander to teach martial arts, the sergeant to practice archery, the driver to practice driving, and the soldiers to test their physical strength.

古文：是月也，乃命水虞渔师收水泉池泽之赋，无或敢侵削众庶兆民，以为天子取怨于下，其有若此者，行罪无赦。
现代文：这个月，命令掌管水利水产的官吏向百姓收缴水泉池泽的赋税，但不得擅自加税来侵犯百姓的利益，给天子在百姓中结下怨恨。敢这样做的人，一定要处罚而不得宽赦。
English: This month, the officials in charge of water conservancy and fishery were ordered to collect the tax on water springs and ponds from the people, but they were not allowed to raise taxes without authorization to infringe on the interests of the people and create resentment among the people. Those who dare to do so must be punished and must not be pardoned.

古文：孟冬行春令，则冻闭不密，地气发泄，民多流亡；行夏令，则国多暴风，方冬不寒，蛰虫复出；行秋令，则雪霜不时，小兵时起，土地侵削。
现代文：孟冬实行应在春天发布的政令，那幺，冰封地冻就不牢固，地气就会宣泄散发，百姓就会多所流亡。如果实行应在夏天实行的政令，那么，国家就会多暴风，正处冬天而不冷，蛰伏的动物就会重新出来。如果实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，霜雪就不能按时气而来，小的战争就会不断发拄生，外寇就会侵扰边境。
English: If Meng Dong implements a decree that should be issued in the spring, then the frozen ground will not be solid, the earth's gas will be released, and the people will be more exiled. If the decree that should be implemented in the summer is implemented, then the country will have more storms, the winter will not be cold, and the animals that are dormant will reappear. If the decree that should be implemented in the autumn is implemented, then frost and snow will not come in time, small wars will continue to occur, and foreign invaders will invade the border.

古文：二曰：审知生，圣人之要也；审知死，圣人之极也。
现代文：节丧职察生命是圣人的要事，明察死亡是圣人的急务。
English: On the day of the funeral, it is a saint's duty to observe life, and it is a saint's duty to observe death.

古文：知生也者，不以害生，养生之谓也；知死也者，不以害死，安死之谓也。
现代文：明察生命，目的在于不以外物伤害生命，即为了养生。明察死亡，目的在于不以外物损害死者，即为了安死。
English: The purpose of observing life is to prevent other things from harming life, that is, to maintain health. The purpose of observing death is to prevent other things from harming the deceased, that is, to achieve euthanasia.

古文：此二者，圣人之所独决也。
现代文：这两件事唯独圣人才能知晓。
English: These are two things that only a sage can know.

古文：凡生于天地之间，其必有死，所不免也。
现代文：凡生活于天地闻的事物，它们必然要有死亡，这是不可避免的。
English: All things that live in the heavens and the earth, they must have death, it is inevitable.

古文：孝子之重其亲也，慈亲之爱其子也，痛于肌骨，性也。
现代文：孝子尊重他们的父母，慈亲疼爱他们的子女，尊重，疼爱之心深人肌骨，这是天性。
English: Filial sons and daughters respect their parents, kind relatives love their children. Respect and love run deep in people's bones. This is nature.

古文：所重所爱，死而弃之沟壑，人之情不忍为也，故有葬死之义。
现代文：所尊重、所疼爱的人，死后却把他们抛入沟壑，这是人之常情所不忍心做的，因而产生了葬送死者的道义。
English: People who are respected and loved are thrown into a ditch after they die. This is something that people cannot bear to do, and this has given rise to the morality of burying the dead.

古文：葬也者，藏也，慈亲孝子之所慎也。
现代文：葬就是藏的意思，这是慈亲孝子所应慎重的。
English: To bury means to hide, and this is something that should be carefully considered by loving relatives and children.

古文：慎之者，以生人之心虑。
现代文：所谓慎重，就是说活着的人要为死者考虑。
English: Prudence means that the living should consider the dead.

古文：以生人之心为死者虑也，莫如无动，莫如无发。
现代文：活着的人为死者考虑，没有比不使死者被移动更重要了，没有比不让坟墓被掘开更重要了。
English: There is no more important consideration for the dead by the living than that the dead should not be moved, no more important than that the grave should not be opened.

古文：无发无动，莫如无有可利，则此之谓重闭。
现代文：而要达到这个目的，没有比让坟墓中无利可图更保险的了，这就叫作大闭。
English: And there is no surer way to achieve this goal than to make the grave unprofitable, which is called closure.

古文：古之人有藏于广野深山而安者矣，非珠玉国宝之谓也，葬不可不藏也。
现代文：古代的人有葬于广野深山之中而平安至今的，不是说由于有珠玉国宝，而是说葬不可不隐蔽埋藏。
English: The ancient people were buried in the vastness of the deep mountains and have been safe to this day, not because of the precious national treasure, but because the burial must be hidden.

古文：葬浅则狐狸抇之，深则及于水泉。
现代文：葬浅了，狐狸就会掘开它；葬深了，就会与泉水相接。
English: If it is buried shallowly, the fox will dig it out; if it is buried deeply, it will be connected to the spring.

古文：故凡葬必于高陵之上，以避狐狸之患、水泉之湿。
现代文：所以，凡葬一定葬在高高的土山之上，以便避开狐狸的危害、泉水的浸渍。
English: Therefore, anyone who is buried must be buried on a high hill, in order to avoid the harm of foxes and the impregnation of spring water.

古文：此则善矣，而忘奸邪、盗贼、寇乱之难，岂不惑哉？
现代文：这样做好是好，但是如果忘了恶人、盗贼、匪乱的祸害，岂不是糊涂吗?
English: It is good to do this well, but if we forget the evils of the wicked, thieves, and bandits, won't we be confused?

古文：譬之若瞽师之避柱也，避柱而疾触杙也。
现代文：这就象盲乐师躲避柱子一样，虽然避开了柱子，却用力撞到了尖木桩上。
English: This is like a blind musician dodging a pillar, and although he avoids the pillar, he hits the spike with force.

古文：奸邪、盗贼、寇乱之患，此杙之大者也。
现代文：恶人、盗贼、匪乱的祸害，这是大大的尖木桩啊！
English: The scourge of evil-doers, thieves, and bandits, this is a large spike!

古文：慈亲孝子避之者，得葬之情矣。
现代文：慈亲孝子埋葬死者能够避开这些，就获得葬的本义了。
English: If the relatives and filial children who bury the dead can avoid these, then the true meaning of burial will be achieved.

古文：善棺椁，所以避蝼蚁蛇虫也。
现代文：使棺棹坚实，是为了避开蝼蚁蛇虫。
English: The coffin lid was made solid to keep out ants and snakes.

古文：今世俗大乱，人主愈侈其葬，则心非为乎死者虑也，生者以相矜尚也。
现代文：如今社会风气大坏，君主行葬越来越奢侈，他们心中不是为死者考虑，而是活着的人借以彼此夸耀，争出人上。
English: Nowadays, the social atmosphere is very bad, and the funerals of monarchs are becoming more and more extravagant. In their hearts, they are not thinking about the dead, but the living, through which they can boast of each other and compete with each other.

古文：侈糜者以为荣，俭节者以为陋，不以便死为故，而徒以生者之诽誉为务。此非慈亲孝子之心也。
现代文：他们把奢侈浪费的行为看作光菜，把俭省节约的行为看作鄙陋，不把利于死者当回事，只是一心考虑话着的人的毁谤、赞誉，这不合于慈亲孝子之心。
English: They regard extravagant and wasteful behavior as nothing, and frugal behavior as despicable. They do not take the benefit of the deceased seriously, but only the slander and praise of those who are thinking about it. This is not in line with the heart of a kind and filial son.

古文：父虽死，孝子之重之不怠；子虽死，慈亲之爱之不懈。
现代文：父母虽然死了，孝子对父母的尊重不会懈怠；子女虽然死了，慈亲对他们的疼爱不会减弱。
English: Although the parents are dead, the respect of the filial son for the parents will not slacken; although the children are dead, the affection of the relatives for them will not weaken.

古文：夫葬所爱所重，而以生者之所甚欲，其以安之也，若之何哉？
现代文：埋葬所疼爱、所尊重的人，却用活着的人十分想得到的东西陪葬，想靠这些东西使死者安宁，其结果会怎么样呢?
English: What would be the result of burying someone who was loved and respected, but burying them with things that the living person wanted very much, and wanted to use these things to pacify the dead?

古文：民之于利也，犯流矢，蹈白刃，涉血肝以求之。
现代文：百姓对干利，宁肯冒着飞箭，踩着利刃，流血残杀去追求它。
English: The common people are opposed to the pursuit of profit, and would rather pursue it at the risk of flying arrows, stepping on sharp blades, and bloodshed.

古文：野人之无闻者，忍亲戚、兄弟、知交以求利。
现代文：不知礼义的野蛮之人宁可残忍地对待父母、兄弟、朋友而去追求利。
English: Uncivilized savages prefer to be cruel to their parents, brothers and friends in the pursuit of profit.

古文：今无此之危，无此之丑，其为利甚厚，乘车食肉，泽及子孙。
现代文：如今，刨坟掘基没有这种危险，没有这种耻辱，而得利十分丰厚，可以乘车吃肉，思惠延及子孙。
English: Today, there is no such danger, no such shame in digging a grave, and the profit is very rich, you can eat meat by car, think of your children and grandchildren.

古文：虽圣人犹不能禁，而况于乱？
现代文：这种情况即使是圣人尚且禁止不住，更何况昏乱之君呢?
English: Even a saint could not forbid such a situation, let alone a deranged prince.

古文：国弥大，家弥富，葬弥厚。
现代文：国越大，家越富，葬物就越丰厚。
English: The bigger the country, the richer the family, the more lavish the funeral.

古文：含珠鳞施，玩好货宝，钟鼎壶滥，舆马衣被戈剑，不可胜其数。
现代文：死者口含的珍珠、身穿的玉衣，赏玩、嗜好的物品，财贷珍宝，钟鼎壶鉴，车马衣被戈剑，数也数不尽。
English: The pearls in the mouths of the dead, the jade clothes they wore, the playthings and hobbies, the treasures of finance and loans, the jars of jars, the chariots and horses, and the swords are countless.

古文：诸养生之具，无不从者。
现代文：各种养生之器无不随葬。
English: All kinds of health-preserving utensils are buried with it.

古文：题凑之室，棺椁数袭，积石积炭，以环其外。奸人闻之，传以相告。
现代文：椁室用大木累积而成，好似四面有檐的屋子，里面棺椁数层，并堆积石头、木炭，环绕在棺椁之外恶人闻知此事，互相传告。
English: The coffin room was made by piling up large trees, resembling a room with coffins on all four sides. Inside, there were several layers of coffins, and stones and charcoal were piled up, surrounding the coffins. The wicked would hear about this and inform on each other.

古文：上虽以严威重罪禁之，犹不可止。
现代文：君主尽管用严刑重罚禁止他们，仍然婪止不住。
English: Although the monarch forbade them with severe punishment, they still couldn't stop being greedy.

古文：且死者弥久，生者弥疏；生者弥疏，则守者弥怠；守者弥怠而葬器如故，其势固不安矣。
现代文：再入，死者死去的时间越久远，活着的人对他的盛情就越疏远，感情越疏远，守墓人就越懈怠，守墓人越来越懈怠，可是墓中随葬的器物却同原来一样，这种形势本来就不安全了。
English: Re-entry, the longer the deceased has been dead, the more estranged the living are from his feelings, the more estranged the feelings are, the more slack the tomb guard is, the more slack the tomb guard is, but the grave goods are the same as before, this situation is inherently unsafe.

古文：世俗之行丧，载之以大輴，羽旄旌旗、如云偻翣以督之，珠玉以佩之，黼黻文章以饬之，引绋者左右万人以行之，以军制立之然后可。
现代文：世俗之人举行葬礼，用大车载着棺柩，各种旗帜、画有云气的偻翣相随，棺柩之上点缀着珠玉，涂饰了各种花纹。灵车左右执绋进葬的有万人，牵引灵车行进，这么多人得用军法指挥才行。
English: Secular people hold funerals, with carts carrying coffins, accompanied by all kinds of flags and clouds. The coffins are embellished with jewels and decorated with various patterns. There are tens of thousands of people in the funeral procession, pulling the hearse, so many people have to use military command.

古文：以此观世，则美矣，侈矣；以此为死，则不可也。
现代文：举行这种葬礼给世人看，那是够美的了，够盛大的了，但是用这种葬礼安葬死者，那是不行的。
English: It's beautiful enough to hold this kind of funeral and show it to the world, it's grand enough, but to bury the dead with this kind of funeral, that's not acceptable.

古文：苟便于死，则虽贫国劳民，若慈亲孝子者之所不辞为也。
现代文：倘若厚葬真有利于死者，那么即使这样做会使国家贫困、人民劳苦，慈亲孝子也是不会拒绝做的。
English: If a rich funeral is really beneficial to the deceased, then even if it makes the country poor and the people work hard, the relatives will not refuse to do it.

古文：三曰：世之为丘垄也，其高大若山，其树之若林，其设阙庭、为宫室、造宾阼也若都邑。
现代文：安死世人建造坟墓，高大如山，坟墓上种树，茂密如林，墓地修建墓阙、庭院，建筑宫室，建造东西石阶，象都邑一样。
English: The people who died peacefully built tombs as tall as mountains, planted trees on the tombs as thick as forests, built tombs and courtyards in the cemeteries, built palaces, and built stone steps to the east and west, just like the capital.

古文：以此观世示富则可矣，以此为死则不可也。
现代文：用这些向世人夸耀财富，那是可以的，但是用这些安葬死者却不行。
English: It's fine to flaunt your wealth to the world, but not to bury your dead.

古文：夫死，其视万岁犹一瞚也。
现代文：对于死者来说，看待一万年就象是一瞬。
English: To the dead, ten thousand years is but a blink of an eye.

古文：人之寿，久之不过百，中寿不过六十。
现代文：人的寿命，长的不超过百岁，一般的不超过六十岁。
English: The longest human life span is no more than a hundred years, and the average is no more than sixty years.

古文：以百与六十为无穷者之虑，其情必不相当矣。
现代文：根据百岁或六十岁寿命的需要替无限久远的死者考虑，它们的实际情况必定不相适合。
English: Considering the infinitely remote dead according to the needs of a hundred-year-old or sixty-year-old life, their actual situation is certainly not suitable.

古文：以无穷为死者之虑，则得之矣。
现代文：根据无限久远的需要替死者考虑，就掌握葬死的本义了。
English: According to the infinitely long-term need to consider the deceased, we have grasped the true meaning of burial.

古文：今有人于此，为石铭置之垄上，曰： 此其中之物，具珠玉、玩好、财物、宝器甚多，不可不抇，抇之必大富，世世乘车食肉。 
现代文：假如有这样一个人，埋葬死者时在墓上立一块石碑，上面刻写道： 这里面的器物，有珠玉、玩好、财物、宝器，十分丰富，不可不发掘，掘开它一定大富，可以世世代代乘车吃肉。 
English: If there were such a person, when burying the dead, he would erect a stone tablet on the grave, inscribed with the following: "The objects in this tomb, including jewels, toys, possessions, and treasures, are so rich that they must be unearthed, and if they are unearthed, they must be so rich that they can eat meat for generations."

古文：人必相与笑之，以为大惑。
现代文：人们一定一起嘲笑他，认为这个人太糊涂。
English: People must have laughed at him together, thinking that this man was too stupid.

古文：世之厚葬也，有似于此。
现代文：世上的厚葬与此相似。
English: The world's mass graves are similar.

古文：自古及今，未有不亡之国也；无不亡之国者，是无不抇之墓也。以耳目所闻见，齐、荆、燕尝亡矣，宋、中山已亡矣，赵、魏、韩皆亡矣，其皆故国矣。
现代文：从古到今，没有不灭亡的国家；没有不灭亡的国家，这就没有不被挖掘的坟墓，就人们耳闻目睹来说，齐、楚、燕曾经灭亡过，宋，中山已经灭亡了，赵、魏、韩都灭亡了，它们都成了古国了。
English: From ancient times to the present, there is no country that will not perish; there is no country that will not perish, and there is no grave that will not be excavated. As far as people have heard and witnessed, Qi, Chu, and Yan have perished, Song, Zhongshan have perished, Zhao, Wei, and Han have all perished, and they have all become ancient countries.

古文：自此以上者，亡国不可胜数，是故大墓无不抇也。
现代文：从它们再往前，灭亡的国家数也数不尽，因此，大墓没有不被掘开的。
English: From them onward, the number of countries that have perished is also countless, so there is no tomb that has not been excavated.

古文：而世皆争为之，岂不悲哉？
现代文：但是世人却都争着造大墓，难道不可悲吗?
English: But isn't it sad that the whole world is competing to build a great tomb?

古文：君之不令民，父之不孝子，兄之不悌弟，皆乡里之所釜䰛者而逐之。
现代文：国君的刁滑之民，父亲的不孝之子，兄长的忤逆之弟，他们都是被乡里一致驱遂的人。
English: The traitorous people of the sovereign, the unfilial son of the father, the rebellious brother of the elder brother, they are all people who have been driven away by the village.

古文：惮耕稼采薪之劳，不肯官人事，而祈美衣侈食之乐，智巧穷屈，无以为之，于是乎聚群多之徒，以深山广泽林薮，扑击遏夺，又视名丘大墓葬之厚者，求舍便居，以微抇之，日夜不休，必得所利，相与分之。
现代文：他们害怕耕种、打柴之苦，不肯从事各种劳役，却追求享受锦衣玉食之乐；当智谋巧诈用尽，仍无法得到时，于是就聚集起很多人，凭惜深山、大潮、树林和沼泽，拦路打劫，又探察葬器丰厚的大墓，想办法住到坟墓附近便于盗墓的住所，暗中挖掘，日夜不止，一定要获得其中的时物，一起瓜分。
English: They are afraid of the hardships of farming and logging, and refuse to engage in all kinds of labor, but seek to enjoy the joys of food. When the wit and cunning are exhausted and still can't get it, so they gathered a lot of people, taking advantage of the deep mountains, tides, forests and swamps, blocking roads and robbing, and exploring large tombs with rich funerary equipment, trying to find a way to live near the grave to facilitate the theft of tombs, secretly digging, day and night, and must get the time and material, and divide it together.

古文：夫有所爱所重，而令奸邪、盗贼、寇乱之人卒必辱之，此孝子、忠臣、亲父、交友之大事。
现代文：如果所疼爱、所尊重的人，死后却肯定要遭到恶人、盗贼，匪寇的凌辱，这是孝子、忠臣，慈父，挚友当忧虑的大事。
English: If someone you love and respect dies, they will surely be abused and humiliated by evil people, thieves, and bandits. This is a serious matter for a filial son, loyal subject, loving father, and close friend to worry about.

古文：尧葬于谷林，通树之；舜葬于纪市，不变其肆；禹葬于会稽，不变人徒。
现代文：尧葬在谷林，墓上处处种上树，舜葬在纪市，市上的作坊，店铺没有任何变动，禹葬在会稽，不烦扰众人。
English: He was buried in a valley, and trees were planted all over the grave. He was buried in Ji City, and there were no changes in the workshops and shops in the city. He was buried in the auditorium, and he did not bother people.

古文：是故先王以俭节葬死也，非爱其费也，非恶其劳也，以为死者虑也。
现代文：由此看来，先王以节俭的原则安葬死者，不是吝惜钱财，也不是忧虑耗费人力，完全是为死者考虑。
English: From this point of view, the former king buried the dead according to the principle of thrift, not to spare money, nor to worry and expend manpower, but to consider the dead.

古文：先王之所恶，惟死者之辱也。发则必辱，俭则不发。
现代文：先王所忧虑的，是惟恐死者受辱，坟墓如果被盗掘，死者肯定要受到凌辱，如果俭葬，墓就不会被盗掘。
English: The concern of the former king was the fear that the dead would be humiliated. If the grave was robbed, the dead would certainly be humiliated. If the burial was frugal, the grave would not be robbed.

古文：故先王之葬，必俭，必合，必同。
现代文：所以，先王安葬死者，一定要做到俭，一定做到合，一定做到同。
English: Therefore, the first king buried the dead, we must be frugal, we must be united, we must be united.

古文：何谓合？
现代文：什么叫合?
English: What do you call it?

古文：何谓同？
现代文：什么叫同?
English: What do you call it?

古文：葬于山林则合乎山林，葬于阪隰则同乎阪隰。此之谓爱人。
现代文：葬于山林就与山林合为一体，葬干山坡或低湿之地，就与山坡或低温之地环境相同。这就叫作爱人。
English: If you are buried in a mountain forest, you will be united with the mountain forest, and if you are buried on a dry hillside or in a low-humidity place, you will be in the same environment as a hillside or a low-temperature place. This is called a lover.

古文：夫爱人者众，知爱人者寡。
现代文：想爱人的人很多，但真懂得爱人的人很少。
English: There are many people who want to love, but few who really know how to love.

古文：故宋未亡而东冢抇，齐未亡而庄公冢抇。
现代文：所以，宋国还没有灭亡，东冢就被盗掘。齐国还没有灭亡，庄公的墓就被盗掘。
English: Therefore, Song has not yet perished, and Donglu has been plundered. Qi has not yet perished, and Zhuanggong's tomb has been plundered.

古文：国安宁而犹若此，又况百世之后而国已亡乎？
现代文：国家安定尚且如此，又何况百世之后国家已经灭亡了呢?
English: How can a country be stable and still exist, when a hundred generations later it has been destroyed?

古文：故孝子、忠臣、亲父、交友不可不察于此也。
现代文：所以孝子、忠臣、慈父、挚友对此不可不阻察。
English: Therefore, a filial son, a loyal subject, a loving father, and a best friend must not fail to observe this.

古文：夫爱之而反危之，其此之谓乎！
现代文：原本是敬爱死者，结果却反而害了他们，大概指的就是厚葬一类事吧。
English: Originally, it was to honor the dead, but as a result, it actually harmed them, probably referring to things like heavy burials.

古文：《诗》曰： 不敢暴虎，不敢冯河。
现代文：《诗》中说： 不敢徒手搏虎，不敢徒涉黄河。
English: "Poetry" said: Do not dare to fight tigers with bare hands, do not dare to wade into the Yellow River.

古文：人知其一，莫知其他。 此言不知邻类也。
现代文：人们只知此一端，不知还有其它祸， 这是说不知类推啊!
English: People only know this side, they don't know that there are other evils, that is to say, they don't know how to draw an analogy!

古文：故反以相非，反以相是。
现代文：所以，忽而翻转过去加以反对，忽而翻转过来表示赞同。
English: So, flip-flop to oppose, flip-flop to approve.

古文：其所非方其所是也，其所是方其所非也。
现代文：他们所反对的正是他们所赞同过的，他们所赞同的正是他们所反对过的。
English: What they are against is what they are for, what they are for is what they are against.

古文：是非未定，而喜怒斗争反为用矣。
现代文：是非尚未确定，而喜怒斗争反倒都用上了。
English: Whether it is or not has not yet been determined, but the struggle between emotions has been used.

古文：吾不非斗，不非争，而非所以斗，非所以争。
现代文：我们不反对斗，也不反对争，但是反对驱使人们糊里糊涂斗、糊里糊涂争的根源。
English: We do not oppose fighting, nor do we oppose conflict, but we do oppose the root causes that drive people to fight and conflict.

古文：故凡斗争者，是非已定之用也。
现代文：因此，凡争斗，都是是非确定以后才采用的手段。
English: Therefore, any struggle is a means to be used only after the rights and wrongs have been determined.

古文：今多不先定其是非，而先疾斗争，此惑之大者也。
现代文：如今人们大多不先确定是非，却先急急忙忙地争斗，这是最糊涂的。
English: Nowadays, most people do not first determine the rights and wrongs, but first rush to fight, which is the most confused.

古文：鲁季孙有丧，孔子往吊之。
现代文：鲁国季孙氏举办丧事，孔子去吊丧。
English: The Ji Sun clan of the State of Lu held a funeral, and Confucius went to the funeral.

古文：入门而左，从客也。
现代文：进门之后，站到左边，立于宾客的位置。
English: After entering the door, stand to the left and stand in the position of the guests.

古文：主人以璵璠收，孔子径庭而趋，历级而上，曰： 以宝玉收，譬之犹暴骸中原也。 
现代文：主丧的季桓子用鲁国的宝玉殓死者。孔子从西阶下穿过中庭快步向东，登东阶而上，说： 用宝玉殓死者，就象是把尸体暴露在原野上一样。 
English: The chief mourner, Ji Huan Zi, used the precious jade of Lu to pick up the dead. Confucius walked quickly from the bottom of the west steps through the atrium to the east, climbed the east steps and said: Using precious jade to pick up the dead is like exposing the corpse to the field.

古文：径庭历级，非礼也；虽然，以救过也。
现代文：穿过中庭，登阶而上是不合于宾客礼仪的，虽然不合礼仪，但孔子仍然这样做了，这是为了阻止过失啊！
English: Walking through the atrium and up the steps is not in accordance with the etiquette of guests. Although it is not in accordance with etiquette, Confucius still did it, this is to prevent mistakes!

古文：四曰：古之人非无宝也，其所宝者异也。
现代文：异宝古代的人不是没有宝物，只是他们看作宝物的东西与令人不同。
English: Treasures The ancients were not without treasures, but what they regarded as treasures was different from what people think.

古文：孙叔敖疾，将死，戒其子曰: 王数封我矣，吾不受也。
现代文：孙叔敖病了，临死的时候告诫他的儿子说； 大王多次赐给我土地，我都没有接受。
English: When Sun Xiuyan was ill and on the verge of death, he admonished his son, "The great king has given me land many times, but I have never accepted it.

古文：为我死，王则封汝，必无受利地。
现代文：如果我死了，大王就会赐给你土地，你一定不要接受肥沃富饶的土地。
English: If I die, the great king will give you land. You must not accept fertile land.

古文：楚、越之间有寝之丘者，此其地不利，而名甚恶。
现代文：楚国和越国之间有个寝丘，这个地方土地贫瘠，而且名声很差。
English: There is a dormant hill between Chu and Yue that is barren and has a bad reputation.

古文：荆人畏鬼，而越人信䘛。
现代文：楚人畏惧鬼，而越人迷信鬼神和灾祥。
English: Chu people are afraid of ghosts, while Yue people are superstitious about ghosts and gods.

古文：可长有者，其唯此也。 
现代文：所以，能够长久占有的封地，恐怕只有这块土地了。 
English: Therefore, this piece of land is probably the only fief that can be held for a long time.

古文：孙叔敖死，王果以美地封其子，而子辞，请寝之丘，故至今不失。
现代文：孙叔敖死后，楚王果然把肥沃的土地赐给他的儿子，但是孙叔敖的儿子谢绝了，请求赐给寝丘，所以这块土地至今没有被他人占有。
English: After Sun Shuxuan's death, King Chu did indeed give the fertile land to his son, but Sun Shuxuan's son refused and asked to be given the sleeping hill, so this land has not been occupied by others.

古文：孙叔敖之知，知不以利为利矣。
现代文：孙叔敖的智慧在于懂得不把世俗心目中的利益看作利益。
English: Sun Shuxuan's wisdom lies in knowing how not to regard worldly interests as interests.

古文：知以人之所恶为己之所喜，此有道者之所以异乎俗也。
现代文：懂得把别人所厌恶的东西当作自己所喜爱的东西，这就是有道之人之所以不同千世俗的原因。
English: The reason why a virtuous person is different from a thousand worldly people is that he knows how to regard what others detest as something he likes.

古文：五员亡，荆急求之，登太行而望郑曰: 盖是国也，地险而民多知；其主，俗主也，不足与举。 
现代文：伍员逃亡，楚国紧急迫捕他。他从事登上太行山，遥望郑国说： 这个国家，地势险要而人民多有智慧，但是它的国君是个凡庸的君主，不足以跟他谋举犬事。 
English: He climbed Mount Taihang and looked at Zheng Guo from a distance and said, "This country is in a precarious situation and its people are very wise, but its sovereign is a mediocre monarch, and it is not enough to have a quarrel with him.

古文：去郑而之许，见许公而问所之。
现代文：伍员离开郑国，到了许国，拜见许公并询问自己宜去的国家。
English: The soldiers left Zheng and arrived in Xu, where they met with Xu and asked him which country they should go to.

古文：许公不应，东南向而唾。
现代文：许公不回答，向东南方吐了一口唾沫。
English: Xu Gong did not answer, but spat a mouthful of spit to the southeast.

古文：五员载拜受赐，曰： 知所之矣。 
现代文：伍员再拜接受赐教说； 我知遭该去的国家了。 
English: The corporal bowed his head and said; I know the country I should go to.

古文：因如吴。
现代文：于是往吴国进发。
English: So they set out for Wuxi.

古文：过于荆，至江上，欲涉，见一丈人，刺小船，方将渔，从而请焉。丈人度之，绝江。
现代文：路过楚国，到了长江岸边，想要渡江。他看到一位老人，撑着小船，正要打鱼，于是走过去请求老人送他过江。
English: Passing through the state of Chu, he came to the bank of the Yangtze River and wanted to cross it. He saw an old man, holding a small boat, about to fish, so he went over and asked the old man to escort him across the river.

古文：问其名族，则不肯告，解其剑以予丈人，曰： 此千金之剑也，愿献之丈人。 
现代文：老人把他送过江去。
English: The old man walked him across the river.

古文：丈人不肯受，曰： 荆国之法，得五员者，爵执圭，禄万檐，金千镒。
现代文：伍员问老人的姓名，老人却不肯告诉。他解下自己的宝剑送给老人，说： 这是价值千金的宝剑，我愿意把它奉献给您。 老人不肯接受，说； 按照楚国的法令，捉到伍员的，授予执圭爵位，享受万石俸禄，赐给黄金千镒。
English: The soldier asked the old man his name, but the old man refused to tell him. He unsheathed his sword and gave it to the old man, saying, "This is a sword worth thousands of gold, I am willing to give it to you." The old man refused to accept, saying, "According to the laws of the State of Chu, if a soldier is caught, he will be awarded the title of knight, enjoy a salary of ten thousand koku, and be given thousands of gold ingots."

古文：昔者子胥过，吾犹不取，今我何以子之千金剑为乎？ 
现代文：从前伍子胥从这里经过，我尚且不捉他去领赏，如争我接受你的价值千金的宝剑做什么呢? 
English: Once upon a time, Wu Zixuan passed by here, but I did not catch him to receive the reward. What should I do if I accept your precious sword?

古文：五员过于吴，使人求之江上，则不能得也。
现代文：伍员到了吴国，派人到江边去寻找老人，却无法找到了。
English: When the soldiers arrived in Wu, they sent someone to the river to look for the old man, but they couldn't find him.

古文：每食必祭之，祝曰： 江上之丈人！
现代文：伍员每次吃饭一定要祭祀那位老人，祝告说； 江上的老人！ 
English: Every time the soldiers eat, they must make a sacrifice to the old man and say, "Long live the old man on the river!"

古文：天地至大矣，至众矣，将奚不有为也？而无以为。
现代文：天地之德大到极点了，养育万物多到极点了，天地何所不为?却毫无所求。
English: The virtue of heaven and earth is great to the extreme, the nurturing of all things is more to the extreme, what does heaven and earth not do? But they do not seek anything.

古文：为矣，而无以为之。名不可得而闻，身不可得而见，其惟江上之丈人乎！ 
现代文：人世间，做了有利于别人的事，却毫无所求，名字无法得知，身影无法得见，达到达种境界的恐怕只有江边的老人吧！
English: In the human world, you have done something beneficial to others, but you have nothing to ask for, your name cannot be known, your figure cannot be seen, and I am afraid that only the old man by the river can reach such a realm!

古文：宋之野人耕而得玉，献之司城子罕，子罕不受。
现代文：宋国一个农夫耕地得到了一块玉，把它献给司城子罕，子罕不接受。
English: A farmer in Song got a piece of jade for his farmland. He dedicated it to Shicheng Zihang, but Zihang did not accept it.

古文：野人请曰： 此野人之宝也，愿相国为之赐而受之也。 
现代文：农夫请求说： 这是我的宝物，希望相国赏小人脸而把它收下。 
English: The farmer pleaded: "This is my treasure. I hope my country will appreciate the villain's face and accept it."

古文：子罕曰： 子以玉为宝，我以不受为宝。 
现代文：于罕说； 你把玉当作宝物，我把不接受别人的赠物当作宝物。 
English: Yu Han said, "You treat the jade as a treasure, but I treat not accepting gifts from others as a treasure."

古文：故宋国之长者曰： 子罕非无宝也，所宝者异也。 
现代文：所以来宋德高望重的人说； 子罕不是没有宝物，只是他当作宝物的东西与别人不同啊! 
English: Therefore, people who hold Song De in high esteem say: Zohan is not without treasure, but what he regards as treasure is different from others!

古文：今以百金与抟黍以示儿子，儿子必取抟黍矣；以和氏之璧与百金以示鄙人，鄙人必取百金矣；以和氏之璧、道德之至言以示贤者，贤者必取至言矣。
现代文：假如现在把百金和黄米饭团摆在小孩的面前，小孩一定去抓黄米饭团了；把和氏之壁和百金摆在鄙陋无知的人面前，鄙陋无知的人一定拿走百金了。把和氏之壁和关于道德的至理名言摆在贤人面前，贤人一定听取至理名言了。
English: If you now put a hundred gold and a yellow rice ball in front of a child, the child will surely catch the yellow rice ball; if you put a hundred gold and a hundred gold in front of a vulgar and ignorant person, the vulgar and ignorant person will surely take the hundred gold. If you put a hundred gold and a yellow rice ball in front of a wise person, the wise person will surely listen to the wise words.

古文：其知弥精，其所取弥精；其知弥粗，其所取弥粗。
现代文：他们的智慧越精深，所取的东西就越珍贵，他们的智慧越低下，所取的东西就越粗陋。
English: The more refined their wisdom, the more precious the things they take, and the lower their wisdom, the coarser the things they take.

古文：五曰：万物同，而用之于人异也，此治乱、存亡、死生之原。
现代文：异用万物对任何人都是同样的，但人们使用它们却各有不同，这是治乱、存亡、死生的根本所在。
English: All things are the same for everyone, but people use them in different ways. This is the essence of governing chaos, survival and death.

古文：故国广巨，兵强富，未必安也；尊贵高大，未必显也：在于用之。
现代文：所以，国土广大，兵力强盛，未必安定，尊贵富有，未必显赫，关键在于如何使用它们。
English: Therefore, a vast territory and a strong military force are not necessarily stable, noble and rich, and not necessarily prominent. The key is how to use them.

古文：桀、纣用其材而以成其亡，汤、武用其材而以成其王。
现代文：夏桀、商村运用他们的才智却造成了他们的灭亡，商汤、周武王运用他们的才智而成就了他们的王业。
English: Xia Yao and Shang Cun used their talents to bring about their demise, while Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu used their talents to achieve their royal careers.

古文：汤见祝网者，置四面，其祝曰： 从天坠者，从地出者，从四方来者，皆离吾网。 
现代文：商汤在郊外看见个猎人四面设网，并祷告说： 从天上坠落的，从地上生出的，从四方来的，让它们都坠落到我的阿上。 
English: On the outskirts of the town, Shang Tang saw a hunter with a net spread out on all sides, and he prayed: "Those who fall from the sky, those who are born from the earth, and those who come from the four directions, let them all fall on my father."

古文：汤曰： 譆！
现代文：汤说； 真这样的话，禽兽就被杀光了。
English: "If that's the case, all the animals will be killed," said Tang.

古文：尽之矣。非桀，其孰为此也？ 
现代文：除了桀那样的暴君，谁还会做这种事呢? 
English: Who would do such a thing but a tyrant like Toad?

古文：汤收其三面，置其一面，更教祝曰： 昔蛛蝥作网罟，今之人学纾。
现代文：汤收起三面的网，只在一面设网，重新教那人祷告说： 从前蜘蛛籍网，现在的人也学着织。
English: Then the king took away the three-sided net and replaced it with a single one, and he taught the man to pray again, saying, "In the past, spiders used to make webs, but now people have learned how to weave them.

古文：欲左者左，欲右者右，欲高者高，欲下者下，吾取其犯命者。 
现代文：禽兽想向左去的就向左去，想向右去的就向右去，想向高处去的就向高处去，想向低处去的就向低处击，我只捕取那些触犯天命的。 
English: If the animals want to go left, they go left; if they want to go right, they go right; if they want to go high, they go high; if they want to go low, they go low. I only capture those who violate the Mandate of Heaven.

古文：汉南之国闻之曰: 汤之德及禽兽矣。 
现代文：汉水以南的国家闻知这件事说： 商汤的仁德连禽兽都顾及到了。 
English: The countries south of the Han River heard about this and said: the benevolence of Shang Tang has taken into account even the animals.

古文：四十国归之。
现代文：于是四十个国家归附了汤。
English: As a result, forty countries were added to the soup.

古文：人置四面，未必得鸟；汤去其三面，置其一面，以网其四十国，非徒网鸟也。
现代文：别人在四面设网，未必能捕获到鸟；汤撤去三面的网，只在一面设网，却由此得到丁四十个国家的归附，不仅仅是捕捉飞鸟啊!
English: Others set a net on all four sides and may not be able to catch a bird; Tang removed the net on three sides and set a net only on one side, but thereby gained the attachment of forty countries, not just catching birds!

古文：周文王使人抇池，得死人之骸。吏以闻于文王，文王曰： 更葬之。 
现代文：周文王派人掘池塘，挖出个死人的尸骨，官吏把此事禀告文王，文王说： 重新安葬他。 
English: Zhou Wenwang sent someone to dig a pond and dug out the bones of a dead man. The officials reported the matter to Wenwang. Wenwang said: Re-bury him.

古文：吏曰： 此无主矣。 
现代文：官吏说： 这具尸骨是没有主的。 
English: The official said: "This skeleton has no owner.

古文：文王曰： 有天下者，天下之主也；有一国者，一国之主也。
现代文：文王说： 抚有天下的人是天下之主，抚有一国的人是一国之主。
English: King Wen said, "He who rules a kingdom is lord of the kingdom, and he who rules a country is lord of the country."

古文：今我非其主也？ 
现代文：现在难道我不是它的主人吗? 
English: Am I not its master now?

古文：遂令吏以衣棺更葬之。
现代文：于是让官吏用衣棺把那具尸骨改葬在它处。
English: So he asked the officials to use a coffin to bury the body in a different place.

古文：天下闻之曰： 文王贤矣！
现代文：天下人闻知这件事说： 文王真贤明啊！
English: When people around the world heard about this, they said, "Wen Wang is so wise!"

古文：泽及髊骨，又况于人乎？ 
现代文：连死人的尸骨都受到他的恩泽，又何况活着的人呢? 
English: Even the bones of the dead are at his mercy, how much more the living?

古文：或得宝以危其国，文王得朽骨以喻其意，故圣人于物也无不材。
现代文：有的人得到宝物却使自己的国家陷入危难，文王得具朽骨却能借它表示自己的仁德，所以，在圣人看来，物是没有没用的。
English: Some people get a treasure but put their country in danger, King Wen got a rotten bone but can use it to express his benevolence, so, in the eyes of the sage, things are useless.

古文：孔子之弟子从远方来者，孔子荷杖而问之曰： 子之公不有恙乎？ 
现代文：孔子的弟子凡是从远方来的，孔子就扛着手杖问候他说。 你的祖父没灾没病吧? 
English: Whenever a disciple of Confucius came from afar, Confucius would carry his cane to greet him and say, "Your grandfather is not ill, is he?

古文：搏杖而揖之，问曰： 子之父母不有恙乎？ 
现代文：然后持杖拱手行礼，问候说： 你的父母没灾没病吧? 
English: Then he bowed his head with his cane and said, "Your parents aren't ill, are they?"

古文：置杖而问曰: 子之兄弟不有恙乎？ 
现代文：然后拄着手杖问候说： 你的哥哥弟弟没灾没病吧? 
English: Then he waved his cane in greeting and said: Your brother is not ill, is he?

古文：曳杖而倍之，问曰： 子之妻子不有恙乎？ 
现代文：最后拖着手杖转过身去，问侯说， 你的妻子、孩子没灾投病吧? 
English: Finally, dragging his cane, he turned around and asked Hou, "Your wife and child didn't get sick, did they?"

古文：故孔子以六尺之杖，谕贵贱之等，辨疏亲之义，又况于以尊位厚禄乎？
现代文：所以，孔子仅用六尺长的手杖，就让人知道了贵贱的等级，辨明了亲疏的关系，又何况用尊贵的地位、丰厚的俸禄呢?
English: Therefore, Confucius used only a six-foot-long cane to let people know the rank of nobility and lowliness, identify the relationship between relatives and strangers, and what about the noble status and rich salary?

古文：古之人贵能射也，以长幼养老也。
现代文：古代的人重视善射的技艺，用来抚养幼者，瞻养老人。
English: The ancient people valued the skill of good shooting, which was used to raise the young and care for the elderly.

古文：今之人贵能射也，以攻战侵夺也。
现代文：现在的人重视善射的技艺，却用来攻战侵夺。
English: Nowadays, people value the skill of good shooting, but they use it to attack and invade.

古文：其细者以劫弱暴寡也，以遏夺为务也。仁人之得饴，以养疾侍老也。
现代文：那卑微的小人更凭惜善射的技艺掠夺弱小的人，欺侮势孤力单的人，把拦路抢劫当作职业。仁爱的凡得到饴糖，用来保养病人，奉养老人。
English: The lowly villain uses his shooting skill to rob the weak, bully the powerless, and make highway robbery his profession. Those who are benevolent receive candy, which is used to care for the sick and the elderly.

古文：跖与企足得饴，以开闭取楗也。
现代文：跖与庄弄到饴糖，却用来拔闩开门，盗窃他人财物。
English: Zou and Zhuang got the candy, but used it to open the door and steal other people's property.

