古文：凡将立国，制度不可不察也，治法不可不慎也，国务不可不谨也，事本不可不抟也。
现代文：凡是建立国家，对于制度不能不明白，政策法令不能不慎重研究，国家的政务不可不谨慎处理，国家该从事的根本之业不能不集中。
English: Whenever a country is established, the system must be clear, the policies and laws must be carefully studied, the government affairs of the country must be carefully handled, and the fundamental business that the country should engage in must be concentrated.

古文：制度时，则国俗可化，而民从制；治法明，则官无邪；国务壹，则民应用；事本抟，则民喜农而乐战。
现代文：国家的制度合于时势，那么国家的风格就能改变，而民众就遵守服从制度；政策法度清明，那么官吏中就不会发生邪恶的的事；国家的政务统一，那么民众就服从国家调用；国家所从事的根本之业专一，那么民众就会听从使用；事业集中，那么民众就会喜欢农业而愿意打仗。
English: If the system of the state is in line with the times, then the style of the state can be changed, and the people will abide by and obey the system; if the policies and laws are clear, then there will be no evil things in the officials; if the government affairs of the country are unified, then the people will obey the call of the state; if the country is engaged in the fundamental business, then the people will obey the use; if the business is concentrated, then the people will like agriculture and will be willing to fight.

古文：夫圣人之立法、化俗，而使民朝夕从事于农也，不可不变也。
现代文：圣人确立法令政策、改变风俗的目的，是让民众早晚从事农耕，这是不能不弄清楚的。
English: It is important to understand that the purpose of the sage's decrees, policies, and changes in customs is to let the people engage in farming sooner or later.

古文：夫民之从事死制也，以上之设荣名、置赏罚之明也，不用辩说私门而功立矣。
现代文：民众所以肯为国家拼死效力，那是因为君主在朝中设立荣誉名称和爵位，设置了明确的奖赏和惩罚的制度，民众不用靠空谈、请托私人门路便能为国家立功。
English: The reason why the people are willing to work hard for the country is because the monarch has set up honorary names and titles in the court and has set up a clear reward and punishment system. The people can make contributions to the country without relying on empty talk and soliciting private channels.

古文：故民之喜农而乐战也，见上之尊农战之士，而下辩说技艺之民，而贱游学之人也。
现代文：民众所以喜欢从事农耕而愿意打仗，是因为看见君主尊重从事农耕和作战的人士，轻视那些喜欢空谈和靠技艺吃饭的民众，更鄙视到处游说的人。
English: The reason why the people like farming and are willing to go to war is that they see the monarch respect those who are engaged in farming and fighting, despise those who like to talk and eat by skill, and despise those who lobby everywhere.

古文：故民壹务，其家必富，而身显于国。
现代文：所以民众专心从事农战，他的家一定富裕，而且自己也会在国中显贵，进入朝廷为官。
English: Therefore, the people concentrated on the agricultural war, his family must be rich, and he would also be prominent in the country and enter the imperial court as an official.

古文：上开公利而塞私门，以致民力；私劳不显于国，私门不请于君。
现代文：君主打开为国家出力的门路，而堵住为权贵效命的行私请托的门路，用这种办法达到吸引民众力量的目的；为私人效力不能在国家中显达，私人也不能在君主面前请托。
English: In this way, the monarch achieves the goal of attracting the power of the people by opening the way for the state to exert its power and blocking the way for the powerful to use their power for private gain. Private gain cannot be manifested in the state, and private people cannot ask for help in front of the monarch.

古文：若此，而功臣劝，则上令行而荒草辟，淫民止而奸无萌。
现代文：如果这样，为国家立功的人得到鼓励，那么君主的命令就能得到实现，而荒地就能得到开垦了，四处游荡的民众就会停止，而邪恶的犯罪现象也就不会发生。
English: If, in this way, those who have rendered meritorious service to the country are encouraged, then the monarch's orders will be fulfilled, the wasteland will be reclaimed, the wandering populace will cease, and the evil phenomenon of crime will not occur.

古文：治国能抟民力而壹民务者，强；能事本而禁末者，富。
现代文：治理国家能集聚民众的力量专心从事务农作战，国家就会强大；能够使民众从事根本之业，禁止商业、手工业，国家就会富足。
English: Governance of the country can gather the strength of the people, concentrate on the affairs of the farmers and the war, and the country will be strong; can make the people engage in the fundamental business, prohibit commerce and handicrafts, and the country will be rich.

古文：夫圣人之治国也，能抟力，能杀力。
现代文：圣明的君主治理国家，能集聚民众的力量，也能消耗民众的力量。
English: The saintly monarch governs the country, can gather the power of the people, and can also consume the power of the people.

古文：制度察则民力抟，抟而不化则不行，行而无富则生乱。
现代文：制度清楚，民众的力量就能集中，民众的力量集中了却不消耗使用不行，民众为国家出力却得不到回报，那么就会发生动乱。
English: If the system is clear, the power of the people can be concentrated, but if the power of the people is concentrated, it cannot be used without being consumed, and if the people's efforts for the country are not rewarded, then there will be turmoil.

古文：故治国者，其抟力也，以富国强兵也；其杀力也，以事敌劝民也。
现代文：因此，治理国家的人，他集聚民众的力量是为了使国家富裕，使军队强大；消耗民众的力量，是为了消灭敌人鼓励民众立功。
English: Therefore, the person who governs the country, he gathers the power of the people in order to make the country rich and the army strong; he consumes the power of the people in order to eliminate the enemy and encourage the people to perform meritorious deeds.

古文：夫开而不塞，则短长；长而不攻，则有奸。塞而不开，则民浑；浑而不用，则力多；力多而不攻，则有奸虱。
现代文：如果国君只打开为国出力受赏的门，而不堵住为私人效力请托的门路，那么民众的智谋就会增长；民众的智谋多了而不加以教育，那么就会发生邪恶的事。堵住私人门路而不打开为国家出力受赏的门路，那么民众就会糊涂愚昧；民众糊涂又不被使用，那么民众的力量就无处用；民众的力量无处使用，又不用来攻打敌国，那么就会产生虱害。
English: If the sovereign only opens the door to be rewarded for his efforts for the country, but does not close the door to be entrusted with private services, then the wisdom of the people will increase; if the wisdom of the people increases without being educated, then evil things will happen. If the private door is blocked and the door to be rewarded for the country is not opened, then the people will be confused and ignorant; if the people are confused and not used, then the power of the people will be useless; if the power of the people is nowhere used and not used to attack the enemy country, then there will be harm.

古文：故抟力以壹务也，杀力以攻敌也。
现代文：所以集中民众的力量用于专心务农，消耗力量用来攻击敌人。
English: Therefore, the power of the people should be concentrated to concentrate on farming, and the power of consumption should be used to attack the enemy.

古文：治国者贵民壹，民壹则朴，朴则农，农则易勤，勤则富。
现代文：治理国家贵在使民众努力的方向一致，民众专一那么就淳朴，淳朴就会务农，民众务农就会变得勤劳，勤劳就会富裕。
English: It is important to govern the country so that the efforts of the people are in the same direction. If the people are single-minded, they will be simple, and simple will be farming. If the people are farming, they will become industrious, and industrious will be rich.

古文：富者废之以爵，不淫；淫者废之以刑，而务农。
现代文：让富人用钱买官爵，消耗他们的财产，他们就不会放荡；用刑罚制止他们放荡，就会去务农。
English: Let the rich use their money to buy officials, consume their property, and they will not indulge in debauchery; use punishment to stop their debauchery, and they will go to farming.

古文：故能抟力而不能用者必乱，能杀力而不能抟者必亡。
现代文：所以能集中民众的力量而不能使用民众的力量的国家一定会乱，只能使用民众的力量而不能集中民众的力量的国家一定灭亡。
English: Therefore, a country that can concentrate the power of the people but cannot use the power of the people is bound to be chaotic, and a country that can only use the power of the people but cannot concentrate the power of the people is bound to perish.

古文：故明君知齐二者，其国强；不知齐二者，其国削。
现代文：因此君主知道调剂这两个方面，国家就强大；国家不知道调剂这两个方面，这个国家就会被削弱。
English: Therefore, if the monarch knows how to adjust these two aspects, the country will be strong; if the country does not know how to adjust these two aspects, the country will be weakened.

古文：夫民之不治者，君道卑也；法之不明者，君长乱也。
现代文：民众没有治理好，这是因为君主的政治措施不高明。国家的法规不能严明执行，那是因为国君助长了动乱的因素。
English: If the people are not well governed, it is because the political measures of the sovereign are not wise; if the laws of the state are not strictly enforced, it is because the sovereign has contributed to the disturbance.

古文：故明君不道卑、不长乱也；秉权而立，垂法而治，以得奸于上，而官无不；赏罚断，而器用有度。
现代文：所以英明的君主不能放松统治措施，不能助长动乱因素；国君掌握大权，主持朝政，根据法律治理国家，在朝堂上捕获奸邪之人，而且官吏也没有邪僻的行为；奖赏、刑罚决断得有凭据，做出的各种器物用具有一定的规矩。
English: Therefore, a wise monarch cannot relax the measures of rule and cannot encourage the factors of turmoil; the sovereign holds great power, presides over the government, governs the country according to the law, captures traitors in the court, and officials do not have perverse behavior; rewards and punishments must have evidence, and the use of various utensils must have certain rules.

古文：若此，则国制明而民力竭，上爵尊而伦徒举。
现代文：如果这样，那么国家的制度清楚而民众的力量也能被充分使用，君主设置的爵位尊贵，而各类人物也能被任用。
English: If so, then the system of the state is clear and the power of the people can be fully used, the nobility set up by the monarch is noble, and all kinds of people can be appointed.

古文：今世主皆欲治民，而助之以乱；非乐以为乱也，安其故而不窥于时也。
现代文：现在列国的君主都想要治理好民众，却滋长了产生动乱的因素。并不是他们乐意让民众乱，这是因为他们固守过去的陈规旧习而没有弄清楚当前的形势。
English: Now the sovereigns of all nations, desirous of governing their people well, have given birth to the elements of disorder, not because they are pleased to have them disorderly, but because they cling to the old customs, and do not understand the present situation.

古文：是上法古而得其塞，下修令而不时移，而不明世俗之变，不察治民之情，故多赏以致刑，轻刑以去赏。
现代文：这样的话，他们对上效法古代而得到的东西却在今天又行不通，向下拘守现状却赶不上时代的发展，不明白社会风俗在变化，不了解治理民众的情况，因此滥用奖赏反而招致了使用刑罚，减少刑罚又使奖赏没有效用。
English: In this way, what they have obtained by imitating the ancients in the past does not work today, and adhering to the status quo does not keep up with the development of the times. They do not understand that social customs are changing, and do not understand the situation of governing the people. Therefore, the abuse of reward has led to the use of punishment, and the reduction of punishment has made the reward useless.

古文：夫上设刑而民不服，赏匮而奸益多。
现代文：君主设立了刑罚可民众不服从，奖赏的财务用尽了邪恶犯罪的事更多。
English: Monarchs established punishments for civil disobedience, and reward funds were exhausted for the most heinous crimes.

古文：故民之于上也，先刑而后赏。
现代文：所以民众对于国君，都是先接受刑罚的约束而后受到奖赏。
English: Therefore, for the sovereign, the people first accept the constraints of punishment and then are rewarded.

古文：故圣人之为国也，不法古，不修今，因世而为之治，度俗而为之法。
现代文：因此，圣明的君主治理国家，不效法古代，不拘守现状，根据社会发展的具体情况来制度适应的政策，考察社会风俗来制定法令。
English: Therefore, the enlightened monarch governs the country, does not follow the ancient law, does not adhere to the status quo, adapts the system according to the specific situation of social development, and examines social customs to formulate laws and regulations.

古文：故法不察民之情而立之，则不成；治宜于时而行之，则不干。
现代文：假如对法度的确立不考察民众的具体情况设立它，就不会成功；对政策确立能适应当时形势要求使用它，就不会相抵触。
English: If the establishment of laws does not consider the specific conditions of the people, it will not succeed; if the establishment of policies can adapt to the requirements of the current situation, it will not conflict.

古文：故圣王之治也，慎为、察务，归心于壹而已矣。
现代文：所以英明称王天下的君主治理国家，一定慎重去做，认真考察情况，将思想集中在专心于农耕和作战上。
English: Therefore, the wise monarchs who rule the country must do it carefully, carefully examine the situation, and concentrate their thoughts on farming and warfare.

