古文：自古受命帝王及继体过文之君，非独内德茂也，盖亦有外戚之助焉。
现代文：自古以来，那些创业的帝王以及继承皇位遵循先王成法的君主，并非衹凭自己美好的德行，也与外戚的帮助分不开。
English: Since ancient times, those emperors who started businesses and the monarchs who inherited the throne and followed the law of succession did not rely on their own good virtues, but were also inseparable from the help of relatives.

古文：夏之兴也以涂山，而桀之放也用末喜；殷之兴也以有娀及有，而纣之灭也嬖妲己；周之兴也以姜嫄及太任、太姒，而幽王之禽也淫褒姒。
现代文：夏朝的兴起与涂山氏有关，而桀遭到放逐则是起因于末喜；殷代的兴起离不开有贼氏和有娶氏，而纣的灭亡则是由于宠信妲己；周朝的兴起有赖于姜螈、太任和太姒，而幽王被戎狄擒捉则是因为与裹姒淫乐。
English: The rise of the Xia Dynasty was related to the Tu Shan clan, while the exile of the Yu Wang was caused by the Muxi; the rise of the Yin Dynasty was inseparable from the Thief clan and the Marry clan, while the death of the Yu Wang was due to the favoritism; the rise of the Zhou Dynasty depended on the Jiang Chen, the Tai Ren and the Tai Chen, while the Yu Wang was captured by the Eun Di Chen because of the sexual intercourse with the Wrapped Yu Wang.

古文：故《易》基《乾》、《坤》，《诗》首《关睢》，《书》美釐降，《春秋》讥不亲迎。
现代文：因此惕》从《干》《坤》二卦开始，《诗经》以《关雎》为第一篇，《尚书》赞美唐尧把两个女儿嫁给虞舜，《春秋》讽刺鲁隐公娶妻而不亲自迎娶。
English: Therefore, beware" begins with "Gan" and "Kun," and "Shijing" begins with "Guanxi" as the first chapter, "Shangshu" praises Tang Xuan for marrying his two daughters to Yujing, and "Spring and Autumn" satirizes Lu Yin for marrying his wife without marrying her in person.

古文：夫妇之际，人道之大伦也。
现代文：夫妇关系是人伦之大事。礼法中婚姻之事要谨慎而行。
English: The relationship between a husband and wife is the most important moral relationship in humanity.

古文：礼之用，唯昏姻为兢兢。
现代文：音乐和谐，四时才能和谐。
English: The music is harmonious, and it can only be harmonious at four o'clock.

古文：夫乐调而四时和，阴阳之变，万物之统也，可不慎与！
现代文：阴阳的变化，生成天地万物，又怎么能够不慎重呢！
English: The changes of yin and yang, the creation of heaven and earth and all things, how can we not be cautious!

古文：人能弘道，末如命何。
现代文：人可以弘扬大道，对待天命却无可奈何。
English: People can promote the road, but they can't help but treat the destiny.

古文：甚哉妃匹之爱，君不能得之臣，父不能得之子，况卑下乎！
现代文：配偶之间的感情是超过一切的，即使凭着君父地位之尊，也无法勉强臣下子女，更何况低贱之辈呢！
English: The feelings between spouses are above all else, even with the dignity of the royal father's position, it is impossible to force the children of the vassals, let alone the lowly ones!

古文：既欢合矣，或不能成子姓，成子姓矣，而不能要其终，岂非命也哉！
现代文：夫妻之爱欢乐融洽，有些人却不能生儿育女，而生养了儿女，却又不能得到善终，这些难道不正是天命吗！
English: The love between husband and wife is happy and harmonious, but some people can't have children, and if they have children, they can't have a happy ending. Isn't this just the destiny of heaven?

古文：孔子罕言命，盖难言之。
现代文：孔子很少谈论天命，大概是由于难以讲述清楚。
English: Confucius rarely spoke about the Mandate of Heaven, probably because it was difficult to explain.

古文：非通幽明之变，恶能识乎性命！
现代文：不懂得阴阳变化，又怎么能知晓性命呢！
English: If you don't know yin and yang, how can you know life?

古文：汉兴，因秦之称号，帝母称皇太后，祖母称太皇太后，適称皇后，妾皆称夫人。
现代文：汉朝沿袭秦朝的称号，皇帝的母亲称为皇太后，祖母称为太皇太后，嫡妻称为皇后，妾都称为夫人。
English: The Han Dynasty followed the title of the Qin Dynasty. The emperor's mother was called the empress dowager, the grandmother was called the great empress dowager, the wife was called the empress, and the concubine was called the wife.

古文：又有美人、良人、八子、七子、长使、少使之号焉。
现代文：又有美人、良人、八子、七子、长使、少使等称号。
English: There are also titles such as beauty, lover, eighth son, seventh son, long envoy, and short envoy.

古文：至武帝制婕妤、濩娥、傛华、充依，各有爵位，而元帝加昭仪之号，凡十四等云。
现代文：到汉武帝时，设婕妤、侄娥、俗华、充依，各有一定的爵位，元帝时设昭仪的称号，共有十四个等级。
English: At the time of Emperor Hanwu, there were fourteen ranks, with the titles of Shao, Neihe, Zonghua, and Congyi, each with a certain rank. At the time of Emperor Yuan, there was the title of Zhaoyi.

古文：昭仪位视丞相，爵比诸侯王。
现代文：昭仪的禄秩相当于丞相，爵位与诸侯王相当。
English: Zhaoyi's rank was equivalent to that of a chancellor, and his title was equivalent to that of a prince.

古文：婕妤视上卿，比列侯。
现代文：婕奸相当于上卿，爵位与列侯相当。
English: A traitor is equivalent to a lord, and a peerage is equivalent to a vassal.

古文：濩娥视中二千石，比关内侯。
现代文：侄娥相当于中二千石，爵位与关内侯相同。
English: Niece is equivalent to middle two thousand koku, and the title is the same as Guan Nei Hou.

古文：傛华视真二千石，比大上造。
现代文：熔华相当于真二千石，爵位与大上造相同。
English: The fusion is equivalent to 2,000 koku, and the peerage is the same as that of the grand superiors.

古文：美人视二千石，比少上造。
现代文：美人相当于二千石，爵位与少上造相同。
English: Beauty is equivalent to two thousand koku, and the title is the same as Shoshojo-zukuri.

古文：八子视千石，比中更。
现代文：八子相当于干石，爵位与中更相同。
English: Yatsuko is equivalent to dry stone, and the peerage is more the same as middle rank.

古文：充依视千石，比左更。
现代文：充依相当于千石，爵位与左更相同。
English: Congyi is equivalent to a thousand koku, and the peerage is the same as Zuo.

古文：七子视八百石，比右庶长。
现代文：七子相当于八百石，爵位与右庶长等同。
English: Seven sons is equivalent to 800 koku, and the peerage is the same as that of the second-in-command.

古文：良人视八百石，比左庶长。
现代文：良人相当于八百石，爵位与左庶长等同。
English: Liangren is equivalent to 800 koku, and his peerage is the same as that of the left subordinate leader.

古文：长使视六百石，比五大夫。
现代文：长使相当于六百石，爵位与五大夫等同。
English: The post of chief minister is equivalent to six hundred koku, and the title of nobility is the same as that of the five great lords.

古文：少使视四百石，比公乘。
现代文：少使相当于四百石，爵位与公乘等同。
English: Less than an envoy is equivalent to four hundred koku, and a peerage is equivalent to a civil servant.

古文：五官视三百石。
现代文：五官相当于三百石。
English: Five officials are equivalent to three hundred koku.

古文：顺常视二百石。
现代文：顺常相当于二百石。
English: Normally, it is equivalent to 200 koku.

古文：无涓、共和、娱灵、保林、良使、夜者皆视百石。
现代文：无涓、共和、娱灵、保林、良使、夜者都相当于百石。
English: Mujing, Republic, Yu Ling, Bao Lin, Liang Zi, and Yige are all equivalent to 100 koku.

古文：上家人子、中家人子视有秩斗食云。
现代文：上家人子、中家人子相当于有秩禄的斗食。
English: The children of the upper class and the children of the middle class are equivalent to the food fight with Chichiroku.

古文：五官以下，葬司马门外。
现代文：五官以下的等级，死后埋葬在司马门之外。
English: Those below the rank of five officials were buried outside the Sima Gate after death.

古文：高祖吕皇后，父吕公，单父人也，好相人。
现代文：汉高祖的吕皇后，父亲叫吕公，是单父人，喜欢给人相面。
English: Empress Lyu, the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, whose father was called Lugu, was a single parent and liked to meet people face to face.

古文：高祖微时，吕公见而异之，乃以女妻高祖，生惠帝、鲁元公主。
现代文：高祖贫贱的时候，吕公见到他，认为不是平常之辈，就把女儿嫁给他为妻，生下惠帝和鲁元公主。
English: When Gao Zu was poor, Lu Gong saw him and thought that he was not an ordinary person, so he married his daughter to him as his wife, giving birth to Hui Di and Lu Yuan Princess.

古文：高祖为汉王，元年封吕公为临泗侯，二年立孝惠为太子。
现代文：高祖做了汉王，元年封吕公为临泗侯，二年册立孝惠帝为太子。
English: Gao Zu became the king of Han. In the first year of the year, he made Lu Gong the prince of Linyi, and in the second year, he made Xiao Hui the prince.

古文：后汉王得定陶戚姬，爱幸，生赵隐王如意。
现代文：后来汉王娶了定陶戚姬，十分宠爱，戚姬生了赵隐王如意。
English: Later, Han Wang married Ding Tao's relative Ji Ji, who was very beloved. Ji Ji gave birth to Zhao Yin Wang Ruyi.

古文：太子为人仁弱，高祖以为不类己，常欲废之而立如意， 如意类我 。
现代文：太子为人仁爱懦弱，高祖认为他不像自己，常常打算废掉太子改立如意，说 如意像我 。
English: The crown prince was a benevolent and cowardly person. Gaozu thought that he was not like himself, and often planned to abolish the crown prince and replace him with Ruyi, saying that Ruyi was like me.

古文：戚姬常从上之关东，日夜啼泣，欲立其子。
现代文：戚姬经常跟从皇上出征关东，日夜哭泣，希望册立自己的儿子为太子。
English: Chihi often accompanied the emperor on his expeditions to Kanto, weeping day and night in the hope that her son would be crowned crown prince.

古文：吕后年长，常留守，希见，益疏。
现代文：而吕后年纪大了，常常留守在关中，很少见到皇上，就越发被疏远了。
English: As Lv Guo grew older, she often stayed behind in Guanzhong and rarely saw the emperor, which further alienated her.

古文：如意且立为赵王，留长安，几代太子者数。
现代文：如意被封为赵王，留居长安，有好几次几乎被立为太子。
English: Ruyi was named King Zhao, stayed in Chang'an, and was almost crowned as the crown prince several times.

古文：赖公卿大臣争之，及叔孙通谏，用留侯之策，得无易。
现代文：幸亏公卿大臣竭力反对，到了叔孙通进谏时，采用留侯的计策，才没有更换太子。
English: Fortunately, the Kugyo-daijin strenuously objected, and when the great-uncle and great-grandson were enthroned, they used the tactic of waiting to replace the crown prince.

古文：吕后为人刚毅，佐高帝定天下，兄二人皆为列将，从征伐。
现代文：吕后为人刚毅，辅佐高祖平定天下，两个哥哥都是将领，跟随高祖作战。
English: Lv Hou was a man of fortitude. He assisted Gao Zu in pacifying the world. Both of his brothers were generals and fought alongside Gao Zu.

古文：长兄泽为周吕侯，次兄释之为建成侯，逮高祖而侯者三人。
现代文：大哥吕泽封为周吕侯，二哥吕释之封为建成侯，到高祖称帝时，吕氏家族已有三人被封为侯。
English: The eldest brother, Lü Zefeng, was named Zhou Lü Hou, and the second brother, Lü Xizhi, was named Jiancheng Hou. By the time Gao Zu was proclaimed emperor, three members of the Lü family had already been named Hou.

古文：高祖四年，临泗侯吕公薨。
现代文：高祖四年，临泗侯吕公薨。
English: Gao Zu was four years old, and Linyi Hou Lujongyi was his best friend.

古文：高祖崩，惠帝立，吕后为皇太后，乃令永巷囚戚夫人，髡钳衣赭衣，令舂。
现代文：高祖去世，惠帝即位，吕后做了皇太后，就下令将戚夫人幽禁在永巷，剃去头发，颈束铁圈，穿上囚徒的红衣，让她舂米做苦役。
English: Gao Zu passed away, Hui Di ascended to the throne, and Lv Hou became the empress dowager. She ordered the relative's wife to be imprisoned in Yongxiang, shaved her hair, put an iron collar around her neck, put on a prisoner's red coat, and made her pick rice as hard labor.

古文：戚夫人舂且歌曰： 子为王，母为虏，终日舂薄幕，常与死为伍！
现代文：戚夫人一边舂米一边唱着歌儿： 儿子为王，母亲为奴，一天到晚舂着米，常与死亡相伴！
English: A relative's wife was chopping rice and singing a song: "The son is the king, the mother is the slave, chopping rice all day long is often accompanied by death!"

古文：相离三千里，当谁使告女？ 
现代文：相隔三千里，谁能告诉你？ 
English: Three thousand miles apart, who can tell you?

古文：太后闻之大怒，曰： 乃欲倚女子邪？ 
现代文：吕太后听说后大怒，说： 你还想靠着你的儿子吗？ 
English: After hearing this, Empress Dowager Lü flew into a rage and said, "Do you still want to rely on your son?

古文：乃召赵王诛之。
现代文：就召赵王来长安打算杀掉他。
English: He summoned Zhao Wang to Chang'an and planned to kill him.

古文：使者三反，赵相周昌不遣。
现代文：使者往返了三次，赵相周昌不让赵王前去。
English: The envoy went back and forth three times, but Zhao Xiang Zhouchang did not allow Zhao Wang to go.

古文：太后召赵相，相征至长安。
现代文：太后就召见赵相，把他召来长安。
English: The empress dowager summoned Zhao Xiang and summoned him to Chang'an.

古文：使人复召赵王，王来。
现代文：然后又派人召赵王，赵王就来了。
English: Then he sent someone to summon King Zhao, and King Zhao came.

古文：惠帝慈仁，知太后怒，自迎赵王霸上，入宫，挟与起居饮食。
现代文：惠帝生性仁慈，知道太后痛恨赵王，就亲自到霸上去迎接赵王，一起进了皇宫，饮食起居都在一处。
English: Emperor Hui had a benevolent nature. He knew that the empress dowager hated King Zhao, so he went to the palace to meet King Zhao in person. They entered the palace together, eating and living all in one place.

古文：数月，帝晨出射，赵王不能蚤起，太后伺其独居，使人持鸩饮之。
现代文：过了几个月，惠帝早晨出宫打猎，赵王没有早起，太后趁他睡着，就派人拿毒酒给他喝。
English: A few months later, Hui Di left the palace in the morning to go hunting. Zhao Wang did not get up early. The empress dowager took advantage of him falling asleep and sent someone to bring him poisoned wine to drink.

古文：迟帝还，赵王死。
现代文：等到惠帝回来时，赵王已经死了。
English: By the time Hui Di returned, Zhao Wang had already died.

古文：太后遂断戚夫人手足，去眼熏耳，饮瘖药，使居鞠域中，名曰 人彘 。
现代文：太后就砍断了戚夫人的手脚，剜掉眼珠，熏聋耳朵，喝下哑药，把她扔在窟室裹，称为 人彘 。
English: The empress dowager cut off her cousin's hands and feet, gouged out her eyes, smoked out her deaf ears, drank the dumb medicine, and threw her in a cave, wrapped in what was called a human cocoon.

古文：居数月，乃召惠帝视 人彘 。
现代文：几个月之后，才叫惠帝来看 人彘 。
English: A few months later, Hui Di was called to see the human centipede.

古文：帝视而问，知其戚夫人，乃大哭，因病，岁余不能起。
现代文：惠童见了一问才知道这竟是戚夫人，就大哭了一场，从此得了病，一年多还没有好。
English: After asking around, Huidong learned that she was actually a relative, and burst into tears. Since then, she has been ill and has not been well for more than a year.

古文：使人请太后曰： 此非人所为。
现代文：惠帝派人去对太后说： 这不是人干的事。
English: He sent someone to see the Empress Dowager and said, "This is not something that people do.

古文：臣为太后子，终不能复治天下！ 
现代文：我做了太后的儿子，终究不能治理天下。 
English: I am the son of the Empress Dowager, after all, I cannot rule the world.

古文：以此日饮为淫乐，不听政，七年而崩。
现代文：从此天天饮酒作乐，根本不理政事。七年后去世。
English: From then on, he drank and partied every day and did not care about politics at all. He died seven years later.

古文：太后发丧，哭而泣不下。
现代文：太后为惠帝发丧，哭而无泪。
English: The empress dowager mourned for Hui Di, weeping without tears.

古文：留侯子张辟强为侍中，年十五，谓丞相陈平曰： 太后独有帝，今哭而不悲，君知其解未？ 
现代文：留侯的儿子张辟彊是侍中，才十五岁，他对丞相陈平说： 太后衹有皇上这一个儿子，现在哭起来却不悲伤，您知道这是什么缘故吗？ 
English: Liu Hou's son, Zhang Bijie, a 15-year-old chamberlain, said to the prime minister, Chen Ping: "The empress dowager has this one son, the emperor, and now she cries, but she is not sad. Do you know why?

古文：陈平曰： 何解？ 
现代文：陈平说： 是什么缘故呢？ 
English: Chen Ping said: What is the reason?

古文：辟强曰： 帝无壮子，太后畏君等。
现代文：张辟彊说： 皇上没有年长的儿子，太后对您们这些大臣心存畏惧。
English: Zhang Bijie said, "The emperor has no elder son, and the empress dowager is afraid of you ministers.

古文：今请拜吕台、吕产为将，将兵居南北军，及诸吕皆军，居中用事。
现代文：现在如果请太后拜吕台、吕产为将军，让他们分别统领南军和北军，并且给吕家的人都封官职，让他们在朝廷做事。
English: Now, if you were to ask the Empress Dowager to appoint Bay Rudei and Lyu Sang as generals, let them lead the Southern Army and the Northern Army respectively, and appoint all members of the Lyu family to official positions, and let them work in the imperial court.

古文：如此则太后心安，君等幸脱祸矣！ 
现代文：这样太后安了心，您们也就有幸免遭杀身之祸了！ 
English: In this way, the Empress Dowager was reassured, and you were also spared the scourge of being killed!

古文：丞相如辟强计请之，太后说，其哭乃哀。
现代文：陈平依照张辟彊的计策请奏太后，太后大喜，哭声这才悲伤起来。
English: Chen Ping followed Zhang Diyao's strategy and asked him to play for the empress dowager. The empress dowager was overjoyed, and only then did she begin to cry.

古文：吕氏权由此起。
现代文：吕氏家族的权势从此形成。
English: From then on, the power of the Lü clan began to rise.

古文：乃立孝惠后宫子为帝，太后临朝称制。
现代文：于是立孝惠帝儿子为皇帝，而由太后临朝处理国事，行使皇帝权力。
English: As a result, the son of Emperor Xiao Hui was made emperor, while the Empress Dowager handled state affairs and exercised imperial power.

古文：复杀高祖子赵幽王友、共王恢及燕王建子。
现代文：太后又杀掉高祖的儿子赵幽王刘友、共王刘恢以及燕灵王刘建的儿子。
English: The empress dowager also killed Gaozu's sons, Zhao Yu Wang Liu You, Gong Wang Liu Wei, and Yan Ling Wang Liu Jian's son, Rong.

古文：遂立周吕侯子台为吕王，台弟产为梁王，建城侯释之子禄为赵王，台子通为燕王，又封诸吕凡六人皆为列侯，追尊父吕公为吕宣王，兄周吕侯为悼武王。
现代文：就封周吕侯的儿子吕台为吕王，封吕台的弟弟吕产为梁王，封建城侯吕释之的儿子吕禄为赵王，吕台的儿子吕通封为燕王，又封其他吕氏六人为列侯，追尊太后的父亲吕公为吕宣王，哥哥周吕侯为悼武王。
English: They named Lüdai, the son of Zhou Lüdai, as King Lüdai, Lüdai's brother Lüdai as King Liang, Lüdai, the son of the feudal lord Lüdai, as King Zhao, Lüdai's son Lüdong as King Yan, and six other members of the Lüdai family as princes, the father of the Empress Dowager Lüdai, as King Lüdai Xuan, and his brother Zhou Lüdai as King Lüdai.

古文：太后持天下八年，病犬祸而崩，语在《五行志》。
现代文：太后掌管国政八年，由于犬祸得病而去世，造件事记载在《五行志》。
English: Eight years after the empress dowager took charge of state affairs, she died due to an illness caused by a dog. The event was recorded in the "Five Elements."

古文：病困，以赵王禄为上将军居北军，梁王产为相国居南军，戒产、禄曰： 高祖与大臣约，非刘氏王者，天下共击之。今王吕氏，大臣不平。
现代文：太后病重的时候，让赵王吕禄做上将军，统领北军，梁王吕产做相国，统领南军，并告诫旦尘和旦拯说： 当年毫祖和大臣们有约，非刘氏而王者天下共击之，现在吕家的人封了王，大臣心裹都是愤愤不平。
English: When the empress dowager was gravely ill, she made Zhao Wang Lulu a general to lead the Northern Army, and Liang Wang Lussang a consort to lead the Southern Army, and admonished Dang Chen and Dang Zheng, saying, "In those days, there was no agreement between the ancestors and the ministers. If it was not the Liu clan, but the king, the whole world would fight against it. Now, the people of the Lyu family have been made kings, and the ministers are filled with resentment.

古文：我即崩，恐其为变，必据兵卫宫，慎毋送丧，为人所制。 
现代文：我就要死了，恐怕大臣们会乘机作乱，你们一定要带领军队守卫皇宫，千万不要出去送丧，以免被别人控制。 
English: I'm about to die, and I'm afraid the ministers will take the opportunity to cause trouble. You must lead the army to guard the palace. Don't go out for the funeral, so as not to be controlled by others.

古文：太后崩，太尉周勃、丞相陈平、朱虚侯刘章等共诛产、禄、悉捕诸吕男女，无少长皆斩之。
现代文：太后驾崩以后，太尉周勃、丞相陈平、朱虚侯刘章等人一起诛杀吕产、吕禄，把吕氏家族的人全部捉拿起来，不论老幼都给杀掉了。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, the lieutenant Zhou Bo, the prime minister Chen Ping, Zhu Xuhou Liu Zhang and others fought together to kill Liusang and Lulu, and captured all the people of the Lyu family, regardless of whether they were old or young.

古文：而迎立代王，是为孝文皇帝。
现代文：于是迎接代王立为皇帝，也就是孝文皇帝。
English: So they welcomed the king's successor as emperor, the Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：孝惠张皇后。
现代文：孝惠皇帝的张皇后。
English: Empress Zhang of Emperor Xiaohui.

古文：宣平侯敖尚帝姊鲁元公主，有女。
现代文：宣平侯张敖娶了惠帝的姐姐鲁元公主，生下一个女儿。
English: Prince Xuanping Zhang Ye married Hui Di's sister, Princess Lu Yuan, and gave birth to a daughter.

古文：惠帝即位，吕太后欲为重亲，以公主女配帝为皇后。
现代文：惠帝即位以后，吕太后打算亲上加亲，就把公主的女儿许配给惠帝做皇后。
English: After Emperor Hui ascended the throne, Empress Dowager Lv, who wanted to be closer to him, promised the princess's daughter to Emperor Hui as his empress.

古文：欲其生子，万方终无子，乃使阳为有身，取后宫美人子名之，杀其母，立所名子为太子。
现代文：吕太后希望皇后生个儿子，但用尽了办法皇后还是没有孩子，就让她装作怀孕的样子，把后宫美人生的儿子弄来说是皇后所生，又杀掉孩子的亲生母亲，册立这孩子为太子。
English: Empress Dowager Lv hoped that the empress would have a son, but after exhausting all her means, the empress still had no child, so she had her pretend to be pregnant, pretending that the son of the harem beauty was born by the empress, killing the child's biological mother, and registering the child as the crown prince.

古文：惠帝崩，太子立为帝，四年，乃自知非皇后子，出言曰： 太后安能杀吾母而名我！
现代文：惠帝去世后，太子被立为皇帝，即位四年，才知道自己不是皇后的亲生儿子，放言说： 太后怎么能杀掉我的母亲说我是皇后所生呢！
English: After the death of Emperor Hui, the prince was made emperor, and it took him four years to realize that he was not the queen's biological son. He said, "How could the queen mother kill my mother and say that I was born to the queen?"

古文：我壮即为所为。 
现代文：等我长大以后，我知道该干什么。 
English: When I grow up, I'll know what to do.

古文：太后闻而患之，恐其作乱，乃幽之永巷，言帝病甚，左右莫得见。
现代文：太后听说后十分担忧，怕他日后生出祸乱，就将他囚禁在永巷，对外声称皇帝病得厉害，连左右侍者都见不到他。
English: When the empress dowager heard of this, she was very worried. Fearing that his birth would bring disaster in the future, she imprisoned him in Yongxiang, claiming to the outside world that the emperor was so ill that even the attendants on his right and left could not see him.

古文：太后下诏废之，语在《高后纪》。
现代文：太后下诏书废掉了他，这件事记载在《高后纪》。
English: The empress dowager abolished him with an imperial edict, and this event is recorded in the "Gaohou Ji."

古文：遂幽死，更立恒山王弘为皇帝，而以吕禄女为皇后。欲连根固本牢甚，然而无益也。
现代文：少帝就被幽禁而死，太后改立恒山王刘弘为皇帝，让吕禄的女儿做皇后，希望从根本上巩固吕氏的地位，但这些并没有起到多大的作用。
English: The young emperor was imprisoned and died, and the empress dowager re-established the Hengshan king Liu Hong as emperor and made Lulu's daughter the empress, hoping to fundamentally consolidate the position of the Lue clan, but these did not play much of a role.

古文：吕太后崩，大臣正之，卒灭吕氏。
现代文：吕太后去世，大臣们拨乱反正，终于诛灭了吕氏家族。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Lv, the ministers set things right and finally wiped out the Lv family.

古文：少帝恒山、淮南、济川王，皆以非孝惠子诛。
现代文：少帝恒山王以及淮南王、济川王，都因为不是孝惠帝的亲生儿子而被杀。
English: The young emperor, King Hengshan, as well as King Huainan and King Jichuan, were all killed because they were not the biological sons of Emperor Xiao Hui.

古文：独置孝惠皇后，废处北宫，孝文后元年薨，葬安陵，不起坟。
现代文：衹有孝惠皇后留了下来，被废掉皇后的称号，住在北宫，孝文帝后元年，孝惠皇后薨，葬于安陵，没有建起陵墓。
English: However, Empress Xiao Hui remained, and the title of empress was abolished, and she lived in the North Palace. In the first year after the death of Emperor Xiaowen, Empress Xiao Hui died and was buried in the An Mausoleum, but no mausoleum was built.

古文：高祖薄姬，文帝母也。
现代文：高祖的薄姬，是文帝的母亲。
English: Gaozu's great-grandmother, Bo Ji, was the mother of Emperor Wen.

古文：父吴人，秦时与故魏王宗女魏媪通，生薄姬。
现代文：薄姬的父亲是吴人，秦朝时和原来魏王宗族的女子魏媪私通。生下薄姬。
English: Bo Ji's father was a Wu man. During the Qin Dynasty, he had a love affair with Wei Wei, a woman from the original Wei Wang clan. She gave birth to Bo Ji.

古文：而薄姬父死山阴，因葬焉。
现代文：薄姬的父亲死在山阴，就埋葬在那裹了。
English: Bo Ji's father died in the shade of the mountain and was buried there.

古文：及诸侯畔秦，魏豹立为王，而魏媪内其女于魏宫。
现代文：等到诸侯反叛秦朝，魏豹自立为王，魏媪把她的女儿送进魏宫裹。
English: When the princes rebelled against the Qin Dynasty, the Wei panther became king, and the Wei empress sent her daughter to the Wei Palace.

古文：许负相薄姬，当生天子。
现代文：许负给薄姬相面，说她能生天子。
English: He promised to marry her, saying that she would give birth to a son.

古文：是时，项羽方与汉王相距荥阳，天下未有所定。
现代文：这时项羽正和汉王在荣阳对峙，天下还没有平定。
English: At this time, Xiang Yu was in confrontation with Han Wang in Rongyang, and the world was not yet pacified.

古文：豹初与汉击楚，及闻许负言，心喜，因背汉而中立，与楚连和。
现代文：魏豹最初和漠一道攻击楚，等听了许负的话，心中大喜，就背叛了汉而实行中立，又与楚结交。
English: At first, Wei and the Mongols attacked Chu together. When they heard Xu's words, they were overjoyed. They then betrayed Han, remained neutral, and made friends with Chu.

古文：汉使曹参等虏魏王豹，以其国为郡，而薄姬输织室。
现代文：汉王派曹参等人俘获魏王豹，把他的国土设为郡，而薄姬被送到织室。
English: The Han king sent Cao San and others to capture the Wei king panther and set his land as a county, while Bo Ji was sent to the weaving room.

古文：豹已死，汉王入织室，见薄姬，有诏内后宫，岁余不得幸。
现代文：魏豹死后，汉王进织室，见到了薄姬，就下诏将她纳入后宫，一年多也没得到皇上的御幸。
English: After the death of Wei Pan, the Han king entered the weaving room, saw Bo Ji, and issued an edict to include her in the harem. She did not receive the emperor's blessing for more than a year.

古文：始姬少时，与管夫人、赵子儿相爱，约曰： 先贵毋相忘！ 
现代文：当薄姬小的时候，和管夫人、赵子儿十分亲密，发誓说： 谁先得到贵幸，不要忘掉别人！ 
English: When Bo Ji was little, she was very close to Madam Guan and Zhao Zi'er, and swore: Whoever gets the honor first, don't forget the others!

古文：已而管夫人、赵子儿先幸汉王。
现代文：不久管夫人、赵子儿先得到汉王的宠爱。
English: Later, Lady Guan and Zhao Zi Er were both favored by the Han King.

古文：汉王四年，坐河南成皋灵台，此两美人侍，相与笑薄姬初时约。
现代文：汉王四年，在河南成皋灵台游玩，这两个美人侍立在一旁，就讥笑薄姬当年与她们的盟约。
English: In the fourth year of the Han dynasty, the king was visiting the Chenghu Lingdai in Henan Province. The two beauties stood by and laughed at the pact that Bo Ji had made with them.

古文：汉王问其故，两人俱以实告。
现代文：汉王询问其中的缘故，两人就把实情告诉了他。
English: Han Wang asked the reason for this, and the two told him the truth.

古文：汉王心凄然怜薄姬，是日召，欲幸之。
现代文：汉王心中可怜薄姬，当天召见她，打算御幸。
English: Han Wang felt sorry for Bo Ji in his heart and summoned her that day, intending to marry her.

古文：对曰： 昨暮梦龙据妾胸。 
现代文：薄姬对汉王说： 昨天晚上，我梦见一条龙盘在胸口。 
English: Bo Ji said to Han Wang: Last night, I dreamed of a dragon plate in my chest.

古文：上曰： 是贵征也，吾为汝成之。 
现代文：汉王说： 这是贵显的征兆，我帮助你成就它。 
English: Han Wang said, "This is a sign of a great accomplishment, and I will help you achieve it."

古文：遂幸，有身。
现代文：于是御幸，薄姬怀了身孕。
English: As a result, fortunately, Bo Ji became pregnant.

古文：岁中生文帝，年八岁立为代王。
现代文：这一年生下文帝，八岁时被立为代王。
English: This one-year-old emperor was crowned at the age of eight.

古文：自有子后，希见。
现代文：薄姬自从生了儿子，就很少见到皇上。
English: Since Bo Ji gave birth to her son, she rarely saw the emperor.

古文：高祖崩，诸幸姬戚夫人之属，吕后怒，皆幽之不得出宫。
现代文：高祖驾崩后，那些得到宠幸的姬妾如戚夫人一类的人，都被吕后所忌恨，幽禁起来不能离开皇宫。
English: After Gao Zu's death, those who were favored with concubines such as relatives' wives were all hated by Empress Lu. They were forbidden to leave the palace.

古文：而薄姬以希见故，得出从子之代，为代太后。
现代文：而薄姬因为很少被皇上召见，得以跟着儿子去了代地，称为代太后。
English: Since she was rarely summoned by the emperor, however, Bo Ji was able to follow her son to the place of succession and was called the acting empress dowager.

古文：太后弟薄昭从如代。
现代文：代太后的弟弟薄昭也跟着到了代国。
English: The empress dowager's younger brother, Bo Zhao, also followed her to the dynastic state.

古文：代王立十七年，高后崩。
现代文：代王立十七年时，吕太后去世。
English: Seventeen years into his reign, Emperor Lyu passed away.

古文：大臣议立后，疾外家吕氏强暴，皆称薄氏仁善，故迎立代王为皇帝，尊太后为皇太后，封弟昭为轵侯。
现代文：大臣们商议立新皇帝，痛恨外戚吕氏强横凶暴，都称赞薄氏仁爱善良，因此迎接代王立为皇帝，尊奉代太后为皇太后，封太后的弟弟薄昭为轵侯。
English: The ministers discussed the establishment of a new emperor, hated his relative Lu Shiqiang for his arrogance and violence, and praised Bo Shiqiang for his benevolence and kindness. Therefore, they welcomed the king-in-waiting as the emperor, respected the queen-in-waiting as the queen-in-waiting, and appointed the queen-in-waiting's brother Bo Zhao as the crown prince.

古文：太后母亦前死，葬栎阳北，乃追尊太后父为灵文侯，会稽郡致园邑三百家，长丞以下使奉守寝庙，上食祠如法。
现代文：太后的母亲在这之前也已去世了，埋葬在梁阳之北。于是追尊太后的父亲为灵文侯，在会稽郡建造陵园，设置三百户人家守园，令长丞以下的官吏奉守寝庙，按照法度祭祀。
English: The empress dowager's mother had also passed away before this, and was buried in the north of Liangyang. Therefore, the father of the revered empress dowager was Ling Wen Hou, and a cemetery was built in Huiqi County. Three hundred households were set up to guard the cemetery, and officials below the rank of chancellor were ordered to guard the sleeping temple and offer sacrifices in accordance with the law.

古文：栎阳亦置灵文夫人园，令如灵文侯园仪。
现代文：梁阳也设置了灵文夫人的陵园，规格、仪式都和灵文侯陵园一样。
English: Liangyang has also set up a mausoleum for Lady Lingwen, with the same specifications and ceremonies as the Lingwen Mausoleum.

古文：太后蚤失父，其奉太后外家魏氏有力，乃召复魏氏，赏赐各以亲疏受之。
现代文：太后早年丧父，靠外婆家魏氏抚养，就召见优待魏氏，按关系的远近分别加以赏赐。
English: The Empress Dowager lost her father at an early age and was brought up by her grandmother's family, the Wei clan. She treated the Wei clan with preferential treatment and rewarded them according to their distance from each other.

古文：薄氏侯者一人。
现代文：薄氏家族中有一人封侯。
English: One member of Bo's family was given the title of vassal.

古文：太后后文帝二岁，孝景前二年崩，葬南陵。
现代文：薄太后在文帝去世二年后卒于景帝前元二年，葬于南陵。
English: Empress Dowager Bo died in 2 B.C., two years after the death of Emperor Wen, and was buried in Nanling.

古文：用吕后不合葬长陵，故特自起陵，近文帝。
现代文：因为吕后是皇后，太后不能与高祖合葬在长陵，所以特地另起一座陵墓，靠近文帝。
English: Because Lü Guo was the empress, the empress dowager could not be buried with Gao Zu in the Changling Mausoleum, so another mausoleum was specially built, close to Emperor Wen.

古文：孝文窦皇后，景帝母也，吕太后时以良家子选入宫。
现代文：孝文窦皇后，是景帝的母亲。吕太后掌权的时候，她以良家子女的身份选进宫中。
English: Empress Xiaowen Dou was the mother of Emperor Jing. When Empress Dowager Lyu took power, she was elected to the imperial court as a child of a good family.

古文：太后出宫人以赐诸王各五人，窦姬与在行中。
现代文：旦立后挑选一些宫女出宫赏赐给诸侯王，每人五名，窦姬也在被选出宫之列。
English: After the enthronement, some court ladies were selected to go out of the palace to reward the princes, five each. Dou Ji was also among those selected.

古文：家在清河，愿如赵，近家，请其主遣宦者吏 必置我籍赵之伍中 。
现代文：窦姬原籍清河郡，希望到赵国去，能离家近一些，就向主管派遣宫女的宦官请求说： 一定把我的名字放在去赵国的名单裹。 
English: Dou Ji, originally from Qinghe County, hoped to go to Zhao Guo Rong so that she could be closer to home, so she asked the eunuch who was in charge of dispatching the concubine: "Be sure to put my name on the list to go to Zhao Guo Rong."

古文：宦者忘之，误置籍代伍中。
现代文：宦官却忘记了她的叮嘱，错将她的名字放进去代国的名单上。
English: The eunuch, however, forgot her advice and mistakenly put her name on the list of delegates.

古文：籍奏，诏可。
现代文：名单上奏以后，皇帝下诏批准。
English: The roll call was announced, the decree said yes, it was time to leave.

古文：当行，窦姬涕泣，怨其宦者，不欲往，相强乃肯行。
现代文：到了要出发的时候，窦姬痛哭流涕，怨恨那名宦官，不想前往，别人相劝她才勉强动身。
English: When it was time to leave, Dou Ji cried bitterly, resented the eunuch, did not want to go, and others persuaded her to reluctantly leave.

古文：至代，代王独幸窦姬，生女嫖。
现代文：到了代国，代王却偏偏衹宠爱实姬一人，生下女儿刘嫖。
English: When it came to the dynastic state, however, the dynastic king favoured the favoured one, Diao Ai Shi Ji, and she gave birth to a daughter, Liu Yao.

古文：孝惠七年，生景帝。
现代文：孝惠帝七年时，又生了景帝。
English: When Emperor Xiao Hui was seven years old, Emperor Jing was born.

古文：代王王后生四男，先代王未入立为帝而王后卒，乃代王为帝后，王后所生四男更病死。
现代文：代王原来的王后生了四个儿子，代王还没有做皇帝，她就已经去世了，等到代王当了皇帝之后，王后所生的四个儿子相继病死。
English: The acting king's original queen gave birth to four sons, and she died before the acting king became emperor. After the acting king became emperor, the four sons born to the queen died of illness one after another.

古文：文帝立数月，公卿请立太子，而窦姬男最长，立为太子。
现代文：文帝即位几个月后，大臣们请求册立太子，而窦姬的儿子年纪最大，就被立作太子。
English: A few months after Emperor Wen ascended the throne, the ministers requested that a crown prince be appointed, and Dou Ji's son, the oldest, was appointed crown prince.

古文：窦姬为皇后，女为馆陶长公主。
现代文：窦姬被册立为皇后，女儿封为馆陶长公主。
English: Dou Ji was enthroned as empress, and her daughter was given the title of the first princess of the Museum of Ceramics.

古文：明年，封少子武为代王，后徙梁，是为梁孝王。
现代文：第二年，又封宝姬的小儿子刘武为代王，后来改为梁王，也就是梁孝王。
English: The following year, Baoji's youngest son, Liu Wu, was appointed acting king, and later changed to Liang Wang, that is, Liang Xiaowang.

古文：窦皇后亲蚤卒，葬观津。
现代文：窦皇后的父母早已去世，埋葬在观津。
English: The parents of Empress Dou died long ago and are buried in Guanzhong.

古文：于是薄太后乃诏有司追封窦后父为安成侯，母曰安成夫人，令清河置园邑二百家，长丞奉守，比灵文园法。
现代文：因此薄太后就下韶给有关主管部门，追封窦皇后的父亲为安成侯，母亲为安成夫人，命令清河郡设置陵园，安排长丞率领二百户人家奉守，规格、仪式与薄太后父亲的灵文园一样。
English: For this reason, Empress Dowager Bo issued an edict to the relevant competent departments, to seal Empress Dowager Dou's father as Prince Ancheng and her mother as Lady Ancheng, to order Qinghe County to set up a cemetery, and to arrange for Chojo to lead 200 households to observe it, with the same specifications and ceremony as Empress Dowager Bo's father's Lingwen Garden.

古文：窦后兄长君。
现代文：窦皇后的哥哥叫窦长君。
English: Queen Dou's brother is called Dou Changjun.

古文：弟广国字少君，年四五岁时，家贫，为人所略卖，其家不知处。
现代文：弟弟窦广国字少君，四、五岁的时候，因为家境贫穷，被别人劫掠出卖，家裹人也不知道他的去向。
English: His younger brother Dou Guang Guo Zi Shao Jun, when he was four or five years old, was robbed and sold by others because his family was poor. Even his family did not know where he was going.

古文：传十余家至宜阳，为其主人入山作炭。
现代文：他被辗转卖了十几家，最后被卖到宜阳，为他的主人进山烧炭。
English: He was poached and resold to more than a dozen families, and was finally sold to Yiyang, where he went into the mountains to burn coal for his master.

古文：暮卧岸下百余人，岸崩，尽压杀卧者，少君独脱不死。
现代文：一天黄昏时，一百多个人在山崖边睡觉，山崖忽然崩塌，睡在崖边的人都被压死了，衹有少君未死。
English: At dusk one day, more than a hundred people were sleeping on the edge of the cliff. The cliff suddenly collapsed, crushing all those sleeping on the edge to death. Only Shao Jun did not die.

古文：自卜，数日当为侯。
现代文：他替自己占卜，卦象显示几天后他可以成为列侯。
English: He divined for himself, and the horoscope showed that in a few days he could become a vassal.

古文：从其家之长安，闻皇后新立，家在观津，姓窦氏。
现代文：他跟随主人到了长安，听说新近册封的皇后原籍观津，姓宝。
English: He followed his master to Chang'an, where he heard that the newly crowned empress was originally from Guanzhong, and her surname was Bao.

古文：广国去时虽少，识其县名及姓，又尝与其姊采桑，堕，用为符信，上书自陈。
现代文：广国离开家的时候虽然年幼，却还记得自己的籍贯和姓氏，又记得曾经和姐姐一起去采桑叶，从树上掉了下来，他就把这些事作为凭证，上书自己讲述身世。
English: Although Guangguo was young when he left home, he still remembered his hometown and surname. He also remembered that he once went to pick mulberry leaves with his sister and fell from a tree. He took these things as evidence and wrote a letter to tell his life story.

古文：皇后言帝，召见问之，具言其故。果是。
现代文：窦皇后把这些事对文帝说了，又把广国召来询问，他详细地述说了事情的来龙去脉，果然都是真的。
English: Empress Dou said these things to Emperor Wen, and summoned Guangguo to inquire. He described in detail the ins and outs of the matter, and they were all true.

古文：复问其所识，曰： 姊去我西时，与我决传舍中，匄沐沐我，已，饭我，乃去。 
现代文：又问起他还记得的一些往事，他说： 姐姐离开我西去的时候，和我在驿站中相别，讨来米汁为我洗头，然后又给我吃了饭，方才离去。 
English: When asked about some of the things he still remembers, he said, "When my sister left me to go west, she parted from me at the station, got some rice juice to wash my hair, and then gave me some rice to eat before leaving.

古文：于是窦皇后持之而泣，侍御左右皆悲。
现代文：于是窦皇后拉着他的手大哭起来，左右的侍者也都跟着悲伤。
English: So Empress Dou took him by the hand and burst into tears, and the waiters on both sides were also sad.

古文：乃厚赐之，家于长安。
现代文：就重重地赏赐了广国，让他居住在长安。
English: He was rewarded with vast lands and allowed to live in Chang'an.

古文：绛侯、灌将军等曰： 吾属不死，命乃且县此两人。
现代文：绛侯周勃、将军灌婴等人说： 我们这些人如果不死，性命就将掌握在这两个人手裹了。
English: Zhou Bo, Gen. Guan Yu and others said, "We cannot die, but our lives are in the hands of the two Dou brothers."

古文：此两人所出微，不可不为择师傅，又复放吕氏大事也。 
现代文：他们出身低微，不能不为他们选择一位良师，免得又重新仿效吕氏家族的旧事。 
English: They are from a lowly background, and they cannot but choose a good teacher for them, lest they have to imitate the old story of the Lv family again.

古文：于是乃选长者之有节行者与居。
现代文：因此就挑选了有德行的长者和他们一同居住。
English: Therefore, virtuous elders were selected to live with them.

古文：窦长君、少君由此为退让君子，不敢以富贵骄人。
现代文：窦长君、窦少君从此成为谦让有礼的君子，不敢凭着自己地位显贵而盛气凌人。
English: Since then, Dou Changjun and Dou Shaojun have become modest and courteous gentlemen, not daring to be pompous and domineering by virtue of their status.

古文：窦皇后疾，失明。
现代文：窦皇后后来生了病，双目失明。
English: Empress Dou later fell ill and lost her sight.

古文：文帝幸邯郸慎夫人、尹姬，皆无子。
现代文：文帝又宠爱邯郸慎夫人和尹姬，但都没有儿子。
English: Emperor Wen also favored Lady Pu Sheng and Yin Ji, but neither of them had a son.

古文：文帝崩，景帝位，皇后为皇太后，乃封广国为章武侯。
现代文：文帝去世，景帝即位后，宝皇后做了皇太后，就封窦广国为章武侯。
English: After Emperor Wen died and Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, Empress Bao became the empress dowager and made Guangguo the prince of Zhangwu.

古文：长君先死，封其子彭祖为南皮侯。
现代文：窦长君死得早，封他的儿子窦彭祖为南皮侯。
English: Dou Changjun died early, and his son Dou Pengzu was named Nanpi Hou.

古文：吴、楚反时，太后从昆弟子窦婴侠，喜士，为大将军，破吴、楚、封魏其侯。
现代文：吴、楚等七国谋反时，太后的堂侄窦婴侠义勇武，喜欢结交士人，被任命为大将军，平灭吴、楚叛乱后，又封他为魏其侯。
English: When Wu, Chu and other Seven Kingdoms plotted a rebellion, the empress dowager's nephew Dou Ying, who was a valiant warrior and liked to make friends with warriors, was appointed general. After quelling the rebellion of Wu and Chu, he was also named Wei Ji Hou.

古文：窦氏侯者凡三人。
现代文：窦氏家族中封侯的一共有三个人。
English: There are a total of three people in the Dou family who have been knighted.

古文：窦太后好黄帝、老子言，景帝及诸窦不得不读《老子》尊其术。
现代文：窦太后喜欢黄帝、老子的学说，景帝和窦氏家族的人不得不读《老子》，推崇黄老之术。
English: Empress Dowager Dou liked the teachings of Huangdi and Lao Zi, and Emperor Jing and the Dou family had to read "Lao Zi" and admired Huanglao's art.

古文：太后后景帝六岁，凡立四十五年，建元六年崩，合葬霸陵。
现代文：窦太后在景帝去世后六年，就是她被立为皇后的五十一年之后，即元光六年去世，与文帝合葬在霸陵。
English: Empress Dowager Dou died six years after the death of Emperor Jing, that is, fifty-one years after she was established as empress, that is, six years after the death of Emperor Yuan, and was buried with Emperor Wen in the Mausoleum.

古文：遗诏尽以东宫金钱财物赐长公主嫖。
现代文：根据其遣韶将束宫的金银财物全部赏赐给长公主刘嫖。
English: He left an imperial edict to give all the money and property of the East Palace to the eldest princess Liu Ye.

古文：至武帝时，魏其侯窦婴为丞相，后诛。
现代文：在汉武帝的时候，魏其侯窦婴做了丞相，后来被杀。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, Wei Qihou Dou Yu served as chancellor and was later killed.

古文：孝景薄皇后，孝文薄太后家女也。
现代文：孝景帝薄皇后，是孝文帝薄太后家族之女。
English: Empress Bo of Emperor Xiaojing was the daughter of Empress Dowager Bo of Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：景帝为太子时，薄太后取以为太子妃。
现代文：景帝做太子的时候，薄太后替他娶了薄氏为太子妃。
English: When Emperor Jing was crown prince, Empress Dowager Bo married Prince Bo on his behalf.

古文：景帝立，立薄妃为皇后，无子无宠。
现代文：景帝即位后，册封薄妃为皇后，薄皇后没有儿子，也不得景帝宠爱。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Jing, Empress Bo was crowned as empress. Empress Bo did not have a son and was not favored by Emperor Jing.

古文：立六年，薄太后崩，皇后废。
现代文：薄氏做了六年皇后，薄太后去世后，她就被废掉了。
English: Bo served as empress for six years. After the death of the Dowager Empress Bo, she was abolished.

古文：废后四年薨，葬长安城东平望亭南。
现代文：薄皇后被废第四年去世，埋葬在长安城束平望亭的南面。
English: Empress Bo died in the fourth year of her dethronement and was buried in the southern part of the Sokuping Pavilion in Chang'an City.

古文：孝景王皇后，武帝母也。
现代文：孝景帝王皇后，是武帝的母亲。
English: Empress of Emperor Xiaoqing, the mother of Emperor Wu.

古文：父王仲，槐里人也。
现代文：王皇后的父亲叫王仲，是槐里人。
English: Queen Wang's father is Wang Zhong, a Balinese.

古文：母臧皃，故燕王臧荼孙也，为仲妻，生男信与两女。
现代文：母亲叫臧儿，是原先燕王臧荼的孙女，嫁给王仲为妻，生下儿子王信和两个女儿。
English: His mother's name was Yan Er. She was originally the granddaughter of Yan Wang Yao. She married Wang Zhong and gave birth to a son, Wang Xin, and two daughters.

古文：而仲死，臧皃更嫁为长陵田氏妇，生男蚡、胜。
现代文：王仲死了以后，臧儿又改嫁到长陵田家做媳妇，生了儿子田盼、田胜。
English: After Wang Zhong died, Yao Er remarried to the Chorying Tian family as a daughter-in-law, and gave birth to sons Tian Pan and Tian Sheng.

古文：臧皃长女嫁为金王孙妇，生一女矣，而臧皃卜筮曰两女当贵，欲倚两女，夺金氏。
现代文：臧儿的大女儿嫁给金王孙为妻，已经生了一个女儿，但是臧儿卜卦，发现两个女儿都是富贵之命，希望依靠两个女儿得到尊宠，就让女儿和金家离婚。
English: Ya'er's eldest daughter married Jin Wangsun and had given birth to a daughter, but Ya'er speculated and found that both daughters were rich. Hoping to rely on the two daughters to gain favor, he divorced his daughter from the Jin family.

古文：金氏怒，不肯与决，乃内太子宫。
现代文：金家大怒，不肯善罢甘休，臧儿就把女儿送进太子宫中。
English: The Jin family was furious and would not give up, so she sent her daughter into the prince's womb.

古文：太子幸爱子，生三女一男。
现代文：太子十分宠爱王氏，她生了三个女儿、一个儿子。
English: The prince was very fond of Wang, and she gave birth to three daughters and a son.

古文：男方在身时，王夫人梦日入其怀，以告太子，太子曰： 此贵征也。 
现代文：王夫人怀着儿子的时候，梦到一轮太阳扑入腹中，就把这件事告诉给太子，太子说： 这是贵显的征兆。 
English: When Mrs. Wang was pregnant with her son, she dreamt of a sun bursting into her belly, and told the prince about it. The prince said, "This is a sign of a precious baby."

古文：未生而文帝崩，景帝即位，王夫人生男。
现代文：孩子还没有出世，文帝去世，景帝即位后，王夫人生下一个儿子。
English: The child had not yet been born, Emperor Wen died, and after Emperor Jing ascended the throne, Mrs. Wang gave birth to a son.

古文：是时，薄皇后无子。
现代文：这时候，薄皇后没有生子。
English: At this time, Queen Bo did not have any children.

古文：后数岁，景帝立齐栗姬男为太子，而王夫人男为胶东王。
现代文：又过了几年，景帝册立齐栗姬的儿子为太子，封王夫人的儿子为胶束王。
English: A few years later, Emperor Jing made Qi Rongji's son the crown prince, and the son of Lady Feng Wang the Prince of Micellar Beads.

古文：长公主嫖有女，欲与太子为妃，栗姬妒，而景帝诸美人皆因长公主见得贵幸，栗姬日怨怒，谢长主，不许。
现代文：长公主刘嫖有个女儿，打算嫁给太子做妃子，可是栗姬生性好妒，而景帝后宫裹的那些美人常常靠长公主出力得到景帝宠幸，栗姬越发对长公主怨恨，就拒绝了长公主，没有答应。
English: The eldest princess, Liu Ye, had a daughter who planned to marry the prince to become his concubine, but Li Qiye was born with a jealous nature, and those beauties wrapped in the Emperor Jing's harem often relied on the eldest princess's output to become the Emperor Jing's favorite. As Li Qiye became more and more resentful of the eldest princess, she rejected the eldest princess and did not agree.

古文：长主欲与王夫人，王夫人许之。
现代文：长公主又想把女儿嫁给王夫人的儿子，王夫人同意了。
English: The eldest princess also wanted to marry her daughter to Mrs. Wang's son, and Mrs. Wang agreed.

古文：会薄皇后废，长公主日谮栗姬短。
现代文：正好这时薄皇后被废，长公主天天在景帝面前讲栗姬的坏话。
English: Just at this time, Queen Bo was dethroned, and the eldest princess spoke ill of Kurihime in front of Emperor Jing every day.

古文：景帝尝属诸姬子，曰： 吾百岁后，善视之。 
现代文：景帝曾经向栗姬托付各位夫人生的那些皇子，说： 我死了以后，你可要好好照顾他们。 
English: Emperor Jing once entrusted the princes in the lives of the ladies to Kurihime, saying, "After I die, you must take good care of them."

古文：栗姬怒不肯应，言不逊，景帝心衔之而未发也。
现代文：栗姬非常恼火，不肯答应，且出言不逊，景帝心裹十分不满，衹是没有发作出来。
English: Kurihisa was very angry, refused to agree, and said some harsh words. Emperor Jing was very dissatisfied, but did not have a tantrum.

古文：长公主日誉王夫子男之美，帝亦自贤之。
现代文：长公主天天称赞王夫人的儿子的好处，景帝自己也认为这个孩子有才能。
English: The eldest princess praised the benefits of Mrs. Wang's son every day, and Emperor Jing himself also thought that this child had talent.

古文：又耳曩者所梦日符，计未有所定。
现代文：再加上先前听到的这个孩子乃梦曰而生的祥瑞之事，景帝心中思来想去，没有拿定主意。
English: Coupled with the fact that he had previously heard that this child was born from a dream, Jingdi thought about it and did not make up his mind.

古文：王夫人又阴使人趣大臣立栗姬为皇后。
现代文：王夫人又暗地裹派人催促大臣们提议册封栗姬为皇后。
English: Mrs. Wang also secretly sent someone to urge the ministers to propose that Kurihime be crowned as empress.

古文：大行奏事，文曰：  子以母贵，母以子贵。 今太子母号宜为皇后。 
现代文：大行上书奏事，有一句话写道：  子以母贵，母以子贵，现在太子母亲的称号应当是皇后。 
English: In the official record of the event, there is a sentence that reads: "Children are precious to their mothers, and mothers are precious to their children. Now, the title of the mother of the prince should be empress."

古文：帝怒曰： 是乃所当言邪！ 
现代文：景帝大怒，说： 这件事是你应当说的吗！ 
English: Emperor Jing flew into a rage and said, "You should have said something about this!

古文：遂案诛大行，而废太子为临江王。
现代文：就下韶杀掉大行，又废了太子，改封为临江王。
English: As a result, Daigokan was actually executed for his crime, and the crown prince was abolished and his title changed to King of Linjiang.

古文：栗姬愈恚，不得见，以忧死。
现代文：栗姬更加恼怒，又不能被皇帝召见，因此忧惧而死。
English: Kurihime was even more angry that she couldn't be summoned by the emperor, so she died of fright.

古文：卒立王夫人为皇后，男为太子。
现代文：终于册立王夫人为皇后，王夫人的儿子做了太子。
English: Mrs. Wang was finally crowned empress, and Mrs. Wang's son became the crown prince.

古文：封皇后兄信为盖侯。
现代文：又封王皇后的哥哥王信为盖侯。
English: He also made Wang Xin, the queen's brother, a vassal lord.

古文：初，皇后始入太子家，后女弟皃姁亦复入，生四男。
现代文：当初，皇后刚刚进太子宫中，后来她的妹妹儿拘也被送了进来，生下四个儿子。
English: At first, the empress had just entered the prince's womb. Later, her younger sister, Negu, was also sent in and gave birth to four sons.

古文：皃姁蚤卒，四子皆为王。
现代文：儿拘死得很早，四个儿子都封了王。
English: He died very early, and his four sons all became kings.

古文：皇后长女为平阳公主，次南宫公主，次隆虑公主。
现代文：皇后的大女儿封为平阳公主，二女儿封为南宫公主，三女儿封为隆虑公主。
English: The eldest daughter of the empress was named Princess Pingyang, the second daughter was named Princess Nangong, and the third daughter was named Princess Longxian.

古文：皇后立九年，景帝崩。
现代文：王皇后册立为后的第九年，景帝去世。
English: In the ninth year after the enthronement of King and Queen, Emperor Jing died.

古文：武帝即位，为皇太后，尊太后母臧皃为平原君，封田蚡为武安侯，胜为周阳侯。
现代文：武帝即位，王皇后为皇太后，就尊封母亲臧儿为平原君，封田盼为武安侯，封田胜为周阳侯。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, Empress Wang became the empress dowager, and the mother of Emperor Wu, Empress Dowager Wang's daughter, was given the title of Plain Princess, Empress Dowager Tian Ran became Empress Dowager Wu, and Empress Dowager Tian Sheng became Empress Dowager Zhou.

古文：王氏、田氏侯者凡三人。
现代文：王氏、田氏家族封侯者有三个人。
English: There are three people from the Wang and Tian families who are vassals.

古文：盖侯信好酒，田蚡、胜贪，巧于文辞。
现代文：盖侯王信喜欢喝酒，田蚜、田胜贪婪，善于词令。
English: Gai Hou Wangxin likes to drink, Tian Yao and Tian Sheng are greedy and good at writing lyrics.

古文：蚡至丞相，追尊王仲为共侯，槐里起园邑二百家，长丞奉守。
现代文：田朌的官一直做到丞相，又追尊王仲为共侯，在槐里设置陵园和二百户人家，设园长和园丞守卫祭扫。
English: The officials of Tianye have always achieved the position of chancellor, and they have also pursued the revered Wang Zhong as a common lord, set up a cemetery and two hundred households in Yili, and set up a garden director and garden chancellor to guard and sweep the festival.

古文：及平原君薨，从田氏葬长陵，亦置园邑如共侯法。
现代文：等到平原君去世后，与田氏合葬在长陵，也设置了园邑，规格、仪式都与共侯相同。
English: After the death of Hirahara-kun, he was buried together with the Tian clan in the Choson Mausoleum, and a garden village was also set up, with the same specifications and ceremonies as the common village.

古文：初，皇太后微时所为金王孙生女俗，在民间，盖讳之也。
现代文：当初，皇太后微贱时给金王孙生的女儿名叫俗，因为在民间，不希望被人知道。
English: At first, when the empress dowager was still a commoner, she gave the daughter of King Sun Sang a common name, because she did not want people to know.

古文：武这始立，韩嫣白之。
现代文：武帝刚刚即位时，韩嫣告诉他逭件事。
English: When Emperor Wu had just ascended to the throne, Han Zheng told him a story.

古文：帝曰： 何为不蚤言？ 
现代文：武帝说： 为什么不早告诉我？ 
English: Emperor Wu said: Why didn't you tell me earlier?

古文：乃车驾自往迎之。
现代文：于是亲自前往迎接。
English: So he went to meet them in person.

古文：其家在长陵小市，直至其门，使左右入求之。
现代文：其家住在长陵的一个小集市裹，武帝他们径直到了她家门口，派手下人进去请金氏。
English: Her family lived in a small market in Changling. Emperor Wu went straight to her door and sent his men to invite Kim.

古文：家人惊恐，女逃匿。
现代文：其家人惊惶失措，金氏吓得躲了起来。
English: His family panicked and Kim hid in fear.

古文：扶将出拜，帝下车立曰： 大姊，何藏之深也？ 
现代文：手下人搀扶着她出来参拜皇上，武帝一下车就说： 大姐，为什么藏得那么深？ 
English: His subordinates helped her to come out to visit the emperor, and Emperor Wu said as soon as he got out of the car: "Big sister, why are you hiding so deeply?

古文：载至长乐宫，与俱谒太后，太后垂涕，女亦悲泣。
现代文：遂上车到长乐宫，一起拜见太后，太后流下了眼泪，金氏也悲伤地哭了。
English: Finally, they got on the bus to Changle Palace and visited the empress dowager together. The empress dowager shed tears, and Kim Jong Il also cried with sadness.

古文：帝奉酒，前为寿。
现代文：武帝举起一杯酒，上前敬祝她们长寿。
English: Emperor Wu raised a glass of wine and came forward to wish them a long life.

古文：钱千万，奴婢三百人，公田百顷，甲第，以赐姊。
现代文：武帝将一千万贯钱、三百名奴婢、一百顷公田、豪华的宅第赏赐给姐姐。
English: Emperor Wu rewarded her sister with ten million crowns, three hundred slaves, one hundred hectares of public land, and a luxurious mansion.

古文：太后谢曰： 为帝费。 
现代文：太后道谢说： 让皇上破费了。 
English: The empress dowager thanked him and said, "You have cost the emperor a lot of money."

古文：因赐汤沐邑，号修成君。
现代文：又赐给她汤沐邑，封为修成君。
English: He also gave her Tang Muyi and named her Xiu Chengjun.

古文：男女各一人，女嫁诸侯，男号修成子仲，以太后故，横于京师。
现代文：修成君有儿女各一人，女儿嫁给诸侯，儿子称为修成子仲，倚仗太后的权势，在京城裹横行霸道。
English: Xiu Chengjun had one son and one daughter each. His daughter married a prince, and his son was called Xiu Chengzichang. He relied on the empress dowager's power, and was domineering in Beijing.

古文：太后凡立二十五年，后景帝十五岁，元朔三年崩，合葬阳陵。
现代文：太后在位一共二十五年，景帝去世后十五年，也就是元朔三年，太后逝世，与景帝合葬在阳陵。
English: The empress dowager reigned for a total of twenty-five years. Fifteen years after the death of Emperor Jing, that is, the third year of the Yuan Shao, the empress dowager died and was buried with Emperor Jing in Yangling.

古文：孝武陈皇后，长公主嫖女也。
现代文：孝武帝陈皇后，是长公主刘嫖的女儿。
English: Empress Chen of Emperor Xiaowu is the daughter of the eldest princess Liu Ye.

古文：曾祖父陈婴与项羽俱起，后归汉，为堂邑侯。
现代文：她的曾祖父陈婴和项羽一同起兵，后来归降汉王，封为堂邑侯。
English: Her great-grandfather Chen Yu and Xiang Yu raised an army together, and later surrendered to the Han king and was given the title of dowager.

古文：传子至孙午，午尚长公主，生女。
现代文：爵位传给儿子，又传给孙子陈午，陈午娶长公主，生了一个女儿。
English: The title was passed on to his son, and then to his grandson Chen Wu. Chen Wu married the eldest princess and had a daughter.

古文：初，武帝得立为太子，长主有力，取主女为妃。
现代文：当初，武帝能够被立为太子，长公主出力很多，就娶了长公主的女儿为妃子。
English: At first, Emperor Wu could only be made crown prince if the eldest princess contributed a lot, so he married the eldest princess's daughter as his concubine.

古文：及帝即位，立为皇后，擅宠骄贵，十余年而无子，闻卫子夫得幸，几死者数焉。
现代文：武帝即位以后，陈氏被册立为皇后，特受宠爱，骄傲专横，十几年都没有生育，听说卫子夫得到皇帝宠幸，就屡次加害于她。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended the throne, the Chen clan was enthroned as empress. She was especially beloved, proud and domineering, and had not given birth for more than ten years. When she heard that her son-in-law was favored by the emperor, he repeatedly harmed her.

古文：上愈怒。
现代文：武帝更加愤怒了。
English: The Emperor also became more angry.

古文：后又挟妇人媚道，颇觉。
现代文：陈皇后又使用妇人那种取悦于人之术企图博取皇上的欢心，事情逐渐败露。
English: Empress Chen also tried to win the emperor's favor by using the woman's art of pleasing people, but the affair gradually came to light.

古文：元光五年，上遂穷治之，女子楚服等坐为皇后巫蛊祠祭祝诅，大逆无道，相连及诛者三百余人，楚服枭首于市。
现代文：元光五年，武帝就追究惩治造件事，女子楚服等人因为替皇后用邪术加祸于人而获罪，罪大恶极，牵连被杀的有三百多人。楚服被砍头示众。
English: In the fifth year of Yuan Guang, Emperor Wu investigated and punished the matter, and the woman Chu Fu and others were found guilty of using magic to harm people on behalf of the queen. The crime was extremely evil, and more than three hundred people were implicated and killed. Chu Fu was beheaded to show the public.

古文：使有司赐皇后策曰： 皇后失序，惑于巫祝，不可以承天命。
现代文：皇帝派官吏赏赐皇后一道文书，说： 皇后不守礼法，祈祷鬼神，降祸于他人，无法承受天命。
English: The emperor sent officials to reward the empress with a document, saying: The empress does not observe the etiquette, prays to ghosts and gods, brings misfortune to others, and cannot bear the fate of heaven.

古文：其上玺绶，罢退居长门宫。 
现代文：应当交回皇后的玺绶，离开皇后之位，退居长门宫。 
English: She should return the Empress Dowager's scepter, leave the position of empress, and retire to Nagato Palace.

古文：明年，堂邑侯午薨，主男须嗣侯。
现代文：第二年，堂邑侯陈午去世，公主的儿子陈须继承侯位。
English: The following year, the lord of the manor, Chen Wu, died, and the princess's son, Chen Su, succeeded to the manor.

古文：主寡居，私近董偃。
现代文：公主在家中守寡，暗中与董偃私通。
English: The princess was a widow at home and secretly had an affair with Dong Xuan.

古文：十余年，主薨。
现代文：十几年后，公主去世。
English: Ten years later, the princess died.

古文：须坐淫乱，兄弟争财，当死，自杀，国除。
现代文：陈须因为淫乱及与兄弟们争夺财物而获罪，应当判处死刑，陈须自杀，国号也被废除了。
English: Chen Su was found guilty of fornication and competing with his brothers for property, and should be sentenced to death. Chen Su committed suicide, and his country name was abolished.

古文：后数年，废后乃薨，葬霸陵郎官亭东。
现代文：又过了几年，被废的陈皇后也死去了，埋葬在霸陵郎官亭的束面。
English: A few years later, the deposed Empress Chen also died and was buried in Sokumen, the palace of the tyrant.

古文：孝武卫皇后字子夫，生微也。
现代文：孝武帝卫皇后，字子夫，出身低贱。
English: Empress Xiaowu of Emperor Wei, a concubine, came from a humble background.

古文：其家号曰卫氏，出平阳侯邑。
现代文：她家姓卫氏，出白平阳侯的封邑。
English: Her family name, Wei, comes from the fiefdom of Bai Pingyang.

古文：子夫为平阳主讴者，武帝即位，数年无子。
现代文：子夫是乎阳公主的歌女。武帝即位后，许多年没有儿子。
English: His son-in-law was a singer of Princess Khuyang. Emperor Wu did not have a son for many years after he ascended the throne.

古文：平阳主求良家女十余人，饰置家。
现代文：平阳公主挑选了十几个良家女子，打扮起来留在家裹。
English: Princess Pingyang selected more than a dozen girls from good families to dress up and stay at home.

古文：帝祓霸上，还过平阳主。
现代文：武帝到了霸上祈福除灾，回来时顺便拜望平阳公主。
English: When Emperor Wu arrived at the top of the mountain, he prayed for good fortune and disaster relief. When he returned, he paid a visit to Princess Pingyang.

古文：主见所偫美人，帝不说。
现代文：公主叫出挑选出来的美人，武帝却都不喜欢。
English: The princess called out the selected beauties, but Emperor Wu did not like any of them.

古文：既饮，讴者进，帝独说子夫。
现代文：喝酒时，歌女进来了，武帝偏偏看中了子夫。
English: While drinking, the singer came in, and Emperor Wu took a fancy to her.

古文：帝起更衣，子夫侍尚衣轩中，得幸。
现代文：武帝起身去换衣服，子夫在更衣车中侍奉，就得到武帝御幸。
English: Emperor Wu got up to change his clothes, and his son-in-law served in the dressing car, and received Emperor Wu's blessing.

古文：还坐欢甚，赐平阳主金千斤。
现代文：武帝回来坐下，非常高兴，赏赐平阳公主金一千斤。
English: Emperor Wu came back and sat down. He was very happy and rewarded Princess Pingyang with one thousand jin of gold.

古文：主因奏子夫送入宫。
现代文：公主就奏请将子夫送进宫去。
English: The princess begged the queen to send her son-in-law to the palace.

古文：子夫上车，主拊其背曰： 行矣！
现代文：子夫上车时，公主抚摸着她的背说： 去吧！
English: When her husband got on the bus, the princess stroked her back and said, "Go!"

古文：强饭勉之。
现代文：好好活下去。
English: Live life to the full.

古文：即贵，愿无相忘！ 
现代文：要是富贵了，希望不会忘了我。 
English: If I get rich, I hope they won't forget me.

古文：入宫岁余，不复幸。
现代文：卫子夫人宫一年多，再没有得到皇上临幸。
English: For more than a year, the palace of the Lady of the Guard did not receive the Emperor's blessing.

古文：武帝择宫人不中用者斥出之，子夫得见，涕泣请出。
现代文：武帝挑选宫中用不着的宫女赶出宫去，子夫得以见到武帝，哭着请求让自己离开皇宫。
English: Emperor Wu selected the palace maids who were not needed in the palace and drove them out of the palace. The son-in-law was able to see Emperor Wu, crying and begging him to leave the palace.

古文：上怜之，复幸。遂有身，尊宠。
现代文：武帝对她很是怜爱，再次临幸，子夫就有了身孕，深得武帝宠爱。
English: Emperor Wu was very sympathetic to her, and once again, fortunately, her husband became pregnant and was deeply loved by Emperor Wu.

古文：召其兄卫长君、弟青侍中。
现代文：武帝召子夫的哥哥卫长君、弟弟卫青作了侍中。
English: Emperor Wu summoned his son-in-law's elder brother Wei Changjun and younger brother Wei Qing to serve as attendants.

古文：而子夫生三女，元朔元年生男据，遂立为皇后。
现代文：子夫生了三个女儿，元朔元年生了儿子刘据，就被册立为皇后。
English: Zifu gave birth to three daughters, and Yuan Shuo gave birth to a son, Liu Xuan, in the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, and was crowned as empress.

古文：先是，卫长君死，乃以青为将军，击匈奴有功，封长平侯。
现代文：卫长君死后，就让卫青做了将军，征伐匈奴立下大功，封为长平侯。
English: After the death of Wei Changjun, he made Wei Qing a general, made a great contribution to the conquest of the Xiongnu, and was awarded the title of Changping.

古文：青三子在襁褓中，皆为列侯。
现代文：卫青有三个儿子都是尚在襁褓之中就已封为列侯。
English: Wei Qing had three sons, all of whom were made princes while they were still in their teens.

古文：及皇后姊子霍去病亦以军功为冠军侯，至大司马票骑将军。
现代文：卫皇后姐姐的儿子霍去病也以军功封为冠军侯，官至大司马骠骑将军。
English: The son of Empress Wei's sister, Huo Jia, was also awarded the title of champion for his military exploits, and rose to the rank of grand secretary and general for horseback riding.

古文：青为大司马大将军。
现代文：卫青是大司马大将军。
English: Wei Qing is the general of the Great Horse Division.

古文：卫氏支属侯者五人。
现代文：卫氏亲属中有五人被封为侯。
English: Five of Mori's relatives were given the title of marquess.

古文：青还，尚平阳主。
现代文：卫青出征归来，娶平阳公主为妻。
English: Wei Qing returned from the expedition and married Princess Pingyang.

古文：皇后立七年，而男立为太子。
现代文：卫皇后册立为后第七年，儿子被立为太子。
English: Seven years after the enthronement of Empress Wei, her son was enthroned as crown prince.

古文：后色衰，赵之王夫人、中山李夫人有宠，皆蚤卒。
现代文：后来皇后容貌衰老，赵的王夫人、中山李夫人得到武帝宠爱，都死得很早。
English: Later, the empress's appearance aged, and Zhao's wife Wang and Zhongshan's wife Li were favored by Emperor Wu and both died early.

古文：后有尹婕妤、钩弋夫人更幸。
现代文：后来又有尹健伃、钩弋夫人相继受到武帝宠幸。
English: Later, Yin Jianqian and Lady Huoqian were successively favored by Emperor Wu.

古文：卫后立三十八年，遭巫蛊事起，江充为奸，太子惧不能自明，遂与皇后共诛充，发兵，兵败，太子亡走。
现代文：卫皇后在位第三十八年，碰上巫蛊之祸，江充使用奸计，太子心中惧怕却又无法说明自己的清白，就和卫皇后一起杀掉了江充，起兵，结果打了败仗，太子逃走。
English: In the thirty-eighth year of Empress Wei's reign, when she encountered the evil of witchcraft and sorcery, Jiangchong used treachery. The prince was afraid in his heart but could not explain his innocence. Together with Empress Wei, he killed Jiangchong and raised an army. As a result, he lost the battle and the prince fled.

古文：诏遣宗正刘长乐、执金吾刘敢奉策收皇后玺绶，自杀。
现代文：武帝下诏派宗正刘长乐、执金吾刘敢拿着文书收回皇后的玺绶，卫皇后就自杀了。
English: Emperor Wu sent Zongzheng Liu Changle and the executor Jinwu Liu Dangang to take the document to withdraw the queen's sceptre. Empress Wei then committed suicide.

古文：黄门苏文、姚定汉舆置公车令空舍，盛以小棺，瘗之城南桐柏。
现代文：黄门苏文、姚定汉用车载上卫皇后的尸体放在公车令的空房裹，又装进一口小棺材，埋在城南的桐柏。
English: Huangmen Suwen and Yao Dinghan wrapped the body of the Empress Dowager on a bus and placed it in a small coffin and buried it in Tongbai, south of the city.

古文：卫氏悉灭。
现代文：卫氏家族全都被杀光了。
English: The entire Wei family was wiped out.

古文：宣帝立，乃改葬卫后，追谥曰思后，置园邑三百家，长丞周卫奉守焉。
现代文：宣帝即位以后，才改葬卫皇后，追赠谧号为思后，设置陵园及三百户人家，令园长和丞祭祀。
English: It was only after the enthronement of Emperor Xuan that the funeral of Empress Wei was changed, the posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthumous posthum

古文：孝武李夫人，本以倡进。
现代文：孝武帝李夫人，原本是作为歌伎进宫的。
English: Emperor Xiaowu's wife Li originally entered the palace as a kabuki actress.

古文：初，夫人兄延年性知音，善歌舞，武帝爱之。
现代文：起初，李夫人的哥哥李延年精通音律，擅长歌舞，武帝很喜欢他。
English: At the beginning, Mrs. Li's brother, Li Yannian, was good at singing and dancing, and Emperor Wu liked him very much.

古文：每为新声变曲，闻者莫不感动。
现代文：李延年每次作出新的乐曲，听到的人没有不受感动的。
English: Every time Li Yannian made a new piece of music, the people who heard it were moved.

古文：延年侍上起舞，歌曰： 北方有佳人，绝世而独立，一顾倾人城，再顾倾人国。
现代文：他为武帝跳舞，唱道： 北方有个美人，风华绝代，举世无双。回眸一笑，倾覆邦国。回眸再笑，倾覆国家。
English: He danced for Emperor Wu and sang: There is a beautiful woman in the north, with an unparalleled style, unparalleled in the world. Look back and smile, overthrow the state. Look back and smile again, overthrow the state.

古文：宁不知倾城与倾国，佳人难再得！ 
现代文：不是不爱惜城与国，衹是美人难以再得。 
English: It's not that I don't care about the city and the country, it's just that beauty is hard to come by.

古文：上叹息曰： 善！
现代文：皇上叹息说： 好！
English: The Emperor sighed and said: Good!

古文：世岂有此人乎？ 
现代文：世上难道真有这样的人吗？ 
English: Are there really such people in the world?

古文：平阳主因言延年有女弟，上乃召见之，实妙丽善舞。
现代文：平阳公主就说李延年有个妹妹，武帝就召见她，确实美貌善舞。
English: Princess Pingyang said that Li Yannian had a younger sister, and Emperor Wu summoned her. She was indeed beautiful and good at dancing.

古文：由是得幸，生一男，是为昌邑哀王。
现代文：因此得到武帝宠爱，生了一个儿子，也就是昌邑哀王。
English: As a result, she was favored by Emperor Wu and gave birth to a son, King Changyi.

古文：李夫人少而蚤卒，上怜闵焉，图画其形于甘泉宫。
现代文：李夫人年轻却早死，武帝非常惋惜，就画了她的肖像挂在甘泉宫。
English: Lady Li died young, but early. Emperor Wu was very sorry and had her portrait painted and hung in Ganquan Palace.

古文：及卫思后废后四年，武帝崩，大将军霍光缘上雅意，以李夫人配食，追上尊号曰孝武皇后。
现代文：卫思后被废四年之后，武帝去世，大将军霍光按照武帝的心意，让李夫人在宗庙配享，并追赠尊号为孝武皇后。
English: Four years after Emperor Wu died, General Huo Guang, in accordance with Emperor Wu's wishes, let Mrs. Li share in the ancestral temple, and posthumously gave her the honorary title of Empress Xiaowu.

古文：初，李夫人病笃，上自临候之，夫人蒙被谢曰： 妾久寝病，形貌毁坏，不可以见帝。
现代文：当初，李夫人病重，武帝亲自去看望她，夫人用被子蒙住脸说： 我卧病久，相貌丑陋，不能拜见皇上。
English: At first, Lady Li was seriously ill, and Emperor Wu went to visit her in person. The lady covered her face with a quilt and said, "I have been ill for a long time, my appearance is ugly, and I cannot visit the emperor."

古文：愿以王及兄弟为托。 
现代文：请皇上好好照顾我的儿子和兄弟。 武帝说： 夫人病得厉害，大概是要不行了。
English: Please ask the emperor to take good care of my son and brother.Wu Di said: My wife is very ill, and she is probably going to die.

古文：上曰： 夫人病甚，殆将不起，一见我属托王及兄弟，岂不快哉？ 夫人曰： 妇人貌不修饰，不见君父。
现代文：和我见上一面，嘱托儿子和兄弟的事情，难道不高兴吗？ 夫人说： 女子没有梳妆打扮，不能见君父。
English: Wasn't she happy to see me and tell me about her son and brother? My wife said, "A woman can't see her father if she's not dressed up."

古文：妾不敢以燕媠见帝。 
现代文：我不敢仪容不整地见皇上。 
English: I wouldn't dare to appear before the Emperor with a disheveled appearance.

古文：上曰： 夫人弟一见我，将加赐千金，而予兄弟尊言。 
现代文：武帝说： 夫人衹要和我见上一面，就赏赐给你千金，并且给你的兄弟加官晋爵。 
English: Emperor Wu said, "If Lady Zhen wants to see me, I will give you a thousand gold coins and give your brother a promotion to the highest rank."

古文：夫人曰： 尊官在帝，不在一见。 
现代文：夫人说： 加官晋爵是皇上决定的，不在于和我见上一面。 
English: His wife said, "His Majesty's grace is the reason why he was appointed to the post, and it has nothing to do with the meeting.

古文：上复言欲必见之，夫人遂转乡歔欷而不复言。
现代文：武帝又说一定要见她，夫人就转过脸去抽泣，不再说话。
English: Emperor Wu also said that he must see her, and his wife turned her face to sobbing and stopped talking.

古文：于是上不说而起。
现代文：于是武帝很不高兴地走了。
English: So Emperor Wu went away very unhappy.

古文：夫人姊妹让之曰： 贵人独不可一见上属托兄弟邪？
现代文：夫人的姐妹埋怨她说： 您难道就不能和皇上见上一面嘱托一下兄弟的事吗？
English: Madame's sisters complained to her: "Couldn't you have gone to see the Emperor and asked him to do something for your brother?

古文：何为恨上如此？ 
现代文：为什么对皇上如此怨恨？ 
English: Why should the Emperor hold a grudge?

古文：夫人曰： 所以不欲见帝者，乃欲以深托兄弟也。
现代文：夫人说： 我之所以不想见皇上，正是要藉此来嘱托兄弟的事。
English: His wife said, "The reason why I don't want to see the Emperor is precisely so that I can ask him about my brother.

古文：我以容貌之好，得从微贱爱幸于上。
现代文：我靠着美貌，能够从微贱之人得到皇上的宠幸。
English: By virtue of my beauty, I was able to win the favor of the emperor from a lowly person.

古文：夫以色事人者，色衰而爱弛，爱弛则恩绝。
现代文：凭藉容貌侍奉别人的人，容貌衰老情谊就浅了，情谊变浅恩惠也就断了。
English: Those who use their looks to serve others will grow old and their friendships will grow shallow. As their friendships grow shallow, their favors will be cut off.

古文：上所以挛挛顾念我者，乃以平生容貌也。
现代文：皇上之所以还深情地眷念着我，正是由于我原来的容貌。
English: The reason why the Emperor still thinks fondly of me is precisely because of my original appearance.

古文：今见我毁坏，颜色非故，必畏恶吐弃我，意尚肯复追思闵录其兄弟哉！ 
现代文：现在如果见到我容貌丑陋，一定会又害怕又厌烦，嫌弃于我，哪里还能再怀念怜悯我、优待我的兄弟呢！ 
English: If you saw me now, ugly as I am, you would be afraid, disgusted, and disgusted with me. How can you still remember me, pity me, and treat my brother well?

古文：及夫人卒，上以后礼葬焉。
现代文：夫人死后，武帝用皇后的礼节将她安葬。
English: After the death of his wife, Emperor Wu used the etiquette of the empress to bury her.

古文：其后，上以夫人兄李广利为贰师将军，封海西侯，延年为协律都尉。
现代文：然后，武帝封李夫人的哥哥李广利为贰师将军，海西侯，封李延年为协律都尉。
English: Then, Emperor Wu appointed Mrs. Li's brother, Li Guangli, as the general of the imperial army, and Haixi Hou, and appointed Li Yan as the captain of the imperial army.

古文：上思念李夫人不已，方士齐人少翁言能致其神。
现代文：武帝一直对李夫人念念不忘，方士齐人少翁说能招徕李夫人的魂魄。
English: Emperor Wu has always remembered Mrs. Li, and the Fang Shi Qi people said that he could attract Mrs. Li's soul.

古文：乃夜张灯烛，设帷帐，陈酒肉，而令上居他帐，遥望见好女如李夫人之貌，还幄坐而步。
现代文：就在夜裹点上灯烛，挂上帷帐，摆上酒肉，让武帝到别的帐篷裹去，武帝远远看到一个美女，正像李夫人的样子，在帐中坐下，又起身徐徐而行。
English: On the night of the wedding, they lit candles, hung the curtains, and set out the wine and meat, and asked Emperor Wu to go to another tent to wrap up. Emperor Wu saw a beautiful woman in the distance, just like Mrs. Li, sat down in the tent, and then got up and walked slowly.

古文：又不得就视，上愈益相思悲感，为作诗曰： 是邪，非邪？
现代文：可是不能走近去看，武帝就更加思念李夫人，心中感伤，为她作了一首诗说： 是不是你呢？
English: However, since he could not get close enough to see her, Emperor Wu missed Lady Li even more. He felt sad in his heart and composed a poem for her, saying: "Is it you?

古文：立而望之，偏何姗姗其来迟！ 
现代文：我站在那儿望着你，却为何偏偏走得如此从容缓慢！ 
English: I stood there looking at you, but why did I walk so slowly!

古文：令乐府诸音家弦歌之。
现代文：命令乐府的那些乐师配上曲子演唱。
English: He ordered the musicians at the music school to sing along with the music.

古文：上又自为作赋，以伤悼夫人，其辞曰：
现代文：武帝又自己写了一篇赋，用来悼念李夫人，是这样写的：
English: Emperor Wu also wrote a tribute of his own, which was used to mourn the death of Lady Li. It was written as follows:

古文：美连娟以修嫮兮，命樔绝而不长，饰新官以延贮兮，泯不归乎故乡。
现代文：你的姿容炽弱美好啊，可叹性命短暂不长久，装饰了新宫久久期待着你啊，你却消失了身影不再回归故乡。
English: Your appearance is fierce, weak, and beautiful. It is sad that life is short and does not last long. You have decorated the new palace and have been looking forward to you for a long time, but you have disappeared and will no longer return to your hometown.

古文：惨郁郁其芜秽兮，隐处幽而怀伤，释舆马于山椒兮，奄修夜之不阳。
现代文：荒草丛生一片凄凉景象啊，你身处幽暗之地令我神伤，把车马停在陵墓旁啊，长夜漫漫何时天明？
English: A desolate scene of overgrown weeds, you are in a dark place that makes me sad, park your car and horse next to the mausoleum, long night, when will it dawn?

古文：秋气憯以凄泪兮，桂枝落而销亡，神茕茕以遥思兮，精浮游而出畺。
现代文：秋气寒凉令我心中惨痛啊，那可人的桂枝玉陨香销，我的灵魂孤独地思恋着远方的你啊，精神脱离躯体四方漫游。
English: The cold autumn air makes my heart ache, the human cinnamon sticks and jade meteorites are fragrant, my soul is lonely and misses you in the distance, the spirit roams away from the body in all directions.

古文：托沈阴以圹久兮，惜蕃华之未央，念穷极之不还兮，惟幼眇之相羊。
现代文：长期寄情于地下的你啊，痛惜你花容如繁华早逝，天的尽头大概并不遥远啊，我想念你那翩翩徜徉的身姿。
English: You, who have been in the underground for a long time, I am sorry for your early death. The end of the world is probably not far away. I miss your graceful figure.

古文：函菱荴以俟风兮，芳杂袭以弥章，的容与以猗靡兮，缥飘姚虖愈庄。
现代文：花蕊绽放等待着春风啊，沁人的芬芳愈加浓郁，明亮的面容婉顺安详啊，飘摇于风中却更加端庄。
English: The flower buds are blooming and waiting for the spring breeze, the pungent fragrance is becoming more and more intense, the bright face is gentle and peaceful, but it is more dignified when it is swaying in the wind.

古文：燕淫衍而抚楹兮，连流视而娥扬，既激感而心逐兮，包红颜而弗明。
现代文：燕儿飞去飞来栖止于楹梁啊，你美目流盼娥眉轻扬。我如有所感心中追寻着你啊，你却将红颜深深地掩藏。
English: The swallows fly to and fro and perch on the beams of the eaves. Your beautiful eyes are radiant and your brow is light. If I were to pursue you with my heart, you would hide your beauty deep inside.

古文：欢接狎以离别兮，宵寤梦之芒芒，忽迁化而不反兮，魄放逸以飞扬。
现代文：相会欢愉亲热又终于分离啊，我深夜从梦中惊醒心下茫然，你忽然逝去再也不回转啊，魂魄放任无拘自在逍遥。
English: Meeting, joy, intimacy and finally separation, I wake up late at night from a dream, dazed, you suddenly pass away and never return, the soul is allowed to wander freely.

古文：何灵魂之纷纷兮，哀裴回以踌躇，势路日以远兮，遂荒忽而辞去。
现代文：思绪飘渺无定啊，你徘徊驻足我心哀戚，道路越来越远啊，恍惚中你飘然离去。
English: Your thoughts are drifting, you are wandering, my heart is sad, the road is getting farther and farther away, you are drifting away in a trance.

古文：超兮西征，屑兮不见。
现代文：如同红曰西坠，霎时不见了踪迹。
English: Just as the red sun sets in the west, when it sets, there is no trace of it.

古文：浸淫敞恍，寂兮无音，思若流波，怛兮在心。
现代文：一切渐渐朦胧起来，静悄悄地再也没有了声音，我对你的思念如流水不绝，心裹永远凄怆伤怀。
English: Everything gradually became hazy, quietly there was no more sound, I miss you like running water, my heart is forever sad.

古文：乱曰： 佳侠函光，陨朱荣兮，嫉妒阘茸，将安程兮！
现代文：结语说：佳丽光彩照人，却如鲜花般凋零；那些嫉妒卑贱之辈，如何能与你相匹敌！
English: The epilogue said: "Beauty shines brightly, but withers like flowers; how can those jealous lowlifes compete with you!

古文：方时隆盛，年夭伤兮，弟子增欷，洿沬怅兮。
现代文：正当鼎盛年华，却夭折而亡，兄弟小儿哭个不休，涕泪交流。
English: He was in the prime of his life, but died prematurely. His younger brother cried incessantly, exchanging tears with him.

古文：悲愁于邑，喧不可止兮。
现代文：悲愁郁结于中，哀声不绝于耳。
English: Sorrow is in the midst, and the sound of weeping is in the ears.

古文：向不虚应，亦云已兮，嫶妍太息，叹稚子兮，懰栗不言，倚所恃兮。
现代文：我们的哀痛你无法知晓，真令人无可奈何。可叹你忧伤瘦损，又哀怜年幼的小儿，你哀怆不语，心中定是有所希冀。
English: You can't know our sorrow, it's really unbearable. But I'm sorry you're sad and thin, and I'm sorry for your young child. You mourn without saying a word, but there must be some hope in your heart.

古文：仁者不誓，岂约亲兮？
现代文：仁者不必发誓，难道对待亲戚还要誓言。
English: Benevolent people don't need to swear, but they do need to swear when dealing with relatives.

古文：既往不来，申以信兮。
现代文：你虽从此一去不复返，我还是要表白自己的诚意。
English: Even though you are gone forever, I still want to show my sincerity.

古文：去彼昭昭，就冥冥兮，既下新官，不复故庭兮。
现代文：你远离光明的人世，前往昏暗的阴间，降临到了新宫，不再去往日的庭园。
English: You are far from the bright human world, go to the dark underworld, come to the new palace, no longer go to the garden of the past.

古文：呜呼哀哉，想魂灵兮！
现代文：可悲啊可叹，我终日想念着你的魂灵！
English: Alas, alas, I long for your spirit!

古文：其后李延年弟季坐奸乱怕宫，广利降匈奴，家族灭矣。
现代文：后来李延年的弟弟李季因在后宫淫乱而获罪，李广利又投降了匈奴，李氏一家就被灭族了。
English: Later, Li Yan Nian's brother Li Ji was found guilty of adultery in the harem, Li Guangli surrendered to the Xiongnu, and the Li family was wiped out.

古文：孝武钩弋赵婕妤，昭帝母也，家在河间。
现代文：孝武帝的钩弋赵健仔，是昭帝的母亲，原籍在河间。
English: Emperor Xiaowu's concubine Zhao Jianzai, the mother of Emperor Zhao, was originally from Hema.

古文：武帝巡狩过河间，望气者言此有奇女，天子亟使使召之。
现代文：武帝巡游经过河间，善于观看云气的人说这裹有奇特的女子，武帝派人召她前来。
English: Emperor Wudi's parade passed through the middle of the river. People who were good at watching clouds said that this was a woman wrapped in a strange cloth. Emperor Wudi sent someone to summon her.

古文：既至，女两手皆拳，上自披之，手即时伸。
现代文：她来的时候，两只手紧握成拳头，武帝亲自去掰她的手，手立刻就分开了。
English: When she came, the two hands were clenched into a fist. Emperor Wu personally went to slap her hand, and the hand was immediately separated.

古文：由是得幸，号曰拳夫人。
现代文：于是得到武帝的宠爱，称为拳夫人。
English: As a result, she became a favorite of Emperor Wu and was known as the Lady of Fist.

古文：先是，其父坐法宫刑，为中黄门，死长安，葬雍门。
现代文：原先她的父亲犯法被处以宫刑，就做了中黄门，死在长安，埋葬在雍门。
English: Originally, her father was sentenced to palace punishment for breaking the law, so he did the Middle Yellow Gate, died in Chang'an, and was buried in Yongmen.

古文：拳夫人进为婕妤，居钩弋宫。
现代文：拳夫人进升为健仔，住在钩弋宫，非常得宠。
English: The wife of the boxer was promoted to the position of the bodybuilder, lived in the palace of hooks, and was very popular.

古文：大有宠，太始三年生昭帝，号钩弋子。
现代文：太始三年，她生下昭帝，孩子被称作钩弋子。
English: In the first three years of the year, she gave birth to Zhao Di, and the child was called Huang Zizi.

古文：任身十四月乃生，上曰： 闻昔尧十四月而生，今钩弋亦然。 
现代文：她怀孕十四个月孩子才降生，武帝说： 听说昔日尧就是怀胎十四个月而生的，现在钩弋夫人也生了这样的儿子。 
English: She was pregnant for fourteen months before her child was born, and Emperor Wu said, "I heard that in the past, a son was born after fourteen months of pregnancy, and now Lady Hook Jaw has given birth to such a son.

古文：乃命其所生门曰尧母门。
现代文：就把孩子降生的那座宫殿的大门称作尧母门。
English: She called the gate of the palace where the child was born the "mother gate."

古文：后卫太子败，而燕王旦、广陵王胥多过失，宠姬王夫人男齐怀王、李夫人男昌邑哀王皆蚤薨，钩弋子年五六岁，壮大多知，上常言 类我 ，又感其生与众异，甚奇爱之，心欲立焉，以其年稚母少，恐女主颛恣乱国家，犹与久之。
现代文：后来卫太子败亡，燕王刘旦、广陵王刘胥常做错事，宠姬王夫人的儿子齐怀王、李夫人的儿子昌邑哀王都早死，钩弋子五六岁时，生得形体伟大，又十分聪明，武帝常说 像我 ，又觉得他的出世也和别人不同，就特别疼爱他，打算立他为太子，又因为他年纪幼小，母亲又年轻，担心再出现女主专权乱国的事，就一直犹豫不决。
English: Later, Wei Taizi was defeated and killed. Yan Wang Liu Dan and Guangling King Liu Ye often did wrong things. Qi Huai Wang, the son of Lady Ji Wang, and Changyi Ao Wang, the son of Lady Li, both died early. At the age of five or six, Huo Zizi was born with a great body and was very smart. Emperor Wu often said that he was like me, and felt that his birth was different from others. He especially loved him and planned to appoint him as the crown prince. And because he was young and his mother was young, he was worried that there would be another case of a female sovereign ruling the country, so he hesitated all the time.

古文：钩弋婕妤从幸甘泉，有过见谴，以忧死，因葬云阳。
现代文：钩弋健伃跟随武帝去甘泉宫，犯了一点儿小错误，受到武帝责备，结果忧惧而死，就埋葬在云阳。
English: He followed Emperor Wu to Ganquan Palace. He made a small mistake and was rebuked by Emperor Wu. As a result, he died of fear and was buried in Yunyang.

古文：后上疾病，乃立钩弋子为皇太子。
现代文：后来武帝病重就册立钩弋子为皇太子。
English: Later, Emperor Wu was gravely ill, and Hook Zizi was registered as the crown prince.

古文：拜奉车都尉霍光为大司马大将军，辅少主。
现代文：又封奉车都尉霍光为大司马大将军，让他辅佐年幼的君主。
English: He also appointed Feng Che's lieutenant, Huo Guang, as the grand secretary of the Grand General of the Horse, allowing him to assist the young monarch.

古文：明日，帝崩。
现代文：第二天，武帝逝世。
English: The next day, Emperor Wu died.

古文：昭帝即位，追尊钩弋婕妤为皇太后，发卒二万人起云陵，邑三千户。
现代文：昭帝即位后，追尊钩弋侄伃为皇太后，派二万名士卒建造云陵，设置三千户人家守陵。
English: After Emperor Zhao ascended to the throne, he sent twenty thousand soldiers to build the mausoleum and set up three thousand households to guard the tomb.

古文：追尊外祖赵父为顺成侯，诏右扶风置园邑二百家，长丞奉守如法。
现代文：又追尊外祖父赵父为顺成侯，下诏令右扶风设置陵园和二百户人家，设长丞依照法度奉守。
English: He also traced his maternal grandfather, Zhao Zifu, to Shuncheng, and issued a decree to establish a necropolis and two hundred households in Shuncheng, and set up a chengzheng in accordance with the law.

古文：顺成侯有姊君姁，赐钱二百万，奴婢第宅以充实焉。
现代文：顺成侯有个姐姐名叫君拘，赏赐她二百万贯钱，以及奴婢和住宅。
English: Shuncheng Hou had a sister named Junzhu, and he rewarded her with two million yuan, as well as slaves and a house.

古文：诸昆弟各以亲疏受赏赐。
现代文：顺成侯的那些兄弟们则各自按照关系的亲疏分别进行赏赐。
English: Those brothers of Shuncheng Hou were rewarded separately according to their relationship.

古文：赵氏无在位者，唯赵父追封。
现代文：赵氏家族中没有做官的人，祇有赵健伃的父亲被迫封为侯。
English: There is no official in the Zhao family, except for Zhao Jianyao's father, who was forced to become a marquess.

古文：孝昭上官皇后。
现代文：孝昭帝上官皇后。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao's superior officers and empresses.

古文：祖父桀，陇西人邽人也。
现代文：她的祖父上官桀，是陇西上邦人。
English: Her grandfather Shangguan Yi was a native of Shangguan, Shaanxi Province.

古文：少时为羽林期门郎，从武帝上甘泉，天大风，车不得行，解盖授桀。
现代文：年轻时做羽林期门郎，跟随武帝去甘泉宫，赶上大风，车不能前进，就解下车盖让上官桀拿着。
English: When he was young, he followed Emperor Wu to Ganquan Palace. When he caught a strong wind and the carriage could not move forward, he opened the lid of the carriage and let the superior officer hold the scepter.

古文：桀奉盖，虽风常属车；雨下，盖辄御。
现代文：上官桀捧着车盖，虽然风很大却并没有被车落下；不久下起了雨，他就用车盖替武帝挡雨。
English: Shangguan Zou held the car cover, although the wind was very strong, he was not knocked down by the car; soon it started to rain, he used the car cover to block the rain for Emperor Wu.

古文：上奇其材力，迁未央厩令。
现代文：武帝对他的勇力很是欣赏，就升他做了未央厩令。
English: Emperor Wu was very appreciative of his bravery, and promoted him to the rank of general.

古文：上尝体不安，及愈，见马，马多瘦，上大怒： 令以我不复见马邪！ 
现代文：武帝曾经身体不太舒服，等到病好之后，去看马，发现马大多都瘦了，武帝大怒，说： 你认为我再也见不着这些马了吗！ 
English: Emperor Wu was once unwell. After he recovered from his illness, he went to see the horses and found that most of them were thin. Emperor Wu was furious and said, "Do you think I will never see these horses again?"

古文：欲下吏，桀顿道曰： 臣闻圣体不安，日夜忧惧，意诚不在马。 
现代文：要治他的罪，上官桀叩头说： 我听说皇上身体不适，就日日夜夜为您担心，哪裹还顾得上看马呀。 
English: To punish him for his sin, the superior officer bowed and said, "I heard that the emperor is unwell, and I have been worrying about you day and night. Why should I bother to look at the horse?"

古文：言未卒，泣数行下。
现代文：话还没有说完，眼泪就一串串地落了下来。
English: Before the words were out of my mouth, tears began to fall in bunches.

古文：上以为忠，由是亲近，为侍中，稍迁至太仆。
现代文：武帝认为他对自己很忠心，因此十分亲信他，让他做了侍中，逐渐升为太仆。
English: Emperor Wu thought that he was very loyal to him, so he trusted him very much and made him an attendant and gradually promoted him to a servant.

古文：武帝疾病，以霍光为大将军，太仆桀为左将军，皆受遗诏辅少主。
现代文：武帝病重，封霍光为大将军，太仆上官桀为左将军，都接受了遣诏辅佐幼主。
English: Emperor Wu was seriously ill, and he sent Emperor Huoguang as the grand general, and the eunuch Shangguan Yu as the left general, both of which were accepted by Emperor Wu.

古文：以前捕斩反者莽通功，封桀为安阳侯。
现代文：由于先前捕杀造的莽通立了功，又封上官桀为安阳侯。
English: As a result of the achievements made by Muntong in the previous capture and killing, he was also given the title of Anyang Hou.

古文：初，桀子安取霍光女，结婚相亲，光每休沐出，桀常代光入决事。
现代文：当初，上官桀的儿子上官安娶了霍光的女儿为妻，两家结为姻亲，关系密切，霍光每当休假外出时，上官桀经常代替他处理国家大事。
English: At first, Shangguan's son Shangguan An married Huo Guang's daughter Ruan. The two families were in-laws and had a close relationship. Whenever Huo Guang went out on vacation, Shangguan An often took his place to deal with national affairs.

古文：昭帝始立，年八岁，帝长姊鄂邑盖长公主居禁中，共养帝。
现代文：昭帝即位的时候衹有八岁，由人姐鄂邑盖长公主住在宫裹，抚育晅童。
English: At the time of the enthronement of the Zhaotian Emperor, Yao was eight years old. His sister, the eldest princess, lived in the palace and raised Yao.

古文：盖主私近子客河间丁外人。
现代文：公主和盖堡的门客迥塱人工处人私通。
English: The princess and Gaiborg's concubine had an adulterous affair.

古文：上与大将军闻之，不绝主欢，有诏外人侍长主。
现代文：晅童和大将军霆光听说了这件事，不愿断绝公主的私情，就下诏命令工夕丛侍奉公主。
English: Xing Tong and General Tingguang heard about this and, unwilling to break off the princess's love affair, issued an edict ordering the workers to serve the princess.

古文：长主内周阳氏女，令配耦帝。
现代文：公主挑选了周阳氏的女子送进宫来，把她许配给昭帝。
English: The princess selected a woman from the Zhouyang clan and sent her to the palace to be betrothed to Emperor Zhao.

古文：时上官安有女，即霍光外孙，安因光欲内之。
现代文：正好上官安也有个女儿，也就是霍光的外孙女，上官安就劝说霍光把这个外孙女送进宫去。
English: It just so happened that Shangguan An also had a daughter, that is, the granddaughter of Huo Guang. Shangguan An persuaded Huo Guang to send this granddaughter to the palace.

古文：光以为尚幼，不听。
现代文：霍光认为孩子还小，就没有答应。
English: Huo Guang thought that the child was still young, so he did not agree.

古文：安素与丁外人善，说外人曰： 闻长主内女，安子容貌端正，诚因长主时得入为后，以臣父子在朝而有椒房之重，成之在于足下，汉家故事常以列侯尚主，足下何忧不封侯乎？ 
现代文：上官安平时和丁外人很要好，就去劝说丁外人： 听说长公主要挑选女子进宫，我的女儿容貌端正，如果能趁长公主选女入宫的机会进宫做了皇后，我们父子在朝廷为官，又有椒房为倚重，就全靠你成全了，汉家的旧例是让列侯娶公主为妻，你还担心封不了侯吗？ 
English: Shangguan Anping was very friendly with Ding Gaozhong at the time, so he went to persuade Ding Gaozhong: I heard that the eldest prince mainly selects women to enter the palace. My daughter is good-looking. If you can take advantage of the opportunity for the eldest princess to choose a woman to enter the palace and become the queen, our father and son will be officials in the imperial court, and the pepper room will be a support, so it all depends on you. The old example of the Han family is to let the prince marry the princess. Are you still worried about not being able to seal the prince?

古文：外人喜，言于长主。长主以为然，诏召安女入为婕妤，安为骑都尉。
现代文：丁外人十分高兴，把这件事告诉公主，公主认为很有道理，就下韶让上官安的女儿进宫做了使伃，上官安封为骑都尉。
English: Ding Gaozhong was very happy and told the princess about this. The princess thought it was very reasonable, so she agreed to let Shangguan An's daughter enter the palace as an envoy, and Shangguan An was made a cavalry captain.

古文：月余，遂立为皇后，年甫六岁。
现代文：又过了一个多月，就册立上官氏为皇后，她才衹有六岁。
English: A little more than a month later, she was crowned empress. She was only six years old.

古文：安以后父封桑乐侯，食邑千五百户，迁车骑将军，日以骄淫。
现代文：上官安因为是皇后的父亲，被封为桑乐侯，封邑一千五百户，升为车骑将军，越来越骄横淫逸。
English: Because Shangguan An was the queen's father, he was given the title of Sanle Hou, with 1,500 fiefs, and was promoted to General of Cavalry. He became more and more arrogant and lewd.

古文：受赐殿中，出对宾客言： 与我婿饮，大乐！ 
现代文：他在殿上领受赏赐，出来后对宾客说： 和我的女婿一起喝酒，真快活！ 
English: After receiving his award in the main hall, he came out and said to the guests: "Drinking with my son-in-law, what a joy!

古文：见其服饰，使人归，欲自烧物。
现代文：炫耀所得的服饰，派人拿回家裹，打算自己燔烧供品祭神。
English: He showed off the clothes he had won, sent someone to take them home and wrap them up, and planned to burn the offerings to the gods himself.

古文：安醉则裸行内，与后母及父诸良人、侍御皆乱。
现代文：上官安喝醉了酒，就光着身子在内宅行走，和他的继母以及父亲的姬妾侍婢淫乱。
English: When Shangguan An was drunk, he walked naked in the inner house and fornicated with his stepmother and his father's concubine.

古文：子病死，仰而骂天。
现代文：他的儿子病死了，就仰面怒骂上天。
English: When his son died of illness, he fell on his face and cursed the heavens.

古文：数守大将军光，为丁外人求侯，及桀欲妄官禄外人，光执正，皆不听。
现代文：他屡次向霍光请求给丁外人封侯，上官桀也妄想给丁外人加官晋爵，霍光秉公办事，都没有同意。
English: He repeatedly asked Huo Guang to give Ding Jianren the title of marquess. Shang Guan Yu also wanted to give Ding Jianren, but Huo Guang did not agree.

古文：又桀妻父所幸充国为太医监，阑入殿中，下狱当死。
现代文：又上官桀妻子的父亲宠爱的充国是一名太医监，擅自跑到殿上，被捉拿下狱，按法律应当处以死罪。
English: Another high-ranking official, his wife's father's favorite, Shingoku, was a medical superintendent. He ran to the palace without permission and was arrested and jailed. According to the law, he should be sentenced to death.

古文：冬月且尽，盖主为充国入马二十匹赎罪，乃得减死论。
现代文：冬天快要过去的时候，公主替充国交纳二十匹马以赎罪，这才免去他的死罪。
English: When winter was about to pass, the princess atoned for her crime by giving the king twenty horses, which absolved him of the death penalty.

古文：于是桀、安父子深怨光而重德盖主。
现代文：因此上官桀、上官安父子深深地怨恨霍光，而感激公主的恩德。
English: Therefore, Shangguan Ren and Shangguan An, father and son, deeply resented Huo Guang, but were grateful for the princess' kindness.

古文：知燕王旦帝兄，不得立，亦怨望，桀、安即记光过失予燕王，令上书告之，又为丁外人求侯。
现代文：他们得知昭帝的哥哥燕王刘旦，因没有被立为皇帝，也心存怨恨，上官桀和上官安就记录下霍光的过失告诉给燕王，让他给昭帝上书告发霍光，并替丁外人求侯爵之位。
English: They learned that Yan Wang Liu Dan, the elder brother of Zhao Di, was also resentful because he was not made emperor. Shangguan Zhai and Shangguan An recorded Huo Guang's fault and told Yan Wang to write to Zhao Di to denounce Huo Guang and ask for the marquisate for Ding Gaozhong.

古文：燕王大喜，上书称： 子路丧姊，期而不除，孔子非之。
现代文：燕王大喜，就上书声称： 子路的姐姐死了，一周年后他还不脱掉丧服，孔子批评他。
English: Yan Wang was overjoyed and wrote a letter saying: Zilu's sister died, and after the first anniversary he still did not take off his mourning clothes. Confucius criticized him.

古文：子路曰： 由不幸寡兄弟，不忍除之。 
现代文：子路就说： 我不幸，没有兄弟，因此不忍心脱掉为姐姐穿的丧服。 
English: Zilu said, "I am unlucky, I have no brother, so I cannot bear to take off the mourning clothes I wore for my sister."

古文：故曰 观过知仁 。今臣与陛下独有长公主为姊，陛下幸使丁外人侍之，外人宜蒙爵号。 
现代文：所以说 看人的过失，可以知道他仁与不仁，现在我和陛下衹有长公主一位姐姐，陛下隆恩让丁外人侍奉公主，丁外人应当封赏爵号。 
English: Therefore, it is said that looking at a person's faults, we can know whether he is kind or unkind. Now, I and Your Majesty have an elder sister, the First Princess. Your Majesty has been kind enough to let Ding Gaozhong serve the princess. Ding Gaozhong should be awarded a knighthood.

古文：书奏，上以问光，光执不许。
现代文：上奏之后，昭帝询问霍光的意见，霍光坚持不同意。
English: After the performance, Zhao Di asked Huo Guang for his opinion, and Huo Guang insisted on disagreeing.

古文：及告光罪过，上又疑之，愈亲光而疏桀、安。
现代文：等到燕王又上书告发霍光有罪，昭帝更加怀疑，越发亲近霍光而疏远上官桀和上官安。
English: When King Yan wrote again to denounce Huo Guang as guilty, Emperor Zhao became more and more suspicious. He grew closer to Huo Guang and distanced himself from Shangguan Xuan and Shangguan An.

古文：桀安浸恚，遂结党与谋杀光，诱征燕王至而诛之，因废帝而立桀。
现代文：上官氏父子逐渐恼羞成怒，就暗地裹集结党羽阴谋杀害霍光，诱骗燕王来京把霍光杀掉，然后废掉昭帝立上官桀为皇帝。
English: Shangguan's father and son gradually became irritated and angry, so they secretly gathered the party feathers to conspire to murder Huo Guang, lured Yan Wang to come to Beijing to kill Huo Guang, and then abolished the Shao Emperor and established Shangguan as the emperor.

古文：或曰： 当如皇后何？ 
现代文：有人说： 皇后可怎么办呢？ 
English: Some people say: What can the empress do?

古文：安曰： 逐麋之狗，当顾菟邪！
现代文：上官安说： 追逐麋的猎狗，还顾得上小兔子吗？
English: Shangguan'an said, "Can a hunting dog that chases a badger still care about a small rabbit?"

古文：且用皇后为尊，一旦人主意有所移，虽欲为家人亦不可得，此百世之一时也。 
现代文：况且依靠皇后得到尊位，一旦皇上变了主意，那就想做平民都不可能了，无论什么朝代都是这样的。 
English: Moreover, relying on the empress to get the dignity, once the emperor changed his mind, it was impossible to be a commoner, no matter what dynasty it was.

古文：事发觉，燕王、盖主皆自杀。
现代文：事情败露后，燕王、盖长公主都自杀。
English: After the affair was exposed, both Yan Wang and Guichang Princess committed suicide.

古文：语在《霍光传》。
现代文：这件事记载在《霍光传》里。
English: This incident is recorded in "The Biography of Huo Guang."

古文：桀、安宗族既灭，皇后以年少不与谋，亦光外孙，故得不废。
现代文：上官桀、上官安父子被灭族，皇后年幼，没有参预这次谋反，又是霍光的外孙女，因此没有被废掉。
English: Shangguan Xuan, Shangguan An and his son were killed, the empress was young and did not participate in this rebellion, and she was also the granddaughter of Huo Guang, so she was not abolished.

古文：皇后母前死，葬茂陵郭东，追尊曰敬夫人，置园邑二百家，长丞奉守如法。
现代文：皇后的母亲在这之前就已经去世了，埋葬在茂陵郭的东面，追加尊号为敬夫人，设置陵园和二百户人家，园陵之长和丞依例祭扫和守卫。
English: The empress's mother had died before this, and was buried on the east side of the Mausoleum. She was given the additional honorific title of Lady, and a cemetery and two hundred homes were set up. The head of the cemetery, Wajo, would sweep and guard the cemetery as usual.

古文：皇后自使私奴婢守桀、安冢。
现代文：皇后自行派手下的奴婢去看护上官桀、上官安的坟墓。
English: The empress herself sent her slaves and maidservants to look after the tombs of Shangguan Xi and Shangguan An.

古文：光欲皇后擅宠有子，帝时体不安，左右及医皆阿意，言宜禁内，虽宫人使令皆为穷裤，多其带，后宫莫有进者。
现代文：霍光希望皇后能够专宠，生下儿子，昭帝的身体经常不舒服，左右的侍者和医官都阿附霍光的心意，说应当节制欲望，即使是宫女也命令她们穿上绲裆裤，又束上许多衣带，因此后宫女子没有能够进幸的。
English: Huo Guang hoped that the empress could have a special favorite and give birth to a son. Zhao Di's body was often uncomfortable, and the waiters and medical officers on both sides were attached to Huo Guang's mind, saying that they should restrain their desires. Even the palace maids ordered them to wear trousers and put on a lot of belts, so the harem girls were not able to get lucky.

古文：皇后立十岁而昭帝崩，后年十四五云。
现代文：上官皇后被册立为后的第十年，昭帝去世。皇后才十四五岁。
English: Ten years after the Shangguan Empress was enthroned, Emperor Zhao died. The Empress was only fourteen or fifteen years old.

古文：昌邑王贺征即位，尊皇后为皇太后。
现代文：昌邑王刘贺被召来做了皇帝，尊上官皇后为皇太后。
English: Liu He, the king of Changyi, was summoned to become the emperor, and his wife, the empress dowager, became the empress dowager.

古文：光与太后共废王贺，立孝宣帝。
现代文：后来，霍光与太后一起废掉刘贺，改立孝宣帝。
English: Later, together with the empress dowager, Huo Guang abolished Liu He and replaced him with Emperor Xiao Xuan.

古文：宣帝好位，为太皇太后。
现代文：宣帝即位后，太后成为太皇太后。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan, the empress dowager became the great empress dowager.

古文：凡立四十七年，年五十二，建昭二年崩，合葬平陵。
现代文：上官氏一共在位四十七年，建昭二年她五十二岁时去世，舆昭帝合葬在平陵。
English: Shangguan, who reigned for a total of 47 years, died at the age of 52 in the second year of Jian Zhao, and was buried with Emperor Miao Zhao in Pingling.

古文：卫太子史良娣，宣帝祖母也。
现代文：卫太子史良娣，是宣帝的祖母。
English: Wei Taizi Shi Liangyao, is the grandmother of Emperor Xuan.

古文：太子有妃，有良娣，有孺子，妻、妾凡三等，子皆称皇孙。
现代文：太子有妃，有良娣，还有孺子，妻妾一共分三个等级，儿子都称为皇孙。
English: The prince has a wife, a concubine, and a son-in-law. The wives and concubines are divided into three grades, and the sons are all called the emperor's grandchildren.

古文：史良娣家本鲁国，有母贞君，史恭。
现代文：史良娣原籍鲁国，有母亲叫做贞君，哥哥叫史恭。
English: Shi Liangyao is originally from Lu. His mother is called Zhenjun, and his brother is called Shi Qiong.

古文：以元鼎四年人为良娣，生男进，号史皇孙。
现代文：史氏在元鼎四年进宫做了太子良娣，生下儿子刘进，称为史皇孙。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of the Yuan Dynasty, Shi entered the palace as the crown prince, and gave birth to his son Liu Jin, known as Shi Huangzhuang.

古文：武帝末，巫蛊事起，卫太子及良娣、史皇孙皆遭害。
现代文：武帝末年，发生了巫蛊之祸，卫太子和良娣、史皇孙都被杀害。
English: At the end of Emperor Wu's reign, the Wushan Incident occurred, in which Empress Dowager Wei, Empress Dowager Liang, and Empress Dowager Shi were all killed.

古文：史皇孙有一男，号皇曾孙，时生数月，犹坐太子系狱，积五岁乃遭赦。
现代文：史皇孙有一个儿子，称作皇曾孙，当时刚出世几个月，也受太子牵连被关进监狱，到了五岁才被赦免。
English: Shi Wangsun had a son, known as the emperor's great-grandson, who was just a few months old at the time. He was also implicated by the crown prince and imprisoned. He was only pardoned when he was five years old.

古文：治狱使者邴吉怜皇曾孙无所归，载以付史恭。
现代文：管理监狱的使者邴吉怜悯皇曾孙无处可去，就把他交给史恭抚养。
English: The emissary of the prison administration, Gongji, took pity on the emperor's great-grandson, who had nowhere to go, and gave him to Shi Qiong to raise.

古文：恭母贞君年老，见孙孤，甚哀之，自养视焉。
现代文：史恭的母亲贞君年岁已老，看到这孩子孤苦零仃，心里非常难过，就亲自照看这个孩子。
English: Shi Qiong's elderly mother, Zhenjun, was very sad to see the child all alone, so she personally took care of the child.

古文：后曾孙收养于掖庭，遂登至尊位，是为宣帝。
现代文：后来，皇曾孙被收养在掖庭，又登基做了皇帝，就是宣帝。
English: Later, the emperor's great-grandson was adopted in Xingting, and ascended to the throne as emperor, that is, Emperor Xuan.

古文：而贞君及恭已死，恭三子皆以旧恩封。
现代文：此时贞君和史恭已经去世了，史恭的三个儿子都因为旧曰的恩情得到封赏。
English: At this time, Zhenjun and Shi Qiong had already passed away, and Shi Qiong's three sons were all rewarded for their old-fashioned kindness.

古文：长子高为乐陵侯，曾为将陵侯，玄为平台侯，及高子丹以功德封武阳侯，侯者凡四人。
现代文：长子史高封乐陵侯，史曾封将陵侯，史玄封平台侯，到了史高的儿子史丹凭着功劳和德行被封为武阳侯，史氏家族中一共有四个人封侯。
English: The eldest son, Shi Gao, was given the title of Le Ling Hou, Shi Zeng was given the title of General Ling Hou, Shi Xuan was given the title of Platform Hou, and Shi Gao's son, Stan, was given the title of Wuyang Hou based on his merits and virtues. There were a total of four people in the Shi family who were given the title of Hou.

古文：高至大司马车骑将军，丹左将军，自有传。
现代文：史高官至大司马车骑将军，史丹做到左将军，他们分别有自己的列传。
English: From Shih Gao Guan to Daishi carriage riding general, and Stan to Zuo general, they each have their own lineage.

古文：史皇孙王夫人，宣帝母也，名翁须，太始中得幸于史皇孙。
现代文：史皇孙王夫人，是宣帝的母亲，名叫翁须，太始年间得到史皇孙的宠爱。
English: Lady Shi Huangsun Wang, the mother of Emperor Xuan, named Wengsu, was favored by Shi Huangsun during the First Emperor's reign.

古文：皇孙妻、帝无号位，皆称家人子。
现代文：皇孙的妻妾没有名号，都称为家人子。
English: The wives and concubines of the emperor's grandchildren do not have a name, but are all called family members.

古文：征和二年，生宣帝。
现代文：征和二年，翁须生下宣帝。
English: In the second year of the war, Wengsu gave birth to Emperor Xuan.

古文：帝生数月，卫太子、皇孙败，家人子皆坐诛，莫有收葬者，唯宣帝得全。
现代文：宣帝出世才几个月，卫太子、史皇孙败亡，家人子都牵连被害，尸体也没能收殓下葬，衹有宣帝保全了性命。
English: Emperor Xuan was only a few months old when he was born. Crown Prince Wei and Emperor Shih were defeated, and their sons were all implicated and killed. Their bodies could not be buried, but Emperor Xuan saved their lives.

古文：即尊位后，追尊母王夫人谥曰悼后，祖母史良娣曰戾后，皆改葬，起园邑，长丞奉守。
现代文：宣帝即位后，追尊母亲王夫人的谧号为悼后，祖母史良娣谧号为戾后，都重新安葬，设置陵园和人家，令长丞奉守。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan, the posthumous name of the revered mother, Mrs. Wang, was mourned, and the grandmother, Shi Liang, was posthumously buried. They were all reburied, a cemetery and a house were set up, and the chancellor served as the keeper.

古文：语在《戾太子传》。
现代文：这件事记载在《戾太子传》。
English: This event is recorded in "The Tale of the Crown Prince."

古文：地节三年，求得外祖母王媪，媪男无故，无故弟武皆随使者诣阙。
现代文：地节三年，宣帝找到了外祖母王媪，王媪的儿子王无故，无故的弟弟王武都跟随使者赶赴皇宫。
English: In the third year of the festival, Emperor Xuan found his grandmother Wang Xi, Wang Xi's son Wang Wujie, and Wujie's brother Wang Wu all followed the messenger to the imperial palace.

古文：时乘黄牛车，故百姓谓之黄牛妪。
现代文：当时他们乘坐黄牛车，所以老百姓称王媪为黄牛妪。
English: At that time, they took the cart, so the common people called Wang Yao the cart.

古文：初，上即位，数遣使者求外家。久远，多似类而非是。
现代文：当初，宣帝即位后，多次派使者去寻找外祖母家的人，但由于年代久了，有很多人都很像却并不是。
English: At first, after Emperor Xuancheng ascended to the throne, he repeatedly sent emissaries to look for people from his grandmother's family, but due to the passage of time, there were many people who looked similar but were not.

古文：既得王媪，令太中大夫任宣与丞相御史属杂考问乡里识知者，皆曰王妪。
现代文：找到王媪之后，派太中大夫任宣与丞相御史手下的官吏去询问同乡那些认识她的人，都说她是王妪。
English: After Wang Yao was found, he sent the Grand Duchess Ren Xuan and officials from the office of the Minister of Education and Culture to ask the people in her hometown who knew her. They all said that she was Wang Yao.

古文：妪言名妄人，家本涿郡蠡吾平乡。
现代文：王妪说自己名叫妄人，原籍涿郡蠡吾平乡。
English: Wang Yu said that his name was Yu Ren and that he was originally from Yu County, Yu Wu Ping Township.

古文：年十四嫁为同乡王更得妻。
现代文：十四岁时嫁给同乡王更得为妻。
English: At the age of fourteen, she married a fellow villager, Wang Rong.

古文：更得死，嫁为广望王虒始妇，产子男无故、武，女翁须，翁须年八九岁时，寄居广望节侯子刘仲卿宅，仲卿谓虒始曰： 予我翁须，自养长之。 
现代文：更得死后。又嫁给广望王乃始为妻，生下儿子王无故、王武和女儿翁须。翁须八九岁时，寄养在广望节侯的儿子刘仲卿家裹，仲卿对乃始说： 把翁须给我，我帮你养大她。 
English: After her husband's death, she married Wang Nanzhi of Guangwang and gave birth to their sons Wang Wuhai and Wang Wu and daughter Wengsu. When Wengsu was 8 or 9 years old, she was fostered at the home of Liu Zhongqing, the son of Guangwang Jiehou. Zhongqing said to Nanzhi, "Give me Wengsu, and I will help you raise her."

古文：媪为翁须作缣单衣，送仲卿家。
现代文：王媪给翁须做了春夏季的衣服，送到仲卿家。
English: Wang Yao made spring and summer clothes for Weng Su and sent them to Zhong Qing's house.

古文：仲卿教翁须歌舞，往来归取冬夏衣。
现代文：仲卿教翁须学习歌舞，翁须回来取过几次冬夏穿的衣服。
English: Zhongqing teaches Weng to learn singing and dancing, and Weng has to come back to get the clothes he has worn several times in winter and summer.

古文：居四五岁，翁须来言： 邯郸贾长皃求歌舞者，仲卿欲以我与之。 
现代文：过了四五年，翁须回来说 邯郸贾长儿来要能歌擅舞的人，仲卿想把我给他。 
English: After four or five years, Wengsu came back and said, "The eldest son of Xingjia came to ask for someone who can sing and dance well. Zhongqing wants to give me to him."

古文：媪即与翁须逃走，之平乡。
现代文：王媪就和翁须一起逃走，到了平乡。
English: Wang Yao fled with Weng Su to Pingxiang.

古文：仲卿载虒始共求媪，媪惶急，将翁须归，曰： 儿居君家，非受一钱也，奈何欲予它人？ 
现代文：仲卿带着乃始一同寻找王媪，王媪很害怕，就领着翁须回去，说： 我女儿住在你家，没有得到一个钱，怎么能把她给别人呢？ 
English: Wang Yao was very scared, so he led Weng Su back and said, "My daughter lives in your house, and she hasn't received a single penny, how can you give her to someone else?

古文：仲卿诈曰： 不也。 
现代文：仲卿骗她说： 不会的。 
English: Chukyo lied to her and said, "I won't."

古文：后数日，翁须乘长皃车马过门，呼曰： 我果见行，当之柳宿。 
现代文：几天之后，翁须坐在买长儿的车上路过家门，她大声呼叫： 我果然被送走了，要到柳宿去。 
English: A few days later, Wengsu was sitting in her eldest son's car as it passed by the family's door. She called out loudly, "I've been sent away, I'm going to Yanagiyado."

古文：媪与虒即之柳宿，见翁须相对涕泣，谓曰： 我欲为汝自言。 
现代文：王媪和乃始到了柳宿，见到翁须后相对而泣，对她说： 我们要为你告状。 
English: Wang Xuanhe first arrived at the Willow Inn, and when he saw Weng Xuan crying on the other side, he said to her: "We will sue you."

古文：翁须曰： 母置之，何家不可以居？
现代文：翁须说： 母亲就算了吧，哪一家不能住呢？
English: Wengsu said: Even if it's the mother, which family can't live together?

古文：自言无益也。 
现代文：告状也没有用。 
English: The complaint didn't work either.

古文：媪与虒始还求钱用，随逐至中山卢奴，见翁须与歌舞等比五人同处，媪与翁须共宿。
现代文：王媪和乃始回去筹集钱财，又跟随到中山卢奴，看到翁须和几名歌舞女子一共五人在一起，王媪和翁须一同睡下。
English: Wang Xuanhe first went back to raise money, and then followed him to Zhongshan Lunu. He saw Wengsu and several singing and dancing women, a total of five people together. Wang Xuanhe and Wengsu fell asleep together.

古文：明日，虒始留视翁须，媪还求钱，欲随至邯郸。
现代文：第二天，乃始留在那裹看护翁须，王媪回去拿钱，打算跟着他们再到邯郸。
English: The next day, Nozaki stayed there to look after Wengso, while Wang Yao went back to get the money, intending to follow them back to Handan.

古文：媪归，粜买未具，虒始来归曰： 翁须已去，我无钱用随也。 
现代文：王媪回家后，还没准备好钱物，乃始回来说： 翁须已经走了，我没钱，无法跟着她们。 
English: After Wang Yao went home, he did not have the money ready, but he came back and said: Wengsu has already left, I have no money, I cannot follow them.

古文：因绝至今，不闻其问。
现代文：于是断绝了联系，再也没有听到翁须的消息。
English: So they broke off contact and never heard from Wengsu again.

古文：贾长皃妻贞及从者师遂辞： 往二十岁，太子舍人侯明从长安来求歌舞者，请翁须等五人。
现代文：贾长儿的妻子贞以及跟随着的歌舞教师遂的供辞上说： 二十年前，太子舍人侯明从长安来，要几名歌舞女子，就选走了翁须等五个人。
English: Jia Chang'er's wife Zhen and the accompanying singing and dancing teachers then said in their confessions: Twenty years ago, Hou Ming, the prince's concubine, came from Chang'an and wanted several singing and dancing women, so he chose Wengsu and five others.

古文：长皃使遂送至长安，皆入太子家。 
现代文：买长儿让遂把她们送到长安，都进了太子宫中。 
English: The eldest son bought them and sent them to Chang'an, and they all entered the crown prince's womb.

古文：及广望三老更始、刘仲卿妻其等四十五人辞，皆验。
现代文：又有广望三老更始、刘仲卿的妻子其等四十五个人的证词，都可以作为凭据。
English: In addition, the testimonies of 45 people, including Guangwang, the three elders, and Liu Zhongqing's wife, can be used as evidence.

古文：宣奏王媪悼后母明白，上皆召见，赐无故、武爵关内侯，旬月间，赏赐以巨万计。
现代文：任宣上奏说王媪确实是悼后的母亲，宣帝召见了她们，赏赐王怨故、王武为关内侯，几个月裹，赏赐他们财产巨万。
English: Ren Xuan reported that Wang Qian was indeed the mother of the mourners. Xuan Di summoned them and rewarded Wang Qian and Wang Wu as Guan Nei Hou for several months and rewarded them with a huge amount of property.

古文：顷之，制诏御史赐外祖母号为博平君，以博平、蠡吾两县户万一千为汤沐邑。
现代文：不久，又下韶给御史，封外祖母为博平君，把博平、蠡吾两县作为她的封邑，包括一万一千户人家。
English: Not long after, she issued an imperial edict to the prince, naming her maternal grandmother Bo Pingjun, and made Bo Ping and Xiangwu counties her fiefs, including 11,000 households.

古文：封舅无故为平昌侯，武为乐昌侯，食邑各六千户。
现代文：封舅舅王无故为平吕侯，王武为乐昌侯，封邑各有六千户人家。
English: The feudal uncle Wang Wuzhong was the feudal lord of Pinglu, and Wang Wu was the feudal lord of Lechang. There were six thousand households in each fief.

古文：初，虒始以本始四年病死，后三岁，家乃富贵，追赐谥曰思成侯。
现代文：原先，王乃始在本始四年就病死了，三年之后，家族才得到富贵，就给他追赐谧号为思成侯。
English: Originally, Wang Naxi died of illness four years after the founding of the dynasty. Three years later, when the family became wealthy, he was given the posthumous title of Sucheng.

古文：诏涿郡治冢室，置园邑四百家，长丞奉守如法。
现代文：下诏令涿郡修建坟墓，设置陵园和四百产人家，让长丞按法度奉守。
English: He issued a decree ordering the county to build a tomb, set up a cemetery and four hundred family homes, and let Chojeong abide by the law.

古文：岁余，博平君薨，谥曰思成夫人，诏徙思成侯合葬奉明顾成庙南，置园邑长丞，罢涿郡思成园。
现代文：过了一年多，博平君去世了，谧号为思成夫人。下诏与思成侯合葬在查明顾成庙的南面，设置陵园、人家及长丞，废除了涿郡的思成园。
English: After more than a year, Bo Pingjun passed away, and her posthumous name was Shicheng Madam. The following edict buried her together with Shicheng Hou in the south of the Gu Cheng Temple, set up cemeteries, people's homes and Changzheng, and abolished the Shicheng Garden in Jixian County.

古文：王氏侯者二人，无故子接为大司马车骑将军，而武子商至丞相，自有传。
现代文：王氏家族中有两个人封侯，王无故的儿子王接做到大司马车骑将军，而王武的儿子王商官至丞相，都有自己的列传。
English: There are two princes in the Wang family. Wang Wuji's son, Wang Zhi, became a general in charge of chariots and cavalry, while Wang Wu's son, Wang Shangguan, became a prime minister.

古文：孝宣许皇后，元帝母也。
现代文：孝宣帝许皇后，是五壶的母亲。
English: Empress Xiao Xuan Di Xu is the mother of Wu Jiu.

古文：父广汉，昌邑人，少时为昌邑王郎。
现代文：她的父亲叫姜庐选，是旦旦人，年轻时给吕邑王作郎。
English: Her father, Jiang Xuanxuan, was a native of Dandan, and when he was young, he was the stepfather of King Lyuyu.

古文：从武帝上甘泉，误取它郎鞍以被其马，发觉，吏劾从行而盗，当死，有诏募下蚕室。
现代文：后来跟随亘嘘去苴星宣，误将别的郎的马鞍放在自己马上，被发现后，官吏揭发他随从皇上出行却有偷盗行为，应当定为死罪，有诏书令他在蚕室受宫刑而免去一死。
English: Later, he followed a lie and went to the Emperor Xuanxing, and mistakenly put the saddle of another young man on his own horse. After he was discovered, officials revealed that he had stolen while traveling with the emperor and should be sentenced to death. There was an edict ordering him to be punished by the palace in the silkworm room to avoid death.

古文：后为宦者丞。
现代文：后来做了宦官中的丞。
English: Later, he became the eunuch's middle son.

古文：上官桀谋反时，广汉部索，其殿中庐有索长数尺可以缚入者数千枚，满一箧缄封，广汉索不得，它吏往得之。
现代文：上官桀谋反时，广汉搜索罪证，上官桀在宫中的庐舍裹有几尺长可以用来捆人的绳子几千条，满满地装在一个封好的筐裹，广汉没有发觉，其他人去时看到了。
English: When Shangguan Xuan was plotting to rebel, Guanghan searched for incriminating evidence. Shangguan Xuan's palace was filled with thousands of lengths of rope that could be used to tie people up. They were packed in a sealed basket. Guanghan didn't notice this, but others did when they visited.

古文：广汉坐论为鬼薪，输掖庭，后为暴室啬夫。
现代文：广汉又获罪，被判徒刑鬼薪罚作劳役，送进掖庭，后来当了暴室啬夫。
English: Guanghan was found guilty again, sentenced to prison and forced labor, sent to the court, and later became a violent miser.

古文：时宣帝养于掖庭，号皇曾孙，与广汉同寺居。
现代文：这时宣帝被收养在掖庭，称为皇曾孙，和广汉住在同一处官舍。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuan was adopted in Xingting, known as the emperor's great-grandson, and lived in the same official residence as Guanghan.

古文：时掖庭令张贺，本卫太子家吏，及太子败，贺坐下刑，以旧恩养视皇曾孙甚厚。
现代文：而掖庭令张贺，本来是卫太子家的小吏，太子败亡后，他被处以宫刑，由于旧时的恩情对待皇曾孙非常好。
English: However, Zhang He, who was originally a minor official of the Wei family, was sentenced to palace punishment after the defeat of the prince, and treated the great-grandson of the emperor very well due to the old-time favor.

古文：及曾孙壮大，贺欲以女孙妻之。
现代文：等到皇曾孙长大以后，张贺打算把孙女嫁给他为妻。
English: When the great-grandson grows up, Zhang He plans to marry his granddaughter to him.

古文：是时，昭帝始冠，长八尺二寸。
现代文：这时，昭帝刚满二十岁，身高八尺二寸。
English: At this time, Emperor Zhao had just turned twenty years old and was eight feet two inches tall.

古文：贺弟安世为右将军，与霍将军同心辅政，闻贺称誉皇曾孙，欲妻以女，安世怒曰： 曾孙乃卫太子后也，幸得以庶人衣食县官，足矣，勿复言予女事。 
现代文：张贺的弟弟张安世做右将军，和霍将军同心辅佐昭帝，听到张贺称赞皇曾孙，又要把孙女嫁给他，就发怒说： 皇曾孙是卫太子的后代，有幸能以平民的身份被朝廷供养，就已经足够了，不要再提把孙女嫁给他的事了。 
English: Zhang He's brother Zhang Anshi was the right general, and he and General Huo worked together to assist Emperor Zhao. When Zhang He heard that Zhang He praised the great-grandson of the emperor and wanted to marry his granddaughter to him, he became angry and said: The great-grandson of the emperor is a descendant of the crown prince, and it is enough to have the privilege of being supported by the court as a commoner. Do not mention the matter of marrying his granddaughter to him.

古文：于是贺止。
现代文：因此张贺衹得作罢。
English: Therefore, Zhang Hejun had to give up.

古文：时许广汉有女平君，年十四五，当为内者令欧侯氏子妇。
现代文：当时许广汉有个女儿叫平君，有十四五岁，本应是内者令欧侯氏的儿媳妇。
English: At that time, Xu Guanghan had a daughter named Pingjun, who was fourteen or fifteen years old, and was supposed to be the daughter-in-law of Ou Hou.

古文：临当入，欧侯氏子死。
现代文：该出嫁的时候，欧侯氏的儿子却死了。
English: When it was time to get married, the son of the Oho clan died.

古文：其母将行卜相，言当大贵，母独喜。
现代文：她的母亲为她求卜人占卜，说她将会大富大贵，她母亲心中暗自高兴。
English: Her mother was secretly delighted as she asked a fortuneteller to tell her that she would be very rich.

古文：贺闻许啬夫有女，乃置酒请之，酒酣，为言： 曾孙体近，下人，乃关内侯，可妻也。 广汉许诺。
现代文：张贺听说许啬夫有个女儿，就摆下酒席宴请他，喝到畅快的时候，就说 皇曾孙和皇上是近亲，纵使他才能低劣，也能做个关内侯，你可以把女儿许配他为妻。 
English: When Zhang He heard that Xu Qianfu had a daughter, he set up a banquet to invite him. When he was well drunk, he said that the emperor's great-grandson and the emperor were close relatives. Even if his talent was inferior, he could be a Guan Nei Hou. You can marry his daughter to him as a wife.

古文：明日，妪闻之，怒。
现代文：广漠应允了。第二天，平君的母亲听到这个消息，十分恼怒。
English: The next day, Ping Jun's mother was very angry when she heard the news.

古文：广汉重令为介，遂与曾孙，一岁生元帝。
现代文：但广漠重新请人作媒，于是把女儿嫁给皇曾孙，一年以后生下元帝。
English: However, Guangmai invited a new matchmaker, so she married her daughter to the emperor's great-grandson, and gave birth to Emperor Yuan a year later.

古文：数月，曾孙立为帝，平君为婕妤。
现代文：又过了几个月，皇曾孙被立为皇帝，封许平君为凄仔。
English: A few months later, the emperor's great-grandson was made emperor, and Emperor Xu Ping was enthroned.

古文：是时，霍将军有小女，与皇太后有亲。
现代文：这时，霍将军还有一个小女儿没有出嫁，又和皇太后是亲戚。
English: At this time, General Huo also had a younger daughter who had not married and was a relative of the Empress Dowager.

古文：公卿议更立皇后，皆心仪霍将军女，亦未有言。
现代文：大臣们提议册立皇后，都倾向于霍将军的女儿，却没有人开口说话。
English: The ministers all favoured General Ho's daughter, but no one spoke up.

古文：上乃诏求微时故剑，大臣知指，白立许婕妤为皇后。
现代文：宣帝就下诏说要寻求自己贫贱时的一口旧宝剑，大臣们明白了皇上的心思，就奏请册立许健仔为皇后。
English: Emperor Xuan issued an edict saying that he wanted to find an old sword from when he was poor. The ministers understood the emperor's thoughts and petitioned to make Xu Jian Zi the empress.

古文：既立，霍光以后父广汉刑人不宜君国，岁余乃封为昌成君。
现代文：册立皇后之后，霍光认为皇后的父亲许广漠是受过宫刑的人，不适合管理地方，过了一年多才封他为昌成君。
English: After the enthronement of the empress, Huo Guang believed that the father of the empress, Xu Guangmu, was a person who had been punished by the palace and was not suitable to manage the place. It took more than a year for him to be appointed as Changcheng.

古文：霍光夫人显欲贵其小女，道无从。
现代文：霍光的夫人霍显想让自己的小女儿显贵，却又想不出办法。
English: Huo Guang's wife, Huo Xian, wanted to make her little daughter famous, but she couldn't think of a way.

古文：明年，许皇后当娠，病。
现代文：第二年，许皇后要临产时得了病。
English: The following year, Empress Xu fell ill just before giving birth.

古文：女医淳于衍者，霍氏所爱，尝入宫侍皇后疾。
现代文：女医生淳于衍，和霍家关系亲密，曾进宫去侍候皇后。
English: A female doctor, Jun Yuyan, who was close to the Huo family, once entered the palace to wait for the empress.

古文：衍夫赏为掖庭户卫，谓衍： 可过辞霍夫人行，为我求安池监。 
现代文：淳于衍的丈夫赏是掖庭户卫，对淳于衍说 你去向霍夫人辞行，替我讨个安池监的职位。 
English: Chun Yuyan's husband was a gardener named Dou Wei. He said to Chun Yuyan, "Go and resign to Mrs. Huo, and find a position for me as a pond inspector."

古文：衍如言报显。
现代文：淳于衍就对霍显讲了。
English: Jun Yuyan told this to Hou Xianrong.

古文：显因生心，辟左右，字谓衍： 少夫幸报我以事，我亦欲报少夫，可乎？ 
现代文：霍显就有了主意，摒退左右，对淳于衍说： 少夫求我遣件事，我也有事求少夫，可以吗？ 
English: Huo Xian had an idea. He stepped back and said to Jun Yuyan, "Young Master asked me to send you something. I also have something to ask Young Master, is that okay?"

古文：衍曰： 夫人所言，何等不可者！ 
现代文：淳于衍说： 夫人说的事，哪裹有不可以的！ 
English: Jun Yuyan said, "What your wife said is unacceptable!

古文：显曰： 将军素爱小女成君，欲奇贵之，愿以累少夫。 
现代文：霍显说： 将军一向喜爱小女儿成君，希望她能够显贵，想麻烦少夫。 
English: Huo Xian said, "The general has always loved his little daughter, Cheng Jun, and hoped that she would become a dignitary. He wanted to trouble the young man."

古文：衍曰： 何谓邪？ 
现代文：淳于衍说： 这是什么意思？ 
English: Jun Yuyan said: What does this mean?

古文：显曰： 妇人免乳大故，十死一生。
现代文：霍显说： 女人分娩是一件大事，九死一生。
English: Huo Xian said: A woman giving birth is a big event, a once-in-a-lifetime experience.

古文：今皇后当免身，可因投毒药去也，成君即得为皇后矣。
现代文：现在皇后就要分娩了，可以藉此机会投进毒药除掉她，成君也就能做皇后了。
English: Now that the queen is about to give birth, you can take this opportunity to inject poison to get rid of her, and Chengjun will be able to become queen.

古文：如蒙力事成，富贵与少夫共之。 
现代文：若你愿意出力办成这件事，我愿和少夫你共享富贵。 
English: If you are willing to work hard to accomplish this, I am willing to share the wealth with you.

古文：衍曰： 药杂治，当先尝，安宁？ 
现代文：淳于衍说： 药是由众位太医共同配成的，又要别人先尝过，怎么能下毒呢？ 
English: Jun Yuyan said, "Medicine is prepared jointly by many great doctors, and if others have to try it first, how can it be poisoned?

古文：显曰： 在少夫为之耳，将军领天下，谁敢言者？
现代文：霍显说： 造就要看少夫你的本事了。大将军掌管天下，谁敢说他什么？
English: Huo Xian said, "Building depends on the ability of the young master. The great general is in charge of the world, who would dare to say anything to him?

古文：缓急相护，但恐少夫无意耳！ 
现代文：危急时我会保护你的，就怕你没这个意思。 
English: I'll protect you in a crisis, even if you don't mean it.

古文：衍良久曰： 愿尽力。 
现代文：淳于衍沉思了半天，说： 愿意尽力去做。 
English: Jun Yuyan pondered for half a day and said: I am willing to do my best.

古文：即捣附子，赍入长定宫。
现代文：她就将附子捣成粉末，带进长定宫。
English: She pounded the aconite into a powder and brought it to Nagatingu.

古文：皇后免身后，衍取附子并合大医大丸以饮皇后。
现代文：皇后生产之后，淳于衍取出附子搀和在太医的药丸中，服侍皇后吃下去。
English: After the queen gave birth, Jun Yuyan took out the epididymis and in the doctor's pills, served the queen and ate it.

古文：有顷曰： 我头岑岑也，药中得无有毒？ 
现代文：一会儿皇后说： 我头疼难受，难道药裹有毒吗？ 
English: After a while, the queen said, "I have a terrible headache. Is this poultice poisonous?"

古文：对曰： 无有。 
现代文：淳于衍回答说： 没有。 
English: Jun Yuyan replied, "No."

古文：遂加烦懑，崩。
现代文：皇后就更加烦闷不安，终于死去了。
English: The Empress became even more depressed and anxious, and finally died.

古文：衍出，过见显，相劳问，亦未敢重谢衍。
现代文：淳于衍离开皇宫，拜见霍显，霍显慰劳她，却没敢重重地赏谢。
English: Chun Yuyan left the palace to visit Hou Hsien. Hou Hsien consoled her, but did not dare to thank her.

古文：后人有上书告诸医待疾无状者，皆收系诏狱，劾不道。
现代文：后来有人上书，控告那些医生给皇后治病时无用，就下韶将他们关进监狱，揭发他们大逆不道的罪行。
English: Later, someone wrote a letter accusing those doctors of being useless in treating the queen, and they were sent to prison, exposing their crimes of high treason.

古文：显恐急，即以状具语光，因曰： 既失计为之，无令吏急衍！ 
现代文：霍显害怕事情败露，就把逭件事原原本本地告诉了霍光，并且说： 既然已经错办了这事，你就想法子别让官吏逼问淳于衍了。 
English: Fok Hsien was afraid that the matter would be exposed, so he told Hok Kwong the whole story in its original form, and said: Since you have done this thing wrong, you should try not to let the officials force you to ask questions.

古文：光惊鄂，默然不应。
现代文：霍光听后惊呆了，一句话也说不出来。
English: After listening to this, Huo Guang was stunned and couldn't say a word.

古文：其后奏上，署衍勿论。
现代文：然后他去奏请皇上，不要再追究淳于衍的责任了。
English: Then he went to appeal to the emperor not to hold Junyuyan responsible.

古文：许后立三年而崩，谥曰恭哀皇后，葬杜南，是为杜陵南园。
现代文：许皇后被立为皇后三年就去世了，谧号为恭哀皇后，埋葬在杜南，也就是杜陵南园。
English: Empress Xu died three years after she was crowned empress. She was given the posthumous title of "Congratulatory Empress" and was buried in Dunan, which is also known as the Southern Garden of Dunling.

古文：后五年，立皇太子，乃封太子外祖父昌成君广汉为平恩侯，位特进。
现代文：五年之后，立她的儿子为皇太子，就封太子的外祖父昌成君许广汉为平恩侯，赐位特进。
English: Five years later, she made her son Rong the crown prince, and named the prince's maternal grandfather, Changchengjun Xu Guanghan, as the Prince of Peace, granting him a special promotion.

古文：后四年，复封广汉两弟，舜为博望侯，延寿为乐成侯。
现代文：四年后，又加封许广漠的两个弟弟，许舜为博望侯，许延寿为乐成侯。
English: Four years later, the two younger brothers of Xu Guangmai were also sealed, Xu Xi as Bohang Hou, and Xu Yanju as Le Cheng Hou.

古文：许氏侯者凡三人。
现代文：许氏家族中一共有三个人封侯。
English: A total of three members of the Hui family were ennobled.

古文：广汉薨，谥曰戴侯，无子，绝。
现代文：许广汉死后，谧号为戴侯，他没有儿子，爵位就中断了。
English: After the death of Xu Guanghan, his posthumous name was Dai Hou, and he had no son, so his title was discontinued.

古文：葬南园旁，置邑三百家，长丞奉守如法。
现代文：埋葬在南园旁边，设置三百户人家，设园陵长和丞依法守卫和祭扫。
English: He was buried next to the South Park. Three hundred households were set up, and the garden mausoleum chief Kazuchika was set up to guard and sweep according to law.

古文：宣帝以延寿为大司马车骑将军，辅政。
现代文：宣帝封许延寿为大司马车骑将军，辅佐朝政。
English: Emperor Xu enthroned Yan Shou as the grand chariot-riding general, and he assisted the imperial government.

古文：元帝即位，复封延寿中子嘉为平恩侯，奉戴侯后，亦为大司马、车骑将军。
现代文：元帝即位后，又封许延寿的中子许嘉为平恩侯，承嗣戴侯之后，也做了大司马车骑将军。
English: After the enthronement of the Yuan Emperor, Xu Jia, the middle son of Xu Yanzhou, was made the Prince of Ping'en, and after the heir of Dai Hou, he also became the General of the Grand Coach.

古文：孝宣霍皇后，大司马、大将军，博陆侯光女也。
现代文：孝宣帝的霍皇后，是大司马大将军博陆侯霍光的女儿。
English: Emperor Xiao Xuan's Empress Huo was the daughter of the great general Sima Bolu Hokwang.

古文：母显，即使淳于衍阴杀许后，显因为成君衣补，治入宫具，劝光内之，果立为皇后。
现代文：霍皇后的母亲霍显，派淳于衍暗地裹害死许皇后后，就为成君做出嫁的衣服，准备进宫的用具，劝霍光把女儿送进宫去，果然成君被册立为皇后。
English: Queen Huo's mother, Huo Xian, secretly plotted with Pa Jun to kill the Empress Xu. She made a wedding dress for Cheng Jun, prepared the equipment for him to enter the palace, and persuaded Huo Guang to send her daughter to the palace. Cheng Jun was indeed crowned as the Empress.

古文：初，许后起微贱，登至尊日浅，从官车服甚节俭，五日一朝皇太后于长乐宫，亲奉案上食，以妇道共养。
现代文：当初，许皇后出身低微，做皇后的时间很短，仆从车驾服饰都非常节俭，每隔五天去长乐宫朝见一次皇太后，亲自捧着食案给太后敬献食物，尽孙媳妇孝道。
English: At first, Empress Xu was from a lowly background, her time as empress was very short, and her servants were very frugal in their driving and clothing. Every five days, she went to Changle Palace to see the empress dowager once in the morning, personally holding a meal plan to offer food to the empress dowager, and to fulfill the filial duty of a granddaughter-in-law.

古文：及霍后立，亦修许后故事。而皇太后亲霍后之姊子，故常竦体，敬而礼之。
现代文：到霍皇后时，也学许皇后时的旧例，但皇太后是霍皇后姐姐的女儿，因此常常谨慎小心，对她十分尊敬。
English: When he came to the Queen of Ho, he also learned from the old example of the Queen of Ho, but the Empress Dowager was the daughter of the sister of the Queen of Ho, so he was often cautious and respected her very much.

古文：皇后轝驾侍从甚盛，赏赐官属以千万计，与许后时县绝矣。
现代文：皇后的车马侍从非常气派，赏赐手下动不动就是千万钱，与许皇后有天壤之别。
English: The chariot and horse attendants of the empress are very imposing, and reward their subordinates with tens of thousands of money, which is very different from the empress Xu.

古文：上亦宠之，颛房燕。
现代文：宣帝也很宠爱她，于足皇后独擅房宠。
English: Emperor Xuan was also very fond of her, and Empress Yu's feet were her favorite.

古文：立三岁而光薨。
现代文：霍皇后被册立的第三年，霍光去世了。
English: In the third year after Queen Huo Guang was enthroned, she passed away.

古文：后一岁，上立许后男为太子，昌成君者为平恩侯。
现代文：又过了一年，宣帝册立许皇后的儿子为太子，封昌成君为平恩侯。
English: A year later, the Emperor's edict established the son of Empress Xu as the crown prince, and Fong Changcheng as the Prince of Pyeongan.

古文：显怒恚不食，呕血，曰： 此乃民间时子，安得立？
现代文：霍显非常恼怒，吃不下饭，甚至吐了血，说： 这是在民间时生的孩子，怎么能立为太子呢？
English: Huo Xian was very angry. He could not eat and even vomited blood. He said, "This is a child who was born among the common people. How can he be crown prince?

古文：即后有子，反为王邪！ 
现代文：要是皇后生了儿子，反而衹能做王吗！ 
English: If the queen gave birth to a son, could he become king instead?

古文：复教皇后令毒太子。
现代文：她又指使霍皇后去毒害太子。
English: She also ordered Queen Huo to poison the crown prince.

古文：皇后数召太子赐食，保阿辄先尝之，后挟毒不得行。
现代文：皇后屡次召见太子赐给他食物，但保姆总是先去品尝，皇后暗藏毒药却无法使用。
English: The empress repeatedly summoned the prince to give him food, but the nanny always tasted it first. The empress hid poison but could not use it.

古文：后杀许后事颇泄，显遂与诸婿昆弟谋反，发觉，谐诛灭。
现代文：后来谋害许皇后的事逐渐泄露出去，霍显就和自己家的女婿及子弟们阴谋造，阴谋泄露，宣帝将霍家诛灭殆尽。
English: Later, the plot to assassinate Empress Xu gradually leaked out, and Huo Xian and his son-in-law and sons plotted and conspired, and the plot leaked out, and Emperor Xuan annihilated the Huo family.

古文：使有司赐皇后策曰： 皇后荧惑失道，怀不德，挟毒与母博陆宣成侯夫人显谋欲危太子，无人母之恩，不宜奉宗庙衣服，不可以承天命。
现代文：又派有司赐给皇后文书，说： 皇后心术不正，图谋不轨，和母亲博陆宣成侯夫人霍显一同阴谋危害太子，完全没有做母亲的恩情，不适合再奉祀祖宗，更不能承受天命。唉！
English: A secretary was also sent to give the queen a document, saying: The queen's mind is not right, the plot is not on track, and her mother, Bolu Xuancheng's wife, Hoxian, conspired to harm the prince. She completely lacks the grace of being a mother, is not suitable for worshipping ancestors, and cannot bear the fate of heaven. Alas!

古文：其退避宫，上玺绶有司。 
现代文：应当退居冷宫，交回玺绶。 
English: He should retire to a cold palace and return to the mountains.

古文：霍后立五年，废处昭台宫。
现代文：霍皇后在位五年，被废避居昭台宫。
English: After five years on the throne, Empress Huo was deposed and took refuge in the Zhaotai Palace.

古文：后十二岁，徙云林馆，乃自杀，葬昆吾亭东。
现代文：十二年后，让霍氏搬到云林馆，她就自杀了，埋葬在昆吾亭的东面。
English: Twelve years later, after letting Mr. Huo move to Yunlin Pavilion, she committed suicide and was buried on the east side of Kunwuting.

古文：初，霍光及兄骠骑将军去病皆自以功伐封侯居位，宣帝以光故，封去病孙山、山弟云，皆为列侯，侯者前后四人。
现代文：当初，霍光和他的哥哥骠骑将军霍去病都靠着自己的功劳被封为侯，宣帝因为霍光的缘故，封霍去病的孙子霍山、霍山的弟弟霍云都为列侯，霍氏家族中封侯的前后有四人。
English: At the beginning, both Huo Guang and his elder brother, the cavalry general Huo Gangtu, were made princes by virtue of their own merits. Because of Huo Guang, Emperor Xuan had Huo Guang's grandson, Huoshan, and Huoshan's younger brother, Huo Yun, made princes. There were four princes in the Huo family before and after they were made princes.

古文：孝宣王皇后。
现代文：孝宣帝王皇后。
English: The Emperor and Empress of Xiaoxuan.

古文：其先高祖时有功赐爵关内侯，自沛徙长陵，传爵至后父奉光。
现代文：王皇后的祖先在高祖时因功赐爵关内侯，从沛迁徙到长陵，爵位一直传到皇后的父亲王奉光。
English: The queen's ancestors were awarded the title of Lord of Guanzhong due to their merits when they were Gao Zu, and they migrated from Pei to Changling. The title was passed down to the queen's father, Wang Fengguang.

古文：奉光少时好斗鸡，宣帝在民间数与奉光会，相识。
现代文：王奉光年轻时喜欢斗鸡，宣帝在民间时屡次和他见面，互相认识。
English: Wang Bongguang liked cockfighting when he was young. Xuan Di met him many times when he was a commoner, and they got to know each other.

古文：奉光有女年十余岁，每当适人，所当适辄死，故久不行。
现代文：奉光有个十几岁的女儿，每当要嫁人的时候，对方总是会死掉，因此很久也没能嫁出去。
English: Feng Guang has a teenage daughter. Whenever she wants to marry someone, the other person always dies, so she hasn't been able to get married for a long time.

古文：及宣帝即位，召入后宫，稍进为婕妤。
现代文：等到宣帝即位以后，就把奉光的女儿召进后宫，逐渐晋升为健伃。
English: After Emperor Xuan came to the throne, he called Feng Guang's daughter into the harem and gradually promoted her to the rank of Jianye.

古文：是时，馆陶王母华婕妤及淮阳宪王母张婕妤、楚孝王母卫婕妤皆爱幸。
现代文：这时候，馆陶王的母亲华健仔，淮阳宪王的母亲张健伃，楚孝王的母亲卫健仔都深得宣帝的宠爱。
English: At this time, Hua Jian Zai, the mother of Guantao Wang, Zhang Jian Qi, the mother of Huaiyang Xian Wang, and Wei Jian Zai, the mother of Chu Xiao Wang, were all deeply loved by Emperor Xuan.

古文：霍皇后废后，上怜许太子蚤失母，几为霍氏所害，于是乃选后宫素谨慎而无子者，遂立王婕妤为皇后，令母养太子。
现代文：霍皇后被废以后，宣帝怜悯许太子很早就失去了母亲，又险些被霍氏害死，因此就在后宫挑选平素谨慎又没有生育子女的人，于是册立王侄仔为皇后，让她用心照顾太子。
English: After Empress Huo was dethroned, Emperor Xu lost his mother at an early age, and was nearly killed by the Huo clan. Therefore, he chose a prudent and childless person in the harem, and appointed Wang Neji as empress, and let her take care of the prince.

古文：自为后后，希见，无宠。
现代文：王皇后自从做了皇后，很少被皇上召见，不受宠爱。
English: Since becoming empress, Empress Wang has rarely been summoned by the emperor and has not been favored.

古文：封父奉光为邛成侯。
现代文：宣帝封皇后的父亲王奉光为邛成侯。
English: Her father, Wang Bongguang, proclaimed emperor and crowned her empress.

古文：立十六年，宣帝崩，元帝即位，为皇太后。
现代文：王皇后被册立为后的第十六年，宣帝驾崩，元帝即位，王皇后成为皇太后。
English: Sixteen years after Empress Wang was enthroned, Emperor Xuan died, Emperor Yuan ascended to the throne, and Empress Wang became empress dowager.

古文：封太后兄舜为安平侯。
现代文：元帝封太后的哥哥王舜为安平侯。
English: The former empress dowager's brother, Wang Yao, was Anping.

古文：后二年，奉光薨，谥曰共侯，葬长门南，置园邑二百家，长丞奉守如法。
现代文：两年以后，王奉光去世，谧号为共侯，埋葬在长门的南面，设置陵园和二百户人家，命令长丞按法度奉守。
English: Two years later, Wang Fengguang died, his posthumous name was Gonghou, and he was buried in the south of the long gate. A cemetery and two hundred households were set up, and Changzheng was ordered to abide by the law.

古文：元帝崩，成帝即位，为太皇太后。
现代文：元帝驾崩，成帝即位后，太后成为太皇太后。
English: After Emperor Yuan died and Emperor Cheng took the throne, the empress dowager became the grand empress dowager.

古文：复爵太皇太后弟骏为关内侯，食邑千户。
现代文：又封太皇太后的弟弟王骏为关内侯，封邑一千户。
English: In addition, the younger brother of the Grand Empress Dowager, Wang Xi, was made the Lord of Guanai, with a thousand households in the fief.

古文：王氏列侯二人，关内侯一人。
现代文：王氏家族中有两人封为侯，一人封为关内侯。
English: Two members of the Wang family were given the title of Hou, and one was given the title of Guanai Hou.

古文：舜子章，章从弟咸，皆至左右将军。
现代文：王舜的儿子王章，王章的堂弟王咸，都官至左右将军。
English: Wang Yao's son, Wang Zhang, and Wang Zhang's cousin, Wang Xian, were both government officials and generals.

古文：时成帝母亦姓王氏，故世号太皇太后为邛成太后。
现代文：当时成帝的母亲也姓王，因此世称太皇太后为邛成太后。
English: At that time, Emperor Cheng's mother was also surnamed Wang, so the world called the Empress Dowager the Empress Dowager.

古文：邛成太后凡立四十九年，年七十余，永始元年崩，合葬杜陵，称东园。
现代文：邛成太后一共在位四十九年，在永始元年她七十多岁时去世，与宣帝合葬在杜陵，称为束园。
English: Empress Dowager Yancheng reigned for a total of forty-nine years. She died in her seventies in the first year of the Yongshi era, and was buried together with Emperor Xuan in the Tu Ling, known as the Shu Yuan.

古文：奉光孙勋坐法免。
现代文：王奉光的孙子王勋犯法被废掉了爵位。
English: Wang Bongguang's grandson Wang Xun was stripped of his title for breaking the law.

古文：元始中，成帝太后下诏曰： 孝宣王皇后，朕之姑，深念奉质共修之义，恩结于心。
现代文：元始年间，成帝王太后发布诏书，说： 孝宣帝的王皇后，是朕的婆母，我深深怀念她的抚养教诲之情，恩义牢记在心裹。
English: At the beginning of the year, the Empress Dowager of Emperor Chengdu issued an imperial edict, saying: The Empress of Emperor Xiaoxuan is my mother-in-law. I deeply miss her care and teaching, and I keep her kindness in my heart.

古文：惟邛成共侯国废祀绝，朕甚闵焉。其封共侯曾孙坚固为邛成侯。 
现代文：衹是邛成共侯的封号被废除，朕非常怜惜，就封共侯的曾孙王坚固为邛成侯。 
English: I am very sorry to see that the title of Prince Hancheng has been abolished. I am very sorry to see that the great-grandson of Prince Hancheng, Wang Jenggu, has been named Prince Hancheng.

古文：至王莽乃绝。
现代文：这个封爵到王莽时才被废除。
English: This knighthood was not abolished until the time of Wang Mang.

