古文：◎五行二
现代文：五行二
English: Five lines of two

古文：《洪范》曰： 火曰炎上。 火不炎上，则失其性矣。
现代文：《洪范》上说 火炎盛而上升 ，火不炎盛上升便失去了自然本性。
English: "Hong Fan" said that if the flame is high and rises, the flame will not rise and lose its natural nature.

古文：前史多以恒燠、草异、火、木、羽虫之孽、羊祸、火灾、火异、赤眚赤祥皆属之火，今从之。▲恒燠
现代文：前代历史多把恒燠、草异、羽虫之孽、羊祸、火灾、火异、赤眚赤祥都归属于火，现在照此处理。恒燠
English: In the history of the previous generation, fire was attributed to fire, grass to grass, insects to insects, sheep to sheep, fire to fire, fire to fire, and red dragonfly to red dragonfly. Now it is treated as such.

古文：洪熙元年正月癸未，以京师一冬不雪，诏谕修省。
现代文：洪熙元年正月癸末日，因为京城整个冬季不降雪，便下诏告论修身反省。
English: On the last day of the first month of the first year of Hongxi, because there was no snowfall in Beijing throughout the winter, he issued an edict on self-cultivation and self-reflection.

古文：正统九年冬，畿内外无雪。
现代文：正统九年冬季，京畿内外没有降雪。
English: There was no snowfall in and around Gyeonggi Province in the winter of 1997.

古文：十二年冬，陕西无雪。
现代文：十二年冬季，陕西没有降雪。
English: In the winter of 2012, there was no snowfall in Shaanxi.

古文：景泰六年冬，无雪。
现代文：景泰六年冬季，没有降雪。
English: There has been no snowfall in the winter of Jing Tai for six years.

古文：天顺元年冬，宫中祈雪。
现代文：天顺元年冬季，宫中祈求上天降雪。
English: In the winter of the first year of Tianshun, the imperial court prayed to the heavens for snow.

古文：是年，直隶、山西、河南、山东皆无雪。
现代文：这一年，直隶、山西、河南、山东都没有降雪。
English: This year, there was no snowfall in Zhili, Shanxi, Henan and Shandong.

古文：二年冬，命百官祈雪。
现代文：二年冬季，命令百官祈求上天降雪。
English: In the winter of the second year, hundreds of officials were ordered to pray to heaven for snow.

古文：六年冬，直隶、山东、河南皆无雪。
现代文：六年冬季，直隶、山东、河南都没有降雪。
English: In the winter of 2006, there was no snowfall in Zhili, Shandong and Henan.

古文：成化元年冬，无雪。
现代文：成化元年冬季，没有降雪。
English: In the winter of 1861, there was no snowfall.

古文：五年冬，燠如夏。
现代文：五年冬季，燥热如同夏季。
English: Five years of winter, sweltering heat like summer.

古文：六年二月壬申，以自冬徂春，雨雪不降，敕谕群臣亲诣山川坛请祷。
现代文：六年二月壬申日，因为从冬季至春季，雨和雪都不降，朝廷下令训谕群臣亲自到山川坛祷告求雨雪。
English: On February 6, Jinshin Day, because neither rain nor snow fell from winter to spring, the imperial court ordered the courtiers to personally pray for rain and snow at the Yamakawa Altar.

古文：十年二月，南京、山东奏，冬春恒燠，无冰雪。
现代文：十年二月，南京、山东上奏，冬季到春季一直燥热，没有冰雪。
English: In February of the 10th year, Nanjing and Shandong played the first game. From winter to spring, it was hot and dry, and there was no snow or ice.

古文：十一年冬，以无雪祈祷。
现代文：十一年冬季，因为没有降雪，于是祈祷上天降雪。
English: In the winter of the eleventh year, because there was no snowfall, he prayed to the heavens for snow.

古文：十五年冬，直隶、山东、河南、山西无雪。
现代文：十五年冬季，直隶、山东、河南、山西没有降雪。
English: In the winter of the fifteenth year, there was no snowfall in Zhili, Shandong, Henan and Shanxi.

古文：十九年冬，京师、直隶无雪。
现代文：十九年冬季，京城、直隶没有降雪。
English: In the winter of 1919, there was no snowfall in Beijing and Zhili.

古文：弘治九年冬，无雪。
现代文：弘治九年冬季，没有降雪。
English: In the winter of 1997, there was no snowfall.

古文：十五年冬，无雪。
现代文：十五年冬季，没有降雪。
English: For the fifteenth winter, there was no snowfall.

古文：十八年冬，温如春，无雪。
现代文：十八年冬季，温暖如同春季，没有降雪。
English: In the winter of '18, it was as warm as spring, but there was no snow.

古文：正德元年冬，无雪。
现代文：正德元年冬季，没有降雪。
English: In the winter of the first year of Zhengde, there was no snowfall.

古文：永嘉自冬至春，麦穗桃李实。
现代文：永嘉从冬季至春季，麦穗桃李结出果实。
English: In Yongjia, from winter to spring, the ears of wheat and plums bear fruit.

古文：三年冬，无雪。
现代文：三年冬季，没有降雪。
English: Three years of winter, no snow.

古文：六年至九年，连岁无雪。
现代文：六年至九年，连年没有降雪。
English: For six to nine years, there was no snowfall in consecutive years.

古文：十一年冬，无雪。
现代文：十一年冬季，没有降雪。
English: In the eleventh year of winter, there was no snowfall.

古文：嘉靖十四年，冬深无雪，遣官遍祭诸神。
现代文：嘉靖十四年，深冬没有降雪，派遣官吏遍祭众神。
English: In the 14th year of Jiajing, when there was no snowfall in late winter, officials were dispatched to offer sacrifices to all the gods.

古文：十九年冬，无雪。
现代文：十九年冬季，没有降雪。
English: In the winter of 1919, there was no snow.

古文：二十年十二月癸卯，祷雪于神祇坛。
现代文：二十年十二月癸卯日，在神只坛祈祷降雪。
English: On the 20th day of the 12th month of the 12th year, he prayed for snowfall at the altar of the gods.

古文：二十四年十二月甲午，命诸臣分告宫庙祈雪。
现代文：二十四年十二月甲午日，命令众臣分头告祭宫庙祈祷降雪。
English: On the afternoon of December 1st, 24 A.D., he ordered all the courtiers to split up and go to the temple to pray for snow.

古文：三十二年冬，无雪。
现代文：三十二年冬季，没有降雪。
English: In the winter of 1932 there was no snow.

古文：三十三年十二月壬申，以灾异屡见，即祷雪日为始，百官青衣办事。
现代文：三十三年十二月壬申日，因为灾害怪异多次出现，从祷告上天降雪之日开始，百官穿着青衣办事。
English: On Jinshin Day, December 33rd, due to the repeated occurrence of strange disasters, from the day of praying for snow to fall from the sky, hundreds of officials wore blue clothes to work.

古文：三十六年冬，无雪。
现代文：三十六年冬季，没有降雪。
English: In the winter of 1936, there was no snowfall.

古文：三十九年冬，无雪。
现代文：三十九年冬季，没有降雪。
English: In the winter of 1939, there was no snowfall.

古文：明年，又无雪。
现代文：第二年，又没有降雪。
English: The next year, there was no snow again.

古文：帝将躬祷，会大风，命亟祷雪兼禳风变。
现代文：皇帝将要亲自祈祷，恰遇大风，便命令赶快祈祷降雪，并且祈祷禳除风灾。
English: The emperor was going to pray in person, and when a strong wind hit, he ordered to quickly pray for snowfall and pray for the elimination of the storm.

古文：四十一年至四十五年冬，祈雪无虚岁。
现代文：四十一年到四十五年冬季，每年祈祷降雪，没有空缺。
English: From forty-one to forty-five winters, every year praying for snowfall, there is no vacancy.

古文：隆庆元年冬，无雪。
现代文：隆庆元年冬季，没有降雪。
English: In the winter of the first year of Longqing, there was no snowfall.

古文：四年冬，无雪。
现代文：四年冬季，没有降雪。
English: In the winter of 2004, there was no snowfall.

古文：万历四年十二月己丑，命礼部祈雪。
现代文：万历四年十二月己丑日，命令礼部祈祷降雪。
English: On December Fool's Day four thousand years ago, the ritual department was ordered to pray for snow.

古文：十六年、十七年、二十九年、三十七年、四十七年，亦如之。
现代文：十六年、十七年、二十九年、三十七年、四十七年，也像那样。
English: Sixteen years, seventeen years, twenty-nine years, thirty-seven years, forty-seven years, and so on.

古文：崇祯五年十二月癸酉，命顺天府祈雪。
现代文：崇祯五年十二月癸酉日，命令顺天府祈祷降雪。
English: On the 3rd day of December in the 5th year of Chongzhen, he ordered Shun Tianfu to pray for snowfall.

古文：六年、七年冬，无雪。
现代文：六年、七年冬季，没有降雪。
English: In the winter of 2006 and 2007, there was no snowfall.

古文：▲草异
现代文：草异
English: Grass is different

古文：永乐十六年正月乙丑，同州、澄城、觔阳、朝邑雨谷及荞麦。
现代文：永乐十六年正月乙丑日，同州、澄城、合阳、朝邑天降谷物和蒿麦。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd month of the 16th year of Yongle, grain and buckwheat fell from the sky in Tongzhou, Chengcheng, Heyang, and Chaoyu.

古文：正统八年十一月，殿上生荆棘，高二尺。
现代文：正统八年十一月，宫殿上长出荆棘，高达二尺。
English: In November of the eighth year of orthodoxy, thorns grew on the palace, up to two feet high.

古文：十四年，广州狱竹床逾年忽青生叶。
现代文：十四年，广州狱的竹床，遇了一年忽然变青，长出叶子。
English: Fourteen years ago, the bamboo bed of Guangzhou Prison suddenly turned blue and sprouted leaves.

古文：成化六年二月戊寅，湖广应山雨粟。
现代文：成化六年二月戊寅日，湖广应山天降粟米。
English: In February of the sixth year of Chenghua, on the day of Wu Yin, the poppy seeds fell from the sky in the lake.

古文：弘治八年二月，枯竹开花，实如麦米。
现代文：弘治八年二月，枯槁的什子开出花来，果实如麦米。
English: In February of the eighth year of the Hongzhi era, the withered shoots blossomed, and the fruit was like wheat rice.

古文：苦荬开莲花。
现代文：苦贾开出莲花。
English: The lotus flowers bloomed in Kuja.

古文：六月甲子，黟县雨豆，味不可食。
现代文：六月甲子日，黟县天降豆子，味道不能吃。
English: In June, on the day of the Year of the Rooster, there were beans falling from the sky in Handan County. The taste was inedible.

古文：九年，黄州民家瓜大如斗，瓤皆赤血。
现代文：九年，黄州百姓家瓜大如量斗，瓜瓤都像鲜血一样红。
English: In the ninth year, the size of the melons in the homes of the people of Huangzhou was as large as a jousting match, and the gourds were as red as blood.

古文：万历四十三年四月戊寅，石首雨豆，大小不一，色杂红黑。
现代文：万历四十三年四月戊寅日，石首天降豆子，大小不一致，颜色红黑相杂。
English: On the first day of the month of April in the 43rd year of Wanli, beans fell from the stone. They were of different sizes and mixed red and black colors.

古文：崇祯四年、五年，河南草生人马形，如被甲持矛驰驱战斗者然。
现代文：崇祯四年、五年，河南草长出人马之形，像披着镗甲，拿着戈矛驰骋战斗的样子。
English: In the four or five years since Chongzhen, the grass in Henan Province has grown into the shape of a man and a horse, like a man wearing armor and holding a spear galloping into battle.

古文：十三年，徐州田中白豆，多作人面，眉目宛然。
现代文：十三年，徐州田中的白豆，很多呈人脸之形，眉目清晰。
English: In the 13th year, the white beans in Xuzhou Tianzhong, many of them are in the shape of a human face, with clear eyebrows.

古文：▲羽虫之孽
现代文：羽虫之孽
English: The Iniquity of Worms

古文：万历二十五年二月壬午，岳州民家有鸭，含絮裹火，飞上屋，入竹椽茅茨中。
现代文：万历二十五年二月壬午日，岳州百姓家中有鸭子，含着棉絮裹着火，飞上房屋，钻入竹椽的茅草中。
English: On the afternoon of February 25th, there were ducks in the homes of people in Yuezhou. They were wrapped in cotton wool and set on fire. They flew onto the houses and burrowed into the thatch of bamboo.

古文：火四起，延烧数百家。
现代文：火四面燃起，蔓延燃烧几百家。
English: The fire flared up on all sides, spreading and burning hundreds of homes.

古文：四十三年四月壬午，双鹤衔火，飞集掖县海神庙殿。
现代文：四十三年四月壬午日，两只鹤衔着火，飞来落在掖县海神庙的殿堂上。
English: On the afternoon of April 30, 1943, two cranes caught fire and landed on the main hall of the Sea God Temple in Handan County.

古文：明日，庙火。
现代文：第二天，庙宇起火。
English: The next day, the temple caught fire.

古文：崇祯六年，汝宁有鸟，鸠身猴足。
现代文：崇祯六年，汝宁有乌，像鸠乌的身子，猴子的足。
English: Over the past six years, Ru Ning has grown like a weasel, with the body of a weasel and the legs of a monkey.

古文：凤阳恶鸟数万，兔头、鸡身、鼠足，供馔甚肥，犯其骨立死。
现代文：凤阳怪鸟数万只，像兔子的头、鸡的身子、老鼠的足，供给的食物很肥厚，触犯乌的骨头，便会立即死去。
English: Tens of thousands of phoenix-yang strange birds, like the head of a rabbit, the body of a chicken, the foot of a mouse, the food provided is very thick, if it touches the bone of the wax, it will die immediately.

古文：▲羊祸
现代文：羊祸
English: The scourge of sheep

古文：万历三十八年四月，崞县民家羊产羔，一首、二眼、四耳、二尾、八足。
现代文：万历三十八年四月，崞县百姓家中母羊产小羊羔，一颗头，两只眼睛，四个耳朵，二条尾巴，八只足。
English: In April of the year 38 of the lunar calendar, a ewe in the home of a villager in Handan County gave birth to a lamb. It had one head, two eyes, four ears, two tails, and eight legs.

古文：三十九年四月，降夷部产羊羔，人面羊身。
现代文：三十九年四月，降夷部中生羊羔，呈人的脸，羊的身子。
English: In April of the year thirty-nine, a lamb with a human face and a sheep's body was born.

古文：▲火灾
现代文：火灾
English: The fire

古文：洪武元年七月丁酉，京师火，延烧永济仓。
现代文：洪武元年七月丁酉日，京城发生火灾，蔓延燃烧到永济仓。
English: In July of the first year of Hongwu, on the day of Dinglong, a fire broke out in Beijing and spread to Yongji Cang.

古文：三年二月己巳，大河卫火，燔及广积库。
现代文：三年二月己巳日，大河卫发生火灾，焚烧到广积库。
English: On February 3rd, a fire broke out in Daihewei, and the fire spread to the warehouse.

古文：七月乙未，宝源局火。
现代文：七月乙末日，宝源局发生火灾。
English: On the last day of July, a fire broke out at the Treasure Bureau.

古文：甲子，凤台门军营火，延烧武德卫军器局。
现代文：甲子日，凤台尸皇军营发生火灾，蔓延燃烧了武德卫军器局。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, a fire broke out in the Fengtai corpse king military camp, spreading and burning the Military Equipment Bureau of the German Armed Forces.

古文：四年十一月癸亥，京师大军仓灾。
现代文：四年十一月癸亥日，京城大军仓库发生火灾。
English: On November 4th, a fire broke out in the warehouse of the Beijing Great Army.

古文：五年二月癸未，临濠府火。
现代文：五年二月癸未日，临濠府发生火灾。
English: On the last day of February 2005, a fire broke out in Linfen.

古文：壬辰至甲午，京师火，毁龙骧等六卫军民庐舍。
现代文：壬辰日至甲午日，京城发生火灾，焚毁龙脓等六卫军民的住房。
English: From Imjin to the afternoon of the 1st, a fire broke out in the capital, burning the houses of the soldiers and civilians of the Six Guards such as Longjing.

古文：七月丁卯，永清卫军器库火。
现代文：七月丁卯日，永清塑军器库发生火灾。
English: In July, a fire broke out at the Yongqing Plastic Arsenal.

古文：十二月丙戌，京师定远等卫火，焚及军器局兵仗。
现代文：十二月丙戌日，京城定远等卫发生火灾，焚烧到军器局，烧毁武器。
English: On December 6th, a fire broke out in the Beijing Dingyuan and other Wei, burned to the Ordnance Bureau, and burned weapons.

古文：十七年十二月己未，潮州火，官廨民居及仓廪、兵仗、图籍焚荡无遗。
现代文：十七年十二月己末日，潮州发生火灾，官署和百姓房屋以及仓麇、武器、图书簿籍全部烧毁无遣留。
English: On the last day of December 17th, a fire broke out in Chaozhou. The government offices and people's houses, as well as warehouses, weapons, and books, were all burned to the ground.

古文：二十一年二月戊辰，历代帝王庙火，上元县治亦灾。
现代文：二十一年二月戊辰日，历代帝王庙发生火灾，上元县治所也遭火灾。
English: On February 21st, the day of Pentecost, a fire broke out in the temple of the emperors of past dynasties, and the Shangyuan County Government also suffered a fire.

古文：甲戌，天界、能仁二寺灾。
现代文：甲戌日，天界、能仁二寺发生火灾。
English: On Armistice Day, a fire broke out at two temples, Tenkai and Nohnin.

古文：二十九年二月辛丑，通州火，燔屋千九百余。
现代文：二十九年二月辛丑日，通州发生火灾，焚毁房屋一千九百多间。
English: On February 29, a fire broke out in Tongzhou, destroying more than 1,900 houses.

古文：三十年四月甲午，广南卫火，延烧城楼及卫治仓库。
现代文：三十年四月甲午日，广南卫发生火灾，蔓延燃烧城楼和卫治所的仓库。
English: On the afternoon of April 1st, 30 years ago, a fire broke out in Guangnan Weihai, burning the city tower and the warehouse of the Weihai Institute.

古文：建文二年八月癸巳，承天门灾。
现代文：建文二年八月癸巳日，承天门发生火灾。
English: In August of the second year of Jianwen, a fire broke out in Chengtianmen.

古文：永乐四年十二月辛亥，瓯宁王邸第火，王薨。
现代文：永乐四年十二月辛亥日，瓯宁王腐邸发生火灾，王死。
English: In December of the fourth year of Yongle, on the day of Xinhai, a fire broke out in Wang Fu's residence in Huning, and Wang died.

古文：十三年正月壬子，北京午门灾。
现代文：十三年正月壬子日，北京午门发生火灾。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the year, a fire broke out in Beijing's Noon Gate.

古文：十九年四月庚子，奉天、谨身、华盖三殿灾。
现代文：十九年四月庚子日，奉天、谨身、华盖三殿发生火灾。
English: On April 19th, the day of the Emperor, a fire broke out in the three halls of Bongten, Genshin, and Huagai.

古文：二十年闰十二月戊寅，乾清宫灾。
现代文：二十年闰十二月戊寅日，干清宫发生火灾。
English: On the 20th day of the 12th lunar month, a fire broke out in Ganqing Palace.

古文：宣德三年三月己亥，东岳泰山庙火。
现代文：宣德三年三月已亥日，束岳泰山庙发生火灾。
English: In March of the third year of Xuande's reign, a fire broke out in the Shuangyue Tai Mountain Temple.

古文：六年八月，武昌火，延烧楚王宫，谱系敕符俱烬。
现代文：六年八月，武昌发生火灾，蔓延燃烧楚王宫，谱系书和朝廷敕符都被焚毁。
English: In August of the sixth year, a fire broke out in Wuchang, spreading and burning the palace of King Chu. The genealogy book and the imperial seal were all burned.

古文：甲辰，天津右卫北城外火，飞焰入城，烧仓廒。
现代文：甲辰日，天津右卫北城外发生火灾，飞起的火焰飘落到城中，烧毁仓厫。
English: On the first day of the month, a fire broke out outside Tianjin Uibei City. Flames from the fire flew into the city and burned down warehouses.

古文：九年二月庚午，京城东南楼火。
现代文：九年二月庚午日，京城东南楼发生火灾。
English: On the afternoon of February 9th, a fire broke out in the South-East Building of the Beijing Municipal Government.

古文：正统二年二月，西镇吴山庙火。
现代文：正统二年二月，西镇昊山庙发生火灾。
English: In February of the second year of orthodoxy, a fire broke out in the Haoshan Temple in Xizhen.

古文：三年八月辛酉，顺天贡院火，席舍多焚，改期再试。
现代文：三年八月辛酉日，顺天贡院发生火灾，席舍很多被焚烧，只得改期再进行考试。
English: On August 3rd, a fire broke out in Shun Tian Gong Academy, and many seats were burned. The examination had to be rescheduled.

古文：十二月乙亥，韩府承运殿灾。
现代文：十二月乙亥日，韩府承运殿发生火灾。
English: On December 1st, a fire broke out at the Hanfu Transportation Center.

古文：四年三月戊午，代府寝殿火。
现代文：四年三月戊午日，代府的寝殿发生火灾。
English: On the afternoon of March 4th, a fire broke out in the governor's bedchamber.

古文：七年正月，广昌木厂火，焚松木八千八百余株。
现代文：七年正月，广昌的木厂发生火灾，焚烧松木八千八百多株。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, a fire broke out in a wood factory in Guangchang, burning more than 8,800 pine trees.

古文：戊午，南京内府火，燔廊房六十余间，图籍、器用、守卫衣甲皆空。
现代文：戊午日，南京内府发生火灾，焚毁廊房六十多间，图书簿籍、器物用具、守卫衣甲都被烧光。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, a fire broke out in the inner city of Nanjing, destroying more than 60 galleries, books, equipment, and guards' uniforms.

古文：三月辛未，赵城娲皇寝庙火。
现代文：三月辛末日，趟城娲皇寝庙发生火灾。
English: On the last day of Xin in March, a fire broke out in the Emperor's sleeping temple in Wucheng.

古文：十年正月庚寅，忠义前后二卫灾。
现代文：十年正月庚寅日，忠义前、后二卫发生火灾。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, Geng Yin, a fire broke out in Zhongyi Qian and He Erwei.

古文：是时太仓屡火，遣官祷祭火龙及太岁以禳之。
现代文：当时太仓多次发生火灾，朝廷派官吏祷告祭祀火龙以及太岁以禳除灾患。
English: At that time, there were many fires in Taicang, and the imperial court sent officials to pray and sacrifice dragons and dragons to get rid of the disaster.

古文：五月甲申，忠义后卫仓复火。
现代文：五月甲申日，忠义后卫仓库又发生火灾。
English: On the third day of May, another fire broke out in the Zhongyi rearguard warehouse.

古文：癸巳，通州右卫仓火。
现代文：癸巳日，通州右卫仓库发生火灾。
English: On the same day, a fire broke out in the warehouse of Tongzhou Uwei.

古文：十一月丁酉，御花房火。
现代文：十一月丁酉日，御花房发生火灾。
English: In November, a fire broke out in the flower shop.

古文：十一年秋，武昌火。死者数百人。
现代文：十一年秋季，武昌发生火灾，死亡敷百人。
English: In the fall of 2011, a fire broke out in Wuchang, killing nearly 100 people.

古文：十二月乙未，周府灾。
现代文：十二月乙末日，周府发生火灾。
English: On the last day of December, a fire broke out in Zhoufu.

古文：十二年六月，南京山川坛灾。
现代文：十二年六月，南京山川坛发生火灾。
English: In June of the same year, a fire broke out in a temple in Nanjing.

古文：十三年二月癸酉，忠义前卫仓火。
现代文：十三年二月癸酉日，忠义前卫仓库发生火灾。
English: On February 13th, a fire broke out at the Zhongyi Avant-garde Warehouse.

古文：十四年六月丙辰夜，南京谨身、奉天、华盖三殿灾。
现代文：十四年六月丙辰日夜晚，南京谨身、奉天、华盖三殿发生火灾。
English: On the evening of June 14th, a fire broke out in the three halls of Nanjing Zenshi, Bongtian and Huagai.

古文：景泰二年六月丙子，青州废齐府火。
现代文：景泰二年六月丙子日，青州废查应发生火灾。
English: In June of the second year of Jing Tai, on the third day of the month, a fire broke out in the waste inspection department of Qingzhou.

古文：三年八月戊寅，秦府火。
现代文：三年八月戊寅日，秦府发生火灾。
English: On August 3rd, a fire broke out in Qin Prefecture.

古文：五年春，南京火，延烧数千家。
现代文：五年春季，南京发生火灾，蔓延燃烧敷千家。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, a fire broke out in Nanjing, spreading and burning thousands of houses.

古文：七年九月壬申，宁府火，延烧八百余家。
现代文：七年九月王申日，宁府发生火灾，蔓延烧毁八百多家。
English: On September 7th, Wang Sheng Day, a fire broke out in Ningfu, spreading and burning more than 800 people.

古文：天顺元年七月丙寅夜，承天门灾。
现代文：天顺元年七月丙寅日夜晚，承天门发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out at Chengdian Gate on the evening of July 4th in the first year of Tianshun.

古文：二年五月戊子，器皿厂火。
现代文：二年五月戊子日，器皿厂发生火灾。
English: On May 2nd, a fire broke out in the ware factory.

古文：三年九月庚寅，肃州城中火，延烧五千四百余家，死者六十余人。
现代文：三年九月庚寅日，肃州城中发生火灾，蔓延燃烧五千四百多家，死亡六十多人。
English: On September 3rd, a fire broke out in the city of Suzhou, burning more than 5,400 people and killing more than 60 people.

古文：四年八月己巳，光禄寺大烹内门火。
现代文：四年八月己巳日，光禄寺大烹内门发生火灾。
English: On August 4th, a fire broke out at the inner gate of the Great Kitchen of Koroku-ji Temple.

古文：是岁，楚府频火，宫殿家庙悉毁。
现代文：这一年，楚府频繁发生火灾，宫殿、家庙全部被焚毁。
English: In that year, there were frequent fires in Chu Prefecture, and the palace and family temple were all burned down.

古文：五年三月丁卯，南京朝天宫灾。
现代文：五年三月丁卯日，南京朝天宫发生火灾。
English: In March of the same year, a fire broke out in the Choten Palace in Nanjing.

古文：六年六月癸未，楚府火。
现代文：六年六月癸末日，楚府发生火灾。
English: On the last day of June, a fire broke out in Chu Prefecture.

古文：七年正月丁酉，南京西安门木厂火，延烧皇墙。
现代文：七年正月丁酉日，直立西安门木厂发生火灾，蔓延燃烧皇城城墙。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, on the day of Ding Xi, a fire broke out in the Zhi Li Xi'an Gate Wood Factory, spreading and burning the imperial city wall.

古文：二月戊辰，会试天下举人，火作于贡院，御史焦显扃其门，烧杀举子九十余人。
现代文：二月戊辰日，会集考试天下举人，火灾在贡院发生，御史焦颢关闭院门，烧死考试的举子九十多人。
English: On the day of Pentecost in February, a fire broke out in the Tribute Academy, closing the doors and killing more than 90 exam candidates.

古文：成化二年九月癸未，南京御用监火。
现代文：成化二年九月癸末日，南京御用监发生火灾。
English: On the last day of September, Chenghua Year 2, a fire broke out in the Nanjing Public Security Bureau.

古文：六年十一月己亥，江浦火，延烧二百六十余家。
现代文：六年十一月己亥日，江浦发生火灾，蔓延烧毁二百六十多家。
English: On November 6, Ji Hai Day, a fire broke out in Jiangpu, spreading and burning more than 260 villages.

古文：九年七月庚戌，东直门灾。
现代文：九年七月庚戌日，柬直门发生火灾。
English: In July of the ninth year, on the day of Geng Zi, a fire broke out in Kamm Zhi Men.

古文：十一年四月壬辰夜，乾清宫门灾。
现代文：十一年四月壬辰日夜晚，干清官门发生火灾。
English: On the evening of April 11th, a fire broke out at the gate of the dry-cleaning office.

古文：十三年十一月壬辰，太仓米麦，岁久蒸浥，自焚百余石。
现代文：十三年十一月壬辰日，太仓米麦，因年久水气蒸发，自燃焚毁一百多石。
English: On November 13th, more than 100 kilos of rice and barley in Taicang were destroyed by spontaneous combustion due to long-term water vapor evaporation.

古文：十八年八月丙午，合州火，延烧千五百余家。
现代文：十八年八月丙午日，合州发生火灾，蔓延烧毁一千五百多家。
English: On the afternoon of August 18th, a fire broke out in Hezhou, spreading and burning more than 1,500 buildings.

古文：乙卯，楚府火凡三发。
现代文：乙卯日，楚府火灾一共发生三次。
English: On the second day of the month, there were a total of three fires in Chu Prefecture.

古文：十一月戊午，南京国子监火。
现代文：十一月戊午日，直立园子监发生火灾。
English: On the afternoon of November 3rd, a fire broke out in the Zi Guan of the Zhi Zhuang Garden.

古文：十二月乙卯，器皿厂火。
现代文：十二月乙卯日，器皿厂发生火灾。
English: On December 2nd, a fire broke out in the tableware factory.

古文：壬辰，宁河王府火。
现代文：壬辰日，宁河王府发生火灾。
English: On the day of Imjin, a fire broke out in Ninghe Wangfu.

古文：先有妖夜见，或为神，或为王侯，时举火作欲焚状，是夜燔府第无遗，冠服器用皆烬。
现代文：先有妖物晚上出现，或变为神，或变为王侯，时而举火作要焚烧的样子，这一夜焚毁府第没有遗留，冠服器具都被烧尽。
English: First, monsters appeared in the evening, either turning into gods or princes, sometimes lighting fires to look like they were about to burn. On this night, there was nothing left of the destroyed palace, and all the ceremonial clothing and utensils were burned.

古文：二十年正月戊戌，钦天监火。
现代文：二十年正月戊戌，钦天监发生火灾。
English: In the first month of the 20th year, a fire broke out in Qin Tianyuan.

古文：二十二年六月，临海县灾，延烧千七百余家。
现代文：二十二年六月，临海县发生火灾，蔓延燃烧一千七百多家。
English: In June 2002, a fire broke out in Linhai County, spreading and burning more than 1,700 acres.

古文：弘治元年三月庚寅，南京内花园火。
现代文：弘治元年三月庚寅日，南京内花园发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in a garden in Nanjing on Geng Yin Day in March 1861.

古文：十一月丁丑夜，南京甲字库灾。
现代文：十一月丁丑日晚上，南京甲字库发生火灾。
English: On the evening of November 1st, a fire broke out in the A-character library in Nanjing.

古文：二年四月乙未，南京神乐观火。
现代文：二年四月乙末日，南京神乐观发生火灾。
English: On the last day of April of the second year, a fire broke out in Nanjing.

古文：四年二月戊午，礼部官舍火。
现代文：四年二月戊午日，礼部官舍发生火灾。
English: On the afternoon of February 4th, a fire broke out in the official residence of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：六年四月甲寅，刑部官舍火。
现代文：六年四月甲寅日，刑部官舍发生火灾。
English: On April 6th, a fire broke out in the official residence of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：辛酉夜，南京旧内灾。
现代文：辛酉日晚上，南京旧内发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in the old quarter of Nanjing on the evening of the 26th.

古文：八年三月戊子，镇东等堡跃火星如斗，毁公馆仓廒，人马多毙。
现代文：八年三月戊子日，镇柬等堡跃动火星，大如量斗，焚毁公家馆舍仓库，人马多被烧死。
English: In March of the eighth year, on the day of the Wu Zi, the town of Cambodia and other fortresses leapt into action, as large as a scale, burning public buildings and warehouses, and many people were burned to death.

古文：十一年，自春徂夏，贵州大火。毁官民房舍千八百余所，死伤者六千余人。
现代文：十一年，从春季到夏季，贵州发生大火灾，焚毁官府平民的房屋一千八百多所，死伤六千多人。
English: In the eleventh year, from spring to summer, a large fire occurred in Guizhou, burning more than 1,800 houses of government civilians, killing and injuring more than 6,000 people.

古文：十月甲戌夜，清宁宫灾。
现代文：十月甲戌日晚上，渣室宣发生火灾。
English: On the evening of October 6th, a fire broke out in Zhashu Xuan.

古文：十二年六月甲辰夜，阙里圣庙灾。
现代文：十二年六月甲辰日晚上，阙里的圣庙发生火灾。
English: On the evening of June 12th, a fire broke out in a holy temple in Bali.

古文：十二月，建阳县书坊火，古今书板皆烬。
现代文：十二月，建阳县书坊发生火灾，古今的书籍雕版都被烧毁。
English: In December, a fire broke out in the bookstore of Jianyang County, and the engraved plates of ancient and modern books were all burned.

古文：十三年二月乙酉，礼部官舍火。
现代文：十三年二月乙酉日，礼部官舍襞生火灾。
English: On February 13th, a fire broke out in the residence of the etiquette official.

古文：七月甲寅，南城县空中有火，乍分乍合，流光下坠十余丈，隐隐有声，毁军民庐舍。
现代文：七月甲寅日，南城县空中有火焰，时而分时而合，流动的火光下坠十多丈，隐隐有声响，焚毁军民房屋。
English: On July 1st, there were flames in the air of Nancheng County. They were intermittent, falling more than ten meters in height under the flowing flames. There were faint sounds, and military and civilian houses were burned.

古文：庚申，永宁卫雁尾山至居庸关之石纵山，东西四十余里，南北七十余里，延烧七昼夜。
现代文：庚申日，永宁卫历尾山至居庸关的石纵山，东西四十多里，南北七十多里，绵延燃烧七个昼夜。
English: On Goshun's day, Yongning Weili Tail Mountain to Juyongguan's Shizhen Mountain, more than forty miles from east to west, more than seventy miles from north to south, burned for seven days and nights.

古文：闰七月辛巳，福州城楼毁。
现代文：闰七月辛巳日，福州城楼遭火焚毁。
English: In July, Fuzhou City Tower was destroyed by fire.

古文：八月己未，沈府火。
现代文：八月己末日，渖府发生火灾。
English: On the last day of August, a fire broke out in Yefu.

古文：十一月庚辰，宁河府火。
现代文：十一月庚辰日，宁河府发生火灾。
English: In November, a fire broke out in Ninghe Prefecture.

古文：十六年三月庚午，辽东铁岭卫坠火如斗。
现代文：十六年三月庚午日，辽东铁岭卫坠落火团大如量斗。
English: On the afternoon of the 16th day of March, Liaodong Tielingwei was hit by a large fireball.

古文：丙子，火起，烧房屋二千五百余间，死者百余人。
现代文：丙子日，火灾发生，烧毁房屋二千五百多间，死亡一百多人。
English: On the third day, a fire broke out, destroying more than 2,500 houses and killing more than 100 people.

古文：四月戊午，宽河卫仓灾，毁米豆四万余石。
现代文：四月戊午日，宽困仓库发生火灾，焚毁米、豆四万多石。
English: On the afternoon of April 3rd, a fire broke out in a warehouse in Kuanzai, burning more than 40,000 kilos of rice and beans.

古文：九月戊寅，广宁卫城火，燔三百余家。
现代文：九月戊寅日，广宁卫城发生火灾，焚烧三百多家。
English: On September 30, a fire broke out in Guangning Acropolis, burning more than 300 towers.

古文：十七年四月丁巳，淮安火焚五百余家。
现代文：十七年四月丁巳日，淮安火灾焚毁五百多家。
English: On April 17th, more than 500 people were burned to death in a fire in Huai'an.

古文：五月癸巳，正阳门内西廊火，燔武功坊。
现代文：五月癸巳，正阳门内西廊发生火灾，焚毁武功坊。
English: In May, a fire broke out in the west corridor of the Zhengyang Gate, destroying the martial arts workshop.

古文：正德元年二月庚寅，郧阳火，毁谯楼官舍，延百余家。
现代文：正德元年二月庚寅日，鄙阳发生火灾，烧毁谯楼官舍，蔓延焚烧一百多家。
English: In February of the first year of Zhengde, on the day of Geng Yin, a fire broke out in Mianyang, burning down the government office building, spreading and burning more than a hundred people.

古文：是岁，宁夏左屯卫红气亘天，既而火作，城楼台堡俱烬。
现代文：这一年，室基左屯卫红气横页天空，随后火灾发生，城楼台堡都被烧尽。
English: In this year, the red atmosphere of Muroki Zuotunwei spread across the sky, and then a fire broke out, and the castle towers were all burned down.

古文：六月庚寅，大同平虏城灾，燔藁百万余。
现代文：六月庚寅日，左旦壬卢城发生火灾，焚毁藁草一百多万。
English: In June, on Geng Yin Day, a fire broke out in the city of Zuodan Minlu, burning more than one million reeds.

古文：十一月己亥，临海县治火，延烧数千家。
现代文：十一月己亥日，临海县治所发生火灾，蔓延烧毁数千家。
English: In November, a fire broke out at the Linhai County government office, spreading and burning down thousands of homes.

古文：七年三月己未，峄县有火如斗，自空而陨，大风随之，毁官民房千余间。
现代文：七年三月己末日，峰县有火球如量斗，从空中坠落下来，大风随着火，焚毁官府平民房屋一千多间。
English: On the last day of March in the seventh year, there was a fireball falling from the sky in Feng County, and the wind followed the fire, burning more than a thousand civilian houses of the government.

古文：火逸城外，延及丘木。
现代文：火迅速蔓延到城外，蔓延燃烧到山丘树木。
English: The fire quickly spread outside the city, spreading and burning into the hills and trees.

古文：庚申，成山卫秦皇庙火，屋宇悉毁，像设如故。
现代文：庚申日，成山卫秦皇庙发生火灾，房屋全部被烧毁，而塑像则仍是原样。
English: On Goshun day, a fire broke out in the Chengshan Wei Qinhuang Temple. All the houses were burned down, but the statue is still as it was.

古文：是月，文登大桑树火，树燔而枝叶无损。
现代文：这个月，文登大桑树起火，树干焚烧而枝叶却没有损伤。
English: This month, the Wenden giant mulberry caught fire, the trunk burned but the branches and leaves were not damaged.

古文：五月癸酉至闰五月丙子，辽东懿路城火三作，焚官民庐舍之半。
现代文：五月癸酉日至闰五月丙子日，辽束懿路城火灾三次发生，烧毁半敷官府、平民的房屋。
English: From the third day of May to the third day of the leap month of May, there were three fires in Liaozhukou Road City, which burned down half of the government buildings and civilian houses.

古文：九月壬午，玉山火，燔学舍及民居三百余家。
现代文：九月壬午日，玉山发生火灾，焚烧学校及平民的房屋三百多家。
English: On the afternoon of September 9, a fire broke out in Yushan, burning schools and more than 300 civilian homes.

古文：八年六月辛酉，丰城县西南连陨火星，如盆如斗。
现代文：八年六月辛酉日，丰城县西南连续陨坠火星，有的如盆大，有的如斗大。
English: On June 8th, the hottest day of the year, the southwest of Fengcheng County was continuously hit by meteorites, some as large as a bowl, some as large as a bucket.

古文：既而火作，至七月初始熄，燔二万余家。
现代文：随后火灾发生，到七月初纔熄灭，焚毁二万多家。
English: Subsequently, a fire broke out, which was extinguished by the beginning of July, and more than twenty thousand people were burned.

古文：七月戊子，火陨龙泉县，焚四千余家。
现代文：七月戊子日，火坠落在龙泉县，焚烧房屋四千多家。
English: On July 31, a fire broke out in Longquan County, burning more than 4,000 houses.

古文：十月壬寅，饶州及永丰、浮梁火，各燔五百余家。
现代文：十月壬寅日，饶州以及永丰、浮梁发生火灾，各自焚毁五百多家。
English: In October, on Jinyin Day, a fire broke out in Raozhou, Yongfeng and Fuxiang, each of which burned more than 500 people.

古文：浮梁学舍灾。
现代文：浮梁学校遭火灾。
English: The Floating Beam School has been destroyed by fire.

古文：庚申，临江火，燔官舍，延八百余家。
现代文：庚申日，临江发生火灾，焚毁官府房屋，蔓延烧毁八百多家。
English: On Goshun's Day, a fire broke out in Linjiang, burning government buildings and spreading to more than 800 others.

古文：九年正月庚辰，乾清宫火。
现代文：九年正月庚辰日，干清官发生火灾。
English: On the day of Geng Chen in the first month of the ninth year, a fire broke out in the dry-cleaning department.

古文：十一年八月丁丑，黔阳火，毁城楼官廨，延七百余家。
现代文：十一年八月丁丑日，黔阳发生火灾，焚毁城楼、官署，蔓延烧毁房屋七百多家。
English: On August 11, Dingwushi Day, a fire broke out in Shenyang, burning down city buildings and government offices, and spreading to more than 700 houses.

古文：十二年正月甲辰，清宁宫小房火。
现代文：十二年正月甲辰日，遗室宣小虏发生火灾。
English: On the first day of the first month of the twelfth year, a fire broke out in the house of his widow, Xuan Xiaoru.

古文：四月，裕陵神宫监火。
现代文：四月，裕陵神宫监发生火灾。
English: In April, a fire broke out in the Yuryo Jingu prison.

古文：八月丁卯，南昌火，燔三百家。
现代文：八月丁卯日，南昌发生火灾，烧毁房屋三百家。
English: In August, a fire broke out in Nanchang, destroying 300 houses.

古文：九月壬午，建安火，燔二百五十余家。
现代文：九月壬午日，建安发生火灾，烧毁二百五十多家。
English: On the afternoon of September 9, a fire broke out in Jian'an, burning more than 250 houses.

古文：十三年二月己卯，夷陵火，燔七百余家。
现代文：十三年二月己卯日，夷陵发生火灾，焚毁七百多家。
English: On February 13th, a fire broke out in Yiling, burning more than 700 tombs.

古文：八月庚辰，献陵明楼灾。
现代文：八月庚辰日，献陵明楼发生火灾。
English: In August, on the day of Geng Chen, a fire broke out in Xianling Minglou.

古文：丁酉，延平火，燔五百余家。
现代文：丁酉日，延平发生火灾，焚毁房屋五百多家。
English: On the day of Ding Xi, a fire broke out in Yanping, destroying more than 500 houses.

古文：十四年四月乙巳，淮安新城火。
现代文：十四年四月乙巳日，淮安新城发生火灾。
English: On April 14th, a fire broke out in Huai'an New Town.

古文：七月丙辰，泰宁火，燔五千余家。
现代文：七月丙辰日，泰宁发生火灾，焚毁房屋五千多家。
English: On July 4th, a fire broke out in Taining, destroying more than 5,000 houses.

古文：十五年五月辛卯，静乐火，燔八百余家。
现代文：十五年五月辛卯日，静乐发生火灾，焚毁八百多家。
English: On May 15, Xinwu Day, a fire broke out in Jingle, burning more than 800 people.

古文：嘉靖元年正月己未，清宁宫后三小宫灾。杨廷和言废礼之应，不报。
现代文：嘉靖元年正月己末日，清宁宫后三个小宫发生火灾，杨廷和上言说是废弃大礼的报应，皇上不回复。
English: It was the last day of the first month of the first year of Jiajing. A fire broke out in the three small palaces behind the Qingning Palace. Yang Tinghe said that it was the retribution of abandoning the grand gift. The emperor did not reply.

古文：二月己丑，南京针线厂火。
现代文：二月己丑日，南京针线厂发生火灾。
English: In February, a fire broke out at the Nanjing Needle and Thread Factory.

古文：己亥，通州城楼火。
现代文：己亥日，通州城楼发生火灾。
English: On the day of Ji Hai, a fire broke out in Tongzhou City Tower.

古文：二年五月丙子，荣府火。
现代文：二年五月丙子，荣府发生火灾。
English: In May of the same year, a fire broke out in Rongfu.

古文：九月戊辰，秦府宫殿火。
现代文：九月戊辰日，秦府宫殿发生火灾。
English: In September, on the day of Pentecost, a fire broke out in the Qin Palace.

古文：四年三月壬午夜，仁寿宫灾，玉德、安喜、景福诸殿俱烬。
现代文：四年三月壬午日晚上，仁寿宫发生火灾，玉德、安喜、景福等殿都被焚为灰烬。
English: On the evening of the second day of the third month of the fourth year, a fire broke out in Renshou Palace, and the palaces of Jade, Anxi, and Gingfu were all burned to ashes.

古文：五年三月乙酉，赵府家庙火。
现代文：五年三月乙酉日，趟府家庙发生火灾。
English: In March of the fifth year, a fire broke out in the temple.

古文：六年三月丁亥，西库火。
现代文：六年三月丁亥日，西库发生火灾。
English: In March of the 6th year of Dinghai, a fire broke out in Xiku.

古文：八年十月癸未，大内所房灾。
现代文：八年十月癸末日，大内所房发生火灾。
English: On the last day of October, a fire broke out in the university's main building.

古文：十年正月辛亥，大内东偏火。
现代文：十年正月辛亥日，大内束侧发生火灾。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of Xinhai, a fire broke out on the side of the large inner bundle.

古文：四月庚辰，兵、工二部公廨灾，毁文籍。
现代文：四月庚辰，兵、工二部公署发生火灾，焚毁文献书籍。
English: In April, Gengchen, a fire broke out in the Public Security Bureau of the Second Department of the People's Liberation Army and the Second Department of the People's Liberation Army. Literature and books were burned.

古文：十三年六月甲子，南京太庙火，毁前后殿、东西庑、神厨库。
现代文：十三年六月甲子日，南京太廓发生火灾，焚毁前后殿、东西庶、神厕库。
English: On the 13th day of the 6th month, a fire broke out in Nanjing Taikou, destroying the front and back halls, the east and west wings, and the sacred toilet.

古文：十五年四月癸卯，山西平虏卫火，尽毁神机官库军器。
现代文：十五年四月癸卯，山西平虏卫发生火灾，全部烧毁神机官库的军器。
English: At the end of April 15th, a fire broke out in Pingruwei, Shanxi Province, and all the military equipment in the official storehouse of sacred machines was burned.

古文：十八年二月乙丑，赵州及临洺镇行宫俱火。
现代文：十八年二月乙丑日，赵州及临沼镇行官都遭受火灾。
English: In February of the 18th year, on the second day of the Ugly, Zhao Prefecture and Linnuma Town were both hit by fire.

古文：丁卯，驾幸卫辉，行宫四更火，陆炳负帝出，后宫及内侍有殒于火者。
现代文：丁卯日，皇帝驾临煎辉，四更时行宫发生火灾，陆炳背着皇帝逃出，后宫以及内侍有的在火灾中殡命。
English: On the day of Dingwu, the emperor arrived in Shenghui. On the fourth day, a fire broke out in the imperial palace. Lu Wei fled with the emperor on his back. The harem and some of the palace attendants died in the fire.

古文：六月丁酉，皇城北鼓楼灾。
现代文：六月丁酉日，皇城北鼓楼发生火灾。
English: In June, a fire broke out in the North Drum Tower of the Imperial City.

古文：二十年四月辛酉夜，宗庙灾。毁成、仁二庙主。
现代文：二十年四月辛酉日晚上，宗庙发生火灾，焚毁成、仁二庙主。
English: On the evening of April 20, a fire broke out in the ancestral temple and destroyed the two temple masters, Cheng and Ren.

古文：二十五年五月壬申，盔甲厂火。
现代文：二十五年五月壬申日，盔甲厂发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in an armour factory on May 25th, Jinshin Day.

古文：二十六年十一月壬午，宫中火，释杨爵于狱。
现代文：二十六年十一月壬午日，皇宫中发生火灾，从监狱中把杨爵释放出来。
English: On the afternoon of November 26, a fire broke out in the imperial palace, and Yang Jie was released from prison.

古文：三十一年八月乙丑，南京试院火。
现代文：三十一年八月乙丑日，南京考试院发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out at the Nanjing Examination Institute on August 31, 1931.

古文：三十五年九月戊辰，杭州大火，延烧数千家。
现代文：三十五年九月戊辰日，杭州发生火灾，蔓延烧毁敷千家。
English: On September 30, 355, a fire broke out in Hangzhou, spreading and burning thousands of houses.

古文：三十六年四月丙申，奉天、华盖、谨身三殿，文武二楼，午门、奉天门俱灾。
现代文：三十六年四月丙申日，奉天、华盖、谨身三殿，文武二楼，午门、奉天门都发生火灾。
English: On April 36th, a fire broke out in the three halls of Fengtian, Huagai, and Jishin, the second floor of Wenwu, the afternoon gate, and the Fengtian gate.

古文：三十七年正月，光禄寺灾。
现代文：三十七年正月，光禄寺发生火灾。
English: In the first month of the year 37, a fire broke out in Koroku-ji Temple.

古文：三十八年正月癸未，前军都督府火。
现代文：三十八年正月癸末日，前军都督府发生火灾。
English: On the last day of the first month of the thirty-eighth year, a fire broke out in the former military governor's office.

古文：四十年十一月辛亥夜，万寿宫灾。
现代文：四十年十一月辛亥日晚上，万寿宫发生火灾。
English: On the evening of November 19th, a fire broke out in the Manju Palace.

古文：四十四年三月己亥夜，大明门内西千步廊火。
现代文：四十四年三月己亥日晓上，大明门内西千步廊发生火灾。
English: In the early morning of March 1944, a fire broke out in the West Thousand Corridor inside the Daming Gate.

古文：隆庆二年正月，浙江省城外灾。毁室庐舟舰以千计。
现代文：隆庆二年正月，浙江省城外发生火灾，焚毁房屋、船舰敷以千计。
English: In the first month of the second year of Longqing, a fire broke out outside the city in Zhejiang Province, burning thousands of houses and ships.

古文：三月乙亥，乾清、坤宁两宫，一时俱烬。
现代文：三月乙亥日，干清、坤宁两宫，一时之间全部被焚毁。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year in March, the two palaces of Ganqing and Kunning were all burned down in an instant.

古文：五年二月壬子，南京广、惠二仓火。
现代文：五年二月壬子日，南京广、惠二座仓库发生火灾。
English: On February 5th, a fire broke out in the warehouse of Nanjing Guang and Hui Niza.

古文：万历元年十一月己亥，慈宁宫后舍火。
现代文：万历元年十一月己亥日，慈宁官后舍发生火灾。
English: In November of the first year of Wanli, on the day of Ji Hai, a fire broke out in the official residence of Cining.

古文：三年四月甲戌，工部后厂火。
现代文：三年四月甲戌日，工部后厂发生火灾。
English: In April 2003, on Jiaxuan Day, a fire broke out in the factory behind the engineering department.

古文：五年十月丙申，禁中火。
现代文：五年十月丙申日，宫禁中发生火灾。
English: In October of the fifth year, a fire broke out in the palace.

古文：十一月癸未，宗人府灾。
现代文：十一月癸未日，宗人府发生火灾。
English: On the last day of November, a fire broke out in Sohin-fu.

古文：十一年十二月庚午夜，慈宁宫灾。
现代文：十一年十二月庚午日晚上，慈宁宫发生火灾。
English: On the evening of the afternoon of December 11, a fire broke out in the Jining Palace.

古文：十二年二月己酉，无逸殿灾。
现代文：十二年二月己酉日，无逸殿发生火灾。
English: In February of the 12th year, a fire broke out in Mu Yat-den.

古文：十二月癸卯朔，又灾。
现代文：十二月癸卯朔日，又发生火灾。
English: In December, another fire broke out.

古文：十五年五月甲子，司设监火。
现代文：十五年五月甲子日，司设监发生火灾。
English: On May 1st, 2015, a fire broke out in the director's office.

古文：十八年三月辛酉，辽东寨山儿堡火，毁城堡器械，伤九十余人。
现代文：十八年三月辛酉日，辽东寨山儿堡发生火灾，焚毁城堡中的器械，伤九十多人。
English: On March 18th, a fire broke out in Liaodong Zhai Children's Castle, burning the castle's equipment and injuring more than 90 people.

古文：十九年十二月甲辰，万法宝殿灾。
现代文：十九年十二月甲辰日，万法宝殿发生火灾。
English: On the first hour of the 19th day of December, a fire broke out in the Universal Law Treasure Hall.

古文：二十一年六月望，太仓公署后楼有炮声，火药器械俱烬。
现代文：二十一年六月望日，太仓公家官署后楼有炮声，火药器械全部被焚烧。
English: In June 21st, there was gunfire in the back building of the Taicang Public Official's Office, and all the gunpowder equipment was burned.

古文：二十二年五月壬寅，天火燔铁岭卫千余家。
现代文：二十二年五月壬寅，天火焚烧铁岭卫一千多家。
English: In May of the 22nd year of Ren Yin, the sky fire incinerated more than a thousand Tielingwei.

古文：二十四年二月甲寅，潞府门火。
现代文：二十四年二月甲寅日，潞府门发生火灾。
English: In February of the year twenty-four, on the day of Kato, a fire broke out at Shufu Gate.

古文：三月乙亥，火发坤宁宫，延及乾清宫，俱烬。
现代文：三月乙亥日，火灾在坤宁宫发生，蔓延到干清官，都被全部烧毁。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year in March, a fire broke out in the Kunning Palace, spreading to the dry-cleaning officials, all of whom were burned to death.

古文：二十五年二月壬午，杭州火，烧官民房千三百余间。
现代文：二十五年二月壬午日，杭州发生火灾，烧毁官府、平民房屋一千三百多问。
English: On the afternoon of February 25, a fire broke out in Hangzhou, destroying more than 1,300 government and civilian buildings.

古文：丙戌，马湖屏山灾，延燔八百余家，毙二十四人。
现代文：丙戌日，马湖屏山发生火灾，蔓延燃烧八百多家，烧死二十四人。
English: On the same day, a fire broke out in Mahu Pingshan, spreading and burning more than 800 people and killing 24.

古文：三月癸卯，泗州大火。烧民房四千余。
现代文：三月癸卯，泗州发生大火灾，烧毁民间的房屋四千多间。
English: At the end of March, a large fire broke out in Ganzhou, burning more than 4,000 private houses.

古文：盱眙火，燔民房百六十余间。
现代文：盱眙发生火灾，焚毁民房一百六十多间。
English: A fire broke out in Handan, destroying more than 160 houses.

古文：拨漕粮二万石以振。
现代文：拨给漕粮二万石，以赈救灾民。
English: Twenty thousand koku of rations were allocated to help the victims of the disaster.

古文：六月戊寅，三殿灾。火起归极门，延皇极等殿，文昭、武成二阁，周遭廊房，一时俱烬。
现代文：六月戊寅日，三殿发生火灾，火灾起自归极门，蔓延到皇极等殿，文昭、武成二阁，周围的廊房，一时之间被全部烧毁。
English: On June 30, a fire broke out in the Third Hall. The fire started at the Gate of Self-Return and spread to the Imperial Hall, the Hall of Literature, the Hall of Military Merit, and the surrounding galleries. All of them were destroyed in an instant.

古文：十二月甲寅，吏部文选司署火。
现代文：十二月甲寅日，吏部文选司官署发生火灾。
English: On December 1st, a fire broke out in the office of the Secretary for Civil Affairs of the Ministry of Personnel.

古文：二十七年十一月壬申，内府火，延烧尚宝司印绶监、工部廊，至银作局山墙而止。
现代文：二十七年十一月壬申日，内府发生火灾，蔓延燃烧尚宝司印绶监、工部的廊屋，直到银作局的山墙纔熄灭。
English: On November 27th, Jinshin Day, a fire broke out in Neifu. The fire spread and burned the hallway of the Shangbaoji Printing and Mint Supervisor and the Ministry of Works, until the gable roof of the Bureau of Silverwork was extinguished.

古文：二十八年三月，南阳火，延烧唐府。
现代文：二十八年三月，直坠发生火灾，蔓延烧毁唐府。
English: In March of the 28th year, a fire broke out, spreading and burning Tangfu.

古文：二十九年正月己巳，铁岭卫火，车辆火药俱烬。
现代文：二十九年正月己巳日，铁岭卫发生火灾，车辆、火药都被焚毁。
English: On the 29th day of the first month of the year, a fire broke out in Tielingwei. Vehicles and gunpowder were burned.

古文：八月己卯，大光明东配殿灾。
现代文：八月己卯日，大光明束配殿发生火灾。
English: On the last day of August, a fire broke out in the Great Brightness Hall.

古文：三十年二月乙酉，魏国公赐第火。
现代文：三十年二月乙酉日，魏国公恩赐的住宅发生火灾。
English: In February of the 30th year, a fire broke out in the residence of Wei Guogong.

古文：十月丙申，孝陵灾。
现代文：十月丙申日，孝陵发生火灾。
English: In October, a fire broke out in the Xiaoling Mausoleum.

古文：十二月庚子，南海普陀山寺灾。
现代文：十二月庚子日，南海普陀山寺院发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out at the Putuoshan Temple in Nanhai on December 9.

古文：三十一年九月戊寅，通州漕艘火。
现代文：三十一年九月戊寅日，通州漕运船发生火灾。
English: On September 31st, a fire broke out on the Tongzhou rowing boat.

古文：三十三年二月乙丑，御马监火。
现代文：三十三年二月乙卫日，御马监发生火灾。
English: In February 1933, a fire broke out at the Imperial Horse Guards.

古文：五月辛巳，洗白厂火。
现代文：五月辛巳日，洗白厂发生火灾。
English: In May, a fire broke out at a white-washing plant.

古文：九月甲午，昭和殿火。
现代文：九月甲午日，昭和殿发生火灾。
English: On the afternoon of September 1st, a fire broke out in Showa-den.

古文：丙申，官军于盔甲厂支火药，药年久凝如石，用斧劈之，火突发，声若震霆，刀枪火箭迸射百步外，军民死者无数。
现代文：丙申日，官军在盔甲厂处理火药，药时年已久，凝结如同石头，用斧头砍劈，火突然发作，爆炸声如同响雷，枪火箭迸发，射出一百步之外，军人和平民死亡不计其敷。
English: On the day of his death, the government army was handling gunpowder in an armour factory. The gunpowder had been aged for a long time, congealed like stone, chopped with an axe, the fire suddenly broke out, the explosion sounded like thunder, the gun rocket burst, shot out a hundred paces away, and soldiers and civilians died regardless.

古文：十一月丁卯，刑部提牢厅火。
现代文：十一月丁卯日，刑部提牢厅发生火灾。
English: In November, a fire broke out in the detention hall of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：三十五年二月乙卯，易州神器库火。
现代文：三十五年二月乙卯日，易州的神器库发生火灾。
English: On February 1st, 355, a fire broke out in the Ezhou artifact repository.

古文：四月丁酉，通州西仓火。
现代文：四月丁酉日，通州西仓发生火灾。
English: In April, a fire broke out in Tongzhou West Warehouse.

古文：十月己卯，南京行人司署毁。
现代文：十月己卯日，南京行人司官署被焚毁。
English: On the same day in October, the Nanjing Pedestrian Police Station was burned down.

古文：三十七年正月庚子，庆府火，燔寝宫及帑藏。
现代文：三十七年正月庚子日，庆府发生火灾，焚毁寝宫以及府库。
English: On the 37th day of the first month of the year Geng Zi, a fire broke out in Qingfu, burning down the palace and the prefectural treasury.

古文：三月丙戌，武昌火，越二日又火，共燔二百六十余家。
现代文：三月丙戍日，武昌发生火灾，遇了二日，又发生火灾，一共烧毁二百六十多家。
English: On the third day of March, a fire broke out in Wuchang. On the second day, another fire broke out, burning a total of more than 260 people.

古文：六月，庆府灾。
现代文：六月，庆府发生火灾。
English: In June, a fire broke out in Keifu.

古文：十月戊午，朝日坛火。
现代文：十月戊午日，朝日坛发生火灾。
English: On the afternoon of October 3rd, a fire broke out in the Asahi Altar.

古文：三十八年四月丁丑夜，正阳门箭楼火。
现代文：三十八年四月丁丑日晚上，正阳门箭楼发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in Zhengyangmen Arrow Tower on the evening of April 30, 38 AD.

古文：三十九年四月戊子，怡神殿灾。
现代文：三十九年四月戊子日，怡神殿发生火灾。
English: In April of the year thirty-nine, on the day of Wu Zi, a fire broke out in the Yi Temple.

古文：四十一年五月壬戌，蜀府灾，门殿为烬。
现代文：四十一年五月壬戌日，蜀府发生火灾，门殿被焚毁成灰烬。
English: On May 31, 1941, a fire broke out in Shu Prefecture, and the gate was burned to ashes.

古文：四十三年四月壬午，黄花镇柳沟火，延烧数十里。
现代文：四十三年四月壬午日，黄花镇柳沟发生火灾，蔓延烧毁数十里。
English: On the afternoon of April 30, 1943, a fire broke out in Liugou, Huanghua Town, spreading and burning for dozens of miles.

古文：甲午，蜀府殿庭灾。
现代文：甲午日，蜀府殿庭发生火灾。
English: On the afternoon of January 1, a fire broke out in the courtyard of the Shufu Palace.

古文：辽东长宁堡自二月至五月，火凡五发，毁房屋人畜无算。
现代文：辽东长宁堡从二月至五月，火灾一共发生五次，焚毁房屋、人民、牲畜不计其数。
English: From February to May, a total of five fires occurred in Changningburg, Liaodong, burning countless houses, people and livestock.

古文：闰八月辛亥，通州粮艘火。
现代文：闰八月辛亥日，通州粮船发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out on the Tongzhou grain ship on Xinhai Day, leap August.

古文：九月丁丑，湖口税廨毁。
现代文：九月丁丑日，湖口税务官署被焚毁。
English: In September, on Dingushi Day, the Hukou Tax Official's Office was burned down.

古文：四十四年十一月己巳，隆德殿灾。
现代文：四十四年十一月己巳日，隆德殿发生火灾。
English: In November 1944, a fire broke out in the Lund Palace.

古文：丁亥，南城延喜宫灾。
现代文：丁亥日，南城延喜官发生火灾。
English: On Dinghai Day, a fire broke out in the Nancheng Yanxi official residence.

古文：四十五年正月壬午，东朝房火，延毁公生门。
现代文：四十五隼正月壬午日，束朝房发生火灾，蔓延焚毁公生门。
English: On the morning of the 45th day of the 1st month of the lunar calendar, a fire broke out in the Sokcho House, spreading and burning down the Gongsheng Gate.

古文：十一月丙戌，宣禧宫灾。
现代文：十一月丙戌日，宣禧官发生火灾。
English: On November 6th, a fire broke out at the Xuanxi official residence.

古文：四十六年闰四月丁丑夜，开原殷家庄堡台杆八同时烬。
现代文：四十六年闰四月丁丑日夜晚，开原殷家庄堡台杆八根同时焚毁。
English: On the night of April Fool's Day in the year 46, eight pillars of the castle were burned at the same time.

古文：甲申，暖阁厂膳房火。
现代文：甲申日，暖阁厂膳房发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in the kitchen of the Nengge factory on the day of the Jiaxing earthquake.

古文：九月壬子，茂陵火。
现代文：九月壬子日，茂陵发生火灾。
English: On September 9th, a fire broke out in Muryo.

古文：四十七年四月癸酉，盔甲厂火。
现代文：四十七年四月癸酉日，盔甲厂发生火灾。
English: On April 30, 1947, a fire broke out in the armor factory.

古文：泰昌元年十月丁卯，哕鸾宫灾。
现代文：泰昌元年十月丁卯日，喊鸾宫发生火灾。
English: In October of the first year of Taichang, a fire broke out in the Palace of Shouts.

古文：天启元年闰二月丙戌，昭和殿灾。
现代文：天启元年闰二月丙戌日，昭和殿发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out at Showa-den on Leap February in the first year of the Heian period.

古文：三月甲辰，杭州火，延烧六千余家。
现代文：三月甲辰日，杭州发生火灾，蔓延燃烧六千多家。
English: On the first hour of March, a fire broke out in Hangzhou, spreading and burning more than six thousand people.

古文：八月戊子，复灾，城内外延毁万余家。
现代文：八月戊子，又发生火灾，城内外蔓延焚毁一万多家。
English: In August, another fire broke out in Boshi, spreading in and out of the city and burning more than 10,000 buildings.

古文：二年五月丙申，旗纛庙正殿灾，火药尽焚，匠役多死者。
现代文：二年五月丙申日，壅灵逮正殿发生火灾，火药全部被焚烧，工匠役夫中有很多死亡的人。
English: In May of the second year, a fire broke out in the Yuling Fangzheng Hall. All the gunpowder was burned, and many craftsmen and workers died.

古文：三年七月辛卯，南京大内左傍宫灾。
现代文：三年七月辛卯日，南京大内左侧宫室发生火灾。
English: In July of the third year, a fire broke out in the left inner palace room of Nanjing University.

古文：六年五月戊申，王恭厂灾，地中霹雳声不绝，火药自焚，烟尘障空，白昼晦冥，凡四五里。
现代文：六年五月戊申日，王恭厂发生火灾，地下霹雳之声不断，火药自燃焚烧，烟雾灰尘遮蔽天空，白天变得黑暗，共达四五里。
English: On May 6th, 2009, a fire broke out at the Wang Qiong factory. There was a constant rumbling sound underground, gunpowder spontaneously combusted, smoke and dust covered the sky, and it became dark during the day, for a total of four or five miles.

古文：五月癸亥，朝天宫灾。
现代文：五月癸亥日，朝天宫发生火灾。
English: In May, on the day of the Year of the Boar, a fire broke out in the Imperial Palace.

古文：七月庚寅，登州城楼火。
现代文：七月庚寅日，登州城楼发生火灾。
English: On July 4th, a fire broke out in Dengzhou City Tower.

古文：七年十月庚子，宁远前屯火，伤男妇二百余人。
现代文：七年十月庚子日，宁速前屯发生火灾，伤害男女二百多人。
English: In October of the seventh year, the day of Geng Zi, a fire broke out in Ningbo Qian Tun, injuring more than 200 men and women.

古文：崇祯元年四月乙卯，左军都督府灾。
现代文：崇祯元年四月乙卯日，左军都督府发生火灾。
English: In April of the first year of the Chongzhen Emperor, a fire broke out in the Left Army's governor's office.

古文：五月乙亥，鹰坊司火。
现代文：五月乙亥日，鹰坊司发生火灾。
English: In May, on the day of the Chinese lunar new year, a fire broke out in Yingfang.

古文：丁亥，丁字库火。
现代文：丁亥日，丁字库发生火灾。
English: On Dinghai Day, a fire broke out in the T-character library.

古文：七月己卯，公安县火，毁文庙，延五千余家。
现代文：七月己卯，公安县发生火灾，焚毁文庙，蔓延烧毁五千多家。
English: In July, a fire broke out in Public Security County, burning the Wen Temple and spreading to more than 5,000 others.

古文：二年十一月庚子，火药局灾。
现代文：二年十一月庚子日，火药局发生火灾。
English: On November 2nd, Geng Zi Day, a fire broke out in the gunpowder office.

古文：三年三月戊戌，又灾。
现代文：三年三月戊戌日，又发生火灾。
English: On March 3rd, another fire broke out.

古文：八月癸酉，头道关灾，火器轰击无余。
现代文：八月癸酉日，头道关发生火灾，火器轰击不计其敷。
English: On the third day of August, a fire broke out at the first checkpoint, and the firearm bombardment had no effect.

古文：六年正月癸丑，济南舜庙灾。
现代文：六年正月癸丑日，济南舜巅发生火灾。
English: In the first month of the sixth year, on the day of the Ugly, a fire broke out in Jinshan.

古文：七年九月庚申，盔甲厂灾。
现代文：七年九月庚申日，盔甲厂发生火灾。
English: On September 7th, a fire broke out in the armor factory.

古文：十一年四月戊戌，新火药局灾。伤人甚众。
现代文：十一年四月戊戌日，新火药局发生火灾，伤人很多。
English: On April 11th, a fire broke out at the New Gunpowder Bureau, injuring many people.

古文：六月癸巳，安民厂灾，震毁城垣廨舍，居民死伤无算。
现代文：六月癸巳，安民厂发生火灾，雷击捣毁城墙官舍，军民死亡和伤害不计其数。
English: As early as June, a fire broke out at the Anmin Factory, a lightning strike destroyed the city wall and government offices, and countless soldiers and civilians were killed and injured.

古文：八月丁酉，火药局又灾。
现代文：八月丁酉日，火药局又发生火灾。
English: In August, a fire broke out in the gunpowder office.

古文：▲火异
现代文：火异
English: Fiercely different

古文：成化二十一年正月甲申朔，有火光自中天而少西，坠于下，化为白气，复曲折上腾，声如雷。
现代文：成化二十一年正月甲申朔日，有火光从中天偏西坠落于地，化成白气，又曲折向上升腾，声响如雷。
English: On the first day of the first month of the twenty-first year of the Jia Sheng, a fire fell from the west of the middle heaven to the ground, turned into white gas, and rose up with twists and turns, with a thunderous sound.

古文：弘治三年三月庚午，仪陇空中有红白火焰，长三丈余，自县治东北流，至正东六十余里而坠，声震如雷。
现代文：弘治三年三月庚午日，仪陇上空有红色和白色两道火焰，长三丈多，从县的治所东北流向正东六十多里，坠落下来，声音响震如雷。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the third month of the third year of the Heian period, there were two red and white flames in the sky over Iitate, more than three meters long, flowing from the northeast of the county seat to more than sixty miles east, falling down, and the sound was thunderous.

古文：八年三月辛卯，广宁右卫台杆火，高五寸，杆如故。
现代文：八年三月辛卯日，魔窒查卫台杆起火，高五寸，台杆则如同原样。
English: On March 8th, Xinwu Day, a fire broke out on the five-inch-tall guardrail, but the guardrail was left as it was.

古文：十年四月辛丑，阜平有火光，长八九尺，大如辘轴，有声，自东南至西南而坠。
现代文：十年四月辛丑日，阜平有火光，长八九尺，大如辕轴，有声响，从东南流至西南，坠落于地。
English: On the fateful day of April 10, there was a fire in Fuping. It was eighty-nine feet long, as big as a ploughshare, and it made a sound. It flowed from the southeast to the southwest and fell to the ground.

古文：正德元年三月戊申夜，太原有火如斗大，坠宁化王殿前。
现代文：正德元年三月戊申日夜晚，太原有火光如量斗一样大，坠落在宁化王殿前。
English: On the evening of March 19 in the first year of Zhengde, there was a fire in Taiyuan that was as big as a measuring jug, and it fell in front of the Ninghua Royal Palace.

古文：广宁墩台火发旗杆，凡六。
现代文：廑窒墩台火光从旗杆发出，一共六处。
English: A total of six flames shot out from the flagpole.

古文：七月壬戌夜，火光坠即墨民家，化为绿石，圆高尺余。
现代文：七月壬戌日夜晚，火光坠落在即墨百姓家中，化成绿色的石头，呈圆形，高一尺多。
English: On the night of July 7th, the firelight fell on the home of the Jimo people, turning it into a green stone, round and more than a foot high.

古文：七年三月丁卯夜，大风雷电，余干仙居寨有光如箭，坠旗竿上，俄如烛龙，光照四野。
现代文：七年三月丁卯日晚上，刮大风，雷电交加，余干仙居寨有火光如箭，坠落在旗杆上，会儿像灯笼，光照四周。
English: On the evening of March 7th, Dingwu Day, there was a strong wind, thunder and lightning, and the Yujian Fairy Village was ablaze like an arrow, falling on the flagpole. It looked like a lantern, shining all around.

古文：士卒撼其旗，飞上竿首，既而其火四散，枪首皆有光如星。
现代文：士兵摇动旗杆，火光飞上杆顶，随后火光四散，枪头都有光亮如星星。
English: The soldiers shake the flagpole, the flames fly to the top of the pole, and then the flames scatter, the gun barrels are bright as stars.

古文：十二年五月己亥夜，火陨都察院狱，旋转久之始灭。
现代文：十二年五月己亥日晚上，火光陨落在都察院的监狱，旋转了很久纔熄灭。
English: On the evening of Ji Hai Day in May of the 12th year, a fireball fell on the prison of Duza Academy, spinning for a long time and then going out.

古文：十五年六月癸未夜，台州火陨三，大如盘，触草木皆焦。
现代文：十五年六月癸末日晚上，台州有火光陨落三团，大如盘，接触草木，都被烧焦。
English: On the evening of the last day of June in the 15th year, Taizhou had three groups of fire, large as a plate, contact with plants and trees, all of which were scorched.

古文：嘉靖五年七月甲申，有火球三，大五六尺，从北坠于东，其光烛天。
现代文：嘉靖五年七月甲申日，有火球三团，大五六尺，从北坠落于束面，其光焰烛照天空。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the 5th year of Jiajing, three fireballs, each five or six feet in size, fell from the north onto the surface of the bunch, and their flames lit up the sky.

古文：二十年七月丙戌，火球如斗，陨左军都督府中门东，良久乃灭。
现代文：二十年七月丙戌日，火球大如量斗，陨落在左军都督府中门柬面，很久纔熄灭。
English: On July 20th, a fireball as big as a jousting match fell on the left army's central gate of the governor's office, and it was extinguished for a long time.

古文：隆庆二年三月戊午，延绥保宁堡城角旗杆出火，灼灼有声。
现代文：隆庆二年三月戊午日，延绥堡整城角旗杆发出火光，灼灼有声响。
English: On the afternoon of March 3 of the second year of Longqing, the entire city corner flagpole of Yancheng Castle emitted fire, and there was a burning sound.

古文：万历十四年，保定府民间墙壁内出火，三日夜乃熄。
现代文：万历十四年，保定府民间的墙壁内发出火光，三天三夜纔熄灭。
English: In the 14th year of Wanli, the walls of the people's palace in Baoding sent out firelight, and it was extinguished for three days and three nights.

古文：十五年二月，绥靖边城各堡，脊兽旗杆俱出火。
现代文：十五年二月，绥靖边城各堡，脊兽、旗杆都发出火光。
English: In February of the fifteenth year, the fortresses, beasts of burden, and flagpoles of the border city of Taojing were all ablaze.

古文：军士以杖扑之，杖亦生火，三更乃熄。
现代文：军士用杖扑火，杖上也生出火，三更纔熄灭。
English: The sergeant used his cane to put out the fire. The cane also caught fire, and the three firecrackers went out.

古文：二十年三月，陕西空中有火，大如盆，后生三尾，陨于西北。
现代文：二十年三月，陕西天空中有火光，大如盆，后面长三根尾巴，陨落在西北面。
English: In March 20th, there was a fire in the sky of Shaanxi, big as a pot, with three tails behind it, and it fell on the northwest.

古文：二十一年二月庚辰夜分，大毛山楼上各兽吻俱有火，如鸡卵，赤色，即时雨雪，火上嗟嗟有声。
现代文：二十一年二月庚辰日半夜，大毛山楼上各个兽吻都有火光，大如鸡蛋，呈赤色。当时天降雪花，火上发出嗟嗟之声。
English: In the middle of the night of February 21st, Geng Chen's day, all the animal kisses on the Da Mao Shan Tower had flames, as big as eggs, and were red in color. At that time, snowflakes fell from the sky, and a crackling sound was heard on the fire.

古文：二十三年九月癸巳夜，永宁有火光，形如屋大，陨于西北。
现代文：二十三年九月癸巳日晚上，永宁有火光，形体如屋大，坠落在西北。
English: On the evening of September 23rd, Yongning was engulfed in flames and fell to the northwest.

古文：永昌、镇番、宁远所见同。
现代文：永昌、镇番、宁远所见相同。
English: Yongchang, Zhenban and Ningyuan saw the same thing.

古文：二十四年二月戊申夜，鄠县雷雨，遍地火光，十有余里。
现代文：二十四年二月戊申日晚上，鄂县打雷下雨，遍地火光，达十多里。
English: On the evening of February 24th, the Day of the Dead, thunder and rain hit E County, and there were fires all over the place, up to more than ten miles away.

古文：二十五年二月癸亥，平凉瓦兽口出火，水灌不灭。
现代文：二十五年二月癸亥日，平凉屋瓦兽口发出火光，用水浇灌而不熄灭。
English: On February 25th, the day of the year of the boar, the animal's mouth of the flat cool roof tile emitted fire, and it was doused with water but did not go out.

古文：八月甲申，肃、凉二州火光在天，形如车轮，尾分三股，约长三丈。
现代文：八月甲申日，肃、凉二州火光在天空，形状像车轮，尾部分出三股，约长三丈。
English: In August, on the day of Jia Sheng, the Suzhou and Liangzhou fires were shining in the sky. They were shaped like wheels, with a three-part tail, about three meters long.

古文：天启六年五月壬寅朔，厚载门火神庙红球滚出，前门城楼角有数千萤火，并合如车轮。
现代文：天启六年五月壬寅朔日，厚载门火神庙有红球滚出来。前门城楼角有数千只萤火虫，合并起来，如同车轮。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth month of the sixth year of the apocalypse, a red ball rolled out of the door of the fire temple. There were thousands of fireflies in the corner of the front gate, merging together like a wheel.

古文：崇祯元年，西安有火如碾如斗者数十，色青，焰高尺许，尝入民居，留数日乃去。
现代文：崇祯元年，西安有火光，大如碾盘、如量斗的有数十处。呈青色，火焰高一尺左右，曾经入平民家中，停留几天纔离开。
English: In the first year of the Chongzhen era, there were dozens of fires in Xi'an, as large as a grinder or a measuring cup. They were blue in color, and the flames were about one foot high. They once entered a civilian home, stayed for a few days, and then left.

古文：用羊豕禳之，不为害，自五月至七月而止。
现代文：用羊、猪禳除它，不作危害的事。从五月到七月纔停止。
English: Remove it with sheep and pig dung, and do not do anything harmful. From May to July, the dung is stopped.

古文：十三年六月壬申，镇安火光如斛，自西坠地，士木皆焦。
现代文：十三年六月壬申日，镇安火光如量斛，从西面坠落在地，土木都被烧焦。
English: On June 13th, Jinshin Day, the town of An was engulfed in flames. It fell to the ground from the west, and all the buildings were scorched.

古文：▲赤眚赤祥
现代文：赤眚赤祥
English: Akasaka, Akasaka

古文：成化十三年二月甲午，浙江山阴涌泉如血。
现代文：成化十三年二月甲午日，浙江山阴泉水涌出如同鲜血。
English: On the afternoon of February 1st, the 13th year of Chenghua, the spring water of Shanyin Spring in Zhejiang Province gushed out like blood.

古文：正德元年正月乙酉夜，崇明空中有红光，曳尾如虹，起东北至西南没，声如雷。
现代文：正德元年正月乙酉日晚上，崇明空中有红光，拖着尾巴像彩虹，起自东北，到西南而消失，声响如雷鸣。
English: On the evening of the first day of the first month of the first year of Zhengde, there was a red light in the sky of Chongming, dragging its tail like a rainbow, starting from the northeast and disappearing to the southwest, with a sound like thunder.

古文：辛丑，凤阳红光发，与日同色，声如雷。
现代文：辛丑日，凤阳发出红光，与太阳同色，响如雷鸣。
English: On a hot and ugly day, the phoenix sun emits red light, the same color as the sun, and sounds like thunder.

古文：二年八月己亥，赤光见宁夏，长五丈。
现代文：二年八月己亥日，赤色的火光出现在宁夏，长达五丈。
English: In August of the second year, on Ji Hai Day, red flames appeared in Ningxia, up to five meters high.

古文：八年七月甲申，龙泉有赤弹二，自空陨于县治，形如鹅卵，跃入民居，相斗久之。
现代文：八年七月甲申日，龙泉有赤弹二颗，从空中陨落在县治所，形状像鹅蛋，跃入平民家中，互相搏斗了很久。
English: In July of the eighth year, on the day of Jiaxing, Longquan had two red bombs, which fell from the sky on the county government, shaped like goose eggs, jumped into the homes of civilians, and fought each other for a long time.

古文：嘉靖三十三年四月戊子，慈溪民家涌血高尺余。
现代文：嘉靖三十三年四月戊子日，慈溪百姓家中涌出鲜血，高一尺多。
English: On April 30, 33rd year of Jiajing, blood gushed out from the homes of the people in Cixi, more than a foot high.

古文：三十七年五月戊辰，东阳民张思齐家地裂五六处，出血如线，高尺许。
现代文：三十七年五月戊辰日，束阳百姓张思齐家地面裂开五六处，流出鲜血如线，高一尺左右。
English: On May 37th, the day of Pentecost, the ground of Zhang Siqi's house, a citizen of Sokyang, was cracked in five or six places, and blood flowed out like a thread, about one foot high.

古文：血凝，犬就食之，掘地无所见。
现代文：血凝结，狗上前吃血，掘开地面什磨也没有见到。
English: The blood congealed, the dogs came forward to eat the blood, and nothing was seen when the ground was dug up.

古文：三十九年二月己未，竹溪民家出血。
现代文：三十九年二月己末日，竹溪百姓家流出鲜血。
English: At the end of February, 1939, blood began to flow from the homes of the people of Zhuxi.

古文：隆庆六年闰二月癸酉，辽东赤风扬尘蔽天。
现代文：隆庆六年闰二月癸酉日，辽东风呈赤色，扬起尘土，遮蔽天空。
English: On the leap day of February in the sixth year of the Longqing Festival, the Liaodong wind was red, raising dust and blocking the sky.

古文：万历六年七月丁丑，松门卫金铛家涌血三尺，有声。
现代文：万历六年七月丁丑日，松门卫金铛象中涌出鲜血，高达三尺，有声响。
English: On the day of Dingwu in July of the sixth year of Wanli, blood gushed out of the pine gate guard golden pheasant, up to three feet high, with a sound.

古文：十三年四月乙丑，虹民王禄投宿姚垒家，见血出于地，惊走至市，市亦流血。
现代文：十三年四月乙丑日，虹地百姓王禄投宿于姚垒家中，见鲜血从地中流出，惊骇得奔跑到集市上，市上也流出鲜血。
English: On April 13th, the second day of the Ugly, Wang Lu, a citizen of Hongdi, stayed at Yao Rong's home. Seeing blood flowing from the ground, he was shocked and ran to the market. Blood was also flowing in the market.

古文：乡人击器物噪之，乃止。
现代文：乡民打击器物喧哗驱逐，纔停止。
English: The villagers beat the equipment and noisily drove it away, and the beating stopped.

古文：十九年六月庚戌，慈溪茅家浦涌血八处，大如盆，高尺许。
现代文：十九年六月庚戌日，慈溪茅家浦涌血八处，大如盆，高一尺左右。
English: On the day of the Geng Zi Festival in June 19th, there were eight spots of blood in Cixi Maojiapu, which was as big as a basin and about one foot high.

古文：血溅船，船即出血，溅人足，足亦出血，数刻乃绝。
现代文：鲜血飞溅到船上，船立即出血，飞溅在人的足上，足也出血，数刻之后纔绝迹。
English: Blood splashed onto the boat, the boat immediately bled, splashed onto a person's foot, the foot also bled, and the pus disappeared after a few moments.

古文：二十六年九月甲辰，萧山贾九经家出血，高尺许。
现代文：二十六年九月甲辰日，萧山贾九经家流出鲜血，高一尺左右。
English: On September 26th, Jia Chen Day, Xiao Shan Jia Jiu Jing's house was drained of blood, about a foot high.

古文：天启元年六月庚寅，肇庆民王体积中庭喷血，如跑突泉。
现代文：天启元年六月庚寅日，肇庆百姓王体积中庭喷出鲜血，像趵突泉。
English: On the day of Geng Yin in June of the first year of the Apocalypse, the voluminous courtyard of the Zhaoqing people's king spewed blood, like a rushing spring.

古文：崇祯七年二月戊午，海丰雨血。
现代文：崇祯七年二月戊午日，海丰降血雨。
English: On the afternoon of February 7th, the blood rain fell in Haifeng.

古文：八年八月戊寅，宣城池中出血。
现代文：八年八月戊寅日，宣城池中流出鲜血。
English: On August 8th, Wu Yin Day, blood flowed from the Xuancheng Pool.

古文：《洪范》曰： 木曰曲直。 
现代文：《洪范》上说 木性可以揉令曲直 。
English: "Hong Fan" said that wood can be rubbed to straighten the curve.

古文：木不曲直，则失其性矣。
现代文：木不能曲直，便失去了它的自然之性。
English: If a tree cannot bend, it loses its naturalness.

古文：前史多以恒雨、狂人、服妖、鸡祸、鼠孽、木冰、木妖、青眚青祥皆属之木，今从之。
现代文：前代历史多把恒雨、狂人、服妖、鸡祸、鼠孽、木冰、木妖、青眚青祥都归属于木，现在照此处理。
English: In the history of the previous generation, the constant rain, the madman, the clothing demon, the chicken plague, the mouse evil, the wood ice, the wood demon, and the young and old were all attributed to wood, and are now dealt with accordingly.

古文：▲恒雨
现代文：恒雨
English: Constant rain

古文：洪武十三年七月，海康大雨，坏县治。
现代文：洪武十三年七月，海康降大雨，毁坏县治所。
English: In July of the 13th year of Hongwu, heavy rain fell in Haikang, destroying the county seat.

古文：二十三年十一月，山东二十九州县久雨，伤麦禾。
现代文：二十三年十一月，山东二十九个州县长久降雨，伤害庄稼。
English: In November 23rd, Shandong's 29 prefectures and counties experienced prolonged rainfall, damaging crops.

古文：建文元年三月乙卯夜，燕王营于苏家桥，大雨，平地水三尺，及王卧榻。
现代文：建文元年三月乙卯日晚上，燕王在苏家桥扎营。天降大雨，平地水深三尺，达到王的卧床。
English: On the evening of the second day of the third month of the first year of Jianwen, Yan Wang camped in Sujiabashi. Heavy rain fell, and the water was three feet deep on the flat land, reaching Wang's bed.

古文：永乐元年三月，京师霪雨，坏城西南隅五十余丈。
现代文：永乐元年三月，京城久降雨水，淋坏城西南角达五十多丈。
English: In March of the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, the long-term rainfall in Beijing flooded the southwest corner of the city to a height of more than fifty meters.

古文：七月，建宁卫霪雨坏城。
现代文：七月，建宁卫久降雨水，损坏城墙。
English: In July, rainfall in Jianningwei damaged the city wall.

古文：二年七月，新安卫霪雨坏城。
现代文：二年七月，新安卫久降雨水，损坏城墙。
English: In July of the second year, Xin'anwei suffered from a long period of rain, which damaged the city wall.

古文：八月，霪雨坏北京城五千余丈。
现代文：八月，久雨损坏北京城墙五千多丈。
English: In August, more than 5,000 meters of Beijing's city wall were damaged by heavy rain.

古文：六年七月，思明霪雨坏城。
现代文：六年七月，思明久雨损坏城墙。
English: In July of the sixth year, the city wall was damaged by the long rain in Siming.

古文：七年九月，浙江卫所五，飓风骤雨，坏城，漂流房舍。
现代文：七年九月，浙江卫所五处，刮狂风降暴雨，毁坏城墙，冲走房屋。
English: In September of the seventh year, five Zhejiang Institutes of Public Health were hit by strong winds and torrential rain, destroying city walls and washing away houses.

古文：八年七月，金乡卫飓风骤雨，坏城垣公廨。
现代文：八年七月，金乡卫刮狂风降暴雨，毁坏城墙和公家官署。
English: In July of the eighth year, Jinxiangwei was hit by fierce winds and torrential rains, destroying the city walls and public offices.

古文：十二年九月，密云后卫霪雨坏城。
现代文：十二年九月，密云后卫久雨，损坏城墙。
English: In September of the twelfth year, it rained for a long time, damaging the city wall.

古文：二十年正月，信丰雨水坏城，瞿城卫如之。
现代文：二十年正月，信丰雨水淋坏城墙，瞿城卫也像那样。
English: In the first month of the 20th year, the city wall of Xinfeng was damaged by rain, and so was the city guard of Handan.

古文：二十一年二月，六安卫霪雨坏城。
现代文：二十一年二月，六安卫久雨损坏城墙。
English: In February 21st, the city wall of Lu'an was damaged by heavy rain.

古文：是岁，建昌守御所，淮安、怀来等卫，皆霪雨坏城。
现代文：这一年，建昌守御所，淮安、怀来等卫都久雨损坏城墙。
English: In this year, Jianchang guarded the imperial palace, and Huai'an, Huailai and other imperial cities suffered from long rains that damaged the city walls.

古文：二十二年二月，寿州卫雨水坏城。
现代文：二十二年二月，寿州卫雨水损坏城墙。
English: In February 1922, the city wall of Shoushu was damaged by rainwater.

古文：三月，赣州、振武二卫雨水坏城。
现代文：三月，赣州、振武二卫雨水损坏城墙。
English: In March, the city walls of Zhangzhou and Zhenwu Erwei were damaged by rain.

古文：四月，霪雨坏密云及蓟州城。
现代文：四月，久降雨水，损坏密云和蓟州的城墙。
English: In April, after a long period of rain and water, the city walls of Miyun and Ganzhou were damaged.

古文：是岁，南、北畿、山东州县，霪雨伤麦禾甚众。
现代文：这一年，南北畿、山东州县，久雨伤害很多庄稼。
English: In this year, the north and south of Gyeonggi Province and Shandong Province, the long rain damaged a lot of crops.

古文：洪熙元年夏，苏、松、嘉、湖积雨伤稼。
现代文：洪熙元年夏天，苏、松、嘉、湖积雨伤害庄稼。
English: In the summer of the first year of Hongxi, Su, Song, Jia and Lake accumulated rain damaged crops.

古文：闰七月，京师大雨，坏正阳、齐化、顺成等门城垣。
现代文：闰七月，京城降大雨，冲坏正阳、齐化、顺成等门的城墙。
English: In July, heavy rain fell in Beijing, damaging the city walls of Zhengyang, Qihua and Shuncheng.

古文：九月，久雨坏密云中卫城。
现代文：九月，长久降雨损坏密云中卫的城墙。
English: In September, the long rains damaged the city wall of Miyun Zhongwei.

古文：宣德元年五月，永嘉、乐清飓风急雨，坏公私廨宇及坛庙。
现代文：宣德元年五月，永嘉、乐清刮狂风，降暴雨，毁坏公家和平民的房屋以及坛台庙宇。
English: In May of the first year of Xuande, Yongjia and Yueqing were hit by strong winds and torrential rain, destroying public and private houses as well as altar temples.

古文：正统元年七月，顺天、山东、河南、广东霪雨伤稼。
现代文：正统元年七月，顺天、山东、河南、广东久降雨水伤害庄稼。
English: In July, Shuntian, Shandong, Henan and Guangdong suffered from long-term rainwater damage to crops.

古文：四年夏，居庸关及定州卫霪雨坏城。
现代文：四年夏天，居庸关以及定州卫久降雨水损坏城墙。
English: In the summer of the fourth year, rainwater from Juyongguan and Dingzhou Yijiu damaged the city wall.

古文：五年二月，南京大风雨，坏北上门脊，覆官民舟。
现代文：五年二月，南京刮大风降大雨，损坏北上门屋脊，倾覆官府和平民的船只。
English: In February of the fifth year, Nanjing was hit by strong winds and heavy rain, which damaged the roof of the north gate and capsized the ships of the government and civilians.

古文：七年，济南、青、莱、淮、凤、徐州，五月至六月霪雨伤稼。
现代文：七月，济南、青、莱、淮、凤、徐州，五月至六月久降雨水，伤害庄稼。
English: In July, Jinan, Qing, Lai, Huai, Feng, and Xuzhou, and from May to June, long-term rainfall caused damage to crops.

古文：九年闰七月，野狐岭等处霪雨坏城及濠堑墩台。
现代文：九年闰七月，野狐岭等处长久降雨损坏城墙以及濠堑墩台等军事设施。
English: In July of the 9th year of the leap year, the long-term rainfall in the Wild Fox Ridge and other places damaged the city wall and military facilities such as Xingtai.

古文：十一年春，江西七府十六县霪雨，田禾淹没。
现代文：十一年春天，江西七府十六县长久降雨，田中禾苗被淹没。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, long-term rainfall in sixteen counties in seven prefectures of Jiangxi Province caused Tanaka grass seedlings to be flooded.

古文：十二年六月，瑞金霪雨，市水丈余，漂仓库，溺死二百余人。
现代文：十二年六月，瑞金久降雨水，集市中积水一丈多深，冲毁仓库，淹死二百多人。
English: In June of the 12th year, more than 200 people were drowned in Ruijin after a long period of rain, and the accumulated water in the market was as deep as a mountain. The warehouse was destroyed.

古文：十三年四月，雨水坏顺天古北口边仓。
现代文：十三年四月，雨水淋坏顺天古北旦边防仓库。
English: In April 13th, the rainwater damaged the Shuntian Ancient Hokutan Border Defense Warehouse.

古文：五月至六月，凤阳、徽州久雨伤稼。
现代文：五月至六月，凤阳、徽州长久降雨伤害庄稼。
English: From May to June, prolonged rainfall in Fengyang and Hebei Province damaged crops.

古文：九月，宁都大雨坏城郭庐舍，溺死甚众。
现代文：九月，宁都降大雨，损坏城郭和房屋，淹死很多人。
English: In September, heavy rain fell in Ningdu, damaging the city walls and houses and drowning many people.

古文：景泰三年，永平、兖州久雨伤禾。
现代文：景泰三年，永平、充州长久降雨伤害禾稼。
English: In the third year of Jing Tai, Yongping and Jenggu provinces suffered from long-term rain damage to crops.

古文：大嵩等二十卫所久雨坏城。
现代文：大嵩等二十个卫所长久降雨损坏城墙。
English: Twenty sanatoriums, including Dasong, were damaged by long-term rainfall.

古文：四年，南畿、河南、山东府十州一，自五月至于八月霪雨伤稼。
现代文：四年，直畿、河南、山东十府一州，从五月直到八月久降雨水伤害庄稼。
English: In the fourth year, from May to August, long-term rainwater damaged crops in 10 prefectures and one prefecture in Shandong Province, including Daegu, Henan Province and Shandong Province.

古文：五年，杭、嘉、湖大雨伤苗，六旬不止。
现代文：五年，杭、嘉、湖大雨伤害禾苗，六旬都不停息。
English: In the past five years, heavy rains in Hangu, Jiayu and Hubei have damaged the seedlings, and they have not stopped growing for sixty years.

古文：七月，京师久雨，九门城垣多坏。
现代文：七月，京城长久降雨，九门的城垣很多受损坏。
English: In July, it rained for a long time in the capital, and many of the city walls in the nine gates were damaged.

古文：六年，北畿府五、河南府二久雨伤稼，云南大理诸府如之。
现代文：六年，北畿五府、河南二府长久降雨伤害庄稼，云南大理等府也像那样。
English: In 2006, the five prefectures of North Gyeongsang Province and the two prefectures of Henan Province suffered from long-term rainfall that damaged crops, as did Dali and other prefectures in Yunnan Province.

古文：七年，两畿、江西、河南、浙江、山东、山西、湖广共府三十，恒雨淹田。
现代文：七年，两畿、江西、河南、浙江、山东、山西、塑魔共三十府，长期下雨淹没田地。
English: In the seventh year, the two provinces of Gyeonggi, Jiangxi, Henan, Zhejiang, Shandong, Shanxi and Shima, a total of 30 prefectures, were flooded by long-term rain.

古文：天顺元年，济、兖、青三府大雨阅月，禾尽没。
现代文：天顺元年，渣、童、青三府大雨经历一月，禾苗全部被淹没。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, the three prefectures of Jia, Tong and Qing experienced heavy rain in January, and all the seedlings were flooded.

古文：四年，安庆、南阳雨，自五月至七月，淹禾苗。
现代文：四年，安庆、南阳降雨，从五月至七月，淹没禾苗。
English: In four years, rainfall in Anqing and Nanyang, from May to July, flooded the seedlings.

古文：七年五月，淮、凤、扬、徐大雨，腐二麦。
现代文：七年五月，淮、凤、扬、徐降大雨，腐烂二麦。
English: In May of the seventh year, heavy rain fell on Huai, Feng, Yang and Xu, and two barley crops rotted.

古文：武昌、汉阳、荆州庐舍漂没，民皆依山露宿。
现代文：武昌、汉阳、荆州的房屋被冲走淹没，人民都依山野外住宿。
English: Houses in Wuchang, Hanyang and Jingzhou were swept away and submerged, and people resorted to camping in the mountains.

古文：成化元年六月，畿东大雨，水坏山海关、永平、蓟州、遵化城堡。
现代文：成化元年六月，畿束降大雨，洪水冲壤山海关、永平、蓟州、遵化的城堡。
English: In June of the first year of Chenghua, heavy rain fell in Guizhou Province, and the floods swept through the castles of Yongyang Mountain Customs, Yongping, Zhangzhou, and Zunhua.

古文：八月，通州大雨，坏城及运仓。
现代文：八月，通州降大雨，损坏城墙和运仓。
English: In August, heavy rain fell in Tongzhou, damaging the city walls and warehouses.

古文：二年，定州积雨，坏城垣及墩台垛口百七十三。
现代文：二年，定州积雨，损坏城垣以及墩台垛口一百七十三处。
English: In the second year, torrential rains in Dingzhou damaged the city walls and 173 gates of Xingtai.

古文：八年七月，南京大风雨，坏天、地坛、孝陵庙宇。
现代文：八年七月，南京刮大风降大雨，损坏天坛、地坛和孝陵的庙宇。
English: In July of the eighth year, Nanjing was hit by strong winds and heavy rain, damaging the Temple of Heaven, the Temple of Earth, and the temple of Xiaoling.

古文：凤阳大雨，坏皇陵墙垣。
现代文：凤阳降大雨，损坏皇陵的墙垣。
English: Fengyang heavy rain falls, damaging the walls of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：九年三月，南京大风雨，拔太庙、社稷坛树。
现代文：九年三月，南京刮大风降大雨，拔起太庙和社稷坛的树木。
English: In March of the ninth year, Nanjing was hit by strong winds and heavy rain, uprooting the trees of the Great Temple and the altar of the shrine.

古文：十三年七月，京城大雨。
现代文：十三年七月，京城降大雨。
English: In July 13th, heavy rain fell in Beijing.

古文：十四年八月，凤阳大雨，没城内民居以千计。
现代文：十四年八月，凤阳降大雨，淹没城内百姓房屋敷以千计。
English: In August 14th, heavy rain fell in Fengyang, flooding thousands of people's houses in the city.

古文：十七年七月乙酉，南京大风雨，社稷坛及太庙殿宇皆摧。
现代文：十七年七月乙酉日，南京刮大风降大雨，社稷坛和太庙殿宇都被摧毁。
English: On July 17th, the day of Yixin, Nanjing was hit by strong winds and heavy rain. The altar of the shrine and the hall of the Great Temple were both destroyed.

古文：十八年，河南、怀庆诸府，夏秋霪雨三月，塌城垣千一百八十余丈，漂公署、坛庙、民居三十一万四千间有奇，淹死一万一千八百余人。
现代文：十八年，河直、堡庆等府，夏秋季节久降雨水长达三月，城垣垮塌一千一百八十多丈，冲走官署、坛庙、民房三十一万四千多间，淹死一万一千八百多人。
English: In the summer and autumn of 1818, in the prefectures of Hezhi and Baoqing, the long-term rainfall and water lasted for three months. The city wall collapsed more than 1,180 meters, washed away more than 314,000 government offices, temples and private houses, and drowned more than 11,800 people.

古文：弘治二年七月，京师霪雨，求直言。
现代文：弘治二年七月，京城长久降雨，朝廷征求直言。
English: In July of the second year of the Konji era, when the capital was hit by a long spell of rain, the imperial court asked for a direct speech.

古文：三年七月，南京骤雨，坏午门西城坛。
现代文：三年七月，南京突降暴雨，损坏午门西城垣。
English: In July of the third year, a sudden rainstorm hit Nanjing, damaging the west city wall of the afternoon gate.

古文：七年七月庚寅，南京大风雨，坏殿宇、城楼兽吻，拔太庙、天、地、社稷坛及孝陵树。
现代文：七年七月庚寅日，南京刮大风降大雨，损坏殿宇、城楼的兽吻，拔起太庙、天坛、地坛、社稷坛以及孝陵的树木。
English: In July of the seventh year, on the day of Geng Yin, Nanjing was hit by strong winds and heavy rain, damaging the temples and towers of the city, and pulling up the trees of the Great Temple, the Temple of Heaven, the Altar of the Earth, the Altar of the Shrine and the Tomb of the Filial Piety.

古文：自五月至八月，义州等卫连雨害稼。
现代文：从五月到八月，义州等卫连续降雨伤害庄稼。
English: From May to August, continuous rainfall from the Yizhou tropical cyclone damaged crops.

古文：八年五月，南京阴雨逾月，坏朝阳门北城堵。
现代文：八年五月，南京阴雨超过一个月，损坏朝阳门北城墙。
English: In May of the eighth year, the rainy weather in Nanjing lasted for more than a month, damaging the northern city wall of Chaoyangmen.

古文：九月，潮州诸府，飓风暴雨坏城垣庐舍。
现代文：九月，潮州等府，狂风暴雨损坏城垣和房屋。
English: In September, violent storms and rain damaged city walls and houses in Chaozhou and other prefectures.

古文：十年七月，安陆霪雨，坏城郭庐舍殆尽。
现代文：十年七月，安陆长久降雨，城郭房屋几乎全部损坏。
English: In July of the tenth year, it rained for a long time in Anlu, and almost all the castle buildings were damaged.

古文：十一年七月，长安岭暴风雨，坏城及庐舍。
现代文：十一年七月，长安岭刮暴风降暴雨，损坏城墙和房屋。
English: In July of the eleventh year, Chang'anling was hit by a storm and torrential rain, damaging the city walls and houses.

古文：十四年六月，义、锦、广宁霪雨，坏城垣、墩堡、仓库、桥梁，民多压死者。
现代文：十四年六月，义、锦、广宁久降雨水，损坏城垣、墩堡、仓库、桥梁，人民很多被压死。
English: In June 14th, Yiwu, Jin and Guangning were hit by a long period of rain and water, damaging the city walls, bunkers, warehouses and bridges. Many people were crushed to death.

古文：十五年六七月，南京大风雨，孝陵神宫监及懿文陵树木、桥梁、墙垣多摧拔者。
现代文：十五年六七月，南京刮大风降大雨，孝陵神宫监以及懿文陵树木、桥梁、墙垣多被摧毁或拔起。
English: In June and July of the 15th year, Nanjing was hit by strong winds and heavy rain, and most of the trees, bridges, and walls of Xiaoling Jinguan Mausoleum and Yuwen Mausoleum were destroyed or uprooted.

古文：十六年五月，榆林大风雨，毁子城垣，移垣洞于其南五十步。
现代文：十六年五月，榆林刮大风降大雨，摧毁子城垣，移易垣洞到其南五十步的地方。
English: In May of the 16th year, Yulin was hit by a strong wind and heavy rain, which destroyed the city wall and moved the Yigaki Cave to a place 50 paces south of it.

古文：十八年三月，双山堡大雷雨坏城。
现代文：十八年三月，双山堡大雷雨毁坏城墙。
English: In March 18th, a thunderstorm destroyed the city wall of Shuangshan Fort.

古文：六月至八月，京畿连雨。
现代文：六月至八月，京畿连续降雨。
English: From June to August, Gyeonggi Province experiences continuous rainfall.

古文：正德元年七月，凤阳诸府大雨，平地水深丈五尺，没居民五百余家。
现代文：正德元年七月，凤阳等府降大雨，平地水深一丈五尺，淹没居民五百多家。
English: In July of the first year of Zhengde, heavy rain fell in Fengyang and other prefectures, and the water depth of the flat land was one and a half feet, flooding more than 500 residents.

古文：二年七月，武平大风雨，毁城楼。长泰、南靖大风雨三日夜，平地水深二丈，漂民居八百余家。
现代文：二年七月，武平刮大风降暴雨，毁坏城楼长泰、南靖刮大风降大雨连续三天三夜，平地水深二丈，冲走民房八百多家。
English: In July of the second year, Wuping was hit by strong winds and torrential rains, destroying the city towers of Changtai and Nanjing. Strong winds and heavy rains fell for three days and three nights in a row, and the flat land was flooded to a depth of two meters, washing away more than 800 private houses.

古文：十二年，苏、松、常、镇、嘉、湖大雨，杀麦禾。
现代文：十二年，苏、松、常、镇、嘉、湖州降大雨，伤害麦禾。
English: In 2012, heavy rain fell in Su, Song, Chang, Zhen, Jia and Huzhou, damaging wheat crops.

古文：十三年，应天、苏、松、常、镇、扬大雨弥月，漂室庐人畜无算。
现代文：十三年，应天、苏、松、常、镇、扬州天降大雨满一月，冲走房屋、人民、牲畜不计其数。
English: In the thirteenth year, heavy rain fell for a full month in Tian, Su, Song, Chang, Zhen and Yangzhou, washing away countless houses, people and livestock.

古文：十六年，京师久雨伤稼。
现代文：十六年，京城长久降雨伤害庄稼。
English: For the sixteenth year in a row, prolonged rainfall in the capital has damaged crops.

古文：嘉靖四年六月，登州大雨坏城。
现代文：嘉靖四年六月，登州降大雨，损坏城墙。
English: In June of the 4th year of Jiajing, heavy rain fell in Dangzhou, damaging the city wall.

古文：十六年，京师雨，自夏及秋不绝，房屋倾倒，军民多压死。
现代文：十六年，京城降雨，从夏季到秋季不断绝，房屋倒塌，军民多被压死。
English: In the 16th year, rain fell in Beijing from summer to autumn, houses collapsed, and many soldiers and civilians were crushed to death.

古文：二十五年八月，京师大雨，坏九门城垣。
现代文：二十五年八月，京城降大雨，损坏九门的城垣。
English: In August 2005, heavy rain fell in the capital, damaging the city walls of nine gates.

古文：三十三年六月，京师大雨，平地水数尺。
现代文：三十三年六月，京城降大雨，平地水深数尺。
English: In June of 1933, heavy rain fell in the capital, flooding the flat ground to a depth of several feet.

古文：四十五年九月，郧阳大霪雨，平地水丈余。
现代文：四十五年九月，鄙阳长久降大雨，平地水深一丈多。
English: In September 1945, the sun was low and heavy rain fell for a long time, and the water depth on the flat land was more than a meter.

古文：坏城垣庐舍，人民溺死无算。
现代文：毁坏城垣和房屋，人民淹死不计其敷。
English: The walls and houses were destroyed, and people were drowned.

古文：隆庆元年六月，京师霪雨，辽东自五月至七月雨不止，坏垣墙禾黍。
现代文：隆庆元年六月，京城久降雨水，辽东从五月到七月雨水不停，损坏垣墙、庄稼。
English: In June of the first year of the Longqing era, there was a long period of rain in Beijing, and in Liaodong from May to July, the rain was incessant, damaging walls and crops.

古文：万历元年七月，霪雨。
现代文：万历元年七月，长久降雨。
English: In July of the first year of Wanli, it rained for a long time.

古文：十一年四月，承天大雨水。
现代文：十一年四月，承天降大雨造成水灾。
English: In April of the eleventh year, heavy rain caused flooding.

古文：十二年正月，喜峰口大风雨，坏各墩台。
现代文：十二年正月，喜峰口刮大风，降大雨，损坏各墩台。
English: In the first month of the 12th year, there was a strong wind and heavy rain in Xifengkou, which damaged each turntable.

古文：十五年五月至七月，苏、松诸府霪雨，禾麦俱伤。
现代文：十五年五月至七月，苏、松等府长久降雨，禾麦都受损伤。
English: From May to July of the fifteenth year, Su, Song and other prefectures had long rains, and the wheat was damaged.

古文：六月，京师大雨。
现代文：六月，京城降大雨。
English: In June, heavy rain fell in Kyoto.

古文：二十四年，杭、嘉、湖霪雨伤苗。
现代文：二十四年，杭、嘉、湖州久雨伤害禾苗。
English: In twenty-four years, Hangzhou, Jia, and Huzhou suffered from long rains that damaged the seedlings.

古文：二十八年七月，兴化、莆田、连江、福安大雨数日夜，城垣、桥梁、堤岸俱圮。
现代文：二十八年七月，兴化、莆田、连江、福安天降大雨数日夜，城垣、桥梁、堤岸都发生垮塌。
English: In July of the 28th year, heavy rain fell on Xinghua, Putian, Lianjiang and Fu'an for several days and nights, and the city walls, bridges and embankments all collapsed.

古文：二十九年春夏，苏、松、嘉、湖霪雨伤麦。
现代文：二十九年春夏季节，苏、松、嘉、湖等州长久降雨，伤害麦收。
English: In the spring and summer of the 29th year, it rained for a long time in the provinces of Su, Song, Jiayu and Hubei, which hurt the wheat harvest.

古文：三十二年七月，京师霪雨，城崩。
现代文：三十二年七月，京城久雨，城墙崩塌。
English: In July of the year thirty-two, it rained for a long time in Kyoto, and the city walls collapsed.

古文：三十三年五月丙申，凤阳大风雨，损皇陵正殿御座。
现代文：三十三年五月丙申，凤阳刮大风降大雨，损坏皇陵正殿御座。
English: In May of 333, Fengyang was hit by a strong wind and heavy rain, damaging the throne of the main hall of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：三十九年春，河南大雨。
现代文：三十九年春季，河南降大雨。
English: In the spring of 1939, heavy rain fell in Henan Province.

古文：夏，京师、广东大雨。
现代文：夏季，京城、广东降大雨。
English: In summer, heavy rain falls in Beijing and Guangdong.

古文：广西积雨五阅月。
现代文：广西连续下雨经历五个月。
English: Guangxi has experienced five months of continuous rain.

古文：四十二年，浙江霪雨为灾。
现代文：四十二年，浙江长久降雨，造成灾害。
English: In forty-two years, Zhejiang has experienced long-term rainfall, causing disasters.

古文：天启六年闰六月，大雨连旬，坏天寿山神路，都城桥梁。
现代文：天启六年闰六月，天降大雨连旬，损坏天寿山神路和都城桥梁。
English: In the sixth leap month of the sixth year of the apocalypse, the sky fell heavy rain for a long time, damaging the Tianshoushan Divine Road and the capital bridge.

古文：是岁，辽东霪雨，坏山海关内外城垣，军民伤者甚众。
现代文：这一年，辽东久降雨水，损坏山海关内外城垣，军民很多受伤害。
English: This year, Liaodong suffered from long-term rainfall and water, which damaged the internal and external city walls of Shanhaiguan, and many soldiers and civilians were injured.

古文：七年，山东州县二十有八积雨伤禾。
现代文：七年，山东二十八个州县连续降雨伤害禾苗。
English: In the seventh year, 28 counties and prefectures in Shandong were affected by continuous rainfall.

古文：崇祯五年六月，大雨。
现代文：崇祯五年六月，天降大雨。
English: In June of the fifth year of Chongzhen, it rained heavily.

古文：八月，又雨，冲损庆陵。
现代文：八月，又降大雨，冲坏庆陵。
English: In August, heavy rain fell again, damaging Qingling.

古文：九月，顺天二十七县霪雨害稼。
现代文：九月，顺天二十七个县久降雨水伤害庄稼。
English: In September, prolonged rainfall in 27 counties damaged crops.

古文：十一年夏，雨浃旬，圮南山边垣。
现代文：十一年夏季，降雨十天，南山边墙垮塌。
English: In the summer of the eleventh year, it rained for ten days, and the south mountain wall collapsed.

古文：十二年十二月，浙江霪雨，阡陌成巨浸。
现代文：十二十二月，浙江久降大雨，田野变成了蓄水湖泽。
English: In December, heavy rain fell in Zhejiang for a long time, and the fields turned into water storage lakes.

古文：十三年四月至七月，宁、池诸郡霪雨，田半为壑。
现代文：十三年四月至七月，宁、池等郡长久降雨，田地一半变成了沟壑。
English: From April to July in 2013, Ning, Chi and other counties experienced prolonged rainfall, and half of the fields turned into gullies.

古文：十五年十月，黄、蕲、德安诸郡县霪雨。
现代文：十五年十月，黄、薪、德安等郡县长久降雨。
English: In October of the fifteenth year, Huanglong, Qianmen, De'an and other counties and counties experienced long-term rainfall.

古文：十六年二月戊辰，亲祀社稷，大风雨，仅成礼而还。
现代文：十六年二月戊辰，皇帝亲临祭祀社稷，遇上大风雨，祇得成礼而回。
English: In February 16th, the emperor himself came to the shrine to offer sacrifices. However, he was met with a great storm and had to return with a bow.

古文：▲狂人
现代文：狂人
English: The Madman

古文：景泰三年五月癸巳朔，以明日立太子，具香亭于奉天门。
现代文：景泰三年五月癸巳朔日，因第二天立太子，在奉天门准备香亭。
English: On the first day of May in the third year of King Gyeongtae's reign, as the crown prince was to be crowned the next day, preparations were made for the Incense Pavilion at the Gate of Heaven.

古文：有一人自外竟入，执红棍击香亭曰： 先打东方甲乙木。 
现代文：有一个人从外竟自进入，拿着红棍子击香亭说： 先打东方甲乙木。 
English: There was a man who entered from the outside, took a red stick and hit the incense stand, saying: "First hit the Oriental Redwood."

古文：嘉靖十八年，驾将南幸，有军人孙堂从御路中桥至奉天门下，登金台，坐久，守门官役无知者。
现代文：嘉靖十八年，皇帝将临幸南方。有一个军人孙堂从御路中桥到奉天门下，登上金台，坐了很久，守门官吏和役夫没有人知道。
English: In the 18th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the emperor was about to visit the southern part of the country. A soldier, Sun-tang, went from the bridge in the middle of the road to the foot of the Gate of Heaven, climbed onto the golden platform, and sat there for a long time. No one knew who the gatekeeper or the porter was.

古文：升堂大呼，觉而捕之，乃病狂者。
现代文：他升堂大叫，人们纔发觉并逮捕了他，原来是一个因病发疯的人。
English: He ran into the hall, shouting, and was discovered and arrested. He turned out to be a man who had gone mad due to illness.

古文：▲服妖
现代文：服妖
English: The Clothed Demon

古文：正德元年，妇女多用珠结盖头，谓之璎珞。
现代文：正德元年，妇女多用珠子编结来盖在头上，叫做璎珞。
English: In the first year of the Zhengde era, women mostly used beads to cover their heads, which was called "Crow."

古文：十三年正月，车驾还京，令朝臣用曳撒大帽鸾带。
现代文：十三年正月，皇帝回京，命令朝臣穿曳撒，戴大帽，系鸾带。
English: In the first month of the thirteenth year, the emperor returned to Beijing and ordered the courtiers to wear broadcloth, a large hat, and a sash.

古文：给事中朱鸣阳言，曳撒大帽，行役所用，非见君服。
现代文：给事中朱呜阳说，曳撒、大帽是行役之人所服用，不宜朝见君主服用。
English: During the presentation, Zhu Wuyang said that the tassel and cap are worn by those who perform duties, and it is not appropriate to wear them when meeting the monarch.

古文：皆近服妖也。
现代文：都近于妖服。
English: They are all close to witchcraft.

古文：十五年十二月，帝平宸濠还京，俘从逆者及悬诸逆首于竿，皆标以白帜，数里皆白。
现代文：十五年十二月，皇帝平定宸濠叛乱回京，俘虏追随叛逆的人，以及悬挂在竿上的众叛逆者的头，都用白帜来标识，数里都是白色。
English: In December of the fifteenth year, the emperor returned to Beijing after putting down the rebellion. The captives who followed the rebels, as well as the heads of the rebels hanging on poles, were all marked with white flags. They were all white.

古文：时帝已不豫，见者识其不祥。
现代文：当时皇帝已经生病，见到的人知道那不吉祥。
English: At that time, the emperor was already ill, and those who saw him knew that it was not auspicious.

古文：崇祯时，朝臣好以纱縠、竹箨为带，取其便易。
现代文：崇祯时，朝臣喜欢用纱壳、竹箨作佩带，取其简便易办。
English: When courting, courtiers like to wear sashes made of gauze and bamboo shoots, which are easy to take off.

古文：论者谓金银重而贵，纱箨贱而轻，殆贱将乘贵也。
现代文：议论的人认为金银重而宝贵，纱箨低贱而轻，大概低贱将要侵凌尊贵。
English: The debaters think that gold and silver are heavy and precious, and that the spindle is base and light, and that the base is about to encroach on the precious.

古文：时北方小民制帻，低侧其檐，自掩眉目，名曰 不认亲 。
现代文：当时北方平民制帽子，低侧其帽檐，掩盖自己的眉目，叫做 不认亲 。
English: At that time, the common people in the north wore a hat with a brim on the lower side to cover their eyes, which was called "not recognizing relatives."

古文：其后寇乱民散，途遇亲戚，有饮泣不敢言，或掉臂去之者。
现代文：后来盗寇作乱，人民离散，道路上遇到亲戚，有的悄悄哭泣不敢说话，有的甩臂离去。鸡祸
English: Later, thieves and robbers caused chaos, people were scattered, relatives were encountered on the road, some quietly cried and did not dare to speak, and some threw their arms and left.

古文：▲鸡祸弘治十四年，华容民刘福家鸡雏三足。
现代文：弘治十四年，华容百姓刘福家，小鸡三只足。
English: In the 14th year of Hongzhi, Huarong people Liu Fu Jia, the chicken has three legs.

古文：十七年六月，崇明民顾孟文家鸡生雏，猴头而人形，身长四寸，有尾，活动无声。
现代文：十七年六月，崇明百姓颅孟文家，鸡生的小鹦，呈猴子头，人的形状，身子长四寸，有尾巴，活动没有声响。
English: In June 17th, the Chongming people saw the skull of Meng Wenjia, a small parrot born of a chicken, with a monkey head, a human shape, a body four inches long, a tail, and no sound.

古文：嘉靖四年，长垣民王宪家鸡抱卵，内成人形，耳目口鼻四肢皆具。
现代文：嘉靖四年，长垣百姓王宪家，鸡抱蛋，蛋内变成人形，耳目口鼻四肢都齐备。
English: In the fourth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Wang Xianjia, a commoner from Nagagaki, held an egg, and the egg turned into a doll, complete with ears, eyes, mouth, nose, and limbs.

古文：万历二十二年六月，靖边营军家雌鸡化为雄。
现代文：万历二十二年六月，靖边营军士家母鸡变成公鹦。
English: In June of the 22nd year of Wanli, the hen of the Jingbian battalion sergeant's family turned into a male parrot.

古文：崇祯九年，淮安民家牝鸡啼跃，化为雄。
现代文：崇祯九年，淮安百姓家中母鸡啼鸣跳跃，变成公鸡。
English: In the ninth year of Chongzhen, the hens in the homes of Huai'an people chirped and jumped, turning into roosters.

古文：十年，宣武门外民家白鸡，喙距纯赤，重四十斤。
现代文：十年，宣武门外百姓家的白鸡，嘴喙和足距纯赤色，重四十斤。
English: Ten years ago, the white chicken of the people's home outside the Xuanwu Gate, with a pure red beak and feet, weighed forty pounds.

古文：或曰此皦也，所见之处国亡。
现代文：有人说这是惊，所见的地方，国家灭亡。
English: Some say it's the shock of seeing a place, a country, go under.

古文：十四年，太仓卫指挥姜周辅家鸡伏子，两头四翼八足。
现代文：十四年，太仓卫指挥姜周辅家，鸡孵出小鸡，两颗头，四只翅膀，八只足。
English: In the 14th year, Taicangwei commanded Jiang Zhoufu's house, the chicken hatched a chick, two heads, four wings, eight feet.

古文：▲鼠妖
现代文：鼠妖
English: Mouse Demon

古文：万历四十四年七月，常、镇、淮、扬诸郡，土鼠千万成群，夜衔尾渡江，络绎不绝，几一月方止。
现代文：万历四十四年七月，常、镇、淮、扬各郡，土老鼠千千万万成群，晚上前后相接渡江，络绎不绝，将近一个月纔停止。
English: In July of the 44th year of Wanli, thousands upon thousands of earthworms swarmed across the counties of Chang, Zhen, Huai and Yang, crossing the river one after the other in the evening. The swarming never stopped and lasted for nearly a month.

古文：四十五年五月，南京有鼠万余，衔尾渡江，食禾稼。
现代文：四十五年五月，南京有老鼠一万多只，前后相接渡江，侵食庄稼。
English: In May 1945, there were more than 10,000 rats in Nanjing, crossing the river back and forth to eat crops.

古文：崇祯七年，宁夏鼠十余万，衔尾食苗。
现代文：崇祯七年，宁夏有老鼠十多万只，前后相接偷吃禾苗。
English: In the past seven years, there have been more than 100,000 mice in Ningxia, stealing seedlings one after another.

古文：十二年，黄州鼠食禾，渡江五六日不绝。
现代文：十二年，黄州老鼠偷吃禾苗，渡江五六天不断绝。
English: In the 12th year, the rats in Huangzhou stole the grain seedlings and crossed the river for five or six days.

古文：时内殿奏章房多鼠盗食，与人相触而不畏，亦鼠妖也。
现代文：当时内殿奏章房很多老鼠偷盗食物，与人相碰撞而不畏惧，也是鼠妖。
English: At that time, there were many mice stealing food in the inner hall of Sozhang House, and they were not afraid to collide with people. They were also rat demons.

古文：至甲申元旦后，鼠始屏迹。
现代文：到甲申元旦以后，老鼠纔隐藏踪迹。
English: After New Year's Day in Jiaxing, the rats began to hide their tracks.

古文：又秦州关山中鼠化鹌鹑者以数千计。
现代文：又秦州关山中老鼠变成鹌鹑的数以千计。
English: There are also thousands of rats that have turned into maggots in the mountains of Qinzhou Pass.

古文：十五年二月，群鼠渡江，昼夜不绝。
现代文：十五年二月，成群的老鼠渡江，昼夜不断绝。
English: In February of the fifteenth year, hordes of rats crossed the river, day and night.

古文：十月，榆林、定边诸堡鼠生虾蟆腹中，一生数十，食苗如割。
现代文：十月，榆林、定边等堡老鼠生在虾蟆肚中，一生数十只，偷食禾苗如同割掉的一样。
English: In October, Yulin, Dingbian and other castle mice are born in the shrimp maw, and there are dozens of them in their lifetime. Stealing grain seedlings is like cutting them off.

古文：▲木冰
现代文：木冰
English: Wooden ice cream

古文：洪武四年正月戊申，木冰。
现代文：洪武四年正月戊申日，树木凝结成冰。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of Hongwu, the trees froze into ice.

古文：六年十二月乙丑，雨木冰。
现代文：六年十二月乙丑日，降木冰。
English: In December of the sixth year, on the day of the Ugly, the ice fell.

古文：十一年正月丁亥，雨木冰。
现代文：十一年正月丁亥日，降木冰。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the year, the day of the boar, the ice fell.

古文：二十二年正月甲戌，雨木冰。
现代文：二十二年正月甲戌，降木冰。
English: In the first month of the 22nd year, armour plating and wood ice fell.

古文：正统三年十月丁丑晓，木介。
现代文：正统三年十月丁丑日清晨，树木凝冰如甲。
English: In the early morning of October 3rd, Dingwuxi Day, the trees were covered with ice.

古文：天顺七年十月甲辰，雨木冰。
现代文：天顺七年十月甲辰日，降木冰。
English: On the seventh day of the tenth month of the seventh year of Tenshun, the ice fell from the trees.

古文：八年正月乙丑，雨木冰。
现代文：八年正月乙丑日，降木冰。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month of the 8th year, the ice fell.

古文：成化十六年正月辛卯晓，雨木冰。
现代文：成化十六年正月辛卯日清晨，降木冰。
English: In the early morning of the 16th day of the first month of Chenghua, the trees were covered with ice.

古文：二十三年十二月戊辰晓，木介。
现代文：二十三年十二月戊辰日清晨，树木凝冰如甲。
English: In the early morning of December 23rd, the trees were covered with ice.

古文：隆庆三年十一月癸巳，木冰。
现代文：隆庆三年十一月癸巳日，树木凝冰如甲。
English: The trees were covered in ice on November 3rd, the Day of the Snake.

古文：万历十四年冬，苏、松木冰。
现代文：万历十四年冬季，苏、松树木凝冰如甲。
English: In the winter of the 14th year of Wanli, the cypress and pine trees froze solid.

古文：崇祯元年十一月，陕西木冰，树枝尽折。
现代文：崇祯元年十一月，陕西树木凝冰，树枝全部折断。
English: In November of the first year of Chongzhen, the trees in Shaanxi Province froze, and all the branches were broken.

古文：其后大河以北，岁有此异。
现代文：这以后，黄河以北，年年有这种怪异现象。
English: Since then, north of the Yellow River, this strange phenomenon has occurred every year.

古文：▲木妖弘治八年，长沙枫生李实，黄莲生黄瓜。
现代文：弘治八年，长沙枫树结出李树果实，黄连结出黄瓜。
English: In the eighth year of Hongzhi, the Changsha maple tree produced plum fruits, and the Huanglian tree produced cucumbers.

古文：九年三月，长宁楠生莲花，李生豆荚。
现代文：九年三月，长宁楠木开出莲花，李树长出豆荚。
English: In March of the ninth year, a lotus flower bloomed in Nanmu, Changning, and a bean sprouted from a plum tree.

古文：嘉靖三十七年十月戊辰，泗水沙中涌出大杉木，围丈五尺，长六丈余。
现代文：嘉靖三十七年十月戊辰日，泗水沙中涌出大杉木，圆周一丈五尺，长六丈多。
English: On the day of Pentecost in October of the 37th year of Jiajing, a large cedar tree sprung up from the sands of the river, with a circumference of five feet and a length of more than six feet.

古文：隆庆五年四月，杭州栗生桃。
现代文：隆庆五年四月，杭州栗树结出桃子。
English: In April of the fifth year of Longqing, Hangzhou chestnut trees produced peaches.

古文：万历十八年五月丁卯，祖陵大松树孔中吐火，竟日方灭。
现代文：万历十八年五月丁卯日，祖陵大松树孔中喷吐火焰，一整天纔熄灭。
English: On the 18th day of the 5th month of the 18th year of the Wanli calendar, a flame spewed from the hole of the great pine tree in the ancestral mausoleum, and the flame was extinguished for a whole day.

古文：二十三年十二月癸亥，皇陵树颠火出，延烧草木。
现代文：二十三年十二月癸亥日，皇陵树顶火焰喷出，蔓延烧毁草木。
English: On December 23rd, the day of the Chinese New Year, flames erupted from the treetops of the imperial mausoleum, spreading and burning vegetation.

古文：天启六年四月癸巳，白露著树如垂绵，日中不散。
现代文：天启六年四月癸巳日，白色露珠附着在树上如同垂挂的绵帛，中午不消散。
English: On April 30, the sixth year of the Apocalypse, white dewdrops clung to the trees like hanging cocoons, and did not dissipate by noon.

古文：十月辛酉，南京西华门内有烟无火。礼臣往视，乃旧宫材木，瘗土中久，烟自生，土石皆焦。
现代文：十月辛酉日，南京西华门内有畑无火，礼臣前往视察，乃是旧宫的材木，埋在土中年久，熘自然产生，土和石头都被烤焦。
English: On the hottest day of October, there was a field without fire inside the Xihua Gate of Nanjing, and the courtiers went to inspect it. It was the timber of the old palace, buried in the soil for a long time, the earthworms were naturally produced, and the soil and stones were scorched.

古文：以水沃之，三日始灭。
现代文：用水浇注，三天纔熄灭。
English: Pour it with water and let it sit for three days.

古文：崇祯六年五月癸巳，霍山县有木甑飞堕，不知所自来。
现代文：崇祯六年五月癸巳日，霍出县有木甑飞坠下来，不知从哪里飞来。
English: On the third day of May in the sixth year of Chongzhen, a raft flew down in Huode County. I don't know where it came from.

古文：七年二月丁巳，太康门牡自开者三，知县集邑绅议其事，梁堕而死。
现代文：七年二月丁巳日，太康门闩多次自然打开，知县召集县中绅士议论此事，屋梁坠落而死。
English: On February 7th, Dingshi Day, the lintel of Taikang's gate opened spontaneously several times, the county summoned the county middlemen to discuss the matter, and the roof beam fell and died.

古文：▲青眚青祥
现代文：青眚青祥
English: Qingtao Qingxiang

