古文：柔兆涒滩，一年。
现代文：柔兆涒滩，一年。
English: Jou Zhaoyuan Beach, one year later.

古文：高祖圣文章武明德孝皇帝上之上天福元年春，正月，吴徐知诰始建大元帅府，以幕职分判吏、户、礼、兵、刑、工部及盐铁。
现代文：后晋高祖天福元年春季正月，吴国徐知诰开始建立大元帅府，用他的幕僚分别执掌吏、户、礼、兵、邢、工六部及盐铁。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Tianfu, the ancestor of Wu who was later promoted to high rank, Xu Zhisheng began to establish a grand marshal's office, and he used his staff to run the six departments of officials, households, ceremonies, soldiers, cadres, workers, and salt and iron respectively.

古文：丁未，唐主立子重美为雍王。
现代文：丁未，后唐末帝李从珂册立他的儿子李重美为雍王。
English: Ding Wei, the late Emperor Li of the Later Tang Dynasty, appointed his son Li Chongmei as the Yong Wang from Kechuan.

古文：癸丑，唐主以千春节置酒，晋国长公主上寿毕，辞归晋阳。
现代文：癸丑，后唐末帝在自己的生日千春节置酒设宴，晋国长公主上寿祝贺完毕，告辞回晋阳。
English: Ugly, the late Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty set up a banquet on his birthday, the Spring Festival, and congratulated the eldest princess of Jin Province on her birthday, and then returned to Jinyang.

古文：帝醉，曰： 何不且留？遽归，欲与石郎反邪！ 
现代文：当时末帝已经醉了，说道： 为什么不多留些时候，忙着赶回去想帮助石郎造反哪！ 
English: At that time, the Last Emperor was already drunk and said, "Why don't you stay a little longer and hurry back to help Ishiro rebel!"

古文：石敬瑭闻之，益惧。
现代文：石敬瑭听说后，更加害怕。
English: After hearing this, Shi Jingyao was even more afraid.

古文：三月，丙午，以翰林学士、礼部侍郎马胤孙为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：三月，丙午，末帝任用翰林学士、礼部侍郎马胤孙为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In March, on the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, the late emperor appointed Ma Yansun, the scholar of Hanlin and the attendant of the etiquette department, as the attendant of the middle school and the attendant of the same level.

古文：胤孙性谨儒，中书事多凝滞，又罕接宾客，时人目为 三不开 ，谓口、印、门也。
现代文：马胤孙性格谨慎懦弱，中书省办事往往凝滞不能畅达，又很少接待宾客，时人说他们是口、印、门 三不开 。
English: Ma Yinsun's character is cautious and cowardly. The affairs of the Ministry of Education and Culture are often stagnant and cannot be smooth, and he rarely receives guests. At that time, it was said that they were mouth, seal, and door three do not open.

古文：石敬瑭尽收其货之在洛阳及诸道者归晋阳，托言以助军费，人皆知其有异志。
现代文：石敬瑭把他在洛阳及诸道的财货全部收拢送回到晋阳，托词说是帮助军费，人们都知道他是心怀异志。
English: Shi Jingyao packed up all of his belongings in Luoyang and Zhuoduo and sent them back to Jinyang, using the excuse that it was to help with military expenses. People knew that he harbored different ambitions.

古文：唐主夜与近臣从容语曰： 石郎于朕至亲，无可疑者；但流言不息，万一失欢，何以解之？ 
现代文：唐主在夜间同近臣从容平淡地说： 石郎是朕的至亲，没有什么可猜疑的；但是流言总是不断，万一和他失掉和好，怎么办为好？ 
English: During the night, the lord of the Tang Dynasty calmly said to his vassal: Ishiro is my close relative, there is nothing to suspect; however, rumors are always circulating. In case we lose our friendship with him, what should we do?

古文：皆不对。
现代文：众臣都不回答。
English: No one answered.

古文：端明殿学士、给事中李崧退谓同僚吕琦曰： 吾辈受恩深厚，岂得自同众人，一概观望邪！
现代文：端明殿学士、给事中李崧退下来对同僚吕琦说： 我们这些人受恩深厚，怎能把自己等同于众人，一概观望呢，现在能想些什么办法呢？ 
English: In the midst of all this, Li Yao stepped back and said to his colleague Lyu Yao: "We have been deeply blessed. How can we compare ourselves to everyone else and just wait and see? What can we do now?

古文：计将安出？ 琦曰： 河东若有异谋，必结契丹为援。
现代文：吕琦说： 河东那里如果有其他打算，必然要勾结契丹作援助。
English: Lyu Wei said: If there are other plans in Hedong, it is inevitable to collude with Qidan to provide assistance.

古文：契丹母以赞华在中国，屡求和亲，但求荝剌等未获，故和未成耳。
现代文：契丹太后因为他的长子李赞华降归中国，屡次要求和亲，但是，他们要求释放剌回去没有获得结果，所以和议未能成功。
English: The Empress Dowager of Khitan, because of the abdication of her eldest son, Li Zhanhua, to China, repeatedly asked for a reconciliation. However, their request for the release of Zou back to China was not successful, so the reconciliation was not successful.

古文：今诚归荝刺等与之和，岁以礼币约直十馀万缗遗之，彼必欢然承命。
现代文：现在，如果真能把剌等放归与他们议和，每年用大约值十多万缗的礼物、钱财送给他们，他们必定会欢欣地答应。
English: Now, if we can really negotiate with them to release the cormorants, and give them gifts and money worth more than one hundred thousand cormorants every year, they will surely agree with joy.

古文：如此，则河东虽欲陆梁，无能为矣。 
现代文：如果做到这样，那么河东虽然想蠢动，也无能为力了。 
English: If this is achieved, then even if Hedong wants to make a move, there is nothing it can do.

古文：崧曰： 此吾志也。
现代文：李崧说： 你说的与我的想法一样。
English: Li Wei said: What you said is the same as what I think.

古文：然钱谷皆出三司，宜更与张相谋之。 
现代文：然而钱、粮都要从三司支出，需要进一步同张丞相商量。 
English: However, both money and grain have to be spent from the three departments, which requires further discussion with Premier Zhang.

古文：遂告张延朗，延朗曰： 如学士计，不惟可以制河东，亦省边费之什九，计无便于此者。
现代文：便把事情告诉了张延朗，张延朗说： 按学士的策划，不但可以制约河东，也可以节省戍边费用十分之九，计谋没有比这更好的了。
English: He then told Zhang Yanlang about the matter. Zhang Yanlang said: According to the plan of the bachelor, it is not only possible to control Hedong, but also to save nine-tenths of the fringe expenses. There is no better strategy than this.

古文：若主上听从，但责办于老夫，请于军财之外捃拾以供之，他夕，二人密言于帝，帝大喜，称其忠，二人私草《遗契丹书》以俟命。
现代文：如果主上听从了这个意见，只要责成老夫去办理就行了，可以在国家财库之外去搜集，以供其用。 又一个晚间，二人秘密地把这个办法陈述给末帝，末帝大喜，称道二人的忠心，二人私下草拟《遗契丹书》来等待命令。
English: If the lord listened to this suggestion, he only had to instruct the old man to handle it, and he could collect it outside the national treasury for his use.Another evening, the two secretly presented this method to the last emperor, and the last emperor was overjoyed, praising the loyalty of the two, and the two secretly drafted the "Book of Khitan" to wait for the order.

古文：久之，帝以其谋告枢密直学士薛文遇，文遇对曰： 以天子之尊，屈身奉夷狄，不亦辱乎！
现代文：过了些时候，末帝把他们的谋略告诉了枢密直学士薛文遇，薛文遇回答说： 以天子的尊崇，屈身来侍奉夷狄野人，不是太耻辱了吗！
English: After some time, the last emperor told their strategy to the privy direct scholar Xue Wenyu. Xue Wenyu replied: With the reverence of the heavenly son, bowing down to serve the barbarians, isn't it too shameful!

古文：又，虏若循故事求尚公主，何以拒之？ 
现代文：再者，如果那胡虏按照过去的做法来谋求迎娶公主去和亲，用什么来拒绝他？ 
English: Besides, if the ruffian, as he had done in the past, had come to seek the princess's hand in marriage and to make her his bride, how could he be refused?

古文：因诵戎昱《昭君诗》曰： 安危托妇人。 
现代文：接着就诵读唐人戎昱的《昭君诗》说： 安危托妇人。 
English: Next, he recited the "Poem of Zhaojun" by the Tang Dynasty poet Rong Zheng, saying: "Be safe, women.

古文：帝意遂变。
现代文：末帝的思想便改变了。
English: The Emperor's mind was changed.

古文：一日，急召崧、琦至后楼，盛怒，责之曰： 卿辈皆知古今，欲佐人主致太平；今乃为谋如是！
现代文：一天，紧急召来李崧和吕琦到后楼，很恼火，责备他们说： 你们这些人都是懂得历史的，是想要辅佐人主获得天下太平的；怎么现在竟然出了这么个主意！
English: One day, he urgently summoned Li Qian and Lv Qian to the back building. He was very angry and scolded them, saying: "You people all understand history and want to help the Lord obtain world peace; how could you come up with such an idea now!

古文：朕一女尚乳臭，卿欲弃之沙漠邪？
现代文：朕有一个女儿还没有脱离乳臭，你们是要想把她抛弃到大沙漠吗？
English: I have a daughter who is still breastfeeding. Do you want to abandon her in the desert?

古文：且欲以养士之财输之虏庭，其意安在？ 
现代文：而且，要把国家养兵的财力输送给胡虏那里去，是什么居心？ 
English: Moreover, what is the intention behind channeling the financial resources of the national army to the Huns?

古文：二人惧，汗流浃背，曰： 臣等志在竭愚以报国，非为虏计也，愿陛下察之。 
现代文：李崧和吕琦很惶恐，汗流浃背，说道： 臣等的本意是要竭尽愚拙的想法用以报效国家，不是在替胡虏作打算，希望陛下明察。 
English: Li Qiye and Lyu Qiye were very frightened and sweating profusely, and said: "The intention of the ministers and others was to exhaust stupid ideas and use them to serve the country, not to make plans for Huru, I hope Your Majesty will see clearly."

古文：拜谢无数，帝诟责不已。
现代文：二人无数次拜谢求恕，末帝指责不停。
English: The two of them have begged for forgiveness countless times, and the emperor has accused them incessantly.

古文：吕琦气竭，拜少止，帝曰： 吕琦强项，肯视朕为人主邪！ 
现代文：吕琦气力不继，叩拜稍有停顿，末帝说： 吕琦倔犟，你还肯把朕看做人主吗？ 
English: Lv Yue's strength was exhausted, and there was a slight pause in his prostration. The last emperor said: Lv Yue, do you still regard me as the master of mankind?

古文：琦曰： 臣等为谋不臧，愿陛下治其罪，多拜可为！ 
现代文：吕琦说： 我们谋事不善，愿请陛下治罪，多拜有什么用！ 
English: Lyu Hao said, "We did not do a good job. I would like to ask Your Majesty to punish us. What is the use of praying more?"

古文：帝怒稍解，止其拜，各赐卮酒罢之，自是群臣不敢复言和亲之策。
现代文：末帝的恼怒稍有缓解，制止他们的叩拜，每人赐给一杯酒，让他们出宫了，从此群臣不敢再提和亲的建议。
English: The last emperor's anger eased a little, stopped their kowtowing, gave each of them a glass of wine, and let them leave the palace. From then on, the ministers no longer dared to suggest a reconciliation.

古文：丁巳，以琦为御史中丞，盖疏之也。
现代文：丁巳，末帝任用吕琦为御史中丞，以表示疏远他。
English: Soon after, the last emperor appointed Lv Xuan to the post of Imperial Historian to distance himself from him.

古文：吴徐知诰以其子副都统景通为太尉、副元帅，都统判官宋齐丘、行军司马徐玠为元帅府左、右司马。
现代文：吴国徐知诰任用他的儿子副都统徐景通为太尉、副元帅，都统判官宋齐丘、行军司马徐为元帅府左、右司马。
English: Xu Zhisheng of the State of Wu appointed his son Xu Jingtong, the deputy governor of the capital, as the first lieutenant and deputy marshal, Song Qiqiu, the judge of the capital, and Xu Ma, the marshal, as the left and right marshals.

古文：闽主昶改元通文，立贤妃李氏为皇后，尊皇太后曰太皇太后。
现代文：闽国主王昶把年号改为通文，册立贤妃李氏为皇后，尊上皇太后称为太皇太后。
English: The lord of the country, Wang Xi, changed the year name to Tongwen, and appointed the virtuous princess Li as the empress, and the revered empress dowager was called the great empress dowager.

古文：静江节度使、同平章事马希杲有善政，监军裴仁照谮之于楚王希范，言其收众心，希范疑之。
现代文：静江节度使、同平章事马希杲有好的政声，监军裴仁煦向楚王马希范诽谤他，说他收买人心，马希范对他产生怀疑。
English: Ma Xifan had a good political reputation, and the military overseer Pei Renyuan slandered him to King Ma Xifan of Chu, saying that he bribed people's hearts. Ma Xifan became suspicious of him.

古文：夏，四月，汉将孙德威侵蒙、桂二州，希范命其弟武安节度副使希广权知军府事，自将步骑五千如桂州。
现代文：夏季，四月，南汉将领孙德威侵犯蒙州和桂州，马希范命令他的弟弟武安节度副使马希广暂时主持军府事，自己带领步兵、骑兵五千人赴桂州。
English: In the summer, in April, Sun Dewi, the general of the Southern Han Dynasty, invaded Mengzhou and Guizhou. Ma Xifan ordered his brother Wu'an Jiedu, the deputy envoy of Ma Xiguang, to temporarily preside over the military affairs, and he himself led five thousand infantry and cavalry to Guizhou.

古文：希杲惧，其母华夫人逆希范于全义岭，谢曰： 希杲为治无状，致寇戎入境，烦殿下亲涉险阻，皆妾之罪也。
现代文：马希杲害怕，他的母亲华夫人到全义岭远迎马希范，谢罪说： 希杲治理政事不得法，招致敌兵入境，烦劳殿下亲自跋涉险阻之地，都是我的罪过。
English: Ma Xizhe was afraid. His mother, Madam Hua, came all the way to Chenyi Ridge to welcome Ma Xifan. Xie Sin said: It was my fault that Ma Xizhe was unable to administer political affairs according to the law, that he invited enemy soldiers to enter the country, and that it was troublesome for His Royal Highness to personally trek through dangerous terrain.

古文：愿削封邑，洒扫夜庭，以赎希杲罪。 
现代文：我们愿意削去封邑，去当洒扫庭院的人，用来赎偿希杲的罪过。 
English: We are willing to give up our fiefdoms and work as yard sweepers to atone for the sins of Xi Xi.

古文：希范曰： 吾久不见希杲，闻其治行尤异，故来省之，无它也。 
现代文：马希范说： 我很久没有见到希杲，听说他治理成绩优异，所以来看看，没有别的意思。 
English: Ma Xifan said: I haven't seen Xifan for a long time, and I heard that his governance achievements are excellent, so I came to take a look, there is no other meaning.

古文：汉兵自蒙州引去，徙希杲知朗州。
现代文：南汉兵从蒙州退走，便把马希杲调迁到朗州。
English: When the South Han soldiers retreated from Mengzhou, they transferred Ma Xiqi to Lanzhou.

古文：高从诲遣使奉笺于徐知诰，劝即帝位。
现代文：荆南高从诲遣派使者送信给徐知诰，劝他即皇帝之位。
English: Jing Nangao sent an envoy to Xu Zhisheng to persuade him to become emperor.

古文：初，石敬瑭欲尝唐王之意，累表自陈赢疾，乞解兵柄，移他镇。帝与执政议从其请，移镇郓州。
现代文：过去，石敬瑭想试探末帝的意图，多次上表陈诉身体羸弱，请求解除他的兵权，调迁到别的镇所；末帝与执政大臣商议后答应了他的请求，把他移镇郓州。
English: In the past, Shi Jingyao wanted to test the intentions of the last emperor. He repeatedly complained that he was physically weak and asked to be relieved of his military powers and transferred to another town. After discussing with the ruling minister, the last emperor agreed to his request and moved him to Zhangzhou.

古文：房暠、李崧、吕琦等皆力谏，以为不可，帝犹豫久之。
现代文：房、李崧、吕琦等人都极力谏劝，认为不能这样做，末帝犹疑了很长时间。
English: Fang, Li Qian, Lv Qian and others all tried their best to persuade him that this could not be done, and the last emperor hesitated for a long time.

古文：五月，庚寅夜，李崧请急在外，薛文遇独直，帝与之议河东事，文遇曰： 谚有之： 当道筑室，三年不成。 
现代文：五月，庚寅夜间，李崧因有急事请假在外，薛文遇独自承值夜班，末帝同他议论河东的事情，薛文遇说： 俗谚说： 在道路当中盖房，三年也盖不成 ，这种事情只能由主上的意志进行决断。
English: In May, during the night of Geng Yin, Li Yao asked for leave due to an urgent matter. Xue Wen Rong undertook the night shift alone. The late emperor discussed the situation in Hedong with him. Xue Wen Rong said: As the saying goes: If you build a house in the middle of the road, it will not be completed for three years. This kind of thing can only be decided by the will of the Lord.

古文：兹事断自圣志；群臣各为身谋，安肯尽言！以臣观之，河东移亦反，不移亦反，在旦暮耳，不若先事图之。 
现代文：群臣各为自身利害作打算，怎么肯什么话都说！以臣看来，河东的事，移镇也反，不移也要反，只是时间早晚而已，不如走在前头，先把他解决了。 
English: As far as the vassals were concerned, the matter of Hedong should be resolved sooner rather than later. It was better to go ahead and resolve it first.

古文：先是，术者言国家今年应得贤佐，出奇谋，定天下。帝意文遇当之，闻其言，大喜，曰： 卿言殊豁吾意，成败吾决行之。 
现代文：以前，术士说国家今年应该得到贤人辅佐，提出奇谋，安定天下，末帝以为这个人当由薛文遇来应验，听到他的话，大为高兴，说道： 爱卿的话，很使我心意豁然开朗，不论成功还是失败，我决心施行。 
English: In the past, the sorcerer said that the country should be assisted by a wise man this year, and proposed a wonderful plan to stabilize the world. The last emperor thought that this man should be fulfilled by Xue Wen. Hearing his words, he was very happy and said: "Aiqing's words have made my mind suddenly clear. Regardless of success or failure, I am determined to implement them."

古文：即为除目，付学士院使草制。辛卯，以敬瑭为天平节度使，以马军都指挥使、河阳节度使宋审虔为河东节度使。
现代文：立即命薛文遇写出封授官职的拟议，交付学士院草拟任命制书，辛卯，任命石敬瑭为天平节度使，任用马军都指挥使、河阳节度使宋审虔为河东节度使。
English: He immediately ordered Xue Wen Rong to write a proposal for the conferment of official positions, and delivered it to the Academy to draft an appointment book, and Xin Wu to appoint Shi Jingqi as the Tianping Festival Envoy, to appoint Ma Jundu Command Envoy, and to appoint Heyang Festival Envoy to Song Xianqian as the Hedong Festival Envoy.

古文：制出，两班闻呼敬瑭名，相顾失色。
现代文：制令一出，文武两班听到呼叫石敬瑭的名字，相顾失色。
English: As soon as the order was issued, the two classes of men and women heard the name of Shi Jingyao being called, and lost interest in each other.

古文：甲午，以建雄节使张敬达为西北蕃汉马步都部署，趣敬瑭之郓州。
现代文：甲午，末帝任用建雄节度使张敬达为西北蕃汉马步都部署，催促石敬瑭速赴郓州。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the late emperor appointed Jianxiong Jiedu to make Zhang Jingda deploy to the northwest of the Han Dynasty and urged Shi Jingyi to go to Bozhou.

古文：敬瑭疑惧，谋于将佐曰： 吾之再来河东也，主上面许终身不除代；今忽有是命，得非如今年千春节与公主所言乎？
现代文：石敬瑭很是疑惧，便和他的将佐计议说： 我第二次来河东时，主上曾当面答应我终身不再派别人来替换我；现在又忽然有了这样的命令，莫不是像今年过千春节时，主上同公主所讲的那样吗？
English: Shi Jingyao was very suspicious, so he discussed the matter with his commander Sazu: When I came to Hedong for the second time, the Lord had promised me in person that He would never send anyone else to replace me; now suddenly there is such an order, isn't it like what the Lord said to the princess during this year's Spring Festival?

古文：我不兴乱，朝廷发之，安能束手死于道路乎！
现代文：我如果不造反，朝廷要先发制人，怎么能束手被擒，死于道路之间呢！
English: If I don't rebel and the imperial court wants to preempt, how can I be handcuffed and die between the roads!

古文：今且发表称疾以观其意，若其宽我，我当事之；若加兵于我，我则改图耳。 
现代文：今天我要上表说有病，来观察朝廷对我的意向，如果他对我宽容，我就臣事他；如果他对我用兵，那我就要另作打算了。 
English: Today, I'm going to announce that I'm ill, to observe the court's intentions towards me. If he's lenient with me, I'll serve him; if he uses soldiers against me, then I'll make other plans.

古文：幕僚段希尧极言拒之，敬瑭以其朴直，不责也。
现代文：幕僚段希尧极力反对，石敬瑭因为他为人直率，并不责怪他。
English: Staff officer Duan Xijun strenuously objected, but Shi Jingyao did not blame him because he was a straightforward person.

古文：节度使判官华阴赵莹劝敬瑭赴郓州；观察判官平遥薛融曰： 融书生，不习军旅。 
现代文：节度判官华阴人赵莹劝石敬瑭去郓州赴任；观察判官平遥人薛融说： 我是个书生，不懂得遣兵作战的事。 
English: The festival judge Huayin Zhao Ying advised Shi Jingyao to go to Bozhou to take office; the observation judge Pingyao Xue Rong said: I am a student, I don't know about sending soldiers to fight.

古文：都押牙刘知远曰： 明公久将兵，得士卒心；今据形胜之地，士马精强，若称兵传檄，帝业可成，奈何以一纸制书自投虎口乎！ 
现代文：都押牙刘知远说： 明公您长期统率兵将，很能受到士兵的拥护；现在正占据着有利的地势，将士和马步军队都很精锐强悍，如果起兵，传发檄文宣示各道，可以完成统一国家的帝王大业，怎么能只为一道朝廷制令便自投虎口呢！ 
English: Liu Zhiyuan, the imperial deputy, said: "Ming Gong, you have been leading the soldiers for a long time, and you can be well supported by the soldiers; now you are occupying a favorable position, and the soldiers and horse-marching troops are very elite and powerful. If you raise an army and send out a proclamation to all directions, you can complete the great imperial cause of unifying the country. How can you throw yourself into a tiger's mouth just for a single imperial edict?

古文：掌书记洛阳桑维翰曰： 主上初即位，明公入朝，主上岂不知蛟龙不可纵之深渊邪？
现代文：掌书记洛阳人桑维翰说： 主上当初即位时，明公您入京朝贺，主上岂能不懂得蛟龙不可纵之归渊的道理？
English: Luoyang resident Sang Weihan, the secretary-in-charge, said: When the Lord ascended the throne at the beginning, Ming Gong congratulated you on your entry into Beijing. Can the Lord not understand the principle that the dragon cannot be allowed to return to the abyss?

古文：然卒以河东复授公，引乃天意假公以利器。
现代文：然而到底还是把河东再次交给您，这正是天意要借一把快刀给您。
English: However, in the end, I will still give you Hedong again, which is exactly the will of heaven to lend you a fast knife.

古文：明宗遗爱在人，主上以庶孽代之，群情不附。
现代文：先帝明宗的遗爱留给了后人，主上却用旁支的庶子取代大位，群情是不依附于他的。
English: The legacy of the former Emperor Mingzong was left to posterity, but the Lord replaced the throne with an illegitimate son of a collateral branch, and the group is not attached to him.

古文：公明宗之爱婿，今主上以反逆见待，此非首谢可免，但力为自全之计。
现代文：您是明宗的爱婿，可是现在主上却把您当作叛逆看待，这就不是仅仅靠表示低头服从所能取得宽免，只能努力为保全自己想办法了。
English: You are the son-in-law of Mingzong, but now the Lord regards you as a traitor. It is not only by bowing down and obeying that you can obtain forgiveness, but you can only try to find a way to save yourself.

古文：契丹主素与明宗约为兄弟，今部落近在云、应，公诚能推心屈节事之，万一有急，朝呼夕至，何患无成。 
现代文：契丹向来同明宗协约做兄弟之邦，现在，他们的部落近在云州、应州，您如果真能推心置腹地曲意讨好他们，万一有了急变之事，早上叫他晚上就能来到，还担心什么事不能办成吗？ 
English: Khitan has always been a fraternal state with the Ming Dynasty. Now, their tribe is close to Yunnan and Yingzhou. If you can really please them with your heart and soul, if there is a sudden change, tell him in the morning that he can come in the evening. Are you still worried that something can't be done?

古文：敬瑭意遂决。
现代文：石敬瑭于是便下了造反的决心。
English: Shi Jingyao then made up his mind to rebel.

古文：先是，朝廷疑敬瑭，以羽林将军宝鼎杨彦询为北京副留守，敬瑭将举事，亦以情告之。
现代文：过去，朝廷猜疑石敬瑭，任用羽林将军宝鼎人杨彦询为北京太原的副留守，石敬瑭将要起兵造反，也把情况告诉了他。
English: In the past, the imperial court suspected Shi Jingyao and appointed Yang Yancheng, the general Baoding of the general Ulin, as the vice-resident of Beijing Taiyuan. Shi Jingyao was going to rebel and told him the situation.

古文：彦询曰： 不知河东兵粮几何，能敌朝廷乎？ 
现代文：杨彦询说： 不知河东现在有多少兵士和粮秣，能够敌得过朝廷吗？ 
English: Yang Yanquan said, "I don't know how many soldiers and food rations there are in Hedong now, but can they defeat the imperial court?"

古文：左右请杀彦询，敬瑭曰： 惟副使一人我自保之，汝辈勿言也。 
现代文：石敬瑭左右的人请求杀了杨彦询，石敬瑭说： 只有副使一个人，我亲自保证他没有事，你们大家就不必再说了。 
English: People around Shi Jingyao begged him to kill Yang Yanquan. Shi Jingyao said, "There is only one vice-envoy, and I personally guarantee that he is fine. You all don't need to say anything more."

古文：戊戌，昭义节度使皇甫立奏敬瑭反。
现代文：戊戍，昭义节度使皇甫立奏报石敬瑭叛乱。
English: Wuzhen, Zhaoyi Festival made the emperor report the rebellion of Shi Jingjun to the emperor.

古文：敬瑭表： 帝，养子，不应承祀，请传位许王。 
现代文：石敬瑭上表称： 皇帝是养子，不应该继位，请把皇位传给许王李从益。 
English: Shi Jingyao said on the table: The emperor is an adopted son, and should not succeed to the throne. Please pass the throne to Xu Wang and Li Congyi.

古文：帝手裂其表抵地，以诏答之曰： 卿于鄂王固非疏远，卫州之事，天下皆知；许王之言，何人肯信！ 
现代文：末帝把石敬瑭的表章撕碎扔在地上，用诏书回答他说： 你同鄂王李从厚本来并不疏远，卫州的事情，天下人都知道；许王的话，谁肯听他！ 
English: The last emperor tore up the seal of Shi Jingyu and threw it on the ground, and replied to him with an imperial edict: You are not estranged from the king of H, Li Conghu. The whole world knows about the events in Weizhou; who would listen to the words of King Xu!

古文：壬寅，制削夺敬瑭官爵。
现代文：壬寅，末帝下制令，削夺了石敬瑭的官爵。
English: Jinyin, the last emperor, issued an order to deprive Shi Jingyao of his title.

古文：乙巳，以张敬达兼太原四面排陈使，河阳节度使张彦琪为马步军都指挥使，以安国节度使安审琦为马军都指挥使，以保义节度使相里金为步军都指挥使，以右监门上将军武廷翰为壕寨使。
现代文：乙巳，末帝任用张敬达兼太原四面排阵使，河阳节度使张彦琪为马步军都指挥使，作用安国节度使安审琦为马军都指挥使，任用保义节度使相里金为步军都指挥使，任用右监门上将军武廷翰为壕寨使。
English: At this time, the last emperor appointed Zhang Jingda and Taiyuan as the four-faced array envoys, Heyang Festival appointed Zhang Yanqi as the commander of the horse marching army, the effect of An Guo Festival appointed An Ji Jun as the commander of the horse army, the appointment of Baoyi Festival appointed Sori Jin as the commander of the marching army, and the appointment of the right guard gate general Wu Tinghan as the entrenchment envoy.

古文：丙午，以张敬达为太原四面兵马都部署，以义武节度使杨光远为副部署。
现代文：丙午，任命张敬达为太原四面兵马都部署，任命义武节度使杨光远为副部署。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd, Zhang Jingda was appointed as the commander of all the troops and horses in Taiyuan, and Yang Guangyuan was appointed as the deputy commander of all the troops and horses in Yiwu.

古文：丁未，又以张敬达知太原行府事，以前彰武节度使高行周为太原四面招抚、排陈等使。
现代文：丁未，又任命张敬达主持太原行府事，任命前彰武节度使高行周为太原四面招抚、排阵等使。
English: Ding Wei also appointed Zhang Jingda to preside over the government affairs of Taiyuan. Prior to the appointment, Gao Xing Zhou was appointed by the Shouwu Festival to be the envoy of the four sides of Taiyuan.

古文：光远既行，定州军乱，牙将千乘方太讨平之。
现代文：杨光远离任后，定州军作乱，牙将千乘县人方太讨伐平定了叛乱。
English: After Yang Guang was removed from office, the Dingzhou Army caused a disturbance, and Fang Zheng of Qianjiang County fought against the Fang Tai and quelled the rebellion.

古文：张敬达将后三万营于晋安乡，戊申，敬达奏西北先锋马军都指挥使安审信叛奔晋阳。审信，金全之弟子也，敬瑭与之有旧。
现代文：张敬达统兵三万在晋安乡安营扎寨，戊申，张敬达奏报西北先锋马军都指挥使安审信叛奔晋阳，安审信是安金全的侄子，与石敬瑭旧有往来。
English: Zhang Jingda led 30,000 soldiers to set up camp in Jin'an Township. Wushin, Zhang Jingda reported that the northwest vanguard of the horse army were all commanded by An Xunxin, who was the nephew of An Jinquan and had a long-standing relationship with Shi Jingyao.

古文：先是，雄义都指挥使马邑安元信将所部六百馀人戍代州，代州刺史张朗善遇之，元信密说朗曰： 吾观石令公长者，举事必成；公何不潜遣人通意，可以自全。 
现代文：过去，雄义都指挥使马邑人安元信带领所部六百余人戍守代州，代州刺史张朗待他很好。安元信暗中劝说张朗说： 我看石令公是个长者，他举兵造反，必能成功；您何不暗地派人去表达心意，可以保全自己。 
English: In the past, An Yuanxin, who was from Ma'e, commanded and led more than six hundred people from the headquarters to defend Daizhou. Zhang Lang, the governor of Daizhou, treated him well. An Yuanxin secretly persuaded Zhang Lang to say: I think Shi Ling Gong is an elder, he raised an army to rebel, and he will succeed; why don't you secretly send someone to express your will, you can save yourself.

古文：朗不从，由是互相猜忌。
现代文：张朗不听，从此二人互相猜忌。
English: Zhang Lang didn't listen, and the two have been suspicious of each other ever since.

古文：元信谋杀朗，不克，帅其众奔审信，审信遂帅麾下数百骑与元信掠百井奔晋阳。
现代文：安元信企图杀了张朗，没有成功，便带领自己的部属兵众投奔安审信，安审信便率领他指挥下的几百骑兵与安元信会合，抢掠百井后，投奔晋阳。
English: An Yuanxin tried to kill Zhang Lang, but was unsuccessful, so he led his subordinate soldiers to An Xunxin. An Xunxin then led several hundred cavalry under his command to meet with An Yuanxin, and after looting hundreds of wells, he rushed to Jinyang.

古文：敬瑭谓元信曰： 汝见何利害，舍强而归弱？ 
现代文：石敬瑭对安元信说： 你看出什么利害，竟然舍强而归弱？ 
English: Shi Jingyao said to An Yuanxin: What interests do you see that you give up strength and become weak?

古文：对曰： 元信非知星识气，顾以人事决之耳。
现代文：回答说： 我并不会观星识气，只是用人事的判断来作决定而已。
English: He replied: "I don't look to the stars, I just use my personnel judgment to make decisions.

古文：夫帝王所以御天下，莫重于信。
现代文：谈起帝王之所以能够临御天下，没有比信誉更重要的了。
English: When it comes to emperors being able to reign over the world, nothing is more important than credibility.

古文：今主上失大信于令公，亲而贵者且不自保，况疏贱乎！
现代文：现在，主上对令公您失去大信，至亲而且尊贵的人尚且不能自保，何况疏远而卑微的人哪！
English: Now, my lord, you have lost the confidence of your father-in-law, and those who are near and dear to you cannot save themselves, much less those who are distant and lowly.

古文：其亡可翘足而待，何强之有！ 
现代文：他的灭亡可以翘着脚等待，他算什么强啊！ 
English: His demise can be awaited with bared feet, what a strong man he is!

古文：敬瑭悦，委以军事。
现代文：石敬瑭高兴，让他掌管军事。
English: Shi Jingyao was pleased and put him in charge of the military.

古文：振武西北巡检使安重荣戍代北，帅步骑五百奔晋阳。
现代文：振武西北巡检使安重荣戌守代北，也率领步兵和骑兵五百人投奔晋阳。
English: Zhenwu Northwest Patrol made An Chong Rongguo defend the north of Dai, and also led 500 infantrymen and cavalrymen to rush to Jinyang.

古文：重荣，朔州人也。
现代文：安重荣是朔州人。
English: An Chongrong is a native of Shuozhou.

古文：以宋审虔为宁国节度使、充待卫马军都指挥使。
现代文：朝廷任命宋审虔为宁国节度使、充当侍卫马军都指挥使。
English: The imperial court appointed Song Jianqian as the delegate to the Ning Guo Festival and the delegate to serve as the guard and commander of the horse army.

古文：天雄节度使刘延皓恃后族之势，骄纵，夺人财产，减将士给赐，宴饮无度。
现代文：天雄节度使刘延皓依恃皇后家族的势力，很骄纵，侵占别人的财产，扣减将士的赏赐，宴会饮酒没有节制。
English: Tianxiong Festival made Liu Yanzhong rely on the power of the queen's family. He was very arrogant, appropriated other people's property, deducted rewards from generals, and drank alcohol at banquets without restraint.

古文：捧圣都虞候张令昭因众心怨怒，谋以魏博应河东，癸丑未明，帅众攻牙城，克之；延皓脱身走，乱兵大掠。
现代文：捧圣都虞候张令昭因为众心怨恨，企图用魏博来响应河东造反，癸丑天未亮，率领兵众攻打主将所居的牙城，攻了下来；刘延皓脱自身逃去，乱兵大肆抢掠。
English: Because of the resentment of the hearts of the people, Zhang Lingzhao, who held the sacred capital, attempted to use Wei Bo to respond to the rebellion in Hedong. At dawn, he led the soldiers to attack the stronghold where the commander lived, and attacked it; Liu Yanxuan escaped himself and fled, and the soldiers looted and plundered.

古文：令昭奏： 延皓失于抚御，以致军乱；臣以抚安士卒，权领军府，乞赐旌节！ 
现代文：张令昭上奏： 刘延皓抚给驾御不当，以致军人作乱；臣为了要抚恤安慰士兵，暂时领管军府，请求朝廷赐给旌节！ 
English: Zhang Ling Zhao's report: Liu Yan's care for the emperor was improper, so that the soldiers rioted; in order to care for and comfort the soldiers, the minister temporarily took charge of the military government and asked the court to grant him a feast day!

古文：延皓至洛阳，唐主怒，命远贬；皇后为之请，六月，庚申，止削延皓官爵，归私第。
现代文：刘延皓逃回洛阳，末帝发怒，下令把他贬到远方，皇后为他说情，六月，庚申，只是削去刘延皓的官爵，让他回自己的宅第。
English: Liu Yanqi fled back to Luoyang. The late emperor was angry and ordered him to be banished to a distant place. The empress interceded for him. In June, Goshun only stripped Liu Yanqi of his title and let him return to his own residence.

古文：辛酉，吴太保、同平章事徐景迁以疾罢，以其弟景遂代为门下侍郎、参政事。
现代文：辛酉，吴国太保、同平章事徐景迁因为患病罢官，任用他的弟弟徐景遂代替他做门下侍郎、参政事。
English: Xin Wei, Wu Guotai Bao, Tongping Zhang, Xu Jingqian resigned because of illness, and appointed his brother Xu Jing to replace him as a footman and political advisor.

古文：癸亥，唐主以张令昭为右千牛卫将军、权知天雄军计事。
现代文：癸亥，后唐末帝任用张令昭为右千牛卫将军，暂时主持天雄军府事。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong appointed Zhang Lingzhao as the general of the Right Thousand Cattle Guards, temporarily presiding over Tianxiong's military affairs.

古文：令昭以调发未集，且受新命。
现代文：张令昭因为调发人马没有会集，暂且接受新的任命。
English: Zhang Lingzhao temporarily accepted the new appointment because there was no meeting for the transfer of personnel.

古文：寻有诏徙齐州防御使，令昭托以士卒所留，实俟河东之成败。
现代文：不久，又有诏书命令他调任齐州防御使，张令昭托词说被士兵所留滞，实际上是等待观察河东起兵之成败。
English: Soon after, another imperial edict ordered him to be transferred to the post of the defense envoy of Qizhou. Zhang Lingzhao said that he was detained by soldiers, but in fact he was waiting to observe the success or failure of the uprising in Hedong.

古文：唐主遣使谕之，令昭杀使者。
现代文：后唐末帝派遣使者告谕他，张令昭把使者杀了。
English: After the late Tang Emperor sent an envoy to tell him, Zhang Lingzhao killed the envoy.

古文：甲戌，以宣武节度使兼中书令范延光为天雄四面行营招讨使、知魏博行府事，以张敬达充太原四面招讨使，以杨光远为副使。
现代文：甲戍，末帝任命宣武节度使兼中书令范延光为天雄四面行营招讨使、主持魏博行府事，任命张敬达充当太原四面招讨使，任用杨光远为副使。
English: At the end of the Ming Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong appointed Fan Yanguang, the envoy of the Xuanwu Festival and the general secretary of the CPC Central Committee, as the envoy of Tianxiong to the four directions, and presided over the government affairs of Wei Bo, appointed Zhang Jinda as the envoy of Taiyuan to the four directions, and appointed Yang Guangyuan as the deputy envoy.

古文：丙子，以西京留守李周为天雄军四面行营副招讨使。
现代文：丙子，任命西京留守李周为天雄军四面行营副招讨使。
English: He Zi appointed Li Zhou, who stayed in West Beijing, as deputy envoy to invite Tianxiong's army to march in all directions.

古文：石敬瑭之子右卫上将军重殷、皇城副使重裔闻敬瑭举兵，匿于民间井中。
现代文：石敬瑭的儿子右卫上将军石重殷、皇城副使石重裔听说石敬瑭起兵造反，躲藏在民间市井中。
English: Shi Jingyao's son, the right guard general Shi Chongyin, and the imperial deputy, Shi Chongzong, heard that Shi Jingyao had rebelled and were hiding in the town.

古文：弟沂州都指挥使敬德杀其妻女而逃，寻捕得，死狱中，从弟彰圣都指挥使敬威自杀。
现代文：石敬瑭的弟弟沂州都指挥使石敬德杀了自己的妻子、女儿而后逃走，不久，被捕获，死于狱中。叔伯弟弟彰圣都指挥使石敬威自杀。
English: Shi Jingtao's brother, the commander of Zhangzhou, ordered Shi Jingde to kill his wife and daughter and then escape, but he was soon caught and died in prison. His uncle, the commander of Zhang Shengtu, ordered Shi Jingtao to commit suicide.

古文：秋，七月，戊子，获重殷、重裔，诛之，并族所匿之家。
现代文：秋季，七月，戊子，抓获了石重殷和石重裔，诛杀了他们，并把藏匿他们的人家全族杀害。
English: In the autumn, in July, Wu Zi captured Shi Chongyin and Shi Chongxiong, killed them, and killed the whole family of those who hid them.

古文：庚寅，楚王希范自桂州北还。
现代文：庚寅，楚王马希范从桂州北还。
English: Gyeongin and Chu King Ma Xifan are also from the north of Guizhou.

古文：云州步军指挥使桑迁奏应州节度使尹晖逐云州节度使沙彦旬，收其兵应河东。
现代文：云州步军指挥使桑迁上奏：应州节度使尹晖驱逐云州节度使沙彦，接收了他的兵马，响应河东造反。
English: The commander of the Yunnan Infantry Corps ordered the Sangqian Uprising: In response to the Yunnan Festival, he ordered Yin Xi to expel the Yunnan Festival, and in response to the rebellion in Hedong, he ordered Sha'yan to receive his soldiers and horses.

古文：丁酉，彦旬表迁谋叛应河东，引兵围子城。
现代文：丁酉，沙彦上表奏称桑迁谋反响应河东，并且率领兵马包围了子城。
English: Ding Yao and Sha Yan publicly announced that Sang Qianmo would retaliate against Hedong, and led the soldiers and horses to surround Zicheng.

古文：彦昫犯围走出西山，据雷公口，明日，收兵入城击乱兵，迁败走，军城复安。
现代文：沙彦突破包围走出西山，占据雷公口，第二天，收集兵士入城袭击乱兵，桑迁败走，军城恢复安定。
English: Shahan broke through the encirclement and went out of the West Mountain, occupied Lei Gongkou, the next day, collected soldiers to enter the city to attack the chaotic soldiers, Sang Qian was defeated and left, and the military city was restored to stability.

古文：是日，尹晖执迁送洛阳，斩之。
现代文：这一天，尹晖抓住桑迁把他押送洛阳，朝廷把他斩了。
English: On this day, Yin Xi seized Sang Qian and escorted him to Luoyang. The imperial court beheaded him.

古文：丁未，范延光拔魏州，斩张令昭。
现代文：丁未，范延光攻取了魏州，斩杀了张令昭。
English: Ding Wei, Fan Yanguang captured Weizhou and killed Zhang Lingzhao.

古文：诏悉诛其党七指挥。
现代文：朝廷下诏：把他的党羽七个指挥都诛除了。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict: all seven commanders of his party were to be eliminated.

古文：张敬达发怀州彰圣军戍虎北口，其指挥使张万迪将五百骑奔河东，丙辰，诏尽诛其家。
现代文：张敬达发动怀州彰圣军戍守在虎北口，该军指挥使张万迪带领五百骑投奔河东，丙辰，朝廷下诏：把他的家属全部诛杀。
English: Zhang Jingda launched the Waizhou Zhang Sheng Army, which was stationed at the northern entrance of the Tigris. The commander of the army ordered Zhang Wandi to lead five hundred horsemen to rush to the east of the river, and the imperial court issued an edict: kill all his family members.

古文：石敬瑭遣间使求救于契丹，令桑维翰草表称臣于契丹主，且请以父礼事之，约事捷之日，割卢龙一道及雁门关以北诸州与之。
现代文：石敬瑭派使者从僻路求救于契丹，让桑维翰草写表章向契丹主称臣，并且请求用对待父亲的礼节来侍奉他，约定事情成功之日，划割卢龙一道及雁门关以北诸州给契丹。
English: Shi Jinglian sent an envoy from a remote road to seek help from the Khitan, let Sanveihan scribble a title to the Khitan, and requested to serve him with the courtesy of his father, and agreed on the day of success, to divide Lulong together with the states north of the Wild Goose Gate to the Khitan.

古文：刘知远谏曰： 称臣可矣，以父事之太过。
现代文：刘知远劝谏他说： 称臣就可以了，用父亲的礼节对待他就太过份了。
English: Liu Zhiyuan advised him, saying, "It's enough to praise the minister. It's too much to treat him with the etiquette of a father.

古文：厚以金帛赂之，自足致其兵，不必许以土田，恐异日大为中国之患，悔之无及。 
现代文：用丰厚的金银财宝贿赂他，自然是足以促使他发兵，不必许诺割给他土田，恐怕那样以后要成中国的大患，后悔就来不及了。 
English: Bribing him with plentiful gold, silver and treasure is naturally enough to prompt him to send troops, without having to promise to assign him land. I'm afraid that will become a big problem for China in the future, and it will be too late to regret it.

古文：敬瑭不从。
现代文：石敬瑭不听。
English: Shi Jingyao did not listen.

古文：表至契丹，契丹主大喜，白其母曰： 儿比梦石郎遣使来，今果然，此天意也。 
现代文：表章送到契丹，契丹国主耶律德光非常高兴，告诉他的母亲述律太后说： 孩儿最近梦见石郎派遣使者来，现在果然来了，这真是天意啊。 
English: The seal was sent to Khitan. The ruler of Khitan, Yerudoglu, was very pleased and told his mother, the Dowager Empress Surya, "My child, I recently dreamed that Ishiro sent an envoy, and now he has come. This is truly God's will."

古文：乃为复书，许俟仲秋倾国赴援。
现代文：便向石敬瑭写了回信，答应等到仲秋时节，发动全国人马来支援他。
English: He then wrote a reply to Shi Jingyao, promising to wait until the mid-autumn festival to mobilize the whole country to support him.

古文：八月，己未，以范延光为天雄节度使，李周为宣武节度使、同平章事。
现代文：八月，己未，末帝任用范延光为天雄节度使，李周为宣武节度使、同平章事。
English: In August, the last emperor appointed Fan Yanguang as Tianxiong's festival envoy and Li Zhou as Xuanwu's festival envoy.

古文：癸亥，应州言契丹三千骑攻城。
现代文：癸亥，应州奏报：契丹三千骑兵进攻州城。
English: In the year of the boar, Yingzhou reported that 3,000 Khitan cavalry attacked the city of Yingzhou.

古文：张敬达筑长围以攻晋阳。
现代文：张敬达设置了很长的包围工事来攻打晋阳。
English: Zhang Jinda set up a long siege to attack Jinyang.

古文：石敬瑭以刘知远为马步都指挥使，安重荣、张万迪降兵皆隶焉。
现代文：石敬瑭任用刘知远为马步都指挥使，把安重荣、张万迪的降兵都隶属于他。
English: Shi Jingyao appointed Liu Zhiyuan as the commanding officer of Ma Bodu, and subordinated the demobilization of An Chongrong and Zhang Wandi to him.

古文：知远用法无私，抚之如一，由是人无贰心。
现代文：刘知远以法办事，没有私弊，对军民抚恤一视同仁，因此人都没有二心。
English: Liu Zhiyuan acts in accordance with the law, has no personal vices, and treats military and civilian pensions equally, so people have no second thoughts.

古文：敬瑭亲乘城，坐卧矢石下，知远曰： 观敬达辈高垒深堑，欲为持久之计，无他奇策，不足虑也。
现代文：石敬瑭亲自登城视察部属兵卒，坐卧在敌人的矢石投射之下。刘知远说： 察看张敬达这些人筑设高垒深沟，想作持久打算，他们没有其他好的办法，是不足为虑的。
English: Shi Jingyao himself went to the city to inspect the troops of the inspection department and sat under the enemy's arrow and stone projection. Liu Zhiyuan said: To see Zhang Jingda and these people build high walls and deep ditches and want to make long-term plans, they have no other good way, it is not enough to worry.

古文：愿明公四出间使，经略外事。
现代文：请您向各方派出走僻路的使者，经办对外事务。
English: I would like to ask you to send emissaries to each side to handle foreign affairs.

古文：守城至易，知远独能办之。 
现代文：守城的事很容易，我知远一个人就能独力办理。 
English: The defense of the city is easy, I know that one person can handle it alone.

古文：敬瑭执知远手，抚其背而赏之。
现代文：石敬瑭拉着刘知远的手，抚拍他的肩背而称赞他。
English: Shi Jingyao took Liu Zhiyuan's hand, patted his shoulder and praised him.

古文：戊寅，以成德节度使董温琪为东北面副招讨使，以佐卢龙节度使赵德钧。
现代文：戊寅，后唐朝廷任用成德节度使董温琪为东北面副招讨使，用来帮助卢龙节度使赵德钧。
English: Wu Yin, after the Tang Dynasty, the court appointed Chengde Jiedu to make Dong Wenqi the deputy recruiting envoy for the northeast, used to help Lulong Jiedu to make Zhao Deqi.

古文：唐主使端明殿学士吕琦至河东行营犒军，杨光远谓琦曰： 愿附奏陛下，幸宽宵旰。
现代文：后唐主派出端明殿学士吕琦到河东行营犒劳军队，杨光远对吕琦说： 请您附带奏告陛下，请主上稍微减少昼夜操劳。
English: After the lord of the Tang Dynasty sent Lu Ye, a scholar of the Duanming Palace, to the east of the river to support the army. Yang Guangyuan said to Lu Ye: "Please send a report to your majesty, and ask the lord to slightly reduce the day and night work."

古文：贼若无援，旦夕当平；若引契丹，当纵之令入，可一战破也。 
现代文：贼兵如果没有援兵，用不多天就可以平定；如果他勾结契丹来犯，自当放他进来，一次战斗就能把他打败。 
English: If the bandits do not have reinforcements, they can be subdued in a few days; if they collude with the Khitan and let him in, they can defeat him in a single battle.

古文：帝甚悦。
现代文：末帝闻奏很是高兴。
English: Emperor Ming was very happy to hear this.

古文：帝闻契丹许石敬瑭以仲秋赴援，屡督张敬达急攻晋阳，不能下。
现代文：末帝听说契丹答应石敬瑭在仲秋时节发兵来支援他，几次督促张敬达紧急攻打晋阳，但不能攻下。
English: The last emperor heard that the Khitan emperor had promised Shi Jingyao to send troops to support him in the mid-autumn festival, and several times urged Zhang Jingda to urgently attack Jinyang, but he could not attack it.

古文：每有营构，多值风雨，长围夏为水潦所坏，竟不能合，晋阳城中日窘，粮储浸乏。
现代文：每当有所营建构筑工事，往往遇到风雨天气，很长的包围工事又被水浸所破坏，竟然接合不拢。晋阳城中日益窘迫，粮食储备因浸泡而缺乏。
English: Whenever there is construction work, it is often exposed to wind and rain, and the long encirclement work is destroyed by flooding, so much so that it cannot be joined. Jinyang City is increasingly distressed, and grain reserves are lacking due to soaking.

古文：九月，契丹主将五万骑，号三十万，自扬武谷而南，旌旗不绝五十馀里。
现代文：九月，契丹主耶律德光统领五万骑兵，号称三十万，从代州扬武谷向南进发，旌旗连绵不断达五十余里。
English: In September, the Khitan lord Yerudoglu led fifty thousand cavalry, known as three hundred thousand, from the Yangwu Valley in Daizhou to the south, and the banner stretched for more than fifty miles.

古文：代州刺史张朗、忻州刺史丁审琦婴城自守，虏骑过城下，亦不诱胁。
现代文：代州刺史张朗、忻州刺史丁审琦绕城自守，敌人骑兵经过城下时，也不诱降挟胁他。
English: Zhang Lang, the deputy provincial governor, and Ding Xun, the provincial governor, encircled the city to defend themselves. When the enemy cavalry passed under the city, they did not coerce or threaten him.

古文：审琦，洺州人也。
现代文：丁审琦是州人。
English: Ding Xuanqian is a native of Suzhou.

古文：辛丑，契丹主至晋阳，陈于汾北之虎北口。
现代文：辛丑，契丹主到达晋阳，把兵马布列在汾北的虎北口。
English: Sin ugly, the Khitan lord arrived in Jinyang, and the soldiers and horses were lined up at the northern entrance of Hubei Province.

古文：先遣人谓敬瑭曰： 吾欲今日即破贼可乎？ 
现代文：先派人对石敬瑭说： 我打算今天攻打贼兵，行不行？ 
English: The person sent ahead said to Shi Jingyao, "I plan to attack the bandits today, can I do it?"

古文：敬瑭遣人驰告曰： 南军甚厚，不可轻，请俟明日议战未晚也。 
现代文：石敬瑭派人驰奔告诉他们说： 南军力量很雄厚，不可以轻视，请等到明天议论好如何开战也不晚。 
English: Shi Jinglian sent people to gallop to tell them: the Southern Army is very powerful and should not be despised. Please wait until tomorrow to discuss how to start the war.

古文：使者未至，契丹已与唐骑将高行周、符彦卿合战，敬瑭乃遣刘知远出兵助之。
现代文：使者还未到达契丹军营，契丹兵已经同后唐骑将高行周、符彦卿打了起来，石敬瑭便派刘知远出兵帮助他们。
English: The envoy had not yet arrived at the Khitan military camp, and the Khitan soldiers had already fought with the Tang cavalry commanders Gao Xing Zhou and Fu Yanqing. Shi Jingyi then sent Liu Zhiyuan to help them.

古文：张敬达、杨光远、安审琦以步兵陈于城西北山下，契丹遣轻骑三千，不被甲，直犯其陈。
现代文：张敬达、杨光远、安审琦用步兵列阵在城西北山下，契丹派轻骑兵三千人，不披铠甲，直奔唐兵阵列。
English: Zhang Jingda, Yang Guangyuan, and An Siyuan led a line of infantry at the foot of the mountain northwest of the city. Khitan sent three thousand light cavalrymen, without armor, straight to the Tang army array.

古文：唐兵见其赢，争逐之，至汾曲，契丹涉水而去。
现代文：唐兵看到契丹兵单薄，争相驱赶，到了汾水之曲，契丹兵涉水而去。
English: When the Tang soldiers saw that the Khitan soldiers were thin, they scrambled to drive them away. When they reached Surabaya, the Khitan soldiers waded away.

古文：唐兵循岸而进，契丹伏兵自东北起，冲唐兵断而为二，涉兵在北都多为契丹所杀，骑兵在南者引归晋陷寨。
现代文：唐兵沿着河岸向北进取，契丹伏兵从东北涌起，冲击唐兵，把唐兵截为两段，在北面的步兵大多被契丹所杀，在南面的骑兵引退回到晋安营寨。
English: The Tang soldiers advanced northward along the riverbank. The Khitan ambush soldiers surged from the northeast and attacked the Tang soldiers, cutting the Tang soldiers into two sections. Most of the infantry on the north side were killed by the Khitan, and the cavalry on the south side retired back to the Jinan camp.

古文：契丹纵兵乘之，唐兵大败，步兵死者近万人，骑兵独全。
现代文：契丹放开兵马乘乱攻击，唐兵大败，步兵死亡近万人，骑兵却保全了。
English: Khitan unleashed troops and horses to attack randomly, the Tang soldiers were defeated, nearly 10,000 infantrymen died, but the cavalry was preserved.

古文：敬达等收馀众保晋安，契丹亦引兵归虎北口。
现代文：张敬达等收集余众退保晋安，契丹也率领其兵返回虎北口。
English: Zhang Jingda and others gathered the rest of the people to retreat to Jinan, and Khitan also led his soldiers back to the north of the tiger.

古文：敬瑭得唐降兵千馀人，刘知远劝敬瑭尽杀之。
现代文：石敬瑭俘获后唐降兵一千余人，刘知远劝石敬瑭把他们都杀了。
English: Liu Zhiyuan advised Shi Jingyao to kill all of the more than one thousand Tang soldiers who had surrendered after Shi Jingyao was captured.

古文：是夕，敬瑭出北门见契丹主，契丹主执敬瑭手，恨相见之晚。
现代文：这天晚上，石敬瑭出北门，会见契丹主。契丹主握住石敬瑭的手，只恨相见晚了。
English: That evening, Shi Jingyao went out of the north gate to meet with the Khitan lord. The Khitan lord shook the hand of Shi Jingyao, but it was too late to see each other.

古文：敬瑭问曰： 皇帝远来，士马疲倦，遽与唐战而大胜，何也？ 
现代文：石敬瑭问道： 皇帝远道而来，兵马疲倦，急切同唐兵作战而取得大胜，这是什么原因？ 
English: Shi Jingyao asked: The emperor came from far away, the soldiers and horses were tired, eager to fight with the Tang soldiers and won a great victory. What is the reason for this?

古文：契丹主曰： 始吾自北来，谓唐必断雁门诸路，伏兵险要，则吾不可得进矣。
现代文：契丹主说： 开始我从北面过来，以为唐兵必然要切断雁门的各条道路，埋伏兵众在险要之地，那样我就不能顺利前进了。
English: The Khitan lord said: At the beginning, I came from the north, thinking that the Tang soldiers would inevitably cut off the various roads of the Wild Goose Gate and ambush the soldiers in the critical place. Then I would not be able to advance smoothly.

古文：使人侦视，皆无之。吾是以长驱深入，知大事必济也。
现代文：我使人侦察，发现断路和伏险都没有，这样，我才得以长驱深入，知道大事必然成功了。
English: I had someone investigate and found that there was no broken path and no danger of ambush, so I was able to drive deeper and deeper and know that the event was bound to succeed.

古文：兵既相接，我气方锐，彼气方沮，若不乘此急击之，旷日持久，则胜负未可知矣。
现代文：兵马相接以后，我方气势正锐盛，彼方气势正沮丧，如果不乘此时急速攻击他，旷日持久，那谁胜谁负就不可预料了。
English: After the soldiers and horses come into contact, our side's momentum is at its peak, and the other side's momentum is depressed. If we do not take advantage of this time to attack him rapidly and for a long time, it is impossible to predict who will win.

古文：此吾所以亟战而胜，不可以劳逸常理论也。 
现代文：这就是我之所以速战而胜的道理，不能用谁劳谁逸的通常的道理来衡量了。 
English: This is the reason why I won a quick victory, and it cannot be measured by the usual reason of who works and who escapes.

古文：敬瑭甚叹伏。
现代文：石敬瑭很是叹服。
English: Shi Jingyao was very impressed.

古文：壬寅，敬瑭引兵会契丹围晋安寨，置营于晋安之南，长百馀里，厚五十里，多设铃索吠犬，人跬步不能过。
现代文：壬寅，石敬瑭率领兵马会合契丹兵马包围了晋安寨，在晋安的南面设置营地，长一百多里，宽五十里，密布带铃索的吠犬，人们连半步也不能过去。
English: In Renin, Shi Jingyao led the Qidan soldiers and horses of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses Association to encircle Jinan Village, and set up a camp in the south of Jinan, more than one hundred miles long and fifty miles wide, densely covered with barking dogs with bell ropes, people can not even walk half a step.

古文：敬达等士卒犹五万人，马万匹，四顾无所之。
现代文：此时张敬达等的士兵尚有五万人，马有万匹，四面张顾，不知往哪里去好。
English: At this time, Zhang Jingda and other soldiers still had fifty thousand people and ten thousand horses, looking around, not knowing where to go.

古文：甲辰，敬达遣使告败于唐，自是声问不复通。
现代文：甲辰，张敬达派出使者向后唐朝廷报告打了败仗，此后便没有再通音讯了。
English: At that time, Zhang Jingda sent an envoy back to the Tang court to report that he had lost the battle, and after that, there was no further communication.

古文：唐王大惧，遣彰圣都指挥使符彦饶将洛阳步骑兵屯河阳，诏天雄节度使兼中书令范延光将魏州二万由青山趣榆次，卢龙节度使、东北面招讨使兼中书令北平王赵德钧将幽州兵由悄孤出契丹军后，耀州防御使潘环糺合西路戍兵由晋、绛两乳岭出慈、隰、共救晋安寨。
现代文：唐主极为恐惧，派遣彰圣都指挥使符彦饶统领洛阳步兵、骑兵屯扎在河阳，末帝下诏命令天雄节度使兼中书令范延光统领魏州兵两万从邢州青山奔赴榆次，卢龙节度使、东北面招讨使兼中书令北平王赵德钧统领幽州兵从契丹军阵之后出击，耀州防御使潘环纠合西路守戍的兵士从晋州、降州间的两乳岭出兵向慈州、隰州共同营救晋安寨。
English: The lord of the Tang Dynasty was extremely afraid. He sent the commander of the Zhang Sheng capital, Fu Yan Ra, to lead the Luoyang infantry and cavalry to camp in Heyang. The last emperor ordered the Tianxiong festival envoy and the Chinese envoy, Fan Yanguang, to lead the 20,000 Wei soldiers from the Qingshan Mountains of Zhangzhou to Liji, the Lulong festival envoy, the northeastern recruiting envoy and the Chinese envoy, the Beiping king, Zhao Dejun, to lead the Yuzhou soldiers to attack from the rear of the Khitan army, and the defense of Yaozhou made Panhuan entangle the soldiers guarding

古文：契丹主移帐于柳林，游骑过石会关，不见唐兵。
现代文：契丹主把军帐移到柳林，流动的骑兵过了石会关，还没有遇到唐兵。
English: The Khitan lord moved the military account to Liulin, and the mobile cavalry passed through the stone meeting gate and had not yet encountered the Tang soldiers.

古文：丁未，唐主下诏亲征。
现代文：丁未，后唐主下诏书，宣布亲征。
English: Ding Wei, the emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, issued an imperial edict declaring that he would personally lead the expedition.

古文：雍正重美曰： 陛下目疾未平，未可远涉风沙；臣虽童稚，愿代陛下北行。 
现代文：雍王李重美说： 陛下眼疾还没有好，不能远路跋涉到风沙之地，为臣虽然尚在童稚之年，愿意代替陛下向北方征讨。 
English: Yong Wang Li Chung Mei said: His Majesty's eye disease is not yet well, he cannot travel far to the land of wind and sand. Although he is still a child, he is willing to take the place of His Majesty to the north.

古文：帝意本不欲行，闻之颇悦。
现代文：末帝的意念本来就不想北行，听了这些话，很觉高兴。
English: Mutei's original intention was not to go north. Hearing these words, he felt very happy.

古文：张延朗、刘延皓及宣徽南院使刘延朗皆劝帝行，帝不得已，戊申，发洛阳，谓卢文纪曰： 朕雅闻卿有相业，故排众议首用卿，今祸难如此，卿嘉谋皆安在乎？ 
现代文：但是张延朗、刘延皓和宣徽南院使刘延朗却劝末帝亲征，末帝不得已，戊申，从洛阳出发，对卢文纪说： 朕向来听说你有宰相才干，所以排除众议首先任用您，现在遭到如此祸难，你的好谋略都在哪里呢？ 
English: However, Zhang Yanlang, Liu Yanqian and the Southern Court of Xuanhui sent Liu Yanlang to persuade the last emperor to personally recruit. The last emperor, Wushin, had no choice but to set out from Luoyang and said to Lu Wenji: I have always heard that you have the talent of prime minister, so I first appointed you without public discussion. Now you are in such a disaster, where are your good strategies?

古文：文纪但拜谢，不能对。
现代文：卢文纪只是拜谢，但拿不出对策。
English: Lu Wenji only said thanks, but could not come up with a countermeasure.

古文：己酉，遣刘延朗监侍卫步军都指挥使符彦饶军赴潞州，为大军后援。
现代文：己酉，遣派刘延朗监督侍卫步军都指挥使符彦饶的部队开赴潞州，为前线晋安寨的大军去做后援。
English: He sent Liu Yanlang to supervise the guards and marchers, and ordered the troops of Fu Yanrao to go to Zhangzhou to support the large army of Jin Anzhai at the front line.

古文：诸军自凤翔推戴以来，骄悍不为用，彦饶恐其为乱，不敢束之以法。
现代文：诸路军队自从凤翔推戴李从珂以来，日益骄悍不听指挥，符彦饶害怕他们作乱，不敢用法纪来约束他们。
English: Ever since Fengxiang and Li Congke were promoted, the armies of all directions have become increasingly arrogant and disobeyed orders. Fuhianrao was afraid of them causing trouble and did not dare to use law and discipline to restrain them.

古文：帝至河阳，心惮北行，召宰相、枢密使议进取方略，卢文纪希帝旨，言 国家根本、太半在河南。
现代文：末帝到了河阳，心里害怕北行，召集宰相、枢密使讨论进取的方略，卢文纪迎合末帝的意旨，说： 国家的根本，大半在黄河之南。
English: When the last emperor arrived in Hayang, he was afraid of going north, and he called together the prime minister and the privy council to discuss an aggressive strategy. Lu Wenji catered to the last emperor's intention, saying: The foundation of the country is mostly in the south of the Yellow River.

古文：胡兵倏来忽往，不能久留；晋安大寨甚固，况已发三道兵救之。
现代文：契丹胡兵忽来忽走，不能久留；晋安的大寨非常坚固，况且已经派出范延光、赵德钧、潘环三起兵马去救援。
English: The Khitan soldiers came and went, and could not stay for long; the fortress of Jinan was very strong, and Fan Yanguang, Zhao Deyu and Panhuan had been sent to the rescue.

古文：河阳天下津要，车驾宜留此镇抚南北，且遣近臣往督战，苟不能解围，进亦未晚。 
现代文：河阳是天下的津渡要路，主上的车驾应该留在这里镇守，安抚南方和北方。可以暂且遣派近臣前去督战，如果不能解围，再向前进发也不晚。 
English: Hayan is the most important road to Tsudo in the world. The lord's chariot should stay here to guard the town and pacify the south and north. You can temporarily send your close vassals to supervise the battle. If you can't relieve the siege, it's not too late to move forward.

古文：张延朗欲因事令赵延寿得解枢务，因曰： 文纪言是也。 
现代文：张延朗想借个因由来使赵延寿解除枢要机务，便说： 文纪的意见是对的。 
English: Zhang Yanlang wanted to borrow a reason to make Zhao Yanshou cancel the key mechanism, and said: Wenji's opinion is right.

古文：帝访于馀人，无敢异言者。
现代文：末帝询访其余的人，没有人敢讲别的意见。
English: The last emperor consulted the rest of the people, and no one dared to voice a different opinion.

古文：泽州刺史刘遂凝，鄩之子也，潜自通于石敬瑭，表称车驾不可逾太行。
现代文：泽州刺史刘遂凝，是刘的儿子，暗中和石敬瑭有来往，上表言称： 车驾不可越过太行山。 
English: Liu Suigeng, the governor of Zhejiang Province and Liu's son, secretly had dealings with Shi Jingyao. The above statement said: "Do not drive over Taihang Mountain."

古文：帝议近臣可使北行者，张延朗与翰林学士须昌和凝等诣曰： 赵延寿父德钧以卢龙兵来赴难，宜遣延寿会之。 
现代文：于是，末帝便同他们商议近臣中可以派去北边的人。张延朗与翰林学士须昌人和凝等人都说： 赵延寿的父亲赵德钧带着卢龙兵马来勤王赴难，应该派赵延寿去与他会合。 
English: As a result, the late emperor discussed with them which of his close vassals could be sent to the north. Zhang Yanlang and the scholars of Hanlin, Su Changren and Geng, all said: Zhao Deyu, the father of Zhao Yanshou, took the Lurong soldiers and horses to serve the king, and Zhao Yanshou should be sent to join him.

古文：庚戌，遣枢密使、忠武节度使、随驾诸军都部署、兼侍中赵延寿将兵二万如潞州。
现代文：庚戍，派遣枢密使、忠武节度使、随驾诸军都部署、兼侍中赵延寿统兵二万人开赴潞州。
English: Geng Zheng, dispatched the envoy of the privy council, the envoy of the loyal military council, and the accompanying troops were deployed, and the general Zhao Yanshou, who was also an attendant, dispatched 20,000 soldiers to Zhangzhou.

古文：辛亥，帝如怀州。
现代文：辛亥，末帝去怀州。
English: Xinhai, the last emperor went to Huai Zhou.

古文：以右神武统军康思立为北面行营马军都指挥使，帅扈从骑兵赴团柏谷。
现代文：任命右神武统军康思立为北面行营马军都指挥使，率领扈从骑兵开赴团柏谷。
English: He appointed Kang Sili, commander of the Right Shenwu United Army, as the commander of the horse army marching to the north, and led the cavalry from the cavalry to the regimental valley.

古文：思立，晋阳胡人也。
现代文：康思立是晋阳的胡人。
English: Kang Sili is a Wu person from Jinyang.

古文：帝以晋安为忧，问策于群臣，吏部侍郎永清龙敏请立李赞华为契丹主，令天雄、卢龙二镇分兵送之，自幽州趣西楼，朝廷露檄言之，契丹主必有内顾之忧，然后选募军中精锐以击之，此亦解围之一策也。 
现代文：末帝忧虑晋安的军事形势，向群臣询问对策，吏部侍郎永清人龙敏建议立李赞华为契丹国主，命令天雄、卢龙二镇分兵送他归国，从幽州趋向西楼，朝廷透露檄文讲出这件事情，契丹主必有内顾不安的忧虑，然后选拔募集军中的精锐之兵去攻击他，这也是解围的一种办法。
English: The last emperor was worried about the military situation in Jin'an and asked his ministers for countermeasures. Long Min, a Yongqing official, suggested that Li Zhanwu be appointed as the Qidan sovereign, and ordered Tianxiong and Lulong to send him back to the country, from Yuzhou to Xiluo. The imperial court revealed that Xiwen talked about this matter. The Qidan sovereign must be worried and worried, and then selected and recruited the elite soldiers in the army to attack him. This is also a way to relieve the siege.

古文：帝深以为然，而执政恐其无成，议竟不决。
现代文：末帝认为这个意见很对，而执政诸人担心不能成功，议论之中竟然作不出决定。
English: The last emperor thought that this opinion was very right, but the people in power were worried that they could not succeed, and they could not even make a decision during the discussion.

古文：帝忧沮形于神色，但日夕酣饮悲歌。群臣或劝其北行，则曰： 卿勿言，石郎使我心胆堕地！ 
现代文：末帝的忧愁沮丧表现在神色之上，从早到晚只是酣饮悲歌，群臣有人劝他北行赴阵，便说： 你不要谈这个了，石朗已经使我的心胆掉落地上了！ 
English: The last emperor's sadness and dejection showed in his countenance. From morning to night, he just drank and sang sad songs. Some of his courtiers advised him to go to the north to fight, and said, "Don't talk about this, Shi Lang has already made my heart drop to the ground!"

古文：冬，十月，壬戌，诏大括天下将吏及民间马，又发民为兵，每七户出征夫一人，自备铠仗，谓之 义军 ，期以十一月俱集，命陈州刺史郎万金教以战陈，用张延朗之谋也。
现代文：冬季十月，壬戌，下诏普遍搜集天下将吏以及民间的马，又发动百姓当兵，每七户出一个征夫，自己准备铠甲兵器，称作 义军 ，定期在十一月全部集中，命令陈州刺史郎万金训练他们的战阵知识和技能，这是采用张延朗的谋划。
English: In the winter of October, the following edict was issued to collect the horses of the generals and the people from all over the world, and to mobilize the people as soldiers. Every seventh household was to send out a conscript to prepare their own armored weapons, called the rebel army. All of them were regularly concentrated in November, and ordered Chen Zhou Shishi Lang Wanjin to train their battle knowledge and skills. This was a plan adopted by Zhang Yanlang.

古文：凡得马二千馀匹，征夫五千人，实无益于用，而民间大扰。
现代文：结果只得到马二千余匹，征夫五千人，实在没有多大用处，但民间却因此受到很大骚扰。
English: As a result, only more than two thousand horses and five thousand men were obtained, which was not very useful, but the people were greatly harassed.

古文：初，赵德钧阴蓄异志，欲因乱取中原，自请救晋安寨；唐主命自飞狐踵契丹后，钞其部落，德钧请将银鞍契丹直三千骑，由土门路西入，帝许之。
现代文：起初，赵德钧暗中怀有异志，想要乘着动乱夺取中原，自己请求去救援晋安寨，末帝命他从飞狐道出代州，绕到契丹之后，抄袭其部落，赵德钧请求把他在幽州用契丹降卒设置的银鞍契丹直三千骑兵，从土门路向西进军，末帝准许了他。
English: At first, Zhao Deyu secretly harbored a dream, he wanted to take advantage of the turmoil to seize the Central Plains, he asked to go to rescue Jin Anzai, the last emperor ordered him to go from Feihu Road to Daizhou, go around to Qidan, and copy his tribe, Zhao Deyu asked to set up a silver saddle Qidan straight three thousand cavalry in Yuzhou with Qidan's pawns, and march westward from the Tu Men Road, the last emperor allowed him.

古文：赵州刺史、北面行营都指挥使刘在明先将兵戍易州，德钧过易州，命在明以其众自随。
现代文：赵州刺史、北面行营都指挥使刘在明原来领兵戍守在易州，赵德钧军过易州，命令刘在明带着自己的兵从跟随他行进。
English: Zhao Zhou engraved the history and commanded the northern marching camp to make Liu Zaiming originally lead the soldiers to stay in Yizhou. Zhao Deyi's army passed through Yizhou and ordered Liu Zaiming to march with his soldiers to follow him.

古文：在明，幽州人也。
现代文：刘在明是幽州人。
English: Liu Zaiming is from Yuzhou.

古文：德钧至镇州，以董温琪领招讨副使，邀与偕行，又表称兵少，须合泽潞兵；乃自吴儿谷趣潞州，癸酉，至乱柳。
现代文：赵德钧到了镇州，任用董温琪为招讨副使，也邀他一起行动。又上表朝廷说自己兵少，须同泽潞的兵力会合；便从吴儿谷向潞州进发，癸酉，到达乱柳。
English: When Zhao Dejun arrived in Zhenzhou, he appointed Dong Wenqi as the vice-envoy to invite others, and also invited him to join the action. He also told the court that he was short of soldiers and had to meet with Zeguang's forces; he then set off from Wu'er Valley to Zhangzhou, and arrived in Ganliu.

古文：时范延光受诏将部兵二万屯辽州，德钧又请与魏博军合；延光知德钧合诸军，志趣难测，表称魏博兵已入贼境，无容南行数百里与德钧合，乃止。
现代文：当时范延光领受诏命统领所属兵士二万人屯驻于辽州，赵德钧又请求与魏博军会合；范延光知道赵德钧合拢诸军，意图难于测料，便上表朝廷声称魏博兵已经入了贼境，不能再向南行军数百里与赵德钧会合，便停止下来。
English: At that time, Fan Yanguang received the imperial command to command 20,000 soldiers stationed in Liaozhou, and Zhao Dejun also requested to meet with the Wei Bo army; Fan Yanguang knew that Zhao Dejun had closed the army, intending to make it difficult to measure materials, and then claimed to the imperial court that the Wei Bo soldiers had entered the thief's territory and could no longer march hundreds of miles south to meet with Zhao Dejun, and then stopped.

古文：汉主以宗正卿兼工部侍郎刘浚为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：南汉主任用宗正卿兼工部侍郎刘浚为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: The director of the Southern Han Dynasty used Liu Jun, the attendant of the Ministry of Industry and the attendant of Mune Zhengqing, as the attendant of the Chinese book and the same rank.

古文：浚，崇望之子也。
现代文：刘浚是刘崇望的儿子。
English: Liu Jun is the son of Liu Chongwang.

古文：十一月，戊子以赵德钧为诸道行营都统，依前东北面行营招讨使。
现代文：十一月，后唐朝廷任命赵德钧为诸道行营都统、依旧任东北面行营招讨使。
English: In November, the post-Tang Dynasty court appointed Zhao Dejun as the general envoy to all the provinces, and he still served as the envoy to the northeastern provinces.

古文：以赵延寿为河东道南面行营招讨使，以翰林学士张厉为判官。
现代文：任用赵延寿为河东道南面行营招讨使，任用翰林学士张砺为判官。
English: Zhao Yanshou was appointed as the envoy to the south side of the river, and Zhang Jun, a scholar of Hanlin, was appointed as the judge.

古文：庚寅，以范延光为河东道东南面行营招讨使，以宣牙节度使、同平章事李周副之。
现代文：庚寅，任用范延光为河东道东南面行营招讨使，任用宣武节度使、同平章事李周为副使。
English: Geng Yin appointed Fan Yanguang as the envoy to the southeast of Hetao, appointed Xuanwu Jiedu as the envoy, and appointed Tongping Zhangji Li Zhou as the deputy envoy.

古文：辛卯，以刘延郎为河东道南面行营招讨副使。
现代文：辛卯，任用刘延朗为河东道南面行营招讨副使。
English: Xinwu appointed Liu Yanlang as the deputy envoy to the south side of the river.

古文：赵延寿遇赵德钧于西汤，悉以兵属德钧。
现代文：赵延寿在西汤遇到赵德钧，把所统兵马全部归属于赵德钧。
English: Zhao Yanshou met Zhao Deyu in Xitang and attributed all the soldiers and horses to Zhao Deyu.

古文：唐主遣吕琦赐钧敕告，且犒军。
现代文：末帝派吕琦赐给赵德钧敕告，并且犒赏了军队。
English: The last emperor sent Lv Ying to give Zhao De a report, and rewarded the army.

古文：德钧志在并范延光军，逗留不进，诏书屡趣之，德钧乃引兵北屯团柏谷口。
现代文：赵德钧的意图是要兼并范延光的军队，逗留不肯前进，朝廷屡次下达诏书催促他，赵德钧便引领部队向北屯扎在团柏谷口。
English: Zhao Deyu's intention was to annex Fan Yanquan's army, and he refused to move forward. The imperial court repeatedly issued an edict to urge him, and Zhao Deyu led the troops to the north and camped at the mouth of Tuanba Valley.

古文：癸巳，吴主诏齐主徐知诰置百官，以金陵府为西都。
现代文：癸巳吴主杨溥下诏，使齐王徐知诰设置百官，以金陵府为西都。
English: The Lord of Wu, Yang Zhen, issued an edict, ordering the King of Qi, Xu Zhixuan, to set up a hundred officials, with Jinling as the western capital.

古文：前坊州刺史刘景岩，延州人也，多财而喜侠，交结豪杰，家有丁夫兵仗，人报其强，势倾州县。
现代文：前坊州刺史刘景岩是延州人，家财富有而且喜爱侠义，交结豪杰，家里设置丁夫兵仗，人们都慑服他的势力强大，整个州县无人能比。
English: Liu Jingyan, the former governor of Fangzhou, was a native of Yanzhou. His family was rich and loved chivalry. He was a great warrior, and his family set up a Dingfu army. People were awed by his great power, and there was no one like him in the entire prefecture.

古文：彰武节度使杨汉章无政，失夷、夏心，会括马及义军，汉章帅步骑数千人将赴军期，阅之于野。
现代文：彰武节度使杨汉章治理无当，丧失夷、夏人心，正赶上搜集马匹和义军，杨汉章率领步兵、骑兵数千人即将按期开赴集合，正在野外进行检阅。
English: Yang Hanzhang's promotion of martial arts during the festival made his governance inappropriate and lost the hearts of the Yi and Xia people. He was just in time to collect horses and rebels. Yang Hanzhang led thousands of infantry and cavalry and was about to go to the assembly on schedule. He was inspecting them in the field.

古文：景岩潜使人挠之曰： 契丹强盛，汝曹有去无归。 
现代文：刘景岩暗中使人阻挠破坏此事说： 契丹强盛，你们这些人有去无回。 
English: Liu Jingyan secretly made people obstruct and sabotage the matter, saying: "Kitan is strong, you people have nowhere to go.

古文：众惧，杀汉章，奉景岩为留后。
现代文：兵众害怕，杀了杨汉章，拥护刘景岩为留后。
English: The soldiers were afraid, killed Yang Hanzhang, and supported Liu Jingyan to stay behind.

古文：唐主不获已，丁酉，以景岩为彰武留后。
现代文：末帝不得已，丁酉，任命刘景岩为彰武留后。
English: As a last resort, Emperor Ding Rong appointed Liu Jingyan as the successor of Zhang Wu.

古文：契丹主谓石敬瑭曰： 吾三千里赴难，必有成功。
现代文：契丹主对石敬瑭说： 我从三千里以外来帮助你解决危难，必然会成功。
English: The Khitan master said to Shi Jingyao: I have come from three thousand miles away to help you solve the crisis, and I am sure to succeed.

古文：观汝气貌识量，真中原之主也。
现代文：观察你的器宇容貌和见识气量，真的是个中原的国主啊。
English: Looking at your appearance and energy, you really are the ruler of the Central Plains.

古文：吾欲立汝为天子。 
现代文：我想扶立你做天子。 
English: I want to raise you up to be the Son of God.

古文：敬瑭辞让数四，将吏复劝进，乃许之。
现代文：石敬瑭推辞逊让了好几次，将吏又反复劝他进大位，于是便答应了。
English: Shi Jingyao refused several times, but the generals repeatedly persuaded him to accept the position, so he agreed.

古文：契丹主作册书，命敬瑭为大晋皇帝，自解衣冠授之，筑坛于柳林。是日，即皇帝位。
现代文：契丹主制作册封的文书，命令石敬瑭为大晋皇帝，自己解下衣服冠冕亲授给他，在柳林搭筑坛台，就在这一天，即了皇帝之位。
English: The Khitan master made a sealed document, ordered Shi Jingyu to become the emperor of Dajin, took off his clothes and crowned him personally, and built an altar in the willow forest. On this day, he became the emperor.

古文：割幽、蓟、瀛、莫、涿、檀、顺、新、妫、儒、武、云、应、寰、朔、蔚十六州以与契丹，仍许岁输帛三十万匹。
现代文：并割让了幽、蓟、瀛、莫、涿、檀、顺、新、妫、儒、武、云、应、寰、朔、蔚十六个州给予契丹，仍然答应每年运输帛三十万匹给他们。
English: He also ceded the 16 provinces of Yu, Zhou, Zhou, Mo, Zhou, Tan, Shun, Xin, Zhou, Ju, Wu, Yun, Ying, Zhou, Shuo and Wei to the Khitan, and still promised to transport 300,000 yakitori to them every year.

古文：己亥，制改长兴七年为天福元年，大赦；敕命法制，皆遵明宗之旧。
现代文：己亥，后晋高祖皇帝石敬瑭下制令，更改长兴七年为天福元年，实行大赦；敕命各种法制都遵守明宗时的旧规。
English: Ji Hai, after the founding father of Jin Gao, Emperor Shi Jing, issued an order to change the seven years of Changxing to the first year of Tianfu, and implemented an amnesty; all legal systems must abide by the old rules of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：以节度判官赵莹为翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎、知河东军府事，掌书记桑维翰为翰林学士、礼部侍郎、权知枢密使事，观察判官薛融为侍御史知杂事，节度推官白水窦贞固为翰林学士，军城都巡检使刘知远为侍卫军都指挥使，客将景延广为步军都指挥使。
现代文：任用节度判官赵莹为翰林学士承旨、户部侍郎、知河东军府事，掌书记桑维翰为翰林学士、礼部侍郎、权知枢密使事，观察判官薛融为侍御史知杂事，节度推官白水人窦贞固为翰林学士，军城都巡检使刘知远为侍卫马军都指挥使，客将景延广为步军都指挥使。
English: The appointed judge of the festival, Zhao Ying, was the successor of the Hanlin scholar, the attendant of the household department, and the military affairs of the Zhihadong Military Prefecture; the secretary, San Weihan, was the Hanlin scholar, the attendant of the ceremonial department, and the confidential envoy of the power and wisdom; the observation judge, Xue Rong, was the attendant of the historical knowledge and miscellaneous affairs; the chief judge of the festival, Bai Shui Ren Dou Zhenggu, was the Hanlin scholar; the military city patrol envoy, Liu Zhiyuan, was the commanding envoy of the horse guards; and the guest general,

古文：延广，陕州人也。
现代文：景延广是陕州人。
English: Jing Yanguang is from Shaanxi Province.

古文：立晋国长公主为皇后。
现代文：立晋国长公主为皇后。
English: The first princess of Jin Province was enthroned as empress.

古文：契丹主虽军柳林，其辎重老弱皆在虎北口，每日暝辄结束，以备仓猝遁逃，而赵德钧欲倚契丹取中国，至团柏逾月，按兵不战，去晋安才百里，声问不能相通。
现代文：契丹主虽然把军队屯扎在柳林，他们的辎重和老弱士兵都在虎北口，每当太阳西落便结扎停当，以便于仓促之间遁逃，而赵德钧想要倚赖契丹夺取中国，到达团柏一个多月，按兵不动，距离晋安才百里，但消息不能相通。
English: Although the Khitan lord had his army encamped in Liulin, their heavy baggage and old and weak soldiers were at the northern entrance of the tiger. Whenever the sun set, they would tie up and stop in order to make a hasty escape, and Zhao Dejun wanted to rely on the Khitan to seize China. It took more than a month to reach Lianbo, the soldiers did not move, and the distance to Jinan was only a hundred miles, but the news could not be communicated.

古文：德钧累表为延寿求成德节度使，曰： 臣今远征，幽州势孤，欲使延寿在镇州，左右便于应接。 
现代文：赵德钧屡次上表为他的儿子赵延寿祈求委任为成德节度使，他说： 臣现在远征在外，幽州形势孤弱，想要让延寿戍守在镇州，向左向右都便于接应。 
English: Zhao Dejun repeatedly went to the table to pray for his son Zhao Yanshou to be appointed as the Chengde Festival envoy. He said: The minister is now away on an expedition, the situation in Yuzhou is weak. If you want to let Yanshou stay in Zhenzhou, it is easy to accept from left to right.

古文：唐主曰： 延寿方击贼，何暇往镇州！
现代文：后唐末帝说： 延寿正在与贼兵争斗，哪有空暇去往镇州！
English: The late Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty said: Yan Shou is fighting against the bandits, how can he have time to go to Zhenzhou!

古文：俟贼平，当如所请。 
现代文：等待贼兵平定后，可以按所请求的办理。 
English: After waiting for the bandits to be subdued, it can be handled as requested.

古文：德钧求之不已，唐主怒曰： 赵氏父子坚欲得镇州，何意也？
现代文：赵德钧没完没了地请求，后唐主发怒说： 赵氏父子坚持要得到镇州，是什么意思？
English: After Zhao Deyu's endless requests, the lord of the Tang Dynasty got angry and said, "What do you mean by Zhao's father and son insisting on getting Zhenzhou?

古文：苟能却胡寇，虽欲代吾位，吾亦甘心，若玩寇邀君，但恐犬兔俱毙耳。 
现代文：如果能够打退胡寇，即使要取代我的位置，我也甘心愿意，若是玩弄寇兵以胁求君主，只怕要落得犬兔都毙命了。 
English: If I can beat back the Huko, even if I have to take my place, I am willing to do so. If I play with the Huko soldiers in order to threaten the monarch, I am afraid that all the dogs and rabbits will be killed.

古文：德钧闻之，不悦。
现代文：赵德钧听说，很不高兴。
English: Hearing this, Zhao Deyu was very unhappy.

古文：闰月，赵延寿献契丹主所赐诏及甲马弓剑，诈云德钧遣使致书于契丹主，为唐结好，说令引兵归国；其实别为密书，厚以金帛赂契丹主，云： 若立己为帝，请即以见兵南平洛阳，与契丹为兄弟之国；仍许石氏常镇河东。 
现代文：闰十一月，赵延寿奉献出契丹主所赐的诏书以及铠甲、马匹、弓矢、刀剑，诈称赵德钧遣派的使者致信给契丹主，为后唐求结和好，劝说契丹让他们引兵归国；其实又另具秘密书信，用丰厚的金宝财帛贿赂契丹主，并说： 如果立自己为中国皇帝，请求就用现有兵马向南平定洛阳，与契丹约为兄弟之国；仍然允许石敬瑭常镇河东。 
English: In leap November, Zhao Yanshou presented the edict given by the Khitan lord, as well as armor, horses, bows and arrows, and swords, falsely claiming that the emissary sent by Zhao Dejun sent a letter to the Khitan lord, seeking reconciliation for the Later Tang, and persuading the Khitan to let them bring troops back to the country; in fact, he also had another secret letter, bribing the Khitan lord with rich gold and treasure, and said: If you establish yourself as the Chinese emperor, please use the existing soldiers and horses to the south to pacify Luoyang, and make it a brotherly country with the Khitan; still

古文：契丹主自以深入敌境，晋安未下，德钧兵尚强，范延光在其东，又恐山北诸州邀其归路，欲许德钧之请。
现代文：契丹主自以为深入敌境，晋安没有攻下，赵德钧兵力尚强，范延光在他的东面，又怕太行山以北诸州遮断他的归路，想要答应赵德钧的请求。
English: The Khitan lord thought that he had penetrated deep into the enemy territory, Jinan had not been conquered, Zhao Deju's army was still strong, Fan Yanguang was to his east, and he was afraid that the states north of Taihang Mountain would block his return route, and wanted to agree to Zhao Deju's request.

古文：帝闻之，大惧，亟使桑维翰见契丹主，说之曰： 大国举义兵以救孤危，一战而唐兵瓦解，退守一栅，食尽力穷。
现代文：后晋帝听说，很是害怕，赶紧派桑维翰去见契丹主耶律德光，劝他说： 您大国发动义兵来救援孤危，一次战斗就使唐兵瓦解，退守到一栅之后，食粮用尽，力量穷竭。
English: Hearing of this, Emperor Go-Jin was very afraid and hurriedly sent Sang Wichan to meet the Khitan lord Yerut Deguang to persuade him: Your great country has mobilized volunteers to rescue the helpless, and one battle has caused the Tang soldiers to collapse. After retreating to the first gate, they have run out of food, and their strength is exhausted.

古文：赵北平父子不忠不信，畏大国之强，且素蓄异志，按兵观变，非以死徇国之人，何足可畏，而信其诞亡之辞，贪豪末之利，弃垂成之功乎！
现代文：赵德钧父子不忠于唐，不信于契丹，只是畏惧大国之强盛，而且素怀异志，按兵不动，以窥测变化，并非以死殉国的人，有什么可怕的。您怎么能因而相信他的妄诞之词，贪取毫末小利，丢弃将要完成的功业呢？
English: Zhao Deyu and his son were not loyal to Tang, did not believe in Khitan, but were afraid of the strength of the great power. Moreover, there is nothing terrible about a person who cherishes a different vision, does not stand still, observes changes, and is not martyred by death. How can you believe his absurd words, covet the slightest profit, and discard the work to be accomplished?

古文：且使晋得天下，将竭中国之财以奉大国，岂此小利之比乎！ 
现代文：而且如果让晋国得了天下，将要竭尽中国之财以奉献给大国，哪里是这些小利可比的！ 
English: Moreover, if Jin won the world, it would devote all of China's wealth to the great powers. How can these small gains compare!

古文：契丹主曰： 尔见捕鼠者乎，不备之，犹或啮伤其手，况大敌乎！ 
现代文：契丹主说： 你看见捕鼠的人吗，不防备它，还可能咬伤了手，何况是大敌啊！ 
English: The Khitan master said, "Do you see the mouse-catcher? If you don't watch out for him, he might bite your hand, especially if he's a big enemy!

古文：对曰： 今大国已扼其喉，安能啮人乎！ 
现代文：回答说： 现在大国已经卡住它的喉咙，岂能再咬人啊！ 
English: He replied: "Now that a great power has grabbed it by the throat, how can it bite anyone again?"

古文：契丹主曰： 吾非有渝前约也，但兵家权谋不得不尔。 
现代文：契丹主说： 我不是要改变以前的约定，只是用兵的权谋不能不这样。 
English: The Khitan lord said: I do not want to change the previous agreement, but the use of soldiers cannot be otherwise.

古文：对曰： 皇帝以信义救人之急，四海之人俱属耳目，奈何一旦二三其命，使大义不终！臣窃为皇帝不取也。 
现代文：回答说： 皇帝用信义救人的急难，四海人的耳目都注意到了这件事，怎么能忽而这样、忽而那样，以致使得大义不能贯彻始终，臣私下认为皇帝不能这样做啊！ 
English: He replied, "The emperor used faith and righteousness to save people in dire straits, and the ears and eyes of people all over the world noticed this. How could he suddenly do this and suddenly do that, so that the great righteousness could not be carried out all the time, and the vassal privately thought that the emperor could not do this!

古文：跪于帐前，自旦至暮，涕泣争之。
现代文：于是，跪在帐前，从早到晚，哭泣流涕地争辩不止。
English: So they knelt at their desks and argued, weeping and wailing, from morning until night.

古文：契丹主乃从之，指帐前石谓德钧使者曰： 我已许石郎，此石烂，可改矣！ 
现代文：契丹主便依从了他，指着帐前的石头对赵德钧的使者说： 我已经许诺了石郎，除非这块石头烂了，才能改变。 
English: The Khitan lord then obeyed him, pointing to the stone in front of the bookcase and saying to Zhao Deyun's messenger: "I have promised the stone, unless this stone is rotten, it can be changed.

古文：龙敏谓前郑州防御李懿曰： 君，国之近亲，今社稷之危，翘足可待，君独无忧乎？ 
现代文：龙敏对前郑州防御使李懿说： 您是国主的近亲，现在社稷如此危难，跷足之间就可以灭亡，您难道唯独没有忧虑吗？ 
English: Long Min said to the former Zhengzhou defense commander Li Qiao: You are a close relative of the sovereign, now the society is so dangerous, you can perish between your legs, are you the only one who is not worried?

古文：懿为言赵德钧必能破敌之状。
现代文：李懿为他分析赵德钧必能打败敌军的形势。
English: Li Yan analyzed for him the situation that Zhao Deyao would surely defeat the enemy.

古文：敏曰： 我燕人也，知德钧之为人，怯而无谋，但于守城差长耳。
现代文：龙敏说： 我是燕地人，知道赵德钧的为人，他胆小而又无谋略，只是对于守城稍有长处而已。
English: Long Min said: I am from Yan'an, and I know Zhao Deyao as a person. He is timid and has no strategy, but he has a slight advantage in defending the city.

古文：况今内蓄奸谋，岂可恃乎！
现代文：何况他现在内蓄奸谋，这样的人怎么能依恃呢？
English: What's more, he now harbors a treacherous plot within himself. How can such a person be embraced?

古文：仆有狂策，但恐朝廷不肯为耳。
现代文：在下有个冒昧的计策，只怕朝廷不肯那样干。
English: There is a daring stratagem afoot, if only the imperial court will do it.

古文：今从驾兵尚万馀人，马近五千匹，若选精骑一千，使仆与郎万金将之，自介休山路，夜冒虏骑入晋安寨，但使其半得入，则事济矣。
现代文：现在随从圣驾的兵尚有万余人，马近五千匹，如果选出精锐骑兵一千人，让我和郎万金指挥他们，从介休山路出发，趁着夜间冲破贼阵而进入晋安寨，只要能有一半人进去，事情就好办了。
English: Now there are still more than ten thousand soldiers and nearly five thousand horses following the holy driver. If we choose one thousand elite cavalry, let me and Lang Wanjin command them to set out from Jiexiu Mountain Road and take advantage of the night to break through the thieves and enter Jin'an Village. As long as half of the people can enter, things will be easy to do.

古文：张敬达等陷于重围，不知朝廷声问，若知大军近在团柏，虽有铁障可冲陷，况虏骑乎！ 
现代文：张敬达等现在陷于重围之中，不知道朝廷的信息，如果他们知道大军近在团柏，那就即使有铁的屏障也可以冲破，何况虏骑的阵列啊！ 
English: Zhang Jingda and others are now trapped in the middle of a heavy siege, and do not know the information of the imperial court. If they know that a large army is near Tuanpai, then even an iron barrier can be broken through, let alone a cavalry array!

古文：懿以白唐主，唐主曰： 龙敏之志极壮，用之晚矣。 
现代文：李懿把这个意见报告了后唐主，后唐主说： 龙敏的志向极为壮烈，现在用这个办法可惜晚了。 
English: Li Qian reported this opinion to the Lord of the Later Tang Dynasty, and the Lord of the Later Tang Dynasty said: Longmin's ambition is extremely strong, and now it is too late to use this method.

古文：丹州义军作乱，逐刺史康承询，承询奔鄜州。
现代文：丹州的义军作乱，驱逐了刺史康承询，康承询投奔州。
English: The rebel army in Danzhou made a riot and drove out the scholar Kangcheng, and Kangcheng fled to Danzhou.

古文：晋安寨被围数月，高行周、符彦卿数引骑兵出战，众寡不敌，皆无功。
现代文：晋安寨被围了几个月，高行周、符彦卿多次率领骑兵出战，由于寡不敌众，都不能成功。
English: Jin Anzhai was besieged for several months. Gao Xing Zhou and Fu Yanqing led the cavalry into battle many times, but they could not succeed because they were outnumbered.

古文：刍粮俱竭，削淘粪以饲马，马相啖，尾鬣皆秃，死则将士分食之，援兵竟不至。
现代文：粮食和草料都用完了，只好削木屑淘马粪中草筋来喂马，马互相啖咬，尾巴和颈鬃都秃了，死了就由将士分而食之，援兵竟还不来。
English: They had run out of grain and fodder, so they had to feed the horses by scraping the straw out of the dung. The horses bit each other, and their tails and collars were bald. When they died, they were fed by the soldiers, but reinforcements did not come.

古文：张敬达性刚，时谓之 张生铁。 
现代文：张敬达性情刚强，当时人叫他 张生铁 。
English: Zhang Jingda had a strong character. At that time, people called him Zhang Shengtie.

古文：杨光远、安审琦，劝敬达降于契丹，敬达曰： 吾受明宗及今上厚恩，为元帅而败军，其罪已大，况降敌乎！
现代文：杨光远、安审琦劝说张敬达向契丹投降，张敬达说： 我受明宗和当今皇上的厚恩，当了元帅而打败仗，罪过已经很大，何况向敌人投降呢！
English: Yang Guangyuan and An Xunjun persuaded Zhang Jinda to surrender to the Khitan. Zhang Jinda said, "I have been favored by the Ming Dynasty and the current emperor. When I became a field marshal and lost the war, my sin was already great, let alone surrendering to the enemy!"

古文：今援兵旦暮至，且当俟之。
现代文：现在援兵早晚是要到来，暂且等待吧。
English: Now, reinforcements are expected to arrive sooner or later. Let's wait for the time being.

古文：必若力尽势穷，则诸军斩我首，携之出降，自求多福，未为晚也。 
现代文：如果一旦力尽势穷，那就请诸军斩了我的头，拿着去投降，以求保全自己而获多福，那时也还不晚。 
English: If once I have exhausted my strength, then let the army cut off my head and take it to surrender, in order to save themselves and gain more blessings, then it is not too late.

古文：光远目审琦欲杀敬达，审琦未忍。
现代文：杨光远向安审琦使眼色要杀掉张敬达，安审琦不忍下手。
English: Yang Guangyuan made eye contact with An Ji, who wanted to kill Zhang Jingda. An Ji couldn't bear to do it.

古文：高行周知光远欲图敬达，常引壮骑尾而卫之，敬达不知其故，谓人曰： 行周每踵余后，何意也？ 
现代文：高行周知道杨光远要暗算张敬达，常常带领精壮骑兵尾随张敬达来护卫他，张敬达不知其中缘故，对别人说： 行周常常跟在我的脚后，是什么用意？ 
English: Gao Xing Zhou knew that Yang Guangyuan was plotting to assassinate Zhang Jingda, and often followed Zhang Xing Zhou with his elite cavalry to protect him. Zhang Xing Zhou, not knowing the reason, said to others: "Xing Zhou often follows my footsteps. What is your intention?"

古文：行周乃不敢随之。
现代文：高行周才不敢再尾随他。
English: Gao Xing Zhou did not dare to follow him again.

古文：诸将每旦集于招讨使营，甲子，高行周、符彦卿未至，光远乘其无备，斩敬达首，帅诸将上表降于契丹。
现代文：诸将每天早晨会集在招讨使的营房中，甲子，高行周、符彦卿尚未到达，杨光远乘着张敬达没有防备，斩了他的头，率领诸将上表向契丹投降。
English: The generals would gather every morning in the barracks of the summoning envoy. Koji, Gao Xing Zhou, and Fu Yanqing had not yet arrived. Yang Guangyuan took Zhang Jingda unprepared, cut off his head, and led the generals to surrender to the Khitan.

古文：契丹主素闻诸将名，皆慰劳，赐以裘帽，因戏之曰： 汝辈亦大恶汉，不用盐酪啖战马万匹！ 
现代文：契丹主耶律德光平素就说诸将的名声，都加以慰劳，赐给皮帽，因而开玩笑说： 你们各位是非常可恨的恶汉，用不着我准备加盐的乳酷来喂你们上万匹的战马了！ 
English: The lord of the Khitans, Yerudud, jokingly said: "You are all very hateful villains. I don't need to prepare salted milk to feed your tens of thousands of horses!"

古文：光远等大惭。
现代文：杨光远等大为羞惭。
English: Yang Guangyuan and others are very ashamed.

古文：契丹主嘉张敬达之忠，命收葬而祭之，谓其下及晋诸将曰： 汝曹为人臣，当效敬达也。 
现代文：契丹主嘉许张敬达的忠义，命令收尸安葬，并进行祭典，对他的下属及晋国诸将说： 你们做人臣的，应该仿效张敬达啊！ 
English: The Khitan lord praised Zhang Jingda's loyalty, ordered the body to be buried, and held a ceremony. He said to his subordinates and the generals of the Jin Dynasty: You who are ministers, should follow Zhang Jingda's example!

古文：时晋安寨马犹近五千，铠仗五万，契丹悉取以归其国，悉以唐之将卒授帝，语之曰： 勉事而主。 
现代文：当时晋安寨尚有马近五千匹，铠甲兵杖五万，契丹全部取走送归本国，而把后唐的将卒全部交给后晋高祖石敬瑭，并对大家说： 勉力效忠你们的主上。 
English: At that time, Jin Anzai still had nearly five thousand horses and fifty thousand armored soldiers. The Khitan took them all away and sent them back to their home country, and handed all the post-Tang soldiers over to the post-Jin Gao Zuishi, and said to everyone: Try your best to be loyal to your master.

古文：马军都指挥使康思立愤惋而死。
现代文：马军都指挥使康思立愤恨惋伤而死。
English: Kang Sili, the commander of the horse army, was so angry that he was wounded and died.

古文：帝以晋安已降，遣使谕诸州。代州刺史张朗斩其使；吕琦奉唐主诏劳北军，至忻州，遇晋使，亦斩之，谓刺史丁审琦曰： 虏过城下而不顾，其心可见，还日必无全理，不若早帅兵民自五台奔镇州。 
现代文：后晋高祖石敬瑭因为晋安已经投降，派使者谕告诸州，代州刺史张朗杀了来使；吕琦奉后唐主的诏书慰劳雁门关以北诸军，到了忻州，遇到晋国使者，也把使者杀了。吕琦对忻州刺史丁审琦说： 胡虏经过城下时都不回头看。他们的心迹可以看清，还朝之日必定不能保全自己，不如早日率领军民从五台奔赴镇州。 
English: After the Jin Dynasty, the founder of the Gao Dynasty, Shi Jingyu, sent an envoy to the states to complain that Jinan had surrendered, and Zhang Lang, the governor of the state, killed the envoy; Lv Ying, after receiving the imperial decree of the Tang Dynasty, comforted the troops north of Ganmen Pass, and when he came to Zhangzhou, he met the envoy of the Jin Dynasty, and also killed the envoy. Lv Ying said to the governor of Zhangzhou, Shi Ding Jianyun: "Hurus do not look back when passing under the city. Their traces can be seen clearly. They will not be able to protect themselves on the day

古文：将行，审琦悔之，闭牙城不从。
现代文：将要出发，丁审琦又后悔了，关闭牙城不跟吕琦走。
English: When they were about to set off, Ding Xuanqian regretted that he had closed the city of Fang and did not follow Lv Ying.

古文：州兵欲攻之，琦曰： 家国如此，何为复相屠灭！ 
现代文：州兵要攻打他，吕琦说： 国与家到了这种地步，为什么还要相互残杀！ 
English: The National Guard wants to attack him, Lv Ying said: The country and the family have come to this point, why do they have to kill each other!

古文：乃帅州兵趣镇州，审琦遂降契丹。
现代文：于是率领兵将奔向镇州，丁审琦便向契丹投降了。
English: As a result, he led the soldiers to rush to Zhenzhou, and Ding Xuanqian surrendered to the Khitan.

古文：契丹主谓帝曰： 桑维翰尽忠于汝，宜以为相。 
现代文：契丹主对后晋高祖石敬瑭说： 桑维翰对你很尽忠心，应该让他做宰相。 
English: The Khitan lord said to the post-promotion great-grandfather Jinshi Jingyu: Sanveehan is very loyal to you, and he should be made prime minister.

古文：丙寅，以赵莹为门下侍郎，桑维翰为中书侍郎，并同平章事；维翰仍权知枢密使事。
现代文：丙寅，高祖任命赵莹为门下侍郎，桑维翰为中书侍郎，二人都同平章事；桑维翰仍然暂时主持枢密使的事务。
English: Hsin-yin, Gaozu appointed Zhao Ying as his attendant, and San Weihan as the attendant of the Chinese book, both of whom were equal; San Weihan still temporarily presided over the affairs of the envoy.

古文：以杨光远为侍卫马步军都指挥使，以刘知远为保义节度使、侍卫马步军都虞侯。
现代文：任命杨光远为侍卫马步军都指挥使，任命刘知远为保义节度使、侍卫马步军都虞候。
English: Yang Guangyuan was appointed as the Commander of the Horse Guards and Foot Guards, and Liu Zhiyuan was appointed as the Minister of Public Security and the Commander of the Horse Guards and Foot Guards.

古文：帝与契丹主将引兵而南，欲留一子守河东，咨于契丹主，契丹主令帝尽出诸子，自择之。
现代文：后晋高祖与契丹主将要领兵向南进军，想留下他的一个儿子戍守河东，征求契丹主的意见。契丹主让后晋高祖把他的儿子都叫出来，由他自己选择。
English: Emperor Go-Jin Gaozu and the Khitan lord were about to lead an army southward, and he wanted to leave one of his sons to guard the east of the river and seek the opinion of the Khitan lord. The Khitan lord asked Emperor Go-Jin Gaozu to call out his sons and let him choose his own.

古文：帝兄子重贵，父敬儒早卒，帝养以为子，貌类帝而短小，契丹主指之曰： 此大目者可也。 
现代文：后晋高祖哥哥的儿子石重贵，其父石敬儒早亡，后晋高祖养育他做自己的儿子，相貌与后晋高祖相像而身材短小，契丹主指着他说： 这个大眼睛的可以。 
English: He was the son of the elder brother of Emperor Gaozong, Shi Chonggui. His father, Shi Jingru, died young, and Emperor Gaozong raised him as his own son. His appearance was similar to that of Emperor Gaozong, but he was short in stature. The Khitan lord pointed to him and said, "This one with the big eyes can do it."

古文：乃以重贵为北京留守、太原尹、河东节度使。
现代文：因而任用石重贵为北京留守、太原尹、河东节度使。
English: As a result, he appointed Shi Chonggui as the Beijing resident, Taiyuan Yin, and Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：契丹以其将高谟翰为前锋，与降卒偕进。
现代文：契丹用他的将领高谟翰做前锋，同降兵一起相偕而进。
English: Khitan used his general, Gaumkhan, as a striker and advanced together with the retreating troops.

古文：丁卯，至团柏，与唐兵战，赵德钧、赵延寿先循，符彦饶、张彦琦、刘延朗、刘在明继之，士卒大溃，相腾践死者万计。
现代文：丁卯，到达团柏，与唐兵交战，赵德钧、赵延寿先逃跑，符彦饶、张彦琦、刘延朗、刘在明也跟着逃跑，士兵大乱溃逃，相互践踏而死的万计。
English: Dingwu arrived at Tuanpai and fought with Tang soldiers. Zhao Deyu and Zhao Yanshou fled first, followed by Fu Yanrao, Zhang Yanqu, Liu Yanlang and Liu Zaiming. The soldiers fled in disorder and trampled each other to death.

古文：己巳，延朗、在明至怀州，唐主始知帝即位，杨光远降。
现代文：己巳，刘延朗、刘在明到了怀州，后唐末帝才知道石敬瑭已即帝位，杨光远已经投降。
English: After all, Liu Yanlang and Liu Ziming arrived in Waizhou, and it was only after the end of the Tang Dynasty that the emperor knew that Shi Jingyao had ascended to the throne, and Yang Guangyuan had surrendered.

古文：众议以 天雄军府尚完，契丹秘惮山东，未敢南下，车驾宜幸魏州。 
现代文：众人议论认为： 天雄军府还完好，契丹必然惧怕崤山以东，不敢南下，皇帝应当到魏州去巡幸。 
English: People argued that: Emperor Tianxiong's military headquarters is still intact, Khitan must be afraid of the east of Lushan and dare not go south, and the emperor should go to Weizhou for a tour.

古文：唐主以李崧素与范延光善，召崧谋之。
现代文：后唐末帝认为李崧素来与天雄节度使范延光相友善，便召唤李崧来谋议。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, the late emperor thought that Li Xuan had always been friendly with Fan Yanguang, the god of festivals, and summoned Li Xuan to consult.

古文：薛文遇不知而继至，唐主怒，变色；崧蹑文遇足，文遇乃去。
现代文：薛文遇不知道也跟着进来，后唐末帝发怒，变了颜色；李崧用脚踩薛文遇的脚，薛文遇才退去。
English: Without knowing it, Xue Wen Rong also came in, after which the late Tang Emperor became angry and changed color; Li Gan stepped on Xue Wen Rong's foot with his foot, and Xue Wen Rong only retreated.

古文：唐主曰： 我见此物肉颤，适几欲抽佩刀刺之。 
现代文：后唐末帝说： 我看见这东西肉就发颤，刚才几乎要拔佩刀刺他。 
English: The late Tang Dynasty emperor said, "When I saw this thing, my flesh trembled, and I almost drew my sword to stab it.

古文：崧曰： 文遇小人，浅谋国，刺之益丑。 
现代文：李崧说： 薛文遇是个小人，出的主意浅薄误国，刺了他更显得丑恶。 
English: Li Wei said: Xue Wenyu is a villain, the idea he came up with is shallow and misleads the country, and stabbing him is even more ugly.

古文：崧因劝唐主南还，唐主从之。
现代文：李崧因而劝后唐末帝南还，后唐末帝听从了他的意见。
English: As a result, Li Gan advised the late Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty to return to China, and the late Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty listened to his advice.

古文：洛阳闻北军败，众心大震，居人四出，逃窜山谷。
现代文：洛阳听说北方军事大败的消息，民众心里大受震动，居住城中的百姓四面出走，逃窜到山谷。
English: Luoyang heard the news of the military defeat in the north, and the people were greatly shaken. The people living in the city fled in all directions and fled to the valley.

古文：门者请禁之，河南尹雍王重美曰： 国家多难，未能为百姓主，又禁其求生，徒增恶名耳；不若听其自便，事宁自还。 
现代文：把守城门的军士禁止百姓出走，河南尹雍王李重美说： 国家多难，不能当好百姓的主管，又禁止他们去求生，只能增加恶名；不如听其自便，事情安定了自然会归还。 
English: The sergeant who guarded the city gate forbade the people to leave, and Li Chungmei, the king of Yin and Yong in Henan Province, said: The country is very difficult, it is not possible to be a good supervisor of the people, and forbidding them to survive can only increase their notoriety; it is better to listen to their own convenience, and things will naturally return when things are stable.

古文：乃出令任从所适，众心差安。
现代文：于是下令任凭他们随便出走，民心稍见安宁。
English: He then ordered that they be allowed to leave at will, and the people's hearts were at peace for a while.

古文：壬申，唐主还至河阳，命诸将分守南、北城。
现代文：壬申，后唐末帝回到河阳，命令诸将分守南、北城。
English: In Jinshin, after the last emperor of the Tang Dynasty returned to Hayao, he ordered the generals to guard the southern and northern cities separately.

古文：张延朗请幸滑州，庶与魏博声势相接，唐主不能决。
现代文：张延朗请求后唐末帝再去滑州，以便同魏博声势相接，后唐末帝没能作出决定。
English: Zhang Yanlang asked Emperor Go-Tang to go to Luzhou again in order to catch up with Wei Bo, but Emperor Go-Tang was unable to make a decision.

古文：赵德钧、赵延寿南奔潞州，唐败兵稍稍从之，其将时赛帅卢龙轻骑东还渔阳。
现代文：赵德钧、赵延寿向南逃奔到潞州，后唐败兵稍微跟着他们，其将领时赛率领卢龙的轻骑兵向东回到渔阳。
English: Zhao Deyu and Zhao Yanshou fled southward to Ganzhou, and the defeated soldiers of the later Tang Dynasty followed them slightly. Their general Jisei led the light cavalry of Lulong eastward back to Yuyang.

古文：帝先遣昭义节度使高行周还具食，至城下，见德钧父子在城上，行周曰： 仆与大王乡曲，敢不忠告！
现代文：后晋高祖先派遣昭义节度使高行周回到潞州准备粮秣，到达城下，见赵德钧父子在城上，高行周说： 我和您是同乡，怎能不向您进言忠告！
English: After being promoted to high rank, Gao Xing Zhou's ancestors sent Zhaoyi Jiedu to make Gao Xing Zhou return to Ganzhou to prepare grain. When he arrived at the city, he saw Zhao Deyun and his son on the city. Gao Xing Zhou said: I am a fellow villager with you, how can I not give you some advice!

古文：城中无斗粟可宁，不若速迎车驾。 
现代文：城中没有一斗粟米可守，不如赶快迎接晋帝车驾。 
English: There is not a single bucket of corn in the city that can be protected, so it is better to quickly meet the car of Emperor Jin.

古文：甲戌，帝与契丹主至潞州，德钧父子迎谒于高河，契丹主慰谕之，父子拜帝于马首，进曰： 别后安否？ 
现代文：甲戍，后晋高祖与契丹主到达潞州，赵德钧父子在高河迎接并谒见，契丹主好言安慰他们，赵氏父子在马前拜见后晋高祖，又走近后晋高祖身边说： 分别以后安好吗？ 
English: Jia Jia, the late Jin Gaozu and the Khitan lord arrived in Zhangzhou, Zhao Dejun and his son greeted and met in Gaohe, and the Khitan lord consoled them with kind words. Zhao's father and son paid their respects to the late Jin Gaozu in front of the horse, and approached the late Jin Gaozu's side and said: Will it be all right after the separation?

古文：帝不顾，亦不与之言。
现代文：后晋高祖不看他们，也不同他们交谈。
English: After promotion, Gaozu did not look at them and did not talk to them.

古文：契丹主谓德钧曰： 汝在幽州所置银鞍契丹直何在？ 
现代文：契丹主问赵德钧说： 你在幽州所设置的银鞍契丹兵现在哪里？ 
English: The Khitan lord asked Zhao Dejun, "Where are the silver-saddled Khitan soldiers you set up in Yuzhou?

古文：德钧指示之，契丹主命尽杀之于西郊，凡三千人。
现代文：赵德钧指给他看，契丹主下令在西郊把这些人都杀了，共有三千人。
English: Zhao Deyun pointed out to him that the Khitan lord ordered these people to be killed in the western suburbs, a total of three thousand people.

古文：遂琐德钧、延寿，送归其国。
现代文：于是，便拘拿了赵德钧、赵延寿，押送到契丹国。
English: As a result, Zhao Deyu and Zhao Yanshou were detained and escorted to Qidan.

古文：德钧见述律太后，悉以所赉宝货并籍其田宅献之，太后问曰： 汝近者何为往太原？ 
现代文：赵德钧谒见契丹主的母亲述律太后，把所有带来的宝货及没收得来的田宅都献出来作贡物，太后问道： 你最近为什么到太原去？ 
English: When Zhao Deyu met the Empress Dowager Shuritsu, the mother of the Khitan lord, she offered all the treasures she had brought and the confiscated farmhouse as a tribute. The Empress Dowager asked: Why did you go to Taiyuan recently?

古文：德钧曰： 奉唐主之命。 
现代文：赵德钧说： 是奉唐主之命。 
English: Zhao Deyao said: It was ordered by the Tang Lord.

古文：太后指天曰： 汝从吾儿求为天子，何亡语邪！ 
现代文：太后指着天说道： 你向我儿请求扶你当天子，为什么说瞎话！ 
English: The empress dowager pointed to the sky and said: "Ask my son to help you, son of the sky. Why are you telling lies?"

古文：又自指其心曰： 此不可欺也。 
现代文：又指指自己的心说： 这里是不能欺骗的。 
English: And he pointed to his heart and said, "There is no deception here.

古文：又曰： 吾儿将行，吾戒之云：赵大王若引兵北向渝关，亟须引归，太原可救也。
现代文：又说： 我儿将要出行时，我告诫他说：赵大王如果率领兵马向渝关北进时，就赶紧带领部众回来，太原不必去救他。
English: He also said, "When my son was about to leave, I warned him, 'If Zhao Daowang marches to the north of Chongguan with his soldiers and horses, he should quickly lead his followers back. Taiyuan does not need to save him.

古文：汝欲为天子，何不先击退吾儿，徐图亦未晚。
现代文：你想当天子，为什么不先把我儿击退，再慢慢谋取也不晚。
English: If you want to catch the sun, why not first repel us, and then slowly seek it.

古文：汝为人臣，既负其主，不能击敌，又欲乘乱邀利，所为如此，何面目复求生乎？ 
现代文：你作为人臣，既辜负自己的君主，不能攻击敌人，又想乘着危乱之时谋求自己的利益，你干出来这样的事，还有什么面目来求生存呢？ 
English: As a vassal, you have failed your sovereign, you cannot attack the enemy, and you want to take advantage of the time of danger to seek your own interests. If you do such a thing, what kind of face do you have to survive?

古文：德钧俯首不能对。
现代文：赵德钧低着头不能回答。
English: Zhao Deyu bowed his head and could not answer.

古文：又问： 器玩在此，田宅何在？ 德钧曰： 在幽州。 
现代文：太后又问他： 你所献的器物玩好在这里，但你所献的田宅在哪里？ 赵德钧说： 在幽州。 
English: The empress dowager also asked him, "The things you donated are good to play with here, but where is the farmhouse you donated?" Zhao Deyu said, "It is in Yuzhou."

古文：太后曰： 幽州今属谁？ 
现代文：太后说： 幽州现在是属于谁的？ 
English: The empress dowager said, "To whom does Yuzhou now belong?

古文：德钧曰： 属太后。 
现代文：回答说： 属于太后。 
English: He answered: It belongs to the Queen Mother.

古文：太后曰： 然则又何献焉？ 
现代文：太后说： 那你还献什么啊！ 
English: The empress dowager said: Then what do you have to offer?

古文：德钧益惭。
现代文：赵德钧更加羞惭。
English: Zhao Deyu was even more ashamed.

古文：自是郁郁不多食，逾年而卒。
现代文：从此郁郁吃不下东西，一年之后便死了。
English: From then on, depressed and unable to eat, he died a year later.

古文：张厉与延寿俱入契丹，契丹主复以为翰林学士。
现代文：张砺与赵延寿一起进入契丹，契丹主仍然让他做翰林学士。
English: Zhang Qian and Zhao Yanshou entered Qidan together, but the Qidan master still made him a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：帝将发上党，契丹主举酒属帝曰： 余远来徇义，今大事已成，我若南向，河南之人必大惊核；汝宜自引汉兵南下，人必不甚惧。我令太相温将五千骑卫送汝至河梁，欲与之渡河者多少随意，余且留此，俟汝音闻，有急则下山救汝。若洛阳既定，吾即北返矣。 
现代文：后晋高祖将要进军上党，契丹主举着酒杯对他说： 我远道而来履行协约，现在大事已经完成，我如果再向南进军，黄河以南的人必然要引起大的惊骇；你应该自已率领汉兵南下，人心定不会太恐惧，我命令太相温带领五千骑兵保卫护送你到河阳桥，你想要多少人随你渡河由你决定。我暂时留在这里，等你的消息，有紧急情况，我便下山去援救你；如果你能把洛阳安定下来，我就返回北面去。 
English: After the promotion, Gaozu was about to march to Shangdang, and the Khitan lord said to him with a cup of wine: I have come all the way to fulfill the agreement, and now the great event has been completed. If I march south again, the people south of the Yellow River will inevitably cause great consternation. You should lead the Han soldiers southward yourself, and your heart will not be too afraid. I order you to lead five thousand cavalry to protect and escort you to Heyang Bridge. How many people you want to cross the river is up to you. I will stay here temporarily, waiting for your news. If there is an emergency, I will go down the mountain to rescue you

古文：与帝执手相泣，久之不能别，解白貂裘以衣帝，赠良马二十匹，战马千二百匹，曰： 世世子孙勿相忘！ 
现代文：于是与后晋高祖执手相泣，久久不能作别，脱下自己的白貂裘给后晋高祖穿上，又赠送了好马二十匹，战马一千二百匹，说： 世世代代子孙不要相忘。 
English: So he held hands with Emperor Gaozong and wept, unable to say goodbye for a long time. He took off his white robe and put it on Emperor Gaozong, and presented him with twenty fine horses and twelve hundred war horses, saying, "Don't forget each other for generations to come."

古文：又曰： 刘知远、赵莹、桑维翰皆创业功臣，无大故，勿弃也。 
现代文：又说： 刘知远、赵莹、桑维翰都是创业的功臣，没有大的过失，不要丢弃他们。 
English: He also said: Liu Zhiyuan, Zhao Ying, and San Weihan are all heroes of entrepreneurship, and they have no major faults. Don't discard them.

古文：初，张敬达既出师，唐主遣左金吾大将军历山高汉筠守晋州。
现代文：起初，张敬达率师出征后，后唐末帝派左金吾大将军历山人高汉筠戍守晋州。
English: At first, after Zhang Jingda led his division to go to war, the late Tang Dynasty Emperor sent General Zuo Kingu, who was a member of the Qiao Han Dynasty, to defend Jinzhou.

古文：敬达死，建雄节度使田承肇帅众攻汉筠于府署，汉筠开门延承肇入，从容谓曰： 仆与公俱受朝寄，何相迫如此？ 
现代文：张敬达死后，建雄节度副使田承肇率领部众在府署攻击高汉筠，高汉筠打开府署大门延请田承肇进入，很从容地对田承肇说： 我和您都是受朝廷的委任，为何如此相迫？ 
English: After Zhang Jingda's death, Tian Chengzhao, Jianxiong's vice-envoy of the festival, led the leading group to attack Gao Han Zhao at the prefectural government office. Gao Han Zhao opened the door of the prefectural government office and invited Tian Chengzhao to enter. He calmly said to Tian Chengzhao: You and I are both appointed by the imperial court, why are we so constrained?

古文：承肇曰： 欲奉公为节度使。 
现代文：田承肇说： 要拥戴您做节度使。 
English: Tian Chengzhao said: I want to support you to be a moderator.

古文：汉筠曰： 仆老矣，义不为乱首，死生惟公所处。 
现代文：高汉筠说： 我老了，道义上不允许我当作乱的头头，或死或生都听任您的处置了。 
English: Gao Hanzhong said, "I am old. Morally, I am not allowed to be the ringleader of a riot. Whether I live or die is up to you.

古文：承肇目左右欲杀之，军士投刃于地曰： 高金吾累朝宿德，奈何害之！ 
现代文：田承肇目示左右要杀他，军士们把武器投掷在地说： 高金吾是几朝有德望的人，为什么要害他！ 
English: Tian Chengzhao looked around and wanted to kill him. The sergeants threw their weapons at him and said: Gao Kingu is a man of great prestige in several dynasties, why harm him!

古文：承肇乃谢曰： 与公戏耳。 
现代文：田承肇这才向他谢罪说： 和您开玩笑而已。 
English: It was only then that Tian Chengzhao apologized to him and said, "I was only joking with you."

古文：听汉筠归洛阳。
现代文：听由高汉筠归还洛阳。
English: He ordered Gao Hanwei to return Luoyang.

古文：帝遇诸涂，曰： 朕忧卿为乱兵所伤，今见卿甚喜。 
现代文：后晋高祖在路途中遇上了他，说道： 朕担忧您为乱兵所伤，现在见到您，我很高兴。 
English: Later, Jin Gaozu met him on the road and said, "I'm worried that you were injured by the soldiers. I'm glad to see you now.

古文：符彦饶、张彦琪至河阳，密言于唐主曰： 今胡兵大下，河水复浅，人心已离，此不可守。 
现代文：符彦饶、张彦琪到达河阳，秘密地向唐末帝说： 现在胡兵大举南下，黄河的水又很浅，人心已经离散，此地不能固守。 
English: When Fu Yanrao and Zhang Yanqi arrived in Kheyang, they secretly said to the last emperor of the Tang Dynasty: "Now Hu's army is marching south in large numbers, the Yellow River is shallow, and people's hearts have been scattered. This place cannot be held fast.

古文：丁丑，唐主命河阳节度使苌从简与赵州刺史刘在明守河阳南城，遂断浮梁，归洛阳。
现代文：丁丑，后唐末帝命令河阳节度使苌从简与赵州刺史刘在明戍守河阳南城，便把渡河浮桥断毁，回到洛阳。
English: Ding Yuxi, the last emperor of the late Tang Dynasty, ordered the Heyang Festival to make Zou Zongjian and Zhaozhou Shishi Liu guard the southern city of Heyang in Mingyuan, and then destroyed the floating bridge across the river and returned to Luoyang.

古文：遣宦者秦继旻、皇城使李彦绅杀昭信节度使李赞华于其第。
现代文：派遣宦官秦继、皇城使李彦绅在昭信节度使李赞华的府邸将他杀死。
English: The eunuch Qin Ji was dispatched, and the imperial city ordered Li Yansheng to kill Li Zanhua at his residence during the Zhaoxin Festival.

古文：己卯，帝至河阳，苌从简迎降，舟楫已具。
现代文：己卯，后晋高祖到达河阳，苌从简迎接投降，渡河舟楫已经准备好了。
English: After the Emperor Jintao and Emperor Gaozong arrived in Heyang, Zhang Congyan welcomed the surrender, and the rafts for crossing the river were ready.

古文：彰圣军执刘在明以降，帝释之，使复其所。
现代文：彰圣军拘执了刘在明，也来投降，后晋高祖把他释放了，让他复职返回镇所。
English: After the Zhang Sheng Army detained Liu Zaiming, he also came to surrender. After the promotion, Gaozu released him and allowed him to return to the town.

古文：唐主命马军都指挥使宋审虔、步军都指挥使符彦饶、河阳节度使张彦琪、宣徽南院使刘延朗将千馀骑至白马阪行战地，有五十馀骑渡河奔于北军。
现代文：后唐末帝命令马军都指挥使宋审虔、步军都指挥使符彦饶、河阳节度使张彦琪、宣徽南院使刘延朗带领千余骑兵到达白司马阪准备进行战斗的地方，有五十多骑兵投奔到北方的后晋军队。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong ordered Song Jianqian to command the horse army, Fu Yanrao to command the infantry army, Zhang Yanqi to command the Kheyang Festival, and Liu Yanlang to command the Southern Yuan of Xuanhui to lead more than a thousand cavalry to the place where Baishi Masaka was preparing to fight. More than fifty cavalrymen rushed to the north of the Hojin army.

古文：诸将谓审虔曰： 何地不可战，谁肯立于此？ 
现代文：诸将对宋审虔说： 哪个地方不能战斗，谁还肯停留在这里？ 
English: Zhu will say to Song Xianqian: Which place can not fight, who would stay here?

古文：乃还。
现代文：便带兵回来了。
English: So I came back.

古文：庚辰，唐主又与四将议复向河阳，而将校皆已飞状迎帝。
现代文：庚辰，后唐末帝又同宋、符、张、刘四将商讨再向河阳进攻，而此时将校都已经驰送降书给晋高祖了。
English: Geng Chen, the last emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, together with Song, Fu, Zhang, and Liu Si, will discuss attacking Heyang again, and at this time, the officers have already sent a letter of surrender to Jin Gaozu.

古文：帝虑唐主西奔，遣契丹千骑扼渑池。
现代文：后晋高祖担心后唐末帝向西逃奔，派遣契丹一千骑兵扼阻在渑池。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu, fearing that the late Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty would flee to the west, dispatched a thousand cavalry of Khitan to stop him at Dianchi.

古文：辛巳，唐主与曹太后、刘皇后、雍王重美及宋审虔等携传国宝登玄武楼自焚，皇后积薪欲烧宫室，重美谏曰： 新天子至，必不露居，他日重劳民力；死而遗怨，将安用之！ 
现代文：辛巳，后唐末帝与曹太后、刘皇后、雍王李重美及宋审虔等携带着传国宝玺登上宣武楼自焚。刘皇后积聚薪柴想把宫室也烧了，李重美劝谏说： 新天子来了，必定不能露天居住，以后修建宫室还要劳费民力；我们死了，还要给民众遗留怨恨，能有什么好处！ 
English: Soon after, the last emperor of the Tang Dynasty, together with Empress Dowager Cao, Empress Liu, the Yong Wang, Li Chongmei, and Song Xuanqian, along with a number of national treasures, boarded the Xuanwu Tower to self-immolate. Empress Liu gathered firewood and wanted to burn down the palace, but Li Chongmei advised her: "When the new emperor comes, he must not live in the open air, and it will take more labor and manpower to build the palace in the future; when we die, we will leave behind a legacy of resentment for the people. What good can it do?"

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是，便停止了焚烧宫室。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：王淑妃谓太后曰： 事急矣，宜且避匿，以俟姑夫。 
现代文：王淑妃对曹太后说： 事情已经危急了，应该暂且躲藏一下，等候姑夫来了再说。 
English: Wang Shufei said to the Empress Dowager Cao, "The situation is critical. You should hide for a while and wait for your uncle to come.

古文：太后曰： 吾子孙妇女一朝至此，何忍独生！
现代文：曹太后说： 我的儿子、孙子、媳妇、女儿一旦到了如此地步，我怎么忍心独自生存！
English: Empress Dowager Cao said: "Once my son, grandson, daughter-in-law and daughter have reached such a stage, how can I bear to live alone!

古文：妹自勉之。 
现代文：妹妹你自己勉励吧。 
English: Sister, encourage yourself.

古文：淑妃乃与许王从益匿于球场，获免。
现代文：王淑妃便同许王李从益藏匿在毯场，终免一死。
English: Wang Shuxi then hid with Xu Wang Li in the carpet field, and was eventually spared death.

古文：是日晚，帝入洛阳，止于旧第。
现代文：这天晚上，后晋高祖石敬瑭进入洛阳，住在自己的旧府第。
English: In the evening of the same day, the late Jin Gao's ancestor, Shi Jingyu, entered Luoyang and lived in his old residence.

古文：唐兵皆解甲待罪，帝慰而释之。
现代文：后唐的兵都解脱铠甲等待问罪，后晋高祖安慰大家，并加以释放。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, all the soldiers were relieved of their armor and awaited arraignment. After the Jin Dynasty, Gaozu consoled everyone and released them.

古文：帝命刘知远部署京城，知远分汉军使还营，馆契丹于天宫寺，城中肃然，无敢犯令。
现代文：后晋高祖命令刘知远部署京城的治安，刘知远分派汉军让他们回到自己的营地，把契丹兵安置在天宫寺，城中秩序非常平静，没有人敢违背命令。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu ordered Liu Zhiyuan to deploy the security of Beijing. Liu Zhiyuan dispatched the Chinese army to let them return to their camp, and placed the Khitan soldiers in Tiangong Temple. The order in the city was very calm, and no one dared to disobey the order.

古文：士民避乱窜匿者，数日皆还复业。
现代文：士民避乱逃窜躲藏的人，没有几天都回来恢复了旧业。
English: Those who fled or hid to escape the turmoil have all returned within a few days to resume their old jobs.

古文：初，帝在河东，为唐朝所忌，中书侍郎、同平章事、判三司张延朗不欲河东多蓄积，凡财赋应留使之外尽收取之，帝以是恨之。壬午，百官入见，独收延朗付御史台，馀皆谢恩。
现代文：过去，后晋高祖在河东时，受到后唐朝廷的猜忌，中书侍郎、同平章事、判三司张延朗不愿让河东有更多的积蓄，于是把除了应该留供地方使用的财物以外，全部收取上缴，晋高祖因此怨恨他，壬午，百官入宫朝见，唯独把张延朗扣押交付御史台究办，其余的都谢恩免究。
English: In the past, when Emperor Jintao's ancestor was in Hedong, he was treated with suspicion by the court of the Later Tang Dynasty. Zhang Yanlang, the attendant of the Chinese classics, Tongping Zhangji, and the three judges, did not want to let Hedong have more savings, so he collected and handed over everything except the property that should be reserved for local use. Emperor Jintao's ancestor resented him for this. In the morning, when all the officials entered the palace to see the emperor, they only detained Zhang Yanlang and handed him over to the Imperial History Research Office. The rest were exempted from investigation.

古文：甲申，车驾入宫，大赦： 应中外官吏一切不问，惟贼臣张延朗、刘延皓、刘延朗奸邪贪猥，罪难容贷；中书侍郎、平章事马胤孙、枢密使房暠、宣徽使李专美、河中节度使韩昭胤等，虽居重位，不务诡随，并释罪除名；中外臣僚先归顺者，委中书门下别加任使。 
现代文：甲申，后晋高祖车驾入宫，实行大赦： 应中外官吏一切不问，只有贼臣张延朗、刘延皓、刘延朗奸邪贪猥，罪行难于容忍宽贷；中书侍郎、平章事马胤孙、枢密使房、宣徽使李专美、河中节度使韩昭胤等，虽然居于重要职位，不追求诡诈逢迎，一并解脱他们的罪行，予以除名；内外臣僚中先归顺的，委令中书、门下省另行加以作用。 
English: The following amnesty was carried out: Chinese and foreign officials should not be questioned at all, only the vassals Zhang Yanlang, Liu Yanzhong, and Liu Yanlong were corrupt and lewd, and their crimes were difficult to tolerate and forgive; the Chinese secretary, Ping Zhang Zhi Ma Yinsun, the confidential envoy, the imperial seal envoy Li Xunmei, and the mid-river governor, Han Zhaotong, although they were in important positions, did not pursue trickery, and were relieved of their crimes and removed from the list; if they were the first to surrender, the Chinese secretary and the subordinate provinces were ordered to play a separate role.

古文：刘延皓匿于成门，数日，自经死。
现代文：刘延皓藏匿在龙门，几天后，自己上吊死了。
English: Liu Yanjun hid in Longmen and hanged himself a few days later.

古文：刘延朗将奔南山，捕得，杀之。
现代文：刘延朗将要逃奔南山，捉住了他，并把他杀死。
English: Liu Yanlang was about to flee to Nanshan. They caught him and killed him.

古文：斩张延朗；既而选三司使，难其人，帝甚悔之。
现代文：把张延朗斩首，接着选拔三司使，难于有合适人选，后晋高祖很是后悔。
English: Zhang Yanlang was beheaded, and then the three envoys were selected. It was difficult to find a suitable candidate. After the promotion, Gaozu regretted it very much.

古文：闽人闻唐主之亡，叹曰： 潞王之罪，天下未之闻也，将如吾君何！ 
现代文：闽国人听到后唐末帝的灭亡消息后，叹息着说： 潞王的罪行，我们没有听说过，他比起我们的国君又能怎么样呢！ 
English: After hearing the news of the demise of the last emperor of the Tang Dynasty, the people of Zhai said with a sigh: We have not heard of the crimes of the king of Zhai, what can he do compared to our sovereign!

古文：十二月，乙酉朔，帝如河阳，饯太相温及契丹兵归国。
现代文：十二月，乙酉朔，后晋高祖来到河阳，设宴给太相温和契丹兵饯行，送他们回国。
English: In December, Emperor Gaozong of the Later Jin Dynasty came to Kheyang to give a banquet to the Thai and Khitan soldiers and send them back to China.

古文：追废唐主为庶人。
现代文：追废后唐末帝为平民百姓。
English: After being abolished, the last emperor of the Tang Dynasty became a commoner.

古文：丁亥，以冯道兼门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：丁亥，高祖任用冯道兼任门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: Dinghai, Gao Zu appointed Feng Dao as his disciple's attendant, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：曹州刺史郑阮贪暴，指挥使石重立因乱杀之，族其家。
现代文：曹州刺史郑阮贪婪暴虐，指挥使石重立乘着变乱，把他杀了，并族灭了他的家属。
English: Caozhou assassin Zheng Ruan was greedy and violent. The commander made Shi Chongli take advantage of the turmoil, killed him, and wiped out his family members.

古文：辛卯，以唐中书侍郎姚顗为刑部尚书。
现代文：辛卯，高祖作用后唐中书侍郎姚为刑部尚书。
English: Xinwu, after the role of Gao Zu, Yao, the attendant of the Tang Dynasty, became Shangshu of the Penal Department.

古文：初，朔方节度使张希崇为政有威信，民夷爱之，兴屯田以省漕运；在镇五年，求内徙，唐潞王以为静难节度使。
现代文：以前，朔方节度使张希崇治理政务有威信，民众喜欢爱戴他，他兴办屯田就地取粮，从而省减了漕运，在镇所五年，要求往内地调迁，后唐潞王李从珂任用为静难节度使。
English: In the past, the Zhaofang Festival made Zhang Xizong's governance of government affairs prestigious, and the people liked to love him. He built a farm to collect grain locally, thereby reducing the transportation. After five years in the township, he asked to be transferred to the mainland. Later, Tang Dynasty King Li Zongke appointed him as the Festival's messenger.

古文：帝与契丹修好，恐其复取灵武，癸巳，复以希崇为朔方节度使。
现代文：后晋高祖与契丹修好，担心契丹再次攻取灵武，癸巳，仍然作用张希崇为朔方节度使。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozu reconciled with Khitan, but he was worried that Khitan would once again capture Lingwu. Therefore, Zhang Xizhong still acted as the messenger of the Shuo side.

古文：初，成德节度使董温琪贪暴，积货巨万，以牙内都虞侯平山秘琼为腹心。
现代文：当初，成德节度使董温琪贪焚暴虐，积蓄的财货竟达巨万，他把牙内都虞候平山人秘琼当作心腹。
English: At first, the Chengde Festival made Dong Wenqi greedy and tyrannical, and the accumulated wealth was huge. He regarded Hizhong Qiong, a Pingshan person, as his confidant.

古文：温琪与赵德钧俱没于契丹，琼尽杀温琪家人，瘗于一坎，而取其货，自称留后，表称军乱。
现代文：董温琪与赵德钧一起死于契丹。秘琼把董温琪的家属杀了，埋葬在一个坟坑里，而把他的家财都夺取了，自称留后，上表称言军队动乱。
English: Dong Wenqi died in the Khitan War together with Zhao Deyao. Bai Qiong killed Dong Wenqi's family members, buried them in a grave, and seized all of his family's wealth. He claimed to stay behind and publicly praised the army for the turmoil.

古文：同州小校门鐸杀节度使杨汉宾，焚掠州城。
现代文：同州的小校门铎杀了节度使杨汉宾，焚烧并掠抢了州城。
English: The state's small school gatecrashers killed Yang Hanbin, the governor, and burned and looted the state capital.

古文：诏赠李赞华燕王，遣使送其丧归国。
现代文：后晋高祖下诏封赠李赞华为燕王，派使者护送他的丧葬回契丹。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Gaozong, Li Zanwu presented the imperial seal to King Yan and sent an envoy to escort his funeral back to Qidan.

古文：张朗将其众入朝。
现代文：代州刺史张朗带领他的兵众入京朝见后晋高祖。
English: Zhang Lang, the governor of Daizhou, led his troops into Beijing to meet Emperor Gaozu.

古文：庚子，以唐中书侍郎、同平章事卢文纪为吏部尚书。
现代文：庚子，后晋高祖任用后唐中书侍郎卢文纪为吏部尚书。
English: Geng Zi, the founder of Jin Gao, appointed Lu Wenji, the post-Tang chancellor's secretary, as the secretary.

古文：以皇城使晋阳周瑰为大将军、充三司使；瑰辞曰： 臣自知才不称职，宁以避事见弃，犹胜冒宠获辜。 
现代文：任用皇城使晋阳人周为大将军、充任三司使；周辞谢说： 臣自知才干不能称职，宁可因为躲避事责而被陛下见弃，也还是比冒恃陛下的宠爱而获罪要好。 
English: Zhou, a native of Jinyang, who was appointed the imperial envoy to the imperial city, was promoted to the rank of general and served as the third secretary of the imperial envoy. Zhou resigned, saying, "As a vassal, I know that I am not capable of fulfilling my duties. I would rather be abandoned by Your Majesty for evading my responsibilities, rather than be punished for defying Your Majesty's favor."

古文：帝许之。
现代文：后晋高祖准许了他。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：帝闻平卢节度使房知温卒，遣天平节度使王建立将兵巡抚青州。
现代文：后晋高祖听说平卢节度使房知温去世，遣派天平节度使王建立领兵巡抚青州。
English: Later, Jingu Gaozu heard that Pinglu Jiedu had caused the death of Fang Zhiwen, and sent Tianping Jiedu to make Wang establish a military leader to patrol Qingzhou.

古文：改兴唐府曰广晋府。
现代文：更改兴唐府叫广晋府。
English: Xingtang Prefecture was renamed Guangjin Prefecture.

古文：安远节度使卢文进闻帝为契丹所立，自以本契丹叛将，辛丑，弃镇奔吴。
现代文：安远节度使卢文进听说后晋高祖是由契丹扶立的，自己本是契丹的叛将，辛丑，放弃了镇所投奔吴国。
English: The Anyuan Festival made Lu Wenjin hear that the late Jin Gao Zu was established by Khitan. He was a traitor to Khitan, Xin Jiu, and abandoned the town to go to the State of Wu.

古文：所过镇戍，召其主将，告之故，皆拜辞而退。
现代文：所过镇戍之地，召唤其主将，告诉他们缘故，都拜辞而退。
English: And when they had passed through the land of the Chaldeans, they cried unto their lord, and he delivered them out of their hand: and they bowed themselves, and departed.

古文：徐知诰以荆南节度使、太尉兼中书令李德诚、德胜节度使兼中书令周本位望隆重，欲使之帅众推戴，本曰： 我受先王大恩，自徐温父子用事，恨不能救杨氏之危，又使我为此，可乎！ 
现代文：吴国的徐知诰因为镇南节度使、太尉兼中书令李德诚、德胜节度使兼中书令周本的地位高声望大，想让他们率领众将吏推戴自己当皇帝。周本说： 我受先王大恩，自从徐温父子擅权用事，恨自己不能挽救杨氏的危难，现在又让我干这种事，可以吗？ 
English: Xu Zhisheng of the State of Wu, because of the high prestige of Zhenan Jiedu Envoy, Second Lieutenant and Central Scribe Li Decheng, and De Sheng Jiedu Envoy and Central Scribe Zhou Ben, wanted them to lead the generals to deem themselves as emperors. Zhou Ben said: I am grateful to the previous king, since Xu Wen father and son have been using power, and hate myself for not being able to save the danger of the Yang clan, now let me do this kind of thing, is it okay?

古文：其子弘祚强之，不得已与德诚帅诸将诣江都表吴主，陈知诰功德，请行册命；又诣金陵劝进。
现代文：他的儿子周弘祚强迫他干，不得已与李德诚率领诸将到江都上表吴主杨溥，陈述徐知诰的功德，请吴主施行册命；又到金陵向徐知诰劝进。
English: His son, Zhou Hongyi, forced him to do so, and he had no choice but to go to the capital of Jiangsu Province with Li Decheng to lead a delegation to present the merits of Xu Zhisheng to the Lord of Wu, Yang Zhen, and ask the Lord of Wu to carry out the written order; he also went to Jinling to persuade Xu Zhisheng.

古文：宋齐丘谓德诚之子建勋曰： 尊公，太祖元勋，今日扫地矣。 
现代文：宋齐丘对李德诚的儿子李建勋说： 令尊是太祖的元勋，今天名声扫地了。 
English: Song Qiqiu said to Li Jianxun, the son of Li Decheng: "Your father was the founder of the great ancestor. Today, his reputation is ruined.

古文：于是吴宫多妖，吴主曰： 吴祚其终乎！ 
现代文：这个时候，吴宫发生许多妖异的事情，吴主说： 吴国的福祚大概将要完了！ 
English: At this time, many strange things happened in the Wu Palace. The Lord of Wu said, "The good fortune of the State of Wu is about to come to an end!

古文：左右曰： 此乃天意，非人事也。 
现代文：左右的人说： 这是天意，不是人事所能改变的啊！ 
English: People on both sides say: This is God's will, not something that can be changed by human beings!

古文：高丽王建用兵击破新罗、百济，于是东夷诸国皆附之，有二京、六府、九节度、百二十郡。
现代文：高丽王王建发兵击破新罗、百济，从此东夷诸国都归附于他，拥有二京、六府、九节度，一百二十郡。
English: King of Goryeo, King Jian sent an army to break through Silla and Baekje, and from then on, all the Eastern Yi countries were attached to him, with two capitals, six prefectures, nine divisions, and 120 counties.

