古文：李固子燮杜乔李固字子坚，汉中南郑人，司徒郃之子也。
现代文：◆李固传，李固字子坚，汉中南郑人，司徒李恢的儿子。
English: ◆ The son of Li Gu Chuan, Li Gu Zi Jian, Han Zhongnan Zheng Ren, and Sitou Li Huai.

古文：郃在《方术传》。
现代文：李恢的事迹在《方术传》。
English: The story of Li Kuan is told in the "History of Fang."

古文：固貌状有奇表，鼎角匿犀，足履龟文。
现代文：李固像貌有奇特的外表，头上有骨突出如鼎足，上入发际隐起，脚板上有龟文。
English: Li Gu's likeness has a peculiar appearance. There are bones protruding from the head like the top of a foot, the hairline is recessed, and there is a turtle pattern on the footboard.

古文：少好学，常步行寻师，不远千里。
现代文：年少时好学，常不远千里，步行寻师。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn and often traveled thousands of miles to find teachers on foot.

古文：遂究览坟籍，结交英贤。
现代文：于是读尽许多古书，结交不少英贤。
English: As a result, he read many ancient books and befriended many sages.

古文：四方有志之士，多慕其风而来学。
现代文：四方有志之士，多羡慕他的风采而来向他学习。
English: People from all over envied his style and came to learn from him.

古文：京师咸叹曰 是复为李公矣 司隶、益州并命郡举孝廉，辟司空掾，皆不就。
现代文：京师人都赞叹说： 这又是第二个李公了。 司隶、益州都命令郡守举李固为孝廉，召他为司空掾，都不去就职。
English: The masters in Beijing were all full of praise, saying, "This is the second Li Gong again." Both Sili and Yizhou ordered the county governor to promote Li Gu to the position of Xiaolian and call him to the position of Sikuo, but they did not go to take up the post.

古文：阳嘉二年，有地动、山崩、火灾之异，公卿举固对策，诏又特问当世之敝，为政所宜。
现代文：阳嘉二年，有地动、山崩、火灾等变异，公卿推举李固去对策，皇上又下诏特地问他当代的弊端，以及为政应做些什么。
English: In the second year of Yang Jia, there were earth tremors, landslides, fires and other changes. The noblemen recommended Li Gu as a countermeasure, and the emperor specifically asked him about the contemporary drawbacks and what should be done for politics.

古文：固对曰：臣闻王者父天母地，宝有山川。
现代文：李固对答道： 臣下听说国王是以天为父，以地为母，拥有山川之宝藏。
English: Li Gu replied, "Our vassals have heard that the king has heaven as his father and earth as his mother, and possesses the treasures of mountains and rivers.

古文：王道得则阴阳和穆，政化乖则崩震为灾。
现代文：王道行得通那么就阴阳和睦，政化乖忤就山崩地震成为灾害。
English: If the royal road is practicable, then the yin and yang will be harmonious, and the political turmoil will become a landslide and earthquake disaster.

古文：斯皆关之天心，效于成事者也。
现代文：这都是关系于天心，见效在成事上面。
English: All of this is related to the will of Heaven, and its effect is to accomplish things.

古文：夫化以职成，官由能理。
现代文：所谓化以职成，官由能理。
English: The so-called transformation from function to achievement, from function to ability.

古文：古之进者，有德有命。今之进者，唯才与力。
现代文：古时进而为官的人，都是有德才有爵命；今日进而为官的人，只是有财和力。
English: In ancient times, those who went on to become officials had to be virtuous in order to receive a title of nobility; today, those who go on to become officials only have wealth and power.

古文：伏闻诏书务求宽博，疾恶严暴。
现代文：臣下听说诏书务求宽大博厚，疾恨苛严残暴。
English: The courtiers heard that the edict was lenient and generous, but harsh and cruel.

古文：而今长吏多杀伐致声名者，必加迁赏。其存宽和无党援者，辄见斥逐。
现代文：可是现在的长吏多用杀伐出了名声，而一定得到升迁重赏；而那些心存宽和而没有党羽援助的，每每得到排斥放逐。
English: However, most of the current officials have made a name for themselves by killing, and they will certainly be promoted and rewarded; while those who are broad-minded and do not have the support of party members will always be excluded and expelled.

古文：是以淳厚之风不宣，雕薄之俗未革。
现代文：因此淳厚的风气不能宣传，周彡薄的习俗不能改革。
English: Therefore, the virtuous culture cannot be publicized, and the pious customs cannot be reformed.

古文：虽繁刑重禁，何能有益。
现代文：即使用繁刑重禁，又有什么益处？
English: What is the benefit of even using heavy punishment and re-ban?

古文：前孝安皇帝变乱旧典，封爵阿母，因造妖，使樊丰之徒乘权放恣，侵夺主威，改乱嫡嗣，至令圣躬狼狈，亲遇其艰。
现代文：前孝安皇帝变乱旧典，封爵给阿母王圣，因而制造妖孽，使樊丰这班人乘权放恣，侵夺主上的威严，改乱嫡嗣，把太子废为济阴王，致使圣躬狼狈不堪，亲遇其难。
English: The former Emperor Xiao'an twisted the old scriptures and gave a title of nobility to King Saint Amo, thus creating witchcraft, causing this group of people to abuse their power, usurp the majesty of the Lord, change the legitimate heir, and abolish the prince as the king of Jiyin, causing Saint Amo to be overwhelmed and in difficulties himself.

古文：既拔自困殆，龙兴即位，天下喁喁，属望风政。
现代文：既从危难中出来，做了皇帝，天下人都在仰望，希望风政有所转变。
English: Since he emerged from the crisis and became the emperor, people all over the world have been looking up to him, hoping for a change in the style of government.

古文：积敝之后，易致中兴，诚当沛然思惟善道。而论者犹云，方今之事，复同于前。
现代文：积敝之后，容易得到中兴，的确应当宽厚地想为善之道；可是议论的人，还说当前的事，又与以前相同。
English: After accumulating wealth, it is easy to get ZTE. Indeed, it should be generous to think of doing good; but the people who talk, and say the current thing, are the same as before.

古文：臣伏从山草，痛心伤臆。
现代文：臣下伏在山草之间，感到十分痛心。
English: The vassal crouched down among the grass and felt very sad.

古文：实以汉兴以来，三百馀年，贤圣相继，十有八主。
现代文：回忆汉朝兴起以来，三百多年，贤圣相继出现，十又八个君主。
English: Recall that since the rise of the Han Dynasty, more than three hundred years, sages and saints have appeared one after another, and there have been ten and eight monarchs.

古文：岂无阿乳之恩。
现代文：难道没有阿乳之恩？
English: Is there no such thing as a milkmaid?

古文：岂忘贵爵之宠。
现代文：难道忘了贵爵之宠？
English: Have you forgotten your lord's favourite?

古文：然上畏天威，俯案经典，知义不可，故不封也。
现代文：然而上面害怕天威，下面根据经典，知道不可违反道义，所以不加封赏。
English: However, the above is afraid of Tianwei, and the below, according to the classics, knows that it is impossible to violate morality, so there is no reward.

古文：今宋阿母虽有大功勤谨之德，但加赏赐，足以酧其劳苦。至于裂土开国，实乖旧典。
现代文：现在宋阿母，虽然有大功勤谨的品德，只要加以赏赐，就足以酬报她的劳苦；至于分封土地，实在与旧典相乖违。
English: Now, Song Amo, although she has the virtue of great merit and diligence, as long as she is rewarded, it is enough to reward her hard work; as for the land allocation, it is really contrary to the old code.

古文：闻阿母体性谦虚，必有逊让，陛下宜许其辞国之高，使成万安之福。夫妃后之家所以少完全者，岂天性当然。
现代文：听说阿母体性谦虚，必然会逊让不受，陛下应赞许她那种辞国的高风，使她成就万安之福。 一般说来，妃后之家很少完全的原因，难道是天性造成的？
English: I have heard it said that the modest nature of a mother will inevitably make her inferior, and that Her Majesty should approve of her high-spirited renunciation of the country, so that she can achieve the blessing of peace and security. Generally speaking, is the reason why the queen's house is rarely complete caused by nature?

古文：但以爵位尊显，专总权柄，天道恶盈，不知自损，故至颠仆。
现代文：只是因为爵位太高太显，专揽大权，而天道最恨盈满，可他们不知自损，所以至于颠仆垮台。
English: It is only because the nobility is too high and too conspicuous, monopolizing great power, and the heavenly way is the most hateful, but they do not know how to lose themselves, so as to the downfall of the servants.

古文：先帝宠遇阎氏，位号太疾，故其受祸，曾不旋时。
现代文：先帝宠遇阎氏，位号立得太快，所以得到灾祸，时间并不太长。
English: The previous emperor was favored by Yan, and the position was established too quickly, so it was not too long before the calamity occurred.

古文：《老子》曰 其进锐，其退速也 今梁氏戚为椒房，礼所不臣，尊以高爵，尚可然也。
现代文：《老子》说过： 其进锐，其退速也。 现在梁氏外戚居在皇后所住的椒房之内，按礼是不能以妻之父母为臣，尊以高爵，还是可以的。
English: "Lao Zi" said: "It's not how fast you advance, it's how fast you retreat." Now that Liang's maternal relative lives in the pepper room where the empress lives, according to the etiquette, it is not possible to treat his wife's parents as vassals, but it is still possible to treat them as high lords.

古文：而子弟群从，荣显兼加，永平、建初故事，殆不如此。
现代文：可是她的子弟侄儿，荣显交加，永平、建初年间的故事，大概不是如此。
English: But the story of her son and nephew, Rong Xian Jia Jia, Yongping and Jianzhu years, is probably not so.

古文：宜令步兵校尉冀及诸侍中还居黄门之官，使权去外戚，政归国家，岂不休乎。又诏书所以禁侍中尚书中臣子弟不得为吏察孝廉者，以其秉戚权，容请托故也。
现代文：应该使步兵校尉梁冀以及诸侍中还居黄门之官，使国家大权离开外戚之手，政权归于国家，难道不很好么！ 又诏书禁止侍中尚书中臣子弟不得为吏察孝廉的原因，就是因为他们掌握威权，照顾私情，准予请托的关系。
English: Isn't it good that Liang Jie, an infantry captain, and the attendants who are still in the Yellow Gate should be made officials, so that the power of the state should leave the hands of the relatives, and the power should be returned to the state! In addition, the edict forbids the sons of the attendants who are still in the book to be officials, that is, because they hold authority, take care of personal feelings, and allow the relationship of entrustment.

古文：而中常侍在日月之侧，声势振天下，子弟禄仕，曾无限极。
现代文：而中常侍在日月的旁边，声势振动于天下，子弟要做官，没有什么极限。
English: On the other hand, there is no limit to the power of the Emperor's son to become an official, as he stands next to the sun and the moon.

古文：虽外托谦默，不干州郡，而谄伪之徒，望风进举。
现代文：虽然外表看似谦默，不插手州郡，可是那些谄伪之徒，望风推举。
English: Although outwardly they appear to be humble and do not meddle in state affairs, those hypocrites are just waiting for the wind to blow.

古文：今可为设常禁，同之中臣。昔馆陶公主为子求郎，明帝不许，赐钱千万。
现代文：现在可为设常禁，与中臣相同。 从前光武帝第三女馆陶公主替她儿子求作郎，明帝不同意，赐钱千万。
English: In the past, Emperor Guangwu's third concubine, Princess Tao, asked for a husband for her son, but Emperor Ming disagreed and gave her tens of millions of dollars.

古文：所以轻厚赐，重薄位者，为官人失才，害及百姓也。
现代文：为什么轻厚赐，重薄位，为的是官人失才，害及百姓哩。
English: Why are high and low positions given lightly, and low and high positions given heavily, in order for officials to be incompetent and harm the people?

古文：窃闻长水司马武宣、开阳城门候羊迪等，无他功德，初拜便真。
现代文：臣下私自听说长水司马武宣，开阳城门侯羊迪等，没有别的功德，初次拜官便补真。
English: I heard from my subordinates that Changshui Sima Wu Xuan, Kaiyang city gate lord Yang Di, etc. had no other merits, so I made up for it the first time.

古文：此虽小失，而渐坏旧章。
现代文：这虽是小过失，可慢慢破坏了旧规章。
English: It was a small mistake, but it slowly eroded the old rules.

古文：先圣法度，所宜坚守，政教一跌，百年不复。
现代文：先圣的法度，应该坚守不移，政教一出差错，百年难得恢复。
English: The laws of the ancients should be unswervingly adhered to. If there is a mistake in politics or religion, it will be difficult to recover in a hundred years.

古文：《诗》云 上帝板板，下民卒瘅 刺周王变祖法度，故使下民将尽病也。今陛下之有尚书，犹天下之有北斗也。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 上帝板板，下民卒瘅。 这是讽刺周厉王变更先王之道，所以使下民尽病哩。 现在陛下有了尚书，等于天上有北斗星。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "God is a board, and the people are pawns." This is a satire of King Zhou Li changing the way of the previous king, which made the people very sick. Now that His Majesty has Shangshu, it is as if there is the Big Dipper in the sky.

古文：斗为天喉舌，尚书亦为陛下喉舌。
现代文：北斗是天的喉舌，尚书便是陛下的喉舌。
English: Beidou is the mouthpiece of heaven, and Shangshu is the mouthpiece of His Majesty.

古文：斗斟酌元气，运平四时。
现代文：北斗斟酌元气，运平四时的气候。
English: The weather in Beidou is moderate, and the weather is normal at 4 o'clock.

古文：尚书出纳王命，赋政四海，权尊势重，责之所归。
现代文：尚书出纳国王之命，布政于天下，权尊势重，责任之所归属。
English: The king's order is still to be issued, the government is to be spread all over the world, the power is to be respected, and the responsibility is to be assigned.

古文：若不平心，灾眚必至。
现代文：如果不平心办事，那么灾害必然到来。
English: If you don't do things with a happy heart, then disasters are bound to come.

古文：诚宜审择其人，以毗圣政。
现代文：的确应该慎审选择其人，来弥补圣政。
English: Indeed, it should be prudent to choose its people carefully, to make up for the shenanigans.

古文：今与陛下共理天下者，外则公卿尚书，内则常侍黄门，譬犹一门之内，一家之事，安则共其福庆，危则通其祸败。
现代文：现在与陛下共同治理天下的人，外面就是公卿尚书，里面就是常侍黄门，譬如一门之内，一家之事，安宁就大家有福，危险就共遭祸败。
English: The people who are now governing the world together with His Majesty, on the outside are the nobles of Shangshu, and on the inside are the attendants of Huangmen. For example, within a door, a family affair, peace is a blessing for everyone, and danger is a common misfortune.

古文：刺史、二千石，外统职事，内受法则。
现代文：刺史、二千石，外面统管职事，里面受法则的制约。
English: With a long history and 2,000 koku, he is in charge of official duties on the outside, but is subject to the law on the inside.

古文：夫表曲者景必邪，源清者流必洁，犹叩树本，百枝皆动也。
现代文：任何事物表面歪曲，影子必斜，源流清澈的流水必干净，等于敲敲树根，百枝都动摇哩。
English: The surface of any thing is distorted, the shadow must be oblique, the source of clear flowing water must be clean, it is equal to knocking the roots of the tree, and all the branches are shaken.

古文：《周颂》曰 薄言振之，莫不震叠 此言动之于内，而应于外者也。
现代文：《周颂》说： 薄言振之，莫不震叠。 这是说动之于内心，而反应在外表。
English: "Zhouxiong" said: "Thoughtful words vibrate, but nothing shakes and folds." This is a speech that is motivated in the heart, but the reaction is on the outside.

古文：由此言之，本朝号令，岂可蹉跌。
现代文：这么说来，本朝发号施令，难道可以随便？
English: So, is it okay for the emperor to give orders this morning?

古文：间隙一开，则邪人动心。利竞暂启，则仁义道塞。
现代文：间隙一打开，那么邪人就在想心思；利竞暂开一线，那么通向仁义的路就阻塞了。
English: As soon as a gap opens, then the wicked are thinking about it; as soon as a line of competition opens, then the path to benevolence and righteousness is blocked.

古文：刑罪不能复禁，化导以之浸坏。
现代文：刑罚不能复禁，化导因此变坏。
English: The punishment cannot be repeated, and the conduct will be bad as a result.

古文：此天下之纪纲，当今之急务。
现代文：这是天下的纪纲，当前的急务。
English: This is the world's curriculum, the current urgent task.

古文：陛下宜开石室，陈图书，招会群儒，引问失得，指擿变象，以求天意。
现代文：陛下应打开石室金匮之书，陈列图书，招集一班儒生，引问为政的得失，指摘变象，以求天意。
English: His Majesty should open the book of Jinshao in the stone room, display the books, convene a group of Confucian scholars, raise questions about the gains and losses of politics, point out the changes, and seek the will of heaven.

古文：其言有中理，即时施行，显拔其人，以表能者。
现代文：他们说得中理，立即实行，选拔其人，表彰能干之辈。
English: They are right in what they say, implement them immediately, select their people, and commend those who are capable.

古文：则圣听日有所闻，忠臣尽其所知。
现代文：那么圣德每天都有所闻，忠臣竭尽他们的智慧。
English: Then holiness is heard every day, and the faithful exhaust their wisdom.

古文：又宜罢退宦官，去其权重，裁置常侍二人，方直有德者，省事左右。小黄门五人，才智闲雅者，给事殿中。
现代文：又应罢退宦官，免去他们的权重，裁置常侍两个，端方正直有德的人，让他们在左右省察事理；小黄门五人，有才智闲雅的，让他们在殿中工作。
English: The eunuchs should also be dismissed, their weight should be removed, and two regular attendants should be appointed, who should be honest and virtuous, and should be allowed to think things over; and the five lesser Huangmen, who should be intelligent, idle and elegant, should be allowed to work in the palace.

古文：如此，则论者厌塞，升平可致也。
现代文：这样一来，那么议论的人厌塞，升平世界即可到来。
English: In this way, people who talk about it will be bored, and the world will be leveled.

古文：臣所以敢陈愚瞽，冒昧自闻者，傥或皇天欲令微臣觉悟陛下。陛下宜熟察臣言，怜赦臣死。
现代文：臣所以敢于陈述愚瞽之言，冒昧上奏，倘若皇天想使微臣使陛下觉悟，陛下应熟虑臣下的话，怜悯赦却臣的死罪。 
English: If the emperor wanted to make his majesty aware of his vassal, his majesty should consider the words of his vassal, pity and forgive his vassal's mortal sin.

古文：顺帝览其对，多所纳用，即进出阿母还弟舍，诸常侍悉叩头谢罪，朝廷肃然。
现代文：顺帝看了上述对策，多所采纳应用，立刻让阿母迁还弟舍，诸常侍全部叩头谢罪，朝廷的政纪肃然。
English: Emperor Shun saw the above-mentioned countermeasures, many of which were adopted and applied, and immediately asked his mother to return his brothers and sisters, all the attendants bowed their heads in thanks, and the political discipline of the imperial court was solemn.

古文：以固为议郎。而阿母宦者疾固言直，因诈飞章以陷其罪，事从中下。
现代文：并用李固作了议郎，可是阿母身边的宦官恨李固的言太直，于是捏造罪恶来陷害李固，事从中下。
English: And Li Gu was used as a mediator, but the eunuchs around Amo hated Li Gu's words for being too forthright, so they fabricated crimes to frame Li Gu, and things went from bad to worse.

古文：大司农黄尚等请之于大将军梁商，又仆射黄琼救明固事，久乃得拜议郎。
现代文：大司农黄尚等人请求大将军梁商，又有仆射黄琼究明李固的案情，过了好久才得拜为议郎。
English: Chief Secretary of Farmers Huang Shang and others requested General Liang Shang to investigate Li Gu's case, and his servant Huang Qiong investigated Li Gu's case. It took a long time for Li Qiong to become a negotiator.

古文：出为广汉召隹令，至白水关，解印绶，还汉中，杜门不交人事。
现代文：李固出去做了广汉雒县县令，到了白水关，解除印绶，回到汉中，关起门来不与人交往。
English: Li Gu went to Guanghan and became the county magistrate of Handan County. When he arrived at Baishuiguan, he cancelled the seal and returned to Hanzhong. He closed the door and did not interact with people.

古文：岁中，梁商请为从事中郎。
现代文：半年之久，梁商请求让李固作从事中郎。
English: For half a year, Liang Shang requested that Li Guso be engaged as a middle-man.

古文：《春秋》褒仪父以开义路，贬无骇以闭利门，夫义路闭则利门开，利门开则义路闭也。
现代文：梁商以后父的身份辅政，而柔和自守，不能有所整顿，灾异多次显现，下面权势日重。李固想使梁商先整治风化，退辞高满之位，于是给梁商写奏记道： 《春秋》褒奖仪父以开义路，贬责无骇以闭利门。义路闭了，利门就打开；利门打开，义路就闭塞。
English: After Liang Shang, Liang Shang's father's status was that of assistant to the government, but he was soft and self-protective, and could not be rectified. Disasters appeared many times, and his power became more and more important. Li Gu wanted Liang Shang to rectify his manners first and give up his lofty position, so he wrote a sonnet to Liang Shang: "In Spring and Autumn, the father is praised for opening the road to righteousness, and the father is blamed for closing the door to righteousness. When the road to righteousness is closed, the door to righteousness is opened; when the door to righteousness is opened, the door to righteousness is closed.

古文：前孝安皇帝内任伯荣、樊丰之属，外委周广、谢恽之徒，开门受赂，署用非次，天下纷然，怨声满道。
现代文：前孝安皇帝内任伯荣、樊丰等人，外委派周广、谢恽等人，开门受贿，用人不当，天下议论纷纷，怨恨之声到处都是。
English: The former Emperor Xiao'an appointed Bo Rong, Yu Feng, and others, and sent Zhou Guang, Xie Qi, and others to open the door and accept bribes, and employed people improperly. The whole world was talking about it, and the voices of resentment were everywhere.

古文：朝廷初立，颇存清静，未能数年，稍复堕损。
现代文：朝廷开始建立，比较清静，不到几年，渐渐堕落。
English: The imperial court began to be established, relatively quietly, but within a few years, it gradually degenerated.

古文：左右党进者，日有迁拜，守死善道者，滞洇穷路，而未有改敝立德之方。
现代文：左右党进，每天均有人升官，守死善道的人，走向穷途末路，而没有改正弊端，树立正气的方法。
English: The left and right parties are advancing, people are promoted every day, and those who stick to the virtuous path go to the dead end, but there is no way to correct the drawbacks and establish a righteous spirit.

古文：又即位以来，十有馀年，圣嗣未立，群下继望。
现代文：又即位以来，十又余年，太子未确立，群下都在盼望。
English: Since the enthronement, for more than ten years, the crown prince has not been established, and the people are looking forward to it.

古文：可令中宫博简嫔媵，兼采微贱宜子之人，进御至尊，顺助天意。
现代文：可使宫中的嫔媵减少一些，挑选身份微贱但宜生子之人，进御到皇上那里，顺助天意。
English: He could reduce the number of concubines in the palace, select people of low social status who were suitable to have children, and send them to the emperor in accordance with the will of heaven.

古文：若有皇子，母自乳养，无委保妾医巫，以致飞燕之祸。
现代文：如果有了皇子，母亲自己喂奶，不要交给保妾巫医，以致出现赵飞燕那样的杀子之祸。
English: If there is a prince and the mother breastfeeds herself, don't hand over the concubine to the witch doctor, resulting in the murder of the child like Zhao Feiyan.

古文：明将军望尊位显，当以天下为忧，崇尚谦省，垂则万方。
现代文：明将军威望高地位显，应当以天下大事为忧，提倡谦虚节约，做万方的榜样。
English: Ming generals, with their high prestige and status, should be concerned about the world's major events, advocate modesty and economy, and set an example for all.

古文：而新营祠堂，费功亿计，非以昭明令德，崇示清俭。
现代文：可是新建祠堂，费工用亿计算，不是来显示美德，表示清俭。
English: However, the newly built ancestral hall, which cost hundreds of millions of dollars, is not to show virtue, but to show frugality.

古文：自数年以来，灾怪屡见，比无雨润，而沉阴郁泱。
现代文：数年以来，灾怪多次出现，连续多时不下雨，而阴沉多云。
English: Over the past few years, the monster has appeared several times, and it has not rained for a long time in a row, but it has been gloomy and cloudy.

古文：宫省之内，容有阴谋。
现代文：宫省之内，定有阴谋。
English: There must be a conspiracy within the Imperial Household Ministry.

古文：孔子曰 智者见变思刑，愚者睹怪讳名 天道无亲，可为祗畏。
现代文：孔子说： 智者见变思刑，愚者睹怪讳名。 天道没有亲疏之分，可为敬畏。
English: Confucius said: "A wise man is punished if he changes his mind, but a fool is praised if he keeps his mouth shut.

古文：加近者月食既于端门之侧。
现代文：近来月食尽于端门之侧。月，大臣的象征。
English: Lately, lunar eclipses have been occurring on the side of the end gate. The moon, the symbol of the minister.

古文：月者，大臣之体也。夫穷高侧危，大满则溢，月盈则缺，日中则移。
现代文：一般地说，太高就危险，太满就溢出，月亮满了就缺，太阳到中午就偏移。
English: Generally speaking, if it is too high, it is dangerous, if it is too full, it will overflow, if the moon is full, it will be missing, and if the sun is at noon, it will shift.

古文：凡此四者，自然之数也。
现代文：这四项，自然之数。
English: These four are the natural numbers.

古文：天地之心，福谦忌盛，是以贤达功遂身退，全名养寿，无有怵迫之忧。
现代文：天地之心，福谦忌盛，因此贤达之人功成身退，保全名节，颐养天年，没有恐惧之忧。
English: In the heart of heaven and earth, there is abundance of blessing, modesty, and forbearance. Therefore, the sages retire with great achievements, preserve famous festivals, nurture heaven and earth, and have no fear.

古文：诚令王纲一整，道行忠立，明公踵伯成之高，全不朽之誉，岂与此外戚凡辈耽荣好位者同日而论哉。
现代文：如使王纲一整，道行忠立，明公走伯高的路，保全不朽的名声，难道和这些外戚平庸之辈耽荣好位的同日而语吗？
English: If Wang Gang were to be made whole, Taoism and practice were to be faithfully upheld, and Ming Gong were to follow the path of Bo Gao and maintain an immortal reputation, would it be the same as these mediocre relatives of the outside world?

古文：固狂夫下愚，不达大体，窃感古人一饭之报，况受顾遇而容不尽乎。
现代文：我是狂夫下愚之人，不知大体，私下感到古人报一饭之恩，何况受了照顾优遇而可不尽心吗？ 
English: I am a foolish person under a madman, I do not know the general situation, I privately feel that the ancients are grateful for a meal, not to mention that I have received care and preferential treatment, but can I not do my best?

古文：商不能用。
现代文：梁商没有听从。
English: Liang Shang did not listen.

古文：永和中，荆州盗贼起，弥年不定，乃以固为荆州刺史。
现代文：永和年间，荆州盗贼兴起，长年不得平定，于是朝廷用李固作荆州刺史。
English: During the Yonghe period, the Jingzhou thieves arose and could not be subdued for many years, so the imperial court used Li Gu to make the history of Jingzhou.

古文：固到，遣吏劳问境内，赦寇盗前衅，与之更始。
现代文：李固到职后，派官吏慰劳访问境内，赦免寇盗以前的罪恶，与他们从头开始。
English: After Li Gu took office, he sent officials to visit the territory to offer consolation, pardon the sins of the robbers before, and start from scratch with them.

古文：于是贼帅夏密等敛其魁党六百馀人，自缚归首。
现代文：于是贼人头目夏密等收编他们的党徒六百多人，绑着自己，前来自首。
English: As a result, the leader of the thieves, Xia Mi, and others gathered more than 600 of their party members, tied themselves up, and surrendered.

古文：固皆原之，遣还，使自相招集，开示威法。
现代文：李固都原谅他们，让他们回去，使他们自相招集，开示威法。
English: Li Guodu pardoned them, let them go back, let them convene among themselves, and start a demonstration.

古文：半岁间，馀类悉降，州内清平。
现代文：半年时间，所有盗贼全部投降，州内从此太平无事。
English: After half a year, all the thieves surrendered, and the state has been peaceful ever since.

古文：上奏南阳太守高赐等臧秽。
现代文：李固上奏南阳太守高赐等人贪赃的秽行。
English: Li Guoxiang recorded the filthy acts of greed and avarice of Nanyang Taishou Gao Zhi and others.

古文：赐等惧罪，遂共重赂大将军梁冀，冀为千里移檄，而固持之愈急。
现代文：高赐等怕受处分，于是共同用重金贿赂大将军梁冀，梁冀替他们千里移送檄文，可是李固抓得更紧。
English: Gao Qi and others were afraid of being punished, so they jointly bribed the general Liang Ji with heavy money. Liang Ji transferred the money for them thousands of miles, but Li Gu grasped it more tightly.

古文：冀遂令徙固为太山太守。
现代文：梁冀便令调李固作太山太守。
English: Liang Jie then ordered the transfer of Li Guzhao to be the governor of Taishan.

古文：时，太山盗贼屯聚历年，郡兵常千人，追讨不能制。
现代文：这时太山盗贼屯聚多年，郡兵常有千人，追讨不能制伏。
English: At this time, thieves in Taishan have been gathering for many years, and there are often thousands of county soldiers, and they cannot be subdued.

古文：固到，悉罢遣归农，但选留任战者百馀人，以恩信招诱之。
现代文：李固到职后，全部将郡兵罢遣回去种田，只挑选留任有战斗力的百多人，用恩信招诱盗贼投降。
English: After Li Gu took office, he sent all the county soldiers back to farmland, and only selected more than a hundred people who had the ability to fight, and used the letter of gratitude to lure the thieves to surrender.

古文：未满岁，贼皆弭散。
现代文：不到一年，贼人都逃散了。
English: Within a year, the thieves had all fled.

古文：迁将作大匠。
现代文：李固升为将作大匠。
English: Yang Fu was promoted to the position of grandmaster.

古文：上疏陈事曰：臣闻气之清者为神，人之清者为贤。
现代文：上疏陈事道： 臣下听说气之清的为神，人之清的为贤。
English: Shang Zoshu Chen Zi Dao: His subjects heard that those whose qi was pure were gods, and those whose qi was impure were sages.

古文：养身者以练神为宝，安国者以积贤为道。
现代文：养身的以练神为最宝贵，治国的以积贤为正道。
English: It is most precious to cultivate oneself by practicing God, and to govern the country by accumulating virtue is the right way.

古文：昔秦欲谋楚，王孙圉设坛西门，陈列名臣，秦使戄然，遂为寝兵。
现代文：古时秦国想进攻楚国，王孙圉在西门设坛，陈列名臣的姓名，秦使者感到惊讶，于是停止进击。
English: In ancient times, Qin State wanted to attack Chu State. Wang Sun Ying set up an altar at the West Gate, displaying the names of eminent ministers. Qin emissaries were surprised, so they stopped the attack.

古文：魏文侯师卜子夏，友田子方，轼段干木，故群俊竞至，名过齐桓，秦人不敢窥兵于西河，斯盖积贤人之符也。
现代文：魏文侯以卜子夏为老师，以田子方为朋友，对段干木行轼礼，所以一般贤人争着到来，名声超过齐桓公，秦国不敢在西河派兵，这大概是积贤人的符命哩。
English: Wei Wen Hou took Bu Zixia as his teacher, Tian Zi Fang as his friend, and paid homage to Duan dry wood. Therefore, ordinary sages competed to arrive, and their reputation exceeded that of Qi Kuan. Qin did not dare to send troops to the West River. This was probably a sign of the fate of accumulating sages.

古文：陛下拨乱龙飞，初登大位，聘南阳樊英、江夏黄琼、广汉杨厚、会稽贺纯，策书嗟叹，待以大夫之位。
现代文：陛下拨乱反正，初登大位，礼聘南阳樊英、江夏黄琼、广汉杨厚、会稽贺纯，策书赞叹他们，用大夫之位接待他们。
English: His Majesty set things right, and on his first ascension to the throne, he appointed Nanyang Xingying, Jiangxia Huang Qiong, Guanghan Yang Hou, and He Jun, the party secretary. He praised them for their writings and received them as a doctor.

古文：是以岩穴幽人，智术之士，弹冠振衣，乐欲为用，四海欣然，归服圣德。
现代文：因此隐居之人，智术之士，弹冠相庆，振衣而出，乐意替你出力，四海人民高兴，归服圣德。
English: Therefore, people who live in seclusion, people of wisdom and art, celebrate together, take off their clothes, and are willing to work hard for you. The people of the four seas are happy and submit to holiness.

古文：厚等在职，虽无奇卓，然夕惕孽孽，志在忧国。
现代文：杨厚等人在职时，虽无奇特的表现，然而每天勤勤恳恳为国事操心。
English: When Yang Hou and others were in office, although there was no unusual performance, they diligently and earnestly worried about national affairs every day.

古文：臣前在荆州，闻厚、纯等以病免归，诚以怅然，为时惜之。
现代文：臣前些时在荆州，听说杨厚、贺纯等人因病免职归田，替他们十分惋惜。
English: When I was in Jingzhou some time ago, I heard that Yang Hou, He Chun and others were relieved of their duties due to illness and returned to the field. I felt very sorry for them.

古文：一日朝会，见诸侍中并皆年少，无一宿儒大人可顾问者，诚可叹息。
现代文：有一天朝会时，看见诸侍中都是年轻人，没有一位宿儒大人可作顾问的，的确可叹。
English: One day, during the morning assembly, I saw that all the attendants were young people, and there was not a single adult Confucian who could serve as an adviser. It was truly lamentable.

古文：宜征还厚等，以副群望。
现代文：应该召回杨厚等人，以满足众人之期望。
English: Yang Hou and others should be recalled to meet everyone's expectations.

古文：琼久处议郎，已且十年，众人皆怪始隆崇，今更滞也。
现代文：黄琼久处议郎，将近十年，众人都觉得开始十分看重，现在都停滞了，很可怪。
English: Huang Qiong has been a leader for a long time, nearly ten years, and everyone feels that they started to attach great importance to it, but now they have stagnated, which is very strange.

古文：光禄大夫周举，才谟高正，宜在常伯，访以言议。
现代文：光禄大夫周举，才谋高正，应在常伯之位，访以言议。
English: Dr. Guanglu Zhouqi, only a high-ranking official, should be in the position of a high-ranking official to visit and discuss.

古文：侍中杜乔，学深行直，当世良臣，久托疾病，可敕令起。
现代文：侍中杜乔，学问品行很好，当世之良臣，久托疾病，可敕令起身视事。 
English: Du Qiao, the attendant, has a good academic performance, and is a good minister in this world. He has been ill for a long time, but he can be ordered to get up and look at things.

古文：又荐陈留杨伦、河南尹存、东平王恽、陈国何临、清河房植等。
现代文：李固又推荐陈留杨伦、河南尹存、东平王恽、陈国何临、清河房植等人。
English: Li Gu also recommended Chen Rui Yang Lun, Henan Yin Cun, Dongping Wang Yao, Chen Guo He Lin, Qinghe Fang Zhi and others.

古文：是日有诏征用伦、厚等，而迁琼、举，以固为大司农。
现代文：这天有诏书召用杨伦、杨厚等，又调升黄琼、周举，用李固作大司农。
English: On this day, there was an imperial edict calling for the appointment of Yang Lun, Yang Hou, and others, and the promotion of Huang Qiong and Zhou Ji, and the appointment of Li Gu as the chief farmer.

古文：先是，周举等八使案察天下，多所劾奏，其中并是宦者亲属，辄为请乞，诏遂令勿考。
现代文：起先周举等八使案察天下，劾奏许多不法官吏，其中多半是宦者亲属，宦者常替他们求情，诏书便叫他们不必追究。
English: At first, eight envoys were sent to investigate the case, and many non-judicial officials were impeached, most of whom were relatives of the perpetrators. The perpetrators often interceded on their behalf, and the edict told them that they did not have to investigate.

古文：又旧任三府选令史，光禄试尚书郎，时皆特拜，不复选试。
现代文：又旧任三府选令史，光禄试尚书郎，这时都系特派，不再选试。
English: In addition, the former three prefectural election commissioners, including the honorable candidate Sho Shuro, were all members of special groups at that time, and they were no longer selected.

古文：固乃与廷尉吴雄上疏，以为八使所纠，宜急诛罚，选举署置，可归有司。
现代文：李固便与廷尉吴雄上疏，认为八使所检举的人，应该赶快诛罚，选举署置，可归有司去办。
English: Li Guibin and the courtier Wu Xiong were at loggerheads. Li Guibin believed that the people who were reported by the eight envoys should be quickly punished, and the election should be placed under the jurisdiction of the department.

古文：帝感其言，乃更下免八使所举刺史、二千石，自是稀复特拜，切责三公，明加考察，朝廷称善。
现代文：皇帝被他们的话感动，于是更免八使所举的刺史、二千石，从此减少特派，责成三公，明加考察，朝廷称赞很好。
English: The emperor was moved by their words, so he even waived the 2,000-koku tally that the eight envoys had raised. From then on, he reduced the number of special envoys, ordered the three princes, and increased the number of inspections. The court praised this as very good.

古文：乃复与光禄勋刘宣上言 自顷选举牧守，多非其人，至行无道，侵害百姓。
现代文：李固又与光禄勋刘宣上言道： 近来选举牧守，多数不称职，甚至横行无道，侵害百姓的权益。
English: Li Gu and Liu Xuan, a member of the Order of the Star of Glory, also said: Recently, the election of pastors, most of them are incompetent, even rampant, and infringe on the rights and interests of the people.

古文：又宜止槃游，专心庶政 帝纳其言，于是下诏诸州劾奏守令以下，政有乖枉，遇人无惠者，免所居官。其奸秽重罪，收付诏狱。
现代文：又主上应停止乐游玩，专心庶政。 皇帝采纳他们的意见，于是下诏诸州劾奏太守、县令以下的官吏，政有乖错不正，对百姓没好处的，免去官职；那些奸秽重罪的人，一律收付诏狱。
English: The emperor accepted their opinion, and issued an edict to the states to impeach officials below the post of the imperial procurator and the county magistrate, and to remove from office those whose policies were improper and of no benefit to the people, and to imprison all those who committed serious crimes of corruption.

古文：及冲帝即位，以固为太尉，与梁冀参录尚书事。
现代文：后来冲帝即位，用李固作太尉，与梁冀参录尚书事。
English: Later, when Chongdi ascended the throne, he used Li Gu as the first lieutenant, and he and Liang Jie were recorded in the records.

古文：明年帝崩，梁太后以杨、徐盗贼盛强，恐惊扰致乱，使中常侍诏固等，欲须所征诸王侯到乃发丧。
现代文：第二年皇帝死了，梁太后认为扬州、徐州盗贼盛强，恐惊扰造成大乱，使中常侍诏李固等，想等到所召诸王侯到齐才发丧。
English: The emperor died the following year, and Empress Dowager Liang thought that the thieves in Yangzhou and Xuzhou were strong and powerful, and feared that the disturbance would cause a great disturbance, so that the Chinese Emperor's personal attendant Li Gu and others wanted to wait until all the princes had arrived.

古文：固对曰 帝虽幼少，犹天下之父。
现代文：李固答道 ：皇帝虽然年少，还是天下之父。
English: Li Gu replied: Although the emperor is young, he is still the father of the world.

古文：今日崩亡，人神感动，岂有臣子反共掩匿乎。
现代文：今日崩亡，人神感动，岂有臣子反共掩匿么？
English: Today, collapse and death, people and gods moved, is there a vassal anti-communist hiding?

古文：昔秦皇亡于沙丘，胡亥、赵高隐而不发，卒害扶苏，以至亡国。
现代文：古时秦始皇死在沙丘，胡亥、赵高隐瞒而不发丧，卒至害死扶苏，以至亡国。
English: In ancient times, Emperor Qin Shihuang died in the sand dunes, but Hu Hai and Zhao Gao concealed his death and did not mourn. He died and killed Fusu, and the country was ruined.

古文：近北乡侯薨，阎后兄弟及江京等亦共掩秘，遂有孙程手刃之事。
现代文：近来北乡侯死了，阎后兄弟和江京等人也一起掩秘，于是有孙程杀人之事。
English: Recently, Bei Xiang Hou died, Yan Hou's brothers and Jiang Jing and others also covered up together, so there was a murder of Sun Cheng.

古文：此天下大忌，不可之甚者也 太后从之，即暮发丧。
现代文：这是天下之大忌，切不可做的。 太后听从了，当天晚上就发丧。
English: This is a great taboo in the world and must not be done. The Queen Mother obeyed and went into mourning that evening.

古文：固以清河王蒜年长有德，欲立之，谓梁冀曰 今当立帝，宜择长年高明有德，任亲政事者，愿将军审详大计，察周、霍之立文、宣，戒邓、阎之利幼弱 冀不从，乃立乐安王子缵，年八岁，是为质帝。
现代文：李固认为清河王刘蒜年长有德，想立他为帝，对梁冀说： 今当立帝，应选择年高而有德的，任亲政事的人，希望将军审详大计，学习周勃立文帝、霍光立宣帝，而不能像邓太后、阎太后利用君主幼弱的做法。 梁冀不听，于是立了乐安王之子刘缵，年刚八岁，这是质帝。
English: Li Gu thought that Liu Garlic, the king of the Qing Dynasty, was old and virtuous, and wanted to make him emperor, and said to Liang Ji: "Nowadays, when it comes to making an emperor, we should choose someone who is old and virtuous, and someone who is close to the government. I hope that the general will carefully examine the grand plan and learn from Zhou Breivik and Huo Guang to make an emperor, and not like the empress dowager Deng and the empress dowager Yan to take advantage of the weakness of the monarch. Liang Ji did not listen, so he made Liu Bei, the son of King Le An, who was just eight years

古文：时，冲帝将北卜山陵。固乃议曰 今处处寇贼，军兴用费加倍，新创宪陵，贼发非一。
现代文：这时冲帝将北卜山陵作为葬址，李固便建议道： 今天处处有寇贼，军兴用费加倍开支，新创宪陵，赋发非一。
English: At this time, Emperor Chong used the Beibu Mountain Mausoleum as a burial site, and Li Guben suggested: Today, there are bandits everywhere, military expenses have doubled, newly-created mausoleums have been built, and there is a lot of waste.

古文：帝尚幼小，可起陵于宪陵茔内，依康陵制度，其于役费三分减一 乃从固议。
现代文：帝尚幼小，可起坟陵在宽陵茔内，照殇帝的康陵制度，可减少三分之一的费用。 
English: The emperor is still young and small, and his tomb can be built in a wide mausoleum. According to the Kangling system of the emperor, the cost can be reduced by one-third.

古文：时太后以比遭不造，委任宰辅，固所匡正，每辄从用，其黄门宦者一皆斥遣，天下咸望遂平，而梁冀猜专，每相忌疾。
现代文：于是听从李固的意见。这时太后因为连遭不幸之事，委任宰辅，李固所匡正的意见，每次听从了，那些黄门宦者一概斥遣，天下都希望太平，可是梁冀猜专，每相忌恨。
English: So she listened to Li Gu's advice. At this time, the empress dowager, because of repeated misfortunes, appointed Zai Fu, Li Gu's rectified advice. Each time she listened, those yellow-faced scoundrels were all expelled. The world hoped for peace, but Liang Ji guessed and hated every phase.

古文：初，顺帝时诸所除官，多不以次，及固在事，奏免百馀人。
现代文：起初，顺帝时所封的官，多不按次序，等到李固在事，奏免百多人。
English: At first, the officials appointed by Emperor Shun were mostly not in order, but when Li Gu was in charge, more than a hundred people were exempted.

古文：此等既怨，又希望冀旨，遂共作飞章虚诬固罪曰：臣闻君不稽古，无以承天。臣不述旧，无以奉君。
现代文：这班人既怨恨，又希望梁冀帮忙，于是共同写个急切的奏章诬蔑李固有罪，奏章说： 臣下听说君王不同天而行事，便无以承受天命；臣子不述旧事，不能侍奉君王。
English: This group of people both resented and hoped that Liang Jie would help, so they jointly wrote an urgent musical score that slandered Li Gu as guilty. The musical score said: "If the vassals hear that the king is not acting in accordance with Heaven, they will not be able to bear the Mandate of Heaven; if the vassals do not recount the past, they cannot serve the king."

古文：昔尧殂之后，舜仰慕三年，坐则见尧于墙，食则睹尧于羹。
现代文：古时尧死之后，舜仰慕三年，坐下就看见尧在墙边，吃饭就看见尧在羹边。
English: In ancient times, after the death of the dragonfly, the dragonfly was admired for three years. When you sat down, you saw the dragonfly on the wall, and when you ate, you saw the dragonfly on the edge of the soup.

古文：斯所谓聿追来孝，不失臣子之节者。
现代文：这就是所谓常追来孝不失臣子的气节。
English: This is what is known as the temperament of a dutiful retainer.

古文：太尉李固，因公假私，依正行邪，离间近戚，自隆支党。
现代文：太尉李固，因公假私，依正行邪，离间近戚，自建支党。
English: Lieutenant Li Gu, because of public and private, according to the positive and evil, estranged relatives, self-built party.

古文：至于表举荐达，例皆门徒，及所辟召，靡非先旧。
现代文：至于他所表举荐达，照例是他的门徒；他所辟召之人，没有不是故旧。
English: And those he predestined, he also called; and those he called, he also justified; and those he justified, he also glorified.

古文：或富室财赂，或子婿婚属，其列在官牒者凡四十九人。
现代文：有的用财货贿赂，有的是他的子婿婚属，那些列在官牒上的共四十九人。
English: Some were bribed with money and goods, some were his sons-in-law, and those listed on the official summons were a total of forty-nine people.

古文：又广选贾竖，以补令史。募求好马，临窗呈试。
现代文：他又广选贾竖之徒，来补充令史；募求好马，临窗呈试。
English: He also widely selected Jia Zha's followers to supplement the history of the order; solicited good horses and presented them at the window.

古文：出入逾侈，辎軿曜日。
现代文：他所出入过分奢侈，车帷鲜艳曜日。
English: His entrances and exits are over-the-top extravagant, with brightly-colored curtains.

古文：大行在殡，路人掩涕，固独胡粉饰貌，搔头弄姿，槃旋偃仰，从容冶步，曾无惨怛伤悴之心。
现代文：皇帝大行在殡，路人都在哭泣，而李固却胡粉饰貌，搔头弄姿，游玩自如，从容冶步，竟无半点伤悴之心。
English: The emperor's funeral was in full swing, and passers-by were weeping. Li Gu, however, whitewashed his face, fidgeted with his hair, played freely, and walked at a leisurely pace, without the slightest hint of a broken heart.

古文：山陵未成，违矫旧政，善则称已，过则归君，斥逐近臣，不得侍送，作威作福，莫固之甚。
现代文：皇帝之山陵尚未建成，他竟违背旧政，把好的都说在自己身上，把过错全部归于君王，斥逐旧臣，不得侍送，作威作福，没有哪个比李固更厉害的了。
English: The emperor's mausoleum had not yet been built, yet he went against the old policy, taking credit for everything that was good, blaming the king for everything that was wrong, expelling old ministers, refusing to serve, and showing off. There is no one more powerful than Li Gu.

古文：臣闻台辅之位，实和阴阳，璇机不平，寇贼奸轨，则责在太尉。
现代文：臣听说宰相之职，在于调理阴阳，璇玑不平，寇贼捣乱，责任就在太尉。
English: The vassal heard that the prime minister's duty was to regulate yin and yang, to settle disputes, and to disrupt bandits. The responsibility lay with the captain.

古文：固受任之后，东南跋扈，两州数郡，千里萧条，兆人伤损，大化陵迟，而诋疵先主，苟肆狂狷。
现代文：李固受任之后，东南地区盗贼猖狂，九江、广陵两州以及数郡，千里萧条，兆民受到伤损，大化陵迟，而诋毁先主，疯狂已极。
English: After Li Gu was appointed, thieves ran rampant in the southeastern region, the two prefectures of Jiujiang and Guangling, as well as several counties, were devastated, trillions of people were injured, the Great Wall was delayed, and his predecessor was slandered. The madness was extreme.

古文：存无廷争之忠，没有诽谤之说。
现代文：存无廷争之忠，没有诽谤之说。
English: There is no such thing as court loyalty, no such thing as libel.

古文：夫子罪莫大于累父，臣恶莫深于毁君。
现代文：儿子之罪没有比累父更大，臣子的罪行没有比毁君更深。
English: The sin of a son is no greater than that of a tired father, and the sin of a courtier is no deeper than that of a despot.

古文：固之过衅，事合诛辟。
现代文：李固之罪，应该杀头。 
English: If Li Gu is guilty, he should be beheaded.

古文：书奏，冀以白太后，使下其事。
现代文：书奏上去，梁冀告太后，请交下面审理。
English: Liang Jie reported to the Empress Dowager, please submit to the following for trial.

古文：太后不听，得免。
现代文：太后不听，得免于死。
English: The Queen Mother did not listen and was spared death.

古文：冀忌帝聪慧，恐为后患，遂令左右进鸠。
现代文：梁冀忌帝之聪慧，恐产生后患，于是叫左右进鸩毒。
English: Liang Jie was afraid of the wisdom of the emperor, fearing that there would be a sequela, so he called the left and right into the poison.

古文：帝苦烦甚，促使召固。
现代文：帝痛烦闷苦，派人把李固找来。
English: Distressed and depressed, the emperor sent someone to find Li Gu.

古文：固入，前问 陛下得患所由 帝尚能言，曰 食煮饼，今腹中闷，得水尚可活 时冀亦在侧，曰 恐吐，不可饮水 语未绝而崩。
现代文：李固进去，上前问道： 陛下怎么得的病？ 帝还能说话，说道： 吃了煮饼，现在腹中闷得很，找到水来还可活命。 当时梁冀也在旁边，说道： 恐怕呕吐，不可饮水。 话未说完就死了。
English: Li Gou went in and asked, "How did your majesty get sick?" The emperor could still speak, and said, "I ate boiled cakes, and now my stomach is stuffy, and I can still live if I find water." At that time, Liang Ji was also nearby, and said, "I'm afraid I'll vomit, so I can't drink water." He died before he could finish speaking.

古文：固伏尸号哭，推举侍医。
现代文：李固伏尸号哭，推举侍医。
English: Li Gufufu's corpse wailed and called for a doctor.

古文：冀虑其事泄，大恶之。
现代文：梁冀顾虑事情被泄露，特别恨了他。
English: Liang Ji was worried about the matter being leaked, and especially hated him.

古文：因议立嗣，固引司徒胡广、司空赵戒，先与冀书曰：天下不幸，仍遭大忧。
现代文：于是商量立嗣，李固引进司徒胡广、司空赵戒，先给梁冀写信道： 天下不幸，仍遭大忧。
English: Therefore, they discussed the introduction of the scholar Hu Guang and the scholar Kuo Zhao Jie to Liang Jie. Li Gu first wrote to Liang Jie, "Unfortunately, the world is still plagued by great worries.

古文：皇太后圣德当朝，摄统万机，明将军体履忠孝，忧存社稷，而频年之间，国祚三绝。
现代文：皇太后圣德当朝，总理万机，明将军体履忠孝之道，考虑国家的安危，而连年之间，国祚三次断绝。
English: During the reign of Empress Dowager Shunde, Prime Minister Wanchi and Ming generals took the path of loyalty and filial piety, and considered the safety of the country. However, the state seal was broken three times in a row.

古文：今当立帝，天下重器，诚知太后垂心，将军劳虑，详择其人，务存圣明。
现代文：今当立帝，帝位是天下重器，太后十分关心，将军劳虑，详择合适的人，务存圣明。
English: Now is the time to establish the emperor, the imperial throne is the world's heavy weapon, the empress dowager is very concerned, the general works hard, selects the right person in detail, and preserves the sacredness.

古文：然愚情眷眷，窃独有怀。
现代文：然而愚情考虑再三，私下独有想法。
English: However, the foolishness considered again and again, privately unique ideas.

古文：远寻先世废立旧仪，近见国家践祚前事，未尝不询访公卿，广求群议，令上应天心，下合众望。
现代文：远寻先代废立的旧制，近见国家立帝的前事，没有不访问公卿、广泛征求意见，务必上应天心，下面符合众人愿望。
English: Looking far and wide for the old system that was abolished by the previous generation, and looking closely at the history of the country's establishment of the emperor, there is no reason not to visit the nobles and widely solicit opinions. Above all, it must be in accordance with the will of Heaven, and below it must be in line with the wishes of the people.

古文：且永初以来，政事多谬，地震宫庙，彗星竟天，诚是将军用情之日 传曰 以天下与人易，为天下得人难 昔昌邑之立，昏乱日滋，霍光忧愧发愤，悔之折骨。
现代文：再说永初年间以来，政事很多谬误，地震宫庙，彗星出现在天，的确是将军用心思的日子到了。《古书》说： 以天下与人易，为天下得人难。 从前昌邑王被立，昏乱得很，霍光十分担心，后悔得折骨。
English: Furthermore, since the beginning of time, there have been many fallacies in political affairs. Earthquakes have struck palaces and temples, and comets have appeared in the sky. The day has indeed come for generals to think with their hearts. "The Ancient Book" says: "It is easy to get along with people in the world, but it is difficult to get along with people in the world." Once upon a time, the king of Changyi was established, and he was very confused. Huo Guang was very worried, and he broke his bones in regret.

古文：自非博陆忠勇，延年奋发，大汉之祀，几将倾矣。
现代文：如果不是博陆侯霍光的忠勇，大司农田延年的奋发，大汉的江山，差点倾覆了。
English: If it wasn't for the loyalty and bravery of Bolu Hou Houguang, the leader of the farmland, and his years of hard work, the great man's country was almost overturned.

古文：至忧至重，可不熟虑。
现代文：可见事关重大，不可不深思熟虑！
English: This is a matter of great importance and must be considered carefully!

古文：悠悠万事，唯此为大，国之兴衰，在此一举。
现代文：悠悠万事，只有这是最大的事。国家的兴衰，在此一举。 
English: In everything, this is the most important thing. The rise and fall of the country, in one fell swoop.

古文：冀得书，乃召三公、中二千石、列侯大议所立。
现代文：梁冀得了信，便召集三公、中二千石、列侯大议立谁为好。
English: When Liang Jie received the letter, he summoned the three princes, the middle two thousand koku, and the feudal lords to discuss who would be better.

古文：固、广、戒及大鸿胪杜乔皆以为清河王蒜明德著闻，又属最尊亲，宜立为嗣。
现代文：李固、胡广、赵戒以及大鸿胪杜乔都认为清河王刘蒜明德著闻，又是最尊亲，应立为嗣。
English: Li Gu, Hu Guang, Zhao Jing and Du Qiao all believed that the Qing King Liu Yiming was famous for his virtue, and was the most respected relative, and should be set up as an heir.

古文：先是蠡吾侯志当取冀妹，时在京师，冀欲立之。
现代文：先是蠡吾侯刘志当娶梁冀之妹，这时正在京师，梁冀想立他。
English: First, Liu Zhidang married Liang Ji's younger sister. At that time, he was studying in Beijing, and Liang Ji wanted to marry him.

古文：众论既异，愤愤不得意，而未有以相夺，中常侍曹腾等闻而夜往说冀曰 将军累世有椒房之亲，秉摄万机，宾客纵横，多有过差。
现代文：众人不同意，梁冀愤愤不乐，可又没有别的理由可以改变大家的主意。中常侍曹腾等听了，晚上到梁冀那里劝说道： 将军几代人与皇后有亲，掌握大权，宾客胡作非为，多有过失。
English: Everyone disagreed, and Liang Jie was indignant and unhappy, but there was no other reason for him to change everyone's minds. Cao Teng, the general's aide, listened and went to Liang Jie in the evening to persuade him, saying: Generals have been related to the empress for generations and wield great power, but guests have misbehaved and made many mistakes.

古文：清河王严明，若果立，则将军受祸不久矣。
现代文：清河王为人很严明，如果立为君，那么将军受祸的日子便不久了。
English: The king of Qinghe was a very strict person. If he became the ruler, then the days of the general's suffering would not be long.

古文：不如立蠡吾侯，富贵可长保也 冀然其言，明日重会公卿，冀意气凶凶，而言辞激切。
现代文：不如立蠡吾侯，富贵可长久保持哩。 梁冀同意他们的话。第二天重会公卿，梁冀意气汹汹，而言辞激动。
English: It's not as good as appointing me as a lord, wealth can be maintained for a long time. Liang Jie agreed with their words. The next day, the reunion of court nobles, Liang Jie's spirit was fierce, and he was excited to speak.

古文：自胡广、赵戒以下，莫不慑惮之。
现代文：自胡广、赵戒以下的官吏，没有不害怕的。
English: From Hu Guang and Zhao Jie on down, there is not a single official who is not afraid.

古文：皆曰 惟大将军令 而固独与杜乔坚守本议。
现代文：都说 ：只有大将军发令就是。 可是李固与杜乔仍坚持原来的意见。
English: They all said, "Only the general can give orders," but Li Gu and Du Qiao still insisted on their original opinion.

古文：冀厉声曰 罢会 固意既不从，犹望众心可立，复以书劝冀。
现代文：梁冀大声宣布 罢会 。李固的意见既不被听从，还希望众人之心可立，又写信给梁冀。
English: Liang Jie loudly announced the strike. Li Gu's opinion was not listened to, but he also hoped that everyone's hearts would be uplifted, and wrote to Liang Jie again.

古文：冀愈激怒，乃说太后先策免固，竟立蠡吾侯，是为桓帝。
现代文：梁冀更加激怒，于是劝太后先策免李固的官，竟立了蠡吾侯，这便是桓帝。
English: Liang Jie was even more enraged, so he persuaded the empress dowager to remove Li Gu from his post first, and then he actually made him a prince, which was Emperor Huan.

古文：后岁馀，甘陵刘文、魏郡刘鲔各谋立蒜为天子，梁冀因此诬固与文、鲔共为妖言，下狱。
现代文：后一年有余，甘陵刘文、魏郡刘鲔各打算立刘蒜做天子，梁冀因此诬蔑李固与刘文、刘鲔等散布妖言，将他们关进牢狱。
English: For more than a year, Liu Wen of Ganling and Liu Zhen of Wei County each planned to make Liu Zhen the son of heaven. As a result, Liang Ji slandered Li Gu, Liu Wen and Liu Zhen and spread evil rumors, and put them in prison.

古文：门生勃海王调贯械上书，证固之枉，河内赵承等数十人亦要鈇锧诣阙通诉，太后明之，乃赦焉。
现代文：李固的门生勃海王调贯械上书，证明李固的冤枉。河内赵承等数十人也要钅夫到朝廷通诉，太后明了他们的意思，于是赦了罪。
English: Liguo's protégé, Bo Hai Wang Zhaojun, wrote a letter to prove that Liguo was wronged. Hanoi Zhao Cheng and dozens of others also wanted the widower to appeal to the imperial court. The empress dowager made it clear what they wanted, and then forgave the crime.

古文：及出狱，京师市里皆称万岁。
现代文：等到放出牢狱，京师市里百姓都喊万岁。
English: When he was released from prison, the people of Jingshi City all shouted "long live."

古文：冀闻之大惊，畏固名德终为己害，乃更据奏前事，遂诛之，时年五十四。
现代文：梁冀听了大吃一惊，害怕李固名声道德将来对自己有大害，于是再力奏前面的事，把李固杀了，当时年仅五十四岁。
English: Liang Jie was taken aback and was afraid that Li Gu's reputation and morality would do great harm to him in the future, so he replayed the previous matter and killed Li Gu, who was only 54 years old at the time.

古文：临命，与胡广、赵戒书曰 固受国厚恩，是以竭其股肱，不顾死亡，志欲扶持王室，比隆文、宣。
现代文：临死前，李固给胡广、赵戒写信道： 我受了国家大恩，因此竭尽股肱之力，不顾个人死亡，志在扶持王室，达到文帝、宣帝那样。
English: Before his death, Li Gu wrote to Hu Guang and Zhao Jing: I have been greatly blessed by the state, so I have made every effort to support the royal family, regardless of personal death, to achieve the same as Emperor Wen and Emperor Xuan.

古文：何图一朝梁氏迷谬，公等曲从，以吉为凶，成事为败乎。
现代文：哪想到一朝梁氏迷谬，你们曲从，把好事变为坏事，成功变为失败呢？
English: Who would have thought that you would follow Liang's fallacy and turn a good thing into a bad thing and a success into a failure?

古文：汉家衰微，从此始矣。
现代文：汉朝衰亡，从此开始了。
English: The decline and fall of the Han Dynasty began.

古文：公等受主厚禄，颠而不扶，倾覆大事，后之良史，岂有所私。
现代文：你们受了主上的厚禄，颠覆而不扶持，倾覆国家大事，后代的良史，难道会容你们的私心？
English: You have received the Lord's bounty, subverting but not supporting, overturning national events, the good history of future generations, will your selfishness be tolerated?

古文：固身已矣，于义得矣，夫复何言 广、戒得书悲惭，皆长叹流涕。
现代文：我的身体完了，在义方面还是有所得，还有什么可说呢！ 胡广、赵戒得了信感到悲痛惭愧，都长叹流涕。
English: My body is finished, but I still have something to gain in terms of righteousness, what else can I say! Hu Guang and Zhao Jie felt sad and ashamed after receiving the letter, and both of them sighed.

古文：州郡收固二子基、兹子郾城，皆死狱中。
现代文：州郡将李固的两个儿子李基、李兹从郾中逮捕了，都死在狱中。
English: Zhouzhou County arrested Li Gu's two sons, Li Qi and Li Zi, from their homes, and they both died in prison.

古文：小子燮得脱亡命。
现代文：小儿子李燮逃出了性命。
English: The youngest son, Li Yao, escaped with his life.

古文：冀乃封广、戒而露固尸于四衢，令有敢临者加其罪。
现代文：梁冀便封胡广、赵戒的官而把李固的尸首露放于交通要道，命令说有敢于接近的加罪处理。
English: Liang Jie then appointed Hu Guang and Zhao Jie as officials and exposed Li Gu's corpse on a major road, ordering that anyone who dared to approach the corpse would be charged with an additional crime.

古文：固弟子汝南郭亮，年始成童，游学洛阳，乃左提章钺，右秉鈇锧，诣阙上书，乞收固尸。
现代文：李固的弟子汝南郭亮，年刚成童，游学到了洛阳，于是左手拿着奏章斧钺，右手拿着钅夫钅质，到朝廷上书，请求替固收尸。
English: Ru Nan Guo Liang, a disciple of Li Gu, was just a child when he traveled to Luoyang to study. He went to the imperial court with a letter in his left hand, holding an axe, and in his right hand, holding a woodcutter's axe. He asked the imperial court to collect the corpse for him.

古文：不许，因往临哭，陈辞于前，遂守丧不去。
现代文：不许可，于是前往哭泣，陈辞于前，便守丧不走。
English: He was not allowed to do so, so he went to cry, resigned, and did not leave.

古文：夏门亭长呵之曰 李、杜二公为大臣，不能安上纳忠，而兴造无端。
现代文：夏门亭长呵斥他道： 李、杜二公为大臣，不能安抚皇上接纳忠言，而兴造无端的大祸。
English: Xia Mentei rebuked him, saying: Li and Du Er Gong are ministers, they can't appease the emperor to accept the loyal advice, but create an unwarranted disaster.

古文：卿曹何等腐生，公犯诏书。
现代文：你们何等迂腐，公然冒犯诏书，干试有司呢？ 
English: How pedantic can you be, openly offending the imperial edict and trying to have a division?

古文：干试有司乎 亮曰 亮含阴阳以生，戴乾履坤。
现代文：郭亮说： 我是含阴阳而生，戴着天，踩着地。
English: Guo Liang said: I was born with yin and yang, wearing heaven and treading on earth.

古文：耳目适宜视听，口不可以妄言也 太后闻而不诛。
现代文：义之所动，难道知道性命要紧，怎么用死吓唬人？ 亭长叹道 ：生在非命的世界，天虽高不敢不弯腰，地虽厚不敢不累足，耳目应该注意听视，口不可乱讲。 
English: Moved by righteousness, do you know that life is important, how to scare people with death? The pavilion chief sighed: Born in a world of non-life, although the sky is high, I dare not bend down, although the ground is thick, I dare not be tired, the ears and eyes should pay attention to listening, and the mouth should not speak out of order.

古文：南阳人董班亦往哭固，而殉尸不肯去。
现代文：太后听了没有杀他。南阳人董班也去哭李固，而殉尸不肯离开。
English: The empress dowager listened and did not kill him. Nanyang resident Dong Ban also went to mourn Li Gu, but the corpse refused to leave.

古文：太后怜之，乃听得襚敛归葬。
现代文：太后同情他，于是让他用布包尸归葬。
English: The empress dowager took pity on him and had his body wrapped in cloth for burial.

古文：邵遂废锢终身。
现代文：两人从此出了名，三公都征召他。
English: Since then, the two have become famous, and all three princes have enlisted him.

古文：燮在职二年卒，时人感其世忠正，咸伤惜焉。
现代文：董班便隐身，不知到哪里去了。李固所著的章、表、奏、议、教令、对策、记、铭共十一篇。弟子赵承等悲叹不止，于是共议李固的言论事迹，写成《德行》一篇。
English: Dongban then went into hiding, and I don't know where he went. There are a total of eleven chapters, tables, plays, discussions, edicts, countermeasures, notes, and inscriptions written by Li Gu. Disciple Zhao Cheng and others lamented endlessly, so they discussed Li Gu's speech deeds and wrote an article on "virtue."

古文：杜乔字叔荣，河内林虑人也。
现代文：◆杜乔传，杜乔字叔荣，河内林虑人。
English: ◆Du Qiao Chuan, Du Qiao Zi Shurong, Hanoi Lin Xianren.

古文：少为诸生，举孝廉，辟司徒杨震府。
现代文：年轻时为诸生，被征入司徒杨震府。
English: When he was young, he was conscripted into the Stuto Yang Zhenfu.

古文：稍迁为南郡太守，转东海相，入拜侍中。
现代文：渐升为南郡太守，调东海相，入朝廷授侍中。
English: He was gradually promoted to the governor of Minami-gun, transferred to the East Sea Minister, and entered the Imperial Court.

古文：汉安元年，以乔守光禄大夫，使徇察兖州。
现代文：汉安元年，杜乔代理光禄大夫，派他巡察兖州。
English: In the first year of Han'an, Du Qiao, acting as Guanglu's doctor, sent him to inspect Zhangzhou.

古文：表奏太山太守李固政为天下第一。陈留太守梁让、济阴太守汜宫、济北相崔瑗等臧罪千万以上。
现代文：上表奏太山太守李固政绩是天下第一；陈留太守梁让、济阴太守汜宫、济北太守崔瑗等贪赃千万以上。
English: The above table shows that the political achievements of Li Gu, the governor of Taishan, are the best in the world; Chen Liu, the governor of Liangzhang, Jiyin, the governor of Shugu, and Jibei, the governor of Cuihui, are more than ten million.

古文：让即大将军梁冀季父，宫、瑗皆冀所善。
现代文：梁让就是大将军梁冀的叔叔，汜宫、崔瑗都是梁冀的亲信。
English: Liang Zhan is the uncle of General Liang Jie. Gong Gong and Cui Jie are close friends of Liang Jie.

古文：还，拜太子太傅，迁大司农。
现代文：回京，授太子太傅，升大司农。
English: He returned to Beijing, received the title of crown prince, and rose to the position of chief agronomist.

古文：时，梁冀子弟五人及中常侍等以无功并封，乔上书谏曰 陛下越从藩臣，龙飞即位，天人瞩心，万邦攸赖。
现代文：这时梁冀的子弟五人以及中常侍等都没有什么功劳受封，杜乔上书谏说： 皇上出自藩臣，龙飞即位，天与人归，万邦所赖。
English: At this time, the five children of Liang Jie and the middle-ranking attendants did not receive any merit, and Du Qiao said in the letter: The emperor comes from the vassals of the domain, Long Fei ascends to the throne, heaven and man return, and all nations rely on him.

古文：不急忠贤之礼，而先左右之封，伤善害德，兴长佞谀。
现代文：但不任用忠贤，却先封左右亲信，这样，损伤善类，有害德行，助长了阿谀谄媚之风。
English: However, instead of appointing a loyal and virtuous person, he first appoints his right and left cronies. In this way, he injures the virtuous, harms the virtuous, and promotes the style of flattery.

古文：臣闻古之明君，褒罚必以功过。末世暗主，诛赏各缘其私。
现代文：我听说古时候英明的君王，褒奖有功，惩罚有过；衰亡的君主，昏暗无能，赏罚都是出于私心。
English: I have heard that in ancient times, wise kings were rewarded for their merits and punished for their misdeeds. The kings who fell into decline were dim and incompetent, and their rewards and punishments were all out of selfishness.

古文：今梁氏一门，宦者微孽，并带无功之绂，裂劳臣之土，其为乖滥，胡可胜言。
现代文：现在梁氏一家，宦官孽子，都佩带没有功劳的印绶，把劳苦有功的封地，分给他们，这种作法的乖张与滥乱，怎么可以说得完呢。
English: Now the Liang family, the sons of eunuchs, are all wearing the seals of no merit, and the fiefs of hard work and merit are distributed to them. How can we say that this practice is perverse and disorderly?

古文：夫有功不赏，为善失其望。奸回不诘，为恶肆其凶。
现代文：有功不赏，做好事没有得到应有的酬报；奸宄之徒，没有人管，让他们逞凶为祸。
English: The meritorious are not rewarded, and the good deed is not rewarded as it should be; the evil-doers, no one cares about, let them be evil-doers.

古文：故陈资斧而人靡畏，班爵位而物无劝。
现代文：所以把杀人的屠刀摆在面前，人们不怕，赐爵授官，也起不到奖励的作用。
English: That is why people are not afraid to put a murderous butcher's knife in front of them, and the award of a knighthood does not act as a reward.

古文：苟遂斯道，岂伊伤政，为乱而已，丧身亡国，可不慎哉 书奏不省。
现代文：如果长此下去，难道仅仅有伤政道，适足为乱动了，丧身亡国，值得警惕呀！ 奏上，皇上不用。
English: If it goes on like this for a long time, isn't it enough just to damage the political system, for it to become disorderly, for people to lose their lives and for the country to perish? It's worth being vigilant!

古文：益州刺史种暠举劾永昌太守刘君世以金蛇遗梁冀，事发觉，以蛇输司农。
现代文：益州刺史种詗弹劾永昌太守刘君世用金蛇送梁冀，事情发觉，把金蛇送到司农。
English: Yizhou stabbed the historical seeds to impeach the Yongchang governor Liu Junse used the golden snake to send Liang Jie. When the matter was discovered, the golden snake was sent to the farmer.

古文：冀从乔借观之，乔不肯与，冀始为恨。
现代文：梁冀向杜乔借了看看，杜乔不肯，梁冀开始怀恨。
English: Liang Jie asked Du Qiao for a look, Du Qiao refused, and Liang Jie began to hold a grudge.

古文：累迁大鸿胪。
现代文：杜乔连升到大鸿胪。
English: Du Qiao was promoted to the rank of Da Hongzhu.

古文：时，冀小女死，令公卿会丧，乔独不往，冀又衔之。
现代文：这时梁冀小女死了，令公卿都去送丧，杜乔一个人独不去，梁冀更加恨了他。
English: At this time, Liang Jie's little daughter died, causing the nobles to go to the funeral. Du Qiao did not go alone, and Liang Jie hated him even more.

古文：迁光禄勋。
现代文：杜乔升任光禄勋。
English: Later, Xue Ying Sheng was awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：建和元年，代胡广为太尉。
现代文：建和元年，代理胡广为太尉。
English: In the first year of Jianhe, the acting Hu Guang was promoted to the rank of captain.

古文：桓帝将纳梁冀未，冀欲令以厚礼迎之，乔据执旧典，不听。
现代文：桓帝准备纳梁冀的妹妹为后，梁冀想要用厚礼迎接他的妹妹，杜乔根据旧的典章，不听他的。
English: After Emperor Huan prepared to receive Liang Jie's sister, Liang Jie wanted to greet his sister with a heavy gift, Du Qiao did not listen to him according to the old rules.

古文：又冀属乔举汜宫为尚书，乔以宫臧罪明著，遂不肯用，因此日忏于冀。
现代文：又梁冀托杜乔举汜宫为尚书，杜乔认为汜宫赃罪事实俱在，也不肯用，因此大大抵触了梁冀的意旨。
English: In addition, Liang Jie asked Du Qiao to elevate Gong Gong to the status of a book. Du Qiao believed that the facts of Gong Gong's crime were all there, and refused to use it. Therefore, it greatly contradicted Liang Jie's intention.

古文：先是李固见废，内外丧气，群臣侧足而立，唯乔正色无所回桡。
现代文：先是，李固被罢废，朝廷内外丧气，群臣害怕，战战兢兢，只有杜乔正色不敢犯。
English: First of all, Li Gu was ousted, the imperial court and beyond were disheartened, the courtiers were afraid and trembling, and only Du Qiao Zhengyi dared not commit a crime.

古文：由是海内叹息，朝野瞻望焉。
现代文：因此海内为之叹息，朝野都看着他，耽心他。
English: As a result, people at home and abroad sigh, look at him, and worry about him.

古文：在位数月，以地震免。
现代文：在位几个月，因地震免官。
English: After a few months in office, he was removed from office due to the earthquake.

古文：宦者唐衡、左悺等因共谮于帝曰 陛下前当即位，乔与李固抗议言上不堪奉汉宗祀 帝亦怨之。
现代文：宦官唐衡、左等人共同在桓帝面前诬陷杜乔说 ：皇上以前当即位的时候，杜乔与李固反对，说皇上不配奉祀汉朝的宗庙，继承皇位。 
English: The eunuchs Tang Heng and Zuo jointly framed Du Qiao in front of Emperor Huan, saying: When the emperor ascended the throne, Du Qiao and Li Gu objected, saying that the emperor was not worthy to serve the ancestral temple of the Han Dynasty and inherit the throne.

古文：及清河王蒜事起，梁冀遂讽有司劾乔及李固与刘鲔等交通，请逮案罪。
现代文：桓帝也恨了他。清河王蒜事发生以后，梁冀暗示管事人弹劾杜乔及李固与刘鲔勾结，请逮捕法办。
English: Emperor Huan also hated him. After the King Garlic Incident in Qinghe, Liang Jie suggested that the steward impeach Du Qiao and Li Gu for colluding with Liu Ye, and requested that they be arrested and prosecuted.

古文：而梁太后素知乔忠，但策免而已。
现代文：梁太后平素知道杜乔忠心耿耿，只免了他官罢了。
English: Empress Dowager Liang always knew that Du Qiao was loyal, and only relieved him of his duties.

古文：冀愈怒，使人胁乔曰 早从宜，妻子可得全 乔不肯。
现代文：梁冀更加发怒，派人威胁杜乔说： 早自杀，妻子可得保全。 杜乔不肯。
English: Liang Jie became even angrier and sent someone to threaten Du Qiao, saying, "If you commit suicide early, your wife will be spared." Du Qiao refused.

古文：明日冀遣骑至其门，不闻哭者，遂白执系之，死狱中。
现代文：第二天梁冀派骑兵到他家，听不见哭声，就把他逮捕了，死在监狱中。
English: The next day, Liang Jie sent cavalry to his home, but they could not hear his cries, so they arrested him, and he died in prison.

古文：妻、子归故郡。
现代文：妻子回到老家去了。
English: My wife went back to her hometown.

古文：与李固俱暴尸于城北，家属故人莫敢视者。
现代文：杜乔与李固都露尸于城北，家属朋友都不敢去看。
English: Both Du Qiao and Li Guo were found dead in the north of the city, and their families and friends were afraid to go and see them.

古文：乔故掾陈留杨匡闻之，号泣星行到洛阳，乃著故赤帻，托为夏门亭吏，守卫尸丧，驱护蝇虫，积十二日，都官从事执之以闻。
现代文：杜乔的老部属陈留杨匡听说了，号哭星夜赶到洛阳，戴着原来的赤帻，假装夏门亭吏，守卫尸体，驱赶苍蝇蚊子，共十二天，都官从事把他捉了报告朝廷。
English: Du Qiao's old subordinate Chen Liu Yang Kuang heard about it. He rushed to Luoyang in the night, wearing the original red coat, pretending to be a summer gate keeper, guarding the body, and driving away flies and mosquitoes. For a total of twelve days, the government official caught him and reported to the court.

古文：梁太后义而不罪。
现代文：梁太后认为有义气，不论罪。
English: Empress Dowager Liang believes that there is a spirit of righteousness, regardless of sin.

古文：匡于是带鈇锧诣阙上书，并乞李、杜二公骸骨。
现代文：杨匡于是带着铁去朝廷上书，并且请求收李固、杜乔二公的尸体。
English: Yang Kuang then took the iron to the imperial court to submit a letter, and requested the bodies of Li Gu and Du Qiao.

古文：太后许之。
现代文：太后答应了他的请求。
English: The Queen Mother agreed.

古文：成礼殡殓，送乔丧还家，葬送行服，隐匿不仕。
现代文：用礼殡殓，送杜乔的丧还家，葬送守服以后，隐居不出仕作官。
English: Du Qiao was given a ceremonial funeral and sent home. After the funeral, Du Qiao kept his clothes on and did not go into seclusion.

古文：匡初好学，常在外黄大泽教授门徒。
现代文：杨匡原先好学，曾在外黄大泽教授学生。
English: Yang Kuang used to be very studious. He used to be a student of Huang Daze.

古文：补蕲长，政有异绩，迁平原令。
现代文：补蕲长，政治有突出的成绩，升平原令。
English: He was promoted to the post of the Minister of Civil Affairs, had outstanding achievements in politics, and was promoted to the post of the Minister of Civil Affairs.

古文：时国相徐曾，中常侍璜之兄也，匡耻与接事，托疾牧豕云。
现代文：这时国相徐曾，是中常侍徐璜的哥哥，杨匡以与他共事可耻，假装有病，回家放猪去了。
English: At this time, the State Councilor Xu Zeng, who was the elder brother of the Vice-Minister of the People's Republic of China, Yang Kuang, who was ashamed to work with him, pretended to be ill and went home to herd pigs.

古文：论曰：夫称仁人者，其道弘矣。
现代文：史家评论说：啊，称仁义的人，他的为人之道是多方面的。
English: Historians commented: Ah, the man who praised benevolence and righteousness, his way of being a man is multifaceted.

古文：立言践行，岂徒徇名安己而已哉，将以定去就之概，正天下之风，使生以理全，死与义合也。
现代文：说的话，在于能够身体力行。
English: It's about being able to do what you say.

古文：夫专为义则伤生，专为生则骞义，专为物则害智，专为己则损仁。若义重于生，舍生可也。生重于义，全生可也。
现代文：难道如一般人一样，仅仅是为了求名安己吗？他的话，表明着去与就的大节，可以正天下的风气，使生合于理，死得其所，合于义。如果专为义，其结果是贱生；专为生，其结果是违义；专为物，则为物所蒙蔽，有害于智；专为己，则自私，有损于仁的博爱。如果义比生重要，应该舍生取义；生比义重要，全生可以。
English: Is it just to seek fame and self-satisfaction like ordinary people? His words indicate that the great festival of going and getting along with others can rectify the world's culture, make birth conform to reason, death its place, and conform to righteousness. If it is exclusively righteousness, the result is unworthy birth; if it is exclusively life, the result is violation of righteousness; if it is exclusively things, it is blinded by things and harmful to wisdom; if it is exclusively selfishness, it is detrimental to benevolent philanthropy. If righteousness is more important than life, it should be sacrificed for righteousness; if life is more important than righteousness, the whole life can be.

古文：上以残暗失君道，下以笃固尽臣节。
现代文：在上的君主因残暴暗弱失去为君之道，在下的臣子应当坚持尽臣子的大节。
English: The monarch at the top has lost his way as a monarch due to his cruelty and weakness, and the vassals at the bottom should insist on fulfilling their duties to the best of their ability.

古文：臣节尽而死之，则为杀身以成仁，去之不为求生以害仁也。
现代文：臣子的为尽大节而死是杀身以成仁，毅然离去，不能叫做求生以害仁。
English: A courtier's death for the greater good is killing oneself for benevolence, and resolutely leaving cannot be called seeking life for benevolence.

古文：顺、桓之间，国统三绝，太后称制，贼臣虎视。
现代文：顺帝、桓帝之间，国家法统三次断绝，太后掌权，乱臣贼子虎视眈眈。
English: Between Emperor Shun and Emperor Kuan, the country's legal system was severed three times, the empress dowager took power, and rogue vassals were on the lookout.

古文：李固据位持重，以争大义，确乎而不可夺。
现代文：李固在朝持重，以争大义，坚毅不可动摇。
English: Li Gu holds a strong position in the DPRK, fights for justice, and has unshakable determination.

古文：岂不知守节之触祸，耻夫覆折之伤任也。
现代文：难道他不知道守节惹祸？他以在位而不能做他应干的事为可耻啊。
English: Doesn't he know that he's stirring up trouble by keeping the festival? It's a shame that he can't do what he's supposed to while he's in office.

古文：观其发正辞，及所遗梁冀书，虽机失谋乖，犹恋恋而不能已。
现代文：看他义正辞严的话，以及给梁冀的信，虽然机失谋乖，还恋恋于朝廷不能自已。
English: Judging from his righteous and stern words, as well as his letter to Liang Jie, although he made a bad move, he still couldn't help but fall in love with the imperial court.

古文：至矣哉，社稷之心乎。其顾视胡广、赵戒，犹粪土也。
现代文：伟大呀！爱国的心！回顾胡广、赵戒之流，真是狗屎都不如。
English: Great! A patriotic heart! Looking back at the likes of Hu Guang and Zhao Jie, it's really no better than shit.

