古文：○理宗五景定元年春正月丙子，诏奖贾似道功。
现代文：景定元年春正月初八，下诏奖励贾似道的功劳。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of Jingding, the following edict was issued to reward the merits of Jia Li Dao.

古文：庚辰，岁星、荧惑合在尾。
现代文：十二日，岁星、荧惑星合在尾宿。
English: On the twelfth day, the year star and the fluorescent planet coincide in the tail lodge.

古文：壬辰，诏： 知涪州赵，聚粮不运饷兵士，遂为北有，已削一秩，罚轻，再削两秩。 
现代文：二十四日，下诏： 涪州知州趣或，聚粮不运晌士兵，于是为元军所有，已经削夺一秩，但处罚仍轻，再削夺二级。 
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the following edict was issued: "If there is no grain gathering and no transportation of soldiers, then it is owned by the Yuan Army, and one rank has been taken away, but the punishment is still light, and the second level has been taken away.

古文：乙未，潼川城仙侣山。
现代文：二十七日，撞川城在仙侣山筑城。
English: On the 27th, Kuchuan Castle was built in Xianlu Mountain.

古文：贾似道言： 高达守鄂州城凡三月，大元师北还。 
现代文：贾似道说： 高达守卫鄂州，前后长达三个月，元军北退。 
English: Jia Xi Dao said: Up to guarding Ezhou, up to three months before and after, the Yuan Army retreated north.

古文：二月丙午，诏贾似道以缗钱三千万犒师，并示赏功之典。
现代文：二月初八，下诏贾似道用三千万络搞赏军队，并告诉他赏功的办法。
English: On the 8th day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2

古文：己酉，以高达为宁江军承宣使、右金吾卫上将军，赐缗钱五十万；吕文德赐缗钱百万、浙西良田百顷；鄂州战守将士赐缗钱三千万；王鉴、孙虎臣、苏刘义等各官十转。
现代文：十一日，以高达为宁江军承宣使、右金吾卫上将军，赐给络钱五十万；赐给吕文德络钱一百万，浙西良田一百顷；鄂州战守将士，赐给络钱三千万；王鉴、孙虎臣、苏刘义等分别转十官。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Da Gao, the successor of the Ningjiang army and the general of the Right Jingu and Wei, was given 500,000 rupees; Lu Wende was given 1 million rupees, Zhejiang Xiliangda was given 100 hectares; Ezhou war veterans were given 30 million rupees; Wang Jian, Sun Huchen, Su Liu Yi, etc. were transferred to ten officials respectively.

古文：高达迁湖北安抚副使、知江陵府兼夔路策应使，陈奕、阮思聪并正任防御使。
现代文：高达迁湖北安抚副使、江陵知府兼夔路策应使，陈奕、阮思聪都正式调任防御使。
English: Gao Da was transferred to the post of deputy envoy for pacification of Hubei Province and deputy envoy for Jiangling Prefecture and the construction of roads, while Chen Yi and Ruan Sicong were officially transferred to the post of defense envoy.

古文：江西、湖南帅司言：大元兵破瑞州、临江军城，兴国、寿昌、洪、抚、全、永、衡诸郡民皆被兵，存者奔窜它所。
现代文：江西、湖南帅司报告说：元军攻破瑞州、临江军城，兴国、寿昌、洪州、抚州、全州、永州、衡州各郡百姓都遭兵祸，活下来的奔走他乡。
English: Shuai Si of Jiangxi and Hunan reported that the Yuan army broke through the military towns of Ruizhou and Linjiang, and the people of Xingguo, Shuchang, Hongzhou, Fuzhou, Quanzhou, Yongzhou and Hengzhou counties all suffered military disasters, and those who survived fled to other towns.

古文：甲寅，诏临江守臣陈元桂死节，官五转，赠宝章阁待制。与一子京官、一子选人恩泽。给缗钱十万治葬，立庙死所，谥曰正节。
现代文：十六日，下诏： 临江守臣陈元桂为国损躯，转五官，赠宝章阁待制；任一子为京官，一子给予选人待遇；给络钱十万治葬，在战死的地方为之立庙，溢号为正节。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: Chen Yuan Gui, the Linjiang governor, lost his body for the country, was transferred to five officials, and was presented with a treasure medal; each son was a Beijing official, and one son was given the treatment of a candidate; he was given 100,000 yuan for burial, and a temple was built for him in the place where he died in the war, and the exclamation mark was the official festival.

古文：瑞州守臣陈昌世治郡虽有善政，兵至，民拥之以逃，以弃城失守，削三秩勒停。 
现代文：瑞州守臣陈昌世治郡虽有善政，但元兵到后，百姓拥之逃跑，因弃城失守，削夺三级，勒令停职。 
English: Although the Ruizhou governor Chen Chang Shiji County had a good government, but after the arrival of the Yuan soldiers, the people ran away, abandoned the city, lost the third level, and was suspended.

古文：乙卯，诏孙虎臣和州防御使，张世杰以下十三人各官五转；立功将士并补两官资，赐银绢。
现代文：十七日，下诏孙虎臣为和州防御使，张世杰以下十三人各转五官；立功将士都补两级官资，赐给银绢。
English: On the 17th, it was decreed that Sun Huchen would be the defense envoy of He Prefecture, and Zhang Shijie and the following thirteen people would each be transferred to five positions; the meritorious soldiers would all be supplemented with two-level government funds and given silver ingots.

古文：庚申，雨雹。
现代文：二十二日，降冰雹。
English: On the 22nd, hail fell.

古文：辛酉，大元遣偏师自大理由广南抵衡州，向士璧会合刘雄飞逆战于道，俘民获还者甚众。
现代文：二十三日，元军派遣偏师从大理经由广南抵达衡州，向士璧联合刘雄飞在沿途阻击，很多被元军俘虏的百姓回到家园。
English: On the 23rd, the Yuan Army dispatched a division from Dali through Guangnan to Henzhou. Xiang Shibi and Liu Xiongfei jointly blocked along the way. Many people who were captured by the Yuan Army returned to their homes.

古文：诏雄飞升保康军承宣使，余转官、赐银钱。
现代文：下诏刘雄飞升保康军承宣使，其余将士转官、赐给银钱。
English: The following edict promoted Liu Xiongfei to the Hongkang Army to assume the post of envoy, and transferred the rest of the soldiers to other posts and gave them money.

古文：贾似道赐金器千两、币千匹，命国子监主簿刘锡趣召赴阙。
现代文：赐给贾似道金器千两、币千匹，命国子监主簿刘锡催促到朝廷。
English: He gave Jia Li Daolu a thousand pieces of gold and a thousand coins, and ordered Liu Xi, the chief overseer of the state, to rush to the imperial court.

古文：向士璧迁兵部侍郎，职任依旧。
现代文：向士璧迁升兵部侍郎，职任依旧。
English: Xiang Shibi was promoted to the position of the attendant of the military department, but his position remained the same.

古文：吕文德、高达、陈奕等各赐金币有差。
现代文：吕文德、高达、陈奕等分别赐给金、币不等。
English: Lu Wende, Gao Gao, Chen Yi and others gave gold and coins respectively.

古文：丙寅，大元军过分宁、武宁二县，河湖砦都监权巡检张兴宗死之，诏赠武翼郎，官一子承信郎，以缗钱三万给其家。
现代文：二十八日，经过分宁、武宁二县，河湖寨都监代理巡检张兴宗战死，下诏赠武翼郎，任其子一人为承信郎，赐给其家络钱三万。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Xingzong, the deputy inspector of Hechuzhai, passed through two counties, including Fening and Wuning, and died in battle. The emperor presented Wu Yulang with an imperial edict, appointed one of his sons as Chengxin Lang, and gave him family money of thirty thousand.

古文：湖南诸将温和转左武大夫、带行遥郡刺史，李虎官三转、带行阁门宣赞，鄮进带行复州团练使，各赐银绢，旌其守御之功。
现代文：湖南诸将温和转左武大夫、带行遥郡刺史，李虎转三官、带行间门宣赞，部进带行复州团练使，各赐银绢，表彰他抵抗元军守卫城池的功劳。
English: Hunan generals gently transferred Zuowu doctor, led the march to Yao County, Li Hu transferred to three officials, led the march to the door to praise, and led the march to the Fuzhou regimental training envoy, and each gave silver ingots to commend his resistance to the former army guarding the city.

古文：三月戊辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of March, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：庚午，命夏贵兼黄、寿策应使，总舟师。
现代文：初三，命令夏贵兼黄州、寿州策应使，统领水军。
English: On the third day of the first month, he ordered Xia Gui, who was also in charge of Huangzhou and Shoushou, to take command of the navy.

古文：癸酉，以横山之战将士效节，多死行阵，总管张世雄、沈彦雄、陈喜、秦安、李孝信、郑俊、李安国各赠十官资，赐缗钱万恤其家。
现代文：初六，因横山之战将士为国捐躯，多战死在沙场，总管张世雄、沈彦雄、陈喜、秦安、李孝信、郑俊、李安国各赠十官资，赐络钱一万抚恤其家。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, as a result of the Battle of Yokoyama, soldiers sacrificed their lives for the country, and many died on the battlefield. The chief administrators Zhang Shixiong, Shen Yanxiong, Chen Xi, Qin An, Li Xiaoxin, Zheng Jun, and Li An each gave ten government funds and ten thousand yuan to their families.

古文：甲戌，赏夏贵鸿宿州、白鹿矶战功，迁福州观察使，职任仍旧。
现代文：初七，赏夏贵鸿宿州、白鹿矶战功，迁福州观察使，职任依旧。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Xia Guihong was awarded for his war service in Shuzhou and Bailuqi, and was transferred to Fuzhou as an observation envoy. His position remains the same.

古文：将士推赏。
现代文：将士给予恩赏。
English: A reward was given to the soldier.

古文：乙亥，诏全、岳、永、衡、柳、象、瑞、兴国、南康、隆兴、江州、临江、潭州诸县经兵，农民失业，应开庆元年以前二税尽除之。
现代文：初八，下诏：全、岳、永、衡、柳、象、瑞、兴国、南康、隆兴、江州、临江、潭州各县经过兵火洗劫，农民失业，开庆元年以前二税全部免除。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: the counties of Quan, Yue, Yong, Heng, Liu, Zeng, Rui, Xingguo, Nankang, Longxing, Jiangzhou, Linjiang and Tanzhou had been looted by war, farmers were unemployed, and the two-percent tax was completely exempted before the beginning of the first year of the celebration.

古文：癸未，贾似道奏蘱草坪大战，进至黄州。
现代文：十六日，贾似道奏暇草坪大战，进至黄州。
English: On the 16th, Jia Lian Dao played the leisure turf war and went to Huangzhou.

古文：乙酉，诏范文虎转左武大夫、环卫官、黄州武定诸军都统制，张世杰环卫官、职任依旧。
现代文：十八日，下诏范文虎转左武大夫、环卫官、黄州武定诸军都统制。张世杰为环卫官，职任依旧。
English: On the 18th, Fan Wenhu was transferred to the post of Zuowu doctor, environmental protection officer, and the troops of Huangzhou Wuding were controlled. Zhang Shijie was the environmental protection officer, and his position remained the same.

古文：鄂州统制张胜死于汉阳战阵，赠官五转，官其子焕进武校尉。
现代文：鄂州统制张胜，死于汉阳战场，赠转五官，任其子张焕为进武校尉。
English: Zhang Sheng, the governor of Ezhou, died on the battlefield of Hanyang. He gave away five officials and allowed his son Zhang Huan to be promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：丙戌，贾似道言，自鄂趋黄，与北朝回军相遇，诸将用命捍御。
现代文：十九日，贾似道说，从鄂州到黄州，与退回的元军相遇，各将用力抵抗。
English: On the 19th, Jia Xi Dao said that from Ezhou to Huangzhou, he would meet with the returning Yuan army, and they would resist vigorously.

古文：诏孙虎臣、范文虎、张世杰以下各赐金帛。
现代文：下诏孙虎臣、范文虎、张世杰以下各赐金帛。
English: Sun Huchen, Fan Wenhu, Zhang Shijie and others were awarded gold medals.

古文：夏四月戊戌朔，侍御史沈炎疏吴潜过失，以 忠王之立，人心所属，潜独不然，章汝钧对馆职策，乞为济邸立后，潜乐闻其论，授汝钧正字，奸谋叵测。请速诏贾似道正位鼎轴。 
现代文：夏四月初一，侍御史沈炎疏论吴潜的过失： 忠王之位，人心所向，唯独吴潜不以为然。章汝钧应对馆职策试，请求为济邸立后，吴潜对此很欣赏，授章汝钧为正字，奸谋不可预测，请求速诏贾似道立定国嗣大政。 
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the courtier and historian Shen Yanxiao commented on Wu Xuan's fault: The position of the loyal king is what people want, but Wu Xuan did not agree. Zhang Ruxuan tried to deal with the duties of the hall and asked for the establishment of the residence, Wu Xuan was very appreciative of this, awarding Zhang Ruxuan was the correct word, the treachery was unpredictable, and the request was to quickly establish the national succession.

古文：诏朱熠、戴庆炣轮日判事，大政则共议以闻。
现代文：下诏朱熠、戴庆卿轮流处理政事，重要政事则共同商议。
English: According to the following edict, Zhu Xi and Dai Qingqing will take turns to handle political affairs, and important political affairs will be jointly discussed.

古文：己亥，贾似道表言夏贵等战新生洲，进至白鹿矶，皆身自督战有功。
现代文：初二，贾似道上表说夏贵等在新生洲作战，进至白鹿矶，都是亲自指挥督战的功劳。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Jia Li said that Xia Gui and others fought in Xinshengzhou and went to Bailuye, all of which were the merit of personally commanding and supervising the battle.

古文：诏赴阙。
现代文：下诏前往朝廷。
English: He went to the Imperial Court with the following message.

古文：庚子，以王坚为侍卫步军司都指挥使。
现代文：初三，以王坚为侍卫步军司都指挥使。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, Wang Jian was appointed as the bodyguard and the commander of the military division.

古文：戊申，以刘整知泸州兼潼川安抚副使。
现代文：十一日，以刘整知沪州兼撞川安抚副使。
English: On the 11th, Liu Neizhi was appointed as the deputy envoy of Huzhou and Qianchuan pacification.

古文：己酉，扬州大火。
现代文：十二日，扬州发生大火。
English: On the 12th, a large fire broke out in Yangzhou.

古文：吴潜以观文殿大学士提举临安府洞霄宫。
现代文：吴潜以观文殿大学士提举临安府洞霄宫。
English: Wu Qian was awarded the title of Grand Scholar of the Guanwen Hall of the Lin'an Provincial Dongxiao Palace.

古文：癸丑，进贾似道少师，依前右丞相兼枢密使，进封卫国公；朱熠知枢密院事兼参知政事；饶虎臣参知政事；戴庆炣同知枢密院事兼参知政事，皮龙荣端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
现代文：十六日，升贾似道为少师，依前为右承相兼枢密使，进封卫国公。朱熠知枢密院事参知政事。饶虎臣参知政事。戴庆何同知枢密院事兼参知政事。皮龙荣为端明殿学士，签书枢密院事。
English: On the 16th, Sheng Jia Li Dao was promoted to Junior Teacher, Yixian was promoted to Right Heir Minister and Privy Envoy, and entered the Imperial Palace as the Prince of the National Guard. Zhu Xizhi was promoted to Privy Councillor and became a member of the Privy Council. Rao Huchen was promoted to Privy Councillor and became a member of the Privy Council. Dai Qing He Tong was promoted to Privy Councillor and became a member of the Privy Council. Pi Long Rong was promoted to Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate and became a member of the Privy Council.

古文：己未，以夏贵为保康军承宣使、左金吾卫上将军、知淮安州兼淮东安抚副使、京东招抚使，赐金器币、溧阳田三十顷。
现代文：二十二日，以夏贵为保康军承宣使、左金吾卫上将军、淮安知州兼淮东安抚副使、京东招抚使，赐给金器币、漂阳田三十顷。
English: On the 22nd, Yixia Gui was awarded gold and silver coins, and 30 hectares of land in the Yangtze River Delta as the ambassador of the Hokang Army, General Zuo Jinguwei, the vice-envoy of Huai'an Chizhou and the pacification of Huai'an and Dongguan, and the envoy of the pacification of Dongguan and Jingdong.

古文：壬戌，进马光祖资政殿大学士，职任依旧。
现代文：二十五日，进马光祖为资政殿大学士，职任依旧。
English: On the 25th, Jinma Guangzu was promoted to the position of a scholar of the Imperial Palace, and his position remains the same.

古文：癸亥，以吕文德兼夔路策应使。
现代文：二十六日，以吕文德兼夔路策应使。
English: On the 26th, it was time for Lu Wende to lead the way.

古文：丙寅，命马光祖兼淮西总领财赋。
现代文：二十九日，命令马光祖兼淮西总领财赋。
English: On the 29th, he ordered Ma Guangzu, who was also the general leader of Huaxi, to receive the money.

古文：五月戊辰朔，诏赵葵依旧少保、两淮宣抚使、判扬州，进封鲁国公；徐清叟观文殿大学士、知建宁府。
现代文：五月初一，下诏赵葵依旧为少保、两淮宣抚使、判扬州，进封鲁国公：徐清雯为观文殿大学士、建宁知府。
English: On the first day of May, the following decrees were issued: Zhao Kwai was still the Minor Protector, the two Huai were appointed as the envoys, Yangzhou was sentenced, and Lu Guogong was sent to Fenghuang: Xu Qingwen was the scholar of Guanwenden University, and Jianning was the prefectural governor.

古文：饶虎臣罢。
现代文：饶虎臣被罢免。
English: Rao Huomin was removed from his post.

古文：壬申，李曾伯、史岩之并落职解官，曾伯坐岭南闭城自守，不能备御；岩之坐鄂州围解，大元兵已渡江北还，然后出兵，又命程芾任事，以致败绩。
现代文：初五，李曾伯，史岩之免职解官：李曾伯因在岭南闭城自守，不能备御；史岩之因鄂州解围，元兵已经渡江北退，然后出兵，又命令程莆任事，导致失败。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Li Zengbo and Shi Yan were relieved of duty and dismissed: Li Zengbo was unable to prepare for self-defense because he was in the closed city of Lingnan; Shi Yan, because of the lifting of the siege of Ezhou, the Yuan soldiers had crossed the river and retreated to the north, and then sent troops and ordered Cheng Yao to take charge, leading to failure.

古文：甲戌，诏赠吕文信宁远军承宣使，立庙赐额，子师宪带行阁职，更与两子承信郎；辅周和州防御使，录其白鹿矶死事。
现代文：初七，下诏赠吕文信为宁远军承宣使，立庙赐额，其子吕师宪带行阎职，另外任其两个儿子为承信郎；辅周为和州防御使，录用其白鹿矶为国捐躯的将士之后。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the next imperial edict bestowed upon Lü Wensin the title of "Ningyuan Army's successor envoy" and a temple was established. His son Lü Shixian was assigned to carry out the duties of the emperor, and his other two sons were appointed as successor envoys. Fu Zhou was appointed as "Wazhou Defense Envoy" after recruiting his soldiers who had sacrificed their lives for the country in Bailuqiao.

古文：乙亥，诏李虎驭军无律，贷命追夺、窜郁林州。
现代文：初八，下诏李虎治军无方，免死，追夺官职，流窜郁林州。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Li Hu ruled the army helplessly, avoided death, pursued an official post, and fled to Yulin Prefecture.

古文：丁丑，赐贾似道玉带。
现代文：初十，赐给贾似道玉带。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Jia Li was given a jade belt.

古文：庚辰，戴庆炣卒，赠资政殿大学士。
现代文：十三日，戴庆何去世，赠资政殿大学士。
English: On the 13th, Dai Qinghe passed away. He was a scholar at the endowed University of Political Science.

古文：壬午，荧惑犯斗。
现代文：十五日，荧惑星侵犯斗宿。
English: On the 15th, the fluorescent planet invaded Douju.

古文：癸未，以皮龙荣兼权参知政事；沈炎端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事；马堃鄂州都统制，驻扎江陵府。
现代文：十六日，以皮龙荣兼代理参知政事；沈炎为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事；马鄂州都统制，驻扎江陵府。
English: On the 16th, with Pirrong Rong and acting assistant governor and political affairs; Shen Yan as Duanming Palace bachelor and co-signer of the Privy Council; Mahe Prefecture capital control, stationed in Gangneung Prefecture.

古文：甲申，祈雨。
现代文：十七日，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 17th, pray for rain.

古文：戊子，诏饶虎臣以资政殿学士提举临安府洞霄宫、任便居住。
现代文：二十一日，下诏饶虎臣以资政殿学士提举临安府洞霄宫，任便居住。
English: On the twenty-first day of the following year, Rao Huchen was appointed as a scholar of the House of Councillors, and moved to Lin'an's Dongxiao Palace.

古文：杨栋召赴阙。
现代文：杨栋，下诏他前往朝廷。
English: Yang Dong, tell him to go to the imperial court.

古文：壬辰，以姚希得为敷文阁待制、知庆元府兼沿海制置使。
现代文：二十五日，以姚希得为敷文阁待制、庆元知府兼沿海制置使。
English: On the 25th, Yao Xide was appointed as the governor of Shibunkaku and the governor of Qingyuan.

古文：乙未，诏李庭芝起复秘阁修撰、主管两淮安抚制置司公事兼知杨州。
现代文：二十八日，下诏李庭芝重新起用为秘阁修撰，主管两淮安抚制置司公事，兼扬州知州。
English: On the 28th, Li Tingzhi was reappointed as the secretary of the secret cabinet, in charge of the public affairs of the two provinces, and Yangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：六月丁酉朔，夏贵奏淮安战功。
现代文：六月初一，夏贵奏报淮安战功。
English: On the first day of June, Xia Gui reported Huai'an's war exploits.

古文：庚子，窜丁大全于南康军。
现代文：初四，丁大全流窜南康军。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Ding Daquan became a member of the Nankang Army.

古文：壬寅，诏立皇子忠王禥为皇太子，赐字长源。
现代文：初六，下诏立皇子忠王赵甚为皇太子，赐字长源。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed that Prince Zhongwang Zhao was the crown prince and gave him the title of Changyuan.

古文：戊申，王野卒。
现代文：十二日，王眺去世。
English: On the 12th, Wang Qiao passed away.

古文：壬子，赐李遇龙金带。
现代文：十六日，赐给李遇龙金带。
English: On the 16th, Li Yulong was given a gold belt.

古文：陈奕带御器械，依旧镇江驻扎御前诸军都统制，赐田三十顷。
现代文：陈奕带御器械，依旧为镇江驻扎御前各军都统制，赐田三十顷。
English: Chen Yi took the imperial instruments and still controlled all the troops stationed in front of Zhenjiang, granting thirty hectares of land.

古文：诏升巢县为镇巢军。
现代文：下诏升巢县为镇巢军。
English: Under the edict, Shengchao County became Zhenchao Army.

古文：甲寅，杨栋、叶梦鼎并太子詹事。
现代文：十八日，杨栋、叶梦鼎为太子詹事。
English: On the 18th, Yang Dong and Ye Mengding became Prince Zhanji.

古文：乙卯，陈韡进一秩、福建安抚使、知福州，徐清叟观文殿学士、知泉州。
现代文：十九日，陈擎进升一级，为福建安抚使兼福州知州；徐清雯为观文殿学士、泉州知州。
English: On the 19th, Chen Qingjin was promoted to the first level, as the Fujian Peace Envoy and Fuzhou Chizhou; Xu Qingwen was the Guanwen Hall Bachelor and Quanzhou Chizhou.

古文：秋七月丁卯朔，皇太子入东宫，行册礼，大赦。
现代文：秋七月初一，皇太子进居东宫，举行册封礼，大赦。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the Crown Prince moved into the East Palace, held the investiture ceremony, and granted a general amnesty.

古文：壬申，贵妃阎氏薨，赐谥惠昭。
现代文：初六，贵妃阎氏去世，赐给溢号惠昭。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Guifei Yan passed away, and was given the posthumous name Huizhao.

古文：东南有星如太白。
现代文：东南有星如太白星。
English: In the southeast, there are stars such as Taibai Star.

古文：丁亥，命皇太子昕朝侍立。
现代文：二十一日，命令皇太子早朝侍立。
English: On the 21st, the crown prince was ordered to be present in the early morning.

古文：戊子，上谓宰执曰： 北朝使来，事体当议。 
现代文：二十二日，理宗对宰执说： 元朝使臣来，当议事体。 
English: On the 22nd, Rizong said to Zai Xie: The Yuan Dynasty envoys have come to be the deliberative body.

古文：贾似道奏： 和出彼谋，岂容一切轻徇？
现代文：贾似道上奏说： 议和出自元朝，难道能够轻视此事？
English: Jia Li said on the way to the meeting: Is it possible to make light of the fact that the Yuan Dynasty was the origin of the Han Dynasty?

古文：倘以交邻国之道来，当令入见。 
现代文：如果元使是来与我们交好的，应当让其朝见。 
English: If the Yuan Envoy is here to make friends with us, he should be allowed to see us.

古文：己丑，侍御史何梦然劾丁大全、吴潜欺君无君之罪。
现代文：二十三日，侍御史何梦然弹勃丁大全、吴潜欺君、蔑视君王之罪。
English: On the 23rd, the chamberlain, Shi He Mengran, played Bo Ding Daquan, Wu Qian deceived the king, and despised the king's crime.

古文：庚寅，贾似道兼太子少师，朱熠、皮龙荣、沈炎并兼宾客。
现代文：二十四日，贾似道兼太子少师，朱熠&;;皮龙荣、沈炎兼宾客。
English: On the 24th, Jia Li Dao was also the prince's apprentice, Zhu Xi, Pi Long Rong, and Shen Yan were also guests.

古文：辛卯，诏丁大全削三秩、谪居南安军，吴潜夺观文殿大学士，罢祠，削二秩、谪居建昌军。
现代文：二十五日，下诏丁大全削夺三秩，贬滴南安军；吴潜削夺观文殿大学士，罢除祠禄，削夺官品二级，贬滴建昌军。
English: On the 25th, the next Emperor Ding Daquan cut three ranks and demoted the Nan'an Army; Wu Qian cut the Benten University, removed the ancestral hall, cut the second-level official product, and demoted the Jianchang Army.

古文：癸巳，诏举孝廉。
现代文：二十七日，下诏举荐孝廉。
English: On the 27th, Xiao Lian was recommended.

古文：八月壬寅，以程元凤为淮、浙发运使、判平江府。
现代文：八月初七，以程元凤为淮、浙发运使、判平江府。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the lunar month, Cheng Yuanfeng was appointed as the Huai, Zhejiang Dispatching and Transporting Envoy to Pingjiang.

古文：己酉，太阴犯填星。
现代文：十四日，月亮侵犯填星。
English: On the 14th, the moon invaded the stars.

古文：诏皇太子受册毕，贾似道、朱熠、皮龙荣、沈炎各进一秩，东宫官吏诸军兵等官一转，余皆推恩。
现代文：下诏：皇太子受册完毕，贾似道、朱熠、皮龙荣、沈炎各进一级，东宫官吏诸军兵等转一官，其余人给予恩赏。
English: The following edict was issued: After the registration of the crown prince was completed, Jia Xiangdao, Zhu Xi, Pi Long Rong, and Shen Yan were promoted to the first grade, the officials of the East Palace and the soldiers were transferred to the first grade, and the rest were rewarded.

古文：太白犯房。
现代文：十七日，赵与袜去世，赠少师，溢号忠宪。
English: Taibai Xing violated the lodging.

古文：壬戌，李曾伯、史岩之各削二秩。甲子，饶虎臣削二秩，夺资政殿学士，罢祠。
现代文：太白星侵犯房宿。二十七日，饶虎臣削夺官品二级，削夺资政殿学士，罢除祠禄。
English: On the 27th, Rao Huochen was stripped of his second-class official title, his bachelor's degree in finance and administration, and his ancestral stipend.

古文：九月癸酉，守泸州刘整以功来上。
现代文：九月初八，沪州守臣刘整报来战功。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of the year, Liu Jianping, the governor of Huzhou Province, reported his military exploits.

古文：丁丑，知漳州、节制屯戍军马洪天锡言，援例创辟干官一员，报行军机密文字，奏可。
现代文：十二日，漳州知州节制屯戍军马洪天锡说，援例创设干官一员，报行军机密文字，奏可。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Ma Hong Tianxi, commander of the Zhangzhou-Chizhou temperance camp army, said that he would create a cadre to assist the case, report the confidential military text, and report it.

古文：辛巳，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：十六日，祭祀明堂，大赦。
English: On the 16th, the memorial service was held at Myeongdong, and a general amnesty was declared.

古文：丙戌，荧惑犯壁。
现代文：二十一日，荧惑星侵犯壁宿。
English: On the twenty-first day, the fluorescent planet invaded the wall.

古文：戊子，李松寿犯淮安。
现代文：二十三日，李松寿侵犯淮安。
English: On the 23rd, Li Songshou invaded Huai'an.

古文：冬十月乙未朔，诏申严边防。
现代文：冬十月初一，下诏申严边防。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the government issued a decree to tighten border defense.

古文：甲辰，诏党丁大全、吴潜者，台谏其严觉察举劾以闻，当置于罪，以为同恶相济者之戒。
现代文：初十，下诏： 与丁大全、吴潜结为同党的人，台谏官要严格监察检举他们的罪状上报，应当判他们的罪，把他们当作为共同作恶而互相帮助勾结的人的警戒。 
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the following edict was issued: Taiwan eunuchs should strictly supervise and report the crimes of those who are members of the same party as Ding Daquan and Wu Qianjun. They should judge their crimes and regard them as the vigilance of those who commit evil together and help and collude with each other.

古文：时似道专政，台谏何梦然、孙附凤、桂锡孙、刘应龙承顺风指，凡为似道所恶者无贤否皆斥，帝弗悟其奸，为下是诏。
现代文：当时贾似道把持大权，台谏官何梦然、孙附凤、桂锡孙、刘应龙等都顺承他的脸色和旨意行事，凡是被贾似道所厌恶的人不管贤否都加以排斥，皇上不明白他的险恶用心，为此下了这道诏令。
English: At that time, Jia Li Dao held great power. Taiwanese eunuchs He Mengran, Sun Fu Feng, Gui Xisun, Liu Yinglong, etc. all obeyed his face and will. Anyone who was disgusted by Jia Li Dao was excluded regardless of merit or not. The emperor did not understand his sinister intentions, so he issued this edict.

古文：戊申，李松寿修南城，诏趣淮阃调兵毁之。
现代文：十四日，李松寿修筑南城，下诏催促两淮统兵将领调兵毁掉。
English: On the 14th, Li Songshou rebuilt Nancheng, and issued an edict urging the two Huaiyi generals to destroy the transferred soldiers.

古文：壬子，破李松寿兵于涟水城下，夷南城旧址。
现代文：十八日，在涟水军城下打败李松寿军，平夷南城旧址。
English: On the 18th, Li Song Shou's army was defeated under the city of Surabaya, and the old site of Pingyi Nancheng.

古文：乙卯，有星自东北急流向太阴。
现代文：二十一日，有一颗星从东北方向月亮流去。
English: On the 21st, a star streamed from the northeast toward the moon.

古文：壬戌，窜吴潜于潮州。
现代文：二十八日，将吴潜流窜到潮州。
English: On the 28th, Wu Qianlu was escorted to Chaozhou.

古文：十一月丙寅，诏内侍何时修削二秩，永罢不叙。
现代文：十一月初三，下诏内侍何时修削夺二秩，永远罢除，不予录用。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the following edict was issued: "When a chambermaid is reduced to the second rank, she will be dismissed forever and will not be hired."

古文：洪焘知临安府兼浙西安抚使。
现代文：洪煮知临安府兼浙西安抚使。
English: Hong Ni Zhi Lin'an Prefecture and Zhejiang and West China Pacifying Envoy.

古文：壬午，以中军统制、知简州马千权兴州都统兼知合州。
现代文：十九日，以中军统制、知简州马千代理兴州都统兼合州知州。
English: On the 19th, with the Chinese army in control, Ma Qian, the deputy of Jianzhou, took charge of the Xingzhou Metropolitan Government and Hezhou Chizhou.

古文：戊子，荧惑与填星顺行，太阴犯房。
现代文：二十五日，荧惑星与填星顺行，月亮侵犯房宿。
English: On the 25th, the fluorescent planet and the filling star go along, and the moon encroaches on the house.

古文：十二月甲午朔，诏华亭奉宸庄，其隶外廷助军饷。
现代文：十二月初一，下诏：华亭奉哀庄，将其隶归外廷，补助军晌用。
English: On the first day of December, the following edict was issued: Huating Bongai Zhuang would be subordinated to the Outer Court and used to subsidize the military.

古文：包恢叙复元官职、知常州。
现代文：包恢恢复原来官职，知常州。
English: Bao Jian recovered his former official position and returned to Zhichang Prefecture.

古文：辛丑，建阳县嘉禾生，一本十五穗，诏改建阳为嘉禾县。
现代文：初八，建阳县生出嘉禾，一株十五穗，下诏改建阳县为嘉禾县。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Jianyang County gave birth to Jiahe, one plant of fifteen ears, and the next day, Jianyang County was changed to Jiahe County.

古文：甲寅，吕文德上夔路战功。
现代文：二十一日，吕文德报上夔路战功。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Lü Wende was awarded the Kushiro War Merit Award.

古文：乙卯，少师、庐陵郡王思正薨，谥简惠。
现代文：二十二日，少师、庐陵郡王赵思正去世，溢号简惠。
English: On the 22nd, Zhao Sizheng, a young teacher and the king of Fuling County, passed away.

古文：印应雷直徽猷阁、知江州、主管江西安抚司公事，节制蕲、黄、兴国三郡。
现代文：印应雷直徽酞阁、江州知州、主管江西安抚司公事，节制薪、黄、兴国三郡。
English: He is in charge of the public affairs of the Jiangxi Pacification Department, and is in charge of the three counties of Guizhou, Huangshan, and Xingguo.

古文：庚申，以监察御史桂锡孙言，追寝全子才叙复之命。
现代文：二十七日，以监察御史桂锡孙说，追停全子才复职之命。
English: On the 27th, Gui Xisun, the inspector, said that the order to suspend the whole son was reinstated.

古文：二年春正月癸亥朔，诏： 监司率半岁具劾去赃吏之数来上，视多寡为殿最，行赏罚。
现代文：景定二年春正月初一，下诏： 监司每半年开列弹勃罢除赃吏人数上报，按多少作为评价好坏的标准，实行赏罚。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Jingding's reign, the following edict was issued: the Supervision Department shall report the number of officials who have been fired or dismissed on a semi-annual basis, and reward and punish according to the number as a criterion for evaluating good and bad.

古文：守臣助监司所不及，以一岁为殿最，定赏罚。
现代文：守臣助监司所不及，以一年为殿最，定赏罚。
English: The Shouson Assistant Supervisor's Office fell short, with one year being the maximum, with a fixed reward and punishment.

古文：本路、州无所劾，而台谏论列，则监司守臣皆以殿定罚。
现代文：本路、州没有弹勃官吏的记录，但台谏论及，那么监司、守臣考核都定为末等，予以处罚。
English: This province and prefecture do not have any record of officials being shot, but if Taiwan is concerned, then the supervisors and supervisors will be assessed as the lowest level and will be punished.

古文：有治状廉声者，摭实以闻。 
现代文：有治绩好名声的，按实际情况上报。 
English: If there is a reputation for good performance, report it according to the actual situation.

古文：乙丑，城安庆。
现代文：初三，在安庆筑城。
English: Third year of junior high school, in Anqing.

古文：诏马光祖进二秩。
现代文：下诏马光祖进升二级。
English: The next edict promoted Ma Guangzu to the second grade.

古文：丁丑，命皇太子谒拜孔子于太学。
现代文：十五日，命令皇太子到太学朝拜孔子。
English: On the 15th, he ordered the crown prince to come to Taigaku to worship Confucius.

古文：己卯，福建安抚使陈韡累疏请老，诏进一秩，守观文殿学士致仕。
现代文：十七日，福建安抚使陈蒸多次上疏请求退休，下诏进一级，守观文殿学士退休。
English: On the 17th, the Fujian appeasement made Chen Qun repeatedly request retirement, and he was promoted to the first grade, and retired from the Shogun Academy.

古文：以董槐判福州、福建安抚使。
现代文：以董槐判福州、福建安抚使。
English: He was appointed as the Fuzhou and Fujian Pacifying Envoy.

古文：乙酉，诏封张栻为华阳伯，吕祖谦开封伯，从祀孔子庙庭。
现代文：二十三日，下诏封张试为华阳伯，吕祖谦为开封伯，从祀孔子庙庭。
English: On the 23rd, the Lower Zhao, Zhang Xian, became Huayang Bo, and Lu Zuqian became Kaifeng Bo, and the Confucius Temple was built.

古文：二月丙申，孙虎臣战邳州，全师而归。
现代文：二月初四，孙虎臣在邱州作战，全师而还。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, Sun Huchen fought in Chuzhou, and the whole division fought back.

古文：癸卯，诏诸路监司申严伪会赏罚之令。
现代文：十一日，下诏各路监司申严伪会赏罚之令。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Superintendent of each road issued an order to reward and punish the counterfeiters.

古文：甲寅，进封周国公主。
现代文：二十二日，进封周国公主。
English: On the 22nd, Princess Zhou Guo was enthroned.

古文：三月壬戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of March, another solar eclipse occurred.

古文：乙亥，故宁远军承宣使张祥、都统制阎忠进，以援蜀之功，祥赠节度使，忠进赠复州团练。除恩泽外，各更官一子承信郎，赐缗钱二万。
现代文：十四日，已故宁远军承宣使张样、都统制阎忠进，因援蜀之功，张样赠节度使，阎忠进赠复州团练使，除自己应得待遇外，分别任其一子为承信郎，赐给络钱二万。
English: On the 14th, the late Ningyuan Army made Zhang So, the successor of Xuanzong, and Yan Zhongjin, the governor of the capital, respectively. For their services in helping Shu, Zhang So was awarded the title of "deputy governor" and Yan Zhongjin was awarded the title of "deputy governor of Fuzhou." In addition to the treatment they deserved, one of their sons was appointed as the successor of Xuanzong and was given 20,000 yuan.

古文：戊寅，贾似道等上《玉牒》、《日历》、《会要》、《经武要略》及孝宗、光宗、宁宗《实录》，诏似道、皮龙荣、朱熠、沈炎各进二秩。
现代文：十七日，贾似道等呈上医碟、《日历、会要、经武要略和孝宗实录、优宗实录、泞宗实录。下诏贾似道、皮龙荣、朱熠、沈炎各进二级。
English: On the 17th, Jia Li Dao and others presented the medical disk, the "calendar, meeting points, martial arts points and filial piety record, superior piety record, and eunuch piety record." Below, Jia Li Dao, Pi Long Rong, Zhu Xi, and Shen Yan each advanced to the second level.

古文：夏四月癸巳朔，余思忠追毁出身文字，除名勒停、窜新州。
现代文：夏四月癸巳朔，余思忠被追毁出身文字，除名，勒令停职，贬窜新州。
English: In the summer of April, Yu Sizhong was persecuted, expelled, suspended from his post, and demoted to Xinzhou.

古文：乙未，以皮龙荣参知政事，沈炎同知枢密院事兼权参知政事，何梦然签书枢密院事，俞兴保康军承宣使、四川安抚制置使。
现代文：初四，以皮龙荣参知政事，沈炎同知枢密院事兼代理参知政事，何梦然签书枢密院事，俞兴为保康军承宣使、四川安抚制置使。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Pi Long Rong was appointed to participate in the chancellor's political affairs, Shen Yan Tongzhi was appointed to participate in the chancellor's political affairs, He Mengran signed a letter to participate in the chancellor's political affairs, and He Xing was appointed as the envoy of the Hokang army and the envoy of the Sichuan pacification system.

古文：丙申，吕文德超授太尉、京湖安抚制置屯田使、夔路策应使兼知鄂州，李庭芝右文殿修撰、枢密都承旨、两淮安抚制置副使、知扬州。
现代文：初五，吕文德越级授为太尉、京湖安抚制置屯田使、夔路策应使兼鄂州知州，李庭芝为右文殿修撰、枢密都承旨、两淮安抚制置副使、扬州知州。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Lü Wende Yue was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general, the Beijing-Hubei Peace Treaty was signed and a garrison was set up, the Kushiro Peace Treaty was signed and a garrison was set up in Ezhou and Chizhou, Li Tingzhi was assigned to the Right Great Hall of the People, the Privy Council was set up, the two Huaihe Peace Treaties were signed and a vice-envoy was set up, and Yangzhou and Chizhou.

古文：己亥，诏申严江防。
现代文：初八，下诏申严江防。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the imperial edict of "strict river defense" was issued.

古文：壬寅，吕文德兼湖广总领财赋。
现代文：十一日，吕文德兼湖广总领财赋。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Lü Wende, who is also the general manager of Huguang, received the donation.

古文：乙巳，马天骥资政殿学士、知福州、福建安抚使，吕文福带御器械、淮西安抚副使兼知庐州，官一转。
现代文：十四日，马天骥为资政殿学士、福州知州、福建安抚使，吕文福为带御器械、淮西军抚副使兼庐州知州，转一官。
English: On the 14th, Ma Tianyao was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Finance and Administration, Fuzhou, Fujian, and Lu Wenfu was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Finance and Administration, Fuzhou, Fujian, and Lu Wenfu was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Finance and Administration, Fuzhou, Fujian, and Lu Wenfu was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Finance and Administration, Fuzhou, Fujian, and Lu Wenfu was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Finance and Administration, Fuzhou, Fujian, and Lu Wenfu was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Finance and Administration, Fuzhou, Fujian

古文：戊申，马光祖进观文殿学士，职任依旧。
现代文：十七日，马光祖进为观文殿学士，职任依旧。
English: On the 17th, Ma Guangzujin became a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and his position remains the same.

古文：乙卯，窜吴潜于循州。
现代文：二十四日，吴潜贬窜到循州。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Wu Qianjun went to Zhengzhou.

古文：丙辰，窜丁大全于贵州，追削二秩。
现代文：二十五日，丁大全流窜到贵州，追夺二级官品。
English: On the 25th, Ding Daquan went to Guizhou to pursue the second-class official products.

古文：丁巳，杨镇授左领军卫将军、驸马都尉，高达知庐州、淮西安抚副使。
现代文：二十六日，杨镇授为左领军卫将军、驹马都尉，高达知庐州、淮西安抚副使。
English: On the 26th, Yang Zhen was awarded the title of General of the Left-Leading Army Guards, Lieutenant of the Horse Guards, and Vice-Envoy of the Supreme Commander of the Chinese People's Liberation Army to pacify Zhishu and Huaixi.

古文：五月癸亥，贾似道请祠禄，诏不允。
现代文：五月初二，贾似道请任祠禄官，诏令不允。
English: On the second day of the fifth month of the year, Jia Xi Dao asked to be appointed as an official of the ancestral hall, but the imperial edict did not allow it.

古文：庚午，谢方叔叙复观文殿大学士致仕。
现代文：初九，谢方叔恢复为观文殿大学士退休。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, Uncle Xie Fang resumed his retirement as a scholar of the Temple of Heaven.

古文：戊寅，以刘雄飞知夔州、夔路安抚使。
现代文：十七日，以刘雄飞知夔州、夔路安抚使。
English: On the 17th, Liu Xiongfei was appointed as the pacification envoy to Bozhou and Kushiro.

古文：乙酉，王坚迁左金吾卫上将军、湖北安抚使兼知江陵府。
现代文：二十四日，王坚迁为左金吾卫上将军、湖北安抚使兼江陵知府。
English: On the 24th, Wang Jian was transferred to the position of Zuo Kingu Wei Shang General, Hubei Peace Envoy and Jiangling Prefecture.

古文：六月乙未，诏霖雨为沴，避殿、减膳、彻乐。
现代文：六月初五，下诏阴雨连绵，造成灾害，决定避殿减膳彻乐。
English: On the 5th day of the 6th month of the year, it rained incessantly, causing disasters, and it was decided to evacuate the palace, reduce meals, and have fun.

古文：乙巳，诏近畿水灾，安吉为甚，亟讲行荒政。
现代文：十五日，下诏近瓷水灾，安吉最为严重，应尽快实行救荒措施。
English: On the fifteenth day of the following month, flooding occurred near the porcelain factory, and Anji was the most seriously affected. It was necessary to implement relief measures as soon as possible.

古文：辛亥，以范文虎为左领军卫大将军，主管侍卫步军司兼马军司。
现代文：二十一日，以范文虎为左领军卫大将军，主管侍卫步军司兼马军司。
English: On the 21st, Fan Wenhu was appointed as the left leader of the Guards General, in charge of the Guards Foot Troops and the Horse Troops.

古文：秋七月甲子，蜀帅俞兴奏守泸州刘整率所部兵北降，由兴构隙致变也。
现代文：秋七月初四，蜀帅俞兴奏报沪州守臣刘整率所部士兵投降元朝，由俞兴构隙致变。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Shu general Yu Xing reported that the soldiers of the Huzhou governor Liu Zhiguo surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty, which was caused by Yu Xing's intervention.

古文：至是，兴移檄讨整。
现代文：到这时，俞兴发布文书讨伐刘整。
English: At this time, He Xing issued a document to crack down on Liu Zhengyi.

古文：辛未，制置使蒲择之坐密通蜡书叛贼罗显，诏窜万安军。
现代文：十一日，制置使蒲择之因用蜡书秘密交通叛贼罗显，下诏贬窜万安军。
English: On the 11th day, the system was set up to make Pu Zi's reasons for using wax books to secretly communicate with traitors be revealed, and the following edict was issued to discredit the Wan'an Army.

古文：太阴犯斗。
现代文：月亮侵犯斗宿。
English: The too-shadowy star is the culprit of the fight in the heavenly quarter.

古文：乙亥，以厉文翁为资政殿学士、沿海制置使、知庆元府。
现代文：十五日，以厉文翁为资政殿学士、沿海制置使、庆元知府。
English: On the 15th, Li Wenyong was appointed as the Vice-governor, the Vice-governor, the Vice-governor, the Vice-governor, the Vice-governor and the Vice-governor.

古文：戊寅，王惟忠家讼冤，诏夺谢方叔合得恩数。
现代文：十八日，王惟忠家诉讼冤屈，下诏削夺谢方叔应得待遇。
English: On the 18th, Wang Weizhong's family filed a lawsuit for grievances, and the next edict was to deprive Uncle Xie Fang of the treatment he deserved.

古文：丁大全责授新州团练使、贵州安置。
现代文：丁大全贬降新州团练使，贵州安置。
English: Ding Daquan demoted Xinzhou regimental training envoy, resettled in Guizhou.

古文：台臣吴燧夺职罢祠，陈大方、胡大昌皆镌官。
现代文：台臣吴隧夺职罢祠，陈大方、胡大昌都被削夺官职。
English: The Taiwanese minister Wu Tun was stripped of his post. Chen Dafang and Hu Dachang were also stripped of their posts.

古文：壬午陈韡卒，赠少师，谥忠肃。
现代文：二十二日，陈擎去世，赠少师，溢号忠肃。
English: On the 22nd, Chen Qin passed away. He was awarded the title of "Junior Teacher" and was known for his loyalty.

古文：丙戌，吴潜责授化州团练使、循州安置。
现代文：二十六日，吴潜贬降为化州团练使，循州安置。
English: On the 26th, Wu Qian was demoted to the rank of a regimental drill sergeant of Huazhou Regiment, and was resettled in Xuzhou.

古文：八月壬辰，命韩宣兼常德、辰、沅、澧、靖五郡镇抚使。吕文德兼四川宣抚使，范文虎以白鹿矶之功赏七官，以五官转行遥郡防御使，余官给凭。
现代文：八月初二，命令韩宣兼常德、辰、沉、遭、靖五郡镇抚使，吕文德兼四川宣抚使，范文虎因白鹿矶之功赏七官，以五官转行遥郡防御使，余官给予凭据。
English: At the beginning of August 2nd, he ordered Han Xuan and Changde, Chen, Sheng, Seng and Jing to be the five county township commissioners, Lu Wende and Sichuan to be the four county commissioners, Fan Wenhu to be awarded seven officials for the achievements of Bai Ruqi, five officials to be transferred to the defense commissioners of Yao County, and the remaining officials to be given certificates.

古文：丁酉，诏夺向士璧从官恩数，穷竟侵盗掩匿之罪。
现代文：初七，下诏削夺向士璧从官待遇，追究侵盗掩匿之罪。
English: On the 7th day of the first month of the year, the next edict was issued to deprive Xiang Shibi of official treatment, and to investigate the crime of theft and concealment.

古文：时以兵退，遣官会计边费，似道忌功，欲以汙篾一时阃臣，士璧及赵葵、史岩之、杜庶皆责征偿。
现代文：当时因元兵北退，派遣官员公计边费，贾似道忌功，想在这方面污蔑陷害在外统兵将领，向士璧、赵葵、史岩之、杜庶都被责令偿还。
English: At that time, because the former soldiers retreated to the north, the dispatched officials made a public calculation of the border fee, Jia Lian Dao Bo Gong, and wanted to slander and frame the generals of the foreign soldiers in this regard. Xiang Sibi, Zhao Kwai, Shi Yanzhi and Du Shiao were all ordered to repay.

古文：信州谢枋得以赵葵檄给钱粟募民兵守御，至是，自偿万缗。
现代文：信州谢仿得，因赵葵致书说给钱粟召募民兵守卫，这时，自偿万络。
English: Shinshu Xie imitated, because Zhao Kwai wrote a letter saying that he would give Qian Mao to recruit militia guards, at this time, he paid a lot of money.

古文：壬寅，筑周国公主馆于安济桥。
现代文：十二日，在安济桥修筑周国公主馆。
English: On the 12th, the Zhou Guo Princess Pavilion was built in Anji Bridge.

古文：乙巳，以江万里为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事，依执政恩数。
现代文：十五日，以江万里为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事，给予执政待遇。
English: On the 15th, Jiang Wanli was appointed as a Duanming Palace scholar and a Privy Councillor with the same signature, and was given the ruling treatment.

古文：九月辛酉，诏湖、秀二郡水灾，守令其亟劝分，监司申严荒政。
现代文：九月初二，下诏湖、秀二郡水灾，守令要竭尽全力劝桌，监司要重申实行荒政措施。
English: On the 2nd day of the 9th month of the year, when the Zhaozhao Lake and Xiu Er County were flooded, the guards should do their best to persuade the table, and the supervisors should reiterate the implementation of austerity measures.

古文：乙亥，李庭芝言李松寿已遁。
现代文：十六日，李庭芝报告说李松寿逃跑。
English: On the 16th, Li Tingzhi reported that Li Songshou had fled.

古文：大元使赦经久留真州，帝趣与锡赉。
现代文：元朝使臣郝经久留真州，理宗催促给予赏赐。
English: The envoys of the Yuan Dynasty stayed in Zhenzhou for a long time, and Li Zong urged that they be rewarded.

古文：经之留，谋出贾似道，帝惑其言不悟。
现代文：拘留郝经，是贾似道的计谋，怀疑他的话，但不知道其中奥秘。
English: The detention of Gong Jing is a trick of Jia Lidao, who doubts his words, but does not know the secret.

古文：盖似道在鄂时，值我世祖皇帝归正大位撤兵，似道自诡有再造之功，讳言岁币及讲和之事，故不使经入见。
现代文：大概是贾似道在鄂州时，恰逢元朝世祖皇帝为了争夺汗位，不得不撤兵，贾似道却自吹有再造宋廷之功，避而不谈岁币和讲和之事，所以不让郝经朝见皇上。
English: It was probably Jia Li Dao who, when he was in Ezhou, coincided with the time when the Yuan Dynasty's ancestor emperor had to withdraw his troops in order to compete for the throne. Jia Li Dao, however, boasted of his role in re-establishing the Song Dynasty, and avoided talking about the new year's money and peace talks, so he did not allow the Emperor to see the Emperor.

古文：冬十月癸巳，吕文德言已复泸州外堡，拟即对江垒石为城，以示持久之计，从之。
现代文：冬十月初四，吕文德报告说已经收复沪州城外寨堡，打算在对江垒石为城，表示抵抗到底的意向，理宗批准了这个设想。
English: On the 4th day of the 10th month of winter, Lü Wende reported that he had recaptured the fortified city outside the city of Huzhou, and intended to make the river a fortress, expressing his intention to resist to the end. Li Zong approved this idea.

古文：戊戌，雷电。
现代文：初九，打雷闪电。
English: At nine o'clock, thunder and lightning.

古文：甲申，诏申奖贾似道鄂州之功。
现代文：甲申日，下诏奖赏贾似道鄂州之功。
English: On the day of Jiaxin, the following edict was issued to reward the contribution of Jiaxin to the development of Ezhou.

古文：丙午，以何梦然同知枢密院事兼参知政事。
现代文：十七日，以何梦然同知枢密院事兼参知政事。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, He Mengran, a member of the Privy Council and also a member of the Council of State, ascended the throne.

古文：癸丑，程元凤授特进、观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读。
现代文：十八日，程元凤授为特进、观文殿大学士、醛泉观使兼侍读。
English: On the 18th, Cheng Yuanfeng was awarded the title of "Special Advancement," "Junior Scholar of the Academy of Confucianism" and "Ambassador and Attendant of the Academy of Confucianism."

古文：甲寅，皇太子择配，帝诏其母族全昭孙之女择日入见。
现代文：十九日，皇太子选择配偶，理宗下诏其母族全昭孙的女儿择日朝见。
English: On the 19th, the crown prince chose a spouse, and the daughter of the patriarch's maternal great-great-grandson chose to see him in the morning.

古文：宝祐中，昭孙没于王事，全氏见上，上曰： 尔父死可念。 
现代文：宝中，全昭孙战死沙场，全氏看见皇上，皇上说： 你的父亲死了，值得思念。 
English: In the treasure, Quanzhao's grandson was killed in the battlefield. When Quanzhi saw the emperor, the emperor said, "Your father is dead and deserves to be remembered."

古文：对曰： 臣妾父固可念，淮、湖百姓尤可念。 
现代文：全氏回答说： 我的父亲固然值得思念，淮、湖一带的百姓尤其值得思念。 
English: Mr. Quan replied: Of course, my father deserves to be remembered, and the people around Huaihe Lake deserve to be remembered in particular.

古文：上曰： 即此语可母天下。 
现代文：理宗说： 就凭这句话，可以为天下百姓的母亲。 
English: Rizong said, "With this sentence alone, I can become the mother of all the people in the world."

古文：迨开庆丁大全用事，以京尹顾嵓女为议，大全败，故有是命。
现代文：到开庆时丁大全擅权用事，想以京尹顾函女作为皇太子的配偶，丁大全失败，所以有这个命令。
English: At the beginning of the celebration, Ding Daquan tried to usurp power and wanted to make Jing Yin Gu Han's daughter the crown prince's consort. Ding Daquan failed, so there was this order.

古文：丙辰，沈炎资政殿学士、提举临安府洞霄宫、任便居住。
现代文：二十一日，沈炎为资政殿学士，提举临安府洞霄宫，任便居住。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Shen Yan was awarded the title of "Bachelor of the House of Councillors" and moved to Lin'an Doushangu Palace.

古文：十一月己未朔，刘雄飞和州防御使、枢密副都承旨、四川安抚制置副使兼知重庆府、四川总领、夔路转运使。
现代文：十一月初一，刘雄飞为和州防御使、枢密副都承旨、四川安抚制置副使兼重庆知府、四川总领、夔路转运使。
English: On the first day of November, Liu Xiongfei was appointed as the envoy for the defense of He Prefecture, the vice-envoy for the construction of the Privy Council, the vice-envoy for the construction of the Sichuan Pacification System, the vice-envoy for the construction of the Chongqing Prefecture, the Sichuan leader, and the Kushiro transit envoy.

古文：庚申，周国公主馆成，诏董宋臣、李忠辅各官一转。
现代文：初二，周国公主馆修成，下诏董宋臣、李忠辅各转一官。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the Princess Zhou Guo Memorial Hall was completed, and the following day, Dong Song Chen and Li Zhongyu were each promoted to a higher position.

古文：甲戌，资政殿学士致仕汝腾卒，赠官四转，谥忠清。
现代文：十六日，以资政殿学士退休的汝腾去世，赠转四官，溢号忠清。
English: On the 16th, Juteng, who retired as a scholar of the House of Councillors, passed away, and four officials were transferred to him, and his name was changed to Zhongqing.

古文：安南国贡象二。
现代文：安南国进贡二只大象。
English: Annan pays tribute with two elephants.

古文：丁丑，马光祖提领户部财用兼知临安府、浙西安抚使。
现代文：十九日，马光祖提领户部财用兼临安知府、浙西安抚使。
English: On the 19th, Ma Guangzu was appointed as the leader of the Household Department's financial affairs, concurrently serving as the Vice-Governor of An Prefecture and the Vice-Minister of Zhejiang and West China.

古文：下嫁周国公主于杨镇。
现代文：周国公主下嫁给杨镇。
English: Princess Zhou Guo married Yang Zhen.

古文：己卯，以镇为宜州观察使，赐玉带，寻升庆远军承宣使。
现代文：二十一日，以杨镇为宣州观察使，赐给玉带，不久升为庆远军承宣使。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yang Zhen was appointed as the Xuanzhou observation envoy, given a jade belt, and soon promoted to the Qingyuan army to succeed the Xuan envoy.

古文：诏： 驸马都尉杨镇家合有赏典，杨蕃孙官两转，杨铎、杨鉴官一转，并直秘阁，余转官进封有差。 
现代文：下诏： 驹马都尉杨镇家都给予奖赏，杨蕃孙转两官，杨铎、杨鉴转一官，都为直秘阁，其余的人转官进封不等。 
English: The following edict was issued: rewards were given to the family members of Yang Zhen, the captain of the horse, Yang Xinsun was promoted to two posts, Yang Xuan and Yang Jian were promoted to one post, all of them were direct secretaries, and the rest of the people were promoted to different ranks.

古文：癸未，封全氏永嘉郡夫人。
现代文：二十五日，封全氏为永嘉郡夫人。
English: On the 25th, Feng Quan became the wife of Yongjia County.

古文：十二月庚寅，改窜蒲择之于南康军。
现代文：十二月初二，蒲择之改贬南康军。
English: On the second day of December, the Southern Kangjun Army was defeated by the Southern Kangjun Army.

古文：辛卯，宰臣奏： 太子语臣等言： 近奉圣训，夫妇之道，王化之基，男女正位，天地大义。
现代文：初三，宰臣上奏说： 太子对臣等说： 近奉圣训，夫妇之道，王化之基，男女正位，天地大义。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, the vice-minister reported, "The prince said to his ministers, "Adhere closely to the Sunnah, the way of the husband and wife, the foundation of kingship, the proper position of men and women, and the justice of heaven and earth.

古文：平日所讲修身齐家之道，当真履实践，勿为口耳之学。 
现代文：平日所讲修身齐家之道，应当亲自实践，不能作为口耳传听之学。 
English: The way of cultivating one's self and one's family, which is usually taught, should be practiced in person, and cannot be learned by word of mouth.

古文：请宣付史馆，永为世程法。 
现代文：请将此语宣付史馆，永远为世人效法。 
English: Please announce this word to the history museum, and forever follow the example of the world.

古文：从之。
现代文：理宗采纳了这个意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：甲午，以皮龙荣兼权知枢密院事，何梦然参知政事兼太子宾客，马光祖同知枢密院事兼太子宾客、知临安府。
现代文：初五，以皮龙荣兼代理知枢密院事，何梦然参知政事兼太子宾客，马光祖同知枢密院事兼太子宾客、临安知府。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, with Pi Long Rong also acting as the Secretary of the Privy Council, He Mengran as the Secretary of State and the Prince's guest, Ma Guangzu as the Secretary of the Privy Council and the Prince's guest, Lin'an Prefecture.

古文：己亥，太阴犯五车。
现代文：初十，月亮侵犯五车宿。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the moon invaded Wucheshuku.

古文：壬寅，江万里依旧端明殿学士、提举临安府洞霄宫、任便居住。
现代文：十三日，江万里依旧为端明殿学士、提举临安府洞霄宫，任便居住。
English: On the 13th, Jiang Wanli was still a bachelor of Duanming Palace, and was promoted to Lin'an Prefecture Dongxiao Palace, where he lived.

古文：癸卯，册永嘉郡夫人全氏为皇太子妃。
现代文：十四日，册封永嘉郡夫人全氏为皇太子妃。
English: On the 14th, the wife of Yongjia County, Ms. Quan Zong, was crowned Crown Princess.

古文：三年春正月戊子朔，诏申饬百官尽言。
现代文：景定三年春正月戊子朔，下诏文武百官畅所欲言。
English: In the first month of the spring in the third year of King Jingding's reign, the Emperor issued the following edict.

古文：诏量移丁大全、吴潜党人，并永不录用。
现代文：下诏丁大全、吴潜党人适当移往近地，但仍然永不录用。
English: In the following edict, Ding Daquan and Wu Xuan Party members were appropriately moved to nearby areas, but they were still never hired.

古文：壬戌，诏： 陈垲等耆年奉祠，宜示崇奖：陈垲端明殿学士，林彬之宝章阁待制，史季温直华文阁，丁仁直宝谟阁，仍并予祠禄。 
现代文：初五，下诏： 陈恺等人年老奉祠，应该予以崇奖：陈恺为端明殿学士，林彬之为宝章阁待制，史季温直华文阁，丁仁直宝漠阁，仍然给予祠禄。 
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: Chen Xi and others who have served the ancestral shrine for many years should be honored with awards: Chen Xi is a graduate of the Duanming Palace, Lin Bin is a treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure treasure.

古文：甲子，福建路安抚使马天骥进资政殿大学士，职任依旧。
现代文：初七，福建路安抚使马天骥进为资政殿大学士，职任依旧。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, the pacification of Fujian Road made Ma Tianyujin a scholar of the University of Investment and Administration, and his position is still the same.

古文：乙丑，诏谕西蜀郡县等官，已授遇阙，毋遥受虚批月日，违期不赴。
现代文：初八，诏令告诉西蜀郡县等官，已经授给官职，但需要待网，不得遥受虚批日月，违期不赴。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the imperial decree told the officials of Xishu County and other counties that they had been awarded official posts, but they needed to wait for the network, and they must not be affected by the false approval.

古文：丁卯，以善谘嗣濮王。
现代文：初十，以赵善咨嗣攫王。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Zhao Zenzhi became the heir to the throne.

古文：戊辰，周国公主进封周、汉国公主。
现代文：十二日，周国公主进封周、汉国公主。
English: On the 12th, Princess Zhou Guo was enthroned as Zhou, Princess of Han.

古文：庚午，赐贾似道第宅于集芳园，给缗钱百万，就建家庙。
现代文：十三日，赐贾似道第宅于集芳园，给络钱一百万，就建家庙。
English: On the thirteenth day, he gave Jia Li the first house in Shifang Garden, and a million dollars to build a family temple.

古文：甲戌，诏权知梁山军李鉴守城有功，带行阁门宣赞舍人，就知梁山军。
现代文：十七日，下诏代理梁山知军李鉴守城有功，带行阎门宣赞舍人，正式担任梁山知军。
English: On the 17th, Li Jian, the deputy commander of the Liangshan Zhigong Army, was awarded the title of the official commander of the Liangshan Zhigong Army.

古文：复泸州，改为江安军。吕文德进开府仪同三司。
现代文：收复沪州，改为江安军，吕文德进为开府仪同三司。
English: After the recovery of Huzhou, it was changed to the Jiang'an Army, and Lü Wenzhong became the third division of the Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：二月丁亥朔，临安、安吉、嘉兴属邑水，民溺死者众，诏守臣给礻彗瘗之。
现代文：二月初一，临安、安吉、嘉兴属县水灾，众多百姓淹死，下诏守臣供给棺材埋葬尸体。
English: On the first day of February, floods hit the counties of Lin'an, Anji and Jiaxing. Many people drowned, and it was ordered to supply coffins to bury the dead bodies.

古文：诏奖谕制置司，其立功参赞将士，进秩、升职犒给有差。
现代文：下诏奖谕制置司，其立功参赞将士，进秩、升职、搞赏不等。
English: The following imperial edict established the post of secretary, whose meritorious service as a councillor ranged from promotion, promotion and reward.

古文：乃裕授检校少保。
现代文：赵乃裕授为检校少保。
English: Zhao Naiyu is a junior security guard.

古文：以皮龙荣为资政殿大学士、知潭州、湖南安抚使。
现代文：以皮龙荣为资政殿大学士、知潭州、湖南安抚使。
English: With Piron Rong as a scholar of the Academy of the Palace of the Grand Vizier, Chitanzhou, and Hunan Pacifying Envoy.

古文：乙巳，太阴入氐。
现代文：十九日，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On the 19th, the moon entered Mr. Jin's house.

古文：戊申，诏省试中选士人覆试于御史台，为定制。
现代文：二十二日，下诏省试中选士人到御史台复试，作为定制。
English: On the 22nd, the selected scholars of the next Zhao Provincial Examination will go to the History Station for a retest, as a custom.

古文：庚戌，李璮以涟、海三城叛大元来归，献山东郡县。
现代文：二十四日，李巨以涟、海三城背叛元朝来归，献纳山东郡县。
English: On the 24th, Li Jiu returned to Shandong after betraying the Yuan Dynasty with the cities of Jiu and Hai.

古文：诏改涟水为安东州，授璮保信宁武军节度使、督视京东河北等路军马、齐郡王，复其父李全官爵。
现代文：下诏改涟水为安东州，授李巨为保信宁武军节度使、督视京东河北等路军马、齐郡王，恢复其父李全官爵。
English: The following edict changed Surabaya to Andong Prefecture, awarded Li Jiu the title of Baoshin Ningwu Junction Commander, supervised the military horses of Jingdong, Hebei and other provinces, and the King of Qi County, and restored his father Li Quan's title.

古文：璮即松寿。
现代文：李王即李松寿。
English: The King of Li is Li Songshou.

古文：三月乙丑，以孙附凤为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事兼太子宾客。
现代文：三月初九，以孙附凤为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事兼太子宾客。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month of the year, Sun Fuxifeng was the guest of Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate, Signing Privy Councillor and Crown Prince.

古文：辛未，诏升海州东海县为东海军。
现代文：十五日，下诏升海州东海县为东海军。
English: On the 15th, Shenghaizhou Donghai County was designated as the Eastern Naval Command.

古文：丁丑，汪立信升直华文阁、知江州、主管江西安抚司公事，节制蕲、黄、兴国三郡军马。
现代文：二十一日，汪立信升直华文阁、江州知州、主管江西安抚司公事，节制薪、黄、兴国三郡军马。
English: On the 21st, Wang Lixin was promoted to be in charge of the public affairs of Huayuan Pavilion and Jiangsu Chizhou, and the director of the Jiangxi Pacification Division. He was in charge of the troops and horses of the three counties of Zhucheng, Huanglong and Xingguo.

古文：庚辰，吕文福依旧职差知濠州兼淮西招抚使。
现代文：二十四日，吕文福依旧职差知壕州兼淮西招抚使。
English: On the 24th, Lu Wenfu still served as the special envoy to Hezhou and Huaxi.

古文：夏四月庚寅，太白昼见。
现代文：夏四月初五，太白星白天显现。
English: On the fifth day of the fourth month in summer, the white star appears in the daytime.

古文：庚子，荧惑与岁星合在危。
现代文：十五日，荧惑星与岁星合在危宿。
English: On the 15th, the fluorescent planet and the year star coincided in a dangerous place.

古文：甲辰，有流星大如杯。
现代文：十九日，有流星大如杯。
English: On the 19th, there was a meteor as big as a cup.

古文：五月壬戌，荧惑犯壁垒阵。
现代文：五月初七，荧惑星侵犯壁垒阵。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month, the fluorescent planet invaded the barrier array.

古文：丙寅，雨雹。
现代文：十一日，降冰雹。
English: On the 11th, hail fell.

古文：己巳，诏： 广西静江屯田，小试有效，其邕、钦、宜、融、柳、象、浔诸州守臣任责措置，经略安抚以课殿最，仍条具来上。 
现代文：十四日，下诏： 广西静江屯田，初见成效。琶、钦、宜、融、柳、象、得各州守臣担负措置屯田的任务，经略使、安抚使以此作为考核好坏的标准，并且开列具体情况上报。 
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: "Guangxi and Jingjiang have begun to establish garrisons, and the first results have been achieved. The provincial governors of the provinces of Biao, Qin, Yi, Rong, Liu, Zhao, and De have taken on the task of establishing garrisons, and have used this as a criterion for evaluating whether they are good or bad, and have reported the specific situation.

古文：辛未，马光祖以病请祠，诏知福州兼福建安抚使。
现代文：十六日，马光祖因病请祠，下诏知福州兼福建安抚使。
English: On the 16th, due to illness, Ma Guangzu went to the ancestral shrine and sent a message to Fuzhou and Fujian to appease the envoy.

古文：丁丑，赐礼部进士方山京以下六百三十七人及第、出身。
现代文：二十二日，赐礼部进士方山京以下六百三十七人及第、出身。
English: On the 22nd, 637 people from Fangshan, Beijing and other places were selected to join the Ceremonial Department.

古文：庚辰，夏贵上蕲县战功。
现代文：二十五日，夏贵上报薪县战功。
English: On the 25th, Xia Gui reported his war exploits in Zhouzhu County.

古文：六月戊子，诏李璮受围，给银五万两，下益都府犒师，遣青阳梦炎率师援之。
现代文：六月初四，下诏：李巨受围，给银五万两，拨给益都府搞赏军队，派遣青阳梦炎率军救援。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of June, the following edict was issued: Li Jiu was besieged, gave silver fifty thousand taels, allocated it to Yidu Prefecture to reward the army, and sent Qingyang Mengyan to lead the army to rescue.

古文：庚寅，以孙附凤兼权参知政事，杨栋端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事兼太子宾客。
现代文：初六，以孙附凤兼代理参知政事，杨栋为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事兼太子宾客。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, with Sun Fuxifeng as the acting co-chairman of politics, and Yang Dong as the academician of the Duanming Palace, the co-signer of the Privy Council and the prince's guest.

古文：壬辰，吴潜没于循州，诏许归葬。
现代文：初八，吴潜死于循州，诏许归葬。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Wu Qian died in Zhouzhou, and was buried.

古文：己亥，董槐乞致仕，诏授特进。
现代文：十五日，董槐请求退休，下诏授为特进。
English: On the 15th, Dong Jun requested to retire, and was promoted to special promotion.

古文：戊申，诏青阳梦炎援李璮，不俟解围，辄提援兵南归，谕制置司劾之。
现代文：二十四日，下诏：青阳梦炎援助李巨，不等解围，就率领援军南归，命令制置司弹勃他。
English: On the 24th, the following edict was issued: Qingyang Mengyan would come to the aid of Li Jiu, and as soon as the siege was lifted, he would lead the reinforcements to the south and order the creation of Sifan Bota.

古文：己酉，有流星大如荧惑。
现代文：二十五日，有流星大如荧惑星。
English: On the 25th, there was a meteor as big as a fluorescent planet.

古文：庚戌，安南国王日煚上表乞世袭，诏授检校太师、安南国王，加食邑，男威晃授静海军节度观察处置使、检校太尉兼御史大夫、上柱国、安南国王、效忠顺化功臣，仍赐金带、器币、鞍马。
现代文：二十六日，安南国王日上表请求世袭爵位，下诏授检校太师、安南国王，加食邑，其子威晃授静海军节度观察处置使、检校太尉兼御史大夫、上柱国、安南国王、效忠顺化功臣，并且赐给金带、器币、鞍马。
English: On the 26th, King Annan requested a hereditary knighthood on the day of the table, and the following was awarded to the school inspector, King Annan, plus the food village, his son Dangdang was awarded the naval discipline observation and disposal envoy, the school inspector and the chief historian, the upper pillar country, King Annan, the loyal Hunhua hero, and was given a gold belt, coins, and a pommel horse.

古文：癸丑，诏应谪臣僚终于贬所者，许令归葬。
现代文：二十九日，下诏贬降臣僚死于贬所者，允许归葬。
English: On the 29th, an edict was issued to allow the burial of demoted ministers who died in the demobilization camp.

古文：秋七月丙辰，诏州县官廪禄不时给者，御史台觉察，或以他物折支，计赃论罪。
现代文：秋七月初二，诏令不按时发给州县官棒禄者，御史台检察，或以他物折支，计赃论罪。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of the autumn, if the imperial edict is not issued to the state and county officials on time, it will be investigated by the State History Bureau, or it will be considered a crime.

古文：壬戌，董槐薨，赠少师，谥文清。
现代文：初八，董槐去世，赠少师，溢号文清。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Dong Xuan passed away. He was awarded the title of "Junior Teacher" and given the posthumous name "Wenqing."

古文：庚午，周、汉国公主薨，赐谥端孝。
现代文：十六日，周汉国公主去世，赐给溢号端孝。
English: On the 16th, Princess Zhou of Han died, and was given the posthumous name of Duan Xiao.

古文：壬申，江州都统聂世兴调遣入蜀，托疾惮行，诏夺二秩，押往京湖制司自效。
现代文：十八日，江州都统聂世兴调遣军队进人四川，胆小怕事，借病不行，下诏削夺官品二级，押往京湖制司改过自新。
English: On the 18th, the Jiangzhou Metropolitan Government dispatched troops to Sichuan. They were timid, afraid of things, and could not take advantage of illness. They cut the official grade of second grade and sent them to the Beijing Lake System Division to reform.

古文：戊寅，侍御史范纯父言： 前四川制置使俞兴，石功启戎，罢任镌秩，罚轻，乞更褫夺，以纾众怒。 
现代文：二十四日，侍御史范纯父说： 前四少制置使俞兴，妒功启兵，罢任削秩，处罚显轻，请求再次革职，以缓和众人的愤怒情绪。 
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the chamberlain, Shi Fanjun's father, said: "The first four minor systems were put in place to make Xing Xing, jealous of his achievements, dismissed and demoted, the punishment was light, and he asked to be dismissed again in order to ease the anger of the people.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：辛巳，诏重修《吏部七司条法》。
现代文：二十七日，下诏重修使部七司条念。
English: On the 27th, the following edict was issued to re-establish the seven departments of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

古文：癸未，诏申严诸路郡县苛取苗米之禁。
现代文：二十九日，下诏申严各路郡县苛取苗米之禁。
English: On the 29th, a decree was issued to strictly prohibit the harvesting of seedlings in all counties.

古文：甲申，夜有白气亘天。
现代文：三十日，夜晚有白气贯穿天空。
English: On the 30th, a white haze permeated the sky at night.

古文：八月甲午，海州石湫堰成，诏知州张汉英带行遥郡刺史、马步军副总管，带行环卫官。
现代文：八月初十，海州石揪堰竣工，下诏知州张汉英带行遥郡刺史、马步军副总管、带行环卫官。
English: At the beginning of August, the completion of the Shek Kip Weir in Haizhou was announced. Zhang Han Ying from Zhizhou led the delegation, which included the governor of Yao County, the deputy chief of the Horse Guards Corps, and the environmental protection officer.

古文：丁酉，筑蕲州城。
现代文：初四，修筑薪州。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, build a tower.

古文：知州王益落阶官，正任高州刺史；制置使汪立信上《新城图》，诏奖谕。
现代文：知州王益落阶官，正任高州刺史；制置使汪立信呈上新城卧，下诏奖赏。
English: Wang Yi of Chizhou was demoted to a lower-ranking official, and he was currently serving as Gaozhou's chief historian; the arrangement made Wang Lixin submit to the new city, and he received a reward.

古文：戊戌，李璮兵败，为大元所诛，事闻，诏沿边诸郡严边防。
现代文：初五，李巨兵败，被元军杀死。此事传到朝廷，下诏沿近各郡严密边防。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Li Jiu was defeated and killed by the Yuan army. The matter was reported to the imperial court, which ordered a strict border defense along the counties nearby.

古文：汪立信升直敷文阁、主管沿江制置司公事、知江州、主管江西安抚司公事。
现代文：汪立信升直敷文阁、主管沿江制置司公事、江州知州、主管江西安抚司公事。
English: Wang Lixin was promoted to the post of the Director of the Department of Public Affairs of the Jiangxi Province, the Director of the Department of Public Affairs of the Jiangxi Province, the Director of the Department of Public Affairs of the Jiangxi Province, and the Director of the Department of Public Affairs of the Jiangxi Province.

古文：癸卯，太阴犯昴。
现代文：初十，月亮侵犯晶宿。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the moon invaded Jingjuku.

古文：乙巳，沿江制置使姚希得进宝章阁学士，职任依旧。
现代文：十二日，沿江制置使姚希得进为宝章阁学士，职任不变。
English: On the 12th, the system along the river was set up to make Yao Xide into a bachelor of Baozhangge, and his position remained unchanged.

古文：九月壬申，召陈奕赴枢密院禀议。
现代文：九月十九日，召陈奕前往枢密院汇报工作。
English: On September 19, Chen Yi was summoned to report to the Privy Council.

古文：丙子，有流星大如太白。
现代文：二十三日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 23rd, there was a meteor as big as the Great White Star.

古文：丁丑，温州布衣李元老，读书安贫，不事科举，今已百四岁，诏补迪功郎致仕，本郡给奉。
现代文：二十四日，温州布衣李元老，读书安贫，不事科举，今已一百零四岁，下诏补为迪功郎退休，由本郡开发棒禄。
English: On the 24th, Wenzhou Buyi Li Yuanlao, who is 104 years old, has been reading and living in poverty, and has not been involved in science education. He retired as a meritorious person, and has been awarded the county's development prize.

古文：闰九月甲申朔，太白昼见。
现代文：闰九月初一，太白星白天显现。
English: On the first day of the leap month of September, the white star appears in the daytime.

古文：丙戌，流星透霞，大如太白。
现代文：初三，流星放出霞光，大如太白星。
English: On the third day of the first month, a meteor emits a glow as big as a white star.

古文：戊戌，诏刑部长贰、大理卿、少卿，岁终无评事可举，即举在京三狱官。
现代文：十五日，下诏刑部正副长官、大理卿、少卿，年终没有评事可举就推举在京三狱官。
English: On the fifteenth day of the following month, the chief and deputy chiefs of the Criminal Investigation Department, Daliqing, and Shaoqing, were elected as the three prison officials in Beijing without any evaluation at the end of the year.

古文：庚子，有流星大如太白。
现代文：十七日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 17th, there was a meteor as big as the Taibai Star.

古文：丙午，诏应知县罪罢，虽经赦，毋注紧、望阙，著为令。
现代文：二十三日，下诏知县因罪罢免者，即使经赦免，也不得差为紧县、望县官，著为令。
English: On the 23rd, the following edict was issued: Those who were removed from their posts for crimes in Zhixian County, even if they were pardoned, could not be sent to work as officials in Yin County or Fang County.

古文：戊申，诏： 绍兴府火，给贷居民钱，今及二载，民贫可悯，悉除勿征。 
现代文：二十五日，下诏： 绍兴府火灾，贷给居民钱，到现在已经二年，百姓贫穷值得同情，全部免除，不予征收。 
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: It has been two years since the fire in Shaoxing and money has been lent to the residents. The poverty of the people is worthy of sympathy. All of the money will be exempted and will not be levied.

古文：冬十月乙卯，诏蠲四川制总、州县盐酒榷额。
现代文：冬十月初二，下诏免除四川制总、州县盐酒榷额。
English: On the second day of October in winter, the following edict exempted the Sichuan system from the total, state and county salt liquor quota.

古文：己未，太阴犯岁星。
现代文：初六，月亮侵犯岁星。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, the moon encroaches on the year star.

古文：甲子，以杨栋签书枢密院事、兼权参知政事兼太子宾客，叶梦鼎端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事兼太子宾客。
现代文：十一日，以杨栋签书枢密院事、兼代理参知政事兼太子宾客，叶梦鼎为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事兼太子宾客。
English: On the 11th day, Yang Dong signed a letter as a Privy Councillor, Acting Councillor and Guest of the Crown Prince, and Ye Mengding signed the same letter as an Academician of the Duanming Palace, a Privy Councillor and Guest of the Crown Prince.

古文：丁卯，吕文德言遣将校御敌，多逗遛不进，且奏功失实，具姓名上闻。
现代文：十四日，吕文德说派将校抗敌，多逗留不进，而且奏报战功失实，开列姓名上报朝廷。
English: On the 14th, Lü Wende said that he had sent officers to resist the enemy, but most of them did not stay, and the reports of their war exploits were untrue. The names were listed and reported to the imperial court.

古文：诏吕文焕、王达、赵真削两秩，马堃、王甫削一秩，余贬降有差。
现代文：下诏：吕文焕、王达、赵真削夺二级、马王甫削夺一级，其余贬降不等。
English: The following edict: Lv Wenhuan, Wang Da and Zhao Zhen were downgraded to the second level, Ma Wang Fu was downgraded to the first level, and the rest were downgraded.

古文：太阴犯五车星。
现代文：月亮侵犯五车星。
English: The moon encroaches on the five-car star.

古文：庚午，太白入氐。
现代文：十七日，太白星进人氏宿。
English: On the 17th, Taibai Xing entered Mr. Jin's lodging.

古文：癸巳，马光祖乞祠禄，诏提举临安府洞霄宫、任便居住。
现代文：十一月初十，丁大全流窜贵州，招游手立将校，置造弓矢舟揖，放纵仆隶淫虐军民。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month of the first month of the year, Ding Daquan went to Guizhou to recruit officers, set up a bow and arrow boat, and indulged in sexual abuse of soldiers and civilians.

古文：丙申，徐清叟薨，赠少师，谥忠简。
现代文：下诏削夺丁大全贵州团练使职务，移置新州。
English: The following edict cut the post of Guizhou regimental drill sergeant and transferred it to Xinzhou.

古文：丁酉，资阳砦主万户小哥及其子众家奴叛来降，诏小哥赐姓王，名永坚，补武翼大夫、夔路副总管，重庆府驻扎。
现代文：十一日，资阳寨主万户小哥及其子众家奴叛变来投降，下诏赐小哥姓王，名永坚，补武翼大夫、夔路副总管，重庆府驻扎。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the lord of Ziyang Village, Wanyu Xiao'er, and his sons, all slaves of the family, came to surrender, and the following edict gave Xiao'er the surname of Wang, the name of Yongjian, the doctor of Zhiwu Wing, the deputy general manager of Kushiro, and stationed in Chongqing.

古文：戊戌，以夏贵知庐州、淮西安抚副使。
现代文：十六日，以夏贵知庐州、淮西安抚副使。
English: On the 16th, Yixia Guizhong, vice-envoy for the pacification of Bozhou and Huaixi.

古文：丁未，皇孙容州观察使封资国公焯薨，赠保静军节度使、广国公。
现代文：二十五日，皇孙容州观察使封资国公赵悼去世，赠保静军节度使、广国公。
English: On the 25th, the emperor's grandson Rong Zhou observed the death of Zhao Mui, the vassal of the fief and vassal of the state, and presented Bao Jingjun, the vassal of the festival, and Guang Guo Gong.

古文：荧惑、填星合在娄。
现代文：荧惑星、填星合在娄宿。
English: Fluorescent planets, star-filled constellations in Pengshu.

古文：十二月辛巳，吕文德累疏辞兼四川宣抚，诏仍兼四川策应使。
现代文：十二月二十九日，吕文德多次上疏辞免兼四川宣抚使，下诏仍兼四川策应使。
English: On December 29th, Lü Wende repeatedly resigned as well as the Sichuan envoy, but was still appointed as the Sichuan envoy.

古文：四年春正月壬午朔，诏侍从、台谏、给舍、卿监、郎官以上及制总、监司各举所知，不拘员限，不如所举，行连坐法。
现代文：景定四年春正月初一，诏令侍从、台谏、给舍、卿监、郎官以上和制总、监司官员各举所知人才，不拘限名额，不像所举荐者，实行连坐法。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of King Jingting's reign, he issued an edict that the number of attendants, officials of the palace, officials of the palace, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of the court, officials of

古文：戊子，林希逸言蒲阳布衣林亦之、陈藻有道之士，林公遇幼承父泽，奉亲不仕，诏林亦之、陈藻赠迪功郎，林公遇元官上进赠一官。
现代文：初七，林希逸说蒲阳布衣林亦之、陈藻有道之士，林公遇幼承父泽，奉亲不仕，下诏林亦之、陈藻赠迪功郎，林公遇在原官上进赠一官。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Lin Xiyi said that Puyang Bu Lin was also a man of virtue, Chen Mo was a man of virtue, Lin Gongyu was a young successor to his father, and did not serve his relatives. Lin Xiyi also said that Chen Mo was a man of merit, and Lin Gongyu was given a post in his original post.

古文：诏董宋臣同提举奉安符宝所，仍奉祠禄。
现代文：下诏董宋臣同提举奉安符宝所，仍奉祠禄。
English: According to the following edict, Dong Songchen was also nominated to serve the Anpu treasure house, and still served the shrine.

古文：己亥，严州火。
现代文：十八日，严州发生火灾。
English: On the 18th, a fire broke out in Yanzhou.

古文：丙午，诏革词诉改送之弊。
现代文：二十五日，下诏革除词诉改送之弊。
English: On the 25th day of the month, the following edict was issued to remove the word "appeal" and remove the disadvantage of sending.

古文：二月癸丑，诏吴潜、丁大全党人迁谪已久，远者量移，近者还本贯，并不复用。
现代文：二月初三，下诏：吴潜、丁大全党人迁滴已久，远者适当移居近地，近者回到本地，但不复职录用。
English: On the third day of the second month of the year, the following edict was issued: Wu Qian and Ding Daquan Party members have been migrating for a long time, those who are far away have properly moved to the near land, and those who are near have returned to the local area, but will not be reinstated.

古文：丁大全溺死藤州，诏许归葬。
现代文：丁大全在藤州溺死，诏许归葬。
English: Ding Daquan drowned in Fujishu and was allowed to be buried.

古文：诏俞兴往岁失陷泸城，更削一秩。
现代文：下诏俞兴先前失陷沪城，再削夺官品一级。
English: The lower Zhao Zixing previously lost Hucheng, and then won the first level of official products.

古文：丁巳，置官田所，以刘良贵为提领，陈訔为检阅。
现代文：初七，设置官田所，任命刘良贵为提领，陈誓为检阅。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the official field office was set up, and Liu Liangui was appointed as the leader, and Chen Zhe as the inspector.

古文：戊午，日晕周匝。
现代文：初八，太阳周围有光圈环绕。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the sun is surrounded by a halo.

古文：乙亥，吕文德浚筑鄂州、常、澧城池讫事，诏奖之，守臣韩宣转遥郡承宣使，苏刘义吉州刺史。
现代文：二十五日，吕文德浚筑鄂州、常州、遭州城池完毕，下诏奖赏，守臣韩宣转遥郡承宣使，苏刘义为吉州刺史。
English: On the 25th, after Lü Wende had completed the construction of Ezhou, Changzhou, and Hanzhou, he issued a decree awarding Han Xuan, the guardian of the state, with the title of ambassador to Yao County, and Su Liu Yi with the title of governor of Jizhou.

古文：三月丁亥，以吕文德为宁武、保康军节度使，职任依旧；刘雄飞枢密都承旨、四川安抚制置使兼知重庆府、四川总领财赋、夔路转运使。
现代文：三月初七，以吕文德为宁武、保康军节度使，职任不变；刘雄飞为枢密都承旨、四少安抚制置使兼重庆知府、四川总领财赋、夔路转运使。
English: On the 7th day of the 3rd month of the year, Lu Wende was appointed as the delegate to the Ningwu and Baokang Armies Festival, with his position unchanged; Liu Xiongfei was appointed as the delegate to the Privy Council, the delegate to the Four Minorities Pacification System, the delegate to Chongqing Prefecture, the delegate to the Sichuan General Administration of Finance, and the delegate to the Kushiro Relocation.

古文：加授姚希得刑部尚书，李庭芝兵部侍郎，朱禩孙太府卿，汪立信太府少卿，并依旧任。
现代文：加授姚希得刑部尚书，李庭芝为兵部侍郎，朱祀孙为太府卿，汪立信为太府少卿，职任不变。
English: In addition, Yao Xide was awarded the title of General Secretary of the Ministry of Justice, Li Tingzhi was awarded the title of General Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Zhu Shishisun was awarded the title of Grand Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and Wang Lixin was awarded the title of Junior Secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：壬辰，太阳赤黄晕。
现代文：十二日，太阳周围有赤黄色光圈。
English: On the 12th, there was a reddish-yellow halo around the sun.

古文：丁酉，以王坚知和州兼管内安抚使，吕思望知濠州兼淮西招抚使。
现代文：十七日，以王坚知和州兼管内安抚使，吕思望知壕州兼淮西招抚使。
English: On the 17th, Wang Jianzhi, conciliator of Hezhou and Huaxi, and Lu Siwang, conciliator of Hezhou and Huaxi, were appointed.

古文：庚子，以何梦然兼权知枢密院事。
现代文：二十日，以何梦然兼代理知枢密院事。
English: On the 20th, He Mengran also acted as the representative of the Privy Council.

古文：丁未，诏知宁国府赵汝禖推行经界，不扰而办，职事修举，升直华文阁，依旧任。
现代文：二十七日，下诏知宁国府赵汝谋推行经界，不骚扰百姓而事情办成，职事修举，升直华文阁，职任不变。
English: On the 27th, it was announced that Zhao Ru, the governor of Ningguo, had been promoted to the position of Hua Wenge, and the position remained unchanged.

古文：戊申，忠州防御使贵杰授福州观察使。
现代文：二十八日，忠州防御使赵贵杰授为福州观察使。
English: On the 28th, the defense of Chungju promoted Zhao Guijie to Fuzhou observation envoy.

古文：夏四月乙卯，太阴犯权星。
现代文：夏四月初六，月亮侵犯权星。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of summer, the moon encroaches on the star.

古文：丙寅，官田所言，知嘉兴县段浚、知宜兴县叶哲佐买公田不遵元制，诏罢之。
现代文：十九日，官田所说，嘉兴知县段浚、宜兴知县叶哲佐买公田不遵原则，下诏罢除他们。
English: On the 19th, Kanda said that Jiaxing Zhixian Duanjun and Yixing Zhixian Ye Zhezu did not follow the principle of buying public land, and ordered them to be removed.

古文：戊辰，太阳赤黄晕，不匝。
现代文：二十一日，太阳旁有赤黄色日晕，没有形成环状。
English: On the 21st, there was a reddish-yellow halo around the sun, but it did not form a ring.

古文：五月庚寅，太阴入氐。
现代文：五月十一日，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On May 11th, the moon entered Mr. Jin's house.

古文：丁酉，婺州布衣何基，建宁府布衣徐几，皆得理学之传。
现代文：十八日，姿州布衣何基，建宁府布衣徐几，皆得理学真传。
English: On the 18th, Zizhou Buyi He Ji, Jianningfu Buyi Xu Ji, all got the true story.

古文：诏各补迪功郎，何基婺州教授兼丽泽书院山长，徐几建宁府教授兼建安书院山长。
现代文：下诏各补迪功郎，何基为姿州教授兼丽泽书院山长，徐几为建宁府教授兼建安书院山长。
English: The following is a list of their achievements: He Ji is a professor at Zizhou and the president of Lize College, and Xu Ji is a professor at Jianning Prefecture and the president of Jian'an College.

古文：戊戌，四川制司言：二月甲寅，大元兵攻嘉定城，马堃出战御之。
现代文：十九日，四川制司说：二月四日，元兵进攻嘉定城，马出战抵抗。
English: On the 19th, the Sichuan Provincial Party Secretary said: On February 4, the Yuan soldiers attacked Jiading City, and Ma went out to fight and resist.

古文：诏马堃援夔迁延，削一秩，令以所转四官理作叙复。
现代文：下诏马援助夔路，迁延削夺一秩，命令他用所转四官代替复职。
English: He issued the following edict: "Help Kushiro with a horse, reduce his post by one rank, and order him to use the four officials he was transferred to instead of reinstating him."

古文：流星出自角宿距星。
现代文：流星出自角宿距星。
English: The meteor came from the star Spica.

古文：六月壬子，祈雨。
现代文：六月初四，祈祷降雨。
English: On the fourth day of the sixth month, pray for rain.

古文：乙卯，京城火。
现代文：初七，京城发生火灾。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, a fire broke out in Kyoto.

古文：丙辰，诏饶虎臣叙复元官，依旧提举太平兴国宫。
现代文：初八，下诏饶虎臣恢复原官，依旧提举太平兴国宫。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Rao Huachen was restored to his original post, and Taiping Xingguo Palace was still promoted.

古文：庚申，诏：平江、江阴、安吉、嘉兴、常州、镇江六郡已买公田三百五十余万亩，今秋成在迩，其荆湖、江西诸道，仍旧和籴。
现代文：十二日，下诏：平江、江阴、安吉、嘉兴、常州、镇江六郡已买公田三百五十多万亩，现在秋成迫近，命令荆湖、江西诸道，仍旧和来。
English: On the 12th, the following edict was issued: The six counties of Pingjiang, Jiangyin, Anji, Jiaxing, Changzhou, and Zhenjiang have bought more than 3.5 million mu of public land, and now that autumn is approaching, they ordered Jinghu and Jiangxi provinces to remain peaceful.

古文：丙寅，诏公田竣事，刘良贵官两转，陈訔、廖邦杰洎六郡官进秩有差。
现代文：十八日，下诏公田出售成功，刘良贵转两官，陈髻、廖邦杰和六郡官进秩不等。
English: On the 18th, the sale of Xiaozhao Gongtian was successful, Liu Liangui was transferred to two posts, and Chen Yu, Liao Bangjie and six county officials were promoted to different ranks.

古文：丁卯，流星出自河鼓。
现代文：十九日，流星出自河鼓星。
English: On the 19th, the meteor came from the river drum star.

古文：庚午，宰执进《玉牒》、《日历》、《会要》、《经武要略》及《徽宗长编》、《宁宗实录》，诏贾似道以下官两转。
现代文：二十二日，宰执进呈压牌、《日厉、啥要、怪武要略和撇宗长、泞宗实录，诏令贾似道以下官员转两官。秋七月十四日，救令所进呈泞宗以来宽恤诏令。
English: On the 22nd, the leader of the rescue team presented a badge saying, "The leader of the rescue team, the leader of the rescue team, the leader of the rescue team, the leader of the rescue team, the leader of the rescue team, the leader of the rescue team, the leader of the rescue team, the leader of the rescue team, the leader of the rescue team, the leader of the rescue team, the leader of the rescue team, the leader of the rescue team, and the leader of the rescue team."

古文：秋七月壬辰，敕令所进《宁宗以来宽恤诏令》。戊戌，以董宋臣为入内内侍省押班。
现代文：二十日，以董宋臣为内侍省押班。
English: On the 20th, Dong Songchen was appointed as the provincial escort.

古文：八月甲寅，董宋臣以病乞收回恩命，请祠，诏赐告五月。
现代文：八月初七，董宋臣因病请求收回恩命，请求祠禄，下诏赐假五个月。
English: On the 7th day of the 8th month of the lunar month, due to illness, Dong Songchen requested to take back his life, asked for a stipend, and was granted a leave of absence for five months.

古文：乙卯，流星出自天仓星。
现代文：初八，流星出自天仓星。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a meteor comes from the star Amakura.

古文：九月甲申，诏赵汝禖为太府少卿、淮东总领财赋。
现代文：九月初七，下诏赵洲某为太府少卿、淮东总领财赋。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, Zhao Zhou was appointed to the position of Taifu Shaoqing, the general leader of Huaidong.

古文：辛卯，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：十四日，祭祀明堂，大赦。
English: On the 14th, the memorial service was held at Myeongdong, and a general amnesty was declared.

古文：甲午，以何梦然知枢密院事兼参知政事，杨栋同知枢密院事兼权参知政事，叶梦鼎签书枢密院事。
现代文：十七日，以何梦然知枢密院事兼参知政事，杨栋同知枢密院事兼代理参知政事，叶梦鼎签书枢密院事。
English: On the 17th, with He Mengran as Privy Councillor and Councillor of State, Yang Dong as Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State, and Ye Mengding as Signatory of Privy Councillor.

古文：冬十月己未，诏发缗钱百四十万，命浙西六郡置公田庄。
现代文：冬十月十三日，下诏发络钱一百四十万，命令浙西六郡设置公田庄。
English: On the 13th day of October in winter, the emperor issued an edict of 1.4 million yuan and ordered the six counties in western Zhejiang to set up public estates.

古文：甲子，命张珏兴元府驻扎、御前诸军都统制兼知合州。
现代文：十八日，命张环为兴元府驻扎御前诸军都统制兼合州知州。
English: On the 18th, Zhang Huan ordered the troops stationed in Xingyuanfu to take control of the capital and Hezhou.

古文：十一月己亥，福州火。
现代文：十一月二十三日，福州发生火灾。
English: On November 23, a fire broke out in Fuzhou.

古文：十二月丁未朔，诏皇太子宫讲官詹事以下，日轮一员，辰入酉出，专讲读，备咨问，以称辅导之实。
现代文：十二月初一，下诏皇太子宫讲官詹事以下，每日轮一人，辰人酉出，专门讲读，备作顾问，以称辅道之实。
English: On the first day of December, one person each day, from the prince's uterus lecturer Zhan Zhi onwards, was sent out to give a special lecture and prepare to be a consultant, to be known as the truth of the supplementary path.

古文：己未，诏在京置窠栅、私系囚并非法狱具，台宪其严禁戢，违者有刑。
现代文：十三日，下诏：在京置案栅、私自关押囚犯和设置非法狱具，台宪部门严格禁止，违者加刑。
English: On the 13th, the following edict was issued: setting up a case gate in Beijing, detaining prisoners without permission and setting up illegal prison equipment are strictly prohibited by Taiwan's constitutional department, and violators will be punished.

古文：辛未，太白、岁星顺行。
现代文：二十五日，太白星、岁星顺行。
English: On the 25th, the Taibai Star and the Year Star will move along.

古文：五年春正月丁丑朔，诏崇经术，考德行。
现代文：景定五年春正月初一，下诏尊崇经术，考校德行。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fifth year of Jingding, it was decreed to respect and venerate the scriptures, and the examination of school ethics.

古文：癸巳，出奉宸库珠，香、象、犀等货下务场货易，助收币楮。
现代文：十七日，出奉哀库珠、香、象、犀等货物拿到场务出售，帮助收回褚币。
English: On the 17th, goods such as mourning beads, incense, elephants and rhinoceros horns were delivered to the venue for sale to help recover the stolen money.

古文：庚子，太子右谕德汤汉三乞休致，授秘阁修撰、知福州、福建安抚使。
现代文：二十四日，太子右谕德汤汉三次请求退休，授为秘阁修撰、福州知州、福建安抚使。
English: On the 24th, the prince's right-hand man, De Tonghan, requested retirement three times and was awarded the titles of secret cabinet, Fuzhou, and Fujian.

古文：二月壬戌，流星出自毕。
现代文：二月十七日，流星出自毕宿。
English: On February 17th, a meteor came out of Bi-juku.

古文：甲子，太阴犯房。
现代文：十九日，月亮侵犯房宿。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the great Yin star committed the crime of lodging in the heavenly quarter.

古文：丁卯，太阴犯斗。
现代文：二十二日，月亮侵犯斗宿。
English: On the 22nd, the moon invaded Douju.

古文：辛未，雨土。
现代文：二十六日，降土。
English: On the 26th, the landings began.

古文：三月辛巳，王坚卒，赐谥忠壮。
现代文：三月初六，王坚去世，赠给溢号忠壮。
English: On the 6th of March, Wang Jian passed away and gave the award to Zhong Zhuang.

古文：马光祖依旧观文殿学士、沿江制置使、知建康府、江东安抚使、行宫留守。
现代文：马光祖依旧为观文殿学士、沿江制置使、建康知府、江东安抚使、行宫留守。
English: Ma Guangzu was still a scholar of the Confucian Academy, an envoy along the Yangtze River, a governor of Jiankang, an envoy to pacify the eastern part of the Yangtze River, and a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：己丑，日晕周匝。
现代文：十四日，太阳周围有光圈环绕。
English: On the 14th, the sun is surrounded by a halo.

古文：夏四月丙午，诏：管景模妻孥陷没，效忠愈坚，平时所得奉入，率以抚恤将士，遂至空乏，特赐缗钱三十万。
现代文：夏四月初二，下诏：管景模妻子陷没，效忠更坚，平时所得棒禄收人，全部拿出抚恤将士，于是造成家境贫乏，特赐给络钱三十万。
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict was issued: Guan Jingmo's wife had fallen into a trap, his loyalty was stronger, he received the usual income bonus, and he took out all the soldiers' pensions. As a result, his family was poor, and he was specially given 300,000 rupees.

古文：寻赐金带。
现代文：不久赐给金带。
English: He was soon given a gold belt.

古文：丁未，以夏贵为枢密都承旨、四川安抚制置使兼知重庆府、四川总领、夔路转运使。
现代文：初三，以夏贵为枢密都承旨、四川安抚制置使，兼重庆知府、四川总领、夔路转运使。
English: On the third day of the first month, Xia Gui was appointed as the envoy of the Privy Council and the Sichuan pacification system, as well as the Chongqing prefecture, the Sichuan leader, and the Kushiro transit envoy.

古文：辛亥，诏郡邑行乡饮酒礼。
现代文：初七，下诏郡县实行乡饮酒礼。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the township drinking ceremony will be carried out in the counties below Zhao.

古文：癸丑，太阴入太微垣。
现代文：初九，月亮进人太微垣。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the moon is too faint to see.

古文：乙卯，信阳军将领余元友等提兵防护春耕有功，补转两官资。
现代文：十一日，信阳军将领余元友等率兵防护春耕有功，补转两官资格。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shinyang Army General Yu Yuanyou, who led the soldiers to protect the spring ploughing, won the qualification of the two officials.

古文：戊午，太白昼见。
现代文：十四日，太白星白天显现。
English: On the 26th, the day of the white star appeared.

古文：乙丑，何梦然、马天骥以台臣劾罢。
现代文：二十一日，何梦然、马天骥因台臣弹勃被罢免。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Ma Tianyao was suddenly removed from his post due to Taishin's outburst.

古文：己巳，江万里以资政殿学士知建宁府，李曾伯以观文殿学士知庆元府、沿海制置使。
现代文：二十五日，江万里以资政殿学士知建宁府，李曾伯以观文殿学士知庆元府、沿海制置使。
English: On the 25th, Jiang Wanli visited Jianning Prefecture as a scholar of the Academy of Governance, and Li Zengbo visited Qingyuan Prefecture as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism and visited coastal areas.

古文：庚午，太白、岁星合于娄。
现代文：二十六日，太白星、岁星合于娄宿。
English: On the 26th, the Taibai Star and the New Year's Star converged on Usuki.

古文：五月庚辰，何梦然以资政殿大学士知建宁府。
现代文：五月初七，何梦然以资政殿大学士知建宁府。
English: On the 7th day of the 5th month, He Mengran suddenly went to Jianningfu, the capital of Jianningfu.

古文：辛卿，以杨栋参知政事，叶梦鼎同知枢密院事权参知政事，姚希得端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事，马天骥提举洞霄宫。
现代文：十八日，以杨栋参知政事，叶梦鼎同知枢密院事兼代理参知政事，姚希得为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事，马天骥提举洞霄宫。
English: On the 18th, with Yang Dong as the political advisor, Ye Mengding as the privy councilor and acting political advisor, Yao Xide as the academician of Duanming Palace and the privy councilor of the same signature, Ma Tianyao raised Dongxiao Palace.

古文：甲午，流星出自河鼓，大如太白。
现代文：二十一日，流星出自河鼓星，大如太白星。
English: On the 21st, a meteor, as big as the Taibai Star, came out of the Hegu Star.

古文：乙未，安南国奉表谢恩，进方物，诏却之，仍赐金帛，以奖恭顺。
现代文：二十二日，安南国奉表谢恩，进贡土特产，下诏退还给安南国，并且赐给金帛，以奖赏他们的恭顺。
English: On the 22nd, the Annan country received a letter of thanks, a tribute of local special products, and returned to the Annan country, and gave them gold ingots to reward their obedience.

古文：己亥，太白经天，昼见。
现代文：二十六日，太白星白天显现，经天。
English: On the 26th, the white star appeared during the day and moved across the sky.

古文：六月甲辰朔，知衢州谢塈因寇焚掠常山县弃城遁，诏削三秩，褫职不叙。
现代文：六月初一，知瞥州谢，因寇贼焚掠常山县，弃城逃跑，下诏削夺三秩，革职不用。
English: On the first day of June, Zhipeshu Xie, because the bandits burned and plundered Changshan County, abandoned the city and fled, and won three ranks under the imperial edict. He did not need to be dismissed.

古文：台臣言衢州詹沔之变，乃谢塈任都吏徐信苛取激之，塈罪重罚轻。
现代文：台臣说瞥州詹洒之变，是由于谢任都吏徐信苛取造成的，谢罪重罚轻。
English: The Taiwanese courtier said that the change of Janshan in Bozhou was caused by the harshness of Xu Xin, the appointed official of the capital, and that Xie's crime was heavily punished.

古文：诏斩信，籍其家，塈再削两秩勒停。
现代文：下诏斩杀徐信，籍没其家，谢再削夺二秩，勒令停职。
English: Under the edict, Xu Xin was killed and his family was deprived of their home. Xie Zai won two ranks and was ordered to suspend his duties.

古文：丁未，诏饶虎臣叙复资政殿学士，依前通奉大夫，差遣如故。
现代文：初四，下诏饶虎臣恢复资政殿学士，依前为通奉大夫，差遣如旧。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Rao Hu-chen was reinstated as a scholar of the Imperial Academy of Arts and Sciences, and he was assigned to the same position as before.

古文：甲寅，加授李庭芝宝章阁直学士，依旧任，朱禩孙右文殿修撰、知静江府、广西经略使，汪立信秘阁修撰、枢密副都承旨、沿江制置副使兼知江州、江西安抚使。
现代文：十一日，加授李庭芝为宝章阁直学士，职任不变，朱祀孙为右文殿修撰、静江知府、广西经略使，汪立信为秘阁修撰。枢密副都承旨、沿江制置副使兼江州知州、江西安抚使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Tingzhi was awarded the honorary title of the direct bachelor of Baozhang Pavilion, and his position remained unchanged. Zhu Shishun was the author of the Right Hall of Literature, Jingjiang Prefecture, Guangxi Province, and Wang Lixin was the author of the secret cabinet. He was the vice-minister of the Privy Council, the vice-minister of Jiangsu Province, and the vice-minister of Jiangsu Province and Jiangxi Province.

古文：诏吕文德职事修举，与官一转。
现代文：下诏吕文德职事修举，转一官。
English: The following edict promoted Lu Wende to a higher post and transferred him to another post.

古文：太阴犯心。
现代文：月亮侵犯心宿。
English: Too gloomy a star makes the criminal's heart stay in the heavens.

古文：戊午，祈雨。
现代文：十五日，祈祷降雨。
English: On the fifteenth day, pray for rain.

古文：太白犯天关星。
现代文：太白星侵犯天关星。
English: The too-white star encroaches on the heavenly gate star.

古文：乙丑，命董宋臣兼主管御前马院、御前酒库。
现代文：二十二日，命令董宋臣兼主管御前马院、御前酒库。
English: On the 22nd, he ordered Dong Songcheng, who was also in charge of the Imperial Equestrian Hall and Imperial Liquor Store.

古文：戊辰，荧惑、岁星并行。
现代文：二十五日，荧惑星、岁星并行。
English: On the 25th, the fluorescent planet and the year star are parallel.

古文：己巳，太白、太阴并行入井。
现代文：二十六日，太白星、月亮并行进人井宿。
English: On the 26th, Taibai Star and the moon marched in parallel to Ningjing.

古文：庚午，太阳赤黄晕。
现代文：二十七日，太阳旁有赤黄色光晕。
English: On the 27th, a reddish-yellow halo appeared next to the sun.

古文：秋七月甲戌，彗星出柳。
现代文：秋七月初二，彗星出现在柳宿。
English: In autumn, on the second day of the seventh month, the comet appeared in Yagyu.

古文：丁丑，诏避殿减膳，应中外臣僚许直言朝政阙失。
现代文：初五，下诏避殿减膳，允许中外臣僚直言朝政缺失。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he issued an edict to evacuate the palace and reduce meals, allowing Chinese and foreign ministers to speak frankly about the lack of imperial government.

古文：己卯，流星出自右摄提星，彗星退于鬼。
现代文：初七，流星出自右摄提星，彗星退于鬼宿。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the meteor comes from the right shooting star, and the comet retreats to the ghost town.

古文：辛巳，彗星退于井。
现代文：初九，彗星退于井宿。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the comet retreated to Ijuku.

古文：甲戌，京城大火。
现代文：甲戊日，京城发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in the capital on the 3rd.

古文：癸巳，谢奕昌卒，赠少保，追封临海郡王，谥庄宪。
现代文：二十一日，谢奕昌去世，赠少保，追封临海郡王，溢号庄宪。
English: On the twenty-first day, Xie Yichang passed away, was awarded the title of Junior Public Security Officer, was posthumously awarded the title of Linhai County King, and was awarded the title of Zhuang Xian.

古文：甲午，填星守毕。
现代文：二十二日，填星守毕宿。
English: On the 22nd, the star-gazing ended.

古文：乙未，马天骥以台臣劾其贪赃，夺职罢祠，其子时楙削一秩、罢新任。
现代文：二十三日，马天骥因台臣弹勃其贪赃，夺职罢祠，其子马时削夺一秩，罢除新任。
English: On the 23rd, Ma Tianyao was ousted from his new post after he was accused of corruption by a Taiwanese official, and his son Ma Shi was demoted one rank.

古文：丙申，知嘉定府洪涛言：新繁县御容殿前枯木再荣，殿有画太祖像；又顺化人杨嗣光等奉太宗、真宗、仁宗、英宗、神宗像来归，令椟藏府中天庆观。
现代文：二十四日，知嘉定府洪涛说： 新繁县御容殿前枯木再荣，殿有画太祖像；又顺化人杨嗣光等奉太宗、真宗、仁宗、英宗、神宗像来归顺，命令犊藏府中天庆观。 
English: On the 24th, Hongtao of Chijia Dingfu said, "The dead trees in front of the palace in Xinxiang County's Goryong have been reborn, and the palace has a painting of the great ancestor. In addition, Yang Shiguang, a native of Hunhua, and others have submitted to the images of the Taizong, the Zhenzong, the Renzong, the Yingzong, and the Shenzong, and ordered them to observe the Mid-Autumn Festival in the Tibetan capital.

古文：诏本府选差武臣迎奉赴行在所，嗣光补武阶两资。
现代文：下诏本府选差武臣迎奉到行在，杨嗣光补武阶两资。
English: According to the following edict, the samurai selected by the prefectural government will be welcomed to the line, and Yang Ziguang will supplement the two funds of the military rank.

古文：祈雨。
现代文：祈祷降雨。
English: Pray for rain.

古文：台臣言太子宾客杨栋指彗为蚩尤旗，欺天罔君，诏栋罢职予祠。
现代文：台臣说太子宾客杨栋指彗为蛋尤旗，欺天同君，下诏杨栋罢职予祠。
English: The Taiwanese minister said that the prince's guest, Yang Dong, referred to the comet as the egg yu flag, deceived the heavens and the emperor, and ordered Yang Dong to resign from the temple.

古文：戊戌，彗星退于参。
现代文：二十六日，彗星退于参宿。
English: On the 26th, the comet retreated to Betelgeuse.

古文：八月壬寅朔，荧惑与填星合。
现代文：八月初一，荧惑星与填星聚合。
English: On the first day of August, the fluorescent planets coalesced with the filling stars.

古文：丙午，以杨栋知建宁府。
现代文：初五，以杨栋知建宁府。
English: On the 5th day of the first month, Yang Dongzhi Jianningfu is at the top.

古文：戊午，彗星消伏。
现代文：十七日，彗星消失。
English: On the 17th, the comet disappeared.

古文：甲子，彗星复见于参。
现代文：二十三日，彗星又在参宿显现。
English: On the 23rd, the comet appeared again in Betelgeuse.

古文：辛未，彗星化为霞气。
现代文：三十日，彗星化为霞气。
English: On the 30th, the comet faded to haze.

古文：九月己丑，日生格气。
现代文：九月十八日，太阳生出格气。
English: On September 18th, the sun came out.

古文：癸巳，内侍李忠辅以台臣劾其贪肆欺罔，削两秩放罢。
现代文：二十二日，内侍李忠辅因台臣弹勃其贪肆欺同，削夺二秩罢免。
English: On the 22nd, the palace attendant, Li Zhongyu, was stripped of his second rank and removed from his post due to his greed and deception.

古文：乙未，建宁府教授谢枋得校文宣城及建康漕闱，发策十余问，言权奸误国，赵氏必亡。
现代文：二十四日，建宁府教授谢仿得在宣城和建康槽司任考官，发策十余问，言权奸误国，赵氏必亡。
English: On the 24th, Professor Xie Yimong of Jianning Prefecture was appointed as an examiner in the Xuancheng and Jiankang trough department, and initiated more than ten questions. He misused his right to speak and misled the country, and the Zhao clan was doomed.

古文：左司谏舒有开劾其怨望腾谤，大不敬，窜兴国军。
现代文：左司谏舒有开弹勃他怨望诽谤，定罪为大不敬，贬居兴国军。
English: Zuo Shi Xunshu has opened fire, arousing resentment and slander, and has been convicted of gross disrespect and disparaging the Xingguo Army.

古文：冬十月丙午，太阴犯斗。
现代文：冬十月初五，月亮侵犯斗宿。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, the moon invaded Douju.

古文：辛亥，诏十七界会浸轻，并以十八界会易之，限一月止。
现代文：初十，下诏十七界会子日益贬值，都用十八界会子兑换，期限一月。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, when the value of the seventeenth-kingdom kaishi began to depreciate, it was exchanged for the eighteenth-kingdom kaishi, with a deadline of January.

古文：乙丑，诏行关子铜钱法，每百作七十七文足，以一准十八界会之三。
现代文：二十四日，下诏推行关子铜钱法，每百作七十七文足，以一兑换十八界会子三。
English: On the 24th, the government promulgated the Guanzi Copper Coin Law, with each 100 coins being worth 77 coppers, and 1 coppers being equal to 3 guanzi from 18 sectors.

古文：帝有疾，不视朝。
现代文：理宗患病，不上朝处理政事。
English: Risso fell ill and did not attend the Imperial Court to deal with political affairs.

古文：丙寅，大赦。
现代文：二十五日，大赦。
English: Cui Yin, amnesty will be implemented next week.

古文：丁卯，帝崩。
现代文：二十六日，理宗去世。
English: On the 26th, Rizo passed away.

古文：遗诏皇太子禥即皇帝位。
现代文：遗诏皇太子赵甚即皇帝位。
English: He decreed that Crown Prince Zhao Jian would become emperor.

古文：咸淳元年三月甲申，葬于会稽之永穆陵。
现代文：咸淳元年三月甲申日，葬于会稽永穆陵。
English: He was buried in the Yongmul Mausoleum of the Association of Korean Residents in Japan on March 6, 1861.

古文：二年十二月丙戌，谥曰建道备德大功复兴烈文仁武圣明安孝皇帝，庙号理宗。
现代文：咸淳二年十二月二十八日，上溢号为建道备德大功复兴烈文仁武圣明安孝皇帝，庙号理宗。
English: On the 28th day of December in the second year of the reign of Emperor Xianjun, Emperor Ming'an Xiao, whose temple name was Li Zong, was crowned with the honorific title of "Building the Way, Preparing for Virtue, Greatly Contributing to the Revival of the Martyrs, Writers, and Soldiers."

古文：赞曰：理宗享国久长，与仁宗同。
现代文：评论说：理宗在位时间久长，与宋仁宗一样。
English: He commented, "Rizong reigned for a long time, just like Song Renzong.

古文：然仁宗之世，贤相相继。理宗四十年之间，若李宗勉、崔与之、吴潜之贤，皆弗究于用；而史弥远、丁大全、贾似道窃弄威福，与相始终。
现代文：但是仁宗在位期间，贤相一个接着一个出现，理宗在位四十年间，像李宗勉、崔与之、吴潜的贤才，都没有很好地予以重用；而史弥远、丁大全、贾似道之流，暗中弄权，作威作福，却与理宗朝相始终。
English: However, during the reign of Emperor Nianzong, the wise men appeared one after another. During the forty years of Emperor Rizong's reign, the wise men such as Li Zongcheng, Cui Zuo, and Wu Qian did not make good use of their talents. However, Shi Yiyuan, Ding Daquan, and Jia Lian Dao secretly used their talents to gain power and make themselves look good, but they were always at odds with Emperor Rizong.

古文：治效之不及庆历、嘉祐，宜也。
现代文：治理国家的效果比不上仁宗庆历、嘉时期，是很自然的事。
English: It is only natural that the effect of governing the country is not as good as that of the celebration calendar and Jiayu period of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：蔡州之役，幸依大朝以定夹攻之策，及函守绪遗骨，俘宰臣天纲，归献庙社，亦可以刷会稽之耻，复齐襄之仇矣。顾乃贪地弃盟，入洛之师，事衅随起，兵连祸结，境土日蹙。
现代文：蔡州围困金国皇帝的战役，幸亏凭借元朝定下来的元、宋夹攻金国的策略，直到包来完颜守绪的遗骨，俘杀了金国重臣张天纲，回来祭献给太庙祖先和土神，这也算是以此来洗刷了像越国会稽那样的耻辱，报了齐襄之仇；但是由于反过来贪图土地而背弃盟约，军队开进洛阳，于是战争的祸乱再次引起，战事不断，灾祸连接发生，宋朝的疆土一天一天地缩小。
English: Caizhou's campaign to besiege the Emperor of Jin, fortunately, relied on the strategy of the Yuan Dynasty and the Song Dynasty to attack Jin, which was set by the Yuan Dynasty, until the remains of Yan Shouxu were wrapped up, the senior vassal of Jin, Zhang Tiangang, was captured, and returned to be sacrificed to the ancestors of the imperial temple and the earth god. This was also a way to wash away the shame like the Viet Cong inspection and to avenge Qi Xiang. However, because of the greed for land and the reneging of the treaty, the army went to Luoyang, so the scourge of war was caused again. The war continued

古文：郝经来使，似道讳言其纳币请和，蒙蔽抑塞，拘留不报，自速灭亡。
现代文：郝经奉命出使来到宋朝，贾似道避开向元交纳钱财请和的事不说，欺骗皇上，拘留使臣，扣压真情不报，自然而然地加速了灭亡进程。唉！
English: After being sent on a mission to the Song Dynasty, Jia Xi Dao avoided paying money to the Yuan Dynasty and did not say anything, deceived the emperor, detained the envoys, suppressed the truth and did not report, and naturally accelerated the process of destruction. Alas!

古文：吁，可惜哉！
现代文：可惜呀！
English: What a shame!

古文：由其中年嗜欲既多，怠于政事，权移奸臣，经筵性命之讲，徒资虚谈，固无益也。
现代文：由于皇上中年以后贪图享乐的欲望已经很多，懒于过问国家的政事，把大权拱手交给了奸臣，经筵性命之讲，只是资以虚谈，本来就没有什么益处。
English: Since the emperor's desire to seek pleasure had already increased after middle age, he was too lazy to inquire into the country's political affairs, and handed over power to his treacherous vassals. His talk about saving his own life was just empty talk, and was of no benefit.

古文：虽然，宋嘉定以来，正邪贸乱，国是靡定，自帝继统，首黜王安石孔庙从祀，升濂、洛九儒，表章朱熹《四书》，丕变士习，视前朝奸党之碑、伪学之禁，岂不大有径庭也哉！
现代文：虽然，宋朝自嘉定以来，正邪混乱，国是未定，但自从理宗即位后，首先把王安石从孔庙配祀中赶出，接着升周敦颐等九位名儒从祀孔子庙庭，称赞朱熹《四书，从而士风大变，与前朝立奸党之碑、开伪学之禁相比，难道不是大大有不同的地方吗？
English: Although the Song Dynasty, since Jiading, has been chaotic in terms of right and wrong, and the country is undecided, since the enthronement of Li Zong, Wang Anshi was first expelled from the Confucius Temple, and then nine famous Confucianists such as Sheng Zhou Dun Dun praised Zhu Xi's "Four Books, and thus the great change in the scholarly style. Compared with the monument to the traitors of the former dynasty and the prohibition of forgery, isn't there a great difference?

古文：身当季运，弗获大效，后世有以理学复古帝王之治者，考论匡直辅翼之功，实自帝始焉。
现代文：身当末世，没有获得大的成效，但后世想以理学复古帝王之治者，考论它对政治统治的作用，实际上应从理宗皇帝开始。
English: In the last days, it did not achieve great results, but future generations want to be the rulers of the ancient emperors with science, and its role in political rule should actually begin with Emperor Rizong.

古文：庙号曰 理 ，其殆庶乎！
现代文：庙号为 理 ，算是恰如其分。
English: The temple's name is appropriate.

