古文：蔡叔既没，王命蔡仲，践诸侯位，作《蔡仲之命》。
现代文：蔡叔度被流放后，爵位也被剥夺，蔡叔度的儿子蔡仲有德行，于是周公最后又把蔡仲封在了蔡国，并且写了《蔡仲之命》来告诫他。
English: After Cai Shudu was exiled, his title was also stripped. Cai Shudu's son Cai Zhong was virtuous, so Zhou Gong finally sealed Cai Zhong in Cai Guo, and wrote "Cai Zhong's Life" to admonish him.

古文：惟周公位冢宰，正百工，群叔流言。
现代文：周公位居大宰、统帅百官的时候，几个弟弟对他散布流言。
English: When Zhou Gong was the grand vizier and commander of hundreds of officials, several younger brothers spread rumors about him.

古文：乃致辟管叔于商；囚蔡叔于郭邻，以车七乘；降霍叔于庶人，三年不齿。
现代文：周公于是到达商地，杀了管叔；囚禁了蔡叔，用车七辆把他送到郭邻；把霍叔降为庶人，三年不许录用。
English: Zhou Gong then arrived at the trading place and killed Uncle Guan; imprisoned Uncle Cai and sent him to Guo's neighbor with seven cars; reduced Uncle Huo to a commoner and forbade him to be hired for three years.

古文：蔡仲克庸只德，周公以为卿士。
现代文：蔡仲能够经常重视德行，周公任用他为卿士。
English: Cai Zhong could always attach importance to virtue, and Zhou Gong appointed him as a noble.

古文：叔卒，乃命诸王邦之蔡。
现代文：蔡叔死后，周公便告诉成王封蔡仲于蔡国。
English: After Cai Shu's death, Zhou Gong told Cheng Wang to appoint Cai Zhong to Cai Guo.

古文：王若曰： 小子胡，惟尔率德改行，克慎厥猷，肆予命尔侯于东土。
现代文：成王这样说： 年轻的姬胡！你遵循祖德改变你父亲的行为，能够谨守臣子之道，所以我任命你到东土去做诸侯。
English: Cheng Wang said, "Young Ji Hu, if you follow your ancestor and change your father's behavior, you will be able to keep the way of a vassal, so I appoint you to the East to be a vassal.

古文：往即乃封，敬哉！
现代文：你前往你的封地，要敬慎呀！
English: If you go to your fiefdom, be careful!

古文：尔尚盖前人之愆，惟忠惟孝；尔乃迈迹自身，克勤无怠，以垂宪乃后；率乃祖文王之遗训，无若尔考之违王命。
现代文：你当掩盖前人的罪过，思忠思孝。你要使自身迈步前进，能够勤劳不怠，用以留下模范给你的后代。你要遵循你祖父文王的常训，不要像你的父亲那样违背天命！
English: You should cover up the sins of your predecessors, think of loyalty and filial piety. You should make yourself move forward, be able to work hard and not be lazy, so as to leave a model for your descendants. You should follow the teachings of your grandfather, King Wen, and not violate the fate of heaven like your father!

古文：皇天无亲，惟德是辅。民心无常，惟惠之怀。
现代文：皇天无亲无疏，只辅助有德的人；民心没有常主，只是怀念仁爱之主。
English: The emperor has no relatives or estranged relatives, and only assists those who are virtuous; the people's heart has no permanent master, but only misses the Lord of benevolence.

古文：为善不同，同归于治；为恶不同，同归于乱。
现代文：做善事虽然各不相同，都会达到安治；做恶事虽然各不相同，都会走向动乱。
English: Doing good things, although different, will achieve stability; doing evil things, although different, will lead to turmoil.

古文：尔其戒哉！
现代文：你要警戒呀！
English: You have to be on your guard!

古文：慎厥初，惟厥终，终以不困；不惟厥终，终以困穷。
现代文：谨慎对待事物的开初，也要考虑它的终局，终局因此不会困窘；不考虑它的终局，终将困穷。
English: If you treat the beginning of a thing with caution, you should also consider its ending, so that the ending will not be embarrassing; if you do not consider its ending, you will end up being poor.

古文：懋乃攸绩，睦乃四邻，以蕃王室，以和兄弟，康济小民。
现代文：勉力做你所行的事，和睦你的四邻，以保卫周王室，以和谐兄弟之邦，而使百姓安居成业。
English: Strive to do what you have done, to make peace with your neighbors, to protect the Zhou royal family, to make the people live in peace and prosperity with the harmony of a brotherly country.

古文：率自中，无作聪明乱旧章。
现代文：要循用中道，不要自作聪明扰乱旧章。
English: It is necessary to follow the middle way, and do not try to be clever and disrupt the old chapter.

古文：详乃视听，罔以侧言改厥度。
现代文：要审慎你的视听，不要因片面之言改变法度。
English: Be careful with your audio-visual, don't change the law because of one-sided words.

古文：则予一人汝嘉。 
现代文：这样，我就会赞美你。 成王说： 啊！
English: In this way, I will praise you. Cheng Wang said: Ah!

古文：王曰： 呜呼！
现代文：年轻的姬胡。你去吧！
English: And the king said, Alas!

古文：小子胡，汝往哉！
现代文：不要废弃我的教导！ 
English: Do not abandon my teaching!

