古文：谢超宗刘祥谢超宗，陈郡阳夏人也。祖灵运，宋临川内史。
现代文：谢超宗，陈郡阳夏人，他的祖父谢灵运是宋时临川内史。
English: Xie Chao Zong, Chen County Yang Xia people, his grandfather Xie Lingyun is Song Dynasty Linchuan history.

古文：父凤，元嘉中坐灵运事，同徙岭南，早卒。
现代文：他的父亲谢凤在元嘉年间因谢灵运的事情同受罪责，流放岭南，早逝。
English: His father, Xie Feng, was exiled to Lingnan during the Yuan Jia Dynasty, and died young.

古文：超宗元嘉末得还。
现代文：谢超宗在元嘉末年才回原籍。
English: Xie Chaozong only returned to his hometown in the last years of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：与慧休道人来往，好学，有文辞，盛得名誉。
现代文：与慧休道人来往，好学，有文采，颇负盛名。
English: With Hui Xiu Taoist, studious, literate, quite a reputation.

古文：解褐奉朝请。
现代文：初任官为奉朝请。
English: First come, first served.

古文：新安王子鸾，孝武帝宠子，超宗以选补王国常侍。
现代文：新安王子鸾是孝武帝宠爱的儿子，谢超宗被选补为王国常侍。
English: Xin'an Prince Yao was the favorite son of Emperor Xiaowu, and Xie Chaozong was selected as the royal attendant.

古文：王母殷淑仪卒，超宗作诔奏之，帝大嗟赏，曰： 超宗殊有凤毛，恐灵运复出。 
现代文：新安王的母亲殷淑仪逝世，谢超宗撰写了谏文奏报皇帝，皇帝大为感叹赞赏，说： 谢超宗很有其先人之才，恐怕是谢灵运再世吧。 
English: After the death of King Xin'an's mother Yin Shuxui, Xie Chao Zong wrote an obituary for the emperor. The emperor was greatly impressed and said, "Xie Chao Zong has the talent of his predecessors. I'm afraid it's Xie Lingyun's reincarnation."

古文：转新安王抚军行参军。
现代文：转任谢超宗为新安王抚军行参军。
English: Xie Chaozong transferred to the new Wangfujing Army and joined the army.

古文：泰始初，为建安王司徒参军事，尚书殿中郎。
现代文：泰始初年，谢超宗为建安王司徒参军事，尚书殿中郎。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, Xie Chao Zong was a disciple of Jian'an Wang Si who participated in the military, and was the middle brother of Shang Shudong.

古文：三年，都令史骆宰议策秀才考格，五问并得为上，四、三为中，二为下，一不合与第。
现代文：泰始三年，都令史骆宰商议考选秀才的标准提出：五问都答好了为上等，五问答出四问或三问的为中等，衹答出二问的为下等，五问衹答出一问的为不合格，不能及第。
English: In the past three years, Shi Luo and his advisers have proposed the standards for selecting talents for the examination: those who answer all five questions well are superior, those who answer four or three questions out of five are intermediate, those who answer two questions are inferior, and those who answer one question out of five are unqualified and cannot reach the first place.

古文：超宗议以为 片辞折狱，寸言挫众，鲁史褒贬，孔《论》兴替，皆无俟繁而后秉裁。
现代文：谢超宗认为 简短的话语可以判决诉讼案件，简短的言词可以挫败众人，《春秋》褒贬人物，《论语》评论兴衰，都不用很多话作出判断。
English: Xie Chaozong believes that short words can judge litigation cases, and short words can frustrate everyone. The praise and criticism of "Spring and Autumn" and the rise and fall of "Analects" do not need a lot of words to make judgments.

古文：夫表事之渊，析理之会，岂必委牍方切治道。
现代文：表述事情的深奥，剖析事理的能力，哪裹一定要依赖文牍才算切合治理的方法。
English: The ability to express the profundity of things and analyze the facts, which must rely on literature, is a suitable method of governance.

古文：非患对不尽问，患以恒文弗奇。
现代文：不用担心不能对答完问题，要担心的是对答的是平淡无奇老生常谈。
English: Don't worry about not being able to answer all the questions. What you should worry about is that the answers are boring and repetitive.

古文：必使一通峻正，宁劣五通而常；与其俱奇，必使一亦宜采。 
现代文：务必让一通而突出的为高妙，宁让五通而平常的为劣等；与其都要奇妙，必使有一点也要适合采纳。 
English: It is necessary to make the one that stands out as superior, and to make the five that are common as inferior. In addition to being wonderful, there must be something that is suitable for adoption.

古文：诏从宰议。
现代文：结果诏旨下达按骆宰的说法办。
English: As a result, the imperial edict was issued according to Luo Zai's statement.

古文：迁司徒主簿，丹阳丞。
现代文：谢超宗迁司徒主簿，丹阳丞。
English: Xie Chaozhong's main book, Danyang Cho.

古文：建安王休仁引为司徒记室，正员郎，兼尚书左丞中郎。
现代文：建安王休仁引荐他做司徒记室，正员郎，兼尚书左丞中郎。
English: King Jian'an (建安王休仁) recommended him to be the scribe's clerk, the chief clerk, and the junior clerk of the left office of the imperial secretary.

古文：以直言忤仆射刘康，左迁通直常侍。
现代文：因说话耿直得罪了仆射刘康，降职为通直常侍。
English: His servant Liu Kang, who was offended by Geng Zhi's words, was demoted to the position of Tong Zhi's attendant.

古文：太祖为领军，数与超宗共属文，爱其才翰。
现代文：太祖为领军时，多次同谢超宗一起撰写文章，喜爱他的才华。
English: When the great-grandfather was leading the army, he often wrote articles with Xie Chaozong, and loved his talent.

古文：卫将军袁粲闻之，谓太祖曰： 超宗开亮迥悟，善可与语。 
现代文：卫将军袁粲听说这些，对太祖说： 谢超宗明达颖悟，很可与他交谈。 
English: Hearing this, Wei General Yuan Shao said to Taizu, "Xie Chao Zong has reached enlightenment, and it is very easy to talk with him.

古文：取为长史、临淮太守。
现代文：太祖以谢超宗为长史、临淮太守。
English: The great-grandfather, Xie Chaozong, was the long-standing, Linhuai governor.

古文：粲既诛，太祖以超宗为义兴太守。
现代文：袁粲被诛复，太祖让谢超宗为义兴太守。
English: Yuan Shao was restored to power, and Emperor Taizu made Emperor Xie Chaozong the ruler of Yixing.

古文：升明二年，坐公事免。
现代文：升明二年，因公事被免职。
English: Two years after his promotion, he was dismissed from his post for misconduct in office.

古文：诣东府门自通，其日风寒惨厉，太祖谓四座曰： 此客至，使人不衣自暖矣。 
现代文：到束府拜访太祖由府门自己直接进去，那天气候寒冷得厉害，太祖对所有在座的人说： 这位客人一到，让人不加穿衣服就自觉暖和了。 
English: On the day of the visit, the weather was very cold, and Taizu said to everyone present, "When this guest arrives, people feel warmer without having to put on clothes."

古文：超宗既坐，饮酒数瓯，辞气横出，太祖对之甚欢。板为骠骑谘议。
现代文：谢超宗坐下后，喝了几瓯酒，辞气横溢，太祖很高兴，即亲自任命谢超宗为骠骑谘议。
English: After Xie Chaozong sat down, he drank a few glasses of wine and was full of resignation. Grandfather was so pleased that he personally appointed Xie Chaozong as a horse riding consultant.

古文：及即位，转黄门郎。
现代文：待到太祖即皇帝位，转为黄门郎。
English: Wait until the great-grandfather, that is, the emperor, turns into Huangmen Lang.

古文：有司奏撰立郊庙歌，敕司徒褚渊、侍中谢朏、散骑侍郎孔稚圭、太学博士王咺之、总明学士刘融、何法冏、何昙秀十人并作，超宗辞独见用。
现代文：有关官员奏请撰写郊庙歌，敕命司徒褚渊、侍中谢肋、散骑侍郎孔稚珪、太学博士王晅之、总明观学士刘融、何法冈、何昙秀十人各自起草，惟独谢超宗的歌辞被采用。
English: Relevant officials requested the writing of a suburb temple song, and ten people were asked to draft their own, including the chief priest Jenyuan, the chamberlain Xie Lei, the cavalryman Kong Zhiqi, the scholar Wang Xizhi, the chief scholar Liu Rong, He Fagao, and He Yuxiu, but only Xie Chaozong's lyrics were used.

古文：为人仗才使酒，多所陵忽。
现代文：谢超宗仗才纵酒使性，对人多不讲礼貌。
English: Xie Chaozhong only indulges in drinking to make sex, and is not polite to many people.

古文：在直省常醉，上召见，语及北方事，超宗曰： 虏动来二十年矣，佛出亦无如何！ 
现代文：在衙门当值经常喝得醉醺醺的，皇上召见，谈及北方事情时，谢超宗说： 魏虏骚扰已经有二十年了，就是佛祖出世也无可奈何! 
English: When the emperor summoned the emperor, who was often drunk on duty at the imperial gate, to discuss matters in the north, Xie Chao Zong said: Wei Rui has been harassing for twenty years, even the birth of the Buddha is unavoidable!

古文：以失仪出为南郡王中军司马。
现代文：谢超宗因有失仪礼外出为南郡王中军司马。
English: Xie Chao Zong was removed from his post as Sima of the Wangzhong Army of Nan County due to improper etiquette.

古文：超宗怨望，谓人曰： 我今日政应为司驴。 
现代文：他心怀怨气，对人说： 我现在正应当作司驴。 
English: With a grudge in his heart, he said to the man, "I should be a judge right now."

古文：为省司所奏，以怨望免官，禁锢十年。
现代文：被省裹的官员劾奏，他也因心怀怨气被免职，在十年内不许做官。
English: The ousted official was impeached, removed from office for harboring grudges and banned from holding public office for 10 years.

古文：司徒褚渊送湘州刺史王僧虔，阁道坏，坠水；仆射王俭尝牛惊，跣下车。
现代文：司徒褚渊送湘州刺史王僧虔，栈道坏了，落在水襄；仆射王俭曾经因拉车的牛被惊吓，赤着脚掉下车来。
English: Szu Qianyuan sent Xiangzhou Zishi Wang Zengqian, the footbridge was broken and fell into the water; the servant Wang Jian was once frightened by the oxen pulling the cart and fell off the cart with bare feet.

古文：超宗抚掌笑戏曰： 落水三公，堕车仆射。 
现代文：谢超宗拍着巴掌戏笑着说： 落水三公，堕车仆射。 
English: Hsieh Chao Zong clapped his hands and said with a smile: "Three princes fell into the water, and one fell into the car."

古文：前后言诮，稍布朝野。
现代文：前前后后嘲弄的话语传遍朝野。
English: Word of the mockery spread far and wide.

古文：世祖即位，使掌国史，除竟陵王征北谘议参军，领记室，愈不得志。
现代文：世祖即皇帝位，使谢超塞掌管国史，任童陵王征北谘议参军，领记室。他更不得志。
English: The ancestor, that is, the emperor's throne, made Xie Chao-tse take charge of the country's history, appointed Tongling Wang Zhengbei to advise and join the army, and took charge of the record room. He was even more discouraged.

古文：超宗娶张敬儿女为子妇，上甚疑之。
现代文：谢超宗娶了张敬儿的女儿作儿媳，皇上因而猜疑他。
English: Xie Chao Zong married the daughter of Zhang Jing Er as his daughter-in-law, so the emperor suspected him.

古文：永明元年，敬儿诛，超宗谓丹阳尹李安民曰： 往年杀韩信，今年杀彭越，尹欲何计？ 
现代文：永明元年，退敬儿被诛杀，谢超宗对丹阳尹李安民说： 往年杀韩信，今年杀彭越，你这位尹打算怎么办? 
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, Tu Jing'er was beaten to death. Xie Chao Zong said to Danyang Yin Li Anmin: In previous years, you killed Han Xin. This year, you killed Peng Yue. What are you, Yin, going to do?

古文：安民具启之。上积怀超宗轻慢，使兼中丞袁彖奏曰：
现代文：李室民把这些话一一奏报，皇上想起谢超塞历来轻慢无礼，指使兼中丞袁彖劾奏说：
English: Li Muromin reported these words one by one, and the emperor thought of Xie Chao-se, who had always been impudent and rude, and ordered the envoy and Vice-Commander-in-Chief Yuan Shijie to report:

古文：风闻征北谘议参军谢超宗，根性浮险，率情躁薄，仕近声权，务先谄狎。
现代文：传闻征北谘议参军谢超宗。生性轻浮险诈，任由自己的性情躁动而不安本分。
English: It is rumored that Xie Chaozong was consulted on the Northern Expedition and joined the army. His nature is frivolous and treacherous, and he is restless and insecure about his duty.

古文：人裁疏黜，亟便诋贱；卒然面誉，旋而背毁。
现代文：做官的人接近声威权势，他就先去讨好亲昵；别人刚刚被疏远罢黜，他便急忙对他诋诽轻贱。仓猝间他会当面奉承，一转身就在背后进行诽谤。
English: When an official is close to a powerful person, he will first try to please his intimates; when someone has just been ostracized, he will rush to slander him. In a hurry, he will flatter him in front of his face and slander him behind his back.

古文：疑间台贤，每穷诡舌；讪贬朝政，必声凶言。
现代文：挑拨朝廷和忠良的关系，每每说尽假话；讥讽朝廷政策，他定然播放恶毒的语言。
English: He provoked the relationship between the imperial court and the loyalists, telling lies at every turn; he ridiculed the imperial court's policies, and he was sure to broadcast vicious language.

古文：腹诽口谤，莫此之甚；不敬不讳，罕与为二。
现代文：心腹诽谤、口舌诬蠛，除此之外再没有更厉害的，不尊敬、不隐讳，像他这样也少有第二人。
English: Heart and belly slander, mouth and tongue slander, in addition to this, there is no more powerful, no respect, no concealment, like him, there is rarely a second person.

古文：辄摄白从王永先到台辨问 超宗有何罪过，诣诸贵皆有不逊言语，并依事列对 。
现代文：随即抓来门生王永先到御史台追问 谢超宗有什么罪遇，他拜访达官贵人时都有不礼貌的言语，都要依据事实一一回答 。
English: Wang Yongpeng, a disciple of Xie Chaozong, was immediately arrested and brought to the State History Channel to ask what crime Xie Chaozong had committed. When he visited dignitaries, he had rude words to say, and he had to answer them one by one according to the facts.

古文：永先列称： 主人超宗恒行来诣诸贵要，每多触忤，言语怨怼。
现代文：王永先依次说道： 主人谢超宗经常拜会很多权贵，每次多有冒犯，言语怨恨。
English: Wang Yongxian said in turn: Master Xie Chaozong often visits many dignitaries, each time there is more offense, verbal resentment.

古文：与张敬儿周旋，许结姻好，自敬儿死后，惋叹忿慨。
现代文：同张敬儿往来密切，结成姻亲，自从张敬儿死后，他惋惜感叹以至愤慨。
English: He had a close relationship with Zhang Jing'er, and they became in-laws. Since Zhang Jing'er's death, he has been filled with regret and even indignation.

古文：今月初诣李安民，语论 张敬儿不应死 。
现代文：本月初拜会李安民，他评论说 张敬儿不应当有死罪 。
English: Li Anmin, who visited Zhang earlier this month, commented that Zhang Jing'er should not be sentenced to death.

古文：安民道： 敬儿书疏，墨迹炳然，卿何忽作此语？ 其中多有不逊之言，小人不悉尽罗缕谙忆。 
现代文：李安民说 张敬儿写的奏疏，墨迹清清楚楚，你怎么忽然说这种话，裹面还有好些不礼貌的话，小人不能全部熟记列举。 
English: Li Anmin said that Zhang Jing'er's writing is sparse, the ink is clear, how can you suddenly say such words, there are many impolite words on the face, the villain can't remember them all.

古文：如其辞列，则与风闻符同。
现代文：依他列举的话语，就同传闻的相符。
English: According to his list of words, it is consistent with the rumors.

古文：超宗罪自已彰，宜附常准。
现代文：谢超宗的罪行已自显明，应该按法处治。
English: Xie Chaozong's crimes have been self-evident and should be dealt with according to the law.

古文：超宗少无士行，长习民慝。狂狡之迹，联代所疾；迷慠之衅，累朝兼触。
现代文：谢超宗从小行为不检点，长大熟习民间的邪恶，狂妄狡诈的劣迹，累代都会忌恨，盲目倔傲的裂痕，历朝都要触及。
English: Xie Chaozong behaved improperly from childhood, and grew up familiar with the evil of the people, the arrogance and cunning of the villainy, the hatred of the past generations, and the rift of blind arrogance, which must be touched throughout the ages.

古文：刬容扫辙，久埋世表。
现代文：铲除形体扫灭印迹，永远沉埋到人世之外。
English: Eradicate the body, erase the imprint, and be buried forever.

古文：属圣明广爱，忍祸舒慈，舍之宪外，许以改过。
现代文：适值皇上圣明、广播仁爱，强忍祸害延缓到现在，把他放置在法令之外，好让他改掉过错。
English: At the right time, Emperor Shengming, broadcasting benevolence and forbearing evil, delayed the calamity until now, and placed him outside the law, so that he could correct his mistake.

古文：野心不悛，在宥方骄；才性无亲，处恩弥戾。
现代文：可是他野心不思悔改，身蒙宽宥他却正在骄纵；才识禀赋没有亲情，处在恩泽之中他反而更加暴戾。
English: But his ambition is unrepentant, he is indulging in self-indulgence despite being forgiven; talent and endowment have no kinship, and he is even more violent in the midst of grace.

古文：遂遘扇非端，空生怨怼，恣嚣毒于京辅之门，扬凶悖于卿守之席。
现代文：于是他就搬弄是非，凭白无故产生怨恨，在京都宰辅的门前宣泄嘲弄，在公卿太守的席上播扬狂悖的话语。
English: As a result, he gossiped, created resentment for no apparent reason, vented his mockery in front of the gate of Kyoto's vice-premier, and spread his wild words at the table of the court noble, the daimyo.

古文：此而不翦，国章何寄？
现代文：这样的狂徒如不剪除，国家宪章将依凭什么?
English: If such maniacs are not eliminated, what will the national charter be based on?

古文：此而可贷，孰不可容？
现代文：这样的罪遇如可以宽免，哪还有什么罪遇不能容忍?
English: If such crimes can be pardoned, what other crimes cannot be tolerated?

古文：请以见事免超宗所居官，解领记室。
现代文：谨请依据前述事由免去谢超宗所任官职，解除他所领的记室。
English: On the basis of the above-mentioned reasons, I respectfully request that Xie Chaozong be removed from his official position and that the registration office he is in charge of be dissolved.

古文：辄勒外收付廷尉法狱治罪。
现代文：即就在外约束，交付廷尉法狱治罪。
English: That is to say, he was externally restrained and handed over to the court lieutenant for criminal punishment.

古文：超宗品第未入简奏，臣辄奉白简以闻。
现代文：谢超宗品位等第不够入简奏，我即此奉白简奏报皇上知悉。
English: Xie Chaozong's grade was not good enough to be included in the jingle, and I immediately reported this white jingle to the emperor.

古文：世祖虽可其奏，以彖言辞依违，大怒，使左丞王逡之奏曰：
现代文：世祖虽认可了他的奏章，又因为袁彖奏章中言词模棱两可，大为生气，让御史左丞王逡之奏道：
English: Although the patriarch approved of his sonata, he was very angry because of the ambiguity of the words in Yuan Xuan's sonata, so he had the imperial secretary Wang Xizhi sing:

古文：臣闻行父尽忠，无礼斯疾；农夫去草，见恶必耘。
现代文：我听说行父尽忠，衹要无礼造就是痛恨的事；种田人除草，看见杂草一定要铲除。
English: I have heard that a good father is loyal, and it is a hateful thing to be rude; a farmer is weeding, and when he sees weeds, he must get rid of them.

古文：所以振缨称良，登朝著绩，未有尸位存私而能保其荣名者也。
现代文：因此隐居被称为良士，进用于朝廷就应使政绩突出，没有挟持私心占着职位不干事却能保全他的荣誉名利的。
English: Therefore, a recluse is called a virtuous man. If he is promoted to the imperial court, his political achievements should be outstanding. If he does not hold a position with selfishness, he is not an official, but he can preserve his honor, fame and fortune.

古文：今月九日，治书侍御史臣司马侃启弹征北谘议参军事谢超宗，称 根性昏动，率心险放，悖议爽真，嚣辞犯实，亲朋忍闻，衣冠掩目，辄收付廷尉法狱治罪 。
现代文：木月九日，治书侍御史臣司马侃启奏弹劾征北谘议参军事谢超宗，声称 本性糊涂浮躁，任由心性放纵邪恶，狂悖的言论失去真情，喧闹的话语违背事实，亲戚朋友忍耐着听，官绅贵胄遮蔽眼睛不愿看，即行收捕交付廷尉法狱治罪 。
English: On the 9th of March, Sima Kan, the chief secretary and senior statesman, initiated the impeachment of Xie Chaozong, a military officer who had been recruited to the North for consultation, claiming that his nature was confused and impetuous, that he had allowed his heart to indulge in evil, that his wild words had lost their true feelings, that his noisy words had contradicted the facts, that his relatives and friends had listened patiently, and that the officials and dignitaries had covered their eyes and did not want to see, and that he was immediately arrested and handed over to the court to be punished.

古文：处劾虽重，文辞简略，事入主书，被却还外。
现代文：处分虽重，文词内容简略，事情虽说传到了主书令史那裹，又被退回外边。
English: Although the punishment was heavy, the content of the text was brief, and although the matter was reported to the editor-in-chief, it was returned to the outside.

古文：其晚，兼御史中丞臣袁彖改奏白简，始粗详备。
现代文：那天晚上，兼御史中丞臣袁彖改奏的白简，才算大略有所说明。
English: That night, the White Paper, which was also revised by Yuan Qi, the Vice-Minister of the Central Military Commission, is only a rough explanation.

古文：厥初隐卫，实彖之由。
现代文：他起先隐瞒护卫的根由实在袁彖。
English: He initially concealed the real reason for the escort from Yuan Shao.

古文：寻超宗植性险戾，禀行凶诐，豺狼野心，久暴遐迩。
现代文：寻思谢超宗生性狠毒，禀行邪恶，豺狼般的野心早就暴露。
English: The ultra-patriarchal malevolence, viciousness, and jackal-like ambition of Xuanshi Xie have long been exposed.

古文：张敬儿潜图反噬，罚未塞愆，而称怨痛枉，形于言貌。协附奸邪，疑间勋烈，构扇异端，讥议时政，行路同忿，有心咸疾。
现代文：张敬儿暗中图谋反咬一口，对张的惩罚不能抵债张的罪遇，可是，谢超宗为他喊冤叫屈，形于言表；附从奸邪，猜疑、离间功臣勋戚，煽动异端邪说，讥讽评议朝廷政治，行路的人也会激起共愤，有良心的人都会为此痛恨。
English: Zhang Jing'er secretly plotted to bite back, and the punishment for Zhang could not meet the debt of Zhang's crime. However, Xie Chao Zong cried out for his grievances, which was manifested in his words; he was attached to treachery, suspicion, estrangement of meritorious soldiers and relatives, incitement of heresy and heresy, ridiculing and commenting on imperial politics. People who travel will also arouse common indignation, and people with a conscience will hate it.

古文：而阿昧苟容，轻文略奏。
现代文：可是却被欺瞒包含，轻描略奏。
English: But it was covered up, glossed over.

古文：又弹事旧体，品第不简，而衅戾殊常者，皆命议亲奏，以彰深愆。
现代文：还有弹劾事情依原先体例，品级第次不够入简奏，而罪过不同寻常的，都命议亲奏，以此显示其罪过深重。
English: There are also impeachment cases in accordance with the original style, the grade is not enough to enter the jingle for the first time, and the unusual crime is ordered to be played in person, thus showing the seriousness of the crime.

古文：况超宗罪逾四凶，过穷南竹，虽下辄收，而文止黄案，沈浮互见，轻重相乖，此而不纠，宪纲将替。
现代文：况且谢超宗罪行超过舜之四凶，过错罄竹难书，虽说下达辄收，可是行文衹止于尚书文案，沉浮错置，轻重颠倒。这样的问题如不纠察，法纪也将被推翻了。
English: Moreover, Xie Chaozong's crimes exceed the four major crimes, and his mistakes are too numerous to be written down. Although the fine was issued, the execution of the fine was limited to the text of the fine, which was misplaced and reversed. If such problems are not investigated, the legal discipline will also be overturned.

古文：彖才识疏浅，质干无闻，凭戚升荣，因慈荷任。
现代文：袁彖才疏识浅，资质能力没有任何长处，衹凭仗亲族关系荣升要职，因受慈爱而担负职任。
English: Yuan Shao's talent was shallow and his qualification and ability were not good at all. He was promoted to an important position by virtue of his kinship, and assumed the position due to his benevolence.

古文：不能克己厉情，少酬恩奖，挠法容非，用申私惠。
现代文：不能克制自己磨砺情性，稍稍报答皇上的恩泽奖赏，反而扰乱法规包容罪恶，以此用来申达他个人的恩惠。
English: He could not restrain himself from honing his affections and repaying the emperor's grace and reward a little, but on the contrary, he disturbed laws and regulations to tolerate evil, and used this to claim his personal favor.

古文：何以纠正邦违，式明王度？
现代文：像这样用什么纠正违背国法的罪错，昭明王者的政治教化?
English: What is the use of correcting the crime of violating the law of the country like this, and the political indoctrination of the king?

古文：臣等参议，请以见事免彖所居官，解兼御史中丞，辄摄曹依旧下禁止视事如故。
现代文：臣等参议，请依所见事实免去袁彖的官职，同时解除他兼任的御史中丞，辄摄曹依旧下令禁止视事同先前一样。
English: Ministers and other advisers, please remove Yuan Xuan from his official position according to the facts you have seen, and at the same time remove him from his concurrent position of Imperial Historian Junior Middle Officer. Cao Cao still ordered a ban on viewing the matter as before.

古文：治书侍御史臣司马侃虽承禀有由，而初无疑执，亦合及咎。
现代文：治书侍御史司马侃虽说承接禀告有他的原因，但是他开始并没有提出疑问，也应当追究责任。
English: Although Magistrate Sima Kan said that he had his reasons for accepting the complaint, he did not raise doubts at the beginning and should also be held accountable.

古文：请杖督五十，夺劳百日。
现代文：请予责打五十杖，削去百俸禄。
English: Please give him fifty strokes of the cane and deduct one hundred rupees from his salary.

古文：令史卑微，不足申尽，启可奉行。
现代文：令史卑微，不值得申尽，启可奉行。
English: Let history be humble, it is not worth exhausting, it can be pursued.

古文：侃奏弹之始，臣等并即经见加推纠，案入主书，方被却检，疏谬之愆，伏追震悚。
现代文：司马侃上奏弹劾之初，臣等一并经手参与推问纠察，案卷送入主书令史才被退检，疏失的罪责，伏请一并予以追究，以便震慑诚惶诚恐的人。
English: At the beginning of Sima Kan's impeachment, the ministers and others participated in the questioning and picketing together, and the case file was sent to the main book to order the history to be withdrawn. The culpability of negligence should be investigated together in order to deter those who are sincerely afraid.

古文：诏曰： 超宗衅同大逆，罪不容诛。
现代文：皇帝诏告说： 谢超宗形同反叛，罪不容诛。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: Xie Chaozhong's lineage is the same as that of a rebel, and his crime is intolerable.

古文：彖匿情欺国，爱朋罔主，事合极法，特原收治，免官如案，禁锢十年。 
现代文：袁彖隐瞒情况欺骗国家，爱护朋友而祸害主上，当以最重的刑法处治，特此原谅宽待，不予收捕处治，免去官职记入案卷，十年不准作官。 
English: Yuan Qi deceived the country by concealing the situation, loved his friends and harmed his master. He should be punished with the heaviest criminal law. I hereby pardon the leniency, do not arrest and punish him, remove him from the official post and record it in the case file, and prohibit him from working as an official for ten years.

古文：超宗下廷尉，一宿发白皓首。
现代文：谢超宗捕入廷尉，一夜之间变得白发苍苍。
English: Xie Chaozong was made a court lieutenant, and his hair turned white overnight.

古文：诏徙越州，行至豫章，上敕豫章内史虞悰曰： 谢超宗令于彼赐自尽，勿伤其形骸。 
现代文：皇上下韶把他流放越州，走到豫章，皇上敕告豫章内史虞惊说： 着令谢超宗在你处自尽，不要伤损他的形体。 
English: The emperors banished him to Yuezhou and went to Yuanzhang. The emperors told Yuanzhang's internal historian Yu Zhen and said: Let Xie Chaozong commit suicide at your place, and do not harm his body.

古文：明年，超宗门生王永先又告超宗子才卿死罪二十余条。
现代文：第二年，谢超宗的门生王永先又控告谢超宗的儿子才卿死罪二十多条。
English: In the following year, Wang Yongsheng, a protégé of Xie Chao Zong, also accused Xie Chao Zong's son Caiqing of more than 20 capital offenses.

古文：上疑其虚妄，以才卿付廷尉辩，以不实见原。
现代文：皇上怀疑那些罪状有假，把谢才卿交付廷尉审查，因为罪状不能落实被原谅。
English: The emperor suspected that the charges were false, and sent Xie Caiqing to the court lieutenant for examination, because the charges could not be implemented and pardoned.

古文：永先于狱自尽。
现代文：王永先在狱中自尽了。
English: Wang Yongxian committed suicide in prison.

古文：刘祥，字显征，东莞莒人也。
现代文：刘祥字显征，是东莞莒人。
English: Liu Xiang is a famous person in Dongguan.

古文：祖式之，吴郡太守。
现代文：祖父刘式之，曾作呈郡太守。
English: His grandfather, Liu Shih-chih, was once the prefect of Sheng County.

古文：父敳，太宰从事中郎。
现代文：父亲刘敳，是太宰从事中郎。
English: His father, Liu Yao, was a Dazai who worked as a middle manager.

古文：祥宋世解褐为巴陵王征西行参军，历骠骑中军二府，太祖太尉东阁祭酒，骠骑主簿。
现代文：刘祥在宋世由平民做巴陵王征西西行参军，历骠骑中军二府，友担太尉束合祭酒，骠骑主簿。
English: In the Song Dynasty, Liu Xiang joined the army from the common people as the king of Baling and went west to west. He rode the Chinese army to two provinces, and his friend was the captain of the bundling of the sacrificial wine.

古文：建元中，为冠军征虏功曹，为府主武陵王晔所遇。
现代文：建五年问，为冠军征虏功曹，被府主武陵王芦壁厚待。
English: After five years of construction, he was awarded the title of champion and was well received by the governor, Wuling Wang Lubei.

古文：除正员外。
现代文：授正员外。
English: He is not an honorary member.

古文：祥少好文学，性韵刚疏，轻言肆行，不避高下。
现代文：刘祥从少年时就爱好文学，性情刚直疏散，言语轻狂行为放纵，不顾忌尊高卑下。
English: Liu Xiang has been fond of literature since he was a boy. His temperament is straightforward and open-minded, his speech is frivolous and his behavior is indulgent, and he does not care about being superior or inferior.

古文：司徒褚渊入朝，以腰扇鄣日，祥从侧过，曰： 作如此举止，羞面见人，扇鄣何益？ 
现代文：司徒褚渊上朝时以腰扇遮蔽阳光，刘祥从他身旁走过，说： 做出这般举动，见人怕羞，用扇遮掩有何好处? 
English: Liu Xiang walked past him and said, "If you act like this, people will be ashamed to see you. What are the benefits of covering yourself with a fan?

古文：渊曰： 寒士不逊。 
现代文：褚渊说： 寒士说话没有礼貌。 
English: Shanyuan said, "It's not polite for a cold person to talk."

古文：祥曰： 不能杀袁、刘，安得免寒士？ 
现代文：刘祥说： 不能杀掉袁粲、刘秉，怎么能不做寒士? 
English: Liu Xiang said: If you can't kill Yuan Qi and Liu Bing, how can you not be a cold warrior?

古文：永明初，迁长沙王镇军，板谘议参军，撰《宋书》，讥斥禅代，尚书令王俭密以启闻，上衔而不问。
现代文：永明初年，迁刘祥为长沙王镇军，板任谘议参军。撰写《宋书》，讥讽贬斥了由宋禅让给齐的事，尚书令王俭把这些事由秘密启奏皇上，皇上藏在心中没加追问。
English: In the first year of Yongming, Liu Xiang was transferred to the Changsha Wangzhen Army, and was appointed to advise and join the army. Writing the "Song Book," he ridiculed the things given to Qi by Song and Zen, and ordered Wang Jian to secretly reveal these things to the emperor. The emperor hid them in his heart and did not ask questions.

古文：历鄱阳王征虏，豫章王大司马谘议，临川王骠骑从事中郎。
现代文：先后任鄱阳王征卢，豫章王大司马谘议，临!王骠骑从事中郎。
English: He successively held the posts of Shenyang Wang Zhelu, Yuzhang Wang Daisima consultation, and Jin! Wang Xueqi engaged in the middle.

古文：祥兄整为广州，卒官，祥就整妻求还资，事闻朝廷。
现代文：刘祥的哥哥刘整为广州刺史，在官任上死了，刘祥到刘整的妻子那裹要求归还财物，事情被朝廷知道。
English: Liu Xiang's brother, Liu Jizhe, was the chief historian of Guangzhou and died in office. Liu Xiang went to Liu Jizhe's wife, Nabao, to demand the return of his property. The matter was known to the imperial court.

古文：于朝士多所贬忽。
现代文：朝廷之士大多贬斥轻视他。
English: Most members of the imperial court despised and belittled him.

古文：王奂为仆射，祥与奂子融同载，行至中堂，见路人驱驴，祥曰： 驴！
现代文：王奂做仆射，刘祥和王奂的儿子王融同坐一部车，走到中堂，看见路上人赶驴，刘祥说： 驴!
English: Wang Yao was a foot soldier, Liu Xiang and Wang Yao's son Wang Rong rode in a carriage together, walked to the middle hall, saw people on the road driving a donkey, Liu Xiang said: Donkey!

古文：汝好为之，如汝人才，皆已令仆。 
现代文：你要好好干，像你这样的人才，都已让他当仆射了。 
English: You have to do a good job. Talents like you have all been used as pawns by him.

古文：著《连珠》十五首以寄其怀。
现代文：刘祥撰写了《连珠》十五首来寄托他的志向。
English: Liu Xiang wrote the fifteen poems of "The String of Pearls" to express his aspirations.

古文：辞曰：
现代文：辞曰：
English: The article said:

古文：盖闻兴教之道，无尚必同；拯俗之方，理贵袪弊。
现代文：据说振兴教化的途径，若无推崇必定趋同；整治民俗的方法，贵在除弊。
English: It is said that the ways to revitalize education, if there is no admiration, must converge; the way to rectify folk customs is to eliminate the drawbacks.

古文：故揖让之礼，行乎尧舜之朝；干戈之功，盛于殷周之世。
现代文：所以揖让的礼仪，风行于尧舜时期；干戈的功用，广施于殷周时代。
English: Therefore, the etiquette of 让 was popular in the  period; the function of 干戈 was widely used in the Yin and Zhou era.

古文：清风以长物成春，素霜以凋严戒节。
现代文：清风使万物生长形成春天，严霜使万物凋谢以知节令。
English: Clear wind makes all things grow to form spring, frost makes all things wither to know the season.

古文：盖闻鼓篸怀音，待扬桴以振响；天地涵灵，资昏明以垂位。
现代文：据说大鼓之音，等待扬起鼓棰来敲响；天与地包涵灵气，藉助白昼黑夜来显示它的存在。
English: It is said that the sound of the big drum is waiting for the cymbals to be raised and sounded; heaven and earth contain the aura, and it uses day and night to show its existence.

古文：是以俊乂之臣，借汤、武而隆；英达之君，假伊、周而治。
现代文：因此贤德的臣子，藉助商汤、周武发达；英达的君主，藉助伊尹、周公得天下太平。
English: Therefore, the virtuous vassals, with the help of Shang Tang and Zhou Wu, developed; the noble monarchs, with the help of Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, achieved world peace.

古文：盖闻悬饥在岁，式羡藜藿之饱；重炎灼体，不念狐白之温。
现代文：据说饥饿的年月，会羡慕藜藿可以果腹；大火烧灼身体时，不会想用狐腋白毛制成衣服的温暖。
English: It is said that in the years of hunger, people will envy the foxes for their stomachs; when the fire burns the body, they will not want to use the white hair of the fox to make clothes warm.

古文：故才以偶时为劭；道以调俗为尊。
现代文：所以才能以适应时势为好，道以纠正时弊而受到推崇。
English: Therefore, the ability to adapt to the current situation is good, and the way to correct the shortcomings of the times is respected.

古文：盖闻习数之功，假物可寻；探索之明，循时则缺。
现代文：据说练习的功效，藉助客观事物可以找寻到；探索事理，随着时光的流转，有些也可能不明白。
English: It is said that the effect of practice can be found with the help of objective things; explore the reason, with the passage of time, some may not understand.

古文：故班匠日往，绳墨之伎不衰；大道常存，机神之智永绝。
现代文：所以鲁班随时光去了绳墨的技艺久传不衰；人间正理常存，灵巧变诈的智谋永不延续。
English: Therefore, the skills of rope and ink have been passed down for a long time; human reason will always exist, and clever and deceptive wisdom will never continue.

古文：盖闻理定于心，不期俗赏；情贯于时，无悲世辱。故芬芳各性；不待汨渚之哀；明白为宝，无假荆南之哭。
现代文：据说心里认定理正，不期望流俗的赏识；情感贯行于当时，不必属社会的羞辱而感伤，所以说芬芳香气各由本性，不用等待汨渚哀叹；世人明白是实，不必藉助卞和的哭泣。
English: It is said that the heart is determined to be right, and does not expect the appreciation of the vulgar; the emotion runs through at the time, it does not have to be a social humiliation and sentimental, so the fragrance is by nature, do not wait for the sadness; the world knows the truth, do not need to cry with the help of peace.

古文：盖闻百仞之台，不挺陵霜之木；盈尺之泉，时降夜光之宝。
现代文：据说百仞高的台于，不能挺立傲霜的树木；径满一尺的泉流，不时降生夜光宝珠。
English: It is said that a hundred-meter-high platform cannot stand proud frost trees; a one-foot-wide spring stream, from time to time, gives birth to luminous gems.

古文：故理有大而乖权；物有微而至道。
现代文：所以说道理至大就会有违背权变的地方；事物虽然极为细微，却能寓涵最正确的道理。
English: Therefore, if the principle is supreme, there will be a place that violates the power change; although things are extremely subtle, they can embody the most correct principle.

古文：盖闻忠臣赴节，不必在朝；列士匡时，义存则干。
现代文：据说忠臣为节操投身，不一定要在朝堂之上；烈士匡救时弊，节义包藏于实干之中。
English: It is said that the loyal vassals who devote themselves to the festival do not necessarily have to be above the imperial court; the martyrs save the times, and the festival is hidden in the actual work.

古文：故包胥垂涕，不荷肉食之谋；王歜投身，不主庙堂之算。
现代文：所以说申包胥痛哭，并非秉承达官贵人的谋略；王歜投身，不属执掌朝廷筹算的人。
English: Therefore, Shen Baojun cried bitterly, not adhering to the strategy of dignitaries; Wang Xi devoted himself and was not the person in charge of the imperial court's planning.

古文：盖闻智出乎身，理无或困；声系于物，才有必穷。
现代文：据说智慧出自本身，理智就不会困乏；声名系于外物，才能必定有穷尽的一天。
English: It is said that wisdom comes from itself, reason will not be tired; reputation is based on external things, talent must have an exhausting day.

古文：故陵波之羽，不能净浪；盈岫之木，无以辍风。
现代文：所以说超越波浪的飞鸟，不能使波浪平静；长满真岗的树木，无法使清风停止。
English: Therefore, the birds that fly over the waves cannot calm the waves; the trees that grow over the hills cannot stop the wind.

古文：盖闻良宝遇拙，则奇文不显；达士逢谗，则英才灭耀。
现代文：据说宝贝碰到笨拙的人，纵有奇妙的文采也得不到显露；通达事理的人遭逢谗言，他的才华就会失去耀眼的光辉。
English: It is said that if a clumsy person meets a darling, even a wonderful literary style will not be revealed; if a sensible person is criticized, his talent will lose its dazzling brilliance.

古文：故坠叶垂荫，明月为之隔辉；堂宇留光，兰灯有时不照。
现代文：所以说树叶能垂荫，明月也将被它隔绝；堂宇本为光亮之地，兰灯有时不明。
English: Therefore, it is said that the leaves can cast shade, and the bright moon will also be cut off by it; the hall is a bright place, and the lanterns are sometimes unclear.

古文：盖闻迹慕近方，必势遗于远大；情系驱驰，固理忘于肥遁。
现代文：据说追慕近处，势必忘记远大之处；志在世俗利禄，当然不会退隐。
English: It is said that if you pursue what is near, you are bound to forget what is far away; if you aspire to worldly riches, of course you will not retire.

古文：是以临川之士，时结羡网之悲；负肆之氓，不抱屠龙之叹。
现代文：所以面对江河的人，时常产生羡慕他人结网打鱼的悲叹；身在集市的平民，不会有怀抱高超技艺而无所施展的感慨。
English: Therefore, people who face rivers often have the lament of envying others for fishing with nets; civilians in the market will not have the emotion of embracing superb skills and doing nothing.

古文：盖闻数之所隔，虽近则难；情之所符，虽远则易。
现代文：据说观念不同，即使相距很近也难趋一致；情感默契，即使相距很远也容易沟通。
English: It is said that different ideas, even if the distance is very close, are difficult to converge; emotional tacit understanding, even if the distance is very far, is easy to communicate.

古文：是以陟叹流霜，时获感天之诚；泣血从刑，而无悟主之智。
现代文：所以面对飞霜感叹，有时能感动上天的至诚；痛哭流泪去就刑，却没有使主上感悟的智慧。
English: Therefore, sighing in the face of flying frost can sometimes move God's sincerity; weeping and shedding tears to go to the execution, but there is no wisdom to impress the Lord.

古文：盖闻妙尽于识，神远则遗；功接于人，情微则著。
现代文：据说即使认识极其深远，一时疏忽也会有遗漏；功在于民，事虽细小也会历历在目。
English: It is said that even if the knowledge is extremely far-reaching, there will be omissions due to momentary negligence; the credit lies with the people, although small things will be experienced.

古文：故钟鼓在堂，万夫倾耳；大道居身，有时不遇。
现代文：所以权势在手，万夫为之倾听；大道在身，有时也会不被赏识。
English: Therefore, the power is in the hand, and people listen to it; the road is in the body, and sometimes it is not appreciated.

古文：盖闻列草深岫，不改先冬之悴；植松涧底，无夺后凋之荣。
现代文：据说布列在屑峦上的草，不能改变冬天来到之前就枯萎的品性；种植在涧底的松树，不会失去后凋的荣耀。
English: It is said that the grass spread on the stubble can not change the character of withering before winter comes; the pine tree planted at the bottom of the stubble will not lose the glory of withering.

古文：故展禽三黜，而无下愚之誉；千秋一时，而无上智之声。
现代文：所以展禽三次被黜，却没有下愚的名声；千秋一时荣显，却没有上智的声誉。
English: That is why the show pigeon has been booed three times, but has no reputation for stupidity; it has been honored once in a blue moon, but has no reputation for wisdom.

古文：盖闻希世之宝，违时则贱；伟俗之器，无圣必沦。
现代文：据说希世实物，不合时宜就会卑贱；超拔流俗的人才，没有圣明的君主必定会沉沦。
English: It is said that if something is rare, it will be despised if it is out of season; if a person is an extraordinary talent, the monarch will surely sink without enlightenment.

古文：故鸣玉黜于楚岫，章甫穷于越人。
现代文：所以鸣玉在楚岫被贬斥，缁布冠在越人那裹就没有用处。
English: Therefore, the Ming jade was denigrated in the Chu Dynasty, and the cloth crown was useless in the Yue Dynasty.

古文：盖闻听绝于聪，非疾响所达；神闭于明，非盈光所烛。
现代文：据说流言在明察者那裹消逝，并不是声响不快所致；神奇在明智的人面前失去。不是圆满的月光所照。
English: It is said that a rumor dies before the eyes of the beholder, and not because of an unpleasant sound; a miracle is lost before the eyes of a wise man, and not by the light of a full moon.

古文：故破山之雷，不发聋夫之耳；朗夜之辉，不开矇叟之目。
现代文：所以能震破山峦的响雷，不能使聋子听到；能照亮黑夜的光辉，不能使盲人看得见。
English: Therefore the thunder that shakes the mountains cannot make the deaf hear, and the light that illuminates the night cannot make the blind see.

古文：有以祥《连珠》启上者，上令御史中丞任遐奏曰： 祥少而狡异，长不悛徙，请谒绝于私馆，反唇彰于公庭，轻议乘舆，历贬朝望，肆丑无避，纵言自若。
现代文：有人把刘祥的《连珠》禀告皇上，皇上命令御史中丞任遐弹奏说：刘祥年轻时狡猾得很，年长后不悔改。没有人敢到他的私宅告求，他却敢在公堂上反唇相讥，轻率地议论皇帝，一一贬低朝廷中富有声威的大臣，毫无顾忌恣意妄为，无所拘束地散布他的言语。
English: Someone reported Liu Xiang's "String of Pearls" to the emperor, and the emperor ordered the imperial historian, Ren Zheng, to play it, saying: "Liu Xiang was very cunning when he was young, and he did not repent when he was older. No one dared to go to his private home to appeal to him, but he dared to backbite in the public hall, flippantly talk about the emperor, one by one belittle the powerful ministers in the imperial court, act recklessly, and spread his words without restraint.

古文：厥兄浮榇，天伦无一日之悲，南金弗获，嫂侄致其轻绝，孤舟夐反，存没相捐，遂令暴客掠夺骸柩，行路流叹，有识伤心。
现代文：他的兄长死了，这天然的亲缘他没有一天悲伤，他哥哥在南方的资财没有获得，致使寡嫂、侄儿和他轻易地断绝了关系，孤舟从远地返回，生死存亡的危险交互出现，于是致使暴徒掠夺骸柩，过路的人为此感叹，有识之士更为之伤心不已。
English: His brother died, and he did not grieve for a day for this natural kinship. His brother's fortune in the south was not acquired, so that his widow, nephew and he easily broke off the relationship. A lone boat returned from a distance, and the danger of life and death interacted. This led to mobs looting the wrecks. People passing by lamented this, and people with insight were even more heartbroken.

古文：摄祥门生孙狼儿列 祥顷来饮酒无度，言语阑逸。道说朝廷，亦有不逊之语，实不避左右，非可称纸墨。
现代文：收捕到的刘祥门生孙狼儿列举 刘祥近来饮洒没有节制，言语放纵， 议论朝廷也有不尊重的话语，放肆不知避讳，简直不好用纸墨表达。
English: Liu Xiang's protégé, Sun Wol'er, who was arrested, listed Liu Xiang's recent drinking habits as unrestrained, his words as indulgent, his discussion of the imperial court as disrespectful, his impudence as unscrupulous, and his inability to express himself with ink and paper.

古文：兄整先为广州，于职丧亡，去年启求迎丧，还至大雷，闻祥与整妻孟争计财物瞋忿，祥仍委前还，后未至鹊头，其夜遭劫，内人并为凶人所淫略 。
现代文：他哥哥刘整先前在广州作刺史，任职期间死去，去年提出迎丧，回到大雷时，听说刘祥同刘整的妻子孟氏争论计较财物而生气，刘样还受委托在龙返回，后来没有到鹊头，那天夜裹即遭受劫难，妇女并被贼盗奸淫抢掠 。
English: His brother Liu Zhengyi had previously made a stabbing history in Guangzhou. He died during his term of office. Last year, he proposed a funeral. When he returned to Dalai, he heard that Liu Xiang was angry with Liu Zhengyi's wife Meng Shi for arguing about property. Liu Zhengyi was also commissioned to return to Long. Later, he did not come to Shantou. That night, he suffered a disaster. Women were raped and robbed by thieves.

古文：如所列与风闻符同。
现代文：上所列举内容与传说符合。
English: The above is consistent with the legend.

古文：请免官付廷尉。 
现代文：请免去刘祥官职交廷尉处治。
English: Please exempt Liu Xiang from the official disciplinary action.

古文：上别遣敕祥曰： 卿素无行检，朝野所悉。
现代文：皇上另又发送敕书给刘祥说：你一向不检点，这是朝野都熟知的。
English: The emperor also sent an imperial edict to Liu Xiang saying, "You have always been indiscreet, which is well known to both the emperor and the people.

古文：轻弃骨肉，侮蔑兄嫂，此是卿家行不足，乃无关他人。
现代文：轻率地抛弃骨肉，侮蠛兄嫂，这是你的家行不足，不关涉别人。
English: Recklessly abandoning the flesh and blood, insulting your brother and sister-in-law, this is your family's deficiency, not involving others.

古文：卿才识所知，盖何足论。
现代文：凭你的才识是懂得这些道理的，还用说什么呢?
English: Your talent and insight are not worth mentioning.

古文：位涉清途，于分非屈。
现代文：职位属于事权不多的一类，按分也不算委屈。
English: The position belongs to a category with few rights and responsibilities, and the points are not considered a grievance.

古文：何意轻肆口哕，诋目朝士，造席立言，必以贬裁为口实？
现代文：谁料口吐恶言，毁谤朝廷人士，出席聚会发表意见，一定把贬低评说他人作实。
English: Anyone who is willing to spout vile words, defame those in the imperial court, and attend gatherings to express their opinions, will certainly make the disparaging comments about others come true.

古文：冀卿年齿已大，能自感厉，日望悛革。
现代文：原希望你年龄已大，能够有所感悟，天天盼你能悔过自新。
English: I had hoped that you were old enough to have some insight, and hoped every day that you would repent and reform.

古文：如此所闻，转更增甚，諠议朝廷，不避尊贱，肆口极辞，彰暴物听。
现代文：像这次所听到的，反而变得更厉害了。大声议论朝政，不避尊卑贵贱，信口胡说，人们都已听得清楚明白。
English: What we heard this time, on the other hand, has become even more powerful. People have heard loudly about the government, not avoiding the high and the low, and talking nonsense.

古文：近见卿影《连珠》，寄意悖慢，弥不可长。
现代文：近来看见你的《连珠》，寓意荒谬不合礼法，更加不能任其发展。
English: Recently, I saw your "String of Pearls," the moral is absurd and improper, and it cannot be allowed to develop.

古文：卿不见谢超宗，其才地二三，故在卿前，事殆是百分不一。
现代文：你没看见谢超宗，他的才干很平凡，所以在你面前，几乎是百分中不到一分。
English: You did not see Xie Chaozong, his talent is very ordinary, so in front of you, almost less than one point out of a hundred.

古文：我当原卿性命，令卿万里思愆。
现代文：我可以饶你性命，让你在万里之外反省过失。
English: I can spare your life and let you reflect on your mistakes thousands of miles away.

古文：卿若能改革，当令卿得还。 
现代文：假若能改掉这些过失，我会让你返回朝廷。
English: If you can correct these faults, I will let you return to the imperial court.

古文：狱鞫祥辞。祥对曰： 被问 少习狡异，长而不悛，顷来饮酒无度，轻议乘舆，历贬朝望，每肆丑言，无避尊贱 ，迂答奉旨。
现代文：狱吏审问刘祥的口供，刘祥说：我被指责为 年轻时狡猾得很，年长后不加悔改，近来饮酒不加节制，轻率地议论皇帝，一一贬低朝廷中富有声威的大臣，时常毫无顾忌地散布丑恶的言语譬不回避尊卑贵贱 。
English: "I have been accused of being very cunning when I was young, unrepentant when I was older, recently drinking alcohol without restraint, carelessly discussing the emperor, belittling prominent ministers in the imperial court, and often spreading ugly words without scruples, such as not shunning the high and the low," Liu Xiang said.

古文：囚出身入官，二十余年，沈悴草莱，无明天壤。
现代文：我回答如下：囚出来做官，二十多年，在蒿草中沉埋忧闷，在天地之间不见光亮。
English: My answer is as follows: I was released from prison to become an official, and for more than twenty years, I was buried in the weeds, and saw no light between heaven and earth.

古文：皇运初基，便蒙抽擢，祭酒主簿，并皆先朝相府。
现代文：皇运刚刚奠定基业，便承恩提拔，祭酒主簿，都由先朝相府提携。
English: As soon as the foundation was laid for the imperial tournament, the promotion and the main book of the sacrificial wine were all affiliated with the Shofu of the previous dynasty.

古文：圣明御宇，荣渥弥隆，谘议中郎，一年再泽。
现代文：御宇之内尽见圣明，蒙受荣誉更高，谘议中郎，一年两次受恩泽。
English: Within the Imperial Court, he sees all the saints, receives higher honors, consults with middlemen, and is favored twice a year.

古文：广筵华宴，必参末列，朝半问讯，时奉天辉。
现代文：广大的聚会，豪华的宴席，定可让叨光末座，朝会中间询问讯息卜时常侍奉皇上。
English: At large gatherings and sumptuous banquets, nagakko is always allowed to sit at the end of the table. He often serves the emperor by asking for messages in the middle of court gatherings.

古文：囚虽顽愚，岂不识恩？
现代文：囚虽说顽劣愚鲁，难道不知道恩惠?
English: Though the prisoner is wicked and stupid, does he not know what kindness is?

古文：有何怨望，敢生讥议？
现代文：能有什么怨气，竟敢肆意讥议?
English: Can there be any bitterness, how dare you mock?

古文：囚历府以来，伏事四王：武陵功曹，凡涉二载；长沙谘议，故经少时；奉隶大司马，并被恩拂，骠骑中郎，亲职少日；临川殿下不遗虫蚁，赐参辞华。
现代文：囚经历府职以来，伏事四位王爷：武陵王功曹，总共过了两年；长沙王谘议，经历时间不长；奉隶大司马，一并被恩泽，骠骑中郎，亲历职责时日少些；临川王殿下不嫌虫蚁之才，赐我参预辞翰。
English: Since the prisoner experienced the government post, the four princes have been arrested: Wuling Wang Gong Cao, a total of two years have passed; Changsha Wang consulted, the experience time is not long; Bongshi Daisima, one was favored, Zou Jie Zhong Lang, less time to experience the duties; His Royal Highness Linchuan Wang does not dislike the talent of insects and ants, and gave me a speech.

古文：司徒殿下文德英明，四海倾属。
现代文：司徒殿下文德英明，四海倾慕。
English: Shuto-den is famous for its sages and sages are admired all over the world.

古文：囚不涯卑远，随例问讯，时节拜觐，亦沾眄议。
现代文：囚不因身份卑远的界限，随例省枧慰问，按时参见，也曾得到斛着眼睛同我交谈。
English: Prisoners not because of the status of the lowly boundaries, with the example of condolences, see you on time, also had a conversation with me with his eyes closed.

古文：自余令王，未被祗拜，既不经伏节，理无厚薄。
现代文：此外的贤王，都不曾恭敬参拜，既不曾殉节而死，理应不存在厚薄之分。
English: In addition, the wise kings did not respectfully attend the worship, nor did they die a martyr's death, so there should be no difference between them.

古文：敕旨制书，令有疑则启。
现代文：敕旨制书，让有疑议就启奏。
English: If in doubt, let the record speak for itself.

古文：囚以天日悬远，未敢尘秽。私之疑事，卫将军臣俭，宰辅圣朝，令望当世，囚自断才短，密以谘俭，俭为折衷，纸迹犹存。
现代文：囚以为天日高悬，不敢以尘垢有污朝廷，我个人存疑的事情，卫将军臣王俭，是圣明宰辅，美好声望盖过当今，囚自觉才智短缺，暗中拿来向王俭咨询，王俭为之折衷，纸迹还保存着。
English: The prisoner thought that the sun was high in the sky, he did not dare to take advantage of the dirty and dirty imperial court, the things that I personally doubted, the guard general, the vassal of Wang Jian, was the sacred wisdom, the beautiful reputation was beyond the present, the prisoner was aware of the shortage of talent, and secretly used it to consult Wang Jian, Wang Jian compromised, and the paper traces were still preserved.

古文：未解此理云何敢为 历贬朝望 。
现代文：不知为什么说我 一一贬低朝中颇具声威的大臣 。
English: I don't know why I say that I disparage every prominent minister in the DPRK.

古文：云囚 轻议乘舆 ，为向谁道？
现代文：说囚 轻率地议论皇上 ，是向谁说的?
English: To whom did the prisoner say that he had spoken rashly about the Emperor?

古文：若向人道，则应有主甲，岂有事无仿佛，空见罗谤？
现代文：若是向人说了，就应该有主甲，岂能事情没个影子，就罗织罪名?
English: If you say it to someone, there should be a principal, can't things be without a shadow, weaving accusations?

古文：囚性不耐酒，亲知所悉，强进一升，便已迷醉。 
现代文：囚本性不胜酒力，亲近的人都熟悉了解，勉强喝一升，便已沉醉了。
English: The prisoner's nature is no match for alcohol, people close to him are familiar with it and understand it. He barely drinks a litre and is already intoxicated.

古文：其余事事自申。
现代文：其他的事都一一自我申辩。
English: Everything else is self-justification.

古文：乃徙广州。
现代文：于是流放广州。
English: As a result, he was exiled to Guangzhou.

古文：祥至广州，不得意，终日纵酒，少时病卒，年三十九。
现代文：刘登到魔业，不得意，整天纵酒，没多久病死了，年仅三十九岁。
English: Liu Deng went to the magic industry, was disappointed, drank all day, and soon died of illness, only 39 years old.

古文：祥从祖兄彪，祥曾祖穆之正胤。
现代文：刘祥的堂兄刘彪，是刘祥曾祖父刘穆之的嫡孙。
English: Liu Xiang's cousin Liu Biao is the legitimate grandson of Liu Xiang's great-grandfather Liu Muzhi.

古文：建元初，降封南康县公，虎贲中郎将。
现代文：建元初年，降封为南康县公，虎贲中郎将。
English: In the first year of the founding of the Republic of China, he was demoted to Nankang County official, and became the vice-commander of the Tiger Regiment.

古文：永明元年，坐庙墓不脩削爵。
现代文：永明元年，因家庙祖墓未修而削去爵号。
English: In the first year of the Yongming Dynasty, he was stripped of his title because his family temple and ancestral tomb had not been repaired.

古文：后为羽林监。
现代文：后又为羽林监。
English: Later, he became a forestry inspector.

古文：九年，又坐与亡弟母杨别居，不相料理，杨死不殡葬，崇圣寺尼慧首剃头为尼，以五百钱为买棺材，以泥洹舆送葬刘墓。为有司所奏，事寝不出。
现代文：建元九年，又因同死去的弟弟的母亲杨氏分居，不帮助照料，杨氏死后不予殡葬，而由崇圣寺尼慧首剃头为尼，用五百钱买棺材，用泥洹舆送到刘家墓地安葬等事，被有关官员劾奏，事情被压下没有颁布。
English: In the ninth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, due to the fact that he separated from the mother of his dead brother, Ms. Yang, and did not help to take care of her, Mr. Yang was not given a funeral after his death, but his head was shaved by the nuns of the Chong Sheng Temple, a coffin was bought with five hundred dollars, and the coffin was sent to the Liu family cemetery for burial with muddy water, he was impeached by relevant officials, and the matter was suppressed and not promulgated.

古文：史臣曰：魏文帝云 文人不护细行 ，古今之所同也。
现代文：史臣曰：魏文帝说 文人不护细行 ，古今的表现都是相同的。
English: Shichen said: Wei Wendi said that the literati do not take good care of themselves, and the performance of ancient and modern times is the same.

古文：由自知情深，在物无竞，身名之外，一概可蔑。
现代文：由于自觉情深，在他人无可比拟，身名之外，一概都可蔑视。
English: Because of his deep self-awareness, he is incomparable to others, and he can despise everything except his name.

古文：既徇斯道，其弊弥流，声裁所加，取忤人世。
现代文：遵从了这种为人之道，他的弊病更加泛滥，评议的话语，招惹世人怪罪。
English: Following this way of being, his ills are more rampant, the discourse of judgment, inciting the world to blame.

古文：向之所以贵身，翻成害已。
现代文：先前可用作使自身尊贵的赞扬，反而成了损害自己的祸害。
English: What could have been a tribute to self-esteem has instead become a self-defeating scourge.

古文：故通人立训，为之而不恃也。
现代文：所以学识博通古今的人树立训教，可照着实行却不可依仗。
English: Therefore, learned and knowledgeable people from ancient times to the present can establish teachings, but they cannot rely on them.

古文：赞曰：超宗蕴文，祖构余芬。刘祥慕异，言亦不群。违朝失典，流放南濆。
现代文：赞曰：超宗身藏文采，构有祖德余香；刘祥追慕奇异，言语也能超群拔俗，但违背朝纲法典，结果流放到南海之滨。
English: Zang said: "Chang Zong is a master of Tibetan language and literature, and he is the embodiment of ancestral wisdom; Liu Xiang admires the bizarre, and his language is also superior to the vulgar, but he violates the Code of Imperial Regulations, and as a result, he was exiled to the coast of the South China Sea."

