古文：山玉笥山大翮山山精石鸡山新丰山庆山瓮峰夸父山插灶河山石斛终南乳洞古铁锁崖山圣钟山嵩梁山石鼓山射的山怪山鸣铙山
现代文：山玉笥山大翮山山精石鸡山新丰山庆山瓮峰夸父山插灶河山石斛终南乳洞古铁锁崖山圣钟山嵩梁山石鼓山射的山怪山鸣铙山
English: Mountain Jade Mountain Mountain Jade Mountain Mountain Jade Mountain Stone Chicken Mountain Xinfeng Mountain Qing Mountain Shandong Mountain Shandong Mountain Shandong Mountain Shandong Mountain Shandong Mountain Shandong Mountain Shandong Mountain Shandong Mountain

古文：赣台上霄峰麦积山斗山观大竹路
现代文：赣台上霄峰麦积山斗山观大竹路
English: Xingtai Shangxiaofeng, Maijishan, Doushan, Grand Bamboo Road

古文：溪溪毒山
现代文：溪溪毒山
English: Xixi Poison Mountain

古文：玉笥山
现代文：玉笥山
English: Yulong Mountain

古文：汉武帝好仙，于玉笥山顶上，置降真坛大还丹灶。
现代文：汉武帝好仙，在玉笥山顶上设置了降真坛大还丹灶。
English: Emperor Hanwu was a virtuous man. He set up the Great Altar of Truth on the top of Jade Mountain.

古文：道士昼夜祈祷，天感其诚，乃降白玉笥，置坛上。
现代文：道士昼夜不停地祈祷，上天被他的至诚所感动，就降下一个白玉笥放在坛上。
English: The Taoist prayed day and night without ceasing. Heaven was moved by his sincerity, and lowered a white jade bowl and placed it on the altar.

古文：武帝遣使取之，至其坛侧，飘风大震，卷玉笥而去。
现代文：汉武帝派人去取它，刚到坛的旁边，忽然来了一阵大旋风，把玉笥给卷走了。
English: Emperor Hanwu sent someone to retrieve it, but just as they got to the side of the altar, a big whirlwind suddenly came and swept away the jade bowl.

古文：因此则为玉笥山焉。
现代文：因此取名叫玉笥山。
English: Therefore, it was named Yulong Mountain.

古文：大翮山
现代文：大翮山
English: Dashan Mountain

古文：上郡人王次仲，少有异志，变仓颉旧文为今隶书。
现代文：王次仲是上郡人，少年时就有不同于别人的志向，把仓颉的旧文字改变为现今的隶书。
English: Wang Jizhong is from Shanggong County. When he was a boy, he had a different ambition from others. He wanted to change the old characters of Cangcun into the present-day Jizhong.

古文：秦始皇时，官务烦多，以次仲所易文，简便于事，因而召之。
现代文：秦始皇的时候，官务繁多，用次仲所改变的文字，办事就简便多了。因而召他进宫。
English: During the time of the First Emperor of Qin, there were many official duties, and it was much easier to do things using the characters changed by Tsering, so he was summoned to the palace.

古文：凡三徵不致。次仲怀道履真，穷数术之妙。
现代文：王次仲心里有着追求真知的思想，穷究天文、占卜的奥妙。
English: Wang Cizhong had the idea of pursuing true knowledge in his heart, studying the mysteries of astronomy and divination.

古文：始皇怒其不恭，令槛车送之，次仲行次。忽化为大鸟，出车外，翻飞而去。落二翮于斯山，故其峰峦有大翮小翮之名矣。
现代文：三次征召他都没来，始皇十分恼怒，认为他对皇帝不恭敬，下令用囚禁押解犯人的车把他送到京城，次仲正走着，忽然变成一只大鸟飞出囚车而去，落下两根翎在那座山上，因此其山峰有大翮山小翮山的名字。
English: He was summoned three times, but he did not come. The first emperor was very angry, considering him to be disrespectful to the emperor, and ordered him to be sent to the capital in a prisoner escort car. While he was walking, he suddenly turned into a big bird and flew out of the prisoner car. He dropped two shackles on the mountain, which is why its peak has the name of Big Shackle Mountain and Small Shackle Mountain.

古文：魏《土地记》曰： 沮阳城东北六十里，有大翮小翮山。山上神名大翮。
现代文：魏《土地记》说： 在沮阳城东北六十里，有大翮山和小翮山，山上神名大翮。
English: Wei's "Land Record" said: Sixty miles northeast of Deyang City, there are Dafu Mountain and Xiaofu Mountain, and the mountain is called Dafu.

古文：庙东有温汤水口，温汤疗治万病。
现代文：庙的东面有温泉，温泉水能治疗各种疾病。
English: There is a hot spring on the east side of the temple. The hot spring water can cure various diseases.

古文：泉所发之麓，俗谓之土亭山。
现代文：涌出温泉的山，百姓叫它土亭山。
English: The mountain that gushes out hot springs, the people call it Tuting Mountain.

古文：北水热甚诸汤，疗病者，要须别消息用之。山精
现代文：山北面涌出的温泉水的温度比其他泉水都高。治病的人，要弄清楚各泉的情况再去应用。 山精
English: The temperature of the hot spring water gushing from the north side of the mountain is higher than that of other springs. People who treat diseases should find out the conditions of each spring before applying it.

古文：吴天门张盖，冬月，与村人共猎。
现代文：吴时天门有个叫张盖的人，冬天与同村人一起去打猎。
English: In Wuxi Tianmen, there was a man named Zhang Gai who went hunting with his fellow villagers in winter.

古文：见大树下有蓬庵，似寝息处，而无烟火。
现代文：看见大树下有一个蓬草搭成的小屋，好像是供睡觉休息的地方，但是没有烟火。
English: I saw a grass hut under a big tree. It looked like a place to sleep and rest, but there were no fireworks.

古文：有顷，见一人，身长七尺，毛而不衣，负数头死猿。
现代文：过了一会儿，见到一个人，身高有七尺，身上长毛而不穿衣了，背着几头死猿。
English: After a while, I saw a man, seven feet tall, with long hair and no clothes, carrying several dead monkeys.

古文：盖与语不应，因将归，闭空屋中。十余日，复送故处。
现代文：张盖和他说话，没有回应。因此把他带了回去，关在一间空屋中，过了十几天，又送回原来的地方。
English: Zhang Gai talked to him, but there was no response, so he was taken back and locked up in an empty room. After a dozen days, he was sent back to his original place.

古文：又孙皓时，临海得毛人。
现代文：又：孙皓时期，在临海抓获一个毛人。
English: Also: During the Sun Yat-sen period, a Maoist was captured in Linhai.

古文：《山海经》云： 山精如人，面有毛。 
现代文：《山海经》讲：山精好象是人，面部有毛。 
English: "Mountain and Sea Sutra" says: the mountain spirit is like a person, with facial hair.

古文：此山精也。
现代文：这就是山精啊！
English: This is mountain spirit!

古文：故《抱朴子》曰： 山之精，形如小儿而独足。足向后，喜来犯人。
现代文：因此《抱朴子》说： 山精形似小孩，但只有一只脚而且向后，喜好进攻人。
English: Therefore, "Holding Pucu" said: "The mountain spirit is shaped like a child, but only has one foot and is backward, and likes to attack people.

古文：其名蚑，知而呼之，即当自却耳。
现代文：他的名叫蚑，知道并且喊他，马上就自己退回去了。
English: She knew his name and called out to him, and he immediately retreated on his own.

古文：一名曰超空，亦可兼呼之。 
现代文：还有一个名叫超空，两个名都可以叫。 
English: There is also one named "Super Sky," which can be called by both names.

古文：又有山精，或如鼓，赤色一足，其名曰浑。
现代文：还有，山精有的象鼓，红色，一只脚，他的名字叫浑。
English: Also, there is a drum-like, red, one-legged mountain elf named Hun.

古文：又或如人，长九尺，衣裘戴笠，名曰金累。
现代文：还有的象人，高九尺，穿皮衣，戴斗笠，名叫金累。
English: There is also an elephant man, nine feet tall, wearing a fur coat and a hat, named Jin Lei.

古文：又或如龙，有五赤色角，名曰飞龙。
现代文：又还有的象龙，有五个红色的角，名叫飞龙。
English: There is also an elephant-like dragon with five red horns, called the flying dragon.

古文：见之，皆可呼其名，不敢为害。
现代文：见到他，可以喊他的名，它就不敢伤害你。
English: If you see him, you can call his name, and he won't dare to hurt you.

古文：玄中记。山精如人，一足，长三四尺。食山蟹，夜出昼藏。
现代文：《玄中记》中记载，山精象人，一只脚，高三四尺，吃山蟹，夜里出来活动，白天躲藏起来。
English: It is recorded in "The Tale of Genji" that the mountain elf Elephant Man, one foot, three or four feet tall, eats mountain crabs, comes out at night and hides during the day.

古文：石鸡山
现代文：石鸡山
English: Stone Chicken Mountain

古文：晋永嘉之乱，宜阳有女子，姓彭名娥。
现代文：晋朝永嘉之乱时期，宜阳有个女子叫彭娥。
English: During the Yongjia Rebellion of the Jin Dynasty, there was a woman named Peng'e in Yiyang.

古文：父母昆弟为长沙贼所虏。
现代文：她的父母兄弟都被长沙贼抓走了。
English: Her parents and brothers were all taken away by the Changsha thieves.

古文：时娥负器出汲于溪，还见坞壁已破，殆不胜哀。
现代文：这时彭娥正背着容器到溪边取水，回来时看见土堡的墙壁已经破损，感到一阵几乎不能承受的悲哀。
English: At this time, Peng E was carrying a container to the stream to fetch water. When she returned, she saw that the walls of the earthen fort had been damaged and felt a wave of almost unbearable sadness.

古文：与贼相格，贼缚娥，驱去溪边。
现代文：她便与贼人格斗，后来被贼人绑住，赶她到溪边。
English: She fought with the thief, who then tied her up and drove her to the edge of the stream.

古文：将杀之际，有大山石壁，娥仰呼皇天： 山灵有神不，我为何罪？ 
现代文：前面有大山石壁，在那将杀她的时候，彭娥仰面大呼： 皇天，山神有灵验吗？我有什么罪？ 
English: In front of her, there was a big mountain and a stone wall. When it was about to kill her, Peng E raised her face and shouted: "Emperor, does the mountain god have power? What is my sin?

古文：因奔走向山，山立开，广数丈。平路如砥。群贼亦逐娥入山，山遂崩合，泯然如初。
现代文：于是向大山石壁冲去，大山马上就分开了，中间宽有数丈，路平的象磨刀石，群贼也追赶彭娥进了山路，山马上又崩合到一起，竟然与原来一样。
English: So they rushed to the mountain's stone wall, the mountain immediately separated, the middle was several meters wide, the road was like a grindstone, the group of thieves also chased Peng'e into the mountain road, and the mountain immediately collapsed together, unexpectedly the same as before.

古文：贼皆压死山里，头出山外。
现代文：群贼都压死在山里，只有头露在外面。
English: The bandits were all crushed to death in the mountains, with only their heads sticking out.

古文：娥遂隐不复出。
现代文：彭娥则隐蔽在里面不再出来。
English: Peng'e is hidden inside and never comes out.

古文：娥所舍汲器，化为石，形似鸡。土人因号曰石鸡山，溪为娥潭。
现代文：她所丢弃的装水的容器变成了石头，形状象一只鸡，当地人因此把这座山叫石鸡山，把溪叫做娥潭。
English: The water container she threw away turned into a rock shaped like a chicken, so the local people called the mountain Shiquishan and the stream Eetan.

古文：新丰山
现代文：新丰山
English: Xinfeng Mountain

古文：唐高宗朝，新丰出山，高二百尺。有神池，深四十尺。水中有黄龙现，吐宝珠，浮出大如拳。
现代文：唐高宗时，新丰县出现了一座山，高二百尺，上面有神池，水深四十尺，池水中有黄龙出现，黄龙口吐宝珠，那珠浮出水面大小如拳头。
English: During the reign of Emperor Tang Gao, a mountain appeared in Xinfeng County, two hundred feet high, with a sacred pond on top, forty feet deep. A yellow dragon appeared in the water of the pond, and the mouth of the dragon spit out a precious bead. The bead floated to the surface and was the size of a fist.

古文：山中有鼓鸣。
现代文：山中还有象击鼓一样的响声。
English: There is also a drumming sound in the mountains.

古文：改新丰县为庆山县。
现代文：因此，把新丰县改名为庆山县。
English: Therefore, Xinfeng County was renamed Qingshan County.

古文：庆山
现代文：庆山
English: Qingshan

古文：昭应庆山，长安中，亦不知从何飞来。
现代文：昭应庆山，则天皇帝长安年间，在长安中，也不知道从何处飞来。
English: Zhao Ying Qingshan was born during the reign of Emperor Tian of Chang'an. In Chang'an, it is not known where he came from.

古文：夜过，闻有声如雷，疾若奔，黄土石乱下，直坠新丰西南。
现代文：一天夜里，人们听到打雷一样的响声，急骤如人在奔跑，黄土石块纷乱落下，一直掉到新丰县西南。
English: One night, people heard a thunderous sound, suddenly as if people were running, and the loess stones fell in disorder, all the way to the southwest of Xinfeng County.

古文：一村百余家，因山为坟。
现代文：有一个村子有一百多家住户，因山崩塌被埋在下面，那座山成了他们的坟墓。
English: There was a village with more than a hundred households that was buried by the collapse of the mountain, and the mountain became their grave.

古文：今于其上起持国寺。
现代文：现在在那上面修建了持国寺。
English: Now Jikoku-ji Temple has been built on top of it.

古文：瓮峰
现代文：瓮峰
English: Wu Feng

古文：华岳云台观，中方之上，有山崛起，如半瓮之状，名曰瓮肚峰。
现代文：在华山云台观中方的上边，有一座山崛起，好象半个瓮的形状，因此名叫瓮肚峰。
English: On the upper side of Huashan Yuntai Viewing Center, there is a mountain rising, like the shape of half a dragonfly, so it is called Dragonfly Peak.

古文：玄宗尝赏望，嘉其高回，欲于峰腹大凿 开元 二字，填以白石，令百余里外望见之。
现代文：玄宗曾经观赏过，赞美它高耸迂回，想要在山峰中部开凿 开元 两个大字，在里面填上白色的石头，让百里以外也能看到它。
English: Xuanzong had seen it, praised its towering circumference, and wanted to carve two large characters in the middle of the mountain, fill it with white stone, so that it could be seen from a hundred miles away.

古文：谏官上言，乃止。
现代文：谏官上奏劝阻，才停止了。
English: It was only after the eunuch was dissuaded from playing that it stopped.

古文：夸父山
现代文：夸父山
English: Mount Kuafu

古文：辰州东有三山，鼎足直上，各数千丈。
现代文：在辰州东面有三座山，成鼎足之势直上云霄，各高有数千丈。
English: In the east of Chenzhou, there are three mountains, each of which is thousands of meters high.

古文：古老传曰：邓夸父与日竞走，至此煮饭，此三山者，夸父支鼎之石也。
现代文：据古老的传说讲： 当初夸父追赶太阳，到了这里煮饭，这三座山，就是夸父来支鼎煮食物的石头啊！ 
English: According to an ancient legend: Originally, Kuafu chased the sun and came here to cook rice. These three mountains are the stones that Kuafu used to support his cooking.

古文：插灶
现代文：插灶
English: Plug-in stoves

古文：荆州有空舲峡，绝崖壁立数百丈，飞鸟不栖。
现代文：在荆州有个空舲峡，悬崖绝壁有数百丈高，连飞鸟也不在上面栖息。
English: There is a hollow gorge in Jingzhou, the cliff is hundreds of meters high, and even the birds do not perch on it.

古文：有一火烬，插在崖间，望见可长数尺。
现代文：有一根被火烧过的木插在山崖上，远远望去有数尺长。
English: Between the cliffs there is an unburnt log, a few feet long.

古文：传云，洪水时，行舟者泊爨于此，余烬插之，至今犹曰插灶。
现代文：据传说，发洪水的时候，驾船的人停泊在这里烧火煮饭，把没有烧完的木头插在那里，到现在还叫插灶。
English: According to legend, when there was a flood, boatmen anchored here to make a fire to cook rice, and stuck the unfinished wood there, which is still called a stove.

古文：河山石斛
现代文：河山石斛
English: Rivers, Mountains and Rocks

古文：融州河水，有泉半岩，将注其下，相次九磴，每磴下一白石浴斛承之，如似镌造。
现代文：在融州河边的大岩石中间有一个水泉。泉水沿着岩石下流，依次流过九级石台阶，每个石台阶下都有一个白色石头的浴斛接着，好象是人工凿成的。
English: In the middle of a large rock on the edge of the Yongzhou River, there is a water spring. The spring water flows down the rock and flows through nine stone steps in turn. Under each stone step, there is a white stone bath tub, which seems to be artificially hewn.

古文：尝有人携一婢，取下浴斛中浣巾。
现代文：曾经有人带领一个婢女，在最下边的浴斛里面洗手巾。
English: At one time, someone led a maid to wash hand towels in the tub at the bottom.

古文：须臾，风雨忽至，其婢震死。所浣巾斛，碎于山下。
现代文：不一会儿就来了风雨，霹雳把那个婢女击死，洗手巾的那个浴斛，在山下变得粉碎。
English: Soon the wind and rain came, the hail killed the maid, and the shower curtain, which was used to wash hand towels, shattered at the foot of the mountain.

古文：自别安一斛，新于向者。终南乳洞
现代文：又另外在石阶上安放一个浴斛，看起来比原有的要新。终南乳洞
English: In addition, a shower curtain was placed on the stone steps, which looks newer than the original one.

古文：有人游终南山一乳洞，洞深数里，乳旋滴沥，成飞仙状。
现代文：有一个人游览终南山的一个钟乳洞，洞深有数里，乳水转动稀疏下落形成了飞仙状的钟乳石。
English: One person visited a stalactite cave on the southern end of the mountain. The cave is several miles deep, and the milk turns and falls sparsely, forming flying fairy-like stalactites.

古文：洞中已有数十，眉目衣服，形制精巧。
现代文：此洞中已有数十个，那飞仙眉目衣服，都生成的很精巧。
English: There are dozens of them in this cave, and all of them are very elaborately made.

古文：一处滴至腰已上，其人因手承漱之。
现代文：有个地方一个钟乳飞仙已滴成到腰部以上，那个人在这里用手捧水漱口。
English: In one place, a drip of milk droplets had reached above the waist, and the man was gargling with water in his hand.

古文：经年再往，见所承滴象已成矣，乳不复滴，当手承处，衣缺二寸不就。
现代文：过了一年他又去了，见到他捧水漱口的那个滴象已经完成，乳水也不再滴了，但当年手捧水的地方，衣服缺有二寸没有滴成。
English: A year later, he went again, and saw that the drop of water he held to rinse his mouth had been completed, and the milk was no longer dripping, but where he held the water in his hand that year, his clothes were two inches short of dripping.

古文：古铁锁
现代文：古铁锁
English: Old iron lock

古文：齐郡接历山，上有古铁锁。大如臂，绕其峰再浃。
现代文：齐郡与历山相连，山上有一把古铁锁链，粗如胳膊，环绕那座山峰两周。
English: Qi County is connected to Mount Leshan. On the mountain, there is an ancient iron chain, as thick as an arm, encircling the peak for two weeks.

古文：相传本海中山，山神好移，故海神锁之。挽锁断，飞于此。
现代文：相传这座山本来是海中山，但是山神好迁移，因此海神把山锁上了，后来系着的锁链断了，飞到了这个地方。
English: According to legend, this mountain was originally a mountain in the sea, but the mountain god liked to migrate, so the sea god locked the mountain, and later the attached chain broke and flew to this place.

古文：崖山
现代文：崖山
English: Cliff Mountain

古文：太原郡东有崖山，天旱，土人常烧此山以求雨。
现代文：太原郡东边有座山叫崖山，每当天旱的时候，当地人常常放火烧这座山以求雨。
English: On the east side of Taiyuan County, there is a mountain called Jia Shan. Every day when it is dry, local people often set fire to this mountain in search of rain.

古文：俗传崖山神娶河伯女，故河伯见火，必降雨救之。
现代文：传说，崖山神娶河伯的女儿为妻，因此河伯见崖山火起，就必然降雨去救他们。
English: According to legend, the god of the cliff married Hebe's daughter as his wife. Therefore, when Hebe saw the cliff on fire, it was bound to rain to save them.

古文：今山上多生水草。
现代文：现在山上生长很多水草。
English: Now there are many aquatic plants growing on the mountain.

古文：圣钟山
现代文：圣钟山
English: Mount St. Bells

古文：黎州圣钟山，古老传此山有钟，闻其声而形不见。
现代文：黎州有座圣钟山，据古老传说，这座山上有一座钟，只能听见钟声而看不见钟形。
English: There is a sacred bell mountain in Lizhou. According to an ancient legend, there is a bell on this mountain. You can only hear the bell but not see the bell shape.

古文：南诏犯境，钟则预鸣。
现代文：南诏侵犯边境时，此钟就事先鸣响。
English: When Nanzhao invaded the border, this bell rang in advance.

古文：唐天宝、大和、咸通、乾符之载，群蛮来寇，皆有征也。
现代文：唐朝天宝、大和、咸通、乾符年间，群蛮来侵犯，也都先有征兆。
English: In the years of the Tang Dynasty, Tianbao, Yamato, Hamdang, and Qianfu, there were also signs of barbarian invasions.

古文：昔有名僧讲《大乘经论》，钟亦震焉。
现代文：过去一个有名的僧人宣讲《大乘经论》时，钟也响了。
English: In the past, the bell also rang when a famous monk preached "The Mahayana Sutra."

古文：乾宁中，刺史张惠安请门僧京师右街净众寺惠维讲《妙法莲花经》一遍，此钟频鸣，如人扣击，知向所传者不谬矣。
现代文：在乾宁年间，刺使张惠安邀请门僧京师右街净众寺的惠维来宣讲《妙法莲花经》一遍，这个钟频繁的鸣响，好象有人击打。这才知道以前所传说的是真的。
English: During the Qianning era, Zhang Hui'an's assassin invited Hui Wei, a monk of Jing Shi Yu Jie Zhenzhong Temple, to preach the Lotus Sutra once again. The bell rang frequently, as if someone had struck it. Only then did he know that the legend was true.

古文：嵩梁山
现代文：嵩梁山
English: Songliang Mountain

古文：澧州嵩梁山，今名石门。
现代文：澧州有座嵩梁山，现在名叫石门。
English: In Zhangzhou, there is a mountain called Songliang Mountain, which is now called Shimen.

古文：永安六年，自然洞开，玄朗如门，高三百丈。
现代文：在永安六年那年，这座山自己贯通打开，幽深开阔象是一个大门，高有三百丈。
English: In the sixth year of Yong'an, this mountain opened up by itself. The deep opening was like a gate, three hundred meters high.

古文：角上生竹，倒垂下拂，谓之天帚。
现代文：边上长有竹子，倒垂下来轻轻飘拂，人们把它叫做天帚。
English: There is bamboo growing on the edge, hanging down and gently wafting, people call it the sky lantern.

古文：石鼓山
现代文：石鼓山
English: Stone Drum Mountain

古文：歙州石鼓山，有石如鼓形，又有石人石驴。
现代文：歙州有座石鼓山，山上有块大石头象鼓的形状，还有石人、石驴。
English: There is a stone drum mountain in Luzhou. There is a big stone shaped like a drum on the mountain, as well as a stone man and a stone donkey.

古文：俗传石鼓鸣，则驴鸣人哭，而县官不利。
现代文：传说石鼓如果响，则石驴也叫而石人则哭，倘若有这种情况，则对县官不利。
English: According to legend, if the stone drum sounds, the stone donkey also cries and the stone people cry. If there is such a situation, it will be unfavorable to the county officials.

古文：后凿破其鼓，遂不复鸣。
现代文：以后把石鼓凿破了，就不再响了。
English: Later, when the stone drum was chiseled, it no longer sounded.

古文：射的山
现代文：射的山
English: The Mountain of Fire

古文：孔晔《会稽记》云： 射的山，远望的的，有如射侯，故曰射的。
现代文：孔晔《会稽记》说： 射的山，远远望去好象射箭的靶子，因此叫射的。
English: Confucius said in "Analects of Confucius," "The mountain from which the archer shoots looks like an archery target from far away, so it is called the archery mountain."

古文：南有石室，可方丈，谓之射室。
现代文：南面有一个石室，大约有一丈见方，叫做射室，传说飞仙游览常在这休息。
English: To the south, there is a stone room, about a meter square, called the firing room. According to legend, the Flying Immortals often rest here.

古文：传云，羽人所游憩，土人常以此占谷贵贱。谚云： 射的白，米斛一百；射的玄，米斛一千。  
现代文：当地人常用它来预测谷物的贵贱。谚语说： 射的白，一斛米卖一百；射的黑，一斛米卖一千。 
English: Locals often use it to predict the price of grain. A proverb says: If you shoot white rice, you can sell a hundred grains of rice; if you shoot black rice, you can sell a thousand grains of rice.

古文：孔灵符《会稽记》云： 射的石水数十丈，其清见底。
现代文：孔灵符《会稽记》说： 射的石水深数十丈，其水清澈见底。
English: Kong Lingfu's "Record of the Auditing Committee" said: The depth of the shot stone water is several tens of meters, and its water is clear to the bottom.

古文：其西有山，上参烟云。半岭石室，曰仙人射堂。
现代文：它的西边有座山，山高出云际，半山腰有个石室，叫仙人射堂。
English: There is a mountain to the west of it, the mountain is high above the clouds, and there is a stone room halfway up the mountain, called the Immortal Archery Hall.

古文：水东高岩临潭有石的，形甚员明，视之如镜。 
现代文：它的东面有高大的岩石靠在潭边，潭边有石靶，其外形十分圆润光滑，看上去好象镜子。 
English: On its eastern side, there are tall rocks leaning against the edge of the pool. There is a stone target on the edge of the pool. Its shape is very round and smooth, looking like a mirror.

古文：又《会稽录》云： 仙人常射如此，使白鹤取箭，北有石帆壁立。 
现代文：还有《会稽录》说： 仙人常在这个地方射箭，让白鹤往回取箭。北面有石帆象墙壁一样立在那里。 
English: There is also a "memorandum of association" that says: "The immortals often shoot arrows in this place, and let the white cranes retrieve the arrows. To the north, there are stone sails standing there like walls.

古文：怪山
现代文：怪山
English: A strange mountain

古文：会稽山阴郭中，有怪山，世传本琅琊东武山。时天夜雨晦冥，旦而见在此焉。
现代文：会稽山阴郭中，有一座山叫怪山。相传这座山本来是琅琊的东武山，有一天夜里阴雨昏暗，等到天明就看见它到了这个地方。
English: In the shadow of Mount Kechi, there is a mountain called Kakuyama. According to legend, this mountain was originally the rugged Dongwu Mountain. One night, it was cloudy and dark, and when it was daylight, I saw it come to this place.

古文：百姓怪之，因名曰怪山。
现代文：百姓感到很奇怪，因此给它起名叫怪山。
English: The people felt very strange, so they called it the strange mountain.

古文：鸣铙山
现代文：鸣铙山
English: Mingtai Mountain

古文：鸣铙山，萧子开《建安记》云： 一名大戈山，越王无诸，乘象辂，大将军乘。鸣铙载旗，畋猎登于此山。 
现代文：鸣铙山在萧子开的《建安记》当中是这样记载的： 它又名大戈山。越王无诸，乘坐有象牙装饰的车子，由大将军驾车，敲着铙举着旗，打猎登上了这座山。 
English: Mingye Mountain is described in Xiao Zi's "Record of the Establishment of Peace" as follows: It is also known as Dago Mountain. Yue Wang Muzhu, riding in an ivory-decorated car, driven by a general, beating a gong and holding a flag, hunted up the mountain.

古文：古老传，天欲雨，其山即有音乐声也。
现代文：还有古老的传说，天将要下雨的时候，这里就有音乐声发出。
English: There is also an old legend that when it is about to rain, music is played here.

古文：赣台
现代文：赣台
English: Xingtai

古文：虔州赣台县东南三百六十三里。
现代文：赣台在虔州赣台县东南三百六十三里。
English: Xingtai is 363 miles southeast of Xingtai County in Qianzhou.

古文：《南康记》云：山上有台，方广数丈，有自然霞，如屋形。
现代文：《南康记》记载说： 山上有个台，有数丈大小，有天然光彩，形状象屋子。
English: "Nankang Ji" records that: There is a platform on the mountain, several meters high and wide, with natural luster, shaped like a house.

古文：风雨之后，景气明净，颇闻山上有鼓吹声，即山都木客，为其舞唱。
现代文：在风雨之后，景物空气格外清明洁净时，可以听见山上有吹吹打打的声音，那是山上怪兽在这里跳舞唱歌。
English: After the wind and rain, when the scenery and air are particularly clear and clean, you can hear the sound of blowing and beating on the mountain, which is the monster of the mountain dancing and singing here.

古文：上霄峰
现代文：上霄峰
English: Shangxiao Peak

古文：补阙熊皎云。
现代文：补阙官熊皓说：庐山有个上霄峰，高有七千仞。
English: Complementary official Xiong Yao said: Lushan has a mountain peak, with a height of seven thousand meters.

古文：庐山有上霄峰者，去平地七千仞，上有石迹，云是夏禹治水之时，泊船之所。
现代文：峰上有石迹，说那是夏禹治水的时候，停泊船只的地方。他在石头上凿个孔用来把船系住。当时有人把崖上的石头磨平当作碑，刻的都是蝌蚪文，隐隐约约还可以看清。
English: There are stone marks on the peak, saying that it was a place where boats were moored when Hsia Yu was controlling the water. He cut a hole in the stone to tie the boat. At that time, someone polished the stone on the cliff as a monument. The inscriptions are all inscriptions, and can be seen faintly.

古文：则知大禹之功，与天地不朽矣。
现代文：看后就可以知道大禹治水的功劳可以和天地一样永垂不朽。
English: After watching it, you can know that Dayu's contribution to water control can be as immortal as heaven and earth.

古文：麦积山
现代文：麦积山
English: Mountain of Wheat

古文：麦积山者，北跨清渭，南渐两当，五百里冈峦，麦积处其半。
现代文：麦积山，北跨清水、渭水，南面接近两当县，冈峦亘延五百里，麦积山位于五百里冈峦的中间。
English: Maiji Mountain, the north across the clear water, Surabaya, the south is close to the two counties, the ridge stretches for five hundred miles, Maiji Mountain is located in the middle of the five hundred mile ridge.

古文：崛起一石块，高百万寻，望之团团，如民间积麦之状，故有此名。
现代文：崛起一块巨石，高有百万寻，望去成圆形，好象民间麦堆的形状，固此有麦积山之名。
English: A huge rock rises up, a million feet high, and when you look down it is round, like the shape of a folk heap of wheat, hence the name "Wheat Mound."

古文：其青云之半，峭壁之间，镌石成佛，万龛千室。虽自人力，疑其鬼功。
现代文：在半山腰里，悬崖峭壁之间，凿岩石而成佛像，万龛千室，虽然是人工雕凿，但好像是借助鬼神之力。
English: In the middle of the mountain, between the cliffs, the rock is chiseled into a Buddha statue. Although it is an artificial carving, it seems to be by the power of ghosts and gods.

古文：隋文帝分葬神尼舍利函于东阁之下，石室之中，有庾信铭记，刊于岩中。
现代文：隋文帝杨坚将佛教神尼的骨头匣子分别放在东阁下面的石室之中，庾信在岩石上刻文字进行记载。
English: Emperor Yang Jian of the Sui Dynasty placed the Buddhist deity's bone box separately in the stone room below the east pavilion, and Yuxin carved words on the rock to record them.

古文：古记云： 六国共修。
现代文：过去有记载说是六国共同修建的。
English: In the past, there were reports that it was built jointly by six countries.

古文：自平地积薪，至于岩巅，从上镌凿其龛室佛像。
现代文：自平地上堆积木柴一直达到岩石的顶端，从上面开始开凿龛室佛像，完工后，一面撤去堆积的木柴，一面曲折回转地下来。
English: After piling up firewood on the flat ground, they reached the top of the rock. From there, they began to excavate the burial chamber of the Buddha statue. After completion, they removed the piled up firewood on one side and twisted and turned the ground on the other side.

古文：功毕，旋旋折薪而下，然后梯空架险而上。其上有散花楼，七佛阁，金蹄银角犊儿。
现代文：然后建梯级于险处上去，上面有散花楼、七佛阁、金蹄银角犊儿等。
English: Then, a staircase was built at the dangerous place to go up, with the Sanzhualu, the Seven Buddhas Pavilion, the Golden Hoof and the Silver Horn, and so on.

古文：由西阁悬梯而上，其间千房万屋，缘空蹑虚，登之者不敢回顾。
现代文：由西阁爬悬梯而上，那里有千房万屋，好象悬于空中，下无基础一般，登上去的人不敢回头看。
English: Climbing up the suspended ladder from the west pavilion, there are thousands of houses, as if suspended in the air, with no foundation underneath. Those who climb up do not dare to look back.

古文：将及绝顶，有万菩萨堂，凿石而成。广若今之大殿。其雕梁画栱，绣栋云楣，并就石而成。
现代文：快要到最顶上，有万菩萨堂，是凿石而成，大小如现在的大殿，雕梁画拱、绣栋云楣都是用石头雕凿而成。
English: Almost to the top, there is the Hall of Ten Thousand Buddhas. It is made of hewn stone, the size of which is the same as the current main hall. The carved beams, painted arches, and embroidered pillars are all carved from stone.

古文：万躯菩萨，列于一堂。
现代文：一万尊菩萨雕像，排列在一个大室内。
English: Ten thousand statues of Bodhisattvas are lined up in a large room.

古文：自此室之上，更有一龛，谓之天堂，空中倚一独梯，攀缘而上。
现代文：在这个室的上面，还有一龛，叫做天堂。空中靠着一个独木梯子，可以顺着它爬上去。
English: Above this room, there is a stairway called Heaven, with a ladder in the sky that you can climb up.

古文：至此，则万中无一人敢登者，于此下顾，其群山皆如堷楼。
现代文：到了这个地方，就一万个人当中也没有一个人敢攀登的。从这里向下看，群山都象一些小土丘。
English: When you get to this place, not one person in ten thousand would dare to climb it. Looking down from here, the mountains all look like small mounds.

古文：王仁裕时独能登之，仍题诗于天堂西壁上曰： 蹑尽悬空万仞梯，等闲身共白云齐。
现代文：当时只有王仁裕能单独登上去。并在天堂的西墙上题诗说： 登到悬空万仞高梯的尽头，已经身与白云同高。
English: At that time, only Wang Renyu was able to climb it alone, and he inscribed a poem on the west wall of heaven, saying: "Having climbed to the end of the sky-high ladder, my body is already as high as the white clouds.

古文：檐前下视群山小，堂上平分落日低。
现代文：在檐前向下望去，群山变得矮小，天堂和落下的太阳一样高低。
English: Looking down before the plough, the mountains dwindle and the heavens are as high as the setting sun.

古文：绝顶路危人少到，古岩松健鹤频栖。
现代文：绝顶路险很少有人到达，古老的岩石强劲的青松引诱得仙鹤经常来这里栖息。
English: Very few people reach the top of the road, and the ancient rock and strong green pine attract cranes to often come here to roost.

古文：天边为要留名姓，拂石殷勤手自题。
现代文：到达天际为的是要留下姓名，轻轻擦试岩石情意深重地在这里自己题写诗句。 
English: The purpose of reaching the sky is to leave a name, gently rub the rock, and write a poem here.

古文：时前唐末辛未年，登此留题。 于今三十九载矣。
现代文：当时是前唐末辛未年，登到这里题诗留念的，到现在已经三十九年。
English: At that time, it was the year of Xin Wei at the end of the Tang Dynasty, and it has been thirty-nine years since the poem was inscribed here.

古文：斗山观
现代文：斗山观
English: View of Doosan Mountain

古文：汉乾祐中，翰林学士王仁裕云，兴元有斗山观，自平川内，耸起一山，四面悬绝，其上方于斗底，故号之。
现代文：五代后汉国乾祐年间，翰林学士王仁裕说：在兴元有个斗山观，从平地上耸立起一座山，四面悬崖峭壁，它的上边如斗的底，因此叫斗山。
English: Five generations later, during the reign of Emperor Qianyu of Han, Wang Renyu, a scholar of Hanlin, said: In the Xingyuan, there was a view of Dooshan. A mountain rose from the plain, with cliffs on all sides, and its top was like the bottom of a barrel. Therefore, it was called Dooshan.

古文：薜萝松桧，景象尤奇。
现代文：山上生有常绿灌木、藤萝、松柏等，景致奇异。
English: There are evergreen shrubs, wisteria, pines and cypresses on the mountain, creating a unique landscape.

古文：上有唐公昉饮李八百仙酒，全家拔宅之迹。
现代文：上有唐代公昉喝李八百仙酒、全家人随住房一起拔地升天的遗迹。
English: There are relics of Tang Dynasty officials drinking Li 800 Immortal Wine and the whole family ascending to heaven together with the house.

古文：其宅基三亩许，陷为坑，此盖连地而上升也。
现代文：其宅基占地约有三亩，下陷成大坑，这是因为与地基相连的地也一起上升而成。
English: The foundation of the house covers an area of about three mu, and sinks into a large pit, because the ground connected to the foundation also rises together.

古文：仁裕辛巳岁，於斯为节度判官，尝以片板题诗于观曰： 霞衣欲举醉陶陶，不觉全家住绛霄。
现代文：仁裕辛巳年在这个地方任节度判官，曾经用薄木片在观内题诗说： 霞衣欲举醉陶陶，不觉全家住降霄。
English: Jin Yu Xin, who served as a judge of the festival in this place, once used a thin piece of wood to write a poem on the inside of the pavilion, saying: "Xi Jie wanted to be drunk, but the whole family fell to the ground."

古文：拔宅只知鸡犬在，上天谁信路歧遥。
现代文：拔宅只知鸡犬在，上天谁信路歧遥。
English: Those who pull down their houses only know that their dogs and chickens are there, but who in the name of heaven knows where they are.

古文：三清辽廓抛尘梦，八景云烟事早朝。
现代文：三清辽廓抛尘梦，八景云烟事早朝。
English: Liao Kuo of Sanqing casts a dust dream, eight views of clouds and smoke in the early morning.

古文：为有故林苍柏健，露华凉叶锁金飙。 
现代文：为有故林苍柏健，露华凉叶锁金飚。 
English: For there is the ancient forest of cedar and cypress, the dew of the cool leaves of the lock of the golden fern.

古文：旧说云，斗山一洞，西去二千里，通于青城大面山，又与严真观井相通。
现代文：过去还有传说，斗山有一个洞，往西面去二千里，通到青城县的大面山，又与严真观里的井相通。
English: In the past, there was also a legend that there was a cave on Doosan Mountain that went 2,000 miles to the west, leading to Daemen Mountain in Qingcheng County, and connected to the well in Yanzheng.

古文：仁裕癸未年入蜀，因谒严真观，见斗山诗碑在焉。
现代文：仁裕癸未年到四川，因为去拜谒严真观，看见斗山诗碑还在。
English: Ren Yuxuan went to Sichuan last year, because he went to worship Yan Zhengu, and saw that the Doosan Poem Monument was still there.

古文：诘其道流，云，不知所来，说者无不惊奇之。
现代文：他询问道士，回答说： 不知道从哪来。 听说的人没有不惊奇的。
English: He asked a Taoist and replied, "I don't know where it came from, but people who hear about it are always surprised.

古文：大竹路
现代文：大竹路
English: Dazhu Road

古文：兴元之南，有大竹路，通于巴州。
现代文：兴元的南面有一条大竹路通于巴州。
English: To the south of Xingyuan, there is a large bamboo road leading to Bazhou.

古文：其路则深溪峭岩，扪萝摸石，一上三日，而达于山顶。
现代文：这条路在深溪峭壁上，要抓着藤萝攀着石块，上去一次需三天时间，才能到达山顶。
English: This path is on the cliff of a deep creek. You have to hold onto the vine and climb the rocks. It takes three days to reach the top of the mountain.

古文：行人止宿，则以縆蔓系腰，萦树而寝。不然，则堕于深涧，若沈黄泉也。
现代文：行人在这里住宿，睡觉时要用粗的藤蔓捆住腰，系在树上，否则，就要掉进深涧，被埋葬掉。
English: Pedestrians stay here, and when they sleep, they have to tie their waists with thick vines and tie them to a tree, otherwise, they will fall into the depths and be buried.

古文：复登措大岭，盖有稍似平处，路人徐步而进，若儒之布武也。
现代文：再登上措大岭，路稍有些平的地方，走路的都慢慢的行进，好象儒生在踱方步。
English: Once on top of the Cotai Ridge, where the road is slightly flatter, pedestrians walk slowly, as if they were Confucians taking a leisurely stroll.

古文：其绝顶谓之孤云两角，彼中谚云： 孤云两角，去天一握。 
现代文：它的最高处叫 孤云两角 。这里有谚语说： 孤云两角，离天只有一拳头。 
English: Its highest point is called the Two Corners of the Lonely Cloud. There is a saying here: The two corners of the lonely cloud are only a fist away from the sky.

古文：淮阴侯庙在焉。
现代文：淮阴侯庙在这里。
English: Huaiyin Hou Temple is here.

古文：昔汉祖不用韩信，信遁归西楚。
现代文：过去，汉高祖不重用韩信，韩信逃跑回归西楚。
English: In the past, Han Gao Zu did not reuse Han Xin, and Han Xin ran away and returned to West Chu.

古文：萧相国追之，及于兹山，故立庙貌。
现代文：萧何追赶他，在这座山追上了，因此在这立庙。
English: Xiao He chased him and caught up with him on this mountain, so he built a temple here.

古文：王仁裕尝佐褒梁师王思同，南伐巴人，往返登陟，亦留题于淮阴祠。
现代文：王仁裕曾经辅佐褒梁师王思同征伐巴蜀，来来回回多次登攀，也题诗留念于淮阴祠。
English: Wang Renyu once assisted Wang Si Tong in the conquest of Bashu, climbed back and forth several times, and also wrote a poem to be remembered in Huaiyin Temple.

古文：诗曰： 一握寒天古木深，路人犹说汉淮阴，孤云不掩兴亡策，两角曾悬去住心。
现代文：诗说： 在这离天只有一拳的地方，古木丛深，过路的人还在谈论着汉伐的淮阴侯。 孤云 掩盖不住韩信那能主宰兴亡的满腹韫略， 两角 也曾经悬挂住韩信那离去或留下的犹豫心理。
English: The poem said: In this place where there is only one punch from the sky, the ancient trees are deep, and the passers-by are still talking about the Huaiyinhou of Hanwha. The lonely clouds cannot cover the full belly of Hanxin that can dominate the rise and fall. The two corners also once hung the hesitancy of Hanxin to leave or stay.

古文：不是冕旒轻布素，岂劳丞相远追寻。
现代文：如若不是帝王刘邦轻视地位低下的韩信，岂能劳累肖何追得这么远？
English: If Emperor Liu Bang had not despised the low-ranking Han Xin, would he have been able to force Xiao He to go so far?

古文：当时若放还西楚，尺寸中华未可侵。 
现代文：当时假如将韩信放回西楚，广阔中原的一尺一寸土地，刘邦也别想占领。 
English: At that time, if Han Xin were to be sent back to West Chu, Liu Bang would not want to occupy one inch of land in the vast Central Plains.

古文：崎岖险峻之状。未可殚言。
现代文：其崎岖险峻的情况，不是用语言可以说尽的。
English: Its rugged and precipitous situation cannot be described in words.

古文：溪
现代文：溪
English: Streams

古文：溪毒
现代文：溪毒
English: Khe Yuen

古文：江南间有溪毒，疾发时，如重伤寒。
现代文：江南有的小溪有毒，中毒发病时，症状好象重伤寒。
English: Some small streams in southern Jiangsu are poisonous. When poisoning occurs, the symptoms are similar to severe typhoid fever.

古文：识之者，取水笔管，内于鼻中，以指弹之三五下，即出墨血，良久疾愈。
现代文：明白的人，可取一根小笔管，插入鼻孔中，用手指弹三五下，就流出黑色的血，过一段时间病就好了。
English: Those who understand can take a small pen tube, insert it into the nostrils, play it with a finger three to five times, and black blood will flow out. After a period of time, the disease will be cured.

古文：不然，即致卒矣。
现代文：否则，可能导致死亡。
English: Failure to do so could result in death.

