古文：舞阳侯樊哙者，沛人也。以屠狗为事，与高祖俱隐。
现代文：舞阳侯樊哙是沛县人，以杀狗卖狗肉为生，曾经和汉高祖一起隐藏在乡间。
English: Maiyang Houyi is a native of Peixian County. He makes a living by killing dogs and selling their meat. He once hid in the countryside with the founder of the Han Dynasty, Gaozu.

古文：初从高祖起丰，攻下沛。
现代文：起初，樊哙随从高祖在丰邑起兵，攻下沛县。
English: At first, Zou, following Gaozu, raised an army in Fengyi and conquered Peixian.

古文：高祖为沛公，以哙为舍人。
现代文：高祖做沛公的时候，用樊哙做舍人。
English: When Gao Zu was doing Pei Gong, he used the cormorant to scare people.

古文：从攻胡陵、方与，还守丰，击泗水监丰下，破之。
现代文：跟随沛公进攻胡陵、方与，又回军镇守丰邑，在丰邑一带攻打泗水郡监的军队，打败了他们。
English: He followed Peigong to attack Huling, Fangye, and returned to defend Fengyi. He attacked the army of the Surabaya County Supervisor around Fengyi and defeated them.

古文：复东定沛，破泗水守薛西。
现代文：又向东平定了沛县，在薛县的西边击败泗水郡守的军队。
English: He also leveled Pei County to the east and defeated the army of the governor of Surabaya County on the west side of Xue County.

古文：与司马枿战砀东，卻敌，斩首十五级，赐爵国大夫。
现代文：在砀县东面与司马交战，打退了敌人，斩了十五个人的首级，沛公赐给他国大夫的爵位。
English: He fought against Sima in the east of Handan County, repulsed the enemy, beheaded fifteen people, and Pei Gong gave him the title of state doctor.

古文：常从，沛公击章邯军濮阳，攻城先登，斩首二十三级，赐爵列大夫。
现代文：沛公在濮阳攻打章邯的军队，攻城的时候，樊哙率先登城，斩秦兵二十三人的首级，沛公又赐给他公大夫的爵位。
English: Pei Gong attacked Zhang Ye's army in Fenyang. When attacking the city, Zhe took the lead in climbing the city, beheading 23 Qin soldiers. Pei Gong also gave him the title of grand doctor.

古文：复常从，从攻城阳，先登。下户牖，破李由军，斩首十六级，赐上间爵。
现代文：此后又经常随从沛公，随从攻城阳时，他率先登城，还攻占户牖，打败李由的军队，斩了十六人的首级，又封赐上间爵位。
English: After that, he often followed Pei Gong, and when he followed the attack on the city of Yang, he took the lead in climbing the city, and also captured the house, defeated Li Yu's army, beheaded sixteen people, and conferred the title of nobility.

古文：从攻围东郡守尉於成武，卻敌，斩首十四级，捕虏十一人，赐爵五大夫。
现代文：随从沛公在成武围攻东郡郡守郡尉时，击退了敌人，斩了十四人的首级，俘虏十一人，封赐五大夫的爵位。
English: When the followers of Pei Gong besieged and attacked the county governor of Dong County in Chengwu, they repulsed the enemy, beheaded fourteen people, captured eleven people, and conferred peerages on five nobles.

古文：从击秦军，出亳南。
现代文：跟随沛公袭击秦军，经过亳邑以南。
English: He followed Peigong to attack the Qin army, passing south of Jinyi.

古文：河间守军於杠里，破之。
现代文：河间郡守的军队在杠里，樊哙打败了他们。
English: The army of the governor of Kawama County was at the barricade, and the dragonfly defeated them.

古文：击破赵贲军开封北，以卻敌先登，斩候一人，首六十八级，捕虏二十七人，赐爵卿。
现代文：又在开封的北面击败赵贲的军队，樊哙因为击退敌军，率先登城，斩杀军候一人，斩六十八人的首级，俘虏二十七人，沛公赐给他卿的爵位。
English: He also defeated Zhao Zhen's army in the north of Kaifeng. Because Zhen defeated the enemy army, he took the lead in climbing the city, killed one army officer, beheaded sixty-eight people, captured twenty-seven people, and Pei Gong gave him the title of lord.

古文：从攻破杨熊军於曲遇。
现代文：随从沛公在曲遇击败杨熊的军队。
English: Pei Gong's followers defeated Yang Xiong Rong's army.

古文：攻宛陵，先登，斩首八级，捕虏四十四人，赐爵封号贤成君。
现代文：攻打宛陵时，樊哙又率先登城，斩了八个人的首级，俘虏四十四人，沛公赐给他贤成君的封号。
English: When attacking Wanling, Zhai took the lead in entering the city, beheaded eight people, captured forty-four people, and Pei Gong gave him the title of Xianchengjun.

古文：从攻长社、轘辕，绝河津，东攻秦军於尸，南攻秦军於犨。
现代文：随从沛公去攻长社和轘辕，封锁黄河渡口，向东在尸乡攻打秦军，又向南在韜邑攻打秦军。
English: He followed Pei Gong to attack Changsha and Handan, block the Yellow River ferry, attack the Qin Army in Zhixiang to the east, and attack the Qin Army in Handan to the south.

古文：破南阳守齮於阳城。东攻宛城，先登。
现代文：在阳城打败南阳郡守吕。向东攻打宛城时，樊哙又率先登城。
English: In Yangcheng, he defeated Nanyang County Governor Lv Ying. When attacking Wancheng to the east, Ying took the lead in entering the city.

古文：西至郦，以卻敌，斩首二十四级，捕虏四十人，赐重封。
现代文：西到郦县，樊哙因为击退了敌人，斩了敌人二十四人的首级，俘虏四十人，沛公赏赐增加爵禄。
English: Westward to Lixian County, for having repulsed the enemy, he beheaded twenty-four of the enemy, took forty prisoners, and was rewarded with an additional peerage.

古文：攻武关，至霸上，斩都尉一人，首十级，捕虏百四十六人，降卒二千九百人。
现代文：进攻武关，到达霸上时，斩杀都尉一人，斩了十人的首级，俘虏一百四十六人，降服敌兵二千九百人。
English: He attacked Wuguan, and when he reached Heping, he killed one captain, beheaded ten people, captured 146 people, and defeated 2,900 enemy soldiers.

古文：项羽在戏下，欲攻沛公。
现代文：项羽驻军在戏下，准备攻打沛公。
English: Under the play, the troops of the Xiang Yu Garrison are preparing to attack Pei Gong.

古文：沛公从百馀骑因项伯面见项羽，谢无有闭关事。
现代文：沛公让一百多骑兵随从，通过项伯面见项羽，申述没有封锁关口的事。
English: Pei Gong sent more than a hundred cavalry to accompany him, met Xiang Yu through Xiang Bo, and complained that there was no blockade of the pass.

古文：项羽既飨军士，中酒，亚父谋欲杀沛公，令项庄拔剑舞坐中，欲击沛公，项伯常蔽之。
现代文：项羽就设宴款待军中将士，在酒酣的时候，亚父想谋杀沛公，派项庄拔剑在席前献舞，要趁机刺杀沛公，项伯却一再掩护沛公。
English: Xiang Yu set up a banquet to entertain the lieutenant generals. During the banquet, Asif wanted to murder Pei Gong. He ordered Xiang Zhuang to draw his sword and dance in front of the table. He wanted to take the opportunity to assassinate Pei Gong. However, Xiang Bo repeatedly covered up for Pei Gong.

古文：时独沛公与张良得入坐，樊哙在营外，闻事急，乃持铁盾入到营。
现代文：当时只有沛公和张良能进入营帐就坐，樊哙留在营外，听说沛公的情况紧急，就拿着铁盾进入营内。
English: At that time, only Pei Gong and Zhang Liang were able to enter the camp and sit down. They stayed outside the camp. Hearing that Pei Gong's situation was urgent, they entered the camp with an iron shield.

古文：营卫止哙，哙直撞入，立帐下。
现代文：军营卫士阻止樊哙，樊哙却径直撞了进去，站在营帐下。
English: The camp guard stopped the badger, but the badger ran straight in and stood under the tent.

古文：项羽目之，问为谁。
现代文：项羽用眼睛看着他，问他是什么人。
English: She looked at him with her eyes and asked him who he was.

古文：张良曰： 沛公参乘樊哙。 
现代文：张良说： 是沛公的陪乘樊哙。 
English: Zhang Liang said: It was Pei Gong's escort.

古文：项羽曰： 壮士。 
现代文：项羽说： 壮士！ 
English: The feather said: "Strong man!

古文：赐之卮酒彘肩。
现代文：就赐给一卮酒和一只猪腿。
English: He was given a jar of wine and a leg of pork.

古文：哙既饮酒，拔剑切肉食，尽之。
现代文：樊哙喝完酒，拔剑切肉，把它吃光了。
English: After drinking the wine, he drew his sword, cut the meat and ate it all.

古文：项羽曰： 能复饮乎？ 
现代文：项羽问： 能再喝酒吗？ 
English: Cao Yu asked: Can I drink alcohol again?

古文：哙曰： 臣死且不辞，岂特卮酒乎！
现代文：樊哙说： 我死尚且不推辞，何况是光喝一卮酒呢！
English: Toad said, "I'm dead and I won't deny it, let alone drink a whole bottle of wine!"

古文：且沛公先入定咸阳，暴师霸上，以待大王。
现代文：再说沛公首先入关平定咸阳，露营在霸上，来等待大王。
English: Moreover, Pei Gong first entered the pass to pacify Xianyang, camped on the hegemony, and came to wait for the great king.

古文：大王今日至，听小人之言，与沛公有隙，臣恐天下解，心疑大王也。 
现代文：大王今天一到，就听信小人的谗言，跟沛公有嫌隙，我担心天下分裂，百姓怀疑大王。 
English: As soon as the great king arrived today, he listened to the criticism of the villain and had a rift with Pei Gong. I am worried that the world will be divided and the people will doubt the great king.

古文：项羽默然。
现代文：项羽沉默不语。
English: The feathers fall silent.

古文：沛公如厕，麾樊哙去。
现代文：沛公上厕所，召樊哙出去。
English: Pei Gong went to the toilet and called her out.

古文：既出，沛公留车骑，独骑一马，与樊哙等四人步从，从间道山下归走霸上军，而使张良谢项羽。
现代文：出来后，沛公留下车马，只骑了一匹马，跟樊哙等徒走随从的四个人抄小路下山逃回霸上的军营，而让张良向项羽辞谢。
English: After coming out, Pei Gong left behind his chariot and horse, and rode only one horse. He followed the four people who accompanied him on foot, such as Yao, and took a small path down the mountain to escape back to the military camp on the top of the mountain, and let Zhang Liang thank Xiang Yu.

古文：项羽亦因遂已，无诛沛公之心矣。
现代文：项羽也因为已经顺心遂意，也就没有杀沛公的念头了。
English: Xiang Yu also did not have the idea of killing Peiguo because he had already fulfilled his heart's desire.

古文：是日微樊哙饹入营谯让项羽，沛公事几殆。
现代文：这一天，如果没有樊哙闯入营内，谴责项羽，沛公的情况可就危险了。
English: On this day, if there was no  to break into the camp and denounce Xiang Yu, Pei Gong's situation would be in danger.

古文：明日，项羽入屠咸阳，立沛公为汉王。汉王赐哙爵为列侯，号临武侯。
现代文：第二天，项羽入城血洗咸阳，封沛公为汉王，汉王就封樊哙为列侯，称为临武侯。
English: The next day, Xiang Yu entered the city and blood-washed Xianyang. He made Pei Gong the Han king, and the Han king made him a vassal lord, called Lin Wu Hou.

古文：迁为郎中，从入汉中。
现代文：后来提升为郎中，随从汉王进入汉中。
English: Later, he was promoted to roju, and followed the Han king into the Han dynasty.

古文：还定三秦，别击西丞白水北，雍轻车骑於雍南，破之。
现代文：汉王回军平定三秦，樊哙另外带兵在白水北面攻打西县县丞的军队，在雍县南面攻打雍王的轻快车骑部队，打败了他们。
English: Han Wang Hui's army subdued Sanqin, and in addition, he led troops to attack the army of Xixian Xian Rong in the north of Baishui, and attacked the light express riding troops of Yong Wang in the south of Yong County, and defeated them.

古文：从攻雍、斄城，先登击章平军好畤，攻城，先登陷阵，斩县令丞各一人，首十一级，虏二十人，迁郎中骑将。
现代文：随从汉王攻打雍、斄二城，又首先登城。在好畤攻打章平的军队，攻城时，率先登城冲进敌阵，斩杀了县令、县丞各一人，斩获十一人的首级，俘虏二十人，被提升为郎中骑将。
English: He followed Han Wang to attack the two cities of Yong and Handan, and was the first to enter the city. In Handan, he attacked the army of Zhang Ping, and when attacking the city, he was the first to enter the city and rushed into the enemy lines, killed one county magistrate and one county magistrate, won the first rank of eleven people, captured twenty people, and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant general.

古文：从击秦车骑壤东，卻敌，迁为将军。
现代文：随从汉王在壤乡东面攻打秦军车骑部队，击退敌军，被提升为将军。
English: He followed Han Wang to attack the Qin Army's chariot and cavalry troops in the east of Liao Township, repelled the enemy army, and was promoted to general.

古文：攻赵贲，下郿、槐里、柳中、咸阳；灌废丘，最。
现代文：攻打赵贲，占领郿县、槐里、柳中、咸阳等地；引水灌废丘，他功劳最大。
English: He made the greatest contribution in attacking Zhao Wei and occupying the areas of Wei County, Wei Li, Liuzhong and Xianyang, and in diverting water to the waste mounds.

古文：至栎阳，赐食邑杜之樊乡。
现代文：到了栎阳，汉王赐封杜陵的樊乡作樊哙的食邑。
English: When he arrived in Fenyang, the Han king granted him the fief of Fenyang Township in Dulin to make it a food town.

古文：从攻项籍，屠煮枣。
现代文：随从汉王攻打项籍，血洗煮枣。
English: Followed the Han King to attack and beat the Shoseki, blood-washed boiled jujube.

古文：击破王武、程处军於外黄。
现代文：在外黄打败王武、程处的军队。
English: He defeated the armies of Wang Wu and Chengde in Waigang.

古文：攻邹、鲁、瑕丘、薛。
现代文：攻取邹县、鲁县、瑕丘、薛县。
English: The capture of Lushan County, Lu County, Keqiu County, Xue County.

古文：项羽败汉王於彭城，尽复取鲁、梁地。
现代文：项羽在彭城打败汉王，全部又夺回鲁、梁的土地。
English: Xiang Yu defeated Han Wang in Pengcheng, and recaptured all of Lu and Liang's lands.

古文：哙还至荥阳，益食平阴二千户，以将军守广武。
现代文：樊哙回到荥阳，汉王增加平阴二千户作他的食邑，让他以将军的身份镇守广武。
English: After returning to Shenyang, Han Wang increased Pingyin by two thousand households to make it his food village, and let him guard Guangwu as a general.

古文：一岁，项羽引而东。从高祖击项籍，下阳夏，虏楚周将军卒四千人。围项籍於陈，大破之。
现代文：一年后，项羽领兵东进，樊哙又跟随高祖袭击项籍，占领阳夏，俘虏楚将周将军的士卒四千人，在陈县包围项籍，把他打得大败。
English: A year later, Xiang Yu led the troops eastward, and Gao Zu attacked Xiang Zi, occupied Yang Xia, captured 4,000 soldiers of Chu General Zhou, surrounded Xiang Zi in Chen County, and defeated him.

古文：屠胡陵。
现代文：血洗胡陵。
English: The blood-washed tomb of Huling.

古文：项籍既死，汉王为帝，以哙坚守战有功，益食八百户。
现代文：项羽死后，汉王做了皇帝，因樊哙坚守城池和出击作战有功，又加封食邑八百户。
English: After Xiang Yu's death, Han Wang became the emperor, and because of Xiang Yu's merits in defending the city and attacking the battle, he also sealed 800 households in the county.

古文：从高帝攻反燕王臧荼，虏荼，定燕地。
现代文：樊哙跟随高祖攻打反叛的燕王臧荼，并俘虏了臧荼，平定了燕地。
English: Yao followed Gao Zu to attack the rebel Yan Wang Yao, and captured Yao and leveled Yan's land.

古文：楚王韩信反，哙从至陈，取信，定楚。
现代文：楚王韩信发动叛乱，樊哙随从高祖到陈县，逮捕了韩信，平定了楚地。
English: Han Xin, the king of Chu, launched a rebellion. He followed Gaozu to Chen County, arrested Han Xin, and pacified Chu.

古文：更赐爵列侯，与诸侯剖符，世世勿绝，食舞阳，号为舞阳侯，除前所食。
现代文：高祖给樊哙改赐列侯的爵位，与诸侯剖符为信，让他们世代相传不绝。高祖把樊哙以前的食邑除去，赐食舞阳，号为舞阳侯。
English: Gao Zu bestowed the title of Count upon Guo Guo, and believed in the letters of the feudal lords, so that they would be passed down from generation to generation. Gao Zu removed Guo's former residence, and gave Guo the title of Maiyang. He was called Maiyang Marquis.

古文：以将军从高祖攻反韩王信於代。
现代文：后来，樊哙又以将军之职跟随高祖前往代地，攻打反叛的韩王信。
English: Later, Zou followed Gaozu to Daidi as a general to attack the rebel Han Wangxin.

古文：自霍人以往至云中，与绛侯等共定之，益食千五百户。
现代文：从霍人一直打到云中，都是樊哙和绛侯周勃等人共同平定的，于是又增加食邑一千五百户。
English: From the Hu people all the way to the clouds, they were all pacified by Zhai and Zhou Bo, and so another 1,500 households were added.

古文：因击陈豨与曼丘臣军，战襄国，破柏人，先登，降定清河、常山凡二十七县，残东垣，迁为左丞相。
现代文：后来，樊哙又率领人马袭击叛臣陈豨和曼丘臣的军队，战于襄国，在攻取柏人县时，率先登城，又降服平定了清河、常山两郡的二十七个县，捣毁了东垣县城，以此功升任左丞相。
English: Later, he led the troops to attack the troops of the traitor Chen Xi and Manchu Chen, and fought in Xiang Province. When capturing Baoren County, he took the lead in climbing the city. He also surrendered and leveled the twenty-seven counties of Qinghe and Changshan counties, and destroyed the city of Dongyuan County. He was promoted to the post of the Minister of the Left.

古文：破得綦毋卬、尹潘军於无终、广昌。
现代文：在无终、广昌，击破了綦毋卬和尹潘的军队，并且活捉了他们二人。
English: At Wuchang, Guangchang, he defeated the armies of Zou Beozhen and Yin Pan, and captured both of them alive.

古文：破豨别将胡人王黄军於代南，因击韩信军於参合。
现代文：在代地南部，击破了陈豨手下的胡人将领王黄所带领的军队。接着，又进军参合，攻打韩王信的军队，樊哙的部下斩杀了韩王信。
English: In the south of Daiji, he defeated the army led by Wang Huang, the Hu people's general under Chen Zhe. Then, he marched into the battle and attacked the army of Han Wangxin, and his subordinates killed Han Wangxin.

古文：军所将卒斩韩信，破豨胡骑横谷，斩将军赵既，虏代丞相冯梁、守孙奋、大将王黄、将军、太仆解福等十人。
现代文：在横谷，大败陈豨的胡人骑兵部队，斩杀了将军赵既，俘虏了代国丞相汉梁、郡守孙奋，大将军王黄、太仆解以及将军等十人。
English: In Yokotani, the Hu cavalry force, which was heavily defeated by Chen Xi, killed General Zhao Ye, and captured the acting prime minister Han Liang, the county governor Sun Fen, the great general Wang Huang, the grand chamberlain, and ten other generals.

古文：与诸将共定代乡邑七十三。
现代文：和诸将领共同平定了代地的乡邑七十三个。
English: He and the generals together subdued seventy-three townships.

古文：其後燕王卢绾反，哙以相国击卢绾，破其丞相抵蓟南，定燕地，凡县十八，乡邑五十一。
现代文：在此之后，燕王卢绾起兵造反，樊哙以相国之职带兵攻打卢绾，在蓟县之南击破卢绾丞相所带领的军队，平定了燕地共十八个县，五十一个乡邑。
English: After this, Yan King Lu Ye rebelled and led troops to attack Lu Ye, defeating the army led by Minister Lu Ye in the south of Yan County, and leveled a total of eighteen counties and fifty-one townships in Yan.

古文：益食邑千三百户，定食舞阳五千四百户。
现代文：于是高祖又给樊哙增加食邑一千三百户，确定他作为舞阳侯的食邑共五千四百户。
English: As a result, Gao Zu also increased the number of food villages to thirteen hundred, and confirmed that he was a food village of five thousand four hundred.

古文：从，斩首百七十六级，虏二百八十八人。
现代文：樊哙跟从高祖征战时，共斩敌人首级一百七十六个，俘虏敌兵一百八十八人。
English: During the War of Succession from Gao Zu, a total of 176 enemy heads were cut off, and 188 enemy soldiers were captured.

古文：别，破军七，下城五，定郡六，县五十二，得丞相一人，将军十二人，二千石已下至三百石十一人。
现代文：他自己单独带兵打仗，打垮过七支敌军，攻下过五座城池，平定了六个郡，五十二个县，并俘虏过敌人丞相一人，将军十二人，二千石以下到三百石的官员十一人。
English: He led soldiers to fight alone, defeated seven enemy armies, captured five cities, leveled six counties, fifty-two counties, and captured one enemy prime minister, twelve generals, and eleven officials with less than 2,000 koku and up to 300 koku.

古文：哙以吕后女弟吕须为妇，生子伉，故其比诸将最亲。
现代文：樊哙因为娶了吕后的妹妹吕须为妻，生下儿子樊伉，因此和其他将领相比，高祖对樊哙更为亲近。
English: Gaozu was closer to Lu than other generals because he married Lu's younger sister, Lu Su, and had a son, Lu.

古文：先黥布反时，高祖尝病甚，恶见人，卧禁中，诏户者无得入群臣。
现代文：以前在黥布反叛的时候，高祖一度病得很厉害，讨厌见人，他躺在宫禁之中，诏令守门人不得让群臣进去看他。
English: In the past, at the time of the rebellion in Zibo, Gaozu was once very ill and hated to see people. He lay under house arrest, and the gatekeeper was ordered not to let the courtiers in to see him.

古文：群臣绛、灌等莫敢入。
现代文：群臣中如绛侯周勃、灌婴等人都不敢进宫。
English: Among the group of courtiers, people such as Zou Hou, Zhou Bo, and Huan Yu did not dare to enter the palace.

古文：十馀日，哙乃排闼直入，大臣随之。
现代文：这样过了十多天，有一次樊哙推开宫门，径直闯了进去，后面群臣紧紧跟随。
English: After more than ten days of this, there was a time when the toad pushed open the palace gate and ran straight in, closely followed by the courtiers.

古文：上独枕一宦者卧。
现代文：看到高祖独自枕着一个宦官躺着。
English: Seeing Gaozu lying alone with a eunuch on his pillow.

古文：哙等见上流涕曰： 始陛下与臣等起丰沛，定天下，何其壮也！
现代文：樊哙等人见到皇帝之后，痛哭流涕地说： 想当初陛下和我们一道从丰沛起兵，平定天下，那是什么样的壮举啊！
English: After seeing the emperor, Zou et al. said with tears streaming down their faces, "To think that at the beginning, His Majesty raised an army together with us from Fengpei to pacify the world, what a feat that was!

古文：今天下已定，又何惫也！
现代文：而如今天下已经安定，您又是何等的疲惫不堪啊！
English: But now that the situation has stabilized, how exhausted you are!

古文：且陛下病甚，大臣震恐，不见臣等计事，顾独与一宦者绝乎？
现代文：况且您病得不轻，大臣们都惊慌失措，您又不肯接见我们这些人来讨论国家大事，难道您只想和一个宦官决断吗？
English: Besides, you are seriously ill, your ministers are in a panic, and you refuse to receive us to discuss matters of state. Do you only want to decide with a eunuch?

古文：且陛下独不见赵高之事乎？ 
现代文：再说您难道没有见到赵高的事情吗？ 
English: Besides, didn't you see what happened to Zhao Gao?

古文：高帝笑而起。
现代文：高祖听罢，于是笑着从床上起来。
English: Hearing this, Gaozu laughed and got up from the bed.

古文：其後卢绾反，高帝使哙以相国击燕。
现代文：后来卢绾谋反，高祖命令樊哙以相国的身份去攻打燕国。
English: Later, Lu Xun plotted a rebellion, and Gao Zu ordered him to attack Yan Province as an ally.

古文：是时高帝病甚，人有恶哙党於吕氏，即上一日宫车晏驾，则哙欲以兵尽诛灭戚氏、赵王如意之属。
现代文：这时高祖又病得很厉害，有人诋毁樊哙和吕氏结党，皇帝假如有一天去世的话，那么樊哙就要带兵把戚夫人和赵王如意这帮人全部杀死。
English: At this time, Gao Zu was very ill again. Some people slandered Zhai and Lu for forming a party. If the emperor died one day, then Zhai would have to take soldiers to kill all the relatives and Zhao Wang Ruyi.

古文：高帝闻之大怒，乃使陈平载绛侯代将，而即军中斩哙。
现代文：高祖听说之后，勃然大怒，立刻命令陈平用车载着绛侯周勃去代替樊哙，并在军中立刻把樊哙斩首。
English: After hearing this, Gaozu flew into a rage and immediately ordered Chen Ping to take Zhou Bo in his car to replace Zhai, and immediately beheaded Zhai in the army.

古文：陈平畏吕后，执哙诣长安。
现代文：陈平因惧怕吕后，并没有执行高祖的命令，而是把樊哙解赴长安。
English: Chen Ping did not carry out Gao Zu's order because he was afraid of Lü Guo. Instead, he sent his son to Chang'an.

古文：至则高祖已崩，吕后释哙，使复爵邑。
现代文：到达长安时，高祖已经去世，吕后就释放了樊哙，并恢复了他的爵位和封邑。
English: By the time he arrived in Chang'an, Gaozu had already passed away, and Lv Hou released him and restored his title and fief.

古文：孝惠六年，樊哙卒，谥为武侯。
现代文：汉惠帝六年时，樊哙去世了，谥号为武侯。
English: Han Hui died when he was six years old, and his posthumous name was Wu Hou.

古文：子伉代侯。
现代文：他的儿子樊伉代其侯位。
English: His son Ying succeeds him as marquess.

古文：而伉母吕须亦为临光侯，高后时用事专权，大臣尽畏之。
现代文：而樊伉的母亲吕须也被封为临光侯。在高后执政时，吕须也掌管政事，十分专断，大臣们没有不怕她的。
English: However, Gao's mother, Liusu, was also given the title of Lin Guangmou. When Gao was in power, Liusu was also in charge of government affairs. She was very arbitrary, and the ministers were not afraid of her.

古文：伉代侯九岁，高后崩。
现代文：樊伉做舞阳侯的第九年，高后去世了。
English: In her ninth year as a maiyanghou, Gao Hou passed away.

古文：大臣诛诸吕、吕须婘属，因诛伉。
现代文：大臣们诛杀吕氏宗族和吕须的亲属，接着，又杀死了樊伉。
English: The ministers killed the Lv clan and Lv Su's relatives, and then they killed Gong.

古文：舞阳侯中绝数月。
现代文：舞阳侯这个爵位中断好几个月。
English: The title of Marquis of Mayang was suspended for several months.

古文：孝文帝既立，乃复封哙他庶子市人为舞阳侯，复故爵邑。
现代文：等到汉文帝即位，这才封樊哙的妾所生的儿子樊市人为舞阳侯，恢复了原来的爵位和食邑。
English: It wasn't until Emperor Hanwen ascended to the throne that the son of Emperor Hanwen's concubine was named the Prince of Wuyang and restored his former title and food town.

古文：市人立二十九岁卒，谥为荒侯。
现代文：樊市人在位二十九年后去世，谥号为荒侯。
English: The mayor of Handan died after 29 years on the throne, and his posthumous name was Arao.

古文：子他广代侯。
现代文：他的儿子樊他广继承侯位。
English: His son, Zhaotagang, succeeded to the throne.

古文：六岁，侯家舍人得罪他广，怨之，乃上书曰： 荒侯市人病不能为人，令其夫人与其弟乱而生他广，他广实非荒侯子，不当代後。 
现代文：六年之后，舞阳侯家中舍人得罪了樊他广，非常怨恨他。于是就上书说： 荒侯市人因为有病而丧失生育能力，就让他的夫人和他的弟弟淫乱而生下他广。他广在事实上并不是荒侯的儿子，因此更不应当继承侯位。 
English: Six years later, the deserter of the Maiyang family offended Zou Taguang and resented him very much. Therefore, he wrote a letter saying: "Ara Hou Shichin lost his fertility due to illness, so he let his wife and his brother commit adultery and give birth to Taguang. In fact, he is not the son of Ara Hou, so he should not inherit the position of mayor."

古文：诏下吏。
现代文：皇帝下命令把此事交给官吏去审理。
English: The emperor ordered that the matter be referred to the magistrates.

古文：孝景中六年，他广夺侯为庶人，国除。
现代文：在汉景帝中元六年时，废除了樊他广的侯位，降他为平民百姓，封国食邑也一并撤除了。
English: In the 6th year of the Middle Yuan Dynasty of Emperor Han Jing, the court rank of Zhaotagang was abolished, he was reduced to a commoner, and the fiefdom of Guozhuyi was also removed.

古文：曲周侯郦商者，高阳人。
现代文：曲周侯郦商是高阳人。
English: Qu Zhou Hou Yi merchants were Gaoyang people.

古文：陈胜起时，商聚少年东西略人，得数千。
现代文：在陈胜起兵反秦的时候，他聚集了一伙年轻人四处招兵买马，得到好几千人。
English: When Chen Sheng raised an army against the Qin Dynasty, he gathered a group of young men to recruit soldiers from all over the country, and gained several thousand soldiers.

古文：沛公略地至陈留，六月馀，商以将卒四千人属沛公於岐。
现代文：沛公攻城夺地来到陈留，六个多月后，郦商就带领将士四千多人到歧投归沛公。
English: Pei Gong came to Chenliu to attack the city and seize the land. After more than six months, the merchants led more than four thousand soldiers to return to Pei Gong.

古文：从攻长社，先登，赐爵封信成君。
现代文：跟随沛公攻打长社，率先登城，沛公赐爵封他为信成君。
English: He followed Pei Gong in attacking Chosha and took the lead in entering the city. Pei Gong gave him the title of Nobushige-kun.

古文：从沛公攻缑氏，绝河津，破秦军洛阳东。
现代文：跟随沛公攻打缑氏，封锁了黄河渡口，在洛阳东面大破秦军。
English: He followed Pei Gong to attack the Dadu clan, blockaded the Yellow River ferry, and defeated the Qin army in the east of Luoyang.

古文：从攻下宛、穰，定十七县。
现代文：跟着沛公攻取宛、穰两地，另外又平定了十七个县。
English: With Pei Gong, the two provinces of Wan and Yan were conquered, and in addition, seventeen counties were leveled.

古文：别将攻旬关，定汉中。
现代文：自己单独率军攻打旬吴，平定汉中。
English: He single-handedly led an army to attack Shun Wu and pacify Hanzhong.

古文：项羽灭秦，立沛公为汉王。
现代文：项羽灭秦之后，立沛公为汉王。
English: After Xiang Yu destroyed the Qin Dynasty, Li Pei Gong became the king of Han.

古文：汉王赐商爵信成君，以将军为陇西都尉。
现代文：汉王赐给郦商信成君的爵位，并以将军的职位担任陇西都尉。
English: The king of Han gave the title of nobility to Shao Shangxin Chengjun, and he served as the captain of Shaanxi with the position of general.

古文：别将定北地、上郡。
现代文：郦商自己单独率军平定了北地和上郡。
English: Qian Shang himself led an army to pacify the north and the upper counties.

古文：破雍将军焉氏，周类军栒邑，苏駔军於泥阳。
现代文：在焉氏打败了雍王章邯部下所率领的军队，在栒邑打败了周类所率领的军队，在泥阳打败了苏驵所率领的军队。
English: In Yan, they defeated the army led by the subordinates of Yang Wang Zhangye, in Zhouyi, they defeated the army led by Zhou Qi, and in Diyang, they defeated the army led by Su Xi.

古文：赐食邑武成六千户。
现代文：于是汉王把武成县的六千户赐给郦商，作为他的食邑。
English: As a result, the Han king gave 6,000 households in Wucheng County to the eel trader as his food village.

古文：以陇西都尉从击项籍军五月，出钜野，与锺离眛战，疾斗，受梁相国印，益食邑四千户。
现代文：他以陇西都尉的职位跟随沛公攻打项羽的军队达五个月之久，出兵巨野，和钟离昧交战，因激战有功，沛公授予他梁国相印，又增封食邑四千户。
English: He followed Pei Gong to attack Xiang Yu's army for five months in the position of Shaanxi captain. He sent troops to the vast field and fought with Zhong Liangmai. Because of the fierce battle, Pei Gong awarded him the Liang Guo Xiangyin, and increased the seal to feed four thousand households.

古文：以梁相国将从击项羽二岁三月，攻胡陵。
现代文：在龙脱大战时，郦商冲锋陷阵，率先登城，在易下击败臧荼的军队。
English: At the time of the Longtao War, the merchants of Yunnan rushed to the front, took the lead in entering the city, and defeated the army of Yunnan under Yi.

古文：项羽既已死，汉王为帝。其秋，燕王臧荼反，商以将军从击荼，战龙脱，先登陷阵，破荼军易下，卻敌，迁为右丞相，赐爵列侯，与诸侯剖符，世世勿绝，食邑涿五千户，号曰涿侯。以右丞相别定上谷，因攻代，受赵相国印。
现代文：因杀敌有功，被升任右丞相，赐给他列侯的爵位，和其他诸侯一样剖符为信，世世代代永不断绝，以涿邑五千户作为他的食邑，封号叫涿侯。以右丞相之职单独带兵平定上谷，接着又攻打代，高祖授予他赵国的相国之印。
English: He was promoted to Minister of the Right and given the title of Marquis for his distinguished service in killing the enemy. Like other princes, he cut the characters into letters so that they would last for generations to come. He used the five thousand households in Zhaozhou as his hometown, and was given the title of Prince of Zhaozhou. As Minister of the Right, he single-handedly led the army to conquer Shanggu, and then attacked Zhaozhou. Gaozu awarded him the seal of the fatherland of Zhao.

古文：以右丞相赵相国别与绛侯等定代、雁门，得代丞相程纵、守相郭同、将军已下至六百石十九人。
现代文：以右丞相加赵国相国的身份带兵和绛侯周勃等人一起平定了代和雁们，活捉了代国丞相程纵，守相郭同，将军以下到六百石的官员共十九人。
English: Taking the identity of the Minister of the Right and Zhao Guo Guo Guo, he led the soldiers together with Yan Hou Zhou Bo and others to pacify the generals and geese, captured alive the generals and ministers Cheng Zheng and Guo Guo Tong, and a total of nineteen officials of up to six hundred koku below the general.

古文：还，以将军为太上皇卫一岁七月。
现代文：凯旋之后，以将军的身份担任太上皇的护卫一年零七个月。
English: After his triumphant return, he served as a general guarding the emperor for one year and seven months.

古文：以右丞相击陈豨，残东垣。
现代文：然后又以右丞相之职攻打陈豨，捣毁东垣城墙。
English: He then used his position as the Minister of the Right to attack Chen Xi and destroy the East Wall.

古文：又以右丞相从高帝击黥布，攻其前拒，陷两陈，得以破布军，更食曲周五千一百户，除前所食，凡别破军三，降定郡六，县七十三，得丞相、守相、大将各一人，小将二人，二千石已下至六百石十九人。
现代文：又以右丞相之职跟随高帝进攻反叛的黥布，郦商领兵向敌人前沿阵地猛攻，夺取了两个阵地，从而使汉军能够打垮黥布的军队。高帝把他的封邑改在曲周，增加到五千一百户，收回以前所封的食邑。总计郦商一共击垮三支敌军，降服平定六个郡、七十三个县，俘获丞相，守相，大将各一人、小将二人、二千石以下到六百石的官员十九人。
English: He also followed Gao Di as the minister of the right to attack the rebel Zibo. The Zibo merchants led the troops to storm the enemy's forward positions and captured two positions, thus enabling the Chinese army to defeat the Zibo army. Gao Di changed his fief to Quzhou, increased it to 5,100 households, and recovered the previously sealed food villages. In total, the Zibo merchants defeated three enemy armies, surrendered and conquered six counties and 73 counties, captured the minister of the left, the minister of the right, one general each, two junior generals, and 19 officials with less than 2,000 koku and up to 600 koku.

古文：商事孝惠、高后时，商病，不治。
现代文：郦商在侍奉孝惠，高后时，因身体不好，不能料理政事。
English: When serving Xiao Hui, a high-ranking official, Zou Shang was in poor health and unable to attend to government affairs.

古文：其子寄，字况，与吕禄善。
现代文：他的儿子郦寄，字况，与吕禄很要好。
English: His son, Diao Ying, has a good handwriting and is very close to Lu Lu.

古文：及高后崩，大臣欲诛诸吕，吕禄为将军，军於北军，太尉勃不得入北军，於是乃使人劫郦商，令其子况绐吕禄，吕禄信之，故与出游，而太尉勃乃得入据北军，遂诛诸吕。是岁商卒，谥为景侯。
现代文：也就在这一年，郦商去世了，谥号为景侯。
English: It was also in this year that the merchant died, and his nickname was Jinghou.

古文：子寄代侯。天下称郦况卖交也。
现代文：他的儿子郦寄继承了侯位，天下人都说他出卖朋友。
English: His son, Miao Ying, succeeded to the throne, and the whole world said that he had betrayed his friends.

古文：孝景前三年，吴、楚、齐、赵反，上以寄为将军，围赵城，十月不能下。
现代文：孝景帝前元三年，吴、楚、齐、赵等诸侯国联合起兵造反，皇帝任命郦寄为将军，围攻赵城，但十个月都没有攻克。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojing, the states of Wu, Chu, Qi, and Zhao jointly revolted. The emperor appointed Miao Ying as a general and besieged Zhao City, but did not conquer it for ten months.

古文：得俞侯栾布自平齐来，乃下赵城，灭赵，王自杀，除国。
现代文：等到俞侯栾布平定了齐国前来助战，这才拿下了赵城，扫平了赵国。赵王刘遂自杀，封国被废除。
English: It wasn't until the warlord Zhou Enbu conquered Qi and came to help in the war that he took Zhao City and leveled Zhao. Zhao Wang Liu then committed suicide, and the feudal state was abolished.

古文：孝景中二年，寄欲取平原君为夫人，景帝怒，下寄吏，有罪，夺侯。
现代文：景帝中元二年，郦寄打算娶景帝王皇后的母亲平原君为妻。景帝大怒，把郦寄交给司法官吏去审理，判定他有罪，剥夺了侯爵爵位。
English: In the middle of the 2nd year of the 1st century, Emperor Jing's emissary planned to marry Pingyuan Jun, the mother of Emperor Jing's empress, as his wife. The Emperor Jing was furious and brought the emissary to the judicial officials for trial. He was found guilty and stripped of his marquis title.

古文：景帝乃以商他子坚封为缪侯，续郦氏後。
现代文：景帝把郦商的另外一个儿子郦坚封为缪侯，以延续郦氏的后代。
English: In order to continue the lineage of the Yi family, Emperor Jing designated another son of the Yi merchants, Yi Jian, as the imperial prince.

古文：缪靖侯卒，子康侯遂成立。
现代文：缪靖侯郦坚去世之后，他的儿子康侯郦遂成继位。
English: After Miao Jing Hou Rongjian died, his son Kang Hou Rongcheng succeeded to the throne.

古文：遂成卒，子怀侯世宗立。
现代文：郦遂成死去之后，儿子怀侯郦世宗继位。
English: After the death of Gong Suicheng, his son Huaihou Gong Shizong succeeded to the throne.

古文：世宗卒，子侯终根立，为太常，坐法，国除。
现代文：郦世宗去世之后，儿子郦终根继承侯位，任太常，后来因为犯法，封国被撤消。
English: After the death of Xing Shizong, his son Zou eventually succeeded to the throne, Ren Taizang. Later, because of the violation of the law, the state seal was revoked.

古文：汝阴侯夏侯婴，沛人也。
现代文：汝阴侯夏侯婴是沛县人。
English: Ru Yin Hou Xia Hou Baby is from Pei County.

古文：为沛厩司御。
现代文：开始在沛县县府的马房里掌管养马驾车。
English: He began to manage the horse breeding and driving in the stable of the county government of Peixian County.

古文：每送使客还，过沛泗上亭，与高祖语，未尝不移日也。
现代文：每当他驾车送完使者或客人返回的时候，经过沛县泗上亭，都要找高祖去聊天，而且一聊就是大半天。
English: Whenever he drives back from seeing off an envoy or a guest, he has to go to Gao Zu for a chat after passing through the Jiaoshang Pavilion in Peixian County, and the chat takes up most of the day.

古文：婴已而试补县吏，与高祖相爱。
现代文：后来，夏侯婴担任了试用的县吏，与高祖更加亲密无间。
English: Later, Xia Houying served as a probationary county official, and became even closer to Gao Zu.

古文：高祖戏而伤婴，人有告高祖。
现代文：有一次，高祖因为开玩笑而误伤了夏侯婴，被别人告发到官府。
English: On one occasion, Gaozu accidentally injured Xia Hou's baby as a joke, and was reported to the government by others.

古文：高祖时为亭长，重坐伤人，告故不伤婴，婴证之。
现代文：当时高祖身为亭长，伤了人要从严惩罚，因此高祖申诉本来没有伤害夏侯婴，夏侯婴也证明自己没有被伤害。
English: At that time, Gao Zu was the head of the pavilion, and if someone was injured, they would be severely punished. Therefore, Gao Zu's complaint did not hurt Xia Hou's baby, and Xia Hou's baby also proved that he was not injured.

古文：後狱覆，婴坐高祖系岁馀，掠笞数百，终以是脱高祖。
现代文：后来这个案子又翻了过来，夏侯婴因受高祖的牵连被关押了一年多，挨了几百板子，但终归因此使高祖免于刑罚。
English: Later, the case was reversed. Xia Houying was detained for more than a year and received several hundred boards for being implicated by Gao Zu. However, Gao Zu was eventually exempted from punishment.

古文：高祖之初与徒属欲攻沛也，婴时以县令史为高祖使。
现代文：当初高祖带领他的徒众准备攻打沛县的时候，夏侯婴以县令属官的身份与高祖去联络。
English: At the beginning, when Gaozu was leading his followers to prepare to attack Peixian, Xia Houyi contacted Gaozu in his capacity as a subordinate official of the county magistrate.

古文：上降沛一日，高祖为沛公，赐婴爵七大夫，以为太仆。
现代文：就在高祖降服沛县的那天，高祖立为沛公，赐给夏侯婴七大夫的爵位，并任命他为太仆。
English: On the very day Gaozhu surrendered Peixian, Gaozhu became Pei Gong, bestowed the title of Shichidaiwu to Xia Houying, and appointed him as the Great Servant.

古文：从攻胡陵，婴与萧何降泗水监平，平以胡陵降，赐婴爵五大夫。
现代文：在跟随高祖攻打胡陵时，夏侯婴和萧何一起招降了泗水郡郡监平，平交出胡陵投降了，高祖赐给夏侯婴五大夫的爵位。
English: When he followed Gao Zu to attack Huling, Xia Houyi and Xia He together recruited and demoted the Surabaya County Supervisor Ping, Ping surrendered Huling, and Gao Zu gave Xia Houyi the title of five husbands.

古文：从击秦军砀东，攻济阳，下户牖，破李由军雍丘下，以兵车趣攻战疾，赐爵执帛。
现代文：他跟随高祖在砀县以东袭击秦军，攻打济阳，拿下户牖，在雍丘一带击败李由的军队，他在战斗中驾兵车快速进攻，作战勇猛，高祖赐给他执帛的爵位。
English: He followed Gaozu to attack the Qin army in the east of Lu County, attacked Jiyang, took down Hucheng, and defeated Li Yu's army in the Yongqiu area. He drove a troop car to attack quickly in the battle and fought bravely. Gaozu gave him the title of holding the scepter.

古文：常以太仆奉车从击章邯军东阿、濮阳下，以兵车趣攻战疾，破之，赐爵执珪。
现代文：夏侯婴又曾经以太仆之职指挥兵车跟从高祖在东阿、濮阳一带袭击章邯，在战斗中驾兵车快速进攻，作战勇猛，大破秦军，高祖赐给他执珪的爵位。
English: Xia Houyong also once served as a servant and commanded the chariot to follow Gao Zu to attack Zhangye in Donga and Shenyang. During the battle, he drove the chariot to attack quickly, fought bravely, and defeated the Qin Army. Gao Zu gave him the title of holding the scepter.

古文：复常奉车从击赵贲军开封，杨熊军曲遇。
现代文：他又曾指挥兵车跟从高祖在开封袭击赵贲的军队，在曲遇袭击杨熊的军队。
English: He also once commanded a troop car to follow Gaozu to attack Zhao Zhen's army in Kaifeng and Yang Xiong's army in Qu.

古文：婴从捕虏六十八人，降卒八百五十人，得印一匮。
现代文：在战斗中，夏侯婴俘虏六十八人，收降士兵八百五十人，并缴获金印一匣。
English: During the battle, Xia Houying captured sixty-eight prisoners, captured eight hundred and fifty soldiers, and seized a box of gold seals.

古文：因复常奉车从击秦军雒阳东，以兵车趣攻战疾，赐爵封转为滕公。
现代文：接着又曾经指挥兵车跟从高祖在洛阳以东袭击秦军。他驾车冲锋陷阵，奋力拼杀，高祖赐与他滕公的封爵。
English: Next, he once commanded a troop car to follow Gaozu to attack the Qin army in the east of Luoyang. He drove to the front and fought hard, and Gaozu gave him the title of Tenggong.

古文：因复奉车从攻南阳，战於蓝田、芷阳，以兵车趣攻战疾，至霸上。
现代文：接着又指挥兵车跟从高祖攻打南阳，在蓝田、芷阳大战，他驾兵车奋力冲杀，英勇作战，一直打到了霸上。
English: Next, he commanded the troop car to follow Gao Zu to attack Nanyang. In the Lantian and Shenyang wars, he drove the troop car to fight hard, fought bravely, and fought to the top.

古文：项羽至，灭秦，立沛公为汉王。
现代文：项羽进关之后，灭掉了秦朝，封沛公为汉王。
English: After Xiang Yu entered the pass, he destroyed the Qin Dynasty and made Pei Gong the king of Han.

古文：汉王赐婴爵列侯，号昭平侯，复为太仆，从入蜀、汉。
现代文：汉王赐与夏侯婴列侯的爵位，号为昭平侯。又以太仆之职，跟随汉王进军蜀、汉地区。
English: The king of Han gave Xia Houjun the title of prince, and his name was Zhao Ping. He also served as a servant and followed the king of Han into Shu and Han regions.

古文：还定三秦，从击项籍。
现代文：后来汉王回军平定了三秦，夏侯婴随从汉王攻击项羽的军队。
English: Later, Han Wang Hui's army conquered Sanqin, and Xia Houying followed Han Wang to attack Xiang Yu's army.

古文：至彭城，项羽大破汉军。
现代文：进军彭城，汉军被项羽打得大败。
English: Marching into Pengcheng, the Chinese army was soundly defeated by Xiang Yu.

古文：汉王败，不利，驰去。
现代文：汉王因兵败不利，乘车马急速逃去。
English: Han Wang, who was at a disadvantage due to his military defeat, quickly fled by horse and carriage.

古文：见孝惠、鲁元，载之。汉王急，马罢，虏在後，常蹶两兒欲弃之，婴常收，竟载之，徐行面雍树乃驰。汉王怒，行欲斩婴者十馀，卒得脱，而致孝惠、鲁元於丰。
现代文：夏侯婴赶着车子，先是慢慢行走，等到两个吓坏了的孩子抱紧了自己的脖子之后，才驾车奔驰。汉王为此非常生气，有十多次想要杀死夏侯婴，但最终还是逃出了险境，把孝惠帝、鲁元公主安然无恙地送到了丰邑。
English: Xia Houying ran after the car, walking slowly at first, and waited until the two frightened children hugged their necks before driving the Mercedes. Han Wang was very angry about this, and tried to kill Xia Houying more than ten times, but eventually he escaped the danger and sent Xia Hui Di and Lu Yuan Princess to Fengyi safely.

古文：汉王既至荥阳，收散兵，复振，赐婴食祈阳。
现代文：汉王到了荥阳之后，收集被击溃的军队，军威又振作起来，汉王把祈阳赐给夏侯婴作为食邑。
English: After the Han king arrived in Poyang, he collected the defeated army, and the military power was invigorated. The Han king gave the prayer to Xia Houyi as food.

古文：复常奉车从击项籍，追至陈，卒定楚，至鲁，益食兹氏。汉王立为帝。
现代文：在此之后，夏侯婴又指挥兵车跟从汉王攻打项羽，一直追击到陈县，最后终于平定了楚地。行至鲁地，汉王又给他增加了兹氏一县作为食邑。
English: After this, Xia Houyong also commanded the chariot to follow Han Wang to attack Xiang Yu, and pursued him all the way to Chen County, and finally leveled Chu. When he went to Ludi, Han Wang also added Zi County to him as a food town.

古文：其秋，燕王臧荼反，婴以太仆从击荼。
现代文：汉王立为皇帝的这一年秋天，燕王臧荼起兵造反，夏侯婴以太仆之职跟从高帝攻打臧荼。
English: In the autumn of the year when Han Wang was made emperor, Yan Wangjun started a military rebellion, and Xia Houyin followed Gao Di to fight against him as a servant.

古文：明年，从至陈，取楚王信。
现代文：第二年，又跟从高帝到陈县，逮捕了楚王韩信。
English: The following year, he followed Emperor Gao to Chen County and arrested King Han Xin of Chu.

古文：更食汝阴，剖符世世勿绝。
现代文：高帝把夏侯婴的食邑改封在汝阴，剖符为信，使爵位世世代代传下去。
English: Emperor Gao changed the seal of Xia Houyi's hometown to Ruyin, and the cut-up characters became letters, so that the title of nobility would be passed down from generation to generation.

古文：以太仆从击代，至武泉、云中，益食千户。
现代文：又以太仆之职跟从高帝攻打代地，一直打到武泉、云中，高帝给他增加食邑一千户。
English: He also followed Gao Di's attack on behalf of the land, and fought until Wuquan and Yunzhong. Gao Di gave him an additional thousand households.

古文：因从击韩信军胡骑晋阳旁，大破之。
现代文：接着又跟随汉王到晋阳附近，把隶属于韩信的匈奴骑兵打得大败。
English: He then followed Han Wang to the vicinity of Jinyang and defeated the Hun cavalry under Han Xin.

古文：追北至平城，为胡所围，七日不得通。
现代文：当追击败军到平城时，被匈奴骑兵团团围住，困了整整七天不能解脱。
English: When they chased the defeated army to Pingcheng, they were surrounded by Hun cavalry regiments and trapped for seven whole days.

古文：高帝使使厚遗阏氏，冒顿开围一角。
现代文：后来高帝派人送给匈奴王的王后阏氏好多礼物，匈奴王冒顿这才把包围圈打开一角。
English: Later, Emperor Gao sent many gifts to the queen of the Xiongnu king, the queen of the Xiongnu, and the king of the Xiongnu suddenly opened a corner of the encirclement.

古文：高帝出欲驰，婴固徐行，弩皆持满外向，卒得脱。
现代文：高帝脱围刚出平城就想驱车快跑，夏侯婴坚决止住车马慢慢行走，命令弓箭手都拉满弓向外，最后终于脱离险境。
English: As soon as Gao Di escaped from the siege and left Pingcheng, he wanted to drive fast and run. Xia Houying resolutely stopped the car and horse and walked slowly. He ordered the archers to pull their bows outward, and finally got out of danger.

古文：益食婴细阳千户。
现代文：以此功，高帝把细阳一千户作为食邑加封给夏侯婴。
English: With this achievement, Emperor Gao sealed a thousand households in Xieyang as food villages to Xia Houying.

古文：复以太仆从击胡骑句注北，大破之。
现代文：又以太仆之职跟随高帝在勾注山以北地区攻打匈奴骑兵，获得大胜。
English: He also followed Gao Di to attack the Hun cavalry in the area north of Mt. Guozhu and won a great victory.

古文：以太仆击胡骑平城南，三陷陈，功为多，赐所夺邑五百户。
现代文：以太仆之职在平城南边攻击匈奴骑兵，多次攻破敌阵，功劳最多，高帝就把夺来的城邑中的五百户赐给他作为食邑。
English: As an eunuch, he attacked the Hun cavalry on the south side of Pingcheng, repeatedly broke through the enemy lines, and had the most merit. Emperor Gao gave him five hundred households in the captured towns as food villages.

古文：以太仆击陈豨、黥布军，陷陈卻敌，益食千户，定食汝阴六千九百户，除前所食。
现代文：又以太仆之职攻打陈豨、黥布的反叛军队，冲锋陷阵，击退敌军，又加封食邑一千户。最后，皇帝把夏侯婴的食邑定在汝阴，共六千九百户，撤消以前所封的其它食邑。
English: He also attacked the rebel army of Chen Xi and Zibo as a servant, stormed and repulsed the enemy army, and sealed a thousand more food villages. Finally, the emperor set Xia Houyi's food villages in Ruyin, a total of 6,900 households, and revoked the previously sealed other food villages.

古文：婴自上初起沛，常为太仆，竟高祖崩。
现代文：夏侯婴自从跟随高帝在沛县起兵，长期担任太仆一职，一直到高帝去世。
English: Xia Houyong served as a eunuch for a long time from the time he joined Gao Di's army in Pei County until Gao Di's death.

古文：以太仆事孝惠。
现代文：之后又作为太仆侍奉孝惠帝。
English: Later, he served Emperor Xiao Hui as a eunuch.

古文：孝惠帝及高后德婴之脱孝惠、鲁元於下邑之间也，乃赐婴县北第第一，曰 近我 ，以尊异之。
现代文：孝惠帝和吕后非常感激夏侯婴在下邑的路上救了孝惠帝和鲁元公主，就把紧靠在皇宫北面的一等宅第赐给他，名为 近我 ，意思是说 这样可以离我最近 ，以此表示对夏侯婴的格外尊宠。
English: Emperor Xiaohui and Empress Lu were very grateful to Xiaohui for saving Emperor Xiaohui and Princess Luyuan on their way to the next town, so they gave him a first-class residence close to the north side of the Imperial Palace. It was named "Near Me," meaning that it was closest to me, to show their special respect for Xiaohui.

古文：孝惠帝崩，以太仆事高后。
现代文：孝惠帝死去之后，他又以太仆之职侍奉高后。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiao Hui, he continued to serve Empress Gao as a eunuch.

古文：高后崩，代王之来，婴以太仆与东牟侯入清宫，废少帝，以天子法驾迎代王代邸，与大臣共立为孝文皇帝，复为太仆。
现代文：等到高后去世，代王来到京城的时候，夏侯婴又以太仆的身份和东牟侯刘兴居一起入皇宫清理宫室，废去了少帝，用天子的法驾到代王府第里去迎接代王，和大臣们一起立代王为孝文皇帝，夏侯婴仍然担任太仆。
English: When Gao Hou died and the acting king came to Beijing, Xia Houyou, as the eunuch, went to the imperial palace to clean up the palace together with Dongmou Hou Liu Xingju, abolished the young emperor, and drove to the imperial palace to meet the acting king with the Law of the Son of Heaven. Together with the ministers, he established the acting king as Emperor Xiaowen. Xia Houyou still served as the eunuch.

古文：八岁卒，谥为文侯。
现代文：八年之后去世，谥号为文侯。
English: He died eight years later, and his nickname was "Wenhou."

古文：子夷侯灶立，七年卒。
现代文：他的儿子夷侯夏侯灶继承侯位，七年之后去世。
English: His son, Yi Hou Xia Hou Zhao, succeeded him and died seven years later.

古文：子共侯赐立，三十一年卒。
现代文：儿子共侯夏侯赐继承侯位，三十一年之后去世。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Prince Xia, who died 31 years later.

古文：子侯颇尚平阳公主。立十九岁，元鼎二年，坐与父御婢奸罪，自杀，国除。
现代文：他的儿子夏侯颇娶的是平阳公主，在他继承侯位十九年时，也就是元鼎二年这一年，因为和他父亲的御婢通奸，畏罪自杀，封国也被撤消。
English: His son Xia Houpo married Princess Pingyang. When he succeeded to the throne 19 years later, that is, in the second year of the reign of the Yuan Dynasty, because he committed adultery with his father's concubine and committed suicide, the state seal was also revoked.

古文：颍阴侯灌婴者，睢阳贩缯者也。
现代文：颍阴侯灌婴原是睢阳的一个贩卖丝缯的小商人。
English: Shouyin Hou Guanzhong was originally a small merchant in Shenyang who sold silk cocoons.

古文：高祖之为沛公，略地至雍丘下，章邯败杀项梁，而沛公还军於砀，婴初以中涓从击破东郡尉於成武及秦军於扛里，疾斗，赐爵七大夫。
现代文：高祖在刚刚起兵反秦，自立为沛公的时候，功城略地来到雍丘城下，章邯击败了项梁并杀死了他。而沛公也撤退到砀县一带，灌婴以内侍中涓官的身份跟随沛公，在成武打败了东郡郡尉的军队，在杠里打败了驻守的秦军，因为杀敌英勇，被赐与七大夫的爵位。
English: When Gaozu had just raised an army against the Qin and stood up for himself as Pei Gong, he came to the castle of Yongqiu, Zhang Ye defeated Xiang Liang and killed him. And Pei Gong also retreated to the area of Lixian County, followed Pei Gong as the eunuch of the eunuch of the eunuch, defeated the army of the county captain of Dong County in Chengwu, defeated the Qin Army stationed in Liuli, and was given the title of the seventh doctor because he killed the enemy bravely.

古文：从攻秦军亳南、开封、曲遇，战疾力，赐爵执帛，号宣陵君。
现代文：后又跟随沛公在亳县以南及开封、曲遇一带与秦军交战，因奋力拼杀，被赐与执帛的爵位，号为宣陵君。
English: Later, he followed Pei Gong to fight against the Qin army in the south of Jixian County and in the areas of Kaifeng and Quyuetang. Because he fought hard, he was given the title of knight and the nickname of Xuanlingjun.

古文：从攻阳武以西至雒阳，破秦军尸北，北绝河津，南破南阳守齮阳城东，遂定南阳郡。
现代文：又跟随沛公在阳武以西至洛阳一带与秦军交战，在尸乡以北地区击败秦军，再向北切断了黄河渡口，然后又领兵南下，在南阳以东打垮了南阳郡郡守吕的军队，这样就平定了南阳郡。
English: He also followed Peigong to fight against the Qin army in the area west of Yangwu to Luoyang, defeated the Qin army in the area north of Zhixiang, then cut off the Yellow River ferry to the north, and then led the soldiers south, and defeated the army of Nanyang County Governor Lyu Wei east of Nanyang, thus leveling Nanyang County.

古文：西入武关，战於蓝田，疾力，至霸上，赐爵执珪，号昌文君。
现代文：再往西进入武关，在蓝田与秦军交战，因为英勇奋战，一直打到霸上，被赐与执珪的爵位，号为昌文君。
English: He went further west to Wuguan, where he fought against the Qin army in Lantian. Because he fought bravely, he was awarded the title of "Changwenjun."

古文：沛公立为汉王，拜婴为郎中，从入汉中，十月，拜为中谒者。
现代文：沛公被封为汉王之后，汉王拜灌婴为郎中之职。他跟从汉王进军汉中，十月间，又被任命为中谒者。
English: After Pei Gong was named King of Han, King Baikang took up the position of junior vassal. He followed the King of Han into Han, and in October, he was appointed as junior vassal.

古文：从还定三秦，下栎阳，降塞王。
现代文：跟从汉王还师平定了三秦，攻取了栎阳，降服了塞王司马欣。
English: He followed the Han king and leveled Sanqin, captured Fenyang, and subdued the Sai king Sima Xin.

古文：还围章邯於废丘，未拔。
现代文：回军又把章邯围在了废丘，但未能攻克。
English: The returning troops encircled Zhangye in the waste hill, but failed to conquer it.

古文：从东出临晋关，击降殷王，定其地。
现代文：后又跟随汉王东出临晋关，降服了殷王董翳，平定了他所统辖的地区。
English: Later, he followed Han Wang Dong out of Jin Pass, subdued Yin Wang Dong Yao, and pacified the area under his jurisdiction.

古文：击项羽将龙且、魏相项他军定陶南，疾战，破之。
现代文：在定陶以南地区与项羽的部下龙且、魏国丞相项他的军队交战，经过激烈的拼搏，最后击败敌军。
English: In the area south of Dingtao, he fought with Xiang Yu's subordinate Long Jie and Wei Guozheng's army, and finally defeated the enemy army after a fierce struggle.

古文：赐婴爵列侯，号昌文侯，食杜平乡。
现代文：因功被赐与列侯的爵位，号为昌文侯，杜县的平乡被封作他的食邑。
English: For his merits, he was given the peerage of the Marquis, called Changwen Marquis, and Pingxiang in Du County was made his food town.

古文：复以中谒者从降下砀，以至彭城。
现代文：以后又以中谒者的身份跟随汉王拿下砀县，进军彭城。
English: Later, he also followed Han Wang to win Jixian County and marched into Pengcheng as a member of the Central Military Commission.

古文：项羽击，大破汉王。
现代文：项羽带领军队出击，把汉王打得大败。
English: Cao Yu led the army to attack and defeated the Han king.

古文：汉王遁而西，婴从还，军於雍丘。
现代文：汉王向西逃跑，灌婴随汉王撤退，在雍丘驻扎。
English: Han Wang fled to the west, Guan Yu followed Han Wang to retreat and stationed in Yongqiu.

古文：王武、魏公申徒反，从击破之。
现代文：王武、魏公申徒谋反，灌婴随从汉王出击，并打垮了他们。
English: Wang Wu and Wei Gong incited the rebels to rebel, and Guan Yu followed the Han king to attack, and defeated them.

古文：攻下黄，西收兵，军於荥阳。
现代文：攻克了外黄，再向西招募士卒，在荥阳驻扎。
English: After conquering Waigaoqiao, he went west to recruit soldiers and stationed them in Shenyang.

古文：楚骑来众，汉王乃择军中可为骑将者，皆推故秦骑士重泉人李必、骆甲习骑兵，今为校尉，可为骑将。
现代文：项羽的军队又来进攻，其中骑兵很多，汉王就在军中挑选能够担任骑兵将领的人，大家都推举原来的秦朝骑士重泉人李必、骆甲，他俩对骑兵很在行，同时现在又都担任校尉之职，因此可以担任骑兵将领。
English: Xiang Yu's army attacked again, and there were many cavalrymen among them. The Han king selected people in the army who could serve as cavalry generals. Everyone nominated Li Bi and Luo Jia, the original Qin Dynasty knights from Chongquan. Both of them were very good at cavalry, and at the same time, they both held the position of captain, so they could serve as cavalry generals.

古文：汉王欲拜之，必、甲曰： 臣故秦民，恐军不信臣，臣原得大王左右善骑者傅之。 
现代文：汉王准备任命他们，但他们二人说： 我们原为秦民，恐怕军中士卒觉得我们靠不住，所以请您委派一名常在您身边而又善于骑射的人做我们的首领。 
English: Han Wang was about to appoint them, but the two of them said, "We used to be Qin people. I'm afraid the army sergeants don't think we can be trusted, so please appoint a person who is always by your side and is good at riding and shooting to be our leader."

古文：灌婴虽少，然数力战，乃拜灌婴为中大夫，令李必、骆甲为左右校尉，将郎中骑兵击楚骑於荥阳东，大破之。
现代文：当时灌婴年龄虽然不大，但在多次战斗中都能勇猛拼杀，所以就任命他为中大夫，让李必、骆甲担任左右校尉，带领郎中骑兵在荥阳以东和楚国骑兵交战，把楚军打得大败。
English: At that time, although Guanzhong was not very old, he was able to fight bravely in many battles, so he appointed him as the middle doctor, let Li Bi and Luo Jia serve as the left and right lieutenants, and led the junior cavalry to fight against the Chu cavalry in the east of Fenyang, and defeated the Chu army.

古文：受诏别击楚军後，绝其饷道，起阳武至襄邑。
现代文：又奉汉王命令自己单独率领军队袭击楚军的后方，断绝了楚军从阳武到襄邑的粮食供应线。
English: He also led the army to attack the rear of the Chu army alone by order of the Han king, and cut off the grain supply line of the Chu army from Yangwu to Xiangyun.

古文：击项羽之将项冠於鲁下，破之，所将卒斩右司马、骑将各一人。
现代文：在鲁国一带，打败了项羽将领项冠的军队，部下将士们斩杀楚军的右司马，骑将各一人。
English: In the Lu area, they defeated the troops of General Xiang Yu and General Xiang Guan, and their subordinates killed the right steed of the Chu army, one cavalryman each.

古文：击破柘公王武，军於燕西，所将卒斩楼烦将五人，连尹一人。
现代文：击败柘公王武，军队驻扎在燕国西部一带，部下将士们斩杀楼烦将领五人，连尹一人。
English: Defeated the Duke of Zhai Wangwu, the army was stationed in the western part of Yan Province, and his subordinates killed five generals, including one Lin Yin.

古文：击王武别将桓婴白马下，破之，所将卒斩都尉一人。
现代文：在白马附近，大破王武的别将桓婴，所统帅的士兵斩都尉一人。
English: In the vicinity of the White Horse, the great defeat of Wang Wu's warlord Huan Yu, the commander of the soldiers beheaded a captain.

古文：以骑渡河南，送汉王到雒阳，使北迎相国韩信军於邯郸。
现代文：又带领骑兵南渡黄河，护送汉王到达洛阳，然后汉王又派遣灌婴到邯郸去迎接相国韩信的部队。
English: He also led the cavalry south across the Yellow River and escorted the Han king to Luoyang, and then the Han king sent Guan Ying to Luoyang to meet the troops of Han Xin.

古文：还至敖仓，婴迁为御史大夫。
现代文：回来到敖仓时，他被升任为御史大夫。
English: When he returned to Kamakura, he was promoted to chief historian.

古文：三年，以列侯食邑杜平乡。
现代文：在汉王三年时，灌婴以列侯的爵位得到了杜县的食邑平乡。
English: When Han Wang was three years old, he was given the title of Marquis of Du County's food town of Pingxiang.

古文：以御史大夫受诏将郎中骑兵东属相国韩信，击破齐军於历下，所将卒虏车骑将军华毋伤及将吏四十六人。
现代文：其后，他以御史大夫的身份率领郎中骑兵，隶属于相国韩信，在历下击败了齐国的军队，他所率领的士卒俘虏了车骑将军华毋伤及将吏四十六人。
English: After that, he led the Langzhong cavalry with the identity of the Imperial Historian, subordinated to the neighboring country Hanxin, and defeated the army of Qi under the calendar. The soldiers he led captured the cavalry general Hua Nei and forty-six officers.

古文：降下临菑，得齐守相田光。
现代文：迫使敌兵投降，拿下了临菑，活捉齐国守相田光。
English: He forced the enemy soldiers to surrender, took Linyi, and captured the Qi governor, Aida Hikaru, alive.

古文：追齐相田横至嬴、博，破其骑，所将卒斩骑将一人，生得骑将四人。
现代文：又追击齐国相国田横到嬴、博，击败齐国骑兵，所率领的士卒斩杀齐国骑将一人，活捉骑将四人。
English: He also chased the Qi minister, Guotian, to Yan and Bo, and defeated the Qi cavalry. The soldiers led by him killed one Qi cavalry commander and captured four alive.

古文：攻下嬴、博，破齐将军田吸於千乘，所将卒斩吸。
现代文：攻克嬴、博，在千乘把齐国将军田吸打得大败，所率士卒将田吸斩首。
English: After conquering Shifang and Bao, he defeated the Qi general Tian Zuo in the Battle of Chihsiao, and the soldiers he led beheaded Tian Zuo.

古文：东从韩信攻龙且、留公旋於高密，卒斩龙且，生得右司马、连尹各一人，楼烦将十人，身生得亚将周兰。
现代文：然后跟随韩信引兵向东，在高密攻打龙且和留公旋的军队，所率领的士卒将龙且斩首，活捉右司马，连尹各一人、楼烦将领十人，自己亲手活捉亚将周兰。
English: Then, he followed Han Xin to lead the soldiers to the east, and in the army that attacked Long and stayed in a tight circle, the officers and men led by him beheaded Long and captured Zuo Sima alive, one person each from Lian Yin and ten from Lou Yu generals, and captured the second general Zhou Lan alive with his own hands.

古文：齐地已定，韩信自立为齐王，使婴别将击楚将公杲於鲁北，破之。
现代文：齐地平定之后，韩信自立为齐王，派遣灌婴单独率军去鲁北攻打楚将公杲的军队，获得全胜。
English: After the settlement of Qi, Han Xin established himself as the king of Qi, and sent Gan Zi alone to lead the army to attack the army of Chu General Gong Xi in North Lubei, and won a complete victory.

古文：转南，破薛郡长，身虏骑将一人。
现代文：灌婴挥师南下，打败了薛郡郡守所率领的军队，亲自俘虏骑将一人。
English: Guanzhong waved his division southward, defeated the army led by Xue County, and personally captured a cavalry general.

古文：攻阳，前至下相以东南僮、取虑、徐。
现代文：接着又进攻傅阳，进军到达下相东南的僮城，取虑和徐城一带。
English: Next, they attacked Fuyang, and marched to Lucheng in the southeast of the lower phase, taking advantage of the Xucheng area.

古文：度淮，尽降其城邑，至广陵。
现代文：渡过淮河，全部降服了淮南的城邑，然后到达广陵。
English: After crossing the Huai River, they conquered all the towns in the south of Huai, and then arrived at Guangling.

古文：项羽使项声、薛公、郯公复定淮北。
现代文：其后项羽派项声、薛公和郯公又重新收复淮北。
English: Later, Xiang Yu sent Xiang Sheng, Xue Gong and Xing Gong to recapture Huaibei.

古文：婴度淮北，击破项声、郯公下邳，斩薛公，下下邳，击破楚骑於平阳，遂降彭城，虏柱国项佗，降留、薛、沛、酂、萧、相。
现代文：因此灌婴渡过淮河北上，在下邳击败了项声，郯公，并将薛公斩首，拿下下邳。在平阳击败了楚军骑兵，接着就降服了彭城，俘获了楚国的柱国项佗，降服了留、薛、沛、酂、萧、相等县。
English: Therefore, Gan Zi crossed the Huaihe River to the north, defeated Xiang Sheng, Xiang Gong, and decapitated Xue Gong in the Lower Yangtze River, and won the Lower Yangtze River. In Pingyang, he defeated the cavalry of the Chu Army, and then he surrendered Pengcheng, captured the pillar country of Chu, Xiang Yangtze, and surrendered the counties of Ru, Xue, Pei, Yao, Xiao, and Zhu.

古文：攻苦、谯，复得亚将周兰。
现代文：攻打苦县，谯县，再次俘获亚将周兰。
English: They attacked Kucheng and Jixian, and once again captured the second-in-command Zhou Lan.

古文：与汉王会颐乡。
现代文：然后在颐乡和汉王会师。
English: Then, he studied with Han Wang in Handan Township.

古文：从击项籍军於陈下，破之，所将卒斩楼烦将二人，虏骑将八人。
现代文：跟随汉王在陈县一带击败项羽的军队，所率领的士卒斩楼烦骑将二人，俘获骑将八人。
English: He followed Han Wang to defeat Xiang Yu's army in the Chen County area. The soldiers led by him killed two annoying cavalry generals and captured eight cavalry generals.

古文：赐益食邑二千五百户。
现代文：汉王给灌婴增加食邑二千五百户。
English: Han Wang has increased the number of households receiving infant formula by 2,500.

古文：项籍败垓下去也，婴以御史大夫受诏将车骑别追项籍至东城，破之。
现代文：项羽在垓下大败，然后突围逃跑，这时，灌婴以御史大夫之职受汉王命令带领车骑部队追击项羽，在东城彻底击垮了他。
English: Xiang Yu suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of Xiang Yu, and then broke through the encirclement and fled. At this time, Gan Ying, in the position of imperial historian, was ordered by the Han king to lead the cavalry and cavalry troops to pursue Xiang Yu, and completely defeated him in Dongcheng.

古文：所将卒五人共斩项籍，皆赐爵列侯。
现代文：所率领的将士五人共同斩杀了项羽，他们都被封为列侯。
English: The five soldiers led by him jointly killed Xiang Yu, and they were all made vassals.

古文：降左右司马各一人，卒万二千人，尽得其军将吏。
现代文：又降服了左右司马各一人，士兵一万二千人，全部俘获了项羽军中的将领和官吏。
English: They also subdued one Sima from each side, twelve thousand soldiers, and captured all the generals and officials in Xiang Yu's army.

古文：下东城、历阳。渡江，破吴郡长吴下，得吴守，遂定吴、豫章、会稽郡。
现代文：接着，又攻克了东城、历阳，渡过长江，在吴县一带打败了吴郡郡守所率领的军队，俘获了吴郡郡守。这样，也就平定了吴、豫章、会稽三郡。
English: Next, they conquered Dongcheng and Liyang, crossed the Yangtze River, and defeated the army led by the county governor of Wuxian County in the area of Wuxian County, and captured the county governor of Wuxian County. In this way, the three counties of Wuxian, Yuzhang and Heji were also leveled.

古文：还定淮北，凡五十二县。
现代文：然后回军，又平定了淮北地区，一共五十二个县。
English: Then the army returned, and the Huaibei region, a total of fifty-two counties, was leveled.

古文：汉王立为皇帝，赐益婴邑三千户。
现代文：汉王立为皇帝之后，又给灌婴加封食邑三千户。
English: After the Han king was made emperor, he added three thousand households in Guanzhong.

古文：其秋，以车骑将军从击破燕王臧荼。
现代文：这一年的秋天，他以车骑将军之职跟从高帝击败燕王臧荼的军队。
English: In the autumn of that year, he followed Gao Di's defeat of Yan Wangtao's army as a cavalry general.

古文：明年，从至陈，取楚王信。
现代文：第二年，跟从高帝到达陈县，逮捕了楚王韩信。
English: The following year, he followed Emperor Gao to Chen County and arrested King Han Xin of Chu.

古文：还，剖符，世世勿绝，食颍阴二千五百户，号曰颍阴侯。
现代文：回朝之后，高帝剖符为信，使其世世代代不绝，把颍阴的两千五百户封给灌婴作为食邑，号为颍阴侯。
English: After returning to the imperial court, Emperor Gao cut the characters into letters so that they could be passed down from generation to generation. He assigned 2,500 households in Jinyin to Guanfei as food villages, and gave him the name Jinyin.

古文：以车骑将军从击反韩王信於代，至马邑，受诏别降楼烦以北六县，斩代左相，破胡骑於武泉北。
现代文：此后，灌婴又作为车骑将军随从高帝到代，去讨伐谋反的韩王信，到马邑的时候，奉皇帝命令率军降服了楼烦以北的六个县，斩了代国的左丞相，在武泉以北击败了匈奴骑兵。
English: After that, as a cavalry general who followed Emperor Gao from generation to generation, he went to fight against Han Wangxin, who was plotting a rebellion. When he arrived in Mayi, he led the army to subdue the six counties north of Loudui by order of the emperor, decapitated the left prime minister of the country, and defeated the Hun cavalry north of Wuquan.

古文：复从击韩信胡骑晋阳下，所将卒斩胡白题将一人。
现代文：又跟随高帝在晋阳一带袭击隶属于韩王信的匈奴骑兵，所统帅的士卒斩杀匈奴白题将一人。
English: He also followed Gao Di to attack the Hun cavalry belonging to Han Wangxin in the area of Jinyang. The soldiers under his command killed one Hun general.

古文：受诏并将燕、赵、齐、梁、楚车骑，击破胡骑於硰石。
现代文：秦皇帝命令一并率领燕赵、齐、梁、楚等国的车骑部队，在硰石打败了匈奴的骑兵。
English: The Qin Emperor ordered to jointly lead the cavalry troops of Yan Zhao, Qi, Liang, Chu and other countries to defeat the cavalry of the Xiongnu in Zhishi.

古文：至平城，为胡所围，从还军东垣。
现代文：到平城的时候，被匈奴大军团团围住，跟随高帝回军到东垣。
English: When he arrived at Pingcheng, he was surrounded by the Hun army and followed Emperor Gao back to Donggaki.

古文：从击陈豨，受诏别攻豨丞相侯敞军曲逆下，破之，卒斩敞及特将五人。
现代文：在跟随高帝攻打陈豨的时候，灌婴受皇帝的命令单独在曲逆一带攻击陈豨丞相侯敞的军队，大败敌军，所率领的士卒杀死了侯敞和特将五人。
English: While following Emperor Gao in the attack on Chen Tuo, Gan Ying was ordered by the emperor to attack the army of Chen Tuo's minister Hou Cang alone in the Quqiao area. He defeated the enemy army, and the soldiers led by him killed Hou Cang and five special generals.

古文：降曲逆、卢奴、上曲阳、安国、安平。攻下东垣。
现代文：降服了曲逆、卢奴、上曲阳，安国、安平等地，攻克了东垣。
English: He conquered Quqiao, Lunu, Shangquyang, An Guo and An equally, and conquered Donggaki.

古文：黥布反，以车骑将军先出，攻布别将於相，破之，斩亚将楼烦将三人。
现代文：黥布造反的时候，灌婴以车骑将军之职率军先行出征，在相县，大败黥布别将的军队，斩杀亚将、楼烦将共三人。
English: When Zibo rebelled, Gan Zi took the position of a general riding a chariot and led the army to march ahead. In Xiang County, the army of Zibo's general was defeated, and a total of three generals were killed.

古文：又进击破布上柱国军及大司马军。
现代文：又进军攻打黥布上柱国的军队和大司马的军队。
English: They also marched to attack the army of the pillar country on the plain and the army of Sima.

古文：又进破布别将肥诛。婴身生得左司马一人，所将卒斩其小将十人，追北至淮上。
现代文：又进军击破黥布别将肥诛的军队，灌婴亲手活捉左司马一人，所率士卒斩其小将十人，追击敌人的败将残兵一直到淮河沿岸。
English: He also marched into the army to break through the thick cloth and capture the fat soldiers. He personally captured one left Sima, led his soldiers to behead ten of his junior generals, and pursued the enemy's defeated remnants all the way to the coast of the Huai River.

古文：益食二千五百户。
现代文：因此，皇帝又给他增加食邑二千五百户。
English: Therefore, the emperor gave him an additional 2,500 households.

古文：布已破，高帝归，定令婴食颖阴五千户，除前所食邑。
现代文：讨平黥布之后，高祖还朝，确定灌婴在颍阴的食邑共五千户，撤销以前所封的食邑。
English: After flattening the cocoon, Gao Zu also determined that there were a total of five thousand households in the food villages of Gu Yin, and revoked the previously sealed food villages.

古文：凡从得二千石二人，别破军十六，降城四十六，定国一，郡二，县五十二，得将军二人，柱国、相国各一人，二千石十人。
现代文：在历次大战中，灌婴总计随高帝俘获二千石的官吏二人，另外自己率部击破敌军十六支，降服城池四十六座，平定了一个诸侯国、两个郡、五十二个县，俘获将军二人，柱国、相国各一人，二千石的官吏十人。
English: In all the wars, Emperor Gao and Guan Yu captured a total of two officials with a total of 2,000 koku. In addition, Guan Yu led his troops to defeat 16 enemy armies, conquered 46 cities and towns, subdued one vassal state, two counties and 52 counties, captured two generals, one pillar state and one sister state, and ten officials with 2,000 koku.

古文：婴自破布归，高帝崩，婴以列侯事孝惠帝及吕太后。
现代文：灌婴在打败了黥布回到京城时，高帝去世了。灌婴就以列侯之职侍奉孝惠帝和吕太后。
English: When Emperor Gao died, Guanzhong defeated Zengbu and returned to the capital. Guanzhong served Emperor Xiao Hui and Empress Dowager Lv as a vassal.

古文：太后崩，吕禄等以赵王自置为将军，军长安，为乱。
现代文：太后去世以后，吕禄等人以赵王的身份自置为将军，驻军长安，妄图发动叛乱。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, Lulu and others, using the identity of King Zhao, set themselves up as generals and garrisoned Chang'an, in a vain attempt to start a rebellion.

古文：齐哀王闻之，举兵西，且入诛不当为王者。
现代文：齐哀王刘襄得知此事以后，发兵西进向京城而来，说要杀死不应该为王的人。
English: After Liu Xiang, the king of Qi Lai, learned of this, he sent an army westward to the capital, saying that he wanted to kill the man who should not be king.

古文：上将军吕禄等闻之，乃遣婴为大将，将军往击之。
现代文：上将军吕禄等人听说之后，就派遣灌婴为大将，带领军队前去阻击。
English: After hearing of this, Shang general Lü Lu and others sent Guan Yu as a general to lead the army to block the advance.

古文：婴行至荥阳，乃与绛侯等谋，因屯兵荥阳，风齐王以诛吕氏事，齐兵止不前。
现代文：灌婴来到荥阳，就和绛侯周勃等人商议，决定大军暂时在荥阳驻扎，向齐哀王暗中示意准备诛杀吕氏的事，齐兵因此也就屯兵不前。
English: When Guan Yu came to Fenyang, he discussed with Zhou Bo and others and decided to temporarily station a large army in Fenyang. He secretly signaled to Qie Er Wang that he was preparing to kill the Lv clan. As a result, the Qie soldiers did not advance.

古文：绛侯等既诛诸吕，齐王罢兵归，婴亦罢兵自荥阳归，与绛侯、陈平共立代王为孝文皇帝。
现代文：绛侯周勃等人杀死诸吕之后，齐王收兵回到封地。灌婴也收兵从荥阳回到京城，和周勃，陈平共同立代王为孝文皇帝。
English: After the warlord Zhou Bo and others killed Zhu Lu, the king of Qi gathered troops and returned to his fief. Guan Yu also gathered troops from Shenyang and returned to the capital. Together with Zhou Bo and Chen Ping, he established the king as Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：孝文皇帝於是益封婴三千户，赐黄金千斤，拜为太尉。
现代文：孝文皇帝于是就给灌婴加封食邑三千户，赐给黄金一千斤，同时任命他为太尉。
English: Emperor Xiaowen then added 3,000 households in Guanzhong to Guanzhong, gave him 1,000 jin of gold, and appointed him captain.

古文：三岁，绛侯勃免相就国，婴为丞相，罢太尉官。
现代文：三年以后，绛侯周勃免除丞相职务回到自己封地上去了，灌婴担任丞相，撤销了太尉之职。
English: Three years later, Gonghou Zhou Bo was relieved of his duties as chancellor and returned to his fiefdom, where he served as chancellor and revoked his position as captain.

古文：是岁，匈奴大入北地、上郡，令丞相婴将骑八万五千往击匈奴。
现代文：这一年，匈奴大举入侵北地、上郡，皇帝命丞相灌婴带领骑兵八万五千人，前去迎击匈奴。
English: In that year, the Huns made a large-scale invasion of the north and the upper counties. The emperor ordered the prime minister, Guan Yu, to lead 85,000 cavalry and go to meet the Huns.

古文：匈奴去，济北王反，诏乃罢婴之兵。
现代文：匈奴逃跑之后，济北王刘兴居造反，皇帝下命令灌婴收兵回京。
English: After the Xiongnu fled, Liu Xingju, the king of Northern Jilin, rebelled, and the emperor ordered him to gather his troops and return to Beijing.

古文：後岁馀，婴以丞相卒，谥曰懿侯。
现代文：又过了一年多，灌婴死在丞相任上，谥号为懿侯。
English: More than a year later, Kaneko died while serving as chancellor, and his posthumous name was Shoko.

古文：子平侯阿代侯。
现代文：儿子平侯灌阿继承了侯位。
English: His son, Ping Guan Ah, succeeded to the throne.

古文：二十八年卒，子彊代侯。
现代文：二十八年以后死去，儿子灌强继承侯位。
English: He died twenty-eight years later, and his son Kanchō succeeded to the post.

古文：十三年，彊有罪，绝二岁。
现代文：十三年之后，因为灌强有罪，侯位中断了两年。
English: Thirteen years later, he was found guilty of coercion and his tenure was suspended for two years.

古文：元光三年，天子封灌婴孙贤为临汝侯，续灌氏後，八岁，坐行赇有罪，国除。
现代文：元光三年，天子封灌婴的孙子灌贤为临汝侯，让他作为灌婴的继承人。八年之后，灌贤因犯行贿罪，封国被撤消。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, the grandson of the emperor's son, Guanxian, was crowned prince, making him Guanxian's heir. Eight years later, Guanxian was stripped of his title for the crime of bribery.

古文：太史公曰：吾適丰沛，问其遗老，观故萧、曹、樊哙、滕公之家，及其素，异哉所闻！
现代文：太史公说：我曾经到过丰沛，访问当地的遗老，观看原来萧何、曹参、樊哙、滕公居住的地方，打听他们当年的有关故事，所听到的真是令人惊异呀！
English: Taishigong said, "I once went to Fengpei to visit the local elders, to see the places where Xiao He, Cao Zhan, Yao and Tenggong used to live, and to ask them about their stories of that year. What I heard was really amazing!"

古文：方其鼓刀屠狗卖缯之时，岂自知附骥之尾，垂名汉廷，德流子孙哉？
现代文：当他们操刀杀狗或贩卖丝缯的时候，难道他们就能知道日后能附骥尾，垂名汉室，德惠传及子孙吗？
English: When they kill a dog with a sword or sell silk cocoons, can they know that they will be able to attach appendices, be called Han, pass down virtues and descendants?

古文：余与他广通，为言高祖功臣之兴时若此云。
现代文：我和樊哙的孙子樊他广有过交往，他和我谈的高祖的功臣们开始起家时的事迹，就是以上我所记述的这些。
English: I have had extensive dealings with Gao's grandson Gao Da, and what he told me about the exploits of Gao Zu's heroes when they started their families is what I have described above.

