古文：乔行简范钟游似赵葵谢方叔
现代文：乔行简，字寿朋，婺州东阳人。
English: Qiao Xingjian, Zi Shoufeng, Zhangzhou Dongyang people.

古文：乔行简，字寿朋，婺州东阳人。学于吕祖谦之门。
现代文：从学于吕祖谦的门下。
English: He studied under Lu Zuqian.

古文：登绍熙四年进士第。
现代文：考中绍熙四年的进士。
English: In the middle school entrance examination, Shaoxi was the top student for four years.

古文：历官知通州，条上便民事。
现代文：历任官职为通州知州、条上便民事。
English: He has held various posts in Tongzhou, Zhizhou, and civil affairs.

古文：主管户部架阁，召试馆职，为秘书省正字兼枢密院编修官。
现代文：主管户部架阁，召为试馆职，担任秘书省正字兼枢密院编修官。
English: The head of the Household Department, Kikaku, was called to the position of the exam hall, and served as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice and the editor of the Privy Council.

古文：升秘书郎，为淮西转运判官，知嘉兴府。
现代文：升任秘书郎，担任淮南西路转运判官，为嘉兴府知府。
English: He was promoted to secretary, served as the judge of Huainan West Road transfer, and was the governor of Jiaxing Prefecture.

古文：改淮南转运判官兼淮西提点刑狱、提举常平。
现代文：改任淮南转运判官，兼做淮西提点刑狱、提举常平官。
English: He was appointed as the judge of Huainan transshipment, and concurrently served as the official of Huaxi to commute the sentence to prison, and the official of Huainan to raise the rank of general.

古文：言金有必亡之形，中国宜静以观变。
现代文：论说金国有必定灭亡的趋势，宋朝最好静待以观时势的变化。
English: On the subject of the trend of the inevitable demise of the Kim dynasty, it is best for the Song dynasty to wait and see how the situation changes.

古文：因列上备边四事。
现代文：因此上奏论述防备边患的四件大事。
English: Therefore, the report discusses four major issues for the prevention of border diseases.

古文：会近臣有主战者，师遂出，金人因破蕲、黄。
现代文：恰好遇近臣有主张与金相战的人，军队于是出击，金兵因此攻破蕲州、黄州。
English: When a close retainer happened to meet someone who advocated fighting against Jin, the army then attacked, and the Jin soldiers thus broke through Zhangzhou and Huangzhou.

古文：移浙西提点刑狱兼知镇江府。
现代文：调任浙西提点刑狱，兼任镇江府知府。
English: He was transferred to the West Zhejiang Tidying Point Penitentiary and concurrently served as the governor of Zhenjiang Prefecture.

古文：迁起居郎兼国子司业，兼国史编修、实录检讨，兼侍讲。
现代文：迁升起居郎兼任国子司业，兼任国史编修、实录检讨官，兼任侍讲。
English: Jiro, who had been promoted, concurrently served as Kokushi no Tsukasa, editor of national history, official reviewer of historical records, and assistant lecturer.

古文：寻迁宗正少卿、秘书监，权工部侍郎，皆任兼职。
现代文：不久，迁升宗正少卿、秘书监，代理工部侍郎，都是担任兼职。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Junior Secretary, Secretary Supervisor, and Acting Chamberlain of the Engineering Department, all of which were part-time positions.

古文：理宗即位，行简贻书丞相史弥远，请帝法孝宗行三年丧。
现代文：理宗即位的时候，乔行简赠送书信给丞相史弥远，请求理宗效法孝宗行服三年丧期。
English: When Risso ascended the throne, Qiao Xingjian presented a letter to Prime Minister Shi Yanyuan, requesting that Risso follow the example of Emperor Xiaozong and observe a three-year mourning period.

古文：应诏上疏曰：
现代文：应诏令上疏说：
English: In response to the Imperial edict, the following was said:

古文：求贤、求言二诏之颁，果能确守初意，深求实益，则人才振而治本立，国威张而奸宄销。
现代文： 寻求贤才、寻求佳言二个诏令的颁布，果然能够如实地坚守最初的意思，广泛地征求而寻求实际的利益，那么人才就会振兴而求治的根本就会树立，国家的权威就会扩张而奸臣坏人就会销声匿迹。
English: The promulgation of the two edicts of seeking talents and seeking good words can truly adhere to the original meaning, widely solicit and seek practical benefits, then the talents will be revitalized and the foundation of seeking solutions will be established, the authority of the country will expand and the traitors will disappear.

古文：臣窃观近事，似或不然。
现代文：我暗中观察近来发生的事情，似乎不是这样。
English: That doesn't seem to be the case from what I've been surreptitiously observing lately.

古文：夫自侍从至郎官凡几人，自监司至郡守凡几人，今其所举贤能才识之士又不知其几人也，陛下盖尝摭其一二欲召用之矣。
现代文：自侍从到郎官共多少个人，从监司到郡守共多少个人，现在所推举的贤能、有才有识的士大夫又不知道有多少人了，陛下大概曾经选择其中的几个想召录采用他们。
English: I don't know how many people there are in total, from self-servants to stewards, from supervisors to county governors, and I don't know how many there are of the capable and insightful magistrates who are currently being elected. His Majesty probably once selected a few of them and wanted to recruit them.

古文：凡内外小大之臣囊封来上，或直或巽，或切或泛，无所不有，陛下亦尝摭其一二见之施行且褒赏之矣。
现代文：只要是朝廷内外不论大小官吏密封奏折上疏，有的忠直，有的曲徇，有的切中要害，有的泛泛而谈，各种各类，无所不有，陛下也曾经选择一二件看启并按上面奏请的去做，又对此进行褒奖、赏赐。
English: As long as the officials inside and outside the Imperial Court, no matter how big or small, play their cards close to the vest, some are loyal, some are devious, some are to the point, some are general, there are all kinds, there is everything. His Majesty has also chosen one or two things to see and do according to the above request, and has also praised and rewarded them.

古文：而天下终疑陛下之为具文。
现代文：而天下众人终究还是怀疑陛下只是徒具形式而已。
English: After all, everyone in the world still suspects that His Majesty is just a mere formality.

古文：盖以所召者，非久无宦情决不肯来之人，则年已衰暮决不可来之人耳。
现代文： 大概因此而被召用的人，不是长期不愿做官是决不会答应被召用的，就是年老岁暮因而是决不可能被召用的人。
English: Probably for this reason, those who are called are not those who have long been unwilling to work as officials and will never agree to be called, or those who can never be called because of old age.

古文：彼风节素著、持正不阿、廉介有守、临事不挠者，论荐虽多，固未尝收拾而召之也。
现代文：那些高风亮节，早就闻名遐迩，主持正义，不阿谀奉承，廉洁、耿介，操行有守，处事有主见的人，虽然议论荐举的人很多，却本来就没有选择而召用他们。
English: Although there are a lot of people who talk about the recommendation, those who have been famous for a long time, preside over justice, do not flatter, are incorruptible, principled, conduct themselves well, and have their own opinions, have no choice but to use them.

古文：其所施行褒赏者，往往皆末节细故，无关于理乱，粗述古今，不至于抵触，然后取之以示吾有听受之意。
现代文：那些所给予褒扬和奖赏的人，往往都只是支末小事，不关系到天理、治乱，粗略地论述古今之事，只是没有相互抵触的事情，然后选取它以表明我有听从、接受的意思。
English: Those who give praise and reward are often just trifles, not related to the laws of nature and the management of chaos, roughly discussing ancient and modern things, but things that do not conflict with each other, and then selecting it to show that I have the will to obey and accept.

古文：其间亦岂无深忧远识高出众见之表，忠言至计有补圣听之聪者，固未闻采纳而用之也。
现代文：其实，各种意见中间难道没有深忧远虑、高见卓识超出一般众人的议论，或忠诚、正直之言有补益于圣上的智慧的奏文吗？只是一直没有听说被采纳而加以使用的。
English: Are there not, indeed, among opinions, discourses of deep thought, of lofty wisdom, beyond the common run of men; or are not the words of truth and sincerity, the contributions of sacred wisdom, but never heard, received, and applied?

古文：自陛下临御至今，班行之彦，麾节之臣，有因论列而去，有因自请而归。
现代文： 自从陛下即位到现在，班列朝中的大臣，率兵在外的将帅，有的因议论弹劾离职，有的因为自己请求离职归乡。
English: From the time of His Majesty's ascension to the present, the ministers in the middle of the line of succession and the generals who led the troops outside have left their posts, some because of the debate on impeachment, and some because they requested to leave their posts and return home.

古文：其人或以职业有闻，或以言语自见，天下未知其得罪之由，徒见其置散投闲，倏来骤去，甚至废罢而镌褫，削夺而流窜，皆以为陛下黜远善士，厌恶直言。
现代文：其中，有的人因为一技之长而闻名于外，有的以言语文章匡正朝政，天下不知道他们所犯的罪过及其原因，只是看到了他们被放置不用，处于闲散境地，悠闲地来来往往，或聚或散，甚至被废弃罢免而剥夺职务，削职夺位而被流放，都以为陛下是斥黜善良的官吏，不喜欢忠直的言论。
English: Among them, some people are well-known to the outside world because of their skill, and some use words and articles to rectify the government. The world does not know the sins they have committed and the reasons for them, but they only saw that they were left unused, in an idle situation, leisurely coming and going, or gathering or dispersing, and even being abandoned and dismissed and deprived of their posts, cutting their posts and taking their places and being exiled. They all thought that His Majesty was a good-natured official and did not like honest speech.

古文：去者遂以此而得名，朝廷乃因是而致谤，其亦何便于此。
现代文：离职而去的人于是因此而得到了好的名声，而朝廷则因此而受到了诽谤，为什么会导致这样呢？
English: The man who left office gained a good reputation for it, and the court was slandered for it. Why did it lead to this?

古文：夫贤路当广而不当狭，言路当开而不当塞，治乱安危，莫不由此。
现代文：寻求贤才的言路应当广泛而不应当狭隘，听取臣民呼声的言路应当放开而不应当堵塞，国家的治与乱、安与危，都是因此而引起的。 
English: The way to seek the wise should be broad and not narrow, and the way to listen to the voice of the people should be open and not blocked. The country's rule and chaos, peace and danger, are all caused by this.

古文：又言： 敬天命，伸士气。 时帝移御清燕殿，行简奏 愿加畏谨 ，且言： 群贤方集，愿勿因济王议异同，致有涣散。 升兼侍读，兼国子祭酒、吏部侍郎，权礼部尚书。权刑部尚书，拜端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事，进签书枢密院事。
现代文：又说： 敬奉天命，伸张士气。 当时理宗皇帝迁移御座于清燕殿，乔行简奏道 ：希望皇上能够谨慎一些。 又说 ：众多贤才刚刚集中，希望不要因为济王议论有不同的意见，以致人心涣散。 升任兼职侍读，兼任国子祭酒、吏部侍郎，任礼部尚书、刑部尚书，拜为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事，进升为签枢密院事。
English: He also said, "Respect the Mandate of Heaven and boost morale." At that time, Emperor Rizong moved the throne to the Qingyan Palace, Qiao Xingjian said, "I hope the emperor can be more cautious." He also said, "Many sages have just gathered, I hope that people's hearts will not be scattered because the king has different opinions." He was promoted to a part-time attendant, concurrently served as the attendant of the National Children's Festival, the attendant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the attendant of the Ministry of Justice, the attendant of the Ministry of Justice, and the

古文：太后崩，疏言：
现代文：太后死了，乔行简上疏说：
English: When the empress dowager died, Qiao Xingjian said:

古文：向者，陛下内廷举动，皆有禀承。
现代文： 过去，陛下宫廷的一举一动，都有禀告承请。
English: In the past, every move of His Majesty's court has been subject to obituary notices.

古文：小人纵有蛊惑干求之心，犹有所忌惮而不敢发，今者，安能保小人之不萌是心？
现代文：小人即使有蛊惑人心、干预政事的打算，还是有所顾忌、害怕而不敢去做，现在，哪能保证小人又不萌生这样的心事呢？
English: Even if the villain has the intention of demagoguing and interfering in political affairs, he still has scruples and is afraid and does not dare to do it. Now, how can we ensure that the villain does not have such thoughts?

古文：陛下又安能保圣心之不无少肆？
现代文：陛下又哪能保证自己的圣贤之意而没有稍许的任意妄为呢？
English: And how can His Majesty guarantee that he is acting in accordance with the will of the sages and not in the slightest arbitrary manner?

古文：陛下为天下君，当懋建皇极，一循大公，不私应徇小人为其所误。
现代文：陛下是天下的君主，应当勤勉建立起皇帝的权威，一心一意地循例处理天下的公务，而不应怀私心被小人的行为有所误导。
English: His Majesty is the monarch of the world. He should diligently establish the authority of the emperor, and single-mindedly handle the official business of the world according to the rules, and should not be misled by the actions of villains with selfishness.

古文：凡为此者，皆戚畹肺肝之亲，近习贵幸之臣，奔走使令之辈。
现代文： 凡是这样做的小人，都是皇亲国戚之类的至亲，受宠佞幸的大臣，奔走传令于宫中的宦官等人。
English: All the villains who do this are close relatives of the emperor, such as relatives of the country, favored and fortunate ministers, eunuchs and others who rush to the palace.

古文：外取货财，内坏纲纪。
现代文：他们在外面掠取货物钱财，在朝中破坏法纪纲常。
English: They plunder goods and money outside the country, and undermine the law and order in the DPRK.

古文：上以罔人君之聪明，来天下之怨谤；下以挠官府之公道，乱民间之曲直。
现代文：对上欺骗陛下的聪明圣断，以致招来天下的怨恨诽谤，对下扰乱官府的法律公道，混乱了民间百姓们的是非曲直。
English: On the one hand, they deceived His Majesty's wise and holy judgment, which caused the world's resentment and slander; on the other hand, they disrupted the legal justice of the government and confused the rights and wrongs of the people.

古文：纵而不已，其势必至于假采听之言而伤动善类，设众人之誉而进拔憸人，借纳忠效勤之意而售其阴险巧佞之奸。
现代文：如果放纵他们，不予制止，那么，发展的趋势一定会导致假借采纳别人的言论而伤害善良之士，虚设众人的赞誉而提拔奸险小人，借口接纳忠言、效法勤政的意思而实行自己阴险、阿谀奉承、争宠的目的。
English: If they are indulged and left unchecked, then the trend of development will surely lead to harming good people by pretending to adopt the words of others, promoting treacherous villains by falsifying the praise of many people, and carrying out their own insidious, flattering and favor-seeking purposes on the pretext of accepting loyal advice and following the will of diligent governance.

古文：日积月累，气势益张，人主之威权，将为所窃弄而不自知矣。
现代文：天长日久，日积月累，气势日益扩张，皇上的威风与势力，就会被窃取、玩弄而还不知道。
English: With the passage of time, the accumulation of time, and the increasing expansion of power, the emperor's prestige and power will be stolen and toyed with without knowing it.

古文：陛下衰绖在身，愈当警戒，宫庭之间既无所严惮，嫔御之人又视昔众多，以春秋方富之年，居声色易纵之地，万一于此不能自制，必于盛德大有亏损。
现代文： 陛下现正在服丧期间，越是应当警惕防备，后宫与朝廷之间既没有严格的法律约束，妃嫔、侍御等人与过去相比增加了很多，陛下现在正当青春的年华，血气方刚，居处于容易放纵声色的地方，万一在这个方面不能自我克制，一定会对皇上的德行造成很大的污损。
English: Your Majesty is now in the period of mourning, the more you should be alert and prepared. There is no strict legal constraint between the harem and the imperial court. The number of concubines, attendants and other people has increased a lot compared to the past. Your Majesty is now in the prime of youth, full of vigor, living in a place where it is easy to indulge in lust. If you cannot exercise self-restraint in this regard, it will certainly cause great damage to the emperor's moral conduct.

古文：愿陛下常加警省。
现代文：希望陛下常常对此加以警惕、反省。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will always be vigilant and reflect on this.

古文：又论火灾求言，乞取其切者付外行之。
现代文：又论就火灾听取寻求意见，请求挑选其中切中要害的吩咐外面实行。
English: On the other hand, the order to listen to and seek opinions on the fire, and to request the selection of the key points should be carried out outside.

古文：又论许国不当换文资，其当虑者有五；郑损不当帅蜀。
现代文：又论说许国不应当更换文资，其中值得忧虑的有五点；郑损不应当担任蜀地的将帅。
English: It is also said that Xu Guo should not replace the cultural assets, of which there are five points that are worth worrying about; Zheng Zi should not serve as the commander of Shu.

古文：又言： 时青者，以官则国家之节度，以人则边陲之大将，一旦遽为李全所戕，是必疑其终为我用，虑变生肘腋，故先其未发驱除之。
现代文：又说 ：时青这个人，作为官，是国家的节度使，作为人，是国家边陲之地的大将，突然间被李全所杀，一定是怀疑他始终被我们所用，怕发生肘腋之变，所以在事变发生之前而除掉了他。
English: He also said, "This person, Ji Qing, as an official, was the state's military commander, and as a person, was the general of the country's borderlands. He was suddenly killed by Li Quan. There must have been a suspicion that he had always been used by us, fearing a change of power, so we got rid of him before the incident occurred.

古文：窃意军中必有愤激思奋之人，莫若乘势就淮阴一军拔其尤者以护其师，然后明指杀青者之姓名，俾之诛戮，加赠恤之典于青，则其势自分，而吾得籍此以制之，则可折其奸心而存吾之大体。
现代文：我的意思是军队中间一定有对此愤慨、思量奋起有为的人，不如趁这种状况在淮阴一军中选拔优秀的人才以掌握好军队，然后明确地指出杀害时青的人的姓名，判处他死刑，对时青追加封赏，那么，军队中的势力就会自然分解，而我们就可以凭借这一点以驾驭它们，那么我们就可以减损奸恶之心而保存我们的主体。
English: What I mean is that there must be some people in the army who are indignant and thoughtful about this. It is better to take advantage of this situation to select outstanding talents in the Huaiyin First Army to master the army, and then clearly point out the name of the person who killed Shi Qing, sentence him to death, and add a reward to Shi Qing. Then the forces in the army will naturally disintegrate, and we can use this to control them. Then we can reduce the evil heart and preserve our main body.

古文：不然，跋扈者专杀而不敢诛，有功者见杀而不敢诉，彼知朝廷一用柔道而威断不施，乌保其不递相视效？
现代文：不然的话，专横跋扈的人专擅滥杀而不敢处他死刑，有功的人被杀而不敢申诉，他们知道朝廷一贯使用柔弱的法道而不敢实行果断的威严，谁敢保证这样而不会有人接连地效法呢？
English: Otherwise, high-handed people will kill indiscriminately without daring to impose the death penalty on him, meritorious people will be killed without daring to appeal, and they know that the court has always used a weak legal way without daring to implement decisive majesty. Who can guarantee that this will not be followed by others?

古文：则其所当虑者，不独李全一人而已。 
现代文：那么，这样值得忧虑的人，就不仅仅是李全一个人了。 
English: Li Quan isn't the only one with cause for concern, then.

古文：又言： 山阳民散财殚，非凶贼久安之地，当日夜为鸱张之计。
现代文：又说 ：山阳民众散去，钱财耗尽，不是凶残之贼长久安居的地方，应当夜以继日地准备讨伐之事。
English: He also said: The people of the mountains and the sun have dispersed, money and wealth have been exhausted, and it is not a place for vicious thieves to live safely for a long time. It is necessary to prepare for the crusade day and night.

古文：扬州城坚势壮，足以坐制全淮，此曹未必无窥伺之心，或为所入，则淮东俱非我有，不可不先为之虑也。 又请屯驻重兵海道，内为吴、越之捍蔽，外为南北之限制。
现代文：扬州城邑坚固，威势雄壮，驻此足以坐镇全淮之地，这些凶贼未必没有窥伺掠取的打算，假如被他们占领，那么淮东就全部不属于我们所有，不可不事先为此考虑。 又请求以重兵屯守驻防沿海一带，对内可作为吴越之地的屏障，对外可以作为南北分界的界线。
English: Yangzhou's cities and towns are solid and powerful, and it is enough to stay here to occupy the whole country. These thugs may not have the intention to spy and plunder. If they occupy, then Huaidong will not belong to us all, and we must consider this in advance. He also requested that heavy troops be stationed along the coast, which can be used as a barrier to the interior of Wuyue, and can be used as a dividing line between the north and the south.

古文：又论： 李全攻围泰州，剿除之兵今不可已。
现代文：又议论说： 李全围攻泰州，围剿他的军事行动不可松懈。
English: He also said: Li Quan besieged Taizhou, and the military operations to encircle him must not be slackened.

古文：此贼气貌无以逾人，未必有长算深谋，直剽捍勇决，能长雄于其党耳，况其守泗之西城则失西城，守下邳则失下邳，守青社则失青社，既又降北，此特败军之将。
现代文：这个贼首气质相貌跟一般人差不多，未必有深谋远虑和长久的打算，仅仅是剽悍凶猛，能够称雄于他们的党羽之中。况且，他们驻守泗州之西城就失掉西城，驻守下邳就失掉了下邳，驻守青社就失掉了青社，既而又投降北方蒙古，真可谓是败军之将。
English: This bandit chief's temperament and appearance were similar to that of an ordinary person. He did not necessarily have forethought and long-term plans. He was merely fierce and ferocious, able to dominate their followers. Moreover, when they were stationed in the western city of Zhangzhou, they lost the western city, when they were stationed in the lower city, they lost the lower city, when they were stationed in the youth organization, they lost the youth organization, and when they surrendered to northern Mongolia, they were truly defeated.

古文：十年之内，自白丁至三孤，功薄报丰，反背义忘恩，此天理人情之所共愤，惟决意行之。 后皆如行简所料。
现代文：十年的时间内，从贫穷的白丁到富贵的三孤，功劳很少，报赏很多，反而忘恩负义，这是天理人情都感到愤怒而不能容忍的，希望决断，采取行动。 此后，都像乔行简所预料的那样。
English: Over a period of ten years, from the poor Paiting to the rich Sanko, the merits are few, the rewards are many, but the ingratitude is intolerable, which is the reason for human beings to feel angry and intolerant, and hope to make a decision and take action.

古文：拜参知政事兼知枢密院事。
现代文：乔行简官任参知政事、兼任知枢密院事。
English: Qiao Xingjian was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and concurrently as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：时议收复三京，行简在告，上疏曰：
现代文：当时人们议论收复南京、东京、西京三京，乔行简知道了这件事后，上疏说：
English: At that time, people were talking about the recovery of Nanjing, Tokyo, and the three western capitals. After Qiao Xingjian learned about this, Shangsuo said:

古文：八陵有可朝之路，中原有可复之机，以大有为之资，当有可为之会，则事之有成，固可坐而策也。
现代文： 北宋巩县八陵有可以祭祀、朝拜的道路，中原之地有可以恢复的机会，以大有所为的资本，遇到大有可为的机会，那么，事情就会取得成功，本来是可以借此商量计策的。
English: The eight mausoleums in Gong County of the Northern Song Dynasty have a road that can be used for worship and pilgrimage, and the Central Plains have an opportunity to recover. With the capital that can do a lot of things, if there is an opportunity to do a lot of things, then things will be successful, and it would have been possible to use this to discuss strategies.

古文：臣不忧出师之无功，而忧事力之不可继。
现代文：我不是担心出师而不能取得成功，而是担心我们进行这个事情的力量无以为继。
English: It's not that I'm worried that we're going to fail, I'm worried that we're not going to be able to do this.

古文：有功而至于不可继，则其忧始深矣。
现代文：有功绩而导致不可继续进行下去，那么，这个忧虑就很大了。
English: If there is merit in not going ahead, then that is a big worry.

古文：夫自古英君，必先治内而后治外。
现代文：从古代的英明君主来看，一定是首先治理国内的事情而后治理外部的事情。
English: Judging from the wise monarchs of ancient times, they must first govern domestic affairs and then govern external affairs.

古文：陛下视今日之内治，其已举乎，其未举乎？
现代文：陛下看看今天国内事情的治理，是已经进行了呢？
English: Your Majesty, look at the management of domestic affairs today. Has it been carried out?

古文：向未揽权之前，其敞凡几？
现代文：还是没有进行呢？过去没有掌握权力之前，有多少弊端存在？
English: Or did it not take place? How many abuses were there in the past before power was seized?

古文：今既亲政之后，其已更新者凡几？
现代文：现在已经亲自掌握政权之后，又有多少弊端已经革除了呢？
English: Now that you have personally taken over the reins of power, how many evils have you eliminated?

古文：欲用君子，则其志未尽伸；欲去小人，则其心未尽革。
现代文：想任用君子，而其志向则没有全部伸展；想除去小人，而其私心则没有全部革除。
English: He wants to appoint a gentleman, but his ambition is not fully developed; he wants to remove a villain, but his selfishness is not completely eliminated.

古文：上有厉精更始之意，而士大夫之苟且不务任责者自若。
现代文：皇上有励精图治、革故鼎新的打算，而士大夫官员们则以苟且因循、得过且过度日。
English: The emperor had the intention of working hard to reform and revolutionize the old ways, while the officials of the Shidafu followed the old ways and worked too hard.

古文：朝廷有禁包苴、戒贪墨之令，而州县之黩货不知盈厌者自如。
现代文：朝廷有禁止贿赂公行、戒除贪污腐化的法令，而州县地方官吏则照样一如既往地贪污纳贿贪得无厌。
English: The imperial court has decrees prohibiting public bribery and preventing corruption, while local officials in prefectures and counties are still as greedy as ever for bribes.

古文：欲行楮令，则外郡之新券虽低价而莫售；欲平物价，则京师之百货视旧直而不殊。
现代文：想推行纸币，而外地州郡的新货币券虽然价格低廉但却不能售出；想平抑物价，而京师之地的各种物品与原有的价格相比却没有什么不同。
English: They want to introduce paper money, but they can't sell the new currency notes from outlying prefectures and counties, even though the prices are low; they want to stabilize prices, but the various goods in Beijing and Shandong Province are no different from the original prices.

古文：纪纲法度，多颓弛而未张；赏刑号令，皆玩视而不肃。
现代文：法纪纲常，多被破坏、废弛而不能伸张执行；有关奖赏、刑罚的号令，都被视而不见，不当作一回事。
English: Most of the laws and regulations have been destroyed or scrapped and cannot be enforced; orders on rewards and punishments have been ignored and are not taken seriously.

古文：此皆陛下国内之臣子，犹令之而未从，作之而不应，乃欲阖辟乾坤，混一区宇，制奸雄而折戎狄，其能尽如吾意乎？
现代文：这些都是国内的朝臣官吏所为，好比命令已下而没有人听从，有所行动而没有人呼应，于是想开辟天地乾坤，统一全国疆土，制止奸雄而使戎狄折服，这样做能够尽如人意取得预期的效果吗？
English: These are all the actions of domestic courtiers and officials. It's as if an order has been issued but no one has obeyed it, an action has been taken but no one has responded to it, so they want to open up the world, unify the national territory, stop the traitors and make the troops submit to them. Can this achieve the desired effect as desired?

古文：此臣之所忧者一也。
现代文：这是我所担忧的第一件事情。
English: That's the first thing I worry about.

古文：自古帝王，欲用其民者，必先得其心以为根本。
现代文： 古代帝王，想号令使用民众，一定首先得获取他们的真心拥护以此作为治国的根本。
English: The ancient emperors, who wanted to command the use of the people, must first obtain their sincere support as the basis for governing the country.

古文：数十年来，上下皆怀利以相接，而不知有所谓义。
现代文：几十年以来，朝廷上下都心怀私利，代代如此，而不知道还有所谓 仁义 。
English: For decades, the imperial court, from top to bottom, has been pursuing selfish interests, generation after generation, without knowing the so-called benevolence and righteousness.

古文：民方憾于守令，缓急岂有效死勿去之人；卒不爱其将校，临陈岂有奋勇直前之士。
现代文：民众对地方的州守县令表示失望，在急难之时，哪里会有效死力的人呢；士卒不喜欢自己的将帅，临阵哪里会有奋勇向前的士兵呢。
English: The people are disappointed with the local prefectural governors. In a time of emergency, where will the effective death-defying force come from? The soldiers do not like their generals. Where will there be soldiers to fight bravely in the front line?

古文：蓄怨含愤，积于平日，见难则避，遇敌则奔，惟利是顾，皇恤其他。
现代文：积蓄怨恨，心怀激愤，是长期日积月累而成，看见困难就避开，遇到敌人就逃跑，唯利是图，对其他事情则不关心。
English: Resentment and resentment are built up over a long period of time. They avoid difficulties when they see them, run away when they encounter enemies, seek profit, and do not care about other things.

古文：人心如此，陛下曾未有以转移固结之，遽欲驱之北乡，从事于锋镝，忠义之心何由而发？
现代文：人心如此，陛下过去没有因此去改变这种状况而结交他们，而匆忙之间想驱使他们收复北方中原故土，从事于战火烽烟，忠义的心愿由什么而发生呢？
English: The hearts of the people are like this. In the past, His Majesty did not want to change this situation and befriend them. Instead, he hurriedly wanted to drive them to recover their homeland in the Central Plains of the North and engage in war. How did this loyal desire come about?

古文：况乎境内之民，困于州县之贪刻，厄于势家之兼并，饥寒之氓常欲乘时而报怨，茶盐之寇常欲伺间而窃发，萧墙之忧凛未可保。
现代文：况且，境内的民众，由于州县官吏的贪婪剥削而贫困，受豪强势宦之家的兼并掠夺而穷困，挨饿受冻的流民经常想乘机报怨，贩卖茶盐的流寇经常想等待机会而采取行动，内部的忧虑都未消除。
English: Moreover, the people in the territory are impoverished due to the greedy exploitation of the state and county officials, impoverished by the annexation and plunder of the powerful and powerful families, the starving and freezing migrants often want to take the opportunity to complain, and the smugglers selling tea and salt often want to wait for the opportunity to take action, and the internal worries have not been eliminated.

古文：万一兵兴于外，缀于强敌而不得休，潢池赤子，复有如江、闽、东浙之事，其将奈何？
现代文：万一外部发生战事，受强敌的侵扰而不得安宁，国土百姓又会遭遇到如同长江、闽地、东浙一带发生的事情，那将怎么办呢？
English: In the unlikely event that a war occurs outside, and the country's people are disturbed by the intrusion of a strong enemy and are unable to find peace, and the people of the country will encounter the same thing that happened in the Yangtze River, Shunde, and East Zhejiang, what will happen?

古文：夫民至愚而不可忽，内郡武备单弱，民之所素易也。
现代文：百姓最愚蠢而不可忽视，内地州郡的兵力武备单薄弱小，民众若有所举动是很容易的。
English: The people are the most stupid and cannot be ignored. The armed forces of the inland states and counties are weak and small, and it is easy for the people to take action.

古文：往时江、闽、东浙之寇，皆藉边兵以制之。
现代文：过去长江、闽地、东浙一带的贼寇，都是借助于边地的兵将来予以制服的。
English: In the past, the bandits in the Yangtze River, Shantou and East Zhejiang were all subdued with the help of soldiers from the border areas.

古文：今此曹犹多窜伏山谷，窥伺田里，彼知朝廷方有事于北方，其势不能以相及，宁不又动其奸心？
现代文：现在这些人多窜逃隐伏于山谷之中，窥测伺机于田野乡里，他们知道朝廷正要发动北方的战事，还来不及对付他们，难道不会又引起他们反抗朝廷的奸心吗？
English: Now, many of these people have fled and are hiding in the valleys, spying and waiting in the fields and countryside. They know that the imperial court is about to launch a war in the north, and there is no time to deal with them. Won't this cause them to rebel against the imperial court?

古文：此臣之所忧者二也。
现代文：这是我所担忧的第二件事情。
English: That's the second thing I worry about.

古文：自古英君，规恢进取，必须选将练兵，丰财足食，然后举事。
现代文： 自古以来英明的君主，图谋恢复、进取图治，必须选择将帅、训练士兵，使财富丰盛，衣食丰足，然后采取行动。
English: Since ancient times, wise monarchs have been trying to restore and advance the rule of law. They must choose generals, train soldiers, make wealth abundant, clothing and food abundant, and then take action.

古文：今边面辽阔，出师非止一途，陛下之将，足当一面者几人？
现代文：现在边地辽阔，出兵不只一条道路，陛下的将帅，能够独当一面的有几人？
English: Now the frontier is vast, there is more than one way to send troops. Your majesty's generals, how many of them can stand alone?

古文：勇而能斗者几人？
现代文：勇敢善战的有几人？
English: How many are brave and good at fighting?

古文：智而善谋者几人？
现代文：足智多谋的有几人？
English: How many of you are resourceful?

古文：非屈指得二三十辈，恐不足以备驱驰。
现代文：没有二三十人，恐怕不足以适应战场上的需求。
English: Without twenty or thirty people, I'm afraid it's not enough to meet the needs of the battlefield.

古文：陛下之兵，能战者几万？
现代文：陛下的士兵，能够作战的有几万？
English: Your Majesty's soldiers, how many thousands of them are able to fight?

古文：分道而趣京、洛者几万？
现代文：分道而取汴京、洛阳的有几万？
English: How many tens of thousands of people have made their way to Beijing and Luoyang?

古文：留屯而守淮、襄者几万？
现代文：驻扎留守淮、襄之地的需几万？
English: How many tens of thousands are needed to be stationed in Huai and Xiang?

古文：非按籍得二三十万众，恐不足以事进取。
现代文：不是按兵籍有二三十万人之众的士兵，恐怕不足以满足图取中原的需要。
English: There are not two or three hundred thousand soldiers according to the military register, which is probably not enough to meet the needs of Tutori Nakahara.

古文：借曰帅臣威望素著，以意气招徕，以功赏激劝，推择行伍即可为将，接纳降附即可为兵，臣实未知钱粮之所从出也。
现代文：假如说将帅朝臣的威望素来很高，以其诚意气度招徕，以军功奖赏激励，推举选择行伍出身的人就可作为将帅，接收降附的人即可作为士兵，我的确不知道钱财军粮可以从哪里得到。
English: If it is said that the prestige of generals and admirals has always been very high, that they are attracted by their sincerity and dignity, that they are rewarded and encouraged by military achievements, that those who are selected and selected from the military can be generals and admirals, and those who accept the surrender can be soldiers, I really do not know where the money and military food can come from.

古文：兴师十万，日费千金，千里馈粮，士有饥色。
现代文：出动军队十万人，每日花费需千金之多，千里运送粮食，士兵会呈饥饿之态。
English: To send out an army of a hundred thousand men, to spend a thousand dollars a day, to transport grain thousands of miles, the soldiers would be in a state of starvation.

古文：今之馈饷，累日不已，至于累月，累月不已，至于累岁，不知累几千金而后可以供其费也。
现代文：现在运送粮食，每天不断，以至每月如此；每月不断，以至每年如此，不知道要花费几千金才可以满足这个费用。
English: At present, grain is transported continuously every day, even every month; continuously every month, even every year. I don't know how many thousands of gold it would take to meet this cost.

古文：今百姓多垂罄之室，州县多赤立之帑，大军一动，厥费多端，其将何以给之？
现代文：现在百姓房子里盛米的器具都空了，地方州县财源枯竭，大军一出动，缺少的费用很多，那么用什么途径来供给呢？
English: Now, the rice-serving utensils in people's houses are all empty, the local state and county financial resources are exhausted, a large army is dispatched, and there are many missing expenses, so what is the way to supply?

古文：今陛下不爱金币以应边臣之求，可一而不可再，可再而不可三。
现代文：现在陛下不爱惜金帛钱财以应付边关臣僚的需求，可以一次而不可二次，可以二次而不可以三次。
English: Now, His Majesty does not like to spare money to meet the needs of border officials. He can do it once, but not twice, and twice, but not three times.

古文：再三之后，兵事未已，欲中辍则废前功，欲勉强则无事力。国既不足，民亦不堪。
现代文：多次之后，兵戎战事还没有结束，想中途停止就废弃了前面的功绩，想勉强继续维持又缺乏进行的物质能力，国财既不够用，民众也不堪负担。
English: After many times, the military war has not yet ended. If you want to stop halfway, you will abandon the previous achievements. If you want to continue to maintain it reluctantly, you lack the material capacity to carry it out. National wealth is not enough, and the people are unbearable.

古文：臣恐北方未可图，而南方已先骚动矣。
现代文：我担心北方还没有图取，而南方已经发生骚乱。
English: I'm worried that the north hasn't been mapped yet and the south is already in turmoil.

古文：中原蹂践之余，所在空旷，纵使东南有米可运，然道里辽远，宁免乏绝，由淮而进，纵有河渠可通，宁无盗贼邀取之患？
现代文：中原在惨遭蹂躏践踏之后，到处是一片空旷，即使东南有粮食可以运送，然而道路遥远，难道可以免除困乏穷绝；从淮地运送粮食，即使有河道水路可以通行，难道没有盗贼拦路抢劫的祸患？
English: After the Central Plains were devastated and trampled, there is an empty space everywhere. Even if there is grain in the southeast that can be transported, but the road is far away, can it be exempted from poverty and exhaustion? If grain is transported from Huaiyi, even if there is a river waterway that can be passed, is there no thief blocking the road and robbing?

古文：由襄而进，必须负载二十钟而致一石，亦恐未必能达。
现代文：从襄阳运送，必须负担满载二十钟才能运送一石，也恐怕未必能够到达。
English: From Xiangyang, it takes 20 minutes to transport one stone with a full load, and it may not be able to arrive.

古文：若顿师千里之外，粮道不继，当此之时，孙、吴为谋主，韩、彭为兵帅，亦恐无以为策。
现代文：如果把军队驻扎在千里之外，运送粮草的道路不能畅通，当遇到这样的时候，就是孙武、吴起作为谋划的主将，韩信、彭越作为率兵的将领，也恐怕不能想出解决的办法。
English: If the army is stationed thousands of miles away, the road for transporting grain and grass cannot be smooth. When this happens, even Sun Wu and Wu Qi, as the master of planning, and Han Xin and Peng Yue, as the generals leading the troops, may not be able to come up with a solution.

古文：他日运粮不继，进退不能，必劳圣虑，此臣之所忧者三也。
现代文：到那一天运送粮食难以为继，前进、后退都不行，一定会劳烦圣上的思虑，这是我所担忧的第三件事情。
English: The third thing that worries me is that by that day, it will be impossible to continue transporting grain, and we will not be able to move forward or backward, which will surely wear out our sacred thoughts.

古文：愿陛下坚持圣意，定为国论，以绝纷纷之说。不果从。
现代文：希望陛下坚持您的想法，做出决定，以此断绝其他种种不同的议论。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will adhere to your thoughts and make a decision, so as to cut off all other different discussions.

古文：进知枢密院事。
现代文：结果没有被听从。进升为知枢密院事。
English: As a result, he was not listened to. He was promoted to the Privy Council.

古文：时议御阅不果，反骤汰之，殿司军哄，为之黜主帅，罢都司官，给黄榜抚存，军愈呼噪。
现代文：当时的议论皇帝看了之后没有结果，反而突然被淘汰了，殿司军兵哄乱，为此废黜了主帅，罢免了都司官，发布黄榜安抚，军兵更进一步鼓噪哄闹。
English: The discussion at that time had no result after the emperor saw it, but it was suddenly eliminated. The palace guards and soldiers were in turmoil. For this reason, the head coach was deposed, the metropolitan magistrate was dismissed, the yellow list was issued to pacify, and the soldiers were further noisy.

古文：行简以闻，戮为首者二十余人，众乃帖息。
现代文：乔行简听说以后，杀了为首的二十多人，众兵才服帖，停止闹事。
English: After Qiao Xingjian heard about it, he killed more than 20 people, including the leader. Only then did the soldiers obey and stop the riot.

古文：寻拜右丞相，言 三京挠败之余，事与前异，但当益修战守之备。
现代文：不久，拜任右丞相，说 ：西京、东京、南京三京被扰乱、打败以后，事情与前相比已不同，但应该更加注重做开战与坚守的准备。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the Minister of the Right, saying, "After the three capitals of Saikyo, Tokyo, and Nanking were disrupted and defeated, things are different from before, but we should pay more attention to preparing for war and standing firm."

古文：襄阳失守，请急收复。 或又陈进取之计，行简奏： 今内外事势可忧而不可恃者七。 言甚恳切，师得不出。
现代文：若襄阳失守了，请求迅速收复。 又有人陈述图谋进取的计划，乔行简奏道： 现在朝廷内外的状况值得忧虑而不能倚仗的有七个方面。 言辞特别真诚恳切，军队得以不出击。
English: If Xiangyang was lost, he asked for a speedy recovery. Another person stated a plan to forge ahead, Qiao Xingjian said: There are seven aspects of the current situation inside and outside the imperial court that are worrisome and cannot be relied on. The words are particularly sincere and sincere, and the army can not attack.

古文：端平三年九月，有事于明堂，大雷雨。
现代文：端平三年九月，在明堂举行典礼，天降大雷雨。
English: In September of the third year of Dengping, a ceremony was held in the Ming Hall, and a heavy thunderstorm fell from the sky.

古文：行简与郑清之并策免。
现代文：乔行简与郑清之同时被免职。
English: Qiao Xingjian and Zheng Qing were dismissed at the same time.

古文：既去，而独趣召行简还京，留之，拜左丞相。
现代文：既已离开朝廷，而单独急忙召乔行简回京，留住他，拜为左丞相。
English: Having already left the imperial court, he hurriedly summoned Qiao Xingjian back to Beijing alone, kept him, and made him the minister of the left.

古文：援韩琦故事，乞以边防、财用分委三执政，请修中兴五朝国事。
现代文：他援引韩琦的故事，请求将防边军务、财税开支分别委托给三个执政，请求编修高宗中兴以来五朝的国事史书。
English: He quoted the story of Han Xuan, and requested that the military defense affairs and fiscal and tax expenditures be separately entrusted to the three rulers, and requested the compilation of a national history book of the five dynasties since Gaozong Zhongxing.

古文：十上章请谢事。
现代文：十次上奏章请求辞职。
English: Ten times he asked to resign.

古文：嘉熙三年，拜平章军国重事，封肃国公。
现代文：嘉熙三年，拜授平章军国重事，封为肃国公。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Jiaxi, he was awarded the title of Pingzhang for military and state affairs, and was given the title of Su Guogong.

古文：每以上游重地为念，请建节度宣抚使，提兵戍夔。
现代文：每每担忧上游军事重地，请求设置节度宣抚使，调兵戍守夔州路。
English: He was worried about the upstream military strongholds, and requested to set up a special envoy and dispatch troops to guard the Zhangzhou Road.

古文：边事稍宁，复告老，章十八上。
现代文：边关军事稍为安宁，又上书告老，十八次上书给皇上。
English: The military situation at the border was a little calmer, and he wrote to the emperor 18 times to tell him he was getting old.

古文：四年，加少师、保宁军节度使、醴泉观使，封鲁国公，淳祐元年二月，薨于家，年八十六。
现代文：嘉熙四年，加封少师、保宁军节度使、醴泉观使，封为鲁国公。淳祐元年二月，死于家中，终年八十六岁。
English: In the 4th year of Jiaxi, he was awarded the title of "Junior Instructor," "Minister of the Baoding Military Festival" and "Minister of the Quanquan Contemplation," and was named the Prince of Lu. He died at home in February, 1861, at the age of 86.

古文：赠太师，谥文惠。
现代文：追赠太师，赐谥号 文惠 。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master and given the posthumous name of Wen Hui.

古文：七年，特授观文殿大学士、醴泉观使兼侍读，进爵国公。
现代文：乔行简，做事稳重，见识广远，气量宏大，在官任上无话不说。
English: Qiao Xingjian is steady in his work, has a wide range of knowledge, and has a huge amount of energy. He does not hold back when it comes to his official duties.

古文：十一年，转两官致仕，薨。特赠少师。赵葵，字南仲，京湖制置使方之子。
现代文：喜欢推荐名士，大多以后发达成为显贵，至于推举钱时、吴汝愚，又都是当时隐逸之士当中的贤能之人。他的著作有《周礼总说》、《孔山文集》。赵葵，字南仲，京湖制置使赵方的儿子。
English: He liked to recommend famous people, and most of them became prominent later. As for Wu Ruwu, he was a virtuous person among the reclusive people at that time. His works include "Zhouli Zongxuan" and "Kongshan Collection." Zhao Kwai, also known as Nan Zhong, was the son of Zhao Fang, the architect of Beijing Lake.

古文：初生时，或梦南岳神降其家。
现代文：刚出生的时候，有人梦见南岳神降临在他的家里。
English: When he was just born, someone dreamed that the god Nangyue descended on his home.

古文：方在襄阳，命葵专督饮食共养之事。
现代文：赵方在襄阳，命令赵葵专门督查饮食供养的事情。
English: Zhao Fang, in Xiangyang, ordered Zhao Kwai to specifically supervise the matter of feeding and feeding.

古文：与兄范俱有志事功，方器之，聘郑清之、全子才为之师。
现代文：与哥哥赵范都有志于事业和功绩，赵方由此器重他，聘请郑清之、全子才作为他的老师。
English: Both he and his brother Zhao Fan were interested in their careers and achievements. Zhao Fang respected him for this and hired Zheng Qingzhi, the eldest son, as his teacher.

古文：又遣从南康李燔为有用之学。
现代文：又遣送他跟随南康军李燔修业有用的学问。
English: He was also sent to study useful knowledge with Li Jun of the Southern Kangjun Army.

古文：每闻警报，与诸将偕出，遇敌则深入死战，诸将惟恐失制置子，尽死救之，屡以此获捷。
现代文：每次听到军事警报，与各位将领一齐出阵，遇到敌人就深入死战到底，各位将领惟恐失掉了制置使的儿子，全力冒死相救，多次因为这个原因获得胜利。
English: Every time he heard the military alarm, he went into battle with his generals, and when they encountered the enemy, they went deep into the death battle to the end. The generals were afraid of losing the son of the commanding officer, and they risked their lives to save him, and won victory many times because of this reason.

古文：一日，方赏将士，恩不偿劳，军欲为变。
现代文：有一天，赵方奖赏将士，恩德不能抵偿功劳，将士们想发动变乱。
English: One day, Zhao Fang rewarded the soldiers, but the reward could not compensate for the service, and the soldiers wanted to start a riot.

古文：葵时十二三，觉之，亟呼曰： 此朝廷赐也，本司别有赏赍。 军心赖一言而定，人服其机警。
现代文：赵葵当时十二三岁，察觉到这件事，急忙喊道 ：这是朝廷赏赐的，本制置使司另外还有赏赐。 军心因这一句话而稳定，人们都佩服他的机警灵敏。
English: At that time, Zhao Kwai was 12 or 13 years old. When he noticed this, he hurriedly shouted, "This is a reward from the imperial court, and there is another reward for this envoy." The military spirit was stabilized by this sentence, and people all admired his alertness and sensitivity.

古文：嘉定十年，金将高琪、乌古论庆寿犯襄阳，围枣阳。
现代文：嘉定十年，金将高琪、乌古论庆寿进犯襄阳，围困枣阳。
English: In the 10th year of Jiading, Jin sent Gao Qi and Wu Guonqing Shou to invade Yangyang and besiege Zaoyang.

古文：时边烽久熄，金兵猝至，人情震惧。
现代文：当时，边境战事已停止很久，金兵突然来进犯，人们因此感到震慑恐惧。
English: At that time, the border war had stopped for a long time, and the gold soldiers suddenly attacked, so people felt shock and fear.

古文：方帅范、葵往战，败走之。
现代文：赵方率二子赵范、赵葵前往迎战，大败而回。
English: Zhao Fang led his two sons, Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai, to meet the enemy, but they were soundly defeated.

古文：十三年，方遣葵及都统扈再兴攻金人至高头。
现代文：嘉定十三年，赵方派遣赵葵和都统扈再兴在高头进攻金人。
English: In the 13th year of Jiading, Zhao Fang sent Zhao Kwai and Du Tong Zai Xing to attack Jinren in Gaotou.

古文：高头，金人必守之处也，出劲兵拒战，葵率先锋奋击，再兴继进歼之。
现代文：高头，金兵必守的地方，派出精悍劲旅坚拒迎战，赵葵率领先锋部队奋勇出击，扈再兴接着进击歼灭金兵。
English: Gaotou, the place where the gold soldiers must defend, sent out a brave and strong brigade to resist the battle, Zhao Kwai led the leading front troops to attack bravely, and Zou Zaixing then attacked and annihilated the gold soldiers.

古文：翼日，进次邓州，金人阻沘河以拒。
现代文：第二天，进驻邓州，金兵在氵比河沿岸设障拒敌。
English: The next day, stationed in Dengzhou, the gold soldiers set up barricades along the coast of the Zoubi River to repel the enemy.

古文：葵麾军进击，杨义诸将继至，金兵亦大出合战，大破之，俘斩及降者几二万，获万户而下十数人，夺马八百，逐北直傅城下而还。
现代文：赵葵指挥宋兵前进攻击金兵，杨义等将领相继到来，金兵也倾巢出动迎战宋兵，被宋兵打得大败，被杀、俘虏与投降的差不多有二万人，俘获万户以下的官吏十几人，夺得马八百匹，追逐金兵向北直到城下才返回。
English: Zhao Kwai led the Song soldiers to advance and attack the Jin soldiers. Yang Yi and other generals arrived one after another. The Jin soldiers also rushed out to fight the Song soldiers. They were defeated by the Song soldiers. Almost twenty thousand people were killed, captured and surrendered. More than a dozen officials under ten thousand households were captured. Eight hundred horses were captured. They chased the Jin soldiers north until they returned to the city.

古文：十四年，金人犯蕲州，葵与范攻唐、邓。
现代文：嘉定十四年，金兵进犯蕲州，赵葵与兄赵范进攻唐州、邓州。
English: In the 14th year of Jiading, Jinbei invaded Bozhou, and Zhao Kwai and his brother Zhao Fan attacked Tangzhou and Dengzhou.

古文：方命之曰： 不克敌，毋相见也。 三月丁亥，至唐州，薄城而陈。
现代文：赵方命令他们说： 不战胜敌人，不要来见我。 三月丁亥，到唐州，靠近城池布阵。
English: Zhao Fang ordered them to say: "If you do not defeat the enemy, do not come to see me." In March of the Year of the Pig, they went to Tangzhou and set up camp near the city.

古文：金大将阿海引兵出战，葵帅精骑赴敌，再兴从之，大捷，斩馘万余。
现代文：金大将阿海率兵出城迎战，赵葵率精干骑兵出击金兵，扈再兴率兵跟随他，大获全胜，斩首万余人。
English: Jin's general Ahai led the troops out of the city to meet the battle, Zhao Kwai led the elite cavalry to attack the gold soldiers, and Zou Zaoxing led the troops to follow him, and won a complete victory, beheading more than 10,000 people.

古文：金人闭门不出。
现代文：金兵关闭城门不出来迎战。
English: The gold soldiers closed the city gate and did not come out to fight.

古文：时金人陷蕲州者至久长，数十骑出山椒，葵帅杨大成以十四骑逐之。
现代文：当时金兵攻陷蕲州后来到久长，派数十骑兵出击山椒，赵葵率杨大成仅用十四个骑兵就把他们赶走了。
English: At that time, after the Jin soldiers conquered Zhangzhou, they came to Jiuchang and sent dozens of cavalry to attack Sansho. Zhao Kwai led by Yang Dacheng drove them away with only fourteen cavalry.

古文：金骑渐益至数百，葵力战连破之，而金步骑大集。
现代文：金人骑兵逐渐增至数百人，赵葵全力迎战接连获胜，而金人步、骑兵越集越多。
English: The number of Jinren cavalry gradually increased to several hundred. Zhao Kwai fought with all his strength and won successively, while the Jinren infantry and cavalry gathered more and more.

古文：会范、再兴军合战，至夜分始解。
现代文：适逢赵范、扈再兴率兵会合迎战，到晚上才得以解围。
English: At the right time, Zhao Fan and Zou Zaixing led the troops to meet the battle, and they were able to relieve the siege in the evening.

古文：庚寅，官军分二阵，范将左，再兴将右，葵帅突骑左右策应。
现代文：庚寅，宋军分成二阵，赵范担任左将，扈再兴担任右将，赵葵率一支精干骑兵左右策应。
English: The Song army was divided into two lines, with Geng Yin leading the Song army, Zhao Fan leading the Song army on the left, Zou Zaixing leading the Song army on the right, and Zhao Kwai leading the Song army on the right.

古文：金人背山亦分为二以相当，而不先动。
现代文：金兵背依山势也分成二大阵营以抵御宋兵，而不先出击。
English: The Jin soldiers also divided into two large camps to resist the Song soldiers, without attacking first.

古文：范曰： 金人必复谋夜战以幸胜，乃预备大鼓，令军中闻叠鼓声始动，若彼未至五十步内而辄动者斩。
现代文：赵范说： 金兵一定是又想在晚上出战以侥幸取胜。 于是预先准备大鼓，命令军中听见击鼓声开始出击，如果敌方没有到五十步内就行动的人定斩不赦。
English: Zhao Fan said: The gold soldiers must have wanted to go out to fight at night to win by chance, so they prepared a big drum in advance and ordered the troops to start attacking when they heard the drumming, and if the enemy did not act within fifty paces, they would not be forgiven.

古文：未几，金兵稍下山，再兴遽冲之，果为敌所乘，遂逼范军。
现代文：不一会儿，金兵逐渐下山，扈再兴匆忙率兵出击，果然被敌人所追击，逐渐逼近赵范的军阵。
English: In a short while, the gold soldiers gradually descended the mountain, and Zou Zaixing hurriedly led the soldiers to attack. They were chased by the enemy and gradually approached Zhao Fan's army.

古文：范叠鼓麾军突斗，葵继进，歼金兵数千。
现代文：赵范击鼓指挥军队突然出击，赵葵相继出兵，歼灭金兵数千人。
English: Zhao Fan drummed and commanded the army to suddenly attack, Zhao Kwai sent troops one after another, annihilating thousands of gold soldiers.

古文：敌并力向再兴，葵率土豪祝文蔚等以精骑横冲之，金人僵尸相属。
现代文：金兵集中人马攻击扈再兴部，赵葵率地方豪强祝文蔚等以精锐骑兵横冲敌阵，金兵一个接一个地被杀倒下。
English: The gold soldiers concentrated their men and horses to attack the Ministry of Reconstruction, and Zhao Kwai led the local powerful Zhu Wenwei and other elite cavalry to rampage the enemy line. The gold soldiers were killed one by one.

古文：复相持至夜分，金人虽敛，而阵如故。
现代文：又相持到夜半时分，金兵虽有所收敛，但其阵势依然如故。
English: They remained in a stalemate until midnight. Although the gold soldiers had somewhat retreated, their position remained the same.

古文：范、葵急会将校，选死士数千，黎明四面奋击，唤声撼山谷。
现代文：赵范、赵葵急忙会集将帅商议，选取敢死队员数千人，到天刚亮时四面奋勇出击，冲杀之声震撼山谷。
English: Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai hurriedly gathered the generals to discuss, selected thousands of death-defying team members, and bravely attacked on all sides at dawn, the sound of rushing shook the valley.

古文：金人走，乘胜逐北，斩首数千级，副统军投戈降，拔所掠子女万余，得辎重器械山积。
现代文：金兵逃走，宋军乘胜追击逃兵，斩首数千，金兵副统帅缴械投降，宋军救出金兵所掠夺的民众万余人，夺得辎重器械堆积如山。
English: The gold soldiers fled, the Song army took advantage of the victory to pursue the deserters, beheading thousands of them, the vice-commander of the gold soldiers surrendered, the Song army rescued more than 10,000 people plundered by the gold soldiers, and seized mountains of heavy equipment.

古文：补葵承务郎、知枣阳军，范授安抚司内机。
现代文：补任赵葵为承务郎、知枣阳军，赵范任安抚司内机。
English: Zhao Kwai was appointed as the successor, Zhizao Yangjun, and Zhao Fan was appointed as the pacifier.

古文：方卒，十五年，起复直秘阁、通判庐州，进大理司直、淮西安抚参议官。
现代文：赵方去世，嘉定十五年，赵葵又升任直秘阁，担任庐州通判，进升大理司直、淮西安抚参议官。
English: After the death of Zhao Fang, in the 15th year of Jiading, Zhao Kwai was promoted to the direct secretary cabinet, served as the general judge of Zhangzhou, and was promoted to the councilor of Dali Sizhi and Huaixi pacification.

古文：十七年，李全往青州，淮东制置使许国檄葵议兵。
现代文：许国说： 士兵不能集中，集中的兵不精练，怎么办？ 
English: Xu Guo said, "Soldiers cannot be concentrated, and concentrated soldiers are not refined. What should we do?"

古文：葵至曰： 君侯欲图贼，而坐贼阱中，悔已无及，惟有重帐前兵，犹足制之尔。 国曰： 兵不能集，集不能精，奈何？ 曰： 葵请视两路之兵，别其精锐，君侯留三万帐前，贼不敢动矣。 国曰： 不若集淮兵来阅，而君董之，既足示众，亦可选锐。 葵曰： 有兵之郡，必当冲要，守将岂可空壁以从制使命耶？
现代文：赵葵答道： 我赵葵请求视察淮南两路的士兵，选拔其中的精锐，您留下三万精兵在军帐前听从调遣，贼寇就不敢贸然行动了。 许国说 ：不如集合淮兵来接受检阅，由您监督管理，这样既足以显示兵多，又可选择精锐。 赵葵道： 有兵的州府，一定是军事要地，守将难道能够不留一兵一卒来服从制置使的命令吗？
English: Zhao Kwai replied: I, Zhao Kwai, asked you to inspect the soldiers on the two roads of Huainan and select the best among them. You left 30,000 elite soldiers in front of the military account to listen to the deployment, and the thieves would not dare to act rashly. Xu Guo said: It is better to gather the soldiers to accept the review, and you can supervise and manage them. This is enough to show the number of soldiers, and you can choose the best. Zhao Kwai said: The state capital with soldiers must be a military important place. Can the commander not leave a soldier to obey the orders of the commander?

古文：必将力争于朝，分留自卫。
现代文：一定要向朝廷力争，分留一部分军队自卫。
English: We must strive to the imperial court to set aside a part of the army for self-defense.

古文：一得朝命，必匿其强壮，遣老弱以备数。
现代文：一旦得到朝廷的允许，定是隐匿他们强壮的士兵，派遣年老体弱的士兵来充数。
English: Once they get permission from the imperial court, they will hide their strong soldiers and send old and weak soldiers to make up the numbers.

古文：本欲选锐，适得其钝，本欲示众，适示单弱，徒启戎心。 国不听，卒败。
现代文：本来是想选择精锐之师，恰好得到愚钝之兵；本来是想显示其兵众力强，恰好给人以兵少力弱的感觉，反而示敌方以可乘之机。 许国不听，最后大败。
English: Originally, he wanted to choose an elite division, but just got a stupid soldier; originally, he wanted to show that his soldiers were strong, just to give people the feeling of being weak with fewer soldiers, but to show the enemy an opportunity.

古文：宝庆元年，范知扬州，乞调葵以强勇、雄边军五千屯宝应备贼。
现代文：宝庆元年，赵范担任扬州知州，请求调赵葵以强勇、雄健的边军五千人屯驻宝应，以防备贼寇。
English: In the first year of Baoqing, Zhao Fan was in charge of Yangzhou Zhizhou, and requested that Zhao Kwai be transferred to Baoying with five thousand strong and vigorous frontier troops to guard against bandits.

古文：葵在庐州，数费私钱会诸将球射，与制置使曾式中不合，葵去之。
现代文：赵葵在庐州，几次花费个人的钱财与各个将领一起玩赏马射箭，同制置使曾式中合不来，赵葵离任。
English: In Zhangzhou, Zhao Kwai spent his personal money several times to play horse archery with various generals, and the same system made it impossible to match the Zeng style, and Zhao Kwai left his post.

古文：言者以为擅，遂奉祠。
现代文：有人说他擅离职守，于是归家闲居。
English: Some people said that he went AWOL, so he returned home to idle.

古文：三年，起为将作监丞。
现代文：宝庆三年，被起用担任将作监丞。
English: In the third year of Baoqing, he was appointed as the superintendent.

古文：绍定元年，出知滁州。
现代文：绍定元年，出任滁州知州。
English: In the first year of Shaoding, he served as the leader of Bozhou Chizhou.

古文：二年，全将入浙西告籴，实欲觇畿甸也。
现代文：绍定二年，李全打算到浙西筹集粮草，实际上是想窥测国都附近的地方。
English: In the second year of Shaoding, Li Quan planned to go to western Zhejiang to collect grain and grass. In fact, he wanted to spy on the places near the national capital.

古文：初，全之献俘也，朝廷授以节钺，葵策其必叛，乃上书丞相史弥远曰： 此贼若止于得粟，尚不宜使轻至内地，况包藏祸心，不止告籴。
现代文：开始时，李全献出俘虏，朝廷授给他一定的权柄，赵葵预计他一定会叛乱，于是向丞相史弥远上书说 ：此贼如果只是希望得到一些粮粟，尚且不适宜让他轻易地到内地来，况且他包藏祸心，不仅仅是为了筹集粮食。
English: At the beginning, Li Quan offered captives and the court granted him certain authority. Zhao Kwai expected him to rebel, so he wrote to the prime minister Shiyan and said: "If this thief only hopes to get some grain, it is not appropriate for him to come to the mainland easily. Moreover, he harbors evil intentions, not just to raise grain.

古文：若不痛抑其萌，则自此肆行无惮，所谓延盗入室，恐畿内有不可胜讳之忧。 至滁，以其地当贼冲，又与金人对境，实两淮门户，修城浚隍，经武不少暇。
现代文：如果不狠狠地抑制他们刚刚萌生的邪念，那么他们从此就会肆无忌惮，好比引狼入室，恐怕京畿之内有不好说而又说不完的忧虑。 到滁州后，因为其辖地正是贼寇进入内地的要道，又与金人的边境相对峙，实为两淮地区的门户，于是，修筑城墙，疏浚护城壕，训练军队，从无空暇。
English: If their newly-born evil thoughts were not severely suppressed, they would be reckless from then on, like luring a wolf into the house. I'm afraid that there is an indescribable and inexhaustible anxiety in Gyeonggi. After arriving in Yeongju, because its jurisdiction is the main route for thieves and robbers to enter the mainland, and because it is opposite the border of the Jin people, it is actually the gateway to the two Huai regions. Therefore, there is never enough time to build walls, dredge moats, and train troops.

古文：命秦喜守青平，赵必胜守万山，以壮形势。
现代文：命令秦喜扼守青平，赵必胜驻守万山，以壮大形势。
English: He ordered Qin Xi to stay in Qingping and Zhao Bisheng to stay in Wanshan in order to strengthen the situation.

古文：葵母疾，谒告省侍不得，刲股杂药以寄之。
现代文：赵葵的母亲患病，赵葵请假探视未被批准，于是，割股肉杂入药中寄送给母亲。
English: Zhao Kwai's mother was ill, and Zhao Kwai's request for leave to visit her was not approved. As a result, the mutilated meat was mixed with medicine and sent to his mother.

古文：母卒，葵求解官，不许，不得已，卒哭复视事。
现代文：母亲死了，赵葵请求辞去官职，未被允许，不得已，办完丧事后又去履行自己的职责。
English: After his mother's death, Zhao Kwai asked to resign from his official position. He was not allowed to do so, but had no choice but to do so. After the funeral, he went back to fulfilling his duties.

古文：全造舟益急，葵复致书史弥远曰： 李全既破盐城，反称陈知县自弃城，盖欲欺朝廷以款讨罪之师，彼得一意修舟楫，造器械，窥伺城邑，或直浮海以捣腹心，此其奸谋，明若观火。
现代文：李全造船更加急迫，赵葵又写信札给史弥远说： 李全已经攻破盐城，反而宣称是陈知县自己放弃城邑，大概是想欺骗朝廷以延缓讨伐其罪过的军队，他们得以一心一意修造船只，制造器械，窥测机会，攻占城邑，或者直接浮海而下，直捣腹心京都之地，这是他们的奸计，像观察燃火那样明了。
English: Li Quan's shipbuilding was even more urgent, and Zhao Kwai also wrote a letter to Shi Miyan saying: Li Quan had broken through Yancheng, but instead claimed that Chen Zhi County itself had abandoned the city, probably trying to deceive the imperial court to delay the crusade against its guilty army. They were able to single-mindedly build ships, manufacture equipment, spy on opportunities, capture cities, or directly float down to the sea and directly attack the land of Kyoto. This was their cunning plan, as clear as observing fire.

古文：葵自闻盐城失守，日夕延颈以俟制帅之设施，今乃闻遣王节入盐城祈哀于逆。
现代文：我自从听说盐城失守，日夜延颈以等待将帅的军事措施，现在才听说派遣王节到盐城向贼寇祈求哀恤。
English: Ever since I heard that Yancheng was defeated, I have been craning my neck day and night to wait for the general's military measures. Only now did I hear that Wang Jie was sent to Yancheng to beg for mercy from the bandits.

古文：葵又闻遣二吏入山阳，请命于贼妇。
现代文：我又听说派遣两个官吏到山阳，向贼妇请命。
English: I also heard that two officials were sent to Sanyang to plead for the thief's life.

古文：堂堂制阃，如此举措，岂不堕贼计，贻笑天下、贻笑外夷乎？
现代文：堂堂制帅家人，这样的行为，岂不正中贼寇之计，贻笑于天下，贻笑于外族之夷狄吗？
English: This kind of behavior by members of the imperial family is nothing more than the tactics of thieves and robbers. It is ridiculed by the world and ridiculed by foreigners.

古文：又闻张国明前此出山阳，已知贼将举盐城之兵，今若听国明言，更从阔略，则自此人心解体，万事涣散，社稷之忧有不可胜讳者。
现代文：又听说张国明前次到山阳，已知道贼寇将动用盐城的兵力，现在如果听从张国明的话，以后对待贼兵更加宽恤，那么，从此以后就会人心涣散，万事解体，国家的忧虑就有不好说也说不完的了。
English: I also heard that the last time Zhang Guoming went to Shanyang, he already knew that the bandits would use the troops from Yancheng. If we follow Zhang Guoming's words now and treat the bandits more leniently in the future, then from now on, people's hearts will be scattered, everything will disintegrate, and the country's worries will be indescribable.

古文：葵非欲张皇生事启衅，李全决非忠臣，非孝子。
现代文：我不是想慌慌张张妄生事端，挑起矛盾，而是李全决非忠臣、孝子。
English: I don't want to create a panic situation and stir up conflicts, but Li Quan is by no means a loyal subject and filial son.

古文：丞相苟听葵之言，翻然改图，发兵讨叛，则岂独可以强国势安社稷，葵父子世受国恩，亦庶几万一之报。
现代文：丞相假如听从我的话，翻然改进，重新图谋定计，发兵讨伐叛逆，那么，岂只可以增强国势，安定社稷，赵葵父子世代承受国家恩德，也差不多可算是报国家恩典之万一。
English: If the prime minister listens to my words, drastically improves, re-plots the plan, and sends troops to fight the rebellion, then it will only be possible to strengthen the national situation, stabilize the society, and Zhao Kwai's father and son generations will receive national grace, and it can almost be considered a case of reporting the grace of the state.

古文：使丞相不听葵言，不发兵讨贼，则岂特不可以强国势安社稷，而葵亦不知死所，不复可报君相之恩矣。
现代文：假如丞相不听从我的话，不发兵讨伐贼寇，那么，不仅不可能增强国势，安定社稷，而且我也不知道将死于何地，不可能再回报皇上、丞相的恩德了。
English: If the prime minister does not listen to me and does not send troops to fight the bandits, then it is not only impossible to strengthen the country and stabilize the society, but I do not know where I will die, and it is impossible to repay the grace of the emperor and the prime minister.

古文：一安一危，一治一乱，系朝廷之讨叛与不讨尔。
现代文：安全与危险，治世与乱世，全在于朝廷对贼寇讨伐不讨伐啊。
English: Safety and danger, governance and chaos, all depend on whether or not the imperial court fights the bandits.

古文：淮东安则江南安，江南安则社稷安，社稷安则丞相安，丞相安则凡为国之臣子、为丞相之门人弟子莫不安矣。 
现代文：淮东安宁，江南就安全了；江南安全，社稷就安全；国家社稷安全，丞相就安全；丞相安全，那么，凡是国家的朝臣、官吏、丞相的门人、学生就没有不安全的了。 
English: If Huai Dong is peaceful, the south of the Yangtze River will be safe; if the south of the Yangtze River is safe, society will be safe; if the country is safe, society will be safe; if the prime minister is safe, the prime minister will be safe; if the prime minister is safe, then all the courtiers, officials, disciples and students of the prime minister will not be unsafe.

古文：又言于朝曰： 葵父子兄弟，世受国恩，每见外夷、盗贼侵侮国家，未尝不为忠愤所激。
现代文：赵葵又向朝廷上书说 ：赵葵父子兄弟，世代接受国家恩典，每次见到外族夷狄、盗贼侵犯侮辱国家，没有不为忠诚、愤恨所激励。
English: Zhao Kwai also wrote a letter to the imperial court, saying: Zhao Kwai and his brothers, father and son, have received the grace of the state for generations. Every time they see foreign invaders and thieves violate and insult the country, they are inspired by loyalty and resentment.

古文：今大逆不道，邈视朝廷，负君相卵翼之恩，无如李全。
现代文：现在大逆不道、藐视朝廷，辜负皇上、丞相袒护的恩德，没有谁比得上李全。
English: Nowadays, no one can match Li Quan in being a traitor, defying the imperial court, and betraying the kindness of the emperor and the prime minister.

古文：前此畔逆未彰，犹可言也，今已破荡城邑，略无忌惮，若朝廷更从隐忍，则将何以为国？
现代文：前次的叛逆行为不昭彰显著，还可说得过去，现在已经破坏城邑，肆无忌惮，假如朝廷进一步容忍、隐匿，那么，将怎样来治理国家呢？
English: If the imperial court continues to tolerate and conceal, then how will the country be governed?

古文：欲望特发刚断，名其为贼，即日命将遣师，水陆并进，诛锄此逆，以安社稷，以保生灵。
现代文：希望朝廷立即果断决定，指斥李全他们为贼，立刻任命将帅，派遣军队，水陆两路并进围剿，诛戮这些逆贼，以此安定国家，保护百姓。
English: It is hoped that the imperial court will immediately make a decisive decision, denounce Li Quan and them as thieves, immediately appoint generals, dispatch troops, and encircle them by land and sea, and kill these traitors, in order to stabilize the country and protect the people.

古文：葵虽不才，愿身许朝廷；如或不然，乞将葵早赐处分，以安边鄙，以便国事。 
现代文：赵葵虽然没有才学，但愿意为朝廷献身；如果不这样，请求将赵葵早日处理责罚，以安定边防，以便于治理国家。 
English: Although Zhao Kwai has no talent, he is willing to sacrifice himself for the imperial court; if this is not the case, we request that Zhao Kwai be dealt with and punished at an early date in order to stabilize the border defense and facilitate the governance of the country.

古文：弥远犹未欲兴讨，参知政事郑清之赞决之。
现代文：史弥远还是没有想到去兴师讨伐，参知政事郑清之赞成决定讨伐。
English: Shi Miyan still did not think of going to the crusade against Xing Shi, but the governor and politician Zheng Qing decided to support the crusade.

古文：乃加葵直宝章阁、淮东提点刑狱兼知滁州。
现代文：于是，升任赵葵任宝章阁、淮东提点刑狱兼滁州知州。
English: As a result, he was promoted to Zhao Kwai-Ren Baozhangge, Huai Dong-Tipi Point Prison and Zhangzhou Zhizhou.

古文：范刻日约葵，葵帅雄胜、宁淮、武定、强勇步骑万四千，命王鉴、扈斌、胡显等将之，以葵兼参议官。
现代文：赵范立刻约定赵葵，赵葵率领雄胜、宁淮、武定、强勇步、骑兵一万四千人，命令王鉴、扈斌、胡显等将官率领，以赵葵兼任参议官。
English: Zhao Fan immediately made an appointment with Zhao Kwai, Zhao Kwai led Xiongsheng, Ninghuai, Wuding, Qiangyongbu, and 14,000 cavalry, and ordered Wang Jian, Yu Bin, Hu Xian and other generals to lead, with Zhao Kwai also serving as a senator.

古文：显，颖之兄也，拳力绝人，方在襄阳，每出师必使显及葵各领精锐分道赴战，摧坚陷阵，聚散离合，前无劲敌，以功至检校太尉。
现代文：胡显，是胡颍的哥哥，拳术武力超群，赵方在襄阳，每次出兵一定派胡显与赵葵各率领精锐兵力分道参与战斗，摧毁坚锐，冲锋陷阵，聚散离合，一往无前，战无劲敌，以军功至检校太尉。
English: Hu Xian is the elder brother of Hu Yao. He is a great martial artist. Zhao Fang is the best in Xiangyang. Every time he sends troops, he will send Hu Xian and Zhao Kwai to lead the elite troops to participate in the battle. They will destroy the elite troops, charge into the battle, gather and disperse, and move forward. There is no strong opponent in the battle. With his military achievements, he will be promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：已而，全攻扬州东门，葵亲出搏战。
现代文：不久，李全攻打扬州东门，赵葵亲自出阵迎战。
English: Soon, Li Quan attacked the East Gate of Yangzhou, and Zhao Kwai personally went into battle.

古文：贼将张友呼城门请葵出，及出，全在隔壕立马相劳苦。
现代文：贼将张友向城门呼喊要求赵葵出见，到赵葵出来，李全在城壕对面站立互问劳苦。
English: The thief took Zhang You to the gate and shouted for Zhao Kwai to come out. When Zhao Kwai came out, Li Quan was standing on the opposite side of the trench, asking each other about the hardships.

古文：左右欲射全，葵止之，问全来何为？
现代文：赵葵左右的人都想射杀李全，赵葵制止了他们，质问李全前来是为了什么？
English: People around Zhao Kwai wanted to shoot Li Quan. Zhao Kwai stopped them and asked Li Quan why he had come.

古文：全曰： 朝廷动见猜疑，今复绝我粮饷，我非背叛，索钱粮耳。 葵曰： 朝廷资汝钱粮，宠汝官职，盖不赀矣。
现代文：李全说： 朝廷动不动就猜疑我，现在又断绝了我们的粮饷供应，我并不是想背叛朝廷，只是索取钱财粮饷罢了。 赵葵说： 朝廷资助你钱财粮饷，宠幸你予以官职，也算不薄待你了。
English: Li Quan said, "The imperial court suspected me at every turn, and now they have cut off our grain supply. I didn't mean to betray the imperial court, I was just asking for money and grain." Zhao Kwai said, "The imperial court supported you with money and grain, and you were lucky enough to be given an official post, so they didn't treat you badly."

古文：待汝以忠臣孝子，而乃反戈攻陷城邑，朝廷安得不绝汝钱粮。
现代文：把你当作忠臣孝子款待，而你们反而反戈一击、攻陷城邑，朝廷哪里还能不断绝你们的钱粮。
English: They treat you as a loyal subject and filial son, but instead you fight back, capture cities, and the imperial court can continue to deprive you of money and grain.

古文：汝云非叛，欺人乎？
现代文：你们自己说不是叛乱，是欺骗人呢？
English: Is it not you yourselves who say that this is not a rebellion, but a deception?

古文：欺天乎？ 切责之言甚多，全无以对，弯弓抽矢向葵而去。
现代文：还是欺骗天呢？ 深切责备的话很多，李全没有办法回答，展开弓、抽出箭向赵葵射去。
English: Or is he deceiving the heavens? There were many words of deep reproach, and Li Quan had no way to answer, so he unfurled his bow, drew out his arrows and shot them at Zhao Kwai.

古文：于是数战皆捷。
现代文：于是赵葵率军与李全数战都胜利了。
English: As a result, Zhao Kwai led the army and won all the battles with Li.

古文：四年正月壬寅，遂杀全。
现代文：绍定四年正月壬寅，终于杀掉李全。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Shaoding, Ren Yin finally killed Li Quan.

古文：事见《全传》。进葵福州观察使、左骁卫上将军，葵辞不受。
现代文：这些事见于《李全传》，赵葵进升福州观察使、左骁卫上将军，赵葵坚决辞谢不接受。
English: These things are seen in the "Biography of Li Quan," Zhao Kwaijin was promoted to Fuzhou observation envoy, Zuoying Wei general, Zhao Kwai resolutely refused to accept the resignation.

古文：八月，召封枢密院禀议，受宝章阁待制、枢密副都承旨，依旧职仍落起复，寻进兵部侍郎。
现代文：八月，诏命封他枢密院禀议，任宝章阁待制、枢密副都承旨，依照旧职仍起用恢复其位，不久，进升兵部侍郎。
English: In August, the imperial edict ordered him to be appointed to the Privy Council for deliberation, and he was appointed to the position of treasure, cabinet, and vice-president of the privy council. He was reinstated in accordance with his former position, and soon he was promoted to the position of attendant of the military department.

古文：六年十一月，诏授淮东制置使兼知扬州，入对，帝曰： 卿父子兄弟，宣力甚多，卿在行阵又能率先士卒，捐身报国，此尤儒臣之所难，朕甚嘉之。 葵顿首谢曰： 臣不佞，忠孝之义，尝奉教于君子，世受国恩，当捐躯以报陛下。 
现代文：绍定六年十一月，诏令赵葵担任淮东制置使兼扬州知州，入朝应对时，理宗皇帝说： 你们父子兄弟，为国效力很多，你在军队阵营中又能身先士卒，有献身报效国家的愿望，这尤其是儒士臣僚们难以办到的，我特别地嘉奖勉励你。 赵葵叩头感谢说： 我缺乏才智，对于忠孝的意义，曾经接受君子的教诲，世代承受国家的恩典，应当捐躯报效皇帝陛下。 
English: In November of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Shao Ding, Zhao Kwai was ordered by the emperor to serve as an envoy to Huai-Dong and Yangzhou-Chizhou, and when he entered the court, Emperor Lizong said: "You brothers and sisters, you have served the country a lot, you can be the first in the army camp, you have the desire to devote yourself to serving the country, which is especially difficult for Confucian ministers, I especially commend and encourage you. Zhao Kwai bowed his head and thanked: I lack talent, for the meaning of loyalty and filial piety, I have received the teachings of a gentleman, I have

古文：端平元年，朝议收复三京，葵上疏请出战，乃授权兵部尚书、京河制置使，知应天府、南京留守兼淮东制置使。
现代文：端平元年，朝廷议论收复东京、西京、南京三京。赵葵上疏请求出战，于是授命他暂且担任兵部尚书，京西、河北路制置使，应天府知府、南京留守、兼任淮东制置使。
English: In the first year of the Taiping era, the imperial court discussed the restoration of Tokyo, West Beijing and Nanjing. Zhao Kwai Shangsu requested to go to war, so he was appointed to temporarily serve as the secretary of the military department, the envoy to West Beijing and Hebei, the governor of Tianfu and Nanjing, and the envoy to Huaidong.

古文：时盛暑行师，汴堤破决，水潦泛溢，粮运不继，所复州郡，皆空城，无兵食可因。
现代文：当时正值酷暑行军，汴河堤坝溃决，洪水泛滥成灾，军粮运送跟不上，所恢复的州郡城邑，都是空城，没有军队和粮饷作为依靠。
English: At that time, the army was marching in the sweltering heat, the dike of the Min River was breached, the floods were rampant, and the delivery of military grain could not keep up. The restored counties and cities were empty, with no army and grain to rely on.

古文：未几，北兵南下，渡河，发水闸，兵多溺死，遂溃而归。
现代文：不久，北方的军队南下，渡过黄河，打开水闸，兵大多淹死，以致溃败而回。
English: Soon, the northern army went south, crossed the Yellow River, opened the sluice, and most of the soldiers drowned, resulting in a rout.

古文：范上表劾葵，诏与全子才各降一秩，授兵部侍郎、淮东制置使，移司泗州。
现代文：赵范上奏表章弹劾赵葵，诏令他与全子才各降一级，授命他担任兵部侍郎、淮东制置使，迁移治所至泗州。
English: Zhao Fan issued a proclamation to impeach Zhao Kwai, ordered him and his sons to be demoted by one rank each, and appointed him to serve as an attendant of the military department and an envoy to the East China Sea, and to relocate the government office to Zhangzhou.

古文：嘉熙元年，以宝章阁学士知扬州，依旧制置使。
现代文：嘉熙元年，赵葵以宝章阁学士的身份任扬州知州，依旧为制置使。
English: In the first year of the Jiaxi Dynasty, Zhao Kwai was appointed as Yangzhou Zhizhou with the status of Baozhangge Bachelor, and he was still a system-placed envoy.

古文：二年，以应援安丰捷，奏拜刑部尚书，进端明殿学士，特予执政恩例，复兼本路屯田使。
现代文：嘉熙二年，因为接应、援助安丰之捷，上奏拜命为刑部尚书，进升端明殿学士，特别给予他按执政的恩例，又兼任本路屯田使。
English: In the second year of the Jiaxi Dynasty, because of his response and assistance to Anfeng Zhijie, he was promoted to the Shanshu of the Department of Criminal Law, and promoted to the Dangdang Mingdian Baccalaureate, which was specially given to him according to the graceful example of the government, and he also served as the main Tunden envoy.

古文：葵前后留扬八年，垦田治兵，边备益饬。
现代文：赵葵前后留任扬州八年，开垦土地，整治军事，边备日益加强。
English: Zhao Kwai stayed in Yangzhou for eight years, reclaimed land, rectified the military, and strengthened the border.

古文：淳祐二年，进大学士、知潭州、湖南安抚使，改福州。
现代文：淳祐二年，进升大学士，做潭州知州、湖南安抚使，改任福州。
English: In the second year of Chunyu, he was promoted to the rank of university scholar, served as a peace envoy of Tanzhou, Chizhou and Hunan, and was reassigned to Fuzhou.

古文：三年，葬其母，乞追服终制，不允。
现代文：淳祐三年，赵葵安葬他的母亲，请求追服母丧之制，未被批准。
English: In the third year of Chunyu, Zhao Kwai An buried his mother, and his request to follow the mourning system for his mother was not approved.

古文：葵上疏曰： 移忠为孝，臣子之通谊；教孝求忠，君父之至仁。
现代文：赵葵上奏疏说 ：移忠作为孝，是臣、子相通的情谊；教孝求取忠，是君、父最仁义的表现。
English: Zhao Kwai Shangsoo said: "To transfer loyalty as filial piety is the best friendship between a vassal and a son; to teach filial piety and seek loyalty is the most benevolent expression of you and your father."

古文：忠孝一原，并行不悖。
现代文：忠孝同于一源，并行不相矛盾。
English: Loyalty and filial piety come from the same source, and they do not contradict each other.

古文：故曰忠臣以事其君，孝子以事其亲，其本一也。
现代文：所以说忠臣以事奉其君王，孝子以事奉其亲长，其根本是一致的。
English: Therefore, it is fundamentally consistent for a loyal subject to serve his sovereign, and for a filial son to serve his parent.

古文：臣不佞，戒谨持循，惟恐先坠。
现代文：我缺乏才智，戒惧谨慎，持守循规，惟恐先失足。
English: I lack talent, fear caution, stick to the rules, and fear missing the first step.

古文：往岁叨当事任，服在戎行，偕同气以率先，冒万死而不顾，捐躯戡难，效命守封，是以孝事君之充也。
现代文：过去几年念叨担当事任，在军队中任职，都是同仇敌忾，身先士卒，冒着万死的危险而不顾，捐躯为国平定危难，效命国家，驻守封疆，这是以孝报答君王的信任啊。
English: Over the past few years, he has been in charge of affairs and served in the army, all of which are with the same enemy, leading the way, risking the danger of death, regardless, sacrificing his life for the country to quell the danger, serving the country, and stationed in the closed territory. This is to repay the king's trust with filial piety.

古文：陛下昭示显扬，优崇宠数，使为人子者感恩，为人亲者知劝矣。
现代文：陛下昭示天下，使我显扬名声，给我优厚的待遇，宠爱有加，使为人之子者感恩戴德，为人之亲者知道劝勉。
English: Your Majesty has made me known to the world, given me a good reputation, treated me well, and endeared me to others, so that those who are your children will be grateful to you, and those who are your relatives will know how to encourage you.

古文：臣昨于草土，被命起家，勉从权制，先国家之急而后亲丧也。
现代文：我是一介平民，受命离家任职，受勉励听从调遣节制，是先服从国家的急需而后服母亲的丧礼。
English: I was a civilian, ordered to leave home to serve, encouraged to obey the deployment of restraint, is to obey the urgent needs of the country first, and then to attend my mother's funeral.

古文：今释位去官，已追服居庐，乞从彝制。 又不许。
现代文：现在解除了官职，已经追服母丧，居住庐舍，请求按旧制处理。 又没有被批准。
English: Now he has been relieved of his official position, he has already attended his mother's funeral, he is living in a retirement home, and his request to be dealt with according to the old system has not been approved.

古文：再上疏曰： 臣昔者奉诏讨逆，适丁家难，闵然哀疚之中，命以驱驰之事，移孝为忠，所不敢辞。
现代文：赵葵又上奏疏说 ：我过去奉诏令讨伐叛逆之贼，恰恰逢母亲去世，忧虑、哀伤痛苦之中，命我以驰驱疆场之事，移孝作为忠，是我不敢推辞的。
English: Zhao Kwai-soo also said: I used to fight against the traitorous thieves by imperial order. Just as my mother passed away, in the midst of anxiety, sorrow and pain, I was ordered to drive the battlefield and be loyal to my father. I did not dare to refuse.

古文：是臣尝先国家之急，而效臣子之义矣。
现代文：是我辈先以国家的急务为急，而尽臣子的忠义。
English: It is our generation that has been the first to take the urgent affairs of the country as urgent, and to devote ourselves to the loyalty of our vassals.

古文：亲恩未报，浸逾一纪，食稻衣锦，俯仰增愧。
现代文：母亲长辈的恩德未报答，渐渐已过了十二年，吃饭穿衣、俯仰之间，愧疚日增。
English: The kindness of my mother's elders has not been repaid. Gradually, twelve years have passed. Between eating, dressing, and bowing down, my guilt is increasing.

古文：且臣业已追衰麻之制，伸苫块之哀，负土成坟，倚庐待尽，丧事有进而无退，固不应数月而除也。 乃命提举洞霄宫，不拜。
现代文：况且我已追服衰麻的丧制，显伸苫块的哀伤，增修母坟，倚庐舍待丧事满，丧事已渐渐进行而再没有退避的道理，本来不能数月就停止服丧啊。 于是任命他提举洞霄宫，没有接受。
English: Moreover, I had already pursued the mourning system of weakness, showed the sorrow of stretching the coffin, repaired the mother's grave, and waited for the funeral to be completed. The funeral had gradually progressed and there was no way to avoid it, so I couldn't stop mourning for several months. So I appointed him to raise the Dongxiao Palace and didn't accept it.

古文：淳祐四年，授同知枢密院事。
现代文：淳祐四年，赵葵授命任同知枢密院事。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Junyu, Zhao Kwai was appointed to the position of Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：疏奏： 今天下之事，其大者有几？
现代文：上奏书道： 现在天下的事情，其大事有哪几件？
English: 上奏書道: What are the major events in the world today?

古文：天下之才，其可用者有几？
现代文：天下有才能的人，其可用者有哪几个？
English: Of all the talented people in the world, how many are employable?

古文：吾从其大者而讲明之，疏其可用者而任使之。
现代文：我按照其大的方面来说明，分辨其可用的来任用他。
English: I have appointed him on the basis of his great qualities, to see what he can do.

古文：有勇略者治兵，有心计者治财，宽厚者任牧养，刚正者持风宪。
现代文：让有勇有谋的人来治兵，派有心计的人来管理钱财，清心宽厚的人担任治民之职，命刚正严明的人来主持监察事务。
English: Let those who are brave and resourceful lead the troops, those who are resourceful manage the money, those who are pure and generous govern the people, and those who are just and strict preside over the supervision affairs.

古文：为官择人，不为人而择官。
现代文：为官职选择人选，不为人来设置官职。
English: To select candidates for public office, not to create public office.

古文：用之既当，任之既久，然后可以责其成效。 又乞 亟与宰臣讲求规画，凡有关于宗社安危治乱之大计者条具以闻，审其所先后缓急以图筹策，则治功可成，外患不足畏 。
现代文：使用得当，使用的时间才能长久，然后就可以责令他取得成效。 又请求 皇上迅速与宰相大臣商量谋划，凡是有关国家安全与危险，治世的重要计策应一一列举上报，按照其先后分别急缓，以图筹谋策划，那么治国的功效可以完成，外部的忧患是不值得怕的 。
English: He also requested that the Emperor should quickly discuss and plan with the Prime Minister, and that all the important measures related to national security and danger, and the governance of the world should be listed and reported one by one, according to their respective urgency, with the aim of planning and planning, so that the effectiveness of governing the country can be completed, and external troubles are not to be feared.

古文：又乞 创游击军三万人以防江 。
现代文：又请求 创建游击军三万人用于长江防守 。
English: He also requested the creation of a guerrilla army of thirty thousand people to defend the Yangtze River.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：理宗诏令按他的主意行事。
English: He complied.

古文：十二月，拜知枢密院事兼参知政事。
现代文：十二月，被任命为知枢密院事兼参知政事。
English: In December, he was appointed a member of the Privy Council and a member of the Council of State.

古文：又特授枢密使兼参知政事、督视江、淮、京西、湖北军马，封长沙郡公。
现代文：又特地授予他为枢密使兼参知政事，督察巡视江南、淮南、京西、湖北各路的军政事务，封为长沙郡公。
English: He was also specially awarded as a privy envoy and political adviser to the governor, inspecting military and political affairs in the south of the Yangtze River, south of Huainan, west of Beijing and Hubei, and was named the governor of Changsha County.

古文：寻知建康府、行宫留守、江东安抚使。
现代文：不久，担任建康府知府、行宫留守、江东安抚使。
English: Soon, he served as the governor of Jiankang Prefecture, as an envoy to the court, and as an envoy to pacify the East River.

古文：九年，特授光禄大夫、右丞相兼枢密使，封信国公。
现代文：淳祐九年，特地授命为光禄大夫、右丞相兼枢密使，封为信国公。
English: In the 9th year of the Junsu era, he was specially appointed as the doctor of Guanglu, the minister of the right and the confidential envoy, and was named the prince of Shinkoku.

古文：四上表力辞，言者以宰相须用读书人，罢为观文殿学士，充醴泉观使兼侍读，仍奉朝请。
现代文：四次上表坚持辞职，议论的人以宰相须用读书人为理由，改职任观文殿学士，充任醴泉观使兼侍读，仍然侍奉朝请。
English: Four times, the Prime Minister insisted on resigning, and those who argued that the Prime Minister should use reading as a reason, changed his position to a scholar of the Academy of Confucius, and served as an attendant and attendant of the Emperor, and still served the Emperor.

古文：寻判潭州、湖南安抚使，加特进。
现代文：不久，担任潭州通判、荆湖南路安抚使，加职特进。
English: Soon, he served as the judge of Tanzhou and the pacifying envoy of Jinghu South Road, and was promoted to a higher position.

古文：宝祐二年，宣抚广西。
现代文：宝二年，任广西路宣抚使。
English: In the second year of Bao, he was appointed as the Guangxi Road Propaganda Envoy.

古文：三年，改镇荆湖，城荆门及郢州。
现代文：宝三年，改任镇守荆湖北路，城治设于荆门及郢州。
English: In the third year of Bao, he was reappointed as the town guard of Jinghu North Road, and the city government was set up in Jingmen and Zhangzhou.

古文：改授湖南路安抚使、判潭州，再辞，依旧职醴泉观使。
现代文：改授荆湖南路安抚使、潭州通判，再次辞职不就，仍然担任醴泉观使之职。
English: He was re-awarded the post of Jinghunan Road Pacifying Envoy and the post of Tanzhou Interpreter, but he did not resign again. He still held the post of Quanxuan.

古文：五年，进少保、宁远军节度使，进封魏国公、醴泉观使兼侍读。
现代文：宝五年，进升少保、宁远军节度使，进封魏国公、醴泉观使兼侍读。
English: In the 5th year of Bao, he was promoted to Shao Bao and Ningyuan Military Festival Envoy, and he was promoted to Wei Guogong and Quanquan Envoy and attended the ceremony.

古文：四辞，免。
现代文：四次辞职不就，被免职。
English: He resigned four times and was removed from office.

古文：开庆元年，判庆元府、沿海制置使，寻授沿江、江东宣抚使，置司建康府，任责隆兴府、饶州江州徽州两界防拓调遣，时暂兼判建康府、行宫留守，寻授江东西宣抚使，节制调遣饶、信、袁、临江、抚、吉、隆兴官军民兵。
现代文：开庆元年，担任庆元府通判、沿海制置使，不久，授命江南西路、江南东路宣抚使，设置机构于建康府，负责隆兴府、饶州、江州、徽州两地界的防务调遣，当时暂且兼任建康府通判、行宫留守，不久授命担任江东、江西宣抚使，节制调遣饶州、信州、袁州、临江、抚州、吉州、隆兴的官军民兵。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Qing Dynasty, he served as the general magistrate of Qingyuan Prefecture and the coastal system placement envoy, and soon he was appointed as the southwestern and eastern Jiangnan Road propaganda envoy, setting up an agency in Jiankang Prefecture, responsible for the defense deployment of the two frontiers of Longxing Prefecture, Raozhou, Jiangzhou and Huizhou. At that time, he temporarily served as the general magistrate of Jiankang Prefecture and stayed at the palace. Soon he was appointed as the east and west Jiangsu propaganda envoy, and moderately dispatched the official and military militia of Raozhou, Xinshou,

古文：访问百姓疾苦，罢行黜陟，并许便宜从事。
现代文：访问老百姓的疾病痛苦，发布政令，升降官员，都允许他根据是否方便合适行事。
English: Visiting the sick and suffering of the people, issuing decrees, and promoting and demoting officials, all allow him to act according to whether it is convenient and appropriate.

古文：景定元年，授两淮宣抚使、判扬州，进封鲁国公，寻奉祠。
现代文：景定元年，授命担任两淮宣抚使、扬州通判，进升封为鲁国公。不久，回家休养。
English: In the first year of Jingding, he was appointed to serve as the two Huai propaganda envoys, Yangzhou Tongzhan, and was promoted to Lu Guogong. Soon, he went home to recuperate.

古文：咸淳元年，加少傅。
现代文：度宗咸淳元年，加少傅衔。
English: In the first year of Wudong Xianjun, he was promoted to the rank of Shao Fu.

古文：二年，乞致仕，特授少师、武安军节度使，进封冀国公。
现代文：咸淳二年，请求担任官职，特地授命他担任少师、武安军节度使，进封冀国公。
English: In the second year of Xianjun, he requested to serve as an official, and he was specially ordered to serve as a young teacher and a military commander of the Wu'an Army, and became the governor of Hebei Province.

古文：舟次小孤山，薨，年八十一。
现代文：坐船停靠小孤山，去世，当年八十一岁。
English: He died at the age of eighty-one, when his ship docked at the small lonely mountain.

古文：四年，知静江府，后卒于家。
现代文：这天晚上，五洲星陨落如箕状。赠赐太傅，谥号 忠靖 。
English: That evening, the Five Continents Star fell like a thunderbolt. He was given the title of Taifu and the posthumous name of Zhongjing.

古文：谢方叔，字德方，威州人。
现代文：谢方叔，字德方，威州人。
English: Uncle Xie Fang, also known as German Fang, is from Wisconsin.

古文：嘉定十六年进士，历官监察御史。
现代文：嘉定十六年考中进士，曾经官至监察御史。
English: Jiading passed the junior high school entrance examination in his 16th year, and rose through the ranks of government officials to inspector general of history.

古文：疏奏： 秉刚德以回上帝之心，奋威断以回天下之势，或者犹恐前习便嬖之人，有以私陛下之听而悦陛下之心，则前日之畏者怠，忧者喜，虑者玩矣。
现代文：他上奏疏道 ：坚持刚强的德性以回应上天的心事，奋行威严的果断以挽回天下的颓势，有的人还担忧过去曾受宠幸的人，堵塞陛下的视听而谋取皇帝的欢心，那么，就会导致以前害怕的人变得怠惰，忧愁的人变得高兴，思虑的人变得玩世不恭。
English: He went on to say: Adhering to a strong moral character to respond to the heart of heaven, striving for majestic decisiveness to save the world's decline, some people are also worried about those who have been favored in the past, blocking His Majesty's audio-visual and seeking the emperor's favor, then, it will cause those who were afraid before to become lazy, sad people to become happy, and thoughtful people to become cynical.

古文：左右前后之人，进忧危恐惧之言者，是纳忠于上也；进燕安逸乐之言者，是不忠于上也。
现代文：皇帝左右的大小官员，进奏忧虑、危险、恐惧的言论的人，是向皇上表达忠心；进奏安乐、闲逸的言论的人，是不忠于皇上的行为。
English: The officials around the emperor, big and small, who play up the words of anxiety, danger and fear, are expressing loyalty to the emperor; those who play up the words of relaxation and leisure are not loyal to the emperor.

古文：凡有水旱盗贼之奏者，必忠臣也；有谄谀蒙蔽之言者，必佞臣也。
现代文：凡是奏报有水旱灾荒、盗贼造反的人，一定是忠臣；而凡是奏报阿谀奉承以蒙蔽皇上的话的人，一定是奸臣。
English: Anyone who reports on floods, droughts, plagues, and rebellious thieves must be a loyal subject; and anyone who reports on words of flattery to deceive the emperor must be a treacherous subject.

古文：陛下享玉食珍羞之奉，当思两淮流莩转壑之可矜；闻管弦钟鼓之声，当思西蜀白骨如山之可念。 又言： 崇俭德以契天理，储人才以供天职，恢远略以需天讨，行仁政以答天意。 帝悦。
现代文：当陛下享用玉器供奉的山珍海味之时，应当思虑两淮一带流民饿殍、转徙沟壑的可怜状况；当皇上耳闻管弦钟鼓的音乐之声时，应当思虑西蜀地区白骨如山的可悲景象。 又说 ：崇尚勤俭的美德以适应天理，储备人才以担任天职，恢复远见的策略以替天行道，推行仁政以报答天意。 
English: When His Majesty is enjoying the mountain and sea delicacies offered by the jade, he should think about the poor conditions of the displaced people in the area of the two Huai rivers; when the Emperor hears the music of the orchestral bell and drum, he should think about the deplorable scene of the mountains of white bones in the West Shu region. He also said: advocating the virtue of diligence and thrift to adapt to the heavenly principle, reserving talents to serve the heavenly office, restoring the strategy of foresight to replace the heavenly path, and implementing benevolent politics to repay the heavenly intention.

古文：差知衡州，除宗正少卿，又除太常少卿兼国史编修、实录检讨。
现代文：皇上看了很高兴。诏令差遣衡州担任知州，任宗正少卿，又任太常少卿兼国史编修、实录检讨。
English: The Emperor was very pleased to see it. The imperial edict sent Hengzhou to serve as Chizhou, appointed him as Zongzheng Shaoqing, and also appointed him as Taizang Shaoqing, as well as compiler of national history and reviewer of historical records.

古文：时刘汉弼、杜范、徐元杰相继死，方叔言： 元杰之死，陛下既为命官鞫狱，立赏捕奸，罪人未得，忠冤未伸。
现代文：当时，刘汉弼、杜范、徐元杰相继死了，谢方叔说： 徐元杰之死，陛下既然已任命官员审问，立即令出赏捕拿奸贼，犯罪的人未抓到，忠诚者的冤狱未伸。
English: At that time, Liu Hanqi, Du Fan, and Xu Yuanjie died one after another. Uncle Xie Fang said: Since His Majesty has appointed officials to interrogate Xu Yuanjie's death, he immediately issued a reward to catch the traitors. The criminals have not been caught, and the unjust imprisonment of the loyalists has not been extended.

古文：陛下苟不始终主持，将恐纪纲扫地，而国无以为国矣。 迁殿中侍御史，进对，言： 操存本于方寸，治乱系于天下。人主宅如法宫蠖濩之邃，朝夕亲近者左右近习承意伺旨之徒，往往觇上之所好，不过保恩宠、希货利而已。
现代文：陛下假若不始终主持，恐怕将会使纲纪废弛，而国家无法再成为国家了。 迁升殿中侍御史，上朝进对，说 ：操守之存本来发于方寸之地，治乱安危系于天下，皇帝之宅如法宫之蠖刻镂装饰而至深邃明亮，早晚亲近的人、左右巴结奉承旨意而动的人，往往投皇上之所好，不过是为了保持恩宠，希求获得利益而已。
English: If His Majesty did not preside at all times, it is feared that discipline would be weakened, and the country would no longer be able to become a country. When he was transferred to the palace to serve the Emperor, he approached the emperor and said, "The preservation of ethics originally originated in the land of Fangcun, the control of chaos and safety is in the world, the emperor's house is like the decoration of the Dharma Palace and is deep and bright. People who are close to the emperor in the morning and evening, and those who flatter and flatter the emperor, often do the emperor's bidding, but in order to maintain favor and hope to gain benefits.

古文：而冥冥之中，或有游扬之说，潜伏而莫之觉。
现代文：而暗暗之中，有的夸大其辞之说，潜伏而传以致未被发觉。
English: And in the dark, some exaggerate their words, lurking and spreading so as not to be discovered.

古文：防微杜渐，实以是心主之。 又言： 今日为两淮谋者有五：一曰明间谍，二曰修马政，三曰营山水砦，四曰经理近城之方田，五曰加重遏绝游骑及救夺掳掠之赏罚。 请行限田，请录朱熹门人胡安定、吕焘、蔡模，诏皆从之。
现代文：防微杜渐，的确应该以这种心情对待它。 又说： 今天，为两淮之计谋者有五个方面：一叫作明了搜查间谍，二叫作修明马政，三叫作营建山水寨隘，四叫作经营管理靠近城邑的土地，五叫作严禁遏止游骑和对救夺、掳掠者予以赏罚。 请推行限田，请录用朱熹的门人学生胡安定、吕焘、蔡模，所请都被诏令允准进行。
English: He also said: Today, there are five aspects for the plotters of the two Huai: the first is to clarify the search for spies, the second is to clarify horse politics, the third is to build landscapes and waterways, the fourth is to operate and manage the land near the city, and the fifth is to strictly prohibit the stopping of riding and reward and punish the rescuers and plunderers. Please implement the field limit, and please recruit Zhu Xi's students Hu Ding, Lv, and Cai Mo. All requests are allowed by the edict.

古文：权刑部侍郎兼权给事中，升兼侍讲，正授刑部侍郎，权国史编修、实录检讨。
现代文：谢方叔临时担任刑部侍郎兼给事中，又升迁兼任侍郎，正式授任为刑部侍郎，暂任国史编修、实录检讨。
English: Uncle Xie Fang temporarily served as a constable of the Criminal Investigation Department, and during the investigation, he was promoted to a constable and officially appointed as a constable of the Criminal Investigation Department, temporarily serving as a compiler of national history and a reviewer of actual records.

古文：拜端明殿学士、签书枢密院事、参知政事。
现代文：拜端明殿学士、签书枢密院事、参知政事。
English: Byeon Myeongdong was a bachelor, a Privy Councillor, and a member of the Council of State.

古文：淳祐九年，拜参知政事，封永康郡侯。
现代文：淳祐九年，拜参知政事，封永康郡侯。
English: In the 9th year of the Junsu era, he was appointed to the post of prefectural governor and the post of governor of Yongkang County.

古文：十一年，特授知枢密院事兼参知政事，寻拜左丞相兼枢密使，进封惠国公。
现代文：十一年，特地授予他知枢密院事兼参知政事职，不久，拜左丞相兼枢密使，进封惠国公。
English: In the eleventh year, he was specially awarded the post of Privy Councillor and Councillor of the Privy Council, and soon after, he was appointed to the post of Left Minister and Privy Counsellor, and was given the title of Prince of Hui.

古文：劝帝以爱身育德。
现代文：劝谏理宗皇帝要爱惜身体、修养道德。
English: He advised Emperor Xuan Lizong to cherish his body and cultivate morality.

古文：属监察御史洪天锡论宦者卢允升、董宋臣，疏留中不下，大宗正寺丞赵崇璠移书方叔云： 阉寺骄恣特甚，宰执不闻正救，台谏不敢谁何，一新入孤立之察官，乃锐意出身攻之，此岂易得哉？
现代文：嘱托监察御史洪天锡议论宦官卢允升、董宋臣，奏折上后留于宫中没有结果，大宗正寺丞赵崇把上书改送给谢方叔说 ：宦官们骄横恣肆特别厉害，宰相没有听说去干预，台谏官不敢去弹劾，一新来的势单力孤的监察官，还坚决站出来去指责批评他们，这难道是容易的吗？
English: Supervisor Hong Tianxi, who was commissioned to investigate eunuchs Lu Yunsheng and Dong Songcheng, stayed in the palace after the report was submitted, but there was no result. Daizong Zhengjiro Zhao Chong changed the letter to Uncle Xie Fang and said: The eunuchs were particularly arrogant and arbitrary. The prime minister did not hear to intervene, the Taiwan eunuchs did not dare to impeach, and a newly arrived powerful overseer stood up to criticize them. Is this easy?

古文：侧耳数日，寂无所闻，公议不责备他人，而责备于宰相。
现代文：打听了数天，寂静无声，什么也没听到，公众的议论中不责备其他人，而只责备宰相。
English: After several days of inquiries, there was silence, nothing was heard, and the public discourse did not blame others, but only the prime minister.

古文：不然，仓卒出御笔，某人授少卿，亦必无可遏之理矣，丞相不可谓非我责也。
现代文：不然的话，仓卒之间，御笔批旨，某人授给少卿，也一定没有可以遏止的道理，丞相不应该说这不是我自己的责任。
English: Otherwise, there must be no way to stop someone from rushing to give a written approval to a junior minister. The prime minister should not say that this is not my own responsibility.

古文：丞相得君最深，名位已极。
现代文：丞相是皇上最了解的，官位名声已达到极点。
English: The prime minister knows the emperor best, and the prestige of the post has reached its peak.

古文：傥言之胜，宗社赖之；言之不胜，则去。
现代文：假如说的话算数了，国家因此可以依靠；说的话不能算数，就离职。
English: If what you say counts, the country can rely on you; if what you say doesn't count, you leave the job.

古文：去则诸君必不容不争，是胜亦胜，负亦胜，况未必去耶。 方叔得书，有赧色。
现代文：离职时各位官吏一定不会不争，是胜利也是胜利，失败也是胜利，况且不一定离职呢。 谢方叔得到书信后，脸上有羞愧之色。
English: When officials leave office, they will certainly not leave without a fight. Victory is also victory, defeat is also victory, and moreover, they do not necessarily leave office. After Uncle Xie Fang received the letter, his face was ashamed.

古文：翼日，果得御笔授天锡大理少卿，而天锡去国。
现代文：第二天，果然得到皇帝授任洪天锡为大理少卿的御笔，而洪天锡离开了朝廷。
English: The next day, Hong Tianxi was indeed appointed by the emperor as the Dali Shaoqing, and Hong Tianxi left the court.

古文：于是太学生池元坚、太常寺丞赵崇洁、左史李昴英皆论击允升、宋臣。
现代文：于是太学生池元坚、太常寺丞赵崇洁、左史李昴英，都议论、抨击卢允升、董宋臣。
English: As a result, the students of Taiyuan University, Ike Yuan Jian, the president of Taijō-ji Temple, Zhao Chong Jie, and the left historian, Li Qianying, all discussed and criticized Lu Yunsheng and Dong Song Chen.

古文：而谗者又曰： 天锡之论，方叔意也。 及天锡之去，亦曰： 方叔意也。 方叔上疏自解，于是监察御史朱应元论方叔，罢相。
现代文：而那些谗言者又说 ：洪天锡的议论，是谢方叔的意思。 到洪天锡离职而去，也说： 这是谢方叔的意思。 谢方叔上奏疏为自己解脱，于是监察御史朱应元议论谢方叔，谢方叔因此被罢免宰相的职务。
English: And those detractors also said: Hong Tianxi's discussion was the meaning of Uncle Xie Fang. When Hong Tianxi left office, they also said: This is the meaning of Uncle Xie Fang. Uncle Xie Fang was relieved of his duties, so Supervisor Gu Shi Zhu Yingyuan discussed Uncle Xie Fang, and Uncle Xie Fang was dismissed from the post of prime minister.

古文：既罢，允升、宋臣犹以为未快，厚赂太学生林自养，上书力诋天锡、方叔，且曰： 乞诛方叔，使天下明知宰相台谏之去，出自独断，于内侍初无预焉。 书既上，学舍恶自养党奸，相与鸣鼓攻之，上书以声其罪。
现代文：到罢免职务以后，宦官卢允升、董宋臣还认为不快乐，于是，重金贿赂太学生林自养，上书竭力抨击洪天锡、谢方叔，而且还说： 请求诛杀谢方叔，使天下的人都清楚地知道宰相、台谏被免职，是出自皇上的独自决策，与内侍宦官并没有什么关系。 当奏疏报上皇帝之后，学舍生员都讨厌林自养为阉党奸臣，大家一起鸣鼓攻击他，上书声讨他的罪行。
English: After they were dismissed from their posts, the eunuchs Lu Yunsheng and Dong Songchen also thought that they were unhappy, so they bribed the student Lin Zhiyao with a large sum of money and tried their best to criticize Hong Tianxi and Uncle Xie Fang in a letter, and also said: Requesting the assassination of Uncle Xie Fang, so that people all over the world would clearly know that the dismissal of the prime minister and Taifang came from the emperor's independent decision-making and had nothing to do with the inner eunuchs. When the report was reported to the emperor, the students all hated Lin Zhiyao for being a traitor to the Kuomint

古文：乃授方叔观文殿大学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：于是，授任谢方叔为观文殿大学士、提举洞霄宫。
English: As a result, Uncle Xie Fang was appointed as a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and Dongxiao Palace was promoted.

古文：复以监察御史李衢两劾，褫职罢祠。
现代文：又因为监察御史李衢两次弹劾他，被削职罢祠。
English: He was also removed from his post and forced to resign because the inspector general of history, Li Yan, twice impeached him.

古文：后依旧职，与祠，起居郎召泽、中书舍人林存劾罢；监察御史章士元请更与降削，窜广南。
现代文：后来，按旧职授他，复与祠官禄职，起居郎召泽、中书舍人林存弹劾罢免。监察御史章士元请更改为降职削祠，流放广南。
English: Later, he was appointed to his old post, reinstated to the post of ancestral hall official, impeached and removed from the post of chief priest, and sent into exile to Guangnan.

古文：景定二年，请致仕，乃叙复官职。
现代文：景定二年，请求致仕，于是恢复官职。
English: In the second year of Jingding, he requested to be discharged, so he resumed his official post.

古文：度宗即位，方叔以一琴、一鹤、金丹一粒来进。
现代文：度宗即位之际，谢方叔以一琴、一鹤、金丹一粒来进贡于皇上。
English: When Emperor Wuzong ascended the throne, Uncle Xie Fang paid tribute to the emperor with a harp, a crane, and a piece of jade.

古文：丞相贾似道恐其希望，讽权右司郎官卢越、左司谏赵顺孙、给事中冯梦得、右正言黄镛相继请夺方叔官职封爵，制置使吕文德愿以己官赎其罪。
现代文：丞相贾似道恐怕他有希望恢复职务，暗示代理右司郎官卢越、左司谏赵顺孙、给事中冯梦得、右正言黄镛相继请求弹劾削夺谢方叔的官职与封爵，制置使吕文德希望以自己的官职来赎谢方叔的罪过。
English: I am afraid that he may hope to resume his duties, suggesting that the acting right secretary, Lu Yue, the left secretary, Zhao Shunsun, Feng Mengde in the case, and the right minister, Huang Qi, successively requested impeachment to deprive Uncle Xie Fang of his official position and knighthood, so that Lu Wende hoped to redeem Uncle Xie Fang's sins with his official position.

古文：咸淳七年，诏叙复致仕。
现代文：咸淳七年，诏令恢复官职。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Xianjun, he was restored to his official position by imperial decree.

古文：八年卒。
现代文：咸淳八年死亡。
English: Ham Jun died eight years later.

古文：特赠少师，方叔在相位，子弟干政，若谗余玠之类是也。
现代文：特地赠予他少师。谢方叔在相位时，他的子弟干预政事，如谗害余等之类的事就是其中之一。
English: When Uncle Xie Fang was in power, one of the things he did was to have his son interfere in political affairs, such as instigating a coup.

