古文：太不花太不花，弘吉剌氏。世为外戚，官最贵显。
现代文：太不花，姓弘吉剌氏，其家族世代为外戚，故官最显贵。
English: Tai Fuxa, surnamed Hong Jizhe, whose family has been a maternal relative for generations, is the most prominent official.

古文：太不花沉厚有大度，以世胄入官，累迁云南行省右丞，历通政使、上都留守、辽阳行省平章政事。
现代文：太不花为人沉着、宽厚，因出身于官宦之家而入宫授职，历任云南行省右丞、通政使、上都留守、辽阳行省平章政事。
English: He was a calm and generous person. Because he was born into a family of officials, he was appointed to the imperial court. He was successively appointed to Yunnan Province as the provincial right-hand man, the political envoy, stayed in Shangdu, and Liaoyang Province as the political affairs of Pingzhang.

古文：至正八年，太平为丞相，力荐太不花可大用，召入，为中书平章政事。
现代文：至正八年，太平为丞相，力荐太不花给朝廷重用，于是召入朝任中书平章政事。
English: In the eighth year of the Taiping era, Taiping became chancellor, and he strongly recommended Taiping to the imperial court for re-use, so he was summoned to the imperial court for political affairs.

古文：明年，太平既罢，脱脱复为相。太不花因党于脱脱谋欲害太平，众由是不平之。
现代文：至正九年，罢太平丞相，脱脱复为丞相，太不花因依附于脱脱而欲谋害太平，大家对他不满。
English: In the ninth year of the Heian period, Taiping was ousted as prime minister and Decheng was reinstated as prime minister. Decheng wanted to assassinate Taiping because of his attachment to Decheng, and everyone was dissatisfied with him.

古文：十二年，盗起河南，知枢密院事老章出师久无功，诏拜太不花河南行省平章政事，加太尉，将兵往代之。
现代文：至正十二年，河南人民起义反元，知枢密院事老章无力镇压，朝廷拜太不花为河南行省平章政事，加太尉衔，领兵去代替老章。
English: In the twelfth year of the Ming Dynasty, the people of Henan revolted against the Yuan Dynasty. Knowing that the Privy Councillor Lao Zhang was powerless to suppress the uprising, the imperial court asked the Taiping Emperor to appoint Ping Zhang as the governor of Henan Province, adding the rank of lieutenant and leading the troops to replace Lao Zhang.

古文：未期月，平南阳、汝宁、唐、随，又下安陆、德安等路，招降服叛，动合事宜，军声大振。
现代文：不到一月，他镇压了南阳、汝宁、唐州、随州等地义军，又攻占安陆、德安等路，声威大振。
English: In less than a month, he suppressed the rebels in Nanyang, Runing, Tangzhou, Suizhou and other places, and captured Anlu, De'an and other roads, and his prestige was greatly shaken.

古文：十四年，脱脱以太师、右丞相总大兵征高邮，寻诏夺其兵柄，而升太不花本省左丞相，与太尉月阔察儿、枢密知院雪雪代总其兵。山东、河北诸军悉令太不花节制。
现代文：十四年，脱脱以太师、右丞相之职，总领大军征高邮，但不久被削夺兵权，而升太不花为河南行省左丞相，与太尉月阔察儿、枢密知院雪雪共同代领全国大军；山东、河北诸军则由太不花调遣。
English: In the 14th year of his reign, he was relieved of his duties as ether master and chancellor of the right, and became the leader of the army to collect high post, but he was soon stripped of his military power, and he was promoted to chancellor of the left in Henan Province, and jointly led the national army on behalf of Taifeng Yueguozhaer and Privy Councilor Xuexue; the armies of Shandong and Hebei were dispatched by Taifuozha.

古文：而太不花乃以军士乏粮之故，颇骄傲不遵朝廷命令，军士又往往剽掠为民患。
现代文：太不花因军队缺粮，不听朝廷命令，军士又往往劫掠百姓，深为民患。
English: Due to the army's lack of food, they did not listen to the orders of the imperial court, and the soldiers often robbed the people, causing deep troubles for the people.

古文：十五年，监察御史也里忽都等劾其慢功虐民之罪，于是天子下诏尽夺其职，俾率领火赤温，从平章政事答失八都鲁征进。
现代文：至正十五年，监察御史也里忽都等弹劾其居功骄傲、虐害人民之罪。天子下诏尽夺其职，使率领火赤温，随平章政事答失八都鲁征讨。
English: In the 15th year of the Taisho era, the inspector of imperial history suddenly went to the capital to impeach him for the crime of being proud of his achievements and abusing the people. The emperor did his best to seize his post, and led the fire to Akahara, and with the political affairs of Pingzhang lost the eight capital cities.

古文：顷之，复拜湖广行省左丞相，节制湖广、荆襄诸军，招捕沔阳、湖广等处水陆贼徒。
现代文：但很快复拜湖广行省左丞相，节制湖广、荆襄诸军，招安或捕获沔阳、湖广等处起义人民。
English: However, he soon paid homage to Hukang Xing, the Minister of the Left of the province, restrained the armies of Hukang and Jingxiang, and recruited or captured the people of the uprising in Fenyang, Hukang and other places.

古文：会朝廷复拜太平为中书左丞相，太不花闻之，意不能平，叹曰： 我不负朝廷，朝廷负我矣。
现代文：朝廷复拜太平为中书左丞相。太不花内心不服，叹息道： 我不负朝廷，而朝廷负我。
English: The imperial court revered Taiping as the chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the Left Chancellery. Unconvinced, he sighed, "I am not inferior to the imperial court, but the imperial court is inferior to me."

古文：太平汉人，今乃复居中用事，安受逸乐，我反在外勤苦邪！ 
现代文：太平是汉人，再让他入中书省掌权，享受安乐，反让我勤苦在外。 
English: Taiping is a Han Chinese, and then let him into the book ministry to take power and enjoy peace and quiet, but let me work hard outside.

古文：及击贼，贼且退，诸将皆欲乘胜渡江，而太不花乃反勒兵而退，以养锐为名。
现代文：元官军攻击义军，义军暂退，元军诸将都要求乘胜渡过长江，而太不花反以蓄精养锐为由，强制部队后退。
English: The former government army attacked the rebel army, the rebel army temporarily retreated, the former army generals all demanded to take advantage of the victory to cross the Yangtze River, and they forced the troops to retreat on the grounds of accumulating energy and sharpness.

古文：其后贼犯汴梁，守臣请援兵，至十往反，太不花乃始率兵援汴梁，而犹按甲不进。
现代文：其后，起义军直攻汴梁，汴梁守臣请求援救，遣使十次至太不花处，太不花虽答应援救汴梁，但依然是按兵不进。
English: Afterwards, the insurgents attacked Shiliang directly. Shiliang's retainers requested rescue and sent envoys ten times to Taifuxa. Although Taifuxa promised to rescue Shiliang, it still refused to advance.

古文：时睢、亳、太康俱已陷，边警日急。
现代文：这时，睢州、亳州、太康均为起义军所有，边警日急。
English: At this time, Zhangzhou, Zhangzhou and Taikang were all in the hands of the insurgents, and the border guards were on high alert.

古文：或谏之曰： 贼旦夕且至，丞相兵不进何也？ 
现代文：有人问他： 贼旦夕即至，丞相不进兵为何？ 
English: Someone asked him: Why doesn't the prime minister go into the army when the thief is approaching?

古文：太不花顾左右大言曰： 我在，何物小寇敢犯境邪？若等毋多言，我自有神算也。 
现代文：太不花大声说道 ：我在，何等小寇敢犯边境，你们不必多言，我自有神机妙算。 
English: It doesn't take too much effort to say out loud: I'm here, how dare a little thief break the border, you don't have to say much, I have my own ingenious plan.

古文：既而纵军出掠，百里之内，荡然无遗。
现代文：他纵兵四处抢劫，百里之内，荡然无遗。
English: He went on a rampage, robbing everything within a hundred miles.

古文：继又渡师河北，声取曹、濮，遂驻于彰德、卫辉。
现代文：随后又率军渡过黄河，声称要取曹州、濮州，却屯军于彰德、卫辉。
English: Subsequently, he also led the army across the Yellow River, claiming to take Caozhou and Zhangzhou, but the army was stationed in Changde and Weihui.

古文：俄而曹、濮之贼夺窜晋、冀，大同亦相继不守，遂蔓延不可制。
现代文：曹、濮方面的起义军进攻晋、冀，占据大同，其势不可阻挡。
English: The insurgents of Cao and Fan attacked Jin and Hebei and occupied Datong. Their momentum was unstoppable.

古文：朝廷以为忧，两遣重臣谕以密旨，授之成算，而太不花恬不为意。
现代文：朝廷深为忧虑，两次遣重臣去令太不花出兵抵御，并告诉他用兵方略，而太不花满不在乎。
English: The imperial court was deeply worried, and twice sent a senior minister to order Taizu to send troops to resist, and told him to use troops, but Taizu did not care.

古文：是时，其子寿童以同知枢密院事将兵分讨山东，久无功，尝以事入奏，语言有骄慢意，帝由是恶之。
现代文：这时，太不花之子寿童以同知枢密院事之职领兵征讨山东，久而无功，但对朝廷都态度傲慢，顺帝更加憎恶。
English: At this time, Shou Tong, the son of Tai Fuhua, led the troops to recruit Shandong as the leader of the Tongzhi Privy Council. It was fruitless for a long time, but his attitude towards the imperial court was arrogant, and he detested Emperor Shun even more.

古文：十八年，山东贼愈充斥，且逼近京畿，于是诏拜太不花中书右丞相，总其兵讨山东。
现代文：至正十八年，山东义军进逼京畿，朝廷诏拜太不花为中书右丞相，领兵进攻山东。
English: In the 18th year of the Heian period, the Shandong Uyghur army invaded and besieged Gyeonggi, and the imperial court made Emperor Baidai the chancellor of the imperial court and the leader of the army to attack Shandong.

古文：既渡河，即上疏以谓： 贼势张甚，军行宜以粮饷为先。
现代文：太不花在大军渡过黄河后上书朝廷说： 贼势很强，军行应以粮饷为先。
English: After the great army crossed the Yellow River, Taifuxing sent a letter to the imperial court saying: The bandits are very strong, and the military campaign should start with grain.

古文：昔汉韩信行军，萧何馈粮，方今措画，无如丞相太平者，如令太平至军中供给，事乃可济，不然兵不能进矣。 
现代文：昔汉代韩信行军，萧何运粮。现在是丞相太平筹划一切，如果太平亲自运送军粮，事情就好办些，否则我军不能进。 
English: Back in Han Dynasty, Han Xin marched and Xiao He transported grain. Now, it is Prime Minister Taiping who plans everything. If Taiping personally transports grain, things will be easier to manage. Otherwise, our army will not be able to advance.

古文：其意实衔太平，欲其至军中即害之也。
现代文：其含意是怨恨太平，想把他诓到军中来害死。
English: The implication is that he resented Taiping and wanted to lure him into the army to be killed.

古文：时参知政事卜颜帖木儿、张晋等分省山东，二人者尝劾寿童不进兵，太不花至，则以其馈运不前断遣之。
现代文：这时参知政事卜颜帖木儿、张晋等巡察山东，二人弹劾寿童不进兵。太不花来山东后借口军粮未运来，将二人断然遣回朝廷。
English: At this time, the political advisors Buyan, Timur, Zhang Jin and others inspected Shandong, and the two of them impeached Shou Tong for not joining the army. After Shou Tang came to Shandong, he sent the two of them back to the imperial court on the pretext that the army rations had not been delivered.

古文：又以知枢密院事完者帖木儿为右丞之日尝劾其非，亦加以失误专制之罪，擅改其官，征至军欲害之。
现代文：知枢密院事完者帖木儿为右丞时，曾弹劾太不花之不法行为，太不花记恨于心，以失误专制之罪名，擅自更改完者帖木儿的官职，把他召到军欲杀害他。
English: When he knew that Tamerlane, the finisher of the Privy Council, was the right-hand man, he had impeached him for the illegal act of being too careless, too careless to bear grudges, and changed the official position of Tamerlane, the finisher, without authorization, on the charge of making a mistake and despotism, and summoned him to the army to kill him.

古文：事闻，廷议喧然。
现代文：这些事朝廷知道后，众皆哗然。
English: After the Imperial Court learned of these events, everyone was in an uproar.

古文：而太平与太不花久有隙，会其疏来上，以其欲害己也，遂讽监察御史迷只儿海等劾其缓师拒命之罪，而于帝前力谮之。
现代文：太平与太不花素来不和，现见太不花有书上奏，以为是要害他自己，便唆使监察御史迷只儿海等，弹劾太不花抗拒朝廷不肯出兵镇压义军之罪，他自己也面向顺帝极力说太不花的不是。
English: Taiping had been at odds with Emperor Taifu from the beginning. Now, he thought that Emperor Taifu was trying to harm him, so he instigated the supervision of Emperor Taifu, and impeached Emperor Taifu for resisting the imperial court's refusal to send troops to suppress the rebel army. He also tried his best to tell Emperor Shun that Emperor Taifu was wrong.

古文：于是乃下诏削其官爵，夺其兵柄，安置于盖州，以知枢密院事悟良哈台总其兵。
现代文：于是，顺帝下诏削太不花官爵，夺其兵权，要把他软禁于盖州，由知枢密院事悟良哈台总领全国兵马。
English: As a result, Emperor Shun stripped him of his title and military power, and put him under house arrest in Gezhou, with the Privy Council Secretary Guoliang Hatai leading the national army.

古文：太不花闻有诏，夜驰诣刘哈剌不花求救解。
现代文：太不花听说朝廷有诏要削夺他的官爵兵权，连夜到刘哈剌不花那里求救。
English: When he heard that the imperial court had issued an edict to strip him of his title of nobility and the right to serve in the military, he went to Liu Harbin where he could seek help.

古文：刘哈剌不花者，太不花故部将也，以破贼累有功，拜淮南行省平章政事，时驻兵保定。
现代文：刘哈剌不花原是太不花的部将，因镇压起义军有功而拜为淮南省平章政事，领兵屯驻保定。
English: Liu Harqin was a great general, and because of his contribution to the suppression of the rebel army, he was appointed as the governor of Pingzhang in Huainan Province and stationed in Baoding.

古文：见太不花来，因张乐大宴，举酒慷慨言曰： 丞相国家柱石，有大勋劳如此，天子终不害丞相，是必谗言间之耳。
现代文：他弄清太不花来意后说道 ：丞相是国家柱石，对国家有大功大劳，天子决不会害丞相，必是有谗言离间你和天子。
English: After making it clear that he did not mean any harm, he said: "The prime minister is the pillar of the country, and has done great service to the country. The heavenly son will never harm the prime minister. There must be a quarrel between you and the heavenly son."

古文：我当自往见上言之，丞相毋忧也。 
现代文：我应当去见天子，丞相毋忧。 
English: I should go to see the Son of God, so don't worry.

古文：哈剌不花即走至京，首见太平。太平问其来何故，哈剌不花具以其故告之。
现代文：哈剌不花到京师首先见太平，太平问他来干什么，刘哈剌不花如实以告。
English: It didn't take him long to get to Beijing. He first saw Taiping. Taiping asked him what he had come to do. Liu Hao told him the truth.

古文：太平曰： 太不花大逆不道，今诏已下，尔乃敢辄妄言邪？
现代文：太平说 ：太不花大逆不道，今诏书已下，尔还敢胡言乱语吗？
English: Taiping said, "It would not take much to be a traitor. Now that the edict has been issued, do you still dare to talk nonsense?"

古文：不审处，祸将及尔矣。 
现代文：若不谨慎行事，你也将身受其祸。 
English: If you're not careful, you'll be next.

古文：哈剌不花闻太平言，畏惧，噤不能发。
现代文：刘哈剌不花听太平如此说，不敢再说什么了。
English: Liu Hao didn't pay attention to what Taiping said, and didn't dare to say anything else.

古文：太平度太不花必在哈剌不花所，即语之曰： 尔能致太不花以来，吾以尔见上，尔功不细矣。 
现代文：太平估计太不花必在刘哈剌不花那里，因对他说。 你能把太不花弄来，我可以带你去见皇上，你的功不小。 
English: Taiping estimated that the money would have to be spent in Liu Hao's place, so he said to him, "If you can get the money, I can take you to see the emperor, your contribution is not small."

古文：哈剌不花因许之。
现代文：刘哈剌不花答应了。
English: Liu Hao said yes without hesitation.

古文：太平乃引入见帝，赐赉良渥。
现代文：太平把刘哈剌不花引见顺帝，帝赏赐他许多东西。
English: Taiping introduced Liu Haofei to Emperor Shun, who rewarded him with many things.

古文：初，刘哈剌不花之为部将于太不花也，与倪晦者同在幕下，太不花每委任晦，而哈剌不花计多阻不行，哈剌不花心尝以为怨。
现代文：原先，刘哈剌不花为太不花部将时，与倪晦同为幕僚，太不花每次委任倪晦，而刘哈剌不花提出的计策却多不被采纳，心怀怨恨。
English: Originally, Liu Harbin spent most of his time as a vice-minister of the ministry, and was the same as Ni Yuxuan as a staff member. It took Ni Yuxuan every time he was appointed, but the strategies proposed by Liu Harbin were mostly not adopted, and he harbored resentment.

古文：及是，知事已不可解，还，缚太不花父子送京师，未至，皆杀之于路。
现代文：到这时，知太不花的事不可挽救了，回去将太不花父子绑送京师，在途中就将他们处决了。
English: By this time, Zhituo's situation was beyond saving. When he returned to Beijing, he tied up Zhituo and his son and sent them to the capital, where they were executed on the way.

古文：察罕帖木儿扩廓帖木儿
现代文：察罕帖木儿字廷瑞，祖籍北庭。
English: Chakhan Timur, known as Ting Rui, was born in Beiting.

古文：察罕帖木儿，字廷瑞，系出北庭。曾祖阔阔台，元初随大军收河南。
现代文：曾祖阔阔台在元初随大军征取河南。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, Zengzu Kuo Kuo Tai led a large army to conquer Henan.

古文：至祖乃蛮台、父阿鲁温，皆家河南，为颍州沈丘人。
现代文：其祖父乃蛮台、父阿鲁温都定居颍州沈丘，因以河南为籍贯。
English: His grandfather, Naimandai, and his father, Aruwin, both settled in Shenqiu, Ganzhou, and were originally from Henan Province.

古文：察罕帖木儿幼笃学，尝应进士举，有时名。
现代文：察罕帖木儿自幼好学，有大志。
English: Chakhan Timur was eager to learn from a young age and had big ambitions.

古文：身长七尺，修眉覆目，左颊有三毫，或怒则毫皆直指。
现代文：至正十一年红巾军在汝宁和颍州起义反元，攻下江淮诸郡，屡败元军。
English: In the eleventh year of the Ming Dynasty, the Red Scarf Army rebelled against the Yuan Dynasty in the Runing and Zhangzhou Uprisings, captured Zhu County in the Jianghuai Province, and repeatedly defeated the Yuan Dynasty army.

古文：十二年，察罕帖木儿乃奋义起兵，沈丘之子弟从者数百人。与信阳之罗山人李思齐合兵，同设奇计袭破罗山。
现代文：十二年察罕帖木儿在沈丘募兵数百人与信阳罗山人李思齐合兵谋取罗山。
English: In the twelfth year, Cahan Timur recruited hundreds of soldiers in Shenqiu and Li Siqi, a mountaineer from Shinyang, to join forces to capture Luoshan.

古文：事闻，朝廷授察罕帖木儿中顺大夫、汝宁府达鲁花赤。
现代文：朝廷授他为中顺大夫、汝宁府达鲁花赤，部队增为万余人，驻守沈丘。
English: The imperial court awarded him the title of Zhongshun Doctor and the title of Daruhana of Ruining Prefecture, and the troops were increased to more than 10,000 and stationed in Shenqiu.

古文：会大风扬沙，自率猛士鼓噪从中起，奋击贼中坚，贼势遂披靡不能支，弃旗鼓遁走，追杀十余里，斩首无算。军声益大振。
现代文：十五年红巾军势力弥漫于邓、许、嵩、洛一带。察罕帖木儿大败义军，因功授职为刑部侍郎。不久，义军三十万攻汴京以西，袭击中牟。察罕帖木儿屯军中牟，严阵以待，败义军，军声大振。
English: In the 15th year, the Red Scarf Army's influence spread to the areas of Deng, Xu, Song and Luo. Cahan Timur suffered a great defeat at the hands of the rebel army and was awarded the position of a guard of honor. Soon, 300,000 rebel soldiers attacked west of Beijing, attacking Zhongmou. Cahan Timur was in the middle of the army, waiting in the line, defeated the rebel army, and the army's voice was loud.

古文：十六年，升中书兵部尚书，阶嘉议大夫。
现代文：因功升中书兵部尚书。
English: Due to his merits, he was promoted to the middle school calligraphy club.

古文：继而贼西陷陕州，断殽、函，势欲趋秦、晋。
现代文：十六年义军攻陷陕州，占据肴殳陵、函谷关，打算向陕西、山西推进。
English: Sixteen years ago, the rebel army invaded and occupied Shaanxi Province, occupying Shanzhauling and Hanyu Pass, and planned to advance to Shaanxi and Shanxi Provinces.

古文：知枢密院事答失八都鲁方节制河南军，调察罕帖木儿与李思齐往攻之。
现代文：知枢密院事答失八都鲁调察罕帖木儿与李思齐率军堵截。
English: Han Timur and Li Siqi led the army to block the interception.

古文：察罕帖木儿追袭之，蹙之以铁骑。
现代文：察罕帖木儿攻克肴殳陵，义军固守陕州，两军相峙。
English: Tsakhan Timur conquered Shanshan Burling, the rebels held on to Shaanxi, and the two armies confronted each other.

古文：贼回扼下阳津，赴水死者甚众。
现代文：后义军渡过黄河，攻陷平陆和安邑，转战于山西南部。
English: Later, the rebels crossed the Yellow River, conquered Pinglu and Anyi, and then fought in the south of Shanxi.

古文：相持数月，贼势穷，皆遁溃。以功加中奉大夫、佥河北行枢密院事。
现代文：察罕帖木儿率元军与义军周旋数月，迫使义军转战他处，因功加中奉大夫、佥河北行枢密院事。
English: Cahan Timur led the Yuan army and the rebels for several months, forcing the rebels to fight elsewhere, and because of his service, he was promoted to the post of middle doctor and went to the north of He River to work for the Privy Council.

古文：十七年，贼寻出襄樊，陷商州，攻武关，官军败走，遂直趋长安，至灞上，分道掠同、华诸州，三辅震恐。陕西省台来告急。
现代文：十七年义军出襄樊，陷商州、攻武关，直趋长安。然后又分兵攻取同州、华州，陕西中部所谓 三辅 地区大为震动，陕西行省告急。
English: In the 17th year, the rebels came out of Xiangfan, trapped in Shangzhou, attacked Wuguan, and headed straight for Chang'an. Then, another detachment of troops captured Tongzhou, Huazhou, and the so-called Sanshui region in central Shaanxi, which was very shocking, and the provinces of Shaanxi were in an emergency.

古文：察罕帖木儿即领大众入潼关，长驱而前，与贼遇，战辄胜，杀获以亿万计。
现代文：察罕帖木儿率大军入潼关与义军大战。
English: Cahan Timur led a large army into Shaoguan and fought against the rebels.

古文：贼大溃，自相践蹂，斩首数万级，伏尸百余里，余党皆遁还。关中悉定。
现代文：义军转入南山，进军兴元路。朝廷因收复关陕有功而授察罕帖木儿资善大夫、陕西行省左丞。不久，义军又从巴蜀攻陷秦陇，占领巩昌，欲进军凤翔。察罕帖木儿自率骑兵与义军血战，义军受挫，关中全为元军收复。
English: The rebel army turned into the Nanshan Mountains and marched into Xingyuan Road. The imperial court awarded Chakhan Timur the title of doctor of medicine and the title of provincial commissar of Shaanxi Province for his contribution to the recovery of Guanzha. Soon, the rebel army invaded Qinbei from Bashu, occupied Gongchang, and wanted to march into Fengxiang. Chakhan Timur led his cavalry into a bloody battle with the rebel army. The rebel army suffered a setback, and Guanzhong was completely recovered by the former army.

古文：十八年，山东贼分道犯京畿。朝廷征四方兵入卫，诏察罕帖木儿以兵屯涿州。
现代文：至正十八年，山东义军分兵进逼京都，朝廷恐慌，征调四方元军来保卫，令察罕帖木儿屯兵涿州。
English: In the 18th year of the Heian period, a detachment of the Shandong Volunteer Army marched into Kyoto, causing panic in the imperial court, which called in four armies to defend the capital, and ordered Chakhan Timur to garrison Bozhou.

古文：察罕帖木儿即留兵戍清湫、义谷，屯潼关，塞南山口，以备他盗。而自将锐卒往赴召。
现代文：察罕帖木儿留一部分元军分守清湫、义谷、潼关、南山口诸地，自己领精锐士卒赶赴涿州。
English: Chakhan Timur left a part of the Yuan army to guard the provinces of Qingdao, Yidong, Shaoguan, and Nanshankou, and led his elite soldiers to rush to Zhangzhou.

古文：而曹、濮贼方分道逾太行，焚上党，掠晋、冀，陷云中、雁门、代郡，烽火数千里，复大掠南且还。
现代文：这时义军声势大张，曹州、濮州一带义军分道越过太行山，活跃于山西、河北一带，攻占云中、雁门、代郡，烽火数千里，向南推进。
English: At this time, the rebel army was in full swing. The detachment of the rebel army in Caozhou and Zhangzhou crossed the Taihang Mountain, and was active in Shanxi and Hebei, capturing Yunchu, Yanmen and Dayi County, setting thousands of miles on fire and advancing southward.

古文：察罕帖木儿先遣兵伏南山阻隘，而自勒重兵屯闻喜、绛阳。
现代文：察罕帖木儿伏兵于南山，自领重兵屯驻闻喜、绛阳，与南下义军大战。
English: Chakhan Timur ambushed soldiers in Nanshan, stationed heavy troops under his command in Wuxi and Shenyang, and waged a great war against the southern rebels.

古文：贼果走南山，纵伏兵横击之，贼皆弃辎重走山谷，其得南还者无几。乃分兵屯泽州，塞碗子城，屯上党，塞吾儿谷，屯并州，塞井陉口，以杜太行诸道。
现代文：以后又分兵屯守碗子城、上党、吾儿谷、并州、井陉口，以堵塞太行山的通道。
English: Later, detachments of soldiers were stationed to guard Banzhicheng, Shangdang, Wu'er Valley, Bianzhou and Jinghongkou to block the passage of Taihang Mountain.

古文：贼屡至，守将数血战击却之，河东悉定。进陕西行省右丞，兼陕西行台侍御史、同知河南行枢密院事。
现代文：义军多次进攻失利。察罕帖木儿又因功进升陕西行省右丞兼陕西行台侍御史、同知河南行枢密院事。
English: The rebels repeatedly failed in their attacks. Cahan Timur was also promoted to the post of provincial right-hand man of Shaanxi Province, the post of governor of Shaanxi Province, the post of governor of Taiwan Province, and the post of privy councilor of Henan Province.

古文：于是天子乃诏察罕帖木儿守御关陕、晋、冀，抚镇汉、沔、荆、襄，便宜行阃外事。察罕帖木儿益务练兵训农，以平定四方为己责。
现代文：皇帝诏令他守御关陕、晋、冀，可自行处理汉、沔、荆襄军职外的事务。察罕帖木儿以练兵务农、平定四方为己任。
English: The emperor ordered him to guard the imperial cities of Shaanxi, Jin and Hebei, and he could independently handle the affairs of the Han, Min and Jingxiang armies outside his duties. It was his duty to train soldiers in agriculture and to pacify the four directions.

古文：是年，安丰贼刘福通等陷汴梁，造宫阙，易正朔，号召群盗。巴蜀、荆楚、江淮、齐鲁、辽海，西至甘肃，所在兵起，势相联结。
现代文：这一年，安丰红巾军刘福通攻下汴梁，修宫室建为国都，巴蜀、荆楚、江淮、齐鲁、辽海以至甘肃各路义军起而响应，相互连结。
English: In the same year, Liu Fortong of the Anfeng Red Scarf Army captured Yanliang, the palace was built as the national capital, and the Ba Shu, Jing Chu, Jianghuai, Qilu, Liaohai and Gansu armies responded and connected with each other.

古文：察罕帖木儿乃北塞太行，南守巩、洛，而自将中军军沔池。
现代文：察罕帖木儿督军北堵义军于太行，南守巩县、洛阳，自将中军屯驻沔池。
English: Chakhan Timur commanded the army in the north to block the rebels in Taihang, in the south to defend Gongxian and Luoyang, and stationed the Chinese army in Dianchi.

古文：贼至城下，见坚壁不可犯，退引去，因追至虎牢，塞成皋诸险而还。拜陕西行省平章政事，仍兼同知行枢密院事，便宜行事。十九年，察罕帖木儿图复汴梁。
现代文：守覃怀部将周全叛，投向义军，与义军合兵围攻洛阳。察罕帖木儿一面下令洛阳元军严守，一面自己率兵从新安支援。义军久攻洛阳不下，撤走，察罕帖木儿因守住了洛阳而拜官为陕西行省平章政事，兼任同知行枢密院事。至正十九年，察罕帖木儿企图收复汴梁。
English: Shou Yan Huai rebelled against Zhou Quanzhang and joined the rebels to besiege Luoyang. Tsakhan Timur ordered the former Luoyang army to hold out, while he led his own troops to support from Xin'an. The rebels attacked Luoyang for a long time and retreated. As a result of defending Luoyang, Tsakhan Timur became an official for the government of Pingzhang Province in Shaanxi, and also served as a councillor for the Privy Council. By the 19th year, Tsakhan Timur attempted to recapture Shiliang.

古文：五月，以大军次虎牢。先发游骑，南道出汴南，略归、亳、陈、察，北道出汴东，战船浮于河，水陆并下，略曹南，据黄陵渡。
现代文：五月大军屯驻于虎牢关，先遣军南出汴南，占据归德府、陈州、亳州、上蔡，北出汴东，沿黄河而下，占领曹州以南之黄陵渡。
English: In May, the large army was stationed in Tigardoguan, and the advance troops were sent south from southern Luzhou to occupy Guidefu, Chenzhou, Luzhou, Shangcai, north from eastern Luzhou, down along the Yellow River, and occupied Huanglingdu south of Caozhou.

古文：乃日修车船，缮兵甲，务农积谷，训练士卒，谋大举以复山东。
现代文：双方从五月一直战到八月，义军粮缺，元军各分门围攻。刘福通以百骑护其宋国国主韩林儿由东门突围而去。
English: The two sides fought from May to August, the rebels were short of food, and the Yuan army besieged each sub-gate. Liu Fortong used a hundred horsemen to protect Han Lin Er, the ruler of the Song Dynasty, and broke out of the East Gate.

古文：先是，山西晋、冀之地皆察罕帖木儿所平定。
现代文：不到十天河南平定。察罕帖木儿又以功拜河南行省平章政事，兼知河南行枢密院事、陕西行台御史中丞。
English: Less than ten days later, Henan was pacified. Chakhan Timur also distinguished himself in the political affairs of Pingzhang Province in Henan Province, the Privy Council Affairs in Henan Province, and the History of Taiwan in Shaanxi Province.

古文：而答失八都鲁之子曰孛罗帖木儿，以兵驻大同，因欲并据晋、冀，遂至兵争，天子屡下诏和解之，终不听，事见《本纪》及《答失八都鲁传》中。
现代文：察罕帖木儿平定中原后，又分兵镇守关陕、荆襄、河洛、江淮，而以重兵屯驻太行，修缮车船兵甲，务农积谷，训练士卒，准备再收复山东。
English: After conquering the Central Plains, Tsakhan Timur divided his troops to guard Guanshan, Jingxiang, Helo, and Jianghuai, while he stationed heavy troops in Taihang, repaired vehicles and ships, worked in the agricultural valley, trained soldiers, and prepared to recapture Shandong.

古文：二十一年，谍知山东群贼自相攻杀，而济宁田丰降于贼。六月，察罕帖木儿乃舆疾自陕抵洛，大会诸将，与议师期。
现代文：至正二十一年六月，察罕帖木儿闻山东义军内部不和，而济宁元军田丰部却投降义军，乃火速自陕抵洛，大会诸将，商议出兵日期。
English: In June, the twenty-first year of the Heian period, Tsakhan Timur heard that there was discord within the Shandong rebel army, but Jining's former military commander, Toyobe, surrendered to the rebel army. He quickly arrived in Luo from Shaanxi, and the general assembly of generals discussed the date of dispatch of troops.

古文：发并州军出井陉，辽、沁军出邯郸，泽、潞军出磁州，怀、卫军出白马，及汴、洛军，水陆俱下，分道并进。
现代文：会后发并州军出井陉，辽、沁军出邯郸，泽、潞军出磁州，怀、卫军出白马，汴、洛军水陆俱下，分道并进。
English: After the meeting, it was announced that the Liao and Luo armies would march out of Jingzhou, the Liao and Luo armies would march out of Zhengzhou, the Zhe and Luo armies would march out of Zhengzhou, the Huai and Wei armies would march out of Baima, and the Luo and Luo armies would march together on land and on water.

古文：而自率铁骑，建大将旗鼓，渡孟津，逾覃怀，鼓行而东，复冠州、东昌。
现代文：察罕帖木儿自率铁骑渡孟津，越过覃怀，向东进发，收复冠州、东昌。
English: Chakhan Timur led his cavalry to Mengjin, crossed the Yunnan-Hai and headed east to recapture Guanzhou and Dongchang.

古文：八月，师至盐河。
现代文：八月，师至盐河。
English: In August, the division arrived in Yanhe.

古文：察罕帖木儿以田丰据山东久，军民服之，乃遣书谕以逆顺之理。
现代文：遣其子扩廓帖木儿及诸将，以精兵五万进攻东平，两战两捷，斩首万余级，直抵城下。
English: He sent his son, Tamerlane, and other generals to attack Dongping with 50,000 elite soldiers, winning two battles and two victories, beheading more than 10,000 people, and reaching the city.

古文：丰及王士诚皆降。遂复东平、济宁。
现代文：田丰及王士诚皆降，元军收复东平、济宁。
English: Tian Feng and Wang Shicheng both surrendered, and the Yuan forces recovered Dongping and Jining.

古文：时大军犹未渡，群贼皆聚于济南，而出兵齐河、禹城以相抗。
现代文：这时大军还未渡河，义军聚于济南，两军在齐河、禹城对峙。
English: At this time, the large army had not yet crossed the river, the rebels gathered in Jinan, and the two armies confronted each other in Qihe and Yucheng.

古文：察罕帖木儿分遣奇兵，取间道出贼后，南略泰安，逼益都，北徇济阳、章丘，中循濒海郡邑。
现代文：察罕帖木儿分兵取小道绕敌后方，南攻泰安，进逼益都，北攻济阳、章丘，中路夺取沿海诸郡，自领大军渡黄河，与义军战于分齐，大败义军，进逼济南城。
English: Cahan Timur's detachment took the trail around the enemy's rear, attacked Tai'an in the south, advanced to Yidu, attacked Jiyang and Zhangqiu in the north, captured the coastal counties in the middle, led the army across the Yellow River, fought with the rebels in the parallel, defeated the rebels, and advanced to Jinan City.

古文：乃自将大军渡河，与贼将战于分齐，大败之，进逼济南城，而齐河、禹城俱来降，南道诸将亦报捷。再败益都兵于好石桥，东至海滨，郡邑闻风皆送款。
现代文：齐河、禹城相继投降，南路诸军亦告捷。接着元军又败益都义军于好石桥，东至海滨，郡县闻风而降。
English: Qihe and Yucheng surrendered one after another, and the troops on the south road were also successful. Then the Yuan army defeated and defeated the rebels at the good stone bridge, east to the seashore, and the county fell to the wind.

古文：攻围济南三月，城乃下。
现代文：察罕帖木儿围攻济南三月才下。
English: Tsakhan Timur besieged Jinan in March.

古文：诏拜中书平章政事、知河南山东行枢密院事，陕西行台中丞如故。
现代文：朝廷拜为中书平章政事，知河南、山东行枢密院事，仍兼陕西行台中丞。
English: He was appointed by the imperial court as the political affairs of Pingzhang of the Central Government, the Privy Councillor of Henan Province and Shandong Province, and the Vice-President of Shaanxi Province and Taiwan Province.

古文：察罕帖木儿遂移兵围益都，环城列营凡数十，大治攻具，百道并进。
现代文：其后率军围益都，环城列营凡数十，大量修造攻城器械。城中义军顽强抵抗。
English: Later, he led the army to encircle Yiwu, and there were dozens of encampments around the city, and a large number of siege engines were built. The rebels in the city put up stubborn resistance.

古文：先是，有白气如索，长五百余丈，起危宿，扫太微垣。
现代文：到二十二年，山东除益都外，其余均为元军占领。是年六月，田丰、王士诚暗中与义军连结，图谋叛元。
English: By 1922, all of Shandong except Yidu was occupied by Yuan forces. In June of the same year, Tian Feng and Wang Shicheng secretly linked up with the rebels and plotted to betray Yuan.

古文：太史奏山东当大水。帝曰： 不然，山东必失一良将。 
现代文：察罕帖木儿闻知，不顾别人劝阻，带轻骑十一人先后至王信及田丰营，希望能说服他们。
English: Despite the dissuasion of others, he took eleven riders to Wangxin and Tianfeng Camp, hoping to convince them.

古文：即驰诏戒察罕帖木儿勿轻举，未至而已及于难。
现代文：不幸为王士诚杀害。
English: Unfortunately, Wang Shicheng was killed.

古文：诏赠推诚定远宣忠亮节功臣、开府仪同三司、上柱国、河南行省左丞相，追封忠襄王，谥献武。
现代文：朝廷闻之无不恸哭。诏赠推诚定远宣忠亮节功臣、开府仪同三司、上柱国、河南行省左丞相，追封忠襄王、谥 献武 。
English: The imperial court heard all of this and wept. The imperial edict awarded the title of "Celebrating the Brightness of the Year of the Emperor" to Zhencheng Dingyuan, the title of "Celebrating the Brightness of the Year of the Emperor" to Zhencheng Dingyuan, the title of "Celebrating the Brightness of the Year of the Emperor" to Zhencheng Dingyuan, the title of "Celebrating the Brightness of the Year of the Emperor" to Zhencheng Dingyuan, the title of "Celebrating the Brightness of the Year of the Emperor" to Zhencheng Dingyuan, the title

古文：及葬，赐赙有加，改赠宣忠兴运弘仁效节功臣，追封颍川王，改谥忠襄，食邑沈丘县，所在立祠，岁时致祭。封其父阿鲁温汝阳王，后又进封梁王。
现代文：后又改赠宣忠兴运弘仁效节功臣，追封颍川王，改谥 忠襄 ，食邑沈丘县，立祠每年祭祀。追封其父阿鲁温为汝阳王，后又进封为梁王。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Xuanzhong Xingyun Hongren Gongsheng Gongsheng, and the title of the King of the Liang River, and the title of the King of the Liang River, and the title of the King of the Liang River, and the title of the King of the Liang River, and the title of the King of the Liang River, and the title of the King of the Liang River.

