古文：景穆皇帝十四男。
现代文：景穆皇帝有十四个儿子。
English: Emperor Jingmu had fourteen sons.

古文：恭皇后生文成皇帝。
现代文：恭皇后生文成皇帝。
English: Empress Gong gives birth to Emperor Wencheng.

古文：袁椒房生阳平幽王新成。
现代文：袁椒房生阳平幽王新成。
English: Yuan Zhaofang is the son of Yang Ping and Wang Xincheng.

古文：尉椒房生京兆康王子推、济阴王小新成。
现代文：尉椒房生京兆康王子推、济阴王小新成。
English: Jing Zhaokang's son Jing Zhaokang pushed the prince, and Jiyin's son Xiaoxin became the king.

古文：阳椒房生汝阴灵王天赐。
现代文：阳椒房生汝阴灵王天题。
English: Yangjiao Fangsheng Ru Yinling Wang Tianqi.

古文：乐浪厉王万寿、广平殇王洛侯，母并阙。
现代文：乐良厉王万寿、广平殇王洛侯，母亲的记载都缺略。
English: Le Liang Li Wang Wanshou, Guangping Zi Wang Luo Hou, the mother's records are missing.

古文：孟椒房生任城康王云。
现代文：孟椒房生任城康王元云。
English: Meng Jiao Fang's son is named Cheng Kang Wang Yuanyun.

古文：刘椒房生南安惠王桢、城阳康王长寿。
现代文：刘椒房生南安惠王五檀、城阳康王体。
English: Liu Jiao Fang's students are Nan'an Hui Wang Wudan and Chengyang Kang Wang Ti.

古文：慕容椒房生章武敬王太洛。
现代文：慕容椒房生童武董旺左盗。
English: Murong Jiao Fang's son Tongwu Dong Wangzao plays the role of a thief.

古文：尉椒房生乐陵康王胡兒。
现代文：尉椒房生乐陵康王蛆旦。
English: Le Jiao Fang Sheng Le Ling Kang Wang Xidan.

古文：孟椒房生安定靖王休。
现代文：孟椒房生安定靖王元休。
English: Meng Jiao Fang Sheng Jing Wang Yuan Xiu.

古文：赵王深早薨，无传，母阙。
现代文：赵王元深过早逝世，没有传记，母亲的记载缺略。
English: Zhao Wangyuan died prematurely, there is no biography, the mother's record is missing.

古文：魏旧太子后庭未有位号，高宗即位，恭宗宫人有子者，并号为椒房。
现代文：魏国旧日太子的后庭没有名号，高宗即位后，恭宗的宫女凡生了儿子的。都称为椒房。
English: In ancient Wei, the backyard of the crown prince did not have a name. After Emperor Gao Zong ascended the throne, the concubines of Emperor Gongzong who gave birth to sons were all called "pepper room."

古文：阳平王新成，太安三年封，拜征西大将军。
现代文：阳平王新成，太安三年封，被任命为征西大将军。
English: Yangping Wang Xincheng, a three-year envoy of Taian, was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition.

古文：后为内都大官。
现代文：后来担任内都大官。
English: Later, he served as the inner city's top official.

古文：薨，谥曰幽。
现代文：逝世，谧号为幽。
English: His posthumous name was Yu.

古文：长子安寿，袭爵。
现代文：长子安寿，继承爵位。
English: The eldest son, Yasuhisa, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：高祖赐名颐。
现代文：高祖赐名为五压。
English: It was given the name Wuchang by Gao Zu.

古文：累迁怀朔镇大将，都督三道诸军事北讨。
现代文：屡经升迁为怀朔镇大将、都督三道诸军事，向北讨伐。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the general of Wai Shuo Town and the military governor of the three provinces, leading the northward crusade.

古文：诏徵赴京，勖以战伐之事。
现代文：诏书征召赶往京城，以征战的事加以勉励。
English: He was summoned by imperial edict to rush to the capital to encourage him to go to war.

古文：对曰： 当仰仗庙算，使呼韩同渭桥之礼。 
现代文：窒画回答说： 应当仰仗朝廷制定的克敌谋略，使坠垄同行躯的礼节。 
English: The painter replied, "We should rely on the strategy of defeating the enemy formulated by the imperial court and the etiquette of falling into a rut.

古文：帝叹曰： 壮哉王言！
现代文：皇帝赞叹说： 王的话有气魄!
English: The emperor said with admiration: The king's words are full of spirit!

古文：朕所望也。 
现代文：这是我所盼望的。 
English: That's what I was hoping for.

古文：未发，遭母忧，诏遣侍臣以金革敦喻。
现代文：没有出发，遭遇母亲去世，诏令派遣侍臣以战事敦促晓谕他。
English: He did not set out, but when his mother died, he was ordered by the emperor to send a courtier to urge him to go to war.

古文：既殡而发，与陆叡集三道诸将议军途所诣。
现代文：出殡后就出发，和卫塑聚集三路将领商议出军路线。
English: After the funeral, they set out, and gathered with Wei Shou and the three generals to discuss the route of the army.

古文：于是中道出黑山，东道趋士卢河，西道向侯延河。
现代文：于是中路出兵到黑山，东路赶往士卢河，西路赶往侯延河。
English: As a result, troops were dispatched to Montenegro on the middle route, to the Shilu River on the east route, and to the Houyan River on the west route.

古文：军过大碛，大破蠕蠕。
现代文：军队通过大戈壁，大败蠕蠕。
English: The army passed through the Great Gobi and suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：颐入朝，诏曰： 王之前言，果不虚也。 
现代文：元颐入朝，诏令说： 王先前的话，果然不假。 
English: At the time of Yuan Shao's accession to the throne, the imperial edict said: The king's previous words are indeed true.

古文：后除朔州刺史。
现代文：后来授任朔州刺史。
English: Later, Yang Tsubaki was also appointed as the governor of Shuozhou.

古文：及恆州刺史穆泰谋反，遣使推颐为主。
现代文：到恒州刺史穆泰图谋反叛，派遣使者推举元颐为首领。
English: He went to Hengzhou to conspire with Mutai to rebel, and sent an envoy to nominate Yuan Zang as the leader.

古文：颐密以状闻，泰等伏诛，帝甚嘉之。
现代文：元颐秘密地把情况上报，穆泰等人受死刑，皇帝十分赞许元颐。
English: Yuan Shao secretly reported the situation, Mu Tai and others were sentenced to death, and the emperor highly praised Yuan Shao.

古文：世宗景明元年，薨于青州刺史，谥曰庄王。
现代文：世宗景明元年，元颐任青少，青州刺史时逝世，谧号为庄王。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong of Gyeongbuk, Gwangsoo was appointed as a young man. He died when he was making history in Gyeongju, and his posthumous name was King Zhuang.

古文：传国至孙宗胤，肃宗时，坐杀叔父赐死，爵除。
现代文：传封国到孙子宗胤，肃宗时，因杀叔父获罪被赐令自杀，封国削除。
English: The fief was passed down to his grandson, Sotane, but when Sotane was convicted of killing his uncle, he was ordered to commit suicide, and the fief was removed.

古文：颐弟衍，字安乐，赐爵广陵侯。
现代文：元颐的弟弟元衍，字安乐，获赐爵位为广陵侯。
English: Yuan Yuan's younger brother, Yuan Yan, also known as Anle, was given the title of Guangling Marquis.

古文：位梁州刺史，表请假王，以崇威重。
现代文：担任梁州刺史，上奏疏请赐予王爵，以提高威望地位。
English: He served as the crown prince of Liangzhou and was given a peerage to enhance his prestige.

古文：诏曰： 可谓无厌求也，所请不合。 
现代文：韶令说： 可以说是不知满足的请求，所请求的不能批准。 
English: The imperial edict said: It can be said that the request is unsatisfactory, and the request cannot be approved.

古文：转徐州刺史，至州病重，帝敕徐成伯乘传疗。
现代文：改任徐州刺史，到州中病重，皇帝命令徐成伯乘驿车去治病。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou and became seriously ill in the middle of the year. The emperor ordered Xu Chengbo to take a carriage to treat his illness.

古文：疾差，成伯还，帝曰 卿定名医 ，赉绢三千匹。
现代文：疾病痊愈，成伯返回，皇帝说 你的确是名医 ，赐绢三千匹。
English: The illness was cured, Cheng Bo returned, the emperor said that you are indeed a famous doctor, and gave you three thousand donkeys.

古文：成伯辞，请受一千。
现代文：成伯推辞，请求接受一千匹。
English: Cheng Bo declined and asked for a thousand horses.

古文：帝曰： 《诗》云 人之云亡，邦国殄瘁。 以是而言，岂惟三千匹乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 《诗经》说 良臣贤士都跑光，国运艰危将倾覆，据此说来，岂仅三千匹呢? 
English: The emperor said, "According to the "Song of Songs," which says that all the good ministers and sages have run away, and that the country's difficult fate will be overturned, are there only three thousand horses?

古文：其为帝所重如此。
现代文：元衍就是如此地受皇帝重视。
English: This is how Yuan Yan was valued by the emperor.

古文：后所生母雷氏卒，表请解州。
现代文：后来亲生母亲雷氏去世，上奏疏请求免除州职。
English: Later, when her biological mother, Lei, died, she petitioned to be exempted from state service.

古文：诏曰： 先君余尊之所厌，礼之明文，季末陵迟，斯典或废。
现代文：下诏说： 关于为先君余留的尊严所压抑，《仪礼》中有明确的文字。末代衰落，这个礼仪有时被废除。
English: The next edict said: Regarding the suppression of the dignity left by the previous emperor, there is a clear text in the "Rite." In the last generation of decline, this rite was sometimes abolished.

古文：侯既亲王之子，宜从余尊之义，便可大功。 
现代文：侯是亲王的儿子，应该依从余留尊严的义理，服大功的丧服。 
English: As the son of a prince, Hou should follow the principle of remaining dignified and wear the mourning clothes of great merit.

古文：后卒于雍州刺史，谥曰康侯。
现代文：后来任雍州刺史时去世，谧号为康侯。
English: He later died while serving as Yongzhou's chief historian, and his posthumous name was Kang Hou.

古文：衍性清慎，所在廉洁，又不营产业，历牧四州，皆有称绩，亡日无敛尸具。
现代文：元衍性格清高谨慎，在各地廉洁守法，又不经营家产，历任四州刺史，都有声誉政绩，死亡的时候没有收殓的棺材。
English: Yuan Yuan had a clear and prudent character, was honest and law-abiding in all regions, and did not manage family assets. He had made history in four states in succession, had a reputation for political achievements, and did not have a coffin when he died.

古文：子暢。
现代文：儿子元畅。
English: My son is doing well.

古文：暢弟融，字叔融。
现代文：元畅的弟弟元融，字叔融。
English: Motonari's younger brother, Motonari, is called Shurui.

古文：貌甚短陋，骁武过人。
现代文：相貌丑陋，勇武超过常人。
English: Ugly in appearance, braver than most.

古文：庄帝谋杀尔朱荣，以融为直阁将军。
现代文：庄帝设谋杀死尔朱荣，任命元融为直合将军。
English: Emperor Zhuang set out to assassinate Zhu Rong and appointed Yuan Rong as Zhihe general.

古文：及尔朱兆入洛，融逃人间。
现代文：等到尔朱兆进入洛阳，元融逃到民间。
English: Wait until Lzhu Zhao enters Luoyang, and Yuan Rong escapes to the civilian world.

古文：衍弟钦，字思若。
现代文：元衍的弟弟元钦，字思若。
English: Yuan Yan's younger brother, Yuan Qin, is also a poet.

古文：位中书监、尚书右仆射、仪同三司。
现代文：担任中书监、尚书右仆射、仪同三司。
English: He served as the middle school's librarian, the school's right-hand man, and the school's third secretary.

古文：钦色尤黑，故时人号为黑面仆射。
现代文：元钦脸色格外黑，所以当时的人称他为黑面仆射。
English: Yuan Qin's face was particularly dark, so people at the time called him a black-faced minion.

古文：钦淫从兄丽妻崔氏，为御史中尉封回劾奏，遇赦免。
现代文：元钦奸淫堂兄元丽的妻子崔氏，被御史中尉封回弹劾奏告，遇大赦而免于处罚。
English: Ms. Cui, the wife of Yuan Qin's adulterous cousin Yuan Li, had her impeachment report rejected by Lieutenant Mishi, and was granted amnesty and exempted from punishment.

古文：寻除司州牧。
现代文：不久授任司州牧。
English: He was soon given the post of provincial governor.

古文：钦少好学，早有令誉，时人语曰： 皇宗略略，寿安、思若。 
现代文：元钦年轻时喜爱学习，很早有好名声，当时人编出谣谚说： 皇宗略略，画画、墨羞。 
English: When he was young, Yuan Qin loved to study, and he had a good reputation early on. At that time, people made up a rumor saying: "The emperor is careless, painting, and shy."

古文：及晚年贵重，不能有所匡益，识者轻之。
现代文：等到晚年地位尊贵，不能有所匡正补益，有见识的人轻视他。
English: Waiting until later in life, when one's status is distinguished, one cannot rectify or make amends, and people with insight despise him.

古文：钦曾托青州人高僧寿为子求师，师至，未几逃去。
现代文：元钦曾委托青州人高僧寿为儿子寻找老师，老师到了后，没过多少天就逃走了。
English: Yuan Qin had commissioned a Qingzhou man, Gao Zeng Shou, to find a teacher for his son. After the teacher arrived, he fled after a few days.

古文：钦以让僧寿。
现代文：元钦就这件事责备僧寿。
English: Yuan Qin reprimanded him for this.

古文：僧寿性滑稽，反谓钦曰： 凡人绝粒，七日乃死；始经五朝，便尔逃遁。去食就信，实有所阙。 
现代文：僧尽性格滑稽，反而对元钦说： 一般人绝食，七天就死了，这人刚过五天，迅疾逃跑，去掉粮食而接受诚信，实在有所缺略。 
English: The monk, in spite of his comical personality, said to Yuan Qin: Ordinary people go on a hunger strike and die after seven days, but this person just ran away after five days, taking away food and accepting honesty. He really missed the mark.

古文：钦乃大惭，于是待客稍厚。
现代文：元钦于是大为惭愧，从此对待客人逐渐优厚。
English: As a result, Yuan Qin was greatly ashamed, and from then on he treated his guests more and more generously.

古文：后除司空公，封钜平县公。
现代文：后来授任司空公，封为钜平县公。
English: Later, he was awarded the post of Sikuo Gong and given the title of Suiping County Gong.

古文：于河阴遇害，赠假黄钺、太师、太尉公。
现代文：在河阴遇害，追赠假黄铁、太师、太尉公。
English: He was killed in Heyin and posthumously awarded the titles of Huang Tie, Taishi, and Taifu.

古文：子子孝，字季业。
现代文：儿子子孝，字季业。
English: His son, Zi Xiao, later became Ji Ye.

古文：早有令誉，年八岁，司徒崔光见而异之曰： 后生领袖，必此人也。 
现代文：很早有好名声，八岁时，司徒崔光见到后而看重他说： 后辈中的头领，一定是这个人。 
English: He had a good reputation from an early age. When he was eight years old, Shitou Cui Guang saw him and thought highly of him, saying, "The leader among the younger generation must be this man."

古文：京兆王子推，太安五年封。
现代文：京兆王子推，太安五年封。
English: Jingzhao Prince pushed, Taian five-year seal.

古文：位侍中、征南大将军、长安镇都大将。
现代文：担任侍中、征南大将军、长安镇都大将。
English: He served as a chamberlain, a general of the Southern Expedition, and a general of the Chang'an Town.

古文：子推性沉雅，善于绥接，秦雍之人，服其威惠。
现代文：子推性格沉稳儒雅，善于安抚接纳，秦州雍州的人，信服他的声威恩惠。
English: Zitu's personality is calm and refined, and he is good at appeasing and accepting. The people of Qinzhou and Yongzhou are convinced of his benevolence.

古文：入为中都大官，察狱有称。
现代文：召入任中都大官，审理案件有名声。
English: He was appointed as a high-ranking official of the Central Government and gained a reputation for hearing cases.

古文：显祖将禅位于子推，以大臣固谏，乃传高祖。
现代文：显祖将要惮让帝位给子推，因大臣极力劝阻，才传位给壶担。
English: Emperor Xianzu was going to give the throne to his son, but the minister tried to dissuade him from doing so.

古文：高祖即位，拜侍中、本将军、开府仪同三司、青州刺史，未至，道薨。
现代文：直担即位，任命他为侍中、本号将军、开府仪同三司、青州刺史，没到任，在途中逝世。
English: Directly in charge of the enthronement, he appointed him as a chamberlain, the general of this title, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, and the history of Qingzhou, but he did not arrive at the office and died on the way.

古文：子太兴，袭。
现代文：儿子太兴，继承爵位。
English: His son, Tai Xing, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：拜长安镇都大将，以黩货，削除官爵。
现代文：被任命为长安镇都大将，因贪污纳贿，被削除官职爵位。
English: He was appointed as the general of Chang'an Town and was stripped of his official title and rank for accepting bribes.

古文：后除秘书监，还复前爵，拜统万镇将，改封西河。
现代文：后来授任秘书监，恢复先前的爵位，任命为统万镇将，改封为西河王。
English: Later, he was given the post of secretary-supervisor, his former title of nobility was restored, he was appointed as the general of Tongwan Town, and his title was changed to King of the West River.

古文：后改镇为夏州，仍以太兴为刺史。
现代文：后来改军镇为夏业，又命左兴任刺史。
English: Later, he changed the military town to Xiaye, and ordered Zuo Xing to serve as a historian.

古文：除守卫尉卿。
现代文：授任为代理卫尉卿。
English: He was appointed Acting Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard.

古文：初，太兴遇患，请诸沙门行道，所有资财，一时布施，乞求病愈，名曰 散生斋 。
现代文：起初，太兴遭遇疾病，请众多僧人作法事道场，所有财产，一下子布施出去，求病痊愈，名叫 散生斋 。
English: At first, when Tai Hing was ill, he invited many monks to the Buddhist practice site and gave away all of his property at once to seek a cure for his illness. This was called "Sanshozai."

古文：及斋后，僧皆四散，有一沙门方云乞斋余食。
现代文：到斋会以后，僧人都四散而去，有一个僧人才说乞讨斋会剩余食物。
English: After arriving at the seder, the monks dispersed. One monk said that he would beg for the surplus food from the seder.

古文：太兴戏之曰： 斋食既尽，唯有酒肉。 
现代文：主兴对他开玩笑说： 斋食已经完了，衹有酒肉。 
English: Jokingly, Zushi Xing said to him, "The fasting meal is over, there is meat and wine.

古文：沙门曰： 亦能食之。 
现代文：僧人说： 也能够吃。 
English: The monk said, "You can also eat worms."

古文：因出酒一斗，羊脚一只，食尽犹言不饱。
现代文：于是拿出酒一斗，羊腿一只，僧人吃完后还说不饱。
English: So he took out a barrel of wine and a leg of lamb. After eating, the monk could not get enough.

古文：及辞出后，酒肉俱在。出门追之，无所见。
现代文：等到告辞出来后，酒肉都还在，太兴出门追赶，没见到僧人。
English: After the farewell speech, the wine and meat were still there. I was too excited to go out and catch up, but I didn't see the monk.

古文：太兴遂佛前乞愿，向者之师当非俗人，若此病得差，即舍王爵入道。
现代文：左垒于是在佛像前许愿，刚才的师傅恐怕不是世俗之人，如果这个病得以痊愈，就抛弃王爵进入佛门。
English: Zuo Bao then made a wish in front of the Buddha statue. The master just now was probably not a worldly person. If this illness could be cured, he would abandon Wang Jue and enter the Buddhist gate.

古文：未几便愈，遂请为沙门。表十余上，乃见许。
现代文：没有多久就痊愈了，于是请求做僧人，奏疏上了十多次，才被批准。
English: It didn't take long for him to recover, so he asked to become a monk, and it took him more than a dozen attempts before he was approved.

古文：时高祖南讨在军，诏皇太子于四月八日为之下发，施帛二千匹。
现代文：当时高祖向南征讨在军队中，诏令皇太子在四月八日为他剃发，施予布帛二千匹。
English: At that time, Gao Zu was in the army for the Southern Expedition, and the emperor ordered the crown prince to shave his hair on April 8 and give him two thousand pieces of cloth.

古文：既为沙门，更名僧懿，居嵩山。
现代文：做僧人后，改名僧懿，居住在嵩山。
English: After becoming a monk, he changed his name to Soen and lived in Songshan.

古文：太和二十二年终。
现代文：太和二十二年去世。
English: She died in 1922.

古文：子昴，字伯晖，袭。
现代文：儿子元昴，字伯晖，继承爵位。
English: His son, Geng Yao, surnamed Bo Yao, succeeded to the title.

古文：薨。
现代文：逝世。
English: He died.

古文：子悰，字魏庆，袭。
现代文：儿子元惊，字魏庆，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Zhen, surnamed Wei Qing, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：孝静时，累迁太尉、录尚书事、司州牧、青州刺史。
现代文：孝静帝时，屡经升任到太尉、录尚书事、司州牧、青州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaojing, he was repeatedly promoted to the rank of captain, recorded records, served as a magistrate, and wrote a history of Qingzhou.

古文：薨于州，赠假黄钺、太傅、司徒公，谥曰文。
现代文：在州中逝世，追赠假黄铁、太傅、司徒公，谧号为文。
English: He died in Shuzhong and was posthumously given the posthumous names Huang Tie, Taifu and Szeto Gong. His posthumous name was Wen.

古文：悰宽和有度量，美容貌，风望俨然，得丧之间，不见于色。
现代文：元惊宽厚和顺有度量，容貌美好，风度翩翩，得失之间，不表现在神色上。
English: Genuine surprise, broadness and smoothness are measured, beautiful appearance, graceful demeanor, between gains and losses, do not show in appearance.

古文：性清俭，不营产业，身死之日，家无余财。
现代文：性格清廉节俭，不经营家产，死的时候，家中没有多余的财产。
English: His character is honest and thrifty, he does not manage the family property, and when he dies, there is no extra property in the family.

古文：昴弟仲景，性严峭。
现代文：元昴的弟弟仲景，性格严厉苛刻。
English: Yuanang's younger brother, Zhongjing, has a serious and upright personality.

古文：庄帝时，兼御史中尉，京师肃然。
现代文：庄帝时，兼任御史中尉，京城整肃。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhuang, he also served as a lieutenant of the Imperial Historian, and oversaw the clean-up of the capital.

古文：每向台，恆驾赤牛，时人号 赤牛中尉 。
现代文：每次到台合，总乘红牛，当时人称他为 赤牛中尉 。
English: Every time he came to Taikoo, he always drove a red cow, and people called him "Lieutenant Red Cow" at that time.

古文：太昌初，为河南尹，奉法无私。
现代文：太昌初年，担任河南尹，奉行法令没有私心。
English: In the first year of Taichang, as Henan Yin, he was selfless in law enforcement.

古文：时吏部尚书樊子鹄部下纵横，又为盗窃，仲景密加收捕，悉获之，咸即行决。于是豪贵寒心。
现代文：当时吏部尚书樊子鹄的部下横行，又进行偷盗，仲景秘密加以逮捕，全部抓获他们，都当即处决，于是豪门贵族心中胆寒。
English: At that time, the subordinates of Shang Shuxu and Zixuan of the cadre department were rampant, and they also stole, and Zhongjing secretly arrested them. All of them were captured and immediately executed. As a result, the wealthy aristocrats were afraid.

古文：出帝将西行，授仲景中军大都督，留京师。
现代文：出帝将向西出行，授任仲景为中军大都督，留在京城。
English: Emperor Dezong will travel to the west, appoint Zhongjing as the grand governor of the Chinese army, and stay in Beijing.

古文：齐献武王欲至洛阳，仲景遂弃妻子而遁。
现代文：齐献武王打算到洛阳，仲景就抛下妻子儿女而逃走。
English: When King Qi Xianwu planned to go to Luoyang, Zhongjing left his wife and children and fled.

古文：仲景弟暹，字叔照。
现代文：仲景的弟弟元暹，字叔照。
English: Yuan Zhongjing's younger brother Yuan Sie, nicknamed Uncle Zhao, appears in the film.

古文：庄帝初，除南兗州刺史。在州猛暴，多所杀害。
现代文：庄帝初年，授任他为南兖州刺史，在州中凶猛暴烈，杀人很多。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was appointed as the governor of Nanlu Prefecture. He was fierce and violent in the province, and killed many people.

古文：元颢入洛，暹据州不屈。
现代文：元颢进入洛阳，元暹占据州城不屈服。
English: When the Yuan Shao entered Luoyang, the Yuan Shao defended Honshu and refused to yield.

古文：庄帝还宫，封汝阳王，迁秦州刺史。
现代文：庄帝回宫，封他为汝阳王，调任秦州刺史。
English: Emperor Zhuang returned to the palace, named him King of Ruyang, and transferred him to Qin Province.

古文：先时，秦州城人屡为反覆，暹尽诛之，存者十一二。
现代文：原先，秦州城内民众屡次反叛，元暹全部诛杀他们，存活下来的仅十之一二。
English: Originally, the people in the city of Qinzhou repeatedly rebelled, and Yuan Siam killed them all. Only one out of ten survived.

古文：普泰元年，除凉州刺史，贪暴无极。
现代文：普泰元年，授任凉州刺史，贪婪暴烈没有极限。
English: In the first year of the Putai Dynasty, Liangzhou was appointed to write history. He was extremely greedy and cruel.

古文：欲规府人及商胡富人财物，诈一台符，诳诸豪等云欲加赏，一时屠戮，所有资财生口，悉没自入。
现代文：想要谋取府库官员和商胡富人的财物，假称一个台阁符命，诳骗一些豪富等说要加以赏赐，一时之间加以杀戮，所有资产奴仆，全部没收归入自己名下。
English: Wanting to obtain the property of treasury officials and wealthy merchants, he pretended that a cabinet was worth his life, tricked some wealthy people and said that he wanted to reward them, and killed them all at once. All the slaves of the capitalists were confiscated and put under his name.

古文：孝静时，位侍中、录尚书事。
现代文：孝静帝时，担任侍中、录尚书事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaozhing, he served as an attendant and recorded records.

古文：薨，赠太师、录尚书。
现代文：逝世，追赠太师、录尚书事。
English: After his death, he was awarded the title of Grand Master and recorded in the records.

古文：子冲，袭。
现代文：儿子元冲，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Chong, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：无子，国绝。
现代文：没有儿子，封国断绝。
English: Yuan Chong did not have a son, and the fiefdom was abolished.

古文：太兴弟遥，字太原。
现代文：太兴的弟弟元遥，字太原。
English: Tai Hing's younger brother, Yuan Yao, known as Taiyuan.

古文：有器望，以左卫将军从高祖南征，赐爵饶阳男。
现代文：有器识声望，以左卫将军跟随高祖向南征伐，赐爵为饶阳男。
English: He had the reputation of being an organiser, he followed Gao Zu to the south with General Zuo Wei, and was given the title of Raoyang Man.

古文：世宗初，遭所生母忧，表请解任。诏以余尊所厌，不许。
现代文：世宗初年，遇上生身母亲去世，上奏疏请求解除职任，诏令以余留的尊严所压抑的义理，不准许。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, when his biological mother passed away, he petitioned to be relieved of his duties, but the Emperor did not allow him to use his remaining dignity to suppress the truth.

古文：肃宗初，累迁左光禄大夫，仍领护军。
现代文：肃宗初年，屡经升任到左光禄大夫，又兼领护军。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, he was repeatedly promoted to Doctor of the Left Hand, and he also led the escort.

古文：迁冀州刺史。
现代文：调任冀州刺史。
English: Transferred to the post of Jizhou chief historian.

古文：遥以诸胡先无籍贯，奸良莫辨，悉令造籍。
现代文：元遥因胡人原来没有籍贯，好坏难分，全部命令造簿籍。
English: Yuan Yao ordered to make a register of all Hu people because they had no origin, and it was difficult to distinguish the good from the bad.

古文：又以诸胡设籍，当欲税之，以充军用。
现代文：又因胡人造簿籍，将要向他们征税，用来充实军用物资。
English: Also, because of Hu's artificial bookkeeping, they will be taxed and used to replenish military supplies.

古文：胡人不愿，乃共构遥，云取纳金马。
现代文：胡人不愿意，就一起诬陷元遥，说他收受金银马匹。
English: Unwilling to do so, the Hu people framed Yuan Yao together, saying that he had accepted gold and silver horses.

古文：御史按验，事与胡同，遥坐除名。
现代文：御史核查，事情和胡人告发相同，元遥获罪除去名籍。
English: According to the historical verification, the case was the same as that reported by Hu Ren, and Yuan Yao was convicted and stripped of his citizenship.

古文：遥陈枉不已，敕有司重究，乃披雪。
现代文：元遥不住地陈述冤枉，肃宗命令有关官员重加推究，才昭雪。
English: Yuan was adamant that he had been wronged, and Su Zong ordered the relevant officials to investigate further.

古文：迁右光禄大夫。
现代文：调任右光禄人夫。
English: He was transferred to the position of Uko Roku Hitoh.

古文：时冀州沙门法庆既为妖幻，遂说勃海人李归伯。归伯合家从之，招率乡人，推法庆为主。法庆以归伯为十住菩萨、平魔军司、定汉王，自号 大乘 。
现代文：当时冀州僧人法庆造作怪异的邪术，就游说勃海人李归伯，归伯全家跟从他，招集乡民，推举法庆为首领法庆委任归伯为十住菩萨、平魔军司、定汉王，自称为 大乘 。
English: At that time, when the Jizhou monk Fa Qing made a strange magic trick, he lobbied the Bohai man Li Guibao, and Guibao's whole family followed him, summoned the villagers, elected Fa Qing as the leader, and appointed Guibao as the Ten-Dwelling Bodhisattva, the Warlord of Pingmao, and the King of Dinghan. He called himself a Mahayana Buddhist.

古文：杀一人者为一住菩萨，杀十人为十住菩萨。
现代文：杀死一个人的做一住菩萨，杀死十个人的做十住菩萨。
English: If you kill one person, you will become a one-life bodhisattva; if you kill ten people, you will become a ten-life bodhisattva.

古文：又合狂药，令人服之，父子兄弟不相知识，唯以杀害为事。
现代文：又调和狂药，让人服下后，父子兄弟不再认识，仅以杀人为职事。
English: There was also a kind of psychotropic drug. After eating it, the father and son brothers did not know each other, and all of them took killing as their daily business.

古文：于是聚众杀阜城令，破勃海郡，杀害吏人。
现代文：于是聚集民众杀死阜城令，攻下勃海郡，杀害官吏民众。
English: As a result, the people gathered to kill Fucheng Rong, capture Bohai County, and kill officials and the public.

古文：刺史萧宝夤遣兼长史崔伯驎讨之，败于煮枣城，伯驎战没。
现代文：刺史萧宝夤派遣兼长史崔伯骈讨伐他们，在煮枣城失败，伯骈战死。
English: Xiao Baojun, the chief of the imperial eunuchs, sent his second-in-command, Cui Bo, to fight. Cui Bo was defeated and killed in the Battle of Jujube Town.

古文：凶众遂盛，所在屠灭寺舍，斩戮僧尼，焚烧经像，云新佛出世，除去旧魔。
现代文：凶恶的党徒于是强盛，在各处消灭寺院，杀戮僧人尼姑，焚烧佛经佛像，说新佛出世，要除去旧魔鬼。
English: As a result, the evil Party members prospered. They destroyed temples everywhere, killed monks and nuns, burned Buddhist scriptures and statues, and said that a new Buddha had been born to remove the old demons.

古文：诏以遥为使持节、都督北征诸军事，帅步骑十万以讨之。
现代文：下韶任命元遥为使持节、都督北征诸军事，率领步兵骑兵十万人去讨伐他们。
English: Lower Yan appointed Yuan Yao as the envoy of the festival, the governor of the north to recruit soldiers, and led 100,000 infantry and cavalry to fight them.

古文：法庆相率攻遥，遥并击破之。
现代文：法庆相继攻打元遥，元遥都打败了他们。
English: Fa Qing attacked Yuan Yao one after another, and Yuan Yao defeated them all.

古文：遥遣辅国将军张虬等率骑追掩，讨破，擒法庆并其妻尼惠晖等，斩之，传首京师。
现代文：元遥派遣辅国将军张纠等人率领骑兵追赶，打败他们，擒获法庆和他的妻子尼姑惠晖等人，杀死他们，传送首级到京城。
English: Yuan Yao dispatched Zhang Guo, the general of the Auxiliary Army, and others to lead the cavalry to chase and defeat them, capture Fa Qing and his wife, the nun Hui Yao, and others, kill them, and send their heads to the capital.

古文：后擒归伯，戮于都市。
现代文：后来擒获归伯，在都城的街市斩首。
English: He was later captured and beheaded in the streets of the capital.

古文：初，遥大功昆弟，皆是恭宗之孙，至肃宗而本服绝，故除遥等属籍。
现代文：当初，元遥的大功兄弟，都是恭宗的孙子，到肃宗时而服属断绝，所以除去元遥等人的家族名册。
English: At first, the great brothers of Yuan Yao were all the grandchildren of Gong Zong, but when they became subject to Su Zong, they were cut off, so the family register of Yuan Yao and others was removed.

古文：遥表曰： 窃闻圣人所以南面而听天下，其不可得变革者，则亲也，尊也。
现代文：元遥上奏疏说： 私下听说圣人之所以面向南而治理天下，有不可改变的，是亲，是尊。
English: Yuan Yao Shang Song So said: I have heard privately that the reason why the sage faces south and governs the world is that there are things that cannot be changed, such as kinship and respect.

古文：四世而缌服穷，五世而袒免，六世而亲属竭矣。
现代文：四代后而鳃服完结，五代后而袒衣免冠，六代以后亲属关系竭尽。
English: After the fourth generation, the kimono has been removed, after the fifth generation, only the kimono is removed, and after the sixth generation, the family relationship is broken.

古文：去兹以往，犹系之以姓而弗别，缀之以食而弗殊。
现代文：在这以外的，还维系姓氏而不加区别，在一起饮食而没有不同。
English: Since then, there has been no difference in their surnames, and there is no special care for their food allowance.

古文：又《律》云议亲者，非唯当世之属亲，历谓先帝之五世。
现代文：另外《律》文所说议亲，不仅是当代的亲属，指的是先帝的五代。
English: In addition, the relatives mentioned in the "Law" not only refer to the current relatives, but also to the fifth-generation relatives of the former emperor.

古文：谨寻斯旨，将以广帝宗，重磐石。
现代文：恭谨探寻这一旨意，是用以增广皇帝的同宗，加大国家的牢固。
English: Respectfully explore this intention, is to be used to expand the emperor's lineage, increase the strength of the country.

古文：先皇所以变兹事条，为此别制者，太和之季，方有意于吴蜀，经始之费，虑深在初，割减之起，暂出当时也。
现代文：先皇之所以改变这一条例，实行这另外的制度，是太和的末年，正有意攻取吴地蜀地，开始经营的用度，在起初就深入考虑，割减亲情的起源，在当时是权宜之计。
English: The reason why the first emperor changed this regulation and implemented this other system was that in the last years of the Taiping Dynasty, he was interested in conquering Wu Di Shu and starting business. At the beginning, he deeply considered the need to reduce the origin of kinship. At that time, it was a stopgap measure.

古文：且临淮王提，分属籍之始，高祖赐帛三千匹，所以重分离；乐良王长命，亦赐缣二千匹，所以存慈眷。
现代文：而且临淮王：左提，在分开名册的开始，高祖赐给布帛三千匹，是表明看重分离；乐良王长命，也赐给缣二千匹，是用以保持慈爱眷恋。
English: Moreover, in front of King Huai: left to mention, at the beginning of the separation roster, Gao Zu gave three thousand cloth ponies to the cormorants, indicating that he valued separation; Le Liang Wang Long Life also gave two thousand donkeys to the donkeys, which was used to maintain love and affection.

古文：此皆先朝殷勤克念，不得已而然者也。
现代文：逭都是先朝殷勤思虑，不得已这样做的。
English: This was also something that the previous government had to do as a last resort.

古文：古人有言，百足之虫至死不僵者，以其辅己者众。
现代文：古人说过。多足的虫子至死不僵硬，是因为辅助自己的多。
English: The ancients said that the multi-legged insect is not stiff until death, because it helps itself a lot.

古文：臣诚不欲妄亲太阶，苟求润屋，但伤大宗一分，则天子属籍不过十数人而已。
现代文：臣下实在不妄想要亲登大殿台阶，苟且求取华屋，衹是担心大宗一分开，天子亲属名册不过十几人而已。
English: In my heart, I don't want to be close to the emperor in order to seek benefits, but I am saddened by the large clan, and there are only more than ten people left who belong to the Son of Heaven.

古文：在汉，诸王之子不限多少，皆列土而封，谓之曰侯，至于魏晋，莫不广胙河山，称之曰公者，盖恶其大宗之不固，骨肉之恩疏矣。
现代文：在汉朝，各王的儿子不限多少，都割裂土地而分封，称之为侯，到了魏晋，无不广赐河山，称他们为公的原因，大概是顾虑大宗不牢固，骨肉的恩情疏远了。
English: In the Han Dynasty, the sons of each king, no matter how many, all divided the land and divided it, calling it Hou. In the Wei and Jin Dynasties, they all widely granted rivers and mountains. The reason for calling them public is probably due to concerns that most of them are not solid, and the kindness of flesh and blood is alienated.

古文：臣去皇上，虽是五世之远，于先帝便是天子之孙，高祖所以国秩禄赋复给衣食，后族唯给其赋不与衣食者，欲以别外内、限异同也。
现代文：臣下和皇上相分离，虽然是五代后的远亲，在先帝来说都是天子的孙子。高祖之所以封国有俸禄又给予衣食，皇后家族仅给俸禄不给予衣食的原因，是要用来区别内外限定同异的。
English: Subordinates and emperors are separated, although they are distant relatives after five generations, in the case of the former emperor, they are all the grandchildren of the son of heaven. The reason why Gao Zu was awarded a state salary and given food and clothing, and the reason why the empress's family only gave a salary and did not give food and clothing, was to be used to distinguish between internal and external limits.

古文：今诸庙之感，在心未忘；行道之悲，倏然已及。
现代文：现在各庙子孙的情感，心中没有忘记；行路之人的悲伤，很快已触及。
English: Nowadays, the feelings of the ancestral temples of the emperors are kept in mind and remembered, and the sorrow of parting ways suddenly comes.

古文：其诸封者，身亡之日，三年服终，然后改夺。
现代文：所以分封的人，三年服丧期满，然后就被剥夺。
English: All those who have received the title should complete three years of service from the day of the emperor's death, and then be removed from the register.

古文：今朝廷犹在遏密之中，便议此事，实用未安。 
现代文：现在朝廷还处于先帝死亡的悲恸中，就商议遣件事，实在不安心。 
English: Now, while the Imperial Court is still in mourning, they are implementing this method, and I am really uneasy.

古文：诏付尚书博议以闻。
现代文：下诏交付尚书广泛讨论后上报。
English: The next order will be to submit the report to the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology for extensive review, and then the opinions will be submitted to the Imperial Court.

古文：尚书令任城王澄、尚书左仆射元晖奏同遥表。
现代文：尚书令任城王五违、尚书左仆射五厘上奏赞同五堡的奏疏。
English: Shangshu decreed that the king of the city should be punished with five years of exile, and Shangshu's left-hand man, Ya, should be punished with five years of exile.

古文：灵太后不从。
现代文：灵太后不听从。
English: The Empress Dowager disobeyed.

古文：卒，谥曰宣公。
现代文：去世，谧号为宣公。
English: He died, and his nickname was Xuan Gong.

古文：遥弟恆，字景安，粗涉书史。
现代文：元遥的弟弟元恒，字景安，粗略阅读书传史册。
English: Yuan Yuan's younger brother, Yuan Heng, the character of Jing An, roughly read the history of the book.

古文：恆以《春秋》之义，为名不以山川，表求改名芝。
现代文：元恒据《春秋》的义理，起名不用山川字眼，上奏请求改名为芝。
English: According to the principle of "Spring and Autumn," Yuan Heng did not use the word "Yamakawa" for the name, but changed it to "Shiba" upon request.

古文：历位太常卿、中书监、侍中。
现代文：历任太常卿、中书监、侍中。
English: He was successively appointed as Taijōkyō, Chūshōkyō, and Samurai chū.

古文：后于河阴遇害。
现代文：后来在河阴遇害。
English: He was later killed in Heyin.

古文：赠太傅、司徒公，谥曰宣穆公。
现代文：追赠为太傅、司徒公，谧号为宣穆公。
English: He was posthumously given the titles of Taifu and Stukong, and his posthumous name was Xuanmukong.

古文：济阴王小新成，和平二年封。
现代文：济阴王小新成，扭垩二年封。
English: Jiyin Wang Xiaoxincheng, two-year post.

古文：颇有武略。
现代文：很有武艺谋略。
English: It's a very martial strategy.

古文：库莫奚侵扰，诏新成率众讨之。
现代文：库莫奚侵犯扰乱，韶令铋率领军队讨伐。
English: Cuomo "invaded and disturbed" and "ordered" the army to lead the crusade.

古文：新成乃多为毒酒，贼既渐逼，便弃营而去。
现代文：新成就做了很多毒药，贼寇逐渐逼近以后，就丢弃营垒离开。
English: The new achievement made a lot of poison. After the bandits gradually approached, they abandoned the camp and left.

古文：贼至，喜而竞饮，聊无所备。
现代文：贼寇到达，欢喜而竞相饮酒，毫无防备。
English: The bandits arrive, happy and drinking, unprepared.

古文：遂简轻骑，因醉纵击，俘馘甚多。
现代文：塞丘盛于是挑选轻装的骑兵，乘贼寇醉时放马攻打，俘获斩首很多。
English: Setiushimori then selected lightly armed cavalry, and when the bandits were drunk, they attacked on horseback, capturing and beheading many of them.

古文：后位外都大官。
现代文：后来担任外都大官。
English: Later, he served as a foreign capital official.

古文：薨，赠大将军，谥曰惠公。
现代文：逝世，追赠大将军，谧号为惠公。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of grand general. His posthumous name was Huigong.

古文：子郁，字伏生，袭。
现代文：兄子：子郁，字伏生，继承爵位。
English: Older brother: Zi Yu, surnamed Fusheng, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：位开府。
现代文：担任开府仪同三司。
English: He served as the head of the Third Division of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：为徐州刺史，以黩货赐死，国除。
现代文：任盆业刺史时，因贪污受贿被赐令自杀，封国被削除。
English: When he was appointed as the head of the mining industry, he was ordered to commit suicide for corruption and bribery, and the state seal was removed.

古文：长子弼，字邕明，刚正有文学。
现代文：长子子弼，字邕明，刚强正直有文学才能。
English: The eldest son is tall, his writing is clear, he is strong and honest, and he has literary talent.

古文：位中散大夫。
现代文：担任中散大夫。
English: He served as a middle-ranking doctor.

古文：以世嫡应袭先爵，为季父尚书仆射丽因于氏亲宠，遂夺弼王爵，横授同母兄子诞。
现代文：凭嫡长子应继承先人爵位，因叔父尚书仆射五丽利用工压的亲近宠信，就剥夺元弼的王爵，专横地授予同母所生哥哥的儿子元诞。
English: On the basis that the legitimate eldest son should inherit the ancestor's peerage, because his uncle, Shang Shufu, took advantage of the pressure of work to get close to and befriend Wu Li, he deprived Yuan Xuan of his peerage and arbitrarily awarded the son of his older brother, who was born of the same mother, with the birth of the year.

古文：于是弼绝弃人事，托疾还私第。
现代文：于是元弼抛弃世间事务，称病回到家中。
English: As a result, Yuan Xuan broke off his worldly affairs and went home on the pretext that he was ill.

古文：世宗徵为侍中，弼上表固让。
现代文：世宗征召他为侍中，元弼上奏疏执意推让。
English: The Sejong called him to be a chamberlain, and he reluctantly gave in.

古文：入嵩山，以穴为室，布衣蔬食，卒。
现代文：进入嵩山，以洞穴为居室，穿布衣吃粗食，去世。
English: He entered Songshan, lived in a cave, wore cloth and ate coarse food, and died.

古文：建义元年，子晖业诉复王爵。
现代文：建义元年，儿子晖业申诉恢复王爵。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, his son Xinye appealed for the restoration of the royal title.

古文：永安三年，追赠尚书令、司徒公，谥曰文献。
现代文：永安三年，追赠为尚书令、司徒公，谧号为文献。
English: In the third year of Yongan, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Shang Shuling and Szeto Gong, and his posthumous name was Literature.

古文：初，弼尝梦人谓之曰： 君身不得传世封，其绍先爵者，君长子绍远也。 
现代文：当初，元弼曾经梦见别人对他说： 您亲身不能传授世代封爵，继承先人封爵的，是您的长子绍远。 
English: At first, Geng Yao once dreamed that someone said to him, "You yourself will not receive a hereditary title of nobility, but your eldest son Shao Yuan will inherit the title of nobility from your ancestors."

古文：弼觉，即语晖业。
现代文：元弼醒后，就告诉晖业。
English: After Yuan Xuan woke up, he told Xuan Ye to leave.

古文：终如其言。
现代文：最终情形如他所说。
English: It turned out just like he said.

古文：晖业，少险薄，多与寇盗交通。
现代文：晖业，年轻时险恶刻薄，多和贼寇强盗交往。
English: Zou Ying, when he was young, was sinister and mean, and often associated with thieves and robbers.

古文：长乃变节，涉子史，亦颇属文，而慷慨有志节。
现代文：长大后才改变操行，阅读诸子史书，也比较会写文章，而慷慨有志向节操。
English: After he grew up, he changed his temper, read many children's history books, could also write poetry, and was generous and self-disciplined.

古文：历位司空、太尉，加特进，领中书监，录尚书事。
现代文：历任司空、太尉，加授特进，兼领中书监，录尚书事。
English: Successive Siku, Taifu, Gatjin, led the middle school librarian, recorded bookkeeping.

古文：齐文襄尝问之曰： 此何所披览？ 
现代文：齐文襄王曾经询问他说： 近来读些什么书? 
English: Qi Wenxiang Wang once asked him: What books have you read recently?

古文：对曰： 数寻伊霍之《传》，不读曹马之书。 
现代文：晖业回答说： 多次阅览伊尹霍光的《列传》，不读曹操司马懿的书。 
English: Zou Ye replied: I have read the "Biography" of Yi Yin Houguang many times, but I have not read the book of Cao Cao Simao.

古文：晖业以时运渐谢，不复图全，唯事饮啖，一日三羊，三日一犊。
现代文：晖业因国运逐渐衰微，不再图谋保全，衹是讲吃讲喝，一天三只羊，三天一头小牛。
English: Due to the country's prosperity, the yakitori industry is gradually declining, and there is no longer any attempt to preserve it. Yakitori is about eating and drinking, three sheep a day, and a calf every three days.

古文：又尝赋诗云： 昔居王道泰，济济富群英。
现代文：又曾经赋诗说： 从前王路宽又明，济济多士会群英。
English: He also once wrote a poem: Once upon a time, I lived a virtuous life, and I was rich and prosperous.

古文：今逢世路阻，狐兔郁纵横。 
现代文：现遇世路多艰险，狐兔纵横挡在前。 
English: Now there are roadblocks in the world, foxes and rabbits are everywhere.

古文：齐初，降封美阳县公，开府仪同三司、特进。
现代文：齐国初年，降封爵为美阳县公，任开府仪同三司、特进。
English: In the first year of the Northern Qi Dynasty, he was demoted to the post of Meiyang County official, and was promoted to Kaifu Yi, three divisions and special promotion.

古文：晖业之在晋阳也，无所交通，居常闲暇，乃撰魏籓王家世，号为《辨宗室录》，四十卷，行于世。
现代文：晖业在晋阳，不同别人来往，日常闲暇，就撰写魏国藩王家世，称为《辨宗室绿》，共四十卷，流行于世间。
English: When he was in Jinyang, he wrote about the history of the royal family of the Wei Dynasty in his spare time, called "Banzongshujululeu," a total of forty volumes, which was popular in the world.

古文：晖业弟昭业，颇有学尚，位谏议大夫。
现代文：晖业的弟弟昭业，很有学问风尚，担任谏议大夫。
English: Gongye's younger brother, Zhao Ye, who was very cultured, served as Zhengye's doctor.

古文：庄帝将幸洛南，昭业立于阊阖门外，扣马谏。帝避之而过，后劳勉之。
现代文：庄帝将前往幸洛南，昭业站在厘厘旦外，拉住马规劝，皇帝避开他而通过，后来慰问勉励他。
English: Zhuangdi will go to the south of Huanluo, and Zhao Ye will stand outside of Lili Dan, pull the horse to persuade, the emperor will avoid him and pass, and then offer condolences and encouragement to him.

古文：位给事黄门侍郎、卫将军、右光禄大夫。
现代文：担任给事黄门侍郎、卫将军、右光禄大夫。
English: When he was about to be sentenced, Takatomo panicked, but Shinya looked confident.

古文：卒，谥曰文侯。
现代文：逝世，谧号为文侯。
English: Emperor Wenzhong also had someone cut the ice and sink his body into the river.

古文：郁弟偃，字仲，位太中大夫。
现代文：子郁的弟弟子偃，字处茎，担任太中大夫。
English: Zi Yu's younger brother and disciple Zou, also known as Zhu Zhu, served as the junior high school vice principal.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子诞，字昙首。
现代文：儿子子诞，字昙苴。
English: The son of Yuan Shao was born in the year of the Dragon.

古文：初，诞伯父郁以贪污赐死，爵除。
现代文：当初，五盏的伯父五郁因贪污被赐令自杀，爵位削除。
English: At first, Yuan Shao's uncle, Yuan Yu, was sentenced to death for corruption, and the title of prince was removed.

古文：景明三年，诞诉云：伯郁前朝之封，正以年长袭封，以罪除爵。
现代文：景明三年，元诞申诉说，伯父元郁前朝的封授，衹是因年长而继承封爵，因有罪而被削除爵位。
English: In the third year of Jingming, on the first day of the first month of the year, he complained that he had inherited the knighthood from his uncle, Yuan Yu, who had been knighted in the previous year, and that he had been stripped of his knighthood because he was guilty.

古文：爵由谬袭，袭应归正。
现代文：爵位是因错误而继承，继承应该归于正嫡。
English: The title of nobility is inherited by mistake, and the inheritance should be attributed to the legitimate heir.

古文：诏以偃正元妃息昙首，济阴王嫡孙，可听绍封，以纂先绪。
现代文：诏令因元偃正元妃的儿子昙直，是济阴王的嫡孙，可准许继承封爵，来秉持先人业绩。
English: According to the imperial edict, because the son of Empress Yuancheng Zhengyuan, Zhi Zhi, is the legitimate grandson of King Jieyin, he can be allowed to inherit the knighthood to uphold the performance of his predecessors.

古文：诞既袭爵，除齐州刺史。
现代文：元诞继承封爵后，授任齐州刺史。
English: After inheriting a knighthood at the time of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was awarded the title of Chizhou Provincial Historian.

古文：在州贪暴，大为人患，牛马骡驴，无不逼夺。
现代文：在州中贪婪暴烈，大为民众祸患，牛马骡驴，无不逼迫夺取。
English: In the state, greed is fierce, a great scourge to the people, cattle, horses, donkeys, all forced to seize.

古文：家之奴隶，悉迫取良人为妇。
现代文：家中的奴仆，都逼娶良民为媳妇。
English: All the servants in the family were forced to marry good people as their daughters-in-law.

古文：有沙门为诞采药，还而见之，诞曰： 师从外来，有何消息？ 
现代文：有位僧人替元诞采草药，返回后见到他，元诞说： 师傅从外地来，有什么消息? 
English: There was a monk who collected herbs for Yuan Zhao. When he returned and saw him, Yuan Zhao said, "Master has come from out of town. What's the news?"

古文：对曰： 唯闻王贪，愿王早代。 
现代文：僧人回答说： 仅听说大王贪婪，希望大王早日被替代。 
English: The monk replied, "I only heard that the king is greedy, and I hope that the king will be replaced as soon as possible."

古文：诞曰： 齐州七万户，吾至来，一家未得三十钱，何得言贪？ 
现代文：元诞说： 齐州七万户，我到来，一家没得到三十文钱，怎么说得上贪婪? 
English: At the time of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he said, "There are 70,000 households in Qizhou. When I arrived, not a single household had received 30 yuan. How could I be greedy?"

古文：后为御史中尉元纂所纠，会赦免。
现代文：后来被御史中尉元纂所纠举，遇大赦免予处分。
English: Later, he was reprimanded by Mishi Lt. Genzosho, and was given a large amnesty.

古文：薨，谥曰静王。
现代文：逝世，谧号为静王。
English: After his death, his nickname was Shizuo.

古文：子抚，字伯懿，袭。
现代文：儿子元抚，字伯懿，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuan Fu, alias Bo Xun, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：庄帝初，为从兄晖业诉夺王爵。
现代文：庄帝初年，被堂兄晖业申诉夺取王爵。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang's reign, his cousin Xingye sued to seize the crown.

古文：偃弟丽，字宝掌。
现代文：元偃的弟弟元丽，字实掌。
English: Geng Yao's younger brother, Geng Li, literally means "true palm."

古文：位兼宗正卿、右卫将军，迁光禄勋，宗正、右卫如故。
现代文：担任兼宗正卿、右卫将军，调任光禄勋，宗正、右卫照旧。
English: He served concurrently as Muneyoshi Chosho and Ue no shogun, and was transferred to the post of Koroku honen, while Muneyoshi and Ue remained the same.

古文：时秦州屠各王法智推州主簿吕苟兒为主，号建明元年，置立百官，攻逼州郡。
现代文：当时秦州屠各王法智推举州中主簿吕苟儿为首领，称建明元年，设置百官，攻打围困州郡。
English: At that time, the king of Qin State, Tu Jia Wang Fazhi, selected the chief of the middle book of the state, Luguo Er, as the leader, said that it was the first year of Jianming, set up hundreds of officials, and attacked and besieged the county.

古文：泾州人陈瞻亦聚众自称王，号圣明元年。
现代文：泾州人陈瞻也聚集民众自己称王，年号为圣明元年。
English: Chen Zhan, a native of Zhangzhou, also gathered people to proclaim himself king. The year was the first year of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：诏以丽为使持节、都督、秦州刺史，与别驾杨椿讨之。
现代文：下诏任命元丽为使持节、都督、秦州刺史，和别驾杨椿讨伐他们。
English: In the following edict, Yuan Li was appointed as the envoy of Ji Jie, the governor of the capital, and the governor of Qin Province, and Yang Tsun and others went to fight against them.

古文：苟兒率众十余万屯孤山，列据诸险，围逼州城。
现代文：苟儿率领部众十多万人驻守孤山，占据各处险阻，围困逼近州城。
English: Gou'er led more than a hundred thousand people to garrison the lonely mountain, occupied the dangerous obstacles everywhere, and besieged the state capital.

古文：丽出击，大破之，便进军永洛。
现代文：元丽出击。大败他们，就进军水洛。
English: Yuanli attacked. After defeating them, they marched into Shuiluo.

古文：贼徒逆战，丽夜击走之。
现代文：贼寇迎战，元丽夜晚出击打退他们。
English: Thieves and bandits came to fight, and Yuan Li went out at night to repel them.

古文：行秦州事李韶破苟兒于孤山，乘胜追奔三十里，获其父母妻子，斩贼王五人。其余相继归降，诸城之围，亦悉奔散。
现代文：行秦州事李韶在孤山打败苟儿，乘胜追击三十里，俘获他的父母妻子儿女，杀死贼王五人，其他的人相继归附投降，各城的包围，也全部逃散。
English: In the Qin state affairs, Li Qian defeated Guo Er in the lonely mountain, chased him for thirty miles, captured his parents, wife and children, killed five thieves, the others surrendered one after another, and all the cities were surrounded and fled.

古文：苟兒率其王公三十余人诣丽请罪。
现代文：苟儿带领他的王公三十多人前往元丽那裹请求治罪。
English: Gourd led more than thirty of his princes to Yuan Lina Wrapped to plead for punishment.

古文：椿又斩瞻。
现代文：杨椿又杀死陈瞻。
English: Yang Tsubaki killed Chen Zhan again.

古文：丽因平贼之势，枉掠良善七百余人。
现代文：元丽利用平定贼寇的声威，掳掠良民七百多人。
English: Taking advantage of the prestige of quelling the bandits, Yuan Li abducted more than seven hundred good people.

古文：世宗嘉其功，诏有司不听追检。
现代文：世宗嘉奖他的功劳，诏令有关官员不准追究。
English: King Sejong praised him for his service and ordered the relevant officials not to pursue the case.

古文：拜雍州刺史，为政严酷，吏人患之。
现代文：被任命为雍州刺史，行政严厉残酷，官吏民众怨恨他。
English: He was appointed as the chief historian of Yongzhou, the administration was harsh and cruel, and the officials and people resented him.

古文：其妻崔氏诞一男，丽遂出州狱囚死及徒流案未申台者，一时放免。
现代文：他的妻子崔氏生下一个男孩，元丽于是放出州狱中没有申报台合的死刑和徒刑流放罪犯，一时之间都免罪。
English: His wife, Cui, gave birth to a baby boy, and Yuan Li was released from the state prison, and the death penalty and prison sentence of the criminal who did not declare Taiwan were temporarily pardoned.

古文：迁冀州刺史，入为尚书左仆射。
现代文：调任冀州刺史，召入朝廷为尚书左仆射。
English: He was transferred to the post of Jizhou chief historian, and was called to the imperial court as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man.

古文：帝问曰： 闻公在州，杀戮无理，枉滥非一，又大杀道人。 
现代文：皇帝问他道： 听说公在州中，杀戮不讲道理，冤屈不仅一例，又大杀佛教徒。 
English: The emperor asked him, "I have heard that in some prefectures, the killing of civilians is unreasonable. This is not only a case of grievance, but also a large-scale killing of Buddhists.

古文：对曰： 臣在冀州可杀道人二百许人，亦复何多？ 
现代文：五丽回答说： 臣下在冀业约杀佛教徒二百来人，哪裹算得上多? 
English: Wuli replied, "Our vassals killed about two hundred Buddhists in Jiye, how many is too many?

古文：帝曰： 一物不得其所，若纳诸隍，况杀道人二百而言不多。 
现代文：皇帝说： 一人不得其所，犹如放进城壕，何况杀佛教徒二百人却说不多? 
English: The emperor said, "One person cannot be put in his place, just as if he were put in a trench, and what is more, killing two hundred Buddhists is not saying much?

古文：丽脱冠谢，赐坐。
现代文：元丽脱帽道歉，赐他就座。
English: Yuan Li took off her hat in apology and gave him a seat.

古文：卒，谥曰威。
现代文：去世，谧号为威。
English: He died, and his nickname became a legend.

古文：子显和，少有节操，历司徒记室参军。
现代文：儿子显和，年轻时有节操，任司徒记室参军。
English: His son, Hsien Ho, had the discipline to join the army when he was young.

古文：司徒崔光每见之曰： 元参军风流清秀，容止闲雅，乃宰相之器。 
现代文：司徒崔光常在见到他后说： 元参军风采清高特异，举止雅致，是做宰相的材料。 
English: After seeing him, Sittu Cui Guangchang said: "The former military man has a clear and unique style, and his manners are elegant. He is the material to be the prime minister."

古文：除徐州安东府长史。
现代文：授任徐州安东府长史。
English: He was awarded the title of Governor of Xuzhou Andong Prefecture.

古文：刺史元法僧叛，显和与战被擒，执手命与连坐。
现代文：刺史元法僧叛变，显和同他交战被捉，法僧握住他的手命他和自己坐在一起。
English: The Buddhist monk Zishi Yuan rebelled, Hsien Ho fought with him and was captured. The Buddhist monk held his hand and ordered him to sit with him.

古文：显和曰： 显和与阿翁同源别派，皆是磐石之宗，一朝以地外叛，若遇董狐，能无惭德！ 
现代文：显和说： 我和阿翁同出一脉而分支不同，都是做磐石的同宗，突然献土地向外人叛变，如果遇到董狐，能不惭愧吗? 
English: Xianhe said, "Aweng and I are from the same lineage, but different branches. We are both from the same clan of rock. Suddenly, we offered our land to outsiders and rebelled. If we met Dong Juxu, would we not be ashamed?

古文：遂不肯坐。
现代文：就不肯坐下。
English: He wouldn't sit down.

古文：法僧犹欲慰喻，显和曰： 乃可死作恶鬼，不能坐为叛臣。 
现代文：法僧还要慰问劝告他，显和说： 可以死后做恶鬼，不能坐下当叛臣。 
English: The Dharma monk also consoled and advised him, saying: You can become an evil spirit after death, but you cannot sit down as a traitor.

古文：及将杀之，神色自若。
现代文：等到将要杀他时，神情面色不改常态。
English: When it comes time to kill him, his expression remains the same.

古文：建义初，赠秦州刺史。
现代文：建义初年，追赠他为秦州刺史。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he was posthumously awarded the title of Qin State Historian.

古文：汝阴王天赐，和平三年封，拜镇南大将军、虎牢镇都大将。
现代文：汝阴王天赐，和平二年封，被任命为镇南大将军、虎牢镇都大将。
English: Blessed by Heaven, Ruyin Wang was given the title of the Second Prince of Peace and was appointed as the General of Zhenan and the General of Hougang.

古文：后为内都大官。
现代文：后来担任内都大官。
English: Later, he served as the inner city's top official.

古文：高祖初，殿中尚书胡莫寒简西部敕勒豪富兼丁者为殿中武士，而大纳财货，简选不平。
现代文：高祖初年，殿中尚书胡莫寒挑选西部敕勒富豪家中男丁多的做殿中武士，而大受财物，挑选不公平。
English: In the first year of Gaozu's reign, the palace secretary Humo coldly chose the western rich man Dindo to be a samurai in the palace, but he received a lot of wealth, so the selection was unfair.

古文：众怒，杀莫寒及高平假镇将奚陵，于是诸部敕勒悉叛。
现代文：众人发怒，杀死莫寒和高平代理镇将奚陵，于是敕勒各部落全反叛。
English: The people were angry and killed Mokhang and Gaoping, so all the tribes in Mule rebelled.

古文：诏天赐与给事中罗云督诸军讨之。
现代文：韶令天赐和给事中罗云统领各军讨伐他们。
English: Luo Yun led the armies to fight them.

古文：前锋敕勒诈降，云信之。副将元伏曰： 敕勒色动，恐将有变，今不设备，将为所图。 
现代文：前锋敕勒假装投降，罗云相信他们，副将元伏说： 敕勒神色变化，恐怕将有变故，现在不加防备，将为他们所图谋。 
English: Forward Xule pretended to surrender, Luo Yun believed them, Vice Admiral Yuan Bu said: Xule's expression changed, I'm afraid there will be a change, now unprepared, will plot for them.

古文：云不从。
现代文：罗云不听从。
English: Luo Yun did not listen.

古文：敕勒轻骑数千袭杀云，天赐仅得自全。
现代文：敕勒轻装的骑兵几千人偷袭杀死罗云，天赐勉强得以自己保全。
English: Mele's lightly armed cavalry of several thousand attacked and killed Luo Yun, and by the grace of God, he was able to save himself.

古文：后除征北大将军、护匈奴中郎将。
现代文：后来授任征北大将军、护匈奴中郎将。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of General of Peking University and General of Xiongnu Protection.

古文：累迁怀朔镇大将。坐贪残，恕死，削除官爵。
现代文：屡次调任至怀朔镇大将，因贪婪残暴获罪，免去死刑，削除官职爵位。
English: He was repeatedly transferred to the post of general of Wai Shuo Town, was convicted of greed and brutality, was exempted from the death penalty, and his official title and rank were removed.

古文：卒，高祖哭于思政观，赠本爵，葬从王礼，谥曰灵王。
现代文：去世，高祖在思政观哭吊，追赠他本来的爵位，安葬用王爵的礼仪，谧号为灵王。
English: When Gao Zu passed away, he wept and hanged himself in Shizhongguan, bequeathed his original title, and was buried with the etiquette of a prince, and his nickname was Lingwang.

古文：子逞，字万安。
现代文：儿子元逞，字万安。
English: His son, Yuan Gang, is known as Wan An.

古文：卒于齐州刺史，谥曰威。
现代文：任齐州刺史时去世，谧号为威。
English: He died when he was in charge of the history of Qizhou, and his nickname was Zheng.

古文：逞子庆和，东豫州刺史。
现代文：元逞的儿子庆翅，任塞逸业刺史。
English: The son of Yuan Gang, Qing Ying, was appointed to the post of secretary.

古文：为萧衍将所攻，举城降之。
现代文：被芦鱼的将领攻打，献城池投降。
English: It was attacked by the generals of the reed fish and surrendered.

古文：衍以为北道总督、魏王。
现代文：萝鱼任命他为北道总督、魏王。
English: Luo Yu appointed him as the governor of the North and the king of Wei.

古文：至项城，朝廷出师讨之，望风退走。
现代文：到达项越，朝廷出兵讨伐他，他望风逃跑。
English: When he arrived in Xiangyue, the imperial court sent troops to fight him, and he tried to escape.

古文：衍责之曰： 言同百舌，胆若鼷鼠。 
现代文：芦堑责备他说： 说起话来有一百个舌头，胆量却如同小老鼠。 
English: Reed scolded him, "You speak with the tongue of a hundred apes, but you have the guts of a mouse."

古文：遂徙合浦。
现代文：于是被流放到合适。
English: So he was exiled to a suitable place.

古文：逞弟泛，字普安。
现代文：元逞的弟弟五迅，字登台。
English: Wuxun, the younger brother of Yuan Gan, takes the stage.

古文：自元士稍迁营州刺史。
现代文：从元士逐渐升任营业刺史。
English: Gradually promoted from a former officer to a sales clerk.

古文：性贪残，人不堪命，相率逐之，泛走平州。
现代文：性格贪婪残暴，人们不能忍受，相继起来驱逐他，元泛逃到芒州。
English: He replied, "I only heard that the common people were saying that the prince was greedy and hoped that you would be replaced sooner." The New Year's Eve said, "There are seventy thousand families in Qizhou, but since I came here, not a single family has been able to get thirty pieces of money. How can you say I am greedy?"

古文：后除光禄大夫、宗正卿，封东燕县男。
现代文：后来授任光禄大夫、宗正卿，封东燕县男。
English: Later, he was impeached by the Imperial History Lieutenant Gensan, but was exempted from punishment due to an amnesty. After his death, he was known as Shizuo.

古文：于河阴遇害。
现代文：在河阴被杀害。
English: He was killed in Heyin.

古文：天赐第五子脩义，字寿安。涉猎书传，颇有文才，为高祖所知。
现代文：天赐的第五个儿子脩义，字寿安，阅读图书传记，很有文才，为高祖所赏识。
English: Heaven-sent fifth son Zhai Yi, surnamed Shouan, read books and biographies, was very literate, and was appreciated by Gao Zu.

古文：自元士稍迁左将军、齐州刺史。
现代文：从无士逐渐升任左将军、齐州刺史。
English: He gradually rose from no-rank officer to General of the Left, and became known as "Qizhou Shishi."

古文：脩义以齐州频丧刺史，累表固辞。
现代文：脩义因齐州接连死去刺史，多次上奏疏一再推辞。
English: Zhai Yi died one after another in the history of Qizhou, and he repeatedly submitted his resignation.

古文：诏曰： 脩短有命，吉凶由人，何得过致忧惮，以乖维城之寄。
现代文：韶书说： 长短有天命，吉凶由人事，何必过于忧虑畏惧，违背保卫国家的寄托?
English: The imperial edict said: "Long and short have the fate of heaven, and good and evil depend on people. Why should we be too worried and afraid, and violate the trust of defending the country?

古文：违凶就吉，时亦有之，可听更立馆宇。 
现代文：避凶而趋吉，也时常有这种事，可准许另建馆舍屋宇。 
English: In order to avoid misfortune and seek good fortune, this kind of thing often happens, and permission may be granted to build a separate building for the museum.

古文：于是移理东城。
现代文：于是迁治所到束城。
English: As a result, the relocation center moved to Sokcho.

古文：脩义为政，宽和爱人，在州四岁，不杀一人，百姓以是追思之。
现代文：脩义施政，宽容和顺爱民，在州中四年，不杀一个人，百姓因此思念他。
English: He administered justice, was tolerant and kind to the people, and did not kill a single person during his four years in the middle school. The people therefore miss him.

古文：迁秦州刺史。
现代文：调任秦州刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Qinzhou magistrate.

古文：肃宗初，表陈庶人禧、庶人愉等，请宥前愆，赐葬陵域。
现代文：肃宗初年，上奏疏陈述庶人元禧、庶人元愉等人，请求宽恕他们从前的罪过，恩赐安葬在陵墓区域。
English: In the first year of Su Zong's reign, there was a short report on commoner Yuan Xiyu, commoner Yuan You and others, asking for forgiveness for their past sins and the gift of burial in the mausoleum area.

古文：灵太后诏曰： 收葬之恩，事由上旨，籓岳何得越职干陈！ 
现代文：灵太后下诏说： 收葬的恩德，事情出于皇帝旨意，刺史哪能超越权限干犯陈述? 
English: The Reverend Mother issued an edict saying that the grace of burial should be determined by the will of the imperial court. How could local officials interfere in such a matter?

古文：在州多受纳。
现代文：在州中受贿颇多。
English: He took a lot of bribes in the state.

古文：累迁吏部尚书。
现代文：累经升迁任吏部尚书。
English: He was successively transferred to the Personnel Department of the Ministry of Education.

古文：及在铨衡，唯专货贿，授官大小，皆有定价。
现代文：等到掌管官吏任免，衹图钱财，授官的大小，都有固定价格。
English: Until the appointment and removal of the officials in charge, the amount of money and the size of the award have a fixed price.

古文：时中散大夫高居者，有旨先叙，时上党郡缺，居遂求之。
现代文：当时中散大夫高居，有诏旨先加任用，其时上党郡有空缺，高居于是求取郡守。
English: At that time, Dr. Zhongshan Gaoju was first appointed by imperial decree. At that time, there was a vacancy in Shangdang County, so Gaoju asked for the county governor.

古文：脩义私已许人，抑居不与。
现代文：脩义私下已答应别人，抑制高居不给予他。
English: Zou Yi has privately promised others to restrain Gaoju from giving it to him.

古文：居大言不逊，脩义命左右牵曳之。
现代文：高居大声议论不客气，脩义命左右的人拖扯他。
English: Gaoju is not welcome to speak loudly, and people around him are dragging him.

古文：居对大众呼天唱贼。
现代文：高居对着众人大声呼喊有贼。
English: Gaoku shouted at the crowd, cursing the thief.

古文：人问居曰： 白日公庭，安得有贼？ 
现代文：有人问高居说： 白天在公堂上，哪能有贼? 
English: Someone asked him: In broad daylight, and above the courtroom, where are the thieves?

古文：居指脩义曰： 此座上者，违天子明诏，物多者得官，京师白劫，此非大贼乎？ 
现代文：高居指着脩义说： 这个座位上面的人，违背天子英明的诏书，财物多的得官位，如同京城白曰抢劫，遣不是大贼吗? 
English: Gaoju pointed at Zou Yi and said, "The person on this seat, in violation of the wise edict of the Son of Heaven, obtained an official position with a lot of wealth. Isn't he a big thief, just like the capital's white robbers?

古文：脩义失色。
现代文：脩义脸色大变。
English: Xinyi's face changed dramatically.

古文：居行骂而出。
现代文：高居边走边骂地走出来。
English: Gaoyu stepped out, cursing as he walked.

古文：后欲邀车驾论脩义罪状，左仆射萧宝夤谕之，乃止。
现代文：后来要拦截皇帝车马论说脩义的罪状，左仆射萧实夤开导他，才作罢。
English: Later, he wanted to intercept the emperor's chariot and horse to discuss the crime of slandering righteousness, but his left-hand man, Xiao Shizhen, enlightened him before he could do so.

古文：二秦反，假脩义兼尚右仆射、西道行台、行秦州事，为诸军节度。
现代文：二秦反叛，任命脩义为兼尚书右仆射、西道行台、行秦州事，做各军的总调度。
English: Two Qin rebelled, and appointed Zhai Yi to be concurrently Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Shao, West Road, Xingtao, and Xing Qin State, and to do the overall scheduling of each army.

古文：脩义性好酒，每饮连日，遂遇风病，神明昏丧，虽至长安，竟无部分之益。
现代文：脩义好饮酒，每次饮酒接连几天，遂得了中风，神志不清，虽然到了长安，也仍然如此。
English: Zhai Yi liked to drink, and every time he drank for several days in a row, he finally had a stroke and became delirious. Although he arrived in Chang'an, it was still the same.

古文：元志败没，贼东至黑水，更遣萧宝夤讨之，以脩义为雍州刺史。
现代文：元志战死，贼寇束到墨丞，又派遣萧实夤讨伐，任命值盏为壅州刺史。
English: Yuan Zhi died in battle, the band of thieves and robbers came to Moxian, and Xiao Shizhen was sent to fight, and he was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：卒于州，赠司空，谥曰文。
现代文：脩义在州中去世，追赠司空，谧号为文。
English: Xinyi died in the middle of the state, posthumously awarded the title of Siku, and his nickname was Wen.

古文：子均，位给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：儿子元均，担任给事黄门侍郎。
English: His son, Motokuni, served as the attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：乐浪王万寿，和平三年封，拜征东大将军，镇和龙。
现代文：乐浪王重画，扭王三年封，被任命为征东大将军，镇守重噬。
English: Le Lang Wang re-painted, Twisting Wang three-year seal, was appointed as the General of the Expedition to the East, the town guard re-devoured.

古文：性贪暴，徵还，道忧薨。
现代文：性格贪婪暴烈，征召回京，在途中忧虑逝世。
English: His character was greedy and violent. He was called back to Kyoto and died of worry on the way.

古文：谥曰厉王。
现代文：谧号为厉王。
English: His posthumous name was Li Wang.

古文：子康王乐平，袭。
现代文：儿子康王乐平，继承爵位。
English: His son, Kang Wang Leping, succeeded to the title.

古文：薨。
现代文：逝世。
English: He died.

古文：子长命，袭。坐杀人赐死，国除。
现代文：儿子长命，继承爵位因杀人获罪被赐令自杀，封国削除。
English: His son lived a long life, inherited the title of nobility, was convicted of murder, was ordered to commit suicide, and the state seal was removed.

古文：子忠，肃宗时，复前爵，位太常少卿。
现代文：儿子元忠，肃宗时，恢复从前的爵位，担任太常少卿。
English: When his son, Mototada, ascended the throne, he was reinstated in his former title of nobility, and became Taijo Shokei.

古文：出帝泛舟天渊池，命宗室诸王陪宴。
现代文：出帝乘船在天渊池上游玩，命令宗室亲王陪同饮宴。
English: Emperor Dezong took a boat ride on the Tianyuan Lake and ordered the prince to accompany the banquet.

古文：忠愚而无智，性好衣服，遂著红罗襦，绣作领；碧裤，锦为缘。
现代文：元忠愚蠢没有智慧，天生喜好打扮，就穿着红罗短衣，绣衣领，绿色的绸裤，锦缎镶边。
English: Foolish and unintelligent, with a natural predilection for dressing up, Yuan Zhong wore a red short robe with an embroidered collar, green silk trousers, and brocade edging.

古文：帝谓曰： 朝廷衣冠，应有常式，何为著百戏衣？ 
现代文：皇帝对他说： 朝廷的衣帽，应有固定的样式，你为什么穿着杂技的衣服? 
English: The emperor said to him: The court's robes and hats should have a fixed style. Why are you wearing acrobatic clothes?

古文：忠曰： 臣少来所爱，情存绮罗，歌衣舞服，是臣所愿。 
现代文：元忠说： 臣下自幼所爱，心在绮罗，歌舞的衣服，是臣下所喜爱的。 
English: Mototada said, "Our vassals have loved marimbas since childhood, and their hearts are set on marimbas. Singing and dancing outfits are favored by our vassals.

古文：帝曰： 人之无良，乃至此乎！ 
现代文：皇帝说： 人没有善德，竟到了如此地步吗? 
English: The emperor said, "Is it possible for a man to be so devoid of virtue?

古文：广平王洛侯，和平二年封。
现代文：广平王洛侯，和平二年封。
English: As a result, he was removed from his official position and died at his home. Guangping Wang Luo Hou was created in the second year of peace.

古文：薨，谥曰殇。
现代文：逝世，谧号为殇。
English: When you die, you become a skeleton.

古文：无子，后以阳平幽王第五子匡后之。
现代文：没有儿子，后来以阳平幽王的第五个儿子元匡继承他。
English: He did not have a son, and later named Yang Pingyu Wang's fifth son, Kuang, as his heir.

古文：匡字建扶，性耿介，有气节。
现代文：元匡字建扶，性格光明正大，有气度节操。
English: Yuan Kuang, the character of Jianfu, has a straightforward temperament and a strong character.

古文：高祖器之，谓曰： 叔父必能仪形社稷，匡辅朕躬。今可改名为匡，以成克终之美。 
现代文：高祖器重他，对他说： 叔父必定能为国家楷模，匡正辅助我，现可改名为元匡，以成就善始善终的美好。 
English: Gao Zu cherished him and said to him: My uncle will surely be a role model for the country, and he will assist me in rectifying things. He can now change his name to Yuan Kuang, so as to achieve the beauty of a good beginning and a good ending.

古文：世宗即位，累迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：世宗即位，元匡屡经升迁为给事黄门侍郎。
English: When King Sejong ascended the throne, Yuan Kuang was repeatedly promoted to attendant of the Yellow Gate.

古文：茹皓始有宠，百僚微惮之。
现代文：茹皓开始受宠信，百官有些畏惧他。
English: Zhu Xi began to be favored, and officials were somewhat afraid of him.

古文：世宗曾于山陵还，诏匡陪乘，又命皓登车。
现代文：世宗曾经祭祀陵墓返回，韶令元匡陪同乘车，又命茹皓上车。
English: Sejong had returned from a ritual at the mausoleum. He ordered Yuan Kuang to accompany him by car, and also ordered Ru Hao to get on the car.

古文：皓褰裳将上，匡谏止。世宗推之令下，皓恨匡失色。
现代文：茹皓撩起衣裳将要上来，元匡劝阻，世宗就推他让他下去，茹皓恨元匡变了脸色。
English: Ru Ru's clothes are about to come up, Yuan Kuang dissuades, Shizong pushes him to let him go down, Ru Ru Ru hates Yuan Kuang and his face changes.

古文：当时壮其忠謇。
现代文：当时的人都佩服他的忠诚正直。
English: At the time, people praised him for his loyalty and courage.

古文：世宗亲政，除肆州刺史。
现代文：世宗亲掌朝政，授任他为肆州刺史。
English: Sejong personally administered the imperial court, and he was appointed as the governor of Wuzhou.

古文：匡既忤皓，惧为所害，廉慎自修，甚有声绩。
现代文：元匡违忤茹皓，担忧被他陷害，清廉谨慎整饬自己，十分有声望政绩。
English: Since Yuan Kuang had offended Zhu Xi and feared being plotted against by him, he paid special attention to self-cultivation. He had a great reputation and political achievements.

古文：迁恆州刺史，徵为大宗正卿、河南邑中正。
现代文：调任恒州刺史，征入任大宗正卿、河南邑中正。
English: He was transferred to the post of the chief historian of Hengzhou, and was conscripted into the posts of Daizong Zhengqing and Henan Zhongzheng.

古文：匡奏亲王及始籓、二籓王妻悉有妃号，而三籓已下皆谓之妻，上不得同为妃名，而下不及五品已上有命妇之号，窃为疑。
现代文：元匡上奏亲王和始藩王、二藩王的妻子都有妃号，而三藩王以下都称为妻，上不能同受妃子名号，而下不如五品以上官员有命妇的名号，私下感到疑惑。
English: The wives of Prince Gensho and the kings of the First and Second Domains all have the title of empress, while the wives of the kings of the Third Domain and below are called wives. The first wife cannot receive the title of empress, while the second wife cannot receive the title of empress, which is not as good as the title of the powerful wives of officials of the Fifth Rank and above. Privately, I feel doubtful.

古文：诏曰： 夫贵于朝，妻荣于室，妇女无定，升从其夫。
现代文：韶令说： 丈夫在朝廷颢贵，妻子在家中荣耀，妇女没有定准，提升依从她的丈夫。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: "Husbands are more valuable than the imperial court, and wives are more honorable than their wives. Women have no fixed title, and are promoted by their husbands.

古文：三籓既启王封，妃名亦宜同等。
现代文：三藩王既受王的封爵，妃的名号也应同等。
English: Since the third generation of the king of the domain is the king's seal, the name of the concubine should be the same.

古文：妻者，齐也，理与已齐，可从妃例。 
现代文：妻子，是齐的意思，道理上和自己平齐，可依妃子的条例。 
English: Wife, is the meaning of Qi, the principle and their own level, can be in accordance with the regulations of the concubine.

古文：自是三籓王妻名号始定。
现代文：从此三藩王妻子的名号才确定。
English: It was only then that the name of the wife of the King of San Francisco was confirmed.

古文：后除度支尚书。
现代文：后来授任度支尚书。
English: Later, the degree of appointment was confirmed.

古文：匡表引乐陵、章武之例，求绍洛侯封，诏付尚书议。
现代文：元匡上奏援引乐陵王、章武王的条例，请求继承洛侯的封爵，诏令交付尚书议论。
English: Quoting the regulations of King Le Ling and King Zhangwu, Yuan Kuang Shangso requested to inherit the title of Luo Hou, and the imperial edict was delivered to Shang Shu for discussion.

古文：尚书奏听袭封，以明兴绝之义。
现代文：尚书上奏准许继承封爵，来表示兴亡继绝的义理。
English: Shang wrote that he should be allowed to assume the title of king, to show the imperial court's intention to prosper, destroy the country, and succeed to the throne.

古文：匡与尚书令高肇不平，常无降下之色。
现代文：元匡和尚书令高肇不和，时常没有顺服的神色。
English: The monk Yuan Kuang ordered Gao Zhao to be at odds with him, and he often did not look submissive.

古文：时世宗委政于肇，朝廷倾惮，唯匡与肇抗衡。
现代文：当时世宗把政事委托给高肇，朝廷都畏惧高肇，衹有元匡和高肇对抗。
English: At that time, Shizong entrusted the political affairs to Gaozhao, the imperial court was afraid of Gaozhao, and there was a confrontation between Yuan Kuang and Gaozhao.

古文：先自造棺，置于事，意欲舆棺诣阙，论肇罪恶，自杀切谏。
现代文：首先自己制造棺材，放置在厅事中，想要用车载上棺材前往宫廷，论说高肇的罪恶，以自杀恳切规劝。
English: First of all, he made a coffin himself, placed it in the office, and wanted to use the car to carry the coffin to the palace to discuss Gao Zhao's evil and earnestly persuade him to commit suicide.

古文：肇闻而恶之。
现代文：高肇听说后厌恶他。
English: When Gao Zhao heard about this, he was disgusted.

古文：后因与太常刘芳议争权量，遂与肇声色。
现代文：元匡后来因为和太常刘芳争议度量单位，就和高肇翻了脸。
English: Yuan Kuang later fell out with Gao Zhao because of the dispute over the unit of measurement between him and Liu Fang.

古文：御史中尉王显奏匡曰：自金行失御，群伪竞兴，礼坏乐崩，彝伦攸斁。
现代文：御史中尉王显举奏元匡说：自从晋朝失去控御，各僭越政权竞相兴起，礼乐制度崩溃，人际关系败坏。
English: Wang Xian, a lieutenant of the Imperial Historian's Office, quoted Yuan Kuang as saying: "Since the Jin Dynasty lost control, various Han-Vietnamese regimes have risen in competition, the ritual music system has collapsed, and interpersonal relationships have deteriorated.

古文：大魏应期，奄有四海。
现代文：大魏顺应天命，拥有四海。
English: The Great Wei conformed to the destiny of heaven and possessed the four seas.

古文：高祖孝文皇帝以睿圣统天，克复旧典。
现代文：高祖孝文皇帝以睿智圣明统御天下，恢复旧日典章。
English: Emperor Gaozhu Xiaowen, who ruled the country with wisdom and wisdom, restored the old day ceremony.

古文：乃命故中书监高闾广旌儒林，推寻乐府，依据《六经》，参诸国志，以黍裁寸，将均周汉旧章。
现代文：于是命令已故中书监高闾广泛招致儒林人物，推究乐府，依据《六经》，参考各朝志书，用黍来裁定寸的长度，将要靠近周汉旧日典章。
English: Therefore, the late Gao Jiong, the book supervisor of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), ordered to invite a wide range of figures from the Confucianism. According to the "Six Classics" and the reference of the morning chronicles, the length of an inch will be close to that of the Zhou and Han dynasties.

古文：属云构中迁，尚未云就。
现代文：遇到建造迁移，还没有完成。
English: Due to construction and relocation, it has not yet been completed.

古文：高祖睿思玄深，参考经记，以一黍之大，用成分体，准之为尺，宣布施行。
现代文：高祖思虑深入，参考经传记载，以一黍的大小，来确定分的规格，依据它为尺，公布施行。
English: Gao Zu thought deeply, referenced the historical records, and determined the specifications of the points with the size of a gong, according to which it was a ruler, announced and implemented.

古文：暨正始中，故太乐令公孙崇辄自立意，以黍十二为寸，别造尺度，定律刊钟。
现代文：到正始年间，已故太乐令公孙崇私自立意，以十二粒黍为寸，另外造作尺度，定律管改钟斛。
English: By the beginning of the year, the late Taile made Gongsun respect self-reliance, with twelve grains of rice as a measure, and made another scale, and the law controlled the change of the bell.

古文：皆向成讫，表求观试。
现代文：都要造成时，上奏请求观看测试。
English: Both are caused when the player requests to watch a test.

古文：时敕太常卿臣芳，以崇造既成，请集朝英，议其得否。
现代文：当时命令太常卿臣刘芳，因公孙崇造作已成，请他集合朝廷英才，商议得失。
English: At that time, he ordered Liu Fang, a senior courtier of the Taizang Emperor, to invite him to gather the eminent persons of the imperial court to discuss the merits and demerits of the project.

古文：芳疑崇尺度与先朝不同，察其作者，于经史复异，推造鲜据，非所宜行。
现代文：刘芳怀疑公孙崇的尺度和先朝不相同，考察它的制作，和经史又有差异，推究造作很少依据，不宜施行。
English: Liu Fang suspected that the scale of Gongsun Chong was not the same as that of the previous dynasty, and examined its production, and there were differences in history. There was little basis for investigating the creation, and it was not appropriate to implement it.

古文：时尚书令臣肇、清河王怿等以崇造乖谬，与《周礼》不同，遂奏臣芳依《周礼》更造，成讫量校，从其善者。
现代文：当时尚书令臣高肇、清河王元恽等人因公孙崇造作谬误，和《周礼》不相同，就奏请臣刘芳依据《周礼》另行制造，造成后测量考校，采用好的。
English: At that time, Shang Shuling's vassals Gao Zhao, Qinghe Wang Yuanqi and others, because of the fallacy of Gongsun Chongzhu, which was not the same as "Zhouli," asked the vassal Liu Fang to make it separately according to "Zhouli," resulting in post-measurement examination, and it was adopted.

古文：而芳以先朝尺度，事合古典。
现代文：而刘芳认为先朝尺度，事情合乎古代典章。
English: Liu Fang, on the other hand, believed that the matter was in accordance with ancient laws and regulations.

古文：乃依前诏书，以黍刊寸，并呈朝廷，用裁金石。
现代文：就依照前面的诏书，用黍改定寸，并呈报朝廷，来裁断钟磬类乐器。
English: In accordance with the previous imperial edict, he used a chisel to determine the size and reported to the imperial court to cut the bell and gong musical instruments.

古文：于时议者，多云芳是，唯黄门侍郎臣孙惠蔚与崇扶同。
现代文：造时评议的人，大多说刘芳是对的，惟独黄门侍郎臣孙惠蔚附和公孙塞。
English: Most of the people who commented on the construction of the time said that Liu Fang was right, except for the Yellow Gate attendant and retainer Sun Huiwei and the public Sun Ce.

古文：二途参差，频经考议。
现代文：二者的差别，接连经过考察评议。
English: The differences between the two were examined and discussed successively.

古文：而尚书令臣肇以芳造。
现代文：而尚书令臣高肇以刘芳所造为是。
English: However, Gaozhao, a high-ranking courtier, is said to have been inspired by Liu Fang.

古文：崇物故之后，而惠蔚亦造一尺，仍云扶。
现代文：公孙崇去世以后，塞菌也造一尺，仍说赞同公莲崇。
English: After the death of Gongsun Chong, Sai Ye also made a shaku, still saying that he agreed with Gonglian Chong.

古文：以比崇尺，自相乖背。
现代文：用来比照公孙崇的尺，自相违背。
English: It is used to compare with the ruler of Gongsun Chong, and contradicts itself.

古文：量省二三，谓芳为得。
现代文：思量再三，以为刘芳所造是准确的。
English: After much deliberation, I thought Liu Fang's creation was accurate.

古文：而尚书臣匡表云刘孙二尺，长短相倾，稽考两律，所容殊异。
现代文：然而尚书臣元匡上奏说刘芳孙惠蔚两种尺，长短不一样，考察两个律管，容积不同。
English: However, Shang Shuxin Yuan Kuang said that Liu Fang, Sun Hui and Wei are two kinds of shaku, the length is different, and the volume is different.

古文：言取中黍，校彼二家，云并参差，抑中无所，自立一途，请求议判。
现代文：说是采取中等黍粒，校正那二家，说是都有差误，没法折中，自己确立一种尺度，请求商议评定。
English: He said that he would take a middle-of-the-road barley grain and calibrate the two companies. He said that there were errors and there was no way to compromise. He established a standard for himself and requested that the evaluation be discussed.

古文：当时议者，或是于匡。
现代文：当时议论的人，有的赞同元匡。
English: At that time, some people who were talking about it agreed with Yuan Kuang.

古文：两途舛驳，未即时定。
现代文：两种意见分歧，没有立即决定。
English: The two disagreed and there was no immediate decision.

古文：肇又云：权斛斗尺，班行已久，今者所论，岂喻先旨？
现代文：高肇又说，权斛斗尺，颁行已经很久，现在所议论的，哪裹理解先朝旨意?
English: Gao Zhao also said that it has been a long time since the decree was issued, and what is being discussed now, what is the understanding of the First Emperor's will?

古文：宜仰依先朝故尺为定。
现代文：应该依先朝旧尺为准。
English: It should be based on the former imperial standard.

古文：自尔以后，而匡与肇厉言都座，声色相加，高下失其常伦，噂竞无复彝序。
现代文：从那以后，而元匡和高肇在尚书省厉声谈论，脸色严肃，使官位的高低失去正常次序，议论纷杂不再有固定的伦常。
English: Since then, however, Yuan Kuang and Gao Zhao have been talking loudly in Shangshu Province, their faces serious, so that the high and low ranks of officials have lost their normal order, and there is no longer a fixed order to the discussions.

古文：匡更表列，据己十是，云芳十非。
现代文：元匡又上奏列举，依据自己的十是，说刘芳的十不是。
English: Yuan Kuang then recited the list, and based on his own ten yeses, said that Liu Fang's ten noes were the best.

古文：又云： 肇前被敕旨，共芳营督，规立钟石之名，希播制作之誉。
现代文：又说： 高肇从前接受皇帝的旨令，和刘芳一起经营督察，规划树立钟石的名字，希望传播制作的声誉。
English: He also said: Gao Zhao once accepted the emperor's order, and together with Liu Fang, he operated the inspector, planned to establish the name of the bell stone, and hoped to spread the reputation of the production.

古文：乃凭枢衡之尊，藉舅氏之势，与夺任心，臧否自已。
现代文：却凭藉掌管大权的尊贵，依仗舅氏的势力，给予夺取任凭心思，赞美否定全随自己。
English: but by virtue of the dignity of holding great power, relying on the power of his uncle, giving and taking anything with his heart, praising and denying everything with himself.

古文：阿党刘芳，遏绝臣事，望势雷同者接以恩言，依经按古者即被怒责。
现代文：阿附刘芳，阻隔臣下事务，望着权势附和的以好言好语相交接，依经籍考古事的就被愤怒斥责。
English: Liu Fang, a vassal, obstructed the affairs of his vassals, and watched as those with power and influence exchanged kind words with each other. He was angrily rebuked for his archaeological activities.

古文：虽未指鹿化马，移天徙日，实使蕴藉之士，耸气坐端；怀道之夫，结舌筵次。 
现代文：虽然没有指鹿为马，移天迁，实在使含蓄宽容的人，在座位上屏住呼吸，心怀道德的人，在侍宴时张口结舌。 
English: Although there is no indication that the deer is a horse, the migration of heaven and earth really makes the implicitly tolerant people hold their breath on the seat, and the moral people are tongue-tied at the banquet.

古文：又言： 芳昔与崇竞，恆言自作，今共臣论，忽称先朝。
现代文：又说： 刘芳从前和公孙崇竞争，总说是自己造作，现在和臣下谈论，忽称先朝。
English: He also said: Liu Fang used to compete with Gongsun Chong, and always said that it was his own invention. Now he talks with his vassals, and casually calls it the previous dynasty.

古文：岂不前谓可行，辄欲自取，后知错谬，便推先朝。
现代文：这难道不是从前以为可行，就要自己谋取名声，后来知道错误，就推到先朝?
English: Wasn't this something that was thought to be possible in the past, that you had to make a name for yourself, and then when you found out you were wrong, you pushed it off to the previous government?

古文：殊非大臣之体，深失为下之义。
现代文：完全不是大臣的礼节，深深失去做臣下的道义。
English: It is not at all the etiquette of a minister, and he has deeply lost the morality of being a subject.

古文：复考校势臣之前，量度偏颇之手，臣必刖足内朝，抱璞人外。 
现代文：再在权臣的面前考校，在不公正的手中测量，臣下必定在朝中被砍足，抱玉璞于人群之外。 
English: Then, in the presence of a powerful minister, he was examined and measured by an unjust hand. The vassal must have had his feet cut off in the morning, and he was hugging his wife outside the crowd.

古文：嚣言肆意，彰于朝野。
现代文：嚣张的言论放肆的意图，传遍朝野。
English: Arrogant remarks and impudent intentions spread throughout the morning and evening.

古文：然匡职当出纳，献替所在，斗尺权度，正是所司。
现代文：然而元匡职掌是出纳王命，静言进谏，斗尺权度，正是他所掌管的。
English: However, Yuan Kuang was in charge of the cashier's king's life, the quiet speech, and the weight of the ruler.

古文：若己有所见，能练臧否，宜应首唱义端，早辨诸惑，何故默心随从，不关一言，见芳成事，方有此语。
现代文：如果自己有所见解，能选定优劣，应该首倡正义一端，早辨别各种疑惑，为什么沉默在心中顺从别人，不发一言，见到刘芳成事，才有这段话?
English: If you have your own opinions, can choose the merits and demerits, should take the lead in promoting justice, and early identify all kinds of doubts, why do you silently obey others in your heart, without saying a word, and only have this passage when you see Liu Fang succeed?

古文：计芳才学，与匡殊悬，所见浅深，不应相匹。
现代文：估量刘芳的才学，和元匡相差很远，所见到的深浅，不应该相等。
English: The estimation of Liu Fang's talent is far different from that of Yuan Kuang, and the profundity and shallowness should not be equal.

古文：今乃始发，恐此由心，借智于人，规成虚誉。
现代文：现在才开始发言，恐怕这是出于心中要藉用别人的智慧，规划实现虚假的声誉。
English: I'm afraid I'm only speaking out now because I want to use the wisdom of others to plan and achieve a false reputation.

古文：况匡表云： 所据铜权，形如古志，明是汉作，非莽别造。 
现代文：况且元匡奏疏中说： 所依据的铜称锤，形状如同古代记载，表明是汉朝所制，不是新莽另造。 
English: Moreover, Yuan Kuang Song wrote: The copper hammer on which it is based has the same shape as that described in ancient records, which indicates that it was made in the Han Dynasty, and not a new invention.

古文：及案《权铭》云： 黄帝始祖，德布于虞；虞帝始祖，德布于新。 
现代文：以及考查《权铭》说： 黄帝始祖，德行布于有虞氏，虞帝始祖，德行布于新。 
English: and the examination of the "Imperial Inscription" said: the founder of the Yellow Emperor, the virtue of the Yu Dynasty, the founder of the Yu Dynasty, the virtue of the Xin Dynasty.

古文：若莽佐汉时事，宁有铭伪新之号哉？
现代文：如果是王莽辅佐汉朝时的事，哪有铭刻僭伪的新莽名号的道理呢?
English: If Wang Mangfu assisted the Han Dynasty, what is the reason for inscribing the false name of New Mangfu?

古文：又寻《莽传》云：莽居摄，即变汉制度。
现代文：又推寻《王莽传》说，王莽代行朝政期间，就改变汉朝制度。
English: It is also inferred from "The Legend of Wang Mang" that Wang Mang changed the Han Dynasty system during his acting as the regent of the dynasty.

古文：考校二证，非汉权明矣。
现代文：考校两个证据，不是汉朝的称锤是很明确的。
English: The two evidences of the examination and examination, it is very clear that it is not the hammer of the Han Dynasty.

古文：复云： 芳之所造，又短先朝之尺。 
现代文：他又说： 刘芳所造的，又短于先朝的尺度。 
English: He also said: Liu Fang's scale is shorter than that of the previous dynasty.

古文：臣既比之，权然相合。
现代文：臣下比较后，的确相合。
English: After comparing the vassals, they did match.

古文：更云： 芳尺与千金堰不同。 
现代文：又说： 刘芳的尺和千金堰不相同。 
English: He also said: Liu Fang's ruler is not the same as the thousand gold weir.

古文：臣复量比，因见其异。
现代文：臣下再测量比较，因而见到它们不同。
English: Subordinates re-measured and compared, thus seeing them differently.

古文：二三浮滥，难可据准。
现代文：两三个虚浮不当的例子，难以作为依据准则。
English: Two or three examples of fraud and abuse are difficult to use as a basis for a guideline.

古文：又云： 共构虚端，妄为疑似，托以先朝，云非己制。 
现代文：又说： 一起构造不同尺度，狂妄制作疑似的标准，假托是先朝所行，说不是自己所制。 
English: He also said: Constructing different scales at the same time, arrogantly making up dubious standards, pretending that they were made by the previous government, and saying that they were not made by themselves.

古文：臣按此欺诈，乃在于匡，不在于芳。
现代文：臣下考察这中间的欺诈，是在于元匡，不在于刘芳。
English: Subordinates investigate this middle fraud, it is in Yuan Kuang, not in Liu Fang.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：凭什么这样说?
English: Why do you say that?

古文：芳先被敕，专造钟律，管籥优劣，是其所裁，权斛尺度，本非其事。
现代文：刘芳先受命令，专门制造钟律，管籥的好坏，是他所裁定的，权斛尺度，本不是他的事。
English: Liu Fang was the first to receive the order to specially manufacture the bell, and he was the one to decide whether the bell was good or bad. The authority and scale were not his business.

古文：比前门下索芳尺度，而芳牒报云： 依先朝所班新尺，复应下黍，更不增损，为造钟律，调正分寸而已。 
现代文：此前门下省索取刘芳的尺度，而刘芳以牒呈报告说： 依照先朝所颁行的新尺，又符合下黍，不加增减，制造钟律，调定分寸而已。 
English: Previously, Liu Fang's yardstick was requested by a subordinate province, and Liu Fang submitted a report with an ultimatum: According to the new yardstick issued by the previous government, it conforms to the lower jaw, without addition or subtraction, creates a clock rhythm, and adjusts the measurement.

古文：检匡造时在牒后一岁，芳于尔日，匡未共争，已有此牒，岂为诈也？
现代文：检查亘匡造尺在牒呈一年以后，刘芳在当时，元匡还没同他相争论，已有这份牒呈，哪裹是欺诈呢?
English: A year after Wang Kuang's ultimatum was presented, Liu Fang, at that time, Yuan Kuang had not yet argued with him, and this ultimatum had already been presented. What is fraud?

古文：计崇造寸，积黍十二，群情共知；而芳造寸，唯止十黍，亦俱先朝诏书。
现代文：考核公孙崇造寸，是积黍十二粒，众所周知的；而刘芳造寸，仅止十粒黍，也都出自先朝诏书。
English: It is a well-known fact that the measurement of Gongsun Chong Zong is made up of twelve ingots, while the measurement of Liu Fang Zong is made up of only ten ingots, both of which come from the imperial edict of the previous dynasty.

古文：以黍成寸，首尾历然，宁有辄欲自取之理？
现代文：以黍成寸，前后清楚，哪有要自己谋取名声的道理?
English: It is clear from the beginning to the end that it is not necessary to seek fame on your own.

古文：肇任居端右，百僚是望，言行动静，必副具瞻。
现代文：高肇任尚书省长官，百官瞻望他，言行动静，一定要和众人瞻仰的身份相符合。
English: Gao Zhao is the governor of Shangshu Province. Hundreds of officials look up to him, and his words and actions are quiet. He must be consistent with the status that everyone looks up to.

古文：若恃权阿党，诈托先诏，将指鹿化马，徙日移天，即是魏之赵高，何以宰物？
现代文：如果仗恃权势阿谀结党，诈托先朝韶书，将要指鹿为马，迁日移天，就是越电的盏适，如何治理人?
English: He first had someone make a coffin and placed it in the hall, intending to carry the coffin into the palace, discuss Gao Zhao's crimes, and commit suicide to dissuade him.

古文：肇若无此，匡既诬毁宰相，讪谤明时。
现代文：高肇如没有这种行为，五垦便是诬陷宰相，诽谤清明的时代。
English: If Gao Zhao hadn't done this, the Fifth Five-Year Plan would have been the era of framing the prime minister and slandering the pure and virtuous.

古文：岂应谈议之间，便有指鹿之事；可否之际，轻生刖足之言。
现代文：哪应谈论之间，就有指鹿为马的事情；赞同否定之时，轻率产生砍足的言语?
English: What should be discussed between, there is a thing that refers to the deer as a horse; when agreeing to deny, rashly produce chopping speech?

古文：赵高矫惑，事属衰秦；卞和抱璞，时遇暴楚。
现代文：走遍诈称惑人，事情发生在衰落的秦国；主塑怀抱玉璞，时代遭遇暴虐的楚国。
English: The story takes place in the declining state of Qin; the main character embraces the Jade Emperor; and the era is dominated by the tyrannical state of Chu.

古文：何宜以济济之朝，而有斯谤者哉！
现代文：哪应在人才济济的朝代，而有这种诽谤呢。
English: How can such slander take place in a dynasty with an abundance of talent?

古文：阻惑朝听，不敬至甚，请以肇、匡并禁尚书，推穷其原，付廷尉定罪。
现代文：蛊惑朝廷视听，不恭敬到极点，请求将高肇、元匡都囚禁在尚书省，推究核实本源，交付廷尉定罪。
English: He enticed the imperial court through audio-visual, disrespectful to the extreme, and requested that Gao Zhao and Yuan Kuangdu be imprisoned in Shangshu Province, investigated and verified the source, and handed over to the court lieutenant for conviction.

古文：诏曰 可 。
现代文：诏令称 可 。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict approving the request.

古文：有司奏匡诬肇，处匡死刑。
现代文：有关官员上奏元匡诬陷高肇，处以元匡死刑。
English: Relevant parties reported that Yuan Kuang falsely accused Gao Zhao and sentenced Yuan Kuang to death.

古文：世宗恕死，降为光禄大夫。
现代文：世宗宽恕他的死罪，降职为光禄大夫。
English: Sejong pardoned his capital crime and demoted him to the position of doctor of Guanglu.

古文：又兼宗正卿，出为兗州刺史。
现代文：又兼任宗正卿，外出任兖州刺史。
English: He also concurrently served as Zong Zhengqing, and went abroad to serve as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：匡临发，帝引见于东堂，劳勉之。
现代文：元匡出发前。皇帝在东堂接见，慰劳勉励他。
English: When Yuan Kuanglin set off, the emperor summoned him in the East Hall to comfort and encourage him.

古文：匡犹以尺度金石之事，国之大经，前虽为南台所弹，然犹许更议，若议之日，愿听臣暂赴。
现代文：元匡还以为尺度钟律的事，是国家的大典，先前虽被南台御史弹劾，然而还要再议论，如议论的时候，希望准许臣下暂时奔赴。
English: Yuan Kuang also thought that the matter of the law of the yardstick and the clock was a great document of the country. Although he had previously been impeached by the Nantai Emperor, he still had to discuss it again. For example, when discussing it, he hoped that his vassals would be allowed to go there temporarily.

古文：世宗曰： 刘芳学高一时，深明典故。
现代文：世宗说： 刘芳学问高于一世之人，深明典章故实。
English: Sejong said, "Liu Fang is a person with a higher level of learning than the previous generation, and is well versed in ceremony and etiquette.

古文：其所据者，与先朝尺乃寸过一黍，何得复云先朝之意也？
现代文：而你依据的，和先朝的尺却一寸超过一黍，怎么能又说是先朝的意思呢?
English: What he is basing on is consistent with the size of the previous government, so how can your opinion be said to be consistent with the original intention of the previous government?

古文：兗州既所执不经，后议之日，何待赴都也。 
现代文：兖州刺史所坚持的不合经典，今后议论的时候，什么时候等待您赶往都城呢? 
English: What you are insisting on is not in line with the classics, so why do you need to return to Kyoto when reconsidering it later?

古文：肃宗初，入为御史中尉。
现代文：肃宗初年，召入任御史中尉。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Suzong, he was called to serve as a lieutenant of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：匡严于弹纠，始奏于忠，次弹高聪等免官，灵太后并不许。
现代文：元匡弹劾纠察严厉，开始举奏于忠，随之弹劾高聪等人免去官职，灵太后都不准许。
English: Yuan Kuang rigorously impeached, began to report to Yu Zhong, and then impeached Gao Cong and others, requesting that they be removed from office, but the Empress Dowager did not listen.

古文：以违其纠恶之心，又虑匡辞解，欲奖安之，进号安南将军，后加镇东将军。
现代文：因违背他纠察恶人的心愿，又担心元匡请求解职，朝廷想奖励安慰他，就升任他为安南将军，后来加授镇束将军。
English: The imperial court wanted to reward and comfort him, so he was promoted to General Annan, and later to General Zhenzuk.

古文：匡屡请更权衡不已，于是诏曰： 谨权审度，自昔令典，定章革历，往代良规。
现代文：元匡屡次不断地请求更改衡器，这时皇帝下诏说： 谨慎审查称锤尺度，是自古的美好法典，确定典章改革历法，是前代的优良规则。
English: Yuan Kuang repeatedly requested to change the rules of weighing, so he issued the following edict: The verification of weighing is an important ordinance since ancient times; the establishment of the legal system and the reform of the calendar are the fine traditions of all ages.

古文：匡宗室贤亮，留心既久，可令更集儒贵，以时验决。
现代文：元匡是宗室中的贤明正派人物，留心已久，可命令再召集儒生贵族，及时检验决断。
English: Yuan Kuang is a wise and decent person in the family, he has been paying attention for a long time, he can order to convene the Confucian aristocracy again, and timely check the decision.

古文：必务权衡得衷，令寸籥不舛。 
现代文：务必使衡器适中，使寸籥不舛误。 
English: Be sure to make the measuring instrument moderate, so that the size is not too large.

古文：又诏曰： 故广平殇王洛侯，体自恭宗，茂年薨殒，国除祀废。不祀忽诸。
现代文：又下诏说： 已故广平殇王洛侯，出自于恭宗，英年早逝，封国削除祭祀废止，不祭祀已有些时曰。
English: The following edict also said: The late Guangping Zi Wang Luo Hou, who was from Gongzong, passed away at an early age, the country was sealed off, the sacrifice was abolished, and it has been said for some time that there will be no sacrifice.

古文：匡亲同若子，私继岁久，宜树维城，永兹磐石，可特袭王爵，封东平郡王。 
现代文：元匡亲近犹如他的儿子，私相继承的岁月已久，应该树立藩屏，永保磐石之固，可特许继承王爵，封为束平郡王。 
English: Yuan Kuang is as close as his son. The time for private inheritance is long overdue. It is time to establish the Han-Ping and Yongbo Rock Fortress. He can be specially allowed to inherit the title of prince and be named the king of Sokping County.

古文：匡所制尺度讫，请集朝士议定是非。
现代文：元匡所制尺度结束，请求聚集朝廷官员商议决定是非得失。
English: After the Yuan Kuang system ended, imperial officials were asked to gather to discuss the pros and cons of the decision.

古文：诏付门下、尚书、三府、九列议定以闻。
现代文：下诏交付门下省、尚书省、三府、九卿商议决定后上奏。
English: The following edict was delivered to the lower ministry, the higher ministry, the three prefectures, and the nine nobles after deliberation.

古文：太师、高阳王雍等议曰： 伏惟高祖创改权量已定，匡今新造，微有参差。
现代文：太师、高阳王元雍等人商议说： 伏惟高祖改革度量衡已经固定，元匡现在新造的，稍微有不同。
English: Daishi, Goyang Wang Yuan Yong and others deliberated and said: Fu Wei Gao Zu's reform of weights and measures has been fixed, Yuan Kuang's newly created one is slightly different.

古文：且匡云所造尺度与《汉志》王莽权斛不殊。
现代文：而且元匡说所造的尺度和《汉志》王莽的衡器量器没有不同。
English: Moreover, Yuan Kuang said that the scale he made was no different from the scale of Wang Mang of "Han Zhi."

古文：又晋中书监荀勖云，后汉至魏，尺长于古四分有余。
现代文：又晋朝中书监荀勖说，后汉到魏国，一尺长于古代四分多。
English: In addition, the book supervisor of the Jin Dynasty, Zou, said that from the Later Han to the Wei Dynasty, it was one foot longer than the ancient quarter.

古文：于是依《周礼》，积黍以起度量，惟古玉律及钟，遂改正之。
现代文：于是依照《周礼》，累积黍子以确定度量，据古代玉律和钟，就加以改正。
English: Therefore, according to the "Weekly Ritual," accumulated dice were used to determine the measurement, and according to the ancient jade law and bell, it was corrected.

古文：寻勖所造之尺与高祖所定，毫厘略同。
现代文：推寻荀勖所造的尺和高祖所决定的，毫厘相同。
English: It is the same as the millimeter, which was determined by the shaku and the ancestor.

古文：又侍中崔光得古象尺，于时亦准议令施用。
现代文：又侍中崔光得到古代象尺，其时也依商议命令施用。
English: In addition, chambermaid Cui Guang obtained an ancient elephant ruler, which was also used in accordance with the negotiated order.

古文：仰惟孝文皇帝，德迈前王，睿明下烛，不刊之式，事难变改。
现代文：仰首思念孝文皇帝，德行超越前代帝王，睿智照耀下面的臣民，是不可磨灭的法式，事情难以改变。
English: Looking up and thinking of Emperor Xiaowen, virtue surpasses previous emperors, wisdom shines on the subjects below, is an indelible French style, things are difficult to change.

古文：臣等参论，请停匡议，永遵先皇之制。 
现代文：臣下等人参与讨论，请求停止元匡的议论，永远遵循先皇的制度。 
English: After discussion, we asked the Imperial Court to stop the recommendation of Yuan Kuang and always follow the Emperor's custom.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下诏依从他们的建议。
English: He complied.

古文：匡每有奏请，尚书令、任城王澄时致执夺，匡刚隘，内遂不平。
现代文：元匡每有上奏请求，尚书令、任城王元澄马上坚持己见否决他，元匡刚烈狭隘，心中就不满。
English: Whenever Yuan Kuang had a request to play, Shang Shuling and the king of the city, Yuan Cheng, immediately insisted on vetoing him. Yuan Kuang was rigid and narrow, and he was dissatisfied in his heart.

古文：先所造棺犹在僧寺，乃复修事，将与澄相攻。
现代文：先前所造的棺材还在寺院中，就又加以整修，将要同元澄相攻击。
English: The coffin made earlier is still in the temple, it will be renovated again, and it will be attacked by Tongyuan.

古文：澄颇知之。
现代文：元澄逐渐知道了。
English: Motosumi gradually came to understand.

古文：后将赴省，与匡逢遇，驺卒相挝，朝野骇愕。
现代文：后来将要赶往尚书省，和元匡在途中相遇，掌管车马的仆隶互相打起来，朝野惊骇。
English: Later, when he was about to rush to Shangshu Province, he met Yuan Kuang on the way. The servants who were in charge of the chariots and horses fought with each other, and the court and countryside were shocked.

古文：澄因是奏匡罪状三十余条，廷尉处以死刑。
现代文：元澄因此上奏元匡的罪状三十多条，廷尉判处他死刑。
English: Therefore, Wangcheng Wangcheng brought more than 30 charges against Yuan Kuang, and the imperial lieutenant sentenced Yuan Kuang to death.

古文：诏付八座议，特加原宥，削爵除官。
现代文：诏令交付八座商议，特地加以宽恕，削夺爵位免除官职。
English: The imperial edict was delivered to eight capitals for deliberation, specifically to be pardoned, stripped of his title and removed from office.

古文：三公郎中辛雄奏理之。后特除平州刺史，徙青州刺史，寻为关右都督，兼尚书行台。
现代文：三公郎中辛雄上奏为他伸冤，后来特地授任他为平州刺史，调任青州刺史，不久担任关右都督，兼尚书行台。
English: The third prince, Zong Xinxiong, played a role in his vindication. Later, he was specially appointed as the scribe of Pingzhou, transferred to the scribe of Qingzhou, and soon served as the governor of Guan Yu, and also served as a scribe.

古文：遇疾还京。
现代文：遇到疾病回京城。
English: He returned to Kyoto when he fell ill.

古文：孝昌初，卒，谥曰文贞。
现代文：孝昌初年，去世，谧号为文贞。
English: Xiaochang died the following year and was succeeded by Wenzheng.

古文：后追复本爵，改封济南王。
现代文：后来追复本来的爵位，改封为济南王。
English: Later, he was posthumously restored to his original title and was renamed King of Jinan.

古文：第四子献，袭。
现代文：第四个儿子元献，继承爵位。
English: The fourth son, Yuan Xian, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：任城王任城王云，年五岁，恭宗崩，号哭不绝声。
现代文：任城王元云，五岁时，恭宗逝世，啼哭不断声。
English: At the age of five, the king of the city, Yuan Yun, passed away, weeping incessantly.

古文：世祖闻之而呼，抱之泣曰： 汝何知而有成人之意也！ 
现代文：世祖听说后呼唤他，抱着他哭泣说： 你为什么懂得有成年人的心意? 
English: When the patriarch heard this, he called him, hugged him and wept, saying, "How do you know the mind of an adult?

古文：和平五年封，拜使持节、侍中、征东大将军、和龙镇都大将。
现代文：和平五年封，任命他为使持节、侍中、征束大将军、和龙镇都大将。
English: After five years of peace, he was appointed to the position of envoy, chamberlain, general of conscription, and general of Longzhen.

古文：显祖时，拜都督中外诸军事、中都坐大官，听理民讼，甚收时誉。
现代文：显祖时，任命他为都督中外诸军事、中都坐大官，受理民众诉讼，很得当时人赞誉。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianzu, he was appointed as the military governor of the capital city, and was highly praised by the people at that time.

古文：延兴中，显祖集群僚，欲禅位于京兆王子推。
现代文：延兴年间，显祖召集群臣，想要传授帝位给匕王子推。
English: During the Yanxing era, Emperor Xianzu gathered a group of ministers and wanted to pass the imperial throne to Prince Zou.

古文：王公卿士，莫敢先言。
现代文：王公卿大夫，没有人敢先发言。
English: Dr. Wang Gongqing, no one dares to speak first.

古文：云进曰： 陛下方隆太平，临覆四海，岂得上违宗庙，下弃兆民。
现代文：元云进奏说： 陛下正要兴起太平，临制天下，岂能够上违背宗庙，下抛弃百姓?
English: Yuan Yun Jinso said, "Your majesty is about to establish peace and rule the world. Can you go against your ancestral temple and abandon the people?

古文：父子相传，其来久矣。皇魏之兴，未之有革。
现代文：父子相传授，由来很久了，皇魏兴起后，没有改变。
English: It has been handed down from father to son for a long time. It did not change after the rise of the Emperor Wei.

古文：皇储正统，圣德夙章。
现代文：储君是嫡系子孙，圣明的德行早巳昭明。
English: The crown prince is a direct descendant, and Shomei's virtuous conduct has long been clear.

古文：陛下必欲割捐尘务，颐神清旷者，冢副之寄，宜绍宝历。
现代文：陛下如一定要割舍世俗事务，在清静中颐养神情，委托的储君，应该继承大位。
English: If His Majesty must give up worldly affairs and cultivate a calm demeanor, the entrusted crown prince should succeed to the throne.

古文：若欲舍储，轻移宸极，恐非先圣之意，骇动人情。
现代文：如果要舍弃储君，轻易改变帝位，恐怕不是先代圣人的心意，会惊动人心。
English: If they want to abandon the crown prince and easily change the imperial throne, I'm afraid it's not the intention of the previous sage, it will shock people.

古文：又，天下是祖宗之天下，而陛下辄改神器，上乖七庙之灵，下长奸乱之道，此是祸福所由，愿深思慎之。 
现代文：另外，天下是祖宗的天下，而陛下擅自改动帝位，上违背七庙的神灵，下助长奸猾混乱的途径，这是祸福的起源，希望深入思考谨慎对待。 
English: In addition, the world is the world of the ancestors, and His Majesty has arbitrarily changed the imperial throne, violated the gods of the seven temples, and promoted treachery and confusion. This is the origin of misfortune and good fortune, and I hope to think about it carefully.

古文：太尉源贺又进曰： 陛下今欲外选诸王而禅位于皇叔者，臣恐春秋蒸尝，昭穆有乱，脱万世之后，必有逆飨之讥，深愿思任城之言。 
现代文：太尉盘又进奏说： 陛下现在要从外面挑选众王而传位给皇叔，臣下恐怕春秋祭祀，辈分紊乱，万一陛下逝世以后，必然有逆祭的讥讽，希望深入思考任城王的话。 
English: "Your Majesty is now going to select kings from outside and pass the throne to your uncle. I'm afraid that your subjects will hold spring and autumn sacrifices, and the lineage will be disordered. In the unlikely event that Your Majesty passes away, there will inevitably be mockery of a counter-sacrifice. I hope you will think deeply about the words of the king of the city.

古文：东阳公元丕等进曰： 皇太子虽圣德夙彰，然实冲幼。
现代文：束阳公亘歪等人进奏说： 皇太子虽然圣明的德行早已显著，然而实在幼小。
English: Sokyang Gong Wangsheng and others said: Although the crown prince's virtuous deeds have long been obvious, he is still very young.

古文：陛下富于春秋，始览机政，普天景仰，率土系心，欲隆独善，不以万物为意，其若宗庙何！
现代文：陛下正年富力强，刚执掌机要政务，普天之下万民景仰，率土之滨人心相向，陛下想要独善其身，不把万民放在心上，那宗庙怎么办?
English: His Majesty is in the prime of life, he is rich and powerful, he has just taken the helm of the government, he is admired by all the people in the world, and he is leading the people of the country towards each other. His Majesty wants to be self-sufficient and does not care about the people. How about that temple?

古文：其若亿兆何！ 
现代文：百姓怎么办? 
English: If that were the case, what would happen to the Imperial Ancestral Temple, what would happen to hundreds of millions of people!

古文：显祖曰： 储宫正统，受终文祖，群公相之，有何不可？ 
现代文：显祖说： 储君是嫡系子孙，接受禅让的帝位，各位大臣辅助他，有什么不可以? 
English: Xianzu said, "The crown prince is a direct descendant of the lineage, he accepted the imperial throne given by Zen, and the ministers assisted him, what is wrong with that?

古文：于是传位于高祖。
现代文：于是传位给高祖。
English: So the position was passed on to Gaozu.

古文：后蠕蠕犯塞，云为中军大都督，从显祖讨之，遇于大碛。
现代文：后来蠕蠕侵犯边境，元云担任中军大都督，跟随显祖讨伐他们，在大沙漠中相遇。
English: Later, the Cree invaded the border, and Yuan Yun served as the grand governor of the Chinese army. He followed Xianzu to fight them, and they met in the desert.

古文：事具《蠕蠕传》。
现代文：事情记载在《蠕蠕传》。
English: The story is recounted in "Creep."

古文：后仇池氐反，以云为征西大将军讨平之。
现代文：后来仇池氐人反叛，任命元云为征西大将军讨伐平定他们。
English: Later, the people of Qiuchihai rebelled, and Yuan Yun was appointed as the general of the Western Conquest to fight and subdue them.

古文：除都督徐兗二州缘淮诸军事、征东大将军、开府、徐州刺史。
现代文：授任都督徐兖二州缘淮诸军事、征束大将军、开府、徐州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the military governor of Xuzhou, the general of conscription, the governor of Kaifu, and the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：云以太妃盖氏薨，表求解任，显祖不许。云悲号动疾，乃许之。
现代文：元云因太妃盖氏逝世，上奏疏请求解除职务，显祖不准许，元云悲伤地号哭引起疾病发作，才答应他的请求。
English: As a result of the death of Tohei Gai, Motoyun requested to be relieved of his duties, but Emperor Xianzu did not allow it. It was only after Motoyun cried out in grief, causing an attack of illness, that his request was granted.

古文：性善抚绥，得徐方之心，为百姓所追恋。
现代文：秉性善于安抚，得到徐州民众的欢心，为百姓所追念。
English: By nature, he was good at appeasing, won the favor of the people of Xuzhou, and was remembered by the people.

古文：送遗钱货，一无所受。
现代文：赠送的钱财，全不接受。
English: Donations of money or property will not be accepted.

古文：显祖闻而嘉之。
现代文：显祖听说后嘉奖他。
English: Hsien Tzu praised him when he heard about it.

古文：复拜侍中、中都大官，赐帛千匹、羊千口。
现代文：又任命他为侍中、中都大官，赐给帛一千匹、羊一千口。
English: And he appointed him to be over his household, and a great captain over his house: and he gave him a thousand bullocks, and a thousand sheep.

古文：出为冀州刺史，仍本将军。
现代文：出任冀州刺史，仍任本号将军。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Jizhou Province, and still remains as the current general.

古文：云留心政事，甚得下情，于是合州请户输绢五尺、粟五升以报云恩。
现代文：元云留心政事，很得民心，这时全州请求每户纳绢五尺、粟五升来报答元云的恩德。
English: At this time, the whole state requested that every household pay five shaku and five liters of millet to repay the kindness of Yuan Yun.

古文：高祖嘉之，迁使持节、都督陕西诸军事、征南大将军、长安镇都大将、雍州刺史。
现代文：高祖嘉奖他，调任使持节、都督陕西诸军事、征南大将军、长安镇都大将、雍州刺史。
English: Gao Zu commended him and transferred him to the post of envoy, military governor of Shaanxi Province, general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, general of the Chang'an Town, and governor of Yongzhou.

古文：云廉谨自修，留心庶狱，挫抑豪强，群盗息止，州民颂之者千有余人。
现代文：元云廉洁谨慎整饬自己，留心政事案件，抑制豪强，盗贼止息，州中民众歌颂他的有一千多人。
English: There are more than a thousand people in the middle of the state singing his praises.

古文：文明太后嘉之，赐帛千匹。
现代文：文明太后嘉奖他，赐给帛一千匹。
English: The Empress Dowager of Civilization rewarded him by giving him a thousand horses.

古文：太和五年，薨于州。
现代文：太和五年，在州中逝世。
English: Taiwa died five years later in Shizuoka.

古文：遗令薄葬，勿受赗襚。
现代文：遣令俭约地安葬，不要接受赠送的车马衣被。
English: Don't accept the gift of a horse-drawn carriage and blanket.

古文：诸子奉遵其旨。
现代文：各个儿子遵奉他的旨意。
English: Each son did as he was told.

古文：丧至京师，车驾亲临，哭之哀恸，赠以本官，谥曰康。
现代文：灵柩被运到京城，皇帝亲自前去，哭得哀伤悲恸，追赠本来的官职，谧号为康。
English: The coffin was transported to the capital, and the emperor went there in person, weeping with grief and sorrow. He was posthumously awarded his original official position, and his posthumous name was Kang.

古文：陪葬云中之金陵。
现代文：在云中的金陵陪葬。
English: Buried with Jinling in the clouds.

古文：云长子澄，字道镇，少而好学。
现代文：元云的长子元澄，字道镇，年轻时爱好学习。
English: The eldest son of Yuan Yun, Yuan Cheng, was fond of studying when he was young.

古文：及康王薨，澄居丧以孝闻。
现代文：等到康王逝世，元澄服丧以孝顺闻名。
English: By the time King Kang died, Yuancheng was famous for his filial piety.

古文：袭封，加征北大将军。
现代文：继承封爵，加授征北大将军。
English: He inherited his father's knighthood, and was also made a general of the Northern Expeditionary Force.

古文：高祖时，蠕蠕犯塞，加澄使持节、都督北讨诸军事以讨之。
现代文：高祖时，蠕蠕军侵犯边境，加授元澄为使持节、都督北讨诸军事去讨伐他们。
English: At the time of Gaozu, the Cree army invaded the border, and Yuancheng was appointed as the envoy to hold the festival, and the military was sent by the governor to the north to fight them.

古文：蠕蠕遁走，又以氐羌反叛，除都督梁益荆三州诸军事、征南大将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：蠕蠕军逃走，又因氐人羌人反叛，授任元澄为都督梁益荆三州诸军事、征南大将军、梁州刺史。
English: Cree Cree's army fled, and because of the rebellion of Cree people, Yuancheng was appointed as the military governor of Liang Yijing three states, the general of the Southern Expedition and the history of Liangzhou.

古文：文明太后引见澄，诫厉之，顾谓中书令李冲曰： 此兒风神吐发，德音闲婉，当为宗室领袖。
现代文：文明太后接见元澄，告诫勉励他，回头对中书令李冲说： 这个孩子神采动人，言谈娴静文雅，将成为宗室杰出人物。
English: When the Empress Dowager of Civilization met with Yuancheng, she admonished and encouraged him, and turned back to Li Chong, who was in charge of Chinese calligraphy, and said, "This child is very engaging, his speech is quiet and elegant, and he will become an outstanding member of the family."

古文：是行使之必称我意。
现代文：这次行动派遣他必定如我的意。
English: Sending him on this mission is certainly in line with my wishes.

古文：卿但记之，我不妄谈人物也。 
现代文：你尽管记下来，我是不随意谈论人和事的。 
English: You should note that I don't like to talk about people and things.

古文：梁州氐帅杨仲显、婆罗、杨卜兄弟及符叱盘等，自以居边地险，世为凶狡。
现代文：梁州氐人头领杨仲显、婆罗、杨卜兄弟和符叱盘等人，白以为居住边境地势险要，世代足山地狡徒。
English: Yang Zhongxian, Borah, Yang Bu brothers and Fuxi Pan, the leaders of the Liangzhou Xiang people, thought that the border was dangerous to live in, and they were mountain cunning for generations.

古文：澄至州，量彼风俗，诱导怀附。
现代文：元澄到州中，估量那裹的风俗，诱导怀柔。
English: Yuancheng went to Shuzhong, assessed the customs there, and induced Huairou.

古文：表送婆罗，授仲显循城镇副将，杨卜广业太守，叱盘固道镇副将。自余首帅，各随才而用之，款附者赏，违命加诛。于是仇池帖然，西南款顺。
现代文：上奏表送婆罗到京城，授任仲显为循城镇副将，杨卜为广业太守，叱盘为固道镇副将，其余的头领，各依据才能而任用他们，归附者赏赐，违背命令者加以诛杀，于是仇池安定，西南依附顺从。
English: The report card was sent to Borah in the capital, and he appointed Zhong Xian as the vice-commander of the town of Xuchang, Yang Bu as the governor of Guangye, Zhiban as the vice-commander of the town of Gu Dao, and the rest of the leaders, appointing them according to their abilities, rewarding those who adhered, and killing those who disobeyed orders. As a result, the enmity pool was stable, and the southwest adhered and obeyed.

古文：加侍中，赐衣一袭、乘马一匹，以旌其能。
现代文：加授元澄为侍中，赐给衣服一套、乘马一匹，来表彰他的才能。
English: In recognition of his talent, Motosumi was promoted to Samurai, given a set of clothes and a horse to ride.

古文：后转征东大将军、开府、徐州刺史，甚有声绩。
现代文：后来改任征东大将军、开府、徐州刺史，十分有声誉和政绩。
English: Later, he was appointed as the general of the East China University of Technology, the governor of Kaifu and the governor of Xuzhou, and had a very good reputation and political achievements.

古文：朝于京师，引见于皇信堂。
现代文：到京城朝见，在皇信堂接见。
English: They went to the capital for a morning meeting, and were received at Kosshindo.

古文：高祖诏澄曰： 昔郑子产铸刑书，而晋叔向非之。
现代文：高祖诏令元澄说： 从前郑国的子产铸造刑书，而晋国的叔向斥责他。
English: Gao Zu's edict to Yuancheng said: Once upon a time, Zheng Guo's son-in-law forged a punishment letter, and Jin Guo's uncle rebuked him.

古文：此二人皆是贤士，得失竟谁？ 
现代文：这两人都是贤明的人，究竟是谁得谁失? 
English: Both of them are wise people. Who will win and who will lose?

古文：对曰： 郑国寡弱，摄于强邻，民情去就，非刑莫制，故铸刑书以示威。
现代文：元澄回答说： 郑国寡小微弱，受强大邻国的威慑，民心的去就，除非刑法不能控制，所以铸造刑书来显示威风。
English: Yuancheng replied: Zheng Guoqiao is small and weak, it is deterred by a powerful neighboring country, and the people's will is weak, unless the criminal law can not be controlled, so it is necessary to cast the punishment book to show the prestige.

古文：虽乖古式，合今权道，随时济世，子产为得。
现代文：虽然违背古代法度，合乎当时变通的道理，依据时代匡救世务，子产是得。
English: Although it violated the ancient laws and regulations and conformed to the flexible principle at that time, according to the times, it was necessary to save the world, and it was necessary to have children.

古文：而叔向讥议，示不忘古，可与论道，未可语权。 
现代文：而叔向讥讽议论，表示不忘古代，可以同他谈论道德，不可同他谈论变通。 
English: My uncle, on the other hand, spoke sarcastically to him, saying that he had not forgotten ancient times, and that he could talk to him about morality, but not about flexibility.

古文：高祖曰： 任城当欲为魏之子产也。 
现代文：高祖说： 任城王将要成为魏国的子产。 
English: Gao Zu said: Ren Chengwang will become the progeny of Wei.

古文：澄曰： 子产道合当时，声流竹素。
现代文：元澄说： 子产的方法适合于当时，声名流传在史籍中。
English: Motosumi said, "The method of giving birth to a child was suitable for that time, and its fame has been passed down in historical records.

古文：臣既庸近，何敢庶几？
现代文：臣下平庸浅薄，哪敢接近他?
English: A subordinate is mediocre and shallow, who would dare to approach him?

古文：愚谓子产以四海为家，宣文德以怀天下，但江外尚阻，车书未一，季世之民，易以威伏，难以礼治。
现代文：现在陛下以四海为家，宣扬文德来怀柔天下，衹是长江南还阻隔，车轨文字不统一，末代的民众，容易以威风制服，难以用礼制治理。
English: At present, His Majesty is at home in the four seas, propagating literature and virtue to win the hearts and minds of the world. However, the south of the Yangtze River is still a barrier, the words on the railway tracks are not unified, and the people of the last generation are easy to use the prestige uniform, and it is difficult to use the etiquette to govern.

古文：愚谓子产之法，犹应暂用，大同之后，便以道化之。 
现代文：浅见以为子产的刑法，还应暂时使用，天下统一以后，就用道德来教化他们。 
English: It is naive to think that the criminal law for children should only be used temporarily. After the unification of the country, they should be educated with morality.

古文：高祖心方革变，深善其对，笑曰： 非任城无以识变化之体。
现代文：高祖心中正要变革，很赞赏元澄的回答，笑着说： 不是任城王不能认识变革的道理。
English: Gao Zu was on the verge of change in his heart. He appreciated Yuan Cheng's answer and said with a smile, "It's not that King Ren can't understand the principle of change.

古文：朕方创改朝制，当与任城共万世之功耳。 
现代文：我正要改革朝廷制度，将和任城王一同完成万代的功业。 
English: I am on the verge of reforming the imperial court system, and will work with the king of the city to complete the work of all generations.

古文：后徵为中书令，改授尚书令。
现代文：后来征入任中书令，改任尚书令。
English: Later, he was conscripted into the post of middle secretary, and was transferred to the post of senior secretary.

古文：萧赜使庾荜来朝，荜见澄音韵遒雅，风仪秀逸，谓主客郎张彝曰： 往魏任城以武著称，今魏任城乃以文见美也。 
现代文：萧赜派庾摹来朝见，庾草见到元澄气韵刚健雅致，风度清秀脱俗，对主客郎张彝说： 从前魏国的任城王以武艺著称，今日魏国的任城王足以文采得到赞美。 
English: Xiao Yu sent his concubine to see the emperor, and when the concubine saw that Yuan Cheng had a vigorous and elegant temperament and a refined and refined demeanor, she said to her host Zhang Yu: In the past, the king of Wei was famous for martial arts. Today, the king of Wei is enough to be praised for his literary skills.

古文：时诏延四庙之子，下逮玄孙之胄，申宗宴于皇信堂，不以爵秩为列，悉序昭穆为次，用家人之礼。
现代文：当时下诏宴请四庙的儿子，下到玄孙的后代，在皇信堂举行宗室的宴会，不以爵位品级为顺序，全按辈分为次第，用家人的礼仪。
English: At that time, the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of

古文：高祖曰： 行礼已毕，欲令宗室各言其志，可率赋诗。 
现代文：高祖说： 行礼结束，要使宗室各谈自己的志向，可一律赋诗。 
English: Gaozu said: At the end of the ceremony, it is necessary to let each family talk about their own aspirations, and they can all compose poems.

古文：特令澄为七言连韵，与高祖往复赌赛，遂至极欢，际夜乃罢。
现代文：特地命元澄作七言连韵的诗，和高祖来回打赌比赛，以至于极度欢乐，到夜晚才结束宴会。
English: He specially ordered Motosumi to write a seven-character rhyming poem, and bet back and forth with Gozo, so that they were extremely happy, and the banquet ended only in the evening.

古文：后高祖外示南讨，意在谋迁，斋于明堂左个，诏太常卿王谌，亲令龟卜，易筮南伐之事，其兆遇《革》。
现代文：后来高祖对外表示向南讨伐，内心在于谋划迁都，在明堂左侧的偏室斋戒，诏令太常卿王谌，命他亲自以龟骨和《周易》占卜向南征伐的事情，征兆遇到了《革卦》。
English: Later, Gao Zu said to the outside world that he would march southward, but his heart was in planning the relocation of the capital. He fasted in a side room on the left side of the Ming Hall, and ordered the Tai Changqing Wang Qian to personally march southward with the turtle bone and the "Zhou Yi" divination. The omen met the "Gegua."

古文：高祖曰： 此是汤武革命，顺天应人之卦也。 
现代文：高祖说： 这是殷汤周武王改朝换代，顺应上天民众的卦。 
English: Gao Zu said: This is Yin Tang Zhou Wu Wang changing the dynasty and changing the generation, conforming to the wisdom of the heavenly people.

古文：群臣莫敢言。
现代文：群臣没有人敢说话。
English: No one from the education and military affairs officials dared to say anything.

古文：澄进曰： 《易》言革者更也。
现代文：元澄进奏说： 《周易》说革是变更的意思。
English: "Zhou Yi" said that "leather" means change.

古文：将欲应天顺人，革君臣之命，汤武得之为吉。
现代文：将要顺应上天民众，改变君臣的命运，殷汤周武王得到它是吉利的。
English: will have to conform to the heavenly people and change the fate of the monarchs and ministers. It is fortunate for King Yin Tang Zhouwu to get it.

古文：陛下帝有天下，重光累叶。
现代文：陛下拥有天下，世代相继。
English: His Majesty owns the world, generation after generation.

古文：今曰卜征，乃可伐叛，不得云革命。
现代文：现在说占卜征讨，才可说是讨伐反叛，不能说是改朝换代。
English: Now, when it comes to the divination campaign, it can only be described as a campaign of rebellion, and cannot be described as a campaign to change the dynasty.

古文：此非君人之卦，未可全为吉也。 
现代文：这不是君主的卦，不可全称为吉利。 
English: This is not a monarch's tale, and cannot be called a tale of good luck.

古文：高祖厉声曰： 《象》云 大人虎变 ，何言不吉也！ 
现代文：高祖大声地说： 《象传》说 大人像猛虎一样推行变革，为什么说不吉利? 
English: Gao Zu said loudly: "The Legend of the Elephant says that adults carry out reforms like tigers, why is it unlucky?

古文：澄曰： 陛下龙兴既久，岂可方同虎变！ 
现代文：元还说： 陛下如龙兴起已经很久，哪可仅同于老虎般的变革? 
English: Yuan also said: His Majesty has been rising like a dragon for a long time, which can only be equated with tiger-like changes?

古文：高祖勃然作色曰： 社稷我社稷，任城而欲沮众也！ 
现代文：高祖勃然变脸说： 国家是我的国家，任城王却要沮丧众人的斗志! 
English: Gaozu suddenly changed his face and said: The country is my country, but the king of the city wants to depress the fighting spirit of the people!

古文：澄曰： 社稷诚知陛下之社稷，然臣是社稷之臣子，豫参顾问，敢尽愚衷。 
现代文：元澄说： 我的确知道国家是陛下的国家，然而臣下是国家的臣子，参与顾问的事情，当竭尽愚蠢的心意。 
English: Motosumi said, "I do know that the country is your majesty's country, but a vassal is a vassal of the country. When you are involved in the matter of advisers, you should do your best."

古文：高祖既锐意必行，恶澄此对。久之乃解，曰： 各言其志，亦复何伤！ 
现代文：产担已经定下主意坚决实行，厌恶元澄的逭番回答，很久才消气，说： 各谈自己的心意，这又有什么妨碍? 
English: The production supervisor had already made up his mind and was determined to carry it out. He was disgusted by Yuancheng's repetitive answers, and it took him a long time to calm down, saying, "Each of you should speak about your own thoughts. What's the harm in that?"

古文：车驾还宫，便召澄。
现代文：皇帝回宫，就召见元澄。
English: When the emperor returned to the palace, he summoned Motosumi.

古文：未及升阶，遥谓曰： 向者之《革卦》，今更欲论之。
现代文：没来得及升上台阶，远远地对他说： 刚才的《革卦》，现在要再讨论。
English: Before he had time to climb the steps, he said to him from a distance: "The "Gegwa" just now, I want to discuss it again.

古文：明堂之忿，惧众人竞言，阻我大计，故厉色怖文武耳，想解朕意也。 
现代文：明堂中的愤怒，是担心众人竞相谈论，阻碍我的大计划，所以脸色严厉恐吓文武官员而已，想来你是理解我的心意的。 
English: The anger in the courtroom was because I was worried that everyone was competing to talk about and hinder my big plan, so I just looked stern and intimidated the cultural and military officials. I think you understand my heart.

古文：乃独谓澄曰： 今日之行，诚知不易。
现代文：就单独对五迢说： 现在的行动，实在知道不容易。
English: He said to Wuzhen alone, "It's not easy to know what to do now.

古文：但国家兴自北土，徙居平城，虽富有四海，文轨未一，此间用武之地，非可文治，移风易俗，信为甚难。
现代文：衹是国家兴起于北方，迁居到平城，虽然拥有四海，但版图没统一，这片土地是用武的地方，不能够以文德治理，移风易俗，实在是十分困难。
English: This is because the country arose in the north and moved to Pingcheng. Although it has the four seas, the territory is not unified. This land is a place of martial arts. It cannot be governed by literature and virtue. It is very difficult to change customs.

古文：崤函帝宅，河洛王里，因兹大举，光宅中原，任城意以为何如？ 
现代文：函谷关是皇帝住宅，黄河洛水是君王乡里，利用这次大举出兵，占据中原，任城王心中以为怎么样? 
English: Shihang has been the imperial residence since ancient times, and Helo has always been the royal residence. I want to make this a big event, the residence of the Central Plains, what do you think?

古文：澄曰： 伊洛中区，均天下所据。陛下制御华夏，辑平九服，苍生闻此，应当大庆。 
现代文：丞迢说： 但业渔丞中原地区，占据天下的中央，陛下统治华夏，平定边远地带，百姓听到这种事，应当大加庆贺。 
English: Zheng Yao said: "Danye Yucheng in the Central Plains region occupies the center of the world, His Majesty rules China and pacifies the outlying areas. When the people hear this, they should celebrate.

古文：高祖曰： 北人恋本，忽闻将移，不能不惊扰也。 
现代文：高祖说： 北方人留恋本土，忽然听说将要迁移，不能不受到惊扰。 
English: Gao Zu said: Northerners are attached to the mainland, and when they suddenly hear that they will be relocated, they can't help but be alarmed.

古文：澄曰： 此既非常之事，当非常人所知，唯须决之圣怀，此辈亦何能为也？ 
现代文：元澄说： 造既不是平常的事，就不是平常的人所理解的，祇需要在陛下心中决断，这些人又能怎么样呢? 
English: Motosumi said, "Since creation is not an ordinary thing, it is not understood by ordinary people. It only needs to be decided in His Majesty's heart. What can these people do?

古文：高祖曰： 任城便是我之子房。 
现代文：高祖说： 任城王就是我的强王皇。 
English: Gao Zu said: Ren Chengwang is my strong king.

古文：加抚军大将军、太子少保，又兼尚书左仆射。
现代文：加授运迁为抚军大将军、太子少保，又兼任尚书左仆射。
English: As a result, he was given the additional titles of General of the General Staff, Junior Protector of the Crown Prince, and Left-Handed Shooter.

古文：及驾幸洛阳，定迁都之策，高祖诏曰： 迁移之旨，必须访众。
现代文：等到皇帝前往洛阳，定下迁都的计策，高祖下诏说： 迁移的旨意，必须访问众人。
English: When the emperor went to Luoyang and decided on the plan to move the capital, Gaozhu issued an edict saying, "For the purpose of relocation, it is necessary to visit everyone."

古文：当遣任城驰驿向代，问彼百司，论择可否。
现代文：将派遣任城王乘驿马到代京，询问那裹的百官，议论决定可以与否。
English: The king of the city will be dispatched to Daikyo on his horse to question the hundreds of officials there and discuss whether or not the decision can be made.

古文：近日论《革》，今真所谓革也，王其勉之。 
现代文：近论说《革卦》，现在真正是所谓变革了，任城王可要努力啊! 
English: According to the recent review of "Gegwa," it is now truly the so-called change, and Ren Chengwang should work hard!

古文：既至代都，众闻迁诏，莫不惊骇。
现代文：到了代都，众人听到迁都的诏令，无不惊讶遑遽。
English: When they arrived at the capital, everyone was surprised to hear of the imperial decree to move the capital.

古文：澄援引今古，徐以晓之，众乃开伏。
现代文：元澄援引古今事例，慢慢地开导他们，众人才理解信服。
English: Motosumi cites examples from the past and present, and patiently enlightens them. Only then do people understand and are convinced.

古文：澄遂南驰还报，会车驾于滑台。
现代文：元澄于是向南奔驰回去报告，在滑台与皇帝相会。
English: Motosumi then went back to the South Benz to report, and met the emperor at the slide.

古文：高祖大悦，曰： 若非任城，朕事业不得就也。 
现代文：高祖非常高兴地说： 如果不是任城王，我的事业不能完成。 
English: Gaozu was very pleased and said, "If it wasn't for Ren Shiwang, I wouldn't have been able to complete my career."

古文：从幸鄴宫，除吏部尚书。
现代文：元澄跟随前往邺宫，授任他为吏部尚书。
English: Motosumi followed him to Shogunomiya, and he was given the title of Shosho, the highest-ranking official in the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：及幸代，车驾北巡，留澄简旧臣。
现代文：等到前往代京，皇帝向北巡视，留下元澄挑选旧日臣属。
English: While waiting to travel to Daikyo, the emperor toured the north, leaving Motosumi to select former Japanese vassals.

古文：初，魏自公侯以下，迄于选臣，动有万数，冗散无事。
现代文：当初，魏国从公侯以下，直到候补官员，动不动有万把人，闲散无事。
English: At the beginning, there were tens of thousands of people in Wei, from the princes down to the alternate officials, and they were idle.

古文：澄品为三等，量其优劣，尽其能否之用，咸无怨者。
现代文：元澄区分为三等，衡量他们的优劣，尽量发挥他们的作用，都没有怨恨的。
English: Motosumi divided them into three classes, determined their strengths and weaknesses, and let the talented ones do their best to be appointed, and no one complained.

古文：驾还洛京，复兼右仆射。
现代文：皇帝回到洛京，又命令他兼任右仆射。
English: After the chauffeur returned to Luoyang, the emperor made him the second right-hand man.

古文：高祖至北邙，遂幸洪池，命澄侍升龙舟，因赋诗以序怀。
现代文：高祖到达北邙，于是前往洪池，命令元澄侍奉他登上龙船，就赋诗抒发胸怀。
English: Gaozu arrived in Beilun, so he went to Hongchi and ordered Yuancheng to serve him aboard the dragon boat, and then he began to express his heart through poetry.

古文：高祖曰： 朕昨夜梦一老公，头鬓皓白，正理冠服，拜立路左。
现代文：高祖说： 我昨天夜晚梦见一个老头，头发两鬓斑白，整理衣帽，在路旁叩拜站立。
English: Gaozu said, "I dreamt last night of an old man with white hair, tidying up his clothes and standing by the side of the road, bowing and prostrating.

古文：朕怪而问之，自云晋侍中嵇绍，故此奉迎。
现代文：我奇怪地问他，他自称是晋朝的侍中嵇绍，所以在这儿迎接。
English: I asked him curiously. He said that he was Gong Shao, a chamberlain of the Jin Dynasty, so he was here to welcome me.

古文：神爽卑惧，似有求焉。 
现代文：他神色爽朗而卑微畏惧，好像有事相求。 
English: He has a cheerful, humble, and fearful look, as if he is looking for something.

古文：澄对曰： 晋世之乱，嵇绍以身卫主，殒命御侧，亦是晋之忠臣；比干遭纣凶虐，忠谏剖心，可谓殷之良士。
现代文：元澄回答说： 晋朝的祸乱，嵇绍用身体保卫君主，死在君主旁。也是晋朝的忠臣；比干遭遇商纣王凶恶暴虐，忠心规劝被剖开胸膛，可以说是殷朝的优秀官员。
English: Yuancheng replied, "During the calamity of the Jin Dynasty, Zou Shao used his body to defend the monarch and died next to the monarch. He was also a loyal subject of the Jin Dynasty; when Bi Gan was subjected to the vicious brutality of the Shang Dynasty king, he was loyally persuaded to have his chest cut open. It can be said that he was an excellent official of the Yin Dynasty.

古文：二人俱死于王事，坟茔并在于道周。
现代文：二人都为国事而死，坟墓都在道路周围。
English: Both men died for their country, and their graves are around the road.

古文：然陛下徙御殷洛，经殷墟而布吊比干，至洛阳而遗嵇绍，当是希恩而感梦。 
现代文：然而陛下迁都到渥水洛水，经过殷墟而吊祭比干，到盗腥后却遣忘了虱瀣，恐怕是他企求恩典而托梦。 
English: However, His Majesty moved the capital to Wonshui, Luoshui, passed through the Yin Ruins and the Hanging Festival, and then to the Puyi Ruins, but he forgot to pay tribute. I am afraid that he was trying to ask for grace and had a dream.

古文：高祖曰： 朕何德，能幽感达士也？
现代文：产担说： 我有什么德行，能感动九泉之下的通达之士呢?
English: The midwife said, "What virtue do I have that can move the sages at the bottom of the well?"

古文：然实思追礼先贤，标扬忠懿。比干、嵇绍皆是古之诚烈，而朕务浓于比干，礼略于嵇绍，情有愧然。
现代文：不过实在思虑追尊礼敬先代贤人，褒扬忠诚有德之士，比干、嵇绍都是古代的忠诚壮烈人物，而我却一意偏重于比干，礼仪上疏略了盛钮，心中有惭愧的感觉。
English: However, I really thought about honoring the wise men of the past and praising the loyal and virtuous men. Bigan and Shaosha were both loyal and heroic figures in ancient times, but I was determined to focus on Bigan. I skimped on the etiquette, and I felt ashamed.

古文：既有此梦，或如任城所言。 
现代文：既有这个梦，或许如同任城王所说的。 
English: This dream already exists, perhaps as the king of the city said.

古文：于是求其兆域，遣使吊祭焉。
现代文：于是寻求嵇绍的墓地，派遣使者吊祭。
English: As a result, he sent someone to look for the grave of Gongshao and sent an envoy to offer a sacrifice.

古文：萧鸾既杀萧昭业而自立，昭业雍州刺史曹虎请以襄阳内附。
现代文：萧鸾杀死芦堕箠而自己登位，坚业的壅业刺史蔓卢请求献出塞屋归附。
English: Xiao Yu killed Lu Deguan and ascended to the throne himself, while the hard-working Zou Ye Zhi Shumenlu requested that the Jieya be given to him.

古文：分遣诸将，车驾将自赴之。
现代文：分别调遣各将领，皇帝将亲自赶赴那裹。
English: The generals will be dispatched separately, and the emperor will go there in person.

古文：豫州又表，虎奉诚之使不复重来。
现代文：豫州又上奏，曹虎投诚的使者不再前来。
English: The envoys of Cao Huocheng did not come again.

古文：高祖引澄及咸阳王禧、彭城王勰、司徒冯诞、司空穆亮、镇南李冲等议之。
现代文：高祖延请元澄和咸阳王元禧、彭城王元勰、司徒冯诞、司空穆亮、镇南将军李冲等人商议这件事。
English: Gaozu Yan asked Yuancheng to discuss the matter with Xianyang Wang Yuanxi, Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun, Siu Fengxiao, Siku Mu Liang, Zhenan General Li Chong and others.

古文：高祖曰： 比得边州表云，襄阳慕化，朕将鸣銮江沔，为彼声势。
现代文：高祖说： 近来得到边远州的奏疏说，襄阳仰慕教化，我将出兵到长江沔水，为他们造成声势。
English: Gao Zu said, "Recently, I received a call from a distant state, saying that Xiangyang admires and enlightens, and I will send troops to the Yangtze River to create a buzz for them.

古文：今复表称，更无后信，于行留之计，竟欲如何？ 
现代文：现在又有奏疏说，他们不再派使者，在出兵留下的计策上，究竟要怎么办? 
English: Now there are rumours that they will no longer send envoys. What exactly are they going to do about the strategy of leaving troops behind?

古文：禧等或云宜行，或言宜止。
现代文：元禧等人有的说应该出兵，有的说应该留下来。
English: Xianyang Wangxi and others advocate that they should go, and some people think that they should not go.

古文：高祖曰： 众人纷纭，意见不等，朕莫知所从。
现代文：高祖说： 众人议论纷纷，意见不相同，我不知听从谁。
English: Gao Zu said: Everyone is talking about it, opinions are different, I don't know who to listen to.

古文：必欲尽行留之势，使言理俱暢者，宜有客主，共相起发。
现代文：如一定要分析透出兵留下的利弊，使言论道理都顺畅，应该有正反两方，互相启发。
English: If it is necessary to analyze the pros and cons left behind by the soldiers, so that the speech reason is smooth, there should be two sides, positive and negative, to inspire each other.

古文：任城与镇南为应留之议，朕当为宜行之论，诸公俱坐听得失，长者从之。 
现代文：任城王和镇南将军发表应留下的议论，我将发表应出兵的议论，各位都坐下倾听得失，依从有道理的一方。 
English: Ren Chengwang and General Zhenan made a speech on the need to stay, and I will make a speech on the need to send troops. Everyone should sit down, listen to the pros and cons, and follow the reasonable side.

古文：于是高祖曰： 二贤试言留计也。 
现代文：这时高祖说： 二位贤士可试论留下的计策。 
English: At this time, Gao Zu said: The two sages can try out the strategy left behind.

古文：冲对曰： 臣等正以徒御草创，人斯乐安，而应者未审，不宜轻尔动发。 
现代文：李冲应对说： 臣下等人正因迁徙草创，人们就安居乐业，而他们在内接应的消息不确切，不应轻易出动。 
English: Li Chong replied, "Our vassals and others are creating a new beginning by migrating, and people are living and working in peace, but the information they receive internally is not accurate, and they should not be easily dispatched.

古文：高祖曰： 襄阳款问，似当是虚。
现代文：高祖说： 襄阳归附的消息，似乎是不真实的。
English: Gao Zu said: The news of the annexation of Yangyang seems to be untrue.

古文：亦知初迁之民，无宜劳役。
现代文：也知道刚迁徙的民众，不宜有劳役。
English: They also know that people who have just migrated are not suitable for labor service.

古文：脱归诚有实，即当乘其悦附，远则有会稽之会，近则略平江北。
现代文：万一他们归附是真实的，就应该利用他们的诚心归附，远则有会稽的会合，近则可以平定长江以北。
English: In the unlikely event that their affiliation is genuine, they should take advantage of their sincerity in affiliation. In the distant future, there will be a meeting for verification, and in the near future, it will be possible to pacify the north of the Yangtze River.

古文：如其送款是虚，且可游巡淮楚，问民之瘼，使彼土苍生，知君德之所在，复何所损而惜此一举？
现代文：如果他们归附是假的，也可巡察淮水荆楚，询问民众的疾苦，使那裹的百姓，知道君主德行的分布，又有什么损害而顾惜这一举动呢?
English: If their attribution is false, they can also inspect the Huai Shui Jing Chu, inquire about the people's sufferings, so that the people there know the distribution of the monarch's virtues, and what is the damage and regret this action?

古文：脱降问是实，而停不抚接，不亦稽阻款诚，毁朕大略也。 
现代文：万一投降的消息是真实的，而停留下来不安抚接应，不也是阻隔归顺者，毁坏我的大谋略吗? 
English: What if the news of surrender is true, and those who stay behind do not want to be pandered to? Aren't they also those who obstruct the surrender and destroy my grand strategy?

古文：澄曰： 降问若审，应有表质。
现代文：元澄说： 投降的消息如果确切，应该有奏疏人质。
English: Motosumi said: If the news of the surrender is accurate, there should be a report of fewer hostages.

古文：而使人一返，静无音问，其诈也可见。
现代文：可是他们的使者一返回，就沉默没有音讯，欺诈是显而易见的。
English: But when their envoys returned, there was silence and no news. The deception was obvious.

古文：今代迁之众，人情恋本，细累相携，始就洛邑，居无一椽之室，家阙儋石之粮，而使怨苦即戎，泣当白刃，恐非歌舞之师也。
现代文：现在代京迁移的民众，人人怀有留恋本土的心情，大大小小的相连带，才到达洛邑，居住没有一根椽的房子，家中缺乏一石的粮食，却使他们带着怨言痛苦出征，哭泣面对兵刃，恐怕不是载歌载舞的军队。
English: The people who are now migrating to Daejeon, all of whom are nostalgic for the motherland, have arrived in Luoyang with large and small ties. They live in houses without a single piece of straw, and lack a stone of grain at home, but they make them go to war with complaints and weeping in the face of the sword, I am afraid it is not an army with songs and dances.

古文：今兹区宇初构，又东作方兴，正是子来百堵之日，农夫肆力之秋，宜宽彼逋诛，惠此民庶。
现代文：如今宫室初建，又当春耕时节，正是百姓奋力营造宫室之，农夫出力之秋，应免其逃债之罪以示恩惠。
English: Now that the palace has been built for the first time, and the spring ploughing season has begun, it is the people who are struggling to build the palace, the autumn of the farmer's output, should be exempted from the crime of debt evasion to show favor.

古文：且三军已援，无稽赴接。
现代文：而且朝廷军队已经支援，不能确知是否赶赴接应。
English: Moreover, the imperial army has already provided support, and it is not certain whether they will rush to respond.

古文：苟其款实，力足纳抚，待克平襄沔，然后动驾。
现代文：如果归附属实，力量足以接纳安抚，等到他们攻克平定襄阳沔水，然后陛下出动。
English: If they return to reality, the strength is enough to accept appeasement, wait until they conquer and pacify Xiangyang and Surabaya, and then His Majesty will move out.

古文：今无故劳涉，空为往返，恐挫损天威，更成贼胆。愿上览盘庚始迁之艰难，下矜诗人《由庚》之至咏，辑宁新邑，惠康亿兆。 
现代文：现在平白无故辛劳跋涉，徒劳地往返，恐怕损伤陛下声威，更助长贼寇胆量，希望皇上在上观察盘庚开始迁徙的艰难，在下同情诗人《由庚》的咏叹，安定新都城，赐恩惠康乐于百姓。 
English: Now, he is trudging to and fro, toiling in vain, which may damage his majesty's reputation and embolden the bandits. It is hoped that the emperor will observe the hardships of Pan Geng's migration from above, sympathize with the lament of the poet "Yu Geng" from below, stabilize the new capital city, and give grace and happiness to the people.

古文：而司空亮以为宜行，公卿皆同之。
现代文：然而司空穆亮以为应出兵，公卿都赞同他的意见。
English: However, Siku Mu Liang thought that it was necessary to send troops, and the nobles agreed with his opinion.

古文：澄谓亮曰： 公在外见旌钺既张，而有忧色，每闻谈论，不愿此行，何得对圣颜更如斯之语也？
现代文：元澄对穆亮说： 您在外面见到旌旗斧铁列出后，而有忧虑的神色，每每听到谈论，不愿意这次的出兵，为什么见到皇上后改变成这样的话?
English: Yuancheng said to Mu Liang, "You had a worried look when you saw the battle flags and axes being displayed outside, and every time you heard people talking about it, you didn't want to send troops this time. Why did you change into such a state after seeing the emperor?"

古文：面背不同，事涉欺佞，非所谓论道之德，更失国士之体。或有倾侧，当曰公辈佞臣。 
现代文：当面背后不相同，事情涉及到欺诈谄谀，这不是所谓论道之士的德行，更失去大臣的体统，如万一有倾覆失败，当是由于各位谄谀的臣子。 
English: It is not the same behind the scenes, the matter involves fraud, this is not the so-called virtue of the Taoist, but the loss of the minister's dignity, if there is a collapse failure, it should be due to the courtiers.

古文：李冲曰： 任城王可谓忠于社稷，愿陛下深察其言。
现代文：李冲说： 任城王可以说是忠于国家，希望陛下深入考察他的言论。
English: Li Chong said: Ren Chengwang can be said to be loyal to the country, and hopes that His Majesty will thoroughly examine his remarks.

古文：臣等在外，皆惮征行，唯贵与贱，不谋同辞。仰愿圣心裁其可否。 
现代文：臣下等人在外面，都畏惧出征，无论贵重和卑贱，不商议而话语同，惟愿陛下心中裁断正确与否。 
English: His subjects and others outside are all afraid to go to war. No matter how high or lowly they are, they all speak the same language without discussion. I hope that His Majesty will judge in his heart whether it is right or not.

古文：高祖曰： 任城适以公等从朕，有如此论。
现代文：高祖说： 任城王正以大臣顺从我，就有如此的议论。
English: Gaozu said, "The king of Rencheng is obeying me as a minister, so there is such a discussion.

古文：不从朕者，何必皆忠而通识安危也。
现代文：不顺从我的，哪能肯定都是忠臣而全都认识安危呢?
English: If they don't obey me, how can they be sure that they are loyal and know what is safe?

古文：小忠是大忠之贼，无乃似诸？ 
现代文：小忠是大忠的对头，不是很相似吗? 
English: Xiaozhong is the opposite of Dazhong, aren't they very similar?

古文：澄曰： 臣既愚暗，不识大理，所可言者，虽涉小忠，要是竭尽微款，不知大忠者竟何据？ 
现代文：元澄说： 臣下愚笨昏啧，不能识别大道理，所能谈论的，虽然事涉小忠，总是竭尽微薄的诚心，不知道有大忠的人是依据什么? 
English: Motosumi said, "The vassals are stupid and dim-witted, unable to recognize the truth, and can only talk about minor loyalties. They always try their best to be sincere, but they don't know what people with major loyalties are based on."

古文：高祖曰： 任城脱居台鼎之任，欲令大忠在己也。 
现代文：高祖说： 任城王如果居于三公的地位，想使大忠在于己身吗? 
English: Gao Zu said, "If Ren Shiwang lives in the position of the three princes, does he want to make Da Zhong lie to himself?

古文：澄曰： 臣诚才非右弼，智阙和鼎，脱得滥居公铉，庶当官而行，不负愚志。 
现代文：元澄说： 臣下的确才能不够任三公，智慧不足执政，万一忝居公辅地位，希望依职责行事，不违背我的心愿。 
English: Motosumi said, "It is true that the ability of my subordinates is not enough to hold the three offices, and their wisdom is not enough to govern. In the unlikely event that I hold the position of public assistant, I hope to act in accordance with my duties and not go against my wishes.

古文：高祖大笑。
现代文：高祖大笑。
English: After listening to this, Gaozu couldn't stop laughing.

古文：澄又谓亮曰： 昔汲黯于汉武前面折公孙食脱粟饭，卧布被，云其诈也。
现代文：元澄又对穆亮说： 从前汲黯在汉武帝面前当面责备公孙弘吃粗食，睡布被，说他是欺诈。
English: Yuancheng also said to Mu Liang: Once upon a time, Ku Ying accused Gongsun Hong of eating coarse food and sleeping cloth in front of Emperor Hanwu, saying that he was a fraud.

古文：于时公孙谦让下之。
现代文：这时公瑟弘谦让卑下。
English: At this time, Emperor Hirohito abdicated.

古文：武帝叹汲黯至忠，公孙长者，二人称贤。
现代文：武帝赞叹汲黯最忠诚，公孙弘有长者风度，二人都有贤士之称。
English: Emperor Wu praised Gu Ying as the most loyal, while Gongsun Hong had the demeanor of an elder, and both were known as sages.

古文：公既道均昔士，愿思长者之言。 
现代文：您的德操等同从前的贤士，希望思虑长者的言语。 
English: Your morals are equal to those of the sages of the past. I hope you will reflect on the words of the elders.

古文：高祖笑曰： 任城欲自比汲黯也。
现代文：高祖笑着说： 任城王想把自己比作汲黯。
English: Gaozu said with a smile, "Ren Shiwang wants to compare himself to a gnat.

古文：且所言是公，未知得失所在，何便谢司空也。 
现代文：而且所说的是公心，不知得失在哪裹，为何就向司空道歉呢? 
English: Moreover, what was said was in the public interest. I don't know where the gains and losses are, so why apologize to Siku?

古文：驾遂南伐。
现代文：皇帝于是向南征讨。
English: The emperor then went to the south to fight.

古文：五等开建，食邑一千户。
现代文：开始封建五等诸侯，元澄食邑为一千户。
English: At the beginning of the feudal five-class lordship, there were more than a thousand households in the Yuancheng food village.

古文：后从行征至悬瓠，以笃疾还京。
现代文：后来跟随征伐到悬瓠，因病重回京城。
English: Later, he followed the expedition to Suspension Bridge, but returned to the capital due to illness.

古文：驾饯之汝汶，赋诗而别。
现代文：皇帝在汝水边为他饯行，赋诗而分别。
English: The emperor paused at the water's edge to walk and compose a poem for him.

古文：车驾还洛，引见王公侍臣于清徽堂。高祖曰： 此堂成来，未与王公行宴乐之礼。
现代文：皇帝回到洛阳，在清邀堂接见王公侍臣。直担说： 这个堂建成以来，没有和王公实行饮宴游乐的礼仪。
English: The emperor returned to Luoyang and received Wang Gong's attendants and retainers in Qingyi Hall. Zhitang said: Since this hall was built, there has been no etiquette of dining and playing with Wang Gong.

古文：后东阁庑堂粗复始就，故今与诸贤欲无高而不升，无小而不入。 
现代文：后面束合的廊厢又粗略建成，所以现在和各位贤士要没有一个高处不登上去，没有一个小地方不进去。 
English: The corridor at the back has been roughly completed, so now, together with you sages, there is no high place you cannot climb, no small place you cannot enter.

古文：因之流化渠。
现代文：于是到流坦昼。
English: So we arrived at the drainage channel.

古文：高祖曰： 此曲水者亦有其义，取乾道曲成，万物无滞。 
现代文：直但说： 这道弯曲的水流也是有意义的，取义为天道曲折而成，万物没有滞积。 
English: Zhi Dan said, "This curved stream of water is also meaningful. Taking meaning from the twists and turns of the heavenly path, all things have no stagnation.

古文：次之洗烦池。
现代文：随之到洗烦池。
English: Next came the washing pond.

古文：高祖曰： 此池中亦有嘉鱼。 
现代文：宣担说： 这个池中也有好鱼。 
English: Xuan Dan said: There are also good fish in this pond.

古文：澄曰： 此所谓 鱼在在藻，有颁其首 。 
现代文：元澄说： 这就是所谓的 水藻丛中鱼藏身，不见尾巴见大头 。 
English: Motosumi said, "This is the so-called fish hiding in the algae, where you can't see the tail but you can see the head."

古文：高祖曰： 且取 王在灵沼，于韧鱼跃 。 
现代文：高祖说： 而且还采用 国王游览到灵沼，满池鱼儿欢跳动。 
English: Gao Zu said, "Moreover, we also took the King's Tour to Lingnuma, and the fish in the pond were jumping with joy.

古文：次之观德殿。
现代文：随之到观德殿。
English: I came to the Kuangde Hall again.

古文：高祖曰： 射以观德，故遂命之。 
现代文：高祖说： 以射箭观察德行，所以就这样命名。 
English: Gao Zu said: To observe the virtue of archery, so it was named.

古文：次之凝闲堂。
现代文：随之到凝闲堂。
English: It's time to go to the lounge again.

古文：高祖曰： 名目要有其义，此盖取夫子闲居之义。
现代文：高祖说： 名目总是有它的意义的，这裹大概是采用夫子闲居的意义。
English: Gao Zu said: The name always has its meaning, which is probably the meaning of using the master's idleness.

古文：不可纵奢以忘俭，自安以忘危，故此堂后作茅茨堂。 
现代文：不能放纵奢侈而忘记俭约，自感安定而忘记危险，所以这个堂后面称作茅茨堂。 
English: You can't indulge in luxury and forget about hard work and frugality, and you can't consciously enjoy yourself and forget about danger. That's why Moutz Hall was built behind this hall.

古文：谓李冲曰： 此东曰步元庑，西曰游凯庑。
现代文：对李冲说： 这里柬面叫步元廉，西面叫游凯廉。
English: He also said to Li Chong: The east side of this hall is called Bu Yuan Gong, and the west side is called You Kai Gong.

古文：此堂虽无唐尧之君，卿等当无愧于元、凯。 
现代文：这个堂上虽然没有唐尧那样的君主，各位应无愧于八元、八凯。 
English: Although there is no monarch like Tang Xuan in this hall, you should be worthy of eight yuan and eight Kai.

古文：冲对曰： 臣既遭唐尧之君，不敢辞元、凯之誉。 
现代文：李冲回答说： 臣下既遇到了唐尧似的君主，不敢推卸八元、八凯的声誉。 
English: Li Chong replied, "Since our vassals have encountered a monarch like Tang Xuan, they dare not discard the reputation of Eight Yuan and Eight Kai.

古文：高祖曰： 光景垂落，朕同宗则有载考之义，卿等将出无还，何得默尔，不示德音。 
现代文：高祖说： 太阳将要落山，我们同宗有考核的义理，你们将出去不远了，为什么沉默，不表现出善言呢? 
English: Gao Zu said, "The sun is about to set, we are all of the same family, and we have the principle of assessment. You will go out not far, why are you silent and do not show kind words?

古文：即命黄门侍郎崔光、郭祚，通直郎邢峦、崔休等赋诗言志。
现代文：就命令黄门侍郎崔光、郭祚，通直郎邢峦、崔休等人赋诗抒发志向。
English: He ordered Huangmen's chamberlains Cui Guang, Guo Wei, Tong Niu Lang Wei, Cui Xiu and others to compose poems to express their aspirations.

古文：烛至，公卿辞退。
现代文：到了点灯烛的时刻，公卿告退。
English: When it came time to light the candles, the courtier withdrew.

古文：李冲再拜上千万岁寿。
现代文：李冲两次叩拜祝愿皇帝万寿无疆。
English: Li Chong bowed twice to wish the emperor everlasting life.

古文：高祖曰： 卿向以烛至致辞，复献千万之寿，朕报卿以《南山》之诗。 
现代文：高祖说： 你刚才因点燃灯烛而告辞，又祝愿长寿，我用《南山》的诗篇回报你。 
English: Gao Zu said: You just said goodbye for lighting a candle, and wished for a long life, I will repay you with the poem "Nanshan."

古文：高祖曰： 烛至辞退，庶姓之礼；在夜载考，宗族之义。
现代文：高祖说： 点燃灯烛而告辞，是异姓的礼仪；在夜间考核，是宗族的义理。
English: Gao Zu said: lighting a candle and bidding farewell is the etiquette of different surnames; in the night assessment, is the clan's principle.

古文：卿等且还，朕与诸王宗室，欲成此夜饮。 
现代文：你们姑且回去，我和宗室各王，要完成遣夜间的饮宴。 
English: Now therefore come, I and the kings who are with me, and let us make an end of eating this passover.

古文：又从幸鄴。
现代文：元澄又跟随前往邺城。
English: Motosumi also followed to Shinshiro.

古文：还洛，以出纳之劳，增邑五百户。
现代文：回到洛阳，以出纳王命的辛劳，增加封邑五百户。
English: Returning to Luoyang, he increased the number of fiefs by 500 households with the hard work of the cashier's life.

古文：坐公事免官。
现代文：因公事获罪免除官职。
English: He was removed from office after being found guilty of misconduct in public office.

古文：寻兼吏部尚书。
现代文：不久兼任吏部尚书。
English: Not long after, he was also appointed to the post of secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：恆州刺史穆泰在州谋反，推朔州刺史、阳平王颐为主。
现代文：恒州刺史穆泰在州中图谋反叛，推举朔州刺史、阳平王元颐为首领。
English: In the middle of the state, Hengzhou leader Shumutai plotted a rebellion, and promoted Shuozhou leader Shumutai and Yangping leader Wangyuanqiu as leaders.

古文：颐表其状。
现代文：元颐上奏了他的事情。
English: The ex-emperor played up his affair.

古文：高祖召澄入见凝闲堂，曰： 适得阳平表曰：穆泰谋为不轨，招诱宗室。
现代文：高祖召唤元澄进入凝闲堂朝见，说： 刚刚得到阳平王奏疏说，穆泰图谋作乱，引诱宗室成员。
English: Gao Zu summoned Yuancheng to the morning meeting in the leisurely hall and said, "I have just received a message from Yangping Wang saying that Mutai is plotting to create turmoil and lure members of the family.

古文：脱或必然，迁京甫尔，北人恋旧，南北纷扰，朕洛阳不立也。
现代文：万一如此，刚刚迁移京城，北方人留恋旧居，南北动乱不安，我在洛阳不能立足。
English: If that were to happen, I would not be able to stay in Luoyang as I had just moved to the capital, northerners are nostalgic for their old homes, and the north and south are in turmoil.

古文：此事非任城不办，可为我力疾向北。
现代文：这件事非任城王不能处理，可为我勉强支撑病体赶往北方。
English: The king of the city could not handle this matter, but he could barely support my illness and drive me to the north.

古文：如其弱也，直往擒翦；若其势强，可承制发并肆兵以殄之。
现代文：如果他们力量薄弱，直接前往擒获消灭；如果他们势力强大，可秉承制命调发并州肆州军队去消灭他们。
English: If their strength is weak, they can go directly to capture and exterminate; if they are powerful, they can adhere to the command and dispatch the state-by-state army to exterminate them.

古文：虽知王患，既是国家大事，不容辞也。 
现代文：虽然知道王患病，既是国家大事，不容许推辞。 
English: Although it is known that Wang's illness is a national event, it is unacceptable to refuse.

古文：澄曰： 泰等愚惑，正恋本为此，非有远图。
现代文：元澄说： 穆塞等人愚蠢迷惑，祇是留恋本土才这样做，没有远大的谋略。
English: Motosumi said, "Musae and others are foolish and confused. They are only doing this out of nostalgia for their home country, and have no grand strategy.

古文：臣诚怯弱，不惮是辈，虽复患惙，岂敢有辞！
现代文：臣下的确怯懦软弱，但不怕这些人，虽然又患病，哪敢推辞?
English: It is true that our subjects are cowardly and weak, but we are not afraid of these people. Even though they are ill, how can we refuse them?

古文：谨当罄尽心力，继之以死。愿陛下勿忧。 
现代文：当恭谨竭尽心力，以生命为代价，希望陛下不要担忧。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will not be worried when I make every effort at the cost of my life.

古文：高祖笑曰： 得任城此行，朕复何忧也。 
现代文：高祖笑着说： 得以让任城王这次出兵，我还担忧什么呢? 
English: Gao Zu smiled and said, "What should I be worried about if I can get Ren Shiwang to send troops this time?"

古文：遂授节，铜虎、竹使符，御仗，左右，仍行恆州事。
现代文：于是授予元澄符节，铜虎、竹使符，御仗，侍卫兵士，又任行恒州事。
English: As a result, he was awarded the Yuancheng Festival, the Bronze Tiger, the Bamboo Envoy, the Great War, the soldiers of the guards, and was appointed to carry out the Hengzhou affairs.

古文：行达雁门，太守夜告泰已握众西就阳平，城下聚结，唯见弓仗。
现代文：行进到雁门，太守在夜晚报告穆泰已掌握军队向西到阳平王那裹，在城外集结，仅见到弓箭兵器。
English: After marching to the Wild Goose Gate, the daimyō reported in the evening that Mutai had taken control of the army and was marching west to Yangpyeong, where they were assembling outside the city. Only bow and arrow weapons could be seen.

古文：澄闻便速进。
现代文：元澄听说后就快速前进。
English: When Motosumi heard about it, he quickly moved forward.

古文：时右丞孟斌曰： 事不可量，须依敕召并肆兵，然后徐动。 
现代文：这时右丞孟斌说： 事情不可估量，必须依照命令召集并州肆州的军队，然后慢慢行动。 
English: At this time, U.S. Marshal Meng Bin said, "The situation is incalculable. We must, according to the order, muster the troops in all the states, and then move slowly.

古文：澄曰： 泰既构逆，应据坚城，而更迎阳平，度其所为，似当势弱。
现代文：元澄说： 穆泰既谋反，应占据坚固的城池，却另外迎接阳平王，估计他的所作所为，似乎是势力薄弱。
English: Motosumi said, "Since Mutai plotted a rebellion, he should have occupied a strong castle, but instead he welcomed King Yangpyeong. Judging by his actions, it seems that his power is weak.

古文：泰既不相拒，无故发兵，非宜也。
现代文：穆泰既然不相抵御，无故调发军队，是不适宜的。
English: Since Mutai does not resist us, it is not appropriate to send troops without reason.

古文：但速往镇之，民心自定。 
现代文：衹要快速前去压住他，民众的心自然安定。 
English: Therefore, it is only necessary to move quickly to suppress, and the people's minds will naturally be able to stabilize.

古文：遂倍道兼行，出其不意。
现代文：于是日夜赶路，行动出乎对方意料之外。
English: As a result, they rushed day and night, and their actions took the other side by surprise.

古文：又遣治书侍御史李焕先赴，至即擒泰，民情怡然。
现代文：又派遣治书侍御史李焕先行赶去，到了就擒获穆泰，民心安然。
English: He also dispatched Li Huan, the chancellor of the imperial court, to go ahead of him. When he arrived, he was captured by Mu Tai, and the people were safe.

古文：穷其党与，罪人皆得，钜鹿公陆睿、安乐侯元隆等百余人皆狱禁。
现代文：详审穆泰的党羽，罪人都查出来了，钜鹿公陆散、安乐侯元隆等一百多人都投入监狱囚禁。
English: After a detailed examination of Mutai's party members, all the criminals were found out, and more than a hundred people, including Mengka Gonglu San and Anle Houyuanlong, were put into prison.

古文：具状表闻，高祖览表大悦，召集公卿以下以表示之，曰： 我任城可谓社稷臣也，寻其罪案，正复皋陶断狱，岂能过之？ 
现代文：列举情况上奏疏报告，高祖读过奏疏非常高兴，召集公卿以下将奏疏给他们看，说： 我的任城王可以说是国家的大臣，审讯罪犯，即使皋陶判案，哪能超过他? 
English: Gaozu was very pleased to have read the report on the situation. He called together the following nobles to show them the report, saying: My king of the city can be said to be the minister of the country, interrogating criminals, even if Zhaotao judges the case, who can surpass him?

古文：顾谓咸阳王等曰： 汝等脱当其处，不能办此。 
现代文：回头对处阳王等人说： 你们如果在他的位置，不能处理得这样好。 
English: Looking back, he said to Zhuan Yangwang and the others: "If you were in his position, you wouldn't be able to handle it so well.

古文：车驾寻幸平城，劳澄曰： 任城此行，深副远寄。 
现代文：皇帝不久前往平城，慰劳元澄说： 任城王这次出兵，很符合我远大的寄托。 
English: The emperor soon left for Pingcheng, and to console him, Yuancheng said, "This dispatch of troops by the king of Rencheng is very much in line with my lofty trust.

古文：对曰： 陛下威灵远被，罪人无所逃刑，臣何劳之有？ 
现代文：丞还回答说： 陛下的声威远布，罪人无处逃脱刑罚，臣下有什么功劳? 
English: Joseph also replied, "Your Majesty's reputation is far and wide, and the guilty have nowhere to escape punishment. What merit do your subjects have?

古文：引见逆徒，无一人称枉。时人莫不叹之。
现代文：接见叛逆的人，没有一个人喊冤枉，当时人无不感叹。
English: When they received the rebellious people, not a single one cried out that they had been wronged. At the time, everyone was filled with regret.

古文：高祖顾谓左右曰： 昔仲尼云： 听讼吾犹人也，必也使无讼乎？ 
现代文：高祖回头对左右的人说： 从前孔子说： 审判诉讼我和别人一样，力求做到的是使诉讼不发生。 
English: Gao Zu looked back and said to the people around him, "Once upon a time, Confucius said, 'I, like others, try to prevent lawsuits from happening.

古文：然圣人之听讼，殆非常人所匹；必也无讼，今日见之矣。 
现代文：自然圣人的审判诉讼，恐怕不是平常人所可比拟的，一定要使诉讼不发生，今日看到了。 
English: The trials and lawsuits of natural saints are probably not comparable to those of ordinary people, and we must make sure that the lawsuits do not occur, as we saw today.

古文：以澄正尚书。
现代文：任命元澄为正尚书。
English: As a result, Motosumi was appointed to the post of chancellor.

古文：车驾南伐，留澄居守，复兼右仆射。
现代文：皇帝向南征伐，留下元澄居中镇守，又兼右仆射。
English: During the Emperor's Southern Expedition, he left Motosumi to guard Kyoto, and also acted as his right-hand man.

古文：澄表请以国秩一岁租布帛助军资，诏受其半。
现代文：元澄上奏请拿出封国一年的秩俸田租布帛帮助供给军用物资，诏令接受一半。
English: Motsumi appealed to the emperor, asking him to help supply military supplies by providing a year's supply of chichihotsuden rent cloth, half of which was accepted by the emperor.

古文：高祖幸鄴，值高车树者反叛，车驾将亲讨之。
现代文：高祖前往邺城，遇到直重蛮昼反叛，皇帝将亲自讨伐他。
English: Gaozhu went to Lucheng and encountered a serious rebellion in the afternoon. The emperor would personally fight against him.

古文：澄表谏不宜亲行。
现代文：五运上奏规劝不应亲自出兵。
English: At the time of the May 5th Movement, it was advised that soldiers should not be sent out in person.

古文：会江阳王继平之，乃止。
现代文：恰好江阳王元继平定翅画，才作罢。
English: It just so happened that Jiangyang Wangyuan succeeded in leveling the Wing Painting before he stopped working on it.

古文：高祖还洛，引见公卿。
现代文：直担回到渣堡，接见公卿。
English: He went straight back to the slag heap to meet the nobles.

古文：高祖曰： 营国之本，礼教为先。
现代文：龃说： 治理国家的根本，以礼乐教化为首。
English: Zou said: The foundation of governing the country is to take the lead in the education of etiquette and music.

古文：朕离京邑以来，礼教为日新以不？ 澄对曰： 臣谓日新。 
现代文：我离开京城以来，礼乐教化是否日日更新呢尸 五澄回答说： 臣下以为是日更新。 
English: Since I left the capital, has the culture of ceremonial music been renewed day by day? Gocho replied, "My subjects think it is renewed day by day.

古文：高祖曰： 朕昨入城，见车上妇人冠帽而著小襦袄者，若为如此，尚书何为不察？ 
现代文：高祖说： 我昨天进城，看到车上的妇女戴帽子却穿着小短袄，行为如此，尚书为什么不纠察? 
English: Gao Zu said: I went into the city yesterday and saw a woman in a car wearing a hat but wearing a short skirt, behaving like this. Why didn't Shang Shu picket?

古文：澄曰： 著犹少于不著者。 
现代文：元澄说： 穿小短袄的还是少于不穿的。 
English: Motosumi said, "Those who wear short skirts are still fewer than those who don't."

古文：高祖曰： 深可怪也！
现代文：高祖说： 实在奇怪!
English: Gaozu said, "This is really strange!"

古文：任城意欲令全著乎？
现代文：任城王的意思是要让她们都这样打扮吗?
English: Does Ren Shiwang mean to have them all dress up like this?

古文：一言可以丧邦者，斯之谓欤？
现代文：一句话就可丧失国家，就是说的这些吧?
English: You can lose your country with a single word, is that what you're saying?

古文：可命史官书之。 
现代文：可命令史官记载下来。 
English: Let the historian write it down.

古文：又曰： 王者不降佐于苍昊，皆拔才而用之。
现代文：又说： 君王不由苍天降下辅佐，都是选拔有才能的人而任用他们。
English: He also said, "Emperors do not choose their aides from the sky. They select talented people and appoint them."

古文：朕失于举人，任许一群妇人辈奇事，当更铨简耳。
现代文：我选拔人失当，任凭一群妇女出现稀奇事，应该另行选拔。
English: I picked the wrong people, let a bunch of women have a freak-out, there should be another pick.

古文：任城在省，为举天下纲维，为当署事而已？ 
现代文：任城王在尚书省，是提起天下的总绳，还是仅画押而已? 
English: If the king of the city is appointed to work in the government office, is it to make the people of the world follow the rules and regulations, or is it to deal with everyday affairs?

古文：澄曰： 臣实署事而已。 
现代文：元澄说： 臣下实在是画押而已。 
English: Motosumi said, "I really just went there to take care of some business."

古文：高祖曰： 如此便一令史足矣，何待任城？ 
现代文：高祖说： 如这样就是一个令史也足够了，何必用任城王呢? 
English: Gaozu said, "If that's the case, it's enough to be a city magistrate. Why do you need to be a city king?"

古文：又曰： 我遣舍人宣诏，何为使小人闻之？ 
现代文：又说： 我派遣舍人宣读诏书，为什么使小人听到? 
English: He also said, "If I send a commoner to read the edict, why should a commoner hear it?"

古文：澄曰： 时虽有干吏，去榜亦远。 
现代文：元澄说： 当时虽有办事人员，离诏书也远。 
English: Motosumi said: Although there were clerks at the time, it was far from an imperial edict.

古文：高祖曰： 远则不闻，闻则不远。
现代文：高祖说： 远就听不到，听得到就不远。
English: Gaozu said, "If you can't hear it from far away, it's not far to hear it."

古文：既得闻诏，理故可知。 
现代文：既然能听到诏书，道理是可推知的。 
English: Since the imperial edict can be heard, the reason can be deduced.

古文：于是留守群臣遂免冠谢罪。
现代文：这时留守的群臣就取下帽子认罪。
English: At this time, the absent ministers took off their hats and confessed.

古文：寻除尚书右仆射。
现代文：不久授任元澄为尚书右仆射。
English: Soon after, Motosumi was appointed as Shoshu's right-hand man.

古文：萧宝卷遣其太尉陈显达入寇汉阳。
现代文：萧宝卷派遣他的太尉陈显达进犯汉水以北。
English: Xiao Baowan sent his lieutenant Chen Xianda to invade north of Hanshui.

古文：是时高祖不豫，引澄入见清徽堂。
现代文：这时高祖患病，召元澄进清徽堂朝见。
English: At this time, Gao Zu fell ill and summoned Yuan Cheng to Qinghui Hall for a morning meeting.

古文：诏曰： 显达侵乱，沔阳不安，朕不亲行，莫攘此贼。
现代文：下诏说： 题达侵犯扰乱，冱扰不安定，我不亲自出兵，不能消灭这群贼寇。
English: The next edict said: "The issue is invasion, disturbance, and instability. If I do not personally send troops, I will not be able to eliminate this group of bandits."

古文：朕疾患淹年，气力惙弊，如有非常，委任城大事。
现代文：我患病多年，气力衰竭，如有意外，委托任城王处理人事。
English: I have been ill for many years, I am exhausted, and if there is an accident, I will entrust the king of the city to deal with personnel.

古文：是段任城必须从朕。 
现代文：遣段时间任城王必须跟随我。 
English: The appointed king of the city must follow me.

古文：澄涕泣对曰： 臣谨当竭股肱之力，以命上报。 
现代文：元澄哭泣着回答说： 臣下应当用尽全身的力量，以性命来报答。 
English: Weeping, Motosumi replied, "Your vassals should use all their strength and give their lives in return.

古文：遂从驾南伐。
现代文：于是跟随皇帝向南征伐。
English: So he followed the emperor to the south.

古文：高祖崩，澄受顾命。
现代文：高祖逝世，元澄受遣诏辅政。
English: After the death of Gaozu, Motosumi was sent as an assistant to the emperor.

古文：世宗初，有降人严叔懋告尚书令王肃遣孔思达潜通宝卷，图为叛逆，宝卷遣俞公喜送敕于肃，公喜还南，肃与裴叔业马为信。
现代文：初年，有投降的人严叔懋告发尚书令王蛊派遣孔思达暗中勾结宜鲞，图谋叛乱，宣卷派遣愈壬迈送敕书给王盛，全远回到南方，王卢送马匹给裴叔业作凭信。
English: In the first year, Yan Shuxuan, who had surrendered, reported that Shang Shuling ordered Wang Shuling to send Kong Sida to secretly collude with Yi Xuan and plot a rebellion, while Xuan Shuling sent Yurin Mai to send a letter to Wang Sheng, who was far away in the south, and Wang Lu sent horses to send a letter to Pei Shueye.

古文：澄信之，乃表肃将叛，辄下禁止。
现代文：五违相信这件事，就上奏王卢将要叛变，就令囚禁他。
English: Yuancheng believed him and declared that Wang Su was about to defect, and immediately imprisoned him.

古文：咸阳、北海二王奏澄擅禁宰辅，免官归第。
现代文：咸阳、北海二王上奏元澄擅自囚禁宰辅，免除元澄的官职回到第宅。
English: Xianyang and the two kings of the North Sea, Supreme Commander Motosumi, arbitrarily imprisoned Zaisuke, exempted Motosumi from his official duties and returned to the Second Residence.

古文：寻出为平西将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：不久外出任平西将军、梁州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the general of Pingxi and the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：辞以母老。
现代文：以母亲年老为由推辞。
English: She declined on the grounds that her mother was too old.

古文：除安东将军、相州刺史，复固辞。
现代文：授任他为安束将军、相州刺史，又执意推辞。
English: He was appointed to the post of General Anzaku, the governor of Sangju Province, but he stubbornly refused.

古文：改授安西将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：改任他为安西将军、雍州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the general of Anxi and the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：寻徵赴季秋讲武。
现代文：不久征召他赶赴秋季末的练兵。
English: He was soon called up for the end-of-autumn training.

古文：除都督淮南诸军事、镇南大将军、开府、扬州刺史。
现代文：授任他为都督淮南诸军事、镇南大将军、开府、扬州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the military governor of Huainan Province, the general of Zhenan Province, the governor of Kaifu Province and the governor of Yangzhou Province.

古文：下车封孙叔敖之墓，毁蒋子文之庙。
现代文：到任祭扫逊拯邀的墓，毁弃蓝王塞的庙。
English: The arrival ceremony sweeps away the tomb of Sun Zhengwei, and destroys the temple of the Blue King.

古文：频表南伐，世宗不许。
现代文：接连上奏疏向南征伐，世塞不准许。
English: It is not allowed to go to the south of the world in succession.

古文：又辞母老，乞解州任，寝而不报。
现代文：又推辞说母亲年老，乞求解除州职，皇帝扣压下来不回答。
English: He also said that his mother was old and begged to be relieved of her state duties, but the emperor held him down and did not answer.

古文：加散骑常侍。
现代文：加授他为散骑常侍。
English: The additional officer strolls along with the regular attendants.

古文：澄表曰： 臣参训先朝，藉规有日，前言旧轨，颇亦闻之。
现代文：元澄上奏疏说： 臣下在前朝受训，依规矩行事颇有时，往日言论和旧法规，也听到了一些。
English: "Vassals were trained under the previous government, and there were times when they acted according to the rules. I also heard some of the old sayings and old laws and regulations.

古文：又昔在恆代，亲习皇宗，熟秘序疑庭无阙日。
现代文：又从前在恒山代京，亲自在皇宗学校学习，熟秘序疑庭中没有空缺的子。
English: In addition, he used to study at the Imperial Family School in Hengshan on behalf of Beijing, and there is no vacancy in the court.

古文：臣每于侍坐，先帝未常不以《书典》在怀，《礼经》为事，周旋之则，不辍于时。
现代文：臣下每次侍奉在座，先帝未尝不把《尚书》诸《典》放在心中，按《礼经》行事，行礼的规则，没有一时丢下。
English: Every time his vassals served at the table, the former emperor always kept the "Shang Shu" and other "scriptures" in mind, acted according to the "Rituals," and never abandoned the rules of etiquette.

古文：自凤举中京，方隆礼教，宗室之范，每蒙委及，四门之选，负荷铨量。
现代文：自从在中原兴起，正要加强礼乐教化，宗室的规范，每被托付，四门建学的人员，我受命挑选。
English: Since it emerged in the Central Plains, I have been ordered to select the personnel for the construction of four schools, each of which has been entrusted with the task of strengthening the teaching of music and etiquette and the norms of the family.

古文：自先皇升遐，未遑修述。学宫虚荷四门之名，宗人有阙四时之业，青衿之绪于兹将废。
现代文：自从先帝逝世，来不及履行职责，学校空受四门的名称，宗室人员缺略四季的学业，士子的系统，在这裹将废止。
English: Since the death of the previous emperor, it has been too late to perform its duties, the school has been named the four gates, the family members have missed the four seasons of study, and the system of scholars will be abolished.

古文：臣每惟其事，窃所伤怀。
现代文：臣下每想到造件事，私下裹伤心。
English: Every time his vassal thought of doing something, he was secretly heartbroken.

古文：伏惟圣略宏远，四方罕务，宴安之辰，于是乎在。
现代文：圣明的谋略宏大深远，四方少事，平安的时刻，就在现在。
English: Shengming's strategy is vast and far-reaching, the four directions are few, and the moment of peace is right now.

古文：何为太平之世，而令子衿之叹兴焉；圣明之日，而使宗人之训阙焉。愚谓可敕有司，修复皇宗之学，开辟四门之教，使将落之族，日就月将。 
现代文：为什么在太平的时代，而使士子的叹息产生，圣明的日子，而使宗室人员的教育缺略呢浅见以为可命令有关官员，修复皇宗的学校，开创四门的教化，使将要衰落的宗族，曰有所得月有所进。 
English: Why, in a time of peace, should the sighs of the scholars arise, and in a time of holiness, should the education of the members of the imperial family be neglected? It is a shallow view to think that the relevant officials can be ordered to repair the schools of the imperial family, to create four doors of enlightenment, so that the family that is going to decline can say that there is something to gain and there is something to advance.

古文：诏曰： 胄子崇业，自古盛典，国均之训，无应久废，尚书更可量宜修立。 
现代文：世宗下诏说： 后代崇尚学业，是自古以来的大典，重臣的教导，不应长久荒废，尚书可再根据需要兴建学校。 
English: King Sejong issued an edict, saying, "It is time for future generations to respect learning. It is a great book from ancient times. The teachings of the chief ministers should not be wasted for a long time. Shangshu can build schools according to needs.

古文：澄又表母疾解州任，不听。
现代文：元澄又上奏疏称母亲有病请求解除少职，不准许。
English: Motosumi also reported that his mother was ill and requested to be relieved of her minor duties, which was not allowed.

古文：萧衍将张嚣之寇陷夷陵戍，澄遣辅国将军成兴步骑赴讨，大破之，复夷陵，嚣之遁走。
现代文：萧衍的将领张嚣之进犯攻占夷陵戍，元澄派遣辅国将军成兴率领步兵骑兵赶去讨伐，大败嚣之，收复夷陵，嚣之逃跑。
English: Xiao Yan's generals aggressively attacked and occupied the Yili Mausoleum, and Yuancheng dispatched the auxiliary general Cheng Xing to lead the infantry and cavalry to rush to the crusade, defeated the aggressors, recovered the Yili Mausoleum, and fled.

古文：又遣长风戍主奇道显攻萧衍阴山戍，破之，斩其戍主龙骧将军、都亭侯梅兴祖。
现代文：又派遣长风戍守头领奇道显攻打萧衍的阴山戍，打败他们，杀死戍守头领龙骧将军、都亭侯梅兴祖。
English: He also dispatched the head of the Longfeng Garrison, Qi Daoxian, to attack Xiao Yan's Yinshan Garrison, defeat them, and kill the head of the Garrison, Longfeng General, Du Ting Hou Meixing Zu.

古文：仍引攻白槁戍，又破之，斩其宁朔将军、关内侯吴道爽。
现代文：又率兵攻打白稿戍，又打败他们，杀死他们的宁朔将军、关内侯吴道爽。
English: He also led his troops to attack Baijuan, defeated them, and killed their Ningshuo general, Guanai Lord Wu Daoshuang.

古文：澄表曰： 萧衍频断东关，欲令巢湖泛溢。
现代文：元澄上奏疏说： 萧衍频繁截断束关，想要使巢湖泛滥。
English: Yuancheng Shangsoo said: Xiao Yan frequently cut off the floodgates, trying to flood the lake.

古文：湖周回四百余里，东关合江之际，广不过数十步，若贼计得成，大湖倾注者，则淮南诸戍必同晋阳之事矣。
现代文：湖周围四百多里，束关汇合长江的地方，宽不过几十步，如果贼寇的计谋得逞，大湖灌注，淮水以南的各据点就一定与晋阳的事相同了。
English: There are more than four hundred miles around the lake, and the place where Shouguan meets the Yangtze River is only a few dozen paces wide. If the thief's plan succeeds and the Great Lake is flooded, the strongholds south of Huai Shui will certainly be the same as those in Jinyang.

古文：又吴楚便水，且灌且掠，淮南之地，将非国有。
现代文：又吴人楚人习惯水战，又灌水又掳掠，淮水以南的土地，将不是国家所有。
English: The Wu and Chu people are also accustomed to water wars, flooding and plundering. The land south of Huai Shui will not be owned by the state.

古文：寿阳去江五百余里，众庶惶惶，并惧水害。
现代文：寿阳离长江五百多里，民众惊惶不安，都畏惧水害。
English: Shouyang is more than five hundred miles away from the Yangtze River, and the people are alarmed and anxious, and are afraid of water damage.

古文：脱乘民之愿，攻敌之虚，豫勒诸州，纂集士马，首秋大集，则南渎可为饮马之津，霍岭必成徙倚之观。事贵应机，经略须早。
现代文：如果利用民众的愿望，攻打敌人的空虚，预先指挥各州，调集兵马，初秋大规模集结，则南方水流可成为战马饮水的渡口，霍岭必定成为留连徘徊的观望台，事情贵于顺应时机，计划必须尽早。
English: If we take advantage of the wishes of the people, attack the enemy's emptiness, command the states in advance, mobilize soldiers and horses, and assemble on a large scale in the early autumn, then the Southern Water Current can become a water port for horses, and the Holling will surely become a lookout for lingering. Things are more important than opportunism, and plans must be made as early as possible.

古文：纵混一不可必果，江西自是无虞。
现代文：纵然统一不一定成功，长江以西自然是没有什么可忧虑的。
English: Although unification may not succeed, there is nothing to worry about west of the Yangtze River.

古文：若犹豫缓图，不加除讨，关塞既成，襄陵方及，平原民戍定为鱼矣。 
现代文：如果犹豫慢慢地考虑，不加以消除讨伐，关塞建成后，大水将要到来，平原的民众戍卒定会成为鱼食了。 
English: If the hesitation is slowly considered, and the crusade is not eliminated, after the checkpoint is completed, the flood will come, and the people of the plain will surely become fish food.

古文：诏发冀、定、瀛、相、并、济六州二万人，马一千五百匹，令仲秋之中毕会淮南，并寿阳先兵三万，委澄经略。
现代文：诏令调发冀、定、瀛、相、并、济六州二万人，马一千五百匹，命令在秋季第二个月的正中全部聚集到淮水以南，加上寿阳原来的兵士三万人，交给元澄指挥。
English: The edict transferred 20,000 soldiers from six prefectures, including Ji, Ding, Shun, Sang and Bin, and 1,500 horses, and ordered them to gather south of Huai Shui in the middle of the second month of autumn, together with 30,000 soldiers from Shouyang, and put them under the command of Yuancheng.

古文：先是朝议有南伐之意，以萧宝夤为东扬州刺史据东城，陈伯之为江州刺史戍阳石，以澄总督二镇，授之节度。
现代文：在这以前朝廷商议有向南征伐的意图，任命萧宝夤为东扬,史占据东城，陈伯之为江州刺史戍守阳石，任命元澄总领二镇，交给他调度。
English: Prior to this, the imperial court discussed the intention to march southward, appointed Xiao Baojun as Dongyang, Shi to occupy Dongcheng, Chen Boyi as Jiangzhou Zhi Shi and Yangshi, and appointed Yuancheng as the leader of the two towns and handed him the dispatch.

古文：至是勒兵进讨。
现代文：到这时统领军队向前讨伐。
English: At this time, he led the army to march forward.

古文：以东关水冲，大岘险要，东关纵水，阳石、合肥有急悬之切；不图大岘，则历阳有乘险之援，淮陵陆道，九山水路，并宜经略。
现代文：因束关是水路要道，大岘城地势险要，束关放水，阳石、合肥有急水高悬的逼迫，不谋取大岘，历阳就可利用险阻的支援，淮陵是陆路，九山是水路，都应该筹划。
English: Because Shouguan is an important waterway, Dalat City is in a precarious situation, Shouguan has to release water, Yangshi and Hefei have high water pressure and high pressure, without seeking Dalat, Liyang can use the support of dangerous obstacles, Huairing is a land route, Jiushan is a waterway, all should be planned.

古文：于是遣统军傅竖眼、王神念等进次大岘、东关、九山、淮凌，皆分部诸将，倍道据之；总勒大众，络绎相接。
现代文：于是派遣统军傅竖眼、王神念等人进军停驻大岘、东关、九山、淮陵，都分别调遣各将领，日夜赶路据有，总领大众，前后相接。
English: As a result, he dispatched the leading generals Fu Zhizhen, Wang Shennian and others to march into and station in Dafu, Dongguan, Jiushan, and Huairing. All generals were dispatched separately, and they were on the road day and night, with the general leading the masses.

古文：而神念克其关要、颍川二城，斩衍军主费尼。
现代文：而神念攻下关要、颖川两座城池，杀死萧衍的军主费尼。
English: But Shen Nian captured the key, Yingchuan two castles, and killed Xiao Yan's commander Fei Ni.

古文：而宁朔将军韦惠、龙骧将军李伯由仍固大岘。
现代文：然而萧衍的宁朔将军韦惠、龙骧将军李伯由仍然固守大岘。
English: However, Xiao Yan's Ningshuo General Wei Hui and Longjing General Li Boyu still clung to Daxing.

古文：澄遣统军党法宗、傅竖眼等进军克之，遂围白塔、牵城。数日之间，便即逃溃。
现代文：元澄派遣统军党法宗、傅竖眼等人进军攻克大岘，于是包围白塔、牵城，几天之间，韦惠等人就逃跑溃散了。
English: Motcho dispatched the united army of the party, including Hossong and Fu Zhizhen, to invade Dalat, and then surrounded Baita and took the city. Within a few days, Wei Hui and others fled and dispersed.

古文：衍清溪戍望风散走。
现代文：萧衍的清溪戍望风四散而逃。
English: Xiao Yan's Qingxi Gong looked at the wind and fled in all directions.

古文：衍徐州刺史司马明素率众三千，欲援九山；徐州长史潘伯邻规固淮陵；宁朔将军王燮负险焦城。
现代文：萧衍的徐州刺史司马明素率领部众三千人，想支援九山；徐州长史潘伯邻打算固守淮陵；宁朔将军王燮仗恃焦城的险阻。
English: Xiao Yan's governor of Xuzhou, Sima Mingsu, led 3,000 men to support Jiushan; the governor of Xuzhou, Spen Bo, planned to hold on to Huairing; the general of Ningshuo, Wang Xuanqian, fought against the dangerous obstacles of Jiaocheng.

古文：法宗进克焦城，破淮陵，擒明素，斩伯邻。
现代文：法宗进军攻克焦城，打下淮陵，擒获明素，杀死伯邻。
English: Fuzong marched into and conquered Jiaocheng, defeated Huairing, captured Mingsu, and killed Bo Xuan.

古文：其济阴太守王厚强、庐江太守裴邃即亦奔退。
现代文：萧衍的济阴太守王厚强、庐江太守裴邃也立即逃奔回去。
English: Xiao Yan's governor of Jiyin, Wang Houqiang, and governor of Minjiang, Pei Long, also immediately fled back.

古文：诏澄曰： 将军文德内昭，武功外暢，奋扬大略，将荡江吴。
现代文：世宗诏令元澄说： 将军在内昭示文德，在外传布武功，奋起大谋略，将扫荡长江句吴。
English: Emperor Zongzong gave the order to Yuancheng: "The general should show virtue at home, propagate military prowess abroad, rise up with a grand strategy, and sweep the Yangtze River."

古文：长旌始舒，贼徒慑气，锐旅方驰，东关席卷。
现代文：旌旗刚张开，贼寇就丧气，精锐的军队刚奔驰，东关就被席卷。
English: As soon as the banner was unfurled, the bandits lost heart. As soon as the elite troops arrived, Dongguan was swept away.

古文：想江湖弭波，在旦夕耳。
现代文：料想江湖波浪平息，就在早晚而已。
English: It's only a matter of time before the tidal wave subsides.

古文：所送首虏，并已闻之。 
现代文：你所传送的首级，都已详知。 
English: Everything you've transmitted has been thoroughly vetted.

古文：初，澄出讨之后，衍将姜庆真袭据寿春外郭，齐王萧宝夤击走之。
现代文：当初，五还出兵征讨以后，盖鱼的将领差庆真偷袭占据画画的外城，查王芦童鱼出击赶走了他。
English: At the beginning, after the five also sent troops to recruit, the general of the fish cover, Chiaqing Zhen, made a sneak attack to occupy the outer city of the painting, and Chao Wang Lucheng fish attack drove him away.

古文：长史韦缵坐免官，澄以在外无坐。
现代文：长史韦缵获罪免官，元澄在外地没受牵连。
English: The director, Shi Weiqi, was convicted and removed from office, while Mr. Yuancheng was not implicated outside the country.

古文：遂攻钟离。
现代文：于是攻打钟离。
English: So they attacked Zhongli.

古文：又诏： 钟离若食尽，三月已前，固有可克，如至四月，淮水泛长，舟行无碍，宜善量之。
现代文：世宗又下诏： 钟离如果粮食吃光，三个月以前，固然可以攻克，如到四个月，进丞泛滥上涨，行船没有阻碍，就应妥善考虑。
English: Shizong also issued an edict: If the grain supply of Zhongli is exhausted, it can be conquered before three months, but if it is four months and the flooding is rampant and there is no obstacle to navigation, it should be properly considered.

古文：前事捷也，此实将军经略，勋有常焉。
现代文：以前战事获胜，这实在是将军的筹划，功勋有常规。
English: In the past, when a war was won, it was really the general's planning, and the achievement was routine.

古文：如或以水盛难图，亦可为万全之计，不宜昧利无成，以贻后悔也。 
现代文：如果因水涨难以图取，也可以采用万无一失的计策，不应贪利不成功，招来以后的悔恨。 
English: If it is difficult to draw due to rising water, you can also use a foolproof strategy, you should not be greedy and unsuccessful, causing regret later.

古文：萧衍冠军将军张惠绍、游击将军殷暹、骁骑将军赵景悦、龙骧将军张景仁等率众五千，送粮钟离。
现代文：萧衍的冠军将军张惠绍、游击将军殷暹、骁骑将军趟景悦、龙骧将军张景仁等人率领部众五千人，送粮食到钟离。
English: Xiao Yan's champion general Zhang Huishao, guerrilla general Yin Sie, cavalry general Zi Jingyue, dragon general Zhang Jingren and others led 5,000 people to send grain to Zhongli.

古文：澄遣统军王足、刘思祖等邀击惠绍等，大破之。
现代文：元澄派遣统军王足、刘思祖等人拦击惠绍等人，大败他们。
English: Yuancheng dispatched Wang Tu, Liu Shizu and others of the United Army to stop Hui Shao and others, and defeated them.

古文：获惠绍、殷暹、景仁及其屯骑校尉史文渊等军主以上二十七人。
现代文：擒获惠绍、殷暹、景仁及其屯骑校尉史文渊等军主以上二十七人。
English: Hui Shao, Yin Siam, Jing Ren and his cavalry lieutenant Shi Wenyuan and other 27 military leaders and above were awarded.

古文：既而遇雨，淮水暴长，引归寿春。
现代文：不久遇到降雨，淮水猛涨，率军回寿春。
English: Soon after, he encountered rain, and the floodwaters surged, and he led his army back to Shoushun.

古文：还既狼狈，失兵四千余人。
现代文：返回时狼狈不堪，损失兵士四千多人。
English: When the soldiers returned, they were very disheartened, having lost more than four thousand soldiers.

古文：频表解州，世宗不许。
现代文：接连上奏请免除州职，世宗不准许。
English: Consecutive appeals are exempt from state service, and are not permitted by the Sejong.

古文：有司奏军还失路，夺其开府，又降三阶。
现代文：有关官员奏告军队返回时迷失道路，剥夺元澄的开府，又降三级。
English: Relevant officials reported that the army lost the road when returning, deprived Yuancheng of the capital, and lowered it by three levels.

古文：时萧衍有移，求换张惠绍。
现代文：造时萧衍有公文，请求交换张惠绍。
English: At the time of construction, Xiao Yan had an official document requesting the exchange of Zhang Huishao.

古文：澄表请不许，诏付八座会议。
现代文：元澄上奏请求不准许，韶令交付八座商议。
English: Gencho's request to appear was not allowed, and the imperial order was delivered to the eight-seat deliberation hall.

古文：尚书令、广阳王嘉等奏宜还之，诏乃听还。
现代文：尚书令、广阳王元嘉等人进奏应放回他，诏书就准许放回。
English: Shang Shuling, Guangyang Wang Yuanjia and others should be returned to him, and the edict will be allowed to be returned.

古文：后果复寇边。
现代文：后来张惠绍果然又侵犯边境。
English: Later, Zhang Huishao violated the border again.

古文：转澄镇北大将军、定州刺史。
现代文：改任元澄为镇北大将军、定州刺史。
English: Motosumi was reappointed as the general of Zhenbei University, and Jingshou was appointed as the chief historian.

古文：初，民中每有横调，百姓烦苦，前后牧守，未能蠲除。澄多所省减，民以忻赖。
现代文：当初，民众中时常有意外的征调，百姓烦恼厌恨，前后的州牧郡守，不能免除，元澄多有节省减轻，民众欢欣依赖他。
English: At the beginning, there were often unexpected conscription among the people, the people were annoyed and hated, the state and county governors before and after could not be exempted, Yuancheng had more savings and relief, and the people happily relied on him.

古文：又明黜陟赏罚之法，表减公园之地，以给无业贫口，禁造布绢不任衣者。
现代文：又严明废黜提升赏赐惩罚的法度，上奏减少官府园囿的土地，来分给没有田业的贫困人口，禁止纺织做不了衣服的布绢。
English: It also strictly abolished the law of increasing rewards and punishments, reduced the land of government gardens to be distributed to the poor without agriculture, and prohibited the weaving of cloth that cannot be made into clothes.

古文：母孟太妃薨，居丧毁瘠，当世称之。
现代文：母亲孟太妃逝世，服丧因哀伤过度而消瘦，当时人称赞他。
English: He was praised at the time for losing weight after the death of his mother, Princess Mengtaifi, due to excessive grief.

古文：服阕，除太子太保。
现代文：守丧期满，授任他为太子太保。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed Crown Prince and Protector of the Realm.

古文：于时高肇当朝，猜忌贤戚。
现代文：这时高肇掌权，猜忌贤明的亲属。
English: At this time, Gao Zhao was in power, and his relatives were suspicious of him.

古文：澄为肇间构，常恐不全，乃终日昏饮，以示荒败。
现代文：元澄遭高肇离间，时常担心不能保全，就整喝酒昏醉，来显示荒淫败落。
English: Being framed by Gao Zhao, Yuancheng was often afraid that it would be difficult to protect himself, so he would get drunk all day long to show that he was a desolate man.

古文：所作诡越，时谓为狂。
现代文：所作所为诡诈越礼，当时人称他神经错乱。
English: His behaviour was peculiar and was regarded by contemporaries as wild.

古文：世宗夜崩，时事仓卒，高肇拥兵于外，肃宗冲幼，朝野不安。
现代文：世宗夜晚逝世，事件突然，高肇拥有军队在外面，肃宗年幼，朝野人心不安。
English: Sejong died in the evening, the event was sudden, Gaozhao had an army outside, Sojong was young, and the hearts of the government and the people were uneasy.

古文：澄疏斥不预机要，而朝望所属。领军于忠、侍中崔光等奏澄为尚书令，于是众心忻服。
现代文：元澄被疏远排斥不参与机要事务，而朝廷中有声望的大臣归向于他，领军于忠、侍中崔光等人上奏推举元澄为尚书令，于是众人心中高兴信服。
English: Motosumi was alienated and excluded from participating in important affairs, and the most prestigious ministers in the imperial court turned to him, leading Yu Zhong, the chambermaid Cui Guang, and others to nominate Motosumi as Shosho Rei, so everyone was happy and convinced.

古文：又加散骑常侍、骠骑大将军，寻迁司空，加侍中。俄诏领尚书令。
现代文：又加授元澄为散骑常侍、骠骑大将军，不久升任司空，加授侍中，继而诏令他兼领尚书令。
English: He also awarded him the title of Sanzhi (free-riding) regular attendant and the title of Sanzhi (free-riding) major general, and soon he was promoted to Siku (secretary) and awarded the title of Jizhong (junior attendant), and then he was also awarded the title of Shangshurong.

古文：初，正始之末，诏百司普升一级，而执事者不达旨意，刺史、守、令限而不及。
现代文：当初，正始末年，诏令百官普升一级，而执掌事务的人不明白旨意，刺史、太守、县令受限制而不升。
English: At the beginning of the year and the end of the year, the Emperor issued a decree to promote 100 officials to the first level, but the people in charge of affairs did not understand the will, and the scribe, the governor and the county magistrate were restricted and did not rise.

古文：澄奏曰： 窃惟云构郁起，泽及百司，企春望荣，内外同庆。
现代文：元澄上奏疏说： 私下以为高大的房舍建起，恩泽遍及百官，企盼春天希望繁荣，内外共同庆贺。
English: Yuancheng Shangsoo said: Privately, I thought that the tall building had been built, and the blessing had spread to hundreds of officials. I looked forward to the spring, hoped for prosperity, and celebrated both at home and abroad.

古文：至于赏陟，不及守宰，尔来十年，冤讼不绝。
现代文：至于赏赐提升，不到太守县令，自那以来十年，申诉的接连不断。
English: As for the reward promotion, it was not until the Taishou County Order, and since then, there have been continuous complaints for ten years.

古文：封回自镇远、安州入为太尉长史，元匡自征虏、恆州入作宗卿，二人迁授，并在先诏。
现代文：封回从镇远将军、安州刺史召入任太尉长史，元匡从征虏将军、恒州刺史召入任宗正卿，二人的调任，都在诏书下达之前。
English: Huan Hui was called from General Zhenyuan and Anzhou Zhishi to the post of Captain Changshi, and Yuan Kuang was called from General Zhengyu and Hengzhou Zhishi to the post of Zong Zhengqing. Both of them were transferred before the imperial rescript was issued.

古文：应蒙之理，备在于斯。
现代文：应受恩赐的道理，完备在这裹。
English: Here is the fullness of the doctrine of the necessity of grace.

古文：兼州佐停私之徒，陪臣郡丞之例，尚蒙天泽下降，荣及当时。
现代文：兼任州佐闲居在家的人，王侯臣属与郡丞之类，还受天子恩泽降下，荣耀于当时。
English: Those who concurrently served as shuso idly living at home, such as princes, vassals, and county magistrates, were also humbled by the grace of heaven, and were glorified at that time.

古文：然参佐之来，皆因府主。
现代文：然而参谋佐吏的由来，都因为府主。
English: However, the origin of the staff sergeant is all because of the governor.

古文：今府主不沾，佐官独预，弃本赏末，愚谓未允。
现代文：现在府主不受恩典，佐吏却独受，抛弃根本赏赐末节，浅见以为不公平。
English: Now the head of the household is not favored, but the steward is favored, abandoning the fundamental reward of the Last Supper, which is considered unfair.

古文：今计刺史、守、宰之官，请准封回，悉同泛限，上允初旨百司之章，下覆讼者元元之心。 
现代文：现在核计刺史、太守、县令等官员，请依照封回、元匡，都同在普升范围，上符合起初施恩百官的意图，下平息诉讼者随声相和的心情。 
English: Now, please verify that the officials such as the history, the governor-general, and the county magistrate are all in the scope of promotion according to the seal and the Yuan Kuang, which is in line with the intention of the benevolent officials at the beginning, and calm down the mood of the litigants.

古文：诏曰： 自今已后，内外之事，尝经先朝者，不得重闻。 
现代文：诏令说： 从今以后，内外的事情，曾经过了先朝的，不能再报告。 
English: The imperial edict said: From now on, internal and external affairs that have passed through the previous government can no longer be reported.

古文：澄奏曰： 臣闻尧悬谏诤之鼓，舜置诽谤之木，皆所以广耳目于刍荛，达四聪于天下。
现代文：元澄上奏疏说：臣下听说尧悬挂规劝的鼓，舜设置指责的木函，都是用来增广耳目到割草打柴人，广开四方视听到天下。
English: Yuancheng Shangsoo said: "Our subjects have heard that the drums of exhortation and the wooden letters of reprimand are used to increase the ears and eyes of people cutting grass and chopping wood, and are widely seen and heard all over the world.

古文：伏惟太祖开基，化隆自远，累圣相承，于今九帝。
现代文：太祖开创基业，教化兴隆到远方，历代相承，到现在已九位皇帝。
English: The great-grandfather founded the foundation, the enlightenment flourished far and wide, and has been passed down from generation to generation. There have been nine emperors so far.

古文：重光叠照，污隆必同，与夺随时，道无恆体。
现代文：相继照耀，盛衰皆同，给与夺取依时代，治道没有固定的体式。
English: Shine successively, rise and fall are the same, give and take according to the times, there is no fixed style of governance.

古文：思过如渴，言重千金，故称无讳之朝，迈踪三、五。
现代文：求人指出过错如同饥渴，一言值千金，所以称没有忌讳的朝廷，业绩超越三皂、五帝。
English: Asking someone to point out mistakes is like being hungry and thirsty. A word is worth a lot of money. That's why the imperial court, which is said to have no taboos, has performed better than the three soaps and five emperors.

古文：高祖冲年纂历，文明协统，变官易律，未为违典。
现代文：高祖幼年继位，文明太后辅助治理，变官制改律令，不是违背典章。
English: The succession of Gao Zu at a young age, the auxiliary governance of the civilized empress dowager, the change of officials and the amendment of the legal code are not violations of the regulations.

古文：及慈圣临朝，母仪宇县，爰发慈令，垂心滞狱，深枉者仰日月于九泉，微屈者希曲照于盆下。
现代文：等到本代太后临朝听政，为天下做人母的典范，发布仁慈的命令，留心迟滞的案件，有重大冤枉的在九泉之下受到曰月照耀，有微小委屈的在盆子下面希冀得到斜阳的光芒。
English: Wait until this generation's Empress Dowager Lin listens to politics, sets an example of being a human mother for the world, issues benevolent orders, and pays attention to the cases of delay. Those who have serious wrongdoings will be shined by the sun and moon under the fountain, and those who have minor grievances will hope to get the light of the setting sun under the basin.

古文：今乃格以先朝，限以一例，斯诚奉遵之本心，实乖元元之至望。
现代文：现在却因是先朝被阻隔，以一个条例被限定，这实在是遵奉先帝的本心，却违背了众人的极大期望。
English: Now, however, because it was blocked by the previous government, it is limited by an ordinance, which is really in accordance with the original intention of the former emperor, but contrary to the great expectations of many people.

古文：在于谦挹，有乖旧典。
现代文：本在于谦虚退让，却违背旧曰典章。
English: It was a modest concession, but it violated the old rules.

古文：谨寻抱枉求直，或经累朝。
现代文：恭谨寻思抱有冤屈谋求正直，有时经过几朝。
English: Respectfully seek to think, hold grievances, seek honesty, and sometimes go through several generations.

古文：毫厘之差，正之宜速；谬若千里，驷马弗追。
现代文：毫厘的差别，纠正它应该迅速；谬误如有千里，四匹马驾的车也追不上。
English: If there is a difference of a millimeter, it should be corrected quickly; if there is a thousand miles of error, even a car driven by four horses cannot catch up.

古文：故礼有损益，事有可否，父有诤子，君有谏臣，琴瑟不调，理宜改作。
现代文：所以礼制有减损增益，事情有同意否定，父亲有直言的儿子，君主有规劝的臣属，琴和瑟不谐和，按道理应该改做。
English: Therefore, the etiquette system has losses and gains, things have agreement and negation, the father has an outspoken son, the monarch has a subordinate who exhorts, and the harp and the seraphim are not in harmony, and should be changed according to reason.

古文：是以防川之论，小决则通；乡校之言，拥则败国。
现代文：所以防止水流的论说，小放就通畅；乡校中的言语，堵起来就败坏国家。
English: Therefore, the theory of preventing the flow of water is that if it is released, it will be smooth; if it is blocked, it will corrupt the country.

古文：矧伊陈屈，而可抑以先朝。
现代文：何况陈述冤枉的，哪能以在先朝而遭到压抑。
English: What's more, those who were unjustly accused could not have been suppressed under the previous government.

古文：且先朝屈者，非故屈之，或有司爱憎，或执事浊僻，空文致法，以误视听。
现代文：而且先朝受冤枉的，不是故意冤枉他们，有的是有关官员凭自己的爱憎，有的是执掌政事者污浊邪僻，虚构文书施予法令，以惑乱视听。
English: Moreover, those who were wronged by the previous government were not intentionally wronged. Some of the relevant officials did so based on their own likes and dislikes, and some of those in charge of government affairs were dirty and perverse, creating fictitious documents to issue decrees in order to confuse the public.

古文：如此冤塞，弥在可哀。
现代文：如此冤屈封堵，实在可哀怜。
English: It's really pitiful to have such a grievance blocked.

古文：僭之与滥，宁失不经，乞收今旨，还依前诏。 
现代文：与其越分和过度，宁可失去不守正法的人，乞求收回现在的旨意，仍依从前的诏书。
English: Rather than overreach and overreach, it is better to lose those who do not abide by the law, beg to withdraw the current will, and still follow the previous edict.

古文：诏曰： 省奏，深体毗赞之情，三皇异轨，五代殊风，一时之制，何必诠改。
现代文：肃宗下韶说： 阅过奏疏，深深体会到你辅佐补益的心情，三皇法规不同，五代风俗有别，一时的制度，何必要更改?
English: Su Zongjie said: After reading the Song of Songs, I deeply understand the mood of your assistant and supplementary benefits, the Three Emperors' laws and regulations are different, the five generations of customs are different, and the system is temporary. Why is it necessary to change?

古文：必谓虚文设旨，理在可申者，何容不同来执。
现代文：一定说是虚构文书设立旨意，道理在可以申诉的，哪能不同你所坚持的意见呢?
English: It must be said that it is a fictitious document establishing the will, the reason is that it can be appealed, how can it be different from the opinion you insist on?

古文：可依往制。 
现代文：可以依照往的制度。 
English: You can follow the previous system.

古文：澄表上《皇诰宗制》并《训诂》各一卷，意欲皇太后览之，思劝戒之益。
现代文：元澄进奏呈上《皇诰宗制》和《训诂》各一卷，是想要皇太后阅览它们，想起到劝诫的助益。
English: Yuancheng Jinso presented one volume of "Imperial Family System" and one volume of "Teaching and Learning" to the Empress Dowager, hoping that she would read them and remember the benefits of exhortation.

古文：又奏利国济民所宜振举者十条。
现代文：又上奏利国救民所应施行的十个条款。
English: It also listed ten articles that should be implemented by the Korea National Rescue Committee.

古文：一曰律度量衡，公私不同，所宜一之。
现代文：一是统一度量衡，公私不相同，应该一致起来。
English: The first is to unify the weights and measures. Public and private are not the same. They should be consistent.

古文：二曰宜兴学校，以明黜陟之法。
现代文：二是应该兴建学校，来明确废黜擢升的法度。
English: Second, a school should be built to clarify the law on abolishing the promotion of cadres.

古文：三曰宜兴灭继绝，各举所知。
现代文：三是应该使灭亡的国家族别复兴并继续下去，各推举自己所赏识的人。
English: Thirdly, it is necessary to revive and continue the national races that have died out, and each country should nominate people it appreciates.

古文：四曰五调之外，一不烦民；任民之力，不过三日。
现代文：四是五种调发以外，一律不准烦扰民众，使用民众的劳力，一年不超过三天。
English: In addition to the four or five kinds of dispatching, it is not allowed to bother the people at all, and the labor of the people is used for no more than three days a year.

古文：五曰临民之官，皆须黜陟，以旌赏罚。
现代文：五是治理民众的官吏，都必须升降，来显明赏罚。
English: Fifth, the officials who govern the people must be promoted and demoted to show rewards and punishments.

古文：六曰逃亡代输，去来年久者，若非伎作，任听即住。
现代文：六是逃亡以后代人输纳租税，年代久远的，如果不是手工艺人，听凭定居下来。
English: Sixth, the generation of tax evaders is long gone, and if they are not craftsmen, they will settle down.

古文：七曰边兵逃走，或实陷没，皆须精检；三长及近亲，若实隐之，徵其代输，不隐勿论。
现代文：七是边境兵士逃跑，有的确为战死，都必须精加检查；三长和近亲，如确实隐藏他们，微调这些人代为输纳，没有隐藏的不追究。
English: Seventh, the border soldiers who ran away, and some who were indeed killed in battle, must be carefully checked; the three elders and close relatives, if they did hide them, fine-tuned these people to be losers, not hidden, not pursued.

古文：八曰工商世业之户，复徵租调，无以堪济，今请免之，使专其业。
现代文：八是世代经营工商的家庭，又征收租调，无法承受，现在请求免除，使他们专做自己的业务。
English: Eighthly, families that have been engaged in business for generations and cannot bear the levying of rent and transfer, are now requesting exemption so that they can do their own business.

古文：九曰三长禁奸，不得隔越相领，户不满者，随近并合。
现代文：九是三长禁止奸猾，不能跨地域统领，户不满的，就近合并。
English: Nine is that the three chiefs prohibit treachery, cannot lead across regions, and if households are dissatisfied, they will merge nearby.

古文：十曰羽林虎贲，边方有事，暂可赴战，常戍宜遣蕃兵代之。
现代文：十是羽林和虎贲，边境有战事时，可暂时奔赴作战，通常的戍守应派轮番服役的兵士代替他们。
English: Ten are feathered forest and tiger's lair. When there is a war on the border, they can temporarily go to fight. The usual guardians should send soldiers to serve in rotation to replace them.

古文：灵太后下其奏，百僚议之，事有同否。
现代文：灵太后颁下他的奏疏，百官商议，有同意的也有否定的。
English: The task of defending the border in normal times should be to send troops to rotate the garrison. The Empress Dowager approved his report and submitted it to the officials for review. Some of these provisions were adopted and some were rejected.

古文：时四中郎将兵数寡弱，不足以襟带京师，澄奏宜以东中带荥阳郡，南中带鲁阳郡，西中带恆农郡，北中带河内郡，选二品、三品亲贤兼称者居之。省非急之作，配以强兵，如此则深根固本、强干弱枝之义也。
现代文：当时四个中郎将手下兵力薄弱，不足以保卫京城，元澄上奏应以束中郎将兼任荣阳郡太守，南中郎将兼任鲁阳郡太守，西中郎将兼任恒农郡太守，北中郎将兼任河内郡太守，挑选兼具亲近贤明的二品、三品官员担任，节省不急迫的制作，配备强大的兵力，这样就合乎加固根本、增强主干削弱枝叶的义理。
English: At that time, the four middlemen led the weak troops under their command, which was not enough to defend the capital city. According to the report from the Yuancheng Emperor, the middle man of the bunch would also serve as the governor of Rongyang County, the middle man of the south would also serve as the governor of Luyang County, the middle man of the west would also serve as the governor of Hengnong County, and the middle man of the north would also serve as the governor of Hanoi County. The second and third officers, who were both close and wise, were selected to serve, the production of which was not urgent was saved, and strong troops were equipped. This was consistent with the principle of

古文：灵太后初将从之，后议者不同，乃止。
现代文：灵太后起初将要听从他的意见，后来议论的人不同意，就作罢了。
English: In the beginning, the spiritual empress Dowager will listen to his opinion, and later, if the speaker does not agree, she will stop.

古文：澄又重奏曰： 固本宜强，防微在豫，故虽有文事，不忘武功。
现代文：元澄又再次上奏说： 加固根本应该强大，防止事故的苗头在于预备，所以虽然有文事，不能忘记武功。
English: "The reinforcement should be strong at all, and the seed of preventing accidents lies in preparation, so although there are literary matters, we must not forget the martial arts," said Motosumi.

古文：况今南蛮仍犷，北妖频结，来事难图，势同往变。
现代文：何况现在南蛮仍然强大，北方妖贼频繁集结，未来的事难以预测，势头同于往日的变故。
English: What's more, the Southern Barbarians are still strong now, the Northern devils are frequently gathering, the future is difficult to predict, and the momentum is the same as in the past.

古文：脱暴勃忽起，振动关畿，四府羸卒，何以防拟？
现代文：如果暴乱忽然发生，震动关隘京郊，四府薄弱的兵士，凭什么防御?
English: If a riot suddenly occurs, shaking the suburbs of Beijing, the weak soldiers in the four prefectures, what defense can they rely on?

古文：平康之世，可以寄安，遗之久长，恐非善策。
现代文：太乎的时代，可以暂时安全，保留长久，恐怕不是好策略。
English: In an era of too much, it may not be a good strategy to be temporarily safe and retain it for a long time.

古文：如臣愚见，郎将领兵，兼总民职，省官实禄，于是乎在。
现代文：按臣下愚蠢的见解，中郎将领兵，兼掌治民职务，减省官员充实俸禄，于是乎兼而有之。
English: According to the foolish opinions of the vassals, the middle vassal would lead the soldiers and also hold the position of governing the people, and the provincial officials would reduce their salaries to make up for it, so they almost had both.

古文：求还依前增兵益号。将位既重，则念报亦深，军郡相依，则表里俱济。朝廷无四顾之忧，奸宄绝窥觎之望矣。 
现代文：请求仍依前奏增兵力添名号，将领地位加重后，思念报答的心也就加深了，军队和州郡相依赖，就能表裹都获利，朝廷没有四面张望的忧虑，作乱的人断绝窥伺的愿望了。 
English: The request is still in accordance with the prelude to increase the number of troops and add a name. After the status of generals has increased, the desire to repay has also deepened. The army and the state and county rely on each other to make a profit. The court does not have the anxiety of looking around, and the troublemakers have broken the desire to spy.

古文：卒不纳。
现代文：最终不被采纳。
English: In the end, it was not adopted.

古文：又以流人初至远镇，衣食无资，多有死者，奏并其妻子给粮一岁，从之。
现代文：又认为流民初到边远的军镇，衣食没有依靠，死亡的人多，上奏连同这些人的妻子儿女供给一年的粮食，采纳了他的意见。
English: He also thought that since the refugees had just arrived in the remote military town, they had no food or clothing to rely on, and many had died, so Shangso, together with the wives and children of these people, provided a year's supply of grain, and his opinion was adopted.

古文：寻以疾患，求解任。不许。
现代文：不久因患病，请求解除职务，不准许。
English: Soon, due to illness, he requested to be relieved of his duties and was not allowed to leave.

古文：萧衍于浮山断淮为堰，以灌寿春。
现代文：萧衍在浮山截断淮水作堰，来灌注寿春。
English: Xiao Yan cut off the Huai River in Fushan to build a weir and fill it with water for Shuchun.

古文：乃除使持节、大将军、大都督、南讨诸军事，勒众十万，将出彭宋。寻淮堰自坏，不行。
现代文：于是授任元澄为使持节、大将军、大都督、南讨诸军事，统领军队十万人，将要出兵彭宋地区，不久淮水堰自行毁坏，没有出动。
English: As a result, Yuancheng was appointed as the envoy of the Jisi Festival, the great general, the great governor, and the military of the Southern Expedition, commanding an army of 100,000 people, and was going to send troops to the Peng Song region. Soon, the Huai Water Weir self-destructed and did not go out.

古文：澄以北边镇将选举弥轻，恐贼虏窥边，山陵危迫，奏求重镇将之选，修警备之严。诏不从。
现代文：元澄以为北方边境镇将的选拔身份越来越低，恐怕贼寇窥伺边境，皇室陵墓危险，上奏请求慎重镇将的选拔，加强警卫的严密，诏书不采纳。
English: Motosumi thought that the status of the selection of the northern border town marshal was getting lower and lower, I was afraid that thieves and robbers would spy on the border, the imperial mausoleum was in danger, so he requested that the selection of the town marshal should be careful, and the security should be strengthened. The edict was not adopted.

古文：贼虏入寇，至于旧都，镇将多非其人，所在叛乱，犯逼山陵，如澄所虑。
现代文：贼寇进犯，到达旧都，镇将多不是合适人选，各处叛乱，侵犯逼迫陵墓，如同元澄所忧虑的。
English: When the bandits attacked and reached the old capital, most of the townspeople were not suitable candidates, and there were rebellions everywhere, invading and persecuting the mausoleum, just as Gencho was worried about.

古文：澄奏：都城府寺犹未周悉，今军旅初宁，无宜发众，请取诸职人及司州郡县犯十杖已上百鞭已下收赎之物，绢一匹，输砖二百，以渐修造。
现代文：元澄上奏都城官府守备还不周全，现在军事行动刚安定，不适宜调发民众，请求征集有职位的人以及司州郡县对犯有十杖以上一百鞭以下罪行的囚徒收取赎罪物品，纳绢一匹，输送砖二百块，逐渐修建。
English: Yuancheng reported that the capital's government offices were not well-guarded. Now that military operations were stable, it was not appropriate to dispatch civilians. He requested that people with positions be recruited, and that prisoners in Shizhou County who had committed crimes punishable by more than ten strokes of the cane and less than one hundred lashes of the whip were required to collect atonement items, pick up a donkey, transport two hundred bricks, and gradually build.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下诏听从他的建议。
English: He complied.

古文：太傅、清河王怿表奏其事，遂寝不行。
现代文：太傅、清河王元恽上奏疏阻止这件事，就停下来没有实行。
English: Taifu and Qinghe Wangyuan made a solemn appeal to stop this, but it was not carried out.

古文：澄又奏曰： 臣闻赏必以道，用防淫人之奸；罚不滥及，以戒良士之困。
现代文：元澄又上奏说： 臣下听说赏赐必依道德，来防止恶人的奸诈；惩罚不越轨施加，来免除良好人士的困苦。
English: Yuancheng also made a report, saying, "Our subjects have heard that rewards must be based on morality to prevent the treachery of evildoers, and punishments must be imposed without deviating from the norm to relieve the hardships of good people.

古文：刑者，侀也。
现代文：刑法，是成形之物。
English: Criminal law is a thing of mold.

古文：每垂三宥，秉律执请，不得已而用之。
现代文：每事常有三种从宽处理的情况，秉持律令执行赏罚，不得已然后使用。
English: There are often three kinds of lenient treatment in each case, upholding the law to implement rewards and punishments, and then using them as a last resort.

古文：是故小大之狱，察之以情；人一呼嗟，或亏王道。
现代文：所以大小案件，以实情考察，一人喊冤嗟叹，也亏损正道。
English: Therefore, in large and small cases, the investigation should be based on the facts. If one person laments the injustice, it is also a loss-making way.

古文：刑罚得失，乃兴废之所由也。
现代文：刑罚的得失，是兴衰产生的原因。
English: The gain or loss of the penalty is the cause of the rise and fall.

古文：窃闻司州牧、高阳王臣雍栲杀奉朝请韩元昭、前门下录事姚敬贤，虽因公事，理实未尽。
现代文：私下听说司州牧、高阳王臣元雍拷打杀死奉朝请韩元昭、前门下录事姚敬贤，虽然是因公事，道理实在不尽如此。
English: Privately, I heard that Sizhou Maki and Gaoyang Wang Zhen Yuan Yong were tortured and killed, and Han Yuan Zhao was invited to serve the North, and Yao Jing Xian was recorded under the front door. Although it was for official business, the reason is really not so.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：太平之世，草不横伐；行苇之感，事验隆周。
现代文：太平的时代，野草不横加砍伐，仁及草木的感觉，事情在刮兴盛时得以应验。
English: In times of peace, the weeds are not cut horizontally, and the feeling of benevolence and vegetation can be fulfilled when things are booming.

古文：若昭等状彰，死罪以定，应刑于都市，与众弃之；如其疑似不分，情理未究，不宜以三清九流之官杖下便死，轻绝民命，伤理败法。
现代文：如果韩元昭等人罪行昭彰，判定死罪，应在都市行刑，当众处死他们；如果他们有疑问的地方没有分辨，情理没有推究，不应在三教九流的官吏棍棒下死去，轻易断绝民众性命，损伤道理败坏法度。
English: If Han Yuan Zhao and others are found guilty and sentenced to death, they should be executed in the city, and they should be executed in public; if they do not distinguish where they have doubts and do not investigate the circumstances, they should not die under the sticks of officials of the three religions and nine schools, easily cut off the lives of the people, damage the reason and corrupt the law.

古文：往年州于大市鞭杀五人，及检赃状，全无寸尺。
现代文：往年元雍在州中于大市上用鞭子抽死五人，等到检查脏物，却没有一尺一寸。
English: In previous years, Yuan Yong used a whip to kill five people in the middle of the state in the big market, and when he checked the dirt, he did not have an inch.

古文：今复酷害，一至于此。朝野云云，咸怀惊愕。
现代文：今又残酷加害，到了这步田地、朝野议论纷纭，部心怀惊讶恐惧。
English: Now they are cruelly inflicting harm again. At this point, the field and the court are discussing various issues, and I am filled with surprise and fear.

古文：若杀生在下，虐专于臣，人君之权，安所复用？
现代文：如果杀人权在下属，暴虐专擅于臣下，君主的权力，又用在哪裹?
English: If murder is the prerogative of the subordinate, and tyranny the prerogative of the vassal, of what use is the power of the prince?

古文：自开古以来，明明之世，未闻斯比也。
现代文：自从远古以来，清明的时代，没有听到与这相比拟的。
English: Since time immemorial, the age of reason, nothing comparable has been heard.

古文：武王曰： 吾不以一人之命而易天下。 盖重民命也。
现代文：武王说： 我不冈一人的性命以换取天下，大概是看重民众的性命。
English: King Wu said: I do not care about the life of one person in exchange for the whole world, probably because I value the lives of the people.

古文：请以见事付廷尉推究，验其为劫之状，察其栲杀之理，使是非分明，幽魂获雪。 诏从之。
现代文：请求将现有事情交付廷尉推究，检验元雍威胁的情形，考察他拷打杀人的理由，使是非分明，死者的灵魂得到昭雪 诏令听从他的建议。
English: He requested that the current matter be referred to the imperial lieutenant to investigate, check the situation of Yuan Yong's threat, investigate the reasons for his torture and murder, clarify the rights and wrongs, and obtain the soul of the deceased, and ordered to follow his advice.

古文：澄当官而行，无所回避。
现代文：互澄依职责行事，没有什么回避。
English: We will act in accordance with our duties, and there will be no evasion.

古文：又奏垦田授受之制八条，甚有纲贯，大便于时。
现代文：又上奏垦田授受的制度八条，卜分有头绪条理，大为便利当时。
English: In addition, the eight-article system of awarding and receiving fields was introduced, and the points system was well organized, which was very convenient at the time.

古文：前来尚书文簿，诸曹须，则出借。
现代文：原来尚爵省的文簿，各官府需要，就借出去。
English: Originally, all government offices needed to borrow books from Shangzhuang Province.

古文：时公车署以理冤事重，奏请真案。
现代文：这时公车署因处理冤案事情重大，上奏请借原始档案。
English: At this time, the bus department was dealing with a grievance case and the matter was serious. Please refer to the original file.

古文：澄执奏以尚书政本，特宜远慎，故凡所奏事，阁道通之，盖以秘要之切，防其宣露。
现代文：互遥坚持上奏认为尚书省是行政的根本，特别应该深远谨慎，所以凡是奏告的事，以楼阁之间的道路相通报，大概是因秘密重要至极，防止宣扬泄露。
English: Mutual insistence on reporting that Shangshu Province is the foundation of administration, especially should be far-reaching caution, so all reported matters, with the road between the pavilions to inform, probably because the secret is extremely important, to prevent propaganda from leaking.

古文：宁有古制所重，今反轻之，内犹设禁，外更宽也？
现代文：哪有古代制度所看重，今日反而轻率，内部还设置禁令，对外却更放松的呢?
English: Is there any ancient system that was valued, but today is frivolous, with internal prohibitions, but more relaxed to the outside world?

古文：宜缮写事意，以付公车。
现代文：应该缮写事情大意，交付给公车署。
English: You should write down the gist of the matter and submit it to the bus department.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令听从他的意见？
English: He complied.

古文：西域嚈哒、波斯诸国各因公使，并遗澄骏马一匹。
现代文：西域噘嚏、波斯各国各自利用使者，部送给五遥一匹骏马。
English: Western countries and Persian countries each sent envoys, and the ministry sent a horse to Wuyao.

古文：澄请付太仆，以充国闲。
现代文：五澄请求交付太仆，以充实国家马厩。
English: Motosumi's request was handed over to the eunuch, and the money was put into the country's stables.

古文：诏曰： 王廉贞之德，有过楚相，可敕付厩，以成君子大哉之美。 
现代文：诏令说： 任城王廉洁忠贞的德行，超过楚国宰相，可下令交付马厩，以成全肘子博大的美德。 
English: The imperial court issued a decree: Ren Chengwang's integrity and loyalty exceeded that of Chu Xiangsun Shuxuan, and he could be entrusted with the stables to achieve the great beauty of a gentleman.

古文：御史中尉、东平王匡奏请取景明元年以来内外考簿、吏部除书、中兵勋案并诸殿最，欲以案校窃阶盗官之人，灵太后许之。
现代文：御史中尉、束平王疽匡上奏请求调用景明元年以来内外考核的簿录、吏部任命文书、中兵曹功劳簿和所有政绩记录，想用来核查窃取品级官职的人，玺左后准许了。
English: Lt. Mishi and Lt. Sokuping Wang Gangyong made a request to call up the records of the internal and external assessment since the first year of Jingming, the appointment documents of the personnel department, the merit book of the lieutenant-commander and all the records of the government, and wanted to use them to verify the person who stole the grade official position, which was later granted.

古文：澄表曰：臣闻三季之弊，由于烦刑；火德之兴，在于三约。
现代文：互迢上奏疏说：臣下听说三代末年的衰败，是由于烦碎的刑罚；火德的兴起。在于三条约定。
English: Mutually agreed upon, it is said that: the subjects heard that the decline of the last three generations was due to the harsh punishment; the rise of fire virtue. It is determined by the three treaties.

古文：是以老聃云： 法令滋彰，盗贼多有 ，又曰： 其政察察，其民缺缺 ，又曰： 天纲恢恢，疏而不漏 。
现代文：所以羞驰说 法令越分明，盗贼反倒越多 ，又说 政治严苛，民众就抱怨不满 ，又说 天网极为广大，稀疏却没有漏失 。
English: Therefore, Shichizhi said that the more clear the decrees are, the more thieves there are, and the harsher the politics are, the more dissatisfied the people are, and the sky net is extremely vast, sparse but not missing.

古文：是故欲求治本，莫若省事清心。
现代文：因此想寻求治理根本，不如减省事务清静内心。
English: Therefore, if you want to seek fundamental governance, it is better to reduce affairs and calm the heart.

古文：昔汉文断狱四百，几致刑措，省事所致也。
现代文：从前汉文帝断案四百例，几乎达到放置刑法，是减省事务所导致的。
English: In the past, 400 cases were dismissed by the Han Emperor, almost reaching the criminal law, which was caused by the reduction of provincial offices.

古文：萧曹为相，载其清静画一之歌，清心之本也。
现代文：萧何曹参为宰相，记载了他们清静统一的歌谣，是清静内心的根本。
English: Xiao He Cao San, as the prime minister, recorded their clear and unified songs, which is the foundation of a clear and calm heart.

古文：今欲求之于本，宜以省事为先，使在位群官，纂萧曹之心，以毗圣化。
现代文：现在想寻求根本，应以减省事务为首，使在位的群臣，继承萧何曹参的心愿，来辅助圣人的教化。
English: Now, if we want to seek the root cause, we should take the reduction of provincial affairs as the first step, so that the reigning ministers will inherit the wishes of Xiao He Cao San to assist the enlightenment of the saint.

古文：如此，则上下相安，远近相信，百司不怠，事无愆失。
现代文：这样，就会上下相安无事，远近信任，百官不懈怠，事情没有过失。
English: In this way, there will be no problems between the top and the bottom, trust from far and near, and the officials will not slack off, and there will be no mistakes.

古文：岂宜扰世教以深文，烹小鲜以烦手哉！
现代文：哪应援引法令条文来扰乱世间教化，频繁动手来烹小鱼呢?
English: Where should the provisions of the law be invoked to disrupt the world's indoctrination, frequent hands to cook small fish?

古文：臣窃惟景明之初暨永平之末，内外群官三经考课。
现代文：臣下私自以为景明初年到永平末年，内外官员三次经历考核。
English: From the first year of Jingming to the last year of Yongping, officials at home and abroad went through the assessment three times.

古文：逮延昌之始，方加黜陟。
现代文：到延昌初年，才加以升降。
English: It was not until the first year of Yanchang that they were promoted and demoted.

古文：五品以上，引之朝堂，亲决圣目；六品以下，例由敕判。
现代文：五品以上，在朝堂接见他们，由皇帝亲自决定；六品以下，依例由敕令宣布。
English: Above the fifth grade, it is decided by the emperor himself to receive them in the imperial hall; below the sixth grade, it is announced by imperial decree.

古文：自世宗晏驾，大宥三行，所以荡除故意，与物更始。
现代文：自从世宗逝世，大量宽宥三种行为，是用来消除旧过失，和百姓一道除旧布新。
English: Since the death of King Sejong, the three acts of forgiveness have been used to eliminate the old mistakes and make amends with the people.

古文：革世之事，方相穷核，以臣愚见，谓为不可。
现代文：过了一朝的事情，还要加以深究，依臣下的愚蠢见解，认为是不妥的。
English: After the morning's events, it is still necessary to investigate them in depth, and according to the stupid opinions of the subjects, it is considered to be improper.

古文：又尚书职分，枢机出纳。
现代文：另外尚书的职掌，是上传下达的机密事务。
English: In addition, Shosho's job is to upload confidential matters.

古文：昔魏明帝卒至尚书门，陈矫亢辞，帝惭而返。
现代文：从前魏明帝忽然到尚书省门前，陈矫言辞严厉，皇帝惭愧地返回。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Ming of Wei suddenly appeared in front of the gate of Shangshu Province. Chen Jiao spoke sternly, and the emperor returned with shame.

古文：夫以万乘之重，非所宜行，犹屈一言，惭而回驾，群官百司，而可相乱乎？
现代文：以皇帝的尊贵，不宜前往，还因一言而理屈，惭愧地返回。群官各府，而能相扰乱吗?
English: With the dignity of the emperor, it is not appropriate to go, but also because of a word and reason, ashamed to return.

古文：故陈平不知钱谷之数，邴吉不问僵道之死，当时以为达治，历代用为美谈。
现代文：所以陈平不知道钱谷的数额，邴吉不过问倒在路旁的死者，当时认为是大治，历代作为美谈。
English: Therefore, Chen Ping did not know the amount of Qiangu, but asked the dead who fell on the roadside. At that time, it was considered to be a great victory, and it was regarded as a beautiful story throughout the ages.

古文：但宜各守其职，思不出位，洁己以励时，靖恭以致节。
现代文：衹应各守自己的职责，思虑不出地位以外，纯洁自己来激励世人，谦虚恭敬来实现节操。
English: They should each adhere to their own duties, not think beyond their position, be pure themselves to inspire the world, and be humble and respectful to achieve self-discipline.

古文：又寻御史之体，风闻是司，至于冒勋妄考，皆有处别，若一处有风谣，即应摄其一簿，研检虚实。若差舛不同，伪情自露，然后绳以典刑，人孰不服？
现代文：又推究御史的体制，收集传闻是他们的职责，至于冒取功勋妄改考核结果，都有辨别之责，如一处有传闻，就应调集其簿录，研究检查真假，如果差误不相同，作假的情形自然暴露，然后绳之以法，人们有谁不服气?
English: They should also investigate the system of imperial history. It is their duty to collect rumors. As for taking credit for changing the assessment results, they all have the responsibility to distinguish. If there is a rumor, they should collect its records, study and check the truth and falsehood. If the errors are different, the situation of fraud will naturally be exposed, and then brought to justice. Who are the people who are not convinced?

古文：岂有移一省之案，取天下之簿，寻两纪之事，穷革世之尤，如此求过，谁堪其罪！
现代文：哪有调用整个尚书省的公文，收取天下的簿录，推寻两个朝代的事情，追究上一朝代的过失，这样寻找过错，谁能承受罪责?
English: Who can bear the guilt of calling up the entire official documents of the Shang and Song dynasties, collecting the book records of the whole world, investigating the affairs of two dynasties, investigating the faults of the previous dynasty, and searching for faults in this way?

古文：斯实圣朝所宜重慎也。
现代文：造实在是圣明的朝廷所应慎重的事。
English: This is really an important matter that should be handled carefully by the Holy Office!

古文：灵太后纳之，乃止。
现代文：垩主亘采纳了他的意见，于是作罢。
English: The Dowager Empress adopted his opinion and stopped the investigation.

古文：后迁司徒公，侍中、尚书令如故。
现代文：后来升为司徒公，侍中、尚书令照旧。
English: Later, he was reappointed as Motosumi to the position of Sotsuko, but he remained a chamberlain and a secretary.

古文：澄又表曰：
现代文：元澄又上奏疏说：
English: Motosumi also said:

古文：伏惟世宗宣武皇帝命将授旗，随陆启颡；运筹制胜，淮汉自宾。
现代文：世宗宣武皇帝任命将领授予旌旗，随包遁之类文臣叩头；在后方谋划而克敌制胜，淮水汉水自然宾服。
English: Emperor Shizong Xuanwu appointed generals to award the banner, followed by courtiers such as Bao Tong; in the rear to plan and defeat the enemy, Huai Shui Han Shui natural guests.

古文：节用劳心，志清六合，是故缵武修文，仍世弥盛。
现代文：节制用度费尽心思，立志肃清天地四方，所以继承武功兴立文教，接连几代更为强盛。
English: The temperance made great efforts, determined to purify the world in all directions, so he inherited the martial arts to establish literature and education, and successively several generations were more powerful.

古文：陛下当周康靖治之时，岂得晏安于玄默。
现代文：陛下处在周康王安定治理的时代，哪裹能够安逸静默?
English: Your Majesty is in the era of the stable governance of King Zhou Kang, how can you remain quiet?

古文：然取外之理，要由内强；图人之本，先在自备。
现代文：然而夺取境外的道理，关键在于内部强大；图取别人的根本，首先在于自己完备。
English: However, the key to conquering the outside world is to be strong inside; the key to conquering others is to be complete oneself.

古文：萧衍虽虐使其民，而窥觎不已。
现代文：萧衍虽然役使他的民众，却不住地窥伺我国。
English: Although Xiao Yan served his people, he kept spying on our country.

古文：若遇我虚疲，士民凋窘，贼衍年老志张，思播虺毒，此之弗图，恐受其病。
现代文：如果遇到我们空虚疲劳，官吏民众凋敝困苦，贼寇芦堑年纪衰老志向扩张，思虑播下歹毒的计谋，对这不考虑，恐怕会遭受祸害。
English: If we encounter emptiness and fatigue, officials and people are withered and impoverished, thieves and robbers are old and old and aspire to expand, and thoughts sow malicious schemes, if we do not consider this, I am afraid we will suffer disaster.

古文：伏惟陛下妙龄在位，圣德方升；皇太后总御天机，乾乾夕惕。
现代文：陛下年轻时在位，圣明德行正上升；皇太后总揽朝政，自强不息不敢怠慢。
English: His Majesty was young when he was on the throne, and his wisdom and virtue were on the rise; the Empress Dowager was always in charge of the government, and she did not dare to neglect self-improvement.

古文：若留意于负荷，忿车书之未一，进贤拔能，重官人之举；标赏忠清，旌养人之器；修干戈之用，畜熊虎之士；爱时鄙财，轻宝重谷，七八年间，陛下圣略方刚，亲王德干壮茂，将相膂力未衰，愚臣犹堪戎伍，荷戈带甲之众蓄锐于今，燕弧冀马之盛充牣在昔。又贼衍恶积祸盈，势不能久，子弟暗悖，衅逆已彰，乱亡之兆，灼然可见。
现代文：如果留心于肩上的负担，怨恨车轨文字没统一，提拔贤明有才能的人，重视官吏的推举；显扬赏赐忠诚清高的人，表彰修养正道者的器度；整修兵器，畜养勇猛的兵士；爱惜时间鄙视财产，看轻珍宝重视粮食。七八年间，陛下谋略英明血气方刚，亲王德行过人身强力壮，将相四肢力气没有衰弱，愚蠢的臣下还可进入军队，扛兵器披钟甲的部众在现在蓄积精锐，强盛的基地的弓冀地的马在从前充备盈满；另外贼寇盖堑罪恶累积祸害充斥，其势不能长久，子弟昏庸狂悖，叛逆的裂痕已经明显，混乱灭亡的征兆，清晰可见。
English: If you pay attention to the burden on your shoulders, resent the lack of uniformity of the track and text, promote the wise and talented people, attach importance to the election of officials; show the reward to the loyal and high-minded people, commend the etiquette of cultivating the righteous; refurbish weapons, breed brave soldiers; cherish time, despise property, look down on treasures, and value food. In the past seven or eight years, His Majesty has been a wise and courageous strategist, the prince has been a strong man, and the strength of the limbs has not weakened. Stupid subjects can still enter the army. The soldiers carrying weapons in bell-shaped armor are now accumulating

古文：兼弱有徵，天与不远，大同之机，宜须蓄备。
现代文：兼并弱小有征候，上天赐与已不远，统一的时机，应该要储备。
English: There are signs of a weak merger, and it is not far away by God's grace. The time for unification is at hand, and reserves should be made.

古文：昔汉帝力疾，讨灭英布；高皇卧病，亲除显达。
现代文：从前还童支撑病体，讨伐灭亡英查；产皇卧病在床，亲自除掉显达。
English: In the past, the emperor supported the sick body and fought against the investigation of the death of the emperor; the emperor was sick in bed and personally removed Xianda.

古文：夫以万乘之主，岂忘宴安，实以侵名乱正，计不得已。
现代文：然而近年以来，东西发生敌寇祸难，艰难忧患的产生，首尾相连接，虽然不久得以消灭，也大大损耗了财力。
English: However, in recent years, things have been plagued by the scourge of invaders, the emergence of hardships and sorrows, and although they were able to be eliminated soon, they have also greatly depleted financial resources.

古文：今宜慕二帝之远图，以肃宁为大任。然顷年以来，东西难寇，艰虞之兴，首尾连接，虽寻得翦除，亦大损财力。且饥馑之氓，散亡莫保；收入之赋不增，出用之费弥众；不爱力以悦民，无丰资以待敌，此臣所以夙夜怀忧，悚息不宁者也。
现代文：而且饥饿的民众，四散逃亡不能保全，收入的赋税不增添，支出的费用更加多，不爱惜力役来取悦民众，没有丰厚的资金来对付敌人，这是臣下日夜心怀忧虑，恐惧喘息不安宁的原因。倜易》说： 用什么来持守盛位?用仁人。
English: Moreover, hungry people, scattered and fleeing cannot be preserved, taxes on income do not increase, expenses are more expensive, people are not willing to work hard to please the people, and there is no abundant funds to deal with the enemy. This is the reason why the vassals are worried day and night, and fear makes them breathless and restless.

古文：《易》曰： 何以守位曰仁，何以聚人曰财。 
现代文：用什么来聚集仁人?
English: What do you use to bring people together?

古文：故曰：财者，非天不生，非地不长，非时不成，非人不聚。
现代文：用财物。 所以说：财物，没有天不能生，没有地不能长，没有时间不能成熟，没有人不能聚集。
English: Therefore it is said, "Without heaven, wealth cannot be born; without earth, wealth cannot grow; without time, wealth cannot mature; without man, wealth cannot be accumulated."

古文：生聚之由，如此其难；集人守位，若此之重。
现代文：生长聚集的由来，是如此的艰难；聚集仁人持守盛位，是如此的重要。
English: The origin of the growth and gathering is so difficult; the gathering of benevolent people to hold the high position is so important.

古文：兴替之道，焉可不虑？
现代文：兴衰的道理，怎可不考虑?
English: How can we not consider the principle of rise and fall?

古文：又古者使民，岁不过三日，食壮者之粮，任老者之智。
现代文：另外古代役使民众，一年不超过三天，吃壮年的粮食，用老年的智慧。
English: In addition, the ancient envoys made the people, no more than three days a year, eat the grain of the prime of life and use the wisdom of the old.

古文：此虽太平之法，难卒而因；然妨民害财，不亦宜戒！
现代文：这虽然是太平年代的做法，难以突然应用；然而妨碍民众损害财物，不也应该警惕吗?
English: Although this is the practice of the Taiping era, it is difficult to apply suddenly; however, should we not also be wary of preventing people from damaging property?

古文：今墉雉素修，厩库崇列，虽府寺胶塾，少有未周，大抵省府粗得庇憩理务，诸寺灵塔俱足致虔讲道。
现代文：现在高大的城墙用白绢装修，马厩府库高耸排列，虽然官府学校，稍微有些不周全，大体官府粗略可以庇身休息料理政务，各寺佛塔都足以表示诚意讲演佛经。
English: Now, the tall city walls are decorated with egrets, the stables and storehouses are lined up high, although the government schools are a little incomplete, the government can generally take a break from cooking and government affairs, and the Buddhist pagodas of each temple are enough to express sincerity and lecture Buddhist scriptures.

古文：唯明堂辟雍，国礼之大。
现代文：衹有明堂和辟雍，是国家礼仪的大宗。
English: It is a staple of the national etiquette to visit the Imperial Hall and the Imperial Pavilion.

古文：来冬司徒兵至，请筹量减彻，专力经营，务令早就。
现代文：来年冬天司徒的军队到来，请求筹划减少膳食撤去乐器，专心营造，务必使早曰建成。
English: The following winter, Stow's army arrived, requesting plans to reduce meals, remove musical instruments, and concentrate on construction, which must be completed as soon as possible.

古文：其广济数施之财，酬商互市之弊，凡所营造，自非供御切须，戎仗急要，亦宜微减，以务阜积，庶府无横损，民有全力。
现代文：多次广泛布施的财产，回报商人互相交易的弊害，凡是建造，除非是供给皇宫所必需，军队兵器所急用，也应略微减少，来致力于积累，各官府没有意外的损耗，民众有全部的精力。
English: The property that has been widely distributed many times, the return of the evils of merchants trading with each other, all construction, unless it is necessary to supply the royal palace, the urgent use of military weapons, should also be slightly reduced, to be committed to accumulation, the government departments have no unexpected loss, and the people have all the energy.

古文：夫食土簋而妫德昭，寝毕室而禹功盛，章台丽而楚力衰，阿宫壮而秦财竭，存亡之由，灼然可睹。
现代文：用瓦器盛饭而使舜的德行昭彰，住简陋的房子而使禹的功劳宏大，章台壮丽而楚国力量衰弱，阿房宫壮观而秦国财产枯竭，存亡的原因，清晰可见。
English: It is clear to see the reasons for the survival and demise of the Qin dynasty: the use of earthenware to serve meals to highlight the virtues of the Qin dynasty, the living in a humble house to magnify the merits of Yu, the magnificent Zhangdai to weaken the power of the State of Chu, the spectacular Afangu Palace to deplete the wealth of the State of Qin.

古文：愿思前王一同之功，畜力聚财，以待时会。
现代文：希望思考前代君王统一的功劳，积蓄力量聚集财物，来等待时机。
English: I hope to think about the achievements of the unification of the previous generation of monarchs, accumulate strength, gather wealth, and wait for the opportunity.

古文：灵太后锐于缮兴，在京师则起永宁、太上公等佛寺，功费不少，外州各造五级佛图。
现代文：玺立后专心一意地修缮兴建，在京城修建永空、太匕公等佛寺，工程费用不少，外地各州各修造五层的佛塔。
English: After his enthronement, he devoted himself single-mindedly to repair and construction, building Buddhist temples such as Yongkang and Taikong in Beijing, with considerable engineering costs, and building five-story pagodas in each of the outlying prefectures.

古文：又数为一切斋会，施物动至万计。
现代文：又多次举行僧俗都参加的斋会，施舍的财物动不动以万计数。
English: In addition, he often donates money and goods to various fasting associations, and the amount is in the tens of thousands.

古文：百姓疲于土木之功，金银之价为之踊上，削夺百官事力，费损库藏，兼曲赉左右，日有数千。
现代文：百姓为土木工程而疲劳，金银的价格为之猛涨，剥夺百官的力夫，浪费损耗库存，加上随意赏赐左右的人，每天有几千两。
English: The people are fatigued by civil engineering projects, the price of gold and silver has skyrocketed as a result, the power of hundreds of officials has been stripped away, stocks have been wasted and depleted, and people on both sides have been rewarded at will, amounting to several thousand taels per day.

古文：澄故有此表。
现代文：所以元澄有这个奏疏。
English: That's why Motosumi has this playbook.

古文：虽卒不从，常优答礼之。
现代文：虽然最后没有听从他的意见，时常好言回答尊敬他。
English: Although it was not finally accepted, the Reverend Mother often replied very politely and courteously.

古文：政无大小，皆引参决。
现代文：政事无论大小，都延请他参与决定。
English: He was invited to participate in the decision-making of all political affairs, large and small.

古文：澄亦尽心匡辅，事有不便于民者，必于谏诤，虽不见用，殷勤不已。内外咸敬惮之。
现代文：元澄也尽心辅佐，事情有不便利民众的，一定规劝，虽然不被采用，恳切不止，内外都尊敬畏惧他。
English: Motosumi also did his best to assist, and when things were not convenient for the people, he would certainly exhort them. Although he was not adopted, he was earnest and persistent, and he was respected and feared both at home and abroad.

古文：神龟二年薨，年五十三。
现代文：神龟二年逝世，时年五十三岁。
English: He died two years later, at the age of fifty-three.

古文：赙布一千二百匹、钱六十万、蜡四百斤，给东园温明秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭；大鸿胪监护丧事，诏百僚会丧；赠假黄钺、使持节、都督中外诸军事、太傅，领太尉公；加以殊礼，备九锡，依晋大司马、齐王攸故事；谥曰文宣王。
现代文：赠给布一千二百匹、钱六十万、蜡四百斤，赐给棺材、朝廷服装一套、衣服一套；大鸿胪监察料理丧事，诏令百官会合送葬；追赠假黄铁、使持节、都督中外诸军事、太傅，兼领太尉公；加授特殊礼仪，使用尊礼大臣的九种器物，依照晋国大司马、齐王司马攸的旧例；谧号为文宣王。
English: He was presented with twelve hundred horses of cloth, six hundred thousand dollars, four hundred pounds of wax, a coffin, a set of court attire, and a set of clothes; Dai Hongyi supervised the funeral, and ordered the funeral to be held by a committee of one hundred officials; he was posthumously presented with a fake yellow iron, an envoy, a military governor, a taifu, and a taifu; he was awarded a special etiquette, and used nine kinds of utensils of the honorable minister, in accordance with the old example of the grand steward of Jin Province, Qi Wang Sima You; his posthumous name was Wen Xuan Wang.

古文：澄之葬也，凶饰甚盛。
现代文：元澄安葬时，凶礼的装饰十分齐备。
English: When Motocho was buried peacefully, the decorations of the funeral rites were very complete.

古文：灵太后亲送郊外，停舆悲哭，哀动左右。
现代文：灵太后亲自送到郊外，停下丧车悲恸地哭泣，哀伤感动左右的人。
English: The Reverend Mother was personally taken to the suburbs, where she stopped the hearse and wept with grief, which moved people on both sides.

古文：百官会赴千余人，莫不歔欷。
现代文：百官会合奔丧的有一千多人，无不哀叹抽泣。
English: More than a thousand mourners gathered at the dignitaries' meeting, all of them wailing and sobbing.

古文：当时以为哀荣之极。
现代文：当时人认为丧礼隆重到极点。
English: At the time, it was considered the height of pomp and ceremony.

古文：第四子彝袭。
现代文：第四个儿子元彝继承爵位。
English: Motosumi's fourth son, Minoru, succeeded to his title.

古文：彝，字子伦，继室冯氏所生，颇有父风。
现代文：元彝，字子伦，是后妻冯氏所生，很有父亲的风度。
English: Yuan Qi, also known as Zi Lun, was born to his second wife, the Feng family, and had a fatherly demeanor.

古文：拜通直散骑常侍。及元叉专权，而彝耻于托附，故不得显职。
现代文：被任命为通直散骑常侍等到元叉专擅朝政，而元彝以请托依附为耻，所以不能得到显要的职位。
English: It wasn't until the Yuan dynasty that a Yuan general was appointed to the position of Zongzhi Sanzhijie Changzhi, while the Yuan dynasty was ashamed of asking for support, so they couldn't get a prominent position.

古文：庄帝初，河阴遇害，赠车骑将军、仪同三司、青州刺史。
现代文：庄帝初年，在河阴遇害，追赠他为车骑将军、仪同三司、青州刺史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was killed in Heyin, and he was posthumously awarded the titles of General of Chariot and Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Three Kingdoms, and Grand Historian of Qingzhou.

古文：谥曰文。
现代文：谧号为文。
English: His nickname is Wen.

古文：子度世，袭。
现代文：儿子度世，继承爵位。
English: After his son's death, he inherited the title.

古文：武定中，金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：武定年间，任金紫光禄大夫。
English: During the Wuding era, he was appointed as the doctor of Jin Ziguanglu.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：彝兄顺，字子和。
现代文：元彝的哥哥元顺，字子和。
English: Mototsune's older brother, Motoshin, and Kazuko.

古文：九岁师事乐安陈丰，初书王羲之《小学篇》数千言，昼夜诵之，旬有五日，一皆通彻。
现代文：九岁时拜乐安人陈丰为师，起初书写王羲之的《小学篇》几千字，日夜朗读，十五天后，全都通晓。
English: When he was nine years old, his teacher was Chen Feng from Bei Le'an. At first, he wrote several thousand words of Wang Xizhi's "Elementary School" and read it aloud day and night. Fifteen days later, he knew it all.

古文：丰奇之，白澄曰： 丰十五从师，迄于白首，耳目所经，未见此比。江夏黄童，不得无双也。 
现代文：陈丰认为他很奇特，对元澄说： 我十五岁跟随老师求学，直到头发变白，耳目所听所见，没见到同他相比的，江夏的黄童，不能没有和他一样的。 
English: Chen Feng thought he was very peculiar, and said to Yuancheng: I was fifteen years old and followed my teacher to school until my hair turned white. From what I have heard and seen, I have never seen anyone comparable to him. The Yellow Boy of Jiangxia cannot but be the same as him.

古文：澄笑曰： 蓝田生玉，何容不尔。 
现代文：元澄笑着说： 蓝田出产玉石，哪能不这样? 
English: Motosumi smiled and said, "Lantern raw gems, what's not to like!"

古文：十六，通《杜氏春秋》，恆集门生，讨论同异。
现代文：十六岁时，通晓《杜氏春秋》，时常聚集门徒，讨论书中的同和异。
English: At the age of sixteen, he was familiar with "Duji Spring and Autumn" and often gathered disciples to discuss the similarities and differences in the book.

古文：于时四方无事，国富民康，豪贵子弟，率以朋游为乐，而顺下帷读书，笃志爱古。
现代文：这时四方没有事变，国家富足民众康乐，豪强贵族的子弟，大都以成群交游为乐事，而元顺放下帐帷读书，专心爱好古籍。
English: At this time, there was no change in the four quarters. The country's affluent people enjoyed themselves, and the sons of powerful aristocrats mostly enjoyed traveling in groups. However, Yuan Shun put down the curtains to read and concentrated on his love of ancient books.

古文：性謇谔，淡于荣利，好饮酒，解鼓琴，每长吟永叹，吒咏虚室。
现代文：性格正直，不追求荣誉利益，喜好饮酒，懂得音乐，能够长篇吟诵，在空房中歌咏。
English: Honest character, does not pursue honor and profit, likes to drink, knows music, can recite for a long time, sings in an empty room.

古文：世宗时，上《魏颂》，文多不载。
现代文：世宗时，他献上《魏颂》，文章长不收录。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, he presented "Ode to the West," but the long article was not included.

古文：起家为给事中。
现代文：出仕为给事中。
English: He is in the middle of his first term in office.

古文：时尚书令高肇，帝舅权重，天下人士，望尘拜伏。
现代文：当时尚书令高肇，因是皇帝的舅父权势大，天下有名望的人，望见他车后的尘土就叩拜伏地。
English: At that time, Shang Shuling Gaozhao, because he was the powerful uncle of the emperor and a famous person in the world, saw the dust behind his car and bowed to Voldemort.

古文：顺曾怀刺诣肇门，门者以其年少，答云： 在坐大有贵客 ，不肯为通。
现代文：元顺曾带著名帖前往高肇门前，守门人因他年纪轻，回答说 在座的有很多贵重的客人 ，不肯为他通报。
English: Yuan Shun once brought a famous postcard to Gaozhao's front door, but the gatekeeper, because he was young, replied that there were many valuable guests present and refused to inform him.

古文：顺叱之曰： 任城王兒，可是贱也！ 
现代文：元顺喝斥他说： 任城王的儿子，难道是卑贱的吗? 
English: Yuan Shun shouted at him, "Is the son of the king of the city a lowly person?

古文：及见，直往登床，捧手抗礼，王公先达，莫不怪慴，而顺辞吐傲然，若无所睹。
现代文：等到见面，直接上前登上坐床，拱手行对等礼，王公前辈，无不奇怪恐惧，而元顺谈吐高傲，好似没有见到什么。
English: When they met, they went straight to the bed and bowed to each other. Wang Gong's predecessors were all strangely afraid, while Yuan Shun spoke proudly, as if he hadn't seen anything.

古文：肇谓众宾曰： 此兒豪气尚尔，况其父乎！ 
现代文：高肇对宾客们说： 这个孩子的豪气尚且如此，何况是他的父亲呢? 
English: Gao Zhao then said to the guests: Such a small child is still so strong-willed, not to mention his father!

古文：及出，肇加敬送之。澄闻之，大怒，杖之数十。
现代文：等到出门，高肇更为恭敬地送他元澄听说后，大发脾气，打了他几十棒。
English: After hearing that Gao Zhao gave him a more respectful send-off than Yuan Cheng, he lost his temper and beat him with dozens of sticks.

古文：后超转中书侍郎，俄迁太常少卿。
现代文：后来越级改任中书侍郎，不久调任太常少卿。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of junior secretary, and soon he was transferred to the position of junior secretary.

古文：以父忧去职，哭泣呕血，身自负土。
现代文：因父亲逝世离职，哭泣呕出鲜血，亲自背土筑坟。
English: He left his job due to his father's death, wept and vomited blood, and dug his own grave.

古文：时年二十五，便有白发，免丧抽去，不复更生，世人以为孝思所致。
现代文：时年二十五岁，就有了白头发，丧期满后拔掉，不再长出来，世人以为是孝顺哀思所导致。
English: At that time, he was only twenty-five years old, but he already had white hair. When the mourning period was over, he plucked out the white hair, and it no longer grew out. The world believed that it was due to his filial piety.

古文：寻除给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：不久授任他为给事黄门侍郎。
English: He was soon appointed as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain.

古文：时领军元叉威势尤盛，凡有迁授，莫不造门谢谒。
现代文：这时领军元叉威风权势格外大，凡被任命之人，无不登门道谢谒见。
English: At this time, the leader of the army, Yuan Zhaoxing, was at the height of his power, and everyone who was promoted to a higher position would come to his door to ask for a meeting.

古文：顺拜表而已，曾不诣叉。
现代文：元顺上奏疏而已，竟不前往元叉那裹。
English: Yuan Shun only sent a greeting card, but never went to meet Yuan Zhao.

古文：叉谓顺曰： 卿何谓聊不见我？ 
现代文：元叉对元顺说： 你为什么不姑且见见我? 
English: Yuan Zha said to Yuan Shun: Why don't you come and see me?

古文：顺正色曰： 天子富于春秋，委政宗辅，叔父宜以至公为心，举士报国，如何卖恩，责人私谢，岂所望也！ 
现代文：元顺严肃地说： 天子年纪很轻，把政事托付给宗室辅佐，叔父应该心中大公无私，推举官吏报答国家，为什么出卖恩情?要求别人私下感谢，哪裹是人们所期望的呢? 
English: Yuan Shun said seriously: Tianzi is very young, entrusting the government affairs to the ancestral assistant, the uncle should be selfless in his heart, electing officials to repay the country, why betray the favor? Asking others to thank them privately, what is it that people expect?

古文：至于朝论得失，顺常鲠言正议，曾不阿旨，由此见惮。
现代文：在朝廷讨论政事得失时，元顺时常直言评议，竞不迎合旨意，因此被人畏惧。
English: When discussing the merits and demerits of political affairs in the imperial court, Yuan Shun often commented bluntly and did not pander to the will, so he was feared.

古文：出除平北将军、恆州刺史。
现代文：外任为平北将军、恒州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the general of Pingbei and the chief historian of Hengzhou.

古文：顺谓叉曰： 北镇纷纭，方为国梗，桑乾旧都，根本所系，请假都督，为国捍屏。 
现代文：元顺对元叉说： 北方军镇纷扰，正为国家灾祸，桑干旧都城，是根本所在，请求赐予都督，为国家捍卫藩屏。 
English: Yuan Shun said to Yuan Zha: The disturbance of the military towns in the north is a national disaster, and the old capital city of Zangan is the fundamental place. He asked to be given the governor to defend Hanping for the country.

古文：叉心疑难，不欲授以兵官。谓顺曰： 此朝廷之事，非我所裁。 
现代文：元叉心中疑虑为难，不想授给他军中职务，对元顺说： 这是朝廷的事情，不是我所裁断的。 
English: Doubts plagued the mind of Yuan Shik, who did not want to give him a position in the army. He said to Yuan Shun, "This is a matter for the imperial court, not for me to decide."

古文：顺曰： 叔父既握国柄，杀生由己，自言天之历数应在我躬，何得复有朝廷也！ 
现代文：元顺说： 叔父掌握国家大权，生死出自本人，自己说上天的命运应在我身上，哪能还有朝廷? 
English: Yuan Shun said, "My uncle wields the power of the state, his life and death come from himself, he said that the fate of heaven should be on me, how can there still be an imperial court?

古文：叉弥忿惮之。
现代文：元叉更愤恨畏惧他。
English: After hearing this, Yuan Xuan became even more angry and fearful.

古文：转为安东将军、齐州刺史。
现代文：改任元顺为安东将军、齐州刺史。
English: Yuan Shun was reappointed as General Anton, and Qi Zhou was appointed as Sisi.

古文：顺自负有才，不得居内，每怀郁怏，形于言色。遂纵酒欢娱，不亲政事。
现代文：元顺自恃有才能，不能在京城任职，时常心中忧闷不舒畅，表现在言语脸色上，就纵情饮酒狂欢作乐，不亲自料理政事。
English: Yuan Shun considered himself too talented to hold office in the capital. He was often depressed and unhappy, which was reflected in his facial expression. He indulged in drinking and carousing, and did not personally attend to political affairs.

古文：叉解领军，徵为给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：元叉解除领军，朝廷征元顺入京任给事黄门侍郎。
English: Yuan Zha was relieved of the leadership of the army, and the imperial court appointed Yuan Shun to Beijing as the Yellow Gate Attendant.

古文：亲友郊迎，贺其得入。
现代文：亲戚朋友到郊外迎接，祝贺他能入京。
English: His relatives and friends went to the suburbs to welcome him and congratulate him on his appointment to the post.

古文：顺曰： 不患不入，正恐入而复出耳。 
现代文：元顺说： 不担心不进入，衹恐怕进入了又外出。 
English: Yuan Shun said, "I'm not worried about not entering the imperial court, I'm worried about entering and coming back!"

古文：俄兼殿中尚书，转侍中。
现代文：不久兼殿中尚书，改任侍中。
English: Soon he was also appointed to the post of courtier in the palace, and then to the post of chamberlain.

古文：初，中山王熙起兵讨元叉，不果而诛，及灵太后反政，方得改葬。
现代文：当初，中山王元熙起兵讨伐元旦，不成功而被杀，等到灵太后重掌大权，才得以改葬。
English: At first, King Yuanxi of Zhongshan raised an army to fight on New Year's Day, but he was not successful and was killed. It was not until the Empress Dowager regained power that he was able to be reburied.

古文：顺侍坐西游园，因奏太后曰： 臣昨往看中山家葬，非唯宗亲哀其冤酷，行路士女，见其一家七丧，皆为潸然，莫不酸泣。 
现代文：元顺在西游园侍奉同座，就上奏太后说： 臣下昨天前去观看中山王家中的葬礼，不仅同宗亲属悲伤他的冤屈惨痛，过路的男男女女，见到他一家七人丧命，都为之伤心，无不辛酸地哭泣。 
English: When Yuan Shun was serving at the same table in the West Garden, he said to the Dowager Empress: "Yesterday, your vassals went to watch the funeral at the home of King Zhongshan. Not only were the relatives of the same family saddened by his grievous wrongdoing, but the men and women passing by were saddened and wept bitterly when they saw that seven members of his family had died.

古文：叉妻时在太后侧，顺指之曰： 陛下奈何以一妹之故，不伏元叉之罪，使天下怀冤！ 
现代文：元叉的妻子这时在太后旁边，元顺指着她说： 陛下为什么因为一个妹妹的缘故，不治元叉的罪，使天下的人心怀冤屈? 
English: At this time, Yuan Zha's wife was standing next to the empress dowager, and Yuan Shun pointed to her and said, "Your Majesty, why did you not cure Yuan Zha's sin for the sake of a younger sister, causing the people of the world to harbor grievances?

古文：太后默然不语。
现代文：太后沉默不语。
English: The Reverend Mother was silent, not saying a word.

古文：就德兴反于营州，使尚书卢同往讨之，大败而返。
现代文：就德兴在营州反叛，派尚书卢同前往讨伐他，大败而回。
English: As for Dexing's rebellion in Yingzhou, he sent Shangshu Lu to fight him, but he was defeated and returned.

古文：属侍中穆绍与顺侍坐，因论同之罪。
现代文：遇上侍中穆绍和元顺侍奉交谈，于是论定卢同的罪过。
English: At this time, it just so happened that the attendants, Musao and Yuan Shun, were both sitting next to the Empress Dowager, discussing the disposition of Lu Tong's culpability.

古文：同先有近宅借绍，绍颇欲为言。
现代文：卢同先前有近处的房屋借给穆绍，穆绍很想为卢同说话。
English: Rutong had previously lent Musho a nearby house, and Musho was eager to speak for Rutong.

古文：顺勃然曰： 卢同终将无罪！ 
现代文：元顺生气地说： 卢同最终将没有罪! 
English: Yuan Shun said angrily, "In the end, Rutong will not be guilty!"

古文：太后曰： 何得如侍中之言？ 
现代文：太后说： 怎么能像侍中所说的? 
English: The Reverend Mother said, "How could a chamberlain say such a thing?"

古文：顺曰： 同有好宅与要势侍中，岂虑罪也？ 
现代文：元顺说： 卢同有优等的房屋供给显要有势力的侍中，哪里担忧有罪呢? 
English: Yuan Shun said: Lu Tong gave a good house to a powerful chamberlain, is he still afraid of being punished?

古文：绍惭，不敢复言。
现代文：穆绍惭愧，不敢再说。
English: Moussaoui was so ashamed that he no longer dared to speak for him.

古文：灵太后颇事妆饰，数出游幸。
现代文：灵太后很爱打扮，多次出宫游玩。
English: The Dowager Empress loved to dress up and went out of the palace many times to play.

古文：顺面诤曰： 《礼》，妇人夫丧，自称未亡人，首去珠玉，衣不被纟采。
现代文：元顺当面规劝说： 按礼制，妇人的丈夫去世，自称为未亡人，头上去掉珠玉，不穿丝织衣物。
English: Yuan Shun persuaded her face-to-face: According to the etiquette, the woman's husband died, she called herself a widow, removed the jewels from her head, and did not wear silk clothing.

古文：陛下母临天下，年垂不惑，过甚修饰，何以示后世？ 
现代文：陛下以母后统御天卜，年近四十，过分地打扮，拿什么给后代看? 
English: His Majesty, who is nearly forty years old, dressed excessively as his mother, the Empress Dowager Tianbu, what does he show to future generations?

古文：灵太后惭而不出。
现代文：灵太后惭愧而不出车门。
English: Embarrassed, the Reverend Mother did not get out of the car.

古文：还入宫，责顺曰： 千里相徵，岂欲众中见辱也！ 
现代文：返回进宫后，责备元顺说： 千里以外征召你回来，哪裹是想当众受辱呢? 
English: After returning to the palace, he reproached Yuan Shun and said, "I called you back from thousands of miles away. Why do you want to be humiliated in public?

古文：顺曰： 陛下盛服炫容，不畏天下所笑，何耻臣之一言乎？ 
现代文：元顺说： 陛下身穿华丽服装炫耀容貌，不怕为天下人所讥笑，为什么以臣下的一句话而耻辱呢? 
English: Yuan Shun said: Your Majesty wears gorgeous clothes to show off your appearance, and is not afraid of being ridiculed by the world. Why should you be humiliated by a word from a subject?

古文：初，城阳王徽慕顺才名，偏相结纳。
现代文：当初，城阳王元徽仰慕元顺的才华名声，出乎寻常地加以结交。
English: At first, King Yuanhui of Chengyang admired Yuan Shun's talent and fame, and befriended him in an unusual way.

古文：而广阳王渊奸徽妻于氏，大为嫌隙。
现代文：而广阳王元渊奸污元徽的妻子于氏，大有矛盾。
English: However, Guangyang Wang Yuan Yuan's wife, Yu Shi, who betrayed and defiled Yuan Hui, is a big contradiction.

古文：及渊自定州被徵，入为吏部尚书，兼中领军。
现代文：等到元渊从定州被征召，入京任吏部尚书，兼中领军。
English: When Motoyasu was conscripted from Dingzhou, he went to Beijing to serve as the secretary of the cadre department and the leader of the middle army.

古文：顺为诏书，辞颇优美。
现代文：元顺写作诏书，言辞很优美。
English: Yuan Shun wrote the imperial edict, and his words were very elegant.

古文：徽疑顺为渊左右，由是与徐纥间顺于灵太后，出顺为护军将军。
现代文：元徽怀疑元顺被元渊所支配，因此和盒纬在灵太后面前离间亘岖，调出五妪任护军将军、太常卿。
English: Yuan Hui suspected that the Yuan Shun was dominated by the Yuan Yuan, so he and Cao Wei were far apart in front of the Empress Dowager, and he appointed Wu Xi as the General of the Guards and the Grand Admiral.

古文：太常卿顺奉辞于西游园，徽、纥侍侧，顺指之谓灵太后曰： 此人魏之宰嚭，魏国不灭，终不死亡。 
现代文：元顺在西游园向灵太后进言，元徽、徐纥在旁边侍奉，元顺指着元徽对灵左盾说： 这个人是蕴迩的车茵，委蝈不减掉，终归不死亡。 
English: In the West Garden, Yuan Shun gave a speech to the Dowager Empress Dowager, with Yuan Hui and Xu Yao serving at his side. Pointing to Yuan Hui, Yuan Shun said to Ling Zuo Dun, "This person is the car of Yunyang, he will not lose his title, and he will not die."

古文：纥胁肩而出。
现代文：徐纥缩敛肩膀而出去。
English: Xu Yao shrugged his shoulders and went out.

古文：顺遂抗声叱之曰： 尔刀笔小人，正堪为几案之吏，宁应忝兹执戟，亏我彝伦！ 
现代文：元顺高声呵斥他说： 你这耍笔杆的小人，祇可做文案小官，哪应不称职地任这侍卫官，亏损我朝的法度? 
English: Yuan Shun shouted at him in a loud voice, "You, a petty person who plays with a pen, can only be a clerk. Why should you be incompetently appointed as a bodyguard and lose the authority of my dynasty?

古文：遂振衣而起。
现代文：于是抖动衣服而起身。
English: That's when things really took off.

古文：灵太后默而不言。
现代文：灵太后沉默不出声。
English: The Reverend Mother was silent and did not speak.

古文：时追论顺父顾托之功，增任城王彝邑二千户，又析彝邑五百户以封顺，为东阿县开国公。
现代文：这时追论元顺的父亲受遣命辅政的功劳，增加任坦逞正艺的食邑二千户，又分出元彝的食邑五百户来封给元顺，为东阿县开国公。
English: At this time, the father of Yuan Shun was awarded the merit of being sent to assist the government, adding two thousand households in the food village of Ren Tan, and five hundred households in the food village of Yuan Xuan were allocated to Yuan Shun, as the founding father of Donga County.

古文：顺疾徽等间之，遂为《蝇赋》曰：
现代文：互岖愤恨越等人离间他，就撰作《蝇赋》说：往。
English: When the mutual resentment of the two parties caused more and more people to leave him, he wrote "The Fly" and said, "Go."

古文：余以仲秋休沐，端坐衡门，寄相琴书，托情纸翰。而苍蝇小虫，往来床几。疾其变白，聊为赋云：
现代文：我在仲秋时节休息沐浴，端庄地坐在简陋的房屋中，寄托心思于琴弦书法，用纸笔抒发情怀，可是苍蝇小虫，来往于坐榻几案间，愤恨它们的变幻莫测，于是作赋说：大道遥远，云气广阔。
English: In the mid-autumn season, I rested and bathed, sat in a humble house, and put my heart into chord calligraphy, using paper and pen to express my feelings. However, the small flies, coming and going between several rooms, resented their vagaries, so I made a fable: the road is far away, the clouds are vast.

古文：遐哉大道，廓矣洪氛。肇立秋夏，爰启冬春。
现代文：始立秋夏，开启冬春。
English: Autumn and summer begin, and winter and spring begin.

古文：既含育于万性，又刍狗而不仁。
现代文：既孕育万物，又以万物为刍草狗畜而无所谓仁慈。
English: Not only does it give birth to all things, but it also treats all things as weeds and beasts without any mercy.

古文：随因缘以授体，齐美恶而无分。
现代文：依据成因条件来授予事物的本体，同等看待美好丑恶而不加区分。
English: According to the conditions of cause and effect, the essence of things is awarded, and the beautiful and the ugly are treated equally without distinction.

古文：生兹秽类，靡益于人。
现代文：产生了这种污浊的物类，对人没有益处。
English: The species that produced this filth is of no use to humans.

古文：名备群品，声损众伦。
现代文：名称列在各种物类中，声誉却损伤各种类别。
English: Names are listed in categories, but reputations tarnish categories.

古文：欹胫纤翼，紫首苍身。
现代文：倾斜的小腿细微的翅膀，紫色的头部青色的身子。
English: Sloping lower legs, wispy wings, purple head, blue body.

古文：飞不能迥，声若远闻。
现代文：不能飞到远处，声音如远处传来。
English: Can't fly far, sounds like a distant chorus.

古文：点缁成素，变白为黑。
现代文：沾染黑色成白色，改变白色为黑色。
English: Staining black to white, changing white to black.

古文：寡爱兰芳，偏贪秽食。
现代文：很少喜爱兰花芬芳，格外地贪恋污浊食品。
English: They rarely like the fragrance of orchids, and are particularly greedy for dirty food.

古文：集桓公之尸，居平叔之侧。
现代文：聚集在桓公的尸体上，居住在平叔的旁边。
English: They gathered on the corpse of Huan Gong and lived next to Uncle Ping.

古文：乱鸡鸣之响，毁皇宫之饰。
现代文：扰乱鶸叫的声音，毁坏皇宫的修饰。
English: Disturbing the sound of howling, destroying the decoration of the palace.

古文：习习户庭，营营榛棘。
现代文：飞翔门户庭院，来往于丛木荆棘。
English: Flying through the gate courtyard, passing through thickets of thorns.

古文：反覆往还，譬彼谗贼。
现代文：反复往返，如同那谗佞的贼寇。
English: Back and forth, back and forth, back and forth, back and forth, back and forth.

古文：肤受既通，谮润罔极。
现代文：体肤受够污浊，谗毁的影响没有极限。
English: The body and skin are dirty enough, and there is no limit to the effects of pollution.

古文：缉缉幡幡，交乱四国。
现代文：喳喳嚼舌根，交相扰乱遍四方。
English: They chew the roots of the tongue and disturb each other all over the four directions.

古文：于是妖姬进，邪士来，圣贤拥，忠孝摧。
现代文：于是妖冶的女子进宫，邪恶的士人来朝，圣贤被壅塞，忠孝遭摧残。
English: As a result, a demonic woman entered the palace, evil nobles came to the court, saints and sages were banished, and loyalty and filial piety were destroyed.

古文：周昌拘于牖里，天乙囚于夏台。
现代文：周昌拘留在牖里，天乙囚禁在夏台。
English: Zhou Chang was detained in Yili, while Tianyi was imprisoned in Xatai.

古文：伯奇为之痛结，申生为之蒙灾。
现代文：伯奇为之痛心疾首，申生为之蒙受灾祸。
English: Burch suffered a broken heart and head, and Shen Sheng suffered a disaster.

古文：《鸱鸮》悲其室，《采葛》惧其怀。
现代文：《鸱鵾》悲伤被毁掉房子，《采葛》抒发思念的情怀。
English: "" is sad because the house was destroyed, and "采葛" expresses the feelings of longing.

古文：《小弁》陨其涕，灵均表其哀。
现代文：《小弁》中流下辛酸的眼泪，灵均表达出他的悲哀。
English: Shedding tears of bitterness in Xiao Wen, Ling Jun expressed his sorrow.

古文：自古明哲犹如此，何况中庸与凡才！
现代文：自古以来明达有才智的人尚且如此，何况是中等和平凡的人呢?
English: This has been the case since time immemorial for the enlightened and intelligent, let alone for the mediocre and the ordinary.

古文：若夫天生地养，各有所亲：兽必依地，鸟亦凭云。
现代文：上天生成大地养育，各自有所亲近。野兽必定依凭大地，鸟也倚托云彩。
English: Heaven created the earth and nurtured it, and they are close to each other. Beasts must rely on the earth, and birds also rely on the clouds.

古文：或来仪以呈祉，或自扰而见文。
现代文：有的飞来预示吉祥，有的自己扰乱而显现文采。
English: Some fly to foreshadow auspicious, some disturb themselves and appear poetic.

古文：或负图而归德，或衔书以告真。
现代文：有的背着图籍而归向仁德，有的衔来文书而预告天意。
English: Some return to benevolence with a book on their back, while others herald the will of heaven with a title.

古文：或夭胎而奉味，或残躯以献珍。
现代文：有的胎中夭折而供奉美味，有的伤残身躯而献上佳肴。
English: Some of them died in the womb and were offered delicacies, while others were presented with delicacies for their mutilated bodies.

古文：或主皮而兴礼，或牢豢以供神。
现代文：有的着重用皮来兴立礼制，有的栏圈豢养来供奉神灵。
English: Some emphasize the use of skins to establish a ritual system, while others raise banners to offer to the gods.

古文：虽死生之异质，俱有益于国人。
现代文：虽然生死有不同的性质，都有利于国家百姓。
English: Although life and death have different natures, both are beneficial to the people of the country.

古文：非如苍蝇之无用，唯构乱于蒸民。
现代文：不像苍蝇没有用处，衹会给百姓制造混乱。
English: Unlike flies, which are useless, maggots can wreak havoc on civilians.

古文：遂属疾在家，杜绝庆吊。后除吏部尚书，兼右仆射。
现代文：于是托病在家中休养，断绝喜事哀事的来后来授任吏部尚书，兼右仆射。
English: As a result, he took sick leave to recuperate at home, and after breaking the cycle of joy and sorrow, he was later awarded the post of secretary, and also the post of right-hand man.

古文：及上省，登阶向榻，见榻甚故，问都令史徐仵起。
现代文：等到前往尚书省，登上台阶朝坐榻走去，见坐榻很陈旧，询问都令史徐仵起。
English: When he went to do his work in the cadre department, climbed the steps and walked to the bed, he saw that the bed was very old, so he scolded Shi Xu to get up.

古文：仵起曰： 此榻曾经先王坐。 
现代文：仵起说： 这个坐榻先王曾经坐过。 
English: Xu Bingqi said: This couch was once sat on by the former king.

古文：顺即哽塞，涕泗交流，久而不能言，遂令换之。
现代文：元顺当即悲叹而气结喉塞，鼻涕眼泪交相流下，很久不能说话，于是派人换走坐榻。
English: Mr. Yuan's throat immediately choked up, tears and snot ran down his face, and he couldn't speak for a long time, so he asked someone to change his bed.

古文：时三公曹令史朱晖，素事录尚书、高阳王雍，雍欲以为廷尉评，频请托顺，顺不为用。
现代文：当时三公曹令史朱晖，一向侍奉绿尚书事、高阳王元雍，元雍想委任他为廷尉评，接连嘱托元顺，元顺不任用他。
English: At that time, the three brothers ordered Shi Zhuqi, who had always served the green Shang Shujie and the high Yang Wang Yuan Yong. Yuan Yong wanted to appoint him as a courtier, and successively ordered to entrust him to Yuan Shun, but Yuan Shun did not appoint him.

古文：雍遂下命用之，顺投之于地。
现代文：元雍就下命令任用他，元顺把元雍的令文丢到地上。
English: Yuan Yong ordered that Yuan Shun must be appointed. Yuan Shun threw Yuan Yong's order to the ground. After hearing this, Yuan Yong flew into a rage.

古文：雍闻之，大怒，昧爽坐都，召尚书及丞郎毕集，欲待顺至，于众挫之。
现代文：元雍听说后，大发脾气，清晨坐在都厅中，召唤尚书和丞郎全体集合，要等待元顺到来，在众人面前折辱他。
English: The next morning, he sat in the hall of the capital and called together all the officials, including Shang Shulun, his son-in-law, and his son-in-law, to prepare for when Yuan Shun arrived and to publicly give him orders.

古文：顺日高方至，雍攘袂抚几而言曰： 身，天子之子，天子之弟，天子之叔，天子之相，四海之内，亲尊莫二，元顺何人，以身成命，投弃于地！ 
现代文：元顺在太阳升到很高时才到来，元雍揎袖捋臂手抚几案说： 我，是天子的儿子，天子的弟弟，天子的叔父，天子的宰相，四海之内，亲近尊贵没有第二个人可比，元顺是什么人，竟将我既定的命令，丢弃在地上? 
English: Yuan Shun did not arrive until the sun was very high in the sky. Yuan Yong tugged his sleeve, rubbed his arm and stroked his hand several times, saying: I am the son of the son of heaven, the brother of the son of heaven, the uncle of the son of heaven, the prime minister of the son of heaven. Within the four seas, there is no second person comparable to the closeness and dignity. What kind of person is Yuan Shun, who has thrown my established order on the ground?

古文：顺须鬓俱张，仰面看屋，愤气奔涌，长歔而不言。
现代文：元顺的胡须鬓发都张开来，仰脸看着屋顶，愤怒的气色涌动，长叹而不说话。
English: Yuan Shun immediately stood up with his hair standing on end, his anger surging in his chest. He did not speak for a long time.

古文：久之，摇一白羽扇，徐而谓雍曰： 高祖迁宅中土，创定九流，官方清浊，轨仪万古。
现代文：很久，摇起一把白羽毛扇，慢慢地对元雍说： 高祖迁都到中原，创立九等职位，官员于是有清流浊流，是万代的规则。
English: After a long time, he shook a white feather fan and slowly said to Yuan Yong: Gaozhu moved the capital to the Central Plains, creating a nine-stream official system, distinguishing between clear flow and turbulent flow, as a custom for all time.

古文：而朱晖小子，身为省吏，何合为廷尉清官！
现代文：而朱晖小人，身为省中小吏，哪裹配做廷尉清流官员?
English: But Zhu Xi villain, as a provincial middle- and lower-ranking official, who is best suited to be a courtier and clear-stream official?

古文：殿下既先皇同气，宜遵成旨，自有垣规而复逾之也。 
现代文：殿下既是先皇的同胞兄弟，应该遵循既定旨意，自然有矮墙而再翻过去。 
English: His Royal Highness, as a brother of the former emperor, should follow the established will and naturally climb over the low wall.

古文：雍曰： 身为丞相、录尚书，如何不得用一人为官？ 
现代文：元雍说： 我做丞相、录尚书事，为什么不能任用一个人为官? 
English: Yuan Yong said, "As I am the prime minister and the chief secretary, how can I not appoint a person as an official?"

古文：顺曰： 庖人虽不治庖，尸祝不得越樽俎而代之。
现代文：元顺说： 厨师虽然不料理膳食，掌管祭祀的人不能越过礼器而代替厨师。
English: Yuan Shun said: Although the chef does not prepare the meal, the person in charge of the sacrificial rites cannot go beyond the ceremonial utensils and replace the chef.

古文：未闻有别旨，令殿下参选事。 
现代文：没有听说有另外的诏令，派殿下参与任免事宜。 
English: I have not heard of any other edict to send His Royal Highness to take part in the appointment and dismissal.

古文：顺又厉声曰： 殿下必如是，顺当依事奏闻！ 
现代文：元顺又大声地说： 殿下一定要这样做的话，我将依据事实上奏皇上! 
English: Genshun said loudly again, "If Your Imperial Highness must do this, I will do it on the basis of fact!"

古文：雍遂笑而言曰： 岂可以朱晖小人，便相忿恨。 
现代文：元雍于是笑着说： 哪能因朱晖一个小人，就互相气愤怨恨? 
English: Yuan Yong then smiled and said, "How can we be angry and resentful with each other because Zhu Xi is a small person?

古文：遂起，呼顺入室，与之极饮。
现代文：就起身，唤元顺进房内，和他痛快地饮酒。
English: He then stood up and called for Yuan Shun to come into the inner room with him, set up a banquet and drink with him.

古文：顺之亢毅不挠，皆此类也。
现代文：元顺的刚直坚毅，都是造一类。
English: The story of Genshun's perseverance is similar.

古文：后除征南将军、右光禄大夫，转兼左仆射。
现代文：后来授任征南将军、右光禄大夫，调任兼左仆射。
English: Later, he was appointed as a general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, doctor of the Right Guanglu Division, and transferred to the Second Division as well as the Third Division.

古文：尔朱荣之奉庄帝，召百官悉至河阴。素闻顺数谏诤，惜其亮直，谓朱瑞曰： 可语元仆射，但在省，不须来。 
现代文：东朱荣侍奉庄帝，召集百官全部到河阴，他一向听说元顺多次规劝，怜惜他的真诚正直，对朱瑞说： 可以告诉元仆射，衹管在省中，不必前来。 
English: East Zhu Rong served Emperor Zhuang and summoned all the officials to Hebei. He had always heard that Yuan Shun had advised him many times. Pitying his sincerity and honesty, he said to Zhu Rui, "You can tell Yuan Fusa that you are in the middle of the province and do not need to come.

古文：顺不达其旨，闻害衣冠，遂便出走，为陵户鲜于康奴所害。
现代文：元顺没有领会东朱荣的意思，听说杀害士大夫，于是出逃，被守墓的人户鲜于康奴所杀害。
English: Yuan Shun didn't understand what he meant, and when he heard that a hundred officials had been killed, he immediately ran away and was killed by the mausoleum's owner, Xian Yu Kangnu.

古文：家徒四壁，无物敛尸，止有书数千卷而已。
现代文：家中衹有四面墙壁，没有财物收殓尸体，衹有书籍几千卷而已。
English: The house had only four walls, no property to receive the body, and only a few thousand volumes of books.

古文：门下通事令史王才达裂裳覆之。
现代文：门下通事令史王才达撕裂衣裳覆盖他。
English: An underling ordered Shi Wangcai to tear off his clothes to cover him.

古文：庄帝还宫，遣黄门侍郎山伟巡喻京邑。
现代文：庄帝回宫，派遣黄门侍郎山伟巡视晓谕京城。
English: Emperor Zhuang returned to the palace and sent Huangmen chamberlain Shan Wei to inspect the capital.

古文：伟临顺丧，悲恸无已。
现代文：山伟前往参加元顺的丧礼，悲伤不止。
English: Shan Wei attended Yuan Shun's funeral and was overcome with grief.

古文：既还，庄帝怪而问曰： 黄门何为声散？ 
现代文：返回后，庄帝奇怪地问他： 黄门为什么声音嘶哑了? 
English: After returning, Zhuang Di asked him strangely: Why is Huangmen's voice hoarse?

古文：伟以状对。
现代文：山伟以实情回答。
English: Sanwei answered truthfully.

古文：庄帝敕侍中元祉曰： 宗室丧亡非一，不可周赡。
现代文：庄帝下令侍中元祉说： 宗室死亡很多，不能全部救济。
English: Zhuangdi said to the chamberlain Yuan Zhi: "The death of the family was not just one or two people, it is impossible to help them all.

古文：元仆射清苦之节，死乃益彰，特赠绢百匹，余不得例。 
现代文：元仆射清廉刻苦的节操，至死就更为显明，特地赠绢一百匹，其余的人不能引以为例。 
English: The hard work and integrity of the former servant was even more evident until his death. He specially gave away a hundred yakitori, and the rest of the people could not be used as an example.

古文：赠骠骑大将军、尚书令、司徒公、定州刺史，谥曰文烈。
现代文：追赠元顺为骠骑大将军、尚书令、司徒公、定州刺史，谧号为文烈。
English: As a posthumous gift, Yuan Shun was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Horse Cavalry, Shang Shuling, Szeto Gong, and Dingzhou Zhishi, and his posthumous name was Wen Rong.

古文：顺撰《帝录》二十卷，诗赋表颂数十篇，今多亡失。
现代文：元顺撰作《帝录》二十卷，诗赋表颂几十篇，现在多已亡佚散失。
English: Yuan Shun wrote 20 volumes of "Imperial Records" and dozens of poems and eulogies, most of which are now lost.

古文：长子朗，时年十七。
现代文：长子元朗，时年十七岁。
English: The eldest son, Yuen Long, was 17 years old at the time.

古文：枕戈潜伏积年，乃手刃康奴，以首祭于顺墓，然后诣阙请罪。
现代文：枕着兵器潜伏了几年，才亲手杀死鲜于康奴，用他的头在元顺墓前祭拜，然后前往朝廷请求治罪。
English: He lurked for a few years with a weapon under his pillow, before he personally killed Xian Yu Kangnu, used his head to worship in front of Yuan Shun's tomb, and then went to the imperial court to request punishment.

古文：朝廷嘉而不问。
现代文：朝廷嘉赏而不追究。
English: The Imperial Court commended his actions and did not charge him with a crime.

古文：朗涉历书记，为司徒属。
现代文：元朗涉猎书籍，做司徒掾属。
English: Yuen Long dabbles in books, doing the Stubbs.

古文：天平中，为奴所害。
现代文：天平年间，被奴仆杀害。
English: During the Heian period, he was killed by a slave.

古文：赠都督瀛冀二州诸军事、囗囗将军、尚书右仆射、冀州刺史。
现代文：追赠他为都督瀛冀二州诸军事、口口将军、尚书右仆射、冀州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of the military governor of the two states of Hebei and Jizhou, the general of the mouth, the right hand of the right hand of the book, and the history of Jizhou.

古文：顺弟淑，淑弟悲，并早卒。
现代文：元顺的弟弟元淑，元淑的弟弟元悲，都过早去世。
English: Yuan Shun's younger brother, Yuan Shu, and Yuan Shu's younger brother, Yuan Bei, both died prematurely.

古文：悲弟纪，字子纲。
现代文：元悲的弟弟元纪，字子纲。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Gao, Yuan Ji, is called Zi Gang.

古文：永熙中，给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：永熙年间，任给事黄门侍郎。
English: During the Yongxi period, he was appointed as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain.

古文：随出帝没于关中。
现代文：跟随出帝死在关中。
English: Following the emperor's death in the pass.

古文：澄弟嵩，字道岳。
现代文：元澄的弟弟元嵩，字道岳。
English: Motosumi's younger brother, Mototake, also goes by the name Dōdake.

古文：高祖时，自中大夫迁员外常侍，转步兵校尉。
现代文：高祖时，从中大夫升任员外常侍，改任步兵校尉。
English: When Gaozu was a high school student, Dr. Zhong was promoted to the rank of non-commissioned officer and became an infantry captain.

古文：大司马、安定王休薨，未及卒哭，嵩便游田。
现代文：大司马、安定王远坯逝世，没到百曰祭奠，亘崖就游览狩猎。
English: When Wang Xiu passed away, people had not finished crying, and he went out to play and hunt.

古文：高祖闻而大怒，诏曰： 嵩不能克己复礼，企心典宪，大司马薨殂甫尔，便以鹰鹞自娱。
现代文：直担听说后大怒，下诏说： 五嵩不能克制自己使言行合乎礼制，心中想着法度，大司马逝世不久，就用苍鹰鸥子来娱乐。
English: After hearing this, Zhitang was furious and said: Wusong could not restrain himself from making his words and deeds conform to the etiquette, thinking about the law in his heart. Not long after the death of Dasima, he used the goshawk duster to entertain himself.

古文：有如父之痛，无犹子之情，捐心弃礼，何其太速！
现代文：有如同父亲的悲痛，没有养子的感情，捐除良心抛弃礼法，何等地快速!
English: There is grief like that of a father, there is no feeling of an adopted son, the donation of conscience and the abandonment of etiquette, how fast!

古文：便可免官。 
现代文：可免除他的官职。 
English: He can be dismissed from his post.

古文：后从平沔北，累有战功，除左中郎将，兼武卫将军。
现代文：后来跟随平定沔水北部地区，屡次有战功，授任左中郎将，兼武卫将军。
English: Later, following the pacification of the northern region of Surabaya, he was repeatedly awarded the title of General of the Left and General of the Imperial Guard.

古文：高祖南伐，萧宝卷将陈显达率众拒战。
现代文：直担向南征伐，芦宣鲞的将领速题达率领部众抵御。
English: Directly responsible for the southern campaign, Lu Xuanqin's generals reached the speed limit and led the people to resist.

古文：嵩身备三仗，免胄直前，将士从之，显达奔溃，斩获万计。
现代文：五蛊身上带三件兵器，脱下钟甲冲锋在前，将领兵士跟着他，显达溃散逃跑，杀死擒获以万计数。
English: Wuzhen took three weapons on his body, took off the bell armor and charged forward. The general and soldiers followed him. Xanda broke up and fled, killing and capturing tens of thousands.

古文：嵩于尔日勇冠三军。
现代文：五崖在这天勇猛为全军第一。
English: On this day, the five cliffs bravely became the first in the whole army.

古文：高祖大悦而言曰： 任城康王大有福德，文武顿出其门。 
现代文：高祖非常高兴地说： 任城康王的福分德行大，文武人才都出在他家中。 
English: Gaozu was very pleased and said, "Rencheng Kangwang's merits and virtues are great, and all the literary and martial arts talents are in his family.

古文：以功赐爵高平县侯，赉帛二千五百匹。
现代文：因功劳赐爵为高平县侯，赏帛二千五百匹。
English: He was given the title of Lord of Takahira County for his services, and was awarded 2,500 horses.

古文：初，高祖之发洛也，冯皇后以罪幽于宫内。
现代文：当初，直担从盗厘出发时，冯皇后因有罪被囚禁在宫中。
English: At first, when Zhitang set out from Paili, Empress Feng was imprisoned in the palace for a crime.

古文：既平显达，回次谷唐原，高祖疾甚，将赐后死，曰： 使人不易可得。 
现代文：平定题达后，回师停驻谷唐原，高祖病重，将要赐令皇后自杀，说： 使者不容易得到。 
English: After the settlement of the issue, Gao Zu, who was seriously ill, would order the empress to commit suicide, saying, "It is not easy to get an envoy.

古文：顾谓任城王澄曰： 任城必不负我，嵩亦当不负任城，可使嵩也。 
现代文：回头对任城王元澄说： 任城王必定不会辜负我，元高也将不辜负任城王，可以用元嵩为使者。 
English: The emperor looked at the king of Rencheng, Yuancheng, and said, "The king of Rencheng will not fail me, and the king of Yuancheng will not fail the king of Rencheng. You can send Yuancheng."

古文：于是引嵩入内，亲诏遣之。
现代文：于是召元嵩进入行宫内，亲自下韶派遣他。
English: Therefore, he summoned Mototsune to the palace and personally handed over the imperial edict to him.

古文：世宗即位，以武卫将军兼侍中，出为平南将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：世宗即位，元嵩任武卫将军兼侍中，外出任平南将军、荆州刺史。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne, and Mototake was appointed as General of the Imperial Guard and Chamberlain. He also served as General of Pingnan Province and Jingzhou Governor.

古文：嵩表曰： 萧宝卷骨肉相残，忠良先戮，臣下嚣然，莫不离背，君臣携贰，干戈日寻。
现代文：元嵩上奏疏说： 萧实卷骨肉之间互相残害，忠臣贤士先被杀戮，臣下忧愁，无不离心背叛，君臣二心，战事不断。
English: According to the commentary on the first volume of the Yuan Shu, Xiao and Shi were at each other's throats, loyal vassals and sages were killed first, vassals were saddened and betrayed, princes and vassals were of two minds, and there was constant warfare.

古文：流闻宝卷雍州刺史萧衍兄懿于建业阻兵，与宝卷相持。荆郢二州刺史并是宝卷之弟，必有图衍之志。
现代文：传闻说宝卷的雍州刺史萧衍的哥哥萧懿在建业起兵，和宝卷相对峙，荆郢二州刺史都是宝卷的弟弟，必定有图谋萧衍的心意。
English: It is rumored that Xiao Yan's elder brother Xiao Zhen, the Yongzhou scribe of the treasure scroll, raised an army in Jianye and confronted the treasure scroll. Both Jing Zhen and the two state scribes were younger brothers of the treasure scroll, and they must have schemed against Xiao Yan.

古文：臣若遣书相闻，迎其本谋，冀获同心，并力除衍。
现代文：臣下如果派人送信相告，迎合他们的本身计谋，希望获得他们共同的心愿，合力除掉萧衍。
English: If a vassal sends someone to report to the emperor, it is to cater to their own schemes, hoping to obtain their common wishes and work together to eliminate Xiao Yan.

古文：平衍之后，彼必旋师赴救丹阳，当不能复经营疆陲，全固襄沔。
现代文：平定萧衍后，他们必定回师赶去救援丹阳，将不能再治理边境，保全襄沔地区。
English: After suppressing Xiaoyan, they will certainly rush back to the division to rescue Danyang, and will no longer be able to control the border and protect the Xiangfan region.

古文：臣之军威已得临据，则沔南之地可一举而收。
现代文：臣下军队的威风已经到达那裹，则沔水以南的土地可一战而收复。
English: The prestige of the vassal army has already reached there, so the land south of Surabaya can be recovered in one battle.

古文：缘汉曜兵，示以威德，思归有道者则引而纳之，受疑告危者则援而接之。
现代文：沿漠水炫耀兵力，向他们展示威力德行，想归顺有道的就招引容纳他们，受怀疑报告危难的就援救而接应他们。
English: Along the desert water to show off troops, to show them the power of virtue, if they want to be obedient, they will be attracted to accommodate them, and if they are suspected of reporting danger, they will be rescued and accepted.

古文：总兵伫锐，观衅伺隙，若其零落之形已彰，怠懈之势已著，便可顺流摧锋，长驱席卷。 
现代文：统领兵马蓄养精锐，观察裂痕窥伺嫌隙，如果他们凋败的形势已经昭彰，懈怠的局面已经明显，就可以顺流而下摧折他们的锋芒，长驱直入席卷南方。 
English: Leading the troops and horses to cultivate the elite, observe the cracks and spy the gaps, if the situation of their decline has become apparent, and the situation of slackness has become obvious, they can go down the river to break their edge, and drive straight into the south.

古文：诏曰： 所陈嘉谋，深是良计。
现代文：诏令说： 所陈述的好谋略，实在是良策。
English: The edict said: "The good policy that has been stated is indeed a good policy.

古文：如当机形可进，任将军裁之。 
现代文：将依时机形势进军，任由将军裁断。 
English: They will march in accordance with the timing and situation, and leave it to the generals to decide.

古文：既而萧衍寻克建业，乃止。
现代文：随后萧衍很快攻克建业，于是作罢。
English: Subsequently, Xiao Yan quickly defeated Jianye, and then stopped.

古文：除平北将军、恆州刺史。
现代文：授任元嵩为平北将军、恒州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the general of North Pyongan Province and the governor of Gyeongju Province.

古文：转平东将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：改任平束将军、徐州刺史。
English: He was reappointed as the general of Pingzhu and the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：又转安南将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：又改任安南将军、扬史。
English: He was also reappointed as General Annan and Yang Shih.

古文：萧衍湘州刺史杨公则率众二万，屯军洛口。姜庆真领卒五千，据于首陂，又遣其左军将军骞小眼，军主何天祚、张俊兴等率众七千，攻围陆城。嵩乃遣统军封迈、王会等步骑八千讨之。
现代文：萧衍的湘州刺史杨公则率领部众二万人，驻守在洛，姜庆真率领兵士五千人，占据了首陂，又派遣他的左军将军骞小眼，军主何天祚，张俊兴等人率领部众七千人，攻打围困陆城，元嵩于是派遣统军封迈、王会等人率领步兵骑兵八千人讨伐他们。
English: Xiao Yan's Xiangzhou vassal, Yang Gong, led a detachment of 20,000 men and was stationed in Lu. Jiang Qingzhen led a detachment of 5,000 soldiers and occupied Shoucheng. He also sent his left-arm general, Zou Xiaoyan, and the commanders He Tianyao, Zhang Junxing and others led a detachment of 7,000 men and attacked and besieged Lucheng. As a result, Yuan Shuang sent the unified army of Feng Mai, Wang Hui and others led by infantry and cavalry of 8,000 men to fight them.

古文：迈达陆城，贼皆夜遁，追击破之，斩获数千，公则、庆真退还马头。
现代文：封遭到达陆城，贼寇都趁夜晚逃跑，追击打败他们，斩杀擒获几千人，公则、庆真退回到马头。
English: After the blockade reached Lucheng, the bandits took advantage of the night to escape, chased and defeated them, killed and captured several thousand people, and Gongzheng and Qingzheng retreated to Ma Tou.

古文：衍徐州刺史昌义之屯据高皇，遣三军潜寇阴陵，以淮水浅竭，不通船舰，屯于马头。
现代文：萧衍的徐州刺史昌义之驻守高皇，派遣三支军队暗中侵犯阴陵，因淮水枯竭太浅，不通船只，驻守在马头。
English: Xiao Yan's Xuzhou vassal Shishi Changyi garrisoned Gao Wang, sent three armies to secretly invade Yinling, because the Huai River was too shallow to allow ships to pass, and stationed in Ma Tou.

古文：衍将田道龙、何景先等领卒三千已至衡山，规寇陆城。
现代文：萧衍的将领田道龙、何景先等人率领兵士三千人已经到达衡山，打算侵犯陆城。
English: Xiao Yan's generals Tian Daolong, He Jingsian and others, led by three thousand soldiers, have arrived in Hengshan, intending to invade Lucheng.

古文：寇并充逼。
现代文：贼寇都很逼近了。
English: The bandits are closing in.

古文：嵩遣兼统军李叔仁等援舍肥、小岘、杨石，频战破之。
现代文：元嵩派遣兼统军李叔仁等人援助合肥、小岘、杨石，接连交战打败他们。
English: Yuan Song dispatched Li Shuren and others of the Unification Army to aid Hefei, Xiaojun, and Yangshi, and defeated them in successive battles.

古文：衍征虏将军赵草屯于黄口，嵩遣军司赵炽等往讨之。先遣统军安伯丑潜师夜渡，伏兵下蔡。
现代文：萧衍的征虏将军趟草驻守黄口，元嵩派遣军司趟炽等人前去讨伐他，先派遣统军安伯丑暗中出兵夜晚渡河，埋伏在下蔡。
English: Xiao Yan's conscript general Zhi Cao was stationed in Huangkou, and Geng Shuang sent his army commander Zhi Gao and others to fight against him. First, he sent the united army of An Bo Xiu to cross the river at night and ambush Xiao Cai.

古文：草率卒四千，逆来拒战，伯丑与下蔡戍主王虎等前后夹击，大败之，俘斩溺死四千余人。
现代文：趟草率领兵士四千人，迎上前来抵御，伯丑和下蔡戍主王虎等人前后夹击，大败赵草，俘获斩杀和淹死的有四千多人。
English: Wudu hastily led four thousand soldiers to meet and resist the attack of Bo Chuxiong and Wang Hu, the lord of the Lower Cai Dynasty, and defeated Zhao Cao. More than four thousand people were captured, killed and drowned.

古文：统军李叔仁等夜袭硖石之贼，又破之。
现代文：统军李叔仁等人在夜晚袭击硖石的贼寇，又打败他们。
English: Li Shuren and other members of the United Front attacked the bandits at night and defeated them.

古文：衍将姜庆真专据肥汭，冠军将军曹天宝屯于鸡口，军主尹明世屯东硖石。
现代文：萧衍的将领姜庆真专弓据守肥水以北，冠军将军曹天宝驻守鸡口，军主尹明世驻守束硖石。
English: Xiao Yan's general Jiang Qingzhen's special bow was stationed north of Fei Shui, champion general Cao Tianbao was stationed in Jikou, and commander Yin Mingshi was stationed in Sokou.

古文：嵩遣别将羊引次于淮西，去贼营十里，司马赵炽率兵一万为表里声势。
现代文：元嵩派遣别部将领羊引停驻在淮水以西，离贼寇的军营十里，司马赵炽率领兵士一万人做裹外的声援。
English: Geng Song dispatched the general of other departments to lead the sheep to stop in the west of Huai Shui, ten miles away from the military camp of the thieves, and Sima Zhao Blaze led ten thousand soldiers to provide external solidarity.

古文：众军既会，分击贼之四垒。
现代文：各军会合后，分别攻打贼寇的四个营垒。
English: After the meeting of the armies, they separately attacked the four camps of the bandits.

古文：四垒之贼，战败奔走，斩获数千，溺死万数。
现代文：四个营垒的贼寇，战败逃跑，斩杀擒获几千人，淹死的以万计数。
English: Four battalions of bandits were defeated and fled, several thousand were killed and captured, and tens of thousands were drowned.

古文：统军牛敬宾攻硖石，明世宵遁。
现代文：统军牛敬宾攻打硖石，明世夜晚逃跑。
English: The United Army's cattle and honored guests attacked and fought against the Flintstones, and fled in the night of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：庆真合余烬浮淮下，下蔡戍主王略截流击之，俘斩太半。
现代文：庆真聚合残余势力顺淮水而下，下蔡的戍主王略截断水流攻打他们，俘获斩杀一多半。
English: Qing Zhen gathered the remaining forces down the Huai River, and the king of the lower Cai River cut off the water flow and attacked them, capturing and killing more than half of them.

古文：于是威名大振。
现代文：于是威名大震。
English: As a result, a major earthquake occurred.

古文：后为苍头李太伯等同谋害嵩，并妻穆氏及子世贤。
现代文：后来奴仆李太伯等人合谋杀害元嵩，还有元嵩的妻子穆氏和儿子世贤。
English: Later, Li Tai Bo, a manservant, and others conspired to murder and kill Yuan Song, as well as Yuan Song's wife Mu Shi and his son Shixian.

古文：世宗为嵩举哀于东堂，赙绢一千匹，赠车骑将军、领军，谥曰刚侯。
现代文：世宗在束堂为元嵩举办丧事，赠绢一千匹，追赠车骑将军、领军，谧号为刚侯。
English: The Sejong held a funeral for Mototake at Sokudo, presented him with a thousand yakitori, and later gave him the title of chariot and cavalry general and army leader. His posthumous name was Gangu.

古文：第二子世俊，颇有干用，而无行业。
现代文：第二个儿子世俊，很有才干，而没有操行事业。
English: The second son, Shijun, was very talented, but did not pursue a career.

古文：袭爵，除给事中、东宫舍人。
现代文：继承爵位，授任给事中、东宫舍人。
English: Heir to the title of nobility, the title was bestowed on the middle son and the heir to the eastern palace.

古文：伯父澄表求转阶授之，于是除员外散骑常侍。
现代文：伯父元澄上奏疏请求转让品级给他，于是授任他为员外散骑常侍。
English: His uncle, Motosumi, petitioned the shogunate to transfer his rank to him, and he was appointed as a non-commissioned officer and free-rider.

古文：肃宗时，追论嵩勋，封世俊卫县开国男，食邑二百户。
现代文：肃宗时，追论元嵩的功勋，封世俊为卫县开国男，食邑为二百户。
English: Su Zong, tracing the merits of the founder, said that Fong Shijun was the founding father of Wei County, and that there were 200 households in the county.

古文：迁冠军将军、宗正少卿，又为散骑常侍、安南将军、武卫将军、河南尹。
现代文：调任冠军将军、宗正少卿，又担任散骑常侍、安南将军、武卫将军、迥亩尹。
English: He was transferred to champion general, Zong Zheng Shaoqing, and also served as straggler, general Annan, general Wu Wei, and Yu Mu Yin.

古文：寻除镇东将军、青州刺史，转征东将军，加散骑常侍。
现代文：不久授任镇束将军、青州刺史，改任征束将军，加授散骑常侍。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the general of Zhenzuk and the chief historian of Qingzhou, and later he was appointed as the general of conscription, and he was also given the title of the knight errant.

古文：邢杲之乱，围逼州城，世俊凭城拒守，遂得保全。
现代文：邢杲叛乱时，围困州城，世垡依凭城池据守，于是得以保全。
English: When the Jurchen rebelled, they besieged the city of Shuzhou. The Jurchen relied on the city to defend itself, and thus it was preserved.

古文：孝庄时，除卫将军、吏部尚书。
现代文：孝庄童时，授任世懂为卫将军、吏部尚书。
English: When he was a child in Xiaozhuang, he was awarded the titles of General of the Guard and Secretary of the General Staff.

古文：尔朱兆寇京师，诏世俊以本官为都督，防守河桥。
现代文：氽朱兆侵犯京城，诏令世俊以本身官职任都督，在河桥防守。
English: Zhu Zhao invaded the capital and ordered Shijun to defend the bridge with his official position as governor.

古文：及兆至河，世俊初无拒守意，便隔岸遥拜，时论疾之。
现代文：等到尔朱兆到董回，世渔一点也没有抵御的意思，就隔河遥相叩拜，当时舆论指责他。
English: When Lzhu Zhao arrived at Dong Hui, the world's fishermen had no intention of resisting, and they bowed to each other across the river. At that time, the public opinion criticized him.

古文：前废帝世，为骠骑将军，仍加尚书，尤为尔朱世隆所昵。
现代文：前废壶时，担任骠骑将军，又加授尚书，格外被尔朱世馑亲近。
English: When he was a former wastebasket, he served as a cavalry general, and was also awarded Shangshu. He was particularly close to Lzhu Shixuan.

古文：出帝初，加仪同三司，改封武阳县开国子，食邑五百户。
现代文：生壶初年，加授仪同三司，改封他为武阳县开国子，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of the new pot, he was awarded the same honor as the three divisions, and changed his title to the founder of Wuyang County, with 500 households in the food village.

古文：世俊居选曹，不能厉心，多所受纳，为中尉弹纠，坐免官。
现代文：世垡在选曹任职，不能磨砺心志，受贿很多，被中尉弹劾纠察，获罪免官。
English: Shifu served as a selector, couldn't sharpen his mind, took a lot of bribes, was impeached by a lieutenant for picketing, and was exonerated.

古文：寻复本职。
现代文：不久恢复本来的职务。
English: He was soon reinstated in his original position.

古文：孝静初，加侍中、尚书右仆射，迁尚书令。
现代文：孝静帝初年，加授侍中、尚书右仆射，升尚书令。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaojing, he was awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain, promoted to the rank of Right Footman, and promoted to the rank of Grand Secretary.

古文：世俊轻薄，好去就，诏送晋阳。
现代文：世垡轻浮刻薄，进退无常，诏令送到置一隆。
English: The world is frivolous and caustic, it advances and retreats impermanently, and the imperial edict is sent to Qi Yilong.

古文：兴和中，薨。
现代文：里些年间，逝世。
English: He died a few years later.

古文：赠侍中、都督冀定瀛殷四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、太傅、定州刺史，尚书令、开国公如故，谥曰躁戾。
现代文：追赠侍中、都督冀定适壁四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、太傅、室业刺史，尚书令、开国公照旧，谧号为麸。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Chamberlain of the Four Provinces, Governor of the Four Provinces, Military Commander of the Four Provinces, General of the Horse, Grand Master of the Horse, Grand Master of the Horse, Grand Master of the Horse, Grand Master of the Horse, Grand Master of the Horse, Grand Master of the Horse, Grand Master of the Horse, and Grand Master of the Horse.

古文：子景远袭，散骑侍郎。
现代文：儿子：鲢继承爵位，任散骑侍郎。
English: Son: He succeeds to the peerage and is appointed as a samurai.

古文：世贤弟世哲，武定中，吏部郎。
现代文：世贤的弟弟世哲，武定年间，任吏部郎。
English: Shisen's younger brother, Shitetsu, was appointed to the position of secretary during the Wuding era.

古文：嵩弟赡，字道周。
现代文：元嵩的弟弟元赡，字道周。
English: Motosuke's younger brother, Motoyasu, is called Dokuchu.

古文：高祖时，自囗大夫稍迁宗正少卿、龙骧将军、光州刺史、散骑常侍、左将军，迁平东将军、兗州刺史。
现代文：高祖时，从口大夫逐渐升任宗正少卿、龙骧将军、光州刺史、散骑常侍、左将军，调任平东将军、兖州刺史。
English: At the time of Gaozu, Dr. Koukou was gradually promoted to the positions of Mune Zheng Shaoqing, General Longyu, Gwangju Shishi, Sanzhiyi Tsuneishi, General Zuo, and transferred to the positions of General Pingdong and Gwangju Shishi.

古文：颇爱书史，而贪暴好杀。
现代文：很喜好图书史籍，而贪婪暴虐好杀人。
English: He is very fond of books and history, while greed and violence make him like to kill people.

古文：澄深耻忿之，绝其往来。
现代文：元澄深为耻辱怨恨他，断绝同他的来往。
English: Motosumi deeply resented him for the humiliation and broke off contact with him.

古文：有四子。
现代文：有四个儿子。
English: They have four sons.

古文：长子远，尚书郎。史臣曰：显祖之将禅让，可谓国之大节。
现代文：长子元远，任尚书郎史臣曰：显祖将要惮让，可以说是国家的根本。
English: The eldest son of Yuan Yuan, Ren Shang Shulang Shichen, said: "Xian Zu will make concessions, which can be said to be the foundation of the country."

古文：康王毅然庭诤，德音孔昭。一言兴邦，其斯之谓欤？
现代文：康王毅然当庭规劝，善言清朗，一句话使国家兴旺，就是说的这种吧?
English: Kang Wang resolutely in court to persuade, kind words clear, a word to make the country flourish, is said to be such?

古文：文宣贞固俊远，郁为宗杰，身因累朝，宁济夷险，既社稷是任，其梁栋之望也。
现代文：文宣王忠贞坚毅杰出远大，堪为宗室豪杰，身经数朝，度过难关平定艰险，以国家大事为己任，有栋梁的声望。
English: King Wenxuan was loyal, steadfast, outstanding and far-sighted. He was worthy of being the family hero. He lived for several dynasties, overcame difficulties and calmed hardships, took national events as his own responsibility, and had a reputation as a pillar.

古文：顺謇谔俶傥，有汲黯之风，不用于时，横招非命，惜矣。
现代文：元顺刚直特异，有汲黯的风范，不为当时所用，横遭不测之祸，太可惜了。
English: It's too bad that the original Shun Gangzhong, with its unique and ethereal demeanor, wasn't used at the time and met with misfortune.

古文：嵩有行陈之气，俊则裂冠之徒欤？
现代文：元嵩有行军作战的气概，元俊就是自毁冠冕的人吧?
English: Motosuke has the courage to march and fight. Is Motojun a self-destructive person?

古文：南安王城阳王章武王乐陵王安定王南安王桢，皇兴二年封，加征南大将军、中都大官，寻迁内都大官。高祖即位，除凉州镇都大将。
现代文：南安王元桢，皇兴二年封，加授征南大将军、中都大宫，不久改任内都大宫。高祖即位，授任他为凉州镇都大将。
English: Nan'an Wang Yuanjun, Emperor Xing's second-year title, was awarded the title of General of the Southern Expeditionary Army and the Grand Palace of the Central Capital, and was soon renamed the Grand Palace of the Inner Capital. Gao Zu ascended the throne and was awarded the title of General of the Capital of Liangzhou.

古文：寻以绥抚有能，加都督西戎诸军事、征西大将军、领护西域校尉、仪同三司、凉州刺史。
现代文：不久因安抚有能力，加授都督西戎诸军事、征西大将军、领护西域校尉、仪同三司、凉州刺史。
English: Soon, due to his ability to pacify, he was awarded additional military titles such as the governor of Xirong, the general of the Western Expedition, the lieutenant of the Western Region, the three departments of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and the historian of Liangzhou.

古文：徵为内都大官，出为使持节、侍中、本将军、开府、长安镇都大将、雍州刺史。
现代文：征入任内都大官，外任为使持节、侍中、本号将军、开府、长安镇都大将、雍州史。
English: He was enlisted as a major official of the capital during his term of office, and was appointed as an envoy, a chamberlain, a general of this title, a general of Kaifu, a general of the capital of Chang'an Town, and a historian of Yongzhou.

古文：桢性忠谨，事母以孝闻，赐帛千匹以褒之。
现代文：元桢性格忠诚谨慎，侍奉母亲以孝顺闻名，赐帛一千匹来表彰他。
English: Geng Yao was a loyal and prudent person. He was known for his filial piety while serving his mother. He was awarded a thousand yakitori to commend him.

古文：征赴讲武，高祖引见于皇信堂，戒之曰： 翁孝行著于私庭，令问彰于邦国，每钦忠懿，思一言展，故因讲武，远征赴阙。
现代文：征召入京练兵，高祖在皇信堂接见，告诫他说： 老人家孝行昭著于家庭，美名传遍全国，时常钦佩您的忠诚美德，想尽情交谈一次，所以利用练兵，远召您奔赴朝廷。
English: Summoned to Beijing for military training, Gao Zu met him in the Emperor's Hall and admonished him: The old man's filial piety is well known in the family, and his good name has spread throughout the country. I often admire your loyalty and virtue, and I would like to have a heart-to-heart talk with you once, so I will use military training to summon you to the imperial court.

古文：仰恋仁慈，情在未已。
现代文：仰慕留恋您的仁义慈爱，情意不断。
English: I admire and long for your kindness and benevolence.

古文：但长安镇年饥民俭，理须绥抚，不容久留，翁今还州，其勤隐恤，无令境内有饥馁之民。
现代文：不过长安镇年成饥荒民众歉收，按道理必须安抚，不容许久留，您现在回州中，可勤恳地审度抚恤，不要使境内有饥饿的民众。
English: However, the famine-stricken people of Chang'an Town have poor harvests every year. According to the principle, they must be appeased and are not allowed to stay for a long time. Now that you are back in the state, you can diligently review the pension, and do not let there be hungry people in the territory.

古文：翁既国之懿亲，终无贫贱之虑。
现代文：您是国家的至亲，始终不会有贫贱的忧虑。
English: You are the beloved of the nation and you will never have to worry about poverty.

古文：所宜慎者，略有三事：一者，恃亲骄矜，违礼僭度；二者，傲慢贪奢，不恤政事；三者，饮酒游逸，不择交友。
现代文：所应慎重的，大致有三件事：第一，仗恃皇亲骄傲自夸，违背礼制超越法度；第二，高傲懈怠贪婪奢侈，不顾惜政事；第三，饮酒游玩，结交朋友不加选择。
English: There are roughly three things that should be considered carefully: First, the emperor's relatives are proud and boastful, violating the etiquette and exceeding the law; second, arrogance, slackness, greed and luxury, regardless of politics; third, drinking and playing, making friends without choice.

古文：三者不去，患祸将生；但能慎此，足以全身远害，光国荣家，终始之德成矣。 
现代文：这三点不去掉，患难灾祸将要产生，祇要能谨慎这几点，就足以保全性命远离祸害，增光国家荣耀家庭，有始有终的德行就形成了。 
English: If these three points are not eliminated, disasters and calamities will occur. If you can only be cautious about these points, it will be enough to save your life from disaster, enhance the glory of the country and family, and form a virtuous beginning and end.

古文：而桢不能遵奉，后乃聚敛肆情。
现代文：然而元桢不能遵循，后来竟纵情聚敛。
English: However, Yuan Shao failed to follow the emperor's admonition, and later he amassed even more wealth.

古文：文明太后、高祖并临皇信堂，引见王公。
现代文：文明太后、高祖都到皇信堂，接见王公。
English: The Empress Dowager Wenming and Gao Zu both came to the Emperor's Hall to meet the prince.

古文：太后令曰： 汝阴王天赐、南安王桢不顺法度，黩货聚敛，依犯论坐，将至不测。
现代文：太后下令说： 汝阴王天赐、南安王元桢不遵从法度，贪污纳贿聚敛财物，依犯罪事实判决，将到死刑。
English: The empress dowager ordered: "By the grace of Heaven, King Yin, King Yuan of Nan'an has been sentenced to death for disobeying the law, taking bribes, and amassing wealth. The sentence is based on the facts of the crime.

古文：卿等为当存亲以毁令，为欲灭亲以明法？ 
现代文：各位是要保存亲属来毁灭条令，还是要大义灭亲来严明法度? 
English: Do you want to preserve relatives to destroy regulations, or do you want to eliminate relatives in the name of justice to establish strict laws?

古文：群臣咸以二王托体先皇，宜蒙矜恕。
现代文：群臣都以为二王是先皇之子，应该得到同情宽恕。
English: The courtiers all thought that the two kings were the sons of the former emperor and deserved sympathy and forgiveness.

古文：太后不答。
现代文：太后不答应。
English: The Empress Dowager did not agree.

古文：高祖乃诏曰： 南安王桢以懿戚之贵，作镇关右，不能洁己奉公，助宣皇度，方肆贪欲，殖货私庭，放纵奸囚，壅绝诉讼，货遗诸使，邀求虚称。二三之状，皆犯刑书。
现代文：高祖就下韶说： 南安王元桢以至亲的贵重身份，在关右做藩镇，不能克己奉公，辅助宣扬国家法度，却放纵贪婪的欲念，在自己家中聚敛财物，放任奸猾的囚犯，阻隔诉讼，送物品给各使者，寻求虚假的称颂，这些情形，都违犯了刑律。
English: Gao Zu said, "Nan'an's King Yuan Rong and his closest relatives, who hold important positions and live in Guanzhong, cannot restrain themselves from serving the public, but indulge their greedy desires, accumulate wealth in their own homes, indulge treacherous prisoners, obstruct lawsuits, send goods to emissaries, and seek false praise, all of which are violations of the criminal law.

古文：昔魏武翦发以齐众，叔向戮弟以明法，克己忍亲，以率天下。
现代文：从前魏武帝剪下自己的头发来整肃众人，叔向杀死弟弟来严明法度，克制自己忍心减亲，为天下做表率。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Wu of Wei cut off his own hair to purify the people, and his uncle made it a strict law to kill his brother, restraining himself from cutting off relatives and setting an example for the world.

古文：夫岂不怀，有为而然耳。
现代文：他们哪是没有情怀，是有原因而如此做而已。
English: They don't have feelings, they just do it for a reason.

古文：今者所犯，事重畴日，循古推刑，实在难恕。
现代文：现在元桢所犯罪行，事情比从前更重，依古代旧例施刑，实在难以宽恕。
English: Now that the crimes committed at the Yuancheng are more serious than before, it is really difficult to forgive the punishment according to the ancient precedent.

古文：皇太后天慈宽笃，恩矜国属，每一寻惟高宗孔怀之近，发言哽塞，悲恸于怀；且以南安王孝养之名，闻于内外，特一原恕，削除封爵，以庶人归第，禁锢终身。 
现代文：皇太后天性慈爱宽厚，恩待国家亲属，每次想到高宗兄弟的亲近，说话喉结气塞，心中悲伤；而且因南安王有孝顺奉养的名声，传闻于内外；特地给予一次宽恕，削除封爵，以平民身份回到家中，终生不能为官。 
English: The empress dowager was naturally kind and generous, and treated the relatives of the country with grace. Every time she thought of the closeness of the Gaozong brothers, her throat was choked and her heart was sad. Moreover, because King Nan'an had a reputation for filial piety, it was rumored at home and abroad. She specially granted a pardon, removed the knighthood, returned home as a commoner, and could not serve as an official for life.

古文：后高祖南伐，桢从至洛，及议迁都，首从大计，高祖甚悦。
现代文：后来高祖向南征伐，元桢跟随到洛阳，等到商议迁都，首先顺从大计，高祖十分高兴。
English: Later, Gaozu went to the south to conquer, and Yuan Zheng followed him to Luoyang. When they discussed moving the capital, Gaozu first obeyed the plan, and was very happy.

古文：桢母刘太妃薨，高祖亲幸临慰。
现代文：元桢的母亲刘太妃逝世，高祖亲自前往慰问。
English: Gaozu went to pay his condolences in person after his mother, Liu Taifei, passed away.

古文：及葬，赠布帛彩五百段。
现代文：等到安葬，赠给布帛彩色丝织物五百段。
English: When he is buried, he will be given 500 strips of colorful silk fabric as a gift.

古文：又以桢议定迁都，复封南安王，食邑一千户。
现代文：又因元桢商议决定迁都，再封为南安王，食邑一千户。
English: Also, due to the deliberation of the Yuan Dynasty, it was decided to move the capital, and it was re-crowned as the King of Nan'an, and a thousand households of food villages were created.

古文：出为镇北大将军、相州刺史。
现代文：外任为镇北大将军、相州史。
English: He was appointed as the general of Zhenbei University and the historian of Xiangzhou.

古文：高祖饯桢于华林都亭。
现代文：高祖在华林都亭为元桢饯行。
English: Gao Zu in the Waring Du Ting as the original Min Xing.

古文：诏曰： 从祖南安，既之蕃任，将旷违千里，豫怀惘恋。
现代文：下诏说： 堂祖父南安王，就要到藩镇赴任，将远隔千里，预先怀有怅惘留恋。
English: The next edict said: His great-great-grandfather, King Nan'an, is about to take office in the town of his domain. He will be thousands of miles away, and he will have a lingering attachment in advance.

古文：然今者之集，虽曰分歧，实为曲宴，并可赋诗申意。
现代文：然而今日的集会，虽说是分别，实际上是宫廷私宴，都可赋诗表达心意。
English: However, today's meeting, although it is separate, is actually a private palace banquet, and can be expressed in poetry.

古文：射者可以观德，不能赋诗者，可听射也。
现代文：射箭可以观察德行，不能赋诗的，可准许射箭。
English: In archery, virtue can be observed. If poetry cannot be added, archery can be allowed.

古文：当使武士弯弓，文人下笔。 
现代文：应当使武士拉弓，文士提笔。 
English: A samurai should be made to draw a bow, and a scribe to take up a pen.

古文：高祖送桢于阶下，流涕而别。
现代文：高祖送元桢到台阶下，流下眼泪而分别。
English: Gao Zu sent Yuan Rong to the bottom of the steps, shed tears and left.

古文：太和二十五年五月至鄴，入治日，暴风大雨，冻死者十数人。
现代文：太和二十年五月到达邺城，进入治所的日子，刮大风下大雨，冻死的有十几人。
English: On May 20th, when Ms. Taihe arrived in Lucheng and entered the detention center, there was a strong wind and heavy rain, and more than a dozen people froze to death.

古文：桢又以旱祈雨于群神。
现代文：元桢又因天旱向众神祈求下雨。
English: Due to the drought, Yuan Zang again prayed to the gods for rain.

古文：鄴城有石虎庙，人奉祀之。
现代文：邺城有座石虎庙，人们敬奉祭祀它。
English: There is a stone tiger temple in Lucheng, and people worship and sacrifice it.

古文：桢告虎神像云： 三日不雨，当加鞭罚。 
现代文：元桢告诉石虎庙神像说： 三天内不下雨，将用皮鞭惩罚。 
English: Yuan Zang told the stone tiger temple statue: If it does not rain for three days, it will be punished with a whip.

古文：请雨不验，遂鞭像一百。
现代文：求雨不灵验，就鞭打神像一百下。
English: When he failed to get rain, he lashed the idol with a hundred lashes.

古文：是月疽发背，薨。
现代文：当月毒疮生在背上，逝世。
English: That month, he died of a poisonous sore on his back.

古文：谥曰惠，赠帛一千匹。及葬，又赐帛千匹，遣黄门郎监护丧事。
现代文：谧号为惠，赠帛一千匹，等到安葬，又赐帛一千匹，派遣黄门郎监督料理丧事。
English: Huangmen Lang was given a thousand yakitori as a gift, and when he was buried, he was given another thousand yakitori, and Huangmen Lang was sent to supervise the funeral.

古文：及恆州刺史穆泰谋反，桢知而不告，虽薨，犹追夺爵封，国除。
现代文：在恒州刺史穆泰谋图反叛时，元桢知道而不报告，虽然逝世，仍被迫夺爵位封邑，封国削除。
English: In Hengzhou, when Mutai was plotting to rebel, Yuan Xuan knew and did not report it. Although he died, he was still forced to take the title of fief and remove the fief.

古文：有五子。
现代文：有五个儿子。
English: He has five sons.

古文：子英，字虎兒。
现代文：儿子元英，字虎儿。
English: His son, Yuan Ying, became a poet.

古文：性识聪敏，博闻强记，便弓马，解吹笛，微晓医术。
现代文：禀性聪慧敏捷，见闻广博记忆力强，善于射箭骑马，懂得吹笛子，略微晓得医术。
English: He is intelligent, quick-witted, has a broad knowledge and strong memory, is good at archery and horseback riding, knows how to play the flute, and knows a little about medicine.

古文：高祖时，为平北将军、武川镇都大将、假魏公。
现代文：高祖时，担任平北将军、武川镇都大将、假魏公。
English: At the time of Gaozu, he served as the general of Pingbei, the general of the town of Wuchuan and the fake Wei Gong.

古文：未几，迁都督梁益宁三州诸军事、安南将军、领护西戎校尉、仇池镇都大将、梁州刺史。
现代文：没过多久，调任都督梁益宁三州诸军事、安南将军、领护西戎校尉、仇池镇都大将、梁州刺史。
English: Not long after, Liang Yining, the military governor of the three states, General Annan, Lieutenant Xi Rong, the head of the garrison, General Qiu Chi, and Liang Zhou, were transferred.

古文：高祖南伐，为梁汉别道都将。
现代文：高祖向南征伐，担任梁汉别道都将。
English: Gaozu went to the south to conquer, and served as the leader of the Liang and Han armies.

古文：后大驾临钟离，诏英率众备寇境上。
现代文：后来皇帝前往钟离，韶令元英率领部众在边境上防备贼寇。
English: Later, the emperor went to Zhongli and ordered Yuan Ying to lead the troops to guard against bandits on the border.

古文：英以大驾亲动，势倾东南，汉中有可乘之会，表求进讨。高祖许之。
现代文：元英因皇帝亲自出动，势力侧重在东南，汉中有可以利用的机会，上奏请求进军讨伐，高祖准许了他的意见。
English: Yuan Yingying was personally dispatched by the emperor, the forces were concentrated in the southeast, and there were opportunities that could be used in the Han Dynasty. He made a request to march into the crusade, and Gaozu approved his opinion.

古文：师次沮水，萧鸾将萧懿遣将尹绍祖、梁季群等领众二万，徼山立栅，分为数处，居高视下，隔水为营。
现代文：军队停驻在沮水，萧鸾的将领萧懿派遣将领尹绍祖、梁季群等人率领部众二万人，巡察山头扎寨，分为几处，居于高地看下面，隔河建立营寨。
English: The army was stationed in Deshuishui. Xiao Zhen's general Xiao Zhen sent generals Yin Shao Zu, Liang Jiqun and others, leading a detachment of 20,000 people, to inspect the hilltop encampment, which was divided into several places, living in the highlands and building a camp across the river.

古文：英乃谋曰： 彼帅贱民慢，莫能相服，众而无上，罔知适从。
现代文：元英就谋划说： 他们的头领低贱民众怠慢，不能互相信服，人多而没有主宰，不知道如何做为好。
English: Yuan Ying made a plan and said: Their leaders and lowly people are negligent, they cannot trust each other, there are many people without authority, and they do not know what to do.

古文：若选精卒，并攻一营，彼不相救，我克必矣。
现代文：如果选拔精锐的兵士，合力攻打一处营寨，他们不相互救助，我们攻克是必然的。
English: If elite soldiers are selected to jointly attack a camp, and they do not help each other, our conquest is inevitable.

古文：若克一军，四营自拔。 
现代文：如果攻克一军，四处营寨自然攻下来。 
English: If you defeat one army, you will naturally defeat four encampments.

古文：于是简兵三面腾上，果不相救。
现代文：于是挑选兵士从三面攀登上去，果然他们不相互救助。
English: So they picked soldiers to climb up on three sides, and sure enough they didn't help each other.

古文：既破一处，四营俱溃，生擒梁季群，斩三千余级，俘七百人。
现代文：破了一处后，四个营寨全都崩溃，活捉梁季群，斩首三千多级，俘获七百人。
English: After breaking one place, all four camps collapsed, capturing Liang Jiqun alive, beheading more than three thousand, and capturing seven hundred people.

古文：鸾白马戍将其夜逃溃。
现代文：萧鸾的白马戍守将领这天夜晚逃跑溃散。
English: Xiao Yao's White Horse garrison generals fled and dispersed that night.

古文：乘胜长驱，将逼南郑，汉川之民，以为神也，相率归附。
现代文：元英乘胜长驱直入，将要逼近南郑，漠川的百姓，以为神奇，相继归附。
English: Yuan Ying drove straight into the victorious Chang and was about to approach Nan Zheng. The people of Mu Chuan thought it was miraculous and successively surrendered.

古文：梁州民李天干等诣英降，待以国士之礼。
现代文：梁州的平民李天干等人前往元英那裹投降，元英以国中杰出人才的礼仪接待他们。
English: Li Tiangan and other civilians from Liangzhou went to Yuanying to surrender, and Yuanying received them with the etiquette of outstanding talents in the country.

古文：天干等家在南郑之西，请师迎接，英遣迎之。
现代文：天干等人的家在南郑的西面，请求派军队迎接，元英派人迎接他们的家人。
English: The home of Tiangan and the others, on the west side of Nan Zheng, requested that the army be sent to meet them, and Yuan Ying sent people to meet their families.

古文：萧懿闻而遣将姜脩率众追袭，逮夜交战，颇有杀伤。
现代文：萧懿听说后派遣将领姜脩率军队追击偷袭，到夜晚交战，杀伤不少。
English: After Xiao Yu heard about it, he dispatched General Jiang Yu and his army to pursue the sneak attack. They fought into the night, causing many casualties.

古文：脩后屡败，复更请军。
现代文：姜脩后来屡次失败，又再请求增兵。
English: Jiang Wei later repeatedly failed, and again asked for more troops.

古文：懿遣众赴之，迎者告急。
现代文：萧懿派遣部众赶去，迎接的人告急。
English: Xiao Yao sent his subordinates to rush to the scene. The people who greeted him were in a hurry.

古文：英率骑一千，倍道赴救。
现代文：元英率领骑兵一千人，日夜兼行赶去救援。
English: Yuan Ying led a thousand cavalrymen to rush to the rescue day and night.

古文：未至，贼已退还。
现代文：没有到达，贼寇已经退回去。
English: Not arrived, the bandits have retreated.

古文：英恐其入城，别遣统军元拔以随其后，英徼其前，合击之，尽俘其众。
现代文：元英恐怕他们进城，另外派遣统军元拔跟随在他们后面，元英在前面拦截，合击他们，全部俘获了他们。
English: Yuan Ying feared that they would enter the city, and sent another unified army, Yuan Batu, to follow them. Yuan Ying intercepted them in front, clashed with them, and captured them all.

古文：懿续遣军，英不虞贼至，且众力已疲，军少人惧，咸欲奔走。
现代文：萧懿继续派遣军队，元英没料到贼寇到来，而且众人精力已经疲劳，军队少人畏惧，都想逃跑。
English: Xiao Yao continued to send troops, Yuan Ying did not expect the arrival of the bandits, and everyone's energy was tired, the army was afraid of few people, and they all wanted to escape.

古文：英乃缓骑徐行，神色自若，登高望贼，东西指麾，状似处分，然后整列而前。
现代文：元英却缓步上马慢慢地走，神色像平常一样，登上高处了望贼寇，东西指挥，样子如同部署军阵，然后排列整齐向前走。
English: Yuan Ying, however, slowly mounted his horse and walked slowly, looking as usual. He climbed to a high place to watch for thieves and robbers, commanded the east and west, looking like he was deploying an army, and then lined up neatly to walk forward.

古文：贼谓有伏兵。
现代文：贼寇以为有伏兵。
English: The bandit thought he was being ambushed.

古文：俄然贼退，乘势追殄，遂围南郑。
现代文：不久贼寇退走，乘势追击消灭他们，于是包围南郑。
English: Soon after, the bandits retreated and took advantage of the situation to pursue and destroy them, thus encircling Nan Zheng.

古文：禁止三军，一无所犯，远近皆供租运。
现代文：向三军发布禁令，对民众一点也不侵犯，远近都供给租赋运输。
English: A ban was issued to the three armed forces, which did not infringe on the people at all, and provided rent-a-car transportation both near and far.

古文：先是，英未至也，萧懿遣军主范洁领三千余人伐獠。
现代文：在这以前，元英没到时，萧懿派遣军主范洁率领三千多人征伐僚人。
English: Prior to this, when Yuan Ying did not arrive, Xiao Han dispatched the military commander Fan Jie to lead more than three thousand soldiers to conquer.

古文：洁闻大军围城，欲还救援。
现代文：范洁听说大军包围城池，想要返回救援。
English: When Fan Jie heard that a large army had surrounded the city, he wanted to return to help.

古文：英遣统军李平敌、李铁骑等收合巴西、晋寿土人，以断其路。
现代文：元英派遣统军李平敌、李铁骑等人集合巴西、晋寿当地人，来截断他的退路。
English: Yuan Ying dispatched the unified army of Li Pinghu, Li Tiejie and others to gather local people from Brazil and Jinzhou to cut off his escape route.

古文：洁以死决战，遂败平敌之军。
现代文：范洁拼命决战，于是打败平敌的军队。
English: Fan Jie desperately fought a decisive battle, thus defeating the leveled enemy army.

古文：英候其稍近，以奇兵掩之，尽皆擒获。
现代文：元英等候他们逐渐靠近，用奇兵袭击他，全都擒获过来。
English: Yuan Ying waited for them to get closer and attacked him with the magic soldiers, and they were all captured.

古文：攻围九十余日，战无不克。
现代文：攻打围困九十多天，战无不胜。
English: The siege lasted more than ninety days, and the battle was unwinnable.

古文：被敕班师。
现代文：后接到命令撤军。
English: They were later ordered to withdraw.

古文：英于是先遣老弱，身勒精卒留后，遣使与懿告别。
现代文：元英于是先送老弱上路，亲自统领精兵留在后面，派遣使者向萧懿告别。
English: Therefore, Yuan Ying sent the old and weak on the road first, personally led the elite soldiers to stay behind, and sent an envoy to bid farewell to Xiao Yao.

古文：懿以为诈也，英还一日，犹闭门不开。
现代文：萧懿以为是欺诈，元英返回了一天，还关着门不打开。
English: Xiao Yao thought it was a fraud. Yuan Ying returned the next day, but still closed the door and did not open it.

古文：二日之后，懿乃遣将追英。
现代文：两天以后，萧懿才派遣将领追赶元英。
English: Two days later, Xiao Yu sent his generals to chase Yuan Ying.

古文：英亲自殿后，与士卒下马交战，贼众莫敢逼之。
现代文：元英亲自在后面阻挡，和兵士下马交战，贼寇军队不敢逼近。
English: Yuan Ying personally blocked behind, and soldiers dismounted to fight, the bandit army did not dare to approach.

古文：四日四夜，然后贼退，全军而还。会山氐并反，断英归路。
现代文：四日四夜，然后贼寇撤退，元英保全军队而返回遇上山氐一并反叛，截断元英的退路。
English: After four days and four nights, the bandits retreated, and Yuan Ying returned to protect the army. However, he was confronted by the rebels in the mountains, cutting off Yuan Ying's escape route.

古文：英勒众奋击，且战且行，为流矢所中，军人莫有知者。
现代文：元英统领军队奋勇攻打，边战边行，被流箭射中，军队中没有知道的人。
English: Yuan Ying led the army to attack bravely, walked along the battlefield, was shot by a stray arrow, and there was no one in the army who knew about it.

古文：以功迁安南大将军，赐爵广武伯。
现代文：因功劳升安南大将军，赐爵位为庐武垣。
English: Due to his meritorious service, he was promoted to General Annan and given a knighthood as Guangwu Bo.

古文：在仇池六载，甚有威惠之称。
现代文：在仇迤六年，很有威武恩惠的声誉。
English: In the past six years, he has earned a reputation as a powerful and benevolent leader.

古文：父忧，解任。
现代文：为父亲守丧，解任。
English: He was relieved of his duties while his father was in mourning.

古文：高祖讨汉阳，起英为左卫将军，加前将军，寻迁大宗正，又转尚书，仍本将军，镇荆州。
现代文：高祖讨伐，起用五墓为左卫将军，加授前将军，不久调任大宗正，又改任尚书，随之仍以本号将军，镇守荆州。
English: Gao Zu led the crusade, appointed Wu Tombs as the General of the Left Division, conferred the title of former general, and was soon transferred to the post of Daizongzheng, and then to the post of Shangshu, still with this title of general, the town guard of Jingzhou.

古文：萧宝卷将陈显达等寇荆州，英连战失利。
现代文：萧宝卷的将领陈显达等人侵犯荆州，元英接连交战失败。
English: Xiao Baozhong's general Chen Xianda and others invaded Jingzhou, and Yuan Ying was defeated in successive battles.

古文：车驾至南阳，免英官爵。
现代文：皇帝到南阳，免除丘墓的官职爵位。
English: The emperor went to Nanyang and exempted Qiu Tomb from the official title.

古文：世宗即位，行徐州，还复尚书、广武伯。
现代文：世宗即位，代行徐州事务，召回恢复尚书、广武伯。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne, acting on behalf of Xuzhou affairs, recalled and restored Shangshu and Guangwu Bo.

古文：萧宝卷遣将军陈伯之寇淮南，司徒、彭城王勰镇寿春，以英为镇南将军，率众讨之。
现代文：萧实卷派遣将军陈值之侵犯进丞以南，司徒、彭城王元勰镇守寿昼，任命五茎为镇南将军，率领军队讨伐伯之。
English: Xiao Si sent the general Chen Zheng to the south of the encroachment of Jin Zheng, and appointed Wukong as the general of the south of the town, and led the army to fight against Bo.

古文：英未至，贼已引退。
现代文：五差没到达，贼寇已撤退。
English: Before reaching Wusha, the bandits had retreated.

古文：勰还，诏英行扬州。
现代文：元勰返回，诏令元英代行扬州事务。
English: When Yuan Shao returned, he ordered Yuan Ying to act on his behalf in Yangzhou affairs.

古文：后英还京师，上表曰： 臣闻取乱侮亡，有国之常道；陈师鞠旅，因机而致发。
现代文：后来丘墓返回京城，上奏疏说： 臣下听说攻取动乱的政权轻慢亡国的君主，是国家的正常道理；陈列军队号令将士，乘时机而发动。
English: Later, Qiaohua returned to Beijing, and said in his report: His subjects have heard that it is the normal principle of a country that a monarch who conquers a turbulent regime but ignores a country that has fallen into ruin should display the troops and order the soldiers to take advantage of the opportunity to launch an attack.

古文：窃以区区宝卷，罔顾天常，凭恃山河，敢抗中国。
现代文：私下以为小小的宣鲞，不顾天道，仗恃山河，竟敢对抗中原。
English: Privately, he thought it was a small proclamation, disregarding the heavenly way, fighting the mountains and rivers, and daring to confront the Central Plains.

古文：今妖逆数亡，骄纵日甚，威侮五行，怠弃三正，淫刑以逞，虐害无辜。
现代文：现在妖贼叛逆几度逃亡，骄傲放纵日益加剧，侮慢五常道德，荒废天地入之正道，滥用刑罚，残害无辜。
English: Now, the evil traitors have escaped several times, their pride and indulgence are increasing, they despise the Five Cardinal Morals, waste heaven and earth to enter the right path, abuse criminal punishment, and kill innocent people.

古文：其雍州刺史萧衍东伐秣陵，扫土兴兵，顺流而下，唯有孤城，更无重卫。
现代文：雍州刺史萧衍向东讨伐秣陵，扫荡土地发动兵变，顺流而下，仅有孤城，再无重大的护卫。
English: Xiao Yan, the governor of Yongzhou, went to the east to fight against Fuling, swept the land to launch a mutiny, and went down the river. There was only a lonely city, and there was no major escort.

古文：此则皇天授我之日，旷载一逢之秋，事易走丸，理同拾芥，此而不乘，将欲何待？
现代文：这是上天授予我们的，多少年一遇的时节，事情容易如同圆球的滚动，治理此事如同拾取草芥，这个机会不利用，还要等待什么时候?
English: This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity granted to us by heaven. Things are as easy as the rolling of a ball. Managing this matter is like picking up hay and mustard. If we do not take advantage of this opportunity, when will we have to wait?

古文：臣乞躬率步骑三万，直指沔阴，据襄阳之城，断黑水之路。
现代文：臣下乞请亲自率领步兵骑兵三万人，直指沔阴，占据襄阳的城池，断绝黑水的道路。
English: Please personally lead 30,000 infantry and cavalry to occupy the city of Xiangyang and cut off the road to Heishui.

古文：昏虐君臣，自相鱼肉。
现代文：昏庸暴虐的君臣，会白相残杀。
English: Dim-witted and tyrannical princes and ministers will kill each other for nothing.

古文：我居上流，威震遐迩，长驱南出，进拔江陵。
现代文：我们处于上游，威风震动远近，长驱向南出动，进军攻下江陵。
English: We are in the upstream, the mighty wind is shaking far and near, the long drive to the south, marching to capture Gangneung.

古文：其路既近，不盈五百，则三楚之地，一朝可收；岷蜀之道，自成断绝。
现代文：道路很近，不到五百里，那么三楚的土地，一下子就可占据，通往岷蜀的道路，自然断绝。
English: The road is very close, less than five hundred miles, so the land of Sanchu can be occupied all at once, and the road to Lushu is naturally cut off.

古文：又命扬徐二州，声言俱举，缘江焚毁，靡使所遗。
现代文：再命令扬徐二州，扬言一起发动，沿长江焚毁物资，不使有所遗留。
English: He then ordered Yang Xu Erzhou to threaten to launch a campaign to burn materials along the Yangtze River so that nothing would be left behind.

古文：建业穷蹙，鱼游釜内。
现代文：建业穷困急迫，如锅内之游鱼。
English: The construction industry is in dire straits, like a fish swimming in a pot.

古文：士治之师再兴，孙皓之缚重至，齐文轨而大同，混天地而为一。
现代文：王士治的军队再次出动，孙皓自行捆绑归降的情况就会重新出现，整齐文字车轨而统一天下，混合天地而为一体。
English: Wang Shizhi's army will be dispatched again, and the situation of Sun Yat-sen's self-tied surrender will reappear, the text will be neatly aligned and unified, and heaven and earth will be blended into one.

古文：伏惟陛下暂辟旒纩，少垂听览，独决圣心，无取疑议。此期脱爽，并吞未日。 
现代文：希望陛下暂且面对臣下，稍加倾听，独自决断于内心，不要听取疑惑的议论，这个时机如果错过，并吞就没有期限了。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will face his subjects for the time being, listen a little, make his own decision in his heart, and not listen to doubtful discussions. If this opportunity is missed, annexation will not have a deadline.

古文：事寝不报。
现代文：事情被压下来不回答。
English: The motion was put on hold with no response.

古文：英又奏曰： 臣闻乘虚讨弱，事在速举；因危攻昧，徼捷可期。
现代文：元英又上奏疏说： 臣下听说乘着空虚讨伐薄弱，成事在于迅速行动，利用危难攻打昏昧，求取胜利是可期待的。
English: Yuan Ying also sent a message to Shao, saying: My subjects have heard that taking advantage of emptiness to fight is weak, success lies in quick action, taking advantage of danger to attack obscurity, and victory can be expected.

古文：今宝卷乱常，骨肉相贼，蕃戍鼎立，莫知所归。
现代文：现在宝卷扰乱常道，骨肉相残，藩镇鼎立，不知道归向谁。
English: Now the treasure scroll disturbs the normal way, the flesh and blood are at odds with each other, the township is standing tall, and I don't know who to turn to.

古文：义阳孤绝，密迩天境，外靡粮援之期，内无兵储之固。
现代文：义阳孤立，很接近我国疆域，外没有粮草增援的时间，内没有兵力储蓄的坚固。
English: Yiyang is isolated, very close to China's territory, there is no time for grain and grass reinforcement outside, and there is no solidity of troop savings inside.

古文：此乃临焚之鸟，不可去薪；授首之寇，何容缓斧。
现代文：这是临近焚烧的乌，不能够去掉柴禾；将要被杀的贼寇，哪容放缓刀斧?
English: This is the ash that is about to be burned, unable to remove the firewood; the robber who is about to be killed, how can the axe be slowed down?

古文：若此行有果，则江右之地，斯为经略之基；如脱否也，非直后举难图，亦或居安生疾。
现代文：如果这次行动有效果，则长江以西的土地，就成为筹划进取的基地；如果不是这样，不仅今后的举措难以考虑，也恐怕处于安逸中生出忧患。
English: If this action is effective, then the land west of the Yangtze River will become the base for planning and forging ahead; if this is not the case, not only will future measures be difficult to consider, but I am afraid that troubles will arise in comfort.

古文：今豫州刺史司马悦已戒严垂迈，而东豫州刺史田益宗方拟守三关，请遣军司为之节度。 
现代文：今豫州刺史司马悦已严密戒备将要出兵，而东豫州刺史田益方正准备守卫三关，请求派遣军司对他们加以调度。 
English: Now, Sima Yue, the military governor of Henan Province, has been on high alert and is about to dispatch troops, while Tian Yifang, the military governor of East Henan Province, is preparing to guard the three passes, and has requested the dispatch of the military governor to dispatch them.

古文：世宗遣直寝羊灵引为军司。
现代文：世宗派遣直寝羊灵引担任军司。
English: Sejong dispatched Yangling, who slept upright, to lead the army.

古文：以军功拜吏部尚书，以前后军功进爵常山侯。
现代文：元英因军功被任命为吏部尚书，因前后的军功升爵位为常山侯。
English: As a result of his military service, Yuan Ying was appointed as an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and because of his military service, he was promoted to the peerage of the Prince of Changshan.

古文：英奏： 谨案学令：诸州郡学生，三年一校所通经数，因正使列之，然后遣使就郡练考。
现代文：元英上奏疏： 谨检学令：各州郡的学生，三年考察一次所通晓的经数，按正式使者的位次排列他们，然后派遣使者到郡中精细考核。
English: Yuan Ying wrote in his diary: "Students of all states and counties are required to make a three-year survey of the number of sutras they know, rank them according to the rank of the official envoy, and then send the envoy to the county for detailed examination.

古文：臣伏惟圣明，崇道显成均之风，蕴义光胶序之美，是以太学之馆久置于下国，四门之教方构于京瀍。
现代文：臣下想到陛下英明，崇尚道德显扬官学的风采，培育仁义光大教育的美好，所以太学的馆舍长久设置在诸侯国，四门的教化正构建于京泸。
English: His subjects thought of His Majesty's wisdom, advocating morality and showing the elegance of official learning, and cultivating the beauty of benevolence, righteousness and light education. Therefore, the hall of the great learning was set up in the princely state for a long time, and the four gates of enlightenment were being built in Beijing.

古文：计习训淹年，听受累纪，然俊造之流应问于魏阙，不革之辈宜返于齐民，使就郡练考，核其最殿。
现代文：估计学习教训几年，听受讲解几载后，杰出有造就的人应策试于朝廷，不可改变的人就应回到民众中，使他们到郡中精细考核，定其优劣。
English: It is estimated that after several years of learning lessons and listening to explanations, outstanding and accomplished people should be tested at the imperial court, and those who cannot be changed should return to the people, so that they can go to the county for a detailed examination to determine their strengths and weaknesses.

古文：顷以皇都迁构，江扬未一，故乡校之训，弗遑正试。
现代文：近来因国都迁移建造，长江扬州没统一，所以乡校的教育，没来得及正式考试。
English: Recently, due to the relocation and construction of the national capital, the Yangtze River Yangzhou was not unified, so the education of the township school did not have time to pass the official examination.

古文：致使薰莸之质，均诲学庭；兰萧之体，等教文肆。
现代文：致使良莠不齐的资质，共同在学校受教育；优劣不等的人物，一起在课堂听讲授。
English: As a result, people with different qualifications are educated together at school; people with different strengths and weaknesses listen to lectures together in the classroom.

古文：今外宰京官，铨考向讫，求遣四门博士明通五经者，道别校练，依令黜陟。 
现代文：现在外地大吏京城官员，考察将要结束，请求派遣通晓五经的四门博士，按地域考校，依法令罢黜擢升。 
English: Now, as the inspection is about to end, officials from Beijing, who are foreign dignitaries, have requested the dispatch of four doctors who are well versed in the Five Classics, who will be tested according to the region and promoted according to the law.

古文：诏曰： 学业堕废，为日已久，非一使能劝，比当别敕。 
现代文：诏令说： 学业的衰落废弃，时间已经很久了，不是一个使者所能劝导的，将会另下命令。 
English: The edict said: The decline of learning has been abandoned, it has been a long time, not a messenger can persuade, there will be another order.

古文：寻诏英使持节、假镇南将军、都督征义阳诸军事，率众南讨。
现代文：不久诏令元英为使持节、代理镇南将军、都督征义阳诸军事，率领军队向南讨伐。
English: Soon after, Yuan Ying issued an imperial edict to enlist the military of Yiyang as the envoy of Jizhi Festival, the acting general of Zhenan, and the governor of Yiyang, and led the army to march southward.

古文：萧衍司州刺史蔡道恭闻英将至，遣其骁骑将军杨由率城外居民三千余家，于城西南十里贤首山即岭为三栅，作表里之势。
现代文：萧衍的司州刺史蔡道恭听说元英将要到来，派遣他的骁骑将军杨由率领城外的居民三千多家，在城西南十里处的贤首山依山岭设置三层栅栏，制造表裹相依的局势。
English: Xiao Yan's statesman Cai Daogong heard that Yuan Ying was about to arrive and sent his cavalry general Yang Yu to lead more than three thousand residents outside the city and set up a three-layer fence along the mountains in the south-west of the city, creating a situation of dependence.

古文：英勒诸军围贤首垒，焚其栅门。
现代文：元英统领各军包围贤首营垒，焚烧栅栏的大门。
English: Yuan Ying led the troops to encircle the camp of Xian Shou and burned the gate of the fence.

古文：杨由乃驱水牛，从营而出，继之以兵。
现代文：杨由就驱赶水牛，从营垒中出来，以兵士跟随在后。
English: Yang Yu drove the buffalo away and came out of the camp, followed by the soldiers.

古文：军人避牛，师遂退下。
现代文：兵士躲避水牛，军队就撤退下来。
English: The soldiers dodged the buffalo and the army retreated.

古文：寻分兵围守。
现代文：不久又分兵包围把守。
English: Soon another detachment of soldiers surrounded and guarded it.

古文：其夜，栅民任马驹斩由以降。
现代文：造天夜晚，栅栏中民众任马驹杀死杨由投降。
English: On the night of the creation of heaven, the people in the fence killed Yang Yu and surrendered.

古文：三军馆谷，降民安堵。
现代文：三军供应食宿，投降的人相安无事。
English: The three armies provided food and lodging, and those who surrendered were safe and sound.

古文：萧衍遣其平西将军曹景宗、后将军王僧炳等率步骑三万来救义阳。
现代文：萧衍派遣他的平西将军曹景宗、后将军王僧炳等人率领步兵骑兵三万人前来救助义阳。
English: Xiao Yan dispatched his Pingxi General Cao Jingzong, Rear General Wang Xiangtao and others to lead 30,000 infantry and cavalry to rescue Yiyang.

古文：僧炳统众二万据凿岘，景宗率一万继后。
现代文：僧炳统领部众二万人占据凿岘，景宗率领一万人繁随于后。
English: Twenty-thousand monks and nuns, led by the abbot, occupied the chisel, followed by 10,000 people led by King Gyeongjong.

古文：英遣冠军将军元逞、扬烈将军曹文敬进据樊城以抗之。
现代文：元英派遣冠军将军元逞、扬烈将军曹文敬进军占据樊城来抗拒他们。
English: Yuan Ying dispatched the champion general Yuan Gang and the young general Cao Wenjing to occupy Lucheng to resist them.

古文：英部勒将士，掎角讨之，大破僧炳军，俘斩四千余人。
现代文：元英统领将士，牵制讨伐，大败僧炳的军队，俘获斩杀四千多人。
English: Yuan Ying, the commander-in-chief, held back the crusade, defeated the army of the monks, and captured and killed more than four thousand people.

古文：英又于士雅山结垒，与景宗相抗，分遣诸统，伏于四山，示之以弱。
现代文：元英又在士雅山构筑堡垒，和景宗相对抗，分别派遣各统军，埋伏在四面山上，向景宗显示薄弱。
English: Yuan Ying also built a fortress on Shiyashan Mountain to oppose Jingzong, and separately dispatched the unified armies to ambush the mountains on all sides, showing weakness to Jingzong.

古文：衍将马仙琕率众万余，来掩英营。
现代文：萧衍的将领马仙碑率领部众一万多人，前来偷袭元英的营垒。
English: Xiao Yan's general Ma Xianbei led more than ten thousand people to raid Yuan Ying's camp.

古文：英命诸军伪北诱之，既至平地，统军傅永等三军击之，贼便奔退。
现代文：元英命令各军假装失败引诱他们，到了平地，统军傅永等三军出击，贼寇就逃跑撤退。
English: Yuan Ying ordered each army to pretend to be defeated to lure them. When they reached the plain, the three armies including the unified army Fu Yong attacked, and the bandits fled and retreated.

古文：进击溃之，斩首二千三百级，斩贼羽林监军邓终年。
现代文：进军攻打击溃了他们，斩首二千三百级，杀死贼寇的羽林监军邓终年。
English: They were defeated by the advance and attack, and 2,300 eunuchs were beheaded, and the eunuchs who killed the bandits were punished by Deng for the rest of the year.

古文：仙琕又率一万余人，重来决战。
现代文：仙埤又率领一万多人，再次来决战。
English: Xian Xuan again led more than ten thousand people to go to the decisive battle.

古文：英勒诸将，随便分击，又破之，复斩贼将陈秀之。
现代文：元英统领各将领，依据形势分兵出击，又打败了他，还杀死贼寇将领陈秀之。
English: Yuan Ying led the generals, according to the situation, the detachment attacked, defeated him again, and killed the bandit general Chen Xiuzhi.

古文：统军王买奴别破东岭之阵，斩首五百。
现代文：统军王买奴另外攻下束岭的军阵，斩首五百级。
English: In addition, Wang Miannu of the United Front Army captured the army formation at Sokling and beheaded five hundred soldiers.

古文：道恭忧死，骁骑将军、行州事蔡灵恩复凭穷城，短兵日接。
现代文：道恭忧虑而死，骁骑将军、行州事蔡灵恩又依仗困城，每日短兵相接。
English: Dao Jiong was worried and died, and the cavalry general and the provincial governor Cai Ling'en also relied on the battle to besiege the city, and the soldiers were close to each other every day.

古文：景宗、仙琕知城将拔，尽锐决战，一日三交，皆大败而返。
现代文：景宗、仙埤知道城池将被攻下，用尽精锐决战，一天交手三次，都大败而回。
English: Kyeongjong and Seonjo knew that the castle would be captured, exhausted the elite in the decisive battle, fought three times a day, were defeated and returned.

古文：灵恩势窘，遂降。
现代文：灵恩见形势窘迫，就投降了。
English: Ling'en saw the predicament and capitulated.

古文：三关戍闻之，亦弃城而走。
现代文：三关守边的军队听说后，也弃城逃跑。
English: After hearing of this, the troops guarding the border of Sanguan also abandoned the city and fled.

古文：诏曰： 知贼城已下，复克三关，展威辟境，声略宣振，公私称泰，良以欣然。
现代文：韶令说： 得知贼寇的城池已攻下，又攻克三关，施展声威开辟疆域，声名谋略宣扬震动，公私都称安泰，实在为之高兴。
English: Gong Ling said: I am really happy to learn that the city of thieves and robbers has been conquered, and the three passes have been conquered, the territory has been opened up, the reputation and strategy have been promoted, and the public and private sectors have been called safe.

古文：将军渊规内断，忠谟外举，受律扬旌，克申庙算，虽方叔之制蛮荆，召虎之扫淮浦，匹兹蔑如也。
现代文：将军宏大的计划在心中决断，忠诚的谋略在外面施行，接受律令飘扬旌旗，实现朝廷的克敌谋略，即使是方叔的制伏蛮荆，邵虎的扫荡淮水两岸，与这相比也不如。
English: The general's grand plan is decided in his heart, the loyal strategy is carried out outside, the imperial edict is accepted, the banner is flown, and the imperial strategy of defeating the enemy is realized. Even if it is not as good as Fang Jie's subduing of the barbarous thorns and Shao Hu's sweeping the two sides of Huai Shui.

古文：新州初附，宜广经略，想善加检督，必令周固，有所委付，然后凯旋耳。 
现代文：新州刚归附，应该广泛加以筹划，想来会妥善加以督察，必定使之周全坚固，有所交待托付，然后凯旋而归。 
English: Now that New South Wales has just been annexed, it should be extensively planned, properly supervised if possible, thoroughly fortified, entrusted with something, and then returned in triumph.

古文：初，高祖之平汉阳，英有战功，许复其封，反为显达所败，遂寝。
现代文：当初，高祖平定汉水以北，元英有战功，答应恢复他的封爵，后反被显达打败，就压下来了。
English: At the beginning, Gao Zu had subdued the north of Hanshui, and Yuan Ying had won the war and promised to restore his knighthood. Later, he was defeated by Xanda and suppressed.

古文：是役也，世宗大悦，乃复之，改封中山王，食邑一千户。遣大使、鸿胪少卿睦延吉持节就拜。
现代文：这次战役，世宗很高兴，就恢复了他的封爵，改封为中山王，食邑一千户，派遣大使、鸿胪少卿睦延吉秉持符节前去任命。
English: Sejong was very pleased with this battle, so he restored his knighthood, changed his title to King of Zhongshan, fed a thousand households, and sent an ambassador, Hongye Shaoqing Muyanji, to hold the festival.

古文：英送蔡灵恩及衍尚书郎蔡僧勰，前军将军、义阳太守冯道要，游击将军鲍怀慎，天门太守王承伯，平北府司马宗象，平北府谘议参军伏粲，给事中、宁朔将军蔡道基，中兵参军庞脩等数十人。
现代文：元英押送蔡灵恩和萧衍的尚书郎蔡僧勰，前军将军、义阳太守冯道要，游击将军鲍怀慎，天门太守王承伯，干北府司马宗象，平北府谘议参军伏粲，给事中、宁朔将军蔡道基，中兵参军庞脩等几十人。
English: Yuan Ying escorted Cai Ling'en and Xiao Yan's Shang Shulang Cai Xiangqi, former army general and Yiyang governor Feng Daojiao, guerrilla general Bao Huaixin, Tianmen governor Wang Chengbo, Ganbei governor Sima Zongxiang, Pingbei governor consultation to join the army Fuxi, to the middle of the matter, Ningshuo general Cai Daoji, Chinese soldiers to join the army Pangyi and dozens of others.

古文：诏曰： 会平江南，此等便可放归也。 
现代文：韶令说： 等到平定长江以南，这些人就可放回去。 
English: The imperial edict said: wait until the Yangtze River is pacified to the south, these people can be put back.

古文：英既还，世宗引见，深嘉劳之，后增封一千户。
现代文：元英返回后，世宗接见，大大地嘉奖慰劳他，后来增加封邑一千户。
English: After Yuan Ying's return, Shizong received him, greatly commended and consoled him, and later increased the number of fiefs by one thousand.

古文：萧衍遣将军寇肥梁，诏英使持节，加散骑常侍，征南将军、都督扬徐二道诸军事，率众十万讨之，所在皆以便宜从事。
现代文：萧衍派遣将军侵犯肥梁，韶令元英为使持节，加授散骑常侍，征南将军、都督扬徐二道诸军事，率领部队十万人讨伐他们，各处都依照实际需要自行决断。
English: Xiao Yan dispatched a general to invade Feiliang, and ordered Yuan Ying to be the envoy of the festival, and gave him the title of straggler, and sent the Southern General and the Governor Yang Xu Erdao to the military, and led a force of 100,000 people to fight them. Each place made its own decision according to actual needs.

古文：诏英曰： 贼势滋甚，围逼肥梁，边将后规，以至于此。
现代文：韶令元英说： 贼寇的势力格外强盛，围困肥梁地区，边境将领延误计划，以至于这样。
English: Yu Ling Yuan Ying said: The influence of the bandits is particularly strong, they have besieged the Feiliang area, the border generals have delayed the plan, and so on.

古文：故有斯举，必期胜捷，而出军淹滞，肥梁已陷。
现代文：所以有这次行动，期待一定取胜，而出军拖延迟滞，肥梁已经沦陷。
English: Therefore, there is this operation, expecting a certain victory, delaying the departure of the army, and the fat beam has fallen.

古文：闻之惋懑，实乖本图。
现代文：听说后惋惜愤怒，实在违背原先的意图。
English: When I heard about it, I felt sorry and angry. It really went against my original intention.

古文：今众军云集，十有五万，进取之方，其算安在？
现代文：现在众多军队云集，十五万人，进军取胜的方略，在哪裹?
English: Now many armies are gathering, one hundred and fifty thousand people, where is the strategy for marching to victory?

古文：克殄之期，复当远近？
现代文：克敌的日期，还有多远?
English: How far away is the date for defeating the enemy?

古文：竟以几日可至贼所？
现代文：究竟用几天可以到贼寇处所?
English: How many days does it actually take to get to the thief's location?

古文：必胜之规，何者为先？
现代文：一定取胜的规划，什么是最重要的?
English: What is the most important part of a winning strategy?

古文：故遣步兵校尉、领中书舍人王云指取机要。 
现代文：所以派遣步兵校尉、领中书舍人王云指点听取机密要务。 
English: Therefore, they sent Wang Yun, an infantry lieutenant and middle school teacher, to listen to confidential matters.

古文：英表陈事机。
现代文：元英上奏陈述事务机宜。
English: Yuan Ying came up to make a statement on the business opportunity.

古文：乃击破阴陵，斩衍将二十五人及虏首五千余级。
现代文：于是攻下阴陵，杀死萧街的将领二十五人并斩首五千多级。
English: He then captured Yinling, killed twenty-five of Xiao Jie's generals and beheaded more than five thousand.

古文：又频破贼军于梁城，斩其支将四十二人，杀获及溺死者将五万。
现代文：又在梁城接连打败贼军，杀死他们的部将四十二人，杀死擒获以及淹死的将近五万人。
English: In Liangcheng, they defeated the bandits one after another, killed forty-two of their commanders, and killed nearly fifty thousand people who were captured and drowned.

古文：衍中军大将军、临川王萧宏，尚书右仆射柳惔等大将五人沿淮南走，凡收米三十万石。
现代文：萧衍的中军大将军、临王萧宏，尚书右仆射柳恢等大将五人沿淮水向南逃跑，共缴获米三十万石。
English: Five generals, including Xiao Yan's general of the Chinese army, Lin Wang Xiaohong, and Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Sha Liu Wei, fled south along Huai Shui and captured a total of 300,000 koku of rice.

古文：诏劳英曰： 知大摧鲸寇，威振南海，江浦无尘，三楚卷壒，声被荒隅，同轨斯始。公私庆慰，良副朕怀。
现代文：诏书慰劳元英说： 得知大败强大的贼寇，威风震动南部海疆，长江岸边没有尘土，三楚之地落定尘埃，声名传遍荒远边地，统一从此开始，公私庆祝相慰，实在符合我的心怀。
English: In his message of consolation, Lao Yuanying said: "It is truly in line with my heart to learn that the great defeat of the powerful bandits, the mighty wind shook the southern sea territory, there was no dust on the banks of the Yangtze River, the three places settled the dust, and the fame spread all over the desolate and remote land. The unification began from here, and the public and private celebrations consoled me.

古文：便当乘威藉响，长驱吴会，翦拉遗烬，截彼东南也。 
现代文：应该趁声威凭影响，长驱直入吴郡会稽，剪除残余的势力，截断东南地域。 
English: It is necessary to take advantage of the influence of prestige and influence, drive straight into the Wuxi County Audit Office, cut off the remaining forces, and cut off the southeastern region.

古文：英追至于马头，衍马头戍主委城遁走，遂围钟离。
现代文：元英追击到马头，萧衍的马头戍守头领弃城逃跑，于是包围钟离。
English: Yuan Ying chased them to Ma Tou, and Xiao Yan's Ma Tou and Shou Tou abandoned the city and fled, thus encircling Zhong Li.

古文：诏曰： 师行已久，士马疲瘠，贼城险固，卒难攻屠。
现代文：诏令说： 军队出动已很长时间，兵马疲劳瘦弱，贼寇城池险要坚固，仓促间难以攻打屠减。
English: The imperial edict said: The army has been dispatched for a long time, the soldiers and horses are tired and weak, the thieves and robbers should be strong, and it is difficult to attack and slaughter in a hurry.

古文：冬春之交，稍非胜便，十万之众，日费无赀。
现代文：冬春之交，逐渐不便于取胜，十万人的军队，每天费用难以计算。
English: At the turn of winter and spring, it is becoming increasingly difficult to win. With an army of 100,000 men, the daily cost is difficult to calculate.

古文：方图后举，不待今事。
现代文：将要考虑今后的举措，不需要现在就解决。
English: Future steps will be considered, there is no need to resolve this now.

古文：且可密装徐严，为振旅之意，整疆完土，开示威略。
现代文：可秘密整装慢慢戒严，做凯旋的准备，保全疆土，展示威风谋略。
English: They can secretly and slowly prepare for martial law, prepare for a triumphant return, preserve the territory, and demonstrate their strategy.

古文：左右蛮楚，素应逃亡，或窜山湖，或难制掠。
现代文：左右的蛮楚，一向都逃走了，有的窜入山湖，或许难以制伏攻掠。
English: The barbarians on the right and left have always fled, and some have broken into the mountains and lakes. It may be difficult to subdue the attack and plunder.

古文：若凶渠黠党，有须翦除者，便可扑扫，以清疆界。
现代文：如果凶恶的头领狡黠的党羽，有必须加以剪除的，就可扑灭扫荡，以肃清边境。
English: If there is a vicious leader or a cunning faction that must be eliminated, it can be eliminated by sweeping to clear the border.

古文：如其强狡凭阻，未易致力者，亦不烦肆兵。
现代文：如果他们强大狡猾仗恃险阻，不容易用兵的，也不必麻烦用兵。
English: If they are strong, cunning, and brave in the face of danger, they will not have to trouble themselves with the use of troops.

古文：凯旋迟近，不复委曲。 
现代文：凯旋时间已近，不再详细论说。 
English: The time of triumph is near, so I will not go into details.

古文：英表曰： 臣奉辞伐罪，志殄逋寇，想敌量攻，期至二月将末三月之初，理在必克。
现代文：元英上奏疏说： 臣下遵奉旨意讨伐罪人，志在消灭残余的贼寇，料想敌人估量进攻，打算到二月底三月初，按道理必定攻克。
English: Yuan Ying said in his report: "Our vassals, in accordance with the will of the Emperor, have set out to fight against the criminals, aiming to wipe out the remnants of the bandits. Anticipating the enemy's estimate of the attack, we plan to attack by the end of February or the beginning of March, and we will surely defeat them.

古文：但自此月一日以来，霖雨连并，可谓天违人愿。
现代文：不过从这个月初一以来，大雨不断，可以说是上天违背人的愿望。
English: However, since the first day of this month, heavy rain has continued, which can be said to be a violation of people's wishes.

古文：然王者行师，举动不易，不可以少致睽淹，便生异议。
现代文：然而帝王的军队行动，发起不容易，不可因为稍微拖延推迟，就产生不同议论。
English: However, it is not easy to launch the emperor's military operation, and it is not possible to have different discussions because of a slight delay.

古文：臣亦谛思：若入三月已后，天睛地燥，凭陵是常。
现代文：臣下也仔细思考过。如果进入三月以后，天气晴朗土地干燥，凭此进逼是常规。
English: If the weather is fine and the land is dry after March, it is normal to advance.

古文：如其连雨仍接，不得进攻者，臣已更高邵阳之桥，防其泛突。
现代文：如果接连下雨不间断，不能够进军攻打，臣下已另增高了邵阳的桥梁，防备河水泛滥溢出。
English: If it rains incessantly and the troops are unable to attack, the vassals have raised the bridges of Shaoyang to prevent the river from overflowing.

古文：意外洪长，虑其破桥，臣亦部分造船，复于钟离城随水狭处，营造浮桥，至三月中旬，桥必克成。
现代文：意外的洪水上涨，担心冲破桥梁，臣下也安排造船只，又在钟离城河水狭的地方，建造浮桥，到三月中旬，浮桥必定能建成。
English: Unexpectedly rising flood, worried about breaking through the bridge, the vassals also arranged to build boats, and built a pontoon bridge in the place where the bell was close to the city river. By the middle of March, the pontoon bridge must be completed.

古文：晴则攻腾，雨则围守，水陆二图，以得为限。
现代文：天晴就攻打登城，下雨就包围把守，水陆两个计划，以得胜为期限。
English: If the weather is fine, we will attack the city. If it rains, we will encircle and hold the city. We have two plans, one for land and one for water, with victory as the deadline.

古文：实愿朝廷特开远略，少复赐宽，假以日月，无使为山之功，中途而废。 
现代文：实在期望朝廷特地制定远大的谋略，稍微给予宽限，增加一些时间，不要使如同山岭的功劳，中途而废。 
English: I really hope that the imperial court will specially formulate a grand strategy, give a little grace, increase some time, and do not let the mountain-like achievement be abandoned halfway.

古文：诏曰： 大军野次，已成劳久，攻守之方，理可豫见。
现代文：诏令说： 大军驻扎在野外，已形成长久的疲劳，攻守的方略，按道理可以预见。
English: The imperial edict said: The large army stationed in the field has formed a long-term fatigue, and the strategy of attack and defense can be reasonably predicted.

古文：比频得启，制胜不过暮春，及省后表，复期孟夏之末。
现代文：近来接连得到报告，取胜不超过晚春，等到阅读后来的奏疏，又预定在初夏的下旬。
English: Recently, it has been reported successively that the victory will not exceed late spring, and it is scheduled to be late in early summer after reading the later record.

古文：彼土蒸泞，无宜久淹。
现代文：那襄土地炎热泥泞，不宜久留。
English: The land there is hot and muddy, and it is not good to stay for a long time.

古文：势虽必取，乃将军之深计；兵久力殆，亦朝廷之所忧。
现代文：依情势虽然必定取胜，是将军深远的计划；出兵已久军力疲惫，也是朝廷所忧虑的。
English: According to the situation, although he must win, it is the general's far-reaching plan; the dispatch of troops has exhausted military strength for a long time, which is also the concern of the imperial court.

古文：故遣主书曹道往观军势，使还，一一具闻。 
现代文：所以派遣主书曹道前往观察军队形势，使者返回，一一报告。 
English: Therefore, Cao Dao, the chief scribe, was sent to observe the situation of the army, and the messenger returned with a report.

古文：及道还，英犹表云 可克 。
现代文：等到曹道回京，元英还上奏说 可以攻克 。
English: When Cao Dao returned to Beijing, Yuan Ying also made a speech saying that it could be conquered.

古文：四月，水盛破桥，英及诸将狼狈奔走，士众没者十有五六。
现代文：四月，水大冲破桥梁，元英和各将领狼狈逃奔，兵士死亡的有十分之五六。
English: In April, water broke through the bridge, and Yuan Ying and his generals fled in panic. Fifty-six out of ten soldiers died.

古文：英至扬州，遣使送节及衣冠、貂蝉、章绶。
现代文：元英到达扬州，派遣使者送上符节和衣帽、貂尾蝉文、印章丝带。
English: When Yuan Ying arrived in Yangzhou, he sent an envoy to Yangzhou to present him with a rune knot, a cap, a cicada design, and a seal ribbon.

古文：诏以付典。
现代文：诏令交付主管者。
English: The person who delivers the edict to the person in charge.

古文：有司奏英经算失图，案劾处死。诏恕死为民。
现代文：有关官员上奏元英计划失策，依法律弹劾处死刑，韶令宽恕他的死罪贬为平民。
English: Relevant officials cited Yuan Ying's plan as a policy failure, sentenced him to death according to the law of impeachment, and ordered him to be pardoned and reduced to a civilian.

古文：后京兆王愉反，英复王封，邑一千户，除使持节，假征东将军、都督冀州诸军事。
现代文：后来京兆王元愉反叛，元英恢复王的封爵，食邑一千户，被授任为使持节，代理征束将军、都督冀州诸军事。
English: Later, King Yuan of Jingzhao rebelled against Yuan Ying, and Yuan Ying restored the king's knighthood. He was given a thousand households of food villages, and was appointed as an envoy, acting conscript general, and military governor of Jizhou.

古文：英未发而冀州已平。
现代文：元英没出发而冀州已平定。
English: Yuan Ying has not yet set off and Jizhou has calmed down.

古文：时郢州治中督荣祖潜引萧衍军，以义阳应之，三关之戍，并据城降衍。
现代文：这时郢州治中督荣祖暗中招引萧衍的军队，献出义阳来响应萧衍，三关的戍守头领，都占据城堡投降萧衍。
English: At this time, the governor of Zhangzhou Province, Rong Zu, secretly attracted the army of Xiao Yan, offered Yiyang to respond to Xiao Yan, and the leaders of the three passes all occupied the castle and surrendered to Xiao Yan.

古文：郢州刺史娄悦婴城自守。
现代文：郢州刺史娄悦环城据守。
English: Zhangzhou Zishi Meiyue also occupied the city to defend itself.

古文：悬瓠城民白早生等杀豫州刺史司马悦，据城南叛。
现代文：悬瓠市民白早生等人杀死豫州刺史司马悦，占据城池向南叛变。
English: Suspicious citizens such as Baizaosheng Bai killed Sima Yue, the governor of Yuzhou, and occupied the city in a southward mutiny.

古文：衍将齐苟仁率众守悬瓠。
现代文：萧衍的将领齐苟仁率领军队守卫悬瓠。
English: Xiao Yan's general Qi Guoren led the troops to guard the hanging coffin.

古文：悦子尚华阳公主，并为所劫。
现代文：司马悦的儿子娶华阳公主，都被劫掠。
English: Sima Yue's son married Princess Huayang, and this time they were all arrested.

古文：诏英使持节、都督南征诸军事、假征南将军，出自汝南。
现代文：韶令元英为使持节、都督南征诸军事、代理征南将军，出兵汝南。
English: The imperial court issued an edict appointing Yuan Ying as the envoy of the festival, the governor of the south was conscripted into the military, and the fake south was conscripted into the general, and sent troops from the south of the country.

古文：世宗引英谓之曰： 娄悦绥御失和，铨衡暗于简授，故使郢民引寇，关戍外奔，义阳孤窘，有倒悬之切。
现代文：世宗接见元英对他说： 娄悦统御失和，任命不懂得挑选，所以使得郢州民众招引贼寇，边关戍守兵士向外投奔，义阳孤立窘迫，有倒悬的急切。
English: When Sejong met Yuan Ying, he said to him, "Mao Ying Tong lost the peace, and he did not know how to make appointments, so he made the people of Zhangzhou attract thieves and robbers, the soldiers guarding the border ran away, Yiyang was isolated and in a predicament, and there was a sense of urgency.

古文：王，国之召虎，威名宿震，故屈王亲总元戎，扫清氛秽。
现代文：王是国家的邵虎，威名早巳震动境外，所以委屈王亲自总领军事，扫清凶恶的丑类。
English: Wang is the country's Shaohu, and his prestige has already shaken the outside world. Therefore, the aggrieved king personally led the military to sweep away the vicious monsters.

古文：昔卫霍以匈奴之故，居无宁岁；今南疆不靖，王不得以屡劳为辞也。 
现代文：从前卫青霍去病因为匈奴的缘故，居住没有安宁的时候。现在南部疆域不安定，王不能以屡次辛劳为推辞的理由。 
English: From the avant-garde youth to the sick because of the Xiongnu, when there was no peace to live in. Now the southern territory is unstable, the king can not use repeated toil as a reason to excuse.

古文：英对曰： 臣才非韩白，识暗孙吴，徒以宗室之长，频荷推毂之寄。
现代文：元英回答说： 臣下才能不如韩信白起，见识弱于孙武吴起，仅因是宗室中的年长者，多次承担做将帅的重托。
English: Yuan Ying replied: His ability as a vassal was not as good as Han Xinbai's, his insight was weaker than Sun Wu Wu's, and just because he was the eldest in the family, he was repeatedly entrusted with the heavy responsibility of being a general.

古文：规略浅短，失律丧师，宜章子反之戮，以谢天下。
现代文：谋略短浅，违背律令丧失军队，应该受到子反那样明显的杀戮，来向天下人认罪。
English: It is a short-sighted strategy, a violation of the law, the loss of the army, and it should be killed as clearly as the rebels, to confess to the world.

古文：陛下慈深念屡，爱等钟牛，使臣得同荀伯，再生明世。誓追孟氏，以报复为期。
现代文：陛下仁慈深于思念 足下，爱心等同钟爱礼器佳品，使臣下能够同于荀伯，再生于清明时代，立誓追踪孟氏，以报答恩情为目标。
English: His Majesty's benevolence is deep in his thoughts, and his love is equal to his fondness for gift items, so that his subjects can be like his great-great-grandfather, born in the Ching Ming era, and vow to pursue Meng, with the goal of repaying his kindness.

古文：关郢微寇，何足平殄？灭贼方略，已在臣目中，愿陛下勿劳圣虑也。 
现代文：关郢微小的贼寇，不难平定，消灭贼寇的策略，已经在我心目中，希望陛下不要费心。 
English: It is not difficult to subdue the tiny bandits, and the strategy of eliminating the bandits has already been in my mind. I hope that Your Majesty will not bother.

古文：世宗曰： 截彼东南，再清随楚，所望于将军。
现代文：世宗说： 截断东南，再次肃清随楚地区，是我期望将军的。
English: Sejong said: I expect the general to cut off the southeast and clean up the Suichu area again.

古文：钟离一眚，岂足以损大德。
现代文：钟离城的一次过失，哪裹足以损伤大德?
English: Is one mistake by Zhong Liucheng enough to damage a great man?

古文：今王董彼三军，朕无忧矣。 
现代文：现在有王统领那三军，我没有忧虑了。 
English: Now that we have a king to rule over these three armies, I am no longer worried.

古文：世宗以邢峦频破早生，诏英南赴义阳。
现代文：世宗因邢峦接连打败早生，诏令元英向南奔赴义阳。
English: The Sejong successively defeated the precocious, and ordered Yuan Ying to go south to Yiyang.

古文：英以众少，累表请军，世宗弗许。
现代文：元英因部众少，接连上奏请增兵，世宗不准许。
English: Due to the small number of members, Yuan Ying successively appealed for more soldiers, but Shizong did not allow it.

古文：而英辄与邢峦分兵共攻悬瓠，克之，乃引军而进。
现代文：而元英就和邢峦分别出兵一同攻打悬瓠，攻克下来，于是率军前进。
English: However, Yuan Ying sent troops to attack Hanging Rock together with Ying separately, defeated it, and then led the army forward.

古文：初苟仁之据悬瓠，衍宁朔将军张道凝等率众据楚城，闻英将至，弃城南走。英追击，斩道凝及衍虎贲中郎曹苦生，尽俘其众。既次义阳，将取三关，英策之曰： 三关相须如左右手，若克一关，两关不待攻而定。
现代文：当初苟仁占据悬瓠，萧衍的宁朔将军张道凝等人率领军队占据楚城，听说元英将要到来，放弃城池向南逃跑，元英追击，杀死道凝和萧衍的虎贲中郎曹苦生，全部俘获了他们的部众停驻在义阳后，将要攻取三关，元英策划说： 三关互相需要如同左右手，如果攻下一关，另两关不等待攻打就可平定。
English: At first, Goren occupied Hanging Rock, Xiao Yan's Ningshuo general Zhang Daojun and others led the army to occupy Chu City. Hearing that Yuan Ying was about to arrive, they abandoned the city and fled south. Yuan Ying chased and killed Daojun and Xiao Yan's Tigress middle brother Cao Kusheng. All of their captives were stationed in Yiyang. They were going to capture three passes. Yuan Ying planned to say: The three passes need each other like right and left hands. If one pass is captured, the other two passes can be pacified without waiting for the attack.

古文：攻难不如攻易，东关易攻，宜须先取，即黄石公所谓战如风发，攻如河决。 
现代文：攻打困难的不如攻打容易的，束关容易攻打，应该首先攻取，这就是黄石公所说的交战如大风吹动，攻打如河水破堤。 
English: Attacking the difficult is not as good as attacking the easy, Shouguan is easy to attack, it should be attacked first. This is what Huangshi Gong said that the war is like the wind blowing, and the attack is like the river breaking the dike.

古文：英恐其并力于东，乃使长史李华率五统向西关，分其兵势。
现代文：元英担心敌军在东部合力抵抗，就派长史李华率领五个统军攻向西关，分开他们的兵力。
English: Fearing that the enemy forces would join forces to resist in the east, Yuan Ying sent General Shi Lihua to lead the five unified armies to attack Xiguan and separate their forces.

古文：身督诸军向东关。
现代文：亲自统领各军攻打东关。
English: He personally led the armies to attack Dongguan.

古文：先是，马仙琕使云骑将军马广率众拒屯于长薄，军主胡文超别屯松岘。
现代文：在这以前，马仙埤派云骑将军马广率领部众在长薄屯兵抗拒，军主胡文超另外驻守松岘。
English: Prior to this, Ma Xianqi sent General Ma Guang to lead the troops in Changbo to resist, and the commander Hu Wenchao was stationed in Songtao.

古文：英至长薄，马广夜遁入于武阳，英进师攻之。
现代文：元英到达长薄，马广夜晚逃进武阳，元英进军攻打他。
English: Yuan Ying arrived at Chang thin, Ma Guang fled into Wuyang at night, Yuan Ying marched to attack him.

古文：闻衍遣其冠军将军彭甕生、骠骑将军徐超秀援武阳，英乃缓军，曰： 纵之使入此城，吾先曾观其形势，易攻耳，吾取之如拾遗也。 
现代文：听说萧衍派遣他的冠军将军彭瓮生、骠骑将军徐超秀援救武阳，元英于是放缓出兵时间，说： 放纵他们使其进入造座城中，我先前曾经观察城中地形，容易攻打，我攻取它如同拾取掉在地上的物件。 
English: Hearing that Xiao Yan had sent his champion general Peng Yansheng and cavalry general Xu Chaoxiu to rescue Wuyang, Yuan Ying slowed down the dispatch time and said: Allow them to enter the city, I have previously observed the terrain in the city, it is easy to attack, I attack it as if picking up objects dropped on the ground.

古文：诸将未之信。
现代文：各将领不相信。
English: The generals were incredulous.

古文：瓫生等既入武阳，英促围攻之，六日而广等降。
现代文：瓮生等人进入武阳后，元英督促围困攻打，六日后马广等人投降。
English: After He Sheng and others entered Wuyang, Yuan Yingdu urged the siege attack, and six days later Ma Guang and others surrendered.

古文：于是进击黄岘，衍太子左卫率李元履弃城奔窜。
现代文：于是进军攻打黄岘，萧衍的太子左卫率李元履放弃城池逃窜。
English: As a result, they marched to attack Huangpi, and Xiao Yan's prince Zuo Wei led Li Yuanlu to abandon the city and flee.

古文：又讨西关，衍司州刺史马仙琕亦即退走，果如英策。
现代文：又讨伐西关，萧衍的司史马仙埤也当即后退逃跑，果然如同元英所策划的。
English: They also attacked Xiguan, and Xiao Yan's secretary Ma Xianqi immediately retreated and fled, just as Yuan Ying had planned.

古文：凡擒其大将六人，支将二十人，卒七千，米四十万石，军资称是。
现代文：共擒获萧衍的大将六人，部将二十七人，兵士七千人，米四十万石，军用物资与此相应。
English: Six generals, 27 subordinate generals, 7,000 soldiers, 400,000 koku of rice, and corresponding military supplies were captured along with Xiao Yan.

古文：还朝，除尚书仆射。
现代文：回到朝廷，授任尚书仆射。
English: After returning to China, he was awarded the title of Shangshu Righteous Servant.

古文：永平三年，英薨，给东园秘器、朝服一具、帛七百匹，赠司徒公，谥曰献武王。
现代文：永平三年，元英逝世，赐给棺材、朝廷礼服一套、帛七百匹，追赠司徒公，谧号为献武王。
English: In the third year of Yongping, Yuan Ying died, and was given a coffin, a set of imperial court dress, and seven hundred horses, and was posthumously given the title of Shituko. His posthumous name was King Xianwu.

古文：英五子。
现代文：元英有五个儿子。
English: Yuan Ying has five sons.

古文：攸，字玄兴，东宫洗马。
现代文：元攸，字玄兴，任东宫洗马。
English: Yuan Yu, also known as Xuan Xing, was assigned to the Eastern Palace to wash horses.

古文：早卒，赠散骑侍郎。
现代文：去世很早，追赠散骑侍郎。
English: He died very early and was posthumously awarded the title of Sanzhijiro.

古文：攸弟熙，字真兴。
现代文：元攸的弟弟元熙，字真兴。
English: Yuan Yu's younger brother, Yuan Xi, was called Zhenxing.

古文：好学，俊爽有文才，声著于世，然轻躁浮动。
现代文：为人好学，杰出豪爽有文才，秆名于世，然而轻浮急躁。
English: He is a studious person, an outstanding man of valor and literary talent, famous in the world, but he is frivolous and impatient.

古文：英深虑非保家之主，常欲废之，立第四子略为世子。宗议不听，略又固请，乃止。起家秘书郎，延昌二年袭封，累迁兼将作大匠，拜太常少卿、给事黄门侍郎，寻转光禄勋。
现代文：元英深深担忧他不是保全家庭的人，时常想废黜他，立第四个儿子元略为世厂，宗族商议不同意，元略又坚决请求，才作罢、元熙出仕为秘书郎，延昌二二年继承封爵，隆经升任至兼将作大匠，被任命为太常少即、给事黄门侍郎，不久调任光禄勋。
English: Motohide was deeply concerned that he was not the one to preserve the family, and often wanted to dethrone him. He appointed his fourth son, Motoyuki, as his successor. The clan deliberated and disagreed, and Motoyuki strongly requested that he resign. Motohiro became the secretary. He succeeded to the title of knight in the 22nd year of the Enchang era. He was promoted to the position of grandmaster and grandmaster. He was appointed as a too-frequent-to-be-too-frequent-to-be-too-often-to-be-too-often-to-be-too-often-to-be-too

古文：时领军于忠执政。熙，忠之婿也，故岁中骤迁。寻除平西将军、东秦州刺史，进号安西将军，秘书监。寻以本将军授相州刺史。熙以七月入治，其日大风寒雨，冻死者二十余人，驴马数十匹。
现代文：当时领军于忠执掌朝政元熙，是于忠的女婿，所以一年中骤然升遥小久授任平西将军、束秦州刺史，升 单号为安西将 甲，秘书监，不久以本号将军授任相州刺史元熙在月进入治所，这天刮大风起寒冷的雨，冻死的有二十多人，驴马几十匹。
English: At that time, the leader of the army, Yu Zhong, was the son-in-law of Yu Zhong's son-in-law, Yuan Xi, who was in charge of the government at that time. Therefore, Yu Zhong's son-in-law, Yu Zhong's son-in-law, Yu Zhong's son-in-law, Yu Zhong's son-in-law, Yu Zhong's son-in-law, Yu Zhong's son-in-law, Yu Zhong's son-in-law, Yu Zhong's son-in-law, Yu Zhong's son-in-law, Yu Zhong's son-in-law, Yu

古文：熙闻其祖父前事，心恶之。
现代文：元熙听过祖父从前的事，心中憎恶造件事。
English: Yuan Xi had heard of his grandfather's past deeds, and his heart abhorred the deed.

古文：又有蛆生其庭。
现代文：又有蛆生在庭院中。
English: There are also twins in the courtyard.

古文：初，熙兄弟并为清河王怿所昵，及刘腾、元叉隔绝二宫，矫诏杀怿，熙乃起兵。上表曰： 臣闻安危无常，时有休否。
现代文：当初，元熙兄弟都为清河王元恽所亲近，等到刘腾、元叉隔断二宫，假称诏令杀死元恽，元熙于是起兵，上奏疏说： 臣下听说安危无常，时事有吉祥凶险。
English: At first, the brothers of Yuan Xi were all close to the king of Qinghe, Yuan Shao, until Liu Teng and Yuan Zha separated the two palaces and pretended to kill Yuan Shao by imperial decree. Then, Yuan Xi raised an army and said: "My subjects have heard that safety and security are impermanent, and that current affairs are auspicious and perilous.

古文：臣早属休明，晚逢多难。
现代文：臣早年遇上清明时代，后来遭遇多灾多难的时代。
English: In his early years, he encountered the Ching Ming era, and later the era of many disasters and difficulties.

古文：自皇基绵茂，九叶承光，高祖、世宗，徽明相袭。
现代文：自从皇室基业茂盛，九代继承光大，高祖、世宗，美好的德行相传。
English: Since the foundation of the imperial family has flourished, the nine generations have inherited the great glory, the great ancestors, the great lineage, and the wonderful virtues.

古文：皇太后圣敬自天，德同马邓；至尊神睿纂御，神鉴烛远。
现代文：皇太后圣明庄敬自是天生，德行同于马皇后邓皇后；皇上神奇聪慧继承皇位，明察秋毫照耀远方。
English: Empress Dowager Shengmingzhuang Jing herself was born with the same virtues as Empress Ma and Empress Deng; the emperor inherited the throne with magical wisdom and shone far and wide.

古文：四海晏如，八表归化。
现代文：四海平安，八方归附。
English: The four seas are safe, and the eight directions have been annexed.

古文：而领军将军元叉宠藉外亲，叨荣左右，豺狼为心，饱便反啮。
现代文：然而领军将军元叉凭藉外戚受宠，在皇帝左右贪得荣耀，以豺狼的心肠，吃饱后就反咬一口。
English: However, the leader of the army, General Yuan Zha, was favored by his relatives and coveted glory around the emperor. With the heart of a wolf, he would bite back when he was full.

古文：遂使二宫阻隔，温清阙礼。
现代文：于是使二宫隔断，生活起居缺失礼节另外太傅清河王横遭杀害。
English: As a result, the second palace was cut off, and there was a lack of etiquette in living. In addition, Taifu Qinghe Wang was killed.

古文：又太傅清河王横被屠害，致使忠臣烈士，丧气阙庭；亲贤宗戚，愤恨内外。
现代文：致使忠诚的臣属刚强的士人，在朝廷感到颓丧；亲信贤士宗室戚属，在皇宫内外愤恨。
English: As a result, the loyal vassals, the strong nobles, were disheartened in the imperial court; the close relatives of the wise men, the relatives of the imperial family, were angry inside and outside the imperial palace.

古文：妄指鹿马，孰能逾之；王董权逼，方此非譬。
现代文：随意指鹿为马，怎能超过这；王莽董卓威权相逼，也不能与此相比。
English: To arbitrarily refer to a deer as a horse, how can it exceed this; Wang Mangdongzhuo's authority cannot be compared with this.

古文：臣仰瞻云阙，泣血而生，以细草不除，将为烂漫。
现代文：臣下仰望宫殿，悲痛地哭泣而生，认为小草不除，将蔓延遍地。
English: The vassals looked up at the palace, wept with grief, and thought that if the weeds were not removed, they would spread everywhere.

古文：况叉悖逆如此，孰可忍之！
现代文：何况元叉如此狂悖作乱，谁能容忍他?
English: What's more, Yuan Xuan is so wild and disorderly, who can tolerate him?

古文：臣忝籍枝萼，思尽力命，碎首屠肝，甘之若荠。
现代文：臣下愧列宗室支属，思虑竭尽力量性命，即使粉身碎骨，也甘之若饴。
English: Subordinate vassals, subordinate vassals, subordinate vassals, subordinate vassals, subordinate vassals, subordinate vassals, subordinate vassals.

古文：今辄起义兵，实甲八万，大徒既进，文武争先，与并州刺史、城阳王徽，恆州刺史、广阳王渊，徐州刺史、齐王萧宝夤等，同以今月十四日俱发。
现代文：现在兴起正义的军队，兵士八万人，大军进发，文武官员争先恐后，和并州刺史、城阳王元徽，恒州刺史、广阳王亘遄，涂业刺史、查王芦宜鱼等人，共同在本月十四日一起出发。
English: Now, a righteous army is rising, with 80,000 soldiers, a large army is marching, and civil and military officials are scrambling. On the 14th of this month, they will set out together with Banzhou Zhishi, Chengyang Wangyuanhui, Hengzhou Zhishi, Guangyang Wangwu, Tuye Zhishi, Cha Wangruiyu and others.

古文：庶仰凭祖宗之灵，俯罄义夫之命，扫翦凶丑，更清京邑。
现代文：希望上凭祖宗的英灵，下尽正义之士的性命，扫除凶恶的歹徒，肃清京城。
English: I hope that, with the help of the ancestors' heroic spirit, the lives of righteous people will be spared, vicious criminals will be eliminated, and the capital city will be cleansed.

古文：臣亲总三军，星迈赴难，置兵温城，伏听天旨。
现代文：臣亲自统领三军，迅急奔赴国难，布置军队在温球，恭敬地接受皇帝旨意。
English: The minister personally led the three armies, quickly rushed to the national disaster, arranged the army in the warm ball, and respectfully accepted the emperor's will.

古文：王公宰辅，或世著忠烈，或宿佩恩顾，如能同力，翦除元叉，使太后至尊忻然奉对者，臣即解甲散兵，赴谢朝阙。
现代文：王公宰辅，有的世代以忠诚勇烈著称，有的往受到恩惠照顾，如能同心协力，消灭元叉，使太后皇上欣然会面，臣下就解下铠甲遣散兵士，到朝廷谢罪。
English: Wang Gongzai Fu, some generations are famous for their loyalty and bravery, and some have been favored in the past. If they can work together to eliminate the Yuan fork, so that the empress dowager is pleased to meet, the vassals will release the armored soldiers and go to the court to apologize.

古文：臣虽才乖昔人，位居蕃屏，宁容坐观奸丑，虚受荣禄哉！ 
现代文：臣下虽然才能不及前人，位居藩镇，哪能坐视奸猾恶人不管，空受荣耀俸禄呢? 
English: Although the talent of the vassals is less than that of their predecessors, and they are in the highest position in the town, how can they sit back and watch the treacherous and wicked, and receive the reward of glory?

古文：熙兵起甫十日，为其长史柳元章、别驾游荆、魏郡太守李孝怡率诸城人，鼓噪而入，杀熙左右四十余人，执熙，置之高楼，并其子弟。
现代文：元熙起兵刚十天，被他的长史柳元章、别驾游荆、魏郡太守李孝怡率领一些市民，击鼓呼叫着进入，杀死元熙的左右四十多人，捉住元熙，放到高楼上，还有他的子弟。
English: Just ten days after Yuan Xi raised an army, some citizens, led by his long-serving generals Liu Yuanzhang, Bei Rui You Jing, and Wei County Governor Li Xiaoyi, entered, beating drums and shouting, killed more than forty people around Yuan Xi, captured Yuan Xi, and put him on a high-rise building, as well as his son.

古文：叉遣尚书左丞卢同斩之于鄴街，传首京师。
现代文：元叉派遣尚书左丞卢同在邺城街市斩杀元熙，传送首级到京城。
English: Yuan Zhaoping dispatched Shang Shuzhong Lu to behead him on Shicheng Street, and the head was sent to Beijing.

古文：始熙妃于氏知熙必败，不从其谋，自初哭泣不绝，至于熙死。
现代文：开始元熙的妃子于氏知道元熙必定失败，不顺从他的谋划，从开始就哭泣不断，直到元熙死去。
English: From the very beginning, Yuan Xi's wife Yu knew that Yuan Xi would certainly fail. She did not agree with his plan and cried from the beginning until Yuan Xi died.

古文：熙临刑为五言诗，示其僚吏曰： 义实动君子，主辱死忠臣。
现代文：元熙受刑前作五言诗，展示给僚属佐吏说： 正义感君子，主辱死忠臣。
English: Before he was sentenced, Yuan Xi composed a five-character poem, which he showed to his colleagues and subordinates, saying, "A gentleman feels justice, but a lord humiliates a loyal subject to death."

古文：何以明是节？将解七尺身。 
现代文：何以明气节，献出七尺身。 
English: What a bright air festival, offering a seven-foot body.

古文：与知友别曰： 平生方寸心，殷勤属知己。
现代文：和相知的朋友告别时说： 平生一片心，殷切托知己。
English: When bidding farewell to an acquaintance, he said: I've always had a warm heart and trusted my friends wholeheartedly.

古文：从今一销化，悲伤无极已。 
现代文：从今入土去，悲伤无尽期。 
English: From now on to the grave, the sadness will be endless.

古文：熙既蕃王之贵，加有文学，好奇爱异，交结伟俊，风气甚高，名美当世，先达后进，多造其门。
现代文：元熙是藩王中的显贵，加上有才学，爱好奇异人才，交结杰出之士，气度很高，在当代有好名声，先辈后辈，多到他的家中造访。
English: Yuan Xi was a prominent member of the kings of the Han Dynasty. He was also a scholar, a curious person, and an outstanding person. He had a good reputation among his contemporaries, and many of his predecessors and successors visited his home.

古文：始熙之镇鄴也，知友才学之士袁翻、李琰、李神俊、王诵兄弟、裴敬宪等咸饯于河梁，赋诗告别。
现代文：开始元熙镇守邺城，知交才学之士袁翻、李琰、李神俊、王诵兄弟、裴敬宪等人都到河梁饯行，赋诗道别。
English: At the beginning, Yuan Xizhen was in charge of the defense of Lucheng. Yuan Fu, Li Yu, Li Shenjun, Wang Chiao brothers, Pei Jingyan and other scholars of diplomacy and learning all went to Hailiang to say goodbye.

古文：及熙将死，复与知故书曰： 吾与弟并蒙皇太后知遇，兄据大州，弟则入侍，殷勤言色，恩同慈母。
现代文：到元熙将死时，又给知己故交写信说： 我和弟弟都受到皇太后的赏识宠遇，哥哥占据大州，弟弟入宫侍奉，皇太后殷切的言语神色，恩情如同慈母。
English: When Yuan Xi was on the verge of death, he wrote to his old confidant: My brother and I have been favored by the Empress Dowager. My brother has occupied Dazhou, my brother has entered the palace to serve. The empress dowager's warm words are beautiful, and her kindness is like that of a loving mother.

古文：今皇太后见废北宫，太傅清河王横受屠酷，主上幼年，独在前殿。
现代文：现在皇太后被废黜在北宫，太傅清河王横遭屠杀，主上小小年纪，独自住在前殿。
English: Now the empress dowager has been abandoned in the North Palace, and King Taifu Qinghe has been killed. The saint is young, and he is at the mercy of others in the front hall.

古文：君亲如此，无以自安，故率兵民建大义于天下。
现代文：君主亲人如此，无法安心，所以率领兵士民众在天下建立大义。
English: The relatives of the monarch could not be reassured in this way, so they led the soldiers and people to establish the Great Righteousness in the world.

古文：但智力浅短，旋见囚执，上惭朝廷，下愧相知。
现代文：衹是智力浅短，不久就被囚禁，上愧朝廷，下愧知心好友。
English: However, due to my lack of intelligence, I am not only a thief, but I am in prison. I am really ashamed of the imperial court, and I have no face for my friends.

古文：本以名义干心，不得不尔，流肠碎首，复何言哉！昔李斯忆上蔡黄犬，陆机想华亭鹤唳，岂不以恍惚无际，一去不还者乎？
现代文：本来因名誉道义在心，不能不这样做，流出肠子粉碎头颅，又有什么可说的呢从前李斯回忆上蔡的黄犬，陆机追想茎皇的鹤叫，难道不是因为隐约没有边际，一去不复返了吗?
English: Originally, with honor and morality in mind, I couldn't help but do it, and my intestines flowed out and crushed my head, and what can I say? Once upon a time, Li Si recalled the yellow dog of Cai, and the land plane recalled the crane call of the stem emperor. Wasn't it because there was no margin, and it would never return?

古文：今欲对秋月，临春风，藉芳草，廕花树，广召名胜，赋诗洛滨，其可得乎？
现代文：现在想要面对秋日月光，受春风吹拂，踏着芳草，走在花朵树荫之下，广泛召集名流，在洛水边赋诗，还有可能吗?
English: Now, if you want to face the autumn sun and moonlight, be blown by the spring wind, walk on the fragrant grass, walk under the shade of flowers, widely convene celebrities, and compose poems at the water's edge of Luo, is it possible?

古文：凡百君子，各敬尔宜，为国为身，善勖名节，立功立事，为身而已，吾何言哉！ 
现代文：各位君子，各自恭敬地对待所应做的事，为国家为自身，好好以名节自勉，建功立业，为自己而已，我有什么可说的呢! 
English: Gentlemen, each of you should respectfully do what needs to be done, for the country and for yourself, make a good name for yourself, make achievements, and for yourself, what can I say!

古文：时人怜之。
现代文：当时人怜惜他。
English: He was pitied at the time.

古文：又熙于任城王澄薨前，梦有人告之曰： 任城当死。
现代文：另外元熙在任城王元澄逝世前，梦见有人告诉他说： 任城王将死去。
English: In addition, before the death of the king of Rencheng, Yuanxi dreamed that someone told him: "The king of Rencheng will die."

古文：死后二百日外，君亦不免。
现代文：死后两百天以后，你也不能免死。
English: Two hundred days after you die, you're still going to die.

古文：若其不信，试看任城家。 
现代文：如果你不相信，可试看任城王的家。 
English: If you don't believe me, look at Ren Shiwang's family.

古文：熙梦中顾瞻任城第舍，四面墙崩，无遗堵焉。
现代文：元熙梦中看到任城王的房舍，四面墙壁崩塌，没有留下一堵墙。
English: In his dream, Yuan Xi saw the four walls of Ren Shiwang's house collapse, leaving no wall behind.

古文：熙恶之，觉而以告所亲。
现代文：元熙憎恶这个梦，醒后告诉给亲近的人。
English: Motohiro hated the dream and told those close to him about it when he woke up.

古文：及熙之死也，果如所梦。
现代文：等到元熙死去，果然如同他所梦见的。
English: When Yuan Xi died, it did indeed match the situation in his dream.

古文：兄弟三人，每从英征伐，在军贪暴，或因迎降逐北，至有斩杀无辜，多增首级，以为功状。
现代文：兄弟三人，时常跟随元英征伐，在军中贪婪残暴，有时因为接应投降者追击溃逃者，有斩杀无辜的现象，用来多增杀敌首级，作为功劳事迹。
English: The three brothers often followed Yuan Ying on campaigns. They were greedy and cruel in the army. Sometimes, because they received those who surrendered and chased those who fled, there was a phenomenon of killing innocents, which was used to kill more enemy leaders as a deed of merit.

古文：又于忠之诬郭祚、裴植也，忠意未决害之，由熙劝奖，遂至极法，世以为冤。
现代文：另外于忠诬陷郭祚、裴植，于忠本意未决定杀害他们，因元熙的劝说怂恿，以至于处死刑，世人以为冤枉。
English: In addition, Guo Qi and Pei Zhi were falsely accused by Yu Zhong. Yu Zhong did not intentionally decide to kill them, but because of Yuan Xi's persuasion, he was sentenced to death, and the world thought it was unjust.

古文：及熙之祸，议者以为有报应焉。
现代文：等到元熙遭灾祸，议论的人认为有报应。
English: After the calamity that befell Yuan Xi, the commentators thought that there would be retribution.

古文：灵太后反政，赠使持节、都督冀定瀛相幽五州诸军事、大将军、太尉公、冀州刺史，增本封一千户，谥曰文庄王。
现代文：灵太后重掌大权，追赠元熙为使持节、都督冀定瀛相幽五州诸军事、大将军、太尉公、冀州刺史，增加原来的封邑一千户，谧号为文庄王。
English: After the great-grandmother Ling regained power, she posthumously presented Yuan Xi with military, generals, captains, and princes of five states, and increased the original number of fiefs by one thousand households, with the posthumous name of King Wenzhuang.

古文：长子景献，次仲献，次叔献，并与熙同被害。
现代文：长子景献，次子仲献，第三个儿子叔献，都和元熙同时被杀害。
English: The eldest son, Jing Xian, the second son, Zhong Xian, and the third son, Shu Xian, were all killed at the same time as Yuan Xi.

古文：后赠景献中军将军、青州刺史，葬以王礼；仲献左将军、兗州刺史；叔献右将军、齐州刺史。
现代文：后来追赠景献为中军将军、青州刺史，用王的礼仪安葬；仲献为左将军、兖州刺史；叔献为右将军、齐州刺史。
English: Later, the general of the Chinese army, Qingzhou Zhishi, was presented with a posthumous gift and buried with the king's etiquette; the middle gift was the left general, Zhangzhou Zhishi; the uncle was the right general, Qizhou Zhishi.

古文：叔献弟叔仁，以年幼获全，与母于氏徙朔州。
现代文：叔献的弟弟叔仁，因年幼得以保全，和母亲于氏流放到朔州。
English: Unken's younger brother, Shujin, was spared because of his young age, and he and his mother were exiled to Shuozhou.

古文：孝昌初，灵太后诏叔仁归京师，还其财宅，袭先爵。
现代文：孝昌初年，灵太后诏令叔仁回到京城，归还他家的财产住宅，继承先人的爵位。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, the Dowager Empress Ling ordered Uncle Ren to return to Beijing, return his family's property and residence, and inherit his ancestor's title.

古文：除征虏将军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：授任他为征虏将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: He was appointed as a conscript general and a regular attendant.

古文：孝庄初，遇害于河阴，赠卫大将军、仪同三司、并州刺史。
现代文：孝庄帝初年，在河阴遇害，追赠他为卫大将军、仪同三司、并州刺史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang, he was killed in Heyin, and he was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Guards, the title of the Three Departments, and the title of the State Historian.

古文：子琳，袭。
现代文：儿子元琳，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuanlin, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：熙弟诱，字惠兴。
现代文：元熙的弟弟元诱，字惠兴。
English: Yuan Xi's younger brother, Yuan Yu, was called Huixing.

古文：自员外郎稍迁通直郎、太子中庶子、征虏将军、卫尉少卿，出为右将军、南秦州刺史。
现代文：从员外郎逐渐升到通直郎、太子中庶子、征虏将军、卫尉少卿，外任为右将军、南秦州刺史。
English: He was gradually promoted from member of the Outer House to Tsunenairo, the Prince's middle child, Conscript General, Junior Captain of the Imperial Guard, General of the Right, and Governor of Southern Qin.

古文：叉斩之于岐州，妻子得不坐。
现代文：元叉在岐州杀了他，妻子儿女得以不受牵连。
English: Yuan Zha killed him in Qizhou, and his wife and children were not implicated.

古文：追赠车骑大将军、雍州刺史，后赠仪同三司，追封都昌县开国伯，食邑八百户，谥曰恭。
现代文：追赠他为车骑大将军、雍州刺史，后来追赠仪同三司，追封都昌县开国伯，食邑八百户，谧号为恭。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Chariot and Cavalry and the History of Yongzhou. Later, he was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Marshal of the Three Departments, and was awarded the title of Grand Duke of Duchang County, with 800 households in his hometown, and his posthumous name was Gong.

古文：子始伯，袭。
现代文：儿子主锤，继承爵位。
English: His son, Lord Hammer, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：给事中。
现代文：担任给事中。
English: The appointment is pending.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：壹国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：诱弟略，字俊兴。
现代文：元诱的弟弟元略，字俊兴。
English: Yuan Yu's younger brother, Yuan Liang, known as Junxing.

古文：才气劣于熙，而有和邃之誉。
现代文：才华气质比元熙差，而有和顺深邃的声誉。
English: His talent and temperament are inferior to that of Yuan Xi, but he has a profound reputation as a conciliator.

古文：自员外郎稍迁羽林监、通直散骑常侍、冠军将军、给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：从员外郎逐渐升任羽林监、通直散骑常侍、冠军将军、给事黄门侍郎。
English: His subordinate, Wairo, gradually rose to the positions of Urin no kami, Tsuchida Sanzhi no tsunezamurai, Champion no shogun, and Gesshikomon no samurai.

古文：清河王怿死后，叉黜略为怀朔镇副将。
现代文：清河王元恽死后，元叉贬降元略为怀朔镇副将。
English: After the death of the Qing River King Yuan Xuan, Yuan Xuan demoted Yuan slightly to vice-general of Waishuo Town.

古文：未及赴任，会熙起兵，与略书来去。
现代文：没来得及赴任，遇到元熙起兵，和元略书信来往。
English: Before he could take office, he met Yuan Xi, who raised an army, and exchanged letters with him.

古文：寻值熙败，略遂潜行，自托旧识河内司马始宾。
现代文：不久遇上元熙失败，元略就隐身出逃，依托旧曰朋友河内人司马始宾。
English: Not long after he met with the failure of Yuan Xi, Yuan Liak fled incognito, relying on his old friend Sima Shih Bing, a native of Hanoi.

古文：始宾便为荻筏，夜与略俱渡盟津，诣上党屯留县栗法光。
现代文：始宾就做荻草筏子，夜晚和元略一起渡过盟津，前往上党屯留县入栗法光那裹。
English: The first guest was a grasshopper, and in the evening, he and Yuan Li crossed Meitun together and went to Shangdang Tunliu County to get into the chestnut light.

古文：法光素敦信义，忻而纳之。
现代文：法光一向重信义，欣然地接纳他们。
English: Kurihara Hikaru, who has always paid attention to loyalty, gladly accepted them.

古文：略旧识刁双时为西河太守，略复归之。
现代文：元略的旧日朋友刁双这时任西河太守，元略又归附他。
English: Yuan Liang's old friend Zou Shuang was the governor of the West River at that time, and Yuan Liang was attached to him.

古文：停止经年，双乃令从子昌送略潜遁江左。
现代文：停留了一年时间，刁双才派侄儿刁昌护送元略暗中逃到长江以束。
English: After staying for more than a year, Yan Shuang asked his nephew Yan Chang to escort Yuan Rong to the East River.

古文：萧衍甚礼敬之，封略为中山王，邑一千户，宣城太守。
现代文：萧衍十分厚待尊敬他，封元略为中山王，食邑一千户，任宣城太守。
English: Xiao Yan treated him very generously and respected him. He was given the title of "King of Zhongshan" (中山王), a thousand households of food villages, and was appointed as the governor of Xuancheng.

古文：俄而徐州刺史元法僧据城南叛，州内士庶皆为法僧拥逼。
现代文：不久徐州刺史元法僧占据城池向南叛变，州内官吏百姓都被法僧挟持逼迫。
English: Soon after, the legal monk of Xuzhou Zishi Yuan occupied the city and rebelled to the south, and the officials and people in the state were held hostage by the legal monk and persecuted.

古文：衍乃以略为大都督，令诣彭城，接诱初附。
现代文：萧衍于是任命元略为大都督，命他前往彭城，接应招诱新归附的人。
English: Xiao Yan then appointed Yuan Liang as the grand governor and ordered him to go to Pengcheng to accept the invitation of the newly annexed people.

古文：略至，屯于河南，为安乐王鉴所破，略唯数十骑入城。
现代文：元略到达，驻守在黄河以南，被安乐王元鉴打败，元略仅几十个骑兵进城。
English: Yuan Liang arrived and stationed himself south of the Yellow River. He was defeated by King Yuan Jian of Anle, and only a few dozen of Yuan Liang's cavalry entered the city.

古文：衍寻遣其豫章王综镇徐州，徵略与法僧同还。
现代文：萧衍不久派遣豫章王萧综镇守徐州，征召元略和法僧一同返回。
English: Xiao Yan soon dispatched Yu Zhang Wang Xiao Zui to guard Xuzhou and conscripted Yuan Liang and the monks to return with him.

古文：略虽在江南，自以家祸，晨夜哭泣，身若居丧。
现代文：元略虽然身在长江以南，自以为家中遭祸，夜啼哭，身体如同在丧期之中。
English: Although he was in the east of the Yangtze River, Yuan Li would cry every morning and night because of the disaster he suffered at home. His home was like a funeral home.

古文：又恶法僧为人，与法僧言，未尝一笑。
现代文：又压恶法僧的为人，和法僧说话，不曾笑过一次。
English: He also disliked the former monk and never smiled when talking to him.

古文：衍复除略衡州刺史，未行。
现代文：萧衍又授任元略为衡州刺吏，没有赴任。
English: Xiao Yan was also appointed by Yuan Rong as the assassin of Hengzhou, but did not take up the post.

古文：会综以城归国，综长史江革、司马祖恆、将士五千人悉见擒虏。
现代文：遇到萧综献出城池归附魏国，萧综的长史江革、司马祖佢、将领士兵五千人全被擒获。
English: When confronted with Xiao Zomei's surrender of the city to Wei, Xiao Zomei's five thousand soldiers, including Changshi Jiangge, Sima Zuo and generals, were all captured.

古文：肃宗敕有司悉遣革等还南，因以徵略。
现代文：肃宗命令有关官员全部遣送江革等人回到南方，凭此来征召元略。
English: Su Zong ordered all relevant officials to send Jiang Ge and others back to the south, in order to conscript Yuan Liang.

古文：衍乃备礼遣之。
现代文：萧衍于是用充分的礼节遣送元略。
English: Xiao Yan then dispatched Yuan Liang with sufficient etiquette.

古文：略之将还也，衍为置酒饯别，赐金银百斤，衍之百官，悉送别江上，遣其右卫徐确率百余人送至京师。
现代文：元略将要返回时，萧衍为他设酒宴送别，赐给金银一百斤，萧衍的百官，全部送到长江边告别，派遣他的右卫将军徐确率领一百多人护送元略到京城。
English: When Yuan Liang was about to return, Xiao Yan gave him a farewell wine banquet, gave him a hundred catties of gold and silver, sent all of Xiao Yan's hundred officials to the Yangtze River to say goodbye, and sent his right guard general Xu Ji to escort Yuan Liang to the capital with more than a hundred people.

古文：肃宗诏光禄大夫刁双境首劳问，又敕徐州赐绢布各一千匹。
现代文：肃宗韶令光禄大夫刁双到边界慰问，又下令徐州赐给绢布各一千匹。
English: Su Zongxuan ordered the Guanglu doctors to both go to the border to offer condolences, and ordered Xuzhou to give each of them a thousand horses.

古文：除略侍中、义阳王，食邑一千户。
现代文：授任元略为侍中、义阳王，食邑一千户。
English: He was given the titles of Samurai Junior Officer and Prince of Righteousness, and served a thousand households.

古文：还达石人驿亭，诏宗室、亲党、内外百官先相识者，听迎之近郊。
现代文：回到石人驿亭，诏令宗室、亲戚、内外百官原先互相认识的，准许到近郊迎接。
English: Returning to Shichin Shotei, the emperor ordered the family, relatives, and foreign and domestic officials who had previously known each other to be allowed to go to the suburbs to meet.

古文：赐帛三千匹，宅一区，粟五千石，奴婢三十人。
现代文：赐给帛三千匹，房舍一栋，粟五千石，奴婢三十人。
English: He was given three thousand yakitori, a house, five thousand koku of millet, and thirty slaves.

古文：其司马始宾除给事中、领直后，栗法光本县令，刁昌东平太守，刁双西兗州刺史。其略所至，一餐一宿之处，无不沾赏。
现代文：司马始宾授任给事中、兼任直后，栗法光任本县县令，刁昌任束平太守，刁双任西兖州刺史，凡元略所到，给予一餐一宿的地方，无不蒙恩受赏。
English: During and immediately after Sima Xiubin was appointed to the post, Li Fangguang was appointed as the county magistrate of this county, Yu Chang was appointed as the governor of Zuping, and both of them were appointed as the governor of Xishuanzhou. Wherever Yuan Liang went, he gave a meal and a night's stay, and they were all appreciated.

古文：寻改封东平王，又拜车骑大将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司、领左卫将军，侍中如故。
现代文：不久改封东平王，又被任命为车骑大将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司、领左卫将军，侍中照旧。
English: He was soon renamed Dongping Wang, and was also appointed General of Chariots and Cavalry, Zuo Guanglu Doctor, General of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, and still a chamberlain.

古文：又本官领国子祭酒，迁大将军、尚书令。
现代文：又以本官兼任国子祭酒，升任骠骑大将军、尚书令。
English: He also served as Kuniko Matsuri Sake with his own post, and was promoted to Shunkei taisho (commander-in-chief of the cavalry) and Shosho Rei (commander-in-chief of calligraphy).

古文：灵太后甚宠任之，其见委信，殆与元徽相埒。
现代文：灵太后十分宠爱重用他，他受到的委任信赖，差不多和元徽相等。
English: The Empress Dowager was very fond of reusing him, and he was trusted almost as much as the original emblem.

古文：于时天下多事，军国万端，略守常自保，无他裨益，唯唯具臣而已。
现代文：这时天下变乱多，军队国家千头万绪，元略持守常道保全自己，没有其他的补益，恭敬顺从备位充数而已。
English: At this time, the world is full of turmoil, the military and the country are in disarray, the Yuan slightly adheres to the usual way to protect itself, there is no other supplement, and it is only respectful and obedient to fill the vacancy.

古文：尔朱荣，略之姑夫，略素所轻忽；略又党于郑俨、徐纥，荣兼衔之。
现代文：尔朱荣，是元略的姑父，元略一向轻视他，元略又阿附于郑俨、徐纥，尔朱荣对这几人都记恨在心。
English: Le Zhu Rong was the uncle of Yuan Liang. Yuan Liang had always despised him. Yuan Liang was also attached to Zheng Qi and Xu Qi. Le Zhu Rong held grudges against these people in his heart.

古文：荣入洛也，见害于河阴。
现代文：尔朱荣进入洛阳，元略在河阴被杀害。
English: Er Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, and Yuan Rong was killed in Hexin.

古文：赠以本官，加太保、司空、徐州刺史，谥曰文贞。
现代文：以本来官职追赠他，加授太保、司空、徐州刺史，谧号为文贞。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Tai Bao, Si Kuo and Xuzhou Zhishi, and his posthumous name was Wen Zhen.

古文：子景式，袭。
现代文：儿子景式，继承爵位。
English: His son, Kage Shiki, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：武定中，北广平太守。齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：武定年间，担任北广平太守齐国接受惮让，爵位依例降低。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wuding, he accepted the abdication of his position as the Northern Guangping Governor of Qi Province, and his title was reduced accordingly.

古文：略弟纂，字绍兴，颇有将略。
现代文：元略的弟弟元纂，字绍兴，很有军事谋略。
English: Yuan Liang's younger brother, Yuan Zuo, also known as Shaoxing, was a military strategist.

古文：为司徒祭酒。
现代文：担任司徒祭酒。
English: It served as the priest's sacramental wine.

古文：闻熙举兵，因逃奔于鄴，至即见擒，与熙俱死。
现代文：听说元熙起兵，就逃奔到邺城，到了就被擒获，和元熙一起死去。
English: Hearing that Yuan Xi had raised an army, he fled to Lucheng. When he arrived, he was captured and died together with Yuan Xi.

古文：追封北平县公，赠安北将军、恆州刺史，改封高唐县开国侯，食邑八百户。
现代文：被追封为北平县公，追赠安北将军、恒州刺史，改封为高唐县开国侯，食邑八百户。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Beiping County official, posthumously awarded the titles of Anbei General and Hengzhou Historian, and was renamed as the founding lord of Gaotang County, with 800 households.

古文：子子献，袭。
现代文：儿子子献，继承爵位。
English: Sons of sons, inherit the peerage.

古文：卒于泾州司马。
现代文：任泾州司马时去世。
English: He died while serving as Zhangzhou Sima.

古文：熙异母弟义兴，出后叔父并洛。
现代文：元熙的异母弟义兴，出继叔父并洛。
English: Yuan Xi's half-brother, Yixing, succeeded his uncle, Nianluo.

古文：肃宗初，除员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：肃宗初年，授任他为员外散骑侍郎。
English: In the first year of Suzong's reign, he was appointed as a non-official horseback riding attendant.

古文：及熙之遇害也，义兴以别后，故得不坐。
现代文：等到元熙被害，义兴因出继，所以得以不受牵累。
English: By the time Yuan Xi was killed, Yixing had already been succeeded, so he was able to avoid being involved.

古文：稍迁辅国将军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：逐渐升任辅国将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: He was gradually promoted to the post of general of the auxiliary province, and eventually became a samurai.

古文：孝庄初，于河阴遇害。
现代文：孝庄帝初年，在河阴被害。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang, he was killed in Hebei Province.

古文：赠中军将军、瀛州刺史。
现代文：追赠中军将军、瀛州刺史。
English: The posthumous gift of the Chinese army general, Zhangzhou stabbing history.

古文：后赠散骑常侍、征东将军，余如故。
现代文：后来追赠散骑常侍、征柬将军，其他的照旧。
English: Later, he gave away the knight errant on horseback, the general conscripted to Cambodia, and other things as before.

古文：义兴妻，赵郡李氏。
现代文：义兴的妻子，是趟郡李氏。
English: Yixing's wife is from the Li family.

古文：李颇有妇工，为尔朱荣妻所亲昵。
现代文：李氏很有女红手艺，为尔朱荣的妻子所亲近。
English: Mr. Li has a lot of skills as a crimson woman and is close to Mr. Le's wife, Zhu Rong.

古文：永安中，追封义兴燕郡王，邑五百户。寻改封钜鹿王，又改封武邑王。
现代文：永安年间，追封义兴为燕郡王，食邑五百户，不久改封为钜鹿王，又改封为武邑王。
English: During the Yong'an era, Yixing was named the king of Yan County and 500 households in Shiyou County, and was soon changed to the king of Elk County, and then to the king of Wuyi County.

古文：子述，袭。
现代文：儿子五述，继承爵位。
English: His son, described five times, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：天平中，通直郎。
现代文：玉垩年间，担任通直郎。
English: During the Tamakazura era, he served as Tsunenairo.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：英弟怡，起家步兵校尉，转城门校尉，迁鄯善镇将。
现代文：元茎的弟弟盈险，出仕为步兵校尉，改任城门校尉，升鄯善镇将。
English: Yuan Zhu's younger brother, Ying Rong, served as an infantry captain, and was promoted to captain of the city gate, and then to commander of the town of Shanshan.

古文：所在贪暴，为有司所纠，逃窜得免。
现代文：在任贪婪暴虐，被有关官员所纠察，出逃得以免死。
English: Greedy and tyrannical while in office, he was picketed by the relevant officials, and was able to escape death.

古文：延昌中，卒。
现代文：延昌年间，去世。
English: He died in Yanchang.

古文：庄帝初，以尔朱荣妇兄，超赠骠骑大将军、太尉公、雍州刺史、扶风王。
现代文：庄帝初年，因是尔朱荣妻子的哥哥，越级追赠骠骑大将军、太尉公、雍州刺史、扶风王。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, because he was the elder brother of Zhu Rong's wife, he was promoted to the rank of General of the Horse, Lieutenant of the Horse, Prince of Yongzhou, and King of the Wind.

古文：长子肃，起家员外散骑侍郎，转直寝。
现代文：长子元肃，出仕为员外散骑侍郎，改任直寝。
English: The eldest son, Gensu, was assigned to serve as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback, and was relegated to sleeping on his back.

古文：庄帝初，封肃鲁郡王，邑千户。
现代文：庄帝初年，封元肃为鲁郡王，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, Fengyuan Su became the king of Lu County, with a thousand households in the county.

古文：除散骑常侍，出为后将军、广州刺史。
现代文：授任散骑常侍，外任为后将军、广州刺史。
English: He was appointed as a knight errant and a regular attendant, and was later appointed as a general and the governor of Guangzhou.

古文：后除卫将军、肆州刺史。
现代文：后来授任卫将军、肆州刺史。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of General of the Guards and the title of Wuzhou Historian.

古文：其弟晔僭立，拜肃侍中、太师、录尚书事。
现代文：他的弟弟元晔僭越登位，任命元肃为侍中、太师、绿尚书事。
English: His younger brother, Yuan Xuan Yue, ascended to the throne and appointed Yuan Su as a chamberlain, grand master, and secretary.

古文：寻改除使持节、都督青胶光齐南青五州诸军事、骠骑大将军、东南道大行台、青州刺史，不行。
现代文：不久改任使持节、都督青胶光齐南青五州诸军事、骠骑大将军、东南道大行台、青州刺史，没有到任。
English: He was soon reassigned as the envoy of Jizhixi, the governor of Qingguiguang, the military of the five states of Qingzhou, the general of the cavalry, the southeast road, and the history of Qingzhou, but he did not arrive at the post.

古文：永熙二年薨。
现代文：永熙二年逝世。
English: Yongxi died two years later.

古文：赠使持节、侍中、都督并恆二州诸军事、本将军、司徒公、并州刺史。
现代文：追赠使持节、侍中、都督并恒二州诸军事、本号将军、司徒公、并州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Jichijijijie, the title of samurai, the title of governor, and the titles of military commander, general, governor, and statesman.

古文：子道与，袭。
现代文：儿子道与，继承爵位。
English: His son, Doyo, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：除前将军。
现代文：授任他为前将军。
English: He was appointed as a former general.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐塱接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：晔字华兴，小字盆子。
现代文：元晔字华兴，小名盆子。
English: The original Chinese character of  is Hua Xing, and the Chinese character of 小名 is 盆子.

古文：性轻躁，有膂力。
现代文：性格轻浮急躁，身体健壮。
English: He has a flighty and impetuous personality and is physically robust.

古文：起家秘书郎，稍迁通直散骑常侍。
现代文：出仕秘书郎，逐渐升任通直散骑常侍。
English: He served as a secretary and was gradually promoted to the position of Tsuchidana Sanzhishi no Tsunezamurai.

古文：庄帝初，封长广王，邑一千户。
现代文：庄帝初年，封为长广王，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was given the title of "Changguang Wang" and served a thousand households.

古文：出为太原太守，行并州事。
现代文：外任为太原太守，代行并州事务。
English: He was appointed as the Taiyuan governor-general, acting on behalf of the state affairs.

古文：尔朱荣之死也，世隆等奔还并州，与尔朱兆会于建兴，乃推晔为主，大赦所部，号年建明。
现代文：水朱荣死后，世隆等人逃回并州，和尔朱兆在建兴会合，于是推举元晔为君主，大赦境内，年号为建明。
English: After the death of Zhu Rong, Shilong and others fled back to the unified state, and met with Zhu Zhao in Jianxing, and then elected Yuan Xuan as the monarch, amnestied the territory, and the year was Jianming.

古文：寻为世隆等所废。
现代文：不久被世隆等人所废黜。
English: He was soon deposed by Shillong and others.

古文：前废帝立，封晔为东海王，邑万户。
现代文：前废帝即位，封元晔为束海王，食邑一万户。
English: The former deposed emperor ascended to the throne, and Fongyuanwu was crowned King of Sokhae. Ten thousand households in the county were provided with food.

古文：出帝初，坐事赐死于第。
现代文：出帝初年，因事获罪被赐死在家中。
English: In the first year after his enthronement, he was sentenced to death at home for a crime he committed.

古文：无子，爵除。
现代文：没有儿子，爵位削除。
English: No son, no peerage.

古文：城阳王长寿，皇兴二年封，拜征西大将军、外都大官。
现代文：城阳王长寿，皇兴二年封，被任命为征西大将军、外都大官。
English: King Seongyang lived a long life, Emperor Heung ascended to the throne two years later, and was appointed as the General of the Western Expedition and the Foreign Minister.

古文：出为沃野镇都大将。
现代文：外任为沃野镇都大将。
English: He was appointed as the mayor of the town of Wouno.

古文：性聪惠，善抚接，在镇甚有威名。
现代文：性情聪慧，善于安抚结交，在镇所很有威名。
English: He is intelligent, good at placating and making friends, and is well-known in the town.

古文：延兴五年薨，谥康王。
现代文：延兴五年逝世，谧号为康王。
English: Yan Xing died five years later, and his posthumous name was Kang Wang.

古文：长子多侯，早卒。
现代文：长子多侯，过早去世。
English: His eldest son, Tojo, died prematurely.

古文：次子鸾，字宣明。
现代文：次子元鸾，字宣明。
English: His second son, Yuan Zang, became known as Xuan Ming.

古文：始继叔章武敬王，及兄卒，还袭父爵。
现代文：开始出继叔父章武敬王，等到哥哥去世，返回继承父亲爵位。
English: He began to succeed his uncle, Zhang Wu Jing Wang, and when his brother died, he returned to inherit his father's title.

古文：身长八尺，腰带十围，以武艺著称。
现代文：身高八尺，腰粗达到十围，以武艺过人出名。
English: He is eight feet tall, has a waist of ten girths, and is famous for his martial arts.

古文：频为北都大将。
现代文：接连担任北都大将。
English: He successively served as the General of the Northern Capital.

古文：高祖时，拜外都大官，又出为持节、都督河西诸军事、征西大将军、领护西戎校尉、凉州镇都大将。
现代文：高祖时，任命他为外都大官，又外任为使持节、都督河西诸军事、征西大将军、领护西戎校尉、凉州镇都大将。
English: At the time of Gaozu, he was appointed as a foreign capital official, and he was also appointed as an envoy of the festival, the military governor of Hexi, the general of the Western Expedition, the lieutenant of the Xi Rong, and the general of the town of Liangzhou.

古文：改镇立州，以鸾为凉州刺史，姑臧镇都大将，余如故。
现代文：改镇设州，任命元鸾为凉州刺史、姑臧镇都大将，其余职位照旧。
English: The town was reorganized into a prefecture, and Yuan Xuan was appointed as the prefect of Liangzhou and the general of Guzhen Town, while the other posts remained unchanged.

古文：后朝于京师。
现代文：后来到京城朝见。
English: Later, they went to see each other in the morning in Kyoto.

古文：会车驾南讨，领镇军将军。
现代文：遇皇帝向南讨伐，命令他兼任镇军将军。
English: When the emperor marched south, he ordered him to serve concurrently as the general of the town army.

古文：定都洛阳，高祖幸鄴，诏鸾留守。
现代文：定都洛阳，高祖前往邺城，韶令元鸾留下守卫京城。
English: The capital was Luoyang, Gao Zu went to Shicheng, and Yu ordered Yuan Zang to stay behind to guard the capital.

古文：及开建五等，食邑一千户。
现代文：到设立五等诸侯时，赐给食邑一千户。
English: When the fifth-class lordships were established, a thousand households were given food villages.

古文：除使持节，征南大将军，都督豫荆郢三州、河内山阳东郡诸军事，与安南将军卢渊、李佐攻赭阳，不克，败退而还。
现代文：授任他为使持节，征南大将军，都督豫荆郢三州、河内山阳束郡诸军事，和安南将军卢渊、李佐攻打赭阳，没攻下来，失败退回。
English: He was appointed to be the commander of the Southern Expeditionary Army, and the military of the three provinces and Sanyangzhu County of Hanoi led by the governor Yu Jingye, and the Annamese generals Lu Yuan and Li Zuo attacked Sanyang. They did not conquer it, but retreated in defeat.

古文：时高祖幸瑕丘，鸾请罪行宫。
现代文：这时高祖前往瑕丘，元鸾到行宫请求治罪。
English: At this time, Gao Zu went to Keqiu, and Yuan Shao went to the palace to ask for punishment.

古文：高祖引见鸾等，责之曰： 卿等总率戎徒，义应奋节，而进不能夷拔贼城，退不能殄兹小寇，亏损王威，罪应大辟。
现代文：高祖接见元鸾等人，责备他们说： 你们统领兵士，按道义应该奋勇有节操，却进不能攻下贼寇城池，退不能消灭这些小股敌寇，损害国家声威，罪应处死。
English: Gao Zu met with Geng Yao and others and reproached them, saying, "You command soldiers, according to morality, you should be brave and have discipline, but you can't enter and capture the thieves and robbers' castle, and you can't destroy these small groups of enemy robbers by retreating, damaging the national prestige, and the crime should be punished by death.

古文：朕革变之始，事从宽贷，今舍卿等死罪，城阳降为定襄县王，削户五百。
现代文：我改革刚开始，事情从宽处置，现在免除你们的死罪，城阳王贬为定襄县王，削减食邑五百户。
English: At the very beginning of my reform, things were handled more leniently, and now you are exempt from the death penalty, the King of Chengyang County has been reduced to the King of Dingxiang County, and 500 households of food villages have been reduced.

古文：古者，军行必载庙社之主，所以示其威惠各有攸归，今徵卿等败军之罪于社主之前，以彰厥咎。 
现代文：在古代，军队出行一定载上宗庙社稷的牌位，用来显示威信恩惠各有归属，现在在社稷牌位前质问你们的败军之罪，来昭明你们的过失。 
English: In ancient times, when the army traveled, it would carry the plaques of the patriarchs, temples, and shrines, which were used to show that the prestige and favors belonged to each. Now, in front of the plaques of the shrines, they question you about the sins of the defeated army, to show your faults.

古文：后以留守之功，还复本封，增邑二百户。
现代文：后来因留守的功劳，恢复本来的封爵，增加食邑二百户。
English: Later, due to the merit of staying behind, he restored the original knighthood and increased the number of households by two hundred.

古文：除冠军将军、河内太守，转并州刺史。
现代文：授任冠军将军、河内太守，改任并州刺史。
English: He was awarded the title of champion general and governor of Hanoi, and was appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：世宗初，除平东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：世宗初年，授任平东将军、青州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was appointed as the general of Pingdong and the governor of Qingzhou.

古文：后转安北将军、定州刺史。
现代文：后来改任安北将军、定州刺史。
English: Later, he was reassigned to General Anbei and Jingshou Zhishi.

古文：鸾爱乐佛道，修持五戒，不饮酒食肉，积岁长斋。
现代文：元鸾崇敬佛教，修持五条禁戒，不喝酒吃肉，长年斋戒。
English: Yuan Qi revered Buddhism, practised the Five Precepts, did not drink alcohol or eat meat, and fasted for many years.

古文：缮起佛寺，劝率百姓，共为土木之劳，公私费扰，颇为民患。
现代文：修建佛寺，劝导带领百姓，共同承担土木营造的辛劳，公私的耗费纷扰，成为民众的大患。
English: The construction of Buddhist temples, persuading and leading the people, jointly undertaking the hard work of civil engineering, public and private expenditure and disturbance, have become a big problem for the people.

古文：世宗闻而诏曰： 鸾亲唯宗懿，作牧大州，民物殷繁，绥宁所属，宜克己厉诚，崇清树惠。而乃骤相徵发，专为烦扰，编户嗷嗷，家怀嗟怨。
现代文：世宗听说后下韶说： 元鸾是宗室中有德行的亲属。在大州做州牧，民众繁盛，以安抚宁静为嘱托，应该克制自己磨砺诚心，崇尚清廉树立恩惠，却骤然加以征调，专门做烦扰的事，民户嘈杂，家家怀有嗟叹怨恨。
English: After hearing this, Shizong said: Yuan Xuan is a virtuous relative in the family. As a state pastor in Dazhou, the people are prosperous, with pacification and tranquility as a mandate, he should restrain himself from honing his sincerity, advocating integrity and establishing favors, but he was suddenly transferred to do annoying things, the households were noisy, and the families harbored resentment.

古文：北州土广，奸乱是由，准法寻愆，应加肃黜。
现代文：北方各州土地广阔，是奸猾动乱产生的地方。
English: The northern states are a vast expanse of land, a place of treacherous upheaval.

古文：以鸾戚属，情有未忍，可遣使者，以义督责，夺禄一周，微示威罚也。 
现代文：依据法律推究过错，应该加以整肃罢黜，因元鸾是皇帝的亲属，感情上不忍心，可派遣使者，以道义督察责备，剥夺一年的俸禄，稍微表示惩罚。 
English: According to the law, the fault should be investigated, rectified and dismissed. Since Yuan Xuan was a relative of the emperor, he could not bear it emotionally. He could send an envoy to reprimand him with a moral inspector, deprive him of a year's salary, and slightly punish him.

古文：正始二年薨，时年三十八。
现代文：正始二年逝世，这年三十八岁。
English: He died two years ago, at the age of thirty-eight.

古文：赠帛六百匹，诏中书舍人王云宣旨临吊，赠镇北将军、冀州刺史，谥怀王。
现代文：赠帛六百匹，韶令中书舍人王云宣读旨意前往吊祭，追赠亘銮为镇北将军、刺史，谧号为。
English: Six hundred horses were given as a gift, and Wang Yun, a middle school teacher, was ordered to read the will and go to the hanging ceremony. He was posthumously awarded the titles of Zhenbei General and Zhishi, and his posthumous name was.

古文：子徽，字显顺。
现代文：儿子元徽，字显顺。
English: The son of the original emblem, the word Hsien Shun.

古文：粗涉书史，颇有吏才。
现代文：粗略涉猎书籍史册，比较有行政才能。
English: Roughly dabble in the history of books, more administrative talent.

古文：世宗时，袭封。
现代文：世宗时，继承封爵。
English: At the time of his enthronement, he succeeded to a knighthood.

古文：除游击将军，出为河内太守。
现代文：授任游击将军，外任为河内太守。
English: He was appointed as a guerrilla general and later as the governor of Hanoi.

古文：在郡清整，有民誉。
现代文：在郡中清廉端正，有声誉。
English: He is reputed to be honest and upright in the county.

古文：徵拜长兼散骑常侍。
现代文：征召入京任命为长兼散骑常侍。
English: He was conscripted into the capital and appointed to the post of chō and samurai.

古文：肃宗时，除右将军、凉州刺史。
现代文：肃宗时，授任右将军、凉州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Suzong, he was awarded the title of Right General and the title of Yangzhou Grand Historian.

古文：徽以径途阻远，固请不行。
现代文：元徽因路途遥远，执意请求不赴任。
English: Due to the long journey, Yuan Hui persistently requested not to go to the post.

古文：除散骑常侍。
现代文：授任为散骑常侍。
English: He was appointed as a samurai for horseback riding.

古文：其年，除后将军、并州刺史。
现代文：这一年，授任为后将军、并州刺史。
English: In the same year, he was awarded the title of Rear Admiral and State Historian.

古文：先是，州界夏霜，禾稼不熟，民庶逃散，安业者少。
现代文：在这以前，州界内夏季有霜降，庄稼不成熟，百姓逃散，安心农业的人少。
English: Before this, frosts fell in the summer within the state border, crops were immature, people fled, and there were few people in safe agriculture.

古文：徽辄开仓赈之，文武咸共谏止。
现代文：元徽到了就打开粮仓赈济他们，文武官员都一起劝阻。
English: When the Yuanhui arrived, they opened the granary to help them, and the civil and military officials discouraged them all together.

古文：徽曰： 昔汲长孺，郡守耳，尚辄开仓，救民灾弊，况我皇家亲近，受委大籓，岂可拘法而不救民困也？ 
现代文：元徽说： 从前汲长孺，一个郡守而已，还擅自打开粮仓，拯救民众的灾难，何况我是皇室亲属，受任主持大镇，哪能拘泥于成法而不解救民众的困苦呢? 
English: Yuan Hui said: Once upon a time, Kuichangye was just a county magistrate, but he opened the granary without authorization to save the people from disaster. Moreover, I am a relative of the royal family, and I was appointed to preside over a large town. How can I stick to the law without relieving the people's hardships?

古文：先给后表。
现代文：于是先供给后上奏疏。
English: As a result, supply comes first and then production.

古文：肃宗嘉之。
现代文：肃宗嘉奖了他。
English: Su Zong commended him.

古文：加安北将军。
现代文：加授安北将军。
English: He was awarded the additional rank of General Ahn Beik.

古文：后拜安西将军、秦州刺史。
现代文：后来任命为安西将军、秦州刺史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Anxi general and the Qinzhou general.

古文：诏书旦至夕发。
现代文：韶书早上接到晚上出发。
English: Received the notice in the morning and left in the evening.

古文：徽以将之秦部，请诣阙恭授，仍表启固陈，请不之职。
现代文：元徽因将到秦州，请求前往朝廷恭敬任命，又上奏执意陈述，请求不任其职。
English: Yuan Hui will go to Qinzhou, request to go to the imperial court for a respectful appointment, and also submit a statement of intent, requesting not to take up his duties.

古文：改授辅国将军，加度支尚书，进号镇军将军。
现代文：改授元徽为辅国将军，加授度支尚书，升军号为镇军将军。
English: The original emblem was re-awarded as the General of the Auxiliary Province, the degree of the Vice-Admiral was additionally awarded, and the promotion name was changed to the General of the Town Army.

古文：于时，戎马在郊，王师屡败，徽以军旅之费，上国封绢二千匹、粟一万石以助军用。
现代文：这时，战争不断，国家军队屡次失败，元徽因军队费用高，献上封国的绢二千匹、粟一万石来资助军事用度。
English: At this time, the war continued, the national army repeatedly failed, and the military cost of the former emblem was high. Two thousand yakitori and ten thousand koku of millet were donated to fund military expenses.

古文：肃宗不纳。
现代文：肃宗不接受。
English: Su Zong did not accept.

古文：又以本官兼吏部尚书，加侍中、征东将军，迁卫将军、右光禄大夫。
现代文：又以本来官职兼任吏部尚书，加授侍中、征束将军，调任卫将军、右光禄大夫。
English: In addition, he was appointed to the post of the official and the post of the official, the post of the official and the post of the official, the post of the official and the post of the official, the post of the official and the post of the official.

古文：拜尚书左仆射，转车骑将军、仪同三司，固辞不拜。听解侍中，然后受诏。
现代文：任命为尚书左仆射，改任车骑将军、仪同三司，坚决推辞不受任，准许解除侍中，然后接受诏书。
English: He was appointed as Shangshu Zuofu Jia, and was reappointed as General of Cavalry and Chariots, General of Ceremonies, and Third Secretary. He resolutely refused to accept the appointment, and was allowed to be relieved of his position as an attendant, and then accepted the imperial edict.

古文：寻除尚书令，加开府、西道行台，不行。
现代文：不久授任尚书令，加授开府、西道行台，没到任。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Shang Shuling, with additional titles of Kaifu and Xi Daoguangdai, but he did not take up the post.

古文：时灵太后专制，朝纲颓褫。
现代文：这时灵太后专权，朝廷纲纪败坏。
English: At this time, the empress dowager Ling was given exclusive power, and the discipline of the imperial court deteriorated.

古文：徽既居宠任，无所匡弼，与郑俨之徒，更相阿党。
现代文：元徽位居重任后，没有匡正补助，和郑俨一些人，互相阿附。
English: After the Yuan Hui was placed in a heavy position, there was no rectification subsidy, and some people of Zheng He attached themselves to each other.

古文：外似柔谨，内多猜忌，睚眦之忿，必思报复。
现代文：他外表看似柔弱谨慎，内心多有猜疑忌恨，一点点怨恨，必定设法报复。
English: Outwardly, he seems gentle and cautious, but inside, he is full of suspicion, hatred, and a little bit of resentment. He will definitely try to take revenge.

古文：识者嫉之。
现代文：有见识的人憎恨他们。
English: Sensible people hate them.

古文：又不能防闲其妻于氏，遂与广阳王渊奸通。
现代文：又不能防备他的妻子于氏，于氏就和广阳王元渊通奸。
English: He was also unable to prevent his wife, Yuji, from committing adultery with King Yuan Yuan of Guangyang.

古文：及渊受任军府，每有表启，论徽罪过，虽涉诬毁，颇亦实焉。
现代文：等到元渊受命主持军府，每有上奏，论说元徽的罪过，虽然有诬陷诋毁之嫌，也有比较多的实情。
English: By the time Yuan Yuan was appointed to preside over the military government, there was always an uproar about the sins of Yuan Hui, although there was a suspicion of slander, there was also more truth.

古文：庄帝践阼，拜司州牧，寻除司徒，仍领牧。
现代文：庄帝登位，任命元徽为司州牧，不久授任司徒，仍兼州牧。
English: Emperor Zhuang ascended the throne and appointed Yuan Hui as the prefect of the prefecture, and he was soon appointed as the prefect of the prefecture, and he was still the prefect of the prefecture.

古文：元颢入洛，徽从庄帝北巡，及车驾还宫，以与谋之功，除侍中、大司马、太尉公，加羽葆、鼓吹，增邑通前二万户，余官如故。
现代文：元颢进入洛阳，元徽跟随庄帝向北巡视，等到皇帝回宫，因参与谋划的功劳，授任他为侍中、大司马、太尉公，加授仪仗、鼓吹，增加封邑连同从前共二万户，其他官职照旧。
English: The Yuan Dynasty entered Luoyang, and the Yuan Dynasty followed the Zhuang Emperor on a tour to the north. When the emperor returned to the palace, he was awarded the titles of chamberlain, grand steward, and lieutenant for his participation in the planning. He was also awarded the titles of honorable warrior and propagandist, and the number of fiefs was increased to 20,000 along with the previous total. Other official positions remained unchanged.

古文：徽表辞官封，前后屡上。
现代文：元徽上奏推辞官职封邑，前后多次奏告。
English: The original emblem resigned from the official position and the seal number on the watch face, and it has been on the watch face many times.

古文：又启云： 河上之功，将士之力，求回所封，加诸勋义。 
现代文：又上奏说： 黄河边的功劳，是将领士兵的功劳，请求归还所封授的，加给那些建功立义的人。 
English: The epitaph also said: "The merit of the Yellow River is the merit of the generals and soldiers. We request that the award be returned and given to those who have made meritorious contributions."

古文：徽为庄帝亲待，内惧荣宠，故有此辞，以防外议。
现代文：元徽为庄帝所亲近厚待，内心畏惧尔朱荣的宠幸，所以有这个推辞，来防止外面的议论。
English: The original emblem was favored by Emperor Zhuang, who was close to Zhu Rong. Zhu Rong's favorite, so there was this excuse to prevent outside discussions.

古文：庄帝识其意，听其辞封，不许让官。
现代文：庄帝懂得他的意思，准许他辞去封邑，不同意他推让官职。
English: Zhuang Di understood his intention and agreed to let him resign from the post. However, he did not let him resign from the post.

古文：徽后妻，庄帝舅女。
现代文：元徽后来的妻子，是庄帝舅舅的女儿。
English: Yuan Hui's second wife was the daughter of Zhuang Di's uncle.

古文：侍中李彧，帝之姊婿。
现代文：侍中李或，是皇帝的姐夫。
English: Li, the chamberlain, is the son-in-law of Zhuang Di's sister.

古文：徽性佞媚，善自取容，挟内外之意，守室亲戚莫与比焉。
现代文：元徽性格奸巧谄谀，善于曲从讨好，挟内亲外戚的旨意，宗室亲属没有人可和他相比。
English: Yuan Hui's character is cunning and crafty. He is good at the art of pleasing others, and he can manipulate the intentions of relatives. No one in his family can compare to him.

古文：遂与彧等劝帝图荣，庄帝亦先有意。
现代文：于是和李或等人劝说皇帝图取尔朱荣，庄帝也先有这个心意。
English: So he and Li or others persuaded the emperor to take Zhu Rong, and Emperor Zhuang also had this intention.

古文：荣死，世隆等屯据不解。
现代文：东朱荣死去，世隆等人屯驻不解散。
English: After the death of Er Zhu Rong, the power of Er Zhu Shilong and others is still gathering.

古文：除徽太保，仍大司马、宗师、录尚书事，总统内外。
现代文：授任元徽为太保，随之任大司马、宗师、录尚书事，总领内外事务。
English: The imperial court appointed Yuan Hui as Tai Bao, and he continued to serve as the grand steward, mentor, record keeper, and general manager of domestic and foreign affairs.

古文：徽本意谓荣死后，枝叶自应散亡。
现代文：元徽本意认为余朱荣死后，部属自然会四散逃跑。
English: Yuan Hui originally thought that after Yu Zhu Rong's death, his subordinates would naturally scatter and flee.

古文：及尔朱宗族，聚结谋难，徽算略无出，忧怖而已。
现代文：等到尔朱宗族聚集谋图作乱时，元徽想不出策略，仅忧虑害怕而已。
English: When the Erzhu clans gathered to plot chaos, Yuan Hui couldn't think of a strategy, he was only worried and afraid.

古文：性多嫉妒，不欲人居其前。
现代文：他性格很妒忌别人，不愿意别人有超出自己之处。
English: His personality is very jealous of others, and he doesn't want others to be better than him.

古文：每入参谋议，独与帝决。
现代文：每次入宫参与密谋决议，独自和皇帝决断。
English: Each time he entered the palace, he participated in the conspiracy resolution and made his own decision with the emperor.

古文：朝臣有上军国筹策者，并劝帝不纳，乃云小贼何虑不除。又吝惜财用，自家及国。
现代文：朝廷大臣中有献上军队国家计划策略的，他都劝皇帝不采纳，却说小贼寇何必担忧不能扫除又吝啬财物，无论是私人还是国家都如此。
English: He advised the emperor not to adopt any of the ministers of the imperial court who presented the army's national plan and strategy, but said that petty thieves should not worry about not being able to sweep away and be stingy with property, whether private or state.

古文：于是有所赏锡，咸出薄少，或多而中氵咸，与而复追。
现代文：于是有所赏赐，都拿出得很少，有时多了就中途减少，给与了又追回来。
English: So there was a reward, but it was given out sparingly, and sometimes if it was given more, it was reduced halfway, and then it was given and then recovered.

古文：徒有糜费，恩不感物。
现代文：白白浪费财物，恩惠不能感动人。
English: Gratuitous waste of wealth, favors cannot move people.

古文：庄帝雅自约狭，尤亦徽所赞成。
现代文：庄帝一向简略狭隘，也格外为元徽所赞成。
English: Zhuang Di was particularly frugal with himself, which was especially approved by Yuan Hui.

古文：太府少卿李苗，徽司徒时司马也，徽待之颇厚。
现代文：太府少卿李苗，是元徽任司徒时的司马，元徽对待他比较优厚。
English: Li Miao, Taifu Shaoqing, when he was a disciple of Yuan Hui, he served as Sima, and Yuan Hui had a deep relationship with him.

古文：苗每致忠言，徽自得志，多不采纳。
现代文：李苗时常献上忠诚的意见，元徽白以为得意，多不加以采纳。
English: Li Miao often offered loyal opinions, which Yuan Huibai thought were good, but most of them were not adopted.

古文：苗谓人曰： 城阳本自蜂目，而豺声复将露也。 
现代文：李苗对别人说： 城阳王本来是胡蜂一样的眼睛，豺狼般的声音又将露出来了。 
English: Li Miao said to others: Chengyang Wang was originally a bee's eye, and even the beep will come out.

古文：及尔朱兆之入，禁卫奔散，庄帝步出云龙门。
现代文：等到尔朱兆入宫，守卫兵士四散逃奔，庄帝走出云龙门。
English: When Zhu Zhao entered the palace, the soldiers on guard scattered and fled, and Emperor Zhuang walked out of the Cloud Dragon Gate.

古文：徽乘马奔度，帝频呼之，徽不顾而去。
现代文：元徽骑马奔跑，皇帝接连呼喊他，元徽不回头而离去。
English: Yuan Hui ran on horseback, the emperor shouted to him one after another, and Yuan Hui left without looking back.

古文：遂走山南，至故吏寇弥宅。
现代文：于是跑到山南面，到了旧日属吏寇弥的房舍。
English: As a result, Yuan Hui fled to Shannan and came to the home of the old official Kou Mi.

古文：弥外虽容纳，内不自安，乃怖徽云，官捕将至，令其避他所。
现代文：寇弥外表上虽然接受他，内心不放心，就恐吓元徽说，官府的搜捕将要到来，让他到其他地方躲避。
English: Although outwardly Komei accepted him, inwardly he was not reassured. He threatened Yuan Hui, saying that the government's search and arrest would come, and told him to hide somewhere else.

古文：使人于路邀害，送尸于尔朱兆。
现代文：派人在路上拦截杀害，送尸体给余朱兆。
English: They sent someone on the road to intercept the killing and take the body to Yu Zhuzhao.

古文：出帝初，赠使持节、侍中、太师、大司马、录尚书事、司州牧，谥曰文献。
现代文：出帝初，追赠使持节、侍中、太师、大司马、录尚书事、司州牧，谧号为文献。
English: At the beginning of his enthronement, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Jichijijie, Samurai, Grand Master, Grand Master of the Horse, Recorder of Records, and Governor of the State, and his posthumous title was Literature.

古文：子延，袭爵。
现代文：儿子元延，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yu Yan, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：武定末，官至太子中庶子。
现代文：亘迈末年，官位到太子中庶子。
English: At the end of his life, he was an illegitimate son of the crown prince.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：变鳕接受惮让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：徽兄显魏，给事中、司徒掾。
现代文：元邀的哥哥题魏，担任给事中、司徒掾属。
English: The invited elder brother, Qi Wei, served as the vice-chairman, and Siu Tuo as vice-chairman.

古文：卒，赠辅国将军、东豫州刺史。
现代文：去世，追赠辅国将军、豫州刺史。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Auxiliary Provinces, and the title of Henan Provincial Historian.

古文：徽次兄显恭，字怀忠。
现代文：元徽的第二个哥哥显恭，字怀忠。
English: The second brother of the original emblem, Hsien Kyong, is called Huai Zhong.

古文：扬州别驾，以军功封平阳县开国子，邑三百户。
现代文：任扬州别驾，因军功封为平阳县开国子，食邑三百户。
English: Yangzhou is not far away. Due to military achievements, it is the founding father of Pingyang County, and there are more than 300 households in the food village.

古文：孝庄初，除北中郎将，迁左将军、东徐州刺史。
现代文：孝庄帝初年，授任北中郎将，升左将军、束徐州刺史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang, he was awarded the titles of North Middle Marshal, Rising Left Marshal, and Grand Marshal of Xuzhou.

古文：入为安东将军、大司农卿。
现代文：召入任安束将军、大司农卿。
English: He was called up to serve as General Anzaku and Chief Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：寻除中军将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：不久授任中军将军、荆州刺史。
English: He was soon promoted to General of the Chinese Army and named Jingzhou Jishi.

古文：庄帝既杀尔朱荣，乃除显恭使持节、都督晋建南汾三州诸军事、镇西将军、兼尚书左仆射、西北道行台、晋州刺史。
现代文：庄帝杀死尔朱荣后，就授任显恭为使持节、都督晋建南汾三州诸军事、镇西将军、兼尚书左仆射、西北道行台、晋州刺史。
English: After Emperor Zhuang killed Er Zhu Rong, he appointed Xian Gong as the envoy to hold the festival, the military of the three states in the south of the three states, the general of Zhenxi, the general of Shuzhuzuo, the general of the northwest road, and the general of Jinzhou.

古文：尔朱兆入洛后，死于晋阳。
现代文：尔朱兆进入洛阳后，显恭死在晋阳。
English: After Zhu Zhao entered Luoyang, Xian Gong died in Jinyang.

古文：出帝初，赠卫大将军、并州刺史，重赠车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：出帝初，追赠显恭为卫大将军、并州刺史，再次追赠为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: At the beginning of the emperor's abdication, Xian Qiong was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Guards and the title of State Historian. He was also posthumously awarded the title of General of the Cavalry and the title of General of the Three Departments of the Imperial Household.

古文：子彦昭，袭。
现代文：彦昭童压，继承爵位。
English: Hiko Akitobe, heir to a peerage.

古文：武定中，渔阳太守。
现代文：武定年间，任渔阳太守。
English: During the Wuding era, he served as the governor of Yuyang.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：显恭弟旭，字显和。
现代文：显恭的弟弟元旭，字显和。
English: Hsien Kung's younger brother, Yuan Xu, is called Hsien Wo.

古文：庄帝时，封襄城郡王，邑一千户。
现代文：庄帝时，封为襄城郡王，食邑一千户。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhuang, he was named the king of Xiangcheng County, with a thousand households in the county.

古文：武定末，位至大司马。
现代文：武定末年，官位到大司马。
English: At the end of Wuding's life, he was promoted to the position of grand steward.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：变量接受惮让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：章武王太洛，皇兴二年薨。
现代文：章武王太洛，皇兴二年逝世。
English: Zhangwu Wang Tailuo, who died two years after Wang Xing.

古文：追赠征北大将军、章武郡王，谥曰敬。
现代文：追赠他为征北大将军、章武郡王，谧号为敬。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Expedition to the North and King of Zhangwu County, and his posthumous name was Wu Jing.

古文：无子。
现代文：没有儿子。
English: Wang Jun has no son.

古文：高祖初，以南安惠王第二子彬为后。
现代文：高担初年，命南安惠王第二个儿子五堑为他的后嗣。
English: In the first year of Gaotan, Nan'an Hui's second son, Wuzhong, was named his heir.

古文：彬，字豹兒，袭爵。
现代文：元彬，字豹儿，继承爵位。
English: Yuan Bin, also known as the Leopard, succeeds to the peerage.

古文：勇健有武用。
现代文：勇猛健壮有武艺。
English: Brave and robust, with martial arts skills.

古文：出为使持节、都督东秦豳夏三州诸军事、镇西大将军、西戎校尉、统万镇都大将、朔州刺史。
现代文：外任为使持节、都督东秦豳夏三州诸军事、镇西大将军、西戎校尉、统万镇都大将、朔州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Western Qin, the commander of the Western Qin, the commander of the Western Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin, the commander of the Eastern Qin,

古文：以贪惏削封。
现代文：因贪婪被削夺封爵。
English: He was stripped of his knighthood for greed.

古文：是时吐京胡反，诏彬持节，假平北将军，行汾州事，率并肆之众往讨之。
现代文：这时吐京胡反叛，诏令元彬为持节、代理平西将军、行汾州事，率领并州肆州的军队前往讨伐他们。
English: At this time, Tujing rebelled against Hu, and ordered Yuan Bin to act as the acting general of Pingxi Province, and to lead the troops of both provinces to fight against them.

古文：胡平，仍除征虏将军、汾州刺史。
现代文：平定胡人后，又授任征虏将军、汾州刺史。
English: After subduing the Hu people, he was also awarded the title of Conscript General, and the title of Zhangzhou Sashih.

古文：胡民去居等六百余人，保险谋反，扇动徒类。
现代文：胡人去居等六百多人，据守险阻谋图反叛，煽动同族人。
English: More than six hundred people waited for the Hu people to go to their homes. According to the guards, they were plotting to rebel and incite their compatriots.

古文：彬请兵二万，有司奏许之。
现代文：元彬请求调拨军队二万人，有关官员上奏准许他。
English: Yuan Bin asked for 20,000 troops to be dispatched, and the relevant officials gave him permission.

古文：高祖大怒曰： 何有动兵马理也！
现代文：高祖大发脾气说： 哪裹有调动兵马的道理呢!
English: Gaozuda lost his temper and said, "What is the reason for mobilizing soldiers and horses?

古文：可随宜肃治，若不能权方静帖，必须大众者，则先斩刺史，然后发兵。 
现代文：可根据实际情况整肃治理，如果不能变通方法达到安宁，必须调大军的，就先斩杀刺史，然后调遣兵马。 
English: It is possible to rectify and govern according to the actual situation. If it is not possible to achieve tranquility through alternative methods, and if it is necessary to transfer a large army, it is necessary to first kill the assassin and then transfer the soldiers.

古文：彬奉诏大惧，而率州兵，身先将士，讨胡平之。
现代文：元彬接到诏书大为恐惧，而率领州中军队，走在将领士兵前面，讨伐胡人平定他们。
English: Yuan Bin was very frightened when he received the edict, and he led the troops in the state, walked in front of the generals and soldiers, and fought against the Hu people to pacify them.

古文：太和二十三年卒。
现代文：太和二十三年去世。
English: His wife died twenty-three years later.

古文：赐钱十万、绢二百匹，赠以本官，加散骑常侍。
现代文：赐给钱十万文、绢二百匹，赠给本来的官职，加授散骑常侍。
English: He was given 100,000 yuan in money, 200 horses, his original official position, and a free-riding attendant.

古文：彬有五子。
现代文：元彬有五个儿子。
English: Yuan Bin has five sons.

古文：长子融，字永兴。
现代文：长子元融，字永兴。
English: The eldest son, Motonari, is called Nagaharu.

古文：仪貌壮丽，衣冠甚伟，性通率，有豪气。
现代文：仪容华丽，身材魁梧，性格旷达坦率，有豪气。
English: She has a gorgeous appearance, a big body, and an open and frank personality, with a strong spirit.

古文：高祖时，拜秘书郎。
现代文：高祖时，被任命为秘书郎。
English: When he was a high school student, he was appointed as a secretary.

古文：世宗初，复先爵，除骁骑将军。
现代文：世宗初年，恢复先人的爵位，授任为骁骑将军。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, the peerage of his predecessor was restored, and he was awarded the title of General of the Horse.

古文：萧衍遣将寇逼淮阳，梁城陷没。诏融假节、征虏将军、别将南讨，大摧贼众，还复梁城。
现代文：萧衍派遣将领，侵犯进逼淮阳，梁城沦陷，诏令元融为假节、征虏将军，另外率军向南讨伐，大量杀伤贼寇兵士，收复梁城。
English: Xiao Yan dispatched generals, invaded Huaiyang, forced Liangcheng to fall, ordered the Yuan Dynasty to be merged into a false festival, captured generals, led another army to the south, killed a large number of Kleptocratic soldiers, and recovered Liangcheng.

古文：于时，扬州刺史元嵩为奴所害，敕融行扬州事。
现代文：这时，扬州刺史元嵩被奴仆杀害，命令元融代行扬州事务。
English: At this time, the Yangzhou assassin, Yuan Song, was killed by a slave, and Yuan Rong was ordered to act on behalf of Yangzhou affairs.

古文：寻除假节、征虏将军、并州刺史。
现代文：不久授任假节、征虏将军、并州刺史。
English: He was soon awarded the title of "Holiday," "Captive General" and "State Historian."

古文：及世宗崩，兼司空，营陪景陵。
现代文：到世宗逝世时，兼任司空，营建景陵。
English: At the time of Sejong's death, he also served as the Secretary of the Air Force and built the Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：拜宗正卿，以本官行瀛州事，遇疾不行。
现代文：被任命为宗正卿，以本来官职代行瀛州事务，遇疾病没有到任。
English: He was appointed as Zong Zhengqing, acting as the official in charge of Zhangzhou affairs. However, he did not take up the post due to illness.

古文：未几，除散骑常侍、平东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：没过多久，授任散骑常侍、平东将军、青州刺史。
English: Not long after, he was awarded the titles of straggler, general of Pingdong, and historian of Qingzhou.

古文：还为秘书监，迁中护军，进号抚军将军，领河南尹，加征东将军。
现代文：回京任秘书监，调任中护军，升军号为抚军将军，兼任河南尹，加授征束将军。
English: He returned to Beijing to serve as secretary-supervisor, was transferred to the position of middle-level military guard, was promoted to the rank of general of garrison, concurrently served as Henan Yin, and was awarded the title of general of conscription.

古文：性尤贪残，恣情聚敛，为中尉纠弹，削除官爵。
现代文：性格特别贪婪残暴，任意聚敛财物，被中尉纠举弹劾，削除官职爵位。
English: His character was particularly greedy and cruel. He amassed wealth at will. He was impeached by a lieutenant and stripped of his official rank and title.

古文：汾夏山胡叛逆，连结正平、平阳，诏复融前封、征东将军、持节、都督以讨之。
现代文：汾州夏州的山胡叛乱，联合正平、平阳，诏令恢复元融从前的封爵，任征束将军、持节、都督去讨伐他们。
English: The Shanhu rebellion in Xiazhou, Ganzhou, united Zhengping and Pingyang, and issued a decree to restore the former title of Yuan Rong, and appointed a conscript general, a military commander, and a governor to fight them.

古文：融寡于经略，为胡所败。
现代文：元融谋略很少，被山胡打败。
English: Yuan Rong Rong had very few strategies and was defeated by the Mountain Goat.

古文：久之，加散骑常侍、卫将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：时间长了，加授散骑常侍、卫将军、左光禄大夫。
English: After a long time, the ranks of non-commissioned officer, general of the Guards, and doctor of the Eastern Light Horse Regiment were added.

古文：后贼帅鲜于脩礼寇暴瀛定二州，长孙稚等讨之，失利。
现代文：后来贼寇头领鲜于脩礼侵犯瀛定二州。长孙稚等人讨伐他，失败。
English: Later, the bandit leader Shian invaded the two states of Luding in Shili. Eldest grandson and others fought him and failed.

古文：除融车骑将军，为前驱左军都督，与广阳王渊等共讨脩礼。
现代文：授任元融为车骑将军，担任前驱左军都督，和广阳王元渊等人共同讨伐脩礼。
English: Yuan Rong was appointed as the general of chariot and cavalry, served as the vanguard of the left army, and fought together with Guangyang Wang Yuan Yuan and others.

古文：师渡交津，葛荣杀脩礼而自立。
现代文：军队渡过交津，葛荣杀死脩礼而自己登位。
English: After the army passed through Jiaozuo, Ge Rong killed Xili and ascended to the throne.

古文：转营至白牛逻，轻骑击融。
现代文：转移军营到白牛逻，以轻装骑兵攻打元融。
English: Transferred the military camp to Baiyulou, and attacked Yuan Rong with light cavalry.

古文：融苦战终日，更无外援，遂大奔败，于陈见杀。
现代文：元融苦战一整天，没有外面的增援，于是大败而逃，在军阵中被杀。
English: Yuan Rong fought hard for a whole day, without outside reinforcements, so he was defeated and fled, and was killed in the army.

古文：肃宗为举哀于东堂，赐东园秘器、朝服一具、彩二千八百段，赠侍中、都督雍华岐三州诸军事、本将军、司空、雍州刺史。
现代文：肃宗在东堂为他举行丧事，赐给棺材、朝廷礼服一套、彩色丝织品二千八百段，追赠他为侍中、都督雍华岐三州诸军事、本号将军、司空、雍州刺史。
English: Su Zong held a funeral for him in the East Hall, and gave him a coffin, a set of imperial court dress, and 2,800 pieces of colored silk fabric. He posthumously presented him as a chamberlain, the military governor of the three states of Yonghua and Qi, the general of this title, the secretary of the sky, and the historian of Yongzhou.

古文：寻以融死王事，进赠司徒，加前后部鼓吹。
现代文：不久因元融为国事而死，进赠司徒，加授前后部鼓吹。
English: Soon after, he died as a result of the unification of the Yuan Dynasty into the state, and was presented with the title of scholar, and was awarded the title of pre- and post-drummer.

古文：谥曰庄武。
现代文：谧号为庄武。
English: His posthumous name was Shomu.

古文：子景哲，袭。武定中，开府、仪同三司。
现代文：儿子景哲，继承爵位武定年间，担任开府仪同三司。
English: His son, Jing Zhe, succeeded to the title of nobility during the Wuding era, and served as Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受惮让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：景哲弟朗，即后废帝，语在《帝纪》。
现代文：景哲的弟弟元朗，就是后废帝，记载在《后废帝纪》。
English: Jingzhe's younger brother, Yuen Long, is a post-emperor, recorded in the "Post-Emperor Chronicle."

古文：子黄头，袭。封安定王，改封安平王。
现代文：儿子董头，继承爵位，封为安定王，改封为安平王。
English: His son, Dong Tou, inherited the title of nobility and was given the title of King of Stability, which was later changed to King of Anping.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受惮让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：融弟凝，字定兴。
现代文：元融的弟弟元凝，字定兴。
English: Yuan Rong's younger brother, Yuan Rong, plays the role of Ding Xing.

古文：起家恆州征虏录事参军，累迁护军长史。
现代文：出仕为恒州征虏绿事参军，屡经升任到护军长史。
English: He served as a conscript for the Hengzhou Conquest Green Army, and was repeatedly promoted to garrison for a long time.

古文：凝姑，尔朱荣妻。
现代文：元凝的姑母，是尔朱荣的妻子。
English: Yuan Rong's aunt is Le Zhu Rong's wife.

古文：庄帝初，封东安王，食邑五百户。
现代文：庄帝初年，封为束安王，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was given the title of King of Sokuan, with 500 households in the food village.

古文：除持节、安东将军、兗州刺史，转济州刺史，仍本将军。
现代文：授任持节、安东将军、兖州刺史，改任济州刺史，仍为本号将军。
English: He was given the titles of Jisetsu, General Anton, and Jeju Sashimi, but was changed to Jeju Sashimi, and is still the current general.

古文：永熙二年薨，赠持节、都督沧瀛冀三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、冀州刺史。
现代文：永熙二年逝世，追赠他为持节、都督沧瀛冀三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、冀州刺史。
English: Yongxi died two years later, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Jixi, the military governor of the three states of Jizhou, the general of the cavalry, and the history of Jizhou.

古文：子彦友，袭。
现代文：儿子彦友，继承爵位。
English: His son, Hikotomo, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：武定中，光禄大夫。
现代文：武定年间，担任光禄大夫。
English: During the Wuding era, he served as a doctor of Guanglu.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：凝弟湛，字镇兴。
现代文：元凝的弟弟元湛，字镇兴。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Rong, Yuan Zhan, goes by the name Zhen Xing.

古文：起家秘书郎，转尚书左司郎中，迁廷尉少卿。
现代文：出仕为秘书郎，改任尚书左士郎中，调任廷尉少卿。
English: He was sent to work as a secretary, and was reassigned to Shoshu Sasiro Junior High School, and then reassigned to the position of Imperial Lieutenant, Junior Secretary.

古文：庄帝初，遇害河阴。
现代文：庄帝初年，在河阴遇害。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was killed in Hebei Province.

古文：赠征东将军、青州刺史、追封渔阳王，食邑五百户。
现代文：追赠他为征东将军、青州刺史，追封他为渔阳王，食邑五百户。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Expedition to the East and the History of Qingzhou. He was also posthumously awarded the title of the King of the Fisherman's Sun.

古文：子俊，袭。
现代文：儿子元俊，继承爵位。
English: His son, Motonobu, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：湛弟晏，字俊兴。
现代文：元湛的弟弟元晏，字俊兴。
English: The younger brother of Yuan Zhan, Yuan Qi, is called Junxing.

古文：卒于秘书丞。
现代文：任秘书丞时去世。
English: He died while serving as secretary.

古文：赠平东将军、秘书监、豫州刺史。
现代文：追赠他为平束将军、秘书监、豫州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General Heizuka, Secretary Supervisor, and Historian of Yuzhou.

古文：乐陵王胡兒，和平四年薨。
现代文：乐陵王胡儿，和平四年逝世。
English: Le Ling Wang Hu Er, passed away peacefully four years ago.

古文：追封乐陵王，赠征北大将军，谥曰康。
现代文：追封乐陵王，追赠征北大将军，谧号为康。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of "King of Le Ling" and posthumously awarded the title of "General of Peking University." His nickname was Kang.

古文：无子。显祖诏胡兒兄汝阴王天赐之第二子永全后之，袭封，后改名思誉。高祖初，蠕蠕犯塞，以思誉为镇北大将军、北征大都将。
现代文：显祖的第二个儿子丞全过继他，继承封爵，后来改名为墨誉。产狙初年，蜢蟋侵犯边境，任命墨誉为镇北大将军、北征大都将。
English: Xianzu's second son, Zheng Quan, succeeded him, inherited the title of knight, and later changed his name to Moyu. In the first year of production, Zheng invaded the border and appointed Moyu as the Northern General and the Northern Expeditionary General.

古文：后除使持节、本将军、领护匈奴校尉、都督、中军都将。
现代文：后来授任为使持节、本号将军、领护匈奴校尉、都督、中军都将。
English: Later, he was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the general of this number, the colonel of the Huns, the governor, and the middle army.

古文：出为使持节、镇东大将军、和龙镇都大将、营州刺史，加领护东夷校尉，转为镇北将军，行镇北大将军。高祖引见百官于光极堂，谓思誉曰： 恆代路悬，旧都意重，故屈叔父远临此任。不可不敬慎所临，以副朕望。 
现代文：外任为使持节、镇束大将军、和龙镇都大将、置业刺史，加授领护束夷校尉，改任为镇北将军，代理镇北大将军，高祖在光极堂接见百官，对墨餐说： 垣业伐业路途遥远，旧都城意义重大，所以委屈叔父远行去担此重任，不可不恭敬谨慎面对职责，以符合我对你的期望。 
English: Gao Zu was appointed as the General of Zhenbei, the Acting General of Zhenbei, the General of Zhenzhu, the General of Longzheng, the General of Zhenzhu, the General of Zhenzhu Town, the General of Zhenzhu Town, the General of Zhenzhu Town, the General of Zhenzhu Town, the General of Zhenzhu Town, the General of Zhenzhu Town, the General of Zhenzhu Town, the General of Zhenzhu Town, the General of Zhenzhu Town, the General of Zhenzhu Town, the General of Zhenzhu Town, the General of Zhen

古文：及穆泰阴谋不轨，思誉知而不告，恕死，削封为庶人。
现代文：等到墨坚童阴谋作乱，墨登知道而不报告，被宽恕免去死罪，削除封爵为平民。
English: Wait until Mo Jianzhong conspires to make trouble, Mo Deng knows and does not report, is pardoned from the death penalty, and removed from the knighthood as a commoner.

古文：太和末，还复其王封。
现代文：太和末年，恢复他的王爵。
English: In the last years of his life, he regained his title.

古文：正始四年薨。
现代文：正盘四年逝世。
English: He died four years later.

古文：赠光州刺史，谥曰密王。
现代文：追赠他为光州刺史，谧号为蜜王。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Gwangju sashimi, and his nickname was Honey King.

古文：子景略，字世彦。
现代文：儿子景略，字世彦。
English: He was the son of Kageyaku, also known as Shihiko.

古文：世宗时，袭封。
现代文：世宗时，继承封爵。
English: At the time of his enthronement, he succeeded to a knighthood.

古文：拜骁骑将军，除持节、冠军将军、幽州刺史。
现代文：任命他为骁骑将军，授任持节、冠军将军、豳州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the general of horse-riding, the general of holding festivals, the general of champions, and the general of the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：熙平元年薨。
现代文：里垩元年逝世。
English: He died in 1861.

古文：赠本将军、豫州刺史，赐帛四百匹，谥曰惠王。
现代文：追赠本号将军、邀业刺史，赐帛四百匹，谧号为惠王。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of general, invited to be a member of history, and given four hundred yakitori. His posthumous name was Hui Wang.

古文：子霸，字休邦，袭。
现代文：儿子元霸，字休邦，继承爵位。
English: His son, Yuanba, known as Xubang, succeeded to the title.

古文：武定中，钜鹿太守。
现代文：武定年间，担任钜鹿太守。
English: During the Wuding era, he served as the governor of Moji Province.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受惮让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：景略弟庆略，散骑侍郎。
现代文：景略的弟弟庆略，担任散骑侍郎。
English: Jingliao's younger brother, Qingliao, served as a horseback-riding attendant.

古文：子子政，通直散骑常侍。
现代文：儿子子政，担任通直散骑常侍。
English: His son, Zi Zheng, served as a regular attendant on horseback.

古文：庆略弟洪略，恆农太守、中军将军、行东雍州刺史。
现代文：庆略的弟弟洪略，担任恒农太守、中军将军、代理束雍州刺史。
English: The younger brother of Qingliu, Hongliu, served as the governor of Hengnong, the general of the Chinese army, and the acting governor of Yongzhou.

古文：洪略弟子业，平原太守。
现代文：洪略的弟弟子业，担任平原太守。
English: Hongliu's younger brother, Ye, served as the governor of the plain.

古文：安定王休，皇兴二年封，拜征南大将军、外都大官。休少而聪慧，治断有称。
现代文：安定王元休，皇兴二年封，被任命为征南大将军、外都大官元休年轻而聪明，理事决断很受称道。
English: Wang Yuanhui, the Prince of Stability, was appointed as the General of the Southern Expedition, and the Grand Officer of the Foreign Capital. He was young and intelligent, and his decision-making was highly praised.

古文：高祖初，库莫奚寇边，以休为使持节、侍中、都督诸军事、征东大将军、领护东夷校尉、仪同三司、和龙镇将。
现代文：高祖初年，库莫奚侵犯边境，任命元休为使持节、侍中、都督诸军事、征东大将军、领护束夷校尉、仪同三司、和龙镇将。
English: In the first year of Gaozu's reign, Cuomo invaded the border and appointed Yuan Hui as envoy, chamberlain, military governor, general of the Eastern Expedition, colonel of Shuai, secretary of the Three Departments of Rites and Decrees, and general of Longzhen.

古文：休抚防有方，贼乃款附。
现代文：元休安抚防范有方略，贼寇于是归附。
English: Yuan Hui had a strategy to pacify and prevent, and the bandits then surrendered.

古文：入为中都大官。
现代文：入京担任中都大官。
English: Entered the capital and served as Chuto no daikan.

古文：蠕蠕犯塞，出为使持节、征北大将军、抚冥镇大将。
现代文：蠕蠕侵犯边境，外任为使持节、征北大将军、抚冥镇大将。
English: He violated the border, and was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the general of the Northern Expedition, and the general of the Fuxi Town.

古文：休身先将士，击虏退之。
现代文：元休身先士卒，攻打贼寇赶走他们。
English: The former retired soldiers attacked the bandits and drove them away.

古文：入为内都大官，迁太傅。
现代文：入京担任内都大官，升任太傅。
English: Entered the capital as an inner-city magistrate and was promoted to taifu.

古文：及开建五等，食邑二千户。
现代文：等到设立五等诸侯，食邑二干户。
English: Wait until the fifth-class lordships are established, and the second-class households in food villages are created.

古文：车驾南伐，领大司马。
现代文：皇帝向南征伐，元休兼任大司马。
English: During the Emperor's Southern Expedition, he served as the Grand Master of the Horse.

古文：高祖亲行诸军，遇休以三盗人徇于六军，将斩之，有诏赦之。
现代文：高祖亲自巡视各军，遇到元休以三个盗贼在六军示众，将斩杀他们，下诏赦免三人。
English: Gaozu personally inspected each army, and when he encountered Yuan Hui with three thieves in the Sixth Army, he would kill them and issue an edict to pardon the three.

古文：休执曰： 陛下将远清衡霍，故亲御六师，跋涉野次。军行始尔，已有奸窃，如其不斩，何以息盗？
现代文：元休坚持说： 陛下将要肃清远方的衡霍，所以亲自统领六军，长途跋涉住在野外，军队刚开始出发，已有人奸猾盗窃，如果不斩杀，如何平息偷盗?
English: Yuan Hui insisted, "Your Majesty is going to clean up the distant Heng Ho, so he personally led the six armies, trekked long distances and lived in the field. The army has just started to set off, and there are already people who are cunning and stealing. If you don't kill them, how can you quell the stealing?

古文：请必行刑，以肃奸慝。 
现代文：请一定施行刑法，来肃清奸猾邪恶。 
English: Please enforce the criminal law to eliminate treachery and evil.

古文：诏曰： 大司马执宪，诚应如是。
现代文：诏令说： 大司马执行法典，的确应该如此。
English: The edict said: "Daishima is enforcing the code, as indeed he should.

古文：但因缘会，朕闻王者之体，亦时有非常之泽，虽违军法，可特原之。 休乃奉诏。
现代文：衹是由于缘分，我听说君王的法式，也时常有不依常规的恩泽，虽然违背军法，可特地原宥他们 元休造才奉行诏书。
English: This is due to fate. I have heard that the emperor's courtiers often have unconventional favors. Although it is against military law, they can be specifically exempted from obeying the edict.

古文：高祖谓司徒冯诞曰： 大司马严而秉法，诸军不可不慎。 
现代文：高祖对司徒冯诞说： 大司马严明执法，各军不可以不谨慎。 
English: Gao Zu said to Siu Feng Xue: Da Sima strictly enforces the law, and each army must not be careless.

古文：于是六军肃然。
现代文：于是六军整肃。
English: As a result, the six armies obediently obeyed the order.

古文：定都洛邑，休从驾幸鄴。
现代文：定都洛阳，元休跟随皇帝前往塑继。
English: The capital was Luoyang, and Yuan Hui followed the emperor to Shuxi.

古文：命休率从驾文武，迎家于平城。
现代文：命令五丛率领护驾的文武官员，到平城迎接家眷。
English: He ordered the civil and military officials, led by the Five Conglomerates, to go to Pingcheng to welcome the family members.

古文：高祖亲饯休于漳水之北。
现代文：高祖亲自在漳水以北为元休饯行。
English: Gaozu himself went on a pilgrimage north of Surabaya to pay his respects to the founder.

古文：十八年，休寝疾，高祖幸其第，流涕问疾。
现代文：十八年，元休患病，高祖前往他的第宅，流着眼泪慰问疾病，宫廷使者送医药。
English: In the 18th year, when Yuan Hui fell ill, Gao Zu went to his second home, shed tears to express his condolences for the illness, and the court emissary sent medicine.

古文：中使医药，相望于路。薨，赠帛三千匹。
现代文：在道路上往来不断。逝世，赠帛三干匹。
English: He was constantly on the road. When he died, he gave away three horses.

古文：自薨至殡，车驾三临。
现代文：从逝世到出殡。皇帝三次前往。
English: From death to funeral, the emperor went there three times.

古文：高祖至其门，改服锡衰，素弁加绖。
现代文：高祖到他门前，改穿细麻所制的丧服，白帽上结上麻带。
English: Gaozu came to his door, changed into mourning clothes made of fine linen, and tied a hemp ribbon on his white hat.

古文：皇太子、百官皆从行吊礼。
现代文：皇太子、百官都随从吊祭行礼。
English: The crown prince and hundreds of officials followed the hanging ceremony.

古文：及将葬，又赠布帛二千匹，谥曰靖王。
现代文：等到将要安葬，又赠布帛二千匹，谧号为靖王。
English: When he was about to be buried, he was presented with another two thousand pheasants. His nickname was King Jing.

古文：诏假黄钺，加羽葆、鼓吹、虎贲、班剑六十三人，悉准三老尉元之仪。
现代文：诏令假黄铁，加授仪仗、鼓吹、卫士、佩带木剑者六十三人，都依照三老尉元的仪式。
English: Sixty-three people were awarded the title of "feudal war," "propagandist," "guardian" and "wooden sword" in accordance with the ceremony of the three old lieutenants.

古文：高祖亲送出郊，恸哭而返，诸王恩礼莫比焉。
现代文：高祖亲自送出郊外，悲恸哭泣而返回，各王的恩惠礼仪无人可和他相比。
English: Gaozu himself was sent out of the countryside, and he returned in sorrow and weeping. No one can compare with him in the gracious etiquette of kings.

古文：世宗世，配飨庙庭。
现代文：世宗时，在宗庙配祭。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, a festival was held at the family temple.

古文：长子安，幼年早卒。
现代文：长子元安，幼年时过早去世。
English: The eldest son, Motoyasu, died prematurely at a young age.

古文：次子燮，除下大夫。
现代文：次子元燮，被委任为下大夫。
English: The second son, Motohiro, was appointed junior doctor.

古文：世宗初，袭拜太中大夫，除征虏将军、华州刺史。
现代文：世宗初年，继承爵位任太中大夫，被任命为征虏将军、华州刺史。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he succeeded to the peerage and was appointed as the Taichung doctor, was appointed as the conscript general, and was appointed as the governor of Huazhou.

古文：燮表曰： 谨惟州治李润堡，虽是少梁旧地，晋、芮锡壤，然胡夷内附，遂为戎落。
现代文：元燮上奏疏说： 恭谨思虑州治李润堡，虽然是少梁旧地，晋国、芮国分封的土地，然而外族归附，于是成为戎人聚集居住的地方。
English: "I respectfully think about the state of Lirunburg, although it is the old land of Shoryang, the land of Jin and Han, it was annexed by foreigners, so it became a place where Edo people gathered and lived.

古文：城非旧邑先代之名，爰自国初，护羌小戍。
现代文：城池不是前代旧城名称，便自建国之初，是护羌校尉的小城堡。
English: Jochoike is not the name of the former old town, but it has been a small castle of the guard captain since the beginning of the founding of the country.

古文：及改镇立郡，依岳立州，因籍仓府，未刊名实。
现代文：等到改镇设郡，靠山设立州城，利用粮仓府库，没改正名称地域。
English: Wait until the town is changed to county, the state capital is established, the granary is used, and the name of the region is not corrected.

古文：窃见冯翊古城，羌魏两民之交，许洛水陆之际，先汉之左辅，皇魏之右翼，形胜名都，实惟西蕃奥府。
现代文：私下以为冯翊古城，在羌人魏国两族民众的交接、许昌洛水水陆交会的地方，是先汉的东部辅弼，皇魏的西部翼卫，名胜古城，实为西部藩镇腹地。
English: Privately, I thought that the ancient city of Fengye, in the place where the people of the two ethnic groups in the Han and Wei dynasties met and the Xu Changlu Water and Land Fair was held, was the eastern auxiliary of the Han Dynasty, the western wing of the Imperial Wei Dynasty, the famous ancient city, and was actually the hinterland of the western Han town.

古文：今州之所在，岂唯非旧，至乃居冈饮润，井谷秽杂，升降劬劳，往还数里，譐誻明昏，有亏礼教。
现代文：现在州的治所，岂止不是旧地，简直是住在山岗上从深涧取水喝，水井山谷污秽杂乱，上下辛劳，来往几里路。背后说长道短，亏损礼乐教化。
English: The present-day prefectural government is not just the same as the old one, it is like living on a hill and fetching water from a deep well. The wells and valleys are filthy and cluttered, it is hard work to go up and down, and it takes several miles to get from one place to another.

古文：未若冯翊，面华渭，包原泽，井浅池平，樵牧饶广。
现代文：不如冯翊，面对华山渭水，环绕平原州泽，井水浅池塘平，打柴放牧富饶广阔。
English: It is not as good as Fengyuan, facing the Huashan River, surrounded by the plain of Shuzawa, the well water is shallow and the pond is flat, and the firewood grazing area is rich and vast.

古文：采材华阴，陆运七十；伐木龙门，顺流而下。
现代文：从华阴采集材料，陆路运输七十里；从龙门砍伐木头，顺流而下。
English: Collecting materials from Huayin and transporting them seventy miles by land; cutting wood from Longmen and sailing down the river.

古文：陪削旧雉，功省力易，人各为己，不以为劳。
现代文：增削旧城墙，工程节省用力不多，人们各自为自己，不以为辛劳。
English: The old city wall is being added and subtracted, the project saves a lot of effort, and people are each for themselves and do not think it is hard work.

古文：昔宋民无井，穿井而忻得人；况合城无水，得水而不家庆？
现代文：从前宋国民众没有井，掘井后欣然得到人心；何况全城没有水，得到水后能不家家庆贺吗?
English: In the former Song Dynasty, the people did not have wells, but after digging wells, they gladly won the hearts of the people; moreover, the whole city did not have water, but after getting water, could everyone celebrate?

古文：窃闻前政刺史，非是无意，或值兵举，或遇年灾，缘此契阔，稽延至此。
现代文：私下听说前任刺史，不是没有这个心意，有的遇上战事，有的碰到灾年，因此离合，拖延到现在。
English: Privately, I have heard that some of my predecessors did not have this intention, because some of them were at war, and some of them were in a disaster year. Therefore, they separated and delayed until now.

古文：去岁已熟，秋方大登，四境晏安，京师无事。
现代文：去年已经收成不错，秋天又将大丰收，四境安定，京城没有事件。
English: Last year's harvest was already good, and the autumn will be another bumper harvest. The four regions are stable, and there are no incidents in Beijing.

古文：丁不十钱之费，人无八旬之勤。
现代文：男丁不用十文钱的耗费，每人没有八十天的辛劳。
English: A man does not need to spend ten pennies to get up, and each man does not have to toil for eighty days.

古文：损轻益重，乞垂昭鉴。 
现代文：损失轻微受益重大，乞求明鉴批准。 
English: Minor loss, major benefit, begging for explicit approval.

古文：遂诏曰： 一劳永逸，便可听移。 
现代文：世宗于是下韶说： 一劳永逸，准许迁移。 
English: Sejong then said, "Once and for all, you are allowed to move."

古文：后除征虏将军、豳州刺史。
现代文：后来授任征虏将军、豳州刺史。
English: Later, he was awarded the post of conscript general, and became known as Zhangzhou Sanzhi.

古文：延昌四年薨。
现代文：延昌四年逝世。
English: Yanchang died four years later.

古文：赠本将军、朔州刺史。
现代文：追赠本号将军、朔州刺史。
English: The posthumous award goes to the general of this issue, Shuo Zhou Zhishi.

古文：子超，字化生。
现代文：儿子元超，字化生。
English: His son, Yuanchao, was born.

古文：肃宗初，袭。
现代文：肃宗初年，继承爵位。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Suzong, he succeeded to the peerage.

古文：时以胡国珍封安定公，改封北平王。
现代文：当时因胡国珍封安定公，元超改封北平王。
English: At that time, Yuan Chao changed his title to Beiping King due to the fact that he was awarded the title of Prince of Stability by Hu.

古文：拜城门校尉、通直散骑常侍、东中郎将。
现代文：被任命为城门校尉、通直散骑常侍、东中郎将。
English: He was appointed castle gate captain, Tsuchida sanshiki tsuneishi, and Higashi churo shogun.

古文：寻除光禄大夫，领将作大匠。
现代文：不久授任光禄大夫，兼将作大匠。
English: He was soon appointed as a doctor of Guanglu, and will also work as a master carpenter.

古文：后复本封。
现代文：后来恢复本来的封爵。
English: The original knighthood was later restored.

古文：尔朱荣之入洛，超避难洛南，遇寇见害。
现代文：水朱荣进入洛阳，元超避难到洛水以南，遇贼寇被害。
English: Water Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, Yuan Chao took refuge in the south of Luoshui, and was killed by thieves.

古文：庄帝初，赠车骑大将军、仪同三司、岐州刺史。
现代文：庄帝初年，追赠他为车骑大将军、仪同三司、岐州刺史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was posthumously awarded the titles of General of Chariot and Cavalry, Grand Marshal of the Imperial Family, and Grand Historian of Kizhou.

古文：子孝景，袭。
现代文：儿子孝景，继承爵位。
English: His son, Takakage, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：武定中，通直郎。
现代文：武定年间，任通直郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wujing, he was appointed as Tsunemitsu Naoro.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐国接受挥让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：燮弟愿平，清狂无行。
现代文：元燮的弟弟愿乎，冷酷狂妄没有操行。
English: Geng Yao's younger brother was willing, but he did not act in a cold and arrogant manner.

古文：高祖末，拜员外郎。
现代文：高祖末年，被任命为员外郎。
English: In the last years of Gaozu's life, he was appointed as a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：世宗初，迁给事中。
现代文：世宗初年，调任给事中。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was transferred to the middle of things.

古文：悖恶日甚，杀人劫盗，公私成患。
现代文：狂悖邪恶日益严重，杀人抢劫，成为官府百姓的祸患。
English: The evil of fanaticism is becoming more and more serious, and murder and robbery have become the scourge of the government and the people.

古文：世宗以其戚近，未忍致之于法，乃免官，禁之别馆。
现代文：世宗因他是近亲，不忍心以法律处治，就免他的官职，囚禁他在单独的客馆。
English: Because he was a close relative and did not have the heart to take legal action, Sejong removed him from his official position and imprisoned him in a separate guest house.

古文：馆名愁思堂，冀其克念。
现代文：客馆名叫愁思堂，希望他能反省。
English: The guesthouse is called Shoushidang. I hope he will reconsider.

古文：世宗崩，愿平乃得出。
现代文：世宗逝世，愿平才得以出客馆。
English: After Sejong's death, he was able to leave the guest house.

古文：灵太后临朝，以其暴乱不悛，诏曰： 愿平志行轻疏，每乖宪典，可还于别馆，依前禁锢。 
现代文：灵太后临朝听政，因他残暴作乱不改正，下诏说： 愿平的志向品行轻浮粗疏，时常违背法典，可回到客馆，依照从前囚禁起来。 
English: Lingdai Hou Lin, who was in charge of the imperial court and listened to the government, because he did not correct his brutality and disorder, issued the following edict: May Ping's ambition, who is frivolous and vulgar and often violates the code of law, return to the guest house and be imprisoned as before.

古文：久之，解禁还家，付师严加诲奖。
现代文：很久以后，解除禁闭回到家中，交给师傅严加教诲辅助。
English: After a long time, he was released from confinement, returned home, and handed over to the master for strict guidance and assistance.

古文：后拜通直散骑常侍、前将军。
现代文：后来被任命为通直散骑常侍、前将军。
English: He was later appointed as Tsuchida Sanshiro no Tsuneishi, a former general.

古文：坐裸其妻王氏于其男女之前，又强奸妻妹于妻母之侧。
现代文：因在儿女面前脱光妻子王氏衣服，又在岳母的旁边强奸妻子的妹妹而获罪。
English: He was found guilty of stripping his wife Wang naked in front of their children and raping his wife's younger sister next to his mother-in-law.

古文：御史中丞侯刚案以不道，处死，绞刑。会赦免，黜为员外常侍。
现代文：御史中丞侯刚判定他没有人道，处以死刑，用绞刑，遇大赦免于一死，贬为员外常侍。
English: Gu Shizhongzheng Hou Gang judged him to be inhumane and sentenced him to death by hanging, but pardoned him in case of death and demoted him to the rank of non-commissioned officer.

古文：孝昌中，卒。
现代文：孝昌年间，去世。
English: He died during the reign of Emperor Xiaochang.

古文：子绪，幽州安西府功曹参军。
现代文：儿子元绪，担任幽州安西府功曹参军。
English: His son, Gengxu, served as the Gong Cao of Yuzhou's Anxi Prefecture and joined the army.

古文：庄帝初，直阁将军。
现代文：庄壶初年，担任直合将军。
English: In the first year of Zhuo Jue, he served as the general of Zhouga.

古文：寻为持节、兼武卫将军、关右慰劳十二州大使，遂没吐谷浑。
现代文：不久担任持节、兼武卫将军、闱右慰劳十二州大使，后来竟沦落到吐谷运。
English: Soon, he served as Jisetsu, General of the Imperial Guard, and Ambassador of the Twelve Provinces of Japan, and later he was reduced to the position of the governor of Togoku.

古文：子长春，员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：儿子长春，担任员外散骑侍郎。
English: His son, Nagaharu, served as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：武定初，封南郡王，邑五百户。
现代文：武定初年，封为南郡王，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Wuding, it was named the king of Nan County, with 500 households in the food village.

古文：齐受禅，爵例降。
现代文：齐接受禅让，爵位依例降低。
English: If all accept Zen, the crown will fall as usual.

古文：愿平弟永平，征虏将军、南州刺史。
现代文：愿平的弟弟永平，担任征虏将军、南州刺史。
English: Yongping, the younger brother of Jiping, served as a conscript general and the leader of Nanzhou.

古文：为城民华延明所害。
现代文：被市民华延明所杀害。
English: He was killed by citizen Hua Yanming.

古文：太昌初，追赠使持节、侍中、都督定瀛幽三州诸军事、卫将军、定州刺史。
现代文：左昌初年，追赠使持节、侍中、都督定瀛幽三州诸军事、卫将军、定州刺史。
English: In the first year of Zuochang, the posthumous gifts of the envoys of Jichijie, the chamberlains, the governor of the three states, the military, the general of the Guards, and the history of Dingzhou.

古文：永平弟珍平，司州治中。
现代文：永平的弟弟珍平，担任司州治中。
English: Yongping's younger brother, Zhenping, served as the vice-governor.

古文：子叔遵，员外散骑常侍。
现代文：儿子叔遵，担任员外散骑常侍。
English: His son, Shizun, served as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback.

古文：珍平弟贵平，羽林监、转射声校尉。
现代文：珍平的弟弟贵平，担任羽林监，改任射声校尉。
English: Zhenping's younger brother Guiping, who had served as the forester, was reassigned to the post of captain.

古文：庄帝初，除散骑常侍、宗正少卿，封东莱王，邑百户。
现代文：庄帝初年，授任散骑常侍、宗正少卿，封东莱王，食邑一百户。
English: In the first year of Emperor Zhuang, he was awarded the title of knight errant, Zongzheng Shaoqing, the title of Donglai Wang, and a hundred households of food villages.

古文：除平北将军、南相州刺史。
现代文：授任平北将军、南相州刺史。
English: He was appointed as the general of North Pyongan Province and the governor of South Siang Province.

古文：庄帝既杀尔朱荣，加武卫将军，兼侍中，为河北、山东慰劳大使。
现代文：庄帝杀死水朱荣后，加授武卫将军，兼侍中，担任河北、山东慰劳大使。
English: After Emperor Zhuang killed Shuizhu Rong, he was awarded the title of Wuwei General, concurrently served as an aide-de-camp, and served as a consolation ambassador for Hebei and Shandong.

古文：至定州东北，为幽州大都督侯渊所执，送于晋阳。
现代文：到达定州东北，被幽州大都督侯渊所拘捕，送到晋阳。
English: He arrived in the northeast of Dingzhou, was arrested by the Yuzhou Governor Hou Yuan and sent to Jinyang.

古文：后还洛。
现代文：后来回到盗阳。
English: Later, he returned to Poyang.

古文：前废帝时，以本官行青州事，属土民崔祖螭作逆，贼徒甚盛，围逼东阳一百余日。
现代文：前废帝时，以本身官职代行青州事务，遇上当地人崔祖螭作乱，贼寇十分强盛，包围逼迫东阳一百多天。
English: When the former emperor was dethroned, he used his official position to conduct Qingzhou affairs on his behalf. He encountered the local people, Cui Zuyi, who caused a disturbance. The bandits were very powerful, and they besieged and persecuted Dongyang for more than 100 days.

古文：贵平率城民固守，又令将士开门交战。
现代文：贵平率领市民固守，又命令将领士兵打开城门交战。
English: Guiping led the citizens to hold fast, and ordered the general soldiers to open the city gate to fight.

古文：大军救至，遂擒祖螭等，斩之。
现代文：救援大军赶到，于是擒获祖螭等人，杀了他。
English: The rescue team arrived, whereupon they captured Zhu Xi and others and killed him.

古文：还，除车骑将军，加散骑常侍，迁左卫将军、宗师，又迁车骑大将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：返回后，授任车骑将军，加授散骑常侍，升任左卫将军、宗师，又升任车骑大将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
English: After returning, he was awarded the post of chariot and cavalry general, the additional post of horseback riding attendant, promoted to the general of the left guard, the grandmaster, and promoted to the general of the chariot and cavalry, the doctor of the left light, and the three divisions of the ceremony.

古文：贵平人才险薄，为出帝所信。
现代文：贵平为人阴险刻薄，被出帝所信任。
English: Guiping is a sinister and mean person, and is trusted by Emperor Dezong.

古文：出为青州刺史，又加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，为幽州大都督侯渊所害。
现代文：外出任青州刺史，又加授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，被幽州大都督侯渊所谋害。
English: He was appointed as the official historian of Qingzhou, and was also awarded the title of General of the Horse Cavalry and the title of General of the Three Departments of Kaifu. He was assassinated by Hou Yuan, the Grand Governor of Yuzhou.

古文：史臣曰：南安原始要终，善不掩恶。
现代文：史臣曰：对南安王的行事考察始终，善不掩恶。
English: Shichen said: The investigation into the conduct of the King of Nan'an has always been good, and the good does not hide the evil.

古文：英将帅之用，有声于时。
现代文：元英有将帅才能，有名于当时。
English: Yuan Ying was famous at the time for his skill as a general.

古文：熙、略兄弟，早播民誉，或才疏志大，或器狭任广，咸不能就其功名，俱至非命，惜也。
现代文：元熙、元略兄弟，早先在民众中传有声誉，或才能不足而抱负大，或器量狭小而职任多，都不能成就功名，全死于非命，是可惜的。
English: It is a pity that the brothers, Yuan Xi and Yuan Liang, who had a reputation among the people earlier, or who lacked talent but had great ambition, or who were small in stature but had many responsibilities, were unable to achieve fame, and all of them died a violent death.

古文：康王不永，鸾起家声。
现代文：康王寿命不长，元鸾振兴家世的名声。
English: King Kang did not live long, and the reputation of Yuan Xuan's revitalization of the family came to an end.

古文：徽饰智矫情，外谄内忌，永安之祸，谁任其责？
现代文：元徽弄巧设诈矫揉造作，对外谄媚内心妒忌，永安年间的祸患，谁承担责任?
English: The original emblem is a trick, fraud, affectation, external flattery and internal jealousy, the scourge of the Yongan period, who is responsible?

古文：宛其死也，固其宜哉！
现代文：好像他的死，本是应该的呀!
English: It's as if his death was meant to be!

古文：章武、乐陵，盖不足数。
现代文：章武王、乐陵王，大概不值得一提。
English: Zhangwu Wang, Le Ling Wang, probably not worth mentioning.

古文：靖王聪断威重，见称太和，美矣。
现代文：靖王聪明果断声威显赫，太和年间受到称赞，是美好的。
English: It is wonderful that the wise and decisive voice of King Yasuchika is so prominent and has been praised during the Taiga era.

