古文：李欣，字元盛，小名真奴，范阳人也。曾祖产，产子绩，二世知名于慕容氏。
现代文：李欣，字元盛，小名真奴，范阳人，曾祖李产，产子绩，二代在慕容氏政权中都很出名。
English: Li Xin, the character Yuan Sheng, the nickname Zhennu, Fan Yangren, the great-grandfather Li Zhanzhong, and the second generation are all famous in the Murong regime.

古文：父崇，冯跋吏部尚书、石城太守。
现代文：父李崇，冯跋政权的吏部尚书、石城太守。
English: His father, Li Chong, was the secretary of Fengba, Shang Shu, and the governor of Shicheng.

古文：延和初，车驾至和龙，崇率十余郡归降。
现代文：延和初年，魏帝车驾到了和龙，李崇率领十余郡归降。
English: In the first year of Yanhe, Emperor Wei's carriage drove to Hailong, and Li Chong led more than ten counties to surrender.

古文：世祖甚礼之，呼曰 李公 ，以崇为平西将军、北幽州刺史、固安侯。
现代文：魏世祖对待他很优厚，总是叫 李公 ，任命他为平西将军、北幽州刺史、固安侯。
English: Wei Shizu treated him very generously, always called him Li Gong, and appointed him as the general of Pingxi, the governor of North Yuzhou, and the governor of Gu'an.

古文：卒，年八十一，谥曰襄侯。
现代文：去世时，年八十一岁，谥为襄侯。
English: At the time of his death, he was eighty-one years old.

古文：欣母贱，为诸兄所轻。
现代文：李欣的母亲出身寒微，李欣被他各位兄长所轻视。
English: Li Xin's mother was from a humble background, and Li Xin was despised by his older brothers.

古文：崇曰： 此子之生，相者言贵，吾每观察，或未可知。 
现代文：李崇说： 这个孩子生时，相面者说他日后富贵，我每每观察他，也许还真有那么回事。 
English: Li Chong said: When this child was born, his parents said that he would be rich in the future. I observed him every day, maybe there really is such a thing.

古文：遂使入都，为中书学生。
现代文：于是让他到京城，当中书学生。
English: So he sent him to Kyoto, where he became a calligraphy student.

古文：世祖幸中书学，见而异之，指谓从者曰： 此小兒终效用于朕之子孙矣。 
现代文：魏世祖到中书学堂，看见他十分惊异，指着他对随从说： 这孩子最终会为我的子孙服务。 
English: When Wei Shizu went to the Chinese school, he was very surprised to see him. He pointed to his attendant and said, "This boy will eventually serve my children and grandchildren."

古文：因识眄之。
现代文：因此认识记住了他。
English: So I took one look at him and remembered him.

古文：世祖舅阳平王杜超有女，将许贵戚。
现代文：世祖的舅舅阳平王杜超有个女儿，准备许配给贵戚之家。
English: The ancestor's uncle, Yang Ping Wang Du Chao, had a daughter who was preparing to marry into a noble family.

古文：世祖闻之，谓超曰： 李欣后必宦达，益人门户，可以女妻之，勿许他贵也。 
现代文：世祖听说，对杜超说： 李欣日后必定官显位高，益人门户，你可以把女儿许配给他，就不要许配给其他人了。 
English: The ancestor heard this and said to Du Chao, "In the future, Li Xin is sure to rise to a high-ranking official, which will be beneficial to others. You can marry your daughter to him, but don't marry her to anyone else."

古文：遂劝成婚。
现代文：于是撮成此事。
English: Under his persuasion, Du Chao's daughter married Li Lan.

古文：南人李哲尝言欣必当贵达。
现代文：南方人李哲曾经说李欣必定会高官显赫。
English: Li Zhe, a southerner, once said that Li Xin would certainly become a high-ranking official.

古文：杜超之死也，世祖亲哭三日。
现代文：杜超去世，世祖亲自临哭三日。
English: Du Chao passed away, and Shizu personally wept for three days.

古文：欣以超婿，得在丧位出入。
现代文：李欣因是杜超的女婿，得以在丧位出入哭祭。
English: Because Li Xin was Du Chao's son-in-law, he was able to enter and leave the wailing ceremony at the funeral.

古文：帝目而指之，谓左右曰： 观此人举动，岂不有异于众？
现代文：世祖指着他对左右僚佐说： 看此人的举动，岂不与众不同？
English: The patriarch pointed to his right and left lieutenants and said, "Look at this man's actions, isn't he different from everyone else?

古文：必为朕家干事之臣。 
现代文：他必定会是我家栋梁之臣。 
English: He will surely become a pillar of my family.

古文：欣聪敏机辩，强记明察。
现代文：李欣聪敏善言、博闻强记、秋毫明察。
English: Li Xin Congmin is good at words, good at reading and writing, and good at observation.

古文：初，李灵为高宗博士、谘议，诏崔浩选中书学生器业优者为助教。
现代文：当初，李灵为高宗博士、咨议，帝下诏让崔浩选拔中书学生中品学兼优的人为助教。
English: At the beginning, Li Ling was Dr. Gao Zong, a consultant, and the emperor ordered Cui Hao to select a person with excellent grades in middle school students as a teaching assistant.

古文：浩举其弟子箱子与卢度世、李敷三人应之。
现代文：崔浩推举其弟子箱子与卢度世、李敷三人。
English: Cui Hao nominated three of his disciples, Hako, Lu Duxie and Li Shiki.

古文：给事高谠子祐、尚书段霸兒侄等以为浩阿其亲戚，言于恭宗。恭宗以浩为不平，闻之于世祖。
现代文：给事高谠之子高、尚书段霸儿侄等人认为崔浩向自己的亲戚讨好，便把此事对恭宗说了，恭宗觉得崔浩很不公平，又向世祖说了此事。
English: Gao Gao's son Gao, Shang Shudanba's nephew and others who were involved in the matter thought that Cui Hao was trying to curry favor with his relatives, so they told the matter to Gongzong. Gongzong thought that Cui Hao was very unfair and told the matter to Shizuo.

古文：世祖意在于欣，曰： 云何不取幽州刺史李崇老翁兒也？ 
现代文：世祖安排此举，意在得讠斤，说： 为什么不选拔幽州刺史李崇老翁的儿子呢？ 
English: The ancestor arranged this move, intending to gain the upper hand, saying: Why not choose the son of Yuzhou poet Li Chonglao?

古文：浩对曰： 前亦言欣合选，但以其先行在外，故不取之。 
现代文：崔浩说： 前些时也说李欣应当被选拔，但因其先行在外，所以不选他了。 
English: Cui Hao said: Some time ago, it was also said that Li Xin should be selected, but because he was ahead of others, he was not selected.

古文：世祖曰： 可待欣还，箱子等罢之。 
现代文：世祖说： 可以等李欣回来之后，箱子等人就不选了。 
English: The ancestor said, "We can wait for Li Xin to come back, then we won't have to choose the box and the others."

古文：欣为世祖所识如此。
现代文：李欣就是这样被世祖所赏识。
English: This is how Li Xin was appreciated by the ancestors.

古文：遂除中书助教博士，稍见任用，入授高宗经。
现代文：于是朝廷除授李欣为中书助教博士，渐渐被朝廷任用。入宫为高宗讲经。
English: As a result, the imperial court awarded Li Xin the title of assistant professor of Chinese literature, and he was gradually appointed by the imperial court.

古文：高宗即位，欣以旧恩亲宠，迁仪曹尚书，领中秘书，赐爵扶风公，加安东将军，赠其母孙氏为容城君。
现代文：高宗即位之后，李欣因旧恩被亲宠，迁任仪曹尚书，领中秘书，赐爵扶风公，加授安东将军，朝廷还赠其母孙氏为容城君。
English: After Gao Zong's accession to the throne, Li Xin was favored because of his old favor. He was transferred to Cao Shangshu, Secretary of the Central Committee, knighted Fu Feng, and promoted to General Anton. The court also presented his mother, Sun, with the title of Yongcheng.

古文：高宗顾谓群臣曰： 朕始学之岁，情未能专，既总万机，温飞靡暇，是故儒道实有阙焉。
现代文：高宗对群臣说： 朕开始学习那年，性情未能专一，总领万机之后，温习起来又没有空闲，所以朕于儒家道理的了解实有欠缺。
English: Gao Zong said to the ministers: In the year that I began to study, my disposition was not one-pointed, and after receiving all the opportunities, I did not have time to study, so my understanding of Confucianism was really lacking.

古文：岂惟予咎，抑亦师传之不勤。
现代文：这哪里只是朕一人的过错，师傅教诲不勤也不可忽视。
English: I am the only one to blame for this, and the teacher's instruction and lack of diligence cannot be ignored.

古文：所以爵赏仍隆者，盖不遗旧也。 
现代文：今天朕所以赏爵仍隆，是出于不忘旧情的原因而已。 
English: Today, the reason why I still have a knighthood is because I have not forgotten the past.

古文：欣免冠拜谢。
现代文：李欣免冠拜揖谢罪。
English: Li Xin was absolved of the crime of worshipping the crown.

古文：其经艺通明者贡之王府。
现代文：出任使持节、安南将军、相州刺史。
English: Envoys such as Mochizuki, General Annan, and Soshu Sashi were appointed.

古文：则郁郁之文，于是不坠。 
现代文：李欣为政清廉简约，善断狱讼，奸邪盗贼纷纷销声匿迹，百姓交口称赞。
English: Li Xin was praised by the public for his clean and simple politics, his ability to adjudicate prison cases, and the fact that the traitors and thieves disappeared one after another.

古文：书奏，显祖从之。
现代文：李欣上疏请求设立学校。疏书奏上后，显祖依从了他的意见。
English: Li Xin went to Suo to request the establishment of a school. After Suo's letter was read, Xianzu followed his advice.

古文：以欣治为诸州之最，加赐衣服。
现代文：朝廷因李欣政绩为众州之最，加赐其礼服。
English: As Li Xin's political achievements were the best among all the states, the imperial court gave him more ceremonial robes.

古文：自是遂有骄矜自得之志。
现代文：从此后李欣便有骄傲自得的情绪。
English: Since then, Li Xin has been feeling proud.

古文：乃受纳民财及商胡珍宝。
现代文：于是他收受民财以及商人胡民的奇珍异宝。
English: As a result, he received people's wealth as well as the rare treasures of the merchant Hu Min.

古文：兵民告言，尚书李敷与欣少长相好，每左右之。
现代文：士兵百姓告发，但尚书李敷与李讠从小到大都交情很好，李敷总是为他遮掩。
English: Soldiers and civilians denounced him, but Shangshu Li Shiki and Li Yao had a good relationship from childhood to adulthood. Li Shiki always covered up for him.

古文：或有劝以奏闻，敷不许。
现代文：有人劝他上书奏明此事，李敷就是不答应。
English: Someone advised him to report the matter in writing, but Li Jiki refused.

古文：显祖闻欣罪状，槛车征欣，拷劾抵罪。
现代文：显祖听说李欣的罪状，以槛车征李欣，拷问其罪。
English: When Xianzu heard of Li Xin's crime, he used a threshing machine to round up Li Xin and interrogate her.

古文：时敷兄弟将见疏斥，有司讽欣以中旨嫌敷兄弟之意，令欣告列敷等隐罪，可得自全。
现代文：当时李敷兄弟将被疏斥贬官，有关部门示意李欣以中枢嫌恶李敷兄弟的意图，让李欣告发列举李敷等尚未被发现的罪行，说这样就可自保。
English: At that time, the Li Shiki brothers would be dismissed and demoted, and the relevant departments signaled Li Xin's intention to detest the Li Shiki brothers with the central government, and asked Li Xin to report and enumerate Li Shiki and other crimes that had not yet been discovered, saying that this would be self-protection.

古文：欣深所不欲，且弗之知也。
现代文：李欣极不愿意，而且也不知道。
English: Li Xin did not want to, and did not know how to.

古文：乃谓其女婿裴攸曰： 吾宗与李敷族世虽远，情如一家。
现代文：于是对其女婿裴攸说： 我们这一族与李敷一族相隔虽远，但是情同一家。
English: So he said to his son-in-law Pei You: Although our family is far away from the Li Shiki family, we are like one.

古文：在事既有此劝，竟如何也？
现代文：事到如今，上面又有让我揭发李敷的劝告建议，究竟让我该怎么办呢？
English: To this day, the above has advised me to expose Li Shu, what should I do?

古文：昨来每欲为此取死，引簪自刺，以带自绞，而不能致绝。
现代文：从昨天以来我每每为此想自杀算了，以簪自刺，用带自缢，都不能如愿。
English: Since yesterday, I have often thought about committing suicide because of this, but I have not been able to do so either by stabbing myself with a knife or by taking a knife with me.

古文：且亦不知其事。 
现代文：况且我也不知道他的事呀。 
English: Besides, I don't know anything about him.

古文：攸曰： 何为为他死也？
现代文：裴攸说： 您为什么要为他而死？
English: Pei You said: Why would you die for him?

古文：敷兄弟事衅可知。
现代文：李敷兄弟事情明白可知。
English: The Lishiki brothers know what they're doing.

古文：有冯阐者，先为敷所败，其家切恨之，但呼阐弟问之，足知委曲。 
现代文：有个叫冯阐的，先被李敷所败，他家切齿痛恨李敷，只要把冯阐的弟弟叫来，不就清楚是怎么回事了吗。 
English: There was a man named Feng Ying, who was first defeated by Li Shiki. His family hated Li Shiki with a vengeance. If only Feng Ying's brother had been called in, it would have been clear what was going on.

古文：欣从其言。
现代文：李欣听了他的话。
English: Li Xin listened to his words.

古文：又赵郡范扌剽具条列敷兄弟事状，有司以闻。
现代文：又有赵郡范依条列举了李敷的事情，有关部门很快就把它递交上去了。
English: Zhao County Fan Yizhe also listed the Li Zhi incident, and the relevant departments quickly submitted it.

古文：敷坐得罪。
现代文：李敷因此被判刑。
English: Lishiki was sentenced for this.

古文：诏列欣贪冒，罪应死。
现代文：帝下诏列举李欣贪赃枉法的罪状，罪当处死。
English: The imperial edict listed Li Xin as being guilty of embezzlement, a crime punishable by death.

古文：以纠李敷兄弟，故得降免，百鞭髡刑，配为厮役。
现代文：但因其纠弹李敷兄弟，所以得以宽赦。只将李欣抽打一百鞭，削去头发，发配去服劳役。
English: However, he was pardoned because he had reprimanded Li Jiki's brother. Li Xin was only given one hundred lashes, his hair was shaved off, and he was assigned to labor service.

古文：欣之废也，平寿侯张谠见欣，与语奇之，谓人曰： 此佳士也，终不久屈。 
现代文：李欣被判刑之后，平寿侯张谠见到李欣，与他交谈后大为惊奇，对人说： 这是一个佳士，不会长久被屈的。 
English: After Li Xin was sentenced, Ping Shou Hou Zhang Ye saw Li Xin and was very surprised after talking with him. He said to people, "This is a good man, he will not be defeated for a long time."

古文：未几而复为太仓尚书，摄南部事。用范扌剽、陈端等计，令千里之外，户别转运，诣仓输之。
现代文：不久，李欣就复官任太仓尚书，摄领南部事宜，采用范、陈端等人计策，令千里之外，户别转运，到仓交纳粮食。
English: Soon, Li Xin was reinstated as the official of Taicang Shangshu and took charge of the southern affairs, adopting the strategy of Fan, Chen Duan and others to make households thousands of miles away transfer and pay grain to the warehouse.

古文：所在委滞，停延岁月，百姓竞以贷赂各求在前，于是远近大为困弊。
现代文：地方官员玩忽职守，拖延时间，老百姓竞相以财物贿赂管理官员，于是远近州县大为贫困。
English: Local officials neglect their duties, delay time, and people compete to bribe management officials with money and goods. As a result, poverty is rampant in prefectures far and wide.

古文：若郑之子产，鲁之季文亦未加也。
现代文：道路之上人们议论纷纷： 蓄养聚敛之臣，比盗臣更残酷。 
English: On the road, people began to argue: it is more cruel to keep and collect vassals than to be a rogue vassal.

古文：然恶直丑正，盗憎主人。自往年以来，群奸不息，劫欣宗人李英等四家，焚烧舍宅，伤害良善。
现代文：李欣之弟左将军李璞对他说： 范善于见人说话，说出的话，我没有听见有关德义之言，只有势利之说。听他的话很舒服，观察其行为全是盗贼行径，他正是所谓集谄谀、谗慝、贪冒、奸佞于一身的人，不早早去除，我担心你后悔不及。 李欣不听，更加信任他，心腹之事，尽数相告于他。
English: Li Xin's brother, General Zuo Li Yan, said to him: Fan is good at seeing people and speaking. When he speaks, I don't hear anything about virtue and righteousness, only snobbery. It's very comfortable to listen to his words. Observing his behavior is all thievery. He is exactly what is called a person who gathers, steals, embezzles, and betrays. If you don't get rid of him early, I'm afraid you won't be able to regret it. Li Xin didn't listen and trusted him even more. He told him everything he wanted to tell him.

古文：此而可忍，孰不可恕！有司可明加购募，必令擒殄。 六月，显祖崩。
现代文：李欣既受到显祖恩宠，参与决议军国大事，兼掌选举，权势倾盖内外，百官无不曲节以侍奉他。范因没有什么功劳，开始做官时被拜为卢奴令。六月，显祖逝世。
English: Li Xin was favored by Emperor Xianzu, participated in the resolution of military and national affairs, was in charge of elections, wielded power both at home and abroad, and hundreds of officials served him without fail. Fan was worshipped as Lunuling when he began to work as an official because he had no merit. In June, Emperor Xianzu died.

古文：欣迁司空，进爵范阳公。
现代文：李欣迁任司空，晋爵范阳公。
English: Li Xinqian was transferred to the post of Secretary of the Air Force, and Fan Yanggong was promoted to the peerage.

古文：七月，以欣为侍中、镇南大将军、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史。
现代文：七月，朝廷任命李欣为侍中、镇南大将军、开府仪同三司、徐州刺史。
English: In July, the imperial court appointed Li Xin as a chamberlain, Zhenan Grand General, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, and Xuzhou Zhishi.

古文：范扌剽知文明太后忿欣也，又知内外疾之。
现代文：范知道文明太后忌恨李欣，又知内外官员都恨他。
English: Fan knew that the civilized empress Dowager Gui hated Li Xin, and also knew that officials at home and abroad hated him.

古文：太和元年二月，希旨告欣外叛。
现代文：太和元年二月，揣摩皇上意旨控告李欣外叛。
English: In February of the first year of the Taisho era, guessing the emperor's intention to accuse Li Xin of rebellion.

古文：文明太后征欣至京师，言其叛状，欣曰无之。
现代文：文明太后征召李欣到京城，言其叛状，李欣说根本就没有这么回事。
English: Li Xin was summoned to Beijing by the Empress Dowager of Civilization and accused of being a traitor. Li Xin said that there was no such thing at all.

古文：引扌剽证欣，欣言： 尔妄云知我，吾又何言！
现代文：太后带出范作证，李欣说： 你妄称知道我有此事，我又有什么可说！
English: The empress dowager brought Fan to testify, and Li Xin said, "You falsely claimed to know about my case, what else can I say!

古文：虽然，尔不顾余之厚德而忍为此，不仁甚矣。 
现代文：好哇，你不顾我对你隆厚的恩遇而忍心为此，你也太不仁不义了。 
English: Wow, you put up with me in spite of my generous treatment of you, and for this, you are too unkind and unjust.

古文：扌剽曰： 公德于扌剽，何若李敷之德于公？
现代文：范说： 李公对我范的恩德，与李敷对您的恩德相比如何？
English: Fan said: How does Li Gong's kindness to my Fan compare to Li Zhi's kindness to you?

古文：公昔忍于敷，扌剽今敢不忍于公乎？ 
现代文：公过去忍心加害李敷，范今天敢不忍心如此对你吗？ 
English: In the past, he had the heart to harm Li Jiki in public. Will Fan dare to do this to you today?

古文：欣慨然曰： 吾不用璞言，自贻伊戚，万悔于心，何嗟及矣！ 
现代文：李欣愤慨地说： 我不听李璞的话，贻祸自己一门，万悔于心，嗟叹何及！ 
English: Li Xin said indignantly, "I didn't listen to Li Qiye's words, and brought misfortune on myself. I feel remorse in my heart. I can't help but sigh!

古文：遂见诛。
现代文：于是被杀。
English: He was killed.

古文：欣有三子。
现代文：李欣有三个儿子。
English: Li Xin has three sons.

