古文：弹棋始自魏宫内，用妆奁戏。
现代文：弹棋最开始是从魏代后宫发明的，用梳妆的镜匣来游戏。
English: The game of draughts was first invented in the harem of the Wei Dynasty, and was played with a dressing mirror.

古文：文帝于此戏特妙，用手巾角拂之，无不中。
现代文：魏文帝对这种游戏特别精通，能用手中角去弹起棋子，没有弹不中的。
English: Emperor Weiwen was particularly proficient at this game, and could use his middle corner to bounce a piece, and never missed a shot.

古文：有客自云能，帝使为之。
现代文：有位客人自称也能这样做，文帝就叫他试一试。
English: One guest claimed to be able to play chess.

古文：客箸葛巾角，低头拂棋，妙踰于帝。
现代文：客人戴着葛中，就低着头用葛巾角去拨动棋子，比文帝做得更妙。
English: When guests wear kudzu socks, they bow their heads and use the kudzu angle to move the pieces, which is better than what Emperor Wen did.

古文：陵云台楼观精巧，先称平众木轻重，然后造构，乃无锱铢相负揭。
现代文：陵云台的楼台建造得十分精妙，建造之前都提前称过所有木材的重量，四面所用木材的重量都是相等的，然后才放筑台，因此四面重量精确到分毫不差。
English: The tower of Lingyuntai was built very skillfully. Before the construction, the weight of all the wood was weighed in advance. The weight of the wood used on all four sides was equal before the platform was placed, so the weight of the four sides was accurate to the minute.

古文：台虽高峻，常随风摇动，而终无倾倒之理。
现代文：楼台虽然很高，风一来就会随风摇摆，但是始终不可能倒塌。
English: Although the platform is high, it will sway with the wind when the wind blows, but it is always impossible to collapse.

古文：魏明帝登台，惧其势危，别以大材扶持之，楼即颓坏。
现代文：魏明帝登上陵云台，害怕楼台危险，又用别的大木头来支撑着它，楼台随即就倒塌了。
English: Wei Mingdi boarded the Lingyuntai, afraid of the danger of the platform, and used other large trees to support it, and the platform immediately collapsed.

古文：论者谓轻重力偏故也。
现代文：很多人则认为这是重心偏向一边的缘故。
English: At the time, some people commented on the incident, saying: "This is caused by the imbalance of weight and weight!"

古文：韦仲将能书。
现代文：韦仲的书法造诣很高。
English: Wei Zhong's calligraphy skills are very high.

古文：魏明帝起殿，欲安榜，使仲将登梯题之。
现代文：魏明帝修建宫殿，想要挂一块牌匾，就派韦仲登上梯子去题匾。
English: Emperor Wei Ming built a palace and wanted to hang a plaque, so he sent Wei Zhong up the ladder to place the plaque.

古文：既下，头鬓皓然，因敕儿孙： 勿复学书。 
现代文：写完字下来后，鬓发全白了。因此，他告诫子孙不要再学习书法。
English: When he finished writing, his hair turned completely white, so he warned his children not to study calligraphy again.

古文：钟会是荀济北从舅，二人情好不协。
现代文：钟会是济北公荀勖的叔伯舅父，两个人感情不好。
English: The bell association is the uncle of the Jibei Gongye, and the two are not on good terms.

古文：荀有宝剑，可直百万，常在母钟夫人许。
现代文：荀勖有一把价值百万的宝剑，经常放在他母亲钟夫人那里。
English: He has a million-dollar sword, which he often leaves with his mother, Mrs. Zhong.

古文：会善书，学荀手迹，作书与母取剑，仍窃去不还。
现代文：钟会擅长书法，就模仿荀勖笔迹，写了一封信给他母亲要宝剑，于是偷拿去不再归还。
English: Bell is good at calligraphy, so he imitated the handwriting of a baboon, wrote a letter to his mother asking for a sword, and then stole it and never returned it.

古文：荀勖知是钟而无由得也，思所以报之。
现代文：荀勖知道是这件事是钟会干的，可是没有办法要回来，就想法报复他。
English: Yao knew that it was the bell club that did it, but since there was no way to get it back, he decided to take revenge on him.

古文：后钟兄弟以千万起一宅，始成，甚精丽，未得移住。
现代文：后来钟家兄弟花了一千万修建一所住宅，刚落成，非常精美，还没有搬进去年。
English: Later, the Zhong brothers spent ten million to build a house, just completed, very beautiful, has not moved into last year.

古文：荀极善画，乃潜往画钟门堂，作太傅形象，衣冠状貌如平生。
现代文：荀勖很擅长绘画，就偷偷地到钟会的新居去，画上钟繇的像，衣帽、相貌都和生前一模一样。
English: Zou was very good at painting, so he secretly went to the new home of the Bell Association and painted a portrait of Zhong Zou. His clothes, hat, and appearance were exactly the same as before his death.

古文：二钟入门，便大感恸，宅遂空废。
现代文：钟氏兄弟进了门，见了父亲的遗像，禁不住悲痛，于是不再去住，大宅子就空置作废了。
English: When Mr. Zhong's brothers entered the house and saw their father's portrait, they couldn't help but grieve, so they no longer lived there. The mansion was left empty and abandoned.

古文：羊长和博学工书，能骑射，善围棋。
现代文：羊长和学识广博，擅长书法，能骑马射箭，长于下围棋。
English: Yang Changhe is well-educated, good at calligraphy, can ride a horse and shoot arrows, and is good at playing Go.

古文：诸羊后多知书，而射、奕余蓺莫逮。
现代文：羊家后代多懂书法，可是射箭、下棋这些技能，却没有谁能赶上羊长和。
English: Sheep descendants mostly know calligraphy, but archery, chess, these skills, but no one can catch up with the shepherd.

古文：戴安道就范宣学，视范所为：范读书亦读书，范钞书亦钞书。
现代文：戴安道上门向范宣学习，他处处都在模仿范宣，范宣读书的时候，他也就跟着读书；范宣抄书的时候，他也抄书。
English: Dian Dao went door-to-door to learn from Fan Xuan. He imitated Fan Xuan everywhere. When Fan Xuan was reading, he also read along with him; when Fan Xuan was copying books, he also copied books.

古文：唯独好画，范以为无用，不宜劳思于此。
现代文：唯独戴安道喜欢绘画，范宣认为画画没有什么用处，不应该在这方面浪费时间和精力。
English: However, Dian Dao likes painting, while Fan Xuanru thinks that painting is of little use and that one should not waste time and energy on it.

古文：戴乃画南都赋图；范看毕咨嗟，甚以为有益，始重画。
现代文：戴安道于是画了《南都赋图》，范宣看了之后，惊叹不已，认为很有好处，因此也开始重视绘画。
English: Dian Dao then painted "Nandu Fu Zhu." After Fan Xuan saw it, he was amazed and thought it was very good, so he also began to attach importance to painting.

古文：谢太傅云： 顾长康画，有苍生来所无。 
现代文：太傅谢安说： 顾长康的画，是自有人类以来所没有的。 
English: Father Xie An said: Gu Changkang's paintings are unprecedented since the beginning of mankind.

古文：戴安道中年画行像甚精妙。
现代文：戴安道中年时画行像，画得非常精妙。
English: When Dian Dao was in his middle age, he was very skillful in painting portraits.

古文：庾道季看之，语戴云： 神明太俗，由卿世情未尽。 
现代文：庚道季看了他的画，对他说： 神像画得太俗气，这是因为你还没有完全摆脱世俗之情。 
English: Geng Daojie looked at his paintings and said to him, "Your paintings of gods are too vulgar. This is because you haven't completely shaken off your worldly feelings."

古文：戴云： 唯务光当免卿此语耳。 
现代文：戴安道说： 只有务光才能避免受到你这样的评论啊。 
English: Dian Dao said: Only Huiguang can avoid receiving such comments from you.

古文：顾长康画裴叔则，颊上益三毛。
现代文：顾恺之给裴叔则画像，在他脸颊上多画了三根胡子。
English: Gu Yanzhi drew a picture of Uncle Pei and drew three more mustaches on his cheeks.

古文：人问其故？顾曰： 裴楷俊朗有识具，正此是其识具。 
现代文：有人问他其中缘由，顾恺之说： 裴楷俊逸爽朗，很有才识，画这三根胡子这恰恰是刻画他的才识。 
English: When asked why, Gu Yanzhi said, "Pei Kaijun is cheerful and talented, and drawing these three mustaches is precisely a portrayal of his talent.

古文：看画者寻之，定觉益三毛如有神明，殊胜未安时。
现代文：看画的人寻味起画像来，确实觉得增加了三根胡子才更有气韵，比没有的时候要好上很多。
English: People who look at the painting are intrigued by the image, and they really think that adding three beards makes it more atmospheric, which is much better than not having them.

古文：王中郎以围棋是坐隐，支公以围棋为手谈。
现代文：北中郎将王坦之认为下围棋是座上隐居，支道林把下围棋看做用手交谈。
English: North Chung-Liang considers Wang Tan-Zhi's game of Go to be a game of seclusion. Subordinate Tong Lin regards the game of Go to be a conversation using hands.

古文：顾长康好写起人形。
现代文：顾恺之喜欢人物写生。
English: Gu Yaozhi's favorite characters are sketched.

古文：欲图殷荆州，殷曰： 我形恶，不烦耳。 
现代文：他想画荆州刺史殷仲堪的画像，仲堪说： 我长得不好看，就不用麻烦你了。 
English: He wanted to draw a picture of Jingzhou's famous poet Yin Zhongkan. Zhongkan said, "I'm not good-looking, so don't bother you."

古文：顾曰： 明府正为眼尔。
现代文：顾恺之说： 你不过是因为眼睛的问题罢了。
English: Gu Yanzhi said, "You just have an eye problem."

古文：但明点童子，飞白拂其上，使如轻云之蔽日。 
现代文：只要明显地画出瞳仁，用飞白笔法轻轻掠过上面，让它像一抹轻云遮住太阳一般。 
English: As long as the pupil is clearly drawn, use the flying white brush method to lightly brush over it, so that it looks like a light cloud covering the sun.

古文：顾长康画谢幼舆在岩石妙。
现代文：顾恺之画谢幼舆的像，把他画在山崖乱石中。
English: Gu Yao's painting is a portrait of Xie Youyou, depicting him in the mountains and cliffs.

古文：人问其所以？顾曰： 谢云： 一丘一壑，自谓过之。 
现代文：别人问他其中缘由，顾恺之说： 谢幼舆自己说过： 在一山一水间游乐的情趣，我比别人更深。 
English: When others asked him the reason for this, Gu Guizhi said: Xie Youyuan himself said: I have a deeper interest in having fun between a mountain and a body of water than others.

古文：此子宜置丘壑中。 
现代文：这样的人就该安置在山崖沟壑里。 
English: Such people should be placed in the mountains, cliffs and ravines.

古文：顾长康画人，或数年不点目精。
现代文：顾恺之画人像，有的好几年了都没有把眼珠点上。
English: Some of Gu Yao's portraits have not had their eyes touched for several years.

古文：人问其故？顾曰： 四体妍蚩，本无关于妙处；传神写照，正在阿堵中。 
现代文：别人问他什么原因，他说： 形体的美丑，本来和画作的神妙之处没有什么关系；画像要能传神。正是取决于眼珠。 
English: When asked why, he said: "The beauty and ugliness of the body has nothing to do with the magic of the painting; the image must be able to convey the spirit. It depends on the eyes.

古文：顾长康道画： 手挥五弦易，目送归鸿难。 
现代文：顾恺之谈论作画时说： 要画出一个人手挥五弦的动作很容易，但要画出一个人目送归鸿的神态就很难。 
English: "It's easy to draw a person waving a five-stringed instrument, but it's hard to draw a person waving goodbye to Hong Kong," Mr. Gu said.

