古文：越王勾践即位三年而欲伐吴。
现代文：越王勾践继承王位后的第三年就想去攻打吴国。
English: In the third year after he succeeded to the throne, King Gojun of Yue wanted to attack the State of Wu.

古文：范蠡进谏曰： 夫国家之事，有持盈，有定倾，有节事。 
现代文：范蠡进谏说： 治理国家有三件事要注意：国家强盛时要设法保持下去；国家将倾复时要设法转危为安；平时处理国家政事要得当。 
English: Fan Junjin said: There are three things to pay attention to when governing the country: when the country is strong, we should try to maintain it; when the country is about to fall, we should try to turn the corner; and in peacetime, we should handle national affairs properly.

古文：王曰： 为三者，奈何？ 
现代文：越王问： 要做到这三点该怎么办呢？ 
English: Yue Wang asked: What should be done to achieve these three points?

古文：对曰： 持盈者与天，定倾者与人，节事者与地。
现代文：回答说： 要保持国家强盛就应顺从天道，要使国家转危为安就应顺从人道，要妥善地处理国家政事就应顺从地道。
English: He replied: To keep the country strong, we should follow the heavenly way; to turn the country around, we should follow the humane way; and to properly handle national affairs, we should follow the earthly way.

古文：王不问，蠡不敢言。
现代文：君王不问我，我不敢说。
English: I dare not say, unless the king asks me.

古文：天道盈而不溢，盛而不骄，劳而不矜其功。
现代文：天道要求我们盈满而不过分，气盛而不骄傲，辛劳而不自夸有功。
English: Heaven's way requires us to be full without being excessive, energetic without being proud, and hard-working without boasting of achievements.

古文：夫圣人随时以行，是谓守时。
现代文：圣人顺着天时行事，这就叫守时。
English: A saint acts in accordance with the heavenly time, which is called keeping time.

古文：天时不作，弗为人客；人事不起，弗为之始。
现代文：对方没有天灾，不要发动进攻；对方没有人祸，不要挑起事端。
English: If there is no natural disaster on the other side, do not launch an attack; if there is no disaster on the other side, do not stir up trouble.

古文：今君王未盈而溢，未胜而骄，不劳而矜其功，天时不作而先为人客，人事不起而创为之始，此逆于天而不和于人。
现代文：现在君王没有等到国家殷富，就要采取过分的举动；没有等到国势强盛，就骄傲起来；没有辛劳，就夸耀自己的功劳；对方没有天灾，就想发动进攻；对方没有人祸，就要挑起事端。这样会违背天意，而且失掉人和。
English: Now the prince does not wait for the country to become rich before he takes excessive action; he does not wait for the country to become powerful before he becomes proud; he does not work hard before he boasts of his merits; if there is no natural disaster on the other side, he wants to launch an attack; if there is no disaster on the other side, he wants to stir up trouble. This will violate the will of heaven and lose people.

古文：王若行之，将妨于国家，靡王躬身。 
现代文：君王如果这样做，必将危害国家，损害自身。 
English: If the king does this, he will harm the country and himself.

古文：王弗听。
现代文：越王不肯听范蠡的话。
English: Guoxi Wang did not listen.

古文：范蠡进谏曰： 夫勇者，逆德也；兵者，凶器也；争者，事之末也。
现代文：范蠡又进谏说： 好勇斗狠是违反道德的行为；攻战的兵器是不吉祥的器物；战争是一种最后的手段。
English: Fan Ye and Jin Ye said: To fight bravely is a violation of morality; offensive weapons are inauspicious; war is a last resort.

古文：阴谋逆德，好用凶器，始于人者，人之所卒也。
现代文：阴谋做不道德的事情，喜欢使用不吉祥的器物，首先向别人挑起事端的人，最终反要被人所害。
English: Those who conspire to do immoral things, who like to use inauspicious objects, and who first provoke others, will eventually be harmed by others.

古文：淫佚之事，上帝之禁也。
现代文：过分的事情是上天所禁止的。
English: Excess is forbidden by heaven.

古文：先行此者，不利。 
现代文：先挑起战争，不会有好处。 
English: Starting a war is not a good idea.

古文：王曰： 无是贰言也，吾已断之矣！ 
现代文：越王说： 不要再说这些惑乱视听的话了，我主意已定！ 
English: Yue Wang said, "Don't say these bewildering words, my mind is made up!"

古文：果兴师而伐吴，战于五湖，不胜，栖于会稽。
现代文：越王果然出兵攻打吴国，在五湖之战中打了败仗，退守到会稽山上。
English: Yue Wang did indeed send troops to attack the State of Wu. He was defeated in the Battle of the Five Lakes and retreated to Mount Heji.

古文：王召范蠡而问焉，曰： 吾不用子之言，以至于此，为之奈何？ 
现代文：越王召见范蠡向他请教说： 我没有听从你的话，以至于陷入如今这般境地，现在该怎么办呢？ 
English: Yue Wang summoned Fan Ye to consult him and said, "I didn't listen to your words and ended up in this situation. What should I do now?"

古文：范蠡对曰： 君王其忘之乎？
现代文：范蠡答道： 君王难道忘了吗？
English: Fan Ye replied, "Has the king forgotten?"

古文：持盈者与天，定倾者与人，节事者与地。 
现代文：保持强盛要顺从天道，转危为安要顺从人道，处理政事得当要顺从地道。 
English: It is necessary to follow the heavenly way to maintain prosperity, to follow the humane way to turn crisis into peace, and to follow the natural way to deal with political affairs properly.

古文：王曰： 与人奈何？ 
现代文：越王问： 要顺从人道，该怎么做呢？ 
English: Yue Wang asked, "What should we do to obey humanity?"

古文：对曰： 卑辞尊礼，玩好女乐，尊之以名，如此不已，又身与之市。 王曰： 诺。 
现代文：回答说： 现在应该用极谦卑的辞令，极恭敬的礼节，带上珍宝和女乐，去向吴王求和，用高贵的名号推崇他。如果这样还不行，君王就只能亲自去做他的奴仆。 越王说： 好吧。 
English: He replied, "Now is the time to use the most humble words, the most respectful etiquette, to bring treasures and female music, to sue for peace with the king of Wu, and to praise him with a noble name. If this does not work, the king himself can only be his slave." King Yue said, "Okay."

古文：乃命大夫种行成于吴，曰： 请士女女于士，大夫女女于大夫，随之以国家之重器。 
现代文：于是派大夫文种去吴国求和，说： 越国愿意把士的女儿都送给贵国的士做女奴，大夫的女儿都送给贵国的大夫做女奴，并且把国家最珍贵的宝货重器都献上。 
English: So he sent Dr. Wenzong to Wu to sue for peace, saying, "Yue is willing to give the daughters of its nobles to the nobles of your country as female slaves, and the daughters of its doctors to the doctors of your country as female slaves, as well as to offer the country's most precious treasures and heavy equipment.

古文：吴人不许。
现代文：吴国不答应。
English: The State of Wu did not agree.

古文：大夫种来而复往，曰： 请委管籥，属国家，以身随之，君王制之。 
现代文：文种回国汇报后又去求和，说： 越王愿意把国库的钥匙都交出来，把整个国家托付给贵国，自己亲自到贵国，听凭吴王处置。 
English: After reporting back to Wenxuan, he went to ask for peace, saying: King Yue is willing to hand over the keys to the treasury, entrust the entire country to your country, and come to your country in person, subject to the disposition of King Wu.

古文：吴人许诺。
现代文：吴国答应了。
English: The State of Wu agreed.

古文：王曰： 蠡为我守于国。 
现代文：越王对范蠡说： 你替我看守好国家吧。 
English: Yue Wang said to Fan Ye: You should take care of the country for me.

古文：对曰： 四封之内，百姓之事，蠡不如种也。
现代文：范蠡回答说： 在国境以内，治理百姓的事，我比不上文种。
English: Fan Ye replied, "Within the national borders, I can do a better job of governing the people.

古文：四封之外，敌国之制，立断之事，种亦不如蠡也。 王曰： 诺。 
现代文：在国境以外，对付敌国，需要当机立断的事，文种也比不上我。 越王说： 好吧。 
English: Outside the borders, dealing with an enemy country is a matter that requires promptness and decisiveness, and the literature is not as good as me.Yue Wang said: Okay.

古文：令大夫种守于国，与范蠡入宦于吴。
现代文：于是就让文种留守在越国，自己带着范蠡到吴国给吴王做臣仆。
English: Therefore, he let Wenzhong stay in Yue Province, and took Fan Qi with him to Wu Province to be a vassal of the King of Wu.

古文：三年，而吴人遣之归。
现代文：三年后，吴王打发他们回国。
English: Three years later, King Wu sent them back to China.

古文：及至于国，王问于范蠡曰： 节事奈何？ 
现代文：一回到越国，越王就向范蠡请教说： 现在要妥善处理政事，该怎么办呢？ 
English: As soon as he returned to Yue, King Yue asked Fan Rong for advice: What should be done now to properly handle political affairs?

古文：对曰： 节事者与地。
现代文：回答说： 处理政事得当应顺从地道。
English: He replied, "To do politics properly, one should follow the true path.

古文：唯地能包万物以为一，其事不失。
现代文：只有大地能包容万物成为一个整体，同时完成自己的功能而不失时机。
English: Only the earth can accommodate all things into a whole, and at the same time complete its own function without losing the opportunity.

古文：生万物，容畜禽兽，然后受其名而兼其利。
现代文：大地生长万物，畜养飞禽走兽，然后享受它应得的名声和利益。
English: The earth grows all kinds of things, breeds birds and beasts, and then enjoys the reputation and benefits it deserves.

古文：美恶皆成，以养其生。
现代文：凡物不论好坏，都使之成长以养活人的生命。
English: All things, whether good or bad, are made to grow to sustain human life.

古文：时不至，不可强生；事不究，不可强成。
现代文：时令不到，不能勉强让人生长；功夫不够，也不能勉强成事。
English: Time is short, you can't force people to grow up; effort is not enough, you can't force things to happen.

古文：自若以处，以度天下。待其来者而正之，因时之所宜而定之。
现代文：顺乎自然，权衡天下大势，以等待时机的来临，再加以匡正，才能在适宜的时机下使天下稳定。
English: It is only natural to weigh up the global situation and wait for the right time to rectify it in order to stabilize the world at the right time.

古文：同男女之功，除民之害，以避天殃。
现代文：君王应和男女百姓共同从事耕织，消除百姓的祸害，以防止上天降下灾殃。
English: The king should engage in ploughing and weaving together with the men and women of the people to eliminate the scourge of the people, so as to prevent the heaven-sent disaster.

古文：田野开辟，府仓实，民众殷。
现代文：还要开辟荒地，充实仓库，让百姓富足。
English: It is also necessary to open up wasteland, fill warehouses, and make the people rich.

古文：无旷其众，以为乱梯。
现代文：不要让民众旷时废业，以致成为祸乱的阶梯。
English: Don't let the people waste their time and become a ladder of calamity.

古文：时将有反，事将有间，必有以知天地之恒制，乃可以有天下之成利。
现代文：天时将会有反复，吴国的事情也会有间隙可乘，只有懂得天地的常规，才能取得天下的利益。
English: There will be ups and downs, and there will be gaps in Wu's affairs that can be taken advantage of. Only by understanding the rules of heaven and earth can we gain the benefits of the world.

古文：事无间，时无反，则抚民保教以须之。 
现代文：如果吴国的事情一时还没有间隙可乘，天时还没有转化的迹象，君王就应专心安抚和教育民众，等待报复时机。 
English: If there is no gap to take advantage of in the affairs of Wu, and there is no sign of transformation, the monarch should concentrate on appeasing and educating the people, and wait for the opportunity to retaliate.

古文：王曰： 不谷之国家，蠡之国家也，蠡其图之！ 
现代文：越王说： 我的国家就是你范蠡的国家，你好好谋划吧！ 
English: Yue Wang said: My country is the country of your idol, you should plan well!

古文：对曰： 四封之内，百姓之事，时节三乐，不乱民功，不逆天时，五谷睦熟，民乃蕃滋，君臣上下交得其志，蠡不如种也。
现代文：赏和罚的施行以天地为常法，生和杀的掌握以天地为准则。
English: The implementation of rewards and punishments is based on heaven and earth, and the mastery of life and death is based on heaven and earth.

古文：四封之外，敌国之制，立断之事，因阴阳之恒，顺天地之常，柔而不屈，强而不刚，德虐之行，因以为常；死生因天地之刑，天因人，圣人因天；人自生之，天地形之，圣人因而成之，是故战胜而不报，取地而不反，兵胜于外，福生于内，用力甚少，而名声章明，种亦不如蠡也。 
现代文：天根据人，圣人也根据天。人怎么行动，天地就显示怎样的征兆，圣人根据天地的征兆去完成大事。所以能战胜敌人而不给它报复的机会，夺取敌人的土地而不让它夺回；军队在国外取得胜利，给国内带来幸福，用力很少，而名声卓著：这些事情，文种却也不如我。 
English: Heaven depends on man, and the sage depends on heaven. How man acts, heaven and earth show what signs, and the sage accomplishes great things according to the signs of heaven and earth. Therefore, to be able to defeat the enemy without giving him a chance to retaliate, to seize the enemy's land without letting him recapture it; the army achieves victory abroad and brings happiness to the country, the effort is small, but the reputation is outstanding: these things, the literature is not as good as me.

古文：王曰： 诺。 
现代文：越王说： 好吧。 
English: After listening, Zhao Wang said, "Hmm.

古文：令大夫种为之。
现代文：于是就叫文种治理内政。
English: As a result, the management of literature and culture is called "domestic affairs."

