古文：十八日天色晴霁甚。
现代文：十八日天色特别晴朗。
English: On the 18th, the sky was particularly clear.

古文：早饭龙隐。
现代文：在龙隐洞吃早饭。
English: Have breakfast at Longyin Cave.

古文：僧净庵引，由山北登蚺蛇洞，借宿二人偕行。
现代文：僧人净庵领路，由山北登蚌蛇洞，借宿的两人同行。
English: The monk Ching-an led the way, climbing from the northern part of the mountain to the Viper Cave, and the two people who were staying there accompanied him.

古文：既下，再饭龙隐，偕二人循南山北西行二里，穿山腋南出，又循山南西行一里余，过龙潭。
现代文：下山后，再在龙隐佩吃饭，同那两人沿南山的北麓往西行二里，穿过山侧向南出来，又沿山南往西行一里多，走过龙潭。
English: After descending the mountain, and then having dinner at Longyinpei, he and the two men walked along the northern foot of Nanshan for two miles to the west, came out through the mountain side to the south, and then walked along the south of the mountain for more than one mile to the west, passing Longtan.

古文：又西一里，渡北流小溪，南入张丹霞墓洞。
现代文：又向西一里，渡过向北流的小溪，向南进入张丹霞墓洞。
English: Another mile to the west, across the north-flowing stream, south into the Zhang Danxia Tomb Cave.

古文：遂东北五里，还饭于香山寺。
现代文：于是向东北走五里，返回香山寺吃饭。
English: So he walked five miles to the northeast and returned to Xiangshan Temple to eat.

古文：复令一人肩卧具，随由西门入，北门出，渡龙江，北循会仙山西麓行一里，东上山又一里，游雪花洞。
现代文：又命令一个人肩扛铺盖，跟随着由西门进城，由北门出城，渡过龙江，向北沿会仙山西麓行一里，向东上山又是一里，游雪花洞。
English: He also ordered a person to carry the blanket on his shoulders, follow the dragonfly into the city from the west gate, out of the city from the north gate, cross the Longjiang River, walk one mile north along the west foot of Mount Xianxian, and another mile east up the mountain, and swim through the Snow Flower Cave.

古文：又里余，登山顶。
现代文：又走一里多，登上山顶。
English: Walked another mile or so to the top of the hill.

古文：是晚宿雪花洞。
现代文：这天晚上住宿在雪花洞。
English: That night, we stayed at Snow Cave.

古文：其人辞去，约明日来。
现代文：那人告辞走了，约好明天来。
English: The man left and made an appointment to come back tomorrow.

古文：十九日五更闻雨声，迨晓而止。
现代文：十九日五更时听见雨声，到拂晓时便停了。
English: At five o'clock on the 19th, we heard the sound of rain. By dawn, it had stopped.

古文：候肩行李者不至，又独行探井，又从书生鲍心赤从雪花东坳下，游百子岩。
现代文：等扛行李的人不见来，又独自走去探了深井岩，又跟随书生鲍心赤从雪花洞东面的山坳下，去游百子岩。
English: When the person carrying the luggage didn't show up, I walked alone to explore the Fukai Rock, and followed the student, Bao Xincha, from under the mountains east of the Snow Flower Cave, to visit Hyakuji Rock.

古文：仍上雪花寺饭。
现代文：仍上山到雪花寺吃饭。
English: They still went up the mountain to the Snow Flower Temple to eat.

古文：有出下卧云阁僧至，因乞其导游中观，东阁诸胜，并肩卧具下二里置阁中。
现代文：有山下卧云阁的僧人来到，于是恳求他领路去游中观、东阁诸处胜景，一起肩扛铺盖下来二里放在卧云阁中。
English: A monk from Jiaoyun Pavilion at the foot of the mountain came to him, so he asked him to lead the way to visit the Middle View and the East Pavilion, and together they carried the cloth and covered it for two miles and placed it in the Jiaoyun Pavilion.

古文：遂携火游中观、东观、丹流阁、白云洞，午餐阁中。
现代文：于是带上火把游了中观、东观、丹流阁、白云洞，在卧云阁中吃午餐。
English: So they took torches and swam to Zhongguancun, Dongguancun, Danliu Pavilion, Baiyun Cave, and had lunch at Jiaoyun Pavilion.

古文：下午，还香山寺。
现代文：下午，返回香山寺。
English: In the afternoon, return to Xiangshan Temple.

古文：二十日人候冯，犹未归。
现代文：二十日进城等候冯润，还未归来。
English: On the 20th, he went to the city to wait for Feng Run, but did not return.

古文：仍出游西竺寺、黄山谷祠。
现代文：仍出城游览西竺寺、黄山谷祠。
English: He still went out of the city to visit Xidi Temple and Huangshan Valley Ancestral Hall.

古文：二十一、二十二日皆有雨，余坐香山寺中。
现代文：二十一日、二十二日都有雨，我坐在香山寺中。
English: It rained on the 21st and 22nd, and I sat in Xiangshan Temple.

古文：抵暮，雨大作，彻夜不休。
现代文：到天黑时，风雨大作，彻夜不止。
English: By nightfall, the wind and rain continued throughout the night.

古文：是日前所随行五人，俱止南山龙隐庵，犹时时以一人来侍余。
现代文：这天先前随行的五个人，都住在南山的龙隐庵，还时时派一个人来侍候我。
English: The five people who had accompanied me earlier that day all lived at Longyin Temple on Nanshan, and they always sent someone to wait on me.

古文：抵暮，忽有言其一人在洞诱牧牛童，将扼其吭ｈáｎｇ喉咙而挟之去者。
现代文：到天黑时，忽然有人说他们其中的一个人在洞中诱拐牧牛的儿童，扼住儿童的喉咙要挟持走。
English: By nightfall, word spread that one of them had abducted a cowherd boy in a cave, holding him by the throat and demanding to be taken away.

古文：村人来诉余，余固疑，其余行亦行，余止亦止，似非端人正派的人；然时时随游扶险，其意殷勤，又似非谋余者。
现代文：村里人来向我诉说，我本来就疑心，他们这些人我走他们也走，我停下来他们也停下，似乎不是正派人；然而时时跟随游览，险途相扶，那意思十分殷勤，又似乎不是要谋害我的人。
English: People from the village came to tell me that I was suspicious from the start, that these people - I walk and they walk, I stop and they stop - do not seem to be decent people; however, they always follow the tour and help each other on the dangerous road. That means they are very courteous, and they do not seem to be people who want to kill me.

古文：心惴惴不能测。
现代文：心中惴惴不安，不能测知深浅。
English: There is an uneasiness in my heart, I can't fathom the depths.

古文：二十三日雨犹时作时止。
现代文：二十三日雨仍时下时停。
English: On the 23rd, the rain was intermittent.

古文：是日为清明节，行魂欲断，而沽酒杏花将何处耶？
现代文：这天是清明节，行路人的神魂欲断，可沽酒的杏花村将在何处呢？
English: This day is the Tomb-Sweeping Day, the spirit of the passers-by is eager to die, but where will the liquor-swilling apricot village be?

古文：是处桃、杏俱腊中开落。下午，冯挥使之母以酒蔬饷，知其子归尚无期，怅怅，闷酌而卧。
现代文：下午，冯指挥使的母亲用酒菜款待，我得知她的儿子归来还无定期，怅怅不乐，喝了闷酒便躺下。
English: In the afternoon, Feng Duanzhi's mother entertained with wine and dishes. I learned that her son's return was not regular. She was unhappy, drank too much wine and lay down.

古文：二十四日五鼓，雨声犹潺潺，既而闻雷，及起渐霁，然浓云或开或合，终无日影焉。
现代文：二十四日五更时，雨声还哗哗响，随后听见雷声，到起床时渐渐晴开，但浓云时开时合，始终不见日影。
English: At 5 a.m. on the 24th, the rain was still rattling, then thunder was heard, and it gradually cleared up when I got up, but the clouds were thick and there was no sun.

古文：既而香山僧慧庵沽酒市鱼，酌余而醉。
现代文：不久香山寺的僧人慧庵打来酒买来鱼，我喝醉了。
English: Soon after, the monk Huian from Xiangshan Temple called for wine to buy fish, and I got drunk.

古文：及寝，雷雨复作，达旦而后止。
现代文：到睡觉时，雷雨又大作，直到天明后才停。
English: By bedtime, the thunderstorm was back in full force and didn't let up until after daybreak.

古文：二十五日上午犹未霁。
现代文：二十五日上午还未晴开。
English: The morning of the 25th was still cloudy.

古文：既饭，丽日晶然。
现代文：饭后，阳光十分明亮。
English: After dinner, the sun was shining brightly.

古文：先是，余疑随行五人不良，至是卜之得吉。
现代文：这以前，我怀疑随行的那五个人不是好人，到此时就此事卜封得到吉卦。
English: Before this, I suspected that the five people who accompanied me were not good people. At this time, I got the good news about this matter.

古文：彼欲以两人从余，先畀定银与之市烟焉。
现代文：他们想让两个人跟随我，先把定金交给他们买烟。
English: They wanted two people to follow me, so I gave them the deposit to buy cigarettes.

古文：又慧庵以缘簿求施，余苦辞之；既而念其意不可却，虽橐中无余资，展转不能已，乃作书贷之陆君，令转付焉。
现代文：慧庵又拿化缘簿来求我布施，我苦苦推辞；随后又考虑他的心意不可推却，虽然口袋中没有多余的钱财，但翻来覆去考虑后就写信向陆君借钱，令人转付给他。
English: Hui'an also asked me for alms with a book of incantations, which I reluctantly declined. Later, I considered that his intention could not be denied. Although there was no extra money in his pocket, after repeated consideration, he wrote a letter to borrow money from Lu Jun and have it transferred to him.

古文：二十六日日晴霁。
现代文：二十六日日光晴朗。
English: On the 26th, the sun was shining brightly.

古文：候冯挥使润犹不归，投谒守备吴，不见而还香山寺，再饭。
现代文：等指挥使冯润仍不归，投名帖拜见昊守备，不接见便返回香山寺，再吃了饭。
English: After waiting for the conductor, Feng Run still did not return. He bowed his head and prayed to see Hao Shouwei. When he did not receive him, he returned to Xiangshan Temple and then ate his meal.

古文：同僧慧庵往九龙，西南穿塍中，蜿蜒排石而过。
现代文：同僧人慧庵去九龙洞，向西南穿越在田埂中，蜿蜿蜒蜒分开岩石而过。
English: He went to the Jiulong Cave with the monk Hui'an, and walked southwest through the rice paddies, meandering through the rocks.

古文：五里，越北流溪，至丹霞遗蜕洞，即前日所入者。
现代文：五里，越过往北流的溪水，来到丹霞遗蜕洞，就是前几天进去过的地方。
English: After five miles, we crossed the north-flowing stream and came to the Danxia Widow Cave, which is where the crocodile had entered a few days before.

古文：仍下，绕其东麓而南，回眺遗蜕峰头，有岩东向高穹，其上灵幻将甚，心欲一登而阻于无路。
现代文：仍然下山，绕着山的东麓往南行，回头眺望遗蜕洞的峰顶，有个岩洞向东高高隆起，那上边将是非常灵幻的，心想登上去一次但阻于无路可走。
English: Still going down the mountain, around the eastern foot of the mountain to the south, looking back at the peak of the widow's cave, there is a cave rising high to the east, the upper side will be very magical, I want to climb it once but there is no way to go.

古文：又东南约半里，抵东峰之北麓，见路两旁皆水坑流贯，路行其上，若桥梁而不知也。
现代文：又向东南约走半里，到达东峰的北麓，见路两旁都有水坑连贯，水流相连，路沿着水坑延伸，好似桥梁。
English: I walked about half a mile to the southeast and reached the northern foot of the east peak. There were puddles on both sides of the road, and the water flow was connected. The road extended along the puddles, like a bridge.

古文：其西有巨枫树一株，下有九龙神之碑，即昔之九龙祠遗址。
现代文：路西有一棵巨大的枫树，树下有九龙神的石碑，是从前九龙祠的遗址。
English: On the west side, there is a huge maple tree with a stone monument to the god of Nine Dragons under it. This is the site of the former Nine Dragons' Shrine.

古文：度其北，是昔从龙隐来所经平冈中之潭，而九龙潭则在祠南石崖之下，水从其中北向经路旁水坑而出为平冈潭者也。
现代文：越到它的北面，这里是从前从龙隐洞来时经过的平缓山冈中的水潭，而九龙潭就在九龙祠南边的石崖之下，水从两者之中向北经过路旁的水坑流出去成为平缓山冈中的潭水。
English: To the north of it, there is the water pool in the gentle hills that the crane used to pass through when coming from the Dragon Hidden Cave, and the Jiulong Lake is under the stone cliff on the south side of the Jiulong Ancestral Hall. The water from the two flows north through the roadside puddles to become the water pool in the gentle hills.

古文：九龙洞山在郡城西南五里，丹霞遗蜕洞东南。
现代文：九龙洞山在府城西南五里，丹霞遗蜕洞的东南。
English: Jiulongdong Mountain is located five miles southwest of the provincial capital and southeast of Danxia Widow's Cave.

古文：其山从遗蜕山后绕而东，其北崖有洞，下有深潭嵌石壁中若巨井。
现代文：它所在的山从遗蜕山后绕向东，它北面的山崖上有洞，下边有深潭嵌入石壁中好像巨大的水井。
English: The mountain where it is located runs east from the back of Widow Mountain. There is a hole in the cliff to the north of it, and there is a deep pool embedded in the stone wall, which looks like a huge well.

古文：潭中下横一石，东西界为二，东小而西巨，东水低，西水高，东水清，西水浑。
现代文：潭下边横着一块岩石，分隔为东西两半，东半边小而西半边大，东边的水低，西边的水高，东面的水清，西面的水浑。
English: Below the pool there is a rock, divided into two halves, east half is small and west half is large. The water in the east is low, the water in the west is high, the water in the east is clear and the water in the west is muddy.

古文：想当雨后，西水通源从后山溢来，而东则常潴者也。
现代文：想来应该是下雨之后，西面的水通着水源从后山溢出来，而东面则是经常积水之处。
English: Supposedly, after it rains, the water in the west overflows from the back of the mountain through the water source, while the east is a place where water often accumulates.

古文：西潭之南，石壁高数丈，下插潭底，上镌 九龙洞 三大字，不知镌者当时横架杙木费几许精力？
现代文：西面水潭的南边，石壁高达数丈，下插到潭底，潭中有很多大鱼。上方刻有 九龙洞 三个大字，不知刻字的人当时栽木桩横架木架费了几多精力？
English: On the south side of the west-facing pool, the stone wall is several meters high and extends to the bottom of the pool. There are many big fish in the pool. Above, there are three large characters engraved with "Kowloon Cave." How much effort did the person who did not know how to engrave the characters put into planting the wooden piles, crossbars and frames?

古文：西潭之深莫能竟，曰垂丝一络，亦未可知，然水际无洞，其深入之窍当潜伏水底耳。
现代文：西面水潭之深无人能走到头，说是像一缕垂丝，也未必可知，水边没有洞，深入其中的洞穴应当潜伏在水底。
English: No one can get to the bottom of the West Lake. It is said to be like a thread. It is not necessarily known that there is no hole at the water's edge, and the cave should be lurking at the bottom of the water.

古文：洞高悬潭上三丈余，当井崖之端，其门北向，东与 九龙洞 三字并列，固知此镌为洞，不为潭也。
现代文：洞高悬在深潭上有三丈多高，正当井壁石崖的顶端，洞口向北，在东面与 九龙洞 三个字并列，因而知道了此处的刻字是为了洞，不是为了水潭。
English: The grotto hangs high above the deep lake. It is right at the top of the rock cliff of the well wall. The mouth of the grotto faces north. In the east, it is juxtaposed with the three characters of the "Kowloon Cave." Therefore, it is known that the engraving here is for the cave, not for the pool.

古文：门颇隘，既入乃高穹。
现代文：洞口很窄，进洞后洞就高高隆起。
English: The mouth of the cave is very narrow, and after entering the cave, the hole bulges up high.

古文：峡南进，秉炬从之，其下甚平。
现代文：峡谷向南进去，举着火把从峡谷中走，那下边十分平坦。
English: Go south into the canyon, hold a torch and walk out of the canyon, the bottom is very flat.

古文：直进十余丈，转而东，下虽平，而石纹涌起，屈曲分环，中有停潦，遂成仙田今人多称 石田坝 。东二丈，忽下陷为深坑。
现代文：一直前进十多丈，转向东，下边虽平，但石纹如水波涌起，弯弯曲曲分为一环一环的，其中有积水，便成了仙田。向东走二丈，忽然下陷为深坑。
English: It went straight ahead for more than ten meters, turned to the east, and although the lower side was flat, the stone lines surged up like water waves, and the curves were divided into a ring and a ring, and there was standing water, and it became Sendai. It went east for two meters, and suddenly sank into a deep pit.

古文：由坑上南崖伛偻而出坑之东，其下亦平，而仙田每每与西同。
现代文：由坑上南侧的石崖弯腰钻出到深坑的东面，那下边也很平坦，而且仙田肥沃与西面的相同。
English: From the rock cliff on the south side of the pit, I bent down and drilled out to the east side of the pit. The lower side is also flat, and the fertility of Sendai is the same as the west side.

古文：但其上覆石悬乳，压坠甚下，令人不能举首。
现代文：但顶上岩石下覆石钟乳悬垂，压坠得十分低，让人不能抬头。
English: But on top of the rock, there is an overhanging stalactite stalactite, the pressure drop is very low, so people can't look up.

古文：披隙透其内，稍南北分岐，遂逼仄逾甚，不得入矣。
现代文：分并缝隙钻进它里面，略走几步便分为南北两岔，就更加狭窄得厉害，不能深入了。
English: A slit drilled into it, and after a few steps, it was divided into two parts, north and south, and became even more narrow, so much so that it was impossible to go deeper.

古文：仍西出至坑崖上，投火坑中谛视之，下深三丈余，中复有洞东西通透：西洞直入，与上峡同；东洞则横拓空阔，其上水淙淙下滴，下似有潦停焉。
现代文：仍往西出到坑旁的石崖上，把火投入坑中细看坑底，下边深三丈多，其中又有洞穿透东西：西洞一直进去，与上面的峡谷相同；东洞却横向拓开十分空阔，洞上边有水涂涂下滴，下边似乎有水停积。
English: He still went out to the west to the stone cliff next to the pit, put the fire into the pit and took a closer look at the bottom of the pit. The bottom was more than three feet deep, and there were holes in it that penetrated things. The west cave went all the way in, the same as the canyon above; the east cave, however, opened up horizontally and was very wide. There were drops of water smeared on the top of the hole, and there seemed to be water stagnating at the bottom.

古文：坑之南，崖平覆如栈，惟北则自上直插坑底。
现代文：深坑南边的石崖平覆如同栈道，唯有北面却从上面直插到坑底。
English: The cliff on the south side of the pit is flat like a boardwalk, but the north side plunges straight down to the bottom of the pit.

古文：坑之裂窍，南北阔二丈，东西长三丈，洞顶有悬柱倒莲，恰下贯坑中，色洁白莹映，更异众乳。
现代文：深坑的裂窍，南北宽二丈，东西长三丈，洞顶有悬挂的石柱倒垂的莲花，恰好下贯到坑中，色彩洁白晶莹，更与众多的钟乳石不同。
English: The crack of the deep pit is two meters wide from north to south, and three meters long from east to west. At the top of the pit, there is a hanging stone pillar with an upside-down lotus flower, which runs right down into the pit. The color is clear and white, and it is different from many stalactites.

古文：俯窥其上久之，恨不携梯悬索，若南山一穷奥底也。
现代文：在那上面俯视了很久，遗憾没带来梯子绳索，像南山一样穷究一下深邃的洞底。
English: I looked down for a long time, regretting that I didn't bring a rope ladder to explore the deep bottom of the cave like Nanshan.

古文：九龙西峰高悬洞，在丹霞遗蜕之东顶，其门东向而无路。
现代文：向东走三百步，又有个向北的岩洞，深十多丈，在东峰崖脊延过之处。九龙洞西峰高悬的洞，在丹霞遗蜕洞东面的山顶，洞口向东而无路。
English: Three hundred paces to the east, there is another rock cave to the north, more than ten meters deep, where the cliff ridge of the east peak stretches. Kowloon Cave, a high-hanging cave on the west peak, on the top of the mountain east of Danxia Widow Cave, the mouth of the cave has no way to the east.

古文：重崖缀石，飞突屼嵲，倒攀虽险，而石铓嵯峨，指可援而足可耸也。
现代文：重重石崖连缀，飞突高耸，倒着攀登虽然危险，但刀刃状的岩石高险磋峨，手指可以抓住而脚下可以上跃。
English: There are many cliffs, soaring cliffs, and it is dangerous to climb upside down, but the blade-shaped rocks are so dangerous that you can grab them with your fingers and jump up with your feet.

古文：先是，一道者持刀芟棘前引，一夫赍火种后随，而余居其中。
现代文：这之前，一个道士拿刀在前砍荆棘引路，一个脚夫带着火种跟随在后，而我在他们中间。
English: Before that, a Taoist with a knife was cutting thorns in front to lead the way, a porter with kindling followed behind, and I was among them.

古文：已而见其险甚，夫不能从，道者不能引，俱强余莫前。
现代文：随后见山势非常危险，脚夫不能跟随，道士不能领路，都强迫我不要向前了。
English: Then I saw that the mountain situation was very dangerous, the porter could not follow, the Taoist could not lead the way, all of which forced me not to move forward.

古文：余凌空直跃，连者数层，频呼道者，鼓其速登，而道者乃至。
现代文：我凌空一直上跃，接连上登数层，频频呼唤道士，鼓动他赶快上登，而后道士这才来到。
English: I kept jumping up in the air, climbing several levels in succession, frequently calling out to the Taoist, encouraging him to climb quickly, and then the Taoist came.

古文：先从其北得一岩，其门东向，前峡甚峻，中通一线，不即不离，相距尺许；曲折而入者三丈，其内忽穹而开；转而西南四五丈，中遂黑暗，恨从夫不以火种相随。
现代文：先从山北找到一个岩洞，洞口向东，前方的峡谷非常陡峻，中间通着一线宽的地方，不即不离，相距一尽左右；曲折走进去三丈，洞内忽然弯隆扩开；转向西南四五丈，洞中便黑暗下来，痛恨随行的脚夫不带上火种相随。
English: First, he found a cave on the north side of the mountain. The mouth of the cave faces east, and the canyon in front is very steep. A line runs through the middle of the canyon, and the two sides are about the same distance from each other. He took a tortuous path to the third floor, and the cave suddenly swelled and expanded. When he turned to the southwest to the fourth and fifth floors, the cave became dark, and he hated the porters who accompanied him for not bringing firewood.

古文：幸其下平，暗中摸索又转入一小室，觉无余隙，乃出。
现代文：幸好底下平坦，在黑暗中摸索着转进一个小石室，觉得没有别的缝隙，这才出来。
English: Fortunately, it was flat at the bottom. In the dark, I groped my way into a small stone room, felt that there was no other gap, and then came out.

古文：此洞外险而中平，外隘而中扃扃原意为门闩、门户，此处作宽敞讲，亦可栖托，然非高悬之洞也。高悬处尚在南畔绝崖之上，亏蔽不能仰见。
现代文：此洞外边险而中间平，外面窄而洞中深锁，也可以寄身居住，不过还不是高悬的洞。高悬之处还在南侧山崖的绝壁之上，林木遮蔽抬头不能望见。
English: This cave is dangerous on the outside and flat in the middle, narrow on the outside and deeply locked in the middle of the cave. You can also live there, but it is not a high-hanging cave. The high-hanging place is still on the cliff of the southern cliff, and you can't see the trees.

古文：稍下，转崖根攀隙以升，所攀者皆兜衣钩发之刺棘也。
现代文：稍下走，转过悬崖根部攀着缝隙上登，攀登之处都是挂住衣服钩住头发的刺丛荆棘。
English: Walk down a bit, turn around the base of the cliff and climb up the crevice. The climbing places are thorn bushes where clothes are hung and hair is hooked.

古文：既上，其岩亦东向，而无门环回前列，高数丈，覆空若垂天之云。
现代文：上去之后，这个岩洞也是向东，但前边没有环绕的洞口，高数丈，覆盖在空中好似垂在天上的云彩。
English: After going up, this rock cave also faces east, but there is no surrounding cave entrance in front. It is several meters high and covered in the air like a cloud hanging in the sky.

古文：而内壁之后，层削而起，上有赭石一区嵌其中，连开二门，层累其上，猿猱之所不能升也，安得十丈梯飞度之。
现代文：而内壁的后方，层层陡削而起，壁上有一块储红色的岩石嵌在其中，一连开有两个洞口，分层垒在上面，是猿猴所不能上登之处，哪里能找到十丈高的梯子飞度上去。
English: But behind the inner wall, the layers rise steeply. On the wall, there is a piece of red-colored rock embedded in it. There are two holes in a row, and the layered walls are on top. This is where the monkeys cannot climb, and where they can find a ten-foot ladder to fly up.

古文：时老僧慧庵及随夫在山麓频频号呼，乃仍旧路下。
现代文：此时老和尚慧庵及随行的随夫在山麓频频呼叫，只好仍从原路下走。
English: At this time, the old monk Shang Huian and his accompanying attendant called frequently at the foot of the mountain, but they still had to go down the original road.

古文：崖突不能下睇，无可点足。
现代文：山崖突出不能下视，无处可立脚。
English: The mountain cliff juts out and you can't look down, there's nowhere to stand.

古文：展转悬眺，觉南上有痕一缕，攀棘侧肩循之。
现代文：辗转在高悬之处眺望，觉得南边的上方有一线石痕，沿着它攀着荆棘侧肩而行。
English: Turning around to look at the high-hanging place, I felt that there was a line of stone marks above the south side, and I walked along it, climbing the thorns.

古文：久之，乃石尽而得土，悬攀虽峻，无虞陨坠矣。
现代文：很久，走完岩石后走到土山上，悬空攀爬虽然陡峻，但不必担忧跌落下去了。
English: For a long time, after walking on the rock, I walked to the dirt hill. Although the suspended climbing was steep, I didn't have to worry about falling down.

古文：下山五里，还香山。
现代文：下山后走五里，返回香山寺。
English: After descending the mountain, walk five miles and return to Xiangshan Temple.

古文：返照甚朗，余以为晴兆。
现代文：夕阳返照十分明朗，我以为是天晴的征兆。
English: The sunset was so bright that I thought it was a sign of a fine day.

古文：既卧而雷雨复大作，达旦不休。
现代文：睡下后雷雨重又大作，通宵达旦不止。
English: After falling asleep, the thunderstorm was heavy and violent, lasting all night.

古文：二十七日雨止而起。
现代文：二十七日雨停后起床。
English: I got up after the rain stopped on the 27th.

古文：余令人索骑欲行，而冯挥使之母令人再留日，已三往促其子矣，姑允其留。
现代文：我派人去找马打算上路，可冯指挥使的母亲派人来再三挽留，说已三次前去催促她儿子了，姑且答应她留下。
English: I sent someone to look for Ma, who was about to set off, but Commander Feng's mother sent someone to repeatedly delay him, saying that she had already gone to urge her son three times, and she was allowed to stay.

古文：既而天色大霁，欲往多灵，以晚不及。
现代文：不久天色大晴，想去多灵山，因为太晚来不及。
English: Soon it was a fine day, and I wanted to go to Dorling Mountain, because it was too late.

古文：亟饭而渡北门大江，登北岸上观者阁，前为澄碧庵，皆江崖危石飞突洪流之上，就而结构成之者。
现代文：急忙吃过饭渡过北门前的大江，登上北岸的观音阁，前边是澄碧庵，都是在江边悬崖危石飞突在洪流之上的地方，就着山势建造成的。
English: After a quick meal, they crossed the big river in front of the north gate, and climbed up to the north bank of the Guanyin Pavilion, in front of which was the Chengbi An. All of this was caused by the cliff on the edge of the river, which was built on top of the torrent.

古文：又北一里，过雪花洞下，乃渡溪，遂西向入石山峡中。
现代文：又向北走一里，经过雪花洞下，于是渡溪，然后向西走入石山峡谷中。
English: Walk another mile north, pass under the snow cave, then cross the stream, and then walk west into the stone mountain canyon.

古文：转而南，登岭坳，遇樵者问之，此上有牛陴洞，非三门也，三门尚在北山。
现代文：转向南，登上岭坳，遇上打柴的人问路，此处上面有个牛碑洞，不是三门岩，三门岩还在北山上。
English: Turning to the south, climbing up the ridge, I met a woodcutter asking for directions. There was a cow monument cave here, not Sanmen Rock. Sanmen Rock was still on the North Mountain.

古文：仍出，由南来大路北行二里，过一古庙。
现代文：仍旧出来，由南边来的大路往北行二里，路过一座古庙。
English: Still, the road from the south goes north for two miles, passing an ancient temple.

古文：又北，有水自西山麓透石而出，其声淙淙，东泻即前所渡自北而南小溪也。
现代文：又往北，有流水自西面的山麓透过石缝流出来，水声涂涂，往东流泻，就是前边渡过自北往南流的小溪了。
English: Further to the north, there is running water from the western foothills of the mountain flowing through the stone cracks. The sound of the water is painted, and it flows eastward. It is the stream that has passed from the north to the south.

古文：又西半里，循西山转入西坞，则北界石峰崔嵬，南界之山又转而为土矣，中有土冈南北横属。
现代文：又向西半里，沿西山转入西面的山坞，就见北面一列石峰崔鬼高大，南面的山又变为土山了，中间有土冈横向连接南北。
English: Another half-mile to the west, along the West Mountain and into the dock on the west side, you will see a row of stone peaks in the north, the mountains on the south side have turned into earthen mountains, and there are earthen mounds in the middle connecting the north and south.

古文：又半里，逾冈西下，则三门岩在北崖之中矣。
现代文：又走半里，越过土冈向西下走，就见三门岩在北面山崖的中间了。
English: After walking another half-mile, crossing the mound and walking westward, I saw Sanmen Rock in the middle of the cliff to the north.

古文：乃由岐北向抵山下，望其岩上下俱危崖，中辟横窍，一带垂柱，分楞齐列于外。
现代文：于是由岔路向北走到山下，远望这个岩洞上下都是危崖，中间洞穴横向辟开，像衣带绕着下垂的石柱，分成窗户整齐地排列在洞外。
English: So I walked north from the fork in the road to the foot of the mountain. In the distance, I could see the rocky cliff above and below this cave. The cave in the middle opened out horizontally, like a belt around a sagging stone pillar, and the windows were neatly arranged outside the cave.

古文：拾级而上，分抵岩东，则石瓣骈沓，石隙纵横，皆可深入。
现代文：沿石阶上登，先到达岩洞东边，就见成瓣的岩石成群杂沓，石缝纵横，都可以深入进去。
English: Climbing up along the stone steps, the first to reach the east side of the cave, you will see clusters of flap-shaped rocks, with vertical and horizontal crevices, all of which can be entered deeply.

古文：而前则有路，循崖端而西，其岩中辟，高二丈余，深亦如之，而横拓四丈余，上下俱平整，而外列三石，界成四门，俱南向，惟中门最大，而左腋一门卑伏。
现代文：而前边就有路，沿石崖外侧往西走，这个岩洞中间拓开，高二丈多，深处也如此，但横处拓开四丈多，上下全很平整，而外边排列着三根石柱，分隔成四个门洞，都是向南，唯有中间的门洞最大，而左侧的一个门洞低伏着。
English: And there is a road in front, along the outer side of the cliff to the west, this cave opens up in the middle, more than two feet high, and so is the depth, but it opens up more than four feet across, the top and bottom are very flat, and there are three stone pillars on the outside, separated into four doorways, all to the south, only the middle doorway is the largest, while a doorway on the left side is low.

古文：言 三门 者，举其大也。
现代文：仅说 三门如，是举其大处说的。
English: To say that there are only three doors is to speak in broad terms.

古文：西门岩壁抵此而莫前，其上石态更奇；东门穿隙而出，即与东偏纵横之隙并；而中门之内，设神像于中，上镌 灵岩 二字。
现代文：西门的洞壁到此处就无法前走，它上方的岩石形态更加奇特；东门穿过缝隙出来，就与编东处纵横的石缝并排；而中门之内，在正中安放了神像，上方刻有 灵岩 二字。
English: The cave wall of the west gate cannot go forward here, and the rock shape above it is even more peculiar; the east gate comes out through the gap and is side by side with the vertical and horizontal stone cracks at the east; and inside the middle gate, a statue of God is placed in the middle, and the word "Spirit Rock" is engraved above.

古文：由神像后穿隙北入，宛转三四丈，逾庋攀而上，中有一龛，乃岩中之奥室也。
现代文：由神像后方穿过石缝向北进去，弯弯转转走三四丈，超过石板攀登上去，中间有一个石完，是岩洞中的琢室。
English: From the back of the statue, go through the stone gap to the north, turn around and go three or four heights, climb over the stone plate, and there is a stone end in the middle, which is the cutting room in the rock cave.

古文：出岩而东，披纵横之隙，亦宛转三四丈，始辟而大。
现代文：出洞往东走，穿越纵横的石缝，也是弯弯转转走三四丈，这才变宽大。
English: Going out of the cave to the east, through the vertical and horizontal stone cracks, it is also bending and turning away three or four heights, which only becomes wide.

古文：东逾石阈而上，其内上下平整，前穴通明，另成一界，乃岩外之奥室也。
现代文：向东越过石门槛上去，那里面上下都平整，前方的洞穴透进亮光来，另成一处境界，是岩洞外的深室。
English: Eastward over the stone threshold up, where the surface is flat above and below, the cave in front penetrates the light, and another boundary is the deep chamber outside the cave.

古文：透其前穴出，有石高擎穴前，上平如台。
现代文：钻过它前边的洞穴出来，有岩石高擎在洞穴前，顶上如像平台。
English: Drilled through the cave in front of it, there is a rock tower in front of the cave, the top is like a platform.

古文：其东又有小隙宛转，如簇瓣莲萼，披之无不通也。
现代文：它东边又有曲曲折折的小裂缝，如成簇的花瓣似莲花的花粤，穿进去无处不通。
English: On the east side of it, there are small cracks with twists and turns, like clusters of petals resembling the inflorescences of a lotus flower. There is no way to get in.

古文：由台前小隙下，即前循崖端而西路。
现代文：由平台前的小裂缝下走，就是先前沿石崖外侧往西走的路。
English: Walking under the small crack in front of the platform is the same as walking along the outer side of the cliff to the west.

古文：复从崖端转石嘴而东，稍入，有洞门内辟。
现代文：再从石崖外侧往东转过石山嘴，略走进去，里面有洞口张开。
English: Then, from the outer side of the cliff, turn eastward past the mouth of the stone mountain, walk slightly into it, and there is a cave opening inside.

古文：其门亦南向，中深数丈，弥备幽深之致。
现代文：这个洞口也是向南，洞中深数丈，更具有幽深的情趣。
English: The mouth of this cave is also to the south, with a depth of several meters in the middle of the cave, which is even more profound.

古文：乃仍旧路下，即沿山麓东还，北望山坳间，有岩高悬绝峡之上，心异之。
现代文：于是仍由原路下山，马上沿着山麓往东回走，望见北面的山坳间，有岩洞高悬在悬绝的山峡之上，心里觉得它很奇特。
English: As a result, I still went down the mountain by the original road, and immediately walked back east along the foot of the mountain. I could see between the mountains to the north, there was a rock cave high above the overhanging gorge, and I thought it was very strange.

古文：乃北向望坳上，攀岩跻崖以升。
现代文：于是向北望着山坳上登，攀着石崖上爬。
English: So I looked north and climbed up the ridge, climbing up the rock cliff.

古文：数十步，逾坳间，乃炭夫樵斫者所由，而悬岩尚在其东，崖壁间之藤棘蒙密，侧身难度。
现代文：几十步后，越到山坳间，是烧炭打柴的人所走的路，可高悬的岩洞还在它的东面，崖壁上的藤条荆棘蒙蒙密密，侧着身子难以过去。
English: After a few dozen steps, you get to the mountains, which is the path taken by the charcoal burners. However, the high-hanging rock cave is still to the east of it, and the rattan thorns on the cliff wall are so dense that it is difficult to pass by.

古文：乃令随夫缘枝践级，横过崖间，不百步而入岩，余亦从之，岩前悬峡，皆棕竹密翳，其色白，大者可为杖，细者可为箸。而洞当转峡之侧，上下悬峭，其门西南向，顶崇底坦。
现代文：于是命令随行的脚夫抓住树枝踩着台阶，横过崖壁之间，不到一百步便进入洞中，我也跟着他走。洞前高悬的峡壁上，都是密蔽的棕竹，而洞正当山峡转弯处的侧面，上下高悬陡峭，洞口向西南，顶高底平。
English: He then ordered the accompanying porter to grasp the branches and step on the steps, cross between the cliff walls, and enter the cave in less than a hundred steps, and I followed him. On the high-hanging canyon wall in front of the cave, there are all hidden brown bamboo, and the side of the cave at the turn of the canyon, high and steep, the cave mouth to the southwest, the top is high and the bottom is flat.

古文：人五六丈，当洞之中，遥望西南锐竖尖峰正列其前，洞两旁裂峡分瓣，皆廉利沓合。
现代文：进去五六丈，位于洞的正中，远望西南方尖尖竖起的尖峰正坐落在它前方，洞两旁裂开的峡谷分为两瓣，都是棱角锋利杂沓聚合。
English: Five or six meters high, it is located in the middle of the cave. Looking far and wide to the southwest, a pointed peak is located in front of it. The cleft canyon on both sides of the cave is divided into two lobes, both of which are sharp-angled polygons.

古文：洞后透石门而入，其内三辟三合，中连下透，皆若浮桥驾空，飞梁骈影，思各跻其上，不知何处着脚。
现代文：洞后穿过石门进去，那以内三次分开三度合拢，中间相连下边空着，都好像浮桥架在空中，飞桥之影骄列，心想如单独登到它上面，不知在何处落脚。
English: After the cave, I entered through the stone gate, which was separated three times and closed three times, connected in the middle and empty at the bottom. It was like a floating bridge in the air, with the shadow of the flying bridge standing tall. I wanted to climb on it alone, and I didn't know where to land.

古文：乃透入三桥之内，其中转宽而黑。
现代文：到穿入三座桥以内后，其中变得又宽又黑。
English: After penetrating the three bridges, it became wide and dark.

古文：从左壁摸索而上攀东崖，南出三四丈，遂凌内梁之东。
现代文：从左侧洞壁摸索着上登东面的石崖，向南走出三四丈，便凌驾在里边一座桥的东头。
English: From the left side of the cave wall, I groped my way up the stone cliff to the east, walked three or four meters to the south, and then overcame the east end of a bridge inside.

古文：其梁背刀削而起，不堪着足。
现代文：这座桥桥背如刀削过一样立起，不能落脚。
English: The bridge stands up as if it had been chiseled by a knife, and cannot be landed on.

古文：而梁之西亦峻石柱顶，另隔成界，不容西渡。
现代文：而桥的西头也有高峻的岩石撑住洞顶，另外隔成一境，不容飞渡到西面。
English: At the west end of the bridge, there is also a steep rock supporting the top of the cave, and it is separated into one area, so it is not possible to fly over to the west.

古文：又南缘东崖，凌中梁之东，其不可度与内梁同。
现代文：又向南沿着东面的石崖走，凌驾在中间一座桥的东头，这里不可越过与里边的一座桥相同。
English: Walk south along the east cliff, over the east end of a bridge in the middle, which is the same as the bridge in the middle.

古文：又南缘东崖凌前梁之东，则梁背平整，横架于两崖之间，下空内豁，天设徒杠独木桥。
现代文：又向南沿东面的石崖凌驾在前边一座桥的东头，就见桥背平整，横架在两面石崖之间，桥下中空向内裂开，是天设的石桥。
English: Further south, the stone cliff along the east overhangs the east end of a bridge in front. You can see the back of the bridge is flat, the cross-beam is between the two stone cliffs, and the hollow space under the bridge is cracked inward. It is a stone bridge made by heaven.

古文：其背平架之端，又有圆石尺许耸立其上，俨若坐墩。
现代文：桥背平架的顶端，又有一子左右的圆石耸立在桥上，俨然一个供人坐的石墩。
English: At the top of the bridge's flat back, there is also a round stone towering over the bridge, like a stone bench for people to sit.

古文：余以为人琢而置此者，扪其根，则天然石柱也。
现代文：我以为是凿好放在此处的，摸了摸它的根部，原来是天然的石柱。
English: I thought it had been chiseled and placed here, and when I touched its base, it turned out to be a natural stone pillar.

古文：渡梁之西，又北转入峡门，即中内二梁西端之石所界而成者。
现代文：越到桥西，又向北转入峡口，就是中间和里边两座桥西头岩石隔成的地方。
English: After crossing to the west of the bridge, it turns north into the mouth of the gorge, where the middle and the inside of the two bridges are separated by the West Head Rock.

古文：其内有又东豁而下通梁后，又西剜ｗáｎ刻而透穴中。
现代文：这里面又有向东去的裂谷下通到桥后，又向西挖空而通入洞穴中。
English: There is also a rift valley to the east, which leads to the back of the bridge, and to the west, which is hollowed out and leads to the cave.

古文：入穴中，又拓而为龛，环而为门，透而为峡，下皆细砂铺底，但其中已暗而渐束，不能深入。
现代文：进入洞穴中，又拓展为石完，环绕成洞口，穿通为峡谷，下边都是细砂铺在底上，平整光洁如玉石，但其中随即暗下来而且渐渐束拢，不能深入。
English: Entering the cave, it expands into a stone finish, surrounds into a cave mouth, penetrates into a canyon, the bottom is covered with fine sand on the bottom, smooth and smooth as jade, but it then darkens and gradually closes, it can not be deep.

古文：仍出至前梁之西，缘西崖之半，攀石笋南下，穿石窟以出，复至洞中央矣。
现代文：仍然出来到前边那座桥的西头，沿西面石崖的半中腰，抓住石笋向南下走，穿过石窟出来，又来到洞中央了。
English: I still went out to the west end of the bridge in front of me, walked along the western half of the stone cliff, grabbed the stone anchor to go south, walked through the grotto, and came to the center of the cave.

古文：前眺尖峰，后瞩飞梁，此洞之胜，内外两绝。
现代文：向前眺望尖峰，往后注视飞桥，是此洞的优美之处，内外双绝。
English: Looking forward to the spikes, looking back at the flying bridge, is the beauty of this hole, both inside and out.

古文：出洞，取棕竹数枝，仍横度坳脊，历悬石，下危峡而抵麓。
现代文：出洞后，摘取了几枝棕竹，仍横越坳脊，经历悬石，走下危峡而后抵达山麓。
English: After getting out of the cave, I picked up a few branches of brown bamboo. I still crossed the ridge, went through hanging rocks, walked down the dangerous gorge, and then arrived at the foot of the mountain.

古文：循麓东行又百步，有洞裂削崖间如 丁 字，上横下竖，甚峻，其门南向。
现代文：沿山麓又往东走一百步，陡削的山崖上有洞裂开如一个 丁 字，上横下竖，非常高峻，洞口向南。
English: A hundred paces further east along the foot of the mountain, there is a hole in the steep cliff, cracked like a "T," vertical from top to bottom, very steep, with the hole opening to the south.

古文：复北向抵崖下巨峡前，大石如窒，累数石而上，皆倒攀悬跻升之。
现代文：再向北走到山崖下的巨大峡谷前，岩石巨大似乎阻塞不通，沿数块叠垒的岩石上登，都是倒攀悬登地爬上去。
English: Then I walked north to the huge canyon under the cliff. The huge rocks seemed to be blocking the way. I climbed up along several stacked rocks, all of which were climbed upside down.

古文：其上一石则高削数丈，无级可攀，而下有穴大如斗。
现代文：它上边的一块岩石却陡削高达数丈，没有台阶可攀，但下边有个如斗一样大的洞穴。
English: On top of it, a rock has been hewn so steeply that there are no steps to climb, but at the bottom there is a cave as big as a bucket.

古文：蛇穿以入，中遂穹然，上高数十丈，外透而起，则 丁 字之竖裂也，而横裂则仰之莫及矣。
现代文：像蛇一样地钻进去，中间便弯然隆起，顶上高数十丈，外边穿通竖起，是 丁 字的竖裂缝，而横向的裂缝却只能抬头望无法到达了。
English: Like a snake, it burrowed in, and the middle of it rose up crookedly, the top was dozens of feet high, and the outside pierced through and stood up. It was a vertical crack with the letter "T," but the horizontal crack could only be reached by looking up.

古文：洞内夹壁而入，倾底而下，北进七八丈，折而东，始黑暗不可穷诘。
现代文：沿洞内的夹壁进去，在倾斜的洞底上下走，向北前进七八丈，折向东，开始黑暗下来不可穷究。
English: Go along the wall in the cave, walk up and down the sloping bottom of the cave, go north seven or eight meters, turn to the east, and it starts to get dark.

古文：乃出斗穴，下累石，又循崖而东数十步，复入巨峡。
现代文：于是钻出斗一样的洞穴，下了叠垒的巨石，又沿山崖往东走数十步，再进入巨大的峡谷。
English: As a result, they drilled out of a pit-like cave, climbed down the stacked boulders, walked east along the cliff for dozens of steps, and then entered a huge canyon.

古文：其门亦南向，前有石界之。
现代文：这个洞口也是向南，前边有岩石隔开它。
English: The mouth of this cave is also to the south, with a rock in front separating it.

古文：连跻石隙二重，其内夹下倾，亦如 丁 字岩。
现代文：接连上登两层石缝，洞内的夹谷下倾，也像 丁 字岩。
English: Two layers of rock crevices rise up one after another, and the valley inside the cave dips downwards, also resembling T-shaped rock.

古文：北进五六丈，亦折而东，则平而拓矣。
现代文：往北前进五六丈，也是折向东，便又平又宽敞了。
English: If you go north, it's five or six stories, but if you turn east, it's flat and spacious.

古文：暗中摸索，忽有光在足下，恍惚不定，余疑为蛇珠虎睛，及近索之，复不见。
现代文：在黑暗中摸索，忽然脚下出现光亮，恍惚不定，我怀疑是蛇蛛虎睛，到走近搜索时，又不见了。
English: Fumbling in the dark, suddenly a light appeared at my feet, I was in a daze. I suspected it was a snake, spider or tiger's eye. When I approached to search, it disappeared again.

古文：盖石板之下，复有下层窟穴通于前崖，而上下交通处，穴小于斗，远则斜引下光，近则直坠莫睹。
现代文：大概在石板之下，又有下层的洞穴通到前边的山崖，但上下相通之处，洞穴比斗小，在远处便斜引进下层的光，走近却笔直下陷无法看见。
English: Probably under the stone slab, there is also a lower-level cave leading to the cliff in front, but where the top and bottom are connected, the cave is smaller than a bucket, in the distance it obliquely introduces light from the lower layer, but when approaching it sinks straight down and cannot be seen.

古文：且其穴小而曲，不能蛇伏以下。
现代文：而且这个洞穴又小又弯曲，不能像蛇一样爬着钻下去。
English: Moreover, this cave is small and crooked, and it is not possible to crawl through it like a snake.

古文：遥瞩其东二三丈，石板尽处，复有微光烨烨。
现代文：远望它东边二三丈外，石板的尽头处，又有微光闪亮。
English: Far away to the east, two or three stories away, at the end of the stone slab, there is a glimmer of light.

古文：匍匐就之，则其外界石如屏，中有细孔径寸，屈曲相攒，透漏不一，可以外窥，而其下有孔独巨，亦如斗大。
现代文：爬着走近它，就见它外面的岩石如像屏风，中间有直径一寸的细小孔洞，曲曲折折攒聚在一起，玲珑剔透，不一而足，可以向外窥视，而且它下边有个孔洞唯独大一些，也像斗一样大。
English: Climbing closer to it, you can see that the rock outside it is like a screen, with tiny holes with a diameter of one inch in the middle, twists and turns gathered together, exquisite and clear, one after another, you can peep out, and there is a hole below it, only larger, also as big as a bucket.

古文：乃以足先坠，然后悬手而下，遂及下层。
现代文：于是把脚先放下去，然后手高吊着下来，便到了下层。
English: So he put his feet down first, and then he dangled his hands down, and he reached the lower level.

古文：其外亦有门南向，而内入不深。
现代文：它外边也有洞口向南，但洞内进去不深。
English: There is also a cave opening to the south on the outside, but it is not deep inside the cave.

古文：岩门内距屏石仅二丈，屏下又开扃窍，内入即前所望石板下窟穴也，然外视昏黑，不知其内通矣。
现代文：洞口以内距屏风石仅有二丈，屏风下又开有一个深闭着的石窍，进入里面就是先前望见的石板下的洞穴了。然而从外边看去十分昏黑，不知道它里面通着了。
English: At the mouth of the cave, within the distance of the screen, the stone is only two meters high. Under the screen, there is also a deeply closed stone nook. Entering it is the cave under the stone plate previously seen. However, it is very dark from the outside, and I do not know if it is open.

古文：由门外又循崖而东数丈，复得一岩。
现代文：由洞口外又顺着山崖往东走数丈，又找到一个洞。
English: From the mouth of the cave, I walked along the cliff to the east for a few meters and found another cave.

古文：其门亦南向，内不甚深，而后壁石窍玲珑，细穴旁披，亦可捱身转隙，然无能破其扃也。
现代文：洞口也是向南，洞内不怎么深，但后壁上的石窍玲珑小巧，细小的洞穴在四旁裂开，也可以侧身转进缝隙，但不能冲破它关锁的门扇。
English: The mouth of the cave is also to the south, the cave is not very deep, but the stone nook on the back wall is exquisite and small. The tiny cave is cracked on all sides, and you can turn sideways into the gap, but you can't break through its locked door.

古文：岩前崖悬磴绝，遂不能东，乃仍西历前所入洞口，下及山麓。
现代文：洞前石崖高悬石瞪断绝，便不能向东走，只好仍往西经过先前进入的洞口，下到山麓。
English: The high cliff in front of the cave was broken, so I couldn't go east, so I had to go west through the entrance of the cave I had entered before, down to the foot of the mountain.

古文：又东百步，有洞当北麓，其门亦南向。
现代文：又向东走一百步，有洞正当北麓，洞口也是向南。
English: Another hundred steps to the east, there is a cave at the northern foot, and the cave entrance is also to the south.

古文：穿而入，则转东，透峡四五丈而出，其门又东豁者也。
现代文：穿入洞中，就转向东，穿过峡谷四五丈后出来，这个洞口又是向东裂开的了。
English: When you enter the cave, you turn to the east, and after passing through a canyon four or five meters high, you come out, and the cave opens to the east again.

古文：时日将晡，恐渡舟晚不及济，亟从旧路还，五里余而抵龙江，渡舟适至，遂受之南济，又穿城一里，抵香山已薄暮矣。
现代文：听说古城洞在青鸟山前，从东门渡江，三里路可以到，石壁对面相夹，其中有人种了很多蔬菜。此时太阳将到下午，担心渡船太晚了来不及渡江，急忙从原路返回来，五里多路便抵达龙江，渡船刚好来到，便乘上它渡到南岸，又穿过城中一里，到达香山寺已是傍晚了。
English: I heard that the ancient city cave is in front of the Blue Bird Mountain, from the east gate to the river, three miles can be reached, opposite the stone wall, some people planted a lot of vegetables. At this time, the sun will be in the afternoon, worried that the ferry is too late to cross the river, hurriedly returned from the original road, five miles to the Longjiang River, the ferry just arrived, and then took it to the south bank, and passed through the city for a mile, and it was already evening to reach Xiangshan Temple.

古文：二十八日天色甚霁。
现代文：二十八日天色十分晴朗。
English: On the 28th, the sky was very clear.

古文：晨起索饭，即同慧庵僧为多灵山之行。
现代文：早晨起床吃了饭，马上同慧庵和尚动身去多灵山。
English: He got up in the morning, ate his meal, and immediately left Tonghui An Monastery to go to Doring Mountain.

古文：西南过雁山村，又过龙项村今作龙降之北，共八里过彭岭桥，其水即九龙北去之流也。
现代文：向西南路过雁山村，又走过龙项村的北边，共八里过了彭岭桥，桥下的水就是九龙潭向北流去的水流了。
English: Passing through Yanshan Village to the southwest and the northern side of Longxiang Village, a total of eight miles passed the Pengling Bridge. The water under the bridge is the water flow of Jiulong Lake flowing northward.

古文：又二里登彭岭，其南陇有村，是为彭村今作鹏岭。
现代文：又走二里登上彭岭，岭南土陇上有村庄，这是彭村。
English: Another two miles up Pengling, there is a village on the mound south of the ridge, this is Peng Village.

古文：又西下岭，西南转入山坞，峡中堰而成塘，水满浸焉。
现代文：又向西下岭，往西南转入山坞中，峡中筑堤修成水塘，塘水浸满。
English: It also turned westward to the lower ridge and southwestward to the dockyard, built a dike in the gorge and built a pond, and the pond was full of water.

古文：共五里，逾土岭而下，于是遂与石山遇。
现代文：共五里，越过土岭下走，于是便与石山相遇。
English: A total of five miles, walk across the mound, and then meet the stone mountain.

古文：又三里，南穿其峡，逾脊而西，其南乃扩然。
现代文：又走三里，向南穿过石山山峡，越过山脊往西走，山脊南面于是十分开阔。
English: I walked another three miles, south through the Shishan Gorge, over the ridge to the west, and the south side of the ridge was very open.

古文：循石峰南麓西行，二里，为黄窑村。
现代文：沿石峰南麓往西行，二里，是黄窑村。
English: Along the southern foot of Shifeng to the west, two miles, is Huangyao Village.

古文：其村之西，石峰前突，是为黄窑山。
现代文：此村的西边，石峰前突，这是黄窑山。
English: On the west side of this village, the stone peak juts forward, this is Huangyao Mountain.

古文：转山嘴而西一里，有水自南冈土峡中泻下，分为二派：一循山嘴东行，引环村之前；一捣山麓北入石峰而出其后。
现代文：转过山嘴往西一里，有水流自南面山冈的土山峡中泻下来，分为两条支流：一条顺山嘴往东流，绳索样环绕过村前；一条冲向山麓向北流入石峰而后在石峰后面流出来。
English: Turning over the mountain mouth to the west for one mile, water flows down from the earthy mountain gorge of the mountains in the south and is divided into two tributaries: one flows eastward along the mountain mouth, with a rope-like loop around the front of the village; one rushes north to the foot of the mountain and flows into the stone peak and then flows out behind the stone peak.

古文：渡水溯流陟冈而上，则上流亦一巨塘也。
现代文：涉过水流逆流上登山冈，就见上游也是一个巨大的水塘。
English: Wading through the current against the current up the mountain, you can see that the upstream is also a huge pond.

古文：山至是南北两界，石峰遥列而中横土脊，东望甚豁，直抵草塘，觉其势渐下，而冈坡环合，反堰成此水。
现代文：山在这里分为南北两列，石峰远远排列而中间横着土山脊，东边望去非常广阔，直达草塘，觉得地势渐渐低下来，但冈峦山坡环绕合拢，反而拦堵成此处水塘。
English: The mountain here is divided into two rows, north and south. The stone peaks are arranged far away and the earth ridge is in the middle. The east side looks very broad, right up to the grassy pond. I feel that the terrain is gradually getting lower, but the hilly slope is surrounded and closed, but it is blocked into a pond here.

古文：由塘上西行，又二里，则其水渐西流。
现代文：由水塘上往西行，又走二里，就见这里的水渐渐向西流。
English: From the reservoir, walk west for another two miles and you will see the water here gradually flowing westwards.

古文：又西南二里，下土洼，中则汇水一塘，自西北石峰下成涧而去。
现代文：又向西南二里，下到土洼中，中间积着一塘水，从西北的石峰下形成山涧流去。
English: Another two miles to the southwest, down to the soil depression, with a pond of water in the middle, forming a mountain torrent from the northwest under the stone peak.

古文：又西四里上土冈，见南山有村三四家，投之炊，其家闭户避不出。
现代文：又向西四里走上土冈，见南山有个三四家人的村庄，投奔村中去做饭，村中人家关上门避而不出。
English: He also walked four miles west to Tsuchigaoka, where he saw a village of three or four families in Nanshan. He ran into the village to cook, and the people in the village closed their doors to avoid leaving.

古文：久之，排户入，与之烟少许，辄以村醪、山笋为供。
现代文：很久后，推开门进去，给了他少许烟草，立即把村中自酿的浊酒、山间的竹笋供献出来。
English: After a long time, she pushed open the door and gave him some tobacco, and immediately offered him the village's home-brewed wine and bamboo shoots from the mountains.

古文：饭而西行，四里，有石峰自西北中悬而来，至此危突，曰高狮山。
现代文：饭后往西行，四里，有石峰自西北悬在中央延来，到此高高突起，叫高狮山。
English: After the meal, we drove westward for four miles. There was a rocky peak that extended from the northwest to the center. At this point, it jutted up high and was called Gao Lishan (High Lion Mountain).

古文：又二里，逾山前土脊而下，又西南四里，过一荒址，则下迁村之遗也。
现代文：又走二里，越过山前的土山脊下走，又向西南四里，路过一处荒凉的废址，是下迁村的遗址。
English: Walk two more miles, over the earth ridge in front of the mountain, and then walk four miles to the southwest, passing a desolate waste site, which is the site of the village of Shimoji.

古文：又西上岭，望见一水自南，一水自东，至此合流而西去，是为下迁江。
现代文：又向西上岭，望见一条水流自南面，一条水流自东边，到此处合流后往西流去，这就是下迁江。
English: Another westward to Shangling, we can see a current from the south, a current from the east, where they meet and flow to the west. This is the Lower Migratory River.

古文：其江西北流去。
现代文：此江向西北流去。
English: This river flows to the northwest.

古文：截流南渡，水涨流深，上及于胸。
现代文：截流渡到南岸，水涨流深，上边到达胸部。
English: The current was cut off to the south bank, and the water rose deep, reaching the chest on the upper side.

古文：既渡，南上陇行三里，有村在南峰东麓，龙门之流潆之而北，是为鹿桥村，大路在其岭西。
现代文：渡江后，向南登上土陇行三里，有村庄在南峰东麓，龙门的水流潦绕过村庄往北流去，这是鹿桥村，大路在此岭的西面。
English: After crossing the river, walk three miles southward up the mound. There is a village at the eastern foot of the South Peak. The water flow of the Longmen flows around the village to the north. This is Deer Bridge Village. The highway is on the west side of this ridge.

古文：乃下岭循南峰东麓西行，过一浑水塘，共二里越脊而下，又二里出土山之隘，于是坞遂南北遥豁，东西两界皆石山矣。
现代文：于是下岭沿南峰东麓往西行，路过一个浑水塘，共二里越过山脊下行，又走二里出了土山的隘口，到这里山坞便呈南北向远远伸展开去，东西两面都是石山了。
English: So the lower ridge went west along the eastern foot of the south peak, passed a muddy pond, went down a total of two miles over the ridge, and walked two miles out of the dirt mountain pass. At this point, the dock stretched far and wide in a north-south direction, and the east and west sides were stone mountains.

古文：又有溪当石山之中，自南而北流去，路乃溯流南入。
现代文：又有溪流正当石山之中，自南向北流去，路于是溯流向南进去。
English: There is also a stream right in the middle of the stone mountain, flowing from south to north, and the road then flows to the south.

古文：二里，过一石桥，由溪西南向行。
现代文：二里，走过一座石桥，由溪边向西南行。
English: For two miles, I walked over a stone bridge, heading southwest from the creek.

古文：又一里，有墟在路左，又有村在西山下，是曰黄村，则宜山西南之鄙矣。
现代文：又一里，有集市在路左，又有村庄在西山下，这里叫黄村，是宜山县西南的偏僻山乡了。
English: Another mile, there is a bazaar on the left of the road, and there are villages under the West Mountain. Here is called Huangcun, which is a remote mountain village in the southwest of Yishan County.

古文：有全州道人惺一者，新结茅于此，遂投宿其中。
现代文：有个叫惺一的全州道人，新近在此地建了茅屋，便投宿到他屋中。
English: A Quanzhou Taoist named Zou Yi recently built a thatched cottage in this area and stayed in his house.

古文：是日尚有余照，余足为草履所损，且老僧慧庵闻郡尊时以朔日行香寺中，欲明日先回，故不复前。
现代文：这时落日还有余辉，我的脚被草鞋磨伤了，并且老和尚慧庵听说此时知府大人将在初一这天到寺中烧香拜佛，打算明天先返回去，所以不再前走了。
English: At this time, there was still the afterglow of the sunset, my feet were worn out by the straw sandals, and the old monk Shang Huian heard that at this time, the prefectural adults would go to the temple to burn incense and worship Buddha on the first day of the first day, intending to return first tomorrow, so he did not go any further.

古文：二十九日复从黄村墟觅一导者，别慧庵南向行。
现代文：二十九日重新从黄村墟找来一个向导，告别慧庵向南行。
English: On the 29th, a new guide was found from Huangcun Hui, bidding farewell to Hui'an and heading south.

古文：一里，有村在西麓，曰牛牢村。
现代文：一里，有村庄在西麓，叫牛牢村。
English: In the first mile, there is a village at the western foot, called Niuye village.

古文：有一小水在其南，自西山峡中出，东人南来之溪，行者渡小水，从二水之中南向循出行。
现代文：有一条小溪在村南，自西面的山峡中流出，往东流入南来的溪流中，走路的人渡过小溪，从两条溪水之中向南沿着山走。
English: There is a small stream in the south of the village, which flows out of the mountain gorge in the west and flows east into the stream coming from the south. Walkers cross the stream and walk south along the mountain from the two streams.

古文：又一里余，有岩突西峰之麓，其门东向，披棘入之，中平而不深。
现代文：又是一里多，有个岩洞突起在西峰的山麓，洞口向东，分开荆棘走进洞，洞中平坦而不深。
English: Another mile and more, there is a cave protruding at the foot of the West Peak, the cave mouth to the east, separate thorns into the hole, the hole is flat but not deep.

古文：从此半里，蹑级西上，石脊崚嶒。
现代文：它南边山峰回绕山坞相夹，石窍纵横，藤蔓环拥密蔽，是山穷水尽之处。
English: Its southern peak is clamped around the dockyard, the crags are vertical and horizontal, the vine ring is densely covered, and it is a place where the mountains are exhausted.

古文：逾坳而西，共一里而抵其下，是曰都田隘，东为宜山县，西为永顺司分界。见有溪自西南来，亦抵坳窟之下，穿其穴而东出，即为黄村上流者也。
现代文：浓密的林木中不知水从哪里流出来，只听到有潺潺的水声来自脚底而已。从此处走半里，踏着石阶向西上登，石脊高峻。越过山坳往西走，共一里到达山下，见有溪水自西南流来，也是流抵山坳的洞窟之下，穿过这个洞穴往东流出去，就成为黄村的上游了。
English: I don't know where the water came from in the dense forest, I only heard the gurgling sound of water coming from the soles of my feet. From here, I walked half a mile, climbed the stone steps to the west, the stone ridge was high. I walked west across the ridge, and reached the bottom of the mountain for a total of one mile. I saw a stream flowing from the southwest, which also flowed under the cave of the ridge, and flowed through this cave to the east, becoming the upper reaches of Huangcun.

古文：又南半里，乃渡其水西南行，山复开，环而成坞。
现代文：又向南半里，就渡过这条溪水往西南行，山又分开，环绕成山坞。
English: Another half-mile to the south, I crossed this stream to the southwest, and the mountains parted, encircling the dock.

古文：二里，有村在西麓，是为都田村，一曰秦村今作新村，乃永顺司之叔邓德本所分辖者。
现代文：二里，有村庄在西麓，这是都田村，又叫秦村，是永顺司的叔父邓德本所分管的地方。
English: Two miles away, there is a village at the western foot of the mountain. This is Tsuru Tsuda Village, also known as Qin Village. It is the place where Yong Shunshi's uncle Dang Deben is in charge.

古文：又南二里，复渡其水之上流，其水乃西北山腋中发源者，即流入都田隘西穴，又东出而为黄村之水者也。
现代文：又向南二里，再渡过这条溪水的上游，这条溪水就是在西北山侧中发源，随即流入都田隘西边的洞穴，又向东流出后成为黄村的溪水的水流了。
English: Another two miles to the south, and then across the upper reaches of this stream, this stream originated in the northwest side of the mountain, and then flowed into the cave on the west side of Dutian Pass, and then flowed out to the east and became the water flow of Huangcun's stream.

古文：又东南一里，陟土山之冈，于是转出岭坳，西向升降土冈之上，二里，为大歇岭。
现代文：又往东南一里，登上土山的冈头，于是转向出到岭坳，向西升降在土冈之上，二里，是大歇岭。
English: Another mile to the southeast, up to the top of the hill of the hill, then turn out to Lingyao, rise and fall to the west above the hill, two miles, is the Dashieling.

古文：石山又开南北两界，中复土脊盘错，始见多灵三峰如笔架，高悬西南二十里外下岭，又西南行夹坞中三里，乃西向升土山。
现代文：石山又分开为南北两列，中间又有土山脊盘绕错落，开始见到多灵山的三座山峰如笔架一样，高悬在西南二十里之外。下岭后，又往西南行走在两山相夹的山坞中三里，于是向西登土山。
English: The stone mountains were again separated into two rows, north and south, and in the middle there were earthen ridges coiled and staggered. I began to see the three peaks of Dorling Mountain like a pen holder, hanging high in the southwest twenty miles away. After descending the ridge, I walked to the southwest for three miles in the dock between the two mountains, and then climbed the earthen mountain to the west.

古文：其山较高，是为永顺与其叔分界，下山是为永顺境。
现代文：此山较高，这是永顺司与他叔父分界之处，下山后就是永顺司境内。
English: This mountain is higher, this is the place where Yong Shunji and his uncle are separated. After descending the mountain, it is within Yong Shunji's territory.

古文：西由坞中入石山峡，渐转西北行，其地寂无人居，而石峰离立，色态俱奇。
现代文：向西由山坞中走入石山山峡，渐渐转向西北行。此地荒寂无人居住，但石峰成排竖立，石色青白相间成纹，形态郁郁苍苍曲折蜿蜒，好像雕刻出来的一样，色彩形态全很奇特。
English: Walking west from the dockyard into the stone mountain gorge, gradually turning to the northwest. This is a desolate and uninhabited place, but the stone peaks are standing in rows, the stone color is blue and white, the shape is rich and twisted, as if carved out, and the color morphology is all very strange.

古文：五里，路右有二岩骈启，其门皆南向，东者在麓，可穿窍东出，而惜其卑；西者在崖，可攀石以上，而中甚幻。
现代文：五里，路右有两个岩洞成双张开，洞口都是向南，东边的在山麓，可穿过洞穴出到东面，但可惜它太低矮了；西边的在山崖上，可攀岩石上去，而且洞中十分奇幻。
English: Five miles away, on the right side of the road, there are two rock caves that open in pairs. The openings of the caves are both to the south. The eastern one is at the foot of the mountain, and you can go through the cave to the east, but unfortunately it is too low. The western one is on the cliff, and you can climb up the rock, and the cave is very magical.

古文：由门后透腋北入，狭窦渐暗，凌窦隙而上，转而南出，已履洞之上矣。
现代文：由洞口后侧方往北钻进去，窄洞渐渐变暗，由缝隙样的洞穴上登，转到南面出来，已踩在洞口之上了。
English: From the back of the cave, the side drilled northwards, the narrow cave gradually darkened, climbed up from the crevice-like cave, turned to the south, and stepped on the top of the cave.

古文：其下石板平如砥，薄若叶，践之声逢逢如行鼓上，中可容两三榻。
现代文：脚下石板平得如同磨刀石，薄如树叶，用脚踏有澎澎澎的声音如同行走在鼓上，洞中可容纳两三张床。
English: The stone slab underfoot is as flat as a grindstone, as thin as a leaf. If you walk on the drum with your foot, you can hear the pounding sound. Two or three beds can be accommodated in the cave.

古文：南有穴，下俯洞门，若层楼之窗，但自外望之，不觉其上之中虚耳。
现代文：南边有洞穴，向下俯视洞口，好似层层高楼的窗子，只是从外边望它，不觉得它上边中间是空的罢了。
English: There is a cave on the south side. Looking down at the mouth of the cave, it looks like the windows of a high-rise building, but looking at it from the outside, I don't feel that it is empty in the middle.

古文：其结构绝似会仙山之百子岩，但百子粗拙而此幻巧，百子藉人力，而此出天上，胜当十倍之也。
现代文：它的构造极像会仙山的百子岩，但百子岩粗笨而此处奇幻精巧，百子岩是借助于人力，而这里是出自于天上，优美之处应当是它的十倍了。
English: Its structure is very similar to that of the Hyakko Rock in Mount Kosen, but the Hyakko Rock is coarse-grained, whereas this one is fantastically delicate. The Hyakko Rock is man-made, whereas this one comes from the sky, and its beauty should be ten times as great.

古文：坐久之，乃南下山，复西北行。
现代文：坐了很久，于是向南下山，再往西北行。
English: After sitting for a long time, I headed south down the mountain and then northwest.

古文：一里，路渐降，北望石峰之顶，有岩蛩然，其门东南向，外有朱痕，内透明穴，乃石梁之飞架峰头者。
现代文：一里，路渐渐下降，望见北边石峰的峰顶，有岩洞呈拱形，洞口朝向东南，外边有朱红色的痕迹，里面通着透出亮光的洞穴，是飞架在峰头的石桥。
English: After one mile, the road gradually descends, and you can see the peak of the stone peak in the north. There is an arched rock cave, the mouth of the cave faces southeast, and there are traces of vermilion on the outside. Inside, there is a cave that transmits light. It is a stone bridge flying on the peak.

古文：下壑半里，转而南，始与溪遇。
现代文：下走壑谷半里，转向南，开始与溪流相遇。
English: Walk down the valley for half a mile, turn south, and begin to meet the stream.

古文：其水西南自八洞来，至此折而西向石山峡中。
现代文：这条溪水从西南的八洞村流来，到这里折向西流入石山峡谷中。
English: This stream comes from the village of Hatcho in the southwest, and flows westward into the Ishiyama Gorge.

古文：是为八洞村。都田村之东有八仙洞，乃往龙门道。又南一里，复南渡溪。
现代文：于是截流横渡，又南行二里，望见西边有村庄在山坞中，这是八洞村。又向南一里，再向南渡溪。
English: As a result, the current was cut across, and two miles further south, we could see a village on the west side in the dock, this is the village of Hatcho. Another mile south, and then south to the creek.

古文：过溪复南上，循山一里，转而东南行一里半，直抵多灵北麓。
现代文：过溪后再往南上行，沿着山走一里，转向东南行一里半，直达多灵山北麓。
English: After crossing the stream, go south again, walk along the mountain for a mile, turn southeast for a mile and a half, and go all the way to the northern foot of Dorling Mountain.

古文：路左有土山，自多灵夭矫下坠。
现代文：路左有土山，自多灵山盘曲下坠。
English: There is a dirt hill on the left of the road, descending from the Dorling Mountain.

古文：其后过腋处，有村数家，是为坟墓村，不知墓在何处也。
现代文：山后半腰侧旁之处，有个数家人的村庄，这是坟墓村，不知坟墓在何处了。
English: Halfway up the mountain, there is a village of a few families. It is a grave village. I don't know where the grave is.

古文：从其前又转而西南行，一里下山，绝流渡溪，其溪自南来，抵石山村之左，山环壑尽，遂捣入石穴，想即八洞溪之上矣。
现代文：从村前又转向西南行，一里后下山，截流横渡溪水，此溪自南边流来，流抵石山村的左边，山脉环绕壑谷到头，于是捣入石穴中，猜想就是八洞溪的上游了。
English: From the front of the village, it turned to the southwest, and after one mile, it went down the mountain and cut off the flow of the cross-stream water. This stream came from the south and flowed to the left of Shishan village. The mountains surrounded Shibuya Valley to the end, so it broke into the stone cave. I guess it was the upstream of Yatong Creek.

古文：过溪又半里，北抵山麓，是为石山村。
现代文：过溪后又是半里，向北抵达山麓，这里是石山村。
English: After crossing the stream, it's another half-mile north to the foot of the mountain. This is Stone Mountain Village.

古文：乃叩一老人家，登其栏而饭。
现代文：于是敲开一位老人的家门，登上他的竹楼吃饭。
English: So he knocked on the door of an old man's house and climbed up to his bamboo house to eat.

古文：望多灵正当其南，问其上，有庐而无居者。
现代文：望见多灵山正当村前，问知山上，有房屋但无人居住。
English: In front of the village of Doringshan, there are houses on the mountain, but no one lives there.

古文：乃借锅于老人，携火于村。
现代文：便向老人借了锅，从村中带上火种。
English: He borrowed a pot from an elderly man and brought kindling from the village.

古文：老人曳杖前导，仍渡溪，东南上土山，共二里，越冈得坞，已在坟墓村之南，与多灵无隔阪矣。
现代文：老人拖着拐杖在前领路，仍渡过溪水，向东南上登土山，共二里，越过山冈见到山坞，已在坟墓村的南边，与多灵山不再有相隔的山坡了。
English: The old man dragged his crutches along the road in front of him. He still crossed the stream and climbed up the hill to the southeast, a total of two miles. He crossed the mountain and saw the dock. It was already on the south side of the grave village, and there was no longer a hillside separating it from Dorling Mountain.

古文：老人乃指余登山道，曰： 此上已岐，不妨竟陟也。 
现代文：老人于是给我指点登山的路说： 这上边已没有岔路，不妨竟自上登。 
English: The old man then showed me the way to climb the mountain and said: There is no fork in the road up here, you might as well climb from the top.

古文：老人始去。
现代文：老人这才离开。
English: The old man then left.

古文：余践土麓东南上，路渐茅塞。
现代文：我踩着土山山麓向东南上走，路渐渐被茅草塞住。
English: I walked up the foothills of the hill to the southeast, and the road was gradually blocked by thatch.

古文：披茅转东北行二里，茅尽而土峡甚峻。
现代文：分开茅草转向东北行二里，茅草完了但土山峡谷非常陡峻。
English: Separate the thatch and turn to the northeast for two miles. The thatch is finished, but the Tsuchiyama Gorge is very steep.

古文：攀之上，抵石崖下，则丛木阴森，石崖峭削，得石磴焉。
现代文：攀上峡谷，抵达石崖下，就见丛林阴森森的，石崖峻峭陡削，在石崖间找到石瞪。
English: Climbing up the canyon, arriving at the bottom of the cliff, you will see the jungle is gloomy, the cliff is steep and steep, and you will find a rock gap between the cliffs.

古文：忽闻犬声，以为有人，久之不见；见竹捆骈置路傍，盖他村之人乘上无人而窃其笋竹，见人至，辄弃竹而避之巉岨间耳。
现代文：忽然听见狗叫声，以为有人，很久不见人影；见有成捆的竹子并排放在路傍，大概是其他村子的人乘山上无人来偷山上的竹笋竹子的，见有人来，就扔下竹子躲避到高险的山石间了。
English: Suddenly I heard a dog barking, I thought it was someone, I hadn't seen anyone for a long time; I saw bundles of bamboo placed side by side on the roadside, it was probably people from other villages taking advantage of the fact that there was no one on the mountain to steal the bamboo shoots. When they saw someone coming, they dropped the bamboo and hid among the high-risk rocks.

古文：此间人行必带犬。于是攀磴上，磴为覆叶满积，几不得级。
现代文：于是攀石瞪上走，石瞪上盖满堆积的落叶，几乎找不到石阶。
English: As a result, I climbed up the rock face, which was covered with a pile of fallen leaves, and I could hardly find the stone steps.

古文：又一里，有巨木横仆，穿其下而上，则老枋之巨，有三人抱者。
现代文：又走一里，有棵巨树横卧着，穿过树下上走，是棵巨大的老仿树，有三个人合抱那么粗。
English: After walking another mile, there was a huge tree lying on its side. I walked up under the tree. It was a huge old imitation tree, as thick as three people hugging each other.

古文：乃复得坪焉，而茅庵倚之。
现代文：于是又走到一块平地上，一座茅草庵坐落在这里。
English: So he walked to a flat area, where a thatched hut was located.

古文：其摩北向，颇高整，竹匡、木几与夫趺跏洒扫之具俱备。
现代文：这座寺庵向北，十分高大整齐，竹床、木几案与那些打坐洒扫的器具都很齐备。
English: This north-facing temple hermitage is very tall and neat, with a bamboo bed, wooden benches and all the necessary tools for meditation and cleaning.

古文：有二桶尚存斗米，惜乎人已久去，草没双扉，苔封古灶，令人恨不知何事忆人间也！
现代文：有两只桶中还存有一斗米，可惜主人已离开很久，荒草掩盖两道门，青苔封住了古旧的炉灶，让人遗憾不知是何事使主人想起了人间！
English: There is still a bucket of rice in two buckets, but unfortunately the owner has been away for a long time. Wild grass covers the two doors, and moss has sealed the old stove. It's a pity that I don't know what made the owner think of the world!

古文：令一人爇火灶中，令一人觅火庵侧，断薪积竹，炊具甚富，而水不可得。
现代文：命令一个人在灶中点燃火，命令一人去人在庵旁找水。砍断的薪柴竹子堆积着，炊具很多，可找不到水。
English: Order one person to light a fire in the stove, order one person to look for water next to the hermitage. Cut firewood and bamboo are piled up, there are many cooking utensils, but no water can be found.

古文：其人反命曰： 庵两旁俱无，亦无路。
现代文：那反而命令我说： 庵两旁都没有，也没有路。
English: On the contrary, he ordered me to say: "There is nothing on either side of the hermitage, and there is no road."

古文：惟东北行，有路在草树间，循崖甚远，不知何之？ 
现代文：唯有向东北走，有路荒草树丛间，沿着山崖走十分远，不知通到哪里去？ 
English: The only way is to go to the northeast, there is a road between the wild grass and trees, walk very far along the cliff, I don't know where to go?

古文：予从之，果半里而得泉。
现代文：我听从他的话，果然走半里后找到泉水。
English: I obeyed his words and walked half a mile to find a spring.

古文：盖山顶悬崖缀石，独此腋万木攒翳。
现代文：原来山顶悬崖危石连缀，独此处侧旁万木成林簇拥密蔽。
English: Originally, the cliff on the top of the mountain was dotted with dangerous rocks, but now it is densely covered with thousands of trees.

古文：水从崖石滴坠不绝，昔人凿痕接竹，引之成流，以供筒酌。
现代文：水从石崖上不停地滴落下来，从前有人凿有石痕接了竹子，把水接引成流，以供用竹筒舀水。
English: Water kept dripping down from the cliff. In the past, someone had chiseled stone marks to connect the bamboo and divert the water into a stream to provide water for the bamboo tube.

古文：其前削崖断峺，无可前矣。
现代文：它前方就是悬崖断埂，不能前走了。
English: There is a cliff ahead of it, so it can't go any further.

古文：乃以两筒携水返庵，令随夫淅ｘī淘米米而炊。
现代文：于是用两个竹筒带水返回庵中，命令随行的脚夫淘米煮饭。
English: So he used two bamboo tubes to bring water back to the hermitage and ordered the attendant porter to make rice.

古文：令导余西南入竹林中，觅登顶之道。
现代文：命令向导领我向西南走入竹林中，找登山顶的路。
English: I ordered the guide to lead me southwest into the bamboo forest to find the way to the top of the mountain.

古文：初有路影，乃取竹觅笋者所践；竹尽而上，皆巨茅覆顶，披之不得其隙。
现代文：最初有路的影子，是取竹子找竹笋的人踩出来的；竹林完后上走，都是高大的茅草覆盖在头顶，拨开茅草找不到缝隙。
English: At first, the shadow of the road was stepped on by people taking bamboo and looking for bamboo shoots. After the bamboo forest was finished, the tall thatch covered the top of their heads, and they couldn't find a gap by pulling away the thatch.

古文：一里，始逾一西走之脊。
现代文：一里后，这才越过一条向西延伸的山脊。
English: A mile later, it crosses a ridge stretching west.

古文：其脊之西，又旁起一峰以拱巨峰者，下不能见，至是始陟之也。
现代文：这条山脊的西面，又在旁边耸起一座山峰拱卫着巨大的主峰，在下边不能看见，到这里才开始登到它上面。
English: On the west side of this ridge, a mountain peak rises next to it, arching over the huge main peak, which cannot be seen from below, and it is only here that you begin to climb it.

古文：又从脊东上，皆短茅没腰，践之每惊。
现代文：又从山脊往东上登，都是短茅草没过腰部，踩着它走常常受到惊吓。
English: Climbing from the ridge to the east, it is all short thatch that does not go past the waist, and walking on it is often frightened.

古文：其路又一里，而始逾一南走之脊。
现代文：这种路又走了一里，这才越过一条向南延伸的山脊。
English: The path goes on for another mile before it crosses a ridge that stretches south.

古文：其脊之南，亦旁起一峰以拱巨峰者，北不能瞩，至是又陟之也。
现代文：这条山脊的南边，也在旁边耸起一座山峰拱卫着巨大的主峰，从北面不能望见，到这里又登上它了。
English: On the south side of this ridge, there is also a mountain next to it, which protects the huge main peak, which cannot be seen from the north, and here it is climbed again.

古文：于是从脊北上，短茅亦尽，石崖峻垂，攀石隙以升，虽峻极，而手援足践，反不似丛茅之易于颠覆也。
现代文：这两座山峰就是在大歇岭望见的与中峰合在一起如笔架的山峰。于是从山脊向北上登，短茅草也完了，石崖高峻下垂，攀石缝上登，虽然极陡峻，可手抓脚踩的，反而不像在茅草丛中那样容易跌倒了。
English: These two peaks are the peaks seen in Dashering, which are joined together with the middle peak like a pen holder. So I climbed up from the ridge to the north, the short thatch was finished, the cliff was high and sagging, and I climbed up the rock crevice. Although it was very steep, I could step on it with my hands and feet, but it was not as easy to fall as in the thatch.

古文：直北上一里，遂凌绝顶。
现代文：一直向北上登一里，终于登上绝顶。
English: I kept climbing one mile north and finally reached the top.

古文：其顶孤悬特耸于众石山之上，南北逾一丈，东西及五丈，惟南面可跻，而东西北三面皆嵌空悬崖，不受趾焉。
现代文：峰顶孤悬独耸在众石山之上，南北宽过一丈，东西长达五丈，唯有南面可以上登，而东、西、北三面都是嵌在空中的悬崖，不能承受脚趾。
English: The peak alone towers above the rocky mountains. It is wider than a meter from north to south, and five meters long from east to west. Only the south side can be climbed, while the east, west and north sides are cliffs embedded in the sky, unable to withstand a toe.

古文：顶之北，自顶平分直坠至庵前石磴下，皆巨木丛列，翳不可窥，惟遥望四面，丛山千垂万簇，其脉似从西南来者。
现代文：峰顶的北边，从峰顶平直分开一直下坠到庵前的石瞪下，都是巨树成丛环列，密蔽不可窥视，只能选望四面，群山千重万簇，山脉似乎是从西南延伸而来的。
English: The north side of the peak, from the peak straightly separated all the way down to the stone gazebo in front of the hermitage, are all giant trees in a cluster, closed and cannot be peered at, only four sides can be seen, mountains are thousands of clusters, mountains seem to extend from the southwest.

古文：南壑之下，重坑隔阪间，时见有水汪汪，盖都泥之一曲也。山高江逼，逆而来则见，随而转又相掩矣。
现代文：远山排列在外层，极北边的一线是五开卫、黎平府的山脊；极南边成丛绵亘的，是思恩府九司的山岭；唯有东北方稍微开阔一些，是从黄窑、里诸延伸而来的山。南面的壑谷之下，隔着重重深坑山坡，不时见有一片汪汪的水，大概是都泥江的一个弯曲处。山高江窄，迎面流来就能看见，顺流转去又被遮住了。
English: The distant mountains are arranged in the outer layer, and the northernmost line is the ridge of Wukai and Liping. The southernmost line is the mountain range of Jiushi in Shine. Only the northeast is a little more open, extending from Huangyao and Li Zhu. Under the valley of the south, across the slope of the heavy pit, there is a piece of water from time to time, probably a bend in the muddy river. The mountain river is narrow, and it can be seen when it flows in the opposite direction, and it is covered when it flows downstream.

古文：此即石堰诸村之境也。
现代文：这就是石堰诸村的地域了。
English: This is the area of the villages of Shiyan.

古文：山之东南垂，亦有小水潺潺，似从南向去，此必入都泥者，其在分脊岭之南乎？
现代文：山的东南垂，也有小河潺潺流淌，从南面流去的，这必定是流入都泥江的水流，它在分水岭的？
English: In the southeastern slope of the mountain, there is also a small stream flowing. If it flows from the south, it must be a stream flowing into the Mud River. Is it in the watershed?

古文：土人言： 登此山者，必清斋数日，故昔有僧王姓者不能守戒，遂弃山而下。
现代文：当地人说： 登此山的人，必定要清心斋戒几天，所以从前王的和尚不能守戒，终于弃山而下。
English: The local people said: "Anyone who climbs this mountain must have a pure heart and fast for a few days, so the former king's monk could not keep the precepts, and finally abandoned the mountain.

古文：若登者不洁，必迷不得道。 以余视之，山无别岐，何以有迷也？
现代文：如果登山的人不干净，迷路。 以我看来，山中别无岔道，凭什么会有人迷路呢？
English: If mountain climbers are not clean, they will get lost. In my opinion, there is no other way in the mountains, so why would anyone get lost?

古文：又云： 山间四时皆辱，名花异果不绝于树。
现代文：山中四季都是春天，树上名花异果不会断绝。
English: All four seasons in the mountains are spring, and the famous flowers and fruits on the trees will not be cut off.

古文：然第可采食，怀之而下，辄复得迷。 若余所见者，引泉覆石之上，有叶如秋海棠而甚巨，有花如秋海棠而色白，嗅之萼，极清香，不知何种。
现代文：但是只能采了吃万不能揣着下山，否则又得迷路。 如我所见的那样，引泉水石崖下覆处的上方，有种树叶如像秋海棠但十分大，有种花如像秋棠可颜色白一些，嗅了嗅它的花萼，极清香，不知是什么品种。
English: But you can only pick and eat if you can't carry it down the mountain, otherwise you'll get lost. As I saw, above the overhang of the stone cliff that leads to the spring, there are some leaves that look like begonias but are very large, and some flowers that look like begonias but are whiter in color. When I sniffed its calyx, it was extremely fragrant. I don't know what kind it is.

古文：而山顶巨木之巅，皆蔷薇缘枝缀花，殷红鲜耀，而不甚繁密。
现代文：而山顶巨树覆盖，都有蔷薇的枝条攀缘花朵连缀，殷红鲜艳，可不怎么茂密。
English: But the top of the mountain is covered with huge trees, all of which are adorned with rose branches and climbing flowers, bright red, but not very lush.

古文：又有酸草，茎大如指，而赤如珊瑚，去皮食之，酸脆殊甚。
现代文：又有种酸草，茎大处如手指，但颜色红如珊瑚，去皮后吃它，特别酸脆。
English: There is also a kind of sour grass, the stem is large like a finger, but the color is red like coral. Eat it after peeling, it is particularly sour and crispy.

古文：亦有遗畦剩菜，已结子离离。
现代文：也有遗弃的菜地剩下的菜，已结子十分繁茂。
English: There are also abandoned vegetable plots with leftover vegetables, and the sprouts are very lush.

古文：而竹下龙孙即竹笋之别称，则悉为窃取者掘索已尽。
现代文：但竹林下的竹笋，却已被偷取的人搜索挖掘光了。
English: However, the bamboo shoots under the bamboo forest have been stolen by people searching and excavating.

古文：此人亦当在迷路之列，岂向之惊余而窜避者，亦迷之一耶？
现代文：此人也应当在迷路之列，难道先前被我惊吓而逃窜躲避的人，也是迷路人中的一个吗？
English: This person should also be among the lost. Is the person who was frightened by me and ran away before also one of the lost?

古文：眺望峰头久之，仍从故道下。
现代文：在峰头眺望了很久，仍从原路下山。
English: After looking at the peak for a long time, I still went down the mountain by the original route.

古文：返茅庵，暝色已合，急餐所炊粥，觉枯肠甚适。
现代文：返回茅草庵，暮色已经四合，急忙吃了煮好的稀粥，觉得饥肠十分舒服。
English: Returning to the thatched hut, the twilight had already faded, I hastily ate the cooked gruel and felt very hungry.

古文：积薪佛座前作长明灯，以驱积阴之气，乃架匡展簟ｄｉｎ供坐卧用的竹席而卧。
现代文：在佛座前堆积起薪柴作为长明灯，以驱散积久的阴气，于是架起床铺开竹席睡下。三月初一日黎明起床，整理好衣帽跪拜在佛座前。
English: In order to dispel the long-accumulated gloom, he piled up firewood in front of the Buddha's seat as an ever-burning lamp, so he got up and spread a bamboo mat to sleep. At dawn on the first day of March, he got up, put his clothes and hat in order, and knelt in front of the Buddha's seat.

古文：三月初一日昧爽起，整衣冠叩佛座前，随夫请下山而炊，余从也，但沸汤漱之而下。仍至石山村导路老人栏，淅米以炊。
现代文：随行的脚夫请求下山后煮饭，我听从了，只用煮沸的热水冲洗了饥肠就下山。仍来到石山村指路老人的竹楼，淘米煮饭。
English: The accompanying porter asked me to cook rice after descending the mountain, and I obeyed. I only used boiling hot water to rinse my hunger and went down the mountain. I still came to the old man's bamboo building in Shishan Village, and cooked rice.

古文：余挟导者觅胜后山，仰见石崖最高处，有洞门穹悬，随小径抵其西峡，以为将攀崖而上，乃穿腋而下者也。
现代文：我携同向导去后山找胜景，仰面见到石崖最高处，有洞口弯隆高悬，沿小径抵达它西面的峡谷，以为将攀着山崖上登，是向下穿透到山侧的洞。
English: Together with my guide, I went to the back of the mountain to find the best view. On the back, I saw the highest point of the cliff, with a cave mouth hanging high. I reached the canyon on the west side of it along the trail. I thought I would climb up the cliff, but it was a hole penetrating down to the side of the mountain.

古文：其隘甚逼，逾而北下，东峰皆峭壁，西峰皆悬窍，然其中石块丛沓，萝蔓蒙密，无可攀跻处也。
现代文：这里的隘口非常狭窄，越过它往北下走，东峰都是峭壁，西峰上全是高悬的石窍，但两峰之中石块丛聚杂沓，藤蔓浓密，没有可攀登之处。
English: The pass here is very narrow. If you cross it and go down to the north, the east peak is all cliffs, and the west peak is all high-hanging rock, but in the middle of the two peaks, the rocks are jumbled, the vines are dense, and there is no place to climb.

古文：其北随峡而出，又通别坞，不能穷焉。
现代文：它北边顺着峡谷出去，又通着另外的山坞，不能穷尽了。
English: It goes out along the canyon on the north side, and passes through another dock, it can't be exhausted.

古文：转山村前，乃由其东觅溪水所从入，则洞穴穹然在山坳之下，其门南向，溪流捣入于中，其底平衍而不潭。
现代文：转出到村前，于是由村东去找溪水流入之处，就见洞穴弯然隆起在山坳之下，洞口向南，溪流奔流到洞中，洞底平平地延伸开来而不是水潭。
English: Turning out to the front of the village, and then from the east of the village to find the place where the stream flows in, we see the cave rising obliquely under the mountain, the cave opening to the south, the stream rushing into the cave, and the bottom of the cave spreading out flatly instead of a pool.

古文：洞高二丈，阔亦二丈，深三四丈，水至后壁，旁分二门以入，其内遂昏黑莫可进。
现代文：洞高二丈，宽也是二丈，深三四丈，水流到后洞壁，在旁边分出两个洞口流进去，那里边便昏黑下来无法可以进去。
English: The cave is two stories high, two stories wide, and three or four stories deep. The water flows to the back wall of the cave, and flows into two openings next to it, where it gets dark and you can't go in.

古文：洞之前，有石柱当其右崖，穿柱而入，下有石坡尺许，傍流渡入，不烦涉水。
现代文：洞的前面，有石柱正当洞右的石崖傍，穿过石柱进去，脚一有一尺左右宽的石坡，傍着水流通进去，不必麻烦涉水。
English: In front of the cave, there is a stone pillar right next to the rock cliff on the right of the cave. Go through the stone pillar and enter the cave. At your feet, there is a stone slope about one foot wide, and you can enter the cave alongside the water. There is no need to wade through the water.

古文：由石柱内又西登一隙，上复有一龛焉。
现代文：由石柱内又向西登上一条裂隙，上边又有一个石完。
English: From the inside of the stone pillar, one climbs westward into a crevice, at the top of which there is another stone end.

古文：底平而上穹，亦有石柱前列，与水洞并向，第水洞下而此上，水洞宽而此隘耳。
现代文：底部平而顶上弯隆，也有石柱排列在前边，与水洞同一方向，只是水洞在下面而此洞在上方，水洞宽而此洞窄罢了。
English: The bottom is flat and the top is cambered, and there are also stone pillars lined up in front, in the same direction as the water cave, but the water cave is below and this hole is above, the water cave is wide and this hole is narrow.

古文：洞中之水，当即透山之背，东北而注于八洞之前者也。
现代文：洞中的水，应当就是穿透山背，向东北流注到八洞村前的水流了。
English: The water in the cave must be the water that penetrates the mountainside and flows northeast to the village of Hatcho.

古文：出洞，还饭老人家。
现代文：出洞后，返回老人家中吃饭。
English: After emerging from the cave, he returned to the old man's home for dinner.

古文：仍东北循土山而下，渡水过八洞，又北渡水，东南转入石山之峡，过前所憩洞前。
现代文：仍往东北沿土山下走，渡水后走过八洞村，又向北渡水，往东南转入石山的峡谷，路过从前休息过的洞前。
English: He still walked northeast down the hill, crossed the water and walked through the village of Watou, crossed the water to the north, turned southeast into the canyon of Ishiyama, and passed the cave where he had rested before.

古文：又东入重坞，逾分脊之岭，乃下岭东北行坞，复陟冈转陂逾大歇岭，乃北下渡溪，沽酒饮于秦村。
现代文：又向东走入重重山坞，越过分水岭，就下岭向东北行走在坞中，再登山冈转山坡地越过了大歇岭，于是向北下岭渡溪，在秦村买酒喝。
English: He walked eastward into the heavy mountain dock, crossed the water ridge, walked down the ridge to the northeast in the dock, then climbed the mountain, turned the hillside and crossed the Dajie Ridge, and then went north to the lower ridge to the creek to buy wine and drink in Qin Village.

古文：又北向渡溪而逾都田之岭，又从岭东随穴中出水北行而抵黄村庵，则惺一瀹茶煮笋以待。
现代文：又向北渡溪后越过都田村的山岭，又从岭东顺着洞穴中流出的水往北走到黄村庵，就见惺一烹茶煮笋等待着了。
English: After crossing the mountain ridge of the village of Du Tian to the north of the Du Du Creek, and from the east of the ridge along the water flowing out of the cave to the north of Huangcun's hermitage, I saw a bowl of boiled tea waiting for me.

古文：而瀹时又捉入凉水煨之，既滚又杂以他味焉。
现代文：我因为脚受了伤，暂且休息不走了。于是取出随行脚夫在多灵山顶采摘的芽茶，洗净锅焙茶叶，拿来当我家乡阳羡茶中的芽茶，香味色泽没有不同之处。
English: Because of my foot injury, I couldn't rest for a while. So I took out the bud tea picked by the porter at the top of Dorin Mountain, washed the pot and roasted the tea leaves, and used the bud tea from Yang Zhen tea in my hometown. The fragrance and color were no different.

古文：初二日别惺一，惺一送余以笋脯。
现代文：初二日辞别惺一，惺一拿笋干送给我。
English: On the first two days of the new year, I said goodbye to him, and he gave me a pair of scissors.

古文：以丝曝干者。乃北行渡溪桥，又北，乃东转入山峡，逾平脊，东过浑水塘上岭，东望鹿桥而北行。
现代文：于是往北行过了溪上的桥，又向北，就向东转入山峡，越过平缓的山脊，向东越过浑水塘上的山岭，东面望见鹿桥后往北行。
English: So I went north over the bridge over the stream, then north again, then east into the gorge, over the gentle ridge, east over the ridge above the muddy pond, east of Deer Bridge and then north.

古文：已而北下，渡大溪之水，其水昔高涌于胸，今乃不及脐矣。
现代文：不久向北下行，渡过大溪的溪水，溪水前几天高高涌到胸口，今天却不到肚脐了。
English: Soon we were heading north, crossing the waters of a large stream. A few days before, the water had swelled up to my chest, but today it was less than my navel.

古文：但北上而崖土淖滑，无可濯处，跣而行。
现代文：但是上到北岸山崖上泥淖滑溜，无处可以洗脚，赤着脚走。
English: However, it is muddy and slippery on the cliffs on the north shore, and there is nowhere to wash your feet, so you have to walk barefoot.

古文：逾坡而下，抵下阱村旧址，有淳涝焉，乃濯足纳履。
现代文：越过山坡下走，抵达下阱村的旧址，有个水塘，这才洗了脚穿上鞋。
English: Walking down the hillside, we arrived at the old site of the lower village, there was a pond, so we washed our feet and put on our shoes.

古文：又东北逾一涧，乃东上高狮山之南阪。
现代文：又往东北越过一条山涧，于是向东走上高四山的南坡。
English: I crossed a ridge to the northeast, and walked eastward up the southern slope of the Gaoshan Mountains.

古文：逾脊又东，升踄陂陀，路两旁皆坠井悬窞，或深或浅，旨土山，石孔累累不尽。
现代文：越过山脊又向东，升登在山坡间，路两旁都是悬坠的陷井，或深或浅，都是土山，石孔层出不穷。
English: Over the ridge and to the east, ascending between the slopes, both sides of the road are overhanging traps, either deep or shallow, are earthen hills, stone holes emerge endlessly.

古文：既而少憩上冈上，其南即截路村。
现代文：随后在土冈上稍作休息，冈南就是截路村。
English: Afterwards, we took a short break on the earth mound. The south of the mound is the village where the road was cut.

古文：又东逾一冈下坞，有塘一方，潴水甚清，西北从石峰下破涧而去，丛木翳之，甚遥。
现代文：又往东越过一座山冈下到坞中，有一个水塘，积水非常清，往西北从石峰下冲破山涧流去，丛林遮蔽着溪水，十分遥远。
English: Further to the east, down a hill to the dock, there is a pond, the stagnant water is very clear, to the northwest from the stone peak to break through the mountain stream, the jungle covers the stream, very far away.

古文：又东逾冈，水从路侧西流。
现代文：又向东翻越山冈，水从路旁向西流。
English: It also rolled over the mountains and hills to the east, and the water flowed from the roadside to the west.

古文：又东则巨塘汇陂间，乃北坠而下，分为两流，一北入山穴，一东循山嘴，环于黄窑村前，诸塍悉取润焉。
现代文：又向东就见巨大的水塘汇积在山坡间，从这里向北下泻，分为两条水流，一条向北流入山中的洞穴，一条向东沿着山嘴，环绕在黄窑村前，众多的田地全都取此水灌溉。
English: Further to the east, huge pools of water can be seen pooling between the mountain slopes. From here, it flows northwards and divides into two streams. One flows north into a cave in the mountain, and the other runs eastwards along the mountain's mouth, encircling the village of Huangyao. Many fields are irrigated with this water.

古文：乃饭于村栏，询观岩之路。
现代文：于是在村中竹楼上吃了饭，打听去观岩的路。
English: So I ate my meal in the middle of the village, on the bamboo floor, and asked the way to the rock.

古文：其人曰： 即在山后，但路须东径草峡，北出峡口，西转循山之阴，而后可得。 
现代文：村里人说： 就在山后，只是路必须向东经过草峡，往北走出峡口，向西转沿山北走，然后才能走到。 
English: The villagers said: It is just behind the mountain, but the road must go east through the grass canyon, north out of the canyon, west along the north of the mountain, and then walk.

古文：从之，遂东。
现代文：听从他的话，于是向东走。
English: Heeding his words, I headed east.

古文：甫出村，北望崖壁之半，有洞高穹，其门东向，甚峻迥，不可攀。
现代文：刚出村，望见北边崖壁半中腰，有个洞高高隆起，洞口向东，非常高峻深远，不可攀登。
English: Just outside the village, you can see the cliff wall halfway up the north side. There is a high-rise cave, the entrance to the cave is to the east, very high and far away, and it is not possible to climb.

古文：草峡之南，有双峰中悬，又有土山倚其下，是为里诸村，聚落最盛。
现代文：草峡的南面，有两座山峰悬在中央，又有土山靠在峰下，这里是里诸村，村落最繁荣。
English: On the south side of the grass canyon, there are two peaks hanging in the center, and there are earthen hills under the peaks. Here are the villages, and the villages are the most prosperous.

古文：共二里半，北人草峡。
现代文：共走二里半，向北进入草峡。
English: A total of two and a half miles, north into the grass canyon.

古文：又东北行一里，逾石脊而过，有岐西行，遂从之，即黄窑诸峰石山之阴也。
现代文：又往东北行一里，翻过石山脊，有岔路向西走，就沿它走，就是黄窑村诸峰石山的北面。
English: Another mile to the northeast, turn over the stone ridge, there is a narrow road to the west, follow it, it is the north side of Zhufeng Stone Mountain in Huangyao Village.

古文：其山排列西北去，北尽于孤山，所谓观岩者正在其中。
现代文：这里的山往西北排列而去，北面在孤山到了尽头，所谓的观岩正在此山之中。
English: The mountains here are aligned to the northwest, and the north side ends in a lonely mountain. The so-called scenic rock is in the middle of this mountain.

古文：乃循山东麓行，又三里折而西南，半里而抵其下，则危崖上覆，下有深潭，水潴其中，不知所出，惟从岩北隅泻入巨门，其中窅黑，水声甚沸。
现代文：于是沿着山的东麓走，又行三里折向西南，半里后抵达岩洞下，就见上面危崖下覆，下边有深潭，水积在潭中，不知从那里流出，唯有从岩洞北隅泻入巨大的洞口，洞中深黑，水声极为沸腾。
English: So I walked along the eastern foot of the mountain, and after another three miles I turned to the southwest. Half a mile later, when I reached the cave, I saw the dangerous cliff overhanging above, and a deep pool below. Water accumulated in the pool, and I don't know where it flowed from, except that it poured into a huge hole from the northern corner of the cave. It was dark in the hole, and the sound of the water was extremely boiling.

古文：盖水从山南来，泛底而出，潴为此潭，当即黄窑之西分流而捣入山穴者，又透底而溢于此也。
现代文：大概水从山南流来，从山底部漫流出来，积为这个水潭，应当就是黄窑村西边巨大的水塘中分流泻入山间洞穴的水流，又透过山底而后在此溢出。
English: The water probably comes from the south of the mountain and flows from the bottom of the mountain, accumulating into this pool. It should be the water that flows into the mountain cave from the huge pond on the west side of Huangyao Village, and then overflows through the bottom of the mountain.

古文：乃一出而复北入于穴，水与山和，其妙如此。
现代文：竟然一流出便又向北流入洞穴中，水与山的和谐，再美妙不过了。
English: What a first-class outflow and northward flow into the cave. The harmony of water and mountain could not be more wonderful.

古文：覆岩之上，垂柱悬旌，纷纭历乱，后壁石脚倒插潭中。
现代文：下覆的岩洞上方，石柱下垂如族旗悬挂，纷纭杂乱，后面的石壁石脚倒插入潭中。
English: Above the overhanging rock cave, the stone pillars are hanging down like a national flag, cluttered and chaotic, and the stone wall at the back is inserted upside down into the pool.

古文：其上旋龛回窦，亦嵌漏不一，潭东南亦有一岩北向，内不甚深；潭东北崖间有神祠焉，中有碑，按之，始知为小观岩。
现代文：它上边石完孔洞回旋，也是深嵌透空，不一而足，全都隔着深潭不能到达。水潭东南方也有一个岩洞向北，里边不怎么深；水潭东北的山崖上有座神庙，庙中有碑，依照碑文，这才知道是小观岩。
English: There is also a rock cave to the north in the southeast of the pool, the inside is not very deep; there is a temple on the cliff in the northeast of the pool, there is a monument in the temple, according to the inscription, this is known as Xiaoguan Rock.

古文：神祠之后，即潭中之水捣入石门处，其门南向，甚高，望其中崆峒，莫须浮筏以进，不能竟入也。
现代文：神庙之后，就是潭中的水捣入石洞之处，这个洞口向南，非常高，望洞中空荡荡的，不用木筏漂浮，是不能径直进去的。
English: After the temple is where the water in the pool crashes into a stone cave. The mouth of this cave faces south and is very high. The lookout cave is empty. You don't need a raft to float in it, so you can't go straight in.

古文：久之，仍从神祠东北出平畴，见有北趋路，从之，意可得大道入郡。
现代文：很久，仍从神庙向东北出到平旷的原野中，见有通向北边的路，沿着它走，意料可以走上进府城的大道。
English: For a long time, I still went out of the temple to the northeast into the open plain. I saw a road leading to the north, and walking along it, I expected to be able to walk onto the main road into the capital.

