古文：孙秀既恨石崇不与绿珠，又憾潘岳昔遇之不以礼。
现代文：孙秀既恨石崇不把绿珠送给他，又不满潘岳从前对自己不礼貌。
English: Sun Xiu not only hated Shi Chong for not giving him the green bead, but was also dissatisfied with Pan Yue for not being polite to him in the past.

古文：后秀为中书令，岳省内见之，因唤曰： 孙令，忆畴昔周旋不？ 
现代文：后来孙秀任中书令，潘岳在中书省的官府里见到他，于是叫住他问： 孙令，还记得我们昔日的来往吗？
English: Later, when Sun Xiu was appointed as the book commissioner of China, Pan Yue saw him in the government office of the book department of China, so he stopped him and asked: "Sun Xiu, do you remember our past interactions?

古文：秀曰： 中心藏之，何日忘之？ 
现代文：孙秀说： 我心中深深记着这件事，哪一日能忘记！ 
English: Sun Xiu said: I remember this deeply in my heart, what a day to forget!

古文：岳于是始知必不免。
现代文：潘岳于是知道自己免不了祸难。
English: Pan Yue then knew that he could not avoid disaster.

古文：后收石崇、欧阳坚石，同日收岳。
现代文：后来孙秀逮捕石崇、欧阳坚石，同一天逮捕潘岳。
English: Later, Sun Xiu arrested Shi Chong and Ouyang Jianshi, and arrested Pan Yue on the same day.

古文：石先送市，亦不相知。
现代文：石崇首先押赴刑场，也不了解潘岳的情况。
English: Shi Chong was the first to go to the execution site, and he did not know the situation of Pan Yue.

古文：潘后至，石谓潘曰： 安仁，卿亦复尔邪？ 
现代文：潘岳后来也押到了，石崇对他说： 安仁，你也这样吗？ 
English: Later, Pan Yue also arrived, and Shi Chong told him: Anren, are you also like this?

古文：潘曰： 可谓 白首同所归 。 
现代文：潘岳说； 可以说是 白首同所归 。 
English: Pan Yue said, "It can be said that we have returned with our heads held high."

古文：潘金谷集诗云： 投分寄石友，白首同所归。 
现代文：潘岳在《金谷集》中的诗写道： 投分寄石友，白首同所归。 
English: Pan Yue wrote a poem in the "Jin Gu Collection": If you cast a stone at a friend, you will return with a white head.

古文：乃成其谶。
现代文：这竟成了他的谶语。
English: It became his catchphrase.

古文：刘玙兄弟少时为王恺所憎，尝召二人宿，欲默除之。
现代文：刘玙兄弟年轻时是王恺所憎恨的人，有一次王恺请他们兄弟两人留宿，想要不声不响地害死他们。
English: When they were young, the Liu Hui brothers were hated by Wang Hui. On one occasion, Wang Hui invited the two brothers to stay with him and wanted to kill them quietly.

古文：令作阬，阬毕，垂加害矣。
现代文：就命手下挖坑，坑挖好了，就动手将他们杀害。
English: He ordered his men to dig a pit, and once the pit was dug, he proceeded to kill them.

古文：石崇素与玙、琨善，闻就恺宿，知当有变，便夜往诣恺，问二刘所在？
现代文：石崇向来和刘玙、刘琨很要好，听说两人到王恺家过夜，知道会发生意外，就连夜去拜访王恺，问刘玙刘琨兄弟在什么地方。
English: Shi Chong had always been very friendly with Liu Ye and Liu Ye. He had heard that the two of them had spent the night at Wang Ye's house. Knowing that an accident would happen, he went to visit Wang Ye overnight and asked Liu Ye where Liu Ye's brothers were.

古文：恺卒迫不得讳，答云： 在后斋中眠。 
现代文：王恺匆忙间没法隐瞒，只得回答说： 在后面房间里睡觉。 
English: Wang Yao was in a hurry and couldn't hide it, so he had to answer: "Sleeping in the back room."

古文：石便径入，自牵出，同车而去。语曰： 少年，何以轻就人宿？ 
现代文：石崇就径直进去，亲自把他们拉出，一同坐车走了，并且对他们说： 年轻人为什么这么轻率地到别人家过夜！ 
English: Shi Chong went straight in, pulled them out himself, drove away with them, and said to them: Why are young people so reckless to spend the night at someone else's house!

古文：王大将军执司马愍王，夜遣世将载王于车而杀之，当时不尽知也。
现代文：大将军王敦拘捕了司马丞，在夜里派王世将把他弄到车中杀了，当时知道这件事的人很少。
English: General Wang Dun arrested Sima Rong and sent Wang Shijie to kill him in a car in the middle of the night. Few people knew about this at the time.

古文：虽愍王家，亦未之皆悉，而无忌兄弟皆稚。
现代文：即使是司马丞家中的人也并不都清楚，而司马丞的儿子司马无忌兄弟年纪都很小。
English: Even people in Sima Joe's family don't know everything, and Sima Joe's son, Sima Muyi, and his brothers are all very young.

古文：王胡之与无忌，长甚相昵，胡之尝共游，无忌入告母，请为馔。
现代文：王胡之和司马无忌，长大后感情很好。有一次两人一起出去玩，无忌回家禀告母亲，想请母亲准备些饭食。
English: Wang Huzhi and Sima Rong had a good relationship when they grew up. Once, when the two of them went out to play together, Wang Huzhi went home to tell his mother and wanted to ask his mother to prepare some food.

古文：母流涕曰： 王敦昔肆酷汝父，假手世将。
现代文：母亲哭着说： 王敦当年极端残暴地杀害了你父亲，就是假借王世将的手干的。
English: My mother cried and said, "Wang Dun killed your father with extreme brutality that year, and he did it by pretending to be Wang Shijie."

古文：吾所以积年不告汝者，王氏门强，汝兄弟尚幼，不欲使此声著，盖以避祸耳！ 
现代文：我这么多年没告诉你们，是因为王家人势力强盛，你们哥俩又还小。我不想把这事张扬开来，是为躲避祸患罢了。 
English: I haven't told you for so many years because the Wang family is powerful and you two brothers are still young. I don't want to make this public, it's just to avoid disaster.

古文：无忌惊号，抽刃而出，胡之去已远。
现代文：无忌听了非常惊讶，号啕大哭，抽出刀就往外冲，但王胡之已经走得很远了。
English: Hearing this, she was very surprised and burst into tears. She pulled out her knife and rushed outside, but Wang Huzhi had already gone too far.

古文：应镇南作荆州，王脩载、谯王子无忌同至新亭与别，坐上宾甚多，不悟二人俱到。
现代文：镇南大将军应詹出任荆州刺史时，王脩载和谯王司马丞的儿子无忌同时到新亭给他饯别。座上宾客很多，没想到这两人都来了。
English: When General Zhenan Yingzhan was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou, Wang Bingzai and the son of the governor Wang Simasiao went to Xinting to bid him farewell at the same time. There were many guests at the table, and I did not expect these two people to come.

古文：有一客道： 谯王丞致祸，非大将军意，正是平南所为耳。 
现代文：有一位客人说： 谯王丞遇难，不是大将军的意思，只是平南将军干的罢了。 
English: One guest said: "The death of Shao Wangcheng was not the fault of the great general, but of General Pingnan."

古文：无忌因夺直兵参军刀，便欲斫。脩载走投水，舸上人接取，得免。
现代文：无忌于是夺了直兵参军的刀，就要杀王脩载；脩载逃出去，被迫投河，船上的人救了他，才得以免死。
English: There was no doubt that he then took the sword of the soldier who had joined the army and was going to kill Wang Xizhe. Xizhe ran away and was forced to jump into the river. The people on the boat saved him and he was able to avoid death.

古文：王右军素轻蓝田，蓝田晚节论誉转重，右军尤不平。
现代文：右军将军王羲之一向轻视蓝田侯王述，王述的晚年得到的评价和声誉更高更大，王羲之尤其不满。
English: Wang Xizhi, one of the right-wing generals, despised the prince of Lantian, Wang Su, whose evaluation and reputation were higher and greater in his later years. Wang Xizhi was particularly dissatisfied.

古文：蓝田于会稽丁艰，停山阴治丧。
现代文：王述在任会稽内史时遭母丧，留在山阴县办理丧事。
English: Wang Shu lost his mother when he was in charge of the internal history of the audit committee, and stayed in Shanyin County to handle the funeral.

古文：右军代为郡，屡言出吊，连日不果。
现代文：王羲之接替他出任会稽内史，他屡次说要前去吊唁，可是一连多天也没有去成。
English: Wang Xizhi succeeded him as the auditor of the internal history of the association. He repeatedly said that he would go to offer condolences, but he did not go for many days.

古文：后诣门自通，主人既哭，不前而去，以陵辱之。
现代文：后来他亲自登门通知前来吊唁，等到主人哭起来后，他又不上灵堂就走了，以此来侮辱王述。
English: Later, he personally came to the door to offer condolences, and when the owner began to cry, he did not go to the chapel and left, thus insulting Wang Shu.

古文：于是彼此嫌隙大构。
现代文：于是双方深结仇怨。
English: As a result, the two sides developed a deep grudge.

古文：后蓝田临扬州，右军尚在郡，初得消息，遣一参军诣朝廷，求分会稽为越州，使人受意失旨，大为时贤所笑。
现代文：后来王述出任扬州刺史，王羲之仍然主管会稽郡，刚得到任命王述的音讯，就派一名参军上朝廷，请求把会稽从扬州划分出来，成立越州。使者接受任务时领会错了意图，结果深为当代名流所讥笑。
English: Later, Wang Su served as Yangzhou chief historian, while Wang Xizhi was still in charge of the county auditor. As soon as Wang Su was appointed, he sent a member of the military to the imperial court to request that the auditor be separated from Yangzhou and established in Yuezhou. When the envoy accepted the task, he understood the wrong intention, and the result was deeply ridiculed by contemporary celebrities.

古文：蓝田密令从事数其郡诸不法，以先有隙，令自为其宜。
现代文：王述也暗中派从事去一一检察会稽郡各种不法行为，因为两人先前有嫌隙， 王述就叫王羲之自己找个合适的办法来解决。
English: Wang Shu also secretly sent him to the procuratorate to engage in various illegal acts. Because the two had a rift before, Wang Shu asked Wang Xizhi to find a suitable way to solve it.

古文：右军遂称疾去郡，以愤慨致终。
现代文：王羲之于是告病离任，因愤慨而送了命。
English: Wang Xizhi then resigned due to illness and died of indignation.

古文：王东亭与孝伯语，后渐异。
现代文：东亭侯王珣和王恭交谈，后来意见渐渐有了分歧。
English: Dongting marquis Wang Yao and Wang Qiong had a conversation, and then their opinions gradually diverged.

古文：孝伯谓东亭曰： 卿便不可复测！ 
现代文：王恭对王珣说： 你怎么也不可捉摸了！ 
English: Wang Qiong said to Wang Yao: You are so elusive!

古文：答曰： 王陵廷争，陈平从默，但问克终云何耳。 
现代文：王珣回答说： 当年吕后要封兄弟们为王，王陵在朝廷上据理力争，陈平一言不发。只问最后事情结果如何啊。 
English: Wang Yao replied, "Back then, Queen Lyu wanted to crown her brothers as kings. Wang Ling argued with Chen Ping in court, but Chen Ping didn't say a word. I just wonder what the final outcome will be."

古文：王孝伯死，县其首于大桁。
现代文：王孝伯死后，他的头被挂在朱雀桥上示众。
English: After the death of Wang Xiao Bo, his head was displayed on the Suzaku Bridge.

古文：司马太傅命驾出至标所，孰视首，曰： 卿何故趣，欲杀我邪？ 
现代文：太傅司马道子坐车到示众的地方，仔细地看着王孝伯的头，说道： 你为什么要急着杀我呢？ 
English: Daifu Sima Daozi drove to the demonstration site, carefully looked at Wang Xiaobing's head, and said, "Why are you in a hurry to kill me?

古文：桓玄将篡，桓脩欲因玄在脩母许袭之。
现代文：桓玄将要篡夺帝位，桓修想趁桓玄在桓修母亲那里时袭击他。
English: Kuan Xuan is about to usurp the throne, and Kuan Xiu wants to attack him while Kuan Xuan is at his mother's.

古文：庾夫人云： 汝等近，过我余年，我养之，不忍见行此事。 
现代文：桓修的母亲庾夫人说： 你们是近亲，等过了我得晚年再说吧，我养大了他，不忍心看到你做这种事。 
English: Mrs. Ru, Huan Xiu's mother, said, "You are close relatives. Let's wait until my old age. I raised him. I can't bear to see you doing such a thing."

