古文：吴王夫差既杀申胥，不稔于岁，乃起师北征。
现代文：吴王夫差杀了伍子胥以后，不等庄稼成熟，便出兵北征。
English: After Wu Wangfuxia killed Wu Zixuan, he did not wait for the crops to mature before he sent troops to the north.

古文：阙为深沟，通于商、鲁之间，北属之沂，西属之济，以会晋公午于黄池。
现代文：他下令开掘沟渠，直通宋国和鲁国的地界，北面连接沂水，西面连接济水，然后约会晋定公在黄池这个地方举行盟会。
English: He ordered the excavation of a ditch, straight through the border of Song and Lu, connecting Surabaya to the north and Jishui to the west, and then arranged for Jin Ding Gong to hold a league in Huangchi.

古文：于是越王勾践乃命范蠡、舌庸，率师沿海溯淮以绝吴路。
现代文：与此同时，越王勾践则命令范蠡和舌庸，率兵沿海岸上行至淮河，以断绝吴军的归路。
English: At the same time, the king of Yue ordered Fan Xuan and Tongyong to march up the coast to the Huai River to cut off the return route of the Wu army.

古文：败王子友于姑熊夷。
现代文：越军在姑熊夷打败了王子友。
English: The Vietnamese army defeated Oji no Tomo in Tsukuba.

古文：越王勾践乃率中军溯江以袭吴，入其郛，焚其姑苏，徙其大舟。
现代文：越王勾践率中军逆江而上袭击吴国，攻陷国都的外城，烧毁姑苏台，运走吴国的大船。
English: Yue Wang Gochun led the Chinese army upstream to attack Wu, captured the outer city of the capital, burned Gusudai, and carried away the big ships of Wu.

古文：吴、晋争长未成，边遽乃至，以越乱告。
现代文：吴晋两国争当盟主的事还未见分晓，吴国边境的驿车就到了，报告越国入侵的消息。
English: The matter of the rivalry between the two states of Wu and Jin for the leadership of the alliance had not yet been resolved, when the wagon train arrived at the border of the State of Wu to report the news of the invasion by Vietnam.

古文：吴王惧，乃合大夫而谋曰： 越为不道，背其齐盟。
现代文：吴王很害怕，便召集大夫商讨对策，说： 越国不守信用，背弃盟约。
English: King Wu was very afraid, so he called together doctors to discuss countermeasures and said: Vietnam is not keeping its word and has reneged on the treaty.

古文：今吾道路修远，无会而归，与会而先晋，孰利？ 
现代文：如今我们离本国路途遥远，或者不去参加盟会就赶快归国，或者参加盟会，而让晋国当盟主，哪个有利？ 
English: Now we are far away from our home country, or if we do not participate in the league, we will return home as soon as possible, or if we participate in the league, and let Jin country be the league leader, which is advantageous?

古文：王孙雒曰： 夫危事不齿，洛敢先对。
现代文：王孙雒说： 面对紧急的事情，不必讲究年龄长幼，我冒昧地先来回答。
English: Wang Sunqi said: In the face of urgent matters, there is no need to pay attention to the age of the eldest and youngest, I dare to answer first.

古文：二者莫利。
现代文：我认为这两种方案都没有利。
English: I don't think either of those options are good.

古文：无会而归，越闻章矣，民惧而走，远无正就。
现代文：如果不参加盟会就回国，越国的声望就大了，民众就会因害怕而逃亡，远走他方而没有立足之处。
English: If they return home without joining the alliance, the prestige of Vietnam will increase, and the people will flee in fear and go far away without a foothold.

古文：齐、宋、徐、夷曰： 吴既败矣！ 
现代文：齐、宋、徐、夷这些国家也会说： 吴国已经失败了！ 
English: The countries of Qi, Song, Xu and Yi will also say, "Wu has failed!"

古文：将夹沟而席我，我无生命矣。
现代文：将从沟渠两侧对我们发动攻击，我们就没命了。
English: They will attack us from both sides of the ditch, and we will die.

古文：会而先晋，晋既执诸侯之柄以临我，将成其志以见天子。
现代文：如果参加盟会但让晋国当盟主，晋国掌握了诸侯之长的权柄后就会居高临下地控制我们，踌躇满志地带领我们一起朝见周天子。
English: If we participate in the alliance but let Jin as the alliance leader, Jin will control us in a high-handed manner after seizing the power of the head of the princes, and will lead us to see Zhou Tianzi with great ambition.

古文：吾须之不能，去之不忍。
现代文：那样的话我们既没有时间逗留，离开又感到无法容忍。
English: In that case, we would not have time to stay and it would be unbearable to leave.

古文：若越闻愈章，吾民恐叛。
现代文：如果越国的声望更大，我国的民众恐怕会背叛。
English: If Vietnam's reputation were higher, I'm afraid our people would defect.

古文：必会而先之。 
现代文：因此一定要参加盟会并且争当盟主。 
English: Therefore, you must participate in the league and compete to be the league leader.

古文：王乃步就王孙雒曰： 先之，图之将若何？ 
现代文：吴王走到王孙雒面前问： 要当盟主，得想什么办法？ 
English: King Wu walked up to Wang Sun Rong and asked, "If you want to be the leader, what should you do?"

古文：王孙雒曰： 王其无疑，吾道路悠远，必无有二命，焉可以济事。 
现代文：王孙雒回答说： 请君王不要犹豫，我们回去路途遥远，决不会有第二条出路，只有赶快决定才能成功。 
English: Wang Sun Rong replied, "Please don't hesitate, Your Majesty. We have a long way to go back. There will never be a second way out. We can only succeed if we make a quick decision."

古文：王孙雒进，顾揖诸大夫曰： 危事不可以为安，死事不可以为生，则无为贵智矣。
现代文：王孙雒前进一步，环视众大夫并作揖说： 面对危局不能转为平安，在死亡面前不能求生，那就不能称作高超的智慧了。
English: Wang Sunyan stepped forward, looked around at all the doctors and said: "If you can't turn to peace in the face of danger, and can't survive in the face of death, then you can't be called superior wisdom.

古文：民之恶死而欲富贵以长没也，与我同。
现代文：晋国的百姓怕死而希望富贵长寿，这一点和我们是相同的。
English: The people of Jin are afraid of death and want to be rich and live a long life. This is the same as us.

古文：虽然，彼近其国，有迁；我绝虑，无迁。
现代文：既然如此，晋军离本国近，有退却的余地；我们距本国遥远，没有退却的可能。
English: That being the case, the Jin army is close to the motherland and has room to retreat; we are far away from the motherland and have no possibility to retreat.

古文：彼岂能与我行此危事也哉？
现代文：晋国怎么能和我们进行危险的较量呢？
English: How could Jin fight a dangerous duel with us?

古文：事君勇谋，于此用之。
现代文：事奉君王要有勇有谋，在此时就用上了。
English: To serve the king, one must be brave and resourceful, and this is where it comes in.

古文：今夕必挑战，以广民心。
现代文：今天晚上一定要向晋国挑战，来安定人心。
English: This evening, we must challenge Jin Province to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：请王励士，以奋其朋势，劝之以高位重畜，备刑戮以辱其不励者，令各轻其死。
现代文：请君王激励士卒，振奋大家的气势，用爵位和财宝来勉励大家，同时准备刑戮来惩治那些不努力作战的人，让大家都不怕死。
English: Ask the king to inspire the soldiers, encourage everyone's momentum, encourage everyone with knighthoods and treasures, and prepare to punish those who do not fight hard, so that everyone is not afraid of death.

古文：彼将不战而先我，我既执诸侯之柄，以岁之不获也，无有诛焉，而先罢之，诸侯必说。
现代文：那样晋国将会不战而把盟主让给我们，我们掌握了诸侯之长的权柄后，以年成不好为由，不责求诸侯的贡赋，让他们先回国，诸侯们一定会高兴。
English: In that way, Jin will give up the commander to us without a fight. After we have mastered the power of the head of the lords, we will not ask for tribute from the lords on the grounds that the year is not good. Let them return to the country first. The lords will be happy.

古文：既而皆入其地，王安挺志，一日惕，一日留，以安步王志。
现代文：等到他们都回到本国以后，君王就可以安下心，一天紧走，一天慢走，安安稳稳地实现你回国的计划了。
English: After they have all returned to their home country, the king can calm down, go fast one day, go slow one day, and realize your plan to return home safely and steadily.

古文：必设以此民也，封于江、淮之间，乃能至于吴。 
现代文：一定要许诺那些出了力的士卒，让他们得到江淮一带的封地，这样我们就能安全回到吴国了。 
English: Be sure to promise those who have exerted themselves to get the fiefs around the Yangtze River and Huai River, so that we can safely return to Wuzhong.

古文：吴王许诺。
现代文：吴王夫差同意他的看法。
English: Wu Wangfusha agreed with him.

