古文：十有四年春，王正月，莒子朱卒。
现代文：十四年春季，周历正月，莒子朱去世。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, in the first month of the lunar calendar, Zhang Zizhu passed away.

古文：夏，卫孙林父自晋归于卫。
现代文：夏季，卫国孙林父从晋国回到卫国。
English: In the summer, Sun Lin's father returned to the motherland from Jin.

古文：秋，叔孙侨如如齐逆女。
现代文：秋季，叔孙侨去齐国迎接齐女。
English: In autumn, the uncles and grandchildren went to Qi Province to meet Qi Niu.

古文：郑公子喜帅师伐许。
现代文：郑国公子喜率领军队攻打许国。
English: Zheng Guo Gongzi led the army to attack Xu Province.

古文：九月，侨如以夫人妇姜氏至自齐。
现代文：九月，侨如带着夫人姜氏从齐国来到。
English: In September, Qiao Ru and his wife Jiang came from Qi Province.

古文：冬十月庚寅，卫侯臧卒。
现代文：冬季十月庚寅日，卫定公去世。
English: On the winter day of October, Wei Jingong passed away.

古文：秦伯卒。
现代文：秦伯去世。
English: Qin Bo passed away.

古文：十四年春，卫侯如晋，晋侯强见孙林父焉，定公不可。
现代文：十四年春季，卫定公去到晋国，晋厉公强请卫定公接见孙林父，卫定公不同意。
English: In the spring of the 14th year, Wei Ding Gong went to Jin Province. Jin Li Gong Qiang asked Wei Ding Gong to meet Sun Lin's father, but Wei Ding Gong did not agree.

古文：夏，卫侯既归，晋侯使郤犫送孙林父而见之。
现代文：夏季，卫定公回国以后，晋厉公派郤犫送孙林父去见他。
English: In the summer, after Wei Ding Gong returned to China, Jin Li Gong sent a messenger to take Sun Lin's father to see him.

古文：卫侯欲辞，定姜曰： 不可。
现代文：卫定公想要推辞。定姜说： 不行。
English: Wei Ding Gong wanted to resign. Ding Jiang said: No.

古文：是先君宗卿之嗣也，大国又以为请，不许，将亡。
现代文：他是先君宗卿的后代，大国又以此作为请求，如果不答应，我国将要灭亡。
English: He is a descendant of the late Emperor Zongqing, and the great powers have taken this as a request, and if they do not agree, our country will perish.

古文：虽恶之，不犹愈于亡乎？
现代文：虽然讨厌他，总比亡国强些吧？
English: Even if you hate him, it's better than losing your country, right?

古文：君其忍之！
现代文：君王还是忍耐一下吧！
English: The king should be patient!

古文：安民而宥宗卿，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：安定百姓而赦免宗卿，不也是可行的吗？ 
English: Isn't it feasible to keep the people stable and pardon the patriarch?

古文：卫侯见而复之。
现代文：卫定公接见了孙林父，并且恢复了他的职位和采邑。
English: Wei Dingong met with Sun Lin's father, and restored his position and hometown.

古文：卫侯飨苦成叔，甯惠子相。苦成叔傲。
现代文：卫定公设享礼招待苦成叔，宁惠子作陪，苦成叔表现出傲慢的样子。
English: Wei Ding publicly set up a ceremony to invite Uncle Ku Cheng, Ning Huizi accompanied him, and Uncle Ku Cheng showed a haughty look.

古文：甯子曰： 苦成家其亡乎！
现代文：宁惠子说： 苦成叔恐怕要被灭亡了吧！
English: Ning Huizi said, "I'm afraid Uncle Bitcheng is going to be destroyed!"

古文：古之为享食也，以观威仪、省祸福也。
现代文：古代举行享礼，是用来观察威仪，省察祸福的，所以《诗》说： 弯弯角杯，柔和甜酒。
English: In ancient times, the ceremony was held to observe dignity and reflect on misfortune and good fortune, so the "Poem" said: Curved angle cup, soft sweet wine.

古文：故《诗》曰： 兕觵其觩，旨酒思柔，彼交匪傲，万福来求。 
现代文：不骄不傲，聚集万福。 现在他老人家表现傲慢，是取祸之道啊！ 
English: Don't be proud, don't be arrogant, gather blessings. Now that he's an old man, he's behaving arrogantly, and that's the way to get into trouble!

古文：今夫子傲，取祸之道也。 
现代文：秋季，鲁大夫宣伯到齐国迎接齐女。
English: In autumn, Dr. Lu Xuanbo went to Qi Province to meet Qi women.

古文：秋，宣伯如齐逆女。称族，尊君命也。
现代文：《春秋》称他的族名，这是由于尊重国君的命令。
English: "Spring and Autumn" called his clan name, this is due to respect for the order of the sovereign.

古文：八月，郑子罕伐许，败焉。
现代文：八月，郑国的子罕进攻许国，战败。
English: In August, Zheng Zihan attacked Xu Guo and was defeated.

古文：戊戌，郑伯复伐许。
现代文：二十三日，郑成公再次进攻许国。
English: On the 23rd, Zheng Chenggong attacked Xu Province again.

古文：庚子，入其郛。
现代文：二十五日，进入许国的外城。
English: On the 25th, they entered the outer city of Xu Province.

古文：许人平以叔申之封。
现代文：许国人把叔申的封地交还郑国以此与郑国讲和。
English: The people of Xu Province made peace with Zheng Province by returning Uncle Shen's fief to him.

古文：九月，侨如以夫人妇姜氏至自齐。
现代文：九月，侨如带着夫人姜氏从齐国来到。
English: In September, Qiao Ru and his wife Jiang came from Qi Province.

古文：舍族，尊夫人也。
现代文：《春秋》不称族名，这是由于尊重夫人。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not call the tribe names, this is out of respect for the wife.

古文：故君子曰： 《春秋》之称：微而显，志而晦，婉而成章，尽而不汙，惩恶而劝善。
现代文：所以君子说：《春秋》的记载，言词不多而意义显明，记载史实而意义深远，婉转而顺理成章，穷尽而不歪曲，警戒邪恶而奖励善良。
English: Therefore, the gentleman said: The records of "Spring and Autumn" are not many words, but the meaning is obvious, the records are historical and far-reaching, the euphemism is logical, the exhaustion is not distorted, the evil is warned and the good is rewarded.

古文：非圣人谁能修之？ 
现代文：如果不是圣人，谁能够编写？ 
English: Who, if not a saint, could have written it?

古文：卫侯有疾，使孔成子、甯惠子立敬姒之子衎以为大子。
现代文：卫定公有病，让孔成子、宁惠子立敬姒的儿子衎作为太子。
English: Wei Dingguo is ill, so let Kong Chengzi and Ning Huizi appoint Jingyao's son Zou as crown prince.

古文：冬十月，卫定公卒。
现代文：冬季，十月，卫定公去世。
English: In the winter, in October, Wei Jingong passed away.

古文：夫人姜氏既哭而息，见大子之不哀也，不内酌饮。叹曰： 是夫也，将不唯卫国之败，其必始于未亡人！
现代文：夫人姜氏哭丧以后休息，看到太子并不悲哀，就连水也不喝，叹气说： 这个人啊，将要不仅会使卫国遭致败亡，而且必然从我这个未亡人身上开始动手。
English: Mrs. Jiang, who was resting after the mourning, saw that the prince was not sad and did not even drink water. She sighed and said, "This man will not only cause the defeat of the motherland, but will also inevitably start with me, the widow."

古文：乌呼！
现代文：唉呀！
English: Alas!

古文：天祸卫国也夫！
现代文：这是上天降祸给卫国吧！
English: This is heaven's punishment for our country!

古文：吾不获鱄也使主社稷。 
现代文：我不能得到鱄来主持国家。 
English: I can't get the gong to preside over the country.

古文：大夫闻之，无不耸惧。
现代文：大夫们听到以后，无不感到十分恐惧。
English: When the doctors heard this, they were absolutely horrified.

古文：孙文子自是不敢舍其重器于卫，尽寘诸戚，而甚善晋大夫。
现代文：孙文子从此不敢把他的宝器藏在卫国，而都放在采邑戚地，同时尽量和晋国的大夫友好。
English: From then on, Sun Wenzi did not dare to hide his treasures in the defense of the country, but put them all in the relatives of the county, while trying to be as friendly as possible with the doctors of Jin.

