古文：初三日余憩足寺中。
现代文：初三日我在寺中歇歇脚。
English: On the first three days, I rested in the temple.

古文：名瑛，庠彦生员。
现代文：府中的人在寺前举行庙会，知府这才出城烧香拜佛。
English: The people in the prefecture held a temple fair in front of the temple, and the prefectural governor went out of the city to burn incense and worship Buddha.

古文：言： 此书达陆君，冯当获罪，求缓之。
现代文：我靠在北边的廊檐下写送给陆参将的信，有一个人守候在身旁，请求观看此信，是冯指挥使的妻弟陈君仲。
English: I leaned under the north porch railing to write a letter to the General Staff. A person was waiting nearby, asking to see the letter. It was Chen Junzhong, the wife and younger brother of Commander Feng.

古文：余当作书往促。 
现代文：说： 此信送给陆君，冯某就将获罪，请暂缓寄信。
English: He said, "If you send this letter to Lu Jun, Feng Mou will be convicted. Please postpone sending the letter."

古文：并携余书去，曰： 明日当来代请。 
现代文：我将写信去催促。 一并带走了我的信，说： 明天将来代为请安。 
English: I was going to write to urge you, but you took my letter away with you, saying, "I'll send you my greetings tomorrow."

古文：已而又二人至，一曰谢还拙，一曰陈斗南。
现代文：不久又有两个人来到，一个叫谢还拙，一个叫陈斗南。
English: Soon, two more people arrived, one named Xie Baozhuang and the other named Chen Dunan.

古文：谢以贡贡生作教将乐而归；陈以廪廪生而被黜，复从事武科者也。
现代文：谢还拙以贡生的资格作教官即将愉快地返乡；陈斗南以凛生的身份被贬黝，再从事武科考试。
English: Xie Jianzhong is about to return home happily as an instructor with the qualification of a tribute student; Chen Dunan was demeaned as a tribute student and then engaged in martial arts examinations.

古文：二君见余箧中有文、项诸公手书，欲求归一录，余漫付之去。
现代文：二君见到我竹箱中有文、项诸公的亲笔信，想要回去抄录一遍，我漫不经心地交给他们去了。
English: The two princes saw that there was a letter in my bamboo box, a handwritten letter from the princes, and wanted to go back and copy it, so I carelessly handed it to them.

古文：既暮，有河池所诸生杜、曾二君来宿寺中，为余言： 谢乃腐儒，而陈即君仲之叔，俗号 水晶 ，言其外好看而内无实也。 
现代文：天黑后，有河池所的生员杜、曾二君来寺中住宿，对我说： 谢还拙是个迁腐的儒生，而陈斗南就是陈君仲的叔父，俗称为 水晶 ，是说他外表好看但肚中没有真才实学。 
English: After dark, Du and Zeng Erjun, natives of the Hechi Institute, came to stay at the temple and said to me: Xie is a rotten Confucian, and Chen Dunan is Chen Junzhong's uncle, commonly known as Crystal, which means that he is good-looking but has no real talent in his stomach.

古文：初四日余晨起欲往觅陈、谢，比出寺东而陈、谢至，余同返寺中，坐谈久之。
现代文：初四日我清晨起床后想去找陈斗南、谢还拙，等出到寺东边时陈、谢二人来到了，我同他们返回寺中，坐谈了很久。
English: On the fourth day of the first lunar month, after I got up in the morning, I wanted to find Chen Dunan and Xie Wanzhou. When I went out to the east side of the temple, Chen and Xie arrived. I returned to the temple with them and sat and talked for a long time.

古文：又求观黄石斋诗帖。
现代文：又请求观看黄石斋的诗帖。
English: He also asked to see Huang Shisai's poetry book.

古文：久之去，余随其后往拜，陈乃返诸公手书。
现代文：很久才离开，我跟随他们后面去回拜，陈斗南于是送还了诸公的亲笔信。
English: It was a long time before I left, so I followed them to pay my respects. Chen Dunan then returned Zhu Gong's personal letter.

古文：观其堂额，始知其祖名陈学夔，乃嘉靖末年进士，曾任常镇兵使者，莅吾邑，有爱女卒于任，葬西门外，为之题碑其上曰： 此兵使者陈学夔爱女之墓。
现代文：观看他堂屋上的匾额，才知道他的祖父名叫陈学夔，是嘉靖末年的进士，曾任常州府兵使者，在任我县，有爱女死在任上，葬在西门外，为她在墓碑上题词说： 这是兵使者陈学夔爱女之墓。
English: Looking at the plaque on the roof of his hall, I realized that his grandfather's name was Chen Xuecheng. He was a Jin soldier in the last years of the Jiajing Dynasty. He had served as the Changzhou prefectural military envoy and was in charge of our county. He had a beloved daughter who died in office and was buried outside the West Gate. The inscription on her tombstone said: "This is the tomb of the beloved daughter of the military envoy Chen Xuecheng."

古文：吾去之后，不知将彝而去之乎？
现代文：我离开之后，不知将把它铲平挖掉呢？
English: After I leave, I wonder if they'll shovel it out and dig it up?

古文：抑将怜而存之乎？
现代文：还是将同情她保存下去呢？
English: Or will you save your sympathy for her?

古文：是在常之人已。 过谢君之堂，谢君方留酌，而随行者觅至，请还，曰： 有陈相公移酒在寺，相候甚久。 余以谢意不可却，少留饮而后行。
现代文：这全在常州府的人了。 到谢君的堂上拜访，谢君将留我饮酒，可随行的人找来了，请求回寺，说： 有个陈相公把酒席搬到寺中，相等很久了。 我因为谢君的情意不可推却，留下稍微饮了一会后动身。
English: They were all from Changzhou. I went to visit Xie Jun at his temple, and Xie Jun was going to let me stay and drink, but someone who was accompanying him came to me and asked me to go back to the temple, saying, "A certain Chen Xianggong has moved the banquet to the temple, and I've been waiting for a long time. I couldn't refuse Xie Jun's request, so I stayed and drank for a while, and then I left.

古文：比还寺，复领陈君仲之酌。
现代文：到返回寺中时，又领受了陈君仲的酒宴。
English: When he returned to the temple, he received a wine banquet from Chen Junzhong.

古文：陈出文请正，在此中亦铮铮者。
现代文：陈君仲拿出文章请求指正，在这一带也是佼佼者。
English: Chen Junzhong took out an article to ask for correction, and is also a leader in this area.

古文：为余言，其邻有杨君者，名姿胜。亦庠生，乃独山烂土司即合江洲陈蒙烂土长官司之族，将往其地， 君可一拜之，俟之同行，不惟此路无虞，而前出黔境亦有导夫，此为最便。 
现代文：对我说起，他的邻居有个杨君，也是序生，是独山烂土司的族人，即将去他家乡， 您可去拜访他一次，等他一同上路，不仅此去一路不会出意外，而且向前到了贵州境内也有向导，这最为方便。 
English: Tell me that his neighbor has a Yang Jun, who is also an ancestor, and is a member of a unique family, and is about to go to his hometown. You can visit him once, and wait for him to go on the road together. Not only will there be no accidents along the way, but there is also a guide to Guizhou, which is the most convenient.

古文：余颔之。
现代文：我点头同意了他。
English: I nodded in agreement.

古文：初五日晨起，余往叩陈君。
现代文：初五日早晨起床，我前去叩见陈君。
English: On the morning of the fifth day of the first lunar month, I got up and went to see Chen Jun.

古文：一曰：《吾何执》一曰：《禄足以代其耕也》。既饭，以稿畀韦，而往叩于陈，陈已他出矣。
现代文：有个韦老者，由凛生将要入贡了，从前以四等被停考，现在来府城补考，知府认为他的文章不堪入目，又再三命令改写，于是强逼我为他代笔。我再三推辞，迫不得已，就为他作了两篇文章。饭后，把文稿交给姓韦的，而后去叩拜陈君，陈君已出门到别的地方了。
English: There was an old man, Wei, who was about to be paid a tribute by Rin Sheng. He had been suspended from the fourth grade in the past, and now he came to the prefectural capital for a make-up exam. The prefectural government thought that his article was not eye-catching, and repeatedly ordered him to rewrite it, so he forced me to write it for him. I repeatedly declined, and out of necessity, I wrote two articles for him. After dinner, I handed the manuscript to Wei, and then went to worship Chen Jun. Chen Jun had gone to another place.

古文：乃返宿于寺。
现代文：于是返回寺中住下。
English: So he returned to the temple to live.

古文：初六日以一书畀吴守备，得其马票。
现代文：初六日把一封信交给吴守备，得到他给的马票。
English: On the sixth day of the first month, he handed a letter to Wu Shoubei and received a horse ticket from him.

古文：韦亦为余索夫票于戚挥使。
现代文：姓韦的也替我向戚指挥使去要夫票。
English: A man surnamed Wei also sent an envoy to my relatives to ask for my husband's ticket.

古文：以为马与夫可必得，及索之，仍无应者。
现代文：以为马和脚夫必定可以得到，到去要马要夫时，仍然没有应差的。
English: He thought he could get a horse and a groom, but when he went to ask for a horse and a groom, there was still no one.

古文：是日斋戒而占，惟思恩可行，而南丹不吉。
现代文：这天斋戒后占卜，只有思恩府可以走，而走南丹州不吉。
English: According to the divination after fasting on this day, only Shine Prefecture can go, and it is not good luck to go to Nantan Prefecture.

古文：其杨生之同行，亦似虚而不实。
现代文：那个姓杨的儒生同行的事，也似乎虚而不实。
English: The story of the Confucian scholar with the surname Yang also seems to be false.

古文：初七日索夫马仍不得。
现代文：初七日去要脚夫马匹仍然没得到。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, they still couldn't get the horses for the porters.

古文：杨姿胜来顾，乃阿迷州杨绳武之族也应为弥勒州。言其往黔尚迟，而此中站骑甚难，须买马可行。
现代文：杨姿胜来看望，是阿迷州杨绳武的族人。说起他去贵州还要推迟，而这里释站的马匹非常难要，必须买马才能上路。
English: Yang Zisheng came to visit. He is a member of the Yangzhewu tribe in Amanzhou. He said that he would have to delay going to Guizhou, and it is very difficult to get horses to leave the station here. You have to buy a horse to get on the road.

古文：余占之，颇吉。
现代文：我以此事占卜，十分吉利。
English: I have divined this matter, and it is very fortunate.

古文：已而冯使以一金来赆，侑以蔬酒，受之。
现代文：不久冯指挥使拿来一两黄金赠送，送酒莱来劝餐，接受了这些礼物。
English: Not long after, Commander Feng sent a gift of one or two pieces of gold to Zhuang, and sent wine to Lai to persuade him to have a meal. He accepted these gifts.

古文：既午，大雨倾盆，欲往杨处看骑，不果行。
现代文：中午后，大雨倾盆，想去杨姿胜处看看坐骑，没走成。
English: After noon, heavy rain poured down. I wanted to go to the Yangzi scenic spot to see the mount, but I didn't make it.

古文：下午雨止，余作一柬托陈君仲代观杨骑。
现代文：下午雨停后，我写了一个柬帖托付陈君仲代我观看杨姿胜的马。
English: After the rain stopped in the afternoon, I wrote a postcard to entrust Chen Junzhong to watch Yang Zisheng's horse on my behalf.

古文：是日为谷雨，占验者以甘霖为上兆，不识吾乡亦有之否也？
现代文：这天是谷雨，占卜的人把甘霖作为上好的征兆，不知我家乡有没有这个风俗？
English: It was a rainy day, so the fortunetellers took the rain as a good omen. I don't know if my hometown has this custom.

古文：初九日零雨浓云，犹未全霁。
现代文：初九日下着零星雨，天有浓云，还未全部晴开。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, it rained sporadically, the sky was overcast, and it was not completely clear.

古文：营中以折马钱至，不及雇骑者十之二。
现代文：军营中把马匹折成钱送来，数额不到雇马的十分之二。
English: The horses were sent to the camp in the form of money, which was less than two-tenths of the amount needed to hire a horse.

古文：此间人之刁顽，实粤西所独见也。
现代文：这里的人的刁顽，实在是粤西所仅见的。
English: The resilience of the people here is something that is only seen in western Guangdong.

古文：欲行，陈君仲未至，姑待之。
现代文：想要上路，陈君仲未来，暂且等一等他。
English: If Chen Junzhong wants to go on the road in the future, let him wait for a while.

古文：抵午不至，竟不成行。
现代文：到中午还未到，终于不能成行。
English: By midday, it was too late to continue.

古文：下午，自往其家，复他出。
现代文：下午，亲自去他家，又是出门他往。
English: In the afternoon, I went to his house in person, and he went out again.

古文：余作书其案头作别，遂返寓，决为明日步行计。
现代文：我写了封信放在他的案头告别，就返回寓所，决定为明天步行做准备。
English: I wrote a letter and left it on his desk to say goodbye. I returned to my apartment and decided to prepare for tomorrow's walk.

古文：自二月十七日至庆远，三月初十起程，共二十三日。
现代文：从二月十七日到庆远府，三月初十上路，共二十三天。
English: From the 17th of February to Qingyuan Prefecture, he went on the road for 10 days in early March, a total of 23 days.

古文：庆远郡城在龙江之南。
现代文：庆远府城在龙江的南岸。
English: Qingyuan Fucheng is on the south bank of the Longjiang River.

古文：龙江西自怀远镇，北凭空山，透石穴而出，其源从贵州都勾而下。循北界石山而东，其流少杀于罗木渡，而两岸森石嶙峋过之。
现代文：龙江从西边的怀远镇，北边紧靠空山，穿过石穴流出来，沿北面一列石山往东流，江流稍小于罗木渡，但两岸森然嶙峋的怪石超过它。
English: The Longjiang River flows from the town of Huaiyuan in the west and the empty mountain in the north, and flows out through a stone hole. It flows eastward along a row of stone mountains in the north. The river flow is slightly smaller than that of Luo Mudu, but the strange stones on both sides of the river exceed it.

古文：江北石峰耸立，中为会仙，东为青鸟，西为宜山，会仙高耸，宜山卑小。
现代文：江北岸石峰耸立，中间是会仙山，东边是青鸟山，西边是宜山，再在西边是天门拜相山，就是冯京的祖坟。
English: On the north bank of the Yangtze River, there are towering stone peaks. In the middle is Huixian Mountain, in the east is Qingjiao Mountain, in the west is Yi Mountain, and in the west is Tianmen Baixiang Mountain, which is the ancestral tomb of Feng Jing.

古文：又西为天门拜相山，皆凭临江北，中复开坞，北趋天河者也。
现代文：都凭临在江北，中间又开为一个山坞，是往北通向天河的通道。
English: Both are located in the northern part of the river, and there is a dock in the middle, which is a passage to the north to the Tianhe.

古文：江南即城。
现代文：江南就是府城。
English: Jiangnan is the prefectural capital.

古文：城南五里有石山一支，自西而东，若屏之立，中为龙隐洞山，东为屏山，西为大号山，又西为九龙山，皆蜿蜒郡南，为来脉者也。
现代文：城南五里处有一座石山，自西往东延伸，似屏风一样竖立，中间的是龙隐洞山，东边是屏山，西边是大号山，又往西是九龙山，都蜿蜒在府城南边，成为延伸而来的山脉。
English: Five miles south of the city, there is a stone mountain, stretching from west to east, standing like a screen. In the middle is Longyin Cave Mountain, to the east is Ping Mountain, to the west is Dazhong Mountain, and to the west is Jiulong Mountain. They all meander south of the capital, becoming extended mountains.

古文：郡城之脉西南自多灵山发轫。
现代文：府城的山脉自西南方的多灵山发端。
English: The mountains of the prefectural capital rise from the southwest at the base of Mount Dorin.

古文：多灵西南为都泥，东北为龙江，二江中夹之脊也。
现代文：多灵山西南是都泥江，东北是龙江，是两江中间相夹的山脊。
English: To the southwest of Doringshan is the Du Dijiang River, and to the northeast is the Longjiang River. It is a ridge sandwiched between the two rivers.

古文：东北走六十里，分支而尽于郡城。
现代文：向东北延伸六十里，分出支脉而后在府城到了头。
English: Extending sixty miles to the northeast, it branched out into branches and then came to a head in the capital.

古文：将抵城五里外，先列为九龙山，又东北为大号山，又北结为土山，曰料高山，则郡之案也。
现代文：将到府城五里之外，先排列为九龙山，又往东北是大号山，又向北盘结为土山叫做料高山，是府城的案山。
English: Five miles outside the capital city, it is first ranked as Mount Kowloon, and to the northeast it is the Big Mountain, and to the north it is called Jiaodao Mountain, which is the mountain of the capital city.

古文：又北遂为郡城，而龙江截其北焉。
现代文：又往北便是府城，而龙江截过它的北边。
English: Further north is Fucheng, and the Longjiang River cuts across its northern edge.

古文：多灵山脉，直东走为草塘堡南之土脊，东起为石壁山，又东而直走为柳州江南岸诸山，又东南而尽于武宣之下柳江、都泥交会处。
现代文：多灵山的山脉，向正东延伸成为草塘堡南边的土山脊，在东面突起为石壁山，又往东一直延伸成为柳州府柳江南岸的群山，又向东南在武宣县的柳江下游与都泥江相会之处到了尽头。
English: The mountains of Doringshan extend due east to become the earth ridge on the south side of Caotang Fortress, protrude to the east as Shibei Mountain, and extend eastward to become the mountains on the south bank of the Liuzhou Prefecture Liujiang River, and to the southeast in the lower reaches of the Liujiang River in Wuxuan County and the meeting place of the Capital River to the end.

古文：龙江，郡之经流也。
现代文：龙江，是庆远府的主要河流。
English: The Longjiang River is the main river of Qingyuan.

古文：其东北有小江南入于龙，其源发于天河县北界；其东南则五蛩桥诸流北入于龙，其源发于多灵山东境，皆郡城下流也。
现代文：府东北部有条小江往南流入龙江，它的源头发源于天河县北境；府东南部则有五碧桥下的诸条水流向北流入龙江，它们的源头发源于多灵山东境，都是府城的下流了。
English: In the northeastern part of the prefecture, there is a small river flowing southward into the Longjiang River. Its source originates from the northern border of Tianhe County. In the southeastern part of the prefecture, there are streams of water flowing northward under the Wubi Bridge into the Longjiang River. Their source originates from the eastern border of Doringshan Mountain. They all flow downstream of the prefecture.

古文：郡城西南又有小水南自料高山北来，抵墨池西流，是为龙溪，又西则九龙潭之水自九龙山北流，与之合而西北之龙江。
现代文：府城西南又有条小河自南边的料高山往北流来，流抵墨池往西流，这就是龙溪。又往西有九龙潭的水自九龙山往北流，与龙溪会合后向西北流入龙江。
English: Southwest of the capital city, there is another small river that flows northward from the south side of the mountain and flows westward to Mochi, which is Longxi. To the west, the water of Jiulongtan flows northward from Mount Jiulong and flows northwest into the Longjiang River after meeting with Longxi.

古文：此郡城之上流也。
现代文：这是府城的上游。
English: This is the upper reaches of the prefecture.

古文：西竺寺在城西门外，殿甚宏壮，为粤西所仅见，然寥落亦甚。
现代文：西竺寺在府城西门外，殿宇非常宏伟壮丽，是粤西所仅见的，然而也十分冷落。
English: Xidi Temple is located outside the west gate of the prefectural capital. The temple is very grand and magnificent, and is only seen in western Guangdong. However, it is also very neglected.

古文：其南为香山寺，寺前平地涌石环立，为门为峡，为峰为嶂，甚微而幻，若位置于英石盘中者。
现代文：它的南面是香山寺，寺前平地上石峰涌起环绕而立，是大门是峡谷，是山峰是屏障，非常精微而奇幻，好像安置在英石盘中的样子。
English: To the south of it is Xiangshan Temple. On the plain in front of the temple, stone peaks rise up and surround it. The gate is a canyon, and the mountain is a barrier. It is very delicate and fantastic, as if it were placed in a stone dish.

古文：且小峰之上，每有巨树箕踞，其根笼络，与石为一，干盘曲下覆，极似苏阊盆累中雕扎而成者。
现代文：况且小峰之上，每每有巨树盘踞着，树根笼罩缠绕，与岩石融为一体，树干屈曲下覆，极似苏州盆景中雕凿捆扎而成的模样。
English: Moreover, on top of the small peak, there are always huge trees dotted, covered with roots, entwined, and integrated with the rock, and the tree trunks are bent under the cover, which is very similar to the sculpted and bundled appearance in the Suzhou Bonsai.

古文：寺西有池，中亦有石。
现代文：寺西有水池，池中也有岩石。
English: There is a pool on the west side of the temple, and there are rocks in the pool.

古文：池北郡守岳和声建香林书院，以存宋赵清献公故迹。
现代文：水池北边知府岳和声建有香林书院，以保存宋代赵清献公的故迹。
English: On the north side of the pond, there is the Shanglin Academy, which was built to preserve the historical site of Zhao Qing's dedication in the Song Dynasty.

古文：又西北为黄文节祠，后有卧龙石，前有龙谿ｘｉ同 溪 西流。
现代文：又往西北是黄文节祠，后边有卧龙石，前边有龙溪往西流淌。
English: To the northwest is the Huangwen Festival Shrine, with Wolong Rock behind and Longxi Stream flowing westward in front.

古文：宋署守张自明因文节遗风，捐数十万钱建祠及龙谿书院，今规模已废而碑图犹存祠中。
现代文：宋代代理知府张自明承袭黄文节的遗风，捐钱数十万修建了祠堂与龙溪书院，今天建筑物的规制已经荒废但石碑地形图还保存在祠堂中。
English: Zhang Ziming, the acting prefect of the Song Dynasty, inherited the legacy of the Huangwen Festival and donated hundreds of thousands of money to build the ancestral hall and Longxi Academy. Today, the building regulations have been abandoned, but the stone monument topography map is still preserved in the ancestral hall.

古文：其东北即西竺寺也。
现代文：它东北面就是西竺寺了。
English: To the northeast of it is Saihoji Temple.

古文：城内外俱茅舍，居民亦凋敝之甚，乃粤西府郡之最疲者。
现代文：城内外都是茅屋，居民也是非常困苦，是粤西各府城中最疲敝的地方。
English: Both inside and outside the city are thatched cottages, and the residents are also very poor. It is the most exhausted place in all prefectures in western Guangdong.

古文：或思恩亦然。闻昔盛时，江北居民濒江瞰流亦不下数千家，自戊午饥荒公元年，蛮贼交出，遂鞠为草莽，二十年未得生聚，真可哀也。
现代文：听说从前繁荣时，江北岸濒江瞰流的居民也不下数千家，自从戊午年闹饥荒以来，蛮族盗贼交替出现，终因极为穷困变为荒芜之地，二十年来未能生殖人口积聚财富，真可悲呀！
English: I heard that during the former prosperity, there were no less than thousands of residents on the north bank of the river overlooking the stream. Since the famine in the year of the Bo, barbarian thieves have appeared alternately, and finally, due to extreme poverty, it has become a desolate land. For twenty years, the reproductive population has not been able to accumulate wealth. What a pity!

古文：绕城之胜有三：早北山，则会仙也；曰南山，则龙隐也；曰西山，则九龙也。
现代文：围绕府城的胜景有三处：一是北山，就是会仙山了；一是南山，就是龙隐山了；一是西山，就是九龙山了。
English: There are three scenic spots around the prefectural capital: one is Beishan, that is, Huixian Mountain; one is Nanshan, that is, Longyin Mountain; one is Xishan, that is, Jiulong Mountain.

古文：龙隐岩在郡城南五里，石峰东隅回环北转处也。
现代文：龙隐岩在府城南边五里，是石峰东角落向北回绕转折之处。
English: Longyin Rock is located five miles south of the prefectural capital, and is the turning point of the east corner of the stone peak to the north.

古文：前有三门，俱西向；后通山背亦有三门，俱东南向。
现代文：前边有三个洞口，都是向西；后面通到山背后也有三个洞口，都朝向东南。
English: There are three openings in the front, all facing west; there are also three openings in the back, all facing southeast.

古文：其中上下层叠，纵横连络，无不通。
现代文：洞中上下层层叠叠，纵横连接，无处不贯通。
English: In the middle of the hole, the upper and lower layers are superimposed, connected vertically and horizontally, and do not penetrate anywhere.

古文：今将中道交加处，以巨窒其穴，洞遂分而为二。
现代文：如今将中间通道相交之处，用巨石堵住了洞穴，洞便分为两半。
English: Now, boulders have blocked the cave where the middle passage intersects, and the cave is divided into two halves.

古文：盖北偏一门最高敞，前有佛宇，僧净庵栖之；南偏二门在山腋间，最南者前多宋刻，张丹霞诸诗俱在焉；其中门已无路。
现代文：大体上北边的一个偏洞口最高敞，前边有佛寺，僧人净庵住在寺中；偏在南边的两个洞口在山侧，最南的洞口前边有很多宋代的碑刻，张丹霞的诸诗都在那里；那中间的洞口己无路。
English: Generally speaking, a partial cave entrance on the north side is the most spacious. There is a Buddhist temple in front of it, and the monk Jingshan lives in the temple. The two cave entrances on the south side are on the mountain side. In front of the southernmost cave entrance, there are many Song Dynasty inscriptions, and Zhang Danxia's poems are there. The middle cave entrance has no road.

古文：余先从南门入，北透暗穴，反从上层下瞰得之，而无从下。
现代文：我先从南洞口进去，向北穿过暗穴，反而从上层往下俯瞰到它，但无法下去。
English: I first entered from the south mouth of the cave and walked north through the dark hole. Instead, I looked down at it from the upper level, but I couldn't go down.

古文：仍出南门，攀搜到其处，再携炬入，遂尽其奥里。
现代文：仍走出南洞口，攀援搜寻到那里，再带着火把进洞，终于观遍了它里边的隐秘之处。
English: He still went out of the south cave entrance, climbed up to search there, then entered the cave with torches, and finally saw all the hidden places inside it.

古文：北门西向高穹，前列佛宇三楹，洞高不碍其朗。
现代文：北洞口向西高高隆起，前边排列着三间佛寺，洞高大不妨碍洞中的亮光。
English: The northern entrance of the cave rises high to the west, with three Buddhist temples lined up in front. The height of the cave does not hinder the light in the cave.

古文：内置金仙像，两旁镌刻皆近代笔，无宋人者。
现代文：洞内放着金佛像，两旁的碑刻都是近代人的笔迹，没有宋人的。
English: There is a golden Buddha statue in the cave, and the inscriptions on both sides are written by modern people, not Song people.

古文：数丈后稍隘，而偏于南畔遂暗黑矣。
现代文：数丈后稍稍变窄，而偏在南边一侧便黑暗下来了。
English: After a few meters, it narrowed slightly, and it got dark on the southern side.

古文：秉炬直东入，又数丈，有岐在南崖之上。
现代文：举着火把一直向东深入，又走数丈，有岔洞在南边石崖之上。
English: Holding torches, they kept going east and deeper, climbing several flights of stairs, until they reached a cave on the south side of the cliff.

古文：攀木梯而登，南向入穴，有一洼下陷如井，横木板于上以渡。
现代文：攀着木梯上登，向南走入洞穴中，有一个洼坑下陷如井一样，在上面横放了木板渡过去。
English: Climbed up the wooden ladder, walked south into the cave, there was a sinkhole like a well, on top of which a wooden board was placed across.

古文：又南，则西壁下有纹一缕，缘崖根而卧，鳞脊蜿蜒，与崖根不即不离，此即所称龙之 隐 者。
现代文：又往南，就见西面石壁下有一缕石纹，沿着石崖根部躺卧着，满是鳞片的石脊蜿蜿蜒蜒，与石崖根部不即不离，这就是所称的龙 隐藏 之处了。
English: Further to the south, there is a streak of stone under the stone wall on the west, lying along the base of the cliff, and a stone ridge full of scales meandering, which is inseparable from the base of the cliff. This is the so-called dragon's hiding place.

古文：外碑有记，谓其龙有昂首奋爪之形，则未之睹矣。
现代文：外边石碑上有碑记，说是这条龙有昂首举爪的形态，却没有看到。
English: There is a inscription on the outer stone tablet, saying that this dragon has the form of holding up its claws, but it was not seen.

古文：又南数丈，逾一隘，遂俯石级下坠，则下层穴道亦南北成隙。
现代文：又向南进数丈，越过一条隘道，于是俯身沿石阶下坠，就见下层洞穴的通道也是成为南北向的缝隙。
English: He also went a few meters south, crossed a narrow path, then bent down and fell down the stone steps, and saw that the passage of the lower cave was also a north-south gap.

古文：南透则与中门内穴通，不知何人以巨石窒而塞之。
现代文：往南通进去就与中间洞口内的洞穴相通，不知是何人用巨石把它堵塞住了。
English: If you go to the south passage, you will come into contact with the cave in the middle opening. I don't know who blocked it with boulders.

古文：北透过二隘，仰其上，则横板上渡处也。
现代文：向北钻过两处隘口，仰望头上，就是在上面横放木板渡过去之处了。
English: I drilled through two gaps to the north and looked up at the top, where the wooden planks had been placed horizontally.

古文：再北，窦隘而穷，遂从横板之窍攀空而上。
现代文：再向北，洞变窄而到了头，便从横放木板的石窍攀高空而上。
English: Further north, the hole narrows and reaches the head, then climbs high into the sky from the stone nook where the wooden boards are placed.

古文：盖上瞰则空悬无底，而下跻则攀跃可升也。
现代文：原来从上面下瞰是空悬无底，但从下边上登却可以攀跳着上升。
English: Originally, looking down from above, the sky was bottomless, but climbing up from below, you could climb and jump.

古文：仍北下木梯，复东向直入，又逾一隘，有岐复南去。
现代文：仍向北走下木梯，再向东径直进去，又越过一个隘口，又有岔洞往南去。
English: He still went north down the wooden ladder, then east straight in, then over a pass, and then south through a wormhole.

古文：从之，渐见前窍有光烨烨，则已透山而得后门矣。
现代文：从岔洞走，渐渐见到前方的洞中有闪闪的亮光，就己经穿透山腹走到后洞口了。
English: Walking from the cave, I gradually saw a flashing light in the front of the cave, and I had already penetrated the mountainside to the back of the cave.

古文：又数丈，抵后门。
现代文：又走数丈，抵达后洞口。
English: I walked a few more meters and arrived at the entrance of the cave.

古文：其门东南向，瞰平畴；山麓有溪一支，环而北透其腋，即五蛩之东流之分而北者；其前复有石山一支环绕为坞，成洞天焉。
现代文：洞口朝向东南，下瞰平旷的田野；山麓有一条溪流，环绕着往北穿流过山侧，就是五碧桥以东的水流往北分出的支流；山前又有一座石山环绕成山坞，成为洞天。
English: The mouth of the cave faces southeast, overlooking the flat fields below; there is a stream at the foot of the mountain, which flows around and through the mountain side to the north, which is the tributary of the water flow east of Wubi Bridge to the north; there is also a stone mountain in front of the mountain, which is surrounded by a dock and becomes the cave sky.

古文：仍北返分岐处，复东向直入，又数丈，则巨石中踞。
现代文：仍向北返回到分岔之处，再向东一直深入，又走数丈，就见巨石盘踞在中央。
English: I still returned to the north to the place where the fork is, and then to the east I went deeper and higher, and I saw the boulder coiled in the center.

古文：由其北隙侧身挨入，有眢井凭空下陷，大三四丈，深亦如之。
现代文：由巨石北边的缝隙侧身挤进去，有枯井凌空下陷，大三四丈，深处也如此。
English: Squeezed sideways through the gap on the north side of the boulder, there is a dry well sinking through the air, about three or four meters high, and the same is true for the depths.

古文：乃悬梯投炬，令一人垂索而下，两人从上援索以挚梯。
现代文：于是悬挂梯子投下火把，命令一个人垂在绳子上下去，两个人从上面拉住绳子以拴住梯子。
English: So he hung up a ladder, threw down the torches, and ordered one man to hang down on the rope, and two men to pull the rope from above to secure the ladder.

古文：其人既下，余亦随之。
现代文：那人下去后，我也跟着他下去。
English: When the man went down, I went down with him.

古文：又东南入一窍，中复有穴，下坠甚隘而深，从其西南攀崖而上，崖内复有眢井空陷，烛之不见其底。
现代文：又向东南走入了一个石窍，其中又有洞穴，陷下去非常狭窄而且很深，一只蝙蝠惊窜上去。从西南攀石崖上登，石崖内又有陷入空中的枯井，用火照不见它的底。
English: And to the south-east he entered a cleft in the rock, in which there was also a cave, very narrow and very deep, into which a bat darted, and from the south-west he climbed up a rock cliff, and within the rock cliff there was also a dry well that had fallen into the air, and fire was used to light it up so that its bottom could not be seen.

古文：循其上西南入穴，遂无可通处。
现代文：沿着它上边向西南走入洞穴，终于无处可通。
English: Walking along the top of it to the southwest into the cave, there was finally nowhere to go.

古文：乃仍下，从悬梯攀索而上，依故道直西而出前门。
现代文：于是仍然下来，从悬梯上抓住绳子上爬，照着原路一直向西出了前洞口。
English: So I still went down, grabbed a rope from the suspended ladder and climbed up, following the original path all the way to the west out of the front hole.

古文：南门在北洞南二百余步出腋间，俗谓之双门洞。
现代文：南洞口在北洞南边二百多步的山侧，俗称为双门洞。
English: The mouth of the South Cave is more than two hundred paces to the south of the North Cave on the mountain side. It is commonly known as Shuangmen Cave.

古文：洞前宋刻颇多，而方信孺所题一洞，中分路口三者，亦在焉。
现代文：洞前宋代碑刻很多，而且方信孺所题 一洞之中分为三个路口 的碑文也在其中。
English: There are many inscriptions in the Song Dynasty in front of the cave, and the inscription "One cave divided into three intersections" inscribed by Fang Xinyu is also among them.

古文：其诗载《一统志》。
现代文：他的诗收载在《一统志》中。
English: His poems were collected in "Isshoushi."

古文：其上又有张自明《丹霞绝句》曰： 玉玲珑外玉崔嵬，似与三生识面来。
现代文：它上方又有张自明的《丹霞绝句》，说： 里面玲珑外面崔鬼都似玉，好似三生有缘见面来。
English: Above it, there is Zhang Ziming's "The Last Sentence of Danxia," which says: "Inside is exquisite, but outside, all Cui ghosts look like jade, as if the three of them had a predestined meeting."

古文：自有此山才 才 字余谓作 谁 字妙。
现代文：自有了此山才有此洞，游人到了这里该舍不得离开。 
English: This cave has existed since this mountain was formed, and visitors should not be reluctant to leave when they get here.

古文：有此，游人到此合徘徊。 此《志》所未载也。
现代文：这是志书未收载的。
English: This is an unrecorded episode.

古文：其左右又有平蛮诸碑，皆宋人年月。
现代文：它的左右又有平定蛮族的诸多碑记，落款都是宋朝人的年月。
English: On its right and left, there are also many monuments of the pacified barbarians. The inscriptions are all from the Song Dynasty.

古文：由门东向入，辄横裂而分南北，若 丁 字形。
现代文：由洞口向东进去，马上南北横向分开，好像 丁 字的形状。
English: Entering the cave from the east, it immediately splits horizontally from north to south, resembling the shape of the letter "T."

古文：南向忽明透山腹，数丈而出后门，此亦后门之最南者也；北向内分两岐，直北遥望有光，若明若暗；东北悬崖而上，累碎石垣横截之。
现代文：南面忽然有亮光透入山腹，数丈后出了后洞口，这也是后洞口中最南边的洞口了；北面洞内分出两个岔洞，正北远远望去有亮光，似明似暗；东北的悬崖之上，垒起碎石墙横堵在洞中。
English: In the south, a bright light suddenly penetrated into the mountainside. After a few steps, the entrance to the back cave emerged, which is also the southernmost entrance to the back cave. In the north, two caves were found in the cave. In the far north, there was a bright light, which seemed to be dark; on the cliff in the northeast, a rubble wall was blocked in the cave.

古文：乃先从直北透腋平入，其下有深窞，循其上若践栈道焉。
现代文：于是先从正北穿过侧旁平缓走进去，它下边有深井，沿着它上面走好像踩在栈道上。
English: So I first walked in from due north across the side of the pond. There was a deep well below it, and walking along it was like stepping on a boardwalk.

古文：数丈，北抵透明处，则有门西辟在五丈之下，而此则北门之上层也。
现代文：数丈后，向北抵达透入亮光之处，就见有洞口在西边开在五丈之下，而这里是北洞口的上层。
English: After a few meters, when you reach the place where the light penetrates to the north, you will see a cave opening in the west below five meters, and this is the upper layer of the north cave opening.

古文：其前列柱生楞，飞崖下悬，与下洞若隔。
现代文：它前边排列着石柱垂着窗权，飞崖下悬，与下洞好像隔开了。
English: In front of it, there are stone pillars hanging from the right side of the window, hanging down from the cliff, seemingly separated from the lower cave.

古文：从隙间俯窥下洞，洞底平直；从履下深入，洞前明敞，恍然一堂皇焉。
现代文：从缝隙间俯身窥视下洞，洞底又平又直；从脚下深入进去，洞前明亮宽敞，恍然是一个厅堂。
English: Peering down from the gap, the bottom of the cave is flat and straight; from the foot, the front of the cave is bright and spacious, and it seems to be a hall.

古文：上层逾隘北转，昏黑不能入。
现代文：上层穿过隘口往北转，昏黑下来不能深入。
English: The upper layer passes through the pass and turns north. When it gets dark, you can't go any deeper.

古文：乃从故道南还，复出南门，索炬于北岩，复入。
现代文：只得从原路向南返回来，又出了南洞口，在北洞中找来火把，再进去。
English: I had to return from the original road to the south, go out of the south cave entrance, find a torch in the north cave, and then go in.

古文：北至分岐处，乃东北逾石垣而下，其内宽宏窈窕，上高下平；数转约二十丈而透出东门，则后门之中也。
现代文：往北走到分岔之处，就向东北翻过石墙下走，那里面宽敞宏大深远，顶上高底下平；转了数个弯约有二十丈后钻出了东洞口，就是后洞口中间的一个。
English: When you go north to the fork, turn over to the northeast and walk under the stone wall, where the surface is spacious and far-reaching, with the top high and the bottom flat; after turning several bends about twenty meters, you drill out the east cave mouth, which is the middle of the back cave mouth.

古文：其前犹垒石为门，置灶积薪，乃土人之樵而食息者。
现代文：它前边仍然垒起石块作为门，安了灶堆积着柴火，是当地打柴的人吃饭休息的地方。
English: In front of it, stones are still set up as a door, and firewood is piled up in front of the stove. It is a place for local firewood gatherers to eat and rest.

古文：崖旁有遗粟，则戊午避盗者之所藏。
现代文：山崖旁有遗下的粮食，是戊午年躲避盗贼的人贮藏的。
English: Beside the cliff, there is grain that was left behind and was stored by a man who was hiding from thieves in the year of the Goat.

古文：门内五丈，有岐东南去，转而西南，共十余丈而穷。
现代文：洞口内五丈处，有岔洞往东南去，转向西南，共走十多丈便到了头。
English: At the five-height point in the mouth of the cave, there is a wormhole to the southeast, turn to the southwest, and go a total of more than ten heights to the end.

古文：密翳，须下而复上。搜剔久之，乃得其门。
现代文：中洞口在南洞口北边数十步，与南洞口只隔着一座山崖，上下悬绝，成丛的竹林密蔽，必须下山后再上登。搜索了很久，才找到这个洞口。
English: The middle cave entrance is a few dozen steps north of the south cave entrance. It is separated from the south cave entrance only by a cliff, suspended above and below. It is densely covered with bamboo groves. You have to go down the mountain and then climb back up. It took a long time to find this cave entrance.

古文：亟觅炬索火于北岩，由门东入，其后壁之上，即南来之上层也。
现代文：急忙在北洞中找来火把取来火种，由洞口往东进去，它后面的洞壁之上，就是从南面来的上层了。
English: He hurried to get a torch and kindling in the north cave. He entered the cave from the east, and on top of the cave wall behind him was the upper layer from the south.

古文：从其下入峡，峡穷，攀而上，其南即上层北转处，向所瞰昏黑不能下者也，而援侧坂可通焉。
现代文：从它下边走入峡谷，峡谷完后，攀登而上，它南边就是上层向北转之处，先前从上俯瞰昏黑得不能下走的地方，但攀着斜坡可以通过其中。
English: From the bottom of it, walk into the canyon. After the canyon, climb up. The south side of it is where the upper level turns north. Previously, it was too dark to walk down from the top, but you could climb the slope to get through it.

古文：其东直进又五六丈，有穴穿而下，以大石窒而塞之，即北洞交通之会，而为人所中断者也。
现代文：从它东面一直前进又有五六丈，有个洞穴穿下去，用大石块堵塞在洞中，就是与北洞互通的会合而被人从中阻断的地方。
English: From the east of it, there is a cave, blocked with large stones in the cave, which is the meeting point with the North Cave and is blocked by people.

古文：大抵北洞后通之门一，南洞后通之门二，而中洞则南通南洞之上层，北通北洞之奥窟。
现代文：大体上北洞后面通着一个洞口，南洞后面通着两个洞口，而中洞却往南通到南洞的上层，往北通到北洞的深奥之中。
English: In general, there is a hole behind the north cave, two holes behind the south cave, and the middle hole goes south to the upper level of the south cave and north to the depths of the north cave.

古文：是山东西南三面无不贯彻，惟北山不通，而顶有蚺蛇洞另辟一境云。
现代文：这座山东、西、南三面无不贯通，唯有山北面不通，但山顶有个蚌蛇洞另外辟出一个境界来了。
English: This Shandong, west and south sides are all connected, only the north side of the mountain is not connected, but there is a python hole at the top of the mountain to create another boundary.

古文：蚺蛇洞在龙隐山北绝顶。
现代文：蚺蛇洞在龙隐山北面的绝顶。
English: The Anaconda Cave is at the very top of the northern side of Longyin Mountain.

古文：由山麓遂其东北一里，溪水从两山峡中破壁西北来，水石交和，漱空倒影，曳翠成声，自成一壑，幽趣窈然。
现代文：由山麓一里路走到山的东北面，溪水从西北两座山之间的峡谷中冲破石壁流来，水石交相应和，冲刷着空檬的倒影，拖着翠色流成响声，自成一个壑谷，幽静的情趣十分深远。
English: From the foot of the mountain one mile to the northeast side of the mountain, the stream breaks through the stone wall from the canyon between the two mountains in the northwest, and the water and stone are mixed accordingly, washing the reflection of the lemon, dragging the emerald flow into noise, and forming a valley. The quietness is very profound.

古文：渡水，共一里，南向攀崖而上，两崖如削瓜倒垂，中凹若刳，突石累累。
现代文：渡过溪水，共一里，向南攀登山崖上走，两侧的山崖如像剖开的瓜一样倒垂着，中间下凹好似挖空的一样，突立的岩石重重叠叠。
English: After crossing the stream, a total of one mile, walk southward up the cliff. The cliffs on both sides are hanging upside down like a cut melon, the hollow in the middle is like a hollow, and the protruding rocks are superimposed.

古文：缘之上跻，两旁佳木丛藤，蒙密摇飏，时度馨飕。
现代文：沿着山崖上登，两旁优美的树木成丛的藤葛，蒙蒙密密，飘扬摇曳，不时吹过馨香。
English: Climbing up along the cliff, on both sides of the beautiful trees are clumps of wisteria, densely covered, fluttering and swaying, from time to time blowing a sweet fragrance.

古文：上一里，则洞门穹然北向，正与郡城相对；前有土山当其中，障溪西北去，而环麓成坞者也。
现代文：上登一里，就见洞口弯然向北，正好与府城相对；前方有土山正当坞中，挡住溪流往西北流去，是环绕山麓成为山坞的地方。
English: After climbing one mile, you can see the cave mouth bending to the north, just opposite the capital city; in front there is a hill, blocking the stream from flowing to the northwest. It is a place that surrounds the foot of the mountain and becomes a dock.

古文：门之中，石柱玲珑缀叠，前浮为台，其东辟洞空朗，多外透之窦。
现代文：洞口的中央；石柱玲珑连缀堆叠，前边浮起成为平台，它东面辟开的洞空阔明朗，有很多穿透到外面的孔洞。
English: The centre of the mouth of the cave; the stone pillars are intricately interlaced and stacked, the front side floats up as a platform, the hole that opens up to the east of it is wide and clear, with many holes penetrating to the outside.

古文：东崖既穷，转窍南入。始昏黑，须炬入，数丈无复旁窍，乃出。
现代文：东边的石崖完后，转入石窍中往南进去，开始昏黑下来，须要火把进去，走数丈不再有旁洞，这才出来。
English: After the eastern cliff was finished, we turned into a rocky nook and went south. It started to get dark, so we had to take a torch to get in. After walking a few meters, there was no longer a side cave, so we had to get out.

古文：仰眺东崖之上，复有重龛。
现代文：仰面眺望东面的石崖之上，又有两重石完。
English: Looking up at the stone cliff to the east, there is another two-storey stone building.

古文：攀崖上跻，则外龛甚大，内龛又重缀其上。
现代文：攀着石崖上登，就见外边的石完很大，里边的石完又重叠连缀在它上方。
English: Climbing up the rock cliff, you can see that the outer stone is very large, and the inner stone is overlapping and interlaced above it.

古文：坐内龛，前对外龛之北，有窦一圆恰当其中，若明镜之照焉。
现代文：坐在内完中，前边对着外完的北面，有一个圆形的孔洞恰当其中，好像明镜一样照耀。
English: Sitting in the middle of the inner end, facing the north of the outer end, there is a round hole right in the middle, shining like a mirror.

古文：此洞极幽极爽，可憩可栖，惜无滴沥，奈艰于远汲何！
现代文：此洞极幽静极明朗，可以歇息可以居住，可惜没有滴水，怎么受得了到远处去汲水的艰辛呢！
English: This cave is extremely quiet and extremely clear, you can rest and live, but unfortunately there is no dripping water, how could I bear the hardships of fetching water from far away!

古文：卢僧洞有龙隐北洞之旁，去北数十步即是。
现代文：卢僧洞在龙隐岩北洞的旁边，距北洞几十步便是。
English: Lu Son Cave is located next to the North Cave of Longyin Rock, just a few dozen steps from the North Cave.

古文：其门亦西向而甚隘，今有葬穴于中者，可笑也。
现代文：洞口也是向西但非常狭窄，如今有人在洞中安葬墓穴，可笑呀！
English: The mouth of the cave also faces west, but it is very narrow. Nowadays, people are burying tombs in the cave. Ridiculous!

古文：既入，中辟一室，从东北攀隙上，又得一小室，其东北奥上悬垂盖，下耸圆笋，若人之首，即指以为卢僧者也。
现代文：进洞后，中间辟开一个石室，从东北攀缝隙上去，又找到一个小石室，它东北的深处顶上悬垂着伞盖，下边耸起一个圆形石笋，像人的头，就是指认为是卢僧的地方了。
English: After entering the cave, a stone chamber was opened in the middle. Climbing up through a crevice from the northeast, a small stone chamber was found. In the depths of the northeast, there was an umbrella cover hanging from the top, and a round stone coffin, like a human head, rose from the bottom. This is the place referred to as Lu Monk.

古文：昔旴张自明候选都门即首都，遇一僧曰： 君当得宜州，至时幸毋相忘。 
现代文：从前叮江人张自明在京城等候选官，遇到一个僧人说： 您将得到宜州，到那时希望不要相忘。 
English: Once upon a time, Zhang Ziming, a native of Jingjiang, was waiting for a candidate in Beijing when he met a monk who said, "You will get Yizhou. I hope you will not forget each other by then."

古文：问： 何以知之？ 
现代文：问： 凭什么知道此事？ 
English: Question: How do you know this?

古文：曰： 以数测之。 
现代文：答： 根据定数测知的。 
English: A: According to the constant measured.

古文：问： 居何处？ 
现代文：间： 住在何处？ 
English: Interviewer: Where do you live?

古文：曰： 南山。 
现代文：答： 南山。 
English: A: Nanshan.

古文：因以香一枝畀之，曰： 依此香觅找，即知所在。 
现代文：于是把一灶香交给他，说： 靠这住香来寻找，就知道在什么地方了。 
English: So she gave him a jar of incense and said, "Use this jar to find out where it is."

古文：后果得宜，抵南山访之，皆曰： 僧已久去，不知所向矣。 
现代文：后来果然得到了宜州，来到南山查访他，都说： 僧人已离开很久，不知到哪里去了。 
English: Later, when they finally got to Yizhou and came to Nanshan to visit him, they all said, "The monk has been gone for a long time, I don't know where he went."

古文：张乃出香爇之，其烟直入此洞，随之入，遂与卢遇。
现代文：张自明于是拿出香来点燃，香烟径直进入此洞，跟随烟气进洞，便与卢僧相遇。
English: Zhang Ziming then took out the incense and lit it. The cigarette went straight into the hole, followed the smoke into the hole, and then met the Lu monk.

古文：余以为所遇者，即此石之似僧者耳。
现代文：我以为他遇上的，就是这块形状似和尚的岩石。
English: I thought he had met this rock shaped like a monk.

古文：或又谓： 卢僧自洞出迎，饮以茶。
现代文：有人又说： 卢僧从洞中出来迎接，拿茶给他饮。
English: Someone else said, "Lu Zeng came out of the cave to meet him, and brought him tea to drink.

古文：茶中有鼻注此地用管子接到鼻子来饮茶，此处即饮茶的管子，张不能饮。侍者饮之，辄飞腾去。
现代文：茶中有鼻注，张自明不能饮下去。侍从的人饮了茶，马上飞腾而去。张自明终于愤恨而死。
English: There was a nose in the tea, and Zhang Ziming could not drink it. The waiter drank the tea and immediately flew away. Zhang Ziming finally died of resentment.

古文：张遂愤而死。忽有风吹其棺，葬九龙洞石间。
现代文：忽然有风吹走了他的棺材，葬在九龙洞的岩石间。
English: Suddenly, the wind blew his coffin away and it was buried in the rocks of Kowloon Cave.

古文：九龙潭在郡城西南五里平冈之上，有潭一泓，深窅无底，而汇水常溢，北流成溪。
现代文：他的棺材数十年前还露出一个角落，今天岩石便合拢来遮遍了棺材了。 这种说法十分怪异，不值得相信。九龙潭在府城西南五里处的平缓山冈之上，有水潭一乱，渊深无底，而积水常流不停地溢出去，向北流成溪。
English: His coffin had a corner exposed decades ago, but today the rocks have closed in to cover the coffin.This story is so bizarre that it is not worth believing.Kowloon Lake is on a gentle hill five miles southwest of the capital.There is a swamp, bottomless, and the stagnant water constantly overflows and flows north into a stream.

古文：九龙洞石山在其南，张自明祷雨有应，请封典焉。
现代文：九龙洞的石山在它南边，张自明祷告求雨有了应验，请求朝廷封赐祭典此山。
English: The stone mountain of Jiulong Cave is on its south side. Zhang Ziming's prayer for rain was answered, and he asked the imperial court to grant the festival to this mountain.

古文：石山之北，有岩北向，前有石屏其中，若树塞门。
现代文：石山的北面，有个岩洞向北，前边有岩石挡在其中，像树一样塞在洞口。
English: On the north side of the stone mountain, there is a cave to the north, with a rock in front of it, like a tree in the cave.

古文：由西隙入，其内辟为巨室，而不甚高。
现代文：由西边的缝隙进去，它里边拓开为巨大的石室，但不怎么高。
English: Entered through a gap on the west side, it opens up into a huge stone chamber, but not very high.

古文：后复有石柱一围，当洞之中，前立穹碑，曰 郡守张自明墓 。
现代文：后面又有一根石柱，位于洞的中央。前边立有一块大碑，写着 知府张自明之墓 。
English: At the back, there is another stone pillar, which is located in the center of the cave. In front, there is a large monument, which reads "Tomb of the Chifu Zhang Ziming."

古文：此嘉靖间郡守所立。
现代文：这确实是石头，怎么会是墓呢？
English: This is indeed stone, so how can it be a tomb?

古文：此实石也，何以墓为？从墓东隙秉炬南入，又南则狭隘止容一人，愈下愈卑，不容入矣。
现代文：从墓东的缝隙举着火把向南进去，再往南就狭窄得只容得下一个人，越下走越矮，不容深入了。
English: From the gap in the east of the tomb, they held torches and went south. Further south, it became so narrow that only the next person could pass through. The further they went, the shorter it became, and it was no longer possible to go deeper.

古文：仍出洞门，有一碑卧其前，中篆 紫华丹台 四大字，甚古。
现代文：仍出到洞口，有一块碑倒卧在洞前，中间用篆文刻着 紫华丹台 四个大字，十分古朴。
English: I still went out to the mouth of the cave, and there was a stone tablet lying upside down in front of the cave. In the middle, it was engraved with four large characters, "紫华丹台" (Zihua Dantai), very quaint.

古文：两旁题诗一绝，左行曰： 百尺长兮手独提，金乌玉兔两东西。 
现代文：两旁题着一首七绝诗，左边一行写着： 百尺之长啊一手独提，红日皎月两头各东西。 
English: On both sides there is an inscription of a seven-syllable poem, and on the left side there is a line that reads: "A hundred feet long ah, one hand alone, the red sun, the crescent moon, and everything at both ends."

古文：右行止存一句曰： 成言一了闲游戏， 及下句一 赤 字，以下则碑碎无可觅矣。
现代文：右边一行只存留下一句，写着： 成约一旦了结闲游戏， 以及下一句的一个 赤 字，以下的碑碎了无处可找了。
English: On the right-hand side, only one sentence remains, which reads: Once the agreement is reached, the game is over, and the next sentence is a deficit, and the following tablet is broken and nowhere to be found.

古文：其字乃行草，而极其遒活之妙，必宋人笔。
现代文：诗句的字体是行草，而极尽这种字体遒劲活泼的妙趣，必定是宋人的笔迹。
English: The font of the poem is cursive, and the most vigorous and lively charm of this font must be the handwriting of the Song people.

古文：惜其碑已碎，并失题者姓名，为可恨！
现代文：可惜此碑已碎了，并且失去了题诗人的姓名，实为遗憾！
English: Unfortunately, this monument has been broken, and the name of the poet has been lost. What a pity!

古文：岩之西下又有一峡门，南入甚深而隘，秉炬入，十余丈而止。
现代文：岩洞西边的下方又有一个峡口，向南进去很深又很窄，举着火把进去，十多丈就到了头。
English: At the bottom of the western side of the cave, there is another gorge. Going south, it is very deep and narrow. If you hold a torch and go in, you will reach the top.

古文：底多丸石如丹，第其色黄，不若向武者莹白耳。
现代文：洞底有很多石丸如像丹砂，只是石色发黄，不如向武州的那样晶莹洁白罢了。
English: At the bottom of the cave, there are a lot of stone balls that look like Tanza sand, but the stone color is yellow. It's better to be crystal clear and white like Wuzhou.

古文：东下又有一覆壁，横拓甚广而平。
现代文：往东下去又有一处下覆的石壁，横向拓开非常宽广而且很平整。
English: To the east, there is another lower stone wall, which is very wide and flat.

古文：倚杖北眺，当与羲皇不远。
现代文：拄着手杖向北眺望，应当与伏羲皇帝时的太古时代不远了。
English: Looking northward with a cane, it should be not far from the primeval times of the Fuxi Emperor.

古文：余览罢，即从北行，东渡龙潭北流之涧，东北三里而抵香山寺。
现代文：距岩洞东北四里处，岩石如军阵一样排列着，自西排到东如下插的屏风，一直到香山寺前才到头，俗称为 铁索系孤舟 。我观览完毕，立即从北行，向东渡过九龙潭往北流的涧水，向东北走三里抵达香山寺。
English: Four miles northeast of the cave, the rocks are lined up like an army line, from west to east like a screen, until the end of Xiangshan Temple, commonly known as the iron cable system. After I finished the tour, I immediately went from the north to the east to cross the rushing water of Jiulongtan to the north, and walked three miles to the northeast to reach Xiangshan Temple.

古文：寺僧言： 九龙洞甚深，须易数炬；此洞犹丹霞墓，非九龙岩也。 
现代文：寺中的僧人说： 九龙洞非常深，要换几次火把；此洞仍是张丹霞墓洞，不是九龙岩。 
English: The monks in the temple said: "Kowloon Cave is very deep, you have to change torches several times; this cave is still Zhang Danxia's tomb cave, not Kowloon Rock.

古文：会仙山在龙江之北，南面正临郡城，渡江半里，即抵其麓。
现代文：会仙山在龙江的北岸，南面正面临府城，渡江后走半里，就到达山麓。
English: Huixian Mountain is on the north bank of the Longjiang River, facing the capital city to the south. After crossing the river, walk half a mile to reach the foot of the mountain.

古文：其山盘崖峻叠，东西南三面俱无可上，惟北面山腋间可拾级而登。
现代文：此山陡峻的山崖盘绕重叠，东、西、南三面都无处可上，仅有北面从山侧可沿石阶上登。
English: The steep cliffs of this mountain are coiled and overlap, and there is nowhere to climb on the east, west, and south sides. Only the north side can be climbed from the mountain side along the stone steps.

古文：路从西麓北向行，抵山西北隅，乃东向上跻。
现代文：路从西麓向北走，抵达山的西北隅，于是向东上登。
English: The road went north from the western foot, reached the northwest corner of the mountain, and then climbed eastward.

古文：第一层，岐而南为百子岩；第二层，岐而南为雪花洞，岐而北为百丈深井岩；直东上岭脊，转而南为绝顶。
现代文：第一层，岔向南边是百子岩；第二层，岔向南边是雪花洞，岔向北边是百丈深井岩；一直向东登上岭脊，转向南是绝顶。
English: In the first layer, the ridge to the south is Baizi Rock; in the second layer, the ridge to the south is Snow Flower Cave, and the ridge to the north is Baizhang Deep Well Rock; all the way to the east is the ridge, and turning south is the peak.

古文：此皆西北面之胜也。
现代文：这都是西北面的胜境。
English: It's a win-win situation for the northwest.

古文：从东麓北向上，直抵绝壁之下，最东北隅者，为丹流阁，又循崖而西为东观，又西为白龙洞，又西为中观，又西为西观。
现代文：从东麓向北上登，直达绝壁之下，在最东北角落的，是丹流阁，又沿着山崖向西走是东观，又往西是白龙洞，又往西是中观，再往西是西观。
English: Climbing from the eastern foot to the north, directly under the cliff, in the farthest northeast corner is Danliu Ge, and walking along the cliff to the west is Dongguan, and to the west is Bailong Cave, and to the west is Zhongguan, and to the west is Xiguan.

古文：此皆东南面之胜也。
现代文：这都是东南面的胜境。
English: It's all a win-win situation for Southeastern.

古文：东南之胜在绝壁下，而中观当正南之中；西北之胜在绝顶上，而玄帝殿踞正南之极；而直北之深井，则上自山巅，下彻山底，中辟奥穴，独当一面焉。
现代文：东南一面的胜境在绝壁下，而中观正当正南方的中间；西北一面的胜境在绝顶上，而玄帝殿盘踞在正南方的极高处；而正北方的深井，却是上边起自山顶，下边通达山底，中间辟开深远的洞穴，独当一面。
English: The southeast side of the victory is under the cliff, while the middle view is right in the middle of the south; the northwest side of the victory is on the peak, and the Emperor's Palace is located at a very high altitude in the south; and the deep well in the north is from the top of the mountain to the bottom of the mountain, with a deep cave in the middle.

古文：百子岩在会仙山西崖之半，其门西向。
现代文：百子岩在会仙山西面山崖的半中腰，洞口向西。
English: Hyakukiiwa is halfway up the cliff on the west side of Mt. Hiei, and the cave entrance faces west.

古文：由下门入三丈余，梯空而上，上复叠为洞，若楼阁然，前门复出下门之上。
现代文：由下洞口进去三丈多，踏着石梯凌空上登，上边又重叠成洞，好像楼阁一样，前边的洞口出来又在下洞口的上方。
English: From the lower cave entrance, there are more than three storeys, and climbing up the stone staircase, the upper side is overlapped into holes, like a castle, and the front hole comes out above the lower hole.

古文：洞虽不深崇，而辟为两重，自觉灵幻。
现代文：洞虽然不高深，但辟为两层，自然觉得灵妙奇幻。
English: Although the cave is not high and deep, it is two-tiered, which naturally feels magical.

古文：内置送子大土，故名。
现代文：洞内放着送子菩萨，所以起这个名字。
English: The cave is home to the Bodhisattva of the Gift of the Son, hence the name.

古文：是山石色皆青黝，而洞石独赭。
现代文：这座山的石色全是青黑色，但洞中的岩石唯独是褚红色。
English: The stone of the mountain is all blue-black, but the rock in the cave is only crimson.

古文：南又一洞与上层并列，已青石矣。
现代文：南面又有一个洞与上层并列，已是青石了。
English: To the south, there is another hole alongside the upper level, which is already bluestone.

古文：雪花洞在会仙山西崖，乃百子之上，而绝顶之侧也。
现代文：雪花洞在会仙山西面的山崖上，就在百子崖之上，在绝顶的侧边。
English: Snow Flower Cave is on the cliff on the west side of Huanxian Mountain, just above the Hundred Cliff, on the side of the peak.

古文：其洞西北向，前有庵奉观音大士。
现代文：此洞朝向西北，前边有座寺庵供奉着观音菩萨。
English: This cave faces northwest, and in front of it there is a temple hermitage dedicated to the goddess of mercy, Kannon.

古文：侧叠石为台，置室其上，则释子所栖也。
现代文：侧边用石块垒砌成平台，台上建了房子，是僧徒住的地方。
English: On the side, a platform was built with stone blocks, and a house was built on the platform, where the monks lived.

古文：由大士龛后秉炬入，门颇不宏；渐入渐崇拓，有石柱石门；宛转数曲，复渐狭；其下石始崎嵚，非复平底矣。
现代文：由观音菩萨佛完后举着火把进去，洞口不怎么宽大；渐渐进去逐渐变高变宽，有石柱石门；转过几个弯，又逐渐变窄；脚下的石头开始崎岖不平，不再是平坦的洞底了。
English: After passing by the Guanyin Bodhisattva Buddha, I held a torch and entered the cave. The mouth of the cave was not very wide. As I entered, it gradually became higher and wider. There was a stone pillar and a stone door. After turning several corners, it gradually became narrow again. The stones under my feet began to be rugged, and the bottom of the cave was no longer flat.

古文：越一小潭，其内南转而路遂穷。
现代文：越过一个小水潭，由它里边向南转后路便断了。
English: After crossing a small pool and turning south from inside it, the road broke up.

古文：洞在最高处，而能窈窕深入，石柱之端，垂水滴沥不绝，僧以器承之，足以供众，不烦远汲，故此处独有僧栖。
现代文：洞在最高处，却能够幽深地深入进去，石柱的顶端，水滴不停地滴，僧人用容器接水，足够供给众多的人，不必麻烦到远处去频繁地取水，所以唯独此处有僧人居住。
English: The cave is at the highest point, but it can be deeply penetrated. At the top of the stone pillar, water drops constantly. The monks use containers to collect water, which is enough to supply a large number of people. There is no need to go far away to frequently collect water, so only monks live here.

古文：余酌水饮之，甘洌不减惠泉也。
现代文：我舀水喝下，甘甜清凉不比惠泉差。
English: When I drink salty water, the sweetness and coolness are no worse than that of Huiquan.

古文：夜宿洞侧台上，三面陡临绝壑，觉灏气上通帝座。
现代文：夜里住宿在洞侧边的平台上，三面下临陡绝的壑谷，觉得弥漫在天地间的浩荡之气上通天庭。
English: At night, we stayed on a platform on the side of the cave, with the steep Shibuya valley on three sides. I felt like I was floating in the vastness of heaven and earth.

古文：绝顶中悬霄汉，江流如带横于下，郡城如棋局布其前，东界则青鸟山，西界则天门拜相山，俱自北而南，分拥左右，若张两翼。
现代文：绝顶高悬在云天之中，江流如像衣带横在下方，府城如棋盘一样在它前方铺开，东面是青鸟山，西面是天门拜相山，都是自北延向南，分在左右拥围着，好似张开的两只翅膀。
English: The very top hangs high in the clouds, the river flows like a girdle below, the capital city spreads out in front of it like a chessboard. To the east is the Blue Bird Mountain, and to the west is the Tianmen Baixiang Mountain. They extend from the north to the south, and are divided on the left and right, like two wings.

古文：而宜山则近在西腋，以其卑小宜众，则此山之岩岩压众可知矣。
现代文：而宜山就近在西侧，因为它矮小适宜一般人攀登而得名，那么此山压倒群山的高峻之状可想而知了。
English: And Mount Yi is close to the west side, named because it is small and suitable for ordinary people to climb, so you can imagine how high this mountain is over the mountains.

古文：峰顶有玄帝殿，颇巨而无居者。
现代文：峰顶有座玄帝殿，相当巨大却无人居住。
English: At the top of the peak is the Emperor's Palace, which is quite large but uninhabited.

古文：殿后有片石凌空，若鼓翼张喙者然。
现代文：殿后有片状的岩石凌空而起，好像鼓动翅膀张开嘴巴的样子。
English: Behind the hall, flakes of rock soar into the air, as if beating their wings and opening their mouths.

古文：按张自明《龙溪书院图》，绝顶有齐云亭，即此。深井在绝顶之北，与雪花洞平列。
现代文：深井在绝顶的北面，与雪花洞平排并列。
English: Fukai is on the north side of the peak, parallel to the snow cave.

古文：路由二天门东北行，忽从山顶中陷而下，周回大数十丈，深且百丈。
现代文：路由二天门往东北行，忽然从山顶中陷下去，周围大数十丈，深近百丈。
English: The road went from Futianmen to the northeast, suddenly sinking down from the top of the mountain, surrounded by dozens of mountains, nearly a hundred meters deep.

古文：四面俱崭削下嵌，密树拥垂，古藤虬结，下瞰不见其底，独南面石崖自山巅直剖而下。
现代文：四面都崭然陡削地向下深嵌，浓密的树丛围抱下垂，古藤盘结，向下俯瞰不见底，独有南面的石崖从山顶一直剖下去。
English: All four sides are steeply cut downwards and deeply embedded, dense clumps of trees surround and hang down, old vines are intertwined, and there is no bottom to the downward view. The unique southern cliff cuts all the way down from the top of the mountain.

古文：下有洞，其门北向，高穹上及崖半，其内下平中远，反可斜瞩。
现代文：下边有洞，洞口向北，高高向上隆起到达石崖半中腰，洞内下边平坦中间深远，反而可以斜视。
English: There is a hole at the bottom. The mouth of the hole is to the north, with a high uplift reaching halfway up the cliff. Inside the cave, the bottom is flat and the middle is far away, but it is possible to squint.

古文：盖洞上崖削无片隙，树莫能缘也。
现代文：原来洞上的石崖笔直没有丝毫缝隙，树不能顺着生长。
English: Originally, there was not the slightest gap in the stone cliff above the cave, and trees could not grow along it.

古文：崖之西北峰头，有石横突窅中，踞其上，正与洞门对。
现代文：石崖西北方的峰头，有岩石横突在深井中，盘踞在深井的上方，正好与洞口相对。
English: At the northwest peak of the cliff, there is a rock protruding sideways in the deep well, perched above the deep well, just opposite the mouth of the cave.

古文：傍又有平石一方如砥，是曰棋枰石，言仙自洞下出，升峰头而弈也。
现代文：旁边又有一块平坦的岩石如像磨刀石，这叫做棋抨石，说是仙人从下边的洞中出来，升到峰头下棋。
English: Next to it, there is a flat rock like a grindstone, which is called the chess stone. It is said that the hermit came out of the hole below and ascended to the peak to play chess.

古文：余晚停杖雪花洞，有书生鲍姓者引至横突石上，俯瞰旁瞩，心目俱动。
现代文：我晚上停宿在雪花洞，有个姓鲍的书生领路来到横突的岩石上，向四旁俯瞰观览，心目全都受到震动。
English: I stopped at the Snow Flower Cave at night, and a student named Bao led the way to the jutting rock, overlooking the four sides, and my eyes were all shaken.

古文：忽幽风度隙，兰气袭人，奚啻何止，岂但两翅欲飞，更觉通体换骨矣，安得百丈青丝悬辘轳而垂之下也！
现代文：忽然幽景中山风透过缝隙吹来，兰花香气袭人，岂止是想插上两翅飞翔，更想去找全身脱胎换骨的方法了，哪里能找到百丈长的青丝带悬挂在辘护上垂到下面去呀！
English: Suddenly, the mountain wind blew through a gap in the scenery, and the orchid fragrance hit people. They not only wanted to fly with two wings, but also wanted to find a way to change the whole body. Where could they find a hundred-meter-long blue ribbon hanging on the eaves to hang down below!

古文：僧言其洞直通山南，穿江底而出南山。
现代文：僧人说此洞直通到山南面，穿过江底而后通到南山。
English: Monks say that this cave leads directly to the southern side of the mountain, through the bottom of the river and then to Nanshan.

古文：通山南之说有之，若云穿江别度，则臆说也。
现代文：通到山南面的说法是有的，如果说穿过江底通到别的地方，却是凭主观推测的说法了。
English: There is a saying that it leads to the southern side of the mountain, but if it is said that it leads through the bottom of the river to another place, it is a subjective speculation.

古文：中观在会仙山南崖之下。
现代文：中观在会仙山南面山崖之下。
English: Zhongguan is located at the foot of the cliff on the south side of Huixian Mountain.

古文：缘石坡而上，至此则轰崖削立。
现代文：沿石坡上走，到此处就见崩裂的山崖笔直竖立。
English: As you walk up the rocky slope, you can see the cracked cliff standing straight up.

古文：前有三清殿，已圮。
现代文：前边有三清殿，已坍塌。
English: In the foreground is the Sansei-den, which has collapsed.

古文：上有玄帝像，倚崖缀石而奉之。
现代文：上边有玄帝像，紧靠石崖连缀着石壁供奉着它。
English: There is a statue of Emperor Xuanzang on the top, and a stone wall adjoining the cliff is dedicated to him.

古文：像后即洞门，南向。
现代文：像后就是洞口，向南。
English: Behind the image is the mouth of the cave, looking south.

古文：篝灯而入，历一室，辄后崖前起。
现代文：点亮油灯进去，经过一个石室，后边的石崖马上向前突起。
English: Light the oil lamp, go inside, pass a stone room, and the stone cliff behind will immediately jut forward.

古文：攀而上，复得龛一圆，可以趺坐，不甚深。
现代文：攀登上去，又见到一个圆形石完，可以盘腿打坐，不怎么深。
English: After climbing up, I saw a round stone. I could sit cross-legged and meditate, but not very deeply.

古文：其东崖上大书有 四遇亭 三字。
现代文：它东面的石崖上大大地写有 四遇亭 三个字。
English: On the stone cliff to the east of it, there are three words "四遇亭" written on a large scale.

古文：循崖而东三百步，得白龙岩。
现代文：沿着石崖往东走三百步，就到了白龙岩。
English: Walk east along the cliff for three hundred paces and you will arrive at Bai Longyan.

古文：白龙洞在中观之东危崖下，入门即西行，秉炬渐转西北，其底平坦，愈入愈崇宏；二十丈之内，有石柱中悬，长撑洞顶，极为伟丽。
现代文：白龙洞在中观东边的危崖之下，洞向南。进洞口后立即往西行，举着火把慢慢转向西北，洞底平坦，越进去越高大；二十丈之内，有石柱悬在中央，长长的撑到洞顶，极为雄伟壮丽。
English: Bailong Cave is under the cliff on the east side of Zhongguancun, and the cave faces south. Immediately after entering the cave, go west and slowly turn to the northwest with a torch. The bottom of the cave is flat, and it gets higher and higher as you go in. Within 20 meters, there is a stone pillar hanging in the center, which is long and protrudes to the top of the cave. It is extremely magnificent.

古文：其内有岐东上，而西北仍平，入已愈开拓。
现代文：洞内有岔洞往东上走，可西北依然平坦，进去不久越开阔。
English: Inside the cave, there is a wormhole to go up to the east, but the northwest is still flat, and it gets wider and wider as you go in.

古文：中有白石一圆，高三尺，尖圆平整，极似罗筑而成者，其为仙冢无疑。
现代文：其中有一块圆形白石，高三尺，又尖又圆十分平整，极似逐一排列修筑而成的样子，它是仙人的坟墓无疑。
English: Among them is a round white stone, three feet high, sharp and round, very flat, very similar to the appearance of being built one by one. It is undoubtedly the tomb of a fairy.

古文：冢后有巨石中亘，四旁愈扩。
现代文：墓后有巨石横亘在中间，四旁愈加宽阔。
English: Behind the tomb, there is a huge boulder in the middle, which is getting wider and wider on all sides.

古文：穿隙而入，其内石柱更多。
现代文：穿过缝隙进去，那里面石柱更多。
English: Enter through the gap, where there are more stone pillars.

古文：北入数丈，过一隘，又数丈，石壁忽涌起，如莲下垂，而下无旁窦可入。
现代文：往北深入数丈，过了一个隘口，又走数丈，石壁忽然平地涌起，如莲花下垂，可下边无旁洞可以深入。
English: Go north and go a few meters deeper, go through a pass and go a few meters further, the stone wall suddenly springs up flatly, like a lotus hanging down, but there is no side hole to go deeper.

古文：望其上复窅然深黑，然离地三四丈，无极以登。
现代文：望那上边重又杳渺深黑，然而离地面有三四丈，没有台阶可登。
English: The view up there is heavy and dark, but it's three or four stories off the ground and there are no steps to climb.

古文：乃从故道出，仍过白石冢至东上之岐，攀跻而上。
现代文：只好从原路出来，仍经过白石坟墓走到东边上方的岔洞，攀登而上。
English: I had no choice but to leave the original path, walk through the white stone tombs to the skull cave above the east side, and climb up.

古文：其石高下成级，入数丈，石柱夹而成门。
现代文：这里的岩石高低不一形成台阶，进去数丈，石柱相夹成门。
English: The rocks here are uneven in height and form steps, which are several meters high, and the stone pillars are clamped into a door.

古文：逾门脊东下，其处深而扩，底平而多碎石漫其中。
现代文：穿过门洞下的石脊往东下走，此处又深又宽，洞底平坦但有许多碎石遍布其中。
English: Go east through the ridge under the doorway, which is deep and wide, with a flat bottom and lots of rubble.

古文：渐转而北，恐火炬不给，乃返步由故道出。
现代文：渐渐转向北，担心火把不够，只好返身由原路出来。
English: Gradually turning to the north, worried that the torches were not enough, I had to turn back from the original path.

古文：余游是洞，以云卧阁僧为导，取刍洞口，未及束炬，故初入至白石冢而出；再取刍入，至石壁高悬，无级以登而出；三取刍入，从东岐逾隘下深底，将北转而出。
现代文：我游览这个洞，请云卧阁的僧人作向导，到洞口取干草，未来得及捆火把，所以初次进洞到了白石坟墓便出来了；第二次取了干草进去，走到高悬的石壁，没有台阶可登便出来了；第三次取了干草进去，从东边的岔洞穿过隘口下到深洞之底，将转向北便出洞来。
English: I toured the cave and asked the monks from Yunjiage to guide me. I went to the mouth of the cave to fetch hay. I didn't have time to tie torches, so the first time I went into the cave, I came out of the white stone tomb. The second time I took the hay in, I walked to the high stone wall, there were no steps to climb up, and I came out. The third time I took the hay in, I went from the east side of the wormhole through the narrow passage to the bottom of the deep cave, and then I turned to the north and came out of the cave.

古文：三出皆以散草易爇，不能持久也。
现代文：三次出洞都是由于散草容易燃尽，不能持久。
English: The three times the hole was drilled, it was due to the fact that the loose grass was easy to burn out and could not last.

古文：洞口有刘棐诗一绝，甚佳，上刻 白龙洞 三大字。
现代文：洞口有刘柒的一首绝句诗，非常好，上边刻着 白龙洞 三个大字。
English: At the mouth of the cave, there is a famous poem by Liu Xuan, which is very good. On the top, there are three large characters engraved with "Bai Long Dong" (White Dragon Cave).

古文：东观在白龙洞东北二百余步，前有三茅真人殿，殿后穹岩覆空，其门南向，中如堂皇，亦置金仙像。
现代文：东观在白龙洞东北二百多步处，前边有三茅真人殿，殿后弯隆的岩洞覆在空中，洞口向南，洞中如厅堂，也放有金佛像。
English: Dongguan is more than two hundred paces northeast of Bailong Cave. In front is the Sanmao Zhenren Hall. Behind the hall, the sloping rock cave is covered in the air. The cave entrance faces south. The cave is like a hall, and there is also a golden Buddha statue.

古文：东西俱有奥室，东奥下而窅黑，西奥上而通明。
现代文：东西两侧都有幽深的石室，东侧的深处在下方，幽深漆黑，西边的深处在上方，通明透亮。
English: There are deep stone chambers on both sides of the east and west, the depth on the east side is below, deep and dark, the depth on the west side is above, clear and bright.

古文：岩前大书 云深 二字，国初彭挥使笔也。
现代文：洞前大写着 云深 二字，是明朝初年彭指挥使的手笔。
English: In front of the cave, the word "Yunshen" is written in capital letters. It was written by Commander Peng in the early years of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：殿西有洞高穹，其门东向。
现代文：殿西有个洞高大弯隆，洞口向东。
English: To the west of the palace, there is a tall, curved mound with a cave opening to the east.

古文：门之南偏，有石笋高二丈余，镌为立佛，东向洞外；门之北偏，有石屏高三丈余，镌为坐佛，西向洞中。
现代文：洞口偏南之处，有根石笋高二丈多，凿刻成站立的佛像，面向洞外的东方；洞口偏北之处，有座石屏风高三丈多，雕凿成坐立的佛像，面向西方的洞中。
English: In the southern part of the cave mouth, there is a stone pillar more than two meters high, carved into a standing Buddha statue, facing the east outside the cave; in the northern part of the cave mouth, there is a stone screen more than three meters high, carved into a seated Buddha statue, facing the west in the cave.

古文：其洞崇峻崆峒，西入数丈，忽下坠深坑，上嵌危石，洞转北入，益深益宏。
现代文：此洞高峻空阔，向西进去数丈，忽然脚下陷为深坑，上边嵌着危石，洞转向北进去，更深更大。
English: The cave is lofty and spacious. It is a few meters high when entering from the west. Suddenly, it sinks into a deep pit at the foot, with a dangerous stone embedded on the upper edge. The cave turns to the north when entering, and it is deeper and bigger.

古文：盖下陷之坑，透石北转于下，上穹之洞，凌石北转于上，中皆欹嵌之石，横跨侧偃，架则为梁，空则为渊，彼此间阻，不能逾涉，故无深入之路，第一望杳黑而已。
现代文：原来下陷的深坑，穿过危石往北转到下边，上面弯隆的山洞，凌驾在危石上向北转到上边，中间全是高峻的岩石，横跨侧卧，高架的就成为桥梁，空着的就成为深渊，彼此之间阻隔，不能跋涉，所以无深入的路，仅只是一眼望去的深黑而已。
English: The original sunken pit, through the perilous stone to the north and turn to the bottom, above the curved cave, over the perilous stone to the north and turn to the top, the middle is full of steep rocks, lying across the side, the elevated one becomes a bridge, the empty one becomes an abyss, separated from each other, unable to trek, so there is no deep road, just a glance of deep darkness.

古文：是洞有题崖者，亦曰 白龙 ，又曰 白龙双洞 ，乃知洞原有二，前之所入乃西洞，此乃东洞也。
现代文：此洞崖壁上有人题字，也叫 白龙 ，又叫 白龙双洞 ，才明白白龙洞原来有两个洞，先前进去之处是西洞，此处是东洞。
English: There is an inscription on the cliff wall of this cave, also known as the White Dragon, also known as the White Dragon Double Cave, only to understand that the White Dragon Cave originally had two caves. The first place to go is the West Cave, and here is the East Cave.

古文：西洞路平可行，此洞石嵌，无容着足，其深远皆不可测。
现代文：西洞路平可以行走，此洞岩石深嵌，不容落脚，它的深远全然不可测。
English: You can walk along the road in the West Cave. The rock in this cave is deeply embedded, making it impossible to land. Its depth is completely unfathomable.

古文：洞门题刻颇多，然无宋人笔，虽多者皆永乐间题，有永乐四年庐陵郭子庐佥宪《小记》云： 此乃陆仙翁休服修炼处，石床、丹灶、仙桃、玉井犹存。 
现代文：洞口题辞碑刻很多，然而没有宋人的笔迹，最多的是永乐年间的题辞，有永乐四年庐陵人金都御史郭子卢的小记说： 此地是陆休服仙翁修炼之处，石床、炼丹灶、仙桃、玉井还保存着。 
English: There are many inscriptions engraved at the mouth of the cave, but there is no handwriting of the Song people. The most inscriptions are from the Yongle years. Guo Zilu, the governor of Jindu, who lived in Yongle for four years, wrote in his diary: This place is the place where Lu Xiufu (Lu Xiufu) and Xian Weng (Xian Weng) practiced. The stone bed, the incense burner, the peach tree and the jade well are still preserved.

古文：按《百粤风土志》，仙翁又名禹臣，唐时人，岂名与字之不同耶？
现代文：据《百粤风土志》，仙翁名字又叫禹臣，是唐代人，难道是他的名与字不同吗？
English: According to "Hundreds of Guangdong Folk Tales," Xianweng's name is also called Yu Chen. He is a Tang Dynasty person. Is his name different from the characters?

古文：洞两旁龛窦甚多，皆昔人趺坐之所。
现代文：洞两旁石完洞穴非常多，都是前人盘腿打坐的场所。
English: There are many caves on both sides of the cave, all of which were places for the ancients to cross their legs and meditate.

古文：殿东有小室，亦俱就圮。
现代文：殿东有小屋，也全都坍塌。
English: There were huts to the east of the palace, and they all collapsed.

古文：丹流阁在东观东北二百余步，其上危崖至此一折矣。
现代文：丹流阁在东观东北二百多步处，它上方危崖到此处又是一道转折处了。
English: Danliu Pavilion is more than two hundred paces northeast of Dongguan, and the cliff above it is a turning point.

古文：崖前有小阁两重，皆就圮。
现代文：石崖前边有两层小楼阁，都将近倒塌。
English: In front of the cliff, there are two-storey small buildings, both of which are close to collapse.

古文：后阁中置文昌司命像。
现代文：后面的阁子中放有文昌司命君的坐像。
English: There is a seated statue of Wenchang Simei in the back of the pavilion.

古文：阁西有洞西入，其门东向，甚高。
现代文：阁子西边有洞往西进去，洞口向东，非常高。
English: On the west side of the pavilion, there is a hole to the west and a hole to the east, which is very high.

古文：门之内，有石夹耸成关，架小庐其上，亦甚幽爽，皆昔人栖真之处也。
现代文：洞口之内，有岩石相夹高耸成为关隘，它上边建了小屋，也十分幽静爽朗，都是前人修真养性之处。
English: Inside the mouth of the cave, there is a rock face clamped high to become a pass. A hut is built on the top of it. It is also very quiet and refreshing. It is a place where the predecessors cultivated their true nature.

古文：由洞内西入数十丈，渐隘而北转，路亦渐黑，似无深入处，遂不及篝灯。
现代文：由洞内向西深入几十丈，渐渐变窄向北转去，路也渐渐黑下来，似乎无深入之处，便不忙点灯。
English: From the cave to the west, I went down several tens of meters, gradually narrowing and turning to the north. The road gradually became dark. It seemed that there was no depth, so I didn't bother to turn on the lights.

古文：此处庐阁处处可栖，今俱凋敝，无一人居，以艰于水也，诸洞惟雪花有滴沥。
现代文：阁子北面上方的山崖断裂开，倒坠到下面的山岭，北面的路便到了头，这是中观东北面的胜景。
English: The mountain cliff above the north face of the pavilion broke off and fell down to the mountain range below, and the road to the north came to an end. This is a magnificent view of the northeast face of Zhongguancun.

古文：西观在中观西三百余步危崖之上，上下皆石壁悬亘。
现代文：西观在中观西边三百多步的危崖之上，上下都是悬亘的石壁。
English: On the west side, there is a cliff of more than three hundred paces on the west side of the middle view, and there are overhanging stone walls above and below.

古文：后有洞，亦南向。
现代文：后面有洞，也是向南。
English: There's a hole in the back, also to the south.

古文：余至中观，仰眺不见，遂折而东行；既下山麓，始回睇见之，不及复往矣。
现代文：我到中观时，仰面眺望不见洞，就折向东行；下到山麓后，这才回头仰视见到洞，来不及再去了。
English: When I reached the middle of the view, I looked up and could not see the hole, so I turned to the east; after descending to the foot of the mountain, I looked back and saw the hole, and it was too late to go back.

古文：此中观西崖之胜也。
现代文：这是中观西面山崖上的胜景。
English: This is the spectacular view from the cliff on the west side of Zhongguancun.

古文：宜山在会仙山之西，龙江之北，其东又有小石一支并起，曰小宜山。
现代文：宜山在会仙山的西边，龙江的北岸。它东面又有一座小石山并排耸起，叫做小宜山。
English: Yishan is on the west side of Xianxian Mountain, on the north bank of the Longjiang River. To the east of it, there is another small stone mountain rising side by side, called Xiao Yishan.

古文：二山孤悬众峰之间，按《志》以其小而卑，宜于众，故名。
现代文：两座山孤悬在群峰之间，根据志书，是因为它又小又矮，适宜一般人攀登，所以得名。
English: The two mountains hang alone between the peaks, according to the book, because it is small and short, suitable for ordinary people to climb, hence the name.

古文：旧宜山县在江南岸、西竺寺西，正与此山相对。
现代文：旧宜山县在龙江南岸、西竺寺西边，正好与此山相对。
English: The former Yishan County is on the south bank of the Longjiang River, west of Xidi Temple, just opposite this mountain.

古文：县今为附郭府治所在地的县与府同城，故称附郭矣。
现代文：又有人称古宜山县在龙江北岸，难道就在此山之下吗？宜山县今天成为附郭县了。
English: Some people say that ancient Yishan County is on the north bank of the Longjiang River. Is it under this mountain? Today, Yishan County has become Fuiguo County.

古文：多灵山最高耸。
现代文：多灵山最为高耸。
English: Doringshan is the highest peak.

古文：其上四时皆春，瑶花仙果，不绝于树。
现代文：山上四季都是春天，美玉般的鲜花与仙境中的果子，在树上不断。
English: All four seasons in the mountains are spring, and the beautiful flowers and fruits in the fairyland continue to grow on the trees.

古文：登其巅，四望无与障者。
现代文：登上山顶，四面望去没有遮挡的山。
English: Climb to the top of the mountain and look out over the unobstructed mountain on all sides.

古文：其山在郡城西南九十里，永顺司邓宗胜之境，乃龙江西南，都泥江东北，二江中分之脊也。
现代文：此山在府城西南九十里，永顺司邓宗胜的辖境内，是龙江西南方，都泥江东北方，是分隔这两条江的山脊。
English: This mountain is located ninety miles southwest of the capital, Yongshun, in the jurisdiction of Deng Zongsheng. It is southwest of the Longjiang River and northeast of the Du Dijiang River. It is the ridge separating the two rivers.

古文：其来脉当自南丹分枝南下，结为此山；东行至青塘之南，过脊为石壁堡山；又东走而环于柳江之南，为穿山驿诸山；而东尽于象州之西南境，柳、都二江交会之间。
现代文：它延伸来的山脉应当起自南丹州分出支脉南下，盘结为此山；往东延伸到青塘的南面，山脊延伸过之处成为石壁堡山；又向东延伸环绕在柳江的南面，成为穿山骚诸处的群山；而后向东在武宣县的西南境到了头，在柳江、都泥江两江相会处之间。
English: The mountain range that it extends from should rise from the branch of Nantanzhou to the south and be coiled into this mountain; to the east it extends to the south of Qingtang, and the ridge extends to the south of the Liujiang River, becoming the Shibeibao Mountain; and to the east it extends around the south of the Liujiang River, becoming a group of mountains everywhere; and then to the east it reaches the southwest of Wuxuan County, between the Liujiang River and the Duodejiang River.

