古文：又东出江关，入南郡界。
现代文：又往东流出江关，流人南郡界，
English: And the Yangtze River flows out to the east, flowing southward to the county border.

古文：江水自关，东径弱关、捍关。
现代文：江水从关东流经弱关、捍关。
English: The water of the river flows from Kanto through Weak Pass and Han Pass.

古文：捍关，廪君浮夷水所置也。弱关在建平、秭归界。
现代文：捍关是凛君乘船下夷水时所设；弱关在建平郡姊归县边界上。
English: The weak pass is on the border of Jianping County and Xiagui County.

古文：昔巴、楚数相攻伐，藉险置关，以相防捍，秦兼天下，置立南郡，自巫东上皆其域也。
现代文：从前巴、楚常常打仗，所以在险要处设关互相防御。秦统一天下后，设置南郡，于是从巫县东上，就都是秦的领土了。
English: Formerly, Ba and Chu often fought, so they set up checkpoints to defend each other at critical points. After the Qin Dynasty fell, Nan County was set up, so from Wuxian County eastward, it was all the territory of Qin.

古文：又东过巫县南，盐水从县东南流注之。
现代文：又往东流过巫县南边，盐水从县城东南流来注人。
English: It also flowed eastward through the southern part of Wuxian County, and the brine flowed from the southeast of the county seat.

古文：江水又东，乌飞水注之。
现代文：江水又往东流，有乌飞水注入。
English: The river flowed eastward again, and black water was injected.

古文：水出天门郡溇中县界，北流径建平郡沙渠县南，又北流径巫县南，西北历山道三百六十里，注于江，谓之乌飞口。
现代文：鸟飞水发源于天门郡楼中县边界，往北流经建平郡沙渠县南边，又往北流经巫县南边，于是往西北经过山间三百七十里的流程，注入江水，汇流处叫乌飞口。
English: The bird's flight water originates from the border of Louzhong County, Tianmen County, flows northward through the southern edge of Shaju County, Jianping County, flows northward through the southern edge of Wuxian County, and then flows northwest through the 370-mile process between the mountains, injecting river water, and the confluence is called Wufeikou.

古文：江水又东径巫县故城南，县故楚之巫郡也。秦省郡立县，以隶南郡。
现代文：江水又往东流，经过巫县老城南，巫县就是旧时楚国的巫郡，秦废巫郡而改置为县，划归南郡管辖。
English: The river then flows eastward, passing through the southern part of the old town of Wuxian County. Wuxian County was the Wuxian County of the old Chu Kingdom, and the Wuxian County of the Qin Dynasty was reorganized into a county and placed under the jurisdiction of the Southern County.

古文：吴孙休分为建平郡，治巫城。
现代文：吴孙休分设建平郡，以巫城为治所。
English: Jianping County was set up in Wusun District, with Wucheng as its capital.

古文：城缘山为塘，周十二里一百一十步，东西北三面皆带傍深谷，南临大江，故夔国也。
现代文：巫城倚山筑城，周围十二里一百一十步，东西北三面都依傍深谷，南临大江，从前是夔国的地方。
English: Wucheng is built on a hill, with a circumference of twelve miles and one hundred and ten paces. It is surrounded by a deep valley from east to west and from north to south, and faces the Yangtze River to the south. It was once a part of Shandong Province.

古文：江水又东，巫溪水注之。
现代文：江水又东流，巫溪水注入。
English: The water of the river flows to the east, and the water of Wuxi Creek is injected.

古文：溪水导源梁州晋兴郡之宣汉县东，又南径建平郡泰昌县南，又径北井县西，东转历其县北。
现代文：巫溪水发源于梁州晋兴郡宣汉县东边，往南流经建平郡泰昌县南面，又流经北井县西面，转向东边，流经县城北面。
English: Wuxi Creek originates in the east of Xuanhan County, Jinsing County, Liangzhou, flows southward through the south of Taichang County, Jianping County, flows through the west of Beii County, turns to the east, and flows through the north of the county.

古文：水南有盐井，井在县北，故县名北井，建平一郡之所资也。
现代文：南岸有盐井，都在县城北面，所以县名叫北井，建平全郡食盐都仰赖这些盐井供应。
English: There are salt wells on the south bank, all of which are north of the county seat, so the county is called Beii. Jianping relies on these salt wells for the supply of salt throughout the county.

古文：盐水下通巫溪，溪水是兼盐水之称矣。
现代文：盐水下通巫溪，溪水于是也兼有盐水之名了。
English: Wuxi Creek flows under the salt water, so the stream also has the name of salt water.

古文：溪水又南，屈径巫县东。
现代文：溪水又往南流，转弯流经巫县东边。
English: The stream flows south again, and turns to flow through the eastern side of Wuxian.

古文：县之东北三百步，有圣泉，谓之孔子泉。其水飞清石穴，洁并高泉，下注溪水。
现代文：巫县东北三百步有圣泉，口转孔子泉，清泉从石洞中飞流而出，莹洁可与名泉媲美。
English: Three hundred meters to the northeast of Wuxian County, there is a holy spring, the mouth of which is the Confucius Spring. The clear spring flows out of a stone cave, and its purity is comparable to that of famous springs.

古文：溪水又南入于大江。
现代文：泉流一注溪水，溪水又南流注入大江。
English: The spring flows into the stream, and the stream flows south into the big river.

古文：江水又东径巫峡，杜宇所凿以通江水也。
现代文：江水继续东流，穿过巫峡。巫峡是杜宇所凿，藉以疏通江水。
English: The river continued to flow eastward, passing through Wuxia Gorge, which was hewn by Du Yu to channel the river water.

古文：郭仲产云：按《地理志》，巫山在县西南，而今县东有巫山，将郡、县居治无恒故也。
现代文：郭仲产说：按《地理志》，巫山在巫县县城西南，但现在县城东却有巫山，或许是郡县治所地址常有迁移变动的缘故吧。
English: Guo Zhongyan said: According to "Geography," Wushan is in the southwest of Wuxian County, but now there is Wushan in the east of the county, perhaps because of the frequent relocation of the address of the county government.

古文：江水历峡东，径新崩滩，此山汉和帝永元十二年崩，晋太元二年又崩。当崩之日，水逆流百余里，涌起数十丈。
现代文：江水穿过山峡往东流，经过新崩滩。汉和帝永元十二年再次山崩，山崩那天，江水倒流百余里，水涌高达数十丈。
English: The river water flows eastward through the mountain gorge, passing through the new landslide beach. In the twelfth year of the Han Dynasty, there was another landslide. On the day of the landslide, the river water flowed back more than a hundred miles, and the water surged up to dozens of meters.

古文：今滩上有石，或圆如箪，或方似笥，若此者甚众，皆崩崖所陨，致怒湍流，故谓之新崩滩。
现代文：现在滩上有很多巨石，圆的如饭箩，方的如房屋，都是从山崖上塌下的，急流受阻，奔腾怒吼，所以叫新崩滩。
English: Now there are a lot of boulders on the beach, round ones like rice cookers, square ones like houses, all of which have fallen down from the cliff, the rapids are blocked, rushing and roaring, so it is called the new beach collapse.

古文：其颓岩所余，比之诸岭，尚为竦桀，其下十余里，有大巫山，非惟三峡所无，乃当抗峰岷、峨，偕蛉衡、疑。其翼附群山，并概青云，更就霄汉，辨其优劣耳。
现代文：崩塌后留下的石峰，与许多别的山岭相比起来，显得还是相当高峻的。下流十余里有大巫山，山势之高不但是三峡所没有的，而且可以与崛山和峨眉山一争上下，与衡山和九疑山互比高低；周围相连的群山，都是高入青云，只有攀登到天上，才分辨得出它们的高下。
English: Compared with many other mountains, the stone peaks left after the collapse still appear to be quite high. There are more than ten Daming Mountains downstream. The height of the mountains is not only higher than that of the Three Gorges, but also can compete with Mount Emei and Mount Emei, and with Mount Heng and Mount Jiuyi. The surrounding connected mountains are all high into the clouds, and only by climbing to the sky can you distinguish their height.

古文：神孟涂所处，《山海经》曰：夏后启之臣孟涂，是司神于巴。巴人讼于孟涂之所，其衣有血者执之。
现代文：大巫山是司法之神孟涂所居之处。《山海经》说：夏启的臣子孟涂，在巴做了司法之神，巴人到孟涂的住所来告状，他只把衣服上有血迹的人抓起来，决不滥杀无辜，而有好生之德。
English: Dawushan is the place where Mengtu, the god of justice, lives. The "Shanhai Jing" says: Mengtu, the vassal of Xiaqi, became the god of justice in Ba. Ba people went to Mengtu's residence to sue. He only arrested people with bloodstains on their clothes. He never killed innocents indiscriminately, but had the virtue of a good life.

古文：是请生居山上，在丹山西。
现代文：他住在山上，在丹山西面。
English: He lives in the mountains, west of Mount Danzan.

古文：郭景纯云：丹山在丹阳，属巴，丹山西即巫山者也。
现代文：郭景纯说：丹山在丹阳，属巴郡。丹山西就是巫山。
English: Guo Jingjun said: Danshan is in Danyang and belongs to Ba County. West of Danshan is Wushan.

古文：又帝女居焉。宋玉所谓天帝之季女，名曰瑶姬，未行而亡，封于巫山之阳。
现代文：此外，赤帝的女儿也住在这里，就是宋玉所说的天帝的小女儿，名叫瑶姬。她还没有出嫁就死了，葬在巫山的南面，精魂化成草，结成灵芝。
English: In addition, the daughter of the Red Emperor also lived here, that is, the little daughter of the Heavenly Emperor, named Zou Ji, who was mentioned by Song Yu. She died before she was married, and was buried in the south of Wushan. Her spirit turned into grass and became reishi mushroom.

古文：精魂为草，实为灵芝，所谓巫山之女，高唐之阻，旦为行云，暮为行雨，朝朝暮暮，阳台之下。
现代文：这就是所谓居于高唐险阻处的巫山神女，早上她是飘荡的云，向晚她是游移的雨，每天早晚都在阳台下面。
English: This is the so-called Wushan Goddess who lives in the dangerous obstacle of Gaotang. In the morning she is a drifting cloud, and in the evening she is a wandering rain. She is under the balcony every morning and evening.

古文：旦早视之，果如其言，故为立庙，号朝云焉。
现代文：次日一早，楚王起来一看，果然像神女所说的一样，于是就为她修建庙宇，号为朝云。
English: In the morning of the next day, King Chu got up and saw that it was indeed like the goddess said, so he built a temple for her, called Morning Cloud.

古文：其间首尾百六十里，谓之巫峡，盖因山为名也。
现代文：山峡从起点到终点长一百六十里，称为巫峡，就是因巫山而得名。
English: The gorge is 160 miles long from start to finish, and is called Wushan Gorge, named after Wushan Mountain.

古文：自三峡七百里中，两岸连山，略无阙处，重岩叠嶂，隐天蔽日，自非亭午夜分，不见曦月。
现代文：三峡七百里的水路间，两岸山脉连绵不绝，其间没有一点空缺的地方。层沓的岩石和峰峦，把天空和阳光都遮住了，不到中午和夜半，看不到太阳和月亮。
English: Between the seven hundred miles of waterways of the Three Gorges, the mountains on both sides are continuous, and there is not a single vacant place. The layered rocks and peaks cover the sky and the sun, and before noon and midnight, the sun and the moon cannot be seen.

古文：至于夏水襄陵，沿溯阻绝，或王命急宣，有时朝发白帝，暮到江陵，其间千二百里，虽乘奔御风，不以疾也。
现代文：到了夏天，大水升涨，漫到了丘陵上，不论上水或下水就都阻断了。如果朝廷颁发诏令须火急传达，有时早上从白帝城出发，晚间就可到江陵，其间行程一千二百里，虽然骑着快马，乘着疾风，也没有这般迅速。
English: In the summer, the floodwaters rise and spread to the hills, blocking both incoming and outgoing water. If the imperial court issues an edict to be urgently conveyed, it is sometimes possible to leave Baidicheng in the morning and reach Gangneung in the evening. The journey of twelve hundred miles, although riding a fast horse and riding a gale, is not so fast.

古文：春冬之时，则素湍绿潭，回清倒影，绝巘多生怪柏，悬泉瀑布，飞漱其间，清荣峻茂，良多趣味。
现代文：春天和冬天时节，又另是一番景象：白浪轻扬，澄潭泛绿，清波间映着倒影，陡峻的峰峦上长满姿态奇诡的柏树，悬崖上的瀑布飞奔直下。这种林泉山石的奇秀风光，真是引人入胜。
English: In spring and winter, there is another scene: the white waves are light, the clear pond is green, the reflection is reflected between the clear waves, the steep peaks are covered with strange-looking cypress trees, and the waterfall on the cliff is rushing down.

古文：每至晴初霜旦，林寒涧肃，常有高猿长啸，属引凄异，空谷传响，哀转久绝。
现代文：每逢初晴的日子和凝霜的清晨，山林寒寂、涧水无声，高处却常常传来猿猴一声声不断的长啸，声音十分凄楚，空谷里回荡着余音，久久方才消失。
English: Every fine day and frosty morning, the mountains and forests are cold and silent, and the rushing water is silent. At high altitudes, however, there is often the incessant howling of a monkey. The sound is very terrible, and the empty valley reverberates with an aftertaste, which only disappears after a long time.

古文：故渔者歌曰：巴东三峡巫峡长，猿鸣三声泪沾裳。
现代文：所以渔夫唱道：巴东三峡巫峡长，猿鸣三声泪沾裳。
English: So the fisherman sang: Badong Three Gorges, Wuxia Long, Monkey Song, Three Tears.

古文：江水又东径石门滩。滩北岸有山，山上合下开，洞达东西，缘江步路所由，刘备为陆逊所破，走径此门，追者甚急，备乃烧铠断道。
现代文：江水又往东流过石门滩，石门滩北岸有一座山，上合下开，东西畅通，沿江步行，都要经过这里。刘备被陆逊打得大败，逃经这道门户。追兵逼得很紧，于是刘备烧掉恺甲，破坏了栈道。
English: The river water flowed eastward through Shimen Beach. There was a mountain on the north shore of Shimen Beach. The top was closed and the bottom was open, everything was smooth, and walking along the river had to pass through here. Liu Bei was defeated by Lu Xun and escaped through this portal. The pursuers were very tight, so Liu Bei burned the armor and destroyed the boardwalk.

古文：孙桓为逊前驱，奋不顾命，斩上夔道，截其要径，备逾山越险，仅乃得免，忿恚而叹曰：吾昔至京，桓尚小儿而今迫孤，乃至于此。
现代文：孙桓充当陆逊的前锋，他奋不顾身地追击，切断通往夔州的要道。
English: Sun Huan acted as Lu Xun's forward. He pursued the enemy relentlessly, cutting off the main road to Zhangzhou.

古文：遂发愤而薨矣。又东过秭归县之南，县故归乡，《地理志》曰：归子国也。
现代文：又往东流过姊归县南边，株归县就是旧时的归乡。《地理志》说：就是归子国。
English: It also flows eastward through the southern part of Sibu County, which is the old homecoming. "Geography" says: it is the homecoming country.

古文：《乐纬》曰：昔归典叶声律。
现代文：《乐纬》说：古时归是掌管音乐的。
English: "Le Wei" said: In ancient times, the orchestra was in charge of music.

古文：宋忠曰：归即夔。归乡盖夔乡矣。
现代文：宋忠说：归就是夔，归乡该就是夔乡了。
English: Song Zhong said: To return is to return, to return is to return.

古文：古楚之嫡嗣有熊挚者，以废疾不立，而居于夔，为楚附庸。后王命为夔子。
现代文：古时楚王的嫡子有个叫熊挚的，因为残疾不能继承王位，因而在夔居住，作为楚的附庸国，以后楚王称他为夔子。
English: In ancient times, the legitimate son of King Chu had a son named Xiong Zhen, who could not inherit the throne because of his disability, so he lived in Yunnan as a vassal state of Chu. Later, King Chu called him Yanzi.

古文：《春秋》值公二十六年，楚以其不祀灭之者也。
现代文：《春秋》：僖公二十六年前，楚因夔子不祭祀，就灭了夔国。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Twenty-six years ago, Chu annihilated the State of Min due to the fact that Min did not offer sacrifices.

古文：袁山松曰：屈原有贤姊，闻原放逐，亦来归，瑜令自宽全。乡人冀其见从，因名曰秭归。即《离骚》所谓女嬃蝉媛以署余也。
现代文：袁山松说：屈原有个贤慧的姐姐，听说屈原被放逐，也来和他一起，劝他想开些，全乡的人也都希望他能听姐姐的话，因此称那地方为株归；就是《离骚》中所说的：女篓牵着我依依不舍，一边又责骂我。
English: Yuan Shansong said: Qu Yuan had a wise sister. When she heard that Qu Yuan had been exiled, she also came with him to persuade him to open up. The whole village hoped that he would listen to his sister's words, so they called that place home. That is what is said in "Leaving So-and-So": "The wench dragged me along and scolded me at the same time."

古文：县城东北，依山即坂，周回二里，高一丈五尺，南临大江。
现代文：县城东北背靠山坡，城墙周围长二里，高一丈五尺，南濒大江。
English: The northeast of the county seat is backed by a hillside, the city wall is two miles long and five feet high, and it is bordered by the Yangtze River to the south.

古文：古老相传，谓之刘备城，盖备征吴所筑也。
现代文：据老人们相传，称为刘备城，大概是刘备征吴时所筑。
English: According to the old people, it is called Liu Bei City. It was probably built by Liu Beizheng.

古文：县东北数十里，有屈原旧田宅。虽畦堰縻漫，犹保屈田之称也。
现代文：县城东北数十里，有屈原过去的田地和住宅，虽然田埂已经紊乱崩坏，可是仍保持着屈田的称呼。
English: Dozens of miles northeast of the prefectural capital, there are fields and residences that used to belong to Quyuan. Although the rice paddies have fallen into disarray, they still retain the name of Quyuan.

古文：县北一百六十里，有屈原故宅，累石为室基，名其地曰乐平里。
现代文：县城以北一百六十里有屈原故居，用石头砌筑成屋基，那地方取名乐平里。
English: To the north of the county seat, there is the 160-year-old house of Qu Yuan, which was built on a stone foundation. The place is called Lepingli.

古文：宅之东北六十里，有女嬃庙，捣衣石犹存。
现代文：故居东北六十里有女婴庙，捣衣石也还在。
English: There is a baby girl's temple in the former residence of the Northeast Sixty, and the dressing stone is still there.

古文：故《宜都记》曰：种归盖楚子熊绎之始国，而屈原之乡里也。原田宅于今具存，指谓此也。
现代文：所以《宜都记》说：株归是楚子熊绎最早的封国，也是屈原的故乡，屈原田园住宅至今还在；指的就是这地方。
English: Therefore, the "Record of Yidu" said: "Kaguigui was the earliest fief of Chu Zi Xiong Yu, and it was also the hometown of Qu Yuan. Qu Yuan's rural residence is still there; it refers to this place.

古文：江水又东径一城北，其城凭岭作固，二百一十步，夹溪临谷，据山枕江，北对丹阳城，城据山跨阜，周八里二百八十步，东北两面，悉临绝涧，西带亭下溪，南枕大江，险峭壁立，信天固也。
现代文：江水又往东流过一座城的北边，此城凭依山岭修筑加固，长二百一十步。城在两溪之间，下临山谷，据山濒江，北对丹阳城。丹阳城依山修筑，跨过丘冈，周围八里二百八十步；东北两面都是下临绝涧，西边靠近亭下溪，南傍大江，陡崖险峻如壁，实在是天然的险、要之地。
English: The river also flows eastward past the northern edge of a city, which is fortified by being built against the mountains and is two hundred and ten paces long. The city is between two streams, down near the valley, according to the mountain near the river, north of Danyang City. Danyang City is built against the mountain, across the hill, around eight miles and two hundred and eighty paces; both sides of the northeast are down near the precipice, the west side is near the Tingxia Creek, the south side of the big river, the steep cliff is steep as a wall, it is really a natural danger, an important place.

古文：楚子熊绎始封丹阳之所都也。
现代文：这是楚子熊绎初封于丹阳时的都邑。
English: This is the capital of Chu Zi Xiong Yu when he was first sealed in Danyang.

古文：《地理志》，以为吴之丹阳。论者云：寻吴楚悠隔，缕荆山，无容远在吴境，是为非也。
现代文：《地理志》以为那是吴的丹阳，有人辩驳道：推想起来吴楚两地相距遥远，熊绎在荆山艰苦经营，丹阳不可能远在吴的境内，所以此说是错误的。
English: "Geography" thought that it was Danyang in Wu. Some people argued: the distance between the two places in Wuchu is far away. Xiong Yiyu ran a hard business in Jingshan. Danyang cannot be far away from the territory of Wu. Therefore, it is wrong to say this.

古文：又楚之先王陵墓在其间，盖为征矣。
现代文：而且楚国前代帝王的陵墓也在那里，这也可作为证据。
English: Moreover, the mausoleum of the former emperor of Chu is also there, which can also be used as evidence.

古文：江水又东南径夔城南，跨据川阜，周回一里百一十八步，西北背枕深谷，东带乡口溪，南侧大江。城内西北角有金城，东北角有圆土狱，西南角有石井口，径五尺。
现代文：江水又往东南流，经过夔城南面，夔城据山川形势而修筑，周围一里一百十八步，西北背依深谷，东边靠近乡口溪，南濒大江边；城内西北角有金城，东北角有圆形土牢，西南角有石井，口径五尺。
English: The river flows to the southeast, passing through the southern side of Lucheng. Lucheng was built according to the mountain and river situation, with a circumference of one mile and one hundred and eighteen paces, northwest backed by a deep valley, east near Xiangkou Creek, south near the big river; the northwest corner of the city has a gold city, the northeast corner has a round dungeon, and the southwest corner has a stone well with a caliber of five feet.

古文：熊挚始治巫城，后疾移此，盖夔徙也。
现代文：熊挚开始把治所一设在巫城，后来有病，迁移到这里，大概是从夔迁过来的。
English: Xiong Zhengyi initially set up the clinic in Wucheng, but later, when he fell ill, he moved here, probably from Handan.

古文：《春秋左传》值公二十六年，楚令尹子玉城夔者也。
现代文：《春秋左传》：僖公二十六年前，楚国的令尹子玉在夔筑城。
English: "Chunqiu Zuo Zhen": Twenty-six years before Zeng Gong, Yin Ziyu, the ruler of the State of Chu, was in Zhiqiu City.

古文：服虔曰：在巫之阳，秭归归乡矣。
现代文：服虔说：夔在巫山南面，就是株归的归乡。
English: Fuxian said, "The south side of Wushan Mountain is the homecoming place for the returnees.

古文：江水又东径归乡县故城北。
现代文：江水又往东流，经过归乡旧城北面。
English: The river then flows eastward, passing the old town of Guizhou to the north.

古文：袁山松曰：父老传言，原既流放，忽然蹔归，乡人喜悦，因名曰归乡。
现代文：袁山松说：据老人相传，屈原被流放后，忽然又回来暂住，乡人们很高兴，因而称为归乡。
English: Yuan Shansong said: According to the old people's legend, after Qu Yuan was exiled, he suddenly came back to stay for a while. The villagers were very happy, so they called him homecoming.

古文：抑其山秀水清，故出俊异，地险流疾，故其性亦隘。
现代文：或许因为那里山明水秀，所以会出天才人物；地势险要，水流迅疾，所以性格也有点过急。
English: Perhaps because the mountains and water are so beautiful there, geniuses will come out; the terrain is dangerous, the water is swift, so the character is a bit too hasty.

古文：《诗》云：惟岳降神，生甫及申。
现代文：《诗经》说：四岳的神灵下降，仲山甫和申伯于是诞生。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: the deities of the four mountains fell, and Zhongshan Fu and Shen Bo were born.

古文：信与！
现代文：确实如此！
English: That's right!

古文：余谓山松此言，可谓因事而立证，恐非名县之本旨矣。
现代文：我要说，袁山松这番话可说是因史事而设证，恐怕不是该县命名的原意。
English: I want to say that Yuan Shansong's words can be said to be justified by historical events, but I'm afraid that's not the original meaning of the county's name.

古文：县城南面重岭，北背大江。
现代文：县修在南面，山岭重沓，北面靠着大江，东面乡口溪回环流过。
English: Xiu County is in the south, the mountains are heavy, the north is close to the big river, and the east is surrounded by Xiangkou Creek.

古文：东带乡口溪，溪源出县东南数百里，西北入县。
现代文：乡口溪源出该县东南数百里，往西北进入县境，流经狗峡西边。
English: Xiangkou Creek originates several hundred miles southeast of the county, flows northwest into the county border, and flows through the west side of the Dog Gorge.

古文：径狗峡西，峡崖龛中石，隐起有狗形，狗状具足，故以狗名峡。
现代文：这里山峡崖壁的凹处，有一块岩石隆起像狗的样子，形状齐全，所以称为狗峡。
English: Here, in the recess of the cliff wall of the mountain gorge, there is a rock bulge that looks like a dog and has a complete shape, so it is called the Dog Gorge.

古文：乡口溪又西北径县下入江，谓之乡口也。
现代文：乡口溪又往西北流，经过县境注入大江，汇流处叫乡口。
English: Xiangkou Creek flows to the northwest, passing through the county border into the big river, and the confluence is called Xiangkou.

古文：江水又东径信陵县，南临大江，东傍深溪，溪源北发梁州上庸县界，南流径县下，而注于大江也。
现代文：江水又往东流经信陵县南。信陵县面愉大江，东傍深溪；溪水发源于北方的梁州上庸县地界，南流经县境注入大江。
English: The river water also flows eastward through the south of Xinying County. Xinying County is bordered by the Yudu River and the Dongbian Creek; the stream water originates from the northern border of Liangzhou Shangyong County, and flows south through the county border into the big river.

古文：又东过夷陵县南，江水自建平至东界峡，盛弘之谓之空泠峡。
现代文：又往东流过夷陵县南边，江水又从建平流到东界峡，盛弘之称为空冷峡。
English: It also flows eastward across the southern edge of Yiling County, and the river water flows from Jianping to Dongjie Gorge, which is known as Air-Cooled Gorge.

古文：峡甚高峻，即宜都、建平二郡界也。
现代文：峡极高峻，这是宜都、建平二郡的分界。
English: The gorge is extremely high, which is the boundary between the two counties of Yidu and Jianping.

古文：其间远望，势交岭表，有五六峰，参差互出。
现代文：这里山势陡峭，在峡中远望，两岸山岭高与天接。五六座山峰参差错落地耸立着，上有奇石，状如二人奋臂相向。
English: The mountains here are steep, and can be seen from far away in the middle of the gorge, and the mountains on both sides of the river are high and close to the sky. Five or six peaks stand in a staggered manner, and there are strange stones, like two people facing each other.

古文：上有奇石，如二人像，攘袂相对，俗传两郡督邮争界于此，宜都督邮，厥势小东倾，议者以为不如也。
现代文：按民间传说，两郡督邮在这里争界，宜都督邮姿势稍稍向东倾斜，人们指点谈论，以为不及对方强。
English: According to folklore, the postmasters of the two counties fought for supremacy here. The post of the postmaster of the capital should be slightly inclined to the east. People talked about it and thought that it was not as strong as the other side.

古文：江水历峡东，径宜昌县之插灶下，江之左岸，绝岸壁立数百丈，飞鸟所不能栖。
现代文：江水穿过东界峡，往东流经宜昌县的插灶下面。左岸是悬崖削壁，高达数百丈，连飞鸟也不能栖息。
English: The water of the river passes through Dongjie Gorge and flows eastward under the stove of Yichang County. The left bank is a cliff wall, hundreds of meters high, where even flying birds cannot live.

古文：有一火烬，插在崖间，望见可长数尺。
现代文：崖岸间插着一根未曾燃尽的木头，望去长约数尺。
English: Between the cliffs there is an unburnt log, a few feet long.

古文：父老传言，昔洪水之时，人薄舟崖侧，以余烬插之岩侧，至今犹存，故先后相承谓之插灶也。
现代文：父老相传，从前发洪水时，人们停船于崖旁，把一根烧过的柴火插在岩边，直到如今还在，所以世代相传，称为插灶。
English: It has been passed down from generation to generation that when there was a flood in the past, people would stop their boats at the edge of the cliff and stick a burnt stick of firewood on the edge of the cliff. It is still there to this day, so it has been passed down from generation to generation and is known as a plug-in stove.

古文：江水又东径流头滩，其水并峻激奔暴，鱼鳖所不能游。
现代文：江水又往东经流头滩，这里也是急流奔腾，势极凶猛，连鱼鳖也不能游过，旅人常视为畏途。
English: The water of the river flows eastward to the headland, where there is also a fast-flowing rapids, extremely fierce, even the bait can not swim through, travelers often regard it as a daunting journey.

古文：行者常苦之，其歌曰：滩头白勃坚相持，倏忽沦没别无期。
现代文：有一首歌谣说：在滩头汹涌的白浪中，大伙要奋力坚持！霎时沉没下去，告别就太迟！
English: There is a song that says: In the turbulent white waves on the beach, everyone must fight to hold on! If you sink at the last moment, it will be too late to say goodbye!

古文：袁山松曰：自蜀至此，五千余里，下水五日，上水百日也。
现代文：袁山松说：从蜀地到这里行程五千余里，下水只消五日就到，上水却要一百日。
English: Yuan Shansong said: It is a journey of more than five thousand miles from Shudi to here. It only takes five days to launch the water, but it takes a hundred days to launch the water.

古文：江水又东径宜昌县北，分夷道很山所立也。
现代文：江水又往东流经宜昌县北面，宜昌县是划出夷道、恨山二县部分地区设立的。
English: The river also flows eastward through the north of Yichang County. Yichang County was established by carving out parts of Yidu and Henshan counties.

古文：县治江之南岸，北枕大江，与夷陵对界。
现代文：县治在江流南岸，北濒大江，与夷陵相 对，以江为界。
English: The county seat is on the south bank of the river and on the north bank of the Yangtze River, opposite Yiling, with the river as the boundary.

古文：《宜都记》曰：渡流头滩十里，便得宜昌县。
现代文：《宜都记》说：过了流头滩十里，就到宜昌县。
English: "Record of Yichang" says: After 10 miles of Liutou Beach, you will arrive in Yichang County.

古文：江水又东径狼尾滩而历人滩。
现代文：江水又往东流，经过狼尾滩后又流过人滩。
English: The river then flows to the east, passing through the Wolf's Tail Beach and then through the Human Beach.

古文：袁山松曰：二滩相去二里。人滩水至峻峭，南岸有青石，夏没冬出，其石崟，数十步中，悉作人面形，或大或小。其分明者，须发皆具，因名曰人滩也。
现代文：袁山松说：二滩相距二里，人滩水流极其险急，南岸有青石，夏天没在水中，冬天露出水面；这块高大的怪石，数十步内看去，都是人面的样子，或大或小，从有的角度看来更加清楚，甚至须发齐全，所以叫人滩。
English: Yuan Shansong said: The two beaches are two miles apart, and the water flow of the human beach is extremely dangerous. There is a bluestone on the south bank, which is not in the water in summer and is exposed to the water in winter. This tall strange stone, when viewed within dozens of steps, looks like a human face, large or small. From a certain point of view, it is more clear, and even has to be complete, so it is called a human beach.

古文：江水又东径黄牛山，下有滩，名曰黄牛滩。
现代文：江水继续东流，经过黄牛山，山下有滩， 叫黄牛滩。
English: The river continues to flow eastward, passing through Huang Niu Mountain. There is a beach at the foot of the mountain, called Huang Niu Beach.

古文：南岸重岭叠起，最外高崖间有石色如人负刀牵牛，人黑牛黄，成就分明，既人迹所绝，莫得究焉，此岩既高，加以江湍纡回，虽途径信宿，犹望见此物，故行者谣曰：朝发黄牛，暮宿黄牛，三朝三暮，黄牛如故。
现代文：但那是人迹不到的地方，也就无法去看个究竟了。这块岩山很高，又加湍急的江流回环曲折，因而虽经两天的航程，还能看到这块奇岩。所以行人编了一首歌谣说：清晨从黄牛启程，晚上在黄牛栖身；三个清晨又三个晚上，黄牛还是这般模样。
English: But that is a place where there are no traces of people, so it is impossible to see the bottom. This rocky mountain is very high, and the river flows back and forth, so even after a two-day voyage, you can still see this strange rock. So the pedestrians made up a song saying: In the morning they set off from Huang Niu, and in the evening they shelter in Huang Niu; three mornings and three nights, Huang Niu is still like this.

古文：言水路纡深，回望如一矣。
现代文：歌谣是说水路迂回深曲，回头眺望时，仿佛总是还在同一个地方。
English: The ballad is that the waterway is circuitous and deep, and when looking back, it always seems to be in the same place.

古文：江水又东径西陵峡，《宜都记》曰：自黄牛滩东入西陵界，至峡口百许里，山水纡曲，而两岸高山重障，非日中夜半，不见日月。
现代文：江水又往东流经西陵峡。《宜都记》说：从黄牛滩往东进入西陵境内，到峡口的百里左右航程中，山水萦纤曲折。两岸高山峻岭层层叠叠，不到正午或夜半，看不见太阳和月亮。
English: The river also flows eastward through the Xiling Gorge. "The Yidu Records" says: From the Yellow Cow Beach eastward into the Xiling territory, in the hundred-mile or so voyage to the mouth of the gorge, the landscape twists and turns. The mountains on both sides are stacked, and before noon or midnight, the sun and the moon cannot be seen.

古文：绝壁或千许丈，其石彩色，形容多所像类。
现代文：绝壁有的高达千丈，岩石色彩缤纷，形状常常很像某种事物。
English: The cliffs are sometimes thousands of feet high, the rocks are colorful, and the shape often resembles something.

古文：林木高茂，略尽冬春。犹鸣至清，山谷传响，泠泠不绝。
现代文：树高林密，经冬常绿不凋；猿啼声极其清越，山谷里回声荡漾，久久不绝。
English: The trees are tall and densely wooded and remain evergreen through the winter; the chirping of the apes is extremely clear and far-reaching, and the echoes reverberate in the valley, never ceasing.

古文：所谓三峡，此其一也。
现代文：所谓三峡，这就是其中之一。
English: The so-called Three Gorges is one of them.

古文：山松言：常闻峡中水疾，书记及口传，悉以临惧相戒，曾无称有山水之美也。
现代文：袁山松说：常听人们说，峡中水流险急，书中记载和口头传闻，都是讲述身临险境时的可怕情景，以此来相告诫，却没有人谈到这里山水之美的。
English: Yuan Shansong said: People often say that the water flow in the gorge is dangerous. The records in the book and the oral rumors are all about the terrible scene when in danger, in order to warn each other, but no one has talked about the beauty of the landscape here.

古文：及余来践跻此境，既至欣然，始信耳闻之不如亲见矣。
现代文：待到我亲身踏上这片土地，一到这里就满怀欣喜，这才相信耳闻不如亲见了。
English: It wasn't until I set foot on this land in person and was filled with joy as soon as I got here that I believed that hearing was not as good as seeing.

古文：其叠崿秀峰，奇构异形，固难以辞叙。林木萧森，离离蔚蔚，乃在霞气之表。
现代文：那层沓的崖壁，秀丽的峰峦，奇形怪状，姿态万千，实在难以笔墨形容；林木参差，郁郁葱葱，高与云霞相接。
English: The sheer cliff walls, the beautiful peaks, the strange shapes, the thousands of postures, are really hard to describe; the trees are jagged, lush, high and close to the clouds.

古文：仰瞩俯映，弥习弥佳。流连信宿，不觉忘返，目所履历，未尝有也。
现代文：仰观山色，俯视倒影，愈看愈感美妙，流连游赏了两天，不觉乐而忘返；平生亲眼所见的景物，没有像这样壮丽的了。
English: Looking up at the mountain, looking down at the reflection, the more I see, the more I feel wonderful. I have been traveling for two days, and I have forgotten it without feeling happy. There is no scenery that I have seen with my own eyes in my life that is as magnificent as this.

古文：既自欣得此奇观，山水有灵，亦当惊知己于千古矣。
现代文：我一边为自己能一睹这样的奇观而高兴，一边又想山水如果有灵，那么千秋万代之中能够得到一个知己，也该感到惊喜了！
English: On the one hand, I am happy to be able to see such a wonder, and on the other hand, I think that if the landscape has a spirit, then it should be a surprise to be able to get a confidant among thousands of generations!

古文：江水历禹断江南。峡北有七谷村，两山间有水清深，潭而不流。
现代文：江水流经禹断江以南，山峡北岸有七谷村，两山间有一湾清泉，澄澈深沉，静止不流。
English: The water of the river flows south of the Ufan River. There is a village of Shichitani on the northern shore of the mountain gorge. Between the two mountains there is a gulf of clear spring. It is clear and deep, and does not flow.

古文：城南临大江。秦令白起伐楚，三战而烧夷陵者也。
现代文：又据老人传说：古时这里是大江，到了大禹治水时，因此江太小，泄水木畅，于是禹又另开了今天这道峡口，水势全从这里直冲而下，此江于是就断了，现在称为断江。
English: According to the old man's legend: In ancient times, there was the Dajiang River here. When water was controlled by Dayu, the river was too small and the water was not drained properly. Therefore, Dayu opened the mouth of today's canyon, and all the water rushed straight down from here. As a result, the river broke and is now called the Broken River.

古文：应劭曰：夷山在西北，盖因山以名县也。
现代文：江水出峡后，往东南流经故城洲，洲与北岸相连，洲头叫郭洲，长二里，宽一里，洲上有步阐旧城，方圆大致与洲相称，只是周围稍留有余地。
English: After the river emerged from the gorge, it flowed to the southeast through the former Chengzhou, and the continent was connected to the north shore. The head of the continent is called Guozhou, which is two miles long and one mile wide. The old city is located on the continent. The square is roughly commensurate with the continent, but there is a little room around it.

古文：王莽改曰居利。吴黄武元年，更名西陵也。后复曰夷陵。
现代文：故城洲上的城墙周围五里，是吴西陵都督步鹭所筑。孙皓凤凰元年改名西陵，以后又恢复夷陵一名。
English: The five-mile perimeter of the city wall on the former castle island was built by Wu Xiling, the governor of the city. Sun Yat-sen changed the name to Xiling in the first year of the Phoenix, and later restored it to Yiling.

古文：县北三十里，有石穴，名曰马穿。
现代文：县北三十里有个石洞，名叫马穿。
English: Thirty miles north of the county, there is a stone cave called Horse Cave.

古文：尝有白马出穴，人逐之入穴，潜行出汉中。
现代文：从前曾有白马从洞中出来，人们去追逐它，又逃进洞里，循着洞走直到汉中才出来。
English: Once upon a time, a white horse came out of a cave, people chased it, fled into the cave again, and followed the cave until they came out of Han.

古文：汉中人失马，亦尝出此穴，相去数千里。
现代文：汉中人有马不见了，也曾从这个洞口重新出现，而二地相距远达数千里。
English: The Hanzhong man and horse disappeared and reappeared from this cave, and the two places are thousands of miles apart.

古文：袁山松言江北多连山，登之望江南诸山，数十百重，莫识其名，高者千仞，多奇形异势，自非烟寨雨霁，不辨见此远山矣。
现代文：袁山松说：江北山岭大都互相连接，登山遥望江南群山，层层叠叠，多达数十或上百重，都不知道山名；高的上千丈，山形千奇百怪，山势也迥异寻常。不是烟散雨收的好天气，是分辨不出这样的远山的。
English: Yuan Shansong said: Most of the mountains and ridges in the north of the Yangtze River are connected to each other. Mountaineers can see the mountains in the south of the Yangtze River from afar. They are layered and stacked, up to dozens or hundreds of layers, and they do not know the names of the mountains. They are thousands of meters high, the mountain shapes are strange, and the mountain situation is also very unusual. It is not a good weather for scattered rain, but it is impossible to distinguish such distant mountains.

古文：余尝往返十许过，正可再见远峰耳。
现代文：我曾往来行走过十来次，但看清这些远峰，也不过两次罢了。
English: I've walked up and down the mountain dozens of times, but I've only seen these distant peaks clearly twice.

古文：江水又东径白鹿岩。
现代文：江水又往东流经白鹿岩。
English: The river then flows east through Shirakawa Rock.

古文：沿江有峻壁百余丈，猿所不能游。有一白鹿，陵峭登崖，乘岩而上，故世名此岩为白鹿岩。
现代文：沿江有峻峭的石壁，高达百余丈，连猿猴也不能上去嬉游，但有一头白鹿竟乘岩而上，登上险峻的高崖。所以世人把此岩称为白鹿岩。
English: There are steep stone walls along the river, more than a hundred meters high. Even monkeys can't go up and play, but a white deer actually climbed up the rock and climbed up the steep cliff. So the world called this rock the White Deer Rock.

古文：江水又东历荆门、虎牙之间。
现代文：江水继续往东流过荆门、虎牙之间。
English: The river continued to flow eastward between Jingmen and Huya.

古文：荆门在南，上合下开，暗彻山南，有门像，虎牙在北，石壁色红，间有白文类牙形，并以物像受名。
现代文：荆门在南，上合下开，暗通山南，北边有座虎牙形的石门，石壁呈赫红色，间有白色的花纹，形状像牙齿，都是以事物形象命名。
English: The Jingmen Gate is in the south, closed at the top and opened at the bottom, leading to the south of the mountain. On the north side, there is a tiger's tooth-shaped stone gate. The stone wall is bright red, with white patterns in between, shaped like teeth. They are all named after the image of things.

古文：此二山，楚之西塞也。
现代文：这两座山是楚国西部的边塞。
English: These two mountains are the border fortresses of the western part of Chu.

古文：水势急峻，故郭景纯《江赋》曰：虎牙桀竖以屹崒，荆门阙竦而盘薄，圆渊九回以悬腾，湓流雷呴而电激者也。
现代文：这里水势湍急，所以郭景纯的《江赋》说：虎牙冲天竖立，高峻而险峭；荆门屹若城网，宏大而雄伟；深渊涡流回旋，骇浪奔腾；洪涛声如巨雷，势若闪电。
English: Here, the water is very rapid, so Guo Jingjun's "River Fu" said: the tiger's teeth stand up to the sky, lofty and dangerous; the jade gate stands like a city net, grand and majestic; the abyss swirls, and the waves are rushing; the sound of the flood is like thunder, and it is like lightning.

古文：汉建武十一年，公孙述遣其大司徒任满、翼江王田戎，将兵数万，据险为浮桥，横江以绝水路，营垒跨山，以塞陆道。
现代文：汉建武十一年公孙述派遣他的大司徒任满、翼江王田戎，率兵数 万，凭险建造浮桥，横跨江上截断航道，又跨山修筑营垒，堵死陆上通路。
English: In the eleventh year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Jianwu's great-grandson wrote that he dispatched his great-great-grandson, Wang Tian Rong of the Yangtze River, with tens of thousands of soldiers, to build a pontoon bridge at risk, cut off the waterway across the river, and build a camp across the mountain, blocking the land route.

古文：光武遣吴汉、岑彭将六万人击荆门，汉等率舟师攻之，直冲浮桥，因风纵火，遂斩满等矣。
现代文：光武帝派遣吴汉、岑彭带领六万人去袭击荆门，吴汉等率水兵向浮桥直冲过来，凭借风势放火烧桥，于是杀了任满等。
English: Emperor Guangwu dispatched Wu Han and Zi Peng to lead 60,000 men to attack Jingmen. Wu Han and his sailors rushed straight to the floating bridge and set the bridge on fire with the help of the wind, thus killing Ren Man and his men.

古文：又东南过夷道县北，夷水从佷山县南，东北注之。
现代文：又往东南流过夷道县北边，夷水从很山县南边往东北注入。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the northern part of Yiduo County, and the Yidu water is injected from the southern part of Yuanshan County to the northeast.

古文：夷道县，汉武帝伐西南夷，路由此出，故曰夷道矣。王莽更名江南。桓温父名彝，改曰西道。
现代文：夷道县，因汉武帝征伐西南夷时，行军路线是从这里走的，所以叫夷道，王莽改名为江南；桓温父亲名彝，夷、彝同音，为避讳改名西道。
English: In Yidu County, because the Han Emperor Wudi marched from here when he conquered the southwestern Yiwu, the march route was called Yidu, Wang Mang was renamed Jiangnan; Kuan Wen's father's name had the same pronunciation as Yiwu and Yiwu, so he changed his name to Xi Dao to avoid the stigma.

古文：魏武分南郡置临江郡。刘备改曰宜都。郡治在县东四百步。
现代文：魏武帝把南郡分开，另设临江郡，刘备改名宜都，郡治设在县治东边四百步处。
English: Emperor Weiwu divided Nan County and set up Linjiang County. Liu Bei changed his name to Yidu, and the county seat was set up 400 meters east of the county seat.

古文：故城，吴丞相陆逊所筑也。为二江之会也。
现代文：老城是吴皿相陆逊所筑，地点在两江的汇合处。
English: The old city was built by Emperor Lu Xun of Wuxia. It is located at the confluence of the two rivers.

古文：北有湖里渊，渊上橘袖蔽野，桑麻暗日，西望佷山诸岭，重峰叠秀，青翠相临，时有丹霞白云，游曳其上。
现代文：北边有湖里渊，渊上桔袖绿荫蔽野，桑麻密得不透阳光。西望恨山的群峰，层峦叠嶂，青苍的翠色一重接着一重，常有红霞白云在山巅飘荡。
English: In the north, there is a lake basin, and on the basin, there is a field of orange-sleeved green shade, and the mulberry trees are so dense that they do not let the sunlight through. In the west, there are peaks of hate mountains, layers of folds, layers of green, and often there are red and white clouds floating on the mountain tops.

古文：城东北有望堂，地特峻，下临清江，游瞩之名处也。
现代文：城中东北边有望堂，那地方很高峻，下临澄碧的江流，是一处有名的游览胜地。
English: The middle and north-eastern edge of the city is called Hodoido. The place is very steep, with a clear, green river flowing below. It is a famous tourist attraction.

古文：县北有女观山，厥处高显，回眺极目。
现代文：县北有女观山，位置高旷，眼界开阔，可以极目远眺。
English: In the northern part of the county, there is Jieguan Mountain, which is located in a high and expansive area, with a wide view, and can be seen from far away.

古文：登此山绝望，忧感而死，山木枯悴，鞠为童枯。
现代文：老人们相传，从前有个女人，丈夫在蜀地做官，屡次延误归期，她登临此山，望眼欲穿，终于忧伤而死。山上的树木也都枯死了，成了一座秃岭。
English: The old people say that once upon a time, there was a woman whose husband was an official in Shu, and who was repeatedly late in returning home. She climbed this mountain, looked around, and finally died of grief. The trees on the mountain also died, and it became a bald mountain.

古文：乡人哀之，因名此山为女观焉。
现代文：乡人哀悼她，因称此山为女观山。
English: The villagers mourned for her, calling the mountain Nyugan Mountain.

古文：县东北十里，土台北岸有迤洲，长十余里，义熙初，烈武王斩桓谦处。
现代文：那位不幸的女人就葬在山顶，至今孤坟依然存在。又往东流过枝江县南边，沮水从北方流来注人。江水继续往东流，经过上明城北边。晋太元年间初年烈武王杀桓谦的地点。
English: The unfortunate woman was buried at the top of the mountain, and her lonely grave still exists today. It also flowed eastward through the southern edge of the Yangtze River County, and the cold water flowed from the north to the people. The river water continued to flow eastward, passing the northern edge of the Shangming City. In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, it was the place where the warrior king killed Huan Qian.

古文：县东南二十里，富城洲上，有道士范侪精庐。
现代文：县城东南二十里，富城洲上有道士范济的精庐。
English: Twenty miles southeast of the county seat, Fuchengzhou has the essence of Taoist Fanji.

古文：自言巴东人，少游荆土。而多盘桓县界。恶衣粗食，萧散自得，言来事多验，而辞不可详。人心欲见，歘然而对，貌言寻求，终弗遇也。
现代文：范济自称是巴东人，少年时期游历荆州地区，大部分时间都往来于该县边境一带，他衣服破烂，食物粗劣，但闲散自在，自得其乐。他预言未来的事，常常应验，但言辞隐晦难解；人们真心想见他，一忽儿就在眼前了，但如虚言要找他，却总碰不到。
English: Fan Zi claimed to be from Padong. As a boy, he traveled to the Jingzhou region, and spent most of his time in and around the border of the county. His clothes were tattered and his food was poor, but he was at ease and enjoyed himself. He predicted future events, which often came true, but his words were obscure and difficult to decipher. People really wanted to see him, and he was suddenly right in front of their eyes, but if they were looking for him with false words, they could not find him.

古文：虽径跨诸洲，而舟人未尝见其济涉也。
现代文：虽然他来往于各处沙洲之间，但船夫却从未见他过渡和涉水。
English: Although he moved between sandbanks all over the place, the boatman never saw him crossing or wading.

古文：后东游广陵，卒于彼土。
现代文：以后他东游广陵，就死在那边。
English: After that, he traveled east to Guangling and died there.

古文：侪本无定止处，宿憩一小庵而已。
现代文：范济本来没有固定的住所，住宿安息，不过一个小奄罢了。
English: Fan Zi originally had no fixed abode, but it was just a small choice.

古文：弟子慕之，于其昔游，共立精舍，以存其人。
现代文：他的弟子思慕他，就在他从前游历过的地方修建道院来纪念他。
English: His disciples thought about him and built a dojo to commemorate him in the place where he had traveled before.

古文：县有陈留王子香庙，颂称子香于汉和帝之时，出为荆州刺史，有惠政，天子征之，道卒枝江亭中。
现代文：县里有陈留王子香庙，人们还传颂着，主子香在汉和帝时出任荆州刺史，有利民的政绩，皇帝征召他，他在旅途死于枝江亭中。
English: There is Chen Liu Zi Xiang Temple in the county. It is also rumored that the master and son Xiang served as Jingzhou's chief historian during the Han Dynasty and the Emperor's reign, and had a good political record. The Emperor conscripted him, and he died in the River Branch Pavilion on his journey.

古文：常有三白虎，出入人间，送丧逾境。
现代文：当他的灵枢运送还乡时，常有三只白虎出入于人间，为他送丧，一直送出县境。
English: When his spirit was transported back to his hometown, there were often three white tigers entering and exiting the human world to see him off, all the way out of the county.

古文：百姓追美甘棠，以永元十八年，立庙设祠，刻石铭德，号曰枝江白虎王君。其子孙至今犹谓之为白虎王。
现代文：百姓追思他的恩德，于永元十八年为他建庙立祠，刻碑记载他的德政，并号为枝江白虎王君，他的子孙后代直到现在还把他称为白虎王。
English: The people thought about his benevolence, and built a temple and a shrine for him in 18th year of Yongyuan. A monument was carved to record his virtuous rule, and he was called the White Tiger King of the Yangtze River. His descendants still call him the White Tiger King.

古文：江水又东会沮口，楚昭王所谓江、汉，沮、漳，楚之望也。
现代文：江水又往东流，汇合沮口，这就是楚昭王所说的：江、汉、沮、漳，都是楚国祭祀河川的地方。
English: The water of the river flows eastward and converges at the Depu mouth, which is what King Chu Zhao said: Jiang, Han, Depu, and Lu are all places where rivers are worshipped in Chu.

古文：又南过江陵县南。
现代文：又往南流过江陵县南边。
English: It also flowed south through the southern part of Gangneung County.

古文：县北有洲，号曰枚回洲，江水自此两分而为南、北江也。
现代文：江陵县北面有个沙洲，称为枚回洲，江水在这里分为两条，就是南江和北江。
English: There is a sandbar in the north of Gangneung County, known as Mihai Chau, where the river water is divided into two, the South River and the North River.

古文：北江有故乡洲。元兴之末，桓玄西奔，毛祐之与参军费恬射玄于此洲。玄子升，年六岁，辄拔去之。
现代文：北江有故乡洲，元兴末年，桓玄往西奔逃，毛佑之和参军费恬就在此洲射桓玄，桓玄的儿子桓升只有六岁，立即把箭拔掉。
English: Beijiang has a hometown island. At the end of the Yuanxing Dynasty, Huan Xuan fled to the west. Mao Youzhi and Fei Yao, who joined the army, shot Huan Xuan on this island. Huan Xuan's son, Huan Sheng, was only six years old and immediately pulled out the arrow.

古文：王韶之云：玄之初奔也，经日不得食，左右进粗粥，咽不能下。
现代文：王韶之说：桓玄开始逃亡时，整日没有东西吃；侍从送了粗米粥给他，他又不能下咽。
English: Wang Xizhi said, "When Huan Xuan started to flee, he had nothing to eat all day. A waiter brought him coarse rice porridge, but he couldn't swallow it.

古文：升抱玄胸抚之，玄悲不自胜。
现代文：小桓升抱住桓玄的胸爱抚着，桓玄不禁悲痛欲绝。
English: Little Kuan Sheng hugged and caressed Kuan Xuan's chest, and Kuan Xuan couldn't help but be overcome with grief.

古文：至此，益州都护冯迁斩玄于此洲，斩升于江陵矣。
现代文：到了这里，益州都护冯迁就在洲上杀了桓玄，又在江陵杀了小桓升。
English: When he arrived here, Feng Qian, the governor of Yizhou, killed Huan Xuan on the mainland and killed Xiao Huan Sheng in Jiangling.

古文：下有龙洲，洲东有宠洲，二洲之间，世擅多鱼矣。渔者投罟历网，往往挂绝，有潜客泳而视之，见水下有两石牛，尝为罾害矣。
现代文：下游有龙洲，洲东有宠洲，这两个沙洲之间，世代以多鱼著称，渔人撒网，常被什么东西钩住，以致拉破了网；有个会潜水的人游到水下去看，见有两头石牛，弄破渔网的就是这些东西。
English: Downstream there is Longzhou, to the east of the island there is Zhaozhou. Between these two sandbanks, which have been famous for their abundance of fish for generations, fishermen cast their nets and are often hooked by something, causing the net to break. A diver swam down to the water and saw two stone cows, and it was these things that broke the fishing net.

古文：敌渔者莫不击浪浮舟；鼓枻而去矣。
现代文：所以渔船到了这里，无不使劲荡桨击浪而去。
English: So when the fishing boats arrived here, they all paddled hard to beat the waves and leave.

古文：其下谓之邴里洲，洲有高沙湖，湖东北有小水通江，名曰曾口。
现代文：下游有洲，叫哪里洲，洲中有高沙湖，湖东北有一条细流与江相通，水口叫曾口。
English: Downstream, there is a shoal called Koda-shoal, and there is a lake called Koshako in the shoal. In the northeast of the lake, there is a small stream that flows into the river, and the mouth of the stream is called Zeng-guchi.

古文：江水又东径燕尾洲北，合灵溪水，水无泉源，上承散水，合承大溪，南流注江。
现代文：江水又东流经燕尾洲北，汇合了灵溪水。灵溪水没有主源，上流承接一些散流的水，合为大溪，南流注入江水。
English: The water of the river also flows eastward through the north of Yanweizhou and merges with the water of Lingxi. The water of Lingxi has no main source, the upstream accepts some scattered water and is combined into a large stream, and the south stream injects water into the river.

古文：江、溪之会有灵溪戍，背阿面江，西带灵溪，故戍得其名矣。
现代文：江水与大溪汇合的地方，有灵溪戍，背靠山陵，面临江流，灵溪就在西边流过，这个驻防城堡也就因此而得名。
English: At the confluence of the river and the creek, there is the Lingxi cormorant, backed by the mountains, facing the river, and the Lingxi flowing on the west side, hence the name of this garrison castle.

古文：江水东得马牧口，江水断洲通会。
现代文：江水东流到马牧口，水流切断沙洲，使两边江道相通了。
English: The water of the river flowed eastward to the mouth of the Mamakou River. The water flow cut off the sandbar, so that the two sides of the river were connected.

古文：江水又东径江陵县故城南，《禹贡》荆及衡阳惟荆州，盖即荆山之称而制州名矣。故楚也。
现代文：江水又往东流经江陵县老城南边。《禹贡》说，荆及衡阳都属荆州地区。大概就是依荆山之名来取州名的―从前这是楚国地方。
English: The river then flows eastward through the southern part of the old city of Gangneung County. "Ugong" says that Jing and Hengyang both belong to the Jingzhou region. It is probably named after Mount Jing - this was once a part of Chu Province.

古文：子革曰：我先君僻处荆山以供王事，遂迁纪郢。
现代文：子革说：我们的祖先居住在偏僻的荆山，因为要为王室服务，就迁移到纪那。
English: Zige said: Our ancestors lived in the remote Jing Mountain, because they wanted to serve the royal family, they moved to Jinan.

古文：今城，楚船官地也。《春秋》之渚宫矣。
现代文：现在这座城就是楚国船官的地方，也就是《春秋》里说到的诸宫。
English: Now this city is the place of the naval officers of Chu, that is, the palaces mentioned in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：秦昭襄王二十九年，使白起拔鄢鄂，以汉南地而置南郡焉。
现代文：秦昭襄王二十九年派白起去攻取鄙邹，在汉水以南地区设置南郡。
English: In the 29th year of the reign of Qin Zhaoxiang, Bai Qi was dispatched to conquer Hanzhong and set up Nan County in the area south of Hanshui.

古文：《周书》曰：南，国名也。
现代文：《周书》说：南是国名。
English: "Zhou Shu" said: South is the name of the country.

古文：南氏有二臣，力钩势敌，竞进争权，君弗能制。南氏用分为二南国也。
现代文：南氏有两个大臣，势均力敌，彼此争位争权，连君主都不能制止，因而南氏就分成两个南国。
English: The Southern Clan had two ministers, who were evenly matched and competed for power. Even the monarch couldn't stop them, so the Southern Clan split into two Southern Clans.

古文：按韩婴叙《诗》云：其地在南郡、南阳之间。
现代文：按韩婴为《诗》作序说：那地方在南郡、南阳之间。
English: According to Han Ye, who wrote the preface to the poem, "That place is between Nangun and Nanyang.

古文：《吕氏春秋》所谓禹自涂山巡省南土者也。
现代文：《吕氏春秋》所谓禹从涂山巡察南方，指的也是这里。
English: This is also where the so-called Yu Cong Tu Mountain patrols the south in "Lu's Spring and Autumn."

古文：是郡取名焉。
现代文：于是郡名就叫南郡。
English: As a result, the name of the county was changed to Minami-gun.

古文：后汉景帝以为临江王荣国。
现代文：后来汉景帝将它作为临江王刘荣的封国。
English: Later, Emperor Han Jing made it the fief of the Linjiang King Liu Rong.

古文：王坐侵庙壖地为宫，被征，升车，出北门面轴折。父老窃流涕曰：吾王不还矣！自后北门不开，盖由荣非理终也。
现代文：临江王因侵占庙墙旁边的空地修建宫室，被征召赴京；上车出门后，车轴忽然折断，父老暗中流泪道：我们的君王不会回来了卫此后北门就关闭了，那是因为刘荣结局不幸的缘故。
English: Linjiang Wang was conscripted to go to Beijing because he had occupied a vacant lot next to the temple wall to build a palace. After he got on the bus and went out, the axle suddenly broke, and his father secretly shed tears: Our king will not come back. After that, the north gate was closed, it was because of Liu Rong's unfortunate ending.

古文：汉景帝二年，改为江陵县。王莽更名郡曰南顺，县曰江陆。
现代文：汉景帝二年前，改为江陵县，王莽改名，郡称南顺，县名江陆。
English: Two years ago, Emperor Han Jing changed it to Gangneung County, Wang Mang changed his name, the county was called Nanshun, and the county was named Jianglu.

古文：旧城，关羽所筑。
现代文：老城是关羽所筑。
English: The old town was built by Guan Yu.

古文：羽北围曹仁，吕蒙袭而据之。
现代文：关羽北上围曹仁，吕蒙趁虚进袭，占据了江陵。
English: Guan Yu encircled Cao Ren to the north, and Lv Meng took advantage of the situation to invade and occupy Jiangling.

古文：羽曰：此城吾所筑，不可攻也。
现代文：关羽说：这座城是我筑的，不可进攻。
English: Guan Yu said, "I built this city. You must not attack it."

古文：乃引而退，杜元凯之攻江陵也，城上人以瓠系狗颈示之，元凯病瘿故也。
现代文：吕蒙于是就退兵了。杜元凯进攻江陵，城上的人把葫芦缚在狗头颈上椰偷他，因为他颈上长了个瘤。
English: Du Yuankai attacked Gangneung, and the people in the city tied a gourd around the dog's neck to steal him, because he had a lump on his neck.

古文：及城陷，杀城中老小，血流沾足。论者以此薄之。
现代文：城被攻破后，他把城中老小都杀了，血流遍地，走过时脚都浸湿了，人们评论此事，都鄙薄其人。
English: After the city was breached, he killed the old and the young in the city, blood flowed all over the ground, his feet were wet when he walked past, people commented on this matter, all despised him.

古文：江陵城地东南倾，故缘以金堤，自灵溪始。桓温令陈遵造。
现代文：江陵城地势向东南倾斜，因而从灵溪开始沿岸筑了金堤。这道堤防是桓温命令陈遵建造的。
English: The terrain of Gangneung City is inclined to the southeast, so a golden dike was built along the coast from Lingxi. This dike was built by Chen Zun on the orders of Kuan Wen.

古文：遵善于方功，使人打鼓，远听之，知地势高下，依傍创筑，略无差矣。
现代文：陈遵善于方技之术，他叫人去打鼓，自己远远听着，就能知道地势的高低，于是修筑起来的堤岸，也就分毫不差了。
English: Chen Zun is good at the art of square technique. He asked someone to play the drums, and listened to them from a distance to know the height of the terrain. Therefore, the embankment that was built was just as good.

古文：城西有栖霞楼，俯临通隍，吐纳江流，城南有马牧城，西侧马径，此洲始自枚回，下迄于此，长七十余里，洲上有奉城，故江津长所治，旧主度州郡贡于洛阳，因谓之奉城。亦曰江津戍也。
现代文：城西有栖霞楼，下面就是护城河，引江流从河里流过。城南有马牧城，西傍马径。这个沙洲上自枚回，下迄于此，长七十余里。洲上有奉城，旧时属江津长管辖，原来执掌各州郡去洛阳朝贡时在此过渡，因此称为奉城，也叫江津戍。
English: To the west of the city, there is the Qixia Tower, below it is the moat, and the diversion current flows through the river. To the south of the city, there is the Horse Pasture City, and to the west is the Horse Trail. This sandbar is more than seventy miles long from the top to the bottom. On the mainland, there is the Fengcheng, which was under the jurisdiction of Jiangjin Chang in the old days, and was originally in charge of the provinces and counties when they paid tribute to Luoyang. Therefore, it is called Fengcheng, and is also called Jiangjin Ying.

古文：戍南对马头岸。
现代文：城堡南•对马头岸，从前陆抗驻扎在这里，与羊枯相对抗。
English: South of the castle, on the opposite bank of the Ma Tou River, they were stationed here from the front-line resistance to fight against the mutineers.

古文：昔陆抗屯此，与羊祜相对，大宏信义，谈者以为华元、子反复见于今矣。
现代文：两人都很讲信义，人们谈论到他们，都称赞他们真是华元、子反再现于今世。
English: Both of them are very faithful, and people talk about them and praise them. They are truly Hua Yuan and Zi Fang reappearing in this world.

古文：北对大岸，谓之江津口，故洲亦取名焉。
现代文：北面与大岸相对，称为江津口，所以洲也以江津取名。
English: The north side is opposite the large bank and is called Jiangjin mouth, so the island is also named after Jiangjin.

古文：江大自此始也。
现代文：江面从这里开始变得宽阔了。
English: The river starts to widen from here.

古文：《家语》曰：江水至江津，非方舟避风，不可涉也，故郭景纯云：济江津以起涨，言其深广也。
现代文：《家语》说：江水到了江津，如果不把船连在一起抵挡风浪，是不能渡江的。所以郭景纯说：渡江津时水势高涨。这是说江水又深又阔。
English: "Home Language" said: When the river water reaches Jiangjin, if you do not connect the boats together to resist the wind and waves, you cannot cross the river. Therefore, Guo Jingjun said: When crossing the Jiangjin, the water potential is high. This means that the river water is deep and wide.

古文：江水又东径郢城南，子囊遗言所筑城也。
现代文：江水又往东流经邹城南边，这是按子囊的遗嘱修筑起来的城。
English: The river then flows east through the southern side of the city of Zoucheng, which was built according to the will of Zi Zucu.

古文：《地理志》曰：楚别邑，故郢矣。
现代文：《地理志》说：这是楚国的别邑，旧时的邹。
English: "Geography" said: This is another town in Chu, the old-time.

古文：王莽以为郢亭。
现代文：王莽名为邹亭。
English: Wang Mang's name is Yueting.

古文：城中有赵台卿冢，歧平生自所营也。
现代文：城中有赵台卿墓，是他生时亲自建造的。
English: There is Zhao Taiqing's tomb in the city, which he personally built during his lifetime.

古文：冢图宾主之容，用存情好，叙其宿尚矣。江水又东得豫章口，夏水所通也，西北有豫章冈，盖因冈而得名矣。
现代文：墓上画有主人和宾客的肖像，以纪念他们之间的情谊，表现他平素所看重的东西。江水又东流，到了豫章口，水口通夏水。西北有豫章冈，大概这地方就是因冈而得名的。
English: Portraits of the host and guests are painted on the tomb to commemorate the friendship between them and to show what he always valued. The river also flows east, to the mouth of Yuzhang, and the mouth of the river flows through Xia Shui. In the northwest is Yuzhanggang, and this place is probably named after the mountain.

古文：或言因楚王豫章台名，所未详也。
现代文：也有人说是因楚王豫章台而得名，这就不大清楚了。
English: Some people also say that it was named after King Yuzhang of Chu, but this is not very clear.

