古文：刘台，字子畏，安福人。
现代文：刘台，字子畏，江西安福人。
English: Liu Tai, Zi Dang, Jiangxi An Fu Ren.

古文：隆庆五年进士。授刑部主事。
现代文：隆庆五年进士，授职刑部主事。
English: In the fifth year of Longqing, he was promoted to the position of the chief of the criminal department.

古文：万历初，改御史。
现代文：万历初年，改任御史。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he was reassigned to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：巡按辽东，坐误奏捷，奉旨谯责。
现代文：巡按辽东，因误奏捷报而犯罪，奉皇帝圣旨责备。
English: The patrol press Liaodong committed a crime by misreporting the victory, and was reprimanded according to the emperor's edict.

古文：四年正月，台上疏劾辅臣张居正，曰：
现代文：万历四年正月，刘台上疏弹劾辅臣张居正，说：
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Wanli era, Liu Shao impeached his aide Zhang Juzheng on the stage, saying:

古文：臣闻进言者皆望陛下以尧、舜，而不闻责辅臣以皋、夔。
现代文： 我听说提建议的人都希望陛下像尧、舜一样，而没有听说责备辅臣张居正要如皋陶、夔龙。
English: I have heard that those who make suggestions want His Majesty to be like a dragonfly, but I have not heard that the aide-de-camp Zhang Jizheng should be scolded like a dragonfly.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：陛下有纳谏之明，而辅臣无容言之量也。
现代文：陛下有纳谏之明，而辅臣没有容纳意见的雅量。
English: His Majesty is very accommodating, but his vassals do not have the grace to accept his opinions.

古文：高皇帝鉴前代之失，不设丞相，事归部院，势不相摄，而职易称。
现代文：高皇帝鉴于前代的失误，不设丞相，丞相之事归于部院，权力不相统摄，而职事容易称职。
English: Emperor Gao, in view of the mistakes of the previous generation, did not set up a prime minister, the affairs of the prime minister were attributed to the ministry, the powers were not unified, and the duties were easy to perform.

古文：文皇帝始置内阁，参预机务。
现代文：文皇帝始置内阁，参预机密事务。
English: Emperor Wen set up a cabinet and participated in confidential affairs.

古文：其时官阶未峻，无专肆之萌。
现代文：那时官阶不高，没有垄断专权的迹象。
English: At that time, the official ranks were not high, and there was no sign of monopoly power.

古文：二百年来，即有擅作威福者，尚惴惴然避宰相之名而不敢居，以祖宗之法在也。
现代文：二百年来，即使有专权作威作福的人，还是惴惴不安地避开宰相之名不敢称相，因为祖宗的法度在那里。
English: For two hundred years, even if there were those who had the absolute power to dictate and give blessings, they still anxiously avoided the name of the prime minister and did not dare to call themselves the prime minister, because the law of the ancestors was there.

古文：乃大学士张居正偃然以相自处，自高拱被逐，擅威福者三四年矣。
现代文：大学士张居正却安然以宰相自居，自从高拱被赶走，专权已有三、四年了。
English: However, Zhang Juzheng, a university graduate, has safely established himself as prime minister. It has been three or four years since Gao Gong was ousted from power.

古文：谏官因事论及，必曰： 吾守祖宗法。 
现代文：御史官因有事论及此点，他必说： 我守祖宗的法度。 
English: When the chief historian hears of this, he will say, 'I have obeyed my father's command.'

古文：臣请即以祖宗法正之。
现代文：我请求以祖宗之法来纠正他。
English: I ask you to correct him according to the law of the ancestors.

古文：祖宗进退大臣以礼。
现代文： 祖宗提升或辞退大臣都有礼节。
English: It is proper for an ancestor to promote or dismiss a minister.

古文：先帝临崩，居正托疾以逐拱，既又文致之王大臣狱。
现代文：先皇帝临终时，张居正托词有病赶走高拱，既而又下文使王丈臣下狱。
English: When the former emperor was on his deathbed, Zhang Jizheng chased away Gao Gong on the pretext that he was ill, and then sent Wang Jiecheng to prison.

古文：及正论籍籍，则抵拱书，令勿惊死。
现代文：等到正直的言论纷纷，则又给高拱去信，请不要害怕。
English: Wait until the honest remarks come one after another, then send a letter to Gao Gong, please do not be afraid.

古文：既迫逐以示威，又遗书以市德，徒使朝廷无礼于旧臣。祖宗之法若是乎？
现代文：既胁迫赶走大臣以表示威严，又送去书信以沽德名，只是徒然让朝廷对旧臣无礼，祖宗的规矩是这样吗？
English: Is it the ancestor's rule to both coerce and drive away a minister to show majesty, and to send a letter in the name of virtue, only to have the imperial court be rude to the old minister in vain?

古文：祖宗朝，非开国元勋，生不公，死不王。
现代文： 祖宗朝，如果不是开国元勋，生前不为公，死后不为王。
English: In the Ancestor Dynasty, if you were not a founding father, you were not a public official during your lifetime, and you were not a king after your death.

古文：成国公朱希忠，生非有奇功也，居正违祖训，赠以王爵。
现代文：成国公朱希忠，生前并未有奇功，张居正违反祖宗的遗训，赠给他王的爵位。
English: Zhu Xizhong, the Prince of Chengguo, did not have any miraculous feats during his lifetime. Zhang Juzheng violated his ancestor's behest and gave him the title of king.

古文：给事中陈吾德一言而外迁，郎中陈有年一争而斥去。臣恐公侯之家，布贿厚施，缘例陈乞，将无底极。
现代文：给事中陈吾德因一言不中他意就被外贬，郎中陈有年与他争论过一次也被贬退，我担心公侯之家，将重加贿赂，援引此例上陈乞求，将没完没了。
English: In this matter, Chen Wude was demoted because he did not say a word and did not mean what he said. His brother-in-law Chen once argued with him and was also demoted. I am afraid that the prince's house will increase the bribe, citing this example of Chen's begging, will be endless.

古文：祖宗之法若是乎？
现代文：祖宗的法度是这样吗？
English: Is this the law of our ancestors?

古文：祖宗朝，用内阁冢宰，必由廷推。
现代文： 祖宗朝，用内阁官吏，必须由朝廷推荐。
English: During the Ancestor's reign, cabinet officials had to be recommended by the imperial court.

古文：今居正私荐用张四维、张瀚。
现代文：现在张居正私自推荐任用张四维、张瀚。
English: Now, Zhang Juzheng has personally recommended the appointment of Zhang Siwei and Zhang Han.

古文：四维在翰林，被论者数矣。
现代文：张四维在翰林，被弹劾数次。
English: Zhang Siwei is in Hanlin and has been impeached several times.

古文：其始去也，不任教习庶吉士也。
现代文：他起初离职，是不胜任教习庶吉士之职。
English: He initially left the post, saying he was not up to the job of assistant head teacher.

古文：四维之为人也，居正知之熟矣。
现代文：张四维的为人，张居正很了解。
English: Zhang Ju Zheng knows Zhang Siwei very well.

古文：知之而顾用之，夫亦以四维善机权，多凭藉，自念亲老，旦暮不测，二三年间谋起复，任四维，其身后托乎？
现代文：知道而任用他，也是因为张四维善于弄权，拍马屁，自己惦记父亲老了，顷刻之间或有不测，二、三年间谋求官复原职，任用四维，难道是他身后的托付？
English: Knowing and appointing him, it is also because Zhang Siwei is good at manipulating power, flattering, and thinking about his father being old. In an instant, there may be an accident. In two or three years, he will seek to restore his position. Is the appointment of Siwei a trust placed behind him?

古文：瀚生平无善状。
现代文：张瀚生平没有什么善行。
English: Zhang Han had no good deeds in his life.

古文：巡抚陕西，赃秽狼籍。及骤躇铨衡，唯诺若簿吏，官缺必请命居正。所指授者，非楚人亲戚知识，则亲戚所援引也；非宦楚受恩私故，则恩故之党助也。
现代文：巡抚陕西，贪赃枉法，等到多次选拔官吏，唯唯诺诺如小吏，有缺官必定请命张居正，张居正所指定的人，不是湖北的亲戚知己，就是亲戚推荐的；不是曾在湖北做过官与他有私交，就是与他有私交一伙的人。
English: Zhang Juzheng, the governor of Shaanxi Province, is a corrupt official. He has been elected many times, but he is as petty as a minor official. If there is a vacancy, Zhang Juzheng will certainly ask for an appointment. The person designated by Zhang Juzheng is not a relative or friend from Hubei, but is recommended by a relative. It is not a person who has been an official in Hubei and has a personal relationship with him, but a person who has a personal relationship with him.

古文：瀚惟日取四方小吏，权其贿赂，而其他则徒拥虚名。
现代文：张瀚唯一做的事就是在四方小官那儿收取贿赂，而其他则徒有虚名。
English: The only thing Zhang Han did was to take bribes from minor officials in the four directions, while the others were just pretending.

古文：闻居正贻南京都御史赵锦书，台谏毋议及冢宰，则居正之胁制在朝言官，又可知矣。
现代文：听说张居正给南京都御史赵锦写信，叫御史不要议论内阁官吏，则张居正挟制朝廷御史，又可以知道了。
English: I heard that Zhang Ju was writing a letter to the governor of South Kyoto, Zhao Jin, telling him not to discuss cabinet officials, but it is clear that Zhang Ju is blackmailing the governor of the imperial court.

古文：祖宗之法如是乎？
现代文：祖宗的法度是这样吗？
English: Is this the law of our ancestors?

古文：祖宗朝，诏令不便，部臣犹訾阁拟之不审。
现代文： 祖宗朝，诏令有不便的地方，部属大臣还可以质问内阁将其搁置不审查。
English: In the Ancestor's time, subordinate ministers could also challenge the cabinet to set aside the edict without reviewing it if it was inconvenient.

古文：今得一严旨，居正辄曰 我力调剂故止是 ；得一温旨，居正又曰 我力请而后得之 。
现代文：今天得到一严厉圣旨，张居正就说： 我尽力调剂才有这样的结果。 得一温和圣旨，张居正又说： 我尽力请求才会这样。 
English: Today, when he received a severe decree, Zhang Juzheng said, "I did my best to adjust the dosage to get this result," and when he received a mild decree, he said, "I did my best to ask for this result."

古文：由是畏居正者甚于畏陛下，感居正者甚于感陛下。威福自己，目无朝廷。
现代文：由此，害怕张居正的胜过于害怕陛下的，感谢张居正的胜于感谢陛下的，恩威之权任凭己意，自专的威福权，目无朝廷。
English: As a result, it is better to fear Zhang Juzheng than to fear His Majesty. It is better to thank Zhang Juzheng than to thank His Majesty. The power of grace is at the mercy of one's own will. The power of blessing is at the mercy of one's own will. There is no imperial court.

古文：祖宗之法若是乎？
现代文：祖宗的法度是这样的吗？
English: Is this the law of our ancestors?

古文：祖宗朝，一切政事，台省奏陈，部院题覆，抚按奉行，未闻阁臣有举劾也。
现代文： 祖宗朝，一切政事，由台省上奏的陈述，部院审核，抚按执行，未有听说内阁有什么举动的。
English: During the Ancestor's reign, all political affairs were reported by the Taiwan Province, reviewed by the ministries, and implemented accordingly. I have not heard of any actions taken by the cabinet.

古文：居正定令，抚按考成章奏，每具二册，一送内阁，一送六科。
现代文：张居正下令，抚按的考察奏章，每份准备二册，一份送内阁，一册送六科。
English: Zhang Juzheng ordered that two copies of the inspection report be prepared, one to be sent to the cabinet, and one to the six departments.

古文：抚按延迟，则部臣纠之。
现代文：巡按有延迟，部臣纠正。
English: There was a delay in the inspection, which was corrected by the minister.

古文：六部隐蔽，则科臣纠之。
现代文：六部有隐瞒，则六科给事中予以纠正。
English: If there is any concealment in the six parts, it shall be corrected in the six subjects.

古文：六科隐蔽，则内阁纠之。
现代文：六科隐蔽，则内阁予以纠正。
English: If the six subjects are concealed, the cabinet will correct it.

古文：夫部院分理国事，科臣封驳奏章，举劾，其职也。
现代文：部院分别治理国事，给事中驳议奏章，上疏举荐弹劾是它的职责。
English: It is the duty of the ministries and commissions to separately administer state affairs, to make a report on the matter, and to recommend impeachment.

古文：阁臣衔列翰林，止备顾问，从容论思而已。
现代文：阁臣头衔列于翰林，止用作顾问，从容议论设想而已。
English: The title of cabinet minister is listed in the Hanlin, but it is only used as a consultant to discuss ideas.

古文：居正创为是说，欲胁制科臣，拱手听令。
现代文：张居正发明这个办法，是想挟制科臣，让他们拱手听令。
English: Zhang Jiusheng invented this method in order to coerce the scholars and make them do his bidding.

古文：祖宗之法若是乎？
现代文：祖宗的法度是这样吗？
English: Is this the law of our ancestors?

古文：至于按臣回道考察，苟非有大败类者，常不举行，盖不欲重挫抑之。
现代文： 至于巡按官员回道考察，假如不是有大败类，一般不举行，是因为不想重加挫折。
English: As for the round-trip inspection of inspection officials, if there is no major failure, it is generally not held, because they do not want to repeat the setback.

古文：近日御史俞一贯以不听指授，调之南京。
现代文：近来，御史俞一贯因为不听所谓调度，被调到南京。
English: Recently, because he always disobeyed the so-called schedule, he was transferred to Nanjing.

古文：由是巡方短气，莫敢展布，所惮独科臣耳。
现代文：于是巡按官丧气，不敢充分展示自己的议事能力，所害怕的唯有给事中。
English: As a result, the supervising magistrate was disheartened and did not dare to fully demonstrate his ability to make decisions. The only thing he was afraid of was giving in.

古文：居正于科臣既啖之以迁转之速，又恐之以考成之迟，谁肯舍其便利，甘彼齮龁，而尽死言事哉？
现代文：张居正对于六科给事中既给他们迅速升任的好处，又以推迟考评恐吓他们，哪一个肯舍弃便利，甘心被他倾轧，都死于谏言之事呢？
English: Zhang Juzheng not only gave them the benefits of rapid promotion in the six subjects, but also threatened them by delaying the evaluation. Which one would give up convenience and be willing to be pushed by him, all died of gossip?

古文：往年赵参鲁以谏迁，犹曰外任也；余懋学以谏罢，犹曰禁锢也；今傅应祯则谪戍矣，又以应祯故，而及徐贞明、乔岩、李祯矣。
现代文：往年，赵参鲁因劝谏被贬，还说是在外任职，余懋学因为提意见被罢官，还说是禁止参加政治活动；现在傅应祯竟被充军，又因为傅应祯的缘故，累及到徐贞明、乔岩、李祯。
English: In previous years, Zhao Sanlu was demoted because of his advice to Fu Yingtao, and it was said that he held a position outside the government, while Yu Yingxue was dismissed from his post because of his opinion, and it was also said that he was banned from participating in political activities. Now, Fu Yingtao has actually been conscripted into the army, and because of Fu Yingtao, Xu Zhenming, Qiao Yan, and Li Qian have been affected.

古文：摧折言官，仇视正士。祖宗之法如是乎？
现代文：摧残言官，仇视正义之士，祖宗的法度是这样吗？
English: Is this the law of our forefathers, to crush the spokesman and hate the righteous?

古文：至若为固宠计，则献白莲白燕，致诏旨责让，传笑四方矣。
现代文： 至于为了邀宠，进献白莲白燕，招致圣旨责备，则传笑四方。
English: As for the offering of white lotus and white swallow for the purpose of inviting a pet, if it incurs the reproach of the holy will, it will be laughed at by all sides.

古文：规利田宅，则诬辽王以重罪，而夺其府地，今武冈王又得罪矣。
现代文：为谋划田地利益，诬赖辽王，治以重罪，夺占辽王的府地，现在武冈王又得罪了。
English: In order to plan for the benefit of the fields, he slandered King Liao, punished him with a felony, and seized King Liao's capital, and now King Wuoka has offended again.

古文：为子弟谋举乡试，则许御史舒鳌以京堂，布政施尧臣以巡抚矣。
现代文：为子弟谋求乡试中第，允许御史舒鳌为京堂，布政施尧臣为巡抚。
English: As a junior high school student seeking a hometown for his son, he allowed Gishi Shushan to become a kyodo, and Buzen Shishin to become an inspector.

古文：起大第于江陵，费至十万，制拟宫禁，遣锦衣官校监治，乡郡之脂膏尽矣。
现代文：在江陵修宅，费钱十万，其形制与宫中禁地一样，派遣锦衣官校监督修建，乡郡的钱财都耗尽了。
English: In Jiangling, it cost 100,000 yuan to build a house, and its form system was the same as that of the Forbidden City in the palace. An official school in brocade was dispatched to supervise the construction. The money and wealth of the township and county were exhausted.

古文：恶黄州生儒议其子弟幸售，则假县令他事穷治无遗矣。
现代文：讨厌黄州的生儒议论他的子弟以非分所得售卖之事，就借县令之手以其他理由将他们一一治罪。
English: Hating the fact that a Huangzhou-born Confucian was talking about his children selling with the proceeds of crime, the county magistrate punished them one by one for other reasons.

古文：编修李维桢偶谈及其豪富，不旋踵即外斥矣。
现代文：编修李维桢偶尔谈到他的富庶，没有多久就被贬出京城。
English: Editor Li Weiwei occasionally spoke of his affluence, but was soon banished from Beijing.

古文：盖居正之贪，不在文吏而在武臣，不在内地而在边鄙。
现代文：张居正的贪婪，不在文吏而在武臣，不在内地而在边远地方。
English: Zhang Juzheng's greed is not in the civil service, but in Bushen, not in the inland, but in the remote areas.

古文：不然，辅政未几，即富甲全楚，何由致之？
现代文：不然，辅政不久，就富裕甲全楚，有什么办法能达到呢？
English: Otherwise, the vice-premier will soon be rich and all-knowing. What can be done to achieve this?

古文：宫室舆马姬妾，奉御同于王者，又何由致之？
现代文：宫室舆马与姬妾，等同于藩王，又是怎么得到的呢？
English: How did the Imperial Household and concubines, equal to the king of the domain, come to be?

古文：在朝臣工，莫不愤叹，而无敢为陛下明言者，积威之劫也。
现代文： 朝廷的大臣，没有不愤慨的，而没有敢跟陛下讲明的，是张居正专权擅威的结果。
English: The ministers of the imperial court, who were not indignant, but did not dare to clarify with His Majesty, were the result of Zhang Juzheng's arbitrary power.

古文：臣举进士，居正为总裁。
现代文：臣中进士，张居正为总裁。
English: Zhang Ju Zheng is the president.

古文：臣任部曹，居正荐改御史。
现代文：臣任部曹，张居正推荐臣为御史。
English: Zhang Jiusheng recommended the vassal to become the imperial historian.

古文：臣受居正恩亦厚矣，而今敢讼言攻之者，君臣谊重，则私恩有不得而顾也。
现代文：臣受张居正的恩情是浓厚的，今天之所以敢于攻击他，是君臣的义重，私交就顾不得了。
English: Zhang Juzheng's gratitude to his vassal is profound. The reason why he dared to attack him today is the importance of loyalty of a monarch and a vassal, and he cannot afford to neglect his personal friendship.

古文：愿陛下察臣愚悃，抑损相权，毋俾偾事误国，臣死且不朽。
现代文：愿陛下考察臣的愚忠，抑制相权，不要让这些败事之人误了国家大事，倘若能这样，我就可以死而不朽了。 
English: May His Majesty examine the foolish loyalty of his ministers, restrain the relative power, and not let these losers miss the national events. If I can do this, I can die and become immortal.

古文：疏上，居正怒甚，廷辩之，曰： 在令，巡按不得报军功。
现代文：奏疏呈上后，张居正大怒，上廷为自己辩护，说： 有命令，巡按不能奏报军功。
English: After the report was submitted, Zhang Juzheng was furious, and the high court defended itself, saying: There is an order that the inspection cannot report military merits.

古文：去年辽东大捷，台违制妄奏，法应降谪。
现代文：去年辽东大捷，刘台违反制度妄自上奏，按规矩应降职。
English: Last year, when Liaodong won the grand victory, Liu Tai violated the system and acted arrogantly. According to the rules, he should be demoted.

古文：臣第请旨戒谕，而台已不胜愤。
现代文：我多次请求皇上告诫他，而刘台为此心怀不满。
English: I repeatedly asked the emperor to admonish him, but Liu Tai was not happy about it.

古文：后傅应祯下狱，究诘党与。
现代文：后来傅应祯被逮捕下狱，追问他的党羽。
English: Later, Fu Yingtao was arrested and jailed, and his followers were interrogated.

古文：初不知台与应祯同邑厚善，实有所主。
现代文：起初不知道刘台与傅应祯为同一县的人，很要好，实际上有所主使。
English: At first, I didn't know that Liu Tai and Fu Yingtao were from the same county. It's good to know that they actually have a leader.

古文：乃妄自惊疑，遂不复顾藉，发愤于臣。
现代文：于是刘台感到惊恐不安，不再顾及到什么，向臣泄愤怒。
English: As a result, Liu Tai felt alarmed and uneasy, no longer cared about anything, and vented his anger on the vassal.

古文：且台为臣所取士，二百年来无门生劾师长者，计惟一去谢之。 
现代文：况且刘台是我录取的进士，二百年来没有门生弹劾老师的，我唯一能做的事就是辞去职位以赎罪。 
English: Moreover, Liu Tai is the most talented student I have ever admitted. In 200 years, no student has ever impeached a teacher. The only thing I can do is to resign from my position to atone for my sins.

古文：因辞政，伏地泣不肯起。
现代文：因而辞去政务，伏在地上哭泣不肯起来。
English: As a result, he resigned from the government, lay down on the ground and wept, refusing to get up.

古文：帝为降御座手掖之，慰留再三。
现代文：皇上走下御座用手拉他，再三劝慰他。
English: When the Emperor stepped down from the throne, he took him by the hand and repeatedly consoled him.

古文：居正强诺，犹不出视事，帝遣司礼太监孙隆赍手敕宣谕，乃起。
现代文：张居正一再声明自己的诺言，不肯答应执掌政事。皇上派司礼太监孙隆拿着他的亲笔诏书宣读，张居正才起来。
English: Zhang Jizheng repeatedly declared his promise and refused to agree to take charge of government affairs. The emperor sent the eunuch Sun Rong to read the imperial edict with his own handwriting, and Zhang Jizheng got up.

古文：遂捕台至京师，下诏狱，命廷杖百，远戍。
现代文：于是将刘台逮捕到京师，关进监狱，在廷上打了一百下，送往边远地带戍边。
English: So he arrested Liu Tai to Beijing Division, put him in prison, beat him a hundred times in court, and sent him to the remote area of Luling.

古文：居正阳具疏救，乃除名为民，而居正恨不已。
现代文：张居正表面上上疏营救，暗地里将他除去官籍，降为平民，张居正仍不解恨。
English: On the surface, Zhang Juzheng is a top-notch rescue, but secretly he was removed from the official register and reduced to a civilian. Zhang Juzheng still does not understand the hatred.

古文：台按辽东时，与巡抚张学颜不相得。
现代文：刘台巡按辽东时，与巡抚张学颜合不来。
English: When Liu Tai was inspecting Liaodong, he couldn't get along with the inspector Zhang Xueyan.

古文：至是学颜为户部，诬台私赎鍰，居正属御史于应昌巡按辽东覆之，而令王宗载巡抚江西，廉台里中事。
现代文：这时，张学颜任职户部，诬陷刘台接受贿赂，张居正嘱咐御史于应昌巡按辽东复查一下，而命令王宗载巡抚江西，考察刘台在家乡的情况。
English: At this time, Zhang Xueyan, who was in charge of the household department, falsely accused Liu Tai of accepting bribes. Zhang Juzheng ordered the governor of Yingchang to inspect Liaodong, and ordered Wang Zongjia, the governor of Jiangxi, to investigate Liu Tai's situation in his hometown.

古文：应昌、宗载等希居正意，实其事以闻，遂戍台广西。
现代文：于应昌、王宗载等顺着张居正的意思，添油加醋地往上报告，于是将刘台发配到广西。
English: Yu Yingchang, Wang Zongzai and others followed Zhang Jizheng's intention and reported to the top, so Liu Tai was sent to Guangxi.

古文：台父震龙、弟国，俱坐罪。
现代文：刘台的父亲震龙、弟弟刘国，都连坐有罪。
English: Liu Tai's father, Zhenlong, and brother, Liu Guo, were both convicted.

古文：台至浔州未几，饮于戍主所，归而暴卒。
现代文：刘台到浔州不久，在戍主的房里饮酒，回去后就突然死了。
English: Not long after Liu Tai arrived in Zhangzhou, he drank alcohol in the master's house and died suddenly after returning home.

古文：是日居正亦卒。
现代文：这一天，张居正也死了。
English: On this day, Zhang Jizheng also died.

古文：明年，御史江东之讼台冤，劾宗载、应昌。
现代文：第二年，御史江东之为刘台喊冤，弹劾王宗载、于应昌。
English: In the second year, Wang Zongzai and Yu Yingchang were impeached by the governor of Jiangdong Province, Liu Tai.

古文：诏复台官，罢宗载、应昌，下所司廉问。
现代文：皇上下诏恢复刘台官职，罢王宗载、于应昌的职务，由有关部门考察、询问。
English: The emperor issued an edict to reinstate Liu Tai as an official, dismissing Wang Zongzai and Yu Yingchang from their posts, and the relevant departments investigated and inquired.

古文：南京给事中冯景隆因言辽东巡抚周咏与应昌共陷台，应昌已罢，咏尚为蓟辽总督，亦宜罢。
现代文：南京给事中冯景隆上疏指责辽东巡抚周咏与于应昌共同陷害刘台，于应昌既已被罢免，周咏还在做蓟辽总督，也应罢免。
English: In the Nanjing case, Feng Jinglong accused the Liaodong governor Zhou Jun and Yu Yingchang of jointly framing Liu Tai. Yu Yingchang has been dismissed, and Zhou Jun is still the governor of Liaodong. He should also be dismissed.

古文：南京御史孙继先亦发学颜陷台罪。
现代文：南京御史孙继先也揭发张学颜陷害刘台之罪。
English: Nanjing Grand Historian Sun also exposed Zhang Xueyan's crime of framing Liu Tai.

古文：帝方向学颜。
现代文：皇帝正在宠幸张学颜。
English: The emperor is favoring Zhang Xueyan.

古文：以景隆疏中并劾李成梁，学颜为成梁讼。
现代文：因为冯景隆的疏中一并弹劾了李成梁，张学颜替李成梁辩冤。
English: Because of Feng Jinglong's absenteeism, Li Chengliang was impeached at the same time, and Zhang Xueyan argued for Li Chengliang.

古文：继先又并劾学颜、成梁。
现代文：孙继先又一并弹劾张学颜、李成梁。
English: Sun Jixian impeached Zhang Xueyan and Li Chengliang together.

古文：乃谪景隆蓟州判官，继先临清州判官，置学颜不问。
现代文：皇上于是贬冯景隆为蓟州判官，孙继先为临清州判官，而对张学颜不加问罪。
English: The emperor then demoted Feng Jinglong to judge of Zhangzhou, and Sun Jianxian to judge of Linqing, but did not punish Zhang Xueyan.

古文：已而江西巡抚曹大埜、辽东巡抚李松，勘报宗载、应昌等朋比倾陷皆有状。
现代文：不久，江西巡抚曹大、辽东巡抚李松考察后报告王宗载、于应昌结为朋党、陷害忠良。
English: Soon after, Jiangxi governor Cao Da and Liaodong governor Li Song inspected and reported that Wang Zongzai and Yu Yingchang were party cronies who had framed Zhongliang.

古文：刑部以故入论，奏宗载等遣戍、除名、降黜有差。
现代文：刑部因此以诬告罪理，奏报将王宗载等发配、贬为平民、降低官阶不等。
English: As a result, the Criminal Investigation Department took the false accusation as the reason for the crime, and reported that Wang Zongzai and others would be dispatched, reduced to civilians, and reduced in rank.

古文：赠台光禄少卿，荫一子。
现代文：赠与刘台光禄少卿，荫庇一子。
English: He was given the title of Liu Tai Guanglu Shaoqing, and had one son, Yingbi.

古文：既坐谪，终南京吏部主事。
现代文：天启初年，追加谥号毅思。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, an additional sign, Yixi, appeared.

古文：傅应祯，字公善，安福人。
现代文：傅应祯，字公善，江西安福人。
English: Fu Yingqian, Zi Gongzen, Jiangxi Anfu people.

古文：隆庆五年进士。除零陵知县。
现代文：隆庆五年中进士，授职零陵知县。
English: In the fifth year of Longqing, he was promoted to junior high school, and was awarded the post of Zilingchi County.

古文：歼洞庭剧寇，论杀祁阳巨猾，民赖以安。
现代文：剿杀洞庭强盗，将祁阳有盗名的大土匪治罪，使老百姓得到安宁。
English: He fought and killed the Dongting bandits, and punished the bandits with stolen names in Shenyang, so that the common people could have peace.

古文：调知溧水。
现代文：后调任溧水知县。
English: Later, he was transferred to Osuichi County.

古文：万历三年，征授御史。
现代文：万历三年升为御史。
English: He was promoted to goshi after three years of hard work.

古文：张居正当国，应祯其门生也，有所感愤，疏陈重君德、苏民困、开言路三事，言：
现代文：张居正执掌国事，傅应祯是他的门生，对时事有所思虑，遂上疏陈述重视君之道德、解除百姓负担、广开言路三件事，说：
English: Zhang Jiusheng was in charge of state affairs, and Fu Yingtao was his protégé. They had some concerns about current affairs, so Shang Shou stated three things: to attach importance to the prince's morality, to relieve the people's burden, and to open up the way of speech, saying:

古文：迩者雷震端门兽吻，京师及四方地震叠告，曾未闻发诏修省，岂真以天变不足畏耶？
现代文： 近来雷鸣震及端门的兽吻，京师及四方的地震频频发生，但没有听说发出诏书自己反省的，难道真的是天变不足以害怕吗？
English: Recently, the thunderous earthquake and the beast's kiss at the end of the gate, the earthquake in Beijing and the four directions have occurred frequently, but I have not heard that they have issued an edict to reflect on themselves. Is it really not enough to be afraid of the natural change?

古文：真定抽分中使，本非旧典，正统间尝暂行之，先帝纳李芳言，已诏罢遣，而陛下顾欲踵行失德之事，岂真以祖宗不足法耶？
现代文：在真定，派驻征税宦官本来不是旧制度，正统年间曾暂时实行过，先皇帝采纳李芳的建议，已下诏停止了，而陛下想跟着实行缺德之事，难道真是祖宗不能效法吗？
English: In Zhengding, the stationing of tax-collecting eunuchs was not originally an old system. It was temporarily implemented during the orthodox years. The first emperor adopted Li Fang's suggestion and issued an edict to stop it. And His Majesty wants to follow the practice of immorality. Is it really impossible for the ancestors to follow suit?

古文：给事中朱东光奏陈保治，初非折槛解衣者比，乃竟留中不报，岂真以人言不足恤耶？
现代文：给事中朱东光上奏陈述治理地方事，不一定可与古代敢言直谏的人相比，竟把他的奏章留在禁中不下发，难道真的是意见不足以值得重视吗？
English: In the case of Zhu Dongguang's report on the governance of local affairs, it can not necessarily be compared with the people who dared to speak out in ancient times, and even left his report in the ban, is it really an opinion that is not worthy of attention?

古文：此三不足者，王安石以之误宋，不可不深戒也。
现代文：这样的三不足，是王安石所以耽误宋朝的原因，不能不引以为戒。
English: Such three deficiencies are the reasons why Wang Anshi delayed the Song Dynasty, and cannot but be cautioned.

古文：陛下登极初，自隆庆改元以前逋租，悉赐蠲除，四年以前免三征七，恩至渥也。
现代文： 陛下登位的时候，自隆庆改元后的欠租，一一蠲免，四年以前的免除三分征收七分，恩眷优厚。
English: At the time of His Majesty's ascension to the throne, the rent arrears after the change of the era from Longqing to Yuan were waived one by one, and the three-point levy of seven points was waived four years ago, and the favors were generous.

古文：乃上轸恤已至，而下延玩自如，曾未有担负相属者，何哉？
现代文：皇上怜恤之情已尽到了，但下面的拖欠仍在拖欠，没有一个能够将欠下的全部还清的，为什么呢？
English: The emperor's mercy has been exhausted, but the following arrears are still in arrears, no one can pay off all the arrears, why?

古文：小民一岁之入，仅足给一岁，无遗力以偿负也。
现代文：小民一年的收入，仅可以供给一年，没有余力偿还欠收。
English: A year's income of a commoner can only supply one year, and there is no spare capacity to repay the shortfall.

古文：近乃定输不及额者，按抚听纠，郡县听调。
现代文：最近制定如果输税没有达到限额的，由按抚官纠察，郡县予以调整。
English: Recently, it has been established that if the tax remittance does not reach the limit, it will be picketed by the tax inspector and adjusted by the county.

古文：诸臣畏谴，督趣倍严。
现代文：各位大臣害怕调遣，于是催促更为严厉。
English: The ministers were afraid of being shuffled around, so the urging became more severe.

古文：致流离接踵，怨咨愁叹，上彻于天。
现代文：致使百姓流离失所，怨声载道，上达于天庭。
English: As a result, the people were displaced, and their complaints reached heaven.

古文：是岂太平之象，陛下所乐闻者哉？
现代文：难道这是太平的气象，陛下愿意听到的吗？
English: Is this the peaceful weather His Majesty wants to hear about?

古文：请下明诏，自非官吏干没，并旷然除之。
现代文：请求下诏，不是官吏吞没的，其他欠租全部免除。
English: If the request is approved, all other rent arrears that are not swallowed up by officials will be exempted.

古文：民困既苏，则灾沴自弭。
现代文：老百姓的困难得到解除，灾害自然没有了。
English: The difficulties of the common people have been resolved, and natural disasters have disappeared.

古文：陛下登极初，召用直臣石星、李已，臣工无不庆幸。
现代文： 陛下登基时，任用正直的大臣石星、李巳，大臣们无不感到欣慰。
English: When His Majesty ascended to the throne, he appointed two honest ministers, Shi Xing and Li Si, and the ministers all felt gratified.

古文：近则赵参鲁纠中涓而谪为典史，余懋学陈时政而锢之终身，他如胡执礼、裴应章、侯于赵、赵焕等封事累上，一切置之，如初政何？
现代文：现在赵参鲁纠正时弊被贬为典史，余懋学上陈时政被禁止终身参予政治。其他像胡轨礼、裴应章、侯于赵、赵焕等议论朝政，被冷落在一旁。如初时政情相比如何？
English: Now, Zhao Sanlu's rectification of historical evils has been relegated to canonical history, and Chen Shizheng has been banned from participating in politics for life. Others, such as Hu Luoli, Pei Ying Zhang, Hou Yu Zhao, and Zhao Huan, have discussed the politics of the dynasty and have been left out in the cold. How does this compare to the political situation at the beginning?

古文：臣请擢参鲁京职，还懋学故官，为人臣进言者劝。
现代文：我请求提拔赵参鲁在京城任职，恢复余懋学的官职，以作为大臣进言的榜样。 
English: I request that Zhao Sanlu be promoted to a post in Beijing, and that Yu Bingxue be reinstated to his official post, so that he can serve as an example for ministers to follow.

古文：疏奏，居正以疏中王安石语侵己，大怒，调旨切责；以其词及懋学，执下诏狱，穷治党与。
现代文：上疏呈上，张居正认为疏中提到王安石之语是影射自己，大怒，下旨责问；又因为奏中论及到余懋学，将他逮捕下狱，严厉追问他的党羽。
English: In the previous report, Zhang Juzheng thought that the words of Wang Anshi mentioned in the previous report were insinuation of himself, he was very angry, and ordered to be reprimanded; and because the report mentioned Yu Xuan Xue, he was arrested and jailed, and his party members were severely interrogated.

古文：应祯濒死无所承，乃谪戍定海。
现代文：傅应祯临死都没有承认什么，于是被贬到定海。
English: Fu Yingjun did not admit anything before he died, so he was relegated to Dinghai.

古文：给事中严用和、御史刘天衢等疏救，不听。
现代文：给事中严用和、御史刘天衢等上疏营救，皇上不听。
English: The emperor did not listen to the efforts to rescue him, which included the use of strict pacifism and the assistance of Liu Tianyao, the imperial historian.

古文：方应祯下狱，给事中徐贞明偕御史李祯、乔岩入视之。
现代文：当傅应祯被关进狱中后，给事中徐贞明带着御史李祯、乔岩看望他。
English: When Fu Yingyao was put in prison, Xu Zhenming visited him in the middle of the case, bringing the imperial historian Li Qian and Qiao Yan.

古文：锦衣帅余荫以闻，三人亦坐谪。
现代文：锦衣帅余阴上告，三个人也被贬。
English: The team's coach, Yu Yin, appealed the decision, and three players were also demoted.

古文：十一年，用御史孙继先言，召复官。
现代文：万历十一年，皇上采纳御史孙继先的意见，下诏恢复他的官职。
English: On the eleventh year of the eleventh lunar month, the emperor adopted the opinion of Goshisun successors and issued a decree to restore his official position.

古文：帝将幸昌平阅寿宫，而蓟镇告警，应祯止帝勿行，且陈边备甚悉。
现代文：皇上将临幸昌平检查墓道，而蓟镇出现军事警报，傅应祯劝皇上不要去，且上陈边防战备特别详悉。
English: The emperor's general, Lin Sheng Changping, inspected the cemetery, and there was a military alert in the town of Handan. Fu Yingtao advised the emperor not to go, and he was particularly familiar with the border defense preparations.

古文：优诏答之。
现代文：皇上以奖赏的语气予以回答。
English: The Emperor specially granted the Imperial Rescript.

古文：俄擢南京大理寺丞。
现代文：不久，提升为南京大理寺丞。
English: Soon, he was promoted to Nanjing Dali Temple.

古文：将行，奏荐海内知名士三十七人。
现代文：临行前，上奏推荐了海内知名人士三十七人。
English: Prior to departure, 37 well-known people in China were recommended.

古文：自尹京后，累迁皆在南，以强直故也。
现代文：没有多久，因病归家，三年后去世。赠本寺右少卿。
English: He soon returned home due to illness, and died three years later. He was given the title of Ushokyo of this temple.

古文：卒，赠太子太保，谥恭质。吴中行，字子道，武进人。
现代文：傅应祯同县人刘台同时中进士，担任御史，同样得罪张居正招致祸患，乡人一同在祠堂祭祀他们。吴中行，字子道，江苏武进人。
English: Fu Yingqian and Liu Tai, a resident of the county, were both junior scholars and served as imperial historians at the same time. Zhang Juzheng, who was also offended, caused a disaster, and the villagers worshiped them together in the ancestral hall. Wu Zhongxing, Zizi Road, Jiangsu Wujin people.

古文：父性，兄可行，皆进士。
现代文：父亲吴性，哥哥吴可行，都是进士。
English: His father, Wu Zhen, and his brother, Wu Jian, were both cadets.

古文：性，尚宝丞。
现代文：吴性，官至尚宝丞。
English: Wu Zheng, official to Shang Baorong.

古文：可行，检讨。
现代文：吴可行，为检讨。
English: Wu feasible, for review.

古文：中行甫冠，举乡试，性诫无躁进，遂不赴会试。
现代文：吴中行刚刚二十岁时就中了乡试，吴性告诫他不要急于求进士，于是他没有参加会试。
English: When Wu Zhongxing was just twenty years old, he passed the township examination. Wu Xing warned him not to rush to seek promotion, so he did not participate in the examination.

古文：隆庆五年成进士，选庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：隆庆五年中进士，选为庶吉士，授职编修。
English: In the fifth year of the Longqing Middle School, he was promoted to a scholar, selected as an associate scholar, and awarded the post of editor.

古文：大学士张居正，中行座主也。
现代文：大学士张居正是吴中行考进士时的主考官。
English: Zhang Ju, a university graduate, was the chief examiner for Wu Zhongxing's entrance examination.

古文：万历五年，居正遭父丧，夺情视事。
现代文：万历五年，张居正的父亲死了，没有解职回乡奔丧，仍就执掌朝政。
English: After five long years, Zhang Juzheng's father died. He did not resign from his post and went back to his hometown to mourn, but still took charge of the imperial government.

古文：御史曾士楚、吏科都给事中陈三谟倡疏奏留，举朝和之，中行独愤。
现代文：御史曾士楚、吏科都给事中陈三谟首先上疏奏请让他留下，满朝大臣都随声附和，唯独吴中行很气愤。
English: In the matter, Chen Sanmu, a veteran historian, and officials from the science department were the first to ask him to stay. All the ministers of the Manchurian government followed suit, except Wu Zhongxing, who was very angry.

古文：适彗出西南，长竟天，诏百官修省，中行乃首上疏曰： 居正父子异地分暌，音容不接者十有九年。
现代文：刚好彗星出现在西南方，长度竟达到天际，皇上下诏让百官反省。吴中行于是首先上疏说： 张居正父子分处两地，双方已有十五年未见面。
English: Just as the comet appeared in the southwest, the length of which reached the sky, the emperor issued an edict to let the officials reflect. Wu Zhongxing then first said: Zhang Jizheng and his son are in two different places, and the two sides have not met for fifteen years.

古文：一旦长弃数千里外，陛下不使匍匐星奔，凭棺一恸，必欲其违心抑情，衔哀茹痛于庙堂之上，而责以訏谟远猷，调元熙载，岂情也哉！
现代文：其父已死于数千里之外，陛下不让他星夜奔丧，抚棺恸哭，却一定要他违心地压抑感情，忍痛含悲于朝廷之上，并让他主持政务，执掌权柄，发扬功业，为国事操劳，这难道合乎情理吗？
English: His father had died thousands of miles away. His Majesty did not allow him to grieve in the starry night, patting the coffin and weeping, but he had to suppress his feelings against his will, endure pain and sorrow in the imperial court, and let him preside over government affairs, hold power, promote his career, and work for national affairs. Is this reasonable?

古文：居正每自言谨守圣贤义理，祖宗法度。
现代文：张居正每每自言他谨守圣贤的义理和祖宗法度。
English: Zhang Jizheng always told himself that he strictly adhered to the righteousness of the sages and the ancestral law.

古文：宰我欲短丧，子曰： 予有三年之爱于其父母乎？ 
现代文：宰我欲将丧期缩短，孔子说： 宰我有三年的爱心于他的父母吗？ 
English: Confucius said, "Should I not have three years of love for his parents?

古文：王子请数月之丧，孟子曰： 虽加一日愈于已。 
现代文：王子请求服几个月的丧期，孟子说： 虽然增加一天已经超过了。 
English: When the prince asked for a few months to mourn, Mencius said, "Although the extra day has already passed.

古文：圣贤之训何如也？
现代文：圣贤的训导怎么样？
English: What about the teachings of the sages?

古文：在律，虽编氓小吏，匿丧有禁；惟武人得墨衰从事，非所以处辅弼也。
现代文：在法律上，虽然是老百姓、小官吏，隐匿丧情也是被禁止的，唯有武人得以穿黑色丧服不奔丧事，但这不是处置辅臣的办法。
English: According to the law, although it is ordinary people and minor officials, it is also forbidden to conceal mourning. Only warriors can wear black mourning clothes and not go to funerals, but this is not the way to deal with vassals.

古文：即云起复有故事，亦未有一日不出国门，而遽起视事者。
现代文：有人说过去也有起用之事，但也没有听说一天都不出京城大门，而立刻就任职的。
English: Some people said that they had also been appointed in the past, but they had never heard of someone who did not leave the gates of the capital for a single day, but took office immediately.

古文：祖宗之制何如也？
现代文：祖宗的规矩如何呢？
English: What about the rules of the ancestors?

古文：事系万古纲常，四方视听，惟今日无过举，然后后世无遗议。
现代文：这件事关系到万古的纲常，天下的人都会看到、听到，唯有今天没有过失的举动，然后后世才没有令人遗憾的议论。
English: This matter is related to the principles of all ages. People all over the world will see and hear. Only if there is no wrongdoing today, then there will be no regrettable discussion in the future.

古文：销变之道，无逾此者。 
现代文：亟待解决的问题莫过于此。 
English: This is the most urgent problem to be solved.

古文：疏既上，以副封白居正。
现代文：奏疏已经上了，他把副本告诉张居正。
English: He told Zhang Juzheng that the transcript had been uploaded.

古文：居正愕然曰： 疏进耶？ 
现代文：张居正惊讶地说： 奏疏送进去了吗？ 
English: Zhang Juzheng said in surprise, "Has the orchestra been sent in?"

古文：中行曰： 未进不敢白也。 
现代文：吴中行说： 没有送上不敢告诉你。 
English: Wu Zhongxing said: I dare not tell you what I didn't send.

古文：明日，赵用贤疏入。
现代文：第二天，赵用贤的疏奏上。
English: The next day, Zhao Yixian's rendition was played.

古文：又明日，艾穆、沈思孝疏入。
现代文：第三天，艾穆、沈思孝的奏也呈上。
English: On the third day, Ai Mu and Shen Si Xiao's performance was also presented.

古文：居正怒，谋于冯保，欲廷杖之。
现代文：张居正发了火，与冯保商量，欲廷杖他们。
English: Zhang Jiusheng was furious, discussed with Feng Bao, and wanted to slap them.

古文：翰林院侍讲赵志皋、张位、于慎行、张一桂、田一俊、李长春，修撰习孔教、沈懋学俱具疏救，格不入。
现代文：翰林院侍讲赵志皋、张位、于慎行、张一柱、田一隽、李长春，修撰习孔教、沈懋学都上奏救他们，但奏疏都被阻止没有上报。
English: Zhao Zhixuan, Zhang Yi, Yu Shengyong, Zhang Yizhu, Tian Yixuan and Li Changchun, the attendants and lecturers of Hanlin Academy, went to recite and save them, but they were all prevented from reciting and did not report.

古文：学士王锡爵乃会词臣数十人，求解于居正，弗纳。
现代文：学士王锡爵于是会同数十人，找张居正求和解，张不接受。
English: Wang Xizhe, a bachelor, then joined dozens of people to find Zhang Jiusheng to seek reconciliation, but Zhang did not accept.

古文：遂杖中行等四人。
现代文：于是廷杖吴中行等四人。
English: As a result, Ting Jie Wu Zhong Xing and four others left.

古文：明日，进士邹元标疏争，亦廷杖，五人者，直声震天下。
现代文：第二天，进士邹元标上疏争辩，也被廷杖。这五个人正直的名声震动天下。
English: The next day, Jin Shi Xuan Yuan was labeled as a troublemaker and was also caned by the court. The reputation of these five people's honesty shook the world.

古文：中行、用贤并称吴、赵。
现代文：吴中行、赵用贤并称吴、赵。
English: Wu Zhongxing and Zhao Yixian are also known as Wu and Zhao.

古文：南京御史朱鸿谟疏救五人，亦被斥。
现代文：南京御史朱鸿谟上疏救援五人，也被斥责。
English: The governor of Nanjing, Zhu Hongmu, was also reprimanded for rescuing five people.

古文：中行等受杖毕，校尉以布曳出长安门，舁以板扉，即日驱出都城。
现代文：吴中行等受了廷杖后，校尉用布将他们拖出长安门，用木板抬着，当天就驱赶出都城。
English: After Wu Zhongxing and others received the imperial scepter, the captain dragged them out of the Chang'an Gate with a cloth, carried them with a wooden board, and drove them out of the capital on the same day.

古文：中行气息已绝，中书舍人秦柱挟医至，投药一匕，乃苏。
现代文：吴中行气息都没有了，中书舍人秦柱带来了医生，喂服了一勺子药，才苏醒。
English: Wu Zhongxing was out of breath. Qin Zhu, a Chinese scholar, brought a doctor and fed him a spoonful of medicine before he woke up.

古文：舆疾南归，刲去腐肉数十脔，大者盈掌，深至寸，一肢遂空。
现代文：用车载着他南归，归家后，挖出腐肉数十块，大的如手掌，深寸许，一肢都挖空了。
English: He was taken south by car, and after returning home, dozens of pieces of carrion were dug out. They were as big as palms and about an inch deep. One limb was hollowed out.

古文：九年，大计京官，列五人察籍，锢不复叙。
现代文：万历九年全面考核京官，把五人列于考察名单上，将其禁锢不让任职。
English: In the ninth year of Wanli, Beijing officials were comprehensively assessed, five people were listed on the inspection list, and they were banned from holding office.

古文：居正死，士楚当按苏、松，怃然曰： 吾何面目见吴、赵二公！ 
现代文：张居正死后，曾士楚应当巡按苏、松地区，他惭愧地说： 我有什么面目去见吴、赵二位大人呢！ 
English: After Zhang Jizheng's death, Zeng Shi Chu should have made a tour of the Su and Song regions. He said with shame: "What kind of face do I have to meet the two adults Wu and Zhao!"

古文：遂引疾去。
现代文：于是声称有病走了。
English: He then claimed to be ill and left.

古文：三谟已擢太常少卿，寻与士楚俱被劾削籍。
现代文：陈三谟已被提为太常少卿，不久与曾士楚都被弹劾而削去职务。
English: Chen Sanmu had already been elevated to the position of Taizhong Shaoqing, and soon he and Zengshi Chu were both impeached and removed from their posts.

古文：廷臣交荐中行，召复故官，进右中允，直经筵。
现代文：朝廷大臣一起推荐吴中行，下诏起用为原官职，升为右中允，值经筵。
English: The ministers of the Imperial Court jointly recommended Wu Zhongxing, who was appointed to his former official position, promoted to the position of the Right Middle Assistant, and promoted to the position of the Vice-Minister.

古文：大学士许国攻李植、江东之，诋中行、用贤为其党。
现代文：大学士许国攻击李植、江东之，诋毁吴中行、赵用贤是他们一派的。
English: College student Xu Guo attacked Li Zhi and Jiang Dongzhi, and slandered Wu Zhongxing and Zhao Yixian.

古文：中行奏辨，因乞罢，不许。再迁右谕德。
现代文：中行上奏辩白，因而乞求回乡，皇上没有答应，又升为右谕德。
English: In the middle of the march, he pleaded his case and begged to return to his hometown, but the emperor did not agree, and he was promoted to the right.

古文：御史蔡系周劾植，复侵中行，中行求去，章四上。
现代文：御史蔡系周弹劾李植，又提到中行，中行请求免职，上了四道奏章。
English: Chief Secretary Cai Zhou impeached Li Zhi, and also mentioned the Bank of China, the Bank of China requested to be removed from office, and went on a four-way recital.

古文：诏赐白金、文绮，驰传归。
现代文：皇上下诏赏赐白金、文绮，乘驿马回去。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict awarding him platinum and money, and he rode back on a horse.

古文：言者屡荐，执政抑不召。
现代文：后来言官屡屡推荐他，执掌大权的人有意抑制，不召他回京城。
English: Later, officials repeatedly recommended him, but those in power deliberately restrained him and did not call him back to the capital.

古文：宗达，少傅、建极殿大学士。
现代文：过了很久，起用为侍讲学士，执掌南京翰林院。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as an attendant lecturer and took charge of the Nanjing Hanlin Academy.

古文：亮尚志节，与顾宪成诸人善。而元深疾东林，所辑《吾徵录》，诋毁不遗力。
现代文：同里之人佥事徐堂吉曾弹劾吴中行，事情已经了结，给事中王嘉谟又重提旧事弹劾他，朝廷命令他呆在家中等待征召。不久就死了。
English: A fellow villager said that Xu Dongji had impeached Wu Zhongxing, and the matter was over. Wang Jia Mu brought up the old matter again to impeach him, and the court ordered him to stay at home and wait for conscription. He died soon after.

古文：兄弟异趣如此。赵用贤，字汝师，常熟人。
现代文：后赠为礼部右侍郎。赵用贤，字汝师，江苏常熟人。
English: He was later given the title of Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies. Zhao Yixian, Zairu's teacher, was a frequent acquaintance in Jiangsu.

古文：父承谦，广东参议。
现代文：父亲承谦，广东参议。
English: His father, Cheng Qian, is a Guangdong councillor.

古文：用贤举隆庆五年进士，选庶吉士。
现代文：赵用贤隆庆五年中进士，选为庶吉士。
English: Zhao Yixian Longqing was promoted to junior high school in the fifth year, and was selected as a junior member.

古文：万历初，授检讨。
现代文：万历初年，授职检讨。
English: In the first year of Wanli, the awarding of posts was reviewed.

古文：张居正父丧夺情，用贤抗疏曰： 臣窃怪居正能以君臣之义效忠于数年，不能以父子之情少尽于一日。
现代文：张居正父亲死后不服丧，赵用贤上疏说： 我暗暗感到奇怪，张居正能以君臣大义效忠数年，却不能以父子之情稍尽心一日。
English: Unconvinced by Zhang Jizheng's grief after his father's death, Zhao Yingxian said: I secretly feel strange that Zhang Jizheng can be loyal for several years as a monarch and minister, but can't devote himself to his father and son for a day.

古文：臣又窃怪居正之勋望积以数年，而陛下忽败之一旦。
现代文：我又暗地里奇怪，张居正的名望以数年累积而成，陛下却让它毁于一旦。
English: I was also secretly surprised that Zhang Juzheng's reputation was built up over several years, but His Majesty allowed it to be destroyed in an instant.

古文：莫若如先朝杨溥、李贤故事，听其暂还守制，刻期赴阙，庶父子音容乖暌阻绝于十有九年者，得区区稍伸其痛于临穴凭棺之一恸也。
现代文：不如像前朝的杨溥、李贤那样，让他暂时回去服丧，规定日期回来补缺，让他们十九年未见面的父子，能在抚棺恸哭的那一刻稍稍缓解心中的痛苦。
English: It would be better to let him go back temporarily to attend the funeral and come back on a specified date to fill the vacancy, as was the case with Yang Hui and Li Xian of the previous dynasty, so that the father and son, who had not seen each other for nineteen years, could ease the pain in their hearts a little at the moment of crying and stroking the coffin.

古文：国家设台谏以司法纪、任纠绳，乃今哓哓为辅臣请留，背公议而徇私情，蔑至性而创异论。
现代文：国家设立台谏是为了整肃法纪，纠正过错，现在却因为恐惧威权请辅臣留下，违背公众的舆论而徇私情，蔑视人伦的纯厚性情而创立怪异之论。
English: The State established the Office of the President of the People's Republic of China for the purpose of rectifying the legal system and correcting mistakes, but now, out of fear of authority, it has invited its vassals to stay, violated the public's public opinion and fostered selfishness, and disdained the pure disposition of human ethics and created bizarre theories.

古文：臣愚窃惧士气之日靡，国是之日淆也。 
现代文：我愚蠢地暗自担心士风将日益颓靡，国家大事将日益混淆了。 
English: Stupidly, I secretly feared that the scholarly style would become more and more decadent, and that national affairs would become more and more confused.

古文：疏入，与中行同杖除名。
现代文：疏奏上后，与吴中行同被廷杖除去官籍。
English: He and Wu Zhongxing were stripped of their official titles by the imperial scepter.

古文：用贤体素肥，肉溃落如掌，其妻腊而藏之。
现代文：赵用贤身体本来肥胖，巴掌大的肉因溃乱而掉落，他的妻子把肉晒干藏了起来。
English: Zhao Yingxian's body was originally fat. The meat, which was as big as his palm, fell off due to the riot. His wife hid the dried meat.

古文：用贤有女许御史吴之彦子镇。
现代文：赵用贤有个女儿许配给吴之彦的儿子吴镇。
English: Zhao Yixian had a daughter who was betrothed to Wu Zhen, the son of Wu Zhihu.

古文：之彦惧及，深结居正，得巡抚福建。
现代文：吴之彦害怕连累自己，赶紧结交张居正，得到巡抚福建之职。
English: Wu Zhihong was afraid of being implicated, so he quickly made friends with Zhang Jizheng and obtained the post of governor of Fujian Province.

古文：过里门，不为用贤礼，且坐镇于其弟下，曰： 婢子也 ，以激用贤。
现代文：经过家门，不向赵用贤行礼，而且让吴镇坐在他弟弟的下面，说 是婢女之子 ，以此激怒赵用贤。
English: He angered Zhao Yixian by not bowing to him when he passed through the door, and by making Wu Zhen sit below his brother, saying that he was the son of a maid.

古文：用贤怒，已察知其受居正党王篆指，遂反币告绝。之彦大喜。
现代文：赵用贤很愤怒，已察觉他是受张居正的党徒王的指使，于是把礼金退还，回绝了这门亲事，吴之彦大喜。
English: Zhao Yixian was very angry. He had already realized that he was being directed by Zhang Jizheng's party king, so he returned the gift money and rejected this marriage. Wu Zhihong was overjoyed.

古文：居正死之明年，用贤复故官，进右赞善。
现代文：张居正死后的第二年，用贤起用为旧职，升右赞善。
English: In the second year after Zhang Juzheng's death, he was appointed to his old post and promoted to the post of right-hand man.

古文：江东之、李植辈争向之，物望皆属焉。
现代文：江东之、李植等争相接见他，他的威望很高。
English: Jiangdong Zhi, Li Zhi and others are competing to meet him, and his prestige is very high.

古文：而用贤性刚，负气傲物，数訾议大臣得失，申时行、许国等忌之。
现代文：但赵用贤性格刚直，恃才傲物，多次品评大臣的得失，申时行、许国等忌恨他。
English: However, Zhao Yixian had a straightforward personality and was proud of his talent. He repeatedly commented on the minister's gains and losses, and was hated by Shen Shixing, Xu Guoqin and others.

古文：会植、东之攻时行，国遂力诋植、东之，而阴斥用贤、中行，谓： 昔之专恣在权贵，今乃在下僚；昔颠倒是非在小人，今乃在君子。
现代文：正好李植、江东之攻击申时行，许国竭力抨击李植、江东之，暗地里却责怪赵用贤、吴中行，说： 过去专权在权贵，现在却在下僚；昔日小人颠倒是非，现在却是君子。
English: Just when Li Zhi and Jiang Dong were attacking Shen, Xu Guo tried his best to criticize Li Zhi and Jiang Dong, but secretly blamed Zhao Yixian and Wu Zhongxing, saying: In the past, the power was in the powerful, but now it is in the subordinates; in the past, the villains reversed the rights and wrongs, but now they are gentlemen.

古文：意气感激，偶成一二事，遂自负不世之节，号召浮薄喜事之人，党同伐异，罔上行私，其风不可长。 
现代文：意气用事，偶然做成一、二件事，就自负得不得了，与浮浅、喜爱生事的人相呼应，党同伐异，行私罔上，这种风气不能助长。 
English: It is impossible to foster a culture in which people are so conceited that they act impulsively and accomplish one or two things by accident. This echoes the shallow people who like to stir up trouble, and the party is at odds with itself and acts selfishly.

古文：于是用贤抗辨求去，极言朋党之说，小人以之去君子、空人国，词甚激愤。
现代文：于是赵用贤上疏辩白、请求离职，极力说明朋党之论的危害，在于小人以此赶去君子，使国家人才一空。
English: Therefore, Zhao used his wisdom to argue and plead for resignation, and tried his best to explain the harm of the theory of cronyism, that the villain used it to drive away the gentleman and make the country empty of talent.

古文：帝不听其去。党论之兴，遂自此始。
现代文：言词很激愤，皇上不准他离去，朋党之争从此开始。
English: The words were very angry, the emperor did not allow him to leave, and the dispute between the friends and the party began.

古文：寻充经筵讲官。再迁右庶子，改南京祭酒。
现代文：不久，他充任经筵讲席，又升右庶子，改任南京祭酒。
English: Soon, he was appointed as a lecturer of economics and finance, and was promoted to the second son of the right, and was appointed as the Nanjing Festival liquor.

古文：荐举人王之士、邓元锡、刘元卿，清修积学。
现代文：推荐举人王之士、邓元锡、刘元卿，请加强圣学。
English: I recommend you to listen to the wise men, Deng Yuanxi and Liu Yuanqing, and please strengthen your study of the Holy Scriptures.

古文：又请建储，宥言官李沂罪。
现代文：又请求设立储君，饶恕言官李沂罪过。
English: He also requested the establishment of a vassal to forgive the sins of the speaker, Li Xi.

古文：居三年，擢南京礼部右侍郎。
现代文：三年后，提升为南京礼部右侍郎。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department.

古文：以吏部郎中赵南星荐，改北部。
现代文：因为吏部郎中赵南星的推荐，改在京城任此职。
English: Because of the recommendation of Zhao Nansing, the younger brother of the secretary, he was transferred to this post in Beijing.

古文：寻以本官兼教习庶吉士。
现代文：不久，又以本官兼任教习庶吉士。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of teaching assistant.

古文：二十一年，王锡爵复入内阁。
现代文：万历二十一年，王锡爵又进入内阁。
English: In the 21st year of Wanli, Wang Xizhe again entered the cabinet.

古文：初，用贤徙南，中行、思孝、植、东之已前贬，或罢去，故执政安之。
现代文：起初，赵用贤回南方时，吴中行、沈思孝、李植、江东之已经被贬，或被罢官，故执政的人很安心。
English: At first, when Zhao Yixian returned to the south, Wu Zhongxing, Shen Sihiao, Li Zhi and Jiangdong had already been demoted or dismissed, so the people in power were very relieved.

古文：及是，用贤复以争三王并封语侵锡爵，为所衔。
现代文：这时，赵用贤又以争三王同时分封的话中牵涉到王锡爵，被王锡爵所怀恨。
English: At this time, Zhao Yingxian also involved Wang Xizhe in the dispute over the three kings at the same time. Wang Xizhe held a grudge against him.

古文：会改吏部左侍郎，与文选郎顾宪成辨论人才，群情益附，锡爵不便也。
现代文：改任吏部左侍郎，与文选郎顾宪成辩论人才，群情激愤，王锡爵颇感不安。
English: He was reappointed as the left-hand man of the cadre department, and argued with Gu Xiancheng, the editor-in-chief. The crowd was outraged, and Wang Xizhe was quite uneasy.

古文：用贤故所绝婚吴之彦者，锡爵里人，时以佥事论罢，使其子镇讦用贤论财逐婿，蔑法弃伦。
现代文：赵用贤过去所回绝婚约的吴之彦，是王锡爵的里人，当时以佥事之职遭人弹劾当罢官，唆使他的儿子吴镇攻击赵用贤论财赶走女婿，蔑视法律废弃伦理。
English: Wu Zhihang, whom Zhao Yixian had refused to marry in the past, was a relative of Wang Xizhe. At that time, he was impeached and dismissed from his post as an anecdote. He instigated his son Wu Zhen to attack Zhao Yixian and drive away his son-in-law, despising the law and abandoning ethics.

古文：用贤疏辨，乞休。
现代文：赵用贤上疏辩解，乞求退休。
English: Zhao pleaded for retirement, using the excuse that he was a virtuous man.

古文：诏礼官平议。
现代文：皇上下诏让礼官评议。
English: The Emperor's edict left it to the etiquette officials to comment.

古文：尚书罗万化以之彦其门生，引嫌力辞。
现代文：尚书罗万化以吴之彦是他的门生，怕引起嫌疑极力推辞。
English: Shangshu Luo Wanhua with Wu Zhihan is his protégé, fearing to arouse suspicion, he tried his best to refuse.

古文：锡爵乃上议曰： 用贤轻绝，之彦缓发，均失也。
现代文：王锡爵于是上疏说： 赵用贤轻易地回绝，吴之彦后来才揭发，都有过失。
English: Wang Xizhe then said to Shang Zuo: Zhao Yixian easily rejected it, Wu Zhihan only revealed it later, both of them were at fault.

古文：今赵女已嫁，难问初盟；吴男未婚，无容反坐。
现代文：现在赵的女儿已出嫁了，难以询问当时的盟约，吴的儿子还没结婚，不能再反坐定罪。
English: Now that Zhao's daughter is married, it is difficult to inquire about the covenant at that time, and Wu's son is still unmarried and can no longer appeal the conviction.

古文：欲折其衷，宜听用贤引疾，而曲贷之彦。 
现代文：想采取折衷的办法，应让赵用贤称病归家，而宽恕吴之彦。 
English: If a compromise is to be found, Zhao Yingxian should be allowed to call in sick and Wu Zhihong should be pardoned.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：皇上下诏同意了。
English: He complied.

古文：用贤遂免归。
现代文：赵用贤于是免职回乡。
English: Zhao Yixian was relieved of his duties and returned to his hometown.

古文：户部郎中杨应宿、郑材复力诋用贤，请据律行法。
现代文：户部郎中杨应宿、郑材又极力诋毁赵用贤，请依据法律从事。
English: The head of the household, Yang Yingjuan, and Zheng Zai also tried their best to defame Zhao Yixian, please act in accordance with the law.

古文：都御史李世达、侍郎李祯疏直用贤，斥两人谗谄，遂为所攻。
现代文：都御史李世达、侍郎李祯上疏替赵用贤抱不平，责备两人谄媚，于是遭攻击。
English: Li Shida, the imperial secretary of the capital, and his attendant Li Xuan, who were sent to replace Zhao Yixian, held a grudge, accused the two of being flattering, and were attacked.

古文：高攀龙、吴弘济、谭一召、孙继有、安希范辈皆坐论救褫职。
现代文：高攀龙、吴弘济、谭一召、孙继有、安希范等都因申救被降职。
English: Gao Panglong, Wu Hongji, Tan Yizhao, Sun Ji You and An Xi Fan were all demoted for appealing for help.

古文：自是朋党论益炽。
现代文：从此朋党之争更加激烈。
English: Since then, the struggle between the two parties has become more intense.

古文：中行、用贤、植、东之创于前，元标、南星、宪成、攀龙继之。
现代文：吴中行、赵用贤、李植、江东之首创于前，邹元标、李南星、顾宪成、高攀龙继续。
English: Wu Zhongxing, Zhao Yixian, Li Zhi and Jiangdong were the first to create it, followed by Xuan Yuanbiao, Li Nansing, Gu Xiancheng and Gaopanlong.

古文：言事者益裁量执政，执政日与枝拄，水火薄射，讫于明亡云。
现代文：言官更加注意品评执政之人，执政也日与其争持。水火不相容，到明代灭亡才停止。
English: Government officials paid more attention to the evaluation of those in power, and the government was also in conflict with them. Water and fire are incompatible, and it only stopped when the Ming Dynasty died out.

古文：用贤长身耸肩，议论风发，有经济大略。
现代文：赵用贤身长肩耸，意气风发，有经世大略。
English: Zhao Yixian is tall, strong-willed, and has a good grasp of the world.

古文：苏、松、嘉、湖诸府，财赋敌天下半，民生坐困。
现代文：苏、松、嘉、湖诸府，财赋占天下的一半，老百姓贫困。
English: The provinces of Su, Song, Jia and Hubei account for half of the country's wealth, while the common people live in poverty.

古文：用贤官庶子时，与进士袁黄商榷数十昼夜，条十四事上之。
现代文：赵用贤做庶子时，与进士袁黄商量了十天十夜，列出十四件事奏上。
English: When Zhao Yixian was a son-in-law, he discussed with Yuan Huang for ten days and ten nights and listed fourteen things.

古文：时行、锡爵以为吴人不当言吴事，调旨切责，寝不行。
现代文：申时行、王锡爵认为吴人不应当谈论吴事，让皇上下圣旨严厉责备了他，建议没有实行。
English: At the time of the petition, Wang Xizhe believed that Wu people should not talk about Wu affairs. He was severely reprimanded by the imperial edict, and the suggestion was not implemented.

古文：家居四年卒。
现代文：在家住了四年后死去。
English: He died after four years in the home.

古文：艾穆，字和父，平江人。
现代文：天启初年，赠为太子少保、礼部尚书，谥号文毅。艾穆，字和父，平江人。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, he was given the title of Prince Minor Protector and the title of Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, with the posthumous name of Wen Yi. Ai Mu, his father's name, was from Pingjiang.

古文：以乡举署阜城教谕，邻郡诸生赵南星、乔璧星皆就学焉。
现代文：因中乡举任命为阜城教谕，邻郡诸生如赵南星、乔璧星等都前来学习。
English: Due to the appointment of the Fucheng Preceptor by the Zhongxiang Clique, people from neighboring counties, such as Zhao Nansing and Qiao Bixing, came to study.

古文：入为国子助教。
现代文：后进入京城，为国子监助教。
English: Later, he moved to Kyoto and worked as an assistant teacher for the state inspector.

古文：张居正知穆名，欲用为诰敕房中书舍人，不应。
现代文：张居正知道艾穆的名声，想将他任用为诰敕房中书舍人，艾穆不答应。
English: Zhang Juzheng knew Ai Mu's reputation and wanted to appoint him as a librarian in the study room, but Ai Mu did not agree.

古文：万历初，擢刑部主事。
现代文：万历初年，他升任刑部主事，晋为员外郎。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he was promoted to the head of the criminal investigation department and promoted to the position of deputy foreign minister.

古文：进员外郎，录囚陕西。
现代文：审查陕西囚犯的罪状。
English: Examining the crimes of prisoners in Shaanxi Province.

古文：时居正法严，决囚不如额者罪。
现代文：当时张居正执法严厉，判决囚犯不到一定数额的人要治罪。
English: At that time, Zhang Ju was enforcing the law strictly, and those who sentenced prisoners to less than a certain amount were to be punished.

古文：穆与御史议，止决二人。
现代文：艾穆与御史商量，只判决了两人。
English: Ai Mu and Mi Shi deliberated, and only two people were sentenced.

古文：御史惧不称，穆曰： 我终不以人命博官也。 
现代文：御史担心不称职，艾穆说： 我决不会用人命来博取官职。 
English: Fearing that he was not up to the job, Aimo said: "I will never use human lives to gain office.

古文：还朝，居正盛气谯让。
现代文：回到朝廷，张居正盛气凌然质问他。
English: Back at the imperial court, Zhang Juzheng questioned him in a spirited manner.

古文：穆曰： 主上冲年，小臣体好生德，佐公平允之治，有罪甘之。 
现代文：艾穆说： 皇上很年幼，小臣要体现皇上重视生命的德行，来帮助成就您公平允当地治法，有罪我也甘心。 
English: Ai Mu said: The emperor is very young, and the vassal should embody the emperor's virtue of valuing life, and help to achieve your fair and reasonable rule of law. I am also willing to be guilty.

古文：揖而退。
现代文：作揖退下。
English: Step back from the fray.

古文：及居正遭丧夺情，穆私居叹息，遂与主事沈思孝抗疏谏曰： 自居正夺情，妖星突见，光逼中天。
现代文：等到张居正父死不服丧，艾穆在家叹息，于是与主事沈思孝上疏劝谏说： 自从张居正不服丧后，妖星突然出现，星光直逼中天。
English: Waiting for Zhang Juzheng's father's death, Aimu sighed at home, so he and the principal, Shen Si Xiao, persuaded Zou to say: Since Zhang Juzheng's death, the monster star suddenly appeared, and the starlight reached the middle of the sky.

古文：言官曾士楚、陈三谟甘犯清议，率先请留，人心顿死，举国如狂。
现代文：言官曾士楚、陈三谟甘心冒犯清议，率先请求张居正留下，人心顿然泯灭，举国如狂。
English: Chu and Chen Samu, former officials of the State Council, were willing to offend the clear discussion, and took the lead in requesting Zhang Ju Zheng to stay. People's hearts were suddenly shattered, and the whole country was frantic.

古文：今星变未销，火灾继起。
现代文：现在星变没有消失，火灾又起来了。
English: Now that the star change has not disappeared, the fire has started again.

古文：臣敢自爱其死，不洒血一为陛下言之！
现代文：臣怎么敢爱惜生命，不抛头洒血为陛下进言。
English: How dare the minister cherish life and not shed blood for the sake of His Majesty.

古文：陛下之留居正也，动曰为社稷故。夫社稷所重，莫如纲常。
现代文：陛下之所以留下张居正，说是为国家的缘故，而国家所重视的莫过于纲常。
English: The reason why His Majesty left Zhang Juzheng is said to be for the sake of the country, and the country attaches importance to nothing more than routine.

古文：而元辅大臣者，纲常之表也。
现代文：首辅大臣是纲常的表率。
English: The Minister of Internal Affairs and Communications is a constant role model.

古文：纲常不顾，何社稷之能安？
现代文：纲常不顾，社稷怎能安宁？
English: How can a society be at peace if it is constantly disregarded?

古文：且事偶一为之者，例也；而万世不易者，先王之制也。
现代文：事情偶然为之，是特例。而万世不变的，是先王的制度。
English: If something happens by chance, it's a special case. But what will never change is the system of the previous king.

古文：今弃先王之制，而从近代之例，如之何其可也。
现代文：现在抛弃先王的制度，而效法近世的特例，像这样怎么能行呢？
English: How is it possible to abandon the system of the former king and follow the example of modern times?

古文：居正今以例留，腆颜就列矣。
现代文：张居正现在因特例留下，碍着情面就任了。
English: Zhang Juzheng is now staying due to a special case, and has taken office in spite of the situation.

古文：异时国家有大庆贺、大祭祀，为元辅者，欲避则害君臣之义，欲出则伤父子之情。
现代文：等到国家有大事庆贺、大祭祀，身为首辅，想避开则害了君臣大义，想出来则伤了父子之情。
English: Wait until the country has a major celebration, a great sacrifice, as the chief aide, if you want to avoid it, it will harm the dignity of the monarch and the minister, and if you want to come out, it will hurt the feelings of the father and son.

古文：臣不知陛下何以处居正，居正又何以自处也！
现代文：臣不知道陛下怎么安置张居正，张居正又把自己置于何地？
English: The minister did not know how His Majesty placed Zhang Juzheng, and where did Zhang Juzheng place himself?

古文：徐庶以母故辞于昭烈曰： 臣方寸乱矣。 
现代文：徐庶因为母亲去世而向昭烈帝辞职说： 臣方寸已乱。 
English: Because of his mother's death, Xu Zhe resigned to Emperor Zhaorong, saying: "The vassal party is in chaos.

古文：居正独非人子而方寸不乱耶？
现代文：张居正难道不是人家儿子而方寸不乱吗？
English: Isn't Zhang Jizheng someone else's son, and isn't Fang Cunru chaotic?

古文：位极人臣，反不修匹夫常节，何以对天下后世！
现代文：位处人臣之上，却不修凡人的日常礼节，何以面对天下后世！
English: How can you face the world and future generations when you hold a position higher than that of a courtier, yet fail to observe the daily etiquette of an ordinary person?

古文：臣闻古圣帝明王劝人以孝矣，未闻从而夺之也。
现代文：臣听说过古代圣贤的帝王常常用孝来劝诫人，没有听说不让服亲丧的。
English: The courtiers had heard that the emperors of ancient sages often used filial piety to exhort people, but they had not heard that they did not allow relatives to be mourned.

古文：为人臣者，移孝以事君矣，未闻为所夺也。
现代文：身为人臣，转移孝道而侍奉君王，没有听说剥夺他人孝行的。
English: It is not unheard of for a vassal to transfer his filial duty and serve the sovereign, depriving others of their filial duty.

古文：以礼义廉耻风天下犹恐不足，顾乃夺之，使天下为人子者，皆忘三年之爱于其父，常纪坠矣。
现代文：用礼义廉耻教育天下唯恐不够，竟然将其剥夺，使天下做人家儿子的，都忘了对父亲养育三年的爱心，纲常沦落了。
English: It is not enough to educate the world with courtesy, honesty and integrity, but to deprive them of it, so that the world's sons have forgotten the love they nurtured for their fathers for three years, and have always fallen.

古文：异时即欲以法度整齐之，何可得耶！
现代文：到那时想用法律整顿，怎么办得到呢？
English: At that time, if you want to use the law to rectify, how do you get it?

古文：陛下诚眷居正，当爱之以德，使奔丧终制，以全大节；则纲常植而朝廷正，朝廷正而百官万民莫不一于正，灾变无不可弭矣。 
现代文：陛下果真眷念张居正，当用道德来爱护他，让他能奔丧尽孝，使他保全大节，那么就纲常树立而朝廷端正，朝廷端正则百官、万民莫不端正，灾变也没有不可消除的。 
English: If His Majesty really cherishes the memory of Zhang Jizheng, and if he is to be cherished with morality, if he is to be able to practice filial piety, and if he is to preserve the Great Festival, then it is necessary to establish the principle that the imperial court is correct, the imperial court is correct, all officials are correct, all people are correct, and there is no disaster that cannot be eliminated.

古文：时吴中行、赵用贤请令居正奔丧，葬毕还朝，而穆、思孝直请令终制，故居正尤怒。
现代文：当时吴中行、赵用贤请皇上让张居正奔丧，将父亲埋葬后再回到朝廷，而艾穆、沈思孝直接请求让他服三年之丧，所以，张居正尤其恼怒。
English: At that time, Wu Zhongxing and Zhao Yingxian asked the emperor to let Zhang Juzheng mourn and return to the imperial court after burying his father, while Ai Mu and Shen Sihiao directly requested that he serve a three-year funeral, so Zhang Juzheng was particularly angry.

古文：中行、用贤杖六十，穆、思孝皆八十加梏堣，置之诏狱。
现代文：吴中行、赵用贤杖六十下，艾穆、沈思孝杖八十下，另加手铐，置于诏狱中。
English: Wu Zhongxing and Zhao were sentenced to 60 strokes of the cane, while Ai Mu and Shen Si Xiao were sentenced to 80 strokes of the cane. They were also handcuffed and placed in the imperial prison.

古文：越三日，以门扉舁出城，穆遣戍凉州。
现代文：过了三天，用木板抬出城门，艾穆派往戍守凉州。
English: After three days, the gate was carried out of the city with wooden planks, and Aimu sent his troops to defend Liangzhou.

古文：创重不省人事，既而复苏，遂诣戍所。
现代文：由于伤太重不醒人事。不久苏醒过来，于是派往戍守所。
English: Due to the severity of his injuries, he was unconscious. He soon regained consciousness and was sent to the infirmary.

古文：穆，居正乡人也。
现代文：艾穆是张居正的乡人。
English: Ai Mu is a villager of Zhang Jizheng.

古文：居正语人曰： 昔严分宜时未有同乡攻击者，我不得比分宜矣。 
现代文：张居正对人说： 昔时严分宜没有同乡攻击他，我不能与严分宜相比。 
English: Zhang Juzheng said to the man: In the past, Yan Bounyi was not attacked by his fellow villagers. I cannot be compared to Yan Bounyi.

古文：九年，大计，复置穆、思孝察籍。
现代文：万历九年，全面考核官吏，又将艾穆、沈思孝置于考察的名册上。
English: In the ninth year of Wanli, officials were comprehensively assessed, and Ai Mu and Shen Sihiao were placed on the inspection roster.

古文：及居正死，言官交荐，起户部员外郎。
现代文：等到张居正死了，言官争相推荐他。艾穆起用为户部员外郎。
English: When Zhang Jiusheng died, officials scrambled to recommend him. Ai Mu was appointed as a member of the household department.

古文：迁西川佥事，屡迁太仆少卿。
现代文：任为四川佥事，逐渐升至太仆少卿。
English: He was appointed to the Sichuan anecdote, and gradually rose to the top as a servant of the young lord.

古文：十九年秋，擢右佥都御史，巡抚四川。
现代文：万历十九年秋天，提拔为右佥都御史，巡抚四川。
English: In the autumn of the 19th year of the Wanli calendar, he was promoted to the Right Hand of the Emperor, the Governor of Sichuan.

古文：故崇阳知县周应中、宾州知州叶春及行义过人，穆举以自代，不报。
现代文：前任崇阳知县周应中、宾州知州叶春及行为义气过人，艾穆推荐他们代替自己，皇上没有回答。
English: His predecessors, Zhou Ying Zhong of Chongyang County, and Ye Chun of Chizhou County, Pennsylvania, were extremely virtuous, and Ai Mu recommended them to replace him. The emperor did not answer.

古文：既之官，有告播州宣慰使杨应龙叛者，贵州巡抚叶梦熊请征之。
现代文：已经上任，有人报告播州宣慰使杨应龙叛乱，贵州巡抚叶梦熊请求征讨。
English: After taking office, it was reported that Yang Yinglong rebelled against Banshu Xuancheng, and Guizhou's governor Ye Mengxiong requested a levy.

古文：蜀人多言应龙强，未易轻举，穆亦不欲加兵，与梦熊异。
现代文：四川人大多说杨应龙势力强，不可以轻而易举征讨，艾穆也不想用兵，与叶梦熊意见不同。
English: Most Sichuan people say that Yang Yinglong is powerful and cannot be easily conscripted, and Ai Mu does not want to use soldiers, which is different from Ye Mengxiong's opinion.

古文：由乡举授福清教谕。上书陈时政，纚纚三万言。
现代文：朝廷命令两位抚臣一同考察，杨应龙不愿到贵州，于是将他逮捕到重庆，对质后按罪当斩，杨应龙贡上物品赎罪，艾穆让他回去了。
English: The imperial court ordered the two officials to investigate together. Yang Yinglong did not want to go to Guizhou, so he was arrested in Chongqing. After the confrontation, he was beheaded according to the crime. Yang Yinglong donated goods to atone for the crime, and Ai Mu let him go back.

古文：终户部郎中。
现代文：艾穆生病回乡，没有多久就去世了。
English: When Aimu fell ill and returned to his hometown, he died not long after.

古文：沈思孝，字纯父，嘉兴人。
现代文：后来杨应龙叛乱，议论的人追究艾穆的罪过，皇上夺去他的职务。沈思孝，字纯父，浙江嘉兴人。
English: Later, Yang Yinglong rebelled, the debaters investigated Ai Mu's sins, and the emperor deprived him of his post. Shen Sihiao, the father of Zhaozhun, was from Jiaxing, Zhejiang.

古文：举隆庆二年进士。
现代文：隆庆二年进士。
English: Longqing entered the priesthood two years ago.

古文：又三年，谒选。
现代文：又过了三年，去吏部等候选派。
English: After another three years, the candidates such as going to the cadre department won.

古文：高拱署吏部，欲留为属曹，思孝辞焉，乃授番禺知县。
现代文：高拱掌吏部，想留用他作为僚属，沈思孝极力推辞，于是授职番禺知县。
English: Gao Gong, the head of the cadre department, wanted to retain him as a colleague, but Shen Si Xiao strongly refused, so he was assigned to Panyu County.

古文：殷正茂总制两广，欲听民与番人互市，且开海口诸山征其税，思孝持不可。
现代文：殷天茂总管两广，想听从百姓与番人互市，而且开放海口诸山以征取税收，沈思孝坚持认为不可以。
English: Yin Tianmao, the general manager of the two provinces, wanted to listen to the people and the guards, and open the mountains of Haikou to collect taxes. Shen Sihiao insisted that it was not possible.

古文：万历初，举卓异，又为刑部主事。
现代文：万历初年，因卓有成绩，又成为刑部主事。
English: In the first year of Wanli, because of his outstanding achievements, he became the head of the criminal department.

古文：张居正父丧夺情，与艾穆合疏谏。
现代文：张居正父亲去世不服丧，他与艾穆合作上疏提意见。
English: Zhang Jizheng was not satisfied with the death of his father, and he did not agree to cooperate with Ai Mu.

古文：廷杖，戍神电卫。
现代文：廷杖后，被派去戍守神龟卫。
English: After the imperial scepter, he was sent to guard the divine turtle.

古文：居正死，召复官，进光禄少卿。
现代文：张居正死后，官复原职，提为光禄少卿。
English: After the death of Zhang Jizheng, the official was reinstated and promoted to Guanglu Shaoqing.

古文：政府恶李植、江东之及思孝辈。
现代文：执掌朝政的人讨厌李植、江东之和沈思孝等人。
English: The people in charge of the imperial government hated Li Zhi, Jiang Dongzhi and Shen Sihiao.

古文：思孝迁太常少卿，御史龚仲庆希指诋之，思孝遂求去，不许。
现代文：沈思孝升为太常少卿，御史龚仲庆奉承旨意诋毁他。沈思孝于是请求离职，皇上不允许。
English: Shen Si Xiao was promoted to the position of Taizhong Shaoqing, but Emperor Shizhongqing flattered him and slandered him. Shen Si Xiao then requested to leave his post, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：寻迁顺天府尹，坐宽纵冒籍举人，贬三秩视事。
现代文：不久他升为顺天府尹，因宽恕冒名顶替的举人，降三级使用。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Shuntianfu Yin, but was demoted three levels because he pardoned the impostor.

古文：思孝御三品服自若，被劾，调南京太仆卿，仍贬三秩。
现代文：沈思孝仍泰然自若穿着三品官的服饰，后被弹劾，调任南京太仆卿，仍旧降三级。
English: Shen Si Xiao still calmly dressed in the attire of a third-grade official, and was later impeached and transferred to Nanjing Taiguqing, still downgraded three levels.

古文：未几，谢病归。
现代文：没有多久，称病回家。
English: Before long, he called in sick and went home.

古文：吏部尚书陆光祖起为南京光禄卿。寻进右佥都御史，巡抚挟西。
现代文：吏部尚书陆光祖起用他为南京光禄卿，不久提升为右佥都御史，巡抚陕西。
English: Shangshu Lu Guangzu, the head of the personnel department, appointed him as the Nanjing Guangluqing, and soon he was promoted to the Right Hand of the Capital, the governor of Shaanxi.

古文：宁夏哱拜叛，诏思孝移驻下马关，为总督魏学曾声援。
现代文：宁夏継拜叛乱，皇上下诏令沈思孝移驻下马关，声援总督魏学曾。
English: Following the Ningxia Rebellion, the Emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Shen Si Xiao to move to Shimoaguan and support Governor Wei Xuezen.

古文：思孝以兵少，请募浙江及宣、大骑卒各五千，发内帑供军，并乞宥故都御史李材罪，令立功。
现代文：沈思孝认为兵力太少，请求在浙江、宣府、大同召募士兵各五千，发内府的钱供应军队，并乞求宽免前任都御史李材的过错，命令他立功赎罪。
English: Shen Shixiao thought that the number of soldiers was too small, and requested that five thousand soldiers each be recruited in Zhejiang, Xuanfu and Datong, and that the money from Fanefu be used to supply the army. He also begged for forgiveness for the mistakes of his predecessor, Li Zhai, and ordered him to make a contribution to atone for his sins.

古文：诏思孝近地召募，而罢材勿遣。
现代文：下诏让沈思孝就地召募，而罢免李材不派他去。
English: The next edict ordered Shen Sihiao to recruit locally, but Li Jia was dismissed and not sent.

古文：思孝与学曾议军事不合，给事中侯庆远劾思孝舍门户而守堂奥，设逻卒以卫妻孥，不任封疆事。
现代文：沈思孝与魏学曾讨论军事时意见不合，给事中侯庆远弹劾沈思孝舍弃边境之地而在内地防守，布置兵力保卫他的妻子及家人，不管边境战事。
English: Shen Si Xiao and Wei Xue had discussed military disagreements, and in the middle of the matter, Hou Qingyuan impeached Shen Si Xiao for abandoning the border area and defending in the mainland, deploying troops to protect his wife and family, regardless of the border war.

古文：改抚河南，辞不赴。
现代文：改为河南巡抚，他推辞不就任。
English: He refused to take up the post of Henan's governor.

古文：顷之，召为大理卿。
现代文：不久，征召他为大理卿。
English: Soon after, he was called up to serve as Daricheng.

古文：中官郝金诈传懿旨下狱，刑部薄其罪，思孝驳诛之。
现代文：中官郝金假传圣旨被逮捕入狱，刑部将他的罪减小，沈思孝上奏驳斥，认为应当处死。
English: Lieutenant Colonel Hao Jin was arrested and sent to prison for falsely transmitting the holy will. The criminal investigation department reduced his sentence, but Shen Si Xiao refuted this and believed that he should be executed.

古文：帝悦，进工部左侍郎。
现代文：皇上很高兴，提拔他为工部左侍郎。
English: The Emperor was very pleased and promoted him to the position of the left hand man of the engineering department.

古文：陕西织羊绒为民患，以思孝奏，减十之四。
现代文：陕西进贡羊毛织品祸害百姓，因沈思孝上奏，朝廷下令减去十分之四。
English: The imperial court ordered the deduction of four-tenths of a rupee from the tax paid on woolen fabrics in Shaanxi Province, which was a scourge to the people.

古文：进右都御史，协理戎政。
现代文：升右都御史，协助办理马政。
English: He was promoted to the post of Metropolitan of the Right and assisted in the administration of horse politics.

古文：初，廷推李祯为首，思孝次之，帝特用思孝。
现代文：起初，朝政推荐李祯为首，沈思孝为副，皇上特地任用沈思孝。
English: At first, the imperial government recommended Li Xi as the head and Shen Sijiao as the deputy, and the emperor specially appointed Shen Sijiao.

古文：或疑有奥援，给事中杨东明、邹廷彦相继疏劾。帝以廷彦受东明指，谪东明，夺廷彦俸。
现代文：有人怀疑他有人帮忙，给事中杨东明、邹廷彦相继上疏反对，皇上认为邹廷彦受杨东明的指使，贬杨东明，停发邹廷彦的俸禄。
English: Some people suspected that someone had helped him, and Yang Dongming and Yu Tingyan successively raised objections. The emperor believed that Yu Tingyan was instructed by Yang Dongming to disparage Yang Dongming and suspend Yu Tingyan's salary.

古文：二十三年，吏部尚书孙丕扬掌外察，黜参政丁此吕。
现代文：万历二十三年，吏部尚书孙丕扬掌管外任官吏考察，贬参政丁此吕。
English: In the 23rd year of the Wanli calendar, the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Sun Jianyang, was in charge of the inspection of external officials, and he was the first to participate in politics.

古文：思孝与东之素善此吕。
现代文：沈思孝与江东之平素与丁此吕很要好。
English: Shen Si Xiao and Jiangdong's Ping Su and Ding Ke Lv are very good.

古文：会御史赵文炳劾文选郎蒋时馨受贿，时馨疑思孝嗾之，遂讦思孝先庇此吕，后求吏部不得，以此二事憾已，遂结江东之、刘应秋等，令李三才属文炳。
现代文：恰好御史赵文炳弹劾文选郎蒋时馨受贿，蒋时馨怀疑是沈思孝唆使的，于是攻击沈思孝先庇护丁此吕，后想在吏部求职未成，因为这两件事他对时馨怀恨在心，遂与江东之、刘应秋等勾结，命令李三才属意赵文炳。
English: It just so happened that Zhao Wenzhong, the minister of state, impeached the poet Chiang Shih-ching for accepting bribes. Chiang Shih-ching suspected that Shen Si-xiao was the instigator, so he attacked Shen Si-xiao for first protecting Ding Guo-lu, and then for failing to get a job in the personnel department. Because of these two things, he held a grudge against Zhao Shih-ching, so he colluded with Jiang Dongzhi and Liu Yingqiu to order Li Sancai to follow the wishes of Zhao Wenzhong.

古文：帝恶时馨，罢其官。
现代文：皇上讨厌蒋时馨，罢了他的官。
English: The emperor hated Chiang Shih-hsin and dismissed him from his post.

古文：思孝等疏辨，且求去。
现代文：沈思孝等上疏辩解，而且请求离职。
English: Shen Sijiao and others made feeble excuses and requested to resign.

古文：丕扬言时馨无罪，此吕受赃有状，思孝不当庇。
现代文：孙丕扬说蒋时馨没有罪，丁此吕受贿有证据，沈思孝不当庇护他。
English: Sun Yanyang said that Jiang Shixin was not guilty, that there was evidence that Ding Guoliu had accepted bribes, and that Shen Sijiao had improperly protected him.

古文：因上此吕访单，乞归。
现代文：沈思孝于是将丁此吕的访单呈上，乞求回家。
English: Shen Shixiao then presented Ding Xulu's visiting card and begged him to come home.

古文：访单者，吏部当察时，咨公论以定贤否，廷臣因得书所闻以投掌察者。
现代文：访单是吏部考察官吏时，咨询大家的意见以定贤否，朝廷大臣因此把所见所闻的写下来给掌管考察的官吏。
English: When officials from the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the General Staff inspected officials, they consulted everyone's opinions to determine whether they were good or not. Therefore, the Minister of the Imperial Court wrote down what he saw and heard to the officials in charge of the inspection.

古文：事率核实，然间有因以中所恶者。
现代文：事情大都符合事实，然而有时也有人中伤自己讨厌的人。
English: Most of it is true, but sometimes people slander people they don't like.

古文：帝降诏慰留丕扬，逮此吕，诘让思孝。
现代文：皇帝下诏安慰、留任孙丕扬，逮捕丁此吕，责备沈思孝。
English: The emperor issued an edict to comfort and retain Sun Xiangyang, arrest Ding Geulu, and reprimand Shen Siqiao.

古文：御史俞价、强思、冯从吾，给事中黄运泰、祝世禄，皆为时馨讼冤，语侵思孝、东之。
现代文：御史俞价、强思、冯从吾，给事中黄运泰、祝世禄，都为蒋时馨伸冤，言语中触及到沈思孝、江东之。
English: Wang Shijian, Qiang Si, and Feng Conglu, in the matter of Huang Yun Tai and Zhu Shilu, all avenged Jiang Shixin, and the words touched Shen Si Xiao and Jiang Dongzhi.

古文：给事中杨天民、马经纶、马文卿又各疏劾思孝，大抵言文炳之疏由思孝，藉以摇丕扬也。
现代文：给事中杨天民、马经伦、马文卿又各自弹劾沈思孝，大抵上是说赵文炳的上疏是由沈思孝指使的，借以动摇孙丕扬的地位。
English: In the matter, Yang Tianmin, Ma Jinglun, and Ma Wenqing each impeached Shen Sihiao, mostly saying that Zhao Wenyi's ascension was ordered by Shen Sihiao, thereby shaking Sun Xiangyang's status.

古文：思孝屡乞罢，因诋丕扬负国。
现代文：沈思孝多次乞求罢官，同时抨击孙丕扬辜负了国家。
English: Shen Shixiao repeatedly begged to be dismissed, and at the same time criticized Sun Yat-sen for failing the country.

古文：员外郎岳元声言大臣相攻，宜两罢，似并论丕扬、思孝，而其指特攻时馨以及丕扬。
现代文：员外郎岳元声说大臣互相攻击，应两方都罢官，好像是指责孙丕扬、沈思孝两人，其实是特地攻击蒋时馨和孙丕扬。
English: The foreign member, Lang Yueyuan, said that the ministers were attacking each other and that both sides should be dismissed, as if he was accusing Sun Shiyang and Shen Siyang, but in fact he was specifically attacking Jiang Shixin and Sun Shiyang.

古文：疏方上，文炳忽变其说，谓： 元声、东之述思孝意，迫之救此吕、劾时馨，非己意也。
现代文：奏疏刚上，赵文炳突然改变他的说法，说： 岳元声、江东之根据沈思孝的意思，强迫臣救丁此吕，弹劾蒋时馨，并不是我自己的意思。 
English: At the beginning of the recitation, Zhao Wenxuan suddenly changed his statement, saying: According to Yue Yuanxuan and Jiang Dong, it was not my intention to force my ministers to save Ding Cui Lv and impeach Jiang Shixin according to the intention of Shen Sihiao.

古文：帝皆置不问。
现代文：皇上都置之不理。
English: The emperor ignored them.

古文：思孝素以直节高天下，然尚气好胜，动辄多忤，以此吕故，颇被物议。
现代文：沈思孝素以正直闻名天下，然而尚义气、好胜，动不动就得罪人。因为丁此吕的原因，很为廷臣议论了一阵。
English: Shen Si Xiao had been famous for his honesty, but he was still loyal and competitive, and would offend people at every turn. For this reason, the courtiers debated for a while.

古文：然时馨、此吕皆非端人，丕扬、思孝亦各有所左右。
现代文：蒋时馨、丁此吕都不是堂堂正正的人，孙丕扬、沈思孝也各有所左右。
English: Chiang Shih-hsin and Ding Guo-lu are not respectable people, and Sun Yu-yang and Shen Sih-hsiao are also not respectable.

古文：其明年，御史林培请辨忠邪，又力诋思孝、东之；且言： 丕扬杜门半载，辞疏十上，意必得请而后已。
现代文：第二年，御史林培请求辨明忠诚与邪恶，又极力诋毁沈思孝、江东之，并且说： 孙丕扬闭门半年，上了十次辞职的奏疏，意在一定要得到批准才停止。
English: In the second year, Goshilinpei asked him to distinguish between loyalty and evil, and also tried his best to discredit Shen Sihiao and Jiang Dongzhi, and said: Sun Xiangyang has been closed for half a year, and has submitted ten resignations, and intends to stop only after getting approval.

古文：思孝则杜门未几，近见从吾、运泰等罢，谓朝廷不难去言官五六人以安我。
现代文：沈思孝则闭门没有多久，就见冯从吾、黄运泰等被罢官，说为了安慰我，罢免五六个言官，朝廷不难办到。
English: Shen Si Xiao, on the other hand, did not stay behind closed doors for long before he saw Feng Congwu, Huang Yun Tai and others being dismissed. He said that in order to comfort me, it was not difficult for the imperial court to dismiss five or six officials.

古文：此人不去，为朝端害。 
现代文：此人不免职，将为害朝政。 
English: If this person is not removed from office, it will harm the government.

古文：帝顾思孝厚，谪培官。
现代文：皇上念及沈思孝的忠厚，贬了林培的官职。
English: The emperor thought of Shen Si Xiao's loyalty and demoted Lin Pei's official position.

古文：乾清宫灾，思孝请行皇长子冠礼以回天心。
现代文：乾清宫发生火灾，沈思孝请求举行皇长子冠礼仪式以回答天意。
English: When a fire broke out in the Qianqing Palace, Shen Sihong requested that the coronation ceremony for the eldest son of the emperor be held in response to the will of heaven.

古文：又以日本封事大坏，请亟修战守备，并论赵志皋、石星误国。
现代文：又以日本封贡的事情失败，请求立即做战守准备，并且弹劾赵志皋、石星误国的罪行。
English: He also failed in the matter of Japanese tribute, requested immediate preparation for war, and impeached Zhao Zhixuan and Shi Xing for the crime of misleading the country.

古文：其秋，丕扬去位，思孝亦引疾，诏驰传归，朝端议论始息。
现代文：这年秋天，孙丕扬离职，沈思孝也称病回乡，皇上下诏让他乘驿马归家，朝廷的议论才停止。
English: In the autumn of that year, the discussion in the imperial court only came to a halt when Sun Yat-sen left office, Shen Sih-hsiao also claimed to be ill and returned to his hometown, and the emperor ordered him to return home on a horse.

古文：久之，丕扬复起为吏部，御史史记事复诋思孝与顾天飐合谋欲构陷丕扬。
现代文：过了很久，孙丕扬再次起用为吏部尚书，御史史记事再次诋毁沈思孝与顾天翪合谋想陷害孙丕扬。
English: After a long time, Sun Hsiao-yang was once again appointed as the official of Shangshu, and the historical record once again slandered Shen Sihiao for conspiring with Gu Tianyao to frame Sun Hsiao-yang.

古文：顾宪成、高攀龙力辨其诬，而思孝卒矣。
现代文：顾宪成、高攀龙极力证明他是被诬告，而沈思孝已经死了。
English: Gu Xiancheng and Gao Panglong tried their best to prove that he was falsely accused, but Shen Sihiao was already dead.

古文：天启中，赠太子少保。
现代文：天启中，沈思孝被赠为太子少保。
English: In the apocalypse, Shen Si Xiao was given the title of Prince Minor Protector.

