古文：臣闻：古之明君错法而民无邪，举事而材自练，赏行而兵强。
现代文：我听说：古代英明的君主推行法治，民众就没有犯罪的邪恶行为；发动战争，就会造就干练的人才；实行赏罚，军队就会强大。
English: I have heard that if the wise monarchs of ancient times promoted the rule of law, the people would not commit evil acts; if they waged war, they would create capable people; if they rewarded and punished, the army would be strong.

古文：此三者，治之本也。
现代文：这三个方面是君主治理国家的根本。
English: These three aspects are fundamental to the monarch's governance of the country.

古文：夫错法而民无邪者，法明而民利之也。举事而材自练者，功分明；功分明，则民尽力；民尽力，则材自练。行赏而兵强者，爵禄之谓也。
现代文：君主推行法治民众没有邪恶行为，这是因为国家的法度严明而民众认为对自己有利；进行战争能造就人才，这是因为功劳分明，民众就全心全意为国家出力；施行赏罚军队力量强大的原因是指爵禄俸禄而说的。
English: The monarch promotes the rule of law, the people do not have evil deeds, this is because the country's laws are strict and the people think it is beneficial to themselves; the war can create talents, this is because the merits are clear, the people are wholeheartedly contributing to the country; the reason for the strong power of the army is said to be the knighthood.

古文：爵禄者，兵之实也。
现代文：爵位俸禄是军队用来奖赏的财物。
English: A knighthood is a military award.

古文：是故人君之出爵禄也，道明。
现代文：因此，君主颁发赐予爵位俸禄，必须遵循公开公正的原则。
English: Therefore, the principle of openness and fairness must be adhered to when the monarch grants a knighthood.

古文：道明，则国日强；道幽，则国日削。
现代文：遵循公开公正的原则国家就会一天天强大；遵循原则不公正，国家就会一天天削弱。
English: If the principle of openness and fairness is followed, the country will become stronger day by day; if the principle of unfairness is not followed, the country will become weaker day by day.

古文：故爵禄之所道，存亡之机也。
现代文：所以发出爵位俸禄的原则公正还是不公正是国家生死存亡的关键。
English: Therefore, whether the principle of awarding knighthoods and salaries is fair or unfair is the key to the country's survival.

古文：夫削国亡主非无爵禄也，其所道过也。
现代文：那些被削弱的国家，亡国的君主，并不是没有颁发爵位俸禄，这是因为他们颁发爵禄所用的方法是错误的。
English: It is not that the weakened states, the vanquished monarchs, did not award knighthoods, it is that they awarded them in the wrong way.

古文：三王五霸，其所道不过爵禄，而功相万者，其所道明也。
现代文：三王五霸，他们所运用的方法不过是授予爵位、奖赏俸禄，可是他们所达到和功效与其他君主相比高一万倍，原因是他们奖赏爵禄的原则正确。
English: The Three Kingdoms and Five Dynasties, the method they use is only to confer peerages and reward salaries, but their achievements and effectiveness are ten thousand times higher than those of other monarchs, because the principle of awarding peerages is correct.

古文：是以明君之使其臣也，用必出于其劳，赏必加于其功。
现代文：因此，英明的君主使用他的臣子和民众时，重用他们，一定是因为他们对国家的功劳，奖赏他们一定要加在他们在功绩上。
English: Therefore, when a wise prince employs his subjects and people, he must employ them well because of their services to the state, and reward them according to their merits.

古文：功赏明，则民竞于功。
现代文：论功行赏原则明确，那么民众就会争着立功。
English: If the principle of reward for meritorious deeds is clear, then people will compete for meritorious deeds.

古文：为国而能使其民尽力以竞于功，则兵必强矣。
现代文：治理国家能让民众争着立功，那军队就强大了。
English: If the people are able to compete for merit in governing the country, then the army will be strong.

古文：同列而相臣妾者，贫富之谓也；同实而相并兼者，强弱之谓也；有地而君，或强或弱者，乱治之谓也。
现代文：本来是处在同等地位的人而一方使另一方成了奴隶，这是因为贫富不同；富裕程度相同的国家却相互兼并，这是因为国家强弱不同；因为拥有了土地而做了君主，可国家有的强大有的弱小，这是政治昏庸与政治清明不同。
English: Originally, they were people in the same position, but one side made the other side a slave, this is because of the difference between rich and poor; countries with the same degree of affluence have annexed each other, this is because the country is strong and weak; because they owned the land and became a monarch, but some countries are strong and some are weak, this is the difference between political dullness and political clarity.

古文：苟有道，里地足容身，士民可致也；苟容市井，财货可聚也。
现代文：如果拥有道路与居报，有土地足可以安身，有才能的人和民众就能吸引过来；假如置身于进行买卖交易的集市中，便可以聚集财富。
English: If you have a road and a residence certificate, if you have enough land to settle down, you can attract talented people and the public; if you are in the market for buying and selling, you can gather wealth.

古文：有土者不可以言贫，有民者不可以言弱。
现代文：战友有土地就不能说贫穷，拥有民众就不可以说自己弱。
English: If you have land, you cannot say you are poor. If you have people, you cannot say you are weak.

古文：地诚任，不患无财；民诚用，不畏强暴。
现代文：土地被正确使用就不愁没有财富；民众被正确役使，就不会惧怕强暴的敌人。
English: If the land is well used, there will be no lack of wealth; if the people are well served, there will be no fear of violent enemies.

古文：德明教行，则能以民之有为己用矣。
现代文：君主的品德圣明，法令能执行，那么就能使民众所有的力量为自己所用。
English: The character of the monarch is sacred, and if the decrees can be executed, then all the power of the people can be used for themselves.

古文：故明主者用非其有，使非其民。
现代文：所以英明的君主能利用不是自己的东西，役使不属于自己的民众。
English: That is why a wise ruler can make use of things that are not his own and use people who do not belong to him.

古文：明王之所贵，惟爵其实，爵其实而荣显之。
现代文：英明的君主所重视的，只是按照实际情况授予官爵，依据实情授予爵位，使他们感觉到荣耀显贵了。
English: Wise monarchs only attach importance to conferring official titles according to the actual situation, and conferring titles according to the actual situation, so that they feel the glory and nobility.

古文：不荣，则民不急列位；不显，则民不事爵；爵易得也，则民不贵上爵；列爵禄赏不道其门，则民不以死争位矣。
现代文：假如不荣耀，那么民众就不急于得到爵位；假如觉得不显贵那民众就不会追求爵位；爵位容易获得，那么民众就不认为君主赐给的爵位尊贵。颁发爵位，给予俸禄奖赏不遵循正常的门路，民众就不会拼死争夺爵位了。
English: If there is no glory, then the people will not be eager to get a title; if they feel that they are not conspicuous, then the people will not pursue a title; if titles are easy to obtain, then the people will not think that the titles given by the monarch are noble. If the awards of titles, salaries and rewards do not follow the normal path, the people will not fight to the death for titles.

古文：人君而有好恶，故民可治也。人君不可以不审好恶。
现代文：人天生就有喜欢和讨厌的东西，所以君主能利用它治理好民众。
English: People are born with likes and dislikes, so the monarch can use it to govern the people well.

古文：好恶者，赏罚之本也。
现代文：因此君主不能不了解清楚民众的爱好和厌恶的习性。
English: Therefore, the monarch must have a clear understanding of the people's likes and dislikes.

古文：夫人情好爵禄而恶刑罚，人君设二者以御民之志，而立所欲焉。
现代文：民众的喜好和厌恶是使用奖赏和刑罚的根本原因。人之常情是喜欢爵位俸禄而讨厌刑罚，所以君主设置这两样逢迎民众的志向，而设立民众想要的爵禄。
English: The people's likes and dislikes are the fundamental reasons for the use of rewards and punishments. It is human nature to like rewards and dislike punishments, so the monarch set up these two to meet the people's aspirations, and set up the people's desired reward.

古文：夫民力尽而爵随之，功立而赏随之，人君能使其民信于此如明日月，则兵无敌矣。
现代文：民众用尽了力，那爵位也随着得到，建立了功绩，那奖赏也跟着得到了。君主假如能让他的民众相信这一点像想念明亮的太阳和月亮一样，那军队就会天下无敌了。
English: The people have spent their strength, and the title has come with it, the merit has been established, and the reward has come with it. If the monarch can make his people believe this, like the bright sun and the moon, the army will be invincible.

古文：人君有爵行而兵弱者，有禄行而国贫者，有法立而乱者。此三者，国之患也。
现代文：君主有爵位颁发，军队的实力反而弱，有俸禄发放，可国家依然贫穷，有的国家法度确立了，而社会政治还是乱了，这几种情况是国家的祸患。
English: Monarchs are awarded titles of nobility, but the strength of the army is weak, salaries are paid, but the country is still poor, some national laws are established, but the social and political situation is still chaotic. These situations are the scourge of the country.

古文：故人君者先便请谒而后功力，则爵行而兵弱矣。
现代文：如果君主先看重宠臣的求情请托，而把有功劳的人放在后面，那爵禄颁发了，而军队就实力就削弱了。
English: If the sovereign gives first place to the petitions of his favourites, and leaves the men of merit behind, the honours will be given out, and the army will be weakened.

古文：民不死犯难而利禄可致也，则禄行而国贫矣。
现代文：民众不拼死作战而利禄爵位就能得到，那俸禄发放了而国家却贫穷了。
English: The people do not fight to the death, but receive a stipend and a title. That stipend is paid, but the country is impoverished.

古文：法无度数，而事日烦，则法立而治乱矣。
现代文：法令没有标准，而国家的事务一天天增多，结果是确立了而社会政治混乱了。
English: There is no standard for laws and regulations, and the affairs of the state are increasing day by day. As a result, social and political chaos has been established.

古文：是以明君之使其民也，使必尽力以规其功，功立而富贵随之，无私德也，故教流成。
现代文：所以英明的君主役使他的民众使他们一定用尽全力来谋求立功的事，功绩建立了，而富贵便随之而来，除此之外国家没有私下的奖赏，所以国家的政令就能够成功执行。
English: Therefore, the wise monarch serves his people so that they must do their best to seek meritorious deeds. Merit is established, and wealth follows. In addition, the state has no private reward, so the state's decrees can be successfully implemented.

古文：如此，则臣忠、君明，治著而兵强矣。
现代文：像这样就会君主英明，臣子忠诚，政绩显著而军队强大。
English: In this way, the monarch will be wise, the courtiers will be loyal, the political achievements will be remarkable, and the army will be strong.

古文：故凡明君之治也，任其力不任其德，是以不忧不劳，而功可立也。
现代文：所以英明的君主治理国家，根据民众为国家出力的情况加以任用，而不是根据私人恩德使用。因此，不担忧不劳累便将功绩建立了起来。
English: Therefore, a wise monarch governs the country and appoints people according to their contribution to the country, rather than according to their personal merit. Therefore, merit is established without worry or fatigue.

古文：度数已立，而法可修。
现代文：法度的标准确立了，法令才可以执行。
English: Once the legal standard is established, the law can be enforced.

古文：故人君者不可不慎己也。
现代文：因此君主不能不慎重地对待自己。
English: So the monarch cannot afford to be indiscreet.

古文：夫离朱见秋豪百步之外，而不能以明目易人；乌获举千钧之重，而不能以多力易力。
现代文：离朱能在百步之外看清鸟兽身上细小的毛却不能将他的好眼力转给别人，乌获能举起上万斤的重物，却不能将大力气转给别人。
English: Zhu can see the fine hairs on birds and beasts a hundred paces away, but he can't transfer his good eyesight to others. Wu Wu can lift thousands of pounds of heavy objects, but he can't transfer his strength to others.

古文：夫圣人之存体性，不可以易人，然而功可得者，法之谓也。
现代文：圣人自身所具有的特殊禀性，也不能转给别人，但是功业却可以建立，这是因为凭借法治啊。
English: The special tenacity possessed by the saint himself cannot be transferred to others, but the merits can be established, this is because by virtue of the rule of law.

