古文：宣帝时，渤海左右郡岁饥，盗起，二千石不能制。
现代文：原文西汉宣帝刘询时，渤海及邻近各郡年成饥荒，盗贼蜂起，郡太守们不能够制止。
English: When Emperor Xuan of the Western Han Dynasty, Liu Qian, ascended to the throne, the Bohai Sea and the neighboring counties suffered from famine, thieves rose up, and the county governors were unable to stop them.

古文：上选能治者，丞相、御史举龚遂可用，上以为渤海太守。
现代文：宣帝要选拔一个能够治理的人，丞相和御史都推荐龚遂可以委用，宣帝就任命他为渤海郡太守。
English: Emperor Xuanzong wanted to select a person who could govern, and both the prime minister and the minister of history recommended him, so he could be appointed. Emperor Xuanzong appointed him as the governor of Bohai County.

古文：时遂年七十岁，召见，形貌短小，不副所闻。上心轻之，问： 息盗何策？ 
现代文：当时龚遂已经七十岁了，皇上召见时，见他身材矮小，其貌不扬，不像所听说的有本事的样子，心里颇看不起他，便问道： 你能用什么法子平息盗寇呀？ 
English: At that time, Yan Sui was already seventy years old. When the emperor summoned him, he saw his short stature, his unimpressive appearance, unlike what he had heard of his ability, and he despised him in his heart. He asked: What method can you use to quell the robbers?

古文：遂对曰： 海濒辽远，不沾圣化，其民困于饥寒而吏不恤，故使陛下赤子盗弄陛下之兵于潢池中耳。
现代文：龚遂回答道： 辽远海滨之地，没有沐浴皇上的教化，那里的百姓处于饥寒交迫之中而官吏们又不关心他们，因而那里的百姓就像是陛下的一群顽童偷拿陛下的兵器在小水池边舞枪弄棒一样打斗了起来。
English: Zou Sui replied, "In the coastal areas of Liaoyuan, where there is no imperial edification, where the people are hungry and cold and the officials do not care about them, the people are like a group of your majesty's urchins who have stolen your majesty's weapons and are fighting like dancing with guns by a small pool.

古文：今欲使臣胜之耶，将安之也？ 
现代文：现在陛下是想让臣把他们镇压下去，还是去安抚他们呢？ 
English: Now, does His Majesty want his ministers to suppress them, or to appease them?

古文：上改容曰： 选用贤良，固将安之。 
现代文：宣帝一听他讲这番道理，便神色严肃起来，说： 我选用贤良的臣子任太守，自然是想要安抚百姓的。 
English: As soon as Emperor Xuan heard him expound this principle, he looked grave and said: I have chosen a virtuous vassal to be the governor-general. Naturally, I want to appease the people.

古文：遂曰： 臣闻治乱民如治乱绳，不可急也，臣愿丞相、御史且无拘臣以文法，得一切便宜从事。 
现代文：龚遂说： 臣下听说，治理作乱的百姓就像整理一团乱绳一样，不能操之过急了。臣希望丞相、御史不要以现有的法令一味束缚我，允许臣到任后诸事均据实际情况由臣灵活处理。 
English: Zou Sui said: My vassals have heard that governing the people who caused the turmoil is like sorting out a tangled mess of ropes, so I can't be too hasty. I hope that the prime minister and the minister of history will not bind me with the existing laws and regulations, and allow me to flexibly handle everything according to the actual situation after I take office.

古文：上许焉，遣乘传至渤海界。
现代文：宣帝答应了他的请求，并派驿车将龚遂送往渤海郡去。
English: Emperor Xuanzong agreed to his request and sent a carriage to take him to the county of Bohai.

古文：郡闻新太守至，发兵以迎，遂皆遣还，移书敕属县： 悉罢逐捕盗贼吏；诸持锄，钩田器者皆为良民，吏毋得问；持兵者乃为盗贼。 
现代文：郡中官员听说新太守要来上任，便派军队迎接、护卫。龚遂把他们都打发回去了，并向渤海所属各县发布文告： 将郡中追捕盗贼的官吏全部撤免，凡是手中拿的是锄、镰等农具的人都是良民，官吏不得拿问，手中拿着兵器的才是盗贼 。
English: The officials in the county heard that the new governor was coming to take office, so they sent troops to meet and escort him. They then sent them all back, and issued a statement to the counties belonging to Bohai: Remove all officials in the county who are pursuing thieves. Anyone who is holding a plow, harrow and other farm tools in their hands is a good citizen. Officials are not allowed to ask questions. It is the thieves who are holding weapons in their hands.

古文：遂单车独行至府。
现代文：龚遂单独乘驿车来到郡府。
English: She then took a taxi alone to the county seat.

古文：盗贼闻遂教令，即时解散，弃其兵弩而持钩、锄。
现代文：闹事的盗贼们知道龚遂的教化训令后，立即瓦解散伙，丢掉武器，拿起镰刀、锄头种田了。
English: The rioting thieves immediately disbanded, threw away their weapons, picked up scythes and hoes, and started farming after they learned of Su Sui's edification order.

古文：汉制，太守皆专制一郡，生杀在手，而龚遂犹云 愿丞相，御史无拘臣以文法 。
现代文：评译汉朝制度，太守独自掌管一郡政事，拥有生杀之权，而龚遂还说： 希望丞相、御史不要用条文法令来约束微臣。 
English: Commenting on the translation of the Han Dynasty system, the Daju is in sole control of a county's political affairs and has the right to kill and kill, and then said: I hope that the Prime Minister and the Minister of History do not use regulations and decrees to restrict Weixin.

古文：况后世十羊九牧，欲冀卓异之政，能乎？
现代文：不像后世民少官多，还希望能有卓越的政绩，可以做到吗？
English: Unlike later generations, when there were fewer officials and more people, we still hope to have outstanding political achievements. Can we achieve this?

古文：古之良吏，化有事为无事，化大事为小事，蕲于为朝廷安民而已；今则不然，无事弄做有事，小事弄做大事，事生不以为罪，事定反以为功。
现代文：古代优秀的官员，化有事为无事，化大事为小事，只是为求得朝廷安定百姓而已，不求自己的功绩；而现在却不是这样，无事弄成有事，小事弄成大事，发生事情不认为有罪，事情平定后反而自认有功。
English: In ancient times, excellent officials turned things into nothing, and big things into small things, just to gain the stability of the imperial court and the people, without seeking their own merits; but this is not the case now. They turn nothing into something, and small things into big things. When things happen, they are not considered guilty, but when things are settled, they consider themselves to have done something.

古文：人心脊脊思乱，谁之过与？
现代文：人心思乱而蠢蠢欲动，这究竟是谁的过错呢？
English: Whose fault is it that people's minds are in turmoil?

