古文：十有六年春，王正月，雨，木冰。
现代文：十六年春季，周历正月，天上在下雨，地上的树木却结着冰。
English: In the spring of the 16th year, the first month of the lunar calendar, the sky was raining, but the trees on the ground were frozen.

古文：夏四月辛未，滕子卒。
现代文：夏季四月辛未日，滕文公去世。
English: On a hot summer day in April, Teng Wengu passed away.

古文：郑公子喜帅师侵宋。
现代文：郑国公子喜率领军队攻打宋国。
English: Zheng Guo Gongzi led the army to attack Song.

古文：六月丙寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月丙寅日，这天是初一，有日食。
English: It was the first day of the new year, and there was a solar eclipse.

古文：晋侯使栾黡来乞师。
现代文：晋侯派遣栾黡来鲁国请求援兵。
English: Jin princes sent envoys to Lu to request reinforcements.

古文：甲午晦，晋侯及楚子、郑伯战于鄢陵，楚子、郑师败绩。
现代文：甲午日，六月的最后一天，晋侯和楚子、郑伯在鄢陵叫战，楚国、郑国的军队被打败。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the last day of June, Jin and Chu and Zheng fought in Fuling, and the armies of Chu and Zheng were defeated.

古文：楚杀其大夫公子侧。
现代文：楚国杀掉自己的大夫公子侧。
English: The state of Chu killed its own doctor.

古文：秋，公会晋侯、齐侯、卫侯、宋华元、邾人于沙随，不见公。公至自会。
现代文：成公与尹子、晋侯、齐国的佐、邾国人一起攻打郑国。鲁成公从盟会的地方回来。
English: Chenggong attacked Zheng along with Yin Zi, Jin Hou, Qi Zuo, and Wei Guo. Lu Chenggong returned from the place of the alliance.

古文：公会尹子、晋侯、齐国佐、邾人伐郑。
现代文：成功与尹子、晋侯、齐国佐、邾人一起攻打郑国。
English: He successfully attacked Zheng along with Yin Zi, Jin Hou, Qi Guo Zuo and Xing Ren.

古文：曹伯归自京师。
现代文：曹伯从京师回来。
English: Cao Bo came back from Beijing.

古文：九月，晋人执季孙行父，舍之于苕丘。
现代文：九月，晋国人拘捕了鲁国大夫季孙行父，又在招丘这个地方把他释放了。
English: In September, the people of Jin arrested Ji Sun Xingfu, a doctor from the State of Lu, and released him in Zhaoyu.

古文：冬十月乙亥，叔孙侨如出奔齐。
现代文：冬季十月乙亥日，叔孙侨如逃到了齐国。
English: In the winter of October, on the day of the Chinese lunar new year, my uncle and grandson fled to Qi Province.

古文：十有二月乙丑，季孙行父及晋郤犫盟于扈。
现代文：十二月乙丑日，季孙行父和晋国的郤犫在扈地结盟。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd month of the 12th lunar month, Ji Sun Xingfa and the king of Jin made an alliance in the land of Yunnan.

古文：乙酉，刺公子偃。
现代文：乙酉日，鲁国暗杀了公子惬。
English: On the 1st day of the 4th month of the 4th year of the 5th month of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year of the 15th year of the 15th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 16th year of the 17th year of the 19th year of the 19th year of the 19

古文：十六年春，楚子自武城使公子成以汝阴之田求成于郑。
现代文：十六年春季，楚共王从武城派公子成用汝阴的土田向郑国求和。
English: In the spring of the 16th year of the Joseon Dynasty, the king of the Chu Kingdom sent a prince from Wucheng to ask for peace from Zheng.

古文：郑叛晋，子驷从楚子盟于武城。
现代文：郑国背叛晋国，子驷跟随楚子在武城结盟。
English: Zheng Guo betrayed Jin Guo, and Zi Xi followed Chu Zi to form an alliance in Wucheng.

古文：夏四月，滕文公卒。
现代文：夏季，四月，滕文公去世。
English: In the summer, in April, Teng Wenguang passed away.

古文：郑子罕伐宋，宋将鉏、乐惧败诸汋陂。
现代文：郑国的子罕进攻宋国，宋国将鉏、乐惧在汋陂打败了他。
English: Zheng Zihan attacked Song, and Song defeated Zang and Le Xian in Zang.

古文：退舍于夫渠，不儆，郑人覆之，败诸汋陵，获将鉏、乐惧。
现代文：宋军退兵，驻扎在夫渠，不加警备。郑军伏兵袭击，在汋陵打败了他们，俘虏了将鉏、乐惧。
English: The Song army retreated, stationed in Fuqou, without being guarded. The Zheng army attacked the ambush, defeated them in Fuling, and captured the generals Zou and Leji.

古文：宋恃胜也。
现代文：这是由宋国仗恃打了胜仗而不加戒备。
English: This is because the Song Dynasty fought and won the war without taking precautions.

古文：卫侯伐郑，至于鸣雁，为晋故也。
现代文：卫献公发兵攻打郑国，到达鸣雁，这是为了晋国的缘故。
English: Wei Xiangong sent troops to attack Zheng and arrived at Mingyan, which was for the sake of Jin.

古文：晋侯将伐郑，范文子曰： 若逞吾愿，诸侯皆叛，晋可以逞。
现代文：晋厉公打算讨伐郑国，范文子说： 如果按照我的愿望，诸侯都背叛，晋国的危机可以得到缓和。
English: When Jin Liguo planned to invade Zheng, Fan Wenzi said, "If, according to my wish, the lords all betray, the crisis in Jin can be alleviated."

古文：若唯郑叛，晋国之忧，可立俟也。 
现代文：如果只是一个郑国背叛，晋国的忧患，可能马上就会来了。 
English: If it is just a betrayal of Zheng Guo, the sorrow of Jin Guo may come soon.

古文：栾武子曰： 不可以当吾世而失诸侯，必伐郑。 
现代文：栾武子说： 不能在我们这一辈执政的时候失去诸侯，一定要进攻郑国。 
English: Zhai Wuzi said, "We must not lose the provinces when our generation is in power, and we must attack Zheng.

古文：乃兴师。
现代文：于是就发兵。
English: So they sent in the troops.

古文：栾书将中军，士燮佐之。郤锜将上军，荀偃佐之。韩厥将下军，郤至佐新军，荀居守。
现代文：栾书率领中军，士燮作为辅佐；郤锜率领上军，荀偃作为辅佐；韩厥率领下军，郤至作为新军辅佐。荀罃留守。
English: Gongshu led the Central Army, and Shifu served as an aide; Gong led the Upper Army, and Gong served as an aide; Han Jue led the Lower Army, and Gong served as an aide to the New Army. Gong stayed behind.

古文：郤犫如卫，遂如齐，皆乞师焉。
现代文：郤犫去到卫国，乘机到齐国，请求两国出兵。
English: He went to the defense of the country, took the opportunity to Qi, and requested the two countries to send troops.

古文：栾黡来乞师，孟献子曰： 有胜矣。 
现代文：栾黡前来请求出兵，孟献子说： 晋国可能得胜了。 
English: Meng Xianzi said: Jin may have won.

古文：戊寅，晋师起。
现代文：四月十二日，晋军出兵。
English: On April 12th, the Jin army sent troops.

古文：郑人闻有晋师，使告于楚，姚句耳与往。
现代文：郑国人听说晋国出兵，就派使者报告楚国，姚句耳同行。
English: When the people of Zheng heard that Jin dispatched troops, they sent an envoy to report to Chu, and Yao Jule went along.

古文：楚子救郑，司马将中军，令尹将左，右尹子辛将右。
现代文：楚共王救援郑国。司马子反率领中军，令尹子重率领左军，右尹子辛率领右军。
English: Chu Zongwang came to the rescue of Zheng. Sima Zi led the Central Army, Yin Zichong led the Left Army, and Yin Zixin led the Right Army.

古文：过申，子反入见申叔时，曰： 师其何如？ 
现代文：路过申地，子反进见申叔时，说： 这次出兵会怎么样？ 
English: Passing through Shen, when he saw his uncle, he said, "What about this troop dispatching meeting?

古文：对曰： 德、刑、详、义、礼、信，战之器也。
现代文：申叔时回答说： 德行、刑罚、和顺、道义、礼法、信用，这是战争的手段。
English: Uncle Shen replied, "Virtue, punishment, harmony, morality, etiquette, and trust are the means of war.

古文：德以施惠，刑以正邪，详以事神，义以建利，礼以顺时，信以守物。
现代文：德行用来施予恩惠，刑罚用来纠正邪恶，和顺用来事奉神灵，道义用来建立利益，礼法用来适合时宜，信用用来护守事物。
English: Virtue is used to grant grace, punishment to correct evil, and obedience to serve the gods, morality to establish interests, etiquette to suit the times, and trust to protect things.

古文：民生厚而德正，用利而事节，时顺而物成。上下和睦，周旋不逆，求无不具，各知其极。
现代文：人民生活优厚，道德就端正；举动有利，事情就合于节度，时宜合适，生产就有所成就；这样就能上下和睦，相处没有矛盾，有所需求无不具备，各人都知道行动的准则。
English: People's lives are good, and their morals are upright; if their actions are favorable, things will be in line with the schedule, the timing will be appropriate, and production will be successful; in this way, there will be harmony between the upper and lower levels, there will be no contradiction in getting along, there will be no lack of needs, and everyone will know the principles of action.

古文：故《诗》曰： 立我烝民，莫匪尔极。 
现代文：所以《诗》说： 安置百姓，没有不合乎准则。 
English: Therefore, the "Poem" says: There is nothing inconsistent with the principle of settling the people.

古文：是以神降之福，时无灾害，民生敦厖，和同以听，莫不尽力以从上命，致死以补其阙。此战之所由克也。
现代文：这样，神灵就降福于他，四时没有灾害，百姓生活优厚，齐心一致地听命，没有不尽力以服从上面命令的，不顾性命来弥补死去的战士的空缺，这样就是战争所以能够胜利的原因。
English: In this way, the gods blessed him, there were no disasters at four o'clock, the people lived well, listened to their orders with one heart and one mind, and did not make every effort to obey orders from above, regardless of their lives, to make up for the vacancies of dead soldiers. This is the reason why the war can be victorious.

古文：今楚内弃其民，而外绝其好，渎齐盟，而食话言，奸时以动，而疲民以逞。
现代文：现在楚国内部丢弃他的百姓，外部断绝他的友好，亵渎神圣的盟约而说话不讲信用，违反时令发动战争，使百姓疲劳以求快意。
English: Now Chu is abandoning his people internally, severing his friendship externally, blaspheming the sacred covenant and speaking dishonestly, launching a war in violation of the season, and making the people tired for pleasure.

古文：民不知信，进退罪也。
现代文：人们不知道什么是信用，进退都是罪过。
English: People don't know what credit is. It's a sin to advance or retreat.

古文：人恤所厎，其谁致死？
现代文：人们为他们的结局在担忧，还有谁肯去送命？
English: People are worried about their fate. Who else is willing to die?

古文：子其勉之！
现代文：您还是尽力做吧！
English: I hope you work hard!

古文：吾不复见子矣。 
现代文：我不会再看到您了。 
English: I won't see you again.

古文：姚句耳先归，子驷问焉，对曰： 其行速，过险而不整。
现代文：姚句耳先回来，子驷询问情况，他回答说： 楚军行军迅速，经过险要的地方行列不整齐。
English: Yao Jule came back first, Zi Yao inquired about the situation, and he replied: The Chu army marched quickly, and the ranks were not neat when passing through critical places.

古文：速则失志，不整丧列。
现代文：动作太快就会考虑不周，军容不整齐就丧失了行列。
English: If you move too quickly, it will be ill-considered, and if the army is not neat, it will lose its ranks.

古文：志失列丧，将何以战？
现代文：考虑不周、行列丧失，怎么能打仗？
English: How can you fight a war if you don't think about it, if you don't wait in line?

古文：楚惧不可用也。 
现代文：楚国恐怕不能依靠了。 
English: I'm afraid we can no longer rely on Chu.

古文：五月，晋师济河。
现代文：五月，晋军渡过黄河。
English: In May, the Jin army crossed the Yellow River.

古文：闻楚师将至，范文子欲反，曰： 我伪逃楚，可以纾忧。
现代文：他们听说楚军将要到达，范文子想要回去，说： 我们假装逃避楚国，这样就能够缓和忧患。
English: They heard that the Chu army was about to arrive, and Fan Wenzi wanted to go back, saying, "Let's pretend to escape from Chu, so that we can ease our worries."

古文：夫合诸侯，非吾所能也，以遗能者。
现代文：会合诸侯，不是我所能做到的，还是遗留给有能力的人吧。
English: Meeting with princes is not something I can do, so I'll leave it to those who are capable.

古文：我若群臣辑睦以事君，多矣。 
现代文：我们如果群臣和睦以奉事国君，这就够了。 
English: It is enough if we, the ministers, harmoniously serve the sovereign.

古文：武子曰： 不可。 
现代文：栾武子说： 不可以。 
English: Sono Takeko said, "No.

古文：六月，晋、楚遇于鄢陵。
现代文：六月，晋、楚两军在鄢陵相遇。
English: In June, the Jin and Chu armies met at Fuling.

古文：范文子不欲战，郤至曰： 韩之战，惠公不振旅。箕之役，先轸不反命。邲之师，荀伯不复从。皆晋之耻也。
现代文：范文子不想作战。郤至说： 韩地这一战，惠公失败归来；箕地这一役，先轸不能回国复命；邲地这一仗，荀伯又失败，这都是晋国的耻辱。
English: Fan Wenzi didn't want to fight. Zou Zi said: "In the Korean War, Huigong failed to return; in the Sino-Japanese War, Xian Zi couldn't return home; in the Sino-Japanese War, Zibo failed again. All of this is the shame of Jin."

古文：子亦见先君之事矣。
现代文：您也了解先君时代的情况了。
English: You have also learned about the situation in the era of the previous emperor.

古文：今我辟楚，又益耻也。 
现代文：现在我们逃避楚国，这又是增加耻辱。 
English: Now we are running away from the state of Chu, which is an added humiliation.

古文：文子曰： 吾先君之亟战也，有故。
现代文：范文子说： 我们先君的屡次作战，是有原因的。
English: Fan Wenzi said: There is a reason why our predecessors repeatedly went to war.

古文：秦、狄、齐、楚皆强，不尽力，子孙将弱。
现代文：秦国、狄人、齐国、楚国都很强大，如果我们不尽自己的力量，子孙将会被削弱。
English: Qin, Di, Qi and Chu are all powerful countries. If we do not do our best, our descendants will be weakened.

古文：今三强服矣，敌楚而已。
现代文：现在三强已经顺服，敌人仅楚国而已。
English: Now the top three have submitted, and the enemy is only Chu.

古文：唯圣人能外内无患，自非圣人，外宁必有内忧。盍释楚以为外惧乎？ 
现代文：只有圣人才能够外部内部都没有祸患。如果不是圣人，外部安定，内部必然还有忧患，何不放掉楚国把它作为外部的戒惧呢？ 
English: Only a saint can be free from external and internal calamities. If it is not a saint, and the outside is stable, there must be sorrow inside, why not let go of Chu as an external fear?

古文：甲午晦，楚晨压晋军而陈。
现代文：二十九日，楚军在清早逼近晋军而摆开阵势。
English: On the 29th, the Chu army approached the Jin army in the early morning and set up a position.

古文：军吏患之。
现代文：晋国的军吏担心这种情况。
English: Military officials in Jin Province are worried about the situation.

古文：范匄趋进，曰： 塞井夷灶，陈于军中，而疏行首。
现代文：范匄快步向前，说： 填井平灶，就在军营摆开阵势，把行列间的距离放宽。
English: Fan Rong quickly stepped forward and said, "If you want to fill in the open well, you should set up a position in the military camp and widen the distance between the rows."

古文：晋、楚唯天所授，何患焉？ 
现代文：晋、楚两国都是上天的赐予，有什么可担心的？ 
English: The two countries of Jin and Chu were bestowed by heaven, so what is there to worry about?

古文：文子执戈逐之，曰： 国之存亡，天也。童子何知焉？ 
现代文：范文子拿起戈来驱逐他，说： 国家的存亡，这是天意，小孩子知道什么？ 
English: Fan Wenzi took up the gauntlet to expel him, saying: The survival of the country, this is the will of heaven, what does a child know?

古文：栾书曰： 楚师轻窕，固垒而待之，三日必退。
现代文：栾书说： 楚军轻佻，加固营垒而等待他们，三天一定退军。
English: The imperial edict said, "The Chu army is light-hearted, fortifying the camp and waiting for them, and will definitely retreat in three days."

古文：退而击之，必获胜焉。 
现代文：乘他们退走而加以追击，一定可以得胜。 
English: If you attack them while they are retreating, you are sure to win.

古文：郤至曰： 楚有六间，不可失也：其二卿相恶；王卒以旧；郑陈而不整；蛮军而不陈；陈不违晦；在陈而嚣，合而加嚣，各顾其后，莫有斗心。
现代文：郤至说： 楚国有六个空子，我们不可失掉时机：楚国的两个卿不和；楚共王的亲兵们从旧家中选拔，都已衰老；郑国虽然摆开阵势却不整齐；蛮人虽有军队却没有阵容；楚军摆阵不避讳月底；士兵在阵中就喧闹，各阵式相联合后就更加喧闹，各军彼此观望依赖，没有战斗意志。
English: Xun Zi said: There are six loopholes in the state of Chu, and we must not lose the opportunity: the two nobles of the state of Chu are at odds with each other; the soldiers of the king of the Communist Party of Chu, who were selected from their old families, are all old; although the state of Zheng has set up a formation, it is not neat; although the barbarians have an army, they do not have a formation; the Chu army does not avoid setting up a formation at the end of the month; the soldiers are noisy in the formation, and they are even more noisy after the formations are united, and the armies are dependent on each other and have no will

古文：旧不必良，以犯天忌。
现代文：旧家子弟的士兵不一定是强兵，所以这些都触犯了天意和兵家大忌。
English: The soldiers of the old family are not necessarily strong soldiers, so these all violate the will of heaven and the soldiers' taboo.

古文：我必克之。 
现代文：我们一定能战胜他们。 
English: We can definitely beat them.

古文：楚子登巢车以望晋军，子重使大宰伯州犁侍于王后。
现代文：楚共王登上楼车了望晋军。子重让大宰伯州犁侍立在楚共王身后。
English: Chu Gong Wang boarded the carriage and looked at the Jin army. Zi Chong let Dazai Bozhou stand behind Chu Gong Wang.

古文：王曰： 骋而左右，何也？ 
现代文：楚共王说： 车子向左右驰骋，干什么？ 
English: Chu Gongwang said: The car is galloping to the left and right, what is it doing?

古文：曰： 召军吏也。 
现代文：伯州犁说： 这是召集军官们。 
English: "This is a call for officers," Mr. Bozhou said.

古文： 皆聚于中军矣！ 
现代文：楚共王说： 那些人都集合在中军了。 
English: Chu Gongwang said: Those people have all gathered in the Chinese army.

古文：曰： 合谋也。 
现代文：伯州犁说： 这是一起谋议。 
English: "This is a concerted effort," Mr. Boshu said.

古文： 张幕矣！ 
现代文：楚共王说： 帐幕张开了。 
English: Chu Gongwang said, "The tent has been opened."

古文：曰： 虔卜于先君也。 
现代文：伯州犁说： 这是在先君的神主前占卜。 
English: He said, "This is divination in front of the lord of the previous ruler's god."

古文： 彻幕矣！ 
现代文：楚共王说： 帐幕撤除了。 
English: Chu Gongwang said: The tent has been removed.

古文：曰： 将发命也。 
现代文：伯州犁说： 这是将要发布命令了。 
English: "This is an order that is about to be issued," Bozhou said.

古文： 甚嚣，且尘上矣！ 
现代文：楚共王说： 喧闹得厉害。而且尘土飞扬起来了。 
English: Chu Gongwang said, "There was a lot of noise, and the dust was flying."

古文：曰： 将塞井夷灶而为行也。 
现代文：伯州犁说： 这是准备填井平灶摆开阵势。 
English: Bozhou Zou said: This is to prepare for the reclamation of the flat stove to set up a position.

古文： 皆乘矣，左右执兵而下矣！ 
现代文：楚共王说： 都登上战车了，将帅和车右都拿着武器下车了。 伯州犁说： 这是宣布号令。 
English: Chu Gongwang said: They have all boarded the chariot, and the commander and the right side of the chariot have all got off the chariot with weapons.

古文：曰： 听誓也。  战乎？ 
现代文：楚共王说： 他们要作战吗？ 
English: The Communist King of Chu said: Do they want to fight?

古文：曰： 未可知也。 
现代文：伯州犁说： 还不能知道。 
English: "It's too early to know," he said.

古文： 乘而左右皆下矣！ 
现代文：楚共王说： 晋军上了战车，将帅和车右又下来了。 
English: Chu Gongwang said: The Jin army got on the chariot, and the general and the chariot right came down.

古文：曰： 战祷也。 
现代文：伯州犁说： 这是战前的祈祷。 
English: "This is a pre-war prayer," said Bozhou.

古文：伯州犁以公卒告王。
现代文：伯州犁把晋厉公亲兵的情况向楚共王报告。
English: Bozhou Zhao reported the situation of Jin Liguo's soldiers to the King of Chu.

古文：苗贲皇在晋侯之侧，亦以王卒告。
现代文：苗贲皇在晋厉公的旁边，也把楚共王亲兵的情况向晋厉公报告。
English: In addition to Jin Liguo, Emperor Miao Wei also reported to Jin Liguo the situation of the soldiers of the King of Chu.

古文：皆曰： 国士在，且厚，不可当也。 
现代文：晋厉公左右的将士们都说： 有国家中杰出的人物在那里，而且军阵厚实，不能抵挡。 
English: The soldiers around Jin Liguo all said: There are outstanding figures in the country there, and the army is thick and cannot resist.

古文：苗贲皇言于晋侯曰： 楚之良，在其中军王族而已。
现代文：苗贲皇对晋厉公说： 楚国的精兵在于他们中军的王族而已。
English: Emperor Miao Xuan said to Jin Liguo: The best soldiers of the Chu Kingdom are the royal family members in their army.

古文：请分良以击其左右，而三军萃于王卒，必大败之。 
现代文：请求把我们的精兵分开去攻击他们的左右军，再集中三军攻打楚王的亲兵，一定可以把他们打得大败。 
English: The request to separate our elite soldiers to attack their left and right armies, and then concentrate the three armies to attack King Chu's own soldiers, will surely defeat them.

古文：公筮之。
现代文：晋厉公让太史占筮。
English: Jin Li Gong let Taishi take the lead.

古文：史曰： 吉。
现代文：太史说： 吉利。
English: Taishi said, "Good luck."

古文：其卦遇《复》，曰： 南国，射其元王，中厥目。 
现代文：得到《复》。卦辞说： 南方的国家局促，射它的国王，箭头中目。 
English: Get the "Fu." Gua Ji said: The southern country is cramped, the king who shoots it, the arrow is in the eye.

古文：国王伤，不败何待？ 
现代文：国家局促，国王受伤，不失败，还等待什么？ 
English: The country is cramped, the king is injured, do not fail, what are you waiting for?

古文：公从之。
现代文：晋厉公听从了。
English: Cao Gong obeyed him.

古文：有淖于前，乃皆左右相违于淖。
现代文：晋军营前头有泥沼，于是晋军都或左或右地避开泥沼而行。
English: There was a quagmire in front of the Jin camp, so the Jin army avoided the quagmire to the left or right.

古文：步毅御晋厉公，栾鍼为右。
现代文：步毅驾御晋厉公的战车，栾鍼作为车右。
English: Bu Yi is driving Jin Liguo's chariot, and Zou Jing is on the right.

古文：彭名御楚共王，潘党为右。
现代文：彭名驾御楚共王的战车，潘党作为车右。
English: Peng Ming is driving the chariot of Emperor Chu and the Pan Party is on the right.

古文：石首御郑成公，唐苟为右。
现代文：石首驾御郑成公的战车，唐苟作为车右。
English: Shi Shou is driving Zheng Chenggong's chariot, with Tang Guo on the right.

古文：栾、范以其族夹公行，陷于淖。
现代文：栾、范领着他们私族部队左右护卫着晋厉公前进。战车陷在泥沼里。
English: Zou and Fan led their private troops to the left and right to escort Jin Liguo forward. The chariot was stuck in the mud.

古文：栾书将载晋侯，鍼曰： 书退，国有大任，焉得专之。
现代文：栾书打算将晋厉公装载在自己车上。他儿子栾鍼说： 书退下去！国家有大事，你哪能一人揽了？
English: Zou Shu planned to load Jin Li Gong's luggage onto his car. His son Zou Jing said: "Zou Shu, back off! The country is in a big trouble, how can you take it all by yourself?"

古文：且侵官，冒也；失官，慢也；离局，奸也。
现代文：而且侵犯别人的职权，这是冒犯；丢弃自己的职责，这是怠慢；离开自己的部下，这是扰乱。
English: And to encroach on another's authority is an offense; to abandon one's duty is negligence; to leave one's subordinates is disorder.

古文：有三罪焉，不可犯也。 
现代文：有三件罪名，不能违犯啊。 
English: There are three charges, so you can't violate them.

古文：乃掀公以出于淖。
现代文：于是就掀起晋厉公的战车离开泥沼。
English: So he lifted Jin Liguo's chariot to leave the quagmire.

古文：癸巳，潘尪之党与养由基蹲甲而射之，彻七札焉。
现代文：六月二十八日，潘尫的儿子党和养由基把皮甲重叠而射它，穿透了七层。
English: On June 28th, Pan Xuan's sons, Dang and Yao, put the armor on top of each other and shot it, penetrating seven layers.

古文：以示王，曰： 君有二臣如此，何忧于战？ 
现代文：拿去给楚共王看，说： 君王有这样两个臣下在这里，还有什么可怕的？ 
English: He showed it to the king of Chu and said, "If the king has such two vassals here, what else is there to fear?"

古文：王怒曰： 大辱国。
现代文：楚共王发怒说： 真丢人！
English: The Communist King of Chu said angrily: What a disgrace!

古文：诘朝，尔射，死艺。 
现代文：明早作战，你们射箭，将会死在这武艺上。 
English: Fight tomorrow morning, you archery, you will die in this martial art.

古文：吕锜梦射月，中之，退入于泥。
现代文：吕锜梦见自己射月亮，射中，自己却退进了泥塘里。
English: Lv Yao dreamed that he shot the moon, and when he hit it, he fell back into the muddy pond.

古文：占之，曰： 姬姓，日也。异姓，月也。必楚王也。
现代文：占卜，说： 姬姓，是太阳；异姓，是月亮，这一定是楚共王了。
English: The soothsayer said, "Her maiden name is Sun; her married name is Moon. This must be the King of Chu."

古文：射而中之，退入于泥，亦必死矣。 
现代文：射中了他，自己又退进泥里，就一定会战死。 
English: If you shoot him and retreat into the mud, you are sure to die in battle.

古文：及战，射共王中目。
现代文：等到作战时，吕锜射中了楚共王的眼睛。
English: While waiting for the battle to begin, Lv Ying shot the King of Chu in the eye.

古文：王召养由基，与之两矢，使射吕锜，中项，伏。
现代文：楚王召唤养由基，给他两支箭，让他射吕锜。
English: King Chu summoned Yang Yuki, gave him two arrows, and told him to shoot Lv Xuan.

古文：以一矢复命。
现代文：结果射中吕锜的脖子，伏在弓套上死了。
English: As a result, he shot Lv Yao in the neck and died on the bow.

古文：郤至三遇楚子之卒，见楚子必下，免胄而趋风。
现代文：养由基拿了剩下的一支向楚共王复命。郤至三次碰到楚共王的士兵，见到楚共王时，一定下车，脱下头盔，快步向前而走。
English: Yaoyu Ji took the remaining one to return the life to Chu Gong Wang. After three times of encountering Chu Gong Wang's soldiers, when they saw Chu Gong Wang, they must get off the train, take off their helmets, and walk fast forward.

古文：楚子使工尹襄问之以弓，曰： 方事之殷也，有韦之跗注，君子也。
现代文：楚共王派工尹襄送上一张弓去问候，说： 正当战事激烈的时候，有一位身穿浅红色牛皮军服的人，是君了啊！
English: The King of Chu sent his worker Yin Xiang to send a bow to greet him, saying: Just when the war was raging, there was a man wearing a light red cowhide military uniform. It was you!

古文：识见不穀而趋，无乃伤乎？ 
现代文：刚才见到我而快走，恐怕是受伤了吧！ 
English: If you just saw me and ran away, I'm afraid you're hurt!

古文：郤至见客，免胄承命，曰： 君之外臣至，从寡君之戎事，以君之灵，间蒙甲胄，不敢拜命。
现代文：郤至见到客人，脱下头盔接受命令，说： 贵国君王的外臣郤至跟随寡君作战，托君王的福，参与了披甲的行列，不敢拜谢命令。
English: When he saw the guests, he took off his helmet to accept the order and said, "Your majesty's foreign minister, who fought with your majesty and received your majesty's blessing and took part in the procession of armor, does not dare to thank you for the order.

古文：敢告不宁君命之辱，为事之故，敢肃使者。 
现代文：谨向君王报告没有受伤，感谢君王惠赐给我的命令。由于战事的缘故，谨向使者敬礼。 
English: I have the honour to report to His Majesty that I am uninjured, and I thank His Majesty for the order he has given me. In view of the war situation, I should like to salute the envoy.

古文：三肃使者而退。
现代文：于是，三次向使者肃拜以后才退走。
English: As a result, he bowed to the messenger three times before leaving.

古文：晋韩厥从郑伯，其御杜溷罗曰： 速从之！
现代文：晋国的韩厥追赶郑成公，他的车夫杜溷罗说： 是否赶快追上去？
English: Han Jue from Jin Province chased after Zheng Chenggong, and his coachman Du Duro said: "Should we hurry to catch up?"

古文：其御屡顾，不在马，可及也。 
现代文：他们的御者屡屡回头看，注意力不在马上，可以赶上。 
English: Their driver repeatedly looks back, attention is not immediate, can catch up.

古文：韩厥曰： 不可以再辱国君。 
现代文：韩厥说： 不能再次羞辱国君。 
English: Han Jue said: You can't humiliate the sovereign again.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是就停止追赶。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：郤至从郑伯，其右茀翰胡曰： 谍辂之，余从之乘而俘以下。 
现代文：郤至追赶郑成公，他的车右茀翰胡说： 另外派轻车从小道迎击，我追上他的战车而把他俘虏下来。 
English: When he caught up with Zheng Chenggong, his car veered to the right, and Han Hu said, "I also sent a light vehicle to meet him from the side road. I caught up with his chariot and captured him."

古文：郤至曰： 伤国君有刑。
现代文：郤至说： 伤害国君要受到刑罚。 
English: He said, "If you harm the king, you will be punished."

古文：亦止。 
现代文：也停止了追赶。
English: They also stopped chasing.

古文：石首曰： 卫懿公唯不去其旗，是以败于荧。 
现代文：石首说： 从前卫懿公由于不去掉他的旗子，所以才在荧地战败。 
English: Shi Shou said: From the avant-garde, Shao Gong was defeated at Fu Di because he did not remove his banner.

古文：乃内旌于中。
现代文：于是就把旗子放进弓袋里。
English: So he put the flag in his bow bag.

古文：唐苟谓石首曰： 子在君侧，败者壹大。
现代文：唐苟对石首说： 您在国君旁边，战败者应该一心保护国君。
English: Tang Gou said to Shi Shou: You are next to the sovereign, the defeated should protect the sovereign wholeheartedly.

古文：我不如子，子以君免，我请止。 
现代文：我不如您，您带着国君逃走，我请求留下。 
English: I am not as good as you. You ran away with the sovereign. I beg you to stay.

古文：乃死。
现代文：于是唐苟就战死了。
English: As a result, Tangguo died in the battle.

古文：楚师薄于险，叔山冉谓养由基曰： 虽君有命，为国敌，子必射！ 
现代文：楚军被逼在险阻的地带，叔山冉对养由基说： 虽然国君有命令，为了国家的缘故，您一定要射箭。 
English: The Chu army was forced into a precarious area. Shushan Ran said to Yaoyuki: Although the sovereign has orders, for the sake of the country, you must shoot arrows.

古文：乃射。再发，尽殪。
现代文：养由基就射晋军，再射，被射的人都被射死。
English: Yaoyuki shot at the Jin army, shot again, and everyone who was shot was shot dead.

古文：叔山冉搏人以投，中车折轼。
现代文：叔山冉举起晋国人投掷过去，掷中战车，折断了车前的横木。
English: Shushan Ran lifted up the Jin people and threw them over, throwing the chariot and breaking the crossbar in front of the chariot.

古文：晋师乃止。
现代文：晋军于是停下来。
English: The Jin army then stopped.

古文：囚楚公子茷。
现代文：囚禁了楚国的公子茷。
English: Imprisoned the prince of Chu, Geng.

古文：栾鍼见子重之旌，请曰： 楚人谓： 夫旌，子重之麾也。 彼其子重也。
现代文：栾鍼见到子重的旌旗，请求说： 楚国人说那面旌旗是子重的旗号，他恐怕就是子重吧。
English: Seeing Zizhe's banner, Zou Jingyu pleaded: "Chu people say that the banner is Zizhe's banner, I'm afraid he is Zizhe."

古文：日臣之使于楚也，子重问晋国之勇。臣对曰： 好以众整。 
现代文：当初下臣出使到楚国，子重问起晋国的勇武表现在哪里，下臣回答说： 喜好整齐，按部就班。 
English: At the beginning, a vassal was dispatched to Chu, and when Zi Chong asked where the bravery of Jin was shown, the vassal replied, "I like to be neat and orderly.

古文：曰： 又何如？ 
现代文：子重说： 还有什么？ 
English: Zi Chong said: What else?

古文：臣对曰： 好以暇。 
现代文：下臣回答说： 喜好从容不迫。 
English: The vassal replied, "Pleasure is not to be forced.

古文：今两国治戎，行人不使，不可谓整。临事而食言，不可谓暇。
现代文：现在两国兴兵，不派遣使者，不能说是按部就班；临到事情而不讲信用，不能说是从容不迫。
English: Now that the two countries are mobilizing troops and not sending envoys, it can't be said that they are following a step-by-step plan; when things happen and they don't trust each other, it can't be said that they are taking things slowly.

古文：请摄饮焉。 
现代文：请君王派人替我给子重进酒。 
English: I ask the king to send someone to re-brew the wine for me.

古文：公许之。使行人执榼承饮，造于子重，曰： 寡君乏使，使鍼御持矛。是以不得犒从者，使某摄饮。 
现代文：晋厉公答应了，派遣使者拿着酒器奉酒，到了子重那里，说： 寡君缺乏使者，让栾鍼执矛侍立在他左右，因此不能犒赏您的从者，派我前来代他送酒。 
English: Jin Li Gong agreed and sent an emissary with a wine vessel to offer the wine. When he arrived at Zicheng, he said, "Your majesty lacks an emissary, so he has a gourd and a spear standing at his side. Therefore, he cannot reward your follower, so he sent me to bring the wine on his behalf."

古文：子重曰： 夫子尝与吾言于楚，必是故也，不亦识乎！ 
现代文：子重说： 他老人家曾经跟我在楚国说过一番话，送酒来一定是这个原因。他的记忆力不也是很强吗？ 
English: Zi Chong said: His old man once said something to me in Chu, this must be the reason for bringing wine. Isn't his memory also very strong?

古文：受而饮之。免使者而复鼓。
现代文：受酒而饮，不留难使者而重新击鼓。
English: Drink wine and drink, do not leave the messenger and re-drum.

古文：旦而战，见星未已。
现代文：早晨开始作战，直到黄昏还没有结束战争。
English: The battle began in the morning and did not end until dusk.

古文：子反命军吏察夷伤，补卒乘，缮甲兵，展车马，鸡鸣而食，唯命是听。
现代文：子反命令军官视察伤情，补充步兵车兵，修理盔甲武器，陈列战车马匹，鸡叫的时候吃饭，唯主帅的命令是听。
English: The son counter-ordered the officers to inspect the injuries, replenish the infantry and chariots, repair the armor and weapons, display the chariots and horses, and eat when the rooster crows, but listen to the orders of the coach.

古文：晋人患之。
现代文：晋国因此担心。
English: As a result, Jin is worried.

古文：苗贲皇徇曰： 蒐乘补卒，秣马利兵，修陈固列，蓐食申祷，明日复战。 
现代文：苗贲皇通告全军说： 检阅战车、补充士卒，喂好马匹，磨快武器，整顿军阵、巩固行列，饱吃一顿、再次祷告，明天再战！ 
English: Miao Yu's empress announced to the whole army: inspect the chariots, replenish the soldiers, feed the horses, sharpen the weapons, rectify the army, consolidate the ranks, eat a full meal, pray again, and fight again tomorrow!

古文：乃逸楚囚。
现代文：就故意放松楚国的俘虏让他们逃走。
English: He deliberately loosened the prisoners in Chukotka and let them escape.

古文：王闻之，召子反谋。
现代文：楚共王听到这些情况，召子反一起商量。
English: When the king of Chu heard about this, he summoned his son to consult with him.

古文：穀阳竖献饮于子反，子反醉而不能见。
现代文：穀阳竖献酒给子反，子反喝醉了不能进见。
English: Grain of the sun stood up and offered wine to the son-in-law. The son-in-law was so drunk that he couldn't see.

古文：王曰： 天败楚也夫！
现代文：楚共王说： 这是上天要让楚国失败啊！
English: The Communist King of Chu said: It is God's will that Chu should fail!

古文：余不可以待。 
现代文：我不能等待了。 
English: I can't wait.

古文：乃宵遁。
现代文：于是就夜里逃走了。
English: So he fled in the night.

古文：晋入楚军，三日穀。
现代文：晋军进入楚国军营，吃了三天楚军留下的粮食。
English: The Jin army entered the Chu military camp and ate the grain left by the Chu army for three days.

古文：范文子立于戎马之前，曰： 君幼，诸臣不佞，何以及此？
现代文：范文子站在兵马前面，说： 君王年幼，下臣们不才，怎么能得到这个地步？
English: Fan Wenzi stood in front of the soldiers and horses and said, "The king is young, and his subordinates are not talented. How did he get to this point?

古文：君其戒之！
现代文：君王还是要警惕啊！
English: The king still has to be on his guard!

古文：《周书》曰 惟命不于常 ，有德之谓。 
现代文：《周书》说， 天命不能常在不变 ，说的是有德的人就可以享有天命。 
English: "Zhou Shu" said that the Mandate of Heaven cannot always remain unchanged, saying that people with virtue can enjoy the Mandate of Heaven.

古文：楚师还及瑕，王使谓子反曰： 先大夫之覆师徒者，君不在。
现代文：楚军回去，到达瑕地，楚共王派人对子反说： 先大夫让军队覆没，当时国君不在军中。
English: When the Chu army returned and arrived at their destination, the Chu king sent a messenger to his son saying: "The previous doctor let the army perish, but the sovereign was not in the army at the time.

古文：子无以为过，不穀之罪也。 
现代文：现在您没有过错，这是我的罪过。 
English: Now you are not at fault, it is my fault.

古文：子反再拜稽首曰： 君赐臣死，死且不朽。
现代文：子反再拜叩头说： 君王赐下臣去死，死而不朽。
English: The son, on the other hand, kowtowed again and said, "The king gives his vassal to die, and death is immortal."

古文：臣之卒实奔，臣之罪也。 
现代文：下臣的士兵的确败逃了，这是下臣的罪过。 
English: The vassal's soldiers were indeed defeated and fled, which was the vassal's fault.

古文：子重使谓子反曰： 初陨师徒者，而亦闻之矣！
现代文：子重也派人对子反说： 当初让军队覆没的人，他的结果你也听到过了。
English: Zi Chong also sent a rebuttal to Zi Chong, saying, "You have heard the result of the man who let the army overwhelm him.

古文：盍图之？ 
现代文：何不自己打算一下！ 
English: Why not plan it yourself!

古文：对曰： 虽微先大夫有之，大夫命侧，侧敢不义？
现代文：子反回答说： 即使没有先大夫自杀谢罪的事，大夫命令侧死去，侧岂敢贪生而陷于不义？
English: The son replied, "Even if there was no such thing as the former doctor committing suicide to atone for his sins, if the doctor ordered you to die, wouldn't you dare to be greedy for life and fall into injustice?"

古文：侧亡君师，敢忘其死。 
现代文：侧使国君的军队败亡，岂敢忘记一死？ 
English: Would you dare to forget a single death, when you have been instrumental in the defeat of the sovereign's army?

古文：王使止之，弗及而卒。
现代文：楚共王派人阻止他，没来得及，子反就自杀了。
English: The king of the Chu communists sent someone to stop him, but before he could do so, the rebel committed suicide.

古文：战之日，齐国佐、高无咎至于师。卫侯出于卫。公出于坏。
现代文：作战的第二天，齐国国佐、高无咎到达军中，卫献公从卫国出来，鲁成公从坏隤出来。
English: On the second day of the battle, Qi Guo Guo Zuo and Gao Muxin arrived in the army, Wei Xianguo came out of Wei Guo, and Lu Chengguo came out of Badan.

古文：宣伯通于穆姜，欲去季、孟，而取其室。
现代文：宣伯和穆姜私通，想要去掉季、孟两人而占取他们的家财。
English: Xuan Bo and Mu Jiang had a personal relationship and wanted to get rid of Ji and Meng and take over their family wealth.

古文：将行，穆姜送公，而使逐二子。
现代文：成公将要出行，穆姜送他，让他驱逐这两个人。
English: Cheng Gong is going to travel, Mu Jiang will see him off, let him expel the two people.

古文：公以晋难告，曰： 请反而听命。 
现代文：成公把晋国的危难告诉她，说： 请等我回来再听取您的命令。 
English: Cheng Gong told her about the danger in Jin Province and said, "Please wait until I come back to listen to your orders."

古文：姜怒，公子偃、公子鉏趋过，指之曰： 女不可，是皆君也。 
现代文：穆姜生气，公子偃、公子鉏快步走过，穆姜指着他们说： 你要不同意，他们都可以是国君！ 
English: Mujang was angry. Gongzihong and Gongzihong walked past at a brisk pace. Mujang pointed at them and said, "If you don't agree, they can both be the king!"

古文：公待于坏，申宫儆备，设守而后行，是以后。
现代文：鲁成公在坏隤等待，防护宫室、加强戒备、设置守卫，然后出行，所以去晚了。
English: Lu Chenggong was waiting in the courtyard, guarding the palace room, strengthening vigilance, setting up guards, and then traveling, so he was late.

古文：使孟献子守于公宫。
现代文：让孟献子在公宫留守。
English: Let Meng Xianzi stay at the palace.

古文：秋，会于沙随，谋伐郑也。
现代文：秋季，鲁成公和晋厉公、齐灵公、卫献公、宋国华元、邾国人在沙随会见，商量进攻郑国。
English: In autumn, Lu Chenggong, Jin Li Gong, Qiling Gong, Wei Xian Gong, Song Guo Huayuan, and Song Guo met in Shazhu to discuss attacking Zheng.

古文：宣伯使告郤犫曰： 鲁侯待于坏以待胜者。 
现代文：宣伯派人告诉郤犫说： 鲁侯在坏隤等着，以等待胜利者。 
English: Xuanbo sent a person to tell Zou that: Lu Hou is waiting in Badou to wait for the winner.

古文：郤犫将新军，且为公族大夫，以主东诸侯。
现代文：郤犫率领新军，同时做公族大夫，主持东方诸侯的事务。
English: He led the new army, and at the same time acted as a public doctor, presiding over the affairs of the Eastern princes.

古文：取货于宣伯，而诉公于晋侯，晋侯不见公。
现代文：他从宣伯那里拿了财物，而在晋厉公那里毁谤鲁成公。晋厉公就不和鲁成公见面。
English: He took money from Xuan Bo and slandered Lu Chenggong from Jin Li Gong. Jin Li Gong would not meet with Lu Chenggong.

古文：曹人请于晋曰： 自我先君宣公即世，国人曰： 若之何忧犹未弭？ 
现代文：曹国人向晋国请求说： 自从我先君宣公去世，国内的人们说： 怎么办？忧患还没有消除。 
English: The people of Cao asked the people of Jin for help, saying, "Since my ancestor Xuan Guo passed away, the people in the country have been saying, 'What should we do? The sorrow has not been eliminated.

古文：而又讨我寡君，以亡曹国社稷之镇公子，是大泯曹也。先君无乃有罪乎？
现代文：而贵国又讨伐我寡君，因而使镇抚曹国国家的公子子臧逃亡，这是在大举灭曹，莫非由于先君有罪吧！
English: But your country also fought against my widowed prince, and thus caused the prince of the state of Cao to flee. This is a large-scale extermination of Cao. Could it be because the former prince is guilty?

古文：若有罪，则君列诸会矣。
现代文：可是如果有罪，那么君王又使他参加会盟。
English: But if he is guilty, then the king makes him join the league.

古文：君唯不遗德刑，以伯诸侯。岂独遗诸敝邑？
现代文：君王不丢失德行和刑罚，所以才能称霸诸侯，岂独丢弃敝邑？
English: A prince cannot lose his virtue and punishments, so how can he dominate the princes? Will he only abandon the provinces?

古文：敢私布之。 
现代文：谨在私下向贵国表达真情。 
English: I would like to express my sincere feelings to your country in private.

古文：七月，公会尹武公及诸侯伐郑。
现代文：七月，鲁成公会合尹武公和诸侯进攻郑国。
English: In July, Lu Chenggong gathered Yin Wukong and the princes to attack Zheng.

古文：将行，姜又命公如初。
现代文：成公将要出行，穆姜又像以前一样命令成公。
English: Chengong is going to travel, and Mujang orders Chengong again as before.

古文：公又申守而行。
现代文：成公又在宫中设了防备以后才出行。
English: Chenggong also set up defenses in the palace before leaving.

古文：诸侯之师次于郑西。我师次于督扬，不敢过郑。
现代文：诸侯的军队驻扎在郑国西部，我国的军队驻扎在督扬，不敢经过郑国。
English: The armies of the princes were stationed in the western part of Zheng, while the Chinese army was stationed in Duyang and did not dare to pass through Zheng.

古文：子叔声伯使叔孙豹请逆于晋师，为食于郑郊。
现代文：子叔声伯派叔孙豹请求晋军前来迎接我军，又在郑国郊外为晋军准备饭食。
English: Zi Xingbo sent his uncle Sun Bao to request the Jin army to come to meet our army, and also prepared meals for the Jin army in the suburbs of Zheng.

古文：师逆以至，声伯四日不食以待之。食使者而后食。
现代文：晋军为迎接我军而来到。声伯四天没有吃饭等着他们，直到让晋国的使者吃了饭以后自己才吃。
English: The Jin army came to meet our army. Shou Bo waited for them for four days without eating, and did not eat himself until he had made the emissary of Jin eat his meal.

古文：诸侯迁于制田。知武子佐下军，以诸侯之师侵陈，至于鸣鹿。遂侵蔡，未反。
现代文：诸侯迁移到制田，知武子作为下军副帅，率领诸侯的军队入侵陈国，到达鸣鹿，因此入侵蔡国。
English: The lords migrated to Seitan, and Tomoko, as the second-in-command of the lower army, led the lords' army to invade Chen Province and reach Minglu, thus invading Cai Province.

古文：诸侯迁于颍上。
现代文：还没有回来，诸侯又迁移到颍上。
English: Before they could return, the lords moved to Tsutsumi again.

古文：戊午，郑子罕宵军之，宋、齐、卫皆失军。
现代文：七月二十四日，郑国的子罕发动夜袭，宋国、齐国、卫国都溃不成军。
English: On July 24th, Zheng Zihan launched a night attack, and Song, Qi, and Wei were all defeated.

古文：曹人复请于晋，晋侯谓子臧： 反！吾归而君。 
现代文：曹国人再次向晋国请求。晋厉公对子臧说： 你回去，我送回你们国君。 
English: The people of Cao again asked Jin to leave. Jin Li Gong said to Zibo, "You go back, I will send back your sovereigns."

古文：子臧反，曹伯归。子臧尽致其邑与卿而不出。
现代文：子臧回国，曹成公也回来了，子臧把他的封邑和卿的职位全部交出去而不再做官。
English: When Zixuan returned to China, Cao Chenggong also returned, and Zixuan handed over all his fiefs and positions of nobility and ceased to be an official.

古文：宣伯使告郤犫曰： 鲁之有季、孟，犹晋之有栾、范也，政令于是乎成。
现代文：叔孙侨如派人告诉郤犫说： 鲁国有季氏、孟氏，就好像晋国有栾氏、范氏，政令就是在那里制订的。
English: My uncle and grandson sent someone to tell me: "The Ji and Meng dynasties in the State of Lu are just like the Shun and Fan dynasties in the State of Jin. That's where the edict was made.

古文：今其谋曰： 晋政多门，不可从也。
现代文：现在他们商量说： 晋国的政令出于不同的家族，不能统一，这是不能服从的。
English: Now they discuss and say: The government decrees of Jin are from different families and cannot be unified. This cannot be obeyed.

古文：宁事齐、楚，有亡而已，蔑从晋矣。 
现代文：宁可事奉齐国和楚国，哪怕亡国，也不要跟从晋国了。 
English: It is better to serve Qi and Chu, even if they fall, than to follow Jin.

古文：若欲得志于鲁，请止行父而杀之，我毙蔑也而事晋，蔑有贰矣。
现代文：晋国如果要在鲁国行使自己的意志，请留下行父而杀了他，我把蔑杀死，事奉晋国，就没有二心了。
English: If Jin wants to exercise his will in Lu, please leave his father and kill him. If I kill my father and serve Jin, there will be no second thoughts.

古文：鲁不贰，小国必睦。
现代文：鲁国没有二心，其他小国一定服从晋国。
English: Lu has no second thoughts, and other small countries must obey Jin.

古文：不然，归必叛矣。 
现代文：不这样，行父回国就必然背叛晋国。 
English: Otherwise, Xingfu's return to China would inevitably be a betrayal of Jin.

古文：九月，晋人执季文子于苕丘。
现代文：九月，晋国人在苕丘逮捕了季孙行父。成公回来。
English: In September, the Jin people arrested Ji Sun Xingfu in Mengqiu. Chenggong came back.

古文：公还，待于郓。
现代文：在郓地等待，派子叔声伯向晋国请求放回季孙。
English: While waiting in the field, Paizi Shushinbo asked Jin Guo to release Ji Sun.

古文：使子叔声伯请季孙于晋，郤犫曰： 苟去仲孙蔑而止季孙行父，吾与子国亲于公室。 
现代文：郤犫说： 如果去掉仲孙蔑而留下季孙行父，我给您鲁国的政权，对待您比对公室还亲。 
English: Zou said, "If you get rid of Zhong Sun Zi and keep Ji Sun Xingfu, I will give you the power of Lu, and treat you better than the public office."

古文：对曰： 侨如之情，子必闻之矣。
现代文：声伯回答说： 侨如的情况，您一定听到了。
English: The voice replied: You must have heard about the situation of overseas Chinese.

古文：若去蔑与行父，是大弃鲁国而罪寡君也。
现代文：如果去掉蔑和行父，这是大大地丢弃鲁国而加罪寡君。
English: If you take away the defamation and the act of fathering, this is a great abandonment of the Lu country and adds to the guilt of the monarch.

古文：若犹不弃，而惠徼周公之福，使寡君得事晋君。则夫二人者，鲁国社稷之臣也。
现代文：如果还不丢弃鲁国，而承您向周公求福，让寡君能够事奉晋国国君，那么这两个人，是鲁国的社稷之臣。
English: If you do not abandon the State of Lu, and instead ask Zhou for a blessing, so that you can serve the State of Jin, then these two people are the social vassals of the State of Lu.

古文：若朝亡之，鲁必夕亡。
现代文：如果早晨去掉他们，鲁国必然晚上灭亡。
English: If they were eliminated in the morning, Russia would inevitably perish in the evening.

古文：以鲁之密迩仇雠，亡而为仇，治之何及？ 郤犫曰： 吾为子请邑。 
现代文：鲁国靠近晋国的仇敌，灭亡了以后就会变成仇敌，还来得及补救吗？ 郤犫说： 我为您请求封邑。 
English: Lu's enemies, who are close to Jin, will turn into enemies after their demise. Is there still time to remedy this? Zou said, "I request a fiefdom for you."

古文：对曰： 婴齐，鲁之常隶也，敢介入国以求厚焉！
现代文：声伯回答说： 婴齐，是鲁国的小臣，岂敢仗恃大国以求取丰厚的官禄？
English: The voice replied, "Jiqi, you are a minor minister of Lu, would you dare to fight against a big country in order to obtain a rich official reward?

古文：承寡君之命以请，若得所请，吾子之赐多矣。又何求？ 
现代文：我奉了寡君的命令前来请求，如果得到所请求的，您的恩赐就很多了，还有什么请求？ 
English: I have come at the behest of a widower to make a request. If I get what I asked for, your gift will be great. What more can I ask for?

古文：范文子谓栾武子曰： 季孙于鲁，相二君矣。
现代文：范文子对栾武子说： 季孙在鲁国，辅助过两个国君。
English: Fan Wenzi said to Zhai Wuzi: Ji Sun was in the State of Lu and assisted two sovereigns.

古文：妾不衣帛，马不食粟，可不谓忠乎？
现代文：妾不穿丝绸，马不吃粮食，难道他不是忠诚吗？
English: The concubine does not wear silk, the horse does not eat grain, is he not faithful?

古文：信谗慝而弃忠良，若诸侯何？
现代文：相信奸邪而丢弃忠良，怎么对付诸侯？
English: How to deal with princes who believe in treachery and discard loyalty?

古文：子叔婴齐奉君命无私，谋国家不贰，图其身不忘其君。
现代文：子叔婴齐接受国君的命令没有私心，为国家谋划也没有二心，为自己打算而不忘国君。
English: Children, uncles and infants all accept the order of the sovereign without selfishness, and have no double-mindedness in planning for the country. They plan for themselves without forgetting the sovereign.

古文：若虚其请，是弃善人也。
现代文：如果拒绝他的请求，这是丢弃善人啊！
English: If you refuse his request, it's throwing away a good man!

古文：子其图之！ 
现代文：您还是考虑一下吧！ 
English: Think about it.

古文：乃许鲁平，赦季孙。
现代文：于是允许鲁国讲和，赦免了季孙行父。
English: As a result, the state of Lu was allowed to make peace, and Ji Sun Xingfu was pardoned.

古文：冬十月，出叔孙侨如而盟之，侨如奔齐。
现代文：冬季，十月，放逐叔孙侨如并且和大夫们结盟。
English: In winter, in October, he exiled his uncles and grandsons and allied with the doctors.

古文：十二月，季孙及郤犫盟于扈。
现代文：侨如逃亡到齐国。十二月，季孙和郤犫在扈地结盟。
English: The overseas Chinese fled to Qi. In December, Ji Sun and Zou made an alliance in Handan.

古文：归，刺公子偃，召叔孙豹于齐而立之。
现代文：回国，暗杀了公子偃，把叔孙豹从齐国召回而立了他。
English: On his return to China, he assassinated Gongzi Yao and recalled his uncle Sunbao from Qi to replace him.

古文：齐声孟子通侨如，使立于高、国之间。
现代文：齐国的声孟子和侨如私通，让他位于高氏、国氏之间。
English: The voice of Qigong, Mencius, and the overseas Chinese are like a private affair, placing him between the Gao and Guo dynasties.

古文：侨如曰： 不可以再罪。 
现代文：侨如说： 不能再犯罪了。 
English: "You can't commit any more crimes," the overseas Chinese said.

古文：奔卫，亦间于卿。
现代文：便逃亡到卫国，也位于各卿之间。
English: He fled to the defense of the country and was also placed among the nobles.

古文：晋侯使郤至献楚捷于周，与单襄公语，骤称其伐。
现代文：晋厉公派遣郤至到成周去献对楚国作战的战利品，郤至和单襄公说话，屡次夸耀自己的功劳。
English: Jin Li Gong sent Zou Zi to Cheng Zhou to present the trophies of the war against Chu. Zou Zi talked to Shan Xiang Gong and repeatedly boasted of his own merits.

古文：单子语诸大夫曰： 温季其亡乎！
现代文：单襄公对大夫们说： 郤至恐怕要被杀吧！
English: Mr. Shanxiang told the doctors, "I'm afraid I'm going to be killed!"

古文：位于七人之下，而求掩其上。
现代文：他的地位在七个人之下，而想要盖过他的上级。
English: He was ranked below seven people and wanted to outshine his superiors.

古文：怨之所聚，乱之本也。
现代文：聚集怨恨，这是祸乱的根本。
English: The root of all evil is the accumulation of resentment.

古文：多怨而阶乱，何以在位？
现代文：多招怨恨，是自造祸乱的阶梯，怎么还能据有官位？
English: Resentment is a self-made ladder of disaster, how can it still hold office?

古文：《夏书》曰 怨岂在明，不见是图。 
现代文：《夏书》说： 怨恨难道只是在看得到的地方？
English: "Summer Book" said: Is resentment only where you can see it?

古文：将慎其细也。
现代文：看不到的倒是应该考虑。 
English: What you can't see is what you should consider.

古文：今而明之，其可乎？ 
现代文：这是说在细微之处也要谨慎。
English: This means that you have to be careful with the little things.

