古文：起玄黓执徐，尽强圉作噩，凡六年。
现代文：起，止，一共六年。晋成帝咸和七年
English: It took a total of six years from start to finish. It took seven years to be promoted to Emperor.

古文：显宗成皇帝中之上咸和七年
现代文：春季，正月，辛未，东晋大赦天下。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, Xin Wei, and the Eastern Jin Dynasty are the most auspicious.

古文：春，正月，辛未，大赦。赵主勒大飨群臣，谓徐光曰： 朕可方自古何等主？ 
现代文：后赵国主石勒盛大地犒赏群臣，对徐光说： 朕可以和古代哪一等君主相比？ 
English: Afterward, Zhao Guozhong Shi Le lavishly rewarded his courtiers and said to Xu Guang: I can be compared to which ancient monarch?

古文：对曰： 陛下神武谋略过于汉高，后世无可比者。 
现代文：徐光回答说： 陛下的神武谋略超过汉高祖，后代人没有可以相比的。 
English: Xu Guang replied, "Your majesty's divine military strategy is slightly superior to that of Henkel's ancestors, and there is nothing comparable for future generations.

古文：勒笑曰： 人岂不自知！
现代文：石勒笑着说： 人哪有不知道自己的！
English: Shearer smiled and said: Who doesn't know their own!

古文：卿言太过。
现代文：您的话太过了。
English: You've gone too far.

古文：朕若遇汉高祖，当北面事之，与韩、彭比肩；若遇光武，当并驱中原，未知鹿死谁手。
现代文：朕如果遇到汉高祖，应当向他北面称臣，与韩信、彭越同列比肩。如果遇上汉光武帝，将会与他共同逐鹿中原，不知鹿死谁手。
English: If I meet the Han Emperor Gaozu, I should bow to him, and stand shoulder to shoulder with Han Xin and Peng Yue. If I meet the Han Emperor Guangwu, I will chase deer in the Central Plains with him, and I don't know who will kill the deer.

古文：大丈夫行事，宜礌礌落落，如日月皎然，终不效曹孟德、司马仲达欺人孤儿、寡妇，狐媚以取天下也。 
现代文：大丈夫行事，应当光明磊落，如同日月之光明亮洁白，终究不该仿效曹操和司马懿，欺凌他人的孤儿寡妇，靠不正当的手段夺取天下。 
English: If you want to be a good husband, you should act openly and honestly, like the sun and the moon are bright and white. After all, you should not follow the example of Cao Cao and Sima Qian, bully other people's orphans and widows, and seize the world by improper means.

古文：群臣皆顿首称万岁。
现代文：群臣都叩头顿首，称呼万岁。
English: The courtiers all bowed their heads and called him "long live."

古文：勒虽不学，好使诸生读书而听之，时以其意论古今得失，闻者莫不悦服。
现代文：勒虽不学，好使诸生读书而听之，时以其意论古今得失，闻者莫不悦服。
English: Although he does not study, so that sentient beings can read and listen to him, when he talks about ancient and modern gains and losses with his thoughts, there is nothing unpleasant to hear.

古文：尝使人读《汉书》，闻郦食其劝立六国后，惊曰： 此法当失，何以遂得天下？ 
现代文：他曾经让人读《汉书》，听到郦食其劝汉高祖册立战国时六国诸侯的后裔，吃惊地说： 这种做法应当是失策，为什么能最终夺得天下？ 
English: He once had people read the "Hanshu" and was surprised to hear that the descendants of the princes of the Six Kingdoms at the time of the Warring States urged the founding of the Han Dynasty. He said: This approach should be a misstep, why can we finally win the world?

古文：及闻留侯谏，乃曰： 赖有此耳！ 
现代文：等到听说留侯张良劝谏，这才说： 幸亏有这么回事。 
English: It wasn't until he heard that Zhang Liang, a resident of Luhou, was advising him, that he said, "Fortunately, this is the case."

古文：郭敬之退戍樊城也，晋人复取襄阳。
现代文：郭敬后退戍守樊城后，晋人又收复了襄阳。
English: After Guo Jing retreated to defend the city, the Jin people regained Xiangyang.

古文：夏，四月，敬复攻拔之，留戍而归。
现代文：夏季，四月，郭敬又攻取襄阳，留下戍守兵员后返回。
English: In the summer, in April, Guo Jing conquered Xiangyang again, leaving the garrison soldiers behind and returning.

古文：赵右仆射程遐言于赵主勒曰： 中山王勇悍权略，群臣莫及；观其志，自陛下之外，视之蔑如；加以残贼安忍，久为将帅，威振外内，其诸子年长，皆典兵权；陛下在，自当无它，恐非少主之臣也。
现代文：后赵右仆射程遐向国主石勒进言说： 中山王石虎勇悍而有权谋武略，群臣中无人比得上，观察他的志向，除陛下以外，对他人都视而不见。再加上性格凶暴残忍，长期出任将帅，威震内外，他的各位儿子年龄都不小，都握有兵权，陛下在世，自然应当没什么事，但恐怕他不甘心作少主的臣子。
English: Afterward, Zhao's right-hand man, Zhancheng, made a suggestion to Lord Shiller, saying, "The King of Zhongshan is as brave as a stone tiger and has the power to plot military strategies. No one among his retainers can match him. Observing his ambition, except for His Majesty, he is blind to others. Coupled with his ferocious and cruel personality, he has been a general for a long time. He is feared both at home and abroad. All of his sons are young and hold military power. His Majesty is still alive, so naturally there should be nothing to worry about, but I'm afraid he is not willing to be a vassal of

古文：宜早除之，以便大计。 
现代文：应当尽早除去他，以利国家大计。 
English: He should be removed as soon as possible for the good of the country.

古文：勒曰： 今天下未安，大雅冲幼，宜得强辅。
现代文：石勒说： 如今天下没有安定，石弘年少，应当得到强大的辅佐。
English: Shiller said: If there is no stability today, Ishihiro, who is young, should receive strong support.

古文：中山王骨肉至亲，有佐命之功，方当委以伊、霍之任，何至如卿所言！
现代文：中山王是我的骨肉至亲，有辅佐王命的功绩，正应委付他伊尹、霍光那样的重任，何至于像你说的那样！
English: King Zhongshan is my flesh and blood relative, and he has the merit of assisting the king's life. He should be entrusted with the same important task as Yin and Huo Guang, let alone as you said!

古文：卿正恐不得擅帝舅之权耳；吾亦当参卿顾命，勿过忧也。 
现代文：你只是唯恐不能专帝舅的权力罢了。我也会让你参与辅政，不必过分忧虑。 
English: You're just afraid that you won't be able to monopolize your uncle's power. I'll also let you participate in auxiliary politics, so you don't have to worry too much.

古文：遐泣曰： 臣所虑者公家，陛下乃以私计拒之，忠言何自而入乎！
现代文：程遐哭泣着说： 我所顾虑的是国家，陛下却认为是为自己打算而加以拒绝，忠言从何处能入耳呢！
English: Cheng Yao wept and said: What I am worried about is the country, but your majesty thinks it is his own intention to reject it. How can you listen to a loyal advisor?

古文：中山王虽为皇太后所养，非陛下天属，虽有微功，陛下酬其父子恩荣亦足矣，而其志愿无极，岂将来有益者乎！
现代文：中山王虽然是皇太后收养的，但并非陛下的亲骨肉，虽然有些小功劳，陛下酬答他们父子的恩惠荣耀也足够了，但他的心意、欲望却没有止境，难道会是有益于将来的人吗！
English: Although King Zhongshan was adopted by the Empress Dowager, he is not Her Majesty's own flesh and blood. Although he has made some small contributions, and His Majesty has rewarded their father and son with enough grace and glory, there is no end to his heart and desires. Will he be beneficial to future generations?

古文：若不除之，臣见宗庙不血食矣。 
现代文：如果不除去他，我看宗庙将为绝祀了。 
English: If he is not removed, I think the ancestral temple will be abolished.

古文：勒不听。
现代文：石勒不听。
English: Shearer wouldn't listen.

古文：遐退，告徐光，光曰： 中山王常切齿于吾二人，恐非但危国，亦将为家祸也。 
现代文：程遐退下后，将此事告诉徐光，徐光说： 中山王经常切齿痛恨我们俩人，恐怕不仅会危害国家，也将是你我家庭的祸殃。 
English: After Cheng Yao retreated, he told Xu Guang about this. Xu Guang said: Zhongshan Wang often grinds his teeth and hates both of us. I am afraid that it will not only harm the country, but will also be a disaster for our family.

古文：它日，光承间言于勒曰： 今国家无事，而陛下神色若有不怡，何也？ 
现代文：后来，徐光寻机对石勒说： 如今国家平定无事，陛下神色却好像有所不乐，为什么？ 
English: Later, Xu Guangzhang said to Shi Le, "Nowadays, the country is peaceful and there is nothing to worry about, but Your Majesty looks unhappy. Why?

古文：勒曰： 吴、蜀未平，吾恐后世不以吾为受命之王也。 
现代文：石勒说： 东吴、西蜀没有平定，我恐怕后人不把我当作承受天命的君王看待。 
English: Shi Lu said: East Wu and West Shu have not been pacified, and I am afraid that future generations will not regard me as a king who bears the fate of heaven.

古文：光曰： 魏承汉运，刘备虽兴于蜀，汉岂得为不亡乎！ 
现代文：徐光说： 魏国继承汉朝国运，刘备虽然在蜀地兴起，汉朝又怎能不亡国呢！
English: Xu Guang said: Wei inherited the Han Dynasty's national movement, and although Liu Bei arose in Shu, how could the Han Dynasty not perish?

古文：孙权在吴，犹今之李氏也。陛下苞括二都，平荡八州，帝王之统不在陛下，复当在谁！
现代文：孙权在东吴，犹如现在的李雄，陛下囊括长安、洛阳二都，平荡八州，帝王的正统不在陛下，又会在谁呢！
English: Sun Quan is in East Wu, just like Li Xiong is now. His majesty covers Chang'an, Luoyang, the two capitals, and eight provinces. The emperor's orthodoxy is not in his majesty, who will it be in?

古文：且陛下不忧腹心之疾，而更忧四支乎！
现代文：况且陛下不忧虑心腹之患，却反倒忧虑四肢之患吗！
English: Moreover, your majesty is not worried about the ailment of the heart, but on the contrary is worried about the ailment of the limbs!

古文：中山王藉陛下威略，所向辄克，而天下皆言其英武亚于陛下。
现代文：中山王凭仗陛下的威略，所向无敌，但天下人都说他的英俊威武仅次于陛下。
English: King Zhongshan is invincible by virtue of his majesty's will, but people all over the world say that his handsome and powerful is second only to his majesty.

古文：且其资性不仁，见利忘义，父子并据权位，势倾王室；而耿耿常有不满之心。
现代文：而且他禀性不仁，见利忘义，父子都占据权位，势力可倾覆王室；自己又耿耿于怀，常有不满之心。
English: Moreover, he is stubborn and insensitive, seeing profit and forgetting righteousness. Both father and son occupy positions of power, and their power can overthrow the royal family. He is also stubborn and often dissatisfied.

古文：近于东宫侍宴，有轻皇太子之色。
现代文：近来在东宫侍奉宴饮，有轻视皇太子的神色。
English: Lately, she has been serving banquets at the East Palace, with a look of contempt for the crown prince.

古文：臣恐陛下万年之后，不可复制也。 
现代文：我恐怕陛下辞世之后，就不能再控制他了。 
English: I'm afraid I won't be able to control him after his majesty's death.

古文：勒默然，始命太子省可尚书奏事，且以中常侍严震参综可否，惟征伐断斩大事乃呈之。
现代文：石勒默默不语，开始命令太子省查、决断尚书的奏事，又让中常侍严震参预判治可否，只有征伐断斩方面的大事才呈报石勒。
English: Shiloh was silent, and began to order the prince to investigate and decide on the matter of Shangshu's report, and let the middle attendant strictly participate in the pre-judgment of whether or not to rule. Only major events in the field of conquest and decapitation were reported to Shiloh.

古文：于是严震之权过于主相，中山王虎之门可设雀罗矣。
现代文：此时严震的权力超过君主和丞相，中山王石虎的门庭冷清，可以罗雀了。
English: At this time, the power of the earthquake exceeded the power of the monarch and the prime minister, and the courtyard of Zhongshan King Shihhu was deserted, and it was possible to solicit.

古文：虎愈怏怏不悦。
现代文：石虎更加怏怏不乐。
English: Shihu was even more unhappy.

古文：秋，赵郭敬南掠江西，太尉侃遣其子平西参军斌及南中郎将桓宣乘虚攻樊城，悉俘其众。
现代文：秋季，后赵郭敬向南攻掠长江以西，太尉陶侃派儿子、平西参军陶斌及南中郎将桓宣乘虚进攻樊城，全数俘虏留守士众。
English: In the autumn, after Zhao Guo Jing went south to attack and plunder the west of the Yangtze River, the son of Lieutenant Tao Kanpai, the Pingxi member of the army Tao Bin and Nan Zhong Lang took Huan Xuan to attack Lucheng, and all the prisoners remained behind.

古文：敬旋救樊，宣与战于涅水，破之，皆得其所掠。
现代文：郭敬回军救援樊城，桓宣和他在涅水接战，郭敬战败，桓宣夺回被郭敬劫掠的全部人员、物品。
English: Guo Jing returned with his army to rescue Handan City. Huan Xuan and Guo Jing engaged in a battle at Neishui. Guo Jing was defeated, and Huan Xuan recovered all the people and goods that Guo Jing had looted.

古文：侃兄子臻及竟陵太守李阳攻新野，拔之。
现代文：陶侃的兄长之子陶臻和竟陵太守李阳攻克新野。
English: Tao Zhen, the son of Tao Kan's elder brother, and Li Yang, the governor of the imperial mausoleum, conquered Shinno.

古文：敬惧，遁去；宣阳遂拔襄阳。
现代文：郭敬恐惧遁逃，桓宣随即夺取了襄阳。
English: Guo Jing fled in fear, and Huan Xuan immediately captured Yangyang.

古文：侃使宣镇襄阳，宣招怀初附，简刑罚，略威仪，劝课农桑，或载鉏耒于轺轩，亲帅民芸获。
现代文：陶侃让桓宣镇守襄阳。桓宣招抚刚刚归降的民众，刑罚从简，威仪从略，鼓励、督促从事农桑生产，有时用轻便车装载耒等农具，亲自率领民众耕耘收获。
English: Tao Kan asked Huan Xuan Zhen to guard Xiangyang. Huan Xuan coaxed the people who had just surrendered, reduced the punishment and lowered the prestige, encouraged and urged them to engage in agricultural mulberry production, sometimes loaded agricultural tools such as ploughs with a light truck, and personally led the people to harvest.

古文：在襄阳十馀年，赵人再攻之，宣以寡弱拒守，赵人不能胜；时人以为亚于祖逖、周访。
现代文：桓宣在襄阳十多年，后赵人多次进攻，桓宣依靠既少且弱的士众抵抗防守，后赵人不能取胜。当时人认为他仅次于祖逖和周访。
English: Huan Xuan had been in Xiangyang for more than ten years. Later, Zhao people attacked him many times. Huan Xuan relied on the few and weak soldiers to resist and defend. Later, Zhao people could not win. At that time, people thought that he was second only to Zu Xi and Zhou Qi.

古文：成大将军寿寇宁州，以其征东将军费黑为前锋，出广汉，镇南将军任回出越巂，以分宁州之兵。
现代文：成汉的大将军李寿侵犯宁州，让其征东将军费黑为前锋，由广汉出击，又让镇南将军任回由越隽出击，使宁州兵力分散。
English: Li Shou, the general of the Genghis Khan, invaded Ningzhou, let Feihei, the general of the Eastern Expedition, take the lead and attack from Guanghan, and let Zhenan, the general of the Southern Expedition, attack from Yueqi, so that the forces of Ningzhou were dispersed.

古文：冬，十月，寿、黑至硃提，硃提太守董炳城守，宁州刺史尹奉遣建宁太守霍彪引兵助之。
现代文：冬季，十月，李寿、费黑到达朱提，朱提太守董炳据城固守，宁州刺史尹奉派建宁太守霍彪领兵相助。
English: In winter, in October, Li Shou and Fei Hei arrived in Juti. The governor of Juti, Dong Yuxuan, firmly defended the city, and the governor of Ningzhou, Shishi Yin Bong, sent the governor of Jianning, Huo Biao, to lead the troops.

古文：寿欲逆拒彪，黑曰： 城中食少，宜纵彪入城，共消其谷，何为拒之！ 
现代文：李寿准备迎击霍彪，费黑说： 城中粮食短缺，应该放任霍彪入城，让他们共同消耗谷物，为什么要阻挡他！ 
English: Li Shou was getting ready to meet Hou Biao, Fei Hei said: There is a shortage of grain in the city, we should let Hou Biao enter the city and let them consume grain together, why stop him!

古文：寿从之。
现代文：李寿听从他的意见。
English: Li Shou followed his advice.

古文：城久不下，寿欲急攻之。
现代文：朱提城久攻不下，李寿想大举猛攻。
English: The city of Jochi could not be conquered for a long time, and Li Shou wanted to attack it in a big way.

古文：黑曰： 南中险阻难服，当以日月制之，待其智勇俱困，然后取之，溷牢之物，何足汲汲也。 
现代文：费黑说： 南中地势险阻，难以制服，应当待以时日，等他们智慧和勇气都消磨殆尽后再攻取。他们如同圈栏中的牲畜，何必那么着急呢？ 
English: Fei Hei said: Nanzhong terrain is dangerous and difficult to subdue, it should wait until their wisdom and courage are exhausted before attacking. They are like cattle in a pen, why should they be in such a hurry?

古文：寿不从，攻，果不利，乃悉以军事任黑。
现代文：李寿不听，进攻果然失利，于是把军事事务全部委托给费黑。
English: Li Shou did not listen, and the attack was a failure, so he entrusted all military affairs to Feihe.

古文：十一月，壬子朔，进太尉侃为大将军，剑履上殿，入朝不趋，赞拜不名；侃固辞不受。
现代文：十一月，壬子朔，提升太尉陶侃为大将军，允许佩剑着履上殿，朝见天子不必趋行小跑，唱礼通名时不直接称呼名字。陶侃坚持辞谢，不接受。
English: In November, Ren Zishuo promoted Taifu Tao Kan to the rank of grand general. He was allowed to wear a sword and walk up to the palace, he did not have to trot when he saw the emperor in the morning, and he did not call his name directly when he sang the name-giving ceremony. Tao Kan insisted on the resignation and did not accept it.

古文：十二月，庚戌，帝迁于新宫。
现代文：十二月，庚戌，成帝迁入新建的宫室。
English: In December, Emperor Gyeongbokgol moved into the newly built palace.

古文：是岁，凉州僚属劝张骏称凉王，领秦、凉二州牧，置公卿百官如魏武、晋文故事。
现代文：这年，凉州的僚属们劝张骏自称凉王，兼领秦州、凉州二州牧。仿效魏武帝、晋文帝的旧例设置公卿百官。
English: In this year, the colleagues of Liangzhou persuaded Zhang Ye to call himself the King of Liangzhou, and to be the ruler of both Qinzhou and Liangzhou. Following the old example of Emperor Wu of Wei and Emperor Wen of Jin, he set up a hundred officials of nobility.

古文：骏曰： 此非人臣所宜言也。
现代文：张骏说： 这不是为人臣子所该说的话。
English: Zhang Ye said, "This is not what a vassal should say.

古文：敢言此者，罪不赦！ 
现代文：敢说这事的，罪在不赦！ 
English: If you dare to speak of this, your crime will not be forgiven!

古文：然境内皆称之为王。
现代文：然而凉州境内都称呼他为王。
English: However, everyone in Liangzhou calls him the king.

古文：骏立次子重华为世子。
现代文：张骏立次子张重华为世子。
English: Zhang Rongli's second son Zhang Chonghua became the heir.

古文：显宗成皇帝中之上咸和八年春，正月，成大将军李寿拔硃提，董炳、霍彪皆降，寿威震南中。
现代文：咸和八年春季，正月，成汉的大将军李寿攻下朱提，董炳、霍彪都投降，李寿威震南中。
English: In the spring and first month of the eighth year of the Han Dynasty, Li Shou, the great general of the Han Dynasty, conquered Zhuti. Dong Xuan and Huo Biao both surrendered. Li Shouwei was in the middle of the south.

古文：丙子，赵主勒遣使来修好；诏焚其币。
现代文：丙子，后赵国主石勒派使者来与晋重归修好，成帝下诏令焚烧他带来的礼物。
English: Shi Le, the ruler of Zhao, sent an envoy to make peace with Jin again, and Emperor Cheng issued an edict to burn the gifts he brought.

古文：三月，宁州刺史尹奉降于成，成尽有南中之地，大赦，以大将军寿领宁州。
现代文：三月，宁州刺史尹奉归降成汉，成汉全部占有南中地区。实行大赦，让大将军李寿兼管宁州。
English: In March, Yin Bong, the governor of Ningzhou, was demoted to Chenghan, and Chenghan occupied all of the south-central region. An amnesty was implemented, and General Li Shou was also put in charge of Ningzhou.

古文：夏，五月，甲寅，辽东武宣公慕容廆卒。
现代文：夏季，五月，甲寅，辽东武宣公慕容死。
English: In the summer, in May, the Liaodong Emperor Mu Rong died.

古文：六月，世子皝以平北将军行平州刺史，督摄部内。赦系囚。
现代文：六月，世子慕容以平北将军的身份摄行平州刺史职务，督察、统领境内士众，赦免囚犯。
English: In June, the heir, Murong, assumed the position of the general of North Pyongan Province and assumed the post of inspector of the history of North Pyongan Province, commanded the local scholars, and pardoned prisoners.

古文：以长史裴开为军谘祭酒，郎中令高诩为玄菟太守。
现代文：任命长史裴开为军咨祭酒，郎中令高翊为玄菟太守。
English: He appointed his eldest son, Shi Peikai, as the commander of the army, and his son-in-law, Gao Jun, as the governor of Xuanzang.

古文：皝以带方太守王诞为左长史，诞以辽东太守阳骛为才而让之；皝从之，以诞为右长史。
现代文：慕容让带方太守王诞任左长史，王诞认为辽东太守阳骛有才能因而推让给他，慕容同意了，任命王诞为右长史。
English: Murong asked Wang Zetian, the party's grand marshal, to be the left chancellor. Wang Zetian thought that the Liaodong grand marshal Yang Jie was talented, so he gave him the job. Murong agreed and appointed Wang Zetian as the right chancellor.

古文：赵主勒寝疾，中山王虎入侍禁中，矫诏，群臣亲戚皆不得入；疾之增损，外无知者。
现代文：后赵国主石勒病重卧床，中山王石虎进入禁中侍卫，矫称诏令，群臣、亲戚都不得入内，石勒病情的好坏，宫外无人得知。
English: After that, Zhao Guozhong Shi Le was seriously ill in bed, Zhongshan Wang Shigu entered the forbidden middle guard, pretentious edict, ministers and relatives were not allowed to enter, and no one outside the palace knew whether Shi Le's condition was good or bad.

古文：又矫诏召秦王宏、彭城王堪还襄国。
现代文：又假传诏令征召秦王石宏、彭城王石堪回襄国。
English: He also issued a false edict to recruit Qin King Shihong and Pengcheng King Shihong to return to Xiangyang.

古文：勒疾小廖，见宏，惊曰： 吾使王处籓镇，正备今日，有召王者邪，将自来邪？
现代文：石勒病情稍好，见到石宏，吃惊地说： 我让你镇守藩镇，正是为了防备今日。你回来有人征召你呢，还是自己前来的？
English: Shi Le, whose condition was slightly better, was surprised to see Shi Hong and said, "I asked you to guard the town, just to be prepared for today. When you came back, did someone conscript you, or did you come on your own?"

古文：有召者，当按诛之！ 
现代文：如果有召请你的人，应当依法处决！ 
English: If anyone calls you, let him be put to death according to the law!

古文：虎惧曰： 秦王思慕，暂还耳，今遣之。 
现代文：石虎恐惧，说： 秦王因思慕您，暂时回来罢了，现在遣返他回去。 
English: The stone tiger was afraid and said, "Qin Wang only came back temporarily because he missed you. Now send him back."

古文：仍留不遣。
现代文：但仍然留住不遣返。
English: But they are still detained and will not be repatriated.

古文：数日，复问之，虎曰： 受诏即遣，今已半道矣。 
现代文：几天后，石勒又问到石宏，石虎说： 接受诏令后当即就已遣返，现在已在半路上了。 
English: A few days later, Shiller asked again about Shi Hong, and Shi Hu said: After accepting the imperial edict, he was immediately repatriated, and now he is halfway there.

古文：广阿有蝗，虎密使其子冀州刺史邃帅骑三千游于蝗所。
现代文：广阿发生蝗灾，石虎秘密地派儿子、冀州刺史石邃率领三千骑兵在蝗灾区游戈。
English: When the locust disaster occurred in Guang'a, Shihu secretly sent his son, Jizhou Jishi Shiqi, to lead three thousand cavalry in the locust disaster area.

古文：秋，七月，勒疾笃，遗命曰： 大雅兄弟，宜善相保，司马氏，汝曹之前车也。
现代文：秋季，七月，石勒病重，颁布遗命说： 石弘兄弟，应当好好相互扶持，司马氏就是你们的前车之鉴。
English: In the autumn, in July, Ishihiro fell seriously ill and issued his last will and testament, saying: Ishihiro brothers, you should support each other well. Sima is your role model.

古文：中山王宜深思周、霍，勿为将来口实。 
现代文：中山王石虎应当深深追思周公、霍光，不要为后世留下口实。 
English: Zhongshan King Shihu should deeply think about Zhou Gong and Huo Guang, and do not leave an excuse for future generations.

古文：戊辰，勒卒。
现代文：戊辰，石勒死。
English: Boshen, died of stone strangulation.

古文：中山王虎劫太子弘使临轩，收右光禄大夫程遐、中书令徐光，下廷尉，召邃使将兵入宿卫，文武皆奔散。
现代文：中山王石虎劫持太子石弘让他到殿前，收捕右光禄大夫程遐、中书令徐光，交付廷尉治罪，又征召石邃，让他带兵入宫宿卫，文武官员纷纷逃散。
English: Zhongshan King Shigu kidnapped Prince Shihong and brought him to the front of the palace. He arrested Uguanglu doctor Cheng Quan and Chinese scholar Xu Quan and handed them over to a courtier to be punished. He also conscripted Shih Quan and let him take soldiers into the palace to guard the palace. Civil and military officials fled in droves.

古文：弘大惧，自陈劣弱，让位于虎。
现代文：石弘大为恐惧，自言软弱，要让位给石虎。
English: Shi Hongda was afraid and said to himself that he was weak and should give way to Shi Hu.

古文：虎曰： 君终，太子立，礼之常也。 
现代文：石虎说： 君王去世，太子即位，这是礼仪常规。 
English: Shihu said, "When a monarch dies, the crown prince ascends the throne. This is a common ritual.

古文：弘涕泣固让，虎怒曰： 若不堪重任，天下自有大义，何足豫论！ 
现代文：石弘流着泪坚决辞让，石虎发怒说： 如果你不能承担重任，天下人自会按大道理行事，哪里能事先就谈论！ 
English: Shi Hong firmly resigned with tears, and Shi Hu said angrily: If you can't shoulder the heavy responsibility, the world will act according to the principle, where can you talk about it in advance!

古文：弘乃即位。大赦。
现代文：石弘于是即位，大赦天下。
English: Ishihiro then ascended to the throne and became emperor.

古文：杀程遐、徐光。
现代文：杀死程遐、徐光。
English: He killed Cheng Yao and Xu Guang.

古文：夜，以勒丧潜瘗山谷，莫知其处。
现代文：夜间，把石勒尸体秘密瘗埋在山谷，没有人知道地点。
English: During the night, Shiller's body was secretly buried in the valley, no one knows where.

古文：己卯，备仪卫，虚葬于高平陵，谥曰明帝，庙号高祖。
现代文：己卯，仪仗护卫齐备，假装将石勒葬在高平陵，谥号明帝，庙号高祖。
English: The ceremonial guards are ready, pretending to bury Shi Le in Gaoping Mausoleum, with the posthumous name Ming Di and the temple name Gao Zu.

古文：赵将石聪及谯郡太守彭彪，各遣使来降。
现代文：后赵将领石聪和谯郡太守彭彪，各自派遣使者前来晋请降。
English: Later, Zhao's general Shi Cong and the governor of Qi County, Peng Biao, each sent an envoy to the emperor to ask him to abdicate.

古文：聪本晋人，冒姓石氏。
现代文：石聪本来是汉族人，因被收养而改姓石。
English: Originally a Han Chinese, Shi Cong changed his surname to Shi after being adopted.

古文：朝廷遣督护乔球将兵救之，未至，聪等为虎所诛。
现代文：朝廷派遣督护乔球带兵救援他，还未到达，石聪等人已被石虎诛灭。
English: The imperial court dispatched the overseer Qiao Qiu and soldiers to rescue him, but before they arrived, Shi Cong and others had been killed by the stone tiger.

古文：慕容皝遣长史勃海王济等来告丧。
现代文：慕容派遣长史、勃海人王济等前来晋报丧。
English: Murong dispatched Changshi, Bo Hai's Wang Ji and others to come and report the death.

古文：八月，赵主弘以中山王虎为丞相、魏王、大单于，加九锡，以魏郡等十三郡为国，总摄百揆。
现代文：八月，后赵国主石弘任中山王石虎为丞相、魏王、大单于，赐加九锡，划分魏郡等十三郡作为石虎的封国，总领朝廷大小政事。
English: In August, Zhao Guozhong Shi Hong appointed Zhongshan King Shi Hu as chancellor, Wei King and Datan Yu as chancellor, granted Jiuxi, divided Wei County and other thirteen counties as Shi Hu's fief country, and led the imperial court's major and minor affairs.

古文：虎赦其境内，立妻郑氏为魏王后；子邃为魏太子，加使持节、侍中、都督中外诸军事、大将军、录尚书事；次子宣为使持节、车骑大将军、冀州刺史，封河间王；韬为前锋将军、司隶校尉，封乐安王；遵封齐王，鉴封代王，苞封乐平王；徙平原王斌为章武王。
现代文：石虎赦免封国境内的囚犯，立妻子郑氏为魏王后，儿子石邃为魏太子，授予使持节、侍中、都督中外诸军事、大将军、录尚书事；次子石宣任使持节、车骑大将军、冀州刺史，封河间王；石韬为前锋将军、司隶校尉，封乐安王；石遵封齐王，石鉴封代王，石苞封乐平王。改封平原王石斌为章武王。
English: Shihu pardoned prisoners within the country, appointed his wife Zheng as the Queen of Wei, and his son Shi Yan as the Prince of Wei, and awarded envoys, chamberlains, governors-general, generals, and records; the second son, Shi Xuan, appointed envoys, cavalry generals, Jizhou engravers, and the king of Hebei; Shi Yan was the general of the vanguard, the lieutenant of Sili, and the king of Le An; Shi Zun was the king of Qi, Shi Jian was the king of the envoys, and Shi Yan was the king of Le Ping. The king of Pingyuan, Shi Bin,

古文：勒文武旧臣，皆补散任；虎之府寮亲党，悉署台省要职。
现代文：石勒原先的文武官员，都委派闲散的官职，而石虎的僚佐亲属，全部充任朝廷要职。
English: Shi Le's former civil and military officials were all appointed to idle official positions, while Shi Hu's colleagues and relatives were all appointed to important positions in the imperial court.

古文：以镇军将军夔安领左仆射，尚书郭殷为右仆射。
现代文：石虎任命镇军将军夔安兼领左仆射，任命尚书郭殷为右仆射。
English: Shihu appointed the general of the town army, Xuan An, as the leader of the left minion, and appointed Shangshu Guo Yin as the right minion.

古文：更命太子宫曰崇训宫，太后刘氏以下皆徙居之。
现代文：把太子的宫室改名为崇训宫，太后刘氏以下的人员，全部移居此处。
English: The prince's palace was renamed the Palace of Prince Chongxun, and everyone from the Empress Dowager Liu down moved there.

古文：选勒宫人及车马、服玩之美者，皆入丞相府。
现代文：又挑选石勒原有宫女、车马和服玩中美丽、精良和珍贵的，全部送入丞相府。
English: They also selected the beautiful, exquisite and precious princesses, chariots, horses and kimonos from the original palace in Shile, and sent them all to the prime minister's office.

古文：宇文乞得归为其东部大人逸豆归所逐，走死于外。
现代文：宇文乞得归被手下的东部大人逸豆归赶逐，逃跑死在外边。
English: Uwen Beggi was chased away by his subordinate, the eastern adult Itzougi, and he ran away and died outside.

古文：慕容皝引兵讨之，军于广安；逸豆归惧而请和，遂筑榆阴、安晋二城而还。
现代文：慕容领兵讨伐逸豆归，屯军广安。
English: Murong led the troops to fight against Yizu, and the garrison was safe.

古文：成建宁、牂柯二郡来降，李寿复击取之。
现代文：逸豆归畏惧，请求和好。慕容便修建榆阴、安晋两座城堡，然后回军。成汉的建宁、柯二郡向东晋投降。又被李寿攻占。
English: Murong then built two castles in Shanyin and Anjin, and then returned to the army. Jianning and Ke Er County in Chenghan surrendered to the East Jin. They were also conquered by Li Shou.

古文：赵刘太后谓彭城王堪曰： 先帝甫晏驾，丞相遽相陵籍如此。帝祚之亡，殆不复久。王将若之何？ 
现代文：后赵刘太后对彭城王石堪说： 先帝刚刚驾崩，丞相便如此欺压践踏我们，帝统的绝灭，大概不会多久，您对此将怎么办？ 
English: Later, Empress Dowager Zhao Liu said to Pengcheng Wang Shikang: The former emperor has just passed away, and the prime minister has trampled on us in such a bullying way. The extinction of the imperial system will probably not take long. What will you do about it?

古文：堪曰： 先帝旧臣，皆被疏斥，军旅不复由人，宫省之内，无可为者；臣请奔兗州，挟南阳王恢为盟主，据廪丘，宣太后诏于牧、守、征、镇，使各举兵以诛暴逆，庶几犹有济也。 
现代文：石堪说： 先帝原先的大臣，都遭疏远和排斥，军事大权不再由我们掌握，朝廷中也没有有所作为的人，我请求出奔兖州，挟持南阳王石恢当盟主，占据廪丘，向各地的地方长官颁布太后诏书，让他们各自起兵诛灭暴逆之人，或许还可挽救。 
English: Shi Kan said: The former emperor's former ministers have all been alienated and ostracized, military power is no longer in our hands, and there is no one in the imperial court who has done anything. I request you to go to Luzhou, seize Nanyang King Shi Wei as the commander-in-chief, occupy Mengqiu, and issue the Empress Dowager's edict to local governors around the country, so that they can each raise an army to exterminate the violent rebels. Perhaps it can still be saved.

古文：刘氏曰： 事急矣！当速为之。 
现代文：刘氏说： 事情很急迫了，你应当迅速行动。 
English: Mr Liu said: "The situation is very urgent, you should act quickly.

古文：九月，堪微服、轻骑袭兗州，不克，南奔谯城。
现代文：九月，石堪换上平民服装，轻骑奔袭兖州，不能获胜，向南逃奔谯城。
English: In September, Shikan put on civilian clothes and rode to Luzhou on a light horse. Unable to win, he fled south to Luzhou.

古文：丞相虎遣其将郭太追之，获堪于城父，送襄国，炙而杀之。
现代文：丞相石虎派部将郭太追击他，在城父执获石堪，送回襄国，用火烧灼后杀死了他。
English: Guotao was pursued by the Shihu faction of the chancellor Shihu, who captured Shi Kan in the city of Chengdu, sent him back to Xiangguo, and killed him after burning him with fire.

古文：征南阳王恢还襄国。
现代文：又征召南阳王石恢回襄国。
English: He also conscripted Nanyang Wangshi to return to Xiangguo.

古文：刘氏谋泄，虎废而杀之，尊弘母程氏为皇太后。
现代文：刘氏的图谋泄露，石虎将她废黜并杀死，尊奉石弘的母亲程氏为皇太后。
English: When Liu's plot was revealed, Shi Hu deposed and killed her, and honored Shi Hong's mother, Cheng, as empress dowager.

古文：堪本田氏子，数有功，赵主勒养以为子。
现代文：石堪本来是田氏子孙，多次建立功绩，后赵国主石勒收养他作为自己的儿子。
English: Shi Kan was originally a descendant of the Tian clan, and he made many achievements. Later, Lord Shi Le of Zhao adopted him as his son.

古文：刘氏有胆略，勒每与之参决军事，佐勒建功业，有吕后之风，而不妬忌更过之。
现代文：刘氏有胆略，石勒经常和她共同决断军事，辅佐石勒建立功业，有西汉吕后的遗风，在不妒忌这方面要胜过吕后。
English: Liu had courage, Shi Le often made military decisions with her, and assisted Shi Le in building up her career. She had the legacy of Western Han Dynasty's Empress Lyu, and she was better than Empress Lyu in the aspect of not being jealous.

古文：赵河东王生镇关中，石朗镇洛阳。
现代文：后赵河东王石生镇守关中，石朗镇守洛阳。
English: Later, Wang Shisheng Town of Zhaohe Dongguan guarded Guanzhong, and Shilang Town guarded Luoyang.

古文：冬，十月，生、朗皆举兵以讨丞相虎；生自称秦州刺史，遣使来降。
现代文：冬季，十月，石生、石朗都起兵讨伐丞相石虎。石生自称秦州刺史，派使者向晋请降。
English: In the winter, in October, Shisheng and Shilang both raised an army to fight against the chancellor Shigu. Shisheng called himself the Qin State Historian and sent an envoy to Jin to ask him to surrender.

古文：氐帅蒲洪自称雍州刺史，西附张骏。
现代文：氐族统帅蒲洪自称雍州刺史，向西依附张骏。
English: The leader of the Yao people, Pu Hong, called himself the "priest of Yongzhou" and followed Zhang Ye to the west.

古文：虎留太子邃守襄国，将步骑七万攻朗于金墉；金墉溃，获朗，刖而斩之；进向长安，以梁王挺为前锋大都督。
现代文：石虎让太子石邃留守襄国，自己带领步、骑兵七万人进攻在金墉的石朗。金墉被攻破，执获石朗，将他砍掉脚后斩首。随后向长安进发，让梁王石挺为前锋大都督。
English: Shihu let Prince Shih Kui stay in Xiang and led 70,000 cavalry to attack Shilang in Jin Kui. Jin Kui was defeated, captured Shilang, chopped off his feet and beheaded him. He then marched to Chang'an and made Liang Wang Shiteng the vanguard grand governor.

古文：生遣将军郭权帅鲜卑涉璝众二万为前锋以拒之，生将大军继发，军于蒲阪。
现代文：石生派将军郭权率领鲜卑涉部士众二万人为前锋拒敌，石生统领大军随后出发，屯军于蒲阪。
English: Shi Sheng sent the general Guo Quan, led by Xianbei, and 20,000 soldiers to oppose the enemy as the vanguard. Shi Sheng then led the army to set out and camped in Pusan.

古文：权与挺战于潼关，大破之，挺及丞相左长史刘隗皆死，虎还奔渑池，枕尸三百馀里。
现代文：郭权和石挺在潼关接战，石挺大败，石挺和丞相左长史刘隗都阵亡，石虎回军逃往渑池，尸体枕藉达三百多里。
English: Guo Quanzhong and Shi Ting fought in Shouguan. Shi Ting suffered a crushing defeat. Shi Ting and the Minister of the Left, Liu Xuan, were both killed in the battle. Shi Hu returned to the army and fled to Dianchi. The corpses were carried more than three hundred miles.

古文：鲜卑潜与虎通谋，反击生。
现代文：鲜卑族私下与石虎勾结，反戈攻击石生。
English: The Xianbei secretly colluded with Shihu to attack Shi Sheng.

古文：生不知挺已死，惧，单骑奔长安。
现代文：石生不知道石挺已死，心中畏惧，单骑逃奔长安。
English: Shi Sheng did not know that Shi Ting was dead. He was afraid and fled to Chang'an alone.

古文：权收馀众，退屯渭汭。
现代文：郭权收聚剩余士众，退却屯军于渭水拐弯处。
English: Guo Quan gathered the remaining soldiers and retreated the garrison at the bend of the Lishui River.

古文：生遂弃长安，匿于鸡头山。
现代文：石生于是放弃长安，藏匿于鸡头山。
English: Shi Sheng then abandoned Chang'an and went into hiding on Jitou Mountain.

古文：将军蒋英据长安拒守，虎进兵击英，斩之。
现代文：将军蒋英占据长安抵抗防守，石虎进兵攻击蒋英，蒋英被杀。
English: General Jiang Ying occupied Chang'an to resist and defend, the Stone Tiger marched in to attack Jiang Ying, and Jiang Ying was killed.

古文：生麾下斩生以降；权奔陇右。
现代文：石生的部下杀死石生投降，郭权逃奔陇右。
English: Shisheng's subordinates killed Shisheng and surrendered, Guo Quan fled to the right.

古文：虎分命诸将屯汧、陇，遣将军麻秋讨蒲洪。
现代文：石虎分别命令众将屯军于水、陇上，派将军麻秋讨伐蒲洪。
English: Shihu separately ordered the general garrison to march on the water and on the raft, and sent General Maqiu to fight against Puhong.

古文：洪帅户二万降于虎，虎迎拜洪光烈将军、护氐校尉。
现代文：蒲洪率二万户投降石虎，石虎拜授他为光烈将军、护氐校尉。
English: Pu Hong led 20,000 households to surrender to the stone tiger, and the stone tiger made him a brilliant general and a guard lieutenant.

古文：洪至长安，说虎徙关中豪杰及氐、羌以实东方，曰： 诸氐皆洪家部曲，洪帅以从，谁敢违者！ 
现代文：蒲洪到达长安，劝说石虎迁徙关中的豪强和氐、羌等部落充实东方，他说： 众氐族部落都是我家的部曲，我率领他们归顺，谁敢违抗！ 
English: Arriving in Chang'an, Pu Hong persuaded the great and powerful of the stone tiger migration pass and the Yao, Yao and other tribes to enrich the East. He said: All Yao tribes are part of my family, I lead them to submit, who dares to defy!

古文：虎从之，徙秦、雍民及氐、羌十馀万户于关东。
现代文：石虎听从他的建议，迁徙秦州、雍州的士民以及氐族、羌族十多万户到关东。
English: Shihu followed his advice, and more than 100,000 Qin and Yong statesmen, as well as Yi and Yao families, migrated to Guandong.

古文：以洪为龙骧将军、流民都督，使居枋头；以羌帅姚弋仲为奋武将军、西羌大都督，使帅其众数万徙居清河之滠头。
现代文：任命蒲洪为龙骧将军、流民都督，让他居住在枋头，任命羌族首领姚弋仲为奋武将军、西羌大都督，让他们率领部众数万人迁居到清河的滠头。
English: He appointed Pu Hong as the general of Longmu and the governor of the displaced people, and let him live in Shantou. He appointed Yao Xizhong, the leader of the Yao people, as the general of Fenwu and the governor of Xizhong, and let them lead tens of thousands of people to move to Shantou in Qinghe.

古文：虎还襄国，大赦。
现代文：石虎返回襄国，实行大赦。
English: Shihu returned to Xiangguo and was granted amnesty.

古文：赵主弘命虎建魏台，一如魏武王辅汉故事。
现代文：后赵国主石弘令石虎建造魏台，完全仿效魏武帝辅佐汉朝的旧例。
English: Later, the Zhao sovereign, Shi Hong, ordered Shi Hu to build Wei Tai, completely imitating the old example of Emperor Wu of Wei assisting the Han Dynasty.

古文：慕容皝初嗣位，用法严峻，国人多不自安，主簿皇甫真切谏，不听。
现代文：慕容刚刚继位，使用刑法过于严厉，国内人大多不知所措，主簿皇甫真恳切劝谏，慕容不听。
English: Murong has just succeeded to the throne, the use of criminal law is too severe, most people in China are at a loss, the main book, the Emperor Fuzhen, earnestly advised him, but Murong did not listen.

古文：皝庶兄建威将军翰、母弟征虏将军仁，有勇略，屡立战功，得士心，季弟昭，有才艺；皆有宠于廆。
现代文：慕容的庶母兄长、建威将军慕容翰和同母兄弟、征虏将军慕容仁，都勇悍而有谋略，多次建立战功，深得人心；小弟弟慕容昭，多才多艺，都受到慕容的宠爱。
English: Murong's brother-in-law, General Murong Han, and his brother-in-law, General Murong Ren, were both brave and resourceful, and won the hearts of the people with their many military exploits. Murong's younger brother, Murong Zhao, was multi-talented and loved by Murong.

古文：皝忌之，翰叹曰： 吾受事于先公，不敢不尽力，幸赖先公之灵，所向有功，此乃天赞吾国，非人力也。
现代文：慕容妒忌他们，慕容翰叹息说： 我从先父那里接受任职，不敢不尽力，幸好仰仗先父的在天之灵，所向披靡，这是上天助我国，并非人力所为。
English: Murong envied them. Murong Han sighed and said, "I accepted the post from my father and dared not not to do my best. Fortunately, I relied on my father's spirit in heaven to overcome all odds. This is God's help to our country, not man's doing.

古文：而人谓吾之所办，以为雄才难制，吾岂可坐而待祸邪！ 
现代文：但别人却说这是我的力量，以为我具有杰出的才能，难以制服，我怎能坐以待祸呢！ 
English: But others say that it is my strength, thinking that I have outstanding talent, difficult to subdue, how can I wait for disaster!

古文：乃与其子出奔段氏。
现代文：于是和儿子出奔段氏。
English: So she and her son ran away from the Duan clan.

古文：段辽素闻其才，冀收其用，甚爱重之。
现代文：段辽平素早就听说他的才能，希望收为己用，所以非常宠爱、看重他。
English: Duan Liao Pingsu had long heard of his talent and hoped to use it for himself, so he was very fond of and valued him.

古文：仁自平郭来奔丧，谓昭曰： 吾等素骄，多无礼于嗣君，嗣君刚严，无罪犹可畏，况有罪乎！ 
现代文：慕容仁从平郭前来奔丧，对慕容昭说： 我们平素骄纵，经常对现在继位的君主无礼，他为人刚毅严厉，自身无罪尚且令人畏惧，何况有罪呢！ 
English: Murongren came from Pingguo to pay his respects, and said to Murong Zhao: "We are normally arrogant and often disrespectful to the monarch who is now succeeding the throne. He is a man of fortitude and sternness. He is innocent yet fearsome, let alone guilty!

古文：昭曰： 吾辈皆体正嫡，于国有分。
现代文：慕容昭说： 我们都身为嫡子，国家应当有我们一份。
English: Murong Zhao said: We are all legitimate children, the state should have our share.

古文：兄素得士心，我在内未为所疑，伺其间隙，除之不难。
现代文：兄长您素来得人心，我在宫内也没什么令人怀疑的地方，寻找机会除灭他并不难。
English: Your brother has always been popular, and there is nothing suspicious about me in the palace. It is not difficult to find an opportunity to eliminate him.

古文：兄趣举兵以来，我为内应，事成之日，与我辽东。
现代文：兄长赶紧兴兵前来，我当内应，事成以后，把辽东分给我。
English: My elder brother hastened to come to Xingbing, and I immediately agreed to divide Liaodong to me after the matter was settled.

古文：男子举事，不克则死，不能效建威偷生异域地。 仁曰： 善！ 
现代文：男子汉行事，不成功则死，不能仿效慕容翰到其他地方偷生苟活。 慕容仁说： 好！ 
English: If you don't succeed, you will die. You can't emulate Muronghan and go to other places to steal a living. Murongren said, "Good!

古文：遂还平郭。
现代文：于是回返平郭。
English: So he returned to Pingguo.

古文：闰月，仁举兵而西。
现代文：闰月，慕容仁兴兵向西进发。
English: During the leap month, Murong Renxing's army marched westward.

古文：或以仁、昭之谋告皝，皝未之信，遣使按验。
现代文：有人把慕容仁、慕容昭的密谋告诉慕容，慕容不相信，派使者查验。
English: Someone told Murong Murongren and Murong Zhao about the conspiracy, but Murong did not believe them and sent an envoy to investigate.

古文：仁兵已至黄水，知事露，杀使者，还据平郭。
现代文：慕容仁的军队已到黄水，知道事情败露，杀死使者，回军占据平郭。
English: Murongren's army had reached Huangshui, knew that the matter had been exposed, killed the messenger, and the returning army occupied Pingguo.

古文：皝赐昭死，遣军祭酒封弈慰抚辽东，以高诩为广武将军，将兵五千与庶弟建武将军幼、稚、广威将军军、宁远将军汗、司马辽东佟寿共讨仁。与仁战于汶城北，皝兵大败，幼、稚、军皆为仁所获。
现代文：慕容赐令慕容昭自尽，派军祭酒封奕慰抚辽东。任命高诩为广武将军，领兵五千与异母弟、建武将军慕容幼、慕容稚、广威将军慕容军、宁远将军慕容汗、司马、辽东人佟寿共同讨伐慕容仁，和慕容仁在汶城以北交战，慕容的军队大败，慕容幼、慕容稚、慕容军都被掳获。
English: Murong gave the order to Murong Zhao to commit suicide, and sent the army's ceremonial wine to comfort Liaodong. He appointed Gao Jun to be the general of Guangwu, leading five thousand soldiers with his half-brother, the general of Jianwu, Murong Ju, Murong Chih, the general of Guangwei, Murong Jun, the general of Ningyuan, Murong Khan, Sima, and the Liaodong people's longevity to jointly fight against Murong Ren, and fought with Murong Ren in the north of Wencheng. Murong's army was defeated, and Murong Ju, Murong Chih, and

古文：寿尝为仁司马，遂降于仁。
现代文：佟寿曾是慕容仁的司马，于是归降慕容仁。
English: Yan Shou was once Murongren's second-in-command, so he surrendered to Murongren.

古文：前大农孙机等举辽东城以应仁。
现代文：前任大农孙机等占据辽东城响应慕容仁。
English: Former great farmer Sun Ji and others occupy Liaodong City in response to Murongren.

古文：封弈不得入，与汗俱还。
现代文：封奕不能入城，和慕容汗一块儿返回。
English: Fong Yi could not enter the city and returned with Murong Khan.

古文：东夷校尉封抽、护军平原乙逸、辽东相太原韩矫皆弃城走，于是仁尽有辽东之地；段辽及鲜卑诸部皆与仁遥相应援。
现代文：东夷校尉封抽、护军平原人乙逸、辽东相太原人韩矫都弃城逃跑，于是慕容仁尽数占有辽东地区。段辽和鲜卑各部都与慕容仁遥相呼应和声援。
English: Dongyi's captain Feng Yu, the protector of the plain, Yi Yi, and the protector of Liaodong, Sotai Yuan's Han Ji, all abandoned the city and fled, so Murongren occupied Liaodong region as much as possible. All departments of Duan Liao and Xianbei echoed and supported Murongren.

古文：皝追思皇甫真之言，以真为平州别驾。
现代文：慕容追忆起皇甫真原先说过的话，任命他为平州别驾。
English: Murong recalled what Empress Dowager Cixi had said, and appointed him as the governor of Pingzhou.

古文：十二月，郭权据上邽，遣使来降；京兆、新平、扶风、冯翊、北地皆应之。
现代文：十二月，郭权占据上，派使者向晋请降，京兆、新平、扶风、冯翊、北地都响应他。
English: In December, Guo Quan took over and sent an envoy to Jin to ask him to abdicate. Jingzhao, Xinping, Fufeng, Fengyao, and Hebei all responded to him.

古文：初，张骏欲假道于成以通表建康，成主雄不许。
现代文：当初，张骏想向成汉借路去建康呈送上表，成汉主李雄不同意。
English: At first, Zhang Ye wanted to take the road to Jiankang to present the table to Chenghan, but Chenghan's master Li Xiong disagreed.

古文：骏乃遣治中从事张淳称籓于成以假道；雄伪许之，将使盗覆诸东峡。
现代文：张骏便派遣治中从事张淳向成汉称臣以便借道。李雄佯装同意，却准备派盗贼将他沉于东峡。
English: Zhang Xuan then sent Zhang Jun to Chenghan to engage in diplomacy. Li Xiong pretended to agree, but was preparing to send thieves to sink him in the East Gorge.

古文：蜀人桥赞密以告淳，淳谓雄曰： 寡君使小臣行无迹之地，万里通诚于建康者，以陛下嘉尚忠义，能成人之美故也。
现代文：蜀人桥赞将此事秘密告诉张淳，张淳对李雄说： 我的君主让我来到这未曾通行的地方，不远万里向建康表达诚意，是因为陛下嘉许和崇尚忠义，能够成人之美的缘故。
English: Shu Ren Qiao Zan told this to Zhang Jun in secret, and Zhang Jun said to Li Xiong: My lord let me come to this place that has never been passed, not far away from expressing sincerity to Jian Kang, because His Majesty praised and advocated loyalty, and because of the beauty of being able to grow up.

古文：若欲杀臣者，当斩之都市，宣示众目曰： 凉州不忘旧德，通使琅邪，主圣臣明，发觉杀之。 
现代文：如果想杀我，应当在都市处斩，向众人宣谕晓示说： 凉州不忘国家旧恩，与晋互通使节，因为君主圣贤、臣下明察，发觉此事因而杀了他。 
English: If you want to kill me, you should behead me in the city and announce to everyone: Liangzhou will not forget the country's old favor and exchange envoys with Jin, because the sovereign, sages, and vassals saw this and killed him.

古文：如此，则义声远播，天下畏威。
现代文：这样，道义的声誉就会远远传播，天下人都懔畏风威。
English: In this way, the reputation of morality will spread far and wide, and people all over the world will be afraid of it.

古文：今使盗杀之江中，威刑不显，何足以示天下乎！ 
现代文：现在如果让盗贼把我杀害在江中，声威和刑罚都不彰显，怎么能示范天下呢！ 
English: Now, if I let the thief kill me in the middle of the river, without showing any prestige or punishment, how can I demonstrate to the world?

古文：雄大惊曰： 安有此邪！ 
现代文：李雄大吃一惊，说： 哪有这种事呢！ 
English: Li Xiong was taken aback and said, "How could such a thing happen!

古文：司隶校尉景骞言于雄曰： 张淳壮士，请留之。 
现代文：司隶校尉景骞对李雄说： 张淳是勇士，请把他留下。 
English: Lieutenant Colonel Jing Yi said to Li Xiong: Zhang Jun is a warrior, please let him stay.

古文：雄曰： 壮士安肯留！
现代文：李雄说： 既然是勇士，怎能肯留下呢！
English: Lixiong said, "Since he is a warrior, how can he stay?"

古文：且试以卿意观之。 
现代文：你暂且试着用自己的意愿试探他。 
English: For the time being, try to test him with your own will.

古文：骞谓淳曰： 卿体丰大，天热，可且遣下吏，小住须凉。 
现代文：景骞对张淳说： 你身强体胖，现在天气炎热，何不暂时派遣手下小吏，您在此小住，等待天气转凉？ 
English: Jingyao said to Zhang Junmao, "You are strong and fat, and the weather is hot right now. Why don't you temporarily send some of your subordinates to live here and wait for the weather to cool down?

古文：淳曰： 寡君以皇舆播越，梓宫未返，生民涂炭，莫之振救，故遣淳通诚上都。
现代文：张淳说： 我的君主因为皇室远徙江南，先帝的梓宫未能送返，生民涂炭，无人拯救，所以派我向皇都表达诚意。
English: Zhang Jun said, "My sovereign sent me to express his sincerity to the imperial capital because the imperial family has migrated to the south of the Yangtze River, the former emperor's Zi Palace could not be returned, and the people were burned and there was no one to save them.

古文：所论事重，非下吏所能传；使下吏可了，则淳亦不来矣。
现代文：所商议的事情重大，不是小吏可以传达的；如果小吏可以任胜，那么我也就不来了。
English: The matter under discussion is important and cannot be conveyed by a petty official; if a petty official can do whatever he wants, then I will not come.

古文：虽火山汤海，犹将赴之，岂寒暑之足惮哉！ 
现代文：即使有火山汤海，我也将前往，天气的寒暑又怎能让人畏惧呢！ 
English: Even if there is a volcanic soup, I will go, how can the cold and hot weather frighten people!

古文：雄谓淳曰： 贵主英名盖世，土险兵强，何不亦称帝自娱一方？ 
现代文：李雄对张淳说： 贵君主英名盖世，境内地势险峻，军力强大，为什么不自己称帝，占据一方享乐呢！ 
English: Li Xiong said to Zhang Jun: Your monarch is famous all over the world, the territory is steep, and the military is strong. Why don't you proclaim yourself emperor and enjoy yourself?

古文：淳曰： 寡君祖考以来，世笃忠贞，以仇耻未雪，枕戈待旦，何自娱之有！ 
现代文：张淳说： 我的君主从祖父、父亲开始，世代坚守忠贞，因国耻未能昭雪，枕戈待旦，哪能自己享乐呢！ 
English: Zhang Chun said: My sovereign has been loyal from his grandfather and father onward. Due to national shame, he has not been able to prove his loyalty. He has been waiting for this day. How can he enjoy himself?

古文：雄甚惭，曰： 我之祖考本亦晋臣，遭天下大乱，与六郡之民避难此州，为众所推，遂有今日。
现代文：李雄十分惭愧，说： 我的祖先本来也是晋国大臣，因遇到天下大乱，和六个州郡的民众到此州避难，被民众推拥，才有今天。
English: Li Xiong was very ashamed and said, "My ancestor was originally a minister of Jin Province, but because of the world turmoil, he and the people of six states and counties took refuge in this state and were embraced by the people. It is only today.

古文：琅邪若能中兴大晋于中国者，亦当帅众辅之。 
现代文：琅邪王如果真能在中原中兴大晋的基业，我也会率领士众相助。 
English: If the king of evil can really revive the foundation of Dajin in the Central Plains, I will also lead the soldiers to help.

古文：厚为淳礼而遣之。
现代文：于是为张淳准备厚礼，送他上路。
English: So they prepared a gift for Zhang Jun and sent him on his way.

古文：淳卒致命于建康。
现代文：张淳终于到达建康转达了张骏的心意。
English: Zhang Jun finally arrived in Jiankang and conveyed Zhang Ye's intention.

古文：长安之失守也，敦煌计吏耿访自汉中入江东，屡上书请遣大使慰抚凉州。
现代文：长安失守时，敦煌郡掌管计簿的官吏耿访从汉中进入江东，多次上书请求派遣职高位重的使节慰抚凉州臣民。
English: When Chang'an was lost, the official in charge of the accounting books of Dunhuang County, Geng Qiu, traveled from Hanzhong to the east of the Yangtze River and repeatedly sent letters requesting the dispatch of high-ranking envoys to comfort the subjects of Liangzhou.

古文：朝廷以访守侍书御史，拜张骏镇西大将军，选陇西贾陵等十二人配之。
现代文：朝廷让耿访暂任侍书御史，拜授张骏为镇西大将军，挑选陇西人贾陵等十二人配备给他。
English: The imperial court appointed Geng Qian as the temporary attendant of the imperial historian, appointed Zhang Ye as the general of the Western Zhen, and selected twelve people such as Jialing, a native of Shaanxi, to be assigned to him.

古文：访至梁州，道不通，以诏书付贾陵，诈为贾客以达之。
现代文：耿访到达梁州后，道路不通，便把诏书交给贾陵，假扮为商贩通过。
English: After Geng Wai arrived in Liangzhou, the road was impassable, so he handed the edict to Jialing and passed through, pretending to be a merchant.

古文：是岁，陵始至凉州，骏遣部曲督王丰等报谢。
现代文：这年，贾陵刚到凉州，张骏派部曲督王丰等人前来答谢。
English: This year, when Jialing had just arrived in Liangzhou, Zhang Ye sent the music director Wang Feng and others to thank him.

古文：显宗成皇帝中之上咸和九年
现代文：咸和九年春季，正月，后赵改年号为延熙。
English: In the spring of the ninth year of Haman and the first month of the year, Zhao changed his name to Yanxi.

古文：春，正月，赵改元延熙。诏以郭权为镇西将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：晋朝廷下诏任命郭权为镇西将军、雍州刺史。
English: Under the imperial edict of the Jin Dynasty, Guo Quan was appointed as the general of Zhenxi and the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：仇池王杨难敌卒，子毅立，自称龙骧将军、左贤王、下辨公；以叔父坚头之子盘为冠军将军、右贤王、河池公，遣使来称籓。
现代文：仇池王杨难敌故去，儿子杨毅继立，自称龙骧将军、左贤王、下辨公；任命叔父杨坚头之子杨盘为冠军将军、右贤王、河池公，派使者来晋称臣。
English: His enemy King Yang Nannan passed away, and his son Yang Yi succeeded him, and called himself General Longyu, King Zuoxian, and King Xiaobeng; he appointed his uncle Yang Pan, the son of King Yang Jiantu, as Champion General, King Zuoxian, and King Hechi, and sent envoys to promote him.

古文：二月，丁卯，诏遣耿访、王丰赍印绶授张骏大将军、都督陕西、雍、秦、凉州诸军事。
现代文：二月，丁卯，朝廷下诏派耿访、王丰携带印绶拜授张骏为大将军，都督陕西、雍州、秦州、凉州诸军事。
English: In February, Dingwu, the imperial court sent Geng to visit, Wang Feng carried the seal to pay homage to Zhang Ye as a general, and the military governors of Shaanxi, Yongzhou, Qinzhou and Liangzhou.

古文：自是每岁使者不绝。
现代文：从此以后每年来往使者不断。
English: Since then, the envoys have continued to come and go every year.

古文：慕容仁以司马翟楷领东夷校尉，前平州别驾庞鉴领辽东相。
现代文：慕容仁让司马翟楷兼领东夷校尉，让原先任平州别驾的庞鉴兼领辽东相。
English: Murongren appointed Sima Qiankai as the leader of Dongyi, and Pang Jian, the former governor of Pingzhou, as the leader of Liaodong.

古文：段辽遣兵袭徒河，不克；复遣其弟兰与慕容翰共攻柳城，柳城都尉石琮、城大慕舆泥并力拒守，兰等不克而退。
现代文：段辽派军队袭击徒河，不能获胜，又派兄弟段兰和慕容翰共同进攻柳城。柳城都尉石琮、城主慕舆合力拒守，段兰等不能取胜，只好退军。
English: Duan Liao sent troops to attack Tuhe, but they could not win. He also sent his brothers Duan Lan and Murong Han to jointly attack Liucheng. Liucheng's captain Shisheng and the city's lord Murong refused to defend the city. Duan Lan could not win and had to withdraw.

古文：辽怒，切责兰等，必令拔之。
现代文：段辽发怒，痛切地斥责段兰等人，严令他们攻取柳城。
English: Duan Liao flew into a rage, bitterly rebuked Duan Lan and others, and ordered them to capture Liucheng.

古文：休息二旬，复益兵来攻。
现代文：段兰等人休息二十天后，又增添兵力来进攻。
English: After a twenty-day rest, Duan Lan and others attacked with additional troops.

古文：士皆重袍蒙楯，作飞梯，四面俱进，昼夜不息。
现代文：士卒都穿上重重战袍，用盾牌保护，架上云梯，四面同时进攻，昼夜不停。
English: The soldiers all put on heavy battle robes, protected with shields, set up ladders, and attacked on all sides at the same time, day and night.

古文：琮、泥拒守弥固，杀伤千馀人，卒不能拔。
现代文：石琮、慕舆的防守也更加坚固。杀段兰的士卒一千多人，段兰等人始终无法取胜。
English: The defense of Shijiazhuang and Muxiu was also more solid. More than a thousand of Duanlan's soldiers were killed, and Duanlan and others were never able to win.

古文：慕容皝遣慕容汗及司马封弈等共救之。皝戒汗曰： 贼气锐，勿与争锋！ 
现代文：慕容派慕容汗和司马封奕等人共同援救，慕容告诫慕容汗说： 敌人士气正盛，不要和他们争斗以决胜负。 
English: Murong sent Murong Khan and Sima Fengyi and others to come to the rescue. Murong warned Murong Khan, saying, "The enemy is in high spirits. Don't fight with them to win or lose.

古文：汗性骁果，以千馀骑为前锋，直进。
现代文：慕容汗性格骁勇果敢，让一千多骑兵为前锋，直赴柳城。
English: Murong Khan's character was courageous and daring, and he sent more than a thousand cavalry as the vanguard to Liucheng.

古文：封弈止之，汗不从。
现代文：封奕劝阻他，慕容汗不听。
English: Fang Yi tried to dissuade him, but Murong Khan would not listen.

古文：与兰遇于牛尾谷，汗兵大败，死者太半；弈整陈力战，故得不没。
现代文：结果和段兰在牛尾谷遭遇，慕容汗的军队大败，死亡过半。封奕整顿阵列尽力苦战，所以才免遭全军覆没。
English: As a result, he encountered Duan Lan in the Niuwei Valley, where Murong Khan's army suffered a crushing defeat, with more than half of them dying. Fen Yi's rectification array fought hard to avoid being overwhelmed by the entire army.

古文：兰欲乘胜穷追，慕容翰恐遂灭其国，止之曰： 夫为将当务慎重，审己量敌，非万全不可动。
现代文：段兰想乘胜穷追，慕容翰害怕就此灭亡自己的国家，劝阻他说： 作为将领，应当慎重，知己知彼，不到万全的时候不能妄动。
English: Duan Lan wanted to take advantage of the victory and pursue, Muronghan was afraid of destroying his own country, so he dissuaded him: As a general, you should be cautious, know your enemy, and do not act rashly when you are not perfect.

古文：今虽挫其偏师，未能屈其大势。
现代文：现在敌方的偏师虽被挫败，但主力还未败。
English: Now, although the enemy's bias division has been defeated, the main force has not yet been defeated.

古文：皝多权诈，好为潜伏，若悉国中之众自将以拒我，我县军深入，众寡不敌，此危道也。
现代文：慕容狡诈多谋，喜欢深藏不露，如果他亲自统帅举国士众抵御我们，而我们孤军深入，寡不敌众，这是危险的作法。
English: Murong is cunning and resourceful, and likes to hide things. If he personally commands the whole country to resist us, and we are alone and outnumbered, this is a dangerous approach.

古文：且受命之日，正求此捷；若违命贪进，万一取败，功名俱丧，何以返面！ 
现代文：况且接受君命的时候，正是想得到今天的胜利，如果违背君命冒进，万一失败，功劳和名望全部丧失，有什么脸面回去面对君主！ 
English: Moreover, when accepting the king's order, it is precisely to get today's victory. If you go against the king's order, in case of failure, you will lose all your merits and reputation, and you will have no face to go back and face the king!

古文：兰曰： 此已成擒，无有馀理，卿正虑遂灭卿国耳！
现代文：段兰说： 这些人被擒已成定局，没有别的道理，你只是忧虑趁势灭亡你的国家罢了！
English: Duan Lan said, "It is a foregone conclusion that these people will be arrested. There is no other reason. You are only worried about taking advantage of the situation to ruin your country!"

古文：今千年在东，若进而得志，吾将迎之以为国嗣，终不负卿，使宗庙不祀也。 
现代文：现在慕容千年在东边，如果进军真能实现愿望，我将迎接他充当国家的继承人，终究不会有负于你，让宗庙绝祀的。 
English: Now that Murong Millennium is in the east, if the advance can really realize the wish, I will welcome him as the successor of the country. After all, I will not be inferior to you and let the ancestral temple be destroyed.

古文：千年者，慕容仁小字也。
现代文：所谓千年，即慕容仁的小名。
English: The so-called millennium, that is, Murongren's nickname.

古文：翰曰： 吾投身相依，无复还理；国之存亡，于我何有！
现代文：慕容翰说： 我既然投身依附，就没有再返回的道理。故国的存亡，和我有什么相干！
English: Muronghan said: Since I have devoted myself to attachment, there is no reason for me to return. What does the survival of my home country have to do with me?

古文：但欲为大国之计，且相为惜功名耳。 
现代文：只是想为贵国出谋划策，并且珍惜你我的功名罢了。 
English: I just want to make suggestions for your country and cherish my achievements.

古文：乃命所部欲独还，兰不得已而从之。
现代文：于是命令自己所部，准备独自返回，段兰不得已，随从他共同返回。
English: So he ordered his subordinates to prepare to return alone, and Duan Lan reluctantly followed him to return together.

古文：三月，成主雄分宁州置交州，以霍彪为宁州刺史，爨深为交州刺史。
现代文：三月，成汉主李雄由宁州分置出交州，让霍彪任宁州刺史，爨深任交州刺史。
English: In March, Chenghan master Li Xiong was transferred from Ningzhou to Jiaozhou, and Houbiao was appointed as the historian of Ningzhou, and Yan Sheng was appointed as the historian of Jiaozhou.

古文：赵丞相虎遣其将郭敖及章武王斌，帅步骑四万西击郭权，军于华阴；夏，四月，上邽豪族杀权以降。
现代文：后赵丞相石虎派部将郭敖和章武王石斌率步、骑兵四万人向西进攻郭权，屯军华阴。夏季，四月，上豪族杀死郭权投降。
English: Later, the Zhao chancellor Shi Hu dispatched Guo Qi and Zhang Wu Wang Shibin to attack Guo Quan in the west with 40,000 cavalry and Huayin's army. In the summer, in April, the Shanghao tribe killed Guo Quan and surrendered.

古文：虎徙秦州三万馀户于青、并二州。
现代文：石虎将秦州三万多户民众迁徙到青州和并州。
English: Shihu migrated more than 30,000 households in Qinzhou to Qingzhou and Binzhou.

古文：长安人陈良夫奔黑羌，与北羌王薄句大等侵扰北地、冯翊。
现代文：长安人陈良夫逃奔黑羌，和北羌王薄句大等人侵扰北地、冯翊。
English: Chen Liangfu, a native of Chang'an, fled to Heihe, and invaded the north and Fengyuan with the king of Beilun, Bo Gu Da.

古文：章武王斌、乐安王韬合击，破之，句大奔马兰山。
现代文：章武王石斌、乐安王石韬合力攻击，打败他们，薄句大逃奔马兰山。
English: Zhangwu Wang Shibin and Le An Wang Shijun attacked together, defeated them, and fled to Malan Mountain.

古文：郭敖乘胜逐北，为羌所败，死者什七八。
现代文：郭敖乘胜追击败兵，反被羌人战败，死亡人数占十之七八。
English: Guo Wei took advantage of the victory to chase and defeat the soldiers, but was defeated by the prisoners, and the number of deaths accounted for seventy-eight out of ten.

古文：斌等收军还三城。
现代文：石斌等人收兵回到三城。
English: Shi Bin and others gathered their troops and returned to Sancheng.

古文：虎遣使诛郭敖。
现代文：石虎派使者处死郭敖。
English: Shihu sent an envoy to execute Guo Yao.

古文：秦王宏有怨言，虎幽之。
现代文：秦王石宏有怨言，石虎将他幽禁。
English: Qin King Shihong complained, and Shihhu imprisoned him.

古文：慕容仁自称平州刺史、辽东公。
现代文：慕容仁自称平州刺史，辽东公。
English: Murongren claimed to be the ruler of Pingzhou and the ruler of Liaodong.

古文：长沙桓公陶侃，晚年深以满盈自惧，不预朝权，屡欲告老归国，佐吏等苦留之。
现代文：长沙桓公陶侃，到晚年深深畏惧物极必反的道理，因此不参预朝政，多次想告老还乡，佐吏们苦苦相留。
English: In his later years, Changsha Kuan Kung Tao said that he was deeply afraid of the principle that what goes up must come down, so he did not participate in pre-imperial politics. He wanted to return to his hometown many times, and the officials struggled to stay together.

古文：六月，侃疾笃，上表逊位。
现代文：六月，陶侃病重，上表请求退位。
English: In June, Tao Kan fell seriously ill and requested to abdicate.

古文：遣左长史殷羡奉送所假节、麾、幢、曲盖、侍中貂蝉、太尉章、荆、江、雍、梁、交、广、益、宁八州刺史印传、棨戟；军资、器仗、牛马、舟船，皆有定薄，封印仓库，侃自加管钥。
现代文：派左长史殷羡归还持有的朝廷符节、麾、憧、曲盖、侍中貂蝉、太尉印章，以及荆、江、雍、梁、交、广、益、宁八州的刺史印传和戟。至于军资、器仗、牛马、舟船等，都有簿录统计，封存仓库，由陶侃亲自上锁。
English: He also returned the imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal, imperial seal,

古文：以后事付右司马王愆期，加督护统领文武。
现代文：陶侃将后事托付给右司马王愆期，授予督护官职，统领文武官吏。
English: Tao Kan entrusted the follow-up to the right secretary, Ma Wangye, and awarded him the post of superintendent and commander of the civil and military officials.

古文：甲寅，舆车出，临津就船，将归长沙，顾谓愆期曰： 老子婆娑，正坐诸君！ 
现代文：甲寅，陶侃乘车离开武昌，到渡口乘船，准备回长沙，回头对王愆期说： 老夫现在蹒跚难行，正因你们阻拦。 
English: A Yin, Tao Kan left Wuchang by car, took a boat to the ferry port, and prepared to return to Changsha. He turned to Wang Xizhi and said: "It is difficult for the old man to travel now, because you are blocking him."

古文：乙卯，薨于樊谿。
现代文：乙卯，在樊去世。
English: Otsu, passed away in Shizuoka.

古文：侃在军四十一年，明毅善断，识察纤密，人不能欺；自南陵迄于白帝，数千里中，路不拾遗。
现代文：陶侃领军四十一年，明智、坚毅，善于决断；见识纤密，别人难以欺蒙。自南陵到白帝，几千里的辖域内路不拾遗。
English: Tao Kan led the army for 41 years. He was wise, resolute, and good at making decisions. His knowledge was fine, and it was difficult for others to deceive him. From Nanling to Baidi, there were thousands of miles of roads within the jurisdiction.

古文：及薨，尚书梅陶与亲人曹识书曰： 陶公机神明鉴似魏武，忠顺勤劳似孔明，陆抗诸人不能及也。 
现代文：陶侃去世后，尚书梅陶给亲友曹识的信说： 陶公的神机明鉴如同魏武帝，忠顺勤军好比孔明，陆抗等人比不上他。 
English: After the death of Tao Kan, Shang Shumei Tao's letter to his relative and friend Cao Zhi said: Tao Gong's shenqi Mingjian is like Emperor Wei, Zhongshun Qinjun is like Confucius, and Lu Anti and others are not comparable to him.

古文：谢安每言： 陶公虽用法，而恒得法外意。 
现代文：谢安经常说： 陶公虽然运用刑法，但常常能领会刑法之外的含意。 
English: Xie An often said: Although Tao Gong uses criminal law, he can often understand the meaning outside of criminal law.

古文：安，鲲之从子也。
现代文：谢安即谢鲲的侄子。
English: Xie An is Xie Yao's nephew.

古文：成主雄生疡于头。身素多金创，及病，旧痕皆脓溃，诸子皆恶而远之；独太子班昼夜侍侧，不脱衣冠，亲为吮脓。
现代文：成汉主李雄头部生疮，身体原有很多创伤，等到病发时，旧伤痕全部化脓溃烂，儿子们都因厌恶而远远躲开，只有太子李班昼夜在身边侍候，不脱衣帽，亲自为他吮吸脓肿。
English: The head of Chenghan, Li Xiong, had a sore on his head, and his body had a lot of trauma. By the time of the onset of the disease, all the old scars had festered and festered. The sons were disgusted and hid far away. Only Prince Li Ban waited around day and night, did not take off his hat, and personally sucked the abscess for him.

古文：雄召大将军建宁王寿受遗诏辅政。
现代文：李雄征召大将军、建宁王李寿接受遗诏辅佐朝政。
English: Li Xiong conscripted the great general, Jianning Wang Li Shou to accept the imperial edict to assist the imperial government.

古文：丁卯，雄卒，太子班即位。
现代文：丁卯，李雄故去，太子李班即位。
English: Dingwu, Li Xiong passed away, Prince Li Ban ascended to the throne.

古文：以建宁王寿录尚书事，政事皆委于寿及司徒何点、尚书令王瑰，班居中行丧礼，一无所预。
现代文：任命建宁王李寿录尚书事，政事都委决于李寿和司徒何点，尚书王。李班居住在宫中服丧，毫不干预。
English: Li Shuro, the king of Jianning, was appointed as the king of literature, and Li Shuro and Sitou were appointed as the king of politics. Li Ban lived in the palace to attend the funeral, and did not interfere.

古文：辛未，加平西将军庾亮征西将军、假节、都督江、荆、豫、益、梁、雍六州诸军事、领江、豫、荆三州刺史，镇武昌。
现代文：辛未，朝廷授予平西将军庾亮征西将军，假节，都督江、荆、豫、益、梁、雍六州诸军事，兼领江、豫、荆三州刺史，镇守武昌。
English: In Xinwei, the imperial court awarded the general of Pingxi with the title of Xiang Liang, the general of the Western Conquest, and on the false festival, the military of the six states of Dujiang, Jing, Henan, Yixing, Liang and Yong, and the history of the three states of Guojiang, Henan and Jing, and the town guard of Wuchang.

古文：亮辟殷浩为记室参军。
现代文：庾亮召用殷浩为记室参军。
English: Yao Liang called Yin Hao to join the army as a recorder.

古文：浩，羡之子也，与豫章太守褚裒、丹杨丞杜乂，皆以识度清远，善谈《老》、《易》，擅名江东，而浩尤为风流所宗。
现代文：殷浩即殷羡的儿子，和豫章太守褚裒、丹阳丞杜都因见识清晰、气度弘远，善于进谈《老子》、《周易》，在江东负有盛名，而殷浩尤其被风流雅士所推重。
English: Yin Hao, the son of Yin Zhen, and Yu Zhang, the son of Ta Shou Zhen and Danyang Zheng, were both famous in the East of the Yangtze River for their clear insight and far-reaching demeanor. They were good at discussing "Lao Zi" and "Zhou Yi," and Yin Hao was especially valued by the courtesans.

古文：裒，略之孙；乂，锡之子也。
现代文：褚裒即褚的孙子，杜即杜锡的儿子。
English: He was the grandson of Tu Youyou and the son of Tu Youyou.

古文：桓彝尝谓裒曰： 季野有皮里《春秋》。 
现代文：桓彝曾经评论褚裒说： 褚季野有皮里《春秋》。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" was once commented on by : 季野有皮里 "春秋."

古文：言其外无臧否而内有褒贬也。
现代文：是说他表面不作评论，但内心却有所褒贬。
English: That is to say, he does not comment on the surface, but he has praise and criticism in his heart.

古文：谢安曰： 裒虽不言，而四时之气亦备矣。 
现代文：谢安说： 褚裒虽然不说话，但气度弘远。 
English: Xie'an said, "Though Hao doesn't speak, he has a far-reaching demeanor.

古文：秋，八月，王济还辽东，诏遣侍御史王齐祭辽东公廆，又遣谒者徐孟策拜慕容皝镇军大将军、平州刺史、大单于、辽东公、持节、都督，承制封拜，一如廆故事。
现代文：秋季，八月，王济返回辽东，成帝下诏派侍御史王齐祭奠辽东公慕容，又派谒者徐孟册封慕容为镇军大将军、平州刺史、大单于、辽东公，持朝廷符节、秉承皇帝旨意封官拜爵，与慕容旧例完全相同。
English: In the autumn, in August, Wang Ji returned to Liaodong. Emperor Cheng sent the attendant Shi Wang Qi to pay tribute to Liaodong Gong Murong, and also sent the envoy Xu Meng to appoint Murong as the general of the town army, the governor of Pingzhou, the governor of Datan and the governor of Liaodong, to hold the court festival, and to uphold the emperor's will to be knighted, which was exactly the same as the old case of Murong.

古文：船下马石津，皆为慕容仁所留。
现代文：舟船行至马石津，都被慕容仁扣留。
English: All of them were detained by Murongren when they traveled by boat to Ma Shijin.

古文：九月，戊寅，卫将军江陵穆公陆晔卒。
现代文：九月，戊寅，卫将军、江陵穆公陆晔去世。
English: In September, Wu Yin, General Wei, and Jiangling Mu Gong and Lu Yao passed away.

古文：成主雄之子车骑将军越屯江阳，奔丧至成都。
现代文：成汉主李雄的儿子、车骑将军李越驻屯江阳，回到成都奔父丧。
English: The son of the lord of the Chenghan Dynasty, Li Xiong, the cavalry general Li Yue was stationed in Tunjiangyang and returned to Chengdu to mourn his father.

古文：以太子班非雄所生，意不服，与其弟安东将军期谋作乱。
现代文：他认为太子李班不是李雄亲生，心中不服，和兄弟、安东将军李期阴谋作乱。
English: He thought that Prince Li Ban was not Li Xiong's biological son, and was not satisfied with his heart, and plotted with his brother, General Anton Li, to make trouble.

古文：班弟玝劝班遣越还江阳，以期为梁州刺史，镇葭萌。
现代文：李班的兄弟李劝李班遣送李越回江阳，让李期出任梁州刺史，镇守葭萌。
English: Li Ban's brother Li advised Li Ban to send Li Yue back to Jiangyang, and let Li Ji serve as the governor of Liangzhou and the town guard of Qimeng.

古文：班以未葬，不忍遣，推心待之，无所疑间，遣玝出屯于涪。
现代文：但李班因为父亲未安葬，不忍心遣返，推心置腹地对待他们，没有任何猜忌和疏远，让李离开成都，驻屯于涪。
English: However, because Li Ban's father had not yet been buried, he could not bear to repatriate them. He treated them sincerely, without any suspicion or alienation, and allowed Li to leave Chengdu and settle in Handan.

古文：冬，十月，癸亥朔，越因班夜哭，弑之于殡宫，并杀班兄领军将军都；矫太后任氏令，罪状班而废之。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸亥朔，李越乘李班夜间哭吊，将他杀死在殡宫，同时杀死李班的兄长、领军将军李都。矫称太后任氏的诏令，罗列李班的罪状，因而废黜其位。
English: In the winter, in October, in the middle of winter, Li Yue took Li Ban crying and hanged him at night, killed him in the funeral hall, and killed Li Ban's brother, the leading general Li Du at the same time. Pretentiously called the Empress Dowager Ren's edict, Li Ban's crimes were listed, and he was dethroned.

古文：初，期母冉氏贱，任氏母养之。
现代文：当初，李期的生母冉氏身份低贱，认任氏为养母，由任氏抚养。
English: At first, Li Ji's birth mother, Ran, had a lowly status. She recognized Ren as her foster mother and was raised by Ren.

古文：期多才艺，有令名。
现代文：李期多才多艺，有好名声。
English: Li Ji is versatile and has a good reputation.

古文：及班死，众欲立越，越奉期而立之。
现代文：李班死后，众人打算立李越为国主，李越推奉李期，立他为国主。
English: After Li Ban's death, everyone planned to make Li Yue the ruler of the country, and Li Yue recommended Li Jian and made him the ruler.

古文：甲子，期即皇帝位。
现代文：甲子，李期即帝位。
English: Ka Zi, Li Zi, that is, the throne.

古文：谥班曰戾太子。
现代文：为李班赐谥号为戾太子。
English: Li Ban gave him the title of crown prince.

古文：以越为相国，封建宁王，加大将军寿大都督，徙封汉王；皆录尚书事。
现代文：李期任命李越为相国，封建宁王，授予大将军李寿大都督，改封汉王，都录尚书事。
English: Li Ji appointed Li Yue as a relative of the country, the feudal Ning Wang, awarded the general Li Shou as the grand governor, and changed the title of Han Wang, all of which are recorded in the records.

古文：以兄霸为中领军、镇南大将军；弟保为镇西大将军、汶山太守；从兄始为征东大将军，代越镇江阳。
现代文：又任兄长李霸为中领军、镇南大将军；兄弟李保任镇西大将军、汶山太守；堂兄李始任征东大将军，代替李越镇守江阳。
English: His elder brother, Li Ba, was appointed as the central leader of the army and the general of Zhennan; his brother, Li Bao, was appointed as the general of Zhenxi and the governor of Wenshan; his cousin, Li Shi, was appointed as the general of Zhengdong and replaced Li Yue as the governor of Jiangyang.

古文：丙寅，葬雄于安都陵，谥曰武皇帝，庙号太宗。
现代文：丙寅，将李雄安葬在安都陵，谥号武皇帝，庙号太宗。
English: Hsin Yin buried Li Xiong peacefully in the Andu Mausoleum. His posthumous name was Emperor Wu, and his temple name was Taizong.

古文：始欲与寿共攻期，寿不敢发。始怒，反谮寿于期，请杀之。
现代文：李始想和李寿共同攻击李期，李寿不敢发难，李始发怒，反而向李期诋谗李寿，请求杀掉他。
English: Li Shi wanted to attack Li Ji together with Li Shou, but Li Shou did not dare to attack Li Ji. Li Shi got angry and instead slandered Li Shou to Li Ji and asked him to kill him.

古文：期欲籍寿以讨李玝，故不许，遣寿将兵向涪。
现代文：李期想依靠李寿征讨李，所以不同意，派李寿率军向涪进发。
English: Li Zhi wanted to rely on Li Shou to recruit Li, so he did not agree and sent Li Shou and his army to advance towards Handan.

古文：寿先遣使告玝以去就利害，开其去路，玝遂来奔。诏以王玝为巴郡太守。
现代文：李寿事先派遣使者向李剖析逃亡与归降之间的利害关系，并让开他离去的道路，李便投奔东晋，朝廷下诏任命他为巴郡太守。
English: In advance, Li Shou sent an envoy to Li to analyze the relationship between the interests of escape and surrender, and to clear the way for him to leave. Li then went to the East Jin, and the imperial court appointed him as the governor of Bashu.

古文：期以寿为梁州刺史，屯涪。
现代文：李期任李寿为梁州刺史，屯驻在涪。
English: Li Shou, who was appointed to Liangzhou for a period of time, settled in Tonglu.

古文：赵主弘自赍玺绶诣魏宫，请禅位于丞相虎。
现代文：后赵国主石弘自己携带印玺到魏宫，请求将君位禅让给丞相石虎。
English: Later, Zhao Guozhong Shi Hong himself carried the seal to the Wei Palace and requested that the imperial throne be given to the chancellor Shi Hu.

古文：虎曰： 帝王大业，天下自当有议，何为自论此邪！ 
现代文：石虎说： 帝王的大业，天下人自会有公议，为什么自己选择这样做呢！ 
English: Shihu said: The emperor's great cause, the world will have public discussion, why do you choose to do so!

古文：弘流涕还宫，谓太后程氏曰： 先帝种真无复遗矣！ 
现代文：石弘流着眼泪回宫，对太后程氏说： 先帝的骨肉真的不会再遗存了！ 
English: With tears streaming down his face, Ishihiro returned to the Imperial Palace and said to Empress Dowager Cheng, "The flesh and bones of the former emperor will truly no longer remain!

古文：于是尚书奏： 魏台请依唐、虞禅让故事。 
现代文：此时尚书奏议说： 魏王请您依照唐尧、虞舜的禅让旧例行事。 
English: This fashion book said: Wei Wang asks you to act according to the Zen of Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan.

古文：虎曰： 弘愚暗，居丧无礼，不可以君万国，便当废之，何禅让也！ 
现代文：石虎说： 石弘愚昧昏暗，服丧无礼，应当将他废黜，谈什么禅让！ 
English: Shihu said, "Shihong is stupid, dim-witted, and disrespectful. He should be dethroned. Let's talk about Zen!"

古文：十一月，虎遣郭殷持节入宫，废弘为海阳王。
现代文：十一月，石虎派郭殷进宫，废黜石弘为海阳王。
English: In November, Shi Hu sent Guo Yin into the palace and deposed Shi Hong as the King of Haiyang.

古文：弘安步就车，容色自若，谓群臣曰： 庸昧不堪纂承大统，夫复何言！ 
现代文：石弘缓步就车，神色从容，对群臣们说： 我庸碌愚昧不堪继承皇帝大统，还有什么可说的。 
English: Shi Hong slowly walked to the car, his face calm, and said to the courtiers: I am too stupid to inherit the emperor, what else can I say.

古文：群臣莫不流涕，宫人恸哭。
现代文：群臣人人流泪，宫女恸哭。
English: All the courtiers were in tears, and the princess was crying.

古文：群臣诣魏台劝进，虎曰： 皇帝者盛德之号，非所敢当，且可称居摄赵天王。 
现代文：群臣到魏宫进劝石虎即位。石虎说： 皇帝是美盛品德的称号，不是我敢承受的，暂且可以称作居摄赵天王。 
English: A group of courtiers went to the Wei Palace to persuade Shihu to ascend the throne. Shihu said: Emperor is a title of beauty and virtue, not something I dare to bear. For the time being, it can be called the residence of Zhao Tianwang.

古文：幽弘及太后程氏、秦王宏、南阳王恢于崇训宫，寻皆杀之。
现代文：石虎将石弘和太后程氏、秦王石宏、南阳王石恢幽禁在崇训宫，不久全数杀害。
English: Shihu imprisoned Shi Hong and Empress Dowager Cheng, Qin King Shi Hong, and Nanyang King Shi Wei in the Chongxun Palace, and soon killed them all.

古文：西羌大都督姚弋仲称疾不驾，虎屡召之，乃至。
现代文：西羌大都督姚弋仲称病不来朝贺，石虎屡次相召，这才前来。
English: West Gansu Governor Yao Jizhong said that he would not come to the morning greeting due to illness. Shihu repeatedly summoned him, but he did not come.

古文：正色谓虎曰： 弋仲常谓大王命世英雄，奈何把臂受托而返夺之邪？ 
现代文：姚弋仲表情端庄严肃地对石虎说： 我经常说大王是闻名于世的英雄，怎么握着手臂受托辅佐遗孤，反而夺人君位呢？ 
English: Yao Yizhong said to Shi Hu with a dignified and serious expression: I often say that the great king is a famous hero in the world. How can I hold his arm and be entrusted to assist the orphans, but take the throne?

古文：虎曰： 吾岂乐此哉！
现代文：石虎说： 我哪里喜欢这样做！
English: Shihu said, "I really like doing this!"

古文：顾海阳年少，恐不能了家事，故代之耳。 
现代文：不过海阳王年少，恐怕不能治理家事，所以代替他罢了。 
English: However, King Haiyang is young and may not be able to manage the household affairs, so it's just a matter of replacing him.

古文：心虽不平，然察其诚实，亦不之罪。
现代文：石虎心中虽然怨怒不平，但看姚弋仲为人诚恳实在，也不加罪于他。
English: Although there was resentment in Shihu's heart, seeing Yao Yizhong as a sincere and honest person did not add to his guilt.

古文：虎以夔安为侍中、太尉、守尚书令，郭殷为司空，韩晞为尚书左仆射，魏郡申钟为侍中，郎闿为光禄大夫，王波为中书令。
现代文：石虎任夔安为侍中、太尉、执掌尚书令，任郭殷为司空，韩为尚书左仆射，魏郡人申钟任侍中，郎为光禄大夫，王波任中书令。
English: Shi Hu appointed Yan'an as a chamberlain, captain, and secretary, Guo Yin as a secretary, Han as a secretary's left-hand man, Wei County man Shen Zhong as a chamberlain, Lang as a doctor of Guanglu, and Wang Bo as a secretary.

古文：文武封拜各有差。
现代文：其余文武官员封爵拜官各有差等。
English: The rest of the civil and military officials have different degrees of knighthood.

古文：虎行如信都，复还襄国。
现代文：石虎出行到信都，又返回襄国。
English: Shihu traveled to Xindu and returned to Xiangguo.

古文：慕容皝讨辽东，甲申，至襄平。
现代文：慕容讨伐辽东，甲申，到达襄平。
English: Murong battled Liaodong, Jiaoshen, and reached Yangping.

古文：辽东人王岌密信请降。
现代文：辽东人王岌秘密派使者请降。
English: The king of the Liaodong people secretly sent an envoy to ask for surrender.

古文：师进，入城，翟楷、庞鉴单骑走，居就、新昌等县皆降。
现代文：军队进发，进入辽东城，翟楷、庞鉴单骑逃跑，居就、新昌等县全都归降。
English: The army advanced and entered Liaodongcheng, Shukai and Pangjian fled on horseback, and Jiushu, Xinchang and other counties all surrendered.

古文：皝欲悉坑辽东民，高诩谏曰： 辽东之叛，实非本图，直畏仁凶威，不得不从。
现代文：慕容想尽数坑杀辽东居民，高诩劝谏说： 辽东的背叛，其实不是他们的本意，只不过畏惧慕容仁的凶戾横威，不得不听从。
English: Murong wanted to kill as many residents of Liaodong as possible, and Gao Yao advised him: The betrayal of Liaodong was actually not their intention, but they were afraid of Murongren's ferocious arrogance and had to obey.

古文：今元恶犹存，始克此城，遽加夷灭，则未下之城，无归善之路矣。 
现代文：如今首恶还活着，刚刚攻克此城，便急于诛灭民众，那么未被攻克的城池，就没有归顺从良的道路了。 
English: Today, the head of evil is still alive. Having just conquered the city, he is eager to exterminate the people. If the city is not conquered, there is no way to submit to good.

古文：皝乃止。
现代文：慕容这才罢休。
English: Only then did Murong give up.

古文：分徙辽东大姓于棘城。以杜群为辽东相，安辑遗民。
现代文：于是分批迁徙辽东的豪门大姓到棘城，任命杜群为辽东相，安抚余留的民众。
English: As a result, the grand families of Liaodong migrated in batches to Thorn Town, and Du Qun was appointed Liaodong Minister to appease the remaining people.

古文：十二月，赵徐州从事兰陵硃纵斩刺史郭祥，以彭城来降，赵将王朗攻之，纵奔淮南。
现代文：十二月，后赵徐州从事兰陵人朱纵杀刺史郭祥，献彭城降晋。后赵将领王朗进攻朱纵，朱纵逃奔淮南。
English: In December, the late Zhao Xuzhou engaged in the Lanling people of Zhu Gang to assassinate Shi Guo Xiang, and offered Pengcheng to Jin. The late Zhao general Wang Lang attacked Zhu Gang, and Zhu Gang fled to Huainan.

古文：慕容仁遣兵袭新昌，督护新兴王寓击走之，遂徙新昌入襄平。
现代文：慕容仁派兵攻击新昌，督护、新兴人王将他击退，于是将新昌的士民迁徙到襄平。
English: Murongren sent troops to attack Xinchang, and the overseer and the new people's king repulsed him, and then moved the people of Xinchang to Xiangping.

古文：显宗成皇帝中之上咸康元年
现代文：晋成帝咸康元年
English: Promoted to emperor in the first year of the Hamkang era

古文：春，正月，庚午朔，帝加元服。大赦，改元。
现代文：春季，正月，庚午朔，成帝加冠，大赦天下，改年号咸康。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, Geng Wu Shuo, the emperor crowned, the world amnestied, and the year changed to Xian Kang.

古文：成、赵皆大赦，成改元玉恒，赵改元建武。
现代文：成汉、后赵都在境内实行大赦，成汉改年号为玉恒，后赵改年号为建武。
English: Both Chenghan and Zhao implemented amnesty in the territory. Chenghan changed his name to Yuheng, and Zhao changed his name to Jianwu.

古文：成主期立皇后阎氏，以卫将军尹奉为右丞相，骠骑将军、尚书令王瑰为司徒。
现代文：成汉国主李期册立皇后阎氏，任卫将军尹奉为右丞相，任命骠骑将军、尚书令王为司徒。
English: Li Ji, the ruler of the Han Dynasty, appointed the Empress Yan, appointed the General of the Guards Yin Bong as the Minister of the Right, and appointed the General of the Horse Cavalry and the King of the Order of the Rising Sun as the tutors.

古文：赵王虎命太子邃省可尚书奏事，唯祀郊庙、选牧守、征伐、刑杀乃亲之。
现代文：后赵王石虎令太子石邃省视、决断尚书奏事，只有祭祀郊庙、选任地方官员、征伐、刑杀方面的奏事才亲自审议。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu ordered the Prince of Shijiazhuang Province to consider and decide on the matter of the report, and only the report on the worship of the suburb temple, the election of local officials, the conquest, and the torture and killing were personally considered.

古文：虎好治宫室，鹳雀台崩，杀典匠少府任汪；复使修之，倍于其旧。
现代文：石虎爱营建宫室，鹳雀台崩圮，便杀死典匠少府任汪，又让人重修，规模比原先扩大一倍。
English: Shihu loved to build palace rooms, and when the palace gate collapsed, he killed the master carpenter, Shofu Ren Wang, and had it rebuilt, doubling the size of the original.

古文：邃保母刘芝封宜城君，关预朝权，受纳贿赂，求仕进者多出其门。
现代文：封石邃的保姆刘芝为宜城君，干预朝政，接受贿赂，谋求任官，晋升的人大多出入其门。
English: Liu Zhi, the nanny of Guo Shisheng, was Yicheng Jun. She interfered in court politics, accepted bribes, and sought to be appointed as an official. Most of the people who were promoted came and went through her door.

古文：慕容皝置左、右司马，以司马韩矫、军祭酒封弈为之。
现代文：慕容设置左、右司马，分别让司马韩矫、军祭酒封奕出任。
English: Murong set up the left and right Sima, and let the Sima Han Jiao and the military festival Shifeng Yi respectively.

古文：司徒导以赢疾，不堪朝会，三月，乙酉，帝幸其府，与群臣宴于内室，拜导并拜其妻曹氏。
现代文：司徒王导因为身患手足麻木之病，不能参与朝会。三月，乙酉，成帝驾临他的宅府，和群臣在内府宴饮，向王导及妻子曹氏行拜礼。
English: In March, Emperor Cheng visited Wang Du and his wife, Cao Cao, at their residence, and had a banquet with them. Wang Du and his wife also attended the banquet.

古文：侍中孔坦密表切谏，以为帝初加元服，动宜顾礼，帝从之。
现代文：侍中孔坦私下写表文恳切劝谏，认为元帝刚刚加冠，举动应当遵从礼仪，成帝应从。
English: The chamberlain, Kong Tan, privately wrote a letter to earnestly advise the emperor, saying that the former emperor had just been crowned, the action should follow the etiquette, and the emperor should follow.

古文：坦又以帝委政于导，从容言曰： 陛下春秋已长，圣敬日跻，宜博纳朝臣，谘诹善道。 
现代文：孔坦又因为成帝将朝政委付王导，缓缓进言说： 陛下年龄渐大，聪明、端肃每日俱进，应当广泛听取群臣的意见，征询正确美好的办法。 
English: Because Emperor Chengdu had appointed the Political Commissar to guide the king, Kong Tan said slowly, "Your Majesty is getting older, wiser, and more and more serious every day. You should listen to the opinions of your courtiers and seek the right and better way.

古文：导闻而恶之，出坦为廷尉。
现代文：王导听说后憎恶孔坦，调出孔坦任廷尉。
English: After hearing about it, Wang Du detested Kong Tan and transferred Kong Tan to be a court lieutenant.

古文：坦不得意，以疾去职。
现代文：孔坦不得志，称病辞职。
English: Disheartened, Kong Tan resigned, saying he was ill.

古文：丹杨尹桓景，为人谄巧，导亲爱之。
现代文：丹阳尹桓景，为人谄谀巧佞，王导亲近宠爱他。
English: Danyang Yin Huanjing is a talented person. Wang Du is very close to and fond of him.

古文：会荧惑守南斗经旬，导谓领军将军陶回曰： 斗，扬州之分，吾当逊位以厌天谴。 
现代文：适逢火星在南斗六星位滞留十余天，王导对领军将军陶回说： 南斗是扬州的分野，我将退位来安定上天的谴责。 
English: When Mars stayed in the position of the six stars of the Southern Cross for more than ten days, Wang Du replied to the leading general Tao: the Southern Cross is the field of Yangzhou, I will abdicate to stabilize the condemnation of heaven.

古文：回曰： 公以明德作辅，而与桓景造膝，使荧惑何以退舍！ 
现代文：陶回说： 您凭仗显明的道德出任辅佐，却与桓景抵膝亲近，怎么能使火星退归正位！ 
English: Tao replied, "You are an assistant by virtue of your obvious morality, but you are so close to Kuan Jing, how can you make Mars return to its rightful place!"

古文：导深愧之。
现代文：王导对此深感惭愧。
English: Wang Du was deeply ashamed of this.

古文：导辟太原王濛为掾，王述为中兵属。
现代文：王导征召太原人王为僚属，王述为中兵属。
English: Wang Du called up the Taiyuan people to be the subordinates of Wang, and Wang Su was the subordinate of Zhonghe.

古文：述，昶之曾孙也。
现代文：王述即王昶的曾孙。
English: Wang Su is the great-grandson of Wang Xi.

古文：濛不修小廉，而以清约见称，与沛国刘惔齐名，友善。
现代文：王不修小节，而以清静简约著称。与沛国刘齐名，关系友善。
English: Wang is known for his quiet simplicity, and he is on a par with Liu Peiguo, with whom he has a friendly relationship.

古文：惔常称濛性至通而自然有节。
现代文：刘经常说王性情至为通达，自然而有节操。
English: Liu often said that Wang's disposition is very open-minded, and he is naturally disciplined.

古文：濛曰： 刘君知我，胜我自知。 
现代文：王说： 刘君对我的了解，胜过我对自己的认识。 
English: Wang said: Liu Jun's understanding of me is better than my understanding of myself.

古文：当时称风流者，以惔、濛为首。
现代文：当时被称为风流雅士的，以刘、王为首。
English: At that time, Liu and Wang were at the head of what was known as the courtesans.

古文：述性沈静，每坐客辩论蜂起，而述处之恬如也。
现代文：王述性格沉称安静，每当坐客们争相辩驳论理，王述却安然处之。
English: Wang Shu's personality is calm and quiet. Whenever the guests argue, Wang Shu is calm.

古文：年三十，尚未知名，人谓之痴。
现代文：王述三十岁，尚未出名，大家说他痴呆。
English: Wang Shu is thirty years old, not yet famous, and everyone says he is demented.

古文：导以门地辟之。
现代文：王导因为他的门第而征召他。
English: Wang Du conscripted him because of his lineage.

古文：既见，唯问在东米价，述张目不答。
现代文：见面以后，王导只问他在东方时米价，王述睁大眼睛不回答。
English: After the meeting, Wang Shu only asked him about the price of rice in the East, but Wang Shu did not answer with his eyes wide open.

古文：导曰： 王掾不痴，人何言痴也！ 
现代文：王导说： 王述并不痴呆，人们为何说他痴呆！ 
English: Wang Shu said: Wang Shu is not demented, why do people say he is demented!

古文：尝见导每发言，一坐莫不赞美，述正色曰： 人非尧、舜，何得每事尽善！ 
现代文：王述曾经见到只要王导一说话，满座人无不赞美，于是表情严肃地说： 人不是尧、舜，哪能每件事都是对的！ 
English: Wang Susu once saw that as long as Wang Du spoke, a full house of people would praise him, so he said with a serious expression: People are not deaf and dumb, how can everything be right!

古文：导改容谢之。
现代文：王导改以严肃的脸色向他道谢。
English: Wang Duoke thanked him with a serious face.

古文：赵王虎南游，临江而还。
现代文：后赵王石虎去南方游巡，到达长江才返回。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu went on a tour to the south, and only returned when he reached the Yangtze River.

古文：有游骑十馀至历阳，历阳太守袁耽表上之，不言骑多少。
现代文：手下的游动骑兵十多人到达历阳，历阳太守袁耽上表奏上，没说骑兵的数量。
English: More than ten of his roving cavalry arrived in Liyang. Yuan, the governor of Liyang, did not mention the number of cavalry.

古文：朝廷震惧，司徒导请出讨之。
现代文：朝廷震动恐惧，司徒王导请求出兵征讨。
English: The imperial court was shaken with fear, and King Stutts asked for conscription.

古文：夏，四月，加导大司马、假黄钺、都督征讨诸军事。
现代文：夏季，四月，授予王导大司马、假黄钺、都督征讨诸军事。
English: In the summer, in April, Wang Du was awarded the titles of Grand Master, False Yellow Kite, and Military Governor.

古文：癸丑，帝观兵广莫门，分命诸将救历阳及戍慈湖、牛渚、芜湖；司空郗鉴使广陵相陈光将兵入卫京师。
现代文：癸丑，成帝到广莫门检阅军队，分别命令众将领救援历阳，以及戍守慈湖、牛渚、芜湖。司空郗鉴让广陵相陈光领兵进入京城护卫。
English: Ugly, Emperor Cheng went to Guangmeng Gate to review the army, and ordered the generals to rescue Liyang, as well as to defend Cihu, Niuzhu, and Lugu Lake. Siku Yujian let Guangling Xiang Chen Guang lead the soldiers into the Beijing escort.

古文：俄闻赵骑至少，又已去，戊午，解严，王导解大司马。袁耽坐轻妄免官。
现代文：不久听说赵国骑兵数量极少，又已经离去，戊午，解除军队的戒备状态，王导卸除大司马职，袁耽坐罪轻妄不察被免官。
English: Soon I heard that the number of Zhao cavalry was very small, and that they had already left. At noon, the army's alert status was lifted, Wang Du removed from the post of chief steward, and Yuan was removed from his post for the crime of sitting idly by.

古文：赵征虏将军石遇攻桓宣于襄阳，不克。
现代文：后赵征虏将军石遇进攻驻守襄阳的桓宣，不能取胜。
English: After the Zhao conquest, General Shi encountered an attack from Kuan Xuan, who was stationed in Xiangyang, and was unable to win.

古文：大旱，会稽、馀姚米斗五百。
现代文：晋发生严重旱灾，会稽郡的余姚每斗米价格五百钱。
English: A severe drought occurred in Jin, and the price of rice in Yuyao, Hefei County, was as high as 500 yuan per barrel.

古文：秋，七月，慕容皝立子俊为世子。
现代文：秋季七月，慕容立儿子慕容为世子。
English: In the autumn of July, Murong made his son Murong the heir.

古文：九月，赵王虎迁都于鄴，大赦。
现代文：九月，赵王石虎迁都于邺，实行大赦。
English: In September, Zhao Wang Shihu moved the capital to Handan, and implemented an amnesty.

古文：初，赵主勒以天竺僧佛图澄豫言成败，数有验，敬事之。
现代文：当初，后赵国主石勒因为天竺僧人佛图澄预先陈言事情的成败，多次得到验证，恭敬地侍奉他。
English: At first, the late Zhao Guozhong Shi Le, because of the success or failure of the celestial monk Buddha Tucheng's advance statement of the matter, was verified many times and served him respectfully.

古文：及虎即位，奉之尤谨，衣以绫锦，乘以雕辇。
现代文：石虎即位后，侍奉他更为恭谨，让他穿绫锦，乘雕辇。
English: After Shihu ascended to the throne, they served him more respectfully, letting him wear brocade and ride a dragonfly.

古文：朝会之日，太子、诸公扶翼上殿，主者唱 大和尚 ，众坐皆起。
现代文：到朝会的日子，太子、各位公卿扶持上殿，掌管朝仪的人唱名说： 大和尚 ，满座都起身。
English: On the day of the Imperial Court Ceremonies, the Crown Prince and all the nobles marched up to the hall, and the person in charge of the Imperial Court Ceremonies chanted the name, "Great Monk," and the entire audience rose to their feet.

古文：使司空李农旦夕问起居，太子、诸公五日一朝。
现代文：石虎让司空李农早晚问候佛图澄的起居，太子、公卿每五天朝见他一次。
English: Shihu asked Siku Li Nong to greet Buddha Tucheng's residence in the morning and evening, and the prince and court noble met him once every five days in the morning.

古文：国人化之，率多事佛。澄之所在，无敢向其方面涕唾者。
现代文：国内人受此影响，大多崇尚佛教，佛图澄所在之处，无人敢朝着那个方面吐口水。
English: Affected by this, the majority of people in China advocate Buddhism, and no one dares to spit in the direction of the place where the Buddha statue is located.

古文：争造寺庙，削发出家。
现代文：大家争着建造寺庙，削发出家。
English: People are competing to build temples and demolish old houses.

古文：虎以其真伪杂糅，或避赋役为奸宄，乃下诏问中书曰： 佛，国家所奉。里闾小人无爵秩者，应事佛不？ 
现代文：石虎因为拜佛出家的人真伪杂混，有的借此躲避赋税和徭役，干不法的勾当，于是下诏书问中书说： 佛教是国家所尊奉的，里闾平民百姓没有官爵的人，是否应当事佛？ 
English: Shihu, because the people who worship Buddha and go into the priesthood are a mixture of the true and the false, and some take advantage of this to evade taxes and taxes, and do illegal activities, so he asked in the next imperial edict: Buddhism is revered by the state, but should the common people who do not have official titles care about Buddhism?

古文：著作郎王度等议曰： 王者祭祀，典礼具存。
现代文：著作郎王度等人评议说： 君王的祭祀，有典制礼仪可供遵循。
English: The book "Lang Wangdu" and others commented: "For the king's sacrifice, there is a ceremonial etiquette to follow.

古文：佛，外国之神，非天子诸华所应祠奉。
现代文：佛是外国的神灵，不是天子和各华夏民族所应祠奉的。
English: Buddha is a foreign deity, not the son of heaven and the deity of every Chinese nation.

古文：汉氏初传其道，唯听西域人立寺都邑以奉之，汉人皆不得出家；魏世亦然。
现代文：汉朝佛教开始传入，当时只是允许西域人在都邑建立寺庙来祠奉，汉人都不让出家，魏朝也是这样。
English: Buddhism began to be introduced during the Han Dynasty. At that time, people from the Western Regions were only allowed to build temples in capital cities to serve as shrines. Han people were not allowed to become monks, and this was also the case during the Wei Dynasty.

古文：今宜禁公卿以下毋得诣寺烧香、礼拜；其赵人为沙门者，皆返初服。 
现代文：现在应当禁止公卿以下的人等，不让他们到寺庙烧香、拜佛；凡赵国人当和尚的，都恢复原先的服饰。 
English: Now it is time to ban people below the rank of nobility from going to temples to burn incense and worship Buddha. All monks in Zhao should return to their original clothing.

古文：虎诏曰： 朕生自边鄙，忝君诸夏，至于飨祀，应从本俗。
现代文：石虎下诏说： 朕出生在边鄙之地，愧为华夏民族的君上，至于祭祀，应当遵从本来的习俗。
English: Shihu issued an edict saying, "I was born in a remote place, and I am ashamed to be a prince of the Chinese nation. As for the sacrificial rites, they should follow the original customs.

古文：其夷、赵百姓乐事佛者，特听之。 
现代文：凡夷族、赵国百姓乐意尊崇佛教的，特别听任其便。 
English: If the barbarians and the people of Zhao are willing to venerate Buddhism, they should be allowed to do so.

古文：赵章武王斌帅精骑二万并秦、雍二州兵以讨薄句大，平之。
现代文：后赵章武王石斌率精锐骑兵二万人，连同秦州、雍州的士兵讨伐薄句大，平定了他们。
English: Later, Zhao Zhangwu Wang Shibin led an elite cavalry of 20,000 men, together with soldiers from Qin and Yongzhou, to fight against the Hokkuda and pacify them.

古文：成太子班之舅罗演，与汉王相天水上官澹谋杀成主期，立班子。
现代文：成汉太子李班的舅父罗演和汉王相、天水人上官澹图谋杀死成汉国主李期，立李班的儿子为王。
English: Luo Yuan, the uncle of Li Ban, the prince of Chenghan, and Wang Xuan and Tianshuijin, the high-ranking official of Tianshui, murdered Li Ji, the ruler of Chenghan, and made Li Ban's son the king.

古文：事觉，期杀演、澹及班母罗氏。
现代文：事情败露，李期杀死罗演、上官澹及李班生母罗氏。
English: The affair was exposed, and Li killed Luo Yuan, Shangguan Zou and Li Bansheng's mother Luo Shi.

古文：期自以得志，轻诸旧臣，信任尚书令景骞、尚书姚华、田褒、中常侍许涪等，刑赏大政，皆决于数人，希复关公卿。
现代文：李期自以为志得意满，轻视各位旧臣，听信重用尚书书令景骞、尚书姚华、田褒、中常侍许涪等人，刑罚赏赐之类的重大政事，都由这几个人决断，很少再向公卿咨询。
English: Li Zi thought that he was satisfied with his ambition, despised all the old ministers, and relied heavily on Shang Shuxu Lingjing, Shang Shuxu Yao Hua, Tian Bo, and Zhong Changzhi Xu Xi. Major political affairs such as punishment and reward were decided by these few people, and rarely consulted the nobles.

古文：褒无它才，尝劝成主雄立期为太子，故有宠。
现代文：田褒没有别的才能，曾经劝说成汉主李雄册立李期为太子，所以得宠。
English: Tian Bo had no other talent. He had once persuaded the lord of the Han Dynasty, Li Xiongcang, to make Li Ji the crown prince, so he was favored.

古文：由是纪纲隳紊，雄业始衰。
现代文：由此朝廷的法度毁圮紊乱，李雄创下的基业开始衰败。
English: As a result, the legal system of the imperial court was in disarray, and the foundation created by Li Xiong began to decay.

古文：冬，十月，乙未朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月，乙未朔，出现日食。
English: In winter, in October, at dusk, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：慕容仁遣王齐等南还。
现代文：慕容仁遣送王齐等人归返南方。
English: Murongren sent Wang Qi and others back to the south.

古文：齐等自海道趣棘城，齐遇风不至。
现代文：王齐等人从海路开赴棘城，王齐乘坐的船遇上海风，未能到达。
English: Wang Qi and others went to Thorn Town by sea. Wang Qi's boat encountered the sea breeze and failed to arrive.

古文：十二月，徐孟等至棘城，慕容皝始受朝命。
现代文：十二月，徐孟等人到达棘城，慕容开始接受朝廷的任命。
English: In December, Xu Meng and others arrived in Thorn Town, and Murong began to accept appointments from the imperial court.

古文：段氏、宇文氏各遣使诣慕容仁，馆于平郭城外。
现代文：段氏、宇文氏各自派遣使者拜见慕容仁，下榻于平郭城外。
English: The Tuan and Uwen clans each sent emissaries to visit Murongren, and they stayed outside Pingguo City.

古文：皝帐下督张英将百馀骑间道潜行掩击之，斩宇文氏使十馀人，生擒段氏使以归。
现代文：慕容的帐下督张英领着一百多骑兵由小道偷偷前往突然袭击他们，斩杀宇文氏的使节十多人，活捉段氏使者返回。
English: Murong's subordinate governor Zhang Ying led more than one hundred cavalrymen to sneak from the trail to suddenly attack them, killing more than ten envoys of the Uwen clan, and capturing alive the envoys of the Duan clan.

古文：是岁，明帝母建安君荀氏卒。
现代文：这年，明帝母亲建安君荀氏死。
English: In the same year, Emperor Ming's mother Jian'an Jun'ao died.

古文：荀氏在禁中，尊重同于太后；诏赠豫章郡君。
现代文：荀氏在宫禁中，受到的尊重如同太后；成帝下诏赐赠名号为豫章郡君。
English: During his confinement to the palace, the Shun clan was treated with the same respect as the empress dowager; Emperor Cheng decreed that he would be given the title of Yuzhang County Prince.

古文：代王翳槐以贺兰蔼头不恭，将召而戮之，诸部皆叛。
现代文：代王拓跋翳槐因为贺兰蔼头对己不恭，准备召他前来，加以杀害，各部落全都反叛。
English: King Tuoba, because of Horan's self-righteousness, prepared to summon him to come and kill him, and all the tribes rebelled.

古文：代王纥那自宇文部入，诸部复奉之。
现代文：代王拓跋纥那由宇文部入境，各部落又重新尊奉他为王。
English: The new king, Tuoba Shena, was brought into the country by the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports and Tourism, and the tribes once again honored him as king.

古文：翳槐奔鄴，赵人厚遇之。
现代文：拓跋翳槐逃奔到邺，后赵人隆礼相待。
English: Tuobao fled to Handan, after which the Zhao people treated each other with great courtesy.

古文：初，张轨及二子寔、茂，虽保据河右，而军旅之事无岁无之。
现代文：当初，张轨及两个儿子张、张茂虽然据守河右，但每年都有战事。
English: At first, Zhang Zhaoyi and his two sons, Zhang and Zhang Mao, held the right side of the river, but there were battles every year.

古文：及张骏嗣位，境内渐平。
现代文：至张骏继位，境内渐渐平定。
English: By the time of Zhang Xuan's succession, the territory was gradually pacified.

古文：骏勤修庶政，总御文武，咸得其用，民富兵强，远近称之，以为贤君。
现代文：张骏辛勤治理各种政事，总领文武官员，让他们各得其用，民富兵强，远近之人都称他为贤君。
English: Zhang Ye diligently managed all kinds of political affairs. He was the commander-in-chief of the civil and military officials, so that they could be used for their own purposes. The people were rich and the army was strong. People near and far called him a wise man.

古文：骏遣将杨宣伐龟兹、鄯善，于是西域诸国焉耆、于阗之属，皆诣姑臧朝贡。
现代文：张骏派部将杨宣攻伐龟兹、鄯善，于是西域各国如焉耆，于之类，都赴姑臧朝贡。
English: Zhang Di sent Yang Xuan to attack Zhezi and Shanshan, so all the countries in the western region, such as Yan Xun and others, went to Gushan to pay tribute.

古文：骏于姑臧南作五殿，官属皆称臣。
现代文：张骏在姑臧城南建造五座宫殿，官属都自称为臣。
English: Zhang Ye built five palaces in the south of Guzheng, and all officials called themselves "vassals."

古文：骏有兼秦、雍之志，遣参军麹护上疏，以为： 勒、雄既死，虎、期继逆，兆庶离主，渐冉经世；先老消落，后生不识，慕恋之心，日远日忘。
现代文：张骏有兼并秦州、雍州的志向，派参军麴护向东晋上疏，认为： 石勒、李雄死后，石虎、李期继承叛逆，万民离开了君主，逐渐经过了一代人。先生老辈衰老死亡，后生小辈不知旧事，仰慕思恋之心，一天天疏远、一天天淡忘。
English: Zhang Ye had the ambition to annex Qinzhou and Yongzhou, and sent soldiers to the east to protect Shangzhu. He believed that: after the death of Shi Le and Li Xiong, Shi Hu and Li Ji inherited the rebellion, the people left the monarch, and gradually a generation passed. The old man died of old age, and the younger generation did not know the old things, admired the heart of love, and were alienated and forgotten day by day.

古文：乞敕司空鉴、征西亮等泛舟江、沔，首尾齐举。 
现代文：乞请敕令司空郗鉴、征西将军庾亮等泛舟于长江、沔水，与我互相呼应，同时发动。 
English: I would like to ask the commander of the Yangtze River Fleet and the general of the Western Expedition to launch a raft on the Yangtze River and Surabaya, and I would like you to respond to each other and launch at the same time.

古文：显宗成皇帝中之上咸康二年
现代文：咸康二年春季，正月，辛巳，奎宿、娄宿一带出现慧星。
English: In the spring of the second year of Xiankang, in the first month of the year, a comet appeared in the vicinity of Xinshi, Kuijuku, and Lushuku.

古文：春，正月，辛巳，彗星见于奎、娄。慕容皝将讨慕容仁，司马高诩曰： 仁叛弃君亲，民神怒；前此海未尝冻，自仁反以来，连年冻者三矣。
现代文：慕容准备讨伐慕容仁，司马高诩说： 慕容仁背叛和抛弃君主亲人，神灵和士民共同恨怒，此前海水从未冻冰，自从慕容仁反叛以来，连续结冻已经三年了。
English: Murongren is preparing to fight Murongren, Sima Gaoqi said: Murongren betrayed and abandoned the monarch's relatives, the gods and the people are angry together. Previously, the sea water had never frozen. Since Murongren's rebellion, it has been frozen for three consecutive years.

古文：且仁专备陆道，天其或者欲使吾乘海冰以袭之也。 
现代文：况且慕容仁专门防备陆路，上天大概是想让我们乘海结冰时去袭击他吧。 
English: In addition, Murongren is specially prepared for the land route. Heaven probably wants us to attack him when the sea freezes.

古文：皝从之。
现代文：慕容听从了他的意见。
English: Murong followed his advice.

古文：群僚皆言涉冰危事，不若从陆道。
现代文：众僚佐都说由冰上过海是危险的事，不如改走陆路。
English: Colleagues and advisors said that it was dangerous to cross the sea on the ice, and it would be better to take the land route.

古文：皝曰： 吾计已决，敢沮者斩！ 
现代文：慕容说： 我计议已定，敢阻拦的人斩首！ 
English: Murong said: My plan has been decided, and those who dare to obstruct it will be beheaded!

古文：壬午，皝帅其弟军师将军评等自昌黎东，践冰而进，凡三百馀里。
现代文：壬年，慕容率领其弟、军师将军慕容评等从昌黎东行踏冰前进，共三百多里。
English: In the following year, Murong led his younger brother, General Murong Yun, and others from Changli East to pedal on the ice, a total of more than three hundred miles.

古文：至历林口，舍辎重，轻兵趣平郭。
现代文：到历林口，舍弃辎重，轻兵赶赴平郭。
English: When they reached Lilinkou, they abandoned their heavy baggage and rushed to Pinggu.

古文：去城七里，候骑以告仁，仁狼狈出战。
现代文：离城七里，侦察骑兵告知慕容仁，慕容仁勉强迎战。
English: Seven miles away from the city, the reconnaissance cavalry informed Murongren that Murongren was reluctant to fight.

古文：张英之俘二使也，仁恨不穷追；及皝至，仁以为皝复遣偏师轻出寇抄，不知皝自来，谓左右曰： 今兹当不使其匹马得返矣！ 
现代文：张英掳获段氏、宇文氏使者的时候，慕容仁怨恨自己没有穷追不舍；等到慕容前来时，慕容仁以为慕容又派遣一小部分军队轻装出发侵扰劫掠，不知道慕容亲自前来，对左右侍从说： 这回应当让他们连一匹马都回不去！ 
English: When Zhang Ying captured the emissaries of the Duan and Uwen clans, Murong Ren resented that he did not pursue them relentlessly. When Murong came, Murong Ren thought that Murong had sent a small group of lightly armed troops to invade and plunder. He did not know that Murong had come in person and said to his attendants: This time, they should not let even one horse go back!

古文：乙未，仁悉众陈于城之西北。慕容军帅所部降于皝，仁众沮动；皝从而纵击，大破之。
现代文：乙未，慕容仁倾其士众在城西北结阵，慕容军率其所部归降慕容，慕容仁的兵众气馁骚动，慕容乘机纵兵攻袭，重创敌军。
English: Soon after, Murong Ren led his soldiers to form a line in the northwest of the city. Murong Jun's army and his subordinates surrendered to Murong. Murong Ren's soldiers were discouraged and agitated, and Murong took the opportunity to attack the enemy with his longitudinal troops, inflicting heavy losses on the enemy.

古文：仁走，其帐下皆叛，遂擒之。皝先为斩其帐下之叛者，然后赐仁死。
现代文：慕容仁逃跑，其军中吏众全部反叛，于是被擒获，慕容先为他斩杀了军中反叛的人，然后赐慕容仁死。
English: Murongren ran away, and all the officials in his army rebelled, so he was captured. Murong first killed the rebels in the army for him, and then gave Murongren death.

古文：丁衡、游毅、孙机等，皆仁所信用也，皝执而斩之；王冰自杀。
现代文：丁衡、游毅、孙机等人，都是慕容仁所信任重用的，被慕容执获斩首，王冰自杀。
English: Ding Heng, You Yi, Sun Ji and others were all trusted by Murong Ren. They were beheaded by Murong, and Wang Bing committed suicide.

古文：慕容幼、慕容稚、佟寿、郭充、翟楷、庞鉴皆东走，幼中道而还；皝兵追及楷、鉴，斩之；寿、充奔高丽。
现代文：慕容幼、慕容稚、佟寿、郭充、翟楷、庞鉴等人都向东逃亡，慕容幼中途返回。慕容的军队追上翟楷、庞鉴，将其斩首。佟寿、郭充逃奔高丽。
English: Murong Ju, Murong Chak, Gong Su, Guo Chong, Gong Kai and Pang Can all fled to the east, with Murong Ju returning halfway. Murong's army caught up with Gong Kai and Pang Can and beheaded them. Gong Su and Guo Chong fled to Goryeo.

古文：自馀吏民为仁所诖误者，皝皆赦之。
现代文：其余被慕容仁贻误连累的吏民，慕容都予以赦免。
English: The rest of the officials and citizens who were mistakenly implicated by Murong Renzhao were pardoned by Murong.

古文：封高诩为汝阳侯。
现代文：封高诩为汝阳侯。
English: He was given the title of Gaozhen and became the Prince of Ruyang.

古文：二月，尚书仆射王彬卒。
现代文：二月，尚书仆射王彬去世。
English: In February, Shang Shufu's servant Sha Wangbin passed away.

古文：辛亥，帝临轩，遣使备六礼逆故当阳侯杜乂女陵阳为皇后，大赦；群臣毕贺。
现代文：辛亥，成帝驾临殿前，派使者按六礼的仪式迎接原当阳侯杜之女杜陵阳为皇后，大赦天下，群臣都来致贺。
English: In Xinhai, before Emperor Chengdu arrived at the palace, he sent an envoy to welcome Du Linyang, the daughter of the former Dangyang Hou Du, as the empress according to the six-ceremony ceremony, the world was amnestied, and all the ministers came to congratulate.

古文：夏，六月，段辽遣中军将军李咏袭慕容皝。咏趣武兴，都尉张萌击擒之。
现代文：夏季，六月，段辽派将军李咏攻袭慕容。李咏赴武兴，被都尉张萌击败擒获。
English: In the summer, in June, Duan Liao sent General Li Qian to attack Murong. Li Qian went to Wuxing and was defeated and captured by Captain Zhang Meng.

古文：辽别遣段兰将步骑数万屯柳城西回水，宇文逸豆归攻安晋以为兰声援。
现代文：段辽另外派遣段兰率步、骑兵数万人驻屯在柳城以西的回水，宇文逸豆归进攻安晋，以此与段兰互为援助。
English: In addition, Duan Liao dispatched Duan Lan to lead tens of thousands of cavalry stationed in the backwaters west of Liucheng, while Uwen Yizu attacked Anjin, in mutual aid with Duan Lan.

古文：皝帅步骑五万向柳城，兰不战而遁。
现代文：慕容率步、骑兵五万人向柳城进发，段兰不战而逃。
English: With Murong leading the way and fifty thousand cavalrymen marching towards Liucheng, Duan Lan fled without a fight.

古文：皝引兵北趣安晋，逸豆归弃辎重走；皝遣司马封弈帅轻骑追击，大破之。
现代文：慕容领兵向北赶赴安晋，宇文逸豆归丢弃辎重逃跑。慕容派司马封奕率轻骑追袭，重创宇文逸豆归所部。
English: Murong led his troops north to Anjin, and Uwen Yatzu abandoned his heavy baggage and fled. Murong sent Sima Fengyi to chase after him on a light horse, causing heavy damage to Uwen Yatzu.

古文：皝谓诸将曰： 二虏耻无功，必将复至，宜于柳城左右设伏以待之。 
现代文：慕容对众将领说： 这两个敌虏耻于战而无功，必定还会再来，应当在柳城附近设下埋伏等待他们。 
English: Murong said to the generals, "These two enemies are ashamed of their ineffectual war and will surely come again. We should set up an ambush near Liucheng to wait for them."

古文：乃遣封弈帅骑数千伏于马兜山。
现代文：于是派封奕率骑兵千人埋伏在马兜山。
English: As a result, he sent a thousand cavalrymen to lie in ambush on Mt.

古文：三月，段辽果将数千骑来寇抄。弈纵击，大破之，斩其将荣伯保。
现代文：三月，段辽果然带领几千骑兵前来侵扰劫掠，封奕出动骑兵攻击，大败敌军，段辽部将荣伯保被杀。
English: In March, Duan Liao led several thousand cavalrymen to attack and plunder, and Fen Yi sent out cavalry to attack and defeated the enemy army. Duan Liao's general Rong Bo Bao was killed.

古文：前廷尉孔坦卒。
现代文：前廷尉孔坦死。
English: Former courtier Kong Tan has died.

古文：坦疾笃，庾冰省之，流涕。
现代文：孔坦病重时，庾冰前往探视，为之流泪。
English: When Kong Tan was seriously ill, Yu Bing went to visit him and shed tears for him.

古文：坦慨然曰： 大丈夫将终，不问以济国安民之术，乃为儿女子相泣邪！ 
现代文：孔坦慷慨地说： 大丈夫将死，不向他询问治国安民的办法，却像小儿女一样哭泣吗！ 
English: Kountan said generously: "A man is about to die, and you don't ask him about how to run the country and keep the people safe, but you cry like little children!"

古文：冰深谢之。
现代文：庾冰向他深深致歉。
English: Yu Bing deeply apologized to him.

古文：九月，慕容皝遣长史刘斌、兼郎中令辽东阳景送徐孟等还建康。
现代文：九月，慕容派长史刘斌、兼郎中令辽东人阳景护送徐孟等人返回建康。
English: In September, Murong sent his chief Liu Bin and his second-in-command Yang Jing to escort Xu Meng and others back to Jiankang.

古文：冬，十月，广州刺史邓岳遣督护王随等击夜郎、兴古，皆克之；加岳督宁州。
现代文：冬季，十月，广州刺史邓岳派督护王随等人进攻夜郎、兴古，都获胜。授予邓岳督察宁州。
English: In the winter, in October, the Guangzhou Zhishi Deng Yue sent the inspector Wang Guo and others to attack Yelang and Xinggu, and they won. It was awarded to the inspector Deng Yue Ningzhou.

古文：成主期以从子尚书仆射武陵公载有俊才，忌之，诬以谋反，杀之。
现代文：成汉国主李期因侄子尚书仆射武陵公李载才能俊逸出众，心中妒忌，便诬陷他谋反，将他杀害。
English: The ruler of the Han Dynasty, Li Ji, was jealous of his nephew, Shang Shuxu's servant, Zhao Wuling's son, Li Zai, because he was more handsome than others. He framed him for plotting a rebellion and killed him.

古文：十一月，诏建威将军司马勋将兵安集汉中；成汉王寿击败之。
现代文：十一月，朝廷诏令建威将军司马勋领兵安抚汉史，被成汉的汉王李寿击败。
English: In November, the imperial court ordered General Jian Wei, Sima Xun, to lead troops to pacify Han history, and he was defeated by Han King Li Shou, who became Han.

古文：寿遂置汉中守宰，戍南郑而还。
现代文：李寿随即设置汉中的守吏，在南郡安排好戍守力量，然后返回。
English: Li Shou immediately set up the guards in Hanzhong, arranged the garrison force in Nanshun, and then returned.

古文：索头郁鞠帅众三万降于赵，赵拜郁鞠等十三人为亲赵王，散其部众于冀、青等六州。
现代文：索头部郁鞠率士众三万人归降后赵，后赵拜授郁鞠等十三人为亲赵王，遣散其部众到冀州、青州等六州之中。
English: After Zhao and Zhao Bai conferred the title of Prince of Zhao, Ikumi, the head of the Zhao dynasty, led 30,000 soldiers to surrender, and 13 others, including Ikumi, were pro-King Zhao, and his troops were sent to Jizhou, Qingzhou and other six provinces.

古文：赵王虎作太武殿于襄国，作东、西宫于鄴，十二月，皆成。
现代文：后赵王石虎在襄国建造太武殿，又在邺营建东、西二宫，十二月，全部峻工。
English: Later, Zhao Wang Shihhu built the Taiwu Palace in Xiangguo, and the East and West Second Palaces in Yingying. In December, all the work was completed.

古文：太武殿基高二丈八尺，纵六十五步，广七十五步，甃以文石。
现代文：太武殿台基高二丈八尺，长六十五步，宽七十五步，用有纹理的石块砌成。
English: The foundation of the Taiwu-den is two stories and eight feet high, sixty-five paces long and seventy-five paces wide, and is made of textured stone.

古文：下穿伏室，置卫士五百人。
现代文：殿基下挖掘地下宫室，安置卫士五百人。
English: The underground palace room was excavated under the foundation of the palace, and five hundred guards were installed.

古文：以漆灌瓦，金珰，银楹，珠帘，玉壁，穷极工巧。
现代文：用漆涂饰屋瓦，用金子装饰瓦当，用银装饰楹柱，珠帘玉壁，巧夺天工。
English: The roof tiles are painted with lacquer, the tiles are decorated with gold, the pillars are decorated with silver, and the walls are decorated with beads.

古文：殿上施白玉床、流苏帐，为金莲华以冠帐顶。
现代文：宫殿内安放白玉床，挂着流苏帐，造金莲花覆盖在帐顶。
English: A white jade bed is placed in the palace, a tasseled curtain hangs, and a golden lotus flower covers the top of the curtain.

古文：又作九殿于显阳殿后，选士民之女以实之，服珠玉、被绮縠者万馀人。教宫人占星气、马步射。
现代文：又在显阳殿后面建造九座宫殿，挑选士民的女儿安置在殿内，佩戴珠玉、身穿绫罗绸缎的有一万多人，教她们占星气，马上及马下的射术。
English: In addition, nine palaces were built behind the Hall of the Rising Sun, and the daughters of selected scholars and commoners were placed in the hall. There were more than 10,000 people wearing jewels and satin, teaching them astrology and the art of shooting.

古文：置女太史，及杂伎工巧，皆与外同。
现代文：又设置女太史，各种杂术、技巧，都与外边男子相同。
English: In addition, women's history is set up, and all kinds of tricks and techniques are the same as those of men.

古文：以女骑千人为卤簿，皆著紫纶巾，熟锦袴，金银镂带，五文织成靴，执羽仪，鸣鼓吹，游宴以自随。
现代文：石虎又让女骑兵一千人充当车驾的侍从，都戴着紫纶头巾，穿熟锦制作的裤子，用金银镂带，用五彩织成靴子，手执羽仪，鸣奏军乐，跟随自己游巡宴饮。
English: Shihu also let a thousand female cavalrymen act as attendants of the chariot, all wearing purple satin headscarves, wearing trousers made of brocade, with gold and silver ribbons, woven into boots with five colors, holding feathers, singing military music, and following their own parade.

古文：于是赵大旱，金一斤直粟二斗，百姓嗷然；而虎用兵不息，百役并兴。
现代文：此时后赵发生严重旱灾，金子一斤只能买粟二斗，百姓嗷嗷待哺，但石虎却用兵不止，各种徭役繁重。
English: After this time, a severe drought occurred in Zhao. One catty of gold could only buy two catties of corn, and the people were starving. However, the stone tiger used more than one soldier, and all kinds of laborious work were required.

古文：使牙门将张弥行徙洛阳钟虡、九龙、翁仲、铜驼、飞廉于鄴，载以四轮缠辋车，辙广四尺，深二尺。
现代文：石虎让牙门张弥把洛阳的钟、九龙、翁仲、铜驼、飞廉搬运到邺，用四轮缠辋车运载，车辙间距四尺，深二尺。
English: Shihu asked Zhang Ya, the gatekeeper, to carry Luoyang's clock, Jiulong, Wengzhong, copper camel and flying camel to Handan. They were carried by four-wheeled cart, with the ruts four feet apart and two feet deep.

古文：一钟没于河，募浮没三百人入河，系以竹絙，用牛百头，鹿栌引之，乃出，造万斛之舟以济之。
现代文：运载中有一口钟沉于黄河，为此招募三百名谙熟水性的人潜入黄河，用竹质的大绳捆扎，然后用一百头牛牵引起重滑车，这才把钟拉出水面，又建造可以载重万斛的大船运送。
English: During the transport, a bell sank in the Yellow River. To this end, three hundred people who were familiar with water were recruited to dive into the Yellow River, tie it with bamboo ropes, and then use a hundred cows to pull a heavy pulley. Only then could the bell be pulled out of the water, and a large ship was built to transport it.

古文：既至鄴，虎大悦，为之赦二岁刑，赉百官谷帛，赐民爵一级。
现代文：东西运到邺，石虎大为喜悦，为此赦免两年的刑罚，赐给百官谷物丝帛，民众赐爵位一级。
English: Things were transported to Handan, and Shihu was greatly pleased. For this, he pardoned a two-year sentence, gave grain silk cocoons to a hundred officials, and the people gave him a first-class knighthood.

古文：又用尚方令解飞之言，于鄴南投石于河，以作飞桥，功费数千万亿，桥竟不成，役夫饥甚，乃止。
现代文：石虎又采用尚方令解飞的意见，在邺的南面将石块抛入黄河，用以建造凌空架设的高桥，工程耗费几千万亿，桥最终没有建成，从事劳役的人饥饿难忍，这才停工。
English: Shihu also used the opinion of Shang Fang to order the lifting of the flight, throwing stones into the Yellow River on the south side of the raft to build a high bridge erected by volley. The project cost tens of trillions. The bridge was not built in the end, and the people engaged in labor were starving. This was the reason for the work stoppage.

古文：使令长帅民入山泽采橡及鱼以佐食，复为权豪所夺，民无所得。
现代文：又让官吏带领民众上山入水，采橡实、捕鱼作为辅助食物，但又被权豪抢夺，民众毫无所得。
English: They also let government officials lead the people up the mountain and into the water to pick acorns and fish as supplementary food, but they were robbed by the powerful, and the people had no income.

古文：初，日南夷帅范稚，有奴曰范文，常随商贾往来中国；后至林邑，教林邑王范逸作城郭、宫室、器械，逸爱信之，使为将。
现代文：当初，日南夷首领范稚，有个奴仆叫范文，经常跟随商贾来往中原，后来到了林邑，教林邑王范逸建造城郭、宫室、器械，范逸宠爱并信任他，任用他为将领。
English: At first, the leader of the Nichinan Yi, Fan Zhi, had a servant named Fan Wen, who often followed the merchant Jia to and from the Central Plains. Later, he came to Linyi to teach Linyi King Fan Yi to build castles, palaces, and equipment. Fan Yi loved and trusted him and appointed him as a general.

古文：文遂谮逸诸子，或徙或逃。
现代文：范文于是谮毁范逸的几个儿子，逼得他们有的迁徙，有的逃亡。
English: Fan Wen then instigated the destruction of several of Fan Yat's sons, forcing some of them to emigrate and others to flee.

古文：是岁，逸卒，文诈迎逸子于它国，置毒于椰酒而杀之，文自立为王。
现代文：这年，范逸死，范文诈称从别的国家迎接范逸的儿子们回来，在椰酒中下毒，把他们全都害死，范文自立为王。
English: That year, when Fan Yat-sen died, Fan Wen falsely claimed that he had come from another country to welcome Fan Yat-sen's sons back. He poisoned the coconut wine and killed them all, and Fan Wen became king.

古文：于是出兵攻大岐界、小岐界、式仆、徐狼、屈都、乾鲁、扶单等国，皆灭之，有众四五万，遣使奉表入贡。
现代文：于是出兵进攻大岐界、小岐界、式仆、徐狼、屈都、乾鲁、扶单等国，将他们全数翦灭。范文拥有士众四五万，派遣使者奉上表到建康朝贡。
English: Accordingly, troops were dispatched to attack countries such as Oki, Kogi, Shikibu, Shiloh, Kudu, Qianlu, and Buthan, annihilating them all. Fan Wen had 450,000 soldiers, and sent emissaries to Jiankang to pay tribute.

古文：赵左校令成公段作庭燎于杠末，高十馀丈，上盘置燎，下盘置人，赵王虎试而悦之。
现代文：后赵左校令成公段在杠竿末稍安装庭燎照明，高十多丈，上盘放置烛燎，下盘安置人，后赵王石虎试用后很喜欢。
English: Afterward, Zhao Zuo ordered Cheng Gong to install garden lighting at the end of the bar, which was more than ten meters high. Candles were placed on the upper plate, and people were placed on the lower plate. After Zhao Wang tried the stone tiger, he liked it very much.

古文：显宗成皇帝中之上咸康三年
现代文：咸康三年
English: Hamkang three years old

古文：春，正月，庚辰，赵太保夔安等文武五百馀人入上尊号，庭燎油灌下盘，死者二十馀人；赵王虎恶之，腰斩成公段。
现代文：春季，正月，庚辰，后赵太保夔安等文武官员五百多人进上皇帝尊号，上盘庭燎用油浇到下盘，死亡二十多人。后赵王石虎为此厌恶，腰斩成公段。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Geng Chen, and later Zhao Taibao, more than five hundred civil and military officials, such as Zhao An, were promoted to the title of emperor, and more than twenty people died after pouring oil from the upper plate to the lower plate. Queen Zhao Wang Shihhu was disgusted by this and became a public official.

古文：辛巳，虎依殷、周之制，称大赵天王，即位于南郊，大赦。
现代文：辛巳，石虎依照商、周的制度，称大赵天王。在南郊即位，实行大赦。
English: According to the Shang and Zhou dynasties, Shihu was called the Great Zhao Heavenly King. He ascended to the throne in the southern suburbs and implemented an amnesty.

古文：立其后郑氏为天王皇后，太子邃为天王皇太子，诸子为王者皆降为郡公，宗室为王者降为县侯。
现代文：册立王后郑氏为天王皇后，立太子石邃为天王皇太子，儿子中本来称王的都降为郡公，宗室子弟中称王的降为县侯。
English: Queen Zheng was appointed as the Heavenly King's Empress, Prince Shi was appointed as the Heavenly King's Crown Prince, the sons who were originally called kings were reduced to county magistrates, and the sons of the family who were called kings were reduced to county magistrates.

古文：百官封署各有差。
现代文：百官封爵各有差等。
English: Hundreds of officials have been knighted, with varying degrees of success.

古文：国子祭酒袁瑰、太常冯怀，以江左浸安，请兴学校，帝从之。
现代文：国子祭酒袁、太常冯怀因为江东逐渐安宁，请求兴建学校，成帝听从。
English: As the east of the Yangtze River gradually became peaceful, Yuan and Feng Huai, the Emperor's son, requested the construction of a school, and Emperor Cheng followed their request.

古文：辛卯，立太学，征集生徒。
现代文：辛卯，建立太学，征招学生门徒。
English: Xinwu, established Taixue, recruited student disciples.

古文：而士大夫习尚老、庄，儒术终不振。
现代文：但士大夫习惯于崇尚老子、庄子，儒学始终不景气。
English: However, scholars and doctors are accustomed to advocating Laozi and Zhuangzi, and Confucianism has always been in a slump.

古文：瑰，涣之曾孙也。
现代文：袁即袁涣曾孙。
English: Yuan is the great-grandson of Yuan Shao.

古文：三月，慕容皝于乙连城东筑好城以逼乙连，留折冲将军兰勃守之。
现代文：三月，慕容在乙连成以东修筑好城，威逼乙连城，留下折冲将军兰勃驻守。
English: In March, Murong built a good city in the east of Bailiancheng and threatened Bailiancheng, leaving General Rambo stationed there.

古文：夏，四月，段辽以车数千两输乙连粟，兰勃击而取之。
现代文：夏季，四月，段辽使用数千辆车向乙连城运粮，遭兰勃袭击，粮食被夺。
English: In the summer, in April, Duan Liao used thousands of vehicles to transport grain to Yilian City, but was attacked by Rambo and the grain was seized.

古文：六月，辽又遣其从弟扬威将军屈云，将精骑夜袭皝子遵于兴国城，遵击破之。
现代文：六月，段辽又派遣堂弟、扬威将军段屈云率领精锐骑兵乘夜间偷袭在兴国城的慕容之子慕容遵，被慕容遵击败。
English: In June, Duan Liao sent his cousin, Yangwei General Duan Quyun, to lead the elite cavalry to attack Murong Zun, the son of Murong Zun, in Xingguo City at night, and was defeated by Murong Zun.

古文：初，北平阳裕事段疾陆眷及辽五世，皆见尊礼。
现代文：当初，北平人阳裕侍奉由段疾陆眷至段辽共五代君主，都受到尊重和礼遇。
English: At the beginning, Peking man Yang Yu served five generations of monarchs, from Duan Zili and Lu Jing to Duan Liao, and was treated with respect and courtesy.

古文：辽数与皝相攻，裕谏曰：  亲仁善邻，国之宝也。 
现代文：段辽多次与慕容互相攻击，阳裕规谏说：  亲近仁厚，与邻友善，是国家之宝 。
English: Duan Liao and Murong attacked each other many times. Yang Yuqi said: "Being close and kind, and being friendly with neighbors, is a national treasure.

古文：况慕容氏与我世婚，迭为甥舅，皝有才德，而我与之构怨；战无虚月，百姓凋弊，利不补害，臣恐社稷之忧将由此始。
现代文：何况慕容氏与我们世代通婚，交相具有甥舅关系。慕容有才又有德，我们却与他结怨，战事每个月都有，百姓凋弊，所得的利益弥补不了遭到的伤害，我怕国家的忧虑将由此开始了。
English: What's more, Murong has been married to us for generations, and we have a nephew-nephew relationship. Murong is talented and virtuous, but we have a grudge against him, there are wars every month, the people are poor, and the benefits received cannot compensate for the harm suffered. I am afraid that the country's worries will begin from this.

古文：愿两追前失，通好如初，以安国息民。 
现代文：希望双方能追悔以往的过失，和好如初，以便使国家安定，百姓休养生息。 
English: It is hoped that the two sides can repent their past mistakes and make peace as before, so that the country can be stabilized and the people can recover.

古文：辽不从，出裕为北平相。
现代文：段辽不听，贬黜阳裕，出任北平相。
English: Duan Liao did not listen and demoted Zou Yangyu to the post of Beiping Minister.

古文：赵太子邃素骁勇，赵王虎爱之，常谓群臣曰： 司马氏父子兄弟自相残灭，故使朕得至此；如朕有杀阿铁理否？ 
现代文：后赵太子石邃素来骁勇，后赵王石虎宠爱他。石虎经常对大臣们说： 司马氏父子兄弟自相残杀，所以朕得以有今天。而朕岂有杀石邃的道理呢！ 
English: Later, Prince Zhao's son, Shih Hao, used to be very brave, and later King Zhao's son, Shih Ho, loved him. Shih Ho often said to the ministers: Sima's father and son brothers killed each other, so I can be here today. But is there any reason for me to kill Shih Hao?

古文：既而邃骄淫残忍，好妆饰美姬，斩其首，洗血置盘上，与宾客传观之，又烹其肉共食之。
现代文：后来，石邃骄淫残忍，喜欢将美丽的姬妾装饰打扮起来，然后斩下首级，洗去血污，盛放在盘子里，与宾客们互相传览，再烹煮姬妾身体上的肉共同品尝。
English: Later, Ishizaki was arrogant and cruel. He liked to dress up the beautiful concubine, and then cut off the head, washed off the blood, and placed it on a plate. He and the guests looked at each other, and then cooked the meat on the concubine's body for tasting.

古文：河间公宣、乐安公韬皆有宠于虎，邃疾之如仇。
现代文：河间公石宣、乐安公石韬都得到石虎的宠爱，石邃恨之如仇敌。
English: Both Kawama-no-Kimi, Sekisen, and Le'an-no-Kimi, Sekigahara, were favored by Sekigahara, and Sekigahara hated them as enemies.

古文：虎荒耽酒色，喜怒无常。
现代文：石虎沉溺于酒色，喜怒无常。
English: The stone tiger indulges in alcohol and is moody.

古文：使邃省可尚书事，每有所关白，虎恚曰： 此小事，何足白也！ 
现代文：他让石邃省视决断尚书奏事，常常当石邃有事禀报时，石虎便不满地说： 这种小事，怎么值得禀报！ 
English: He let Shijiazhuang Province to decide whether to report the matter, and often when Shijiazhuang had something to report, Shigu was dissatisfied and said: This kind of trifle, how is it worth reporting!

古文：时或不闻，又恚曰： 何以不白！ 
现代文：有时听不到石邃的禀报，又不满地说： 为什么不禀报！ 
English: Sometimes you can't hear the fake news from Shijiazhuang, and you say with dissatisfaction: Why not fake news from Zhuang!

古文：诮责笞棰，月至再三。
现代文：于是对石邃谴责斥骂、鞭打杖击，一月之中多次发生。
English: As a result, Shidao was reprimanded, scolded, and whipped with a cane, which occurred several times in January.

古文：邃私谓中庶子李颜等曰： 官家难称，吾欲行冒顿之事，卿从我乎？ 
现代文：石邃私下对中庶子李颜等人说： 天子的心志难以满足，我想干汉冒顿那样的事情，你们跟我干吗？ 
English: Shi Hao privately said to Li Yan, the middle child, and the others: "The will of the Heavenly Son is difficult to satisfy. I want to do things like Han Bok Tong. What are you doing with me?

古文：颜等伏不敢对。
现代文：李颜等人伏地不敢回答。
English: Li Yan and the others did not dare to answer.

古文：秋，七月，邃称疾不视事，潜帅宫臣文武五百馀骑饮于李颜别舍，因谓颜等曰： 我欲至冀州杀河间公，有不从者斩！ 
现代文：秋季，七月，石邃称病不理政事，秘密带领宫内大臣、文武官员五百多人骑马到李颜的别宅饮酒，乘机对李颜等人说： 我想到冀州杀死河间公石宣，有胆敢不跟从的斩首！ 
English: In the autumn, in July, Shih Kui said that he was ill and did not care about politics. He secretly led the Minister of the Imperial Household and more than 500 military and civilian officials on horseback to Li Yan's villa to drink alcohol. He took the opportunity to say to Li Yan and others: I want to go to Jizhou to kill Khema Gong Shi Xuan, and behead those who dare not follow!

古文：行数里，骑皆逃散。
现代文：出行数里后，众人都逃散。
English: After travelling for several miles, the crowd dispersed.

古文：颜叩头固谏，邃亦昏醉而归。
现代文：李颜跪地叩头，极力谏止，石邃也就昏昏欲醉地返回。
English: Li Yan knelt down and bowed, trying her best to stop, and Shijie also drowsily returned.

古文：其母郑氏闻之，私遣中人诮让邃；邃怒，杀之。
现代文：石邃的母亲郑氏听说此事，私下派遣身边的人责问石邃。石邃发怒，杀死来人。
English: When Shi Hao's mother Zheng heard about this, she privately sent someone to interrogate Shi Hao. Shi Hao became angry and killed the person.

古文：佛图澄谓虎曰： 陛下不宜数往东宫。 
现代文：佛图澄对石虎说： 陛下不宜经常去东宫。 
English: Buddha Tuzhen said to Shihu: Your Majesty should not often go to the East Palace.

古文：虎将视邃疾，思澄言而还；既而瞋目大言曰： 我为天下主，父子不相信乎！ 
现代文：石虎本来准备探视石邃的病情，想到佛图澄的话，便返回宫中。接着瞪大眼睛高声说： 我是天下人的君主，父子都不能互相信任吗！ 
English: Shihu was originally going to visit Shisheng's illness, but when he thought of the Buddha's words, he returned to the palace. Then he stared wide-eyed and said in a loud voice: I am the ruler of the world, can't father and son trust each other?

古文：乃命所亲信女尚书往察之。
现代文：于是让自己所亲近信任的女尚书前往察看。
English: So he asked his close confidante, Shang Shu, to go and take a look.

古文：邃呼前与语，因抽剑击之。
现代文：石邃喊她近前谈话，乘势拔剑刺击。
English: Shi Hao shouted at her to come forward, and she took advantage of the situation to draw her sword and stab him.

古文：虎怒，收李颜等诘问，颜具言其状。杀颜等三十馀人；幽邃于东宫，既而赦之，引见太武东堂；邃朝而不谢，俄顷即出。
现代文：石虎发怒，拘捕李颜等人诘问，李颜原原本本述说了原委，石虎便杀死李颜等三十多人，把石邃幽禁在东宫，不久又赦免其罪，在太武东堂召见他。石邃朝见时不谢罪，顷刻便离去。
English: Shihu became enraged and arrested Li Yan and others for questioning. Li Yan had originally said the above about the committee. Shihu then killed Li Yan and more than 30 others, imprisoned Shi Hui in the East Palace, and soon pardoned his crime and summoned him to the East Hall of the Taiwu Palace. Shi Hui did not apologize for his crime when he saw the emperor, and left immediately.

古文：虎使谓之曰： 太子应朝中宫，岂可遽去！ 
现代文：石虎让人对他说： 太子应召朝见皇后，怎么可以急遽离开！ 
English: Shihu had someone say to him: The prince has been summoned to see the queen, how can he leave in a hurry!

古文：邃径出，不顾。
现代文：石邃头也不回，径直出宫。
English: Shi Shantou did not turn back and went straight out of the palace.

古文：虎大怒，废邃为庶人。
现代文：石虎勃然大怒，废黜石邃为庶人。
English: Shihu flew into a rage and dethroned Shijie as a commoner.

古文：其夜，杀邃及其妃张氏，并男女二十六人同埋于一棺；诛其宫臣支党二百馀人；废郑后为东海太妃。
现代文：当夜，杀死石邃和妃子张氏，连同男女共二十六人合葬在一口棺材内，并诛杀石邃宫臣中的门党二百多人，废黜郑皇后为东海太妃。
English: That night, he killed Shi Yan and his concubine Zhang, together with a total of twenty-six men and women buried in a single coffin, and killed more than two hundred of Shi Yan's palace retainers, dethroning Queen Zheng as the East Sea Princess.

古文：立其子宣为天王皇太子，宣母杜昭仪为天王皇后。
现代文：石虎立儿子石宣为天王皇太子，石宣的母亲杜昭仪被封为天王皇后。
English: Shi Horyu's son, Shi Xuan, was named the Prince of Heaven, and Shi Xuan's mother, Du Zhaoyi, was named the Queen of Heaven.

古文：安定侯子光，自称佛太子，云从大秦国来，当王小秦国，聚众数千人于杜南山，自称大黄帝，改元龙兴；石广讨斩之。
现代文：安定人侯子光自称佛太子，说是从大秦国来，应当在小秦国称王，在杜南山中聚集了数千名士众，自称大黄帝，改年号龙兴。石广征讨并斩杀了他。
English: Hou Ziguang, a man of stability, claimed to be the Buddha's crown prince, saying that he came from the Great Qin State and should be crowned king in the Small Qin State. He gathered thousands of nobles in the Dunan Mountains, claimed to be the Great Yellow Emperor, and changed his name to Longxing. Shi Guang enlisted and killed him.

古文：九月，镇军左长史封弈等劝慕容皝称燕王；皝从之。
现代文：九月，镇军左长史封奕等劝慕容称燕王，慕容听从了。
English: In September, Shifeng Yi, the town's commander of the Left Division, persuaded Murong to call himself the King of Swallows, and Murong obeyed.

古文：于是备置群司，以封弈为国相，韩寿为司马，裴开为奉常，阳骛为司隶，王寓为太仆，李洪为大理，杜群为纳言令，宋该、刘睦、石琮为常伯，皇甫真、阳协为冗骑常侍，宋晃、平熙、张泓为将军，封裕为记室监。
现代文：于是设置各个官署，让封奕出任国相，韩寿任司马，裴开任奉常，阳骛任司隶，王任太仆，李洪任大理，杜群任纳言令，宋亥、刘睦、石琮任常伯，皇甫真、阳协任冗骑常侍，宋晃、平熙、张泓为将军，封裕任记室监。
English: As a result, various government offices were set up, with Feng Yi serving as minister of state, Han Shou as secretary of state, Pei Kai as minister, Yang Xi as secretary, Wang as eunuch, Li Hong as grand secretary, Du Qun as minister of propaganda, Song Hai, Liu Mu, and Shijie as permanent secretaries, Huang Fuzhen and Yang Jie as cavalry constables, Song Guang, Ping Xi, and Zhang Ye as generals, and Feng Yu as inspector of records.

古文：洪，臻之孙；晃，奭之子也。
现代文：李洪即李臻的孙子；宋晃即宋的儿子。
English: Li Hong is the grandson of Li Zhen; Song Xiang is the son of Song.

古文：冬，十月，丁卯，皝即燕王位，大赦。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁卯，慕容前即前燕王位，实行大赦。
English: Winter, October, Dingwu, Murong ago, that is, the former Yan throne, the implementation of amnesty.

古文：十一月，甲寅，追尊武宣公曰武宣王，夫人段氏曰武宣后；立夫人段氏为王后，世子俊为王太子，如魏武、晋文辅政故事。
现代文：十一月，甲寅，追尊武宣公慕容为武宣王，夫人段氏称为武宣后。又立自己的夫人段氏为王后，册立世子慕容俊为王太子，效仿魏武帝、晋文帝辅佐朝政之例。
English: In November, Emperor Go-In honored Mu Rong as the King of Wu Xuan and his wife Duan as the Empress of Wu Xuan. He also appointed his own wife Duan as the Queen and his son Mu Rongjun as the Crown Prince, following the example of Emperor Wu of Wei and Emperor Wen of Jin.

古文：段辽数侵赵边，燕王皝遣扬烈将军宋回称籓于赵，乞师以讨辽，自请尽帅国中之众以会之，并以其弟宁远将军汗为质。
现代文：段辽多次侵扰后赵边境，前燕王慕容派扬烈将军宋回向后赵称臣，乞请军队来讨伐段辽，自言将率领国内所有士众会同讨伐，并让自己的兄弟、宁远将军慕容汗到后赵当人质。
English: Duan Liao repeatedly invaded the border of Hou Zhao, and the former Yan King Murong sent the young general Song Hui to Hou Zhao to praise him, begging the army to fight Duan Liao, saying that he would lead all the scholars in the country to fight together, and let his brother, Ningyuan General Murong Khan to Hou Zhao as a hostage.

古文：赵王虎大悦，厚加慰答，辞其质，遣还，密期以明年。
现代文：后赵王石虎大为喜悦，盛情抚尉、酬答，谢绝慕容汗为人质，遣送他返回，与前燕王秘密约定明年会合。
English: Afterward, Zhao Wang Shihhu was greatly pleased, generously rewarded and rewarded, refused Murong Khan as a hostage, sent him back, and secretly agreed with the former Yan Wang to meet next year.

古文：是岁，赵将李穆纳拓跋翳槐于大宁，其故部落多归之。
现代文：这年，后赵将领李穆安置拓跋翳槐回到大宁，拓跋翳槐原先领有的部落大多归从了他。
English: In this year, after Zhao general Li Mu resettled Tuobao back to Daning, most of the tribes originally owned by Tuobao followed him.

古文：代王纥那奔燕，国人复奉翳槐为代王，翳槐城盛乐而居之。
现代文：代王拓跋纥那逃奔前燕国，国内人又尊奉拓跋翳槐为代王，在盛乐筑城居住。
English: The reigning king, Tuobao, fled to the former Yan Kingdom, and the people in the country revered Tuobao as the reigning king and lived in Sheng Lezhu City.

古文：仇池氐王杨毅族兄初，袭杀毅，并有其众，自立为仇池公，称臣于赵。
现代文：仇池氐王杨毅的同族之兄杨初，击杀杨毅，兼并杨毅部众，自立为仇池公，向后赵称臣。
English: Yang Chu, the elder brother of Yang Yi, the enemy of King Yang Yi, killed Yang Yi, annexed Yang Yi's followers, established himself as the enemy of King Yang Yi, and promoted Zhao as his vassal.

