古文：韩之先与周同姓，姓姬氏。
现代文：韩国的祖先和周天子同姓，姓姬氏。
English: South Korea's ancestors and Zhou Tianzi have the same surname, surnamed Ji.

古文：其后苗裔事晋，得封于韩原，曰韩武子。
现代文：他的后代待奉晋国，被封在韩原，称为韩武子。
English: His descendants stayed in Jin Province and were sealed in Han Yuan, known as Han Wuxi.

古文：武子后三世有韩厥é，从封姓为韩氏。
现代文：韩武子之后再传三代有了韩厥，他随封地的名称为韩为氏。
English: Three generations after Han Wuxi, there was Han Jue, who was named after the name of his fiefdom, Hanwei.

古文：韩厥，晋景公之三年，晋司寇屠岸贾将作乱，诛灵公之贼赵盾。
现代文：韩厥在晋景公三年的时候，晋国司寇屠岸贾将要作乱，说是诛杀灵公的贼臣赵盾。
English: When Han Jue was three years old in the reign of King Jinjing, the steward of the State of Jin, Tu Quan Jia, was about to start a riot, saying that it was the thief and vassal Zhao Dun who had killed the prince.

古文：赵盾已死矣，欲诛其子赵朔。
现代文：赵盾早已经死了，就要杀他的儿子赵朔。
English: Zhao Dun had already died, so he wanted to kill his son Zhao Shuo.

古文：韩厥止贾，贾不听。
现代文：韩厥阻止屠岸贾，屠岸贾不听。
English: Han Jue stopped Tuogang Jia, but Tuogang Jia did not listen.

古文：厥告赵朔令亡。
现代文：韩厥就去告诉赵朔，让他逃走。
English: Han Jue went to tell Zhao Shuo to let him escape.

古文：朔曰： 子必能不绝赵祀，死不恨矣。 
现代文：赵朔说： 您一定能不使赵氏的后代断绝，我死后也就没有遗恨了。 
English: Zhao Shuo said: You must be able to make the descendants of the Zhao family break off, and there will be no hatred left after my death.

古文：韩厥许之。
现代文：韩厥答应了他。
English: Han Jue agreed.

古文：及贾诛赵氏，厥称疾不出。
现代文：等到屠岸贾诛灭赵氏的时候，韩厥称病不出家门。
English: When the time came for Tuogang Jiaqi to exterminate the Zhao clan, Han Jue said that he was too ill to leave home.

古文：程婴、公孙杵臼之藏赵孤赵武也，厥知之。
现代文：程婴、公孙臼把赵氏孤儿赵武藏了起来，韩厥是知道这件事的。
English: Cheng Ying and Gong Sun Us hid Zhao Wu, an orphan of the Zhao clan, and Han Jue knew about it.

古文：景公十一年，厥与郄克将兵八百乘伐齐，败齐顷公于鞍，获逢丑父。
现代文：晋景公十一年，韩厥和郤克率领八百辆战车的兵力征讨齐国，在鞍打败了齐顷公，俘虏了逢丑父。
English: In the eleventh year of Jinjing, Han Jue and Yan Ke led a force of eight hundred chariots to conquer Qi, defeated Qi Aogong in the saddle, and captured Feng Yushi.

古文：于是晋作六卿，而韩厥在一卿之位，号为献子。
现代文：从这时候起，晋国设置了六卿，韩厥位居一卿，号为献子。
English: From that time on, Jin set up six lords, and Han Jue ranked as the first lord, with the title of Jianzhong.

古文：晋景公十七年，病，卜大业之不遂者为祟。
现代文：晋景公十七年，景公生病，占卜的结果说是大业的后代子孙中有不顺心的人在作怪。
English: In the seventeenth year of King Jin, King Jing fell ill. The result of the divination was that some of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants.

古文：韩厥称赵成季之功，今后无祀，以感景公。
现代文：韩厥就赞扬赵衰的功劳，并说他如今已没有人接续香火，以此来感动景公。
English: Han Jue praised Zhao Zhen's merits, and said that now there is no one to continue the incense, in order to move Jinggong.

古文：景公问曰： 尚有世乎？ 
现代文：景公问道： 他还有后代吗？ 
English: Jing Gong asked: Does he have any descendants?

古文：厥于是言赵武，而复与故赵氏田邑，续赵氏祀。
现代文：韩厥当时就谈到了赵武，景公因而把赵氏原有的田邑重新给他，让他延续赵氏的香火。
English: Han Jue talked about Zhao Wu at that time, so Jing Gong gave him back the original Tianyi of the Zhao clan, so that he could continue the Zhao clan's incense.

古文：晋悼公之七年，韩献子老。
现代文：晋悼公七年，韩献子告老。
English: After seven years of service to the Emperor, Han Xianzi is reaching old age.

古文：献子卒，子宣子代。
现代文：献子去世后，他的儿子宣子继承爵位。
English: After the death of his son, his son, Nobuko, succeeded to the title.

古文：宣子徙居州。
现代文：宣子迁徙到州邑。
English: Nobuko moved to the prefecture.

古文：晋平公十四年，吴季札使晋，曰： 晋国之政卒归于韩、魏、赵矣。 
现代文：晋平公十四年，吴国的季札出使晋国，他说： 晋国的政权最终要属于韩、魏、赵三家。 
English: In the 14th year of the reign of Emperor Jin Ping, Jifat of the State of Wu sent an envoy to the State of Jin. He said, "The political power of the State of Jin must ultimately belong to the three families of Han, Wei, and Zhao."

古文：晋顷公十二年，韩宣子与赵、魏共分祁氏、羊舌氏十县。
现代文：晋顷公十二年韩宣子和赵、魏两家一起瓜分子祁氏、羊舌氏的十个县。
English: In the 12th year of the Jin era, Han Xuan Zi, Zhao and Wei together won ten counties from the Guarani clan and the Sheep Tongue clan.

古文：晋定公十五年，宣子与赵简子侵伐范、中行氏。
现代文：晋定公十五年韩宣子和赵简子攻打范氏、中行氏。
English: Han Xuan Zi and Zhao Jian Zi attacked the Fan and Zhong Xing clans in the fifteenth year of the reign of Emperor Jin.

古文：宣子卒，子贞子代立。
现代文：宣子去世，他的儿子贞子继承爵位。
English: When Nobuko died, his son Sadako succeeded to the peerage.

古文：贞子徙居平阳。
现代文：贞子迁居到平阳。
English: Sadako moved to Pingyang.

古文：贞子卒，子简子代。
现代文：韩贞子去世，他的儿子简子继位。
English: Han Sadako died and was succeeded by his son Janzi.

古文：简子卒，子庄子代。
现代文：韩简子去世，他的儿子庄子继位。
English: Han Jianzi died and was succeeded by his son Zhuo Zi.

古文：庄子卒，子康子代。
现代文：韩庄子去世，他的儿子康子继位。
English: Han Zhuangzi died and was succeeded by his son, Kangzi.

古文：康子与赵襄子、魏桓子共败知伯，分其地，地益大，大于诸侯。
现代文：韩康子和赵襄子、魏桓子一起打败了知伯，瓜分了他的领地，他们三家的领地更大了，超过了其他诸侯的领地。
English: Han Kangzi, together with Zhao Xiangzi and Wei Huanzi, defeated Zhi Bo and divided his territory. The territory of their three families was larger than that of other princes.

古文：康子卒，子武子代。
现代文：韩康子去世后，他的儿子武子继位。
English: After Han Yasuko's death, his son, Takeko, succeeded to the throne.

古文：武子二年，伐郑，杀其君幽公。
现代文：武子二年，进攻郑国，杀死了他们的国君郑幽会。
English: In the second year of Mushi, they attacked Zheng and killed their sovereign Zheng Yuhui.

古文：十六年，武子卒，子景侯立。
现代文：十六年，韩武子去世，他的儿子景侯即位。
English: Sixteen years later, Han Mu Zi died, and his son Jing Hou ascended to the throne.

古文：景侯虔元年，伐郑，取雍丘。
现代文：韩景侯虔元年，进攻郑国，占领雍丘。
English: In the first year of Han Jing Hou Qian, he attacked Zheng Guo and occupied Yongqiu.

古文：二年，郑败我负黍。
现代文：二年，郑军在负黍打败了赵军。
English: Two years later, Zheng's army defeated Zhao's army at the Battle of Zhouzhuang.

古文：六年，与赵、魏俱得列为诸侯。
现代文：景侯六年韩与赵、魏一起被承认为诸侯国。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of King Jing, Han was recognized as a vassal state along with Zhao and Wei.

古文：九年，郑围我阳翟。
现代文：景侯九年，郑国包围韩国的阳翟。
English: In the ninth year of Jinghong, Zheng surrounded South Korea.

古文：景侯卒，子列侯取立。
现代文：景侯去世。他的儿子列侯韩取即位。
English: Prince Jing died and his son Prince Han took the throne.

古文：列侯三年，聂政杀韩相侠累。
现代文：列侯三年，聂政刺杀了韩国宰相侠累。
English: In the third year of his reign, He Zheng assassinated the Prime Minister of South Korea.

古文：九年，秦伐我宜阳，取六邑。
现代文：九年，秦国进攻韩国的宜阳，占领了六邑。
English: In the ninth year, Qin attacked Yiyang in South Korea and occupied six towns.

古文：十三年，列侯卒，子文侯立。
现代文：十三年，列侯去世，他的儿子文侯即位。
English: In the thirteenth year, the lord died, and his son, Wen Hou, ascended to the throne.

古文：是岁魏文侯卒。
现代文：这一年魏文侯去世。
English: Wei Wenhou died that year.

古文：文侯二年，伐郑，取阳城。
现代文：韩文侯二年，韩国进攻郑国，占领阳城。
English: In the second year of Han Wen Hou, South Korea attacked Zheng and occupied Yangcheng.

古文：伐宋，到彭城，执宋君。
现代文：进攻宋国，打到彭城，俘虏了宋国的国君。
English: He attacked Song, reached Pengcheng, and captured the sovereign of Song.

古文：七年，伐齐，至桑丘。
现代文：七年，进攻齐国，打到桑丘。
English: In the seventh year of Wuhou, the Wei army attacked Qi and reached Sanqiu.

古文：郑反晋。
现代文：郑国反叛晋国。
English: Zheng rebelled against Jin.

古文：九年，伐齐，至灵丘。
现代文：九年，韩国进攻齐国，打到了灵丘。
English: Nine years ago, South Korea attacked Qi, and they hit a dead end.

古文：十年，文侯卒，子哀侯立。
现代文：十年，韩文侯去世，他的儿子哀侯即位。
English: Ten years later, Han Wenhou died, and his son Meng Hou ascended to the throne.

古文：哀侯元年，与赵、魏分晋国。
现代文：韩哀侯元年，韩与赵、魏三家瓜分了晋国。
English: In the first year of Han's reign, Han divided Jin with Zhao and Wei.

古文：二年，灭郑，因徙都郑。
现代文：二年，韩国灭了郑国，于是把都城迁到了新郑。
English: Two years later, South Korea destroyed Zheng and moved the capital to Xinzheng.

古文：六年，韩严弑其君哀侯。而子懿侯立。
现代文：哀侯六年，韩严杀死了他的国君哀侯，哀侯的儿子懿侯即位。
English: After six years of mourning, Han Yan killed his sovereign, Mourning, and Mourning's son, Gong Hou, ascended to the throne.

古文：懿侯二年，魏败我马陵。
现代文：懿侯二年，魏军在马陵打败韩军。
English: Two years later, the Wei army defeated the Korean army in Maling.

古文：五年，与魏惠王会宅阳。
现代文：五年，韩侯与魏惠王在宅阳相会。
English: Five years later, Han Hou and Wei Hui Wang met in Zhayang.

古文：九年，魏败我浍。
现代文：九年，魏军在浍水打败了韩军。
English: In nine years, the Wei army defeated the Korean army in Surabaya.

古文：十二年，懿侯卒，子昭侯立。
现代文：十二年，懿侯去世，他的儿子昭侯即位。
English: In the twelfth year, Gong Hou died, and his son, Zhaohou, ascended the throne.

古文：昭侯元年，秦败我西山。
现代文：韩昭侯元年，秦军在西山打败韩军。
English: In the first year of Han Zhaohou, the Qin army defeated the Korean army in Xishan.

古文：二年，宋取我黄池。
现代文：二年，宋国夺取了韩国的黄池。
English: Two years later, the Song dynasty conquered South Korea's Hwangchi Province.

古文：魏取朱。
现代文：魏国夺取了朱邑。
English: Wei captured Zhuyun.

古文：六年，伐东周，取陵观、邢丘。
现代文：六年，韩军征讨东周国，攻占了陵观、邢丘。
English: In the sixth year, the Korean army conquered the eastern Zhou Province, and conquered Lingguan and Mengqiu.

古文：八年，申不害相韩，修术行道，国内以治，诸侯不来侵伐。
现代文：昭侯八年，申不害任韩国宰相，运用君主驾驭群臣的权术，实行法家的治国之道，国内得到安定，各诸侯国不敢前来侵犯。
English: In the eighth year of Shōhō, Shin was appointed prime minister of Korea, using the power of the monarch to control the vassals and implementing the law-based way of governing the country. The country was stable, and the vassal states did not dare to invade.

古文：十年，韩姬弑其君悼公。
现代文：昭侯十年，韩姬杀死了他的国君悼公。
English: In the tenth year of Akihito's reign, Hanji killed his regent, Yoriko.

古文：十一年，昭侯如秦。
现代文：十一年，昭侯到秦国去。
English: In the eleventh year, Zhao Hou went to Qin.

古文：二十二年，申不害死。
现代文：二十二年，申不害去世。
English: Twenty-two years later, Shin passed away.

古文：二十四年，秦来拔我宜阳。
现代文：二十四年，秦军攻下了韩国的宜阳。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, the Qin army captured the South Korean city of Yiyang.

古文：二十五年，旱，作高门。
现代文：昭侯二十五年，发生旱灾，修建了高大的城门。
English: In the 25th year of Shōhō, a drought occurred, and a tall gate was built.

古文：屈宜臼曰： 昭侯不出此门。
现代文：屈宜臼说： 昭侯出不了这座门。
English: Qu Yiyu said: Zhao Hou can't get out of this door.

古文：何也？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: What is it for?

古文：不时。
现代文：因为不合时宜。
English: Because it was not the right time.

古文：吾所谓时者，非时日也，人固有利不利时。
现代文：我所说的时，不是指的时间，人本来就有顺利或不顺利的时候。
English: When I say time, I don't mean time. People naturally have good or bad times.

古文：昭侯尝利矣，不作高门。
现代文：昭侯曾经顺利过，可是并没有修建高门。
English: Akihiro was once successful, but he did not build a high gate.

古文：往年秦拔宜阳，今年旱，昭侯不以此时恤民之急，而顾益奢，此谓 时绌举赢 。 
现代文：去年秦国攻下了宜阳，今年发生旱灾，昭侯不在这个时候体恤民众的急难，反而是更加奢侈，这就叫做 在艰难的时候作奢侈的事情 。 
English: Last year, Qin conquered Yiyang. This year, a drought occurred. Instead of sympathizing with the plight of the people at this time, Zhao Hou became more extravagant. This is called doing extravagant things in difficult times.

古文：二十六年，高门成，昭侯卒，果不出此门。
现代文：二十六年，高门修成了，昭侯也去世了，果然没能走出这座城门。
English: Twenty-six years later, the high gate was completed, and Shōhō passed away, unable to leave the gate.

古文：子宣惠王立。
现代文：他的儿子宣惠王即位。
English: His son, King Xuan Hui, ascended the throne.

古文：宣惠王五年，张仪相秦。
现代文：宣惠王五年，张仪任秦国宰相。
English: In the fifth year of King Xuan Hui, Zhang Yi was appointed the Prime Minister of Qin.

古文：八年，魏败我将韩举。
现代文：八年，魏军打败了韩国将军韩举。
English: Eight years later, the Wei army defeated the Korean general Hanju.

古文：十一年，君号为王。
现代文：十一年，韩国把君号改称为王。
English: In the eleventh year, South Korea changed the king's name to Wang.

古文：与赵会区鼠。
现代文：韩王与赵王在区鼠相会。
English: Han Wang and Zhao Wang meet at the district mouse.

古文：十四年，秦伐败我鄢。
现代文：十四年，秦军进攻并在鄢陵打败韩军。
English: In the 14th year, the Qin army attacked and defeated the Korean army in Fuling.

古文：十六年，秦败我修鱼，虏得韩将、申差于浊泽。
现代文：宣惠王十六年，秦军在脩鱼打败韩军，在浊泽俘虏了韩国将领和申差。
English: In the 16th year of King Xuan Hui, the Qin army defeated the Korean army in Huludao and captured the Korean generals and envoys in Heze.

古文：韩氏急，公仲谓韩王曰： 与国非可恃也。
现代文：韩国着急了，相国公仲对韩王说： 盟国是不可靠的。
English: South Korea was in a hurry, and its partner country, Korea, said to King Han: "Allies are unreliable."

古文：今秦之欲伐楚久矣，王不如因张仪为和于秦，赂以一名都，具甲，与之南伐楚，此以一易二之计也。 韩王曰： 善。 
现代文：如今秦国想征伐楚国已经很久了，大王不如通过张仪向秦王求和，送给它一座名城，并准备好盔甲武器，和秦军一起向南征伐楚国，这是用一失换二得的计策。 韩王说： 好。 
English: Now Qin has been trying to conquer Chu for a long time. It would be better for the Great King to sue for peace through Zhang Yi, give him a famous city, and prepare armor and weapons to conquer Chu together with the Qin army. This is a strategy of exchanging one loss for two gains. Han Wang said: Good.

古文：乃警公仲之行，将西购于秦。
现代文：于是为公仲的行动作好警戒，他要西行与秦国讲和。
English: Therefore, he was on the alert for Gongzhong's actions. He wanted to go west and make peace with Qin.

古文：楚王闻之大恐，召陈轸告之。
现代文：楚王听说后非常惊恐，召见陈轸把情况告诉他。
English: After hearing this, King Chu was very alarmed and summoned Chen Xi to tell him the situation.

古文：陈轸曰： 秦之欲伐楚久矣，今又得韩之名都一而具甲，秦韩并兵而伐楚，此秦所祷祀而求也。今已得之矣，楚国必伐矣。
现代文：陈轸说： 秦国想攻伐楚国已经很久了，现在又得到韩国的一座名城，并且还准备好了盔甲武器，秦韩合兵攻伐楚国，这是秦国祈祷祭祀梦寐以求的，如今已经得到了，楚国一定要受到侵伐。
English: Chen Yao said: Qin has wanted to invade Chu for a long time, and now it has obtained a famous city in South Korea, and it has also prepared armored weapons. Qin and Han armies will invade Chu. This is what Qin's prayers and sacrifices have dreamed of, and now they have obtained it. Chu must be invaded.

古文：王听臣为之警四境之内，起师言救韩，命战车满道路，发信臣，多其车，重其币，使信王之救己也。
现代文：大王听我的意见，先在全国加强警戒，发兵声言援救韩国，让战车布满道路，然后派出使臣，多给他配备车辆，带上厚礼，让韩国相信大王是在救他们。
English: The great king listened to my advice, first strengthened the vigilance in the whole country, sent troops to rescue South Korea, let the chariots cover the roads, and then sent envoys, equipped him with more vehicles, and brought gifts to make South Korea believe that the great king was saving them.

古文：纵韩不能听我，韩必德王也，必不为雁行以来，是秦韩不和也，兵虽至，楚不大病也。
现代文：即使韩王不听我们的意见，韩国也一定会感激大王的恩德，一定不会列队前来攻楚，这样秦韩就不和了，即使军队到了，也不会成为楚国的大患。
English: Even if Han Wang does not listen to our opinions, South Korea will certainly be grateful for the great king's kindness, and will certainly not line up to attack Chu, so that Qin and Han will not be at odds, and even if the army arrives, it will not become a big problem for Chu.

古文：为能听我绝和于秦，秦必大怒，以厚怨韩。韩之南交楚，必轻秦；轻秦，其应秦必不敬：是因秦、韩之兵而免楚国之患也。 楚王曰： 善。 
现代文：如果韩国听从我们的意见，停止向秦求和，秦国必定大怒，因而对韩国的怨恨加深；韩国到南方结交楚国，必定慢待秦国，慢待秦国，应对秦国一定会不恭敬，这就是利用秦韩军队之间的矛盾来免除楚国的祸患。 楚王说： 很好！ 
English: If South Korea listens to our opinion and stops suing for peace with Qin, Qin will be furious and its hatred of South Korea will deepen; if South Korea makes friends with Chu in the south, it will wait for Qin, wait for Qin, and treat Qin with disrespect. This is the use of the contradiction between the Qin and South Korean armies to get rid of the scourge of Chu. King Chu said: Very good!

古文：乃警四境之内，兴师言救韩。命战车满道路，发信臣，多其车，重其币。
现代文：于是在全国加强警戒，发兵声言去救援韩国，让战车布满道路，然后派出使臣，给他配备很多车辆，让他带着厚礼到韩国。
English: Therefore, they strengthened vigilance throughout the country, sent soldiers to rescue South Korea, let the chariots cover the roads, and then sent envoys to equip him with many vehicles and let him bring gifts to South Korea.

古文：谓韩王曰： 不谷国虽小，已悉发之矣。
现代文：楚使对韩王说： 敝国虽小，已经把军队全派出来了。
English: The envoy of Chu said to the king of Han, "Though our country is small, we have sent out the whole army.

古文：愿大国遂肆志于秦，不谷将以楚殉韩。 
现代文：希望贵国能随心所欲地同秦国作战，敝国君将让楚军为韩国死战。 
English: I hope that your country will be able to fight with Qin as much as you want, and that you will let the Chu army fight to the death for Korea.

古文：韩王闻之大说，乃止公仲之行。
现代文：韩王听了之后非常高兴，就停止了公仲到秦国议和的行动。
English: After listening to this, Han Wang was very happy and stopped Gongzhong's peace talks with Qin.

古文：公仲曰： 不可。夫以实伐我者秦也，以虚名救我者楚也。
现代文：公仲说： 不能这样，以实力侵犯我们的是秦国，用虚名来救我们的是楚国。
English: Guanzhong said, "This is unacceptable. It is Qin that is invading us by force, and it is Chu that is rescuing us under false pretenses.

古文：王恃楚之虚名，而轻绝强秦之敌，王必为天下大笑。
现代文：大王想依靠楚国的虚名，而轻易和强敌秦国绝交，大王必定要被天下大加嘲笑。
English: If the great king wants to rely on the false name of Chu and easily break off diplomatic relations with the strong enemy Qin, the great king will certainly be ridiculed by the whole world.

古文：且楚韩非兄弟之国也，又非素约而谋伐秦也。
现代文：况且楚韩并非兄弟之国，又不是早有盟约共谋伐秦的。
English: Moreover, Chu-Han was not a brotherly country, nor did it have an early alliance to conspire to attack Qin.

古文：已有伐形，因发兵言救韩，此必陈轸之谋也。
现代文：我们已有了联秦攻楚的迹象，楚国才声言发兵救韩，这一定是陈轸的计谋。
English: We already have signs of the joint Qin-Qing attack on Chu. It was only after this that the State of Chu declared that it would send troops to save South Korea. This must have been Chen Yu's plan.

古文：且王已使人报于秦矣，今不行，是欺秦也。
现代文：况且大王已经派人把我们的打算通报秦国了，现在又决定不去，这是欺编秦国。
English: Moreover, the great king had already sent someone to inform Qin of our plans, and now he has decided not to go. This is deception of Qin.

古文：夫轻欺强秦而信楚之谋臣，恐王必悔之。 
现代文：轻易欺骗强秦，而听信楚国的谋臣，恐怕大王必定要后悔的。 
English: If he easily deceived Qiang Qin, but listened to the trusted advisors of the State of Chu, I'm afraid the great king will surely regret it.

古文：韩王不听，遂绝于秦。
现代文：韩王不听劝告，终于和秦国断交。
English: Han Wang did not listen to the advice and finally broke off diplomatic relations with Qin.

古文：秦因大怒，益甲伐韩，大战，楚救不至韩。
现代文：秦国因而大怒，增加兵力进攻韩国，两国大战，而楚国救兵一直没到韩国来。
English: As a result, Qin became very angry and increased its forces to attack South Korea, leading to a war between the two countries. However, the Chu rescuers never came to South Korea.

古文：十九年，大破我岸门。
现代文：十九年，秦军大败韩军于岸门。
English: In the 19th year, the Qin army defeated the Korean army in the gate.

古文：太子仓质于秦以和。
现代文：韩国只好派太子仓去作人质来向秦国求和。
English: South Korea had no choice but to send Taizi Cang as a hostage to sue for peace from Qin.

古文：二十一年，与秦共攻楚，败楚将屈丐，斩首八万于丹阳。
现代文：宣惠王二十一年，韩国同秦国一起攻打楚国，打败了楚将屈丐，在丹阳斩杀了八万楚军。
English: In the twenty-first year of King Xuan Hui, South Korea and Qin attacked Chu together, defeated Chu general Qu Gai, and killed eighty thousand Chu troops in Danyang.

古文：是岁，宣惠王卒，太子仓立，是为襄王。
现代文：这一年，宣惠王去世，太子仓即位，这就是韩襄王。
English: In this year, King Xuan Hui died, and Prince Cang ascended to the throne. This is King Han Xiang.

古文：襄王四年，与秦武王会临晋。
现代文：襄王四年，韩襄王和秦武王在临晋会见。
English: In the fourth year of King Xiang, King Han Xiang and King Qin Wu met in Linjin.

古文：其秋，秦使甘茂攻我宜阳。
现代文：这年秋天，秦国派甘茂进攻韩国的宜阳。
English: In the autumn of that year, Qin sent Ganmao to attack Yiyang in South Korea.

古文：五年，秦拔我宜阳，斩首六万。
现代文：五年，秦攻下宜阳，斩杀了六万韩军。
English: Five years later, Qin conquered Yiyang and killed sixty thousand Korean soldiers.

古文：秦武王卒。
现代文：同年，秦武王去世。
English: In the same year, King Qinwu passed away.

古文：六年，秦复与我武遂。
现代文：六年，秦国又把武遂还给韩国。
English: Six years later, Qin returned Wusui to Korea.

古文：九年，秦复取我武遂。
现代文：九年，秦国再度攻取了韩国的武遂。
English: In the 9th year, Qin conquered Wusui in Korea again.

古文：十年，太子婴朝秦而归。
现代文：十年，韩国太子婴朝见秦王后回国。
English: Ten years later, the infant crown prince of South Korea returned to China after meeting Queen Qin.

古文：十一年，秦伐我，取穰。
现代文：十一年，秦军攻韩，占领了穰邑。
English: In the eleventh year of the Qin Dynasty, the Qin army invaded Korea and occupied the city of Tong.

古文：与秦伐楚，败楚将唐眛。
现代文：韩国和秦国进攻楚国，打败了楚将唐昧。
English: Korea and Qin attacked Chu and defeated the Chu general Tangmai.

古文：十二年，太子婴死。
现代文：襄王十二年，太子婴去世。
English: In the twelfth year of King Xiang, the infant prince died.

古文：公子咎、公子虮虱争为太子。
现代文：公子咎和公子虮虱争做太子。
English: Prince Gui and Prince Ye vie for the crown.

古文：时虮虱质于楚。
现代文：当时虮虱在楚国做人质。
English: At that time, Zou was a hostage in Chu.

古文：苏代谓韩咎曰： 虮虱亡在楚，楚王欲内之甚。
现代文：苏对韩咎说： 虮虱流记在楚国，楚王特别想把他送回国。
English: Su said to Han Gui, "The story of Ganryu is set in the State of Chu. The King of Chu especially wanted to send him back to his country.

古文：今楚兵十余万在方城之外，公何不令楚王筑万室之都雍氏之旁，韩必起兵以救之，公必将矣。
现代文：现在十几万楚军驻在方城山北边，您为什么不让楚国在雍氏城的旁边建起一座万户的城邑，这样，韩王必定派兵去救雍氏，您一定会担任将领。
English: Now more than a hundred thousand Chu troops are stationed on the north side of Fangcheng Mountain. Why don't you let the State of Chu build a city of ten thousand households next to Yongshi City? In this way, King Han will certainly send troops to rescue Yongshi, and you will certainly serve as a general.

古文：公因以韩楚之兵奉虮虱而内之，其听公必矣，必以楚韩封公也。 
现代文：这样您就可以利用韩楚两国的军队拥戴虮虱，把他接回韩国，将来他一定会听您的，他一定会把楚韩边境封给您的。 
English: In this way, you can take advantage of the military forces of South Korea and South Korea to take him back to South Korea. In the future, he will surely listen to you, and he will surely seal the Chu-Han border for you.

古文：韩咎从其计。
现代文：韩咎听从了他的计谋。
English: Han Wei followed his advice.

古文：楚围雍氏，韩求救于秦。
现代文：楚军包围雍氏，韩国向秦国求救。
English: The Chu army encircled the Yong Dynasty, and Korea appealed to the Qin for help.

古文：秦未为发，使公孙昧入韩。
现代文：秦国没有出兵，只是派公孙昧来到韩国。
English: Qin did not send troops, but sent Gongsunmai to Korea.

古文：公仲曰： 子以秦为且救韩乎？ 
现代文：公仲对公孙昧说： 您认为秦国将会援救韩国吗？ 
English: Gongzhong said to Gongsunmai: Do you think Qin will come to the rescue of South Korea?

古文：对曰： 秦王之言曰 请道南郑、蓝田，出兵于楚以待公 。
现代文：公孙昧回答说： 秦王是这样说的： 我们要取道南郑、蓝田，出兵到楚国等待您的军队。 
English: Gongsunmai replied, "King Qin said this: We will take Donan Zheng and Lantian and send troops to Chu to wait for your army."

古文：殆不合矣。 
现代文：恐怕是不能会合了。 
English: I'm afraid we can't meet.

古文：公仲曰： 子以为果乎？ 
现代文：公仲说： 您认为真的会这样吗？ 
English: He said, "Do you think this will really happen?

古文：对曰： 秦王必祖张仪之故智。
现代文：公孙昧回答说： 秦王一定会沿用张仪原来的计谋。
English: Gongsunmai replied, "Qin Wang will definitely follow Zhang Yi's original strategy."

古文：楚威王攻梁也，张仪谓秦王曰： 与楚攻魏，魏折而入于楚，韩固其与国也，是秦孤也。
现代文：当初楚威王进攻魏国的时候，张仪对秦王说： 秦国和楚国进攻魏国，魏国失败就会倒向楚国，韩国本来就是它的盟国，这样，秦国就孤立了。
English: When King Chuwei attacked Wei, Zhang Yi said to King Qin: "If Qin and Chu attack Wei, if Wei fails, it will fall to Chu. Korea was originally its ally. As a result, Qin was isolated.

古文：不如出兵以到之，魏楚大战，秦取西河之外以归。 
现代文：我们不如出兵来迷惑他们，让魏国和楚国大战，秦军就可以占领西河以外的土地后再回来。 
English: We might as well send out troops to confuse them, let Wei and Chu have a big war, and the Qin Army can occupy the land outside the West River and then come back.

古文：今其状阳言与韩，其实阴善楚。
现代文：现在看秦王的样子表面上是同韩国结盟，其实是暗中同楚国交好。
English: Now, King Qin appears to be allied with South Korea on the surface, but he is actually secretly friendly with the State of Chu.

古文：公待秦而到，必轻与楚战。
现代文：您等待秦军的到来，必定会轻率地同楚军打仗。
English: If you wait for the arrival of the Qin army, you will certainly fight against the Chu army.

古文：楚阴得秦之不用也，必易与公相支也。
现代文：楚国暗中已经得知秦军不会援助韩国，一定很容易同您相对抗。
English: Chu has secretly learned that the Qin army will not aid South Korea, so it must be easy to oppose you.

古文：公战而胜楚，遂与公乘楚，施三川而归。
现代文：您这一丈如果战胜了楚国，秦国就会和您共同凌驾楚国之上，然后到三川一带扬威而回。
English: If you succeed in defeating Chu, Qin will surpass Chu together with you, and then return to the Mikawa region.

古文：公战不胜楚，楚塞三川守之，公不能救也。
现代文：您这一仗如果不能战胜楚国，楚国阻塞三川据守，您就无法的到援救。
English: If you fail to defeat Chu in this battle, and Chu blocks Mikawa, you will not be able to come to the rescue.

古文：窃为公患之。
现代文：我私下里为您担忧。
English: I worry about you in private.

古文：司马庚三反于郢，甘茂与昭鱼遇于商于，其言收玺，实类有约也。 
现代文：秦人司马庚三度往返于郢都，秦相甘茂和楚相昭鱼在商於相会，表面上扬言说要收回攻韩楚军的印信，其实双方好像是有什么密约。 
English: The Qin ruler Sima Geng made three round trips to and from the Han capital. Qin Emperor Qian Ganmao and Chu Emperor Zhaoyu met for business. On the surface, they threatened to take back the seal of the attack on the Han and Chu armies, but in fact, the two sides seemed to have a secret agreement.

古文：公仲恐，曰： 然则奈何？ 
现代文：公仲惊恐地说： 那么该怎么办呢？ 
English: Frightened, he said, "So what should we do?

古文：曰： 公必先韩而后秦，先身而后张仪。
现代文：公孙昧说： 您一定要先从韩国自身考虑，然后考虑秦国是否来救援，先想好自救的方法，然后再考虑怎样应付张仪那种计谋。
English: Gongsunmai said: You must first consider yourself from South Korea, then consider whether Qin will come to the rescue, first think about how to save yourself, and then consider how to deal with Zhang Yi's kind of strategy.

古文：公不如亟以国合于齐楚，齐楚必委国于公。
现代文：您不如尽快让韩国同齐楚两国联合，齐楚必定会把国事托付给您。
English: It would be better for you to unite the two countries of South Korea and Quichou as soon as possible. Quichou will surely entrust the affairs of state to you.

古文：公之所恶者张仪也，其实犹不无秦也。 
现代文：您所厌恶的只是张仪那种欺诈的计谋，其实还是不能疏远秦国呀！ 
English: What you dislike is only Zhang Yi's kind of deceitful stratagem. In fact, you still can't alienate Qin!

古文：于是楚解雍氏围。
现代文：于是楚国解除了对雍氏的围困。
English: As a result, the state of Chu lifted the siege on the Yong clan.

古文：苏代又谓秦太后弟芈戎曰： 公叔、伯婴恐秦楚之内虮虱也，公何不为韩求质子于楚？
现代文：苏代又对秦太后的弟弟芈戎说： 公叔伯婴唯恐秦国把虮虱送回韩国，您为什么不为韩国到楚国去请求放回质子虮虱呢？
English: Su Dai also said to the Qin Empress's younger brother Yu Rong: Uncle Uncle, lest the Qin State send the caesium back to Korea, why don't you go to Chu State to request the return of the proton caesium for Korea?

古文：楚王听入质子于韩，则公叔、伯婴知秦楚之不以虮虱为事，必以韩合于秦楚。
现代文：楚国如果不答应把质子放回韩国，那么公叔伯婴就知道秦楚两国并不重视虮虱的事，一定会使韩国与秦楚联合。
English: If the State of Chu does not agree to return the proton to South Korea, then Uncle Uncle will know that the two countries of Qin and Chu do not attach importance to the matter, and will certainly make South Korea and Qin Chu united.

古文：秦楚挟韩以窘魏，魏氏不敢合于齐，是齐孤也。
现代文：秦楚就能依靠韩国使魏国受窘，魏国不敢同齐国联合，这样，齐国就孤立了。
English: Qin Chu could rely on Korea to embarrass Wei, and Wei did not dare to unite with Qi, so Qi was isolated.

古文：公又为秦求质子于楚，楚不听，怨结于韩。
现代文：然后您再替秦国请求楚国把质子虮虱送到秦国，楚国不答应，就会同韩国结怨。
English: Then, on behalf of Qin, you ask Chu to send proton beams to Qin. If Chu does not agree, you will have a grudge with South Korea.

古文：韩挟齐魏以围楚，楚必重公。
现代文：韩国就要依靠齐国和魏国的力量去围困楚国，楚国必家会尊重您。
English: South Korea will have to rely on the strength of Qi and Wei to besiege Chu. Chu will certainly respect you.

古文：公挟秦楚之重以积德于韩，公叔、伯婴必以国待公。 
现代文：您依靠秦国和楚国的尊重向韩国施以恩德，公叔伯婴一定会拿整个国家来侍奉您。 
English: You rely on the respect of Qin and Chu countries to do favors to South Korea. Uncle Gong will surely take the whole country to serve you.

古文：于是虮虱竟不得归韩。
现代文：于是虮虱终于未能回到韩国。
English: As a result, Hao was finally unable to return to South Korea.

古文：韩立咎为太子。
现代文：韩国立公子咎为太子。
English: South Korea's first prince is crowned crown prince.

古文：齐、魏王来。
现代文：齐王、魏王到韩国来。
English: King Qi and King Wei came to Korea.

古文：十四年，与齐、魏王共击秦，至函谷而军焉。
现代文：襄王十四年，韩国与齐、魏两国一起进攻秦国，到了函谷关就在那里驻军。
English: In the 14th year of King Xiang, Korea, together with Qi and Wei, attacked Qin. When they reached Hanyu Pass, they stationed their troops there.

古文：十六年，秦与我河外及武遂。
现代文：十六年，秦国把河外之地和武遂还给韩国。
English: Sixteen years later, Qin returned the lands outside the river and Wusui to Korea.

古文：襄王卒，太子咎立，是为厘王。
现代文：同年襄王去世，太子咎即位，这就是釐王。
English: In the same year, King Xiang died, and the crown prince ascended to the throne. This is the King of Gong.

古文：厘王三年，使公孙喜率周、魏攻秦。
现代文：釐王三年，派公孙喜率领周和魏的军队攻打秦国。
English: In the third year of the reign of Qian Wang, he sent Gongsun Xi to lead the armies of Zhou and Wei to attack Qin.

古文：秦败我二十四万，虏喜伊阙。
现代文：秦国打败韩军二十四万，在伊阙俘虏了公孙喜。
English: Qin defeated 240,000 Korean troops and captured Gongsun Xi in Yili.

古文：五年，秦拔我宛。
现代文：五年，秦军攻下韩国的宛城。
English: Five years later, the Qin army captured the Korean city of Wancheng.

古文：六年，与秦武遂地二百里。
现代文：六年，韩国把武遂地带的二百里土地给了秦国。
English: Six years ago, South Korea gave 200 miles of land in the Wusui area to Qin.

古文：十年，秦败我师于夏山。
现代文：十年，秦军在夏山打败韩军。
English: Ten years later, the Qin army defeated the Korean army in Xia Shan.

古文：十二年，与秦昭王会西周而佐秦攻齐。
现代文：十二年，韩釐王与秦昭王在西周都城相会，并帮助秦国进攻齐国。
English: In the twelfth year, King Han Xuan and King Qin Zhao met in the West Zhou capital city and helped Qin attack Qi.

古文：齐败，愍王出亡。十四年，与秦会两周间。
现代文：齐国战败，齐湣，韩王与秦王在两周国之间相会。
English: After the defeat of Qi, Han and Qin met each other two weeks later.

古文：二十一年，使暴䳒救魏，为秦所败，䳒走开封。
现代文：二十一年，派暴ｙｕāｎ救援魏国，被秦军打败，暴䳒逃到开封。
English: In the twenty-first year, he sent his troops to rescue Wei, but they were defeated by the Qin army, and he fled to Kaifeng.

古文：二十三年，赵、魏攻我华阳。
现代文：釐王二十三年，赵、魏两国进攻韩国的华阳。
English: In the 23rd year of the reign of Shao Wang, the two countries of Zhao and Wei attacked Huayang in Korea.

古文：韩告急于秦，秦不救。
现代文：韩国向秦国告急，秦国不来援救。
English: South Korea sent an urgent message to the State of Qin, but the State of Qin did not come to the rescue.

古文：韩相国谓陈筮曰： 事急，愿公虽病，为一宿之行。 
现代文：韩国相国对陈筮ｓｈì说： 事态急迫，您虽有病，还是希望您连夜到秦国去。 
English: South Korea's foreign minister said to Chen Yuxi: The situation is urgent. Although you are ill, I still hope you will go to Qin overnight.

古文：陈筮见穰侯。
现代文：陈筮到秦先会见穰侯魏冉。
English: Chen Xi went to Qin to meet with Wei Ran.

古文：穰侯曰： 事急乎？
现代文：穰侯说： 事情紧迫了吧？
English: Gong Hou said, "Things are pressing, aren't they?"

古文：故使公来。 
现代文：所以才派你来。 
English: That's why I sent you.

古文：陈筮曰： 未急也。 
现代文：陈筮说： 哈不是很急呀。 
English: Chen Yao said, "I'm not in a hurry.

古文：穰侯怒曰： 是可以为公之主使乎？
现代文：穰侯发怒道： 如果这样，你的君主还能派你做使臣吗？
English: The vassal lord became angry and said, "If this is the case, can your sovereign still send you as an envoy?"

古文：夫冠盖相望，告敝邑甚急，公来言未急，何也？ 
现代文：你们的使臣来来往往，都是来向我们告急的，你来了却说不急，为什么？ 
English: Your envoys come and go all the time, all of them come to tell us they are in a hurry, but you come and say you are not in a hurry, why?

古文：陈筮曰： 彼韩急则将变而佗从；以未急，故复来耳。 
现代文：陈筮说： 韩国如果真的危急，就要改变政策去追随其他国家，因为还没到危急的时候，所以我又来了。 
English: "If South Korea is really in a crisis, it will have to change its policy and follow other countries, because it's not yet time for a crisis, that's why I'm here again," Chen Yao said.

古文：穰侯曰： 公无见王，请今发兵救韩。 
现代文：穰侯说： 你不必去见秦王了，现在我立即发兵救援韩国。 
English: Yan Hou said: You don't have to go to see King Qin, now I will immediately send troops to rescue South Korea.

古文：八日而至，败赵、魏于华阳之下。
现代文：过了八天，秦军赶到，在华阳山下打败赵军和魏军。
English: Eight days later, the Qin Army arrived and defeated the Zhao Army and the Wei Army at the foot of Huayang Mountain.

古文：是岁，厘王卒，子桓惠王立。
现代文：这一年，釐王去世，他的儿子桓惠王即位。
English: In the same year, King Yao died and his son King Huan Hui ascended to the throne.

古文：桓惠王元年，伐燕。
现代文：桓惠王元年，韩军攻打燕国。
English: In the first year of King Kanehide, the Korean army attacked Yan Province.

古文：九年，秦拔我陉，城汾旁。
现代文：九年，秦军攻占了韩国的陉城，并在汾水旁筑城。
English: In the ninth year, the Qin army captured the South Korean city of Ye, and built a city next to Ye.

古文：十年，秦击我于太行，我上党郡守以上党郡降赵。
现代文：十年，秦军在太行山进击韩军，韩国的上党郡守献出上党郡投降赵国。
English: In the tenth year, the Qin army attacked the Korean army in Taihang Mountain, and the Korean Shangdang county guard surrendered Shangdang county to Zhao Guo.

古文：十四年，秦拔赵上党，杀马服子卒四十余万于长平。
现代文：十四年，秦国守取赵国的上党。在长平杀死了马服君之子赵括率领的军卒四十万人。
English: In the 14th year of the Qin Dynasty, the Qin guards captured the upper party of Zhao. In Changping, they killed 400,000 soldiers led by Zhao Braid, the son of Ma Fuqun.

古文：十七年，秦拔我阳城、负黍。
现代文：十七年，秦军攻占韩国的阳城、负黍。
English: In the seventeenth year, the Qin army captured Yangcheng and Zhouzhuang in South Korea.

古文：二十二年，秦昭王卒。
现代文：二十二年，秦昭王去世。
English: Twenty-two years later, Qin Zhaowang died.

古文：二十四年，秦拔我城皋、荥阳。
现代文：二十四年，秦军攻占韩国的城皋、荥阳。
English: In the 24th year, the Qin army captured the South Korean cities of Ye and Poyang.

古文：二十六年，秦悉拔我上党。
现代文：二十六年，秦军全部攻占了韩国的上党地区。
English: In the 26th year, the Qin army completely occupied the Shangdang region of South Korea.

古文：二十九年，秦拔我十三城。
现代文：二十九年，秦军攻下韩国的十三座城池。
English: In the 29th year, the Qin army conquered thirteen cities in South Korea.

古文：三十四年，桓惠王卒，子王安立。
现代文：三十四年，桓惠王去世，他的儿子韩王安即位。
English: In 34, King Huan Hui died, and his son Han Wang An ascended the throne.

古文：王安五年，秦攻韩，韩急，使韩非使秦，秦留非，因杀之。
现代文：韩王安五年，秦国进攻韩国，韩国形势危急，派韩非出使秦国，秦国扣留了韩非，后来就把他杀了。
English: In the fifth year of King An of Han, Qin attacked Korea, the situation in Korea was critical, and sent Han Fei as an envoy to Qin. Qin detained Han Fei and later killed him.

古文：九年，秦虏王安，尽入其地，为颍川郡。
现代文：九年，秦军俘虏了韩王安，韩国领土全部归属秦国，设置为颍川郡。
English: In the ninth year, the Qin army captured Han Wangan, and all the Korean territory belonged to Qin, and was set up as Suichuan County.

古文：韩遂亡。
现代文：韩国终于灭亡。
English: Korea has finally perished.

古文：太史公曰：韩厥之感晋景公，绍赵孤之子武，以成程婴、公孙杵臼之义，此天下之阴德也。
现代文：太史公说：韩厥感动了晋景公，让赵氏孤儿赵武继承了赵氏的爵位，因而成全了程婴和公孙杵臼的大义，这是天下少有的阴德。
English: Taishi Gong said: Han Jue moved Jin Jing Gong to let Zhao Wu, an orphan of the Zhao clan, inherit the title of the Zhao clan, thus fulfilling the great justice of Cheng Ying and Gong Sun Xuanwu, which is a rare vice in the world.

古文：韩氏之功，于晋未睹其大者也。然与赵、魏终为诸侯十余世，宜乎哉！
现代文：韩氏在晋国，并没看到有什么大功，然而，终于能和赵氏、魏氏一样，做了十几代诸侯，这是很应该的呀！
English: Mr. Han did not see any great achievements in Jin Province, however, he was finally able to do more than a dozen generations of princes like the Zhao and Wei dynasties, which is very appropriate!

