古文：司民掌登万民之数。自生齿以上，皆书于版。辨其中国，与其都鄙，及其郊野，异其男女，岁登下其死生。
现代文：司民负责呈报民数，自生齿的婴儿以上的人都载入户籍，辨明他们居住在都城、采邑或在郊野，区别男女性别，并载明每年出生、死所造成的人数增减。
English: The people's commissar is responsible for reporting the number of citizens. All people over the age of one year old are recorded in the household register, identifying whether they live in the capital city, the county seat or in the countryside, distinguishing between male and female, and recording the increase or decrease in the number of people caused by birth and death each year.

古文：及三年，大比，以万民之数诏司寇。
现代文：到三年大校比，把民数报告司寇。
English: By the end of the third year of high school, the number of people was reported to the secretary.

古文：司寇及孟冬祀司民之日，献其数于王，王拜受之，登于天府。
现代文：司寇到冬十月祭祀司民时，献民数给王，王行拜礼而后接受，收藏于天府。
English: When the steward arrived in the winter of October to offer sacrifices to the priests, he offered the number of people to the king, and the king prayed and then accepted it, and it was collected in the heavenly palace.

古文：内史、司会、冢宰贰之，以赞王治。
现代文：内史、司会和冢宰保存副本，以协助王施政。
English: Copies of the internal history, board of directors, and secretary are kept to assist the king in his administration.

古文：司刑掌五刑之法，以丽万民之罪。墨罪五百，劓罪五百，宫罪五百，刖罪五百，杀罪五百。
现代文：司刑掌管五刑之法，以施加于犯罪的民众：判墨刑的罪有五百条，判劓刑的罪有五百条，判宫刑的罪有五百条，判刖的罪有五百条，判死刑的罪有五百条。
English: The magistrate presided over the law of five punishments to be imposed on the people who committed crimes: there were five hundred crimes sentenced to ink, five hundred crimes sentenced to whipping, five hundred crimes sentenced to palace punishment, five hundred crimes sentenced to whipping, and five hundred crimes sentenced to death.

古文：若司寇断狱弊讼，则以五刑之法诏刑罚，而以辨罪之轻重。
现代文：如果大司寇在外朝审断诉讼，就依据五刑之法辨别罪行的轻重，而建议大司寇所宜施的刑罚。
English: If the grand steward adjudicates the lawsuit in a foreign country, he will distinguish the severity of the crime according to the law of five punishments, and recommend the appropriate punishment to the grand steward.

古文：司刺，掌三刺、三宥、三赦之法，以赞司寇听狱讼。壹刺曰讯群臣，再刺曰讯群吏，三刺曰讯万民。壹宥曰不识，再宥曰过失，三宥曰遗忘。壹赦曰幼弱，再赦曰老旄，三赦曰蠢愚。
现代文：司刺掌管三次讯问、三种宽宥、三项赦免之法，以协助大司寇审理诉讼：三讯一讯是讯问群臣的意见，二讯是迅问群吏的意见，三讯是讯问民众的意见；三宥一是宽宥看错人而杀人者，二是宽宥无心而误杀者，本是宽宥忘了某处有人而误杀人者；三赦一是赦免年龄幼小而杀人者，二是赦免年老而杀人者，三是赦免痴呆而杀人者。
English: The magistrate presided over three interrogations, three pardons, and three amnesties to assist the chief magistrate in adjudicating the lawsuit: three interrogations and one pardon were the opinions of the interrogating ministers, two interrogations were the opinions of the interrogating officials, and three amnesties were the opinions of the interrogating public; three pardons and one pardon were the opinions of the wrong-looking murderer, two pardons were the opinions of the unintentional murderer, and three amnesties were the opinions of the forgotten murderer; three pardons and one pardon were the opinions of the young murderer, two pardons were the opinions of the old murderer,

古文：以此三法者，求民情，断民中，而施上服下服之罪，然后刑杀。
现代文：用这三法求得人犯罪的实情，使对犯人的审断正确，而决定是应当施以重刑或轻的罪，然后施刑或处死。
English: These three methods are used to obtain the facts of a person's crime, so that the judgment of the offender is correct, and the decision is to impose a heavy sentence or a light crime, and then to impose a sentence or death.

古文：司约掌邦国及万民之约剂。
现代文：司约掌各诸侯国以及民众间的契约券书。
English: It is a book of contracts between the various vassal states and the people.

古文：治神之约为上，治民之约次之，治地之约次之，治功之约次之，治器之约次之，治挚之约次之。
现代文：治理有关神约的事最重要，治理有关民约的事次一等，治理有关地约的事又次一等，治理有关功约的事又次一等，治理有关器约的事又次一等，治理有关挚约的事又次一等。
English: The administration of the covenant with God is the most important, the administration of the covenant with the people is the next most important, the administration of the covenant with the land is the next most important, the administration of the covenant with the work is the next most important, the administration of the covenant with the vessel is the next most important, and the administration of the covenant with the vow is the next most important.

古文：凡大约剂书於宗彝，小约剂书於丹图。
现代文：凡重大的契约券书记载垂宗庙彝器上，小事的卖约券书用红色书写在竹帛上。
English: All important contracts were recorded by the clerk on the temple's inkstand, while minor contracts were written in red on the bamboo stand.

古文：若有讼者，则珥而辟藏，其不信者服墨刑。
现代文：如果有因契约而争讼的，就先行衅礼而后打开府库查阅契约原件，违约的服墨刑。
English: If there is a dispute due to the contract, the first provocation is to open the government treasury to check the original contract, and the penalty for breach of contract is to serve ink.

古文：若大乱，则六官辟藏，其不信者杀。
现代文：如果有大乱事件，就会同六卿打开府库所藏契约，违约的处死。
English: If there is a major incident, he will open the contract with the six nobles, and those who violate the contract will be executed.

古文：司盟掌盟载之法。
现代文：司盟掌管订立盟辞之法。
English: The Secretary of the League is in charge of the method of concluding the alliance.

古文：凡邦国有疑，会同，则掌其盟约之载，及其礼仪。北面诏明神，既盟，则贰之。
现代文：凡诸侯国之间因不和协而会同，就负责记载盟约之辞以及盟约的礼仪，面朝北宣读盟辞以报告神明。
English: If there was a union between the feudal lords due to discord, they were responsible for recording the words of the covenant and the etiquette of the covenant, and reading the words of the covenant facing north to report to the gods.

古文：盟万民之犯命者。
现代文：盟约订立后，就抄写副本交给六卿。
English: After the covenant was concluded, a copy was given to the Six Lords.

古文：诅其不信者，亦如之。
现代文：盟诅民众中违犯国君教令的人，盟诅违犯誓约的人，也这样做。
English: Cursing those among the people who violate the edict of the sovereign, cursing those who violate the oath, do the same.

古文：凡民之有约剂者，其贰在司盟。
现代文：凡民众之间订有契约券书的，副本收藏在司盟那里。
English: Where there is a contract between the people, a copy is kept by the League.

古文：有狱讼者，则使之盟诅。
现代文：如果有因契约发生诉讼的，就先让他们盟诅。
English: If there are any lawsuits due to the contract, let them be damned first.

古文：凡盟诅，各以其地域之众庶，共其牲而致焉。
现代文：凡举行盟诅，各使当事人所在地的民众供给所需的牲，并把民众召集在一起。
English: And when a covenant is made, then each one of them shall give unto the people of his place such things as are needful for the service of the altar, and the people shall be gathered together.

古文：既盟，则为司盟共祈酒脯。
现代文：盟诅之后，又为司盟提供祈神所需的酒脯。
English: After the Meng Curse, they also provided Simeon with the wine jars needed to pray to God.

古文：职金，掌凡金、玉、锡、石、丹、青之戒令。
现代文：职金掌管凡有关铜玉锡石丹青等的戒令。
English: The officials in charge of the gold are in charge of the precepts concerning copper, jade, cassiterite and so on.

古文：受其入征者，辨其物之恶与其数量，楬而玺之。入其金锡于为兵器之府；入其玉石丹青于守藏之府。
现代文：接受开采者缴纳的赋税，辨别所缴纳矿物的质量好坏及数量多少，书写标签并加盖印章，把铜锡交到制造兵器的府库，把玉石丹青等交到主管收藏的府库。
English: accept the taxes paid by the miners, distinguish the quality and quantity of the minerals paid, write labels and affix seals, hand over the copper and tin to the prefectural treasury for the manufacture of weapons, and hand over the jade, etc. to the prefectural treasury in charge of collection.

古文：入其要，掌受士之金罚货罚，入于司兵。
现代文：上交记录的簿书给大府。负责接受司法官所判罚的铜和货币，交给司兵。
English: He is in charge of receiving the copper and money imposed by the judicial officer and handing it over to the sergeant.

古文：旅于上帝，则共其金版。
现代文：旅祭上天，就供给所需的金版。
English: Tabisai ascended to heaven and provided the required gold plates.

古文：飨诸侯，亦如之。
现代文：用飨礼款待诸侯时也这样做。
English: This is also done when entertaining the lords with a bowl.

古文：凡国有大故而用金石，则掌其令。
现代文：凡王国有军事行动而需用铜石，就掌管有关领取铜石的政令。
English: Whenever there is a military action in the kingdom that requires the use of copper and stone, the decree for the receipt of copper and stone is in charge.

古文：司厉掌盗贼之任器货贿。辨其物，皆有数量，贾而楬之，入于司兵。
现代文：司厉掌管所收缴的盗贼的兵器、财物，辨别它们的种类，都记有数量，标明价格而加上标签，交到司兵那里。
English: The sergeant is in charge of the weapons and property of the thieves that have been collected, and to distinguish their types, they are all recorded in quantity, marked with prices and added with labels, and handed over to the sergeant.

古文：其奴，男子入于罪隶，女子入于舂槀。
现代文：盗贼罚做奴隶，男子交到罪隶那里，女子交到舂人、槁人那里。
English: Thieves are punished as slaves, men are handed over to the criminal police, and women are handed over to the thief and thief.

古文：凡有爵者，与七十者；与未乱者，皆不为奴。
现代文：凡盗贼中原来有爵位的和七十岁以上的，以及尚未换牙的小儿，都不罚做奴隶。
English: All the thieves who had been knighted and were over seventy years old, as well as the children who had not yet changed their teeth, were not punished as slaves.

古文：犬人掌犬牲。
现代文：犬人掌管犬牲。
English: The dog people are in charge of the canine livestock.

古文：凡祭祀，共犬牲，用牷物。
现代文：凡祭祀供给所需的犬牲，要用毛色纯一的犬。
English: For all canine animals needed for sacrificial offerings, dogs with a pure coat color should be used.

古文：伏瘗，亦如之。
现代文：伏牲行辕祭、埋牲祭地神也供给犬牲。
English: The deities of the earth also provide dogs and animals for the offerings of the dead and buried animals.

古文：凡几珥沈辜，用駹可也。
现代文：凡举行衅祭、沉祭、毁折牲体而祭，用杂色的犬也可以。
English: For those who hold a provocation festival, a sinking festival, or an animal sacrifice, dogs of mixed colors can also be used.

古文：凡相犬牵犬者属焉，掌其政治。
现代文：凡挑选犬的人、牵犬的人都隶属犬人，由犬人掌管他们的事务和对他们的治理。
English: All those who select dogs and those who lead dogs are subordinate to the dog people, and the dog people are in charge of their affairs and their governance.

古文：司圜掌收教罢民。
现代文：司圜负责拘禁不良之民而加以教育。
English: Priests were responsible for detaining and educating bad people.

古文：凡害人者，弗使冠饰，而加明刑焉。任之以事，而收教之。
现代文：凡危害人的人不让他们戴寇饰，而写明他们的罪状让他们背在背上，使他们服劳役而对他们加以拘禁教育。
English: Anyone who harms others will not be allowed to wear the Dai Ke decoration, but will have their criminal record written on their back, be forced to do labor service, and be detained for education.

古文：能改者，上罪三年而舍，中罪二年而舍，下罪一年而舍，其不能改而出圜土者，杀。
现代文：能改过的，重罪拘禁三年而后释放，次一等的罪拘禁两年而后释放，轻罪拘禁一年而后释放。不能改过而逃出狱城的，抓住了就处死。
English: If you can reform, you will be imprisoned for three years for a felony and then released, for a second-class crime you will be imprisoned for two years and then released, and for a minor crime you will be imprisoned for one year and then released. If you cannot reform and escape from the prison, you will be caught and executed.

古文：虽出，二年不齿。
现代文：改过者即使放出来，三年内不得按年龄与乡民排列尊卑位次。
English: Even if those who have made amends are released, they are not allowed to rank higher or lower than the villagers according to their age within three years.

古文：凡圜土之刑人也，不亏体，其罚人也，不亏财。
现代文：凡拘禁在狱城中而身加明刑的人，不施加肉刑而亏损他们的身体；罚服劳役的人，不罚没他们的财产。
English: Those who are detained in the city of confinement and are given a definite punishment, do not inflict corporal punishment and lose their bodies; those who are punished with forced labor, do not have their property confiscated.

古文：掌囚掌守盗贼。
现代文：掌囚负责看守被抓捕在狱的盗贼，以及凡有罪被囚禁的人。
English: The keeper of the prison was responsible for guarding the thieves who had been caught and were in prison, as well as anyone who had been imprisoned for a crime.

古文：凡囚者，上罪梏拲而桎，中罪桎梏，下罪梏。
现代文：重罪犯戴桔、辇、桎，次一等的錾蕉，挂，轻罪犯只戴梏。
English: The felons should wear oranges, gourds, and thistles, the second-class criminals should wear bananas, and the petty criminals should only wear thistles.

古文：王之同族拲，有爵者桎，以待弊罪。
现代文：王的同族人犯罪只戴拳，有爵位塑人犯罪只戴桎，以等待判决。
English: Wang's compatriots only wear fists when they commit crimes, and those with titles only wear shackles when they commit crimes, waiting for the verdict.

古文：及刑杀，告刑于王，奉而适朝士加明梏，以适市而刑杀之。
现代文：到施刑或处死罪犯那天，向王报告将行刑罪犯的姓名，把罪犯押送到朝士那里，朝士给罪犯加上写有姓名和罪状的梏，然后押送到市上施刑或处死。
English: On the day of the punishment or execution of the criminal, report to the king the name of the criminal to be executed, and escort the criminal to the courtier. The courtier will add a badge with the name and crime to the criminal, and then escort the criminal to the city to be punished or executed.

古文：凡有爵者，与王之同族，奉而适甸师氏，以待刑杀。
现代文：凡有爵位的人以及王的同族中人，就押送到旬师氏那里，以等待施刑或处死。
English: All the nobles and members of the king's family were sent to Shunshi's house to await punishment or execution.

古文：掌戮掌斩杀贼谍而搏之。
现代文：掌戮负责斩杀盗贼和间谍，杀后剥去衣服并分裂尸体。
English: The executioner was responsible for killing thieves and spies, stripping them of their clothes and dismembering their bodies.

古文：凡杀其亲者，焚之；杀王之亲者，辜之。
现代文：凡杀害亲属的人处死后焚尸，杀害王的亲属的人处死后分裂尸体。
English: Anyone who killed a relative was to be burned after death, and anyone who killed a relative of the king was to be dismembered after death.

古文：凡杀人者，踣诸市，肆之三日，刑盗于市。
现代文：凡杀人的人在市上处死，陈尸三日。对盗贼行刑也在市上。
English: All murderers are to be put to death in the city, and their bodies are to lie in state for three days; thieves are also to be put to death in the city.

古文：凡罪之丽於法者，亦如之。
现代文：凡有罪而犯法的，也在市上行刑。
English: Anyone guilty of breaking the law will also be executed in the city.

古文：唯王之同族与有爵者，杀之于甸师氏。
现代文：只有王的同族和有爵位的人，在甸师氏那里处死。
English: Only members of the king's family and those with royal titles were put to death by Lord Tien.

古文：凡军旅、田役，斩杀刑戮亦如之。
现代文：凡出征、田猎、劳役，对犯罪的人斩杀行刑，也这样做。
English: Those who go out to fight, go hunting in the fields, or do labor service, and those who execute criminals by beheading, should also do the same.

古文：墨者使守门，劓者使守关，宫者使守内，刖者使守囿，髡者使守积。
现代文：受过墨刑的人使他守门，受过劓刑的人使他守关，受过宫刑的人使他守宫内，受过刖刑的人使他守苑囿，受过髡刑的人使他守粮草。
English: The one who had been inked made him guard the door, the one who had been beaten made him guard the gate, the one who had been beaten made him guard the palace, the one who had been beaten made him guard the courtyard, and the one who had been beaten made him guard the grain.

