古文：明帝太宗明皇帝讳彧，字休炳，小字荣期，文帝第十一子也。
现代文：太宗明皇帝号彧，字休炳，小字荣期，文帝的第十一个儿子。
English: Emperor Taizongming was the eleventh son of Emperor Wen.

古文：元嘉十六年十月戊寅生。
现代文：元嘉十六年十月十八日出生。
English: He was born on October 18th in the 16th year of Yuan Jia.

古文：二十五年，封淮阳王，食邑二千户。
现代文：二十五年，封为淮阴王，食邑二千户。
English: Twenty-five years later, it was given the title of Huaiyin King, serving 2,000 households.

古文：二十九年，改封湘东王。
现代文：二十九年改封为湘东王。
English: In 1929, his title was changed to King of Eastern Hunan.

古文：元凶弑立，以为骁骑将军，加给事中。
现代文：元凶篡位，任命他为骁骑将军，加封为给事中。
English: The culprit usurped the throne, appointed him to be the general of the cavalry, and was given the title of general.

古文：世祖践阼，为秘书监，迁冠军将军、南兰陵下邳二郡太守，领石头戍事。
现代文：世祖继位，任职秘书监，升迁为冠军将军、南兰陵下邳二郡太守，兼管石头戍军务。
English: Succession to the throne of the founder of the dynasty, served as secretary and supervisor, promoted to the champion general, the governor of the two counties in the lower part of South Lanling, and also in charge of the military affairs of Stone Mountain.

古文：孝建元年，徙为南彭城、东海二郡太守，将军如故，镇京口。
现代文：孝建元年调任南彭城、东海二郡太守，将军照旧担任，镇守京口。
English: In the first year of the reign of Xiao Jian, he was transferred to the position of the governor of South Pengcheng and the two counties in the East China Sea. He continued to serve as a general and became the town guard of Jingkou.

古文：其年，征为中护军。
现代文：同年，擢升为中护军。
English: In the same year, he was promoted to middle guard.

古文：二年，迁侍中，领游击将军。
现代文：二年升为卫尉，侍中照旧担任。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Guards, while he continued to serve as a chamberlain.

古文：三年，徙卫尉，侍中如故。又为左卫将军，卫尉如故。
现代文：又封为左将军，卫尉照旧担任，升迁为侍中，兼任游击将军。三年，迁官卫尉，侍中官职照旧。后又转任左卫将军，卫尉官职照旧。
English: He was also given the title of General of the Left, with the position of Lieutenant of the Guard, as before, and was promoted to the rank of Junior Chamberlain, also serving as a guerrilla general. Three years later, he was transferred to the rank of Lieutenant of the Guard, with the position of Junior Chamberlain, as before. Later, he was transferred to the rank of General of the Left, with the position of Lieutenant of the Guard, as before.

古文：大明元年，转中护军，卫尉如故。
现代文：大明元年，转任中护军，卫尉官职照旧。
English: In the first year of the Daimyo era, he was transferred to the position of middle guard, but retained his position as a guard officer.

古文：三年，为都官尚书，领游击将军，卫尉如故。
现代文：三年任都官尚书，兼任游击将军，卫尉照旧担任。
English: For three years, the official of the capital, Shosho, also served as a guerrilla general, and the guard officer continued to serve as before.

古文：七年，迁领军将军。
现代文：七年，升迁为领军将军。
English: Seven years later, he was promoted to the leading general.

古文：八年，出为使持节、都督徐兗二州豫州之梁郡诸军事、镇北将军、徐州刺史，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：八年被委任为使持节管理徐州兖州和豫州梁郡的军事、镇北将军、徐州刺史，赐给乐队一支。
English: The military, Zhenbei General, and Xuzhou Sashih, who were appointed to administer the festival in Xuzhou Luzhou and Yuzhou Liang County for eight years, gave the band a band.

古文：其年，征为侍中、护军将军。
现代文：同年，升迁为侍中、护军将军。
English: In the same year, he was promoted to Samurai Junior Officer and Escort General.

古文：未拜，复为领军将军，侍中如故。
现代文：没正式任命，又被封为领军将军，侍中照旧担任。
English: Although he was not officially appointed, he was named the leading general, and continued to serve as a chamberlain.

古文：永光元年，又出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督南豫豫司江四州扬州之宣城诸军事、卫将军、南豫州刺史，镇姑孰。
现代文：永光元年又出任使持节、散骑常侍，总管南豫州豫州司州江州扬州的宣城郡军务、任卫将军、南豫州刺史，镇守姑苏。
English: In the first year of the Yongguang era, he also served as an envoy, horseback riding attendant, general manager of the military affairs of Xuancheng County, Yangzhou, Jiangzhou, Yangzhou, Sizhou, Southern Henan Province, general of the National Guard, governor of Southern Henan Province, and town guard of Gu Su.

古文：又徙为都督雍梁南北秦四州郢州之竟陵诸军事、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史，持节、常侍、将军如故。
现代文：又调任管理雍梁南北秦四州郢州的竟陵郡军务、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史、持节、常侍，将军照旧担任。
English: In addition, Genglin County Military Affairs, Ningmanzhong Lieutenant, Yongzhou Zhishi, Ji Jie, and Changzhi were transferred to manage Yongliang, North and South Qin, Shizhou and Ganzhou, and the general served as before.

古文：未拜，复本位。
现代文：未正式任命，还是担任原来的官职。
English: He remains in his post without an official appointment.

古文：寻以本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：原来担任官职不变。出任开府仪同三司。
English: Originally, his official position remained unchanged. He served as the head of the prefectural government and the three departments.

古文：废帝景和末，上入朝，被留停都。
现代文：废帝景和年末，休炳入朝，被扣留在京城。
English: After the fall of Emperor Jing and the end of the year, Emperor Hushan ascended to the throne and was detained in the capital.

古文：废帝诛害宰辅，杀戮大臣，恆虑有图之者，疑畏诸父，并拘之殿内，遇上无礼，事在《文诸王传》。
现代文：废帝残害宰相，杀戮大臣，总担心有人图谋不轨，尤其怀疑他的叔父们，把叔父们都扣留在宫廷内，毫无礼貌，有关情况记在《文诸五传》里。
English: The deposed emperor mutilated the prime minister and the minister of homicide. He was always worried that someone was plotting against him, and he was especially suspicious of his uncles. He detained his uncles in the court without any manners. The relevant situation is recorded in "Wen Zhu Wuxuan."

古文：遂收上付廷尉，一宿被原。
现代文：于是将休炳抓起来交给廷尉，关了一晚，放了出来。
English: So he arrested Hucho and handed him over to the imperial lieutenant, who locked him up for one night and let him out.

古文：将加祸害者，前后非一。
现代文：想要陷害，前后不止一次。
English: If you want to frame someone, you have to go back and forth more than once.

古文：既而害上意定，明旦便应就祸。上先已与腹心阮佃夫、李道兒等密共合谋。
现代文：不久，害死他的决心已定，准备第二天早晨就进行，休炳早先与心腹阮佃夫、李道儿等秘密谋划。
English: Soon, the decision to kill him was made, and preparations were made for the next morning. Earlier, Huchu had secretly plotted with his confidants Ruan Shifu and Li Dao'er.

古文：于时废帝左右常虑祸及，人人有异志。
现代文：当时废帝左右常常担心灾祸降临，人人心怀贰心。
English: At that time, the former emperors were often worried about the disaster, and everyone was worried.

古文：唯有直皞将军宋越、谭金、童太一等数人为其腹心，并虓虎有干力，在殿省久，众并畏服之，故莫敢动。
现代文：只有直阁将军宗越、谭金、童太一等几个人是废帝的心腹，威武有臂力，在宫中供职日久，众人都惧怕他们，不敢妄动。
English: Only General Zong Yue, Tan Jin, Tong Ta, and a few others were close to the deposed emperor. They were mighty and powerful, and had served in the palace for a long time. Everyone was afraid of them and did not dare to make any moves.

古文：是夕，越等并外宿。
现代文：这天晚上，宗越等人在宫外住宿。
English: That evening, Zong Yue and others stayed outside the palace.

古文：佃夫、道兒因结寿寂之等殒废帝于后堂，十一月二十九日夜也。
现代文：佃夫、道儿乘机与寿寂之联络在十一月十九日夜在后堂刺杀废帝。
English: On the evening of November 19th, the widower and the daughter took advantage of their connection with Shoujia to assassinate the deposed emperor in the back hall.

古文：事定，上未知所为。
现代文：废帝被杀，休炳不知所措。
English: The deposed emperor was killed, and Hucho was at a loss.

古文：建安王休仁便称臣奉引升西堂，登御坐，召见诸大臣。
现代文：建安王休仁便向休炳称臣，奉迎休炳升坐西堂，登皇位，召见众大臣。
English: King of Jian'an, Emperor Qiu Ren, then declared himself a vassal of Emperor Qiu, and after receiving Emperor Qiu's welcome, he was promoted to the West Hall, ascended the throne, and summoned his ministers.

古文：于时事起仓卒，上失履，跣至西堂，犹著乌帽。
现代文：当时事情发生得仓促，休炳鞋掉了，赤脚到西堂，还戴着乌纱帽。
English: At that time, things happened in a hurry, Hume's shoes fell off, he went barefoot to the West Hall, and he was still wearing a black fedora.

古文：坐定，休仁呼主衣以白帽代之，令备羽仪。
现代文：刚坐下来，休仁便叫休炳换戴白帽子，修整仪表。
English: As soon as he sat down, he told Hu Rong to put on a white hat and fix the instrument.

古文：虽未即位，凡众事悉称令书施行。
现代文：虽没即位，大小事情都由休炳下令。
English: Although he did not accede to the throne, all major and minor matters were ordered by Hucho.

古文：己未，司徒扬州刺史豫章王子尚、山阴公主并赐死。
现代文：十八日，司徒、扬州刺史豫章王子尚、山阴公主全被赐死。
English: On the 18th day, Sito, Yangzhou Zishi Yuzhang Prince Shang and Sanyin Princess were all put to death.

古文：宗越、谭金、童太一谋反伏诛。
现代文：宗越、谭金、童太一被杀。
English: Zong Yue, Tan Jin and Tong Taichi were all killed.

古文：十二月庚申朔，令书以司空东海王祎为中书监、太尉，镇军将军、江州刺史晋安王子勋进号车骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十二月一日，行文任命司空东海王礻韦为中书监、太尉、镇军将军，江州刺史晋安王子勋晋升为车骑将军，开府仪同三司。
English: On December 1, Xingwen appointed Sikyong Donghai Wang Qianwei as the Chinese librarian, captain and general of the town army, and Jiangzhou Jishi Jinan Prince Xun was promoted to the general of the cavalry, and the ceremony of opening the capital was the same as the three divisions.

古文：癸亥，以新除骠骑大将军建安王休仁为司徒、尚书令、扬州刺史，镇军将军、开府仪同三司山阳王休祐进号骠骑大将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：五日，委任新任骠骑大将军建安王休仁为司徒、尚书令、扬州刺史、镇军将军、开府仪同三司，山阳王休晋升为骠骑大将军、荆州刺史。
English: On the fifth day, the newly appointed cavalry general, Jian'an Wang Xuren, was appointed as the chief of staff, Shang Shuling, Yangzhou Zhishi, the general of the town army, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, and Sanyang Wang Xiu was promoted to the cavalry general and Jingzhou Zhishi.

古文：崇宪卫尉桂阳王休范为镇北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：崇实卫尉桂阳王休范为镇北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: Chongshi Guards Lieutenant Guiyang Wang Xiufan was the general of Zhenbei and the history of South Xuzhou.

古文：乙丑，改封安陆王子绥为江夏王。
现代文：十九日，改封安陆王子绥为江夏王。
English: On the 19th, he changed his title from Prince Anlu to King Jiangxia.

古文：泰始元年冬十二月丙寅，上即皇帝位。
现代文：泰始元年冬十二月二日，休炳即位。下诏说：
English: On the 2nd day of December in the winter of the first year of the Taisho era, when Huseini ascended the throne, the following edict was issued:

古文：诏曰：高祖武皇帝德洞四瀛，化绵九服。
现代文： 高祖武皇帝以道德感化天下。
English: Emperor Gao Zuwu inspired the world with morality.

古文：太祖文皇帝以大明定基；世祖孝武皇帝以下武宁乱。
现代文：太祖文皇帝以圣明安定国家；世祖孝武皇帝以后国家动荡。
English: Emperor Taizouwen stabilized the country with Shenming; the country was in turmoil after Emperor Xizou Xiaowu.

古文：日月所照，梯山航海；风雨所均，削衽袭带。
现代文：子业天性凶残，人面兽心，道德沦丧，儿时就显露出来了。
English: Zoya's ferocious nature, brutishness, and lack of morals were revealed in his childhood.

古文：所以业固盛汉，声溢隆周。
现代文：他违背三纲五常，不敬上天，祸害国人，确实是开天辟地以来所未有过的，典籍图书所没记载过的。
English: He violated the three principles and five constants, disrespected heaven, and harmed the Chinese people, which is truly unprecedented since the beginning of the world, and has not been recorded in classic books.

古文：虎兕难匣，凭河必彰，遂诛灭上宰，穷衅逆之酷，虐害国辅，究孥戮之刑。
现代文：父丧之时，无一日悲哀，丧服在身，却寻欢作乐。诛杀宰相，残害朝廷大臣，极尽残酷杀戮之能事。
English: At the time of my father's funeral, there was not a single day of sadness, I was in mourning, but I was looking for fun. I killed the Prime Minister, I killed the Minister of the Imperial Court, I killed with the utmost cruelty.

古文：子鸾同生，以昔憾殄殪；敬猷兄弟，以睚眦歼夷。征逼义阳，将加屠脍。
现代文：子鸾、敬猷本是手足兄弟，却因往昔小事将他们处死。征讨义阳，图谋屠杀。
English: Zi Yao and Jing Yao were brother and sister, but they were put to death for trivial matters in the past. They plotted to kill Yiyang.

古文：陵辱戚籓，槚楚妃主。
现代文：凌辱亲戚，不讲尊卑。
English: Insulting relatives is not a matter of superiority or inferiority.

古文：夺立左右，窃子置储，肆酗于朝，宣淫于国。
现代文：夺左右所爱，偷别人儿子立为太子，穷凶极恶于朝廷，寻欢作乐于国内。
English: Seize what you love left and right, steal someone else's son and set him up as crown prince, be extremely cruel to the imperial court, and seek joy and pleasure in the country.

古文：事秽东陵，行污飞走。
现代文：秽污东陵，行窃逃走。
English: Filthy Dongling, stealing and running away.

古文：朕假寐凝忧，泣血待旦，虑大宋之基，于焉而泯，武、文之业，将坠于渊。
现代文：不断制造冤案，一天比一天多，又想毒死崇宪，加害众叔父，这些事虽发生在宫廷内，但却传遍京城。宠信小人，压抑忠臣。苛捐杂税，如狼似虎，百官不安，害怕头颅不保；百姓离心，担心不能保全家老小。因此鬼哭山鸣，天降凶兆，神器将坠，基业将毁。
English: Constantly creating unjust cases, more and more every day, and trying to poison and kill the revered constitution and harm all the uncles, these things happened in the court, but they spread all over the capital. Favouring villains, suppressing loyalists. Harsh taxes, like a wolf-like tiger, all officials are uneasy, afraid of losing their heads; the people are distracted, worried about not being able to protect their families. Therefore, the ghosts cry, the heavens fall, the sacred objects will fall, and the foundation will be destroyed.

古文：赖七庙之灵，藉八百之庆，巨猾斯殄，鸿沴时褰。
现代文： 我日夜忧虑，担心大宋的基业，将要毁灭。靠祖宗的保佑，灭亡了这个坏蛋。
English: I worried day and night, fearing that the heritage of the Great Song Dynasty would be destroyed. Thanks to the blessing of the ancestors, this villain was destroyed.

古文：皇纲绝而复纽，天纬缺而更张。
现代文：皇纲濒临崩溃而重振，改弦更张。
English: The imperial system was on the verge of collapse, but was revived and reformed.

古文：猥以寡薄，属承乾统，上缉三光之重，俯顾庶民之艰。
现代文：我无才无德，即皇位，上靠苍天保佑，下靠百姓拥戴。
English: I have no talent and no virtue, that is to say, the imperial throne is blessed by the heavens above and supported by the people below.

古文：业业矜矜，若履冰谷，思与亿兆，同此维新。
现代文：兢兢业业，如履薄冰，想同黎民百姓一起，维新变法。
English: They are working diligently, treading on thin ice, and want to work with the people of Lebanon to reform and change the law.

古文：可大赦天下，改景和元年为泰始元年。
现代文：可大赦天下，改景和元年为泰始元年。
English: But there was a general amnesty for the whole country, and the change of scenery and the first year of the year began in the first year of the year.

古文：赐民爵二级。
现代文：赐百姓爵二级。
English: He was awarded the second-level title of "peoples peer."

古文：鳏寡孤独不能自存者，人谷五斛。
现代文：鳏寡孤独难以生存的，每人赐谷五斛。
English: Widows and widowers who find it difficult to survive on their own will be given five mu of grain each.

古文：逋租宿债勿复收。
现代文：旧租旧债不再征收。
English: Old rents and debts will no longer be collected.

古文：庚午，以荆州刺史临海王子顼为镇军将军，南徐州刺史永嘉王子仁为中军将军，左卫将军刘道隆为中护军。
现代文：违犯乡约，偷盗奸淫，严惩不贷。被判长期徒刑的，特赦释放回家。被削去官爵的人，不准为官，遵循旧典。废帝制订的荒谬政策，一律废除。 三日，任命安西将军、南豫州刺史刘遵考为特进、右光禄大夫、辅国将军，历阳南谯二郡太守建平王景素为南豫州刺史。四日，任命临海王子顼为镇军将军，南徐州刺史永嘉王子仁为中军将军，左卫将军刘道隆为中护军。
English: On the third day, General Anxi, Liu Zunka, the governor of South Hubei Province, was appointed as the special envoy, doctor of Uguanglu, and general of Fu Guo Province, and Jianping Wang Jingsu, the governor of South Hubei Province, was appointed as the governor of South Hubei Province. On the fourth day, Prince Linhai was appointed as the general of the town army, Prince Yongjia, the governor of South Hubei Province, was appointed as the general of the central army, and General Liu Daolong, the governor of Zuoying Province, was appointed as the general of the left guard.

古文：辛未，改封临贺王子产为南平王，晋熙王子舆为庐陵王。
现代文：五日，改封临贺王子产为南平王。晋熙王子兴为庐陵王。
English: On the fifth day, Prince Lin He's title was changed to King of Nanping, and Prince Jin Xi's title was changed to King of Fuling.

古文：壬申，以尚书左仆射王景文为尚书仆射。
现代文：六日，任命尚书左仆射王景文为尚书仆射。
English: On the 6th, he appointed Shang Shuxu's left-hand man Sha Wang Jingwen as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：新除中护军刘道隆卒。
现代文：新任中护军刘道隆去世。
English: Liu Daolong, the newly appointed middle-ranking bodyguard, passed away.

古文：壬午，诏曰： 朕戡乱宁民，属膺景祚。
现代文：八日，下诏说： 我平定动乱安定民心，即皇位。
English: On the eighth day, he issued the following edict: "I will put down the unrest and stabilize the people's hearts, that is, the throne."

古文：鸿制初造，革道惟新。而国故频罹，仁泽偏壅。
现代文：初即皇位百废待兴。而国家罹乱日久，仁义丧失。
English: In the beginning, the imperial throne was completely abandoned, and the country was in turmoil for a long time, and benevolence and righteousness were lost.

古文：每鉴寐疚心，罔识攸济。
现代文：每每彻夜难眠，忧心忡忡。
English: Every night I can't sleep, I'm so worried.

古文：巡方问俗，弘政所先，可分遣大使，广求民瘼，考守宰之良，采衡闾之善。
现代文：巡察民间访问民俗是为先导，可派遣使臣，访求民苦，考查地方官，选拔民间人才。
English: The inspection of the people and the visit to the folk customs are forerunners. Envoys can be dispatched to visit the hardships of the people, local officials can be examined, and folk talents can be selected.

古文：若狱犴淹枉，伤民害教者，具以事闻；鳏寡孤独，癃残六疾，不能自存者，郡县优量赈给；贞妇孝子，高行力田，许悉条奏。
现代文：若有冤案，伤害百姓有损礼教的，一一上报。鳏寡孤独、伤残病疾、难以生存的，郡县官吏尽力赈给。节妇孝子，道德高尚致力种田者，一一上报。
English: If there is a case of injustice, harming the people and undermining etiquette, report it one by one. Widows and widowers who are lonely, disabled, sick, and difficult to survive, county and prefectural officials will do their best to help them. Women and children who celebrate festivals, and those who have high morals and are committed to farming, report it one by one.

古文：务询舆诵，广纳嘉谋，每尽皇华之旨，俾若朕亲览焉。 
现代文：努力询访，广采良策，尽量按照我的旨意去办，就像我亲自去视察一样。 
English: Make every effort to make inquiries, collect a wide range of good ideas, and try to do as much as possible according to my will, just as if I were to inspect it myself.

古文：乙亥，追尊所生沈婕妤曰宣皇太后。
现代文：十一日，追尊生母沈婕妤为宣皇太后。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Sui Son's birth mother, Shen Yi, was proclaimed empress dowager.

古文：后军将军垣闳为司州刺史，前右将军长史殷琰为豫州刺史。
现代文：任命后军将军垣闳为司州刺史，前右将军长史殷琰为豫州刺史。
English: After the appointment, the general of the rear army was appointed as the chief historian of Shizhou, and the former right-wing general was appointed as the chief historian of Yuzhou.

古文：丙子，诏曰： 皇室多故，糜费滋广，且久岁不登，公私歉弊。
现代文：十六日，下诏说： 皇室事多，耗费越来越大，而连年年成不好，歉收。
English: On the 16th, the next imperial edict said: The imperial family has many affairs, the expenses are getting bigger and bigger, but the results are not good year after year, and the harvest is poor.

古文：方刻意从俭，弘济时艰，政道未孚，慨愧兼积。
现代文：要下决心节俭，以度过眼前的困难，治道未理顺，既感慨又惭愧。
English: It is necessary to make up one's mind to be thrifty in order to get through the immediate difficulties, and it is both regretful and ashamed that the way of governance has not been straightened out.

古文：大官供膳，可详所减撤，尚方御府雕文篆刻无益之物，一皆蠲省，务存简约，以称朕心。 
现代文：太官供应的膳食，要尽量减少，宫中的雕梁画栋等无用的奢华物，一律免去，一定要节俭，以称我心。 
English: The meals provided by the eunuchs should be reduced as much as possible, useless luxuries such as the carved beams and painted buildings in the palace should be eliminated, and we must be frugal.

古文：戊寅，崇太后为崇宪皇太后，立皇后王氏。
现代文：十八日，尊太后为崇宪皇太后。立王氏为皇后。
English: On the 18th, Empress Dowager Sonno became Empress Dowager Sonken, and Empress Dowager Ritsuko became Empress.

古文：镇军将军、江州刺史晋安王子勋举兵反，镇军长史邓琬为其谋主，雍州刺史袁鳷率众赴之。
现代文：镇军将军、江州刺史晋安王子勋起兵造反，镇军长史邓琬是主谋，雍州刺史袁头率众投奔。
English: The general of the township army, the prince of Jiangzhou, Shi Jianan, led the rebellion, the commander of the township army, Shi Dengyao, was the mastermind, and the leader of Yongzhou, Shi Yuan, led the crowd to flee.

古文：辛巳，骠骑大将军、前荆州刺史山阳王休祐改为江州刺史，荆州刺史临海王子顼即留本任。加领军将军王玄谟镇军将军。
现代文：十九日，骠骑大将军、前荆州刺史山阳王休改任江州刺史。荆州刺史临海王子顼任原职不变，加封领军将军王玄谟为镇军将军。
English: On the 19th, Shanyang Wangxu, the general of the cavalry and the former Jingzhou chief of staff, was reappointed as the chief of staff of Jiangzhou. Jingzhou chief of staff Linhai Wangxu remained in his original position, and Wang Xuanmu, the leader of the garrison, became the general of the town army.

古文：壬午，车驾谒太庙。
现代文：二十二日，皇上拜谒祖庙。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor visited the Ancestral Temple.

古文：甲申，后将军、郢州刺史安陆王子绥进号征南将军，右将军、会稽太守寻阳王子房进号安东将军，前将军、荆州刺史临海王子顼进号平西将军。
现代文：二十四日，后将军、郢州刺史安陆王子绥晋升为征南将军，前将军、荆州刺史临海王子顼晋升为平西将军。子绥、子顼都不接受任命，起兵造反。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the latter general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general and the former general were promoted.

古文：子绥、子房、子顼并不受命，举兵同逆。戊子，新除中军将军永嘉王子仁为护军将军。
现代文：二十八日，委任新任中军将军承嘉王子仁为护军将军。
English: On the 28th, the newly appointed Chinese general, Cheng Jia Wuzhen, was appointed as the escorting general.

古文：二年春正月己丑朔，以军事不朝会。
现代文：泰始二年正月初一，因为有战事，没举行朝会。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of Taishi, because of the war, there was no imperial court meeting.

古文：庚寅，以金紫光禄大夫王僧朗为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：二日，任命金紫光禄大夫王僧朗为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: On the second day, Wang Songlang, the doctor of the Jin Zi Guanglu, was appointed as the doctor of the Zuo Guanglu and the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：壬辰，骠骑大将军、江州刺史山阳王休祐改为南豫州刺史；镇历阳。镇军将军、领军将军王玄谟为车骑将军、江州刺史，平北将军、徐州刺史薛安都进号安北将军。
现代文：四日，骠骑大将军、江州刺史山阳王休改任南豫州刺史，镇守历阳，镇军将军、领军将军王玄谟改任车骑将军、江州刺史，平北将军、徐州刺史薛安都晋升为安北将军。
English: On the 4th, Shanyang Wang Xiu, the general of the cavalry and the governor of Jiangsu Province, was promoted to the governor of South Henan Province, Liyang, the town guard, was promoted to the general of the cavalry, the governor of Jiangsu Province, the general of Pingbei Province, and the governor of Xuzhou Province, Xue An, were promoted to the general of Anbei Province.

古文：安都亦不受命。
现代文：安都不接受任命。
English: Neither accepted the appointment.

古文：癸巳，以左卫将军巴陵王休若为镇东将军；新除安东将军寻阳王子房为抚军将军；司徒左长史袁愍孙为领军将军。
现代文：七日，委任左卫将军巴陵王休若为镇东将军，新任安东将军浔阳王子房为抚军将军，司徒左长史袁慰孙为领军将军。
English: On the 7th, he appointed the left guard general, Baling Wang Xuera, as the Zhendong general, the new Anton general, Shenyang Prince Fang, as the Fuzhou army general, and the left guard general, Yuan Jiusun, as the leading army general.

古文：甲午，中外戒严。
现代文：八日，全国戒严。
English: On the 8th, martial law was declared throughout the country.

古文：司徒建安王休仁都督征讨诸军事，统众军南讨。以青州刺史刘祗为南兗州刺史。
现代文：司徒建安王休仁总管统领各路大军南讨，任命青州刺史刘祗为南兖州刺史。
English: The commander-in-chief of the Jian'an Wang Xueren led the army of the south to discuss, and appointed Liu Wei, the governor of Qingzhou, as the governor of the southern Luzhou.

古文：丙申，以征虏司马申令孙为徐州刺史，义阳内史庞孟虬为司州刺史。
现代文：九日，任命征虏司马申令孙为徐州刺史，义阳内史宠孟暇为司州刺史。
English: On the 9th, the conscript Sima Shenling Sun was appointed as the historian of Xuzhou, and the historian of Yiyang, Diao Mengfei, was appointed as the historian of Xuzhou.

古文：令孙、孟虬及豫州刺史殷琰、青州刺史沈文秀、冀州刺史崔道固、湘州行事何慧文、广州刺史袁昙远、益州刺史萧惠开、梁州刺史柳元怙并同叛逆。
现代文：令孙、孟暇和豫州刺史殷琰、青州刺史沈文秀、冀州刺史崔道固、湘州行事何慧文、广州刺史袁云远、益州刺史萧惠开、梁州刺史柳元怙共同谋反。
English: Ling Sun, Meng Hao, Yin Qi, Shen Wenxiu, Cui Daogu, He Huiwen, Yuan Yunyuan, Xiao Huikai, Liang Zhou, Liu Yuanqin, and others plotted the rebellion together.

古文：兗州刺史殷孝祖入卫京都，仍遣孝祖前锋南伐。
现代文：兖州刺史殷孝祖进京城巩卫，还是派孝祖为南伐先锋。
English: Yin Xiaozhu, who was born in Zhangzhou, entered the capital of Gongwei, and sent Xiaozhu to be the vanguard of the Southern Expedition.

古文：甲辰，加孝祖抚军将军。
现代文：十三日，加封孝祖为抚军将军。
English: On the 13th, Gafong Xiaozu became the general of the Fuzhou army.

古文：丙午，车驾亲御六师，出顿中兴堂。
现代文：十四日，皇上亲率大军，在中兴堂誓师。
English: On the 14th, the emperor's relatives led a large army to swear an oath at the Zhongxing Hall.

古文：辛亥，骠骑大将军、南豫州刺史山阳王休祐改为豫州刺史，统众军西讨。
现代文：十八日，骠骑大将军、南豫州刺史山阳王休改任豫州刺史，统率大军西讨。
English: On the 18th, Shanyang Wangxu, the commander of the Southern Yuzhou cavalry, was appointed as the commander of the Southern Yuzhou cavalry and led the army to the west.

古文：吴郡太守顾琛、吴兴太守王昙生、义兴太守刘延熙、晋陵太守袁摽、山阳太守程天祚并举兵反。镇东将军巴陵王休若统众军东讨。
现代文：吴郡太守顾琛、吴兴太守王云生、义兴太守刘延熙、晋陵太守袁标、山阳太守程天祚共同起兵谋反，镇东将军巴陵王休若统率大军东讨。
English: Wu County Governor Gu Gu, Wu Xing Governor Wang Yunsheng, Yixing Governor Liu Yanxi, Jinling Governor Yuan Biao, and Sanyang Governor Cheng Tianyao jointly raised an army to rebel, and Zhendong General Baling Wang Xiuyao led a large army to discuss.

古文：壬子，崇宪皇太后崩。
现代文：二十一日，崇宪皇太后去世。
English: On the 21st, Empress Dowager Chongxian passed away.

古文：是日，军主任农夫、刘怀珍平定义兴。
现代文：同日，军主任农夫、刘怀珍平定义兴。
English: On the same day, Liu Huai Zhenping, a farmer and military chief, declared a jubilee.

古文：永世县民史逸宗据县为逆，殿中将军陆攸之讨平之。
现代文：永世县百姓史逸宗占县城叛逆，殿中将军陆攸之讨伐平定。
English: The people of Yongse County, Shi Yizong, occupied the county seat and rebelled, and the crusade of General Lu You in the palace was pacified.

古文：丙辰，以新除左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王僧朗为特进，左光禄大夫如故。
现代文：二十四日，委任新任左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王僧朗为特进，左光禄大夫照旧担任。
English: On the 24th, the newly-appointed Dr. Sakoroku, Kaifu, and the three chief priests were appointed as special advisers, and Dr. Sakoroku continued to serve as before.

古文：二月乙丑，僧朗卒。尚书仆射王文景父忧去职。
现代文：二月三日，王僧朗去世，尚书仆射王景文因父病离职。
English: On February 3rd, Wang Monk Lang passed away, and Shang Shufu Sha Wang Jingwen left his post due to his father's illness.

古文：曲赦吴、吴兴、义兴、晋陵四郡。
现代文：赦免吴、吴兴、义兴、晋陵四郡。
English: The four counties of Wu, Wu Xing, Yixing and Jinling were pardoned.

古文：吏部尚书蔡兴宗为尚书左仆射，吴兴太守张永、右军将军齐王东讨，平晋陵。
现代文：任命吏部尚书蔡兴宗为尚书左仆射，吴兴太守张永、右军将军齐王东征，平定晋陵。
English: Cai Xingzong, Shangshu's right-hand man, was appointed as Shangshu's left-hand man, and Wu Xing, Zhang Yong, the governor-general, and Qi Wang, the general of the right-hand army, went on an eastward expedition to pacify Jinling.

古文：癸未，曲赦浙江东五郡。
现代文：二十一日，赦免浙江东部五郡。
English: On the 21st, five counties in eastern Zhejiang were pardoned.

古文：丁亥，镇东将军巴陵王休若进号卫将军。
现代文：二十七日，镇军将军巴陵王休若晋升为卫将军。
English: On the 27th, the general of the town army, Baling Wang Xiu Ruo, was promoted to the general of the guards.

古文：建武将军吴喜公率诸军破贼于吴、吴兴、会稽，平定三郡，同逆皆伏诛。
现代文：建武将军吴喜公率各路大军在吴兴、会稽大败叛贼，平定了这三个郡，叛逆同伙被处死。
English: Jianwu General Wu Xigong led a large number of troops from all walks of life in Wuxing, defeated the traitors, and leveled these three counties. The traitor accomplices were executed.

古文：辅国将军齐王前锋北讨，辅国将军刘缅前锋南讨。
现代文：辅国将军齐王为北伐前锋。辅国将军刘面力为西伐前锋。
English: Auxiliary General Qi Wang was the vanguard of the Northern Expedition, and Auxiliary General Liu Mianli was the vanguard of the Western Expedition.

古文：贼刘胡领众四万据赭圻。
现代文：叛贼刘胡率众四万占据赭圻。
English: The traitor Liu Hu led 40,000 people to occupy the capital.

古文：三月庚寅，抚军将军沈攸之代为南讨前锋。
现代文：三月三日，抚军将军殷孝祖进攻赭圻，战死，任命辅国将军沈攸之代理南征前锋。
English: On March 3rd, General Yin Xiaozu of the Fuzhou army attacked Shandong and was killed in the battle. He appointed General Shen You of the Auxiliary Army as the acting vanguard of the southern expedition.

古文：贼众稍盛，袁鳷顿鹊尾，联营迄至浓湖，众十余万。
现代文：贼人势盛，袁头驻扎在鹊尾，军营驻扎到了浓湖，有十万多人。
English: The bandits were in full swing. Yuan Tou was stationed in Shanwei, and the military camp was stationed in Nonghu. There were more than 100,000 of them.

古文：壬辰，以新除太子詹事张永为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：八日，任命新任太子詹事张永为青冀二州刺史。
English: On the 8th, the newly appointed crown prince Zhan Zhi Zhang Yong was appointed as the crown prince of the two states of Qinghai and Hebei.

古文：丙申，镇北将军、南徐州刺史桂阳王休范总统北讨诸军事。
现代文：九日，镇北将军、南豫州刺史桂阳王休范总管北伐各路军军务。
English: On the 9th, General Zhenbei and General Guiyang Wang Xuan of the Southern Yuzhou Military Region, in charge of the military affairs of all the armies of the Northern Expedition.

古文：丁酉，以尚书刘思考为徐州刺史。
现代文：十二日，委任尚书刘思考为徐州刺史。
English: On the 12th, Shangshu Liu was appointed to write the history of Xuzhou.

古文：戊戌，贬寻阳王子房爵为松滋县侯。
现代文：十七日，将寻阳王子房贬为松滋县侯。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, he demoted Hoyang Prince House to the status of a prefect of Songzhi County.

古文：乙巳，以奉朝请郑黑为司州刺史。
现代文：二十三日，任命奉朝请郑黑为司州刺史。
English: On the 23rd, he was appointed to ask Zheng He to write the history of Sizhou.

古文：辛亥，镇北将军、南徐州刺史桂阳王休范领南兗州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，镇北将军、南徐州刺史桂阳王休范兼任南兖州刺史。
English: On the 26th, Zhenbei General, South Xuzhou chief historian Guiyang Wang Xuan also served as South Luzhou chief historian.

古文：壬子，断新钱，专用古钱。
现代文：二十九日，禁止用新钱，只用旧钱。
English: On the 29th, the use of new money was prohibited, and only old money was used.

古文：癸丑，原赦扬、南徐二州囚系，凡逋亡一无所问。
现代文：三十日，赦免扬州、南徐州囚犯，原来逃亡的不再追究。
English: On the 30th, Yangzhou and Nanxuzhou prisoners were pardoned, and those who had previously escaped were no longer pursued.

古文：夏四月壬午，以散骑侍郎明僧暠为青州刺史。
现代文：夏四月二十六日，任命散骑侍郎明僧为青州刺史。
English: On the 26th day of the 4th month of the summer, he appointed Zangjia Zhilang Mingzang as the official historian of Qingzhou.

古文：五月壬辰，以辅国将军沈攸之为雍州刺史。
现代文：五月七日，委任辅国将军沈攸之为雍州刺史。
English: On May 7, Shen You, the general of the Auxiliary State, was appointed as the leader of Yongzhou.

古文：丁酉，曲赦豫州。
现代文：九日，赦免豫州。
English: On the 9th, he pardoned Yuzhou.

古文：丁未，新除尚书仆射王景文为中军将军，以青、冀二州刺史张永为镇军将军。
现代文：十三日，任命新任尚书仆射王景文为中军将军，青、冀二州刺史张永为镇军将军。
English: On the 13th, the newly appointed Shang Shuxu servant Sha Wang Jingwen was appointed as the general of the Chinese army, and Zhang Yong, the secretary of the Qing and Hebei states, was appointed as the general of the town army.

古文：庚戌，以宁朔将军刘乘民为冀州刺史。
现代文：十五日，委任宁朔将军刘乘民为冀州刺史。
English: On the 15th, Ningshuo General Liu Xingmin was appointed to write the history of Jizhou.

古文：甲寅，葬崇宪皇太后于攸宁陵。
现代文：十九日，将崇宪太后葬在修宁陵。
English: On the 19th, Empress Dowager Chongxian was buried in Shuning Mausoleum.

古文：冠军将军、益州刺史萧惠开进号平西将军。
现代文：冠军将军、益州刺史萧惠开晋升为平西将军。
English: The champion general, Yizhou acolyte Xiao Huikai, was promoted to General Pingxi.

古文：六月辛酉，镇军将军张永领徐州刺史。
现代文：六月三日，镇军将军张永兼任徐州刺史。
English: On June 3, Zhang Yong, the general of the town army, also served as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：京师雨水，丁卯，遣殿中将军检行赐恤。
现代文：京城发洪水，五日，派殿中将军视察赈济。
English: The capital was flooded, and on the 5th, a vice-admiral was sent to inspect the economy.

古文：以左军将军垣恭祖为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：任命左军将军垣恭为琛、南秦二州刺史。
English: He appointed the general of the Left Army, Gaki Yasushi, to be the shogun, and the history of the Southern Qin and Erzhou dynasties.

古文：秋七月己丑，镇北将军、南徐兗二州刺史桂阳王休范进号征北大将军。
现代文：秋七月二日，镇北将军、南徐兖二州刺史桂阳王休范晋升为征北大将军。
English: On July 2 of autumn, Zhenbei General, Nan Xuqi Erzhou Zhi Shi Guiyang Wang Xiufan was promoted to General of the Northern Expedition.

古文：辛卯，镇军将军、徐州刺史张永改为南兗州刺史。
现代文：十四日，镇军将军、徐州刺史张永改任南兖州刺史。
English: On the 14th, Zhang Yong, the general of the township army and the chief of Xuzhou, was transferred to the post of the chief of South Luzhou.

古文：丁酉，以仇池太守杨僧嗣为北秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：十二日，加封仇池太守杨俾嗣为北秦州刺史、武都王。
English: On the 12th, Yang Bizi, the governor of Quchi, was appointed as the governor of North Qin and the King of Wudang.

古文：壬寅，以男子时朗之为北豫州刺史。
现代文：十八日，任命男子时朗之为北豫州刺史。
English: On the 18th, he appointed a man named Shi Lang as the new governor of North Henan Province.

古文：乙巳，龙骧将军刘道符平山阳。
现代文：二十一日，龙骧将军刘道符平定山阳。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, the Dragon Emperor General Liu Daofu conquered Shanyang.

古文：辛亥，又以义军主郑叔举为北豫州刺史，镇军将军、南兗州刺史张永复领徐州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，又任命义军主帅郑叔举为北豫州刺史，镇军将军、南兖州刺史张永又兼任徐州刺史。
English: On the 26th, Zheng Shuhe, the commander of the rebel army, was appointed as the governor of North Henan Province, and Zhang Yong, the general of the town army and the governor of South Henan Province, was also appointed as the governor of Xuzhou Province.

古文：甲寅，复以冀州刺史崔道固为徐州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，又调冀州刺史崔道固为徐州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Cui Daogu from Jizhou Province was transferred to Xuzhou Province.

古文：八月己卯，司徒建安王休仁率众军大破贼，斩伪尚书修射袁鳷，进讨江、郢、荆、雍、湘五州，平定之。
现代文：八月七日，司徒建安王休仁率大军大败叛军，斩叛军尚书仆射袁头，挺进江、郢、荆、雍、湘五州，并平定了这五个州。
English: On August 7th, the great army led by King Jian'an and King Shuren of Sidu defeated the rebels, defeated the rebel Shang Shubu and Yuan Tou, and advanced into the five provinces of Jiang, Handan, Jing, Yong and Hunan, and leveled these five provinces.

古文：晋安王子勋、安陆王子绥、临海王子顼、邵陵王子元并赐死；同党皆伏诛。
现代文：晋安王子勋、安陆王子绥、临海王子顼、邵陵王子元都被赐死，同谋都被处死。
English: Prince Jinan, Prince Anlu, Prince Linhai and Prince Shao Ling were all sentenced to death, and their accomplices were all executed.

古文：诸将军帅封赏各有差。甲申，以护军将军、永嘉王子仁为平南将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：各将帅都有封赏。十七日，任命护军将军、永嘉王子仁为平西将军、湘州刺史。
English: On the 17th, Yongjia Prince Ren, the general of the escort, was appointed as the general of Pingxi, and the history of Xiangzhou was written.

古文：九月乙酉，曲赦江、郢、荆、雍、湘五州；守宰不得离职。
现代文：九月五日，赦免江、郢、荆、雍、湘五州，地方官不得擅离职守。
English: On September 5, the five prefectures of Jiang, Handan, Jing, Yong and Hunan were pardoned. Local officials were not allowed to leave their posts without permission.

古文：壬辰，骠骑大将军、豫州刺史山阳王休祐改为荆州刺史。
现代文：十一日，骠骑大将军、豫州刺史山阳王休改任荆州刺史。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shanyang Wang Xiu, General of the Horse Cavalry and Governor of Yuzhou Province, was appointed Governor of Jingzhou Province.

古文：分豫州立南豫州。
现代文：从豫州分出一部设立南豫州。
English: A part of Henan Province was separated from Henan Province to form South Henan Province.

古文：癸巳，六军解严。
现代文：十二日，军队解除戒严。
English: On the 12th, the army lifted martial law.

古文：大赦天下，赐民爵一级。
现代文：大赦天下，赐民爵一级。
English: Grant amnesty to the whole world, and give him a first-class title.

古文：甲午，以中军将军王景文为安南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：十五日，任命中军将军王景文为安南将军、江州刺史。
English: On the 15th, Wang Jingwen, a general of the Chinese army, was appointed as General Annan and the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：戊戌，以车骑将军、江州刺史王玄谟为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司、护军将军。
现代文：十七日，委任车骑将军、江州刺史王玄谟为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司、护军将军。
English: On the 17th, he appointed the general of cavalry and cavalry, Wang Xuanmu, the governor of Jiangsu Province, as the doctor of Zuo Guanglu, the three officers of Kaifu Yi Tong, and the general of the escort.

古文：庚子，以建安王休仁世子伯融为豫州刺史。
现代文：二十二日，任命建安王休仁长子伯融为豫州刺史。
English: On the 22nd, the eldest son of King Jianan, King Huiren, named Bo Rong as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：辛丑，卫将军巴陵王休若即本号为雍州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，卫将军巴陵王休若以卫将军名义任雍州刺史。
English: On the 24th, the Wei general, Baling Wang Xiuya, was appointed as the Yongzhou governor in the name of the Wei general.

古文：雍州刺史沈攸之为郢州刺史。
现代文：雍州刺史沈攸之改任郢州刺史。
English: Shen You, Yongzhou chief historian, has been promoted to the post of Zhangzhou chief historian.

古文：庚戌，以太子左卫率建平王景素为南兗州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，委任太子左卫率建平王景素为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 27th, Prince Jianping Wang Jingsu, the leader of Prince Zuo Wei, was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：十月乙卯，永嘉王子仁、始安王子真、淮南王子孟、南平王子产、庐陵王子舆、松滋侯子房并赐死。
现代文：十月四日，永嘉王子仁、始安王子真、淮南王子孟、南平王子产、庐陵王子兴、松滋侯子房都被赐死。
English: On October 4, Yongjia Prince Ren, Shi'an Prince Zhen, Huainan Prince Meng, Nanping Prince Zang, Fuling Prince Xing, and Songzi Prince Zifu were all put to death.

古文：庚午，以吴郡太守顾觊之为湘州刺史。
现代文：七日，任命郢州刺史沈攸之为中领军，与张永共同北伐。
English: On the 7th, Shen You, the governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the central leader, and he and Zhang Yong jointly led the Northern Expedition.

古文：戊寅，立皇子昱为皇太子。
现代文：八日，立皇子昱为皇太子。
English: On the 8th, the crown prince was enthroned.

古文：曲赦扬、南徐二州。
现代文：赦免扬州、南徐州。
English: Yangzhou and South Xuzhou were pardoned.

古文：以辅国将军刘勔为广州刺史，左军将军张世为豫州刺史。
现代文：委任辅国将军刘面力为广州刺史，左军将军张世为豫州刺史。
English: Liu Mianli, the general of the Auxiliary Army, was appointed as the governor of Guangzhou, and Zhang Shih, the general of the Left Army, was appointed as the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：十一月甲申，以安成太守刘袭为郢州刺史。
现代文：十一月十三日，任命安成太守刘袭为郢州刺史。
English: On November 13th, Liu Wei, the governor of Ancheng, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：壬辰，诏曰： 治崇简易，化疾繁侈，远关隆替，明著轨迹者也。
现代文：下诏说： 治国应崇尚简易，革除侈靡，我受命于危难之际，却要供应军费开支，智识比不上先王，目前的困难却比前代大。
English: The next edict said: "Governing the country should be simple, and extravagance should be eliminated. I have been ordered to provide military expenditure in times of crisis. I am not as intelligent as the previous king, but the current difficulties are greater than the previous generation.

古文：朕甫承大业，训道未敷，虽侧席忠规，伫梦岩筑，而良图莫荐，奇士弗闻，永鉴通古，无忘宵寐。
现代文：选贤运能，是国家兴盛的关键。我初即皇位，百废待兴，虽然极愿倾听忠告，但没人推荐奇才志士，也没人进献良策，同时记着古书的告诫，无时敢忘。
English: The key to a country's prosperity is the ability to select good men and women. When I first came to the throne, I was impatient to succeed. Although I was eager to listen to advice, no one recommended a great man, no one suggested a good strategy, and at the same time, I kept in mind the admonitions of the ancient books, and I always dared to forget.

古文：今籓隅克晏，敷化维始，屡怀存治，实望箴阙。王公卿尹，群僚庶官，其有嘉谋直献，匡俗济时，咸切事陈奏，无或依隐。若乃林泽贞栖，丘园耿洁，博洽古今，敦崇孝让，四方大任，可明书搜扬，具即以闻，随就褒立。 
现代文：今叛乱平定，天下太平，可开始整治国家，王公贵族，文武百官，有匡济时弊的良策，都速速上奏，不要有所隐瞒，耿直高洁，博古通今，尊崇孝义的民间贤士，地方官应注意访求，认真上报，根据情况褒奖选用。 
English: Now that the rebellion has been quelled and the world is at peace, we can begin to rectify the country. Princes and aristocrats, civil and military officials, and those who have good policies to improve the economy in times of adversity, should immediately report, do not hide anything, be straightforward and clean, be knowledgeable about the past and present, and respect the filial piety of folk sages. Local officials should pay attention to visits, carefully report, and reward and select according to the situation.

古文：以建平王景素子延年为新安王。
现代文：委任建平王景素的儿子延年为新安王。
English: The son of King Jianping King Jingsu was appointed King of Xin'an for another year.

古文：以新除左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王玄谟为车骑将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：任命新任左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王玄谟为车骑将军、南豫州刺史。
English: He appointed the newly-appointed Dr. Zuo Guanglu, Kaifu Yi, and Wang Xuanmu as the cavalry generals, and the history of South Yuzhou was written.

古文：丙申，制使东土经荒流散，并各还本，蠲众调二年。
现代文：十六日，下令在东方开荒的流民回归本乡，免除他们二年赋税。
English: On the 16th, he ordered the exiles who had left the east to return to their hometowns and exempted them from paying taxes for two years.

古文：十二月己未，以尚书金部郎刘善明为冀州刺史。
现代文：十二月十二日，委任尚书金部郎刘善明为冀州刺史。
English: On December 12th, he appointed Liu Zhenming, the son of Shang Shuxu's finance minister, as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：乙丑，诏曰： 近众籓称乱，多染衅科。
现代文：十四日，下诏说： 近来各地藩王叛乱，很多人被牵连。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: "Recently, there have been rebellions against the feudal lords in various regions, and many people have been implicated.

古文：或诚系本朝，事缘逼迫，混同证锢，良以怅然。
现代文：有的本是忠于朝廷的，被迫同叛乱者合流，良心上很是过不去。
English: Some, who had been loyal to the imperial court, were forced to join the rebels, which was very hard on their conscience.

古文：夫天道尚仁，德刑并用，雷霆时至，云雨必解。
现代文：上天崇尚仁义，恩威并用，雷霆一到，云开雨散。
English: Heaven advocates benevolence and righteousness, and uses benevolence and strength. When the thunder arrives, the clouds open and the rain disperses.

古文：朕眷言静念，思弘风泽，凡应禁削，皆从原荡。
现代文：我冷静考虑，想传播恩泽，凡是本应削职为民终身禁锢的，都一律不追究。
English: I calmly considered that if I wanted to spread grace, I would not pursue anyone who should have been removed from office and imprisoned for life.

古文：其文武堪能，随才铨用。 
现代文：文才武略出众者，量才录用。 
English: Only those who excel in literature, art and strategy will be hired.

古文：辛未，以新除广州刺史刘勔为益州刺史，前巴西、梓潼二郡太守费混为广州刺史。
现代文：十八日，调新任广州刺史刘面力任益州刺史，由前巴西、梓潼二郡太守费混任广州刺史。
English: On the 18th, Liu Mianli, the newly-appointed Guangzhou magistrate, was transferred to serve as the Yizhou magistrate, and the former Brazil and Zizhou two-county governor Fei was transferred to serve as the Guangzhou magistrate.

古文：刘勔克寿阳，豫州平。
现代文：刘面力攻克寿阳，豫州平定。
English: Liu Mian made great efforts to conquer Shouyang and subdue Yuzhou.

古文：辛巳，以辅国将军刘灵遗为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：二十三日，任命辅国将军刘灵遗为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On the 23rd, Liu Lingyi, the general of the auxiliary state, was appointed as the leader and the leader of the history of the two states of South Qin.

古文：薛安都要引索虏，张永、沈攸之大败，于是遂失淮北四州及豫州淮西地。
现代文：薛安都向索虏军求援，张永、沈攸之战败，丢失淮河以北四州和豫州、淮河以西地区。
English: Both Xue'an and Soru's armies called for help, and Zhang Yong and Shen You were defeated, losing the four provinces north of the Huai River, as well as the province of Yuzhou and the area west of the Huai River.

古文：三年春正月庚子，以农役将兴，太官停宰牛。
现代文：泰始三年正月四日，因为春耕即将开始，太官停止宰牛。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the third year of Taishi, because spring plowing was about to begin, the eunuch stopped slaughtering cattle.

古文：癸卯，曲赦豫、南豫二州。
现代文：十六日，赦免豫州、南豫州。
English: On the 16th, he pardoned Yuzhou and South Yuzhou.

古文：卫将军巴陵王休若降号镇西将军。
现代文：卫将军巴陵王休若降为镇西将军。
English: The general of Wei, Baling Wang Xiu Ruo, was demoted to the general of Zhenxi.

古文：闰月庚午，京师大雨雪，遣使巡行，赈赐各有差。
现代文：闰正月二日，京城下大雨雪，派使臣巡行，赈济百姓。
English: On the second day of the leap month, the capital was under heavy rain and snow, and envoys were sent to the parade to help the people.

古文：戊寅，以游击将军垣阆为益州刺史。
现代文：十日，任命游击将军垣闳为益州刺史。
English: On the 10th, he appointed the guerrilla general, Kakehiro, as the governor of Iksu.

古文：二月甲申，以御史中丞羊南为广州刺史。
现代文：二月八日，任命御史中丞羊希为广州刺史。
English: On February 8th, Yang Xi, the Vice-President of History, was appointed as the Vice-President of Guangzhou.

古文：是日，车驾为战亡将士举哀。
现代文：同日，皇上亲自为战亡将士举行葬礼。
English: On the same day, the Emperor himself held a funeral for the fallen soldiers.

古文：己丑，以镇西司马刘亮为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：十四日，任命镇西司马刘亮为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On the 14th, he appointed Zhenxi Sima Liu Liang as the leader and Southern Qin Erzhou as the historian.

古文：索虏寇汝阴，太守张景远击破之。
现代文：索虏侵犯汝阴，太守张景远击败索虏。
English: Sorru infringed upon Ruyin, and the Tai Shou Zhang Jingyuan defeated Sorru.

古文：丙申，曲赦青、冀二州。
现代文：十九日，赦免青、冀二州。
English: On the 19th, Qing and Hebei were pardoned.

古文：三月丙子，以尚书左仆射蔡兴宗为安西将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：三月三日，任命尚书左仆射蔡兴宗为安西将军、郢州刺史。
English: On March 3, Cai Xingzong, Shangshu's right-hand man, was appointed the general of Anxi and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：戊寅，以冠军将军王玄载为徐州刺史，宁朔将军崔平为兗州刺史。
现代文：七日，委任冠军将军王玄载为徐州刺史，宁朔将军崔平为兖州刺史。
English: On the 7th, the champion general Wang Xuanjie was appointed as the history of Xuzhou, and the Ningshuo general Cui Ping was appointed as the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：夏四月癸巳，以前司州刺史郑黑为司州刺史。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，任命前任司州刺史郑黑为司州刺史。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of summer, Zheng He, the former secretary of state, was appointed secretary of state.

古文：乙未，冠军将军、北秦州刺史杨僧嗣进号征西将军。
现代文：二十六日，冠军将军、北秦州刺史杨僧嗣晋升为征西将军。
English: On the 26th, the champion general, the North Qin State poet Yang Sangzhi, was promoted to the general of the Western Expedition.

古文：庚子，立桂阳王休范第二子德嗣为庐陵王，立侍中刘韫第二子铣为南丰王。
现代文：二十七日，立桂阳王休范第二个儿子德嗣为庐陵王，立侍中刘韫第二个儿子铣为南丰王。
English: On the 27th, Guiyang King Xu Fan's second son, Dezhi, was appointed as the King of Guilin, and the second son of Liu Ye, an attendant, was appointed as the King of Nanfeng.

古文：丙午，安西将军蔡兴宗降号平西将军。
现代文：二十九日，降安西将军蔡兴宗为平西将军。
English: On the 29th, Cai Xingzong, the Anxi general who was demoted, became the Pingxi general.

古文：五月丙辰，宣太后崇宁陵禁内坟屋瘗迁徙者，给葬直，蠲复家丁。
现代文：五月十四日，宣太后崇陵禁地内的坟屋迁走的人，给葬费，免除丁税。
English: On May 14th, the people who moved out of the tombs in the forbidden land of the Empress Dowager Xuan Zongling were exempted from the Ding tax for funeral expenses.

古文：戊午，以车骑将军、南豫州刺史王玄谟为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十七日，委任车骑将军、南豫州刺史王玄谟为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: On the 17th, he appointed the general of cavalry and cavalry, Wang Xuanmu, the governor of South Henan Province, as the doctor of Zuo Guanglu and the secretary of Kaifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：辛酉，罢南豫州并豫州。
现代文：二十三日，撤南豫州并入豫州。
English: On the 23rd, Nan Yuzhou was withdrawn and merged into Yuzhou.

古文：壬戌，以太子詹事袁粲为尚书仆射。
现代文：二十四日，任命太子詹事袁粲为尚书仆射。
English: On the 24th, he appointed Prince Zhan Zhi Yuan Qi to be his secretary.

古文：六月乙酉，以侍中刘韫为湘州刺史。
现代文：六月七日，任命侍中刘韫为湘州刺史。
English: On June 7th, Liu Ye, a chamberlain, was appointed as the new governor of Hunan Province.

古文：秋七月壬子，以左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王玄谟为特进、左光禄大夫、护军将军。
现代文：秋七月九日，委任左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司王玄谟为特进、左光禄大夫、护军将军。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of autumn, he appointed Dr. Sakoroku, Kaifu Yi, and the third king, Genmu, as the special envoy, Dr. Sakoroku, and the general of the escort.

古文：薛安都子伯令略据雍州四郡，刺史巴陵王休若讨斩之。
现代文：薛安都之子伯令占据雍州四郡，刺史巴陵王休若讨伐斩杀了伯令。
English: Bo Ling, the son of Xue Andu, occupied four counties in Yongzhou, and killed Bo Ling in a battle with King Shibaling.

古文：顷商贩逐末，竞早争新。折未实之果，收豪家之利，笼非膳之翼，为戏童之资。岂所以还风尚本，捐华务实。
现代文：八月二日，下诏说： 近来商贩舍本逐末争着抢购新上市的果品，采摘没熟的果实，以取暴利。难道这是崇尚农本，抛弃奢华务实吗？
English: On August 2, the next edict said: "Recently, merchants have been competing to buy newly listed fruits, picking unripe fruits to make huge profits. Is this advocating agricultural principles, abandoning luxury and being pragmatic?

古文：宜修道布仁，以革斯蠹。
现代文：应当传播仁义，革除这种弊病。
English: We should spread benevolence and eliminate this kind of malady.

古文：自今鳞介羽毛，肴核众品，非时月可采，器味所须，可一皆禁断，严为科制。 
现代文：自今日起动物皮毛，干鲜果品，一定要按时令采集，那种随心所欲，一律禁止，并订立一项严厉的法律条文。 
English: From today, animal fur, dried fresh fruit, must be collected on time, the kind of arbitrary, all prohibited, and set up a strict legal provisions.

古文：壬寅，以中领军沈攸之行南兗州刺史，率众北讨。
现代文：三日，任命中领军沈攸之为行南兖州刺史，率军北伐。
English: On the third day, Shen Yu, the middle leader of the army, was appointed to go to the south of Luzhou and lead the army to the north.

古文：宵言永怀。良兼矜疚。思所以重播至泽，覃被区宇。
现代文：过去的犯罪者，虽然多次宽恕，仍有些人，被判重刑。
English: Past offenders, though often pardoned, still face heavy sentences.

古文：可大赦天下。 
现代文：时时在心深为愧疚。想广播恩惠，泽被天下。可大赦天下。 
English: Convicted criminals across the country can have their sentences commuted or pardoned.

古文：加新除左光禄大夫王玄谟车骑将军。
现代文：加封新任左光禄大夫王玄谟为车骑将军。
English: Wang Xuanmu, the newly-appointed doctor of the Left Guanglu District of Jiafeng, became the general of the cavalry.

古文：丙午，遣吏部尚书褚渊慰劳缘淮将帅，随宜量赐。
现代文：十二日，派吏部尚书褚渊慰劳淮河一带将领，根据情况赏赐。
English: On the 12th, Shang Shuxuan of the General Staff Department was sent to comfort the generals in the Huaihe area, and reward them according to the situation.

古文：戊申，以新除右卫将军刘勔为豫州刺史。
现代文：十七日，任命新任右卫将军刘面力为豫州刺史。
English: On the 17th, Liu Mianli, the newly appointed right guard general, was appointed as the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：九月癸丑，镇西将军、雍州刺史巴陵王休若进号卫将军，平西将军、郢州刺史蔡兴宗进号安西将军。
现代文：九月十九日，镇西将军、雍州刺史巴陵王休若晋升为卫将军，平西将军、郢州刺史蔡兴宗晋升为安西将军。
English: On September 19th, Zhenxi General and Yongzhou Provincial Party Secretary Wang Xuera was promoted to Wei General, and Pingxi General and Zhangzhou Provincial Party Secretary Cai Xingzong was promoted to Anxi General.

古文：乙卯，以越骑校尉周宁民为兗州刺史。
现代文：二十二日，任命越骑校尉周宁民为兖州刺史。
English: On the 22nd, Zhou Ningmin, a Vietcong cavalry lieutenant, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：戊午，以皇后六宫以下杂衣千领，金钗千枚，班赐北征将士。
现代文：二十四日，把除皇后以外的六宫嫔妃的衣服千件、金钗千枚，赏赐给北征将士。
English: On the 24th, a thousand pieces of clothing and a thousand pieces of gold brooches of Princess Rokugo, except for the empress, were given to the Northern Expedition soldiers.

古文：庚申，前将军兼冀州刺史崔道固进号平北将军。
现代文：二十七日，前将军兼冀州刺史崔道固晋升为平北将军。
English: On the 27th, Cui Daogu, a former general and the governor of Jizhou Province, was promoted to the rank of General of the North.

古文：甲子，曲赦徐、兗、青、冀四州。
现代文：三十日，赦免徐、兖、青、冀四州。
English: On the 30th, he pardoned Xu, Handan, Qingdao and Hebei.

古文：冬十月壬午，改封新安王延年为始平王。
现代文：冬十月三日，改封新安王延年为始平王。
English: In the winter, on October 3, the title of Xin'an Wang was extended to Shihei Wang.

古文：戊子，芮芮国遣使献方物。
现代文：八日，芮芮国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 8th, the State of Min sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：辛丑，复郡县公田。
现代文：十六日，恢复郡县官员的禄田。
English: On the 16th, the position of county official was reinstated.

古文：镇西大将军、西秦河二州刺史吐谷浑拾寅进号征西大将军。
现代文：镇西大将军、西秦河二州刺史吐谷浑拾寅晋升为征西大将军。
English: Zhen Xi Da Gen. and West Qin He Erzhou Zi Shi Tu Gu Hun Shuxin were promoted to Seisei Da Gen.

古文：十一月，立建安王休仁第二子伯猷为江夏王，改封义阳王昶为晋熙王。
现代文：十一月，立建安王休仁第二个儿子伯猷为江夏王，改封义阳王昶为晋熙王。
English: In November, King Jianan's second son, King Huiren, was elevated to King of Jiangxia, and King Yiyang's title was changed to King of Jinxi.

古文：乙卯，分徐州置东徐州，以辅国将军张谠为刺史。
现代文：九日，从徐州划出一部分设置东徐州，任命辅国将军张谠为东徐州刺史。
English: On the 9th, a part of Xuzhou was set aside as East Xuzhou, and the general of the Auxiliary State, Zhang Jun, was appointed as the chief historian of East Xuzhou.

古文：高丽国、百济国遣使献方物。
现代文：高丽国、百济国派使者来进献特产。
English: Goryeo and Baekje sent envoys to present their special products.

古文：十二月庚辰，以宁朔将军刘休宾为兗州刺史。
现代文：十二月七日，任命宁朔将军刘休宾为兖州刺史。
English: On December 7th, Ningshuo General Liu Xubing was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：四年春正月己未，车驾亲祠南郊，大赦天下。
现代文：泰始四年正月三日，皇上到南郊祭祀，大赦天下。
English: On the 3rd day of the first month of the 4th year of the reign of Emperor Taishi, the emperor went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices and grant amnesty to the world.

古文：庚午，卫将军巴陵王休若降号左将军。
现代文：二十三日，降卫将军巴陵王休若为左将军。
English: On the 23rd, the fallen guard general, Baling Wang Xiu Ruo, became the left general.

古文：乙亥，零陵王司马勖薨。
现代文：二十七日，零陵王司马勖去世。
English: On the 27th day of the month, King Sima Yi of Jilin passed away.

古文：二月辛丑，以前龙骧将军常珍奇为平北将军、司州刺史，珍奇子超越为北冀州刺史。
现代文：二月二十六日，任命前龙骧将军常珍为平北将军、司州刺史，珍奇的儿子超越为北冀州刺史。
English: On February 26th, Chang Zhen, the former Longyu general, was appointed as the general of North Pyongan Province and the governor of Sizhou Province, and Zhenqi's son Qiao was appointed as the governor of North Hebei Province.

古文：乙巳，右光禄大夫、车骑将军、护军将军王玄谟薨。
现代文：二十九日，右光禄大夫、车骑将军、护军将军王玄谟去世。
English: On the 29th, Wang Xuanmu, doctor of Uguanglu, general of chariots and cavalry, and general of the escort, passed away.

古文：三月乙未，以游击将军刘怀珍为东徐州刺史。
现代文：三月十日，委任游击将军刘怀珍为东徐州刺史。
English: On March 10, Liu Huaizhen, a guerrilla general, was appointed to write the history of East Xuzhou.

古文：戊辰，以军司马刘灵遗为梁、南秦二州刺史，南谯太守孙奉伯为交州刺史。
现代文：十九日，任命司马刘灵遗为梁、南秦二州刺史，南谯太守孙奉伯为交州刺史，交州人李长仁占领州府叛乱。
English: On the 19th, Sima Liu Lingye was appointed as Liang, the governor of the two states of Southern Qin, and the governor of Jiaozhou, Sun Bongbo, was appointed as the governor of Jiaozhou. The governor of Jiaozhou, Li Changren, occupied the provincial capital and rebelled.

古文：交州人李长仁据州叛，妖贼攻广州，杀刺史羊南，龙骧将军陈伯绍讨平之。夏四月己卯，复减郡县田租之半。
现代文：叛贼攻陷广州，东广州刺史羊希、龙骧将军陈伯绍讨伐平定叛乱。夏四月四日，郡县官员的俸禄田又减少一半。
English: On April 4th, the summer, the salary of county officials was reduced by half.

古文：东海王祎改封庐江王，山阳王休祐改封晋平王，改晋安郡为晋平郡。
现代文：十二日，东海王礻韦改封为庐江王，山阳王休佑改封为晋平王，晋安郡改为晋平郡。
English: On the 12th, the king of the East Sea, Zou Wei, was changed to the king of the Min River, the king of Sanyang, Xiu You, was changed to the king of Jinping, and Jinan County was changed to Jinping County.

古文：辛丑，芮芮国及河南王并遣使献方物。
现代文：二十日，芮芮国和河南王都派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 20th, the kings of Shandong and Henan both sent envoys to bring special products.

古文：甲辰，以豫章太守张辩为广州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，任命豫章太守张辩为广州刺史。
English: On the 27th, Yu Zhang was appointed as the governor of Guangzhou.

古文：五月乙未，曲赦广州。
现代文：五月四日，赦免广州。
English: On May 4, Guangzhou was pardoned.

古文：癸亥，以行雍州刺史巴陵王休若行湘州刺史。会稽太守张永为雍州刺史，湘州刺史刘韫为南兗州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，委任行雍州刺史巴陵王休若为行湘州刺史，会稽太守张永为雍州刺史，湘州刺史刘韫为南兖州刺史。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Wang Xiu, the Yangzhou historian, was appointed as the Hunan historian, Zhang Yong, the auditor-general, was appointed as the Yongzhou historian, and Liu Wei, the Hunan historian, was appointed as the Nanluozhou historian.

古文：秋七月乙巳朔，以吴郡太守王琨为中领军。
现代文：秋七月一日，任命吴郡太守王琨为中领军。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the governor of Wuxi County, Wang Qi, was appointed as the leader of the middle army.

古文：丙辰，始平王延年薨。
现代文：七日，始平王延年去世。
English: On the seventh day, Prince Shihei died.

古文：己未，以侍中刘袭为中护军。
现代文：十六日，任命侍中刘袭为中护军。
English: On the 16th, Liu Wei, an aide-de-camp, was appointed as the middle guard.

古文：庚申，以骁骑将军齐王为南兗州刺史。
现代文：十七日，任命骁骑将军齐王为南兖州刺史。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, he appointed the general Qi Wang as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：八月戊子，以南康相刘勃为交州刺史。
现代文：八月二十三日，任命南康相刘勃为交州刺史。
English: On August 23rd, the South Korean Minister of Health, Liu Bo, was appointed as the governor of Gyeongju.

古文：辛卯，分青州置东青州，以辅国将军沈文靖为东青州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，从青州分出一部分设置东青州，委任辅国将军沈文靖为东青州刺史。
English: On the 26th, a part of Qingzhou was separated from Qingzhou to set up East Qingzhou, and Vice-Governor General Shen Wenzhong was appointed to write the history of East Qingzhou.

古文：丁酉，安南将军、江州刺史王景文进号镇南将军。
现代文：三十日，安南将军、江州刺史王景文晋升为镇南将军。
English: On the 30th, General Annan and Jiangzhou Governor Wang Jingwen were promoted to General Zhenan.

古文：九月丙辰，以骠骑长史张悦为雍州刺史。
现代文：九月五日，任命骠骑长史张悦为雍州刺史。
English: On September 5th, Zhang Yue, the chief of the imperial cavalry, was appointed as the new governor of Yongzhou.

古文：戊辰，诏曰： 夫愆有小大，宪随宽猛，故五刑殊用，三典异施。
现代文：十二日，下诏说： 罪恶有大小，处罚有轻重，五刑三典据不同情况施用。
English: On the 12th day of the month, the following edict was issued: Crimes vary in degree, punishments vary in severity, and the five punishments and three penalties are applied according to different situations.

古文：庶简惠之化，有孚群萌，好生之德，无漏幽品。 
现代文：法律简约，符合众愿，好生之德，遍施天下。 
English: The law is simple, in line with the wishes of the people, and the virtue of a good life is spread all over the world.

古文：庚午，曲赦扬、南徐、兗、豫四州。
现代文：十三日，赦免扬、南徐、兖、豫四州。
English: On the 13th, Yang, Nan Xu, Handan and Henan were pardoned.

古文：冬十月癸酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十月一日，日蚀。征调各州兵力北伐。
English: On the first day of winter, October, there was a solar eclipse. Troops from every state were called up for the Northern Expedition.

古文：发诸州兵北讨。南康、建安、安成、宣城四郡，昔不同南逆，并不在征发之例。甲戌，割扬州之义兴郡属南徐州。
现代文：南康、建安、安成、宣城四郡，过去就不同于南方叛逆，不在征发之列。八日，将扬州的义兴郡划归南徐州。
English: The four counties of Nankang, Jian'an, Ancheng, and Xuancheng are different from the southern rebels in the past and are not included in the conscription. On the 8th, Yangzhou's Yixing County was transferred to South Xuzhou.

古文：五年春正月癸亥，车驾躬耕藉田。
现代文：泰始五年正月四日，皇上亲自耕田。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taishi, the Emperor himself began to cultivate the fields.

古文：大赦天下，赐力田爵一级。
现代文：大赦天下，赐致力耕田者爵一级。
English: Grant the world a general amnesty, and bestow a first-class title to those who have devoted themselves to farming.

古文：二月丙申，分豫州、扬州为南豫州。以太尉庐江王祎为车骑将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史。
现代文：二月三日，从豫州、扬州分出一部分设立南豫州，任命太尉庐江王礻韦为车骑将军、开府仪同三司、南豫州刺史。
English: On February 3rd, a part of South Henan Province was separated from Henan Province and Yangzhou Province to establish South Henan Province, and the general of cavalry and cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and the historian of South Henan Province were appointed as the lieutenant of the Minjiang Wang Wei.

古文：三月乙卯，于南豫州立南义阳郡。
现代文：三月十三日，在南豫州设立南义阳郡。
English: On March 13th, South Yiyang County was established in South Henan Province.

古文：丙寅，车驾幸中堂听讼。
现代文：十六日，皇上到中堂听诉讼。
English: On the 16th, the emperor went to the central hall to listen to the proceedings.

古文：己巳，河南王遣使献方物。
现代文：十八日，河南王派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 18th, the king of Henan sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：夏四月辛未，割雍州随郡属郢州。
现代文：夏四月六日，划雍州随郡归郢州。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of summer, the county of Zhiyong returned to Ganzhou.

古文：乙酉，割豫州义阳郡属郢州，郢州西阳郡属豫州。
现代文：七日，划豫州义阳郡属郢州，郢州西阳郡属豫州。
English: On the 7th, Yizhou Yiyang County was assigned to Ganzhou, and Ganzhou Xiyang County was assigned to Yuzhou.

古文：戊子，以宁朔将军崔公烈为兗州刺史。
现代文：十二日，任命宁朔将军崔公烈为兖州刺史。
English: On the 12th, Ningshuo General Cui Gongliao was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：戊戌，新除给事黄门侍郎杜幼文为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：十五日，委任新任给事黄门侍郎杜幼文为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On the 15th, the newly appointed Huangmen waiter Du Qianwen was appointed as the leader and the Southern Qin Erzhou was appointed as the leader.

古文：六月辛未，晋平王休祐子宣曜为南平王。
现代文：六月二日，立晋平王休佑之子宣曜为南平王。
English: On June 2nd, Emperor Jinpyeong's son, Emperor Xuyou, was proclaimed King of Nanping.

古文：壬申，以安西将军、郢州刺史蔡兴宗为镇东将军。
现代文：六日，封安西将军、郢州刺史蔡兴宗为镇东将军。
English: On the 6th, the general of Anxi and the general of Zhangzhou, Cai Xingzong, became the general of Zhendong.

古文：癸酉，以左卫将军沈攸之为郢州刺史。
现代文：九日，任命左卫将军沈攸之为郢州刺史。
English: On the 9th, General of the Left Division Shen Yu was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：以军兴已来，百官断俸，并给生食。
现代文：自从战争发生以来，百官没有俸禄，只供给生活必需品食物。
English: Since the outbreak of the war, the centurion has had no salary, and has only been provided with the necessities of life such as food.

古文：丁丑，车骑将军、南豫州刺史庐江王祎免官爵。
现代文：十三日，削去车骑将军、南豫州刺史庐江王礻韦的官职爵位。
English: On the 13th, the official rank and title of the General of Cavalry and Cavalry and the highest-ranking official of the Southern Henan Province, Wang Zhenwei, were removed.

古文：戊寅，以左将军、行湘州刺史巴陵王休若为征南将军、湘州刺史。
现代文：二十日，任命左卫将军、行湘州刺史巴陵王休若为征南将军、湘州刺史。
English: On the 20th, he appointed General Zuo Wei, the governor of Hunan Province, as the general of the Southern Expedition, and the governor of Hunan Province as the governor of the Southern Expedition.

古文：壬午，罢南豫州。
现代文：二十九日，撤南豫州。
English: On the 29th, it retreated south to Yuzhou.

古文：丙戌，以新除给事黄门侍郎刘亮为益州刺史。
现代文：三十日，任命新任给事黄门侍郎刘亮为益州刺史。
English: On the 30th, Liu Liang, the newly-appointed attendant of the Yellow Gate, was appointed as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：秋七月己酉，以辅国将军王亮为徐州刺史，东莞太守陈伯绍为交州刺史。
现代文：秋七月十一日，任命辅国将军王亮为徐州刺史，东莞太守陈伯绍为交州刺史。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of autumn, Wang Liang, the general of the auxiliary state, was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou, and Chen Bashao, the governor of Dongguan, was appointed as the governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：甲寅，以山阳太守李灵谦为兗州刺史。
现代文：十三日，调山阳太守李灵谦任兖州刺史。
English: On the 13th, Li Lingqian, the Yang di-Pertuan Agong of the Shang Dynasty, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：壬戌，改辅国将军为辅师将军。
现代文：十六日，辅国将军改名为辅师将军。
English: On the 16th, the vice-governor-general was renamed vice-division-general.

古文：八月己丑，以右将军行豫州刺史刘勔为平西将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：八月二十三日，委任右将军行豫州刺史刘面力为平西将军、豫州刺史。
English: On August 23rd, Liu Mengli was appointed as the right general to act as the governor of Yuzhou, and became the general of Pingxi and the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：壬辰，以海陵太守刘崇智为冀州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，任命海陵太守刘崇为冀州刺史。
English: On the 27th, Liu Chong, the governor of Hailing, was appointed as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：九月甲寅，立长沙王纂子延之为始平王。
现代文：九月二日，立长沙王纂的儿子延之为始平王。
English: On September 2nd, the son of Wang Zuo of Changsha was proclaimed King Shihei.

古文：戊午，中领军王琨迁职。
现代文：十日，中领军王琨升职。
English: On the 10th, the middle leader, Wang Qi, was promoted.

古文：将贲园矜德，茂昭厥礼。群司各举所知，以时授爵。 
现代文：隐居民间，志存高远，超凡脱俗的贤才志士，各地要认真搜寻，及时为他们扬名。众官员举荐各自所知道的贤才，及时授予爵位。 
English: All localities should earnestly search for and timely make a name for themselves among the hidden residents, who have lofty aspirations and extraordinary talents. All officials should recommend the talents they know and promptly award them a knighthood.

古文：乙丑，以新除平西将军、豫州刺史刘勔为中领军。
现代文：十六日，任命新任平西将军、豫州刺史刘面力为中领军。
English: On the 16th, the newly appointed General Pingxi and the Governor of Yuzhou Liu Mianli were appointed as the leaders.

古文：冬十月丁卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十月一日，日蚀。
English: Winter October 1st, solar eclipse.

古文：十一月丁未，索虏遣使献方物。
现代文：十一月二日，索虏派使者来进献特产。
English: On November 2nd, Saurup sent an envoy to present the special products.

古文：闰月戊子，骠骑大将军、荆州刺史晋平王休祐以本号为南徐州刺史，征南将军、湘州刺史巴陵王休若为征西将军、荆州刺史，辅师将军孟阳为兗州刺史，义阳太守吕安国为司州刺史。
现代文：闰十一月二十日，调骠骑大将军、荆州刺史晋王以骠骑大将军的名义任南豫州刺史，调征南将军，湘州刺史巴陵王休若为征西将军、荆州刺史，辅师将军孟次为兖州刺史，义阳太守吕安国为司州刺史。
English: On the 20th day of the 11th month of the leap year, Jin Wang, the general of Jing Province, was appointed as the general of South Henan Province, the general of South Henan Province was appointed as the general of West Henan Province, the general of West Henan Province was appointed as the general of West Henan Province, the general of West Henan Province was appointed as the general of West Henan Province, the general of West Henan Province was appointed as the general of West Henan Province, the general of West Henan Province was appointed as the general of West Henan Province, the general of West Henan Province was appointed as the general of West Henan Province, the general of West Hen

古文：十二月戊戌，司徒建安王休仁解扬州刺史。
现代文：十二月三日，解除司徒建安王休仁扬州刺史职务。
English: On December 3, Jian'an Wang Xiu Ren was relieved of his duties as Yangzhou chief historian.

古文：己未，以征北大将军、南徐州刺史桂阳王休范为中书监、中军将军、扬州刺史，吴兴太守建平王景素为湘州刺史，辅师将军建安王世子融为广州刺史。
现代文：九日，任命征北大将军、南徐州刺史桂阳王休范为中书监、中军将军、扬州刺史，吴兴太守建平王景素为湘州刺史，辅师将军建安王长子伯融为广州刺史。
English: On the 9th, Guiyang Wang Xiufan, the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force and the Southern Xuzhou Military Region, was appointed as the Chinese librarian, the general of the Chinese Army was appointed as the Yangzhou Military Region, the Wu Xing governor Jianping Wang Jingsu was appointed as the Hunan Military Region, and the assistant division general Jianan Wang's eldest son Bo Rong was appointed as the Guangzhou Military Region.

古文：庚申，分荆、益州五郡置三巴校尉。
现代文：从荆州、益州分出郡设置三巴校尉。
English: From Jingzhou and Yizhou, three bus captains will be set up in the county.

古文：六年春正月乙亥，初制间二年一祭南郊，间一年一祭明堂。
现代文：泰始六年春正月二日，首次规定每隔三年南郊祭祀一次，隔一年到明堂祭奠一次。
English: On the second day of the first month of spring of the sixth year of the Tai period, it was first stipulated that there should be a ritual in the southern suburbs once every three years, and a ritual in the Myeongdong once every other year.

古文：二月壬寅，司徒建安王休仁为太尉，领司徒。
现代文：二月十二日，司徒建安王休仁任太尉，兼任司徒。
English: On February 12th, Jianan Wang Xuren was promoted to the rank of lieutenant and concurrently served as an apprentice.

古文：癸丑，皇太子纳妃。
现代文：十五日，皇太子纳妃。
English: On the fifteenth day, Crown Prince Naifei passed away.

古文：甲寅，大赦天下，巧注从军，不在赦例。班赐各有差。
现代文：十六日，大赦天下。从军中弄虚作假的，不在赦免之列，各有赏赐。
English: On the sixteenth day, there was a general amnesty. Those who had lied and cheated in the army were not included in the amnesty, but each received a reward.

古文：三月乙亥，中护军刘袭卒。
现代文：三月十四日，中护军刘袭去世。
English: On March 14th, Liu Xi, a member of the Central Protection Force, passed away.

古文：丁丑，以太子詹事张永为护军将军。
现代文：十六日，委任太子詹事张永为护军将军。
English: On the 16th, the crown prince Zhan Zhi Zhang Yong was appointed as the escort general.

古文：夏四月癸亥，立第六皇子燮为晋熙王。
现代文：夏四月二十一日，立第六皇子燮为晋熙王。
English: On the 21st day of the 4th month of the summer, the 6th prince, Zou, was appointed King of Jinxi.

古文：五月丁丑，以前军将军陈胤宗为徐州刺史。
现代文：五月二十二日，任命前军将军陈胤宗为徐州刺史。
English: On May 22, Chen Yanzong, a former army general, was appointed as the new governor of Xuzhou.

古文：丁亥，以冠军将军吐谷浑拾虔为平西将军。
现代文：二十四日，任命冠军将军吐谷浑拾虔为平西将军。
English: On the 24th, the champion general, Tugu Hunchiken, was appointed as the general of Pingxi.

古文：戊子，奉朝请孔玉为宁州刺史。
现代文：二十五日，聘请孔玉为宁州刺史。
English: On the 25th, Kong Yuping was hired to write the history of Ningzhou.

古文：六月己亥，以第五皇子智井继东平冲王休倩。
现代文：六月八日，把第五皇子智井过继给东平冲王休倩。
English: On June 8th, the fifth prince, Chii, was passed down to Dongping Chong Wang Xiuqi.

古文：庚子，以侍中刘韫为抚军将军、雍州刺史，前将军、郢州刺史沈攸之进号镇军将军，扬州刺史桂阳王休范为征南大将军、江州刺史。
现代文：十一日，任命侍中刘韫为抚军将军、雍州刺史，前将军、郢州刺史沈攸之晋升为镇军将军，扬州刺史桂阳王休范为征南大将军、江州刺史。
English: On the 11th, he appointed the chamberlain Liu Wei as the general of the Fuzhou army and the leader of the Yongzhou army, the former general Shen You, the leader of the Zhangzhou army, was promoted to the general of the town army, and the leader of the Yangzhou army, Guiyang Wang Xuan, was promoted to the general of the Southern Expedition and the leader of the Jiangzhou army.

古文：癸卯，以镇南将军、江州刺史王景文为尚书左仆射、扬州刺史，尚书仆射袁粲为尚书右仆射。
现代文：十五日，委任镇南将军、江州刺史王景文为尚书左仆射、扬州刺史，尚书仆射袁粲为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 15th, General Zhenan and Wang Jingwen, the governor of Jiangsu Province, were appointed as Shangshu's left and Yangzhou's right subordinates, respectively. Yuan Qi, the governor of Yangzhou Province, was appointed as Shangshu's right subordinate.

古文：己未，改临贺郡为临庆郡，追改东平王休倩为临庆冲王。
现代文：二十二日，改临贺郡为临庆郡，追改东平王休倩为临庆冲王。
English: On the 22nd, Linhe County was changed to Linqing County, and Dongping Wang Xiuqi was changed to Linqing Chong Wang.

古文：七月丙戌，第五皇子智井薨。
现代文：七月七日，第五皇子智井去世。
English: On July 7, the fifth prince, Chii, passed away.

古文：九月乙丑，中领军刘勔加平北将军。
现代文：九月九日，中领军刘面力加封为平北将军。
English: On September 9th, Liu Mianli, the leader of the Central Army, was promoted to the rank of General of the North.

古文：戊寅，立总明观，征学士以充之。
现代文：十八日，建立总明观，征集学士充实总明观。
English: On the 18th, the general bright outlook was established, and the bachelor's degree was recruited to enrich the general bright outlook.

古文：置东观祭酒。
现代文：设置东观祭酒。
English: Dongguan Festival Liquor will be set up.

古文：癸未，以第八皇子智涣继临庆冲王休倩。
现代文：二十一日，把第八皇子智涣过继给临庆冲王休倩。
English: On the twenty-first day, the eighth prince Zhisheng was passed down to Linqing Chongwang Xueyuan.

古文：十一月己巳，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：冬十月十三日，立第九皇子赞为武陵王。
English: On the 13th day of winter in October, the 9th prince was enthroned as the King of Wuling.

古文：十二月癸巳，以边难未息，制父母陷异域，悉使婚宦。
现代文：十七日，任命前右军马诜为北雍州刺史。二十日，皇上驾临东堂听诉讼。十一月十日，高丽国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 17th, the former right-wing military commander Ma Jun was appointed as the chief historian of Beiyang Province. On the 20th, the emperor came to the East Hall to listen to the proceedings. On November 10, Goryeo sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：戊戌，以始兴郡为宋安郡。
现代文：十二月二十一日，改始兴郡为宋安郡。
English: On December 21, Shixing County was renamed Song'an County.

古文：丙辰，护军将军张永迁职。
现代文：二十三日，护军将军张永升职。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Yong, the escort general, was promoted.

古文：七年春正月甲戌，置散骑奏举郎。
现代文：泰始七年春正月四日，设置散骑奏举郎。
English: On the 4th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of the Taisho era, a horseback riding performance was held.

古文：二月癸巳，征南将军、荆州刺史巴陵王休若进号征西大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：二月六日，征西将军、荆州刺史巴陵王休若晋升为征西大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On February 6th, the general of the Western Expedition, Jingzhou Zhishibaling Wang Xiu Ruo was promoted to the general of the Western Expedition, and the three departments of the prefectural government were established.

古文：戊戌，置百梁、陇苏、永宁、安昌、富昌、南流郡，又分广、交州三郡，合九郡，立越州。
现代文：八日，设白梁、忄龙苏、永宁、安昌、富昌、南流郡，又从广州、交州分出三郡，共九郡，设立越州。
English: On the 8th, Bai Liang, Longsu, Yongning, Anchang, Fuchang and Nanliu counties were set up, and three counties were separated from Guangzhou and Jiaozhou, a total of nine counties, and Yuezhou was established.

古文：己亥，以前将军刘康为平东将军。
现代文：十一日，任命前将军刘康为平东将军。
English: On the 11th, former General Liu Kang was appointed as General Pingdong.

古文：妖寇宋逸攻合肥，杀汝阴太守王穆之，郡县讨平之。
现代文：贼寇宋逸进攻合肥，杀汝阴太守王穆之，地方郡县讨伐平定。
English: The bandit Song Yat attacked Hefei, killed Ryu Yin's father-in-law Wang Muzhi, and pacified the local counties and counties.

古文：甲寅，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史晋平王休祐薨。
现代文：二十一日，骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、南徐州刺史晋平王休去世。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the general of the imperial cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and the southern Xuzhou scribe Jinping Wang Xiu passed away.

古文：戊午，以征西大将军、荆州刺史巴陵王休若为征北大将军、南徐州刺史，湘州刺史建平王景素为荆州刺史。
现代文：二十三日，任命征西大将军、荆州刺史巴陵王休若为征北大将军、南徐州刺史、湘州刺史建平王景素为荆州刺史。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed the general of the Western Expedition, the general of the Northern Expedition for Jingzhou, the general of the Southern Expedition for Xuzhou, and the general of the Western Expedition for Hunan, the general of the Western Expedition for Jingzhou, the general of the Southern Expedition for Xuzhou, and the general of the Western Expedition for Hunan, the general of the Western Expedition for Jingzhou.

古文：三月辛酉，索虏遣使献方物。
现代文：三月十六日，索虏派使者来进献特产。
English: On March 16th, Saurup sent an emissary to present special products.

古文：壬戌，芮芮国遣使奉献。
现代文：二十七日，芮芮派使者来朝贡。
English: On the 27th, Yao sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：夏四月辛丑，减天下死罪一等，凡敕系悉遣之。
现代文：夏四月三日，减天下死囚罪行一等，凡在赦免之内的全部释放。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the first-class crimes of death row prisoners in the world were reduced, and all those who were within the scope of pardon were released.

古文：甲辰，于南兗州置新平郡。
现代文：五日，在南兖州设置新平郡。
English: On the 5th, Xinping County was set up in Nanluozhou.

古文：癸丑，金紫光禄大夫张永领护军。
现代文：七日，金紫光禄大夫张永兼任护军。
English: On the seventh day, Jin Zi Guanglu doctor Zhang Yong also served as a military escort.

古文：五月戊午，司徒建安王休仁有罪，自杀。
现代文：五月六日，司徒建安王休仁犯罪，自杀。
English: On May 6th, King Jian'an committed a crime and committed suicide.

古文：辛酉，以宁朔长史孙超之为广州刺史，尚书左仆射、扬州刺史王景文以刺史领中书监。
现代文：十二日，任命宁朗长史孙超之为广州刺史，尚书左仆射、扬州刺史王景文兼任中书监。
English: On the 12th, Sun Chaoxing, the chief historian of Ninglang, was appointed as the chief historian of Guangzhou, Shang Shuxu Zuopu Ya, and Wang Jingwen, the chief historian of Yangzhou, was also appointed as the middle school librarian.

古文：庚午，以尚书右仆射袁粲为尚书令，新除吏部尚书褚渊为尚书左仆射。
现代文：二十一日，任命尚书右仆射袁粲为尚书令，新任吏部尚书褚渊为尚书右仆射。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Yuan Qi, was appointed as Shang Shuling, and the newly appointed official, Shang Shuling Yuan, was appointed as Shang Shuling's right-hand man.

古文：辛未，监吴郡王僧虔行湘州刺史。
现代文：二十三日，委任吴郡王僧虔为行湘州刺史。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Xiangqian, a monk from Wuxian County, was appointed as the official historian of Xiangzhou.

古文：丙戌，追免晋平王休祐为庶人。
现代文：二十六日，追废晋平王休为平民。
English: On the 26th, King Jianping was deposed and became a commoner.

古文：六月丁酉，以征南大将军、江州刺史桂阳王休范为骠骑大将军、南徐州刺史，征北大将军巴陵王休若为车骑大将军、江州刺史。
现代文：六月七日，委任征南大将军、江州刺史桂阳王休范为骠骑大将军、南徐州刺史，征北大将军巴陵王休若为车骑大将军、江州刺史。
English: On June 7, Guiyang Wang Xuanfan, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force and the governor of Jiangsu Province, was appointed as the general of the cavalry and the governor of the Southern Expeditionary Force and the governor of Xuzhou Province, and Baling Wang Xuanruo, the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, was appointed as the general of the cavalry and the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：甲辰，芮芮国遣使献方物。
现代文：九日，芮芮国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 9th, the State of Min sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：秋七月丁巳，罢散骑奏举郎。
现代文：秋七月六日，裁散骑奏举郎。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Kaisan rode the horse to perform the ceremony.

古文：乙丑，新除车骑大将军、江州刺史巴陵王休若薨。桂阳王休范以新除骠骑大将军，还为江州。
现代文：九日，新任车骑大将军、江州刺史巴陵王休若去世，桂阳王休范以新任骠骑大将军的身份，回江州任刺史。
English: On the 9th, the newly appointed General of Cavalry and Cavalry, Jiangzhou Zhishi Baring Wang Xiu Ruo passed away, and Guiyang Wang Xiu Fan returned to Jiangzhou as the newly appointed General of Cavalry and Cavalry and Cavalry.

古文：庚午，以第三皇子准为抚军将军。
现代文：十三日，任命第三皇子淮为抚军将军。
English: On the 13th, the third prince Huai was appointed as the general of the Fuzhou army.

古文：辛未，以太子詹事刘秉为南徐州刺史。
现代文：十七日，任命太子詹事刘秉为南徐州刺史。
English: On the 17th, the crown prince Zhan Zhi Liu Bing was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou.

古文：戊寅，以宁朔将军沈怀明为南兗州刺史。
现代文：任命宁朗将军沈怀明为南兖州刺史。
English: Ninglang General Shen Huiming was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：乙酉，于冀州置西海郡。
现代文：二十四日，在冀州设置西海郡。
English: On the 24th, Xihai County was set up in Jizhou.

古文：八月戊子，第八皇子跻继江夏文献王义恭。
现代文：八月九日，把第八皇子跻过继给江夏文献王义恭。
English: On August 9th, Wang Yikong, the 8th prince of Jiangxia Literature, was named as the successor.

古文：庚寅，以疾愈，大赦天下。
现代文：十二日，皇上因为病愈大赦天下。
English: On the twelfth day, the emperor retired from public life due to illness.

古文：冀州刺史刘崇智加青州刺史。
现代文：冀州刺史刘崇智加封为青州刺史。
English: Liu Chongzhi, the chief historian of Jizhou, was awarded the title of chief historian of Qingzhou.

古文：戊戌，立第三皇子准为安成王。
现代文：十九日，立第三皇子淮为安成王。
English: On the 19th, the third prince Huai was appointed King Ancheng.

古文：九月辛未，以越骑校尉周宁民为徐州刺史。
现代文：九月六日，任命越骑校尉周宁民为徐州刺史。
English: On September 6th, Zhou Ningmin, a Vietcong cavalry lieutenant, was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：冬十一月戊午，百济国遣使献方物。
现代文：冬十一月十日，百济国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 10th day of the 11th month of winter, Baekje sent an envoy to bring special products.

古文：十二月丁酉，分豫州、南兗州立南豫州，以历阳太守王玄载为南豫州刺史。
现代文：十二月二十日，从豫州、南兖州分出一部设立南豫州，任命历阳太守王玄载为南豫州刺史。
English: On December 20th, a part of Henan Province was separated from Henan Province and South Henan Province to establish South Henan Province, and Liyang Governor Wang Xuanjie was appointed as the governor of South Henan Province.

古文：泰豫元年春正月甲寅朔，上有疾不朝会。
现代文：泰豫元年春正月初一，皇上患病没举行朝会。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of Taiyuan, the emperor was ill and did not hold a court meeting.

古文：以疾患未痊，故改元。
现代文：因为疾病不愈，改了纪年。
English: Because the disease did not go away, the chronology was changed.

古文：赐孤老贫疾粟帛各有差。戊午，皇太子会万国于东宫，并受贡计。
现代文：赏赐孤老贫病者粟帛。四日，皇太子在东宫会见各国使节，接受贡品。
English: On the 4th, the Crown Prince met with envoys from various countries at the East Palace to accept the tribute.

古文：二月辛丑，以给事黄门侍郎王瞻为司州刺史。
现代文：二月三十日，任命给事黄门侍郎王瞻为司州刺史。
English: On February 30th, Wang Zhan, the steward of the Yellow Gate, was appointed as the secretary of state.

古文：三月癸丑朔，林邑国遣使献方物。
现代文：三月一日，林邑国派使者来进献特产。
English: On March 1st, Lin'yi sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：己未，中书监、扬州刺史王景文卒。
现代文：二十六日，中书监、扬州刺史王景文去世。
English: On the 26th, Wang Jingwen, the librarian of the People's Republic of China and Yangzhou Sisi, passed away.

古文：夏四月辛卯，以抚军司马蔡那为益州刺史。
现代文：夏四月五日，任命抚军司马蔡那为益州刺史。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, Ma Cai Na, the military governor of Fuzhou, was appointed as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：癸巳，以右卫将军张兴为雍州刺史。
现代文：六日，任命右卫将军张兴世为雍州刺史。
English: On the 6th, Zhang Xingshi, the right guard general, was appointed as the new governor of Yongzhou.

古文：己亥，上大渐。
现代文：七日，皇上病加重。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor's illness worsened.

古文：骠骑大将军、江州刺史桂阳王休范进位司空，尚书右仆射褚渊为护军将军，中领军刘勔加尚书右仆射，镇东将军蔡兴宗为征西将军、开府仪同三司、荆州刺史，镇军将军、郢州刺史沈攸之进号安西将军。诏曰： 朕自临御亿兆，仍属戎寇，虽每存弘化，而惠弗覃远，军国凋弊，刑讼未息。
现代文：骠骑大将军、江州刺史桂阳王休范晋升为司空，尚书右仆射褚渊任护军将军，中领军刘面力加封为尚书右仆射，镇东将军蔡兴宗任征西将军，郢州刺史沈攸之晋升为安西将军。下诏说： 我君临天下以来，战祸接连不断，虽然想弘扬教化，但总不能如偿，国家凋敝，诉讼不断。
English: Guiyang Wang Xuanfan was promoted to the rank of second-in-command, Shangshu's right-hand man Shao Yuanyuan was promoted to the rank of general, Liu Mianli was promoted to Shangshu's right-hand man Shao Yuanyuan, Zhendong's general Cai Xingzong was promoted to the rank of general of the Western Expedition, and Zhangzhou's general of the Western Expedition Shen Yuanyou was promoted to the rank of general of the Western Expedition. The next edict said: Since I came to the world, the scourge of war has continued. Although I wanted to promote enlightenment, I could not do so

古文：今大渐维危，载深矜叹，可缓徭优调，去繁就约。
现代文：如今病重，深感愧疚。可轻徭薄赋，去繁就简。
English: Now she is seriously ill and feels deeply guilty. She can be frivolous, but it is easy to be frivolous.

古文：因改之宜，详有简衷。务以爱民为先，以宣朕遗意。 
现代文：早就打算这样改革一番。一定要以爱民为本，以合乎我的遗愿。 
English: I've been planning this kind of reform for a long time. It must be based on love for the people and in accordance with my last wish.

古文：袁粲、褚渊、刘勔、蔡兴宗、沈攸之同被顾命。
现代文：袁粲、褚渊、刘面力、蔡兴宗、沈攸之一起被授遗命。
English: Yuan Qi, Gong Yuan, Liu Menli, Cai Xingzong and Shen You were all given posthumous lives.

古文：是日，上崩于景福殿，时年三十四。
现代文：同日，皇上驾崩于景福殿，时年三十四岁。
English: On the same day, the Emperor passed away at the Gyeongbokgung Palace at the age of thirty-four.

古文：五月戊寅，葬临沂县莫府山高宁陵。
现代文：五月十日，葬在临沂县莫府山高宁陵。
English: On May 10, he was buried in the Gaoning Mausoleum in Mofushan, Linyi County.

古文：帝少而和令，风姿端雅。
现代文：明帝少时仁和伶俐，风姿端正雅丽。
English: When Emperor Ming was young, he was benevolent and kind, and his appearance was elegant.

古文：早失所生，养于太后宫内。
现代文：早年丧母，在太后宫内抚养。
English: She lost her mother at an early age and was raised in the imperial court.

古文：大明世，诸弟多被猜忌，唯上见亲，常侍路太后医药。
现代文：大明年间，兄弟们多被猜忌，只有他被亲信，经常侍候跻太后端汤喂药。
English: During the Chinese New Year, the brothers were mostly suspected, only he was trusted by his relatives, and he often waited for Rinpoche to give him medicine.

古文：好读书，爱文义，在籓时，撰《江左以来文章志》，又续卫瓘所注《论语》二卷，行于世。
现代文：好读诗书，爱好文学，在做藩王时，撰写了《江左以来文章志》，续注过卫王襄注释的《论语》二卷本，流行于世。
English: He was good at reading poetry and loved literature. When he was the king of the Han Dynasty, he wrote "Jiang Zuo Zhe Xing Shi Zhi," a two-volume edition of "Analects" annotated by Wei Wangxiang, which became popular in the world.

古文：及即大位，四方反叛，以宽仁待物。诸军帅有父兄子弟同逆者，并授以禁兵，委任不易，故众为之用，莫不尽力。
现代文：即皇帝位后，四方反叛，皇上宽厚待人，有父兄子弟参加叛逆的各将帅，都授给兵权，委任的官职不变，因此将士为他效劳，莫不尽力。
English: That is, after the emperor's enthronement, the four sides rebelled, the emperor treated people generously, and the generals who had father, brother and son participated in the rebellion were all granted military power, and the appointed official positions remained unchanged. Therefore, the soldiers served him and did their best.

古文：平定天下，逆党多被全；其有才能者，并见授用，有如旧臣。
现代文：平定天下后，叛逆者多被保全性命，有才能的还被录用，如老臣一样看待。
English: After the world was pacified, most of the rebels were spared their lives, and the talented ones were hired and treated like old ministers.

古文：才学之士，多蒙引进，参侍文籍，应对左右。
现代文：饱学之士，多被启用，整理书籍，咨询于左右。
English: Those who are well-educated are more likely to be put to work, sort out books, and consult with others.

古文：于华林园芳堂讲《周易》，常自临听。
现代文：华林园会芳堂讲《周易》时，常亲自去听。
English: When "Zhou Yi" is recited at the Hua Lin Yuan Association's Fang Hall, I often go to listen to it in person.

古文：末年好鬼神，多忌讳，言语文书，有祸败凶丧及疑似之言应回避者，数百千品，有犯必加罪戮。
现代文：末年迷信鬼神，忌讳很多，言谈文书中，与祸败凶丧和怀疑同祸败凶丧有关的都要回避，有几百上千种之多，如有违犯必加处罚。
English: At the end of the year, there are many superstitions and taboos. In the discourse documents, evasions related to calamities and suspicions related to calamities should be avoided. There are hundreds and thousands of kinds, and if there is a violation, it must be punished.

古文：改 騧 为马边瓜，亦以 騧 字似 祸 字故也。
现代文：改 马呙 字为马边瓜，也是因为 马呙 字像 祸 。
English: The reason for changing the character "馬" to "馬边瓜" is also because the character "馬" resembles "祸."

古文：以南苑借张永，云 且给三百年，期讫更启 。
现代文：从南苑调来张永，说 暂且给三百年，期限到了再开始 。
English: Zhang Yong, who was transferred from Nanyuan, said, "Let's give it three hundred years for the time being. When the time limit is up, we'll start again."

古文：其事类皆如此。
现代文：很多事情都像这样。
English: A lot of things are like that.

古文：宣阳门，民间谓之白门，上以白门之名不祥，甚讳之。
现代文：宣阳门，民间称做白门，皇上认为白门名字不吉祥，很是忌讳。
English: Xuanyang Gate is popularly known as the White Gate. The emperor considered the name of the White Gate to be unlucky and taboo.

古文：尚书右丞江谧尝误犯，上变色曰： 白汝家门！ 
现代文：尚书右丞江谧曾出过错误，皇上脸色都变了说： 白你家门！ 
English: Shang Shuyuan Jiang Yao once made a mistake. The emperor's face changed and he said, "Your house is white!"

古文：谧稽颡谢，久之方释。
现代文：江谧叩头谢罪，过了好久才作罢。
English: It took him a long time to stop kowtowing to Jiang Chen.

古文：太后停尸漆床先出东宫，上尝幸宫，见之怒甚，免中庶子官，职局以之坐者数十人。
现代文：太后的尸体先停放在东宫的漆榻上，皇上到东宫，见到了大怒，撤了中庶子官的职务，职局因为这件事被杀的几十人。
English: The empress dowager's body was first placed on a lacquered couch in the East Palace. When the emperor arrived at the East Palace, he was enraged and removed the middle-ranking official from his post. Dozens of people were killed because of this incident.

古文：内外常虑犯触，人不自保。
现代文：宫内宫外常常担心犯忌，人人感到性命不保。
English: People at home and abroad often worry about breaking taboos, and everyone feels unable to protect themselves.

古文：宫内禁忌尤甚，移床治壁，必先祭土神，使文士为文词祝策，如大祭飨。
现代文：宫内禁忌更多，移床修壁，都要先祭土地神，叫文士写祭词，像举行大的祭礼仪式一样。
English: There are more taboos inside the palace. Before moving the bed or repairing the wall, the god of the land must first be offered, and the scribes are asked to write the ritual, just like holding a large ritual.

古文：泰始、泰豫之际，更忍虐好杀，左右失旨忤意，往往有斮刳断截者。
现代文：泰始、泰豫相交之际，更是肆虐好杀，左右违背旨意，往往被砍手削足。
English: At the time of interaction between Tai Shi and Tai Yu, they were even more violent and eager to kill. They went against their wills left and right, and were often chopped up and had their feet chopped off.

古文：时经略淮、泗，军旅不息，荒弊积久，府藏空竭。
现代文：当时开发淮、泗地区，战事不断，长时间天灾，府库空虚。
English: At that time, the Huai and Handan regions were being developed, the war was incessant, natural disasters lasted for a long time, and the government treasury was empty.

古文：内外百官，并日料禄俸；而上奢费过度，务为雕侈。
现代文：宫廷内外百官，每天算着日子用禄俸；而皇上花费无度，更显示奢靡。
English: Hundreds of officials inside and outside the court count their days and use their salaries every day, while the emperor spends extravagantly and is even more extravagant.

古文：每所造制，必为正御三十副，御次、副又各三十，须一物辄造九十枚，天下骚然，民不堪命。其余事迹，别见众篇。
现代文：每次制造器物，必做正御三十件，不亲自用的、备用的各三十件，需要一件器物而造九十件，天下舆论哗然，民不堪重负，其他事迹，详见列传篇。
English: Each time he made a utensil, he had to make thirty for the emperor, thirty for those he did not personally use, and thirty for spare parts. If he needed one utensil, he had to make ninety. The world's public opinion was in an uproar, and the people were overwhelmed by the burden. For more details, see the biography.

古文：亲近谗慝，剪落皇枝，宋氏之业，自此衰矣。
现代文：亲近小人谗臣，翦除皇亲，宋朝基业，就是从此开始衰落的。
English: Close to villains and vassals, the removal of imperial relatives, the Song Dynasty foundation, is the beginning of the decline.

古文：史臣曰：圣人立法垂制，所以必称先王，盖由遗训余风，足以贻之来世也。太祖负扆南面，实有君人之懿焉，经国之义虽弘，而隆家之道不足。
现代文：史臣说：圣人制定法律规章，之所以遵照先王，是因为先王留传下来的遗训，能造福后世，太祖称帝，确实有为人君的德行，在治国上虽然有建树，但在富国上则不足。
English: Shi Zhen said: The reason why sages formulate laws and regulations and follow the former king is because the last teachings of the former king can benefit future generations. The great-grandfather proclaimed himself emperor, and indeed had the virtue of being a ruler. Although he did a good job in governing the country, it was not enough to make the country rich.

古文：彭城王照不窥古，本无卓尔之资，徒见昆弟之义，未识君臣之礼，冀以此家情，行之国道，主猜而犹犯，恩薄而未悟，致以呵训之微行，遂成灭亲之大祸。
现代文：彭城王不师古训，本无出众之才，只见兄弟之义，不识君臣之礼，想把家里的情义，推广到全国，导致了兄弟残杀的灾祸。
English: The king of Pengcheng did not learn the ancient teachings, he had no outstanding talent, he only saw the righteousness of brothers, he did not know the courtesy of princes and ministers, he wanted to spread the meaning of the family to the whole country, which led to the disaster of fratricide.

古文：开端树隙，垂之后人。
现代文：前人栽树，后人乘凉。
English: The predecessors planted trees, the successors enjoyed the coolness.

古文：太宗因易隙之情，据已行之典，剪落洪枝，愿不待虑。既而本根无庇，幼主孤立，神器以势弱倾移，灵命随乐推回改。
现代文：太宗因为些小事情，根据已经实行的规章，翦除皇亲，本指望少些忧虑。由于不少皇亲翦除，幼主孤立无援，神器危弱，天命也随之更改。冰冻三尺，非一日之寒，由来远矣。
English: Emperor Taizong removed the imperial relatives because of some small things, according to the regulations that have already been implemented, hoping to be less worried. Due to the removal of many imperial relatives, the young master was left alone without help, the sacred artifact was in danger, and the fate of heaven was also changed. Frozen three feet, not a day's cold, has a long history.

