古文：肃宗文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝讳亨，玄宗第三子，母曰元献皇后杨氏。
现代文：肃宗文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝名亨，玄宗的第三个儿子，母亲名杨氏，乃元献皇后。
English: Su Zong, the third son of Emperor Mingheng, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanxiao, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong, the third son of Emperor Xuanzong,

古文：景云二年乙亥生。
现代文：景云二年九月三日生。
English: Jingyun was born on September 3rd, 2002.

古文：初名嗣升，二岁封陕王，五岁拜安西大都护、河西四镇诸蕃落大使。
现代文：初名嗣升，两岁封为陕王，五岁被任命为安西大都护、河西四镇各蕃邦部落大使。
English: His first name was Shisheng, he was given the title of King of Shaanxi at the age of two, and at the age of five he was appointed as the guardian of the Anxi Capital and the ambassador of the four towns of the Shan State.

古文：上仁爱英悟，得之天然；及长，聪敏强记，属辞典丽，耳目之所听览，不复遗忘。
现代文：皇上仁爱英俊聪颖，得之于自然；等到年长，聪明而记忆力强，写文作诗，典雅华丽，耳目所见所闻，不会再遗忘。
English: The Emperor Ren'ai was handsome, clever, and intelligent by nature; when he was older, he was clever and had a strong memory, wrote poetry, was elegant and gorgeous, and would not forget what he saw and heard.

古文：开元十五年正月，封忠王，改名浚。
现代文：开元十五年正月，封为忠王，改名为浚。
English: In the first month of the 15th year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was given the title of Zhongwang and changed his name to Jun.

古文：五月，领朔方大使、单于大都护。
现代文：五月，兼任朔方大使、单于大都护。
English: In May, he concurrently served as the ambassador of the Shuo side and the single in the protection of the capital.

古文：十八年，奚、契丹犯塞，以上为河北道元帅，信安王祎为副，帅御史大夫李朝隐、京兆尹裴伷先等八总管兵以讨之。
现代文：十八年，奚、契丹侵犯边界，以皇上为河北道元帅，信安王为副，率御史大夫李朝隐、京兆尹裴亻由先等八总管讨伐他们。
English: In the 18th year, the Xiongnu and Khitan invaded the border, with the emperor as the marshal of Hebei Province, and the king of Xin'an as the deputy, led by the chief historian Li Chaoying and the governor of Jingzhao, Yin Peiqi, and other eight general managers to fight them.

古文：仍命百僚设次于光顺门，与上相见。
现代文：又命百官依次排列在光顺门，与皇上相见。
English: He also ordered hundreds of officials to line up at the Guangshun Gate in order to meet the emperor.

古文：左丞相张说退谓学士孙逖、韦述曰： 尝见太宗写真图，忠王英姿颖发，仪表非常，雅类圣祖，此社稷之福也。 
现代文：左丞相张说在谒见以后对学士孙逖、韦述曰： 我曾见到太宗写真的画像。忠王雄姿英俊，仪表非同一般，很像圣祖李世民，这是国家福分啊！ 
English: Zhang, the minister of the left, said to Sun Yat-sen and Weizhong, the academicians, after the audience: "I once saw a real picture of Taizong. King Zhongwang is handsome, his appearance is extraordinary, very much like the holy ancestor Li Shimin, this is a national blessing!

古文：二十年，诸将大破奚、契丹，以上遥统之功，加司徒。
现代文：开元二十年，诸将大破奚、契丹，因为这是忠王遥遥统领的功劳，加忠王司徒之职。
English: In the 20th year of the founding of the Republic of China, all generals were awarded the title of Dabaozhong and Khitan, because this was the merit of the loyal king Dabaozhong, as well as the position of the loyal king's steward.

古文：二十三年，改名玙。
现代文：开元二十三年，改名为王与。
English: In the 23rd year of the Heian period, the name was changed to Wangyo.

古文：二十五年，皇太子瑛得罪。
现代文：开元二十五年，皇太子瑛得罪。
English: In the twenty-fifth year of the Heian period, Crown Prince Ei committed a crime.

古文：二十六年六月庚子，立上为皇太子，改名绍。
现代文：开元二十六年六月三日，立皇上为皇太子，改名为绍。
English: On June 3, 1865, the emperor was enthroned as crown prince and changed his name to Shao.

古文：后有言事者云：绍与宋太子名同，改今名。
现代文：后来有进言的人说绍与宋太子名相同，不吉，才改为现在的名，即李亨。
English: Later, someone suggested that it was unlucky for Shao to have the same name as Prince Song, so he changed his name to his current one, Li Heng.

古文：初，太子瑛得罪，上召李林甫议立储贰，时寿王瑁母武惠妃方承恩宠，林甫希旨，以瑁对。
现代文：当初，太子瑛得罪，玄宗皇上召李林甫议论立太子，当时寿王李瑁的母亲武惠妃正承受玄宗的恩宠，林甫观望皇上旨意，以李瑁可立为太子对答。
English: At first, Prince Ying committed a crime, Emperor Xuanzong summoned Li Linfu to discuss the establishment of the prince. At that time, the mother of King Shou Li Xi, Wu Hui, was receiving the grace of Emperor Xuanzong. Linfu watched the emperor's will and answered with the establishment of Li Xi as the prince.

古文：及立上为太子，林甫惧不利己，乃起韦坚、柳勣之狱，上几危者数四。
现代文：等到玄宗立李亨为太子，李林甫害怕对自己不利，于是发动了迫害韦坚、柳责力的冤案，太子李亨多次发生危险，几乎不能当太子。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong made Li Heng the crown prince, Li Linfu was afraid of being unfavorable to himself, so he launched the persecution of Wei Jian and Liu Guili. Prince Li Heng was in danger many times and could hardly be crown prince.

古文：后又杨国忠依倚妃家，恣为亵秽，惧上英武，潜谋不利，为患久之。
现代文：后来又有杨国忠依赖贵妃之家，胡作非为，但害怕太子英武，暗中图谋对太子不利，杨国忠作为祸患，对太子李亨为害很久。
English: Later, there was Yang Guozhong, who relied on the Guifei family and did bad things, but was afraid of Prince Yingwu and secretly plotted against the prince. As a scourge, Yang Guozhong harmed Prince Li Heng for a long time.

古文：天宝十三载正月，安禄山来朝，上尝密奏，云禄山有反相。玄宗不听。
现代文：天宝十三年正月，安禄山来朝见，李亨曾经秘密上奏，说安禄山有造反之相，玄宗不听。
English: In the first month of the 13th year of Tianbao, An Lushan came to see the emperor. Li Heng had secretly played the melody, saying that An Lushan had the appearance of rebellion, and Xuanzong would not listen.

古文：十四载十一月，禄山果叛，称兵诣阙。
现代文：天宝十四年十一月，安禄山果然反叛，举兵直指京城。
English: In November of the 14th year of Tianbao, Anlu Mountain rebelled and raised an army to attack the capital.

古文：十二月丁未，陷东京。
现代文：十二月二十二日，攻陷东都。
English: On December 22, the Eastern Capital was captured.

古文：辛丑，制太子监国，仍遣上亲总诸军进讨。
现代文：十六日，皇上有诏令太子代行国政，仍然派遣太子李亨亲自统率各军进讨。
English: On the 16th, the emperor issued a decree that the prince should carry out state affairs on behalf of the emperor, and still sent the prince Li Heng to personally lead the army to advance.

古文：时禄山以诛杨国忠为名，由是军民切齿于杨氏。
现代文：当时军民对杨氏切齿痛恨。杨国忠害怕，于是与杨贵妃秘谋其事，皇上终于没有追究。
English: At that time, the military and the people hated the Yang family. Yang Guozhong was afraid, so he secretly plotted with Yang Guifei, and the emperor finally did not investigate.

古文：国忠惧，乃与贵妃谋间其事，上遂不行。乃召河西节度使哥舒翰为皇太子前锋兵马元帅，令率众二十万守潼关。
现代文：于是召河西节度使哥舒翰为皇太子前锋兵马元帅，令率领二十万军队扼守潼关。
English: Therefore, the Hexi Festival was called to make Goshukhan the crown prince's vanguard and marshal of soldiers and horses, and ordered him to lead two hundred thousand troops to guard Shaoguan.

古文：明年六月，哥舒翰为贼所败，关门不守，国忠讽玄宗幸蜀。
现代文：第二年六月，哥舒翰被贼人所打败，潼关不守，国忠委婉劝说玄宗驾往四川。
English: In June of the following year, Goshukhan was defeated by the thieves and did not keep the pass. Guozhong gently persuaded Xuanzong to go to Sichuan.

古文：丁酉，至马嵬顿，六军不进，请诛杨氏。
现代文：二十五日，到了马嵬顿，六军不进，都请求诛杀杨氏。
English: On the 25th, when they arrived at Maotian, the six armies did not advance, and all of them requested to fight and kill Yang.

古文：于是诛国忠，赐贵妃自尽。
现代文：于是杀杨国忠，赐贵妃自尽。
English: So he killed Yang Guotong and ordered Guifei to commit suicide.

古文：车驾将发，留上在后宣谕百姓。众泣而言曰： 逆胡背恩，主上播越，臣等生于圣代，世为唐民，愿戮力一心，为国讨贼，请从太子收复长安。 
现代文：皇上车驾将出发，留太子在后面抚慰百姓，众官中百姓流泪说道： 叛乱的胡人背恩，皇上流亡，臣等生在圣朝，世世代代是唐朝民众，愿合力一心，为国讨贼，请求跟从太子讨伐贼人收复长安。 
English: The emperor was about to set off in his chariot, leaving the crown prince behind to comfort the people. The people among the officials said with tears: The rebellious Hu people have betrayed the grace, the emperor is in exile, the vassals were born in the Holy Dynasty, and for generations they have been the people of the Tang Dynasty. They are willing to work together to fight the thieves for the country, and ask to follow the prince to fight the thieves to recover Chang'an.

古文：玄宗闻之曰： 此天启也。 
现代文：玄宗听后道 ：这是上天启发我啊！ 
English: After listening, Xuanzong said, "This is God's inspiration to me!"

古文：乃令高力士与寿王瑁送太子内人及服御等物，留后军厩马从上。
现代文：于是命令高力士与寿王李瑁送给太子宫人及衣物用具等，只留后军马匹跟从皇上。
English: Therefore, he ordered Koryoshi and Shouwang Rihyo to send clothing and equipment to the Prince Consort, leaving only the rear-guard horses to follow the emperor.

古文：令力士口宣曰： 汝好去！百姓属望，慎勿违之。莫以吾为意。
现代文：又令高力士口头对太子宣告旨意 ：你好好去讨贼，百姓对你热切期望，千万不要违背百姓之意，不要以我为念。
English: He also ordered Colossus to verbally declare his will to the prince: "You should do your best to catch the thief, the people are eagerly waiting for you, don't go against the will of the people, and don't think about me."

古文：且西戎北狄，吾尝厚之，今国步艰难，必得其用，汝其勉之！ 
现代文：再说西戎、北狄两个少数民族，我曾经厚待他们，现在国家的命运艰难，必将会得到他们的帮助，你好自为之吧！ 
English: As for the two ethnic minorities of Xirong and Beidi, I once treated them well, but now the fate of the country is difficult, and I will surely get their help. Go ahead!

古文：上回至渭北，便桥已断，水暴涨，无舟楫；上号令水滨百姓，归者三千余人。
现代文：太子车驾回到渭北，便桥已经断了，水猛涨，没有舟船；太子号令水边百姓，归附者三千多人。
English: When the prince's carriage drove back to the north of Shandong Province, the bridge had already been broken, the water had risen sharply, and there was no boat; the prince ordered the people on the water's edge, more than three thousand people.

古文：渭水可涉，又遇潼关散卒，误以为贼，与之战，士众多伤。
现代文：渭水可以徒步过河，又遇见潼关散兵，误以为是贼兵，与他们作战，士众大多受伤。
English: Surabaya can cross the river on foot, and they met the Shaoguan stragglers, mistook them for bandits, and fought with them. Most of the soldiers were injured.

古文：乃收其余众北上，军既济，其后皆溺，上喜，以为天之佑。
现代文：于是收集剩余部众北上，军队已渡过渭水，后来的人被淹没，太子大喜，以为是上天保佑。
English: So he gathered the rest of the army and marched north. The army had already crossed the Surabaya River, and those who came later were drowned. The prince was overjoyed, thinking it was a blessing from heaven.

古文：时从上惟广平、建宁二王及四军将士，才二千人。
现代文：当时跟从太子者只有广平王、建宁王二王及四军将士，才只二千人。
English: At that time, only Guangping Wang, Jianning Wang II and four soldiers followed the prince, only two thousand people.

古文：自奉天而北，夕次永寿，百姓遮道献牛酒。
现代文：从奉天向北行，晚上驻扎在永寿，百姓拦路献上牛、酒。
English: Heading north from Mukden, they camped in Yeongju in the evening. People blocked the road and offered them cattle and wine.

古文：有白云起西北，长数丈，如楼阁之状，议者以为天子之气。
现代文：有白云从西北升起，长数丈，像楼阁之状，议论的人认为这是天子气。
English: There is a white cloud rising from the northwest, long and tall, like a castle, and people who talk about it think it is the son of heaven.

古文：戊戌，至新平郡。
现代文：十六日，太子到新平郡。
English: On the 16th, the crown prince went to Xinping County.

古文：时昼夜奔驰三百余里，士众器械亡失过半，所存之众，不过一旅。
现代文：当时昼夜奔跑三百多里，士众军器械丢失超过一半，所保存的部众，不过五百人。
English: At that time, more than three hundred miles were run day and night, more than half of the army's equipment was lost, and only five hundred soldiers were saved.

古文：己亥，至安定郡，斩新平太守薛羽、保定太守徐，以其弃郡也。
现代文：十七日，到安定郡，斩新平太守薛羽、保定太守徐，因为他们抛弃州郡逃跑。
English: On the 17th, they went to Anding County to execute the new Taira governor, Xue Yu, and the Baoding governor, Xu, because they had abandoned the county and fled.

古文：庚子，至乌氏驿，彭原太守李遵谒见，率兵士奉迎，仍进衣服粮糗。
现代文：十八日，到了乌氏驿，彭原太守李遵谒见，率兵士奉迎，多次进献衣服粮食和炒熟的米麦。
English: On the 18th, when he arrived at Wuxi, Pengyuan's eunuch Li Zunyi met him, led soldiers to welcome him, and repeatedly presented clothes, grain and fried rice.

古文：上至彭原，又募得甲士四百，率私马以助军。
现代文：到了彭原，又招募得士兵四百人，各率自己私人马匹来帮助军队。
English: When they arrived at Pengyuan, they recruited another four hundred soldiers, each with their own private horses to help the army.

古文：辛丑，至平凉郡，蒐阅监牧公私马，得数万疋，官军益振。
现代文：十九日，到平凉郡，检阅公私马匹，得到数万匹马，官军越发振奋。
English: On the 19th, they went to Pingliang County to inspect the public and private horses. Tens of thousands of horses were obtained, and the government army became more and more excited.

古文：时贼据长安，知上治兵河西。三辅百姓皆曰： 吾太子大军即至！ 
现代文：当时贼兵占据长安，知道皇上在河西练兵，三辅百姓都说： 我们太子大军马上就到！ 
English: At that time, the robber soldiers occupied Chang'an. Knowing that the emperor was training soldiers in Hexi, the people of Sanfu all said: Our prince's army will arrive soon!

古文：贼望西北尘起，有时奔走。
现代文：贼人望见西北尘土大起，有的吓得奔逃。
English: The thieves saw the dust rising in the northwest, and some of them ran away in fright.

古文：戊申，扶风人康景龙杀贼宣慰使薛总等二百余人，陈仓令薛景仙率众收扶风郡守之。
现代文：二十六日，扶风人康景龙杀贼宣慰使薛总等二百多人，陈仓县令薛景仙率部众收复扶风郡而后镇守。
English: On the 26th, more than 200 people, including Xue Zong, were comforted by Kang Jinglong, the man who killed the thief, and ordered Xue Jingxian to lead the troops to recover Fu Feng County from Chencang County, and then to defend the town.

古文：由是关辅豪右皆谋杀贼，贼故不敢侵轶。
现代文：从此，关中畿辅豪门大族都图谋杀贼，贼人所以不敢侵犯。
English: From then on, the powerful families of Kansai, Kansai, Kansai, and Kansai all plotted to murder the thieves, so the thieves did not dare to invade.

古文：上在平凉，数日之间未知所适，会朔方留后杜鸿渐、魏少游、崔漪等遣判官李涵奉笺迎上，备陈兵马招集之势，仓储库甲之数，上大悦。
现代文：太子在平凉，数天之间不知到哪里去好，恰巧朔方留后杜鸿渐、魏少游、崔漪等派遣判官捧着给太子的信札迎接太子，详细陈述兵马招集的情况及仓库储蓄铠甲的数目，太子大喜。
English: The prince did not know where to go for several days. Du Hongqian, Wei Shaoyou, Cui Wei and other judges were sent to meet the prince, holding a letter to the prince, detailing the recruitment of soldiers and horses and the number of armor stored in the warehouse. The prince was overjoyed.

古文：鸿渐又发朔方步骑数千人于白草顿奉迎。时河西行军司马裴冕新授御史中丞赴阙，遇上于平凉，亦劝上治兵于灵武以图进取，上然之。
现代文：杜鸿渐又调遣步兵和骑兵数千人到白草顿奉迎太子，当时河西行军司马裴冕则授命为御史中丞准备去向太子谢恩，在平凉遇到太子，裴冕也劝太子在灵武练兵来图谋进取，太子认为他说的对。
English: Du Hongxian also dispatched thousands of infantry and cavalry to Bai Caotong to welcome the prince. At that time, the Sima Pei Guan of the Hexi Marching Army was ordered to prepare to thank the prince. When he met the prince in Pingliang, Pei Guan also advised the prince to train soldiers in spiritual martial arts to forge ahead. The prince thought he was right.

古文：上初发平凉，有彩云浮空，白鹤前引，出军之后，有黄龙自上所憩屋腾空而去。
现代文：太子刚刚从平凉出发，有五片云凌空飞翔，白鹤在前面引路，出军之后，有条黄龙从太子所休息的屋上腾空飞去。
English: The prince had just set off from Pingliang. There were five clouds flying in the sky, and a white crane was leading the way. After leaving the army, a yellow dragon took off from the roof where the prince was resting.

古文：上行至丰宁南，见黄河天堑之固，欲整军北渡，以保丰宁，忽大风飞沙，跬步之间，不辨人物，及回军趋灵武，风沙顿止，天地廓清。
现代文：太子走到丰宁南部，见黄河是天然险要的坚固之地，想要整顿军队渡河向北，以保护丰宁，忽然大风刮起，飞沙走石，半步之间，人和物都辨别不清，等到军队跑回灵武，风沙突然止息，天地清朗。
English: The prince walked to the south of Fengning and saw that the Yellow River was a strong natural place. He wanted to rectify the army crossing the river to the north to protect Fengning. Suddenly, a strong wind blew, the sand flew, and people and things were indistinguishable between half a step. When the army ran back to Lingwu, the wind and sand suddenly stopped, and the sky was clear.

古文：七月辛酉，上至灵武，时魏少游预备供帐，无不毕备。
现代文：七月九日，太子到了灵武，当时魏少游预备了供奉帐具，无不齐备。
English: On July 9th, the prince arrived in Lingwu. At that time, Wei Shaoyou had prepared the offering tableware, and everything was ready.

古文：裴冕、杜鸿渐等从容进曰： 今寇逆乱常，毒流函谷，主上倦勤大位，移幸蜀川。
现代文：裴冕、杜鸿渐不慌不忙地进言道 ：现在叛贼扰乱国家，毒害已经到了函谷关，玄宗皇上懒于国家大事，已经移车驾到蜀川。
English: Fei Guanyin and Du Hongxuan said unhurriedly: Now the traitors are disturbing the country, the poison has reached Hantan Pass, Emperor Xuanzong is lazy in national affairs, and has moved his car to Shu River.

古文：江山阻险，奏请路绝，宗社神器，须有所归。
现代文：江山险要阻绝，奏请大事，路途断绝，宗社国家，须要人主持。
English: It is necessary to prevent the dangers of the country, play the role of major events, break the road, and lead the country, and must be presided over by important people.

古文：万姓颙颙，思崇明圣，天意人事，不可固违。伏愿殿下顺其乐推，以安社稷，王者之大孝也。 
现代文：亿万百姓仰慕太子，想要得到英明之圣主，这是天意，也是人意，不可违背，希望殿下愉快地接受百姓的拥戴，继承皇帝之位，以安定国家，这是称王的人的大孝道。 
English: Hundreds of millions of people admire the crown prince and want to get the wisdom of the Lord. This is the will of heaven and the will of man, which cannot be violated. I hope that His Royal Highness will happily accept the support of the people, inherit the throne of the emperor, and stabilize the country. This is the great filial piety of those who praise the king.

古文：上曰： 俟平寇逆，奉迎銮舆，从容储闱，侍膳左右，岂不乐哉！
现代文：太子道 ：等到平定叛乱，奉迎皇上车驾，再慢慢议定东宫之事，我在皇上旁边侍候皇上膳食，以尽孝道，难道不快乐吗？
English: The Crown Prince said, "Let's wait until the rebellion is quelled, and then drive the car to welcome the emperor, and then slowly come to an agreement about the East Palace. I will wait for the emperor's meal next to the emperor to fulfill my filial duty. Isn't that happy?"

古文：公等何急也？ 
现代文：你们为何这样急切呢？ 
English: Why are you in such a hurry?

古文：冕等凡六上笺。辞情激切，上不获已，乃从。
现代文：裴冕等人总计六次上书，言辞激烈恳切，太子不能制止，这才听从。
English: Fei Guan and others submitted a total of six letters. Their words were fierce and earnest, and the prince could not stop them, so he listened to them.

古文：是月甲子，上即皇帝位于灵武。
现代文：这月十二日，太子李亨在灵武即皇帝位。
English: On the twelfth day of this month, Prince Li Heng ascended to the throne of Lingwu.

古文：礼毕，冕等跪进曰： 自逆贼恁陵，两京失守，圣皇传位陛下，再安区宇，臣稽首上千万岁寿。 
现代文：仪式完毕，裴冕等人跪着进言道： 自从叛贼仗势侵犯，东京、西京相继失守，圣皇传帝位给陛下，第二次安定国家，臣等叩头祝皇上千万岁！ 
English: When the ceremony was over, Fei Guan and the others knelt down and said: "Since the traitors invaded, Tokyo and Saikyo have been lost one after another, the Holy Emperor has passed the throne to Your Majesty, the country is stable for the second time, and the vassals bow down and wish Your Majesty a thousand years of life!"

古文：群臣舞蹈称万岁。
现代文：群臣手舞足蹈欢呼万岁。
English: Long live the courtiers dancing and cheering.

古文：上流涕歔欷，感动左右。
现代文：皇上流泪感叹，感动左右大臣。
English: The emperor shed tears and sighed, and the ministers on both sides were moved.

古文：即日奏其事于上皇。
现代文：当天就把此事奏闻给太上皇。
English: On the same day, the matter was reported to the Emperor.

古文：是日，御灵武南门，下制曰：
现代文：这天，皇上驾到灵武南门，下制曰：
English: On this day, the emperor drove to the Lingwu South Gate and said:

古文：朕闻圣人畏天命，帝者奉天时。
现代文： 朕听说圣人畏惧天命，称帝的人承奉的是天时。
English: I have heard that sages are afraid of the fate of heaven, and those who claim to be gods are subject to the time of heaven.

古文：知皇灵睠命，不敢违而去之；知历数所归，不获已而当之。
现代文：朕知道这是先皇神灵眷顾，所以不敢违背离弃；朕知道这是历数所归，不能制止而担任它。
English: I know that this is the patronage of the gods of the former emperor, so I dare not disobey and abandon it; I know that this is the return of the calendar, and I can't stop it and serve it.

古文：在昔帝王，靡不由斯而有天下者也。
现代文：在过去的帝王，无一不是由此而占有天下也。
English: In the past, all emperors came to rule the world because of this.

古文：乃者羯胡乱常，京阙失守，天未悔祸，群凶尚扇。
现代文：近来叛胡扰乱国家，京都失守，上天尚未追悔这一祸害，群贼仍很猖狂。
English: Recently, traitors have disturbed the country, Kyoto has been lost, heaven has not repented of this scourge, and the bandits are still rampant.

古文：圣皇久厌大位，思传眇身，军兴之初，已有成命，予恐不德，罔敢祗承。
现代文：圣皇玄宗长期以来对帝位厌倦，想传位给朕，军队兴起之初，已有成命，我恐怕德行不厚，不敢承接大命。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was tired of the imperial throne for a long time and wanted to pass it on to me. At the beginning of the rise of the army, he had already made his will. I am afraid that I am not virtuous and dare not undertake the great destiny.

古文：今群工卿士佥曰： 孝莫大于继德，功莫盛于中兴。 
现代文：现在群臣都说 ：孝行没有比继承圣德更大的了，功劳没有比中兴国家更盛的了。 
English: Now the courtiers all say: There is no greater filial duty than to inherit the sacred virtue, and there is no greater merit than to develop the country.

古文：朕所以治兵朔方，将殄寇逆，务以大者，本其孝乎。
现代文：朕在朔方练兵的原因，在于将消灭叛将，朕务必顺从大的方面，本着孝行的根本。
English: The reason why I am training soldiers in the Shuo side is that I will eliminate the traitors. I must obey the great aspects and adhere to the fundamentals of filial piety.

古文：须安兆庶之心，敬顺群臣之请，乃以七月甲子，即皇帝位于灵武。
现代文：须要安定亿万百姓之心，尊敬地顺应群臣的请求，才在七月十二日，在灵武继皇帝位。
English: It was necessary to stabilize the hearts of hundreds of millions of people and respectfully comply with the requests of the ministers before Lingwu succeeded to the throne on July 12.

古文：敬崇徽号，上尊圣皇曰上皇天帝，所司择日昭告上帝。
现代文：朕尊敬地奉上徽号，尊圣皇玄宗曰上皇天帝，有关部门选择吉日明晰地报告上天。
English: I respectfully present the badge, saying that revered Holy Emperor Xuanzong is the Heavenly Emperor, and the relevant departments have chosen a good day to clearly report to heaven.

古文：朕以薄德，谬当重位，既展承天之礼，宜覃率士之泽，可大赦天下，改元曰至德。
现代文：朕凭借微薄的德行，担当大位，既要展开继承大位之礼，也应该向天下广施恩泽，可以大赦天下，改元为至德。
English: By virtue of my meager virtue, I am in charge of the throne. I should not only carry out the ceremony of inheriting the throne, but also should extend grace to the world. I can pardon the world and change the yuan to the highest virtue.

古文：内外文武官九品已上加两阶、赐两转，三品已上赐爵一级。
现代文：内外文武官员九品以上者加两阶，勋位加两等，三品以上官员赐爵一级。 
English: Foreign and domestic civil and military officials with nine or more pins are awarded two steps, and the order is awarded two grades, and officials with three or more pins are awarded a first-class knighthood.

古文：以朔方度支副使、大理司直杜鸿渐为兵部郎中，朔方节度判官崔漪为吏部郎中，并知中书舍人。
现代文：以朔方度支副使、大理司直杜鸿渐为兵部郎中，朔方节度判官崔漪为吏部郎中，并且主持中书舍人的工作。
English: Du Hongqian, deputy envoy of the Shuo-Fangdu Subdivision and Dali Division, was the vice-minister of the Military Department, and Cui Qi, the judge of the Shuo-Fangdu Subdivision, was the vice-minister of the Civil Affairs Department, and presided over the work of the scholars.

古文：以御史中丞裴冕为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：以御史中丞裴冕为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: With Mishi no chujo, Fei Guan, as the attendant of Chusho, and Shimohei Shoji as the disciple of Chusho.

古文：河西兵马使周佖为河西节度使，陇右兵马使彭元晖为陇右节度使，前蒲州刺史吕崇贲为关内节度使兼顺化郡太守。
现代文：河西兵马使周亻必为河西节度使，陇右兵马使彭元晖为陇右节度使，前任蒲州刺史吕崇贲为关内节度使兼顺化郡太守。
English: Zhou Qi, the military commander of the west of the river, will be the military commander of the west of the river, Peng Yuanqi, the military commander of the right side of the river, will be the military commander of the right side of the river, and Lyu Chongyi, the former military commander of the west of the river, will be the military commander of the Guanai River and the governor of Hunhua County.

古文：以陈仓县令薛景仙为扶风太守，以陇右节度使郭英乂为天水郡太守。
现代文：以陈仓县令薛景仙为扶风太守，以陇右节度使郭英为天水郡太守。
English: Chencang County ordered Xue Jingsian to be the governor of Fufeng, and Guo Ying was made the governor of Tianshui County with the right degree.

古文：改灵武郡为大都督府，上县为望，中县为上。
现代文：改灵武郡为大都督府，上等县叫望县，中等县为上县。
English: He changed Lingwu County to Dadu Prefecture, upper counties to Wang County, and middle counties to Shang County.

古文：丁卯，逆胡害霍国长公主、永王妃侯莫陈氏、义王妃阎氏、陈王妃韦氏、信王妃任氏、驸马杨朏等八十余人于崇仁之街。
现代文：十五日，叛胡杀害了霍国长公主、永王妃侯莫陈氏、义王妃阎氏、陈王妃韦氏、信王妃任氏，驸马杨月出等八十多人在崇仁街上被杀。
English: On the 15th, the traitor Hu killed the eldest princess Huo Guo Guo, Yong Wangfei Hou Mo Chen, Yi Wangfei Yan, Chen Wangfei Wei, Xin Wangfei Ren, and more than eighty people were killed on Chongren Street.

古文：甲戌，贼党同罗部五千余人自西京出降朔方军。
现代文：二十二日，贼党同罗所部五千余人从西京出动投降了朔方军。
English: On the 22nd, more than 5,000 members of the Kleptocratic Party and the Losob unit marched from West Beijing and surrendered to the Shuo army.

古文：己卯，京兆尹崔光远、长安令苏震等率府县官吏大呼于西市，杀贼数千级，然后来赴行在。
现代文：二十七日，京兆尹崔光远、长安令苏震等率领府县官吏在西市大喊，杀贼人数千个，然后奔向皇上临时的驻地。
English: On the 27th, the prefectural and county officials led by Jing Zhao, Yin Cui, Guangyuan, Chang An, and Su Zhen shouted in Xi Shi that there were thousands of thieves, and then ran to the emperor's temporary residence.

古文：诏改扶风为凤翔郡。八月壬午，朔方节度使郭子仪、范阳节度使李光弼破贼于常山郡之嘉山。
现代文：八月一日，朔方节度使郭子仪、范阳节度使李光弼在常山郡之嘉山大破贼兵。皇上因为要练兵收复京师，诏令郭子仪等人班师。
English: On the first day of August, Shuo Fang made Guo Ziyi and Fan Yang made Li Guangya break the bandit soldiers in Jiashan Mountain of Changshan County. The emperor ordered Guo Ziyi and others to be the drill sergeants because he wanted to train soldiers to recapture the capital.

古文：上以治兵收京城，诏子仪等旋师，子仪、光弼率所统步骑五万至自河北。诏以子仪为兵部尚书，依前灵州大都督府长史；光弼为户部尚书，兼太原尹、北京留守：同中书门下平章事。
现代文：郭子仪、李光弼率领所统率的步兵、骑兵五万从河北到来。皇上诏令以郭子仪为兵部尚书，仍依前任灵州大都督府长史；李光弼为户部尚书，兼太原尹、北京留守：两人都任同中书门下平章事。
English: Guo Ziyi and Li Guangyao led the infantry and cavalry of 50,000 from Hebei. The emperor decreed that Guo Ziyi should be the secretary of the military department, still according to the previous governor of Lingshou; Li Guangyao was the secretary of the household department, and Taiyuan Yin and Beijing were left behind: both of them were in charge of the same department.

古文：回纥、吐蕃遣使继至，请和亲，愿助国讨贼，皆宴赐遣之。
现代文：回纥、吐蕃派遣使者相继到来，请求与唐皇和亲，愿意帮助唐朝讨伐叛贼，皇上都设宴款待然后送走他们。
English: Envoys from Yunnan and Tubo arrived one after another, requesting to be reconciled with the Tang Emperor and willing to help the Tang Dynasty fight against the traitors. The Emperor held a banquet to entertain them and then sent them away.

古文：是日，上皇至成都，大赦。
现代文：这天，太上皇到成都，大赦。
English: On this day, the emperor arrived in Chengdu to grant amnesty.

古文：癸巳，上所奉表始达成都。
现代文：十二日，皇上奉给太上皇的表章才到达成都。
English: On the twelfth day, the imperial seal presented to the emperor did not reach the capital.

古文：丁酉，上皇逊位称诰，遣左相韦见素、文部尚书房琯、门下侍郎崔涣等奉册书赴灵武。
现代文：十六日，太上皇让位，诏令称诰，派遣左相韦见喜、文部尚书房、门下侍郎崔涣等人捧着上皇册封之书奔赴灵武。
English: On the 16th, when the Emperor abdicated and the imperial edict was promulgated, he dispatched Zuo Wei Mianxi, Mengbu Shang Shobo, and his manservant Cui Wei to Lingwu, carrying the imperial seal.

古文：九月戊辰，上南幸彭原郡。封故邠王守礼男承寀为燉煌王，令使回纥和亲，册回纥可汗女为毗伽公主，仍令仆固怀恩送承寀至回纥部。
现代文：九月十七日，皇上往南来到彭原郡，封已故王守礼之子承肕为火敦煌王，命令他出使回纥去和亲，册封回纥可汗的女儿为毗伽公主，又命令仆固怀恩送承肕到回纥部落。
English: On September 17th, the emperor went south to Pengyuan County, appointed the son of the late King Shurei, Chengyu, as the King of Fudanhuang, ordered him to send an envoy to Hui'an to make peace with his relatives, crowned the daughter of Hui'an Khan as Princess Figa, and ordered the servant Gu Hui'en to send Chengyu to Hui'an tribe.

古文：内官边令诚背上皇投贼，至是复来见，上命斩之。
现代文：近侍官边令诚背叛太上皇投降贼人，至此又来见皇上，皇上命令将他斩首。
English: The aide-de-camp, who betrayed the Emperor and surrendered to the thief, came to see the Emperor again, and the Emperor ordered him to be beheaded.

古文：丙子，至顺化郡，韦见素、房琯、崔涣等自蜀郡赉上册书及传国宝等至。
现代文：二十五日，皇上到顺化郡，韦见素、房、崔涣等人从蜀郡捧着太上皇册封书信及传国玉玺等到来。
English: On the 25th, the emperor arrived in Hue County, and Wei Mingsu, Fang, Cui Yao and others came from Shu County holding the emperor's sealed letter and the imperial edict.

古文：己卯，斩潼关败将李承光于纛下。
现代文：二十八日，皇上斩潼关败将李承光于大旗之下。
English: On the 28th, the emperor defeated Li Chengguang and brought him under the banner.

古文：十月辛巳朔，日有蚀之，既。
现代文：十月一日，有日蚀，日蚀已尽。
English: On October 1st, there was a solar eclipse. The eclipse has ended.

古文：癸未，彭原郡以军兴用度不足，权卖官爵及度僧尼。
现代文：三日，彭原郡因为战争发生用度不足，姑且用卖官职爵位以及度人为和尚、尼姑来补足用度。
English: On the third day, Pengyuan County was short of supplies due to the war, and had to supplement the supplies by selling official titles and degrees to monks and nuns.

古文：上素知房琯名，至是琯请为兵马元帅收复两京，许之，仍令兵部尚书王思礼为副。
现代文：皇上素来知道房的名声，至此，房请求任兵马元帅去收复东京、西京，皇上同意，仍然命令兵部尚书王思礼为副元帅。
English: The emperor had always been aware of Fong's reputation. At this point, Fong requested to be appointed as the marshal of the army and cavalry to recover Tokyo and West Beijing. The emperor agreed and still ordered the vice-marshal of the military department, Shoshu Wang Sulei.

古文：分兵为三军，杨希文、刘贵哲、李光进等各将一军，其众五万。
现代文：分兵为三军，杨希文、刘贵哲、李光进等三人各率一军，部众共五万人。
English: Divided into three armies, Yang Xiwen, Liu Guizhe, Li Guangjin and other three people each led an army, with a total of 50,000 people.

古文：辛丑，琯与贼将安守忠战于陈涛斜，官军败绩，杨希文、刘贵哲等降于贼，琯亦奔还。
现代文：二十一日，房与贼将安守忠在陈涛斜作战，官军大败，杨希文、刘贵哲等向贼人投降，房也奔逃而还。
English: On the twenty-first day, Fang and the thief An Shou Zhong fought in Chen Tao slope, the official army was defeated, Yang Xiwen, Liu Guizhe and others surrendered to the thieves, Fang also fled and returned.

古文：平原太守颜真卿以食尽援绝，弃城渡河，于是河北郡县尽陷于贼。
现代文：平原太守颜真卿因为粮食已尽援助断绝，弃城渡过黄河而逃。就这样，河北郡县全部陷入贼手。
English: Yan Zhenqing, the governor of the plain, abandoned the city and fled across the Yellow River because the grain aid had been cut off. In this way, all counties in Hebei fell into the hands of thieves.

古文：十一月辛亥，河西地震有声，圮裂庐舍，张掖、酒泉尤甚。
现代文：十一月一日，河西地震，轰轰之声，随后土地坼裂房屋倒塌，张掖、酒泉尤其厉害。
English: On November 1, the earthquake in Hexi, the rumbling sound, followed by the land cracking and houses collapsing, Zhangye and Jiuquan were particularly severe.

古文：戊子，回纥引军来赴难，与郭子仪同破贼党同罗部三千余众于河上。
现代文：八日，回纥引军来会合，与郭子仪在河上共同打破贼党同罗所部三千多人。
English: On the 8th, he and Guo Ziyi jointly defeated the Kuomintang and more than 3,000 members of the Luo Sect on the river.

古文：诏宰相崔涣巡抚江南，补授官吏。
现代文：皇上诏令宰相崔涣为巡抚巡视江南，补足授予当地官吏。
English: The emperor decreed that the prime minister, Cui Gan, would patrol the southern part of the Yangtze River as an inspector, and local officials were given additional powers.

古文：十二月戊子，以王思礼为关内节度。
现代文：十二月九日，皇上以王思礼为关内节度。
English: On December 9, the emperor proclaimed Wang Sili as the festival of Guanai.

古文：彭原郡百姓给复二载，郡同六雄，县升紧、望。
现代文：彭原郡百姓免除两年的赋税徭役，彭原郡等同于地处要害的 六雄 州郡，县则上升为紧县和望县。
English: The people of Pengyuan County are exempted from two years of tax service. Pengyuan County is equivalent to the critically-affected Liuxiong County, and the county is upgraded to Nian County and Wang County.

古文：以秦州都督郭英乂为凤翔太守，谏议大夫高适为广陵长史、淮南节度兼采访使。
现代文：以秦州都督郭英为凤翔太守，谏议大夫高适为广陵长史、淮南节度使兼采访使。
English: Guo Ying, the governor of Qin State, was appointed as Fengxiang's governor, and Gaoshu, the doctor of deliberation, was appointed as Guangling's chief historian, and Huainan's ceremonial envoy and interview envoy.

古文：其天下有至孝友悌行著乡闾堪旌表者，郡县长官采听闻奏，庶孝子顺孙沐于玄化也。 
现代文：贼将阿史那承庆攻陷颍川郡，抓住了太守薛愿、长史庞坚。二十五日，江陵大都督府永王李瞞擅自率领军队和战船顺江下广陵。至德二年春正月一日，皇上在彭原接受朝贺。
English: On the 25th, Yong Wang Li Xie, the governor of Gangneung, led troops and warships down the Yangtze River to Guangling without permission. On the first day of the first month of the second year of the German Spring, the emperor received morning greetings in Pengyuan.

古文：甲寅，以襄阳太守李峘为蜀郡长史、剑南节度使，将作少监魏仲犀为襄阳、山南道节度使，永王傅刘汇为丹阳太守兼防御使。
现代文：这天送表章入蜀向太上皇祝贺。五日，以襄阳太守李山亘为蜀郡长史、剑南节度使，将作少监魏仲犀为襄阳、山南道节度使，永王傅刘汇为丹阳太守兼防御史。
English: On the 5th, Li Shanwu, the Yangyang governor, was appointed as the chief historian of Shu County and the secretary of the Jianan Festival, Wei Zhongxiao, the junior superintendent, was appointed as the Yangyang governor and the secretary of the Shannan Festival, and Yongwangfu Liuhui was appointed as the Danyang governor and the defense historian.

古文：以宪部尚书李麟同中书门下平章事。
现代文：以宪部尚书李麟任同中书门下平章事。
English: Li Lin was appointed to the Constitutional Department of the People's Republic of China.

古文：上皇遣平章事崔圆奉诰赴彭原。
现代文：太上皇派遣平章事崔圆奉诏诰奔赴彭原。
English: Empress Dowager Cui Yuan sent the envoy to Pengyuan in accordance with the imperial edict.

古文：乙卯，逆胡安禄山为其子庆绪所杀。
现代文：六日，叛胡首领安禄山被他的儿子安庆绪所杀。
English: On the 6th, the rebel leader An Lushan was killed by his son An Qingxu.

古文：辛酉，于江宁县置金陵郡，仍置军，分人以镇之。
现代文：十二日，在江宁县设置金陵郡，仍设置军队，分人来镇守。
English: On the 12th, Jinling County was set up in Jiangning County, and the army was still set up, and people were assigned to guard the town.

古文：甲子，幸保定郡。
现代文：十五日，皇上来到保定郡。
English: On the 15th, the emperor came to Baoding County.

古文：丙寅，武威郡九姓商胡安门物等叛，杀节度使周佖，判官崔称率众讨平之。
现代文：十七日，武威郡九姓商人胡人安门物等人叛乱，杀节度使周亻必，判官崔称率众军讨伐平定了他们。
English: On the 17th, Wuwei County merchants of nine surnames Hu Ren An Men and other people rebelled, and the killing of the festival made Zhou Xuan necessary. Judge Cui said that he led the army to fight and quelled them.

古文：是日，蜀郡健兒贾秀等五千人谋逆，上皇御蜀郡南楼，将军席元庆等讨平之。
现代文：这天，蜀郡的贾秀等五千人阴谋叛乱，太上皇驾到蜀郡南楼，将军席元庆等人讨伐平定了他们。
English: On this day, Jia Xiu of Shu County and five thousand other people plotted a rebellion. The Emperor drove to the South Tower of Shu County, and Gen. Shi Yuanqing and others fought and defeated them.

古文：二月戊子，幸凤翔郡。
现代文：二月十日，皇上驾到凤翔郡。
English: On February 10, the emperor drove to Fengxiang County.

古文：文城太守武威郡九姓齐庄破贼五千余众。
现代文：文城太守武威郡九姓齐庄破贼五千多人。
English: There are more than 5,000 thieves from nine surnames in Qizhuang, Wuwei County.

古文：上议大举收复两京，尽括公私马以助军。
现代文：皇上议定大举进攻收复两京，全部收集公私马匹以帮助军队。
English: The emperor agreed to launch a large-scale offensive to recover the two capitals, and to collect all private and public horses to help the army.

古文：给事中李暠署云 无马 ，大夫崔光远劾之，贬暠江华太守。
现代文：给事中李訥却写道 无马 ，大夫崔光远弹劾他，贬李訥为江华太守。
English: In the letter, however, Li Yao wrote that he had no horse, and the doctor, Cui Guangyuan, impeached him and demoted Li Yao to the position of the governor of the Yangtze River.

古文：节度使李光弼大破贼将蔡希德之众于城下，斩虏七万，军资器杖称是。
现代文：节度使李光弼在城下大破贼将蔡希德之部众，杀敌、俘虏七万，缴获的军械物资器具与杀的敌人相当。
English: The festival made Li Guangyao crack down on Cai Xide's subordinates under the castle, killing and capturing 70,000 enemies, and the captured armaments and equipment were equivalent to the killed enemies.

古文：朔方节度使郭子仪大破贼将崔乾祐于潼关，收河东郡。
现代文：朔方节度使郭子仪在潼关大破贼将崔乾，收复河东郡。
English: Shuo Fang's determination made Guo Ziyi defeat the thief Cui Qian in Shaoguan and recover Hedong County.

古文：永王璘兵败，奔于岭外，至大庾岭，为洪州刺史皇甫侁所杀。
现代文：永王李瞞兵败，奔向岭外，到大庾岭，被洪州刺史皇甫亻先所杀。
English: Yong Wang Li concealed his defeat, ran to the outskirts of the ridge, to Dalatling, and was killed by the Hongzhou assassin Emperor Fuxi.

古文：三月癸亥，河西自去冬地震，至是方止。
现代文：三月十五日，河西从去年冬天地震，直到今天才停止。
English: On March 15th, the earthquake in Hexi from last winter has not stopped until today.

古文：辛酉，以左相韦见素、平章事裴冕为左右仆射，并罢知政事。
现代文：十三日，以左相韦见素、平章事裴冕为左右仆射，都罢免知政事。
English: On the thirteenth day, the left-wing Wei Mingsu and the right-wing Ping Zhang Jie and the left-wing Fei Guan were both dismissed from their posts.

古文：以前宪部尚书致仕苗晋卿为左相。
现代文：以先前任过宪部尚书而辞官的苗晋卿为左相。
English: Miao Jinqing, who had previously served as the Constitutional Affairs Minister and resigned, became the Minister of the Left.

古文：吐蕃遣使和亲，遣给事中南巨川报命。
现代文：吐蕃派遣使者和亲，皇上派给事中南巨川到吐蕃回复。
English: Tubo sent envoys and relatives, and the emperor sent Zhongnan Kogawa to Tubo to reply.

古文：癸亥大雨，至癸酉不止，诏疏理刑狱，甲戌方止。
现代文：这天大雨，直到二十五日不止，皇上诏令清理案件，二十六日，大雨才停止。
English: This day of heavy rain did not stop until the 25th, when the Emperor issued a decree to clean up the case. On the 26th, the heavy rain did not stop.

古文：夏四月戊寅朔，以郭子仪为司空，兼副元帅，统诸节度；李光弼为司徒。
现代文：夏四月一日，以郭子仪为司空，兼副元帅，统领所有节度；李光弼为司徒。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, Guo Ziyi was appointed as the Vice Marshal, in charge of all ceremonies; Li Guangyao was appointed as the secretary.

古文：乙酉，太史奏岁星、太白、荧惑集于东井。
现代文：八日，太史奏明，岁星、太白星、荧惑星集聚在东井星座。
English: On the 8th, the Taishi Sonming, the Year Star, the Taibai Star, and the Fluorescent Planet gathered in the East Jing constellation.

古文：五月癸丑，郭子仪与贼将安守忠战于清渠，官军败绩，子仪退保武功。
现代文：五月六日，郭子仪与贼将安守忠在清渠作战，官军大败，郭子仪退军保卫武功。
English: On May 6th, Guo Ziyi fought with the thief An Shou Zhong in the Clear Channel, the official army was defeated, and Guo Ziyi withdrew from the army to defend his military exploits.

古文：丁巳，房琯为太子少师，罢知政事。
现代文：十日，房为太子少师，罢免知政事。
English: On the 10th, Fong, as the young prince, was dismissed from the post of chancellor.

古文：以谏议大夫张镐为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：以谏议大夫张镐为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: He appointed Zhang Jian, a doctor of the Second Sino-Japanese War, as the attendant of the Second Sino-Japanese War, and promoted him to the position of Second Sino-Japanese War.

古文：以武部侍郎杜鸿渐为河西节度。
现代文：以武部侍郎杜鸿渐为河西节度。
English: Takebe's butler, Du Hongqian, is depicted as the ruler of Hexi.

古文：庚申，诰追赠故妃杨氏为元献皇太后，上母也。
现代文：十三日，皇上诏诰赠已故世之杨氏玉环为元献皇太后，崇尚尊重母亲也。
English: On the 13th, the emperor issued an imperial edict to present the deceased Yang's jade ring to the empress dowager, advocating respect for the mother.

古文：甲子，郭子仪以失律让司空，许之。
现代文：十七日，郭子仪因为打仗失利让出司空一职，皇上同意了。
English: On the 17th, Guo Ziyi resigned from the position of Siku because of the defeat in the war, and the emperor agreed.

古文：七月庚戌夜，蜀郡军人郭千仞谋逆，上皇御玄英楼，节度使李峘讨平之。
现代文：七月四日，夜，蜀郡军人郭千仞图谋叛逆，太上皇驾到玄英楼，节度使李山亘讨伐平定了他。
English: On the evening of July 4th, Guo Qianqian, a soldier from Shu County, plotted to rebel. The emperor drove to Xuan Ying Lou, and the emperor ordered Li Shanwei to fight and subdue him.

古文：丁巳，贼将安武臣陷陕郡，民无遗类。
现代文：十一日，贼将安武臣攻陷陕郡，陕郡百姓全被杀死，无一生存。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the bandits took Anwu County and occupied Shaanxi County. All the people in Shaanxi County were killed, and no one survived.

古文：八月甲申，以黄门侍郎崔涣为余杭太守、江东采访防御使。
现代文：八月八日，以黄门侍郎崔涣为余杭太守、江东采访防御史。
English: On August 8th, the defense history of Yuhang was interviewed by Jiangdong, with the Yellow Gate attendant Choi Min as the governor of Yuhang.

古文：己丑，以平章事张镐兼河南节度、采访处置等使。
现代文：十三日，以平章事张镐兼河南节度使、采访处置使等。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Qian and Henan Festival envoy, interviewing and handling envoy, etc.

古文：灵昌太守许叔冀为贼所攻，援兵不至，拔众投睢阳郡。
现代文：灵昌太守许叔冀被贼人所攻打，救兵不到，便率众投奔睢阳城。
English: Lingchang's grand marshal Xu Shuji was attacked by thieves, and when there were no rescuers, he led the crowd to rush to the city of Shenyang.

古文：癸巳，大阅诸军，上御城楼以观之。
现代文：十七日，皇上检阅所有军队，皇上到城楼观看。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor inspected all the troops and went to the castle to watch.

古文：丁酉，改雍县为凤翔县，陈仓为宝鸡县。
现代文：二十一日，改雍县为凤翔县，陈仓县为宝鸡县。
English: On the 21st, Yong County was changed to Fengxiang County, and Chencang County was changed to Baoji County.

古文：闰八月辛未，贼将遽寇凤翔，崔光远行军司马王伯伦、判官李椿率众捍贼。
现代文：闰八月二十六日，贼将突然袭击凤翔，崔光远的行军司马王伯伦、判官李椿率众军抗击贼兵。
English: On the 26th day of the 8th month, the bandits suddenly attacked Fengxiang. Cui Guangyuan's army commander Wang Buren and judge Li Qin led the army to fight against the bandits.

古文：贼退，乘胜至中渭桥，杀贼守桥众千人，追击入苑中。
现代文：贼人退兵，便乘胜追击贼人到中渭桥，杀贼人守桥部众一千人，追击贼人进入凤翔御苑之中。
English: When the bandits retreated, they took advantage of the victory to chase the bandits to Zhongluo Bridge, kill a thousand bandits guarding the bridge, and chase the bandits into the middle of Fengxiang Gyoen.

古文：时贼大军屯武功，闻之烧营而去。
现代文：当时贼人大军屯扎在武功、听说此事后烧毁营垒而逃。
English: At that time, a large army of thieves was encamped in Wugong. After hearing about this, they burned down the camp and fled.

古文：伯伦与贼血战而死，李椿力穷被执，然自是贼不敢西侵。
现代文：王伯伦与贼人血战而死，李椿力气用尽被贼活捉，然而从此以后贼人再不敢入西边来侵犯。
English: Wang Buren died in a bloody battle with the bandits, and Li Qin was captured alive by the bandits. However, from then on, the bandits did not dare to invade the west.

古文：九月丁丑，上党节度使程千里与贼挑战，为贼将蔡希德所擒。
现代文：九月二日，上党节度使程千里与贼挑战，被贼将蔡希德所擒。
English: On September 2nd, the upper-level Party members challenged Cheng Qianli and the thief, and the thief kidnapped Cai Xide.

古文：燉煌王承寀自回纥使还，拜宗正卿；纳回纥公主为妃，回纥封为叶护，持四节，与回纥叶护太子率兵四千助国讨贼。
现代文：火敦煌王承肕从回纥出使而回，拜为宗正卿；承肕收纳回纥公主为妃子，回纥封他叶护，持四节，与回纥叶护太子一起率兵四千帮助唐王讨伐贼人。
English: King Chengyu of Dunhuang sent an envoy from Huizhou and returned, worshipping Zong Zhengqing; Chengyu received the Princess of Huizhou as his concubine, sealed him as Ye Guo of Huizhou, held four sections, and led four thousand soldiers together with the Prince of Huizhou Ye Guo to help the Tang King fight against thieves.

古文：叶护入见，宴赐加等。丁亥，元帅广平王统朔方、安西、回纥、南蛮、大食之众二十万，东向讨贼。壬寅，与贼将安守忠、李归仁等战于香积寺西北，贼军大败，斩首六万级，贼帅张通儒弃京城东走。
现代文：二十七日，与贼将安守忠、李归仁等在香积寺西北大战，贼军大败，斩贼头六万个，贼帅张通儒抛弃京城向东逃跑。
English: On the 27th, he fought with the bandits, including An Shou Zhong and Li Guiren, in the Northwest Great Battle of Xiangji Temple. The bandits were soundly defeated and 60,000 bandits were killed. The bandit commander Zhang Tongru abandoned the capital and fled eastward.

古文：癸卯，广平王收西京。
现代文：二十八日，广平王收复西京。
English: On the 28th, Guangping Wang recaptured West Beijing.

古文：甲辰，捷书至行在，百僚称贺，即日告捷于蜀。
现代文：二十九日，捷报传到皇帝临时住地，百官祝贺，当天便向蜀地太上皇告捷。
English: On the 29th, the news of the victory reached the emperor's temporary residence, and hundreds of officials congratulated him. On the same day, he announced the victory to the Shu Emperor.

古文：上皇遣裴冕入京，启告郊庙社稷。
现代文：太上皇派裴冕入京城，向宗庙祖先告捷并祭祀天地。
English: Empress Dowager sent Fei Guan to enter the capital, declare victory to the ancestors of the ancestral temple and sacrifice heaven and earth.

古文：冬十月乙巳朔，以崔光远为京兆尹。
现代文：冬十月一日，皇上以崔光远为京兆尹。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the emperor named Choe Kwang-yong as the new emperor.

古文：诏曰： 缘京城初收，要安百姓，又洒扫宫阙，奉迎上皇。
现代文：下诏曰： 由于西京刚刚收复，要安顿百姓，又要洒扫宫庭，奉迎太上皇。
English: The following edict said: Since Saikyo had just been recaptured, it was necessary to settle the people, sweep the palace grounds, and welcome the retired emperor.

古文：以今月十九日还京，应缘供顿，务从减省。 
现代文：在本月十九日还京，应依据现在情况张罗供应，务必减少节省。 
English: On returning to Beijing on the 19th of this month, it is necessary to increase supply according to the current situation, and it is imperative to reduce savings.

古文：吐蕃寇陷西平郡。
现代文：吐蕃攻陷西平郡。
English: Siping County was invaded from Tubo.

古文：癸丑，贼将尹子奇陷睢阳，害张巡、姚訚、许远。
现代文：九日，贼将尹子奇攻陷睢阳，杀害了张巡、姚躢、许远。
English: On the 9th, thieves took Yin Ziqi to Shenyang and killed Zhang Jun, Yao Qi and Xu Yuan.

古文：贼自香积之败，悉众保陕郡，广平王统郭子仪等进攻，与贼战于陕西之新店，贼众大败，斩首十万级，横尸三十里。
现代文：贼人自从香积寺大败，全部退到陕郡。广平王统率郭子仪等进攻，与贼人在陕西之新店作战，贼众大败，斩敌首十万多个，横尸三十里。
English: Since the great defeat of the bandits in Xiangji Temple, they all retreated to Shaanxi County. Guangping Wang Tong led Guo Ziyi and other attackers to fight against the bandits in the new store in Shaanxi, the bandits were defeated, more than 100,000 enemy heads were cut off, and corpses were strewn for 30 miles.

古文：庚申，安庆绪与其党奔河北。
现代文：十六日，安庆绪与他的党徒奔往河北。
English: On the 16th, An Qingxu and his party members rushed to Hebei.

古文：壬戌，广平王入东京，陈兵天津桥南，士庶欢呼路侧。
现代文：十八日，广平王进入东京，在天津桥梁南边陈列军队，官员及百姓在路边欢呼。
English: On the 18th, Guangping Wang entered Tokyo and displayed troops on the south side of the Tianjin Bridge. Officials and ordinary people cheered on the roadside.

古文：陷贼官伪署侍中陈希烈、中书令张垍等三百余人素服待罪。
现代文：陷入贼中任伪侍中的陈希烈、伪中书令张土自等三百余人穿白色素服待罪京城。
English: Caught in the middle of the thieves, more than three hundred people, including Chen Xilei, a pseudo-chamberlain, and Zhang Tu Zi, a pseudo-chamberlain, wore white plainclothes and were punished in the capital.

古文：癸亥，上自凤翔还京，仍遣太子太师韦见素入蜀迎上皇，凤翔郡给复五载。
现代文：十九日，皇上从凤翔回到京城，仍旧派遣太子太师韦见素入蜀迎太上皇入京。凤翔郡免除五年徭役。
English: On the 19th, the emperor returned to Beijing from Fengxiang, and still sent the crown prince and grand master Wei Jian Su to Shu to welcome the emperor to Beijing. Fengxiang County was exempted from five years of military service.

古文：丙寅，至望贤宫，得东京捷书至，上大喜。
现代文：二十二日，皇上到望贤宫，得到东京捷报，皇上大喜。
English: On the 22nd, the Emperor went to the Palace of the Emperors and received the news of Tokyo's victory. The Emperor was overjoyed.

古文：丁卯，入长安。士庶涕泣拜忭曰： 不图复见吾君！ 
现代文：二十三日，皇上入长安，吏民百姓流泪向皇上跪拜着高兴地道： 没想到能再次见到皇上。 
English: On the 23rd, the emperor entered Chang'an, and the officials and people bowed down to the emperor with tears streaming down their faces, saying happily, "I didn't expect to see the emperor again."

古文：上亦为之感恻。
现代文：皇上也为此感伤。
English: The Emperor was also saddened by this.

古文：九庙为贼所焚，上素服哭于庙三日，入居大明宫。
现代文：九庙被贼人所焚毁，皇上素服在太庙哭了三天，入居大明宫。
English: Nine temples were burned down by thieves, and Emperor Su Fu cried for three days in the Great Temple before moving into the Daming Palace.

古文：是日，上皇发蜀郡。
现代文：这天，太上皇从蜀郡出发。
English: On this day, the Emperor departed from Shu County.

古文：己巳，文武胁从官免冠徒跣，朝堂待罪，禁之府狱，命中丞崔器劾之。
现代文：二十五日，胁从于贼的文武官员免除官服官帽赤足在朝堂上待罪，将他们监押到府狱，命令中丞崔器弹劾他们的罪状。
English: On the 25th, the civil and military officials who had threatened to obey the thief were exempted from the official uniform and barefoot in the morning hall, and they were detained in the capital prison, and ordered Lieutenant Colonel Cui Jie to impeach their charges.

古文：回纥叶护自东京还，宴之于宣政殿，便辞还蕃。
现代文：回纥叶护从东京回来，皇上在宣政殿宴请他，宴后便告辞回自己的蕃国。
English: When 叶護 returned from Tokyo, the emperor invited him to a banquet at the Imperial Palace, after which he left to return to his own country.

古文：乃封叶护为忠义王，约每年送绢二万疋，至朔方王便交授。
现代文：皇上于是封叶护为忠义王，每年大约送绢绸二万匹，等叶护到朔方时唐王便交给他。
English: The emperor then sealed Ye Guo as the King of Loyalty, and sent him about 20,000 pieces of silk each year. When Ye Guo reached Shuo Fang, the Tang King gave him the horse.

古文：十一月壬申朔，上御丹凤楼，下制曰： 我国家出震乘乾，立极开统。讴歌历数，启圣千龄；文物声名，握图六叶。
现代文：十一月一日，皇上驾到丹凤楼，下制曰 ：我国家乘时而动，驾六龙以御天下，建立了大一统的国家，百姓齐声歌唱，天命在唐，开启了大唐圣代千年；礼乐典章制度，声名远扬，掌握国家，已经六代。
English: On November 1st, the emperor drove to the Danfeng Building, and said: "Our country has taken advantage of the times, driven six dragons to rule the world, established a unified country, the people sing in unison, the fate of the world is in Tang, and opened the Great Tang Dynasty millennium; the ceremonial music system, renowned, has mastered the country for six generations.

古文：安禄山夷羯贱类，粗立边功，遂肆凶残，变起仓卒，而毒流四海，涂炭万灵。
现代文：安禄山这个叛乱胡人，是个贱类丑货，在边疆稍微立了一点边功，就肆意凶残，突然发动叛乱，毒流四海，生灵涂炭。
English: An Lushan, the rebellious Hu, is a low-class ugly person. He made a little contribution to the frontiers, but he was wantonly cruel and suddenly launched a rebellion. The poison spread to all parts of the world, and the lives of people were ruined.

古文：朕兴言痛愤，提戈问罪，灵武聚一旅之众，至凤翔合百万之师，亲总元戎，扫清群孽。
现代文：朕严加指责，十分痛恨，兴师问罪，在灵武聚集了一旅之师，到凤翔竟会集成百万之众，朕亲自统领，扫清了所有的叛乱。
English: I severely reproached, very hated, arraigned, gathered a traveling division in Lingwu, and a million people gathered in Fengxiang. I personally led and cleared all the rebellions.

古文：广平王俶受委元帅，能振天声；郭子仪决胜无前，克成大业。兼回纥叶护、云南子弟、诸蕃兵马，力战平凶，势若摧枯，易同破竹。
现代文：广平王李亻叔受朕任命为元帅，能够震动天威；郭子仪决断胜利，一往无前，终于成就了灭胡的大业，兼有回纥叶护、云南子弟、各蕃邦兵马，力战而平定凶顽的叛乱，其势如摧枯拉朽，势如破竹。
English: Guangping King Li Shunshu was appointed as a marshal by me and was able to shake the power of heaven; Guo Ziyi won a decisive victory and never looked back, and finally achieved the great cause of eliminating Hu. He had Hui, Yunnan, and Shan soldiers and horses, and fought hard to quell the fierce rebellion. The situation was devastating and devastating, and the situation was like breaking bamboo.

古文：朕早承圣训，尝读礼经，义切奉先，恐不克荷。
现代文：朕很早就继承了圣君的训示，曾读礼记五经，在道义上定要率先杀敌，只恐不能胜任。
English: I inherited the instructions of the holy man very early on. I had read the Five Classics of Rites and Rituals. Morally, I had to be the first to kill the enemy, but I was afraid I wouldn't be able to do it.

古文：今复宗庙于函洛，迎上皇于巴蜀；导銮舆而反正，朝寝门而问安；寰宇载宁，朕愿毕矣。
现代文：现在在函谷关、洛阳恢复宗庙，到巴蜀迎接太上皇；引导太上皇銮驾返回圣朝，面朝寝门而问安；全国安宁，朕的心愿完成了。
English: Now, I have restored the ancestral temple in Hanyuguan and Luoyang, and I have come to Bashu to meet the Emperor. I have guided the Emperor to return to the Holy Land, and I have greeted him at his bedside. The country is at peace, and my wish has been fulfilled.

古文：且复人将有主，敬当天地之心；兴岂在予，实凭社稷之祐。
现代文：再说百姓将有主子，应当合于天地之心；中兴难道由于朕的功劳，实在是凭借国家保。
English: Moreover, the people will have a master, which should be in line with the heart of heaven and earth. Is it because of my merits that ZTE is really relying on the national guarantee?

古文：今两京无虞，三灵通庆，可以昭事，宜在覃恩，待上皇到日，当取处分。 
现代文：现在东京、西京安定，天、地、人都来庆贺，可以显示事理，应广施恩惠，待太上皇到来之日，当由太上皇安排处置。 
English: Now that Tokyo and Saikyo are stable, and people from all over the world come to celebrate, it can show the reason, and it should be widely favored. When the Retired Emperor arrives, the Retired Emperor should arrange the disposition.

古文：是时河南、河东诸郡县皆平。
现代文：这时河南、河东各郡县都已平定。
English: At this time, all counties in Henan and Hedong had been pacified.

古文：宫省门带 安 字者改之。
现代文：皇宫中各门带 安 字的都改掉。
English: All the doors in the palace with the word "Amen" have been changed.

古文：伪御史大夫严庄来降。
现代文：伪御史大夫严庄前来归降。
English: The pseudo chief historian solemnly came forward to surrender.

古文：新成九庙神主，上亲告享。
现代文：新建成九庙神主，皇上亲自报告祭祀。
English: Nine new temples were built, and the emperor himself reported on the sacrificial rituals.

古文：十二月丙午，上皇至自蜀，上至望贤宫奉迎。
现代文：十二月三日，太上皇从蜀到来，皇上亲自到望贤宫奉迎。
English: On December 3, the Emperor Emeritus arrived from Shu, and the Emperor himself came to Wangxian Palace to welcome him.

古文：上皇御宫南楼，上望楼辟易，下马趋进楼前，再拜蹈舞称庆。
现代文：太上皇驾到宫南楼，皇上远望楼而回避，下马快步到楼前，两次跪倒叩头舞蹈庆贺。
English: Empress Dowager drove to the South Palace Building, the emperor looked at the building from afar and avoided it, dismounted and walked quickly to the front of the building, kneeled down and bowed twice to celebrate the dance.

古文：上皇下楼，上匍匐捧上皇足，涕泗呜咽，不能自胜。
现代文：太上皇下楼，皇上跪伏地下捧着上皇的脚，哽咽流泪，不能自止。
English: The Empress Dowager went downstairs, and the Emperor knelt down holding the Emperor's feet, choking back tears, unable to stop himself.

古文：遂扶侍上皇御殿，亲自进食；自御马以进，上皇上马，又躬揽辔而行，止之后退。
现代文：于是皇上服侍太上皇驾到朝堂，亲自献上食物；又亲自驾马进上，太上皇上马，又亲自拿着马缰绳而行，上皇加以制止方才后退。
English: Therefore, the emperor drove to the imperial palace to serve the emperor and personally presented the food; he also drove the horse himself, the emperor mounted the horse and personally held the horse's bridle, and the emperor stopped him before he retreated.

古文：上皇曰： 吾享国长久，吾不知贵，见吾子为天子，吾知贵矣。 
现代文：太上皇道： 我统率国家很长久，我不知贵重；见到我的儿子当天子，我才知道贵重了。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "I have been leading the country for a long time, so I don't know how valuable I am. I only know how valuable I am when I see my son, the Emperor."

古文：上乘马前导，自开远门至丹凤门，旗帜烛天，彩棚夹道。
现代文：皇上乘马在前面引导，从开远门到丹凤门，旗帜鲜亮，照耀天空；彩色的棚子很多，排列在道路两旁。
English: The emperor led the way on horseback, from the Kaiyuan Gate to the Danfeng Gate, the banner was bright and shone in the sky; there were many colorful sheds lining both sides of the road.

古文：士庶舞忭路侧，皆曰： 不图今日再见二圣！ 
现代文：官吏百姓在道路两侧欢欣鼓舞，都说： 想不到今天再次见到两位皇上！ 
English: Officials and commoners on both sides of the road cheered and said, "I can't believe I get to see the two emperors again today!"

古文：百僚班于含元殿庭，上皇御殿，左相苗晋卿率百辟称贺，人人无不感咽。
现代文：百官在含元殿之殿庭排班，太上皇驾到殿庭，左相苗晋卿率领百官祝贺，人人都感动流泪。
English: Hundreds of officials lined up in the courtyard of the Hongyuan Hall. The Emperor drove to the courtyard, and Left Heir apparent Miao Jinqing led the hundreds of officials in congratulations. Everyone was moved to tears.

古文：礼毕，上皇诣长乐殿谒九庙神主，即日幸兴庆宫。
现代文：礼毕，太上皇到长乐殿谒见九庙神主，当天便驾到兴庆宫。
English: After the ceremony, the emperor went to the Changle Hall to meet with the heads of the nine temples, and drove to the Xingqing Palace the same day.

古文：上请归东宫，上皇遣高力士再三尉譬而止。
现代文：皇上请求回归东宫去做太子，太上皇派高力士再三劝慰才停止。
English: The emperor asked him to return to the East Palace to be crown prince, but the emperor only stopped after he was repeatedly consoled by Gao Lixi.

古文：受贼伪署左相陈希烈、达奚珣等二百余人并禁于杨国忠宅鞫问。
现代文：接受贼人伪官职的左相陈希烈、达奚王旬等二百多人都监禁在杨国忠旧住宅内严加审问。
English: More than 200 people, including the leftists Chen Xilei and Datong Wang Shun, who accepted the post of thief and pseudo-official, were imprisoned and severely interrogated in the old residence of Yang Guozhong.

古文：甲寅，以左相苗晋卿为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十一日，以左相苗晋卿为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Saso Miao Jinqing was appointed as the attendant of Chusho, and the disciple of Chusho, Shitahira Shoji.

古文：十二月戊午朔，上御丹凤门，下制大赦。
现代文：十二月一日，皇上驾到丹凤门，下制大赦。
English: On December 1st, the emperor drove to the Danfeng Gate and issued a general amnesty.

古文：蜀郡灵武元从功臣太子太师、豳国公韦见素，内侍、齐国公高力士，右龙武大将军陈玄礼，各加实封三百户。
现代文：在蜀郡和灵武开始就跟从太上皇、皇上的元老大臣太子太师、豳国公韦见素，内侍、齐国公高力士，右龙武大将军陈玄礼，各加实际封户三百户。
English: From the beginning of Shu County and Lingwu, the Retired Emperor, the Retired Emperor's Minister of Veterans, the Crown Prince, the Grand Master, the Duke of Shandong, Wei Mingsu, the Chamberlain, the Duke of Qi, Gao Lixi, and the Grand Marshal of the Right Dragon Army, Chen Xuanli, each added 300 households.

古文：田长文、张崇俊、杜休祥各加二百户。
现代文：田长文、张崇俊、杜休祥各加实际封户二百户。
English: Tian Changwen, Zhang Chongjun and Du Xiu Xiang each added 200 households.

古文：右仆射裴冕冀国公，殿中监李辅国成国公，宗正卿李遵郑国公，兼进封邑。
现代文：右仆射裴冕为冀国公，殿中监李辅国为成国公，宗正卿李道为郑国公，而且都加了封邑。
English: His right-hand man, Sha Pei Guan, became the Duke of Ji Province, the palace overseer, Li Shuo Guo, became the Duke of Cheng Province, and the grand vizier, Zong Zhengqing, Li Dao, became the Duke of Zheng Province, and all of them were given additional fiefs.

古文：广平王俶封楚王，加实封二千户。
现代文：广平王李亻叔封为楚王，加实封二千户。
English: The Guangping King, Li Jianshu, was given the title of King of Chu, and two thousand households were given additional titles.

古文：左仆射、朔方节度郭子仪加司徒，进封代国公，实封一千户。
现代文：左仆射、朔方节度使郭子仪给予司徒的加官，晋封代国公，加实封一千户。
English: Zuo Fuxia and Shuo Fang made Guo Ziyi give the additional post to the scholar, promoted him to acting governor, and increased the real estate of a thousand households.

古文：兵马使仆固怀恩封丰国公，右金吾将军李嗣业封虢国公，司徒兼太原尹李光弼蓟国公，关内节度王思礼霍国公，淮南节度来瑱颍国公，南阳太守鲁炅岐国公，仍并加实封。
现代文：兵马使仆固怀恩封丰国公，右金吾将军李嗣业封虢国公，司徒兼太原尹李光弼封蓟国公，关内节度王思礼封霍国公，淮南节度来王真封颖国公，南阳太守鲁炅封为岐国公，仍旧都加以实封。
English: The soldiers and horses sent the servant Gu Wai En to seal Feng Guo, the right Kingu general Li Shigeye to seal Xing Guo, the scholar and Taiyuan Yin Li Guangya to seal Xing Guo, the Guanai governor Wang Sili to seal Huo Guo, the Huainan governor Wang Zhen to seal Ying Guo, and the Nanyang governor Lu Xi to seal Qi Guo, all of which are still sealed.

古文：京兆尹崔光远鄴国公，开府李光进范阳郡公，左相苗晋卿为侍中、封韩国公，宪部尚书、平章事李麟褒国公，中书侍郎崔圆为中书令、赵国公，中书侍郎张镐南阳县公。
现代文：京兆尹崔光远封邺国公，开府李光晋封范阳郡公，左相苗晋卿为侍中、封韩国公，宪部尚书、平章事李麟封褒国公，中书侍郎崔圆为中书令、赵国公，中书侍郎张镐为南阳县公。
English: Jing Zhao Yin Cui Guangyuan was appointed as the Duke of Shandong Province, Kaifu Li Guangjin was appointed as the Duke of Fanyang County, Zuo Miao Jincai was appointed as the Junior Chamberlain and the Duke of South Korea, Genshu Shangshu and Ping Zhangji Li Lin were appointed as the Duke of Baoguo, Cui Yuan was appointed as the Junior Chamberlain of Shandong Province, Zhao Guogong was appointed as the Junior Chamberlain of Shandong Province, and Zhang Jun was appointed as the Junior Chamberlain of Nanyang County.

古文：近日所改百司额及郡名官名，一依故事。
现代文：近日所改百司名额及郡名、官员，其职掌仍依原来职掌。
English: The number of officers and the names of counties and officials have been changed recently, but their duties are still the same as before.

古文：改蜀郡为南京，凤翔府为西京，西京改为中京，蜀郡改为成都府。
现代文：改蜀郡为南京，改凤翔府为西京，西京改为中京，蜀郡改为成都府。
English: Shu County was changed to Nanjing, Fengxiang Prefecture was changed to Xijing, Xijing was changed to Zhongjing, Shu County was changed to Chengdu Prefecture.

古文：凤翔府官僚并同三京名号。
现代文：凤翔府的官僚和南京、西京、中京的名号相同。
English: The bureaucrats in Fengxiangfu have the same names as those in Nanjing, Xijing and Zhongjing.

古文：其李憕、卢弈、颜杲卿、袁履谦、许远、张巡、张介然、蒋清、庞坚等即与追赠，访其子孙，厚其官爵。
现代文：至于李忄登、卢弈、颜杲卿、袁履谦、许远、张巡、张介然、蒋清、庞坚等死难官员都给予追赠，寻访他们的子孙，使他们的官爵加厚。
English: As for the deceased officials such as Li Yu-deng, Lu Wei, Yan Yu-ching, Yuan Lucheng, Xu Yuan, Zhang Jun, Zhang Kai-nan, Jiang Qing, and Pang Jian, they all gave posthumous gifts, visited their descendants, and made their official titles thicker.

古文：文武三品已上赐爵一级，四品已下加一阶。
现代文：文武官员三品以上赐爵一级，四品以下加官一阶。
English: Civil and military officers with three or more awards are awarded first class, and those with four or less awards are awarded second class.

古文：赐酺五日。
现代文：赐给百官大饮宴五天。
English: The banquet lasted three days.

古文：进封南阳王系为赵王，新城王仅为彭王，颍川王僴为兗王。
现代文：晋封南阳王亻系为赵王、新城王仅为彭王，颍川王亻间为兖王。
English: Of the Nanyang kings who were awarded the title of Jin, Zhao Wang was the first, Xincheng Wang was only Peng Wang, and Shichuan Wang was the second.

古文：第七男侹为泾王，第九男僙封襄王，第十男佋封兴王，第十一男倕封杞王，第十二男侗封定王。
现代文：第七个儿子亻廷为泾王，第九个儿子亻黄封襄王，第十人亻召封兴王，第十一个儿子亻垂封为杞王，第十二个儿子侗封为定王。
English: The seventh son, Yu Ting, became the king of Shanshan, the ninth son, Yu Huangfu, became the king of Shanshan, the tenth son, Yu Zhaofu, became the king of Xing, the eleventh son, Yu Tiefu, became the king of Shanshan, and the twelfth son, Yu Hui, became the king of Ding.

古文：甲子，上皇御宣政殿，授上传国玺，上于殿下涕泣而受之。
现代文：二十一日，太上皇驾到宣政殿，授予皇上传国玉玺，皇上在殿下流泪接受了玉玺。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Emperor drove to the Imperial Palace to present the Imperial Regalia to the Emperor. The Emperor accepted the Regalia with tears in his eyes.

古文：己丑，贼将伪范阳节度使史思明以其兵众八万之籍，与伪河东节度使高秀岩并表送降。
现代文：二十二日，贼将伪范阳节度使史思明把他兵众八万人的名籍，与伪河东节度使高秀岩一起送表章投降。
English: On the 22nd, the thief sent the fake Fanyang Festival to make Shi Siming give the names of his 80,000 soldiers, and the fake Hedong Festival to make Gao Xiuyan surrender together.

古文：庚午，制： 人臣之节，有死无二；为国之体，叛而必诛。
现代文：二十七日，皇上下制曰 ：臣子的节义，有死无二；为了国家的礼义道德，背叛的人必须诛杀。
English: On the 27th, the Emperor issued the following edict: "For the sake of the loyalty of a subject, there is no other way but death; for the sake of the country's courtesy and morality, a traitor must be killed."

古文：况乎委质贼廷，宴安逆命，耽受宠禄，淹延岁时，不顾思义，助其效用，此其可宥，法将何施？
现代文：何况是托身于贼人之伪朝，享乐而违背皇命，沉湎于伪贼的宠幸和俸禄，苟活岁月，不顾恩义，替贼人效力卖命，这样还可饶恕，法律还怎么施行？
English: What's more, entrusting oneself to the false dynasty of thieves, enjoying oneself and violating the imperial order, indulging in the favors and salaries of the false thieves, living for years, disregarding kindness, and working for the thieves, can still be forgiven, how can the law be enforced?

古文：达奚珣等或受任台辅，位极人臣；或累叶宠荣，姻联戚里；或历践台阁，或职通中外。
现代文：达奚王旬等人有的被任命为宰相，地位在臣子中最高；有的人历代荣耀受皇上宠信，在乡里和外亲中结亲；有的人历任尚书台的工作，有的人职务显要可交结朝中内外。
English: Some of them, such as King Dagu, were appointed as prime minister, the highest position among the courtiers; some of them were favored by the emperor for their glory throughout the ages, and made relatives in the countryside and among their relatives; some of them were in charge of the work of the study desk, and some of them had important positions that could be connected to the inside and outside of the dynasty.

古文：夫以犬马微贱之畜，犹知恋主；龟蛇蠢动之类，皆能报恩。
现代文：那些犬马一般低贱的牲畜，还知道留恋主人；龟蛇一样蠢笨的丑类，都能报恩。
English: Those dogs and horses are generally lowly livestock, but they still know how to be attached to their owners; turtles and snakes are just as stupid and ugly, and they can return the favor.

古文：岂曰人臣，曾无感激？
现代文：难道作为人臣，连一点感动奋发之情都没有？
English: Is it possible that, as a minister, you are not even a little moved and motivated?

古文：自逆胡作乱，倾覆邦家，凡在黎元，皆含怨愤，杀身殉国者，不可胜数。
现代文：自从叛胡作乱，颠覆国家，凡是百姓，都非常愤怒仇恨，为国而杀身殉职者，多得数也数不清。
English: Since the rebellion and subversion of the country, all the people are very angry and hateful, and the number of those who have killed themselves and died for the country is countless.

古文：此等黔首，犹不背国恩。
现代文：这些普通百姓，还不背弃国恩。
English: These ordinary people have not yet betrayed the national debt.

古文：受任于枭獍之间，咨谋于豺虺之辈，静言此情，何可放宥。
现代文：然而你们竟在凶残的野兽面前接受任命，为豺狼一样凶残的仇敌出谋划策，这样恶劣的情节，怎么可以宽免！
English: But how can you be excused for accepting an appointment in the presence of a ferocious beast to advise an enemy as vicious as a jackal?

古文：达奚珣等一十八人，并宜处斩；陈希烈等七人，并赐自尽；前大理卿张均特宜免死，配流合浦郡。 
现代文：达奚王旬等十八人，都应处以死刑斩首；陈希烈等七人，都赐他们自杀；前任大理卿张均特别免除死罪，发配到合浦郡。 
English: Eighteen people, including Wang Shun of Dadu, were sentenced to death by beheading; seven people, including Chen Xili, were sentenced to suicide; and Zhang Jun, the predecessor of Daliqing, was specially exempted from the death penalty and sent to Hepu County.

古文：是日斩达奚珣等于子城西南隅独柳树，仍集百僚往观之。
现代文：这天，斩达奚王旬等人在子城西南角的独柳树，又集中百官前往观看死刑的执行。
English: On this day, 斩達王旬 and others gathered at the willow tree in the southwest corner of Zicheng, and hundreds of officials went to watch the execution of the death penalty.

古文：三载正月甲戌朔。
现代文：至德三年正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of the third year is the new year's day.

古文：戊寅，上皇御宣政殿，册皇帝尊号曰光天文武大圣孝感皇帝。
现代文：五日，太上皇驾到宣政殿，册封皇帝尊号曰光天文武大圣孝感皇帝。
English: On the fifth day, Emperor Taizong drove to Xuancheng Palace and was given the title Emperor Guangxu.

古文：上以徽号中有 大圣 二字，上表固让，不允。
现代文：皇上因为徽号中有 大圣 二字，坚决上表辞让，太上皇不允许辞让。
English: The Emperor, because of the word "Daisho" (Great Saint) in the crest, insisted on making concessions, but the Empress Dowager did not allow him to make concessions.

古文：乙酉，敕： 因乱所失库物，先差使搜检，如闻下吏因便扰人，其搜检使一切并停，务令安辑。 
现代文：十二日，皇上下令： 因为战乱所失去的国库物资，先派使者搜查寻检，如果听说下面官吏乘机骚扰百姓，那么搜检使者应该停止一切搜检，务必要让他们安定和睦。 
English: On the 12th, the emperor issued an order: Because of the loss of treasury materials caused by the war, an emissary was first sent to search and search. If it was heard that the officials below were taking the opportunity to harass the people, then the search emissary should stop all searches and make sure that they were stable and harmonious.

古文：内出宫女三千人。
现代文：从宫内放宫女三千人让她们归家。
English: Three thousand princesses were released from the palace so that they could return home.

古文：庚寅，大阅诸军于含元殿庭，上御栖鸾阁观之。
现代文：十七日，在含元殿大庭上检阅各军，皇上到栖鸾阁观看。
English: On the 17th, the troops were reviewed in the great court of the Gan Yuan Hall, and the emperor went to the imperial pavilion to watch.

古文：庚子，册良娣张氏为淑妃。
现代文：二十七日，皇上册封张氏良娣为淑妃。
English: On the 27th, Zhang's empress Dowager Liangyao was enthroned as empress.

古文：二月癸卯朔，贼将伪淄青节度能元皓以其地请降，用为河北招讨使，并其子昱并授官爵。
现代文：二月一日，贼将伪淄青节度使能元皓率他的地方请求归降，皇上用他为河北招讨使，连同他的儿子昱也一起授予官爵。
English: On the first day of February, the thief turned the pseudo-Amethyst Festival into an opportunity for Yuan Xuan to lead his province in a request for surrender. The emperor used him as an envoy to Hebei Province, and together with his son Xuan, he was also awarded a peerage.

古文：乙巳，上御兴庆宫，奉册上皇徽号曰太上至道圣皇大帝。
现代文：三日，皇上驾到兴庆宫，恭敬地奉上太上皇徽号曰太上至道圣皇大帝。
English: On the third day, the emperor drove to the Xingqing Palace and respectfully presented the imperial emblem to the emperor, saying, "Your Majesty the Supreme Emperor."

古文：丁未，御明凤门，大赦天下，改至德三载为乾元元年。
现代文：五日，皇上驾到明凤门，大赦天下，改至德三年为乾元元年。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor drove to the Mingfeng Gate, pardoned the world, and changed the year to the first year of the Qianyuan.

古文：死王事、陷贼不受伪命而死者，并与追赠。陷贼官先推鞫者，例减罪一等。
现代文：成都、灵武护驾随从功臣三品以下官员给予他一个儿子以官职，五品以下官员给予一个儿子为中吏部试出身，六品以下官员根据情况改任或迁调官职。
English: In Chengdu, Lingwu gave one son of an official of three grades or lower to an official of five grades or lower, and one son of an official of six grades or lower to an official of junior middle-ranking officials. The official of six grades or lower was reassigned or transferred according to the situation.

古文：今后医卜入仕者，同明法例处分。
现代文：为王事而死、陷于贼中不受伪任而死的人，都给予追赠。陷于贼中官员先已审问者，按例减罪一等。
English: Those who died for the cause of the king, and those who died as a result of being caught in the midst of thieves without being falsely accused, were all given posthumous awards. Those who were caught in the midst of thieves and had already been interrogated by officials, had their crimes reduced to the first class as usual.

古文：三月癸酉朔。
现代文：三月一日是朔日。
English: March 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：甲戌，元帅楚王俶改封成王。
现代文：二日，元帅楚王亻叔改封为成王。
English: On the second day, Marshal Chu Wangye changed his title to Chengwang.

古文：乙亥，山南东道、河南、淮南、江南皆置节度使。
现代文：三日，山南东道、河南、淮南、江南都设置节度使。
English: On the third day, Shannan Host, Henan, Huainan and Jiangnan all set up festival envoys.

古文：辛卯，以岁饥，禁酤酒，麦熟之后，任依常式。
现代文：十九日，因为荒年，禁止卖酒，麦熟之后，仍旧依照常规。
English: On the 19th, because of the bad weather, the sale of alcohol was prohibited. After the wheat was ripe, it was still in accordance with the usual practice.

古文：太史监为司天台，取承宁坊张守珪宅置，仍补官员六十人。
现代文：太史监为司天台，取承宁坊张守王圭的旧宅设置司天台，仍然补官员六十人。
English: The Chief Historian was appointed as the chief steward, and the old house of Zhang Shou Wang Gui in Chengningfang was used as the chief steward's house. Sixty officials were still needed.

古文：夏四月癸卯，以太子少师、嗣虢王巨为东京留守、河南尹，充京畿采访处置使。
现代文：夏四月二日，以太子少师、嗣虢王巨为东京留守、河南尹，充任京畿采访处置使。
English: On the 2nd of April in summer, Ether Zi, a junior teacher, and Wang Jiao, a disciple, left for Tokyo, while Yin, from Henan Province, took up the post of Gyeonggi interview and disposition envoy.

古文：己酉，册淑妃张氏为皇后。
现代文：八日，册封淑妃张氏为皇后。
English: On the 8th, Princess Shuxi Zhang was enthroned as empress.

古文：辛亥，九庙成，备法驾自长安殿迎九庙神主入新庙。
现代文：十日，九庙建成，皇上备车驾从长安殿迎接九庙神主进入新九庙。
English: On the tenth day, the nine temples were completed, and the emperor prepared a car to drive from Chang'an Hall to welcome the nine temple gods into the new nine temples.

古文：甲寅，上亲享九庙，遂有事于圆丘，即日还宫。翌日，御明凤门，大赦天下。
现代文：十九日，皇上亲自在九庙祭祀，即日回宫。第二天，皇上驾到明凤门，大赦天下。
English: On the 19th, the emperor himself held a religious service in nine temples and returned to the palace the same day. The next day, the emperor drove to the Mingfeng Gate to grant a general amnesty to the world.

古文：戊辰，上进炼石英金灶于兴庆宫。
现代文：二十七日，皇上到兴庆宫向太上皇进献炼石英的金灶。
English: On the 27th, the emperor went to the Xingqing Palace to present the gold stove for refining quartz to the empress dowager.

古文：五月壬申朔，回纥、黑衣大食各遣使朝贡，至阁门争长，诏其使各从左右门入。
现代文：五月一日，回纥、黑衣大食分别派遣使者朝贡，到了内阁门双方争论谁为长谁为次，皇上诏令，回纥、黑衣大食各从左右门同时进入。
English: On the first day of May, Hui Xuan and the Black Clothed Emperor separately sent emissaries to pay tribute. When they arrived at the cabinet door, the two sides argued about who would be the first and who would be the second. The emperor decreed that Hui Xuan and the Black Clothed Emperor would enter from the left and right doors at the same time.

古文：其诸道先置采访、黜陟二使宜停。 癸未夜，月掩心前星。
现代文：十一日，皇上诏曰： 近来由于猖狂胡人扰乱国家，各道都分设了节度使，大概总管内征调派遣、文牍往来，仍加采访使，反而滋生繁乱。现在我命令原先设置的采访使、黜陟使的职务都加以撤销。 
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Emperor issued an edict: "Recently, due to the rampant Hu people disturbing the country, each province has set up a special envoy, presumably the general administration of internal conscription, dispatch, and correspondence, and still has an envoy, but it breeds chaos. Now I order that the duties of the envoy and the envoy originally set up be revoked.

古文：戊子，以河南节度、中书侍郎、平章事张镐为荆州大都督府长史、本州防御使，以礼部尚书崔光远为河南节度。
现代文：十七日，以河南节度使、中书侍郎、平章事张镐为荆州大都督府长史、本州防御使，以礼部尚书崔光远为河南节度使。
English: On the 17th, the Henan Festival Delegate, the Chinese Calligraphy Attendant, and the Pingzhang Zhizhang were appointed as the Governor of Jingzhou, the Honshu Defense Delegate, and the Ceremonial Department's Shangshu Cui Guangyuan was appointed as the Henan Festival Delegate.

古文：庚寅，立成王俶为皇太子。
现代文：十九日，立成王亻叔为皇太子。
English: On the 19th, Prince Chengwangs uncle became the crown prince.

古文：以荆州长史季广琛赴河南行营会计讨贼于河北。
现代文：以荆州长史季广琛奔赴河南行营会合计议到河北讨伐贼人。
English: The governor of Jing Province, Shi Ji Guangyao, rushed to Henan to attend the camp meeting and proposed to go to Hebei to fight against the loggers.

古文：已未，中书令崔圆为太子少师，刑部尚书、同平章事李麟为太子少傅，并罢知政事。
现代文：二十四日，中书令崔圆为太子少师，刑部尚书、同平章事李麟为太子少傅，都罢免知政事。
English: On the 24th, Cui Yuan was appointed as the prince's apprentice by the Central Government, and Li Lin was appointed as the prince's apprentice by the Central Government, and Shang Shu by the Central Government, and Tongping Zhangji by the Central Government.

古文：以太常少卿、知礼仪事王玙为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：以太常少卿、主持礼仪事王王与为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Eta Jocho Shokei, presided over the ceremonial affairs of the king, and was the attendant of the middle school, and the lower level of the middle school.

古文：丙申，敦煌王承寀薨。
现代文：二十五日，火敦煌王承宀采去世。
English: On the 25th day of the month of Dunhuang, Wang Chengyu died.

古文：六月辛丑朔，吐火罗、康国遣使朝贡。
现代文：六月一日，吐火罗、康国派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: On June 1, Tu Huaro and Kang State sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：己酉，初置太一神坛于圆丘东。是日，命宰相王玙摄行祠事。
现代文：九日，开始在圆丘东面设置太一神坛。这天，任命宰相王王与代理在神坛祭祀。
English: On the 9th, the Taichi Shrine began to be set up on the east side of the round mound. On this day, Prime Minister Wang Wang and his deputy were appointed to offer sacrifices at the shrine.

古文：癸丑夜，月入南斗魁。戊午，诏： 三司所推劾受贼伪官等，恩泽频加，科条递减，原其事状，稍近平人，所推问者，并宜释放。 
现代文：十八日，皇上诏令： 三法司所审问弹劾接受贼人伪官的人，对他们已多次施加恩泽，法令已逐渐使他们减轻了罪状，根据他们的情况，已渐渐接近普通人，经过审问的人，都应释放。 
English: On the 18th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: Those who have been questioned and impeached by the three legal departments for accepting thieves and false officials have been rewarded many times. The decree has gradually mitigated their crimes. According to their circumstances, they have gradually approached ordinary people. Those who have been interrogated should be released.

古文：秋七月辛未朔，吐火罗叶护乌利多并九国首领来朝，助国讨贼，上令赴朔方行营。
现代文：秋七月一日，吐火罗叶护、乌利多以及九国首领都来朝见，帮助国家讨伐贼人，皇上命令他们奔赴朔方行营。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, Tu Huo, Luo Ye Guo, Ulido, and the leaders of the Nine Kingdoms all came to see the emperor to help the country fight the bandits. The emperor ordered them to rush to the camp in Shuo Fang.

古文：丙戌，初铸新钱，文曰 乾元重宝 ，用一当十，与开元通宝同行用。
现代文：十六日，开始铸造了新钱，钱上文字曰 乾元重宝 ，用一个当十个，与 开元通宝 同时通行使用。
English: On the 16th, the minting of the new money began. The words on the money said "Qianyuan heavy treasure," with one as ten, and "Kaiyuan pass treasure" used at the same time.

古文：丁亥，制上第二女宁国公主出降回纥英武威远毗伽可汗。
现代文：十七日，皇上下制，命第二个女儿宁国公主下嫁给回纥英武威远毗伽可汗为妻。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor decreed that his second daughter, the princess of Ningguo, should be married to Ui Zang Ying Wu Wei Yuan Pi Gak Khan.

古文：八月壬寅，以青徐等五州节度使季广琛兼许州刺史，河南节度使崔光远兼汴州刺史。以青州刺史许叔冀兼滑州刺史，充青滑六州节度使。
现代文：八月三日，以青、徐等五州节度使季广琛兼任许州刺史，河南节度使崔光远兼汴州刺史，以青州刺史许叔冀兼滑州刺史，以充实青、滑等六州节度使。
English: On August 3, the Qing and Xu five-state festivals made Ji Guangyao concurrently serve as the Xuzhou festival secretary, the Henan festival made Cui Guangyuan concurrently serve as the Xuzhou festival secretary, the Qing state festival secretary made Xu Shuji concurrently serve as the Nianzhou festival secretary, and the Qing and Xuzhou six-state festivals made Cui Guangyuan concurrently serve as the Nianzhou festival secretary.

古文：甲辰，上皇诞节，上皇宴百官于金明门楼。
现代文：五日，是太上皇寿诞节，太上皇在金明门楼宴请百官。
English: On the fifth day, it was the birthday of the Emperor, and the Emperor invited hundreds of officials to a banquet at the Jinming Gate.

古文：朔方节度使郭子仪、河东节度使李光弼、关内节度使王思礼来朝，加子仪中书令，光弼侍中，思礼兵部尚书，馀如故。
现代文：朔方节度使郭子仪、河东节度使李光弼、关内节度使王思礼前来朝见，给予郭子仪中书令的加官，给予李光弼侍中的加官，给予王思礼兵部尚书的加官，其余职务依照原来一样。
English: The festival in Shuo brought Guo Ziyi, the festival in Hedong brought Li Guangyao, and the festival in Guanai brought Wang Sili to see the emperor. They were given the additional post of the secretary in Guo Ziyi, the additional post of the attendant in Li Guangyao, and the additional post of the secretary in Wang Sili's military department. The rest of the duties were the same as before.

古文：九月庚午朔，右羽林大将军赵泚为蒲州刺史、蒲同虢三州节度使，贝州刺史能元皓为齐州刺史、齐兗郓等州防御使。
现代文：九月一日，右羽林大将军赵氵此被任命为蒲州刺史及蒲、同、虢三州节度使；贝州刺史能元皓为齐州刺史及齐、兖、郓等州防御使。
English: On September 1st, General Zhao Jian of the Right Feather Forest was appointed as the secretary of defense of the three prefectures of Puzhou and Pu, Tong and Handan; and the secretary of defense of Bei Zhou was appointed as the secretary of defense of the three prefectures of Qi, Handan and Handan.

古文：庚寅，大举讨安庆绪于相州。
现代文：三日，大举讨伐安庆绪于相州。
English: On the third day, a large-scale campaign against Anqing was launched in Xiangzhou.

古文：命朔方节度郭子仪、河东节度李光弼、关内潞州节度使王思礼、淮西襄阳节度鲁炅、兴平节度李奂、滑濮节度许叔冀、平卢兵马使董秦、北庭行营节度使李嗣业、郑蔡节度使季广琛等九节度之师，步骑二十万，以开府鱼朝恩为观军容使。
现代文：命令朔方节度使郭子仪、河东节度使李光弼、关内潞州节度使王思礼、淮西襄阳节度使鲁炅、兴平节度使李奂及滑、濮节度使许叔冀、平卢兵马使董秦、北庭行营节度使李嗣业、郑蔡节度使季广琛等九节度使的军队，步兵、骑兵二十万，以开府鱼朝恩为观军容使。
English: He ordered Guo Ziyi to be sent to Shuo, Li Guangya to be sent to Hedong, Wang Sili to be sent to Guanzhou, Lu Yao to be sent to Xiangyang, Xingping to be sent to Li Ying and Nian, Xu Shuhei to be sent to Heping, Dong Qin to be sent to Pinglu, Li Siye to be sent to Beiting, Zheng Cai to be sent to Ji Guangya, and so on.

古文：癸巳，广州奏大食国、波斯国兵众攻城，刺史韦利见弃城而遁。
现代文：二十四日，广州上奏说大食国、波斯国兵众攻打城池，刺史韦利见弃城而逃。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Guangzhou reported that the Persian soldiers attacked the city, and Shweili abandoned the city and fled.

古文：十月乙未，以凤翔尹李齐物为刑部尚书，以濮州刺史张方须为广州都督、五府节度使。
现代文：十月六日，以凤翔尹李齐物为刑部尚书，以濮州刺史张方须为广州都督、五府节度使。
English: On October 6th, Feng Xiang, Yin, Li and Qi were appointed as the heads of the criminal department, and Zhang Fangsu, the governor of Guangzhou and the delegate of the five prefectures for the festival, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：郭子仪奏破贼十万于卫州，获安庆绪弟庆和，进收卫州。
现代文：郭子仪上奏章，说在卫州打败贼兵十万，活捉安庆绪之弟安庆和，进攻收复卫州。
English: Guo Ziyi recited a poem, saying that he would defeat 100,000 bandits in Weizhou, capture An Qingxu's brother An Qinghe alive, and attack and recover Weizhou.

古文：甲寅，上皇幸华清宫，上送于灞上。
现代文：十五日，太上皇驾到华清宫，皇上亲自送到灞上。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Emperor drove to the Huaqing Palace, and the Emperor personally sent it to Yu.

古文：许叔冀奏： 卫州妇人侯四娘、滑州妇人唐四娘、某州妇人王二娘相与歃血，请赴行营讨贼。 
现代文：许叔冀上奏章说 ：卫州妇女侯四娘、滑州妇人唐四娘、某州妇人王二娘互相之间饮牲畜之血而决心订盟，誓死讨伐贼人。 
English: Xu Shuji wrote in his report: "The four daughters of Wei Province, the four daughters of Tang Province, and the two daughters of Wang Province all drank the blood of animals and decided to make an alliance to fight against the bandits.

古文：皆补果毅。
现代文：三个妇女都补上了统领府兵的果毅官。
English: All three women have been promoted to the post of commander-in-chief.

古文：壬申，王思礼破贼二万于相州。
现代文：十一月三日，王思礼在相州打败贼人二万。
English: On November 3rd, Wang Sili defeated 20,000 thieves in Xiangzhou.

古文：十一月丁丑，郭子仪收魏州，得伪署刺史萧华于州狱，诏复以华为刺史。
现代文：八日，郭子仪收复了卫州，在卫州监狱里救出了贼人伪任为刺史的萧华，皇上诏令还以萧华为卫州刺史。
English: On the eighth day, Guo Ziyi recovered Weizhou and rescued Xiao Hua, a thief falsely appointed as a historian, in Weizhou Prison. Emperor's edict also appointed Xiao Hua as a historian of Weizhou.

古文：是日，上皇至自华清宫，上迎于灞上。
现代文：这天，太上皇从华清宫到来，皇上到灞上迎接。
English: On this day, the Emperor Emeritus arrived from the Huaqing Palace, and the Emperor went to Shao Shang to greet him.

古文：上自控上皇马辔百余步，诰止之，乃已。
现代文：皇上亲自为太上皇控制马缰绳，走了一百多步，太上皇诰令加以制止，皇上这才停止。
English: The Emperor himself controlled the reins of the horse for the Grand Empress Dowager and walked more than a hundred steps. The Grand Empress Dowager issued an order to stop it, and the Emperor stopped it.

古文：十二月癸卯，以河南节度崔光远为魏州刺史，遣萧华赴相州行营。
现代文：十二月五日，以河南节度使崔光远为魏州刺史，派遣萧华奔赴相州行营。
English: On December 5th, on the occasion of the Henan Festival, Cui Guangyuan made history in Weizhou and sent Xiao Hua to travel to Xiangzhou.

古文：甲辰，以升州刺史韦黄裳为苏州刺史、浙西节度使。
现代文：六日，以升州刺史韦黄裳为苏州刺史、浙西节度使。
English: On the 6th, Shengzhou chief historian Wei Huangxiang was appointed as the chief historian of Suzhou and the chief historian of western Zhejiang.

古文：庚戌，以户部尚书李峘充淮南、浙西观察使、处置节度使。
现代文：十二日，以户部尚书李山亘充任淮南、浙西观察使、处置节度使。
English: On the 12th, with the approval of the Ministry of the Household, Li Shan was appointed as the observation envoy for Huainan and West Zhejiang and the dispatching envoy.

古文：丙寅，立春，上御宣政殿，读时令，常参官五品已上升殿序坐而听之。
现代文：二十八日，立春，皇上驾到宣政殿，宣读按季节制定的政令，定时入朝参见的官五品以上者升入殿堂之东西两厢坐着听宣读时令。
English: On the 28th, the first day of spring, the emperor drove to the Imperial Palace to read out the decrees, which were made according to the season. Officials of the Fifth Rank and above, who regularly came to the palace to see the emperor, were elevated to the east and west chambers of the palace to sit and listen to the reading of the season.

古文：时王师围相州，庆绪食尽，求于史思明，率众来援。
现代文：当时唐朝军队包围相州，安庆绪粮食已尽，向史思明求救，请求他率部众来援助。
English: At that time, the Tang Dynasty army surrounded Xiangzhou, and Anqingxu had run out of grain. He appealed to Shi Siming for help and asked him to lead his people to come to his aid.

古文：丁卯，思明复陷魏州，刺史崔光远出奔。
现代文：二十九日，史思明再次攻陷魏州，刺史崔光远出逃。
English: On the 29th, Shi Siming once again invaded Weizhou, and stabbed Shi Cui Guang, who fled far away.

古文：二年春正月己巳朔，上御含元殿，受尊号曰乾元大圣光天文武孝感皇帝。
现代文：乾元二年春正月一日，皇上驾到含元殿，接受尊号曰乾元大圣光天文武孝感皇帝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the Qianyuan Spring, the emperor arrived at the Hall of Han Yuan and received the honorific title of "Emperor of the Great Heavenly Light of Qianyuan."

古文：是日，史思明自称燕王于魏州，僭立年号。
现代文：这一天，史思明在魏州自称为燕王，越权而建立年号。
English: On this day, Shi Siming established the year name in Weizhou by claiming to be the King of the Swallows.

古文：丁丑，上亲祀九宫贵神，斋宿于坛所。
现代文：九日，皇上亲自祭祀九宫贵神，吃斋沐浴并住在九宫神坛所在地。
English: On the 9th, the emperor personally offered sacrifices to the Nine Palace Gods, ate, fasted, bathed, and stayed at the location of the Nine Palace Shrine.

古文：戊寅，有事于籍田，上行九推，礼官奏太过，上曰： 朕劝农率下，所恨不终千亩耳。 
现代文：十日，皇上亲自耕种征用民用耕种的田，皇上耕种，卿、诸侯参加拨土九次，礼仪之官上奏，认为这太过分，皇上道： 朕鼓励农耕，亲自为百姓表率，遗憾的是不能耕完一千亩啊！ 
English: On the tenth day, the emperor personally cultivated the fields that were requisitioned for civilian cultivation. The emperor cultivated, and the lords and princes participated in the allocation of land nine times. The officials of the etiquette thought that this was too much. The emperor said: I encourage farming and personally lead by example for the people. Unfortunately, I can't finish cultivating a thousand mu!

古文：癸未夜，月掩岁星。
现代文：十五日夜，月亮遮掩了岁星。
English: On the night of the fifteenth day, the moon covered the year star.

古文：乙丑，以御史中丞崔寓都统浙江、淮南节度处置使。
现代文：十七日，以御史中丞崔寓都统浙江、淮南节度处置使。
English: On the seventeenth day, he sent messengers to Zhejiang and Huainan with the title of Grand Historian Choi Yotong.

古文：丙申，开府仪同三司、卫尉卿、怀州北庭行营节度使、虢国公李嗣业卒于相州行营。
现代文：二十八日，开府仪同三司、卫尉卿、怀州北庭行营节度使、虢国公李嗣业在相州行营去世。
English: On the 28th, Kaifu Yi, together with the Third Division, the Captain of the Guards, the Keeper of the North Court of Huai Zhou, and the Governor of Shandong Province, Li Siye, died in the camp of Xiang Zhou.

古文：庚子，以太子少师崔圆充东京留守，判尚书省事。
现代文：二月三日，以太子少师崔圆充任东京留守，并兼任地位较低的尚书省事。
English: On February 3rd, Etsuko's junior master, Choi Won-chong, left for Tokyo, and concurrently assumed the low-ranking post of secretary.

古文：二月壬子望，月蚀既。
现代文：十五日是望日，月蚀已完。
English: The fifteenth day is the sighting day, and the lunar eclipse is over.

古文：百官请加皇后张氏尊号曰 翊圣 ，上以月蚀阴德不修而止。
现代文：百官请求加皇后张氏尊号曰 翊圣 ，皇上因为有月蚀，说明皇后阴德没有修好而加以制止。
English: A hundred officials requested that the name of Empress Zhang Shizun be added to the name of the emperor, saying that the emperor stopped it because there was a lunar eclipse, indicating that the queen's yin and yang had not been repaired.

古文：贬东京留守、嗣虢王巨以遂州刺史，苛政也。
现代文：贬东京留守、嗣虢王巨为遂州刺史，因为他施行苛政。
English: He left Tokyo and his heir, Wang Jiao, became the history of Suizhou because of his harsh rule.

古文：丙辰，月犯心大星。壬戌，遣侍中苗晋卿、王玙分录囚徒。
现代文：二十五日，派遣侍中苗晋卿、王王与分别审查并记录囚徒的罪状。
English: On the 25th, they dispatched the chamberlains Miao Jinqing and Wang Wang to examine and record the prisoners' charges separately.

古文：三月丁卯朔。
现代文：三月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of March is Dingwu Day.

古文：己巳，皇后祀先蚕于苑中。
现代文：三日，皇后在宫苑中祭祀先蚕。
English: On the third day, the empress sacrificed the first silkworm in the palace garden.

古文：壬申，相州行营郭子仪等与贼史思明战，王师不利，九节度兵溃，子仪断河阳桥，以余众保东京。
现代文：六日，相州行营郭子仪等人与贼将史思明大战，王朝军队不利，九节度使的军队崩溃，郭子仪断河阳桥，以剩余部众退保东京。
English: On the 6th, Guo Ziyi and others in the Xiangzhou Campaign fought against the Thief General Shi Siming, the imperial army was unfavorable, and the army of the Nine Divisions collapsed. Guo Ziyi broke through the Heyang Bridge and withdrew to Tokyo with the remaining troops.

古文：辛卯，以卫尉卿荔非元礼为怀州刺史，权镇西、北庭行营节度使；以滑州刺史许叔冀充滑、汴、曹、宋等州节度使；以郓州刺史尚衡为徐州刺史，充亳、颍等州节度使。
现代文：二十五日，以卫尉卿荔非元礼为怀州刺史，替代镇西、北庭行营节度使；以滑州刺史许叔冀充当滑、汴、曹、宋等州节度使；以郓州刺史尚衡为徐州刺史，充任亳、颍等州节度使。
English: On the 25th, Wei Fuxing Li Fei Yuanli was appointed as the official historian of Waizhou, replacing Zhenxi and Beiting Xingying as the official historian of the state; Xu Shuji was appointed as the official historian of the state of Nanning, Shandong, Cao and Song as the official historian of the state of Nanning; Shangheng was appointed as the official historian of the state of Xuzhou as the official historian of the state of Shandong, and served as the official historian of the state of Nanning and Shandong.

古文：甲午，以兵部侍郎吕諲同中书门下平章事，以太子宾客薛景仙为凤翔尹、本府防御使。
现代文：二十八日，以兵部侍郎吕醔任同中书门下平章事，以太子宾客薛景仙为凤翔尹、本府防御使。
English: On the 28th, with the attendant of the military department, Lv Ying, as the guest of honor, and the guest of ether, Xue Jingxian, as the guest of honor, the guest of honor was Feng Xiangyin, the defense envoy of the capital.

古文：乙未，侍中苗晋卿为太子太傅，平章事王玙为刑部尚书，并罢知政事。
现代文：二十九日，侍中苗晋卿为太子太傅，平章事王王与为刑部尚书，都罢免知政事。
English: On the 29th, Miao Jinqing, an aide-de-camp to the crown prince, was removed from his post as the prince's eunuch, and both Ping Zhangjiu Wang Wang and Shang Shu, an aide-de-camp to the minister of justice, were removed from their posts as chancellors.

古文：以京兆尹李岘为吏部尚书，礼部侍郎李揆为中书侍郎，与户部侍郎第五琦等并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：以京兆尹李岘为吏部尚书，礼部侍郎李揆为中书侍郎，与户部侍郎第五琦等人都任同中书门下平章事。
English: With Jing Zha Yin Lijuan as the official secretary of the General Office, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies Lijuan as the attendant of the General Office, and the attendant of the General Office of the Fifth Division as the attendant of the General Office.

古文：甲辰，以邓州刺史鲁炅为郑州刺史，充陈、郑、颍、亳节度使；以徐州刺史尚衡为青州刺史，充青、淄、密、登、莱、沂、海等州节度使；以商州刺史、兴平军节度李奂兼豫、许、汝等州节度使。
现代文：八日，以邓州刺史鲁炅为郑州刺史，充任陈、郑、颍、亳节度使；以徐州刺史尚衡为青州刺史，充任青、淄、密、登、莱、沂、海等州节度使；以商州刺史、兴平军节度使李奂兼任豫、许、汝等州节度使。
English: On the 8th, Dengzhou's Lu Wei was appointed as Zhengzhou's Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei Wei

古文：乙巳，第五琦依旧判度支、租庸等使。
现代文：九日，第五琦依旧兼任职务较低的度支使、租庸使。
English: On the 9th, the 5th generation still concurrently served as a lower-ranking official, and a less-senior official.

古文：史思明僭号于魏州。
现代文：史思明在魏州超越本分自号称帝。
English: Shi Siming overstepped his bounds in Weizhou and proclaimed himself emperor.

古文：贬季广琛宣州刺史。
现代文：贬季广琛为宣州刺史。
English: The dethronement of Guanzhong was a turning point in the history of Xuanzhou.

古文：崔光远为太子少保。
现代文：崔光远为太子少保。
English: Choe Kwang-yong is the prince's junior bodyguard.

古文：癸亥，以久旱徙市，雩祈雨。
现代文：二十七日，因为长久干旱而迁移市场，祭祀求雨。
English: On the 27th, because of the long drought, the market was moved and a ritual was held to pray for rain.

古文：五月辛巳，贬宰相李岘蜀州刺史。
现代文：五月十六日，贬宰相李岘为蜀州刺史。
English: On May 16th, the deposed Prime Minister Li Wei became the history of Shuzhou.

古文：丁亥，上御宣政殿试文经邦国等四科举人。
现代文：二十二日，皇上驾到宣政殿考试文、经、邦、国等四科举人。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor drove to the Xuancheng Palace for the examination of four subjects, including literature, classics, state, and country.

古文：乃以汝州刺史刘展为滑州刺史，以平卢军节度都知兵马使董秦为濮州刺史。
现代文：于是以汝州刺史刘展为滑州刺史，以平卢节度兼管兵马使董秦为濮州刺史。
English: As a result, Liu Zhen, the governor of Ruzhou, was appointed governor of Luzhou, and Dong Qin, the governor of Luzhou, was appointed governor of Luzhou.

古文：六月乙未朔，以右仆射裴冕为御史大夫、成都尹，持节充剑南节度副大使、本道观察使；以邠州刺史房琯为太子宾客；以饶州刺史颜真卿为升州刺史，充浙江西道节度使。
现代文：六月一日是朔日，以右仆射裴冕为御史大夫、成都尹，让他持皇上赐予的符节充任剑南节度副大使、本道观察使；以州刺史房为太子宾客；以饶州刺史颜真卿为升州刺史，充任浙江西道节度使。
English: The first day of June was the New Year's Day. He appointed his right-hand man, Sha Pei Guan, as the imperial historian and Chengdu Yin as the deputy ambassador of the Jianan Festival and the observation envoy of this province, holding the festival given by the emperor. He also appointed the prince's guest, the state historian Fang Fang; and the Raozhou historian Yan Zhenqing as the ascending state historian and the festival envoy of the West Zhejiang Province.

古文：已巳，以明州刺史吕延之为越州刺史，充浙江东道节度使；以右羽林大将军彭元曜为郑州刺史，充陈、郑、申、光、寿等州节度使。
现代文：十一日，以明州刺史吕延之为越州刺史，充任浙江东道节度使；以右羽林大将军彭元曜为郑州刺史，充任陈、郑、申、光、寿等州节度使。
English: On the 11th, Lyu Yan, the Ming prefect, was appointed as the prefect of Yue Prefecture and the host prefect of Zhejiang Province; Peng Yuanyou, the right prefect of Yulin, was appointed as the prefect of Zheng Province and the prefect of Chen, Zheng, Shen, Guang, Shou and other prefectures.

古文：秋七月乙丑朔，以礼部尚书韦陟充东京留守。
现代文：秋七月一日，以礼部尚书韦陟充当东京留守。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, he was absent from Tokyo as a member of the ceremonial club.

古文：太子少傅、兗国公李麟卒。
现代文：太子少傅、兖国公李麟去世。
English: Prince Shoufu and Prince Li Lin of the State of Shandong passed away.

古文：辛巳，制以赵王系为天下兵马元帅，司空兼侍中李光弼为副。
现代文：十七日，皇上下制，命令以赵王亻系为天下兵马元帅，司空兼侍中李光弼为副元帅。
English: On the 17th, the emperor ordered Zhao Wangyu to be the marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, and Li Guangyao, the air officer and chamberlain, to be the deputy marshal.

古文：丁亥，以兵部尚书、潞州大都督府长史、潞沁节度、霍国公王思礼兼太原尹，充北京留守、河东节度副大使。刑部尚书王玙为蒲州刺史，充蒲、同、绛三州节度使。
现代文：十三日，以兵部尚书、潞州大都督长史、潞沁节度使、霍国公王思礼兼太原尹，充当北京留守、河东节度副大使；刑部尚书王王与为蒲州刺史，充当蒲、同、绛三州节度使。
English: On the 13th, Shang Shu Wang Wang of the Ministry of Military Affairs, the governor of Zhangzhou, the envoy of the Three Provinces Festival, and the prince of Huo, Sulei and Taiyuan Yin, acted as the deputy ambassador of the Three Provinces Festival in Beijing; Shang Shu Wang Wang of the Ministry of Criminal Affairs and the envoy of the Three Provinces Festival in Puzhou, acted as the envoy of the Three Provinces Festival in Pu, Tong and Handan.

古文：八月乙亥，襄州偏将康楚元逐刺史王政，据城自守。
现代文：八月十二日，襄州偏将康楚元驱逐刺史王政而造反，占据城池自己守住。
English: On August 12, Xiangzhou rebelled against Kang Chuyuan's expulsion of Jishi Wang Zheng and occupied the city to defend itself.

古文：丙辰，宁国公主自回纥还宫。
现代文：二十三日，宁国公主从回纥回宫。
English: On the 23rd, Princess Ningguo returned to the palace from the retreat.

古文：副元帅李光弼兼幽州大都督府长史、河北节度等使。
现代文：副元帅李光弼兼任幽州大都督府长史、河北节度使等。
English: Vice-Marshal Li Guangyao also served as the governor of Yuzhou, the chief of the Hebei Festival, and so on.

古文：九月甲午，襄州贼张嘉延袭破荆州，澧、朗、复、郢、硖、归等州官吏皆弃城奔窜。
现代文：九月一日，襄州贼张嘉延偷袭攻破荆州，澧、朗、复、郢、硖、归等州官吏都弃城逃窜。
English: On September 1, Zhang Jianyan, the thief of Xiangzhou, made a sneak attack and broke through Jingzhou. The officials of Xing, Lang, Fu, Zou, Zou and Gui all abandoned the city and fled.

古文：戊辰，新铸大钱，文如乾元重宝，而重其轮，用一当五十，以二十二斤成贯。
现代文：五日，新铸造大钱，文字像乾元重宝，而加重它的钱轮，用一个当五十个，以二十二斤成为一贯钱。
English: On the fifth day, the newly minted big money, the text is like the Qianyuan heavy treasure, and the weight of its money wheel, with one when fifty, with twenty-two pounds to become consistent money.

古文：丁亥，以太子少保崔光远充荆、襄等州招讨使，右羽林大将军王仲升充申、安、沔等州节度使，右羽林将军李抱玉为郑州刺史、郑陈颍亳四州节度使。
现代文：二十四日，以太子少保崔光远充当荆襄等州招讨使，右羽林大将军王仲升充当申、安、沔等州节度使，右羽林将军李抱玉为郑州刺史、郑、陈、颍、亳四州节度使。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the ethereal minor Bao Cui Guangyuan acted as the state recruiting envoy for Jingxiang and other states, the right feather forest general Wang Zhongsheng acted as the state festival envoy for Shen, An and Handan, and the right feather forest general Li Baoyu was the four state festival envoy for Zhengzhou Shishi, Zheng, Chen, Handan and Handan.

古文：庚寅，逆胡史思明陷洛阳，副元帅李光弼守河阳，汝、郑、滑等州陷贼。
现代文：二十七日，叛胡史思明攻陷洛阳，副元帅李光弼守河阳，汝、郑、滑等州陷入贼手。
English: On the 27th, the traitor Hu Shiming led the attack on Luoyang, Vice-Marshal Li Guangya guarded Heyang, and Ru, Zheng, and Niu and other states fell into the hands of the bandits.

古文：冬十月丁酉，制亲征史思明，竟不行。
现代文：冬十月四日，皇上下制要亲自征伐史思明，然而终究没有成行。
English: In the winter of October 4th, the emperor wanted to personally subjugate Shiming, but in the end it did not happen.

古文：乙巳，李光弼奏破贼于城下。
现代文：十二日，李光弼上奏，说在城下攻破贼人。
English: On the twelfth day, Li Guangyao gave a speech, saying that the thieves would be defeated at the foot of the city.

古文：壬戌，宰相吕諲起复，依前平章事。
现代文：二十九日，宰相吕醔重新起复，依旧如先前任同平章事。
English: On the 29th, Prime Minister Lyu Hao was reinstated, as before.

古文：十一月甲子朔，商州刺史韦伦破康楚元，荆襄平。
现代文：十一月一日，商州刺史韦伦打破康楚元，荆襄平定。
English: On November 1st, Shang Zhou stabbed Wei Lun to break Kang Chu Yuan, and Jing Xiang was pacified.

古文：庚午，户部侍郎、同平章事第五琦贬忠州长史，御史大夫贺兰进明贬溱州司马。
现代文：七日，户部侍郎、同平章事第五琦贬为忠州长史，御史大夫贺兰进明贬为溱州司马。
English: On the 7th, the fifth secretary of the Household Department, Tongping Zhangji, was demoted to the position of loyal governor, and the secretary of the governor, Helan Jinming, was demoted to the position of the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月癸巳朔，神策将军卫伯玉破贼于陕东强子坂。
现代文：十二月一日，神策将军卫伯玉在陕东强子坂大破贼兵。
English: On December 1st, Shenze General Wei Boyu defeated the bandits in Qiaozi Hill in eastern Shaanxi Province.

古文：甲寅，以御史大夫史翙为襄州刺史，充山南东道节度、观察处置等使。
现代文：二十二日，以御史大夫史岁羽为襄州刺史，充当山南东道节度使、观察处置使。
English: On the 22nd, with the official historian Dr. Shiyi Yu as the official historian of Xiangzhou, he acted as the host festival envoy of Shannan and the observation and disposition envoy.

古文：三年春正月癸亥朔。
现代文：乾元三年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the third year of the Qian Dynasty was the new year's day.

古文：辛巳，李光弼进位太尉、兼中书令，余如故。
现代文：十九日，李光弼晋位为太尉，兼任中书令，其余官爵如前。
English: On the 19th, Li Guangya was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant, concurrently serving as the middle secretary, and the rest of the officials remained as before.

古文：以杭州刺史侯令仪为升州刺史，充浙江西道节度兼江宁军使。
现代文：以杭州刺史侯令仪为升州刺史，充当浙江西道节度使兼江宁军使。
English: He took the Hangzhou military governor Hou Lingyi as the Shangzhou military governor, acting as the military governor of West Zhejiang Province and the military governor of Jiangning Province.

古文：戊子，以朔方节度使郭子仪兼邠宁、鄜坊两道节度使。
现代文：二十五日，以朔方节度使郭子仪兼任宁、坊两道节度使。
English: On the 25th, Guo Ziyi was appointed as the delegate to both the Ning and the Fang festivals.

古文：二月癸巳朔，以右丞崔寓为蒲州刺史，充蒲、同、晋、绛等州节度使。
现代文：二月一日，以右丞崔寓为蒲州刺史，又充当蒲、同、晋、绛等州节度使。
English: On February 1st, Choi Ye, the right-hand man, was appointed as the official historian of Gushu, and also served as the special envoy of Gushu, Tong, Jin, and Handan.

古文：庚戌，第五琦除名，长流夷州。
现代文：十八日，第五琦除去名籍，远远地流放到夷州。
English: On the 18th, the 5th generation was removed from the family register and exiled far away to Yizhou.

古文：癸丑，以太子少保崔光远为凤翔尹、秦陇节度使。
现代文：二十一日，以太子少保崔光远为凤翔尹、秦陇节度使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the etheric minor god Choe Kwang-yong became the messenger of Feng Xiang-yin and Qin Hui.

古文：三月壬申，以京兆尹李若幽为成都尹、剑南节度使。
现代文：三月十一日，以京兆尹李若幽为成都尹、剑南节度使。
English: On March 11th, Jing Zhao Yin Li Ruoyu was appointed as the Chengdu Yin and Jianan Festival envoy.

古文：甲申，以蒲州为河中府，其州县官吏所置，同京兆、河南二府。
现代文：二十三日，以蒲州为河中府，府中州、县官吏的设置，和京兆府、河南府二府相同。
English: On the 23rd, with Puzhou as Henan Province, the establishment of prefectural and county officials is the same as that of Jinghao Province and Henan Province.

古文：四月甲午，李光弼奏破贼于怀州、河阳。
现代文：四月四日，李光弼上表奏称在怀州、河阳打破贼人。
English: On April 4th, Li Guangya announced that he would break the bandits in Huaizhou and Heyang.

古文：甲辰，以礼部尚书、东京留守韦陟为吏部尚书，太子宾客房琯为礼部尚书。
现代文：十四日，以礼部尚书、东京留守韦陟为吏部尚书，太子宾客房为礼部尚书。
English: On the 14th, Wei Wei, who was staying in Tokyo, and the Prince's guest room were given the honorable mention.

古文：以太子宾客、平章事张镐为左散骑常侍，太子宾客崔涣为大理卿。
现代文：以太子宾客、平章事张镐为左散骑常侍，太子宾客崔涣为大理卿。
English: The prince's guests, Prince Heungjong and Prince Janghyeon, are depicted as left-hand riding attendants, while the prince's guest, Prince Choeil, is depicted as Lord Dali.

古文：是岁饥，米斗至一千五百文。
现代文：这一年发生荒年，米价一斗一千五百文。
English: This year was a lean year, and the price of rice rose to 1,500 mon per barrel.

古文：戊申，襄州军乱，杀节度使史翙，部将张维瑾据州叛。
现代文：十八日，襄州军乱，杀节度使史岁羽，部将张维瑾占据州郡造反。
English: On the 18th day of the month, the military riot in Xiangzhou and the degree of killing caused the commander Zhang Weiqi to occupy the county and revolt.

古文：丁巳夜，彗出东方，在娄、胃间，长四尺许。
现代文：二十二日夜，彗星出在东方，在娄星、胃星星座之间，长四尺多。
English: On the night of the 22nd, the comet appeared in the east, between the constellation of Cancer and the constellation of Vesta. It was more than four feet long.

古文：戊午，以右丞萧华为河中尹、兼御史中丞，充同、晋、绛等州节度、观察处置使。
现代文：二十八日，以右丞萧华为河中尹、兼御史中丞，充当同、晋、绛等州节度使、观察处置使。
English: On the 28th, Xiao Hua, the right-hand man, and Hechuan Yin, the second-in-command, concurrently the middle-man, acted as the envoy of Tong, Jin, Zou and other state festivals, and the envoy of observation and disposition.

古文：己未，以陕州刺史来瑱为襄州刺史，充山南东道襄邓等十州节度、观察处置等使。
现代文：二十九日，以陕州刺史来王真为襄州刺史，充当山南东道襄邓等十州节度使、观察处置使等职务。
English: On the 29th, Wang Zhen came from Shaanxi Province to serve as Yangzhou's ambassador, acting as Shannan's host, Xiang Deng, and other ten states' festival envoys, observation and disposition envoys, and other duties.

古文：庚申，以右羽林大将军郭英乂为陕州刺史、陕西节度、潼关防御等使。
现代文：三十日，以右羽林大将军郭英为陕州刺史、陕西节度使、潼关防御使等职。
English: On the 30th, Guo Ying, General of the Right Division of the Wu Lin Army, was appointed as the Shaanxi Provincial Historian, the Shaanxi Festival Commissioner, and the Shaoguan Defense Commissioner.

古文：闰四月辛酉朔，彗出西方，其长数丈。
现代文：闰四月一日，彗星出在西方，长数丈。
English: On the first day of leap April, the comet appeared in the west, rising several meters high.

古文：壬戌，以礼部尚书房琯为晋州刺史。
现代文：二日，以礼部尚书房为晋州刺史。
English: On the second day, the history of Jinzhou was written in the study room of the etiquette club.

古文：甲子，制彭王仅充河西节度大使，兗王僴北庭节度大使，泾王侹陇右节度大使，杞王倕陕西节度大使，兴王佋凤翔节度大使，蜀王偲邠宁节度大使，并不出阁。
现代文：四日，皇上下制，命彭王仅充任河西节度大使，六兄王亻间任北庭节度大使，泾王亻廷任陇右节度大使，杞王亻垂任陕西节度大使，兴王亻召任凤翔节度大使，蜀王亻思任宁节度大使，都不到任所上去。
English: On the 4th, the emperor stepped down, ordering Peng Wang to only serve as the ambassador of the Hexi Festival, the six brothers Wang Qian as the ambassador of the North Court Festival, Zhao Wang Qingting as the ambassador of the South Right Festival, Zhao Wang Qitian as the ambassador of the Shaanxi Festival, Xing Wang Qizhao as the ambassador of the Fengxiang Festival, Shu Wang Qisi as the ambassador of the Ning Festival, all of them did not go up to the post.

古文：丁卯，太原尹王思礼进位司空。
现代文：七日，太原尹王思礼晋位为司空。
English: On the 7th, Taiyuan Yin Wang Sirei was promoted to Siku.

古文：甲戌，天下兵马元帅、赵王系改封越王。
现代文：十四日，天下兵马元帅、赵王亻系改封为越王。
English: On the 14th, Zhao Wangqian, the world's Marshal of the Horse and Cavalry, was renamed King of Yue.

古文：己卯，以星文变异，上御明凤门，大赦天下，改乾元为上元。
现代文：十九日，因为星象变异，皇上驾到明凤门，大赦天下，改乾元为上元。
English: On the 19th, because of the change of the stars, the emperor drove to the Mingfeng Gate, pardoned the world, and changed the Qianyuan to the Shangyuan.

古文：追封周太公望为武成王，依文宣王例置庙。
现代文：追封周太公吕望为武成王，按照文宣王旧例设置庙宇。
English: He enthroned Zhou Taigong Lü Wang as King Wucheng, and set up temples according to the old example of King Wenxuan.

古文：时大雾，自四月雨至闰月末不止。
现代文：当时大雾，从四月下雨到闰四月末不止。
English: At that time, there was heavy fog, and it rained from April to the end of April.

古文：米价翔贵，人相食，饿死者委骸于路。
现代文：米价飞涨昂贵，人与人互相吃，饿死的人丢弃尸骸在路上。
English: The price of rice is skyrocketing, people are eating each other, and the bodies of those who have starved to death are being dumped on the road.

古文：壬午，以刑部尚书王玙为太常卿，右散骑常侍韩择木为礼部尚书。
现代文：二十二日，以刑部尚书王王与为太常卿，右散骑常侍韩择木为礼部尚书。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Wang, the head of the Department of Ceremonial Arts, was appointed as the Grand Master of Ceremonial Arts, and Han Zegi, the Right Hand Rider, was appointed as the Secretary of Ceremonial Arts.

古文：五月庚寅朔。
现代文：五月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the leap month of May is Geng Yin Day.

古文：丙午，以太子太傅、韩国公苗晋卿为侍中。
现代文：十七日，以太子太傅、韩国公苗晋卿为侍中。
English: On the 17th, Ether Zi Taifu and South Korea's Gong Miao Jinqing were appointed as attendants.

古文：壬子，黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品吕諲为太子宾客，罢知政事。
现代文：二十三日，黄门侍郎、同中书门下三品吕醔为太子宾客，罢免知政事。
English: On the 23rd, Huangmen waiter, and the same middle school student, Sanpin Lv Ying, were guests of the prince, and were dismissed from the government.

古文：癸丑，以河南尹刘晏为户部侍郎，勾当度支、铸钱、盐铁等使。
现代文：二十四日，以河南尹刘晏为户部侍郎，兼管理度支、铸钱、盐铁等使。
English: On the 24th, Yin Liuqi of Henan Province was appointed as the steward of the household department, and was also responsible for the management of government expenditure, minting money, and salt and iron.

古文：是夜，月掩昴。
现代文：这一夜，月亮遮掩了昴星。
English: At night, the moon hides the shooting star.

古文：六月乙丑，诏先铸重棱钱一当五十，宜减当三十文；开元宜一当十。
现代文：六月七日，皇上诏令先铸造重眣钱，一文当五十文。应该减少一文当三十文的钱；开元通宝应该一文当十文。
English: On June 7th, the emperor issued an imperial edict to mint heavy money first, with one coin worth 50 coins. The money worth 30 coins should be reduced by one coin; the treasure worth 1 yuan should be worth 10 coins.

古文：七月己丑朔。
现代文：七月一日是朔日。
English: July 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：丁未，上皇自兴庆宫移居西内。
现代文：十九日，太上皇从兴庆宫移居到西内。
English: On the 19th, the Retired Emperor moved from the Xingqing Palace to the west.

古文：丙辰，开府高力士配流巫州；内侍王承恩流播州，魏悦流溱州；左龙武大将军陈玄礼致仕。
现代文：二十八日，开府高力士发配流放到巫州；内侍王承恩流放到播州，内侍魏悦流放到溱州；左龙武大将军陈玄礼辞去官职。
English: On the 28th, Kaifu Gao Lixi was exiled to Wuzhou; Naishi Wang Cheng'en was exiled to Banzhou; Naishi Wei Yue was exiled to Zhangzhou; General Chen Xuanli resigned from his post.

古文：丙辰，御史大夫崔器卒。
现代文：御史大夫崔器去世。
English: Doctor of History Cui Jie passed away.

古文：八月辛未，吏部尚书韦陟卒。
现代文：八月十四日，吏部尚书韦陟去世。
English: On August 14th, the head of the personnel department, Shang Shuwei, passed away.

古文：丁丑，以太子宾客吕諲为荆州大都督府长史、澧朗硖忠五州节度观察处置等使。
现代文：二十日，以太子宾客吕醔为荆州大都督府长史、兼任澧、朗、硖、忠、荆五州节度使和观察处置使。
English: On the 20th, the guest of Etheric, Lv Ying, was appointed as the governor of the Jingzhou Grand Duchy, and also served as the festival envoy and the observation and disposition envoy of the five states of Ying, Lang, Zhou, Zhong and Jing.

古文：己卯，以将作监王昂为河中尹、本府晋绛等州节度使。
现代文：二十二日，以将作监王昂为河中尹、本府晋、绛等州节度使。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Ang, who will be the supervisor, will be the state festival envoy for Yin, Jin, and Zou.

古文：丁亥，赠故兴王佋为恭懿太子。
现代文：三十日，赠已故世之兴王亻召为恭懿太子。
English: On the 30th, the late King Heungseong was given the title of crown prince.

古文：九月甲午，以荆州为南都，州曰江陵府，官吏制置同京兆。
现代文：九月七日，以荆州为南都，州叫做江陵府，官吏设置同于京兆府。
English: On September 7, Jingzhou was designated as the southern capital, and the prefecture was called Jiangling Prefecture, with the same government officials as Jingzhao Prefecture.

古文：其蜀郡先为南京，宜复为蜀郡。
现代文：蜀郡先前改为南京，应该再改回蜀郡之名。
English: Shu County was previously changed to Nanjing, it should be changed back to Shu County.

古文：十月壬申，以庐州刺史赵良弼为越州刺史，充浙江东道节度使；青州刺史殷仲卿为淄州刺史、淄沂沧德棣等州节度使。
现代文：十月十五日，以庐州刺史赵良弼为越州刺史，充任浙江东道节度使；青州刺史殷仲卿为淄州刺史，兼淄、沂、沧、德、棣等州节度使。
English: On October 15th, Zhao Liangyao, the chief historian of Bozhou, was appointed as the chief historian of Yuezhou, and served as the host festival envoy of Zhejiang; Yin Zhongqing, the chief historian of Qingzhou, was appointed as the chief historian of Bozhou, and also served as the chief historian of Yunnan, Fujian, Sichuan, Zhejiang, and other states.

古文：甲申，以兵部侍郎尚衡为青州刺史、青登等州节度使。
现代文：二十七日，以兵部侍郎尚衡为青州刺史、青州登州节度使。
English: On the 27th, Shang Heng, the attendant of the military department, was appointed as the official historian of Qingzhou and the festival envoy of Qingzhou.

古文：十一月乙巳，李光弼奏收怀州。
现代文：十一月十九日，李光弼奏报收复了怀州。
English: On November 19th, Li Guangyao reported that he had recaptured Waizhou.

古文：宋州刺史刘展赴镇扬州，扬州长史邓景山以兵拒之，为展所败，展进陷扬、润、升等州。
现代文：宋州刺史贼人刘展奔赴镇守扬州，扬州长史邓景山率军队抗拒他，被刘展击败，刘展攻陷扬州、润州、升州等州。
English: Liu Zhen, the Songzhou assassin and thief, rushed to Yangzhou to defend the town. Yangzhou Governor Shi Deng Jingshan led an army to resist him and was defeated by Liu Zhen. Liu Zhen conquered Yangzhou, Runzhou, and Shengzhou.

古文：十二月庚辰，以右羽林军大将军李鼎为凤翔尹、兴凤陇等州节度使。
现代文：十二月二十四日，以右羽林大将军李鼎为凤翔尹，兼兴、凤、陇等州节度使。
English: On December 24th, Li Ding, General of the Right Feather Forest, was appointed as Feng Xiangyin, concurrently with Xing, Feng, Zou and other state festival envoys.

古文：癸未夜，岁星掩房。
现代文：二十七日夜，岁星遮掩了房星。
English: On the night of the 27th, the year star covered the house star.

古文：二年春正月丁亥朔。
现代文：上元二年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of the second year of the Spring of Baoying is the New Year's Day.

古文：辛卯，温州刺史季广琛为宣州刺史，充浙江西道节度使。
现代文：五日，温州刺史季广琛为宣州刺史，充任浙江西道节度使。
English: On the 5th, Wenzhou chief historian Ji Guangyao became the chief historian of Xuanzhou and served as the chief envoy of the Zhejiang West Road Festival.

古文：甲午，上不康，皇后张氏刺血写佛经。
现代文：八日，皇上身体不适，皇后张氏刺臂血写佛经为皇上祈祷。
English: On the eighth day, when the emperor was unwell, Empress Zhang wrote Buddhist scriptures in blood on her arm and prayed for the emperor.

古文：甲寅，诏府县、御史台、大理疏理系囚，死罪降从流，流已下并释放。
现代文：二十八日，皇上诏令府、县、御史台、大理寺清理被关押的囚犯，死罪减轻为流放，流放以下罪人都释放。
English: On the 28th, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the prefectures, counties, Goshidai, and Dali Temple to clean up the imprisoned prisoners. The death penalty was reduced to banishment, and the following criminals were released.

古文：乙卯，平卢军兵马使田神功生擒刘展，扬、润平。
现代文：二十九日，平卢军兵马使田神功活捉刘展，扬州、润州平定。
English: On the 29th, the soldiers and horses of the Pinglu Army sent Tian Shengong to capture Liu Zhan alive, and Yangzhou and Runzhou were pacified.

古文：二月己未，党项寇宝鸡，入散关，陷凤州，杀刺史萧忄曳，凤翔李鼎邀击之。
现代文：二月四日，党项入侵宝鸡，攻入散关，攻陷凤州，杀了刺史萧忄曳，凤翔尹李鼎半路拦截他。
English: On February 4, the party invaded Baoji, invaded Sankuan, invaded Fengzhou, killed the assassin Xiao Binghui, and intercepted Fengxiang Yin Liding halfway.

古文：癸亥，以凤翔尹崔光远为成都尹、剑南节度、度支营田观察处置等使，以太子詹事、赵国公崔圆为扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度观察等使。
现代文：八日，以凤翔尹崔光远为成都尹、兼剑南节度使、度支使、营田使及观察处置使。
English: On the 8th, Fengxiang Yin Cui Guangyuan was appointed as the Chengdu Yin, and also the Jianan Festival Envoy, the Doushi Envoy, the Yingtan Envoy and the Observation and Disposition Envoy.

古文：辛未夜，月有蚀之，既。
现代文：十六日夜，有月蚀。
English: On the night of the 16th, there was a lunar eclipse.

古文：戊寅，李光弼率河阳之军五万，与史思明之众战于北邙，官军败绩。
现代文：二十三日，李光弼统率河阳之军五万，在北邙与史思明的军队大战，官军大败。
English: On the 23rd, Li Guangya led the Heyang army of fifty thousand, and fought with Shi Siming's army in Beilun. The government army was defeated.

古文：光弼、仆固怀恩走保闻喜，鱼朝恩、卫伯玉走保陕州，河阳、怀州共陷贼，京师戒严。
现代文：李光弼、仆固怀恩逃跑退守闻喜，鱼朝恩、卫伯玉逃跑退守陕州，河阳、怀州都陷入贼手，京师戒严。
English: Li Guangyao, Dugu Wai'en fled and retreated to Wenshi, Yu Chao'en, Wei Bo'yu fled and retreated to Shaanxi, Hebei and Huai'zhou fell into the hands of thieves, and Beijing was placed under martial law.

古文：癸未，中书侍郎、同中书门下三品李揆贬为袁州长史。
现代文：二十八日，中书侍郎、同中书门下三品李揆贬为袁州长史。
English: On the 28th, Li Yan, the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the third grade of the Chinese Academy of Letters, was demoted to Yuan Guo Shi.

古文：以前河中尹萧华为中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿崇文馆大学士，兼修国史。
现代文：以前任河中尹萧华为中书侍郎、同平章事、集贤殿崇文馆大学士，兼修国史。
English: Formerly, Yin Xiaohua, a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China (CPC), served as a junior secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, Tongping Zhangji, and Shixianden College of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and also studied national history.

古文：三月甲子，史朝义率众夜袭我陕州，卫伯玉逆击，败之。
现代文：三月九日，史朝义率领部众夜袭击我陕州，卫伯玉率军迎击，打败了他。
English: On March 9th, Shi Chaoying led his troops to attack our Shaanxi Province at night. Wei Boyu led his troops to counterattack and defeated him.

古文：戊戌，史思明为其子朝义所杀。
现代文：十三日，史思明被他的儿子史朝义所杀。
English: On the 13th, Shi Siming was killed by his son Shi Chaoyi.

古文：李光弼以失律让太尉、中书令，许之，授侍中、河中尹、晋绛等州节度观察使。
现代文：李光弼因为作战失利让出太尉、中书令的职务，皇上同意了，授予他为侍中、河中尹、晋州、绛州等州的节度使和观察使。
English: As a result of the defeat in the battle, Li Guangya relinquished the positions of captain and second secretary, and the emperor agreed and appointed him as the attendant, the middle-ranking official, the ceremonial envoy and the observation envoy of the states such as Hechu Yin, Jinzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：夏四月乙亥朔，嗣岐王珍得罪，废为庶人，于溱州安置。
现代文：夏四月一日，嗣岐王李珍得罪，废为平民，到溱州安置。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Zigi Wang Lizhen was found guilty, abolished as a civilian, and resettled in Zhangzhou.

古文：连坐窦如玢、崔昌处斩，驸马都尉杨洄、薛履谦赐自尽，左散骑常侍张镐贬辰州司户长任。
现代文：窦如玢、崔昌牵连治罪而被杀，驸马都尉杨洄、薛履谦被赐以自杀，左散骑常侍张镐贬为辰州司户，长期留任。
English: Dou Ruzhen and Cui Chang were implicated in crimes and killed, the horse captains Yang Zhen and Xue Lucheng were sentenced to suicide, and the left-handed cavalryman Zhang Zhen was demoted to the Chenzhou steward and remained in office for a long time.

古文：己未，以吏部侍郎裴遵庆为黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：五日，以吏部侍郎裴遵庆为黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the fifth day of the month, Pei Zunqing, a chamberlain of the cadre department, was appointed as a chamberlain of the Yellow Gate, and Shumon Shimodaira as a chamberlain of the Middle Gate.

古文：青州刺史尚衡、兗州刺史能元皓并奏破贼。
现代文：青州刺史尚衡、兖州刺史能元皓都上奏说攻破贼人。
English: Qingzhou chief historian Shangheng and Zhangzhou chief historian Nengyuan both made speeches about defeating the bandits.

古文：壬午，梓州刺史段子璋叛，袭破遂州，杀刺史嗣虢王巨。
现代文：二十八日，梓州刺史段子璋叛变，袭击攻破遂州，杀了刺史嗣虢王李巨。
English: On the 28th, Zizhou assassinated Duan Ziqi in a mutiny, attacked and defeated Suizhou, and killed the assassin's heir, Duan Wang Li Jiu.

古文：东川节度使李奂战败，奔成都。
现代文：东川节度使李鱼战败，奔逃到成都。
English: Dongchuan Festival defeated Li Yu and fled to Chengdu.

古文：五月甲午，思明伪将滑州刺史令狐彰以滑州归朝，授彰御史中丞，依前滑州刺史、滑魏德贝相六州节度使。
现代文：五月十日，史思明的伪将滑州刺史令狐彰率滑州归附朝廷，彰被授予御史中丞的职衔，依旧任滑州刺史，并兼任滑、魏、德、贝、相州六州节度使。
English: On May 10th, Shi Siming's pseudo-assignment of the city of Nanzhou to the imperial court was carried out by Zhang Zhang, who was awarded the title of the Vice-Governor of Nanzhou, and also served as the governor of Nanzhou, Wei, De, Bei, and Xiangzhou.

古文：乙未，剑南节度使崔光远率师与李奂击败段子璋于绵州，擒子璋杀之。绵州平。
现代文：十一日，剑南节度使崔光远率军队与李奂共同击败了段子璋于绵州，活捉了段子璋并杀了他，绵州平定。
English: On the 11th day of the Jianan Festival, Cui Guangyuan led the army to defeat Duan Zixuan in Mianzhou, captured Duan Zixuan alive and killed him, and Mianzhou was pacified.

古文：李光弼来朝，进位太尉、兼侍中，充河南副元帅，都统河南、淮南、山南东道五道行营节度，镇临淮。
现代文：李光弼前来朝见，晋位为太尉、兼任侍中，充任河南副元帅，全部统领河南、谯南、山南东道五道行营节度，镇守临淮。
English: Li Guangyao came to see the emperor in the morning, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, concurrently served as an attendant, and served as deputy marshal of Henan Province. He led the five provinces of Henan Province, South Shandong Province, and South Shandong Province, and guarded Linhuai.

古文：北京留守、守司空、太原尹、河东节度副大使、霍国公王思礼卒。
现代文：北京留守、试用司空、太原尹、河东节度副大使、霍国公王思礼去世。
English: Beijing absent, probationary Siku, Taiyuan Yin, deputy ambassador of Hedong Festival, Huo Guo Wang Sili passed away.

古文：辛丑，以鸿胪卿、赵国公管崇嗣为太原尹、兼御史大夫，充北京留守、河东节度副大使。
现代文：十七日，以鸿胪卿、赵国公管崇嗣为太原尹、兼御史大夫，充任北京留守、河东节度副大使。
English: On the 17th, with Hong Zhenqing and Zhao Guo Gongguan Chongzhi as Taiyuan Yin, concurrently the Imperial Historian, he served as the Deputy Ambassador to Beijing and the Hedong Festival.

古文：壬子，太子少傅、宗正卿李齐物卒。
现代文：二十八日，太子少傅、宗正卿李齐物去世。
English: On the 28th, the Prince's Younger Brother, Zong Zhengqing Li Qiming passed away.

古文：六月癸丑朔。
现代文：六月一日是朔日。
English: June 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：己卯，以凤翔尹李鼎为鄯州刺史、陇右节度营田等使。
现代文：二十六日，以凤翔尹李鼎为鄯州刺史、陇右节度使、营田使。
English: On the 26th, Feng Xiang, Yin, and Li Ding were appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, the deputy governor of Guizhou, and the deputy governor of Yingtan.

古文：秋七月癸未朔，日有蚀之，既。大星皆见。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日，有日蚀。日蚀完毕，大星都出现。
English: The first day of autumn in July is the new moon, and there is a solar eclipse. After the eclipse, the great stars all appear.

古文：甲辰，延英殿御座梁上生玉芝，一茎三花，上制《玉灵芝诗》。
现代文：二十二日，延英殿皇上座位上生出玉芝，一根茎三朵花，皇上亲自制作《玉灵芝诗》。
English: On the 22nd day of the month, Jade Gooseberry, a stem with three flowers, sprouted from the seat of the Empress at Yan Ying Palace. The Empress personally made the "Yulingshi Poem."

古文：八月癸丑朔，以中官李辅国守兵部尚书，于尚书省上，命宰臣百官送之，酣宴竟日。
现代文：八月一日是朔日，以太监李辅国试用为兵部尚书，地位在尚书省之上，命令宰相百官送他，欢宴了一整天。
English: August 1st was the New Year's Day. The ethereal overseer, Li Shuoguo, was put on probation as the military commander of Shangshu, a position higher than that of Shangshu Province. He ordered the prime minister and hundreds of officials to send him, and they feasted all day.

古文：自七月霖雨，至是方止，墙宇多坏，漉鱼道中。
现代文：自从七月降雨不止，到今天才停止。宫墙屋宇大多被雨水浸坏，水把鱼冲到了道路上。
English: It has rained continuously since July and has only stopped today. Most of the palace walls have been damaged by the rain, and the water has washed fish onto the road.

古文：辛巳，以殿中监李若幽为户部尚书，充朔方镇西北庭陈郑等州节度使，镇绛州，赐名国贞。
现代文：二十九日，以殿中监李若幽为户部尚书，充任朔方、镇西、北庭、陈、郑等州节度使，镇守绛州，赐名为国贞。
English: On the 29th, the court middle warden Li Ruoyu was appointed as the head of the household, and was appointed as the state festival envoy of Shuo Fang, Zhenxi, Beiti, Chen, Zheng and other states, and the town guard of Zhangzhou, and was given the name Guozhen.

古文：九月壬午朔。
现代文：九月一日是朔日。
English: September 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：壬辰，以太子宾客、集贤殿学士、昌黎伯韩择木为礼部尚书。
现代文：十一日，以太子宾客、集贤殿学士、昌黎伯韩择木为礼部尚书。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the guests of Ethereal, the bachelor of Jixian Hall, and Changlibo Han Zegi were the guests of honor.

古文：壬寅，制：朕获守丕业，敢忘谦冲，欲垂范而自我，亦去华而就实。
现代文：二十一日，皇上下制曰： 朕荣幸地守住帝王大业，怎么敢忘记谦虚，想从我自身留下典范，也想抛弃华而不实。
English: On the twenty-first day, the emperor said: I am honored to hold the emperor's great cause, how dare I forget modesty, I want to leave a model from myself, and I also want to abandon the flashy.

古文：其 乾元大圣光天文武孝感 等尊崇之称，何德以当之？
现代文：那 乾元大圣光天文武孝感 等等尊敬崇高的称呼，朕有何德行敢于担当？
English: That Qianyuan Da Shengguang Astronomy Wu Xiaoxin and so on respect the lofty title, I have what virtue dares to be in charge?

古文：钦若昊天，定时成岁，《春秋》五始，义在体元，惟以纪年，更无润色。
现代文：尊敬的如上天，按一定时候成为一年，《春秋》有五个章法，意义在体验纪元，只有纪年，更不修饰润色。
English: Respectable as the heavens, according to a certain time to become a year, "Spring and Autumn" has five chapters, the meaning of which is to experience the era, only the chronology, and no embellishment.

古文：至于汉武，饰以浮华，非前王之茂典，岂永代而作则。
现代文：至于汉武帝，用浮华在修饰，不是前王的盛典，难道世世代代作为楷模。
English: As for Emperor Hanwu, he is embellishing with glitz, not the pageantry of the former king, who has been a role model for generations.

古文：自今已后，朕号唯称皇帝，其年号但称元年，去上元之号。
现代文：从今以后，朕的号只称皇帝，年号只称元年，去掉 上元 之号。
English: From now on, my name will only be referred to as the emperor, the year name will only be referred to as the first year, and the name of Shangyuan will be removed.

古文：其以今北庭潞仪隰等州行营、本管节度观察等事，移镇绛州。
现代文：现在我命令以现在的北庭、潞、仪、阝显等州行营、本管节度观察等事，改移镇守绛州。 
English: Now I order that the town guards of Bozhou should be transferred from the current Beiting, Zou, Yi, Juxian and other state camps, and the main festival observation.

古文：壬申，嗣宁王棣薨。
现代文：嗣宁王棣去世。
English: His heir, King Ning, passed away.

古文：癸酉，河南副元帅李光弼破贼于许州城下，收复许州。
现代文：河南副元帅李光弼破贼于许州城下，收复了许州。
English: Henan Vice-Marshal Li Guangyao defeated the bandits at the foot of Xuzhou Castle and recovered Xuzhou.

古文：建辰月庚辰朔。
现代文：建辰月三月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the third month of Jiancheng is the New Year's Day.

古文：壬午，诏天下见禁系囚，无轻重一切释放。
现代文：三日，皇上诏令将天下被关押囚徒，不论轻重一律释放。
English: On the third day, the emperor issued a decree to release all prisoners in the world, regardless of their severity.

古文：丙戌夜，月有白冠。
现代文：七日夜，月亮有白冠。
English: For seven days and nights, the moon has a white crown.

古文：癸巳，以襄州刺史来瑱为安州刺史，充淮西申、安、蕲、黄、沔等十六州节度使。
现代文：十四日，以襄州刺史来王真为安州刺史，充任淮西、申、安、蕲、黄、沔等十六州节度使。
English: On the 14th, Wang Zhen came from Xiangzhou to serve as the chief of Anzhou, and served as the chief of 16 states including Huaxi, Shen, An, Handan, Huanglong and Handan.

古文：甲午，党项奴剌寇梁州，刺史李勉弃郡走。
现代文：十五日，党项奴剌入侵梁州，刺史李勉弃城而逃。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the party's henchmen invaded Liangzhou, forcing Shi Li to abandon the city and flee.

古文：丙申，党项寇奉天。
现代文：十七日，党项入侵奉天。
English: On the 17th, the party invaded Mukden.

古文：上不康，百僚于佛寺斋僧。
现代文：皇上身体不适，百官在佛寺给寺僧送斋饭。
English: The emperor was unwell, and hundreds of officials went to the Buddhist temple to give the monks a meal.

古文：丁未，诏左降官、流人一切放还。
现代文：二十八日，诏令贬职官员、流放的人一律放回。
English: On the 28th, all the demoted officials and exiles were released.

古文：戊申，中书侍郎、平章事、徐国公萧华为礼部尚书，罢知政事。
现代文：二十九日，中书侍郎、平章事、徐国公萧华为礼部尚书，罢免知政事。
English: On the 29th, Zhongshu's attendant, Ping Zhangji, and Xu Guogong's subordinate, Xiao Hua, were removed from their posts.

古文：以尚书户部侍郎元载同中书门下平章事，以礼部尚书韩择木为太子太保。
现代文：以尚书户部侍郎元载任同中书门下平章事，以礼部尚书韩择木为太子太保。
English: It was His Imperial Highness the Household Division's chamberlain, Mototsune, who was appointed to the same post as the chancellor, and His Imperial Highness the Ministry of Ceremonies' secretary, Han Zegi, who was appointed as the prince's bodyguard.

古文：建巳月庚戌朔。
现代文：建巳月四月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the fourth month is the new moon.

古文：壬子，楚州刺史崔侁献定国宝玉十三枚：一曰玄黄天符，如笏，长八寸，阔三寸，上圆下方，近圆有孔，黄玉也。
现代文：三日，楚州刺史崔亻先贡献定国宝玉十三枚：一曰玄黄天符，像笏，长八寸，阔三寸，上圆下方，接近圆形有孔，黄玉也。
English: On the third day, Chuzhou's Jinshi Cui Junxian donated thirteen pieces of jade to be designated as national treasures: the first day, a yellow celestial beacon, like a gong, eight centimeters long, three centimeters wide, at the bottom of the upper circle, close to a circle with a hole, and a topaz.

古文：二曰玉鸡，毛文悉备，白玉也。
现代文：二曰玉鸡，毛文全部俱备，白玉也。
English: On the second day, there was yakitori, with all the ingredients, including white yakitori.

古文：三曰谷璧，白玉也，径可五六寸，其文粟粒无雕镌之迹。
现代文：三曰谷璧，白玉也，直径若五六寸，其文字如粟米粒而无雕刻痕迹。
English: Sanjaya Valley Bi, also known as Baiyu, has a diameter of about five or six inches, and its characters are like corn kernels without any engraving marks.

古文：四曰西王母白环，二枚，白玉也，径六七寸。
现代文：四曰西王母玉环，两枚，白玉也，直径六七寸长。
English: On the fourth day, the Western King's mother jade ring, two pieces, also white jade, with a diameter of sixty-seven inches long.

古文：五曰碧色宝，圆而有光。
现代文：五曰碧色宝，圆而有光。
English: Five days of azure treasure, round and bright.

古文：六曰如意宝珠，形圆如鸡卵，光如月。
现代文：六曰如意宝珠，形状圆如鸡卵，光亮如月。
English: On the sixth day, the wish-fulfilling jewel, round as a chicken's egg, shines like the moon.

古文：七曰红靺鞨，大如巨栗，赤如樱桃。
现代文：七曰红，大如大栗子，红如樱桃。
English: Seven days of red, big as a big chestnut, red as a cherry.

古文：八曰琅玕珠，二枚，长一寸二分。
现代文：八曰琅王干珠，两枚，长一寸二分。
English: On the 8th day of the month, there are two dried king cormorants, each one inch and two minutes long.

古文：九曰玉玦，形如玉环，四分缺一。
现代文：九曰玉，形如玉环，四分缺一。
English: Nine-day jade, shaped like a jade ring, missing one quarter.

古文：十曰玉印，大如半手，斜长，理如鹿形，陷入印中，以印物则鹿形著焉。
现代文：十曰玉印，大如半手，斜长，纹理像鹿形，陷入印中，用来印物，则鹿形状十分显著。
English: Ten-day jade seal, large as half a hand, obliquely long, texture like deer, caught in the seal, used for printing, the deer shape is very significant.

古文：十一曰皇后采桑钩，长五六寸，细如箸，屈其末，似真金，又似银。
现代文：十一曰皇后采桑钩，长五六寸，细如筷子，其末尾弯屈处，似真金，又像银。
English: On the 11th day, the queen took a mulberry hook, five or six inches long, as thin as chopsticks, with a bend at the end that resembled real gold and silver.

古文：十二曰雷公石斧，长四寸，阔二寸，无孔，细致如青玉。
现代文：十二曰雷公石斧，长四寸，阔二寸，无孔，细致如青玉。
English: A twelve-day-old stone axe, four inches long, two inches wide, without holes, as fine as a blue marble.

古文：十三宝置于日中，皆白气连天。
现代文：十三宝放在日中，都白气上冲连天。
English: If the thirteen treasures are placed in the sun, they will rise into the sky.

古文：亻先表云： 楚州寺尼真如者，恍惚上升，见天帝。
现代文：亻先上表曰： 楚州寺尼真如，恍惚上升，见到天帝。
English: The above table says: Chuzhou Temple nun Zhenru, rising in a trance, sees the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：帝授以十三宝，曰： 中国有灾，宜以第二宝镇之。  
现代文：天帝授给她十三宝，曰： 中国有灾，应以第二宝镇它。  
English: The Heavenly Emperor bestowed upon her the thirteen treasures, saying, "If there is a calamity in China, it should be treated as the second treasure town."

古文：甲寅，太上至道圣皇天帝崩于西内神龙殿。
现代文：五日，太上至道圣皇天帝在西内神龙殿去世。
English: On the fifth day, the Supreme Patriarch Shodo Shoko Tentei passed away in the Shinnai Shoryu-den.

古文：上自仲春不豫，闻上皇登遐，不胜哀悸，因兹大渐。
现代文：皇上从二月身体不适，听说太上皇去世，悲哀不止，因此病势加剧。
English: The Emperor had been unwell since February. When he heard that the Empress Dowager had passed away, he was inconsolable. As a result, his condition worsened.

古文：乙丑，诏皇太子监国。
现代文：十六日，皇上下诏命皇太子代理国政。
English: On the 16th, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the crown prince to take over state affairs.

古文：又曰： 上天降宝，献自楚州，因以体元，叶乎五纪。
现代文：又说： 上天降宝，从楚州献来，因此可用来体法天地之德，协调岁、明、星辰、历数这五纪。
English: He also said: It is a treasure from heaven, brought from Chuzhou, so it can be used to harmonize the five ages of the year, the light, the stars, and the calendar.

古文：其元年宜改为宝应，建巳月为四月，余月并依常数，仍依旧以正月一日为岁首。 
现代文：朕命令元年应改为宝应，建巳月为四月，其余月份都依照常规，仍依旧以正月一日为岁首。 
English: I order that the first year of the year should be changed to Baoying, the founding month is April, and the remaining months are in accordance with the usual practice, still starting from the first day of the new year.

古文：丁卯，宣遗诏。
现代文：十八日，皇上宣读遗诏。
English: On the 18th, the Emperor read out his last will and testament.

古文：是日，上崩于长生殿，年五十二。
现代文：这天，皇上在长生殿去世，年五十二。
English: On this day, the Emperor died in Chosei-den, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：群臣上谥曰文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝，庙号肃宗。
现代文：群臣奉上谥号曰：文明武德大圣大宣孝皇帝，庙号肃宗。
English: The group of courtiers were presented with an honorary title, saying: "Civilization, martial arts, great saint, great emperor Xuan Xiao, temple name Su Zong."

古文：宝应二年三月庚午，葬于建陵。
现代文：宝应二年三月二十七日，安葬在建陵。
English: He was buried in Jianling Mausoleum on March 27 of the second year of Baoying.

