古文：孙登字子高，权长子也。
现代文：孙登，字子高，孙权的长子。
English: Sun Deng, the eldest son of Sun Quan.

古文：魏黄初二年，以权为吴王，拜登东中郎将，封万户侯，登辞疾不受。
现代文：魏黄初二年，封孙权为吴王，同时授予孙登为东中郎将，封为万户侯，孙登称病推辞。
English: In the second year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Sun Quan was named the King of Wu, while Sun Deng was named the General of the East and the Marquis of Wanchou. Sun Deng resigned, saying that he was ill.

古文：是岁，立登为太子，选置师傅，铨简秀士，以为宾友，於是诸葛恪、张休、顾谭、陈表等以选入，侍讲诗书，出从骑射。
现代文：同年，孙权立孙登为吴王太子，为他挑选安排师傅，精选一些才徳优秀之人作为他的宾友。于是诸葛恪、张休、顾谭、陈表等被选入东宫，陪孙登讲读诗书，随从出外骑马射箭。
English: In the same year, Sun Quan appointed Sun Deng as the Crown Prince of Wu, selected and arranged masters for him, and selected some talented and excellent people as his friends. Therefore, Zhuge Ke, Zhang Xiu, Gu Tan, Chen Table, etc. were selected into the East Palace, accompanied Sun Deng to read poetry, and accompanied him to ride horses and shoot arrows.

古文：权欲登读汉书，习知近代之事，以张昭有师法，重烦劳之，乃令休从昭受读，还以授登。
现代文：孙权想让孙登研读《汉书》，熟悉知晓近代事情，考虑到张昭研究《汉书》有指导之法，着重劳烦他指教，就令张休随从张昭学习，回来再教授给孙登。
English: Sun Quan wanted Sun Deng to study "Hanshu" and be familiar with modern affairs. Considering that Zhang Zhao's study of "Hanshu" had a guiding method and stressed his instruction, he ordered Zhang Xiu to study with Zhang Zhao and come back to teach Sun Deng.

古文：登待接寮属，略用布衣之礼，与恪、休、谭等或同舆而载，或共帐而寐。
现代文：孙登接待官僚臣属，只简单地行使百姓间的礼节，和诸葛恪、张休、顾谭等有时同坐一辆车，有时同床共眠。
English: Sun Deng received bureaucratic subordinates, and simply exercised the etiquette of the common people. He sometimes rode in the same car as Zhuge Ke, Zhang Xiu, Gu Tan, and others, and sometimes slept in the same bed.

古文：太傅张温言於权曰： 夫中庶子官最亲密，切问近对，宜用隽德。 
现代文：太傅张温对孙权说： 中庶子这个官职与太子最为亲密，太子随时提问他要能随时解答，应当选用才徳卓著之人。 
English: Grandmaster Zhang Wen said to Sun Quan: The official position of the middle son is the closest to the prince. The prince can ask questions at any time, and if he can answer at any time, he should choose a person with outstanding virtue.

古文：於是乃用表等为中庶子。
现代文：孙权就任命陈表等为中庶子。
English: Sun Quan appointed Chen Bo as the middle child.

古文：后又以庶子礼拘，复令整巾侍坐。
现代文：后来又因为中庶子的礼节过于拘束，又令他们戴着头巾侍坐。
English: Later, because the middle child's etiquette was too restrained, they were also made to wear a headscarf.

古文：黄龙元年，权称尊号，立为皇太子，以恪为左辅，休右弼，谭为辅正，表为翼正都尉，是为四友，而谢景、范慎、刁玄、羊衟等皆为宾客，於是东宫号为多士。
现代文：黄龙元年，孙权登基称帝，立孙登为皇太子，任命诸葛恪为左辅，张休为右弼，顾谭为辅正，陈表为翼正都尉，这就是常说的四友。而谢景、范慎、刁玄、羊瞆等都是宾客，于是东宫号称俊杰众多。
English: In the first year of the Yellow Dragon, Sun Quan ascended to the throne as emperor, established Sun Deng as crown prince, appointed Zhu Ge Ke as left assistant, Zhang Xiu as right assistant, Gu Tan as assistant general, and Chen You as wing general, which is often called the four friends. And Xie Jing, Fan Sheng, Yao Xuan, Yang Xuan, etc. are all guests, so the East Palace is known for its many young stars.

古文：权迁都建业，徵上大将军陆逊辅登镇武昌，领宫府留事。
现代文：孙权迁都建业，征召上大将军陆逊辅佐孙登镇守武昌，兼管宫府中遗留事宜。
English: Sun Quan moved the capital to Jianye, and conscripted General Lu Xunfu to assist Sun Deng in guarding Wuchang, and also in charge of the affairs left behind in the palace.

古文：登或射猎，当由径道，常远避良田，不践苗稼，至所顿息，又择空间之地，其不欲烦民如此。
现代文：孙登有时外出射猎，应该走小路近道，但他常绕远路避开良田，不践踏庄稼，到休息时间，又选择开阔之处。他不想劳动百姓，就是像这样。
English: Sun Deng sometimes goes out to shoot, he should take a shortcut, but he often takes a long way to avoid good fields, does not trample crops, and chooses an open place at rest time. He does not want to work the people, just like this.

古文：尝乘马出，有弹丸过，左右求之。
现代文：他曾骑马外出，有一颗弹丸从身边飞过，他身边侍卫便去寻找射弹丸之人。
English: He once went out on horseback and a projectile flew past him, so the guards around him went to look for the person who fired the projectile.

古文：有一人操弹佩丸，咸以为是，辞对不服，从者欲捶之，登不听，使求过丸，比之非类，乃见释。
现代文：正有一人拿着弹弓身带弹丸，大家都以为就是这个人射的弹丸，但其人否认并表示不服，随从们便想殴打他，孙登不允许，派人寻找飞过他身边的那粒弹丸，和这人身上携带的相比，两者并不一样，这人才被放走了。
English: There was a man with a slingshot carrying a projectile, everyone thought it was the projectile shot by this man, but the man denied it and said he was not satisfied, his followers wanted to beat him, Sun Deng did not allow it, he sent someone to look for the projectile that flew past him, compared to what the man was carrying, the two were not the same, and the man was let go.

古文：又失盛水金马盂，觉得其主，左右所为，不忍致罚，呼责数之，长遣归家，敕亲近勿言。
现代文：又有一次盛水的金马盂丢失，查出偷窃者，原来是自己身边人做的，孙登不忍心加以刑罚，只是叫他来一番责备，让他长久待在家，并下令周围的人不要传扬。
English: On another occasion, a golden stallion containing water was lost. When the thief was found out, it turned out to be someone close to him. Sun Deng did not have the heart to punish him, but only scolded him, let him stay at home for a long time, and ordered the people around him not to spread the news.

古文：后弟虑卒，权为之降损，登昼夜兼行，到赖乡，自闻，即时召见。
现代文：后来他弟弟孙虑去世，孙权为此下旨减少饮食，孙登日夜兼行，赶到赖乡，亲自通报，孙权当即召见他。
English: Later, his younger brother Sun Xian died, and Sun Quan decided to cut down on his diet. Sun Deng traveled day and night, and arrived in Lai Township to personally inform him. Sun Quan immediately summoned him.

古文：见权悲泣，因谏曰： 虑寝疾不起，此乃命也。
现代文：孙登见孙权哀痛流泪，便劝说： 孙虑病重不起，这是天命。
English: When Sun Deng saw that Sun Quan was sad and in tears, he persuaded him: "Sun Qian is seriously ill, this is the fate of heaven.

古文：方今朔土未一，四海喁喁，天戴陛下，而以下流之念，减损大官殽馔，过於礼制，臣窃忧惶。 
现代文：现在北方未统一，天下都在翘首企盼，上天授命陛下，陛下却按照社会下流百姓的想法，减少朝臣的饮食，超出了礼制的规范，我个人忧虑不安。 
English: Now that the north is not unified, the whole world is looking forward to it. Heaven has given His Majesty an order, but His Majesty has reduced the diet of courtiers in accordance with the ideas of the common people, exceeding the norms of etiquette. I am personally worried and uneasy.

古文：权纳其言，为之加膳。
现代文：孙权采纳了他的劝告，为此增加膳食。
English: Sun Quan took his advice and increased his diet accordingly.

古文：住十馀日，欲遣西还，深自陈乞，以久离定省，子道有阙，又陈陆逊忠勤，无所顾忧，权遂留焉。
现代文：孙登住了十多天，孙权打算他遣他西回武昌，孙登深切地陈情请求，认为长久分离使自己不能侍奉父母，在儿子的孝道上有所缺失，又陈述陆逊忠正勤谨，武昌没有什么可忧虑的，孙权就留他住下。
English: Sun Deng stayed for more than ten days. Sun Quan planned to send him back to Wuchang. Sun Deng made a heartfelt plea, saying that the long separation made it impossible for him to serve his parents, and that there was a deficiency in his son's filial piety. He also said that Lu Xunzhong was honest and diligent, and that there was nothing to worry about in Wuchang. Sun Quan let him stay.

古文：嘉禾三年，权征新城，使登居守，总知留事。
现代文：嘉禾三年，孙权征讨新城，让孙登留守京城，总管留守事宜。
English: In the three years of Jiahe, Sun Quan solicited the new city, let Sun Deng stay in Beijing, and became the head of the matter of staying.

古文：时年谷不丰，颇有盗贼，乃表定科令，所以防御，甚得止奸之要。
现代文：当时庄稼收成不好，盗贼很多，孙登就制定相关法令用以防范，深得制止奸邪的关键。
English: At that time, the harvest of crops was not good, there were many thieves, and Sun Deng formulated relevant laws and regulations to prevent them, which was the key to stopping the evil.

古文：初，登所生庶贱，徐夫人少有母养之恩，后徐氏以妒废处吴，而步夫人最宠。
现代文：当初，孙登的生母地位卑贱，徐夫人对他从小就有抚养的恩德。后来徐夫人因为妒嫉被废黜，安置在吴郡，而步夫人最为得宠。
English: At first, Sun Deng's birth mother had a lowly status, and Mrs. Xu had been kind to him since he was a child. Later, Mrs. Xu was dethroned because of jealousy and placed in Wuxi County, while Mrs. Bu was the most favored.

古文：步氏有赐，登不敢辞，拜受而已。
现代文：步氏有所赏赐，孙登不敢推辞，都是拜受而已。
English: Mr. Bu received some rewards, but Sun Deng did not dare to refuse. It was all just a form of worship.

古文：徐氏使至，所赐衣服，必沐浴服之。
现代文：徐氏派人前来赐给孙登的衣服，孙登必定沐浴后才穿上。
English: Xu sent someone to come and give Sun Deng clothes. Sun Deng must have bathed before putting them on.

古文：登将拜太子，辞曰： 本立而道生，欲立太子，宜先立后。 
现代文：孙登将被册立为太子，他推辞说： 根本确立，原则才能产生，要立太子，应先册立皇后。 
English: Sun Deng will be the first to be crowned as crown prince. He declined, saying, "The principle can only come into being when the foundation is established. If you want to establish a crown prince, you should first establish a queen."

古文：权曰： 卿母安在？ 
现代文：孙权说： 你的母亲在哪? 
English: Sun Quan said: Where is your mother?

古文：对曰： 在吴。 权默然。
现代文：孙登回答说： 在吴郡。 孙权默然不应。
English: Sun Deng replied, "In Wu County. Sun Quan should not be silent.

古文：立凡二十一年，年三十三卒。
现代文：孙登被立为太子共二十一年，三十三岁去世。
English: Sun Den was crowned crown prince for a total of 21 years, and died at the age of 33.

古文：临终，上疏曰： 臣以无状，婴抱笃疾，自省微劣，惧卒陨毙。
现代文：临终前，他上疏说： 儿臣凭借微弱的德行，身缠重病，自知生命垂危，恐怕很快殒命。
English: On his deathbed, he said: "My son-in-law, by virtue of his feeble virtue, is seriously ill, and knowing that his life is in danger, I am afraid that he will soon die.

古文：臣不自惜，念当委离供养，埋胔后土，长不复奉望宫省，朝觐日月，生无益於国，死贻陛下重慼，以此为哽结耳。
现代文：儿臣不是惋惜自己，只是想到即将离开父母，身埋黄土，永远不能再入宫探望，不能朝见陛下皇后，活着无益于国，死后还留给陛下沉重的悲痛，因而悲凄郁结以致哽咽。
English: The vassal did not feel sorry for himself, but choked with grief at the thought of leaving his parents, of being buried in the loess, of never being able to visit the palace again, of not being able to meet Her Majesty the Queen, of being of no benefit to the country while alive, and of leaving Her Majesty with a heavy burden of grief after his death.

古文：臣闻死生有命，长短自天，周晋、颜回有上智之才，而尚夭折，况臣愚陋，年过其寿，生为国嗣，没享荣祚，於臣已多，亦何悲恨哉！
现代文：儿臣听说生死有命，寿命在天，周晋、颜回有上佳才智，尚且夭折，更何况儿臣愚陋，享年已超过他们，生而为国家继承，死后还享有尊荣，对于我来说已是够多的了，还有什么可悲可怨的呢?
English: I have heard that my sons are immortal and live forever, and that Zhou Jin and Yan Hui had great talents but died young. What's more, my sons are stupid and have passed away at an older age than them. They were born to inherit the country and still enjoy honor after their death. That's enough for me. What else is there to be sad about?

古文：方今大事未定，逋寇未讨，万国喁喁，系命陛下，危者望安，乱者仰治。
现代文：现在天下大事未定，各地贼寇未被剿灭，天下人民翘首盼望，将性命托付于陛下，身处危乱之人希望安定，身处动乱者盼望安治。
English: At present, major events in the world are undecided, thieves and robbers in various regions have not been exterminated, the people of the world are looking forward to it, entrusting their lives to His Majesty, those in danger hope for stability, and those in turmoil hope for stability.

古文：愿陛下弃忘臣身，割下流之恩，修黄老之术，笃养神光，加羞珍膳，广开神明之虑，以定无穷之业，则率土幸赖，臣死无恨也。
现代文：希望陛下彻底忘记儿臣，割舍普通百姓的深恩厚德，修炼黄老之术，努力保养精神，增加美食佳馔，扩大神明思想，以此奠基延续无穷的功业，这样则天下百姓有幸有所仰赖，儿臣死而无憾。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will completely forget his sons and daughters, forsake the profound kindness and virtue of ordinary people, cultivate the art of Huanglao, work hard to maintain the spirit, increase the delicious food, expand the thought of gods, and thus lay the foundation for the continuation of endless work. In this way, the people of the world are fortunate to have something to rely on, and there is no regret for the death of his sons and daughters.

古文：皇子和仁孝聪哲，德行清茂，宜早建置，以系民望。
现代文：皇子孙和仁慈孝顺聪慧明智，道德品行清明丰盛，应尽早立为太子，以延续百姓期望。
English: The prince's children and grandchildren should be benevolent, filial, obedient, intelligent and wise, with clear and abundant moral conduct. They should be appointed as princes as soon as possible in order to continue the people's expectations.

古文：诸葛恪才略博达，器任佐时。
现代文：诸葛恪才智谋略博大练达，可重用他来辅佐国事。
English: Zhuge, who is highly skilled in strategy and strategy, can be reused to assist in state affairs.

古文：张休、顾谭、谢景，皆通敏有识断，入宜委腹心，出可为爪牙。
现代文：张休、顾谭、谢景，都通达机敏有识人断事之才，入朝应视为心腹之臣，出外可用作勇猛之将。
English: Zhang Xiu, Gu Tan and Xie Jing were all shrewd and astute decision-makers. They should be regarded as loyal vassals when entering the imperial court and could be used as brave generals when going abroad.

古文：范慎、华融矫矫壮节，有国士之风。
现代文：范慎、华融勇壮有气节，有国士风采。
English: Fan Shen, gorgeous, brave and strong, has the temperament and style of a statesman.

古文：羊衟辩捷，有专对之材。
现代文：羊瞆论辩敏捷，有独自应对之材。
English: He is a quick debater and has the ability to deal with things on his own.

古文：刁玄优弘，志履道真。
现代文：刁玄心地宏达，志在践行道义真谛。
English: He has a great heart and is determined to practice the true meaning of morality.

古文：裴钦博记，翰采足用。
现代文：裴钦博闻强记，翰墨文采足以取用。
English: Pei Qinbo's memory is strong, and his penmanship is good enough.

古文：蒋脩、虞翻，志节分明。
现代文：蒋修、虞翻，志向节操十分明晰。
English: Jiang Xiu, Gu Tuo, the aspiration of the party is very clear.

古文：凡此诸臣，或宜廊庙，或任将帅，皆练时事，明习法令，守信固义，有不可夺之志。
现代文：凡此各位大臣，有的适宜用作朝臣，有的能够担任将帅，都通达时事，明悉法度，坚守信用道义，有不可改变的志向。
English: All these ministers, some suitable as courtiers, some able to serve as generals, are well versed in current affairs, know the law, adhere to trust and morality, and have unchangeable aspirations.

古文：此皆陛下日月所照，选置臣官，得与从事，备知情素，敢以陈闻。
现代文：这都是陛下日月般光辉照耀，给儿臣选置这样的属官，令他们与儿臣共事，因而儿臣能全面地了解他们的心中所想，敢于将他们的情况陈述给陛下。
English: All of this shines like the sun and the moon for His Majesty to choose such a subordinate officer for his vassals, to have them work with his vassals, so that his vassals can fully understand what is in their hearts and dare to present their situation to His Majesty.

古文：臣重惟当今方外多虞，师旅未休，当厉六军，以图进取。
现代文：儿臣仔细地思虑着当今边疆外多有预料之外的情况，军事不止，应当激励六军，借此谋求进取。
English: My son-in-law carefully considered the current situation outside the border, which is often unexpected. There is more to military affairs than meets the eye, and it is necessary to encourage the six armed forces and seek advancement through them.

古文：军以人为众，众以财为宝，窃闻郡县颇有荒残，民物凋弊，奸乱萌生，是以法令繁滋，刑辟重切。
现代文：军队靠人民为众，百姓以财货为宝，儿臣私下听说各郡县都有破败，百姓物资稀缺，奸邪乱行正在萌芽，故而法令频繁增订，刑罚深重苛刻。
English: The army relies on the people as the public, the people rely on wealth and goods as the treasure, the vassals have heard in private that every county and county has been ruined, the people are short of materials, and treason and disorderly conduct are budding. Therefore, the laws are frequently updated, and the punishments are severe and harsh.

古文：臣闻为政听民，律令与时推移，诚宜与将相大臣详择时宜，博采众议，宽刑轻赋，均息力役，以顺民望。
现代文：儿臣听说治理政事应听从民意，颁订律令要依据实情，陛下实在该与将相大臣认真详细选择合乎时宜的治国政策，广纳谏言，减轻刑法降低赋税，适当地取消一些劳役，以顺应百姓的期望。
English: His son-in-law heard that the governance of political affairs should listen to the public opinion, and the issuance of laws and regulations should be based on the actual situation. His Majesty should seriously and carefully choose a timely national governance policy with the Minister of the Prime Minister, widely accept suggestions, reduce the criminal law, reduce taxes, and appropriately abolish some labor services to meet the expectations of the people.

古文：陆逊忠勤於时，出身忧国，謇謇在公，有匪躬之节。
现代文：陆逊对朝政忠诚勤勉，为国忧虑献身，忠正为公，具有不谋私利的节操。
English: Lu Xun was loyal and diligent to the imperial government, worried and devoted himself to the country, was loyal and upright, and had the discipline of not seeking personal gain.

古文：诸葛瑾、步骘、朱然、全琮、朱据、吕岱、吾粲、阚泽、严畯、张承、孙怡忠於为国，通达治体。
现代文：诸葛瑾、步骘、朱然、全琮、朱据、吕岱、吾粲、阚泽、严畯、张承、孙怡忠心为国，通晓明晰治国的根本。
English: Zhu Gejun, Bu Xuan, Zhu Ran, Quan Xuan, Zhu Zhu, Lv Xuan, Wu Xuan, Heze, Yan Xuan, Zhang Cheng and Sun Yi were loyal to the country and knew the fundamentals of governing the country clearly.

古文：可令陈上便宜，蠲除苛烦，爱养士马，抚循百姓。
现代文：可让他们陈述目前应做的事宜，废除苛刻烦琐的政务和政策，爱护士兵养马，抚慰百姓。
English: It can let them state what should be done at present, abolish harsh and cumbersome government affairs and policies, cherish soldiers and horses, and soothe the people.

古文：五年之外，十年之内，远者归复，近者尽力，兵不血刃，而大事可定也。
现代文：五年以后，十年之内，则远方百姓前来归附，近处人民为国效忠，兵不血刃，就能平定大事。
English: After five years, within ten years, the people from far away will come to join us, the people in the vicinity will be loyal to the country, and the soldiers will be able to settle major issues without bloodshed.

古文：臣闻 鸟之将死其鸣也哀，人之将死其言也善 ，故子囊临终，遗言戒时，君子以为忠，岂况臣登，其能已乎？
现代文：儿臣听说 鸟之将死，其鸣也哀;人之将死，其言也善 ，因而子囊临终，留下遗言对时政提出告诫，君子认为这是忠诚，何况儿臣孙登，岂能闭口不言?
English: His son-in-law heard that when a bird dies, its song is sad; when a person dies, his words are good, so the son-in-law died, leaving his last words to warn the current government. The gentleman thought this was loyalty. What's more, his son-in-law Sun Deng, could he not keep his mouth shut?

古文：愿陛下留意听采，臣虽死之日，犹生之年也。 
现代文：希望陛下留心听取采纳儿臣之言，这样儿臣即使某天死去，也如同出生之年。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will listen attentively and accept the words of his son-in-law, so that even if the son-in-law dies one day, it will be like the year of his birth.

古文：既绝而后书闻，权益以摧感，言则陨涕。是岁，赤乌四年也。
现代文：奏疏在他去世之后才被呈报上去，孙权更为悲痛感动，一言语就流泪，这年为赤乌四年。
English: Sonosho was only reported after his death, and Sun Quan was even more saddened and moved, shedding tears at the mere mention of the word. This year marks the fourth anniversary of the death of Sun Quan.

古文：谢景时为豫章太守，不胜哀情，弃官奔赴，拜表自劾。
现代文：谢景当时担任豫章太守，他无法抑制悲痛心情，竟弃职前来奔丧，又上表自我弹劾。
English: At that time, Xie Jing served as the governor of Yuzhang. Unable to suppress his grief, he resigned from his post and came to the funeral. He also publicly impeached himself.

古文：权曰： 君与太子从事，异於他吏。 使中使慰劳，听复本职，发遣还郡。
现代文：孙权说： 您随太子共事，与其他官员不同。 便派宫中使者前往慰问他，允许他恢复原来职务，让他返回豫章郡。
English: Sun Quan said, "You work with the prince, unlike other officials," and sent an emissary from the palace to console him, allow him to resume his original duties, and let him return to Yuanzhang County.

古文：谥登曰宣太子。 
现代文：追谥孙登为 宣太子 。
English: He succeeded his great-grandson as crown prince.

古文：子璠、希，皆早卒，次子英，封吴侯。
现代文：孙登的儿子孙璠、孙希，都早年去世，次子孙英被封为吴侯。
English: Sun Deng's sons, Sun Hao and Sun Xi, both died at an early age, and his second son, Sun Ying, was given the title of Wuhou.

古文：五凤元年，英以大将军孙峻擅权，谋诛峻，事觉自杀，国除。
现代文：五凤元年，孙英因大将军孙峻专权揽政，密谋诛杀孙峻，事情败露后自杀，他的封地被取消。
English: In the first year of the Wufeng era, Sun Ying committed suicide after his plot to assassinate Sun Jun was exposed, and his fiefdom was abolished.

古文：谢景者字叔发，南阳宛人。
现代文：谢景，字叔发，南阳郡宛县人。
English: Xie Jing, also known as Uncle Fa, was from Nanyang County.

古文：在郡有治迹，吏民称之，以为前有顾劭，其次即景。
现代文：在郡守任上有政绩，官吏百姓都称颂他，认为前有顾劭，其后就是谢景。
English: In the position of county governor, he had political achievements, and officials and people praised him, saying that before him, there was Gu Xi, and after him, there was Xie Jing.

古文：数年卒官。
现代文：几年后，在任职上去世。
English: A few years later, Yin Yun died in office.

古文：孙虑字子智，登弟也。
现代文：孙虑，字子智，孙登的弟弟。
English: Sun Xian, the younger brother of Sun Deng.

古文：少敏惠有才艺，权器爱之。
现代文：他年少时就机敏聪慧很有才艺，孙权器重喜爱他。
English: When he was young, he was quick-witted, clever and very talented. Sun Quanqi loved him very much.

古文：黄武七年，封建昌侯。
现代文：黄武七年，他被封爵建昌侯。
English: In the seventh year of Huangwu, he was knighted as Jianchang Marquis.

古文：后二年，丞相雍等奏虑性聪体达，所尚日新，比方近汉，宜进爵称王，权未许。
现代文：两年后，丞相顾雍等上奏说孙虑性情聪慧练达识大体，才识不断增新，相比近代汉朝之例，应晋爵称王，孙权没答应。
English: Two years later, the chancellor Gu Yong and others said that Sun Qian's temperament, wisdom, practice, and knowledge were generally good, and his talent was constantly increasing. Compared with the example of the modern Han Dynasty, he should be promoted to the peerage and called the king, but Sun Quan did not agree.

古文：久之，尚书仆射存上疏曰： 帝王之兴，莫不褒崇至亲，以光群后，故鲁卫於周，宠冠诸侯，高帝五王，封列于汉，所以藩屏本朝，为国镇卫。
现代文：过了较长一段时间，尚书仆射□存上疏说： 帝王兴盛，无不褒扬推崇骨肉至亲，以此光华后妃，所以鲁国、卫国在周朝所受恩宠超过所有诸侯，汉高祖以五子为王，封地在汉朝本土，就是以此作为中央朝廷的屏障，作为国家的镇守护卫。
English: After a long period of time, Shang Shuxu's servant Zhaozhuang said: "The emperors prospered, and they all praised and respected their closest relatives, so that the empress could shine. Therefore, Lu and Wei were favored more than all the princes in the Zhou Dynasty. Emperor Gaozhu had five sons as kings and fiefdoms in the mainland of the Han Dynasty, which was used as a barrier to the central court and as a town guard of the country.

古文：建昌侯虑禀性聪敏，才兼文武，於古典制，宜正名号。
现代文：建昌侯孙虑秉性聪慧机敏，文武双全，根据古代典章制度，应当推正他名号。
English: According to the ancient legal system, Jianchang Hou Sun Qian, who was intelligent, quick-witted, and well-versed in both literature and military affairs, should have his name corrected.

古文：陛下谦光，未肯如旧，群寮大小，咸用於邑。
现代文：陛下谦让，不肯依照旧制办事，群臣上下，都取用于各自的封邑。
English: His Majesty humbly conceded that he did not want to operate according to the old system, and all the courtiers, both high and low, were assigned to their respective fiefdoms.

古文：方今奸寇恣睢，金鼓未弭，腹心爪牙，惟亲与贤。
现代文：现在奸寇猖獗肆虐，军事未息，文臣武将，只有亲属及贤士。
English: Now, the bandits are rampant and rampant, the military is not retired, the scholars and generals are only relatives and sages.

古文：辄与丞相雍等议，咸以虑宜为镇军大将军，授任偏方，以光大业。 
现代文：我私下与丞相顾雍等商议，都认为孙虑应当担任镇军大将军，并担负守卫一方的职责，以光耀国家事业。 
English: In my private discussions with Premier Gu Yong and others, we all believe that Sun Qian should serve as the general of the township army, and assume the responsibility of guarding the side, so as to shine the national cause.

古文：权乃许之，於是假节开府，治半州。
现代文：孙权就同意这些请求，授予孙虑假节，单独开置府署，治所设在半州。
English: Sun Quan agreed to these requests, granted Sun Xian a holiday, opened a separate government office, and the government office was located in Hanzhou.

古文：虑以皇子之尊，富於春秋，远近嫌其不能留意。
现代文：孙虑以皇子的尊贵身份，加上年纪又轻，远近的人都担心他不能留心州中事务。
English: Sun Xian's status as an eminent prince, coupled with his young age, made people near and far worry that he would not be able to pay attention to state affairs.

古文：及至临事，遵奉法度，敬纳师友，过於众望。
现代文：等到他任职掌政，遵奉法度，恭侍师友，超过了众人对他的期望。
English: By the time he took office, he had exceeded everyone's expectations by abiding by the law and respecting his teachers and colleagues.

古文：年二十，嘉禾元年卒。
现代文：嘉禾元年，孙虑二十岁时去世。
English: In the first year of Jiahe, Sun Qian died at the age of twenty.

古文：无子，国除。
现代文：没有儿子，封邑被取消。
English: Without a son, the state was abolished.

古文：孙和字子孝，虑弟也。
现代文：孙和，字子孝，孙虑的弟弟。
English: Sun He, Zi Zi Xiao, is Sun Qian's younger brother.

古文：少以母王有宠见爱，年十四，为置宫卫，使中书令阚泽教以书艺。
现代文：他年少时因为母亲王夫人受孙权的宠爱而受到孙权喜爱，十四岁时，就将他安排在宫廷侍卫中，让中书令阚泽教他学习经传典籍六艺。
English: When he was young, he was favored by Sun Quan because his mother, Lady Wang, was favored by Sun Quan. At the age of fourteen, he was placed among the palace attendants and guards, and he was taught the six arts of the classics by the Chinese scholar Zhe Ze.

古文：好学下士，甚见称述。
现代文：他爱好学习，礼贤下士，受到人们的普遍称颂。
English: He loved to study and was universally praised as a virtuous corporal.

古文：赤乌五年，立为太子，时年十九。
现代文：赤乌五年，被册立为太子，当时十九岁。
English: He was nineteen years old when he was enthroned as crown prince in the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Wu.

古文：阚泽为太傅，薛综为少傅，而蔡颖、张纯、封俌、严维等皆从容侍从。
现代文：阚泽为太傅，薛综任少傅，而蔡颖、张纯、封亻甫、严维等都是他的陪侍随从。
English: Heze was the grand tutor, Xue Zimin the junior tutor, while Cai Ying, Zhang Chun, Feng Shufu, Yan Wei and others were his attendants.

古文：是时有司颇以条书问事，和以为奸妄之人，将因事错意，以生祸心，不可长也，表宜绝之。
现代文：当时司法官员多以律例条文来判刑，孙和认为奸邪狂妄之徒，会利用讼事掺杂私人感情，从而产生作乱的想法，此风不可助长，上表表示应当杜绝。
English: At that time, judicial officials mostly used the provisions of laws and regulations to impose sentences. Sun He believed that those who are evil and arrogant will use litigation to mix with personal feelings, thus generating the idea of creating chaos. This trend should not be encouraged, and the above table said that it should be eliminated.

古文：又都督刘宝白庶子丁晏，晏亦白宝，和谓晏曰： 文武在事，当能几人，因隙构薄，图相危害，岂有福哉？ 
现代文：又有都督刘宝状告中庶子丁晏，丁晏也状告刘宝，孙和对丁晏说： 文武官员任职处事合格，能有几人?因有嫌隙就相互翻脸诋毁，都想着坑害对方，这怎么会有福运呢? 
English: In addition, the governor Liu Bao sued his illegitimate son Ding Jun, and Ding Jun also sued Liu Bao. Sun and Ding Jun said, "How many civil and military officials are qualified to hold office? When there is a rift, they turn the other cheek and slander each other. They all want to harm each other. How can this be good luck?"

古文：遂两释之，使之从厚。
现代文：于是他对双方进行劝释调解，使他们相互交往亲厚。
English: As a result, he advised and mediated between the two sides, so that they interacted closely with each other.

古文：常言当世士人宜讲脩术学，校习射御，以周世务，而但交游博弈以妨事业，非进取之谓。
现代文：他常说当世的才学之士应钻研讲习学问，操练熟习武功，以周全当世事务，而只知交游下棋以妨碍事业，不是进取的做法。
English: He often said that today's talented people should study and study, practice and master martial arts, and be well-versed in the affairs of the world, but only knowing how to play chess to hinder the cause is not an enterprising approach.

古文：后群寮侍宴，言及博弈，以为妨事费日而无益於用，劳精损思而终无所成，非所以进德脩业，积累功绪者也。
现代文：后来群臣出席他的宴会，言语中说到下棋，孙和认为此事只能妨碍事务浪费时光而没有用处，耗费精神竭尽思虑却一无所获，不是可用来增进德行增长功业，积累功绩的做法。
English: Later, a group of courtiers attended his banquet, and when it came to playing chess, Sun He thought that it was only a hindrance to business and a waste of time, but it was useless, and it was not a practice that could be used to promote virtue, increase merit, and accumulate merit.

古文：且志士爱日惜力，君子慕其大者，高山景行，耻非其次。
现代文：而且有志之士爱惜光阴珍惜精力，君子最仰慕的大德行，是功德崇高如山，行为光明耀世，以不能列入其中为耻。
English: Moreover, there are aspirants who cherish their time and cherish their energy, and the great virtue most admired by the gentleman is the sublime virtue, the behavior is bright and brilliant, and it is a shame not to be included in it.

古文：夫以天地长久，而人居其间，有白驹过隙之喻，年齿一暮，荣华不再。
现代文：天地之长久，而人处天地之间，就像白驹过隙，年龄很快衰老，青春不再回返。
English: Heaven and earth are long-lasting, but people are between heaven and earth, like egrets crossing the gap, age quickly aging, youth no longer return.

古文：凡所患者，在於人情所不能绝，诚能绝无益之欲以奉德义之涂，弃不急之务以脩功业之基，其於名行，岂不善哉？
现代文：列举人生所忧虑的，就在于人的欲望所不能杜绝的那些东西，如果真能杜绝无用的欲念而奉行德义之路，抛弃不必要的事情以奠定功业的根基，对于人的名声品行，难道不是良好之事吗?
English: To enumerate the anxieties of life, it lies in those things that cannot be eliminated by human desires. If one can truly eliminate useless desires and pursue the path of virtue, discard unnecessary things to lay the foundation of one's work, is it not a good thing for one's reputation and conduct?

古文：夫人情犹不能无嬉娱，嬉娱之好，亦在於饮宴琴书射御之间，何必博弈，然后为欢。
现代文：当然，人的欲望不能没有游乐嬉笑，而戏嬉娱乐的爱好，也在于饮宴书画琴音骑射等方面，何必要下棋，然后才感到快乐呢?
English: Of course, people's desire can not be without amusement and laughter, and the hobby of playful entertainment is also in the aspects of banqueting, painting, playing the piano, riding and shooting. Why is it necessary to play chess before feeling happy?

古文：乃命侍坐者八人，各著论以矫之。於是中庶子韦曜退而论奏，和以示宾客。
现代文：就令陪坐者中的八个人，各自写出评判下棋行为的文章以矫正时弊，于是中庶子韦曜回去后写了一篇论文奏上，孙和将文章出示给宾客传阅。
English: He ordered eight of the attendants to each write an article judging the behavior of playing chess to correct the shortcomings of the time, so the middle child Wei You wrote a paper after returning, and Sun He showed the article to the guests.

古文：时蔡颖好弈，直事在署者颇斅焉，故以此讽之。
现代文：当时蔡颖爱好下棋，在他官署中任职者不少人都跟着他学，因而孙和用这个方法规劝他。
English: At that time, Cai Ying was fond of playing chess, and many officials in his government office followed him to learn, so Sun He used this method to persuade him.

古文：是后王夫人与全公主有隙。
现代文：在这之后王夫人与全公主生了嫌隙。
English: After this, Mrs. Wang fell out with the princess.

古文：权尝寝疾，和祠祭於庙，和妃叔父张休居近庙，邀和过所居。
现代文：孙权曾重病卧床，孙和到太庙祭祀，孙和的妃子的叔父张休的居所离太庙很近，就邀孙和到他家看看。
English: When Sun Quan was seriously ill in bed, Sun He went to the Imperial Temple to offer sacrifices. The residence of Sun He's concubine's uncle Zhang Xiu was very close to the Imperial Temple, so he invited Sun He to visit his home.

古文：全公主使人觇视，因言太子不在庙中，专就妃家计议；又言王夫人见上寝疾，有喜色。
现代文：全公主派人跟随探查，趁机向孙权进谗说太子不在太庙里，而专往妃子家去商议事情，又说王夫人看到皇上病重，脸上有喜色。
English: Princess Quan sent someone to follow the investigation, and took the opportunity to tell Sun Quan that the prince was not in the imperial temple, but only went to the princess's house to discuss the matter, and that Mrs. Wang saw that the emperor was seriously ill and had a happy look on her face.

古文：权由是发怒，夫人忧死，而和宠稍损，惧於废黜。
现代文：孙权因此发怒，王夫人忧郁而死，而孙和所受宠信逐渐减少，他害怕自己被废黜。
English: As a result, Sun Quan was enraged, Mrs. Wang died of melancholy, and Sun He's favorability gradually decreased, and he feared that he would be deposed.

古文：鲁王霸觊觎滋甚，陆逊、吾粲、顾谭等数陈適庶之义，理不可夺，全寄、杨竺为鲁王霸支党，谮愬日兴。
现代文：鲁王孙霸图谋太子之位的想法愈加强烈，陆逊、吾粲、顾谭等多次向孙权陈述区分和辨析嫡庶的道义，指出按理太子之位不能被剥夺，全寄、杨竺是鲁王孙霸的党羽，他们日常在孙权面前诋毁。
English: The idea that Sun Yat-sen, the king of Lu, was plotting to become the crown prince became stronger and stronger. Lu Xun, Wu Xi, Gu Tan, and others repeatedly explained to Sun Quan the moral principles of distinguishing and distinguishing between legitimate and illegitimate children, pointing out that according to the principle, the position of crown prince could not be deprived, and that Quanzhang and Yang Xi were the followers of Sun Yat-sen, the king of Lu, and they slandered them in front of Sun Quan on a daily basis.

古文：粲遂下狱诛，谭徙交州。
现代文：吾粲最后被关进监狱处死，顾谭被流放交州。
English: In the end, Wu Gan was sent to prison and executed, while Gu Tan was exiled to Gansu.

古文：权沈吟者历年，后遂幽闭和。
现代文：孙权犹豫了数年，最后将孙和软禁。
English: Sun Quan hesitated for several years, and finally placed Sun He under house arrest.

古文：於是骠骑将军朱据、尚书仆射屈晃率诸将吏泥头自缚，连日诣阙请和。
现代文：于是骠骑将军朱据、尚书仆射屈晃率领众多将吏头上抹泥，将自己捆绑起来，接连几天到宫门外为孙和求情。
English: As a result, the cavalry general Zhu Zhen and the scholar-servant Shao Qiao led a large number of officials to smear mud on their heads, tie themselves up, and go outside the palace gate for several days to intercede for Sun He.

古文：权登白爵观见，甚恶之，敕据、晃等无事忩々。
现代文：孙权登上白爵观观望，非常反感这种行为。斥责朱据、屈晃等是无事生非。
English: Sun Quan boarded the white knight to watch and wait, and was very disgusted with this behavior. The reprimand of Zhu Zhen and Qu Jiao was out of place.

古文：权欲废和立亮，无难督陈正、五营督陈象上书，称引晋献公杀申生，立奚齐，晋国扰乱，又据、晃固谏不止。
现代文：孙权想要废除孙和册立孙亮为太子，无难督陈正、五营督陈象上书，引述晋献公杀申生、立奚齐，导致晋国大乱的史实进行劝谏，而朱据、屈晃又固执地劝谏不止。
English: Sun Quan wanted to abolish Sun Hezong and install Sun Liang as the crown prince. Governor Chen Zheng and the commander of the Fifth Battalion, Chen Xiang, wrote a letter, quoting the historical facts of the Jin Dynasty's assassination of Shen Sheng and the establishment of the Han Dynasty, which led to the Great Turmoil in the Jin Dynasty, to persuade Sun Quan, while Zhu Zhen and Qu Jiao persisted in persuading Sun Quan.

古文：权大怒，族诛正、象，据、晃牵入殿，杖一百，竟徙和於故鄣，群司坐谏诛放者十数。
现代文：孙权大怒，将陈正、陈象满门抄斩，将朱据、屈晃拖进大殿，杖打一百，最后将孙和流放到故鄣，群臣中因劝谏而被诛杀流放的有几十人。
English: Sun Quan flew into a rage, beheaded Chen Zheng and Chen Xiang Manmen, dragged Zhu Zhi and Qu Jiao into the Great Hall, beat them with a hundred canes, and finally exiled Sun He to the Old Palace. Among the courtiers, there were dozens of people who were beaten to death and exiled for persuading Sun He.

古文：众咸冤之。
现代文：人们都为他们感到冤屈。
English: People feel bad for them.

古文：太元二年正月，封和为南阳王，遣之长沙。
现代文：太元二年正月，孙权封孙和为南阳王，将他遣往长沙。
English: In the first month of the second year of Taiyuan, Sun Quan crowned Sun He as the King of Nanyang and sent him to Changsha.

古文：四月，权薨，诸葛恪秉政。
现代文：当年四月，孙权去世，诸葛恪主管国事。
English: In April of that year, Sun Quan died, and Zhuge Ke was put in charge of state affairs.

古文：恪即和妃张之舅也。
现代文：诸葛恪就是孙和之妃张氏的舅舅。
English: Zhuge Ke is the uncle of Sun He's consort, the Zhang family.

古文：妃使黄门陈迁之建业上疏中宫，并致问於恪。
现代文：张妃派黄门陈迁到建业上疏中宫，并向诸葛恪表示问候。
English: Zhangfei sent Huangmen Chen to move to the Jianye Shangxiao Middle Palace, and expressed his greetings to Zhuge Ke.

古文：临去，恪谓迁曰： 为我达妃，期当使胜他人。 
现代文：陈迁即将离开建业时，诸葛恪对他说： 替我转告张妃，到时我一定让她胜过别人。 
English: When Chen Qian was about to leave Jianye, Zhuge Ke said to him: Tell Zhang Fei for me. I will definitely let her win over others at that time.

古文：此言颇泄。
现代文：这些话有些被泄露出去。
English: Some of this was leaked.

古文：又恪有徙都意，使治武昌宫，民间或言欲迎和。
现代文：再加上诸葛恪有迁都的想法，派人整修武昌的宫殿，民间有人传言他想迎立孙和。
English: In addition, Zhuge had the idea of moving the capital and sent people to renovate the palace in Wuchang. Some people rumored that he wanted to welcome Sun He.

古文：及恪被诛，孙峻因此夺和玺绶，徙新都，又遣使者赐死。
现代文：等到诸葛恪被诛杀，孙峻因此事而剥夺孙和的印玺绶带，将他流放到新都，又派使者将他赐死。
English: When Zhuge Ke was killed, Sun Jun deprived Sun He of his seal ribbon, exiled him to Xindu, and sent an envoy to put him to death.

古文：和与妃张辞别，张曰： 吉凶当相随，终不独生活也。 
现代文：孙和与张氏告别，张氏说： 无论吉凶我都跟随你，终不会独自活着。 
English: Sun He said goodbye to Mr. Zhang. Mr. Zhang said, "I will follow you no matter what, I will not live alone."

古文：亦自杀，举邦伤焉。
现代文：她也自尽而亡，举国上下都为之悲伤。
English: She also committed suicide, and the whole country was saddened by it.

古文：孙休立，封和子皓为乌程侯，自新都之本国。
现代文：孙休即位后，封孙和的儿子孙皓为乌程侯，从新都迁到封邑乌程。
English: After Sun Xiu ascended to the throne, he transferred Sun He, the son of Sun He, to Ucheng, and moved from Xindu to the fief Ucheng.

古文：休薨，皓即阼，其年追谥父和曰文皇帝，改葬明陵，置园邑二百家，令、丞奉守。
现代文：孙休去世，孙皓登上皇位，当年就追谥父亲孙和为 文皇帝 ，改葬明陵，安排守护陵园的人二百户，设立奉侍守墓的令、丞等。
English: When Sun Xiu died and Sun Yat-sen ascended to the throne, he pursued his father, Sun Hwa-Wen, Emperor of China, to have the Ming Tombs reburied, arranged for two hundred families to guard the cemetery, and established the order of serving and guarding the tombs.

古文：后年正月，又分吴郡、丹杨九县为吴兴郡，治乌程，置太守，四时奉祠。
现代文：第二年正月，又将吴郡、丹杨的九个县分为吴兴郡，治所在乌程，设置太守，按四时时祭祀明陵。
English: In the first month of the second year, the nine counties of Wu County and Danyang were divided into Wuxing County, governed by Wucheng, set up by the governor, and the Ming Tomb was sacrificed at four o'clock.

古文：有司奏言，宜立庙京邑。
现代文：有关官员上奏说，应在京都为孙和立庙。
English: Officials said in a report that the temple should be built in Kyoto.

古文：宝鼎二年七月，使守大匠薛珝营立寝堂，号曰清庙。
现代文：宝鼎二年七月，孙皓令守将大臣薛珝修建寝堂，号为 清庙 。
English: In July of the second year of Baoding, Sun Yat-sen ordered the minister Xue Ying to build a dormitory, which was called the Qing Temple.

古文：十二月，遣守丞相孟仁、太常姚信等备官僚中军步骑二千人，以灵舆法驾，东迎神於明陵。
现代文：十二月，派遣代理丞相孟仁、太常姚信等人配备官员及中军两千步、骑兵，用灵车法驾往东向明陵迎接孙和的神位。
English: In December, he dispatched acting chancellor Meng Ren, Taizhang Yao Xin and others, equipped with officials and the Chinese army of two thousand paces and cavalry, to use the hearse method to drive east to Mingling to welcome Sun He's enthronement.

古文：皓引见仁，亲拜送於庭。
现代文：孙皓召见孟仁，亲自到庭下拜送。
English: Sun Yat-sen summoned Meng Ren and personally went to the court to see him off.

古文：灵舆当至，使丞相陆凯奉三牲祭於近郊，皓於金城外露宿。
现代文：灵车将到京城，又派丞相陆凯敬奉三牲在近郊祭祀迎请，孙皓在京城外露宿。
English: The hearse will go to the capital, and the prime minister, Lu Kaiqing, has sent his son, Bong San Sui, to hold a welcoming ceremony in the suburbs. Sun Yat-sen is sleeping rough outside the capital.

古文：明日，望拜於东门之外。
现代文：第二天，在东门外仰望拜迎灵车。
English: The next day, I looked up at the hearse outside the east gate.

古文：其翌日，拜庙荐祭，歔欷悲感。
现代文：第三天，在清庙拜谒神灵、荐牲祭祀，流泪呜咽，悲戚伤痛。
English: On the third day, in the Qing Temple, they worshiped the deities, recommended animal sacrifices, shed tears, sobbed, and grieved.

古文：比七日三祭，倡技昼夜娱乐。
现代文：到第七天已祭祀三次，倡伎昼夜演唱奏乐。
English: By the seventh day, the ritual had been held three times, and music was performed day and night.

古文：有司奏言 祭不欲数，数则黩，宜以礼断情 ，然后止。
现代文：有关官员上奏说： 祭祀不可太多，过分了就是不庄重，应以礼来制止思念。 
English: The officials concerned made a report saying, "There should not be too many sacrifices. If there are too many, it is undignified. We should use etiquette to stop the yearning."

古文：孙霸字子威，和弟也。
现代文：祭祀至此才停。孙霸，字子威，孙和的弟弟。
English: The ritual only stopped at this point. Sun Ba, also known as Zi Wei, was Sun He's younger brother.

古文：和为太子。霸为鲁王，宠爱崇特，与和无殊。
现代文：孙和做太子时，孙霸是鲁王，他所受的恩宠待遇，与孙和没有什么不同。
English: When Sun He was crown prince, Sun Ba was the King of Lu, and the favors and treatment he received were no different from those of Sun He.

古文：顷之，和、霸不穆之声闻於权耳，权禁断往来，假以精学。
现代文：不久，孙和、孙霸不和的消息被孙权知道，孙权断绝他们与外界往来，借此让他们专心向学。
English: Soon, the news of Sun He and Sun Ba's discord was known by Sun Quan. Sun Quan cut off their contacts with the outside world, thereby allowing them to concentrate on their studies.

古文：督军使者羊衟上疏曰： 臣闻古之有天下者，皆先显别適庶，封建子弟，所以尊重祖宗，为国藩表也。
现代文：督军使者羊瞆上疏说： 为臣听说古代拥有天下之人，都是先明确区别嫡庶，封建子弟的爵地，借此让他们尊崇祖先，成为国家外部屏障。
English: The emissary of the governor's army, Yang Xuan Shangsuo, said: The vassals heard that the people who owned the world in ancient times were the first to clearly distinguish between the heir and the heir, the feudal children's land, so that they could respect their ancestors and become the external barrier of the country.

古文：二宫拜授，海内称宜，斯乃大吴兴隆之基。
现代文：现在二宫被任命的声名，天下都称赞适宜，这是我大吴国兴盛的根基。
English: The reputation of the current appointment of Ermiya is worthy of praise all over the world. This is the foundation of the prosperity of my great State of Wu.

古文：顷闻二宫并绝宾客，远近悚然，大小失望。
现代文：近来得知二宫一起被断绝与宾客来往，远近之人都很震惊，上下官员都有失望。
English: Recently, it was learned that Ninomiya had been cut off from guests altogether. People near and far were shocked, and officials at all levels were disappointed.

古文：窃从下风，听采众论，咸谓二宫智达英茂，自正名建号，於今三年，德行内著，美称外昭，西北二隅，久所服闻。
现代文：我私下打听下层的议论，听取众人的谈论，都认为二宫智慧通达、英才俊茂，自从他们被确定名分和称号，至今已有三年，他们的德行在国内很显达，在外邦也被称颂，连西、北两地边疆，也敬服他们的声名很久了。
English: I privately inquired about the discussions of the lower class and listened to the discussions of many people. They all thought that the two palaces were intelligent and talented. It has been three years since their names and titles were determined. Their virtues are very prominent in the country, and they have been praised in foreign countries. Even the western and northern borders have also respected their reputation for a long time.

古文：谓陛下当副顺遐迩所以归德，勤命二宫宾延四远，使异国闻声，思为臣妾。
现代文：大家都说陛下应当符合远近之人都想归顺仁德的期望，尽量让二宫延请四方宾客，使异国得知他们声名后，都想成为他们的臣仆。
English: Everyone said that His Majesty should live up to the expectations of people near and far who want to be obedient, and try to let the second palace invite guests from all over the world, so that foreign countries would want to become their servants after learning their reputation.

古文：今既未垂意於此，而发明诏，省夺备卫，抑绝宾客，使四方礼敬，不复得通，虽实陛下敦尚古义，欲令二宫专志於学，不复顾虑观听小宜，期於温故博物而已，然非臣下倾企喁喁之至愿也。
现代文：现在既未致力于这方面，反而颁布诏令，减少他们的侍从护卫，断绝与四方宾客的往来，使四方百姓的礼敬之意不能通达二宫。虽说陛下确是在尊崇古代道义，想让二宫致力于研究学习，不再考虑观察听取细微事务，期望他们温习历史博览众物，但这并非臣下翘首企盼的最大心愿。
English: Now, instead of working on this, he issued a decree to reduce their attendants and guards, cut off contacts with the guests from the four directions, so that the respect of the people from the four directions could not reach the second palace. Although His Majesty is indeed honoring ancient morals and wants the second palace to devote itself to research and study, no longer considering observing and listening to minor matters, expecting them to review history and expound many things, this is not the greatest wish of his subjects.

古文：或谓二宫不遵典式，此臣所以寝息不宁。
现代文：有人说二宫不遵循典章制度，这正是为臣所以寝食不安的原因。
English: Some people say that Ninomiya does not follow the code system, which is precisely the reason why the vassal is uneasy about sleeping and eating.

古文：就如所嫌，犹宜补察，密加斟酌，不使远近得容异言。
现代文：即使实际情况如人们所猜疑的那样，也应该明察补救，细致地加以斟酌，不使远近的人们都听到如此传言。
English: Even if the actual situation is as suspected, the remedy should be clear and carefully considered, so that people far and near do not hear such rumors.

古文：臣惧积疑成谤，久将宣流，而西北二隅，去国不远，异同之语，易以闻达。
现代文：为臣担心人们猜疑日益积累会发展成毁谤，长久会传播四方，而西、北两地，离我国不远，流言互相传播，很容易传到魏、蜀两国境内。
English: The vassal was worried that people's increasingly accumulated suspicions would develop into slander and would spread to the four directions for a long time, while in the west and north, not far from China, rumors would spread to each other and easily spread to the territory of Wei and Shu.

古文：闻达之日，声论当兴，将谓二宫有不顺之愆，不审陛下何以解之？
现代文：传到西、北两地之日，舆论应当很快产生，会认为我们二宫有背叛的过失，到时不知陛下如何解释?
English: On the day the news reaches the west and north, public opinion should quickly arise. It will think that our two palaces are guilty of betrayal. At that time, I don't know how His Majesty will explain it.

古文：若无以解异国，则亦无以释境内。
现代文：如果无法向他国解释疑虑，那也无法在国内解释。
English: If doubts cannot be explained abroad, they cannot be explained at home either.

古文：境内守疑，异国兴谤，非所以育巍巍，镇社稷也。
现代文：国人心存疑惑，他国借机陷害，这就绝不能发展弘大基业、镇守江山社稷了。
English: There are doubts in the hearts of the Chinese people, and other countries have taken the opportunity to frame them. This will absolutely prevent the development of Hongda Foundation and the protection of the country and society.

古文：愿陛下早发优诏，使二宫周旋礼命如初，则天清地晏，万国幸甚矣。 
现代文：希望陛下尽早发布仁德诏令，使太子与鲁王像过去一样去以礼结交贤士，这样则天地清明，是天下的大幸事了。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will issue the edict of benevolence as soon as possible, so that the prince and the king of Lu will, as in the past, make friends with the wise men by courtesy, so that the world will be clear and it will be a great blessing for the world.

古文：时全寄、吴安、孙奇、杨竺等阴共附霸，图危太子。
现代文：当时，全寄、吴安、孙奇、杨竺等暗中一起依附孙霸，密谋危害太子。
English: At that time, Zensho, Wu An, Sun Qi, Yang Qi and others secretly adhered to Sun Ba and conspired to harm the crown prince.

古文：谮毁既行，太子以败，霸亦赐死。
现代文：他们谗言诋毁，导致太子败落，孙霸也被赐死。
English: They slandered and slandered, leading to the downfall of the prince and the death of Sun Ba.

古文：流竺尸于江，兄穆以数谏戒竺，得免大辟，犹徙南州。
现代文：杨竺被判处尸体漂流长江的惩罚，他的哥哥杨穆因多次劝诫杨竺，所以免于斩首，但依旧被流放到南方的州里去。
English: Yang Muxuan was sentenced to the punishment of his corpse drifting in the Yangtze River. His brother Yang Muxuan was excused from beheading because he repeatedly admonished Yang Muxuan, but he was still exiled to a southern prefecture.

古文：霸赐死后，又诛寄、安、奇等，咸以党霸构和故也。
现代文：孙霸被赐死后，又处死了全寄、吴安、孙奇等人，他们都是因为结党孙霸构陷孙和导致恶果。
English: After Sun Hao was given death, he also executed Quanzhang, Wu An, Sun Qi and others, all of whom were punished for forming a faction with Sun Hao to frame Sun He.

古文：霸二子，基、壹。
现代文：孙霸有两个儿子，孙基、孙壹。
English: Sun Ba had two sons, Sun Ji and Sun Yi.

古文：五凤中，封基为吴侯，壹宛陵侯。
现代文：五凤年间，孙基被封为吴侯，孙壹被封为宛陵侯。
English: During the Five Phoenix Years, Sun Ji was given the title of Wuhou, and Sun Yi was given the title of Wanlinghou.

古文：基侍孙亮在内，太平二年，盗乘御马，收付狱。
现代文：孙基在宫内侍奉孙亮，太平二年，因盗骑御马，被关押入狱。
English: Sun Ji served Sun Liang in the palace. In the Taiping era, he was imprisoned for stealing a royal horse.

古文：亮问侍中刁玄曰： 盗乘御马罪云何？ 
现代文：孙亮问侍中刁玄说： 偷骑御马是什么罪名? 
English: Sun Liang asked the chamberlain Yu Xuan: "What is the crime of riding a horse without permission?"

古文：玄对曰： 科应死。
现代文：刁玄回答说： 应定死罪。
English: Yu Xuan replied, "He should be sentenced to death."

古文：然鲁王早终，惟陛下哀原之。 
现代文：然而鲁王死的早，希望陛下能怜悯宽恕他。 
English: However, King Lu died early, and I hope His Majesty will have mercy and forgive him.

古文：亮曰： 法者，天下所共，何得阿以亲亲故邪？
现代文：孙亮说： 律法，是天下人所共同遵守的事，怎能因亲人的缘故就有所偏袒呢?
English: Sun Liang said, "The law is a matter that everyone in the world must abide by. How can there be favoritism because of relatives?

古文：当思惟可以释此者，奈何以情相迫乎？ 
现代文：应当考虑一个可以免他的罪行的办法，怎能用追念死去的亲人情感来劝服呢? 
English: A way to absolve him of his crime should be considered, but how can the emotion of remembering dead relatives be used to persuade him?

古文：玄曰： 旧赦有大小，或天下，亦有千里、五百里赦，随意所及。 亮曰： 解人不当尔邪！ 
现代文：刁玄说： 按旧例，赦免罪犯有大小之分，有时是涉及天下的大赦，也有千里、百里范围的赦免，依据君主的想法而定。 孙亮说： 能解人意的不正是您吗? 
English: Zhai Xuan said: According to the old practice, the pardon of criminals is divided into large and small, sometimes involving the world's amnesty, and there are also thousands of miles and hundreds of miles of amnesty, depending on the monarch's thoughts.Sun Liang said: Isn't it you who can understand people's feelings?

古文：乃赦宫中，基以得免。
现代文：就下令赦免宫中的罪犯，孙基因此免于一死。
English: He issued an order to pardon the criminals in the palace, and Sun Ji was thus spared from death.

古文：孙皓即位，追和、霸旧隙，削基、壹爵土，与祖母谢姬俱徙会稽乌伤县。
现代文：孙皓登基后，追究孙和与孙霸的旧怨，削除孙基、孙壹的爵位封地，和他们的祖母谢姬一起被流放到会稽郡乌伤县。
English: After Sun Yat-sen ascended to the throne, he investigated the old grudge between Sun He and Sun Ba, removed the peerage fiefdoms of Sun Ji and Sun Yi, and together with their grandmother Xie Ji, they were exiled to Wuya County, Heji County.

古文：孙奋字子扬，霸弟也，母曰仲姬。
现代文：孙奋，字子扬，孙霸的弟弟，他的母亲叫仲姬。
English: Sun Fen, Zizi Yang, the younger brother of Sun Ba, his mother is called Zhong Ji.

古文：太元二年，立为齐王，居武昌。
现代文：太元二年，孙奋被册立为齐王，居住在武昌。
English: In the second year of Taiyuan, Sun Fen was registered as the King of Qi and lived in Wuchang.

古文：权薨，太傅诸葛恪不欲诸王处江滨兵马之地，徙奋於豫章。
现代文：孙权去世，太傅诸葛恪不希望众王处在长江地区的兵马战乱之地，就将孙奋迁移到豫章郡。
English: After the death of Sun Quan, King Zhuge did not want the kings to be in the war zone of the Yangtze River region, so he moved Sun Quan to Yuzhang County.

古文：奋怒，不从命，又数越法度。
现代文：孙奋很愤怒，不听从命令，又数次行事违背法度。
English: Sun Fen was very angry, disobeyed orders, and violated the law several times.

古文：恪上笺谏曰： 帝王之尊，与天同位，是以家天下，臣父兄，四海之内，皆为臣妾。
现代文：诸葛恪上笺书劝谏他说： 帝王的尊贵，与上天等同，故此帝王即以天下为家，视父兄为臣，四海之内，都是臣属。
English: Zhuge Ke wrote a letter to advise him, saying: "The dignity of the emperor is equal to that of heaven. Therefore, the emperor regards the whole world as his home, and regards his father and brother as his vassals. Within the four seas, they are all his vassals.

古文：仇雠有善，不得不举，亲戚有恶，不得不诛，所以承天理物，先国后身，盖圣人立制，百代不易之道也。
现代文：仇人有善行，不能不任用，亲人做了恶事，不能不惩处，以此顺承天命协同万物，先考虑国家，再替自己着想，这是圣人制定法度，百世不变的道理。
English: Enemies have good deeds, and must be appointed; relatives have done evil deeds, and must be punished. In this way, we must obey the mandate of heaven and cooperate with all things. We must first consider the country, and then think for ourselves. This is the reason why sages have established laws and regulations that will never change.

古文：昔汉初兴，多王子弟，至於太强，辄为不轨，上则几危社稷，下则骨肉相残，其后惩戒，以为大讳。
现代文：昔日汉朝初兴，多将子弟封为藩王，以至于他们势力过于强大，时常有不臣行为，严重的几乎危害社稷，轻的也使骨肉相残，后世以此为戒，认为是最大的忌讳。
English: In the early days of the Han Dynasty, many emperors made their sons and grandsons the kings of their domains, so much so that their power was too strong, and they often behaved insubordinately, with the serious ones almost harming society, and the light ones making flesh and blood hate each other. Future generations regard this as a warning and consider it to be the greatest taboo.

古文：自光武以来，诸王有制，惟得自娱於宫内，不得临民，干与政事，其与交通，皆有重禁，遂以全安，各保福祚。
现代文：自光武帝中兴以来，对众王有所约束，只能在宫中自我娱乐，不得治理百姓，参与政事，与他们来往的，都有严格的限制，于所以他们各人都得以保全安定，保住福运。
English: Since Emperor Guangwu's enthronement, there have been restrictions on kings. They can only entertain themselves in the palace, they are not allowed to govern the people or participate in political affairs, and there are strict restrictions on those who have dealings with them. Therefore, each of them has been able to maintain stability and maintain good fortune.

古文：此则前世得失之验也。
现代文：这便是前代得失成败的明验。
English: This is a clear indication of the success or failure of the previous generation.

古文：近袁绍、刘表各有国土，土地非狭，人众非弱，以適庶不分，遂灭其宗祀。
现代文：近来袁绍、刘表各占有地盘，土地并不狭小，人众也不弱小，只因嫡庶未分，所以断绝了自己家中祖庙的祭祀。
English: Recently, Yuan Shao and Liu Biao have each occupied a site. The land is not small, and the people are not small. It is only because they are not separated that they have cut off the sacrificial worship of their family ancestral temple.

古文：此乃天下愚智，所共嗟痛。
现代文：这是天下智者愚人共同嗟叹哀伤的。
English: This is what the world's wise and foolish lament together.

古文：大行皇帝览古戒今，防芽遏萌，虑於千载。
现代文：大行皇帝考察古代警戒如今，在事情尚未萌娃时遏制住，考虑千秋功业之事。
English: Emperor Da Xing examined the ancient warning, "Nowadays, when things are still in their infancy, restrain them and consider the things of the future."

古文：是以寝疾之日，分遣诸王，各早就国，诏策殷勤，科禁严峻，其所戒敕，无所不至，诚欲上安宗庙，下全诸王，使百世相承，无凶国害家之悔也。
现代文：所以他卧床不起之时，将众王遣回到各自的封邑，诏令文书很是恳切，律法条文十分严峻，他所戒令的事情，遍及方方面面，实在是想对上安定宗庙，对下保全诸王，使帝王百代延续，没有危害国家的后患。
English: Therefore, when he was bedridden, he sent the kings back to their respective fiefdoms. The imperial edict documents were very earnest, the legal provisions were very severe, and the things he ordered, covering all aspects, were really to stabilize the ancestral temple on the one hand, and to protect the kings on the other, so that the emperors would continue for hundreds of generations, and there would be no harm to the country.

古文：大王宜上惟太伯顺父之志，中念河间献王、东海王强恭敬之节，下当裁抑骄恣荒乱以为警戒。
现代文：大王您应当上思虑周泰伯顺从父亲意愿之事，中念河间献王刘德、东海王刘强恭敬朝命的操守，下当限制骄横恣意荒谬错乱的行为，将此作为警戒。
English: Your Majesty, you should think about Zhou Taibo's obedience to his father's wishes, remember the honor of Liu De, the King of the East Sea, and Liu Qiang, the King of the East Sea, and respect the imperial order, and restrict the arrogant, arbitrary, absurd and disorderly behavior, and take this as a warning.

古文：而闻顷至武昌以来，多违诏敕，不拘制度，擅发诸将兵治护宫室。
现代文：而我听说大王不久前来到武昌，多次违背诏令，不循礼法，擅自召集将士修整宫室。
English: But I heard that the great king came to Wuchang not long ago, repeatedly violated the imperial edict, did not follow the etiquette, and arbitrarily summoned soldiers to repair the palace room.

古文：又左右常从有罪过者，当以表闻，公付有司，而擅私杀，事不明白。
现代文：另外您的左右经常跟随着身负罪名的人，原应上表呈报，公开交付有关部门处理，而您却擅自私下杀掉，使事情混乱不清。
English: In addition, your right and left hand often follow the person who is guilty of the crime. Originally, it should have been reported on the table and publicly handed over to the relevant departments for handling, but you selfishly killed it, making things confusing.

古文：大司马吕岱亲受先帝诏敕，辅导大王，既不承用其言，令怀忧怖。
现代文：大司马吕岱亲自收到先帝的诏令，辅助引导大王，而大王却不接受采纳他的建议，使他心中忧虑。
English: Grand Master Maruyama personally received the imperial edict from the former emperor to help guide the great king, but the great king did not accept to adopt his suggestion, which made him worried.

古文：华锜先帝近臣，忠良正直，其所陈道，当纳用之，而闻怒锜，有收缚之语。
现代文：华锜是先帝的亲近大臣，忠诚正直，他所陈述的道理，您应当采纳接受，然而您听后却迁怒华锜，说要将他关押起来。
English: Hua Tuo was a close minister of the former emperor. He was loyal and honest. You should accept what he said. However, after listening to him, you became angry with Hua Tuo and said that he should be detained.

古文：又中书杨融，亲受诏敕，所当恭肃，云 正自不听禁，当如我何 ？
现代文：又有中书杨融，亲受皇上诏令，您本应当对他恭敬严谨，却说 我就是不听从禁令，你把我怎样 ?
English: There is also the Chinese writer Yang Rong, who personally received the imperial edict. You should have treated him with respect and rigor, but you said, "I just disobeyed the ban. How do you treat me?"

古文：闻此之日，大小惊怪，莫不寒心。
现代文：听到这话时，众臣心中惊诧，无人不感到寒心。
English: Hearing this, all the courtiers were stunned, and no one could help but feel cold.

古文：里语曰： 明镜所以照形，古事所以知今。
现代文：俗话说： 明镜可以照出形貌，古事可以鉴戒今人。 
English: As the saying goes: A clear mirror can reflect the appearance, and ancient things can warn modern people.

古文：大王宜深以鲁王为戒，改易其行，战战兢兢，尽敬朝廷，如此则无求不得。
现代文：大王应将鲁王视为深刻的警戒，改变自己的行为，勤谨严肃，尽力敬奉朝廷，这样则没有什么要求不能得到。
English: The great king should regard King Lu as a profound warning, change his behavior, be diligent and serious, and try his best to serve the court, so that there is nothing that can not be obtained.

古文：若弃忘先帝法教，怀轻慢之心，臣下宁负大王，不敢负先帝遗诏，宁为大王所怨疾，岂敢忘尊主之威，而令诏敕不行於藩臣邪？
现代文：如果背弃遗忘先帝的法度教导，怀着轻慢之心，为臣宁肯有负大王，不敢背离先帝遗诏，宁愿承受大王的怨恨，又怎么敢忘记主上的威仪，而使诏令在藩臣中不能推行呢?
English: If you turn your back on the teachings of the laws and regulations of the former emperor and forget them, if you act with a light heart, if you are a vassal who would rather have a negative great king, if you dare not depart from the last emperor's will, if you would rather bear the great king's grudge, how dare you forget the majesty of the Lord and make it impossible for the imperial edict to be implemented among the vassals?

古文：此古今正义，大王所照知也。
现代文：这是古今道义，也是主上您所知晓的。
English: This is ancient and modern morality, and it is also known to the Lord.

古文：夫福来有由，祸来有渐，渐生不忧，将不可悔。
现代文：福运的降临有一定的缘由，灾祸的降临也是逐渐累积的，在其逐渐发展时不忧不虑，那将来也不可以后悔了。
English: The arrival of good fortune has a certain cause, the arrival of disaster is also gradually accumulated, and when it gradually develops, it is not worried, and it can not be regretted in the future.

古文：向使鲁王早纳忠直之言，怀惊惧之虑，享祚无穷，岂有灭亡之祸哉？
现代文：假如鲁王早日接纳忠正良言，心中有着惊惧的忧虑，那么他就能享受无穷的福运，哪来灭亡的祸患呢?
English: If King Lu accepted the words of loyalty and righteousness at an early date, with fear and anxiety in his heart, then he would be able to enjoy endless good fortune. Where would the disaster of destruction come from?

古文：夫良药苦口，惟疾者能甘之。忠言逆耳，惟达者能受之。
现代文：良药苦口，只有患病之人认为它甘甜;忠言逆耳，只有通达事理之人乐意接受。
English: Good medicine tastes bitter, but only the sick find it sweet; good advice tastes bitter, but only the wise accept it.

古文：今者恪等慺慺欲为大王除危殆於萌芽，广福庆之基原，是以不自知言至，愿蒙三思。
现代文：现在我诸葛恪等人苦苦思虑想为大王解除尚处萌芽之际的危险，扩大您福运吉祥的基础，所以不自觉地把话说到了头，希望您能加以考虑。 
English: Now, I, Zhuge Ke and others are thinking hard to remove the danger that is still in the bud for the great king and expand the foundation of your good fortune, so I unconsciously put the words to the end and hope you can consider it.

古文：奋得笺惧，遂移南昌，游猎弥甚，官属不堪命。
现代文：孙奋收到笺书后很是惊恐，就移居南昌，但他游玩狩猎更为频繁，官员下属都不堪忍受他的命令。
English: After receiving the letter, Sun Fen was very alarmed and moved to Nanchang, but he went hunting more frequently, and his subordinate officials could not bear his orders.

古文：及恪诛，奋下住芜湖，欲至建业观变。
现代文：等到诸葛恪伏诛，孙奋到下游住在芜湖，想要到建业观察情势变化。
English: By the time Zhuge fell into line, Sun Fen was living downstream in Wuhu and wanted to go to Jianye to observe the changes in the situation.

古文：傅相谢慈等谏奋，奋杀之。
现代文：傅相谢慈等人劝谏孙奋，孙奋却将他们杀了。
English: Fu Xiang Xie Ci and others tried to dissuade Sun Fen, but Sun Fen killed them.

古文：坐废为庶人，徙章安县。
现代文：孙奋因此被废黜为平民，流放到章安县。
English: As a result, Sun Fen was dethroned as a commoner and exiled to Zhang'an County.

古文：太平三年，封为章安侯。
现代文：太平三年，被封为章安侯。
English: In the third year of the Taiping era, he was given the title of Zhang'an Hou.

古文：建衡二年，孙皓左夫人王氏卒。
现代文：建衡二年，孙皓左夫人王氏去世。
English: In the second year of Jianheng, Mrs. Wang, the wife of Sun Yiza, passed away.

古文：皓哀念过甚，朝夕哭临，数月不出，由是民间或谓皓死，讹言奋与上虞侯奉当有立者。
现代文：孙皓哀痛思念过度，每日对着灵柩哭泣，一连数月不出门，因此民间有传言说孙皓死了，并谣传孙奋与上虞侯孙奉必有一人会被立为皇帝。
English: Sun Yat-sen grieved excessively, wept over his coffin every day, and did not leave his house for months on end. As a result, there were folk rumors that Sun Yat-sen had died, and that one of Sun Fen and Shangyu vassal Sun Bong would become emperor.

古文：奋母仲姬墓在豫章，豫章太守张俊疑其或然，扫除坟茔。
现代文：孙奋的母亲仲姬的坟墓在豫章，豫章太守张俊怀疑此事也许是真的，就前往祭扫坟茔。
English: The tomb of Sun Fen's mother, Zhong Ji, is in Yuzhang. The governor of Yuzhang, Zhang Jun, suspected that this might be true, so he went to the cemetery to sweep the graves.

古文：皓闻之，车裂俊，夷三族，诛奋及其五子，国除。
现代文：孙皓得知此事后，将张俊车裂处死并夷灭三族，将孙奋和他的五个儿子全部诛死，并废除了他的封邑。
English: After Sun Yat-sen learned of this, he executed Zhang Junche and exterminated the three ethnic groups, killed Sun Fen and his five sons, and abolished his fiefdom.

古文：评曰：孙登居心所存，足为茂美之德。
现代文：评曰：孙登内心所思虑看重的，足以称赞他有美好的德行。
English: The review said: Sun Deng's inner thoughts and values are enough to praise him for his fine virtues.

古文：虑、和并有好善之姿，规自砥砺，或短命早终，或不得其死，哀哉！
现代文：孙虑、孙和都有喜好善行的姿态，自我规劝勉励，但一个短命早死，一个不得善终，哀痛啊！
English: Sun Xian, Sun He all have the attitude of liking good deeds, self-exhortation and encouragement, but a short-lived early death, one does not end well, sorrow!

古文：霸以庶干適，奋不遵轨度，固取危亡之道也。
现代文：孙霸以庶出身份侵占嫡出身份，孙奋不遵循礼仪法度，是自己选择的覆灭之路。
English: Sun Ba usurped the status of the legitimate child with the status of the illegitimate child, and Sun Fen did not follow the rules of etiquette, which was the road to ruin he chose.

古文：然奋之诛夷，横遇飞祸矣。
现代文：但孙奋被夷灭的三族人，是遭遇了飞来横祸啊。
English: However, the three ethnic groups that were annihilated by Sun Fen suffered a sudden calamity.

