古文：五年春，公矢鱼于棠。
现代文：五年春季，鲁隐公在棠地观鱼。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Lu Yinggong went to Tangdi to watch fish.

古文：夏四月，葬卫桓公。
现代文：夏季四月，安葬卫桓公。
English: In the summer, in April, the funeral of Prince Eikan took place.

古文：秋，卫师入郕。
现代文：秋季，卫国攻入郕国。
English: In the autumn, the Japanese invaded Korea.

古文：九月，考仲子之宫，初献六羽。
现代文：九月，仲子之宫建成。将要表演 万舞 。
English: In September, Nakako's palace was completed, and a dance performance was held.

古文：邾人、郑人伐宋。
现代文：郑国率领军队和邾军会合，一起进攻宋国。
English: Zheng Guo led the army and the Shan army to meet and attack Song Province together.

古文：螟。冬十有二月辛巳，公子彄卒。
现代文：冬季，十二月辛巳日，公子彄去世。
English: In the winter, on Xinshi Day in December, Gongzi Yao passed away.

古文：宋人伐郑，围长葛。
现代文：宋国攻打郑国，包围了长葛。
English: Song attacked Zheng and encircled Changge.

古文：五年春，公将如棠观鱼者。
现代文：五年春季，鲁隐公准备到棠地观鱼。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Lu Yin Gong was preparing to go to Tangdi to watch fish.

古文：臧僖伯谏曰： 凡物不足以讲大事，其材不足以备器用，则君不举焉。
现代文：臧僖伯劝阻说： 凡是一种东西不能用到讲习祭祀和兵戎的大事上，它的材料不能制作礼器和兵器，国君对它就不会采取行动。
English: Zibo dissuaded him, saying, "If there is anything that cannot be used for rituals and military affairs, and its materials cannot be used to make ceremonial objects and weapons, the sovereign will not take action against it.

古文：君将纳民于轨物者也。
现代文：国君是要把百姓引入正 轨 、善于取材的人。
English: The ruler of the country is a person who is good at collecting information and bringing the people onto the right track.

古文：故讲事以度轨量谓之轨，取材以章物采谓之物，不轨不物谓之乱政。
现代文：所以演习大事以端正法度叫做 轨 ，选取材料以制作重要器物叫做 物 。事情不合于 轨 、 物 ，叫做乱政。
English: Therefore, the exercise of major events with correct laws and regulations is called a track, the selection of materials to make important objects is called a thing. Things that are not on track, things, are called chaos.

古文：乱政亟行，所以败也。
现代文：乱政屡次执行，国家将由此败亡。
English: The country will be defeated by the repeated implementation of chaotic politics.

古文：故春蒐夏苗，秋狝冬狩，皆于农隙以讲事也。
现代文：所以春蒐、夏苗、秋狝、冬狩这四种打猎的举动，都是在农业空闲时讲习。
English: Therefore, the four hunting behaviors of spring gathering, summer seedlings, autumn reaping, and winter hunting are all learned during leisure time in agriculture.

古文：三年而治兵，入而振旅，归而饮至，以数军实，昭文章，明贵贱，辨等列，顺少长，习威仪也。
现代文：每三年大演习一次，进入国都整顿军队，回来祭祖告宗庙，宴请臣下，犒赏随员，以计算俘获的东西。要车服文采鲜明，贵贱有别，辨别等级，少长有序，这是讲习威仪。
English: Once every three years, a large-scale drill is held. The troops are reorganized after entering the national capital, and they come back to pay tribute to their ancestors and report to the ancestral temple. The vassals are invited to a banquet, and the attendants are rewarded in order to calculate what they have captured. The uniforms are required to be brightly colored, the nobility and the commoners are distinguished, the ranks are distinguished, and the young and the old are in order. This is a drill of dignity.

古文：鸟兽之肉不登于俎，皮革齿牙、骨角毛羽不登于器，则公不射，古之制也。
现代文：鸟兽的肉不摆上宗庙的祭器里，它的皮革、牙齿、骨角、毛羽不用到礼器上，国君就不去射它，这是古代的规定。
English: The meat of birds and beasts is not placed in the sacrificial vessels of the ancestral temple, and its leather, teeth, horns, and feathers are not used for ceremonial objects, and the sovereign does not shoot it, which is an ancient rule.

古文：若夫山林川泽之实，器用之资，皂隶之事，官司之守，非君所及也。 
现代文：至于山林河泽的产品，一般器物的材料，这是下等人的事情，有关官吏的职责，不是国君所应涉及的。 
English: As for the products of the mountains, forests, and rivers, and the materials of ordinary utensils, this is a matter for the lower classes. The duties of the relevant officials are not something that the sovereign should be involved in.

古文：公曰： 吾将略地焉。 
现代文：隐公说： 我是打算视察边境呀！ 
English: Ying Gong said, "I'm planning to inspect the border!"

古文：遂往，陈鱼而观之。
现代文：于是隐公就动身前往棠邑，让捕鱼者摆出捕鱼场面来观看。
English: Therefore, Ying Gong set off to Tanggu, and let the fishermen set up a fishing scene to watch.

古文：僖伯称疾，不从。
现代文：臧僖伯推说有病，没有跟随前去。
English: Zou Bo said that he was ill and did not follow him.

古文：书曰 公矢鱼于棠 ，非礼也，且言远地也。
现代文：《春秋》说： 公矢鱼于棠 ，隐公在棠地陈列渔具，这是由于隐公的行为不合于礼制，而且暗示棠地离国都较远。
English: "Spring and Autumn" said: the public fishes in Tanggu, and the private citizen displays fishing gear in Tanggu. This is because the private citizen's behavior does not conform to the etiquette, and it implies that Tanggu is far away from the country.

古文：曲沃庄伯以郑人、邢人伐翼，王使尹氏、武氏助之。
现代文：曲沃庄伯带领郑军、邢军进攻翼地，周桓王派尹氏、武氏帮助他。
English: Qu Wo Zhuangbo led the Zheng army and the Yao army to attack the flank, and King Zhou Huan sent Yin and Wu to help him.

古文：翼侯奔随。
现代文：在翼地的晋鄂侯逃到随地。
English: In the wing of the Jin E Hou fled to anywhere.

古文：夏，葬卫桓公。
现代文：夏季，安葬卫桓公。
English: In the summer, the funeral of Lord Wei Huan took place.

古文：卫乱，是以缓。
现代文：由于卫国发生动乱，所以迟缓了。
English: Due to the turmoil in the motherland, it was delayed.

古文：四月，郑人侵卫牧，以报东门之役。
现代文：四月，郑国人入侵卫国郊外，来报复去年东门这一战役。
English: In April, the Zheng people invaded the outskirts of the country to avenge last year's Dongmen battle.

古文：卫人以燕师伐郑。郑祭足、原繁、洩驾以三军军其前，使曼伯与子元潜军军其后。
现代文：卫国人带领南燕军队进攻郑国，郑国的祭足、原繁、泄驾带领三军进攻燕军的前面，派曼伯和子元偷偷率领制地的军队袭击燕军的后面。
English: The defender of the country led the South Yan army to attack Zheng. Zheng led the three armies to attack the front of the Yan army, and sent Manbo and Ziyuan to secretly lead the army to attack the back of the Yan army.

古文：燕人畏郑三军而不虞制人。
现代文：燕国人害怕郑国的三军，而没有防备从制地来的军队。
English: The Yan people were afraid of the three armies of Zheng, but they were not prepared to defend themselves against the troops coming from Jiangxi.

古文：六月，郑二公子以制人败燕师于北制。君子曰： 不备不虞，不可以师。 
现代文：六月，郑国的两个公子曼伯和子元在虎牢关击败了燕军。君子说： 不防备意外，就不可以带兵作战。 
English: In June, Zhengzhou's two princes, Man Bo and Zi Yuan, defeated Yan's army at the Tiger Pass. The gentleman said, "If you don't prepare for accidents, you can't lead soldiers into battle."

古文：秋，王命虢公伐曲沃而立哀侯于翼。
现代文：秋季，周桓王命令虢公进攻曲沃，而在翼地立哀侯为晋君。
English: In the autumn, King Zhou Kuan ordered Shao Gong to attack Quwo, while in the wings he mourned for Jinjun.

古文：卫之乱也，郕人侵卫，故卫师入郕。
现代文：当卫国动乱的时候，郕国人入侵卫国，所以卫国的军队进入郕国。
English: When the defense of the country was in turmoil, the Han people invaded the defense of the country, so the defense of the country's army entered the Han country.

古文：九月，考仲子之宫，将《万》焉。
现代文：九月，祭仲子庙，又准备在庙里献演万舞。
English: In September, they held a festival at the Nakago-dera Temple and prepared to perform a dance in the temple.

古文：公问羽数于众仲。
现代文：隐公向众仲询问执羽舞的人数。
English: Ying Gong asked everyone how many people were dancing the feather dance.

古文：对曰： 天子用八，诸侯用六，大夫四，士二。
现代文：众仲回答说： 天子用八行，诸侯用六行，大夫四行，士二行。
English: The general assembly answered: The heavenly son uses eight lines, the lords six lines, the doctors four lines, and the judges two lines.

古文：夫舞所以节八音而行八风，故自八以下。 
现代文：舞，用来调节八种材料所制乐器的乐音而传播八方之风。所以人数在八行以下。 
English: Dance, used to adjust the musical sound of musical instruments made of eight materials and spread the wind of the eight directions. Therefore, the number of people is less than eight lines.

古文：公从之。
现代文：隐公听从了。
English: Cao Gong obeyed him.

古文：于是初献六羽、始用六佾也。
现代文：从此以后献演六羽乐舞，开始使用六行舞人。
English: Since then, the six feather dance has been performed, and six-line dancers have been used.

古文：宋人取邾田。邾人告于郑曰： 请君释憾于宋，敝邑为道。 
现代文：宋国人掠取邾国的土地，邾国人告诉郑国说： 请君王攻打宋国，报仇雪恨，敝邑愿意做向导。 
English: The Song people plundered the land of Song, and the Song people told Zheng Guo: "Please ask the king to attack Song, to avenge the wrongs done to you. You are willing to be a guide."

古文：郑人以王师会之。伐宋，入其郛，以报东门之役。
现代文：郑国人带领周天子的军队和邾军会合，进攻宋国，进入了外城，以报复去年东门这一战役。
English: The Zheng people led by Zhou Tianzi's army and the Yao army met, attacked Song, and entered the outer city to retaliate for the East Gate battle last year.

古文：宋人使来告命。
现代文：宋国人派人前来用国君的名义告急请救。
English: The people of the Song Dynasty sent someone to come and appeal for emergency help in the name of the sovereign.

古文：公闻其入郛也，将救之，问于使者曰： 师何及？ 对曰： 未及国。 
现代文：隐公听说军队已经进入外城，打算出兵救援宋国，询问使者说： 军队到了什么地方？ 使者欺骗他说： 还没有到国都。 
English: When Yin Gong heard that the army had entered the outer city and planned to send troops to rescue Song, he asked the messenger: Where has the army arrived? The messenger deceived him and said: It hasn't arrived at the capital yet.

古文：公怒，乃止，辞使者曰： 君命寡人同恤社稷之难，今问诸使者，曰 师未及国 ，非寡人之所敢知也。 
现代文：隐公发怒，不去救援。他辞谢使者说： 君王命令我一起为宋国的危难忧虑，现在询问使者，回答说 军队还没有到国都 ，这就不是我所敢知道的了。 
English: He declined to thank the envoy and said, "The king ordered me to be worried about the danger of Song. Now, I have asked the envoy, and he replied that the army has not yet arrived at the capital, which is not something I dare to know."

古文：冬十二月辛巳，臧僖伯卒。
现代文：冬季，十二月二十九日，臧僖伯死了。
English: In winter, on December 29th, Zou Bo died.

古文：公曰： 叔父有憾于寡人，寡人弗敢忘。葬之加一等。 
现代文：隐公说： 叔父对我有怨恨，我不敢忘记他的忠诚。 
English: He said, "My uncle has a grudge against me, and I dare not forget his loyalty.

古文：宋人伐郑，围长葛，以报入郛之役也。
现代文：宋国人进攻郑国，包围长葛，以报复攻进外城这一战役。
English: Song attacked Zheng, besieged Changge, and took revenge by attacking the outer city.

