古文：和洽字阳士，汝南西平人也。
现代文：和洽，字阳士，汝南郡西平县人。
English: He Chaoyang, also known as Yang Shi, was from Xiping County, Runan County.

古文：举孝廉，大将军辟，皆不就。
现代文：被推举为孝廉以及大将军征召，他都没有赴任。
English: He was promoted to filial piety and general conscript, but he did not take up the post.

古文：袁绍在冀州，遣使迎汝南士大夫。
现代文：袁绍在冀州时，派使者迎接汝南地区的士大夫。
English: When Yuan Shao was in Jizhou, he sent an envoy to welcome the scholars and doctors from the south of the Ryukyus.

古文：洽独以 冀州土平民强，英桀所利，四战之地。
现代文：只有和洽认为 冀州地势平坦，百姓富强，是有利于英雄豪杰的地方，四方征战要争夺的地方。
English: Only the concordance thinks that Jizhou is flat, the people are rich and strong, it is a place that is conducive to heroes and heroes, and a place to be fought for by the four parties.

古文：本初乘资，虽能强大，然雄豪方起，全未可必也。
现代文：袁本初仗着这样的优势，虽然能强大起来，但是现在英雄豪杰并起，他不一定能保全。
English: Yuan Ben initially relied on this advantage, although he could become strong, but now that heroes and heroines are rising together, he may not be able to preserve.

古文：荆州刘表无他远志，爱人乐士，土地险阻，山夷民弱，易依倚也 。
现代文：荆州的刘表没有什么远大的志向，但爱惜人才贤士，再加上那里地势险要，地处偏僻，百姓比较贫弱，很容易前去依附。 
English: Liu Biao in Jingzhou does not have any lofty aspirations, but he cherishes talents and sages. In addition, the terrain there is precarious, the location is remote, and the people are relatively poor and weak, so it is easy to move forward and attach.

古文：遂与亲旧俱南从表，表以上客待之。
现代文：于是就和亲朋故旧一起往南跟随刘表，刘表用贵宾的礼节接待他们。
English: So, together with relatives and friends, they went south to follow Liu table, and Liu table received them with the etiquette of VIPs.

古文：洽曰： 所以不从本初，辟争地也。
现代文：和洽说： 之所以没有跟随袁本初，是想避开有征战的地区。
English: "The reason why I didn't follow Yuan Benchu is that I wanted to avoid areas where there was conscription," said He Jia.

古文：昏世之主，不可黩近，久而阽危，必有谗慝间其中者。 
现代文：统治腐朽主君，不能太亲近，时间一久就会面临危险，一定有在其间进谗言陷害的人。 
English: One should not be too close to a corrupt ruler, as he will face danger over time. There must be someone who slanders and traps him.

古文：遂南度武陵。
现代文：于是就往南去到武陵郡。
English: So he went south to Wuling County.

古文：太祖定荆州，辟为丞相掾属。
现代文：太祖平等荆州后，征召和洽为丞相掾属。
English: After the great-grandfather was equal to Jingzhou, he was conscripted and became the prime minister.

古文：时毛玠、崔琰并以忠清幹事，其选用先尚俭节。
现代文：当时毛玠、崔琰一同因为做事忠诚廉正，他们选用人才也是县推崇节俭的。
English: At that time, Mao Jun and Cui Jun were both loyal and honest in their work, and they were also frugal in selecting talents.

古文：洽言曰： 天下大器，在位与人，不可以一节检也。
现代文：和洽说： 天下能担负重任的人，在于职位和人的才能相应，不能只凭借节俭这一品质。
English: Harmony said: People who can shoulder heavy responsibilities in the world are those whose positions are commensurate with their talents, and cannot rely on the quality of frugality alone.

古文：俭素过中，自以处身则可，以此节格物，所失或多。
现代文：节俭朴素超过了常理，用来修养自身可以，用这样的标准来要求他们，所失去的就很多了。
English: Frugality and simplicity are beyond common sense, and they can be used to cultivate themselves. If they are required by such standards, they will lose a lot.

古文：今朝廷之议，吏有著新衣、乘好车者，谓之不清；长吏过营，形容不饰，衣裘敝坏者，谓之廉洁。
现代文：现在朝廷中议论他们，官员又穿新衣，乘坐好的车驾的人，都说他是不清廉；地位比较高的官员经过营地，看到容貌服饰没有装饰，衣服破旧，就说他很廉洁。
English: Now they are being discussed in the imperial court. Officials who wear new clothes and people who travel in good cars all say that he is not dishonest. Officials of a higher rank who pass through the camp and see his unadorned appearance and shabby clothes say that he is very clean.

古文：至令士大夫故汙辱其衣，藏其舆服；朝府大吏，或自挈壶餐以入官寺。
现代文：以至于现在士大夫故意损毁衣服，将车马装饰都藏起来；朝中的大臣，有的自己带着水壶、餐食到官署中。
English: So much so that nowadays, senior officials deliberately ruin their clothes and hide their car and horse decorations; ministers of the Imperial Court, some of them bring their own water jugs and meals to the government offices.

古文：夫立教观俗，贵处中庸，为可继也。
现代文：树立教化，观察风俗，贵在调和折中，才能延续下去。
English: Only by establishing enlightenment and observing customs, and through compromise and compromise, can it continue.

古文：今崇一概难堪之行以检殊涂，勉而为之，必有疲瘁。
现代文：现在崇尚那些令人难以忍受的行为以检验官员的行为，即使他们勉强实行，一定也会疲惫憔悴。
English: The insufferable acts now advocated to test the conduct of officials, even if they are carried out reluctantly, are bound to wear them out.

古文：古之大教，务在通人情而已。
现代文：古代大的教化，要旨就在于交接人情而已。
English: In ancient times, the main purpose of enlightenment was to pass on human feelings.

古文：凡激诡之行，则容隐伪矣。 
现代文：凡是矫情立异的行为，就容易隐藏着虚伪。 
English: Any unconventional behavior is easy to hide hypocrisy.

古文：魏国既建，为侍中，后有白毛玠谤毁太祖，太祖见近臣，怒甚。
现代文：魏国建立以后，和洽担任侍中，后来有人举报毛玠诽谤太祖，太祖召见身边的大臣，非常愤怒。
English: After the founding of the state of Wei, He Cha served as an attendant. Later, someone reported that Mao Yao had slandered the great-grandfather. The great-grandfather summoned the ministers around him and was very angry.

古文：洽陈玠素行有本，求案实其事。
现代文：和洽陈述说毛玠向来行为举止都有本分，请求核查清楚事情情况。
English: The conciliatory statement said that Mao Jun has always been responsible for his behavior and asked for a clear verification of the situation.

古文：罢朝，太祖令曰： 今言事者白玠不但谤吾也，乃复为崔琰觖望。
现代文：退朝之后，太祖下令说： 现在举报的人说毛玠不只是毁谤我，还有为崔琰表示的怨恨。
English: After retiring from the imperial court, the great-grandfather ordered, "The informant now says that Mao Xuan not only slandered me, but also expressed hatred for Cui Xuan.

古文：此损君臣恩义，妄为死友怨叹，殆不可忍也。
现代文：这样的行为损害了君臣间的恩德道义，胡乱为死去的亲友怨恨悲叹，实在是不能容忍。
English: This kind of behavior has harmed the benevolence and morality between princes and ministers, and it is really intolerable to lament the dead relatives and friends.

古文：昔萧、曹与高祖并起微贱，致功立勋。
现代文：过去萧何、曹参和高祖刘邦出身都很微贱，但后来建立功勋。
English: In the past, Xiao He, Cao San, and Gao Zu Liu Bang were all from humble backgrounds, but later they made great achievements.

古文：高祖每在屈笮，二相恭顺，臣道益彰，所以祚及后世也。
现代文：高祖每次处在困厄之中，这两位都恭敬顺从，更加彰显为人臣子的道义，所以福分能延续到后代。
English: Every time Gao Zu is in trouble, both of them are respectful and obedient, and more clearly demonstrate the morality of being a vassal, so the blessing can be passed on to future generations.

古文：和侍中比求实之，所以不听，欲重参之耳。 
现代文：和侍中现在请求核查这件事，我之所以没有允准，是想要加以考验罢了。 
English: I did not grant the request to check the matter with the chamberlain. I only wanted to test it.

古文：洽对曰： 如言事者言，玠罪过深重，非天地所覆载。
现代文：和洽回答说： 如果向举报的人那样说，毛玠的罪过深重，已经不是天地能容忍的了。
English: "If I were to say, as I did to the person who reported me, that Buttercup's crime was so serious, it would no longer be tolerated by heaven and earth," he replied.

古文：臣非敢曲理玠以枉大伦也，以玠出群吏之中，特见拔擢，显在首职，历年荷宠，刚直忠公，为众所惮，不宜有此。
现代文：臣不是敢偏帮毛玠而曲解的君臣之道，是因为毛玠的才能超出百官，受到特殊的提拔，在重要职位上声名显赫，多年以来都蒙受恩宠，刚强正直，忠诚公正，被人忌惮，不应该有这样的行为。
English: It is not that the vassal dares to take advantage of Mao Tse-tung, but because Mao Tse-tung's talent surpasses that of a hundred officials, he has received special promotion, he is famous in important positions, he has been favored for many years, he is strong and upright, he is loyal and fair, and he is feared. There should be no such behavior.

古文：然人情难保，要宜考覈，两验其实。
现代文：但是人情世故难以保留，应该要经过考验，两次检验其中的事实。
English: But human nature is hard to retain, and the facts should be tested and double-checked.

古文：今圣恩垂含垢之仁，不忍致之于理，更使曲直之分不明，疑自近始。 
现代文：现在您的恩德遭受耻辱，不忍心将他们处以法理，更会导致是非对错的分别不明显，心中的疑虑也会从眼前开始。 
English: Now that your benefactors have suffered humiliation, you can't bear to punish them legally. What's more, the difference between right and wrong will not be obvious, and the doubts in your heart will start right away.

古文：太祖曰： 所以不考，欲两全玠及言事者耳。 洽对曰： 玠信有谤上之言，当肆之巿朝；若玠无此，言事者加诬大臣以误主听；二者不加检覈，臣窃不安。 
现代文：太祖说： 之所以没有查验，是想要保全毛玠和奏报的人罢了。 和洽对答说： 如果毛玠确实有诽谤君主的言论，应该处死陈尸在街市上；如果毛玠没有做这样的事，那就是奏报的人犯了诬陷大臣和误导圣听的罪行；这两种情况没有加以查验，臣私下很不安。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "The reason why there was no investigation is that the person who wanted to keep the furrier and the reporter was the only one who wanted to keep the furrier and the reporter." The conciliator replied, "If the furrier did indeed slander the monarch, he should be executed and his corpse displayed in the streets; if the furrier did not do such a thing, then the reporter committed the crime of slandering the minister and misleading the audience; these two cases were not investigated, and the minister was privately very uneasy.

古文：太祖曰： 方有军事，安可受人言便考之邪？
现代文：太祖说： 现在正有军事，怎么能听了他人的话就立即考验呢？
English: The great-grandfather said: Now that there is a military, how can you listen to others and immediately test them?

古文：狐射姑刺阳处父於朝，此为君之诫也。 
现代文：过去狐射姑在朝堂山刺杀阳处父，这就是对君主的告诫。 
English: In the past, Fuxaigu stabbed and killed Yang Zifu on Mt. Chaodang, which was a warning to the monarch.

古文：太祖克张鲁，洽陈便宜以时拔军徙民，可省置守之费。
现代文：太祖攻克张鲁，和洽上奏说明应该适时的撤退军队，迁移百姓，可以省下部队驻扎防守的费用。
English: The great ancestor conquered Zhanglu, and made a peace treaty to explain that the army should be withdrawn in a timely manner and the people should be relocated, which could save the cost of stationing troops for defense.

古文：太祖未纳，其后竟徙民弃汉中。
现代文：太祖没有采纳，这之后还将百姓迁移，放弃了汉中。
English: The great-grandfather did not adopt it, after which he also relocated the people and abandoned Hanzhong.

古文：出为郎中令。
现代文：和洽后来出京担任郎中令。
English: After making peace, he went to the capital to serve as a vice-regent.

古文：文帝践阼，为光禄勋，封安城亭侯。
现代文：文帝登基后，和洽担任光禄勋，被封为安城亭侯。
English: After Emperor Wendi ascended to the throne, He Cha served as Guanglu Xun and was named Ancheng Tinghou.

古文：明帝即位，进封西陵乡侯，邑二百户。
现代文：明帝登基后，晋升他的爵位为西陵乡侯，食邑两百户。
English: After the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the title of Xiling Township, with more than 200 households.

古文：太和中，散骑常侍高堂隆奏： 时风不至，而有休废之气，必有司不勤职事以失天常也。 
现代文：太和年间，散骑常侍高堂隆上奏： 良好的教化还没有形成，就已经有了衰败的气象，这一定是相关官员不勤于职务之事，导致失去了天的常道。 
English: During the Taihe era, the rousing chorus of the high school hall rang out: Good education has not yet been formed, and there is already a climate of decay. This must be due to the fact that the relevant officials are not diligent in their duties, resulting in the loss of heaven's normal way.

古文：诏书谦虚引咎，博谘异同。
现代文：明帝下诏，谦恭地将错误归结在自己身上，并广泛征求意见。
English: Emperor Ming issued a decree, humbly attributed the error to himself, and solicited opinions widely.

古文：洽以为 民稀耕少，浮食者多。
现代文：和洽认为 百姓人口不多，耕地稀少，但不耕作却要吃饭的人多。
English: Hechao believes that the population of the people is not large, the cultivated land is scarce, but there are many people who do not cultivate but want to eat.

古文：国以民为本，民以谷为命。
现代文：国家以百姓为根本，百姓将粮食看做生命。
English: The country is based on the people, and the people regard grain as their life.

古文：故费一时之农，则失育命之本。
现代文：所以废弃了一时的农耕，那就失去了养育生命的根本。
English: Therefore, if farming is abandoned for the time being, the foundation for nurturing life will be lost.

古文：是以先王务蠲烦费，以专耕农。
现代文：所以先王将废除繁琐的费用支出看做要紧事，以专心耕种。
English: Therefore, the former king regarded the abolition of cumbersome expenses as a matter of urgency and concentrated on farming.

古文：自春夏以来，民穷於役，农业有废，百姓嚣然，时风不至，未必不由此也。
现代文：从春夏季节以来，百姓因为劳役很是困顿，农事荒废，百姓饥饿，好的教化不能推广，未必不是因为这个。
English: Since the spring and summer seasons, the people have been in a very difficult situation due to forced labor, agricultural work has been abandoned, the people are hungry, and good education cannot be promoted, which may not be because of this.

古文：消复之术，莫大於节俭。
现代文：消除灾变，恢复正常的办法，没有比节俭用度更好的了。
English: There is no better way to eliminate the disaster and restore normalcy than to be frugal.

古文：太祖建立洪业，奉师徒之费，供军赏之用，吏士丰於资食，仓府衍於谷帛，由不饰无用之宫，绝浮华之费，方今之要，固在息省劳烦之役，损除他馀之务，以为军戎之储。
现代文：太祖开创了宏伟的基业，支出兵士们的费用，供应军队封赏的费用，官吏们在财产和粮食上丰富，官府仓库的粮食布帛充足，都是因为太祖不修饰没有用处的宫殿，断绝奢华的消费，现在的要务，是在于撤除繁琐的劳役，删减多余的杂物，以作为军队的储备。
English: The great-grandfather created a magnificent foundation, spending the soldiers' expenses, supplying the army's reward expenses, the officials were rich in property and grain, and the grain cloth in the government warehouse was sufficient, all because the great-grandfather did not decorate the useless palace, and cut off the luxury consumption. Now the main task is to remove the cumbersome labor service and reduce the excess debris to serve as the army's reserve.

古文：三边守御，宜在备豫。
现代文：边境的守卫防御，应该做好准备。
English: The border guards should be prepared.

古文：料贼虚实，蓄士养众，算庙胜之策，明攻取之谋，详询众庶以求厥中。
现代文：预料敌人的行动虚实，养精蓄锐，制定好克敌制胜的计策，明确好攻占取胜的谋略，详细地听取众人的意见，以求得合适的策略。
English: Anticipate the enemy's actions are false and real, keep your energy sharp, formulate a good strategy to defeat the enemy, clarify the strategy to win, listen to the opinions of many people in detail to find a suitable strategy.

古文：若谋不素定，轻弱小敌，军人数举，举而无庸，所谓 悦武无震 ，古人之诫也。 
现代文：如果谋略没有制定好，轻视敌军，那军队就算多次出兵，也没有什么用，正所谓 喜好武事却没有威力 ，是古人的训诫啊。 
English: If the strategy is not well formulated, and the enemy army is despised, then the army, even if it is sent out many times, is of no use. The so-called "liking martial arts but no power" is an admonition of the ancients.

古文：转为太常，清贫守约，至卖田宅以自给。
现代文：和洽转任太常，生活清贫，保持简朴，以至于要卖掉土地房屋以供应生活。
English: It is too common to be transferred peacefully, live in poverty, and keep a simple life, so much so that it is necessary to sell land and houses to provide for life.

古文：明帝闻之，加赐谷帛。
现代文：明帝得知后，对他加以赏赐粮食布帛。
English: When Emperor Ming learned of this, he rewarded him with a grain basket.

古文：薨，谥曰简侯。
现代文：和洽去世后，谥号为简侯。
English: After his death, his posthumous name was Jian Hou.

古文：子离嗣。
现代文：他的儿子和离承袭了他的爵位。
English: His son and heir succeeded to his title.

古文：离弟逌，才爽开济，官至廷尉书。
现代文：和离的弟弟和逌，很有才干，节操高尚，做官到廷尉书。
English: His younger brother, Kazuchika Kazuchika, was very talented, virtuous and noble, and rose to the rank of courtier.

古文：洽同郡许混者，许劭子也。
现代文：和洽的同郡人许混，是许邵的儿子。
English: He is the son of Xu Shao, the son of county resident Xu Ming.

古文：清醇有鉴识，明帝时为尚书。
现代文：为人干净纯正，能明辨识人，明帝时期曾担任尚书。
English: He is a clean and pure person, able to clearly identify people. He once served as Shangshu during the Ming Dynasty.

古文：常林字伯槐，河内温人也。
现代文：常林，字伯槐，河内郡温县人。
English: Changlin, surnamed Bo'ao, a native of Wen County, Hanoi County.

古文：年七岁，有父党造门，问林： 伯先在否？
现代文：七岁时，父亲的一个朋友前来拜访，问常林说： 伯先在家吗？
English: When he was seven years old, a friend of his father's came to visit and asked Changlin, "Is Bo Xian at home?"

古文：汝何不拜！ 
现代文：你为什么不对我下拜！ 
English: Why don't you bow down to me!

古文：林曰： 虽当下客，临子字父，何拜之有？ 
现代文：常林回答说： 虽然应该礼敬宾客，但你对着儿子称他父亲的字，有什么可拜的呢？ 
English: Changlin replied, "Although you should treat your guests with respect, what right do you have to call your son by his father's name?

古文：於是咸共嘉之。
现代文：于是大家都赞赏他。
English: So everyone appreciated him.

古文：太守王匡起兵讨董卓，遣诸生於属县微伺吏民罪负，便收之，考责钱谷赎罪，稽迟则夷灭宗族，以崇威严。
现代文：太守王匡发兵讨伐董卓，派门生在他们的县城中暗中观察吏役和百姓的过失，发现之后就将他们收押，判决之后让他们用钱财粮食抵消罪罚，延误期限就会灭掉全族，以彰显威严。
English: The daimyō Wang Kuang sent an army to fight against Dong Zhuo, and sent his disciples to secretly observe the faults of officials and people in their county seat. After discovering them, they were taken into custody. After the judgment, they were allowed to use money and grain to offset the punishment. Delaying the deadline would destroy the whole family, in order to show their majesty.

古文：林叔父挝客，为诸生所白，匡怒收治。
现代文：常林的叔父掌掴了客人，被王匡的门生上告，王匡大怒，将他的叔父收押起来。
English: Changlin's uncle slapped a guest and was sued by Wang Kuang's protégé. Wang Kuang was furious and had his uncle detained.

古文：举宗惶怖，不知所责多少，惧系者不救。
现代文：全族人都很惊慌恐惧，不知道有多重的处罚，担心常林的叔父不能获救。
English: The whole family was very panicked and afraid, not knowing how many punishments there would be, and worried that Changlin's uncle could not be rescued.

古文：林往见匡同县胡母彪曰： 王府君以文武高才，临吾鄙郡。
现代文：常林前去拜见王匡的同县人胡母彪说： 王府君因为文武双全，到我们郡来担任太守。
English: Changlin went to see Wang Kuang's fellow county resident, Hu Miao Biao, and said: Wangfukun came to our county to serve as governor because he is both literate and brave.

古文：鄙郡表里山河，土广民殷，又多贤能，惟所择用。
现代文：这门这个郡内外都有山河环绕，土地广阔百姓殷实，又有很多闲贤能之人，可以又他选拔任用。
English: This county is surrounded by mountains and rivers both inside and outside the county, the land is vast and the people are affluent, and there are many idle and capable people who can be selected and appointed by him.

古文：今主上幼冲，贼臣虎据，华夏震栗，雄才奋用之秋也。
现代文：现在天子年幼，现在贼臣董卓盘踞京城，势力强大，国家都震动惊恐，是英雄豪杰奋发做为的好时机。
English: Now that Tianzi is young, now that the thief minister, Dong Zhuopan, has seized the capital, his power is strong, and the country is shocked and frightened, it is a good time for the hero hero to work hard.

古文：若欲诛天下之贼，扶王室之微，智者望风，应之若响，克乱在和，何征不捷。
现代文：如果想要诛杀天下的贼子，匡扶衰微的王室，有智慧的人会看着风向归附，响应的人就像有声响一样，平定战乱，有什么战事不能胜利？
English: If you want to fight and kill the world's thieves and support the fading royal family, a wise person will look at the direction of the wind, and the person who responds will be like a sound, calming the war, what kind of war can't be won?

古文：苟无恩德，任失其人，覆亡将至，何暇匡翼朝廷，崇立功名乎？
现代文：如果没有恩德，又不能任用贤人，那灭亡的时候已经快到了，又有什么闲暇来匡扶朝廷，建立功名呢？
English: If there is no benevolence, and wise men cannot be appointed, then the time of perdition is already approaching, and what leisure is there to support the imperial court and build a reputation?

古文：君其藏之！ 
现代文：您还是好好考虑这件事吧！ 
English: You'd better think about it!

古文：因说叔父见拘之意。
现代文：就趁机陈述了他叔父被收押的事情。
English: He took the opportunity to state that his uncle had been detained.

古文：彪即书责匡，匡原林叔父。
现代文：胡母彪立即写信责问王匡，王匡就释放了常林的叔父。
English: Hu Miao immediately wrote to Wang Kuang to reprimand him, and Wang Kuang released Changlin's uncle.

古文：林乃避地上党，耕种山阿。
现代文：常林就到上党郡躲避，在山中耕种。
English: Changlin took refuge in Shangdang County and farmed in the mountains.

古文：当时旱蝗，林独丰收，尽呼比邻，升斗分之。
现代文：当时出现旱灾蝗灾，只有常林的粮食丰收，他将周围的邻居都召集过来，将自己的粮食整升整斗地分给他们。
English: At that time, there was a drought and a locust plague, and only the standing forest had a bumper grain harvest. He gathered all the neighbors around him and distributed his grain to them in an orderly manner.

古文：依故河间太守陈延壁。
现代文：常林居住的地方靠近已故河间太守陈延家的围墙。
English: The place where Changlin lived was close to the wall of the late Chen Yan's house.

古文：陈、冯二姓，旧族冠冕。
现代文：陈、冯两家，过去都是做官的家族。
English: The Chen and Feng families were both families of officials in the past.

古文：张杨利其妇女，贪其资货。
现代文：张杨看上了这两家家的妇人，还贪图他们家的财物。
English: Zhang Yang fell in love with the women of these two families and coveted their family's belongings.

古文：林率其宗族，为之策谋。
现代文：常林率领全族人，为他们出谋划策。
English: Changlin led the whole family and made suggestions for them.

古文：见围六十馀日，卒全堡壁。
现代文：两家人被围困六十多天，最后都得以保全。
English: The two families were besieged for more than sixty days, but were eventually saved.

古文：并州刺史高幹表为骑都尉，林辞不受。
现代文：并州刺史高幹上表请求任命常林为骑都尉，常林推辞没有接受。
English: And the senior cadre of the State Bureau of Statistics requested the appointment of Changlin as a cavalry captain. Changlin's resignation was not accepted.

古文：后刺史梁习荐州界名士林及杨俊、王凌、王象、荀纬，太祖皆以为县长。
现代文：后来刺史梁习推荐州郡中的名士常林以及杨俊、王腸、王象、荀纬，太祖将他们都任命为县长。
English: Later, Zhang Shiliang Xi recommended the famous Changlin as well as Yang Jun, Wang Ji, Wang Xiang, Zou Wei in the county, and the great-grandfather appointed them all as county governors.

古文：林宰南和，治化有成，超迁博陵太守、幽州刺史，所在有绩。
现代文：常林主管南和县，治理和教化都很有效果，被越级提升为博陵太守、幽州刺史，所治理的地方都很有政绩。
English: Changlin is in charge of Nanhe County, and his governance and indoctrination are very effective. He was promoted to Boling Taizhou and Yuzhou Zhishi, and the places he governs are very successful.

古文：文帝为五官将，林为功曹。
现代文：文帝还是五官中郎将时，常林是他的功曹。
English: When Emperor Wen was still a middle-ranking official, Changlin was his hero.

古文：太祖西征，田银、苏伯反，幽、冀扇动。
现代文：太祖率军西征，田银、苏伯反叛，幽州、冀州也出现动乱。
English: Taizu led the army to the west, Tianyin and Su Bo rebelled, and unrest also occurred in Yuzhou and Jizhou.

古文：文帝欲亲自讨之，林曰： 昔忝博陵，又在幽州，贼之形势，可料度也。
现代文：文帝想要亲自征讨他们，常林说： 我过去曾忝列博陵太守，后来又在幽州任职，贼人的形势动态，我是可以预料的。
English: Emperor Wen wanted to personally collect them, and Changlin said: I used to be the governor of Boling, and later I served in Yuzhou. I can predict the situation of the thieves.

古文：北方吏民，乐安厌乱，服化已久，守善者多。
现代文：北方的官吏百姓，喜好安定厌恶战争，接受教化已经很久了，怀着善意的人很多。
English: The officials and people in the north have been educated for a long time, preferring stability and abhorring war, and there are many people with good intentions.

古文：银、伯犬羊相聚，智小谋大，不能为害。
现代文：田银、苏伯只不过是勉强凑在一起的部队，智谋不足但阴谋很大，不能造成祸患。
English: Tian Yin and Su Bo are just forces that have been forced together. They are not clever enough, but they have a great conspiracy, and they cannot cause any disaster.

古文：方今大军在远，外有强敌，将军为天下之镇也，轻动远举，虽克不武。 
现代文：现在我朝大军在远处，外部有强大的敌军，将军作为镇守天下的人，轻率行动，率兵远征，即使打了胜仗也不算智勇。 
English: Now I am facing a large army in the distance, and there is a powerful enemy army outside. The general, as a person who guards the world, acts rashly and leads an expedition. Even if he wins the battle, it is not considered wise and brave.

古文：文帝从之，遣将往伐，应时克灭。
现代文：文帝听从了他的建议，派将领前去征讨，不久就击溃消灭的敌军。
English: Emperor Wen heeded his advice and sent his generals to fight, and they soon defeated the annihilated enemy.

古文：出为平原太守、魏郡东部都尉，入为丞相东曹属。
现代文：常林出京担任平原太守、魏郡东部都尉，后来又入朝担任丞相东曹属。
English: Changlin went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Pingyuan and the eastern governor of Wei County, and later he entered the imperial court to serve as the prime minister of East Caozhen.

古文：魏国既建，拜尚书。
现代文：魏国建立以后，常林担任尚书。
English: After the founding of the State of Wei, Changlin served as Shang Shu.

古文：文帝践阼，迁少府，封乐阳亭侯，转大司农。
现代文：文帝登基后，又提升他为少府，封为乐阳亭侯，后又转任大司农。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the position of Shofu (lesser prefect) and given the title of Leyang Tinghou (lord of Leyang Tinghou). Later, he was transferred to the position of Daisho Nongsu.

古文：明帝即位，进封高阳乡侯，徙光禄勋太常。
现代文：明帝登基后，晋升常林的爵位为高阳乡侯，升任光禄勋太常。
English: After the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, Changlin was promoted to the title of Gaoyang Township, and was promoted to Guanglu Xun Taojang.

古文：晋宣王以林乡邑耆德，每为之拜。
现代文：晋宣王司马懿因为常林是同乡中年老德高的人，每次都向他下拜。
English: Wang Simaqi, the king of Jinxuan, bowed down to Changlin every time, because Changlin was a middle-aged and virtuous fellow villager.

古文：或谓林曰： 司马公贵重，君宜止之。 
现代文：有人对常林说： 司马公身份贵重，您应该阻止他对您的行礼。 
English: Someone said to Changlin: Sima Gong's status is precious, you should prevent him from saluting you.

古文：林曰： 司马公自欲敦长幼之叙，为后生之法。
现代文：常林说： 司马公自己想要遵守长幼的位次，作为年轻人的表率。
English: Changlin said: Sima Gong himself wants to abide by the seniority of elders and children, as a role model for young people.

古文：贵非吾之所畏，拜非吾之所制也。 
现代文：他身份贵重，不是我担心的，他下拜行礼不是我需要阻止的。 
English: It's not his status I'm worried about, it's not his bowing down that I need to stop.

古文：言者踧而退。
现代文：说话的人就恭敬地告退了。
English: The speaker respectfully withdrew.

古文：时论以林节操清峻，欲致之公辅，而林遂称疾笃。
现代文：当时大臣们都议论说因为常林节操清雅高峻，想要推举他为三公或辅相，但常林就自称病重推辞。
English: At that time, the ministers all discussed that they wanted to nominate him as the three princes or the assistant minister because Changlin's behavior was elegant and dignified, but Changlin claimed to be seriously ill and declined.

古文：拜光禄大夫。
现代文：后来常林被任命为光禄大夫。
English: Ren Guanglu is a doctor.

古文：年八十三，薨，追赠骠骑将军，葬如公礼，谥曰贞侯。
现代文：常林在八十三岁的时候去世，朝廷追赠他为骠骑将军，按照公侯的礼节下葬，谥号为贞侯。
English: Changlin died at the age of eighty-three, and the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of General of the Horse Cavalry. He was buried according to the etiquette of a duke, and his posthumous name was Zhengzhou.

古文：子峕嗣，为泰山太守，坐法诛。
现代文：他的儿子常峕承袭爵位，曾担任过常山太守，因为触犯刑律而被诛杀。
English: His son, Tsuneyoshi, inherited the title of nobility and once served as the governor of Mt. Tsuneyoshi. He was beaten to death for violating the criminal law.

古文：峕弟静绍封。
现代文：常峕的弟弟常静继承封爵。
English: Tsuneyoshi's younger brother, Tsunekazu, succeeded him as a peer.

古文：杨俊字季才，河内获嘉人也。
现代文：杨俊，字季才，河内郡获嘉县人。
English: Yang Jun, also known as Ji Cai, was from Huojia County, Hanoi County.

古文：受学陈留边让，让器异之。
现代文：曾向陈留郡的边让从师学习，边让很看重他。
English: He once studied under Benjen of Chenlu County, and Benjen thought highly of him.

古文：俊以兵乱方起，而河内处四达之衢，必为战场，乃扶持老弱诣京、密山间，同行者百馀家。
现代文：杨俊因为各地战乱正在兴起，而河内郡又处于四通八达的要地，一定会成为战场，就带着郡中的老弱之人到京、密地区山林间，同行的有一百多家。
English: Yang Jun took the weak and old people of Hanoi County to the mountains and forests of Beijing and the densely populated areas, accompanied by more than a hundred people, because wars were on the rise in various parts of the country, and Hanoi County was located in a strategic location with good access to all directions, and would certainly become a battlefield.

古文：俊振济贫乏，通共有无。
现代文：杨俊救济贫穷困顿的人，互相供应物资。
English: Yang Jun helped the poor and needy, and they supplied each other with goods.

古文：宗族知故为人所略作奴仆者凡六家，俊皆倾财赎之。
现代文：族中的人知道以前被劫持做为奴仆的共有六家，杨俊都倾尽家财将他们赎了回来。
English: People in the tribe knew that there were a total of six families who had previously been abducted as slaves, and Yang Jun spent all of his family's wealth to ransom them back.

古文：司马宣王年十六七，与俊相遇，俊曰： 此非常之人也。 
现代文：司马宣王十六七岁的时候，和杨俊相遇，杨俊说： 这不是一般人啊。 
English: When Sima Xuanwang was sixteen or seventeen years old, he met Yang Jun. Yang Jun said, "This is no ordinary person.

古文：又司马朗早有声名，其族兄芝，众未之知，惟俊言曰： 芝虽夙望不及朗，实理但有优耳。 
现代文：又有司马朗早年就有名声，他的族兄司马芝，大家都还不了解，只有杨俊说： 司马芝虽然平素的声望比不上司马朗，但实际上他比司马朗优秀。 
English: There is also Sima Lang, who was famous in his early years. His elder brother, Sima Zhi, is still unknown to everyone, only Yang Jun said: Although Sima Zhi's reputation is not higher than Marang, he is actually better than Sima Lang.

古文：俊转避地并州。
现代文：杨俊辗转到并州避难。
English: Yang Junyao was transferred to Ganzhou for refuge.

古文：本郡王象，少孤特，为人仆隶，年十七八，见使牧羊而私读书，因被箠楚。
现代文：本郡的王象，年少就孤高，是人家的仆人，十七八岁的时候，被派去放羊但他却私下读书，因此被鞭打。
English: The county's king elephant, lonely and tall from a young age, was a servant of others. At the age of seventeen or eighteen, he was sent to herd sheep, but he secretly studied, so he was whipped.

古文：俊嘉其才质，即赎象著家，聘娶立屋，然后与别。
现代文：杨俊赏识他的资质，立即就给他赎身带到家中，为他聘娶妻子成家，然后就和他告别了。
English: Yang Jun appreciated his ability and immediately bought him a wife and brought him home. He hired a wife for him and started a family, and then said goodbye to him.

古文：太祖除俊曲梁长，入为丞相掾属，举茂才，安陵令，迁南阳太守。
现代文：太祖委任杨俊为曲梁县令，又入京担任丞相掾属，被推举为茂才，又担任安陵县令，被提升为南阳太守。
English: The great-grandfather appointed Yang Jun as the magistrate of Quliang County, and he also entered Beijing to serve as the chancellor of the imperial court, and was promoted to Motsai, and also served as the magistrate of Anling County, and was promoted to the Nanyang governor.

古文：宣德教，立学校，吏民称之。
现代文：他在位期间，宣扬德行教化，建立学校，官吏百姓都称赞他。
English: During his reign, he preached morality and enlightenment, established schools, and was praised by officials and commoners alike.

古文：徙为征南军师。
现代文：又升任征南军师。
English: He was also promoted to the Southern Expeditionary Division.

古文：魏国既建，迁中尉。
现代文：魏国建立后，他又被提升为中尉。
English: After the founding of the state of Wei, he was promoted to lieutenant.

古文：太祖征汉中，魏讽反於邺。
现代文：太祖征讨汉中，魏讽在邺城反叛。
English: The Great Ancestor conquered the Han Dynasty, and the Wei Dynasty rebelled in Lucheng.

古文：俊自劾诣行在所。
现代文：杨俊自己到行所弹劾自己。
English: Yang Jun went to the bank to impeach himself.

古文：俊以身方罪免，笺辞太子。
现代文：因为自己刚因罪被免职，就写信给太子辞别。
English: Because he had just been removed from office for a crime, he wrote a letter of resignation to the crown prince.

古文：太子不悦，曰： 杨中尉便去，何太高远邪！ 
现代文：太子很不高兴，说： 杨中尉就这样离开，也太清高了吧！ 
English: The prince was very upset and said, "It's too neat and tidy for Lieutenant Yang to leave just like that!

古文：遂被书左迁平原太守。
现代文：于是杨俊被降职为平原太守。
English: As a result, Yang Jun was demoted to plain governor.

古文：文帝践阼，复在南阳。
现代文：文帝登基后，杨俊又重新担任南阳太守。
English: After Emperor Wendi ascended to the throne, Yang Jun once again assumed the position of Nanyang Dazhou.

古文：时王象为散骑常侍，荐俊曰： 伏见南阳太守杨俊，秉纯粹之茂质，履忠肃之弘量，体仁足以育物，笃实足以动众，克长后进，惠训不倦，外宽内直，仁而有断。
现代文：当时王象是散骑常侍，推荐杨俊说： 我观察南阳太守杨俊，秉持着纯粹的资质，有着忠诚恭敬的气量，心怀仁德足以滋养万物，坚定踏实足以打动众人，对后辈教诲不倦，训导不止，表面上宽和，实际上很正直，仁德又能决断。
English: At that time, Wang Xiang was a roving attendant and recommended Yang Jun, saying: I observed Nanyang Daju Yang Jun, upholding pure qualifications, with a loyal and respectful temperament, with a heart of benevolence enough to nourish all things, firm and down-to-earth enough to impress everyone, teaching the younger generation tirelessly, training more and more, on the surface amiable, in fact very honest, and benevolence can be decisive.

古文：自初弹冠，所历垂化，再守南阳，恩德流著，殊邻异党，襁负而至。
现代文：从入朝为官开始，经历了很多地方的教化，再担任南阳太守，推广恩德，远处的人或者和他对立的人，都携老带幼前来归附。
English: From the time he entered the imperial court and became an official, he experienced a lot of local indoctrination, and then served as the Nanyang Daju to promote Nande. People from far away, or those who opposed him, all brought their old and young to join him.

古文：今境守清静，无所展其智能，宜还本朝，宣力辇毂，熙帝之载。 
现代文：现在他管辖的南阳郡内平定，没有办法能展示他的智慧才能，应该让他返回朝中，在您身边效力，就能有尧帝以来的功绩。 
English: Now that the Nanyang County under his jurisdiction has been pacified, there is no way to show his wisdom and talent. He should be allowed to return to the central government and work alongside you, so that he can have the achievements since Emperor Gao.

古文：俊自少及长，以人伦自任。
现代文：杨俊从年少到成年，都将弘扬伦理纲常看做自己的责任。
English: From a young age to adulthood, Yang Jun has always regarded the promotion of ethics as his responsibility.

古文：同郡审固、陈留卫恂本皆出自兵伍，俊资拔奖致，咸作佳士；后固历位郡守，恂御史、县令，其明鉴行义多此类也。
现代文：同郡人审固、陈留郡的卫恂本来都是出身军队，杨俊认为他们资质出众，都提拔了他们，后来都成了杰出的人才；后来审固担任多多地郡守，卫恂担任过御史、县令，杨俊的明察行动大多是想这样的事例。
English: Fellow countymen Xun Gu and Chen Liu County's garrison were originally from the military. Yang Jun believed that they had outstanding qualifications and promoted them, and later they all became outstanding talents. Later, Xun Gu served as county governor in many places, and the garrison served as imperial historian and county magistrate. Yang Jun's inspection actions were mostly examples of this.

古文：初，临菑侯与俊善，太祖適嗣未定，密访群司。
现代文：当初，临菑侯曹植和杨俊关系很好，太祖刚好没有确定继承人，暗中询问大臣们。
English: At first, Linfen lord Cao Zhi and Yang Jun had a good relationship. The great-grandfather just did not decide on a successor and secretly asked the ministers.

古文：俊虽并论文帝、临菑才分所长，不適有所据当，然称临菑犹美，文帝常以恨之。
现代文：杨俊虽然谈到文帝、临菑侯曹植各有所长，没有偏颇，但是称赞临菑侯尤其美好，文帝心中经常怀恨他。
English: Although Yang Jun said that Emperor Wen and Linyi Hou Cao Zhi each had their own strengths, there was no bias, but he praised Linyi Hou as particularly beautiful. Emperor Wen often harbored hatred for him in his heart.

古文：黄初三年，车驾至宛，以巿不丰乐，发怒收俊。
现代文：黄初三年，文帝来到宛城，因为街市上没有热闹的奏乐，生气之下收押了杨俊。
English: In the third year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen came to Wancheng, because there was no lively music in the street market, and he angrily detained Yang Jun.

古文：尚书仆射司马宣王、常侍王象、荀纬请俊，叩头流血，帝不许。
现代文：尚书仆射司马宣王、常侍王象、荀纬都为杨俊求情，磕头以至于流血，文帝都没有宽恕杨俊。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant, King Ma Xuan, the king's attendant, Wang Xiang, and Zou Wei all begged for Yang Jun's forgiveness, to the point of shedding blood. Emperor Wen did not forgive Yang Jun.

古文：俊曰： 吾知罪矣。 
现代文：杨俊说： 臣知罪了。 
English: Yang Jun said, "The vassal has confessed.

古文：遂自杀。
现代文：于是就自杀了。
English: Zhang Tang then committed suicide.

古文：众冤痛之。
现代文：众人都为他感到冤屈悲痛。
English: Everyone felt a sense of injustice and sorrow for him.

古文：杜袭字子绪，颍川定陵人也。
现代文：杜袭，字子绪，颍川郡定陵县人。
English: Du袭,字子绪,川郡定陵县 insiders.

古文：曾祖父安，祖父根，著名前世。
现代文：曾祖父杜安，祖父杜根，在当年都很有名声。
English: Great-grandfather Duan, grandfather Dugan, were both famous in their day.

古文：袭避乱荆州，刘表待以宾礼。
现代文：杜袭到荆州躲避战乱，刘表以宾客之礼对待他。
English: Du Gan went to Jingzhou to escape the war, and Liu Table treated him as a guest.

古文：同郡繁钦数见奇於表，袭喻之曰： 吾所以与子俱来者，徒欲龙蟠幽薮，待时凤翔。
现代文：同郡的繁钦多次对刘表说杜袭是个奇才，杜袭向他说明说： 我之所以和你一起到这里来，只是想要像龙一样隐身在草泽中，等待时机飞翔。
English: Du Xi explained to him: The reason why I came here with you is that I just want to hide in the grass like a dragon and wait for the opportunity to fly.

古文：岂谓刘牧当为拨乱之主，而规长者委身哉？
现代文：怎么能说刘牧是拨乱反正的主君，而规劝长者归附于他呢？
English: How can it be said that Liu Mu is the master of stirring up trouble and persuading the elders to join him?

古文：子若见能不已，非吾徒也。吾其与子绝矣！ 
现代文：你如果看到贤能之人却没有停下脚步，就不是我的同类。我还是和你绝交吧！ 
English: If you see a virtuous person but do not stop walking, you are not my kind. I still want to break up with you!

古文：钦慨然曰： 请敬受命。 
现代文：繁钦情绪激动地说： 那就像你说的那样吧。 
English: An emotional Hongqin said, "It's just like you said.

古文：袭遂南適长沙。
现代文：杜袭就往南到了长沙。
English: Du袭 went south to Changsha.

古文：建安初，太祖迎天子都许。
现代文：建安初年，太祖奉迎天子定都许昌。
English: In the first year of Jian'an, the great-great-grandfather, Bongyong Tianzhong, came to Xuchang.

古文：袭逃还乡里，太祖以为西鄂长。
现代文：杜袭逃往返回故乡，太祖任命他为西鄂县令。
English: Du Wei fled to return to his hometown, and Emperor Taizu appointed him as the governor of Xi'an County.

古文：县滨南境，寇贼纵横。
现代文：西鄂县靠近魏国的南部边境，经常有贼寇侵扰。
English: Xi'e County, close to the southern border of Wei, is often invaded by bandits.

古文：时长吏皆敛民保城郭，不得农业。
现代文：当时，县中的长官将百姓都聚集起来守卫城墙，不能正常耕种。
English: At that time, the prefect of the county gathered the people to guard the city wall, and they could not cultivate normally.

古文：野荒民困，仓庾空虚。
现代文：土地荒芜，百姓困顿，官府的仓库空虚。
English: The land is barren, the people are hard-pressed, and the government warehouses are empty.

古文：袭自知恩结於民，乃遣老弱各分散就田业，留丁强备守，吏民欢悦。
现代文：杜袭知道要用恩德连结百姓，就派老弱百姓各自分散回去耕种，留下男丁和强壮的百姓防备守卫，吏役百姓都很高兴。
English: Du Wei knew that he had to use benevolence to unite the people, so he sent the old and weak people back to farm on their own, leaving the men and strong people to guard the guards. The officials and the people were very happy.

古文：会荆州出步骑万人来攻城，袭乃悉召县吏民任拒守者五十馀人，与之要誓。
现代文：适逢荆州派出步兵骑兵一万多人前来攻城，杜袭就将县中那些担任防御守卫的官吏百姓五十多人都召集过来，和他们立下誓约。
English: When Jingzhou sent more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry to attack the city, Du Wei called together more than fifty officials and commoners who served as defense guards in the county and made a pledge with them.

古文：其亲戚在外欲自营护者，恣听遣出；皆叩头愿致死。
现代文：他们的亲戚在城外的想要自己保护的，都允许他们出城；这些人都磕头表示愿意誓死效力。
English: Their relatives outside the city, who wanted to protect themselves, allowed them to leave the city; these people all bowed their heads and said they were willing to fight to the death.

古文：於是身执矢石，率与戮力。
现代文：于是杜袭身上带着弓箭石头，和他们一同拼死守城。
English: So Du Gan took a stone with a bow and arrow on his body and fought with them to defend the city.

古文：吏民感恩，咸为用命。临陈斩数百级，而袭众死者三十馀人，其馀十八人尽被创，贼得入城。
现代文：官吏百姓们都心怀感恩，愿意舍命战斗，在战场上斩杀了几百敌人，而杜袭的部众有三十多人战死，剩下的十八人都受了伤，贼军得以攻进城内。
English: The officials and people were grateful and willing to fight to the death, killing hundreds of enemies on the battlefield, while more than thirty of Du's subordinates died in the battle, and the remaining eighteen were injured, allowing the bandits to enter the city.

古文：袭帅伤痍吏民决围得出，死丧略尽，而无反背者。
现代文：杜袭率领受伤的官吏百姓冲出重围，几乎全部战死，但没有投降的人。
English: Du Wei led the injured officials and people to break out of the heavy siege. Almost all of them died in the battle, but there were those who did not surrender.

古文：遂收散民，徙至摩陂营，吏民慕而从之如归。
现代文：于是杜袭召集流散的百姓，转移到摩陂安营，官吏百姓们因仰慕他而跟随他，就像要返回家乡一样。
English: So Du Hao gathered up the scattered people and moved them to a camp in Mogao. The officials and the people followed him because they admired him, as if they wanted to return to their hometown.

古文：司隶锺繇表拜议郎参军事。
现代文：司隶钟繇上表请求任命杜袭为议郎参军事。
English: At the request of the top table, the clerk Zhong Yao asked Du Xi to be appointed as a member of the military council.

古文：荀彧又荐袭，太祖以为丞相军祭酒。
现代文：荀彧也举荐杜袭，太祖就任命杜袭为丞相军祭酒。
English: Zhai also recommended Du Hao, and the great-grandfather appointed Du Hao as the prime minister's military festival wine.

古文：魏国既建，为侍中，与王粲、和洽并用。
现代文：魏国建立以后，杜袭被任命为侍中，和王粲、和洽一起被重用。
English: After the founding of the State of Wei, Du Wei was appointed as an attendant, and was reused together with Wang Yao and He Cha.

古文：粲强识博闻，故太祖游观出入，多得骖乘，至其见敬不及洽、袭。
现代文：王粲记忆力强，见识广博，所以太祖游览或日常出入，都让他在身边陪同，至于他被敬重的程度，就比不上和洽、杜袭。
English: Wang Qian has a strong memory and broad knowledge, so he always accompanies the great-grandfather when he visits or goes out. As far as the degree of respect for him is concerned, it is not as high as that for Tonga and Du Xi.

古文：袭尝独见，至于夜半。
现代文：杜袭曾经单独拜见太祖，一直到半夜。
English: Du Wei used to visit Taizu alone until midnight.

古文：粲性躁竞，起坐曰： 不知公对杜袭道何等也？ 
现代文：王粲性情急躁好争，站起来对和洽说： 不知道曹公对杜袭说什么呢？ 
English: Wang Yao, who is quick-tempered and argumentative, stood up and said to He Xiao: Don't you know what Cao Gong said to Du Wei?

古文：洽笑答曰： 天下事岂有尽邪？
现代文：和洽笑着回答说： 天下间的事哪里有完美的呢？
English: Harmony smiled and replied, "What in the world is perfect?

古文：卿昼侍可矣，悒悒於此，欲兼之乎！ 
现代文：您白天在曹公身边侍奉就好了，为这样的事郁闷不已，难道想要兼任杜袭的职务吗！ 
English: It is enough for you to serve around Cao Gong during the day. If you are depressed about such a thing, do you really want to take on the position of Du Wei?

古文：后袭领丞相长史，随太祖到汉中讨张鲁。
现代文：后来杜袭兼任丞相长史，跟随太祖到汉中征讨张鲁。
English: Later, Du Wei concurrently served as chancellor and minister of Long History, and followed the great-grandfather to the Han Dynasty to recruit Zhang Lu.

古文：太祖还，拜袭驸马都尉，留督汉中军事。
现代文：太祖返回之后，任命杜袭为驸马都尉，让他留下来督领汉中的军事事宜。
English: After the great-grandfather returned, he appointed Du Wei as the captain of the horse, and let him stay to supervise the military affairs of the Han Dynasty.

古文：绥怀开导，百姓自乐出徙洛、邺者，八万馀口。
现代文：他对百姓安抚开道，有八万多百姓自愿迁出汉中，转移到洛阳、邺城。
English: He opened the way to pacify the people, and more than 80,000 people voluntarily moved out of Hanzhong and moved to Luoyang and Shicheng.

古文：夏侯渊为刘备所没，军丧元帅，将士失色。
现代文：夏侯渊被刘备杀害，军队丧失了统帅，将士们都惊慌失措。
English: Xia Houyuan was killed by Liu Bei, the army lost its commander, and the soldiers were panicked.

古文：袭与张郃、郭淮纠摄诸军事，权宜以郃为督，以一众心，三军遂定。
现代文：杜袭和张郃、郭淮督责整饬各项军事事务，权衡之下让张郃做为都督，以统一军心，三军将士就安定下来。
English: Du Gui, Zhang Ye and Guo Huai were put in charge of rectifying various military affairs, and Zhang Ye was made the governor of the capital, in order to unify the military spirit, and the three military officers settled down.

古文：太祖东还，当选留府长史，镇守长安，主者所选多不当，太祖令曰： 释骐骥而不乘，焉皇皇而更索？ 
现代文：太祖往东返回洛阳，想要选择一个留府长史镇守长安，主管此事的官员挑选的人大多不合适，太祖就下令说： 放着良马不乘，怎么彷徨无措地到其他地方找呢？ 
English: The great-grandfather went back to Luoyang in the east, and wanted to choose someone to stay in the prefecture to guard the town of Chang'an. The officials in charge of this matter selected people who were mostly unsuitable. The great-grandfather ordered: "If you don't ride a good horse, how can you look for it in other places?

古文：遂以袭为留府长史，驻关中。
现代文：于是就让杜袭担任留府长史，驻守关中。
English: As a result, Du Wei was appointed to serve as the governor-in-residence, stationed in Guanzhong.

古文：时将军许攸拥部曲，不附太祖而有慢言。
现代文：当时将军许攸坐拥部众，不依附太祖，而且有轻慢的言论。
English: At that time, General Xu You sat with his subordinates, did not cling to his grandfather, and had contemptuous remarks.

古文：太祖大怒，先欲伐之。
现代文：太祖大怒，想要先攻打他。
English: The great-grandfather was furious and wanted to attack him first.

古文：群臣多谏： 可招怀攸，共讨强敌。 
现代文：大臣们大多劝谏说： 可以招揽许攸，一同讨伐强敌。 
English: Most of the ministers advised him, saying, "We can recruit Xu You, and together we can fight the powerful enemy."

古文：太祖横刀於膝，作色不听。
现代文：太祖将佩刀横放在膝盖上，神情严肃都没有听。
English: The great-grandfather laid the saber across his lap, not listening with a serious expression.

古文：袭入欲谏，太祖逆谓之曰： 吾计以定，卿勿复言。 
现代文：杜袭进去想要劝谏，太祖抢先对他说： 我的想法已经决定了，你不用再说了。 
English: Du Du stormed in to try to persuade Yao, but Taizu preempted him by saying, "My thoughts have already been decided, you don't need to say anything more.

古文：袭曰： 若殿下计是邪，臣方助殿下成之；若殿下计非邪，虽成宜改之。
现代文：杜袭说： 如果殿下的计策正确，臣就帮助您完成；如果殿下的计策不正确，即使决定了也应该修改。
English: Du Wei said: If Your Highness's plan is correct, I will help you to complete it; if Your Highness's plan is not correct, even if it is decided, it should be revised.

古文：殿下逆臣，令勿言之，何待下之不阐乎？ 太祖曰： 许攸慢吾，如何可置乎？ 
现代文：殿下抢在臣前面说话，让我不要再说，为什么不等我说完话呢？ 太祖说： 许攸轻慢我，怎么处置他？ 
English: His highness rushed to speak in front of the vassal, asking me to stop talking, why not wait for me to finish? The ancestor said, "Xu You despised me, what should I do with him?

古文：袭曰： 殿下谓许攸何如人邪？ 太祖曰： 凡人也。 
现代文：杜袭说： 殿下认为许攸是个什么样的人？ 太祖说： 凡人。 
English: Du Wei said, "What kind of person does Your Highness think Xu Youcang is?" Grandfather said, "An ordinary person."

古文：袭曰： 夫惟贤知贤，惟圣知圣，凡人安能知非凡人邪？
现代文：杜袭说： 只有贤人才能赏识贤人，只有圣人才能了解圣人，凡人怎么能知道不是凡人呢？
English: Du Xi said: Only a wise man can appreciate a wise man, only a saint can understand a saint, how can an ordinary person know that he is not an ordinary person?

古文：方今豺狼当路而狐狸是先，人将谓殿下避强攻弱，进不为勇，退不为仁。
现代文：现在是豺狼挡在路上但却要先除掉狐狸，世人会说殿下是避开强敌进攻弱小的，进攻不能称上应用，撤退也不算是仁慈。
English: Now it is the jackal that stands in the way, but the fox must first be eliminated. The world will say that His Highness is avoiding a strong enemy and attacking a weak one. The attack cannot be called an application, and the retreat is not a mercy.

古文：臣闻千钧之弩不为鼷鼠发机，万石之锺不以莛撞起音，今区区之许攸，何足以劳神武哉？ 太祖曰： 善。 
现代文：臣听说力量强大的弩箭不会因为家鼠而发射，容积很大的钟鼎不会因为草根的碰撞而发出声音，现在一个小小的许攸，哪里需要劳动英明神武的殿下呢？ 太祖说： 好。 
English: The vassal heard that the powerful crossbow arrow would not be fired because of the house mouse, and the large bell would not make a sound because of the collision of the grass roots. Now, a small question, where is the need for the labor of the wise and powerful highness? The great-grandfather said: Good.

古文：遂厚抚攸，攸即归服。
现代文：于是对许攸进行了很好的安抚，许攸随即归附了太祖。
English: So he did a good job of appeasing Xu Youyou, and Xu Youyou immediately became a vassal of Taizu.

古文：时夏侯尚昵於太子，情好至密。
现代文：当时夏侯尚受到太子重新，两人交往很密切。
English: At that time, Xia Hou Shang was re-captured by the prince, and the two had a close relationship.

古文：袭谓尚非益友，不足殊待，以闻太祖。
现代文：杜袭认为夏侯尚不是好的朋友，不足以对他特殊对待，就将这件事告诉了太祖。
English: Du Wei thought that Xia Hou was still not a good friend, not enough to give him special treatment, so he told this to Taizu.

古文：文帝初甚不悦，后乃追思。
现代文：文帝刚开始很不高兴，后来才同意他的看法。
English: At first, Wen Di was very unhappy, but later he agreed with him.

古文：语在尚传。
现代文：这件事在《夏侯尚传》中另有记载。
English: This incident is also recorded in the "Biography of Xia Hou Shang."

古文：其柔而不犯，皆此类也。
现代文：杜袭为人处世柔和而不冒犯他人，都是这样的情况、
English: Du Xi's way of being gentle and not offending others is like this.

古文：文帝即王位，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：文帝继位魏王，赐封杜袭的爵位为关内侯。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne of Wei, and conferred the title of Guan Nei Hou on Du Xi.

古文：及践阼，为督军粮御史，封武平亭侯，更为督军粮执法，入为尚书。
现代文：等到文帝登基，杜袭担任督军粮御史，被封为武平亭侯，又改任督军粮执法，入朝担任尚书。
English: By the time Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Du Xi had served as the governor of military grain and history, was named the governor of Wupingting, and was appointed the governor of military grain and law enforcement, and entered the imperial court as Shangshu.

古文：明帝即位，进封平阳乡侯。
现代文：明帝登基后，杜袭爵位晋升为平阳乡侯。
English: After the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, Du Xi was promoted to the peerage of Pingyang Township.

古文：诸葛亮出秦川，大将军曹真督诸军拒亮，徙袭为大将军军师，分邑百户赐兄基爵关内侯。
现代文：诸葛亮率兵出秦川，大将军司马真率领各军抵御诸葛亮，杜袭被提升为大将军均属，明帝又分出他一百户食邑赐封他的兄长杜基关内侯的爵位。
English: Zhuge Liang led his troops out of the Qin River, and the great general Sima Zhen led the armies to resist Zhuge Liang. Du Wei was promoted to the rank of general, and the Ming Emperor also allocated him a hundred households and gave his brother Duji the title of Guanai Marquis.

古文：真薨，司马宣王代之，袭复为军师，增邑三百，并前五百五十户。
现代文：曹真去世，司马宣王代替他的职务，杜袭重新担任军师，增加两百户食邑，连带之前的一共五百五十户。
English: Cao Zhen passed away, Sima Xuan Wang took his place, Du Hei resumed his duties as a military strategist, and two hundred households were added, bringing the total number of households to 550.

古文：以疾徵还，拜太中大夫。
现代文：因为生病被征召回朝中，担任太中大夫。
English: Because of illness, he was called back to the Imperial Middle School to serve as a junior high school teacher.

古文：薨，追赠少府，谥曰定侯。
现代文：杜袭去世后，朝廷追赠他为少府，谥号为定侯。
English: After Du Xi's death, the imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Shofu, and his posthumous name was Jinghou.

古文：子会嗣。
现代文：他的儿子杜会承袭爵位。
English: His son Du will inherit the title.

古文：赵俨字伯然，颍川阳翟人也。
现代文：赵俨，字伯然，颍川郡阳翟县人。
English: Zhao Yao, known as Bo Ran, was from Yangshuo County, Luochuan County.

古文：避乱荆州，与杜袭、繁钦通财同计，合为一家。
现代文：到荆州躲避战乱，和杜袭、繁钦互通财物，一同计划，合在一起生活。
English: They went to Jingzhou to escape the war, exchanged property with Du Xi and Fang Qin, made plans together, and lived together.

古文：太祖始迎献帝都许，俨谓钦曰： 曹镇东应期命世，必能匡济华夏，吾知归矣。 建安二年，年二十七，遂扶持老弱诣太祖，太祖以俨为朗陵长。
现代文：太祖刚奉迎献帝迁都许都，赵俨对繁钦说： 曹镇东顺应期运天命，一定能匡扶中原，我知道要去哪里了。 建安二年，赵俨二十七岁，就带着老幼弱小到太祖那里投靠，太祖任命他为朗陵县长。
English: Just after the great-grandfather had moved the capital to Xudu, Zhao Wei said to Fanqin, "Cao Zhendong is in accordance with the timing of God's providence, and will surely be able to support the Central Plains, and I know where to go." In the second year of Jianan, Zhao Wei, 27 years old, took the old and the weak to the great-grandfather, and the great-grandfather appointed him as the head of Langling County.

古文：县多豪猾，无所畏忌。
现代文：朗陵县内有很多蛮横狡猾的人，无所顾忌。
English: There are a lot of insolent and cunning people in Langling County, who have no scruples.

古文：俨取其尤甚者，收缚案验，皆得死罪。
现代文：赵俨抓住其中最猖狂的人，将他关押审问查验，都应被判死罪。
English: Zhao Jun should be sentenced to death for seizing the most violent of them and detaining him for interrogation and investigation.

古文：俨既囚之，乃表府解放，自是威恩并著。
现代文：赵俨抓捕他们之后，就上表州郡请求释放她们，从那以后，赵俨的恩德威信都很著名。
English: After Zhao Wei arrested them, he requested the release of them from Shangmianzhou County, and since then, Zhao Wei's Endeavor letters have been famous.

古文：时袁绍举兵南侵，遣使招诱豫州诸郡，诸郡多受其命。
现代文：当时袁绍率军侵犯边境，并派使者招诱各州郡，各郡大多接受了他的招揽。
English: At that time, Yuan Shao led the army to invade the border, and sent an envoy to invite the states and counties, and most of the counties accepted his invitation.

古文：惟阳安郡不动，而都尉李通急录户调。
现代文：只有安阳郡没有行动，而都尉李通又着急向百姓征收赋税。
English: Only Anyang County did not act, and Captain Li Tong was in a hurry to collect taxes from the people.

古文：俨见通曰： 方今天下未集，诸郡并叛，怀附者复收其绵绢，小人乐乱，能无遗恨！
现代文：赵俨拜见的李通说： 现在天下还没有平定，各郡一同反叛，对于想依附朝廷的地方，又想要收取他们的绢帛赋税，小人喜欢动乱的局面，怎么会不造成百姓的怨恨呢！
English: Li Tong, whom Zhao Yao paid a visit to, said: Now the world has not been pacified, all counties are rebelling together. For the places that want to cling to the imperial court and want to collect their taxes, villains like the turbulent situation, how can it not cause the resentment of the people!

古文：且远近多虞，不可不详也。 
现代文：况且远近处都有乱事，不能不仔细啊。 
English: Moreover, there are disturbances far and near, so you have to be careful.

古文：通曰： 绍与大将军相持甚急，左右郡县背叛乃尔。
现代文：李通说： 袁绍和大将军对峙的情况紧急，周围的郡县纷纷背叛。
English: Li Tong said: The situation of confrontation between Yuan Shao and the general is urgent, and the surrounding counties have betrayed each other.

古文：若绵绢不调送，观听者必谓我顾望，有所须待也。 
现代文：如果绢帛赋税不能征收送往朝廷，探听消息的人一定说我在观察形势，在等待时机。 
English: If taxes cannot be collected and sent to the imperial court, those who seek information will certainly say that I am observing the situation and waiting for the right time.

古文：俨曰： 诚亦如君虑；然当权其轻重，小缓调，当为君释此患。 
现代文：赵安说： 确实会像您考虑的那样，但也应该权衡事情的轻重，慢慢地征收调动，我愿意为您解决这个祸患。 
English: Zhao An said: It will indeed be as you have considered, but you should also weigh the importance of the matter and slowly collect the transfer. I am willing to solve this scourge for you.

古文：乃书与荀彧曰： 今阳安郡当送绵绢，道路艰阻，必致寇害。
现代文：就写信送给荀彧说： 现在阳安郡应该运送绢帛，但道路艰险，一定会招来贼寇。
English: He wrote a letter to Zou saying: Now Yang'an County should transport Zou, but the road is difficult and dangerous, which will surely attract thieves.

古文：百姓困穷，邻城并叛，易用倾荡，乃一方安危之机也。
现代文：百姓困顿贫穷，旁边的城池一同反叛，很容易导致倾覆，这是关系一方安危存亡的重要时机啊。
English: The people are poor and hard-pressed, and the city next to it is rebelling together, which can easily lead to its overthrow. This is an important opportunity for one side of the relationship to survive.

古文：且此郡人执守忠节，在险不贰。
现代文：况且阳安郡的百姓都坚守忠诚节操，面临险境也没有二心。
English: Moreover, the people of Yang'an County all adhere to loyalty and discipline, and have no second thoughts in the face of danger.

古文：微善必赏，则为义者劝。
现代文：微小的善事也一定要赏赐，那就会勉励正义的人。
English: A little that is good must be rewarded, and the righteous will be encouraged.

古文：善为国者，藏之於民。
现代文：善于治理国家的人，会将财富藏在百姓中。
English: Those who are good at governing the country will hide the wealth among the people.

古文：以为国家宜垂慰抚，所敛绵绢，皆俾还之。 
现代文：我认为国家现在应该对百姓加以慰问安抚，所征收的绢帛，全都退回给百姓。 
English: I think that the state should now comfort and appease the people, and all the taxes collected should be returned to the people.

古文：彧报曰： 辄白曹公，公文下郡，绵绢悉以还民。 
现代文：荀彧回复说： 我立刻上报曹公，将公文下发到郡县，将绢帛都退还给百姓。 
English: Gong replied: I immediately reported to Cao Gong, sent the document to the county, and returned the money to the people.

古文：上下欢喜，郡内遂安。
现代文：百姓上下都很高兴，阳安郡内就安定下来了。
English: The people are very happy, and Yang'an County has settled down.

古文：入为司空掾属主簿。时于禁屯颍阴，乐进屯阳翟，张辽屯长社，诸将任气，多共不协；使俨并参三军，每事训喻，遂相亲睦。
现代文：赵俨入朝担任司空掾属主簿，当时于禁在颖阴驻扎，乐进在阳翟驻守，张辽屯兵长社，将领们意气用事，大多意见不一致；太祖就让赵俨一起参与这三个地方的军务，每次有事，都训示晓喻，所以将领们都和睦起来。
English: At that time, Yu Zhen was stationed in Yingyin, Le Jin was stationed in Yangshuo, and Zhang Liao was stationed in Changsha. The generals were spirited, and most of them disagreed; the great-grandfather let Zhao Jun participate in the military affairs of these three places together. Every time something happened, the instructions were clear, so the generals were in harmony.

古文：太祖征荆州，以俨领章陵太守，徙都督护军，护于禁、张辽、张郃、朱灵、李典、路招、冯楷七军。
现代文：太祖征讨荆州，任命赵俨兼任章陵太守，又升任都督护军，督领于禁、张辽、张郃、朱灵、李典、路招、冯楷七支部队。
English: Emperor Taizu conquered Jingzhou, appointed Zhao Jun as the governor of Zhangling, and promoted him to the position of the governor of the city, leading seven troops including Yu Kan, Zhang Liao, Zhang Jun, Zhu Ling, Li Dian, Lu Zha and Feng Kai.

古文：复为丞相主簿，迁扶风太守。
现代文：又任命他为丞相主簿，转任扶风太守。
English: He also appointed him as the chief secretary to the prime minister and transferred to the post of Fufu Taishu.

古文：太祖徙出故韩遂、马超等兵五千馀人，使平难将军殷署等督领，以俨为关中护军，尽统诸军。
现代文：太祖将原来隶属韩遂、马超部队的五千多士兵调转出来，让平难将军殷署等人统率，并让赵俨担任关中护军，统领各路人马。
English: The great-grandfather transferred more than five thousand soldiers who were originally affiliated with the Han Sui and Ma Chao troops, let General Pingnan Yin and others lead the troops, and let Zhao Wei serve as the guard of Guanzhong, leading all the people and horses.

古文：羌虏数来寇害，俨率署等追到新平，大破之。
现代文：羌人敌寇多次前来进犯，赵俨率领殷署等一直追到新平，击溃敌军。
English: The enemy raiders repeatedly came to attack, and Zhao Wei led the Yin Department to chase them all the way to Xinping to defeat the enemy army.

古文：屯田客吕并自称将军，聚党据陈仓，俨复率署等攻之，贼即破灭。
现代文：有个从外地来屯田的吕并，自称为将军，聚集同党占据陈仓，赵俨又率领殷署等攻打他们，贼寇就被铲除了。
English: A Lu Jian, who came to Tonden from out of town and called himself a general, gathered his party to occupy Chen Cang, and Zhao Yu led the Yin Department to attack them, and the bandits were eliminated.

古文：时被书差千二百兵往助汉中守，署督送之。
现代文：当时赵俨收到朝廷诏令，要派一千两百名士兵前去协助汉中守卫，殷署监督护送。
English: At that time, Zhao Wei received an imperial edict from the court to send twelve hundred soldiers to assist the Han Chinese guards, and the Yin Department supervised the escort.

古文：行者卒与室家别，皆有忧色。
现代文：被派去的士兵突然间要和家人分别，都面带愁容。
English: The soldiers who had been sent there were suddenly separated from their families, and they all looked sad.

古文：署发后一日，俨虑其有变，乃自追至斜谷口，人人慰劳，又深戒署。
现代文：殷署出发一天之后，赵俨担心会出现变故，及自己追赶到斜谷口，对每个士兵都慰问安抚，又再三告诫殷署。
English: One day after Yin's departure, Zhao Yao was worried that there would be a change of fortune, and he chased him to the mouth of the valley, comforted every soldier, and repeatedly admonished Yin.

古文：还宿雍州刺史张既舍。
现代文：返回的时候住在雍州刺史张既的馆舍中。
English: When he returned, he lived in the residence of Zhang Ye, a famous poet in Yongzhou.

古文：署军复前四十里，兵果叛乱，未知署吉凶。
现代文：殷署率军往前行进了四十里，士兵果然叛乱，不知道殷署的安危。
English: Yin's troops marched forward for forty miles, and the soldiers rebelled, not knowing the safety of Yin's troops.

古文：而俨自随步骑百五十人，皆与叛者同部曲，或婚姻，得此问，各惊，被甲持兵，不复自安。
现代文：而赵俨自己带领的一百五十名步兵骑兵，都是跟反叛的士兵一个部队，或者有姻亲关系，他们得知这个消息后，都还能惊慌，穿上铠甲拿着兵器，也没有了安定的状况。
English: However, the 150 infantry and cavalry soldiers led by Zhao Jun himself were all with the rebel soldiers as a unit, or were related by marriage. After they learned this news, they could still panic, put on armor and carry weapons, and there was no stable situation.

古文：俨欲还，既等以为 今本营党已扰乱，一身赴之无益，可须定问 。
现代文：赵俨向返回，张既等认为 现在自己军营中的士兵已经动乱，只身前去也没有好处，应该打探一下消息。 
English: When Zhao Yingxiang returned, Zhang Yingxiang thought that the soldiers in his military camp were already in turmoil, and it was no good to just go forward. He should investigate the news.

古文：俨曰： 虽疑本营与叛者同谋，要当闻行者变，乃发之。
现代文：赵俨说： 我虽然也怀疑本营和叛乱的人合谋，听说出发的士兵动乱，才出发。
English: Zhao Wei said: Although I also suspected that the main camp was conspiring with the rebels, I heard that the departing soldiers were in turmoil before they set off.

古文：又有欲善不能自定，宜及犹豫，促抚宁之。
现代文：还有一些士兵不想作乱但不能自行决断，应该在他们还在犹豫的时候，赶快去安抚让他们安定。
English: There are also some soldiers who don't want to make trouble but can't make up their own minds. We should quickly pacify and stabilize them while they are still hesitating.

古文：且为之元帅，既不能安辑，身受祸难，命也。 遂去。
现代文：况且既然是统帅，已经不能安抚将士，就算是遭受的祸患，也是命啊。 
English: Moreover, since he is the commander-in-chief, he can no longer pacify the soldiers. Even if it is a misfortune, it is also life.

古文：行三十里止，放马息，尽呼所从人，喻以成败，慰励恳切。
现代文：于是就离开了张既家。行进了三十里停下，放马休息，将所有跟随的士兵都召集过来，将成败的结果都明白告诉他们，言辞恳切地安慰鼓励他们。
English: So he left Zhang Ye's house. After marching thirty miles, he stopped, put his horse to rest, gathered all the soldiers who were following him, told them clearly the results of success and failure, and consoled and encouraged them earnestly.

古文：皆慷慨曰： 死生当随护军，不敢有二。 
现代文：众士兵都慷慨激昂地说： 无论生死，都追随护军，不敢有二心。 
English: All the soldiers said impetuously, "No matter whether we live or die, we will follow the escort. We dare not have second thoughts."

古文：前到诸营，各召料简诸奸结叛者八百馀人，散在原野，惟取其造谋魁率治之，馀一不问。
现代文：部队继续往前到部队的营帐中，派各位将领清点查看部下中勾结反叛的人，总共八百多人，将他们都分散在原野中，只抓捕其中带头作乱的人并处置了，其余的都没有问责。
English: The troops continued to advance to the camp of the troops, sent the generals to the clearing point to check the people who colluded with the rebels among their subordinates, a total of more than eight hundred people, dispersed them all in the field, only arrested those who led the disturbance and disposed of them, and the rest were not accountable.

古文：郡县所收送，皆放遣，乃即相率还降。
现代文：各郡县所收押的士兵，也都释放他们，他们就相继返回军营投降。
English: The soldiers detained by each county also released them, and they returned to the military camp one after another to surrender.

古文：俨密白： 宜遣将诣大营，请旧兵镇守关中。 太祖遣将军刘柱将二千人，当须到乃发遣，而事露，诸营大骇，不可安喻。
现代文：赵俨暗中上报说： 应该派将领到军营中来，并派旧兵镇守关中。 太祖派将军刘柱率领两千士兵，本来应该等士兵都召集完毕再发送往关中，但事情泄露了出去，各军营都很惊骇，没有办法安抚。
English: Zhao Yao secretly reported: Generals should be sent to the military camp, and the old military town should be sent to guard Guanzhong. The great-grandfather sent General Liu Zhu to lead two thousand soldiers, and it was supposed to be sent to Guanzhong after the soldiers were all called up, but the matter leaked out, the military camps were shocked, and there was no way to appease.

古文：俨谓诸将曰： 旧兵既少，东兵未到，是以诸营图为邪谋。
现代文：赵俨对将领们说： 这里朝廷的旧兵很少，东面的援军还没有到，所以各营都有叛乱的想法。
English: Zhao Wei said to the generals: There are few old soldiers of the imperial court here, and the reinforcements from the east have not yet arrived, so each battalion has the idea of rebellion.

古文：若或成变，为难不测。
现代文：如果真的发生变故，结局是难以预料的。
English: If something does happen, the outcome is unpredictable.

古文：因其狐疑，当令早决。 
现代文：趁着他们还在犹豫，应该早点决断。 
English: While they are still hesitating, they should make a decision sooner.

古文：遂宣言当差留新兵之温厚者千人镇守关中，其馀悉遣东。
现代文：于是就宣布要留下一千名温良厚道的新兵镇守至中，其余全部派到汉中。
English: As a result, it was announced that one thousand good-natured recruits would be left to guard the middle school, and the rest would all be sent to the middle school.

古文：便见主者，内诸营兵名籍，案累重，立差别之。
现代文：赵俨又去见主管官员，将各营士兵的名册籍贯都拿过来，按照家中情况做好排序，显出之间的差别。
English: Zhao Wei also went to see the competent official, took the roster of soldiers of each battalion and sorted them according to the situation at home, showing the difference between them.

古文：留者意定，与俨同心。
现代文：那些被留下来的士兵心中安定，都这赵俨同心协力。
English: Those soldiers who were left behind are stable in their hearts, and all of them are united in their efforts.

古文：其当去者亦不敢动，俨一日尽遣上道，因使所留千人，分布罗落之。
现代文：那些应该去汉中的士兵也不敢有所行动，赵俨在一天之内将他们都遣送上路，又派留下的一千人分布在各营中。
English: Those soldiers who were supposed to go to Hanzhong didn't dare to take any action either. Zhao Jun sent them all on their way within a day, and also sent the remaining one thousand people to be distributed among the battalions.

古文：东兵寻至，乃复胁喻，并徙千人，令相及共东，凡所全致二万馀口。
现代文：东面的援军不久就来到了，赵俨又威吓训导，将剩下的一千人也迁到汉中，最后派送过去的共有两万多人。
English: Reinforcements from the east soon arrived, and Zhao Jun threatened the tutor to move the remaining one thousand people to Hanzhong, eventually sending a total of more than twenty thousand people.

古文：关羽围征南将军曹仁於樊。
现代文：征南将军曹仁在樊城被关羽围困。
English: Cao Ren, the general of the Southern Expedition, was besieged by Guan Yu in Handan.

古文：俨以议郎参仁军事南行，舆平寇将军徐晃俱前。
现代文：赵俨以议郎的身份参与曹仁部队的军事随同南行，和平寇将军徐晃领兵一同前往。
English: Zhao Wei, as the mediator, participated in the military escort of Cao Ren's troops to the south, and the Peaceful General Xu Xiao led the troops together.

古文：既到，羽围仁遂坚，馀救兵未到。
现代文：到达樊城后，关羽围困曹仁的攻势更加秘籍，其他的援兵还没有来到。
English: After arriving at Lucheng, Guan Yu's siege of Cao Ren became more secretive, and other reinforcements had not yet arrived.

古文：晃所督不足解围，而诸将呵责晃促救。
现代文：徐晃所督领的部队不足以解除围困，将领们又不断催促徐晃迅速援救。
English: The troops under the command of Xu Huang were not enough to lift the siege, and the generals kept urging Xu Huang to rescue them quickly.

古文：俨谓诸将曰： 今贼围素固，水潦犹盛。
现代文：赵俨对将领们说： 现在贼人的围困很坚固，比被水围绕还要严密。
English: Zhao Wei said to the generals: Now the siege of the thieves is very strong, even tighter than being surrounded by water.

古文：我徒卒单少，而仁隔绝不得同力，此举適所以弊内外耳。
现代文：我军步兵人数少，而曹仁又被隔绝在内，不能合力作战，现在行动，对内外部都是不利的。
English: The number of infantrymen in our army is small, and Cao Ren is isolated, unable to fight together. The current action is unfavorable to both inside and outside.

古文：当今不若前军偪围，遣谍通仁，使知外救，以励将士。
现代文：现在不如让前进逼近重围，派间谍暗中联络曹仁，让他知道外部有援救，以激励将士们。
English: Now it is better to let the advance approach the encirclement, send spies to secretly contact Cao Ren, let him know that there is outside help, and encourage the soldiers.

古文：计北军不过十日，尚足坚守。
现代文：估计北面的援军不过十天就到了，现在还能坚守。
English: It is estimated that reinforcements from the north arrived in just ten days, and they can still hold out.

古文：然后表里俱发，破贼必矣。
现代文：然后内外一起发兵，一定能击溃敌军。
English: Then both inside and outside the country will send troops together, which will surely defeat the enemy.

古文：如有缓救之戮，余为诸军当之。 
现代文：如果因为救援迟来而出现祸患，我为各军承担责任。 
English: If there is a disaster due to the delay in rescue, I will take responsibility for each army.

古文：诸将皆喜，便作地道，箭飞书与仁，消息数通，北军亦至，并势大战。
现代文：将领们都欣喜，就挖通地道，一边用箭将书信射到曹仁那边，传递了几次消息后，北面的援军也道路，各军合并大战关羽。
English: The generals were overjoyed. They dug a tunnel and shot a letter to Cao Ren with an arrow. After several messages, reinforcements from the north arrived, and the armies joined in the great battle of Guan Yu.

古文：羽军既退，舟船犹据沔水，襄阳隔绝不通，而孙权袭取羽辎重，羽闻之，即走南还。
现代文：关羽部队失利撤退后，但船只依然占据着沔水，樊城与襄阳的水路被隔断不能通行，孙权又偷袭了关羽的辎重部队，关羽得知后，立即往南返回蜀地。
English: After Guan Yu's troops withdrew in defeat, but the ships still occupied Surabaya. The waterway between Shicheng and Yangyang was cut off and impassable. Sun Quan also attacked Guan Yu's heavy troops. After Guan Yu learned of this, he immediately headed south to return to Shu.

古文：仁会诸将议，咸曰： 今因羽危惧，必可追禽也。 
现代文：曹仁召集将领们商议，大家都时候： 现在趁着关羽危急恐惧，追击他们一定能擒获。 
English: Cao Ren called the generals together for discussion, and they all agreed that now was the time to take advantage of Guan Yu's fear of imminent danger and pursue them to capture them.

古文：俨曰： 权邀羽连兵之难，欲掩制其后，顾羽还救，恐我承其两疲，故顺辞求效，乘衅因变，以观利钝耳。
现代文：赵俨说： 孙权趁着关羽刚交战的弱势，想要暗中截断他的后路，又担心关羽返回援救，担心我军趁着他们两军疲敝的时候进攻，所以谦逊地表示想要效力，但其实是想要顺着成败，观察局势，以看吉凶罢了。
English: Zhao Wei said: Sun Quan took advantage of Guan Yu's weakness just after the battle and wanted to secretly cut off his back way. He was also worried that Guan Yu would return to help, and worried that our army would take advantage of the time when their two armies were exhausted to attack. Therefore, he humbly said that he wanted to be effective, but in fact, he wanted to follow the success and failure, observe the situation, and see the fortunes.

古文：今羽已孤迸，更宜存之以为权害。
现代文：现在关羽已经势单力薄，更应该留下他以成为孙权的祸患。
English: Now that Guan Yu has become a weak force, he should be left to become the scourge of Sun Quan.

古文：若深入追北，权则改虞於彼，将生患於我矣。
现代文：如果大军深入追击逃往的败军，孙权就会改变想法，就会为我军制造祸患。
English: If the large army chases the defeated army that has fled, Sun Quan will change his mind and create a disaster for our army.

古文：王必以此为深虑。 
现代文：魏王也一定会好好考虑这件事。 
English: Wei Wang will certainly give this matter serious consideration.

古文：仁乃解严。
现代文：曹仁就解除了追击的警戒。
English: Cao Ren then lifted the pursuit alert.

古文：太祖闻羽走，恐诸将追之，果疾敕仁，如俨所策。
现代文：太祖得知关羽逃走，担心将领们会追击，果然迅速派人下令曹仁不许追击，都像赵俨计划的那样。
English: When Taizu learned that Guan Yu had fled, he was worried that the generals would pursue him, so he quickly sent someone to order Cao Ren not to pursue him, just as Zhao Yu had planned.

古文：文帝即王位，为侍中。
现代文：文帝继位魏王，赵俨担任侍中。
English: Emperor Wen succeeded to the throne of Wei, and Zhao Jun served as an aide-de-camp.

古文：顷之，拜驸马都尉，领河东太守，典农中郎将。
现代文：不久，又被任命为驸马都尉，兼任河东太守，典农中郎将。
English: Not long after, he was appointed to the post of Lieutenant of the Horse Guards, concurrently serving as the Governor of the Eastern Province and the Vice-Commander of the Peasants' and Peasants' Guard.

古文：黄初三年，赐爵关内侯。孙权寇边，征东大将军曹休统五州军御之，徵俨为军师。
现代文：黄初三年，赵俨被赐封爵位为关内侯，孙权进犯边境，征东大将军曹休率领五个州郡的部抗击，征召赵俨为军师。
English: In the third year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Zhao Qi was given a knighthood as Guan Nei Hou, Sun Quan attacked the border, and the East Conquest General Cao Hui led the resistance of five states and counties, and recruited Zhao Qi as a military division.

古文：权众退，军还，封宜土亭侯，转为度支中郎将，迁尚书。
现代文：孙权的部队退走，大军返回，赵俨被封为宜土亭侯，转为度支中郎将，升任尚书。
English: Sun Quan's troops retreated, and the large army returned. Zhao Jun was made the marquis of Yiduting, and was transferred to the position of the general of the general staff, and was promoted to Shangshu.

古文：从征吴，到广陵，复留为征东军师。
现代文：赵俨跟随文帝征讨东吴，大军到了广陵，留任征东军师。
English: Zhao Wei followed Emperor Wen to conquer the Eastern Wu, the army arrived at Guangling, and he remained as the military commander to conquer the Eastern Wu.

古文：明帝即位，进封都乡侯，邑六百户，监荆州诸军事，假节。
现代文：明帝登基后，晋升赵俨的爵位为都乡侯，食邑六百户，监管荆州的军事事务，并授予符节。
English: After the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, Zhao Jun was promoted to the title of capital township, with 600 households in food villages, supervising the military affairs of Jingzhou, and awarded the Fu Festival.

古文：会疾，不行，复为尚书，出监豫州诸军事，转大司马军师，入为大司农。
现代文：刚好赵俨生病没有能赴任，又重新担任尚书，出京监管豫州的各项军事事务，转任大司马军师，又入京担任大司农。
English: Just when Zhao Jun fell ill and was unable to take up his post, he resumed his duties as Shangshu, went to Beijing to supervise various military affairs in Yuzhou, was transferred to the position of Major-General Ma Junshi, and returned to Beijing to serve as Major-General Nong.

古文：齐王即位，以俨监雍、凉诸军事，假节，转征蜀将军，又迁征西将军，都督雍、凉。
现代文：齐王曹芳登基后，派赵俨监管雍州、凉州的各项军事，并授予符节，后转任征蜀将军，又担任征西将军，督领雍州、凉州。
English: After Cao Fang, the king of Qi, ascended to the throne, he sent Zhao Xi to supervise the military affairs of Yongzhou and Liangzhou, and awarded him the title of Fu Xi. Later, he was transferred to the position of General of the Expedition to Shu, and he also served as the General of the Expedition to the West, and was the governor of Yongzhou and Liangzhou.

古文：正始四年，老疾求还，徵为骠骑将军，迁司空。
现代文：正始四年，赵俨因年老多病请求返回京师，齐王征召他为骠骑将军，升任司空。
English: At the beginning of the fourth year, Zhao Wei requested to return to the Beijing division due to his old age and illness, and King Qi conscripted him as a cavalry general and promoted him to the position of Siku.

古文：薨，谥曰穆侯。
现代文：赵俨去世后，谥号为穆侯。
English: After Zhao Jun's death, his posthumous name became Mu Hou.

古文：子亭嗣。
现代文：他的儿子赵亭承袭爵位。
English: His son Zhao Ting succeeded to the title.

古文：初，俨与同郡辛毗、陈群、杜袭并知名，号曰辛、陈、杜、赵云。
现代文：当初，赵俨与同郡的辛毗、陈群、杜袭都很出名，号为 辛、陈、杜、赵 。
English: At the beginning, Zhao Jun and his compatriots Xin Bi, Chen Qun and Du Wei were very famous. Their names were Xin, Chen, Du and Zhao.

古文：裴潜字文行，河东闻喜人也。
现代文：裴潜，字文行，河东郡闻喜县人。
English: Pei Qian, Zhi Wen Xing, from Wensi County, Hedong County.

古文：避乱荆州，刘表待以宾礼。
现代文：到荆州躲避战乱。刘表用宾客的礼节招待他。
English: He went to Jingzhou to escape the war. Liu table invited him with the etiquette of guests.

古文：潜私谓所亲王粲、司马芝曰： 刘牧非霸王之才，乃欲西伯自处，其败无日矣。 
现代文：裴潜私下对和自己关系友好的王粲、司马芝说： 刘牧不是能称霸的能人，又想要以周文王自居，他的失败不用等很久了。 
English: Pei Qian privately said to Wang Qian and Sima Zhi, who had a friendly relationship with him, "Liu Mu is not a capable person who can dominate, and he wants to portray himself as King Zhou Wen. His failure does not have to wait long.

古文：遂南適长沙。
现代文：于是就往南到了长沙。
English: So I went south to Changsha.

古文：太祖定荆州，以潜参丞相军事，出历三县令，入为仓曹属。
现代文：太祖平定荆州，让裴潜参与丞相军事，曾担任过三县的县令，又入朝担任仓曹属。
English: The great-great-grandfather Pingding Jingzhou, let Pei Qian participate in the prime minister's military, once served as the county magistrate of three counties, and entered the court as Cang Cao Zhen.

古文：太祖问潜曰： 卿前与刘备俱在荆州，卿以备才略何如？ 潜曰： 使居中国，能乱人而不能为治也。
现代文：太祖问裴潜说： 您之前和刘备一同在荆州，您认为刘备的才智谋略怎么样呢？ 裴潜说： 让他安居在中原，只能导致动乱却不能治理。
English: The great-grandfather asked Pei Qian: You were in Jingzhou with Liu Bei before, what do you think of Liu Bei's clever strategy? Pei Qian said: Let him live in peace in the Central Plains, it can only lead to turmoil but cannot be governed.

古文：若乘间守险，足以为一方主。 
现代文：如果他趁机守住险要之地，也足以成为一方的霸主。 
English: If he takes advantage of the opportunity to hold the critical place, it will be enough to become the overlord of one side.

古文：时代郡大乱，以潜为代郡太守。
现代文：当时代郡动乱，朝廷就派裴潜为代郡太守。
English: When Times County was in turmoil, the imperial court sent Baekhyun as the acting governor of the county.

古文：乌丸王及其大人，凡三人，各自称单于，专制郡事。
现代文：乌丸王和其他首领，共三个人，都自称为单于，对代郡的事务专横决断。
English: King Kumaru and the other leaders, a total of three people, all claimed to be alone and arbitrarily decided on the affairs of the county.

古文：前太守莫能治正，太祖欲授潜精兵以镇讨之。
现代文：前任太守不能治理，太祖想交给裴潜精兵，让他前去镇压征讨。
English: The previous daimyo could not govern, and the great-grandfather wanted to hand over Baekhyun to the elite soldiers, and let him go to suppress the investigation.

古文：潜辞曰： 代郡户口殷众，士马控弦，动有万数。
现代文：裴潜推辞说： 代郡人口众多，人马都做好了战斗准备，一有行动就会有上万人。
English: Pei Qian said, "Dai County has a large population, and everyone is ready for battle. If there is an action, there will be tens of thousands of people.

古文：单于自知放横日久，内不自安。
现代文：单于知道自己横行霸道已经很久，心中不安。
English: Just knowing that he has been a bully for a long time, he is uneasy in his heart.

古文：今多将兵往，必惧而拒境，少将则不见惮。
现代文：现在率领众多士兵前往，他们一定会因为畏惧而在边境抵抗，如果士兵少，那就不能使他们忌惮。
English: If you go now with a large number of soldiers, they will certainly resist at the border out of fear, but if there are fewer soldiers, they will not be deterred.

古文：宜以计谋图之，不可以兵威迫也。 
现代文：应该用计策降服他们，不能靠武力胁迫。 
English: They should be subdued by means of strategy, not by force.

古文：遂单车之郡。
现代文：他就自己乘车前往代郡。
English: He drove to Daegu by himself.

古文：单于惊喜。
现代文：单于又惊又喜。
English: I'm just surprised and happy.

古文：潜抚之以静，单于以下脱帽稽颡，悉还前后所掠妇女、器械、财物。
现代文：裴潜平静地安抚他们，单于的部属都脱下帽子并下拜，并将前后所掳掠抢夺的妇女、器械、财物都归还了。
English: Pei Xuan calmly calmed them down, and all of Zanyu's subordinates took off their hats and bowed down, and returned the women, equipment, and property that they had captured and looted.

古文：潜案诛郡中大吏与单于为表里者郝温、郭端等十馀人，北边大震，百姓归心。
现代文：裴潜按律诛杀了代郡与单于内外勾结的高官郝温、郭端等十余人，北方边境地区大为震惊，百姓都愿意依附。
English: Pei Xuan killed more than ten people, including high-ranking officials Xuan Wen and Guo Duan, who were colluding on behalf of the county. The northern border areas were greatly shocked, and the people were willing to follow.

古文：在代三年，还为丞相理曹掾，太祖褒称治代之功，潜曰： 潜於百姓虽宽，於诸胡为峻。
现代文：裴潜在代郡三年，又回京担任丞相理曹掾，太祖称赞他治理代郡有功劳，裴潜说： 我对待百姓虽然宽容，但对胡人很严厉。
English: Pei Jian represented the county for three years, and then returned to Beijing to serve as the prime minister of Cao Pi. The great-grandfather praised him for his service in governing the county. Pei Jian said: Although I treat the people with tolerance, I am very strict with the Hu people.

古文：今计者必以潜为理过严，而事加宽惠；彼素骄恣，过宽必弛，既弛又将摄之以法，此讼争所由生也。
现代文：现在谋臣们一定认为我在礼法上过于严苛，对待事情却很宽和；胡人向来傲慢任性，对他们太宽和就会导致松弛散漫，他们松弛散漫后又用律法震慑他们，这就是诉讼纷争所以产生的原因。
English: Now the advisers must think that I am too strict in etiquette and law, but am very lenient in dealing with things; the Hu people have always been arrogant and capricious, and being too lenient with them will lead to slackness and laxity, and after they are slack and lax, they will use the law to deter them, which is why litigation disputes arise.

古文：以势料之，代必复叛。 
现代文：从现在的形势估计，代郡一定会再次反叛。 
English: Judging from the current situation, Dai County will definitely rebel again.

古文：於是太祖深悔还潜之速。
现代文：于是太祖很后悔让裴潜回来得这么快。
English: So the great-grandfather regretted letting Baekhyun come back so soon.

古文：后数十日，三单于反问至，乃遣鄢陵侯彰为骁骑将军征之。
现代文：过了几十天，三个单于反叛的消息送达，太祖就任命鄢陵侯曹彰为骁骑将军并前去征讨。
English: After dozens of days, three separate messages were sent to the rebels, and Emperor Taizu appointed the lord of Fuling, Cao Zhang, as the general of the cavalry and went to the front to fight.

古文：潜出为沛国相，迁兖州刺史。
现代文：裴潜出京担任沛国相，调任兖州刺史。
English: Pei Jian left Beijing to serve as the Minister of the State of Pa and was transferred to the post of the Governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：太祖次摩陂，叹其军陈齐整，特加赏赐。
现代文：太祖经过摩陂，感叹衮州的军队严整，特地加以赏赐。
English: The great-grandfather passed through Matsu, lamented the strictness of the troops in Ganzhou, and specially rewarded them.

古文：文帝践阼，入为散骑常侍。
现代文：文帝登基后，裴潜入京担任散骑常侍。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Pei sneaked into Beijing to serve as a knight errant.

古文：出为魏郡、颍川典农中郎将，奏通贡举，比之郡国，由是农官进仕路泰。
现代文：又出京任魏郡、颍川典农中郎将，他上奏举荐人才，就像各郡国一样，因此农官仕途晋升的道路就顺通了。
English: He also went to Beijing to serve as Wei County's and Luochuan County's vice-commander of agriculture, and he was the first to recommend talents, just like the counties and counties of the country, so the path of promotion of the agricultural officer's career was smooth.

古文：迁荆州刺史，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：后来他调任荆州刺史，被赐封爵位为关内侯。
English: Later, he was transferred to the post of Jingzhou magistrate and was given the title of Guanai marquis.

古文：明帝即位，入为尚书。
现代文：明帝登基后，裴潜入朝担任尚书。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, Pei sneaked into the imperial court to serve as the imperial secretary.

古文：出为河南尹，转太尉军师、大司农，封清阳亭侯，邑二百户。
现代文：后来出京担任河南尹，转任太尉军事、大司农，被封为清阳亭侯，食邑两百户。
English: Later, he went to Beijing to serve as Henan Yin, and was transferred to the positions of military lieutenant and agricultural superintendent. He was given the title of Qingyang Tinghou, with 200 households in the food village.

古文：入为尚书令，奏正分职，料简名实，出事使断官府者百五十馀条。
现代文：后又入朝任尚书令，奏报正直，让人才各司其职，能判断人的名声和才干，制定判断官府事件的条文一百五十多条。
English: Later, he was appointed to the court of Shang Shuling, reporting honestly, letting talents perform their duties, being able to judge people's reputation and talent, and formulating more than one hundred and fifty articles to judge government affairs.

古文：丧父去官，拜光禄大夫。
现代文：后来因为父亲去世离职，被任命为光禄大夫。
English: Later, because of his father's death, he left his job and was appointed as a doctor of Guanglu.

古文：正始五年薨，追赠太常，谥曰贞侯。
现代文：裴潜在正始五年去世，朝廷追赠为太常，谥号为贞侯。
English: Pei Jianzhong died five years later. The imperial court posthumously awarded him the title of Taizang, and his posthumous title was Zhenhong.

古文：子秀嗣。
现代文：他的儿子裴秀承袭爵位。
English: His son, Pei Xiu, inherited the title.

古文：遗令俭葬，墓中惟置一坐，瓦器数枚，其馀一无所设。
现代文：裴潜临终前令家人葬礼要节俭，墓室中只设置了一个座位，和几件瓦器，其余什么都没有。
English: Before his death, Pei Qian ordered his family to have a frugal funeral. Only one seat and a few earthenware were set up in the burial chamber, and there was nothing else.

古文：秀，咸熙中为尚书仆射。
现代文：裴秀在咸熙年间曾做过尚书仆射。
English: Pei Xiu had been a calligrapher and shoemaker during the reign of Emperor Han.

古文：评曰：和洽清和幹理，常林素业纯固，杨俊人伦行义，杜袭温粹识统，赵俨刚毅有度，裴潜平恒贞幹，皆一世之美士也。
现代文：评曰：和洽清净平和，做事干练，常林学问节操都纯粹坚定，杨俊弘扬人伦，行事仁义，杜袭温和纯正识大体，赵俨刚强坚毅，行事有度，裴潜平和坚守，忠贞干练，他们都是一代的美士。
English: The review said: He Heping is clean and peaceful, he is capable of doing things, Changlin's learning and discipline are pure and firm, Yang Jun promotes human ethics, acts with benevolence and righteousness, Du Xi is gentle and pure, Zhao Wei is strong and firm, he acts with a degree, Pei Xuan is peaceful and steadfast, and he is loyal and capable. They are all a generation of beauties.

古文：至林能不系心於三司，以大夫告老，美矣哉！
现代文：至于常林能放弃三公的职位，以大夫职位辞官回乡，更值得赞美！
English: As for Changlin's ability to give up the position of the Three Princes and return to his hometown as a doctor, it is even more worthy of praise!

