古文：大府掌九贡、九赋、九功之贰。以受其货贿之人，颁其货于受藏之府，颁其贿于受用之府。
现代文：大府负责协助大宰掌管九贡、九赋、九功，以收取交纳的财物，并把财物分拨给负责收藏以待用的各府。
English: The daifu was responsible for assisting the dazai in administering the nine gongs, nine tributes, and nine merits, in order to collect the property paid, and to allocate the property to the various daifu responsible for collecting it for future use.

古文：凡官府、都鄙之吏及执事者受财用焉。
现代文：凡王朝各官府和王畿内采邑的官吏以及暂时执行某项任务的官吏，帮可领取所需财物。
English: The officials of all the government offices of the dynasty and the officials of the townships in Wangji, as well as the officials who are temporarily carrying out a certain task, can help to receive the required property.

古文：凡颁财，以式法授之。
现代文：凡分拨财物，都按照制度授给。
English: All allocated assets are awarded in accordance with the system.

古文：关市之赋，以待王之膳服；邦中之赋，以待宾客；四郊之赋，以待稍秣；家削之赋，以待匪颁；邦甸之赋，以待工事；邦县之赋，以待币帛；邦都之赋；以待祭祀；山泽之赋；以待丧纪；币馀之赋；以待赐予；凡邦国之贡，以待吊用；凡万民之贡；以充府库；凡式贡之余财，以共玩好之用。
现代文：凡向万民征收的赋税，用以充实府库。凡赋税收入开支后的余财，用以供王的玩好所用。
English: All the taxes of the people go to enrich the treasury, and all the surplus of the revenues of the taxes, after the expenses, is laid out for the king's pleasure.

古文：凡邦之赋用取具焉。
现代文：凡王国所用财物，都可以从大府领取。
English: All the property used by the kingdom can be obtained from the Great House.

古文：岁终，则以货贿之入出会之。
现代文：年终，就总计一年财物的收支。
English: At the end of the year, a total of one year's income and expenditure of property.

古文：玉府掌王之金玉、玩好、兵器。
现代文：玉府负责王的金玉、玩好、兵器和车乘礼乐之器，及一切珍贵物品的收藏。
English: The Jade Palace is responsible for the collection of the king's jewels, toys, weapons and vehicles, ceremonial instruments, and all precious items.

古文：凡良货贿之藏，共王之服玉、佩玉、珠玉。
现代文：供给王所需的服玉、佩玉、珠玉。王斋戒时，就供给食玉。
English: To supply the king with the necessary jade, jade and gems. When the king is fasting, he will be supplied with jade.

古文：王齐，则共食玉；大丧，共含玉、复衣裳、角枕、角柶。
现代文：王的丧事，供给含玉、招魂衣、角枕、角栖。
English: For the king's funeral, there was a supply of jade, shrouds, corner pillows, and corner sofas.

古文：掌王之燕衣服，衽席床笫，凡亵器。
现代文：掌管王燕寝中所用的衣被、卧席、床铺，以及便溺之器。
English: Wang Yan is in charge of the quilts, couches, beds, and toilet bowls used for sleeping.

古文：若合诸侯，则共珠槃、玉敦。
现代文：如果会合诸侯，就供给珠粲、玉敦。
English: If lords meet, they will offer beads and gems.

古文：凡王之献，金玉、兵器、文织、良货贿之物，受而藏之。
现代文：凡献给王的金玉、兵器和车乘礼乐之器、绘画的帛和刺绣的锦，以及其他珍贵的物品，都负责接受而收藏。
English: All the jewels given to the king, the weapons and instruments of chariot music, the painted shields and embroidered brocades, as well as other precious objects, are to be accepted and collected.

古文：凡王之好赐，共其货贿。
现代文：凡王喜欢而加赏赐，就供给赏赐的财物。
English: If the king is pleased to give a reward, he gives a reward of goods.

古文：内府掌受九贡、九赋、九功之货贿、良兵、良器，以待邦之大用。
现代文：内府负责接受九贡、九赋、九功所交纳的财物、优良的兵器和优良的车乘礼乐之器，以供给王国中大事所用。
English: Naifu is responsible for receiving the wealth, fine weapons, and fine instruments of chariot and ceremonial music donated by the Nine Tributes, Nine Gifts, and Nine Merits to be used for the major events in the kingdom.

古文：凡四方之币献之金、玉、齿、革、兵器，凡良货贿，入焉。
现代文：凡四方诸侯所进献的玉币珍异和金玉、兽齿皮革、兵器和车乘礼乐之器等，以及一切珍贵的物品，都藏入内府。
English: All the rare and valuable jade coins, gold and jade, animal teeth, leather, weapons, chariot and ceremonial instruments, and all the precious items donated by the four lords were hidden in Naifu.

古文：凡适四方使者，共其所受之物而奉之。
现代文：凡出使四方诸侯国的使者，供给他们所当领受的财物而送给他们。
English: And they sent messengers to all the provinces of the king of Assyria, and to all the provinces of the king of Assyria, to give them provisions and to give them victuals.

古文：凡王及冢宰之好赐予，则共之。
现代文：凡王和冢宰喜欢而加赏赐，就供给赏赐的财物。
English: Whomsoever the king and the treasurer delight to honour with a reward, they bestow the reward of wealth.

古文：外府掌邦布之入出，以共百物，而待邦之用。
现代文：外府掌管王国钱币的收支，以供各种物品，并供给王国合法的公用开支。
English: The Outer House controls the receipt and disbursement of the Kingdom's coinage, which is used for a variety of items and to fund the Kingdom's legitimate public expenditures.

古文：凡有法者，共王及后、世子之衣服之用。
现代文：供给王和王后、太子穿衣的开支。
English: The cost of clothing the king, queen and crown prince.

古文：凡祭祀、宾客、丧纪、会同、军旅，共其财用之币赍，赐予之财用。
现代文：凡祭祀、招待宾客、丧事、会同、出兵征伐，供给所需赍带的财物费用：以及行赏赐所需的财物费用。
English: The financial expenses for offering sacrifices, inviting guests, funerals, rites of passage, dispatching troops, supplying the required umbilical cord: as well as the financial expenses required for giving rewards.

古文：凡邦之小用，皆受焉。
现代文：凡王国小事的开支，都到外府来领受。
English: And all the king's expenses for trifles came out of the king's house.

古文：岁终，则会，唯王及后之服不会。
现代文：年终就做收支总计。只有王和王后的穿衣费用不计算。
English: At the end of the year, the income and expenditure are summed up. Only the cost of dressing the king and queen is not calculated.

古文：司会掌邦之六典、八法、八则之贰，以逆邦国都鄙官府之治。
现代文：司会掌管王国六典、八法、八则的副本，以接受天下各国和畿内采邑各官府呈报的政绩。
English: The Board of Directors is in charge of the copies of the Six Codes, Eight Laws, and Eight Principles of the Kingdom, in order to accept the political achievements reported by the governments of all countries in the world and the governments of the provinces in the Kinai region.

古文：以九贡之法致邦国之财用，以九赋之法令田野之财用，以九功之法令民职之财用，以九式之法均节邦之财用。
现代文：按照九种贡法，收取诸侯国的财物。
English: In accordance with the nine tribute laws, the property of the vassal states was collected.

古文：掌国之官府、郊野、县都之百物财用。
现代文：按照九种赋税法，命令征收出于的地税。
English: In accordance with the nine tax laws, it was ordered to collect the resulting land tax.

古文：凡在书契、版图者之贰，以逆群吏之治而听其会计。
现代文：按照九种职业的征税法，命令征收民众的从业税。用九种法则，调节王国的财物开支。
English: Order the collection of the people's occupation tax according to the taxation law of the nine occupations, and use the nine laws to regulate the financial expenditure of the kingdom.

古文：以参互考日成，以月要考月成，以岁会考岁成，以周知四国之治，以诏王及冢宰废置。
现代文：掌管王国各官府以及郊、野、县、都记载各种财物开支的账册和户籍地图的副本，据以接受各级官吏呈报的政绩而加考核，评断他们的会计文书。相互参照以考核十日的办事文书记录，用月结算的会计文书考核当月的办事文书记录，用年终结算的会计文书考核全年的办事文书记录。
English: The government offices in charge of the kingdom, as well as the suburbs, fields, and counties, all record copies of account books and household registration maps of various financial and material expenditures, and assess their accounting documents according to the performance of the government officials at all levels. Cross-reference the records of the administrative documents on the 10th with the assessment, the accounting documents settled by the month with the assessment of the administrative documents of the month, and the administrative documents of the whole year with the year-end accounting documents.

古文：司书掌邦之六典、八法、八则、九职、九正、九事邦中之版，土地之图，以周知入出百物。以叙其财，受其币，使入于职币。
现代文：全面了解各诸侯国的治理情况，以协助王和冢宰决定对他们的惩罚和奖励。司书掌管有关王国的六典、八法、八则、九职、九赋、九贡、九式，以及王国中的户籍，土地的地图，以全面了解各种财物的收支情况，经考核后依次记载各种财物的使用情况，接受各官府的余财，交到职币那里。
English: The librarian is in charge of the six books, eight laws, eight regulations, nine offices, nine furs, nine tributes, and nine forms, as well as the household registration in the kingdom, and the map of the land, in order to fully understand the income and expenditure of various assets. After the assessment, the use of various assets is recorded in turn, and the surplus money from each government office is accepted and handed over to the bank.

古文：凡上之用财用，必考于司会。
现代文：凡王和冢宰所用财物，也必经司会考核。
English: All the property used by the king and the eunuchs must also be examined by the Board of Directors.

古文：三岁，则大计群吏之治，以知民之财、器械之数，以知田野、夫家、六畜之数，以知山林、川泽之数，以逆群吏之征令。
现代文：三年对各级官吏的政绩进行一次大考核，以了解民众的财物、农具和兵器的数目，以了解田地、各家的劳动力和牛马等牲畜的数目，以了解山林和川泽的数胃，以考察各级官吏的征敛命令。
English: In three years, a large-scale appraisal of the political performance of officials at all levels will be carried out to understand the number of people's property, agricultural tools and weapons, to understand the number of fields, the labor force of each family and the number of livestock such as cattle and horses, to understand the number of stomachs of mountains, forests and rivers, and to examine the collection orders of officials at all levels.

古文：凡税敛，掌事者受法焉。及事成，则入要贰焉，凡邦治考焉。
现代文：凡征收赋税，主管官吏从司书那里接受所当征收之数，到征收完毕，就将征税记录的副本交给司书。凡治理王国就到司书那里考察。
English: When a tax is levied, the official in charge receives the appropriate amount from the librarian, and when the collection is complete, he hands a copy of the tax record to the librarian. When governing the kingdom, he visits the librarian.

古文：职内掌邦之赋入，辨其财用之物而执其总。
现代文：职内掌管王国的赋税收入，分辨所征收财物的种类，掌握财物的分类明细账和总账。
English: In this capacity, he was in charge of the kingdom's tax revenue, distinguishing the types of property levied, and mastering the classification of property, including the detailed account and the general account.

古文：以贰官府、都鄙之财入之数，以逆邦国之赋用。
现代文：用所掌握的王朝官府和王畿官吏财税收入数的副本，以考核王国的赋税用途。
English: Using the copies of the financial and tax revenues of the dynastic government offices and the officials of Wangji to assess the tax purposes of the kingdom.

古文：凡受财者，受其贰令而书之。及会，以逆职岁与官府财用之出，而叙其财以待邦之移用。
现代文：凡领取财物的，就接受他们领取财物的命令的副本而登记入册，到年终结算的时候，就用以考核职岁与各官府财物支出的情况，而依次记载财物考核的结果，就供王国移作他用。
English: Those who receive the property will receive a copy of the order to receive the property and will be registered. At the end of the year, it will be used to assess the seniority and the expenditure of the property of each government, and the results of the property assessment will be recorded in order for the kingdom to be used for other purposes.

古文：职岁掌邦之赋出，以贰官府、都鄙之财出赐之数，以待会计而考之。
现代文：职岁掌管王国所收赋税的支出，用所掌握的王朝官府和王畿官吏赋税支出和赏赐之数的副本，以待年终结算时考核用。
English: In charge of the tax expenditure of the kingdom during the year of service, use the copies of the tax expenditure and the number of rewards of the dynastic government offices and the officials of the king and state to be used for the assessment at the end of the year.

古文：凡官府、都鄙、群吏之出财用，受式法于职岁。
现代文：凡王朝官府及王畿各级官吏支出财物，都要从职岁那里接受有关支出的规定。
English: All dynastic government offices and officials at all levels of the Wanggi should accept the relevant expenditure regulations from the senior officials.

古文：凡上之赐予，以叙与职币授之。
现代文：凡王和冢宰有所赐予，按照尊卑会同职币授给所赐的财物。
English: All kings and emperors have given gifts, and the wealth they bestowed was given according to the standards of the nobility and the commoners.

古文：及会，以式法赞逆会。
现代文：到年终结算时，用所掌有关支出的法则考核群吏的会计文书。
English: By the end of the year, the accounting documents of the group officials will be assessed according to the rules of expenditure.

古文：职币掌式法，以敛官府、都鄙与凡用邦财者之币。振掌事者之余财，皆辨其物而奠其录，以书楬之，以诏上之小用赐予。
现代文：职币掌管支出的法则据以收取王朝官府和王畿群吏与凡使用王国财物者所剩余的财物，并收取奉王命办事者的余财，分辨所收剩余财物的名称、种类、数量和品质优劣而录定簿册，书写小木牌作为标识，以报告王和冢宰，以作为小事的开支和赏赐之用。
English: According to the rules governing the expenditure of the post money, the remaining wealth of the dynastic government and the officials of the king and the people who used the kingdom's wealth was collected, and the surplus wealth of those who served the king's order was collected, and the name, type, quantity and quality of the remaining wealth were recorded in a book, and small wooden cards were written as a mark to report to the king and the steward, and to be used as small expenses and rewards.

古文：岁终，则会其出。
现代文：夏历年终，就结算所掌剩余财物的支出。
English: At the end of the lunar year, the expenditure of the remaining assets is settled.

古文：同邦之会事，以式法赞之。
现代文：凡王国中年终考核的事，就依据法则协助进行。
English: All mid-year appraisals in the kingdom are assisted in accordance with the law.

