古文：鲁哀公问于孔子曰： 夫子之服，其儒服与？ 
现代文：鲁哀公向孔子问道： 先生的衣服，大概是儒者特有的衣服吧？ 
English: Lu Aigong asked Confucius, "Sir, your clothes are probably unique to Confucians, right?

古文：孔子对曰： 丘少居鲁，衣逢掖之衣，长居宋，冠章甫之冠。
现代文：孔子回答说： 我小时候住在鲁国，就穿鲁国的逢掖之衣；长大了住在宋国，就戴殷代的章甫之冠。
English: Confucius replied, "Roughly speaking, it is impossible to describe the behavior of the Confucians; if you talk about it in detail, it is difficult to describe the attendants who serve so tired.Confucius replied, "When I was a child, I lived in the country of Lu and wore a dress with wide sleeves; when I grew up, I lived in the country of Song and wore a ceremonial crown made of embroidered cloth.

古文：丘闻之也：君子之学也博，其服也乡；丘不知儒服。 
现代文：我听人们说：君子对自己的要求是，学问要广博，衣服则入乡随俗，不求与众不同。
English: I've heard that a gentleman should be well-educated and dress according to the local customs. I don't know if this is a Confucian costume.

古文：哀公曰： 敢问儒行。 
现代文：我不知道天底下还有什么儒服。 哀公又问道： 请问儒者的行为有哪些特点呢？ 
English: I don't know what other Confucian clothes there are under heaven. Aiko asked again: What are the characteristics of the behavior of Confucians?

古文：孔子对曰： 遽数之不能终其物，悉数之乃留，更仆未可终也。 
现代文：孔子答道： ，仓促地列举，短时间难以说完。全部说完要费很长时间，恐怕值班的仆人到了换班时间也未必说完。 
English: Confucius replied, "In a short time, it is difficult to complete a hasty enumeration. It will take a long time to complete everything, and I am afraid that the servants on duty may not finish when it is time to change shifts.

古文：哀公命席。
现代文：哀公于是命人给孔子设席。
English: Aiko then ordered someone to set up a seat for Confucius.

古文：孔子侍曰： 儒有席上之珍以待聘，夙夜强学以待问，怀忠信以待举，力行以待取，其自立有如此者。
现代文：孔子陪侍哀公坐着，说： 儒者的德行就像筵席上的珍宝，等待着诸侯的聘用；早起晚睡地努力学习，等待着别人的询问；心怀忠信，等待着别人的举荐；身体力行，等待着别人的录取。儒者的修身自立有如此者。
English: Confucius, sitting with the attendant Aigong, said: "The virtues of the Confucians are like the treasures at the banquet, waiting for the employment of the princes; they study hard from morning to night, waiting for the inquiry of others; they are faithful, waiting for the recommendation of others; they work hard, waiting for the admission of others. The self-cultivation and self-reliance of the Confucians are such.

古文：儒有衣冠中，动作慎，其大让如慢，小让如伪，大则如威，小则如愧，其难进而易退也，粥粥若无能也。
现代文： 儒者的衣冠适中，行为谨慎，他们的大谦让如同傲慢，小谦让如同虚伪；做大事如同有所畏惧，做小事如同心怀惭愧；他们难于躁进做官而易于谦退辞官。
English: Confucians dress modestly and behave cautiously, seeming arrogant when they concede big things, and seeming hypocritical when they concede small things. When they do big things, their cautious demeanor looks like they are afraid, and when they do small things, their cautious demeanor looks like they don't dare to do them. It is difficult to make progress and easy to concede, and being meek and humble looks like a sign of incompetence.

古文：其容貌有如此者。
现代文：柔弱谦卑好像是没有能力的样子。
English: This is what a Confucian looks like.

古文：儒有居处齐难，其坐起恭敬，言必先信，行必中正，道涂不争险易之利，冬夏不争阴阳之和，爱其死以有待也，养其身以有为也。
现代文：儒者的容貌就是这样的。 儒者的曰常生活相当严肃，其一起一坐都恭恭敬敬，说话一定要讲究信用，做事一定要讲究公正。在路上不因路的好走难走这等小事就和别人争吵，冬天不和别人争有太阳的地方，夏天不和别人争有凉荫的地方。这样做的目的，是为了爱惜生命以等待时机，养精畜锐以备有所作为。
English: Confucians are solemn and prudent in their living, sit up and walk respectfully, speak with sincerity, and must be upright in their behavior. They do not compete with pedestrians for a smooth road on the road, and do not compete with people for warm and cool places in winter and summer. They do not easily go to death to wait for things worth sacrificing their lives, and cultivate themselves to expect something to be done.

古文：其备豫有如此者。
现代文：儒者的瞻前顾后有如此者。
English: This is how Confucians prepare for the future.

古文：儒有不宝金玉，而忠信以为宝；不祈土地，立义以为土地；不祈多积，多文以为富。
现代文： 在儒者的心目中，金玉并不值得宝贵，忠信才值得宝贵。他们不祈求土地，树立起道义就是他们的土地；他们不祈求多有积蓄，多掌握知识就是他们的财富。
English: For Confucians, it is not gold that is precious, but loyalty and credibility. They do not seek to occupy land, but regard benevolence and righteousness as land. They do not seek to accumulate a lot of wealth, but regard broad knowledge as wealth.

古文：难得而易禄也，易禄而难畜也，非时不见，不亦难得乎？
现代文：请他们出来做官很困难，因为他们不在乎高官厚禄；因为他们不在乎高官厚最，就是请出来也难长期留住。
English: Confucians are hard to get but easy to support, easy to support but hard to keep. They won't appear until the right time, aren't they hard to get?

古文：非义不合，不亦难畜乎？先劳而后禄，不亦易禄乎？
现代文：不是可以有所作为的时候，就隐居不仕，这难道不是很难请出一来做官吗；即令出仕，如果国君不尊重他的正确意见，他就辞职不干，这难道不是很难长期留住吗！
English: Isn't it difficult to be invited to be an official when you can make a difference, and isn't it difficult to be retained for a long time? Even if you are ordered to serve, if the sovereign does not respect your correct opinion, you will resign.

古文：其近人有如此者。儒有委之以货财，淹之以乐好，见利不亏其义；劫之以众，沮之以兵，见死不更其守；鸷虫攫搏不程勇者，引重鼎不程其力；往者不悔，来者不豫；过言不再，流言不极；不断其威，不习其谋。
现代文： 有些儒者，即令把许多金银财宝赠送给他，即令用声色犬马去引诱他，他也不会见利而忘义。即令用人数众多来威协他，用武器来恐吓他，他宁愿去死也不会改变节操。和邪恶势力作斗争，他也不估量一下自己的本领；领受艰巨的任务，他也不估量一下自己的能耐：只要认准了就坚决去做。认准了的事，做过了从不后悔，尚未做的也不考虑那么许多。说错了的话就不再说，对于流言蜚语也不去穷究。时刻保持威严，拿定主意的事说干就干，绝不优柔寡断。
English: Some Confucians, even if they give him a lot of gold, silver and treasure, even if they use dogs and horses to lure him, he will not forget the truth for profit. Even if they use a large number of people to threaten him and use weapons to intimidate him, he would rather die than change his discipline. In the fight against evil forces, he does not measure his ability; when he receives a difficult task, he does not measure his ability: as long as he is right, he will resolutely do it. He will never regret what he has done, and he will not consider how much he has not yet done. He will no longer say the wrong thing, and he will not investigate

古文：其特立有如此者。
现代文：儒者做事的与众不同有如此者。
English: This is what makes Confucians unique.

古文：儒有可亲而不可劫也；可近而不可迫也；可杀而不可辱也。
现代文： 儒者可以亲密而不可以威协，可以亲近而不可以强迫，杀头而不可以羞辱。
English: Confucians can be close but not coerce, can be close but not intimidate, can kill but not insult.

古文：其居处不淫，其饮食不溽；其过失可微辨而不可面数也。
现代文：可以儒者的住处不讲究豪华，儒者的饮食不讲究丰厚，儒者的过失可以委婉地批评而不可以当面责备。
English: Their quarters are not luxurious, their food is not plentiful, and their faults can be gently pointed out rather than pointed out.

古文：其刚毅有如此者。
现代文：毅有如此者。
English: This is what the strong perseverance of Confucians is all about.

古文：儒有忠信以为甲胄，礼义以为干橹；戴仁而行，抱义而处，虽有暴政，不更其所。
现代文：儒者的刚 儒者把忠信当做申胃，把礼义当做盾牌是在家，都时时刻刻谨守着仁义；无论是出门，或者即使受到暴政的迫害，也不改变自己的操守。
English: Confucians use loyalty as armor and etiquette as a shield. They act with benevolence in mind and live with righteousness in their hearts. Even if they encounter tyranny, they will not change their ethics.

古文：其自立有如此者。
现代文：儒者在操守上的自立有如此者。
English: This is what Confucian independence looks like.

古文：儒有一亩之宫，环堵之室，筚门圭窬，蓬户瓮牖；易衣而出，并日而食，上答之不敢以疑，上不答不敢以谄。
现代文：为了节约，两天只吃一天的粮食。受到上边的赏识重用，不敢怀疑自己的能力不足；受不到上边的赏识重用，也不敢馅媚以求进。
English: Confucians have a courtyard of one mu of land, living in a room with a height of one meter. The courtyard door made of wicker is as narrow as a hole, the door is made of puff grass, and the broken lintel is used as a window frame. When they go out, they only change their clothes to cover their body, and they eat one day's meal for one meal. The prince takes his advice and does not dare to have doubts; if the prince does not take his advice, he does not dare to flatter.

古文：其仕有如此者。
现代文：儒者的做官态度有如此者。
English: This is the principle of Confucian officials.

古文：儒有今人与居，古人与稽；今世行之，后世以为楷；适弗逢世，上弗援，下弗推，谗谄之民有比党而危之者，身可危也，而志不可夺也，虽危起居，竟信其志，犹将不忘百姓之病也。
现代文： 儒者虽然和当代的人生活在一起，但他的言行却和古代的君子相合；他现在做的事情，后世就将奉为楷模。命运乖蚌，生不逢时，当君长的不说拉他一把，做随从的也不帮他一下，那些说坏话善拍马的家伙，还要勾结起来算计他。但这只能危害他的身体，却绝对改变木了他的志向。虽然处境险恶，一举一动还想着施展自己的抱负，还念念不忘老百姓的痛苦。
English: The Confucianist lives with the people of today and holds himself to the moral standards of the ancients; the behavior of the Confucianist in this world can serve as a model for future generations. If he is born at an inopportune time, if no one quotes him from above and no one recommends him from below, and if flattering people conspire to frame him, it can only endanger his body, but cannot deprive him of his aspirations. Although he can endanger his life and live, in the end he will still have to exert his own aspirations, and will still not forget the suffering of the people.

古文：其忧思有如此者。
现代文：儒者的忧民意识有如此者。
English: This is how the Confucians feel.

古文：儒有博学而不穷，笃行而不倦；幽居而不淫，上通而不困；礼之以和为贵，忠信之美，优游之法，举贤而容众，毁方而瓦合。其宽裕有如此者。
现代文： 儒者虽然己经博学，但仍然学习不止；虽然操行淳厚，但仍然力行不怠。隐居独处时不作坏事，飞黄腾达时力行正道。礼的运用，以和为贵。以忠信为美德，效法和柔。既能推举贤人君子，又能容纳凡夫俗子；既有原则性，又有灵活性。儒者的胸襟宽阔有如此者。
English: Confucians, although they have been well-educated, still continue to learn; although they are well-behaved, they still do their best. When they live alone, they do not do bad things, and when they fly, they try to do the right thing. The use of etiquette is precious. Faithfulness is a virtue, imitation and gentleness. They can not only promote wise men and women, but also accommodate ordinary people; they are both principled and flexible. Confucians have a broad mind.

古文：儒有内称不辟亲，外举不辟怨，程功积事，推贤而进达之，不望其报；君得其志，苟利国家，不求富贵。
现代文： 有这样的二种儒者，他在向朝廷推举贤能时，只考虑被推举者有无真才实学，而不管他是否是自己的亲属，还是自己的仇人。
English: Confucians recommend talents, do not avoid relatives internally, and do not avoid people with grudges externally.

古文：其举贤援能有如此者。儒有闻善以相告也，见善以相示也；爵位相先也，患难相死也；久相待也，远相致也。
现代文：在充分考虑到被推举者的业绩和才能以后，才向朝廷举荐并使之得到任用，但这并不是为了得到对方的回报。
English: After taking full account of the performance and talent of the nominee, it is recommended to the imperial court and appointed, but this is not to get the other side's reward.

古文：其任举有如此者。
现代文：只要国君能因此而得遂其志，只要能为国家造福，自己并不希望得到什么赏赐。儒者的推举贤能有如此者。
English: As long as it is beneficial to the country, do not covet personal wealth.

古文：儒有澡身而浴德，陈言而伏，静而正之，上弗知也；粗而翘之，又不急为也；不临深而为高，不加少而为多；世治不轻，世乱不沮；同弗与，异弗非也。
现代文： 有这样的一种儒者，他在对待朋友的问题上，听到了有益的话便要告诉他，见到了有益的事便要指给他。爵位有了空缺，首先考虑到朋友；灾祸临头，首先考虑自己献身。朋友长期不得志，自己就不单独出来做官；如果朋友是在远方的他国不得志，自己也要设法把他招来一同出仕。
English: They do not form parties with like-minded people, nor do they denigrate those whose political views differ from their own.

古文：其特立独行有如此者。
现代文：儒者品德的不同一般有如此者。
English: This is what makes Confucians unique.

古文：儒有上不臣天子，下不事诸侯；慎静而尚宽，强毅以与人，博学以知服；近文章，砥厉廉隅；虽分国如锱铢，不臣不仕。
现代文： 有这样一种儒者，他上不臣事天子，下不事奉诸侯；性情慎静而崇尚宽大，性格强毅而能从善如流，学间渊博而能服膺胜于己者。多读圣贤之书，以磨练自己的品行气节。
English: There is such a kind of Confucian, who does not submit to the Son of Heaven at the top, and does not serve the princes at the bottom; who is prudent and respects generosity, who has a strong character and can follow the virtuous stream, who is well-versed in learning and can obey those who are better than himself.

古文：其规为有如此者。儒有合志同方，营道同术；并立则乐，相下不厌；久不相见，闻流言不信；其行本方立义，同而进，不同而退。
现代文：即令是要把整个国家分给他，在他看来也不过是芝麻般的小事而不为动心，不会因此就出来称臣做官。儒者的行为方正有如此者。 有这样一种儒者，和朋友志同道合，作学问的路子也一样；彼此皆有成就则皆大欢喜，彼此有了差距也互不嫌弃；彼此久不相见，如果听到了有关对方的流言蜚语，也绝不相信。友谊的基础建立在方正上、道义上，合乎这一点就是朋友，违背这一点就敬而远之。
English: Even if the whole country were to be given to him, in his eyes it would be nothing more than a trifle like a sesame seed, and he would not be moved by it, and would not therefore come out and claim to be a minister. This is exactly how a Confucian behaves. There is such a kind of Confucian, and friends have the same way of thinking, and the same way of learning; they are all very happy with each other's achievements, and they do not hate each other when there is a gap; they have not seen each other for a long time, and if they hear gossip about each other, they will never believe it. The foundation of friendship is based

古文：其交友有如此者。
现代文：儒者的交友有如此者。
English: This is how Confucians make friends.

古文：温良者，仁之本也；敬慎者，仁之地也；宽裕者，仁之作也；孙接者，仁之能也；礼节者，仁之貌也；言谈者，仁之文也；歌乐者，仁之和也；分散者，仁之施也；儒皆兼此而有之，犹且不敢言仁也。
现代文： 温厚善良是仁的根本，恭敬谨慎是仁的落脚点，胸襟广阔是仁的发扬，谦逊待人是仁的能力，礼节是仁的外表，言谈是仁的文采，唱歌跳舞是仁的和谐，有福同享是仁的施行。儒者具备了上述的种种美德，尚且不敢说自己合乎仁。
English: Gentleness and kindness are the foundation of benevolence, respect and caution are the foundation of benevolence, magnanimity is the beginning of benevolence, humble treatment is the function of benevolence, etiquette is the appearance of benevolence, speech is the literary style of benevolence, song and dance music is the harmony of benevolence, and the distribution of wealth is the donation of benevolence. Confucians have both of these virtues and dare not say that they have achieved benevolence.

古文：其尊让有如此者。
现代文：儒者的重视谦让有如此者。
English: This is what Confucianism's deference and modesty is all about.

古文：儒有不陨获于贫贱，不充诎于富贵，不慁君王，不累长上，不闵有司，故曰儒。
现代文： 儒者不因贫贱而困顿失志，不因富贵而骄奢失节，不因为国君的侮辱、卿大夫的掣肘、官员们的刁难而改变节操，所以才叫做 儒 。
English: Confucians are not discouraged because they are poor, nor are they elated because they are rich. They do not insult the king, do not drag their superiors, and do not bring trouble to the relevant officials. That is why they are called Confucians.

古文：今众人之命儒也妄，常以儒相诟病。 
现代文：现在很多人自命为儒但却有名无实，所以才往往被作为笑料来讲。 
English: Nowadays, people's understanding of the name "Confucius" is false, and people often call each other "Confucius" to make fun of each other.

古文：孔子至舍，哀公馆之，闻此言也，言加信，行加义： 终没吾世，不敢以儒为戏。 
现代文：孔子从国外返回鲁国，鲁哀公在公馆里接见了他，听了孔子的这一席话，对儒者的话更加相信，对儒者的行为更加看重，并且说： 我这一辈子，再也不敢和儒者开玩笑了。 
English: When Confucius returned to Lu from abroad, Lu Ye Gong received him at his residence. After hearing these words from Confucius, Lu Ye Gong himself spoke more faithfully and behaved more seriously, saying: Until I die, I will not dare to make fun of Confucians.

