古文：匡章曰： 陈仲子岂不诚廉士哉？
现代文：匡章说： 陈仲子难道不是真正的正直廉洁之人吗？
English: Kuanzhang said: Isn't Chen Zhongzi a truly honest and incorruptible person?

古文：居于陵，三日不食，耳无闻，目无见也。
现代文：他居住在於陵，三天不吃饭，饿得耳朵听不见，眼睛看不到。
English: He lived in a mausoleum and did not eat for three days. He was so hungry that his ears could not hear and his eyes could not see.

古文：井上有李，螬食实者过半矣，匍匐往将食之，三咽，然后耳有闻，目有见。 
现代文：井边有个李子，金龟子的幼虫已蛀食大半，他摸索着爬过去取来吃，吞咽了三口，耳朵才听得见，眼睛才看得见。 
English: There is a plum on the edge of the well. The larvae of the golden beetle have already eaten most of it. He groped his way over to get it and eat it. He swallowed three mouthfuls. Only his ears can hear it, only his eyes can see it.

古文：孟子曰： 于齐国之士，吾必以仲子为巨擘焉。
现代文：孟子说： 在齐国的人士中，我一定推仲子为首屈一指的人物。
English: Mencius said, "Among the people of Qi, I would definitely recommend Zhongzi as the most outstanding person.

古文：虽然，仲子恶能廉？
现代文：然而，仲子怎么称得上廉洁呢？
English: However, how can Nakako be called incorruptible?

古文：充仲子之操，则蚓而后可者也。
现代文：如果要推广仲子的操守，那只有变成蚯蚓才能做到。
English: If you want to promote the integrity of the matchmaker, it can only be done by turning into a dragonfly.

古文：夫蚓，上食槁壤，下饮黄泉。
现代文：蚯蚓，吞食地面上的干土，饮用地底下的泉水。
English: earthworms, which eat the dry soil on the ground and drink the underground spring water.

古文：仲子所居之室，伯夷之所筑与？
现代文：而仲子所居住的房屋，是像伯夷那样廉洁的人建造的呢？
English: But was the house in which Nakako lived built by someone as incorruptible as Bo Yi?

古文：抑亦盗跖之所筑与？
现代文：还是像盗跖那样的强盗所建造的呢？
English: Or was it built by bandits like the Thieves?

古文：所食之粟，伯夷之所树与？
现代文：他所吃的粮食，是像伯夷那样廉洁的人种植的呢？
English: Was the grain he ate grown by a man of integrity like Bo Yi?

古文：抑亦盗跖之所树与？
现代文：还是像盗跖那样的强盗所种植的？
English: Or was it planted by bandits like the Thieves?

古文：是未可知也。 
现代文：这些都不知道！ 
English: I didn't know any of this!

古文：曰： 是何伤哉？
现代文：匡章说： 这有什么关系呢？
English: Kuanzhang said, "What does it matter?

古文：彼身织屦，妻辟纑，以易之也。 
现代文：他亲自编织草鞋，妻子开辟纺织麻线的事，拿这些去交换来的。 
English: He himself knitted straw sandals, his wife opened up the business of weaving hemp thread, and took these to exchange.

古文：曰： 仲子，齐之世家也。兄戴，盖禄万钟。以兄之禄为不义之禄而不食也，以兄之室为不义之室而不居也，辟兄离母，处于于陵。
现代文：孟子说： 仲子，出生于齐国的大家世族；他的哥哥陈戴，有封地在盖邑，年收入万钟；仲子认为他哥哥的俸禄是不义之禄而不吃，认为哥哥的房子是不义之室而不住，避开哥哥，离开母亲，住在於陵。
English: Mencius said: Chuang Tzu, born in the State of Qi, belonged to a great family and clan; his elder brother Chen Dai, had a fief in Guiyu and an annual income of ten thousand yuan; Chuang Tzu thought that his brother's salary was unjust and did not eat it, thought that his brother's house was unjust and did not live in it, avoided his brother, left his mother, and lived in a mausoleum.

古文：他日归，则有馈其兄生鹅者，己频顣曰： 恶用是鶂鶂者为哉？ 
现代文：有一天回来，正好碰上有人送一只鹅来，他皱着眉头说： 要这嘎嘎叫的东西干什么？ 
English: One day he came back and happened to meet someone bringing a goose. He frowned and said: "What do you want with this quacking thing?

古文：他日，其母杀是鹅也，与之食之。其兄自外至，曰： 是鶂鶂之肉也。 
现代文：过了几天，他母亲杀了这只鹅给他吃，他正吃着，他哥哥从外面回来，说： 这便是那嘎嘎叫的东西的肉。 
English: A few days later, his mother killed the goose and gave it to him to eat. While he was eating, his brother came back from outside and said, "This is the meat of the quacking thing."

古文：出而哇之。
现代文：仲子一听，便跑到外面把肉呕吐出来。
English: Upon hearing this, Nakako ran outside and vomited up the meat.

古文：以母则不食，以妻则食之；以兄之室则弗居，以于陵则居之。是尚为能充其类也乎？
现代文：母亲的东西不吃，妻子的食物却吃；兄长的房屋不住，於陵的房屋却去住，这样能称得上是廉洁的典范吗？
English: Can one be called a model of integrity if he does not eat his mother's food, but eats his wife's food; if he does not live in his brother's house, but lives in a mausoleum?

古文：若仲子者，蚓而后充其操者也。 
现代文：像陈仲子这样的人，恐怕只有把自己变成蚯蚓后才能符合他的廉洁作风吧？ 
English: A man like Chen Zhongzi, I'm afraid, can only live up to his incorruptible style if he turns himself into a skeleton, right?

