古文：起玄黓摄提格，尽昭阳赤奋若，凡十二年。
现代文：起，止，一共十二年。
English: A total of twelve years.

古文：太祖高皇帝下八年
现代文：汉高帝八年
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Han

古文：冬，上东击韩王信馀寇于东垣，过柏人。
现代文：冬季，汉高帝刘邦在东垣攻打韩王信的余党，经过赵国的柏人城。
English: In winter, Emperor Liu Bang of the Han Dynasty attacked the remnants of Han Wangxin's party in Donggaki, passing through the city of Baoren in Zhao.

古文：贯高等壁人于厕中，欲以要上。
现代文：赵相贯高派人藏在厕所的夹墙中，准备行刺高帝。
English: Zhao Xiangran Gao sent people to hide in the wall of the toilet, preparing to assassinate Gao.

古文：上欲宿，心动，问曰： 县名为何？ 曰： 柏人。 
现代文：高帝正想留宿城中，忽然心动不安，问： 这个县叫什么？ 回答说： 柏人。 
English: Gao Di was thinking of staying in the city, when he suddenly felt uneasy. He asked, "What is the name of this county?" He replied, "Bai people."

古文：上曰： 柏人者，迫于人也。 
现代文：高帝说： 柏人，就是受迫于人呀！ 
English: The emperor said: "Bai people" means forced by others.

古文：遂不宿而去。
现代文：于是不住宿而离开。
English: So they left without accommodation.

古文：十二月，帝行自东垣至。
现代文：十二月，高帝从东垣城回长安。
English: In December, Gao Di returned to Chang'an from Donggaki Castle.

古文：春，三月，行如洛阳。
现代文：春季，三月，高帝前往洛阳。
English: In the spring, in March, Gao Di went to Luoyang.

古文：令贾人毋得衣锦、绣、绮、縠、絺、纻、罽，操兵、乘、骑马。
现代文：高帝下令，商人不准穿锦、绣、细绫、绉纱、细葛布、布、毛织品，不准持兵器、乘车、骑马。
English: Emperor Gao decreed that merchants were not allowed to wear brocade, embroidery, fine embroidery, embroidered yarn, fine georgette cloth, cloth, and woolen fabrics, and were not allowed to hold weapons, ride in cars, or ride horses.

古文：秋，九月，行自洛阳至；淮南王、梁王、赵王、楚王皆从。
现代文：秋季，九月，高帝一行从洛阳回长安。淮南王、梁王、赵王、楚王都随行。
English: In the autumn, in September, Emperor Gao and his entourage returned to Chang'an from Luoyang. King Huainan, King Liang, King Zhao, and King Chu all accompanied him.

古文：匈奴冒顿数苦北边。
现代文：匈奴冒顿屡次侵扰汉朝北部边境。
English: The Huns repeatedly invaded the northern border of the Han Dynasty.

古文：上患之，问刘敬，刘敬曰： 天下初定，士卒罢于兵，未可以武服也。
现代文：高帝感到忧虑，问刘敬对策，刘敬说； 天下刚刚安定，士兵们因兵事还很疲劳，不宜用武力去征服冒顿。
English: Emperor Gao was worried and asked Liu Jing for a countermeasure. Liu Jing said that the world had just been stabilized, and the soldiers were still very tired due to military affairs. It was not appropriate to use force to conquer Haston.

古文：冒顿杀父代立，妻群母，以力为威，未可以仁义说也。
现代文：但冒顿杀父夺位，把父亲的妃子占为妻子，以暴力建立权威，我们也不能用仁义去说服他。
English: He killed his father at the drop of a hat to make himself king, and took many of his father's concubines as his own wives. He used force and intimidation, and could not be convinced by benevolence and morality.

古文：独可以计久远，子孙为臣耳；然恐陛下不能为。 
现代文：可以用计策，使他的子孙长久做汉的臣属，然而我担心陛下做不到。 
English: It is possible to contrive a way for his children and grandchildren to remain Han subjects for a long time, but I am afraid that His Majesty will not be able to do so.

古文：上曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：高帝问： 应该怎么做呢？ 
English: The emperor said: What about that?

古文：对曰： 陛下诚能以適长公主妻之，厚奉遗之，彼必慕，以为阏氏，生子，必为太子。
现代文：回答说： 陛下如果能把嫡女大公主嫁给他为妻，又赠送丰厚俸禄，他一定仰慕汉朝，以公主为匈奴的阏氏，生下儿子，肯定是太子。
English: He replied, "Your Majesty, if you were able to marry your eldest daughter, the Grand Princess, to him, and give him a generous salary, he would surely admire the Han Dynasty, and the Xiongnu, who took the princess as his wife, would surely give birth to a son, who would definitely be the crown prince."

古文：陛下以岁时汉所馀，彼所鲜，数问遗，因使辨士风谕以礼节。
现代文：陛下每年四季用汉朝多余而匈奴缺乏的东西，频繁地慰问赠送他们，乘机派能说善辩的人士前去讽劝和讲解礼节。
English: Every four seasons, His Majesty uses the surplus of the Han Dynasty and the lack of the Xiongnu, frequently gives them condolences, and takes the opportunity to send people who can speak well to persuade and explain etiquette.

古文：冒顿在，固为子婿；死，则外孙为单于；岂尝闻外孙敢与大父抗礼者哉！
现代文：这样，冒顿在世时，他本是汉朝的女婿辈；他死后，您的外孙便即位为匈奴王单于。难道曾听说过外孙敢和外祖父分庭抗礼的吗？
English: In this way, when he was alive, he was the son-in-law of the Han Dynasty; after his death, your grandchild was enthroned as the King of the Xiongnu. Have you ever heard of a grandchild daring to stand up to his grandfather?

古文：可无战以渐臣也。
现代文：我们可以不经一战而让匈奴渐渐臣服。
English: We can gradually subjugate the Huns without a single battle.

古文：若陛下不能遣长公主，而令宗室及后宫诈称公主，彼知，不肯贵近，无益也。 
现代文：如果陛下舍不得让大公主去，而令宗室及后宫女子假称公主，他们知道了，不肯尊敬亲近，还是没有用。 
English: If His Majesty is not willing to let the Grand Princess go, but has the Imperial Household and the ladies of the harem pretend to be princesses, it is still useless if they know and do not want to respect and be close to her.

古文：帝曰： 善！ 
现代文：高帝说： 好！ 
English: Gaudi said: Good!

古文：欲遣长公主。
现代文：便想让大公主去。
English: So they had to send the great princess to the Xiongnu.

古文：吕后日夜泣曰： 妾唯太子、一女，奈何弃之匈奴！ 
现代文：但吕后日日夜夜哭泣着说： 我只有太子和一个女儿，为什么把她扔给匈奴！ 
English: But the Empress Dowager Lu cried day and night and said: I only have a prince and a daughter, why should I give her to the Huns!

古文：上竟不能遣。
现代文：高帝到底没有办法让大公主去。
English: In the end, Emperor Gao had no choice but to let the Grand Princess go.

古文：太祖高皇帝下九年
现代文：汉高帝九年
English: In the ninth year of Emperor Han

古文：冬，上取家人子名为长公主，以妻单于；使刘敬往结和亲约。
现代文：冬季，高帝在庶民家找来一名女子，称之为大公主，把她嫁给匈奴单于作妻子，同时派刘敬前往缔结和亲盟约。
English: In the winter, Emperor Gao found a woman in a commoner's home, called her the Grand Princess, and married her to the Xiongnu to be his wife. At the same time, he sent Liu Jing to conclude a peace treaty.

古文：臣光曰：建信侯谓冒顿残贼，不可以仁义说，而欲与为婚姻，何前后之相违也！
现代文：臣司马光曰：建信侯刘敬说冒顿残暴，不能用仁义道德去说服他，而又想与其联姻，为什么前后这样矛盾呀！
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: Jianxin Hou Liu Jing said that he was cruel, he could not use benevolence and morality to convince him, but he wanted to marry him, why is there such a contradiction!

古文：夫骨肉之恩，尊卑之叙，唯仁义之人为能知之；奈何欲以此服冒顿哉！
现代文：骨肉亲人的恩情，长幼尊卑的次第，只有仁义的人才能明白，怎么要以此来降服匈奴呢？
English: Only those who are benevolent and righteous can understand the benevolence of flesh-and-blood relatives, and how to use it to subjugate the Xiongnu.

古文：盖上世帝王之御夷狄也，服则怀之以德，叛则震之以威，未闻与为婚姻也。
现代文：先代帝王驾御夷狄民族的对策是：他们归服就用德来安抚，他们叛扰就用威来镇慑，从没听说过用联姻的办法。
English: The previous emperors' countermeasures for the rise of the Yidi people were: they were pacified by virtue when they surrendered, they were deterred by threat when they rebelled, and they had never heard of the method of marriage.

古文：且冒顿视其父如禽兽而猎之，奚有于妇翁！
现代文：况且，冒顿把生身父亲视为禽兽而猎杀，对岳父会怎么样！
English: Moreover, what would happen to my father-in-law if I treated my biological father as an animal and hunted him down!

古文：建信侯之术，固已疏矣；况鲁元已为赵后，又可夺乎！
现代文：刘敬的计策本已粗疏了，何况公主鲁元已经成了赵王王后，又怎么能夺回来呢！
English: Liu Jing's strategy is already crude, and what's more, Princess Lu Yuan has already become the Queen of Zhao Wang. How can she be won back?

古文：刘敬从匈奴来，因言： 匈奴河南白羊、楼烦王，去长安近者七百里，轻骑一日一夜可以至秦中。
现代文：刘敬从匈奴归来，说： 匈奴的河南白羊、楼烦王部落，离长安城近的只有七百里，轻骑兵一天一夜就可以到达关中。
English: Liu Jing returned from the Xiongnu and said: The Xiongnu's Henan Baiyang, Lou Dui Wang tribe, is only seven hundred miles away from Chang'an City, and light cavalry can reach Guanzhong in one day and one night.

古文：秦中新破，少民，地肥饶，可益实。
现代文：关中刚遭过战事洗劫，缺少百姓，但土地肥沃，应该加以充实。
English: The Guanzhong area, which has just gone through the war, is still very desolate, with few people, but the land is fertile and can be gradually enriched by immigrants.

古文：夫诸侯初起时，非齐诸田、楚昭、屈、景莫能兴。
现代文：诸侯最初起事时，没有齐国田氏，楚国昭、屈、景氏就不能勃兴。
English: When the feudal lords first rose up, they could not have flourished without the Qi, Guotian, Chu, Zhao, Qu and Jing clans.

古文：今陛下虽都关中，实少民，东有六国之强族，一日有变，陛下亦未得高枕而卧也。
现代文：现在陛下您虽然已经建都关中，实际却没有多少百姓，而东部有旧六国的强族，一旦有什么事变，您也就不能高枕而卧了。
English: Now, Your Majesty, although you have built the capital, there are actually not many people, and in the east there are strong tribes of the old six countries. If anything happens, you will not be able to sleep well.

古文：臣愿陛下徙六国后及豪桀、名家居关中，无事可以备胡，诸侯有变，亦足率以东伐。
现代文：我建议陛下把旧六国的后人及地方豪强、名门大族迁徙到关中居住，国家无事可以防备匈奴，如果各地旧诸侯有变，也足以征集大军向东讨伐。
English: I suggest that His Majesty relocate the descendants of the former six kingdoms and the local powerful and famous families to live in Guanzhong. The country has nothing to do to prevent the Xiongnu, and if there is a change in the old rulers in various regions, it is enough to recruit a large army to fight in the east.

古文：此强本弱末之术也。 
现代文：这是加强根本而削弱末枝的办法。 高帝说： 对。 
English: This is a way to strengthen the foundation while weakening the branches. Gao Di said, "That's right."

古文：上曰： 善！ 十一月，徙齐、楚大族昭氏、屈氏、景氏、怀氏、田氏五族及豪桀于关中，与利田、宅，凡十馀万口。
现代文：十一月，便下令迁徙旧齐国、楚国的大族昭氏、屈氏、景氏、怀氏、田氏五族及豪强到关中地区，给予便利的田宅安顿，共迁来十余万人。
English: In November, he ordered the relocation of the five major clans of the former Qi and Chu kingdoms, the Akou, Qu, Jing, Huai, and Tian clans, as well as the Gaoqang, to the Guanzhong region, where they were given convenient farmhouses to settle in. In total, more than 100,000 people were relocated.

古文：十二月，上行如洛阳。
现代文：十二月，高帝前往洛阳。
English: In December, Gao Di went to Luoyang.

古文：贯高怨家知其谋，上变告之。
现代文：赵国相国贯高的阴谋被他的仇家探知，向高帝举报这桩不寻常的大事。
English: The plot of Zhao Guoxiang Guoguanggao was detected by his enemies, who reported this unusual event to Emperor Gao.

古文：于是上逮捕赵王及诸反者。
现代文：高帝下令逮捕赵王及各谋反者。
English: Emperor Gao ordered the arrest of King Zhao and the conspirators.

古文：赵午等十馀人皆争自刭，贯高独怒骂曰： 谁令公为之？
现代文：赵王属下赵午等十几人都争相表示要自杀，只有贯高怒骂道： 谁让你们这样做的？
English: More than a dozen of Zhao Wang's subordinates, including Zhao Wu, said they wanted to commit suicide. Only Guan Gao said angrily, "Who told you to do this?

古文：今王实无谋，而并捕王。
现代文：如今赵王确实没有参与谋反，而被一并逮捕。
English: Now Zhao Wang is indeed not involved in plotting a rebellion, and has been arrested along with others.

古文：公等皆死，谁白王不反者？ 
现代文：你们都死了，谁来申明赵王不曾谋反的真情？ 
English: You are all dead. Who can affirm that Zhao Wang never plotted a rebellion?

古文：乃轞车胶致，与王诣长安。
现代文：于是被关进胶封的木栏囚车，与赵王一起押往长安。
English: As a result, Guan Gao was imprisoned and transported to Chang'an together with Zhao Wang in a sturdy prisoner's wagon covered with bars.

古文：高对狱曰： 独吾属为之，王实不知。 
现代文：贯高对审讯官员说： 只是我们自己干的，赵王的确不知道。 
English: Guan Gao told the interrogation officer: "We did it ourselves, but Zhao Wang really didn't know.

古文：吏治，扌旁笞数千，刺剟，身无可击者，终不复言。
现代文：狱吏动刑，拷打鞭笞几千下，又用刀刺，直至体无完肤，贯高始终不再说别的话。
English: The warden started the torture, beat and whipped him several thousand times, and stabbed him with a knife until his body was completely destroyed, and he never said anything else.

古文：吕后数言： 张王以公主故，不宜有此。 
现代文：吕后几次说： 赵王张敖娶了公主，不会有此事。 
English: Queen Lyu said several times: Zhao Wang Zhangye married a princess, there will be no such thing.

古文：上怒曰： 使张敖据天下，岂少而女乎！ 不听。
现代文：高帝怒气冲冲地斥骂她： 要是张敖夺了天下，难道还缺少你的女儿不成！ 
English: Gao Di angrily scolded her: If Zhang Ye conquered the world, wouldn't your daughter still be missing?

古文：廷尉以贯高事辞闻。上曰： 壮士！谁知者？以私问之。 
现代文：不予理睬。廷尉把审讯情况和贯高的话报告高帝，高帝感慨地说： 真是个壮士，谁平时和他要好，用私情去探听一下。 
English: The courtier reported to Gao Di the status of the interrogation and the words of Guan Gao, and Gao Di said with emotion: What a strong man, who is better than him in ordinary times, use personal feelings to listen.

古文：中大夫泄公曰： 臣之邑子，素知之，此固赵国立义不侵，为然诺者也。 
现代文：中大夫泄公说： 我和他同邑，平常很了解他，他在赵国原本就是个以义自立、不受侵辱、信守诺言的人。 
English: I am from the same town as him, and I usually know him well. In Zhao Province, he was originally a person who stood up for himself with righteousness, was not insulted, and kept his promises.

古文：上使泄公持节往问之箯舆前。
现代文：高帝便派泄公持节去贯高的竹床前探问。
English: Emperor Gao then sent Le Gongzhi Jie to investigate in front of the high bamboo bed.

古文：泄公与相劳苦，如生平欢，因问： 张王果有计谋不？ 
现代文：泄公慰问他的伤情，见仍像平日一样欢洽，便套问： 赵王张敖真的有谋反计划吗？ 
English: Dejected by the public's condolences for his injury, but still as happy as usual, he asked: Did Zhao Wang Zhangye really have a plan to rebel?

古文：高曰： 人情宁不各爱其父母、妻子乎？
现代文：贯高回答说： 以人之常情，难道不各爱自己的父母、妻子儿女吗？
English: Konggao replied, "With human feelings, doesn't everyone love their parents, wives, and children?

古文：今吾三族皆以论死，岂爱王过于吾亲哉？
现代文：现在我的三族都被定成死罪，难道我爱赵王胜过我的亲人吗？
English: Now that all three of my families have been sentenced to death, do I love Zhao Wang more than my relatives?

古文：顾为王实不反，独吾等为之。 
现代文：因为实在是赵王不曾谋反，只是我们自己这样干的。 
English: But Zhao Wang really did not object, and only we participated.

古文：具道本指所以为者、王不知状。
现代文：又详细述说当初的谋反原因及赵王不曾知道的情况。
English: It also detailed the reasons for the initial rebellion and the circumstances that Zhao Wang did not know about.

古文：于是泄公入，具以报上。
现代文：于是泄公入朝一一报告了高帝。
English: So Gao Di reported the defection to the imperial court one by one.

古文：春，正月，上赦赵王敖，废为宣平侯，徒代王如意为赵王。
现代文：春季，正月，高帝下令赦免赵王张敖，废黜为宣平侯，另调代王刘如意为赵王。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Gao ordered the pardon of Zhao Wang Zhangye, the dethronement of the dethronement of the dethronement of the dethronement of the dethronement of the dethronement of the dethronement of the dethronement of the dethronement of the dethronement of the dethronement of the dethronement of the dethronement.

古文：上贤贯高为人，使泄公具告之曰： 张王已出。 
现代文：高帝称许贯高的为人，便派泄公去告诉他： 张敖已经放出去了。 
English: Emperor Gao praised Guan Gao as a person, and sent a magistrate to tell him: Zhang Ye has been released.

古文：因赦贯高。
现代文：同时赦免贯高。
English: That's why he pardoned Kang Gao.

古文：贯高喜曰： 吾王审出乎？ 泄公曰： 然。 
现代文：贯高高兴地问： 我的大王真的放出去了？ 泄公说： 是的。 
English: Guan Gao said with joy, "Are we Zhao Wang really released?" Ge Gong said, "Yes."

古文：泄公曰： 上多足下，故赦足下。 
现代文：又告诉他： 皇上看重你，所以赦免了你。 
English: Deguang also said: The emperor praised you, so he pardoned you.

古文：贯高曰： 所以不死，一身无馀者，白张王不反也。
现代文：贯高却说： 我之所以不死、被打得遍体鳞伤，就是为了表明赵王张敖没有谋反。
English: However, Konggao said, "The reason why I did not die and was beaten all over my body is to show that Zhao Wang Zhangye did not plot a rebellion."

古文：今王已出，吾责已塞，死不恨矣。
现代文：现在赵王已经出去，我的责任也尽到了，可以死而无憾。
English: Now that Zhao Wang has been released, I have fulfilled my duty and can die with no regrets.

古文：且人臣有篡弑之名，何面目复事上哉！
现代文：况且，我作为臣子有谋害皇帝的罪名，又有什么脸再去事奉皇上呢！
English: Moreover, as a courtier, I am guilty of plotting to assassinate the emperor. How dare I serve the emperor again!

古文：纵上不杀我，我不愧于心乎！ 
现代文：即使皇上不杀我，我就不心中有愧吗！ 
English: Even if the Emperor doesn't kill me, won't I feel guilty?

古文：乃仰绝亢，遂死。
现代文：于是掐断自己的颈脉，自杀了。
English: So he snapped his neck and killed himself.

古文：荀悦论曰：贯高首为乱谋，杀主之贼；虽能证明其王，小亮不塞大逆，私行不赎公罪。
现代文：荀悦论曰：贯高带头谋反作乱，是个弑君的贼子。虽然他舍身证明赵王无罪，但小的优点掩盖不住大逆不道，个人的品行赎不了法律上的罪过。
English: The theory of Zhao Yue said: Guan Gao took the lead in plotting rebellion and chaos, and was a thief of the prince. Although he sacrificed himself to prove that King Zhao was not guilty, his small merits could not cover up his high treason, and his personal conduct could not redeem his legal sins.

古文：《春秋》之义大居正，罪无赦可也。
现代文：按照《春秋》大义，遵循正道最为重要，他的罪应是不可赦免的。
English: According to the principle of "Spring and Autumn," it is most important to follow the right path, and his crime should be unforgivable.

古文：臣光曰：高祖骄以失臣，贯高狠以亡君。
现代文：臣司马光曰：汉高祖因为骄横失去了臣下，贯高因为狠毒使他的主子失掉原有的封国。
English: The vassal Sima Guang said: Han Gao Zu lost his vassals because of his arrogance, and Guan Gao caused his master to lose his original fief because of his viciousness.

古文：使贯高谋逆者，高祖之过也；使张敖亡国者，贯高之罪也。
现代文：促使贯高谋反行逆的，是汉高祖的过失；致令张敖亡国的，是贯高的罪过。
English: It was Han Gao Zu's fault that he encouraged Guan Gao to rebel; it was Guan Gao's fault that he ordered Zhang Ye to destroy the country.

古文：诏： 丙寅前有罪，殊死已下，皆赦之。 
现代文：高帝颁布诏书： 丙寅日以前犯罪者，死罪以下，都予以赦免。 
English: Emperor Gao issued an edict: All those who had committed crimes, including those punishable by death, before the Fourth of July would be pardoned.

古文：及张敖既免，上贤田叔、孟舒等。召见，与语，汉廷臣无能出其右者。
现代文：二月，高帝一行自洛阳回长安。当初，高帝颁布诏书： 赵王群臣及宾客有敢随从张敖者，满门抄斩。 但郎中田叔、孟舒等都自行剃去头发，以铁圈束颈，作为赵王家奴随从。
English: In February, Gao Di and his entourage returned to Chang'an from Luoyang. At the beginning, Gao Di issued an edict: If any of Zhao Wang's ministers and guests dared to follow Zhang Ye, they would be beheaded. However, uncle Zhongtian, Meng Shu and others shaved their hair and tied their necks with iron collars as Zhao Wang's followers.

古文：上尽拜为郡守、诸侯相。夏，六月，乙未晦，日有食之。
现代文：待到张敖免罪，高帝称许田叔、孟舒的为人，下令召见，与他们交谈，发现他们的才干超过了汉朝朝廷的大臣。
English: After Zhang Xuan was exonerated, Emperor Gao praised Uncle Xu Tian and Meng Shu as heroes, ordered to summon and talk with them, and found that their talents exceeded those of the ministers of the Han Dynasty.

古文：是岁，更以丞相何为相国。
现代文：高帝任命两人为郡守、诸侯国相。夏季，六月晦，出现日食。改任丞相萧何为相国。
English: Emperor Gao appointed the two men as county governors and governors of provinces. In the summer, at the end of June, there was a solar eclipse. Xiao He was appointed as chancellor of the province.

古文：太祖高皇帝下十年
现代文：汉高帝十年
English: Ten years of Emperor Henkel

古文：夏，五月，太上皇崩于栎阳宫。
现代文：夏季，五月，太上皇于栎阳宫驾崩。
English: In the summer, in May, the Emperor died at Shenyang Palace.

古文：秋，七月，癸卯，葬太上皇于万年。
现代文：秋季，七月癸卯，将太上皇安葬于万年。
English: In the autumn, at the end of July, the Emperor will be buried.

古文：楚王、梁王皆来送葬。
现代文：楚王、梁王都来送葬。
English: King Chu and King Liang both came to the funeral.

古文：赦栎阳囚。
现代文：高帝下令特赦栎阳囚犯。
English: Pardoned the prisoners in Fenyang.

古文：定陶戚姬有宠于上，生赵王如意。
现代文：定陶女子戚夫人受高帝宠爱，生下赵王刘如意。
English: The wife of a female relative of Ding Tao was favored by Emperor Gao and gave birth to Zhao Wang Liu Rongyi.

古文：上以太子仁弱，谓如意类己；虽封为赵王，常留之长安。
现代文：高帝因为太子为人仁慈懦弱，认为刘如意像自己，虽然封他为赵王，却把他长年留在长安。
English: Emperor Gao thought that Liu Ruyi was like himself because the prince was kind and weak. Although he was named King Zhao, he stayed in Chang'an for many years.

古文：上之关东，戚姬常从，日夜啼泣，欲立其子。
现代文：高帝出巡关东，戚夫人也常常随行，日夜在高帝面前哭泣，想要立如意为太子。
English: When Emperor Gao went on a tour to the eastern part of Guanzhong, his wife often accompanied him, crying in front of Emperor Gao day and night, wanting to become the crown prince as soon as possible.

古文：吕后年长，常留守，益疏。
现代文：而吕后因年老，常留守长安，与高帝愈发疏远。
English: Due to her old age, however, Lü Guo often stayed behind in Chang'an and became increasingly estranged from Emperor Gao.

古文：上欲废太子而立赵王，大臣争之，皆莫能得。
现代文：高帝便想废掉太子而立赵王为继承人，大臣们表示反对，都未能说服他。
English: Emperor Gao then wanted to abolish the crown prince and set up King Zhao as the successor. The ministers expressed their opposition, but failed to convince him.

古文：御史大夫周昌廷争之强，上问其说。
现代文：御史大夫周昌在朝廷上强硬地争执，高帝问他理由何在。
English: Imperial Historian Zhou Chang argued forcefully in the imperial court, and Emperor Gao asked him why.

古文：昌为人吃，又盛怒，曰： 臣口不能言，然臣期期知其不可！陛下欲废太子，臣期期不奉诏！ 
现代文：周昌说话口吃，又在盛怒之下，急得只是说： 臣口不能言，但臣期期知道不能这样做，陛下要废太子，臣期期不奉命！ 
English: Zhou Chang's speech was stuttering, and in his anger, he was in a hurry to say: The vassal cannot speak, but the vassal knows that he cannot do this, His Majesty wants to abolish the prince, the vassal is not ordered!

古文：上欣然而笑。
现代文：高帝欣然而笑。
English: Gao Di listened and laughed with joy.

古文：吕后侧耳于东厢听，既罢，见昌，为跪谢，曰： 微君，太子几废！ 
现代文：吕后在东厢房侧耳聆听，事过后，她召见周昌，向他跪谢说： 要不是您，太子几乎就废了。 
English: Lu Hou listened attentively in the east wing room. After the event, she summoned Zhou Chang, knelt down to thank him and said, "If it weren't for you, the crown prince would almost be useless."

古文：时赵王年十岁，上忧万岁之后不全也；符玺御史赵尧请为赵王置贵强相，及吕后、太子、群臣素所敬惮者。
现代文：当时赵王刚十岁，高帝担心自己死后他难以保全；符玺御史赵尧于是建议为赵王配备一个地位高而又强有力，平时能让吕后、太子及群臣敬惮的相。
English: At that time, Zhao Wang was just ten years old, and Emperor Gao was worried that it would be difficult to preserve him after his death; the Grand Historian Zhao Jun then suggested that King Zhao should be equipped with a high-ranking and powerful consort, who could be respected by Empress Dowager Lv, the prince and the courtiers.

古文：上曰： 谁可者？ 
现代文：高帝问： 谁合适呢？ 
English: Gao Di asked: Who is suitable?

古文：尧曰： 御史大夫昌，其人也。 
现代文：赵尧说： 御史大夫周昌正是这样的人。 
English: Zhao Wei said, "Goshi doctor Zhou Changlu is just such a person.

古文：上乃以昌相赵，而以尧代昌为御史大夫。
现代文：高帝便任命周昌为赵国的相，而令赵尧代替周昌为御史大夫。
English: Emperor Gao then appointed Zhou Chang as the minister of the State of Zhao, and appointed Zhao Wei to replace Zhou Chang as the imperial historian.

古文：初，上以阳夏侯陈豨为相国，监赵、代边兵；豨过辞淮阴侯。
现代文：起初，高帝任命阳夏侯陈为相国，监管赵国、代国边境部队。陈拜访淮阴侯韩信并向他辞行。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Gao appointed Yang Xia Hou Chen as a relative of the state to supervise the border troops of Zhao and the representative of the state. Chen visited Huaiyin Hou Han Xin and resigned from him.

古文：淮阴侯挈其手，辟左右，与之步于庭，仰天叹曰： 子可与言乎？ 
现代文：淮阴侯握着他的手，屏退左右随从，与他在庭院中散步，忽然仰天叹息道： 有几句话，能和你说吗？ 
English: Huaiyin Hou shook his hand, followed him left and right, and walked with him in the courtyard. Suddenly, he looked up to heaven and sighed, "Can I say a few words to you?"

古文：豨曰： 唯将军令之！ 
现代文：陈说： 只要是将军您的指示，我都听从。 
English: Chen said: As long as it is the general's instructions, I will obey.

古文：淮阴侯曰： 公之所居，天下精兵处也；而公，陛下之信幸臣也。
现代文：韩信说： 你所处的地位，集中了天下精兵；而你，又是陛下信任的大臣。
English: Huaiyin Hou said: The area under your jurisdiction is the place where the world's elite soldiers are gathered; and you are His Majesty's trusted and favored vassal.

古文：人言公之畔，陛下必不信；再至，陛下乃疑矣；三至，必怒而自将。
现代文：如果有人说你反叛，陛下肯定不信；然而再有人说，陛下就会起疑心；说第三次，陛下必定会愤怒地亲自率领大兵来攻打你。
English: If someone reports that you have rebelled, His Majesty will certainly not believe it; if they report it again, His Majesty will doubt it; if they report it three times, His Majesty will certainly be enraged and personally lead an army to encircle you.

古文：吾为公从中起，天下可图也。 
现代文：请让我为你做个内应，那么天下就可以谋取了。 
English: If I do the internal correspondence for you in Beijing, the whole world can obtain it.

古文：陈豨素知其能也，信之，曰： 谨奉教！ 
现代文：陈平常便知道韩信的能力，相信他，于是说： 遵奉你的指教！ 
English: Chen Yao always knew about Han Xin's great talent. Convinced, he said: I will definitely follow your advice!

古文：豨常慕魏无忌之养士，及为相守边，告归，过赵，宾客随之者千馀乘，邯郸官舍皆满。
现代文：陈常常羡慕当年魏国信陵君魏无忌养士的行为，及至他做相国驻守边境，告假回来时，经过赵国，跟随他的宾客乘坐的车有一千多辆，把邯郸城的官舍都住满了。
English: Chen often envied the behavior of Wei Guoxin Mausoleum, and when he was stationed at the border of the neighboring country and came back from vacation, there were more than a thousand cars passing through Zhao Province, followed by his guests, and the official residences in Lucheng were full.

古文：赵相周昌求入见上，具言豨宾客甚盛，擅兵于外数岁，恐有变。
现代文：赵相周昌见此情况请求入京进见高帝，详述陈门下宾客盛多，又专擅兵权在外数年，恐怕会有事变等等。
English: Zhao Xiang Zhouchang saw this situation and requested to enter Beijing to see Emperor Gao, detailing that there were many guests under Chen's door, and that he had been outside for several years without military authority, and that there would probably be an incident, and so on.

古文：上令人覆案豨客居代者诸不法事，多连引豨。
现代文：高帝令人再审查陈宾客在代国时的种种不法之事，很多牵连到陈。
English: Emperor Gao made people re-examine all kinds of illegal things that Chen Binke did while representing the country, many of which implicated Chen.

古文：豨恐，韩王信因使王黄、曼丘臣等说诱之。
现代文：陈听说后十分恐慌，韩王信趁机派王黄、曼丘臣等人来劝诱他联成一伙。
English: When Chen heard about this, he panicked. Han Wangxin took the opportunity to send Wang Huang, Manchu Chen and others to persuade him to join forces.

古文：太上皇崩，上使人召豨，豨称病不至；九月，遂与王黄等反，自立为代王，劫略赵、代。
现代文：太上皇驾崩时，高帝派人来召陈，陈称病不去；九月，他便与王黄等人公开反叛，自封为代王，率军劫掠赵国、代国。
English: At the time of the Emperor's death, Emperor Gao sent someone to summon Chen, but Chen claimed that he was too ill to go; in September, he openly rebelled with Wang Huang and others, proclaimed himself the acting king, and led an army to plunder Zhao and the acting country.

古文：上自东击之。至邯郸，喜曰： 豨不南据邯郸而阻漳水，吾知其无能为矣。 
现代文：高帝领兵从东面进击，到达邯郸，高兴地说： 陈不占据邯郸而去扼守漳水，我知道他没多大能耐了！ 
English: Gao Di led the troops to attack from the east and arrived in Handan. He said happily, "Chen did not occupy Handan, but went to hold Handan. I know he does not have much stamina!"

古文：周昌奏： 常山二十五城，亡其二十城；请诛守、尉。 
现代文：周昌奏报说： 常山郡二十五城，有二十城都失陷了，请处死郡守、郡尉。 
English: Zhou Changso Newspaper said: Of the twenty-five towns in Changshan County, twenty have fallen. Please execute the county governor and the county lieutenant.

古文：上曰： 守、尉反乎？ 
现代文：高帝问： 郡守、郡尉反叛了吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Did the governor and lieutenant take part in the rebellion?"

古文：对曰： 不。 
现代文：周昌回答： 没有。 
English: Answer: No.

古文：上曰： 是力不足，亡罪。 
现代文：高帝说： 这是他们力量不足，没有罪。 
English: The emperor said, "It is due to their shortage of troops, they are not guilty."

古文：上令周昌选赵壮士可令将者，白见四人。
现代文：高帝又令周昌选挑赵国壮士中可充当将领的，周昌报告说有四个人，并让他们来进见。
English: The emperor ordered Zhou Chang to select and send Zhao Di Zhuangdu to be appointed general, and Zhou Chang introduced four people.

古文：上嫚骂曰： 竖子能为将乎？ 
现代文：高帝谩骂道： 你们这群小子能当将军吗？ 
English: Gao Di scolded: Can you boys become generals?

古文：四人惭，皆伏地；上封各千户，以为将。
现代文：四人大为惭愧，都伏在地上；高帝却真的赏赐各人以一千户的封邑，任用为将领。
English: The four were so ashamed that they all prostrated themselves on the ground. However, Emperor Gao actually rewarded each of them with a thousand fiefs and appointed them as generals.

古文：左右谏曰； 从入蜀、汉，伐楚，赏未遍行；今封此，何功？ 
现代文：左右随从劝阻说： 跟随您进兵蜀、汉，征讨楚王的功臣都没有全部封赏；今天封他们，凭的什么功劳？ 
English: Followers on both sides tried to dissuade him, saying, "The heroes who followed you into Shu and Han, and fought against King Chu, have not all been rewarded; why should they be rewarded today?

古文：上曰： 非汝所知。
现代文：高帝说： 这就不是你们所能知道的了。
English: The emperor said: This is not what you know.

古文：陈豨反，赵、代地皆豨有。
现代文：陈造反，赵国、代国一带都被他占有。
English: Chen Jian rebelled, and occupied Zhao and Daiji.

古文：吾以羽檄征天下兵，未有至者，今计唯独邯郸中兵耳。吾何爱四千户，不以慰赵子弟！ 
现代文：我用紧急军书征调天下军队，至今还没有到来的，现在估计能够调遣的只有邯郸城中这些士兵而已，我为什么还要吝惜那四个千户封邑，不用来抚慰赵国子弟呢！ 
English: I used the emergency military book to conscript the world's army, which has not yet arrived, and now it is estimated that only these soldiers in Lucheng can be dispatched. Why should I begrudge the four thousand fiefs and not use them to comfort the sons and daughters of Zhao!

古文：皆曰： 善！ 
现代文：属下都点头说： 好主意。 
English: His subordinates all nodded and said, "That's a good idea."

古文：又闻豨将皆故贾人，上曰： 吾知所以与之矣。 
现代文：高帝又听说陈的部将很多过去都是商人，便说： 我知道如何对付他们了。 
English: Gao Di also heard that many of Chen's generals were merchants in the past, so he said: I know how to deal with them.

古文：乃多以金购豨将，豨将多降。
现代文：下令多用黄金去收买陈部将，果然有大部分来降。
English: As a result, more gold coins were used to buy off the ministers, and most of the ministers were demoted.

古文：太祖高皇帝下十一年
现代文：汉高帝十一年
English: The eleventh year of Emperor Han

古文：冬，上在邯郸。
现代文：冬季，高帝在邯郸城。
English: In winter, Gao Di stayed in Lucheng.

古文：陈豨将侯敞将万馀人游行，王黄将骑千馀军曲逆，张春将卒万馀人渡河攻聊城。汉将军郭蒙与齐将击，大破之。
现代文：陈的部将侯敞率一万余人游动袭击，王黄率骑兵一千余人屯军曲逆，张春率一万余士卒渡过黄河进攻聊城；汉朝将军郭蒙与齐国将军迎击，大破陈军。
English: Chen's general Hou Bi led more than ten thousand people in a swimming attack, Wang Huang led more than one thousand cavalry troops in a counter-attack, Zhang Chun led more than ten thousand soldiers across the Yellow River to attack Liaocheng; Han Dynasty General Guo Meng and Qi Dynasty General counterattacked and defeated Chen's army.

古文：太尉周勃道太原入定代地，至马邑，不下，攻残之。
现代文：太尉周勃取道太原去平定代地，兵抵马邑，久攻不下，攻下后便大行杀戮。
English: Captain Zhou Bo took the Taiyuan Road to pacify the vicarious land. The soldiers arrived in Ma'i, but they could not conquer it for a long time. After they conquered it, they went on a killing spree.

古文：赵利守东垣，帝攻拔之，更命曰真定。
现代文：赵利守东垣城，高帝亲自率军攻克，将地名改为真定。
English: Zhao Lixu guarded Donggaki Castle, and Emperor Gao personally led the army to conquer it, and changed the name of the place to Zhending.

古文：帝购王黄、曼丘臣以千金，其麾下皆生致之。于是陈豨军遂败。
现代文：高帝又悬赏千金捉拿王黄、曼丘臣，结果其部下都将他们活捉送来，于是陈军队溃败。
English: Emperor Gao also offered a large reward for the capture of Wang Huang and Manchu Chen. As a result, his subordinates captured them alive and sent them back, and Chen's army was defeated.

古文：淮阴侯信称病，不从击豨，阴使人至豨所，与通谋。
现代文：淮阴侯韩信假称有病，不随从高帝去攻击陈，暗中却派人到陈那里，与他勾结谋划。
English: Huaiyin Prince Hanxin pretended to be ill and did not follow Gao to attack Chen, but secretly sent someone to Chen to collude with him.

古文：信谋与家臣夜诈诏赦诸官徒、奴，欲发以袭吕后、太子；部署已定，待豨报。
现代文：韩信想在夜间与家臣用伪诏书赦免官府的有罪工匠及奴隶，打算发动他们去袭击吕后、太子。已经部署完毕，只等陈的消息。
English: During the night, Han Xin and his vassals wanted to use a forged edict to pardon the guilty craftsmen and slaves of the government, intending to launch them to attack Lü Guo and the crown prince. The deployment had been completed, and they were just waiting for Chen's message.

古文：其舍人得罪于信，信囚，欲杀之。
现代文：韩信有个门下舍人曾因得罪韩信，被囚禁起来，准备处死。
English: One of Han Xin's subordinates was imprisoned and prepared to be executed for offending Han Xin.

古文：春，正月，舍人弟上变，告信欲反状于吕后。
现代文：春季，正月，舍人的弟弟上书举报事变，将韩信打算谋反的情况告诉吕后。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Sheren's younger brother sent a letter to report the incident and told Lü Guo about Han Xin's intention to rebel.

古文：吕后欲召，恐其傥不就，乃与萧相国谋，诈令人从上所来，言豨已得，死，列侯、群臣皆贺。
现代文：吕后想把韩信召来，又担心他可能不服从，便与相国萧何商议，假装让人从高帝处来，说陈已经被擒，处死。列侯及群臣闻讯都到朝中祝贺。
English: Queen Lyu wanted to summon Han Xin, but was worried that he might not obey, so she negotiated with her brother-in-law, Xiao He, and pretended to have someone come from Emperor Gao, saying that Chen had been arrested and executed. Upon hearing the news, the vassals and courtiers all went to the center of the country to offer congratulations.

古文：相国绐信曰： 虽疾，强入贺。 
现代文：萧何又欺骗韩信说： 你虽然病了，也应当强挺着来道贺。 
English: Xiao He also deceived Han Xin and said: Although you are ill, you should still come to congratulate.

古文：信入，吕后使武士缚信，斩之长乐钟室。
现代文：韩信来到朝廷，吕后便派武士将他捆绑起来，在长乐宫钟室里斩首。
English: As soon as Han Xin entered the palace, Queen Lyu ordered a samurai to tie up Han Xin and behead him in the clock room of the Changle Palace.

古文：信方斩，曰： 吾悔不用蒯彻之计，乃为儿女子所诈，岂非天哉！ 
现代文：韩信在斩首之前，叹息说： 我真后悔没用蒯彻的计策，竟上了小孩子、妇人的当，这难道不是天意吗！ 
English: Before he was beheaded, Han Xin sighed and said, "I really regret that I didn't use the best strategy, and ended up being tricked by a child and a woman. Isn't this God's will?"

古文：遂夷信三族。
现代文：吕后随后下令将韩信三族都连坐杀死。
English: So he killed the three families of Han Xin.

古文：臣光曰：世或以韩信为首建大策，与高祖起汉中，定三秦，遂分兵以北，禽魏，取代，仆赵，胁燕，东击齐而有之，南灭楚垓下，汉之所以得天下者，大抵皆信之功也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：世人有的认为，韩信为汉高祖首先奠定开业大计，与他一同在汉中起事，平定三秦后，又分兵向北，擒获魏国，夺取代国，扑灭赵国，胁迫燕国，再向东攻击占领齐国，复向南在垓下消灭楚国，汉朝之所以能得到天下，大致都归功于韩信。
English: Minister Sima Guang said: Some people in the world believe that Han Xin was the first to lay the groundwork for the founding of the Han Dynasty, and together with him, they rose up in the Han Dynasty. After the Three Qin Dynasties were pacified, Han Xin sent troops to the north, conquered Wei, conquered Sui, extinguished Zhao, and coerced Yan. He then attacked and occupied Qi in the east, and went south to eliminate Chu under his command. Han Xin was largely responsible for the Han Dynasty gaining control of the world.

古文：观其距蒯彻之说，迎高祖于陈，岂有反心哉！
现代文：再看他拒绝蒯彻的建议，在陈地迎接高祖，哪里有反叛之心呢！
English: Then again, look at him rejecting the suggestion of Yan Che, and welcoming Gao Zu in Chen, where is his rebellious heart!

古文：良由失职怏怏，遂陷悖逆。
现代文：实在是因为失去诸侯王的权位后怏怏不快，才陷于大逆不道。
English: It was really because he was unhappy after losing the power of the prince that he fell into the trap of high treason.

古文：夫以卢绾里闬旧恩，犹南面王燕，信乃以列侯奉朝请，岂非高祖亦有负于信哉！
现代文：卢绾仅仅有高祖里巷旧邻的交情，就封为燕王，而韩信却以侯爵身分奉朝请；高祖难道不也有亏待韩信的地方吗？
English: Lu Yao was crowned the King of Swallows just because he had the friendship of Gaozuli Lane's old neighbor, while Han Xin was invited to the imperial court as a marquis; didn't Gaozhu also treat Han Xin badly?

古文：臣以为高祖用诈谋禽信于陈，言负则有之；虽然，信亦有以取之也。
现代文：我认为：汉高祖用诈骗手段在陈地抓获韩信，说他亏待是有的；不过，韩信也有咎由自取之处。
English: In my opinion, Han Gao Zu used fraudulent means to capture Han Xin in Chen Di, and said that he was treated unfairly; however, Han Xin also has something to blame himself for.

古文：始，汉与楚相距荥阳，信灭齐，不还报而自王；其后汉追楚至固陵，与信期共攻楚而信不至。当是之时，高祖固有取信之心矣，顾力不能耳。
现代文：当初，汉王与楚王在荥阳相持，韩信灭了齐国，不来奏报汉王却自立为王；其后，汉王追击楚王到固陵，与韩信约定共同进攻楚王，而韩信按兵不动；当时，高祖本已有诛杀韩信的念头了，只是力量还做不到罢了。
English: At first, King Han and King Chu were at loggerheads in Shenyang. Han Xin had destroyed the state of Qi, but King Han became the king of his own accord without reporting it. Later, King Han chased King Chu to Guryong and agreed with Han Xin to jointly attack King Chu, but Han Xin did not move. At that time, Gao Zu already had the idea of killing Han Xin, but he did not have the strength to do it.

古文：及天下已定，则信复何恃哉！
现代文：待到天下已经平定，韩信还有什么可倚仗的呢！
English: Wait until the world has been pacified, Han Xin still has something to rely on!

古文：夫乘时以徼利者，市井之志也；酬功而报德者，士君子之心也。
现代文：抓住机会去谋取利益，是市井小人的志向；建立大功以报答恩德，是有志操崐学问的君子的胸怀。
English: Seizing the opportunity to seek profits is the ambition of the common villain; building a great achievement to repay kindness is the mind of a gentleman who is willing to learn.

古文：信以市井之志利其身，而以君子之心望于人，不亦难哉！
现代文：韩信用市井小人的志向为自己谋取利益，而要求他人用君子的胸怀回报，不是太难了吗！
English: Isn't it too difficult to get rid of the ambition of the villain of Han Credit to seek profit for himself, while asking others to return with the heart of a gentleman!

古文：是故太史公论之曰： 假令韩信学道谦让，不伐己功，不矜其能，则庶几哉！
现代文：所以，太史公司马迁评论说： 假如让韩信学习君臣之道，谦虚礼让，不夸耀自己的功劳，不矜持自己的才能，情况大概就不同了！
English: Therefore, Ma Qian of Taishi Company commented: If Han Xin is allowed to learn the way of a ruler and a subject, to be humble and courteous, not to boast of his merits, not to hold back his talents, the situation will probably be different!

古文：于汉家勋，可以比周、召、太公之徒，后世血食矣！
现代文：他对汉家的功勋，可以与周公、召公、太公吕尚等人相比，后代也就可以享有祭祀了！
English: His merits to the Han family can be compared to Zhou Gong, Zhao Gong, Tai Gong Lushang and others, and future generations can also enjoy the sacrifices!

古文：不务出此，而天下已集，乃谋畔逆；夷灭宗族，不亦宜乎！ 
现代文：他不去这样做，反而在天下已定之时，图谋叛逆，被斩灭宗族，不是理所当然的吗！ 
English: Instead of doing so, he plotted a rebellion when the world was already settled, and his clan was destroyed, isn't that natural?

古文：将军柴武斩韩王信于参合。
现代文：将军柴武在参合将韩王信斩首。
English: General Chaiwu beheaded Han Wangxin and joined the alliance.

古文：上还洛阳，闻淮阴侯之死，且喜且怜之，问吕后曰： 信死亦何言？ 
现代文：高帝回到洛阳，知道淮阴侯韩信被杀，又是欣喜又是怜惜。他问吕后： 韩信临死有什么话？ 
English: When Emperor Gao returned to Luoyang, he was both delighted and pained to learn that the Huaiyin lord Han Xin had been killed. He asked Lü Hou: What did Han Xin say on his deathbed?

古文：吕后曰： 信言恨不用蒯彻计。 
现代文：吕后说： 韩信说后悔没用蒯彻的计谋。 
English: Lyu Hou said: Han Xin said that he regretted that he did not use the best strategy.

古文：上曰： 是齐辩士蒯彻也。 
现代文：高帝悟道： 是齐国的能辩之士蒯彻呀！ 
English: Gao Di Guo said, "It is the debater of Qi who is the best!"

古文：乃诏齐捕蒯彻。
现代文：便诏令齐国逮捕蒯彻。
English: He then ordered Qi Guo to arrest Yan Che.

古文：蒯彻至，上曰： 若教淮阴侯反乎？ 
现代文：蒯彻被押来后，高帝问： 你教韩信造反吗？ 
English: After Yan Che was brought in, Gao Di asked: Did you teach Han Xin to rebel?

古文：对曰： 然，臣固教之。
现代文：回答说： 是的，我确实教过。
English: He replied: Yes, I did teach.

古文：竖子不用臣之策，故令自夷于此；如用臣之计，陛下安得而夷之乎！ 
现代文：那家伙不听我的计策，所以才自取灭亡，落到这个地步；如果用我的计策，陛下怎么能够杀了他呢！ 
English: The fellow would not listen to my counsel, and so he brought about his own destruction, and came to this pass; how could your Majesty have killed him if he had listened to my counsel!

古文：上怒曰； 烹之！ 
现代文：高帝勃然大怒，下令： 煮死他！ 
English: Emperor Gao flew into a rage and ordered: "Boil him to death!"

古文：彻曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：蒯彻大叫： 哎呀！
English: Zou Che shouted: Alas!

古文：冤哉烹也！ 
现代文：煮我实在冤枉！ 
English: You've really wronged me!

古文：上曰： 君教韩信反，何冤？ 
现代文：高帝问 你教韩信造反，还有何冤枉？ 
English: Gao Di asked, "You taught Han Xin to rebel, what else is wrong?"

古文：对曰： 秦失其鹿，天下共逐之，高材疾足者先得焉。
现代文：蒯彻说： 秦朝失去江山，天下人都群起争夺，有才能、动作快的人能先得到。
English: Hao Che said: The Qin Dynasty lost the country, and people all over the world flocked to compete. Talented and fast-moving people could get it first.

古文：跖之狗吠尧，尧非不仁，狗固吠非其主。
现代文：古时跖的狗对尧吠叫，并不是尧不仁，而是狗本来就要对不是它主人的人吠叫。
English: In ancient times, when a yakitori-eating dog barked at a yakitori eater, it was not out of animosity, but because the dog had to bark at someone who was not its owner.

古文：当是时，臣唯独知韩信，非知陛下也。
现代文：当时，我作为臣子只知道有韩信，不知道有陛下啊！
English: It was at this time that I only knew that there was a Korean letter, and did not know that there was His Majesty.

古文：且天下锐精持锋欲为陛下所为者甚众，顾力不能耳，又可尽烹之邪？ 
现代文：何况，天下磨刀霍霍，想做陛下这般大业的人很多，只是力量达不到罢了，您又能都煮死吗？ 高帝听罢说： 放了他。 
English: What's more, the whole world is busy sharpening their swords, and there are many people who want to do such a great thing as your majesty, but they just can't do it. Can you cook them all to death? Gao Di said, "Let him go."

古文：上曰： 置之。 立子恒为代王，都晋阳。大赦天下。
现代文：高帝立儿子刘恒为代王，以晋阳为都城。高帝下令大赦天下。
English: Emperor Gao appointed his son Liu Heng as acting king, with Jinyang as the capital. Emperor Gao ordered a general amnesty.

古文：上之击陈豨也，征兵于梁；梁王称病，使将将兵诣邯郸。
现代文：高帝进攻陈时，向梁王彭越征兵，彭越称病，只派将军率兵赴邯郸。
English: When Emperor Gao attacked Chen, he conscripted soldiers from Liang Wang Peng Yue. Peng Yue claimed to be ill and only sent a general to lead the troops to Gan.

古文：上怒，使人让之。
现代文：高帝大怒，令人前去斥责。
English: Emperor Gao was furious and sent someone to reprimand him.

古文：梁王恐，欲自往谢。
现代文：彭越恐惧，想亲身入朝谢罪。
English: Liang Wang was very scared and planned to go to Xie Sin in person.

古文：其将扈辄曰： 王始不往，见让而往，往则为禽矣。不如遂发兵反。 
现代文：部将扈辄说： 您当初不去，受到斥责后才去，去就会被擒，不如就势发兵反了吧。 
English: General Zou said, "You didn't go at first, you only went after being reprimanded, and if you go you will be arrested. It's better to send troops instead."

古文：梁王不听。
现代文：彭越不听劝告。
English: Peng Yue did not listen to the advice.

古文：梁太仆得罪，亡走汉，告梁王与扈辄谋反。
现代文：他的太仆因获罪逃往长安，控告梁王彭越与扈辄谋反。
English: His great-nephew fled to Chang'an after being convicted and accused Liang Wang Peng Yue of plotting against him.

古文：于是上使使掩梁王，梁王不觉，遂囚之洛阳。
现代文：于是高帝派人突袭彭越，彭越事先没有发觉，便被俘囚禁到洛阳。
English: As a result, Gao Di sent people to raid Peng Yue. Peng Yue was not discovered in advance and was captured and imprisoned in Luoyang.

古文：有司治 反形已具，请论如法 ，上赦以为庶人，传处蜀青衣。
现代文：有关部门审讯结果是： 已有谋反迹象，应按法律处死。 高帝赦免他为平民，押送到蜀郡青衣居住。
English: The result of the interrogation by the relevant departments was: There were already signs of plotting rebellion, and he should be put to death according to the law. Emperor Gao pardoned him as a civilian and sent him to live in Qingyi, Shu County.

古文：西至郑，逢吕后从长安来。
现代文：彭越向西到了郑地，遇到吕后从长安来。
English: Peng Yue went west to Zhengdi and met Lv Hou from Chang'an.

古文：彭王为吕后泣涕，自言无罪，愿处故昌邑。
现代文：彭越向吕后哭泣，说自己无罪，希望能到故地昌邑居住。
English: Peng Yue cried to Lv Guo, saying that he was not guilty and hoped to live in his hometown Changyi.

古文：吕后许诺，与俱东。
现代文：吕后口中应允，与他一起东行。
English: Lü agreed to go east with him.

古文：至洛阳，吕后白上曰： 彭王壮士，今徙之蜀，此自遗患；不如遂诛之。
现代文：到了洛阳，吕后对高帝说： 彭越是个壮士，如今把他流放到蜀郡，这是自留后患，不如就此杀了他。
English: When they arrived in Luoyang, Lv Hou said to Gao Di: Peng Yue is a strong man. Now he has been exiled to Shu County. This is a self-inflicted wound. It would be better to kill him.

古文：妾谨与俱来。 
现代文：我已与他同来。 
English: So I brought him back with me.

古文：于是吕后乃令其舍人告彭越复谋反。
现代文：吕后又指使彭越门下舍人控告彭越再行谋反。
English: Lü Guo also ordered Peng Yue's subordinates to accuse Peng Yue of plotting another rebellion.

古文：廷尉王恬关奏请族之，上可其奏。
现代文：廷尉王恬开奏请将彭越灭三族，高帝予以批准。
English: The courtier Wang Qiaoxuan requested that Peng Yue exterminate the three ethnic groups, and Emperor Gao approved.

古文：三月，夷越三族。
现代文：三月，彭越三族都被斩首。
English: In March, all three Peng Yue clans were beheaded.

古文：枭越首洛阳，下诏： 有收视者，辄捕之。 
现代文：还割下彭越的首级在洛阳示众，并颁布诏令： 有来收敛尸体者，一律逮捕。 
English: He also cut off Peng Yue's head and displayed it in Luoyang, and issued an edict: Anyone who came to collect the body would be arrested.

古文：梁大夫栾布使于齐，还，奏事越头下，祠而哭之。
现代文：梁王彭越的大夫栾布出使齐国，回来后，在彭越的头颅下奏报，祭祀后大哭一场。
English: After Liang Wang Peng Yue's doctor, Zibo, returned from his mission to Qi, he delivered a report under Peng Yue's head, and burst into tears after the sacrifice.

古文：吏捕以闻。
现代文：官吏将他逮捕，报告高帝。
English: The envoy arrested Lo Bu and reported him to the emperor.

古文：上召布，骂，欲烹之。
现代文：高帝召来栾布，痛骂一番，想煮死他。
English: Gao Di summoned Zibo, scolded him, and wanted to boil him to death.

古文：方提趋汤，布顾曰： 愿一言而死。 
现代文：两旁的人正提起他要投入滚水中，栾布回头说： 请让我说句话再死。 高帝便问： 还有什么话？ 
English: People on both sides were mentioning that he should be thrown into the boiling water, and Zibo looked back and said, "Please let me say something before I die." Gao Di then asked, "What else can I say?"

古文：上曰： 何言？ 布曰： 方上之困于彭城，败荥阳、成皋间，项王所以遂不能西者，徒以彭王居梁地，与汉合从苦楚也。
现代文：栾布说： 当年皇上受困于彭城，战败于荥阳、成皋之间，而项羽却不能西进，只是因为彭越守住梁地，与汉联合而使楚为难。
English: Hao Bu said: In those days, the emperor was trapped in Pengcheng, and was defeated between Shenyang and Chengdu, while Xiang Yu was unable to advance westward. It was only because Peng Yue held Liang Di and united with Han that Chu was in difficulty.

古文：当是之时，王一顾，与楚则汉破，与汉则楚破。
现代文：当时，只要彭越一有倾向，与项羽联合则汉失败，与汉联合则楚失败。
English: At that time, as long as Peng Yue had a tendency to unite with Xiang Yu, Han failed, and united with Han, Chu failed.

古文：且垓下之会，微彭王，项氏不亡。
现代文：而且垓下会战，没有彭越，项羽就不会灭亡。
English: Moreover, in the war under his command, without King Peng, Xiang Yu would not perish.

古文：天下已定，彭王剖符受封，亦欲传之万世。
现代文：如今天下已经平定，彭越接受符节，被封为王，也想传给子孙后代。
English: Now that the world has been stabilized, Peng Wang has received a knighthood for accepting the Rune Festival, and he also wants to pass this knighthood down from generation to generation.

古文：今陛下一征兵于梁，彭王病不行。而陛下疑以为反；反形未具，以苛小案诛灭之。
现代文：而如今陛下向梁国征一次兵，彭越因病不能前来，陛下就疑心以为造反；未见到反叛迹象，便以苛细小事诛杀了他。
English: Now, however, His Majesty has called for an army from Liang Province, and Peng Yue is unable to come due to illness. His Majesty is suspicious and thinks he is rebelling. Seeing no signs of rebellion, he kills him in a petty way.

古文：臣恐功臣人人自危也。
现代文：我担心功臣会人人自危。
English: I'm worried that the heroes will all be in danger.

古文：今彭王已死，臣生不如死，请就烹。 
现代文：现在彭越已经死了，我活着也不如死，请煮死我吧！ 
English: Now that Peng Yue is dead, I'd rather be dead than alive. Please cook me to death!

古文：于是上乃释布罪，拜为都尉。
现代文：高帝认为有理，便赦免了栾布的罪，封他为都尉。
English: Gao Di thought it was reasonable, so he pardoned Zeng Bu's crime and made him a captain.

古文：丙午，立皇子恢为梁王。丙寅，立皇子友为淮阳王。
现代文：丙午，高帝立皇子刘恢为梁王，丙寅，立皇子刘友为淮阳王。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, Emperor Gao appointed Prince Liu Jiao as the King of Liang, and Prince Liu You as the King of Huaiyang.

古文：罢东郡，颇益梁；罢颍川郡，颇益淮阳。
现代文：废除东郡，较大地扩充了梁国；废除颍川郡，较大地扩充了淮阳国。
English: Dong County was abolished, and part of it was transferred to Liangdi; Hechuan County was abolished, and part of it was transferred to Huaiyang.

古文：夏，四月，行自洛阳至。
现代文：夏季，四月，高帝一行从洛阳回长安。
English: In the summer, in April, Gao Di and his entourage returned to Chang'an from Luoyang.

古文：五月，诏立秦南海尉赵佗为南粤王，使陆贾即授玺绶，与剖符通使，使和集百越，无为南边患害。
现代文：五月，高帝下诏立原秦朝南海尉赵佗为南粤王，派陆贾前往授予印信绶带，颁发符节，互通使者，让他团结安抚百越，不要成为南方边境的祸害。
English: In May, Emperor Gao decreed that the former Qin Dynasty's South Sea lieutenant Zhao Jun would become the king of Southern Guangdong, and sent Lu Jia to award the seal ribbon, issue symbols, and exchange envoys, so that he could unite and pacify the hundred Viets and not become a scourge on the southern border.

古文：初，秦二世时，南海尉任嚣病且死。召龙川令赵佗，语曰： 秦为无道，天下苦之。
现代文：当初，秦二世时，南海尉任嚣病重将死，他召来龙川县令赵佗，对赵佗说： 秦朝的政治暴虐无道，天下都十分怨愤。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Qin II, when Nanhai Lieutenant Ren Ren was seriously ill and about to die, he summoned Longchuan County Governor Zhao Wei and said to Zhao Wei: The political tyranny of the Qin Dynasty is senseless, and the whole world is very indignant.

古文：闻陈胜等作乱，天下未知所安。
现代文：听说陈胜等人已起兵造反，天下不知怎样才能安定。
English: I heard that Chen Sheng and others had started a mutiny, and the world did not know how to be stable.

古文：南海僻远，吾恐盗兵侵地至此，欲兴兵绝新道自备，待诸侯变；会病甚。
现代文：我们南海虽然地处偏远，我也担心盗贼匪兵到这里来侵占地盘，想发动军队切断秦朝修筑的通往内地的新道，以自做准备，等待诸侯的变化，恰在此时我却病重。
English: Although our South China Sea is remote, I was also worried that thieves and bandits would come here to occupy the site and wanted to launch an army to cut off the new road to the mainland built by the Qin Dynasty, so I prepared myself and waited for the change of princes. At this time, I was seriously ill.

古文：且番禺负山险，阻南海，东西数千里，颇有中国人相辅；此亦一州之主也，可以立国。
现代文：再说我们的番禺城后山势险要，前有南海阻隔，东西几千里，有很多中原人在辅佐治理，这也是一州之主，可以建立个国家。
English: In addition, our Panyu city is surrounded by mountains, separated by the South Sea and thousands of miles from east to west. There are many Central Plains people who assist in governance. This is also the master of a state and can build a country.

古文：郡中长吏，无足与言者，故召公告之。 
现代文：我看郡中的官员，没有人足以商议，所以召你前来，告诉你我的嘱托。 
English: I see that the officers of the county have no one with whom to confer, and have called you here to tell you of my commission.

古文：即被佗书，行南海尉事。
现代文：任嚣说完，便为赵佗写下委任书，请他代理南海尉的政事。
English: Ren Ren immediately issued an appointment document to Zhao Wei, allowing him to act on behalf of Nanhai County.

古文：嚣死，佗即移檄告横浦、阳山、湟谿关曰： 盗兵且至，急绝道，聚兵自守！ 
现代文：任嚣死后，赵佗立即发出檄文通知横浦、阳山、湟关说： 盗匪军队就要来到，各地立即断绝通道，聚兵自守。 
English: After Ren Ran's death, Zhao Wei immediately sent out a message to Yokoura, Yangshan, and Shaoguan, saying: The robber army is about to arrive, all regions should immediately cut off access, and gather soldiers to defend themselves.

古文：因稍以法诛秦所置长吏，以其党为假守。
现代文：随后又逐渐地利用法律诛杀秦朝所设官员，以他的同党做代理郡守。
English: Zhao Jun took this opportunity to gradually use the law to kill the officials installed by the Qin Dynasty, and used his cronies as acting officials.

古文：秦已破灭，佗即击并桂林、象郡，自立为南越武王。
现代文：秦朝灭亡后，赵佗立即发兵进攻吞并桂林、象郡，自立为南越武王。
English: After the Qin Dynasty was destroyed, Zhao Wei attacked and annexed Guilin and Xiang County, establishing himself as the King of South Vietnam.

古文：陆生至，尉佗魋结、箕倨见陆生。
现代文：陆贾来到南越，赵佗头上盘着南越族的头髻，伸开两脚坐着接见他。
English: When Lu Jia came to South Vietnam, Zhao Jun, with the headdress of the South Vietnamese on his head, sat with his feet stretched out to meet him.

古文：陆生说佗曰： 足下中国人，亲戚、昆弟、坟墓在真定。
现代文：陆贾劝说赵佗： 您是中原人士，亲戚、兄弟、祖先坟墓都在真定。
English: Lu Jia persuaded Zhao Wei: You are a Central Plains person. Your relatives, brothers, and ancestors' graves are all in Zhending.

古文：今足下反天性，弃冠带，欲以区区之越与天子抗衡为敌国，祸且及身矣！
现代文：现在您违反天性，抛弃华夏冠带，想以区区南越之地与汉朝天子相抗衡成为敌国，大祸就要临头了！
English: Now, contrary to your nature, you are abandoning the crown of China and trying to compete with the Han Dynasty and become an enemy country with the land of South Vietnam. A great disaster is imminent!

古文：且夫秦失其政，诸族、豪桀并起，唯汉王先入关，据咸阳。
现代文：再说，秦朝丧失德政，各地诸侯、豪强纷纷起兵反抗，只有汉王能先入关中，占据咸阳。
English: Moreover, the Qin Dynasty lost its political power, and princes and strongmen from all over the country took up arms to resist. Only the Han King could enter Guanzhong first and occupy Xianyang.

古文：项羽倍约，自立为西楚霸王，诸侯皆属，可谓至强。
现代文：项羽背约，自立为西楚霸王，诸侯都成为他的部属，他可以说是极强大的了。
English: Xiang Yu reneged on the agreement and established himself as the king of Western Chu. The princes all became his subordinates. He could be said to have become extremely powerful.

古文：然汉王起巴、蜀，鞭笞天下，遂诛项羽，灭之。
现代文：但汉王起兵巴、蜀后，便横扫天下，终于诛杀了项羽，消灭了楚军。
English: However, the Han king started from Ba and Shu, then swept the world, and finally killed Xiang Yu and wiped out the Chu army.

古文：五年之间，海内平定。此非人力，天之所建也。
现代文：五年之间，海内获得平定，这并非人力所为，而是上天的建树啊！
English: In the space of five years, the country was pacified. This was not the work of man, but the work of God!

古文：天子闻君王王南越，不助天下诛暴逆，将相欲移兵而诛王。
现代文：汉朝天子听说您在南越称王，却不协助天下诛杀暴逆，文武将相都请求派兵来剿灭您。
English: The emperor of the Han Dynasty heard that you claimed to be the king of South Vietnam, but did not help the world fight the tyranny. The generals and marshals all requested to send troops to exterminate you.

古文：天子怜百姓新劳苦，故且休之，遣臣授君王印，剖符通使。
现代文：但天子怜悯百姓刚刚经过兵事劳苦，所以暂且休兵不发，派我前来授您君王印信，颁发符节，互通使臣。
English: However, the Son of Heaven, out of compassion for the people who have just gone through the hardships of military service, has sent me to grant you the Emperor's seal letter, issue a festival of symbols, and exchange envoys.

古文：君王宜郊迎，北面称臣；乃欲以新造未集之越，屈强于此！
现代文：您应该亲自到郊外迎接，向北称臣才是，而您竟要凭借新近缔造尚未安定的越国，对汉朝如此倔强不服从！
English: You should personally go to the suburbs to greet, to the north to be a vassal is, and you actually have to rely on the newly created yet unstable Vietnam to be so stubbornly disobedient to the Han Dynasty!

古文：汉诚闻之，掘烧王先人冢，夷灭宗族，使一偏将将十万众临越，则越杀王降汉如反覆手耳！ 
现代文：汉朝要是知道了，掘毁焚烧您祖先的坟墓，杀光您的宗族，再派一员偏将率领十万大兵压境，那么南越人杀您投降汉朝，是易如反掌的！ 
English: If the Han Dynasty finds out, digs up and burns the graves of your ancestors, kills your entire clan, and then sends a general to lead 100,000 soldiers to suppress the border, then the South Vietnamese will kill you and surrender to the Han Dynasty, it is as easy as pie!

古文：于是尉佗乃蹶然起坐，谢陆生曰： 居蛮夷中久，殊失礼义！ 
现代文：于是赵佗大惊失色，立即离开坐位，向陆贾谢罪说： 我在蛮夷民族中居住已久，太没有礼义了。 
English: As a result, Zhao Yao was shocked and lost his composure. He immediately left his seat and said to Lu Jia Xie, "I have lived among barbarian peoples for a long time. This is too disrespectful.

古文：因问陆生曰： 我孰与萧何、曹参、韩信贤？ 
现代文：他又问陆贾： 我与萧何、曹参、韩信比，谁高明？ 
English: Next, he asked Lu Sheng: Compared with Xiao He, Cao San and Han Xin, who is more virtuous and talented?

古文：陆生曰： 王似贤也。 
现代文：陆贾回答： 似乎是您高明些。 
English: Lu Jia replied: It seems that you are more intelligent.

古文：复曰： 我孰与皇帝贤？ 
现代文：赵佗又问： 那么我与汉朝皇帝比，谁高明？ 
English: Then he asked, "How do I compare to the emperor?"

古文：陆生曰： 皇帝继五帝、三皇之业，统理中国；中国之人以亿计，地方万里，万物殷富；政由一家，自天地剖判未始有也。
现代文：陆贾说： 皇帝继承三皇、五帝的伟业，统一治理中国；中原人口以亿计算，土地方圆万里，万物殷实丰富；皇帝能把政权集于一家之手，是开天辟地以来未曾有过的事。
English: Lu Jia said: The emperor inherits the great cause of the three emperors and five emperors, and governs China in a unified way; the population of the Central Plains is counted in hundreds of millions, the land is vast, and everything is rich and plentiful; the emperor can concentrate power in the hands of one family, which has never happened since the beginning of time.

古文：今王众不过十万，皆蛮夷，崎岖山海间，譬若汉一郡耳，何乃比于汉！ 
现代文：您的臣民不过几十万，还都是蛮夷，散布在崎岖的崇山大海之间，好像是汉朝的一个郡而已，怎么可以与汉朝相提并论！ 
English: Your subjects are only a few hundred thousand, but they are all barbarians, scattered between the rugged mountains and the sea, as if they were just a county of the Han Dynasty, how can they be compared with the Han Dynasty!

古文：尉佗大笑曰： 吾不起中国，故王此；使我居中国，何遽不若汉！ 
现代文：赵佗大笑着说： 我没有在中原兴起，所以在这里称王；如果我在中原，怎么就见得不如汉朝！ 
English: Zhao Yao laughed loudly and said, "I did not rise in the Central Plains, so I claim the title of king here. If I were in the Central Plains, how could I be inferior to the Han Dynasty!

古文：乃留陆生与饮。
现代文：说完便留下陆贾与他畅饮。
English: Having said that, he left Lu Jia to have a drink with him.

古文：数月，曰： 越中无足与语。至生来，令我日闻所不闻。 
现代文：过了几个月，赵佗说： 南越没有可说话的人，直到你来，才让我每天听到从未听过的事。 
English: After a few months, Zhao Wei said: "There is no one to talk to in South Vietnam. Until you came, I heard things I had never heard before every day.

古文：赐陆生橐中装直千金，他送亦千金。
现代文：又赏赐陆贾一袋珠宝，价值千金，其他馈赠也达千金之多。
English: He also gave Lu Shengwu a bagged package worth thousands of dollars, and also gave him many other gifts worth thousands of dollars.

古文：陆生卒拜违法佗为南越王，令称臣，奉汉约。
现代文：陆贾最后便拜赵佗为南越王，令他向汉朝称臣，遵守汉朝的约定。
English: In the end, Lu Jia made Zhao Jun the king of South Vietnam and made him pledge allegiance to the Han Dynasty and abide by the Han Dynasty's agreement.

古文：归报，帝大悦，拜贾为太中大夫。
现代文：陆贾回朝报告，高帝大为高兴，封陆贾为太中大夫。
English: Lu Jia reported back to the North, Emperor Gao was very pleased, and Fong Lu Jia was appointed as the First Vice-Admiral.

古文：陆生时时前说称《诗》、《书》，帝骂之曰： 乃公居马上而得之，安事《诗》、《书》！ 
现代文：陆贾时时在高帝面前称道《诗经》、《尚书》，高帝斥骂他说： 你老子是在马上打下的天下，哪里用得着《诗经》、《尚书》！ 
English: Lu Jia always praised the "Book of Songs" and "Song of Songs" in front of Gao Di. Gao Di scolded him and said, "Your father is about to bring down the world, what is the use of "Book of Songs" and "Song of Songs"!

古文：陆生曰： 居马上得之，宁可以马上治之乎？
现代文：陆贾反驳道： 在马上得天下，难道可以在马上治理天下吗？
English: Lu Jia retorted, "Can we rule the world immediately after winning the world?

古文：且汤、武逆取而以顺守之；文武并用，长久之术也。
现代文：况且商朝汤王、周朝武王都是逆上造反取天下，顺势怀柔守天下。文武并用，才是长治久安的方法。
English: Moreover, the Tang kings of the Shang Dynasty and the Wu kings of the Zhou Dynasty both rebelled to take over the world, and kept the world under their control. The combination of literature and martial arts is the only way to achieve long-term peace.

古文：昔者吴王夫差、智伯、秦始皇，皆以极武而亡。
现代文：当年吴王夫差、智伯瑶、秦始皇，也都是因为穷兵黩武而遭致灭亡。
English: In those years, the emperors Wu Wangfuzha, Zhi Boqin, and Qin Shihuang were also killed because of their poor military discipline.

古文：乡使秦已并天下，行仁义，法先圣，陛下安得而有之！ 
现代文：假使秦国吞并天下之后，推行仁义，效法先圣，陛下今天怎能拥有天下！ 
English: If, after the Qin State had annexed the whole world, it had promoted benevolence and righteousness and followed the example of the First Sage, how could His Majesty possess the whole world today!

古文：帝有惭色，曰： 试为我著秦所以失天下、吾所以得之者及古成败之国。 
现代文：高帝露出惭愧面容，说： 请你试为我写出秦国所以失去天下，我所以得到天下及古代国家成败的道理。 
English: Gao Di showed a shame-faced face and said: Please try to write out for me the reason why Qin lost the world and why I gained the world and the reason for the success or failure of ancient countries.

古文：陆生乃粗述存亡之征，凡著十二篇。
现代文：陆贾于是大略阐述了国家存亡的征兆，共写成十二篇。
English: Lu Jia then outlined the signs of the country's survival, writing a total of twelve articles.

古文：每奏一篇，帝未尝不称善，左右呼万岁；号其书曰《新语》。
现代文：每奏上一篇，高帝都称赞叫好，左右随从也齐呼万岁。该书被称为《新语》。
English: Every time he played the last piece, Emperor Gao praised it and called it good, and his left and right followers also shouted "long live." The book was called "New Language."

古文：帝有疾，恶见人，卧禁中，诏户者无得入群臣，群臣绛、灌等莫敢入，十馀日。
现代文：高帝生了病，讨厌见人，躺在宫中，命令守宫门官员不准群臣进入，周勃，灌婴等群臣都不敢进去。
English: Gao Di fell ill and hated to see people. He lay in the palace and ordered the officials guarding the palace gate not to allow the courtiers to enter. The courtiers such as Zhou Bo and Guan Yu did not dare to enter.

古文：舞阳侯樊哙排闼直入，大臣随之。
现代文：这样过了十几天，舞阳侯樊哙闯开宫门直冲而崐入，各大臣也随后跟进。
English: After a dozen days of this, Maiyang Houyi broke open the palace door and rushed straight in, followed by the ministers.

古文：上独枕一宦者卧。
现代文：只见高帝正以一个宦官为枕头，独自躺在那里。
English: Seeing Gaozu lying alone with a eunuch on his pillow.

古文：哙等见上，流涕曰： 始陛下与臣等起丰、沛，定天下，何其壮也！
现代文：樊哙等人见了高帝，流着眼泪说： 想当年，陛下与我们一同在丰、沛起事，平定天下，是何等的雄壮！
English: When they saw Gao Di, they shed tears and said, "I remember that year, your majesty was with us in Feng, vigorously rising up and pacifying the world. How majestic he was!

古文：今天下已定，又何惫也！
现代文：现在天下已经安定，又是多么的疲惫不堪！
English: But now that the situation has stabilized, how exhausted you are!

古文：且陛下病甚，大臣震恐；不见臣等计事，顾独与一宦者绝乎？
现代文：而且，陛下病重，大臣们都感到震惊恐惧；陛下不接见我们商议国家大事，就只是和一个宦官到死吗！
English: Moreover, His Majesty is seriously ill, and the ministers are shocked and frightened; if His Majesty does not receive us to discuss national affairs, will he just die with a eunuch!

古文：且陛下独不见赵高之事乎？ 
现代文：再说陛下难道不知道赵高篡权的事吗？ 
English: Besides, didn't you see what happened to Zhao Gao?

古文：帝笑而起。
现代文：高帝便笑着起了身。
English: Gao Di laughed and got up.

古文：秋，七月，淮南王布反。
现代文：秋季，七月，淮南王黥布反叛。
English: In the autumn, in July, Huainan Wang Zibo rebelled.

古文：初，淮阴侯死，布已心恐。
现代文：起初，淮阳侯韩信被杀，黥布已感到心惊。
English: At first, when Huaiyang Hou Hanxin was killed, Zibo was shocked.

古文：及彭越诛，醢其肉以赐诸侯。
现代文：待到彭越也遭处死，高帝又把他的肉制成肉酱分赐各地诸侯。
English: Peng Yue was also executed, and Emperor Gao made his flesh into meat sauce and distributed it to various provinces.

古文：使者至淮南，淮南王方猎，见醢，因大恐，阴令人部聚兵，候伺旁郡警急。
现代文：使者到了淮南，淮南王黥布正在打猎，见了肉酱，大为惊恐，便暗中派人部署军队，等候邻郡报警告急。
English: When the envoy arrived in Huainan, the king of Huainan, Zibo, was hunting. When he saw the meat sauce, he was greatly alarmed, and secretly sent someone to deploy the army, waiting for the neighboring county to report an emergency warning.

古文：布所幸姬病就医，医家与中大夫贲赫对门，赫乃厚馈遗，从姬饮医家；王疑其与乱，欲捕赫。
现代文：黥布的一个宠姬，因病去就医，医生与中大夫贲赫住对门。贲赫便备下厚礼，陪同宠姬在医生家饮酒。黥布却怀疑贲赫与宠姬私通，想抓起贲赫治罪。
English: A favorite of Yan Bu went to see a doctor due to illness, and the doctor lived next door to Dr. Zou He. Zou He then prepared a generous gift and accompanied Zou He to drink alcohol at the doctor's house. However, Yan Bu suspected Zou He of having an affair with Zou He, and wanted to arrest Zou He and punish him.

古文：赫乘传诣长安上变，言： 布谋反有端，可先未发诛也。 
现代文：贲赫觉察，乘传车跑到长安城向高帝告发事变，说： 黥布谋反，已有迹象，应该趁他尚未发动先行诛杀。 
English: Noticing this, Yan He ran to Chang'an City by car to report the incident to Gao Di. He said, "There are already signs that Yan Bu is plotting a rebellion. We should take advantage of the fact that he has not yet launched a preemptive strike."

古文：上读其书，语萧相国，相国曰： 布不宜有此，恐仇怨妄诬之。
现代文：高帝读了他的举报信，对萧何说起，萧何认为： 黥布不至于做这种事，恐怕是仇人妄行诬告他。
English: Gao Di read his report letter and began to talk to Xiao He. Xiao He thought: Xie Bu wouldn't do such a thing. I'm afraid it's the enemy who's making false accusations against him.

古文：请系赫，使人微验淮南王。 
现代文：可以先把贲赫抓起来，派人暗中查验黥布。 
English: Please arrest Yan He and send someone to secretly watch Huainan Wang.

古文：淮南王布见赫以罪亡上变，固已疑其言国阴事；汉使又来，颇有所验；遂族赫家，发兵反。
现代文：黥布见贲赫畏罪逃去向高帝控告，本来已经疑心他会说出本国的阴谋；汉朝使者又来，查验出不少证据；便杀光贲赫全家，发兵反叛。
English: When Zibo saw that Yan Heji had fled to complain to Emperor Gao, he had already suspected that he would reveal his country's plot; the Han Dynasty envoy came again and found a lot of evidence; he killed Yan He's entire family and sent troops to rebel.

古文：反书闻，上乃赦贲赫，以为将军。
现代文：关于黥布造反的报告传至，高帝于是赦免贲赫，任命为将军。
English: News of the rebellion reached Chang'an, and the emperor released Yan He and made him a general.

古文：上召诸将问计，皆曰： 发兵击之，坑竖子耳，何能为乎！ 
现代文：高帝召集众将询问对策，大家都说： 发兵征讨，坑杀这家伙罢了，他有什么能耐！ 
English: Gao Di called together the generals to inquire about the countermeasures, and everyone said: Send troops to collect, just kill this guy, what is he capable of!

古文：汝阴侯滕公召故楚令尹薛公问之。
现代文：汝阴侯滕公夏侯婴召来原楚国的令尹薛公，向他征求意见。
English: Ruyin Hou Tenggong Xia Houying summoned the former King of Chu, Yin Xuegong, to ask him for advice.

古文：令尹曰： 是固当反。 
现代文：薛公说： 黥布当然要反。 
English: Xue Gong said: Of course, the cloth should be reversed.

古文：滕公曰： 上裂地而封之，疏爵而王之；其反何也？ 
现代文：夏侯婴问： 皇上割地封给他，又分赐爵位让他称王，还有什么造反的道理？ 
English: Xia Houying asked: If the emperor gave him land and title, and gave him a title of nobility to make him king, what other reason is there to rebel?

古文：令尹曰： 往年杀彭越，前年杀韩信；此三人者，同功一体之人也，自疑祸及身，故反耳。 
现代文：薛公回答道： 皇上前不久杀了彭越，再早些还杀了韩信，他们三人，功劳相同是三位一体的，他自己疑心大祸降临，所以便造反了。 
English: Xue Gong replied, "The emperor killed Peng Yue shortly before, and earlier also killed Han Xin. The three of them are a trinity with the same merit. He himself suspected that a great calamity had befallen, so he rebelled.

古文：滕公言之上，上乃召见，问薛公，薛公对曰： 布反不足怪也。
现代文：夏侯婴将此话告诉高帝，高帝于是传来薛公，问他，薛公回答说： 黥布造反不足为怪。
English: Xia Houyong told this to Gao Di. Gao Di then sent for Xue Gong and asked him. Xue Gong replied, "It is not surprising that Xie Bu rebelled.

古文：使布出于上计，山东非汉之有也；出于中计，胜败之数未可知也；出于下计，陛下安枕而卧矣。 
现代文：但是，如果他采用上策，崤山之东便不再是汉朝所有的了；如果他采用中策，两方谁胜谁负还难以预料；如果他采用下策，那么陛下就可以高枕无忧了。 
English: However, if he adopts the upper policy, the eastern part of Lushan Mountain will no longer be owned by the Han Dynasty; if he adopts the middle policy, it is still difficult to predict who will win and who will lose; if he adopts the lower policy, then His Majesty can rest easy.

古文：上曰： 何谓上计？ 
现代文：高帝问： 什么是他的上策？ 
English: The emperor said: What is the best way?

古文：对曰： 东取吴，西取楚，并齐，取鲁，传檄燕、赵，固守其所，山东非汉之有也。 
现代文：回答说： 向东攻取吴地，向西夺占楚地，吞并齐地，占据鲁地，传令给燕、赵两地，让他们固守本土，那么崤山以东就不在汉朝手中了。 
English: He replied: "Conquer Wu to the east, occupy Chu to the west, annex the whole country, occupy Ludi, and issue orders to Yan and Zhao to hold fast to the mainland, then the east of Mount Lushan will no longer be in the hands of the Han Dynasty."

古文： 何谓中计？ 
现代文： 什么是他的中策？ 
English: The Emperor asked again: What is the middle course?

古文： 东取吴，西取楚，并韩，取魏，据敖仓之粟，塞成皋之口，胜败之数未可行也。 
现代文： 向东攻取吴地，向西夺占楚地，吞并韩地，占据魏地，掌握敖仓的储粮，阻塞成皋通道，那么谁胜谁负就难以预料。 
English: Conquer Wudi in the east, occupy Chudi in the west, annex Korea, occupy Wei, control the grain reserves of Kamakura, block the road to Chengdu, then it is difficult to predict who will win.

古文： 何谓下计？ 
现代文： 什么是他的下策？ 
English: The Emperor also asked: What is the next step?

古文： 东取吴，西取下蔡，归重于越，身归长沙，陛下安枕而卧，汉无事矣。 
现代文： 向东攻取吴地，向西夺占下蔡，然后把辎重送回越地，自己回到长沙，那么陛下就可以高枕无忧，汉朝就没事了。 
English: Conquer Wudi in the east, capture Lower Cai in the west, and then send Zouhe back to Yueji, and return to Changsha. Then His Majesty can rest easy, and the Han Dynasty will be fine.

古文：上曰： 是计将安出？ 对曰： 出下计。 
现代文：高帝又问： 他将会使哪种计策呢？ 薛公说： 必使下策。 
English: Gao Di also asked: What kind of strategy will he use? Xue Gong said: He will definitely use the next strategy.

古文：上曰： 何谓废上、中计而出下计？ 
现代文：高帝问： 为什么他会舍弃上、中策而采用下策呢？ 
English: Gao Di asked: Why would he abandon the upper and middle measures and adopt the lower measure?

古文：对曰： 布，故丽山之徒也，自致万乘之主，此皆为身，不顾后、为百姓万世虑者也。
现代文：薛公答道： 黥布其人，原是个骊山的刑徒，自己奋力爬到王的高位，这些都使他只顾自身，不顾以后崐，更不会为百姓做长远打算。
English: Xue Gong replied, "Obuji, who was originally a convict from Shaoshan, worked hard to climb to the high position of the king. All of this made him only care about himself, ignore the future, and not make long-term plans for the people.

古文：故曰出下计。 
现代文：所以说他必采用下策。 高帝说： 好！ 
English: Therefore, he had to take the next step. Gao Di said: Good!

古文：上曰： 善！ 封薛公千户。
现代文：下令封薛公一千户。
English: An order was issued to seal one thousand households of Xue Gong.

古文：乃立皇子长为淮南王。
现代文：于是立皇子刘长为淮南王。
English: the enthronement of Prince Liu Chang as King of Huainan.

古文：是时，上有疾，欲使太子往击黥布。
现代文：这时，高帝正有病，想让太子前去进攻黥布。
English: At this time, Emperor Gao was ill and wanted the crown prince to go and attack Yanbu.

古文：太子客东园公、绮里季、夏黄公、角里先生说建成侯吕释之曰： 太子将兵，有功则位不益，无功则从此受祸矣。
现代文：太子的宾客东园公、绮里季、夏黄公、角里先生劝建成侯吕释之说： 太子统领大军，有了功劳地位已无以再增高，没有功劳便从此受祸。
English: The prince's guests, Dongyuan Gong, Bao Lijie, Xia Huang Gong, and Mr. Kakuri, persuaded Jiancheng Hou Liusi to say: The prince led a large army, and his status could not be further enhanced with merit. Without merit, he would suffer from this.

古文：君何不急请吕后，承间为上泣言： 黥布，天下猛将也，善用兵。
现代文：你何不赶快去请求吕后，抓个机会在皇上面前哭求说： 黥布是天下闻名的猛将，擅长用兵。
English: Why don't you hurry up and plead with Lv Hou, seize the opportunity to cry and plead in front of the emperor and say: Zibo is a world-famous fierce general, good at using soldiers.

古文：今诸将皆陛下故等夷，乃令太子将此属，无异使羊将狼，莫肯为用；且使布闻之，则鼓行而西耳！
现代文：而我方众将领又都是过去与陛下平起平坐的旧人，要是让太子指挥这些人，无异于让羊去驱使狼，无人听命于他。况且假使黥布知道，便会击鼓向西，长驱直入了。
English: And our generals are all old men who used to be on an equal footing with His Majesty. If the prince were to command these people, it would be tantamount to letting the sheep drive the wolf. No one would listen to him. Moreover, if he knew, he would beat the drum to the west and drive straight in.

古文：上虽病，强载辎车，卧而护之，诸将不敢不尽力。
现代文：皇上您虽然有病，也要勉强上帘车，躺着指挥，众将领就不敢不尽力。
English: Emperor, although you are ill, you still have to get on the carriage, lie down and command. The generals dare not not do their best.

古文：上虽苦，为妻子自强！  
现代文：皇上虽然生病困苦，为了妻子儿女还是要自己振作一下！  
English: Although the Emperor is ill and in need, he should cheer himself up for the sake of his wife and children!

古文：于是吕释之立夜见吕后。
现代文：于是吕释之立刻连夜求见吕后。
English: As a result, Lv Xizhi immediately went to see Lv Hou overnight.

古文：吕后承间为上泣涕而言，如四人意。
现代文：吕后找个机会对高帝流泪哀求，照四位宾客的意思说了。
English: Lv Hou took the opportunity to tearfully plead with Gao Di and said what the four guests wanted.

古文：上曰： 吾惟竖子固不足遣，而公自行耳。 
现代文：高帝说： 我本知道这小子不配派遣，还是我自己去吧！ 
English: The emperor said, "I thought that this young man couldn't have sent him, so let Lao Zi go himself."

古文：于是上自将兵而东，群臣居守，皆送至霸上。
现代文：于是高帝亲自统领大兵向东进发，君臣留守朝中，都送行到霸上。
English: As a result, Emperor Gao personally led the soldiers to march eastward, and the monarchs and ministers stayed in the middle of the court, all of whom were sent to Baxian.

古文：留侯病，自强起，至曲邮，见上曰： 臣宜从，病甚。
现代文：留侯张良生了病，也支撑身子，来到曲邮，对高帝说： 我本应随您出征，但实在病重。
English: Zhang Liang, a resident of Luhou, who was ill, also supported his body, came to Qupo and said to Gao Di: I should have gone with you, but I am really seriously ill.

古文：楚人剽疾，愿上无与争锋！ 
现代文：黥布那些楚国人剽悍凶猛，望皇上不要和他硬拼！ 
English: Those Chu people are fierce and ferocious, please don't fight with him!

古文：因说上令太子为将军，监关中兵。
现代文：又建议高帝让太子为将军，监领关中军队。
English: He also suggested that Emperor Gao make the prince a general to supervise the troops in Guanzhong.

古文：上曰： 子房虽病，强卧而傅太子。 
现代文：高帝说： 张先生虽然有病在身，请勉强躺着辅佐太子。 
English: Gao Di said: Although Mr. Zhang is ill, please reluctantly lie down to assist the crown prince.

古文：是时，叔孙通为太傅，留侯行少傅事。
现代文：当时，叔孙通是太子的太傅，张良代理少傅之事。
English: At that time, Uncle Sun Tong was the prince's grand tutor, and Zhang Liang was acting as junior tutor.

古文：发上郡、北地、陇西车骑、巴蜀材官及中尉卒三万人为皇太子卫，军霸上。
现代文：高帝又下令征发上郡、北地、陇西的车、骑兵，巴、蜀两地的材官及京师中尉的军队三万人，作为皇太子的警卫部队，驻扎在霸上。
English: Emperor Gao also ordered the conscription and dispatch of an army of 30,000 cavalry and chariots from Shang County, the North, and Shaanxi, as well as officers and lieutenants of the Beijing Division from Ba and Shu, to serve as the crown prince's guard force, stationed in Baxian.

古文：布之初反，谓其将曰： 上老矣，厌兵，必不能来。
现代文：黥布造反之初，对部将说： 皇上老了，讨厌兵事，肯定不能来。
English: When Ying Bu began to rebel, he said to his generals: The emperor is old and tired of war, he will not personally lead the troops.

古文：使诸将，诸将独患淮阴、彭越，今皆已死，馀不足畏也。 
现代文：要是派各大将，其中我只怕韩信、彭越，但他们现在都死了。其他人全不值得担心。 
English: If I were to send generals, I would only be afraid of Han Xin and Peng Yue, but they are all dead now. The others are not worth worrying about.

古文：故遂反。
现代文：所以决心反叛。
English: So he rebelled.

古文：果如薛公之言，东击荆。荆王贾走死富陵；尽劫其兵，渡淮击楚。
现代文：他果然像薛公说的那样，向东攻击吴地的荆王刘贾，刘贾败逃死在富陵；黥布胁迫刘贾的全部兵士，渡过淮河攻打楚王刘交。
English: He did indeed, as Xue Gong said, attack Liu Jia, the king of Jing in Wu, to the east. Liu Jia was defeated and fled to his death in Fuling; Zibo coerced all of Liu Jia's soldiers to cross the Huai River to attack Liu Jia, the king of Chu.

古文：楚发兵与战徐、僮间。为三军，欲以相救为奇。
现代文：刘交发兵在徐县、僮县一带迎战，他把军队分为三支，想以互相救援出奇制胜。
English: Liu Jia sent soldiers to fight in the areas of Xu County and Handan County. He divided the army into three branches, hoping to achieve a surprise victory through mutual rescue.

古文：或说楚将曰： 布善用兵，民素畏之。
现代文：有人劝说楚将道： 黥布善于用兵，人们平时就惧怕他。
English: Someone advised Chu Zheng: Ying Bu is good at using soldiers to fight, and the people have always been afraid of him.

古文：且兵法： 诸侯自战其地为散地 ，今别为三，彼败吾一军，馀皆走，安能相救！ 
现代文：何况兵法说： 诸侯在自己领土上作战，士兵极易逃散。 现在楚军分为三支，敌军只要打败一支，其余的就会逃跑，哪能互相援救呢！ 
English: What's more, the laws of war say: Princes fight on their own territory, and soldiers are easily dispersed. Now the Chu army is divided into three, and if the enemy army defeats just one, the rest will flee. How can they help each other?

古文：不听。布果破其一军，其二军散走；布遂引兵而西。
现代文：楚王不听，结果被黥布攻破一支，另两支果然便四散了。黥布于是引兵西进。
English: King Chu did not listen, and as a result, one of them was broken by Zibo, and the other two were scattered. Zibo then led his troops westward.

古文：太祖高皇帝下十二年
现代文：汉高帝十二年
English: The 12th year of the Hango Emperor

古文：冬，十月，上与布兵遇于蕲西，布兵精甚。
现代文：冬季，十月，高帝刘邦与黥布军队在蕲西对阵。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Gao, Liu Bang and the Zibo army faced off in Shaanxi.

古文：上壁庸城，望布军置陈如项籍军，上恶之。
现代文：黥布军队十分精锐，高帝便在庸城坚壁固守。远远望去，黥布军队的布阵如同当年的项籍军队，高帝心中厌恶。
English: The Zibo army was very elite, and Emperor Gao held fast to the strong walls of Yongcheng. Looking from afar, the Zibo army's formation was like the Xiang nationality army of that year, which Emperor Gao detested.

古文：与布相望见，遥谓布曰： 何苦而反？ 
现代文：他与黥布互相望见，远远地质问黥布： 你何苦要造反？ 
English: Seeing Ying Bu from afar, he said to Ying Bu from a distance: "Why bother to rebel?

古文：布曰： 欲为帝耳！ 
现代文：黥布崐回答说： 想当皇帝而已！ 
English: He replied, "I just want to be emperor!"

古文：上怒骂之，遂大战。
现代文：高帝怒声斥骂他，于是双方大战。
English: The emperor flew into a rage, cursed him, and the two armies immediately went to war.

古文：布军败走，渡淮，数止战，不利，与百馀人走江南，上令别将追之。
现代文：黥布军队败退而逃，渡过淮河，虽然几次停住阵脚再战，仍不能取胜。他只好与一百余人逃到长江南岸，高帝便另派一员将军继续追击。
English: The Zibo army retreated in defeat and fled across the Huai River. Although he stopped several times to fight again, he still could not win. He had no choice but to flee with more than a hundred people to the south bank of the Yangtze River. Emperor Gao then sent another general to continue the pursuit.

古文：上还，过沛，留，置酒沛宫，悉召故人、父老、诸母、子弟佐酒，道旧故为笑乐。
现代文：高帝凯旋，路过沛县，留下来，在沛宫举行酒宴。把旧友、父老、女长辈、家族子弟全部召来陪同饮酒，共叙旧情，欢笑作乐。
English: Emperor Gao's triumphant return passed through Peixian, but he stayed and held a wine banquet in Peigu. He invited all of his old friends, parents, female elders, family members and children to accompany him in drinking, recounting old stories, laughing and having fun.

古文：酒酣，上自为歌，起舞，慷慨伤怀，泣数行下，谓沛父兄曰： 游子悲故乡。
现代文：酒喝到畅快时，高帝自己作歌，欣然起舞，唱到慷慨伤怀之时，洒下了几行热泪。高帝对沛县父老兄弟说： 游子悲故乡。
English: When the wine was drunk, Gao Di himself sang a song and danced with joy. When he sang a generous and sad song, he shed a few lines of tears. Gao Di said to his parents and brothers in Peixian: "The wanderer is sad about his hometown."

古文：朕自沛公以诛暴逆，遂有天下；其以沛为朕汤沐邑，复其民，世世无有所与。 
现代文：我以沛公名义起事诛灭秦朝暴逆，才夺取了天下。现在把沛县当作我的汤沐邑，免除县中百姓的赋役，世世代代不予征收。 
English: It was only after I rose up in the name of Pei Gong to crush the violent rebellion of the Qin Dynasty that I conquered the world. Now, I regard Pei County as my soup, exempting the people in the county from service and not imposing it for generations.

古文：乐饮十馀日，乃去。
现代文：高帝在沛县饮酒欢乐十余天后，才离去。
English: Gao Di only left Peixian after more than ten days of drinking and revelry.

古文：汉别将击英布军洮水南、北，皆大破之。
现代文：汉朝将军在洮水南、北追击黥布残军，都大获全胜。
English: Han Dynasty generals pursued the remnants of the Zibo army in the south and north of Surabaya, and won a complete victory.

古文：布故与番君婚，以故长沙成王臣使人诱布，伪欲与亡走越，布信而随之。
现代文：黥布曾与番君吴芮结有婚姻之好，所以长沙成王吴臣便派人诱骗黥布，假称想和他一起逃到南越去。
English: Zibo had a good marriage with the warden Wu Xuan, so the Changsha ruler Wu Chen sent someone to trick Zibo, pretending that he wanted to escape with him to South Vietnam.

古文：番阳人杀布兹乡民田舍。
现代文：黥布果然相信，与使者前往，结果在布兹乡农民田舍被番阳人杀死。
English: Zibo truly believed, and went with the messenger. As a result, he was killed by the Panyang people in a farmer's farmhouse in Buzi Township.

古文：周勃悉定代郡、雁门、云中地，斩陈豨于当城。
现代文：周勃全部平定代郡、雁门、云中等地，在当城将陈斩首。
English: Zhou Bo completely subdued Dingdai County, Yanmen and Yunzhong, and beheaded Chen in Dangcheng.

古文：上以荆王贾无后，更以荆为吴国。
现代文：高帝因为荆王刘贾没有后人，便改荆国为吴国。
English: Emperor Gao changed Jing Province to Wu Province because Jing King Liu Jia had no descendants.

古文：辛丑，立兄仲之子濞为吴王，王三郡、五十三城。
现代文：辛丑，立兄长刘仲的儿子刘濞为吴王，管辖三个郡五十三座城。
English: Xin Xiu, the son of Liu Zhong, the eldest brother of Liu Zhong, was the king of Wu, governing 53 cities in three counties.

古文：十一月，上过鲁，以太牢祠孔子。
现代文：十一月，高帝经过鲁地，用牛、羊、猪的太牢礼祭祀孔子。
English: In November, Emperor Gao passed through Ludi and used cattle, sheep, and pigs to sacrifice to Confucius.

古文：上从破黥布归，疾益甚，愈欲易太子。
现代文：高帝自从击败黥布归来，病更加重，愈发想换太子。
English: Since Gao Di's return from defeating Zibo, his illness has become more severe, and he increasingly wants to change the crown prince.

古文：张良谏不听，因疾不视事。
现代文：张良劝止未被接受，只好称病不过问政事。
English: Zhang Liang's advice was not accepted, and he had no choice but to call in sick to attend to political affairs.

古文：叔孙通谏曰： 昔者晋献公以骊姬之故，废太子，立奚齐，晋国乱者数十年，为天下笑。
现代文：叔孙通又劝谏说： 从前晋献公因为宠爱骊姬，废黜太子，另立奚齐，结果造成晋国几十年内乱，被天下耻笑。
English: His uncle and grandson also advised him, saying, "Once upon a time, Jinxiangong, because of his fondness for Zou Ji, deposed the crown prince and set up another one, Zou Qi. As a result, it caused civil unrest in Jin Province for decades and was ridiculed by the whole world.

古文：秦以不蚤定扶苏，令赵高得以诈立胡亥，自使灭祀，此陛下所亲见。
现代文：秦国也因为不早定扶苏为太子，使赵高得以用奸诈手段立胡亥为皇帝，自己使宗庙灭绝。这是陛下亲眼所见。
English: Qin Shihuang, because he did not decide to make Fu Su the crown prince early enough, allowed Zhao Gao to use fraudulent tricks to set up Hu Hai. As a result, he took his own life. This is a fact that His Majesty saw with his own eyes.

古文：今太子仁孝，天下皆闻之。
现代文：如今太子仁义孝顺，天下都知道。
English: Nowadays, the world knows that the prince is benevolent, righteous and dutiful.

古文：吕后与陛下攻苦食淡，其可背哉！
现代文：吕后又与陛下艰苦创业，粗茶淡饭地共过患难，怎可背弃。
English: Lv Hou and His Majesty have gone through hardships and hardships together, how can they turn their backs on each other?

古文：陛下必欲废適而立少，臣愿先伏诛，以颈血污地！ 
现代文：陛下一定要废去嫡长子而立小儿子，我愿先受诛杀，用脖颈的血涂地！ 
English: Your Majesty must abolish the legitimate eldest son and establish a younger son. I am willing to be killed first and cover the ground with the blood of my neck!

古文：帝曰： 公罢矣，吾直戏耳！ 
现代文：高帝只好说： 你不要这样，我只是开玩笑而已！ 
English: Gaudi had to say: Don't do that, I'm only joking!

古文：叔孙通曰： 太子，天下本，本一摇，天下振动；奈何以天下为戏乎！ 
现代文：叔孙通又说： 太子，是国家的根本，根本一旦动摇，天下就会震动；怎么能用天下来开玩笑呢！ 
English: Uncle Sun Tong also said: The prince is the foundation of the country. Once the foundation is shaken, the whole world will be shaken. How can you make fun of the whole world?

古文：时大臣固争者多；上知群臣心皆不附赵王，乃止不立。
现代文：当时大臣中坚持反对的人很多，高帝明白群臣的心都不向着赵王，于是放下此事不再提。
English: At that time, there were many ministers who insisted on opposing, and Emperor Gao understood that the hearts of the ministers were not toward King Zhao, so he put the matter aside and no longer mentioned it.

古文：相国何以长安地狭，上林中多空地，弃；愿令民得入田，毋收稾，为禽兽食。
现代文：相国萧何因为长安地方狭窄，而皇家上林苑中有很多空地，且荒弃不崐用，希望能让百姓入内耕种，留下禾杆不割，作为苑中鸟兽的饲料。
English: Because the Chang'an area is narrow, and the Royal Shanglin Garden has a lot of open space, and it is abandoned and not used, Xiao He, the partner country, hopes to let the people go into the inner cultivation, leaving the straw not cut, as the feed of the birds and beasts in the garden.

古文：上大怒曰： 相国多受贾人财物，乃为请吾苑！ 
现代文：高帝一听勃然大怒说： 相国你一定收下了商人的大批财物，才替他们算计我的上林苑！ 
English: Gao Zu said angrily, "You accepted a large amount of the merchant's property, and then you asked to occupy my Shanglin Yuan for them!

古文：下相国廷尉，械系之。
现代文：将萧何交付廷尉，用刑具锁铐。
English: Xiao He was handed over to a court lieutenant and chained with a torture device.

古文：数日，王卫尉侍，前问曰： 相国何大罪，陛下系之暴也？ 
现代文：过了几天，一个姓王的卫尉侍奉高帝，上前探问： 相国犯了什么大罪，陛下突然把他拘禁起来？ 
English: A few days later, when a guard named Wang was serving Gao Zu, he came forward and asked: What great crime did the other country commit, and why did Your Majesty detain him so harshly?

古文：上曰： 吾闻李斯相秦皇帝，有善归主，有恶自与。
现代文：高帝说： 我听说李斯做秦始皇的丞相时，有善行就归功于君主，有过失就自己承担。
English: Gao Zu said: I heard that when Li Sisuo was the first emperor of Qin, he attributed his achievements to the Lord and took responsibility for any mistakes.

古文：今相国多受贾竖金，而为之请吾苑以媚于民，故系治之。 
现代文：现在萧何接受了商人的大批财物，为他们要我的上林苑，以讨好下民，所以拘禁起来治罪。 
English: Now Xiao He has accepted a large amount of wealth from the merchants, and they want my Shanglinyuan to please the people, so he was detained and punished.

古文：王卫尉曰： 夫职事苟有便于民而请之，真宰相事；陛下奈何乃疑相国受贾人钱乎？
现代文：王卫尉便劝说： 份内的事只要对百姓有利就向皇帝建议，这是真正的宰相行为，陛下为什么竟疑心相国受了商人钱财呢？
English: Wang Weifeng then persuaded him: It is a true act of a prime minister to advise the emperor on matters within his jurisdiction as long as they are beneficial to the people. Why did His Majesty suspect that the country had accepted money and wealth from a merchant?

古文：且陛下距楚数岁，陈豨、黥布反，陛下自将而往；当是时，相国守关中，关中摇足，则关以西非陛下有也！
现代文：况且，陛下与楚霸王作战几年，陈、黥布造反，您亲自率军出征。当时，相国独守关中，只要关中一有动摇，函谷关以西就不再是陛下所有了！
English: Moreover, His Majesty fought against King Chu for several years, Chen and Zibo rebelled, and you personally led the army to go to war. At that time, your country alone guarded the pass, and as long as the pass was shaken, the west of Hakodate Pass was no longer owned by His Majesty!

古文：相国不以此时为利，今乃利贾人之金乎？
现代文：相国不在那时为自己谋利，反而在现在贪图商人的金钱吗？
English: Did not the other country take advantage of this opportunity to make a profit for itself, but now covets the money of the merchant?

古文：且秦以不闻其过亡天下；李斯之分过，又何足法哉！
现代文：再说，秦朝就是因为不知道自己的过失才丧失了天下，李斯为秦始皇分担过失的作为，又有什么值得效法的呢？
English: Moreover, the Qin Dynasty lost the world precisely because it did not know its own faults. What did Li Si do to share the faults of Qin Shi Huangdi, and what is worth emulating?

古文：陛下何疑宰相之浅也！ 
现代文：陛下为什么如此轻易地怀疑相国呢！ 
English: Your Majesty, how can you have such a shallow view of the Prime Minister!

古文：帝不怿。
现代文：高帝听完很不高兴。
English: Gao Di was very unhappy after listening.

古文：是日，使使持节赦出相国。
现代文：当天，派人持符节赦免释放了萧何。
English: On the same day, Gao Zu sent a delegation to pardon and release his compatriot.

古文：相国年老，素恭谨，入，徒跣谢。
现代文：萧何年纪已老，平时对高帝很恭谨，进宫后光着脚前去谢恩。
English: My father-in-law is getting old. He has always been modest and prudent, admiring his ancestors and walking barefoot to atone for sins.

古文：帝曰： 相国休矣！
现代文：高帝说： 相国您不要这样！
English: Gao Di said: My countrymen, don't do this!

古文：相国为民请苑，吾不许，我不过为桀、纣王，而相国为贤相。
现代文：相国为人民讨要上林苑，我不准许，我不过是夏桀、商纣那样的昏君，而相国您是贤相。
English: I do not allow my country to go to the forest for the people. I am just a dimwit like Xia Yao and Shang Yao, but my country is a wise man.

古文：吾故系相国，欲令百姓闻吾过也。 
现代文：我所以抓起相国，就是想让百姓知道我的过失啊！ 
English: I wanted the people to know that I was at fault for detaining you with chains.

古文：胜还，具道所以为者；燕王乃诈论他人，脱胜家属，使得为匈奴间。
现代文：如今您为燕国考虑，想赶快灭掉陈等人；陈等人一消灭，接下来也就轮到燕国，你们也就将成为阶下囚了。您何不让燕王暂缓进攻陈，而与匈奴和好？
English: Now you are thinking about Yan's country and want to quickly eliminate Chen and others; once Chen and others are eliminated, it will be the turn of Yan's country, and you will become prisoners. Why don't you let King Yan suspend his attack on Chen and make peace with the Xiongnu?

古文：而阴使范齐之陈豨所，欲令久亡，连兵勿决。
现代文：情况缓和，便可以长期在燕称王；一旦汉廷有急变，也可以借外援保全本国。 
English: If the situation eases, it will be possible to reign in Yan for a long time; if there is a sudden change in Hanting, it will be possible to preserve the country with the help of foreign aid.

古文：汉击黥布，豨常将兵居代；汉击斩豨，其裨将降，言燕王绾使范齐通计谋于豨所。
现代文：张胜认为很对，于是私下让匈奴帮助陈等人攻击燕军。燕王卢绾疑心张胜勾结匈奴汉击黥布，常将兵居代。汉击斩，其裨将降，言燕王绾使范齐通计谋于所。
English: Zhang Sheng thought it was right, so he secretly asked the Xiongnu to help Chen and others attack the Yan army. The Yan King Lu Qi suspected Zhang Sheng of colluding with the Xiongnu and Han to attack the Yan army, and often took the place of the soldiers. If Han was killed, his benefits would be reduced, and said that the Yan King sent Fan Qitong to plot.

古文：帝使使召卢绾，绾称病；上又使辟阳侯审食其、御史大夫赵尧往迎燕王，因验问左右。
现代文：帝使使召卢绾，绾称病；又使辟阳侯审食其、御史大夫赵尧往迎燕王，因验问左右。
English: The emperor sent an envoy to summon Lu Yao, who was ill; he also sent Biyang Marquis to interrogate him, and the imperial historian Zhao Yao went to meet Yan Wang, because of the interrogation.

古文：绾愈恐，闭匿，谓其幸臣曰： 非刘氏而王，独我与长沙耳。
现代文：绾愈恐，闭匿，谓其幸臣曰： 非刘氏而王，独我与长沙耳。
English: Lu Yao was even more afraid and could not hide behind closed doors. He said to his trusted vassal, "It is not Liu who has been made king, but only I, Lu Yao, and the king of Changsha, Wu Yao.

古文：往年春，汉诛淮阴，夏，诛彭越，皆吕氏计。
现代文：往年春，汉族淮阴，夏，诛彭越，皆吕氏计。
English: In previous years, the spring, the Han Huaiyin, the summer, the summer Peng Yue, are all Lv's plans.

古文：令上病，属任吕后；吕后妇人，专欲以事诛异姓王者及大功臣。 
现代文：今上病，属任吕后；吕后妇人，专欲以事诛异姓王者及大功臣。 
English: Now that he is ill, he belongs to Empress Lv; Empress Lv's wife, the one who wants to be the king and the great hero.

古文：乃遂称病不行，其左右皆亡匿。
现代文：乃遂称病不行，其左右皆亡匿。
English: However, he claimed that he was too ill to continue, and both of his parents passed away.

古文：语颇泄，辟阳侯闻之，归，具报上，上益怒。又得匈奴降者，言张胜亡在匈奴为燕使。
现代文：语颇泄，辟阳侯闻之，归，具报上，上益怒；又得匈奴降者，言张胜亡在匈奴为燕使。
English: The words are quite outspoken, and when the prince hears them, he will return, report them, and get angry; and those who have been defeated by the Xiongnu will say that Zhang Shengdu is the Yanshi of the Xiongnu.

古文：于是上曰： 卢绾果反矣！ 
现代文：于是上曰： 卢绾果反矣！ 
English: As a result, the Supreme Court said: Let's reverse the result!

古文：春，二月，使樊哙以相国将兵击绾，立皇子建为燕王。
现代文：春，二月，使樊哙以相国将兵击绾，立皇子建为燕王。
English: In the spring and February, he ordered his son, Prince Jian, to be crowned King of the Swallows.

古文：诏曰： 南武侯织，亦粤之世也，立以为南海王。 
现代文：高帝颁布诏书说： 南武侯织，也是南越的贵族世家，立为南海王。 
English: Emperor Gao issued an edict saying: Nanwu Hotei, also a noble family in South Vietnam, was established as the king of the South Sea.

古文：上击布时，为流矢所中，行道，疾甚。
现代文：高帝刘邦进攻黥布时，曾被流箭射中，行军路上，病势沉重。
English: When Emperor Gao Liu Bang attacked Yanbu, he was shot by a stray arrow. He was seriously ill on the march.

古文：吕后迎良医。医入见，曰： 疾可治。 
现代文：吕后请来一位良医，医生入内诊视后说： 病可以治。 
English: Lü Hou invited a good doctor to come. After an internal examination, the doctor said, "The disease can be cured."

古文：上嫚骂之曰： 吾以布衣提三尺取天下，此非天命乎！
现代文：高帝却破口大骂： 我以一个老百姓手提三尺剑夺取了天下，这不是天命吗！
English: However, Gao Di opened his mouth and cursed: I conquered the world with a three-feet sword held by a commoner. Isn't this the destiny of heaven!

古文：命乃在天，虽扁鹊何益！ 
现代文：我的生死在天，即使扁鹊复生又有什么用！ 
English: Fate is in the sky, even if there is a squint, it is of no use!

古文：遂不使治疾，赐黄金五十斤，罢之。
现代文：于是不让医生治病，而赏给医生黄金五十斤，让他回去。
English: refused to allow the doctor to treat him, rewarded him with fifty kilos of gold, and ordered him to leave the palace.

古文：吕后问曰： 陛下百岁后，萧相国既死，谁令代之？ 
现代文：吕后问高帝： 陛下百年之后，萧何相国死了，让谁代替他呢？ 
English: Lyu Hou asked, "One hundred years after Your Majesty, Premier Xiao He Rong has also passed away. Who can replace him as premier?

古文：上曰： 曹参可。 
现代文：高帝说： 曹参可以。 
English: Gao Zu said: Cao San can do it.

古文：问其次，曰： 王陵可，然少戆，陈平可以助之。
现代文：吕后再问曹参之后，高帝说： 王陵可以，但他有点憨，陈平可以帮助他。
English: Lv Hou also asked who would succeed Cao San, and the emperor said, "Wang Ling may be, but his character is somewhat upright, and Chen Ping can help him.

古文：陈平知有馀，然难独任。
现代文：陈平智谋有余，但难以独自承担重任。
English: Chen Pingzhi is resourceful, but it is difficult to shoulder heavy responsibilities alone.

古文：周勃重厚少文，然安刘氏者必勃也，可令为太尉。 
现代文：周勃为人厚道不善言词，但将来安定刘家天下的必定是他，可任用为太尉。 
English: Zhou Bo is steady and kind, lacking literary talent, but it must be Zhou Bo who can stabilize Liu's world, and he can make him a captain.

古文：吕后复问其次，上曰： 此后亦非乃所知也。 
现代文：吕后再追问其后，高帝只说： 这以后的事也就不是你能操心的了。 
English: When asked who would succeed her in the future, the Empress said, "I don't know anymore."

古文：夏，四月，甲辰，帝崩于长乐宫。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲辰，高帝刘邦驾崩于长乐宫。
English: Summer, April, Jia Chen, Emperor Gao Liu Bang died in Changle Palace.

古文：丁未，发丧，大赦天下。
现代文：丁未，朝廷发布丧事消息，宣布大赦天下。
English: Ding Wei, the imperial court released the funeral news and announced a general amnesty.

古文：卢绾与数千人居塞下候伺，幸上疾愈，自入谢。
现代文：卢绾率领几千人住在边塞等候机会，希望高帝病愈，他好亲自入朝谢罪。
English: Lu Wei and thousands of people waited at the border fortress, hoping that the emperor would recover from his illness and enter the court to plead guilty.

古文：闻帝崩，遂亡入匈奴。
现代文：他听到高帝驾崩的消息，便逃入匈奴。
English: When he heard the news of Emperor Gao's death, he fled to the Huns.

古文：五月，丙寅，葬高帝于长陵。
现代文：五月，丙寅，将高帝刘邦安葬在长陵。
English: In May, Hsin Yin buried Emperor Gao Liu Bang in Changling Mausoleum.

古文：初，高祖不修文学，而性明达，好谋，能听，自监门、戍卒，见之如旧。
现代文：当初，高帝刘邦不修习学术，而秉性聪明通达，喜谋略，能采纳旁人意见，纵是守门官或戍卒，见面时也如同老熟人一般。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Gao and Liu Bang did not pursue academic studies, but they were intelligent, clever, strategic, and able to accept the opinions of others. Even if they were gatekeepers or pawns, they were like old acquaintances when they met.

古文：初顺民心作三章之约。天下既定，命萧何次律、令，韩信申军法，张苍定章程，叔孙通制礼仪；又与功臣剖符作誓，丹书、铁契，金匮、石室，藏之宗庙。
现代文：当年他顺应民心约法三章，天下平定以后，又命令萧何整理法律、法令，韩信申明军法，张苍制订历法及度量衡章程，叔孙通规定礼仪；又与功臣剖分符节，立下誓言，用朱砂写就，以铁制成，放入国家收存重要文书的金柜石室，妥藏在宗庙中。
English: In that year, he complied with the Three Chapters of the Law of the People's Hearts, and after the world was pacified, he also ordered Xiao He to sort out laws and decrees, Han Xin to affirm the military law, Zhang Cang to formulate the calendar and weights and measures regulations, and his uncles and grandsons to stipulate the etiquette; he also made an oath with the hero, wrote it with cinnabar, made it with iron, put it into the gold cabinet stone room where the state stored important documents, and stored it in the ancestral temple.

古文：虽日不暇给，规摹弘远矣。
现代文：高帝虽然众事繁多，日不暇给，但创立制度规模宏远。
English: Although Gao Zu is a day-to-day machine, the planning and momentum he has established are far-reaching.

古文：己巳，太子即皇帝位，尊皇后曰皇太后。
现代文：己巳，太子登上皇帝大位，尊吕后为皇太后。
English: At that time, the prince ascended to the throne of the emperor, and his wife became the empress dowager.

古文：初，高帝病甚，人有恶樊哙，云： 党于吕氏，即一日上晏驾，欲以兵诛赵王如意之属。 
现代文：当初，高帝病重时，有人诬谄樊哙 与吕姓结党，只要有一天皇上过世，就要兴兵诛杀赵王如意及其从属 。
English: At the beginning, when Emperor Gao was seriously ill, some people falsely accused him of forming a party with the surname of Lv. As long as the emperor died one day, they would raise an army to kill Zhao Wangruyi and his subordinates.

古文：帝大怒，用陈平谋，召绛侯周勃受诏床下，曰： 陈平亟驰传载勃代哙将；平至军中，即斩哙头！ 
现代文：高帝大怒，采纳陈平建议，召来绛侯周勃在床前接受诏令： 陈平立刻乘驿车，载着周勃，让周勃代樊哙为将军；陈平一到军中，就砍下樊哙的头！ 
English: Emperor Gao was furious and, taking Chen Ping's suggestion, summoned the warlord Zhou Bo to his bedside to receive the edict: Chen Ping would immediately take a carriage and carry Zhou Bo to make Zhou Bo the general; as soon as Chen Ping arrived in the army, he would cut off Zhou Bo's head!

古文：二人既受诏，驰传，未至军，行计之曰： 樊哙，帝之故人也，功多，且又吕后弟吕之夫，有亲且贵。
现代文：两人接受命令后，乘驿车前往，还未到军中，在路上商议道： 樊哙是皇上的旧人，功劳很大，而且是吕后妹妹吕的丈夫，有皇亲关系又是尊贵之人，皇上因为一时动怒所以想杀他，恐怕日后会反悔。
English: After receiving the order, the two of them rode to the capital in a carriage, and before reaching the army, they had a discussion on the way: Zou is the emperor's old man, he has done a great deal of service, and he is the husband of Lü's younger sister Lü, he is a relative of the emperor and an honorable person. The emperor wanted to kill him because he was angry at the time, and I'm afraid he will regret it later.

古文：帝以仇怒故欲斩之，则恐后悔；宁囚而致上，上自诛之。 未至军，为坛，以节召樊哙。
现代文：我们不如抓起他来送到皇上那里，让皇上自己去杀。 他们还没到军中，就筑了坛，用符节召樊哙前来。
English: We might as well seize him and bring him to the emperor, and let the emperor kill him himself.Before they reached the army, they built an altar and used symbols to summon the dragonfly to come.

古文：哙受诏，即反接，载槛车传诣长安；而令绛侯勃代将，将兵定燕反县。
现代文：樊哙接受诏令后，立即将手放到背后叫人把他反绑起来，用木栏囚车押送到长安；而让绛侯周勃代他为将军，率军征讨燕国谋反的诸县。
English: After accepting the edict, Zhai immediately put his hands behind his back and ordered someone to tie him up and escort him to Chang'an in a wagon with a wooden palisade. Zhou Bo, the prince of Zhai, was asked to act as general and lead an army to subjugate the rebellious counties of Yan.

古文：平行，闻帝崩，畏吕谗之于太后，乃驰传先去。
现代文：陈平一行走到中途，听到高帝驾崩消息。陈平怕吕太后的妹妹吕在吕太后面前说他的坏话，便驱驰驿车先行回都。
English: When Chen Ping and his party reached the halfway point, they heard the news of Emperor Gao's death. Chen Ping was afraid that Empress Dowager Lv's sister Lv would speak ill of him in front of Empress Dowager Lv, so he drove the horse-drawn carriage back to the capital in advance.

古文：逢使者，诏平与灌婴屯荥阳。
现代文：路上他又遇到朝廷使者，传诏命令陈平与灌婴屯守荥阳。
English: On the way, he met an emissary from the imperial court, who ordered Chen Ping and Guan Yu to stay in Fenyang.

古文：平受诏，立复驰至宫，哭殊悲；因固请得宿卫中。
现代文：陈平接受诏书后，立即又疾驰到宫中，哭得十分悲哀，又坚决要求亲自守卫内宫。
English: After Chen Ping accepted the imperial edict, he immediately rushed to the palace, wept very sadly, and insisted on personally guarding the inner palace.

古文：太后乃以为郎中令，使傅教惠帝。
现代文：吕太后于是任命他为掌管宫殿门户的郎中令，还让他辅导汉惠帝刘盈。
English: Empress Dowager Lv then appointed him as the second-in-command in charge of the palace gate, and also let him tutor Han Hui Liu Ying.

古文：是后吕谗乃不得行。
现代文：此后，吕便无法说陈平的坏话。
English: Since then, Lu has not been able to speak ill of Chen Ping.

古文：樊哙至，则赦，复爵邑。
现代文：樊哙到长安，便被赦免，恢复原来的爵位和封地。
English: When he was exiled to Chang'an, he was pardoned and his former title and fiefdom were restored.

古文：太后令永巷囚戚夫人，髡钳，衣赭衣，令舂。
现代文：吕太后下令把戚夫人关在宫中永巷里，剃去头发，带上刑具，穿上土红色的囚服，做舂米的苦活。
English: Empress Dowager Lv ordered her cousin to be locked up in Yongxing Lane in the palace, shaved of her hair, put in a torture device, dressed in a red prison uniform, and made to do the hard labor of glutinous rice.

古文：遣使召赵王如意。使者三反，赵相周昌谓使者曰： 高帝属臣赵王，赵王年少，窃闻太后怨戚夫人，欲召赵王并诛之，臣不敢遣王。
现代文：她又派使者去召赵王刘如意，使者三次往返，赵相周昌对使者说： 高帝生前把赵王嘱托给我，赵王年纪小，我听说吕太后怨恨戚夫人，想把赵王召去一齐杀掉，我不敢让赵王去。
English: She also sent an envoy to summon Zhao Wang Liu Ruyi. The envoy went back and forth three times. Zhao Xiang Zhouchang said to the envoy: Emperor Gao entrusted Zhao Wang to me when he was alive. Zhao Wang was young. I heard that Empress Dowager Lü resented her relative and wanted to summon Zhao Wang to kill them all. I did not dare to let Zhao Wang go.

古文：王且亦病，不能奉诏。 
现代文：而且赵王也病了，不能接受命令。 
English: Moreover, Zhao Wang was also ill and unable to travel.

古文：太后怒，先使人召昌。
现代文：吕太后听到回报，大为愤怒，便先派人去召周昌。
English: When Empress Dowager Lv heard about the reward, she was very angry and sent someone to summon Zhou Chang.

古文：昌至长安，乃使人复召赵王。
现代文：待周昌到了长安，才派人再去召赵王。
English: It was not until Zhou Chang arrived in Chang'an that he sent someone to summon Zhao Wang.

古文：王来，未到；帝知太后怒，自迎赵王霸上，与入宫，自挟与起居饮食。
现代文：赵王前来，还未到达时，汉惠帝听说吕太后要对赵王动怒，便亲自去霸上迎接赵王，与他一起入宫，自己带着他一同吃饭睡觉。
English: When King Zhao came but had not yet arrived, Emperor Han Hui heard that Empress Dowager Lv would be angry with King Zhao, so he went to meet King Zhao in person, entered the palace with him, and took him to eat and sleep with him.

古文：太后欲杀之，不得间。
现代文：吕太后想杀掉赵王，但找不到机会。
English: The empress dowager wanted to kill King Zhao, but couldn't find an opportunity.

古文：孝惠皇帝
现代文：孝惠皇帝
English: Emperor Xiao Hui

古文：元年
现代文：汉惠帝元年
English: In the first year of Emperor Han Hui

古文：冬，十二月，帝晨出射。赵王少，不能蚤起；太后使人持鸩饮之。
现代文：冬季，十二月，惠帝凌晨便出去打猎，赵王因为年纪小，不能早起同去，吕太后便派人拿着毒酒让赵王喝。
English: In winter, in December, Hui Di went out hunting in the early morning. Zhao Wang could not get up early because of his young age, so Empress Dowager Lv sent someone to take poisoned wine for Zhao Wang to drink.

古文：犁明，帝还，赵王已死。
现代文：黎明，惠帝回宫时，赵王已经死了。
English: At dawn, when Hui Di returned to the palace, Zhao Wang had already died.

古文：太后遂断戚夫人手足，去眼，煇耳，饮喑药，使居厕中，命日 人彘 。
现代文：吕太后又下令砍断戚夫人的手、脚，挖去眼珠，熏聋耳朵，喝哑药，让她呆在厕所里，称她为 人彘 。
English: Empress Dowager Lv also ordered to cut off her cousin's hands and feet, gouge out her eyes, smoke out her deaf ears, drink dumb medicine, keep her in the toilet, and call her a tramp.

古文：居数日，乃召帝观人彘。
现代文：过了几天，吕太后便召惠帝来看 人彘 。
English: A few days later, Empress Dowager Lv summoned Emperor Hui to see the human skeleton.

古文：帝见，问知其戚夫人，乃大哭，因病，岁馀不能起。
现代文：惠帝见后，问知这就是戚夫人，便大哭起来，从此患病，一年多不能起身。
English: After seeing her, Hui Di asked if this was his relative's wife, and burst into tears. Since then, he has been ill and has not been able to get up for more than a year.

古文：使人请太后曰： 此非人所为。
现代文：他派人向吕太后请求说： 这种事不是人做的。
English: He sent someone to see the Empress Dowager and said, "This is not something that people do.

古文：臣为太后子，终不能治天下。 
现代文：我虽然是太后您的儿子，到底还是治不了这个天下。 
English: As the son of the empress dowager, I finally have no face to rule the world.

古文：帝以此日饮为淫乐，不听政。
现代文：惠帝因此每天饮酒淫乐，不理政事。
English: As a result, Hui Di indulged in drinking and debauchery every day, and did not care about politics.

古文：臣光曰：为人子者，父母有过则谏；谏而不听，则号泣而随之。
现代文：臣司马光曰：做儿子的，见父母有过失就应该劝谏；劝谏不听，就应该跟着痛哭。
English: Subordinate Sima Guang said: "If you are a son, you should persuade your parents when you see their mistakes; if they don't listen, you should cry with them."

古文：安有守高祖之业，为天下之主，不忍母之残酷，遂弃国家而不恤，纵酒色以伤生！
现代文：哪有继承汉高祖的伟业，当天下的君主，因为不忍心于母亲的残酷，便抛弃国家不顾念，纵情酒色自伤身体的道理！
English: What kind of monarch inherits the great cause of Han Gao Zu, and abandons the country because he can't bear his mother's cruelty, and indulges in alcohol and self-injury!

古文：若孝惠者，可谓笃于小仁而未知大谊也。
现代文：像汉惠帝这样，可以说只是固执于小的仁爱，而不知道大义啊！
English: Like Han Hui Di, it can be said that he is only stubborn to small benevolence, but does not know the great meaning!

古文：徙淮阳王友为赵王。
现代文：朝廷改封淮阳王刘友为赵王。
English: The imperial court changed the title of Huaiyang King Liu You to Zhao King.

古文：春，正月，始作长安城西北方。
现代文：春季，正月，开始修筑长安西北面的城墙。
English: In the spring, in the first month, the construction of the northwest city wall of Chang'an began.

古文：二年
现代文：汉惠帝二年
English: In the second year of Emperor Han Hui

古文：冬，十月，齐悼惠王来朝，饮于太后前。
现代文：冬季，十月。齐悼惠王刘肥来朝见惠帝，在吕太后面前举行酒宴。
English: In the winter, in October, Liu Hui, the king of Hui, came to see Emperor Hui and held a wine banquet in front of Empress Dowager Lü.

古文：帝以齐王，兄也，置之上坐。
现代文：惠帝认为齐王是自己的哥哥，便请他坐上座。
English: Hui Di thought that Qi Wang was his brother, so he invited him to sit on the throne.

古文：太后怒，酌鸩酒置前，赐齐王为寿。
现代文：吕太后非常恼怒，让人倒了一杯毒酒放在面前，赏赐给齐王，为他祝福。
English: Empress Dowager Lv was very angry and had someone pour a glass of poisoned wine in front of her and give it to King Qi to bless him.

古文：齐王起，帝亦起取卮；太后恐，自起泛帝卮。
现代文：齐王刚起身要接，惠帝也起身来取酒杯崐。太后一见大惊，自己起来泼去惠帝手中的酒。
English: As soon as Qi Wang got up to receive it, Hui Di also got up to take the goblet. The empress dowager was shocked at the sight, and she got up to throw away the wine in Hui Di's hand.

古文：齐王怪之，因不敢饮，佯醉去；问知其鸩，大恐。
现代文：齐王心知有怪，不敢再喝，假装酒醉离去。经打听知道那是杯毒酒，大为惊恐。
English: Knowing there was something strange in his heart, King Qi did not dare to drink any more, and left pretending to be drunk. Upon inquiry, he learned that it was a cup of poisoned wine, and was greatly alarmed.

古文：齐内史士说王，使献城阳郡为鲁元公主汤沐邑。
现代文：齐国一个名叫士的内史向齐王建议，使齐王献出城阳郡做吕太后女儿鲁元公主的汤沐邑。
English: An internal historian of the State of Qi named Shi suggested to the King of Qi that the King of Qi offer Chengyang County to be the Tang Muyun of Princess Lu Yuan, the daughter of Empress Dowager Lu.

古文：太后喜，乃罢归齐王。
现代文：太后因此大喜，便放走了齐王。
English: The empress dowager was overjoyed and released King Qi.

古文：春，正月，癸酉，有两龙见兰陵家人井中。
现代文：春季，正月，癸酉，兰陵一平民家的井中出现两条龙。
English: In the spring, the first month, the new year, Lanling, two dragons appeared in the well of a commoner's house.

古文：陇西地震。
现代文：陇西发生地震。
English: Shaanxi earthquake.

古文：夏，旱。
现代文：夏季，大旱。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：郃阳侯仲薨。
现代文：阳侯刘仲去世。
English: Yang Hou Liu Zhong passed away.

古文：酂文终侯萧何病，上亲自临视，因问曰： 君即百岁后，谁可代君者？ 
现代文：文终侯萧何病重，惠帝亲自前去探视，问他： 您百年之后，谁可以替接您？ 
English: At the end of the article, Hou Xiaohe was seriously ill, and Hui Di went to visit him in person and asked him: After your hundred years, who can take your place?

古文：对曰： 知臣莫如主。 
现代文：萧何说： 最了解臣下的还是皇上。 
English: Xiao He replied, "Only the sovereign can understand his subjects."

古文：帝曰： 曹参何如？ 
现代文：惠帝又问： 曹参怎么样？ 
English: The emperor said, "How is Cao San?"

古文：何顿首曰： 帝得之矣，臣死不恨！ 秋，七月，辛未，何薨。
现代文：萧何立即叩头说： 皇上已找到人选，我死也没有什么遗憾了。 秋季，七月，辛未，萧何去世。
English: Xiao He immediately kowtowed and said: The emperor has found a candidate, and I have no regrets about my death.In the autumn, in July, Xinwei, Xiao He passed away.

古文：何置田宅，必居穷僻处，为家，不治垣屋。
现代文：他生前购置田地房宅，必定选位于穷乡僻壤的；他主持家政，也从不起建高墙大屋。
English: When he bought a farmhouse, he always chose one in a poor and remote area; he was the head of the household and never built a large house with high walls.

古文：曰： 后世贤，师吾俭；不贤，毋为势家所夺。 
现代文：他说： 如果我的后代贤德，就学我的俭朴；如果后代不贤，这些劣房差地也不会被权势之家抢夺。 
English: He said: If my descendants are virtuous, they will learn from my frugality; if my descendants are not virtuous, these inferior houses and land will not be robbed by powerful families.

古文：癸巳，以曹参为相国。
现代文：癸巳，朝廷任命曹参为相国。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Cao San as a consort.

古文：参闻何薨，告舍人： 趣治行！
现代文：曹参刚听说萧何去世时，就对门下舍人说： 快准备行装！
English: As soon as Cao San heard that Xiao He had passed away, he said to his subordinates: "Quickly prepare to march!

古文：吾将入相。 
现代文：我要进京去做相国了。 
English: I'm going to go to Beijing to visit my motherland.

古文：居无何，使者果召参。
现代文：过了不久，使者果然前来召曹参入朝。
English: Not long after, the person sent by the imperial court actually came to summon Cao San.

古文：始，参微时，与萧何善；及为将相，有隙；至何且死，所推贤唯参。
现代文：起初，曹参当平民时，和萧何相交甚好；及至做了将相，两人有些隔阂。到萧何快死时，所推举接替自己的贤能之人惟独曹参。
English: At first, when Cao San was a commoner, he got along very well with Xiao He; and when he became a general, the two were somewhat estranged. By the time Xiao He was about to die, only Cao San was chosen to succeed him.

古文：参代何为相，举事无所变更，一遵何约束：择郡国吏木讷于文辞、重厚长者，即召除为丞相史；吏之言文刻深、欲务声名者，辄斥去之。
现代文：曹参接替做了相国后，所有的条令都不做变更，一律遵照萧何当年的规定。他挑选各郡各封国中为人质朴、拘谨不善言辞、敦厚的长者，召来任命为丞相的属官。对那些言谈行文苛刻、专门追逐名声的官员，都予以斥退。
English: After Cao San took over as chancellor, all regulations were not changed, and they were all in accordance with the regulations of Xiao He. He selected the elders in each county and fiefdom who were simple, prudent, not good at speech, and courageous, and summoned them to be appointed as subordinate officials of the chancellor. He rejected those officials who were harsh in speech and action, and specialized in chasing fame.

古文：日夜饮醇酒。
现代文：然后曹参日夜只顾饮香醇老酒。
English: Cao San himself drank wine all day long.

古文：卿、大夫以下吏及宾客见参不事事，来者皆欲有言，参辄饮以醇酒；间欲有所言，复饮之，醉而后去，终莫得开说，以为常。
现代文：卿、大夫以下的官员及宾客见他不管政事，来看望时都想劝说，曹参却总是劝他们喝酒；喝酒间隙中再想说话，曹参又劝他们再喝，直到喝醉了回去，始终没机会开口说话。这样的情况成为常事。
English: Sirs, doctors and other officials and guests saw that he did not care about politics, and when they came to visit, they all wanted to persuade him, but Cao Zhan always advised them to drink; if they wanted to talk in between drinking, Cao Zhan advised them to drink again, until they got drunk and went back, and they never had a chance to speak. Such a situation became common.

古文：见人有细过，专掩匿覆盖之，府中无事。
现代文：曹参见到别人犯有小错误，也一昧包庇掩饰，相国府中终日无事。
English: Cao San saw that others made small mistakes, but also covered up and covered up, and there was nothing to do all day in the provincial government.

古文：参子窋为中大夫。帝怪相国不治事，以为 岂少朕与？ 
现代文：曹参的儿子曹任中大夫之职，惠帝向他埋怨曹参不理政事，认为 难道是因为我年纪轻吗 ？
English: When Cao San's son, Cao, was appointed to the post of middle-ranking doctor, Hui Di complained to him that Cao San did not care about politics, thinking, "Is it because I am young?

古文：使窋归，以其私问参。
现代文：让曹回家时，以私亲身分探问曹参。
English: When letting Cao go home, inquire about Cao San as a relative.

古文：参怒，笞窋二百，曰： 趣入侍！天下事非若所当言也！ 
现代文：曹参大怒，鞭笞曹二百下，喝斥： 快回宫去侍候，国家大事不是你该说的！ 
English: Cao San flew into a rage, lashed Cao 200 times, and shouted at him: Hurry back to the palace to wait, you are not supposed to talk about national affairs!

古文：至朝时，帝让参曰： 乃者我使谏君也。 
现代文：到上朝时，惠帝责备曹参说： 那天是我让曹劝你的。 
English: When he arrived in the morning, Hui Di reproached Cao San and said, "That day, I asked Cao to advise you.

古文：参免冠谢曰： 陛下自察圣武孰与高帝？ 
现代文：曹参立即脱下帽子谢罪，说： 陛下自己体察圣明威武比高帝如何？ 
English: Cao San took off his hat and said, "Your Majesty, please think about it carefully. Compared to Gao Di, who is more holy, wise and mighty?"

古文：上曰： 朕乃安敢望先帝！ 
现代文：惠帝说： 朕哪里敢比高帝！ 
English: The emperor said: How dare I compare myself to the former emperor!

古文：又曰： 陛下观臣能孰与萧何贤？ 
现代文：曹参又问： 陛下再看我的才能比萧何谁强？ 
English: Cao San also asked: Your Majesty, considering my talent, who is better than Xiao He?

古文：上曰： 君似不及也。 
现代文：惠帝说： 你好像不如他。 
English: Cao San said, "Your Majesty's words are right.

古文：参曰： 陛下言之是也。
现代文：曹参便说： 陛下说得太对了。
English: Cao San said, "Your Majesty is quite right.

古文：高帝与萧何定天下，法令既明。
现代文：高帝与萧何平定天下，法令已经明确。
English: Gao Di and Xiao He pacified the world, the decree has been clear.

古文：今陛下垂拱，参等守职，遵而勿失，不亦可乎？ 帝曰： 善！ 
现代文：如今陛下垂手治国，我们臣下恭谨守职，大家认真遵守不去违反旧时法令，不就够了吗！崐 惠帝说： 对。 
English: Now that His Majesty is leading the country with a steady hand, and our subjects are dutifully performing their duties, and everyone is conscientiously complying with the old laws and regulations, isn't that enough?

古文：参为相国，出入三年，百姓歌之曰： 萧何为法，较若画一；曹参代之，守而勿失。载其清净，民以宁壹。 
现代文：曹参做相国，前后三年，百姓唱歌称颂他说： 萧何制法，整齐划一；曹参接替，守而不失；做事清净，百姓安心。 
English: Cao San served as the country's consort for three years, and the people sang songs in praise of him, saying, "No system, no uniformity; Cao San succeeds, preserves and does not lose; the work is clean, and the people are at ease."

古文：三年
现代文：汉惠帝三年
English: Three years of Han Hui

古文：春，发长安六百里内男女十四万六千人城长安，三十日罢。
现代文：春季，朝廷征发长安周围六百里内的男女民工十四万六千人修筑长安城，三十天结束。
English: In the spring, the imperial court solicited and dispatched 146,000 male and female migrant workers within 600 miles around Chang'an to build Chang'an City. Thirty days ended.

古文：以宗室女为公主，嫁匈奴冒顿单于。
现代文：惠帝以宗室女子作为公主，嫁给匈奴冒顿单于。
English: Emperor Hui treated his heiress as a princess and married her to the Xiongnu.

古文：是时，冒顿方强，为书，使使遗高后，辞极亵嫚。
现代文：当时，冒顿正强大，写信派人送给吕太后，措词极为亵污傲慢。
English: At that time, he was very powerful and sent a letter to Empress Dowager Lv, the wording of which was extremely profane and arrogant.

古文：高后大怒，召将相大臣，议斩其使者，发兵击之。
现代文：吕太后大为愤怒，召集将相大臣，商议要杀掉匈奴来使，发兵攻打。
English: Empress Dowager Lv was very angry and called together the generals and ministers to discuss killing the Hun envoy and sending troops to attack.

古文：樊哙曰： 臣愿得十万众横行匈奴中！ 
现代文：樊哙说： 我愿意率领十万军队去横扫匈奴！ 
English: He said, "I am willing to lead a hundred thousand troops to sweep away the Huns!"

古文：中郎将季布曰： 哙可斩也！
现代文：中郎将季布却说： 樊哙真该杀！
English: However, the middle-ranked commander, Qibu, said, "He really should be killed!

古文：前匈奴围高帝于平城，汉兵三十二万，哙为上将军，不能解围。
现代文：从前匈奴在平城围困高帝，那时汉兵有三十二万，樊哙身为上将军，而不能解围。
English: Once upon a time, the Xiongnu besieged Gao Di in Pingcheng. At that time, there were 320,000 Han soldiers, but they could not relieve the siege because they were senior generals.

古文：今歌吟之声未绝，伤夷者甫起，而哙欲摇动天下，妄言以十万众横行，是面谩也。
现代文：如今四方百姓哀苦之声尚未断绝，受伤兵士刚能起身，而樊哙却想搞乱天下，妄称以十万军队横扫匈奴。这是当面说谎！
English: Today, the cries of grief from the people in all four directions have not yet been silenced. The wounded soldiers have just been able to get up, but the baboons want to create chaos in the world, claiming to have swept the Huns with a hundred thousand troops. This is lying to your face!

古文：且夷狄譬如禽兽，得其善言不足喜，恶言不足怒也。 高后曰： 善！ 
现代文：况且，匈奴好比禽兽一般，听了他的好话不必高兴，听了他的谩骂也不值得生气。 吕太后说： 说得对。 
English: Moreover, the Xiongnu is like an animal, and it is not necessary to be happy after listening to his kind words, and it is not worth getting angry after listening to his abuse.

古文：令大谒者张释报书，深自谦逊以谢之，并遗以车二乘，马二驷。
现代文：便派大谒者张释送去回信，十分谦逊地致以歉意，并送给匈奴二乘车、八匹马。
English: He then sent Zhang Xie, the chief executioner, to reply to the letter, very humbly apologizing and giving Xiongnu two cars and eight horses.

古文：冒顿复使使来谢，曰： 未尝闻中国礼义，陛下幸而赦之。 
现代文：冒顿接信后又派使臣前来道歉，说： 我们从不知道中国的礼义，感谢陛下的宽恕。 
English: Immediately after receiving the letter, he sent an envoy to apologize, saying, "We never knew the meaning of courtesy in China, and we thank Your Majesty for forgiving us.

古文：因献马，遂和亲。
现代文：于是献上马匹，与汉朝和亲为好。
English: The Xiongnu offered horses, and the Han and the Hungarians made peace.

古文：夏，五月，立闽越君摇为东海王。
现代文：夏季，五月，朝廷立名为摇的闽越君为东海王。
English: In the summer, in May, the imperial court established the shaken Emperor Xuan Yue as the king of the East Sea.

古文：摇与无诸，皆越王句践之后也，从诸侯灭秦，功多，其民便附，故立之。
现代文：摇与无诸，都是越王勾践的后代，曾跟随诸侯推翻秦朝，功劳不小，当地百姓归附，所以立他为王。
English: Both Shake and Muzhu are descendants of King Gochang of Yue, who followed the princes to overthrow the Qin Dynasty. His contribution was not small, and the local people supported him, so they made him king.

古文：都东瓯，世号东瓯王。
现代文：建都东瓯，世人称之为东瓯王。
English: He built the capital Dongluo, and the world called him the King of Dongluo.

古文：六月，发诸侯王、列侯徒隶二万人城长安。
现代文：六月，朝廷征发各封国的王、侯属下刑徒奴隶二万人修筑长安城。
English: In June, 20,000 princes, their families and slaves were sent to Chang'an to build the city.

古文：秋，七月，都厩灾。
现代文：秋季，七月，太仆的马厩起火。
English: In the autumn, in July, the stable of the great-nephew caught fire.

古文：是岁，蜀湔氐反，击平之。
现代文：这一年，蜀郡湔氐部族反叛，朝廷出兵平定。
English: In this year, the Shu County Yi tribe rebelled, and the imperial court sent troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：四年
现代文：汉惠帝四年
English: Emperor Han Hui reigned for four years

古文：冬，十月，立皇后张氏。
现代文：冬季，十月，惠季立张氏为皇后。
English: In the winter, in October, Huizhi crowned Zhang as empress.

古文：后，帝姊鲁元公主女也，太后欲为重亲，故以配帝。
现代文：张后是惠帝姐姐鲁元公主的女儿。吕太后想亲上加亲，所以将她嫁给惠帝。
English: Empress Dowager Zhang was the daughter of Hui Di's sister, Princess Lu Yuan. Empress Dowager Lu wanted to be closer to her sister, so she married Hui Di.

古文：春，正月，举民孝、弟、力田者，复其身。
现代文：春季，正月，朝廷下令推荐民间孝顺父母、和睦兄长、努力耕作的人，免除他们的赋役。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the imperial court ordered that people who were filial to their parents, reconciled with their brothers and sisters, and worked hard at farming should be recommended to be exempted from military service.

古文：三月，甲子，皇帝冠，赦天下。
现代文：三月，甲子，皇帝行成年加冠礼，大赦天下。
English: In March, Emperor Kozu became an adult and was crowned. He was pardoned by the world.

古文：省法令妨吏民者；除挟书律。
现代文：检查法令中对官民有防害的条目，废除秦律中禁止携带、收藏书籍的 挟书律 。
English: Eliminate the laws and regulations that obstruct officials and citizens, and abolish the Qin laws that make it a crime to hold up a book.

古文：帝以朝太后于长乐宫及间往，数跸烦民，乃筑复道于武库南。
现代文：惠帝认为去长乐宫朝见太后及平时前往时，经常清道警戒，使百姓惊忧，便在武库的南面修筑了一条空中道路。
English: Hui Di thought that when he went to the Changle Palace to see the Empress Dowager in the morning and when he went there in peacetime, he often kept the road clear, which alarmed the people, so he built an aerial road on the south side of the arsenal.

古文：奉常叔孙通谏曰： 此高帝月出游衣冠之道也，子孙奈何乘宗庙道上行哉！ 
现代文：奉常叔孙通劝阻说： 那是每月举行高帝衣冠出巡仪式的道路啊！子孙后代怎么能在祖宗的道上行走呢！ 
English: Feng Chang's uncle and grandson dissuaded him, saying, "That's the road where Emperor Gao's crowning ceremony is held every month! How can future generations walk on the path of their ancestors!"

古文：帝惧曰： 急坏之！ 
现代文：惠帝惊惧地说： 快快拆去！ 
English: Hui Di said in shock: Quickly remove it!

古文：通曰： 人主无过举。今已作，百姓皆知之矣。
现代文：叔孙通又说： 天子没有错误的举动；现在路已经修了，百姓也都知道。
English: Uncle Sun Tong also said, "There is no wrong move by the Son of Heaven; now the road has been built, and the people know about it.

古文：愿陛下为原庙渭北，衣冠月出游之，益广宗庙，大孝之本。 
现代文：希望陛下在渭河北面再建个原庙，可以到那里去举行高帝衣冠出巡仪式，这样也扩大了宗庙，是大孝的根本。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will build another Gao Tei Temple in the north of Surabaya, as a temple of traveling clothes, which will also increase and expand the number of Gao Tei ancestral temples, which is the foundation of filial piety.

古文：上乃诏有司立原庙。
现代文：惠帝便下令有关部门修建原庙。
English: The emperor issued a decree to let the relevant officials build a separate ancestral temple.

古文：臣光曰：过者，人之所必不免也，惟圣贤为能知而改之。
现代文：臣司马光曰：错误，是人人都必定无法避免的；但只有圣贤能知而改正。
English: Sima Guang said: Mistakes are unavoidable for everyone, but only sages can know and correct them.

古文：古之圣王，患其有过而不自知也，故设诽谤之木，置敢谏之鼓，岂畏百姓之闻其过哉！
现代文：古代圣明的君主，怕自己有错误不知道，所以设置批评君主的诽谤木和劝阻君主的敢谏鼓，哪里会怕百姓知道自己的过错呢！
English: The monarchs of ancient times were afraid of not knowing their own mistakes, so they set up slanderous trees to criticize the monarchs and drums to dissuade the monarchs. Who would be afraid of the people knowing their own mistakes?

古文：是以仲虺美成汤曰： 改过不吝。 
现代文：所以仲虺赞美商汤王说： 改正错误决不吝惜。 
English: Therefore, Zhongyao praised the merchant Tang Wang and said: "We will never begrudge correcting mistakes."

古文：傅说戒高宗曰： 无耻过作非。 
现代文：傅说劝诫商王武丁道： 不要因为怕别人耻笑便不改正过失。 
English: Fu said, admonishing the merchant Wang Wuding, "Don't be afraid of others' ridicule and don't correct your mistakes.

古文：由是观之，则为人君者，固不以无过为贤，而以改过为美也。
现代文：由此而见，做君王的人，本来就不是以不犯错误为贤明，而是以改正错误为美德。
English: From this it follows that a prince is not wise by not making mistakes, but by virtue of correcting them.

古文：今叔孙通谏孝惠，乃云 人主无过举 ，是教人君以文过遂非也，岂不缪哉！
现代文：这里叔孙通却劝谏汉惠帝说 天子没有错误的举动 ，正是在教做君主的文过饰非，岂不太荒谬了吗！
English: Here, however, Uncle Sun Tong advised Emperor Hui of Han to say that the Son of Heaven did not make a wrong move, just as he was teaching the monarchs to be polite and courteous. Isn't that ridiculous?

古文：长乐宫鸿台灾。
现代文：长乐宫中鸿台发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in Zhonghongtai of Changle Palace.

古文：秋，七月，乙亥，未央宫凌室灾；丙子，织室灾。
现代文：秋季，七月，乙亥，未央宫的藏冰室发生火灾。丙子，织造室发生火灾。
English: In autumn, in July, a fire broke out in the ice-storage room of the Weiyang Palace in Yihai, and a fire broke out in the weaving room in Cixi.

古文：五年
现代文：汉惠帝五年
English: Five years of Emperor Han Hui

古文：冬，雷；桃李华，枣实。
现代文：冬季，雷声响起，桃树、李树开花，枣树结果。
English: In winter, thunder sounds, peach trees and plum trees blossom, and jujube trees sprout.

古文：春，正月，复发长安六百里内男女十四万五千人城长安，三十日罢。
现代文：春季，正月，再次征发长安周围六百里内男女民工十四万五千人修筑长安城，三十天后结束。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, 145,000 male and female migrant workers within 600 miles around Chang'an were once again sent to build Chang'an City, which ended 30 days later.

古文：夏，大旱，江河水少，谿谷水绝。
现代文：夏季，大旱，长江、黄河水少，溪谷干涸。
English: In summer, when there is a big drought, the Yangtze River and the Yellow River have less water, and the valleys are dry.

古文：秋，八月，己丑，平阳懿侯曹参薨。六年
现代文：秋季八月，平阳侯曹参去世。汉惠帝六年
English: In the autumn of August, the Prince of Pingyang, Cao San, passed away.

古文：冬，十月，以王陵为右丞相，陈平为左丞相。
现代文：冬季，十月，任命王陵为右丞相，陈平为左丞相。
English: In the winter, in October, Wang Ling was appointed as the Minister of the Right and Chen Ping as the Minister of the Left.

古文：齐悼惠王肥薨。
现代文：齐悼惠王刘肥去世。
English: All mourn the passing of Hui Wang Liu Hui.

古文：夏，留文成侯张良薨。
现代文：夏季，留侯张良去世。
English: In the summer, Zhang Liang passed away.

古文：以周勃为太尉。
现代文：任命周勃为太尉。
English: Zhou Bo was appointed as a second lieutenant.

古文：七年
现代文：汉惠帝七年
English: Seven years of Han Hui

古文：冬，发车骑、材官诣荥阳，太尉灌婴将。
现代文：冬季，征发战车和骑兵、步兵前往荥阳，由太尉灌婴统率。
English: In the winter, chariots, cavalry and infantry were sent to Fenyang, led by the eunuch Hanying.

古文：春，正月，辛丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：春季，正月，辛丑朔，出现日食。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, Xin uglishuo, solar eclipses.

古文：夏，五月，丁卯，日有食之，既。
现代文：夏季，五月，丁卯，出现日全食。
English: A total solar eclipse will occur in the summer, in May, Tingwu.

古文：秋，八月，戊寅，帝崩于未央宫。
现代文：秋季，八月，戊寅，汉惠帝刘盈在未央宫驾崩。
English: In the autumn, in August, Wu Yin, Han Hui Emperor Liu Ying passed away in the Weiyang Palace.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：九月，辛丑，葬安陵。
现代文：九月，辛丑，惠帝下葬在安陵。
English: In September, Emperor Hui was buried in Anling.

古文：初，吕太后命张皇后取他人子养之，而杀其母，以为太子。
现代文：当初，吕太后让张皇后找个别人的孩子来抚养，杀死他的母亲，以他为太子。
English: At first, Empress Dowager Lv asked Empress Zhang to find someone else's child to raise, kill his mother, and make him the crown prince.

古文：既葬，太子即皇帝位，年幼；太后临朝称制。
现代文：惠帝下葬后，太子登上皇帝之位，因为年幼，便由吕太后在朝廷上行使天子权力。
English: After Emperor Hui was buried, the prince ascended to the throne of the emperor. Because he was young, Empress Dowager Lv exercised the power of the emperor at the court.

