古文：虞世南，字伯施，越州余姚人，隋内史侍郎世基弟也。
现代文：虞世南字伯施，越州余姚人，是隋代内史侍郎虞世基的弟弟。
English: Yu Shennan, surnamed Bo Shi, a native of Yuyao in Yuezhou, was the younger brother of Yu Shiji, a chamberlain in the Sui Dynasty.

古文：祖检，梁始兴王谘议；父荔，陈太子中庶子，俱有重名。
现代文：他的祖父虞检，是梁代始兴王咨议。他的父亲虞荔，是陈代太子中庶子，都有尊贵的名望。
English: His grandfather, Yu Jian, was an adviser to King Heungseong of the Liang Dynasty, and his father, Yu Li, was an illegitimate son of a prince of the Chen Dynasty, both of whom had distinguished reputations.

古文：叔父寄，陈中书侍郎，无子，以世南继后，故字曰伯施。
现代文：他的叔父虞寄，是陈代中书侍郎，没有子嗣，以世南为继嗣的后人，因此世南取字伯施。
English: His uncle, Yu Ying, was a secretary in the middle of the Chen Dynasty, and had no children, so he chose Shennan as his successor. Therefore, Shennan chose Zhibo Shi.

古文：世南性沈静寡欲，笃志勤学，少与兄世基受学于吴郡顾野王，经十余年，精思不倦，或累旬不盥栉。
现代文：世南生性沉静寡欲，意志坚定努力学习，年少时与他的哥哥世基一起在吴郡顾野王的门下读书，受学十多年，他勤奋努力精思不懈，有时十几天不洗脸不梳头。
English: Shennan was born with a quiet nature and a strong will to study hard. When he was young, he studied with his brother Shiji under the tutelage of King Guye of Wuxi County. He studied for more than ten years. He was diligent and hard-working, sometimes not washing his face or combing his hair for ten days.

古文：善属文，常祖述徐陵，陵亦言世南得己之意。
现代文：擅长做文章，曾师法著名文学家徐陵，徐陵也认为世南得到了自己的真髓。
English: He is good at writing articles. He was once a student of the famous writer Xu Ling. Xu Ling also believes that Shennan has obtained his true essence.

古文：又同郡沙门智永，善王羲之书，世南师焉，妙得其体，由是声名籍甚。
现代文：世南同郡的和尚智永擅长王羲之的书法，世南拜智永为师，深得王羲之书法真传，由此名声更大。
English: The monk Zhiyong of Tong County in the south of the world was good at Wang Xuan's calligraphy, and the south of the world followed Zhiyong as a teacher, and deeply learned Wang Xuan's calligraphy true biography, which made his reputation even greater.

古文：天嘉中，荔卒，世南尚幼，哀毁殆不胜丧。
现代文：天嘉年间，世南的父亲虞荔去世，当时世南还年幼，他因悲哀过度瘦损得几乎受不住丧服。
English: During the Tianjia era, Shennan's father, Yu Li, died when Shennan was still young, and he was so thin from grief that he could hardly stand the mourning.

古文：陈文帝知其二子博学，每遣中使至其家将护之。
现代文：陈文帝知道虞荔的两个儿子博学，常从宫廷中派出使者到他们家里去扶助卫护他们。
English: Chen Wendi knew that the two sons of Yu Li were learned, and often sent emissaries from the court to their home to help and protect them.

古文：及服阕，召为建安王法曹参军。
现代文：世南居丧期满，被召为建安王法曹参军。
English: When his term of service expired, he was called up to join the army as Jianan Wang Fa Cao.

古文：寄陷于陈宝应，在闽、越中，世南虽除丧，犹布衣蔬食。
现代文：他的叔父虞寄被陈宝应捕获，在闽、越一带，世南虽然已除去丧服，却还是布衣蔬食。
English: His uncle, Yu Ying, was captured by Chen Baoying. In the areas of Handan and Yue, although the South of the world has removed mourning clothes, they still wear cloth and eat vegetables.

古文：至太建末，宝应破，寄还，方令世南释布食肉。
现代文：到太建末年，陈宝应战败，虞寄得以生还，才令世南脱去布衣吃肉食。
English: In the last years of the Taijian era, Chen Bao was defeated in battle, and Yu Ying survived, only to make Shennan take off his clothes and eat meat.

古文：至德初，除西阳王友。
现代文：至德初年，除西阳王友。
English: In the first year after coming to Germany, Xiyang Wangyou was removed.

古文：陈灭，与世基同入长安，俱有重名，时人方之二陆。
现代文：陈朝灭亡，世南与世基一起到京都长安，兄弟二人都名重一时，当时的人把他们比作西晋的陆机与其弟陆云。
English: After the fall of the Chen Dynasty, Shennan and Shiji went to Kyoto and Chang'an together. Both brothers were famous for a while, and people at the time compared them to the land machine of the Western Jin Dynasty and his brother Lu Yun.

古文：时炀帝在籓，闻其名，与秦王俊辟书交至，以母老固辞，晋王令使者追之。
现代文：那时隋炀帝在做晋王，听到他们的名声，隋炀帝与秦王俊征召的文书一起送到，世南以母亲年老为借口，坚决推辞了，晋王命令使者去追他们。
English: At that time, the Emperor Sui and the Emperor Shun were the kings of Jin. Hearing of their fame, the Emperor Sui and the Emperor Shun sent them together with the document for the conscription of Qin Wangjun. Shennan firmly refused on the pretext of his mother's old age, and the King of Jin ordered the envoy to chase them.

古文：大业初，累授秘书郎，迁起居舍人。
现代文：大业初年，世南接连被授为秘书郎，升迁为起居舍人。
English: In the first year of Taiei, Shennan was successively awarded the title of secretary, and promoted to live-in houseman.

古文：时世基当朝贵盛，妻子被服拟于王者。世南虽同居，而躬履勤俭，不失素业。
现代文：那时世基在当朝非常显贵，妻子穿衣都模仿王者，世南虽然同他们住在一起，却清贫节俭，不改变自己的性情。
English: At that time, Shiji was very prominent in the dynasty, and his wife dressed like a king. Although Shennan lived with them, he was poor and frugal and did not change his disposition.

古文：及至隋灭，宇文化及弑逆之际，世基为内史侍郎，将被诛，世南抱持号泣，请以身代，化及不纳，因哀毁骨立，时人称焉。
现代文：等到隋朝灭亡，宇文化及反叛杀君，世基任内史侍郎，也将被杀，世南抱持着世基痛号悲泣，请求让自己替兄受死，化及不接受他的请求，世南因此悲哀得瘦损异常，形销骨立，当时的人都称赞他的行为。
English: By the time the Sui Dynasty was overthrown, the Sui culture and rebels had killed the king, and the Shiji, who had served the king as his personal attendant, would also be killed. Shennan held the Shiji in his arms and cried bitterly, begging to die in his brother's place. However, the Shiji did not accept his request. As a result, Shennan became extremely thin and emaciated. People at the time praised his actions.

古文：从化及至聊城，又陷于窦建德，伪授黄门侍郎。
现代文：世南随化及到聊城，又被窦建德抓获，伪授黄门侍郎。
English: Shennan followed Hu to Liaocheng, and was caught by Dou Jiande and falsely awarded the title of Huangmen waiter.

古文：太宗灭建德，引为秦府参军。寻转记室，仍授弘文馆学士，与房玄龄对掌文翰。
现代文：太宗灭了窦建德后，世南被授为秦府参军，不久转任记室参军，授弘文馆学士，与房玄龄共同掌管诏告文翰。
English: After Emperor Taizong annihilated Dou Jiande, Shennan was awarded the first place to join the army of Qin, and was soon transferred to the record office to join the army, awarded a bachelor's degree from the Hongwu Library, and jointly presided over the Dazhao Wenhan with Fang Xuanling.

古文：太宗尝命写《列女传》以装屏风，于时无本，世南暗疏之，不失一字。
现代文：太宗曾令世南写《列女传》用来装屏风，当时没有底本，世南默记刻写它没有错一个字。
English: Emperor Taizong once ordered Shennan to write "The Biography of a Column Girl" to be used as a screen. At that time, there was no source, and Shennan memorized and inscribed it without missing a single word.

古文：太宗升春宫，迁太子中舍人。
现代文：太宗正式封为太子后，升任世南为太子中舍人。
English: After Taizong was officially crowned as the crown prince, he was promoted to the position of crown prince.

古文：及即位，转著作郎，兼弘文馆学士。
现代文：到太宗即位，世南转任著作郎，兼弘文馆学士。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, Shennan was transferred to the post of chancellor, and also became a scholar at the Hongwen Academy.

古文：时世南年已衰老，抗表乞骸骨，诏不许。迁太子右庶子，固辞不拜，除秘书少监。
现代文：当时世南年已衰老，上表请求辞官，太宗下诏不许他辞官，升任他为太子右庶子，世南坚决推辞不受职，被授任为秘书少监。
English: At that time, Shennan was already old and senile. He was asked to resign from his post by the upper table, but Emperor Taizong did not allow him to resign from his post. He was promoted to the position of the prince's son-in-law. Shennan resolutely refused to accept the post and was appointed as the secretary of the junior inspector.

古文：上《圣德论》，辞多不载。
现代文：世南上《圣德论》，文字多无记载。
English: In the world, there is no written record of the "Sacred Virtue Theory."

古文：七年，转秘书监，赐爵永兴县子。
现代文：贞观七年，世南转任秘书监，赐爵永兴县子。
English: In the seventh year of Zhenguan, Shennan was transferred to the post of secretary-supervisor, and Yongxing Xianzi was given a peerage.

古文：太宗重其博识，每机务之隙，引之谈论，共观经史。
现代文：太宗器重他的博识，常常在处理军政大事的间隙，召世南在一起谈经论史。
English: Emphasizing his broad knowledge, Emperor Taizong often invited the world to discuss the history of the scriptures in the intervals between dealing with military and political events.

古文：世南虽容貌懦曌，若不胜衣，而志性抗烈，每论及古先帝王为政得失，必存规讽，多所补益。
现代文：世南虽然容貌柔弱得像是受不了衣衫，但志性却刚烈，每每谈到古时先代帝王为政的得失，必定诚心以正言相劝诫，对当时的政事多所补益。
English: Although Shennan's appearance is so soft and weak that it looks like he can't stand clothes, his ambition is strong. Whenever he talks about the gains and losses of the previous emperor's government in ancient times, he must sincerely use righteous words to admonish, which has a lot of benefits for the government affairs at that time.

古文：太宗尝谓侍臣曰： 朕因暇日，与虞世南商略古今，有一言之失，未尝不怅恨，其恳诚若此，朕用嘉焉。
现代文：太宗曾对侍臣说 ：朕借闲暇的时间与世南商讨古今政事，有一个字的差错，未尝不惆怅恼恨，他恳切诚挚到这种程度，朕用他用得好啊。
English: Emperor Taizong once said to a courtier: I take advantage of my leisure time to discuss ancient and modern politics with Shennan. There is a mistake in one word, and I do not feel angry. He is earnest and sincere to such an extent, and I use him well.

古文：群臣皆若世南，天下何忧不理！ 
现代文：群臣都像世南这样，天下还愁有什么不能治理。 
English: The ministers are all like the south of the world, and the world is still worried about what cannot be governed.

古文：八年，陇右山崩，大蛇屡见，山东及江淮多大水。
现代文：贞观八年，陇右山崩，大蛇多次出现，山东及江淮多次遭大水。
English: In the eighth year of Zhenguan, there were landslides on the right bank of the Yangtze River, large snakes appeared many times, and Shandong and the Huai River were flooded many times.

古文：太宗以问世南，对曰： 春秋时山崩，晋侯召伯宗而问焉，对曰： 国主山川，故山川崩竭，君为之不举，降服、乘缦、彻乐、出次、祝币以礼焉。 
现代文：太宗以这事问世南，世南回答说： 春秋时梁山崩，晋侯召伯宗问这件事，伯宗回答说 ：国家主宰山川，所以山崩川竭，君王因此不奏乐，穿素服，乘坐没有花纹的车、撤去音乐、出宫住宿、太祝陈献币帛用来祭祀神灵。 
English: Taizong told this to Shennan, and Shennan replied, "During the spring and autumn, the Liang Mountains collapsed, and the prince of Jin summoned Bozong to inquire about the matter. Bozong replied, "The country dominates the mountains and rivers, so the mountains and rivers collapsed. Therefore, the king did not play music, wore plain clothes, rode in a car without patterns, removed the music, went out of the palace to stay, and made offerings to the gods.

古文：梁山，晋所主也，晋侯从之，故得无害。
现代文：梁山，属晋国主宰，晋侯听从了伯宗的话，所以没有受到危害。
English: Liangshan belonged to the ruler of Jin Province. Jin Hou obeyed the words of Bozong, so he was not harmed.

古文：汉文帝元年，齐、楚地二十九山同日崩，水大出，令郡国无来贡献，施惠于天下，远近欢洽，亦不为灾。
现代文：汉文帝元年，齐、楚一带二十九座山同一天崩裂，洪水大肆泛滥，汉文帝命令郡国不要来进贡，对天下广施恩惠，远近欢乐和谐，也没有成灾。
English: In the first year of the Han Dynasty, twenty-nine mountains in the Qi and Chu regions collapsed on the same day, causing massive flooding. Emperor Han Wen ordered the county not to pay tribute, and to grant favors to the world. There was joy and harmony far and near, and there was no disaster.

古文：后汉灵帝时，青蛇见御座。
现代文：后汉灵帝时，青蛇出现在御座上。
English: After the Han Dynasty, the Blue Snake appeared on the throne.

古文：晋惠帝时，大蛇长三百步，见齐地，经市入朝。
现代文：晋惠帝时，大蛇长三百步，出现在齐地，经过市区进入朝廷。
English: At the time of Emperor Jinhui, the snake was 300 paces long, appeared in Qi, and entered the imperial court through the urban area.

古文：案蛇宜在草野，而入市朝，所以可为怪耳。
现代文：蛇应当在草野之中，但它进入市区朝廷，所以可以认为是怪异的。
English: The snake should be out in the grass, but it's made its way into an urban court, so it can be considered freakish.

古文：今蛇见山泽，盖深山大泽必有龙蛇，亦不足怪也。
现代文：如今蛇在山泽出现，深山大泽自然有龙蛇，也不足为怪。
English: Nowadays, snakes appear in mountains and lakes, and it is not surprising that deep mountain lakes naturally have dragons and snakes.

古文：又山东足雨，虽则其常，然阴淫过久，恐有冤狱，宜省系囚，庶几或当天意。
现代文：再说山东多雨，虽然合乎常规，然而阴雨连绵过久，恐怕有冤狱，应当审断关押的囚犯，或许可以符合天意。
English: In addition, Shandong has a lot of rain. Although it is normal, the rain has been continuous for a long time. I am afraid that there will be unjust imprisonment. The prisoners should be tried, which may be in line with God's will.

古文：且妖不胜德，唯修德可以销变。 
现代文：况且妖邪不能制服道德，只有遵循道德可以削减突发的事故。 
English: Moreover, evil cannot subdue morality. Only by following morality can sudden accidents be reduced.

古文：太宗以为然，因遣使者赈恤饥馁，申理狱讼，多所原宥。
现代文：太宗认为他说得对，因此派使者救济饥民，审理官司辨断冤案，多有赦免宽恕。
English: Emperor Taizong thought he was right, so he sent an envoy to help the starving people, tried and adjudicated cases of injustice, and mostly pardoned and forgave.

古文：后有星孛于虚、危，历于氐，百余日乃灭。
现代文：后来有一颗彗星出现于虚、危宿之间，经过氏宿，一百多天才消失。
English: Later, a comet appeared between the virtual and dangerous quarters, passing by Ujiyado and disappearing for more than a hundred days.

古文：太宗谓群臣曰： 天见彗星，是何妖也？ 
现代文：太宗对群臣说： 天上出现彗星，是什么妖邪呢？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said to his courtiers, "A comet appeared in the sky, what kind of evil is this?

古文：世南曰： 昔齐景公时有彗星见，公问晏婴，对曰： 穿池沼畏不深，起台榭畏不高，行刑罚畏不重，是以天见彗为公诫耳。 
现代文：世南说： 过去齐景公时有彗星出现，景公问晏婴，晏婴回答说 ：凿池沼怕它不深，兴建台榭怕它不高，施用刑罚怕刑罚不重，因此天上出现彗星来警诫您。 
English: Shennan said: In the past, a comet appeared during the reign of King Chieh Ching. King Ching asked the baby, and the baby replied: "If you want to dig a pond, don't dig too deep. If you want to build a tower, don't build too high. If you want to impose a penalty, don't impose a heavy penalty. Therefore, a comet appeared in the sky to warn you."

古文：景公惧而修德，后十六日而星没。
现代文：景公害怕而遵循道德，过了十六天彗星消失了。
English: Qi Jing Gong was very afraid, so he cultivated morality. Sixteen days later, the comet fell.

古文：臣闻 天时不如地利，地利不如人和 ，若德义不修，虽获麟凤，终是无补；但政事无阙，虽有灾星，何损于时？
现代文：我听说： 天时不如地利，地利不如人和 ，如果不遵循道德义理，即使获得麟凤，终究是于事无补，但政事没有过失，即使有灾星，也于时无损。
English: I have heard that: time is not as good as place, place is not as good as people, if you do not follow moral principles, even if you get a lot of money, it will not help, but there is no fault in politics, even if there is a disaster, it will not hurt.

古文：然愿陛下勿以功高古人而自矜伐，勿以太平渐久而自骄怠，慎终如始，彗星虽见，未足为忧。 
现代文：希望陛下不要因功高而自以为了不起，不要因太平久了而骄傲松懈，始终如一，即使出现彗星，也不足为它忧虑。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will not be puffed up with self-importance because of his great achievements, and that he will not be lax in his pride because it has been too long, and that he will remain consistent. Even if a comet appears, it is not enough to worry about it.

古文：太宗敛容谓曰： 吾之抚国，良无景公之过。
现代文：太宗神情严肃地对他说： 我治理国家，确实没有齐景公那样的过失。
English: Taizong looked serious and said to him, "I am governing the country, and I really don't have the same faults as Qi Jing Gong.

古文：但吾才弱冠举义兵，年二十四平天下，未三十而居大位，自谓三代以降，拨乱之主，莫臻于此。
现代文：但我才二十岁就发动义兵，二十四岁平定天下，不到三十岁就居于帝位，自认为夏、商、周以来，治理乱世的君主，没有人达到这样的。
English: But I was only twenty years old when I launched the volunteer army, twenty-four years old when I pacified the world, and less than thirty years old when I lived on the imperial throne. Since Xia, Shang and Zhou, no one has achieved this.

古文：重以薛举之骁雄，宋金刚之鸷猛，窦建德跨河北，王世充据洛阳，当此之时，足为勍敌，皆为我所擒。
现代文：再拿薛举的骁勇，宋金刚的凶猛，窦建德横跨河北，王世充占据洛阳来说，在那个时候，够得上是劲敌，都被我擒获。
English: Then take Xue Zhu's bravery, Song King Kong's ferocity, Dou Jiande across Hebei, and Wang Shichong's occupation of Luoyang. At that time, it was enough to be a strong opponent, and I captured them all.

古文：及逢家难，复决意安社稷，遂登九五，降服北夷，吾颇有自矜之意，以轻天下之士，此吾之罪也。
现代文：到遭逢家难，又决定安定社稷，于是登上帝位，降服北方的异族，我颇有些自傲的意向，以此轻视天下之士，这是我的罪过。
English: When I encountered family difficulties and decided to stabilize society, I ascended to the throne of God and surrendered to the foreign people in the north. I had a rather arrogant intention to despise the people of the world, which was my sin.

古文：上天见变，良为是乎？
现代文：上天出现变故，确实是为这吗？
English: Now the heavens are showing signs, warning me!

古文：秦始皇平六国，隋炀帝富四海，既骄且逸，一朝而败，吾亦何得自骄也。
现代文：秦始皇平定六国，隋炀帝富达四海，骄奢淫逸，一个早上就灭亡了，我又怎么能够自骄呢？
English: The First Emperor of Qin conquered six countries, the Emperor of Sui and Qin conquered the four seas, and died in the morning. How can I be proud of myself?

古文：言念于此，不觉惕焉震惧。 
现代文：想到这里，不觉由此警惕震惊。 
English: When I thought about it, I was shocked and alarmed.

古文：四月，康国献狮子，诏世南为之赋，命编之东观，辞多不载。
现代文：四月，康国献来狮子，太宗诏令世南为之做赋，在东观编撰，文字多无记载。
English: In April, Kangguo presented a lion, and Emperor Taizong ordered Shennan to make an endowment for it. It was compiled in Dongguan, but there is no record of the text.

古文：后高祖崩，有诏山陵制度，准汉长陵故事，务从隆厚。程限既促，功役劳弊。
现代文：后来高祖去世，太宗诏令高祖的坟墓依照汉长陵的先例，务必要隆重丰厚，安葬期限已经迫近，建筑工程繁劳艰难。
English: Later, Gaozu died, and Emperor Taizong issued an edict that Gaozu's tomb should be grand and lavish in accordance with the precedent of the Han Dynasty Mausoleum. The burial deadline was approaching, and the construction work was arduous and difficult.

古文：世南上封事谏曰：
现代文：世南上密封的奏章规劝说：
English: The world's most airtight playbook of persuasion:

古文：臣闻古之圣帝明王所以薄葬者，非不欲崇高光显，珍宝具物，以厚其亲。
现代文： 我听说古代圣明的帝王所以薄葬的，并不是不想要高贵光耀、准备珍宝物器来厚葬自己的亲人。
English: I heard that the emperors of ancient China buried their loved ones thinly, not because they did not want a noble shine, but because they wanted to prepare precious objects to bury their loved ones thickly.

古文：然审而言之，高坟厚垅，珍物毕备，此适所以为亲之累，非曰孝也。
现代文：可是认真想一想，高坟厚垅，珍物齐备，这恰恰会成为亲人的累赘，而不是孝。
English: However, if you think about it seriously, a high grave with a thick coffin and a lot of precious things will just become a burden for the relatives, not a filial duty.

古文：是以深思远虑，安于菲薄，以为长久万代之计，割其常情以定耳。
现代文：因此深思远虑，安于菲薄，是为长久万代考虑，割舍人之常情而决定的。
English: Therefore, forethought, peace of mind, is for the long-term consideration of all generations, to cut off people's common sense and decided.

古文：昔汉成帝造延、昌二陵，制度甚厚，功费甚多。
现代文：从前汉成帝造延、昌二陵，制度非常优厚，工程费用很多。
English: In the past, Emperor Hancheng built the two mausoleums of Yan Yan and Chang Er. The system was very generous, and the project cost was high.

古文：谏议大夫刘向上书，其言深切，皆合事理。其略曰： 孝文居霸陵，凄怆悲怀，顾谓群臣曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：谏议大夫刘向上书，他的话深刻恳切，都合乎事理，上书大致是说： 孝文帝在霸陵，凄怆悲怀，看着群臣说： 啊！
English: Dr. Liu wrote a letter to the emperor. His words were profound, sincere and reasonable. The letter basically said: Emperor Xiaowen is in the tomb, sad and sorrowful. He looked at the courtiers and said: Ah!

古文：以北山石为椁，用纻絮斮陈漆其间，岂可动哉？ 
现代文：以北山做棺椁，把麻絮斩断排列涂漆在它的间隙里，难道还可以动它吗？ 
English: Using the North Mountain as a coffin, cutting off and arranging the hemp fluff and painting it in the gaps, can it still be moved?

古文：张释之进曰： 使其中有可欲，虽锢南山犹有隙；使其中无可欲，虽无石椁，又何戚焉！ 
现代文：张释之走上前说： 假若墓中有可贪欲的东西，即使用铜铁铸塞南山也有缝隙，假若墓中没有可贪欲的东西，即使没有石椁，又有什么愁的呢！ 
English: Zhang Xizhi stepped forward and said: "If there is something to be coveted in the tomb, even if Nanshan is cast with copper and iron, there will be a gap. If there is nothing to be coveted in the tomb, even if there is no stone coffin, what is there to worry about?

古文：夫死者无终极，而国家有废兴，释之所言，为无穷计也。
现代文：死去的人没有终极，然而国家有废兴，释之所说的话是为长久打算。
English: The dead do not have an end, but the country has its ups and downs, and what he said was a long-term plan.

古文：孝文寤焉，遂以薄葬。 
现代文：孝文帝领悟了其中的意思，于是对汉成帝施行薄葬。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen understood the meaning of this, so Emperor Hancheng was given a short funeral.

古文：又汉氏之法，人君在位，三分天下贡赋，以一分入山陵。
现代文：再说汉朝的制度，君主在位，把天下的赋税分为三份，拿一份纳入帝王的坟墓。
English: In addition, the system of the Han Dynasty, when the monarch is on the throne, divides the taxes of the world into three parts, and takes one part into the tomb of the emperor.

古文：武帝历年长久，比葬，陵中不复容物，霍光暗于大体，奢侈过度。
现代文：武帝经历的年代长久，等到入葬时，陵墓中不能再容纳物品，霍光不识大体，奢侈过度。
English: Emperor Wu experienced a long period of time. By the time he was buried, the mausoleum could no longer hold objects. He was ignorant and extravagant.

古文：其后至更始之败，赤眉贼入长安，破茂陵取物，犹不能尽。
现代文：那以后到更始战败，赤眉贼入长安，毁坏汉武帝陵墓茂陵，掠取宝物，还拿不完。
English: After that, after the defeat at the beginning of the war, the red-browed thieves entered Chang'an, destroyed the Han Emperor Wu's mausoleum, plundered treasures, and could not get enough.

古文：无故聚敛百姓，为盗之用，甚无谓也。
现代文：无故搜刮百姓，被强盗取用，是很没有意义的。
English: It is meaningless to search the people without reason and be taken advantage of by robbers.

古文：魏文帝于首阳东为寿陵，作终制，其略曰： 昔尧葬寿陵，因山为体，无封树，无立寝殿园邑，为棺椁足以藏骨，为衣衾足以朽肉。
现代文：魏文帝在首阳东建寿陵，做关于丧葬的文告，文告大致是说 ：过去丧葬在寿陵，依山造成墓的形体，没有封树，没有建寝殿园邑，造棺椁足以藏遗骨，做衣服足以裹朽肉。
English: Emperor Weiwen built the Shouling Mausoleum in the east of Shouyang and made a proclamation about funerals. The proclamation roughly said: In the past, funerals were held in the Shouling Mausoleum, the shape of the tomb was created by the mountain, there was no sealing of trees, no garden was built for sleeping, a coffin was made to hide the remains, and clothes were made to wrap the dead flesh.

古文：吾营此不食之地，欲使易代之后，不知其处，无藏金银铜铁，一以瓦器。
现代文：我营造这不食之地，想使更易朝代之后，不知道它的位置，不藏金银铜铁，一律用瓦器。
English: I built this land that does not eat, and I want to make it easier for dynasties to come, I do not know its location, I do not hide gold, silver, copper and iron, and I always use earthenware.

古文：自古及今，未有不亡之国，无有不发之墓，至乃烧取玉匣金缕，骸骨并尽，乃不重痛哉！
现代文：从古到今，没有不亡的国家，没有不掘的坟墓，以至于烧取玉匣金缕，骸骨一起烧尽，还不痛心吗？
English: From ancient times to the present, there is no country that does not die, no grave that is not dug, so that it is not painful to burn the jade box and the skeleton together?

古文：若违诏妄有变改，吾为戮尸于地下，死而重死，不忠不孝，使魂而有知，将不福汝。
现代文：如果违背诏令妄有改变，我在地下被斩戮尸体，死了一次再死一次，不忠不孝，使鬼魂知道，将不赐福给你。
English: If, in violation of the edict, there is any change, I will be chopped up in the underground, die again and again, be disloyal and unfilial, and let the ghosts know that they will not bless you.

古文：以为永制，藏之宗庙。 
现代文：这作为永久的制度，藏在宗庙中。 
English: As a permanent institution, it is kept in the ancestral temple.

古文：魏文帝此制，可谓达于事矣。
现代文：魏文帝的这个制度，可以说是通达事理啊。
English: This system of Emperor Weiwen can be said to be a matter of common sense.

古文：向使陛下德止如秦、汉之君，臣则缄口而已，不敢有言。
现代文： 假如陛下的德行只是如同秦汉的君主，臣就闭口而已，不敢有什么话说。
English: If His Majesty's virtue were only like that of the Qin and Han monarchs, the vassal would just keep his mouth shut and not dare to say anything.

古文：伏见圣德高远，尧、舜犹所不逮，而俯与秦、汉之君同为奢泰，舍尧、舜、殷、周之节俭，此臣所以尤戚也。
现代文：我恭敬地看到陛下圣德高远，尧、舜还有所不及，却屈身与秦汉的君主一样奢霍无度，舍弃尧、舜、殷、周的节俭，这是我所尤其发愁的。
English: I respectfully see that Your Majesty's virtue is high and far-reaching, far beyond that of the emperors of the Qin and Han dynasties, but you have stooped to the same extravagance as the emperors of the Qin and Han dynasties, abandoning the frugality of the emperors of the Qin, Han, Yin and Zhou dynasties. This is what I particularly worry about.

古文：今为丘垅如此，其内虽不藏珍宝，亦无益也。
现代文：现在建造丘垅像这个样子，它里面即使不藏珍宝也是无益的。
English: Now it is useless to build a mound like this, even if there is no treasure hidden in it.

古文：万代之后，但见高坟大墓，岂谓无金玉耶？
现代文：万代之后，只要看见高坟大墓，人们难道认为里面没有金玉吗？
English: After thousands of generations, whenever people see a large tomb, do they think there are no gold ornaments inside?

古文：臣之愚计，以为汉文霸陵，既因山势，虽不起坟，自然高显。
现代文：我的愚虑，认为汉文帝的霸陵，既然依着山势，即使不起坟，也自然高显。
English: My stupidity, thinking that Emperor Hanwen's domineering mausoleum, since it follows the mountain, even if it is not a tomb, is naturally high.

古文：今之所卜，地势即平，不可不起，宜依《白虎通》所陈周制，为三仞之坟，其方中制度，事事减少。事竟之日，刻石于陵侧，明丘封大小高下之式。明器所须，皆以瓦木，合于礼文，一不得用金银铜铁。
现代文：现在所卜测的墓址，地势接近平坦，不能不修起来，应当依照《白虎通》所列举的周代法制，造三仞高的坟，建筑坟墓的制度，事事减少，墓建成之日，刻石碑立在陵墓旁，明确陵墓大小高低的标准，随葬器物，都用瓦木，合乎礼节仪式，一律不准用金银铜铁。
English: The site of the tomb, which is close to flat and cannot be left unrepaired, should be built in accordance with the Zhou Dynasty legal system listed in the "White Tiger Pass." The system of building tombs should be reduced, and the engraved stone monument should be erected next to the mausoleum on the day of the completion of the tomb. The size and height of the mausoleum should be clear. The funeral objects should be made of shingle, which is in line with the etiquette ceremony. Gold, silver, copper and iron should not be used at all.

古文：使万代子孙，并皆遵奉，一通藏之宗庙，岂不美乎！
现代文：让万代子孙，一起都遵守奉行，一起全部藏在宗庙里，难道不好吗？
English: Isn't it a good idea to let all generations of children and grandchildren observe the practice together, and hide it all together in the ancestral temple?

古文：且臣下除服用三十六日，已依霸陵，今为坟垅，又以长陵为法，恐非所宜。
现代文：况且臣下除去丧服为三十六天，已经依照霸陵的制度，现在修坟垅，又依照长陵为标准，恐怕不适宜。
English: Moreover, it took 36 days for the vassals to remove their mourning clothes, which was already in accordance with the system of desecrating tombs. Now, it is not appropriate to repair tombs according to the standard of long tombs.

古文：伏愿深览古今，为长久之虑，臣之赤心，唯愿万岁之后，神道常安，陛下孝名，扬于无穷耳。
现代文：我恭敬地愿陛下深览古今，为长久考虑。臣的赤子之心，只愿万岁之后，神道长安，陛下的孝名，传扬天下没有尽头而已。 
English: I respectfully hope that Your Majesty will take a deep look at the past and present and consider the long-term. I only wish that Your Majesty's cherished heart will live forever, and that there will be no end to the propagation of the Shinto religion and Your Majesty's filial name.

古文：书奏不报。世南又上疏曰： 汉家即位之初，便营陵墓，近者十余岁，远者五十年方始成就。今以数月之间而造数十年之事，其于人力，亦已劳矣。
现代文：书奏没有得到回答，世南又上奏疏说 ：汉家即位之初，就营造陵墓，近的十多年，远的五十年，才开始建成，现在用几个月的时间而建造几十年规模的陵墓，这对于人力也已经劳乏了。
English: The scribe did not get an answer, and Shennan went on to say: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, mausoleums were built. It took more than ten years to build them, and fifty years to complete them. Now, it takes a few months to build a mausoleum of several decades. This is also a strain on manpower.

古文：又汉家大郡五十万户，即目人众未及往时，而功役与之一等，此臣所以致疑也。 
现代文：再说汉家大郡五十万户，眼前的人数不及过去，而工程却与它相等，这是导致我疑虑的原因。 
English: In addition, there are 500,000 households in Hanya County. The current number is not as high as in the past, but the project is equal to it. This is the reason for my doubts.

古文：时公卿又上奏请遵遗诏，务从节俭，因下其事付所司详议，于是制度颇有减省焉。
现代文：当时公卿又上奏请求太宗遵守遗诏，务必要节俭，因此太宗把这事交付主管的人详议，于是殡葬制度很有减省。
English: At that time, the court noble also petitioned Taizong to abide by the will and be frugal, so Taizong submitted the matter to the person in charge for detailed discussion, and the funeral and burial system was greatly reduced.

古文：太宗后颇好猎，世南上疏谏曰： 臣闻秋狝冬狩，盖惟恆典；射隼从禽，备乎前诰。
现代文：太宗后来颇好狩猎，世南上疏规劝说 ：我听说秋天打猎，冬天打猎，这是通常的制度；射鹰放禽，都有从前的告诫。
English: Later, Emperor Taizong was quite good at hunting, and persuaded the world to relax the rules: I heard that hunting in autumn and hunting in winter was the usual system; shooting eagles and releasing birds were all warned against in the past.

古文：伏惟陛下因听览之余辰，顺天道以杀伐，将欲躬摧班掌，亲御皮轩，穷猛兽之窟穴，尽逸材于林薮。
现代文：我想，陛下用处理政事的余暇，依自然的规律去杀伐，准备亲自抛弃朝中用的障扇，亲自驾驭虎皮装饰的车，捣尽猛兽的窟穴，取尽山林水泽间的良材。
English: I think that His Majesty will use his leisure time to deal with political affairs, and according to the laws of nature, he will go on a killing spree, prepare to personally abandon the fan used by the North Korea and China, personally drive the car decorated with tiger skin, and exhaust the holes of ferocious beasts, and exhaust the good timber between mountains, forests and rivers.

古文：夷凶剪暴，以卫黎元；收革擢羽，用充军器；举旗效获，式遵前古。
现代文：削平凶残剪除暴虐，以此保卫百姓，收集皮革拢取羽毛，用来充当武器，举旗颁赐出猎所得，遵照前古的仪式。
English: to protect the people by cutting down the savages and eliminating the tyranny, to collect the leather and feathers to be used as weapons, to raise the flag and give out the hunting proceeds, according to the ancient ceremony.

古文：然黄屋之尊，金舆之贵，八方之所仰德，万国之所系心，清道而行，犹戒衔橛，斯盖重慎防微，为社稷也。
现代文：然而黄屋之尊，金舆之贵，是八方所敬慕的德行，万国关联的中心，先使道路清净再出行，还要提防倾覆之祸，这样看重谨慎、防微杜渐，是为了社稷。
English: However, the reverence of Huangya, the preciousness of Jinyou, is a virtue admired by all sides and the center of international relations. First make the road clean before traveling, but also beware of the disaster of overturning. This emphasis on caution and prevention is for the sake of the society.

古文：是以马卿直谏于前，张昭变色于后，臣诚微浅，敢忘斯义？
现代文：因此马卿直言规劝在前，张昭争论变色在后，臣确实低微卑贱，怎敢忘这个道理？
English: Therefore, Ma Ching was forthright and persuasive before, Zhang Zhao's argument changed color after, and the minister was indeed low and lowly. How dare you forget this truth?

古文：且天弧星毕，所殪已多，颁禽赐获，皇恩亦薄。
现代文：况且所射死的鸟兽已经很多了，颁赐所获的猎物，皇恩也广大啊。
English: Moreover, there are already many birds and beasts that have been shot to death, and the bounty given by the emperor is also vast.

古文：伏愿时息猎车，且韬长戟，不拒刍荛之请，降纳涓浍之流，袒裼徒抟，任之群下，则贻范百王，永光万代。 
现代文：愿陛下按时停止出猎，姑且掩藏长戟，不拒绝草野小民的请求，俯纳细小的水流，赤身徒手搏斗的人，任他们在自己身边，就会成为遗留后世君王的典范，永光万代。 
English: May His Majesty stop hunting on time, hide the long beak, not refuse the request of the grassland people, accept the small water flow, and let the naked people who fight with their bare hands be around them, and they will become the model of the future monarchs, forever and ever.

古文：其有犯无隐，多此类也。
现代文：其中犯颜直谏的话，多是这一类。
English: Among them, those who commit sexual misconduct are mostly in this category.

古文：太宗以是益亲礼之。
现代文：太宗因此更加亲近、礼待世南。
English: As a result, Taizong became closer to the South and treated it with more respect.

古文：尝称世南有五绝：一曰德行，二曰忠直，三曰博学，四曰文辞，五曰书翰。
现代文：太宗曾经称赞世南有五绝：一曰德行，二曰忠直，三曰博学，四曰文辞，五曰书翰。
English: Emperor Taizong once praised the world's South as having five outstanding qualities: one is virtue, two is loyalty, three is erudition, four is literature, and five is calligraphy.

古文：十二年，又表请致仕，优制许之，仍授银青光禄大夫、弘文馆学士，禄赐防阁，并同京官职事。
现代文：贞观十二年，世南又上表请求辞官归居，太宗格外开恩应许他，仍授银青光禄大夫、弘文馆学士，禄赐、防门合并同京官职事。
English: In the twelfth year of Zhenguan, Shennan went to the table to request the resignation of the official to return to his residence, and the Taizong promised him an extraordinarily generous grace, still awarding him the silver Qingguanglu doctor, the Kobunkwan bachelor, the reward, and the defense gate combined with the Beijing official.

古文：寻卒，年八十一。
现代文：不久世南去世，时年八十一岁。
English: Shennan died soon after, at the age of 81.

古文：太宗举哀于别次，哭之甚恸。
现代文：太宗在别室为他举哀，哭得非常悲恸。
English: Taizong mourned for him in another room, weeping bitterly.

古文：赐东园秘器，陪葬昭陵，赠礼部尚书，谥曰文懿。
现代文：赐给棺木，让他陪葬在昭陵，赠礼部尚书，赐谥号文懿。
English: Give the coffin, let him accompany the burial in Zhaoling, give the gift of Shangshu, and give the gift of Zhuo Wenjun.

古文：手敕魏王泰曰： 虞世南于我，犹一体也。拾遗补阙，无日暂忘，实当代名臣，人伦准的。吾有小失，必犯颜而谏之。
现代文：下手令给魏王泰说 ：虞世南对于我，像是一个人，纠正帝王的过失，没有一天有片刻的忘记，确实是当代名臣，人伦的准则，我有小的过失，世南必定犯颜直谏。
English: He gave the order to Wei Wang Tai and said, "For me, Yu Shennan is like a person who corrects the emperor's mistakes. He never forgets for a moment. Indeed, he is a contemporary dignitary, the standard of human relations. I have a small mistake, Shennan will certainly commit a disgraceful act."

古文：今其云亡，石渠、东观之中，无复人矣，痛惜岂可言耶！ 
现代文：现在他已亡故，石渠、东观之中，再也没有这样的人了。悲痛、惋惜怎么可以说啊！ 
English: Now that he has passed away, there is no one else like him in the country, and I can't help but regret that.

古文：未几，太宗为诗一篇，追述往古兴亡之道，既而叹曰： 钟子期死，伯牙不复鼓琴。
现代文：不久，太宗为他做诗一篇，追述往古兴亡之道，接着感叹说： 钟子期死，伯牙不再鼓琴。
English: Soon after, Taizong composed a poem for him, tracing his rise and fall back to ancient times, and then lamented: "When the bell dies, Baoga will no longer play the drum."

古文：朕之此诗，将何以示？ 
现代文：朕的这篇诗，将拿给谁看呢？ 
English: To whom shall I show this poem of mine?

古文：令起居郎褚遂良诣其灵帐读讫焚之，冀世南神识感悟。
现代文：于是命令起居郎褚遂良拿诗到世南的灵帐边读完后焚烧，希望世南的神灵知道感悟。
English: Therefore, he ordered his retainer, Soorang Soorang, to take the poem to the South of the World and burn it after reading it, hoping that the gods of the South of the World would be impressed.

古文：后数岁，太宗夜梦见之，有若平生。
现代文：几年后，太宗夜里梦见世南，像平时活着一样。
English: A few years later, Taizong had a dream about Shennan in the night. He was alive as usual.

古文：翌日，下制曰： 礼部尚书、永兴文懿公虞世南，德行淳备，文为辞宗，夙夜尽心，志在忠益。
现代文：第二天，太宗下令说： 礼部尚书、永兴文懿公虞世南，德行淳朴完备，文章是辞赋的宗师，早晚尽心，志在忠益。
English: The next day, Emperor Taizong gave the following order: "The Ministry of Rites and Decrees is well written, Yongxing is a scholar and statesman, the world is young, and virtue is simple and complete. This article is the master of words and deeds. I will do my best in the morning and in the evening, aiming to be loyal and beneficial."

古文：奄从物化，倏移岁序，昨因夜梦，忽睹其人，兼进谠言，有如平生之日。
现代文：忽然去世，转眼过了几年。昨因夜梦，忽见其人，并且进谏直言，有如平生之日。
English: A few years have passed since his sudden death. Last night, due to a dream, I suddenly saw him, and I spoke to him directly, as if it were the day of my life.

古文：追怀遗美，良增悲叹。宜资冥助，申朕思旧之情，可于其家为设五百僧斋，并为造天尊像一区。 
现代文：追怀他留下的美德，很增悲叹，应当供给冥钱，申明朕的思旧之情，可在他家设五百僧斋，并为他造天尊像一座。 
English: In memory of the virtues he left behind, I greatly increase my lament, I should offer him money, affirm my nostalgia, I can set up five hundred monks in his house, and make a statue for him.

古文：又敕图其形于凌烟阁。
现代文：又命令在凌烟阁上画虞世南的肖像。
English: He also ordered a portrait of Yu Shennan to be painted on Lingyakou.

古文：有集三十卷，令褚亮为之序。
现代文：世南有文集三十卷，太宗令褚亮为集做序。
English: There are thirty volumes of collections in the world, and Emperor Taizong ordered Su Liang to make a preface for the collection.

古文：世南子昶，官至工部侍郎。
现代文：世南的儿子虞昶，官至工部侍郎。
English: Shinnan's son, Yuge, rose through the ranks to become a chamberlain in the Ministry of Works.

古文：李百药，字重规，定州安平人，隋内史令、安平公德林子也。
现代文：李百药字重规，定州安平人，是隋朝内史令、安平公李德林的儿子。
English: Li Baizhang, a native of Anping, Dingzhou, was the son of Li Delin, a member of the Inner History Commission of the Sui Dynasty and an official of Anping.

古文：为童兒时多疾病，祖母赵氏故以百药为名。
现代文：因生来体弱多病，祖母赵氏因此给他取名百药。
English: Because he was born frail and sickly, his grandmother Zhao named him Hundred Medicine.

古文：七岁解属文。
现代文：百药七岁懂得做文章。
English: The seven-year-old knows how to make an article.

古文：父友齐中书舍人陆乂、马元熙尝造德林宴集，有读徐陵文者，云 既取成周之禾，将刈琅邪之稻 ，并不知其事。
现代文：父亲的朋友齐中书舍人陆父、马元熙曾到李德林家中聚宴，读徐陵的文章，说 ：收获完了成周的粟子，将要收获琅笽的稻谷。 都不知道说的什么事。
English: His father's friends, Lu Fuzhong and Ma Yuanxi, both of whom were students at the Qizhong School, once went to Li Delin's home for a banquet, read Xu Ling's article, and said, "We have finished harvesting Zhou's millet, and are about to harvest Zhou's rice." Neither knew what to say.

古文：百药时侍立，进曰： 《传》称 鄅人藉稻 。杜预《注》云 鄅国在琅邪开阳 。 
现代文：百药当时侍立在旁边，走上前说： 在传上说 禹阝人藉稻 ，杜预注解说 禹阝国在琅笽开阳 。 
English: At that time, Baizhe stood next to him and stepped forward to say: According to legend, the Uygur people used rice, Du Yu's annotation explained that the Uygur country was in the open.

古文：乂等大惊异之。
现代文：陆父等人感到非常惊奇。
English: Lu father and others were very surprised.

古文：开皇初，授东宫通事舍人，迁太子舍人，兼东宫学士。
现代文：开皇初年，百药被授封为东宫通事舍人，调任太子舍人，兼东宫学士。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, Baiyao was awarded the title of Eastern Palace Keeper, transferred to the Prince Keeper, and also the Eastern Palace Bachelor.

古文：或嫉其才而毁之者，乃谢病免去。
现代文：有的人嫉妒他的才能而毁谤他，百药就托病辞去官职离开了东宫。
English: Some people were jealous of his talent and slandered him. He resigned from his post and left the Eastern Palace.

古文：十九年，追赴仁寿宫，令袭父爵。
现代文：开皇十九年，进入仁寿宫，隋文帝命百药承袭父爵。
English: In the 19th year of the emperor's reign, he entered the Renshou Palace, and Sui Emperor Wen inherited his father's title.

古文：左仆射杨素、吏部尚书牛弘雅爱其才，奏授礼部员外郎，皇太子勇又召为东宫学士。
现代文：左仆射杨素、吏部尚书牛弘很赏识他的才华，被推荐为礼部员外郎，皇太子杨勇又重新召他为东宫学士。
English: His talent was highly appreciated by his left-hand servant, Yang Su, and the head clerk, Shang Shuxiu Hong, and he was recommended as a member of the etiquette department, and crown prince Yang Yong reappointed him as a scholar of the East Palace.

古文：诏令修五礼，定律令，撰阴阳书。
现代文：诏令他修订《五礼》，制定刑律法令，撰《阴阳书》。
English: The emperor ordered him to revise the "Five Rites," formulate criminal laws and regulations, and compile the "Book of Yin and Yang."

古文：台内奏议文表，多百药所撰。
现代文：尚书省的奏议文表，大多是百药所撰写的。
English: Most of Shang Shuxuan's petition forms were written by Baizhe.

古文：时炀帝出镇扬州，尝召之，百药辞疾不赴，炀帝大怒，及即位，出为桂州司马。
现代文：当时隋炀帝出镇扬州府，曾经征召过百药，百药托病不应他的征召，隋炀帝大怒，到他即位，就把李百药贬为桂州司马。
English: At that time, the Sui Dynasty Emperor Xuanzong went to Yangzhou. He had conscripted Baizhe, but Baizhe did not accept his conscription. The Sui Dynasty Emperor Xuanzong was furious. When he ascended to the throne, he relegated Li Baizhe to the position of Guizhou Sima.

古文：其后，罢州置郡，因解职还乡里。
现代文：那以后，废州设郡，百药因此就解职还乡了。
English: After that, the waste state was divided into counties, and Baidao was dismissed and returned to his hometown.

古文：大业五年，授鲁郡临泗府步兵校尉。
现代文：大业五年，李百药被授为鲁郡临泗府步兵校尉。
English: After five years of hard work, Li Baiyao was awarded the title of Lu County, Linyi Prefecture Infantry Captain.

古文：九年，充戍会稽。
现代文：大业九年，担任防守会稽的职务。
English: After nine years of hard work, he assumed the post of defense auditor.

古文：寻授建安郡丞，行达乌程，属江都难作，复会沈法兴为李子通所破，子通又命为中书侍郎、国子祭酒。
现代文：不久被授为建安郡丞，赴任途中走到乌程县，适逢江都发动叛乱，被卷入沈法兴部下，暂任一个小官。恰好遇到沈法兴被李子通打败，李子通又令李百药为中书侍郎、国子祭酒。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Jian'an County Commissioner, and on his way to the post, he went to Wucheng County. It was a time when Jiangdu launched a rebellion, and he was involved in Shen Faoxing's subordinates, temporarily serving as a minor official. It just so happened that Shen Faoxing was defeated by Li Zittong, and Li Zittong also made Li Baiyao the attendant of Chinese books and the national son's sacrificial wine.

古文：及杜伏威攻灭子通，又以百药为行台考功郎中。
现代文：到杜伏威攻灭李子通，又任用李百药为行台考功郎中。
English: He went to Du Fu Wei to attack and destroy Li Zi Tong, and appointed Li Baiyao as a meritorious student in the Taiwan Examination.

古文：或有谮之者，伏威囚之，百药著《省躬赋》以致其情，伏威亦知其无罪，乃令复职。
现代文：有人暗地诬陷百药，杜伏威把他囚禁起来了，百药撰写了《省躬赋》用来表达自己的情怀，杜伏威也知道他没有罪，就令他复职。
English: He was falsely accused by someone, and he was imprisoned by DuFuWei. DuFuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWuWu.

古文：伏威既据有江南，高祖遣使招抚，百药劝伏威入朝，伏威从之，遣其行台仆射辅公祏与百药留守，遂诣京师。
现代文：杜伏威已经占据了江南，唐高祖派使者招抚他，百药劝杜伏威进京接受招抚，伏威答应了，派他的行台仆射辅公礻石与百药留守，就到京师长安去。
English: Du Fu Wei had already occupied the south of the Yangtze River. Tang Gao Zu sent an envoy to entice him, and Baizhe advised Du Fu Wei to go to Beijing to be enticed. Fu Wei agreed, and sent his traveling servant Sha Fu Gong to stay with Baizhe, and then went to Beijing Shichang'an.

古文：及渡江至历阳，狐疑中悔，将害百药，乃饮以石灰酒，因大泄痢，而宿病皆除。
现代文：等到渡江到丹阳，心中狐疑而中途后悔，准备加害百药，于是送石灰酒给百药饮，百药因此大泄而旧病都由此而去掉了。
English: Waiting to cross the river to Danyang, he had doubts in his heart and regretted halfway, preparing to harm the medicine, so he sent lime wine to drink the medicine. The medicine was drained and the old disease was removed.

古文：伏威知百药不死，乃作书与公祏令杀百药，赖伏威养子王雄诞保护获免。
现代文：伏威知道百药没死，于是写信给辅公礻石命令他杀死百药，依靠杜伏威养子王雄诞的保护才得幸免。
English: Fowey knew that Baekhyeol was not dead, so he wrote to Fu Gong and ordered him to kill Baekhyeol, relying on the protection of Du Fowey's adopted son Wang Yuxing to be spared.

古文：公祏反，又授百药吏部侍郎。
现代文：辅公礻石起兵反唐，又任百药吏部侍郎。
English: He was an assistant to the procurator Zou Shi, who raised an army against the Tang Dynasty, and also served as a chamberlain of the Hundred Medicine Officers' Department.

古文：有谮百药于高祖，云百药初说杜伏威入朝，又与辅公祏同反。
现代文：有人在唐高祖面前诬陷百药，说百药开始劝杜伏威降唐，又与辅公礻石一起反唐。
English: Someone falsely accused Baekhyo in front of Tang Gaozu, saying that Baekhyo began to persuade Du Fuwei to surrender to Tang, and also opposed Tang together with Fu Gong Zhi Shi.

古文：高祖大怒。
现代文：唐高祖非常震怒。
English: Tang Gaozu was furious.

古文：及公祏平，得伏威与公祏令杀百药书，高祖意稍解，遂配流泾州。
现代文：到辅公礻石被平定，查得杜伏威令辅公礻石害百药的书信，唐高祖怒意稍息，于是将百药发配流放到泾州。
English: When Du Fuwei's letter was discovered, which ordered Du Fuwei's subordinates to harm the medicine, Tang Gaozu's anger subsided, and he sent the medicine to Zhangzhou for distribution.

古文：太宗重其才名，贞观元年，召拜中书舍人，赐爵安平县男。
现代文：唐太宗看重李百药的才名，贞观元年，李百药被太宗召回长安拜为中书舍人，赐爵安平县男。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty valued Li Baiyao's talent. In the first year of Zhenguan, Li Baiyao was recalled to Chang'anbei by Emperor Taizong as a scholar, and was awarded the title of Anping County man.

古文：受诏修定《五礼》及律令，撰《齐书》。
现代文：受诏修定《五礼》和刑律法令，编撰《北齐书》。
English: The "Five Rites" and the Criminal Law Decree were amended by imperial edict, and the "Beijing Qi Shu" was compiled.

古文：二年，除礼部侍郎。
现代文：贞观二年，任命百药为礼部侍郎。
English: In the second year of Zhenguan, he was appointed as the attendant of the etiquette department.

古文：朝廷议将封建诸侯，百药上《封建论》曰：
现代文：朝廷议论准备分封诸侯，百药上《封建论》说：
English: The Imperial Court discussed the preparation for the division of the feudal lords, and the "Feudal Theory" said:

古文：臣闻经国庇民，王者之常制；尊主安上，人情之本方。
现代文： 臣听说治理国家保佑人民，是君王永恒的职责；尊敬君主使朝廷安定，是人情的根本道义。
English: Vassals have heard that it is the eternal duty of the monarch to govern the country and protect the people; respect for the monarch to make the court stable is the fundamental morality of human nature.

古文：思阐治定之规，以弘长世之业者，万古不易，百虑同归。
现代文：考虑治国安邦的规划，用来弘扬永世的基业，是万古不变的规矩，尽管有各种各样的谋虑，但都是为同一个目的。
English: It is an immutable rule to consider the plan for governing the country and promoting the eternal cause. Despite all kinds of concerns, they are all for the same purpose.

古文：然命历有赊促之殊，邦家有理乱之异，遐观载籍，论之详矣。
现代文：然而天命历数有长短的差别，帝王之邦、大夫之家有治和乱的不同，纵观典籍上的记载，论述这些是够详尽的了。
English: However, there is a difference in the length of the life cycle, and there is a difference in the rule and disorder of the emperor's state and the doctor's home. Looking at the records in the classics, the discussion of these is quite detailed.

古文：咸云周过其数，秦不及期，存亡之理，在于郡国。
现代文：都说周朝超过了它的历数，秦朝没有达到应有的期限，存亡的道理，在于周朝采用封国制，秦朝推行郡县制。
English: People say that the rule of the Zhou Dynasty has exceeded its lifespan, that the rule of the Qin Dynasty has not yet reached the time limit it should enjoy, and that the reason for the country's survival is due to whether or not the princes were divided.

古文：可以监夏殷之长久，遵黄唐之并建，维城盘石，深根固本，虽王纲弛废，枝干相持，故使逆节不生，宗祀不绝。
现代文：周朝从夏朝、商朝的长久得到借鉴，遵循黄帝、唐尧建国的榜样，使诸侯如磐石拱城，朝廷从根本上得到巩固，虽然国政荒废，由于枝与干互相扶持，所以使得叛逆现象没有发生，宗庙祭祀没有断绝。
English: The Zhou Dynasty borrowed from the Xia Dynasty and the Shang Dynasty for a long time, followed the example of the Yellow Emperor and the Tang Dynasty in founding the country, made the princes like a rock arch, and the imperial court was fundamentally consolidated. Although the national government was abandoned, because the branches and the trunk supported each other, the rebellious phenomenon did not occur, and the ancestral temple sacrifices did not break off.

古文：秦氏背师古之训，弃先王之道，践华恃险，罢侯置守，子弟无尺土之邑，兆庶罕共治之忧，故一夫号泽，七庙隳祀。
现代文：秦朝背离了师法古人的训戒，抛弃了先王的法则，跨越华山恃仗险要，废除王侯设置郡守，子弟没有尺土的封地，百姓缺乏共同平安的忧患，所以一人在大泽乡发出反秦号召，秦朝的七庙就被毁断绝了祭祀。
English: The Qin Dynasty deviated from the teachings of the ancient people, abandoned the rules of the previous king, crossed the Huashan Mountains to fight a dangerous battle, abolished the prince to set up a county seat, the children did not have a fief, and the people lacked common peace. Therefore, one person in Osawa Township issued an anti-Qin call, and the seven temples of the Qin Dynasty were destroyed and the sacrificial rites were cut off.

古文：臣以为自古皇王，君临宇内，莫不受命上玄，飞名帝录，缔构遇兴王之运，殷忧属启圣之期。
现代文： 臣认为自古皇帝君王，坐位天下，没有不是受命于上天，扬名于皇帝注册的，建国遇到兴王的气数，遭难接着开启圣明的时代。
English: The minister believed that since ancient times, emperors and kings have been sitting in the world, and there is nothing that was not ordered by heaven and registered by the emperor. The founding of the country encountered the qi number of the rejuvenating king, and the tribulation then opened the era of enlightenment.

古文：虽魏武携养之资，汉高徒役之贱，非止意有觊觎，推之亦不能去也。
现代文：虽然魏武帝出身于宦官养子之家，汉高祖出身于押运役徒的小吏，不是他们有称帝的非分想法，就是想推也推不掉啊。
English: Even if they have the qualifications of an adopted son like Cao Cao and the status of a servant like Han Gao Zu, they do not intend to seize the world, and they cannot escape even if they want to.

古文：若其狱讼不归，菁华已竭，虽帝尧之光被四表，大舜之上齐七政，非止情存揖让，守之亦不可固焉。
现代文：假如狱讼不归，精华已完，即使像尧帝一样光照四方，像舜帝一样上齐日月五星，不是诚心让位，就是想守也守不住啊。
English: If the lawsuit does not return, the essence is over, even if it shines in all directions like Emperor Gong, and the sun, moon and stars are aligned like Emperor Gong, it is not sincere to give way, even if you want to keep it, you can't keep it.

古文：以放勋、重华之德，尚不能克昌厥后，是知祚之长短，必在天时，政或盛衰，有关人事。
现代文：凭着唐尧、虞舜的圣德，尚且不能使他们的后人昌盛。从这可以看出帝位长短，肯定在于天时，国政的盛衰，与人的活动有关。
English: By virtue of the sacredness of Tang Xuan and Yu Xuan, it is not yet possible to make their descendants prosperous. From this, it can be seen that the length of the imperial throne certainly depends on the time of day, the rise and fall of national politics, and is related to human activities.

古文：隆周卜代三十，卜年七百，虽沦胥之道斯极，而文、武之器犹存，斯则龟鼎之祚，已悬定于杳冥也。
现代文：昌盛的周朝占卜可传三十代、可传七百年，虽然相率沦丧到极点，而文王武王传下的帝位依然存在，这说明长久的国运，已是在极早之前就事先确定了。
English: The fortune-telling of the prosperous Zhou Dynasty can be passed down for 30 generations or 700 years. Although the phase ratio has fallen to the extreme, the throne passed down by King Wenwu still exists, which shows that the long-term national fortune has been determined in advance very early.

古文：至使南征不返，东迁避逼，禋祀如线，郊畿不守，此乃凌夷之渐，有累于封建焉。
现代文：以至于周昭王南巡不返，周平王躲避犬戎东迁，国家危机如线，国都附近不得安宁，这是衰败的过程，牵连到分封诸侯。
English: As a result, Zhou Zhao Wang did not return from his southern tour, Zhou Ping Wang moved to the east to avoid the dogs, the national crisis was imminent, and there was no peace near the capital. This was a process of decay, which involved the division of the princes.

古文：暴秦运短闰余，数钟百六。
现代文：残暴的秦朝国运短暂，多次遭到厄运。
English: The brutal Qin Dynasty was short-lived and suffered bad luck many times.

古文：受命之主，德异禹、汤；继世之君，才非启、诵。
现代文：受命于天的秦始皇，德行比不上夏禹、商汤；继承皇位的秦二世，才干比不上禹的儿子启、武王的儿子诵。
English: Qin Shi Huang, who was ordered by Heaven, was not as virtuous as Xia Yu or Shang Tang; Qin II, who succeeded to the throne, was not as talented as Yu's son Kai or King Wu's son Xuan.

古文：借使李斯、王绾之辈，盛开四履，将闾、子婴之徒，俱启千乘，岂能逆帝子之勃兴，抗龙颜之基命者也！
现代文：假使李斯、王倌等人大大开拓了四方的领土；将闾、子婴等人都建立起千乘之国，难道就能阻挡君主的突然兴起，改变帝王的本来命运吗？
English: If Li Si, Wang Qian and others had greatly expanded the territory of the four directions; if they had established the kingdom of a thousand horsemen, would they have been able to stop the sudden rise of the monarch and change the original destiny of the emperor?

古文：然则得失成败，各有由焉。
现代文： 然而得失成败，各有原因。
English: However, there are reasons for each success or failure.

古文：而著述之家，多守常辙，莫不情亡今古，理蔽浇淳，欲以百王之季，行三代之法。
现代文：而记载评述的人，多守常规，在感情上没有不忘记古今的差异，在道理上不明白治世乱世的风气厚薄不同，欲在百王的末世，实行夏商周的治国办法。
English: However, the people who recorded and commented on it adhered more to the routine, emotionally did not forget the differences between the past and the present, and logically did not understand the different styles of ruling the chaotic world, and wanted to implement Xia Shangzhu's way of governing the country in the last days of the hundred kings.

古文：天下五服之内，尽封诸侯；王畿千乘之间，俱为采地。
现代文：天下王畿以外的地方，都封给诸侯；天子与诸侯的领土之间，都是卿大夫的封邑。
English: All the places outside the realm of kings and queens are fiefs of lords; all the territories between the emperor and the lords are fiefs of nobles.

古文：是以结绳之化，行虞、夏之朝；用象刑之典，治刘、曹之末，纪纲既紊，断可知焉。
现代文：这是用上古结绳记事的一套在虞、夏朝代推行，用上古穿不同颜色服装为刑的法规来治理汉、魏，法纪与政纲已经紊乱，确实可以知道。
English: This is a system of using ancient knots to record events, which was implemented during the Zhou and Xia dynasties, and using ancient laws to punish people for wearing clothes of different colors to govern the Han and Wei dynasties. Legal disciplines and political programs have been disordered, it is true to say.

古文：锲船求剑，未见其可；胶柱成文，弥所多惑。
现代文：刻舟求剑，没有见过能达到目的的；胶柱鼓瑟，只会增加更多的迷惑。
English: Carving a boat to seek a sword, I have never seen one that can achieve the goal; the rubber column drum, will only add more confusion.

古文：徒知问鼎请隧，有惧霸王之师；白马素车，无复籓篱之援。
现代文：只知道有人想图谋帝位，会害怕霸王的军队；国家将亡，再没有周围诸侯的援救。
English: I only know that someone who wants to seek the throne will be afraid of the overlord's army; the country will perish, and there will be no help from the surrounding princes.

古文：不悟望夷之衅，未甚羿、浞之灾；高贵之殃，宁异申、缯之酷！
现代文：不明白秦二世在望夷被杀，没有超过后羿、寒浞的灾难；高贵乡公曹髦被司马昭所杀，难道与申国、缯国的灭亡有什么不同。
English: They don't understand that the death of Qin II in Wangyi did not exceed the calamities of Houyi and Qianzhong; the death of Gao Guoxiang Gong Cao Xiang by Sima Zhao, is it any different from the demise of Shen Guo and Qian Guo?

古文：乃钦明昏乱，自革安危，固非守宰公侯，以成兴废。
现代文：是君主自己洞察昏乱，转危为安，根本不是守宰公侯等人，能造成兴亡。
English: It is the monarch himself who sees through the confusion, turns the corner, and is not at all the prince who guards the prince, who can cause the rise and fall.

古文：且数世之后，王室浸微，始自籓屏，化为仇敌。
现代文：况且数世以后，王室渐渐衰弱，分封时当作屏障的诸侯，转化成仇敌。
English: Moreover, after several generations, the royal family gradually weakened, and the vassals who had acted as a barrier at the time of partition were transformed into enemies.

古文：家殊俗，国异政，强凌弱，众暴寡，疆场彼此，干戈日寻。
现代文：大夫之家习俗不同，诸侯之国政事各异，强的欺凌弱的，人多的侵犯人少的，这里那里都是战场，战事日益增多。
English: The customs of the doctor's house are different, the state affairs of the princes are different, the strong bully the weak, the many encroach on the few, here and there are battlefields, and the number of wars is increasing.

古文：狐骀之役，女子尽髽；崤陵之师，只轮不返。
现代文：狐骀的一场战争，使妇女都梳上守丧的发髻，回师崤山的军队，连一只车轮也没回营。
English: A war in the foothills of the Yangtze River caused women to put on mourning headdresses, and the army of Shaoshan returned to the camp, and not even a wheel returned to the camp.

古文：斯盖略举一隅，其余不可胜数。
现代文：这只是略微举个例子，其余的事数也数不清。
English: Here are just a few examples, the rest are countless.

古文：陆士衡方规规然云： 嗣王委其九鼎，凶族据其大邑，天下晏然，以治待乱。 
现代文：陆士衡才小心地说 ：继承王位的人放弃一统天下，凶狠的诸侯占有自己领地，天下安乐，以治待乱。 
English: Lu Shiheng said carefully: the heir to the throne should give up ruling the whole world, the fierce lords should occupy their own territory, the world should be at ease, and chaos should be avoided.

古文：何斯言之谬也！
现代文：这种说法是多么的荒谬啊！
English: That's absolutely ridiculous.

古文：而设官分职，任贤使能，以循吏之才，膺共治之寄，刺郡分竹，何代无人？
现代文：而设置官吏分清职责，任用贤人能人，对依法办事的人才，委派他们承担治理的任务，分赴郡县，哪个朝代缺乏这样的人才。
English: On the other hand, officials were set up to distinguish their duties, wise and capable people were appointed, and talented people who acted in accordance with the law were assigned to undertake the task of governance and sent to counties. Which dynasty lacked such talent?

古文：至使地或呈祥，天不爱宝，民称父母，政比神明。
现代文：结果使得大地呈现丰收，上天赐降吉祥，百姓称官为父母，政事清明得如同神在治理。
English: Which dynasty does not have talented people? If these talented people are appointed as officials, it will make the land appear auspicious, a treasure given by heaven, and the people will praise the sovereign as the people's parents and worship the court as a god.

古文：曹元首方区区然称： 与人共其乐者，人必忧其忧，与人同其安者，人必拯其危。 
现代文：曹元首还得意地说 ：与人共享欢乐的人，别人一定会以他的忧患为自己的忧患；与人同享安乐的人，别人一定会拯救他的危难。 
English: Cao also said proudly: "Those who share joy with others, others will surely take his sorrow as their own sorrow; those who share happiness with others, others will surely save him from danger."

古文：岂容委以侯伯，则同其安危；任之牧宰，则殊其忧乐？
现代文：哪里能容忍分封为诸侯，才与君王同安共危；任命为州县的长官，就不与君王同忧共乐呢？
English: Where can it be tolerated that a person who is appointed as a vassal of a vassal can enjoy the same happiness and peace as the king, but a person who is appointed as a prefect of a prefecture cannot enjoy the same happiness and peace as the king?

古文：何斯言之妄也！
现代文：这种说法多么错误啊！
English: How absurd this is!

古文：封君列国，藉庆门资，忘其先业之艰难，轻其自然之崇贵，莫不世增淫虐，代益骄侈。
现代文： 分封诸侯建立国家，凭借门第的资历，忘掉了先辈创业的艰难，轻视自然造化的高贵，没有不世世代代更加淫糜残暴、骄矜奢侈的。
English: The feudal lords established the country, relying on the qualifications of their descendants, forgetting the hardships of their predecessors' entrepreneurship, despising the nobility of natural creation, and becoming more lewd, cruel, arrogant and extravagant for generations.

古文：自离宫别馆，切汉凌云，或刑人力而将尽，或召诸侯而共乐。
现代文：从建造离宫别馆，高耸入云，到有时肆意地使用刑罚，有时邀请其他诸侯共同淫乐。
English: From the construction of the palace annex, towering into the clouds, to the sometimes wanton use of punishment, and sometimes inviting other lords to share sexual pleasures.

古文：陈灵则君臣悖礼，共侮徵舒；卫宣则父子聚麀，终诛寿、朔。
现代文：陈灵公君臣间互相违背礼仪，都遭到徵舒的侮辱；卫宣公父子陷于禽兽之行，宣公之子寿、朔终遭杀害。
English: Chen Linggong and his ministers violated the etiquette between each other, and they were all insulted by soliciting money; Wei Xuangong's father and son were trapped in the beast's behavior, and Xuangong's sons Shou and Shuo were eventually killed.

古文：乃云为己思治，岂若是乎？
现代文：还说为自己谋求治世，难道就是像这样的吗？
English: He also said that he wanted to rule the world for himself. Is that what it's like?

古文：内外群官，选自朝廷，擢士庶以任之，澄水镜以鉴之，年劳优其阶品，考绩明其黜陟。
现代文：内外的群官，由朝廷选任，从世族与平民中挑选，明镜般地考察他们，任职多年而有劳绩就提升官阶，考核政绩明确职务的升降。
English: Inner and outer group officials are appointed by the imperial court, selected from the world's people and civilians, and examined like a mirror. After serving for many years, they are promoted to higher ranks based on their performance, and their promotion and demotion are clearly defined based on their performance evaluation.

古文：进取事切，砥砺情深，或俸禄不入私门，妻子不之官舍。
现代文：盼求进取事情迫切，经受磨难感情深切，有的甚至当官的收入不进私人腰包，妻和子不到官府中来。
English: Hoping for advancement, things are urgent, suffering hardships, feelings are deep, and some even officials' income does not go into private pockets, and their wives and children do not come to government offices.

古文：颁条之贵，食不举火；剖符之重，衣唯补葛。
现代文：能颁布条律的刺史，吃饭不生火；朝廷任命的地方大臣，穿衣打补钉。
English: He who can promulgate a well-ordered history, does not light a fire for dinner; the local ministers appointed by the imperial court, wear clothes and hammer nails.

古文：南郡太守，敝布裹身；莱芜县长，凝尘生甑。
现代文：南阳的太守，破布裹在身上当衣裳；莱芜的县长，盛饭的瓦甑上积满了灰尘。
English: The daimyō of Nanyang wore rags as clothing; the governor of Laiwu County had a meal served on a shingle table covered in dust.

古文：专云为利图物，何其爽欤！
现代文：说他们做官就是为了贪图利益，完全说错了。
English: If all officials are greedy for money, why are they so incorruptible?

古文：总而言之，爵非世及，用贤之路斯广；民无定主，附下之情不固。
现代文：总而言之，爵位不是世代相传，启用圣能的路才宽广；国家没有稳定的君主，笼络百姓的感情不牢固。
English: In a word, so long as the reward of nobility is not hereditary, there will be ample opportunity for the appointment of good men; but if the people do not have a fixed sovereign, they are in great perplexity.

古文：此乃愚智所辨，安可惑哉！
现代文：这个道理不论智士愚人都能懂得，哪里会迷惑呢？
English: This truth can be understood by both the wise and the foolish, so where is the confusion?

古文：至如灭国弑君，乱常干纪，春秋二百年间，略无宁岁。
现代文：至于像灭国杀君，违犯常规纲纪，春秋时期二百年来，几乎没有安宁的年头。
English: As for such things as overthrowing the emperor and corrupting the discipline, they have never stopped in the past two hundred years.

古文：次睢咸秩，遂用玉帛之名；鲁道有荡，每等衣裳之会。
现代文：次睢的诸侯相同，就用曾阝子祭祀睢水之神；鲁国的道路平坦，常举行诸侯间淫乱的衣裳之会。
English: The second-ranking lords were the same, and they used zengzizi to worship the god of water; the roads in Lu were smooth, and there were often meetings of lascivious clothing between the lords.

古文：纵使西汉哀、平之际，东洛桓、灵之时，下吏淫暴，必不至此。
现代文：就是西汉哀帝、平帝之际，东汉桓帝、灵帝之时，下属的官吏淫乱残暴，也不会到这种程度。
English: Even if it was the Western Han Dynasty during the reigns of Emperor Lei and Emperor Ping, or the Eastern Han Dynasty during the reigns of Emperor Kuan and Emperor Ling, it would not have reached such a level of depravity.

古文：为政之理，可一言以蔽之。
现代文：为政的道理，可以用一句话来概括。
English: The reason for politics can be summed up in one sentence.

古文：伏惟陛下握纪御天，膺期启圣，救亿兆之焚溺，扫氛昆于寰区。
现代文： 皇帝您掌握纲纪统治天下，承受天命启迪圣智。拯救亿万百姓于水火之中，扫荡妖气在环宇之内。
English: Emperor, you have mastered the discipline to rule the world, and have received the divine destiny to enlighten the wisdom. Save hundreds of millions of people in the midst of water and fire, and sweep away the evil spirits in the world.

古文：创业垂统，配二仪以立德；发号施令，妙万物而为言。
现代文：创建基业传于后世，功德可与天地相匹配。发号施令，都是极万物之妙的言辞。
English: To create a great cause, to pass it on to our children and grandchildren, to establish a virtue that is comparable to heaven and earth; to issue a call, to issue an executive order, and to conform our words and deeds to the principles of all things.

古文：独照宸衷，永怀前古，将复五等而修旧制，建万国以亲诸侯。
现代文：帝心最为明察，总是怀念古时，准备恢复公、侯、伯、子、男五等爵位和分封诸侯的旧制，以亲族为诸侯建立众多的邦国。
English: The emperor's heart was the most clear-sighted, always nostalgic for the old times, and prepared to restore the old system of five ranks of nobility: prince, vassal, great vassal, grand vassal, and vassal, and to establish numerous states with kinsmen as vassals.

古文：窃以汉、魏以还，余风之弊未尽；勋、华既往，至公之道斯革。
现代文：我个人认为汉、魏以来，分封诸侯带来的祸害没有消去，尧、舜已去，绝对公正的道路已经改变。
English: I personally believe that since the Han and Wei Dynasties, the scourge brought about by the division of feudal lords has not been eliminated, and the absolute fair way has changed.

古文：况晋氏失驭，宇县崩离；后魏时乘，华夷杂处。
现代文：况且晋氏失去控制后，天下分崩离析；北魏乘机立国，汉族与夷人杂居在一起。
English: Moreover, after the Jin lost control, the world fell apart; the Northern Wei Dynasty took the opportunity to establish a state, and the Han people and the barbarians lived together.

古文：重以关河分阻，吴、楚悬隔，习文者学长短纵横之术，习武者尽干戈战争之心，毕为狙诈之阶，弥长浇浮之俗。
现代文：加上关河阻拦，江南远隔，学文的人学合纵连横的本领，习武的人都是比武打仗的心事，尽是狡猾奸诈的阶梯，更加助长轻薄的风气。
English: In spite of the separation of North and South and the distance between them, the literati are still learning the art of governing the country, and the military commanders are still full of enthusiasm. These are all steps to realize their political ambitions, and they have fostered a false and unsophisticated culture.

古文：开皇在运，因藉外家。
现代文：隋文帝在位，凭借外戚的势力。
English: Sui Emperor Wen on the throne, by virtue of the influence of relatives.

古文：驱御群英，任雄猜之数；坐移时运，非克定之功。
现代文：驾驭群臣，靠的是无比的猜忌和权术；坐着时世就向前推移，不是战胜敌人的功绩。
English: To control the courtiers, rely on the incomparable suspicion and tactics; to sit and move forward, is not the achievement of defeating the enemy.

古文：年逾二纪，民不见德。
现代文：在位超过二十四年，百姓没有见到德政。
English: His rule lasted for two centuries, and the people did not feel his benevolence.

古文：及大业嗣文，世道交丧，一时人物，扫地将尽。虽天纵神武，削平寇虐，兵威不息，劳止未康。
现代文：到了隋炀帝即位，世道更为凶乱，身边的各种人才，一时丧失将尽，纵使上天派来神明英武的人，来削平暴乱，战事不能停息，劳碌得不到休养。
English: When the Sui and Qian emperors came to the throne, the world was more violent, and all kinds of talents around them would be exhausted if they were lost for a while. Even if the heavens sent divine and valiant people to quell the riots, the war could not be stopped, and the labor could not be rested.

古文：自陛下仰顺圣慈，嗣膺宝历，情深致治，综核前王。
现代文： 自陛下谨遵父命，继承帝位，心情深切盼望天下大治，综合考察前代君王。
English: Since His Majesty complied with the will of the Emperor and succeeded to the throne, he has devoted all his energy to governing the country, taking into account the experience of the previous monarchs.

古文：虽至道无名，言象所纪，略陈梗概，实所庶几。
现代文：虽最高的道德没有具体的标志，但言辞图象所记载的，大略描述了它的轮廓，您实在差不多达到了至德的程度。
English: Although there is no specific sign of the highest morality, but the words and images recorded, roughly described its contours, you really almost reached the level of perfection.

古文：爱敬蒸蒸，劳而不倦，大舜之孝也。
现代文：深深地爱下敬上，劳碌而不厌倦，这是大舜的孝行。
English: To love and respect deeply, to toil and not grow weary, this is the filial duty of a great egret.

古文：访安内竖，亲尝御膳，文王之德也。
现代文：向宦官询问父母的健康，亲自品尝皇帝的饮食，这是文王的德行。
English: His Majesty personally went to the palace to inquire about the Emperor's residence, and personally tasted the food for the Emperor, which is the virtue of King Zhou Wen.

古文：每宪司谳罪，尚书奏狱，大小必察，枉直咸申，举断趾之法，易大辟之刑，仁心隐恻，贯彻幽显，大禹之泣辜也。
现代文：每当刑部议罪，尚书上奏案件，大案小案必定察明，冤枉之处一概纠正，废除断去脚趾的刑罚，更改死刑，仁义之心见人遭祸有所不忍，在暗中和明处都体现出来，这像大禹见了罪人而哭泣。
English: Whenever the Criminal Law Department deliberates on a crime, it will record the case in writing, and the major case and minor case will certainly be detected, and the wrongs will be corrected, the punishment of severed toes will be abolished, and the death penalty will be changed. The heart of benevolence and righteousness will not bear to see people suffer, and it will be reflected in the dark and in the light. This is like crying when seeing a sinner.

古文：正色直言，虚心受纳，不简鄙陋，无弃刍荛，帝尧之求谏也。
现代文：对于严厉的直谏，虚心接受采纳，对粗陋迟钝人的意见不轻视，对于割草打柴人的意见不抛弃，这是尧帝征求意见的作风。
English: It is the style of the Emperor Xuan to solicit opinions, to humbly accept and adopt the opinions of the stern-faced people, not to despise the opinions of the coarse and dull people, and not to discard the opinions of the people who mow grass and chop wood.

古文：弘奖名教，劝励学徒，既擢明经于青紫，将升硕儒于卿相，圣人之善诱也。
现代文：奖励儒学，鼓励学子，已经选拔精通经术的人为高官，还将提升大儒至卿相，这是圣人善于诱导的行为。
English: His Majesty revered enlightenment, encouraged study, selected talents through the imperial examinations, and appointed the great Confucius as the noble minister, following the virtuous path like a saint.

古文：群臣以宫中暑湿，寝膳或乖，请徙御高明，营一小阁。
现代文：群臣因皇宫中闷热潮湿，陛下睡觉吃饭都不舒服，请求陛下迁到高爽明亮的地方，建造一座小阁。
English: Due to the sweltering heat and humidity in the palace, the courtiers were uncomfortable with His Majesty's sleeping and eating, and asked His Majesty to move to a high and bright place and build a small pavilion.

古文：遂惜家人之产，竟抑子来之愿，不吝阴阳所感，以安卑陋之居。
现代文：由于爱惜家人的财产，最终拒绝了群臣的请求。不躲避温热的侵袭，在低矮简陋的宫室安居。
English: Because of his love for his family's property, he eventually refused the request of the courtiers. He did not avoid the invasion of warmth and lived in a low and simple palace room.

古文：去岁荒俭，普天饥馑，丧乱甫尔，仓廪空虚。
现代文：去年灾荒欠收，天下闹起饥荒，战乱刚刚过去，粮仓没有积储。
English: Last year, there was a bad harvest due to a famine, famine broke out all over the world, the war had just ended, and there was no storage in the granary.

古文：圣情矜愍，勤加惠恤，竟无一人流离道路，犹且食啖藜藿，乐撤簨弶，言必凄动，貌成癯瘠。
现代文：圣上心怀怜悯，尽力给予赈救。
English: His Holiness, with compassion in his heart, tried his best to help.

古文：公旦喜于重译，文命矜其即序。
现代文：使得没有一个人流离失所。尚且吃野菜，废音乐，谈话满脸悲伤，容貌日见瘦弱。
English: He eats vegetables, listens to rubbish music, talks with a sad face and is looking thinner by the day.

古文：陛下每四夷款附，万里归仁，必退思进省。
现代文：周公旦为不通的语言辗转相译而高兴，夏禹为边远民族秩序井然而自豪。
English: Zhou Gongdan is pleased with the translation of incomprehensible languages, and Xia Yu is proud of the orderliness of remote ethnic groups.

古文：凝神动虑，恐妄劳中国，以事远方，不藉万古之英声，以存一时之茂实。
现代文：陛下每当四夷诚心归附，万里之内尽依明主，还进也反省退也反省，聚精会神地思考，生怕白白地劳累国中，来使远方服事，不希求流传万古的英名，来完成一时的实迹。
English: Whenever the four emperors sincerely adhered to the principle of adhering to the Lord within ten thousand miles, they also advanced, reflected, retreated, and reflected, concentrated on thinking, and feared that they would labor in vain in the country to make the distant service, and did not want to spread the fame of the ages, to complete the momentary achievement.

古文：心切忧劳，迹绝游幸，每旦视朝，听受无倦。
现代文：心里悬挂着忧劳，行迹断绝了游乐，每天早晨上朝，处理事务从不感到疲倦。
English: Sorrow and toil hang heavy in my heart. Travel has cut off my play. I get up early every morning, and I never get tired of handling affairs.

古文：智周于万物，道济于天下。
现代文：智慧遍及万物，大道利于天下。
English: Wisdom pervades all things, and the highway is beneficial to the whole world.

古文：罢朝之后，引进名臣，讨论是非，备尽肝膈，唯及政事，更无异辞。
现代文：退朝以后，召进名臣，讨论是非，肝胆相照，一谈到政事，再没有不同意见。
English: After the emperor's abdication, eminent courtiers were summoned to discuss the rights and wrongs, and when it came to politics, there was no longer any difference of opinion.

古文：才及日昃，命才学之士，赐以清闲，高谈典籍，杂以文咏，间以玄言，乙夜忘疲，中宵不寐。
现代文：才到太阳偏西，诏命有才学的人，赐给清闲，围绕典籍高谈阔论，穿插作文咏诗及玄妙的谈论，到二更时分还不知疲倦，半夜还不去就寝。
English: It was not until the sun was in the west that the emperor gave leisure to those who had the ability to learn. They talked about classics, interspersed with essays, poems and mysterious discussions. They were not tired at two o'clock, and they did not go to bed at midnight.

古文：此之四道，独迈往初。斯实生民以来，一人而已。
现代文：这四种做法，独自超过了以往，这实在是有百姓以来，一人而已。
English: These four practices alone exceed the past, which is really only one person since there are people.

古文：弘兹风化，昭示四方，信可以期月之间，弥纶天壤。
现代文：弘扬这种风俗教化，向四方显示，确实可以在一月之间，包罗天地。
English: Carrying forward such a culture and enlightenment, and showing the people of the four directions, will surely change the world in a very short time.

古文：而淳粹尚阻，浮诡未移，此由习之永久，难以卒变。
现代文：然而淳厚质朴之风还受到阻碍，虚浮欺诈之风还未改变，这是由于积习长久，难以一下更新。
English: However, the style of honesty and simplicity is still hindered, and the style of deception and fraud has not changed. This is due to long-term practice, and it is difficult to update it.

古文：请待斫雕成朴，以质代文，刑措之教一行，登封之礼云毕，然后定疆理之制，议山河之赏，未为晚焉。
现代文：请陛下等到用朴质代替雕饰，用朴实代替文采，搁置刑罚的教化一施行，登泰山行封禅之礼已经结束，然后再拟定治理土地的规章，讨论高山大河的封赏，时间也不算晚啊！
English: Your majesty, please wait until you use simplicity to replace carvings, use simplicity to replace literature, and suspend the punishment of punishment once the edification is implemented, and the ceremony of ascending Mount Tai for the sealing of Zen has ended, and then draw up the regulations for the governance of the land, and discuss the reward of the high mountains and rivers. The time is not too late!

古文：《易》称： 天地盈虚，与时消息，况于人乎？ 
现代文：《易经》说道： 天地的变化，都是随着时间而消长，更何况是人事的变化呢？ 
English: "Zhou Yi" has a saying: Heaven and earth are vast, full of the law of change of the four seasons, let alone personnel?

古文：美哉斯言也。
现代文：这话说得真美啊。 
English: What a wonderful phrase!

古文：太宗竟从其议。
现代文：太宗最终接受了他的意见。
English: Emperor Taizong finally accepted his opinion.

古文：四年，授太子右庶子。
现代文：贞观四年，授予他太子右庶子的官职。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, he was awarded the official position of the Prince's right illegitimate son.

古文：五年，与左庶子于志宁、中允孔颖达、舍人陆敦信侍讲于弘教殿。
现代文：贞观五年，与左庶子于志宁、中允孔颖达、舍人陆敦信在弘教殿陪伴太子、讲论经书。
English: In the fifth year of Zhenguan's reign, she accompanied the crown prince and lectured on scriptures with her left illegitimate son Yu Zhining, Zhongyong Kong Yingda, and her nephew Lu Dunxin at Hongye Hall.

古文：因赐彩物五百段。然太子卒不悟而废。
现代文：当时太子学习五典三坟很用心，然而闲散下来，过度地游戏玩乐。李百药做《赞道赋》来劝告太子，然而太子最终还是因不醒悟而被废去。
English: At that time, the prince was very diligent in studying the Five Classics and the Three Tombs, but he was idle and played games excessively. Li Baiyao made "Zan Daofu" to advise the prince, but the prince was eventually eliminated because he did not wake up.

古文：十年，以撰《齐史》成，加散骑常侍，行太子左庶子，赐物四百段。
现代文：贞观十年，因他完成了《北齐书》的撰写，加封散骑常侍，履行太子左庶子的职责，赐给他绢绸四百段。
English: Zhenguan for ten years, because he completed the writing of the "Beijing Qi Book," and added a Zangjie attendant to fulfill the duties of Prince Zuo's illegitimate son, and gave him four hundred pieces of silk.

古文：俄除宗正卿。
现代文：不久授予他宗正卿。
English: He was soon given the title of Zongzheng.

古文：太宗尝制《帝京篇》，命百药并作，上叹其工，手诏曰： 卿何身之老而才之壮，何齿之宿而意之新乎！ 二十二年卒，年八十四，谥曰康。
现代文：贞观十一年，因他完成了《五礼》的撰写及 律令 的修定，晋升为子爵。过了几年，李百药因年老坚决请求辞官退休，太宗同意了。贞观二十二年去世，年八十四岁，死后封号为康。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhenguan, he was promoted to viscount because he completed the writing of the "Five Rites" and the revision of the Ruling. A few years later, Li Baiyao firmly requested the dictionary to retire due to old age, and Taizong agreed. Zhenguan died in 22 years, at the age of 84, and his posthumous name was Kang.

古文：百药以名臣之子，才行相继，四海名流，莫不宗仰。
现代文：李百药是名臣的后代，继承了父辈的才德品行，四海名流，没有不推崇景仰他的。
English: Li Baiyao is the descendant of a famous minister. He has inherited the talent, morality and conduct of his parents. He is a celebrity in the world and is admired by all.

古文：藻思沈郁，尤长于五言诗，虽樵童牧竖，并皆吟讽。
现代文：文辞深沉，尤其擅长五言诗，就是砍柴童子放牛娃，也会诵读他的诗。
English: His words are profound, and he is especially good at five-character poems. Even the woodcutter boy who lets the cowherd out can recite his poems.

古文：性好引进后生，提奖不倦。
现代文：性情喜欢扶植年轻人，提携鼓励从不厌倦。
English: The temperament likes to support young people, encourage cooperation and never get tired of it.

古文：所得俸禄，多散之亲党。
现代文：所得的俸禄，大多散发给亲族。
English: Most of the salaries earned are distributed to relatives.

古文：又至性过人，初侍父母丧还乡，徒跣单衣，行数千里，服阕数年，容貌毁悴，为当时所称。
现代文：又保持天性超过了一般的人，早年办父母丧事回到家乡，赤着脚穿着单衣，行数千里，守孝多年，容貌憔悴，被当时人所称赞。
English: He also maintained a nature that exceeded that of the average person. In his early years, he went to his parents' funerals and returned to his hometown, barefoot and wearing a singlet. He traveled thousands of miles, was a filial son for many years, and had a gaunt appearance, which was praised by people at the time.

古文：及悬车告老，怡然自得，穿池筑山，文酒谈赏，以舒平生之志。有集三十卷，子安期。
现代文：等到辞官告老，欣然自得其乐。挖水池筑假山，著文饮酒，谈论鉴赏，来抒发平生的志向，有文集三十卷。
English: When the lexicographer reaches old age, he is happy to enjoy himself. He digs a pond, builds a rockery, writes, drinks, and talks about appreciation to express his life's aspirations. There are thirty volumes of anthologies.

