古文：陈成子弑齐简公，孔子告于鲁哀公，请讨之。
现代文：春秋时，齐简公四年，齐国大臣陈成子弑杀齐简公，拥立齐平公，自任国相。这时，孔子找到鲁国的国君鲁哀公，请求讨伐陈成子。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, in the fourth year of the reign of King Qi Jian, Chen Chengzi, the Minister of the State of Qi, tried to kill King Qi Jian, supported King Qi Ping, and appointed himself as the Minister of the State. At this time, Confucius found King Lu Aiguo of the State of Lu and asked him to fight against Chen Chengzi.

古文：公曰： 告夫三子者。 
现代文：鲁哀公： 这件事你去找 三子 跟他们说吧。 
English: Lu Aigong: You should go to San Zi and tell them about this.

古文：之三子告，不可。
现代文：孔子把他的想法告诉了 三子 ，遭到了拒绝。
English: Confucius told his idea to San Zi and was rejected.

古文：《左传》曰： 孔子请伐齐，公曰： 鲁为齐弱久矣，子之伐之，将若之何？ 
现代文：对此事，《左传》的记载是： 孔子请求讨伐齐国，鲁哀公说： 鲁国比齐国弱已是很久的事实了。你说要讨伐他，结果会怎么样呢？ 
English: Regarding this matter, "Zo Zhuan" records: Confucius requested a crusade against Qi, and Lu Aikong said: It has been a fact for a long time that Lu has been weaker than Qi. If you say you want to crusade against him, what will the result be?

古文：对曰： 陈常弑其君，民之不与者半，以鲁之众，加齐之半，可伐也。  
现代文：孔子回答说： 陈成子杀了他的国君，齐国老百姓不拥护的有一半，现在用鲁国的全部力量和齐国的一半力量，共同去讨伐，是可以胜利的。 
English: Confucius replied, "Chen Chengzi killed his sovereign, and half of the people of Qi did not support him. Now, if we use all the power of Lu and half of the power of Qi to fight together, we can win.

古文：说者以为孔子岂较力之强弱，但明其义而已。
现代文：对于这件事，有人评论说：孔子怎么会去计较实力的大小呢？
English: Regarding this matter, someone commented: How could Confucius care about the size of power?

古文：能顺人心而行天讨，何患不克？
现代文：他重在讲仁义，只要从仁义的角度把道理讲清楚就够了，如能顺乎民心而代天讨伐，还用担心不会胜利吗？
English: He focuses on benevolence and righteousness. It is enough to explain the truth clearly from the perspective of benevolence and righteousness. If you can follow the people's will and fight on behalf of heaven, do you still have to worry that you will not win?

古文：使鲁君从之，孔子其使于周，请命乎天子，正名其罪。
现代文：假如鲁哀公接受了孔子的请求，派孔子出使周朝天子，请求周天子，给陈成子定罪、天下共讨，问题就解决了。
English: If Lu Aiko had accepted Confucius' request and sent Confucius to summon Zhou Chao Tianzi and ask Zhou Tianzi to convict Chen Chengzi and discuss the matter with the whole world, the problem would have been solved.

古文：至其所以胜齐者，孔子之余事也。
现代文：至于说能否胜齐的实际力量，在孔子看来是十分次要的。
English: As far as the actual strength of the winning team is concerned, in Confucius's view, it is very minor.

古文：予以为鲁之不能伐齐，三子之不欲伐齐，周之不能讨齐，通国知之矣。
现代文：我认为，鲁国因弱小不能讨伐齐国，孟孙氏、叔孙氏、季孙氏三人与陈成子一样居心不良，因而不想伐齐，周天子失去了权威也不能伐齐，这是全国没人不知的道理。
English: In my opinion, because of its small size, the State of Lu cannot fight against the State of Qi; the three Mengsuns, Unshuns, and Ji Suns are just as bad-intentioned as Chen Chengzi, so they do not want to fight against Qi; and Zhou Tianzi has lost his authority and cannot fight against Qi. This is a truth that no one in the country does not know.

古文：孔子为此举，岂真欲以鲁之半，力敌之哉？
现代文：那么，孔子的这一举动，难道真的是想以鲁国一半去与齐国相拼吗？
English: So, did Confucius really want to use half of the country of Lu to compete with the country of Qi?

古文：盖是时三子无君与陈氏等，孔子上欲悟哀公，下欲警三子，使哀公悟其意，必察三臣之擅国，思有以制之，起孔子而付以政，其正君君、臣臣之分不难也。使三子者警，必将曰：鲁小于齐，齐臣弑君而欲致讨，吾三臣或如是，彼齐、晋大国，肯置而不问乎？
现代文：不是的。孔子看到，当时鲁国的 三子 目无君主与陈成子是一样的，因此，他的这一作法并不在于去打仗，而在于这样做，上可以使鲁哀公觉悟，下可以警告 三子 ，如果鲁哀公明白了孔子的本意，就会认真看待三臣谋权，谋图不轨的事实，设法加以控制，并且起用孔子执掌国政，君臣之间的正常关系也就不难恢复了；假如 三子 因孔子的举动而受到震警，一定会说：鲁国比齐国小，齐国的大臣杀了君主，大家要去讨伐；我们三人如去杀君主，像齐、晋这些大国，怎么会置之不理呢？
English: No. Confucius saw that at that time, the Three Sons of Lu were the same as Chen Chengzi. Therefore, his approach was not to go to war, but to do so. On the one hand, he could make Lu Aikong aware, and on the other hand, he could warn the Three Sons. If Lu Aikong understood the original intention of Confucius, he would seriously look at the fact that the three ministers were scheming for power and scheming for evil, try to control it, and use Confucius to hold state affairs, and the normal relationship between the monarchs and ministers would not be difficult to restore. If the Three Sons were shocked by Confucius'

古文：惜其君臣皆不识圣人之深旨。自是二年，孔子亡。
现代文：可惜的是，鲁国的君臣都未能明白圣人的这番深意，二年后，孔子死。
English: Unfortunately, the princes and courtiers of Lu failed to understand this profound meaning of the sage, and two years later, Confucius died.

古文：又十一年，哀公竟逼于三子而也于越，此之简公，仅全其身尔。
现代文：又过了十一年，鲁哀公竞在三位大臣的威逼下流亡到越国，与齐简公相比，只是落个全尸了，被大臣推舞，其结果是一样的。
English: Eleven years later, Lu Aigong Jing was forced into exile in Vietnam by three ministers. Compared to Qi Jian Gong, he was just a corpse, pushed by the ministers, with the same result.

