古文：黄帝问曰：余闻九针于夫子，众多博大，不可胜数。
现代文：黄帝问道：我听先生讲了九针道理后，觉得丰富广博，不可尽述。
English: Huang Di asked: After listening to my teacher's explanation of the nine-needle principle, I feel that it is rich and extensive and cannot be fully described.

古文：余愿闻要道，以属子孙，传之后世，着之骨髓，藏之肝肺，歃血而受，不敢妄泄，令合天道，必有终始。
现代文：我想了解其中的主要道理，以嘱咐子孙，传于后世，铭心刻骨，永志不忘，并严守誓言，不敢妄泄。
English: I want to understand the main reason for this, and pass it on to my children and grandchildren in order to pass it on to future generations. I will keep it in my heart and never forget it, and I will strictly keep my oath and not dare to act recklessly.

古文：上应天光星辰历纪，下副四时五行，贵贱更互，冬阴夏阳，以人应之奈何？
现代文：这些道理符合天体运行的规律，有始有终，上应于日月星辰周历天度之标志，下符合四时五行阴阳盛衰的变化，盛衰之变化，冬阴与夏阳，人是怎样适应这些自然规律的呢？
English: These principles are consistent with the laws of the movement of celestial bodies, there is a beginning and an end, the top should be in the sun, moon and stars, the sign of the celestial degree, and the bottom should be consistent with the changes in the rise and fall of the yin and yang at four and five, the changes in the rise and fall, the winter shade and the summer sun, how do people adapt to these natural laws?

古文：愿闻其方！
现代文：希望你讲解这方面的道理。
English: I would like you to explain the rationale behind this.

古文：岐伯对曰：妙乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯回答说：问得多好啊！
English: Gibo replied, "What a good question!

古文：此天地之至数。
现代文：这是天地间至为深奥的道理。
English: This is the most profound principle between heaven and earth.

古文：帝曰：愿闻天地之至数，合于人形血气，通决死生，为之奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：我愿闻天地的至数，与人的形体气血相通，以决断死生，是怎样一回事呢？
English: Huangdi said, "I would like to know the number of the heavens and the earth, and how it is with the human body and blood to decide life and death.

古文：岐伯曰：天地之至数，始于一，终于九焉。
现代文：岐伯说：天地的至数，开始于一，终止于九。
English: Qibo said: The number of the heavens and the earth begins with one and ends with nine.

古文：一者天，二者地，三者人。因而三之，三三者九，以应九野。
现代文：一奇数为阳代表天，二偶数为阴代表地，人生天地之间，故以三代表人；天地人合而为三，三三为九，以应九野之数。
English: An odd number is the yang representing heaven, two even numbers are the yin representing earth, and life is between heaven and earth, so three represents people; heaven and earth are three, and three and three are nine, corresponding to the number of nine fields.

古文：故人有三部，部有三候，以决死生，以处百病，以调虚实，而除邪疾。
现代文：所以人有三部，每部各有三候，可以用它来决断死生，处理百病，从而调治虚实，祛除病邪。
English: Therefore, there are three parts of a person, each of which has three phases. It can be used to determine life and death, deal with all kinds of diseases, and thus adjust the truth and falsehood, and eliminate the evil.

古文：帝曰：何谓三部？
现代文：黄帝道：什么叫做三部呢？
English: Huang Di said: What is the name of the three parts?

古文：岐伯曰：有下部，有中部，有上部，部各有三候。三候者，有天、有地、有人也。
现代文：岐伯说：有下部，有中部，有上部。每部各有三候，所谓三候，是以天、地、人来代表的。
English: Qibo said, "There is a lower part, a middle part, and an upper part. Each part has three phases. The so-called three phases are represented by heaven, earth, and man.

古文：必指而导之，乃以为真。
现代文：必须有老师的当面指导，方能懂得部候准确之处。
English: It is necessary to have a teacher's face-to-face guidance in order to understand the accuracy of waiting.

古文：上部天，两额之动脉；上部地，两颊之动脉；上部人，耳前之动脉。
现代文：上部的天候，即两额处动脉；上部的地候，即两颊处动脉；上部的人候，即耳前处动脉。
English: The weather in the upper part, that is, the artery at the forehead; the weather in the upper part, that is, the artery at the cheeks; the weather in the upper part, that is, the artery at the front of the ear.

古文：中部天，手太阴也；中部地，手阳明也；中部人，手少阴也。
现代文：中部的天候，即手太阴处动脉；中部的地候，即手阳明经处动脉；中部的人候，即手少阴经处动脉。
English: The weather in the center, that is, the arteries at the palms of the hands; the climate in the center, that is, the arteries at the palms of the hands; the climate in the center, that is, the arteries at the palms of the hands; the weather in the center, that is, the arteries at the palms of the hands.

古文：下部天，足厥阴也；下部地，足少阴也；下部人，足太阴也。
现代文：下部的天候，即足厥阴经或处动脉；下部的地候，即足少阴经处动脉；下部的人候，即足太阴经处动脉。
English: The weather of the lower part, that is, the foot Jue Yin meridian or the artery; the weather of the lower part, that is, the foot Shao Yin meridian artery; the weather of the lower part, that is, the foot Tai Yin meridian artery.

古文：故下部之天以候肝，地以候肾，人以候脾胃之气。
现代文：故而下部之天候可以诊断肝脏之病变，下部之地候可以诊断肾脏之病变，下部之人候可以诊断脾胃之病变。
English: Therefore, the weather in the lower part can diagnose the pathology of the liver, the weather in the lower part can diagnose the pathology of the kidney, and the weather in the lower part can diagnose the pathology of the spleen and stomach.

古文：帝曰：中部之候奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：中部之候怎样？
English: Huang Di Dao: How is the weather in central China?

古文：岐伯曰：亦有天，亦有地，亦有人。
现代文：岐伯说：中部亦有天、地、人三候。
English: Qibo said, "In the upper part, there are heaven, earth, and human beings.

古文：天以候肺，地以候胸中之气，人以候心。
现代文：中部之天候可以诊断肺脏之病变，中部之地候可以诊断胸中之病变，中部之人候可以诊断心脏之病变。
English: The weather in the central region can diagnose lung lesions, the weather in the central region can diagnose lesions in the chest, and the weather in the central region can diagnose heart lesions.

古文：帝曰：上部以何候之？
现代文：黄帝道：上部之候又怎样呢？
English: Huang Di said: What about the weather in the upper part?

古文：岐伯曰：亦有天，亦有地，亦有人。
现代文：岐伯说：上部也有天、地、人三候。
English: Qibo said, "In the upper part, there are heaven, earth, and human beings.

古文：天以候头角之气，地以候口齿之气，人以候耳目之气。
现代文：上部之天候可以诊断头部之病变，上部之地候可以诊断口齿之病变，上部之人候可以诊断耳目之病变。
English: The weather of the upper part can diagnose the lesions of the head, the weather of the upper part can diagnose the lesions of the oral cavity, and the weather of the upper part can diagnose the lesions of the ears and eyes.

古文：三部者，各有天，各有地，各有人。
现代文：三部之中，各有天、各有地、各有人。
English: Among the three parts, each has a heaven, each has a land, and each has people.

古文：三而成天，三而成地，三而成人。
现代文：三候为天，三候为地，三候为人，三三相乘，合为九候。
English: Three times three is heaven, three times three is earth, three times three is man, three times three is nine.

古文：三而三之，合则为九，九分为九野，九野为九脏。故神脏五，形脏四，合为九脏。
现代文：脉之九候，以应地之九野，以应人之九脏。所以人有五神脏和四形脏，合为九脏。
English: There are nine levels of veins, nine fields corresponding to the earth, and nine human organs corresponding to the human body. Therefore, humans have five divine organs and four human organs, which are combined into nine organs.

古文：五脏已败，其色必夭，夭必死矣。
现代文：若五脏以败，必见神色枯槁，枯槁者是病情危重，乃至死亡征象。
English: If the five viscera are failing, the appearance will be withered, and the withered person will be in critical condition, even showing signs of death.

古文：帝曰：以候奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：诊察的方法怎样呢？
English: Huang Di Dao: What is the method of diagnosis?

古文：岐伯曰：必先度其形之肥瘦，以调其气之虚实，实则泻之，虚则补之。
现代文：岐伯说：必先度量病人的身形肥瘦，以了解病人正气的虚实，实证用泻法，虚症用补法。
English: Qi Bo said: we must first measure the patient's body fat and thinness, in order to understand the truth and falsity of the patient's righteousness, the empirical method of laxity, and the deficiency method of supplementation.

古文：必先去其血脉而后调之，无问其病，以平为期。
现代文：必先去除血脉中的凝滞，而后调补气血的不足，不论治疗什么病都是以达到气血阴阳的平和为目的。
English: The coagulation in the blood must be removed first, and then the deficiency of qi and blood must be compensated. No matter what disease is treated, the aim is to achieve the peace of qi and blood yin and yang.

古文：帝曰：决死生奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：怎样决断死生呢？
English: Huang Di said: How to decide between life and death?

古文：岐伯曰：形盛脉细，少气不足以息者危。
现代文：岐伯说：如形体肥壮，脉反细，气短，呼吸困难，危险。
English: Qi Bo said: if the body is fat and strong, the pulse is thin, shortness of breath, difficulty breathing, and danger.

古文：形瘦脉大，胸中多气者死。
现代文：如形体瘦弱，脉反大，胸中喘满而多气的是死亡之症。
English: If the body is thin and weak, the pulse is large, and the chest is full and breathless, it is a disease of death.

古文：形气相得者生。
现代文：形体与脉象相应的生。
English: Corresponding to the shape and pulse.

古文：参伍不调者病。
现代文：脉象参差不调的病。
English: a condition in which the pulse is irregular.

古文：三部九候皆相失者死。
现代文：三部九候之脉与疾病完全不相适应的，主死。
English: If the pulse of the nine seasons of the three parts is completely incompatible with the disease, the main death will occur.

古文：上下左右之脉相应如参舂者病甚。
现代文：上下左右之脉，相应鼓指如舂杵捣谷，参差不齐，病必严重。
English: The veins on the left, right, up and down, and the corresponding drum fingers are uneven, and the disease must be serious.

古文：上下左右相失不可数者死。
现代文：若见上下之脉相差甚大，而又息数错乱不可计数的，是死亡征候。
English: If the difference between the upper and lower pulse is very large, and the number of beats is incalculable, it is a sign of death.

古文：中部之候虽独调，与众脏相失者死。
现代文：中部之脉虽然独自调匀，而与其他众脏不相协调的，也是死候。
English: Although the middle vein is adjusted independently, if it is not coordinated with the other viscera, it will die.

古文：中部之候相减者死。
现代文：目内陷的为正气衰竭现象，也是死候。
English: If the eyes are sunken, it is due to the phenomenon of qi depletion, which is also a sign of death.

古文：目内陷者死。
现代文：黄帝道：怎样知道病的部位呢？
English: Huang Di: How do you know the location of the disease?

古文：帝曰：何以知病之所在？
现代文：岐伯说：从诊察九候脉的异常变化，就能知病变部位。
English: Qi Bo said: From the examination of abnormal changes in the nine-day pulse, we can know the lesion site.

古文：岐伯曰：察九候，独小者病，独大者病，独疾者病，独迟者病，独热者病，独寒者病，独陷下者病。
现代文：九候之中，有一部独小，或独大，或独疾，或独迟，或独热，或独寒，或独陷下，均是有病的现象。
English: Among the nine seasons, there is a single small, or a single large, or a single disease, or a single late, or a single heat, or a single cold, or a single fall, all of which are diseases.

古文：以左手足上，上去踝五寸按之，庶右手足当踝而弹之，其应过五寸以上，蠕蠕然者不病；其应疾，中手浑浑然者病；中手徐徐然者病；其应上不能至五寸，弹之不应者死。
现代文：以左手加于病人的左足上，距离内踝五寸处按着，以右手指在病人足内踝上弹之，医者之左手即有振动的感觉，如其振动的范围超过五寸以上，蠕蠕而动，为正常现象；如其振动急剧而大，应手快速而浑乱不清的，为病态；若振动微弱，应手迟缓，应为病态；如若振动不能上及五寸，用较大的力量弹之，仍没有反应，是为死候。
English: Apply it with the left hand to the patient's left foot, pressing it at a distance of five inches from the inner ankle, and bouncing it on the patient's inner ankle with the right finger. The doctor's left hand will feel the vibration. If the vibration range exceeds five inches, it is normal; if the vibration is sharp and large, it should be fast and chaotic, it is pathological; if the vibration is weak, it should be slow, it should be pathological; if the vibration cannot reach five inches, it should be bounced with greater force, but there is still no reaction, it is death.

古文：是以脱肉身不去者死。
现代文：身体极度消瘦，体弱不能行动，是死亡之征。
English: Extreme emaciation of the body, weakness and inability to move are signs of death.

古文：中部乍疏乍数者死。
现代文：中部之脉或快或慢，无规律，为气脉败乱之兆，亦为死征。
English: The pulse in the middle is either fast or slow, irregular, a sign of air pulse disorder, and also a death sign.

古文：其脉代而钩者，病在络脉。
现代文：如脉代而钩，为病在络脉。
English: If the pulse is hooked, the disease is in the vas deferens.

古文：九候之相应也，上下若一，不得相失。
现代文：九候之脉，应相互适应，上下如一，不应该有参差。
English: The nine meridians should be compatible with each other. The upper and lower meridians should be the same, and there should be no discrepancy.

古文：一候后则病，二候后则病甚，三候后则病危。
现代文：如九候之中有一候不一致，则病必危险。所谓不一致，就是九候之间，脉动的不相适应。
English: If one of the nine phases is inconsistent, the disease will be dangerous. The so-called inconsistency is the incompatibility of the pulsation between the nine phases.

古文：所谓后者，应不俱也。
现代文：诊察病邪所在之脏腑，以知死生的时间。
English: To know the time of life and death, one should examine the internal organs where the malady is located.

古文：察其腑脏，以知死生之期，必先知经脉，然后知病脉，真脏脉见者，胜死。
现代文：临症诊察，必先知道正常之脉，然后才能知道有病之脉；若见到真脏脉象，到了胜己的时间，变要死亡。
English: In a pre-hospital examination, you must first know the normal vein, and then you can know the diseased vein; if you see the appearance of the real vein, when it is time to overcome yourself, you will die.

古文：足太阳气绝者，其足不可屈伸，死必戴眼。
现代文：足太阳经脉气绝，则两足不能屈伸，死亡之时，必目睛上视。
English: If the sun passes through the veins of the feet and the breath is exhausted, then the two feet cannot be flexed, and at the time of death, the eyes must be raised.

古文：帝曰：冬阴夏阳奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：冬为阴，夏为阳，脉象与之相应如何？
English: Huang Di said: Winter is yin, summer is yang, how does the pulse image correspond to it?

古文：岐伯曰：九候之脉，皆沉细悬绝者为阴，主冬，故以夜半死；盛躁喘数者为阳，主夏，故以日中死。是故寒热病者，以平旦死。热中及热病者，以日中死。病风者，以日夕死。病水者，以夜半死。
现代文：岐伯说：九候的脉象，都是沉细悬绝的，为阴，冬令死于阴气极盛之夜半；如脉盛大躁动喘而疾数的，为阳，主夏令，所以死于阳气旺盛之日中；寒热交作的病，死于阴阳交会的平旦之时；热中及热病，死于日中阳极之时；病风死于傍晚阳衰之时；病水死于夜半阴极之时。
English: Qi Bo said: The pulse images of the nine seasons are all heavy and thin, for yin, wintering dies in the middle of the night when yin is at its peak; if the pulse is large and restless and wheezing, it is yang, summering, so it dies in the middle of the day when yang is strong; cold and heat interplay disease, died in the daytime when yin and yang meet; heat and heat disease, died in the middle of the day when the anode; sickness wind died in the evening when the sun set; sickness water died in the middle of the night when the cathode.

古文：其脉乍疏乍数乍迟乍疾者，日乘四季死。形肉已脱，九候虽调犹死。七诊虽见，九候皆从者不死。
现代文：其脉象忽疏、忽数、忽迟、忽急，一天中如四季之气温交换的时候死亡；若形坏肉脱，虽九候协调，犹是死亡的征象；假使七诊之脉虽然出现，而九候都顺于四时的，就不一定是死候。
English: Its pulse is like suddenness, sudden number, sudden delay, sudden urgency, and it dies when the temperature of the four seasons is exchanged in a day; if the body is out of shape, although the nine seasons are coordinated, it is still a sign of death; if the seven diagnosis pulses appear, but the nine seasons are all subject to four o'clock, it is not necessarily death.

古文：所言不死者，风气之病，及经月之病，似七诊之病而非也，故言不死。
现代文：所说不死的病，指心感风病，或月经之病，虽见类似七诊之病脉，而实不相同，所以说不是死候。
English: The so-called "deathless disease" refers to psychosomatic rheumatism, or menstrual disease, although it is similar to the seven diseases, but it is not the same, so it is not death.

古文：若有七诊之病，其脉候亦败者死矣，必发哕噫。
现代文：若七诊出现、其脉候有败坏现象的，这是死征，死的时候，必发呃逆等证候。
English: If the seven symptoms appear and the pulse is deteriorated, it is a death sign. When you die, you will have the opposite symptoms.

古文：必审问其所始病，与今之所方病，而后各切循其脉，视其经络浮沉，以上下逆从循之。
现代文：所以治病之时，必须详细询问他的起病情形和现在症状，然后按各部分，切其脉搏，以观察其经络的浮沉，以及上下逆顺。
English: Therefore, at the time of treatment, it is necessary to ask him in detail about the onset of the disease and the current symptoms, and then according to each part, cut his pulse to observe the ups and downs of his meridians, as well as the up and down.

古文：其脉疾者不病，其脉迟者病，脉不往来者死，皮肤着者死。
现代文：如其脉来流利的，不病；脉来迟缓的，是病；脉不往来的，是死候；久病肉脱，皮肤干枯且显露出筋骨的，亦是死候。
English: If the pulse is smooth, it is not a disease; if the pulse is slow, it is a disease; if the pulse does not pass, it is death; if the disease is long, the flesh is detached, the skin is dry and the bones and muscles are exposed, it is also death.

古文：帝曰：其可治者奈何？
现代文：黄帝道：那些可治的病，应怎样治疗呢？
English: Huang Di said: Those curable diseases, how should they be treated?

古文：岐伯曰：经病者治其经。孙络病者治其孙络血。血病身有痛者，治其经络。
现代文：岐伯说：病在经的，刺其经；病在孙络的，刺其孙络使它出血；血病而有身痛症状的，则治其经与络。
English: Qibo said: If the disease is in the meridian, prick the meridian; if the disease is in the solar plexus, prick the solar plexus to make it bleed; if the disease is in the blood and there are symptoms of pain, then treat the meridian and the solar plexus.

古文：其病者在奇邪，奇邪之脉则缪刺之。
现代文：若病邪留在大络，则用右病刺左、左病刺右的缪刺法治之。
English: If the disease remains in the large network, it will be ruled by the right thorn of the disease, and the left thorn of the disease.

古文：留瘦不移，节而刺之。
现代文：若邪气久留不移，当于四肢八溪之间、骨节交会之处刺之。
English: If the evil spirit remains for a long time, it should be stabbed between the four limbs and the eight streams, where the bone joints meet.

古文：上实下虚，切而从之，索其结络脉，刺出其血，以见通之。
现代文：上实下虚，当切按气脉，而探索气脉络郁结的所在，刺出其血，以通其气。
English: On the contrary, it is necessary to cut according to the qi vein, and explore the location of the qi vein complex, prick out its blood to pass its qi.

古文：瞳子高者，太阳不足；戴眼者，太阳已绝，此决死生之要，不可不察也。
现代文：如目上视的，是太阳经气不足。目上视而又定直不动的，是太阳经气已绝。这是判断死生的要诀，不可不认真研究。
English: If you look straight ahead, the sun's aura is deficient. If you look straight ahead and do not move, the sun's aura is exhausted. This is the key to judging life and death, and must be carefully studied.

