古文：《诗》总六义，风冠其首，斯乃化感之本源，志气之符契也。
现代文：《诗经》具备 六义 ，第一项是 风 ；这是进行教化的根源，同作者的情志和气质是一致的。
English: "The Book of Songs" has six meanings, the first of which is wind; this is the source of enlightenment and is consistent with the author's sentiments and temperament.

古文：是以怊怅述情，必始乎风；沉吟铺辞，莫先于骨。
现代文：所以作者内心兴感而要抒发时，就应该先注意风教的问题；而在考虑怎么用文字来表达时，就应该先注意到骨力。
English: Therefore, when the author wants to express his inner excitement, he should first pay attention to the problem of etiquette; and when considering how to express it in writing, he should first pay attention to the backbone.

古文：故辞之待骨，如体之树骸；情之含风，犹形之包气。
现代文：文字应该有骨力，就好比身体必须要有骨架一样；情感要能够起教化作用，就像人一样，都具某种气质。
English: Words should have a backbone, just as the body must have a skeleton; emotions should be able to educate, just like people, they all have a certain temperament.

古文：结言端直，则文骨成焉；意气骏爽，则文风清焉。
现代文：文辞如写得整饬准确，文章便有了骨力；更能表达出作者昂扬爽朗的意志和气概，文章就能够起到明显的感化作用。
English: If the wording is written neatly and accurately, the article will have a backbone; it can better express the author's high-spirited will and spirit, and the article can play a significant influence role.

古文：若丰藻克赡，风骨不飞，则振采失鲜，负声无力。
现代文：假使辞藻虽繁多，但风教作用不大而骨力软弱，那么文章就会黯然无光，音节也难于动人。
English: If there are a lot of words, but the teaching effect is small and the bone strength is weak, then the article will be dull and the syllables will be difficult to move.

古文：是以缀虑裁篇，务盈守气，刚健既实，辉光乃新。
现代文：所以在构思谋篇之前，一定要充分培养自己的气质，做到辞句有力而内容充实，作品方能放射出新的光彩。
English: Therefore, before conceiving an article, you must fully cultivate your temperament, so that the words are powerful and the content is rich, and the work can radiate new brilliance.

古文：其为文用，譬征鸟之使翼也。
现代文：这对于写作所其到的作用，就像猛禽运用翅膀一样。
English: This has the same effect on writing as the wings of a bird of prey.

古文：故练于骨者，析辞必精；深乎风者，述情必显。
现代文：所以，懂得怎样使文章有骨力的作者，文辞一定选择得精当；懂得怎样使文章有教化作用的作者，思想感情必然能抒写得显豁。
English: Therefore, the author who knows how to make the article have a backbone must choose the words carefully; the author who knows how to make the article have an edifying effect must be able to express the thoughts and feelings clearly.

古文：捶字坚而难移，结响凝而不滞，此风骨之力也。
现代文：文字运用得准确而不能改易，作品发生的影响牢固而没有止境：这就是讲究风教与骨力的功效。
English: The use of words is accurate and can not be changed, and the influence of the work is strong and endless: this is the effect of paying attention to style and bone strength.

古文：若瘠义肥辞，繁杂失统，则无骨之征也。思不环周，牵课乏气，则无风之验也。
现代文：如果内容本来不多而辞句过于拖沓，文章就会显得杂乱缺乏条理，这是没有骨力的表现；如果思想不周密，内容枯燥而文章的气势不足，这是无益于教化的说明。
English: If the content is not much and the words are too long, the article will appear disorganized and lack of organization, which is a sign of no backbone; if the thought is not thorough, the content is boring and the momentum of the article is insufficient, this is an explanation that is not conducive to enlightenment.

古文：昔潘勖锡魏，思摹经典，群才韬笔，乃其骨髓峻也；相如赋仙，气号凌云，蔚为辞宗，乃其风力遒也。
现代文：从前潘勖写《册魏公九锡文》，企图学习经典的文辞，使别人都不敢下笔了，那是由于文辞骨力的高超；司马相如写《大人赋》，被称为有 凌云之气 ，蔚然成为赋家的宗匠，那是由于它具有很强的感染力。
English: Once upon a time, Pan Zheng wrote "Book of Wei, Gong and Juxi," trying to learn the classic literature, so that others would not dare to write, because of the superb vocabulary; Sima Xiangru wrote "Adult Fu," known as the spirit of Lingyun, and became the master of Fu family, because it has a strong appeal.

古文：能鉴斯要，可以定文，兹术或违，无务繁采。
现代文：若能看到这些重要问题，就可以从事写作了；假使违背这些基本法则，就不要徒然追求文采的繁多。
English: If you can see these important issues, you can engage in writing; if you violate these basic rules, don't pursue literary variety in vain.

古文：故魏文称∶ 文以气为主，气之清浊有体，不可力强而致。 
现代文：因此，曹丕曾说： 文章的气势随作者的气质而定，气质或刚或柔的主要倾向，那是勉强不来的。 
English: Therefore, Cao Wei once said: The momentum of an article depends on the temperament of the author. Whether the temperament is hard or soft is the main tendency, which is hard to come by.

古文：故其论孔融，则云 体气高妙 ，论徐干，则云 时有齐气 ，论刘桢，则云 有逸气 。
现代文：所以他评论孔融时就说： 他的风格特色是很卓越的。 他评论徐幹时却说： 常常有齐地的特点。 他评论刘桢时又说： 有俊逸的特点。 
English: Therefore, when he commented on Kong Rong, he said: His style characteristics are very outstanding; when he commented on Xu Gan, he said: He often has the characteristics of Qi Di; when he commented on Liu Bei, he also said: He has the characteristics of handsome.

古文：公干亦云∶ 孔氏卓卓，信含异气；笔墨之性，殆不可胜。 
现代文：刘桢也说过： 孔融很杰出，的确具有不平常的特色；他的创作中的优点，别人很难超过。 
English: Liu Wei also said: Kong Rong is very outstanding, indeed, he has unusual characteristics; the advantages in his creation are hard to be surpassed by others.

古文：并重气之旨也。
现代文：这些话都是重视作者气质和文章气势的意思。
English: These words all mean that the author's temperament and the momentum of the article should be valued.

古文：夫翚翟备色，而翾翥百步，肌丰而力沈也；鹰隼乏采，而翰飞戾天，骨劲而气猛也。
现代文：野鸡有着不同色彩的羽毛，但最多只飞一百步，那是由于肌肉过多而力量缺乏。老鹰没有什么彩色，却能一飞冲天，那是由于骨骼强壮而气概雄健。
English: The pheasant has feathers of different colors, but can only fly up to a hundred paces, because of too much muscle and lack of strength. The eagle has little color, but can fly into the sky, because of strong bones and vigor.

古文：文章才力，有似于此。
现代文：创作的才华和能力，也和这差不多。
English: Creative talent and ability are similar.

古文：若风骨乏采，则鸷集翰林；采乏风骨，则雉窜文囿；唯藻耀而高翔，固文笔之鸣凤也。
现代文：如果文章写得既在内容上能起风教作用，而又在文句上富有骨力，但是缺少辞采，那好像是飞集文坛的老鹰；如果只有辞采而缺乏教化作用和骨力，就恰像文坛上乱跑的野鸡。只有既具备动人的辞采，又富于感化作用和骨力的作品，才算是文章中的凤凰。
English: If an article is written in such a way that it can play a moralizing role in terms of content, yet it is full of energy in terms of words, but lacks eloquence, then it is like an eagle flying to gather the literary world; if it only has eloquence, but lacks education and energy, then it is just like a pheasant running wild in the literary world. Only a work that has both moving eloquence and is rich in inspiration and energy can be considered a phoenix in an article.

古文：若夫熔铸经典之范，翔集子史之术，洞晓情变，曲昭文体，然后能孚甲新意，雕昼奇辞。
现代文：如果学习经书的典范来写作，同时也参考子书和史书的写作方法，并深知文学创作的发展变化情况，详悉各种文章的体势；然后才能产生新颖的意思，锤炼出奇特的文辞来。
English: If you learn the model of scriptures to write, and also refer to the writing methods of children's books and history books, and are well aware of the development and changes of literary creation, and are familiar with the form of various articles; then you can produce novel meanings and temper strange words.

古文：昭体，故意新而不乱，晓变，故辞奇而不黩。
现代文：明确了各种文章的体势，就能意思新颖而不紊乱；懂得了创作的继承和革新，就能文辞奇特而无瑕疵。
English: By clarifying the structure of various articles, the meaning can be novel and not disorderly; by understanding the inheritance and innovation of creation, the wording can be peculiar and flawless.

古文：若骨采未圆，风辞未练，而跨略旧规，驰骛新作，虽获巧意，危败亦多，岂空结奇字，纰缪而成经矣？《周书》云∶ 辞尚体要，弗惟好异。 
现代文：假如文章的骨力和文采既配合得不圆满，风教作用和辞藻也联系得不恰切，却想摆脱掉原有的规范，追求新的写作技巧，那么即使得到巧妙的文意，也常常会失败。难道徒然用些奇特的字句，就错误地算作正常的做法了吗？《尚书·毕命》中说： 文辞应该抓住要点，不能一味追求新异。 
English: If the core strength of the article and the literary style are not perfectly coordinated, and the role of teaching and rhetoric are not properly connected, but want to get rid of the original norms and pursue new writing skills, then even if you get a clever meaning, it will often fail. Is it wrong to use some strange words in vain, is it considered a normal practice? "Shangshu Bi Sheng" said: "Writing should grasp the essentials, not just pursue novelty."

古文：盖防文滥也。
现代文：这是为了防止文辞的浮滥。
English: This is to prevent the excesses of rhetoric.

古文：然文术多门，各适所好，明者弗授，学者弗师。
现代文：不过写作手法不止一种，各人有自己所喜爱的；所以优秀的作家也难于传授给别人，学习写作的人也没法向别人领教。
English: But there is more than one way of writing, and everyone has his own favorite; therefore, excellent writers are difficult to teach to others, and those who learn to write cannot learn from others.

古文：于是习华随侈，流遁忘反。
现代文：后人渐渐地走上华侈的道路，越走越远而不想回头。
English: Successive generations have gradually embarked on the road of luxury, going further and further without wanting to turn back.

古文：若能确乎正式，使文明以健，则风清骨峻，篇体光华。
现代文：如果能够确立正当的写作方式，使文章写得又明畅又有力，那么风教作用既明显，文辞骨力又高超，全篇都能发射出光芒来了。
English: If you can establish a legitimate way of writing, so that the article is written clearly and powerfully, then the teaching effect is obvious, the vocabulary is strong and superb, and the whole article can emit light.

古文：能研诸虑，何远之有哉！
现代文：只要研讨上述这些问题，写作的成功是不会太远的。总结：
English: As long as the above-mentioned problems are studied, the success of writing will not be far away.

古文：赞曰∶情与气偕，辞共体并。
现代文：作家的思想感情和气质是相配合的，文辞和风格也是统一的。
English: The writer's thoughts, feelings and temperament are compatible, and the words and style are also unified.

古文：文明以健，珪璋乃聘。
现代文：文章必须写得明畅而有力，才能像珍贵的玉器那样为人所重视。
English: An article must be written clearly and powerfully in order to be valued like precious jade.

古文：蔚彼风力，严此骨鲠。才锋峻立，符采克炳。
现代文：既要求起更大的教化作用，还要能增强文辞的骨力；这样才能体现作家的高才，使作品的风教和骨力密切结合而发出光彩。
English: It is not only required to play a greater educational role, but also to strengthen the backbone of the literature; in this way, it can reflect the writer's talent and make the work shine with a close combination of tradition and backbone.

