古文：孔子侍坐于哀公，公曰： 敢问人道孰为大？ 
现代文：孔子在鲁哀公身侧陪侍。哀公问道： 请问治理民众的措施中，什么最重要？ 
English: With Confucius by his side, Lu Aiguo asked, "What is the most important measure to govern the people?"

古文：孔子愀然作色而对曰： 君之及此言也，百姓之惠也。固臣敢无辞而对：人道政为大。
现代文：孔子的神色变得严肃起来，回答道： 您能谈到这个问题，真是百姓的福气，所以为臣只能不加推辞地回答这个问题。
English: Confucius's expression became serious and he replied, "It is truly a blessing for the people that you can talk about this issue, so I can only answer this question without hesitation.

古文：夫政者，正也。
现代文：在治理民众的措施中，政事最重要。所谓政，就是正。
English: Among the measures to govern the people, political affairs are the most important.

古文：君为正，则百姓从而正矣。
现代文：国君做得正，那么百姓就能跟着效仿做得正了。
English: If the sovereign does the right thing, then the people will be able to follow suit and do the right thing.

古文：君之所为，百姓之所从。
现代文：国君的所作所为，百姓就会跟从。
English: What the sovereign does, the people will follow.

古文：君不为正，百姓何所从乎！ 
现代文：国君做得不正，百姓能跟君主学什么呢？ 
English: What can the people learn from the monarch?

古文：公曰： 敢问为政如之何？ 
现代文：哀公问： 请问如何处理政事呢？ 
English: Aikong asked: How should we handle political affairs?

古文：孔子对曰： 夫妇别，男女亲，君臣信。
现代文：孔子回答说： 夫妇要有别，男女要相亲，君臣要讲信义。
English: Confucius replied, "Couples should be different, men and women should be friends, and princes and ministers should be loyal.

古文：三者正，则庶物从之。 
现代文：这三件事做好了，那么其他的事就可以做好了。 
English: Once these three things are done, then everything else can be done.

古文：公曰： 寡人虽无能也，愿知所以行三者之道，可得闻乎？ 
现代文：哀公说： 我虽然没有太大的才能，但还是希望知道实行这三件事的方法，可以说给我听听吗？ 
English: Aiko said, "Although I don't have much talent, I still want to know how to do these three things. Can you tell me?"

古文：孔子对曰： 古之政，爱人为大；所以治爱人，礼为大；所以治礼，敬为大；敬之至矣，大婚为大；大婚至矣，冕而亲迎。
现代文：孔子回答说： 古人治理政事，爱人最为重要；要做到爱人，施行礼仪最重要；要施行礼仪，恭敬最为重要；最恭敬的事，以天子诸侯的婚姻最为重要。结婚的时候，天子诸侯要穿上冕服亲自去迎接。
English: Confucius replied, "The ancients governed by politics, and the most important thing was to love people. To love people, the most important thing was to practice etiquette. To practice etiquette, the most important thing was to be respectful. The most respectful thing was to marry the sons of heaven. When getting married, the sons of heaven had to put on their crown robes and go to meet the bridegroom in person.

古文：亲迎者，敬之也。
现代文：亲自迎接，是表示敬慕的感情。
English: To greet someone in person is a sign of respect.

古文：是故君子兴敬为亲，舍敬则是遗亲也。
现代文：所以君子要用敬慕的感情和她相亲相爱。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should cherish and love her with feelings of admiration.

古文：弗亲弗敬，弗尊也。
现代文：如果没有敬意，就是遗弃了相爱的感情。不亲不敬，双方就不能互相尊重。
English: If there is no respect, the feeling of love is abandoned. If there is no respect, the two sides cannot respect each other.

古文：爱与敬，其政之本与？ 
现代文：爱与敬，大概是治国的根本吧！ 
English: Love and respect are probably fundamental to governing a country!

古文：公曰： 寡人愿有言也。然冕而亲迎，不已重乎？ 
现代文：哀公说： 我还有问题想要问您，天子诸侯穿冕服亲自去迎亲，礼节会不会太隆重了？ 
English: Aiko said, "I still have a question to ask you. Would it be too formal for the prince of princes to wear a coronation robe to greet his relatives in person?

古文：孔子愀然作色而对曰： 合二姓之好，以继先圣之后，以为天下宗庙社稷之主，君何谓已重焉？ 
现代文：孔子脸色更加严肃地回答说： 婚姻是两个不同姓氏的结合，以延续祖先的后嗣，使之成为天地、宗庙、社稷祭祀的主人。您为何说太隆重了呢？ 
English: Confucius looked even more serious and replied, "Marriage is the union of two different surnames to perpetuate the descendants of the ancestors and make them the masters of heaven and earth, ancestral temples, and social rites. Why do you say it is too grand?

古文：公曰： 寡人实固，不固安得闻此言乎！
现代文：哀公说： 我这个人很浅陋，如果不这样，怎能听到您这番话呢？
English: Aiko said, "I am a very shallow person. If I were not, how would I be able to hear what you are saying?"

古文：寡人欲问，不能为辞，请少进。 
现代文：我想问，又找不到合适的言辞，请慢慢给我讲一讲吧。 
English: I want to ask, but I can't find the right words. Please tell me slowly.

古文：孔子曰： 天地不合，万物不生。
现代文：孔子说： 天地阴阳不交合，万物就不会生长。
English: Confucius said: If the yin and yang of heaven and earth do not mix, all things will not grow.

古文：大婚，万世之嗣也，君何谓已重焉？ 
现代文：天子诸侯的婚姻，是诞生使社稷延续万代的后嗣的大事，怎么能说太隆重了呢？ 
English: The marriage of princes, sons of the gods, is an important event in the birth of heirs who perpetuate society for thousands of generations. How can it be said to be too grand?

古文：孔子遂言曰： 内以治宗庙之礼，足以配天地之神；出以治直言之礼，足以立上下之敬。
现代文：孔子接着又说： 夫妇对内主持宗庙祭祀的礼仪，足以与天地之神相配；对外掌管发布政教号令，能够确立君臣上下之间的恭敬之礼。
English: Confucius went on to say: The etiquette of a husband and wife presiding over the sacrificial rites of the ancestral temple internally is sufficient to match the gods of heaven and earth; issuing political and religious proclamations to the outside world can establish a respectful ceremony between the monarch and his subordinates.

古文：物耻则足以振之，国耻则足以兴之。
现代文：事情不合礼可以改变，国家有丧乱可以振兴。
English: Things that are improper can be changed, and the country can be revitalized through turmoil.

古文：故为政先乎礼，礼其政之本与！ 
现代文：所以治理政事先要有礼，礼不就是执政的根本吗？ 
English: Therefore, it is necessary to be polite in advance to govern the government. Isn't politeness the essence of governing?

古文：孔子遂言曰： 昔三代明王，必敬妻子也，盖有道焉。
现代文：孔子继续说： 从前夏商周三代圣明的君主治理政事，必定敬重他们的妻子，这是有道理的。
English: Confucius continued: It is reasonable that the emperors who governed the country from the time of Xia Shang to the time of Shen Ming must have respected their wives.

古文：妻也者，亲之主也。子也者，亲之后也。敢不敬与？
现代文：妻子是祭祀宗祧的主体，儿子是传宗接代的人，能不敬重吗？
English: The wife is the main body of the sacrificial worship of the patriarch, and the son is the person who inherits the lineage, can it not be respected?

古文：是故，君子无不敬。
现代文：所以君子对妻儿没有不敬重的。
English: Therefore, a gentleman does not disrespect his wife and children.

古文：敬也者，敬身为大。
现代文：敬这件事，敬重自身最为重要。
English: Respect the thing, respect yourself is the most important.

古文：身也者，亲之支也，敢不敬与？
现代文：自身，是亲人的后代，能够不敬重吗？
English: Is it possible to disrespect the descendants of one's own relatives?

古文：不敬其身，是伤其亲；伤其亲，是伤其本也；伤其本，则支从之而亡。
现代文：不敬重自身，就是伤害了亲人；伤害了亲人，就是伤害了根本；伤害了根本，支属就要随之灭绝。
English: If you do not respect yourself, you will hurt your relatives; if you hurt your relatives, you will hurt the root; if you hurt the root, the branch will be extinct.

古文：三者，百姓之象也。
现代文：自身、妻子、儿女这三者，百姓也像国君一样都是有的。
English: The people, like the sovereign, have themselves, their wives, and their children.

古文：身以及身，子以及子，妃以及妃，君以修此三者，则大化忾乎天下矣，昔太王之道也。
现代文：由自身想到百姓之身，由自己的儿子想到百姓的儿子，由自己的妻子想到百姓的妻子，国君能做到这三方面的敬重，那么教化就通行天下了，这是从前太王实行的治国方法。
English: If the sovereign thinks of the people's body by himself, thinks of the people's son by his own son, and thinks of the people's wife by his own wife, and if he can achieve these three respects, then enlightenment will spread throughout the world. This was the method of governing the country practiced by the great king in the past.

古文：如此，国家顺矣。 
现代文：能够这样，国家就顺畅了。 
English: If we can do that, the country will run smoothly.

古文：公曰： 敢问何谓敬身？ 
现代文：哀公问： 请问什么是敬重自身？ 
English: A question: What is self-respect?

古文：孔子对曰： 君子过言则民作辞，过行则民作则。
现代文：孔子回答说： 君主言语失当，百姓就会效仿；行为失当，百姓也会跟从。
English: Confucius replied, "If the ruler speaks improperly, the people will follow suit; if he acts improperly, the people will follow suit.

古文：言不过辞，动不过则，百姓恭敬以从命。
现代文：君主的言行举止得当，百姓便能恭敬地服从君主的命令。
English: If the monarch behaves properly, the people will respectfully obey the monarch's orders.

古文：若是，则可谓能敬其身，敬其身则能成其亲矣。 
现代文：如果能做到，便可称为敬重自身；敬重自身，就能成就他的家族。 
English: If he can do this, he can be said to respect himself; if he respects himself, he can achieve his family.

古文：公曰： 何谓成其亲？ 
现代文：哀公问： 什么是成就他的家族？ 
English: Aiko asked: What is the achievement of his family?

古文：孔子对曰： 君子者也，人之成名也。
现代文：孔子回答道： 所谓君子，就是有名望的人。
English: Confucius replied, "A gentleman is a person of reputation.

古文：百姓与名，谓之君子，则是成其亲为君而为其子也。 
现代文：百姓送给他的名称，称作君子，就是称他的亲人为有名望的人，而他是有名望人的儿子。 
English: The name given to him by the people, called Junzi, means that his relatives are famous people, and he is the son of a famous person.

古文：孔子遂言曰： 爱政而不能爱人，则不能成其身；不能成其身，则不能安其土；不能安其土，则不能乐天；不能乐天，则不能成身。 
现代文：孔子接着说： 只注重政治而不能爱护民众，就不能成就自身；不能成就自身，就不能使自己的国家安定；不能使自己的国家安定，就不能无忧无虑。不能无忧无虑，就不能成就自身 
English: Confucius went on to say: If you only pay attention to politics and cannot care for the people, you cannot achieve yourself; if you cannot achieve yourself, you cannot make your country stable; if you cannot make your country stable, you cannot be carefree; if you cannot be carefree, you cannot achieve yourself.

古文：公曰： 敢问何能成身？ 
现代文：哀公问： 请问怎么做才能成就自身？ 
English: Aiko asked: What can I do to achieve my goals?

古文：孔子对曰： 夫其行己不过乎物，谓之成身。
现代文：孔子回答说： 自己的言行举止合乎固有法则，不超出原有的界限，就可以成就自身。
English: Confucius replied, "If one's words, deeds and actions conform to the inherent laws and do not exceed the original boundaries, one can achieve self-fulfillment."

古文：不过乎物，合天道也。 
现代文：不超出法则的界限，就会与天道相合。 
English: If you do not overstep the bounds of the law, you will be in harmony with the heavenly way.

古文：公曰： 君子何贵乎天道也？ 
现代文：哀公问： 请问君子为何尊崇天道呢？ 
English: Lamenting, he asked, "Why should a gentleman respect the heavenly way?

古文：孔子曰： 贵其不已也。如日月东西相从而不已也，是天道也；不闭而能久，是天道也；无为而物成，是天道也；已成而明之，是天道也。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 尊重它是因为它永不停止地运动，就像太阳月亮每天东升西落一样，永不停止循环一样，这就是天道；运行无阻而能长久，这也是天道；不见有所作为而万物发育成长，这也是天道；成就了自己而功业也得到显扬，这也是天道。 
English: Confucius replied, "Respect it because it never stops moving, just as the sun and moon rise and set every day, and never stops circulating, which is the heavenly way; it can run unimpeded for a long time, which is also the heavenly way; if there is nothing to do, everything will develop and grow, which is also the heavenly way; if you have accomplished yourself and your work is also shown, which is also the heavenly way.

古文：公曰： 寡人且愚冥，幸烦子志之于心也。 
现代文：哀公说： 我实在愚昧，幸亏您耐心地将这些道理讲给我听。 
English: Aiko said, "I'm really ignorant, thank goodness you patiently explained these things to me."

古文：孔子蹴然避席而对曰： 仁人不过乎物，孝子不过乎亲。
现代文：孔子恭敬地离开坐席回答说： 仁德之人不能逾越事物的自然法则，孝顺的人不能超越亲情的规范。
English: Confucius respectfully left the table and replied, "A benevolent person cannot go beyond the natural laws of things, and a filial person cannot go beyond the norms of kinship.

古文：是故，仁人之事亲也如事天，事天如事亲，此谓孝子成身。 
现代文：因此仁德的人侍奉父母，就如同侍奉天一样；侍奉天，就如同侍奉父母一样。这就是所说的孝子成就自身。 
English: Therefore, people of benevolence serve their parents as if they were serving heaven; they serve heaven as if they were serving their parents. This is what is called filial piety and self-fulfillment.

古文：公曰： 寡人既闻如此言也，无如后罪何？ 
现代文：哀公说： 我既然听到了这些道理，将来如果行为还有过错怎么办呢？ 
English: Aiko said, "Now that I have heard these truths, what should I do in the future if my actions are still wrong?"

古文：孔子对曰： 君之及此言，是臣之福也。 
现代文：孔子说： 您能说出这样的话，这是臣下的福分啊！ 
English: Confucius said, "If you can say such a thing, it is a great blessing for a subject!"

