古文：吉甫，贤父也，伯奇，孝子也。
现代文：吉甫是一位贤明的父亲，伯奇是一位孝顺的儿子。
English: Kifu is a wise father, Birch is a dutiful son.

古文：以贤父御孝子，合得终于天性，而后妻间之，伯奇遂放。
现代文：用贤父来教导孝顺的儿子，应该是能够一直保有父与子之间慈孝的天性。但是由于吉甫的后妻从中挑拨，伯奇就被放逐。
English: Using a wise father to teach a dutiful son is supposed to be able to keep the filial nature between father and son. However, because Ji Fu's second wife provoked him, Birch was banished.

古文：曾参妇死，谓其子曰： 吾不及吉甫，汝不及伯奇。 
现代文：曾参的妻子去世以后，他对儿子说： 我不如吉甫贤明，你也没有伯奇孝顺。 
English: After the death of Zeng Zang's wife, he said to his son: "I am not as wise as Ji Fu, and you are not as filial.

古文：王骏丧妻，亦谓人曰： 我不及曾参，子不如华、元。 
现代文：王骏的妻去世以后，他也对人说： 我不如曾参，我的儿子比不上曾华、曾元。 
English: After Wang Yao's wife passed away, he also said to people: I am not as good as Zeng Zang, my son is not as good as Zeng Hua and Zeng Yuan.

古文：并终身不娶，此等足以为诫。
现代文：曾参与王骏两位后来终身未娶。这些事例都足以引为鉴诫。
English: Two people who had participated in Wang Xuan later never married. These cases are enough to serve as a warning.

古文：其后，假继惨虐孤遗，离间骨肉，伤心断肠者，何可胜数。
现代文：继母虐待前妻的孩子，离间前妻之子和其生父的骨肉之情，弄得伤心断肠的人多得数不清。
English: There are countless people who are heartbroken by the stepmother's abuse of the ex-wife's child, the separation of the ex-wife's son and his biological father.

古文：慎之哉！
现代文：对此一定要慎重啊！
English: You have to be careful!

古文：慎之哉！
现代文：一定要慎重啊！
English: You have to be careful!

古文：江左不讳庶孽，丧室之后，多以妾媵终家事；疥癣蚊虻，或未能免，限以大分，故稀斗之耻。
现代文：江东一带的人不避忌庶妾，大老婆死了以后，多由小老婆来主持家事。这样家庭中细小的纠纷或许不能避免；但限于妾的身份地位，打架争吵等可耻的事情就很少见。
English: People in the eastern Jiangsu region do not shun concubines. After the death of the eldest wife, it is mostly the younger wife who presides over household affairs. Such minor disputes in the family may be unavoidable; however, shameful things such as fights and quarrels limited to the status of the concubine are rare.

古文：河北鄙于侧出，不预人流，是以必须重娶，至于三四，母年有少于子者。
现代文：黄河以北一带则不同，瞧不起妾媵，所以必须妻亡重娶，甚至重娶三四次，以致于继母的年龄有时比大的儿子还小。
English: North of the Yellow River, on the other hand, they despise concubines, so they have to remarry even three or four times, so that the age of the stepmother is sometimes younger than that of the eldest son.

古文：后母之弟，与前妇之兄，衣服饮食，爰及婚宦，至于士庶贵贱之隔，俗以为常，身没之后，辞讼盈公门，谤辱彰道路，子诬母为妾，弟黜兄为佣，播扬先人之辞迹，暴露祖考之长短，以求直己者，往往而有，悲夫！
现代文：继母生的孩子和前妻生的孩子，会有在衣服饮食以及婚姻仕宦做官上的差异，甚至会有士庶贵贱之间隔，而当地的习俗竟然认为这是很正常的。等到父亲去世以后，家里的人会为了诉讼挤破衙门，把诽谤污辱的言语嚷嚷得行人都能听见，前妻的孩子辱骂继母为小老婆，继母的孩子则贬斥前妻之子为仆役。们肆意传扬去世父亲的隐私，暴露家中先人的是非长短，以此来证明自己有理，这样的事情在再娶的家庭里常常出现！
English: The children of the stepmother and the children of the ex-wife will have differences in clothing, diet, and marital etiquette. There will even be a gap between the rich and the poor, and local customs even consider this to be normal. After the father's death, the family members will break through the gate to sue, shouting slanderous and insulting words so that pedestrians can hear, the children of the ex-wife will abuse the stepmother as a little wife, and the children of the stepmother will disparage the son of the ex-wife as a servant. They willfully spread the privacy of the deceased father, expose the rights and wrongs of the ancestors in the family

古文：自古奸臣佞妾，以一言陷人者众矣！
现代文：自古以来，奸臣佞妾，用一句话来害人的多得很呢。
English: Since ancient times, treacherous vassals and concubines have often harmed people with a single word.

古文：况夫妇之义，晓夕移之，婢仆求容，助相说引，积年累月，安有孝子乎？
现代文：更何况继母凭借夫妇的情义，早晚想办法来改变男人的心意，而婢仆为了讨主子的欢心，帮着劝说引诱，日子一久，家里哪里还会有孝子呢？
English: Not to mention the fact that the stepmother, relying on the couple's feelings, will sooner or later find a way to change the man's mind, while the maidservant, in order to please the master's heart, will help to persuade and seduce. After a long time, where will there still be a filial son in the family?

古文：此不可不畏。
现代文：对此不可以不警惕。
English: We must remain vigilant in this regard.

古文：凡庸之性，后夫多宠前夫之孤，后妻必虐前妻之子；非唯妇人怀嫉妒之情，丈夫有沉惑之僻，亦事势使之然也。
现代文：一般普通人的习性，后夫大多宠爱前夫留下的孩子，后妻必然虐待前妻的孩子。这不只是因为妇人心怀妒忌，丈夫沉迷女色，也是事态促使成这样的。
English: According to the habits of ordinary people, the second husband mostly favors the children left behind by the former husband, and the second wife inevitably abuses the children of the former wife. This is not only because the woman's heart is jealous and the husband is addicted to women, but also the state of affairs has led to this.

古文：前夫之孤，不敢与我子争家，提携鞠养，积习生爱，故宠之；前妻之子，每居己生之上，宦学婚嫁，莫不为防焉，故虐之。
现代文：前夫的孩子，不敢和我的孩子争夺家业，将他提携抚养，天长日久自然生爱，因而宠爱他；前妻的孩子，常常居於自己所生孩子之上，无论学业做官婚姻嫁娶，没有不需防范的，因而虐待他。
English: The children of my ex-husband did not dare to compete with my children for the family business, raised him in partnership, and loved him naturally for a long time; the children of my ex-wife often lived on top of their own children, regardless of their studies, official marriage, and marriage, there was no need to guard against, so they mistreated him.

古文：异姓宠则父母被怨，继亲虐则兄弟为仇，家有此者，皆门户之祸也。
现代文：异姓之子受宠则父母遭怨恨，后母虐待前妻之子则兄弟成仇敌，家庭里发生这类事情，都是家里的祸患。
English: If a son with a different surname is favored, the parents will be resented, if the stepmother abuses the son of the ex-wife, the brothers will become enemies. If such things happen in the family, they are the scourge of the family.

古文：思鲁等从舅殷外臣，博达之士也，有子基、谌，皆已成立，而再娶王氏。
现代文：思鲁的表舅父殷外臣，是位博学通达的读书人。他有两个孩子，叫殷基、殷谌，都已长大成人，殷外臣又娶了王氏为妻。
English: Sulu's great-uncle, Yin Gaozhong, was a well-read scholar. He had two children, named Yin Ji and Yin Yao, who are now adults. Yin Gaozhong also married Wang Shi.

古文：基每拜见后母，感慕呜咽，不能自持，家人莫忍仰视。
现代文：殷基每当拜见后母时，因念及生母失声痛哭，难以控制，家里人都低下头不忍心看他。
English: Whenever Anji visits his stepmother, he cries uncontrollably because he misses his birth mother. His family members can't bear to look at him.

古文：王亦凄怆，不知所容，旬月求退，便以礼遣，此亦悔事也。
现代文：王氏也非常悲伤，不知如何是好，才过门不到十天就要求退婚，殷家只好依照礼节将她送回娘家，这也是值得懊悔的事啊。
English: Mr. Wang was also very sad and didn't know what to do. It took him less than ten days to ask for a divorce, and the Yin family had to send her back to her mother's house according to the etiquette. This is also something worth regretting.

