古文：周德威，字镇远，小字阳五，朔州马邑人也。
现代文：周德威，字镇远，小名阳五，朔州马邑人。
English: Zhou Dewei, Zhenyuan, Xiaomingyang V, Shuozhou Ma'e.

古文：初事武皇为帐中骑督，骁勇，便骑射，胆气智数皆过人。久在云中，谙熟边事，望烟尘之警，悬知兵势。乾宁中，为铁林军使，武皇讨王行瑜，以功加检校左仆射，移内衙军副。
现代文：刚开始时在武皇手下任帐中骑督，骁勇善于骑射，胆量智力都强过他人，长期在云中郡，熟悉边疆的战事，观望烟尘报警，便能推测出兵力大小，唐僖宗乾宁年中，任铁林军使，跟随武皇讨伐王行瑜，因战功升任检校左仆射，移任内衙军副。
English: At the beginning, he served as a cavalry commander in the account under the Emperor Wu. He was good at riding and shooting, and his courage and intelligence were stronger than others. He had been in Yunnan County for a long time, was familiar with the war on the frontier, and could estimate the size of the army by watching the smoke alarm. In the middle of the Qianling period of the Tang Dynasty, he served as an envoy to Tielin, followed the Emperor Wu to fight Wang Xingyu, and was promoted to the position of the left-handed shooting guard of the school, and transferred to the vice-commander of the Inner Palace Guards.

古文：光化二年三月，汴将氏叔琮率众逼太原。有陈章者，以虓勇知名，众谓之 夜叉 ，言于叔琮曰： 晋人所恃者周阳五，愿擒之，请赏以郡。 
现代文：僖宗光化二年三月，汴将氏叔琮率军逼近太原，有一个叫陈章的人，以勇猛知名，大家称他为 夜叉 ，他对氏叔琮说： 晋人所依靠的是周阳五，我愿擒获他，请赏给我一郡。 
English: In March of the second year of Emperor Gaozong's reign, Emperor Gaozong led his army to approach Taiyuan. A man named Chen Zhang, who was known for his bravery and was known as Yasha, said to Emperor Gaozong: The Jin people rely on Zhou Yang Wu. I would like to capture him. Please give me one county.

古文：陈章尝乘骢马硃甲以自异。
现代文：陈章经常骑着一匹青白色的马穿着红色甲胄来和别人区别。
English: Chen Zhang often rides a blue-and-white horse and wears red armor to distinguish himself from others.

古文：武皇戒德威曰： 我闻陈夜叉欲取尔求郡，宜善备之。 
现代文：武皇告诫周德威说 ：我听说陈夜叉想抓住你求赏，你应认真防备。 
English: Emperor Wu warned Zhou Dewei, saying, "I heard that Chen Yasha wants to catch you and ask for a reward. You should be on your guard.

古文：德威曰： 陈章大言，未知鹿死谁手！ 
现代文：周德威说： 陈章说大话，还不知道鹿死谁手呢！ 
English: Zhou Dewei said: Chen Zhang talks big, but he still doesn't know who killed the deer!

古文：他日致师，戒部下曰： 如阵上见陈夜叉，尔等但走。 
现代文：后来周德威挑战汴军，告诫部下说： 如果阵上见到陈夜叉，你们只管走开。 
English: Later, Zhou Dewei challenged the Wei army, admonishing his subordinates: "If you see Chen Yasha at the front, you should just walk away.

古文：德威微服挑战，部下伪退，陈章纵马追之，德威背挥铁楇击堕马，生获以献，由是知名。
现代文：周德威穿着一般的衣服上阵挑战，部下假装退下，陈章策马追来，周德威从背后挥动铁木过把他打下马，活捉献上，因此而知名。
English: Zhou Dewei wore ordinary clothes to challenge, his subordinates pretended to retreat, Chen Zhang led the horse to chase, Zhou Dewei swung the iron wood from behind to knock him off the horse, caught him alive, and thus became famous.

古文：天复中，我师不利于潘县，汴将硃友宁、氏叔琮来逼晋阳。
现代文：天复年中，晋军在蒲县失利，汴将朱友宁、氏叔琮逼近晋阳。
English: In the middle of the year of the Return of Heaven, the Jin army was defeated in Pu County, and Zhu Youning and Uji Shuxuan were driven closer to Jinyang.

古文：时诸军未集，城中大恐，德威与李嗣昭选募锐兵出诸门，攻其垒，擒生斩馘，汴人枝梧不暇，乃退。
现代文：这时各军还没集合起来，晋阳城中大为恐慌，周德威和李嗣昭选召精锐士兵从各座城门出击，攻打敌营，擒获斩杀，汴军应付不过来，只好退走。
English: At this time, the armies had not yet assembled, and there was great panic in the city of Jinyang. Zhou Dewei and Li Shizhao selected elite soldiers to attack from each city gate, attack the enemy camp, capture and kill, the Wei army could not cope, and had to retreat.

古文：天祐三年，与李嗣昭合燕军攻潞州，降丁会，以功加检校太保、代州刺史；代嗣昭为蕃汉都将。
现代文：天祐三年，和李嗣昭联合燕军攻潞州，降伏丁会，以军功升任检校太保、代州刺史，代替李嗣昭任蕃汉都将。
English: In the third year of Tian Yu's reign, he and Li Shizhao united with Yan's army to attack Bozhou, surrendered to the Dinghui, and was promoted to the post of school inspector with military merit, and to the post of governor of Daizhou, and replaced Li Shizhao as the governor of Han.

古文：李思安之寇潞州也，德威军于余吾。
现代文：李思安侵犯潞州时，周德威在余吾驻军。
English: When Li Sian invaded Zhangzhou, Zhou Dewei was stationed in Yuwu.

古文：时汴军十万筑夹城，围潞州，内外断绝，德威以精骑薄之，屡败汴人，进营高河，令游骑邀其刍牧。
现代文：这时十万汴军修筑夹城，围住潞州，城内外断绝来往，周德威用精锐骑兵逼近，屡败汴人，进军到高河扎营，派骑兵游击狙杀打柴草的汴人。
English: At this time, a hundred thousand Wei troops built a sandwich city, encircled Bozhou, and cut off traffic in and out of the city. Zhou Dewei approached with elite cavalry, repeatedly defeated the Wei people, marched to Gaohe to camp, and sent cavalry guerrillas to shoot and kill the Wei people playing firewood.

古文：汴军闭壁不出，乃自东南山口筑甬道树栅以通夹城，德威之骑军，倒墙堙堑，日数十战，前后俘馘，不可胜纪。
现代文：汴军闭壁不敢出，从东南山口修筑甬道、栅栏和夹城相连，周德威的骑兵，推倒城墙填塞沟堑，每天作战几十次，前前后后俘斩无数。
English: The Wei army did not dare to leave the closed wall. They built a causeway and a fence from the southeastern mountain pass to connect with the city. Zhou Dewei's cavalry knocked down the city wall and filled in the ditch. They fought dozens of times a day and captured and beheaded countless people.

古文：梁有骁将黄角鹰、方骨仑，皆生致之。
现代文：汴军的骁将黄角鹰、方骨仑山，都被活捉。
English: Huangjiao Eagle and Fangjiaolun Mountain were captured alive.

古文：五年正月，武皇疾笃，德威退营乱柳，武皇厌代。
现代文：天祐五年一月，武皇病重，周德威退到乱柳扎营。
English: In January of the 5th year of Tenyu, Emperor Wu fell seriously ill, and Zhou Dewei retreated to Ranliu to set up camp.

古文：四月，命德威班师。
现代文：武皇去世，四月，命令周德威回师。
English: Emperor Wu died in April and ordered Zhou Dewei to return to his division.

古文：时庄宗初立，德威外握兵柄，颇有浮议，内外忧之。
现代文：这时庄宗刚刚即位，周德威在外掌握重兵，很有一些没有根据的议论针对他，使得朝廷内外担心他生事。
English: At this time, Zhuangzong had just ascended to the throne, Zhou Dewei was in charge of heavy troops outside, and there were a lot of unfounded discussions against him, which made the court and outside worry about him causing trouble.

古文：德威既至，单骑入谒，伏灵柩哭，哀不自胜，由是群情释然。
现代文：周德威到京后，独自骑马进见庄宗，趴在武皇灵柩上痛哭，哀痛得受不了，因此大家都放下心了。
English: After Zhou Dewei arrived in Beijing, he rode alone to see Zhuangzong, lay down on the coffin of the Emperor Wu and cried bitterly. The grief was unbearable, so everyone lost heart.

古文：是月二十四日，从庄宗再援潞州。
现代文：这个月二十四日，跟随庄宗再次援救潞州。
English: On the 24th of this month, he followed Zhuangzong to rescue Zhangzhou again.

古文：二十九日，德威前军营横碾，距潞四十五里。
现代文：二十九日，周德威的前军在横碾扎营，离潞州四十五里。
English: On the 29th, Zhou Dewei's former army set up camp in Hengnian, 45 miles away from Zhangzhou.

古文：五月朔，晨雾晦暝，王师伏于三垂岗下。翼日，直趋夹城，斩关破垒，梁人大败，解潞州之围。
现代文：五月一日，早晨雾气阴暗，晋军埋伏在三垂岗下，第二天，直奔夹城，攻关破垒，梁军大败，解除了潞州之围。
English: On the first day of May, the morning mist was gloomy, and the Jin army was lying in wait under the three hanging posts. On the second day, they went straight to the city, broke through the barriers, defeated the Liang army, and lifted the siege of Zhangzhou.

古文：初，德威与李嗣昭有私憾，武皇临终顾谓庄宗曰： 进通忠孝不负我，重围累年，似与德威有隙，以吾命谕之，若不解重围，殁有遗恨。 
现代文：起初，周德威和李嗣昭有私怨，武皇临死时对庄宗说 ：李嗣昭竭忠尽孝不背叛我，现被重围在潞州已一年多，又似乎与周德威有隔阂，传我的命令告诉周德威，如不能解除对潞州重围，我死有遗恨。 
English: At first, Zhou Dewei and Li Shizhao had a personal grudge. When Emperor Wu was about to die, he said to Zhuangzong, "Li Shizhao has been loyal to me and has not betrayed me. He has been surrounded in Zhangzhou for more than a year, and it seems that he is estranged from Zhou Dewei. Send me an order to tell Zhou Dewei that if I cannot lift the heavy siege of Zhangzhou, I will die with a grudge."

古文：庄宗达遗旨，德威感泣，由是励力坚战，竟破强敌，与嗣昭欢爱如初。
现代文：庄宗传达遗言，周德威感动得流泪，所以全力以赴，终于破除强敌，与李嗣昭和好如初。
English: Zhuangzong conveyed his last words, and Zhou Dewei was moved to tears, so he did his best to finally defeat the strong enemy, and he and Li Xi were as good as ever.

古文：以功加检校太保、同平章事、振武节度使。
现代文：以军功升任检校太保、同平章事、振武军节度使。
English: With military merit, he was promoted to the posts of school inspector, dongping official, and military commander.

古文：七年，岐人攻灵夏，遣使来求助，德威渡河以应之；师还，授蕃汉马步总管。
现代文：天祐六年，岐人进攻灵夏，派使者来求助，周德威渡黄河去接应，回师后，授任蕃汉马步军总管。
English: In the sixth year of Tianyu, the Qin attacked Lingxia and sent an envoy to ask for help. Zhou Dewei crossed the Yellow River to meet the envoy. After returning to his division, he was awarded the post of the general manager of the Sino-Han horse marching army.

古文：七年十一月，汴人据深、冀，汴将王景仁军八万次柏乡，镇州节度使王镕来告难，帝遣德威率前军出井陉，屯于赵州。
现代文：七年十一月，梁军占据深、冀二州，梁将王景仁率八万人到达柏乡，镇州节度使王钅容前来告急，庄宗派周德威率领前军出井陉，驻扎在赵州。
English: In November of the seventh year, Liang's army occupied the two prefectures of Shenshan and Hebei. Liang led Wang Jingren and eighty thousand people to Baoshan Township. The festival of the township made Wang Yirong come urgently. Zhuang Zong faction Zhou Dewei led the front army out of the well and stationed in Zhao Prefecture.

古文：十二月，帝亲征。二十五日，进薄汴营，距柏乡五里，营于野河上。
现代文：十二月，庄宗亲自出征，二十五日，进逼梁军营地，离柏乡五里路，在野河上扎营。
English: In December, Zhuangzong personally went to the front, and on the 25th, he entered the camp of the Liang Army, left the five-mile road of Baixiang, and camped on the field river.

古文：汴将韩勍率精兵三万，铠甲皆被缯绮，金银炫曜，望之森然，我军惧形于色。
现代文：梁军大将韩京力率领三万精兵，铠甲上都披上丝绸，金银闪烁，望去一片森然，晋军士兵害怕得变了脸色。
English: Liang's general Han Jingli led thirty thousand elite soldiers. Their armor was covered with silk, gold and silver glittered, and the whole scene was dazzling. The Jin soldiers were so scared that their faces changed color.

古文：德威谓李存璋曰： 贼结阵而来，观其形势，志不在战，欲以兵甲耀威耳。
现代文：周德威对李存璋说： 敌人结成阵势而来，看这种形势，目的不在作战，而是用兵甲炫耀一下。
English: Zhou Dewei said to Li Cunxu: "The enemy has come in formation, looking at this situation, the purpose is not to fight, but to show off with armor."

古文：我军人乍见其来，谓其锋不可当，此时不挫其锐，吾军不振矣！ 
现代文：我军士兵突然见他们冲来，以为抵挡不住，这时如不挫败他们的锐气，我军就振作不了。 
English: Our soldiers suddenly saw them rushing towards them, and thought they could not resist. At this time, if we did not frustrate their spirit, our army would not be able to recover.

古文：乃遣存璋谕诸军曰： 尔见此贼军否？
现代文：于是派李存璋对各军说 ：你们看见这些敌人吗？
English: So he sent Li Cunxu to the armies to say: "Do you see these enemies?

古文：是汴州天武健兒，皆屠沽佣贩，虚有表耳，纵被精甲，十不当一，擒获足以为资。 
现代文：这些汴州的英武健儿，只不过是杀猪卖酒做仆人小贩的，虚有其表，即使披上精甲，十个也当不上我们一个，足可擒获他们。 
English: These Yingwu Jianren in Zhangzhou are nothing more than hog-slaughterers, wine-sellers and servant-peddlers. They are nothing more than a facade. Even if they were wearing armor, ten of them would not be enough to catch one of us.

古文：德威自率精骑击其两偏，左驰右决，出没数四。
现代文：周德威亲自率精锐骑兵攻击敌军两翼，左冲右杀，反复进出。
English: Zhou Dewei personally led the elite cavalry to attack the enemy's two wings, left and right, and repeatedly entered and exited.

古文：是日，获贼百余人，贼渡河而退。
现代文：这一天，俘敌一百多，敌人渡河退走。
English: On this day, more than a hundred enemies were captured, and the enemy retreated across the river.

古文：德威谓庄宗曰： 贼骄气充盛，宜按兵以待其衰。 
现代文：周德威对庄宗说 ：敌人骄气太盛，应该按兵不动以等待他们衰弱下去。 
English: Zhou Dewei said to Zhuangzong, "The enemy is too arrogant, we should wait for them to weaken by standing still."

古文：庄宗曰： 我提孤军，救难解纷，三镇乌合之众，利在速战，卿欲持重，吾惧其不可使也。 
现代文：庄宗说： 我率领孤军，救难解困，敌军乃三镇乌合之众，应该速战速决，你想谨慎从事，我却担心这样不行。 
English: Zhuangzong said: I am leading a lone army, rescuing and relieving distress. The enemy army is a crowd of three towns. We should fight quickly. If you want to be cautious, I am afraid that this is not possible.

古文：德威曰： 镇、定之士，长于守城，列阵野战，素非便习。
现代文：周德威说： 镇州、定州的士兵擅长守城，对列阵野战则一向不太熟悉。
English: Zhou Dewei said: The soldiers of Zhenzhou and Dingzhou are good at defending the city, but they are not familiar with the field battle.

古文：我师破贼，惟恃骑军，平田广野，易为施功。
现代文：我军破敌，只有依靠骑兵，平田广野，容易施展。
English: Our army can defeat the enemy only by relying on the cavalry, Hirata Hirono.

古文：今压贼营，令彼见我虚实，则胜负未可必也。 
现代文：今天逼近敌营，已让他们知道我们的虚实，这样胜负就难以确定了。 
English: By approaching the enemy's camp today, we have already let them know our truth and falsehood, so it is difficult to determine the outcome.

古文：庄宗不悦，退卧帐中。
现代文：庄宗不高兴，回帐中躺下。
English: Zhuang Zong was not happy and lay down during the chargeback.

古文：德威患之，谓监军张承业曰： 王欲速战，将乌合之徒，欲当剧贼，所谓不量力也。
现代文：周德威担心此事，对监军张承业说： 王想速战，用乌合之众去对付强大的敌人，可说是不量力而行。
English: Zhou Dewei was worried about this and said to Zhang Chengye, the supervisor of the army: Wang wanted to fight quickly and use the rabble to deal with a powerful enemy. It can be said that he did not try his best.

古文：去贼咫尺，限此一渠水，彼若早夜以略彴渡之，吾族其为俘矣。
现代文：这里离敌人很近，只隔一道小河，他们如夜里用小木桥渡河，我们都将被他们俘虏了。
English: Here we are very close to the enemy, separated only by a small river, they cross the river at night with a small wooden bridge, we will all be captured by them.

古文：若退军鄗邑，引贼离营，彼出则归，复以轻骑掠其刍饷，不逾月，败贼必矣。 
现代文：如退兵到高阝邑，引敌人离开营地，等他们出来我们就回来，再用轻骑兵抢夺他们的粮草，不出一个月，敌人必定失败。 
English: If we retreat to Gaocheng, lead the enemy away from the camp, wait for them to come out, and then return, and then use light cavalry to rob them of grain and grass, the enemy will certainly fail within a month.

古文：承业入言，庄宗乃释然。
现代文：张承业进帐跟庄宗一讲，庄宗便放下了心。
English: As soon as Zhang Chengye entered the account with Zhuang Zong, Zhuang Zong gave up his heart.

古文：德威得降人问之，曰 景仁下令造浮桥数日 ，果如德威所料。
现代文：周德威找来投降的敌兵询问敌情，回答说： 王景仁下令造浮桥有好几天了。 果然不出周德威所料。
English: Zhou Dewei called up a surrendered enemy soldier to inquire about the situation of the enemy, and replied: Wang Jingren has ordered the construction of a floating bridge for several days.

古文：二十七日，乃退军保鄗邑。
现代文：二十七日，便退兵据守高阝邑。
English: On the 27th, they retreated to defend Gaojun.

古文：八年正月二日，德威率骑军致师于柏乡，设伏于村坞间，令三百骑以压汴营。
现代文：天祐八年一月二日，周德威率骑兵到柏乡挑战，在村庄之间设下埋伏，派三百骑兵逼近梁军营地。
English: On January 2, 1908, Zhou Dewei led the cavalry to challenge Baixiang, set up an ambush between the villages, and sent three hundred cavalrymen to approach Liang's camp.

古文：王景仁悉其众结阵而来，德威转战而退，汴军因而乘之，至于鄗邑南。
现代文：王景仁带全部人马结阵而来，周德威转战而退，梁军乘势赶来，一直追到高阝邑南边。
English: Wang Jingren brought all the men and horses to form a line, Zhou Dewei turned to fight and retreated, Liang's army took advantage of the situation and chased them all the way to the south of Gaojun.

古文：时步军未成列，德威阵骑河上以抗之。
现代文：这时步兵没有排成阵列，周德威在黄河边上用骑兵列阵抵抗。
English: At this time, the infantry did not form an array, and Zhou Dewei resisted with a cavalry array on the edge of the Yellow River.

古文：亭午，两军皆阵，庄宗问战时，德威曰： 汴军气盛，可以劳逸制之，造次较力，殆难与敌。
现代文：中午时，两军排好阵势，庄宗问出战时机，周德威说： 汴军气盛，可以以逸待劳制服他们，如轻易与他们决战，很难抗得住。
English: At noon, the two armies lined up their positions. Zhuang Zong asked Zhou Dewei about the time to go to war. Zhou Dewei said, "The Han army is full of vigor. We can subdue them with hard work. If it is easy to fight a decisive battle with them, it will be difficult to resist.

古文：古者师行不逾一舍，盖虑粮饷不给，士有饥色。
现代文：古时行军一天不超过三十里，因为担心粮食供应不上，士兵饥饿。
English: In ancient times, soldiers marched no more than thirty miles a day, because they were afraid that food supplies would not be available and soldiers would go hungry.

古文：今贼远来决战，纵挟糗Я，亦不遑食。
现代文：现在敌人从远方赶来决战，即使带了干粮，也顾不上吃。
English: Now the enemy is coming from far away to fight a decisive battle. Even if they bring dry rations, they will not be able to eat.

古文：晡晚之后，饥渴内侵，战阵外迫，士心既倦，将必求退。
现代文：天黑之后，饥渴难忍，战事又紧迫，军心既已疲倦，必然会要求退兵。
English: After dark, the hunger and thirst are unbearable, the war is urgent, and the military spirit is already tired, it will inevitably require withdrawal.

古文：乘其劳弊，以生兵制之，纵不大败，偏师必丧。
现代文：乘他们劳累，以有生兵力制服他们，纵然不能大败他们，两翼的军队也会被消灭掉。
English: Take advantage of their fatigue and subdue them with live troops. Even if you can't defeat them, the troops on both sides will be eliminated.

古文：以臣所筹，利在晡晚。 
现代文：按我的筹划，应在傍晚作战。 
English: According to my plan, the battle should begin in the evening.

古文：诸将皆然之。
现代文：诸位将军都同意他的看法。
English: The generals agree with him.

古文：时汴军以魏、博之人为右广，宋、汴之人为左广，自未至申，阵势稍却，德威麾军呼曰； 汴军走矣！ 
现代文：这时梁军用魏、博士兵为右翼，用宋、汴士兵为左翼，从下午二点到四点，阵势稍稍后退，周德威指挥大军喊道： 汴军逃跑啦！ 
English: At this time, Liang's army was on the right with Wei's army and Hebei's army, and Song's army and Yu's army were on the left. From two o'clock in the afternoon to four o'clock, the formation retreated slightly. Zhou Dewei, commanding the army, shouted: "Hebei's army has fled!"

古文：尘埃涨天，魏人收军渐退。庄宗与史建瑭、安金全等因冲其阵，夹攻之，大败汴军，杀戮殆尽；王景仁、李思安仅以身免，获将校二百八十人。
现代文：灰尘遮天，魏人收兵渐退，庄宗和史建瑭、安金全等人乘势冲其阵营，两边夹攻，大败梁军，杀戮将尽，王景仁、李思安仅得以单身逃脱，俘获将校二百八十人。
English: Dust obscured the sky, the Wei army was gradually retreating, Zhuang Zong, Shi Jianqian, An Jinquan and others took advantage of the situation to attack their camp, both sides clamped down, the Liang army was defeated, and the killing was almost over. Wang Jingren and Li Sian were only able to escape single-handedly, capturing 280 officers.

古文：八月，刘守光僭称大燕皇帝。
现代文：八月，刘守光僭称大燕皇帝。
English: In August, Liu Shouguangxuan became known as the Emperor of the Great Yan.

古文：十二月，遣德威率步骑三万出飞狐，与镇州将王德明、定州将程严等军进讨。
现代文：十二月，庄宗派周德威率步兵骑兵三万人出飞狐，和镇州将军王德明、定州将军程严等率军讨伐他。
English: In December, Zhuang Zong sent 30,000 infantry and cavalry led by Zhou Dewei to fight the flying fox, and the army led by Zhenzhou General Wang Deming and Dingzhou General Cheng Yan to fight him.

古文：九年正月，收涿州，降刺史刘知温。
现代文：九年一月，收复涿州，降服刺史刘知温。
English: In January of the ninth year, he recovered Bozhou and subdued Liu Zhiwen.

古文：五月七日，刘守光令骁将单廷珪督精甲万人出战，德威遇于龙头岗。
现代文：五月七日，刘守光派骁将单廷王圭带一万精兵出战，周德威在龙头岗与他相遇。
English: On May 7th, Liu Shouguang sent Wang Gui to fight with ten thousand soldiers. Zhou Dewei met him at Longtonggang.

古文：初，廷珪谓左右曰： 今日擒周阳五。 
现代文：起初，单廷王圭对身边人说 ：今天活捉周阳五。 
English: At first, Wang Gui Shan Ting said to those around him, "Today, we will capture Zhou Yang Wu alive."

古文：既临阵，见德威，廷珪单骑持枪躬追德威，垂及，德威侧身避之，廷珪少退，德威奋楇南坠其马，生获廷珪，贼党大败，斩首三千级，获大将李山海等五十二人。
现代文：临阵以后，看见周德威，单廷王圭单枪匹马追杀周德威，快追上了，周德威侧身避开，单廷王圭稍稍后退，周德威挥木过把他打下马，活捉单廷王圭，敌军大败，斩首三千级，俘虏大将李山海等五十二人。
English: After the battle, seeing Zhou Dewei, Wang Gui Shan Ting single-handedly chased and killed Zhou Dewei, and soon caught up with him. Zhou Dewei sidestepped, Wang Gui Shan Ting retreated a little, Zhou Dewei waved a piece of wood to knock him off his horse, and captured Wang Gui Shan Ting alive. The enemy army suffered a great defeat, beheaded 3,000 ranks, and captured 52 people such as General Li Shanhai.

古文：十二日，德威自涿州进军良乡、大城。
现代文：十二日，周德威从涿州进军到良乡、大城。
English: On the 12th, Zhou Dewei marched from Bozhou to Liangxiang and Dacheng.

古文：守光既失廷珪，自是夺气。
现代文：刘守光失去单廷王圭，从此丧失势力。
English: Liu Shouguang lost Shanting Wang Gui and lost his power.

古文：德威之师，屡收诸郡，降者相继。
现代文：周德威的军队，收复许多郡城，前来投降的人不断。
English: Zhou Dewei's army recaptured many county towns, and people kept coming to surrender.

古文：十年十一月，擒守光父子，幽州平。
现代文：十年十一月，擒获刘守光父子，平定幽州。
English: In November of the 10th year, Liu Shouguang and his son were captured and Yuzhou was pacified.

古文：十二月，授德威检校侍中、幽州卢龙等军节度使。
现代文：十二月，授予周德威检校侍中、幽州卢龙等军节度使。
English: In December, Zhou Dewei was awarded the title of junior attendant of the inspection school, and Yuzhou Lulong was awarded the title of military envoy.

古文：德威性忠孝，感武皇奖遇，尝思临难忘身。
现代文：周德威生性忠孝，感念武皇的褒扬恩遇，总想临难献身。
English: Zhou Dewei was a loyal and filial son. He was moved by Emperor Wu's praise for him, and always wanted to devote himself to him in the face of difficulties.

古文：十二月，汴将刘鄩自洹水乘虚将寇太原，德威在幽州闻之，径以五百骑驰入土门，闻鄩军至乐平不进，德威径至南宫以候汴军。
现代文：十二年，梁将刘寻阝从洹水乘虚准备侵入太原，周德威在幽州听说后，直接率五百骑兵进入土门，听说刘寻阝军队到乐平后不再前进，周德威就赶到南宫等候梁军。
English: In the twelfth year, Liang sent Liu Xun to take advantage of the opportunity to invade Taiyuan from Surabaya. After Zhou Dewei heard about it in Yuzhou, he directly led five hundred cavalry into Dumen. When he heard that Liu Xun's army would not advance after reaching Leping, Zhou Dewei rushed to the South Palace to wait for Liang's army.

古文：初，刘鄩欲据临清以扼镇、定转饷之路，行次陈宋口，德威遣将擒数十人，皆倳刃于背，絷而遣之。
现代文：起初，刘寻阝想占据临清以扼住镇、定二地运送粮饷的道路，行军到陈宋口，周德威派将军擒获几十人，都在背上砍了一刀，捆住后放掉。
English: At first, Liu Huanqian wanted to occupy Linqing in order to strangle the town and the road transporting grain and straw in Dingyi, marching to Chen Songkou. Zhou Dewei sent a general to capture dozens of people, all of whom were knifed in the back, tied up and released.

古文：既至，谓刘鄩曰： 周侍中已据宗城矣！ 
现代文：他们回去后对刘寻阝说： 周侍中已占据临清了。 
English: After they returned, they said to Liu Xingyao: Zhou Zhizhong has occupied Linqing.

古文：德威其夜急骑扼临清，刘鄩乃入贝州。
现代文：周德威晚上急行军扼守临清，刘寻阝只得进入贝州。
English: In the evening, Zhou Dewei made an express march to defend Linqing, and Liu Xingyao had no choice but to enter Bechu.

古文：是时德威若不至，则胜负不可知也。
现代文：这时周德威如不赶到临清，胜负就很难说了。
English: At this time, if Zhou Dewei did not arrive in Linqing, it would be difficult to say whether he would win or lose.

古文：十四年三月，契丹寇新州，德威不利，退保范阳。
现代文：天祐十四年三月，契丹侵犯新州，周德威失利，退保范阳。
English: In March of the 14th year of Tianyu, the Khitan invaded Xinzhou, Zhou Dewei lost, and Fan Yang was released.

古文：《辽史·太祖纪》：神册二年三月辛亥，攻幽州，节度使周德威以幽、并、镇、定、魏五州兵拒战于居庸关之西，战于新州东，大破之，斩首三万级。又，《通鉴》：契丹主帅众三十万，德威众寡不敌，大为契丹所败。敌众攻仅二百日，外援未至，德威抚循士众，昼夜乘城，竟获保守。十五年，我师营麻口渡，将大举以定汴州。
现代文：敌人攻城有二百天，外边援军没到，周德威安慰士兵，昼夜登城，最终保住该城。十五年，晋军在麻口渡扎营，准备大举用兵平定汴州。
English: The enemy besieged the city for two hundred days, and reinforcements from abroad did not arrive. Zhou Dewei consoled the soldiers, climbed the city day and night, and finally secured the city. For fifteen years, the Jin army camped at Maguchowo, preparing to use a large number of soldiers to pacify Zhangzhou.

古文：德威自幽州率本军至。十二月二十三日，军次胡柳陂。
现代文：周德威从幽州率军赶到，十二月二十三日，进军到胡柳陂。
English: Zhou Dewei arrived from Yuzhou at the head of the army, and on December 23rd, he marched into Huliuwei.

古文：诘旦，骑报曰； 汴军至矣！ 
现代文：天亮时，骑兵报告说： 梁军来了。 
English: At dawn, the cavalry reported: Liang's army is coming.

古文：庄宗使问战备，德威奏曰： 贼倍道而来，未成营垒，我营栅已固，守备有余，既深入贼疆，须决万全之策。
现代文：庄宗询问怎么作战，周德威说： 敌人兼程赶来，营垒还没修好，我军营地已很牢固，守备绰绰有余，既然要深入敌人疆土，必须想好一个万全之策。
English: Zhuangzong asked how to fight, Zhou Dewei said: The enemy has come all the way, the camp has not yet been repaired, our army camp is already very strong, the defense is more than enough, since we want to go deep into the enemy's territory, we must think of a perfect plan.

古文：此去大梁信宿，贼之家属，尽在其间，人之常情，孰不以家国为念？
现代文：从这里去大梁要两夜时间，敌人的家属，都在那里，人之常情，谁不会挂念家国？
English: It takes two nights to get from here to Dalian. The enemy's family members are all there. It's human nature. Who wouldn't miss their home country?

古文：以我深入之众，抗彼激愤之军，不以方略制之，恐难必胜。
现代文：以我深入敌境之军，抗击激烈愤怒之敌，如不以策略对付，恐怕很难一定取胜。
English: If I go deep into the enemy territory with my army and fight against the fierce and angry enemy, if I don't deal with it strategically, I'm afraid it will be difficult to win.

古文：王但按军保栅，臣以骑军疲之，使彼不得下营，际晚，粮饷不给，进退无据，因以乘之，破贼之道也。 
现代文：王只须按军不动保住营垒，我用骑兵疲扰敌人，使他们不得扎营，到晚上，粮饷供应不上，进退不得，这时乘势攻击，这就是破敌的办法。 
English: The king only has to hold the camp by the army, I use the cavalry to exhaust the enemy, so that they can not camp. In the evening, the grain can not be supplied, and it is impossible to advance and retreat. At this time, take advantage of the situation and attack. This is the way to defeat the enemy.

古文：庄宗曰： 河上终日挑战，恨不遇贼，今款门不战，非壮夫也！ 
现代文：庄宗说 ：我们在黄河边上天天挑战，恨不得早点与敌交战，现在闭门不战，不是壮夫所为。 
English: Zhuangzong said, "We challenge each other on the Yellow River every day. We wish we could have engaged the enemy earlier. Now, not fighting behind closed doors is not the act of a strong man."

古文：乃率亲军成列而出，德威不获已，从之。
现代文：便率亲军排列出战，周德威没办法，只好随从。
English: He then led the pro-army platoon into battle. Zhou Dewei had no choice but to follow.

古文：谓其子曰： 吾不知其死所矣！ 
现代文：他对自己儿子说： 我不知会死在哪里了。 
English: "I don't know where I'm going to die," he told his son.

古文：庄宗与汴将王彦章接战，大败之。
现代文：庄宗与梁将王彦章交战，大败梁军。
English: Zhuozong fought with Liang general Wang Yanzhang and defeated Liang's army.

古文：德威之军在东偏，汴之游军入我辎重，众骇，奔入德威军，因纷扰无行列。
现代文：周德威的军队在东边，梁军的游击部队袭击晋军辎重，众人惊骇，逃进周德威军中，因而混乱不成队列。
English: Zhou Dewei's army was in the east, and the guerrilla forces of Liang's army attacked the Jin army heavily. Everyone was shocked and fled into Zhou Dewei's army, causing chaos and not forming a queue.

古文：德威兵少，不能解，父子俱战殁。
现代文：周德威的兵少，不能解除混乱，父子都一起战死。
English: Zhou Dewei's soldiers were few and could not resolve the confusion. Both father and son died in the battle.

古文：先是，镇星犯上将，星占者云，不利大将。
现代文：在这之前，镇星犯上将，占星者说 ：对大将不利。 
English: Prior to this, the town star offends the general, the astrologer says: unfavorable to the general.

古文：是夜收军，德威不至，庄宗恸哭谓诸将曰： 丧我良将，吾之咎也！ 
现代文：这天晚上收兵，周德威就再没回来，庄宗痛哭着对诸将说： 丧失我的良将，是我的过错呀。 
English: That evening, when the troops were called back, Zhou Dewei did not return. Zhuang Zong cried bitterly and said to the generals: "It was my fault that I lost my good general."

古文：德威身长面黑，笑不改容，凡对敌列阵，凛廪然有肃杀之风。中兴之朝，号为名将。
现代文：周德威身高脸黑，笑的时候也不改容，每次列阵对敌，凛凛然有肃杀之气，中兴时期，号称名将。
English: Zhou Dewei is tall with a dark face, and he doesn't change his appearance when he smiles. Every time he lines up against an opponent, he has a stern demeanor. During the ZTE period, he was known as a famous player.

古文：及其殁也，人皆惜之。
现代文：他死时，人人都叹惜。
English: Everyone was sad when he died.

古文：同光初，追赠太师。
现代文：同光初年，追赠太师。
English: In the first year of his apprenticeship, he was posthumously awarded the title of grandmaster.

古文：天成中，诏与李嗣昭、符存审配飨庄宗庙廷。
现代文：天成中，下诏把他与李嗣昭、符存审一起配飨庄宗庙廷。
English: In the middle of Tiancheng, the emperor decreed that he and Li Shizhao and Fu Cunxi should be assigned to the temple court of the Shanzhuang Patriarchate.

古文：盖存审子彦卿有女为宋太宗后，故存其本姓也。旧名存。
现代文：晋高祖即位后，追封为燕王。儿子周光辅，历任汾州、汝州刺史。符存审，字德详，陈州宛丘人，原名符存。
English: After Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, he was posthumously named King of the Yan. His son, Zhou Guangfu, successively served as the governor of Zhangzhou and Ruzhou. His name survives, his character is known, he was from Wanchiu in Chenzhou, and his original name survives.

古文：父楚，本州牙将。
现代文：父亲符楚，任本州牙将。
English: His father, Fuchu, served as Honshu dental officer.

古文：存审少豪侠，多智算，言兵家事。
现代文：符存审少年时有豪侠气概，多智谋，常谈论兵家战事。
English: When he was a young man, he had a heroic and chivalrous spirit, was resourceful, and often talked about military affairs.

古文：乾符末，河南盗起，存审鸠率豪右，庇捍州里。
现代文：乾符末年，黄河以南出现强盗，符存审纠集豪强，保护乡里。
English: At the end of the Qianfu era, a bandit appeared south of the Yellow River. He gathered powerful warriors to protect the countryside.

古文：会郡人李罕之起自群盗，授光州刺史，因往依之。
现代文：此时本郡人李罕之从强盗发家，授予光州刺史，因而前往依附他。
English: At this time, Li Hanzhi, a native of this county, who had made his fortune as a robber, was awarded the title of Gwangju Prince and went to join him.

古文：中和末，罕之为蔡寇所逼，弃郡投诸葛爽；存审从至河阳，为小校，屡战蔡贼有功。
现代文：中和末年，李罕之被蔡州军逼迫，放弃郡城投奔诸葛爽，符存审跟着到河阳，任小校，屡次与蔡军作战有功。
English: In the middle and late years, Li Hanzhi was forced by the Caizhou Army to give up the county seat and go to Zhuge Shuang. He was followed by Fu Cunxuan to Kheyang, where he served as a schoolmaster and repeatedly fought against the Cai Army.

古文：诸葛爽卒，罕之为其部将所逼，出保怀州，部下分散，存审乃归于武皇。
现代文：诸葛爽死后，李罕之被部将逼迫，出守怀州，部下分散，符存审便归顺武皇。
English: After Zhuge Shuang's death, Li Han's subordinates were persecuted. Li Han's subordinates were dispersed to defend Huai Zhou, and the remaining cases were handed over to Emperor Shunwu.

古文：武皇署右职，令典义兒军，赐姓名。
现代文：武皇授任他右职，令他掌管义儿军，赐给姓名。
English: Emperor Wu appointed him to the right position, put him in charge of the righteous army, and gave him a new name.

古文：存审性谨厚，宠遇日隆，自是武皇西征，存审常从，所至立功。
现代文：符存审谨慎厚重，一天比一天受宠，从此武皇西征，符存审经常跟从，每次都立功。
English: Since the Western Expedition of the Emperor Wu, Fu Cunxiu has always followed, and has made great contributions every time.

古文：从讨赫连铎，冒刃死战，血流盈袖，武皇手自封疮，日夕临问。
现代文：跟从讨伐赫连铎，顶着刀刃死战，鲜血流满袖子，武皇亲自为他治疗，每天询问伤情。
English: Following the crusade of Hereng Yao, he fought to the death with a sword, his sleeves were full of blood. Emperor Wu personally treated him and inquired about his injuries every day.

古文：乾宁初，讨李匡俦，存审前军拔居庸关。
现代文：乾宁初年，讨伐李匡俦，符存审的前军攻下居庸关。
English: In the first year of Qianning, he fought against Li Kuangyao, and the former army, which was still under investigation, captured Juyongguan.

古文：明年，从讨邠州，时邠之劲兵屯龙泉寨，四面悬崖，石壁险固，存审奋力拔之。
现代文：第二年，跟从讨伐州，这时州的劲兵驻在龙泉寨，四面悬崖，石壁险固，符存审奋力攻下。
English: In the second year, he followed the crusade against the state. At that time, the strong soldiers of the state were stationed in Longquan Village, with cliffs on all sides, and the stone walls were nearly solid.

古文：师还，授检校左仆射。
现代文：回师后，授予检校左仆射。
English: After returning to his teacher, he was awarded the inspection school left-handed shooting.

古文：副李嗣昭讨李瑭于汾州，擒之，以功改左右厢步军都指挥使。
现代文：辅佐李嗣昭到汾州讨伐李瑭，擒获了他，以军功改任左右厢步军都指挥使。
English: Li Shizhao, an aide, went to Zhangzhou to fight against Li Xi, captured him, and was appointed commander of the left and right wing infantry with military merit.

古文：天祐三年，授蕃汉马步副指挥使，与李嗣昭降丁会于上党，从周德威破贼于夹城，加检校司徒，授忻州刺史，领蕃汉马步都指挥使。
现代文：天祐三年，授予蕃汉马步副指挥使，与李嗣昭在上党降伏丁会，随从周德威在夹城破敌，加授检校司徒，授忻州刺史，任蕃汉马步军都指挥使。
English: In the third year of Tian Yu's reign, he was awarded the title of deputy commander of the Qianhan Horse March, and he and Li Shizhao surrendered to the Dinghui in the upper party, followed Zhou Dewi to defeat the enemy in the middle of the city, awarded the title of inspector of the school, awarded the title of Qianzhou stabbing history, and served as the commander of the Qianhan Horse March Army.

古文：七年，加检校太保，充蕃汉副总管。
现代文：七年，加授检校太保、兼蕃汉副总管。
English: In the seventh year, he was additionally awarded the title of inspector of schools, and also became the vice-governor of Shuhan.

古文：庄宗击汴人于柏乡，留存审守太原。
现代文：庄宗在柏乡攻击梁军，留下符存审守卫太原。
English: Zhuang Zong attacked Liang's army in Baixiang, leaving Fu Xun to guard Taiyuan.

古文：三月，代李存璋戍赵州。
现代文：三月，代替李存璋守卫赵州。
English: In March, he replaced Li Cunxu to guard Zhaozhou.

古文：九年，梁祖攻蓚县，存审与史建瑭、李嗣肱赴援，屯下博桥，汴人惊乱，烧营而遁，以功遥领邢、洺、磁团练使。
现代文：九年，梁太祖进攻县，符存审与史建瑭、李嗣肱赶去援救，驻扎在下博桥，梁人惊乱，焚烧营地逃走，因军功遥任邢、氵名、磁州团练使。
English: In the ninth year, Liang Taizu attacked the county, Fu Cunxin and Shi Jiankun and Li Shizhu rushed to the rescue, stationed in Shibo Bridge, Liang people panicked, burned the camp and fled, and because of his military exploits, he was appointed as the commander, commander, and magnetic state group training envoy.

古文：十二年，魏博归款于庄宗，遣存审率前锋据临清，以俟进取。
现代文：天祐十二年，魏博与庄宗讲和。庄宗派符存审率前锋占据临清，等候进军。
English: In the twelfth year of Tianyu, Wei Bo made peace with Zhuang Zong. The advance guard of the Zhuang Zong faction occupied Linqing, waiting to march.

古文：庄宗入魏，存审屯魏县以抗刘鄩。
现代文：庄宗入魏州，符存审驻在魏县以抵抗刘寻阝。
English: Zhuangzong entered Weizhou, and Fucheng stationed in Weixian to resist Liu Xun.

古文：六月，鄩营莘县，存审与镇、定之师营莘西三十里，一日数战。
现代文：六月，刘寻阝在莘县扎营，符存审与镇州、定州的军队在莘县西边三十里处扎营，一天交战数次。
English: In June, Liu Huanqian encamped in Jixian County, and the army of Fuxun and Zhenzhou and Dingzhou encamped 30 miles west of Jixian County, and fought several times a day.

古文：八月，率师攻张源德于贝州。
现代文：八月，率兵在贝州进攻张源德。
English: In August, he led an army to attack Zhang Yuande in Beizhou.

古文：十三年二月，刘鄩自莘悉众来袭我魏州，存审以大军踵其后，战于故元城，大败汴人，从收澶、卫、磁、洺等州。
现代文：十三年二月，刘寻阝从莘县带全部人马来袭击魏州，符存审率大军跟踪在后面，在故元城交战，大败梁军，收复澶、卫、磁、氵名等州。
English: In February of the 13th year, Liu Huanqian attacked Weizhou from Min County with all men and horses, followed by a large number of troops. They fought in the former Yuancheng, defeated Liang's army, and recovered Min, Wei, Magneto, and Yunnan.

古文：秋，邢州阎宝降，授存审安国军节度、邢洺磁等州观察使。
现代文：秋天，邢州阎宝投降，授予符存审安国军节度使，邢、氵名、磁等州观察使。
English: In autumn, Zhangzhou Yanbao surrendered, awarding Fu Cun, Jian An, and the National Army with the status of festival envoys, and Zhang, Shennai, Magnet and other states with the status of observation envoys.

古文：十月，戴思远弃沧州，毛璋以城降，授存审检校太傅、横海军节度使，兼领魏博马步军都指挥使。
现代文：十月，戴思远放弃沧州，毛璋献城投降，授予符存审检校太傅、横海军节度使，兼领魏博马步军都指挥使。
English: In October, Dai Siyuan gave up Cangzhou, Mao Dun surrendered the city, and awarded Fu Cun as the inspector of the school, the commander of the navy, and the commander of the Wei Boma marching army.

古文：明年，就加平章事。
现代文：第二年，加封平章事。
English: In the second year, he was awarded a posthumous title.

古文：十四年八月，将兵援周德威于幽州，败契丹之众。
现代文：天祐十四年八月，符存审带兵到幽州援助周德威，打败契丹众兵。
English: In August of the 14th year of Tianyu, Fu Cunxun led soldiers to Yuzhou to assist Zhou Dewei and defeat the Qidan soldiers.

古文：冬，破汴将安彦之于杨刘，诸军进营麻口。
现代文：冬天，在杨刘打败梁将安彦之，各军进军驻扎在麻口。
English: In winter, after Yang Liu defeated Liang's general, An Yan, the armies marched into and were stationed in Magou.

古文：时梁将谢彦章营行台村，庄宗勇于接战，每以轻骑当之，遇窘者数四。
现代文：此时梁将谢彦章在行台村扎营，庄宗勇于作战，常常亲自以轻骑出战，好几次碰上困境。
English: At this time, Liang camped Xie Yan Zhang in Xingtai Village. Zhuo Zong fought bravely, often riding out to battle on horseback, and several times ran into difficulties.

古文：存审每俟其出，必叩马谏曰： 王将复唐宗社，宜为天下自爱，搴旗挑战，一剑之任，无益圣德，请责效于臣。
现代文：符存审每次看到他出去，必拦住马劝说道： 大王打算复兴唐朝社稷，应该为天下着想而爱护自己，举旗挑战，挥剑上阵，对圣德没有益处，请看臣等做出成效。
English: Whenever Fu Cunxiu saw him go out, he would stop his horse to persuade him, saying, "The great king intends to revive the Tang Dynasty, and he should cherish himself for the sake of the world, raise a banner to challenge, and wave a sword to go into battle. It is not beneficial to virtue. Please wait for your vassals to produce results.

古文：古人不以贼遗君父，臣虽不武，敢不代君之忧。 
现代文：古人不让敌人接近君父，我虽然不勇武，但不敢不担代君王之忧。 
English: The ancients did not allow the enemy to approach the monarch. Although I am not brave, I do not dare not to bear the worries of the monarch.

古文：庄宗及时回驾。
现代文：庄宗立刻回去。
English: Zhuangzong immediately went back.

古文：十二月，战于胡柳。晡晚之后，存审引所部银枪效节军，败梁军于土山下。
现代文：十二月，在胡柳作战，天黑之后，符存审带所管的银枪效节军，在土山下打败梁军。
English: In December, in the battle of Hu Liu, after dark, the Silver-Gun Effectiveness Army under the jurisdiction of the Consistent Examination Zone defeated the Liang Army under the soil mountain.

古文：是日辰巳间，周德威战殁，一军逗挠，梁军四集，存审与其子彦图冒刃血战，出没贼阵，与庄宗军合。
现代文：这天上午，周德威战死，全军停滞不动，梁军从四面汇集，符存审和他儿子符彦图冒着刀锋血战，出没于敌阵，与庄宗的军队会合。
English: On the morning of this day, Zhou Dewei was killed in battle, the whole army was at a standstill, Liang's army gathered from all sides, Fu Cunxin and his son Fu Yantu braved the bloody battle of the blade, haunted the enemy lines, and met with Zhuangzong's army.

古文：午后，师复集，击败汴人。
现代文：午后，部队再次汇集，击败梁军。
English: In the afternoon, the troops gathered again and defeated Liang's army.

古文：十六年春，代周德威为内外蕃汉马步总管，于德胜口筑南北城以据之。
现代文：天祐十六年春，符存审接替周德威任内外蕃汉马步军总管，在德胜口修筑南北城据守。
English: In the spring of 16th year of Tenyu, he succeeded Zhou Dewei as the general manager of the Han horse marching army at home and abroad, and built the north and south city fortifications in Deshengkou.

古文：七月，汴将王瓚自黎阳渡河寇澶州，存审拒战，瓚退，营于杨村渡，控我上游。
现代文：七月，梁将王瓒从黎阳渡黄河侵入澶州，符存审抵抗，王瓒退兵，在杨村渡扎营，控制上游。
English: In July, Liang sent Wang Hui from Liyang to cross the Yellow River and invade Ganzhou. Wang Hui withdrew his troops and set up camp at Yangcundui to control the upstream.

古文：自是日与交锋，对垒经年，大小凡百余战。
现代文：从此每天交战，相互对垒一年多，大小战斗一百多次。
English: Since then, they have been fighting every day, opposing each other for more than a year, and fighting more than a hundred times.

古文：十七年，汴将刘鄩攻同州，硃友谦求援于我，遣存审与李嗣昭将兵赴之。
现代文：天祐十七年，梁将刘寻阝进攻同州，朱友谦向晋军求援，庄宗派符存审和李嗣昭带兵援助。
English: In the seventeenth year of Tianyu, Liang attacked Liu Huanqian in Tongzhou, Zhu Youqian asked the Jin army for help, Zhuang Sect followers and Li Shizhao led troops to help.

古文：九月，次河中，进营朝邑。
现代文：九月，到河中，在朝邑扎营。
English: In September, they went to the middle of the river and camped in the morning.

古文：时河中久臣于梁，众持两端，及诸军大集，刍粟暴贵，嗣昭惧其翻覆，将急战以定胜负。
现代文：此时河中对梁帝称臣已很久，众人两头讨好，各军大量涌来，粮价暴涨，李嗣昭担心他们反复，准备急战决定胜负。
English: At this time, Kechu had been a vassal of Emperor Liang for a long time. Everyone was trying to please both sides. The armies were coming in large numbers, and grain prices were skyrocketing. Li Shizhao was worried that they would do it again and again, and was preparing for a quick battle to decide the outcome.

古文：居旬日，梁军逼我营。
现代文：过了十几天，梁军逼近晋军营地。
English: After a dozen days, Liang's army approached the Jin camp.

古文：会望气者言，西南黑气如斗鸡之状，当有战阵，存审曰： 我方欲决战，而形于气象，得非天赞欤！ 
现代文：观察天象的人说，西南有黑气像斗鸡形状，会有战事发生。符存审说： 我方准备决战，而且表现在天象，这不是得到上天赞许了吗！ 
English: The person observing the celestial object said that there was a black atmosphere in the southwest like the shape of a cockfight, and there would be a battle. Fu Cunxi said: Our side is preparing for a decisive battle, and it is manifested in the celestial object. Isn't this approved by heaven!

古文：是夜，阅其众，诘旦进军。
现代文：这天夜里，检阅部队，天亮进军。
English: That night, the troops were reviewed and marched out at dawn.

古文：梁军来逆战，大败之，追斩二千余级。
现代文：梁军来迎战，大败梁军，追杀二千多人。
English: Liang's army came to fight, defeated Liang's army, and killed more than two thousand people.

古文：自是梁军保垒不出。
现代文：从此梁军守住营垒不出。
English: Since then, Liang's army has remained encamped.

古文：十八年，王师讨张文礼于镇州，李嗣昭、李存进相次战殁。
现代文：天祐十八年，晋军到镇州讨伐张文礼，李嗣昭、李存进相继战死。
English: In the 18th year of Tianyu, the Jin army went to Zhenzhou to fight against Zhang Wenli, and Li Shizhao and Li Cunjin were killed one after another.

古文：十九年，遣存审率师进攻叛帅于城下，文礼之将李再丰阴送款于存审，我师中夜登城，擒文礼之子处球等，露布以献。镇州平，以功加检校太傅、兼侍中。
现代文：十九年，庄宗派符存审率师进攻叛军到镇州城下，张文礼的将军李再丰暗地与符存审讲和，晋军半夜登城，抓获张文礼之子张处球等人，献上捷报，镇州平定，以军功加授检校太傅、兼侍中。
English: In the 19th year, Zhuang Sect's Fu Cunxin led the division to attack the rebel army to the city of Zhenzhou. Zhang Wenli's general Li Zaifeng secretly negotiated with Fu Cunxin, and the Jin army entered the city in the middle of the night, captured Zhang Wenli's son Zhang Duanqiu and others, presented a successful report, and conquered Zhenzhou. He was awarded the title of "school inspector" and "chamberlain" for his military service.

古文：二十年正月，师还于魏州，庄宗出城迎劳，就第宴乐。
现代文：天祐二十年一月，军队回到魏州，庄宗出城迎接慰劳，到府第设宴庆贺。
English: In January of the 20th year of Tianyu, the army returned to Weizhou, Zhuangzong went out of the city to meet the consolation, and set up a banquet to celebrate.

古文：无何，契丹犯燕蓟，郭崇韬奏曰： 汴寇未平，继韬背叛，北边捍御，非存审不可。 
现代文：没多久，契丹侵犯燕蓟，郭崇韬报告说 ：汴州之敌没有消灭，李继韬又背叛我们，防御北边的侵犯，非符存审不可。 
English: Not long after, the Khitan invaded Yan'an, and Guo Chongyi reported: "The enemy of Zhangzhou has not been eliminated. Li Jizhe has betrayed us again. To defend against the invasion from the north, it is necessary to have a trial.

古文：上遣中使谕之，存审卧病羸瘠，附奏曰： 臣效忠禀命，靡敢为辞，但疴恙缠绵，未堪祗役。 
现代文：庄宗派朝中使者告知此事，符存审卧病虚弱，附奏说： 臣效忠听从命令，从没有拒绝过，但疾病缠身，不能从征。 
English: An emissary of the Zhuang Sect of the CPC and the CPC Central Committee reported the matter, saying that he was weak due to a lingering illness, and added: "The vassal is loyal and obeys orders, and has never refused, but he is riddled with illness and cannot follow the enlistment."

古文：既而诏存审以本官充幽州卢龙节度使，自镇州之任。
现代文：不久诏令符存审以本官兼任幽州卢龙军节度使，自镇州前往赴任。
English: Soon after the imperial edict was issued, he was appointed as the official of the Yuzhou Lulong Army, and went to the post from Zhenzhou.

古文：同光初，加开府仪同三司、检校太师、中书令、食邑千户，赐号忠烈扶天启运功臣。
现代文：同光初年，加开府仪同三司、检校太师、中书令、食邑千户，赐号忠烈扶天启运功臣。
English: In the first year of Tongguang, he was awarded the title of "Faithful Servant of Heaven," and was given the titles of the Third Division of the Kaifu Rites, the Third Division of the Inspection of Schools, the Third Division of the Chinese Calligraphy, and the First Division of the Chinese Cuisine.

古文：十月，平梁，迁都洛阳。
现代文：十月，消灭了梁朝，将首都迁到洛阳。
English: In October, the Liang Dynasty was eliminated and the capital was moved to Luoyang.

古文：存审以身为大将，不得预收复中原之功，旧疾愈作，坚求入觐寻医，以情告郭崇韬。时崇韬自负一时，佐命之功，无出己右，功名事望，素在存审之下，权势既隆，人士辐凑，不欲存审加于己上，每有章奏求觐，即阴沮之。
现代文：符存审因自己身为大将，不能参予收复中原的战斗，旧病复发，坚决要求进京寻求医治，将情况告诉郭崇韬，此时郭崇韬十分自负，辅佐之功，没有超过他的，功名威望本来一直在符存审之下，现在权势大了，别人都趋附于他，不想让符存审压在自己上面，每当有奏章求见，便暗中阻拦。
English: Because he was a general, he could not participate in the battle to recover the Central Plains, and his old illness recurred. He resolutely requested to go to Beijing to seek treatment and told Guo Chongyi about the situation. At this time, Guo Chongyi was very conceited. He did not surpass him in the role of assistant. His reputation and prestige had always been under him. Now his power is great. Others are attached to him. They do not want to let Fu Cunxin press down on themselves. Whenever there is a petition for an opinion, they secretly block it.

古文：存审妻郭氏泣诉于崇韬曰： 吾夫于国，粗效驱驰，与公乡里亲旧，公忍令死弃北荒，何无情之如是！ 
现代文：符存审妻子郭氏对郭崇韬哭着说 ：我丈夫对国家，征战效力；和您是同乡亲旧，您忍心让他死在北边荒地，怎么如此无情呢！ 
English: Fu Cunxin's wife, Ms. Guo, cried to Guo Chongyao and said: My husband's contribution to the country and the war effort; and you are a fellow villager, you have the heart to let him die in the northern wasteland, how can you be so ruthless!

古文：崇韬益惭戁。
现代文：郭崇韬更加惭愧恐惧。
English: Guo Chongyao was even more ashamed and afraid.

古文：明年春，疾甚，上章恳切，乞生觐天颜，不许。
现代文：第二年春天，符存审病情严重，恳切上奏，请求让活着见到皇上，不允许。
English: In the spring of the following year, Fu Cunxiu, seriously ill, earnestly appealed to be allowed to see the emperor alive, but was not allowed.

古文：存审伏枕而叹曰： 老夫历事二主，垂四十年，幸而遇今日天下一家，远夷极塞，皆得面觐彤墀，射钩斩祛之人，孰不奉觞丹陛，独予壅隔，岂非命哉！ 
现代文：符存审伏枕叹道： 老夫侍从两位主人，近四十年，有幸遇上现在天下统一为一家，边远的人都能回到京城，过去的敌人也无不在宫中任职，只有我与皇上隔绝，岂不是命运造成的！ 
English: Fuxun Xiufu sighed, "As an old man who has served two masters for nearly forty years, I am fortunate to encounter a world that is now united as one family. People from far away can return to the capital, and enemies from the past are all serving in the palace. Only I am isolated from the emperor. Isn't this caused by fate?"

古文：渐增危笃，崇韬奏请许存审入觐。
现代文：病情渐渐危急，郭崇韬奏请允许符存审进见。
English: The condition of the patient gradually became critical. Guo Chongyao asked for permission to examine the patient's condition.

古文：四月，制授存审宣武军节度使、诸道蕃汉马步总管。诏未至，五月十五日卒于幽州官舍，时年六十三，遗命葬太原。
现代文：四月，诏令符存审为宣武军节度使，诸道蕃汉马步军总管，诏书还没到，符存审就在五月十五日死于幽州官舍，时年六十三岁，留下遗言葬于太原。
English: In April, he was appointed as the commander of the Xuanwu army and the general manager of the Han horse-marching army. Before the edict arrived, he died in the Yuzhou government house on May 15 at the age of 63, leaving his last words to be buried in Taiyuan.

古文：存审遗奏陈叙不得面觐，词旨凄惋。
现代文：符存审留下遗奏，陈述不能面见皇上，词句凄惋。
English: The examination of the surviving notes left a legacy, the statement could not meet the emperor, and the words were terrible.

古文：庄宗震悼久之，废朝三日，赠尚书令。
现代文：庄宗震惊哀悼很久，停止上朝三天，赠尚书令。
English: Shozong was shocked and mourned for a long time. He stopped praying for three days and gave Shang a written order.

古文：存审少在军中，识机知变，行军出师，法令严明，决策制胜，从无遗悔，功名与周德威相匹，皆近代之良将也。
现代文：符存审少年时在军中，识机知变，行军作战，法令严明，决策取胜，从没有留下遗憾，功名和周德威相匹配，都是近代的良将。
English: When he was a teenager in the army, he was quick-witted, marched in battle, had strict laws and regulations, made decisions to win, and never left any regrets. His achievements match those of Zhou Dewei. They are all modern good generals.

古文：常戒诸子曰： 予本寒家，少小携一剑而违乡里，四十年间，位极将相。
现代文：他常常告诫几个儿子说 ：我本是寒微之人，小时候携一剑离开乡里，四十年间，位到将相。
English: He often admonished several of his sons, saying, "I am originally a cold-hearted person. When I was a child, I left the countryside with a sword. In forty years, I became a shogun.

古文：其间屯危患难，履锋冒刃，入万死而无一生，身方及此，前后中矢仅百余。 
现代文：这中间危急患难，冲锋陷阵，入万死而无一生，才有现在这个地位，前后中箭就有一百多处。 
English: In the midst of this, there are more than a hundred arrows flying back and forth, from crisis to crisis, from charge to charge, from death to life.

古文：乃出镞以示诸子，因以奢侈为戒。
现代文：拿出箭头给儿子们看，以此戒除奢侈。
English: Take out the arrows and show them to your sons as a way to cut back on extravagance.

古文：存审微时，尝为俘囚，将就戮于郊外，临刑指危垣谓主者曰： 请就戮于此下，冀得坏垣覆尸，旅魂之幸也。 
现代文：符存审没成名时，曾被俘虏过，将要在郊外被处死，临刑时他指着快要倒的墙对主事人说： 请在那墙下用刑，以便将倒塌的墙能盖住我的尸体，就是我的游魂之幸。 
English: When he was sentenced to death, he pointed to a wall that was about to collapse and said to the warden, "Please carry out the sentence under that wall, so that the collapsed wall can cover my corpse. That is the happiness of my wandering soul."

古文：主者哀之，为移次焉。
现代文：主事人可怜他，给他换地方。
English: The manager took pity on him and gave him a new place.

古文：迁延之际，主将拥妓而饮，思得歌者以助欢。
现代文：延缓了这一点时间，这时主将搂着歌妓饮酒，想要一位唱歌的人为他助兴。
English: This delayed the time when the lord would drink with a courtesan and wanted a singer to entertain him.

古文：妓曰： 俘囚有符存审者，妾之旧识，每令击节，以赞歌令。 
现代文：歌妓说 ：俘虏中有个符存审，是我的旧相识，每次要他打拍子赞助歌令。 
English: The singer said, "One of the captives is an old acquaintance of mine, and every time I ask him to beat the music, he does it.

古文：主将欣然，驰骑而舍之；岂非命也！
现代文：主将很高兴，派人骑马把他救下，这难道不也是命运吗！
English: The captain was delighted, and sent a man on horseback to rescue him. Wasn't this also fate?

