古文：昔在黄帝，生而神灵，弱而能言，幼而徇齐，长而敦敏，成而登天。
现代文：从前的黄帝，生下来就很聪明，年龄很小时就善于言谈，幼年时对周围事物领会得很快，长大之后，既敦厚又勤勉，及至成年之时，登上了天子之位。
English: The former Yellow Emperor was born very clever, was good at talking when he was very young, and quickly grasped the things around him when he was young. When he grew up, he was both generous and diligent, and when he became an adult, he ascended to the position of the Son of Heaven.

古文：乃问于天师曰：余闻上古之人，春秋皆度百岁，而动作不衰；今时之人，年半百而动作皆衰者，时世异耶？人将失之耶？
现代文：他向歧伯问到：我听说上古时期的人，年龄都能超过百岁，动作不显衰老迟钝；现在的人，年龄刚至半百，动作就已经衰弱无力了，这是由于时代不同所造成的呢，还是因为现在的人们不会养生所造成的呢？
English: He asked the guru: I have heard that in ancient times, people could live to be over a hundred years old, and their movements did not show signs of senility; people today, who have just reached the age of half a hundred, already have weak and feeble movements. Is this caused by the different times, or is it caused by the fact that people today do not take care of their health?

古文：岐伯对曰：上古之人，其知道者，法于阴阳，和于术数，食饮有节，起居有常，不妄作劳，故能形与神俱，而尽终其天年，度百岁乃去。
现代文：歧伯回答说：上古时期的人，那些懂得养生之道的，能够取法于天地阴阳自然变化之理而加以适应，调和养生的办法，使之达到正确的标准。饮食节制，作息规律，既不妄事操劳，又避免过度的房事，所以能够形神俱旺，协调统一，活到天赋的自然年龄，超过百岁才离世。
English: He replied, "In ancient times, people who knew how to take care of their health were able to adapt to the natural changes of the yin and yang of heaven and earth, and harmonize the methods of health care to achieve the correct standard. Dietary moderation, regular work and rest, neither working too hard, nor excessive housework, so they were able to be well-groomed and coordinated, and live to the natural age of talent, and only passed away when they were over one hundred years old.

古文：今时之人不然也，以酒为浆，以妄为常，醉以入房，以欲竭其精，以耗散其真，不知持满，不时御神，务快其心，逆于生乐，起居无节，故半百而衰也。
现代文：现在的人就不是这样了，把酒当水浆，滥饮无度，使反常的生活成为习惯，醉酒行房，因恣情纵欲，而使阴精竭绝，因满足嗜好而使真气耗散，不知谨慎地保持精气的充满，不善于统驭精神，而专求心志的一时之快，沉溺于人生在世时的快乐，起居作息，毫无规律，所以到年过半百就衰老了。
English: Today's people are not like that. They use wine as a syrup, drink excessively, make abnormal life a habit, get drunk and have sex, exhaust the yin and yang by indulging in arbitrary passions, dissipate the true spirit by satisfying hobbies, keep the spirit full without caution, are not good at controlling the spirit, but concentrate on the speed of the mind, indulge in the happiness of life in the world, and have no regularity in their daily routine. Therefore, they are old at the age of over half a hundred.

古文：夫上古圣人之教下也，皆谓之虚邪贼风，避之有时，恬淡虚无，真气从之，精神内守，病安从来。
现代文：古代深懂养生之道的人在教导普通人的时候，总要讲到对虚邪贼风等致病因素，应及时避开，心要清净安闲，摒弃杂念妄想，以使真气顺畅，精神守持与内，这样，疾病就无从发生。
English: In ancient times, when people who had a deep understanding of the way of health care were teaching ordinary people, they always had to talk about the pathogenic factors such as the spirit of deceit and evil, which should be avoided in time, the heart should be clean and leisurely, and the miscellaneous thoughts and delusions should be abandoned, so that the true qi would be smooth and the spirit would be kept within, so that the disease would not occur.

古文：是以志闲而少欲，心安而不惧，形劳而不倦，气从以顺，各从其欲，皆得所愿。
现代文：因此，人们就可以心志安闲，少有欲望，情绪安定而没有焦虑，形体劳作而不使疲倦，真气因而调顺，各人都能随其所欲而满足自己的愿望。
English: Therefore, people can have peace of mind and leisure, few desires, stable emotions without anxiety, physical labor without fatigue, and true qi can be adjusted accordingly. Everyone can satisfy their desires as they wish.

古文：故美其食，任其服，乐其俗，高下不相慕，其民故曰朴。
现代文：人们无论吃什麽食物都觉得甘美，随便穿什麽衣服也都感到满意，大家喜爱自己的风俗习尚，愉快地生活，社会地位无论高低，都不相倾慕，所以这些人称得上朴实无华。
English: No matter what kind of food they eat, people find it delicious. No matter what kind of clothes they wear, they are satisfied. Everyone likes their own customs and habits, lives happily, and no matter how high or low their social status, they are not admired. Therefore, these people can be called unpretentious.

古文：是以嗜欲不能劳其目，淫邪不能惑其心，愚智贤不肖，不惧于物，故合于道。
现代文：因而任何不正当的嗜欲都不会引起他们注目，任何淫乱邪僻的事物也都不能惑乱他们的心志。无论愚笨的，聪明的，能力大的还是能力小的，都不因外界事物的变化而动心焦虑，所以符合养生之道。
English: Therefore, any improper desire will not attract their attention, nor will any lewd or perverse thing disturb their minds. No matter how stupid, clever, powerful or less powerful, they will not be disturbed by changes in external things, so they are in line with the way of health.

古文：所以能年皆度百岁而动作不衰者，以其德全不危也。
现代文：他们之所以能够年龄超过百岁而动作不显得衰老，正是由于领会和掌握了修身养性的方法而身体不被内外邪气干扰危害所致。
English: The reason why they can be more than a hundred years old and their movements do not appear to be aging is precisely because they have understood and mastered the methods of self-cultivation and the body is not affected by internal and external evil spirits.

古文：帝曰：人年老而无子者，材力尽耶？将天数然也？
现代文：黄帝说：人年纪老的时候，不能生育子女，是由于精力衰竭了呢，还是受自然规律的限定呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: When a person is old and cannot bear children, is it due to energy exhaustion, or is it limited by the laws of nature?

古文：岐伯曰：女子七岁，肾气盛，齿更发长。
现代文：歧伯说：女子到了七岁，肾气盛旺了起来，乳齿更换，头发开始茂盛。
English: "When a girl reaches the age of seven, her kidneys begin to flourish, her milk teeth are replaced, and her hair begins to grow.

古文：二七，而天癸至，任脉通，太冲脉盛，月事以时下，故有子。
现代文：十四岁时，天癸产生，任脉通畅，太冲脉旺盛，月经按时来潮，具备了生育子女的能力。
English: At the age of fourteen, the umbilical cord was born, the pulse was smooth, the pulse was strong, the menstruation came on time, and the ability to bear children was equipped.

古文：三七，肾气平均，故真牙生而长极。
现代文：二十一岁时，肾气充满，真牙生出，牙齿就长全了。
English: At the age of twenty-one, the kidneys are full of qi, the real teeth come out, and the teeth are complete.

古文：四七，筋骨坚，发长极，身体盛壮。
现代文：二十八岁时，筋骨强健有力，头发的生长达到最茂盛的阶段，此时身体最为强壮。
English: At the age of twenty-eight, muscles and bones are strong and powerful, hair growth reaches the most prosperous stage, and the body is the strongest at this time.

古文：五七，阳明脉衰，面始焦，发始堕。
现代文：三十五岁时，阳明经脉气血渐衰弱，面部开始憔悴，头发也开始脱落。
English: At the age of thirty-five, Yang Ming's qi and blood gradually weakened, his face began to wrinkle, and his hair began to fall out.

古文：六七，三阳脉衰于上，面皆焦，发始白。
现代文：四十二岁时，三阳经脉气血衰弱，面部憔悴无华，头发开始变白。
English: At the age of forty-two, Sanyang's qi and blood were weak, his face was dull, and his hair began to turn white.

古文：七七，任脉虚，太冲脉衰少，天癸竭，地道不通，故形坏而无子也。
现代文：四十九岁时，任脉气血虚弱，太冲脉的气血也衰少了，天葵枯竭，月经断绝，所以形体衰老，失去了生育能力。
English: At the age of forty-nine, the qi and blood of any pulse are weak, the qi and blood of the pulse are also reduced, the geranium is exhausted, and menstruation is cut off, so the body is aging and has lost fertility.

古文：丈夫八岁，肾气实，发长齿更。
现代文：男子到了八岁，肾气充实起来，头发开始茂盛，乳齿也更换了。
English: At the age of eight, a man's kidneys are full, his hair begins to grow, and his milk teeth are replaced.

古文：二八，肾气盛，天癸至，精气溢泻，阴阳和，故能有子。
现代文：十六岁时，肾气旺盛，天癸产生，精气满溢而能外泻，两性交合，就能生育子女。
English: At the age of sixteen, the kidneys are vigorous, the qi is produced, the qi is overflowing and can be ejaculated, and the two sexes can mate and give birth to children.

古文：三八，肾气平均，筋骨劲强，故真牙生而长极。
现代文：二十四岁时，肾气充满，筋骨强健有力，真牙生长，牙齿长全。
English: At the age of twenty-four, the kidneys are full of energy, the muscles and bones are strong and powerful, the real teeth grow, and the teeth are long.

古文：四八，筋骨隆盛，肌肉满壮。
现代文：三十二岁时，筋骨丰隆盛实，肌肉亦丰满健壮。
English: At the age of thirty-two, my bones are strong and my muscles are plump and robust.

古文：五八，肾气衰，发堕齿槁。
现代文：四十岁时，肾气衰退，头发开始脱落，牙齿开始枯槁。
English: At the age of forty, kidney qi declines, hair begins to fall out, and teeth begin to wither.

古文：六八，阳气衰竭于上，面焦，发鬓斑白。
现代文：四十八岁时，上部阳气逐渐衰竭，面部憔悴无华，头发和两鬓花白。
English: At the age of forty-eight, the upper yang gradually faded, the face was dull, and the hair and cheeks were white.

古文：七八，肝气衰，筋不能动。
现代文：五十六岁时，肝气衰弱，筋的活动不能灵活自如。
English: At the age of fifty-six, the liver is weak, and muscle activity is not flexible.

古文：八八，天癸竭，精少，肾脏衰，形体皆极，则齿发去。
现代文：六十四岁时，天癸枯竭，精气少，肾脏衰，牙齿头发脱落，形体衰疲。
English: At the age of sixty-four, his energy was depleted, his stamina was low, his kidneys were failing, his teeth and hair were falling out, and his body was exhausted.

古文：肾者主水，受五脏六腑之精而藏之，故五脏盛，乃能泻。
现代文：肾主水，接受其他各脏腑的精气而加以贮藏，所以五脏的精气充盛，肾脏的精气才能盈满溢泻。
English: The main water of the kidney receives the essence of the other organs and stores it, so the five organs are full of essence, and the essence of the kidney can be overflowed.

古文：今五脏皆衰，筋骨解堕，天癸尽矣，故发鬓白，身体重，行步不正，而无子耳。
现代文：五脏功能都以衰退，筋骨懈惰无力，天癸以竭。所以发鬓都变白，身体沉重，步伐不稳，也不能生育子女了。
English: The functions of the five internal organs are all in decline, the muscles and bones are sluggish and weak, and the divine energy is exhausted. Therefore, the hair has turned white, the body is heavy, the pace is unstable, and it is no longer possible to have children.

古文：帝曰：有其年已老，而有子者，何也？
现代文：黄帝说：有的人年纪已老，仍能生育，是什麽道理呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Some people are so old that they can still have children. Why is that?

古文：岐伯曰：此其天寿过度，气脉常通，而肾气有余也。
现代文：歧伯说：这是他天赋的精力超过常人，气血经脉保持畅通，肾气有余的缘故。
English: This is due to the fact that his innate energy exceeds that of an ordinary person, his qi and blood flow remain unimpeded, and he has more than enough kidney qi.

古文：此虽有子，男子不过尽八八，女子不过尽七七，而天地之精气皆竭矣。
现代文：这种人虽然有生育能力，但男子一般不超过六十四岁，女子一般不超过四十九岁，精气便枯竭了。
English: Although such people have fertility, men are generally no more than sixty-four years old, and women are generally no more than forty-nine years old, and they are exhausted.

古文：帝曰：夫道者年皆百数，能有子乎？
现代文：黄帝说：掌握养生之道的人，年龄都可以达到一百岁左右，还能生育吗？
English: Huangdi said: People who have mastered the way of health can reach the age of about one hundred years old. Can they still give birth?

古文：岐伯曰：夫道者能却老而全形，身年虽寿，能生子也。
现代文：歧伯说：掌握养生之道的人，能防止衰老而保全形体，虽然年高，也能生育子女。
English: "Those who have mastered the way of health can prevent aging and preserve the body, and even though they are old, they can still have children," said Shibo.

古文：黄帝曰：余闻上古有真人者，提挈天地，把握阴阳，呼吸精气，独立守神，肌肉若一，故能寿敝天地，无有终时，此其道生。
现代文：黄帝说：我听说上古时期有称为真人的人，掌握了天地阴阳变化的规律，能够调节呼吸，吸收精纯的清气，超然独处，令精神守持于内，锻炼身体，使筋骨肌肉与整个身体达到高度的协调，所以他的寿命同于天地而没有终了的时候，这是他修道养生的结果。
English: Huangdi said: I heard that in ancient times, there was a person called a real person who mastered the laws of the changes of yin and yang in heaven and earth, was able to regulate breathing, absorb pure clean air, stay alone, keep the spirit within, exercise the body, and achieve a high degree of coordination between the bones and muscles and the entire body. So when his life is the same as heaven and earth and does not end, this is the result of his monastic regimen.

古文：中古之时，有至人者，淳德全道，和于阴阳，调于四时，去世离俗，积精全神，游行天地之间，视听八达之外，此盖益其寿命而强者也，亦归于真人。
现代文：中古的时候，有称为至人的人，具有醇厚的道德，能全面地掌握养生之道，和调于阴阳四时的变化，离开世俗社会生活的干扰，积蓄精气，集中精神，使其远驰于广阔的天地自然之中，让视觉和听觉的注意力守持于八方之外，这是他延长寿命和强健身体的方法，这种人也可以归属真人的行列。
English: In the Middle Ages, there was a person known as the supreme man, with a mellow morality, able to comprehensively grasp the way of health care, and the changes in yin and yang at four o'clock, leaving the interference of secular social life, accumulating energy, concentrating the spirit, making it far away in the vast world of nature, and keeping the attention of sight and hearing beyond the eight directions. This is his way of prolonging life and strengthening the body. Such a person can also belong to the ranks of real people.

古文：其次有圣人者，处天地之和，从八风之理，适嗜欲于世俗之间，无恚嗔之心，行不欲离于世，被服章，举不欲观于俗，外不劳形于事，内无思想之患，以恬愉为务，以自得为功，形体不敝，精神不散，亦可以百数。
现代文：其次有称为圣人的人，能够安处于天地自然的正常环境之中，顺从八风的活动规律，使自己的嗜欲同世俗社会相应，没有恼怒怨恨之情，行为不离开世俗的一般准则，穿着装饰普通纹采的衣服，举动也没有炫耀于世俗的地方，在外，他不使形体因为事物而劳累，在内，没有任何思想负担，以安静、愉快为目的，以悠然自得为满足，所以他的形体不益衰惫，精神不益耗散，寿命也可达到百岁左右。
English: Secondly, there are people called sages who can stay in the normal environment of heaven, earth and nature, obey the laws of the eight winds, make their desires correspond to the secular society, have no feelings of anger and resentment, do not leave the general norms of the secular world, wear clothes with ordinary patterns, and do not show off in the secular place. Outside, he does not make his body tired because of things. Inside, there is no burden of thought, with the purpose of quiet and pleasant, with leisurely self-satisfaction, so his body is not exhausted, his spirit is not dissipated, and his life expectancy can reach about one hundred years old.

古文：其次有贤人者，法则天地，象似日月，辨列星辰，逆从阴阳，分别四时，将从上古合同于道，亦可使益寿而有极时。
现代文：其次有称为贤人的人，能够依据天地的变化，日月的升降，星辰的位置，以顺从阴阳的消长和适应四时的变迁，追随上古真人，使生活符合养生之道，这样的人也能增益寿命，但有终结的时候。
English: Secondly, there are people called sages, who can follow the ancients according to the changes of heaven and earth, the rise and fall of the sun and the moon, the position of the stars, to obey the waxing and waning of the yin and yang and adapt to the changes of the four hours, and make life conform to the way of health. Such people can also increase life expectancy, but there is an end.

