古文：五礼之别，二曰凶。
现代文：五礼的分支，第二叫凶礼。
English: The second branch of the Five Rites is called the Evil Rites.

古文：自天子至于庶人，身体发肤，受之父母，其理既均，其情亦等，生则养，死则哀，故曰三年之丧，天下之达礼者也。
现代文：从天子直到平民，身体皮肤毛发，都是得之于父母，其道理既然一致，其感情也相同，生则奉养，死则守孝，所以说三年服丧，是天下通行之礼。
English: From the heavenly son to the common people, the body, skin, and hair are all obtained from the parents. Since the reason is the same and the feelings are the same, the birth is the upbringing, and the death is the filial piety. Therefore, the three-year funeral is a common ritual in the world.

古文：汉礼，天子崩，自不豫至于登遐及葬，丧纪之制，与夫三代变易。
现代文：漠的礼制，天子崩，从生病到登天而去以及安葬，丧事的制度，与三代有所改变。
English: The ceremonial system of the desert, the death of the son of heaven, from illness to ascension to heaven, and the system of burial and funeral have changed with the three generations.

古文：魏晋以来，大体同汉。
现代文：魏、晋以来，大体舆漠相同。
English: Since the Wei and Jin dynasties, public opinion has been generally the same.

古文：然自汉文革丧礼之制，后代遵之，无复三年之礼。
现代文：然而从汉文改变丧礼的仪制，后代遵行，不再有守孝三年之礼。
English: However, when the funeral ceremony was changed from Chinese, the descendants followed suit, and there was no longer a three-year celebration of filial piety.

古文：及魏武临终，遗令 天下尚未安定，未得遵古。
现代文：到魏武临终时，遣令说 天下还没有安定，还不能遵循古制。
English: When Wei Wu was on his deathbed, he sent an order saying that the world was not yet stable, and it was not yet possible to follow the old system.

古文：百官当临中者，十五举音，葬毕便除。
现代文：百官应当到殿中哭丧者，分两批哀哭，安葬完后就除去丧服。
English: The dignitaries should come to the hall in two groups to mourn the mourners, and remove their mourning clothes after the burial.

古文：其将兵屯戍者，不得离部。 
现代文：率兵屯守的将领，不得离部 。
English: Generals leading troops in garrison duty may not leave their posts.

古文：魏武以正月庚子崩，辛丑即殡，是月丁卯葬，是为不逾月也。
现代文：魏武于正月庚子曰崩，辛丑日停放灵柩，当月丁卯日安葬，这是不过月。
English: Weiwu died in the first month of the year, Geng Zi said, and the casket was placed on the first day of the month, and the casket was buried on the first day of the month, which was just a month.

古文：及宣帝、景帝之崩，并从权制。
现代文：到宣帝、景帝崩时，都依权宜之制。
English: When Emperor Xuanxuan and Emperor Jing died, they both died according to the system of expediency.

古文：文帝之崩，国内服三日。
现代文：文帝崩时，国内服丧三天。
English: When Emperor Wen died, there were three days of mourning in China.

古文：武帝亦遵汉魏之典，既葬除丧，然犹深衣素冠，降席撤膳。
现代文：武帝也依照漠、魏的制度，安葬后就除去丧服，然而还是穿深衣戴素冠，不设宴席。
English: Emperor Wu also removed his mourning clothes after burial in accordance with the Western and Wei systems, but he still wore dark clothes and a plain crown, and no banquet was held.

古文：太宰司马孚、太傅郑冲、太保王祥、太尉何曾、司徒领中领军司马望、司空荀顗、车骑将军贾充、尚书令裴秀、尚书仆射武陔、都护大将军郭建、侍中郭绥、中书监荀勖、中军将军羊祜等奏曰： 臣闻礼典轨度，丰杀随时，虞夏商周，咸不相袭，盖有由也。
现代文：太宰司马孚、太傅郑冲、太保王祥、太尉何曾、司徒领中领军司马望、司空荀颢、车骑将军贾充、尚书令裴秀、尚书仆射武陔、都护大将军郭建、侍中郭绥、中书监荀勖、中军将军羊枯等上奏说： 臣听说礼典法度，隆盛还是减省依当时的情况而定，虞、夏、商、周，都不相沿袭，大概是有理由的。
English: Dazai Sima Fu, Taifu Zheng Chong, Taipo Wang Xiang, Taifu He Zeng, Siu Ma Wang, Siu Kuang, General Jia Chong, Shang Shuling Pei Xiu, Shang Shubo Sha Wu Xi, General Guo Jian, Vice Admiral Guo Jian, Vice Admiral Guo Jian, Vice Admiral Guo Jian, Vice Admiral Guo Jian, Vice Admiral Guo Jian, Vice Admiral Guo Jian, Vice Admiral Guo Jian, Vice Admiral Guo Jian, Vice Admiral Guo Jian, Vice Admiral Guo Jian, Vice Admiral Guo Jian, Vice Admiral Guo J

古文：大晋绍承汉魏，有革有因，期于足以兴化而已，故未得皆返太素，同规上古也。
现代文：大晋继承漠、魏，有变化有因袭，衹是期望足以振兴教化而已，所以未能全都返回质朴，与上古相同。
English: The Great Jin Dynasty succeeded the Mu and Wei Dynasties, and there were changes and influences, but it was only the hope that it would be enough to revitalize and enlighten, so it was not possible to return to simplicity, the same as the ancients.

古文：陛下既以俯遵汉魏降丧之典，以济时务，而躬蹈大孝，情过乎哀，素冠深衣，降席撤膳，虽武丁行之于殷世，曾闵履之于布衣，未足以逾。
现代文：陛下既已屈尊依照汉、魏降低丧礼规格的旧典，以救助世事，而躬临大孝，感情极其悲哀，戴素冠穿深衣，不设宴席，即使是武丁在殷代守孝，曾、闵当百姓守孝，也不过如此。
English: Since His Majesty has condescended to lower the standard of funeral rites in accordance with the old Han and Wei dynasties, in order to save the world, and bowed to the great filial piety, his feelings are extremely sad, wearing a crown and wearing a deep robe, without a banquet, even if he was a warrior in the Yin Dynasty, he was once a commoner.

古文：方今荆蛮未夷，庶政未乂，万机事殷，动劳神虑，岂遑全遂圣旨，以从至情。
现代文：现在荆蛮未平，各种政务还没治理好，天下大事繁忙，劳累神虑，哪能得暇完全遵从圣旨，以满足极悲哀的感情呢?
English: Now, the situation is very unstable, various government affairs have not been well managed, the world is busy with major events, and we are tired and worried. How can we have time to fully comply with the holy will and satisfy our extremely sad feelings?

古文：臣等以为陛下宜割情以康时济俗，辄敕御府易服，内省改坐，太官复膳，诸所施行，皆如旧制。 
现代文：臣等认为陛下宜割舍感情以匡时济世，即令御府改变服饰，内省改换座席，太官复膳，各种仪式，都如旧制。 
English: The courtiers thought that it would be appropriate for His Majesty to give up his feelings in order to save the world, so he ordered the Imperial Household Agency to change the costumes, the seats to be changed, the eunuchs to resume their meals, and all kinds of ceremonies to be carried out according to the old system.

古文：诏曰： 每感念幽冥，而不得终苴绖于草土，以存此痛，况当食稻衣锦，诚诡然激切其心，非所以相解也。
现代文：下诏说： 每每思念死者，而不能服满三年之丧，以宽慰悲痛的心情，况且还食稻衣锦，确实是换了方式刺激心情，不是用来解脱的好办法。
English: The next edict said: "Thinking of the deceased every day, instead of fulfilling the three-year mourning period, in order to relieve the grief, and even eating rice and brocade, is indeed to stimulate the mood in a different way, and is not a good way to use for relief.

古文：吾本诸生家，传礼来久，何心一旦便易此情于所天！
现代文：我出身儒家，接受礼的教育已久，怎么能一日之间就改变对父亲的感情呢!
English: I come from a Confucian family, and I have long been educated in etiquette. How can I change my feelings for my father overnight?

古文：相从已多，可试省孔子答宰我之言，无事纷纭也。
现代文：这件事来回说得很多了，可试看孔子回答宰我的话，不要再纷纭不停地说了。
English: There has been a lot of back-and-forth about this, but let's see if Confucius can answer my question, and stop talking about it incessantly.

古文：言及悲剥，柰何！
现代文：说到悲伤的事情，有什么办法!有什么办法! 
English: When it comes to sad things, what a way to go! what a way to go!

古文：柰何！ 孚等重奏： 伏读圣诏，感以悲怀，辄思仲尼所以抑宰我之问，圣思所以不能已已，甚深甚笃。
现代文：司马孚等又奏道： 伏读圣韶，臣等受感动而伤怀，就想到了仲尼用来责备宰我的话，圣思之所以不能止息的原因，很深切很笃厚。
English: Sima Fu and the others also played: After reading the holy book, the ministers were moved and saddened, and they thought of the words used by Zhong Ni to reproach me. The reason why the holy thought could not stop was very deep and profound.

古文：然今者干戈未戢，武事未偃，万机至重，天下至众。
现代文：然而当今兵甲未停，战事未息，国家大事极繁重，天下极大。
English: However, today's armament has not stopped, the war has not ended, and the national affairs are extremely heavy, and the world is extremely large.

古文：陛下以万乘之尊，履布衣之礼，服粗席稿，水饮疏食，殷忧内盈，毁悴外表。
现代文：陛下以万乘的尊贵，履行平民百姓的礼节，使用粗劣的荐席，喝冷水，吃粗蛎的饭食，内心充满重忧，伤害了身体。
English: His Majesty, with the dignity of Wanxiang, performed the etiquette of the common people, used the rough recommended seats, drank cold water, and ate rough meals. His heart was full of worries and hurt his body.

古文：而躬勤万机，坐而待旦，降心接下，仄不遑食，所以劳力者如斯之甚。
现代文：而亲自为天下大事劳累，坐而待旦，抑制心志接见臣下，日西斜还来不及吃饭，如此辛苦劳累。
English: However, he was personally exhausted by the world's great events, sitting and waiting, suppressing his will to meet with his subjects, and it was too late to eat, so hard and tired.

古文：是以臣等悚息不宁，诚惧神气用损，以疚大事。
现代文：因此臣等惶恐不安，确实担心神气因而受损，以损害大事。
English: As a result, vassals and others are panicked and anxious, genuinely worried that their dignity will be damaged as a result, and that major events will be compromised.

古文：辄敕有司，改坐复常，率由旧典。
现代文：就敕令有关官员，改换座席恢复常度，完全依照老规矩行事。
English: The relevant officials were ordered by the emperor to change seats to restore normalcy and act in full accordance with the old rules.

古文：惟陛下察纳愚款，以慰皇太后之心。 
现代文：希望陛下考察采纳愚诚，以宽慰皇太后之心。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty's inspection will adopt Gucheng to ease the heart of the Empress Dowager.

古文：又诏曰： 重览奏议，益以悲剥，不能自胜，柰何！
现代文：又下诏说： 再览奏议，更加悲伤，不能克制自己，有什么办法有什么办法!
English: He also said: "Reviewing the motion, I am even more sad, I cannot restrain myself, what can I do, what can I do!"

古文：柰何！三年之丧，自古达礼，诚圣人称情立衷，明恕而行也。
现代文：服丧三年，是自古以来共通的礼制，确实是圣人根据人的感情制定的适当的礼法。明信宽厚地行事。
English: The three-year mourning period has been a common ritual since ancient times, and it is indeed an appropriate ritual developed by sages based on human feelings.

古文：神灵日远，无所诉告，虽薄于情，食旨服美，所不堪也。
现代文：死者的灵魂一天天离得更远了，虽然感情不够笃厚，但是吃美味的食物穿华丽的衣服，也是受不了的。
English: The souls of the dead are getting farther and farther away every day. Although the feelings are not strong enough, it is unbearable to eat delicious food and wear gorgeous clothes.

古文：不宜反覆，重伤其心，言用断绝，柰何！
现代文：不宜改变恢复，更加伤害他的心，因此而与我隔绝，有什么办法!
English: It's not right to change the recovery, hurt his heart even more, and thus isolate him from me. What can I do?

古文：柰何！ 
现代文：有什么办法! 
English: What a way to go!

古文：帝遂以此礼终三年。
现代文：皇帝于是用这种礼服丧三年。
English: The emperor then used this dress to mourn for three years.

古文：后居太后之丧亦如之。
现代文：后来为太后服丧也是这样。
English: Later, it was the same for the funeral of the Empress Dowager.

古文：泰始二年八月，诏曰： 此上旬，先帝弃天下日也，便以周年。
现代文：台游二年八月，下诏说： 这个月上旬，是先帝弃天下而去的日子，就到了周年。
English: In August of the second year of his tour of Taiwan, he issued the following edict: At the beginning of this month, it will be the anniversary of the day the former emperor left the world.

古文：吾茕茕，当复何时一得叙人子之情邪！
现代文：我孤独无依，又要到什么时候才能一叙人子之情呢!
English: I'm all alone, and I don't know when I'll be able to feel human again!

古文：思慕烦毒，欲诏陵瞻侍，以尽哀愤。
现代文：思慕之情烦扰酷烈，想去陵墓瞻仰奉侍，以表达哀痛之情。
English: Her feelings of longing are so disturbing that she wants to visit the mausoleum and serve as an attendant to express her sorrow.

古文：主者具行备。 
现代文：主管者做好出行的准备。 
English: Supervisors should be prepared to travel.

古文：太宰安平王孚、尚书令裴秀、尚书仆射武陔等奏： 陛下至孝蒸蒸，哀思罔极。
现代文：太宰安平王司马孚、尚书令裴秀、尚书仆射武陔等奏道： 陛下极其孝顺，哀思无边。
English: Dazai Anping Wang Sima Fu, Shang Shuling Pei Xiu, Shang Shuling Shao Wu, etc. sang: His Majesty is extremely filial, and his sorrow is boundless.

古文：衰麻虽除，哀毁疏食，有损神和。
现代文：孝服虽然已经除去，但是悲痛损伤身体，吃粗榍的食物，有损精神。
English: Although filial piety has been eliminated, grief damages the body, eating coarse food damages the spirit.

古文：今虽秋节，尚有余暑，谒见山陵，悲感摧伤，群下窃用竦息，以为宜降抑圣情，以慰万国。 
现代文：现在虽然是秋季，但还有余暑，去谒见山陵，悲痛摧伤身心，群下因此惶恐而屏息，认为应当抑制圣情，以宽慰天下。 
English: Although it is autumn now, there is still the lingering heat. People go to see the mountains and mausoleums. Grief ravages the body and mind. As a result, the people hold their breath in fear, believing that they should restrain their sacred feelings in order to comfort the world.

古文：诏曰： 孤茕忽尔，日月已周，痛慕摧感，永无逮及。
现代文：下诏说： 孤独无依地忽然一年已满，悲痛思慕之情，总是不能满足。
English: The next edict said: "Lonely and helpless, suddenly a year has passed, and the feelings of grief and yearning can never be satisfied.

古文：欲瞻奉山陵，以叙哀愤，体气自佳耳。
现代文：想要瞻仰奉侍山陵，以叙悲伤之情，身体精神自然就好。
English: If you want to look up at the mountains and feel sad, your body and spirit will naturally be fine.

古文：又已凉，便当行，不得如所奏也。
现代文：天又凉快了，就可出行，不能按所奏的办。
English: It's getting cooler again, so you can travel, but you can't do as you please.

古文：主者便具行备。 
现代文：主管者就可做好出行准备。 
English: The person in charge can then prepare for the trip.

古文：又诏曰： 汉文不使天下尽哀，亦帝王至谦之志。
现代文：又下韶说： 汉文不使天下尽哀，也是帝王极谦逊的心意。
English: He also said, "It is also the Emperor's extremely humble intention that the Chinese language should not make the whole world mourn.

古文：当见山陵，何心而无服，其以衰绖行。 
现代文：将要谒见山陵，怎么能不穿丧服呢?将穿丧服而行。 
English: If you are going to see the tomb, how can you not wear mourning clothes? Wear mourning clothes and go.

古文：孚等重奏曰： 臣闻上古丧期无数，后世乃有年月之渐。
现代文：司墨垩等又奏道： 臣听说上古服丧期没有确定的时间，后代才逐渐规定了年月。
English: Simo Xuan and others also said: The minister heard that there was no definite time for the mourning period of the ancient clothing, and the descendants gradually determined the years.

古文：汉文帝随时之义，制为短丧，传之于后。
现代文：汉文帝根据时世之宜，规定缩短服丧期限，传于后代。
English: In accordance with the needs of the times, Emperor Hanwen decreed that the period of mourning should be shortened and passed down to future generations.

古文：陛下以社稷宗庙之重，万方亿兆之故，既从权制，释除衰麻，群臣百姓吉服，今者谒陵，以叙哀慕，若加衰绖，进退无当。
现代文：陛下以国家宗庙之重，天下百姓之故，已依照权宜之制，去除了丧服，群臣百姓都穿礼服，现在谒见陵墓，以叙悲哀思慕之情，如果穿上丧服，举止不当。
English: His Majesty, with the weight of the national ancestral temple and for the sake of the people of the world, has removed the mourning clothes in accordance with the system of expediency. All the ministers and people wear ceremonial clothes. Now, when he sees the mausoleum, he is sad and pensive. If he puts on the mourning clothes, he will behave improperly.

古文：不敢奉诏。 
现代文：不敢奉韶。 
English: They don't dare to sing the anthem.

古文：诏曰： 亦知不在此麻布耳。
现代文：下诏说： 我也知道并不在于丧服的缘故。
English: He said: "I also know it's not because of the uniform.

古文：然人子情思，为欲令哀丧之物在身，盖近情也。
现代文：然而作为人子的心情，衹是以身穿丧服表达人情之常情。
English: However, as the son of a human being, Xing expressed his human feelings by wearing mourning clothes.

古文：群臣自当案旧制。 
现代文：群臣自然都照旧制。 
English: Naturally, all the retainers continued to work according to the old system.

古文：孚等又奏曰： 臣闻圣人制作，必从时宜。
现代文：司马垩等又奏道： 臣听说圣人制定典章制度，必因时制宜。
English: Sima Yao and others also made a report: The minister heard that the system of ordinances was established by a saint, and it must be time-based.

古文：故五帝殊乐，三王异礼，此古今所以不同，质文所以迭用也。
现代文：所以五帝的音乐不同，三王的礼法有异，造就是古今不同，质朴和文采交替使用的原因。
English: Therefore, the music of the five emperors is different, the etiquette of the three kings is different, the construction is different from the past to the present, and the reason for the alternating use of simplicity and literature.

古文：陛下随时之宜，既降心克己，俯就权制，既除衰麻，而行心丧之礼，今复制服，义无所依。
现代文：陛下因时制宜，克制自己，实行权宜之制，除去了丧服，而行心丧之礼，现在又要恢复丧服，没有可依据的义理。
English: There is no reason why His Majesty should reinstate the mourning dress, after having removed it for the sake of expediency and moderation.

古文：若君服而臣不服，亦未之敢安也。
现代文：如果君穿丧服而臣不穿，也不会心安。
English: If you wear mourning clothes and your vassal doesn't, you won't feel at ease.

古文：参议宜如前奏。 
现代文：参与议论宜如前次奏章所言。 
English: It is advisable to participate in the discussion as mentioned in the previous section.

古文：诏曰： 患情不能跂及耳，衣服何在。
现代文：下诏说： 祇担心感情不能达到，穿什么衣服关系不大。
English: The next edict said: Only worry about not being able to achieve feelings, it doesn't matter what clothes you wear.

古文：诸君勤勤之至，岂苟相违。 
现代文：诸君恳切至诚，怎么能随便违背呢? 
English: You are earnest and sincere, how can you casually renege?

古文：泰始四年，皇太后崩。
现代文：四年，皇太后崩。
English: Four years later, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：有司奏： 前代故事，倚庐中施白缣帐、蓐、素床，以布巾裹塊草，轺辇、版舆、细犊车皆施缣里。 
现代文：主管部门奏请： 按前代的旧例，在守丧住的倚庐中用白缣帐、蓐、素床，用布巾裹块草，韶辇、版舆、细犊车都用缣裹。 
English: The competent department requested: According to the old example of the previous generation, in the living room of the deceased, use white curtains, rugs, and beds, wrap the grass with a cloth towel, and wrap the rugs, plates, and fine rugs.

古文：诏不听，但令以布衣车而已，其余居丧之制，不改礼文。
现代文：诏书不同意，衹让用布装饰车辆，其他服丧的规矩，不改变礼法的规定。
English: The imperial edict disagreed, allowing the use of cloth to decorate vehicles and other rules of mourning, without changing the rules of etiquette.

古文：有司又奏： 大行皇太后当以四月二十五日安厝。
现代文：主管部门又奏： 刚去世的皇太后应当在四月二十五安葬。
English: The authority also said that the recently deceased empress dowager should be buried on April 25.

古文：故事，虞著衰服，既虞而除。
现代文：旧例，既葬而祭穿丧服，祭后就除去丧服。
English: In the old days, mourners wore mourning clothes after the funeral and removed them after the service.

古文：其内外官僚皆就朝晡临位，御除服讫，各还所次除衰服。 
现代文：内外官僚都就朝时晡时哭丧之位，皇上除去丧服后，各自回去除丧服。 
English: Bureaucrats at home and abroad were in a state of weeping and mourning, and after the emperor removed the mourning clothes, they went back to remove the mourning clothes.

古文：诏曰： 夫三年之丧，天下之达礼也。
现代文：下诏说： 守丧三年，是天下共通的礼制。
English: The next edict said: To observe mourning for three years is the common etiquette throughout the world.

古文：受终身之爱，而无数年之报，柰何葬而便即吉，情所不忍也。 
现代文：接受父母终身之爱，而没有数年的报答，怎么能安葬后就除去丧服，这是感情不能忍受的。 
English: It is emotionally unbearable to accept the lifelong love of one's parents without the reward of several years. How can one remove the mourning clothes after the funeral?

古文：有司又奏： 世有险易，道有洿隆，所遇之时异，诚有由然，非忽礼也。
现代文：主管部门又奏道： 世事有艰险和平易，政局有衰落和隆盛，各自的时代不同，确实有理由这样做，并不是忽略礼法。
English: The competent department also reported: World affairs have hardships and ease, the political situation has decline and prosperity, their respective times are different, there is indeed a reason to do so, it is not to ignore etiquette.

古文：方今戎马未散，王事至殷，更须听断，以熙庶绩。
现代文：当今戎马未散，国事繁忙，都需要处理，以使各项事业兴旺。
English: Today, the army is not dispersed, and the country is busy with affairs of state, which all need to be dealt with in order to make various undertakings flourish.

古文：昔周康王始登翌室，犹戴冕临朝。
现代文：从前周康王刚入翼室，还戴冕上朝。
English: From the previous week, King Kang had just entered the wing room and was still crowned.

古文：降于汉魏，既葬除释，谅闇之礼，自远代而废矣。
现代文：到了汉、魏时，安葬之后就除去丧服，帝王守丧之礼，从古代就废除了。
English: In the Han and Wei dynasties, mourning clothes were removed after burial, and the emperor's funeral rites were abolished from ancient times.

古文：惟陛下割高宗之制，从当时之宜。 
现代文：希望陛下割舍高宗那样的礼制，依从当前的时宜。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will abandon the etiquette of Gaozong and follow the current trend.

古文：诏曰： 夫三年之丧，所以尽情致礼，葬已便除，所不堪也。
现代文：下韶说： 三年守丧，是用来表达感情推行礼法的方式，安葬之后就除去丧服，是不能忍受的事。
English: He said: The three-year mourning period is a way to express feelings and promote etiquette. It is intolerable to remove the mourning clothes after the burial.

古文：当叙吾哀怀，言用断绝，柰何！柰何！ 
现代文：将以此表达我悲哀的心情，如果在天之灵因此与我隔绝，如何是好!如何是好! 
English: I will thus express my sad mood, and if in the spirit of heaven I am thus cut off, how good! how good!

古文：有司又固请。
现代文：主管部门又再三奏请。
English: The competent authorities have asked us to do this again and again.

古文：诏曰： 不能笃孝，勿以毁伤为忧也。
现代文：下诏说： 衹担心不能做到真正的孝顺，不要担心因此损害身体。
English: The next edict said: "If you are worried about not being able to achieve true filial piety, don't worry about damaging your body.

古文：诚知衣服末事耳，然今思存草土，率当以吉物夺之，乃所以重伤至心，非见念也。
现代文：我确实知道穿什么衣服是小事，然而现在一心想要守丧，一概用吉礼之物替换，是使至诚之心受到伤害的事，不是表达思慕之情的方式。
English: I do know that what clothes to wear is a small matter, but now the whole idea of mourning and replacing everything with auspicious things is a matter of hurting the sincerity of the heart, not a way to express the feelings of yearning.

古文：每代礼典质文皆不同耳，何为限以近制，使达丧阙然乎！ 
现代文：各个朝代的礼典质朴华丽都不相同，为什么限定依照近代的礼制，使共通的丧礼废缺呢! 
English: The ceremonial of each dynasty is different in its simplicity and splendour, so why limit it to the modern system of etiquette and make the common funeral ceremony obsolete?

古文：群臣又固请，帝流涕久之乃许。
现代文：群臣又再三奏请，皇帝长时间流泪然后同意了。
English: The emperor shed tears for a long time and then agreed.

古文：文明皇后崩及武元杨后崩，天下将吏发哀三日止。
现代文：文明皇后和武元杨后崩，天下将吏哀悼三天后停止。
English: After the demise of Empress Wenming and Emperor Wuyuan, the mourning of the world's generals stopped after three days.

古文：穆帝崩，哀帝立。
现代文：穆帝崩，哀帝即位。
English: Mu Di passed away and Emperor Paidei ascended the throne.

古文：帝于穆帝为从父昆弟，穆帝舅褚歆有表，中书答表朝廷无其仪，诏下议。
现代文：皇帝是穆帝的叔伯兄弟，堕帝之舅褚歆上表，中书答覆朝廷没有这样的礼仪，韶令交付朝廷议论。
English: The emperor is the uncle and brother of Mu Di, the uncle of the fallen emperor, and the imperial rescript replied that the imperial court did not have such etiquette. The imperial decree was submitted to the imperial court for discussion.

古文：尚书仆射江虨等四人并云，闵僖兄弟也，而为父子，则哀帝应为帝嗣。
现代文：尚书仆射江彭等四人都说，闵、僖是兄弟，而像父子一样继承，那么哀帝应该是皇帝的继承人。
English: Shang Shufu, Zhaojiang Peng and four others all said that Zhai and Zhai are brothers, and inherit like father and son, so the emperor should be the emperor's heir.

古文：卫军王述等二十五人云 成帝不私亲爱，越授天伦，康帝受命显宗。
现代文：卫军王述等二十五人说： 成帝对自己的亲人不偏私，越过天伦之亲传授帝位，康帝受命于显宗。
English: Twenty-five people, including Wei Jun Wang, said: Emperor Cheng was not partial to his relatives, and passed the imperial throne to his relatives, while Emperor Kang was ordered by Emperor Xianzong.

古文：社稷之重，已移所授，纂承之序，宜继康皇。 
现代文：社稷之重，已转移了，从继承的次序看，宜继承康皇。 
English: The weight of social responsibility has shifted, and from the perspective of the order of succession, it is appropriate to succeed Emperor Kang.

古文：尚书谢奉等六人云： 继体之正，宜本天属，考之人情，宜继显宗也。 
现代文：尚书谢奎等六人说： 继承的正宗，应当依据天生的关系，从人情上考察，应当继承显宗。 
English: Six people, including Shangshu Xiekui, said, "Inheriting the authentic lineage should be based on innate relationships, and from a human perspective, it should be inherited from the prominent lineage.

古文：诏从述等议，上继显宗。
现代文：诏书听从王述等人的议论，上继显宗。
English: The edict listened to the arguments of Wang Su and others, and followed the lead of Emperor Xianzong.

古文：宁康二年七月，简文帝崩再周而遇闰。
现代文：二年七月，崩后第二个周年遇闰月。
English: In July of the following year, the second anniversary of his death fell on a leap month.

古文：博士谢攸、孔粲议： 鲁襄二十八年十二月乙未，楚子卒，实闰月而言十二月者，附正于前月也。
现代文：博士谢攸、孔粲议论说： 鲁襄二十八年十二月乙未，楚子去世，其实是闰月而说是十二月，是因为附于前面正式的十二月。
English: Drs. Xie You and Kong Rong discussed: Lu Xiang's 28th year, December 28th, Chu Zi's death, is actually a leap month, and it is said to be December, because it is attached to the previous official December.

古文：丧事先远，则应用博士吴商之言，以闰月祥。 
现代文：丧事以远为先，那就应当采用博士吴商的话，在闰月举行祥祭。 
English: If the funeral is far ahead, then the auspicious festival should be held in the intercalary month, according to Dr. Wu Shang.

古文：尚书仆射谢安、中领军王劭、散骑常侍郑袭、右卫将军殷康、骁骑将军袁宏、散骑侍郎殷茂、中书郎车胤、左丞刘遵、吏部郎刘耽意皆同。
现代文：尚书仆射谢安、中领军王劭、散骑常侍郑袭、右卫将军殷康、骁骑将军袁宏、散骑侍郎殷茂、中书郎车胤、左丞刘遵、吏部郎刘耽的意见都相同。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant, Sha Xie'an, the middle leader of the army, Wang Qian, the rider of the cavalry, Zheng Qi, the right guard general, Yin Kang, the cavalry general, Yuan Hong, the rider of the cavalry, Yin Mao, the middle scribe, Che Yin, the left sergeant, Liu Zun, and the officer, Liu Tan, all had the same opinion.

古文：康曰： 过七月而未及八月，岂可谓之逾期。
现代文：殷康说： 过了七月而还没到八月，岂能说是过了周年之时。
English: Yin Kang said: After July but before August, can it really be said that the anniversary has passed?

古文：必所不了，则当从其重者。 
现代文：如果肯定搞不清楚，就应当顺从更重的。 
English: If you are not sure, you should follow a heavier weight.

古文：宏曰： 假值闰十二月而不取者，此则岁未终，固不可得矣。
现代文：袁宏说： 如果碰上闰十二月而不取，那么遣一年就没有终结，本来是不合适的。
English: Yuan Hong said, "If there is a leap December and I don't take it, then I won't complete my one-year term, which would be inappropriate.

古文：《汉书》以闰为后九月，明其同体也。 
现代文：《汉书》以闰月为后九月，表明这道理相同。 
English: "Hanshu" takes the leap month as the last month of September, indicating that this is the same reason.

古文：袭曰： 中宗、肃祖皆以闰月崩，祥除之变皆用闰之后月。
现代文：郑袭说： 中宗、肃祖都在闰月崩，大祥期满除去丧服的改变都用闰的后月。
English: Zheng Wei said: The Chinese and Su ancestors both died in the intercalary month, and the change of mourning clothes after the death of the emperor was made in the intercalary month.

古文：先朝尚用闰之后月，今闰附七月，取之何疑，亦合远日申情之言。
现代文：先朝尚且用闰的后月，现在闰月附在七月之后，用这个月有什么疑惑，也符合以远为先表达哀情的说法。
English: The previous government still used the leap month after the leap month, and now the leap month is attached to July. There is no doubt about using this month, which is also in line with the saying that it is far ahead to express sorrow.

古文：又闰是后七而非八也，岂逾月之嫌乎！ 
现代文：再说闰月是后七月而不是八月，岂有过月的嫌疑! 
English: Besides, the leap month is in late July, not August, so how can there be any suspicion of a leap month!

古文：尚书令王彪之、侍中王混、中丞谯王恬、右丞戴谧等议异，彪之曰： 吴商中才小官，非名贤硕儒、公辅重臣、为时所准则者。
现代文：尚书令王彪之、侍中王混、中丞谯王司马恬、右丞戴谧等有不同的议论，王彪之说： 吴商是个中等才能的小官，不是名贤大儒、公辅重臣、作为时代的楷模的人。
English: Wang Biao Zhi, Wang Biao Zhi, Wang Biao Zhi, Wang Biao Zhi, Wang Biao Zhi, Wang Biao Zhi, Wang Biao Zhi, Wang Biao Zhi, Wang Biao Zhi, Wang Biao Zhi, Wang Biao Zhi, Wang Biao Zhi, Wang Biao Zi, Wang Biao Zi, Wang Biao Zi, Wang Biao Zi, Wang Biao Zi, Wang Biao Zi, Wang Biao Zi, Wang Biao Zi, Wang Biao Zi, Wang Biao Zi, Wang Biao Zi, Wang Biao Zi, Wang Biao Z

古文：又取闰无证据，直揽远日之义，越祥忌，限外取，不合卜远之理。
现代文：再说取闰没有证据，衹是持着远的义理，越过祥忌之日，限于外取，不合于卜远的道理。
English: Moreover, there is no evidence to support the use of the interpolation. It is a far-fetched theory, beyond the day of mourning. It is limited to external use and does not conform to the principle of the interpolation.

古文：又丞相桓公尝论云，《礼》二十五月大祥。
现代文：又丞相桓公曾经论道，《礼》记载二十五个月大祥。
English: In addition, the Prime Minister Kan-ko once said, "Rite" records twenty-five months of great prosperity.

古文：何缘越期取闰，乃二十六月乎？ 
现代文：为什么越过周年取闰，而成了二十六个月呢? 
English: Why did the leap year leap over the anniversary and become twenty-six months?

古文：于是启曰： 或以闰附七月，宜用闰月除者。
现代文：于是启奏说： 有人认为闰月附在七月后，宜用闰月除丧服。
English: Then the prelude said: Some people think that the leap month is attached to July, so it is appropriate to use the leap month to remove mourning clothes.

古文：或以闰名虽除七月，而实以三旬别为一月，故应以七月除者。
现代文：有人认为闰月之名虽然附在七月之后，但实际上三旬就是一个月，所以应该在七月除丧服。
English: Some people think that although the name of the leap month is attached to July, but actually the third month is a month, so it should be removed in July.

古文：臣等与中军将军冲参详，一代大礼，宜准经典。
现代文：臣等与中军将军桓冲参酌详审，一代的大礼，应当依据经典。
English: Vassals and generals of the Chinese army should participate in the detailed examination, and the grand gift of a generation should be based on the classics.

古文：三年之丧，十三月而练，二十五月而毕，《礼》之明文也。
现代文：三年守丧，十三个月练祭，二十五个月结束，这是《礼》上的明文。
English: Three years of mourning, thirteen months of rehearsal, twenty-five months of completion, this is a clear text in the "Rite."

古文：《阳秋》之义，闰在年内，则略而不数。
现代文：《阳秋》之义，闰月在年内，就略去不计。
English: The meaning of "Yangqiu" is that the leap month is within the year, so it is omitted.

古文：明闰在年外，则不应取之以越期忌之重，礼制祥除必正期月故也。 
现代文：表明闰月在年外，那就不应该取闰月以越过周年忌日的重要祭礼，这是礼制中大祥期满除去丧服必用正式的周年的原因。 
English: This indicates that if the leap month falls outside the year, then the leap month should not be used as an important festival to pass the anniversary of the death. This is the reason for removing the formal anniversary of the funeral in the ceremonial system.

古文：己酉晦，帝除缟即吉。
现代文：月末己酉，皇帝除去丧服穿礼服。
English: At the end of the month, the emperor removed his mourning clothes and put on a ceremonial robe.

古文：徐广论曰： 凡辨义详理，无显据明文可以折中夺易，则非疑如何。
现代文：徐广评论说： 凡是辨明义理，如果没有明显的依据和明文可以用来作为准则决定取舍，那就一定有疑难。
English: Xu Guang commented: Whenever there is no obvious basis and clear text that can be used as a criterion to determine the choice, there must be difficulties.

古文：礼疑从重，丧易宁戚，顺情通物，固有成言矣。
现代文：礼法有疑义时从重，治丧之制有疑义宁可更悲哀，顺于事理人情，本来有现成的论断。
English: When there is doubt about the meaning of the etiquette, it is more important. When there is doubt about the meaning of the mourning system, it is better to be more sad.

古文：彪之不能徵援正义，有以相屈，但以名位格人，君子虚受，心无适莫，岂其然哉！
现代文：王彪之不能援引正确的义理，用来说服人，衹是用名位压人，君子虚心接受，心中没有厚薄，难道是这样吗!
English: Is it true that Wang Biao Zi cannot invoke the correct principles of righteousness and use them to persuade people, that he uses his position to oppress people, and that a gentleman accepts with an open mind and has no thickness in his heart?

古文：执政从而行之，其殆过矣。 
现代文：执政者因而施行，大概是不对的。 
English: It is probably not right for the government to do so.

古文：魏武以正月崩，魏文以其年七月设妓乐百戏，是则魏不以丧废乐也。
现代文：魏武于正月崩，魏文在造年七月设各种伎乐歌舞表演，这是魏不因丧事而取消娱乐活动。
English: Wei Wu passed away in the first month of the year, and Wei Wen held various magic music and dance performances in July of the same year. This was Wei Wu's way of cancelling entertainment activities due to his death.

古文：武帝以来，国有大丧，辄废乐终三年。
现代文：从武帝以来，国家有大丧，就取消娱乐活动三年。
English: Since Emperor Wu, the country has been in great mourning, and entertainment activities have been canceled for three years.

古文：惠帝太安元年，太子丧未除，及元会亦废乐。
现代文：惠帝太安元年，太子之丧未除丧服，到元旦朝会群臣也取消乐舞。
English: In the first year of Emperor Hui's reign, the mourning of the prince did not remove the mourning clothes, and on New Year's Day, the courtiers of the imperial court also canceled the music and dance.

古文：穆帝永和中，为中原山陵未修复，频年元会废乐。
现代文：穆帝永和年间，因为中原陵墓没有修复，连年元旦朝会群臣都取消乐舞。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mu Di Yonghe, because the Central Plains mausoleum had not been repaired, the New Year's Day court banquet was cancelled.

古文：是时太后临朝，后父褚裒薨，元会又废乐也。
现代文：这时太后临朝听政，太后父褚裒薨，元旦朝会群臣又取消乐舞。
English: At this time, the Empress Dowager Lin listened to the government, the Empress Dowager's father rebelled, and on New Year's Day, the courtiers of the Imperial Court cancelled the music and dance.

古文：孝武太元六年，为皇后王氏丧，亦废乐。
现代文：孝武太元六年，因皇后王氏之丧，也取消娱乐活动。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, due to the death of Empress Wang, entertainment activities were also cancelled.

古文：孝武崩，太傅录尚书会稽王道子议： 山陵之后，通婚嫁不得作乐，以一期为断。 
现代文：孝武崩，太傅录尚书会稽王司马道子议论说： 先帝崩后，结婚嫁娶不准作乐，以一周年为限。 
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowu, Wang Sima and Daozi of the Taifu Records Shangshu Association commented: After the death of the former emperor, it is not allowed to make music when getting married, but only for the first anniversary.

古文：汉仪，太皇太后、皇太后崩，长乐太仆、少府大长秋典丧事，三公奉制度，他皆如礼。
现代文：汉代规定，太皇太后、皇太后崩，由长乐太仆、少府大长秋主持丧事，三公负责丧葬制度事宜，其他依礼仪规定。
English: According to the regulations of the Han Dynasty, when the Grand Empress Dowager and the Grand Empress Dowager passed away, the funeral was presided over by Changle Taifu and Shofu Daichangqiu. The three princes were responsible for the funeral system, and other matters were in accordance with the rules of etiquette.

古文：魏晋亦同天子之仪。
现代文：魏、晋也与天子之礼仪相同。
English: The Wei and Jin dynasties also followed the same etiquette.

古文：泰始十年，武元杨皇后崩，及将迁于峻阳陵，依旧制，既葬，帝及群臣除丧即吉。
现代文：泰始十年，武元杨皇后崩，到时将迁到峻阳陵，依旧制，安葬完毕后，皇帝及群臣除去丧服穿礼服。
English: When Empress Wuyuan Yang passed away ten years ago, the emperor and his retainers removed their mourning clothes and put on ceremonial robes.

古文：先是，尚书祠部奏从博士张靖议，皇太子亦从制俱释服。
现代文：在此之前，尚书祠部奏请按照博士张靖的意见，皇太子也依规定一起除丧服。
English: Prior to this, please follow the advice of Dr. Zhang Jing, and the crown prince will also remove his mourning clothes in accordance with the regulations.

古文：博士陈逵议，以为 今制所依，盖汉帝权制，兴于有事，非礼之正。
现代文：博士陈逵议论，认为 现在所依照的制度，是汉皇帝的权宜之制，这种规定出自有关部门，不是正礼。
English: Dr. Chen Xuan argued that the current system is based on the Han emperor's system of expediency. This regulation comes from the relevant departments, and is not proper etiquette.

古文：皇太子无有国事，自宜终服。 
现代文：皇太子没有国事，自然应当服满丧期 。
English: The crown prince has no state affairs, so naturally he should serve out the mourning period.

古文：有诏更详议。
现代文：下韶再详审讨论。
English: The discussion will be reviewed in detail at a later date.

古文：尚书杜预以为： 古者天子诸侯三年之丧始同齐斩，既葬除丧服，谅闇以居，心丧终制，不与士庶同礼。
现代文：尚书杜预认为： 古代天子诸侯服父母之丧开始与齐縯斩缭相同，安葬之后除去丧服，住在服丧之处，不穿孝服守丧直到服丧期满，不与士入平民同礼。
English: Shangshu Du Yu believes that: the ancient sons of heaven and princes began to wear the same mourning clothes for their parents as Qi Yan Zhen, removed the mourning clothes after burial, lived in the place of mourning, did not wear filial piety until the mourning period was over, and did not join the commoners in the same ceremony.

古文：汉氏承秦，率天下为天子修服三年。
现代文：漠氏承秦制，普天下为天子穿丧服三年。
English: Under the Qin Dynasty, the whole world wore mourning clothes for three years for the heavenly son.

古文：汉文帝见其下不可久行，而不知古制，更以意制祥禫，除丧即吉。
现代文：汉文帝看到下民服丧不能时间太长，却不知道古代的礼制，另外按自己的意旨制定祥掸之祭，除去丧服穿礼服。
English: Emperor Hanwen saw that the mourning period should not be too long, but he did not know the ancient etiquette. In addition, according to his own intention, he formulated the Xiangye Festival, removed the mourning clothes and wore a dress.

古文：魏氏直以讫葬为节，嗣君皆不复谅闇终制。
现代文：魏氏衹以到下葬为限，继位之君不在居丧之所服满丧期。
English: The Wei family's mourning period is limited to the time of burial, and the prince who succeeds to the throne is not in mourning until the period of mourning is over.

古文：学者非之久矣，然竟不推究经传，考其行事，专谓王者三年之丧，当以衰麻终二十五月。
现代文：学者们很久以来就认为这样不对，然而终究不从经传中去推究，考察其中的行事，祇说王者三年的服丧期，应当穿缭麻满二十五个月。
English: Scholars have long held that this is not correct, but in the end they do not look to the scriptures to examine the actions therein, only to say that the king's three-year mourning period should last a full twenty-five months.

古文：嗣君苟若此，则天子群臣皆不得除丧。
现代文：继位之君如果这样，那么天子群臣都不能除去丧服。
English: If this is the case for the heir to the throne, then all of heaven's sons and ministers cannot remove their mourning clothes.

古文：虽志在居笃，更逼而不行。
现代文：虽然有志于专心服丧，受到各种因素的交替制约而不能实行。
English: Although they are willing to pay attention to mourning, they are alternately constrained by various factors and cannot practice.

古文：至今世主皆从汉文轻典，由处制者非制也。
现代文：到现在君王都依照汉文的轻典，是由于居丧守孝的人不守礼制。
English: Up until now, emperors have been crowned according to a simplified Chinese script. This is due to the fact that those who are filial to the deceased do not observe the etiquette.

古文：今皇太子与尊同体，宜复古典，卒哭除衰麻，以谅闇终制。
现代文：现在皇太子与皇上同体，应恢复古制，卒哭之祭后除去丧服。
English: Now that the crown prince and the emperor are the same person, the old system should be restored, and the mourning clothes should be removed after the wailing ceremony.

古文：于义既不应不除，又无取于汉文，乃所以笃丧礼也。 
现代文：在居丧之所服满丧期。从义理上说既不应该不除丧服，又不取法，是使丧礼纯正的方式。 
English: After the period of mourning is over, the funeral service should be held at the funeral home. From a moral point of view, it is not necessary to remove the mourning clothes, nor to take the method. This is the way to make the funeral pure.

古文：于是尚书仆射卢饮、尚书魏舒问杜预证据所依。
现代文：于是尚书仆射卢敛、尚书委凿蟹问丝预所依据的证据是什么。
English: As a result, Shang Shuxu's minions shot Lu Chen, and Shang Shuxu's committee chiseled crabs to ask what the evidence was based on.

古文：预云： 传称三年之丧自天子达，此谓天子绝期，唯有三年丧也。
现代文：丝预说： 古书说三年之丧期从天子起，这是说天子没有一年的丧期，衹有三年的丧期。
English: Prediction: An ancient book says that the three-year mourning period begins with the heavenly son. This means that the heavenly son does not have a one-year mourning period, but a three-year mourning period.

古文：非谓居丧衰服三年，与士庶同也。
现代文：不是说居丧三年穿丧服，与士人平民同礼。
English: It does not mean that the mourners wear mourning clothes for three years and wear the same dress as the commoners.

古文：故后、世子之丧，而叔向称有三年之丧二也。
现代文：所以皇后、太子之丧，而叔向说有三年之丧两件。
English: Therefore, the death of the empress and the crown prince, and my uncle said that there were two deaths in three years.

古文：周公不言高宗服丧三年，而云谅闇三年，此释服心丧之文也。
现代文：周公不说高宗服丧三年，而说在居丧之所守丧三年，这是解释不穿丧服守丧的文字。
English: Zhou Gong did not say that Gaozong had been in mourning for three years, but said that he had been in mourning for three years, which was a text explaining that he did not wear mourning clothes.

古文：叔向不讥景王除丧，而讥其燕乐已早，明既葬应除，而违谅闇之节也。
现代文：叔向不讥刺景王除去丧服，而讥刺他宴饮奏乐太早，表明安葬之后应该除去丧服，可是违反了居住在守丧之所守丧的礼节。
English: The uncle did not ridicule Jing Wang for removing his mourning clothes, but ridiculed his banquet and music for being too early, indicating that the mourning clothes should be removed after burial, but it violated the etiquette of living in mourning.

古文：《春秋》，晋侯享诸侯，子产相郑伯，时简公未葬，请免丧以听命，君子谓之得礼。
现代文：《春秋》中，晋侯设宴招待诸侯，子产辅佐郑伯，当时郑国简公还未下葬，请求除去丧服以后再听取命令，君子说这样很符合礼义。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," the prince of Jin set up a banquet to invite the princes, and Zheng Bo, the assistant of the progeny, at that time Zheng Guo Jian Gong had not yet been buried, requested to remove the funeral clothes before listening to the order. The gentleman said that this was in line with etiquette.

古文：宰咺来归惠公仲子之赗，传曰 吊生不及哀 。此皆既葬除服谅闇之证，先儒旧说，往往亦见，学者来之思耳。
现代文：宰晅前来馈送惠公仲子的助丧之物，传中说 吊慰活着的人没有赶上葬后的安神礼，这都是安葬之后除去丧服在居丧之所守丧的证明，先儒原有的说法，也常常可以见到，衹是学者没有好好考虑。
English: According to legend, the sacrificial eunuchs came to give offerings to the mourners of Hui Gong's companion, and it is said that the condolences of the living did not catch up with the funeral ceremony. This is proof that after the burial, the mourning clothes were removed and the funeral was held in the place of mourning. The original saying of the early Confucianists can often be seen that the scholars did not consider it well.

古文：《丧服》，诸侯为天子亦斩衰，岂可谓终服三年邪！
现代文：《丧服》中，诸侯为天子也穿斩绩，难道能说一直穿满三年吗?
English: In "The Funeral Robe," the princes also wear it for the son of heaven. Can it really be said that they have been wearing it for three years?

古文：上考七代，未知王者君臣上下衰麻三年者谁；下推将来，恐百世之主其理一也。
现代文：向上考察七代，不知道帝王君臣上下穿丧服三年的有谁；向下推论将来，恐怕百代帝王将是同样的道理罢。
English: Looking up the seven generations, I don't know who the emperors, monarchs, and courtiers were who wore mourning clothes for three years; looking down the future, I'm afraid the same will be true for hundreds of emperors.

古文：非必不能，乃事势不得，故知圣人不虚设不行之制。
现代文：并不是一定办不到，而是情况不允许，所以知道圣人不虚设不能实行的制度。
English: It is not necessarily impossible, but the situation does not allow it, so we know that sages do not falsely set up a system that cannot be implemented.

古文：仲尼曰 礼所损益虽百世可知 ，此之谓也。 
现代文：仲尼说 礼法的增减即使是百代也可以知道 ，说的就是这个。 
English: Zhongni said that the increase and decrease of etiquette can be known even by a hundred generations, which is what he said.

古文：于是饮、舒从之，遂命预造议，奏曰：侍中尚书令司空鲁公臣贾充、侍中尚书仆射奉车都尉大梁侯臣卢钦、尚书新沓伯臣山涛、尚书奉车都尉平春侯臣胡威、尚书剧阳子臣魏舒、尚书堂阳子臣石鉴、尚书丰乐亭侯臣杜预稽首言：礼官参议博士张靖等议，以为 孝文权制三十六日之服，以日易月，道有污隆，礼不得全，皇太子亦宜割情除服 。
现代文：于是卢钦、魏舒认为他说得对，就让杜预写奏议，奏道：侍中尚书令司空鲁公臣贾充、侍中尚书仆射奉车都尉大梁侯臣卢钦、尚书新沓伯臣山涛、尚书奉车都尉平春侯臣胡威、尚书剧阳子臣魏舒、尚书堂阳子臣石鉴、尚书丰乐亭侯臣杜预叩首说：礼官参议博士张靖等议论，认为 孝文权宜之制规定三十六天的服丧期，用代替月，道有盛有衰，礼不可能完美，皇太子应割舍哀情除去丧服 。
English: Therefore, Lu Qin and Wei Shu thought that he was right, so they asked Du to write a pre-recorded speech. The speech was given by: Jia Chong, the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamberlain of the Vice-Chamber

古文：博士陈逵等议，以为 三年之丧，人子所以自尽，故圣人制礼，自上达下。
现代文：博士陈逵等议论，认为 三年的服丧期，是人子用以表达哀情的方式，所以圣人制定礼法，从上到下都通用。
English: Dr. Chen Qi and others argued that the three-year mourning period is a way for mortals to express their grief, so the sage established a ritual that is universal from top to bottom.

古文：是以今制，将吏诸遭父母丧，皆假宁二十五月。
现代文：因此现在规定，众将吏遭父母之丧者，都给假二十五个月回家服丧。
English: Therefore, it is now stipulated that all generals who have suffered the death of their parents are allowed to go home for 25 months to mourn.

古文：敦崇孝道，所以风化天下。
现代文：这是为使孝道笃厚，用来风化天下的方式。
English: This is a way to spread filial piety throughout the world.

古文：皇太子至孝著于内，而衰服除于外，非礼所谓称情者也。
现代文：皇太子内心以极孝著称，可是外表上却要除去丧服，遣不是礼所说的与情相符的做法。
English: The crown prince is known for his extreme filial piety in his heart, but on the outside he has to remove his mourning clothes, which is not what the etiquette says is the right thing to do.

古文：宜其不除。 
现代文：不宜除丧服 。
English: It is not appropriate to remove mourning clothes.

古文：臣钦、臣舒、臣预谨案靖、逵等议，各见所学之一端，未晓帝者居丧古今之通礼也。
现代文：臣卢钦、魏舒、杜预谨考察张靖、陈逵等的议论，都衹看到所学礼法的一个方面，不懂得帝王服丧之事古今的共通之礼。
English: Lu Qin, Wei Shu, and Du Yuanzhi carefully examined the discussions of Zhang Jing and Chen Qi. Tudou saw an aspect of the etiquette he had learned, and did not understand the common etiquette of the emperor's funeral from ancient times to the present.

古文：自上及下，尊卑贵贱，物有其宜。
现代文：从上到下，尊卑贵贱，事物各有自己所适宜的道理。
English: From top to bottom, high and low, high and low, things have their own appropriate reason.

古文：故礼有以多为贵者，有以少为贵者，有以高为贵者，有以下为贵者，唯其称也。
现代文：所以礼有以多为贵的，有以少为贵的，有以高为贵的，有以下为贵的，都衹能根据本身所适宜。
English: Therefore, some etiquettes are more expensive than others, some are less expensive than others, some are more expensive than others, and some are less expensive than others, all of which can be based on what is appropriate.

古文：不然，则本末不经，行之不远。
现代文：不然的话，那就本末不正，就不能长期实行。
English: Otherwise, it is fundamentally unfair and cannot be implemented for a long time.

古文：天子之与群臣，虽哀乐之情若一，而所居之宜实异，故礼不得同。
现代文：天子与群臣，虽然哀乐的感情相同，但所处的地位实在有别，所以礼也不能相同。
English: Although the feelings of sorrow and joy are the same between the heavenly son and the ministers, the positions they occupy are quite different, so the etiquette cannot be the same.

古文：《易》曰 上古之世丧期无数 ，《虞书》称 三载四海遏密八音 ，其后无文。
现代文：《易》说 上古之时丧期没有规定的时限 ，《虞书》说 三年之中天下不奏乐 ，这以后就没有别的文字记载了。
English: "Yi" says that in ancient times there was no specified time limit for the period of mourning, "Yu Shu" says that for three years there was no music in the world, and after that there is no other written record.

古文：至周公旦，乃称 殷之高宗谅闇三年不言 。
现代文：到周公旦，才说 殷的高宗住在守丧之所三年不说话 。
English: It took Zhou Gongdan to say that Gaozong Yin had lived in the funeral home for three years without speaking.

古文：其传曰 谅，信也；闇，默也 。
现代文：注解说 谅，确实；合，沉默 。
English: The annotation says 諒, indeed;合, silence.

古文：下逮五百余岁，而子张疑之，以问仲尼。
现代文：过了五百多年，子张对此有疑虑，就去问仲尼。
English: After more than five hundred years, Zi Zhang had doubts about this, so he went to ask Zhongni.

古文：仲尼答云： 何必高宗，古之人皆然，君薨，百官总己以听于冢宰三年。 
现代文：仲尼回答说： 不仅仅是高宗，古代的人都是这样，君王薨，百官都听命于冢宰三年。 
English: Zhongni replied, "Not only Gaozong, but all the people in ancient times were like this. All the kings, emperors, and officials obeyed Xuzhai for three years.

古文：周景王有后、世子之丧，既葬除丧而乐。
现代文：周景王有皇后、太子的丧事，安葬之后除去丧服而宴饮奏乐。
English: Zhou Jing Wang had the funeral of the empress and the prince, and after the burial, he removed the funeral clothes and played music.

古文：晋叔向讥之曰： 三年之丧，虽贵遂服，礼也。
现代文：晋叔向讥刺说： 三年服丧期，即使贵为天子也要服满，这是礼法。
English: Uncle Jin said to the mocker, "It is the etiquette to complete the three-year mourning period, even if you are the son of Heaven.

古文：王虽弗遂，宴乐已早，亦非礼也。 
现代文：现在王即使不能服满丧期，宴饮奏乐太早，也不合礼法。 
English: Now, even if the king cannot serve the full mourning period, the banquet music is too early and does not conform to etiquette.

古文：此皆天子丧事见于古文者也。
现代文：这些都是古代文献中关于天子的丧事的记载。
English: These are all records of the funeral of the heavenly son in ancient literature.

古文：称高宗不云服丧三年，而云谅闇三年，此释服心丧之文也。
现代文：称高宗时不说服丧三年，而说在居丧之所三年，这是解释脱去丧服守丧的文字。
English: Saying that Gao Zongshi did not persuade mourning for three years, but said that he was in the house of mourning for three years, this is a text to explain how to take off mourning clothes and keep mourning.

古文：讥景王不讥其除丧，而讥其宴乐已早，明既葬应除，而违谅闇之节也。
现代文：讥刺景王时不讥刺他除去丧服，而讥刺他宴饮奏乐太早，表明安葬之后应该除去丧服，可是违反了在居丧之所守丧的礼节。
English: The ridicule of King Gyeongbokgol did not ridicule him for removing his mourning clothes, but the ridicule of his banquet and music was too early, indicating that the mourning clothes should be removed after burial, but it violated the etiquette of mourning at the funeral home.

古文：尧崩，舜谅闇三年，故称遏密八音。
现代文：尧崩，舜在居丧之所守丧三年，所以说不奏乐。
English: passed away,  was in mourning for three years, so he did not play music.

古文：由此言之，天子居丧，齐斩之制，菲杖绖带，当遂其服。
现代文：由此而言，天子居丧，齐縯斩縯之服，菲杖绖带，应当服满丧期。
English: From this point of view, the funeral of the heavenly son, the clothes of the funeral, and the scepter of the scepter of the scepter, should serve the full mourning period.

古文：既葬而除，谅闇以终之，三年无改父之道，故百官总已听于冢宰。
现代文：安葬之后除去丧服，在居丧之所守丧期满，三年不改变其父的为政之道，所以百官都听命于冢宰。
English: After the funeral, the mourning clothes are removed, and the mourning period is completed at the place of mourning. For three years, he does not change his father's way of doing politics, so all officials are subject to his orders.

古文：丧服已除，故称不言之美，明不复寝苫枕塊，以荒大政也。《礼记》： 三年之丧，自天子达。 
现代文：丧服已经除去，所以称美不说话，表明不再枕着土块睡在草垫子上，而荒废国家大政。《礼记》说： 三年之丧，从天子开始。 
English: The mourning clothes have been removed, so the dead do not speak, indicating that they no longer sleep on a straw mat with a lump of earth as a pillow, but the country's great power is abandoned. "Li Ji" said: The three-year mourning begins with the Son of Heaven.

古文：又云： 父母之丧，无贵贱一也。 
现代文：又说： 父母之丧，不分贵贱都是一样的。 
English: He also said, "The loss of a parent is the same no matter how high or low one is.

古文：又云： 端衰丧车皆无等。 
现代文：又说： 丧服的上衣、丧车都不分等次。 
English: He also said, "The mourning clothes, the coats, and the carts are not ranked in order of importance.

古文：此通谓天子居丧，衣服之节同于凡人，心丧之礼终于三年，亦无服丧三年之文。
现代文：这都是说天子居丧，衣服的规定与凡人相同，不穿丧服心存哀悼三年，也没有服丧三年的记载。
English: All of this is to say that the heavenly son is in mourning, the rules of clothing are the same as those of ordinary people, do not wear mourning clothes and mourn for three years, and there is no record of mourning for three years.

古文：然继体之君，犹多荒宁。
现代文：然而继位之君，还是常常懈怠荒废。
English: However, the heir to the throne is often lazy and wasteful.

古文：自从废谅闇之制，至令高宗擅名于往代，子张致疑于当时，此乃贤圣所以为讥，非讥天子不以服终丧也。
现代文：自从废止在居丧之所守丧之制后，就使得高宗在古代大为出名，使子张在那时产生疑问，造就是贤圣之所以讥刺的原因，而不是讥刺天子不穿丧服守丧期满。
English: Since the abolition of the system of mourning in the house of mourning, it made Gaozong very famous in ancient times, causing Zhang Zizhi to have doubts at that time, which was the reason for the mockery of the sage, rather than the mockery of the heavenly son not wearing mourning clothes to observe the end of the mourning period.

古文：秦燔书籍，率意而行，亢上抑下。
现代文：秦焚烧书籍，任意行事，违背古礼影响后世。
English: Qin burned books, acted arbitrarily, violated ancient rites and influenced future generations.

古文：汉祖草创，因而不革。
现代文：汉祖草创，因袭不变。
English: The Han ancestors created it from scratch, and it has remained unchanged.

古文：乃至率天下皆终重服，旦夕哀临，经罹寒暑，禁塞嫁娶饮酒食肉，制不称情。
现代文：以至于全天下都穿重服守丧期满，早晚哀哭，经历寒暑，禁止嫁娶饮酒吃肉，其制度不合情理。
English: The system is so unreasonable that the whole country wears heavy clothing, observes the end of the mourning period, weeps in the morning and evening, experiences cold and heat, and is forbidden to marry, drink alcohol and eat meat.

古文：是以孝文遗诏，敛毕便葬，葬毕制红禫之除。
现代文：因此汉文临终下韶，入殓后就下葬，安葬之后制定了穿各种丧服的人祭祀除丧服的期限。
English: Therefore, Han Wen was cremated at the end of his life, buried after being cremated, and after burial, a period of time was set for people wearing various funeral clothes to remove the funeral clothes.

古文：虽不合高宗谅闇之义，近于古典，故传之后嗣。
现代文：造虽不合高宗在居丧之所守丧的义理，但与古制接近，所以传于后世。
English: Although it does not conform to the principle of mourning observed by Gaozong at his residence, it is close to the ancient system, so it has been passed down to future generations.

古文：于时预修陵庙，故敛葬得在浃辰之内，因以定制。
现代文：当时预先修建陵庙，所以入殓下葬能在十二天内完成，因而定局制度。
English: At that time, mausoleums were built in advance, so the burial under the coffin could be completed within twelve days, thus establishing a predetermined system.

古文：近至明帝，存无陵寝，五旬乃葬，安在三十六日。
现代文：近到明帝，没有陵庙存放牌位，五十天才下葬，哪裹还说得上三十六天的服丧期呢?
English: Close to the Ming Dynasty, there was no mausoleum or temple to store the plaques, and it took fifty days to bury the dead. How can it be said to be a thirty-six-day mourning period?

古文：此当时经学疏略，不师前圣之病也。
现代文：这是因为当时经学疏略，不效法前代圣人的弊病。
English: This was due to the fact that at that time, they did not follow the teachings of the previous sages.

古文：魏氏革命，以既葬为节，合于古典，然不垂心谅闇，同讥前代。
现代文：魏氏应从天命改朝换代，以安葬后为限，与古制相合，但是不注重在居丧之所守丧，舆前人所讥刺的毛病相同。
English: The Wei dynasty should change the dynasty from the fate of heaven to the change of generation, limited to after the burial, consistent with the old system, but do not pay attention to the funeral at the place of mourning, the same problems that the predecessors of the public ridicule.

古文：自泰始开元，陛下追尊谅闇之礼，慎终居笃，允臻古制，超绝于殷宗，天下歌德，诚非靖等所能原本也。
现代文：自从泰始开元以来，陛下追效前代崇尚在居丧之所守丧之礼，自始至终谨慎地诚笃居丧，确实符合古制，超过了殷宗，天下歌颂，这确实不是张靖等人所能追溯到的。
English: Since the beginning of the Taizhi era, His Majesty has followed the example of the previous generation in advocating the funeral ceremony held in the funeral hall, and from beginning to end, he has carefully and sincerely attended the funeral, which is indeed in line with the ancient system, surpasses the Yinzong, and is praised by the world. This is indeed not something that Zhang Jing and others can trace back.

古文：天子诸侯之礼，当以具矣。
现代文：天子诸侯的礼制，应当是很完备的。
English: The etiquette of the prince of princes should be very complete.

古文：诸侯恶其害己而削其籍，今其存者唯《士丧》一篇，戴圣之记杂错其间，亦难以取正。
现代文：诸侯厌恶这种礼法妨害自己而删削典籍，现在保存下来的衹有《士丧》一篇，而戴圣的记载又参杂在其间，也难以作为准则。
English: Princes abhorred this kind of self-sabotaging etiquette and deleted the classic books. The only one that has been preserved now is a copy of "The Funeral of a Hero," and the record of the canonization is mixed in with it, and it is difficult to use it as a guideline.

古文：天子之位至尊，万机之政至大，群臣之众至广，不同之于凡人。
现代文：天子之位极尊，国家政务极大，群臣的人数极多，与凡人是不同的。
English: The position of the Son of Heaven is the most exalted, the affairs of state are the most important, and the number of ministers is extremely large, which is different from that of ordinary people.

古文：故大行既葬，祔祭于庙，则因疏而除之。
现代文：所以刚去世的皇帝安葬之后，就在庙中柑祭，然后除去丧服。
English: Therefore, after the emperor who had just died was buried, there was a mandarin orange festival in the temple, and then the mourning clothes were removed.

古文：己不除则群臣莫敢除，故屈己以除之。
现代文：自己不除丧服群臣就谁也不敢除，因此委屈自己除去丧服。
English: If you don't remove your mourning clothes, no one will dare to remove them, so you have to remove your mourning clothes.

古文：而谅闇以终制，天下之人皆曰我王之仁也。
现代文：而在居丧之所守丧期满，天下之人都说我们君王仁义。
English: And when the mourning period is over, people all over the world say that we are the kings of benevolence.

古文：屈己以从宜，皆曰我王之孝也。
现代文：委屈自己顺从权宜之制，都说我们君王孝顺。
English: Those who are aggrieved by their own obedience to the system of expediency all say that we are more dutiful than kings.

古文：既除而心丧，我王犹若此之笃也。
现代文：不穿丧服守丧，我们君王还是如此纯笃。
English: Without mourning clothes for mourning, we kings are still so pure.

古文：凡等臣子，亦焉得不自勉以崇礼。
现代文：所有的臣子，又怎么能不勉励自己崇尚礼制呢。
English: How can all the courtiers not encourage themselves to uphold the etiquette?

古文：此乃圣制移风易俗之本，高宗所以致雍熙，岂惟衰裳而已哉！
现代文：这本是圣人的礼制，移风易俗的根本，高宗之所以导致和乐升平的原因，哪裹是仅仅穿着丧服而已呢!
English: This was originally a saint's ritual system, the foundation of changing customs, and the reason why Gaozong led to the leveling of harmony, which is just wearing mourning clothes!

古文：若如难者，更以权制自居，疑于屈伸厌降，欲以职事为断，则父在为母期，父卒三年，此以至亲屈于至尊之义也。
现代文：如果为难，再以权宜之制自己居丧，在屈伸厌降方面有疑问，要以职事判断，那么父亲在为母亲服丧周年，父亲去世服丧三年，这是以至亲屈从于至尊的道理。
English: If you are in difficulty, and then use the expedient system to make your own funeral, if you have doubts about the extension and extension, and you have to judge by the job, then the father is in the anniversary of his mother's funeral, and the father died three years after his death. This is the reason why even relatives succumb to the supreme.

古文：出母之丧，以至亲为属，而长子不得有制，体尊之义，升降皆从，不敢独也。
现代文：被父亲休弃的生母之丧，以至亲属属，而长子不得穿丧服，体现至尊之义，升降都跟随，不敢专独。
English: The bereavement of the birth mother, who was abandoned by the father, even extends to relatives, and the eldest son is not allowed to wear mourning clothes, reflecting the highest righteousness, promotion and demotion follow, not daring to be exclusive.

古文：《礼》：诸子之职，掌国子之倅。
现代文：《礼》规定：诸子的职责是掌管国子的聚集训练。
English: "Rite" stipulates: the responsibility of the sons is to take charge of the gathering training of the sons of the state.

古文：国有事则帅国子而致之太子，唯所用之。
现代文：国家有事时就把他们交给太子，一切听他指挥。
English: When the country is in trouble, they are handed over to the crown prince, and everything is at his command.

古文：《传》曰， 君行则守，有守则从，从曰抚军，守曰监国 ，不无事矣。
现代文：《传》说 君王出行就留守，有人留守就随行，随行叫做抚军，留守叫做监国 ，不算是无事。
English: "Legend" says that when the king travels, he stays behind, and if someone stays behind, he accompanies him. The accompanying party is called the army, and the person who stays behind is called the overseer of the country, which is not nothing.

古文：《丧服》母为长子，妻为夫，妾为主，皆三年。
现代文：《丧服》规定母为长子，妻为夫，妾为主，都服丧三年。
English: "Funeral clothes" stipulates that the mother is the eldest son, the wife is the husband, the concubine is the main, and they all serve three years of mourning.

古文：内宫之主，可谓无事、揆度汉制，孝文之丧，红禫既毕，孝景即吉于未央，薄后、窦后必不得齐斩于别宫，此可知也。
现代文：内宫之主，能说是无事吗?考察汉制，孝文之丧，功禅之祭完毕后，孝景在未央宫穿礼服，薄后、宝后必定不能在另外的宫中穿齐缀斩绶，这是可想而知的。
English: The lord of the inner palace, can it be said that there is nothing wrong? After examining the Han system, the death of Xiaowen, and the completion of the gongzen ceremony, it is conceivable that Xiao Jing will wear a ceremonial dress in the Weiyang Palace, and that Bo Hou and Bao Hou will not be able to wear zizhuzhuzhang in another palace.

古文：况皇太子配贰至尊，与国为体，固宜远遵古礼，近同时制，屈除以宽诸下，协一代之成典。
现代文：何况皇太子辅佐至尊，与国家一体，本来应该上遵古礼，下与近时之制相符，委屈自己除去丧服以宽缓下人，符合一代现有的礼典。
English: What's more, the crown prince's aide-de-camp, who is the most important person in the country, should have followed the ancient etiquette at the top and the modern etiquette at the bottom, and he should have removed his mourning clothes to spare the feelings of his subordinates, which is in line with the current etiquette.

古文：君子之于礼，有直而行，曲而杀；有经而等，有顺而去之，存诸内而已。
现代文：君子对于礼，有的是直接奉行，有的是变通减省；有的是按照常规照章实行，有的是采用权宜之计去掉，保存在内心而已。
English: For the etiquette of a gentleman, some are directly followed, some are flexible and reduced; some are implemented according to the regular rules, and some are removed by means of expediency and kept in the heart.

古文：礼云非玉帛之谓，丧云唯衰麻之谓乎？
现代文：礼不是指玉帛之类，丧事难道仅仅是指缭麻之类的孝服吗?
English: Doesn't "ritual" refer to such things as the Jade Scepter, and "funeral" only refer to such filial piety as the Dazzle?

古文：此既臣等所谓经制大义，且即实近言，亦有不安。
现代文：这既是臣等所说的治国的制度之大义，而且更贴近现实，也有不妥之处。
English: This is not only the great justice of the system of governing the country, but also closer to reality, and there is also something wrong.

古文：今皇太子至孝蒸蒸，发于自然，号咷之慕，匍匐殡宫，大行既奠，往而不反，必想像平故，彳旁徨寝殿。
现代文：现在皇太子至孝笃诚，出自于自然，思念号眺，在停放灵柩的宫中匍匐不起，刚去世的皇后已经祭奠过后，去而不复回，必然会想象她平时的一言一行，在陵墓彷徨。
English: Now the crown prince, who is very filial and sincere, comes from nature, misses the view, and cannot bear to stay in the palace where the coffin is parked. After the newly deceased queen has been honored, she will not return, and will inevitably imagine her usual words and deeds, wandering in the mausoleum.

古文：若不变从谅闇，则东宫臣仆，义不释服。
现代文：如果不变服在居丧之所守丧，那么东宫的臣仆，从道理上说也不能除去丧服。
English: If the same uniform is worn at the place of mourning, then the courtiers of the East Palace cannot reasonably remove their mourning clothes.

古文：此为永福官属，当独衰麻从事，出入殿省，亦难以继。
现代文：这是永福官属，将独自穿丧服行事，出入宫禁，也难以实行下去。
English: This is a Yongfu official, will act alone in mourning clothes, entry and exit ban, and it is difficult to implement.

古文：今将吏虽蒙同二十五月之宁，至于大臣，亦夺其制。
现代文：现在将吏虽蒙恩都有二十五个月的假为父母服丧，但是如果是大臣，也要改变他的丧期。
English: Although generals are now allowed to take 25 months off to mourn their parents, if they are ministers, the period of mourning must also be changed.

古文：昔翟方进自以身为汉相，居丧三十六日，不敢逾国典，而况于皇太子？
现代文：从前翟方进认为自己是漠丞相，服丧三十六天，不敢超过国家典章的规定，何况皇太子呢?
English: From the front, Zou Fangjin thought that he was the prime minister of the desert, and he did not dare to exceed the provisions of the national ordinance, not to mention the crown prince.

古文：臣等以为皇太子宜如前奏，除服谅闇终制。
现代文：臣等认为皇太子应如前面所奏，除去丧服在居丧之所守丧满三年。
English: The courtiers thought that the crown prince should remove his mourning clothes and stay at his residence for three years, as mentioned above.

古文：于是太子遂以厌降之议，从国制除衰麻，谅闇终制。
现代文：于是太子就按照厌降的说法，顺从国制除去丧服，在居丧之所守丧满三年。
English: So the prince, according to the theory of aversion to surrender, removed his mourning clothes in obedience to the state system, and mourned for three years at the residence of mourning.

古文：于时外内卒闻预异议，多怪之。
现代文：当时内外之人猛一听到杜预的异议，都很奇怪。
English: At that time, it was very strange for people at home and abroad to suddenly hear Du Yuan's objection.

古文：或者乃谓其违礼以合时。
现代文：有人就说他违礼以趋合时事。
English: Some people said that he violated etiquette to fit in with current events.

古文：时预亦不自解说，退使博士段暢博采典籍，为之证据，令大义著明，足以垂示将来。
现代文：当时杜预自己也不解释，回去让博士段畅广泛收集典籍中的有关议论，作为证据，要使大义昭彰，足以留传到将来。
English: At that time, Du Yu did not explain himself, but went back and let the doctoral section collect the relevant discussions in the classics extensively, as evidence, to make the truth known, enough to be passed down to the future.

古文：暢承预旨，遂撰集书传旧文，条诸实事成言，以为定证，以弘指趣。
现代文：段畅接受杜预的意旨，于是撰集书传中的旧说，把书籍中记载的事实和成说一条条列举出来，作为确定的证据，以弘扬他的宗旨。
English: Duan Chang accepted Du Yu's intention, so he compiled the old stories in the book and listed the facts and stories recorded in the books as definite evidence to promote his purpose.

古文：其传记有与今议同者，亦具列之，博举二隅，明其会归，以证斯事。
现代文：传记中有与现在的议论相同的，也列举出来，广泛列举两种说法，以表明所凭藉的准则，以证明这件事。
English: In the biography there are the same two statements as in the present discussion, and they are enumerated, extensively enumerated, to show the standard by which to prove the matter.

古文：文多不载。
现代文：其文辞繁多不载。
English: Its words are many and varied.

古文：武帝杨悼皇后既母养怀帝，后遇难时，怀帝尚幼，及即位，中诏述后恩爱。
现代文：武帝杨悼皇后抚养了怀帝，皇后遇难时，怀帝还年幼，到他即位，亲自下诏书叙述皇后的恩爱。
English: Emperor Wu Yang mourned for the empress and raised Emperor Huai. When the empress was killed, Emperor Huai was still young. When he ascended the throne, he personally issued an edict describing the queen's love.

古文：及后祖载，群官议帝应为追制服，或以庶母慈己，依礼制小功五月，或以谓慈母服如母服齐衰者，众议不同。
现代文：到皇后将要下葬行祖祭之礼时，群官议论皇帝应为她追服丧，有的认为作为庶母慈爱自己，依礼服小功五月之丧，有的认为抚养自己的庶母如同生母服齐线，众人说法不同。
English: When the empress was about to be buried and the ancestor's rite was performed, the group officials began to argue that the emperor should mourn for her. Some thought that as the mother-in-law, she loved herself. According to the ceremonial dress, the funeral was in May. Others thought that raising one's mother-in-law was the same as the mother-in-law. Everyone's opinion was different.

古文：闾丘冲议云： 杨后母养圣上，盖以曲情。
现代文：间丘冲议论： 杨后抚养圣上，这是私情。
English: Discussion between the hills: It's a private matter for Yang Hou to raise Sheng Shang.

古文：今以恩礼追崇，不配世祖庙。
现代文：现在以恩礼追封号，不能拊祭于世祖庙。
English: Now, with the grace of the emperor, it is not possible to make a sacrificial offering at the ancestral temple.

古文：王者无慈养之服，谓宜祖载之日，可三朝素服发哀而已。 
现代文：帝王没有慈养的丧服，认为可在下葬行祖祭之礼时，穿素服三天哀哭而已。 
English: The emperor did not have the proper mourning clothes and thought that he could wear plain clothes and mourn for three days while performing the ancestral rites at the funeral.

古文：于是从之。
现代文：于是听从他的说法。
English: So they obeyed him.

古文：康帝建元元年正月晦，成恭杜皇后周忌，有司奏，至尊期年应改服。
现代文：康帝建元元年正月末，成恭杜皇后周年忌日，主管部门奏议，至尊满一年应该改服。
English: At the end of the first month of the first year of Kangdi Jianyuan, on the anniversary of the death of Empress Chenggongdu, the competent department made a report that the clothes should be changed after one year.

古文：诏曰： 君亲，名教之重也，权制出于近代耳。 
现代文：下诏说： 君和亲，是礼教中最重要的，权宜之制衹是近代才出现的。 
English: The next edict said: "You and your relatives are the most important thing in etiquette. Expedient discipline only appeared in modern times.

古文：于是素服如旧，固非汉魏之典也。
现代文：于是照旧穿素服，这本不是汉、魏的礼典。
English: As a result, they continued to wear plain clothes, which was not a Han or Wei ritual.

古文：兴宁元年，哀帝章皇太妃薨，帝欲服重。
现代文：兴宁元年，哀帝章皇太妃薨，皇帝想服重孝。
English: In the first year of the Xingning era, Emperor Xizang of the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager, the emperor wanted to serve Shigetaka.

古文：江虨启： 先王制礼，应在缌服。 
现代文：江彭启奏： 先王制定的礼法，应该是穿鳃服。 
English: Jiang Peng Qiao: The etiquette established by the late king should be to wear formal clothes.

古文：诏欲降期，江虨又启： 厌屈私情，所以上严祖考。 
现代文：下韶想降格为周年丧期，江彭又启奏说： 压抑私情，就是尊崇祖先。 
English: The lower jaw wants to be downgraded to the anniversary mourning period, and Jiang Peng said: Suppressing selfishness is to respect the ancestors.

古文：于是制缌麻三月。
现代文：于是穿鳃麻三个月。
English: And he was three months in sackcloth and ashes.

古文：孝武宁康中，崇德太后褚氏崩。
现代文：孝武宁康年间，崇德太后褚氏崩。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowu, Empress Dowager Zongde passed away.

古文：后于帝为从嫂，或疑其服。
现代文：太后是皇帝的堂嫂，有人对服什么规格的丧有疑问。
English: The empress dowager is the emperor's sister-in-law. Some people have doubts about the size of the mourning dress.

古文：博士徐藻议，以为： 资父事君而敬同。
现代文：博士徐藻议论，认为： 侍奉父亲与事君恭敬相同。
English: Dr. Xu Miao said: Serving one's father is the same as respecting one's relatives.

古文：又，礼，其夫属父道者，其妻皆母道也。
现代文：又，礼法规定，其夫属于父亲的行辈的，其妻都属于母亲的行辈。
English: In addition, the etiquette law stipulates that if the husband belongs to the father's lineage, his wife belongs to the mother's lineage.

古文：则夫属君道，妻亦后道矣。
现代文：那么夫属于君辈，妻也就是后辈了。
English: Then the husband belongs to the monarchs, and the wife belongs to the younger generation.

古文：服后宜以资母之义。
现代文：为太后服丧应以侍奉母亲的样子。
English: The mourning for the empress dowager should be in the form of serving her mother.

古文：鲁讥逆祀，以明尊尊。
现代文：鲁讥刺违反上下位次的祭祀，以表明尊重尊者。
English: In order to show respect for His Holiness, Lu sneered at the sacrificial rites that violated the hierarchy.

古文：今上躬奉康、穆、哀皇及靖后之祀，致敬同于所天。
现代文：现在皇上亲奉康、穆、哀皇及靖后的祭祀，表达的敬意与父相同。
English: Now, the Emperor himself attends the rites of Kang, Mu, Laiwang, and the post-Jing dynasty, expressing the same respect as his father.

古文：岂可敬之以君道，而服废于本亲。
现代文：怎么能以君辈恭敬他，而因自家的亲戚关系不服丧呢?
English: How can one revere him as a great man and not be saddened by one's own kinship?

古文：谓应服齐衰期。 
现代文：认为应当服齐缀一年。 
English: It was considered that they should serve for one year.

古文：于是帝制期服。
现代文：于是皇帝服一年丧。
English: As a result, the emperor died a year later.

古文：隆安四年，孝武太皇太后李氏崩，疑所服。
现代文：隆室四年，继太皇太后奎压崩，服丧的规格有疑问。
English: In the fourth year of the imperial family, following the collapse of the great empress Dowager Kui, the specifications of mourning are questionable.

古文：尚书左仆射何澄、右仆射王雅、尚书车胤、孔安国、祠部郎徐广议、太皇太后名位允正，体同皇极，理制备尽，情礼弥申。
现代文：尚书左仆射何澄、右仆射王雅、尚书娄胤、孔安国、祠部郎鑪议论： 太皇太后名位很正，与皇帝同体，道理和制度都具备，感情和礼法更加顺畅。
English: Shangshu's left-hand servant Sha He Cheng, his right-hand servant Sha Wang Ya, Shangshu Xuanlin, Kong An Guo, and the minister of the ancestral hall, Lang Yao, discuss: The empress dowager's title is very correct, she is the same as the emperor, she has reason and system, and her emotions and etiquette are smoother.

古文：《阳秋》之义，母以子贵，既称夫人，礼服从正。
现代文：《阳秋》之义，母以子贵，既然称为夫人，礼仪丧服就要从正。
English: According to the meaning of "Yangqiu," the mother is more precious than the child. Since it is called the wife, the etiquette of the funeral dress should be from the positive.

古文：故成风显夫人之号，文公服三年之丧。
现代文：所以成风称了夫人之号，文公为她服三年之丧。
English: Therefore, it became popular to call her Madam, and Wen Gong served three years of mourning for her.

古文：子于父之所生，体尊义重。
现代文：子对于父亲的生身父母，体尊义重。
English: For the biological parents of the father, the son is more important than the body.

古文：且礼，祖不厌孙，固宜遂服无屈，而缘情立制。
现代文：再说从礼法上说，祖不压孙，本应依礼服丧没有疑问，而根据情理设立制度。
English: Furthermore, from the point of view of etiquette, there is no doubt that the ancestors should not oppress the grandchildren, and the system should be established according to reason.

古文：若嫌明文不存，则疑斯从重，谓应同于为祖母后齐衰期。
现代文：如果觉得礼法中没有明文规定，那么有疑问时从重，认为应当像为祖母一样服齐绩一年。
English: If you feel that there is no explicit provision in the etiquette, then when in doubt, it is important to think that you should serve for one year like a grandmother.

古文：永安皇后无服，但一举哀，百官亦一期。 
现代文：永安皇后五服之外无服丧关系，衹要一举哀哭悼，百官也服一年之丧。 
English: In addition to the five-year mourning period, there is no mourning period for the Yongan Empress. She is to be mourned in one fell swoop, and a hundred officials are also to be mourned for one year.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏书同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：孝武帝太元十五年，淑媛陈氏卒，皇太子所生也。
现代文：孝武帝左五十五年，淑媛速旦去世，她是皇太子的生母。
English: Fifty-five years after the death of Emperor Xiaowu, Shuhei died suddenly. She was the birth mother of the crown prince.

古文：有司参详母以子贵，赠淑媛为夫人，置家令典丧事。
现代文：主管官员参酌母以子贵，赠淑媛眉夫人，置家令主持丧事。
English: The officials in charge attended the funeral with mother and son, presented Lady Suk Yuen with an eyebrow, and presided over the funeral.

古文：太子前卫率徐邈议： 《丧服传》称与尊者为体，则不服其私亲。
现代文：太子前卫率徐邈议论： 《丧服传》称以与尊者的关系为准，那就不为私亲服丧。
English: The prince's avant-garde leader, Xu Xi, commented: "Funeral Costumes" said that the relationship with the deceased is the standard, then it is not for me to attend the funeral.

古文：又，君父所不服，子亦不敢服。
现代文：又有，君父不为之服丧的，子也不敢服丧。
English: In addition, if the father does not mourn, the son will not dare to mourn.

古文：故王公妾子服其所生母练冠麻衣，既葬而除，非五服之常，则谓之无服。 
现代文：所以王公之妾之子为其生母服练冠麻衣，下葬后就除去丧服，如果不在五服之内，就不服丧。 
English: Therefore, the son of the prince's concubine would dress his birth mother in a crown and sackcloth. After the burial, the mourning clothes would be removed, and if they were not among the five, they would not be mourned.

古文：从之。
现代文：听取了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：太元二十一年，孝武帝崩，孝武太后制三年之服。
现代文：立五二十一年，耋亘瞳崩，孝武太后服三年之丧。
English: In 521, Empress Dowager Gaowu passed away, and Empress Dowager Xiaowu passed away three years later.

古文：惠帝太安元年三月，皇太孙尚薨。
现代文：元年三月，皇太孙司马尚薨。
English: In March of the first year of the year, the grandchild of the emperor, Sima Shangyuan, was born.

古文：有司奏，御服齐衰期。
现代文：主管官员奏，御服齐缭周年。
English: The official in charge of the ceremony performed the ceremony, marking the anniversary of the wedding.

古文：诏下通议。
现代文：下韶交群臣议论。
English: The lower echelons of the imperial court began to discuss this.

古文：散骑常侍谢衡以为： 诸侯之太子，誓与未誓，尊卑体殊。
现代文：散骑常侍邀堕认为： 诸侯的太子，是否接受了天子的爵命，其尊卑是不同的。
English: "The prince of princes, whether or not he has accepted the divine command, has different levels of dignity and inferiority," he said.

古文：《丧服》云为嫡子长殇，谓未誓也，已誓则不殇也。 
现代文：《丧服》说为嫡子服长殇之丧，说的是没有接受爵命的，接受了爵命就不算殇了。 
English: "The Funeral Robe" says that it is the funeral of the eldest son of the eldest son, saying that if he did not accept the peerage, he would not be considered a peer if he accepted the peerage.

古文：中书令卞粹曰： 太子始生，故已尊重，不待命誓。
现代文：中书令卞粹说： 太子一出生，本来就很尊贵，不须等接受爵命后才尊贵。
English: The Chinese imperial edict said, "Once a prince is born, he is already very honorable, and there is no need to wait until he receives a peerage before he becomes honorable.

古文：若衡议已誓不殇，则无服之子当斩衰三年；未誓而殇，则虽十九当大功九月。
现代文：像谢衡所议的接受了爵命后不算殇，那么无丧服之子应当服斩缭三年；没有接受爵命而夭折，那即使是十九岁也服大功九个月。
English: As Xie Heng suggested, if accepting a peerage does not count as a badge, then a son without mourning clothes should serve for three years; if he did not accept a peerage and died prematurely, then even if he was nineteen years old, he would serve for nine months.

古文：誓与未誓，其为升降也微；斩衰与大功，其为轻重也远。
现代文：是否接受了爵命，其中的升降很细微；斩縯和大功，其中的轻重相差得很远。
English: Whether or not he received a knighthood, the promotion and demotion is very subtle; whether or not he was awarded a knighthood or a great achievement, the weight and importance are very different.

古文：而今注云 诸侯不降嫡殇重 。
现代文：而现在注解说 诸侯不降低嫡子之殇的规格，是重视嫡子 。
English: Now, however, the commentary says that the lords did not lower the standards of the legitimate son, but valued the legitimate son.

古文：嫌于无服，以大功为重嫡之服，则虽誓，无复有三年之理明矣。
现代文：不愿意无丧服之礼，以大功作为重视嫡子的丧服，那么即使是接受了爵命，很明显也不再有三年之丧的道理。
English: If one does not want to have no funeral rites, and if one values the funeral rites of one's legitimate son as a great achievement, then even if one accepts a peerage, it is clear that there is no longer a three-year mourning period.

古文：男能卫社稷，女能奉妇道，以可成之年而有已成之事，故可无殇，非孩龀之谓也。
现代文：男的能保卫国家，女的能奉行妇道，以可成之年而有了已成之事，所以不算殇，不是说的孩童。
English: A man can defend the country, a woman can follow the women's path, and they have achieved something in their childbearing years, so they are not considered children.

古文：为殇后者尊之如父，犹无所加而止殇服，况以天子之尊，而为无服之殇行成人之制邪！
现代文：做夭折者的继承人尊之如父，还是不能加重礼典而衹能服殇丧，何况以天子之尊，而为无丧服之礼的夭折者服成人之丧吗?
English: If the heirs of the deceased are as honored as the father, is it still not possible to increase the ceremony so that the deceased can be mourned, not to mention the honor of the heavenly son, but for the deceased without the funeral rite to be mourned as an adult?

古文：凡诸宜重之殇，皆士大夫不加服，而令至尊独居其重，未之前闻也。 
现代文：凡是应该重视的殇丧，士大夫都不穿丧服，而让至尊独自服重丧，从来没有听说过。 
English: It is unheard of for a scholar-bureaucrat to not wear mourning clothes for any mourning that should be taken seriously, and for the Supreme Being to mourn alone.

古文：博士蔡克同粹。
现代文：博士蔡克之议与卞粹同。
English: Dr. Zeiker's argument is the same as that of the author.

古文：秘书监挚虞云： 太子初生，举以成人之礼，则殇理除矣。
现代文：秘书监挚虞说： 太子出生时，就行成人的礼仪，那么殇丧之理就应该去除了。
English: Secretary Guan Zhiyao said: "When the prince was born, the adult etiquette was carried out, so the reason for mourning should be removed.

古文：太孙亦体君传重，由位成而服，全非以年也。
现代文：太孙也与君同体传重，依所处的地位服丧，完全不按年龄。
English: The great-grandson also passed on the same weight as you, according to the position he was in, not according to his age.

古文：天子无服殇之义，绝期故也。 
现代文：天子没有服殇丧的道理，因为没有一年丧。 
English: The Son of Heaven did not accept the principle of mourning, because there was no year of mourning.

古文：于是从之。
现代文：于是采用他们的议论。
English: So they obeyed him.

古文：魏氏故事，国有大丧，群臣凶服，以帛为绶囊，以布为剑衣。
现代文：魏氏旧制，国家有大丧，群臣穿孝服，用帛做绶袋，用布做剑衣。
English: In the old system of the Wei Dynasty, the country had a great mourning, the courtiers wore filial piety clothes, used straw to make bags, and cloth to make swords.

古文：新礼，以传称 去丧无所不佩 ，明在丧则无佩也，更制齐斩之丧不佩剑绶。
现代文：新制定的礼法规定，因为传中称 除去丧服后没有什么东西不能佩带 ，说明服丧时就没有佩饰。另规定齐缭斩缭之丧不佩带剑绶。
English: The newly formulated etiquette law stipulates that, because the legend says that there is nothing that cannot be worn after removing the mourning clothes, it means that there is no adornment when wearing mourning clothes. Another stipulation is that the mourning should not wear a sword.

古文：挚虞以为 《周礼》武贲氏，士大夫之职也，皆以兵守王宫，国有丧故，则衰葛执戈楯守门，葬则从车而哭。
现代文：挚虞认骂 《周礼》中武贲氏，是士大夫之职，都执兵器守卫王宫，国家有丧事，就穿丧服执戈盾守门，下葬时跟在车后哭。
English: It is the duty of the shidafu to guard the royal palace with weapons. When there is a national funeral, they wear mourning clothes, hold the shield and guard the gate. When the funeral is held, they cry behind the car.

古文：又，成王崩，太保命诸大夫以干戈内外警设。
现代文：又有，成王崩，太保命诸大夫执干戈在宫禁内外设警戒。
English: In addition, when Cheng Wang passed away, the doctors in charge of protecting the king's life set up a vigil outside and inside the palace.

古文：明丧故之际，盖重宿卫之防。
现代文：表明在办丧事时，大概要重视宫禁的防卫。
English: It shows that, when holding a funeral, the defense of the imperial palace is of great importance.

古文：去丧无所不佩，谓服饰之事，不谓防御之用。
现代文：除去丧服后没有什么东西不能佩带，指的是服饰之类的东西，不是说防卫的武器。
English: Apart from mourning clothes, there is nothing that cannot be worn. This refers to clothing and the like, not to defensive weapons.

古文：宜定新礼布衣剑如旧，其余如新制。 
现代文：应制定新礼规定用布做剑衣照旧，其他都依新制度 。
English: It is necessary to formulate the new rules of etiquette. Cloth should be used to make swords and cloaks as before, and everything else should follow the new system.

古文：诏丛之。
现代文：韶书同意。
English: I hereby agree.

古文：汉魏故事，将葬，设吉凶卤簿，皆以鼓吹。
现代文：汉、魏旧例，将下葬时，设吉凶仪仗队，都配鼓吹乐器。
English: In the Han and Wei dynasties, when a person was to be buried, an honor guard was set up, complete with trumpet and musical instruments.

古文：新礼以礼无吉驾导从之文，臣子不宜释其衰麻以服玄黄，除吉驾卤簿。
现代文：新礼法因为礼书没有吉驾引导随从之文，臣子不应脱去衰麻丧服而穿彩色衣物，所以除去吉驾仪仗队。
English: New etiquette Because the etiquette book does not have the text of guiding the follower with good luck, the vassal should not take off the mourning clothes and wear colorful clothes, so the good luck honor guard is removed.

古文：又，凶事无乐，遏密八音，除凶服之鼓吹。
现代文：又有，丧事不奏乐，禁止各种音乐，所以除去丧事的鼓吹乐器。
English: In addition, no music is played at funerals, and all kinds of music are prohibited, so the funeral trumpet is removed.

古文：挚虞以为： 葬有祥车旷左，则今之容车也。
现代文：挚虞认为： 下葬有祥车空缺左边的位置，就是现在的容车。
English: Zhengyu believes that: the location on the left side of the empty space where the funeral car is buried is the current carriage.

古文：既葬，日中反虞，逆神而还。
现代文：安葬之后，中午回到停放灵柩之室虞祭。迎神而回。
English: After the burial, at noon, they returned to the shrine where the coffin was parked for the Muroyu Festival.

古文：《春秋传》，郑大夫公孙虿卒，天子追赐大路，使以行。
现代文：《春秋传》中，郑大夫公孙茧去世，天子追赐大辖，让它跟在灵车后面。
English: In "Spring and Autumn Legend," Zheng Daifu Gongsun Yao passed away, and Tianzi posthumously bestowed great jurisdiction on him, letting him follow behind the hearse.

古文：《士丧礼》，葬有稿车乘车，以载生之服。
现代文：《士丧礼》中，出葬时有蘗车乘车，用来装载死者生前穿的衣服。
English: In "The Funeral," a hearse is used to carry the clothes worn by the deceased.

古文：此皆不唯载柩，兼有吉驾之明文也。
现代文：这都是不仅有灵车，也有吉驾的明文。
English: These are all not only hearse, but also have auspicious driving clear text.

古文：既设吉驾，则宜有导从，以象平生之容，明不致死之义。
现代文：既然设有吉驾，就应有引导随从，以像平时活着的样子，以表明不致死的意思。
English: Since there is a auspicious car, there should be a guide to follow, to look like a normal life, to show the intention not to die.

古文：臣子衰麻不得为身而释，以为君父则无不可。
现代文：臣子的縯麻丧服不能为自己的原因而脱去，为君父脱去就没什么不可以的。
English: A courtier's nettle mourning dress cannot be taken off for his own reasons, and there is nothing wrong with taking it off for your father.

古文：《顾命》之篇足以明之。
现代文：《顾命》之篇的记载足以证明逭点。
English: The record of the "Gu Sheng" article is enough to prove the point.

古文：宜定新礼设吉服导从如旧，其凶服鼓吹宜除。 
现代文：宜制定新礼设礼服引导随从如旧，穿丧服的鼓吹乐队应除去。 
English: It is appropriate to formulate a new ceremonial dress to guide the followers as before, and the trumpeters wearing mourning clothes should be removed.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下诏书同意。
English: He complied.

古文：汉魏故事，大丧及大臣之丧，执绋者挽歌。
现代文：汉、魏旧例，大丧及大臣之丧，牵绋的人唱挽歌。
English: In the Han and Wei dynasties, when there was a great death or the death of a minister, mourners would sing elegies.

古文：新礼以为挽歌出于汉武帝役人之劳歌，声哀切，遂以为送终之礼。
现代文：新礼法认为挽歌产生于漠武帝时役人服劳役时唱的歌，声音哀切，于是用来做送终之礼。
English: According to the new etiquette, the elegy originated from the song sung by the officials of the time of Emperor Mowu when they were performing labor service. The sound was sad, so it was used as a send-off.

古文：虽音曲摧怆，非经典所制，违礼设衔枚之义。
现代文：虽然音调凄惨，但不是经典所规定的，违反了礼制衔枚在口中的道理。
English: Although the tone is gloomy, it is not prescribed by the classics, violating the reason why the ceremonial title plate is in the mouth.

古文：方在号慕，不宜以歌为名。除，不挽歌。
现代文：正在号哭思慕之际，不宜用歌这个名义，取消挽歌。
English: At a time when we are crying and thinking, it is not appropriate to use the name of the song to cancel the elegy.

古文：挚虞以为： 挽歌因倡和而为摧怆之声，衔枚所以全哀，此亦以感众。
现代文：挚虞认为： 挽歌因有唱有和而成为凄惨之声，衔枚在口中是为了尽哀，这也是用来感动众人的方式。
English: Zhengyu believed that: the dirge became a mournful sound because of the singing and harmony, and the epitaph in the mouth was to mourn, which was also used to move many people.

古文：虽非经典所载，是历代故事。
现代文：虽然不是经典中所记载的，但这是历代实行的旧例。
English: Although it is not recorded in the classics, it is an old example that has been practiced throughout the ages.

古文：《诗》称 君子作歌，惟以告哀 ，以歌为名，亦无所嫌。
现代文：《诗》中说 君子作歌，用来告哀 ，用歌为名，也没有什么妨碍。
English: In the "Poem," it is said that there is nothing to prevent a gentleman from composing a song to mourn, using a song as a name.

古文：宜定新礼如旧。 
现代文：宜制定新礼照旧实行。 
English: It is appropriate to formulate a new rite and implement it as before.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下诏书同意。
English: He complied.

古文：咸宁二年，安平穆王薨，无嗣，以母弟敦上继献王后，移太常问应何服。
现代文：盛宁二年，安平穆王薨，没有继承人，以母弟司马敦上继卢逗之位，递送文书给太常问应该服什么规格的丧。
English: In the second year of Shengning, Anping Mu Wangtao, without an heir, with his mother's brother Sima Dun as the successor of Lu Zhi, delivered a document to Tai Chang to ask what kind of mourning should be served.

古文：博士张靖答，宜依鲁僖服闵三年例。
现代文：博士张靖答覆，宜依照鲁僖公为盟公服三年丧的例子。
English: Dr. Zhang Jing replied that it was appropriate to follow the example of the three-year mourning for Lu Wei Meng.

古文：尚书符诘靖： 穆王不臣敦，敦不继穆，与闵僖不同。 
现代文：尚书用文书责问张靖： 壬旺不以司马敦为臣，塱屋圣不继承擅玉之位，与因、堡的情况不同。 
English: Shang Shu used the document to question Zhang Jing: Zhenwang did not take Sima Dun as a vassal, and Zhaiya Sheng did not inherit the position of good jade, which was different from the situation of Ying and Bao.

古文：孙毓、宋昌议，以穆王不之国，敦不仕诸侯，不应三年。
现代文：逐堑、塞旦议论，因为穆王没去自己的封国，司马敦没有在诸侯朝中任职，不应服三年丧。
English: Because King Mu did not go to his own vassal state, Sima Dun did not serve in the vassal court, he should not serve three years of mourning.

古文：以义处之，敦宜服本服，一期而除，主穆王丧祭三年毕，乃吉祭献王。
现代文：从义理上来看，司马敦应服本来的丧，一年除丧服，主持穆王的丧祭三年完毕后，就吉祭塞逗。
English: From the point of view of justice, Sima Dun should serve the original mourning, remove the mourning clothes for one year, preside over the funeral of King Mu for three years, and then stop the auspicious festival.

古文：毓云： 《礼》，君之子孙所以臣诸兄者，以临国故也。
现代文：逐筮说： 《礼》说，君的子孙之所以做兄长的臣，是治理国政的缘故。
English: One by one, they said, "Ri" says that the reason why the descendants of the prince are the vassals of the elder brother is because of the governance of state affairs.

古文：《礼》又与诸侯为兄弟服斩者，谓邻国之臣于邻国之君，有犹君之义故也。
现代文：《礼》中又有替诸侯为兄弟服斩縯的，说的是邻国的臣对邻国的君，有如同本国之君的道义的原因。
English: In the "Rite" there is also a reference to the execution of princes for their brothers, saying that the vassal of a neighboring country has the same moral reasons for the prince of a neighboring country as the prince of his own country.

古文：今穆王既不之国，不臣兄弟，敦不仕诸侯，无邻臣之义，异于闵僖，如符旨也。
现代文：现在垂旺既没去封国，不以兄弟为臣，司马敦没在诸侯朝中任职，没有邻国之臣的道义，与闵、僖不同，如文书中所说。
English: Now, Tsuwang did not go to fiefdom, did not take brothers as vassals, Sima Dun did not serve in the vassal court, and did not have the morality of a neighboring country's vassal, which is different from that of Zou and Zou, as mentioned in the document.

古文：但丧无主，敦既奉诏绍国，受重主丧，典其祭祀。 大功者主人之丧，有三年者则必为之再祭 。郑氏《注》云， 谓死者之从父昆弟来为丧主也。 
现代文：衹是丧事无人主持，司马敦既然奉诏继国，受重托主持丧事，掌管他的祭祀。 大功的入主持别人的丧事，有三年之丧的必须为他祭祀两次，郑氏《注》说 这是说死者的叔伯兄弟来做丧事之主。
English: If there is no one to preside over the funeral, Sima Dun, since he succeeded to the throne after the imperial edict, has been entrusted to preside over the funeral and take charge of his offerings. If a person who has made great contributions presides over the funeral of others, he must be sacrificed twice if he has three years of mourning, Zheng "Note" said. This means that the deceased's uncles and brothers come to be the head of the funeral.

古文：有三年者，谓妻若子幼少也 。 再祭，谓大小祥也 。
现代文：有三年之丧，是说死者之妻或是子幼小 。 祭祀两次，说的是大祥小祥之祭 。
English: There is a three-year mourning period, which refers to the wife or children of the deceased, and two times of sacrifice, which refers to the festival of the great auspiciousness and small auspiciousness.

古文：穆妃及国臣于礼皆当三年，此为有三年者，敦当为之主大小两祥祭也。
现代文：疆蛆及国臣从礼法上说都应当服三年丧，这是有三年之丧的人，司马敦应当为他主持大祥小祥两次祭祀。
English: From the point of view of etiquette and law, both Jiang Chen and state ministers should serve a three-year mourning period. This is a person who has a three-year mourning period, and Sima Dun should preside over two sacrifices for him.

古文：且哀乐不相杂，吉凶不相干。
现代文：再说哀乐不相混，吉凶不相干。
English: Besides, sorrow and joy do not mix, and good luck and bad luck are not related.

古文：凶服在宫，哭泣未绝。
现代文：宫禁中还在穿孝，哭泣未止。
English: During the palace ban, she was still wearing filial piety and crying.

古文：敦遽主穆王之丧，而国制未除，则不得以己本亲服除而吉祭献王也。 
现代文：司马敦忽然之间主持穆王的丧事，而国家丧服还没除去，就不能以自己本身的丧服已经除去了而吉祭献王。 
English: Sima Dun suddenly presided over the funeral of King Mu, and the national mourning clothes had not yet been removed, so he could not offer the auspicious sacrifice to the king with his own mourning clothes already removed.

古文：咸宁四年，陈留国上，燕公是王之父，王出奉明帝祀，今于王为从父，有司奏应服期，不以亲疏尊卑为降。
现代文：咸宁四年，陈留国上疏，燕公是王之父，王出供奉明帝祭祀，现在是王的伯父，主管部门奏告应服一年丧，不能因亲疏尊卑而降低丧礼的规格。
English: In the fourth year of Xianning, Chen stayed in the country and went upstream. Yan Gong was the father of Wang. Wang went out to offer sacrifices to Emperor Ming. Now he is the uncle of Wang. The competent department reported that it should be a one-year funeral. The funeral specifications should not be reduced due to personal differences.

古文：诏曰： 王奉魏氏，所承者重，不得服其私亲。 
现代文：下诏说： 王奉魏氏祭祀，所承担的责任重大，不能以私亲关系服丧。 
English: The next edict said: Wang Feng Wei's sacrificial rites are a great responsibility, and he cannot be buried as a relative.

古文：穆帝时，东海国言，哀王薨逾年，嗣王乃来继，不复追服，群臣皆已反吉，国妃亦宜同除。
现代文：穆帝时，东海国说，哀王去世一年后，继位之王才来继承，不再追服丧，群臣都已恢复了礼服，国妃也应一同除去丧服。
English: At the time of Mu Di, the East China Sea country said that a year after the death of the king of mourning, the king of succession came to inherit, no longer chasing mourning, the ministers have restored the ceremonial dress, and the princess should also remove the mourning dress.

古文：诏曰： 朝廷所以从权制者，以王事夺之，非为变礼也。
现代文：下韶说： 朝廷之所以依照权宜之制，是因为国事所迫，不是改变礼制。
English: Shimotsuki said: The reason why the Imperial Court follows the system of expediency is because of the pressure of national affairs, not to change the etiquette.

古文：妇人传重义大，若从权制，义将安托！ 
现代文：妇人传重之义重大，如果依照权宜之制，义将寄托到哪裹! 
English: It is important for women to pass on the burden of righteousness. If it is done according to the system of expediency, where will the righteousness be entrusted to?

古文：于是国妃终三年之礼。
现代文：于是国妃服满三年之丧。
English: As a result, the Empress was buried three years later.

古文：孙盛以为： 废三年之礼，开偷薄之源，汉魏失之大者也。
现代文：孙盛认为： 废弃三年之礼，开启浮薄苟且的源头，这是汉、魏的大失误。
English: Sun Sheng believed that: Abandoning the three-year gift and opening the source of pomposity, this is a big mistake of Han and Wei.

古文：今若以大夫宜夺以王事。妇人可终本服，是吉凶之仪杂陈于宫寝，彩素之制乖异于内外，无乃情礼俱违，哀乐失所乎！ 
现代文：如果认为丈夫应该因国事除去丧服，妇人可以服满丧期，造就使吉凶的礼仪在宫中混杂，彩色和素色的服制内外错乱，恐怕是于情于礼都有违失，哀乐都难以得当吧! 
English: If it is thought that the husband should remove the mourning clothes due to state affairs, and the woman can serve the full mourning period, creating a mixture of auspicious and inauspicious etiquette in the palace, and disorder inside and outside the color and plain dress code, I am afraid that there is a violation of feelings and etiquette, and it is difficult to properly mourn.

古文：太元十七年，太常车胤上言： 谨案《丧服礼经》，庶子为母缌麻三月。
现代文：太元十七年，太常车胤上言说： 谨考察《丧服礼经》， 庶子为母服鳃麻三个月 。
English: In the seventeenth year of the first century, Taizhong Cheyin said: "I would like to examine the "Funeral Rites and Rituals," the son-in-law is the mother-in-law for three months.

古文：《传》曰： 何以缌麻？
现代文：《传》说 为什么服鳃麻?
English: "Biography" says Why wear nettles?

古文：以尊者为体，不敢服其私亲也。 此《经》《传》之明文，圣贤之格言。
现代文：以尊者为准则，不敢为自己的私亲服丧，这是《经》、《传》的明文，圣贤的格言。
English: Taking His Holiness as the standard, not daring to mourn for one's own loved ones, this is the clear text of the "Ching" and "Zhuan" and the motto of the sages.

古文：而自顷开国公侯，至于卿士，庶子为后，各肆私情，服其庶母，同之于嫡。
现代文：而近来开国的公侯，以至于卿士，庶子作继承人的，都各自放肆自己的私情，为庶母服丧，与嫡母相同。
English: But recently, the princes who founded the country, to the extent that nobles, knights, and illegitimate children as heirs, have each indulged their private feelings and mourned for their stepmothers, the same as their legitimate mothers.

古文：此末俗之弊，溺情伤教，纵而不革，则流遁忘返矣。
现代文：这是陋俗的弊病，溺于私情而伤害教化，如果放纵而不革除，那么因循流传下去将难以纠正。
English: This is a vulgar malady, indulging in personal feelings and harming enlightenment. If it is indulged and not eliminated, it will be difficult to correct if it continues to spread.

古文：且夫尊尊亲亲，虽礼之大本，然厌亲于尊，由来尚矣。
现代文：再说尊重尊者爱戴父母，虽然是礼的大节，然而压亲于尊，由来已久。
English: Furthermore, although it is a great festival of courtesy to respect His Holiness and love one's parents, it has a long history of oppressing relatives of His Holiness.

古文：《礼记》曰， 为父后，出母无服也者，不祭故也 。又，礼，天子父母之丧，未葬，越绋而祭天地社稷。
现代文：《礼记》说， 作为父亲的继承人，不为被休弃的母亲服丧，是因为不祭祀，还有，礼法规定，天子父母之丧，下葬之前，在服丧期参加祭祀天地社稷的典礼。
English: "The Book of Rites" says that, as the father's successor, he did not mourn for the abandoned mother because he did not offer sacrifices. Furthermore, the etiquette stipulates that before the funeral of the heavenly son's parents, he should participate in the ceremony of sacrificing heaven and earth during the mourning period.

古文：斯皆崇严至敬，不敢以私废尊也。
现代文：这都是庄重严肃极为恭敬，不敢因私废尊。
English: All of this is solemn, serious, and extremely respectful, and I dare not lose respect for myself.

古文：今身承祖宗之重，而以庶母之私，废烝尝之事。
现代文：现在身受祖宗遣业的重任，而以庶母之私情，废弃祭祀之事。
English: Now, burdened with the heavy responsibility of carrying out the duties of an ancestor, she is abandoning the ritual with the selfishness of a stepmother.

古文：五庙阙祀，由一妾之终，求之情礼，失莫大焉。
现代文：五庙的祭祀废缺，衹因一妾的丧服，从情礼上考求，没有比这更大的过失了。
English: Five temples' sacrificial rites were abandoned, and because of a concubine's funeral dress, there was no greater mistake than to seek love rituals.

古文：举世皆然，莫之裁贬。
现代文：整个社会都是如此，没有谁稍加批评。
English: This is true for the entire society, and no one criticizes it in the slightest.

古文：就心不同，而事不敢异。
现代文：即使看法有所不同，但做事不敢有异。
English: Even if their opinions differ, they dare not do things differently.

古文：故正礼遂穨，而习非成俗。
现代文：所以正礼于是衰微，而习非成俗。
English: As a result, formal etiquette waned, while informal etiquette became the norm.

古文：此《国风》所以思古，《小雅》所以悲叹。
现代文：这正是《国风》为之思古，纠、雅》为之悲叹那一类的事情。
English: This is exactly the kind of thing that "Kokufu" thinks about, corrects, and laments.

古文：当今九服渐宁，王化惟新，诚宜崇明礼训，以一风俗。
现代文：当今天下渐渐安定，王化曰新，确实应该崇尚宣扬礼训，以统一风俗。
English: Now that the situation is gradually stabilizing and the king is changing, it is indeed necessary to advocate the propagation of etiquette to unify customs.

古文：请台省考修经典，式明王度。 
现代文：请台省机关考察整理经典，宣明国家法度。 
English: Please ask the Taiwan provincial authorities to investigate and sort out the classics and publicize the national laws.

古文：不答。
现代文：没有答覆。
English: There was no reply.

古文：十八年，胤又上言： 去年上，自顷开国公侯，至于卿士，庶子为后者，服其庶母，同之于嫡，违礼犯制，宜加裁抑。
现代文：十八年，车胤又上言： 去年上言，近来开国公侯，以至卿士，庶子作继承人的，为庶母服丧，与嫡母相同，违反了礼制，应当加以约束抑制。
English: In the 18th year, Cheyin also made the following statement: Last year's statement, recently the founding prince, and even the noblemen, the heir's illegitimate son, mourned for his stepmother, the same as the legitimate mother, violated the etiquette, and should be restrained.

古文：事上经年，未被告报，未审朝议以何为疑。
现代文：事情奏上一年多，没有得到答覆，不明白朝中议论有什么疑虑。
English: It has been more than a year since the matter was reported, and there has been no response. I don't understand what misgivings there are in the discussions between North Korea and China.

古文：若以所陈或谬，则经有文；若以古今不同，则晋有成典。
现代文：如果认为所陈述的事情可能有谬误，那么经典中有明文；如果认为古今有所不同，那么晋有现成的典章。
English: If it is thought that what is stated may be false, then there is a clear text in the scriptures; if it is thought that the past and the present are different, then there are ready-made rules.

古文：升平四年，故太宰武陵王所生母丧，表求齐衰三年，诏听依昔乐安王故事，制大功九月。
现代文：升平四年，故太宰武陵王的生母去世，上表请求服齐缤三年，诏书让他依照从前乐安王的旧例，服大功九个月。
English: Four years after his elevation to the peerage, the birth mother of Dazai Wuling Wang passed away. The above table requested that he serve for three years, and the edict asked him to serve for nine months in accordance with the old practice of King Le'an.

古文：兴宁三年，故梁王逢又所生母丧，亦求三年。
现代文：兴宁三年，故梁王司马琏又是生母去世，也请求服丧三年。
English: After three years of Xingning, Liang Wang Sima Yao's birth mother died, and he also requested three years of mourning.

古文：《庚子诏书》依太宰故事，同服大功。
现代文：《庚子诏书》依照太宰的旧例，同样让他服大功。
English: According to the old example of Dazai, the "Ganzi Zhao Shu" also gave him great credit.

古文：若谨案周礼，则缌麻三月；若奉晋制，则大功九月。
现代文：如果严格按照周礼，那应该服鳃麻三个月；如果奉行晋制，那就是大功九个月。
English: If you strictly follow the weekly ritual, then you should serve nettle for three months; if you follow the promotion system, then it is nine months of great merit.

古文：古礼今制，并无居庐三年之文，而顷年已来，各申私情，更相拟袭，渐以成俗。
现代文：古礼和今制，都没有服丧三年的说法，而近年以来，各自放纵私情，相互比拟沿袭，逐渐成为习俗。
English: Both ancient rites and the current system do not have the saying of mourning for three years, but in recent years, they have indulged their own personal feelings, followed each other, and gradually become a custom.

古文：纵而不禁，则圣典灭矣。
现代文：放纵下去而不加禁止，那么圣典就要消亡了。
English: If it is allowed to continue unchecked, then the holy book will die.

古文：夫尊尊亲亲，立人之本，王化所由，二端而已。
现代文：尊敬尊者爱戴父母，是人的立身之本。王化所遵循的义理，是两个方面而已。
English: Respecting and loving one's parents is the foundation of one's life. There are only two aspects of righteousness that Wanghua follows.

古文：故先王设教，务弘其极，尊郊社之敬，制越绋之礼，严宗庙之祀，厌庶子之服，所以经纬人文，化成天下。
现代文：所以先王制定教化，务要弘扬其中的最高准则，尊崇郊社之祭的礼敬，制定了在服丧期参加祭祀天地社稷典礼的规定，崇尚宗庙的祭祀，降低庶子的丧服，这是用来治理礼乐教化，使天下教化成功的方式。
English: Therefore, the former king formulated the education, and it is important to promote the highest standards among them, respect the worship of the festival of the suburban society, formulate the regulations for participating in the sacrificial ceremony of the heaven and earth society during the period of mourning, advocate the sacrifice of the ancestral temple, and reduce the funeral dress of the bastard. This is a way to control the education of the ritual music and make the education of the world successful.

古文：夫屈家事于王道，厌私恩于祖宗，岂非上行乎下，父行乎子！
现代文：为王道而舍弃家事，为祖宗而压抑私恩，难道不是上行于下，父行于子的道义吗?
English: Is it not the moral principle of ascending from below, and of the father from the son, to give up family duties for the sake of the kingly way, and to suppress personal favors for the sake of the ancestors?

古文：若尊尊之心有时而替，宜厌之情触事而申，祖宗之敬微，而君臣之礼亏矣。
现代文：如果尊敬尊者之心可以不时放弃，应该压抑的私情遇到事情就要抒发，对祖宗的恭敬就会衰微，而君臣之间的礼仪就要受到损害了。
English: If one's respect for His Holiness can be abandoned from time to time, personal feelings that should be suppressed will be expressed when things happen, respect for ancestors will wane, and the etiquette between monarchs and subjects will be damaged.

古文：严恪微于祖宗，致敬亏于事上，而欲俗安化隆，不亦难乎！
现代文：对祖宗的崇敬衰微，事奉君王的礼仪损害，而想要人民安宁教化隆盛，这不是很难的吗?
English: Is it not difficult to see that reverence for ancestors is on the wane, that the service of kings is becoming a nuisance, and that the people want peace and prosperity?

古文：区区所惜，实在于斯。
现代文：诚挚之心所痛惜的，实在就在于此。
English: It is this, indeed, which my sincere heart deplores.

古文：职之所司，不敢不言。
现代文：职责之内的事情，不敢不言。
English: I'm not afraid to say things that are within the scope of my duties.

古文：请台参详。 
现代文：请台省机构参详审议。 
English: Institutions in Taiwan Province are invited to participate in the detailed deliberation.

古文：尚书奏： 案如辞辄下主者详寻。
现代文：尚书奏： 根据上书之言交主管者详细考求。
English: Shang Shuxiao: According to the written request, the person in charge will make a detailed investigation.

古文：依礼，庶子与尊者为体，不敢服其私亲，此尊祖敬宗之义。
现代文：依照礼法，庶子舆尊者骂一体，不敢为私亲服丧，这是尊重祖先恭敬宗庙的义理。
English: According to the etiquette, the son-in-law should not be afraid to mourn for himself. This is the principle of respecting the ancestors and revering the ancestral temple.

古文：自顷陵迟，斯礼遂废。
现代文：近来衰微了，这种礼节就会废弃。
English: With the recent decline, this etiquette will fall by the wayside.

古文：封国之君废五庙之重，士庶匹夫阙烝尝之礼，习成穨俗，宜被革正。
现代文：封国之君废弃祭祀五庙的重任，士民百姓阙失祭祀之礼，逐渐形成陋俗，应该加以纠正。
English: The feudal lords of the country abandoned the important duty of the five temples, and the scholars and commoners lost the ritual of sacrifice, gradually forming a vulgar custom, which should be corrected.

古文：辄内外参详，谓宜听胤所上，可依乐安王大功为正。
现代文：经过内外参酌详审，认为应当按车胤上疏所说的办，可以依照乐安王服大功为准。
English: After a detailed examination with internal and external participation, it was considered that it should be done according to Cheyin Shangsuo, and it could be done in accordance with the great achievements of Le An Wangfu.

古文：请为告书如左，班下内外，以定永制，普令依承，事可奉行。 
现代文：请求制定告谕文书如下，颁发到内外，以确定常规，使普遍依照秉承，就可以实行。 
English: It is requested that the following proclamation be issued both at home and abroad in order to establish a standard that can be universally adhered to.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：《礼》，王为三公六卿锡衰，为大夫士疑衰，首服弁绖。
现代文：《礼》载，王为三公六卿服踢榱，为大夫士服拟缀，头上戴弁绖。
English: According to the "Ritual," the king kicks the yoke for the three princes and six nobles, embellishes the doctor's uniform, and wears a headdress.

古文：天子诸侯皆为贵臣贵妾服三月。
现代文：天子诸侯为贵臣贵妾服三个月丧。
English: The three-month mourning period for the sons and princes of heaven and earth and their courtiers and concubines has begun.

古文：汉为大臣制服无闻焉。
现代文：汉代没听说为大臣服丧的事。
English: During the Han Dynasty, it was unheard of for a minister to be buried.

古文：汉明帝时，东海恭王薨，帝出幸津门亭发哀。
现代文：汉明帝时，束海恭王薨，皇帝出幸津门亭举行哀悼仪式。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanming, Emperor Zokhai paid homage to Wang Xuan and held a mourning ceremony at the Imperial Palace.

古文：及武帝咸宁二年十一月，诏 诸王公大臣薨，应三朝发哀者，逾月不举乐，其一朝发哀者，三日不举乐也 。
现代文：到武帝咸宁二年十一月，诏令 诸王公大臣薨，应该三天举行哀悼仪式的，遇一个月奏乐，一天举行哀悼仪式的，三天不奏乐 。
English: In November of the second year of Emperor Wu's reign, the Emperor issued an edict to the princes and ministers that they should hold a mourning ceremony for three days, play music for one month, hold a mourning ceremony for one day, and not play music for three days.

古文：元帝姨广昌乡君丧，未葬，中丞熊远表云： 案《礼》 君于卿大夫，比葬不食肉，比卒哭不举乐 ，恻隐之心未忍行吉事故也。
现代文：元帝之姨广昌乡君之丧，下葬前，中丞熊远上表说： 考案《礼》中说 君对卿大夫，到下葬不吃肉，到卒哭之祭不奏乐，心中悲痛不忍举行吉祥之事。
English: Before the funeral of Guangchang Xiangjun, the aunt of the former emperor, Chujo Xiongyuan said: In the "Ritual," it is said that you should not eat meat until the funeral, not play music until the memorial service, and not hold auspicious events with grief in your heart.

古文：被尚书符，冬至后二日小会。
现代文：接尚书公文，冬至后两天宴会。
English: Receiving the imperial edict, a banquet was held two days after the winter solstice.

古文：臣以为广昌乡君丧殡日，圣恩垂悼。
现代文：臣认为广昌乡君殡丧之日，圣恩哀悼。
English: The minister believed that the day of Guangchang Xiangjun's funeral was a day of mourning for the saint.

古文：礼，大夫死，废一时之祭。
现代文：礼法，大夫死，取消一季的祭祀。
English: After the doctor's death, the ritual was cancelled for a season.

古文：祭犹可废，而况馀事。
现代文：祭祀尚且可以取消，何况其他的事呢。
English: Sacrifices can still be cancelled, not to mention other things.

古文：冬至唯可群下奉贺而已，未便小会。 
现代文：冬至衹要群臣奉贺就可以了，不便举行宴会。 
English: On the winter solstice, it is enough to have a group of courtiers offer congratulations, but it is inconvenient to hold a banquet.

古文：诏以远表示贺循，又曰： 咸宁二年武皇帝故事云 王公大臣薨，三朝发哀，逾月不举乐，其一朝发哀，三日不举乐 ，此旧事明文。 
现代文：诏令把熊远的表章拿给贺循看，又说： 咸宁二年武皇帝的先例说 王公大臣薨，三天举行哀悼仪式的，过一个月奏乐，一天举行哀悼仪式的，三天不奏乐 ，这是旧事的明文。 
English: The imperial edict showed Xiong Yuan's badge to He Xuan, and said, "The precedent of Emperor Wu in the second year of Xianning says that Wang Gong and other ministers should hold a mourning ceremony for three days, play music for one month, hold a mourning ceremony for one day, and not play music for three days. This is the plain text of the old matter."

古文：贺循答曰： 案《礼·杂记》， 君于卿大夫之丧，比葬不食肉，比卒哭不举乐 。古者君臣义重，虽以至尊之义，降而无服，三月之内，犹锡衰以居，不接吉事。
现代文：贺循答覆说： 考案《礼记。杂记》， 君对卿大夫之丧，到下葬不吃肉，到卒哭之祭不奏乐，古代君臣义重，虽然因至尊的地位，降格不服丧，但是在三个月内，还是穿踢榱，不举行吉事。
English: He Cun replied: "In devising "Ren Ji. Zang Ji," you do not eat meat until the funeral of the noble doctor, and you do not play music until the memorial service. Although the ancient monarchs and nobles did not accept the demotion due to their supreme status, they did not hold any auspicious events for three months.

古文：故春秋晋大夫智悼子未葬，平公作乐，为屠蒯所讥。
现代文：所以春秋时晋大夫智悼子没下葬时，平公作乐，被屠蒯讥讽。
English: Therefore, during the Spring and Autumn Period, when Jin doctor Zhi Yizi was not buried, Ping Gong made music and was ridiculed by Tu Youyou.

古文：如远所答，合于古义。
现代文：熊远的启奏，符合古义。
English: Xiong Yuan's opening is in line with the ancient meaning of the rune.

古文：咸宁诏书虽不会经典，然随时立宜，以为定制，诚非群下所得称论。 
现代文：咸宁诏书虽然不与经典相合，然而依据时事制定适宜的规定，作为确定的制度，这确实不是臣下们所应该谈论的事。 
English: Although the edict of Emperor Xianning is not consistent with the classics, it is indeed not a matter for the subjects to talk about, but to formulate appropriate regulations based on current affairs as a definite system.

古文：升平元年，帝姑庐陵公主未葬，符问太常，冬至小会应作乐不。
现代文：升平元年，帝之姑庐陵公主未下葬，文书询问太常，冬至的宴会应不应该奏乐。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, the Emperor's aunt, Princess Kuryo, had not yet been buried, and it was common to inquire about documents, and whether or not music should be played at the winter solstice banquet.

古文：博士胡讷议云： 君于卿大夫，比卒哭不举乐。
现代文：博士胡讷议论说： 君对卿大夫，到卒哭之祭不奏乐。
English: Dr. Huna argued: You, sir, do not play music at the wailing ceremony.

古文：公主有骨肉之亲，宜阙乐。 
现代文：公主有骨肉亲情，应取消奏乐。 
English: The princess is a close relative, so the concert should be cancelled.

古文：太常王彪之云： 案武帝诏，三朝举哀，三旬乃举乐；其一朝举哀者，三日则举乐。
现代文：太常王彪之说： 据逮童诏，三天举行哀悼仪式的，三十天才奏乐；一天举行哀悼仪式的，三天就奏乐。
English: Wang Biao Zhi said, "According to the edict of Fang Tong, if the mourning ceremony is held for three days, the music should be played for thirty days; if the mourning ceremony is held for one day, the music should be played for three days.

古文：泰始十年春，长乐长公主薨，太康七年秋，扶风王骏薨，武帝并举哀三日而已。
现代文：童篮十年春季，长乐长公主薨，叁尘七年秋季，迭肚动型冬薨，亘游都是举行哀悼仪式三天而已。
English: The children's basket in the spring of the 10th year, the Changle eldest princess, the dust in the autumn of the 7th year, and the moving winter cocoon, are all just three days of mourning ceremonies.

古文：中兴已后，更参论不改此制。
现代文：中兴以后，又参详议论不改变这种规定。
English: After ZTE, the detailed discussion did not change this provision.

古文：今小会宜作乐。 
现代文：现在宴会应该奏乐。 
English: Now the banquet should play music.

古文：二议竟不知所取。
现代文：两种议论最终不知该听取哪种。
English: In the end, it is hard to know which of the two arguments to listen to.

古文：《丧服记》，公为所寓，齐衰三月。
现代文：《丧服记》载，公为所寄寓之地之君，服齐绩三个月。
English: According to the "Diary of a Funeral Costume," the prince of the place where he was staying had to serve for three months.

古文：新礼以今无此事，除此一章。
现代文：新制之礼因现在没有这种事，除去这一条。
English: Since there is no such thing as the new system of honor, delete this article.

古文：挚虞以为： 《周礼》作于刑厝之时，而著荒政十二。
现代文：挚虞认为： 《周礼》作于置刑法而不用的时候，却载有赈济饥荒的政令十二条。
English: Zhengyu believed that: "Zhouli" was written when the criminal law was not used, but it contains twelve decrees on famine relief.

古文：礼备制待物，不以时衰而除盛典，世隆而阙衰教也。
现代文：礼法的规定应完备以适应事情，不能因时局衰落就除去盛世之典，世事隆盛就阙失衰世的教化。
English: The provisions of the etiquette should be complete to adapt to the situation. It is not possible to remove the code of prosperity due to the decline of the current situation, and the prosperity of the world has lost the enlightenment of the decline of the world.

古文：曩者王司徒失守播越，自称寄公。
现代文：从前王司毽失守流亡，自称寄公。
English: Wang Siyi once lost his position and went into exile, claiming to be in exile.

古文：是时天下又多此比，皆礼之所及。
现代文：当时天下又有很多这类事，追都是礼法中有的。
English: At that time, there were many such things in the world, and chasing was part of etiquette.

古文：宜定新礼自如旧经。 
现代文：应制定新礼如旧经一样。 
English: The new rite should be formulated in the same way as the old rite.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下诏书同意。
English: He complied.

古文：汉魏故事无五等诸侯之制，公卿朝士服丧，亲疏各如其亲。
现代文：晋、魏旧例没有五等诸侯的制度，公卿朝士服丧，轻重都依亲属关系远近而定。
English: In the Jin and Wei dynasties, there was no system of fifth-class lords, and court nobles and courtiers were buried according to their kinship.

古文：新礼王公五等诸侯成国置卿者，及朝廷公孤之爵，皆傍亲绝期，而旁亲为之服斩衰，卿校位从大夫者皆绝缌。
现代文：新礼法王公五等诸侯设置卿的大国，以及朝廷中的重臣，都不为旁系亲属服一年之丧，而旁系亲属为他们服斩缩，卿校位从大夫者不服鳃缭。
English: The New Rite, the Five Great Princes, the Five Great Princes, the Great Kingdoms, as well as the senior courtiers in the imperial court, do not pay a year's mourning for the collateral relatives, but the collateral relatives pay for them, and those who do not pay for the collateral relatives do not pay for the collateral relatives.

古文：挚虞以为： 古者诸侯君临其国，臣诸父兄，今之诸侯未同于古。
现代文：挚虞认为： 古代诸侯统治其国，以诸父兄眉臣，现今的诸侯与古代不同。
English: Zhengyu believes that: ancient princes ruled their countries with their fathers and brothers, and today's princes are different from the ancients.

古文：未同于古，则其尊未全，不宜便从绝期之制，而令傍亲服斩衰之重也。
现代文：与古代不同，其尊贵就不全，不宜这样实行不服一年丧之制，而让旁系亲属服斩绩的重孝。
English: Different from the ancient times, its dignity is not complete, and it is not appropriate to implement the one-year mourning system in this way, and let the collateral relatives perform the duties of filial piety.

古文：诸侯既然，则公孤之爵亦宜如旧。
现代文：诸侯既然这样，那么朝廷重臣也应依旧制。
English: If this is the case for the princes, then the senior courtiers of the imperial court should also remain the same.

古文：昔魏武帝建安中已曾表上，汉朝依古为制，事与古异，皆不施行，施行者著在魏科。
现代文：从前垄二适谴年间曾上表说，挝因袭古礼，事情却与古不同，都不能施行，施行了的记载在垫的法令中。
English: In the olden days, it was said on the table that because Laos had inherited ancient rituals, things were different from the old days and could not be enforced. The records of what was enforced were in the decrees of the mat.

古文：大晋采以著令，宜定新礼皆如旧。 
现代文：大晋用来编制法令，应规定新礼都依旧制。 
English: Dajin is used to compile laws and regulations, and it should be stipulated that new gifts are still required.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下韶书同意。
English: He complied.

古文：《丧服》无弟子为师服之制，新礼弟子为师齐衰三月。
现代文：《丧服》中没有弟子眉老师服丧的规定，新礼法规定弟子为老师服齐縯三个月。
English: There is no provision for disciples to mourn their teacher in the "Mourning Dress," and the new etiquette stipulates that the disciple should serve the teacher for three months.

古文：挚虞以为： 自古无师服之制，故仲尼之丧，门人疑于所服。
现代文：挚虞认为： 自古以来没有为老师服丧的制度，所以仲尼去世，门人对丧服有疑问。
English: Zhengyu believes that: Since ancient times, there has been no system of mourning for teachers, so when Zhongni died, people had doubts about mourning clothes.

古文：子贡曰： 昔夫子之丧颜回，若丧子而无服，请丧夫子若丧父而无服。 
现代文：子贡说： 从前夫子失去题旦时，如死了儿子一样而不服丧，让我们也把失去夫子如死了父亲一样而不服丧。 
English: Zigong said, "In the past, when my husband lost his title, I did not mourn like a dead son. Let's not mourn the loss of my husband like a dead father.

古文：遂心丧三年。
现代文：于是不穿丧服守丧三年。
English: Therefore, she did not wear mourning clothes and kept mourning for three years.

古文：此则怀三年之哀，而无齐衰之制也。
现代文：这是心中有三年的悲哀，而没有齐绩的丧服。
English: This is the heart of three years of sorrow, but there is no uniform mourning.

古文：群居，入则绖，出则否，所谓吊服加麻也。
现代文：住在一起就披麻，不住在一起就不披，这是所谓的吊丧之服加麻。
English: If you live together, you wear the same clothes. If you don't live together, you don't wear the same clothes. This is the so-called mourning dress.

古文：先圣为礼，必易从而可传。
现代文：先圣制定礼法，必定容易实行才能流传下来。
English: The first saint established the ritual, it must be easy to implement in order to be passed down.

古文：师徒义诚重，而服制不著，历代相袭，不以为缺。
现代文：师生之义确实很重，可是礼书中没有服丧之条，历代相传，不认为有欠缺。
English: The sense of teachers and students is indeed very heavy, but there is no mourning clause in the book of honor, which has been passed down from generation to generation, and is not considered to be lacking.

古文：且寻师者以弥高为得，故屡迁而不嫌；修业者以日新为益，故舍旧而不疑。仲尼称 三人行，必有我师焉 。
现代文：再说寻师的人以找到更高明的老师为成功，所以不断地变换老师而不惧嫌疑；学习的人以每天都有新收获为成功，所以弃去旧东西不迟疑。倥星说 行，必有我师 。
English: Moreover, those who are looking for a teacher consider it a success to find a more brilliant teacher, so they constantly change teachers without fear of suspicion; those who are learning consider it a success to have a new harvest every day, so they do not hesitate to discard the old things.

古文：子贡云， 夫何常师之有 。
现代文：王重说， 哪裹有什么永恒不变的老师呢 。
English: Wang Chong said, "What kind of teacher is eternal and unchanging?

古文：浅学之师，暂学之师，不可皆为之服。
现代文：学问浅陋的老师，衹短时间跟随学习的老师，不能都为他们服丧。
English: Not all teachers with a shallow knowledge of learning, or those who have only been studying for a short period of time, can be mourned.

古文：义有轻重，服有废兴，则臧否由之而起，是非因之而争，爱恶相攻，悔吝生焉。
现代文：义有轻有重，丧服有废有兴，那么褒贬因此而起，是非由此而争执，爱恶相攻，悔恨就要产生了。
English: Righteousness has lightness and heaviness, mourning clothes have waste and joy, so praise and criticism arise from this, disputes arise from this, love and evil attack each other, and remorse will arise.

古文：宜定新礼无服如旧。 
现代文：应制定新礼为老师不服丧依旧。 
English: A new salute should be developed for teachers who are still in mourning.

古文：诏从之。
现代文：下韶书同意。
English: He complied.

古文：古者天子诸侯葬礼粗备，汉世又多变革，魏晋以下世有改变，大体同汉之制。
现代文：古代天子诸侯的葬礼大致完备，漠代又有许多变革。魏、置以后每代都有改变，大体上与汉制相同。
English: The funerals of the princes and princes of ancient times were generally complete, and there were many changes in the desert era. After Wei and Qi, there were changes in each generation, and it was generally the same as the Han system.

古文：而魏武以礼送终之制，袭称之数，繁而无益，俗又过之，豫自制送终衣服四箧，题识其上，春秋冬夏，日有不讳，随时以敛。金珥珠玉铜铁之物，一不得送。
现代文：而魏武因礼法中送终的规定中，尸衣的套数，繁琐而没有用处，风俗又超过礼的规定，就预先自制四箱送终的衣服，在上面题上标记，春秋冬夏，一旦不讳，随时可以用来装殓，金珥珠玉铜铁之类的物品，一概不得用来送葬。
English: However, Wei Wu, because the number of sets of clothes for the dead in the rules of sending the dead in the etiquette law is cumbersome and useless, and the custom exceeds the rules of etiquette, made four boxes of clothes for the dead in advance and marked them with the above title. Spring, autumn, winter and summer can be used for decoration at any time if they are not concealed. Items such as gold, pearl, jade, copper and iron are not allowed to be used for burial.

古文：文帝遵奉，无所增加。
现代文：文帝遵奉遣制，无所增加。
English: Emperor Wen adhered to the dispatch system, and there was no increase.

古文：及受禅，刻金玺，追加尊号，不敢开埏，乃为石室，藏玺埏首，以示陵中无金银诸物也。
现代文：到代汉称帝后，刻制金玺，追加尊号，不敢打开墓道，就用石头造了墓室，把金玺藏在墓道前面，以表示墓中没有金银之物。
English: The empress dowager of the Han Dynasty engraved a golden urn and added an honorific title. She did not dare to open the graveyard, so she built a stone burial chamber and hid the golden urn in front of the graveyard to show that there was no gold or silver in the grave.

古文：汉礼明器甚多，自是皆省之矣。
现代文：制度随葬的冥器很多，到这时就都省去了。
English: There are a lot of necromancers buried with the system, and they were all omitted at this time.

古文：魏文帝黄初三年，又自作终制曰： 礼，国君即位为椑，存不忘亡也。
现代文：魏塞壶童翅三年，又白作对葬礼的嘱咐说： 礼法规定，国君即位就做好内棺，表示不忘死亡。
English: Wei Xie Jug Tong Ying, who has been in charge of the funeral for three years, said, "The etiquette stipulates that when the sovereign ascends the throne, the inner coffin should be done well, indicating that death should not be forgotten.

古文：寿陵因山为体，无封树，无立寝殿，造园邑，通神道。
现代文：生前预制的陵墓依据山势，不堆土植树，不建正殿，不设守护陵墓的县邑，不修墓道。
English: The prefabricated mausoleum before his death is based on the mountain situation, no soil is heaped, no trees are planted, no main hall is built, no county town is set up to guard the mausoleum, and no cemetery road is built.

古文：夫葬者藏也，欲人之不得见也。
现代文：葬就是藏的意思，想要别人看不见。
English: To bury means to hide, to want others not to see.

古文：礼不墓祭，欲存亡不黩也。
现代文：礼法规定不墓祭，不愿意生死相亵渎。
English: The code of etiquette stipulates that there should be no funeral rites, and one should not desecrate life and death.

古文：皇后及贵人以下不随王之国者，有终没，皆葬涧西，前又已表其处矣。 
现代文：皇后以及不随王到封国去的贵人，终没之后，都葬在涧西，以前已经标明了地点。
English: The empress and the nobles who did not follow the king to the feudal state were all buried in Shaanxi after they passed away, and the locations had been marked in advance.

古文：此诏藏之宗庙，副在尚书、秘书、三府。
现代文：这份诏书藏在宗庙裹，副本存放在尚书、秘书、三府。 
English: This edict is kept in the family temple, and copies are kept in the palace, the secretary, and the three prefectures.

古文：明帝亦遵奉之。
现代文：明帝也遵奉此制。
English: Emperor Ming also followed this system.

古文：明帝性虽崇奢，然未遽营陵墓之制也。
现代文：明童虽然崇尚奢华，然而也没有急忙规划陵墓的规模。
English: Although Ming Tong advocated luxury, he did not rush to plan the size of the mausoleum.

古文：宣帝豫自于首阳山为土藏，不填不树，作《顾命终制》，敛以时服，不设明器。
现代文：自己在首阳山预造坟墓，不堆土不植树，作《顾命终制》，穿平时的衣服入殓，不设置随葬的冥器。
English: He prefabricated his own grave on Shouyang Mountain, did not pile up soil, did not plant trees, made a "life-saving final system," wore ordinary clothes for burial, and did not set up a necropolis to be buried with.

古文：景、文皆谨奉成命，无所加焉。
现代文：景、文都谨奉成命，没有增加什么。
English: Both Jing and Wen obeyed the order and did not add anything.

古文：景帝崩，丧事制度又依宣帝故事。
现代文：量童崩，丧事的制度又依宣帝旧例。
English: When a child dies, the system of funerals follows the old example of Emperor Xuan.

古文：武帝泰始四年，文明王皇后崩，将合葬，开崇阳陵，使太尉司马望奉祭，进皇帝密玺绶于便房神坐。
现代文：武帝蠢垃四年，文明王皇后崩，将要合葬，打开崇阳陵，使太尉司马望奉祭，把皇帝蜡玺放在便房神座。
English: Four years after the death of Emperor Wu, the death of King and Queen of Civilization will be buried together, and the Chongyang Mausoleum will be opened, so that Lieutenant Sima Wang will offer a sacrifice, and the emperor's wax coffin will be placed on the toilet seat.

古文：魏氏金玺，此又俭矣。
现代文：魏氏用金玺，遣比魏又更俭省了。
English: The Wei clan used gold ingots, and they were more frugal than the Wei.

古文：江左初，元、明崇俭，且百度草创，山陵奉终，省约备矣。
现代文：江左之初，元、明崇尚节俭，再说百事草创，山陵是送终的地方，俭约备至。
English: At the beginning of the Yangtze River, the Yuan and Ming dynasties advocated frugality, and it was said that the mountains were the place to die, and frugality was prepared.

古文：成帝咸康七年，皇后杜氏崩。
现代文：成帝咸康七年，皇后杜氏崩。
English: Emperor Jiankang reigned for seven years, and Empress Du died.

古文：诏外官五日一入临，内官旦一入而已，过葬虞祭礼毕止。
现代文：韶令外官五天入宫哭吊一次，内官早晨入宫哭吊一次而已，过了下葬虞祭之礼后就结束。
English: The imperial edict required the foreign minister to enter the palace five days in a row to weep and mourn once, and the privy councillor to enter the palace in the morning to weep and mourn only once, and it ended after the funeral ceremony.

古文：有司奏，大行皇后陵所作凶门柏历门，号显阳端门。
现代文：主管部门奏请，刚去世的皇后陵墓设的凶门柏历门，叫做显阳端门。
English: The competent department reported that the evil door of the newly deceased empress's mausoleum is called the Hsien Yang Duan Gate.

古文：诏曰： 门如所处。凶门柏历，大为烦费，停之。 
现代文：下诏说： 门如同住的地方一样，设凶门柏历，太烦费，停止。 
English: The next edict said: "The door should be like the place where you live, and the door should be set on the lunar calendar. If it's too much trouble, stop."

古文：案蔡谟说，以二瓦器盛始死之祭，系于木，裹以苇席，置庭中，近南，名为重，今之凶门是其象也。
现代文：根据蔡谟的说法，用两个瓦器盛着刚死时的祭品，挂在木头上，用苇席裹着，放在庭中，靠近南方，名叫重，现在的凶门就是这个样子。
English: According to Zaimu, the sacrificial offering at the time of death was held in two earthenware vessels, hung on a tree, wrapped in a feast, and placed in the yard, near the south, named heavy, which is what the gate looks like now.

古文：礼，既虞而作主，今未葬，未有主，故以重当之。
现代文：根据礼法，虞祭之后设牌位，现在还没安葬，没有牌位，所以用重来代替。
English: According to the etiquette, a plaque is set up after the Yu Festival, but now there is no burial, there is no plaque, so it is replaced with weight.

古文：礼称为主道，此其义也。
现代文：礼书中称这是主道，就是这个道理。
English: In the book of etiquette, it is said that this is the main course, and that is the reason.

古文：范坚又曰： 凶门非礼，礼有悬重，形似凶门。
现代文：茎坚又说： 凶门不是丧礼中规定的东西，丧礼中有悬重，样子像凶门。
English: Zhu Jian also said: The evil door is not something stipulated in the funeral rites. There is a hanging weight in the funeral rites, which looks like the evil door.

古文：后人出之门外以表丧，俗遂行之。
现代文：后人把悬重移到门外表示家中有丧事，世人就都用这种方式。
English: Later generations moved the hanging weight outside the door to indicate that there was a funeral at home, and the world used this method.

古文：薄帐，即古吊幕之类也。 
现代文：薄帐，就是古代吊幕一类的东西。 
English: A thin curtain is a kind of ancient hanging curtain.

古文：是时，又诏曰： 重壤之下，岂宜崇饰无用，陵中唯洁扫而已。 
现代文：这时，又下诏说： 黄土之下，哪裹应当崇尚装饰无用的东西呢?陵墓中衹要清洁扫除就可以了。 
English: At this time, the next edict said: Under the loess, where should one wrap things that are useless for decoration? It is enough to clean and sweep away the skeletons in the mausoleum.

古文：有司又奏，依旧选公卿以下六品子弟六十人为挽郎，诏又停之。
现代文：主管部门又奏请，依照旧例选六十个公卿以下六品子弟当挽郎，又诏令停止。
English: The competent department also requested that, in accordance with the old practice, sixty nobles and less than six court nobles should be selected as grooms, and the imperial edict was issued to stop it.

古文：孝武帝太元四年九月，皇后王氏崩。
现代文：孝武帝太元四年九月，皇后王氏崩。
English: In September of the 4th year of Emperor Xiaowu's reign, Empress Wang died.

古文：诏曰： 终事唯从俭速。 
现代文：下诏说： 丧事一切从俭从速办理。 
English: The next edict said: "All funeral matters should be handled with frugality and speed."

古文：又诏： 远近不得遣山陵使。 
现代文：又下诏说： 远近各地不准派山陵使。 
English: The next edict said: It is not allowed to send envoys to the mountains and tombs far and near.

古文：有司奏选挽郎二十四人，诏停之。
现代文：主管部门奏说选挽郎二十四人，韶令停止。
English: The competent department reported that there were twenty-four selectees, and the order was issued to stop.

古文：古无墓祭之礼。
现代文：古代没有墓祭之礼。
English: In ancient times, there was no such thing as a tomb festival.

古文：汉承秦，皆有园寝。
现代文：汉承继秦，陵墓上都建庙。
English: Han successors followed Qin and built temples on their tombs.

古文：正月上丁，祠南郊礼毕，次北郊、明堂、高庙、世祖庙，谓之五供。
现代文：正月上丁，祭南郊结束后，然后是北郊、明堂、高庙、世祖庙，叫做五供。
English: On the first day of the first month, after the festival in the southern suburb is over, then the northern suburb, Myeongdong, Gaomyeong and Sejongmyeong are called the five offerings.

古文：魏武葬高陵，有司依汉立陵上祭殿。
现代文：面生葬在直堕，主管部门依照连制在陵上设祭殿。
English: Mengsheng was buried in the upright position, and the competent department set up a hall of worship on the tomb in accordance with the system of succession.

古文：至文帝黄初三年，乃诏曰： 先帝躬履节俭，遗诏省约。
现代文：到塞壹董翅三年，就下诏说： 先帝亲自履行节俭，遣诏命令省约。
English: Three years after the death of Emperor Dongying, he issued the following edict: The former emperor personally performed thrift, and issued an edict to save money.

古文：子以述父为孝，臣以系事为忠。
现代文：子以传承父志篇孝，臣以履行职事为忠。
English: A son is loyal to his father by inheriting his filial piety, and a vassal is loyal by performing his duties.

古文：古不墓祭，皆设于庙。
现代文：古代不墓祭，都设在庙中。
English: The ancient non-tomb festivals are all held in temples.

古文：高陵上殿皆毁坏，车马还厩，衣服藏府，以从先帝俭德之志。 
现代文：直堕上的祭殿都毁去，车马收回厩中，衣服藏入府中，以顺从先帝节俭之志。 
English: All the temples that had been built directly on the slope were destroyed, the chariots and horses were taken back to the stables, and the clothes were hidden in the palace, in obedience to the former emperor's desire to be frugal.

古文：文帝自作终制，又曰 寿陵无立寝殿，造园邑 ，自后园邑寝殿遂绝。
现代文：文帝自己留下丁关于身后丧葬礼制的嘱咐，又说 预制的陵墓上不设正殿，不设守护陵墓的县邑 ，从此守陵的县邑和正殿就绝迹了。
English: Emperor Wen himself left Ding's instructions about the funeral system for the deceased, and also said that the prefabricated mausoleum would not have a main hall, and there would be no county town to guard the mausoleum. Since then, the county town guarding the mausoleum and the main hall have disappeared.

古文：齐王在位九年，始一谒高平陵而曹爽诛，其后遂废，终于魏世。
现代文：齐王在位九年，刚谒见一次高平陵而萱塞就被诛杀了，以后就废止了，一直到魏世灭亡。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of King Qi, Gang Li saw a Gaoping Mausoleum and was killed for refusing. It was later abolished until the end of the Wei Dynasty.

古文：及宣帝，遗诏 子弟群官皆不得谒陵 。于是景、文遵旨。
现代文：到宣帝时，遣韶说 子弟和群官都不准拜谒陵墓 ，于是景、文遵照旨意。
English: At the time of Emperor Xuan's death, Emperor Qianlong said that his sons and officials were not allowed to visit Emperor Qianlong's mausoleum, so Jing and Wen did as ordered.

古文：至武帝，犹再谒崇阳陵，一谒峻平陵，然遂不敢谒高原陵，至惠帝复止也。
现代文：到武帝时，还两次拜谒崇阳陵，一次拜谒峻平陵，然而一直不敢拜谒高原陵，到惠帝时又停止了。
English: When he came to Emperor Wu, he also visited the Chongyang Mausoleum twice, and the Jianping Mausoleum once. However, he did not dare to visit the Highland Mausoleum. When he came to Emperor Hui, he stopped again.

古文：逮于江左，元帝崩后，诸公始有谒陵辞告之事。
现代文：到了江左之时，元帝崩后，诸公才开始有了拜谒陵墓辞告之事。
English: At the time of Jiang Zuo, after the demise of the former emperor, the princes began to have the matter of paying homage to the mausoleum.

古文：盖由眷同友执，率情而举，非洛京之旧也。
现代文：大概是由于情同好友，任情而举，不是洛京旧制。
English: It is probably due to the fact that they are like-minded friends, and they do things as they please, not the old system of Luo Jing.

古文：成帝时，中宫亦年年拜陵，议者以为非礼，于是遂止，以为永制。
现代文：成帝时，皇后也每年拜谒陵墓，议论者认为不合礼制，于是就停止了，作为固定的制度。
English: When the emperor was crowned, the empress also paid an annual visit to the imperial mausoleum, which was considered inappropriate by the commentators, so it was discontinued as a fixed system.

古文：至穆帝时，褚太后临朝，又拜陵，帝幼故也。
现代文：到穆帝时，褚太后临朝，又拜谒陵墓，是因为皇帝年幼。
English: When it came to Mu Di, Empress Dowager Cixi visited the imperial court and paid homage to the imperial mausoleum, because the emperor was young.

古文：至孝武崩，骠骑将军司马道子曰： 今虽权制释服，至于朔望诸节，自应展情陵所，以一周为断。 
现代文：到孝武崩，骠骑将军司马道子说： 现在虽依权宜之制除去丧服，到了朔望诸节日，本应到陵墓抒发哀情，以一周年为期。 
English: On the death of Xiaowu, the commander of the imperial cavalry, Sima Daozi, said: Although it is now expedient to remove the mourning clothes, when it comes to festivals, it should have been to the mausoleum to express sorrow, with a one-year anniversary period.

古文：于是至陵，变服单衣，烦黩无准，非礼意也。
现代文：于是到陵墓，改穿单衣，繁简无准，不是礼法之意。
English: So I went to the mausoleum and changed into a singlet. It was not a matter of etiquette.

古文：及安帝元兴元年，尚书左仆射桓谦奏： 百僚拜陵，起于中兴，非晋旧典，积习生常，遂为近法。
现代文：到安帝元兴元年，尚书左仆射桓谦奏： 百官拜谒陵墓，起于中兴之后，不是晋的旧制，积习成常，于是成为制度。
English: In the first year of An Di's reign, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Sha Kan Qian, wrote: "Hundreds of officials pay homage at the imperial mausoleum. This is not the old system of the Jin Dynasty, but has become habitual after the rise of the Qing Dynasty. It has become a system."

古文：寻武皇帝诏，乃不使人主诸王拜陵，岂唯百僚！
现代文：追寻武皇帝韶，是不让主上诸王拜谒陵墓，岂止是百官!
English: The pursuit of Emperor Wu's tomb is not to let the main kings worship the tomb, it is more than a hundred officials!

古文：谓宜遵奉。 
现代文：认为应当遵奉。 
English: considered to be complied with.

古文：于是施行。
现代文：于是照他的奏章施行。
English: So he followed his playbook to the letter.

古文：及义熙初，又复江左之旧。
现代文：到义熙初年，又恢复江左旧制。
English: In the first year of Yixi, the old Jiangzuo system was restored.

古文：太康七年，大鸿胪郑默母丧，既葬，当依旧摄职，固陈不起，于是始制大臣得终丧三年。
现代文：七年，大鸿胪堑麸母去世，下葬后，应当依旧任职，坚辞不出，于是开始规定大臣可以守丧满三年。
English: In the seventh year, after the death and burial of the mother of the great man, he should still hold the post and not resign, so it was stipulated that the minister could keep the post for three years.

古文：然元康中，陈准、傅咸之徒，犹以权夺，不得终礼，自兹已往，以为成比也。
现代文：然而元康年间，陈准、傅咸等人，还是以权宜之制勉强他们除去丧服，不得服满三年丧，自此以后，被当作人们援用的成例。
English: However, during the Yuan and Kang dynasties, Chen Jun, Fu Xian and others were still forced to remove their mourning clothes on a makeshift basis, and were not allowed to complete the three-year mourning period. Since then, it has been used as a precedent.

古文：太康元年，东平王楙上言，相王昌父毖，本居长沙，有妻息，汉末使入中国，值吴叛，仕魏为黄门郎，与前妻息死生隔绝，更娶昌母。
现代文：元年，东平王司马椁上言，相互旦之父兰毖，本来住在昼沙，有妻子儿女，坠末出使到中原，正碰上吴反叛，在魏任职当了黄门郎，与前妻及儿女生死隔绝，另娶了王昌之母。
English: In the first year of the new year, Dongping King Sima Qian said that his father Lan Xuan, who had been living in the daytime, had a wife and children, was sent to the Central Plains at the end of the fall, was facing the Wu rebellion, served as Huangmen Lang in Wei, was separated from his ex-wife and daughter-in-law by death, and married Wang Chang's mother.

古文：今江表一统，昌闻前母久丧，言疾求平议。
现代文：现在逗表一统，王旦听说前母久已去世，上言急请议论。
English: Now the table of jokes is unified. Wang Dan heard that his former mother had passed away a long time ago. The last words are urgent.

古文：守博士谢衡议曰： 虽有二妻，盖有故而然，不为害于道，议宜更相为服。 
现代文：守博士谢蛮议论说： 虽然有两个妻子，这自有其原因，对道德法规没有妨害，认为应当再为之服丧。 
English: Dr. Shou Xie argued: Although there are two wives, this has its own reasons, it does not interfere with the moral code, and it should be mourned again.

古文：守博士许猛以为 地绝，又无前母之制，正以在前非没则绝故也。
现代文：守博士许猛认为 地方阻隔，又没有为前母服丧之制，正是因为以前不是死了就是隔绝的缘故。
English: Dr. Xu Meng believed that the reason why there was no mourning for his former mother was because she was either dead or isolated in the past.

古文：前母虽在，犹不应服。 
现代文：前母即使还在，也不应为之服丧 。
English: An ex-mother should not be mourned, even if she is still alive.

古文：段暢、秦秀、驺冲从猛。
现代文：堡蝗、垩歪、堕迚同意注猛的说法。
English: Castle locusts, grasshoppers, and fallen locusts agree with the fierce argument.

古文：散骑常侍刘智安议： 礼为常事制，不为非常设也。
现代文：散骑常侍刘圣议论： 礼法是为正常的情况设立的，不为非正常情况而设。
English: "The etiquette is set up for normal situations, not for abnormal situations," said Liu Sheng, the equestrian equerry.

古文：亡父母不知其死生者，不著于礼。
现代文：失散的父母不知死生的情况，礼法中没有规定。
English: There is no provision in the code of etiquette for separated parents who do not know whether their children are alive or dead.

古文：平生不相见，去其加隆，以期为断。 
现代文：平生没有相见，除去加重的礼仪，以一周年为限。 
English: They haven't seen each other in their entire lives, and aside from the heightened etiquette, they only see each other on their first anniversary.

古文：都令史虞溥议曰： 臣以为礼不二嫡，所以重正，非徒如前议者防妒忌而已。
现代文：都令史虞溥议论说： 臣认为礼法规定没有两个正妻，这是因为重视正妻，不仅是像从前的议论者所说防止妒忌而已。
English: Daming Shi Yuqi commented: "The minister believes that the etiquette law stipulates that there are no two legal wives. This is because the importance of a legal wife is not only to prevent jealousy, as previous commentators have said.

古文：故曰 一与之齐，终身不改 ，未有遭变而二嫡。
现代文：所以说 一旦出嫁，终身不变 ，没有因遭变乱而娶两个正妻的。
English: Therefore, it is said that once you get married, you will remain the same for the rest of your life, and you should not marry two wives because of the turmoil.

古文：苟不二，则昌父更娶之辰，是前妻义绝之日也。
现代文：如果不能有两个正妻，那么王昌之父再娶之时，就是前妻恩义断绝之曰。
English: If it is not possible to have two legal wives, then when Wang Chang's father remarries, it is said that the former wife's favor is cut off.

古文：使昌父尚存，二妻俱在，必不使二嫡专堂，两妇执祭，同为之齐也。 
现代文：假使王昌之父还活着，两个妻子都在，一定不会让两个正妻主持家务，两个媳妇一同祭祀，都与他齐等。 
English: If Wang Chang's father were still alive and had two wives, he would not have let his two wives take care of the housework and his two daughters-in-law make sacrifices together.

古文：秦秀议： 二妾之子，父命令相慈养，而便有三年之恩，便同所生。
现代文：秦秀议论： 两个妾之于，父亲命她们相互抚育教养，就有服丧三年之恩，如同自己的生母一样。
English: Qin Xiu commented: If two concubines are ordered by their father to raise and educate each other, they will have to serve a three-year mourning period, just like their birth mother.

古文：昌父何义不命二嫡依此礼乎！父之执友有如子之礼，况事兄之母乎！ 
现代文：王昌之父为什么不让两个正妻依照这条规定呢对父亲的好友要行子礼，何况事奉兄之母呢! 
English: Why didn't Wang Chang's father allow his two legitimate wives to follow this rule? They should have performed the filial piety to their father's good friend, not to mention serving their brother's mother!

古文：许猛又议： 夫少妇稚，则不可许以改娶更适矣。
现代文：许猛又议论说： 丈夫年轻妻子年轻，就不能同意是改娶改嫁。
English: Xu Meng also argued that: if the husband is young and the wife is young, they cannot agree to remarry.

古文：今妻在许以更聘，夫存而妻得改醮者，非绝而何。 
现代文：如果妻子还在而同意丈夫再娶，丈夫活着而妻子能够改嫁，不是夫妻之义断绝又是什么呢? 
English: If the wife is still alive and consents to the husband remarrying, and the husband is still alive and the wife is able to remarry, is this not the severing of conjugal rights and what is it?

古文：侍中领博士张恽议： 昔舜不告而娶，婚礼盖阙，故《尧典》以厘降二女为文，不殊嫡媵。
现代文：侍中领博士张惮议论说： 从前舜不告父母而娶妻，婚礼大概不完备，所以《尧典》中说下嫁二女，不分妻妾。
English: The head of the chamberlains, Dr. Zhang Shuo, commented: In the past, when a man married a woman without telling his parents, the wedding ceremony was probably incomplete, so the "Shengxuan" said that he married two daughters, regardless of his wife and concubine.

古文：传记以妃夫人称之，明不立正后也。
现代文：传记中以妃夫人称呼，表明没有立皇后。
English: In the biography, she is referred to as the Empress Dowager, indicating that she did not become queen.

古文：夫以圣人之弘，帝者嫡子，犹权事而变，以定典礼。
现代文：以圣人的伟大，帝王的嫡子，尚且根据实际情况而变通，以制定典礼。
English: With the greatness of the saint, the legitimate son of the emperor, it is still flexible according to the actual situation to formulate the ceremony.

古文：黄昌之告新妻使避正室，时论许之。
现代文：黄昌让新妻避开正室，时人称许他。
English: Huang Chang let his new wife avoid his legal wife, and people praised him.

古文：推姬氏之让，执黄卿之决，宜使各自服其母。 
现代文：以姬氏的谦让推论，用黄卿的决断作依据，应该让他们各自为其母服丧。 
English: Based on the gracious reasoning of Ms. Ji and the determination of Huangqing, they should each pay their respects to their mother.

古文：黄门侍郎崔谅、荀悝、中书监荀勖、领中书令和峤、侍郎夏侯湛皆如溥议。
现代文：黄门侍郎崔谅、荀悝、中书监荀勖、领中书令和崤、侍郎夏侯湛都同意虞溥的议论。
English: Huangmen's chamberlains Cui Jun, Zou, Zhongshu Guan Zi, Lin Zhongshu Ling and Zou, and chamberlain Xia Hou Tan all agreed with Yu's argument.

古文：侍郎山雄、兼侍郎著作陈寿以为： 溥驳一与之齐，非大夫也，礼无二嫡，不可以并耳。
现代文：侍郎山雄、兼侍郎著作陈寿认为： 虞溥驳斥一旦与夫齐等，不是指丈夫，礼法规定不能有两个正妻，不能并立。
English: According to the books of the attendant Yamao and the attendant Chen Shou, the attendant refuted that once the husband and the wife are equal, it does not mean the husband, and the etiquette stipulates that there can not be two legal wives, and they can not stand side by side.

古文：若昌父及二母于今各存者，则前母不废，已有明徵也。
现代文：如果王昌之父以及两位母亲现在都活着，那么前母不废，已经有明白的验证。
English: If Wang Chang's father and both mothers are alive now, then the former mother is still valid, which has been clearly verified.

古文：设令昌父将前母之子来入中国尚在者，当从出母之服。
现代文：假设王昌之父带前母之子来到中原现在还在，应当按被父亲休弃的生母服丧。
English: Assuming that Wang Chang's father brought his former mother's son to the Central Plains and is still alive, he should be mourned according to the birth mother who was abandoned by his father.

古文：苟昌父无弃前妻之命，昌兄有服母之理，则昌无疑于不服。 
现代文：如果王昌之父没有休弃前妻之命，王昌之兄就有为母服丧的理由，那么王昌对不服丧没有疑虑。 
English: If Wang Chang's father did not abandon his ex-wife's order, Wang Chang's brother would have a reason to mourn for his mother, so Wang Chang has no doubts about not mourning.

古文：贼曹属卞粹议： 昌父当莫审之时而娶后妻，则前妻同之于死而义不绝。
现代文：贼曹属卞堕议道： 王旦之父在搞不清楚的时候娶了后妻，那么前妻就等于死丫而恩义未绝。
English: Cao Zhengyuan, a thief, said, "Wang Dan's father married his second wife when he did not know what to do, so his first wife is as good as dead.

古文：若生相及而后妻不去，则妾列于前志矣。
现代文：如果她活着见到后妻丈夫又不休去后妻，那么根据古书的记载就是妾了。
English: If she lived to see the husband of the second wife and did not leave the second wife, then according to the records of ancient books, she was a concubine.

古文：死而会乎，则同祔于葬，无并嫡之实。
现代文：死后相会，就一同拊葬于夫之圹，没有并月正妻之实。
English: When they met after their deaths, they were buried together in their husband's coffin, but they did not become husband and wife.

古文：必欲使子孙于没世之后，追计二母隔绝之时，以为并嫡，则背违死父，追出亡母。
现代文：一定要让子孙在去世之后，追论两个母亲在隔绝之时，作为并立的正妻，那就违背了亡父，死后休弃亡母。
English: It is necessary to let the children and grandchildren, after the death of their parents, trace the two mothers in the time of isolation, as a concurrent legal wife, that is, to violate the deceased father and abandon the deceased mother after death.

古文：议者以为礼无前母之服者，可谓以文害意。
现代文：议论者认为礼法中没有为前母服丧的条文，可以说是以文害意。
English: Commentators believe that there is no provision in the etiquette law for mourning the former mother, which can be said to be a bad intention.

古文：愚以为母之不亲而服三年，非一无异于前母也。
现代文：愚意认为母亲不亲，而服三年丧的情况不止一种，与前母无异。 
English: I foolishly thought that my mother was not a relative, but there was more than one case of a three-year mourning period, which was no different from my ex-mother.

古文：仓曹属卫恆议： 或云，嫡不可二，前妻宜绝。
现代文：仓曹属卫恒议道： 有人说，正妻不能有两个，前妻应被绝弃。
English: Cang Cao Ren Wei Heng said: Some people say that there cannot be two legal wives, and the former wife should be abandoned.

古文：此为夺旧与新，违母从子，礼律所不许，人情所未安也。
现代文：这是去掉旧的给予新的，违背母亲依从儿子，是礼法所不允许，人情认为不妥的。
English: This is to remove the old and give the new, to disobey the mother and obey the son, which is not allowed by etiquette and law, and is considered inappropriate by human nature.

古文：或云，绝与死同，无嫌二嫡，据其相及，欲令有服。
现代文：有人说，绝弃与死了相同，没有两个正妻的嫌疑，根据其活着时见过，就要让其子服丧。
English: Some people say that abandonment is the same as death, there is no suspicion of two legal wives, according to what he saw when he was alive, he must let his son go into mourning.

古文：此为论嫡则死，议服则生，还自相伐，理又不通。
现代文：这是说到正妻的名分时就死了，说到服丧就活着，白相矛盾，道理上又不通。
English: This is to say that when it comes to the name of the legal wife, he is dead, and when it comes to mourning, he is alive, which is a white contradiction and does not make sense.

古文：愚以为地绝死绝，诚无异也，宜一如前母，不复追服。 
现代文：愚意认为，地域隔绝和生死隔绝，确实没有区别，应该一概看作前母，不再补服丧。 
English: Stupidity believes that there is really no difference between the isolation of the region and the isolation of life and death, and should be regarded as the former mother, and no longer make up for the mourning.

古文：主薄刘卞议： 毖在南为邦族，于北为羁旅，以此名分言之，前妻为元妃，后妇为继室。
现代文：主簿刘卞议道： 王毖在南方是国人，到北方来是寄旅，根据这个名分来说，前妻是元配，后妻是继室。
English: Liu Wei, the chief clerk, said: Wang Wei is a Chinese citizen in the south, and he came to the north as a traveler. According to this name, his ex-wife is the first wife, and his second wife is the second wife.

古文：何至王路既通，更当逐其今妻，废其嫡子！
现代文：何至于国家的道路通畅后，又要逐弃前妻，废掉嫡子呢!
English: What if, after the country's road is smooth, he has to abandon his ex-wife and his legitimate son!

古文：不书姜氏，绝不为亲，以其犯至恶也。
现代文：不写姜氏，断绝关系，因为她犯了最坏的事。
English: Don't write about Ms. Jiang, break off the relationship, because she did the worst thing.

古文：赵姬虽贵，必推叔隗；原同虽宠，必嫡宣孟。
现代文：赵姬虽然高贵，必定要推让叔隗为正妻；原同虽然得宠，必定要以宣孟为嫡于。
English: Although Zhao Ji is noble, she will definitely push her uncle to be her lawful wife; although he is favored, he will definitely take Xuan Meng as his legitimate wife.

古文：若违礼苟让，何则《春秋》所当善也！
现代文：如果违反礼法随便谦让，为什么《春秋》要赞美他们呢!
English: If they violate the rules of etiquette and give in, why should "Spring and Autumn" praise them!

古文：论者谓地绝，其情终已不得往来。今地既通，何为故当追而绝之邪！
现代文：议论者说地域隔绝，他们夫妻不能往来，现在道路已经通畅，为什么要有意地追行弃绝呢!
English: Commentators say that the area is isolated, their husbands and wives can not travel, now the road has been smooth, why deliberately pursue abandonment!

古文：黄昌见美，斯又近世之明比。 
现代文：黄昌受到赞美，这又是近来的明证。 
English: The praise for Huang Chang is another recent example.

古文：司空齐王攸议： 《礼记》 生不及祖父母、诸父昆弟，而父税丧，己则否 ，诸儒皆以为父以他故子生异域，不及此亲存时归见之，父虽追服，子不从税，不责非时之恩也。
现代文：司空齐王司马攸议道： 《礼记》 没有活着见到祖父母、诸父兄弟，父亲因误了丧期而追服最轻的丧服，自己不服 ，诸儒者都认为父亲因故而子生在异地，没赶上这个亲人活着时回家见面，父亲虽然追服丧服，子不跟着服丧，不要求不合时之恩。
English: Sifu Qi Wang Sima You said: "The Book of Rites" did not live to see grandparents, fathers and brothers. The father missed the mourning period and had to wear the lightest mourning clothes. He did not accept it. All Confucians believe that the father was born in a different place for some reason and did not catch up with this relative to meet him when he was alive. Although the father wore mourning clothes, the son did not follow the mourning, and did not ask for the grace of not being in time.

古文：但不相见，尚不服其先终，而况前母非亲所生，义不逾祖，莫往莫来，恩绝殊隔，而令追服，殆非称情立文之谓也。
现代文：衹要不曾相见，尚且不为先去世者服丧，何况前母不是自己亲生之母，恩义不越过祖辈，不来不往，恩义断绝地域远隔，而让其追服丧，这大概不是合乎情理用来作为准则的做法。
English: It is probably not reasonable to use as a guideline the practice of not mourning for the first-deceased even if they had never met, let alone if the first-born was not one's own biological mother, not exceeding the gratitude of one's ancestors, not coming and going, and not severing the geographical distance of gratitude and letting it pursue mourning.

古文：以为昌不宜追服。 
现代文：认为王昌不宜追服丧。 
English: He thought it was not appropriate for Wang Chang to follow suit.

古文：司徒李胤议： 毖为黄门侍郎，江南已叛。
现代文：司徒李胤议道： 王毖当黄门侍郎时，江菌已经反叛。
English: Li Yan, a scholar, said: When Wang Yao was a Yellow Gate attendant, Jiang Ye had already rebelled.

古文：石厚与焉，大义灭亲，况于毖之义，可得以为妻乎！ 
现代文：五厘做了大逆不道之事，亘殖大义灭亲，何况王毖夫妻之义，还能再保持夫妻关系吗? 
English: Wulian has done a great act of rebellion and immorality, spreading the great righteousness of eliminating relatives, not to mention the righteousness of Wang Yao and his wife, can they still maintain the relationship between husband and wife?

古文：大司马骞不议，太尉充、抚军大将军妆南王亮皆从主者。
现代文：大司马陈骞不议论，太尉买充、抚军大将军迪起亘压童都同意主管官的意见。
English: Chief Secretary Ma Chen Rong did not discuss the matter, while Second Lieutenant Maichong and General of the General Staff Di Qiwang all agreed with the opinion of the officer in charge.

古文：溥又驳粹曰： 丧从宁戚，谓丧事尚哀耳，不使服非其亲也。
现代文：卢遵又反驳主硿说： 丧礼以平息哀伤为目的，是说丧事注重哀伤，不让人月非亲之人服丧。
English: Lu Zun also refuted the main criticism, saying: The purpose of the funeral is to appease the grief, which means that the funeral pays attention to the grief, and does not allow people who are not relatives to mourn.

古文：夫死者终也，终事已故无绝道。
现代文：死是终结，终结之事所以没有弃绝之道。
English: Death is the end, the end of things, so there is no way out.

古文：分居两存，则离否由人。
现代文：分居而都活着，那么离否由人决定。
English: If you live apart and both of you are alive, then it is up to you to decide whether or not to separate.

古文：夫妇以判合为义，今土隔人殊，则配合理绝。
现代文：夫妇以两性结合为义，现在地域隔绝人各一方，那么配合之义就不存在了。
English: Couples use sexual union as a justification, but now the region is isolating each side, so the meaning of cooperation does not exist.

古文：彼已更娶代己，安得自同于死妇哉！
现代文：他已经再娶了代替自己，怎么能把自己等同于死了的妻子呢!
English: He has remarried in his place, how can he equate himself with his dead wife!

古文：伯夷让孤竹，不可以为后王法也。
现代文：伯夷让位给孤竹，不能用来作后王的准则。
English: Bo Yi gave way to Lone Bamboo, which cannot be used as a guideline for the queen.

古文：且既已为嫡后服，复云为妾，生则或贬或离，死则同祔于葬，妻专一以事夫，夫怀贰以接己，开伪薄之风，伤贞信之教，于以纯化笃俗，不亦难乎！今昌二母虽土地殊隔，据同时并存，何得为前母后母乎！
现代文：再说既然已经为嫡后妻服丧，再说当妾，活着可能贬斥可能离异，死了就拊葬在一起，妻子专一地事夫，夫以二心对待自己，开启伪诈刻薄的风气，伤害忠贞信义的教化，以此来使风化纯正敦厚，不也很难吗现在王昌两个母亲虽然地域远隔，根据她们曾经同时活在世上的情况，哪能是前母后母呢!
English: Furthermore, since it has already been a mourning for the wife of the heir, and then a concubine, it may be disparaged or divorced while alive, and buried together when dead, the wife should be devoted to the husband, and the husband should treat himself with two hearts, and open up a false, deceitful and cruel culture, and harm the enlightenment of loyalty and faithfulness, so as to make the culture pure and strong, isn't it also difficult? Now, although Wang Chang's two mothers are geographically far apart, according to the situation that they once lived in the world at the same time, how can they be the former mother and the latter mother?

古文：设使昌母先亡，以嫡合葬，而前母不绝，远闻丧问，当复相为制何服邪！夫制不应礼，动而愈失。
现代文：假使王昌的生母先死，以正妻的身份合葬，而前母并未绝弃，远闻消息，她将又该服什么样的丧呢规定如果与礼不合，施行起来过失就更大。
English: If Wang Chang's birth mother died first and was buried together with him as his lawful wife, and the former mother did not abandon him, and the news was heard far away, what kind of funeral should she wear? If the regulation is inconsistent with etiquette, the fault will be greater when it is implemented.

古文：夫孝子不纳亲于不义，贞妇不昧进而苟容。
现代文：孝子不使父母陷于不义，贞妇不贪财而取悦于人。
English: A filial son does not cause his parents to fall into iniquity, and a chaste woman does not covet but brings joy to others.

古文：今同前嫡于死妇，使后妻居正而或废，于二子之心，曾无恧乎！而云诬父弃母，恐此文致之言，难以定臧否也。
现代文：如果把前面的正妻等同于死了的妻子，使后妻居正位或者被废弃，在两个儿子心中，竟然没有惭愧吗而说是诬蠛父亲抛弃母亲，恐怕这是舞文弄法陷入于罪之言，难以确定善恶。
English: If the previous legal wife is equated with the dead wife, so that the second wife is in the right position or abandoned, and in the hearts of the two sons, they are not ashamed to say that they falsely accused the father of abandoning the mother, I am afraid that this is a dance trick caught in the word of sin, it is difficult to determine good and evil.

古文：礼，违诸侯适天子，不服旧君，然则昌父绝前君矣，更纳后室，废旧妻矣，又何取于宜诛宜抚乎！且妇人之有恶疾，乃慈夫之所愍也，而在七出，诚以在人理应绝故也。
现代文：礼法规定，离去诸侯归附天子，不为旧君服丧，那么王昌之父绝去了前君，再娶后妻，废弃前妻，在应该责罚或应该赞成方面取法什么呢而且妇人如果有难以医治的疾病，慈善的丈夫应该怜悯她，却在七出之条中，确实是因人理应该绝弃的缘故。
English: According to the rules of etiquette, if you leave the princes to the heavenly son and do not mourn for the old prince, then Wang Chang's father will never go to the former prince, marry the second wife, abandon the former wife, and what should be done in terms of punishment or approval? Moreover, if a woman has a disease that is difficult to cure, a charitable husband should pity her, but in the seven rules, it is indeed a reason that should be abandoned by human reason.

古文：今夫妇殊域，与无妻同，方之恶疾，理无以异。
现代文：现在夫妇各在一方，与没有妻子相同，与难以医治的疾病相比，从道理上没有区别。
English: Now, a husband and wife are on the same side, the same as without a wife, and compared with incurable diseases, there is no difference in principle.

古文：据己更娶，有绝前之证。而云应服，于义何居！ 
现代文：根据再娶的事实，有绝弃前妻的明证，而说应为前妻服丧，在道理上说不过去。 
English: According to the fact of remarriage, there is clear evidence of abandonment of the former wife, and it is unreasonable to say that the former wife should be mourned.

古文：尚书八座以为 设令有人于此，父为敦煌太守，而子后任于洛，若父娶妻，非徒不见，乃可不知，及其死亡，不得不服。
现代文：尚书令、尚书仆射、六尚书认为 假设有这样一个人，父亲是敦煌太守，儿子后来在洛任职，如果父亲娶妻，不但他见不到，还可能不知道，到后母死时，他不能不服丧。
English: Shang Shuling, Shang Shuling and Liushang Shuling think that if there is such a person, the father is the governor of Dunhuang, and the son later serves in Luo, if the father marries a wife, not only can he not see her, but he may not know her, when the mother dies, he cannot but be saddened.

古文：但鞠养已者情哀，而不相见名制，虽戚念之心殊，而为之服一也。
现代文：衹要养育自己之情悲哀，即使不相见也有名分，虽然悲哀思念之心有所不同，但为之服丧却是一样的。
English: If you want to nurture your own feelings of sadness, even if you don't see each other, you have a place. Although the feelings of sadness and yearning are different, the mourning is the same.

古文：又，两后匹嫡，自谓违礼，不谓非常之事而以常礼处之也。
现代文：又有，如果有两个皇后两个正妻，自然认为这是违反礼法的事，不会说这是非常之事就用常礼来对待。
English: Also, if there are two queens and two legal wives, it is natural to think that this is a violation of etiquette, and it will not be said that this is an extraordinary thing and will be treated with common courtesy.

古文：昔子思哭出母于庙，其门人曰： 庶氏之女死，何为哭于孔氏之庙！ 
现代文：从前于思在祖庙为被父亲休弃的生母悲哭，他的门人说： 别人家的女人死了，为什么在孔氏的庙裹哭呢? 
English: Once upon a time, Yu Si wept in the ancestral temple for his birth mother, who had been abandoned by his father. His disciple said, "Other people's women have died, why do you weep in Kong's temple?

古文：子思惧，改哭于他室。
现代文：子思恐惧，改在别的屋裹哭。
English: The child thought of fear, and wept in another room.

古文：若昌不制服，不得不告其父祖，掘其前母之尸，徙之他地。
现代文：如果王昌不服丧，他不能不向父祖告知，从地下掘出前母的尸体，迁往别的地方。
English: If Wang Chang does not accept the mourning, he cannot but tell his ancestors that he will dig out his ex-mother's body from the ground and move to another place.

古文：若其不徙，昌为罪人。
现代文：如果不迁走。王昌就是罪人。
English: If they don't move away, Wang Chang is a sinner.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: Why is that?

古文：异族之女不得祔于先姑，藏其墓次故也。
现代文：别人家的女人不能与死去的婆婆葬在一起，埋在家族的墓地中。
English: A woman from another family cannot be buried with her dead mother-in-law in the family cemetery.

古文：且夫妇人牵夫，犹有所尊，赵姬之举，礼得权通，故先史详之，不讥其事耳。
现代文：且妇人牵夫，还是有尊严，趟姬的推让，从礼法上可以变通，所以先代史书详细记载，不讥刺造件事。
English: Moreover, a woman who has a husband is still dignified, and the wife's concession can be flexible in terms of etiquette, so the previous history books have detailed records, and they do not ridicule and fabricate things.

古文：今昌之二母，各已终亡，尚无并主轻重之事也。
现代文：现在王昌的两个母亲，都已死去，还没有并立为正妻谁轻谁重的问题。
English: Now that both of Wang Chang's mothers are dead, there is no question of who is more important.

古文：昌之前母，宜依叔隗为比。
现代文：王昌的前母，应以叔隗为比照。
English: Wang Chang's former mother should be compared to his uncle.

古文：若亡在昌未生之前者，则昌不应复服。
现代文：如果她死时王昌没有出生，那么王昌不应该再服丧。
English: If Wang Chang was not born when she died, then Wang Chang should not be in mourning.

古文：生及母存，自应如礼以名服三年。
现代文：如果他出生时赶上了前母还活着，自然应该依照礼法以儿子的名分服三年丧。
English: If he is still alive at the time of his birth, he should naturally be buried for three years in accordance with the etiquette in the name of his son.

古文：辄正定为文，章下太常报楙奉行。 
现代文：就依此制定条文，交太常告司马榊奉行 。
English: Accordingly, the provisions were formulated, and Jiaotong University often told Sima Yi to follow them.

古文：制曰： 凡事有非常，当依准旧典，为之立断。
现代文：皇帝说： 事情总会有特殊情况，应当依旧典为准，作出决断。
English: The emperor said: There will always be special circumstances in the matter, and the law should still prevail and make a decision.

古文：今议此事，称引赵姬、叔隗者粗是也。然后狄与晋和，故姬氏得迎叔隗而下之。
现代文：现在议论这件事，援引趟姬、叔隗的旧例大致合适，后来狄与晋和好，所以姬氏能迎接叔隗而自居下位。
English: To discuss this matter now, it is roughly appropriate to invoke the old example of Wai Ji and Shu Ye. Later, Di and Jin were reconciled, so Hsieh was able to meet Shu Ye and take a lower position.

古文：吴寇隔塞，毖与前妻，终始永绝。
现代文：吴寇阻隔。王毖与前妻，终于永久隔绝。
English: Wu Kou is estranged. Wang Yao and his ex-wife are finally permanently estranged.

古文：必义无两嫡，则赵衰可以专制隗氏。
现代文：如果一定说从礼义上不能有两个正妻，那么赵衰可以祇为叔隗服丧。
English: If it must be said that there cannot be two legal wives from the point of view of etiquette, then Zhao Zhen can only mourn for his uncle.

古文：昌为人子，岂得擅替其母。
现代文：王昌作为人子，怎么能擅自废弃其母呢?
English: As the son of man, how could Wang Chang abandon his mother without permission?

古文：且毖二妻并以绝亡，其子犹后母之子耳，昌故不应制服也。 
现代文：而且王毖两个妻子都已经死亡，其子还是后母之子，王昌因此不应服丧。 
English: Moreover, both of Wang Yao's wives have died, and his son is still the son of his stepmother, so Wang Chang should not be in mourning.

古文：太兴初，著作郎干宝论之曰： 礼有经有变有权，王毖之事，有为为之也。
现代文：立星初年，著作郎王室评论遣件事说： 礼法有常法有变通有权宜，王毖之事，是有一定的原因造成的。
English: In the first year after the establishment of Wang Xing, the royal author commented on the case of Wang Xing, saying: The etiquette has the common law and the flexibility is appropriate. Wang Xing's case is caused by a certain reason.

古文：有不可责以始终之义，不可求以循常之文，何群议之纷错！同产者无嫡侧之别，而先生为兄；诸侯同爵无等级之差，而先封为长。
现代文：有的事情不能用有始有终之义要求，有的事情不能用依循常法之文要求，为什么众人议论纷纭呢同一个父亲的人没有嫡庶的区别，而先出生的为兄；爵位相同的诸侯没有等级的差别，而先受封的为长。
English: Some things can't be required to have a beginning and an end, some things can't be required to follow the text of the common law, why do people argue? There is no difference between a person with the same father as a legitimate son, but the first born is a brother; there is no difference in the rank of princes with the same title, but the first to be named is the eldest.

古文：今二妻之入，无贵贱之礼，则宜以先后为秩，顺序义也。
现代文：这两个妻子进他家的门，没有贵贱之礼，那么应该以先后为次第，这是顺序的意思。
English: The two wives entered the door of his house, there is no nobility, then it should be in order, this is the meaning of order.

古文：今生而同室者寡，死而同庙者众，及其神位，固有上下也。
现代文：现在活着同居一室的人少，死后同在庙中的人多，说到牌位，本来是有上下的。
English: There are fewer people living together in the same room now, and more people in the temple after death. When it comes to the cards, there are ups and downs.

古文：故《春秋》贤赵姬遭礼之变而得礼情也。
现代文：所以《春秋》以赵姬遭到礼变而符合礼情为贤。
English: Therefore, "Spring and Autumn" is virtuous in that Zhao Ji was subjected to a change of etiquette and complied with etiquette.

古文：且夫吉凶哀乐，动乎情者也，五礼之制，所以叙情而即事也。
现代文：再说吉凶哀乐，是动感情的事，五礼的制定，是用来抒发感情而适应事情的。
English: In addition, auspicious and inauspicious music is an emotional thing, and the formulation of the five precepts is used to express emotions and adapt to things.

古文：今二母者，本他人也，以名来亲，而恩否于时，敬不及生，爱不及丧，夫何追服之道哉！
现代文：现在两位母亲，本来是不相干的人，以名分而有亲，可是恩情不及时，恭敬没赶上她活着，爱戴没赶上她去世。
English: Now the two mothers, originally unrelated people, are related by name, but the gratitude is not timely, the respect did not catch up with her alive, and the love did not catch up with her death.

古文：张恽、刘卞，得其先后之节，齐王、卫恆，通于服绝之制，可以断矣。
现代文：又有什么追服丧的道理呢张惮、刘卞的议论，抓住了先后这个关键，齐王、卫恒的议论，搞通了不应服丧的道理，可以作决断了。
English: The arguments of Zhang Shuo and Liu Xi have grasped this key successively, and the arguments of Qi Wang and Wei Heng have figured out the reason why mourning should not be pursued, and a decision can be made.

古文：朝廷于此，宜导之以赵姬，齐之以诏命，使先妻恢含容之德，后妻崇卑让之道，室人达长少之序，百姓见变礼之中。
现代文：朝廷在这件事上，应该以赵姬的事为启迪，以韶命统一口径，使前妻恢弘宽恕容忍之德，后妻崇尚谦卑礼让之道，家人通达长幼之序，百姓在礼法之中见识变通。
English: In this matter, the imperial court should take Zhao Ji's case as an inspiration, and strive to unify the caliber, so that the former wife will magnify the virtue of forgiveness and tolerance, the latter wife will advocate the way of humility and courtesy, the family will understand the order of the eldest and the youngest, and the people will see the flexibility in the etiquette.

古文：若此，可以居生，又况于死乎！古之王者，有以师友之礼待其臣，而臣不敢自尊。
现代文：像这样，可以用来立身处世，又何况死后呢古代的王者，有的用师友之礼对待臣下，而臣下不敢自尊。
English: Like this, it can be used to stand up in life, let alone after death. In ancient times, some kings treated their subjects with the courtesy of teachers and friends, but the subjects did not dare to show self-respect.

古文：今令先妻以一体接后，而后妻不敢抗，及其子孙交相为服，礼之善物也。
现代文：现今如果让前妻用礼义对待后妻，而后妻不敢与她抗礼，让她们的子孙相互为她们服丧，这是礼中的善事。
English: Nowadays, if the former wife treats the latter wife with courtesy, and the latter wife does not dare to defy her, let their children and grandchildren mutually mourn for them, this is a good deed in the ritual.

古文：然则王昌兄弟相得之日，盖宜祫祭二母，等其礼馈，序其先后，配以左右，兄弟肃雍，交酬奏献，上以恕先父之志，中以高二母之德，下以齐兄弟之好，使义风弘于王教，慈让洽乎急难，不亦得礼之本乎！ 
现代文：那么王昌兄弟相互和睦的时候，就应该合祭两位母亲，使她们祭礼祭品相等，列好先后之序，以左右相配，兄弟庄严和谐，交替献祭，上可以体谅父亲的心意，中可以宣扬两位母亲的德行，下可以和谐兄弟的关系，使善美的风气在王教中得以弘扬，慈爱谦让的品德在急难之时充分体现，这不也是得到了礼的根本吗? 
English: Then, when the Wangchang brothers are in harmony with each other, they should make a joint offering to the two mothers, make their sacrificial offerings equal, arrange the order of succession, match the left and right, brothers solemn and harmonious, alternate sacrifices, on the top can understand the father's intentions, in the middle can promote the virtues of the two mothers, and on the bottom can harmonize the relationship between brothers, so that the good and beautiful ethos can be promoted in Wangjiao, and the character of love and modesty can be fully reflected in times of distress. Isn't this also the foundation of the ceremony?

古文：是时，沛国刘仲武先娶毌丘氏，生子正舒、正则二人。
现代文：这时，沛国刘仲武先娶了母丘氏，生子刘正舒、刘正则两人。
English: At this time, Liu Zhongwu of Peiguo first married his mother, Ms. Qiu, and had two sons, Liu Zhengshu and Liu Zhengzai.

古文：毌丘俭反败，仲武出其妻，娶王氏，生陶，仲武为毌丘氏别舍而不告绝。
现代文：母丘俭反叛失败，刘仲武休弃其妻，娶王氏，生刘陶，刘仲武为母丘氏另安排住处而没有断绝关系。
English: After the failure of his mother's Qiuqian rebellion, Liu Zhongwu abandoned his wife and married the Wang clan, giving birth to Liu Tao. Liu Zhongwu arranged another residence for his mother's Qiu clan, but did not break off the relationship.

古文：及毌丘氏卒，正舒求祔葬焉，而陶不许。
现代文：挂丘氏去世时，刘正舒请求与父合葬，刘陶不同意。
English: When Kakeoka died, Liu Zhengshu requested to be buried with his father, but Liu Tao did not agree.

古文：舒不释服，讼于上下，泣血露骨，缞裳缀络，数十年弗得从，以至死亡。
现代文：刘正舒不脱丧服，上下告讼，流泪出血瘠瘦露骨，丧服破烂，数十年不获同意，直到他死去。
English: Liu Zhengshu did not take off his mourning clothes, sued up and down, shed tears and blood, was emaciated and bared his bones, his mourning clothes were tattered, and did not receive consent for decades until he died.

古文：时吴国硃某娶妻陈氏，生子东伯。
现代文：当时吴国朱某娶妻陈氏，生子朱东伯。
English: At that time, Wu Guozhu married his wife Chen and had a son Zhu Dongbo.

古文：入晋，晋赐妻某氏，生子绥伯。
现代文：到晋，晋赐给他妻子某氏，生子朱绥伯。
English: To Jin, Jin gave his wife, a certain clan, and his son, Zhu Zibo.

古文：太康之中，某已亡，绥伯将母以归邦族，兄弟交爱敬之道，二母笃先后之序，雍雍人无间焉。
现代文：太康年间，朱某死后，朱绥伯携母亲回家乡，兄弟相互尽爱敬之道，两位母亲笃诚遵守先后之序，和睦相处，外人无可指责。
English: During the Taikang years, after Zhu's death, Zhu Zibo returned to his hometown with his mother. The brothers loved and respected each other. The two mothers faithfully followed the order of succession and lived in harmony. Outsiders were beyond reproach.

古文：及其终也，二子交相为服，君子以为贤。
现代文：到她们去世后，两个儿子相互服丧，君子认为他们很贤。
English: After their death, the two sons mourned each other, and the gentleman thought they were very virtuous.

古文：安丰太守程谅先已有妻，后又娶，遂立二嫡。
现代文：安丰太守程谅先已经有了妻子，后来又娶，于是立两个正妻。
English: Anfeng Taizhong already had a wife, and later he married again, so he had two legal wives.

古文：前妻亡，后妻子勋疑所服。
现代文：前妻死，后妻之子程勋对服什么丧有疑问。
English: After the death of his ex-wife, Cheng Xun, the son of his second wife, had doubts about the cause of his wife's death.

古文：中书令张华造甲乙之问曰： 甲娶乙为妻，后又娶丙，匿不说有乙，居家如二嫡，无有贵贱之差。
现代文：中书令张华作甲乙问答之文说： 甲娶乙为妻，后又娶丙，隐瞒不说已经有乙，像两个正妻一样过日子，没有贵贱的区别。
English: The CCP ordered Zhang Hua to write a question and answer for A and B, saying: A marries B as his wife, then marries C, conceals the fact that he already has B, and lives like two legal wives. There is no difference between the rich and the poor.

古文：乙亡，丙之子当何服？
现代文：乙死后，丙之子应当服什么丧?
English: After the death of B, what kind of mourning should C's son undergo?

古文：本实并列，嫡庶不殊，虽二嫡非正，此失在先人，人子何得专制析其亲也。
现代文：本和实并列，嫡和庶不分，虽然两个正妻不合正礼，但这个过失是先人造成的，人子怎么能专为一个母亲服丧而分开其父母呢?
English: The real and the real are side by side, and the legitimate and the illegitimate are not distinguished. Although two legal wives are not proper, but this fault is caused by the ancestors. How can the Son of Man separate his parents just to mourn for one mother?

古文：若为庶母服，又不成为庶。
现代文：如果为庶母服丧，又不成其眉庶了。
English: If the mother-in-law is in mourning, it's not a miscarriage.

古文：进退不知所从。 
现代文：取舍的依据不明。 
English: The basis for the trade-off is unclear.

古文：太傅郑冲议曰： 甲失礼于家，二嫡并在，诚非人子所得正。
现代文：太傅郑冲议论说： 甲在家中失礼，两个正妻并存，确实不是人子所能纠正的。
English: Grandfather Zheng Chong commented: A's discourtesy at home, the coexistence of two legal wives, is really not something that a son of man can correct.

古文：则乙丙之子并当三年，礼疑从重。 
现代文：那么乙丙之子都应服三年丧，礼法有疑问时从重。 
English: Then the sons of A and B should all serve three years of mourning, and the etiquette is more important when in doubt.

古文：车骑贾充、侍中少传任恺议略与郑同。
现代文：车骑买充、侍中少傅任恺意见大致与郑冲相同。
English: The opinions of the chariot and cavalry commander, the chamberlain, the junior sous-chef and the steward were roughly the same as those of Zheng Chong.

古文：太尉荀顗议曰： 《春秋》并后匹嫡，古之明典也。
现代文：太尉荀颢议论道： 《春秋》中如后，庶同嫡为祸乱之本之说是古代的明典。
English: Second Lieutenant Zou commented: "In Spring and Autumn, it is said that the lineage of the queen and her son-in-law is the root of evil is an ancient text.

古文：今不可以犯礼并立二妻，不别尊卑而遂其失也。
现代文：现在不能犯礼并立两个正妻，不区别尊卑而放任其过失。
English: Now, it is not possible to break the etiquette and set up two legal wives, and allow them to make mistakes without distinguishing between the superior and the inferior.

古文：故当断之以礼，先至为嫡，后至为庶。
现代文：所以应该依据礼法作出判决，先到的为正妻，后到的为庶妻。
English: Therefore, a judgment should be made according to the etiquette, the first to arrive is the legal wife, and the second is the common-law wife.

古文：丙子宜以嫡母服乙，乙子宜以庶母事丙。
现代文：丙之子宜以嫡母为乙服丧，乙之子宜以庶母奉事丙。
English: The son of C should take the legitimate mother as the second to attend the funeral, and the son of B should take the stepmother to serve C.

古文：昔屈建去芰，古人以为违礼而得礼。
现代文：从前屈建祭祀父亲时去掉芰菱，古人认为违反礼又符合礼。
English: In the past, when Kujian sacrificed his father, he removed the honeysuckle. The ancients believed that this was both a breach of etiquette and in accordance with etiquette.

古文：丙子非为抑其亲，斯自奉礼先后贵贱顺叙之义也。 
现代文：丙之子并不是要贬低自己的母亲，这是他遵奉礼法先后贵贱的顺序的道理。 
English: C's son did not want to belittle his mother, which is why he followed the etiquette of the order of precedence.

古文：中书监荀勖议曰： 昔乡里郑子群娶陈司空从妹，后隔吕布之乱，不复相知存亡，更娶乡里蔡氏女。
现代文：中书监萄勖议论说： 从前同乡人郑子群娶陈司空的堂妹，后来因吕布之乱隔绝，不知其存亡，又娶同乡蔡氏之女。
English: Zheng Ziqun, the book supervisor of the People's Republic of China, commented: In the past, Zheng Ziqun, a fellow villager, married a cousin of Chen Siqiao. Later, due to the Lvbu Rebellion, he was cut off and did not know whether he would survive or not. He also married the daughter of a fellow villager, Cai.

古文：徐州平定，陈氏得还，遂二妃并存。
现代文：徐州平定后，陈氏回来了，于是两个妻子并存。
English: After Xuzhou was pacified, Mr. Chen returned, and the two wives coexisted.

古文：蔡氏之子字元衅，为陈氏服嫡母之服，事陈公以从舅之礼。
现代文：蔡氏之子字元衅，为陈氏服嫡母之丧，以堂舅之礼奉事陈公。
English: Cai's son, Ziyuan Qiao, served Chen with the courtesy of a cousin to mourn the death of Chen's mother.

古文：族兄宗伯曾责元衅，谓抑其亲，乡里先达以元衅为合宜。
现代文：族兄宗伯曾经贵陆元衅，认为他贬低自己的母亲。乡中的先达之人认为元衅做得合宜。
English: Zongbo, the elder brother of the clan, once provoked Guilu Yuan, thinking that he was belittling his mother. The forerunners in the village thought that Yuan's provocation was appropriate.

古文：不审此事粗相似否。 
现代文：不知这两件事是否大体相似。 
English: I don't know if the two things are broadly similar.

古文：建武元年，以温峤为散骑侍郎，峤以母亡值寇，不临殡葬，欲营改葬，固让不拜。
现代文：建武元年，任温崤为散骑侍郎，温娇以母亲去世正逢寇乱，不能哭哀殡葬，想要改葬母亲，坚决推让不就任。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, Ren Wenju was a horseback riding attendant, and Wenjiao took his mother's death as a time of turmoil. He could not mourn the funeral, and if he wanted to change his mother's funeral, he would resolutely refuse to take office.

古文：元帝诏曰： 温峤不拜，以未得改卜葬送，朝议又颇有异同。
现代文：元帝下韶说： 温崤不就任，因为未能改卜葬送，朝廷议论又不一致。
English: Emperor Yuan said: Wen Jiabao did not take office, because he failed to amend and send, and the discussion in the imperial court was inconsistent.

古文：为审由此邪？
现代文：确实是因此吗?
English: Is that really the reason?

古文：天下有阙塞，行礼制物者当使理可经通。
现代文：天下有阙失阻塞，施行礼法处理事务的人应当使道理可以常通。
English: There are ups and downs in the world, and those who deal with affairs according to etiquette should allow reason to prevail.

古文：古人之制三年，非情之所尽，盖存亡有断，不以死伤生耳。
现代文：古人规定服丧三年，不是感情已完了，而是因为存亡有别，不以死者影响活者。
English: The ancients prescribed three years of mourning, not because the feelings were over, but because there is a difference between life and death, and the dead do not affect the living.

古文：要绖而服金革之役者，岂营官邪？
现代文：服系麻带而服兵甲之役的人，难道是谋求官职吗?
English: Is a man who serves as a soldier in the army, wearing a sash, seeking a position of authority?

古文：随王事之缓急也。
现代文：是为了奔赴国家的急难。
English: Is to rush to the country's emergency.

古文：今桀逆未枭，平阳道断，奉迎诸军犹未得径进，峤特一身，于何济其私艰，而以理阂自疑，不服王命邪！
现代文：现在叛逆未平，王区道路不通，奉迎的军队尚且不能直接通行，过崤祇是独自一人，哪能有办法处理私艰，而因道理有所不通而自疑，不服从王命呢!
English: Now the rebellion has not been quelled, the royal road is impassable, the army of the emperor cannot pass directly, the emperor is alone, how can there be a way to deal with selfishness, and because of the incomprehensible reason, they doubt themselves and disobey the king's order!

古文：其令三司八座、门下三省、外内群臣，详共通议如峤比，吾将亲裁其中。 
现代文：令三司八座、门下三省、内外群臣，一起详细议论温崤这类的事，我将亲自裁决。 
English: I will personally make the three departments and eight offices, the three provinces under me, and the domestic and foreign ministers discuss in detail the issue of Wen Xuan.

古文：于是太宰、西阳王羕，司徒临颍公组，骠骑将军、即丘子导，侍中纪瞻，尚书周顗，散骑常侍荀邃等议，以 昔伍员挟弓去楚，为吴行人以谋楚，诚志在报仇，不苟灭身也。
现代文：于是太宰、西阳王司马莱，司徒临颖公荀组，骠骑将军、即丘三王遵，侍中，尚书且盏，散骑常侍直达等议论，认为 从前伍员携带弓箭离开楚国，当了昱的行人以对付楚国，确实是志在报仇，不愿意随便地使自己死去。
English: Therefore, the Dazai, the Xiyang King Sima Lai, the Sittu Lin Ying Gong Jun group, the cavalry general, that is, the Qiu San Wang Zun, the chamberlains, the Shang Shuxu and the Shan, the strolling attendants, and so on, argued that the former soldiers had left the Chu Kingdom with bows and arrows, and had become unruly pedestrians to deal with the Chu Kingdom. They were indeed aiming at revenge, and were not willing to casually let themselves die.

古文：温峤遭难，昔在河朔，日寻干戈，志刷雠恶，万里投身，归赴朝廷，将欲因时竭力，凭赖王威，以展其情，此乃峤之志也。
现代文：温崤遭难，原先在河北，兵争不断，志在扫清寇仇，万里投奔，归赴朝廷，想要顺应时势竭尽心力，凭藉王威，以舒展情怀，这是温崤的志向。
English: Wen Rong suffered hardships. He was originally in Hebei, where there was a constant war, and he aspired to clear up the banditry, travel thousands of miles, return to the imperial court, and do his best to comply with the current situation. With the help of Wang Wei, he was able to expand his feelings. This was Wen Rong's ambition.

古文：无缘道路未通，师旅未进，而更中辞王事，留志家巷也。
现代文：因为道路不通，军队不能进发，就再中途辞让国事，尽心于家中之事。
English: Because the roads were impassable and the army could not advance, he gave up the affairs of state and devoted himself to his family.

古文：以为诚宜如明诏。 
现代文：认为确实应当如明韶所示处理。 
English: considered that it should indeed be dealt with as clearly indicated.

古文：于是有司奏曰： 案如众议，去建武元年九月下辛未令书，依礼文，父丧未葬，唯丧主不除。
现代文：于是主管官员奏道： 根据众议，建武元年九月下达的辛末日令书，依据礼法条文，父母去世拖了很久没有安葬，衹有丧事主持人不除去丧服。
English: Then the responsible official made a report: According to the public opinion, the Xin Doomsday Decree issued in September of the first year of Jianwu, according to the provisions of the etiquette law, the death of parents has been delayed for a long time without burial, but there are funeral directors who do not remove the funeral clothes.

古文：以他故未葬，人子之情，不可居殡而除，故期于毕葬，无远近之断也。
现代文：因为其他的原因没有安葬，依人子的感情，不能守着殡柩除去丧服，所以等待着安葬完毕，没有远近的区别。
English: Because there is no burial for other reasons, according to the feelings of the sons of men, it is not possible to keep the funeral urn and remove the funeral clothes, so they are waiting for the burial to be completed, there is no difference between near and far.

古文：若亡遇贼难，丧灵无处，求索理绝，固应三年而除，不得故从未葬之例也。
现代文：如果流亡遇到贼难，殡柩无处安放，找不到好的办法，这本应三年除丧服，不能依照未下葬之条。
English: If the exile encounters difficulties, there is nowhere to place the funeral urn, and no good way can be found, it should be three years to remove the funeral clothes, and it cannot be in accordance with the article of not being buried.

古文：若骨肉歼于寇害，死亡漫于中原，而继以遗贼未灭，亡者无收殡之实，存者又阙于奔赴之礼，而人子之情，哀痛无断，辄依未葬之义，久而不除，若遂其情，则人居无限之丧，非有礼无时不得之义也。
现代文：如果骨肉死于寇害，死在中原，接下来遣贼未减，死者没有得到收殓安葬，活者又缺废赴丧之礼，人子的哀情，悲痛不尽，就依照没有下葬的条文，久久不除去丧服，如果顺从这种感情，那么人就处在没有止尽的服丧期，这不是衹要合于礼而没有时间限定都算得体的道理。
English: If one's flesh and blood dies in a heinous crime, in the Central Plains, and then the bandits are not reduced, the dead are not received and buried, and the living are too poor to go to the funeral, the sorrow of the son of man is inexhaustible, according to the provisions of not being buried, the mourning clothes are not removed for a long time. If one obeys this feeling, then one is in an endless period of mourning. This is not a reason to be polite without a time limit.

古文：诸如此，皆依东关故事，限行三年之礼毕而除也。
现代文：诸如此例，都依照束关旧例，限行服丧三年之礼完毕后除去丧服。
English: In all of these cases, the mourning clothes were removed after the three-year mourning period had ended, in accordance with the old custom.

古文：唯二亲生离，吉凶未分，服丧则凶事未据，从吉则疑于不存，心忧居素，出自人情，有如此者，非官制之所裁。
现代文：衹有双亲生离，吉凶不知，如果服丧凶讯又不确实，从吉又怕父亲已去世，心中忧虑而服素服，这是出于人情，如有这样的情况，就不是国家的制度所能裁断的。
English: If you are separated from your parents and do not know whether you are lucky or unlucky, if the news of your death is not accurate, and if you are afraid that your father has passed away, and you are worried and do not obey, this is due to human nature. If there is such a situation, it is not possible for the state system to judge.

古文：今峤以未得改卜奔赴，累设疾辞。
现代文：现在温崤以未能改卜葬送，多次推辞不就任。
English: Now Wen Weiwei has been dismissed for failing to change his views, and has repeatedly declined to take up the post.

古文：案辛未之制，已有成断，皆不得复遂其私情，不服王命，以亏法宪。
现代文：根据辛未之制文，已经有了决断，都不能再顺从他的私情，不服从王命，以损害法度。
English: According to Xin Wei's document, it has been decided that he can no longer obey his personal feelings, disobey the king's order, and damage the rule of law.

古文：参议可如前诏峤受拜，重告以中丞司徒，诸如峤比者，依东关故事辛未令书之制。 
现代文：参酌议论可依前次韶书温崤接受职务，正式告知中丞司徒，诸如温崤之类的情况，依照东关旧例辛末日令书执行。 
English: The discussion can be based on the previous imperial edict to formally inform the junior high school students of the emperor's acceptance of the post, and the situation such as the imperial edict will be implemented in accordance with the old imperial edict of the Eastern Gate.

古文：峤不得已，乃拜。
现代文：温崤没办法，就接受了职务。
English: There was nothing Wen Kun could do, so he accepted the position.

古文：是时中原丧乱，室家离析，朝廷议二亲陷没寇难，应制服不。
现代文：这时中原动乱，家庭离散，朝廷议论双亲陷没于寇难，应不应该服丧。
English: At this time, the Central Plains were in turmoil, families were separated, and the imperial court was debating whether it was appropriate to mourn the death of two parents who had fallen victim to a coup.

古文：太常贺循曰：二亲生离，吉凶未分，服丧则凶事未据，从吉则疑于不存，心忧居素，允当人情。 
现代文：太常贺循说： 双亲活着离别，吉凶不知，如果要服丧死讯又没有根据，从吉又怀疑父母已死，心中忧伤服素服，很合乎人情。 
English: Too often, He Xun said: Both parents are alive and parting, fortunes and misfortunes do not know, if there is no basis for accepting the news of death, and if they suspect that their parents are dead, they are sad and wear plain clothes, which is very human.

古文：元帝令以循议为然。
现代文：元帝令书认为贺循的议论有道理。
English: The imperial edict said that He Xun's argument was reasonable.

古文：太兴二年，司徒荀组云： 二亲陷没寇难，万无一冀者，宜使依王法，随例行丧。 
现代文：左兴二年，司徒茎组说： 双亲陷没于寇难，一万中也没有一个有希望生还的，应该让他们依照王法，按惯例服丧。 
English: In the second year of Zuo Xing, the Stubbs group said: Both parents were trapped in a coup, and out of ten thousand, there is no one who can hope to survive. They should be allowed to mourn in accordance with the royal law and according to the usual practice.

古文：庾蔚之云： 二亲为戎狄所破，存亡未可知者，宜尽寻求之理。
现代文：庾蔚之说： 双亲被戎狄所败，生死不明的，应尽寻求的道理。
English: Hao Weizhi said, "My parents were defeated by the army. If you don't know whether you are alive or dead, you should do your best to find out."

古文：寻求之理绝，三年之外，便宜婚宦，胤嗣不可绝，王政不可废故也。
现代文：寻求的希望绝灭了，三年之后，就可以结婚任职，因为子孙后代不能断绝，国家的政务不能废弃。
English: After three years, you can marry and hold office, because future generations cannot be broken off, and the affairs of state cannot be abandoned.

古文：犹宜以哀素自居，不豫吉庆之事，待中寿而服之也。
现代文：还是应该穿素服心怀悲哀，不参与吉庆之事，等到中等的年寿再服丧。
English: You should still wear vegetarian clothes with a sad heart, not participate in auspicious events, and wait until the middle of your life before mourning.

古文：若境内贼乱清平，肆眚之后，寻觉无踪迹者，便宜制服。 
现代文：如果境内的贼乱平定了，宽赦罪入之后，再寻找不到踪迹的，就应该服丧。 
English: If the banditry in the territory is smoothed out, after the pardon of the crime, if there is no trace, it should be mourned.

古文：咸康二年，零陵李繁姊先适南平郡陈诜为妻，产四子而遭贼。
现代文：二年，零陵李繁之姊先嫁南平郡陈说为妻，生了四个孩子后遭贼乱。
English: Two years later, the elder sister of Li Lian married Nanping County's Chen Xia, and after giving birth to four children, she was attacked by thieves.

古文：姊投身于贼，请活姑命，贼略将姊去。
现代文：姊向贼投身，请求保全婆婆的性命，贼把姊掠去。
English: My sister threw herself at the thief and begged him to spare my mother-in-law's life. The thief took my sister away.

古文：诜更娶严氏，生三子。
现代文：陈说再娶严氏，生三个孩子。
English: Chen said she would remarry Yan and have three children.

古文：繁后得姊消息，往迎还诜，诜籍注领二妻。
现代文：李繁后来得到姊的消息，去接回并送还陈说，陈说的户籍上兼有两个妻子。
English: Li Xiang later got the news from his sister and went to pick up and return Chen He, who has two wives on his family register.

古文：及李亡，诜疑制服，以事言征西大将军庾亮府平议，时议亦往往异同。
现代文：到李氏死时，陈说对服什么丧有疑虑，把这件事交征西大将军庾亮府评议，当时的议论不相一致。
English: At the time of Li's death, Chen said that he had doubts about what kind of mourning clothes he should wear, and submitted the matter to the Western General Zou Liangfu for deliberation. The discussion at the time was inconsistent.

古文：司马王愆期议曰： 案礼不二嫡，故惠公元妃孟子，孟子卒，继室以声子。
现代文：司马王愆期议论说： 考察礼法没有两个正妻，所以惠公的元配孟子，孟子死，声子做继室。
English: Sima Wang Yanzhi argued: There are not two legal wives in the study of etiquette, so Huigong's original match was Mencius, Mencius died, and Shoko became his stepmother.

古文：诸侯犹尔，况庶人乎！《士丧礼》曰，继母本实继室，故称继母，事之如嫡，故曰如母也。
现代文：诸侯尚且如此，何况庶人呢《士丧礼》说，继母本来实际是继室，所以叫继母，奉事她如嫡母一样，所以叫如母。
English: "The Funeral of a Statesman" says that the stepmother was actually the stepmother, so she was called the stepmother, and she served as the mother, so she was called the mother.

古文：诜不能远虑避难，以亡其妻，非犯七出见绝于诜。
现代文：陈说不能有远虑躲避灾难，因而失去了他的妻子，不是其妻犯了七出之条而被陈说弃绝。
English: Chen said that he could not have foresight to avoid the disaster, and thus lost his wife. It was not his wife who violated the seven-point article and was rejected by Chen.

古文：始不见绝，终又见迎，养姑于堂，子为首嫡，列名黄籍，则诜之妻也。
现代文：开始没被弃绝，后来又被迎接回来，在家中奉养婆婆，其子眉嫡长子，名列于户口册中，那么她是陈说之妻。
English: At first, she was not rejected, but later she was welcomed back, she raised her mother-in-law at home, and her eldest son was listed in the household register, so she was Chen said's wife.

古文：为诜也妻，则为晖也母，晖之制服无所疑矣。
现代文：对陈说来说是妻子，那么对陈晖来说是母亲，陈晖服丧就没有可疑了。
English: For Chen, she was a wife, but for Chen Yao, she was a mother. Chen Yao's funeral was not suspicious.

古文：礼为继母服而不为前母服者，如李比类，旷世所希。
现代文：礼法中为继母服丧而不为前母服丧，像李氏这一类的情况，空前罕见。
English: In etiquette, it is customary to mourn one's stepmother, but not one's former mother. Situations like Li's are unprecedentedly rare.

古文：前母既终，乃有继母，后子不及前母，故无制服之文。
现代文：前母死了以后，才有继母，后出生的儿子没赶上前母，所以没有为之服丧的条文。
English: After the death of the former mother, there was only a stepmother, and the son born later did not catch up with the former mother, so there was no mourning clause.

古文：然礿祠蒸尝，未有不以前母为母者，亡犹母之，况其存乎！
现代文：然而家中的祭祀，没有不把前母当作母亲的，死了尚且还是母亲，何况还活着呢!
English: However, there is no family ritual that does not regard the former mother as a mother, even if she is dead, she is still a mother, let alone still alive!

古文：诜有老母，不可以莫之养，妻无归期，纳妾可也。
现代文：陈说有老母，不能无人奉养，妻子久无归期，可以纳妾。
English: Chen said that if you have an old mother, you can't have no one to support you, and if your wife has not returned for a long time, you can take a concubine.

古文：李虽没贼，尚有生冀，诜寻求之理不尽，而便娶妻，诚诜之短也。
现代文：李氏虽然落入贼手，但还有生还的希望，速越没有极尽寻求的努力，就又娶妻，这确实是他的过失。
English: Although Mr. Li fell into the hands of thieves, he still had hope of survival. He married his wife again without exhausting his efforts to find her, which was indeed his fault.

古文：然陇亩之夫，不达礼义，考之传记不胜。
现代文：然而村野之人，不懂礼义，不会去考察传记。
English: However, people in rural areas, who do not know the meaning of etiquette, will not go to investigate biographies.

古文：有施孝叔之妻失身于郤犨而不弃者，以非其罪也。
现代文：施孝叔之妻失身于郁荤而不被遣弃，因为不是她的罪过。
English: The wife of Shi Xiaozhu lost her life in Yuxuan without being expelled, because it was not her fault.

古文：诜有两妻，非故犯法。
现代文：陈说有两个妻子，不是故意犯法。
English: Chen said he did not intentionally break the law by having two wives.

古文：李鄙野人，而能临危请活姑命，险不忘顺，可谓孝妇矣。
现代文：李氏是个鄙野之人，却能临危请求保全婆婆的性命，危险之时不忘孝顺，可以说是个孝妇。
English: Mr. Li is a mean-spirited person, but he can plead to save his mother-in-law's life in a crisis. When in danger, he does not forget to be dutiful. It can be said that he is a filial wife.

古文：议者欲令在没略之中，必全苦操，有陨无二，是望凡人皆为宋伯姬也。
现代文：议论想让她陷落之时，一定要保全贞操，有死无二，这是希望普通人都成为宋伯姬。
English: When people talk about wanting her to fall, they must preserve their chastity, there is no other way. This is the hope that ordinary people will become Song Baoji.

古文：诜虽不应娶妻，耍以严为妻，妻则继室，本非嫡也。
现代文：陈说虽然不应娶妻，中间以严氏为妻，就是继室，本来不是正妻。
English: Chen said that although he should not marry a wife, Yan's wife was the middle one, that is, the stepmother, and she was not originally the legal wife.

古文：虽云非嫡，义在始终，宁可以诜不应二妻而己涉二庭乎！
现代文：虽然说不是正妻，也应有始有终，难道能使陈说不应有两个妻子而自己成为两个正室吗!
English: Although it is said that there should be a beginning and an end even if it is not a legal wife, can it be said that Chen should not have two wives and become two legal wives himself?

古文：若能下之，则赵姬之义。
现代文：如果能自己抑制，那就是赵姬那样的义举。
English: If you can restrain yourself, it is a good deed like Zhao Ji.

古文：若云不能，官当有制。
现代文：如果不能抑制自己，官府应当有所裁断。
English: If they can't control themselves, the government should make a decision.

古文：先嫡后继，有自来矣。
现代文：先正妻后继室，由来已久了。
English: It has been a long time since the first wife became the second wife.

古文：众议贬讥太峻，故略序异怀。 
现代文：众人的议论贬斥遇于严刻，所以略叙异怀。 
English: Many people's comments and criticisms were met with severity, so they expressed their dissent.

古文：亮从愆期议定。
现代文：庾亮依照王愆期的议论裁定。
English: Hao Liang made a ruling according to Wang Xizhi's discussion.

古文：《五经通义》以为有德则谥善，无德则谥恶，故虽君臣可同。
现代文：《五经通义》认为有德的人就谧号好，无德的人就谧号恶，所以即使是君和臣谧号可以相同。
English: "Five Classics of Confucianism" believes that a virtuous person has a good nickname, and a person without virtue has an evil nickname, so even the nickname of the prince and the vassal can be the same.

古文：魏朝初谥宣帝为文侯，景王为武侯，文王表不宜与二祖同，于是改谥宣文、忠武。
现代文：魏朝开始谧宣帝为文侯，景王为武侯，文王上表不应与两位祖宗相同，于是改谧为宣文、忠武。
English: At the beginning of the Wei Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong was called Wenhu, and King Jing was called Wuhou. The name of King Wen should not be the same as the two ancestors, so the names were changed to Xuanwen and Zhongwu.

古文：至文王受晋王之号，魏帝又追命宣文为宣王，忠武为景王。
现代文：到文王接受晋王之号后，魏帝又追命宣文为宣王，忠武为景王。
English: After King Wen accepted the title of King Jin, Emperor Wei also ordered King Wen to become King Xuan, and King Jing to become King Zhongwu.

古文：太康八年十月，太常上谥故太常平陵男郭奕为景侯。
现代文：太康八年十月，太常请谧故太常平陵男郭奕为 景侯 。
English: In October of the 8th year of Taikang, Taizang invited Guo Yi, the former Taizang Pingling Mausoleum man, to be the Jinghou.

古文：有司奏云： 晋受命以来，祖宗号谥群下未有同者，故郭奕为景，与景皇同，不可听，宜谥曰穆。 王济、羊璞等并云： 夫无穷之祚，名谥不一，若皆相避，于制难全。
现代文：主管部门奏道： 自从晋受命以来，祖宗的谧号没有舆臣下相同过，所以郭奕谧为 景 ，与景皇相同，不能同意，应谧为 穆， 王济、羊璞等都说： 没有止境的国运，名称谧号不一，如果全都相避，从制度上说难以周全。
English: The competent department made a report: Since Jin was ordered, the surnames of the ancestors have not been the same among the public ministers. Therefore, Guo Yixuan as Jing, the same as the King of Jing, could not agree, should be surnamed as Mu. Wang Zi, Yang Xuan and others all said: There is no end to the national movement, the names and surnames are not the same. If they all avoid each other, it is difficult to be complete from a system point of view.

古文：如悉不避，复非推崇事尊之礼。
现代文：如果全都不避，又不合推崇奉事尊长之礼。
English: If you don't avoid all of them, it's not appropriate to recommend you to serve your superiors.

古文：宜依讳名之义，但及七庙祖宗而已，不及迁毁之庙。 
现代文：应依照讳名的道理，衹避七庙祖宗之镒，不避其他祖先。 
English: According to the principle of concealment, we should avoid the names of the ancestors of the seven temples, and not avoid other ancestors.

古文：成粲、武茂、刘讷并云： 同谥非嫌。
现代文：成粲、武茂、刘讷都说： 谧号相同没有妨害。
English: Cheng Yu, Wu Mao and Liu Na all said: There is no obstacle to having the same surname.

古文：号谥者，国之大典，所以厉时作教，经天人之远旨也。
现代文：号谧，是国家的大典，用来激励世人促成教化，反映天和人的远大谋虑。
English: It is the great document of the country, used to inspire the world to promote enlightenment and reflect the lofty thoughts of heaven and man.

古文：固虽君父，义有所不隆，及在臣子，或以行显。
现代文：即使是君父，从义的方面来看也有不隆盛的；虽然是臣子，可能凭着德行而著称。
English: Even the prince's father, from the point of view of righteousness, is not prosperous; although he is a courtier, he may be famous for his virtue.

古文：故能使上下迈德，罔有怠荒。
现代文：所以能使上下勉力树立德行，没有荒废懈怠。
English: Therefore, it is possible to make the upper and lower levels work hard to establish virtue, and there is no waste and slack.

古文：臣愿圣世同符尧舜，行周同谥之礼，舍汉魏近制相避之议。 
现代文：臣希望圣世与尧、舜相同，实行周谧号相同之礼，舍去汉、魏以来规定相避的说法。 
English: The minister hoped that the sacred world would be the same as the  and, and that the Zhou  name would be the same as the rite, abandoning the saying that the Han and Wei dynasties had been avoiding each other.

古文：又引周公父子同谥曰文。
现代文：又援引周公父子同谧为文的例子。
English: He also cited the example of Zhou Gong and his son's classmates.

古文：武帝诏曰： 非言君臣不可同，正以奕谥景不相当耳，宜谥曰简。 
现代文：武帝下诏说： 并不是说君臣不能相同，衹是因为郭奕谧为 景 不合适罢了，宜谧为 简 。 
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict saying, "It's not that princes and ministers can't be the same, it's just that Guo Yixuan is not suitable for the scene, it's better to be simple.

古文：及太元四年，侍中王欣之表君臣之嫌同谥，尚书奏以欣之言为然。
现代文：到太元四年，侍中王欣之上表说君臣同谧没有妨害，尚书奏告认为王欣之说得有道理。
English: In the 4th year of the Taiyuan era, Wang Xin, a chamberlain, made a public statement that there was no interference from princes, ministers, and peers. Shangshu reported that Wang Xin's statement was reasonable.

古文：诏可。
现代文：韶令同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：骠骑将军温峤前妻李氏，在峤微时便卒。
现代文：骠骑将军温崤前妻李氏，在温崤地位低微时就去世了。
English: The former wife of General Wen Jiabao, Li Clan, died when Wen Jiabao's status was low.

古文：又娶王氏、何氏，并在峤前死。
现代文：又娶了王氏、何氏，都在温矫之前死了。
English: He also married Wang and He, both of whom died before he could be ordained.

古文：及峤薨，朝廷以问陈舒： 三人并得为夫人不？ 
现代文：到温崤去世，朝廷问陈舒： 他的三个妻子都能成为夫人吗? 
English: When Wen Jiabao died, the imperial court asked Chen Shu: Can all his three wives become his wife?

古文：舒云： 《礼记》 其妻为夫人而卒，而后其夫不为大夫，而祔于其妻，则不易牲。
现代文：陈舒说： 《礼记》 其妻在丈夫当大夫时去世，而后丈夫不当大夫了，而拊祭于其妻，就不改变祭祀用的牺牲。
English: Chen Shu said: "Li Ji" His wife died when her husband was a doctor, and then the husband was not a doctor, and the sacrificial offering to his wife did not change the sacrificial offering.

古文：妻卒。而后夫为大夫，而祔于其妻，则以大夫牲 。
现代文：妻子死了，而后丈夫当了大夫，而柑祭于其妻，就用大夫所用的牺牲 。
English: The wife died, and then the husband became a doctor, and the mandarin was sacrificed to his wife, using the sacrifice used by the doctor.

古文：然则夫荣于朝，妻贵于室，虽先夫没，荣辱常随于夫也。
现代文：这就是说丈夫在朝廷显荣，妻子在家中尊贵，虽然在丈夫之前死去，她的荣辱总是依丈夫而定。
English: That is to say, the husband is honored at court, the wife is honored at home, and although she dies before her husband, her honor and disgrace always depend on her husband.

古文：《礼记》曰 妻祔于祖姑，祖姑有三人，则祔其亲者 。如礼，则三人皆为夫人也。
现代文：《礼记》说 妻子拊祭于公公的母亲，如果公公的母亲有三个，就拊祭于最亲的那个，根据礼法，那么她们三人都可成为夫人。
English: "The Book of Etiquette" says that a wife should be dedicated to the mother of the father-in-law. If there are three mothers of the father-in-law, they should be dedicated to the closest one. According to the etiquette, all three of them can become a wife.

古文：自秦汉已来，废一娶九女之制，近世无复继室之礼，先妻卒则更娶。
现代文：从秦、汉以来，废除了一男娶九女的制度，近代不再有继室的礼法，前妻死了就再娶。
English: Since the Qin and Han dynasties, the system of one man marrying nine women has been abolished. In modern times, there is no longer a stepmother's etiquette, and a man can remarry his ex-wife if she dies.

古文：苟生加礼，则亡不应贬。 
现代文：如果活着时加以礼命，死后就不应贬除。 
English: If you give a respectful order while alive, it should not be belittled after death.

古文：庾蔚之云： 贱时之妻不得并为夫人，若有追赠之命则不论耳。 
现代文：庾蔚之说： 卑贱之时的妻子不能一同做夫人，如果有追赠之命就不论了。 
English: Zou Weizhi said: "A wife at the time of humiliation cannot be a wife at the same time. If there is a posthumous order, it does not matter.

古文：《峤传》，赠王、何二人夫人印绶，不及李氏。
现代文：《温崤传》中，追赠王、何二人夫人印绶，没有赠李氏。
English: In "Wen Xuan Biography," Wang and his two wives were posthumously presented with seals, but Li was not.

古文：永和十一年，彭城国为李太妃求谥。
现代文：永和十一年，彭城国为李太妃求谧号。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yonghe era, the Pengcheng Kingdom asked Li Taifi for a posthumous name.

古文：博士曹耽之议： 夫妇行不必同，不得以夫谥谥妇。
现代文：博士曹耽之议论说： 夫妇的品行不一定相同，不能以丈夫的谧号谧妻子。
English: Dr. Cao Tan Zhi said: The behavior of a couple is not necessarily the same, and it is not possible to use the husband's nickname to cheat the wife.

古文：《春秋》妇人有谥甚多，经无讥文，知礼得谥也。 
现代文：《春秋》中妇人有谧号的很多，经文中没有讥刺的文字，可知依礼应加谧号。 
English: In "Spring and Autumn," there are a lot of women with nicknames. There are no sarcastic words in the text, so it is only proper to add a nickname.

古文：胡讷云： 礼，妇人生以夫爵，死以夫谥。
现代文：胡讷说： 礼法规定，妇人活着用丈夫的爵号，死了用丈夫的谧号。
English: Hune said: According to the rules of etiquette, a woman should use her husband's title while she is alive, and her husband's nickname when she dies.

古文：《春秋》夫人有谥，不复依礼耳。
现代文：《春秋》中妇人有谧号，这是不再依照礼法了。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," the woman has a nickname, which is no longer in accordance with etiquette.

古文：安平献王李妃、琅邪武王诸葛妃，太傅东海王裴妃并无谥，今宜率旧典。 
现代文：安平献王李妃、琅邪武王诸葛妃、太傅束海王裴妃都没有谧号，现在应当依照旧典。 
English: Anping Xian Wang Li Fei, Zhaozhou Wang Zhuge Fei, Taifu Zakkai Wang Pei Fei do not have surnames, and should now follow the old canon.

古文：王彪之云： 妇人有谥，礼坏故耳。
现代文：王彪之说： 妇人有谧号，这是礼法衰微了的缘故。
English: Wang Biaozhi said, "The reason why a woman has a nickname is due to the decline of etiquette.

古文：声子为谥，服虔诸儒以为非。
现代文：声子做谧号，服虔等儒者认为不对。
English: Confucians such as Shoko and Fuchien do not think it is right.

古文：杜预亦云 礼，妇人无谥 。
现代文：杜预也说 依照礼法，妇人没有谧号 。
English: Du Yu also said that according to the etiquette, a woman does not have a nickname.

古文：《春秋》无讥之文，所谓不待贬绝自明者也。
现代文：《春秋》中没有讥刺的文字，是所谓不需要贬斥而自然明白的道理。
English: The fact that there are no satirical words in "Spring and Autumn" is a so-called principle that does not need to be denigrated but is naturally clear.

古文：近世惟后乃有谥耳。 
现代文：近代衹有皇后有谧号。 
English: In modern times, every empress has a nickname.

古文：太尉荀顗上谥法云： 若赐谥而道远不及葬者，皆封策下属，遣所承长吏奉策即冢祭赐谥。 
现代文：太尉荀颢呈上谧法说： 如果赐给谧号而路程遥远赶不上葬礼的，都封好文书交付下去，派承办的部门长官奉封策到家中祭祀赐谧号。 
English: "If the funeral is far away and the funeral cannot be held, all the documents should be sealed and delivered to the funeral home. The head of the department in charge of the funeral should be sent to the funeral home to offer the funeral.

古文：太元十三年，召孔安国为侍中。
现代文：太元十三年，召孔安国任侍中。
English: In the 13th year of the Taiyuan era, Kong An Guo was summoned to serve as a chamberlain.

古文：安国表以黄门郎王愉名犯私讳，不得连署，求解。
现代文：孔安国上表认为黄门郎王愉名犯家讳，不能联合署名，请求解职。
English: Kong An Guo believed that Huangmen Lang Wang Yun was a notorious criminal and could not jointly sign the petition, and requested his dismissal.

古文：有司议云： 名终讳之，有心所同，闻名心瞿，亦明前诰。
现代文：有关官员议道： 名为忌讳，这是人同此心的，听到了名心中惊惧，也是不忘前人告诫的表现。
English: Relevant officials said: The name is taboo, which is the same as that of the people, heard the fear in the name, and is also a manifestation of not forgetting the exhortation of the predecessors.

古文：而《礼》复云 君所无私讳，大夫之所有公讳 ，无私讳。
现代文：而《礼》又说 在君之处不避私家之讳，在大夫之处避君王之讳 ，没有私家之讳。
English: But "Li" also says that in the place of the king, one should not avoid private speech, and in the place of the doctor, one should avoid the king's speech, and there is no private speech.

古文：又云 诗书不讳，临文不讳 。岂非公义夺私情，王制屈家礼哉！尚书安众男臣先表中兵曹郎王祐名犯父讳，求解职，明诏爰发，听许换曹，盖是恩出制外耳。
现代文：又说 《诗》《书》不避讳，写文章不避讳，难道不是公义夺去私情，王制压抑家礼吗尚书安众男臣先上表说中兵曹郎王佑名犯父讳，请求解职，于是下明诏，同意他换一个部门，这是恩典超出制度之外。
English: He also said that "poetry" and "writing" are not to be shunned, and writing articles is not to be shunned. Isn't it justice to take away personal feelings, and does the royal system suppress family etiquette? Shang Shuan and all the male retainers first went to the table and said that the middle-ranking soldier Cao Lang and Wang You were criminals, and asked for dismissal, and then issued a clear edict and agreed to change him to another department. This is grace beyond the system.

古文：而顷者互相瞻式，源流既启，莫知其极。
现代文：而近来相互察看攀比，这个头开了以后，不知什么时候有个完。
English: But recently, they have been watching each other's performance, and after this head started, I don't know when there will be an end.

古文：夫皇朝礼大，百僚备职，编官列署，动相经涉。
现代文：皇朝的礼法最大，百官供职，列入官署名册，动辄就相互牵涉。
English: The etiquette of the imperial dynasty is the largest, with hundreds of officials serving and being included in the official signature book, and they are often involved with each other.

古文：若以私讳，人遂其心，则移官易职，迁流莫已，既违典法，有亏政体。
现代文：如果因为私家之讳，人人都满足自己的心愿，那么移官动职，变动不停，既违反典法，又损害了政体。
English: If everyone is satisfied with their own wishes because of personal vendettas, then the changing of officials and the constant changes are both a violation of the law and a detriment to the political system.

古文：请一断之。 
现代文：请一律拒绝。 
English: Please refuse them all.

古文：从之。
现代文：同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

