古文：六年春，城邾瑕。
现代文：流年春季，在邾瑕筑城。
English: In the spring of the previous year, the city was built in Zibo.

古文：晋赵鞅帅师伐鲜虞。
现代文：晋国的赵鞅率领军队攻打鲜虞。
English: Zhao Jun of Jin led an army to attack Shuangyu.

古文：吴伐陈。
现代文：吴国攻打陈国。
English: Wu attacked Chen.

古文：夏，齐国夏及高张来奔。
现代文：夏季，齐国的国夏和高张逃到鲁国。
English: In the summer, Guoxia and Gao Zhang of Qi fled to Lu.

古文：叔还会吴于柤。
现代文：叔还在柤地与吴国会见。
English: My uncle also met with the Wu National Assembly in Handan.

古文：秋七月庚寅，楚子轸卒。
现代文：秋季七月庚寅日，楚子轸去世。
English: In the autumn of July, Geng Yin Day, Chu Zi Yao passed away.

古文：齐阳生入于齐。
现代文：齐国的阳生进入齐国。
English: Yang Sheng of Qi entered Qi.

古文：齐陈乞弑其君荼。
现代文：齐国的陈乞弑杀陈国的国君荼。
English: Chen Qian of Qi killed the sovereign of Chen.

古文：冬，仲孙何忌帅师伐邾。
现代文：冬季，仲孙何忌率领军队攻打邾国。
English: In the winter, Zhongsun He Boi led an army to attack Shandong.

古文：宋向巢帅师伐曹。
现代文：宋国的向巢率领军队攻打曹国。
English: Song Dynasty's Xiangzhu led an army to attack Cao.

古文：六年春，晋伐鲜虞，治范氏之乱也。
现代文：六年春季，晋国进攻鲜虞，这是为惩治鲜虞帮助范氏作乱。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the Jin attacked the Xiangyu, which was to punish the Xiangyu for helping the Fan clan to make trouble.

古文：吴伐陈，复修旧怨也。
现代文：吴国攻打陈国，这是重提旧怨。
English: Wu attacked Chen, reviving old grudges.

古文：楚子曰： 吾先君与陈有盟，不可以不救。 
现代文：楚昭王说： 我们先君和陈国有过盟约，不能不去救援。 
English: Chu Zhao Wang said, "Our forefather and Chen Guozhong had a covenant, and we can't not go to the rescue.

古文：乃救陈师于城父。
现代文：于是就救援陈国，楚军驻扎在城父。
English: As a result, Chen Guo was rescued, and the Chu army was stationed in Chengdu.

古文：齐陈乞伪事高、国者，每朝必骖乘焉。
现代文：齐国的陈乞伪装出事奉高氏、国氏的样子，每逢上朝，一定和他们同坐一辆车。
English: Chen Qian of Qi disguised himself as a servant of Gao and Guo, and always rode in the same car with them when they went to court.

古文：所从必言诸大夫，曰： 彼皆偃蹇，将弃子之命。
现代文：随从时一定要说到大夫们，说： 他们都很骄傲，将要抛弃您的命令。
English: When following up, be sure to mention the doctors, saying, "They're all so proud, they're going to throw out your order."

古文：皆曰： 高、国得君，必偪我，盍去诸？ 
现代文：他们都说： 高氏、国氏受到国君的宠信，必然要逼迫我们，何不除去他们？ 
English: They all said: Gao Clan and Guo Clan are favored by the sovereign, so they must persecute us. Why not eliminate them?

古文：固将谋子，子早图之。
现代文：本来想要打您的主意，您要早点考虑对策！
English: Originally, I wanted to beat your idea, you should consider countermeasures earlier!

古文：图之，莫如尽灭之。需，事之下也。 
现代文：考虑了，最好是全部灭亡他们。等待是下策。 
English: After consideration, it is best to destroy them all. Waiting is the next best thing.

古文：及朝，则曰： 彼虎狼也，见我在子之侧，杀我无日矣。
现代文：到了朝廷上，就说： 他们都是虎狼，见到我在您的旁边，早就要杀死我了，请让我靠到大夫们那边去。 
English: When he arrived at court, he said: "They are all tigers and wolves. If they saw me next to you, they would have killed me long ago. Please let me go to the doctors."

古文：请就之位。 又谓诸大夫曰： 二子者祸矣！
现代文：到了大夫们那里，又对大夫们说： 这两位要发动祸乱了！
English: When he got to the doctors, he said to them, "These two are going to start a riot!"

古文：恃得君而欲谋二三子，曰，国之多难，贵宠之由，尽去之而后君定。
现代文：仗着得到国君的宠信而要打您几位的主意，说： 国家的患难多，这是由贵宠造成的，全部去掉他们然后国君才能安定。 
English: On the strength of having gained the favor of the sovereign, he wanted to defeat the idea of several of you, saying: The country has many troubles, this is caused by your favor, get rid of them all and then the sovereign can be stable.

古文：既成谋矣，盍及其未作也，先诸？作而后悔，亦无及也。 
现代文：现在已经定下计划了，何不乘他们没有下手而抢在他们前头？等他们发动了再后悔，也来不及了。 
English: Now that the plan has been set, why not take advantage of the fact that they have not started and get ahead of them? It will be too late to regret it when they start.

古文：大夫从之。
现代文：大夫们听从了。
English: The doctors listen to him.

古文：夏六月戊辰，陈乞、鲍牧及诸大夫，以甲入于公宫。
现代文：夏季，六月二十三日，陈乞、鲍牧和大夫们率领甲士进入公宫。
English: In the summer, on June 23rd, Chen Qi, Bao Mu and the doctors led the knights into the palace.

古文：昭子闻之，与惠子乘如公，战于庄，败。
现代文：高张听到了，和国夏坐车到齐侯那里去。在庄街作战，被打败。
English: Gao Zhang heard this and rode with Guoxia to Qi Hou. They fought in Zhuang Street and were defeated.

古文：国人追之。国夏奔莒，遂及高张、晏圉、弦施来奔。
现代文：国内的人们追赶他们，国夏逃亡到莒国，就和高张、晏圉、弦施一起逃亡前来。
English: People in the country chased after them, and Guoxia fled to Shandong Province, and came to flee together with Gaozhang, Zou and Zhenshi.

古文：秋七月，楚子在城父，将救陈，卜战不吉，卜退不吉。
现代文：秋季，七月，楚昭王驻在城父，准备救援陈国。占卜战争，不吉利。占卜退兵，不吉利。
English: In the autumn, in July, King Chu Zhao was stationed in Chengdu, preparing to rescue Chen Guo. Divination war, unlucky. Divination retreat, unlucky.

古文：王曰： 然则死也！
现代文：楚昭王说： 那么只有死了。
English: Chu Zhao Wang said: Then only dead.

古文：再败楚师，不如死。
现代文：如果再次让楚军失败，不如死。
English: If we let the Chu army fail again, it would be better to die.

古文：弃盟逃仇，亦不如死。
现代文：抛弃盟约、逃避仇敌，也不如死。
English: It is better to die than to forsake the covenant and flee from the enemy.

古文：死一也，其死仇乎！ 
现代文：同是一死，还是死在仇敌手里吧！ 
English: It is the same to die, or to die at the hands of the enemy!

古文：命公子申为王，不可；则命公子结，亦不可；则命公子启，五辞而后许。
现代文：命令公子申继承王位，公子申不同意；就命令公子结，公子结也不同意，又命令公子启，公子启辞谢五次然后同意。
English: He ordered Prince Shin to succeed to the throne, but Prince Shin did not agree; he ordered Prince Kuju, but Prince Kuju also did not agree, and he ordered Prince Kai, but Prince Kai declined five times and then agreed.

古文：将战，王有疾。
现代文：将要作战，楚昭王得了病。
English: They were going to fight, but Chu Zhao Wang fell ill.

古文：庚寅，昭王攻大冥，卒于城父。
现代文：十六日，楚昭王进攻大冥，死在城父。
English: On the 16th, King Chu Zhao attacked the Great Darkness and died in the city.

古文：子闾退曰： 君王舍其子而让群臣，敢忘君乎？
现代文：子闾退兵说： 君王舍弃他的儿子而让位，臣下们岂敢忘记君王呢？
English: Zixuan retreated and said, "A prince abdicates his throne to his son. Don't his subjects dare to forget him?"

古文：从君之命，顺也。立君之子，亦顺也。
现代文：服从君王的命令，这是顺乎情理的；立君王的儿子，也是顺乎情理的。
English: To obey the king's command is right, and to become the king's son is right.

古文：二顺不可失也。 
现代文：两种顺乎情理都不能丢掉。 
English: Both cannot reasonably be discarded.

古文：与子西、子期谋，潜师闭涂，逆越女之子章，立之而后还。
现代文：和子西、子期商量，秘密转移军队，封闭有关的通路，迎接越国女子的儿子章而立他做国君，然后退兵回国。
English: He discussed with his son Xi and his son-in-law, secretly transferred the army, closed the relevant passage, welcomed the son of the Vietnamese woman Zhang and made him the king, and then returned to the country.

古文：是岁也，有云如众赤鸟，夹日以飞，三日。
现代文：这一年，有云彩好像一群红色的鸟一样，夹在太阳两边飞翔了三天。
English: This year, there were clouds like a flock of red birds, flying on both sides of the sun for three days.

古文：楚子使问诸周大史。
现代文：楚昭王派人询问成周的太史。
English: King Chu Zhao sent someone to inquire about Cheng Zhou's taishi.

古文：周大史曰： 其当王身乎。
现代文：成周的太史说： 恐怕要应在君王的身上吧！
English: Cheng Zhou's Taishi said, "I'm afraid it should be on the king's body!"

古文：若禜之，可移于令尹、司马。 
现代文：如果禳祭，可以移到令尹、司马身上。 
English: If it is a burnt offering, it can be transferred to Ling Yin and Sima.

古文：王曰： 除腹心之疾，而置诸股肱，何益？
现代文：楚昭王说： 把腹心的疾病去掉，而放在大腿胳臂上，有什么益处？
English: Chu Zhao Wang said: What is the benefit of removing the disease of the abdomen and placing it on the thigh and arm?

古文：不穀不有大过，天其夭诸。
现代文：我没有重大的过错，上天能让我夭折吗？
English: I haven't done anything seriously wrong. Can God let me die before my time?

古文：有罪受罚，又焉移之？ 
现代文：有罪受到处罚，又能移到哪里去呢？ 
English: If I am guilty and deserve to be punished, why should I be transferred to another person?

古文：遂弗禜。
现代文：于是就不去禳祭。
English: That's why I'm not going to the festival.

古文：初，昭王有疾。卜曰： 河为祟。 
现代文：当初，楚昭王有病，占卜的人说： 黄河之神在作怪。 
English: At the beginning, King Chu Zhao was ill, and soothsayers said: The god of the Yellow River is playing tricks.

古文：王弗祭。
现代文：楚昭王不去祭祀。
English: Chu Zhao Wang did not go to the sacrifice.

古文：大夫请祭诸郊。
现代文：大夫们请求在郊外祭祀。
English: The doctors have asked for the ceremony to be held outside the city.

古文：王曰： 三代命祀，祭不越望。
现代文：楚昭王说： 三代时规定的祭祀制度，祭祀不超越本国的山川。
English: Chu Zhao Wang said: The sacrificial system stipulated in the Three Dynasties is perfect, and the sacrificial rites do not exceed the mountains and rivers of the home country.

古文：江、汉、雎、漳，楚之望也。
现代文：长江、汉水、睢水、漳水，是楚国的大川。
English: The Yangtze River, the Han River, the Surabaya River, and the Surabaya River are the major rivers in the State of Chu.

古文：祸福之至，不是过也。
现代文：祸福的来到，不会超过这些地方。
English: The arrival of misfortune and fortune will not exceed these places.

古文：不穀虽不德，河非所获罪也。 
现代文：我即使没有德行，也不会得罪黄河之神。 
English: Even if I have no virtue, I will not offend the god of the Yellow River.

古文：遂弗祭。
现代文：于是就不去祭祀。
English: So they don't go to the sacrifices.

古文：孔子曰： 楚昭王知大道矣！
现代文：孔子说： 楚昭王理解大道理了。
English: Confucius said: Chu Zhaowang has understood the great truth.

古文：其不失国也，宜哉！
现代文：他的不失去国家，就是当然的了！
English: It is a matter of course that he will not lose his country!

古文：《夏书》曰： 惟彼陶唐，帅彼天常。
现代文：《夏书》说： 那位古代的君王陶唐，遵循天道纲常，据有这中国地方。
English: "The Summer Book" said: The ancient king Tao Tang, who followed the heavenly way, is said to have this Chinese place.

古文：有此冀方，今失其行。乱其纪纲，乃灭而亡。 
现代文：现在走到邪道上，搅乱了治国的大纲，于是就被灭亡。 
English: Now, they have gone down the wrong path and disrupted the outline of governing the country, so they will be destroyed.

古文：又曰： 允出兹在兹，由己率常可矣。  
现代文：又说： 付出了什么，就会收获什么。 由自己来服从天道，这就可以了。 
English: He also said, "You will reap what you have sown, and it is enough for you to submit to the heavenly way.

古文：八月，齐邴意兹来奔。
现代文：八月，齐国的邴意兹逃亡到鲁国来。
English: In August, Zhi Yizi of Qi fled to Lu.

古文：陈僖子使召公子阳生。
现代文：陈僖子派人召见公子阳生。
English: Chen Zhenzi sent someone to summon his son Yang Sheng.

古文：阳生驾而见南郭且于，曰： 尝献马于季孙，不入于上乘，故又献此，请与子乘之。 
现代文：阳生套上车去见南郭且于，说： 我曾经把马奉献给季孙，但没有能列入他的上等乘马之中，所以又奉献这几匹，请和您一起坐上车试试。 
English: Yang Sheng hitched a ride to see Nan Guo and said, "I once dedicated a horse to Ji Sun, but I couldn't be included in his first-class riding horses, so I'm dedicating these horses. Please try riding with me."

古文：出莱门而告之故。
现代文：出了莱门然后把原因告诉南郭且于。
English: He went out of the gate and then told Nan Guo and Yu the reason.

古文：阚止知之，先待诸外。
现代文：阚止知道了，先在城外等着。
English: When I found out, I waited outside the city.

古文：公子曰： 事未可知，反与壬也处。 
现代文：公子阳生说： 事情是好是坏还不能知道，回去，和壬在一起。 
English: "Whether it's good or bad, I don't know yet. I'll go back and be with Ren," said Yangsheng.

古文：戒之，遂行。
现代文：告诫了阚止，就动身了。
English: After warning them to stop, they set off.

古文：逮夜至于齐，国人知之。
现代文：等到夜里，到达齐国，国内的人们就知道他到了。
English: When he arrives in Qi in the evening, people in the country will know that he has arrived.

古文：僖子使子士之母养之，与馈者皆入。
现代文：陈僖子让子士的母亲照顾阳生，又让阳生跟着送食物的人一起进入公宫。
English: Chen Zizi asked the mother of the sons to take care of Yang Sheng, and let Yang Sheng enter the palace together with the person who brought the food.

古文：冬十月丁卯，立之。
现代文：冬季，十月二十四日，立阳生为国君。
English: In the winter, on October 24th, Yang Sheng became the king.

古文：将盟，鲍子醉而往。
现代文：将要盟誓，鲍子喝醉了前去。
English: I'll swear that Pao Zi was drunk when he left.

古文：其臣差车鲍点曰： 此谁之命也？ 
现代文：他管车的家臣鲍点说： 这是谁的命令？ 
English: His vassal Bao Dian, who was in charge of the car, said, "Whose order is this?

古文：陈子曰： 受命于鲍子。 
现代文：陈僖子说： 接受鲍子的命令。 
English: Chen Zizi said, "Accept Baozi's order."

古文：遂诬鲍子曰： 子之命也。 
现代文：于是就诬赖鲍子说： 这是您的命令！ 
English: So he slandered Bao Zi and said, "This is your order!

古文：鲍子曰： 女忘君之为孺子牛而折其齿乎？
现代文：鲍子说： 您忘记先君为荼做牛而折掉牙齿吗？
English: Bao Zi said, "Have you forgotten that your predecessor broke his teeth to make yakitori?

古文：而背之也！ 
现代文：现在又要违背先君吗？ 
English: Are you going to disobey your predecessor now?

古文：悼公稽首曰： 吾子奉义而行者也，若我可，不必亡一大夫。
现代文：齐悼公叩头，说： 您是按照道义办事情的。如果我行，不必杀死一个大夫。
English: They kowtow to the mourners and say, "You did the right thing. If I can, I don't have to kill a doctor."

古文：若我不可，不必亡一公子。
现代文：如果我不行，也不必杀死一个公子。
English: If I can't, I don't have to kill a noble.

古文：义则进，否则退，敢不唯子是从。
现代文：合于道义就前进，不合就后退，岂敢不唯您是从？
English: If it is moral to advance, if it is immoral to retreat, will you dare to obey?

古文：废兴无以乱，则所愿也。 
现代文：废一个，立一个，不要因此发生动乱，这就是我的愿望。 
English: One down, one to go, don't let this cause any turmoil, that's what I want.

古文：鲍子曰： 谁非君之子？ 
现代文：鲍子说： 你们有谁不是先君的儿子呢？ 
English: Baozi said: Are there any of you who are not the sons of the former emperor?

古文：乃受盟。
现代文：于是就接受了盟约。
English: So they accepted the covenant.

古文：使胡姬以安孺子如赖。去鬻姒，杀王甲，拘江说，囚王豹于句窦之丘。
现代文：悼公让胡姬带着安孺到赖地去，把鬻姒送到别处，杀死王申，拘捕江说，把王豹囚禁在句窦之丘。
English: Lai Gong asked Hu Ji to take An Qian to Lai Di, and sent Qian to another place, killing Wang Shen, arresting Jiang He, and imprisoning Wang Jiao in the hill of Jiu Dou.

古文：公使朱毛告于陈子曰： 微子则不及此。
现代文：齐悼公派朱毛告诉陈僖子，说： 没有您，我不能到这一步。
English: Zhu Mao, a member of the mourning committee, told Chen Zizi: "Without you, I couldn't have made it this far.

古文：然君异于器，不可以二。
现代文：然而国君和器物不一样，不能有两个。
English: However, a sovereign is not the same as an object, and there cannot be two of them.

古文：器二不匮，君二多难。敢布诸大夫。 
现代文：有两件器物就不愁缺乏，有两个国君祸难就多了，谨敢向您陈述。 
English: If there are two vessels, there will be no shortage. If there are two sovereigns, there will be more misfortune. I dare to tell you.

古文：僖子不对而泣曰： 君举不信群臣乎？
现代文：陈僖子不回答而哭泣，说： 国君对臣下们都不相信吗？
English: Chen Zhenzi did not answer, but wept, saying: Does the sovereign not believe his subjects?

古文：以齐国之困，困又有忧。少君不可以访，是以求长君，庶亦能容群臣乎！
现代文：齐国有困难，贫困而又有忧患，年幼的国君不能去请示，因此我才找来年长的，大约还能够对臣下们加以容忍吧！
English: The state of Qi is in difficulties, poverty and sorrow, and the young sovereign cannot go to ask for instructions. Therefore, I have to find the next year's ruler, who will probably be able to tolerate his subjects!

古文：不然，夫孺子何罪？ 
现代文：不这样，孺子荼有什么罪过？ 
English: Otherwise, what is the guilt of the cripple?

古文：毛复命，公悔之。
现代文：朱毛向悼公复命，悼公后悔失言。
English: Zhu Mao restored his life to Lai Gong, and Lai Gong regretted his slip of the tongue.

古文：毛曰： 君大访于陈子，而图其小可也。 
现代文：朱毛说： 您大事征求陈子的意见，小事情自己拿主意就行了。 
English: Zhu Mao said: You should seek Chen Zi's opinion on major matters, and make up your own mind on minor matters.

古文：使毛迁孺子于骀，不至，杀诸野幕之下，葬诸殳冒淳。
现代文：悼公派朱毛把孺子迁移到骀地。没有到达，把他杀死在野外的帐篷里，葬在殳冒淳。
English: The mourning official sent Zhu Mao to relocate the mule to Lantian. When he did not arrive, he killed him in a tent in the open and buried him in Zhouzhuang.

