古文：植物非一，故有万卉之名；谷种甚多，故有百谷之号。
现代文：植物并非只有一种，所以有 万卉 的名称。谷类也有很多种，所以称作 百谷 。
English: There is more than one kind of plant, which is why it has the name "million flowers." There are also many kinds of cereals, which is why they are called "hundreds of grains."

古文：如茨如梁，谓禾稼之蕃；惟夭惟乔，谓草木之茂。
现代文：《诗经》说 如茨如梁 是形容庄稼长势茂盛， 惟夭惟乔 是形容草木生长茂盛。
English: "The Book of Songs" says that "Rutsuru-Ryo" describes the flourishing growth of crops, and "Wuyao-Wuyao" describes the flourishing growth of plants.

古文：莲乃花中君子，海棠花内神仙。
现代文：莲花被称作是 花中君子 ，海棠花被称作 花中神仙 。
English: The lotus flower is known as the gentleman among flowers, and the begonia flower is known as the fairy among flowers.

古文：国色天香，乃牡丹之富贵；冰肌玉骨，乃梅萼之清奇。
现代文： 国色天香 ，是说牡丹富贵艳丽； 冰肌玉骨 ，是形容梅花清秀俊奇。
English: National color Tianxiang, is to say that peony is rich and gorgeous; ice skin jade bone, is to describe plum blossom beautiful.

古文：兰为王者之香，菊同隐逸之士。
现代文：兰花有 王者之香 ，菊花如 隐逸之士 。
English: Orchids have the fragrance of kings, and chrysanthemums are like hermits.

古文：竹称君子，松号大夫。
现代文：竹子有 君子 之称，松树有 丈夫 之号。
English: Bamboo has the title of gentleman, and pine trees have the title of husband.

古文：萱草可忘忧，屈轶能指佞。
现代文：萱草又名 忘忧草 ，可以使人忘却忧愁；屈轶别号 指佞草 ，据说它能够指出佞人。
English: Fenugreek, also known as forget-me-not, can make people forget their sorrows; Qu's nickname is Fenugreek, and it is said to be able to point out a lazy person.

古文：筼筜，竹之别号；木樨，桂之别名。
现代文： 筼筜 是竹子的代称， 木樨 是桂花的别号。
English: Bamboo is another name for bamboo, and osmanthus is another name for osmanthus.

古文：明日黄花，过时之物；岁寒松柏，有节之称。
现代文：黄菊花过了时令便萎谢了，故以 明日黄花 比喻过时的事物，松柏在严寒时依然苍翠，所以称有气节的人为 岁寒松柏 。
English: The yellow chrysanthemum withers after the season, so the yellow flower of tomorrow is used as a metaphor for outdated things. The conifer is still verdant when it is cold, so people with seasons are called "cold conifers."

古文：樗栎乃无用之散材，楩楠胜大用之良木。
现代文：樗树和栎树是无用的树木，楩木和楠木是能做栋梁的优质木材。
English: Elm and birch are useless trees, while birch and alder are high-quality timber that can be used as beams.

古文：玉版，笋之异号；蹲鸱，芋之别名。
现代文： 玉版 是干笋的别名， 蹲鸱 是芋头的别名。
English: "Jade plate" is another name for dried bamboo shoots, and "squatting bamboo shoots" is another name for taro.

古文：瓜田李下，事避嫌疑；秋菊春桃，时来尚早。
现代文： 瓜田李下 ，是说做事要避免嫌疑； 秋菊春桃 ，是说时机还未到。
English: The melon field is low, meaning that suspicion should be avoided in doing things; the autumn chrysanthemum, meaning that the time has not yet come.

古文：南枝先，北枝后，庾岭之梅；朔而生，望而落，尧阶蓂荚。
现代文：庾岭的梅花，南边枝条先开，北边枝条后开；生长于尧帝庭阶上的蓂荚，夏历初一开始生荚，十五后开始落荚。
English: The plum blossoms of the Jiaoling Mountains, the branches on the south side open first, and the branches on the north side open later; the dragonflies that grow on the steps of the emperor's garden, the dragonflies are born at the beginning of the summer calendar, and the dragonflies begin to fall after the fifteenth day.

古文：苾蒭背阴向阳，比僧人之有德；木槿朝开暮落，比荣华之不长。
现代文：苾刍这种植物背阴向阳，比喻僧人一心向佛有德行；木槿的花早晨开放晚上凋谢，比喻荣华富贵不会长久。
English: This plant, with its back to the sun, is a metaphor for a monk's single-minded devotion to the Buddha; the flowers of the hibiscus open in the morning and wither in the evening, a metaphor for glory and wealth that will not last long.

古文：芒刺在背，言恐惧不安；薰莸异气，犹贤否有别。
现代文： 芒刺在背 是说心里极度的恐惧不安；熏草香、莸草臭，二者气味绝不相同，如同贤人、恶人之差别。
English: A thorn in the flesh is a sign of extreme fear and anxiety in the heart; the smell of incense and the smell of weeds are completely different, just like the difference between a wise man and a wicked man.

古文：桃李不言，下自成蹊；道旁苦李，为人所弃。
现代文：桃李虽不会说话，但人们喜爱它的花跟果实，来往不绝，树下自然踩出小路；若是苦李，就算生在路旁，也会为人所摒弃。
English: Although peach and plum cannot speak, people love its flowers and fruits. People come and go incessantly, and paths naturally emerge under the trees. If it is bitter plum, even if it is born on the side of the road, it will be abandoned by people.

古文：老人娶少妇，曰枯杨生稊；国家进多贤，曰拔茅连茹。
现代文：年老的男人娶年轻的女子，叫作 枯杨生稊 ；国家招进的贤才多，就像 拔茅连茹 。
English: An old man who marries a young woman is called a withered poplar; the country recruits many talented people, such as Bapu Maoliang.

古文：蒲柳之姿，未秋先槁；姜桂之性，愈老愈辛。
现代文：蒲柳的资质很差，未到秋天便已枯槁；生姜和肉桂的特性，是越老味道越辛辣。
English: The quality of the willow is very poor and withers before the autumn; the characteristics of ginger and cinnamon are that the older the taste, the more pungent it is.

古文：王者之兵，势如破竹；七雄之国，地若瓜分。
现代文：行王道之师，摧敌势如破竹；战国时期七雄争霸，天下的土地都被瓜分。
English: During the Warring States period, seven strong men fought for supremacy, and the lands of the world were divided up.

古文：苻坚望阵，疑草木皆是晋兵；索靖知亡，叹铜驼会在荆棘。
现代文：淝水之战苻坚大败，远望风吹草动，都以为是晋兵。索靖预测晋朝将亡，指着洛阳宫殿前的铜驼，叹息道，日后恐怕要在荆棘丛中见到了。
English: In the Battle of Surabaya, Shujian was soundly defeated, and everyone thought it was Jin soldiers, hoping for the wind to blow and the grass to move. So Jing predicted that the Jin dynasty would perish, pointing to the bronze camel in front of the Luoyang Palace, sighing, I'm afraid I'll see it in the thorn bushes in the future.

古文：王祜知子必贵，手植三槐；窦钧五子齐荣，人称五桂。
现代文：王佑知道子孙将来一定显贵，预先在庭院中种下三棵槐树；窦钧有五个儿子皆显贵，世人称为五桂。
English: Wang Yu knew that his children and grandchildren would be eminent in the future, so he planted three eucalyptus trees in the courtyard in advance. Dou Yu had five sons who were all eminent, known to the world as the Five Gui.

古文：鉏麑触槐，不忍贼民之主；越王尝蓼，必欲复吴之仇。
现代文：鉏麑不忍心杀害忠臣，又不敢违抗命令，就自己头撞槐树而死；越王卧薪尝苦蓼，必定要报吴国之仇。
English: He could not bear to kill his loyal vassal, and dared not disobey the order, so he hit his head on a banyan tree and died.

古文：修母画荻以教子，谁不称贤；廉颇负荆以请罪，善能悔过。
现代文：欧阳修的母亲以荻杆当笔，教子读书写字，世人都称赞她是个贤德的母亲；廉颇背负荆条向蔺相如请罪，知错并善于改正。
English: Ouyang Xiu's mother used a rattan pole as a pen, while her godson read and wrote. People all over the world praised her as a virtuous mother.

古文：弥子瑕常恃宠，将馀桃以啖君；秦商鞅欲行令，使徙木以立信。
现代文：弥子瑕依仗卫灵公的宠爱，把咬过的桃子给卫灵公吃；秦国的商鞅为推行变法，让人搬木头而给赏金，以此树立威信。
English: Yizi Ke, relying on the favor of Wei Ling Gong, gave the bitten peach to Wei Ling Gong to eat; the merchants of Qin State, in order to promote the change of law, let people carry wood and give bounty, in order to establish prestige.

古文：王戎卖李钻核，不胜鄙吝；成王剪桐封弟，因无戏言。
现代文：王戎卖李子之前，先在李核上钻洞，防止他人得到种子，这种做法实在鄙吝。周成王剪桐叶分封弟弟叔虞，后来因为天子不可有戏言，叔虞就被封为唐侯。
English: Before Wang Rong sold plums, he first drilled a hole in the core of the plum tree to prevent others from getting the seeds. This practice is truly despicable. Zhou Cheng Wang cut the leaves of the tree to appoint his brother Shugu, and later, because the son of heaven could not have a joke, Shugu was made a Tang lord.

古文：齐景公以二桃杀三士，杨再思谓莲花似六郎。
现代文：齐景公用两个桃子就使三位壮士自杀身亡，杨再思奉承说莲花就像张宗昌。
English: Qi Jing Gong used two peaches to make three strong men commit suicide, Yang Zai Si flattered that the lotus was like Zhang Zongchang.

古文：倒啖蔗，渐入佳境；蒸哀梨，大失本真。
现代文：倒吃甘蔗，越吃越甜，因此说 渐入佳境 ；把哀梨拿来一蒸，便失去本来的美味。
English: On the other hand, if you eat sugar cane, the more you eat, the sweeter it becomes, so it is said that you are gradually getting into the best situation; if you take bitter pear and steam it, it will lose its original taste.

古文：煮豆燃萁，比兄残弟；砍竹遮笋，弃旧怜新。
现代文： 煮豆燃萁 比喻骨肉自相残杀；抛弃旧爱去结交新欢，就称作 砍竹遮笋 。
English: Boiling beans and burning cocoons are metaphors for fratricide; abandoning an old love to make new friends is called "chopping bamboo to cover one's tracks."

古文：元素致江陵之柑，吴刚伐月中之桂。
现代文：董元素有仙术，能把江陵的柑橘搬至长安的宫殿中。
English: Dong element has magic, can carry the citrus from Jiangling to the palace in Chang'an.

古文：捐资济贫，当效尧夫之助麦；以物申敬，聊效野人之献芹。
现代文：吴刚被天帝惩罚，罚他砍伐月中的桂树，却怎么砍也砍不倒。捐资财救济贫困，应当学范尧夫把一船的麦子送给石曼卿；以物品馈赠他人，就自谦仿效山野之民献芹菜以表敬意。
English: Wu Gang was punished by the Heavenly Emperor, who ordered him to cut down the moon cactus, but no matter how hard he tried, he could not cut it down. To donate funds and resources to alleviate poverty, he should follow the example of Fan Yufu, who gave a shipload of wheat to Lord Shiman; to give gifts to others, he should humbly follow the example of the people of the mountains and fields and offer celery as a sign of respect.

古文：冒雨剪韭，郭林宗款友情殷；踏雪寻梅，孟浩然自娱兴雅。
现代文：亲自冒雨去菜园割韭菜，郭林宗款待友人的心情十分殷切；踏雪寻梅，孟浩然自我娱乐雅兴不凡。
English: Guo Linzong was very eager to entertain his friends when he went to the vegetable garden to cut leeks in the rain. Meng Haoran had a great time entertaining himself while searching for plums in the snow.

古文：商太戊能修德，详桑自死；寇莱公有深仁，枯竹复生。
现代文：商代太戊修行德政，作祸的祥桑便自己枯死。寇准仁德深厚，插下的枯竹又长出嫩芽。
English: In the Shang Dynasty, Taewu practiced virtue politics, and the evil-doer Xiang San himself withered and died. Kol Quan Ren was deeply virtuous, and the dead bamboo he planted sprouted shoots.

古文：王母蟠桃，三千年开花，三千年结子，故人借以祝寿诞；上古大椿，八千岁为春，八千岁为秋，故人托以比严君。
现代文：西王母的蟠桃，每三千年开一次花，三千年结一次果，故而人们借用桃子来祝寿；上古有大椿树八千年才算一春，八千年才算一秋，所以人们借它来比喻自己的父亲长寿。
English: The peach blossoms once every three thousand years, and the peach fruits once every three thousand years, so people borrow peaches to celebrate their birthdays. In ancient times, there was a camellia tree, and eight thousand years is only a spring, and eight thousand years is only an autumn, so people use it to compare their father's long life.

古文：去稂莠，正以植嘉禾；沃枝叶，不如培根本。
现代文：稂莠是害草，去稂莠以使禾苗更茂盛；植物以根为本，与其使枝叶肥美，不如培育根本。
English: The thistle is a harmful weed, it is better to remove the thistle to make the grass seedling more luxuriant; the plant is based on the root, rather than making the branches and leaves beautiful, it is better to cultivate the root.

古文：世路之蓁芜当剔，人心之茅塞须开。
现代文：社会上的恶人好比路上的杂草，应当剔除干净；世人愚昧无知，如同茅草塞住心灵，必须使它通畅才好。
English: The wicked in society are like weeds in the road, which should be weeded out; the world's ignorance is like a thatch that chokes the soul, which must be unblocked.

