古文：子曰： 为政以德，譬如北辰，居其所而众星共之。 子曰： 《诗》三百，一言以蔽之，曰： 思无邪 。 
现代文：孔子说： 用道德来统治国家的人，就会像北极星一样处在一定的位置，所有的星辰都会环绕在它的周围。 孔子说： 《诗经》三百篇，可以用一句话来概括它，就是 思想纯正 。 
English: Confucius said: "He who rules a country with morality will be in a certain position like the North Star, and all the stars will surround it. "Confucius said: "The 300 poems of the Book of Songs can be summed up in one sentence, that is, pure thoughts.

古文：子曰： 道之以政，齐之以刑，民免而无耻。道之以德，齐之以礼，有耻且格。 
现代文：孔子说： 用强权手段、法制禁令来管理百姓，使用刑法来约束他们，老百姓只能免于犯罪受惩罚，却没有了廉耻之心；用道德引导百姓，用礼制去统一百姓的言行，不但懂得廉洁是非，而且从心里归服。 
English: Confucius said: People can only be exempted from punishment for crimes, but they have no sense of shame. People should be guided by morality and use etiquette to unify people's words and deeds. They should not only understand what is right and what is wrong, but also submit from the heart.

古文：子曰： 吾十有五而志于学，三十而立，四十而不惑，五十而知天命，六十而耳顺，七十而从心所欲，不逾矩。 
现代文：孔子说： 我十五岁立志于学习；三十岁就有了自己的德行和做人的原则；四十岁遇到事情不再感到困惑；五十岁就知道哪些是不能为人力支配的事情而乐知天命；六十岁能正确对待各种言论，不觉得不能接受；七十岁能随心所欲而不越出规矩。 
English: Confucius said: At the age of fifteen, I was determined to study; at the age of thirty, I had my own virtues and principles of being a man; at the age of forty, I no longer felt confused when encountering things; at the age of fifty, I knew which things could not be controlled by human beings and enjoyed knowing the destiny of heaven; at the age of sixty, I could correctly treat all kinds of speech and did not feel unacceptable; at the age of seventy, I could do whatever I wanted without breaking the rules.

古文：孟懿子问孝，子曰： 无违。 
现代文：孟懿子问什么是孝，孔子说： 孝就是不要违背礼。 
English: When asked by Mencius what filial piety is, Confucius said: "Filial piety is not to violate the etiquette.

古文：樊迟御，子告之曰： 孟孙问孝于我，我对曰 无违 。 
现代文：不久，樊迟替孔子驾车，孔子告诉他说： 孟孙问我什么是孝道，我回答他说不要违背礼。 
English: Before long, Zou was driving for Confucius, and Confucius told him: Meng Sun asked me what filial piety was, and I answered that he should not violate the etiquette.

古文：樊迟曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：樊迟说： 这是什么意思呢？ 
English: "What does that mean?

古文：子曰： 生，事之以礼；死，葬之以礼，祭之以礼。 
现代文：孔子说： 父母活着的时候，要依照规定的礼节侍奉他们；父母去世后，依规定的礼节安葬他们，祭祀他们。 
English: Confucius said: When your parents are alive, you should serve them according to the prescribed etiquette; after their death, you should bury them and sacrifice them according to the prescribed etiquette.

古文：孟武伯问孝。
现代文：孟武伯问什么是孝。
English: Meng Wubo asked what filial piety was.

古文：子曰： 父母唯其疾之忧。 
现代文：孔子说： 除生病不能避免外，不要让父母担忧子女的任何事情。 
English: Confucius said: Don't let parents worry about their children about anything except unavoidable illness.

古文：子游问孝。
现代文：子游问什么是孝。
English: Zoyu asks what filial piety is.

古文：子曰： 今之孝者，是谓能养。
现代文：孔子说： 当今许多人认为的孝呀，就是能够赡养父母便足够了。
English: Confucius said: The filial piety that many people think of today is that it is enough to be able to support one's parents.

古文：至于犬马，皆能有养；不敬，何以别乎？ 
现代文：其实狗和马，也都有人饲养。如果对自己的父母不恭敬孝顺，那么赡养父母与饲养犬马又有什么区别呢？ 
English: In fact, both dogs and horses are raised by people. If you do not respect and obey your parents, then what is the difference between supporting your parents and raising dogs and horses?

古文：子夏问孝。
现代文：子夏问什么是孝。
English: Zoxia asked what filial piety was.

古文：子曰： 色难。
现代文：孔子说： 侍奉父母时，最不容易的就是对父母和颜悦色。
English: Confucius said: When serving one's parents, the most difficult thing is to be agreeable to them.

古文：有事，弟子服其劳；有酒食，先生馔，曾是以为孝乎？ 
现代文：有了事情，儿女替父母去做，有了可口的饭菜，让父母吃，难道能认为这样就可以算是孝了吗？ 
English: With affairs, children do things for their parents, with delicious meals, let their parents eat, can they think that this can be considered filial piety?

古文：子曰： 吾与回言终日，不违，如愚。
现代文：孔子说： 我给颜回授课，一整天下来他都不提任何反对意见和疑问，像个愚钝的人。
English: Confucius said, "I gave a lecture to Yan Hui, and for the whole day he did not raise any objections or questions, like a dull person.

古文：退而省其私，亦足以发，回也不愚。 
现代文：等他回去后，我观察他私下里同别人讨论时，却能发挥我所讲的，可见颜回他并不愚笨呀！ 
English: When he returned, I observed that when he was in private discussion with others, he was able to make use of what I had said, which showed that he was not stupid!

古文：子曰： 视其所以，观其所由，察其所安，人焉廋哉？
现代文：孔子说： 看一个人的所作所为，应看他言行的动机，观察他所走的道路，了解他心安于什么事情。
English: Confucius said: Look at a person's behavior, look at the motives of his words and deeds, observe the path he takes, and understand what he is comfortable with.

古文：人焉廋哉？ 
现代文：这样，这个人怎样能隐藏得了呢？
English: How then can this man hide himself?

古文：子曰： 温故而知新，可以为师矣。 
现代文：这个人怎样能隐藏得了呢？ 孔子说： 温习学过的知识，可以从中获得新的理解与体会，那么就可以凭借这一点去做老师了。 
English: How can this person hide? Confucius said: If you study the knowledge you have learned, you can gain new understanding and experience from it, then you can use this to become a teacher.

古文：子曰： 君子不器。 
现代文：孔子说： 君子不像器具那样，只有一种用途。 
English: Confucius said: A gentleman is not like a tool, which has only one use.

古文：子贡问君子。
现代文：子贡问怎样做一个君子。
English: Zigong asked how to be a gentleman.

古文：子曰： 先行其言而后从之。 
现代文：孔子说： 应该先行动实践自己想要说的话，做到后再把它说出来。 
English: Confucius said: You should first act and practice what you want to say, and then say it.

古文：子曰： 君子周而不比，小人比而不周。 
现代文：孔子说： 德行高尚的人以正道广泛交友但不互相勾结，品格卑下的人互相勾结却不顾道义。 
English: Confucius said: People of high moral character make a wide range of friends with the right way but do not collude with each other. People of low moral character collude with each other but do not care about morality.

古文：子曰： 学而不思则罔，思而不学则殆。 
现代文：孔子说： 只学习却不思考，就会感到迷茫而无所适从，只是思考而不学习，就会疑惑而无所得。 
English: Confucius said: "If you only study but do not think, you will feel confused and at a loss. If you only think but do not study, you will feel confused and at a loss."

古文：子曰： 攻乎异端，斯害也已！ 
现代文：孔子说： 研攻异端杂学，不过带来危害罢了。 
English: Confucius said, "Studying heresy and miscellaneous learning is good, but it only brings harm.

古文：子曰： 由，诲女知之乎！
现代文：孔子说： 仲由啊，让为师教导你对待知与不知的态度吧！
English: Confucius said, "Nakayu, let your teacher teach you how to treat knowledge and ignorance.

古文：知之为知之，不知为不知，是知也。 
现代文：知道就是知道，不知道就是不知道，这才是聪明的。 
English: To know is to know, not to know is not to know, that is wisdom.

古文：子张学干禄。
现代文：子张要学谋取官职的办法。
English: Zi Zhang should learn how to seek a government post.

古文：子曰： 多闻阙疑，慎言其余，则寡尤；多见阙殆，慎行其余，则寡悔。
现代文：孔子说： 要多听，不明白的地方先放在一旁不说，对于真正懂得的，也要谨慎地说出来，这样就能少犯错误；要多看，有疑惑的先放在一旁不做，对于真正懂的，也要谨慎地去做，这样就能减少事后懊悔。
English: Confucius said: Listen more, put aside what you don't understand and don't talk about it first. For those who really understand, you should also speak out carefully, so that you can make fewer mistakes; look more, put aside doubts and don't do it first, and for those who really understand, you should also do it carefully, so that you can reduce regret afterwards.

古文：言寡尤，行寡悔，禄在其中矣。 
现代文：说话很少犯错，做事很少后悔，自然就有官职俸禄了。 
English: Fewer mistakes in speech, less remorse in action, and the official salary you asked for is right there.

古文：哀公问曰： 何为则民服？ 
现代文：鲁哀公问： 用什么方法才能让老百姓服从呢？ 
English: Lu Aigong asked: What method can be used to make the people obey?

古文：孔子对曰： 举直错诸枉，则民服；举枉错诸直，则民不服。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 提拔那些正直的人，让他们居于不正直的人之上，老百姓就会服从了；把不正直的人提拔上来，让他们居于正直的人之上，老百姓就不会服从统治了。 
English: Confucius replied, "If you promote those who are honest above those who are dishonest, the people will obey; if you promote those who are dishonest above those who are honest, the people will not obey.

古文：季康子问： 使民敬、忠以劝，如之何？ 
现代文：季康子问道： 要让老百姓恭敬、尽忠并互相勉励，应该怎么做呢？ 
English: Ji Kangzi asked: What should be done to make the people respect, be loyal and encourage each other?

古文：子曰： 临之以庄，则敬；孝慈，则忠；举善而教不能，则劝。 
现代文：孔子说： 如果你用庄重的态度对待他们，他们就会恭敬；如果你能孝顺父母、爱护幼小，他们就会忠诚；如果你能任用贤能之士，教育能力低下的人，他们就会互相勉励。 
English: Confucius said: If you treat them with dignity, they will respect you; if you can be filial to your parents and love your children, they will be loyal; if you can appoint wise men, people with low educational ability, they will encourage each other.

古文：或谓孔子曰： 子奚不为政？ 
现代文：有人对孔子说： 你为什么不去从政呢？ 
English: Someone said to Confucius: Why don't you go into politics?

古文：子曰： 《书》云： 孝乎惟孝，友于兄弟。 
现代文：孔子回答说： 《尚书》上说， 孝就是孝敬父母，友爱兄弟。 
English: Confucius replied, "In the Shangshu, it is said that filial piety means honoring one's parents and loving one's brothers and sisters.

古文：施于有政，是亦为政，奚其为为政？ 
现代文：把这孝悌的道理施于政事，也就是参与政事了，你以为要怎样才能算是参与政事呢？ 
English: If you apply this principle of filial piety to politics, that is, if you participate in politics, how do you think you can be considered to participate in politics?

古文：子曰： 人而无信，不知其可也。
现代文：孔子说： 一个人如果不讲信用，不知道他还能做什么。
English: Confucius said: If a person does not trust, he does not know what else he can do.

古文：大车无輗，小车无軏，其何以行之哉？ 
现代文：就好像牛车没有大车辕和车辕前横木相接的关键，马车没有辕前横木两端的木销，它还怎么行驶呢？ 
English: Just as an ox-drawn carriage does not have a key to connect the front of the carriage to the front of the carriage, and a horse-drawn carriage does not have wooden pins at both ends of the front of the carriage, how can it still travel?

古文：子张问： 十世可知也？ 
现代文：子张问孔子： 今后十世的礼仪制度可以预知吗？ 
English: Zi Zhang asked Confucius: Is it possible to predict the future of the etiquette system in the tenth generation?

古文：子曰： 殷因于夏礼，所损益，可知也；周因于殷礼，所损益，可知也。
现代文：孔子回答说： 商朝承袭了夏朝的礼仪制度，其中减少和所增加的内容是可以知道的；周朝又承袭了商朝的礼仪制度，其中减少和所增加的内容也是可以知道的。
English: Confucius replied: The Shang Dynasty inherited the etiquette system of the Xia Dynasty, of which the decrease and the increase can be known; the Zhou Dynasty also inherited the etiquette system of the Shang Dynasty, of which the decrease and the increase can also be known.

古文：其或继周者，虽百世，可知也。 
现代文：以后如果有继承周朝的朝代，就是一百世以后的情况，也是可以预先知道的。 
English: In the future, if there is a dynasty that succeeds the Zhou Dynasty, the situation after the 100th generation can also be known in advance.

古文：子曰： 非其鬼而祭之，谄也；见义不为，无勇也。 
现代文：孔子说： 不是自己的先祖而去祭祀，就是谄媚。见到应该挺身而出的事情，却袖手旁观，就是怯懦。 
English: Confucius said, "If you do not worship your ancestors, then you are a flatterer, and if you do not stand up when you should, then you are a coward."

