古文：刘祎之，常州晋陵人也。
现代文：刘祎之，常州晋陵人。
English: Liu Xizhi, a native of Jinling, Changzhou.

古文：祖兴宗，陈鄱阳王谘议参军。
现代文：他的祖父刘兴宗，是前朝陈鄱阳王的咨议参军。
English: His grandfather, Liu Xingzong, was advised to join the army by the former emperor Chen Bingyang.

古文：父子翼，善吟讽，有学行。隋大业初，历秘书监，河东柳顾言甚重之。
现代文：他的父亲刘子翼，善诵，有学行，隋朝大业初年，历任秘书监，河东柳顾言很看重他。
English: His father, Liu Ziying, was a good reciter and student. In the first year of the Sui Dynasty, he was appointed as the superintendent of secretaries. Hedong Liu Guyan thought highly of him.

古文：性不容非，朋僚有短，面折之。
现代文：他性不能容忍是非，朋友同事有短，他当面指责。
English: He cannot tolerate right and wrong, friends and colleagues have shortcomings, he blames them in person.

古文：友人李伯药常称曰： 刘四虽复骂人，人都不恨。 
现代文：友人李伯药常称扬他说： 刘四即使骂了人，人都不恨。 
English: His friend Li Boyao often praised him, saying: "Liu Si doesn't hate people, even if he scolds them.

古文：贞观元年，诏追入京，以母老固辞，太宗许其终养。
现代文：贞观元年，唐太宗召他入京，他以母老坚决推辞，太宗答应他终养。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Tang Taizong called him to Beijing. He firmly refused with his mother and elder brother, and Taizong promised to support him forever.

古文：江南大使李袭誉嘉其至孝，恆以米帛赉之，因上表旌其门闾，改所居为孝慈里。
现代文：江南大使赞扬他至孝，常常送给他粮食绸布，并上表表彰他的家族，还把他所居住的地方改名为孝慈里。
English: The ambassador of Jiangnan praised him for his filial piety, often gave him grain silk cloth, and commended his family on the table, and changed the name of the place where he lived to Xiaozili.

古文：母卒，服竟，征拜吴王府功曹，再迁著作郎、弘文馆直学士，预修《晋书》，加朝散大夫。
现代文：他母亲去世后，服孝完，太宗征拜他为吴王府功曹，再升迁著作郎，弘文馆直学士，参与编写《晋书》，加朝散大夫之职。
English: After his mother's death, after he completed his filial duty, Emperor Taizong enlisted him as a meritorious student of King Wu's palace, promoted him to the position of a scholar, made him a direct graduate of the Hongwen Library, participated in the writing of the "Jin Shu," and promoted him to the position of a doctor of the Joseon Dynasty.

古文：永徽初卒，高宗遣使吊赠，给灵舆还乡。
现代文：永徽元年去世，高宗遣使者吊赠，送灵柩还乡。
English: Yonghui died in the first year of the year, Gao Zong sent an envoy to present gifts and send the coffin back to his hometown.

古文：有集二十卷。
现代文：有文集二十卷。
English: There are 20 volumes in the series.

古文：祎之少与孟利贞、高智周、郭正一俱以文藻知名，时人号为刘、孟、高、郭。
现代文：刘祎之少年时代与孟利贞、高智周、郭正一一起以文章知名，当时，以刘、孟、高、郭齐名。
English: In his boyhood, Liu Xizhi was famous for his articles together with Meng Lizhen, Gao Zhizhou and Guo Zhengyi. At that time, Liu, Meng, Gao and Guo were all famous.

古文：寻与利贞等同直昭文馆。
现代文：不久他与孟利贞等同进昭文馆。
English: Soon he and Meng Lizhen entered the Shouwen Museum together.

古文：上元中，迁左史、弘文馆直学士，与著作郎元万顷，左史范履冰、苗楚客，右史周思茂、韩楚宾等皆召入禁中，共撰《列女传》、《臣轨》、《百僚新诫》、《乐书》，凡千余卷。
现代文：上元二年，他升迁左史，弘文馆直学士，与著作郎元万顷，左史范履冰、苗楚客，右史周思茂、韩曹宾等，都被召入宫中，共同修写《列女传》、《臣轨》、《百僚新识》、《乐书》，共千余卷。
English: In the second year of the first century, he was promoted to the left history, the direct bachelor of the Hongwen Museum, and the authors Lang Yuan Wanhao, the left history Fan Lubei, Miao Chuk, the right history Zhou Simao, Han Cao Bin, etc., were all called into the palace to jointly revise "The Legend of the Women," "The Path of the Subjects," "The New Knowledge of the Hundred Experts" and "The Music Book," a total of more than one thousand volumes.

古文：时又密令参决，以分宰相之权，时人谓之 北门学士 。
现代文：当时又密令他参与决策，来分担宰相之权，时人称他为 北门学士 。
English: At that time, he was also secretly ordered to participate in decision-making to share the power of the prime minister. At that time, he was called the North Gate Scholar.

古文：祎之兄懿之，时为给事中，兄弟并居两省，论者美之。
现代文：刘祎之的兄长刘懿之，当时任给事中之职，兄弟并在两省，谈论者很是赞美他们。
English: Liu Xizhi's brother Liu Xizhi, who was in charge of the affairs at that time, and his brothers in the two provinces, were highly praised by the talkers.

古文：仪凤二年，转朝议大夫、中书侍郎，兼豫王府司马，寻加中大夫。
现代文：仪凤三年，转任朝议大夫、中书侍郎，兼豫王府司马，不久又加中大夫之职。
English: In the third year of Yifeng, he was transferred to the post of the doctor of the Imperial Court Council, the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and the secretary of the Henan royal court, and soon he was promoted to the post of the doctor of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：祎之有姊在宫中为内职，天后令省荣国夫人之疾，祎之潜伺见之，坐是配流巂州。
现代文：刘祎之有姐在宫中为内职，武则天令她去探望荣国夫人的疾病，刘祎之私自偷见他的姐姐，因此被流配隽州。
English: Liu Xizhi's sister had an office in the palace. Wu Zetian ordered her to visit the illness of Rongguo's wife. Liu Xizhi secretly saw his sister, so he was exiled to Zhangzhou.

古文：历数载，天后表请高宗召还，拜中书舍人。
现代文：经过数年，武则天又上表请求高宗召刘祎之回京，拜中书舍人。
English: After several years, Emperor Wuzetian again petitioned Emperor Gao to call Liu Xizhi back to Beijing and ask him to renounce Chinese calligraphy.

古文：转相王府司马，复迁检校中书侍郎。
现代文：任相王府司马，又升迁检校中书侍郎。
English: He was appointed as the secretary of Wangfu, and was promoted to the junior secretary of the inspection school.

古文：高宗谓曰： 相王朕之爱子，以卿忠孝之门，藉卿师范，所冀蓬生麻中，不扶自直耳。 
现代文：高宗对他说 ：相王是我的爱子，因为卿忠孝之家，我想凭借卿高尚品德做师范，能够出现蓬生麻中，不扶自直的好效果。 
English: Gao Zong said to him, "King Si is my beloved son. Because I come from a family of loyalty and filial piety, I would like to use his noble character as a model to achieve good results.

古文：祎之居家孝友，甚为士族所称，每得俸禄，散于亲属，高宗以此重之。
现代文：刘祎之在家敬老爱幼，与亲友和睦相亲，很是受士族的称赞，他每得俸禄，总散于亲属，高宗因此很是看重他。
English: At home, Liu Xizhi respected his elders, loved his children, and lived in harmony with his relatives and friends. He was highly praised by the warrior class. Whenever he received a salary, he always gave it to his relatives. Gaozong therefore highly valued him.

古文：则天临朝，甚见亲委。
现代文：武则天临朝，也很亲近他并委以重任。
English: Wu Zetian was also very close to him and entrusted him with important duties.

古文：及豫王立，祎之参预其谋，擢拜中书侍郎、同中书门下三品，赐爵临淮男。
现代文：到豫王即位，刘祎之参与谋划，拜中书侍郎，代理宰相职务，赐爵临淮男。
English: When Emperor Yu ascended to the throne, Liu Xizhi took part in the planning, served as the attendant of the Chinese envoy, held the post of acting prime minister, and conferred a peerage on Lin Huai'an.

古文：时军国多事，所有诏敕，独出祎之，构思敏速，皆可立待。
现代文：当时，国家和军队中多事，朝廷的所有诏敕，都出自刘祎之笔下，他构思敏捷，都立待可成。
English: At that time, there were many things going on in the country and the army, and all the imperial edicts of the imperial court came from the pen of Liu Bei. He had a quick mind and could accomplish anything.

古文：及官名改易，祎之为凤阁侍郎、同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：到官名改变，刘祎之为凤阁侍郎，代宰相之职。
English: After the official name change, Liu Xuan was appointed as Fengge's chamberlain, and assumed the post of acting prime minister.

古文：时有司门员外郎房先敏得罪，左授卫州司马，诣宰相陈诉。
现代文：当时有司门员外郎房先敏犯了错误，降职为卫州司马，他找宰相申诉。
English: At that time, there was a gatekeeper, Wai Lang Fong Xian Min, who made a mistake and was demoted to the position of Weizhou Sima. He appealed to the Prime Minister.

古文：内史骞味道谓曰： 此乃皇太后处分也。 
现代文：内史骞味道对他说 ：这是皇太后处分的。 
English: Naishi told him, "This is the Empress Dowager's punishment."

古文：祎之谓先敏曰： 缘坐改官，例从臣下奏请。 
现代文：祎之对房先敏说： 因为犯错误而改官，一向是由下向上奏请的。 
English: Hao Zhi said to Fang Xianmin: Because of making a mistake and changing the post, it has always been done from the bottom up.

古文：则天闻之，以味道善则归己，过则推君，贬青州刺史。以祎之推善于君，引过在己，加授太中大夫，赐物百段、细马一匹。
现代文：武则天听到他们的话，认为骞味道善则归己，过则推君，于是贬骞味道为青州刺史；认为刘祎之能推善于君，引过在己，便加官太中大夫，赐五色帛百段，细马一匹。
English: Wu Zetian heard their words and thought that if the taste was good, it would go to him, and if it was bad, it would push him away, so he belittled the taste as the history of Qingzhou; if he thought that Liu Zetian could push away the good from him, and lead it away from him, then he was promoted to the position of the official junior high school doctor, and he was given a hundred pieces of five-colored gourds and a fine horse.

古文：因谓侍臣曰： 夫为臣之体，在扬君之德，君德发扬，岂非臣下之美事？
现代文：还以此事对侍臣说 ：作为臣子处事，在扬君之德，君德发扬，难道不是臣下的美事？
English: He also said this to his vassal: "Isn't it a good thing for a vassal to work as a vassal, to promote the virtue of the vassal, and to promote the virtue of the vassal?

古文：且君为元首，臣作股肱，情同休戚，义均一体。
现代文：况且君是元首，臣是支体，情同一体，好坏也在一体。
English: Moreover, you are the head, the vassal is the branch, the love is one, and the good and the bad are also one.

古文：未闻以手足之疾移于腹背，而得一体安者。
现代文：未闻手和脚的毛病转移到腹背，而能一体安康的。
English: The problems of the hands and feet have not been transferred to the abdomen and back, but can be healthy as a whole.

古文：味道不存忠赤，已从屏退。祎之竭忠奉上，情甚可嘉。 
现代文：骞味道不存忠心，已经贬官；刘祎之竭忠奉上，情甚可嘉。 
English: Zou Qi lacked loyalty and was demoted; Liu Bei's loyalty was highly commendable.

古文：纳言王德真对曰： 昔戴至德每有善事，必推于君。 
现代文：纳言王德真对曰： 过去戴至德每有善事，必推于君。 
English: Wang Dezhen said: In the past, every good deed done by Dai Zhizhen must be recommended to you.

古文：太后曰： 先朝每称至德能有此事，逮其终殁，有制褒崇。
现代文：太后说： 所以先朝总是称扬至德能这样为人处事，到他临终，也受到褒扬推崇。
English: The empress dowager said, "That is why the previous government always praised Ji De Neng for being such a good person, and he was praised and respected until his deathbed.

古文：为臣之道，岂过斯行，传名万代，可不善欤！ 
现代文：为臣之道，难道有超过此行的吗？这样传名万代，难道不美吗？ 
English: Does the way of being a vassal surpass this? Is it not beautiful to have one's name passed down from generation to generation?

古文：仪凤中，吐蕃为边患，高宗谓侍臣曰： 吐蕃小丑，屡犯边境，我比务在安辑，未即诛夷。
现代文：唐高宗仪凤三年，吐蕃造成边患，高宗对侍臣们说： 吐蕃小丑，屡次侵犯我边境，我们本来的任务是谋求安定和睦，未能立即诛讨夷狄。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang, when the border troubles caused by the Tuyn occurred, Gaozong said to his courtiers: "Tuyn clowns, you have repeatedly violated our borders. Our original task was to seek stability and harmony, but we failed to immediately fight against the Yidi.

古文：而戎狄豺狼，不识恩造，置之则疆场日骇，图之则未闻上策，宜论得失，各尽所怀。 
现代文：而夷狄豺狼成性，不知好歹，恩将仇报，我们放下不管则疆场日日紧张，处理它但又未有上策。现在应该议论得失，请各位各抒己见。 
English: However, it is the nature of the wolf to devour the sheep and the sheep to devour the sheep. For better or for worse, good will be repaid with evil. No matter what we do, the situation is getting more and more tense, and there is no good way to deal with it. Now we should discuss the gains and losses. Please express your own opinions.

古文：时刘景仙、郭正一、皇甫文亮、杨思征、薛元超各有所奏。
现代文：当时，刘景光、郭正一、皇甫文亮、杨思徵、薛元超各有所奏。
English: At that time, Liu Jingguang, Guo Zhengyi, Wang Fuwenliang, Yang Sijing and Xue Yuanchao each had a role.

古文：祎之时为中书舍人，对曰： 臣观自古明王圣主，皆患夷狄。
现代文：刘祎之那时是中书舍人，发表意见说： 臣看自古明王圣主，皆有夷狄之患。
English: At that time, Liu Xizhi was a person who did not care for Chinese calligraphy, and he expressed his opinion, saying, "From the viewpoint of a courtier, since the time of the ancient King Ming, everyone has suffered from Yidi.

古文：吐蕃时扰边隅，有同禽兽，得其土地，不可攸居，被其凭凌，未足为耻。
现代文：吐蕃时时骚扰边境，如同禽兽，得到他们的土地，不可居住；被他们侵扰，也算不上耻辱。
English: The Tibetan mastiffs constantly harass the border, like animals, get their land, uninhabitable; it is not a shame to be harassed by them.

古文：愿戢万乘之威，且宽百姓之役。 
现代文：愿陛下息万乘之威，且宽百姓之劳役。 
English: May His Majesty live long and prosper, and may the labor of the people be plentiful.

古文：高宗嘉其言。
现代文：高宗很赞赏他的意见。
English: Gao Zong appreciated his opinion very much.

古文：后祎之尝窃谓凤阁舍人贾大隐曰： 太后既能废昏立明，何用临朝称制？
现代文：后来，刘祎之曾私下对凤阁舍人贾大隐说： 太后既然能够废除昏君立明君，又何用自己临朝行天子事呢？
English: Later, Liu Xizhi once said privately to Fengge's concubine Jia Dayin: Since the empress dowager can abolish the emperor, why does she use herself to do the emperor's bidding?

古文：不如返政，以安天下之心。 
现代文：不如返政给皇帝，来安天下人的心。 
English: It would be better to return the government to the emperor and restore peace to the hearts of the people.

古文：大隐密奏其言。则天不悦，谓左右曰： 祎之我所引用，乃有背我之心，岂复顾我恩也！ 
现代文：贾大隐把这话密奏给武则天，武则天很不高兴，对左右的人说： 刘祎之是我所引用的人，意有背我之心，哪里还顾念我对他的恩呢！ 
English: Jia Da'in secretly played the words to Wu Zetian. Wu Zetian was very displeased and said to the people around him: "Liu Qizhi is the person I quoted, meaning he has my back. How can he still remember my kindness to him?"

古文：垂拱三年，或诬告祎之受归州都督孙万荣金，兼与许敬宗妾有私，则天特令肃州刺史王本立推鞫其事。
现代文：垂拱三年，有人诬告刘祎之收受归诚州都督孙万荣的钱财，又兼与许敬宗的妾有私情，武则天特令肃州刺史王本立审讯此案。
English: In the last three years, someone falsely accused Liu Xizhi of receiving money and property from Sun Wan Rong, the governor of Chengdu, and also of having a personal relationship with the concubine of Xu Jingzong. Wu Zetian specially ordered Wang Benli, the chief magistrate of Suizhou, to investigate the case.

古文：本立宣敕示祎之，祎之曰： 不经凤阁鸾台，何名为敕？ 
现代文：王本立宣读太后的手敕，刘祎之说： 未经过凤阁鸾台，怎么能称敕呢？ 
English: Wang Benli read out the bracelet of the empress dowager, and Liu Shizhi said: "How can you call it a bracelet without passing through the Fengge Bracelet Hall?

古文：则天大怒，以为拒捍制使，乃赐死于家，时年五十七。
现代文：武则天得知大怒，以刘祎之拒抗天子的刺史罪赐死于自己家中，时年五十七岁。
English: Wu Zetian learned of the great anger, and died in his own home at the age of fifty-seven as a result of Liu Xizhi's refusal to resist the son of Heaven.

古文：初，祎之既下狱，睿宗为之抗疏申理，祎之亲友咸以为必见原宥，窃贺之。祎之曰： 吾必死矣。
现代文：当初，刘祎之已经下狱，睿宗为他申辩，刘祎之的亲友都以为太后一定会宽宥，私下庆贺，但刘祎之说： 我必死无疑。
English: At first, Liu Xizhi had already been released from prison, and Ruizong defended him. Liu Xizhi's relatives and friends all thought that the empress dowager would surely pardon him and privately celebrated, but Liu Xizhi said, "I will surely die."

古文：太后临朝独断，威福任己，皇帝上表，徒使速吾祸也。 
现代文：太后临事独断专横，威福全由自己的心意，皇帝上表，只不过使我加速致祸罢了。 
English: The empress dowager acted arbitrarily and imperiously, Wei Fu acted entirely of her own accord, and the emperor was on the watch, which only accelerated my misfortune.

古文：祎之在狱时，尝上疏自陈。
现代文：刘祎之在狱中，曾经上疏申诉。
English: While in prison, Liu Xizhi once went to the police station to appeal.

古文：及临终，既洗沐，而神色自若，命其子执笔草谢表，其子将绝，殆不能书。监刑者促之。祎之乃自操数纸，援笔立成，词理恳至，见者无不伤痛。
现代文：到临死前，自洗沐，神色自若，命他的儿子执笔起草谢表，他的儿子见将与父亲诀别，悲痛得不能书写，监刑的人催促，刘祎之就自己拿起笔一气呵成，词理恳切，见到刘祎之谢表的人无不伤痛。
English: Before his death, he washed himself, looked confident, ordered his son to write a thank-you letter, his son saw that he would say goodbye to his father, he was so sad that he couldn't write, the prisoners urged him, Liu Xizhi picked up the pen himself and finished it in one go, the words were sincere, the people who saw Liu Xizhi's thank-you letter were all hurt.

古文：时麟台郎郭翰、太子文学周思钧共称叹其文，则天闻而恶之，左迁翰为巫州司法，思钧为播州司仓。
现代文：当时麟台郎郭翰、太子文学周思钧一起赞扬感叹他的文采。武则天听见便很讨厌他们，于是降郭翰为丞州司马，降周思钧为播州司马。
English: At that time, Guo Han, the prince of Lintai, and Zhou Siyi, the prince of literature, praised and lamented his literary skills together. Wu Zetian hated them when he heard them, so he demoted Guo Han to the position of Zhengzhou Sima and demoted Zhou Siyi to the position of Banzhou Sima.

古文：睿宗即位，以祎之宫府旧僚，追赠中书令。
现代文：睿宗即位，以刘祎之为宫府旧僚，追赠中书令。
English: Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne, with Liu Xuan as an old colleague of the imperial court, posthumously presented the imperial edict.

古文：有集七十卷，传于时。
现代文：有文集七十卷，传于当时。
English: There are seventy volumes of the anthology, handed down at that time.

古文：魏玄同，定州鼓城人也。
现代文：魏玄同，定州鼓城人。
English: Wei Xundong, from Dingzhou, Gucheng.

古文：举进士。累转司列大夫。
现代文：他中举进士，后长时任司列大夫。
English: He was promoted to the rank of junior doctor, and later became a senior doctor.

古文：坐与上官仪文章属和，配流岭外。
现代文：因与上官仪文章唱和而受牵连，流配岭外。
English: He was implicated because he sang along with the article on official ceremonies, and he was out of the mainstream.

古文：上元初赦还。工部尚书刘审礼荐玄同有时务之才，拜岐州长史。累迁至吏部侍郎。
现代文：上元初年赦免回京，工部尚书刘审礼推荐他，称赞他有时务之才，拜岐州长史，直升迁到吏部侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Shangyuan era, he was pardoned and returned to Beijing. He was recommended by Liu Xunli of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, praised for his time management ability, and was quickly transferred to the staff of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：玄同以既委选举，恐未尽得人之术，乃上疏曰：
现代文：魏玄同因自己担当了选拔人才的职责，担心不能很好运用选人定职之术，就在这方面写了很有价值的书面意见上呈皇上，内容大义是：
English: Wei Xuan Tong, because he was responsible for the selection of talents, worried that he could not make good use of the skill of selecting and appointing people. In this regard, he wrote a very valuable written opinion to the emperor, the content of which is:

古文：臣闻制器者必择匠以简材，为国者必求贤以莅官。
现代文： 臣闻制造器物一定要择其好工匠；治理国家一定要求贤用贤。
English: A vassal must choose a good craftsman to make utensils; the governance of the country must require a virtuous person.

古文：匠之不良，无以成其工；官之非贤，无以致于理。
现代文：匠不良，无法做出好器物；官不贤，无法按规律治国。
English: A bad craftsman cannot make a good vessel; a bad official cannot rule the country according to the law.

古文：君者，所以牧人也；臣者，所以佐君也。
现代文：国君，是来管理天下人民的；臣子，是来辅佐国君的。
English: The sovereign is there to govern the people of the world; the vassals are there to assist the sovereign.

古文：君不养人，失君道矣；臣不辅君，失臣任矣。
现代文：如果国君不能安养百姓，就失去了君道；臣子不能辅佐国君，就丧失了臣子的职责。
English: If the sovereign is unable to support the people, he has lost the royal road; if the vassal is unable to assist the sovereign, he has lost the duties of a vassal.

古文：任人者，诚国家之基本，百姓之安危也。
现代文：任用人才，实在是国家的根本，与人民的安危相联。
English: The appointment of talent is really the foundation of the country and is closely linked to the safety and security of the people.

古文：方今人不加富，盗贼不衰，狱公未清，礼义犹阙者，何也？
现代文：现在的状况是百姓没有变富，盗贼也没有减，狱讼冤曲也未理清，礼仪法度也不齐全。
English: The current situation is that the people have not become rich, the thieves have not decreased, the prison lawsuits have not been resolved, and the etiquette laws are not complete.

古文：下吏不称职，庶官非其才也。
现代文：这是什么原因呢？主要是下吏不称职，众官非其才。
English: What is the reason for this? It is mainly due to the incompetence of subordinate officials and the incompetence of officials.

古文：官之不得其才者，取人之道，有所未尽也。
现代文：官之不得其才，取人之道，也就有没有用好的地方。
English: There is no place for talent in government, and there is no place for talent in recruiting.

古文：臣又闻传说曰： 明王奉若天道，建邦设都，树后王君公，承以大夫师长，不惟逸豫，惟以理人。 
现代文： 臣又闻傅说说： 英明的帝王奉顺天道，建邦设都，设置后王君公，大夫师长，不只是为了让自己逸豫，更重要的在于更有效地治理百姓。 
English: The vassal also heard Fu say, "The wise emperor followed the heavenly way, built a country and set up a capital, set up a queen regent, a doctor and a teacher, not only to make himself hesitant, but more importantly to govern the people more effectively."

古文：昔之邦国，今之州县，士有常君，人有定主，自求臣佐，各选英贤，其大臣乃命于王朝耳。
现代文：古代的邦国，就如现在的州县，土有常君，人有定主，各自选择英贤辅佐之才，而宰相等大臣则由朝廷任命。
English: Ancient states, just like present-day prefectures and counties, were ruled by a common ruler. People had their own leaders, and each chose their own wise men and women, while prime ministers and other ministers were appointed by the imperial court.

古文：秦并天下，罢侯置守，汉氏因之，有沿有革。
现代文：秦朝兼并天下，除封建割据，设置州郡地方官，汉代袭用，有沿有革。
English: The Qin Dynasty annexed the whole country, and in addition to the feudal partition, set up state and county local officials, which were used during the Han Dynasty.

古文：诸侯得自置吏四百石以下，其傅相大官，则汉为置之。
现代文：侯王设置官吏限制在四百石以下，其太傅宰相等大官，则由汉王朝设置。
English: Princes set a limit of less than 400 koku for government officials, while the Han Dynasty set a limit of more than 400 koku for high-ranking officials such as taifu and chancellors.

古文：州郡掾吏、督邮从事，悉任之于牧守。
现代文：州郡掾吏、督邮、从事等官职，全部由州郡长官来任命。
English: County magistrates, postmasters, and other officials are all appointed by county governors.

古文：爰自魏、晋，始归吏部，递相祖袭，以迄于今。
现代文：这样一直到魏晋，才开始将所有官员归入吏部任命。这样一直延用到现在。
English: It wasn't until the Wei and Jin dynasties that all officials began to be assigned to the cadre department, and this has continued to the present day.

古文：用刀笔以量才，案簿书而察行，法令之弊，其来自久。
现代文：现在选用人的特点是 ：用笔来量才，看档案来察行。 这样的弊病，由来已久。
English: The characteristics of the current selection of people are: use the pen to measure, look at the file to investigate.Such a disease has been around for a long time.

古文：盖君子重因循而惮改作，有不得已者，亦当运独见之明，定卓然之议。
现代文： 大概是由于君子重因循而害怕改革，如有不得已的情况，也只是运独见之明，定卓然之议。
English: It is probably due to the fact that the gentleman is afraid of reform, and if there is a last-resort situation, it is only a matter of being clear-sighted and determined.

古文：如今选司所行者，非上皇之令典，乃近代之权道，所宜迁徙，实为至要。
现代文：如今的人事官员所行的，不是圣王的好的法典，而是近代的权道，这实在应当改革，这非常重要。
English: What today's personnel officials are doing is not the good code of the holy king, but the modern way of power. This really should be reformed, this is very important.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：夫尺丈之量，所及者盖短；钟庾之器，所积者宁多。
现代文：例如尺丈之量，所能及者短；斗升之器，所积者怎么会多。
English: For example, the measure of a ruler is short for those who can reach it; the bucket is tall for those who can accumulate it.

古文：非其所及，焉能度之；非其所受，何以容之？
现代文：尺丈不能及，怎么能量呢；斗升不能受，怎么能容得了呢？
English: If you can't match the length, how can you match the power? If you can't stand the height, how can you tolerate it?

古文：况天下之大，士人之众，而可委之数人之手乎？
现代文：何况天下之大，士人之众，却委托于几个人的手上呢？
English: Besides, how can it be that the greatest power in the world is entrusted to the hands of a few men?

古文：假使平如权衡，明如水镜，力有所极，照有所穷，铨综既多，紊失斯广。
现代文：一个人的能力是有限度的，天下选才之事都集中几人手中，肯定会出现不全和紊乱之毛病。
English: A person's ability is limited, the world's talent selection is concentrated in the hands of a few people, and there will certainly be problems of incompleteness and disorder.

古文：又以比居此任，时有非人。岂直愧彼清通，昧于甄察；亦将竟其庸妄，糅彼棼丝。情故既行，何所不至？脏私一启，以及万端。至乃为人择官，为身择利，顾亲疏而下笔，看势要而措情。
现代文：再说居此任的人，不一定称职，昧于甄别察审，只是尽其庸妄，糊涂官理糊涂案，一旦讲情面看私交盛行，什么样的无理事都能做；一旦贪赃营私开头，千奇百怪的坏现象也会出现，这样就形成为人择官，为身择利，看亲疏而下笔，顾势要而措情。
English: Moreover, the person holding this post is not necessarily competent, is not concerned with screening and inspection, but only does his or her best to be delusional, muddles up officialdom, and muddles up cases. Once personal interest prevails, all kinds of irresponsible things can be done; once corruption begins, all kinds of strange bad phenomena will also appear. In this way, it will become a person-selecting official, for personal benefit, looking at relatives and distancing, and taking advantage of the situation.

古文：悠悠风尘，此焉奔兢；扰扰游宦，同乎市井。
现代文：官场之中，竞相投靠；巧言令色，同于市井。
English: In the officialdom, there is a competition for patronage; in the city and in the country, clever words are the order of the day.

古文：加以厚貌深衷，险如溪壑，择言观行，犹惧不周。
现代文：加之以厚貌深藏机心，险如溪壑，择言观行，尚惧不周。
English: In addition, he has a thick-set face and deep-rooted cunning. He is not afraid of taking risks and choosing his words and actions carefully.

古文：今使百行九能，折之于一面，具僚庶品，专断于一司，不亦难矣！
现代文：今天百行折之于一面，众官专断于一司，这样选才任贤不是太难了吗。
English: Today, a hundred lines are folded on one side, and all officials are arbitrarily in one department. Isn't it too difficult to select and appoint talents in this way?

古文：且魏人应运，所据者乃三分；晋氏播迁，所临者非一统。逮乎齐、宋，以及周、隋，战争之日多，安泰之时少，瓜分瓦裂，各在一方。
现代文： 而且魏代只据天下的三分之一；晋代所处的是没有一统的状况，到齐、宋，以至周、隋，战争之日多，安泰之时少，天下分裂，各据一方。
English: Moreover, the Wei Dynasty only ruled one-third of the world; the Jin Dynasty was in a situation where there was no uniformity. From the Qi and Song Dynasties to the Zhou and Sui Dynasties, there were more days of war and fewer days of peace. The world was divided and each side ruled.

古文：天祚大圣，享国永年，比屋可封，异人间出。咸以为有道耻贱，得时无怠，诸色入流，岁以千计。
现代文：隋代平静，太平之时仅十多年罢了，接着又起兵祸，继之以饥馑，德业既未有成，世事也应接不暇，不能说非古而是今。
English: The Sui Dynasty was calm, and the time of peace was only more than ten years old. Then the military disaster occurred, followed by famine. Virtue has not been achieved, and the world is busy. It cannot be said that it is not ancient, but it is now.

古文：群司列位，无复新加，官有常员，人无定限。
现代文：武德年代、贞观年代，也与今有异，当时开国草创，不仅国事繁多无空闲，而且也缺乏人才。到今天，享国永年，比屋可封，人才间出。
English: The age of virtue and chastity is also different from today. At the time of the founding of the country, not only were there many national affairs and no leisure, but there was also a lack of talent. To this day, the country has been around for a long time, and talent is emerging.

古文：选集之始，雾积云屯，擢叙于终，十不收一。
现代文：选集之始，雾积云屯，选用之后，十不收一。
English: At the beginning of the anthology, everything was foggy and cloudy. After the anthology was selected, there was no response at all.

古文：淄渑杂混，玉石难分，用舍去留，得失相半。
现代文：但因玉石难分，用舍去留，得失相半。
English: However, because the jade is difficult to separate, it is better to stay with the jade.

古文：抚即事之为弊，知及后之滋失。
现代文：研究人事上的弊病，应明白今后的补救。
English: When researching personnel problems, it is important to know what the future remedy will be.

古文：夏、殷已前，制度多阙，周监二代，焕乎可睹。
现代文： 夏代、殷代以前，制度多缺。周朝借鉴夏殷，可以清楚地看到。
English: Before the Xia and Yin dynasties, many systems were lacking. It can be clearly seen that the Zhou dynasty borrowed from the Xia and Yin dynasties.

古文：岂诸侯之臣，不皆命于天子，王朝庶官，亦不专于一职。
现代文：这就是诸侯以下的官吏，不是全由天子任命，朝廷的众官，也不是专于一职。
English: These are the officials below the princes, not all of whom were appointed by the Son of Heaven, and the officials of the imperial court, not all of whom are dedicated to one post.

古文：故周穆王以伯冏为太仆正，命之曰： 慎简乃僚，无以巧言令色便僻侧媚，唯吉士。 
现代文：所以周穆王任命伯礒做太仆正时说 ：慎重地选拔你的下属，不要把巧言令色、偏辟侧媚的人当贤士误用。 
English: Therefore, when King Zhou Mu appointed Bo Xuan to be his eunuch Zheng, he said, "Choose your subordinates carefully, and don't misuse those who are persuasive and flattering as sages."

古文：此则令其自择下吏之文也。
现代文：这就是当时天子令诸侯自择下吏的实证。
English: This is the empirical evidence that officials were chosen by the princes at that time by the order of heaven.

古文：太仆正，中大夫耳，尚以僚属委之，则三公九卿，亦必然矣。
现代文：太仆正，只不过是中大夫，这样的官也可任命自己的僚属，那么三公九卿，也必然可以自选僚属了。
English: Taigu Zheng is just a middle-ranking official. Such an official can also appoint his own subordinates, so the three princes and nine nobles can also choose their own subordinates.

古文：夫委任责成，君之体也，所委者当，所用者精，故能得济济之多士，盛芃芃之棫朴。
现代文：再则《周礼》上规定太宰、内史，共同掌诏事。当是分职任于群司，但统起来只以数职。
English: Furthermore, the "Weekly Ritual" stipulates that the Dazaifu and Naishi should jointly be in charge of the imperial edict. The duties should be assigned to the Gunji, but only a few positions should be unified.

古文：裴子野有言曰： 官人之难，先王言之尚矣。
现代文：各人又去任命自己的下属，天子只任命大官。这样委任，所委者当，所用者精，因此贤人众多，国家繁荣兴盛。 裴子野有言： 任官之难，先王之备述之。
English: Each person went to appoint his own subordinates, but the Son of Heaven only appointed high-ranking officials. In this way, those who were appointed were important, and those who were used were fine. As a result, there were many wise men, and the country prospered. Peizhino had a saying: "It is difficult to appoint officials, as described by the former king."

古文：居家视其孝友，乡党服其诚信，出入观其志义，忧欢取其智谋。烦之以事，以观其能；临之以利，以察其廉。
现代文：平时视其孝友；乡里中诚信服人，言行举止，观其志义；忧患祸难，取其智谋；以工作重担压他，来观其才能；以财利委托他，来察其廉洁。
English: In ordinary times, he regards them as his filial pals; in the countryside, he treats them with sincerity, and observes their words, deeds, and manners to see their righteousness; in times of trouble and calamity, he takes their wisdom and strategy; he presses them with the heavy burden of work to see their talents; he entrusts them with financial interests to see their integrity.

古文：《周礼》始于学校，论之州里，告诸六事，而后贡之王庭。
现代文：《周礼》中讲官吏即于学校培养，在州里选择，告知他们政事，然后向朝廷举荐。
English: According to "Weekly Ritual," officials are trained in schools, selected in prefectures, informed of government affairs, and then recommended to the imperial court.

古文：其在汉家，尚犹然矣。
现代文：到汉代，仍然如此。
English: Until the Han Dynasty, this was still the case.

古文：州郡积其功能，然后为五府所辟，五府举其掾属而升于朝，三公参得除署，尚书奏之天子。
现代文：在州郡干出成绩，然后被五府征用，五府举荐自己的佐治之吏到朝廷，三公审参给予授职，尚书上奏天子。
English: He did his best in the prefecture and county, and then was requisitioned by the five prefectures. The five prefectures recommended their officials to the imperial court, and the three public trials were awarded the post.

古文：一人之身，所关者众；一士之进，其谋也详。
现代文：一人的任职，所关者众，一士之进，其考核极细。
English: One person's post, many people concerned, one person's advancement, its assessment is very fine.

古文：故官得其人，鲜有败事。
现代文：所以官能得其人，很少有败事的。
English: Therefore, if one's ability is good, one will rarely be defeated.

古文：魏、晋反是，所失弘多。 
现代文：魏、晋反之，所受的损失也很大。 
English: Wei and Jin, on the other hand, also suffered great losses.

古文：子野所论，盖区区之宋朝耳，犹谓不胜其弊，而况于当今乎！
现代文：裴子野所论，只是南北朝的一个小小的宋朝，还认为不胜其弊，而况于当今呢！
English: According to Peizhino, it is just a small Song Dynasty of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, and it is still considered to be no better than its drawbacks, and even more so today!

古文：又夫从政莅官，不可以无学。
现代文： 再者从政为官，不可以无学。
English: Moreover, if you want to be a politician, you can't be uneducated.

古文：故《书》曰： 学古入官，议事以制。 
现代文：所以《尚书》中说 ：学古入官，议事以制。 
English: Therefore, it is said in "Shoshu" (the Imperial Rescript) that it is better to be a student before entering the government, and to have a deliberation system.

古文：《传》曰： 我闻学以从政，不闻以政入学。 
现代文：《左传》曰： 我闻学而后从政，不闻以政入学。 
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: I heard about learning and then went into politics, but I didn't hear about going to school for politics.

古文：今贵戚子弟，例早求官，髫龀之年，已腰银艾，或童草之岁，已袭硃紫。
现代文：今贵戚子弟，多早求官，小小年纪，腰配银印青绶，有的在束发如两角的年龄，已经承袭高官。
English: Now, the sons and daughters of noble families, many of whom aspire to high-ranking positions at an early age, are small in age, with silver-embossed youthful hips, and some of whom have hair as long as two horns, have already inherited high-ranking positions.

古文：弘文崇贤之生，千牛辇脚之类，课试既浅，艺能亦薄，而门阀有素，资望自高。
现代文：弘文馆崇贤馆的生员，宫内的侍从禁卫，课试既浅，能力也薄，但是门阀有素，门第声望自然也高。
English: The students of the Chongxian Hall of the Hongwen Hall, the palace attendants of the palace guards, have shallow examinations and weak abilities, but they have good gate valves, and their reputation is naturally high.

古文：夫象贤继父，古之道也。
现代文：父子事业相承，本是古人之道。
English: The father-son business is inherited, which is the way of the ancients.

古文：所谓胄子，必裁诸学，修六礼以节其性，明七教以兴其德，齐八政以防其淫，举上贤以崇德，简不肖以黜恶。
现代文：所说的王侯的长子，一定要考核他们，修六礼来节其性，明七教来兴其德，学全施政的八方面来防其淫乱，尊敬贤人来崇尚道德，批评不肖来除掉丑恶。
English: The eldest son of the prince mentioned must examine them, perform six rites to establish their character, clarify seven teachings to promote their virtue, learn the eight aspects of governance to prevent their immorality, respect the wise to promote morality, and criticize the ugly to eliminate the ugly.

古文：少则受业，长而出仕，并由德进，必以才升，然后可以利用宾王，移家事国。
现代文：少年受业，长大做官，均由德进，必凭才能而提升，这样而后才能治国理家有益。
English: Adolescents enter the profession, grow up to become officials, and are promoted by virtue, and must be promoted by talent. Only then can it be beneficial to govern the country.

古文：少仕则废学，轻试则无才，于此一流，良足惜也。又勋官三卫流外之徒，不待州县之举，直取之于书判，恐非先德而后言才之义也。
现代文：小小年纪做官而废学，轻考试而无才，像这类的人，也实在可惜，再者九品以下的官员，不待州县推荐，直接取之于书判，这恐怕不是先德而后讲才的意见。
English: It is a real pity that people of this type do not study when they become officials at a young age, and do not have the ability to pass examinations. Moreover, officials below the ninth grade do not wait for the recommendation of the state and county, but directly take it from the book. I am afraid that this is not the opinion of talking about talent first.

古文：臣又以为国之用人，有似人之用财。
现代文： 臣又认为治理国家用人才，就像人之用财。
English: The minister also believes that the management of state-employed talent is like the use of people's money.

古文：贫者厌糟糠，思短褐；富者余粮肉，衣轻裘。
现代文：贫者满足于糟糠，希望得到粗麻布短衣；富人厌粮肉，思轻裘。
English: The poor are content with dross, and hope for coarse linen breeches; the rich are weary of grain and meat, and think lightly of cloth.

古文：方之用才，理亦当尔，选人幸多，尤宜简练。
现代文：然而当缺乏贤人的时候，就可以磨钝器策驽马而乘驭。在太平多士之日，就应精益求精而选人才。选才就要面广，尤其应该精选。
English: However, when there is a lack of wise men, it is possible to sharpen a blunt instrument and ride a horse. On the day of the Justice of the Peace, it is necessary to select talents with excellence. Selection should be wide-ranging, and in particular, it should be carefully selected.

古文：臣窃见制书，每令三品、五品荐士，下至九品，亦令举人，此圣朝侧席旁求之意也。
现代文：臣见制书，每令三品、五品荐士，下至九品，也令举荐，这是圣朝广求人才之意。
English: In the book industry, for every promotion up to the third and fifth grades, a recommendation is made, and for every promotion down to the ninth grade, a recommendation is also made. This is the meaning of the Holy Dynasty's wide search for talent.

古文：但以褒贬不甚明，得失无大隔，故人上不忧黜责，下不尽搜扬，苟以应命，莫慎所举。且惟贤知贤，圣人笃论，伊、皋既举，不仁咸远。
现代文：但因为褒贬不甚明，得失无大碍，故人升了官不忧处分受责，降了职也不尽搜扬。如果应征任职，也没有谨慎自己的行为的，况且贤人了解贤人，圣人识才，伊、皋这些贤人既举荐，不仁的就自然会离得远。
English: However, because the praise and blame are not very clear, and the gain and loss are not serious, the person who has been promoted does not worry about the punishment and responsibility, and the person who has been demoted does not do a thorough search. If you apply for a post, you do not have to be careful about your behavior, moreover, the wise man knows the wise man, the sage knows the talent, and the sage recommends these wise men, and those who are not kind will naturally be far away.

古文：今欲务得实才，兼宜择其举主。
现代文：所以今天要想真正得到贤才，也要慎重地择其举荐贤才的人。
English: So today, if you really want to get a talented person, you should also carefully select the person who recommends the talented person.

古文：流清以源洁，影端由表正，不详举主之行能，而责举人之庸滥，不可得已。
现代文：流清就是因为源洁，影正就是由于身正，不认真细致了解选才之官的品行，却一味责备被举人人才庸滥，这样是不可能得到真才的。
English: It is impossible to get a true talent if one does not carefully and meticulously understand the conduct of the talent selection officer, but only blames the talent being selected for being mediocre.

古文：《汉书》云： 张耳、陈余之宾客、厮役，皆天下俊杰。 
现代文： 《汉书》上说： 张耳、陈余的宾客、厮役，都是天下的俊杰。 
English: "The Book of Han" said: Zhang Er and Chen Yu's guests and attendants are the best in the world.

古文：伏愿稍回圣虑，时采刍言，略依周、汉之规，以分吏部之选。即望所用精详，鲜于差失。疏奏不纳。
现代文：他们只不过是小人物，尚且能如此，何况以皇上的圣明，国家的德业，如果不建长久之策略，打好深厚的基础，用好得贤取士之术，一味顾望魏晋留下的不好风尚，臣窃以为这样是不明智的，伏愿陛下认真考虑，采纳良言，依照周代、汉代的好规矩，来把好吏部选才这一关。 魏玄同的建议未被采纳。
English: They are just petty people, yet they can do so, not to mention the wisdom of the emperor, the virtue of the country, if they do not build a long-term strategy, lay a deep foundation, use the skill of being a good man, and blindly follow the bad customs left by Wei and Jin. The vassal thought that this was unwise. I hope that His Majesty will seriously consider, adopt good advice, and follow the good rules of the Zhou and Han dynasties to select good officials. Wei Xuan Tong's suggestion was not adopted.

古文：弘道初，转文昌左丞，兼地官尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：弘道初年，魏玄同转任文昌左丞，兼地官尚书，代理宰相。
English: In the first year of Hongdao, Wei Xuantong was transferred to the post of Wenchang Zuo, concurrently local official Shangshu, and acting prime minister.

古文：则天临朝，迁太中大夫、鸾台侍郎，依前知政事。
现代文：武则天临朝，调任太中大夫、鸾台侍郎，仍然行宰相之职权。
English: Wu Zetian ascended to the throne, and was transferred to the post of Taichung Daifu (Grand Vice-Minister of the Central Military Commission) and Xingtai Jiro (Minister of the Central Military Commission), while still exercising the powers of the Prime Minister.

古文：垂拱三年，加银青光禄大夫，检校纳言，封钜鹿男。
现代文：垂拱三年，魏玄同加授银青光禄大夫之职，加任检校纳言，封钜鹿男。
English: In the past three years, Wei Xuan has been awarded the title of silver Qingguanglu doctor, appointed as a school inspector, and awarded the title of elk man.

古文：玄同素与裴炎结交，能保始终，时人呼为 耐久朋 。而与酷吏周兴不协。
现代文：魏玄同平时与裴炎交好，能始终保持友好，时人称赞为 耐久朋 ；但他与酷吏周兴不协调。
English: Wei Xuan Tong was usually on good terms with Pei Yan, and could always maintain a friendly relationship. At that time, he was praised as a "durable friend"; however, he did not get along with the cruel official Zhou Xing.

古文：永昌初，为周兴所构，云玄同言： 太后老矣，须复皇嗣。 
现代文：在永昌初年，被周兴陷害，说魏玄同讲太后已经老了，应当让皇位给皇帝。
English: In the first year of Yongchang, he was framed by Zhou Xing, saying that Wei Xuan Tong said that the empress dowager was old and should give the throne to the emperor.

古文：太后闻之，怒，乃赐死于家。
现代文：武则天听了，大怒，于是赐他死在自己的住宅。
English: Wu Zetian heard this and was furious, so he ordered him to die in his own house.

古文：监刑御史房济谓玄同曰： 何不告事，冀得召见，当自陈诉。 
现代文：监刑御史房济对魏玄同说 ：何不申告，如能得到召见，当自陈冤曲。 
English: The chief inspector of prisons, Fang Ji, said to Wei Xuantong, "Why don't you declare it? If you can be summoned, you should confess your wrongdoings."

古文：玄同叹曰： 人杀鬼杀，有何殊也，岂能为告人事乎！ 
现代文：魏玄同叹道： 人杀鬼杀，有什么不同，哪里能告人事？ 
English: Wei Xuan also lamented: What's the difference between killing people and killing ghosts? Where can I sue?

古文：乃就刑，年七十三。
现代文：于是就刑，死时七十三岁。
English: He was sentenced to death and died at the age of seventy-three.

古文：子恬，开元中为颍王傅。李昭德，京兆长安人也。
现代文：李昭德，京兆长安人。
English: Li Zhaode, a resident of Beijing-Shanghai-Chang'an.

古文：父乾祐，贞观初为殿中侍御史。
现代文：父李乾，唐太宗贞观初年曾任殿中侍御史。
English: His father, Li Qian, had served as a palace attendant in the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang.

古文：时有鄃令裴仁轨私役门夫，太宗欲斩之。
现代文：当时，有一个俞县县令，名叫裴仁轨，他役使县衙的门夫干私事，唐太宗想重罚斩掉这县令。
English: At that time, there was a county magistrate of Jixian County, named Pei Renglu, who served as the gatekeeper of the county magistrate to do private business. Tang Taizong wanted to severely punish and cut off this county magistrate.

古文：乾祐奏曰： 法令者，陛下制之于上，率土尊之于下，与天下共之，非陛下独有也。
现代文：李乾奏道： 法令，陛下在上面制定出来，在下的所有人都要遵守，这就成了陛下与天下人共同遵守的律法，并不是陛下独有的。
English: Li Qianso said, "Your Majesty's decrees are formulated from above and must be obeyed by everyone below. This has become a law that Your Majesty and the rest of the world must abide by. It is not unique to Your Majesty.

古文：仁轨犯轻罪而致极刑，是乖画一之理。刑罚不中，则人无所措手足。
现代文：裴仁轨犯的是轻罪，而判的是重刑，这是与划一的律令相违背的，执法如果不按条律，那么天下的人就无措手足。
English: Pei Renlu committed a misdemeanor, but was sentenced to a heavy sentence, which is contrary to the uniform law. If the law is not enforced according to the rules, then people around the world will be caught off guard.

古文：臣忝宪司，不敢奉制。 
现代文：臣被委任做了司法官，不敢违法而奉命。 
English: The vassal was appointed as a judicial officer. He did not dare to break the law and was ordered to do so.

古文：太宗意解，仁轨竟免。
现代文：唐太宗理解了这一点，裴仁轨竟免于刑法处分。
English: Tang Taizong understood this, and Pei Renlu was exempted from criminal punishment.

古文：乾祐寻迁侍御史。
现代文：李乾不久升迁，做了侍御史。
English: Li Qian was soon promoted and became a chamberlain.

古文：母卒，庐于墓侧，负土成坟，太宗遣使就墓吊之，仍旌表其门。
现代文：李昭德的祖母去世时，他父亲李乾在墓侧筑庐而居，自己负土成坟。唐太宗派使到墓前吊祭，并旌表他们的门庭。
English: When Li Zhaode's grandmother died, his father, Li Qian, built a coffin on the side of the grave and lived there. He carried the soil into the grave himself. The Tang Taizong sect sent a messenger to the grave to make a hanging offering and decorate their courtyard.

古文：后历长安令、治书御史，皆有能名，擢拜御史大夫。
现代文：李乾后来历任长安令、治书御史，都有能干的美名。
English: Later, Li Qian's successors, Chang'anling and Zhishuo, gained a reputation for their ability.

古文：乾祐与中书令褚遂良不协，竟为遂良所构。
现代文：后拜御史大夫，与中书令褚遂良不协调，竟被褚遂良设计陷害。
English: Later, Dr. Pai, who was not in harmony with the Chinese edict of Gong Suiliang, was set up by Gong Suiliang's design.

古文：永徽初，继受邢、魏等州刺史。
现代文：永徽初年，相继任邢、魏等州的刺史。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, he was successively appointed as the chief historian of Min, Wei and other states.

古文：乾祐虽强直有器干，而昵于小人，既典外郡，与令史结友，书疏往返，令伺朝廷之事。
现代文：李乾虽然强直能干，但是与小人亲近，他在京外任职，却与令史结友，书信往来，叫令史打听朝廷之事。
English: Although Li Qian was strong and capable, he was close to the villain. He worked outside of Beijing, but made friends with Ling Shi, exchanged letters, and asked Ling Shi to inquire about the imperial court.

古文：俄为友人所发，坐流爱州。
现代文：不久，被友人揭发，流放到爱州。
English: Soon, he was exposed by a friend and exiled to Aizhou.

古文：乾封中，起为桂州都督，历拜司刑太常伯。
现代文：乾封元年，李乾被起用任桂州都督，历任司刑太常伯。
English: In the first year of Qianfeng, Li Qian was appointed as the governor of Guizhou, and the successive chief magistrate was Tai Changbo.

古文：举京兆功曹参军崔擢为尚书郎，事既不果，私以告擢。后擢有犯，乃告乾祐泄禁中语以赎罪，乾祐复坐免官。
现代文：他曾举荐京兆功曹参军崔擢为尚书郎。但事未成，就偷偷把内情告诉崔擢，后来，崔擢犯了错误，就告李乾泄露禁中话语来为自己赎罪，于是李乾被免官。
English: He once recommended General Choi Chuan, a member of the Beijing Zhaogong Cao Army, to become Shang Shulang. However, things did not work out, so he secretly told Choi Chuan the inside story. Later, Choi Chuan made a mistake and accused Li Qian of leaking the banned words to atone for his sins. As a result, Li Qian was removed from office.

古文：寻卒。
现代文：不久去世。
English: He died soon after.

古文：昭德，即乾祐之孽子也。
现代文：李昭德，就是李乾的儿子。
English: Li Zhaode is the son of Li Qian.

古文：强干有父风。少举明经，累迁至凤阁侍郎。
现代文：强干有父风，少年时就以明经科中举，做官升到凤阁侍郎。
English: Strong-willed like his father, when he was a boy, he was promoted to the position of Fengge waiter.

古文：长寿二年，增置夏官侍郎三员，时选昭德与娄师德、侯知一为之。
现代文：长寿二年，朝廷增置夏官侍郎三员，当时选李昭德与娄师德、侯知一担任。
English: Two years after his death, the imperial court added three more attendants to the summer official, and selected Li Zhaode, Gong Shide, and Hou Zhiyi to serve at that time.

古文：是岁，又迁凤阁鸾台平章事，寻加检校内史。
现代文：这年，他又升任凤阁鸾台平章事，即代理宰相之职，不久又加检校内史之职。
English: In the same year, he was promoted to Fengge Xingtai Pingzhangji, that is, the post of acting prime minister, and soon he was promoted to the post of inspector of school history.

古文：长寿中，神都改作文昌台及定鼎、上东诸门，又城外郭，皆昭德创其制度，时人以为能。
现代文：长寿中，京都改建文昌台和定鼎、上东等门，又在城外建外郭，这都是李昭德所创建的，时人认为他很有能力。
English: During his long life, Li Zhaode built Wenchangdai, Dingding, Shangdong and other gates in Kyoto, as well as outbuildings outside the city. These were all built by Li Zhaode, and people at the time thought he was very capable.

古文：初，都城洛水天津之东，立德坊西南隅，有中桥及利涉桥，以通行李。
现代文：当初，都城洛水天津的东边，立德坊的西南角，有中桥和利涉桥，用来通行人。
English: In the beginning, the east side of the capital city of Luoshui Tianjin, the southwest corner of Lide Square, had the Middle Bridge and the Lishu Bridge, which were used by passers-by.

古文：上元中，司农卿韦机始移中桥置于安众坊之左街，当长夏门，都人甚以为便，因废利涉桥，所省万计。
现代文：上元二年，司农卿韦机才移中桥到安众坊的左街，对着长夏门，京都的人都认为很方便，因此利涉桥废而不用。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Secretary of Agriculture Wei Jizai moved the bridge to the left street of Anzhuangfang, opposite the Changxia Gate. People in Kyoto thought it was very convenient, so the bridge was scrapped and not used.

古文：然岁为洛水冲注，常劳治葺。
现代文：节省钱财以万计。但是经常被洛水冲击，必须经常出劳力修治。
English: Save money by tens of thousands. However, it is often hit by floods, and must be repaired by labor.

古文：昭德创意积石为脚，锐其前以分水势，自是竟无漂损。
现代文：李昭德创意堆积石头桥墩，使对着流水的部位成尖形来分水势，从此，竟未出现洛水冲刷损坏的情况。
English: Li Zhaode creatively piled up stone piers, making the part facing the flowing water into a pointed shape to divide the water potential. Since then, there has been no damage caused by the rushing water.

古文：时则天以武承嗣为文昌左相，昭德密奏曰： 承嗣，陛下之侄，又是亲王，不宜更在机权，以惑众庶。且自古帝王，父子之间犹相篡夺，况在姑侄，岂得委权与之？
现代文：当时，武则天以武承嗣为文昌左相，李昭德密奏： 武承嗣是陛下的侄儿，又是亲王，不宜加上机要的重权，来使众百姓生惑，况且自古帝王，父子之间，犹相篡夺权力，何况在姑侄呢，哪里能把重要权力委托给他呢？
English: At that time, Wu Zetian appointed Wu Chengzhi as the left minister of Wenchang, Li Zhaode played a secret role: Wu Chengzhi is the nephew of His Majesty, and he is also a prince. It is not appropriate to add the weight of authority to confuse the people. Moreover, since ancient times, emperors, between father and son, have usurped power, let alone in the nephew, where can important power be entrusted to him?

古文：脱若乘便，宝位宁可安乎？ 
现代文：如果他不受控制，随心用权，陛下的宝位怎么可能安稳呢？ 
English: How can His Majesty's throne be secure if he is not under control and can do as he pleases?

古文：则天矍然曰： 我未之思也。 
现代文：武则天惊惧地说： 我未考虑到这一方面。 
English: Wu Zetian said in alarm: I did not consider this aspect.

古文：承嗣亦尝返谮昭德，则天曰： 自我任昭德，每获高卧，是代我劳苦，非汝所及也。 
现代文：武承嗣也曾返告李昭德不是，武则天说 ：自从我任用昭德，总能高卧心宁，他能代我劳苦，不是你能赶得上的。 
English: Wu Chengzhi also replied that Li Zhaode was not. Wu Zetian said, "Since I appointed Zhaode, I have always been able to sleep peacefully. He can work hard for me. It is not something you can catch up with."

古文：承嗣俄转太子少保，罢知政事。
现代文：武承嗣不久转任太子少保，罢去参与政事的职务。
English: Soon after, Wu Chengzi was transferred to the position of the Prince's Junior Bodyguard, and was removed from his position to participate in government affairs.

古文：延载初，凤阁舍人张嘉福令洛阳人王庆之率轻薄恶少数百人诣阙上表，请立武承嗣为皇太子。
现代文：延载初年，凤阁舍人张嘉福指使洛阳人王庆之率轻薄恶少数百人到朝廷上表，请求立武承嗣为太子。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Jiafu, the ruler of Fengge, ordered Wang Qingzhi, a Luoyang native, to lead a small group of a few hundred people to petition the imperial court to make Wu Chengshi the crown prince.

古文：则天不许，庆之固请不已，则天令昭德诘责之，令散。
现代文：武则天不许，王庆之坚持请求没完没了。武则天令李昭德责问他们，才使他们散去。
English: Wu Zetian did not allow it, and Wang Qingzhi's persistent requests were endless. Wu Zetian ordered Li Zhaode to interrogate them, and only then did they disperse.

古文：昭德便杖杀庆之，余众乃息。
现代文：随即李昭德便用杖打死王庆之，余众才息。
English: Li Zhaode then beat Wang Qingzhi to death with a cane.

古文：昭德因奏曰： 臣闻文武之道，布在方策，民有侄为天子而为姑立庙乎！
现代文：李昭德因此上奏道 ：臣闻文王武王之道，重在方略策划布署，哪里有侄儿做天子而替姑母立庙的！
English: As a result, Li Zhaode made a speech, saying: Follow the way of King Wen and King Wu, focus on strategic planning of the deployment, where is the nephew to be the son of heaven and build a temple for his aunt!

古文：以亲亲言之，则天皇是陛下夫也，皇嗣是陛下子也，陛下正合传之子孙，为万代计。
现代文：以亲人而言，天皇是陛下的丈夫，皇嗣是陛下的亲子，陛下应当将皇位传之子孙，以为万代之计。
English: As far as relatives are concerned, the Emperor is His Majesty's husband, the Imperial Heir is His Majesty's son, and His Majesty should consider the children and grandchildren of the Imperial succession to be the best of all generations.

古文：况陛下承天皇顾托而有天下，若立承嗣，臣恐天皇不血食矣。 
现代文：何况陛下是承蒙天皇顾托才有天下的，如果立了武承嗣，臣恐天皇不享祭了。 
English: Moreover, His Majesty is only able to rule the world thanks to the Emperor's patronage. If he were to appoint a successor to the throne, the Emperor would not be able to enjoy the festival.

古文：则天寤之，乃止。
现代文：武则天才明白了，立武承嗣为太子之事才罢了。
English: Wu Zetian was a genius and understood that it was only a matter of making Wu Zetian the crown prince.

古文：时朝廷谀佞者多获进用，故幸恩者，事无大小，但近谄谀，皆获进见。
现代文：当时，朝廷谀佞之人多被进用，所以，凡是无论大小，只要近于谄媚阿谀，虚假奉承，都能获得进见。
English: At that time, most of the courtiers of the imperial court were used, so no matter how big or small, as long as it was close to flattery, false flattery, it could be used.

古文：有人于洛水中获白石数点赤，诣阙辄进。
现代文：有人于洛水中获有数点赤色的白石头，就到宫阙进见。
English: Some people found a few reddish white stones in the water in Hulot and went to see them in Gongye.

古文：诸宰相诘之，对云： 此石赤心，所以来进。 
现代文：诸宰相问这石头有何特点，回答说： 这块石头赤心，所以拿来进献。 
English: The councillors asked what was special about the stone, to which he replied: "This stone is red-hearted, that's why I brought it as an offering."

古文：昭德叱之曰： 此石赤心，洛水中余石岂能尽反耶？ 
现代文：李昭德叱责道 ：此石赤心，洛水中余石难道能尽反么？ 
English: Li Zhaode scolded, "This stone is red-hearted, can the remaining stones in Luoshui do the opposite?

古文：左右皆笑。
现代文：左右皆笑。
English: People on both sides burst out laughing.

古文：是时，来俊臣、侯思止等枉挠刑法，诬陷忠良，人皆慑惧，昭德每廷奏其状，由是俊臣党与少自摧屈。
现代文：这个时期，来俊臣、侯思止等，歪曲刑法，诬陷忠良，人都惧畏，李昭德每在朝廷奏他们的枉法情状，由此来俊臣的党羽也稍稍受到挫折。
English: During this period, Li Zhaode, Zhuang Zhen and Hou Xizhi distorted the criminal law and framed the loyal and the good. People were afraid of them, and Li Zhaode played up their illegal activities in the imperial court. As a result, Zhuang Zhen's followers suffered a slight setback.

古文：来俊臣又尝弃故妻而娶太原王庆诜女，侯思止亦奏娶赵郡李自挹女，敕政事堂共商量。
现代文：来俊臣曾弃故妻娶太原王庆诜之女，侯思止也上奏要娶赵郡李自挹之女，太后要政事堂共同商量。
English: Lai Junchen had abandoned his late wife to marry the daughter of Taiyuan Wang Qingyao, Hou Sijie also reported that he wanted to marry the daughter of Zhao County Li Zixuan, and the Empress Dowager wanted to discuss the matter with the government.

古文：昭德抚掌谓诸宰相曰： 大可笑！往年俊臣贼劫王庆诜女，已大辱国。
现代文：李昭德抚掌对诸宰相说 ：太可笑，往年来俊臣像贼一样强取了王庆诜之女，已经大有辱国家。
English: Li Zhaode patted his palms and said to the prime ministers: "This is ridiculous. In the past years, the young ministers have forced Wang Qingyao's daughter like a thief, which has greatly humiliated the country."

古文：今日此奴又请索李自挹女，无乃复辱国耶！ 
现代文：今日此奴又请求索取李自挹之女，莫不是又要来辱国吗？ 
English: Today, this scoundrel also asked for the daughter of Li Zhisheng. Isn't he going to humiliate the country again?

古文：陛下深览臣言，为万姓自爱。 
现代文：这样，此事才作罢，侯思止后来竟被李昭德依法处死在杖刑之下。
English: In this way, the matter came to an end, and Hou Siji was later executed by Li Zhaode according to the law under the cane.

古文：时长上果毅邓注又著《硕论》数千言，备述昭德专权之状，凤阁舍人逢弘敏遽奏其论。
现代文：不久，李昭德由于专权用事，很为朝野之士所厌恶。前鲁王府功曹参军丘忄音上疏指责李昭德，说他性好凌轹，气负刚强，朝廷诏命陛下皆依李昭德，李昭德自专无忌，威震人主，有势盛之殃。邓注又著《硕论》数千言，详细述说李昭德专权之状。凤阁舍人逢弘敏立即将此文上奏。
English: Soon, Li Zhaode was detested by the people of the court and the country because of his exclusive use of power. Former Lu King's Office meritorious serviceman Qiu Ying accused Li Zhaode, saying that he was good-natured, strong-willed, and strong-willed. The imperial edicts were all in accordance with Li Zhaode. Li Zhaode did not hesitate to use his power, and he was a formidable person. Deng Note also wrote thousands of words of "Shuo Theory" to describe Li Zhaode's exclusive power in detail. Feng Ge's assistant Feng Hongmin immediately published this article.

古文：则天乃恶昭德，谓纳言姚璹曰： 昭德身为内史，备荷殊荣，诚如所言，实负于国。 
现代文：武则天于是开始厌恶李昭德，对纳言姚王寿说： 昭德身为内史，备受殊荣，如果真的像大家所说的情状，那实在是有负于国家。 
English: Wu Zetian then began to detest Li Zhaode, and said to Yao Wangshou: Zhaode, as an internal historian, is highly honored. If the situation is really like what everyone says, then it is really a failure to the country.

古文：延载初，左迁钦州南宾尉，数日，又命免死配流。寻又召拜监察御史。
现代文：延载二年，降职任钦州南宾尉。数日，又命免死配流，不久又召回京拜监察御史。
English: Two years later, he was demoted to the position of Qinzhou Nanbin Lieutenant. A few days later, he was ordered to be exempted from death and banishment, and soon he was recalled to Beijing to supervise imperial history.

古文：时太仆少卿来俊臣与昭德素不协，乃诬构昭德有逆谋，因被下狱，与来俊臣同日而诛。
现代文：当时太仆少卿来俊臣与李昭德一向不和，于是诬陷李昭德有叛逆行为，因此被下到狱中，与来俊臣同一天处死。
English: At that time, Li Zhaode had always been at odds with his servant, Li Juncheng, so Li Zhaode was falsely accused of treason and sent to prison. He was executed on the same day as Li Juncheng.

古文：是日大雨，士庶莫不痛昭德而庆俊臣也。
现代文：这一天大雨，臣民百姓莫不痛惜李昭德之死，又庆贺来俊臣之死。
English: On this day of heavy rain, the subjects and commoners could not help but mourn the death of Li Zhaode and celebrate the death of the young minister.

古文：相谓曰： 今日天雨，可谓一悲一喜矣。 
现代文：人们交谈： 今日天雨，可谓一悲一喜。 
English: People talking: It's raining today, which is both sad and happy.

古文：德宗建中三年，加赠司空。
现代文：德宗建中元年，加赠司空。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong Jianchu, he was also given the title of Empress Dowager.

