古文：九年春，王正月，公如齐。
现代文：九年春季，周历正月，宣公去齐国。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Xuan Gong went to Qi.

古文：公至自齐。
现代文：宣公从齐国回来。
English: Zhuang Gong has returned from Qi Province.

古文：夏，仲孙蔑如京师。
现代文：夏季，仲孙蔑去京师。
English: In the summer, Nakasone went to Kyoto to study.

古文：齐侯伐莱。
现代文：齐侯讨伐莱国。
English: Qihou is leading the fight against the Wallai.

古文：秋，取根牟。
现代文：秋季，占领了根牟。
English: In autumn, they occupied Nemu.

古文：八月，滕子卒。
现代文：八月，滕昭公去世。
English: In August, Teng Zhaogong passed away.

古文：九月，晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯会于扈。
现代文：九月，晋侯、宋公、卫侯、郑伯、曹伯在扈地会见。
English: In September, Jin Hou, Song Gong, Wei Hou, Zheng Bo and Cao Bo met in Handan.

古文：晋荀林父帅师伐陈。
现代文：晋国荀林父率领军队攻打陈国。
English: Yulin's father from Jin Province led an army to attack Chen Province.

古文：辛酉，晋侯黑臀卒于扈。
现代文：辛酉日，晋侯在扈地去世。
English: On the day of Xin Rong, Jin Hou died in Handan.

古文：冬十月癸酉，卫侯郑卒。
现代文：冬季十月癸酉日，卫侯去世。
English: On the third day of October in winter, Wei Hou passed away.

古文：宋人围滕。
现代文：宋军包围滕国。
English: The Song army encircled Tengguo.

古文：楚子伐郑。
现代文：楚国攻打郑国。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang attacked Zheng Guo.

古文：晋郤缺帅师救郑。
现代文：晋国的郤缺率领军队援救郑国。
English: Jin's lackeys led the army to rescue Zheng.

古文：陈杀其大夫洩冶。
现代文：陈国杀掉了自己的大夫洩冶。
English: Chen Guo killed his own doctor Le Ye.

古文：九年春，王使来征聘。
现代文：九年春季，周定王的使者来鲁国要求派人去聘问。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, the envoy of King Zhou Ding came to Lu and asked to send someone to ask questions.

古文：夏，孟献子聘于周，王以为有礼，厚贿之。
现代文：夏季，孟献子去成周聘问。周定王认为有礼，赠给他丰厚的财礼。
English: In the summer, Meng Xianzi went to Cheng Zhou to ask for a job. Zhou Dingwang thought it was courteous and gave him a rich gift.

古文：秋，取根牟，言易也。
现代文：秋季，占领了根牟，《春秋》记载是说很容易。
English: Autumn, occupied the Nemu, "Spring and Autumn" records are said to be easy.

古文：滕昭公卒。
现代文：滕昭公死。
English: Teng Zhaogong died.

古文：会于扈，讨不睦也。陈侯不会。
现代文：晋成公、宋文公、卫成公、郑襄公、曹文公在扈地会见，这是由于准备攻打不听从晋国的国家。
English: Jin Cheng Gong, Song Wen Gong, Wei Cheng Gong, Zheng Xiang Gong, Cao Wen Gong met in Handan, this is due to the preparation of attacking countries that do not obey Jin.

古文：晋荀林父以诸侯之师伐陈。
现代文：陈灵公没有参加会见，晋国的荀林父率领诸侯的军队进攻陈国。
English: Chen Linggong did not attend the meeting, and Jin's Yulin father led the warlord's army to attack Chen.

古文：晋侯卒于扈，乃还。
现代文：晋成公死在扈地，荀林父便率兵回国。
English: When Jin Chenggong died in Handan, Yulin's father led his soldiers back to China.

古文：冬，宋人围滕，因其丧也。
现代文：冬季，宋军包围滕国，这是乘滕国有丧事。
English: In winter, the Song army encircled Teng Guo, which was a great tragedy for Teng Guo.

古文：陈灵公与孔宁、仪行父通于夏姬，皆衷其衵服以戏于朝。
现代文：陈灵公和孔宁、仪行父与夏姬通奸，都把夏姬的汗衣贴身穿着，而且在朝廷上开玩笑。
English: Chen Linggong and Kong Ning, the father-in-law who committed adultery with Xia Jie, all wore Xia Jie's sweatshirt close to their bodies and joked about it in the court.

古文：洩冶谏曰： 公卿宣淫，民无效焉，且闻不令，君其纳之。 
现代文：泄冶进谏说： 国君和卿宣扬淫乱，百姓就无所效法，而且名声不好。君王还是把那件汗衫收藏起来吧！ 
English: Fei Ye Jintao said, "When the sovereign and the lord advocate sexual promiscuity, the people have nothing to emulate, and the reputation is not good. The sovereign should collect that shirt!"

古文：公曰： 吾能改矣。 
现代文：陈灵公说： 我能够改过了。 
English: Chen Linggong said: I can make amends.

古文：公告二子，二子请杀之，公弗禁，遂杀洩冶。
现代文：陈灵公把泄冶的话告诉孔宁、仪行父两个人，这两个人请求杀死泄冶，陈灵公不加禁止，于是就杀了泄冶。
English: Chen Linggong told two people, Kong Ning and Yi Xingtao, about Deye. The two people asked to kill Deye, but Chen Linggong did not forbid it, so he killed Deye.

古文：孔子曰： 《诗》云： 民之多辟，无自立辟。 
现代文：孔子说： 《诗》说： 百姓多行邪恶，就不要再去自立法度。 
English: Confucius said, "The poem says, 'If the people commit many evils, they should no longer practice self-governance.

古文：其洩冶之谓乎。 
现代文：这说的就是泄冶吧！ 
English: That's what they say about casting out evil spirits!

古文：楚子为厉之役故，伐郑。
现代文：楚庄王为了厉地战役的缘故，进攻郑国。
English: Chu Zhuang Wang attacked Zheng for the sake of the Lidi Campaign.

古文：晋郤缺救郑，郑伯败楚师于柳棼。
现代文：晋国的郤缺率兵去救援郑国，郑襄公在柳棼打败了楚军。
English: Zheng Xiangong defeated the Chu army at the Battle of Liuye.

古文：国人皆喜，唯子良忧曰： 是国之灾也，吾死无日矣。 
现代文：国内的人们都很欢喜，只有子良担心说： 这是国家的灾难，我离死期不远了。 
English: People all over the country were overjoyed. Only Tzu-Liang was worried and said, "This is a national disaster. I am not far from death."

