古文：张琼，字连德，代人也。
现代文：张琼，字连德，代地人氏。
English: Zhang Qiong, Zi Lian De, the representative of the local people.

古文：少壮健，有武用。魏世自荡寇将军为朔州征虏府外兵参军，随葛荣为乱。荣败，尔朱荣以为都督。
现代文：年轻时强壮健康，有武艺，魏朝时从荡寇将军升为朔州征虏府外兵参军。随葛荣作乱，荣败，尔朱荣拜他做了都督。
English: When he was young, he was strong and healthy and had martial arts skills. During the Wei Dynasty, he was promoted from the general of the roving bandits to the foreign soldiers of the Shuozhou Conscription to join the army. With Ge Rong's rebellion, victory and defeat, he became the governor of Zhu Rongbei.

古文：讨元颢有功，除汲郡太守。
现代文：因征讨元颢有功，除汲郡太守。
English: He was promoted to the position of county governor due to his success in conscripting Yuan Shao.

古文：建明初，为东道尉劳大使，封行唐县子，邑三百户。
现代文：建明初，为东道慰劳大使，封行唐县子，食邑三百户。
English: At the beginning of the Jianming Dynasty, it was the host of the Ambassador of Consolation and Relief, sealing the Tang County, with three hundred households in food villages.

古文：转太尉长史。出为河内太守，除济州刺史。
现代文：转太尉长史，出为河内太守，除济州刺史。
English: He was promoted to the rank of captain general and became the governor of Hanoi, except for his time in Jeju.

古文：尔朱兆败，归高祖，迁汾州刺史。
现代文：尔朱兆败，投奔高祖，迁汾州刺史。
English: After Zhu Zhao's defeat, he defected to Gao Zu and moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：天平中，高祖袭克夏州，以为尉劳大使，仍留镇之。
现代文：天平中，高祖偷袭夏州成功，以琼为慰劳大使，并留他镇守夏州。
English: In the balance of the scales, Gaozu successfully raided Xiazhou, with Qiong as a consolation ambassador, and left him to defend Xiazhou.

古文：寻为周文帝所陷，卒。
现代文：不久，琼因周文帝攻城，战死。
English: Soon after, Qiong was killed in battle as a result of Emperor Zhou's attack on the city.

古文：赠使持节、燕恒云朔四州诸军事、大将军、司徒公、恒州刺史。
现代文：赠使持节、燕恒云朔四州诸军事、大将军、司徒公、恒州刺史。
English: The gifts of the festival, Yan Hengyun, the four states of the military, the general, the scholar, and the history of Hengzhou.

古文：有二子。长忻，次遵业。
现代文：琼有二子，长曰忻，次曰遵业。
English: Qiong has two sons. The eldest is Zong, and the second is Zunye.

古文：忻，普泰中为都督，随尔朱世隆。
现代文：忻，普泰中为都督，是尔朱世隆的麾下。
English: , the governor of Putai, was a subordinate of Zhu Shilong.

古文：以功尚魏平阳公主，除驸马都尉、大将军、开府仪同三司、建州刺史、南郑县伯。
现代文：因军功娶魏平阳公主，拜驸马都尉、大将军、开府仪同三司、建州刺史、南郑县伯。
English: He married Princess Wei Pingyang for his military exploits, and was given the titles of lieutenant of Baima, general, secretary of Kaifu, secretary of Jianzhou, and governor of Nanzheng County.

古文：琼常忧其太盛，每语亲识曰： 凡人官爵，莫若处中，忻位秩太高，深为忧虑。 
现代文：琼经常担忧忻的官位显赫，对亲近熟识的人说： 凡人做官得爵，不如不高不低，忻位秩过高，这是我最大的忧虑。 
English: Joan often worried about the prominence of his official position, and said to people who were close to him: "It is better for an ordinary person to be a knight than to be high or low, and his rank is too high. This is my biggest worry.

古文：而忻豪险放纵，遂与公主情好不协，寻为武帝所害，时称琼之先见。
现代文：忻豪险放纵，又与公主感情不和，很快遭到武帝的迫害，时人认为琼有先见之明。
English: Qiong Gao risked indulgence, and had a conflict of feelings with the princess, and was soon persecuted by Emperor Wu. At the time, people thought Qiong was prescient.

古文：遵业，讨元颢有功，封固安县开国子，除宁远将军、云州大中正。
现代文：遵业，征讨元颢立下军功，封固安县开国子，拜宁远将军、云州大中正。
English: Zunye, to collect the military merit of the Yuan Dynasty, sealed the founding of Gu'an County, General Bai Ningyuan, and Yunnan University Junior High School.

古文：天平中，除清河太守，寻加安西将军、建州刺史。
现代文：天平中，除清河太守，不久加安西将军、建州刺史。
English: In the balance of power, in addition to the governor of Qinghe, General Anxi and Jianzhou stabbed history soon.

古文：武定中，随仪同刘丰讨侯景，为景所擒。
现代文：武定中，随仪同刘丰讨伐侯景，被景掳获。
English: In Wuding, he fought against Houjing with Liu Feng and was captured by Houjing.

古文：景败，杀遵业于涡阳。
现代文：侯景败，在涡阳杀死了遵业。
English: Hou Jing was defeated and Zunye was killed in the whirlwind.

古文：丧还，世宗亲自临吊，赠并肆幽安四州军事、开府仪同三司、并州刺史。
现代文：遵业尸体运回来时，世宗亲自吊唁，赠其并肆幽安四州军事、开府仪同三司、并州刺史。
English: When Zunye's body was brought back, Shizong personally expressed his condolences, and presented him with military awards from the four prefectures of You'an, Kaifu, and Sanji, as well as the prefectural seal.

古文：斛律羌举，太安人也。
现代文：斛律羌举，太安人氏。
English: He is from the Tai'an people.

古文：世为部落酋长。
现代文：其家世代为部落酋长。
English: His family has been tribal chiefs for generations.

古文：父谨，魏龙骧将军、武川镇将。
现代文：父谨，魏龙骧将军、武川镇将。
English: My father was a general of Wei Longyu and a general of Wuchuan Town.

古文：羌举少骁果，有胆力。
现代文：羌举年轻时敢说敢干，胆量大。
English: When you are young, dare to say, dare to do, and have a lot of courage.

古文：永安中，从尔朱兆入洛，有战功，深为兆所爱遇，恒从征伐。
现代文：永安中，随从尔朱兆进驻洛阳，有战功，而受兆的爱戴，时常跟着征战讨伐。
English: In Yongan, he was stationed in Luoyang as a follower of Zhu Zhao. He had distinguished war service, and was loved by Zhao. He often went to war with him.

古文：高祖破兆，方始归诚。
现代文：高祖打败尔朱兆后，羌举才投奔过来。
English: After Gaozu defeated Lzhu Zhao, it was only after he was promoted that he came over.

古文：高祖以其忠于所事，亦加嗟赏。
现代文：高祖感觉到他对尔朱氏的忠诚，也大加赞赏。
English: Gaozu felt his loyalty to the Lzhu clan, and also greatly appreciated it.

古文：天平中，除大都督，令率步骑三千导众军西袭夏州，克之。
现代文：天平中，除大都督，受命率领三千步骑引导众军偷袭夏州，获胜。
English: In the balance of power, in addition to the great governor, he was ordered to lead three thousand cavalry and guide the army to attack Xiazhou and win.

古文：后从高祖西讨，大军济河，集诸将议进趣之计。
现代文：后从高祖西讨，大军渡过黄河之后，高祖召集将领们商讨进取的计划。
English: Later, Gao Zu went to the west to discuss, and after the army crossed the Yellow River, Gao Zu convened the generals to discuss the aggressive plan.

古文：羌举曰： 黑獭聚凶党，强弱可知，若欲固守，无粮援可恃。
现代文：羌举说： 宇文黑獭聚集凶徒，其强弱是清楚的，如果准备固守，但没有粮援可以依仗。
English: He said: "The strength and weakness of the Uven black stork's gathering of thugs is clear. If they are prepared to hold out, but do not have food aid, they can rely on it.

古文：今揣其情，已同困兽，若不与其战，而迳趣咸阳，咸阳空虚，可不战而克。
现代文：眼下我估摸情况，黑獭已如困兽，若不同他交战，而直趋咸阳，咸阳空虚，则能够不战而胜。
English: At the moment, I estimate the situation, the black dragonfly is already like a beast of burden, if it is different from him to fight, but straight to Xianyang, Xianyang is empty, it can win without a fight.

古文：拔其根本，彼无所归，则黑獭之首悬于军门矣。 
现代文：端掉了他的老巢，也就没有了归路，那么黑獭的脑袋就已经悬挂在军门之上了。 
English: If he lost his nest, there would be no way back, so the black stork's head would already be hanging above the gate.

古文：诸将议有异同，遂战于渭曲，大军败绩。
现代文：将领们有的赞同，也有的反对，于是两军在渭曲接战，东魏军大败。
English: The generals either agreed or disagreed, so the two armies fought a pitched battle, and the Eastern Wei army was soundly defeated.

古文：天平末，颍川人张俭聚众反叛，西通关右，羌举随都督侯景、高昂等讨破之。
现代文：天平末，颍川人张俭聚众造反，并与西魏勾结，羌举随从都督侯景、高昂等平定了叛乱。
English: At the end of the Tenpyeong era, Zhang Jian, a native of Beichuan, rallied the people to rebel, and in collusion with the Western Wei Dynasty, he subdued the rebellion by enlisting the support of governors Houjing and Gaoang.

古文：元象中，除清州刺史，封密县侯。
现代文：元象中，除清州刺史，封密县侯。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, in addition to the history of Qingzhou, there was also the history of Fongmi County.

古文：兴和初，高祖以为中军大都督，寻转东夏州刺史。
现代文：兴和初，高祖拜他为中军大都督，不久转任东夏州刺史。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, Gao Zu worshipped him as the grand governor of the Chinese army, and soon he was transferred to the post of the governor of Dongxia Prefecture.

古文：时高祖欲招怀远夷，令羌举使于阿至罗，宣扬威德，前后称旨，甚被知赏。
现代文：此时高祖打算招抚远方的夷民，令羌举出使阿至罗，以宣扬威德，前前后后，其任务都完成得非常好，因此极得高祖赏识。
English: At this time, Gaozu planned to appease the distant barbarians, and ordered the envoy A Zi Luo to be raised to propagate the virtue of virtue. Both before and after, his tasks were completed very well, so Gaozu was highly appreciated.

古文：卒于州，时年三十六。
现代文：死于东夏州刺史任上，时年三十有六。
English: He died at the age of thirty-six in Dongxia County, when he was appointed to the post of chief historian.

古文：高祖深悼惜之。
现代文：高祖十分的惋惜。
English: Gaozu was very sorry.

古文：赠并恒二州军事、恒州刺史。
现代文：赠并恒二州军事、恒州刺史。
English: The military history of the two states of Hengshui and the history of embroidery in Hengshui were added.

古文：子孝卿，少聪敏几悟，有风检，频历显职。
现代文：子孝卿，少时聪敏机悟，有风度，多任显职。
English: Zi Xiaoqing, when he was young, was intelligent and witty, with good manners, and held many prominent positions.

古文：武平末，侍中、开府仪同三司，封义宁王，知内省事，典外兵、骑兵机密。
现代文：武平末年，为侍中、开府仪同三司，封义宁王，知内省事，掌管外兵、骑兵机密。
English: At the end of Wu Ping's life, he was a chamberlain, Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies and the Three Departments, the vassal of King Yining, in charge of domestic affairs, and in charge of foreign soldiers and cavalry secrets.

古文：是时，朝纲日乱，政由群竖。
现代文：这一时期，朝纲日乱，政归宦官。
English: During this period, the Choshanga Riots and the return of eunuchs to political power took place.

古文：自赵彦深死，朝贵典机密者，唯孝卿一人差居雅道，不至贪秽。
现代文：自赵彦深死后，朝廷主持机密的，只有孝卿一个人独守清白，没有贪秽。
English: Since the death of Zhao Yancheng, the imperial court presided over the secret, only one person, Xiaoqing, kept his innocence, and there was no corruption.

古文：后主至齐州，以孝卿为尚书令。又以中书侍郎薛道衡为侍中，封北海王。
现代文：后主到齐州，拜孝卿为尚书令，又以中书侍郎薛道衡为侍中，封北海王。
English: Afterward, the master went to Qizhou, with Bai Xiaoqing as the Shang Shuling, and Xue Daoheng, the Chushu waiter, as the waiter, and he was given the title of the North Sea King.

古文：二人劝后主作承光主诏，禅位任城王，令孝卿赍诏策及传国玺往瀛州。
现代文：二人劝后主作承光主诏书，禅位给任城王。后主令孝卿携带诏策以及传国玺前往瀛州。
English: The two advised the latter to write the imperial edict of Emperor Joko and give the throne to the king of the city. The latter ordered Prince Takakyo to carry the imperial edict and the imperial edict to Bozhou.

古文：孝卿便诣邺城，归于周武帝，仍从入长安，授纳言上士。
现代文：孝卿抵达邺城，将诏策和传国玺送给了周武帝，居住长安，拜他为纳言上士。
English: Xiaoqing arrived in Shicheng, presented the imperial edict and the imperial edict to Emperor Zhou, lived in Chang'an, and became a staff sergeant after worshiping him.

古文：隋开皇中，位太府卿，卒于民部尚书。
现代文：隋开皇中，位太府卿，卒于民部尚书任上。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty's reign, he was given the title of daifu chancellor, and after his death, he was appointed to the post of minister of the people.

古文：代人刘世清，祖拔，魏燕州刺史；父巍，金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：代地人刘世清，其祖父拔，魏燕州刺史。父巍，金紫光禄大夫。
English: Substitute Liu Shiching, his grandfather, Wei Yanzhou, and his father, Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：世清武平末侍中、开府仪同三司，任遇与孝卿相亚。
现代文：世清于武平末年为侍中、开府仪同三司，其职权、恩宠与孝卿不相上下。
English: At the end of the Wuping era, Shiching was a member of the Council of Palace Attendants and the Keifu Rites and Ceremonies, and his powers and favors were comparable to those of a high-ranking courtier.

古文：情性甚整，周慎谨密，在孝卿之右。
现代文：世清性情严整，周密谨慎，则在孝卿之上。
English: On the other hand, Shih Ching, with his strict disposition and meticulous prudence, was superior to Xiaoqing.

古文：能通四夷语，为当时第一。
现代文：还精通四夷语言，号称当时第一。
English: He was also proficient in the Si'i language, and was reputed to be the best at that time.

古文：后主命世清作突厥语翻《涅槃经》，以遗突厥可汗，敕中书侍郎李德林为其序。
现代文：后主命世清用突厥语翻译《涅经》，译好后送给突厥可汗，还敕告中书侍郎李德林为该经作序。
English: Later, the master ordered Shixing to translate the "Nirvana Sutra" into Turkish and send it to the Turkic khan after the translation was completed. He also told the servant Li Delin that the sutra was a prelude.

古文：世清隋开皇中卒于开府、亲卫骠骑将军。
现代文：世清于隋开皇中卒于开府、亲卫骠骑将军位上。
English: Shiching died in Kaifu in the Sui Dynasty and was promoted to the rank of General of the Imperial Guards.

古文：尧雄，字休武，上党长子人也。
现代文：尧雄，字休武，上党长子人氏。
English: Shao Xiong, also known as Xiu Wu, was the eldest son of a member of the Shang Party.

古文：祖暄，魏司农卿。
现代文：祖父暄，魏司农卿。
English: His grandfather, Wei Si, was the Minister of Agriculture.

古文：父荣，员外侍郎，雄少骁果，善骑射，轻财重气，为时辈所重。
现代文：父荣，员外侍郎。雄少年时勇猛矫健，长于骑马射箭，轻财重义，被同辈人推崇。
English: His father, Rong, was an outside attendant. When he was a young man, Rong was brave and vigorous, good at riding horses and archery, valued money, and was respected by his peers.

古文：永安中，拜宣威将军、给事中、持节慰劳恒燕朔三州大使。
现代文：永安中，拜宣威将军、给事中、持节慰劳恒燕朔三州大使。
English: In Yong'an, General Bai Xuanwei, in the middle of giving things, in the middle of holding festivals, and in the middle of consoling labor, Ambassador Heng Yanshuo of the three states.

古文：仍为都督，从叱列延讨刘灵助，平之，拜镇东将军、燕州刺史，封城平县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：仍为都督，跟从叱列延攻打刘灵助，获胜，拜镇东将军、燕州刺史，封城平县伯，食邑五百户。
English: He was still the governor of the capital. He followed Yan to attack Liu Lingsu, and won. He paid tribute to Zhendong General, Yanzhou Shishi, Fucheng Pingxian Bo, and 500 households in Shiyou.

古文：义旗初建，雄随尔朱兆败于广阿，遂率所部据定州以归高祖。
现代文：义旗初树，雄随尔朱兆在广阿大败，于是他便率领自己的部众占据定州，之后归顺了高祖。
English: Yibata Hatsuki, who followed Er Zhu Zhao, was defeated in Guang'a, so he led his followers to occupy Dingzhou, after which he surrendered to Gaozu.

古文：时雄从兄杰，尔朱兆用为沧州刺史，至瀛州，知兆败，亦遣使归降。
现代文：这时雄的从兄亻桀，被尔朱兆委任为沧州刺史，赴任抵达瀛州，得知兆败的消息，也遣使归降。
English: At this time, Xiong's younger brother Yao, who was appointed by Er Zhu Zhao as the chief historian of Cangzhou, arrived in Zhangzhou, learned the news of Zhao's defeat, and also sent him back.

古文：高祖以其兄弟俱有诚款，便留杰行瀛州事，寻以雄为车骑大将军、瀛州刺史以代杰，进爵为公，增邑五百户。
现代文：高祖认为雄兄弟都有赤诚之心，就让亻桀行瀛州刺史事。很快又授雄车骑大将军、瀛州刺史以替代亻桀，并晋爵为公，增加食邑五百户。
English: Gao Zu believed that both brothers had a sincere heart, so he let Meng Xing, the general of Bozhou Jishi, be appointed. Soon, Meng Xing, the general of Bozhou Jishi, was appointed as the general of Bozhou Jishi, and he was promoted to the peerage, increasing the number of households by 500 households.

古文：于时禁网疏阔，官司相与聚敛，唯雄义然后取，复能接下以宽恩，甚为吏民所怀附。
现代文：这个时期，禁网疏阔，官员们纷纷聚敛，只有雄能洁身自好，用宽恩待下，所以深得吏民拥戴。
English: During this period, the network of prohibitions was extensive, and officials gathered one after another. Only those who were able to keep themselves clean and wait with grace were deeply supported by the people.

古文：魏武帝入关，雄为大都督，随高昂破贺拔胜于穰城。
现代文：魏武帝入关，雄为大都督，随高昂在穰城大破贺拔胜。
English: Emperor Weiwu entered the pass and became the grand governor. He and Gao An won a great victory in Shicheng.

古文：周旋征讨三荆，仍除二豫、扬、郢四州都督、豫州刺史。
现代文：追随驰逐征讨三荆，又授二豫、扬、郢四州都督、豫州刺史。
English: He was also awarded the titles of the four prefectures of Er-Yuan, Yang-Yuan and Yan-Yuan, as well as the title of the prefectural governor of Yuzhou.

古文：元洪威据颍州叛，民赵继宗杀颍川太守邵招，据乐口，自称豫州刺史，北应洪威。
现代文：元洪威占据颍州叛乱，老百姓赵继宗杀颍川太守邵招，屯驻乐口，自称豫州刺史，与北边的洪威呼应。
English: Former Hongwei occupied Zhangzhou rebellion, the common people Zhao Jizong killed Shao Zhao, the governor of Zhangchuan, and settled in Lekou, claiming to be the historian of Yuzhou, echoing Hongwei in the north.

古文：雄率众讨之，继宗败走。
现代文：雄领兵讨伐，继宗失败逃走。
English: He led the troops in a crusade, but his successors fled in defeat.

古文：民因雄之出，遂推城人王长为刺史，据州引西魏。
现代文：乡民们因为雄的离走，又推举城人王长为刺史，并且争取到了西魏的援助。
English: Because of the male's departure, the villagers also nominated the city man Wang Chang as the successor, and won the assistance of the West Wei Dynasty.

古文：雄复与行台侯景讨平之。
现代文：雄再次与行台侯景打垮了王长。
English: Xiong once again defeated Wang Chang along with Gongtai Houjing.

古文：梁将李洪芝、王当伯袭破平乡城，侵扰州境。
现代文：梁将李洪芝、王当伯偷袭平乡城成功，继之骚扰州境。
English: Liang led Li Hongzhi and Wang Dangbo to successfully attack Pingxiang City, and then harassed the state border.

古文：雄设伏要击，生擒洪芝、当伯等，俘获甚众。
现代文：雄设伏兵邀击，活捉了洪芝、当伯等人，俘虏缴获极多。
English: He set up an ambush and invited the enemy to attack. He captured Hong Zhi, Dang Bo and others alive, and captured a large number of prisoners.

古文：梁司州刺史陈庆之复率众逼州城，雄出与战，所向披靡，身被二创，壮气益厉，庆之败，弃辎重走。
现代文：梁司州刺史陈庆之又率部围攻州城，雄领兵出城应战，一时所向披靡，虽身体两处负伤，但斗志更旺，庆之败，抛弃辎重逃跑。
English: Liang Shizhou assassin Chen Qingzhi once again led his troops to besiege the city of Shuzhou, and led the troops out of the city to fight. For a while, he was victorious. Although he was injured in two places, his fighting spirit was stronger. He celebrated his defeat and abandoned his heavy baggage to escape.

古文：后庆之复围南荆州，雄曰： 白苟堆，梁之北面重镇，因其空虚，攻之必克，彼若闻难，荆围自解，此所谓机不可失也。 
现代文：后庆之复围南荆州，雄说： 白苟堆是梁朝北面的重镇，现在城中空虚，攻打的话一定可以夺取，庆之他们听了白苟堆的消息，荆州之围自然也就解除了，这是所谓的机不可失吧。 
English: After Qing's re-encirclement of southern Jingzhou, Xiong said: Baigouhe is a major town in the north of Liang Dynasty. Now the city is empty, and it can be captured if it is attacked. After Qing's victory, they heard the news of Baigouhe, and the siege of Jingzhou was naturally lifted. This is the so-called opportunity.

古文：遂率众攻之，庆之果弃荆州来。
现代文：于是依计划进行，庆之果然放弃荆州赶来救助。
English: As a result, according to the plan, Qingzhi gave up Jingzhou and came to the rescue.

古文：未至，雄陷其城，擒梁镇将苟元广，兵二千人。
现代文：当他还在路上的时候，雄攻克了白苟堆城，生擒梁镇将苟元广，以及兵士二千人。
English: While he was still on his way, he conquered the city of Baigoudui, the town of Zouliang, the town of Guoyuan, and two thousand soldiers.

古文：梁以元庆和为魏王，侵扰南城。
现代文：梁拜元庆和为魏王，侵扰魏之南境。
English: Liang Bai Yuan Qinghe was the king of Wei and invaded the southern border of Wei.

古文：雄率众讨之，大破庆和于南顿。
现代文：雄统众反击，在南顿大败庆和。
English: The male-dominated crowd counter-attacked and won a great victory in Nantong.

古文：寻与行台侯景破梁楚城。
现代文：不久，与行台侯景攻下梁朝的楚城。
English: Soon after, he and Xiangtai Houjing conquered the city of Chu.

古文：豫州民上书，更乞雄为刺史，复行豫州事。
现代文：豫州百姓上书朝廷，再次请求雄作刺史，因此雄复行豫州事。
English: The people of Yuzhou sent a letter to the imperial court, once again requesting the emperor to make a stab at history, so the emperor returned to the affairs of Yuzhou.

古文：颍州长史贺若徽执刺史田迅，据州降西魏，诏雄与广州刺史赵育、扬州刺史是云宝等各总当州士马，随行台任延敬并势攻之。
现代文：颍州长史贺若徽拘捕刺史田迅，占领州城投降了西魏，帝诏令雄与广州刺史赵育、扬州刺史是云宝等各自统领本州兵马，齐心协力，随行台任延敬围攻颍州。
English: The governor of Shijiazhuang, He Ruo Hui, arrested and arrested the assassin of Shi Tian Xun, occupied the state capital and surrendered to the Western Wei Dynasty. Emperor Ling Xiong, the assassin of Guangzhou, Zhao Yu, and the assassin of Yangzhou, Yun Bao, each commanded their own troops and horses, and worked together to besiege Shizhou.

古文：西魏遣其将怡锋率众援之，延敬等与战失利。
现代文：西魏遣将怡锋率众援救，双方交战后，延敬等失利。
English: The Western Wei sent Yi Feng to lead the rescue, and after the two sides fought, Yan Jing and others were defeated.

古文：育、宝各还本州，据城降敌。
现代文：赵育、是云宝各自返回本州，很快拥城降敌。
English: Zhao Yu and Yesun Bao each returned to Honshu, and soon surrendered the city to the enemy.

古文：雄收集散卒，保大梁。
现代文：雄收聚散兵，防守大梁城。
English: He gathered the scattered soldiers and defended Dalian City.

古文：周文帝因延敬之败，遣其右丞韦孝宽等攻豫州。雄都督郭丞伯、程多宝等举豫州降敌，执刺史冯邕并家属及部下妻子数千口，欲送之长安。
现代文：由于延敬吃了败仗，周文帝便派右丞韦孝宽等攻打豫州，雄的都督郭丞伯、程多宝等则带着豫州投降了，还将刺史冯邕和家属及其部下的妻儿老小几千人押解到长安。
English: As Yanjing was defeated, Emperor Zhou sent the right-hand man Wei Xiaokuan and others to attack Yuzhou, and the male governors Guo Zhenbo and Cheng Daobao surrendered with Yuzhou, and also deported the family members of Zhi Shi Feng Rong and the wives and children of his subordinates to Chang'an.

古文：至乐口，雄外兵参军王恒伽、都督赫连俊等数十骑从大梁邀之，斩多宝，拔雄等家口还大梁。
现代文：一行人到达乐口，雄的外兵参军王恒伽、都督赫连俊等数十骑突然拦截，杀死多宝，搜找出雄等人的家属带着返回了大梁。
English: The party arrived at Lekou, and dozens of horsemen, including the foreign soldiers Wang Heng Jia and the governor He Lian Jun, suddenly intercepted and killed Dobao. They searched for and found the family members of Xiong and others and returned with the girders.

古文：西魏以丞伯为颍川太守，雄仍与行台侯景讨之。
现代文：西魏任命丞伯为颍川太守，雄还是同行台侯景一道讨击。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty appointed Zheng Bo as the governor of Li River, and he and his companion, Tai Houjing, fought together.

古文：雄别攻破乐口，擒丞伯。
现代文：雄从另一方向攻下乐口，活捉了丞伯。
English: From the other direction, the male captured the mouth of the stream and captured the juvenile.

古文：进讨悬瓠，逐西魏刺史赵继宗、韦孝宽等。
现代文：向前推进，攻打悬瓠，追逐西魏刺史赵继宗、韦孝宽等。
English: They pushed forward, attacked the hanging anchor, and chased the Western Wei princes Zhao Jizong and Wei Xiaokang.

古文：复以雄行豫州事。
现代文：朝廷再以雄行豫州事。
English: The emperor also appointed Zou Xiong to be in charge of the political affairs of Yuzhou.

古文：西魏以是云宝为扬州刺史，据项城；义州刺史韩显据南顿。
现代文：西魏以是云宝作扬州刺史，屯驻项城；义州刺史韩显盘踞南顿。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, Yunbao was stationed in Xiangcheng, Yangzhou, and Han Xianpan in Nantong, Yizhou.

古文：雄复率众攻之，一日拔其二城，擒显及长史丘岳，宝遁走，获其妻妾将吏二千人，皆传送京师。
现代文：雄再次领兵攻打，一天就占领了两座城池，掳获了韩显以及长史丘岳，是云宝遁走，俘虏他们的妻妾和将吏二千多人，并一概解送到京师。
English: Xiong again led the troops to attack, occupied two cities in one day, captured Han Xian and Changshi Qiuyue, and took them away, captured their wives and concubines and more than 2,000 officers, and sent them all to Beijing.

古文：加骠骑大将军。
现代文：朝廷加雄骠骑大将军。
English: The imperial court promoted him to cavalry general.

古文：仍随侯景平鲁阳，除豫州刺史。
现代文：雄依然随同侯景，平定鲁阳后，再拜豫州刺史。
English: Xiong still followed Houjing, and after the pacification of Luyang, he worshiped the history of Yuzhou.

古文：雄虽武将，而性质宽厚，治民颇有诚信，为政去烦碎，举大纲而已。
现代文：雄虽是武将，但品性宽厚，治民极讲诚信，为政去繁就简，只是注重大事而已。
English: Although he is a military commander, he has a generous character, treats the people with utmost sincerity, and is easy-going when it comes to politics. He only pays attention to important matters.

古文：抚养兵民，得其力用。
现代文：抚育教养兵民，而能尽其所长。
English: They can do their best to raise and educate soldiers and civilians.

古文：在边十年，屡有功绩，豫人于今怀之。
现代文：在边地十年，多次建有战功，豫人直至今日都在怀念着他。
English: In the borderland for ten years, he repeatedly achieved military exploits, and people in Henan still miss him to this day.

古文：又爱人物，多所施与，宾客往来，礼遗甚厚，亦以此见称。
现代文：雄爱惜人才，多有施予；宾客往来，赠给甚厚，这些，都受到了时论的赞许。
English: Xiong cherished talent and gave a lot; guests came and went and gave a lot, all of which were praised by contemporary critics.

古文：兴和三年，征还京师，寻领司、冀、瀛、定、齐、青、胶、兖、殷、沧十州士卒十万人，巡行西南，分守险要。
现代文：兴和三年，征还京师，不久，统率司、冀、瀛、定、齐、青、胶、兖、殷、沧十州士卒十万人，巡行西南，分守险要。
English: In the third year of Xinghe, the Beijing division was conscripted, and soon, a hundred thousand soldiers from ten prefectures led by Di, Hebei, Shandong, Shandong, Qi, Qinghai, Jiaozuo, Fujian, Yin and Cangzhou marched in the southwest, and the division was at risk.

古文：四年，卒于邺，时年四十四。
现代文：四年，死于邺城，时年四十四岁。
English: Four years later, he died in Handan, at the age of forty-four.

古文：赠使持节、都督青徐胶三州军事、大将军、司徒公、徐州刺史，谥武恭。
现代文：赠使持节、都督青徐胶三州军事、大将军、司徒公、徐州刺史，谥号武恭。
English: He was given the title of Jixi, the military governor of Sanzhou, the general, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, and the grand marshal.

古文：子师嗣。
现代文：子师继嗣。
English: His son Gong Shi succeeded to the peerage.

古文：雄弟奋，字彦举。
现代文：雄弟奋，字彦举。
English: Younger brother, raise your fist, raise your fist.

古文：解褐宣威将军、给事中，转中坚将军、金紫光禄大夫，赐爵安夷县子。
现代文：以布衣拜宣威将军、给事中，转中坚将军、金紫光禄大夫，赠爵安夷县子。
English: He paid homage to General Xuan Wei with a cloth robe, became a general in the middle of things, a general in the middle of things, a doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and was awarded the title of Anyi County son.

古文：从高祖平邺，破尔朱兆等，进爵为伯。
现代文：从高祖平定邺城，打败尔朱兆等，晋爵为伯。
English: From Gaozhu to subdue Shicheng, defeat Lzhu Zhao, and so on, Jinzhe is Bo.

古文：出为南汾州刺史，胡夷畏惮之。
现代文：离开京师为南汾州刺史，胡人都害怕他。
English: He left Beijing to make history in southern Luzhou, and the Hu people are afraid of him.

古文：西魏行台薛崇礼举众攻奋，与战，大破之，崇礼兄弟乞降，送于相府。
现代文：西魏行台薛崇礼统众攻奋，交战，奋大胜，崇礼兄弟乞求归降，奋就将他们送往相府。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, Xue Chongli led the people to attack, fight, and win a great victory. The Chongli brothers begged to return, and he sent them to the Sangfu.

古文：转奋骠骑将军、左光禄大夫、颍州刺史，卒。
现代文：转奋为骠骑将军、左光禄大夫、颍州刺史，卒。
English: He became a general of the Horse Cavalry, a doctor of the Left Guanglu, and a member of the Zhangzhou Jishi.

古文：赠兖豫梁三州诸军事、司空、兖州刺史。
现代文：赠兖豫梁三州诸军事、司空、兖州刺史。
English: He presented the military, civil and military history of the three states of Anhui, Henan and Liang to the emperor.

古文：雄从父兄杰，字寿。
现代文：雄从父兄傑，字寿。
English: He is descended from his father and brother Jie, both surnamed Shou.

古文：性轻率，嗜酒，颇有武用。
现代文：性轻率，嗜酒，却极有武力。
English: He's promiscuous, he drinks, but he's very strong.

古文：历给事中、羽林监。
现代文：初官给事中、羽林监。
English: The first official to arrive at the scene was the forester.

古文：从高祖破纥豆陵步藩有功，除镇东将军。封乐城县伯，邑百户。
现代文：从高祖破纥豆陵步藩，因有战功，擢为镇东将军，封乐城县伯，食邑百户。
English: From Gao Zu's ancestor, he was promoted to Zhendong General, Fenglecheng County Mayor, and hundreds of households in food villages due to his war exploits.

古文：出为沧州刺史。
现代文：出任沧州刺史。
English: Appointed as Cangzhou chief historian.

古文：属义兵起，归高祖。
现代文：时义兵起事，亻桀投奔高祖。
English: When the volunteer soldiers revolted, he went to Gaozu.

古文：从平邺及破尔朱兆，进爵为侯。
现代文：从高祖平邺及败尔朱兆，晋爵为侯。
English: From Gao Zu Pingyao and defeated Zhu Zhao, he was promoted to marquis.

古文：后为都督，率众随樊子鹄讨元树于谯城，平之。
现代文：后为都督，率众在樊子鹄统领下在谯城讨伐元树，获胜。
English: Later, as the governor of the capital, he led the people to fight against the Yuan tree in Lucheng under the leadership of Zizi Yu, and won.

古文：仍除南兖州，多所取受，然性果决，吏民畏之。
现代文：又除南兖州刺史，虽大力收受财货，但敢作敢为，吏民都很惧怕他。
English: In addition, in addition to the history of Nanluozhou, although he vigorously received wealth and goods, he dared to act boldly, and the officials and people were very afraid of him.

古文：寻加行兖州事。
现代文：不久加行兖州事。
English: It was soon followed by the Zhangzhou Incident.

古文：元象初，拜车骑大将军、仪同三司，进爵为公。
现代文：元象初，拜车骑大将军、仪同三司，晋爵为公。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, the General of the Horse-drawn Carriage, the Three Departments of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and the promotion to the peerage became official.

古文：出为磨城镇大都督，转安州刺史，卒于州。
现代文：出任磨城镇大都督，转安州刺史，卒于任上。
English: He was appointed as the governor of the town of Mura, and later became the governor of Anshu. He died in office.

古文：赠使持节、沧瀛二州诸军事、尚书右仆射，沧州刺史，谥曰。宋显，字仲华，敦煌效谷人也。
现代文：赠使持节、沧瀛二州诸军事、尚书右仆射、沧州刺史。宋显，字仲华，敦煌交力谷人氏。
English: He gave gifts to Jishu, Cangshan, the two states of the military, Shangshu and Cangzhou. Song Xian, Zhaozhonghua, and Dunhuang Jiaolitian.

古文：性果敢，有干用。
现代文：性格直率，敢说敢干，而且有才能。
English: He's forthright, outspoken, and talented.

古文：初事尔朱荣为军主，擢为长流参军。
现代文：初事尔朱荣，为军主，擢为长流参军。
English: Zhu Rong, the commander of the army at the beginning, was promoted to join the army for a long time.

古文：永安中，除前军、襄垣太守，转荣府记室参军。
现代文：永安中，除前军、襄垣太守，转任荣府记室参军。
English: In Yongan Middle School, in addition to the former army, the governor of Xiangyak was transferred to the Rongfu Records Office to join the army.

古文：从平元颢，加平东将军。
现代文：从平元颢，加平东将军。
English: Starting with General Pingyuan and ending with General Pingdong.

古文：荣死，世隆等向洛，复以显为襄垣太守。
现代文：尔朱荣死，尔朱世隆等向洛阳开进，再以显为襄垣太守。
English: After the death of Lr Zhu Rong, Lr Zhu Shilong and others marched to Luoyang, and then took Xian as the governor of Xiangyuan.

古文：普泰初，迁使持节、征北将军、晋州刺史。
现代文：普泰初，迁使持节、征北将军、晋州刺史。
English: At the beginning of the Putai Dynasty, he was transferred to hold a festival, became a general of the Northern Expedition, and made history in Jinzhou.

古文：后归高祖，以为行台右丞。
现代文：后归顺高祖，拜为行台右丞。
English: Later, he returned to Shun Gao Zu, and was known as Gangtai Ujo.

古文：樊子鹄据兖州反，前西兖州刺史乙瑗、谯郡太守辛景威屯据五梁，以应子鹄。
现代文：樊子鹄占据兖州反叛，前西兖州刺史乙瑗、谯郡太守辛景威等屯驻五梁，响应子鹄。
English: Zhang Zizhao occupied Zhangzhou rebellion, former West Zhangzhou Zishi Yixuan, Zhang County Governor Xin Jingwei and others stationed in Wuliang, in response to Zhang Zizhao.

古文：高祖以显行西兖州事，率众讨破之，斩瑗，景威遁走。
现代文：高祖以显行西兖州事，率众攻讨，获胜，斩杀瑗，景威偷偷逃走。
English: Gao Zu marched to Xizang State with Xian, led the crowd to attack, won, killed the dragonfly, and Jing Wei secretly fled.

古文：拜西兖州刺史。
现代文：拜显西兖州刺史。
English: Paying homage to the history of West Luzhou.

古文：时梁州刺史鹿永吉据州外叛，西魏遣博陵王元约、赵郡王元景神率众迎接。
现代文：此时梁州刺史鹿永吉据州城外叛，西魏遣博陵王元约、赵郡王元景神领兵迎接。
English: At this time, Liangzhou was besieged by Lu Yongji, who rebelled outside the city of Liangzhou, and the Western Wei Dynasty sent Boling Wang Yuanjo and Zhao County Wang Yuanjing to lead the troops to meet him.

古文：显勒当州士马邀破之，斩约等，仍与左卫将军斛律平共会大梁。
现代文：显统带本州兵马拦截，斩杀元约等人，又同左卫将军斛律平聚会大梁。
English: Hentong led the Honshu soldiers and horses to intercept and kill the people of the Yuan Dynasty, and also met with the left guard general Zou Ruhei.

古文：拜仪同三司。
现代文：拜显仪同三司。
English: Bai Xianyi marched with the Third Division.

古文：在州多所受纳，然勇决有气干，检御左右，咸能得其心力。
现代文：显在州里多有收受，但其勇决有才干，督察左右，而且能够充分发挥这帮人的作用。
English: It is obvious that there is more acceptance in the state, but its courage and talent, inspectors and so on, and can give full play to the role of these people.

古文：及河阴之战，深入赴敌，遂没于行阵。
现代文：河阴之战时，因攻入敌军纵深之阵，战死。
English: During the Battle of Hekin, he was killed when he penetrated deep into the enemy's lines.

古文：赠司空公。
现代文：赠司空公。
English: Presented to Shikugo.

古文：显从祖弟绘，少勤学，多所博览，好撰述，魏时，张缅《晋书》未入国，绘依准裴松之注《国志》体，注王隐及《中兴书》。
现代文：显从祖弟绘，少时学习勤奋，博阅群书，喜好撰述。魏时，张缅所著的《晋书》还没有传到北方，绘依照裴松之注《三国志》的体例，注王隐以及《中兴书》。
English: During the Wei Dynasty, Zhang Meng's "Jin Shu" had not yet spread to the north, and it was painted according to the style of Pei Song's "Three Kingdoms" and Wang Yin and "Zhongxing Shu."

古文：又撰《中朝多士传》十卷，《姓系谱录》五十篇。
现代文：又撰《中朝多士传》十卷，《姓系谱录》五十篇。
English: He also wrote ten volumes of "Biographies of Notable People of the Middle Kingdom" and fifty articles of "Family Tree."

古文：以诸家年历不同，多有纰缪，乃刊正异同，撰《年谱录》，未成，河清五年并遭水漂失。
现代文：由于诸家年历不同，且有许多纰缪，绘便校正异同，撰《年谱录》，但未写成。这些书多在河清五年遭受水灾遗失。
English: Due to the different calendars of different families, and there are many differences, it was necessary to correct the similarities and differences, and compile the "Yearbook," but it was not written. Most of these books were lost in the floods in Heqing five years.

古文：绘虽博闻强记，而天性恍惚，晚又遇风疾，言论迟缓。
现代文：绘虽然博闻强记，但天性恍惚，晚年又遭风疾，言语极为迟缓。
English: Although he was well-read and had a strong memory, he was naturally in a trance, and in his later years he suffered from wind disease, and his speech was extremely slow.

古文：及失所撰之书，乃抚膺恸哭曰： 可谓天丧予也！ 
现代文：当所撰之书被水毁坏时，他拍着胸脯恸哭道： 这是老天要我的命啊！ 
English: When the book he was writing was destroyed by the water, he beat his chest and cried: "This is God's will for my life!"

古文：天统中卒。
现代文：天统中卒。
English: He is a pupil of Tiantong Middle School.

古文：王则，字元轨，自云太原人也。
现代文：王则，字元轨，自称为太原人氏。
English: Wang Ze, also known as Zhiyuanlu, calls himself a member of the Taiyuan people.

古文：少骁果，有武艺。
现代文：少时骁勇果敢，有武艺。
English: At a young age, he was brave and daring, and had martial arts skills.

古文：初随叔父魏广平内史老生征讨，每有战功。
现代文：早年随叔父魏广平内史老生征战，立有诸多军功。
English: In his early years, he went to war with his uncle Wei Guangping, a veteran of Chinese history, and achieved many military feats.

古文：老生为朝廷所知，则颇有力。
现代文：老生受朝廷重用，则从中起了重要作用。
English: Laosheng was reused by the imperial court and played an important role in this.

古文：初以军功除给事中，赐爵白水子。
现代文：最初因军功除给事中，赐爵白水子。
English: At first, Shiro Mizuko was given a knighthood in recognition of his military service.

古文：后从元天穆讨邢杲，轻骑深入，为杲所擒。
现代文：后随从元天穆攻打邢杲，轻骑深入敌阵，被邢杲掳获。
English: Later, he followed Yuan Tianmu in attacking and defeating the Yao, rode lightly deep into the enemy lines, and was captured by the Yao.

古文：元颢入洛，则与老生俱降颢，颢疑老生，遂杀之。
现代文：元颢入洛，则与老生都投降了颢，颢怀疑老生，便杀了他。
English: When Yuan Xuan entered Luo, he and the old man both surrendered. He suspected the old man and killed him.

古文：则奔广州刺史郑先护，与同拒颢，颢败，迁征虏将军，出为东徐州防城都督。
现代文：则投奔广州刺史郑先护，与先护一同抗抵元颢。颢败，迁征虏将军，出任东徐州防城都督。
English: He then went to Guangzhou to join Zheng Xianyou, and together with Xianyou, resisted Yuan Shao. Defeated, he was conscripted as a general and served as the governor of the East Xuzhou Defense City.

古文：尔朱荣之死也，东徐州刺史斛斯椿其枝党，内怀忧怖，时梁立魏汝南王悦为魏主，资其士马，送境上，椿遂翻城降悦，则与兰陵太守李义击其偏师，破之。
现代文：尔朱荣死后，其党羽即东徐州刺史斛斯椿等内心忧惧。这时梁立魏朝的汝南王悦为魏主，还赠助给他诸多兵马，送到边境上，斛斯椿于是出城降悦。则和兰陵太守李义攻击他们的偏师，取得胜利。
English: After the death of Le Zhu Rong, his followers, namely, Dong Xuzhou Zhi Shi, Jinshchun and others, were deeply worried. At this time, Liang established the Wei Dynasty's Runan Wang Yue as the ruler of Wei. He also gave him many soldiers and horses and sent them to the border. Jinshchun then went out of the city to surrender to Yue. Then, he and Lanling Taishu Li Yi attacked their partial division and achieved victory.

古文：魏因以则行北徐州事，后隶尔朱仲远仲远败，始归高祖。
现代文：魏便让则行北徐州事。后隶属尔朱仲远，仲远败，才归顺高祖。
English: Wei then let Zetsu go to the north of Xuzhou. Later, it was subordinated to Erzhu Zhongyuan, and it was defeated by Zhongyuan before it fell to Shun Gaozu.

古文：仍加征南将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：高祖加其征南将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: Gao Zu plus his Southern Expeditionary General, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：初随荆州刺史贺拔胜，后从行台侯景，周旋征讨，屡有功绩。
现代文：初随荆州刺史贺拔胜，后从行台侯景，周旋征讨，屡次立有战功。
English: At first, he accompanied Jingzhou's Zhang Shi He to victory, and later, he went from Xingtai to Houjing, and repeatedly made war exploits.

古文：天平初，行荆州事，都督三荆、二襄、南雍六州军事，荆州刺史。
现代文：天平初，行荆州事，都督三荆、二襄、南雍六州军事、荆州刺史。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, Jing State affairs were carried out, and the governors of Sanjing, Erxiang, and Nanyong Six States were involved in military affairs, and the history of Jing State was written.

古文：则有威武，边人畏服之。
现代文：则有武威，边鄙之民很是敬畏。
English: There is martial prowess, and the outcasts are awestruck.

古文：渭曲之役，则为西师围逼，遂弃城奔梁。梁寻放还，高祖怒而不责。
现代文：渭曲之役，则被西魏军围逼，因而弃城逃跑，到了梁朝，梁很快把他放了回来，高祖宽恕而没有斥责。
English: During the War of the Grand Alliance, Gaozu was besieged by the Western Wei army, so he abandoned the city and fled. When he came to the Liang Dynasty, Liang quickly released him, and Gaozu forgave him without reprimand.

古文：元象初，除洛州刺史。
现代文：元象初，除洛州刺史。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, there was no history except for the history of Luozhou.

古文：则性贪婪，在州取受非法，旧京诸像，毁以铸钱，于时世号河阳钱，皆出其家。
现代文：则贪婪，在州非法受取，从旧都城里夺来佛像，销毁后用来铸钱，这个时候，社会上都叫此种钱为 河阳钱 ，全都出自他的家中。
English: But he was greedy. He illegally received money from the state, seized a Buddha statue from the old capital, and used it to mint money after it was destroyed. At this time, the society called this money "Heyang money," and it all came from his family.

古文：武定中，复随侯景西讨。
现代文：武定中，再随侯景往西征讨。
English: In the middle of Wuding, he followed Houjing to the west to fight.

古文：景于颍川作逆，时则镇柏崖戍，世宗以则有武用，征为徐州刺史。
现代文：景在颍川反叛，则正好镇守木百崖戍，世宗认为则有武艺，征拜为徐州刺史。
English: When Jing rebelled in Luochuan, it happened to be the town guard of Mubaiyaguan, and Shizong thought that it was martial arts, and the recruitment was the beginning of the history of Xuzhou.

古文：景既南附，梁遣贞阳侯萧明率大众向徐州，以为影响，堰泗水灌州城。
现代文：侯景投奔梁朝，梁派贞阳侯萧明率领大军进逼徐州，作为声势、影响，拦堵清水淹灌州城。
English: Hou Jing ran to the Liang Dynasty, and Liang sent Zhengyang Hou Xiaoming to lead an army to push into Xuzhou, as a voice and influence, to block the clear water from flooding the city.

古文：则固守历时，而取受狼藉，锁送晋阳，世宗恕其罪。
现代文：则固守了很长时间，但他还是不断地收受财货，被人锁送晋阳，世宗宽恕其罪。
English: He held fast for a long time, but he continued to receive money and goods. He was locked up and sent to Jinyang, and Shizong forgave his sins.

古文：武定七年春，卒，时年四十八。
现代文：武定七年春，卒，时年四十八岁。
English: Wu Ding was forty-eight years old in the spring of the seventh year.

古文：赠青齐二州军事、司空、青州刺史，谥曰烈懿。
现代文：赠青齐二州军事、司空、青州刺史，谥号烈懿。
English: He was awarded the titles of the Military Commander of the Second State of Qinghai and Qingdao, the Commander of the Air Force, the Military Historian of Qingdao, and the Hero of Qingdao.

古文：则弟敬宝，少历显位。
现代文：则弟敬宝，年轻时就身居显位。
English: His younger brother, Jing Bao, rose to prominence at a young age.

古文：后为东广州刺史，与萧轨等攻建业，不克，没焉。
现代文：后为东广州刺史，与萧轨等进攻建业，不果，战死。
English: Later, he wrote a history of East Guangzhou, and built a business with Xiao Liao and other attackers, but was unsuccessful and died in battle.

古文：慕容绍宗，慕容晃第四子太原王恪后也，曾祖腾，归魏，遂居于代。
现代文：慕容绍宗，是慕容晃第四个儿子太原王恪的后代。曾祖腾，投奔魏后，就定居到了代。
English: Murong Shaosong is a descendant of Murong Ao's fourth son, Taiyuan Wang Ke. Zengzu Teng settled in the dynasty after moving to Wei.

古文：祖都，岐州刺史。
现代文：祖父都，岐州刺史。
English: Grandfather's capital, the history of Qizhou.

古文：父远，恒州刺史。
现代文：父远，恒州刺史。
English: Far away from his father, he is the history of Hengzhou.

古文：绍宗容貌恢毅，少言语，深沉有胆略。
现代文：绍宗容貌恢毅，言语寡少，深沉且有胆略。
English: Shao Zong has a robust appearance, few words, profound and daring.

古文：尔朱荣即其从舅子也。
现代文：尔朱荣就是绍宗叔伯舅父的儿子。
English: Er Zhu Rong is the son of Uncle Shaozong's uncle.

古文：值北边挠乱，绍宗携家属诣晋阳以归荣，荣深待之。
现代文：当初北方边地出现骚乱，绍宗便携家带口前往晋阳投奔了尔朱荣，荣以厚礼相待。
English: At the beginning of the riots in the northern border areas, Shaozong took his family to Jinyang and went to Zhu Rong, and Rong treated him with great courtesy.

古文：及荣称兵入洛，私告绍宗曰： 洛中人士繁盛，骄侈成俗，若不加除剪，恐难制驭。
现代文：到荣举兵入洛阳前，私底下对绍宗讲： 洛中人士极多，却骄侈淫逸，如不给以除剪，大概就会积重难返。
English: Before Rong Rong raised an army to enter Luoyang, he privately told Shao Zong: There are many people in Luoyang, but they are arrogant and lascivious. If they are not removed, they will probably accumulate and be difficult to return.

古文：吾欲因百官出迎，仍悉诛之，尔谓可不？ 
现代文：我准备借百官出迎的机会，将他们全部诛杀，你认为如何？ 
English: I'm ready to take the opportunity to meet hundreds of officials and kill them all, what do you think?

古文：绍宗对曰： 太后临朝，淫虐无道，天下愤惋，共所弃之。
现代文：绍宗说： 太后临朝，淫虐无道，天下愤慨，都想摆脱她的统治。
English: Shaozong said, "The Empress Dowager Lintong is a lecherous and wicked woman, and the whole world is indignant and wants to get rid of her rule.

古文：公既身控神兵，心执忠义，忽欲歼夷多士，谓非长策，深愿三思。 
现代文：公既然手握神兵，心执忠义，忽然想到杀尽士人，愚意以为不是上策，愿公三思。 
English: Since the public holds the divine soldier in its hand, and holds loyalty and righteousness in its heart, and suddenly thinks of killing all the soldiers, and foolishly thinks that this is not the best strategy, the public should think twice.

古文：荣不从。
现代文：尔朱荣并没有听从。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：后以军功封索卢县子。寻进爵为侯。
现代文：后因军功封索卢县子，很快又晋爵为侯。
English: Later, because of his military exploits, he was made the son of Solu County, and soon he was promoted to marquis.

古文：从高祖破羊侃，又与元天穆平邢杲，累迁并州刺史。
现代文：从高祖破羊侃，又与元天穆平邢杲，升官为并州刺史。
English: From Gao Zu to Yang Kan, and from Yuan Tian to Muping, he was promoted to be a member of the State Council.

古文：纥豆陵步藩逼晋阳，尔朱兆击之，累为步藩所破，欲以晋州征高祖共图步藩。
现代文：纥豆陵步藩围逼晋阳，尔朱兆领兵抵抗，却多次被步藩打垮，所以他想从晋州征调高祖来共同对付步藩。
English: He wanted to recruit Gaozhu from Jinzhou to fight against the Bu clan, since the Bu clan had besieged and besieged Jinyang and Er Zhu Zhao had led the resistance, but had been repeatedly defeated by the Bu clan.

古文：绍宗谏曰： 今天下扰扰，人怀觊觎。正是智士用策之秋。
现代文：绍宗进谏说： 当今天下纷乱，人人怀着野心，这正是智士用策的大好时机。
English: Shaozong Jinlu said: Today is a chaotic day, everyone is ambitious, this is a great opportunity for wise men to use strategies.

古文：高晋州才雄气猛，英略盖世，譬诸蛟龙，安可借以云雨！ 
现代文：高晋州雄才武略，英雄盖世，好似蛟龙，岂可借助他来兴云播雨？ 
English: Gao Jinzhou, a brilliant strategist, a world-renowned hero, like a dragon, can he be used to create clouds and spread rain?

古文：兆怒曰： 我与晋州推诚相待，何忽辄相猜阻，横生此言！ 
现代文：尔朱兆发火了，说： 我与高晋州推诚相见，你却跑出来阻挡挑拨，竟然讲出了这样的话语！ 
English: Le Zhu Zhao got angry and said, "I met Gao Jinzhou with sincerity, but you ran out to block the provocation and even spoke such words!

古文：便禁止绍宗，数日方释。
现代文：于是拘禁绍宗，几天后才放他出来。
English: As a result, they detained Shaozong and only released him a few days later.

古文：遂割鲜卑隶高祖。
现代文：尔朱兆割让鲜卑隶属高祖。
English: Er Zhu Zhaojuan subordinated Xianbei to Gaozu.

古文：高祖共讨步藩，灭之。
现代文：高祖与兆合兵攻打步藩，终于大获全胜。
English: Gaozu and the Zhaohe soldiers attacked the Shu domain, and finally won a complete victory.

古文：及高祖举义信都，兆以绍宗为长史，又命为行台，率军壶关，以抗高祖。
现代文：在高祖起义信都后，兆委绍宗为长史，又任命为行台，率兵赶赴壶关，以抵挡高祖。
English: After Gaozu's uprising against the Shintō, the Zhaokei Shōzong had a long history, and was also appointed as the governor. He led the troops to rush to Kuguan to resist Gaozu.

古文：及广阿、韩陵之败，兆乃抚膺自咎，谓绍宗曰： 比用卿言，今岂至此！ 
现代文：当广阿、韩陵战败时，尔朱兆拍着胸脯自责，对绍宗说： 如果当时听了你的话，就不会有今天的结果。 
English: When Guang Ah and Han Ling were defeated, Er Zhu Zhao beat his chest and blamed himself, saying to Shaozong: If I had listened to you at that time, there would not have been today's result.

古文：兆之败于韩陵也，士卒多奔，兆惧，将欲潜遁。
现代文：兆败韩陵，士卒逃亡很多。尔朱兆恐慌了，打算潜逃。
English: Zhao defeated Han Ling, and many soldiers fled. Er Zhu Zhao panicked and planned to abscond.

古文：绍宗建旗鸣角，招集义徒，军容既振，与兆徐而上马。
现代文：绍宗便树起义旗，吹响号角，集合了众多的义徒，整肃军容之后，他就同尔朱兆一道慢慢地坐到了马上。
English: Shao Zong planted the flag of the uprising, blew the trumpet, and gathered a large number of righteous people. After cleaning up the military, he slowly sat on the horse with Er Zhu Zhao.

古文：后高祖从邺讨兆于晋阳，兆窘急，走赤谼岭，自缢而死。
现代文：后来高祖从邺城赶往晋阳，攻讨尔朱兆，兆窘迫无奈，逃到赤襌岭，自缢而死。
English: Later, Gao Zu rushed from Lucheng to Jinyang to attack Erzhu Zhao, but Zhao was in a desperate situation and fled to Akhaling, where he hanged himself and died.

古文：绍宗行到乌突城，见高祖追至，遂携荣妻子及兆余众自归。
现代文：绍宗跑到乌突城，见高祖追兵赶来，就带着尔朱荣的妻儿和尔朱兆的余部投降了。
English: Shaozong ran to Utu City, saw Gaozu chasing the soldiers, and surrendered with the wife and children of Lzhu Rong and the rest of Lzhu Zhao.

古文：高祖仍加恩礼，所有官爵并如故，军谋兵略，时参预焉。
现代文：高祖对绍宗大加礼遇，不仅保留了他的所有官爵，而且经常请其参与军谋兵略等大事的策划。
English: Gaozu treated Shaosong with great courtesy, not only retaining all of his official titles, but also often inviting him to participate in the planning of major events such as military strategy.

古文：天平初，迁都邺，庶事未周，乃令绍宗与高隆之共知府库图籍诸事。
现代文：天平初年，迁都邺城，诸多事务来不及处理，高祖便下令绍宗与高隆之共同掌管府库图籍等事。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, when the capital was moved to Goseong and many affairs could not be dealt with in time, Gaozu ordered Shaosong and Gaolong to jointly manage the affairs of the prefectural government, such as the registration of documents.

古文：二年，宜阳民李延孙聚众反，乃以绍宗为西南道军司，率都督厍狄安盛等讨破之。
现代文：二年，因宜阳民李延孙聚众造反，朝廷就委任绍宗为西南道军司，率领都督厍狄安盛等人平定了叛乱。
English: In the second year, because Li Yansun, a citizen of Yiyang, rallied the people to rebel, the imperial court appointed Shao Zong as the military commander of Southwest Province, and led the governor Zou Di'an Sheng and others to quell the rebellion.

古文：军还，行扬州刺史，寻行青州刺史。
现代文：军还，行扬州刺史事，不久，改任青州刺吏。
English: The military also carried out the Yangzhou stabbing history, and soon he was appointed as the Qingzhou stabbing official.

古文：丞相府记室孙搴属绍宗以兄为州主簿，绍宗不用。
现代文：丞相府记室孙搴请求绍宗委任兄长作州主簿，绍宗没有答应。
English: Sun Yat-sen, the chief cabinet secretary, asked Shaosong to appoint his elder brother as the state's chief accountant, but Shaosong did not agree.

古文：搴谮之于高祖，云： 慕容绍宗尝登广固城长叹，谓其所亲云 大丈夫有复先业理不 。 
现代文：于是孙搴向高祖进谗，说： 慕容绍宗曾经在广固城上长吁短叹，对最亲近的人讲： 大丈夫难道就没有恢复先业的理想？  
English: So Sun Yat-sen approached Gao Zu and said, "Mulong Shao Zong once sighed deeply on Guanggu Castle and said to those closest to him, 'Isn't it true that your husband has no ideal of resuming his former profession?

古文：由是征还。
现代文：因此绍宗被召回都城。
English: As a result, Shaosong was recalled to the capital.

古文：元象初，西魏将独孤如愿据洛州，梁、颍之间，寇盗锋起。
现代文：元象初，西魏大将独孤如愿占据洛州后，梁、颍之间，一时盗贼蜂起。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, after the general of the Western Wei Dynasty occupied Lozhou alone as he wished, the thieves rose up between the beams and rafters.

古文：高祖命绍宗率兵赴武牢，与行台刘贵等平之。
现代文：高祖命令绍宗领兵奔赴武牢，配合行台刘贵等人进行了弹压。
English: Gaozu ordered Shaozong to lead the soldiers to Wudang Prison, and with the cooperation of Liu Gui and others, they carried out the spring pressure.

古文：进爵为公，除度支尚书。
现代文：晋爵为公，拜度支尚书。
English: Promotion to the peerage is a matter of public record.

古文：后为晋州刺史、西道大行台，还朝，迁御史中尉。
现代文：后为晋州刺史、西道大行台，还朝，迁任御史中尉。
English: Later, he was assigned to Jinzhou Shishi, West Daogangdai, and in the Tang Dynasty, he was transferred to the position of Lieutenant of Shishi.

古文：属梁人刘乌黑入寇徐方，令绍宗率兵讨击之，大破，因除徐州刺史。
现代文：梁人刘乌黑寇掠徐方，朝廷派遣绍宗率兵讨击，大破，因此被任命为徐州刺史。
English: Liu Wuhai, the leader of the Liang people, raided the Xuzhou side, and the imperial court sent Shao Zong to lead the troops to fight, which was a big defeat, so he was appointed as the leader of Xuzhou.

古文：乌黑收其散众，复为侵窃，绍宗密诱其徒党，数月间，遂执乌黑杀之。
现代文：刘乌黑聚集残部，再次侵扰，绍宗秘密地收买了他的徒党，几个月后，就抓获了乌黑，并将其处死。
English: Liu Wuhai gathered the remnants and invaded again. Shao Zong secretly bribed his clique. A few months later, he captured Wuhai and put him to death.

古文：侯景反叛，命绍宗为东南道行台，加开府，转封燕郡公，与韩轨等诣瑕丘，以图进趣。
现代文：侯景反叛，朝廷拜绍宗为东南道行台，加开府，转封燕郡公，与韩轨诸人前往瑕丘，准备平乱。
English: Houjing rebelled, the imperial court Baishao Zong for the Southeast Road, Kaifu, transferred to Yan County, and went to Keqiu with Hanlu and others to prepare to quell the chaos.

古文：梁武帝遣其兄子贞阳侯渊明等率众十万，顿军寒山，与侯景掎角，拥泗水灌彭城。
现代文：梁武帝派遣其兄之子贞阳侯渊明等统众十万，屯驻寒山，同侯景构成犄角之势，还引泗水灌彭城。
English: Emperor Liangwu sent his brother's son, Zhengyang Hou Yuanming, and a total of 100,000 people to live in the mountains. Together with Houjing, they formed a powerful force, and also brought water to Pengcheng.

古文：仍诏绍宗为行台，节度三徐、二兖州军事，与大都督高岳等出讨，大破之，擒渊明及其将帅等，俘虏其众。
现代文：朝廷又诏令绍宗为行台，节度三徐、二兖州军事，与大都督高岳等出兵攻讨，大获全胜，虏获渊明及其诸多部将，还有不少的士卒。
English: The imperial court also decreed that Shao Zong should be the one to march to the capital, and that there should be three military festivals and two provincial military festivals, and sent troops to fight against the great governor Gao Yue and others, and won a great victory, capturing Yuanming and many of his subordinates, as well as many soldiers.

古文：乃回军讨侯景于涡阳。
现代文：绍宗趁势挥师直逼涡阳。
English: Shao Zong took advantage of the situation and waved his sword to directly attack Vortex Yang.

古文：于时景军甚众，前后诸将往者莫不为其所轻。
现代文：此时侯景军人多势众，所以对前来攻打的将领都不看在眼里。
English: At this time, there was a large number of Houjing soldiers, so they did not pay attention to the generals who came to attack.

古文：及闻绍宗与岳将至，深有惧色，谓其属曰： 岳所部兵精，绍宗旧将，宜共慎之。 
现代文：当听到绍宗与高岳拥兵将至的报告，满脸惧色，对其部将说： 高岳兵精，绍宗老将，应该谨慎地对付他们才行。 
English: When he heard the report that Gao Zong and Gao Yue's supporters were coming, he was full of fear and said to his subordinate: Gao Yue's soldiers, veteran of Shaozong, should be dealt with cautiously.

古文：于是与景接战，诸将持疑，无肯先者，绍宗麾兵径进，诸将从之，因而大捷，景遂奔遁。
现代文：同侯景军接战后，诸将持疑，不肯为先，绍宗则挥兵猛进，诸将也就紧随其后，因此大捷，侯景逃遁。
English: After the engagement with the army of Hou Jing, the generals were suspicious and did not want to go first, but Shao Zong stormed forward with his army, and the generals followed him closely. As a result, Hou Jing was victorious and fled.

古文：军还，别封永乐县子。
现代文：军还，别封绍宗永乐县子。
English: The military also said that the county seat of Yongle County should not be occupied by Shaosong.

古文：初，高祖末，命世宗云： 侯景若反，以慕容绍宗当之。 
现代文：当初高祖遗命世宗说： 如果侯景反叛，当派慕容绍宗平定。 
English: At the beginning, Gao Zu's last words to Shizong were: If Hou Jing rebels, Murong Shaozong should be dispatched to quell the rebellion.

古文：至是，竟立功效。
现代文：这个时候，绍宗终于未负厚望。
English: At this time, Shaosong finally did not live up to high expectations.

古文：西魏遣其大将王思政入据颍州，又以绍宗为南道行台，与太尉高岳、仪同刘丰等率军围击，堰洧水以灌之。
现代文：西魏调遣其大将王思政入据颍州，朝廷又以绍宗为南道行台，与太尉高岳、仪同刘丰等人率军围击，拦挡洧水淹灌颍州。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty dispatched its general Wang Sizheng to its stronghold of Bozhou, and the imperial court also took Shaozong as the southern road platform, and led the army to encircle it with Taifu Gao Yue, Yi Tong Liu Feng and others to block the flooding of Bozhou.

古文：时绍宗频有凶梦，意每恶之。
现代文：这时绍宗常做恶梦，心情极不畅快。
English: At this time, Shaozong often had nightmares and was in a very bad mood.

古文：乃私谓左右曰： 吾自年二十已还，恒有蒜发，昨来蒜发忽然自尽。
现代文：因此私底下对左右的人讲： 我二十岁之后，就有了白发，昨天开始，却一根也没有了。
English: Therefore, I privately tell people around me: After I was twenty years old, I had white hair, but since yesterday, I don't have any.

古文：以理推之，蒜者算也，吾算将尽乎？ 
现代文：依此推断，蒜者，算也，大概我们的计划要失败？ 
English: If we extrapolate from this, what is the likelihood that our plan will fail?

古文：未几，与丰临堰，见北有尘气，乃入舰同坐。
现代文：不一会，与刘丰亲临拦坝，见北方尘土飞扬，就上船同坐。
English: Soon after, he and Liu Feng visited the barrage, saw the dust flying in the north, and boarded the ship together.

古文：暴风从东北来，远近晦冥，舟缆断，飘舰径向敌城。
现代文：风暴突然从东北扑了过来，一时浑天黑地，系船的缆也被扯断，于是船直向敌城冲去。
English: The storm suddenly swept in from the northeast, and for a moment it was pitch black. The cable that was tethering the ship was also torn, so the ship rushed straight to the enemy city.

古文：绍宗自度不免，遂投水而死，时年四十九。
现代文：绍宗心想，大祸即将临头，无法逃避，便投水自杀了，时年四十九。
English: Shaozong thought to himself that a great calamity was imminent and he could not escape, so he threw himself into the water and committed suicide at the age of 49.

古文：三军将士莫不悲惋，朝廷嗟伤。
现代文：绍宗死，三军将士无不哀痛悲戚，朝廷也十分嗟叹。
English: Shao Zong died, the soldiers of the three armies all grieved and mourned, and the imperial court was also very sad.

古文：赠使持节、二青二兖齐济光七州军事、尚书令、太尉、青州刺史，谥曰景惠。
现代文：赠使持节，二青、二兖、齐、济、光等七州军事，尚书令，太尉，青州刺史，谥号景惠。
English: He was awarded the title of "Holding Festival," and was awarded the titles of "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth," "Second Youth

古文：除其长子士肃为散骑常侍。
现代文：拜其长子士肃为散骑常侍。
English: His eldest son, Su, became a horseback riding attendant.

古文：寻以谋反伏诛。
现代文：旋因士肃谋反，被朝廷诛杀。
English: Shou Yinshi plotted a rebellion and was killed by the imperial court.

古文：朝廷以绍宗功，罪止士肃身。
现代文：帝看在绍宗的功勋事上，没有株连九族。
English: In the Emperor's eyes, there were no nine families in the line of succession to Shao Zong's merits.

古文：皇建初，配飨世宗庙庭。
现代文：皇建初年，配享世宗庙庭。
English: It was built in the first year of the Emperor's reign, and it shares the same grounds as the Sejong Temple.

古文：士肃弟建中，袭绍宗爵。
现代文：士肃弟建中，继承绍宗爵位。
English: His younger brother Su Jianzhong succeeded to the title of Shao Zong.

古文：武平末，仪同三司。
现代文：武平末年，为仪同三司。
English: At the end of Wu Ping's life, he became the third secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：隋开皇中，大将军、叠州总管。
现代文：隋开皇中，位至大将军、垒州总管。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, he rose to the rank of general and was the governor of Yezhou.

古文：薛循义，字公让，河东汾阴人也。
现代文：薛循义，字公让，河东汾阴人士。
English: Xue Cunyi, Zi Gongzhan, people from Shiyin, Hedong.

古文：曾祖绍，魏七兵尚书、太子太保。
现代文：曾祖绍，魏七兵尚书、太子太保。
English: Zeng Zu Shao, Wei seven soldiers Shang Shu, Prince Taibo.

古文：祖寿仁，河东河北二郡守、秦州刺史、汾阴公。
现代文：祖父寿仁，河东河北二郡太守、秦州刺史、汾阴公。
English: His grandfather, Shouren, was the governor of two counties in Hebei Province, the governor of Qin Province, and the Duke of Suyin.

古文：父宝集，定阳太守。
现代文：父宝集，定阳太守。
English: The three armies mourned for him, and the imperial court also mourned for him, posthumously awarding him the rank of captain and the posthumous title of Jinghui.

古文：循义少而奸侠，轻财重气，招召膏猾，时有急难相奔投者，多能容匿之。
现代文：循义年轻时奸侠，轻财重义，招召豪猾，如有急难前来投奔他的话，则能收容藏匿。
English: When he was young, he was a ruffian. He valued money more than virtue. He summoned his courage and cunning. If someone came to him in an emergency, he could shelter and hide him.

古文：魏咸阳王为司州牧，用为法曹从事。
现代文：魏咸阳王为司州牧，用循义为法曹从事。
English: Wei Xianyang Wang was a magistrate and a legal scholar.

古文：魏北海王颢镇徐州，引为墨曹参军。
现代文：魏北海王颢镇守徐州，引其为墨曹参军。
English: Wei Beihai Wang Yao Zhen guarded Xuzhou, leading him to join the army as Miao Cao.

古文：正光末，天下兵起，颢为征西将军，都督华、豳、东秦诸军事，兼左仆射、西道行台，以循义为统军。
现代文：正光末，天下兵起，颢为征西将军，都督华？东秦诸军事，兼左仆射、西道行台，任循义为统军。
English: At the end of the reign of Zheng Guang, the world's armies rose up, and he was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition, the military governor of the Eastern Qin Dynasty, and the general of the Western Expedition, and he was appointed as the general of the unified army.

古文：时有诏，能募得三千人别将。
现代文：时帝有诏，若能召募三千人来当兵的话，拜为别将。
English: At the time, the emperor had decreed that if he could recruit three thousand soldiers, it would be a great success.

古文：于是循义还河东，仍历平阳、弘农诸郡，合得七千余人，即假安北将军、西道别将。
现代文：于是循义回到河东，奔赴平阳、弘农诸郡，召募到了七千多人，朝廷即给他安北将军、西道别将名号。
English: So he returned to the east of the river, went to the counties of Pingyang and Hongnong, and recruited more than seven thousand people. The imperial court gave him the titles of Anbei General and Xidobaizhong.

古文：俄而东西二夏、南北两华及豳州等反叛，颢进讨之。
现代文：不久，东西二夏、南北两华及豳州诸地反叛，颢前往征讨。
English: Soon, the East and the West, the North and the South, and Bozhou rebelled and went to fight.

古文：循义率所部，颇有功。
现代文：循义统领其部参战，多立战功。
English: He led his troops into battle in a disciplined manner, and achieved much military success.

古文：绛蜀贼陈双炽等聚汾曲，诏循义为大都督，与行台长孙稚共讨之。
现代文：绛蜀贼人陈双炽等聚众汾曲，帝诏令循义为大都督，同行台长孙稚一道讨伐。
English: Chen Shuangyao, the usurper of Zhuge Liang, and others gathered to sing a folk song. The emperor issued an imperial edict to make him the grand governor, and his colleague, the governor Sun Zhuge, led the crusade.

古文：循义以双炽是其乡人，遂轻诣垒下，晓以利害，炽等遂降。
现代文：循义认为双炽是自己的乡邻，便直接跑到他的阵垒前边，向其晓谕利害，双炽等人也就投降了。
English: He thought that Shuang Blazing was his neighbor, so he ran directly to the front of his camp and told him what was at stake. Shuang Blazing and the others also surrendered.

古文：拜循义龙门镇将。
现代文：拜循义龙门镇将。
English: Bye-bye, Longmen Town.

古文：后循义宗人凤贤等作乱，围镇城。
现代文：后循义的宗党凤贤等人作乱，包围了龙门镇城。
English: Later, the patriarchal party Fengxian, who followed the teachings of Confucius, and others caused a disturbance and surrounded Longmen Town.

古文：循义亦以天下纷扰，规自纵擅，遂与凤贤聚众为逆，自号黄钺大将军。
现代文：循义也认为天下大乱，准备起事，于是便与凤贤等人聚众为逆，还自号为黄钺大将军。
English: Sui Yi also thought that the world was in chaos and prepared to rise up, so he gathered a crowd with Feng Xian and others to do the opposite, and also called himself General Huang Qi.

古文：诏都督宗正珍孙讨之。
现代文：朝廷下令都督宗正珍孙出讨。
English: The Northern Wei court ordered the governor Zong Zheng Zhen's grandson to go and fight them.

古文：军未至，循义惭悔，乃遣其帐下孙怀彦奉表自陈，乞一大将招慰。
现代文：讨伐军还没到来，循义反悔，便派遣帐下孙怀彦奉表自陈心迹，乞请来一大将招抚。
English: Before the crusaders arrived, he sent his subordinate, Sun Huaiyan, to solicit the general's friendship.

古文：魏孝明遣西北大行台胡元吉奉诏晓喻，循义降。
现代文：魏孝明帝派西北道大行台胡元吉奉诏晓谕，循义归降。
English: Emperor Xiaoming of the Wei Dynasty sent Hu Yuanji, the governor of the Northwest Passage, to surrender according to the edict.

古文：凤贤等犹据险屯结，长孙稚军于弘农，珍孙军灵桥，未能进。
现代文：凤贤等人依然据险屯结，长孙稚军驻扎弘农，珍孙军屯驻灵桥，受阻不能前进。
English: Fengxian and others were still encamped according to danger, the eldest grandson army stationed in Hongnong, the youngest grandson army stationed in Lingqiao, and could not advance due to obstruction.

古文：循义与其从叔善乐、从弟嘉族等各率义勇为攻取之势，与凤贤书示其祸福。
现代文：循义同从叔善乐、从弟嘉族等各率义勇摆开攻打的架式，并写信给凤贤，向他陈述利害关系。
English: Based on the principles of righteousness, together with Zhu Zhenle, Zhu Jia Zong and other leaders, they bravely set up a framework for the attack, and wrote to Feng Xian to state their interests to him.

古文：凤贤降，拜凤贤龙骧将军、假节、稷山镇将，夏阳县子、邑三百户。
现代文：凤贤降，朝廷拜凤贤龙骧将军、假节、稷山镇将，夏阳县子，食邑三百户。
English: After Fengxian's abdication, the imperial court paid homage to General Fengxian Longyu, the holiday, the mayor of Lushan Town, the county seat of Xiayang County, and more than 300 households in food villages.

古文：封循义汾阴县侯，邑八百户。
现代文：封循义汾阴县侯，食邑八百户。
English: There are 800 households in the county seat of Yibin County.

古文：尔朱荣以循义豪猾反覆，录送晋阳，与高昂等并见拘防。
现代文：尔朱荣认为循义豪猾反复，录送晋阳，同高昂等人一道被朝廷拘捕。
English: Le Zhu Rong believed that he had repeatedly and bravely followed the teachings of Confucius, and he was arrested by the imperial court together with Gao Ang and others.

古文：荣赴洛，以循义等自随，置于驼牛署。
现代文：荣赴洛阳，让循义跟随前往，安置在驼牛署。
English: Rong went to Luoyang, let Xunyi follow him, and placed him in the camel station.

古文：荣死，魏孝庄以循义为弘农、河北、河东、正平四郡大都督。
现代文：荣死，魏孝庄帝拜循义为弘农、河北、河东、正平四郡大都督。
English: After his death, Wei Xiaozhuang Emperor Baizhongyi became the grand governor of Hongnong, Hebei, Hedong and Zhengping counties.

古文：时高祖为晋州刺史，见循义，待之甚厚。
现代文：此时高祖为晋州刺史，见到循义后，用很高的礼节对待他。
English: At this time, Gao Zu was making history in Jinzhou. When he saw Xue Yi, he treated him with great courtesy.

古文：及尔朱兆立魏长广王为主，除循义右将军、陕州刺史，假安南将军。
现代文：当尔朱兆立魏长广王为主后，朝廷除循义右将军、陕州刺史，假安南将军。
English: When Zhu Zhao made Wei Changguang Wang the main ruler, the imperial court removed General Xu Youyu, Shaanxi Zhishi, and fake General Annan.

古文：魏前废帝初，以循义为持节、后将军、南汾州刺史。
现代文：魏前废帝初年，擢循义为持节、后将军、南汾州刺史。
English: In the first year of the dethronement of the emperor before the Wei Dynasty, Xunyi was promoted to hold the festival, the post of general, and the history of Nanluozhou.

古文：高祖起义信都，破四胡于韩陵，遣征循义，从至晋阳，以循义行并州事。
现代文：高祖信都起义，在韩陵大败四胡，派人征召循义，循义赶往晋阳，行并州事。
English: Gao Zuxin led an uprising, defeated four Hu in Hanling, sent people to recruit Xu Rongyi, and Xu Rongyi rushed to Jinyang to join the state affairs.

古文：又从高祖平尔朱兆。
现代文：又在高祖指挥下平定尔朱兆。
English: He also subdued Zhu Zhao under the command of Gaozu.

古文：武帝之入关也，高祖奉迎临潼关，以循义为关右行台，自龙门济河。
现代文：魏武帝西入关，高祖迎接抵达潼关，授循义关右行台，从龙门渡过黄河。
English: Emperor Weiwu entered the West Gate, Gaozu greeted the arrival of Shaoguan, followed the Yiguan right-hand platform, and crossed the Yellow River from Longmen.

古文：西魏北华州刺史薛崇礼屯杨氏壁，循义以书招之，崇礼率万余人降。
现代文：西魏北华州刺史薛崇礼屯扎杨氏壁，循义用书信招之，于是崇礼率万余人前来投降。
English: Xue Chongli, a scholar from North Huazhou in the Western Wei Dynasty, went to Yang's Wall and invited him by letter, so Chongli led more than 10,000 people to surrender.

古文：樊子鹄之据兖州，循义从大司马娄昭破平之。
现代文：樊子鹄占据兖州，循义随从大司马娄昭一道进攻，获胜。
English: Zou Ziqi occupied Zhangzhou, followed the general secretary Ma Junzhao to attack, and won.

古文：天平中，除卫将军、南中郎将，带汲郡太守、顿丘、淮阳、东郡、黎阳五郡都督。
现代文：天平中，除卫将军、南中郎将，带汲郡太守，及顿丘、淮阳、东郡、黎阳五郡都督。
English: In the middle of the Tenpyo era, there were the General of the National Guard, the General of the Southern Middle Palace Guards, the Governor of Gumi County, and the governors of five counties, Dongqiu, Huaiyang, Donggun, and Liyang.

古文：迁东徐州。
现代文：迁东徐州。
English: Moved to East Xuzhou.

古文：元象初，拜仪同。
现代文：元象初，拜仪同。
English: At the beginning of the Yuan Dynasty, the worship of ritual also began.

古文：沙苑之役，从诸军退。
现代文：沙苑之役，随同诸军后退。
English: The Battle of Sha Yuan was over, and the troops retreated.

古文：还，行晋州事。封祖业弃城走，循义追至洪洞，说祖业还守，而祖业不从。
现代文：还，晋州刺史封祖业弃城逃走，循义追赶至洪洞，劝祖业回来守城，但祖业却没有听从。
English: In addition, the Jinzhou engraving states that Fong Zuye abandoned the city and ran away, and chased him to Hongdong to persuade Zuye to return and defend the city, but Zuye did not listen.

古文：循义还据晋州，安集固守。
现代文：循义返归，据守晋州，并作了诸多准备。
English: He returned to Jinzhou in accordance with the precepts and made a lot of preparations.

古文：西魏仪同长孙子彦逼城下，循义开门伏甲以待之，子彦不测虚实，于是遁去。
现代文：西魏仪同长孙子彦围逼晋州城下，循义洞开城门，埋伏甲士等待着，子彦因不知虚实，很快溜走。
English: In the Western Wei Dynasty, he and his eldest grandson, Zihang, besieged and forced their way under the city of Jinzhou. They opened the city gate through the Yidong Cave. The ambushed soldiers were waiting for them. Zihang, not knowing the truth, quickly slipped away.

古文：高祖甚嘉之，就拜晋州刺史、南汾、东雍、陕四州行台，赏帛千匹。
现代文：高祖大大地嘉奖了他，马上拜他为晋州刺史，南汾、东雍、陕四州行台，还赏帛千疋。
English: Gao Zu greatly commended him, and immediately worshiped him as Jinzhou Zhishi, Nanzhu, Dongyong, and Shaanxi Shizhou Xitai, and also awarded him thousands of talents.

古文：循义在州，擒西魏所署正平太守段荣显。
现代文：循义在晋州，活捉了西魏所委任的正平太守段荣显。
English: In Jinzhou, Cao Rongyi captured Zhengping Taishoudan Rongxian, who was appointed by the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：招降胡酋胡垂黎等部落数千口，表置五城郡以安处之。
现代文：招降胡人酋帅胡垂黎等部落数千人，上表朝廷，置五城郡安排这批人。
English: He recruited and demoted thousands of people from tribes such as the Hu people's chieftain Hu Tuli Li, presented them to the imperial court, and placed them in Wucheng County to arrange this group of people.

古文：高仲密之叛，以循义为西南道行台，为掎角声势，不行。
现代文：高仲密反叛后，以循义为西南道行台，企图构成犄角之势，计划没有实施。
English: After Gao Zhongmi's rebellion, he tried to create a power struggle by using Shunyi as the southwestern road platform, but the plan was never implemented.

古文：寻除齐州刺史，以黔货除名。
现代文：很快除齐州刺史，因贪污罪被朝廷除名。
English: He was soon expelled from the imperial court for embezzlement.

古文：追其前守晋州功，复其官爵，仍拜卫尉卿。
现代文：朝廷追念其前守护晋州的功劳，又恢复了他的官爵，还拜其为卫尉卿。
English: The imperial court remembered the merits of its former guardian of Jinzhou, and restored his official title, and also worshiped him as the Lord of the Guards.

古文：时山胡侵乱晋州，遣循义追讨，破之。
现代文：时山胡侵扰晋州，派循义追逐讨伐，获胜。
English: When the Mountain Goose invaded Jinzhou, the Kuangyi faction pursued the crusade and won.

古文：进爵正平郡公，加开府。
现代文：晋爵正平郡公，加开府。
English: He was promoted to the peerage as the county magistrate of Zhengping County, Gakaifu.

古文：世宗以高祖遗旨，减封二百户，别封循义为平乡男。
现代文：依照高祖遗言，世宗减除循义封邑二百户，别封循义为平乡男。
English: According to Gao Zu's last words, Shizong deducted two hundred households from Xueyi's fief, leaving Xueyi as the man of Pingxiang.

古文：天保初，除护军，别封蓝田县公，又拜太子太保。
现代文：天保初，除护军，别封蓝田县公，又拜太子太保。
English: At the beginning of Tianbao, in addition to the escort, don't seal the Lantian County government, and worship the Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：五年七月卒，时年七十七。
现代文：五年七月卒，时年七十一。
English: He passed away in July 2005, at the age of 71.

古文：赠晋太华三州诸军事、司空、晋州刺史，赠物三百段。
现代文：赠晋太华三州诸军事、司空、晋州刺史，赠帛三百段。
English: Jin Taihua was presented with the military records of the three prefectures of Jinzhou, Siku, and Jinzhou, as well as 300 pieces of imperial regalia.

古文：子文殊嗣。
现代文：子文殊继嗣。
English: His son Manjusri succeeded him.

古文：循义从弟嘉族，性亦豪爽。
现代文：循义从弟嘉族，性格也很豪爽。
English: He follows the teachings of his younger brother Jia Zong, and his character is also very heroic.

古文：释褐员外散骑侍郎，稍迁正平太守。
现代文：以老百姓身份升任员外散骑侍郎，慢慢升职到正平太守。
English: As a commoner, he was promoted to the position of a non-commissioned officer, horseback riding attendant, and was slowly promoted to the position of Shohei Taishu.

古文：属高祖在信都，嘉族闻而赴义。
现代文：适逢高祖在信都，嘉族闻讯，即赶往投奔。
English: Gao Zu was in Xindu at the right time, and when the Jia people heard the news, they rushed to the capital.

古文：从平四胡于韩陵，除华州刺史。
现代文：随从高祖在韩陵打垮了四胡，除华州刺史。
English: Gao Zu's followers defeated the four Hu in Hanling, except for Huazhou.

古文：及贺拔岳拒命，令嘉族置骑河上，以御大军。
现代文：当贺拔岳抗拒朝廷诏令时，帝诏嘉族在黄河边安置骑兵，用来抵御大军。
English: When Mt. He Badu resisted the imperial edict, the Jia people stationed cavalry on the Yellow River to resist the large army.

古文：嘉族遂弃其乘马，浮河而度，归于高祖。
现代文：嘉族弃其坐骑，渡过黄河，回到了高祖那里。
English: The Jia people abandoned their horses, crossed the Yellow River and returned to Gao Zu.

古文：由是拜扬州刺史，卒于官。
现代文：由是拜扬州刺史，卒于刺史任上。
English: He was appointed to the post of Bayangzhou chief historian and died in office.

古文：子震，字文雄。
现代文：子震，字文雄。
English: Zi Zhen, Zi Wen Xiong.

古文：天平初，受旨镇守龙门，陷于西魏。
现代文：天平初，受诏镇守龙门，但被西魏攻占。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, Longmen was guarded by the town of Zhaozhao, but it was conquered by the Western Wei Dynasty.

古文：元象中，方得逃还。
现代文：元象中，才设法逃跑回来。
English: He managed to escape and return to his former life.

古文：高祖嘉其至诚，除广州刺史。
现代文：高祖嘉奖他的赤诚，拜其为广州刺史。
English: Gao Zu commended his red-heartedness and worshiped him as the leader of the history of Guangzhou.

古文：后从慕容绍宗讨侯景，以功别封肤施县男。
现代文：后随慕容绍宗讨伐侯景，以军功别封肤施县男。
English: Later, he followed Murong Shaosong to fight against Houjing and was awarded the title of Shixian Man for his military exploits.

古文：天保四年，从讨山胡，破茹茹，并有功绩，累迁谯州刺史。
现代文：天保四年，从讨山胡，破蠕蠕，均有战功，迁谯州刺史。
English: In the four years of Tianbao, from the battle of Shanhu and the destruction of Creep Creep, they all had military achievements, and the history of Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping Creeping.

古文：循义从子元颖，父光炽，东雍州刺史、太常卿。
现代文：循义从子元颖，父光炽，东雍州刺史、太常卿。
English: Zuoying's son, Yuan Ying, and his father, Guangyan, were famous scholars in East Yongzhou, and Tai Changqing.

古文：元颖廉谨有信义，起家永安王参军。
现代文：元颖廉洁谨慎讲究信义，最初为永安王参军。
English: Genuine, incorruptible, prudent, and concerned with loyalty, he initially joined the army as Yongan Wang.

古文：行秀容县事，有清名。
现代文：行秀容县事，有清名。
English: Gyoshuyong county affairs, have a clear name.

古文：累转定州别驾，举清平勤干，除渔阳太守。
现代文：累转定州别驾，因清平勤恳被举荐，提升为渔阳太守。
English: He was recommended to be promoted to the position of Yuyang Taishu (governor of Yuyang Province) because of his diligence.

古文：叱列平，字杀鬼，代郡西部人也，世为酋帅。
现代文：叱列平，字杀鬼，代郡西部地方的人氏，其家世代为酋帅。
English: Zheleiping, the Chinese character for slaying ghosts, represents the people of the western part of the county, and his family has been chieftains for generations.

古文：平有容貌，美须髯，善骑射。
现代文：平有容貌，须髯漂亮，善骑马射箭。
English: Plain-looking, with beautiful whiskers, good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：袭第一领民酋长，临江伯。
现代文：袭职第一领民酋长、临江伯。
English: The first territorial chief of the people, Lin Jiangbo, succeeds to the post.

古文：孝昌末，拔陵反叛，茹茹余众入寇马邑，平以统军属，有战功，补别将。
现代文：孝昌末年，拔陵反叛，蠕蠕的部分人众寇掠马邑，平由于统领其部众反击，立军功，补为别将。
English: At the end of Xiaochang's life, Bailing rebelled and some of his followers invaded and plundered Ma'yun. As a result of leading his followers to fight back, Ping made military exploits and became a distinguished general.

古文：后牧子作乱，刘胡仑、斛律可那律俱时构逆，以平为都督，讨定胡仑等。
现代文：后来牧子作乱，同时，刘胡仑、斛律可那律也一齐反叛，朝廷拜平为都督，打垮了胡仑等人。
English: Later, the herdsman caused a riot, and at the same time, Liu Hulun and Pei Lu Kang Naru also rebelled together, and the court appointed Baiping as the governor, defeating Hulun and others.

古文：魏孝庄初，除武卫将军。
现代文：魏孝庄初年，除武卫将军。
English: In the first year of Wei Xiaozhuang, in addition to General Wuwei.

古文：随尔朱荣破葛荣，平元颢，迁中军都督、右卫将军，封瘿陶县伯，邑七百户。
现代文：随从尔朱荣破葛荣，平元颢，迁中军都督、右卫将军，封鞼陶县伯，食邑七百户。
English: He was followed by Zhu Rong, Ge Rong, Ping Yuan Rong, the governor of the Chinese army, the right guard general, the county magistrate of Tao County, and seven hundred households in food villages.

古文：荣死，平与荣妻及尔朱世隆等北走。
现代文：尔朱荣死，平护卫着荣的妻子和尔朱世隆逃往北地。
English: Er Zhu Rong died, and his wife and Er Zhu Shilong, who were protecting him, fled to the north.

古文：长广王晔立，授右卫将军，加京畿大都督。
现代文：长广王晔为帝，授平右卫将军，加京畿大都督。
English: Changguang Wang Qian became emperor, was awarded the title of General of the Right Division of the PLA, and also became the governor of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：时尔朱氏凌僭，平常虑危祸，会高祖起义，平遂归诚。
现代文：此时，尔朱氏为所欲为，平常常担忧灾祸降临头上，适逢高祖举起义旗，平便投奔而来。
English: At this time, the Er Zhu clan did whatever they wanted, usually worried about the disaster befalling their heads. When Gao Zu raised the banner of righteousness, he came running.

古文：从平邺，破四胡于韩陵。
现代文：从高祖平邺，于韩陵大破四胡。
English: From Gaozu Pingyao to Hanling, there are four Hu.

古文：仲远既走，以平为东郡大行台。
现代文：仲远亡逃，拜平为东郡大行台。
English: Zhongyuan fled and died, and Baiping became the main square of Dong County.

古文：军还，从高祖平尔朱兆。
现代文：军还，又随高祖打垮了尔朱兆。
English: The army also defeated Lzhu Zhao together with Gao Zu.

古文：复从领军娄昭讨樊子鹄平之。
现代文：还在领军娄昭的指挥下大败樊子鹄。
English: They also suffered a crushing defeat at the hands of the leading troops under the command of Zou Zhao.

古文：授使持节、华州刺史。
现代文：授使持节、华州刺史。
English: Awarded the prize of "Holding Festival" and made history in Huazhou.

古文：高仲密之叛，平从高祖破周文帝于邙山。
现代文：高仲密叛乱，平从高祖在邙山打败了周文帝。
English: Gao Zhongmi rebelled, and Ping Cong Gao Zu defeated Zhou Wendi in Shaoshan.

古文：武定初，除廓州刺史。
现代文：武定初年，除廓州刺史。
English: In the first year of Wuding, the history of Guozhou was written.

古文：五年，加仪同三司，镇河阳。
现代文：五年，加仪同三司，镇守河阳。
English: Five years later, Jiaying was promoted to the third division and became the town guard of Heyang.

古文：八年，进爵为侯。
现代文：八年，晋爵为侯。
English: Eight years later, he was given the title of Marquis.

古文：天保初，授兖州刺史，寻加开府，别封临洮县子。
现代文：天保初年，授兖州刺史，不久，加开府，别封临洮县子。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was awarded the title of prefect of Linyi County, and shortly after, he was awarded the title of prefect of Kaifu County and the title of Linyi County.

古文：三年，与诸将南讨江淮，克阳平郡。
现代文：三年，与诸将南讨江淮，夺取了阳平郡。
English: In three years, he fought with other generals south of the Yangtze River and Huai River and captured Yangping County.

古文：隋开皇中，上柱国，卒于泾州长史。
现代文：陈人进攻围逼广陵，帝令平统领河南诸军赶赴增授，陈人退兵，他才返归。五年夏，死在兖州刺史任上，时年五十一岁。
English: Chen Rong attacked and besieged Guangling. Emperor Ping led the armies of Henan to rush to confer additional honors. Chen Rong withdrew from the army, and only then did he return. In the summer of the fifth year, he died at the age of fifty-one on the post of the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：虽无他伎，前在官以清干著称。步大汗萨，太安狄那人也。
现代文：赠瀛沧幽三州军事、瀛州刺史、中书监，谥号庄惠。子孝中嗣继。步大汗萨，太安狄那人氏。
English: He was given the titles of Cangzhou Military, Cangzhou History, and Central Library Supervisor, and his posthumous name was Zhuang Hui. He was succeeded by his son Xiao Zhongzhi, and his great-grandson Han Sa, of the Taian Dynasty.

古文：曾祖荣，仕魏历金门、化正二郡太守。
现代文：曾祖荣，仕魏历职金门、化正二郡太守。
English: Zeng Zu Rong, served as the governor of Kinmen and the governor of Kesheng County.

古文：父居，龙骧将军、领民别将。
现代文：父居，龙骧将军、领民别将。
English: My father's residence, the Dragon Pavilion, and the people's residence.

古文：正光末，六镇反乱，萨乃将家避难南下，奔尔朱荣于秀容。
现代文：正光末年，六镇造反，萨便携带家小往南避难，来到秀容，投靠了尔朱荣。
English: In the last years of the Zhengguang era, when six towns rebelled, Sa took his family to the south for refuge, came to Xiurong, and took refuge in Lezhurong.

古文：后从荣入洛，以军功除扬武军帐内统军，赐爵江夏子。
现代文：后随尔朱荣进占洛阳，因军功除扬武军帐内统军，赐爵江夏子。
English: Later, he followed Zhu Rong into Luoyang, and because of his military achievements, the Yangwu army was removed from the ledger, and Jiang Xiazi was given a peerage.

古文：从平葛荣，累前后功，加镇南将军。
现代文：从平葛荣，累计前后所立战功，加镇南将军。
English: From Ping Ge Rong, the cumulative war achievements made before and after, plus Zhenan general.

古文：荣死后，从尔朱兆入洛，补帐内大都督，从兆拒战于韩陵。兆败，萨以所部降。
现代文：荣死后，从尔朱兆入洛，补为帐内大都督。从兆参加了韩陵大战，兆败，萨带领自己的部众投降。
English: After Rong's death, Rzhu Zhao entered Luo and became the Grand Governor of Luo. Rzhu Zhao participated in the Hanling War, Zhao was defeated, and Sa led his men to surrender.

古文：高祖以为第三领民酋长，累迁秦州镇城都督、北雍州刺史。
现代文：高祖拜他做了第三领民酋长。累迁秦州镇城都督、北雍州刺史。
English: Gao Zubaibai made him the third territorial chief of the people. He was successively the governor of Qinzhou Town and the governor of North Yongzhou.

古文：天平中，转东寿阳三泉都督。
现代文：天平中，转任东寿阳、三泉都督。
English: During the Tenpyo era, he was transferred to the governorship of Higashi Shouyang and Sanzhen.

古文：元象中，行燕州，累迁临川领民大都督，赐爵长广伯。
现代文：元象中，行燕州事，累迁临川领民大都督，赐爵长广伯。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, he was involved in the affairs of Yan Province, and was successively transferred to the position of the governor of the Linchuan territory, and was given the title of Guangbo.

古文：时茹茹寇钞，屡为边害，高祖抚纳之，遣萨将命。
现代文：时蠕蠕寇掠，屡次出现边害，高祖安抚招纳他们，派遣萨受命出使。
English: At the time of the invasion of the invaders, there were repeated border disasters, Gaozu appeased and recruited them, and sent Sa to be dispatched.

古文：还，拜仪同三司。
现代文：还，拜仪同三司。
English: In addition, the ceremony will be held with the third division.

古文：出为五城大都督，镇河阳。
现代文：出任五城大都督，镇守河阳。
English: He served as the governor of the five cities and the town guard of Heyang.

古文：又加车骑大将军、开府，进封行唐县公，减勃海三百户以增其封。
现代文：朝廷又加萨车骑大将军、开府，晋封行唐县公，减少渤海三百户用来增加他的食邑。
English: In addition, the imperial court sent the general riding a horse-drawn carriage to Kaifu, and promoted him to the Tang County government, reducing the number of three hundred households in Bohai to increase his food villages.

古文：仍授晋州刺史，别封安陵县男，邑二百户，加骠骑大将军。
现代文：仍授晋州刺史，别封安陵县男，食邑二百户，加骠骑大将军。
English: He was still awarded the History of Jinzhou, the Man of Anling County, the 200 households of the food village, and the general of the cavalry.

古文：齐受禅，改封义阳郡公。
现代文：齐受魏禅，改封义阳郡公。
English: Qi accepted the Wei and Zen dynasties, and was made the governor of Yiyang County.

古文：慕容俨，字恃德，清都成安人，慕容廆之后也。
现代文：慕容俨，字恃德，清都成安人氏，慕容蝅的后代。
English: Murong Yao, Zhaode, Qing Dynasty Cheng Anren clan, descendants of Murong Yao.

古文：父叱头，魏南顿太守，身长一丈，腰带九尺。
现代文：父叱头，魏南顿太守，身高一丈，腰围九尺。
English: The father's scold, Wei Nanton Taishou, is one meter tall and has a waist circumference of nine feet.

古文：武平初，追赠开府仪同三司、尚书左仆射、持节、都督沧恒二州军事、恒州刺史。
现代文：武平初年，追赠为开府仪同三司、尚书左仆射、持节、都督沧恒二州军事、恒州刺史。
English: In the first year of Wuping, the posthumous gifts were Kaifu ceremony with three divisions, Shangshu left-handed shooting, holding festival, the governor of Hengduan two-state military, and the history of Hengduan.

古文：俨容貌出群，衣冠甚伟，不好读书，颇学兵法，工骑射。
现代文：俨容貌出众，衣冠俊伟，不爱读书，却学到了诸多兵法，擅长骑马射箭。
English: He is distinguished in appearance, handsome in clothes, does not like to read, but has learned many methods of warfare, and is good at riding and archery.

古文：正光中，魏河间王元琛率众救寿春，辟俨左厢军主，以战功赏帛五十匹。
现代文：正光年中，魏河间王元琛率众救援寿春，辟举俨为左厢军主，因战功赏帛五十匹。
English: In the middle of the year, Wang Yuanqi led the crowd to rescue Shuchun from Weihe. He was promoted to be the commander of the left wing, and was awarded 50 horses for his war service.

古文：军次西硖石，因解涡阳之围，平仓陵城、荆山戍。
现代文：军队驻屯西硖石，趁势解除了涡阳的包围，平定了仓陵城、荆山戍。
English: The army stationed in Xishuanshi, took advantage of the situation to lift the encirclement of the whirlwind, and leveled Cangling City and Jingshan Town.

古文：梁遣将郑僧等要战，俨击之，斩其将萧乔，梁人奔遁。
现代文：梁派出将军郑僧等人阻击拦截，俨迎战，斩杀郑僧手下的将领肖乔，梁人偷偷地撤兵了。
English: Liang sent the general Zheng Zeng and others to block and intercept, and fought against and killed Zheng Zeng's general Xiao Qiao. Liang's men secretly withdrew.

古文：又袭破王神念等军，擒二百余人，神念仅以身免。
现代文：又偷袭王神念等军，取得胜利，擒获二百多人，神念也差点被俘。
English: He also made a surprise attack on Wang Shennian and other troops, achieved victory, captured more than two hundred people, and Shennian was almost captured.

古文：三年，梁遣将攻东豫州，大都督元宝掌讨之。俨为别将。
现代文：三年，梁派兵攻打东豫州，大都督元宝掌应战，俨为别将。
English: In the third year, Liang sent troops to attack East Yuzhou, and the great governor, Yuan Baoshu, took part in the battle. Yu was the best.

古文：郑海珍与战，斩其军主朱僧珍、军副秦太。
现代文：郑海珍与俨交战，俨斩杀其军主朱僧珍、军副秦太。
English: Zheng Haizhen fought with Yao, and Yao killed his commander Zhu Sanzhen and deputy commander Qin Tai.

古文：又击贼王苟于阳夏，平之。
现代文：又率兵前往阳夏击打贼帅王苟，平定了贼乱。
English: He also led the soldiers to Yangxia to beat the thief Wang Guo, and quelled the banditry.

古文：孝昌中，尔朱荣入洛，授俨京畿南面都督。
现代文：孝昌中，尔朱荣占据洛阳，授俨京畿南面都督。
English: In Xiaochang, Er Zhu Rong occupied Luoyang and was given the title of the governor of the southern part of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：永安中，西荆州为梁将曹义宗所围，俨应募赴之。
现代文：永安中，西荆州城遭梁将曹义宗包围，俨应朝廷招募赶赴援助。
English: In Yong'an, West Jingzhou City was besieged by Liang general Cao Yizong, who was recruited by the imperial court to rush to help.

古文：时北育太守宋带剑谋叛，俨乃轻骑出其不意，直至城下，语云： 大军已到，太守何不迎？ 
现代文：此时，北育太守宋带剑谋反，俨便勒兵出其不意地直逼城下，大声叫道： 大军来了，太守为什么不出城相迎？ 
English: At this time, Song, the northern governor of Yunnan, plotted a counterattack with his sword, and the soldiers of Yu Benle unexpectedly drove straight under the city, shouting: The army is coming, why doesn't the governor go out of the city to meet them?

古文：带剑造次惶恐不知所为，便出迎，俨即执之，一郡遂定。
现代文：带剑惊慌失措，不知怎么办，就出城迎接，俨马上将他抓捕，此郡就这样被安定下来了。
English: Panic-stricken with his sword, not knowing what to do, he went out of the city to meet them, and they immediately arrested him. This is how the county was stabilized.

古文：又破梁将马元达、蔡天起、柳白嘉等，累有功。
现代文：俨又大败梁将马元达、蔡天起、柳白嘉等，累立战功。
English: He also defeated the generals Ma Yuanda, Cai Tianqi, Liu Baijia and so on, and made great achievements.

古文：除强弩将军。
现代文：除强弩将军。
English: Except for General Qiang Yu.

古文：与梁将王玄真、董当门等战，并破之，解穰城围，克复南阳、新乡。
现代文：与梁将王玄真、董当门等交战，获胜，解除了穰城的包围，克复南阳、新乡。
English: He fought against Liang generals Wang Xuanzhen and Dong Dangmen, and won. He lifted the siege of Fucheng and recovered Nanyang and Xinxiang.

古文：转积射将军，持节、豫州防城大都督。
现代文：转任积射将军、持节、豫州防城大都督。
English: He was transferred to the posts of General Zesho, Jisetsu, and Governor of Yuzhou Defense City.

古文：尔朱败，与豫州刺史李恩归高祖。
现代文：尔朱氏败，俨和豫州刺史李恩一道投奔高祖。
English: After the defeat of the Zhu clan, Zou and Li En, the governor of Yuzhou, went to Gaozu together.

古文：以勋累迁安东将军、高梁太守，转五城太守、东雍州刺史。
现代文：因勋累迁安东将军、高梁太守，转五城太守、东雍州刺史。
English: General Anton and Governor Gao Liang were promoted to Governor of Wuzhen and Governor of Dongyang Province respectively.

古文：沙苑之败，西魏荆州刺史郭鸾率众攻俨，拒守二百余日，昼夜力战，大破鸾军，追斩三百余级，又擒西魏刺史郭他。
现代文：沙苑之败，西魏荆州刺史郭鸾统众攻俨，俨抵抗二百多天，昼夜力战，大败鸾军，乘胜追击，又砍下了敌军三百多个首级，并活捉了西魏刺史郭他。
English: After the defeat of Sha Yuan, the Western Wei Jingzhou Zhang Shi Guo led the people to attack and resist for more than two hundred days, fought day and night, defeated the Zhang army, pursued the victory, and cut off more than three hundred heads of the enemy army, and captured the Western Wei Zhang Shi Guo alive.

古文：时诸州多有翻陷，唯俨获全。
现代文：这时很多州郡都有反叛事发生，只有俨未遭此难。
English: At this time, there were rebellions in many states and counties, but only the Kuomintang did not suffer this hardship.

古文：进号镇南将军。
现代文：进号镇南将军。
English: Jin shooed General Zhenan away.

古文：武定三年，率师解襄州围。
现代文：武定三年，率师解除襄州敌军的包围。
English: In the third year of Wuding, he led the division to lift the siege of the enemy army in Xiangzhou.

古文：频使茹茹。
现代文：俨多次出使蠕蠕。
English: He was sent on several missions.

古文：又从攻玉壁，赐帛七百匹并衣帽等。
现代文：俨又从大军进攻玉壁，赐帛七百匹以及衣帽等物。
English: Yao also attacked Yubi from a large army, and was given seven hundred yakitori, as well as clothing and hats.

古文：五年，镇河桥五城。
现代文：五年，镇守河桥五城。
English: Five years later, the town guards the five towns of Heqiao.

古文：侯景叛，俨击陈郡贼，获景麾下库狄曷赖及伪暑太守郑道合、兖州刺史王彦夏、行台狄畅等，擒斩百余级。
现代文：侯景叛乱，俨击打陈郡贼，掳获侯景部将厍狄曷赖以及伪署太守郑道合、兖州刺史王彦夏、行台狄畅等，斩首百余级。
English: During the rebellion of Houjing, he defeated the bandits of Chen County, captured the general of Houjing Department, Zou Diyu Lai, as well as the pseudo-deputy governor Zheng Daohai, the governor of Zhangzhou, Wang Yanxia, and the governor of Xingtai, Di Chang, and beheaded more than a hundred people.

古文：旋军项城，又擒景伪署刺史辛光及蔡遵，并其部下二千人。
现代文：随即驻扎项城，又活捉侯景伪署的刺史辛光以及蔡遵和部下二千多人。
English: They immediately stationed in Xiangcheng and captured alive the assassin of the Houjing Pseudo-Department, Xin Guang, as well as Cai Zun and more than two thousand of his subordinates.

古文：六年，除谯州刺史，屡有战功，多所降附。
现代文：六年，除谯州刺史，屡立军功，降附极多。
English: In six years, in addition to the bitter history of Zhangzhou, it has repeatedly made military achievements, and there have been a lot of declines.

古文：七年，又除胶州刺史。
现代文：七年，又除胶州刺史。
English: Seven years later, the history of Jiaozhou was erased.

古文：天保初，除开府仪同三司。
现代文：天保初，拜俨开府仪同三司。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, the ceremony of opening the prefectural capital was held with three divisions.

古文：六年，梁司徒陆法和、仪同宋蒨等率其部下以郢州城内附。
现代文：六年，梁司徒陆法和、仪同宋等率其部众拥郢州城内附。
English: In the sixth year, Liang Sitou, Lu Fa, Yi Tong Song and others led the crowd of supporters in the city of Ganzhou.

古文：时清河王岳帅师江上，乃集诸军议曰： 城在江外，人情尚梗，必须才略兼济，忠勇过人，可受此寄耳。 
现代文：此时清河王岳统兵屯驻江边，他集合诸将商议说： 郢州城在江外边，这里民风刚直，必须要有才略俱备、忠勇过人之士，才可治理此郡。 
English: At this time, Qinghe Wang Yue's soldiers were stationed along the river, and he gathered the generals to discuss and said: Zhangzhou City is outside the river, the people here are straightforward, and it is necessary to have talented and loyal people to govern this county.

古文：众咸共推俨。
现代文：众人齐推慕容俨。
English: Everyone is rooting for Jonghyun.

古文：岳以为然，遂遣镇郢城。
现代文：岳认为人选合适，便命令俨镇守郢城。
English: Yue thought that the candidate was suitable, so he ordered Yan Zhen to guard Yancheng.

古文：始入，便为梁大都督侯瑱、任约率水陆军奄至城下。
现代文：刚刚入城，即被梁大都督侯王真、任约带领的水陆军包围。
English: As soon as they entered the city, they were encircled by the army and navy led by Liang's grand governor, Hou Wang Zhen, and Ren Yu.

古文：俨随方御备，瑱等不能克。
现代文：俨迅速组织防御，王真等无可奈何。
English: He quickly organized a defense, leaving Wang Zhen helpless.

古文：又于上流鹦鹉洲上造荻洪竟数里，以塞船路。
现代文：王真便组织力量，在上游鹦鹉洲之地造荻洪数里，用来堵塞船路。
English: Wang Zhen then organized forces to create several miles of floodplains in the upstream of Parrot Island to block the shipping route.

古文：人信阻绝，城守孤悬，众情危惧，俨导以忠义，又悦以安之。
现代文：这时消息中断，城池孤悬，人情危惧，俨则以忠义引导，使人心很快安定下来。
English: At this time, the news was interrupted, the city was isolated, the people were worried, and the dragonfly guided them with loyalty, so that people's hearts quickly settled down.

古文：城中先有神祠一所，俗号城隍神，公私每有祈祷。
现代文：郢城中早先就有一座神祠，俗称 城隍神 ，公私常来祠中祈祷。
English: There used to be a shrine in Shicheng earlier, commonly known as the Shicheng Shrine. Both public and private often come to the shrine to pray.

古文：于是顺士卒之心，乃相率祈请，冀获冥祐。
现代文：俨也顺从士卒的心思，让他们分批进祠祈请，希望能得神灵的庇佑。
English: He also obeyed the thoughts of the soldiers, letting them enter the shrine in batches to pray, hoping to receive the protection of the gods.

古文：须臾，冲风欻起，惊涛涌激，漂断荻洪。
现代文：不一会儿，狂风突起，惊涛拍岸，漂断荻洪。
English: In a short time, the stormy wind burst, the storm surged ashore, and the flood was cut off.

古文：约复以铁锁连治，防御弥切。
现代文：任约则再用铁锁连结，防止荻洪被风卷走。
English: Each contract is then linked with an iron lock to prevent the flood from being swept away by the wind.

古文：俨还共祈请，风浪夜惊，复以断绝，如此者再三。
现代文：俨等人还亲入神祠祈请，此时风更大浪更高，荻洪再次被冲断，这样反复了多次。
English: Zou and others also personally went to the shrine to pray. At this time, the wind was stronger and the waves were higher, and the flooding was once again interrupted. This happened repeatedly.

古文：城人大喜，以为神功。
现代文：城内兵民大喜，认为这是神灵的救助。
English: The soldiers and people in the city were overjoyed, believing that this was the help of the gods.

古文：瑱移军于城北，造栅置营，焚烧坊郭，产业皆尽。
现代文：侯王真移军，扎营城北，造栅置营，焚烧坊郭，郢城的产业一下子遭到严重毁坏。
English: Hou Wangzhen moved his army, set up camp in the north of the city, built a fence, set up camp, burned the castle, and the industry of Lucheng was suddenly seriously destroyed.

古文：约将战士万余人，各持攻具，于城南置营垒，南北合势。
现代文：任约带领万余士卒，士卒每人持有一种攻城工具，在城南扎下营盘，形成了南北夹击之势。
English: Ren roughly led more than 10,000 soldiers, each of whom held a tool for attacking the city, and camped in the south of the city, forming a north-south clampdown.

古文：俨乃率步骑出城奋击，大破之，擒五百余人。
现代文：俨便统领步骑出城搏击，很快打破了敌人的营垒，还俘虏了五百多人。
English: They all rode out of the city to fight, and soon broke the enemy's camp, and captured more than five hundred people.

古文：先是郢城卑下，兼土疏颓坏，俨更修缮城雉，多作大楼。
现代文：由于郢城地势低下，加之土疏和风雨侵蚀，城墙多有损坏，俨认真给以修整，并作了很多大楼。
English: Due to the low terrain of Lucheng, coupled with sparse soil and wind and rain erosion, the city wall was often damaged, but it was carefully repaired and many buildings were built.

古文：又造船舰，水陆备具，工无暂阙。萧循又率众五万，与瑱、约合军，夜来攻击。
现代文：俨又建造船舰，使水陆俱备。萧循又领众五万，与侯王真、任约军汇合，在夜幕掩护下发起进攻。
English: He also built ships to make the land and water ready. Xiao Xun also led a crowd of fifty thousand to meet with the armies of Hou Wangzhen and Ren You, and launched an attack under the cover of night.

古文：俨与将士力战终夕，至明，约等乃退。
现代文：俨与将士猛力抗击，一直坚持到天亮，任约等才退兵。
English: He and his soldiers resisted fiercely until dawn, and only then did they withdraw.

古文：追斩瑱骁将张白石首，瑱以千金赎之，不与。
现代文：俨大开城门追击，砍掉了侯王真骁将张白石的脑袋，王真要求用千金换回白石的首级，俨不许。
English: He opened the gate of the city and chased and chopped off the head of Zhang Baishi, who had been chopped off by Hou Wang Zhen. Wang Zhen demanded that the head of Zhang Baishi be replaced with a thousand gold, but he was not allowed to do so.

古文：夏五月，瑱、约等又相与并力，悉众攻围。
现代文：夏五月，王真、约等又重新部署，以最大的力量围城。
English: In the summer of May, Wang Zhen, about and others were redeployed to besiege the city with the greatest strength.

古文：城中食少，粮运阻绝，无以为计，唯煮槐楮、桑叶并纻根、水萍、葛、艾等草及靴、皮带、觔角等物而食之。
现代文：城中食物减少，而且粮运阻隔，人们为了生存，只得烧煮槐楮、桑叶和纟宁根、水萍、葛、艾等草以及皮靴、皮带、角力角等物充饥。
English: Food in the city was dwindling, and grain transport was blocked. In order to survive, people had no choice but to feed their hunger with boiled eel, mulberry leaves and ginger root, water spinach, gooseberries, and other grasses, as well as leather boots, belts, and wrestling horns.

古文：人有死者，即取其肉，火别分啖，唯留骸骨。
现代文：有了死人，就马上从尸上割下肉来，用火一烤，便吞下肚去，吃得只剩下了骨头。
English: When they had a dead body, they immediately cut the flesh from the corpse, roasted it over the fire, and then swallowed the stomach, leaving only the bones.

古文：俨犹申令将士，信赏必罚，分甘同苦，死生以之。
现代文：俨依然动员将士，有奖有罚，共甘同苦，视死如归。
English: He still mobilizes his soldiers, rewards and punishes them, and treats them as equals.

古文：自正月至于六月，人无异志。
现代文：从正月开始一直到六月，人们没有丝毫的异心。
English: From the first month of the year until June, there was not the slightest sign of animosity.

古文：后萧方智立，遣使请和。
现代文：后萧方智立为梁帝，遣使向东魏求和。
English: After Xiao Fangzhi became Emperor Liang, he sent an envoy to East Wei to sue for peace.

古文：显祖以城在江表，据守非便，有诏还之。
现代文：显祖觉得郢城位居江边，防守不太方便，便下诏将城归还梁朝。
English: Emperor Xianzu felt that Lucheng was located on the edge of the river, and it was not convenient to defend it, so he issued an edict to return the city to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：俨望帝，悲不自胜。
现代文：俨抬头看着文宣帝，极其悲哀。
English: Zou looked up at Emperor Wenxuan, extremely sad.

古文：帝呼令至前，执其手，持俨须鬓，脱帽看发，叹息久之。
现代文：帝喊他走近身来，拉着手，抚弄着俨的须鬓，又脱下他的帽子察看，叹息了好一会儿。
English: The Emperor called him, approached him, took him by the hand, stroked his beard, took off his hat, looked at him, and sighed for a long time.

古文：谓俨曰： 观卿容貌，朕不复相识，自古忠烈，岂能过此！ 
现代文：对俨说： 观看你的容貌，我好像还不敢相认，古往今来的忠臣烈士，哪有超过你的！ 
English: To Toad he said, "Looking at your face, I don't think I can recognize you. There are no more loyal subjects and martyrs from the past to the present than you!"

古文：俨对曰： 臣恃陛下威灵，得申愚节，不屈竖子，重奉圣颜。
现代文：俨回答说： 我依仗陛下的威灵，才算伸张了我的气节，不屈不挠的小子，今日有幸再睹陛下的容颜。
English: Toad replied, "I rely on your majesty's spirit to stretch my stamina, indomitable boy, today I have the honor to see your majesty's face again."

古文：今虽夕死，没而无恨。 
现代文：即使傍晚死了，也没有什么遗憾的了。 
English: Even if you die in the evening, there is nothing to regret.

古文：帝嗟称不已。
现代文：帝又感叹了半天。
English: The emperor sighed for a long time.

古文：除赵州刺史，进伯为公，赐帛一千匹、钱十万。
现代文：授赵州刺史，晋爵为公，赏赐帛一千匹，钱十万。
English: Zhao Zhou was awarded the title of "priest" and the title of "royal knight." He was also awarded a thousand yakitori fish and 100,000 yuan.

古文：九年，又讨贼有功，赐帛一百匹、钱十万。
现代文：九年，又因讨贼有功，赐帛一百匹、钱十万。
English: In nine years, he was also awarded one hundred yakitori and one hundred thousand coins for his service in catching thieves.

古文：十年，诏除扬州行台，与王贵显、侯子监将兵卫送萧庄。
现代文：十年，诏令拜俨扬州行台，与王贵显、侯子监领兵护送萧庄回梁。
English: Ten years later, he was ordered to pay homage to Yangzhou on his way to Taiwan, and escorted Xiaozhuang back to Liang with Wang Guixian and Hou Zi Guan leading the troops.

古文：筑郭默、若邪二城。
现代文：筑造郭默、若邪二城。
English: To build Guomao and Wakayama as two cities.

古文：与陈新蔡太守鲁悉达战大蛇洞，破走之。
现代文：同陈朝的新蔡太守鲁悉达在大蛇洞交战，获胜，并赶跑了鲁悉达。
English: The new Empress Dowager Cai of the Chen Dynasty fought with Rusilda in the Great Snake Cave, won, and chased away Rusilda.

古文：又监萧庄、王琳军，与陈将侯瑱、侯安都战于芜湖，败归。
现代文：又监视萧庄、王琳的军队，与陈朝大将侯王真、侯安都在芜湖接战，败，返归。
English: He also monitored the armies of Xiao Zhuang and Wang Lin, and fought with the Chen Dynasty generals Hou Wang Zhen and Hou An at Wuhu. They were defeated and returned.

古文：皇建初，别封成阳郡公。
现代文：皇建初年，别封成阳郡公。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was appointed as the governor of Chengyang County.

古文：天统二年，除特进。
现代文：天统二年，拜特进。
English: Two years after reunification, Baitejin came into being.

古文：四年十月，又别封猗氏县公，并赐金银酒钟各一枚、胡马一匹。
现代文：四年十月，又别封猗氏县公，并赏赐金酒锺、银酒锺各一只，胡马一匹。
English: In October of the fourth year, he was awarded the title of Shishi County Governor, as well as a gold and silver sake cup and a horse.

古文：五年四月，进爵为义安王。
现代文：五年四月，晋爵为义安王。
English: In April of the fifth year, he was raised to the peerage as King Yian.

古文：武平元年，出为光州刺史。
现代文：武平元年，出任光州刺史。
English: In the first year of Wuping, he served as Gwangju chief historian.

古文：俨少任侠，交通轻薄，遨游京洛间。
现代文：俨年轻时讲义气，多与轻薄之徒来往，还喜好在京洛之间游荡。
English: When he was young, he had a strong sense of loyalty and often associated with frivolous people. He also liked to wander around Kyoto.

古文：及从征讨，每立功效，经略虽非所长，而有将帅之节。
现代文：到跟随大将征战后，常常立下战功，策划处理虽然不是他的长处，但却有将帅的气节。
English: After following the general to the war, he often made war achievements, and although planning and handling were not his strengths, he had the temperament of a general.

古文：所历诸州，虽不能清白守道，亦不贪残。
现代文：他做过太守、刺史，即便不能清白守道，却不贪婪残暴。
English: He has been a tyrant and a traitor, and even if he cannot keep his ways pure, he is not greedy and cruel.

古文：至是薄录，并归天府。
现代文：卒，赠司徒、尚书令。
English: pawn, bestowal of the scepter, and conferment of the imperial edict.

古文：史臣曰：高祖霸业始基，招集英勇。
现代文：史臣曰：高祖霸业奠基之初，招集天下英勇之士。
English: Shichen said: At the beginning of the foundation of Gaozuba industry, the world's brave men were summoned.

古文：张琼等虽识非先觉，而运属时来，驱驰戎旅，日不暇给，义宣御侮，契协宠图，临敌制胜，有足称也。
现代文：张琼等人虽说不是有先知觉悟之人，而时运来到，他们也就驰驱于疆场，报效于军旅，无日休歇，无时偷闲，义在御敌，共襄宏图，成就功业，克敌制胜，有值得称颂之处。
English: Although Zhang Qiong and others were not people with prophetic consciousness, when the time came, they also rushed to the battlefield, served in the military expedition, never rested, never idle, righteously resisted the enemy, participated in the grand plan, accomplished their work, and defeated the enemy. There are praiseworthy points.

古文：慕容绍宗兵机武略，在世见推。
现代文：慕容绍宗的兵机武略，当年就受人推重。
English: Murong Shaozong's military strategy was highly regarded at the time.

古文：昔事尔朱，固执忠义，不用范增之言，终见乌江之祸。
现代文：过去追随氽朱兆时，一腔忠义，苦心谋划。不用范增早作安排的计策，终于导致乌江覆亡的结果。
English: In the past, when he followed Zhu Zhaoxi, he was loyal and painstakingly planned. The strategy of making arrangements early without Fan Zeng finally led to the result of the fall of Wujiang.

古文：侯景狼戾，固非后主之臣，末命诸言，实表知人之鉴。
现代文：侯景公然叛乱，他原就不可能作少主之臣；高祖留下用慕容绍宗抵挡的遗言，表现出高祖的知人之明。
English: Since Hou Jing openly rebelled, he could not have been a vassal of a minor lord; Gaozu left his last words to oppose Murong Shaosong, showing that Gaozu knew him well.

古文：寒山、涡水，往若摧枯，算尽数奇，逢斯厄运，悲夫！
现代文：寒山、涡水之战，他临阵摧陷，有摧枯拉朽之势，可惜命运不好，遭逢灾祸，着实令人痛心啊!
English: In the battle between the cold mountain and the whirlpool, he was on the verge of defeat, and there was a potential for destruction and decay. Unfortunately, his fate was not good, and he suffered a disaster, which was really distressing!

古文：赞曰：霸图立肇，王业是因。
现代文：赞曰：霸业宏图建根基，依赖群雄建功业。
English: Zang said: the ambitious plan to dominate the industry is to build a foundation and rely on a group of heroes to build a career.

古文：伟哉诸将，实曰功臣。永怀耿、贾，无累清尘。
现代文：好伟大的功臣名将们，将永远留名史册，无愧于古人。
English: The great heroes and famous generals will forever remain in the history books, worthy of the ancients.

