古文：黄帝曰：余闻九针于夫子，众多博大矣，余犹不能寤，敢问九针焉生，何因而有名？
现代文：黄帝说：我听先生你讲述的九针理论，内容真是博大精深，丰富多彩，但是我还有些问题不能领悟。请问九针是怎样产生的，又是根据什么命名的呢？
English: Huang Di said, "I have listened to the nine-pin theory that you have told me, and the content is really vast, profound, and rich and colorful, but I still have some questions that I can't understand. How did the nine pins come about, and what is the name based on?

古文：岐伯曰：九针者，天地之大数也，始于一而终于九。
现代文：岐伯说：九针之 九 ，是天地间的大数，数开始于一，而终止于九。
English: Qibo said: Nine of nine, is the largest number in the world. The number begins with one and ends with nine.

古文：故曰：一以法天，二以法地，三以法人，四以法时，五以法音，六以法律，七以法星，八以法风，九以法野。
现代文：所以九针的创制，第一种针具取法于天，第二种针具取法于地，第三种针具取法于人，第四种针具取法于四时，第五种针具取法于五音，第六种针具取法于六律，第七种针具取法于北斗星，第八种针具取法于八风，第九种针具取法于九野。
English: Therefore, the creation of nine needles, the first kind of needle tool is taken from the sky, the second kind of needle tool is taken from the ground, the third kind of needle tool is taken from the person, the fourth kind of needle tool is taken from the four o'clock, the fifth kind of needle tool is taken from the five tones, the sixth kind of needle tool is taken from the six laws, the seventh kind of needle tool is taken from the Big Dipper, the eighth kind of needle tool is taken from the eight winds, and the ninth kind of needle tool is taken from the nine fields.

古文：黄帝曰：以针应九之数，奈何？
现代文：黄帝问：将针具与九这个数相应，是什么道理呢？
English: Huang Di asked: What is the reason for making the needle corresponding to the number nine?

古文：岐伯曰：夫圣人之起天地之数也，一而九之，故以立九野。
现代文：岐伯说：圣人创立天地间的数理，是从一开始而递增至九的，所以据此划定了九野区划。
English: Qibo said: The sage created the heavens and the earth according to mathematics, from the beginning and increasing to nine, so according to this, the nine-field zoning was delineated.

古文：九而九之，九九八十一，以起黄钟数焉，以针应数也。
现代文：九与九相乘，九九八十一，据此而创立了黄钟数，九针之数与此相应也是同样的道理。
English: Nine multiplied by nine equals 9981, which was the basis for the creation of the yellow clock, and the same applies to the number of nine hands.

古文：一者，天也。
现代文：第一种针具，比象于天，天属阳。
English: The first kind of needlework is likened to the sky, and the sky is the sun.

古文：天者，阳也。五脏之应天者，肺。
现代文：在人体五脏中，与天相应的是肺。
English: Among the five viscera of the human body, the corresponding organ is the lung.

古文：肺者，五脏六腑之盖也。
现代文：肺的位置最高，称为五脏六腑的华盖，犹如天空覆盖万物一样。
English: The lungs occupy the highest position, known as the crown of the viscera, just as the sky covers all things.

古文：皮者，肺之合也，人之阳也。
现代文：皮肤在最外层，内与肺脏相应合，是人的体表。
English: The skin is the outermost layer of the human body, corresponding to the lungs.

古文：故为之治针，必以大其头而锐其末，令无得深入而阳气出。
现代文：所以，为治疗生于皮肤的疾病而制作了第一种针具一一鑱针，其式样，必须针头大，末端锋利，使它不能深刺，以防因刺得过深而阳气泄漏。
English: Therefore, in order to treat diseases born in the skin, the first kind of needle was made. The shape of the needle must be large and the end must be sharp, so that it cannot be deeply pierced, in order to prevent the yang gas from leaking due to being pierced too deeply.

古文：二者，地也。
现代文：第二种针具，比象于地，地属土。
English: The second kind of needlework, likened to the earth, is earthy.

古文：人之所以应土者，肉也。
现代文：人体与土相应的是肌肉。
English: The human body and the soil correspond to the muscles.

古文：故为之治针，必筩其身而员其末，令无得伤肉分，伤则气得竭。
现代文：所以，为治疗生于肌肉的疾病而制作了第二种针具一一圆针，针的式样，针身呈内空的筒状且要直，针尖呈卵圆形，使它不能损伤肌肉，损伤了肌肉会导致阳气衰竭。
English: Therefore, for the treatment of muscle-born diseases, a second type of needle was made - a round needle, the shape of the needle, the needle body was hollow and straight, and the needle tip was oval-shaped, so that it could not damage the muscle, and if the muscle was damaged, it would cause yang deficiency.

古文：三者，人也。
现代文：第三种针具，比象于人。
English: The third type of needle is more like a person.

古文：人之所以成生者，血脉也。故为之治针，必大其身而员其末，令可以按脉勿陷，以致其气，令邪气独出。
现代文：人之所以能够成长和维持生命活动，有赖于血脉的输给和营养，所以，为治疗生于血脉的疾病而制作了第三种针具一一鍉针，这种针，针身一定要大，末端一定要圆，使它可以按揉脉络而不致过深地陷进肌肉，引导正气得以充实，而使邪气单独排出。
English: The reason why people can grow and maintain life activities depends on the blood supply and nutrition. Therefore, for the treatment of diseases born in the blood, a third kind of needle was made. The needle body must be large and the end must be round, so that it can press the vein network without getting too deep into the muscle, guide the positive energy to be enriched, and make the evil energy be discharged separately.

古文：四者，时也。
现代文：第四种针具，比象于四时。
English: The fourth kind of needlework, figuratively, begins at four o'clock.

古文：时者，四时八风之客于经络之中，为瘤病者也。
现代文：四时的意思是，如果四时八风的贼风邪气，侵入人体的经络中，能使血脉留滞瘀结，而形成经久不愈的顽固性疾病。
English: The meaning of four o'clock is that if the thief wind evil spirit of the four o'clock eight winds invades the meridians of the human body, it can cause the blood vessels to remain stagnant and form a stubborn disease that does not heal.

古文：故为之治针，必筩其身而锋其末，令可以泻热出血，而痼病竭。
现代文：为了治疗这种疾病，所以制作了第四种针具一一锋针，针的式样，针身呈内空的筒状且要直，末端要锋锐，用于刺络放血，开瘀泻热，使得顽固性疾病得以根除。
English: In order to treat this disease, a fourth type of needle was made, the one-to-one needle, the shape of the needle, the needle body was hollow and straight, and the end was sharp, used for stabbing bloodletting, curing diarrhea fever, and eradicating intractable diseases.

古文：五者，音也。
现代文：第五种针具，比象于五音。
English: The fifth type of needle is compared to the five tones.

古文：音者，冬夏之分，分于子午，阴与阳别，寒与热争，两气相搏，合为痈脓者也。
现代文：在九宫的顺序里，一为冬至节所属的北方叶蛰宫，九为夏至节所属的南方上天宫，五为中央招摇宫，五既把阴寒的冬至与阳热的夏至分开，也把北方子与南方午分开。人体与季候节令相应合，如果体内阴与阳乖违不和，寒热相争，两气相互搏击，就会形成痈肿。
English: In the order of the nine palaces, one is the northern Ye Qing Palace, which belongs to the winter solstice festival, nine is the southern Shang Tian Palace, which belongs to the summer solstice festival, five is the central swaying palace, five not only separates the gloomy winter solstice from the hot summer solstice, but also separates the northern son from the southern afternoon. The human body and the seasonal festivals are correspondingly matched. If the yin and yang in the body are not harmonious, cold and heat compete, and the two airs fight each other, it will form an abscess.

古文：故为之治针，必令其末如剑锋，可以取大脓。
现代文：为治疗这种疾病，所以制作了第五种针具一一铍针，这种针的尖端应如剑刃一般锋利，可以用来破痈排脓。
English: In order to treat this disease, a fifth kind of needle was made, a needle with a sharp tip, which can be used to break the umbilical hernia.

古文：六者，律也。
现代文：第六种针具，比象于六律。
English: The sixth kind of needle tool is likened to the six laws.

古文：律者，调阴阳四时而合十二经脉，虚邪客于经络而为暴痹者也。
现代文：律吕是调和阴阳四时的，律吕各六，合为十二，人的十二经脉同它相应。如果虚邪侵入于经络，就会形成急性发作的痹症。
English: Lu Lu is the harmonization of yin and yang at four o'clock, Lu Lu each six, combined into twelve, and the twelve meridians of human beings correspond to it. If false evil invades the meridians, it will form an acute attack of paralysis.

古文：故为之治针，必令尖如氂，且员其锐，中身微大，以取暴气。
现代文：所以，为治疗这种疾病而制作了第六种针具一一圆利针，这种针一定要针尖如氂毛，圆而且锐利，针身略粗，以便用它来刺治因虚邪骤然侵入经络而形成的痹症。
English: Therefore, for the treatment of this disease, a sixth kind of needle was made - a round and sharp needle, which must be as sharp as a mane, round and sharp, with a slightly coarse needle body, so that it can be used to treat the paralysis caused by the sudden invasion of the meridians.

古文：七者，星也。
现代文：第七种针具，比象于北斗七星，在人体应于七窍。
English: The seventh kind of needle, like the seven stars in the Big Dipper, should be in the seven points of the human body.

古文：星者，人之七窍，邪之所客于经，而为痛痹，合于经络者也。
现代文：人的通身分布着许多孔窍，类如天空星辰密布，如果外邪从孔窍侵入经络之间而久留不去，使气血凝滞，就会发生痛痹。
English: There are many orifices distributed throughout the human body, such as the sky, which is densely covered with stars. If an external evil invades the meridians from the orifices and remains for a long time, causing the qi and blood to congeal, it will cause pain.

古文：故为之治针，令尖如蚊虻喙，静以徐往，微以久留，正气因之，真邪俱往，出针而养者也。
现代文：所以，为治疗这种疾病，制作了第七种针具一一毫针，要使针头纤细锐利像蚊、虻的嘴。刺治时，进针要平稳而徐缓，而且要留针少时，使正气借此得以充实，经气邪气同时受到了针刺的影响，出针后要较长时间按住针孔，使正气不致外泄。
English: Therefore, in order to treat this disease, a seventh type of needle was made, a milliliter needle. The needle should be as thin and sharp as the mouth of a mosquito or centipede. When pricking, the needle should be inserted smoothly and slowly, and the needle should be left for a short time so that the positive qi can be enriched. The evil qi is also affected by the needling. After the needle is released, it is necessary to hold the needle hole for a long time so that the positive qi does not leak out.

古文：八者，风也。风者，人之股肱八节也。
现代文：第八种针具，比象于八方之风，在人应于大腿和胳膊的肩、肘、髋、膝八处大关节。
English: The eighth kind of needle, like the wind in the eight directions, should be used in the eight major joints of the thighs and arms, the shoulders, elbows, shins, and knees.

古文：八正之虚风，八风伤人，内舍于骨解、腰脊节、腠理之间为深痹也。
现代文：如果来自八方的贼风邪气侵袭人体，就会深入而留止在骨缝、腰脊关节及皮肤之间，而形成邪深在里的痹症。
English: If the evil wind from the eight directions invades the human body, it will go deep and stay between the bone seam, the lumbar spine joint and the skin, forming a deep-seated paralysis.

古文：故为之治针，必长其身，锋其末，可以取深邪远痹。
现代文：所以，为治疗这种疾病，制作了第八种针具一一长针，这种针，针身一定要长，末端一定要锋利，可以用它来针刺深藏的邪气，治愈为时已久的痹症。
English: Therefore, in order to treat this disease, the eighth kind of needle tool was made - a long needle. This needle, the needle body must be long and the end must be sharp, can be used to prick the deep-seated evil spirit and cure the long-standing polio.

古文：九者，野也。野者，人之节解、皮肤之间也。
现代文：第九种针具，比象于九野，应于人的周身关节、骨缝和皮肤之间。
English: The ninth type of needle, as in Kuno, should be between the joints, bone seams and skin around the human body.

古文：淫邪流溢于身，如风水之状，而留不能过于机关、大节者也。
现代文：如果邪气过盛，在体内逐渐蔓延，出现浮肿而状似风水病，这是由于水气流注不能通过关节，以致肌肤积水而出现水肿。
English: If the evil spirit is too strong, it will gradually spread in the body, and puffiness will appear that looks like feng shui disease. This is because the water and gas flow cannot pass through the joints, causing the skin to accumulate water and cause edema.

古文：故为之治针，令尖如挺，其锋微员，以取大气之不能过于关节者也。
现代文：所以，为治疗这种疾病，制作了第九种针具一一大针，要使针尖像竹中空，锋刃要略圆，用它来通利关节，以使气机通达去除壅滞在关节的病邪。
English: Therefore, in order to treat this disease, the ninth type of needle was made. It is a large needle. The tip of the needle should be hollow like a bamboo, and the blade should be slightly round. It is used to pass through the joint, so that the gas engine can pass through and remove the disease of the affected joint.

古文：黄帝曰：针之长短有数乎？
现代文：黄帝问：各种针的长短，有一定分寸吗？
English: Huang Di asked: the length of various needles, is there a certain proportion?

古文：岐伯曰：一曰镵针者，取法于巾针，去末寸半，卒锐之，长一寸六分，主热在头身也。
现代文：岐伯说：第一种针叫鑱针，它仿效巾针的式样，在距离针尖半寸处就陡然锐利起来，针长一寸六分，主治热邪在头身的病。
English: Qibo said, "The first kind of needle is called the acupuncture needle. It imitates the shape of the needle on a handkerchief. It suddenly becomes sharp at a distance of half an inch from the needle tip. The needle is one inch and six minutes long. It is mainly used to treat heat-induced diseases of the head and body.

古文：二曰员针，取法于絮针，筩其身而卵其锋，长一寸六分，主治分间气。
现代文：第二种针叫圆针，它仿效絮针的式样，针身圆直如筒，针尖椭圆如卵，长一寸六分，主治邪气在分肉间的疾病。
English: The second kind of needle is called a round needle. It imitates the shape of a float needle. The needle body is round and straight like a tube, and the needle tip is elliptical like an egg. It is one inch and six minutes long. It is used to treat diseases caused by evil spirits in the meat.

古文：三曰鍉针，取法于黍粟之锐，长三寸半，主按脉取气，令邪出。
现代文：第三种针叫鍉针，它仿效大黄米、小黄米的谷粒样子，圆而微尖，针长三寸半，用以按脉取气。
English: The third type of needle is called a reed needle. It imitates the grain shape of large yellow rice and small yellow rice. It is round and slightly pointed. The needle is three and a half inches long and is used to extract gas according to the pulse.

古文：四曰锋针，取法于絮针，筩其身，锋其末，长一寸六分，主痈热出血。
现代文：第四种针叫锋针，它仿效絮针的式样，针身直圆，末端锋利，长一寸六分，主要用于泻热出血。
English: The fourth kind of needle is called a sharp needle. It imitates the shape of a float needle. The needle body is round, the end is sharp, and it is one-and-a-half inches long. It is mainly used for laxative bleeding.

古文：五曰铍针，取法于剑锋，广二分半，长四寸，主大痈脓、两热争者也。
现代文：第五种针叫铍针，它仿效剑的锋刃，针宽二分半，针长四寸，主治痈肿大脓及寒热两气相搏形成的疾病。
English: The fifth kind of needle is called the sickle needle. It imitates the sharp edge of a sword. The needle is two-and-a-half centimeters wide and four inches long. It is used to treat abscessed large tonsils and diseases caused by the struggle between hot and cold.

古文：六曰员利针，取法于氂针，微大其末，反小其身，令可深内也，长一寸六分，主取痈痹者也。
现代文：第六种针叫圆利针，它仿效氂毛的样子，针尖稍大，针身反小，使它可以深刺，针长一寸六分，主治痈症、痹症。
English: The sixth kind of needle is called the round needle. It imitates the appearance of a mane. The needle tip is slightly larger, and the needle body is smaller, so that it can be deeply pierced. The needle is one inch and six minutes long. It is mainly used to treat porphyria and palsy.

古文：七曰毫针，取注于毫毛，长一寸六分，主寒热、痛痹在络者也。
现代文：第七种针叫毫针，它仿效毫毛的样子，长一寸六分，主治寒热、痛痹在络脉的病症。
English: The seventh kind of needle is called the millimeter needle. It imitates the appearance of a millimeter of hair, is one inch and six minutes long, and is mainly used to treat colds and fevers, and pain in the vas deferens.

古文：八曰长针，取法于綦针，长七寸，主取深邪远痹者也。
现代文：第八种针叫长针，它仿效綦针的式样，针长七寸，主治因病邪滞留深部而形成的积年痹症。
English: The eighth kind of needle is called the long needle. It imitates the shape of the acupuncture needle. The needle is seven inches long. It is mainly used to treat the age-related paralysis caused by the deep retention of the disease.

古文：九曰大针，取法于锋针，其锋微员，长四寸，主取大气不出关节者也。
现代文：第九种针叫大针，它仿效锋针，锋刃微圆，针长四寸，主治气机不能通过关节的疾病。
English: The ninth kind of needle is called the big needle. It imitates the sharp needle, the sharp edge is slightly rounded, the needle is four inches long, and the main treatment machine cannot pass through the joint disease.

古文：针形毕矣，此九针大小、长短法也。
现代文：针的形制已讲解完毕，这就是九针大小、长短的法式。
English: The shape of the needle has been explained. This is the French system of the size and length of the nine needles.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻身形应九野，奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：我想知道人体各部与九野是怎样相应的。
English: Huang Di said: I want to know how the various parts of the human body correspond to the nine elements.

古文：岐伯曰：请言身形之应九野也，左足应立春，其日戊寅、己丑。
现代文：岐伯说：请让我谈谈身形应九野的情况吧。春夏属阳，气从左而升，所以人的左足应于东北方的艮宫，在节气应于立春，其所值的是戊寅日、己丑日。
English: Qibo said, "Please let me talk about the situation that the body should be in Kuno. Spring and summer are yang, and qi rises from the left, so a person's left foot should be in the northeastern part of the Palace of Heaven, and in the solar terms it should be at the beginning of spring. Its value is Wu Yin Day, Ji Ugly Day.

古文：左胁应春分，其日乙卯。
现代文：左胁应于正东方的震宫，节气应于春分，其所值的是乙卯日。
English: Zuo Jiao should be in Zhengyu in the east, the solar terms should be in the vernal equinox, and its value is in the second day of the month of Yu.

古文：左手应立夏，其日戊辰、己巳。
现代文：左手应于东南方的巽宫，在节气应于立夏，其所值的是戊辰日、己巳日。
English: The left hand should be in the southeast of the Summer Palace, and the solar terms should be at the beginning of summer. Its value is the day of Bo Chen and the day of Ji Si.

古文：膺、喉、首头应夏至，其日丙午。
现代文：前胸、咽喉、头面应于南方的离宫，在节气应于夏至，正是阳气极盛的时候，其所值的是丙午日。
English: The forearm, throat, and head should be in the south of the parting palace, and the solar terms should be in the summer solstice, when the yang is at its peak, and its value is in the afternoon.

古文：右手应立秋，其日戊申、己末。
现代文：秋冬属阴，阴气从右而降，自上而下，所以右手应于西南方的坤宫，在节气应于立秋，其所值的是戊申日、己未日。
English: Autumn and winter are yin, yin descends from the right and rises from the top, so the right hand should be in the southwest of the Kun Palace, and the solar term should be at the beginning of autumn. Its value is the day of Boshin and the day before yesterday.

古文：右胁应秋分，其日辛酉。
现代文：右胁应于正西方的兑宫，在节气应于秋分，其所值的是辛酉日。
English: The right geomantic meridian should be in the west of the palace, and the solar terms should be in the autumn equinox. Its value is in the middle of the year.

古文：右足应立冬，其日戊戌、己亥。
现代文：右足应于西北方的乾宫，在节气应于立冬，其所值的是戊戌日、己亥日。
English: The right foot should be in the northwest of the Dry Palace, in the solar terms should be in the beginning of winter, its value is the day of the wolf, the day of the boar.

古文：腰、尻、下窍应冬至，其日壬子。六腑膈下三臓应中州，其大禁，大禁太一所在之日，及诸戊、己。
现代文：腰部、臀部、前后二阴应于正北方的坎宫，在节气应于冬至，这是阴气极盛，其所值的是壬子六腑和胸膈以下的肝、脾、肾三脏，应于中宫，它的大禁日期是太一移居各宫所在之日以及各戊、己日。
English: The waist, buttocks, and the front and back of the yin should be in the Kang Palace in the north, and the solar terms should be in the winter solstice, which is the peak of yin. Its value is the six gills and the liver, spleen, and kidneys below the pectoral fins, which should be in the middle palace. Its forbidden date is the day when Taichi moved to each palace and the day of the eclipse.

古文：凡此九者，善候八正所在之处。
现代文：上述身形应九野的情况，可以测候八个节气所在的方位。
English: The above-mentioned figure corresponds to the situation in Kuno, and can measure the position of the eight solar terms.

古文：所主左右上下身体有痈肿者，欲治之，无以其所直之日溃治之，是谓天忌日也。
现代文：按照九宫所主左右上下的方位，凡身体各部患有痈肿的，如果要进行治疗，切不可在它其所值之日进行刺破排脓，这就是所说的天忌日。
English: According to the orientation of the master of the nine palaces, from left to right and up and down, if any part of the body suffers from an abscess, if it is to be treated, it must not be punctured on the day it is due. This is the so-called day of death.

古文：形乐志苦，病生于脉，治之于灸刺。形苦志乐，病生于筋，治之以熨引。形乐志乐，病生于肉，治之以针石。形苦志苦，病生于咽、喝，治之以甘药。形数惊恐，筋脉不通，病生于不仁，治之以按摩醪药。
现代文：形体安逸而精神苦闷的人，疾病多发生在经脉，治疗时适宜用针法和灸法；形体过于劳苦，但精神愉快的人，疾病多发生于筋，治疗时适宜温熨导引的方法；形体和精神都很舒适而好逸恶劳的人，疾病多发生在肌肉，宜用针和砭石刺治；形体劳苦、精神也苦闷的人，多发生声嘶咽塞或呼吸不利，宜用各种味甘的药物调治；屡受惊恐而形神不安的人，筋脉气血不通，多发生肢体麻木不仁，治疗时，适宜用药酒和按摩。
English: People who are physically comfortable and mentally distressed, the disease mostly occurs in the meridians, and acupuncture and moxibustion are suitable for treatment; people who are too hard-working, but mentally happy, the disease mostly occurs in the muscles, and the treatment is suitable for the warm iron guide method; people who are physically and mentally comfortable and are good at escaping and bad at work, the disease mostly occurs in the muscles, and should be treated with needles and flints; people who are physically laborious and mentally distressed, often have hoarse choking or bad breathing, and should be treated with various sweet-tasting drugs; people who are often frightened and restless,

古文：是谓形。五脏气：心主噫，肺主咳，肝主语，脾主吞，肾主欠。
现代文：以上是五种形志生病各自的特点和治法。五脏之气失调，各有所主的病症：心气不舒，发生噫气；肺气不利，则发生咳嗽；肝气郁结，则表现多语；脾气不和，发生吞酸；肾气衰惫，出现呵欠频作。
English: The above are the characteristics and treatment methods of each of the five diseases. The five viscera are dysregulated, and each has its own symptoms: the heart is not comfortable, resulting in shortness of breath; the lungs are unfavorable, resulting in coughing; the liver is depressed, resulting in multilingualism; the temper is discordant, resulting in acid swallowing; the kidneys are exhausted, resulting in frequent yawning.

古文：六腑气：胆为怒，胃为气逆哕，大肠小肠为泄，膀胱不约为遗溺，下焦溢为水。
现代文：六腑之气失调，各有所主的病症：胆气郁而不舒，易于发怒；胃气上逆则为呕吐、呃逆；小肠不能泌别清浊，大肠传导失常，则形成泄泻；膀胱气虚而不能约束，则出现遗尿；下焦不通，水液泛溢，则积水为肿。
English: There are six types of qi disorders, each with its own symptoms: choler is depressed but not comfortable, easy to get angry; the opposite of gastric qi is vomiting, hiccup; the small intestine can not secrete clear pus, the large intestine conduction disorder, then the formation of diarrhea; bladder qi deficiency and can not be constrained, then the appearance of urine; the lower calcification is not passed, the liquid overflows, then the accumulated water is swollen.

古文：五味：酸入肝，辛入肺，苦入心，甘入脾，咸入肾，淡入胃，是谓五味。
现代文：饮食五味入胃后，按其属性各归所合的脏腑：酸味属木入于肝；辛味属金入于肺；苦味属火入于心；甘味属土入于脾；咸味属水入于肾，这就是五味各自所入的脏腑。
English: After the five flavors of food and drink enter the stomach, according to their attributes, they all belong to the same viscera: sourness belongs to wood and enters the liver; pungency belongs to gold and enters the lungs; bitterness belongs to fire and enters the heart; sweetness belongs to earth and enters the spleen; saltiness belongs to water and enters the kidneys. This is the viscera that each of the five flavors enters.

古文：五并：精气并肝则忧，并心则喜，并肺则悲，并肾则恐，并脾则畏，是谓五精之气并于臓也。
现代文：五脏精气并入一脏的病症：精气并入于肝，则肝气抑郁，而生忧虑；并入于心，则心气有余而出现嬉笑不休；并入于肺，则肺气郁结，而出现悲哀不止；并入于肾，则水盛火衰，而出现心悸善恐；并入于脾，使脾盛而胆虚，则出现胆怯畏惧。这就是五脏精气并于一脏所发生的各种病症。
English: Diseases in which the five viscera are merged into a single viscera: if the five viscera are merged into the liver, the liver will be depressed, and anxiety will arise; if they are merged into the heart, the heart will be full of energy, and laughter will arise; if they are merged into the lungs, the lungs will be depressed, and sorrow will arise; if they are merged into the kidneys, the water will rise and fall, and the heart will be fearful; if they are merged into the spleen, the spleen will be timid, and fear will arise. These are the various diseases in which the five viscera are merged into a single viscera.

古文：五恶：肝恶风，心恶热，肺恶寒，肾恶燥，脾恶湿，此五脏气所恶也。
现代文：五脏按其不同的性能，各有所厌恶：肝主筋，风能引起筋的拘急，所以厌恶风；心主血脉，高热能伤血脉，所以厌恶热；肺主气，寒则气滞不宣，所以厌恶寒；肾属水，其性喜润，所以厌恶燥；脾属土，其性喜燥，所以厌恶湿。
English: According to their different properties, each of the five viscera has an aversion: the main muscle of the liver, wind can cause muscle tension, so it abhors wind; the main blood vessel of the heart, high heat can injure blood vessels, so it abhors heat; the lung is the main gas, cold is stagnant, so it abhors cold; the kidney is water, its nature is joyful, so it abhors dryness; the spleen is earth, its nature is joyful, so it abhors wetness.

古文：五液：心主汗，肝主泣，肺主涕，肾主唾，脾主涎，此五液所出也。
现代文：这就是五脏有所厌恶的具体表现。五脏各有所化生的水液：心脏主化生汗液，肝脏主化生泪液，肺脏主化生涕液，肾脏主化生唾液，脾脏主化生涎液。这就是五液的出处。
English: This is a concrete manifestation of the five viscera's aversion. Each of the five viscera produces its own fluid: the heart mainly produces sweat, the liver mainly produces tears, the lungs mainly produce mucus, the kidneys mainly produce saliva, and the spleen mainly produces pus. This is where the five fluids come from.

古文：五劳：久视伤血，久卧伤气，久坐伤肉，久立伤骨，久行伤筋，此五久劳所病也。
现代文：五种疲劳过度所致的损伤：久视则伤血，久卧则伤气，久坐则伤肌肉，久立则伤骨，久行则伤筋，这就是五种长期疲劳对人体损伤的具体情况。
English: There are five types of injury caused by excessive fatigue: long-sightedness causes blood loss, long-lying down causes irritation, long-sitting causes muscle injury, long-standing causes bone injury, and long-walking causes muscle injury. These are the specific conditions of five types of long-term fatigue on human injury.

古文：五走：酸走筋，辛走气，苦走血，咸走骨，甘走肉，是谓五走也。
现代文：五味归于五脏，按其属性，各有一定的走向：酸味入肝，肝主筋，故酸走筋；辛味入肺，肺主气，故辛走气；苦味入心，心主血，故苦走血；咸味入肾，肾主骨，所以咸走骨；甘味入脾，脾主肌肉，所以甘走肉。
English: Five tastes belong to the five viscera, according to their attributes, each has a certain direction: sourness into the liver, the main muscle of the liver, so the acid goes to the muscle; pungent into the lungs, the main air of the lungs, so the pain goes to the air; bitterness into the heart, the main blood of the heart, so the bitterness goes to the blood; salty into the kidney, the main bone of the kidney, so the salty goes to the bone; sweetness into the spleen, the main muscle of the spleen, so the sweet goes to the meat.

古文：五裁：病在筋，无食酸；病在气，无食辛；病在骨，无食咸；病在血，无食苦；病在肉，无食甘。
现代文：这就是五味走向各部的具体情况。节制饮食的五种情况：酸性收敛，筋喜柔而不喜收敛，所以筋病不宜多食酸味；辛味发散，气宜聚敛不喜发散，所以气病不宜多食辛味；咸能软坚，骨宜坚不喜软，所以骨病不宜多食咸味；苦味主燥，血不喜燥，所以血病不宜多食苦味；甘味壅滞，肌肉不喜壅滞，所以肌肉病变不宜多食甘味。
English: This is the specific situation of the five tastes moving towards each part. The five situations of the temperate diet are: acid convergence, the muscle is soft and does not like convergence, so the muscle disease should not eat more sour taste; pungent dispersion, the qi should not be dispersed, so the qi disease should not eat more pungent taste; salty energy is soft and hard, the bone is hard and does not like soft, so the bone disease should not eat more salty taste; bitter taste is mainly dry, the blood is not dry, so the blood disease should not eat more bitter taste; sweet taste is stagnant, the muscle is not stagnant, so the muscle disease should

古文：口嗜而欲食之，不可多也，必自裁也，命曰五裁。
现代文：即使是自己最爱吃的东西，也不要吃得过多，必须自己加以节制，适可而止，这就是节制饮食五味的具体情况。
English: Even if it's your favorite food, you shouldn't overeat it. You have to control it yourself. This is the specific situation of the Five Flavors of Restricted Eating.

古文：五发：阴病发于骨，阳病发于血，阴病发于肉，阳病发于冬，阴病发于夏。五邪：邪入于阳，则为狂。
现代文：五脏之病的发生，各有其部位与不同的季节：肾为阴脏而主骨，则肾阴的病多发生在骨；心为阳脏而主血，则心阳的病多发生在血；脾为阴脏而主肌肉，则脾阴的病多发生在肌肉；肝为阳脏而主春，则属于肝脏的阳病发源于冬季；肺为阴脏而主秋，则属于肺脏的阴病发源于夏季。邪气侵扰的五种病变：邪气入于阳分而阳盛热极，能使神志受扰而发生狂症。
English: The occurrence of diseases of the five internal organs, each has its own parts and different seasons: the kidney is the yin and the main bone, then the disease of the kidney yin mostly occurs in the bone; the heart is the yang and the main blood, then the disease of the heart yang mostly occurs in the blood; the spleen is the yin and the main muscle, then the disease of the spleen yang mostly occurs in the muscle; the liver is the yang and the main spring, then the yang disease of the liver originates in the winter; the lungs are the yin and the main autumn, then the yang disease of the lungs originates in the summer.

古文：邪入于阴，则为血瘅。
现代文：邪气入于阴分而阴寒至极，能使营血凝滞，发生血痹症。
English: The evil spirit enters the yin element and is extremely cold, which can cause blood to congeal and cause hemolytic disease.

古文：邪入于阳，转则为癫疾。
现代文：邪气入于阳分，阳与邪相搏，则发生头部巅顶的疾患。
English: When the evil spirit enters the yang, and the yang fights with the evil, the disease of the top of the head occurs.

古文：邪入于阴，转则为瘖。
现代文：邪气入于阴分，阴与邪相搏，则导致喑哑。
English: The evil spirit enters into the yin element, and the yin fights with the evil, resulting in deafness.

古文：阳入于阴，病静；阴出之于阳，病喜怒。
现代文：阳分的邪气入于阴分，病人则安静沉默；阴分的邪气出于阳分，病人则躁动易怒。
English: The evil spirit of the yang goes into the yin, and the patient is quiet and silent; the evil spirit of the yang comes out of the yang, and the patient is restless and irritable.

古文：五藏：心藏神，肺藏魄，肝藏魂，脾藏意，肾藏精志也。
现代文：五脏各有所藏的精神意识活动：心藏神，肺藏魄，肝藏魂，脾藏意，肾藏精和志。
English: Each of the five viscera has its own spiritual awareness activities: the heart contains God, the lungs contain the soul, the liver contains the soul, the spleen contains the will, and the kidneys contain the essence and the will.

古文：五主：心主脉，肺主皮，肝主筋，脾主肌，肾主骨。
现代文：五脏对躯体各部分分别有其所主：心主脉，肺主皮毛，肝主筋，脾主肌肉，肾主骨。
English: The five viscera have their respective owners for each part of the body: the main artery of the heart, the main skin of the lungs, the main muscle of the liver, the main muscle of the spleen, and the main bone of the kidney.

古文：阳明多血多气，太阳多血少气，少阳多气少血，太阴多血少气，厥阴多血少气，少阴多气少血。
现代文：手足阳明经多血多气，手足太阳经多血少气，手足少阳经多气少血，手足太阴经多血少气，手足厥阴经多血少气，手足少阴经多气少血。
English: The Hand and Foot Yang Ming Ching is more blood and gas, the Hand and Foot Sun Ching is more blood and less gas, the Hand and Foot Shao Yang Ching is more gas and less blood, the Hand and Foot Tai Yin Ching is more blood and less gas, the Hand and Foot Jue Yin Ching is more blood and less gas, the Hand and Foot Shao Yin Ching is more gas and less blood.

古文：故曰刺阳明出血气，刺太阳出血恶气，刺少阳出气恶血，刺太阴出血恶气，刺厥阴出血恶气，刺少阴出气恶血也。
现代文：所以说，针刺阳明经可以泻其气，也可以泻其血。针刺太阳经，只宜泻其血，不宜泻其气。针刺少阳经，只宜泻其气，不宜泻其血。针刺太阴经，只宜泻其血，不宜泻其气。针刺厥阴经，只宜泻其血，不宜泻其气。针刺少阴经，只宜泻其气，不宜泻其血。
English: Therefore, it is said that acupuncture on the Yang Ming Jie can relieve one's breath, and can also relieve one's blood. Acupuncture on the Sun Jie is only suitable for relieving one's blood, but not for relieving one's breath. Acupuncture on the Shao Yang Jie is only suitable for relieving one's breath, but not for relieving one's blood. Acupuncture on the Ta Yin Jie is only suitable for relieving one's blood, but not for relieving one's breath. Acupuncture on the Jue Yin Jie is only suitable for relieving one's blood, but not for relieving one's breath. Ac

古文：足阳明、太阴为里表，少阳、厥阴为表里，太阳、少阴为表里，是谓足之阴阳也。
现代文：足阳明胃经与足太阴脾经为表里，足少阳胆经与足厥阴肝经为表里，足太阳膀胱经与足少阴肾经为表里，这是足三阴经与足三阳经的表里配合关系。
English: The foot yang stomach meridian and the foot yin spleen meridian are in the surface, the foot yang gall meridian and the foot yang liver meridian are in the surface, and the foot sun bladder meridian and the foot yang kidney meridian are in the surface. This is the relationship between the foot three yin meridian and the foot three yang meridian.

古文：手阳明、太阴为表里，少阳、心主为表里，太阳、少阴为表里，是谓手之阴阳也。
现代文：手阳明大肠经与手太阴肺经为表里，手少阳三焦经与手厥阴心包经为表里，手太阳小肠经与手少阴心经为表里，这是手三阴经与手三阳经的表里配合关系。
English: The Hand Yang Ming Large Intestine Sutra and the Hand Tai Yin Lung Sutra are inside the face, the Hand Shao Yang Three-Focus Sutra and the Hand Jue Yin Heart Enveloping Sutra are inside the face, and the Hand Sun Small Intestine Sutra and the Hand Shao Yin Heart Sutra are inside the face. This is the inside-face cooperation relationship between the Hand Three Yin Sutra and the Hand Three Yang Sutra.

