古文：汉永平中，会稽钟离意，字子阿，为鲁相。
现代文：汉明帝永平年间，会稽郡人钟离意，字子阿，任鲁国的国相。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanming Yongping, Zhong Liangyi, also known as Zi Zi Ah, was appointed as the Minister of State of Lu.

古文：到官，出私钱万三千文，付户曹孔诉，修夫子车。身入庙，拭几席剑履。
现代文：到任后，他拿出自己的钱一万三千文，交给户曹孔，让他修复孔子生前坐的车；他还亲自到孔庙去，揩拭孔子用过的桌子、坐席、刀剑、鞋子。
English: After taking office, he took out 13,000 yuan of his own money and gave it to Hou Cao Kongyao to repair the car in which Confucius used to sit. He also went to the Confucius Temple in person to wipe the table, seat, sword and shoes used by Confucius.

古文：男子张伯除堂下草，土中得玉璧七枚，伯怀其一，以六枚白意。
现代文：有个男子叫张伯，在堂下除草的时候，从泥土里捡到了七块玉壁。张伯把一块藏在怀里，拿六块禀报给钟离意。
English: A man named Zhang Bo, while weeding under the hall, picked up seven pieces of jade wall from the dirt. Zhang Bo hid one piece in his arms, and took six pieces of jade wall to give the bell away.

古文：意令主簿安置几前，孔子教授堂下床首有悬瓮，意召孔诉问： 此何瓮也？ 
现代文：钟离意命令主簿把它放在桌子前面，孔子传授学业的讲堂前的床头有一个悬挂着的瓮，钟离意召见孔诉，问他： 这是什么瓮？ 
English: Zhong Liangyi ordered the ledger to be placed in front of the desk. In front of the lecture hall where Confucius taught, there was a hanging anchor at the head of the bed. Zhong Liangyi summoned Confucius and asked him: What is this anchor?

古文：对曰： 夫子瓮也。
现代文：孔沂回答说： 是孔夫子的瓮。
English: Confucius replied, "It is Confucius's hammer."

古文：背有丹书，人莫敢发也， 意曰： 夫子，圣人。
现代文：里面装有丹书，人们没有敢打开它的。 钟离意说： 孔夫子是圣人。
English: There was a book of Confucius in it, but people didn't dare to open it. Zhong Liang said, "Confucius is a saint.

古文：所以遗瓮，欲以悬示后贤。 
现代文：他之所以留下这瓮，是想把它挂在这儿让后代的贤良来看。 
English: The reason why he left this urn is that he wanted to hang it here for future generations to see.

古文：因发之。中得素书，文曰： 后世修吾书，董仲舒。
现代文：接着就把它打开了，从里面得到一块帛书，上面写着： 后代研究我著作的，是董仲舒。
English: He then opened it and got a piece of paper from inside, on which was written: It is Dong Zhongshu who will be studied by future generations.

古文：护吾车拭吾履，发吾笥，会稽钟离意。璧有七，张伯藏其一。
现代文：保护我车子、揩拭我鞋子、开启我书箱的，是会稽人钟离意，玉壁有七块，张伯私藏了其中的一块。 
English: It is the auditor who protects my car, wipes my shoes, and opens my bookcase. There are seven pieces of jade wall, and Zhang Bo has hidden one of them.

古文：意即召问： 璧有七，何藏一耶？ 
现代文：钟离意就召来张伯，责问他说： 玉璧有七块，你为什么要藏掉一块呢？ 
English: Zhong Liang summoned Zhang Bo and asked him, "There are seven pieces of jade, why did you hide one?

古文：伯叩头出之。
现代文：张伯磕头求饶，马上把一块玉璧交了出来。
English: Zhang Bo Shantou begged for mercy and immediately handed over a piece of jade.

古文：段医，字符章，广汉新都人也。
现代文：段翳，字元章，是广汉郡新都县人。
English: Duan Qi, Zhi Yuan Zhang, is a native of Xindu County, Guanghan County.

古文：习易经，明风角。
现代文：他精通《易经》，懂得根据五音与四方之风声来占吉凶的占候之术。
English: He was well versed in the "I Ching" and knew how to predict the weather according to the five tones and the wind of the four directions.

古文：有一生来学。积年，自谓略究要术，辞归乡里。
现代文：有个学生来学习了几年，自以为已经大致掌握了关键的道术，就告辞回到家乡去了。
English: One student came to study for a few years, thought he had roughly mastered the key techniques of Taoism, and left to return to his hometown.

古文：医为合膏药，幷以简书封于筒中，告生曰： 有急，发视之。 
现代文：段留给他配了些膏药，并用竹简写了封信一起封在竹筒里，告诉这学生说： 碰上急事，就打开这竹筒看看。 
English: He left a piece of paper with some plasters and wrote a letter on a piece of bamboo and sealed it in a bamboo tube, telling the student, "In case of emergency, open this bamboo tube and take a look."

古文：生到葭萌，与吏争度津。
现代文：这学生来到葭萌县自水江边，为了过河同渡口的小吏吵了起来。
English: The student came to the side of the Zhisui River in Qimeng County and quarreled with a minor official at the ferry port in order to cross the river.

古文：吏挝破从者头。
现代文：管渡口的官吏打破了他随从的头。
English: The official in charge of the ferry broke the heads of his entourage.

古文：生开筒得书，言： 到葭萌，与吏斗，头破者，以此膏裹之。 
现代文：他打开竹筒看到那信札，上面写着： 到葭萌县，与官吏争斗，头被打破的，就用这膏药敷在伤口上。 
English: He opened the bamboo tube and saw the letter, which read: "If you go to Qimeng County and fight with officials and your head is broken, use this ointment to apply to the wound.

古文：生用其言，创者即愈。
现代文：他就按这话办了，受伤的人马上就痊愈了。
English: The students listened to his words, and the injured recovered immediately.

古文：右扶风臧仲英，为侍御史。
现代文：右扶风的臧仲英，任侍御史。
English: Zou Zhongying, who supported the right-wing faction, became an attendant to the emperor.

古文：家人作食，设案，有不清尘土投污之。
现代文：他家里的仆人做了饭菜，放在木托盘中，却有不清洁的尘土掉进去把它给搞脏了。
English: His domestic servant had prepared the meal and placed it in a wooden tray, but some unclean dust had fallen in and soiled it.

古文：炊临熟，不知釜处。
现代文：烧饭马上要烧熟了，却不知锅子到什么地方去了。
English: The cooked rice is about to be cooked, but I don't know where the pot has gone.

古文：兵弩自行。
现代文：兵器、弓箭自己会动。
English: Weapons, bows and arrows move on their own.

古文：火从箧簏中起，衣物尽烧，而箧簏故完。
现代文：火从竹箱里冒出来，箱子里的衣服物品全都烧光了，而箱子却还象原来的样子完好无损。
English: Fire came out of the bamboo box, and all the clothes and items in the box were burned out, but the box was still intact as it was.

古文：妇女婢使，一旦尽失其镜；数日，从堂下掷庭中，有人声言： 还汝镜。 
现代文：家里的妇女丫鬟，有一天都丢了镜子，过了几天，却看见镜子从堂下扔到厅堂里，还有人声在说： 还给你们镜子！ 
English: The family's female servants all lost their mirrors one day. A few days later, however, they saw a mirror thrown from under the hall into the hall, and a voice saying: Give back your mirrors!

古文：女孙年三四岁，亡之，求，不知处；两三日，乃于圊中粪下啼。
现代文：孙女儿只有三四岁，忽然不见了，找来找去不知道在什么地方，过了两三天，却在厕所中的大粪下面啼哭。
English: My granddaughter was only three or four years old when she suddenly disappeared. I looked for her everywhere, but I didn't know where she was. Two or three days later, she was crying under a pile of excrement in the toilet.

古文：若此非一。
现代文：象这样的事情不一而足。
English: When strange things like this keep happening, Hao Zhongying is very worried.

古文：汝南许季山者，素善卜卦，卜之，曰： 家当有老青狗物、内中侍御者名益喜，与共为之。
现代文：汝南郡的许季山，一向善于占卦，为此占了个卜，说： 你家一定有一条老青狗，而家中有个仆人名叫益喜，与它一起干这些事。
English: Xu Qishan of Runan County, who has always been good at divination, made a prediction for this, saying: Your family must have an old dog, and there is a servant named Yixi in the family who does these things with it.

古文：诚欲绝，杀此狗，遣益喜归乡里。 
现代文：如果你真要杜绝这种事的发生，就要杀掉这条狗，遣送益喜回老家去。 
English: If you really want to stop this from happening, kill the dog and send Yixi back home.

古文：仲英从之，怪遂绝。
现代文：臧仲英按他的办法做了，怪事就不再发生了。
English: Zou Zhongying did as he was told, and the strange things no longer happened.

古文：后徙为太尉长史，迁鲁相。
现代文：后来他调任太尉长史，又升迁为鲁国相。
English: Later, he was transferred to the rank of captain-general, and was promoted to minister of state.

古文：太尉乔玄，字公祖，梁国人也。
现代文：太尉乔玄，字公祖，是梁国人。
English: Captain Qiao Xuan, nicknamed Gong Zu, is a native of Liang.

古文：初为司徒长史，五月末，于中门卧，夜半后，见东壁正白，如开门明。
现代文：他当初任司徒长史的时候，在五月底的一天，睡在大门边，半夜以后，看见东墙雪白，就像开了门一样明亮。
English: One day at the end of May, when he was first appointed as the head of Stutthof, he was sleeping next to the gate. After midnight, he saw the east wall white as snow, as bright as if he had opened the door.

古文：呼问左右。左右莫见。
现代文：他叫过身边的人来问问，这些人都说没看见。
English: He called the people around him to ask, and they all said they didn't see it.

古文：因起自往手扪摸之，壁自如故。
现代文：于是他就起了床亲自前去，用手抚摸这墙壁，墙壁还是像原来那样。
English: So he got out of bed and went over and touched the wall with his hand, and the wall is still as it was.

古文：还床，复见。心大怖恐。
现代文：但他回到床上，又看见了之前的景象，因而他心里非常恐惧。
English: But when he went back to bed and saw what had happened, he was terrified.

古文：其友应劭，适往候之，语次相告。
现代文：他的朋友应劭正好去看望他，他便把这事一一告诉了应劭。
English: His friend Ying Yao happened to visit him, and he told Ying Yao everything.

古文：劭曰。 乡人有董彦兴者，即许季山外孙也。
现代文：应劭说： 我同乡有个叫董彦兴的，是许季山的外孙。
English: Ying Yao said: I have a fellow villager named Dong Yanxing, who is the grandson of Xu Qishan.

古文：其探赜索隐，穷神知化，虽眭孟，京房，无以过也。
现代文：他喜欢探索幽深莫测、隐秘难见的事实，穷尽神妙玄奥、变幻化生的道理，就是精通《春秋公羊传》的眭弘和精通《易经》的京房，也没有什么地方可以胜过他的。
English: He likes to explore the deep and unfathomable, the hidden and difficult to see facts, to exhaust the mysterious and esoteric, the principle of the transformation of life, that is, to be proficient in "The Spring and Autumn Ram" and proficient in "I Ching," and there is no place that can beat him.

古文：然天性褊狭，羞于卜，筮者间来候师。 
现代文：但他天性拘谨，老把占卜看作是羞耻的事而不愿意干。
English: But he is a natural prude and has always regarded divination as something to be ashamed of and does not want to do it.

古文：王叔茂谓往迎之。
现代文：近来他正好来看望他的老师王叔茂，请让我去把他接来吧！ 
English: Recently, he happened to visit his teacher, Wang Shumo. Please let me pick him up!

古文：须臾，便与俱来。
现代文：一会儿，董彦兴便与应劭一起来了。
English: After a while, Dong Yanxing came with the troupe.

古文：公祖虚礼盛馔，下席行觞。
现代文：乔玄谦恭地以礼款待董彦兴，准备了丰盛的酒宴，走下座席给他敬酒。
English: Qiao Xuan humbly treated Dong Yanxing with courtesy, prepared a sumptuous banquet, and stepped down from his seat to give him a toast.

古文：彦兴自陈： 下土诸生，无他异分。币重言甘，诚有踧踖。
现代文：董彦兴不待他请求就自己先说道： 我一个乡下的学生，没有与众不同的天赋，您现在礼节隆重，甜言蜜语，我实在有点忐忑不安。
English: Dong Yanxing did not wait for his request and said first: I am a student from the countryside, I do not have a unique talent, you are now ceremonious, sweet-talking, I am really a little uneasy.

古文：颇能别者，愿得从事。 
现代文：如果我略能识别的话，愿意为您效劳。 
English: If I can identify it, I'm at your service.

古文：公祖辞让再三，尔乃听之，曰： 府君当有怪，白光如门明者。
现代文：乔玄推让了好几次，然后才听从了他，让他说说自己的命运。
English: Qiao Xuan pushed him away several times before listening to him and letting him speak about his fate.

古文：然不为害也。六月上旬，鸡明时，闻南家哭，即吉。
现代文：董彦兴便对他说： 您一定碰上了奇怪的事情，是墙上的自光象开了门一样明亮吧，但这不会给您造成什么危害。六月上旬早晨鸡啼的时候，听见南边有人家在哭，您就吉利了。
English: Dong Yanxing said to him, "You must have come across something strange. The self-illumination on the wall is as bright as if you opened the door, but this will not cause you any harm. In the early morning of June, when the rooster crows, you will be lucky to hear someone crying on the south side.

古文：到秋节，迁北行，郡以金为名。
现代文：到秋季，您将调到北面的郡府任职，那郡府的名称中有 金 字。
English: By autumn, you will be transferred to the county seat in the north, which has "gold" in its name.

古文：位至将军三公。 
现代文：您的官职直到将军、三公。 
English: Your official position is up to the generals and three dukes.

古文：公祖曰： 怪异如此，救族不暇，何能致望于所不图？
现代文：乔玄说： 我已经碰到这样的怪事，现在连抢救灭族的灾难都来不及，哪能把希望寄托在办不到的事情上呢？
English: Qiao Xuan said: I have already encountered such a strange thing, now it is too late to even rescue the disaster of extermination, how can I pin my hopes on things that can't be done?

古文：此相饶耳。 
现代文：您这只是在宽我的心罢了。 
English: You're just breaking my heart.

古文：至六月九日，未明。太尉杨秉暴薨。
现代文：到六月初九天还没亮，太尉杨秉突然死了。
English: At the beginning of June, nine days before dawn, Second Lieutenant Yang Bing suddenly died.

古文：七月七日，拜钜鹿太守。 钜 边有金。
现代文：七月初七，乔玄被任命为矩鹿太守， 钜 字的偏旁中有 金 字。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month, Qiao Xuan was appointed as the governor of Ruka. Beside the  character, there is a gold character.

古文：后为 度辽将军， 历登三事。
现代文：后来乔玄又做了度辽将军，历任太尉、司徒、司空等三公要职。
English: Later, Qiao Xuan also became General Du Liao, and successively held three important public positions such as the first lieutenant, the second lieutenant, and the second lieutenant.

古文：管辂，字公明，平原人也。
现代文：管辂，字公明，是平原县人。
English: Guanqian, also known as Gongming, is from Pingyuan County.

古文：善易卜。
现代文：他精通《周易》，擅长卜笼。
English: He is proficient in "Zhou Yi" and is good at playing the cages.

古文：安平太守东莱王基，字伯舆，家数有怪，使辂筮之。
现代文：安平太守东莱人工基，字伯舆，家里屡次出现怪事，就让管辂用著草给他算个卦。
English: Anping Taishu, the governor of the Donglai artificial base, the word Bo-Yu, repeatedly had strange things happen at home, so he asked Guan Yu to use grass to calculate a fortune for him.

古文：卦成，辂曰： 君之卦，当有贱妇人，生一男，堕地，便走入灶中死。
现代文：卦象成了后，管辂说： 根据您的卦象，一定有一个下贱的女人生一个男孩，那男孩一落地便跑，跑进灶中就死了。
English: After the puzzle was complete, Guan Yu said, "According to your puzzle, there must have been a lowly woman who gave birth to a boy, and as soon as the boy fell to the ground, he ran into the stove and died.

古文：又，床上当有一大蛇，衔笔，大小共视，须臾便去。
现代文：还有，你床上一定有一条大蛇衔了毛笔，大家都去看，一会儿它便游走了。
English: Also, there must be a big snake in your bed with a quill, everyone went to see it, and in a moment it swam away.

古文：又，乌来入室中，与燕共斗，燕死，乌去。
现代文：还有乌鸦飞到你家里，与燕子一起搏斗，燕子死了，乌鸦便飞走了。
English: And the crow flies to your house, fights with the swallow, the swallow dies, and the crow flies away.

古文：有此三卦。 
现代文：一共有这三种卦象。 
English: There are a total of these three types of conjecture.

古文：基大惊曰： 精义之致，乃至于此，幸为占其吉凶。 
现代文：王基十分惊奇他说： 您深入研讨事物的微妙义蕴的细密程度，竟达到了这种地步！
English: Wang Qi was very surprised and said, "You have reached such a level of in-depth study of the subtle meanings of things!

古文：辂曰： 非有他祸，直客舍久远，魑魅罔两，共为怪耳。
现代文：希望您能再给我预测一下这些卦象的吉凶。 管辂说： 这并没有什么其他的灾祸，只是你住的房子太古老了，里面的魑魅魍魉等精怪一起作祟罢了。
English: I hope you can give me another prediction of the fortunes of these gaga elephants.Guan Yu said: This is not any other disaster, but the house you live in is too old, and the enchanted dragonflies and other elves inside are working together.

古文：儿生便走，非能自走，直宋无忌之妖将其入灶也。
现代文：那孩子生下来就跑，不是他自己能跑，而只是火精宋无忌的妖术将他拉进了灶中。
English: The boy was born able to walk, not because he could walk on his own, but because a rampant demon chased him into the kitchen.

古文：大蛇衔笔者，直老书佐耳。
现代文：那衔笔的大蛇，只是您原来的文书罢了。
English: That big snake with a pen is just your original paperwork.

古文：乌与燕斗者，直老铃下耳。
现代文：那与燕子搏斗的乌鸦，只是您原来的侍从罢了。
English: The crow that fights with the swallow is only your former servant.

古文：夫神明之正，非妖能害也。
现代文：那神圣的正道，不是妖精能够加害的。
English: It is not fairies that can harm the sacred path.

古文：万物之变，非道所止也。
现代文：各种事物的变化，不是道术所能阻止得了的。
English: Changes in all kinds of things cannot be stopped by Taoism.

古文：久远之浮精，必能之定数也。
现代文：经久历远的精怪，必然具有一定的气数。
English: A long-standing eccentricity must have a certain number of qi.

古文：今卦中见象，而不见其凶，故知假托之数，非妖咎之征，自无所忧也。
现代文：现在卦象中只看见它们做的事市没看见这些事情所导致的严重后果，所以知道这些都是虚假的花招，而不是妖怪危害的预兆，这当然也就没有什么可忧虑的了。
English: Now, the goblins only see what they do, but they don't see the serious consequences of these things, so they know that these are false tricks, not signs of harm from monsters, and of course there's nothing to worry about.

古文：昔高宗之鼎，非雉所雊；太戊之阶，非桑所生。
现代文：过去殷高宗的宝鼎上，不是野鸡啼叫的地方；太戊帝的石阶上，也不是桑树生长的地方。
English: In the world of the ancestors of the Han Dynasty, although there was the power of Lv Ying, it was finally eliminated. Mulberry trees would not grow on the steps of the Great Hall of King Tae of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：然而野鸟一雊，武丁为高宗；桑谷暂生，太戊以兴焉。
现代文：然页野鸡在那宝鼎上一叫，武丁却当上了高宗；桑树、谷树突然长在朝廷上，太戊帝却因而兴盛了。
English: But when the pheasants crowed at the top of the tree, Wuding became Emperor Gaozong; the mulberry tree and the corn tree suddenly grew in the imperial court, and Emperor Taewu prospered as a result.

古文：知三事不为吉祥，愿府君安身养德，从容光大，勿以神奸，污累天真。 
现代文：怎么知道您这三件怪事不是吉样的征兆呢？请您安心修养高尚的德行，将它发扬光大，不要因为这些精怪的干扰而沾污连累了天皇真人。 
English: How do you know that these three strange happenings of yours are not auspicious omens? Please feel free to cultivate noble virtue and carry it forward, and do not tarnish and burden Emperor Makoto with these strange distractions.

古文：后卒无他。迁安南督军后，辂乡里乃太原，问辂： 君往者为王府君论怪云： 老书佐为蛇，老铃下为乌， 此本皆人。
现代文：后来王基终于没碰上什么其它的不幸，升迁为安南督军。后来，管箱的同乡乃太原问管辂： 您过去与王太守谈论精怪的时候，说 原来的文书变成了大蛇，原来的侍从变成了乌鸦 。
English: Later, Wang Ji finally did not encounter any other misfortune, and was promoted to the Annan Governor's Army. Later, a fellow villager of Guan Bin, Nao Taiyuan, asked Guan Yu: When you used to talk about fine things with Wang Tai Shou, you said that the original clerk turned into a snake, and the original attendant turned into a crow.

古文：何化之微贱乎？
现代文：他们本来都是人，为什么让自己变成卑贱的东西呢？
English: They are all human beings, so why do they turn themselves into lowly things?

古文：为见于爻象出君意乎？ 
现代文：这是您在卦象里看见的呢？还是出自您的想象？ 
English: Is this what you see in the Chinese zodiac, or is it your imagination?

古文：辂言： 苟非性与天道，何由背爻象而任心胸者乎？
现代文：管辂说： 如果不是依据本性与自然之道，凭什么不顾卦象而任凭想象呢？
English: Guan Yu said: If it is not based on nature and the way of nature, why do we have to rely on imagination in spite of the elephant?

古文：夫万物之化，无有常形；人之变异，无有定体。
现代文：各种事物的变化，没有永久不变的形态，人变化为其它的东西，没有固定的模式。
English: All kinds of things change, there is no permanent and unchanging form, people change into other things, there is no fixed pattern.

古文：或大为小，或小为大，固无优劣。
现代文：有的东西是由大变小，有的东西是由小变大，这本来就没有什么好坏之分。
English: Some things change from big to small, and some things change from small to big. There is nothing inherently good or bad about this.

古文：万物之化，一例之道也。
现代文：各种事物的变化，一律因循着自然的规律。
English: The changes of all kinds of things all follow the laws of nature.

古文：是以夏鲧天子之父，赵王如意，汉高之子，而鲧为黄熊，意为苍狗，斯亦至尊之位，而为黔喙之类也。
现代文：因此，夏代的鲧，是天子禹的父亲；赵王如意，是汉高祖刘邦的儿子。但结果鲧变成了类似熊的黄色野兽，如意变成了青色的狗，他们也是从极其尊贵的地位，变成了普通的动物。
English: Therefore, the Summer Dynasty's Zhai was the father of the Heavenly Son Yu; Zhao Wang Ruyi was the son of the Han Emperor Liu Bang. But as a result, Zhai became a yellow beast resembling a bear, Ruyi became a blue dog, and they also changed from an extremely noble position to an ordinary animal.

古文：况蛇者协辰巳之位，乌者栖太阳之精，此乃腾黑之明象，白日之流景。
现代文：更何况蛇与地支中的已相配，乌鸦又是太阳的精灵！它们实在是腾蛇星宿的神形，是太阳的遗影。
English: Not to mention the fact that the snake is already compatible with the branch of the earth, and the crow is the spirit of the sun! They are really the divine form of the constellation Serpens, the last shadow of the sun.

古文：如书佐、铃下，各以微躯，化为蛇乌，不亦过乎。 
现代文：象文书、侍从这种人，各自以他们卑微的身躯，变成了蛇、乌鸦，不是也已经超过了他们原有的地位了吗？ 
English: Such people as clerks and attendants, each with their humble bodies, have become snakes and crows, haven't they also surpassed their original status?

古文：管辂至平原，见颜超貌主夭亡。颜父乃求辂延命。
现代文：管辂来到平原县，看见颜超的面色异常，预示着他不到成年就会死去，颜超的父亲就求管辂延长颜超的寿命。
English: Guan Yu came to Pingyuan County and saw that Yan Chao's complexion was abnormal, indicating that he would die before reaching adulthood. Yan Chao's father asked Guan Yu to extend Yan Chao's life.

古文：辂曰： 子归，觅清酒鹿脯一斤，卯日，刈麦地南大桑树下，有二人围位，次但酌酒置脯，饮尽更斟，以尽为度。
现代文：管辂对颜超说： 您回家，去准备好一壶清澈的酒，一斤鹿肉干。在逢卯的那一天，那割掉麦子的田地南边的大桑树下，有两个人在下围棋，您只管给他们斟酒，并把肉干端上去，他们喝完了杯里的酒，您就再给他们斟上，直到把酒喝完为止。
English: Guan Yu said to Yan Chao, "You should go home and prepare a pot of clear wine and a kilo of dried venison. On the day of the match, there were two people playing Go under the big mulberry tree on the south side of the wheat field. All you had to do was pour the wine for them and serve the dried meat. When they finished drinking the wine in the cup, you had to pour it for them again until they had finished drinking the wine.

古文：若问汝，汝但拜之，勿言。
现代文：如果他们问你，你只管向他们磕头作揖，不要说话。
English: If they ask you, just nod your head and don't say anything.

古文：必合有人救汝。 
现代文：这样，一定会有人来搭救你的。 
English: That way, someone will come to your rescue.

古文：颜依言而往，果见二人围碁，频置脯，斟酒于前。
现代文：颜超按照管辂的话去了，果然看见两个人在下围棋。颜超拿了肉干斟了酒放在他们面前。
English: Yan Chao followed Guan Yu's words and saw two people playing Go. Yan Chao took the dried meat, poured the wine and placed it in front of them.

古文：其人贪戏，但饮酒食脯。不顾数巡，北边坐者忽见颜在，叱曰： 何故在此？ 
现代文：那两个人贪图玩耍，一心扑在下棋上，只管喝酒吃肉，也不回头看看这酒、肉是什么地方来的。酒斟了好几次，坐在北边的人忽然看见颜超在边上，就责问道： 你为什么呆在这儿？ 
English: The two men were so eager to play that they played chess with all their hearts, drank wine and ate meat without looking back to see where the wine and meat came from. The wine was poured several times, and the person sitting on the north side suddenly saw Yan Chao on the edge and asked, "Why are you staying here?"

古文：颜惟拜之。
现代文：颜超只管向他磕头作揖。
English: Yan Chao just made fun of him.

古文：南面坐者语曰： 适来饮他酒脯，宁无情乎？ 
现代文：坐在南边的人说道： 刚才还吃他的酒肉，难道能毫不曾情吗？ 
English: The person sitting on the south side said, "How can you not have any feelings for him when you just ate his meat and drink?"

古文：北坐者曰： 文书已定。 
现代文：坐在北边的人说： 他的寿命在文书上已经写定了。 
English: The man sitting on the north side said, "His life span is already written in the document."

古文：南坐者曰： 借文书看之。 
现代文：坐在南边的人说。 把你的文书借给我看一下。 
English: Said the man sitting on the south side, Lend me your book.

古文：见超寿止可十九岁，乃取笔挑上语曰： 救汝至九十年活。 
现代文：他看见文书上所记载的颜超寿命只有十九岁，就拿起笔来把 九 字勾到 十 字之上，对颜超说： 我挽救你一下，让你活到九十岁。 
English: When he saw that Yan Chao's lifespan was only nineteen years old as recorded in the document, he picked up a pen to tick the nine characters above the ten characters and said to Yan Chao: I'll save you a bit and let you live to be ninety years old.

古文：颜拜而回。
现代文：颜超拜谢后就回去了。
English: Yan Chao went back home after giving thanks.

古文：管语颜曰： 大助子，且喜得增寿。
现代文：管辂对颜超说： 这真是大大地帮助了您，我也很高兴您能增加寿限。
English: Guan Yu said to Yan Chao: This has really helped you a lot, and I am also very happy that you can increase your lifespan.

古文：北边坐人是北斗，南边坐人是南斗。
现代文：坐在北边的人是北斗星，坐在南边的人是南斗星。
English: The person sitting in the north is the Big Dipper, and the person sitting in the south is the Southern Dipper.

古文：南斗注生，北斗主死。
现代文：南斗星管生，北斗星管死。
English: The Southern Dipper is born and the Northern Dipper dies.

古文：凡人受胎，皆从南斗过北斗；所有祈求，皆向北斗。 
现代文：人只要成了胎，都在南斗星那边定好生日，再在北斗星那边定好死日。有什么请求，都得向北斗星诉说。 
English: As soon as a person becomes a fetus, the birthday is set on the side of the Southern Dipper, and the day of death is set on the side of the Northern Dipper. Any request must be told to the Northern Dipper.

古文：信都令家妇女惊恐，更互疾的。使辂筮之。
现代文：信都县县令家中，女人们都担惊受怕，轮流生病，因而让管辂用蓄草给他算个卦。
English: At the home of the county magistrate of Xindu County, the women were all worried and frightened, taking turns to get sick, so they asked Guan Yu to use grass to calculate a fortune for him.

古文：辂曰： 君北堂西头有两死男子：一男持矛，一男持弓箭。头在壁内，脚在壁外。
现代文：管辂说： 您家北屋的西头有两个死了的男人，一个男人拿长矛，一个男人拿弓箭；他们的头在墙壁里页，脚在墙壁外边。
English: Guan Yu said: At the west end of the north wing of your house, there are two dead men, one man with a spear and one man with a bow and arrow; their heads are inside the walls and their feet are outside the walls.

古文：持矛者主刺头，故头重痛不得举也；持弓箭者主射胸腹，故心中悬痛不得饮食也。
现代文：拿长矛的男人管刺头，所以被他刺中的人，头疼得很厉害，沉重得不能抬起来；拿弓箭的男人管射胸部腹部，所以被他射中的人，心口痛得发慌，提心吊胆，吃不下饭。
English: The man with the spear pierces the head, so the person he pierced has a severe headache and is too heavy to lift; the man with the bow and arrow pierces the chest and abdomen, so the person he hit is heartbroken, panicky, and can't eat.

古文：昼则浮游，夜来病人，故使惊恐也。 
现代文：白天他们在闲逛，夜里就来害人，所以让女人们都担惊受怕。 于是这县令就叫人在那间屋里挖掘，掘下去八尺深，果然发现两口棺材。
English: They were loitering about during the day, and at night they came to do harm, so that the women were terrified. So the prefect ordered someone to dig in the house, dig down eight feet deep, and found two coffins.

古文：于是掘其室中，入地八尺，果得二棺：一棺中有矛；一棺中有角弓及箭，箭久远，木皆消烂，但有铁及角完耳。
现代文：一口棺材中有长矛，一口棺材中有用兽角装饰的弓及箭。箭已经很古老了，箭杆木都已烂光了，只有箭头上的铁以及弓上的兽角仍然完好无损。
English: In one coffin there is a spear, in another a bow and arrows decorated with horns. The arrows are very old, the shafts are rotten, only the iron on the arrowheads and the horns on the bow are still intact.

古文：乃徙骸骨去城二十里埋之，无复疾病。
现代文：于是就迁移他们的尸骨，将他们埋到离城二十里的地方。从此，女人们不再生病了。
English: So they removed their bones and buried them twenty miles from the city, and the women were no longer ill.

古文：利漕民郭恩，字义博，兄弟三人，皆得躄疾。
现代文：利漕口有个老百姓叫郭恩，字义博。他兄弟三人，都得了瘸腿的毛病。
English: There is a commoner in Lizaokou called Guo En, alias Yibo. His three brothers all have the problem of lameness.

古文：使辂筮其所由。
现代文：因此就让管辂用蓄草算卦，看看这毛病倒底出在什么地方。
English: Therefore, let Guan Yu use the grass to calculate and see where this problem comes from.

古文：辂曰： 卦中有君本墓，墓中有女鬼，非君伯母，当叔母也。昔饥荒之世，当有利其数升米者，排着井中，啧啧有声，推一大石下，破其头，孤魂冤痛，自诉于天耳。 
现代文：营辂说： 卦象中有您亲人的坟墓，这坟墓中有一个女鬼，不是您的伯母，就一定是您的叔母，过去闹饥荒的时候，一定有一个送给她几升米的人，被她推到了井里，她还啧啧地赞赏个不停，又推了一块大石头下去，把这个人的头都砸破了。
English: Ying Qi said, "There is your relative's grave in the Gua Elephant. There is a female ghost in this grave. If it is not your aunt, it must be your aunt. During the famine in the past, there must have been a person who gave her a few liters of rice. She pushed him into the well. She was still clapping her hands in admiration. She then pushed a large rock down and broke the man's head.

古文：淳于智，字叔平，济北庐人也。
现代文：淳于智，字叔平，是济北郡卢县人。
English: Jun Yu Zhi, alias Shuping, is a native of Lu County, Jibei County.

古文：性深沈，有思义。
现代文：他性格深沉，讲义气。
English: He has a deep character and a sense of loyalty.

古文：少为书生，能易筮，善厌胜之术。
现代文：他年轻的时候是个书生，精通《易经》，擅长占卦，并很好地掌握了用诅咒来制胜的道术。
English: When he was young, he was a scholar, well versed in the I Ching, good at divination, and had a good grasp of the art of using curses to win.

古文：高平刘柔，夜卧，鼠啮其左手中指，意甚恶之。以问智。智为筮之，曰： 鼠本欲杀君而不能，当为使其反死。 
现代文：高乎县人刘柔在晚上睡觉的时候，有只老鼠咬他的左手中指，他心里非常讨厌这件事，就去问淳于智，淳于智给他算了个卦，说： 老鼠本来是想咬死您，但没能得逞，我该给你想个办法让它反而自己死去。 
English: When Liu Rou, a high-ranking resident of the county, was sleeping at night, a mouse bit his left middle finger. He really hated this thing, so he went to ask Chun Yu Zhi. Chun Yu Zhi gave him a riddle, saying: The mouse originally wanted to bite you to death, but it didn't succeed. I should find a way for you to let it die on its own.

古文：乃以朱书手腕横文后三寸，为田字，可方一寸二分，使夜露手以卧。有大鼠伏死于前。
现代文：于是淳于智就用丹砂在刘柔的手腕横纹后面三寸的地方写了一个田字，大约有一寸二分见方，叫他夜里把手露在外面睡觉，结果便有一只大老鼠死在他的前面。
English: So Jun Yu Zhi wrote a Chinese character for rice field, about one and a half centimeters square, on the three-inch space behind Liu Zhuo's wrist stripe, and told him to sleep with his hand exposed at night. As a result, a large rat died in front of him.

古文：上党鲍瑗家多丧病贫苦，淳于智卜之，曰： 君居宅不利，故令君困尔。
现代文：上党郡的鲍瑗，家里的人死的死，病的病，十分穷苦。淳于智给他占卜，说： 您的住宅不吉利，所以使您贫困成这个样子。
English: In Baodi, Shangdang County, the people in the family were dying, sick, and very poor. Junyu gave him a divination, saying: Your house is unlucky, so it has made you poor like this.

古文：君舍东北有大桑树。
现代文：您家的东北有棵大桑树。
English: There is a large mulberry tree to the northeast of your house.

古文：君径至市，入门数十步，当有一人卖新鞭者，便就买还，以悬此树。
现代文：您径直赶到城里，进城几十步，会有一个卖新鞭子的人，您就去把他的鞭子买回来，将它挂在这桑树上。
English: You will go straight to the city, and a few dozen steps into the city, there will be a man selling new whips, and you will go and buy his whip back and hang it on this mulberry tree.

古文：三年，当暴得财。 
现代文：再过三年，您一定会猛然大发横财。 
English: In another three years, you will certainly make a sudden windfall.

古文：瑗承言诣市，果得马鞭悬之。
现代文：鲍瑗听从了他的话到城里去，果然买到了马鞭。
English: Bao Tong listened to his words and went to the city, where he bought a horse whip.

古文：三年，浚井，得钱数十万，铜铁器复二万余，于是业用既展，病者亦无恙。
现代文：他就把它挂在那桑树上，过了三年，他疏浚家里的井，得到几十万钱币，还有二万多只铜器、铁器。于是不但家里的费用不再紧缺了，连家里的病人也没有毛病了。
English: He hung it on the mulberry tree, and three years later, he dredged the well at home and obtained hundreds of thousands of coins, as well as more than twenty thousand copper and iron utensils. As a result, not only the expenses at home were no longer in short supply, but even the patients at home had no problems.

古文：谯人夏侯藻，母病困，将诣智卜，忽有一狐当门向之嗥叫。
现代文：谯县人夏侯藻，母亲病得很厉害，当他将要到淳于智那里去占卜的时候，忽然有一只狐狸，对着他家的大门向他嗥叫。
English: Xia Houmou, a resident of Qixian County, whose mother was very ill, was about to go to Junyuzhi to do divination when a fox suddenly howled at him from the gate of his house.

古文：藻大愕惧。遂驰诣智。智曰： 其祸甚急。
现代文：夏侯藻惊恐万状，于是就快马加鞭赶到淳于智那里。淳于智说： 这灾祸迫在眉睫。
English: Xia Houxiao was terrified, so he hurried to Jun Yu Zhi with a whip. Jun Yu Zhi said: This disaster is imminent.

古文：君速归，在狐嗥处，拊心啼哭，令家人惊怪，大小毕出，一人不出，啼哭勿休。
现代文：您快点赶回去，在狐狸嗥叫的地方拍着胸口大声啼哭，使家里的人都感到惊奇，让大人小孩都出来，有一个人不出来，你就哭着别停。
English: You hurry back, where the fox is howling, beat your chest and wail loudly, surprising everyone in the house. Let all the adults and children come out, but if one person doesn't come out, then don't stop crying.

古文：然其祸仅可免也。 
现代文：这样，这灾祸才可以避免。 
English: In this way, this scourge can be avoided.

古文：藻还如其言，母亦扶病而出。
现代文：夏侯藻回去后，照淳于智的话做了，连母亲也带病出了门。
English: After Xia Houmao returned, she did as Jun Yu Ji said, and even her mother went out with illness.

古文：家人既集，堂屋五间拉然而崩。
现代文：家里的人已经聚集在外面了，那五间房屋哗啦啦地都倒塌了。
English: The family had already gathered outside when the five houses came crashing down.

古文：护军张劭母病笃。
现代文：护军张劭，母亲病得很重。
English: Zhang Qi, a military escort, whose mother is seriously ill.

古文：智筮之，使西出市沐猴系母臂。令傍人搥拍，恒使作声，三日放去。
现代文：淳于智为他算了个卦，让他到西边的集市上去买一只猕猴，买来后把它系在母亲的手臂上，叫旁边的人拍打它，使它一直叫个不停，三天后将它放掉。
English: Jun Yu Zhi made up a riddle for him, asking him to go to the western market to buy a macaque monkey. After buying it, he tied it to his mother's arm and asked the people next to him to slap it, so that it kept crying, and let it go after three days.

古文：劭从之，其猴出门，即为犬所咋死，母病遂差。
现代文：张助按照这话做了。那猕猴一出门，就彼狗咬死了，他母亲的病也就痊愈了。
English: Zhang Su did as he was told. As soon as the macaque left the house, he was bitten to death by the dog, and his mother's illness was cured.

古文：郭璞，字景纯，行至庐江，劝太守胡孟康急回南渡。
现代文：郭璞，字景纯，当他来到庐江郡的时候，却劝太守胡孟康赶快转回渡江南下。
English: Guo Gan, the pure poet, when he came to Minjiang County, urged the governor Hu Mengkang to quickly turn back to the south of the Wudu River.

古文：康不从，璞将促装去之，爱其婢，无由得，乃取小豆三斗，绕主人宅散之。
现代文：胡孟康不听他的。郭璞就急忙收拾行李准备离开他，但很爱他的婢女，又没有正当的办法得到她，于是就拿了三斗小赤豆，绕着胡孟康的住宅撒上。
English: Hu Mengkang did not listen to him. Guo Yao hurriedly packed his bags and prepared to leave him, but he loved his maid very much, and there was no legitimate way to get her, so he took three buckets of red beans and sprinkled them around Hu Mengkang's house.

古文：主人晨起，见赤衣人数千围其家，就视，则灭。
现代文：胡盂康早晨起床，看见几千个穿着红衣服的人包围了他的家，走近去仔细看，却又没有了。
English: When Hu Rongkang woke up in the morning, he saw thousands of people wearing red clothes surrounding his house. He went to take a closer look, but they were gone.

古文：甚恶之，请璞为卦。
现代文：他十分讨厌这事，就请郭璞为他算卦。
English: He hated it so much that he asked Guo Jun to do the calculation for him.

古文：璞曰： 君家不宜畜此婢，可于东南二十里卖之，慎勿争价，则此妖可除也。 
现代文：郭璞说： 您的家里不宜养这婢女，您可以到东南方二十里外把她卖了，千万别和买主讨价还价，那么这妖怪就可以除去了。 
English: Guo Yao said, "It is not appropriate for your family to keep this servant girl. You can sell her twenty miles to the southeast. Do not bargain with the buyer. Then this monster can be eliminated."

古文：璞阴令人贱买此婢，复为投符于井中，数千赤衣人一一自投于井。
现代文：郭璞暗中叫人用便宜的价钱买了这婢女，又为太守写了道符篆丢到井里，几千个穿红衣服的人都自己纷纷跳到井里。
English: Guo Yao secretly ordered someone to buy the servant girl at a cheap price. He also wrote a Taoist symbol for the emperor and threw it into the well. Several thousand people dressed in red jumped into the well one after another.

古文：主人大悦。
现代文：胡孟康十分高兴。
English: Hu Mengkang is very happy.

古文：璞携婢去，后数旬，而庐江陷。
现代文：郭璞就带着婢女走了。几十天之后，庐江郡就沦陷了。
English: Guo Yao took his maid with him and left. A few dozen days later, Minjiang County fell.

古文：赵固所乘马忽死，甚悲惜之，以问郭璞。
现代文：赵固骑的马忽然死了，他十分悲痛惋借，就去请教郭璞。
English: The horse that Zhao Gu was riding suddenly died, and he was very sad, so he went to consult Guo Yao.

古文：璞曰： 可遣数十人持竹竿，东行三十里，有山林陵树，便搅打之。当有一物出，急宜持归。 
现代文：郭璞说： 你可以派几十个人拿了竹竿，向东走三十里地，看见那陵园里的树，就乱打一气，这时一定会有一个怪物出来，便赶快把它逮回家。 
English: Guo Wei said, "You can send dozens of people to take bamboo poles and walk thirty miles to the east. When they see the tree in the cemetery, they will randomly beat it. At this time, a monster will surely come out, and they will quickly catch it and take it home."

古文：于是如言，果得一物，似猿。
现代文：于是赵固按照郭璞的话去做了，果然得到了一个怪物，样子象猿。
English: So Zhao Gu did as Guo Yao told him, and got a monster that looked like a monkey.

古文：持归，入门，见死马，跳梁走往死马头，嘘吸其鼻。
现代文：他就把它带回家中，这怪物一进门看见死马，就矫捷地奔跑到死马的头前，对着死马的鼻子又是吹气又是吸气。
English: He took it home with him, and as soon as the monster entered the door and saw the dead horse, it ran briskly to the dead horse's head, and blew and breathed into the dead horse's nose.

古文：顷之，马即能起。奋迅嘶鸣，饮食如常。亦不复见向物。
现代文：一会儿，这匹马就能站起来了，精神抖擞，高声吼叫，吃喝也同往常一样，只是不再看见刚才那怪物了。
English: In a moment the horse was on its feet, high-spirited, bellowing, eating and drinking as usual, but no longer seeing the monster.

古文：固奇之，厚加资给。
现代文：赵固认为郭璞有奇才，所以给了他很多报酬。
English: Zhao Gu thought that Guo Gan was a genius, so he gave him a lot of reward.

古文：扬州别驾顾球姊，生十年，便病，至年五十余，令郭璞筮，得大过之升。
现代文：扬州别驾从事史顾球的姐姐，生下来才十岁就生病了。到五十多岁的时候，她让郭璞用蓍草给她算卦，得到的卦名是 大过 与 升 。
English: Yangzhou's elder sister, who was engaged in historical Guqiu, was born only ten years old and fell ill. When she was more than fifty years old, she asked Guo Yao to use eelgrass to calculate her Gua. The resulting Gua name was Dafu and Sheng.

古文：其辞曰： 大过卦者义不嘉。冢墓枯杨无英华。
现代文：郭璞诵读那卦辞道：  大过 这卦名涵义不佳，坟墓上的枯杨不开花。
English: Guo Zhe recited the words of the Nahua saying, "Bigger than" The meaning of the name of this Nahua is not good. The dead poplars on the graves do not bloom.

古文：振动游魂见龙车。身被重累婴妖邪。
现代文：惊动了过路人看见龙车，身缠重病不离妖邪。
English: Passers-by were startled to see the dragon chariot. He was seriously ill and could not be separated from the evil.

古文：法由斩祀杀灵蛇。非己之咎先人瑕。
现代文：缘由在灭种杀了神蛇，不是你自己的错误而是你亡父的过差。
English: The reason why you killed the snake was not your own fault, but the fault of your dead father.

古文：案卦论之可奈何。 
现代文：我只能按这卦辞告诉你，也没有其它办法。 
English: I can only tell you this, there is no other way.

古文：球乃迹访其家事，先世曾伐大树，得大蛇，杀之，女便病。
现代文：顾球就追究他家里的事，原来他的父亲曾砍伐一棵大树，发现一条大蛇，就把它打死了，于是女儿使得了病。
English: Gu Gu inquired about his family. It turned out that his father had cut down a big tree, found a big snake and killed it. As a result, his daughter fell ill.

古文：病后，有群鸟数千，回翔屋上，人皆怪之，不知何故，有县农行过舍边，仰视，见龙牵车，五色晃烂，其大非常，有顷遂灭。
现代文：女儿生病后，有一群鸟有几千只，在屋上盘旋，人们都觉得奇怪，但不知道是什么缘故。有个乡下的农民经过他家，抬头一看，望见龙拉着车，五光十色，闪烁耀眼，车子大得非同寻常，过了一会儿就消失了。
English: After my daughter fell ill, there was a flock of several thousand birds circling on the roof. People thought it was strange, but they didn't know why. A farmer from the countryside was passing by his house. He looked up and saw a dragon pulling a car. It was multicolored, shiny and dazzling. The car was unusually large, and it disappeared after a while.

古文：义兴方叔保得伤寒，垂死，令璞占之，不吉，令求白牛厌之。
现代文：义兴郡方叔保患伤寒症，将要死了，叫郭璞给他占卜，占卜的结果很不吉利，郭璞就叫他找一头白牛来压邪。
English: Fang Shubao of Yixing County was suffering from typhoid fever and was about to die. He asked Guo Gan to give him a divination. The result of the divination was very unlucky. Guo Gan told him to find a white cow to suppress the evil.

古文：求之不得，唯羊子玄有一白牛，不肯借。
现代文：方叔保找来找去找不到白牛，只有羊子玄有一头白牛，但他又不肯出借。
English: Fang Shubao searched and searched, but could not find a white cow. Only Yang Zi Xuan had a white cow, but he refused to lend it.

古文：璞为致之，即日有大白牛从西来，径往临，叔保惊惶、病即愈。
现代文：郭璞就给他招引白牛，当天就有一头大白牛从西边走来，直奔到方叔保面前。方叔保吃了一惊，病就好了。
English: Guo Yao lured a white cow for him, and on the same day, a big white cow came from the west and ran straight to Fang Shubao. Fang Shubao was surprised, and his illness was cured.

古文：西川费孝先善轨革，世皆知名，有大若人王旻，因货殖至成都，求为卦。
现代文：西川的费孝先，擅长根据出生时日用图画来预测吉凶的占候术，社会上都知道他的大名。有个大若人叫王旻，因为经商到了成都，就请他算个卦。
English: Fei Xiaoxian of Xichuan is good at using pictures to predict the auspicious and inauspicious based on the date of birth, and his name is well known in the community. There is a young man named Wang Yao, because he came to Chengdu for business, he asked him to calculate a fortune.

古文：孝先曰： 教住莫住，教洗莫洗。
现代文：费孝先说： 让你住你别住，让你洗你别洗。
English: Fei Xiao said first: Let you live, don't live, let you wash, don't wash.

古文：一石谷捣得三斗米。
现代文：一石稻谷青得三斗米。
English: One stone of rice yields three bushels of rice.

古文：遇明即活，遇暗即死。 
现代文：碰上圣明就活，碰上愚昧就死。 
English: Where there is wisdom, there is life; where there is folly, there is death.

古文：再三戒之，令诵此言足矣。
现代文：费孝先反复告诫他，要他把这些话背得滚爪烂熟，那就行了。
English: Fei Xiao first repeatedly admonished him and asked him to memorize these words.

古文：旻志之。
现代文：王旻把这些话牢记在心中。
English: Wang Yao took these words to heart.

古文：及行，途中遇大雨，憩一屋下，路人盈塞，乃思曰： 教住莫住，得非此耶？ 
现代文：等到王旻回家的时候，半路上碰到了大雨，他就在一间房子下歇息，过路的人都来躲雨，把房子挤得满满的。王旻寻思道： 让你住你别住，不就是指这种情况么？
English: When Wang Yao was on his way home, he encountered heavy rain on the way, so he rested under a house. People passing by came to take shelter from the rain and crowded the house. Wang Yao Xun thought: Let you live, don't let you live, isn't that what this means?

古文：遂冒雨行，未几，屋遂颠覆，独得免焉。
现代文：于是他就冒着雨走了。没过多少时候，这房子就倒塌了，只有他一个人能幸免于难。
English: So he walked out into the rain. Before long, the house collapsed, and he was the only one to survive.

古文：旻之妻已私邻比，欲媾终身之好，俟旋归，将致毒谋。
现代文：王旻的妻子已经和邻居私通，并想结为终身的伴侣，等王旻回家，将对他下毒手。
English: Wang Yao's wife has been having an affair with a neighbor and wants to make a life-long partner. When Wang Yao comes home, she will attack him.

古文：旻既至，妻约其私人曰： 今夕新沐者，乃夫也。 
现代文：王旻已经到了家，妻子就与她的姘夫约定说： 今天晚上刚洗过澡的，就是我的丈夫。 
English: When Wang Yao arrived home, his wife made an appointment with her widower: "The man who just took a shower this evening is my husband."

古文：将哺，呼旻洗沐，重易巾幯。
现代文：快下午三四点了，他妻子就叫王旻洗澡，并给他重新换上了毛巾、梳子等洗沐用具。
English: It was nearly three or four o'clock in the afternoon when his wife asked Wang Yao to take a shower, and he was given a new towel, comb and other toiletries.

古文：旻悟曰： 教洗莫洗，得非此耶？ 
现代文：王旻明白了： 让你洗你别洗，肯定是指这个了。 
English: Wang Yao understood: "Let you wash, don't wash" must refer to this.

古文：坚不从。
现代文：于是他就坚决不听他妻子的。
English: So he refused to listen to his wife.

古文：妻怒，不省，自沐。
现代文：他妻子生气了，也没有想一想与姘夫说的话，就自己去洗澡了。
English: His wife got angry and, without thinking about what she had said to the widower, went to take a shower by herself.

古文：夜半反被害。
现代文：结果到了半夜，他的妻子反而被杀了。
English: In the middle of the night, his wife was killed instead.

古文：既觉，惊呼邻里共视，皆莫测其由。遂被囚系考讯。
现代文：王旻马上被惊醒了，惊慌地叫起来，乡邻们都赶来察看，但没有人能推测到他妻子被害的原因，于是王是就被囚禁起来拷问审讯。
English: Wang Yao was immediately awakened and cried out in panic. His neighbors came to investigate, but no one could guess the cause of his wife's death, so Wang Yao was imprisoned and interrogated.

古文：狱就，不能自辨。
现代文：这案件已经判定，王畏也不能再为自己辩护了。
English: The case has been adjudicated, and Wang Dai can no longer defend himself.

古文：郡守录状，旻泣言死即死矣，但孝先所言，终无验耳。
现代文：太守让手下的办事人员来记录他的罪状，王旻哭着说： 死就死了吧！只是费孝先所说的话，结果却没有应验罢了。 
English: The daimyō asked his clerks to record the charges against him. Wang Yao cried and said, "Let him die! It's just that what Fei Xiaoxian said earlier didn't come to pass.

古文：左右以是语上达。
现代文：办事的人把这话向上作了汇报。
English: The clerk reported this to higher-ups.

古文：郡守命未得行法乎旻。问曰： 汝邻比何人也？ 曰： 康七。 
现代文：太守就命令下面不要对他马上执行死刑，并传呼王旻来问道： 你隔壁邻居是什么人？ 王旻回答说： 是康七。 
English: The eunuch then ordered that the death sentence not be carried out immediately, and summoned Wang Yao to ask: Who is your next-door neighbor? Wang Yao replied: It is Kang Qi.

古文：遂遣人捕之。 杀汝妻者，必此人也。 
现代文：太守就派人去逮捕康七，并对王旻说： 杀你妻子的，一定是这个人。 
English: The governor sent someone to arrest Kang Qi, and said to Wang Yao, "This must be the man who killed your wife."

古文：已而果然。
现代文：后来审问了康七，果然是这样。
English: Afterward, it really was like that.

古文：因谓僚佐曰： 一石谷捣得三斗米，非康七乎。 
现代文：太守就对身边的副官们说： 一石稻谷舂得三斗米，那就还有七斗糠，这不是康七吗？ 
English: The Empress Dowager said to the adjutants around her: If one stone of rice yields three buckets of rice, then there are seven buckets of straw. Isn't that Kang Qi?

古文：由是辨雪，诚遇明即活之效。
现代文：王旻的不白之冤靠了费孝先的这句话才得到昭雪，这实在是 碰上圣明就活 的效验啊。
English: Wang Yao's unwarranted grievance only came to light thanks to Fei Xiaoxian's words. This is truly a case of living up to one's sacred duty.

古文：隗照，汝阴鸿寿亭民也。
现代文：隗照，是汝阴郡鸿寿亭的老百姓，精通《易经》。
English: Gong Zhao is an ordinary citizen of Hong Shou Ting, Ruyin County, who is proficient in the I Ching.

古文：善易，临终，书板授其妻曰： 吾亡后，当大荒。
现代文：他临死时写了一块板，交给他妻子，说： 我死后，会有严重的灾荒。
English: As he lay dying, he wrote on a tablet and gave it to his wife, saying: "After my death, there will be a great calamity.

古文：虽尔，而慎莫卖宅也。
现代文：尽管这样，你千万别把住房卖了。
English: Despite this, you should never sell your home.

古文：到后五年春，当有诏使，来顿此亭，姓龚，此人负吾金，即以此板往责之。
现代文：到五手后的春天，会有皇上委派的使者来到这鸿寿亭停宿，他姓龚。这人欠我黄金，你就用这块板去讨债，千万别违背了我的这些遗嘱啊！ 
English: Five days later, in the spring, an emissary of the emperor will come to stay at this Hongshou Pavilion. His surname is Zou. This person owes me gold, so use this board to collect the debt. Don't violate my will!

古文：勿负言也。 亡后，果大困，欲卖宅者数矣，忆夫言，辄止。
现代文：他死后，家中果然十分贫困，他妻子几次想卖掉房产，但每次回想起丈夫的话，就打消了卖房的念头。
English: After his death, the family was indeed very poor, and his wife wanted to sell the property several times, but every time she recalled her husband's words, she dispelled the idea of selling the house.

古文：至期，有龚使者，果止亭中，妻遂赉板责之。
现代文：到了那预定的日期，果然有一个龚使者到亭中停宿，他妻子就把这块板给了龚使者向他讨债。
English: On the appointed day, a messenger came to stay in the pavilion, and his wife gave the tablet to the messenger to collect the debt.

古文：使者执板，不知所言，曰： 我平生不负钱，此何缘尔邪？ 
现代文：龚使者拿着这块板不知道说什么才好，就说： 我从来不欠人家的钱，你怎么能这样呢？ 
English: The messenger took the tablet and, not knowing what to say, said, "I never owe anyone money. How could you do this?"

古文：妻曰： 夫临亡，手书板见命如此，不敢妄也。 
现代文：隗炤的妻子说： 我丈夫临死的时候，亲手写了这块板，他吩咐我这样做的，我并不敢乱来。 
English: His wife said: "My husband wrote this tablet with his own hand when he was dying. He told me to do it, and I didn't dare mess it up.

古文：使者沈吟良久而悟，乃命取蓍筮之卦成，抵掌叹曰： 妙哉隗生！
现代文：龚使者沉思着，过了好长时间才明白，于是就叫人拿蓄草为此事占了个卦。卦占好后，他拍着手赞叹说： 好啊，隗炤！
English: The messenger pondered for a long time before he understood, so he asked someone to take the weeds and make a guess for the matter. After the guess was made, he clapped his hands and said with admiration: Good, grasshopper!

古文：含明隐迹，而莫之闻。可谓镜穷达而洞吉凶者也。 
现代文：你不暴露自己的明智，隐蔽起自己的形踪，因而没有人能知道你，你真可以说是一个明察穷团通达、洞悉吉利灾祸的人啊！ 
English: You do not reveal your wisdom, you hide your tracks, so that no one can know you. You can truly be said to be a person who observes the poor, is knowledgeable, and understands the calamity of auspiciousness!

古文：于是告其妻曰： 吾不负金，贤夫自有金。
现代文：于是他就告诉隗炤的妻子说： 我不欠他黄金。
English: So he told Zou's wife: "I don't owe him gold.

古文：乃知亡后当暂穷，故藏金以待太平。
现代文：你那贤能的丈夫本来就有黄金，因为他知道死后你们会遭到短时间的贫因，所以他藏起黄金等太平的日子来了后再说。
English: Your virtuous husband had the gold in the first place, because he knew that after death you would suffer a short period of poverty, so he hid the gold and waited for a peaceful day to come.

古文：所以不告儿妇者，恐金尽而困无已也。
现代文：他之所以不告诉儿子、妻子，是怕黄金用完了贫穷又没个完。
English: The reason why he does not tell his son and wife is that he is afraid of running out of gold and poverty.

古文：知吾善易，故书板以寄意耳。
现代文：他知道我精通《易经》，所以写了这块板来寄托他的心意。
English: He knew that I was well versed in the I Ching, so he wrote this board to express his thoughts.

古文：金五百斤，盛以青罂，覆以铜柈，埋在堂屋东头，去地一丈，入地九尺。 
现代文：五百斤黄金，他用青色的瓷瓶装着，用铜盘盖着，埋在堂屋东头，寓墙一丈，深九尺。 
English: Five hundred kilos of gold, which he had placed in a blue porcelain jar and covered with a copper plate, was buried at the east end of the hall, one storey above the wall and nine feet deep.

古文：妻还掘之，果得金，皆如所卜。
现代文：隗炤的妻子回去挖掘，果然得到了黄金，一切都与占卜时所预测到的情况一样。
English: Zou's wife went back to dig and found gold, just as the fortune-teller had predicted.

古文：韩友，字景先，庐江舒人也。善占卜，亦行京房厌胜之术。
现代文：韩友，字景先，庐江郡舒县人，他擅长占卜，也会施行京房用诅咒来制胜的道术。
English: Han You, a native of Shu County, Minjiang County, is good at divination, and he will also perform the Taoism of Jingfang using a curse to win.

古文：刘世则女病魅，积年，巫为攻祷，伐空冢故城间，得狸鼍数十，病犹不差。
现代文：刘世则的女儿因为鬼魅作祟而病了好几年，巫婆为她驱邪祷告，在原来的城里发掘空坟。抓到了狐狸和猪婆龙几十只，她的毛病还是没好。
English: Liu Shizhe's daughter had been ill for several years due to a spell cast by a ghost. The witch prayed for her to be exorcised, and excavated empty graves in the original city. She caught dozens of foxes and porcupine dragons, but her condition was still not good.

古文：友筮之，命作布囊，俟女发时，张囊着窗牖间。
现代文：韩友用蓍草给她占了个卦，于是便叫人做了一个大布袋，等这女孩发病的时候，张开布袋罩在窗口。
English: Han You covered her with rushes, so he asked someone to make a large cloth bag, and when the girl fell ill, he opened the cloth bag cover at the window.

古文：友闭户作气，若有所驱。
现代文：韩友关上门运气，好象在驱赶什么似的。
English: Han You closed the door on Luck, as if he were chasing something away.

古文：须臾间，见囊大胀如吹。因决败之。
现代文：一会儿，便看见布袋胀得大大的，象吹了一样，因为布袋裂开了，所以才没有成功。
English: After a while, he saw that the cloth bag had swelled up, as if it had been blown up. It was not successful because the cloth bag had cracked.

古文：女仍大发。友乃更作皮囊二枚沓张之，施张如前，囊复胀满，因急缚囊口，悬着树，二十许日，渐消。开视，有二斤狐毛。
现代文：这女孩的毛病仍然发得很厉害，韩友就重新做了两只皮袋，重叠着套起来，就象前次一样张挂在窗口，皮袋又胀得鼓鼓的。于是他就赶快缚住袋口，然后把它挂在树上。二十天左右，这袋渐渐地小了，打开一看，有两斤狐狸毛。
English: The girl's problem was still very severe, so Han You made two new leather bags, overlapped and put them together, and hung them on the window like the previous time, and the leather bag swelled up again. So he quickly tied the bag and hung it on the tree. After about twenty days, the bag gradually became smaller. When he opened it, he found two kilos of fox fur.

古文：女病遂差。
现代文：这女孩的病就好了。
English: The girl's illness is over.

古文：会稽严卿善卜筮。
现代文：会稽郡的严卿，善于占卜。
English: Yanqing, the county auditor, is good at divination.

古文：乡人魏序欲东行，荒年，多抄盗，令卿筮之。
现代文：他的同乡魏序想到东方去，因为荒年多强盗，所以让严卿算个卦。
English: His countryman Wei Zheng wanted to go to the East, because there were more robbers in the year of famine, so he asked Yan Qing to calculate a fortune.

古文：卿曰： 君慎不可东行。
现代文：严卿说： 您千万不可以到东边去。
English: Yanqing said: You must not go to the east.

古文：必遭暴害。而非劫也。 
现代文：如果您要去，就一定会遭到残暴的杀害，而不只是被抢劫。 
English: If you go, you will be brutally murdered, not just robbed.

古文：序不信。卿曰： 既必不停，宜有以禳之。
现代文：魏序不相信这话，严卿就说： 你既然一定要去，就该想个办法禳除这灾祸。
English: Wei Sequence did not believe this, Yanqing said: Since you must go, you should find a way to eliminate this scourge.

古文：可索西郭外独母家白雄狗，系着船前。 
现代文：你可以到西门外独山上的寡妇家要一条白色的雄狗，把它缚在船的前面。 
English: You can go to the widow's house on the hill just outside the West Gate to get a white male dog and tie it to the front of the boat.

古文：求索，止得驳狗，无白者。
现代文：魂序去寻觅了一番，只得到一条颜色错杂的花狗，没有白色的。
English: Soul sequence went to look for a while, only got a mixed-colored flower dog, no white.

古文：卿曰： 驳者亦足。然犹恨其色不纯。当余小毒，止及六畜辈耳。
现代文：严卿说： 花狗也可以，但它的毛色不纯一，还是有点遗憾，到时候还会馀下一点小小的毒汁，不过它至多只会危害到六育之类罢了。
English: Yanqing said, "Flower dog can also be used, but its fur color is not pure, which is a bit of a pity. At that time, there will still be a little poison juice left, but at most, it will only harm the likes of Liu Yu."

古文：无所复忧。 
现代文：你不要再有什么担忧了。 
English: You don't have to worry about anything.

古文：序行半路，狗忽然作声，甚急，有如人打之者。
现代文：魏序走到半路，狗忽然叫得很厉害，就象有人在打它一样。
English: When Wei Zheng walked halfway, the dog suddenly barked very loudly, as if someone was beating it.

古文：比视，已死，吐黑血斗余。
现代文：等到魏序去察看时，狗已经死了，还吐出了一斗多黑色的血。
English: When Wei Xuan went to investigate, the dog was already dead and had vomited a lot of black blood.

古文：其夕，序墅上白鹅数头，无故自死。序家无恙。
现代文：那天晚上，魂序家里的几只白鹅，也无缘无故地死了，魏序家里的人倒没有什么灾祸。
English: That night, several white geese in the Guanzhong family also died for no reason, but there was no disaster for the Wei family.

古文：沛国华佗，字符化，一名敷。
现代文：沛国的华佗，字元化，又有个名字叫旉。
English: Pei Guo's Chinese character, "華," has become a character, and has a name, "."

古文：琅邪刘勋，为河内太守，有女，年几二十，苦脚左膝有有疮，痒而不痛，疮愈数十日复发，如此七八年。
现代文：琅邪郡人氏刘勋任河内郡太守，有个女儿年龄快二十岁了，因为左边的膝盖里生了疮而十分苦恼。这疮痒得厉害，却不疼痛。
English: Liu Xun, the governor of Hà Ni County, has a daughter in her late 20s who is suffering from an itch in her left knee, which is itchy but not painful.

古文：迎佗使视。佗曰： 是易治之。 
现代文：疮一会儿好了，而过了儿十天便又复发，象这样一直过了七八年，才请来华伦使他诊治。华伦说： 这毛病好治。 
English: The boil cleared up for a while, but ten days later it came back, and it went on like that for seven or eight years, until Warren was called in to treat it.

古文：当得稻糠，黄色犬一头，好马二匹。以绳系犬颈，使走马牵犬，马极，辄易，计马走三十余里，犬不能行，复令步人拖曳，计向五十里，乃以药饮女。
现代文：于是他觅了一条与著糠一样颜色的黄狗，两匹好马，用绳系在狗的脖子上，让奔走着的马牵着狗跑，一匹马筋疲力尽了，就换上另一匹。估计马跑了三十多里，狗走不动了。又叫步行的人拖着狗走，共计走了五十里。于是他拿药给女孩喝，这女孩就安然躺下，不知人事了。
English: So he looked for a yellow dog, the same color as the yakitori, and two good horses. He tied a rope around the dog's neck and let the running horse lead the dog. When one horse was exhausted, it was replaced by another. It is estimated that the horse ran for more than thirty miles, and the dog could not walk. He also asked the walker to drag the dog, a total of fifty miles. So he gave the girl medicine to drink, and the girl lay down peacefully, not knowing anything.

古文：女即安卧不知人，因取大刀断犬腹，近后脚之前，以所断之处向疮口，令二三寸，停之须臾，有若蛇者，从疮中出。
现代文：接着他就拿起大刀，把这条狗靠近后腿前的腹部斩断，拿这斩断的地方对准女孩的疮口，让它与疮口保持二三寸的距离，一会儿，就有象蛇一样的东西从疮口中爬出来，华伦便用铁锥子横向戳穿它的头部。
English: Then he picked up a large knife and cut the dog's abdomen near the front of the hind leg. He aimed the cut at the girl's wound, keeping it two or three inches away from the wound. A moment later, something like a snake crawled out of the wound, and Warren poked it across the head with an iron spike.

古文：便以铁椎横贯蛇头，蛇在皮中动摇良久，须臾，不动，乃牵出，长三尺许，纯是蛇，但有眼处而无童子，又逆麟耳。
现代文：这蛇在女孩的皮肤下蠕动了好长时间，过了一会儿便不动了，华佗就把它拉出来，竞有三尺左右长，纯粹是条蛇，不过它只有跟眶眶，而没有眸子，又倒长着鳞片罢了。
English: The snake wriggled under the girl's skin for a long time, and after a while it did not move, and Hua Wei pulled it out. It was about three feet long, and it was purely a snake, but it only had a beak, but no eyes, and it had scales.

古文：以膏散着疮中，七日愈。
现代文：华佗用药膏涂在这女孩的疮口里面，过了七天，女孩的疮就痊愈了。
English: Hua Jun applied ointment to the inside of the girl's sores, and after seven days, the girl's sores were healed.

古文：佗尝行道，见一人病咽，嗜食不得下，家人车载，欲往就医。
现代文：华佗有一次走在路上，看见有个人喉咙里生了病，很想吃东西，但咽不下。他的仆人用车装着他，想去让医生诊治。
English: Once, while walking on the road, Hua Tuo saw a man with a sore throat. He wanted to eat, but he couldn't swallow. His servant put him in a cart and went to see a doctor.

古文：佗闻其呻吟声，驻车往视语之曰： 向来道边，有卖饼家蒜虀大酢，从取三升饮之，病自当去。 
现代文：华佗听见他呻吟的声音，就停住车看了一下，对他说： 你刚才经过的路旁，一家卖饼的有蒜泥大醋，你从他那里取来三升喝了，毛病自然会消除。 
English: Hua Yu heard his groaning, so she stopped the car to take a look and said to him, "The roadside you just passed, there is a bakery that sells garlic puree and vinegar. If you take three liters from them and drink it, the problem will naturally disappear.

古文：即如佗言，立吐蛇一枚。
现代文：这人就按照华佗的话去做了，立刻吐出了一条蛇。
English: The man did as Hua Tuo told him and immediately vomited out a snake.

