古文：恭宗孝安皇帝讳祜，肃宗孙也。
现代文：恭宗孝安皇帝名祜，肃宗孙。
English: Emperor Gaozong of the Xiao'an Dynasty, Su Zong's grandson.

古文：父清河孝王庆，母左姬。
现代文：父清河孝王刘庆，母左姬。
English: Liu Qing, the father of Qinghe Xiaowang, and Zuo Ji, the mother.

古文：帝自在邸第，数有神光照室，又有赤蛇盘于床第之间。
现代文：帝自从住在父王邸第，多次有神光照室，又有赤蛇盘于床铺上。
English: Ever since the emperor lived in his father's palace, there have been many times when the room was illuminated by divine light, and there was also a red snake on the bed.

古文：年十岁，好学《史书》，和帝称之，数见禁中。
现代文：年十岁，好学《史书》，得到和帝称赞，多次在宫中召见。
English: At the age of ten, he was fond of studying the "History Book" and was praised by the emperor. He was summoned to the palace many times.

古文：延平元年，庆始就国，邓太后特诏留帝清河邸。
现代文：延平元年，刘庆才到封国，邓太后特诏令留刘祜住清河邸中。
English: In the first year of the Yanping era, Liu Qing only arrived in the fief country, and Empress Dowager Deng issued a special edict to keep Liu Xuan in the Qinghe residence.

古文：八月，殇帝崩，太后与兄车骑将军邓骘定策禁中。
现代文：八月，殇帝逝世，太后与兄车骑将军邓骘在宫中决定帝位问题。
English: In August, Emperor Xizong died, and the empress dowager and her brother, the chariot-riding general Deng Yu, decided the issue of the imperial throne in the palace.

古文：其夜，使骘持节，以王青盖车迎帝，斋于殿中。
现代文：当夜派邓骘带着符节，用王青盖车迎刘祜，在宫殿中整洁身心。
English: That night, Deng Wei sent Liu Wei with the festival of symbols to welcome Liu Wei with the king's carriage and clean up his body and mind in the palace.

古文：皇太后御崇德殿，百官皆吉服，群臣陪位，引拜帝为长安侯。
现代文：皇太后来到崇德殿，百官都穿吉服，群臣出席相陪，引见拜刘祜为长安侯。
English: Afterward, the Empress Dowager came to the Chongde Palace. All the officials were dressed in auspicious clothes, accompanied by a group of courtiers, and introduced Liu Ye as the prince of Chang'an.

古文：皇太后诏曰： 先帝圣德淑茂，早弃天下。
现代文：皇太后诏令说： 先帝圣德淑茂，早弃天下。
English: The empress dowager issued a decree saying: The previous emperor, Saint De Shumo, left the world early.

古文：朕奉皇帝，夙夜瞻仰日月，冀望成就。
现代文：我侍奉皇帝，日夜瞻仰岁月，希望快快长大。
English: I serve the emperor, looking back on the years day and night, hoping to grow up quickly.

古文：岂意卒然颠沛，天年不遂，悲痛断心。
现代文：不料突然发生变故，天年不永，悲痛断心。
English: Unexpectedly, a sudden change of fortune occurs, the year is short, and the heart is broken with grief.

古文：朕惟平原王素被痼疾，念宗庙之重，思继嗣之统，唯长安侯祜质性忠孝，小心翼翼，能通《诗》、《论》，笃学乐古，仁惠爱下。
现代文：我考虑平原王素患痼疾，宗庙的重任，继位嗣后的大统，只有长安侯刘祜质性忠孝，小心谨慎，能通《诗》、《论》，笃学乐古、仁惠爱下，很是合适。
English: Considering the plains king's chronic illness, the heavy responsibility of the ancestral temple, and the succession of the succeeding general, only Chang'an Hou Liu, who is loyal and filial, careful and prudent, can understand "Poetry" and "Discourse," and is devoted to learning and enjoying the ancient times, and is loved by benevolence, is very suitable.

古文：年已十三，有成人之志。
现代文：现年已十三岁，有成人一般的志气。
English: He is now 13 years old and has the ambition of an adult.

古文：亲德系后，莫宜于祜。
现代文：亲民明德传宗接代，没有比刘祜再好的。
English: There is no one better than Liu Ye to be a pro-people, pro-Mingde and progenitor of the next generation.

古文：《礼》 昆弟之子犹己子 ；《春秋》之义，为人后者为之子，不以父命辞王父命。
现代文：《礼记》说： 兄弟之子犹如是自己的儿子 ；《春秋》之义，出继于人就是他的儿子，不受父亲之命而受祖父之命。
English: "Li Ji" said: A brother's son is like his own son; according to "Chunqiu," the successor is his son, who is not ordered by his father but by his grandfather.

古文：其以祜为孝和皇帝嗣，奉承祖宗，案礼仪奏。 又作策命曰： 惟延平元年秋八月癸丑，皇太后曰：咨长安侯祜：孝和皇帝懿德巍巍，光于四海；大行皇帝不永天年。
现代文：应以祜为孝和皇帝的后嗣，继承祖宗，合乎礼仪标准。 又下策书说： 延平元年秋八月初八，皇太后说： 咨！长安侯刘祜：孝和皇帝懿德巍巍，光照四海；新逝世的天子，寿命太短。
English: The following policy also states: On the 8th day of the 8th month of the 8th month in the autumn of the first year of Yanping, the empress dowager said: Zhi!Chang'an Hou Liu Xi: Xiao and Emperor Zi De Xi, illuminate the four seas; newly deceased heavenly son, life is too short.

古文：朕惟侯孝章帝世嫡皇孙，谦恭慈顺，在孺而勤，宜奉郊庙，承统大业。
现代文：我想到你长安侯，是孝章帝世嫡皇孙，谦恭慈顺，幼年就很勤勉，适宜于奉祀郊庙，继承帝业。
English: I think of you, Prince Chang'an, as the legitimate grandchild of Emperor Xiaozhang, humble, courteous and kind. You were very diligent when you were young. You are suitable to be enshrined in a suburban temple and inherit the imperial inheritance.

古文：今以侯嗣孝和皇帝后。
现代文：今以长安侯为孝和皇帝后嗣。
English: Now, Emperor Xiaowa's heir is the Prince of Chang'an.

古文：其审君汉国，允执其中。一人有庆，万民赖之。
现代文：应慎重统治汉家天下，诚信地执掌中庸之道。 一人有庆，万民赖之。 
English: It is necessary to rule the Han world prudently and faithfully adhere to the principle of moderation.

古文：皇帝其勉之哉！ 读策毕，太尉奉上玺绶，即皇帝位，年十三。
现代文：皇帝应好好勉励啊！ 读完策书，太尉奉上御玺，刘祜就继皇帝位，年十三。
English: The emperor should be encouraged! After reading the policy book, the lieutenant was presented with the imperial scepter, and Liu Ye succeeded to the emperor's throne at the age of thirteen.

古文：太后犹临朝。
现代文：太后仍临朝听政。
English: The empress dowager still attends court and listens to the government.

古文：九月庚子，谒高庙。
现代文：九月二十六日，拜谒高庙。
English: On September 26th, he paid homage to Gonggao Temple.

古文：辛丑，谒光武庙。
现代文：二十七日，拜谒光武庙。
English: On the 27th, he visited the Gongguangwu Temple.

古文：六州大水。
现代文：六州发大水。
English: Six states are facing serious water shortages.

古文：己未，遣谒者分行虚实，举灾害，赈乏绝。
现代文：己未，派谒者分别考察虚实，报告灾害，赈济匮乏断粮的贫民。
English: So far, the dispatchers have separately investigated the truth and falsehood, reported disasters, and provided assistance to the poor who are short of food.

古文：丙寅，葬孝殇皇帝于庚陵。
现代文：丙寅，葬孝殇皇帝于康陵。
English: Hsin-Yin buried Emperor Xiaojun in Kangling.

古文：乙亥，陨石于陈留。
现代文：乙亥，陈留陨石。
English: Eihei, Chen Liu meteorite.

古文：西域诸国叛，攻都护任尚，遣副校尉梁慬救尚，击破之。
现代文：西域诸外族叛变，攻打都护任尚，派副校尉梁忄堇援救任尚，把外族打败。
English: Foreign tribes in the western region mutinied, attacked and besieged Ren Shang, and sent Vice-Colonel Liang Qi to rescue Ren Shang and defeat the foreign tribes.

古文：冬十月，四州大水，雨雹。
现代文：冬十月，四州发大水，下冰雹。
English: In the winter of October, the four prefectures experienced heavy rain and hail.

古文：诏以宿麦不下，赈赐贫人。
现代文：诏令因宿麦不能下种，赈济赏赐贫人。
English: The imperial edict decreed that no sowing could take place due to the late-ripening wheat, and that the poor would be rewarded for their generosity.

古文：十二月甲子，清河王薨，使司空持节吊祭，车骑将军邓骘护丧事。
现代文：十二月二十一日，清河王逝世，派司空持符节吊祭，车骑将军邓骘维护丧事。
English: On December 21st, Qinghe Wang passed away. He sent an airman to hold a wreath-laying ceremony for the festival, and the cavalry general Deng Qi came to preside over the funeral.

古文：乙酉，罢鱼龙曼延百戏。
现代文：乙酉，罢去鱼龙曼延百戏。
English: Acetylene, let go of the fish and extend the play.

古文：永初元年春正月癸酉朔，大赦天下。
现代文：永初元年春正月初一，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first month of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：蜀郡徼外羌内属。
现代文：蜀郡边外羌人归附内属。
English: The outlying areas of Shu County and the people of Yunnan Province were attached to it.

古文：戊寅，分犍为南部为属国都尉。
现代文：初六，分出犍为南部为属国都尉。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he was promoted to the rank of provincial captain.

古文：禀司隶、兖、豫、徐、冀、并州贫民。
现代文：以仓廪储粮贷给司隶、兖、豫、徐、冀、并州贫民。
English: Loans of grain stored in warehouses were made to the poor people of Sipi, Handan, Henan, Hebei and Hebei.

古文：二月丙午，以广成游猎地及被灾郡国公田假与贫民。
现代文：二月初四，将广成游乐打猎的地方及遭灾郡国公田借予贫民。
English: On the fourth day of the second month of the year, Guangcheng's recreational and hunting areas and the county's public lands that were affected by the disaster were lent to the poor.

古文：丁卯，分清河国封帝弟常保为广川王。
现代文：二十五日，分清河国封帝弟刘常保为广川王。
English: On the 25th, Liu Changbao, the younger brother of the emperor of the Qing River State, became the king of Guangchuan.

古文：庚午，司徒梁鲔薨。
现代文：二十八日，司徒梁鲔逝世。
English: On the 28th, Stuliang Yao passed away.

古文：三月癸酉，日有食之，诏公卿内外众官、郡国守、相，举贤良方正、有道术之士，明政术、达古今、能直言极谏者，各一人。
现代文：三月初二，日蚀。诏令公卿内外众官、郡国守相，举荐贤良方正有道术的士人，明政术、达古今、能直言极谏的各一人。
English: On the 2nd day of the 3rd month, the solar eclipse, the imperial edict was issued to the court nobles, all officials at home and abroad, and the county and state governors, recommending the wise and virtuous persons who had the ability of Taoism, Ming Dynasty, ancient and modern times, and who were able to speak frankly.

古文：己卯，永昌徼外僬侥种夷贡献内属。
现代文：初七，永昌边外僬侥种夷人纳贡内属。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Yongchang and its outlying areas were subject to the Iroquois tribute.

古文：甲申，葬清河孝王，赠龙旗、虎贲。
现代文：十二日，葬清河孝王，赠龙旗、虎贲。
English: On the 12th, King Qinghe Xiao Wang was buried and presented with a dragon banner and a tiger banner.

古文：夏五月甲戌，长乐卫尉鲁恭为司徒。
现代文：夏五月初三，任长乐卫尉鲁恭为司徒。
English: On the third day of the fifth month of the summer, Lu Qiong, the Changle Guards Lieutenant, became a disciple.

古文：丁丑，诏封北海王睦孙寿光侯普为北海王。
现代文：初六，诏封北海王刘睦孙寿光侯刘普为北海王。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, Liu Mucsun Shuguang Hou Liu Pu, the king of the North Sea, was proclaimed the king of the North Sea.

古文：九真徼外夜郎蛮夷举上内属。
现代文：九真边外夜郎蛮夷举土内属。
English: Jiuzhen's night watchman is a barbarian and belongs to the soil.

古文：六月戊申，爵皇太后母阴氏为新野君。
现代文：六月初八，封皇太后母阴氏为新野君。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month, Nino became the mother of the Empress Dowager.

古文：丁巳，河东地陷。
现代文：十七日，河东地陷。
English: On the 17th, the eastern part of the river was submerged.

古文：壬戌，罢西域都护。
现代文：二十二日，罢西域都护。
English: On the 22nd, the siege of the western region of Dōgo began.

古文：先零种羌叛，断陇道，大为寇掠，遣车骑将军邓骘、征西校尉任尚讨之。丁卯，赦除诸羌相连结谋叛逆者罪。
现代文：先零种羌叛变，切断陇道，大事寇掠，派车骑将军邓骘、征西校尉任尚去讨伐，二十七日，赦免诸羌人相互勾结阴谋叛逆的罪恶。
English: On the 27th, he pardoned all of them for the crime of colluding with each other and plotting to rebel.

古文：秋九月庚午，诏三公明申旧令，禁奢侈，无作浮巧之物，殚财厚葬。
现代文：秋九月初一，诏令三公重申旧令，禁奢侈，毋作浮夸奇巧的冥物，耗费资财从事厚葬。
English: On the first day of the autumn and the first day of September, the three emperors issued an edict reiterating the old order, prohibiting extravagance, not being pompous and fanciful, and expending resources to engage in heavy burial.

古文：是日，太尉徐防免。
现代文：这天，太尉徐防免职。
English: On this day, Lieutenant Xu Fang was relieved of duty.

古文：辛未，司空尹勤免。
现代文：初二，司空尹勤免职。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Sikuku Yinqin was dismissed.

古文：癸酉，调杨州五郡租米，赡给东郡、济阴、陈留、梁国、下邳、山阳。
现代文：初四，调运扬州等五郡租米，供给东郡、济阴、陈留、梁国、下邳、山阳。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, rice was transported from five counties including Yangzhou, and supplied to Dongxun, Jiyin, Chenlu, Liangguo, Shimoda, and Sanyang.

古文：丁丑，诏曰： 自今长吏被考竟未报，自非父母丧，无故辄去职者，剧县十岁、平县五岁以上，乃得次用。 壬午，诏太仆、少府减黄门鼓吹，以补羽林士；厩马非乘舆常所御者，皆减半食；诸所造作，非供宗庙园陵之用，皆且止。
现代文：初八，诏令说： 从现在开始，长吏被考问完了却未断决，如果不是父母丧事无故去职的，官吏多的县十年以后、一般的县五年以后，才能依次任用。 十三日，诏令太仆、少府减去黄门鼓吹，用来补羽林士，厩马不是乘舆经常御用的，都减半食；凡造作器物，不是供宗庙园陵用的，一律暂时停止。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the edict said: From now on, officials who have passed the examination but are still undecided, if their parents are not deceased and leave the post without reason, can only be appointed in succession after ten years in counties with many officials, and after five years in general counties. On the 13th day, the edict ordered that the servants of the emperor and the shogun should be deducted from the propaganda of the Yellow Gate, used to make up the feathers of the woodsmen, and the stables and horses should be reduced by half if they are not used regularly by the emperor; all manufactured utensils, not for the use of the

古文：丙戌，诏死罪以下及亡命赎，各有差。
现代文：十七日，诏令死罪以下及逃亡的可以赎罪，分别赎物不等。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict decreed that those who had committed a crime punishable by death or less and those who had escaped could atone for their sins, with varying amounts of ransom.

古文：庚寅，太傅张禹为太尉，太常周章为司空。
现代文：二十一日，任太傅张禹为太尉，太常周章为司空。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhang Yu, the appointed Taifu, was promoted to Taifu, and Zhou Zhang, the appointed Taifu, was promoted to Siku.

古文：冬十月，倭国遣使奉献。
现代文：冬十月，倭国派使者进贡。
English: In the winter of October, Wakoku sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：辛酉，新城山泉水大出。
现代文：二十三日，新城山泉水大出。
English: On the 23rd, the Xincheng Mountain spring water flowed out.

古文：十一月丁亥，司空周章密谋废立，策免，自杀。
现代文：十一月十九日，司空周章密谋废立，被策书免职，自杀。
English: On November 19th, Siu Ku Zhou Zhang conspired to abolish the legislature, was removed from office and committed suicide.

古文：戊子，敕司隶校尉、冀、并二州刺史： 民讹言相惊，弃捐旧居，老弱相携，穷困道路。
现代文：二十日，命令司隶校尉、冀并二州刺史说 ：居民因谣言互相惊扰，离开自己的旧居，扶老携幼，穷困潦倒。
English: On the 20th, the order was given to the captain of Sili, Ji, and the two states of Zhishi, saying: "Due to rumors, residents will scare each other, leave their old homes, help the elderly with their children, and fall into poverty.

古文：其各敕所部长吏，躬亲晓喻。
现代文：应各告诫所属长吏，亲自去对居民加以说明，不要上当。
English: All officials should personally go to the residents to explain the situation, and should not be deceived.

古文：若欲归本郡，在所为封长檄；不欲，勿强。 
现代文：如果有要回本郡的，当地政府发给证明文件；不想回去的，就不要勉强。 
English: If someone wants to return to the county, the local government will issue a certificate; if you don't want to go back, don't force it.

古文：十二月乙卯，颍川太守张敏为司空。
现代文：十二月十八日，任颍川太守张敏为司空。
English: On December 18th, Zhang Min, the appointed governor of Beichuan, became the deputy governor.

古文：是岁，郡国十八地震；四十一雨水，或山水暴至；二十八大风，雨雹。
现代文：这年，郡国十八处地震，四十一处雨水，有的山水暴至，二十八处大风、下冰雹。
English: This year, the county was hit by 18 earthquakes, 41 rainfalls, some flash floods, and 28 gales and hailstorms.

古文：二年春正月，禀河南、下邳、东莱、河内贫民。
现代文：二年春正月，以仓廪储粮赈济河南、下邳、东莱，河内贫民。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the poor people in Henan, Shimonoseki, Donglai and Hanoi were provided with grain stored in warehouses.

古文：车骑将军邓骘为种羌所败于冀西。
现代文：车骑将军邓骘在冀县西被种羌所打败。
English: The chariot and cavalry general, Deng Yu, was defeated in the west of Jixian County by the seed grasshopper.

古文：二月乙丑，遣光禄大夫樊准、吕仓分行冀、兖二州，禀贷流民。
现代文：二月二十九日，派光禄大夫樊准、吕仓分别视察冀、兖二州，以仓廪储粮赈济流民。
English: On February 29th, Dr. Guanglu sent doctors from Jianzhong and Luchang to inspect Hebei and Shandong provinces respectively, and used the stored grain from Jianzhong to help the displaced people.

古文：夏四月甲寅，汉阳城中火，烧杀三千五百七十人。
现代文：夏季四月十九日，汉阳城中火灾，烧杀三千五百七十人。
English: In the summer, on April 19, a fire broke out in Hanyang City, killing 3,570 people.

古文：五月，旱。
现代文：五月，天气干旱。
English: In May, there was a drought.

古文：丙寅，皇太后幸洛阳寺及若庐狱，录囚徒，赐河南尹、廷尉、卿及官属以下各有差，即日降雨。
现代文：初一，皇太后到洛阳寺及若卢狱，审查记录囚徒，赏赐河南尹、廷尉、卿及官属以下各分别不等，当天下了雨。
English: On the first day of the new year, the empress dowager went to Luoyang Temple and Ruolu Prison, reviewed the records of prisoners, and rewarded Henan Yin, courtier, lord and officials respectively. It rained that day.

古文：六月，京师及郡国四十大水，大风，雨雹。
现代文：六月，京师及郡国四十处大水、大风、下冰雹。
English: In June, forty places in Beijing and the county were affected by heavy rain, strong winds, and hail.

古文：秋七月戊辰，诏曰： 昔在帝王，承天理民，莫不据璇机玉衡，以齐七政。朕以不德，遵奉大业，而阴阳差越，变异并见，万民饥流，羌貊叛戾。
现代文：秋七月初四，诏令说： 从前的帝王，秉承天命治理人民，没有不掌握天文仪器，了了解日月五星变化的，我以薄德之身，总理一国大业，阴阳不调，变异时见，万民饥寒流离，羌貊叛逆。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the imperial edict said: "Former emperors, adhering to the destiny of heaven to govern the people, did not fail to master the astronomical instrument, and understood the changes of the sun, moon and five stars. I am a person of great virtue, the prime minister is a great cause of the country, yin and yang are not in tune, I see the time of mutation, all the people are hungry and cold, and they are displaced, and they are rebellious.

古文：夙夜克己，忧心京京。
现代文：日夜反省，忧心忡忡。
English: I thought about it day and night, full of anxiety.

古文：间令公卿郡国举贤良方正，远求博选，开不讳之路，冀得至谋，以鉴不逮，而所对皆循尚浮言，无卓尔异闻。
现代文：近来命令公卿郡国举荐贤良方正，远求博选，打开不忌讳敢直谏的局面，希望得到好的谋略，以匡不逮。但得到的只是一些漂浮虚词，没有卓识远见。
English: Recently, he ordered the court noble of the county to recommend the virtuous Fang Zheng, to seek the best choice, to open up the situation of not shying away from direct confrontation, and to hope for a good strategy. However, what he got was just some floating empty words, without insight and foresight.

古文：其百僚及郡国吏人，有道术明习灾异阴阳之度璇机之数者，各使指变以闻。
现代文：今着令百官及郡国吏人，凡有道术研究灾异阴阳、通晓天文律令的，叫他们指明问题的所在。
English: I hereby order all officials and county magistrates who have studied Taoism, the Yin and Yang of disasters, and are familiar with the astronomical rites, to point out the source of the problem.

古文：二千石长吏明以诏书，博衍幽隐，朕将亲览，待以不次，冀获嘉谋，以承天诫。 
现代文：二千石长吏明白说明诏书，广泛的引用幽深隐晦，我将亲自听取意见，给以优待，总的是想得到好的计谋，以接受上天的警告。 
English: The 2,000-koku chieftain clearly explains the edict, the extensive citation is deep and obscure, I will personally listen to opinions, give preferential treatment, in general, I want to get a good strategy to accept the warning from heaven.

古文：闰月辛丑，广川王常保薨，无子，国除。
现代文：闰七月初七，广川王刘常保逝世，无子，撤除封国。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the leap year, Liu Changbao, the king of Guangchuan, died childless, and the state was revoked.

古文：癸未，蜀郡徼外羌举土内属。
现代文：癸未，蜀郡边外羌人全部内属。
English: At present, all the people in and out of Shu County belong to the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region.

古文：九月庚子，诏王国官属墨绶下至郎、谒者，其经明任博士，居乡里有廉清孝顺之称、才任理人者，国相岁移名，与计偕上尚书，公府通调，令得外补。
现代文：九月初七，诏令王国官属墨绶下至郎、谒者，经书奥义明晓者任博士，居乡里有清廉孝顺的好名声，才能胜任治理民众的，国相每年造册备文，与计吏一同上报尚书，公府通选，以便外补官员。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, the imperial edict decreed that officials of the kingdom should be subordinate to the emperor, and those who were not subordinate to the emperor should be promoted to the rank of doctor, and those who had a good reputation for honesty and filial piety in the countryside should be qualified to govern the people. The minister of state should make a record every year, and submit it to the government together with the tax collector, and the government should be elected by universal suffrage in order to supplement the officials.

古文：冬十月庚寅，禀济阴、山阳、玄菟贫民。
现代文：冬十月二十八日，以仓廪储粮赈济济阴、山阳、玄菟贫民。
English: On the 28th day of October in winter, the poor in Yin, Shanyang and Xuanwu were fed with stored grain from the warehouse.

古文：征西校尉任尚与先零羌战于平襄，尚军败绩。
现代文：征西校尉任尚与先零羌战于平襄，任尚军失败。
English: Ren Shang, the captain of the Western Expeditionary Army, fought against the previous zero in Pingxiang, and Ren Shang's army failed.

古文：十一月辛酉，拜邓骘为大将军，征还京师，留任尚屯陇右。
现代文：十一月二十九日，授邓骘为大将军，召还京师，留任尚驻屯陇右。
English: On November 29th, Deng Rong was awarded the title of General, recalled to Beijing Division, and remained stationed in Tuen Mun.

古文：先零羌滇零称天子于北地，遂寇三辅，东犯赵、魏，南入益州，杀汉中太守董炳。
现代文：先零羌滇零在北地称天子。寇掠三辅，东犯赵、魏，南入益州，杀汉中太守董炳。
English: In the north, Zi Zi Zi was called the son of heaven. He plundered Sanfu, in the east he plundered Zhao and Wei, in the south he invaded Yizhou, and in the middle of the Han Dynasty he killed the supreme commander of the Han Dynasty, Dong Xuan.

古文：十二月辛卯，禀东郡、巨鹿、广阳、安定、定襄、沛国贫民。
现代文：十二月三十日，以仓廪储粮赈济东郡、巨鹿、广阳、安定、定襄、沛国贫民。
English: On December 30th, the poor people of Jidong County, Julu, Guangyang, Dingdian, Dingxiang and Peiguo were fed with the stored grain.

古文：广汉塞外参狼羌降，分广汉北部为属国都尉。
现代文：广汉塞外参狼羌投降，分广汉北部为属国都尉。
English: Guanghan surrendered to foreign forces in disarray, and the northern part of Guanghan became a vassal state.

古文：是岁，郡国十二地震。
现代文：这年，郡国十二处地震。
English: This year, there were twelve earthquakes in the county.

古文：三年春正月庚子，皇帝加元服。
现代文：三年春正月初九，皇帝加冠于首。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the third year of Spring, the emperor crowned him.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：赐王、主、贵人、公、卿以下金帛各有差；男子为父后，及三老、考悌、力田爵，人二级，流民欲占者人一级。
现代文：分别赏赐王、主、贵人、公、卿以下金帛各不等；男子为父后，及三老、孝悌、力田爵，每人二级，流民归首的一级。
English: The king, lord, dignitary, prince, and nobleman were each awarded varying amounts of gold ingots; the man was the father, and the three elders, filial piety, and power, each with two levels, and the exiles with one level.

古文：遣骑都尉任仁讨先零羌，不利，羌遂破没临洮。
现代文：派骑都尉任仁讨伐先零羌，不利，羌便攻陷临氵兆。
English: He sent cavalry captain Ren Ren to fight against the first few Huns, but to no avail. The Huns then invaded Lin's Hsiang.

古文：高句骊遣使贡献。
现代文：高句骊派使者进贡。
English: Gao Guanzhong sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：三月，京师大饥，民相食。
现代文：三月，京师大饥荒，饥民人吃人。
English: In March, there was a great famine in Beijing, and the starving people were cannibalistic.

古文：壬辰，公卿诣阙谢。
现代文：初二，公卿到皇帝居所谢罪认错。
English: On the second day of the new year, the nobles went to the emperor's residence to confess their sins.

古文：诏曰： 朕以幼冲，奉承鸿业，不能宣流风化，而感逆阴阳，至令百姓饥荒，更相啖食。
现代文：诏令说： 我以年幼继承帝业，不能弘扬传统文化，反而弄得阴阳乖舛，以致百姓饥荒，互相口敢食。
English: The imperial edict said: I inherited the imperial inheritance at a young age, I cannot carry forward the traditional culture, but I have made yin and yang angry, so that the people are starving and dare not eat each other.

古文：永怀悼叹，若坠渊水。
现代文：让我久久地痛悼哀叹，好像掉在无底深渊中。
English: Let me mourn and lament for a long time, as if falling into a bottomless abyss.

古文：咎在朕躬，非群司之责，而过自贬引，重朝廷之不德。
现代文：咎戾在于我一人，不是各部官员的责任，而你们引过自贬内咎，更加重显示了朝廷的不德。
English: The blame lies with me alone, not the responsibility of the officials of various ministries, and you have drawn self-deprecating internal blame, further demonstrating the immorality of the imperial court.

古文：其务思变复，以助不逮。 癸巳，诏以鸿池假与贫民。
现代文：务必考虑改变恢复的办法，以便帮助我的不够。 初三，诏令把鸿池借与贫民，可以在其中捕鱼。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an edict to borrow a pond from the poor so that they could fish in it.

古文：壬寅，司徒鲁恭免。
现代文：十二日，司徒鲁恭免职。
English: On the 12th, Stulukong was relieved of his duties.

古文：夏四月丙寅，大鸿胪九江夏勤为司徒。
现代文：夏四月初七，任大鸿胪九江夏勤为司徒。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, Xia Qin from Jiujiang Province was appointed as a disciple.

古文：三公以国用不足，奏令吏人入钱谷，得为关内侯、虎贲羽林郎、五大夫、官府吏、缇骑、营士各有差。
现代文：三公以国用不足，奏请令吏民纳谷，得为关内侯、虎贲羽林郎、五大夫、官府吏、缇骑、营士分别各不等。
English: The three princes, feeling that they were not of sufficient use to the state, requested that the officials be sent to Nagaya. They could be the Lord of Guanai, the Tiger, the Feather, the Five Generals, the government officials, the cavalrymen, and the camp followers.

古文：己巳，诏上林、广成苑可垦辟者，赋与贫民。
现代文：初十，诏令上林、广成苑可以垦植开辟的，租给贫民。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, it was decreed that the woodlands and Guangcheng Garden could be planted and developed, and rented to the poor.

古文：甲申，清河王虎威薨。
现代文：二十五日，清河王刘虎威逝世。
English: On the 25th, Liu Huwei, the king of Qinghe, passed away.

古文：五月丙申，封乐安王宠子延平为清河王。
现代文：五月初七，封乐安王刘宠子刘延平为清河王。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month of the lunar calendar, Liu Yanping, the favorite son of King Liu of Le'an, became the king of Qinghe.

古文：丁酉，沛王正薨。
现代文：初八，沛王刘正逝世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, King Pei Liu Zheng passed away.

古文：癸丑，京师大风。
现代文：二十四日，京师大风。
English: On the 24th, a strong wind blew in Beijing.

古文：六月，乌桓寇代郡、上谷、涿郡。
现代文：六月，乌桓寇掠代郡、上谷、涿郡。
English: In June, the Chinese peregrine falcon was seen in Shoudai-gun, Kamidani, and Shizuku-gun.

古文：秋七月，海贼张伯路等寇略缘海九郡，遣侍御史庞雄督州、郡兵讨破之。
现代文：秋七月，海贼张伯路等寇掠缘海九郡，派侍御史庞雄督促州郡兵讨伐打败他们。
English: In autumn and July, the pirates of Zhangbo Road and other pirates plundered Haijiu County, and sent the attendant Shi Pangxiong to urge the county soldiers to fight and defeat them.

古文：庚子，诏长吏案行在所，皆令种宿麦蔬食，务尽地力，其贫者给种饷。
现代文：十二日，诏令长吏巡视京城地区，都叫种宿麦蔬食，务必地尽其力，贫穷的农民给种子食粮。
English: On the twelfth day, the prefect of the imperial edict made a tour of the Beijing area. All were asked to grow wheat, vegetables and food, and to do their best. Poor farmers were given seeds and food.

古文：九月，雁门乌桓及鲜卑叛，败五原郡兵于高渠谷。
现代文：九月，雁门乌桓及鲜卑叛变，在高渠谷打败五原郡兵。
English: In September, Wuhuan and Xianbei of the Wild Goose Gate mutinied and defeated the soldiers of Wuhuan County in Gaoju Valley.

古文：冬十月，南单于叛，围中郎将耿种于美稷。
现代文：冬十月，南单于叛变，在美稷围中郎将耿种。
English: In the winter of October, Nan Shan mutinied, and Geng Zeng, a middle-ranking official, was raised in Meishan.

古文：十一月，遣行车骑将军何熙讨之。
现代文：十一月，派代理车骑将军何照讨伐。
English: In November, it sent agents to mount a car-mounted crusade against General He Zhao.

古文：十二月辛酉，郡国九地震。
现代文：十二月初五，郡国九处地震。
English: On the fifth day of the twelfth month, there were nine earthquakes in the county.

古文：乙亥，有星孛于天苑。
现代文：十九日，有彗星出现于天苑星。
English: On the 19th, a comet appeared in the sky.

古文：是岁，京师及郡国四十一雨水雹。并、凉二州大饥，人相食。
现代文：这年，京师及郡国四十一次下冰雹，并、凉二州大饥荒，人食人。
English: In this year, Beijing and the county were hit by the 41st hailstorm, and there was a great famine in the two counties of Liangshan. People were eating each other.

古文：四年春正月元日，会，彻乐，不陈充庭车。
现代文：四年春正月元日，大朝会，撤歌乐，不陈乘舆法物车辇于庭，因为年荒。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth year of the Spring, the Grand Imperial Court Meeting, the withdrawal of singing and music, and the absence of the use of public law vehicles in the courtyard, because of the famine.

古文：辛卯，诏以三辅比遭寇乱，人庶流冗，除三年逋租、过更、口算、刍稿；禀上郡贫民各有差。
现代文：初六，诏令因三辅连遭寇乱，人丁流散，免除三年欠租，过更、口算、刍稿；用仓廪储粮赈济上郡贫民，分别不等。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, because the three auxiliary companies were invaded and dispersed, the imperial edict was issued to exempt three years of rent arrears, overpayments, oral calculations, and drafts; the poor of Shangxian County were provided with grain stored in warehouses.

古文：海贼张伯路复与勃海、平原剧贼刘文河、周文光等攻厌次，杀县令，遣御史中丞王宗督青州刺史法雄讨破之。
现代文：海贼张伯路又与渤海、平原势力强大的盗寇刘文河、周文光等攻打厌次，杀县令，派御史中丞王宗督青州刺史法雄打败他们。
English: The sea robber Zhang Bo Lu also fought with the powerful robbers Liu Wenhe and Zhou Wenguang in the Bohai Sea and the plains, killing the county orders and sending the imperial historian Zhongzheng Wang Zongdu Qingzhou Zhishi Haxiong to defeat them.

古文：度辽将军梁慬、辽东太守耿夔讨破南单于於属国故城。
现代文：度辽将军梁忄堇，辽东太守耿夔讨破南单于属国故城。
English: Du Liao's general Liang Qi and Liaodong's grand marshal Geng Qi fought to break Nan Shan's hold on the ancient city.

古文：丙午，诏减百官及州、郡、县奉各有差。
现代文：二十一日，诏令减少百官及州郡县官吏薪俸各不等。
English: On the 21st, the imperial edict reduced the salaries of hundreds of officials and state, county and county officials.

古文：二月丁巳，禀九江贫民。
现代文：二月初二，以粮食赈济九江贫民。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, the poor people of Jiujiang were provided with grain.

古文：南匈奴寇常山。
现代文：南匈奴寇掠常山。
English: The Southern Xiongnu raided the Changshan Mountains.

古文：乙丑，初置长安、雍二营都尉官。
现代文：初十，开始设置长安、雍二营都尉官。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Chang'an and Yong's second battalion captains were set up.

古文：乙亥，诏自建初以来，诸祅言它过坐徙边者，各归本郡；其没入官为奴婢者，免为庶人。
现代文：二十日，诏令自建初年间以来，因各种妖言和其他过错送往边远地区的，让各归本郡；没收入官为奴婢的，免为庶人。
English: On the 20th, the edict said that since the first year of construction, due to various gossips and other mistakes, they had been sent to remote areas, so that they should return to their own counties; no income official was a slave, and they were exempted from being a commoner.

古文：诏谒者刘珍及《五经》博士，校定东观《五经》、诸子、传记、百家艺术，整齐脱误，是正文字。
现代文：诏令谒者刘珍及《五经》博士，校定东观《五经》、诸子、传记、百家艺术，整理脱误，订正文字。
English: Liu Zhen and the doctor of the "Five Classics," who issued the edict, revised the Oriental Outlook "Five Classics," various sons, biographies, and hundreds of arts, sorted out errors, and revised the text.

古文：三月，南单于降。
现代文：三月，南单于投降。
English: In March, Nandan surrendered.

古文：先零羌寇褒中，汉中太守郑勤战殁。
现代文：先零羌寇掠褒中，汉中太守郑勤战死。
English: Zheng Qin, the first emperor of the Han Dynasty, died in the battle.

古文：徙金城郡都襄武。
现代文：迁移金城郡首府到襄武。
English: The capital of Jincheng County was moved to Xiangwu.

古文：戊子，杜陵园火。
现代文：初四，杜陵园火灾。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, a fire broke out in the cemetery.

古文：癸巳，郡国九地震。
现代文：初九，郡国九地震。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the 9th earthquake occurred.

古文：夏四月，六州蝗。
现代文：夏四月，六州蝗灾。
English: In April of the summer, locusts infested six states.

古文：丁丑，大赦天下。
现代文：二十三日，大赦天下。
English: On the 23rd, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：秋七月乙酉，三郡大水。
现代文：秋七月初三，三郡大水。
English: On the third day of autumn and the first day of July, three counties were flooded.

古文：己卯，骑都尉任仁下狱死。
现代文：己卯，骑都尉任仁监死狱中。
English: Meanwhile, the cavalry captain, Ren Ren, died in prison.

古文：九月甲申，益州郡地震。
现代文：九月初三，益州郡地震。
English: On the third day of September, the earthquake in Yizhou County occurred.

古文：冬十月甲戌，新野君阴氏薨，使司空持节护丧事。
现代文：冬十月二十三日，新野君阴氏逝世，使司空持符节护办丧事。
English: On the 23rd day of October in winter, Nino Junin passed away, so that the flight attendants held a funeral ceremony.

古文：大将军邓骘罢。
现代文：大将军邓骘罢去。
English: General Deng Wei was dismissed.

古文：五年春正月庚辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：五年春正月初一，日蚀。初七，郡国十地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of spring, there was a solar eclipse. On the seventh day of the first month, there was an earthquake.

古文：丙戌，郡国十地震。己丑，太尉张禹免。
现代文：初十，太尉张禹免职。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, Lieutenant Zhang Yu was relieved of his duties.

古文：甲申，光禄勋李脩为太尉。
现代文：初五，任光禄勋李脩为太尉。
English: In the fifth year of his junior high school career, he was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant.

古文：二月丁卯，诏省减郡国贡献太官口食，先零羌寇河东，遂至河内。
现代文：二月十八日，诏减省郡国贡献太官口食。先零羌寇掠河东，并至河内。
English: On the 18th of February, the provincial and county government of Zhaozhou made a contribution to the eunuch's meal. First, the raiders raided the east of the river and went to Hanoi.

古文：三月，诏陇西徙襄武，安定徙美阳，北地徙池阳，上郡徙衙。
现代文：三月，诏令陇西迁襄武，安定迁美阳，北地迁池阳，上郡迁衙。
English: In March, the imperial edict ordered the western part of Shaanxi to move to Xiangwu, the stable part to move to Miyang, the northern part to move to Chiyang, and the upper county to move to Handan.

古文：夫馀夷犯塞，杀伤吏人。
现代文：夫余夷人进犯边塞，杀伤吏民。
English: Husbands of the Yiyi people attacked the border fortress, killing and wounding officials and civilians.

古文：闰月丁酉，赦凉州河西四郡。
现代文：闰四月十九日，赦凉州河西四郡。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of the leap year, the four counties of Hexi in Liangzhou were pardoned.

古文：戊戌，诏曰：
现代文：二十日，诏令说：
English: On the 20th, the edict said:

古文：朕以不德，奉郊庙，承大业，不能兴和降善，为人祈福。
现代文： 我以薄德之身，奉祠郊庙，继承大统，不能兴隆和善，为人们造福。
English: I am a person of poor moral character, worshipping at shrines and temples, inheriting the Great Unification Church, unable to prosper and do good, and benefit the people.

古文：灾异蜂起，寇贼纵横，夷狄猾夏，戎事不息，百姓匮乏，疲于征发。
现代文：反而灾祸迭起，寇贼纵横，夷狄寇掠，战争不息，以致百姓贫困，税役繁重。
English: On the contrary, calamities occurred one after another, banditry was rampant, looting was rampant, and wars were incessant, resulting in poverty for the people and heavy taxation.

古文：重以蝗虫滋生，害及成麦，秋稼方收，甚可悼也。
现代文：加以蝗虫滋生，为害庄稼，稻不结实，秋收无望，令人伤痛。
English: With locusts breeding, it is harmful to crops, rice is not strong, autumn harvest is hopeless, and it is painful.

古文：朕以不明，统理失中，亦未获忠良以毗阙政。
现代文：我因为不英明，统治失当，同时也没有找到忠良的助手来辅助。
English: I have misgoverned because I am not wise, and I have not found a faithful assistant to help me.

古文：传曰： 颠而不扶，危而不持，则将焉用彼相矣。 公卿大夫将何以匡救，济斯艰厄，承天诫哉？
现代文：传书上说 ：倒下了不能扶一把，十分危险了不能拉一把，那么在什么地方需要臣相呢？ 公卿大夫应当怎样进行帮助，赈济这艰难困苦，接收上天的警诫呢？
English: The letter said: "If you fall down, you can't be helped, if it's too dangerous, you can't be pulled up, so where is the need for a minister? How should a minister help, relieve this hardship, and receive the warning of heaven?

古文：盖为政之本，莫若得人，褒贤显善，圣制所先。 济济多士，文王以宁 。
现代文：为政的根本没有什么比得到人才更重要。褒奖表扬贤良的人，是圣人法制首要强调的。 有众多的人才，文王所以安宁。 
English: In politics, there is nothing more important than getting talented people. Rewarding and praising virtuous people is the primary emphasis of the sage legal system. There are many talented people, so King Wen is calm.

古文：思得忠良正直之臣，以辅不逮。
现代文：我很想得到忠良正直的臣下以匡辅我。
English: I would very much like to have loyal and honest vassals to support me.

古文：其令三公、特进、侯、中二千石、二千石、郡守、诸侯相举贤良方正、不道术、达于政化、能直言极谏之士各一人，及至孝与众卓异者，并遣诣公车，朕将亲览焉。
现代文：现命令三公、特进、侯、中二千石、二千石、郡守、诸侯相举贤良方正、有道术、通达政治教化、能直言极谏之士各一人，以及最有孝道与众不同的，送到公车，我将亲自接待听取意。 
English: I hereby order that one of each of the three princes, the special envoy, the marquess, the junior 2,000-koku, the 2,000-koku, the county governor, and the marquesses, who are to promote the virtuous and upright, those who are skilled in Taoism and political enlightenment, and those who are able to speak forthrightly, as well as those with the most distinctive filial piety, be sent to the bus, and I will personally receive and listen to their opinions.

古文：六月甲辰，乐成王巡薨。
现代文：六月二十七日，乐成王刘巡逝世。
English: On June 27th, Lesheng Wang Liu Jun passed away.

古文：秋七月己巳，诏三公、特进、九卿、校尉，举列将子孙明晓战陈任将帅者。
现代文：秋七月二十三日，诏令三公、特进、九卿、校尉，举荐子孙中明晓战阵能任将帅的，将名单上报。
English: On the 23rd day of the 7th month of autumn, the emperor ordered the three princes, the special envoy, the nine nobles, and the captain to recommend those of their descendants who could be appointed as generals of the Ming Xiao army, and to report the list to the emperor.

古文：九月，汉阳人杜琦、王信叛，与先零诸种羌攻陷上邽城。
现代文：九月，汉阳人杜琦、王信叛逆，与先零诸种羌攻陷上圭阝城。
English: In September, the Hanyang people Dujuan and Wang Xin rebelled and captured Shangguiyuan City with the help of all kinds of weapons.

古文：十二月，汉阳太守赵博遣额刺杀杜琦。
现代文：十二月，汉阳太守赵博派刺客杀杜琦。
English: In December, Hanyang governor Zhao Bo sent assassins to kill Du Xi.

古文：是岁，九州蝗，郡国八雨水。
现代文：这年，九州蝗灾，郡国八雨水。
English: This year, Kyushu was plagued by locusts, and the county received eight inches of rain.

古文：六年春正月庚申，诏越巂置长利、高望、始昌三苑，又令益州郡置万岁苑，犍为置汉平苑。
现代文：六年春正月十七日，诏令越设置长利、高望、始昌三苑，又令益州郡设置万岁苑，犍为设置汉平苑。
English: On the 17th day of the first month of the sixth year of the Spring, the imperial edict set up the Changli, Gaowang and Shichang Three Gardens in Yuezhou, the Wanlian Garden in Yizhou County, and the Hanping Garden.

古文：三月，十州蝗。
现代文：三月，十州蝗灾。
English: In March, locust plagues began in ten prefectures.

古文：夏四月乙丑，司空张敏罢。
现代文：夏四月乙丑，司空张敏罢去。
English: Xia April second ugly, Siku Zhang Min dismissed.

古文：己卯，太常刘恺为司空。
现代文：初七，任太常刘恺为司空。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Ren Taizhong Liu Yao became the secretary.

古文：五月，旱。
现代文：五月，旱灾。
English: In May, there was a drought.

古文：丙寅，诏令中二千石下至黄绶，一切复秩还赎，赐爵各有差。
现代文：二十五日，诏令中二千石下至黄绶，一切复秩还赎，赐爵各分别不等。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict reduced 2,000 koku to the lowest rank, all ranks were restored, and knighthoods were awarded to various individuals.

古文：戊辰，皇太后幸雒阳寺，录囚徒，理冤狱。
现代文：二十七日，皇太后到洛阳寺，讯问并记载囚徒罪行情况，清理冤狱。
English: On the 27th, the Empress Dowager went to Luoyang Temple, interrogated and recorded the prisoners' crimes, and cleaned up the unjust prison.

古文：六月壬辰，豫章、员谿、原山崩。
现代文：六月二十一日，豫章、员溪关、原山崩。
English: On June 21st, Yu Zhang, Jian Xiguan, and Yuan Shandong collapsed.

古文：辛巳，大赦天下。
现代文：十月，大赦天下。
English: In October, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：遣侍御史唐喜讨汉阳贼王信，破斩之。
现代文：派侍御史唐喜讨伐汉阳贼王信，把他打败并杀掉。
English: He sent his attendant, Shi Tangxi, to fight against Hanyang Thief Wangxin, defeat him and kill him.

古文：冬十一月辛丑，护乌桓校尉吴祉下狱死。
现代文：冬十一月初二，护乌桓校尉吴祉监死狱中。
English: On the second day of November in winter, Wu Huan's bodyguard, Captain Wu Ji, died in prison.

古文：是岁，先零羌滇零死，子零昌复袭伪号。
现代文：这年，先零羌滇零死，子零昌复袭伪号。
English: In this year, Zi Zi Zi died first, and Zi Zi Chang repeated the fake number.

古文：七年春正月庚戌，皇太后率大臣命妇谒宗庙。
现代文：七年春正月十二日，皇太后率领大臣命妇拜谒宗庙。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring, the empress dowager, led by the minister, ordered the women to pay homage to the Jinsong Temple.

古文：二月丙午，郡国十八地震。
现代文：二月丙午，郡国十八地震。
English: On the afternoon of February 3rd, the 18th county earthquake occurred.

古文：夏四月乙未，平原王胜薨。
现代文：夏四月二十九日，平原王刘胜逝世。
English: On April 29th, Liu Sheng, the king of the plain, passed away.

古文：丙申晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，有日食发生。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：五月庚子，京师大雩。
现代文：五月初四，京师雩祭求雨。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, the Kyoto Shishimai Festival is held to pray for rain.

古文：秋，护羌校尉侯霸、骑都尉马贤破先零羌。
现代文：秋，护羌校尉侯霸、骑都尉马贤打败先零羌。
English: In the autumn, Guard Lieutenant Hou Ba and Cavalry Captain Ma Xian defeated Zeng Yao.

古文：八月丙寅，京师大风，蝗虫飞过洛阳。
现代文：八月初二，京师大风，蝗虫飞过洛阳。
English: On the second day of August, Beijing was hit by strong winds, and locusts flew over Luoyang.

古文：诏赐民爵。
现代文：诏赐民爵。
English: He was given a peerage by the Emperor.

古文：郡国被蝗伤稼十五以上，勿收今年田租；不满者，以实除之。
现代文：郡国被蝗伤稼十分之五以上，不收今年田租；不到十分之五的，按实际免除。
English: If more than five-tenths of the county's crops are damaged by locusts, no field rent will be collected this year; less than five-tenths will be exempted according to the actual situation.

古文：九月，调零陵、桂阳、豫章、会稽租米，赈给南阳、广陵、下邳、彭城、山阳、庐江、九江饥民；又调滨水县谷输敖仓。
现代文：九月，调拨零陵、桂阳、丹阳、豫章、会稽租米，赈给南阳、广陵、下邳、彭城、山阳、庐江、九江饥民，又调滨水县谷送往敖仓。
English: In September, the rice allocated to the hungry people in Ziling, Guiyang, Danyang, Yuzhang and the rent of the association was transferred to Nanyang, Guangling, Xiamen, Pengcheng, Sanyang, Minjiang and Jiujiang, and the rice allocated to the hungry people in Guizang was transferred to Mincang.

古文：元初元年春正月甲子，改元元初。
现代文：元初元年春正月初二，改元元初。
English: On the second day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, it was changed to the first day of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：赐民爵，人二级，孝悌、力田人三级，爵过公乘，得移与子若同产、同产子，民脱无名数及流民欲占者人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃贫不能自存者谷，人三斛；贞妇帛，人一匹。
现代文：赐民爵，每人二级；孝悌、力田每人三级；爵过公乘，可以移与子或同母兄弟、同母兄弟的儿子；民无户籍及流民归首的每人一级；鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、穷得不能活下去的，每人发谷三斛；贞节妇人，每人帛一匹。
English: People were given peerage, second level per person; filial piety, strength of field, third level per person; peerage was conferred, and could be transferred to a son or brother of the same mother, or a son of a brother of the same mother; people without household registration and exiles were given first level per person; widows, widowers, orphans, and the terminally ill, who were too poor to live, were given three hairpins per person; chaste women were given one hairpin per person.

古文：二月己卯，日南地坼。
现代文：二月己卯，日南地坼。
English: In February, the sun sets in the south.

古文：三月癸酉，日有食之。
现代文：三月十二日，有日食发生。
English: On March 12, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：夏四月丁酉，大赦天下。
现代文：夏四月初七，大赦天下。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, the general amnesty begins.

古文：京师及郡国五旱、蝗。
现代文：京师及郡国五旱灾、蝗灾。
English: Beijing and the county suffered from five droughts and locust plagues.

古文：诏三公、特进、列侯、中二千石、二千石、郡守举敦厚质直者，各一人。
现代文：诏令三公、特进、列侯、中二千石、二千石、郡守举荐敦厚耿直之士各一人。
English: The imperial edict called for one person from each of the following ranks: three princes, a special envoy, a vassal lord, a vassal of 2,000 koku, a vassal of 2,000 koku, and a county governor.

古文：五月，先零羌寇雍城。
现代文：五月先零羌寇掠雍城。
English: In May, a group of raiders raided Yongcheng.

古文：六月丁巳，河东地陷。
现代文：六月二十八日，河东地陷。
English: On June 28th, the eastern part of the river was submerged.

古文：秋七月，蜀郡夷寇蚕陵，杀县令。
现代文：秋七月，蜀郡夷寇掠蚕陵，杀县令。
English: In autumn and July, the Shu County raiders plundered the silkworm tombs, killing the county.

古文：九月乙丑，太尉李脩罢。
现代文：九月初七，太尉李脩罢去。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, Lieutenant Li Yao was dismissed.

古文：先零羌寇武都、汉中，绝陇道。
现代文：先零羌寇掠武都、汉中，断绝陇道。
English: First, the invaders raided Wudu and Hanzhong, and cut off trade routes.

古文：辛未，大司农山阳司马苞为太尉。
现代文：十三日，任大司农山阳司马苞为太尉。
English: On the 13th, the director of Nonsan Yang Sima Yu was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：冬十月戊子朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬十月初一，有日食发生。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：先零羌败凉州刺史皮阳于狄道。
现代文：先零羌在狄道打败凉州刺史皮阳。
English: First Zero defeated Liangzhou Spi Yang in Dido.

古文：乙卯，诏除三辅三岁田租、更赋、口算。
现代文：二十八日，诏令免除三辅三岁田租、更赋、口算。
English: On the 28th, the imperial edict exempted the three-year-old three-year-olds from the field rent, the land tax, and the mouth calculation.

古文：十一月。
现代文：十一月。
English: November.

古文：是岁，郡国十五地震。
现代文：郡国十五地震。
English: It was the county's 15th earthquake.

古文：二年春正月，诏禀三辅及并、凉六郡流冗贫人。
现代文：二年春正月，诏令以粮食赈济三辅及并、凉六郡流散贫民。
English: In the first month of the second year of the Spring, the Imperial Edict was issued to provide food to the poor in Sanju, Tongyeong and Liangliu counties.

古文：蜀郡青衣道夷奉献内属。
现代文：蜀郡青衣道夷纳贡内属。
English: It is under the jurisdiction of Shu County, Qingyi Province.

古文：修理西门豹所分漳水为支渠，以溉民田。
现代文：修理西门豹所分漳水为支渠，以灌溉民田。
English: The water diverted from repairing the West Gate leopard will be used as a branch canal to irrigate people's fields.

古文：二月戊戌，遣中谒者收葬京师客死无家属及棺椁朽败者，皆为设祭；其有家属，尤贫无以葬者，赐钱人五千。
现代文：二月十二日，派中谒者收葬京师客死无家属及棺椁朽败者，都为设祭；有家属但特贫无力埋葬的，每人赐钱五千。
English: On February 12th, those who died without relatives and those whose coffins had rotted away were given a memorial service. Those who had relatives but were too poor to bury them were each given 5,000 yuan.

古文：辛酉，诏三辅、河内、河东、上党、赵国、太原各修理旧渠，通利水道，以溉公私田畴。
现代文：辛酉，诏令三辅、河内、河东、上党、赵国、太原各修理旧渠，通利水道，以灌溉公私田畴。
English: In Xinjiang, the emperor ordered Sanfu, Hanoi, Hedong, Shangdang, Zhao Guo and Taiyuan to repair old canals and irrigation canals to irrigate public and private fields.

古文：三月癸亥，京师大风。
现代文：三月初八，京师大风。
English: On the eighth day of the third month of the year, a strong wind blew in Beijing.

古文：先零羌寇益州，遣中郎将尹就讨之。
现代文：先零羌寇掠益州，派中郎将尹就讨伐他们。
English: At first, the invaders raided Yekizhou, and Zhong Lang sent Yin to fight them.

古文：夏四月丙午，立贵人阎氏为皇后。
现代文：夏四月二十一日，立贵人阎氏为皇后。
English: On the 21st day of the 4th month of the summer, the noblewoman Yan became the empress.

古文：五月，京师旱，河南及郡国十九蝗。
现代文：五月，京师旱，河南及郡国十九处蝗灾。
English: In May, there was a drought in Beijing and 19 locust plagues in Henan and the county.

古文：甲戌，诏曰： 朝廷不明，庶事失中，灾异不息，忧心悼惧。
现代文：二十日，诏令说： 朝廷不明，政务失当，灾害变异不止，我忧心如焚。
English: On the 20th, the imperial edict said: "The imperial court is unknown, government affairs are improper, and disasters continue to mutate. I am deeply worried."

古文：被蝗以来，七年于兹，而州、郡隐匿，裁言顷亩。
现代文：遭蝗灾以来，前后七年，而州郡隐瞒情况，仅言被灾几多顷几多亩。
English: It has been seven years since the locust disaster, and the state and county have concealed the situation, saying only that several hectares and several mu have been affected.

古文：今群飞蔽天，为害广远，所言所见，宁相副邪？
现代文：现群蝗蔽天，为害广远，所言与所见，难道相符合吗？
English: Now that swarms of locusts are covering the sky and causing widespread damage, do what they say and what they see match up?

古文：三司之职，内外是监，即不奏闻，又无举正。
现代文：三司之职，内外都要监督。既不向上报告，又不实地纠正。
English: It is the duty of the three departments to supervise both internally and externally. They neither report to the top nor correct inaccurately.

古文：天灾至重，欺罔罪大。
现代文：天灾如此严重，欺天罔上的罪过特大。
English: The natural disaster is so serious that the sin of deceiving the heavens is extremely great.

古文：今方盛夏，且复假贷，以观厥后。
现代文：今方盛夏，暂且免除追究给以宽容，以观后效。
English: Now that it's midsummer, it's best to be tolerant and wait and see.

古文：其务消救灾眚，安辑黎元。 
现代文：应当消除灾害所造成的疾苦，安抚百姓。 
English: The suffering caused by the disaster should be eliminated and the people should be pacified.

古文：六月丙戌，太尉司马苞薨。
现代文：六月初二，太尉司马苞逝世。
English: On the 2nd day of the 6th month of the year, Lieutenant Sima Yao passed away.

古文：洛阳新城地裂。
现代文：洛阳新城地裂。
English: Luoyang's new city is breaking up.

古文：秋七月辛巳，太仆太山马英为太尉。
现代文：秋七月二十八日，任太仆太山马英为太尉。
English: On the 28th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Taishan Ma Ying, who had been appointed as a eunuch, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：八月，辽东鲜卑围无虑县。
现代文：八月，辽东鲜卑围无虑县。
English: In August, Liaodong Xianbei Waiwu County.

古文：九月，又攻夫犁营，杀县令。
现代文：九月，又攻夫犁营，杀县令。
English: In September, there was another attack on the camp and the order to kill the county was issued.

古文：壬午晦，日有食之。
现代文：三十日，有日食发生。
English: On the 30th, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：冬十月，遣中郎将任尚屯三辅。
现代文：冬十月，派中郎将任尚屯驻三辅。
English: In the winter of October, Pa Chung-ro will be stationed in Sang-so.

古文：诏郡国中都官系囚减死一等，勿笞，诣冯翊、扶风屯，妻子自随，占著所在；女子勿输。
现代文：诏令郡国中都官系囚减死一等，勿笞，送冯翊、扶风屯垦，妻子自随，上当地户籍；女子不要送去。
English: The imperial edict decreed that the first-class death penalty for the official prisoners in the county should be reduced to the first-class death penalty, and that they should not be sent to Fengyuan and Fufengyuan, and that their wives should follow them and go to the local household registration; women should not be sent to Fengyuan.

古文：亡命死罪以下赎，各有差。
现代文：亡命死罪以下赎罪，分别不等。
English: Exile, capital punishment, and the following atonement, are not equal.

古文：其吏人聚为盗贼，有悔过者，除其罪。
现代文：吏民聚而为盗，有悔过表现好的，免罪。
English: If an official or a member of the public commits theft and repents and behaves well, he or she will be exonerated.

古文：乙未，右扶风仲光、安定太守杜恢、京兆虎牙都尉耿溥与先零羌战于丁奚城，光等大败，并没。
现代文：十三日，右扶风仲光、安定太守杜恢、京兆虎牙都尉耿溥与先零羌在丁奚城战斗，仲光等人大败，并战死。
English: On the 13th, Zhongguang Yu Fu Feng, Du Huan, the governor of Dinglong, and Geng Ya, the captain of Jingzha Koga, fought against Zi Yao in Dinglong City. Zhongguang and others were defeated and died in the battle.

古文：左冯翊司马钧下狱，自杀。
现代文：左冯翊司马钧下狱，自杀。
English: Left Feng Xuan Sima Yao in prison and committed suicide.

古文：十一月庚申，郡国十地震。
现代文：十一月初九，郡国十地震。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, the county's 10th earthquake occurred.

古文：十二月，武陵澧中蛮叛，州、郡击破之。
现代文：十二月，武陵澧中蛮反叛，州郡兵将他们打败。
English: In December, the people of Wuling County rebelled violently, and the soldiers of the county defeated them.

古文：己酉，司徒夏勤罢。庚戌，司空刘恺为司徒，光禄勋袁敞为司空。
现代文：二十八日，司徒夏勤罢去，二十九日，任司空刘恺为司徒，光禄勋袁敞为司空。
English: On the 28th, Szu Xiaqin was dismissed, and on the 29th, Liu Ye, who had been appointed as Szu, and Guanglu Xun Yuan, who had been appointed as Szu, were dismissed.

古文：三年春正月甲戌，修理太原旧沟渠，溉灌官私田。
现代文：三年春正月二十四日，修理太原旧沟渠，灌溉官田私田。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the third year of spring, the old ditch in Taiyuan was repaired, and the irrigation of official fields and private fields was completed.

古文：东平陆上言木连理。
现代文：东平陆上报出现木连理。
English: Tohei Rikuho Shimbun reported that the divorce was amicable.

古文：苍、郁林、合浦蛮夷反叛，二月，遣侍御史任逴督州、郡兵讨之。
现代文：苍梧、郁林、合浦蛮夷反叛，二月派侍御史任逴督促郡兵讨伐。
English: Cangwu, Yulin and Hepu rebelled against the barbarians, and in February, he sent his attendant, the Grand Historian Renzhong, to urge the county soldiers to fight.

古文：郡国十地震。
现代文：郡国十地震。
English: The tenth earthquake in the county.

古文：三月辛亥，日有食之。
现代文：三月初二，日蚀。
English: March 2nd, solar eclipse.

古文：丙辰，赦苍梧、郁林、合浦、南海吏人为贼所迫者。
现代文：初七，赦免苍梧、郁林、合浦、南海吏民为贼所胁犯下的罪。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he pardoned Cangwu, Yulin, Hapu and Nanhai officials for the crimes committed by the thieves.

古文：夏四月，京师旱。
现代文：夏四月，京师旱灾。
English: In the summer of April, there was a drought in Kyoto.

古文：五月，武陵蛮复叛，州、郡讨破之。
现代文：五月，武陵蛮再度反叛，州郡把他们打败。
English: In May, the Wuling barbarians rebelled again, and the prefecture defeated them.

古文：癸酉，度辽将军邓遵率南匈奴击先零羌于灵州，破之。
现代文：二十五日，度辽将军邓遵率领南匈奴攻击先零羌于灵州，把他们打败。
English: On the 25th, Du Liao's general Deng Zun led the Southern Xiongnu to attack the First Division in Lingzhou and defeated them.

古文：越巂徼外夷举种内属。
现代文：越巂边外夷人率全部族内属。
English: In the Yuejiang Uygur Autonomous Region, the proportion of foreign immigrants is higher than that of the local population.

古文：六月，中郎将任尚遣兵击破先零羌于丁奚城。
现代文：六月，中郎将任尚派兵在丁奚城攻破先零羌。
English: In June, Zhong Lang sent his troops to break through the first encampment in Dingyi City.

古文：秋七月，武陵蛮复叛，州、郡讨平之。
现代文：秋七月，武陵蛮再度反叛，州郡打败他们。
English: In autumn and July, the Wuling barbarians rebelled again, and the prefectures defeated them.

古文：缑氏地坼。
现代文：缑氏地坼。
English: The crickets of the cormorants begin to sing.

古文：九月辛己，赵王宏薨。
现代文：九月初五，赵王刘宏逝世。
English: On September 5th, Zhao Wang Liu Hong passed away.

古文：冬十一月，苍梧、郁林、合浦蛮夷降。
现代文：冬十一月，苍梧、郁林，合浦蛮夷降服。
English: In the winter of November, Cangwu, Yulin, and Hepu submitted to the barbarians.

古文：丙戌，初听大臣、二千石、刺史行三年丧。
现代文：初十，开始听任大臣、二千石、刺史实行三年丧服。
English: At the age of ten, he began to serve as a minister, two thousand koku, and three years of mourning clothes.

古文：癸卯，郡国九地震。
现代文：二十七日，郡国九地震。
English: On the 27th, the Guoju Earthquake occurred.

古文：十二月丁巳，任尚遣兵击破先零羌于北地。
现代文：十二月十二日，任尚派兵在北地击败先零羌。
English: On December 12th, Ren Shang sent troops to the North to defeat the First Division.

古文：四年春二月乙巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：四年春二月初一，日蚀。十一日，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of February in the spring of the fourth year, a solar eclipse. On the eleventh day, the general amnesty.

古文：乙卯，大赦天下。
现代文：十八日，武库遭火灾。
English: On the 18th, the arsenal was set on fire.

古文：壬戌，武库灾。夏四月戊申，司空袁敞薨。
现代文：夏四月初五，司空袁敞逝世。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, Siku Yuanchan passed away.

古文：己巳，鲜卑寇辽西，辽西郡兵与乌桓击破之。
现代文：二十六日，鲜卑寇掠辽西，辽西郡兵与乌桓打败他们。
English: On the 26th, the Xianbei raiders raided western Liaoning, and the soldiers of Liaoning County and Wuhuan defeated them.

古文：五月丁丑，太常李郃为司空。
现代文：五月初五，任太常李郃为司空。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth month of May, Ren Taizang Li Jun was promoted to the position of Siku.

古文：六月戊辰，三郡雨雹。
现代文：六月二十六日，三郡下冰雹。
English: On June 26, hail fell in three counties.

古文：秋七月辛丑，陈王钧薨。
现代文：秋七月三十日，陈王刘钧逝世。
English: On the 30th day of the 7th month of autumn, Chen Wang Liu Ye passed away.

古文：京师及郡国十雨水。
现代文：京师及郡国十雨水。
English: The capital city and the county are flooded with rainwater.

古文：诏曰： 今年秋稼茂好，垂可收获，而连雨未霁，惧必淹伤。
现代文：诏令说 ：今年秋稼茂盛，将要收获，而连雨不晴，惟恐淹伤。
English: The edict said, "This year, the autumn harvest will be bountiful, and the harvest will come, but the rain will be intermittent, so beware of drowning."

古文：夕惕惟忧，思念厥咎。
现代文：戒慎恐惧，思念咎戾。
English: Caution, fear, and guilt.

古文：夫霖雨者，人怨之所致。
现代文：霪雨霏霏，是因人民怨恨的缘故。
English: It is because of the resentment of the people.

古文：其武吏以威暴下，文吏妄行苛刻，乡吏因公生奸，为百姓所患苦者，有司显明其罚。
现代文：武官以淫威虐待下属，文官妄行苛刻，乡吏假公生奸，是为百姓所患难而痛苦的，有关部门应公开惩罚。
English: Military officers abusing subordinates with sexual arrogance, civil servants acting harshly, and township officials committing perfidy are painful for the people, and the relevant departments should publicly punish them.

古文：又《月令》 仲秋养衰老，授几杖，行糜粥 。
现代文：又《月令》上说： 仲秋养护衰老，授老人几杖，赐老人糜粥。 
English: It was also said in "Lunar Calendar": The Mid-Autumn Festival preserves aging, gives the elderly a few canes, and gives the elderly gruel.

古文：方今案比之时，郡、县多不奉行。
现代文：现在正是八月按验户口，比较核实的时候，但郡县多不执行。
English: Now is the time to compare and verify according to the August account verification, but most counties do not implement it.

古文：虽有糜粥，糠秕相半，长吏怠事，莫有躬亲，甚违诏书养老之意。
现代文：虽有糜粥，糠秕参半，长吏怠惰，没有亲自办理的。大大违背诏令养老的本意。
English: Although there is ginger porridge, ginger and ginger half, the officials are lazy and do not personally handle it. It greatly contradicts the intention of the old-age pension.

古文：其务崇仁恕，赈护寡独，称朕意焉。 
现代文：应当崇尚仁恕，赈济保护寡独，做得称我的心意。 
English: It is my heart's desire that we should advocate benevolence and forgiveness, and protect the rights and interests of the few.

古文：九月，护羌校尉任尚使客刺杀叛羌零昌。
现代文：九月，护羌校尉任尚派刺客杀死叛羌零昌。
English: In September, Guard Lieutenant Ren Shang sent assassins to kill the renegade Zichang.

古文：冬十一月己卯，彭城王恭薨。
现代文：冬十一月初九，彭城王刘恭逝世。
English: On the ninth day of the eleventh month of winter, Liu Gong, the king of Pengcheng, passed away.

古文：十二月，赵巂夷寇遂久，杀县令。
现代文：十二月，越巂夷寇掠遂久，杀县令。
English: In December, the Yue Shi raiders plundered Suiji, and the county-killing order was issued.

古文：甲子，任尚及骑都尉马贤与先零羌战于富平上河，大破之。
现代文：二十五日，任尚及骑都尉马贤与先零羌在富平上河战斗，把他们打败。
English: On the 25th, Ren Shang and his cavalry captain Ma Xian fought against the Zengqi in the upper reaches of the Fuping River and defeated them.

古文：虔人羌率众降，陇右平。
现代文：虔人羌率部众投降，陇右平定。
English: The pious people led the subordinates to surrender, and the right wing was pacified.

古文：是岁，郡国十三地震。
现代文：这年，郡国十三地震。
English: In the same year, there were thirteen earthquakes in the county.

古文：五年春正月，越巂夷叛。
现代文：五年春正月，越巂夷反叛。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Spring, the Yue and the Yi rebelled.

古文：二月壬戌，中山王宪薨。
现代文：二月十四日，中山王刘宪逝世。
English: On February 14, Liu Xian, the King of Zhongshan, passed away.

古文：三月，京师及郡国五旱，诏禀遭旱贫人。
现代文：三月，京师及郡国五旱，诏令以粮食赈济遭旱贫民。
English: In March, Beijing and five counties in the country were hit by drought, prompting the government to issue an order to provide food to the drought-stricken poor.

古文：夏六月，高句骊与秽貊寇玄菟。
现代文：夏六月，高句骊与犭岁貊寇掠玄菟。
English: In the summer of June, Gao Guoqi and his two-year-old son, Guo Guoqi, raided Xuanwu.

古文：秋七月，越巂蛮夷及旄牛豪叛，杀长吏。
现代文：秋七月，越巂蛮夷及旄牛豪反叛，杀长吏。
English: In autumn and July, the barbarians of Yue and Yao rebelled and killed the magistrates.

古文：丙子，诏曰： 旧令制度，各有科品，欲令百姓务崇节约。
现代文：初十，诏令说： 旧令制度，各有品类等级，其目的就是要百姓务必崇尚节约。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the imperial edict said: the old order system, each with a category level, its purpose is that the people must advocate economy.

古文：遭永初之际，人离荒厄，朝廷躬自菲薄，去绝奢饰，食不兼味，衣无二采。
现代文：永初年代，人心离散生活荒困，朝廷亲自菲薄，去除奢饰，食不兼味，衣不二采。
English: At the beginning of the 19th century, people were living a disjointed and impoverished life, and the imperial court itself was thin and thin, stripped of luxury, lacking in food and taste, and lacking in clothing.

古文：比年虽获丰穰，尚乏储积，而小人无虑，不图久长，嫁聚送终，纷华靡丽，至有走卒奴婢被绮谷，著珠玑。
现代文：这些年虽获丰收，仍少储蓄，而小人没有盘算，不想久远，嫁娶送终，竞尚豪华，以至贩夫走卒奴婢下人也穿绫罗，戴珍宝首饰。
English: These years, despite the bumper harvest, there is still little savings, and villains do not have a plan, do not want to be far away, marry and send off, compete for luxury, so much so that the peddlers walk, the slaves and servants also wear brocade, wear precious jewelry.

古文：京师尚若斯，何以示四远？
现代文：京师尚且如此，何以能作四方的表率？
English: If this is still the case for the Beijing division, how can it set an example for the four regions?

古文：设张法禁，恳恻分明，而有司惰任，讫不奉行。
现代文：各种法令禁条，恳切明白，而各级衙门官员，怠惰放任，一直不遵照执行。
English: The prohibitions of all kinds of laws and regulations are earnestly clear, but the gate officials at all levels have been lax and have not complied with the implementation.

古文：秋节既立，鸷鸟将用，且复重申，以观后效。 
现代文：秋天来了，不遵法令，必将治罪，顺秋行诛。现再一次重申，以观后效。 
English: Autumn has come, and those who do not obey the law will be punished, and they will be executed in the autumn. Now, I would like to reiterate this once again, with the effect of hindsight.

古文：八月丙申朔，日有食之。鲜卑寇代郡，杀长吏。冬十月，鲜卑寇上谷。
现代文：八月初一，日蚀。鲜卑寇掠代郡，杀长吏。冬十月，鲜卑寇掠上谷。
English: On the first day of August, the sun eclipsed. A fresh brigand robbed the county and killed the magistrate. In winter and October, a fresh brigand robbed Shangguan.

古文：十二月丁巳，中郎将任尚有罪，弃市。
现代文：十二月十八日，中郎将任尚有罪，斩首于市。
English: On December 18th, Zhong Lang was found guilty and beheaded in the city.

古文：是岁，郡国十四地震。
现代文：这年，郡国十四地震。
English: In that year, the 14th earthquake in the county occurred.

古文：六年春二月乙巳，京师及郡国四十二地震，或坼裂，水泉涌出。
现代文：六年春二月十二日，京师及郡国四十二地震，或坼裂，水泉涌出。
English: On the 12th of February in the spring of the sixth year, there was an earthquake in Beijing Division and County 42, or a fissure, and water springs gushed out.

古文：壬子，诏三府选掾属高第，能惠利牧养者各五人，光禄勋与中郎将选孝廉郎宽博有谋、清白行高者五十人，出补令、长、丞、尉。
现代文：十九日，诏令三府选掾属高贵门第，能惠利牧养者各五人，光禄勋与中郎将选孝廉郎宽博有谋、清白行高的五十人，用以补任令、长、丞、尉。
English: On the 19th, the three prefectures were ordered to choose five nobles who could be good shepherds, and Guanglu Xun and Zhonglang were to choose 50 nobles who were noble, virtuous, and honest to fill the posts of commander, captain, major, and lieutenant.

古文：乙卯，诏曰： 夫政，先京师，后诸夏。
现代文：二十二日，诏令说： 政治，先京师，后诸夏。
English: On the 22nd, the imperial edict said: Politics, first Beijing Division, then Zhuxia.

古文：《月令》仲春 养幼小，存诸孤 ，季春 赐贫穷，赈乏绝，省妇使，表贞女 ，所以顺阳气，崇生长也。其赐人尤贫困、孤弱、单独谷，人三斛；贞妇有节义十斛，甄表门闾，旌显厥行。 
现代文：《月令》仲春 养幼小，存诸孤 ，季春 赏赐贫穷，赈济无以为生的，减少妇女劳动，表彰忠节女子 ，是为了顺理阳气，崇尚生长，现令赏赐特困、孤弱、单独的人每人三斛谷；贞节义妇每人十斛。甄别表扬门闾，表扬高尚的德行。 
English: According to the lunar calendar, in the middle of spring, small children should be raised and kept in orphanages, in the spring, poverty should be rewarded, there should be no need to earn a living, women's labor should be reduced, and women who are loyal to the festival should be commended. In order to follow the logic of yang qi and advocate growth, it is now ordered to reward the extremely poor, weak, and single people with three rupees per person; and the virtuous women with ten rupees per person on the festival of chastity. The door of discrimination should be praised, and the noble virtue should be praised.

古文：三月庚辰，始立六宗，祀于洛城西北。
现代文：三月十八日，始立天地四方六宗，祀于洛城西北。
English: On March 18th, six temples in four directions were established and enshrined in the northwest of Los Angeles.

古文：夏四月，会稽大疫，遣光禄大夫将太医循行疾病，赐棺木，除田租、田赋。
现代文：夏四月，会稽时疫流行，派光禄大夫带太医循行治病。死了的赏赐棺木，免除田租、口赋。
English: In the summer of April, when there was an epidemic at the inspection meeting, Dr. Guanglu sent a doctor with a doctor to treat the disease. The dead were rewarded with a coffin, and were exempted from farm rents and subsidies.

古文：沛国，勃海大风，雨雹。
现代文：沛国、勃海大风、下冰雹。
English: The country has been hit by strong winds, high seas and hailstorms.

古文：五月，京师旱。
现代文：五月，京师干旱。
English: In May, there was a drought in Kyoto.

古文：六月丁丑，乐成王宾薨。
现代文：六月十七日，乐成王刘宾逝世。
English: On June 17th, Liu Bin, the king of music, passed away.

古文：丙戌，平原王得薨。
现代文：二十六日，平原王刘得逝世。
English: On the 26th, Liu De, the king of the plain, passed away.

古文：秋七月，鲜卑寇马城，度辽将军邓遵率南单于击破之。
现代文：秋七月，鲜卑寇掠马城，度辽将军邓遵率南单于打败他们。
English: In the autumn and July, the Xianbei corsairs pillaged the city of Ma, and Du Liao's general Deng Zun led Nan Shan to defeat them.

古文：九月癸巳，陈王竦薨。
现代文：九月初四，陈王刘竦逝世。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, Chen Wang Liu Ye passed away.

古文：十二月戊午朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：十二月初一，日蚀，郡国八地震。
English: On the first day of December, the eclipse, the eighth earthquake in the county.

古文：郡国八地震。是岁，永昌、益州蜀郡夷叛，与越巂夷杀长吏，燔城邑，益州刺史张乔讨破降之。
现代文：这年，永昌、益州蜀郡夷反叛，与越巂夷杀长吏，烧城邑，益州刺史张乔打败他并使降附。
English: In this year, Yongchang and Shu County of Yizhou rebelled against the Yi, killed officials and burned towns with the Yue Yi, and Zhang Qiao, the statesman of Yizhou, defeated him and made him surrender.

古文：永宁元年春正月甲辰，任城王安薨。
现代文：永宁元年春正月十七日，任城王刘安逝世。
English: On the seventeenth day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yongning, Liu An, the king of the city, passed away.

古文：三月丁酉，济北王寿薨。
现代文：三月十一日，济北王刘寿逝世。
English: On March 11th, Liu Shou, King of Northern Jilin Province, passed away.

古文：车师后王叛，杀部司马。
现代文：车师后王反叛，杀部司马。
English: The driving instructor, Queen Wang, rebelled and killed Sima.

古文：沈氐羌寇张掖。
现代文：沈氐羌寇掠张掖。
English: Shen Zhen, Zhang Zhen, Zhang Zhen.

古文：夏四月丙寅，立皇子保为皇太子，改元永宁，大赦天下。
现代文：夏四月十一日，立皇子保为皇太子，改元永宁，大赦天下。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, Prince Yasushi was enthroned as crown prince, the era was changed to Yongning, and there was a general amnesty.

古文：赐王、主、三公、列侯下至郎吏、从官金、帛；又赐民爵及布、粟各有差。
现代文：赏赐王、公、三公、列侯下至郎吏、从官金帛；又赐民爵及布粟分别不等。
English: The awards ranged from gold ingots for kings, dukes, three dukes, vassals down to vassals and subordinate officials, as well as burgesses and poppies.

古文：己巳，绍封陈王羡子崇为陈王，济北王子苌为乐成王，河间王子翼为平原王。
现代文：十四日，诏封陈王刘羡子刘崇为陈王，济北王子刘苌为乐成王，河间王子刘翼为平原王。
English: On the 14th, Liu Chong, the son of Liu Enzo, the king of Chen, was crowned as the king of Chen, Liu Xi, the prince of Jibei, was crowned as the king of Lecheng, and Liu Ying, the prince of Kawama, was crowned as the king of the plain.

古文：壬午，琅邪王寿薨。
现代文：二十七日，琅笽王刘寿逝世。
English: On the 27th, Liu Shou passed away.

古文：六月，沈氐种羌叛，寇张掖，护羌校尉马贤讨沈氐羌，破之。
现代文：六月，沈氐种羌反叛，寇张掖，护羌校尉马贤讨伐沈氐羌，打败他。
English: In June, Shen Yao rebelled against Guo Zhangye, and Guo's lieutenant Ma Xian fought against Shen Yao and defeated him.

古文：秋七月乙酉朔，日有食之。冬十月己巳，司空李郃免。
现代文：秋七月初一，日蚀。冬十月十六日，司空李郃免职。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the sun eclipsed. In winter, on October 16th, Sikuo Lijun was relieved of his duties.

古文：癸酉，卫尉庐江陈褒为司空。
现代文：二十日，卫尉庐江陈褒为司空。
English: On the 20th, the guard sergeant, Lijiang River Chen Bao, became the deputy commander.

古文：自三月至是月，京师及郡国三十三大风，雨水。
现代文：自三月至这月，京师及郡国三十三大风，雨水多。
English: From March to this month, there have been 33 major windstorms and a lot of rain in the capital and county.

古文：十二月，永昌徼外掸国谴使贡献。
现代文：十二月，永昌边外掸国遣使纳贡。
English: In December, Yongchang sent envoys to foreign countries to pay tribute.

古文：戊辰，司徒刘恺罢。
现代文：十六日，司徒刘恺罢去。
English: On the 16th, Liu Zhen, a scholar, was dismissed.

古文：辽西鲜卑降。
现代文：辽西鲜卑投降。
English: West Liaoning surrenders.

古文：癸酉，太常杨震为司徒。
现代文：二十一日，任太常杨震为司徒。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Ren Taizhang Yang Zhen became a disciple.

古文：是岁，郡国二十三地震。
现代文：这年，郡国二十三地震。
English: In the same year, the 23rd earthquake hit the county.

古文：夫馀王遣子诣阙贡献。
现代文：夫余王派儿子到帝宫纳贡。
English: Her husband, Yu Wang, sent his son to collect tribute from the imperial palace.

古文：烧当羌叛。
现代文：烧当羌反叛。
English: Burn the donjon and rebel.

古文：建光元年春正月，幽州刺史冯焕率二郡太守讨高句骊、秽貊，不克。
现代文：建光元年春正月，幽州刺史冯焕率领二郡太守讨伐高句骊、犭岁貊，没有克服。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of Jianguang, Feng Huan, the governor of Yuzhou, led the two county governors to fight Gaoguang and Jianye, but did not overcome them.

古文：二月癸亥，大赦天下。
现代文：二月十二日，大赦天下。
English: On February 12th, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：赐诸园贵人、王、主、公、卿以下钱、布各有差。
现代文：赏赐诸园贵人、王、公、主、卿以下钱帛各不等。
English: The gardens reward dignitaries, kings, princes, lords, and nobles with varying amounts of money.

古文：以公、卿、校尉、尚书子弟一人为郎、舍人。
现代文：以公、卿、校尉、尚书子弟一人为郎、舍人。
English: He had three sons, Kimi, Kyo, and Shoko, and one son, Shosho.

古文：三月癸巳，皇太后邓氏崩。
现代文：三月十三日，皇太后邓氏逝世。
English: On March 13, Empress Dowager Deng passed away.

古文：丙午，葬和熹皇后。
现代文：二十六日，葬和熹皇后。
English: On the 26th, the funeral and burial of the Empress was held.

古文：丁未，乐安王宠薨。
现代文：二十七日，乐安王刘宽逝世。
English: On the 27th, Liu Kuan, the king of happiness, passed away.

古文：戊申，追尊皇考清河孝王曰孝德皇。皇妣左氏曰孝德皇后，祖妣宋贵人曰敬隐皇后。
现代文：二十八日，追尊皇考清河孝王为孝德王，皇妣左氏为孝德皇后，祖妣宋贵人为敬隐皇后。
English: On the 28th, Qinghe Prince Xiao Wang was named the Prince of Filial Piety, Emperor Xuanzang was named the Empress of Filial Piety, and Empress Zuo Song was named the Empress of Reverence.

古文：夏四月，秽貊复与鲜卑寇辽东，辽东太守蔡讽追击，战殁。
现代文：夏四月，犭岁貊又与鲜卑寇掠辽东，辽东太守蔡讽追击，战死。
English: In the summer of April, he again plundered Liaodong with the Xinbei bandits, and was pursued by the Liaodong governor Cai Lin, who was killed in the battle.

古文：丙辰，以广川并清河国。
现代文：初六，以广川并入清河国。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, it was merged into Qinghe Province with Guangchuan.

古文：丁巳，尊孝德皇元妃耿氏为甘陵大贵人。
现代文：初七，尊孝德皇元妃耿氏为甘陵大贵人。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the revered German Emperor's daughter Princess Geng became a great noblewoman of Kanling.

古文：甲子，乐成王苌有罪，废为临湖侯。
现代文：十四日，乐成王刘苌有罪，废为临湖侯。
English: On the 14th, Liu Ye, the ruler of Lecheng, was found guilty and deposed as the governor of Linhu.

古文：己巳，令公、卿、特进、侯、中二千石、二千石、郡国守相，举有道之士各一人。赐鳏、寡、孤、独、贫不能自存者谷，人三斛。
现代文：十九日，令公、卿、特进、侯、中二千石、二千石、郡国守相，荐举有道之士各一人，赐鳏、寡、孤、独、穷不能活命的每人三斛谷。
English: On the 19th, the king, the lord, the special envoy, the lord, the middle class of two thousand koku, two thousand koku, the county governor and the minister, recommended one person each with the Tao, and each person who was widowed, widower, orphan, single, and poor and could not live was given Samcheok Valley.

古文：甲戌，辽东属国都尉庞奋，承伪玺书杀玄菟太守姚光。
现代文：二十四日，辽东属国都尉庞奋，接受伪玺书杀玄菟太守姚光。
English: On the 24th, the Liaodong vassal state captain, Pang Fen, accepted the pseudo-script to kill the emperor's bodyguard, Yao Guang.

古文：五月庚辰，特进邓骘及度辽将军邓遵，并以谮自杀。
现代文：五月初一，特进邓骘及度辽将军邓遵，都因诬告自杀。
English: On the first day of May, Deng Yao, the special envoy, and Deng Zun, the general of Du Liao, both committed suicide because of false accusations.

古文：丙申，贬平原王翼为都乡侯。
现代文：十七日，贬平原王刘翼为都乡侯。
English: On the 17th, Liu Ying, the king of the plain, was demoted to the status of capital township.

古文：秋七月己卯，改元建光，大赦天下。
现代文：秋七月初一，改元建光，大赦天下。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the Yuan Dynasty was reformed, and Jian Guang was pardoned.

古文：壬寅，太尉马英薨。
现代文：十四日，太尉马英逝世。
English: On the 14th, Lieutenant Ma Ying passed away.

古文：八月，护羌校尉马贤讨烧当羌于金城，不利。
现代文：八月，护羌校尉马贤讨伐烧当羌于金城，战事不利。
English: In August, Colonel Ma Xian, a garrison officer, was in Jincheng to fight against the logging and burning of rice paddies, but the war turned out unfavorably.

古文：甲子，前司徒刘恺为太尉。
现代文：十六日，任前司徒刘恺为太尉。
English: On the 16th, Liu Ye, a former Sifu, was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant.

古文：鲜卑寇居庸关，九月，云中太守成严击之，战殁。
现代文：鲜卑寇居庸关，九月，云中太守成严击鲜卑，战死。
English: In September, Yunzhong Taizhong was defeated by Xianbei and died in battle.

古文：鲜卑围乌桓校尉于马城，度辽将军耿夔救之。
现代文：鲜卑围乌桓校尉于马城，度辽将军耿夔去援救。
English: Colonel Wu Huan of Xianbei surrounded Macheng, and General Geng Yao of Du Liao came to the rescue.

古文：戊子，幸卫尉冯石府。
现代文：戊子，帝到卫尉冯石府。
English: Boshi, Emperor to Lieutenant Feng Shifu.

古文：是秋，京师及郡国二十九雨水。
现代文：这年秋，京师及郡国二十九雨水。
English: In the autumn of that year, there were 29 rainy days in the capital and the county.

古文：冬十一月己丑，郡国三十五地震，或坼裂。
现代文：冬十一月十二日，郡国三十五地震，或坼裂。
English: In the winter of November 12th, the 35th earthquake in the county occurred, or the fault ruptured.

古文：诏三公以下，各上封事陈得失。遣光禄大夫案行，赐死者钱，人二千。
现代文：诏令三公以下，各秘密上书批评建议，议论利害得失，派光禄大夫巡视，赏赐死了的每人钱二千。
English: The three emperors and their subordinates secretly wrote letters of criticism and suggestions, discussed the gains and losses, sent Dr. Guanglu to inspect, and rewarded each dead person with two thousand money.

古文：除今年田租。
现代文：免除今年田租。
English: This year's field rent will be waived.

古文：其被灾甚者，勿收口赋。
现代文：遭灾特重的免收人口税。
English: People who were severely affected by the disaster are exempt from paying the population tax.

古文：鲜卑寇玄菟。
现代文：鲜卑寇掠玄菟。
English: A fresh-faced goblin raiding a goblin.

古文：庚子，复断大臣二千石以上服三年丧。
现代文：二十三日，再停止大臣二千石以上服三年丧。
English: On the 23rd, the minister of more than 2,000 koku was suspended for three years.

古文：癸卯，诏三公、特进、侯、卿、校尉，举武猛堪将帅者各五人。
现代文：二十六日，诏令三公、特进、侯、卿、校尉，荐举堪任将帅的武猛人士各五人。
English: On the 26th, the imperial edict was issued to appoint three princes, a special envoy, a marquess, a lord, and a lieutenant, and to nominate five men of valor who were worthy of being appointed as generals.

古文：丙午，诏京师及郡国被水雨份稼者，随顷亩减田租。
现代文：二十九日，诏京师及郡国被水灾损害了庄稼的，按田亩减少田租。
English: On the 29th, the Beijing Division and the county were damaged by floods, and the field rent was reduced by the mu.

古文：甲子，初置渔阳营兵。
现代文：甲子，初置渔阳营兵。
English: Kaozi, initially placed Yuyang battalion.

古文：冬十二月，高句骊、马韩、秽貊围玄菟城，夫馀王遣子与州、郡并力讨破之。
现代文：冬十二月，高句骊、马韩、犭岁貊围攻玄菟城，夫馀王派儿子与州郡合力把他们打败。
English: In the winter of December, Gao Guzheng, Ma Han, and Xian Liancheng besieged Xuanzang, and Yu Wang sent his son to work with the county to defeat them.

古文：延光元年春二月，夫馀王遣子将兵救玄菟，击高句骊、马韩、秽貊，破之，遂遣使贡献。
现代文：延光元年春二月，夫余王派儿子统兵救玄菟，攻击高句骊、马韩、犭岁貊，把他们打败，于是派使者纳贡。
English: In the spring and February of the first year of Yan Guang, her husband, Yu Wang, sent his son to lead an army to rescue Xuanzang, attack Gao Guanqian, Ma Han, and Jian Ye, defeat them, and then sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：三月丙午，改元延光。
现代文：三月初二，改元延光。
English: On the second day of March, the era name was changed to Enko.

古文：大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：还徙者，复户邑属籍。
现代文：返回迁移的，恢复户口籍贯。
English: Those who have returned to their place of residence will have their residence registration reinstated.

古文：赐民爵及三老、孝悌、力田，人二级；加赐鳏、寡、孤、独、笃癃、贫不能自存者粟，人三斛；贞妇帛，人二匹。
现代文：赏赐民爵及三老、孝悌、力田每人二级；加赐鳏、寡、孤、独、患绝症、穷得不能活下去的每人粟三斛；贞节妇人每人帛二匹。
English: People's nobles and elders, filial sons and daughters, and powerful peasants will each receive a second-class cow; those who are widows, widowers, orphans, and the terminally ill, and those who are too poor to survive, will each receive three millet cows; and those who are virtuous women will each receive two millet cows.

古文：夏四月癸未，京师郡国二十一雨雹。
现代文：夏四月初九，京师郡国二十一处下冰雹。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of summer, hail fell in 21 places in Jingshi County.

古文：癸巳，司空陈褒免。
现代文：十九日，司空陈褒免职。
English: On the 19th, Sikyong Chen Bao was relieved of his duties.

古文：五月庚戌，宗正彭城刘授为司空。
现代文：五月初七，任宗正彭城刘授为司空。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month of the year, Zong Zheng appointed Pengcheng Liu Zhu as the secretary.

古文：己巳，改乐成国为安平，封河间王开子得为安平王。
现代文：二十六日，改乐成国为安平，封河间王刘开子刘得为安平王。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the country was changed to Anping, and Liu Kaizi, the son of Liu, the king of Huanan, became the king of Anping.

古文：六月，郡国蝗。
现代文：六月，郡国蝗灾。
English: In June, the locust infestation in the county began.

古文：秋七月癸卯，京师及郡国十三地震。
现代文：秋七月初一，京师及郡国十三地震。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, there was an earthquake in the capital and thirteen counties.

古文：高句骊降。
现代文：高句骊降服。
English: A high-pitched chant of surrender.

古文：虔人羌叛，攻谷罗城，度辽将军耿夔讨破之。
现代文：虔人羌反叛，攻打谷罗城，度辽将军耿夔把他们打败。
English: The pious people rebelled and attacked the city of Gulao, and the Liao general Geng Liao defeated them.

古文：八月戊子，阳陵园寝火。
现代文：八月十六日，阳陵园寝起火。
English: On August 16th, the Yangling Garden caught fire.

古文：辛卯，九真言黄龙见无功。
现代文：十九日，九真上言黄龙现无功。
English: On the 19th, Jiu Zhen said that Huanglong had no effect.

古文：己亥，诏三公、中二千石，举刺史、二千石、令、长、相，视事一岁以上至十岁，清白爱利、能赖身率下、防奸理烦、有益于人者，无拘官簿。刺史举所部，郡国太守、相举墨绶，隐亲悉心，勿取浮华。
现代文：二十七日，诏令三公、中二千石，举荐刺史、二千石、令、长、相，视事一岁以上至十岁，清白爱民利民，自身勤勉率下，防止奸诈调理繁杂，有益于人的人，不一定按常规晋升，可以越级提升，刺史荐举部下，郡国太守相荐举墨绶，不表现自己，尽心公务，而不是浮华不实的人。 
English: On the 27th day of the month, the three princes of the imperial edict, the middle two thousand stones, the scribe of the imperial edict, the scribe of the imperial edict, the chief of the imperial edict, the chief of the imperial edict, the chief of the imperial edict, the chief of the imperial edict, the scribe of the imperial edict, the scribe of the imperial edict, the scribe of the imperial edict, the scribe of the imperial edict, the scribe of the imperial edict, the scribe of the imperial edict, the scribe of the imperial edict, the scribe of the imperial edict, the s

古文：九月甲戌，郡国二十七地震。
现代文：九月甲戌，郡国二十七地震。
English: September, Jiaxuan, the county's 27th earthquake.

古文：冬十月，鲜卑寇雁门、定襄。
现代文：冬十月，鲜卑寇掠雁门、定襄。
English: In winter and October, the fresh grasshopper raided the wild goose gate and Dingxiang.

古文：十一月，鲜卑寇太原。
现代文：十一月，鲜卑寇太原。
English: November, fresh berries from Taiyuan.

古文：烧光羌豪降。
现代文：烧当羌首领降服。
English: Burn the leaders of the Dangdang Rebellion into submission.

古文：十二月，九真徼外蛮夷贡献内属。
现代文：十二月，九真边外蛮夷纳贡内附。
English: In December, tributes were paid to the barbarians outside Jiuzhen.

古文：是岁，京师及郡国二十七雨水，大风，杀人。
现代文：这年，京师及郡国二十七雨水，大风，杀人。
English: In this year, rain, high winds, and homicides occurred in 27 cities and counties in Beijing.

古文：诏赐压、溺死者年七岁以上钱，人二千；其坏败庐舍、失亡谷食，粟，人三斛；又田被淹伤者，一切勿收田租；若一家皆被灾害而弱小存者，郡、县为收敛之。
现代文：诏令赏赐压死溺死的在七岁以上每人二千钱；庐舍损坏，失去食谷的每人发粟三斛；又稻田被淹伤的，一律不收田租；若一家被灾仅存弱小的，郡县为收殓死者。
English: The edict awarded 2,000 yuan to every person over the age of seven who was crushed to death and drowned; every person whose rice house was damaged and who lost food grains was given three millets; and if the rice field was flooded, no field rent was collected; if only a small family was affected by the disaster, the county was to collect the dead.

古文：虔人羌反，攻谷罗城，度辽将军耿夔讨破之。
现代文：虔人羌攻谷罗城，度辽将军耿夔讨伐打败他们。
English: The pious people besieged the city of Gulao, and the Du Liao general Geng Liao fought and defeated them.

古文：二年春正月，旄牛夷叛，寇灵关，杀县令。
现代文：二年春正月，旄牛夷反叛，寇掠灵关，杀县令。
English: In the first month of the second year of Spring, the Yaks rebelled, raided Lingguan, and ordered the killing of the county.

古文：益州刺史蜀郡西部都尉讨之。
现代文：益州刺史蜀郡西部都尉讨伐他们。
English: The western captain of Yizhou Zhishi Shu County fought against them.

古文：诏选三署郎及吏人能通《古文尚书》、《毛诗》、《谷梁春秋》各一人。
现代文：诏令选拔三署郎及吏人能通晓《古文尚书》、《毛诗》、《谷梁春秋》的各一人。
English: The edict called for the selection of a third-ranking official and an official who could read "Kobun Shosho," "Mao Shi" and "Guliang Chunqiu."

古文：丙辰，河东、颍川大风。
现代文：十六日，河东、颍川大风。
English: On the 16th, there was a strong wind in the east of Hebei Province and the Beichuan River.

古文：夏六月壬午，郡国十一大风。
现代文：夏六月十五日，郡国十一大风。
English: On the fifteenth day of the sixth month of summer, the eleventh typhoon of the year hit the county.

古文：九真言嘉禾生。
现代文：九真报告生长嘉禾。
English: Jiuzhen reports growth of Jiahe.

古文：丙申，北海王普薨。
现代文：二十九日，北海王刘普逝世。
English: On the 29th, the king of the North Sea, Liu Pu, passed away.

古文：秋七月，丹阳山崩。
现代文：秋七月，丹阳山崩。
English: In autumn and July, landslides in Danyang.

古文：八月庚午，初令三署郎通达经术任牧民者，视事三岁以上，皆得察举。
现代文：八月初四，开始命令三署郎通达经术能治国管理老百姓的，视事三岁以上，都得考察举荐。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month of the year, it began to order the three subordinates to investigate and recommend those who are able to govern the country and manage the people, regardless of whether they are over three years old.

古文：九月，郡国五雨水。
现代文：九月，郡国五雨水。
English: In September, the county received five inches of rain.

古文：冬十月辛未，太尉刘恺罢。
现代文：冬十月初六，太尉刘恺罢去。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, Lieutenant Liu Yao was dismissed.

古文：甲戌，司徒杨震为太尉，光禄勋东莱刘憙为司徒。
现代文：初九，任司徒杨震为太尉，光禄勋东莱刘熹为司徒。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Yang Zhen, who was appointed as an apprentice, became a second lieutenant, and Guanglu Shun Donglai Liu Qi became an apprentice.

古文：十一月甲辰，校猎上林苑。
现代文：十一月初九，帝校猎上林苑。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month, the imperial school went hunting in the forest.

古文：鲜卑败南匈奴于曼柏。
现代文：鲜卑在曼柏打败南匈奴。
English: Xianbei defeated the Southern Xiongnu in Manbij.

古文：是岁，分蜀郡西部为属国都尉。
现代文：这年，分蜀国西部为属国都尉。
English: In this year, the western part of Benshu Province became a provincial capital.

古文：京师及郡国三地震。
现代文：京师及郡国三地震。
English: The third earthquake in the history of Beijing and Shandong Province.

古文：三年春二月丙子，东巡狩。
现代文：三年春二月十三日，帝视察东部。
English: In the spring of the third year, on February 13th, the emperor inspected the east.

古文：丁丑，告陈留太守，祠南顿君、光武皇帝于济阳，复济阳今年田租、刍稿。
现代文：十四日告陈留太守，祭祀南顿君、光武皇帝于济阳，免除济阳今年田租、刍稿。
English: On the 14th, they reported to Chen Ruzhu, the de facto ruler of Jinyang, to offer sacrifices to Nantongjun and Emperor Guangwu in Jiyang, and to exempt Jiyang from this year's field rent and land tax.

古文：庚寅，遣使者祠唐尧于成阳。
现代文：二十七日，派使者祭祀唐尧于成阳。
English: On the 27th, an emissary was sent to worship Tang Xuan in Chengyang.

古文：戊子，济南上言，凤皇集台县丞霍收舍树上。
现代文：二十五日，济南报告，凤凰集于台县丞霍收住舍树上。
English: On the 25th, Jinan reported that the phoenixes gathered on the tree of the house in the county of Taishan.

古文：赐台长帛五十匹、丞二十匹、尉半之、吏卒人三匹。
现代文：赏赐台县长帛五十匹，丞二十匹，尉半数，吏卒每人三匹。
English: Taishan prefectural governors were awarded with 50 yakitori, county commissioners with 20 yakitori, county commissioners with half a yakitori, and county officials with three yakitori.

古文：凤皇所过亭部，无出今年田租。
现代文：凤凰所过行人停留的亭子及衙署，免出今年田租。
English: The pavilion where pedestrians stop and the station where the phoenix passes are exempt from this year's field rent.

古文：赐男子爵，人二级。
现代文：赐男子爵，每人二级。
English: Awarded a knighthood, second class to each of them.

古文：辛卯，幸太山，柴告岱宗。
现代文：二十八日，帝到泰山，望岱宗燔柴告天。
English: On the 28th, the emperor arrived at Mount Taishan, and Wanzhong Zong Baichai went to heaven.

古文：齐王无忌、北海王翼、乐安王延来朝。
现代文：齐王刘无忌、北海王刘翼、乐安王刘延前来朝拜。
English: The king of Qi Liu Mubi, the king of the North Sea Liu Ying, and the king of Le'an Liu Yan came to pay homage.

古文：壬辰，宗祀五帝于汶上明堂。
现代文：二十九日，在汶上明堂祭祀五帝。
English: On the 29th, the Five Emperors were enshrined in Wen Shangming Hall.

古文：癸巳，告祀二祖、六宗，劳赐郡、县，作乐。
现代文：三十日，告祀高祖、光武二祖，告祀孝文、孝武、孝宣、孝元、孝明、孝章六宗，慰劳赏赐郡县，作乐。
English: On the 30th, the two patriarchs Gao Zu and Guangwu were worshipped, and the six sects of Xiaowen, Xiaowu, Xiaoxuan, Xiaoyuan, Xiaoming and Xiaozhang were worshipped, and the county and county were rewarded for their hard work and made music.

古文：三月甲午，陈王崇薨。
现代文：三月初一，陈王刘崇逝世。
English: On March 1, Chen Wang Liu Chong passed away.

古文：戊戌，祀孔子及七十二弟子于阙里，自鲁相、令、丞、尉及孔氏亲属、妇女、诸生悉会，赐褒成侯以下帛各有差。
现代文：初五，在阙里祭祀孔子及七十二弟子，自鲁相、令、丞、尉及孔氏亲属、妇女、诸生都参与集会，赏赐褒成侯以下帛分别不等。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Confucius and his seventy-two disciples were worshipped in Bali. People from Rusang, Rong, Rong, Rong, Rong, and relatives of the Confucius family, women, and all walks of life participated in the gathering.

古文：还，幸东平，至东郡，历魏郡、河内。
现代文：返还，帝到东平，至东郡，经历魏郡、河内。
English: Returning, the emperor went to Dongping and Dong County, passing through Wei County and Hanoi.

古文：壬戌，车驾还京师，幸太学。
现代文：二十九日，帝回京师，到太学。
English: On the 29th, the emperor returned to Beijing to teach and went to Taigaku.

古文：是日，太尉杨震免。
现代文：这天，太尉杨震免职。
English: On this day, Second Lieutenant Yang Zhen was relieved of duty.

古文：夏四月乙丑，车驾入宫，假于祖祢。
现代文：夏四月初二，帝入宫，至父神主庙。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the emperor entered the palace and went to the main temple of Father God.

古文：壬戌，沛国言甘露降丰县。
现代文：壬戌，沛国报告丰县得及时雨。
English: Nanshan, Pei Guo reported that Feng County received timely rain.

古文：戊辰，光禄勋冯石为太尉。
现代文：任光禄勋冯石为太尉。
English: Ren Guanglu Honors Feng Shi as Second Lieutenant.

古文：五月，南匈奴左曰逐王叛，使匈奴中郎将马翼讨破之。
现代文：五月，南匈奴左日逐王反叛，派匈奴中郎将马翼把他打败。
English: In May, the Southern Xiongnu rebelled against the king on the left day, and sent the middle Xiongnu to defeat him.

古文：曰南徼外蛮夷内属。
现代文：日南边外蛮夷内附。
English: Nichinanbe Sotoba Barbarian Invaders, with a crescent moon.

古文：六月，鲜卑寇玄菟。
现代文：六月，鲜卑寇玄菟。
English: In June, Xuan Zang, a fresh-faced rooster, was born.

古文：庚午，阆中山崩。
现代文：初八，阆中山崩。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, a landslide occurred in the middle of the day.

古文：辛未，扶风言白鹿见雍。
现代文：初九，扶风报告白鹿出现于雍。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the wind reports that a white deer has appeared in Yong.

古文：辛巳，遣侍御史分行青、冀二州灾害，督录盗贼。
现代文：十九日，派侍御史分别视察青、冀二州灾害。督促逮捕盗贼。
English: On the 19th, he sent an attendant to inspect the disasters in Qinghai and Hebei Provinces, and urged the arrest of the thieves.

古文：秋七月丁酉，初复右校、左校令丞官。
现代文：秋七月初六，开始恢复右校、左校令丞官。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, the right school and the left school began to resume.

古文：日南徼外蛮豪帅诣阙贡献。
现代文：日南边外蛮豪帅到宫阙纳贡。
English: On the south side of the sun, a great warrior came to pay tribute to Miyazaki.

古文：冯翊言甘露降频阳、衙。
现代文：冯翊报告频阳、衙得及时雨。
English: Feng Rong reported frequent sunshine and timely rain.

古文：颍川上言木连理。
现代文：颍川报告生长木连理。
English: Hijikawa reports that the growth of the tree has stabilized.

古文：白鹿、麒麟见阳翟。鲜卑寇高柳。
现代文：阳翟出现白鹿、麒麟。鲜卑寇掠高柳。
English: White deer and giraffes appear in impotence. A fresh-faced roe deer raids a willow tree.

古文：梁王坚薨。
现代文：梁王刘坚逝世。
English: Liang Wang Liu Jian passed away.

古文：八月辛已，大鸿胪耿宝为大将军。
现代文：八月二十日，任大鸿胪耿宝为大将军。
English: On August 20th, Geng Bao was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：戊子，颍川上言麒麟一、白虎二见阳翟。
现代文：二十七日，颍川报告阳翟出现麒麟一只，白虎二只。
English: On the 27th, Xingchuan reported that one unicorn and two white tigers appeared in Yangshuo.

古文：九月丁酉，废皇太子保为济阴王。
现代文：九月初七，废皇太子刘保为济阴王。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month, the former crown prince Liu Bao became the king of Jiyin.

古文：乙巳，诏郡国中都官死罪系囚减罪一等，诣敦煌、陇西及度辽营；其右趾以下及亡命者赎，各有差。
现代文：十五日，诏令郡国中都官对死罪系囚减罪一等，遣送敦煌、陇西及度辽营；刖右脚以下及亡命的赎罪，分别不等。
English: On the 15th, the county's vice-governor decreed that the death-penalty prisoner's crime would be reduced to the first class, and he would be sent to Dunhuang, Shaanxi and Du Liao camp; the atonement of the right foot and the death penalty would be different.

古文：壬午，新丰上言凤皇集西界亭。
现代文：二十一日，济南报告历城出现黄龙。三十日，日蚀。冬十月，帝到长安。二十二日，新丰报告西界亭有凤凰飞集。
English: On the 21st, Jinan reported that a yellow dragon appeared in Licheng. On the 30th, a solar eclipse. In winter and October, the emperor came to Chang'an. On the 22nd, Xinfeng reported that there was a phoenix flying set in the West Pavilion.

古文：丁亥，会三辅守、令、掾史于长安，作乐。
现代文：二十七日，会集三辅守、令、掾史于长安，作乐。
English: On the 27th, the three auxiliary governors, Ling, and Zou Shi gathered in Chang'an to make music.

古文：闰月乙未，祠高庙，遂有事十一陵，历观上林、昆明池。
现代文：闰十月初六，祭祀高庙，祭祀十一陵，历观上林、昆明池。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the leap year, the high temple will be dedicated, the eleven mausoleums will be dedicated, and the Liguang Shanglin and Kunming Pond will be dedicated.

古文：遣使者祠太上皇于万年，以中牢祠萧何、曹参、霍光。
现代文：派使者祭祀太上皇于万年，以猪羊祭祀萧何、曹参、霍光。
English: Envoys were sent to offer sacrifices to the Great Retired Emperor for 10,000 years, and pigs and sheep were used to offer sacrifices to Xiao He, Cao San, and Huo Guang.

古文：十一月乙丑，至自长安。
现代文：十一月初六，帝自长安回宫。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month, the emperor returned to the palace from Chang'an.

古文：十二月乙未，琅邪言黄龙见诸县。
现代文：十二月初七，琅笽报告诸县出现黄龙。
English: On the 7th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, it was reported that yellow dragons appeared in various counties.

古文：是岁，京师及郡国二十三地震；三十六雨水，疾风，雨雹。
现代文：这年，京师及郡国二十三地震；三十六雨水、疾风、下冰雹。
English: In this year, there were 23 earthquakes in the capital and county, and 36 rain, wind and hailstorms.

古文：四年春正月壬午，东郡言黄龙二、麒麟一见濮阳。
现代文：四年春正月二十四日，东郡报告濮阳出现黄龙二、麒麟一。
English: On the 24th day of the first month of the fourth year of Spring, Dong County reported that Huanglong II and Kirin I appeared in Fenyang.

古文：二月乙亥，下邳王衍薨。
现代文：二月乙亥，下邳王刘衍逝世。
English: In February of the Year of the Boar, Liu Yan, the king of the Lower Han Dynasty, passed away.

古文：甲辰，南巡狩。
现代文：十七日，帝视察南部。三月初一，日蚀。
English: On the 17th, the emperor inspected the south, and on the first day of March, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：三月戊午朔，日有食之。
现代文：初三，帝到宛，身体不舒适。
English: In the third year of junior high school, my body was not comfortable.

古文：庚申，幸宛，帝不豫。辛酉，令大将军耿宝行太尉事。
现代文：初四，令大将军耿宝代行太尉工作。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, Geng Bao was appointed acting captain.

古文：祠章陵园庙，告长沙、零陵太守，祠定王、节侯、郁林府君。
现代文：祭祀章陵园庙，告长沙、零陵太守，祭祀定王、节侯、郁林府君。
English: Ceremonies will be held to celebrate the tombs, gardens and temples, to pay respects to the governors of Changsha and Luling, and to honor King Ding, Prince Jie and the governor of Yulin.

古文：乙丑，自宛还。
现代文：初八帝从宛还。
English: The first eight emperors returned from exile.

古文：丁卯，幸叶，帝崩于乘舆，年三十二。
现代文：初十，帝到叶，逝世于乘舆中，年三十二。
English: He was in his early teens when he died at the age of thirty-two.

古文：秘不敢宣，所在上食问起居如故。
现代文：秘不敢宣，所到之处上食问起居照旧。
English: They dare not divulge their secrets, and ask for food and shelter wherever they go.

古文：庚午，还宫。
现代文：十三日，还宫。
English: On the 13th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：辛未夕，乃发丧。
现代文：十四日晚，发丧。
English: On the evening of the 14th, the funeral was held.

古文：尊皇后为皇太后。太后临朝，以后兄大鸿胪阎显为车骑将军，定策禁中，立章帝孙济北惠王寿子北乡侯懿。
现代文：尊皇后为皇太后，太后临朝执政，以后兄大鸿胪阎显为车骑将军，定策宫中，立章帝孙济北惠王刘寿子北乡侯刘懿为帝。
English: The respected empress was the empress dowager, and the empress dowager ruled the imperial court. Later, her brother, the Great Hungaria Yanxian, became the general of chariots and cavalry. In the palace of decision-making, the emperor's grandson, the Jibei Hui King Liu Shouzi, and the Beixiang Hou Liu Ye became the emperor.

古文：甲戌，济南王香薨。
现代文：十七日，济南王刘香逝世。
English: On the 17th, King Liu Xiang of Jinan passed away.

古文：乙酉，北乡侯即皇帝位。
现代文：二十八日，北乡侯即皇帝位。
English: On the 28th, Hokusho became emperor.

古文：夏四月丁酉，太尉冯石为太傅，司徒刘熹为太尉，参录尚书事；前司空李郃为司徒。
现代文：夏四月十一日，任太尉冯石为太傅，司徒刘熹为太尉，参与总领尚书事务；任前司空李郃为司徒。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of the summer, Lieutenant Feng Shi was appointed as Taifu, and Sutor Liu Wei was appointed as Taifu to participate in the affairs of the commander-in-chief Shangshu; former Siku Li Wei was appointed as Sutor.

古文：辛卯，大将军耿宝、中常侍樊丰、侍中谢惲、周广、乳母野王君王圣，坐相阿党，丰、惲、广下狱死，宝自杀，圣徙雁门。
现代文：初五，大将军耿宝、中常侍樊丰、侍中谢恽、周广、乳母野王君王圣，因结党阴谋不轨，樊丰、谢恽、周广监死狱中，耿宝自杀，王圣遣送去雁门。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the general Geng Bao, the middle-ranking attendant Yu Feng, the attendant Xie Yao, Zhou Guang, and the nanny Yang Wang Guo Wang Sheng, fell foul of a conspiracy to form a party; Yu Feng, Xie Yao, and Zhou Guang were sentenced to death in prison; Geng Bao committed suicide, and Wang Sheng was sent to the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：己酉，葬孝安皇帝于恭陵。庙曰恭宗。
现代文：二十三日，葬孝安皇帝于恭陵，尊称庙号为恭宗。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Xiao'an was buried in the Gongling Mausoleum, and the temple was called the Gongzong.

古文：六月乙巳，大赦天下。
现代文：六月二十日，大赦天下。
English: On June 20th, the amnesty went into effect.

古文：诏先帝巡狩所幸，皆半入今年田租。
现代文：诏令先帝巡视所到之处，都半入今年田租。
English: According to the edict, half of the land rent of the year was to be paid to the emperor wherever he went on inspection.

古文：秋七月，西域长史班勇击车师后王，斩之。
现代文：秋七月，西域长史班勇攻击车师后王，把他杀掉。
English: In autumn and July, the governor of the western region, Ban Yong, attacked the driver, Hou Wang, and killed him.

古文：丙午，东海王肃薨。
现代文：二十一日，东海王刘肃逝世。
English: On the twenty-first day, the East Sea King Liu Su passed away.

古文：冬十月丙午，越巂山崩。
现代文：冬十月二十二日，越巂山崩。
English: On the 22nd day of October in winter, a landslide occurred in Yueqi.

古文：辛亥，少帝薨。
现代文：二十七日，少帝逝世。
English: On the 27th, the young emperor passed away.

古文：是冬，京师大疫。
现代文：这年冬，京师疾疫流行。
English: In the winter of that year, an epidemic broke out in Beijing.

古文：论曰：孝安虽称尊享御，而权归邓氏，至乃损彻膳服，克念政道。
现代文：史家评论说： 安帝虽称尊统治天下，而权柄掌握在邓太后手中，以至衣食菲薄，能尽心政务。
English: Historians commented: Although Emperor An said that he would rule the world, the power was in the hands of Empress Dowager Deng, who was so poorly fed and clothed that she was able to do her best in government affairs.

古文：然令自房帷，威不逮远，始失根统，归成陵敝。遂复计金授官，移民逃寇，推咎台衡，以答天眚。
现代文：然号令出自宫房帷幕，声威不能远及，开始失去根本，终于形成汉家衰败的局面，且竟然计入钱谷鬻官卖爵，移民内迁逃避羌寇，推咎于三公，以答对上天的过失。
English: However, the call came from the palace curtain, the voice could not be far away, and it began to lose its foundation, finally forming the situation of the Han Dynasty's decline, and it was even included in the sale of Qiangu eunuchs, the migration of immigrants to escape the invaders, and blamed on the three princes to answer the fault of heaven.

古文：既云哲妇，亦 惟家之索 矣。
现代文：这就是所谓 哲夫成城，哲妇倾城，牛七鸡司晨，国家一定颓败了。  
English: This is the so-called "philosopher into the city, philosopher woman into the city, cow seven chickens into the morning, the country must have been defeated."

古文：赞曰：安德不升，秕我王度。
现代文：史家颂赞说： 安帝德行不高，政教不行。
English: Historians said in their eulogies: "Andean virtue is not high, politics and religion are not good."

古文：降夺储嫡，开萌邪蠹。
现代文：立皇太子，旋又信谮废去，为江京等的邪蠹行为开绿灯。
English: The establishment of the crown prince, the spin and the belief and the waste, and the green light for the evil behavior of Jiangjing and others.

古文：冯石承欢，杨公逢怒。
现代文：特别宠幸卫尉冯石，并任为太傅。
English: Feng Shi, the guard lieutenant, was especially favored, and he was appointed as the grand master.

古文：彼日而微，遂祲天路。
现代文：又听信樊丰的谮言，免去太尉杨震。
English: He also listened to the criticisms of Xin Yufeng and removed First Lieutenant Yang Zhen.

