古文：谯国夫人洗氏者，高凉人也。
现代文：谯国夫人洗氏，是高凉人。
English: The lady of Shandong Province, Ms. Sae, is a cool person.

古文：世为南越首领，部落十余万家。
现代文：先世是南越的首领。部族有十多万家。
English: He was the leader of South Vietnam in a previous life. The tribe has more than a hundred thousand members.

古文：夫人幼贤明，在父母家，抚循部众，能行军用师，压服诸越。
现代文：夫人自幼贤慧明达。在父母家时，抚慰部众，能指挥军队，压制降服南越诸部。
English: Since she was a child, my wife has been wise and intelligent. When she was at her parents' home, she was able to soothe the troops, command the army, and suppress and subjugate the South Vietnamese troops.

古文：每劝宗族为善，由是信义结于本乡。
现代文：常劝宗族人行善，因此在本乡建有信义。
English: He often exhorts his family members to do good deeds, so he has built up a sense of loyalty in his hometown.

古文：越人俗好相攻击，夫人兄南梁州刺史挺恃其富强，侵掠傍郡，岭表苦之。
现代文：越地人风俗喜好互相攻杀，夫人的哥哥南梁州刺史洗挺自恃其国富民强，侵犯掠夺邻近各郡，岭南人被他害得很苦。
English: The Viets attacked and killed each other according to their customs and preferences. My wife's brother, Nan Liang Zhou Zhishi Ying, boasted that his country was rich and strong, and invaded and plundered neighboring counties. The Lingnan people suffered a lot from him.

古文：夫人多所规谏，由是怨隙止息，海南儋耳归附者千余洞。
现代文：夫人经常劝谏，由此怨仇消除。海南儋耳族归顺降服的有一千多洞。
English: His wife often advised him, and thus the grudge was eliminated. There are more than a thousand caves where the Hainan Mule people surrendered.

古文：梁大同初，罗州刺史冯融闻夫人有志行，为其子高凉太守宝聘以为妻。
现代文：梁武帝大同初年，罗州刺史冯融听说夫人很有志向操守。就给他的儿子高凉太守冯宝娶为妻子。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Liangwu, Luozhou ruler Feng Rong heard that his wife was very ambitious. He married his son Gao Liang Taizhou Feng Bao.

古文：融本北燕苗裔也。
现代文：冯融原是北燕的后代。
English: Feng Rongyuan is a descendant of Bei Yan.

古文：初，冯弘之南投，遣融大父业以三百人浮海归宋，因留于新会。
现代文：当初，冯弘向南投奔高丽的时候，派遣冯融的祖父冯业带领三百人漂洋过海归顺宋朝。留在新会。
English: At first, when Feng Hong went to Nantou to visit Korea, he sent Feng Rong's grandfather Feng Ye to lead three hundred people to cross the sea and return to the Song Dynasty.

古文：自业及融，三世为守牧，他乡羁旅，号令不行。
现代文：从冯业到冯融，三代做守牧，旅居他乡，命令都不执行。
English: From Feng Ye to Feng Rong, three generations of herdsmen, living in other villages, do not carry out orders.

古文：至夫人诫约本宗，使从百姓礼。
现代文：由此，夫人告诫自家宗室，让他们遵从百姓礼法。
English: As a result, the lady admonished her own family and told them to follow the folk etiquette.

古文：每与夫宝，参决辞讼，首领有犯法者，虽是亲族，无所纵舍。
现代文：常与丈夫冯宝，参预决策诉讼，首领有触犯法令的，即使是亲族，也不放任不管。
English: She and her husband, Feng Bao, often take part in pre-decision-making proceedings. If the leader has violated the law, even if they are relatives, they will not be left alone.

古文：自此，政令有序，人莫敢违。
现代文：从此，政令都有秩序，人们不敢违犯。
English: From then on, all government decrees were in order, and people dared not violate them.

古文：后遇候景反，广州都督萧勃征兵援台，高州刺史李迁仕据大皋口，遣召宝。
现代文：后来碰上侯景反叛，广州都督萧勃征兵救援台阁，高州刺史李迁仕占据大皋口，派人召请冯宝。
English: Later, when he encountered the rebellion of Hou Jing, the governor of Guangzhou, Xiao Bo, set up a conscription rescue table, and the governor of Gaozhou, Zhishi Li Qian, occupied the Great Gate and sent someone to summon Feng Bao.

古文：宝欲往，夫人疑其反，止之。
现代文：冯宝想前往，夫人怀疑李迁仕谋反，就制止冯宝。
English: Feng Bao wanted to go, but his wife suspected that Li Qian was plotting a rebellion and stopped Feng Bao.

古文：数日，迁仕果反，遣主帅杜平虏率兵入灨石。
现代文：几天后，李迁仕果然反叛，派主帅杜平虏带兵进入氵赣石。
English: A few days later, Li Qianshi indeed rebelled and sent head coach Du Pingru to lead the troops into Shanshi.

古文：宝以告，夫人曰： 平虏入灨，与官兵相拒，势未得还，迁仕在州，无能为也。
现代文：冯宝把消息告诉夫人，夫人说： 杜平虏进入氵赣石，和官军相对抗，势必不能回。李迁仕在州府，不能有所作为。
English: Feng Bao told the news to his wife, who said: "Du Pingru entered Shaoshi to oppose the government army and will not be able to return. Li Qianshi is at the state capital and cannot make a difference.

古文：宜遣使诈之，云： 身未敢出，欲遣妇往参。 
现代文：应该遣使者欺骗他，说： 自身不敢出城，想派妇人前去参战。 
English: He should have sent a messenger to deceive him, saying, "I am afraid to go out of the city, and I will send a woman to the battle."

古文：彼必无防虑。
现代文：他一定不会防备担心。
English: He's not going to worry about it.

古文：我将千余人，步担杂物，唱言输赕，得至栅下，贼变可图。 
现代文：我带领一千多人，步行担着各种东西，声称是输财赎罪，能够到达栅栏下，贼兵就可以谋取了。 
English: I led more than a thousand people, carrying all kinds of things on foot, claiming to atone for the loss of wealth, and if I could get under the fence, the thieves could get it.

古文：从之。
现代文：冯宝听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：迁仕果大喜，觇夫人众皆提物，不设备。
现代文：李迁仕果然大喜，窥视夫人带的人都担着东西，不加防备。
English: Li Qian Shi was really overjoyed. People who peeped at his wife were carrying things, without any precaution.

古文：夫人击之，大捷。
现代文：夫人攻打他，大胜。
English: His wife fought him and won.

古文：因总兵与长城侯陈霸先会于灨石。
现代文：于是统领军队在氵赣石和长城侯陈霸先会合。
English: As a result, the leaders of the army met with Chen Baxian, the Marquis of the Great Wall, in Shanshi.

古文：还谓宝曰： 陈都督极得众心，必能平贼，君厚资给之。 
现代文：回来后对冯宝说： 陈都督很得众人拥护，一定能平定叛贼，您要给他丰厚的资助。 
English: After returning, he said to Feng Bao, "Chen Tudou has won the support of many people. He will surely be able to suppress the traitors. You should give him generous funding.

古文：及宝卒，岭表大乱，夫人怀集百越，数州晏然。
现代文：冯宝死后，岭南大乱，夫人召集百越，数州安逸。
English: After the death of Feng Bao, the Lingnan War broke out, and his wife called together more than a hundred Vietnams, and several states were at ease.

古文：陈永定二年，其子仆年九岁，遣帅诸首领朝于丹阳，拜阳春郡守。
现代文：陈朝永定二年，她儿子冯仆九岁，派他带领许多首领在丹阳朝见天子，授阳春郡守。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongding of the Chen Dynasty, her nine-year-old son, Feng Bu, sent him to lead many leaders to meet the heavenly son in the Danyang Dynasty and bestow him with the title of Yangchun County Governor.

古文：后广州刺史欧阳纥谋反，召仆至南海，诱与为乱。仆遣使归告夫人，夫人曰： 我为忠贞，经今两代，不能惜汝负国。 
现代文：后来广州刺史欧阳纥叛乱。召请冯仆到南海，引诱他参与叛乱，冯仆派人回去告诉夫人，夫人说 ：我坚守忠贞，到现在已经两代，不能因爱惜你而背弃国家。 
English: Later, Guangzhou invited Feng Zhuo to the South China Sea to lure him into the rebellion. Feng Zhuo sent someone back to tell his wife, who said, "I have been loyal for two generations, and I cannot betray the country out of love for you."

古文：遂发兵拒境，纥徒溃散。
现代文：于是带兵抵御敌人。欧阳纥的部下溃败。
English: As a result, he led troops to resist the enemy. Ouyang Xuan's subordinates were routed.

古文：仆以夫人之功，封信都侯，加平越中郎将，转石龙太守。
现代文：冯仆依靠夫人的功劳，封为信都侯，授予平越中郎将，调为石龙太守。
English: Relying on his wife's merits, Feng Servant was awarded the title of the Prince of Xin, granted the title of the General of Pingyue and transferred to the position of the Governor of Shilong.

古文：诏使持节册夫人为高凉郡太夫人，赍绣宪油络驷马安车一乘，给鼓吹一部，并麾幢旌节，一如刺史之仪。
现代文：诏令使者持符节册封夫人为高凉郡太夫人，赐予纟肃巾宪油络驷马安车一辆，供给鼓吹一部，还有旗帜符节，一如刺史的仪礼。
English: The emperor ordered the emissary to hold the festival of symbols to record the wife as the great lady of Gaoliang County, and gave her a horse-drawn carriage, a supply of propaganda, and a flag festival, just like the ceremony of engraving history.

古文：至德中，仆卒。
现代文：至德年间，冯仆死去。
English: During his stay in Germany, Feng Pucong died.

古文：后陈国亡，岭南未有所附，数郡共奉夫人，号为圣母。
现代文：后来陈朝灭亡，岭南没有依托，数郡共同尊奉夫人，称为圣母。
English: Later, after the fall of the Chen Dynasty, Lingnan had no support, and several counties jointly venerated the Lady, known as the Virgin Mary.

古文：隋文帝遣总管韦洸安抚岭外，陈将徐璒以南康拒守，洸不敢进。
现代文：隋文帝派总管韦安抚岭外，陈朝余将徐王登在南康拒守，韦不敢进入。
English: Emperor Sui Wen dispatched the general manager Wei Anpiling outside, Chen Dynasty Yu refused to defend Xu Wangden in Nankang, and Wei did not dare to enter.

古文：初，夫人以扶南犀杖献陈主，至此，晋王广遣陈主遗夫人书，谕以国亡，命其归化，并以犀杖及兵符为信。
现代文：当初，夫人把扶南犀角手杖献给陈主，这时晋王杨广让陈主给夫人写信，告诉她国家已经灭亡，命令她归顺，并且用犀角手杖和朝廷兵符作为凭据。
English: At first, his wife presented the Fu Nan rhinoceros cane to Chen Shou. At this time, King Yang Guang of Jin asked Chen Shou to write a letter to his wife, telling her that the country had perished, ordering her to submit, and using the rhinoceros cane and the imperial insignia as evidence.

古文：夫人见杖，验知陈亡，集首领数千人，尽日恸哭。
现代文：夫人见到手杖，确认陈朝已灭亡，集合首领数千人，整日悲伤痛哭。
English: When his wife saw the cane, she confirmed that the Chen dynasty had perished, gathered thousands of leaders, and wept bitterly all day long.

古文：遣其孙魂，帅人迎洸。
现代文：派她的孙子冯魂，率领部众迎接韦。
English: She sent her grandson, Feng Tun, to lead the troops to welcome Wei.

古文：洸至广州，岭南悉定。
现代文：韦到广州，岭南全部安定。
English: From Wei to Guangzhou, Lingnan is all stable.

古文：表魂为仪同三司，册夫人为宋康郡夫人。
现代文：上奏章封冯魂为仪同三司，册封夫人为宋康郡夫人。
English: The inscribed seal of Feng Tun is the ceremony with the three divisions, and the inscribed seal of the wife is the wife of Song Kang County.

古文：未几，悉禺人王仲宣反，围洸，进兵屯衡岭。
现代文：不久，番禺人王仲宣反叛，包围韦，带兵驻扎在衡岭。
English: Soon, Wang Zhongxuan, a Panyu man, rebelled, encircled Wei, and stationed his troops in Hengling.

古文：夫人遣其孙暄帅师援洸。
现代文：夫人派她的孙子冯暄率部队援救韦。
English: His wife sent her grandson Feng Jun to lead the troops to rescue Wei.

古文：时暄与逆党陈佛智素相友，故迟留不进。夫人大怒，遣使执暄系州狱，又遣孙盎讨佛智斩之。
现代文：当时冯暄与逆贼党徒陈佛智一向友好，所以迟迟逗留不前进，夫人大怒，派遣使者把冯暄逮捕押进州府监狱中。
English: At that time, Feng Yu had always been friendly with the rebel party member Chen Fozhi, so he lingered and did not advance. His wife was furious and sent an envoy to arrest Feng Yu and put him in the state capital prison.

古文：进兵至南海，与鹿愿军会，共败仲宣。
现代文：又派孙子冯盎讨伐陈佛智把他杀死，进兵到南海，与鹿愿的部队会合，一起打败王仲宣。
English: He also sent his grandson Feng Ang to attack and kill Chen Fuzhi, marched into the South China Sea, met with De Rui's troops, and together defeated Wang Zhongxuan.

古文：夫人亲被甲，乘介马，张锦伞，领彀骑，卫诏使裴矩巡抚诸州。
现代文：夫人亲自身披铠甲，骑着战马，举着锦伞，领着彀骑，护卫诏令使裴矩巡回抚慰各州。
English: His wife herself put on armor, rode a war horse, held a brocade umbrella, led a horse-drawn carriage, and ordered the guards to escort Pei Rong on a tour to soothe the states.

古文：其苍梧首领陈坦、罔州冯岑翁、梁化邓马头、藤州李光略、罗州庞靖等皆来参谒。
现代文：苍梧首领陈坦、冈州的冯岑翁、梁化的邓马头、滕州的李光略、罗州的庞靖等都来参拜。
English: Cangwu leader Chen Tan, Ganzhou's Feng Xiong, Lianghua's Deng Ma Tou, Tengzhou's Li Guangliu, and Luozhou's Pang Jing all came to pay their respects.

古文：还令统其部落，岭南悉定。
现代文：仍让他们统领各自的部落，岭南全部安定下来。
English: still let them lead their respective tribes, Lingnan all settled down.

古文：帝拜盎为高州刺史，仍赦出暄，拜罗州刺史。追赠宝为广州总管，封谯国。
现代文：皇上授冯盎为高州刺史，并且赦免释放冯暄，授他罗州刺史，追封冯宝为广州总管，封地谯国。
English: The emperor awarded Feng Ang with the title of Gaozhou governor, pardoned and released Feng Xuan, awarded him the title of Luozhou governor, and posthumously appointed Feng Bao as the governor of Guangzhou, the fiefdom of Luo.

古文：夫人幕府署长史已下官属，给印章，听发部落、六州兵马，若有机急，便宜行事。
现代文：夫人幕府署长史之下的官吏，给予印章，听凭他们调用部落、六州的兵马，如果有重要急迫的事情，自行决定处理。
English: The officials under the wife of the director of the shogunate, Shiro, were given seals, and they were allowed to call the tribes, the soldiers and horses of the six states, and if there were important and urgent matters, they would deal with them at their own discretion.

古文：降敕书褒美，赐物五千段。
现代文：下诏书褒扬赞美，赏赐物品五千段。
English: The following edict praises and commends, and awards five thousand items.

古文：皇后以首饰及宴服一袭赐之。
现代文：皇后把首饰和宴会服装一套赏赐给她。
English: The Queen presented her with jewellery and a set of party clothes.

古文：夫人并盛于金箧，并梁、陈赐物，各藏于一库。
现代文：夫人都放在金箱子里，还有梁、陈两朝的赐物，分别藏在府库里面。
English: His wife's belongings were placed in a gold chest, and gifts from the Liang and Chen dynasties were separately hidden in the treasury.

古文：每岁时大会，皆陈于庭，以示子孙曰： 汝等宜尽赤心向天子。
现代文：每年大聚会时，都陈列在院子里，给子孙们看，说： 你们应该竭尽赤心朝向天子。
English: Every year, at the great assembly, they are displayed in the courtyard for the children and grandchildren to see, saying: "You should do your best to face the Son of Heaven with a pure heart.

古文：我事三代主，唯用一好心。
现代文：我事奉三代君主，只用一颗好心。
English: I have served three generations of monarchs with nothing but a good heart.

古文：今赐物具存，此忠孝之报。 
现代文：现在赏赐物品都在这里，这是忠孝的报答。 
English: Now all the rewards are here. This is the reward for loyalty.

古文：时番州总管赵讷贪虐，诸俚獠多有亡叛。
现代文：当时番州总管赵讷贪婪暴虐，那些俚獠族大多逃亡反叛。
English: At that time, the head of Fanzhou, Zhao Ne, was greedy and tyrannical, and most of those Yi people fled and rebelled.

古文：夫人遣长史张融上封事，论安抚之宜，并言讷罪状。
现代文：夫人派长史张融送上密封的奏章，论述安抚的必要，并列举赵讷的罪状。
English: His wife sent Zhang Rong, the chief historian, to deliver a sealed report, discussing the need for appeasement and listing Zhao Ne's crimes.

古文：上遣推讷，得其赃，竟致于法。
现代文：皇帝派人免去赵讷，搜到赃物，最后绳之于法。
English: The emperor sent someone to free Zhao Ne, search for stolen goods, and finally bring her to justice.

古文：敕委夫人招慰亡叛。夫人亲载诏书，自称使者，历十余州，宣述上意，谕诸俚獠，所至皆降。
现代文：下令委托夫人招纳安慰逃亡反叛的俚獠人，夫人亲自带着皇上的诏书，自称皇上使者，到达十多个州，宣读介绍皇上旨意，让各俚獠族人明白，所到之处都降服。
English: An order was issued to entrust his wife with recruiting and consoling the fleeing rebels. His wife personally carried the Emperor's edict and claimed to be the Emperor's emissary, reaching more than ten states, reading out and introducing the Emperor's will, so that the Yi people would understand that they would be subdued wherever they went.

古文：复下诏褒美之，赐物五百段，集命妇与冯相识，以旌宠异。
现代文：文帝赏赐夫人临振县汤沐用的封邑一千五百户。追赠冯仆为崖州总管，平原郡公。
English: Emperor Wen rewarded his wife with 1,500 households in Linzhen County, a fiefdom used for the production of soup. Feng Servant was posthumously awarded the title of the chief administrator of Yazhou and the governor of Pingyuan County.

古文：刘昶女者，河南长孙氏妇。
现代文：仁寿初年去世，谥号为诚敬夫人。刘昶的女儿，是河南长孙氏的媳妇。
English: Ren Shou passed away in the first year of his reign. She was known as Mrs. Cheng Jing. She was the daughter of Liu Ye and the daughter-in-law of the eldest son of Henan.

古文：昶在周尚公主，为上柱国、彭国公，位望甚显。
现代文：刘昶在周朝娶公主为妻，封为上柱国、彭国公，地位声望很显赫。
English: Liu Ye married a princess in the Zhou Dynasty and was named Shangzhu Guo and Peng Guo Guo. His status and reputation were very prominent.

古文：与隋文帝有旧，及受禅，甚见亲礼。
现代文：与隋文帝有老交情，隋文帝受禅即位后，很得亲近礼遇。
English: He had an old friendship with Emperor Sui Wen. After the enthronement of Emperor Sui Wen, he was treated with great courtesy.

古文：历左武卫大将军、庆州总管。
现代文：前后任左武卫大将军、庆州总管。
English: He served successively as General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards and Governor of Gyeongju.

古文：其子居士为千牛备身，不遵法度，数得罪。
现代文：刘昶的儿子刘居士任千牛备身，不遵守法则，多次获罪。
English: Liu Hui's son, Liu Kuishi, was punished many times for not abiding by the law.

古文：上以昶故，每原之。
现代文：皇上因为刘昶的缘故，都原谅了他。
English: The emperor pardoned him for Liu Ye's sake.

古文：居士转恣，每大言曰： 男兒要当辫头反缚，蘧蒢上作獠舞。 
现代文：刘居士越加放纵。常大声说道： 男儿们应当辫头反捆，在荷叶、枝条上像獠族人那样跳舞。 
English: Liu Koji became more and more indulgent, often saying in a loud voice, "Boys should bow their heads backwards and dance on the lotus leaves and branches like the Yi people."

古文：取公卿子弟膂力雄健者，辄将归家，以车轮括其颈而棒之，殆死，能不屈者，称为壮士，释而与之交。
现代文：选择公卿子弟中膂力雄健的人，带回家中，用车轮卡住头颈后棒打，将死，能不屈服的，称为壮士，释放而与他结交。
English: Choose a strong and vigorous person among the sons of nobles, take him home, hit him on the head and neck with a wheel, and beat him to death. If he can not give in, he is called a strong man, release him and make friends with him.

古文：党与三百人，其趫捷者号为饿鹘队，武力者号为蓬转队。
现代文：党徒三百人，那些矫健敏捷的称为饿鹘队，那些勇猛有力的称为蓬转队。
English: There are three hundred party members. Those who are agile and agile are called the Hungry Grasshopper Team, and those who are brave and powerful are called the Pontoon Team.

古文：韝鹰绁犬，连骑道中，殴击路人，多所侵夺。
现代文：臂鞲上的鹰鸟与绳索上的肥犬，相随而行的骑兵充溢道中，殴打伤害路上行人，多有侵犯抢夺。
English: The hawk on the armlet and the fat dog on the rope, the accompanying cavalrymen flooded the road, beating and injuring pedestrians on the road, and there were many violations and robberies.

古文：长安市里，无贵贱见者辟易。
现代文：长安市面上，无论贵贱，谁碰到都得退避。
English: In the market of Chang'an, no matter how high or low, anyone who comes across it has to retreat.

古文：至于公卿妃主，亦莫敢与校。
现代文：至于公卿妃主，也不敢和他对抗。
English: As for the noble princess, she did not dare to confront him.

古文：其女则居士姊也，每垂泣诲之，居士不改，至破家产。
现代文：刘昶的女儿便是居士的姐姐，多次流泪教导他，刘居士不改恶习，直至破坏家业。
English: Liu Yao's daughter is the householder's sister, and she has repeatedly shed tears to teach him that Liu Householder will not change his bad habits until he destroys the family business.

古文：昶年高，奉养甚薄。
现代文：刘昶年事已高，奉禄很少。
English: Liu Ye is very old and has received very few rewards.

古文：其女时寡居，哀昶如此，每归宁于家，躬勤纺绩，以致其肥鲜。
现代文：女儿当时寡居，哀怜父亲刘昶这种处境，每次回家省亲，都勤劳纺织，以购买鱼肉。
English: At that time, her daughter was a widow. She felt sorry for her father Liu Ye's situation. Every time she went home to visit her relatives, she would diligently weave textiles to buy fish meat.

古文：有人告居士与其徒游长安城，登故未央殿基，向南坐，前后列队，意有不逊。
现代文：有人告发刘居士带领党徒游长安城，登上以前的未央殿殿基，面向南而坐，前后排列队伍，有不恭顺的意图。
English: Some people reported that Liu Guosi led the party members to tour Chang'an City, climbed the foundation of the former Weiyang Hall, sat facing south, and lined up in front and behind, with the intention of being disobedient.

古文：每相约曰： 当作一死耳。 
现代文：常互相订立盟誓，说： 拼做一死吧！ 
English: They often make vows to each other, saying, "Let's fight to the death!"

古文：又时有人言居士遣使引突厥，令南寇，当于京师应之。
现代文：又当时还有人说刘居士派使者召引突厥人，让他们往南侵犯，他在京城里接应。
English: At that time, it was also said that Liu Kuishi sent an envoy to summon the Turks and let them invade the south, and he responded in the capital.

古文：上谓昶曰： 今日事当如何？ 
现代文：皇上对刘昶说 ：今天这件事怎么处理？ 
English: The emperor said to Liu Bei, "How will this matter be handled today?"

古文：昶犹恃旧恩，不自引咎，直前曰： 黑白在于至尊。 
现代文：刘昶还想依靠过去的恩情，不自我责备，径直上前说 ：是黑是白在于天子。 
English: Liu Wei also wanted to rely on past favors, not blame himself, and go straight forward to say: whether it is black or white depends on the Son of Heaven.

古文：上大怒，下昶狱，捕居士党与。
现代文：皇上大怒，将刘昶逮捕入狱，搜捕刘居士以及党徒。
English: The emperor was enraged and had Liu Bei arrested and imprisoned, and Liu Kuishi and party members were rounded up.

古文：宪司又奏昶事母不孝。
现代文：执法部门又上奏说刘昶侍奉母亲不孝顺。
English: The law enforcement department also reported that Liu Ye was not filial to his mother.

古文：其女知昶必不免，不食者数日。
现代文：他女儿知道刘昶一定不会赦免，就绝食数天。
English: His daughter knew that Liu Bei would not pardon her, so she went on a hunger strike for several days.

古文：每亲调饮食，手自捧持，诣大理饷父。
现代文：每次都亲自做饭食，两手捧着，到狱中送给父亲吃。
English: Each time, I personally prepared the meal, held it in my two hands, and took it to my father in prison.

古文：见狱卒，跪以进之，歔欷鸣咽，见者伤之，居士斩，昶赐死于家。
现代文：见到狱卒，跪着送上，抽抽搭搭地哭泣，见者都很可怜她。刘居士被斩首，刘昶恩准死在家中。
English: When she saw the jailer, she knelt down to give her away, sobbing uncontrollably, and everyone who saw her felt sorry for her. Liu Kosei was beheaded, and Liu Xuan almost died at home.

古文：诏百僚临视。时其女绝而复苏者数矣，公卿慰喻之。
现代文：诏令百官亲去察看，当时他的女儿几次哭死而又苏醒过来，公卿们出言安慰。
English: The emperor ordered the officials to go and see for themselves, when his daughter cried herself to death several times and then woke up, and the nobles offered words of consolation.

古文：其女言父无罪，坐子及祸。
现代文：他的女儿说父亲无罪，因儿子导致灾祸。
English: His daughter says her father is not guilty of causing the disaster.

古文：词情哀切，人皆不忍闻见。
现代文：言词哀伤恳切，人们都不忍心听见。
English: The words were so sad and earnest that people couldn't bear to hear them.

古文：遂布衣蔬食，以终其身。
现代文：于是穿着麻布衣服，仅吃蔬菜，过完一生。
English: So he wore sackcloth and ate only vegetables for the rest of his life.

古文：上闻叹曰： 吾闻衰门之女，兴门之男，固不虚也。 
现代文：皇上听说后感叹道 ：吾听说衰落家族的女子如兴望家族的男子，真正不假啊。 
English: After hearing this, the Emperor lamented, "I heard that a woman from a family in decline is like a man from a prosperous family. It's really true."

