古文：淳于棼
现代文：淳于棼
English: Atsushi Yuzaki

古文：东平淳于棼，吴楚游侠之士，嗜酒使气，不守细行，累巨产，养豪客。
现代文：东平人淳于棼，是个喜欢交友漫游，讲义气的人，爱喝酒，意气用事，做事不拘小节。
English: Dongping people are straightforward, a person who likes to make friends and roam, a person with a sense of loyalty, a lover of alcohol, a spirited person, and a person who does things in an informal manner.

古文：曾以武艺补淮南军裨将，因使酒忤帅，斥逐落魄，纵诞饮酒为事。
现代文：家里积累了巨大的产业，养了一些豪杰之士，曾经靠武艺被补充缺额任淮南军队的副将，因为酒后狂言触犯了主帅，被撤销官职后飘泊流浪，行为放纵不受拘束，每天只是喝酒。
English: The family has accumulated huge industries, raised some heroes, once relied on martial arts to fill the vacancy as vice-general of the Huainan army, because drunk rants offended the coach, wandered after being removed from office, indulged in unrestrained behavior, and just drank every day.

古文：家住广陵郡东十里，所居宅南有大古槐一株，枝干修密，清阴数亩，淳于生日与群豪大饮其下。
现代文：他的家住在广陵郡东十里，居住的宅南有一株大古槐树，枝干长而浓密，覆盖了几亩地的荫凉，淳于棼天天和一群豪迈之士在树荫下痛快地喝酒。
English: His family lived ten miles east of Guangling County. To the south of the house where they lived, there was a large ancient eucalyptus tree. Its branches were long and thick, covering several acres of shade. Every day, he and a group of heroes drank happily in the shade of the tree.

古文：唐贞元七年九月，因沈醉致疾，时二友人于坐扶生归家，卧于堂东庑之下。
现代文：唐朝贞元七年七月九日，因酒喝得大醉而得了病，当时有两个朋友从酒桌上把他送回家去，躺在堂屋东面的走廊里。
English: On July 9th, 7th year of the Tang Dynasty, Zhen Yuan, when he was very drunk and fell ill, two friends sent him home from the wine table, and he was lying in the corridor on the east side of the hall.

古文：二友谓生曰： 子其寝矣，余将秣马濯足，俟子小愈而去。 
现代文：两个朋友对他说： 你就睡一会儿吧，我们两个人喂喂马洗洗脚，等你的病稍好之后再走。 
English: Two friends said to him, "You just sleep for a while, and the two of us will feed the horse, wash its feet, and wait for your illness to get better before we leave."

古文：生解巾就枕，昏然忽忽，仿佛若梦。见二紫衣使者，跪拜生曰： 槐安国王遣小臣致命奉邀。 
现代文：淳于棼解下头巾枕上枕头，昏昏沉沉，恍恍惚惚，仿佛象梦一样，看见两个穿紫衣的使者，对着他行跪拜之礼说： 槐安国王派我们向你表示邀请。 
English: Junyu undid his turban and put it on his pillow. He was dizzy, groggy, and in a trance, as if in a dream. He saw two messengers in purple robes kneeling before him and saying, "King Juan has sent us to invite you."

古文：生不觉下榻整衣，随二使至门。
现代文：他不知不觉地走下床，整理一下衣服，跟着二位使者到了门外，看见青油小车，套着四匹公马，左右随从七八个人。
English: Without noticing, he got out of bed, put his clothes in order, followed the two emissaries outside the door, and saw a sleek carriage with four stallions, followed by seven or eight people on either side.

古文：见青油小车，驾以四牡，左右从者七八，扶生上车，出大户，指古槐穴而去，使者即驱入穴中。生意颇甚异之，不敢致问。
现代文：他们将淳于棼扶上车，出了大门，一直向古槐树的一个洞穴走去。使者随即赶着车进入洞穴里，淳于棼心里很奇怪，也不敢发问。
English: They helped Chun Yu into the car, went out of the gate, and walked all the way to a cave in the ancient elm trees. The messenger then drove into the cave. Chun Yu Yu felt very strange and did not dare to ask questions.

古文：忽见山川风候，草木道路，与人世甚殊。
现代文：忽然看见山川风物、草木道路，和人世很不一样。
English: Suddenly, I saw the scenery of mountains and rivers, and the grass and tree-lined roads, which were very different from the real world.

古文：前行数十里，有郛郭城堞，车舆人物，不绝于路。
现代文：再往前走了几十里路，有外城城墙，车马和行人，在路上连续不断。
English: Further ahead, we walked dozens of miles. There were outer city walls, horses and carriages, and pedestrians continuously on the road.

古文：生左右传车者传呼甚严，行者亦争辟于左右。
现代文：淳于棼身边跟随着的供呼唤支使的人，呼唤得很严厉，行人也急忙向道路两侧躲避。
English: The caller, who was accompanied by Junyu Zou, shouted very harshly, and pedestrians hurried to the sides of the road to avoid him.

古文：又入大城，朱门重楼，楼上有金书，题曰《大槐安国》。
现代文：又走入一个大城，红色的大门，重迭的楼阁，楼上有金色题写的字，叫 大槐安国 。
English: I walked into another big city, with a red gate, overlapping towers, and golden inscriptions on the upper floors. It was called Dajian Guo.

古文：执门者趋拜奔走，旋有一骑传呼曰： 王以驸马远降，令且息东华馆。 
现代文：城门官跑上前来行礼，又奔走招乎，接着有一人骑马呼喊着说： 国王因为驸马从远方来，让他暂且到东华馆休息。 
English: The doorkeepers ran up to him, bowed and waved to him, and then a man on horseback shouted: "Since the king's horse has come from far away, let him rest for a while at the Donghua Pavilion."

古文：因前导而去。俄见一门洞开，生降车而入。
现代文：于是在前面领路，很快看见一个门大开，淳于棼下车走了进去。
English: So he led the way in front, and soon saw a door wide open. Jun Yu got out of the car and walked in.

古文：彩槛雕楹，华木珍果，列植于庭下；几案茵褥，帘帏肴膳，陈设于庭上。
现代文：里面是彩绘雕花的栏杆和柱子，美观的树木，珍贵的果实，一行行地栽种在厅外。桌椅、垫子，门帘和酒席，陈列在厅外，淳于棼心里很高兴。
English: Inside, there are railings and pillars with painted and carved flowers, beautiful trees, precious fruits, planted in rows outside the hall. Tables and chairs, cushions, door curtains and banquettes, displayed outside the hall, making Junyuban very happy.

古文：生心甚自悦。
现代文：接着有人喊道： 右丞相快要到了。 
English: Then someone shouted: "The Minister of the Right is about to arrive."

古文：有一人紫衣象简前趋，宾主之仪敬尽焉。右相曰： 寡君不以弊国远僻，奉迎君子，托以姻亲。 
现代文：淳于棼走下台阶恭敬地迎接，有一个人穿着紫色的朝服，拿着象牙手板急步走来，宾主之间的礼仪完后，右丞相说： 我们的国君，不因为我国遥远偏僻，把你迎来，结为婚姻亲家。 
English: After the ceremony between the guests, the minister of justice said, "Our sovereign, it is not because our country is far away and isolated that we have welcomed you into our family.

古文：生曰： 某以贱劣之躯，岂敢是望。 
现代文：淳于棼说： 我自己只有个卑贱的身躯，怎么敢想这样的事呢？ 
English: Jun Yuyao said: I myself only have a lowly body, how dare I think such a thing?

古文：右相因请生同诣其所。
现代文：右丞相于是请淳于棼一同去皇上那里。
English: The Minister of the Right, therefore, asked Jun to go with him to the Emperor.

古文：行可百步，入朱门，矛戟斧钺，布列左右，军吏数百，辟易道侧。
现代文：走了大约一百多步，进入一个大红门，左右手持矛、戟、斧、钺的武士，排列两侧，几百个军官，回避在道边上。
English: After walking more than a hundred paces, they entered a large red gate. Samurai armed with spears, halberds, axes, and halberds lined up on both sides, and several hundred officers stood on the side of the road.

古文：生有平生酒徒周弁者，亦趋其中，生私心悦之，不敢前问。
现代文：淳于棼有个平生一起喝酒的酒徒叫周弁的，也在人群中。淳于棼心里很高兴，却不敢上前问话。
English: There was also an alcoholic named Zhou Ben in the crowd, who Junyuxuan had been drinking with all his life. Junyuxuan was very happy in his heart, but he did not dare to ask questions.

古文：右相引生升广殿，御卫严肃，若至尊之所。
现代文：右丞相领着淳于棼登上一所宽敞的宫殿，御卫非常严密，象是帝王的住处。
English: The chancellor of the Right, leading Jun Yuxuan, ascended to a spacious palace. The guards were very strict, as if it were the emperor's residence.

古文：见一人长大端严，居正位，衣素练服，簪朱华冠。生战栗，不敢仰视。
现代文：只见有一个人又高又大端庄严肃，坐在正中的位置上，穿着白色的锦服，戴红花冠，淳于棼身上战悚起来，不敢抬起头来看。
English: I just saw a tall, dignified and serious person, sitting in the middle, wearing a white brocade dress and a red flower crown. He was so nervous that he didn't dare to look up.

古文：左右侍者令生拜，王曰： 前奉贤尊命，不弃小国，许令次女瑶芳奉事君子。 
现代文：左右的侍者让淳于棼叩头，国王说： 先前遵照令尊的命令，不嫌弃我们是个小国，允许让我的二女儿瑶芳嫁给你。 
English: The waiters on the right and left bowed their heads to Junyu Yao, and the king said, "Previously, I followed your father's order and did not disdain it. We are a small country, and I allowed my second daughter, Hao Fang, to marry you.

古文：生但俯伏而已，不敢致词。
现代文：淳于棼只是趴在地上，不敢回话。
English: Jun Yuxuan just lay on the ground, not daring to speak back.

古文：王曰： 且就宾宇，续造仪式。 
现代文：国王说： 你暂且到宾馆去，过后再举行仪式。 
English: The king said: You go to the hotel for the time being, and the ceremony will take place later.

古文：有旨，右相亦与生偕还馆舍。
现代文：有了皇上的旨意，右丞相也和淳于棼一起回到了馆舍。
English: In accordance with the emperor's wishes, the chancellor also returned to the palace together with Junyushin.

古文：生思念之，意以为父在边将，因没虏中，不知存亡。将谓父北蕃交通，而致兹事，心甚迷惑，不知其由。
现代文：淳于棼思考着这件事。心里以为父亲在边界做将军，因为被敌人捉去、不知道是死是活，或者是父亲与北蕃暗中来住，才带来现在招为驸马这件事？心里很迷惑，不知道其中的原因。
English: Chun Yu Yao thought about this matter. He thought that his father was a general on the border, because he was captured by the enemy and did not know whether he was dead or alive, or did his father come to live with the Northern Wei secretly, which brought about the matter of being recruited as a steed? He was very confused and did not know the reason.

古文：是夕，羔雁币帛，威容仪度，妓乐丝竹，肴膳灯烛，车骑礼物之用，无不咸备。
现代文：这天晚上，结婚用的礼物，又气派又排场。跳舞弹唱，酒席灯烛，车马礼物等等，没有不备足的。
English: On this evening, the wedding gifts are both grand and extravagant. There is no shortage of dancing and singing, dinner candles, gifts of cars and horses, and so on.

古文：有群女，或称华阳姑，或称青溪姑，或称上仙子，或称下仙子，若是者数辈，皆侍从数千，冠翠凤冠，衣金霞帔，采碧金钿，目不可视。遨游戏乐，往来其门，争以淳于郎为戏弄。风态妖丽，言词巧艳，生莫能对。复有一女谓生曰： 昨上巳日，吾从灵芝夫人过禅智寺，于天竹院观右延舞婆罗门，吾与诸女坐北牖石榻上。时君少年，亦解骑来看，君独强来亲洽，言调笑谑。吾与穷英妹结绛巾，挂于竹枝上，君独不忆念之乎？
现代文：有一群女子，有的叫华阳姑，有的叫青溪姑，有的叫上仙子，有的叫下仙子，象这样的有好几批人，都是带着几千侍从，头上戴载着翠凤冠，身上穿着金色的霞帔，五彩装饰的青玉，金子做的装饰品，光亮闪得眼睛白天不敢看，在他住的地方随意游玩说笑，争着以淳于棼为戏弄的对象，风度姿态妖艳美丽，说起话来巧妙而有文采，淳于棼对答不上，又有一个女子对淳于棼说： 去年的上巳日，我跟着灵芝夫人路过禅智寺，在天竺院观看右延跳《婆罗门》舞，我和各位女子坐在北窗的石凳上，当时你还是个少年，也下马来观看，你一个人强来亲近，说些调笑的笑话，我和穷英妹编了个绛色的头巾，挂在竹枝上，你难道想不起来了吗？
English: There is a group of women, some are called Hua Yang Gu, some are called Qingxi Gu, some are called the Upper Fairy, some are called the Lower Fairy. Like this, there are several groups of people, all with thousands of attendants, wearing a crown of green phoenixes on their heads, wearing golden chrysanthemums, multi-colored decorations of green jade, and gold ornaments. Their eyes shine so brightly that they dare not look at them during the day. They casually play and joke in the place where they live, competing to use Chun Yu Yao as the object of teasing. Their demeanor is charming and beautiful. They speak skillfully and

古文：又七月十六日，吾于孝感寺侍上真子，听契玄法师讲观音经。吾于讲下舍金凤钗两只，上真子舍水犀合子一枚，时君亦讲筵中，于师处请钗合视之，赏叹再三，嗟异良久。
现代文：还有在七月十六日，我在孝感寺和上真子一起，听契玄法师讲解《观音经》，我在讲台下施舍了两只金凤钗，上真子施舍了一枚水犀角做的盒子，当时你也在听讲席上，在法师那里借来钗和盒看了看，再三地赞叹，很长时间地感慨。
English: Also, on July 16th, I was listening to the explanation of "The Guanyin Sutra" by Master Qi Xuan at the Xiaogan Temple together with Mother Superior. I gave alms to two gold phoenixes under the podium, and Mother Superior gave alms to a box made of water rhinoceros horn. At that time, you were also at the lecture hall, borrowed a bowl and a box from the master, looked at it, repeatedly admired it, and felt regret for a long time.

古文：顾余辈曰： 人之与物，皆非世间所有。 
现代文：回头对我们说： 这人和所施之物，都不是人世间能存在的！ 
English: He turned to us and said, "This man and what he has done cannot exist in this world!"

古文：或问吾民，或访吾里，吾亦不答。情意恋恋，瞩盼不舍，君岂不思念之乎？ 
现代文：又是问我是哪里人，又是问我住在什么地方，我也没有回答，互相地情意恋恋地你看我，我看你，不舍得分手，你难道不思念了吗？ 
English: Again they asked me where I was from, again they asked me where I lived, but I didn't answer. They fell passionately in love with each other. Look at me, I'm looking at you, I don't mind being the scorer, don't you miss it?

古文：生曰： 中心藏之，何日忘之。 
现代文：淳于棼说： 我已把这些深深地藏在心里，什么时候能忘记呢？ 
English: "I have hidden these things deep in my heart. When will I be able to forget them?" said Junyuzhang.

古文：群女曰： 不意今日与君为眷属。 
现代文：一群女子说： 想不到今天与你成了亲属。 
English: A group of women said: "I didn't expect to become relatives with you today.

古文：复有三人，冠带甚伟，前拜生曰： 奉命为驸马相者。 
现代文：又有三个人，穿戴得很神气，走上前对淳于棼行礼说： 我们是遵照命令做驸马傧相的。 
English: Three other people, dressed very dignified, stepped forward and said to Chun Yu Min: "We are following the order to make a horse-drawn carriage.

古文：中一人，与生且故，生指曰： 子非冯翊田子华乎？ 
现代文：其中一个人与淳于棼是老朋友，淳于棼指着他说： 你不是冯翊的田子华吗？ 
English: One of them was an old friend of Chun Yoo-soo. Chun Yoo-soo pointed at him and said, "Aren't you Feng Ye's Tian Zi Hua?"

古文：田曰： 然。 
现代文：田子华说： 是的。 
English: Tian Zihua said: Yes.

古文：生前，执手叙旧久之。
现代文：淳于棼走上前，握着他的手谈过去的事谈了很久。
English: Jun Yuxuan walked up to him, held his hand and talked about the past for a long time.

古文：生谓曰： 子何以居此？ 
现代文：淳于棼对田子华说： 你为什么居住在这里？ 
English: Jun Yuqi said to Tian Zihua: Why do you live here?

古文：子华曰： 吾放游，获受知于右相武成侯段公，因以栖托。 生复问曰： 周弁在此，知之乎？ 
现代文：田子华说： 我随意游玩，受到了右丞相武成侯段公的知遇和赏识，所以就在这里安身了。 淳于棼又问他说： 周弁在这里，你知道吗？ 
English: Tian Zihua said, "I wandered around at will, and was well received and appreciated by Minister of the Right, Wu Cheng Houdan, so I settled down here." Jun Yuxuan also asked him, "Zhou Ben is here, did you know that?"

古文：子华曰： 周生贵人也，职为司隶，权势甚盛，吾数蒙庇护。 
现代文：田子华说： 周生是个尊贵人，担任司隶的职务，权势很大，我多次蒙受他的庇护。 
English: Tian Zihua said: Zhou Sheng was an honorable man. He held the position of subordinate and was very powerful. I was protected by him many times.

古文：言笑甚欢，俄传声曰： 驸马可进矣。 
现代文：两个人说说笑笑很高兴，不久传来声音说： 驸马可以进来了。 
English: The two men chatted and laughed happily, and soon a voice called out: "The horse can come in."

古文：三子取剑佩冕服更衣之。子华曰： 不意今日获睹盛礼，无以相忘也。 
现代文：三个男傧相解下武器衣帽更换了新衣服，田子华说： 想不到今天能亲眼看到这么盛大的婚礼，不要忘记我。 
English: The three young men put down their weapons and changed into new clothes. Tian Zihua said, "I didn't expect to see such a grand wedding with my own eyes today. Don't forget me."

古文：有仙姬数十，奏诸异乐，婉转清亮，曲调凄悲，非人间之所闻听。
现代文：这时有几十个仙女，演奏各种奇异的音乐，乐声曲折清亮，曲调却很凄凉悲伤，不是人间所能够听到的。
English: At this time, there were dozens of fairies, playing all kinds of strange music, the music twists and turns clear, but the tune is very bleak and sad, not what the world can hear.

古文：有执烛引导者亦数十，左右见金翠步障，彩碧玲珑，不断数里。
现代文：又有几十个拿着灯烛领路的人，左右两边是金色和绿色的屏障，上面镶着玲珑精巧的彩色装饰的碧玉，一连有好几里地长。
English: There were also dozens of people leading the way with lamps and candles, and on the right and left sides were golden and green barriers, on top of which were inlaid exquisite colored decorative jasper, stretching for several miles in a row.

古文：生端坐车中，心意恍惚，甚不自安，田子华数言笑以解之。
现代文：淳于棼端正地坐在车子里，心神恍恍惚惚，很不安宁，田子华多次和他说笑来安慰他。
English: Jun Yuqi sat upright in the car, his mind in a trance, very restless. Tian Zihua laughed with him many times to comfort him.

古文：向者群女姑娣，各乘凤翼辇，亦往来其间。
现代文：刚才的那群女子们，各自乘坐着凤翼辇，也在路上来来往往。
English: The group of women just now, each riding a phoenix-winged dragonfly, are also coming and going on the road.

古文：至一门，号修仪宫，群仙姑姊，亦纷然在侧。令生降车辇拜，揖让升降，一如人间。撤障去扇，见一女子，云号金枝公主，年可十四五，俨若神仙。
现代文：到了一个宫门，门上写着 修仪宫 ，一群神仙姑、姊，也纷纷地来到门边，让淳于棼走下车辇行礼，又作揖，又道谢，一忽儿前进，一会儿后退，礼节和人间的一样，撤去障子和遮面的羽扇，就看见一个女子，说叫金枝公主，年龄大约十四五岁，庄重得象神仙一样。
English: When they arrived at a palace gate, the sign on the door read "Shuri Palace," a group of fairy godmothers and sisters also came to the door in succession, asking Jun Yu Ye to get out of the car, bowing, making a bow, and thanking, advancing in a flash, retreating in a moment. The etiquette was the same as that of the human world, removing the shoji and the feather fan covering the face, and they saw a woman, said to be called Princess Kinji, aged about fourteen or fifteen, dignified like a fairy godmother.

古文：交欢之礼，颇亦明显。
现代文：二人交欢时，也是很庄严的样子。
English: When the two have sex, they also look very solemn.

古文：生自尔情义日洽，荣曜日盛，出入车服，游宴宾御，次于王者。
现代文：淳于棼从此感情一天天地融洽，荣誉光彩一天天地兴盛，进出的车马衣服，游玩宴会跟随的宾客和侍从，仅次于国王。
English: Since then, the feelings of Chun Yu Kun have been harmonious day by day, the glory of honor has flourished day by day, the chariots and horses entering and leaving, the clothes, the guests and attendants following the banquet, are second only to the king.

古文：王命生与群寮备武卫，大猎于国西灵龟山。山阜峻秀，川泽广远，林树丰茂，飞禽走兽，无不蓄之。
现代文：国王让淳于棼和朝廷官员准备好武器和兵士，在大槐安国西面的灵龟山上大规模地打猎，山连着山险峻而秀美，江河湖泊宽广得望不到边际，林中树木茂盛浓密，飞禽走兽，样样都有，他们捕猎了很多物，一直到晚上才回去。
English: The king asked Chunyu Kun and the court officials to prepare weapons and soldiers, and they hunted on a large scale on the Spirit Turtle Mountain in the west of Dalian. The mountains are steep and beautiful, the rivers and lakes are too wide to see the edge, the trees in the forest are thick and dense, and there are all kinds of birds and beasts. They hunted a lot of things and did not go back until the evening.

古文：师徒大获，竟夕而还。生因他日启王曰： 臣顷结好之日，大王云奉臣父之命。
现代文：于是淳于棼有一天向国王说： 我不久前结婚的时候，大王曾说是遵照我父亲的意思办的。
English: So one day, Chunyu said to the king, "When I got married not long ago, the great king said it was done according to my father's wishes.

古文：臣父顷佐边将，用兵失利，陷没胡中，尔来绝书信十七八岁矣。
现代文：我的父亲原先是驻守边疆的将军，因为打仗失利，被捉到匈奴国去，从那以来断绝书信已经十七八年了。
English: It's been seventeen-eight years since my father, a general stationed on the frontier, was captured and taken to the Huns after losing a battle.

古文：王既知所在，臣请一往拜觐。 
现代文：大王既然知道我父亲住的地方，请让我去拜见他。 
English: Now that the king knows where my father lives, please let me go and see him.

古文：王遽谓曰： 亲家翁职守北土，信问不绝，卿但具书状知闻，未用便去。 
现代文：国王立刻对他说： 亲家翁的职责是守卫北方的国土，通过书信互相问候，从未断绝，你只要写封信告诉一下你的情况，就可以了，不用亲自去。 
English: The king immediately said to him, "It is the duty of a kinsman to guard the land of the north. Greetings through letters have never been cut off. You just need to write a letter to tell me about your situation. You don't have to go in person."

古文：遂命妻致馈贺之礼，一以遣之。
现代文：于是让妻子准备赠送的礼品，派专人送去，几天后就回了信。
English: So he asked his wife to prepare the gift, sent a special person to deliver it, and a few days later he wrote back.

古文：数夕还答，生验书本意，皆父平生之迹，书中忆念教诲，情意委屈，皆如昔年。
现代文：淳于棼检查了书信的字迹和含义，全是父亲生平的事迹，信中陈述了思念的感情和对他的教诲，感情和心意表达得很详尽，全都象从前一样。
English: Chun Yu Yao checked the handwriting and meaning of the letter. It was all about the events of his father's life. The letter described the feelings of missing him and his teachings. The feelings and thoughts were expressed in detail. Everything was the same as before.

古文：复问生亲戚存亡，闾里兴废。
现代文：又问淳于棼亲戚们的生和死，家乡的兴与废。
English: He also asked about the life and death of Junyu's relatives, and the rise and fall of his hometown.

古文：复言路道乖远，风烟阻绝，词意悲苦，言语哀伤，又不令生来觐。云岁在丁丑，当与女相见。
现代文：又说道路相隔遥远，风烟阻隔，话说得很痛苦，语气也哀伤，又不让淳于棼来看望他，说是在丁丑这一年，才能与你相见。
English: He also said that the roads are far apart, the wind and smoke are blocking the distance, the words are very painful, the tone is also sad, and he did not allow Chunyu Yao to visit him, saying that it will be in the year of Ding Qiu to meet you.

古文：生捧书悲咽，情不自堪。
现代文：淳于棼捧着信，悲哀地哭起来，无法控制自己的感情。
English: Holding the letter in her hand, Jun Yu Yu burst into tears, unable to control her emotions.

古文：他日，妻谓生曰： 子岂不思为政乎？ 
现代文：有一天，妻子对淳于棼说： 你难道不想做官吗？ 
English: One day, his wife said to him, "Don't you want to be an official?"

古文：生曰： 我放荡，不习政事。 
现代文：淳于棼说： 我放荡惯了，又不熟悉政界之事。 
English: "I'm used to debauchery, and I'm not familiar with politics," Jun said.

古文：妻曰： 卿但为之，余当奉赞。 妻遂白于王。
现代文：妻子说： 你只是做你的官，我来帮助你。 
English: My wife said, "You are just your official, I am here to help you."

古文：累日，谓生曰： 吾南柯政事不理，太守黜废，欲藉卿才，可曲屈之，便与小女同行。 
现代文：妻子就告诉了国王，几天后，国王对淳于棼说： 我的南柯郡政事治理得不好，太守被我免职了，想借助你的才能，可以委曲你担任这个官职吗？就和小女儿一起去吧。 
English: His wife told the king, and a few days later, the king said to Chun Yu-ran, "My Nanko County government affairs are not well managed. I dismissed the governor. If you want to use your talent, can I appoint you to this official position? Just go with your little daughter."

古文：生敦受教命。
现代文：淳于棼恭敬地接受了国王的命令。
English: Junyushin respectfully accepted the king's order.

古文：王遂敕有司备太守行李，因出金玉锦绣，箱奁仆妾车马列于广衢，以饯公主之行。
现代文：国王就下令让主管官员给太守准备好行李等用品。于是拿出黄金、美玉、绸缎，还有箱奁、仆妾、车马等排列在宽广的街道上，来为公主饯行。
English: The king ordered the officials in charge to prepare luggage and other supplies for the empress dowager, so they took out gold, precious stones, silk and satin, as well as luggage, concubines, chariots and horses, and arranged them on the wide streets to walk for the princess.

古文：生少游侠，曾不敢有望，至是甚悦。因上表曰： 臣将门余子，素无艺术。猥当大任，必败朝章。自悲负乘，坐致覆餗。
现代文：淳于棼从小就交友漫游，讲究义气，并不敢有什么过分的期望，到这时自然很高兴，因而向皇上上表说： 我是将军家的没出息的后代，平时也没有才艺和策略，勉强地担当重任，一定会扰乱朝廷的法制，担当重任，自己也觉得自卑，因而造成失败。
English: From a young age, Chun Yu-tao wandered around making friends, was concerned with loyalty, and did not dare to have any excessive expectations. By this time, he was naturally happy, so he said to the emperor: I am a worthless descendant of a general's family, usually without talent and strategy, reluctantly taking on heavy responsibilities, will certainly disrupt the legal system of the imperial court, taking on heavy responsibilities, I also feel inferior, thus causing failure.

古文：今欲广求贤哲，以赞不逮。
现代文：现在我想广泛地寻求有才能的人，用来帮助我力所不及的地方。
English: Now I want to search far and wide for talented people to help me where I can't.

古文：伏见司隶颍川周弁忠亮刚直，守法不回，有毗佐之器。
现代文：我看司隶颍川人周弁忠亮刚正不阿，严守法度不屈曲，具有辅佐政事的能力。
English: In my opinion, the member of the Sichuan Provincial People's Procuratorate, Zhou Benzhongliang, is honest and upright, strictly abides by the law and does not bend, and has the ability to assist in politics.

古文：处士冯翊田子华清慎通变，达政化之源。
现代文：处士冯翊郡人田子华谦洁谨慎，通晓事变，十分了解政治教化的本源。
English: Ms. Tian Zihua, the clerk of Fengye County, is modest and prudent, is familiar with the events, and fully understands the origin of political indoctrination.

古文：二人与臣有十年之旧，备知才用，可托政事。
现代文：他们两个人和我有十年的老交情，我完全了解他们的才干和长处，可以把政事托付给他。
English: The two of them and I have a ten-year-old friendship, I fully understand their talents and strengths, and I can entrust the government to him.

古文：周请署南柯司宪，田请署司农，庶使臣政绩有闻，宪章不紊也。 
现代文：周弁请任命为南柯郡的司宪，田子华请任命为司农，也许可以使我做出优异的政绩，使国家的法度章程有条不紊。 
English: Zhou Ben asked to be appointed as the Secretary of the Constitution of Nanko County, and Tian Zihua asked to be appointed as the Secretary of Agriculture, which may enable me to make outstanding political achievements and make the country's laws and regulations orderly.

古文：王并依表以遣之。
现代文：国王全都依照他上表说的办。
English: And the king did according to all that he had said.

古文：其夕，王与夫人饯于国南。王谓生曰： 南柯国之大郡，土地丰壤，人物豪盛，非惠政不能以治之，况有周田二赞，卿其勉之，以副国念。 
现代文：那天晚上，国王和王后在京城的南门外为他们饯行，国王对淳于棼说： 南柯是国家的大郡，土地肥沃，能人很多，不实行爱民政治就不能治理好这个郡，何况还有周弁和田文华二人的赞助，你要勉力为之，以符合国家的期望。 
English: That evening, the king and queen walked for them in front of the south gate of Beijing. The king said to Chun Yujing: Nanko is a large county of the country, the land is fertile, there are many capable people, and it is impossible to govern this county well without practicing a people-loving politics. Moreover, there is the sponsorship of Zhou Ben and Tian Wenhua. You must do your best to meet the expectations of the country.

古文：夫人戒公主曰： 淳于郎性刚好酒，加之少年，为妇之道，贵乎柔顺，尔善事之，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：王后告诫公主说： 淳于郎性情刚烈喜欢喝酒，加上又正在少年，做妻子的规则，贵在温柔顺从，你好好地侍奉他，我也就不担心了。
English: The queen admonished the princess, saying, "Since Junyurang has a strong temperament and likes to drink, and since he is still a young man, the rules of being a wife are to be gentle and obedient. If you serve him well, I won't worry about it.

古文：南柯虽封境不遥，晨昏有间，今日暌别，宁不沾巾。
现代文：南柯郡虽然离京城不算远，早晚也不能天天见面，今天一离别，怎能不泪水沾湿巾帕。 
English: Although Nanko County is not far from Beijing, sooner or later we can't meet every day. How can we part today without tears staining our wet napkins?

古文：生与妻拜首南去，登车拥骑，言笑甚欢，累夕达郡。
现代文：淳于棼和妻子拜谢之后就向南去了。他们站在车上，骑士们簇拥着，说说笑笑十分欢畅。
English: After saying their goodbyes, Jun Yuxuan and his wife headed south. They stood on the carriage, surrounded by the knights, chatting and laughing happily.

古文：郡有官吏僧道耆老，音乐车舆，武卫銮铃，争来迎奉。人物阗咽，钟鼓喧哗不绝。
现代文：走了几天就到了南柯郡，郡里的官吏们，和尚道士和地方上德高望重的老人，奏乐的车队，武装的卫士和车子，争着来迎接，人马喧闹，熙熙攘攘，撞钟打鼓到处一片喧哗的声音。
English: After walking for a few days, I arrived in Nanko County. The county officials, monks, Taoists, and local venerable elders, the motorcade of music, armed guards and cars, competed to meet. People and horses were noisy, bustling, and there was a clamor of bells and drums everywhere.

古文：十数里，见雉堞台观，佳气郁郁。
现代文：又走了十多里，就看见城墙和楼台宫殿，一看就充满着吉祥的气象。
English: After walking more than ten miles, he saw the city wall and the palace tower. At a glance, he was filled with auspicious weather.

古文：入大城门。门亦有大榜，题以金字，曰 南柯郡城 。
现代文：进入大城门，门上也有一个大匾额，上面题写的金色大字： 南柯郡城 。
English: Entering the gate, there is also a large plaque on the gate, inscribed with large gold letters: Nanko County.

古文：是朱轩棨户，森然深邃。生下车，省风俗，疗病苦，政事委以周田，郡中大理。
现代文：只见红色的大门，门外面挂着表示威严的剑戟，威武森严，淳于棼一到任，就视察风俗民情，治疗人民的疾病，政事交给周弁和田子华处理，郡中治理得井井有条。
English: A red gate can be seen, and a sword hanging outside the gate, indicating the majesty of the county. Once Jun Yuxuan took office, he inspected the customs and folk customs, treated the people's diseases, and handed over the government affairs to Zhou Ben and Tian Zihua. The governance of the county was well organized.

古文：自守郡二十载，风化广被，百姓歌谣，建功德碑，立生祠宇。
现代文：自从他到南柯郡以来二十多年，政治教化推行得十分普遍，百姓们用歌谣唱他，为他树立了歌颂功德的石碑，在他生前就为他建了祠堂。
English: In the more than 20 years since he came to Nanko County, political indoctrination has been widespread. The people have sung songs about him, erected a stone monument in his honor, and built a shrine for him before his death.

古文：王甚重之，赐食邑锡爵，位居台辅。
现代文：国王很看重他，赏赐给他封地和爵位，地位相当于三公宰相。
English: The king thought highly of him and rewarded him with a fief and a peerage, giving him a status equivalent to that of the three grand chancellors.

古文：周田皆以政治著闻，递迁大位。
现代文：周弁和田子华也全都因为政事处理得井井有条而闻名，也接连被提升到更高的职位上。
English: Zhou Ben and Tian Zihua are also famous for their orderly handling of government affairs, and have been promoted to higher positions one after another.

古文：生有五男二女，男以门荫授官，女亦娉于王族，荣耀显赫，一时之盛，代莫比之。
现代文：淳于棼有五个儿子二个女儿，儿子因父母的地位而做官，女儿也嫁给了王族，他家的门第荣耀显赫，一时达到了极繁盛的地步，当代没有谁能比得上。
English: He had five sons and two daughters. His son became an official due to his parents' status, and his daughter married into the royal family. His family achieved great glory and prosperity, which no one in the present day can match.

古文：是岁，有檀萝国者，来伐是郡。王命生练将训师以征之，乃表周弁将兵三万，以拒贼之众于瑶台城。
现代文：这一年，有个檀萝国，来侵犯南柯郡，国王让淳于棼训练将官和军队去征伐檀萝国，于是上表推荐让周弁率领军队三万人，在瑶台城一带与敌人战斗。
English: In the same year, there was a foreign country that invaded Nanko County. The king asked Chunyu Kun to train generals and troops to invade the foreign country. Therefore, the above table recommended that Zhou Ben should lead an army of 30,000 to fight the enemy around Xingtai City.

古文：弁刚勇轻进，师徒败绩，弁单骑裸身潜遁，夜归城。贼亦收辎重铠甲而还。
现代文：周弁刚烈勇敢轻率地冒进，他的部队吃了大败仗，周弁一人一骑光着身子逃走，到晚上才回到城里，敌人也收拾起军用物资回去了。
English: Zhou Bengang bravely and rashly rushed in. His troops suffered a great defeat. Zhou Ben ran away naked on horseback. He only returned to the city in the evening. The enemy also packed up their military supplies and went back.

古文：生因囚弁以请罪，王并舍之。
现代文：淳于棼于是囚禁起周弁向皇上请求处罚，国王全都赦免了他们。
English: As a result, Zhou Ben pleaded with the emperor for punishment, and the king pardoned them all.

古文：是月，司宪周弁疽发背卒。
现代文：这个月，司宪周弁背上疽病发作死了。
English: This month, Constitutional Court Chief Justice Zhou Benguang died of a gangrene attack on his upper back.

古文：生妻公主遘疾，旬日又薨。
现代文：淳于棼的妻子金枝公主也得了病，十多天也死了。
English: His wife, Princess Kaneda, also fell ill and died more than ten days later.

古文：生因请罢郡，护丧赴国，王许之，便以司农田子华行南柯太守事。
现代文：淳于棼接着请求免去自己的太守职务，护送公主的灵柩回都城去，国王答应了他，就让司农田子华代理南柯太守的职务。
English: Chunyu then asked to be relieved of his duties as crown prince and to escort the princess's coffin back to the capital. The king agreed to his request and asked Sino-Tian Zihua to act as crown prince of Nanko.

古文：生哀恸发引，威仪在途，男女叫号，人吏奠馔，攀辕遮道者，不可胜数，遂达于国。
现代文：淳于棼悲哀痛若地护送灵柩启程，威严的仪仗队慢慢地走在路上，哭号的男女，陈设食品祭奠的百姓官使，扯住车辕拦住道路极力挽留的人，数也数不清，就这样回到了都城。
English: A solemn honor guard marched slowly down the road, accompanied by the sad and sorrowful escort of the casket, the wailing men and women, the people's officials and envoys who set up food offerings, and the countless people who stopped the road with their carriages and tried their best to hold it back, and thus returned to the capital.

古文：王与夫人素衣哭于郊，候灵舆之至。
现代文：国王和王后穿着白衣服在郊外痛哭，等候着灵柩的到来，授给公主的称号是 顺仪公主 。
English: The king and queen, dressed in white, wept bitterly in the suburbs, waiting for the arrival of the coffin. The title given to the princess was Shunyi Princess.

古文：谥公主曰顺仪公主，备仪仗羽葆鼓吹，葬于国东十里盘龙冈。
现代文：然后准备好华盖和乐队，把公主埋葬在国都东面十里的盘龙冈。
English: Then prepare the casket and band, and bury the princess in Panlonggang, ten miles east of the capital.

古文：是月，故司宪子荣信亦护丧赴国。
现代文：这一月，已故司宪周弁的儿子周子荣护着灵柩回到国都。
English: This month, Zhou Zi Rong, the son of the late constitutionalist Zhou Ben, escorted the casket back to the capital.

古文：生久镇外藩，结好中国，贵门豪族，靡不是洽。
现代文：淳于棼长期镇守藩国，与满朝文武都相处得很好，权贵人家和豪门大族，没有一个不跟他相处得很好的。
English: Junyuban was a long-term commander of the domain, and he got along well with the Manchurian, Manchu and Wuzhong dynasties. There was not a single person of power and nobility, or a member of a large family, who did not get along well with him.

古文：自罢郡还国，出入无恒，交游宾从，威福日盛，王意疑惮之。
现代文：自从罢去郡职务回到首都，出外或在家没有一定的时间，而交往游历时跟随的宾客随从，也开始作威作福，并一天天地兴盛起来。
English: Since he returned to the capital after being dismissed from his county post, he has not had much time to go out or stay at home, and the entourage of guests who followed him when he traveled has also begun to show off and prosper day by day.

古文：时有国人上表云，玄象谪见，国有大恐，都邑迁徙，宗庙崩坏。衅起他族，事在萧墙。
现代文：国王心里已经有些疑忌和惧怕他了。这时国内有人上表说： 天象表现出谴责的征象，国家将有大灾祸，首都要搬迁，宗庙要崩坏，这灾祸将由外姓人引起，祸患将由内部发生。 
English: The king already had some suspicion and fear of him in his heart. At this time, some people in the country came forward to say: the celestial bodies show signs of condemnation, the country will have a great disaster, the capital will be relocated, the ancestral temple will collapse, this disaster will be caused by foreigners, and the disaster will occur from within.

古文：时议以生侈僭之应也，遂夺生侍卫，禁生游从，处之私第。
现代文：当时的议论认为各种天象的出现是淳于棼奢侈得超越本份的反映，于是就撤销了淳于棼的卫士，禁止淳于棼随便游玩，软禁在家里。
English: At that time, it was argued that the appearance of various celestial objects was a reflection of Chunyu Kun's extravagance beyond his duty, so the guards of Chunyu Kun were revoked, Chunyu Kun was forbidden to play casually, and he was placed under house arrest.

古文：生自恃守郡多年，曾无败政，流言怨悖，郁郁不乐。
现代文：淳于棼依仗着自己多年来镇守南柯郡，一点也没有不良的政事，只因谣言而引起国王的怨恨和疏远，心里烦闷不快乐。
English: Junyuriy relied on himself to guard Nanko County for many years. There were no bad political affairs at all, only rumors caused the king's resentment and alienation. He was bored and unhappy.

古文：王亦知之，因命生曰： 姻亲二十余年，不幸小女夭枉，不得与君子偕老，良用痛伤。夫人因留孙自鞠育之。 
现代文：国王也了解他的心思，因而命令淳于棼说： 我们结成亲属二十多年，不幸小女儿短命而死，不能与你白头偕老，实在令人悲痛哀伤，所以王后留下外孙子亲自养育他们。 
English: The king also understood his thoughts, so he ordered Chun Yu to say, "We have been relatives for more than twenty years. Unfortunately, our youngest daughter died young. It is very sad that she cannot grow old with you. Therefore, the queen left her grandchild to raise them herself.

古文：又谓生曰： 卿离家多时，可暂归本里，一见亲族，诸孙留此，无以为念。后三年，当令迎生。 
现代文：又对淳于棼说： 你离家已经很久了，可以暂时回家乡去，看望一下亲戚，几个外孙留在这里，你也不要挂念他们，三年以后，我会让他们去迎接你回来。 
English: He also said to Junyu Zhuang, "You have been away from home for a long time. You can go back to your hometown for a while and visit your relatives. A few grandchildren will stay here. Don't worry about them. In three years, I will let them go to welcome you back."

古文：生曰： 此乃家矣，何更归焉？ 
现代文：淳于棼说： 这里就是我的家，怎么还要回家呢？ 
English: "This is my home, how can I go home again?" said Jun Yuqi.

古文：王笑曰： 卿本人间，家非在此。 
现代文：国王笑着说： 你本来在人世间，家不在这里。 
English: The king smiled and said, "You were born in the world, but your home is not here.

古文：生忽若惛睡，瞢然久之，方乃发悟前事，遂流涕请还。王顾左右以送生，生再拜而去。
现代文：淳于棼忽然觉得像似在昏睡，迷迷糊糊地，很长时间之后，才突然想起从前的事，于是流着泪请求回到人间，国王示意左右的人送淳于棼走，淳于棼拜了又拜之后走了。
English: Chunyu suddenly felt as if he was in a coma, confused, and after a long time, he suddenly remembered the past, so he tearfully asked to return to the world. The king gestured to the people around him to send Chunyu away. Chunyu bowed and bowed and then left.

古文：复见前二紫衣使者从焉，至大户外，见所乘车甚劣，左右亲使御仆，遂无一人，心甚叹异。
现代文：此时又看见那两个紫衣使者跟从着，走到大门之外，看见乘坐的车子很破旧，左右支使的人和车夫仆人，一个人也没有，心里很感叹奇怪。
English: At this time, he also saw the two purple-robed emissaries follow him and go outside the gate. He saw that the car they were riding in was very old, and there was no one to support them on the right and left, nor was there a servant to drive the car. He was very surprised and puzzled.

古文：生上车行可数里，复出大城，宛是昔年东来之途，山川源野，依然如旧。
现代文：淳于棼上车走了大约几里地，又走出一个大城门，很象是从前向东走，来大槐安国时的道路，山川和原野，仍然象从前一样。
English: After getting on the bus, Chun Yu walked for a few miles and came out of a big gate. It was as if he had been walking eastwards. The roads, mountains, rivers and fields of the time when he came to Daguang'an were still the same as before.

古文：所送二使者，甚无威势，生逾怏怏。
现代文：送他的两个使者，一点威严的气势也没有，淳于棼的心里更加不痛快。
English: The two emissaries who sent him did not have the slightest air of majesty, which was even more displeasing to Jun Yuqi's heart.

古文：生问使者曰： 广陵郡何时可到？ 
现代文：淳于棼问使者说： 广陵郡什么时候能到？ 
English: Jun Yuqi asked the messenger: "When can I arrive in Guangling County?"

古文：二使讴歌自若。久之乃答曰： 少顷即至。 
现代文：两个使者自顾唱着小调，很久之后才回答说： 不一会就到了。 
English: The two messengers hummed to themselves for a long time before replying, "I'll be there in a minute."

古文：俄出一穴，见本里闾巷，不改往日。潸然自悲，不觉流涕。
现代文：不一会儿走出一个洞穴，又看见自己家乡里巷，与从前没有什么两样，暗中悲伤起来，不觉流下泪来。
English: After a while, I walked out of a cave and saw the alleys of my hometown, which were no different from before. I was secretly saddened and shed tears.

古文：二使者引生下车，入其门，升自阶，己身卧于堂东庑之下。生甚惊畏，不敢前近。
现代文：两个使者领着淳于棼下车，进入他家的大门，登上自己家的台阶，看见自己的身体躺在堂屋东面的走廊里，淳于棼很吃惊、害怕，不敢近前去，两个使者于是大声呼叫淳于棼的姓名，叫了好几遍，淳于棼才突然醒悟象原先一样。
English: The two emissaries led Chun Yu Yao out of the car, entered the gate of his house, climbed the steps of his house, and saw his body lying in the corridor on the east side of the house. Chun Yu Yao was very surprised and afraid, and did not dare to approach. The two emissaries then shouted Chun Yu Yao's name and called several times, and Chun Yu Yao suddenly woke up as before.

古文：二使因大呼生之姓名数声，生遂发寤如初，见家之僮仆，拥篲于庭，二客濯足于榻，斜日未隐于西垣，余樽尚湛于东牖。
现代文：看见家里的僮仆，正拿着扫帚在庭前扫地，两个客人坐在床榻上洗脚，斜射的阳光还未从西墙上消失，东窗下没有喝完的酒还在那里地放着。梦中一会儿的时间，象是活了一辈子。
English: Seeing the family's servant sweeping the ground in front of the courtyard with a broom, two guests sitting on the bed and washing their feet, the slanting sunlight not yet disappearing from the west wall, and the unfinished wine still lying there under the east window. A moment in a dream feels like a lifetime.

古文：梦中倏忽，若度一世矣，生感念嗟叹，遂呼二客而语之，惊骇，因与生出外，寻槐下穴。
现代文：淳于棼感慨思念叹气不已，就叫过两个客人把梦中的事说给他们了。他们也是又惊又怕，于是与淳于棼一起出去，寻找槐树下的洞穴。
English: With a sigh of emotion and longing, Jun Yuxuan called two guests to tell them about the dream. They were also shocked and afraid, so they went out with Jun Yuxuan to look for a cave under the eucalyptus tree.

古文：生指曰： 此即梦中所惊入处。 
现代文：淳于棼指着说： 这个就是我在梦中惊恐进去的地方。 
English: "This is the place I was scared to go in my dream," Junyu said, pointing at the cocoon.

古文：二客将谓狐狸木媚之所为祟，遂命仆夫荷斤斧，断拥肿，折查枿，寻穴究源。
现代文：两个客人以为是狐狸精和树妖作的怪，就让仆人拿来斧头，砍断树根，又砍去后来重生的树枝。
English: The two guests thought that it was a monster made by a fox spirit and a tree spirit, so they asked the servant to bring an axe and cut the roots of the tree, and also cut the branches that were later reborn.

古文：旁可袤丈，有大穴，根洞然明朗，可容一榻，上有积土壤，以为城郭台殿之状，有蚁数斛，隐聚其中。中有小台，其色若丹，二大蚁处之，素翼朱首，长可三寸，左右大蚁数十辅之，诸蚁不敢近，此其王矣，即槐安国都也。
现代文：周围大约一丈方圆，有个大洞穴，根部空空洞洞地看得清清楚楚，能容下一张床，上面有堆积的土，做成城郭台殿的样子。好几斛蚂蚁，隐藏聚集在里面，中间有个小台，是红色的，两个大蚂蚁住在那里，白色的翅膀，红色的头，长大约三寸，周围有几十只大蚂蚁保护着他，其它蚂蚁不敢靠近。这就是他们的国王，这里也就是槐安国的国都。
English: There is a large cave about a meter square around it. The root is hollow and can be clearly seen. It can accommodate a bed with a pile of soil on it, making it look like a castle platform. Several ants are hidden and gathered inside. There is a small platform in the middle, which is red. Two large ants live there, white wings, red head, about three inches long. Dozens of large ants protect him around, other ants do not dare to approach. This is their king, here is the capital of Shao'an.

古文：又穷一穴，直上南枝可四丈，宛转方中，亦有土城小楼，群蚁亦处其中，即生所领南柯郡也。
现代文：又挖掘了一个洞穴，直上南面的槐树枝大约四丈，曲折宛转，中间呈方形，也有用土堆成的城墙和小楼，一群蚂蚁也住在里面，这里就是淳于棼镇守的南柯郡。
English: They also excavated a cave. The branches of the eucalyptus trees straight up to the south are about four meters high, twisted and turned, and square in the middle. There are also walls and small buildings made of useful soil. A group of ants also live inside. This is Nanko County, which is governed by the town of Junyu.

古文：又一穴，西去二丈，磅礴空朽，嵌窞异状，中有一腐龟壳，大如斗，积雨浸润，小草丛生，繁茂翳荟，掩映振壳，即生所猎灵龟山也。
现代文：又一个洞穴，向西去二丈远，洞穴宽广空旷，土洞的形状很不一样，中间有一个腐烂了的乌龟壳，象斗那么大，在积雨的浸润下，长满了一丛丛小草，小草长得很茂盛，遮蔽着古旧的乌龟壳，这里就是淳于棼打猎的灵龟山。
English: Another cave, far to the west, the cave is wide and empty, the shape of the earth cave is very different, in the middle there is a rotten turtle shell, as big as an elephant's trunk, under the infiltration of accumulated rain, it is covered with a clump of grass, the grass grows very luxuriantly, covering the ancient turtle shell, here is the turtle mountain that is just hunting.

古文：又穷一穴，东去丈余，古根盘屈，若龙虺之状，中有小土壤，高尺余，即生所葬妻盘龙冈之墓也。
现代文：又挖出一个洞穴，向东去一丈多，古老的树根盘旋弯曲着，象龙蛇一样，中间一个小土堆，高一尺多，这就是淳于棼埋葬妻子的盘龙冈上的坟墓。
English: They also dug out a cave, more than a meter to the east, with ancient tree roots spiraling and bending like dragons and snakes, and a small mound in the middle, more than a foot high. This is the tomb on the dragon hill where Jun Yuqi buried his wife.

古文：追想前事，感叹于怀，披阅穷迹，皆符所梦。
现代文：淳于棼回想起梦中的事情，心里十分感叹，亲自观看追寻迹象，和梦中全都符合。
English: Thinking back on the events in the dream, Jun Yuyao was very impressed. When he saw the signs of pursuit in person, they were all consistent with the dream.

古文：不欲二客坏之，遽令掩塞如旧。
现代文：他不想让两个客人毁坏它们，马上让人们掩埋堵塞象原来一样。
English: He didn't want the two guests to ruin them, and immediately had people bury the blockage as it was.

古文：是夕，风雨暴发。旦视其穴，遂失群蚁，莫知所去。
现代文：这天晚上，风雨突然发作，早晨起来去看那洞穴，所有蚂蚁都失去踪迹，不知去了哪里。
English: That night, the wind and rain suddenly hit, and when I got up in the morning to look at the cave, all the ants had disappeared and I didn't know where they had gone.

古文：故先言国有大恐，都邑迁徙，此其验矣。
现代文：所以先前说国家将要有大灾难，都城要迁移，这就验证了。
English: So what I said before, that the country would have a catastrophe and the capital would have to be moved, has been confirmed.

古文：复念檀萝征伐之事，又请二客访迹于外。宅东一里，有古涸涧，侧有大檀树一株，藤萝拥织，上不见日，旁有小穴，亦有群蚁隐聚其间，檀萝之国，岂非此耶！
现代文：又想起檀萝国侵略的事，就请两个客人到外面去寻访踪迹，住宅东面一里，有条古老的干涸了的山涧，山涧边上有一株大檀树，藤和萝纠缠交织，向上看不见太阳，旁边有个小洞穴，也有一群蚂蚁隐藏聚居在里面，檀萝国，难道不就是这里吗？
English: Thinking again about the invasion of Danro, he invited two guests to go outside to search for traces. A mile east of the house, there is an ancient dried-up mountain ridge. On the edge of the ridge, there is a large sandalwood tree. Wisteria and radish are entangled and intertwined, and the sun cannot be seen from above. There is a small cave next to it, and there is also a group of ants hiding and living in it. Danro, isn't it here?

古文：嗟乎！蚁之灵异，犹不可穷，况山藏木伏之大者所变化乎？
现代文：唉，蚂蚁的神奇，尚且不能考究明白，更何况藏伏在山林之中那些大动物的变化呢？
English: Alas, the magic of ants cannot be studied and understood, not to mention the changes of those large animals hiding in the mountains and forests.

古文：时生酒徒周弁、田子华，并居六合县，不与生过从旬日矣，生遽遣家僮疾往候之。
现代文：当时，淳于棼的酒友周弁和田子华，都居住在六合县，不和淳于棼来往已经十天了。
English: At that time, both Zhou Ben and Tian Zihua, Jun Yuxuan's drinking friends, lived in Liuhe County. It had been ten days since they had been in contact with Jun Yuxuan.

古文：周生暴疾已逝，田子华亦寝疾于床。
现代文：淳于棼急忙派家僮快去问候他们，周生得了暴病已经去世了，田子华也得病躺在床上。
English: Jun Yuxuan hurriedly sent his family members to greet them. Zhou Sheng had died of a violent illness, and Tian Zihua was also sick and lying in bed.

古文：生感南柯之浮虚，悟人世之倏忽，遂栖心道门，绝弃酒色。
现代文：淳于棼感慨南柯一梦的漂渺空虚，从此不喝酒也不接近女人。
English: Feeling the emptiness of Nanko's dream, Jun Yuyao no longer drinks alcohol or approaches women.

古文：后三年，岁在丁丑，亦终于家，时年四十七，将符宿契之限矣。
现代文：三年以后，是丁丑年，也在家里死去，当时年龄是四十七岁，符合从前约定的期限。
English: Three years later, in the Year of the Ox, he also died at home, at the age of forty-seven, in accordance with the previously agreed deadline.

古文：公佐贞元十八年秋八月，自吴之洛，暂泊淮浦，偶觌淳于生棼，询访遗迹。翻复再三，事皆摭实，辄编录成传，以资好事。
现代文：李公佐在贞元十八年秋天八月份时，从吴郡到洛阳，临时停泊在淮河岸边，偶然看见了淳于棼，就询问访求他遗留下来的事迹，再三反复地推敲，事情全都是从事实中摘取下来的，就编写抄录成传记，以供给好事人阅读。
English: In the autumn and August of the 18th year of Zhengyuan, Li Gongzao traveled from Wu County to Luoyang, temporarily anchored on the bank of the Huai River. He happened to see Chunyu Yao, inquired about and visited the deeds he left behind, and repeatedly reasoned that the things were all taken from the facts, and compiled and copied into a biography to provide good people to read.

古文：虽稽神语怪，事涉非经，而窃位著生，冀将为戒。后之君子，幸以南柯为偶然，无以名位骄于天壤间云。
现代文：虽然涉及的是神灵怪异的事情，事情有点不合常情，可是那些窃取官位而维持生活的人，希望这个故事能成为他的借鉴，后来的正人君子们，希望你们把南柯一梦当做是偶然的事，不要拿名利地位在人世间炫耀骄傲了。
English: Although it involves the strange things of gods, things are a bit unusual, but those who steal official positions and maintain their lives, I hope this story can be his reference, later righteous gentlemen, I hope you treat Nanko's dream as a matter of chance, don't take fame and fortune status in the world to show off pride.

古文：前华州参军李肇赞曰： 贵极禄位，权倾国都。达人视此，蚁聚何殊。 
现代文：以前的华州参军李肇赞叹说： 官做到最高的等级，权力压倒了京城里所有的人，达观的人看待这样的事，跟聚集在一起的蚂蚁有什么区别。 
English: Li Zhao, a former member of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, said admiringly: "The officials have reached the highest level, and the power has overwhelmed all the people in Beijing. The people of Daguan look at such a thing, and what is the difference from the ants gathered together.

