古文：凡与敌各守疆界，若敌人寇抄我境，以扰边民，可于要害处设伏兵，或筑障塞以邀之，敌必不敢轻犯。
现代文：大凡在敌我双方各守自己疆界的情况下，如果敌人进犯我边界，袭扰我边民时，可在边界要害之处埋设伏兵，或者构筑障碍要塞用以拦截敌人。这样，敌人一定不敢轻率来犯。
English: Generally speaking, under the circumstances that both sides of the enemy defend their own borders, if the enemy invades our borders and harasses our border residents, they can set up ambushes at the critical points of the border, or build obstacle fortresses to intercept the enemy. In this way, the enemy will not dare to commit crimes.

古文：法曰： 能使敌人不得至者，害之也。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 能使敌人无法达到其预定目标的，是我设置重重障碍妨害它的缘故。 
English: As it is said in the art of war: I can prevent the enemy from achieving his predetermined goal by setting up many obstacles to prevent him from doing so.

古文：唐时，朔方军总管沙矺忠义为突厥所败，诏张仁愿摄御史大夫代之。
现代文：唐朝中宗神龙三年，朔方军总管沙吒忠义被突厥军打败，朝廷下诏派张仁愿任御史大夫去接替他打突厥军。
English: During the three years of Emperor Shenlong's reign in the Tang Dynasty, the commander-in-chief of the Shuo army, Shaju Zhongyi, was defeated by the Turkic army, and the imperial court sent Zhang Ren to succeed him as chief historian to fight the Turkic army.

古文：既至，贼已出，率兵蹑击，夜掩其营，破之。
现代文：张仁愿抵达任所时，突厥兵已经退走，于是他便率军跟踪追击，乘夜偷袭，击败了突厥军。
English: When Zhang Renzhong arrived at the post, the Turkish soldiers had already retreated, so he led the army to follow and pursue, sneak attack at night, and defeated the Turkish army.

古文：始，朔方军与突厥以河为界，北崖有拂云祠，突厥每犯边，必先谒祠祷祀，然后引兵渡而南。
现代文：在此之前，唐朝朔方军与突厥是以黄河为分界的。黄河北岸有个拂云祠，突厥首领每次率兵南下侵犯边界，必定先到该祠祷告以求神灵保佑，然后再引兵渡过黄河南下。
English: Prior to this, the Tang Dynasty's Shuangfang Army and the Turks were separated by the Yellow River. On the north bank of the Yellow River, there was a cloud-blowing shrine. Every time a Turkic leader led his troops south to violate the border, he must first go to the shrine to pray for the blessing of the gods, and then lead his troops across the Yellow River to the south.

古文：时默啜悉兵西击突骑施，张仁愿请乘虚取漠南，于河北筑三受降城，绝虏南寇路。
现代文：张仁愿刚来这里时，恰值突厥可汗默啜率领全军西向进攻突骑施，仁愿奏请中宗批准其率兵乘突厥内部空虚之隙而攻取了漠南地区，并于黄河以北修筑东、中、西三座受降城，以此切断敌人南犯的进军道路。
English: When Zhang Renzhong first came here, it was just in time for the Turkic khan Miao to lead the whole army to the west to attack and raid Shi. Renzhong asked Zhongzong to approve his soldiers to take advantage of the empty space inside the Turks to capture the southern desert area, and to build three cities north of the Yellow River, East, Central and West, in order to cut off the enemy's southward invasion path.

古文：唐休璟以为： 西汉以来，皆南守河，今筑城虏腹中，终为所有。 
现代文：但此请求却遭到了尚书右仆射唐休璟的反对，他认为： 自两汉以来，国家在这个地区都是以北守黄河为限，如今却要筑城于敌人腹地之中，最终结果还是为敌人所占有。 
English: However, this request was opposed by Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, Tang Xiuqi, who said: Since the Han Dynasty, the country has been limited to guarding the Yellow River in this region, but now it wants to build a city in the enemy's heartland, and the final result will be occupied by the enemy.

古文：仁愿固请，中宗许之。
现代文：为此，张仁愿一再上表申述自己的请求，唐中宗最后终于批准了他筑城的请求。
English: To this end, Zhang Renzhen repeatedly petitioned his request, and Tang Zhongzong finally approved his request to build a city.

古文：表留岁满镇兵以助其功，时咸阳兵二百人逃归，仁愿擒之，尽斩城下，军中股栗，役者尽力，六旬而三城就。
现代文：仁愿还上表请求准许其把服役期满即将返乡的士兵留下帮助筑城。当时有咸阳籍镇兵二百人怠工逃跑，仁愿派人抓回后全部杀死在城下，全军上下都为之所震慑。
English: At that time, there were two hundred soldiers from Xianyang who were slacking off and ran away. After sending someone to recapture them, they killed them all under the city. The entire army was shocked by this.

古文：以拂云为中城，南直朔方；西城南直灵武，东城南直榆林。
现代文：自此以后，参加筑城的人都很卖力，仅用六十天就将三座城垒修好了：以拂云祠处的筑城为中受降城，向南直通朔方镇；西受降城向南直通灵武镇；东受降城向南直通榆林镇。
English: Since then, the people who participated in the construction of the city have been working hard, and it took only sixty days to complete the construction of three fortresses: the building of the city at the Huiyun ancestral hall is the middle city, and it is connected to Shuo Fang Town to the south; the west city is connected to Lingwu Town to the south; and the east city is connected to Yulin Town to the south.

古文：三垒相距各四百余里，其北皆大碛也，斥地三百里远。
现代文：三座城间各相距四百余里，其北面是大沙漠，这样为国家拓宽疆土三百里远。
English: The distance between each of the three cities is more than four hundred miles, and there is a large desert to the north, which is three hundred miles away for the country to expand its territory.

古文：又于牛头朝那山北置烽候千八百所。
现代文：同时，又在牛头朝那山北设置烽火瞭望台一千八百个。
English: At the same time, 1,800 campfire lookout posts were set up in the northern part of Niu Tou Cha Na Shan.

古文：自是突厥不敢逾山牧马，朔方复无寇。
现代文：从此，突厥人不敢越山牧马，朔方也看不到敌兵的踪迹。
English: From then on, the Turks did not dare to cross the mountain pasture, and the Shuo side could not see the traces of the enemy soldiers.

古文：岁省费亿计，减镇兵数万。
现代文：每年能节银以亿计算，缩减镇兵几万人。
English: Annual savings can be calculated in the hundreds of millions of silver, reducing the number of townspeople by tens of thousands.

