古文：三年春，王正月，公如晋，至河乃复。
现代文：三年春季，周历正月，定公去到晋国，到达黄河就回来了。
English: In the spring of the third year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Ding Gong went to Jin Province and returned when he reached the Yellow River.

古文：二月辛卯，邾子穿卒。
现代文：二月辛卯日，邾庄公去世。
English: In February, on the day of Xinwu, Gong Zhuanggong passed away.

古文：夏四月。
现代文：夏季四月。
English: In the summer, in April, nothing.

古文：秋，葬邾庄公。
现代文：秋季，安葬邾庄公。
English: In autumn, the funeral of Shanzhuanggong.

古文：冬，仲孙何忌及邾子盟于拔。
现代文：冬季，仲孙何忌和邾子在拔地结盟。
English: In winter, the middle son, He Boi, and the son, Zouzi, formed an alliance at Bati.

古文：三年春二月辛卯，邾子在门台，临廷。
现代文：三年春季，二月二十九日，邾庄公在门楼上，下临庭院。
English: In the spring of the third year, on February 29th, Gong Zhuang Gong went up the gate tower and came down to the courtyard.

古文：阍以缾水沃廷。
现代文：守门人用瓶装水洒在庭院里。
English: The doorman sprinkled the courtyard with bottled water.

古文：邾子望见之，怒。
现代文：邾庄公远远看见了，发怒。
English: He saw it from far away and got angry.

古文：阍曰： 夷射姑旋焉。 
现代文：守门人说： 夷射姑曾在这里小便。 
English: The gatekeeper said, "Yi Shaogu used to urinate here.

古文：命执之。
现代文：邾庄公命令把夷射姑逮捕起来。
English: Gong Zhuang ordered the arrest of Yishaigu.

古文：弗得，滋怒，自投于床，废于炉炭，烂，遂卒。先葬以车五乘，殉五人。
现代文：没有抓到，更加生气，自己从床上跳下来，摔在炉子里的炭火上，皮肉溃烂，就死了，用五辆车陪葬，用五个人殉葬。
English: When he was not caught, he became even more angry. He jumped out of bed, fell on the charcoal fire in the stove, his flesh festered, and he died. He was buried with five cars and five people.

古文：庄公卞急而好洁，故及是。
现代文：邾庄公急躁而爱干净，所以才弄到这地步。
English: He is impatient and loves cleanliness, which is why he got to this point.

古文：秋九月，鲜虞人败晋师于平中，获晋观虎，恃其勇也。
现代文：秋季，九月，鲜虞人在平中打败晋军，俘虏了晋国的观虎，这是因为他自恃勇敢。
English: In the autumn, in September, Xiangyuan defeated the Jin army in Pingzhong and captured the Guanhu of Jin, because he considered himself brave.

古文：冬，盟于郯，修邾好也。
现代文：冬季，仲孙何忌和邾子在郯地结盟，这是为重修和邾国的友好。
English: In winter, Zhongsun He Boi and Zizi made an alliance in Handan, which was to rebuild the friendship with Handan.

古文：蔡昭侯为两佩与两裘以如楚，献一佩一裘于昭王。
现代文：蔡昭侯制作了两块玉佩和两件皮衣到楚国去，把一块玉佩和一件皮衣献给楚昭王。
English: Cai Zhaohou made two pieces of jade and two leather coats to go to Chu, and dedicated a piece of jade and a leather coat to King Chu Zhaohou.

古文：昭王服之，以享蔡侯。
现代文：昭王穿上皮衣佩戴好玉佩，设享礼招待蔡侯。
English: Shao Wang put on a fur coat, wore a good jade cloak, and set up a ceremony to invite Cai Hou.

古文：蔡侯亦服其一。
现代文：蔡侯也穿带了另外一件皮衣和玉佩。
English: Cai Hou also wore another fur coat and a jade cloak.

古文：子常欲之，弗与。
现代文：子常想要蔡侯的皮衣和玉佩，蔡侯不给，子常就把蔡侯扣留了三年。
English: Zi Chang wanted Cai Hou's fur coat and jade cloak, but Cai Hou would not give it to him, so Zi Chang detained Cai Hou for three years.

古文：三年止之。唐成公如楚，有两肃爽马，子常欲之，弗与。
现代文：唐成公到楚国去，有两匹肃爽马，子常也想要，唐成公不给，子常也把唐成公扣留了三年。
English: When Tang Chenggong went to Chu, he had two horses. Zichang also wanted them, but Tang Chenggong would not give them to him. Zichang also detained Tang Chenggong for three years.

古文：亦三年止之。唐人或相与谋，请代先从者，许之。
现代文：唐国有人互相商量，请求代替先跟成公去的人，答应了。
English: Some people in Tang negotiated with each other and asked to replace the person who went first with Cheng Gong, and they agreed.

古文：饮先从者酒，醉之，窃马而献之子常。
现代文：让先跟去的人喝酒，灌醉了他们，偷了马献给子常。
English: He made those who went ahead of him drink, got them drunk, and stole a horse to give to his son.

古文：子常归唐侯。
现代文：子常送回了唐侯。
English: His son often sent him back to Tang.

古文：自拘于司败，曰： 君以弄马之故，隐君身，弃国家群臣。请相夫人以偿马，必如之。 
现代文：偷马的人自己囚禁到了唐国司法官那里，说： 国君由于玩马的缘故，使自身失去自由，抛弃了国家和群臣，臣下们请求帮助养马人赔偿马，一定要像以往两匹马一样的好。 
English: The person who stole the horse imprisoned himself and went to the judicial officer of Tang, saying: "The sovereign lost his freedom due to horseplay, abandoned the country and the courtiers, and the courtiers requested help from the horse breeder to compensate for the horse. It must be as good as the previous two horses."

古文：唐侯曰： 寡人之过也，二三子无辱。 
现代文：唐侯说： 这是寡人的过错。您几位不要羞辱自己！ 
English: Tang Hou said, "This is the fault of only a few people. Don't humiliate yourselves!

古文：皆赏之。
现代文：对他们全都给予赏赐。
English: Reward them all.

古文：蔡人闻之，固请而献佩于子常。
现代文：蔡国人听说了这件事，坚决请求，而把玉佩献给了子常。
English: When the people of Cai heard about this, they made a firm request and dedicated the jade sword to Zichang.

古文：子常朝，见蔡侯之徒，命有司曰： 蔡君之久也，官不共也。
现代文：子常上朝，见到蔡侯的手下人，就命令官员们说： 蔡侯所以长久留在我国，都是由于你们不供给饯别的礼物。
English: Zichang went to the morning, saw Cai Hou's subordinates, and ordered the officials to say: Cai Hou stayed in our country for a long time because you did not provide a parting gift.

古文：明日，礼不毕，将死。 
现代文：到明天礼物再不完备，就要处死你们。 
English: If by tomorrow the gift is not complete, you will be put to death.

古文：蔡侯归，及汉，执玉而沈，曰： 余所有济汉而南者，有若大川！ 
现代文：蔡侯回国，到达汉水，拿起玉丢入汉水中，说： 我要是再渡汉水往南，有大河为证！ 
English: Cai Hou returned to China, reached the Han River, picked up the ball and threw it into the Han River, saying: If I cross the Han River to the south again, there is a big river to prove it!

古文：蔡侯如晋，以其子元与其大夫之子为质焉，而请伐楚。
现代文：蔡侯到晋国去，以他的儿子元和大夫的儿子作为人质，请求进攻楚国。
English: Cai Hou went to Jin Province and took his son Yuan and Dafu's son as hostages to request an attack on Chu.

