古文：凡欲征伐，先用间谍，觇敌之众寡、虚实、动静，然后兴师，则大功可立，战无不胜。
现代文：凡是要出兵攻打敌人，首先要派遣间谍秘密探明敌军人数之多少、力量之虚实、部队之行止，然后才能出兵。这样就能大功告成，战无不胜。
English: Whenever you want to send troops to attack the enemy, you must first send spies to secretly find out the number of enemy troops, the strength of the forces, and the behavior of the troops before you can send troops. In this way, great achievements can be made and the war is invincible.

古文：法曰： 无所不用间也。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 无时无处不可以使用间谍。 
English: As the law of war says, spies can be used anywhere and at any time.

古文：周将韦叔裕，字孝宽，以德行守镇玉壁。
现代文：南北朝时期，北周名将韦叔裕，字孝宽，凭借自身之德行而长期镇守在玉壁城。
English: During the period of the Northern and Southern Dynasties, the famous Northern Zhou generals Wei Shyuyu and Zi Xiaokang, by virtue of their own virtues, kept the town in Yubi City for a long time.

古文：孝宽善于抚御，能得人心，所遣间谍入齐者，皆为尽力。
现代文：他善于抚慰和管理士卒，甚得部众拥护。因此，他所派往北齐的间谍，都能尽全力的搜集情报。
English: He was good at soothing and managing people, and was very popular. The spies he sent to Qi did their best for him.

古文：亦有齐人得孝宽赂金者，遥通书疏。故齐动静，朝廷皆知之。
现代文：也有为他重金收买的北齐人，从齐国送来情报。所以，北齐有什么动静，北周都了如指掌。
English: There are also North Qi people who have been bribed heavily by him to send information from Qi. Therefore, North Zhou knows everything about what is going on in North Qi.

古文：齐相斛律光，字明月，贤而有勇，孝宽深忌之。
现代文：北齐左丞相斛律光，字明月，既贤明又勇武，是为孝宽非常忌恨的一个对手。
English: Northern Qi Zuozheng minister Zou Riguang, nicknamed "Ming Yue," was both wise and brave, and was an opponent that Xiaokang detested very much.

古文：参军曲严颇知卜筮，谓孝宽曰： 来年东朝必大杀戮。 
现代文：参军曲严颇懂占卜之术，他对孝宽说： 明年，北齐必因相互残杀而大乱。 
English: Joining the army, Qu Yan quite understood the art of divination. He said to Xiao Guang, "Next year, the Northern Qi will be in turmoil due to mutual killing.

古文：孝宽因令严作谣歌曰： 百升飞上天，明月照长安。 
现代文：孝宽因此命令曲严编造歌谣，说： 百升飞上天，明月照长安。 
English: Therefore, Takahiro ordered Qu Yan to make up a ballad, saying: "Hundreds soar into the sky, the bright moon shines on Chang'an."

古文：百升，斛也。又言： 高山不推自崩，槲木不扶自立。 
现代文： 百升 ，就呈一斛，又说： 高山不推自隤，槲木不扶自立。 
English: He also said, "Mountains do not move by themselves, and trees do not stand on their own.

古文：令谍者多赉此文，遗之于邺。祖孝征与光有隙，既闻，更润色之。明月卒以此见诛。
现代文：然后命令间谍携带大量写好歌谣的传单，散发到齐都邺城，北齐尚书左仆射祖孝徵与斛律光有矛盾，他得此传单后则更添油加醋地报告了齐后主高纬，斛律光最终因此而惨遭杀害。
English: Then he ordered the spies to carry a large number of leaflets with well-written songs and distribute them to Qi Duyuan City. Northern Qi Shangshu's right-hand man, Sha Zu Xiao Zheng, had a conflict with Baliguang. After he received this leaflet, he even more emphatically reported that Baliguang was the master of Qi Duyuan. Baliguang was eventually killed because of this.

古文：周武帝闻光死，赦其境内，后大举兵伐之，遂灭齐。
现代文：北周武帝宇文邕获悉斛律光被杀身亡的消息后，高兴得立即向全国颁布大赦令。立即出动大军讨伐，终于灭掉了北齐。
English: After the Northern Zhouwu Emperor Uwen Hui learned the news of the death of Gong Liguang, he was so happy that he immediately issued an amnesty order to the whole country. He immediately dispatched a large army to fight, and finally eliminated the Northern Qi.

