古文：王守仁王阳明年十二，继母待之不慈。父官京师，公度不能免。
现代文：王阳明十二岁时，继母常常虐待他，而他父亲远在京师任官，根本不知王阳明的遭遇。
English: When Wang Yangming was twelve years old, his stepmother often abused him, and his father, who was stationed in Beijing, did not know what happened to Wang Yangming.

古文：以母信佛，乃夜潜起，列五托子于室门。母晨兴，见而心悸。他日复如之，母愈骇，然犹不悛也。
现代文：王阳明不得已，乃利用继母笃信佛教的弱点，于半夜悄悄起床，把茶盘放在佛堂门外，第二天早晨继母见了，觉得非常奇怪，可是日后每天都如此，继母不由得心中发毛，但她对王阳明的态度依然如故。
English: Wang Yangming had no choice but to take advantage of his stepmother's weakness of believing in Buddhism. He got up quietly in the middle of the night and placed the tea tray outside the door of the Buddhist temple. When his stepmother saw him the next morning, she thought it was very strange, but it happened every day after that. His stepmother couldn't help but feel sad, but her attitude towards Wang Yangming remained the same.

古文：公乃于郊外访射鸟者，得一异形鸟，生置母衾内，母整衾，见怪鸟飞去。大惧，召巫媪问之。
现代文：有一天，王阳明到郊外找寻捕鸟人，买下一只平日罕见的怪鸟，放在继母被内。继母整理床铺时，突然看见这只怪鸟，害怕鬼魅作祟，便赶紧请来巫婆占卜。
English: One day, Wang Yangming went to the suburbs to look for a bird catcher, bought a rare rare bird and put it in his stepmother's quilt. When the stepmother was making the bed, she suddenly saw this strange bird and was afraid of ghosts, so she quickly invited a witch to tell fortunes.

古文：公怀金赂媪，诈言： 王状元前室责母虐其遗婴，今诉于天，遣阴兵收汝魂魄，衾中之鸟是也。 
现代文：谁知王阳明早就买通巫婆，对继母说： 王状元前妻对自己儿子遭人虐待很生气，上告天帝，现在天帝派阴兵下凡拘捕你的魂魄，被中的怪鸟，就是阴兵的化身。 
English: Who knew that Wang Yangming had already bribed his way through the witch and said to his stepmother: Wang Lianyuan's ex-wife was very angry about her son being mistreated, and appealed to the Heavenly Emperor. Now the Heavenly Emperor has sent the Yin soldiers to arrest your soul. The strange bird in the quilt is the embodiment of the Yin soldiers.

古文：后母大恸，叩头谢不敢，公亦泣拜良久。巫故作恨恨，乃蹶然苏。
现代文：继母听了这话，吓得脸色发青，赶紧下跪谢罪，王阳明也哭着跪拜很长一段时间，一旁的巫婆故意连声叹息离去。
English: When the stepmother heard this, she was so scared that her face turned blue and she quickly knelt down to apologize. Wang Yangming also knelt down and cried for a long time. The witch beside her left with a sigh.

古文：自是母性骤改。
现代文：从此后母的性格骤然转变。
English: From then on, my mother's personality suddenly changed.

