古文：辛毗字佐治，颍川阳翟人也。
现代文：辛毗，字佐治，颍川郡阳翟县人。
English: Xin Wei, surnamed George, from Yangshuo County, Beichuan County.

古文：其先建武中，自陇西东迁。毗随兄评从袁绍。
现代文：他的先祖在建武年间从陇西东迁过来，辛毗跟随兄长辛评跟随袁绍。
English: His ancestors moved from the east of Shaanxi Province during the Jianwu period. Xin Pi followed his elder brother, Xin Cao followed Yuan Shao.

古文：太祖为司空，辟毗，毗不得应命。
现代文：太祖担任司空时，征召辛毗，辛毗没有办法答应太祖的征召。
English: When the great-great-grandfather served as the second-in-command, he conscripted Xin Pi, but Xin Pi had no way to accept the call-up of the great-great-grandfather.

古文：及袁尚攻兄谭於平原，谭使毗诣太祖求和。
现代文：等到袁尚在平原郡攻打他的兄长袁谭，袁谭派辛毗到太祖那里求和。
English: When Yuan Shang attacked his brother Yuan Tan in Pingyuan County, Yuan Tan sent Xin Pi to his grandfather to sue for peace.

古文：太祖将征荆州，次于西平。
现代文：太祖将要征讨荆州，县在西平驻扎。
English: Taizu will conquer Jingzhou, and the county will be stationed in Xiping.

古文：毗见太祖致谭意，太祖大悦。
现代文：辛毗拜见太祖后，表达了袁谭的想法，太祖很高兴。
English: After meeting the great-grandfather, Xin Bi Bai expressed Yuan Tan's thoughts, and the great-grandfather was very pleased.

古文：后数日，更欲先平荆州，使谭、尚自相弊。
现代文：几天之后，太祖又改变想法想要先平定荆州，让袁谭、袁尚互相猜疑。
English: A few days later, Taizu changed his mind and wanted to pacify Jingzhou first, making Yuan Tan and Yuan Shang suspicious of each other.

古文：他日置酒，毗望太祖色，知有变，以语郭嘉。
现代文：后来太祖准备了酒席，辛毗望见太祖的神色，知道事情有了变故，就将这件事告诉了郭嘉。
English: Later, the great-grandfather prepared a banquet, and when Xin Pi saw the look on the great-grandfather's face and knew that something had changed, she told Guo Jia about it.

古文：嘉白太祖，太祖谓毗曰： 谭可信？
现代文：郭嘉又告诉太祖，太祖对辛毗说： 袁谭可以相信吗？
English: Guo Jia also told the great-grandfather that the great-grandfather said to Xin Pi: Can Yuan Tan be believed?

古文：尚必可克不？ 
现代文：袁尚一定能攻克吗？ 
English: Will Yuan Shang be able to conquer Cangzhou?

古文：毗对曰： 明公无问信与诈也，直当论其势耳。
现代文：辛毗回答说： 明公不需要问是真是还是有诈，只应该对比形势而已。
English: Xinvi replied, "Ming Gong doesn't need to ask whether something is true or false, he just needs to compare the situations.

古文：袁氏本兄弟相伐，非谓他人能间其间，乃谓天下可定於己也。
现代文：袁氏本来是兄弟互相攻打，不是说其他人能在中间离间的，都说天下是能被自己平定的。
English: The Yuan clan were originally brothers who fought against each other. This does not mean that the others can be separated in the middle. They all say that the world can be pacified by themselves.

古文：今一旦求救於明公，此可知也。
现代文：现在一旦向明公求助，就能知道形势了。
English: Now, if you ask for help from Ming Gong, you can know the situation.

古文：显甫见显思困而不能取，此力竭也。
现代文：袁尚看袁谭困顿却不能攻克他，这是因为势力衰微。
English: Yuan Shang saw Yuan Tan in a difficult situation but could not defeat him. This was because Yuan's power was waning.

古文：兵革败於外，谋臣诛於内，兄弟谗阋，国分为二；连年战伐，而介胄生虮虱，加以旱蝗，饥馑并臻，国无囷仓，行无裹粮，天灾应於上，人事困於下，民无愚智，皆知土崩瓦解，此乃天亡尚之时也。
现代文：外部有军队作战失败，内部又谋臣互相争斗，兄弟之间互相攻讦争抢，国家一分为二；又连年征战，将士的甲胄都生了虱子，再加上旱灾蝗灾，和饥荒一同到来，国家仓库中缺乏粮食，将士行军没有干粮，上天出现天灾的感应，下面又困于人祸，百姓无论是智慧还是愚陋，都知道他们即将土崩瓦解，这是上天要灭亡袁氏的时机。
English: Outside there were armies that failed in battle, inside there were scheming ministers fighting each other, brothers attacking and robbing each other, and the country was divided into two; and even after years of war, the armor of the soldiers had lice, coupled with drought, locusts, and famine, there was a lack of grain in the national warehouse, the soldiers marched without dry grain, the heavens were affected by natural disasters, and below they were trapped by man-made disasters. The people, whether they were wise or stupid, knew that they were about to collapse. This was the time for the heavens to perish the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：兵法称有石城汤池带甲百万而无粟者，不能守也。
现代文：兵法上说有坚固的城墙，深深的护城河，还有一百万装备精良的士兵但却没有粮食，也是不能守城的。
English: The art of war says that you can have a strong wall, a deep moat, and a million well-armed soldiers, but if you don't have food, you can't defend the city.

古文：今往攻邺，尚不还救，即不能自守。
现代文：现在前去攻打邺城，袁尚没有返回救援，就是不能守住自己。
English: Now, Yuan Shang went to attack Lucheng, but he couldn't defend himself without returning for help.

古文：还救，即谭踵其后。以明公之威，应困穷之敌，击疲弊之寇，无异迅风之振秋叶矣。
现代文：如果他返回救援，那袁谭就会紧跟在后，凭借明公您的威势，对付困顿之中的敌人，攻打疲惫的士兵，跟疾风震动落叶没有什么不同。
English: If he comes to the rescue, then Yuan Tan will be right behind him, using his might to deal with the enemy in trouble, attacking tired soldiers, no different from the wind shaking the fallen leaves.

古文：天以袁尚与明公，明公不取而伐荆州。
现代文：上天想要将袁尚的势力交给明公，明公不拿，反而要攻打荆州。
English: Heaven wanted to give Yuan Shang's power to Ming Gong, but Ming Gong did not want to take it, but wanted to attack Jingzhou.

古文：荆州丰乐，国未有衅。
现代文：荆州富饶安乐，城中没有什么矛盾。
English: Jingzhou is rich and comfortable, and there are no contradictions in the city.

古文：仲虺有言： 取乱侮亡。
现代文：仲虺曾说： 夺取政治荒乱的国家，侵侮将亡的国家。 
English: Zhonglu once said: "Seize a country in political turmoil, abuse a dying country."

古文：方今二袁不务远略而内相图，可谓乱矣；居者无食，行者无粮，可谓亡矣。
现代文：现在袁氏两兄弟不想着远大的谋略反而在内互相图谋，可以说是荒乱了；城中的百姓没有食物，在外行军的士兵没有干粮，可以说是将要灭亡了。
English: Now the two brothers of the Yuan family, instead of thinking of a far-reaching strategy, are plotting against each other internally, and it can be said that they are in a state of chaos; the people in the city have no food, and the soldiers of the marching army have no dry grain, and it can be said that they are about to perish.

古文：朝不谋夕，民命靡继，而不绥之，欲待他年；他年或登，又自知亡而改脩厥德，失所以用兵之要矣。
现代文：早上不考虑晚上的事情，百姓的性命无以为继，却不想着安抚百姓，还想要等待来年；来年如果粮食丰收，袁氏又知道自己将要灭亡而修养德行，就会失去出兵的好时机了。
English: In the morning, they don't think about what will happen in the evening, the people's lives are unsustainable, but they don't want to appease the people, they still want to wait for next year; next year, if the grain harvest is plentiful, and the Yuan clan knows that they will perish and cultivate virtue, they will lose a good time to send troops.

古文：今因其请救而抚之，利莫大焉。
现代文：现在袁谭求救而您安抚他，没有更大的好处了。
English: Now that Yuan Tan is calling for help and you are appeasing him, there is no greater benefit.

古文：且四方之寇，莫大於河北；河北平，则六军盛而天下震。 太祖曰： 善。 
现代文：况且四面的敌寇，没有比河北地区更强大的；河北平定，那将军的部队就会更强盛，也会使天下震动。 太祖说： 好。 
English: Moreover, the enemy raiders on all sides were no more powerful than those in the Hebei region; if Hebei was pacified, the general's army would be stronger and would shake the world.

古文：乃许谭平，次于黎阳。
现代文：就答应了袁谭的请就，率军在黎阳驻守。
English: He agreed to Yuan Tan's request and stationed his army in Liyang.

古文：明年攻邺，克之，表毗为议郎。
现代文：第二年，太祖率军攻打邺城，顺利攻克，上表请求封辛毗为议郎。
English: In the second year, the great-grandfather led the army to attack Shicheng and successfully conquered it. The above table requested that Xin Pi be appointed as the negotiator.

古文：久之，太祖遣都护曹洪平下辩，使毗与曹休参之，令曰： 昔高祖贪财好色，而良、平匡其过失。
现代文：过了很久，太祖派都护曹洪平定下辩，并让辛毗和曹休参与这次行动，并下令说： 过去汉高祖贪财好色，而张良、陈平匡正他的过失。
English: After a long time, Cao Hongping, the guardian of the great ancestors, decided to argue, and let Xin Pi and Cao Xiu participate in this action, and ordered: In the past, Han Gao Zu was greedy and lascivious, while Zhang Liang and Chen Pingyuan corrected his mistakes.

古文：今佐治、文烈忧不轻矣。 
现代文：现在佐治、文烈的忧虑不小啊。 
English: Now George and Bunraku are not a little worried.

古文：军还，为丞相长史。
现代文：大军返回，辛毗被任命为丞相长史。
English: The large army returned, and Xin Pi was appointed chancellor.

古文：文帝践阼，迁侍中，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：文帝登基后，辛毗被提升为侍中，并赐封关内侯的爵位。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Xin Pi was promoted to chamberlain and given the title of Marquis of Guanzhong.

古文：时议改正朔。
现代文：当时朝中商议修改正朔。
English: At that time, the DPRK and China discussed the revision of Zhengshuo.

古文：毗以魏氏遵舜、禹之统，应天顺民；至於汤、武，以战伐定天下，乃改正朔。
现代文：辛毗认为威势遵循虞舜、大禹的传统，顺应天命民意；至于商汤、周武王，依靠征战平定天下，才修改正朔。
English: Xin Pi believed that Wu Xiang followed the tradition of Yu Xuan and Dayu and conformed to the will of heaven; as for Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu, they relied on conquering and settling the world, and only revised Zheng Shuo.

古文：孔子曰 行夏之时 ，左氏传曰 夏数为得天正 ，何必期於相反。
现代文：孔子说： 实行夏朝的时辰 ，《左氏传》中说 夏朝的礼法符合天时的正道 ，又何必往相反的方向修改呢。
English: Confucius said: To implement the time of the Xia Dynasty, "The Biography of Zuo" said that the etiquette of the Xia Dynasty conforms to the right path of heaven and time, and why should it be modified in the opposite direction.

古文：帝善而从之。
现代文：文帝认为他说得对，采纳了他的建议。
English: Emperor Wen thought he was right and accepted his suggestion.

古文：帝欲徙冀州士家十万户实河南。
现代文：文帝想要迁移冀州的十万户有职业士兵的人家以充实河南。
English: Emperor Wen wants to relocate 100,000 households with professional soldiers in Jizhou to enrich Henan Province.

古文：时连蝗民饥，群司以为不可，而帝意甚盛。
现代文：当时接连出现蝗灾，百姓饥饿，各部主管官员都认为不可行，但文帝想法很强硬。
English: At that time, there were successive locust plagues, people were starving, and officials in charge of various ministries thought it was not feasible, but Emperor Wen's idea was very strong.

古文：毗与朝臣俱求见，帝知其欲谏，作色以见之，皆莫敢言。
现代文：辛毗和朝中大臣们一同请求拜见，文帝知道他们想要劝谏，神色严肃地接见他们，大臣们都不敢说话。
English: Simbi and the ministers of the DPRK and China jointly requested to see each other. Emperor Wen knew that they wanted to persuade him and received them with a serious look. The ministers did not dare to speak.

古文：毗曰： 陛下欲徙士家，其计安出？ 
现代文：辛毗说： 陛下想要迁移有职业士兵的人家，这个计划是怎么来的呢？ 
English: Simbi said: Your Majesty wants to relocate the families of professional soldiers, how did this plan come about?

古文：帝曰： 卿谓我徙之非邪？ 毗曰： 诚以为非也。 帝曰： 吾不与卿共议也。 
现代文：文帝说： 你是在说我迁移这些百姓是不对的吗？ 辛毗说： 我确实认为不对。 文帝说： 我不和你商议这件事。 
English: Wendi said: Are you saying that it is wrong for me to move these people? Simbi said: I really think it is wrong. Wendi said: I will not discuss this with you.

古文：毗曰： 陛下不以臣不肖，置之左右，厕之谋议之官，安得不与臣议邪！
现代文：辛毗说： 陛下没有因为我没有才能，还将我安排在身边，让我担任谋划的官职，怎么能不和臣商议呢！
English: Xinvi said, "Your majesty did not place me around because I am not talented, and let me serve as a planning official, how can I not discuss with the vassal!

古文：臣所言非私也，乃社稷之虑也，安得怒臣！ 
现代文：臣所说的话不是出于私心，都是为了江山社稷考虑，怎么能迁怒于臣！ 
English: What the minister said was not out of selfishness, but for the sake of the country and society. How could he be angry with the minister?

古文：帝不答，起入内；毗随而引其裾，帝遂奋衣不还，良久乃出，曰： 佐治，卿持我何太急邪？ 
现代文：文帝没有回答，起身进入内室；辛毗跟在后面拉住文帝的衣袖，文帝就拂袖而去，没有回来，过了很久才出来，说： 佐治啊，你为什么拉我的衣服这么着急呢？ 
English: Emperor Wen did not answer, but got up and went into the inner room. Xin Bi followed behind and tugged at Emperor Wen's sleeve. Emperor Wen brushed his sleeve and left. He did not return, but came out after a long time, saying, "George, why are you in such a hurry to tug at my clothes?"

古文：毗曰： 今徙，既失民心，又无以食也。 帝遂徙其半。
现代文：辛毗说： 现在迁移百姓，既失去了民心，百姓也没有食物。 文帝就迁移了其中的一半。
English: Xinvi said, "Moving the people now, since the people's hearts have been lost and the people have no food, Emperor Wen has moved half of them.

古文：尝从帝射雉，帝曰： 射雉乐哉 毗曰： 於陛下甚乐，而於群下甚苦。 
现代文：辛毗曾经跟随文帝射杀山鸡，文帝说： 射猎山鸡真是开心啊！ 辛毗说： 对于陛下来说很高兴，对我们下属来说很辛苦。 
English: Simbi used to shoot pheasants with Emperor Wen. Emperor Wen said, "Shooting pheasants is really fun!" Simbi said, "It's a pleasure for His Majesty, but it's hard work for us subordinates."

古文：帝默然，后遂为之稀出。
现代文：文帝沉默着没有说话，后来就很少外出射猎了。
English: Emperor Wen kept silent and did not speak. Later, he rarely went out to shoot.

古文：上军大将军曹真征朱然于江陵，毗行军师。
现代文：上军大将军曹真在江陵攻打朱然，辛毗任军师。
English: The general Cao Zhen attacked Zhu Ran in Gangneung, and Xin Pi served as his military instructor.

古文：还，封广平亭侯。
现代文：大军返回，辛毗被封为广平亭侯。
English: When the large army returned, Xin Pi was given the title of Guangping Prince.

古文：帝欲大兴军征吴，毗谏曰： 吴、楚之民，险而难御，道隆后服，道洿先叛，自古患之，非徒今也。
现代文：文帝想要征发大军征讨东吴，辛毗劝谏说： 吴楚地区的百姓，危险又难以驾驭，道德兴盛后，他们就会臣服，道德衰微，他们就会反叛，是自古以来都忧虑的，不是只有现在有这种情况。
English: Emperor Wen wanted to send a large army to conquer Eastern Wu, and Xin Pi advised him: "The people in the Wuchu region are dangerous and difficult to control. When morals flourish, they will submit. When morals wane, they will rebel. This has been a concern since ancient times, and it is not only the case now.

古文：今陛下祚有海内，夫不宾者，其能久乎？
现代文：现在陛下有着享有天下的福分，那些不肯臣服的人，难道能长久吗？
English: Now that your majesty has enjoyed the blessings of the world, can those who refuse to be subjugated last long?

古文：昔尉佗称帝，子阳僣号，历年未几，或臣或诛。
现代文：过去南越尉佗称帝，公孙述自称为皇帝，但存在的时间都不久，要么臣服要么被诛杀。
English: In the past, the Nanyue lieutenant pretended to be the emperor, and the grandson of the emperor claimed to be the emperor, but they both existed for a short time, either surrendering or being killed.

古文：何则，违逆之道不久全，而大德无所不服也。
现代文：为什么呢，因为违背道义的事情不能长久保全，而盛大的德行没有什么不能降服。
English: Why, because immoral things cannot long be preserved, and great virtues cannot be subdued.

古文：方今天下新定，土广民稀。
现代文：现在天下刚刚平定，土地广阔人口稀少。
English: Now the world has just been pacified, the land is vast and the population is sparse.

古文：夫庙算而后出军，犹临事而惧，况今庙算有阙而欲用之，臣诚未见其利也。
现代文：就算现在朝中做好谋划再出兵，面对战事是也会有所忧虑，更何况现在缺乏谋划却想要出兵呢，臣实在看不到其中的好处。
English: Even if North Korea and China are now planning to send troops again, they will be worried about the war. Moreover, if they want to send troops now without planning, the minister really cannot see the benefits.

古文：先帝屡起锐师，临江而旋。
现代文：先帝多次派出精锐的士兵，都是到了江边就回来。
English: The former emperor repeatedly sent out elite soldiers, but they all returned to the riverbank.

古文：今六军不增於故，而复循之，此未易也。
现代文：现在国家军队没有比过去更多，又重复这样的做法，这是不容易取胜的。
English: There are no more national armies now than in the past, and repeating such a practice is not easy to win.

古文：今日之计，莫若脩范蠡之养民，法管仲之寄政，则充国之屯田，明仲尼之怀远；十年之中，强壮未老，童龀胜战，兆民知义，将士思奋，然后用之，则役不再举矣。 帝曰： 如卿意，更当以虏遗子孙邪？ 
现代文：现在的办法，不如学习范蠡修养百姓，像管仲那样将军令寄托在政令中，效法赵充国的屯田方法，明确孔子安抚边远百姓的政策；这样，十年之后，现在强壮的人还没有老弱，儿童也能上阵作战，天下万民都知道大义，将士们想着奋勇杀敌，这样之后再出兵，那战役就不会再兴起了。 文帝说： 像你说的那样，又将敌寇留给子孙后代来解决吗？ 
English: The current method is not as good as learning from Fan Qi how to cultivate the people, entrusting the general order to the government order like Guanzhong, emulating Zhao Chongguo's method of tuning fields, and clarifying Confucius' policy of appeasing the outlying people; in this way, after ten years, the strong people are not old and weak, children can also go to battle, all the people in the world know the great justice, and the soldiers want to kill the enemy bravely, and then send troops, the battle will not rise again.

古文：毗对曰： 昔周文王以纣遗武王，唯知时也。
现代文：辛毗回答说： 过去周文王将商纣王留给周武王，只是因为了解时机。
English: Xinwei replied: In the past, King Zhou Wen left King Shang Ye to King Zhou Wu, just because he understood the opportunity.

古文：苟时未可，容得已乎！ 
现代文：如果时机不允许，那就忍忍吧！ 
English: If time does not permit, then be patient!

古文：帝竟伐吴，至江而还。
现代文：文帝最后还是出兵征讨吴国，大军到了江边就回来了。
English: In the end, Emperor Wen still sent troops to subjugate the State of Wu. When the large army reached the riverside, they returned.

古文：明帝即位，进封颍乡侯，邑三百户。
现代文：明帝登基后，晋升辛毗的爵位为颖乡侯，食邑三百户。
English: After the Ming Dynasty ascended to the throne, Xin Pi was promoted to the title of Ying Township, with more than 300 households.

古文：时中书监刘放、令孙资见信於主，制断时政，大臣莫不交好，而毗不与往来。
现代文：当时中书监刘放、中书令孙资被明帝重新，他们把持朝政，朝臣们没有不和他们交好的，但辛毗不和他们往来。
English: At that time, Liu Fang, the Chinese book supervisor, and Sun Zi, the Chinese calligrapher, were recruited by the Ming emperor. They controlled the imperial government. The courtiers were friendly with them, but Xin Pi did not interact with them.

古文：毗子敞谏曰： 今刘、孙用事，众皆影附，大人宜小降意，和光同尘；不然必有谤言。 
现代文：辛毗的儿子辛敞劝说： 现在刘放、孙资当权，众人都像影子一样依附他么，父亲应该稍稍屈尊，收敛锋芒，多和他们来往；不然一定会出现诽谤您的言论。 
English: Xin Bi's son Xin Chang advised, "Now that Liu Fang and Sun Zi are in power, and everyone is clinging to them like a shadow, your father should be a little more humble, restrain his sharpness, and spend more time with them; otherwise, there will surely be slanderous remarks about you.

古文：毗正色曰： 主上虽未称聪明，不为闇劣。
现代文：辛毗神色严肃地说： 陛下虽然不算聪明，但也不做愚昧无能的事。
English: Sinhvi looked serious and said, "Your Majesty, although he is not very intelligent, does not do stupid and incompetent things.

古文：吾之立身，自有本未。
现代文：我能在朝中立足，就有自己处事的标准。
English: If I can establish a foothold in the morning, I have my own standard of doing things.

古文：就与刘、孙不平，不过令吾不作三公而已，何危害之有？
现代文：就算我和刘放、孙资不和，也不过是让我不能做三公罢了，有什么危害呢？
English: Even if I don't get along with Liu Fang and Sun Zi, it's just that I can't be one of the Three Wise Men. What's the harm?

古文：焉有大丈夫欲为公而毁其高节者邪 冗从仆射毕轨表言： 尚书仆射王思精勤旧吏，忠亮计略不如辛毗，毗宜代思。 帝以访放、资，放、资对曰： 陛下用思者，诚欲取其效力，不贵虚名也。
现代文：那里有大丈夫想要做三公而损害了高尚的节操的呢？ 冗从仆射毕轨上表说： 尚书仆射王思是专心勤奋的旧臣，但他的忠诚正直和智慧谋略都比不上辛毗，辛毗应该替代王思。 明帝将这件事询问刘放、孙资，刘放、孙资回答说： 陛下之所以重用王思，实在是想要让他效力，而不是看中虚名。
English: Is there anyone who wants to be one of the Three Princes but compromises the noble principle of the Three Princes' Rule? Zhou's flunky Sho Wangsi is a dedicated and diligent old retainer, but his loyalty, honesty and wisdom are no match for Xin Pi. Xin Pi should replace Wang Si. Emperor Ming asked Liu Fang and Sun Zi about this matter. Liu Fang and Sun Zi replied, "Your Majesty's reason for reusing Wang Si is really to make him effective, not to gain a false reputation."

古文：毗实亮直，然性刚而专，圣虑所当深察也。 
现代文：辛毗确实诚实正直，但是性情刚烈又专断，陛下应该仔细考虑。 
English: It is true that Simbi is honest and upright, but he is also headstrong and arbitrary. His Majesty should think carefully.

古文：遂不用。
现代文：于是明帝没有采纳毕轨的建议。
English: As a result, Mingtai did not adopt the proposal to complete the track.

古文：出为卫尉。
现代文：后来辛毗担任了卫尉。
English: Later, Xinvi served as a guard lieutenant.

古文：帝方脩殿舍，百姓劳役，毗上疏曰： 窃闻诸葛亮讲武治兵，而孙权巿马辽东，量其意指，似欲相左右。
现代文：明帝正在修建宫殿，百姓受劳役之苦，辛毗上疏说： 臣私下听说诸葛亮讲习武事，操练军队，而孙权到辽东买马，推测他们的意图，好像是要观察身边的人。
English: Emperor Ming is building a palace, the people are suffering from hard labor, Xin Pi Shang Shao said: The minister privately heard that Zhuge Liang studied martial arts and practiced the army, while Sun Quan went to Liaodong to buy a horse, speculating on their intentions, as if to observe the people around him.

古文：备豫不虞，古之善政，而今者宫室大兴，加连年谷麦不收。
现代文：防备好意料之外的事，是古代的好政治，但现在却大修宫殿，再加上连续几年粮食收成不好。
English: It was good politics in ancient times to be prepared for the unexpected, but now the palace is being overhauled and the grain harvest has been poor for several years in a row.

古文：诗云： 民亦劳止，迄可小康，惠此中国，以绥四方。
现代文：《诗经》中说： 百姓已经好辛苦，应该可以稍安康。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: The people have been through a lot of hardship, and they should be able to enjoy a little peace and quiet.

古文：唯陛下为社稷计。 
现代文：抚爱王畿周围的百姓，安定四方的诸侯邦国。 希望陛下为江山社稷考虑。 
English: To cherish the people around Wang Gui, and to stabilize the four-sided vassal states. I hope that His Majesty will consider the interests of the country and society.

古文：帝报曰： 二虏未灭而治宫室，直谏者立名之时也。
现代文：明帝回复说： 吴蜀两国还没有消灭就修建宫殿，是直言进谏的人立身扬名的机会。
English: Emperor Ming replied, "Building a palace before the destruction of Wuxu and Shu is an opportunity for an outspoken person to make a name for himself.

古文：夫王者之都，当及民劳兼办，使后世无所复增，是萧何为汉规摹之略也。
现代文：帝王所在的首都，应该由百姓劳役一同完成，使得后世不需要再增加修建，这是萧何为汉朝国都规划的策略。
English: The capital, where the emperor is, should be completed by the people's labor together, so that future generations do not need to increase the construction. This is the strategy planned by Xiao He for the Han Dynasty.

古文：今卿为魏重臣，亦宜解其大归。 
现代文：现在您是魏朝的重臣，也应该理解其中的要义。 
English: Now that you are a senior vassal of the Wei Dynasty, you should also understand the essence of this.

古文：帝又欲平北芒，令於其上作台观，则见孟津。
现代文：明帝又想要削平北芒山，在上面建造高台楼观，站在那里可以望见孟津。
English: Emperor Ming also wanted to flatten Beimang Mountain and build a viewing platform on top of it. Standing there, you can see Mengjin.

古文：毗谏曰： 天地之性，高高下下，今而反之，既非其理；加以损费人功，民不堪役。
现代文：辛毗劝谏说： 天地的自然之性，有高有低，现在却要反过来，既不是天地间的事理；又加上耗费人力，百姓不能承受劳役。
English: Xin Pi advised Zou that: the natural nature of heaven and earth is to have high and low, but now it is to be reversed, which is not a matter between heaven and earth; coupled with the expenditure of manpower, the people cannot bear labor.

古文：且若九河盈溢，洪水为害，而丘陵皆夷，将何以御之？ 
现代文：况且如果黄河泛滥，洪水肆虐，而丘陵都被削为平地，到时候用什么来抵御洪水呢？ 
English: Moreover, if the Yellow River floods and floods, and the hills are flattened, what will be used to resist the flood?

古文：帝乃止。
现代文：明帝才停止这个念头。
English: Emperor Wu then gave up.

古文：青龙二年，诸葛亮率众出渭南。
现代文：青龙二年，诸葛亮率军进攻渭南。
English: In the second year of the Qinglong, Zhuge Liang led an army to attack southern Anhui.

古文：先是，大将军司马宣王数请与亮战，明帝终不听。
现代文：在这之前，大将军司马懿多次请求率军和诸葛亮交战，明帝始终没有允许。
English: Prior to this, the great general Sima Qian repeatedly requested to lead the army to fight Zhuge Liang, but Emperor Ming never gave permission.

古文：是岁恐不能禁，乃以毗为大将军军师，使持节。
现代文：这一年，因担心大将军不能制止，就委任辛毗为大将军军事，让他持符节。
English: This year, fearing that the general could not stop him, he appointed Xin Pi as the military general and let him hold the festival.

古文：六军皆肃，准毗节度，莫敢犯违。
现代文：全军都肃然，听从辛毗的调派，没有人敢违抗。
English: The entire army was awestruck, obeying Xin Bi's deployment, and no one dared to disobey.

古文：亮卒，复还为卫尉。
现代文：诸葛亮去世后，辛毗回朝担任卫尉。
English: After the death of Zhuge Liang, Xin Pi returned to the imperial court to serve as a guard lieutenant.

古文：薨，谥曰肃侯。
现代文：辛毗去世后，谥号为肃侯。
English: After Xin Pi's death, his posthumous name was Suhang.

古文：子敞嗣，咸熙中为河内太守。
现代文：他的儿子辛敞承袭爵位，曾在咸熙年间担任河内太守。
English: His son Sin Trang inherited the title and served as the governor of Hanoi during the reign of Emperor Han.

古文：杨阜字义山，天水冀人也。
现代文：杨阜，字义山，天水郡冀县人。
English: Yangfu, Yishan, Tianshui County, Jie County.

古文：以州从事为牧韦端使诣许，拜安定长史。
现代文：以州从事的身份被州牧韦端派遣到许都，被任命为安定长史。
English: As a person engaged in state affairs, he was dispatched to Xudu by the state government and was appointed as the leader of the long history of stability.

古文：阜还，关右诸将问袁、曹胜败孰在，阜曰： 袁公宽而不断，好谋而少决；不断则无威，少决则失后事，今虽强，终不能成大业。
现代文：杨阜回来后，关右地区的将领们都问袁氏和曹氏的争斗谁胜谁败，杨阜说： 袁公宽纵且不能判断，喜欢谋划但不能决断；不能判断就没有威势，缺少决断就损失后面的事，现在虽然强大，但终究不能成就大业。
English: After Yang Fu's return, the generals in Guanzhong District all asked who won and who lost in the struggle between the Yuan and Cao clans. Yang Fu said: Yuan Gongguan is broad-minded and can't judge, likes to plan but can't decide; if you can't judge, you don't have the power, and if you don't decide, you'll lose what's behind you. Although you're powerful now, you can't achieve great things in the end.

古文：曹公有雄才远略，决机无疑，法一而兵精，能用度外之人，所任各尽其力，必能济大事者也。 
现代文：曹公有出众的才能远大的谋略，该决断的时机没有犹疑，律法专一并且士兵精锐，能重用制度之外的人才，所任用的人也能竭尽全力，一定是能成就大事的人。 
English: Cao Gong has outstanding talent and a far-reaching strategy, there is no hesitation in the timing of this decision, the law is specific and the soldiers are elite, they can reuse talents outside the system, and the appointed people can also do their best. They must be people who can achieve great things.

古文：长史非其好，遂去官。
现代文：因为长史这个官职不是他的喜好所在，就辞了官。
English: He resigned from the post because he did not like the position.

古文：而端徵为太仆，其子康代为刺史，辟阜为别驾。
现代文：而韦端被征召为太仆，他的儿子韦康代替他的刺史职位，又征召杨阜为别驾。
English: However, Wei Duan was conscripted as a eunuch, his son Wei Kang replaced him in the post of chief historian, and Yang Fu was conscripted as a second lieutenant.

古文：察孝廉，辟丞相府，州表留参军事。
现代文：杨阜被推举为孝廉，被征召到丞相府中，州中上表要留下他参谋军事。
English: Yang Fu was elected as a filial piety, was called up to the middle school of the prime minister's office, and the state middle and upper table wanted to keep him as a military staff officer.

古文：马超之战败渭南也，走保诸戎。
现代文：马超在渭南战败后，逃到边塞胡人那里寻求庇护。
English: After the defeat of Ma Chao in southern Fujian, he fled to the border of Sichuan to seek refuge.

古文：太祖追至安定，而苏伯反河间，将引军东还。
现代文：太祖追击到安定，而这时苏伯在河间反叛，太祖就率军往东回来。
English: The great-grandfather pursued to stability, and when Su Bo rebelled in Hema, the great-grandfather led the army back to the east.

古文：阜时奉使，言於太祖曰： 超有信、布之勇，甚得羌、胡心，西州畏之。
现代文：杨阜当时奉命出使，对太祖说： 马超有韩信、吕布的勇武，很得到羌人、胡人的欢欣，西州也忌惮他的势力。
English: At that time, Yang Fu was ordered to send an envoy to the patriarch and said: Ma Chao has the bravery of Han Xin and Lv Bu, and is greatly admired by the Xiong people and Hu people. Xizhou is also afraid of his power.

古文：若大军还，不严为之备，陇上诸郡非国家之有也。 
现代文：如果大军返回，不加以严防死守，陇上各郡就不是国家拥有的了。 
English: If the great army returns without a strict defense, the counties on the map will not be owned by the state.

古文：太祖善之，而军还仓卒，为备不周。
现代文：太祖认为他说的有道理，但大军撤退得很仓促，没有什么周密的准备。
English: The great-grandfather thought he was right, but the army retreated hastily and without careful preparation.

古文：超率诸戎渠帅以击陇上郡县，陇上郡县皆应之，惟冀城奉州郡以固守。
现代文：马超率领各戎狄的首领攻打陇上各县，各县都响应他，只有冀州听从州郡的命令死守。
English: Ma Chao led the leaders of the various armies to attack and attack the counties on the plateau, and each county responded to him. Only Jizhou obeyed the orders of the state and county to hold fast.

古文：超尽兼陇右之众，而张鲁又遣大将杨昂以助之，凡万馀人，攻城。
现代文：马超将陇右的部队全都兼并了，而张鲁又派大将张昂帮助他，一共有一万多人攻打城池。
English: Ma Chao merged all the right-wing troops, and Zhang Lu sent General Zhang Ang to help him, with a total of more than 10,000 people attacking the city.

古文：阜率国士大夫及宗族子弟胜兵者千馀人，使从弟岳於城上作偃月营，与超接战，自正月至八月拒守而救兵不至。州遣别驾阎温循水潜出求救，为超所杀，於是刺史、太守失色，始有降超之计。
现代文：杨阜率领城中的士大夫和宗族子弟能打仗的一千多人，派他的堂弟杨岳在城上修筑偃月营，和马超交战，从正月死守到八月但援军一直没有来到，州中派恰别驾阎温沿着水路潜出城求救，被马超抓住杀害，于是城中的刺史、太守都惊慌失措，开始有了投降马超的计划。
English: Yang Fu led more than a thousand people in the city who were able to fight, including the shidafu and the children of the clan, and sent his cousin Yang Yue to build a camp on the city, and fought with Ma Chao. From the first month to August, reinforcements did not come. The central faction of the state just drove Yan Wen along the waterway to sneak out of the city for help, and was caught and killed by Ma Chao. Therefore, the city's chief historian and governor were panicked and began to have a plan to surrender to Ma Chao.

古文：阜流涕谏曰： 阜等率父兄子弟以义相励，有死无二；田单之守，不固於此也。
现代文：杨阜流着眼泪说： 我率领父兄和族中子弟，用大义互相激励，只有牺牲没有二心；过去田单死后，也没有比这更牢固。
English: Yang Fu said with tears streaming down his face, "I led my father, brother and children in the tribe, and encouraged each other with great righteousness. Only sacrifice has no double-mindedness. In the past, after the death of Tian Shan, there was nothing more solid than this.

古文：弃垂成之功，陷不义之名，阜以死守之。 
现代文：放弃将要成功的大业，将自己陷入不义的骂名中，我愿意以死守城。 
English: I am willing to defend the city to the death, giving up the great cause that will be successful, and plunging myself into the unfair name-calling.

古文：遂号哭。
现代文：于是失声痛哭。
English: Then she burst into tears.

古文：刺史、太守卒遣人请和，开城门迎超。
现代文：但刺史、太守最后还是派人求和，打开城门迎接马超。
English: In the end, however, Sashi and Taishu still sent someone to sue for peace, and opened the gates to welcome Ma Chao.

古文：超入，拘岳於冀，使杨昂杀刺史、太守。
现代文：马超入城后，在冀州抓捕了杨岳，并派杨昂杀了刺史和太守。
English: After Ma Chao entered the city, he arrested Yang Yue in Jizhou and sent Yang Ang to kill Shishi and Taishu.

古文：阜内有报超之志，而未得其便。
现代文：杨阜心中有着报复马超的想法，但没有得到机会。
English: Yang Fu had the idea of taking revenge on Ma Chao, but he didn't get the chance.

古文：顷之，阜以丧妻求葬假。
现代文：不久，杨阜因为妻子去世要下葬请求休假。
English: Soon after, Yang Fu requested a leave of absence to attend his wife's funeral.

古文：阜外兄姜叙屯历城。
现代文：杨阜的表兄姜叙在历城驻守。
English: Yang Fu's cousin Jiang Xiu was stationed in Licheng.

古文：阜少长叙家，见叙母及叙，说前在冀中时事，歔欷悲甚。
现代文：杨阜年少时在姜叙家长大，见到姜叙和他母亲后，就叙说之前在冀州时候的事情，感慨不已，很是悲伤。
English: When Yang Fu was young, he grew up in Jiang Xiu's family. After seeing Jiang Xiu and his mother, he recounted the previous time in Jizhou. He was deeply moved and very sad.

古文：叙曰： 何为乃尔？ 
现代文：姜叙问： 为什么这样呢？ 
English: Jiang Shu asked: Why is this?

古文：阜曰： 守城不能完，君亡不能死，亦何面目以视息於天下！
现代文：杨阜说： 固守城池却不能保全，主君阵亡我却不能一同赴死，还有什么面目面对天下呢！
English: Yang Fu said, "I can hold fast to the castle, but I can't keep it safe. My lord died in battle, but I can't go to my death with him. What other face can I show to the world?"

古文：马超背父叛君，虐杀州将，岂独阜之忧责，一州士大夫皆蒙其耻。
现代文：马超违逆父亲反叛君主，虐杀州中将士，怎么只有我要承担这个责任，一州的的士大夫都蒙受这个耻辱。
English: Ma Chao disobeyed his father, rebelled against the monarch, and brutally killed a state lieutenant general. How is it that I am the only one to bear this responsibility, when all the state's senior officials have suffered this disgrace?

古文：君拥兵专制而无讨贼心，此赵盾所以书弑君也。
现代文：你坐拥军队，专制决断但没有讨伐贼人的决心，这是史书上所说的 赵盾弑其君 的情形。
English: You have an army, an autocratic decision, but no determination to fight against the thieves. This is what the history books call the situation of Zhao Dun's rise to power.

古文：超强而无义，多衅易图耳。 
现代文：马超强大，但没有道义，军中有很多矛盾，是很容易谋取的。 
English: The horse is super-powerful, but it has no morality. There are many contradictions in the army, and it is easy to obtain horses.

古文：叙母慨然，敕叙从阜计。
现代文：姜叙的母亲感慨，命姜叙听从杨阜的计划。
English: Jiang Xiu's mother sighed and ordered Jiang Xiu to follow Yang Fu's plan.

古文：计定，外与乡人姜隐、赵昂、尹奉、姚琼、孔信、武都人李俊、王灵结谋，定讨超约，使从弟谟至冀语岳，并结安定梁宽、南安赵衢、庞恭等。
现代文：计划制定后，又与同乡姜隐、赵昂、尹奉、姚琼、孔信，武都人李俊、王灵等人定好计策，又定下征讨马超的约定，并派堂弟姜谟到冀城将情况告诉杨岳，并联络了安定的梁宽，南安的赵衢、庞恭等。
English: After the plan was formulated, he also worked out a strategy with fellow townsmen Jiang Yin, Zhao Ang, Yin Feng, Yao Qiong, Kong Xin, Wu Du people Li Jun, Wang Ling and others, and also set an agreement to recruit Ma Chao, and sent his cousin Jiang Moo to Jicheng to tell Yang Yue about the situation, and contacted stable Liang Guang, Nan'an Zhao Wei, Pang Gong and others.

古文：约誓既明，十七年九月，与叙起兵於卤城。
现代文：盟约确定建安十七年九月，杨阜和姜叙在卤城起兵。
English: In September of the 17th year of Jianan determined by the covenant, Yang Fu and Jiang Xiu raised an army in Liaocheng.

古文：超闻阜等兵起，自将出。
现代文：马超后得知杨阜等人出兵，亲自率军出来。
English: After Ma Chao learned that Yang Fu and others had sent troops, he personally led the troops out.

古文：而衢、宽等解岳，闭冀城门，讨超妻子。
现代文：赵衢、庞恭等救出杨岳，关闭冀城大门，抓住马超的妻子孩子。
English: Zhao Wei, Pang Gong and others rescued Yang Yue, closed the gate of Jicheng, and caught Ma Chao's wife and child.

古文：超袭历城，得叙母。
现代文：马超攻打历城，抓住了姜叙的母亲。
English: Ma Chao attacked Licheng and captured Jiang Xiu's mother.

古文：叙母骂之曰： 汝背父之逆子，杀君之桀贼，天地岂久容汝，而不早死，敢以面目视人乎！ 
现代文：姜叙母亲骂他说： 你是违背父亲的逆子，杀害主君的凶残暴徒，天地怎么会长久地容下你，你不早点死，还敢用这样的面目看人！ 
English: Jiang Xiu's mother scolded him: "You are a rebel against your father, a murderous thug who killed your master. How can heaven and earth tolerate you for so long? If you don't die sooner, how dare you look at others with such a face!

古文：超怒，杀之。
现代文：马超大怒，将她杀了。
English: The horse flew into a rage and killed her.

古文：阜与超战，身被五创，宗族昆弟死者七人。
现代文：杨阜和马超交战，身上受了五处伤，宗族兄弟有七人战死。
English: Yang Fu fought with Ma Chao and received five wounds on his body. Seven of his clan brothers died in the battle.

古文：超遂南奔张鲁。
现代文：马超就往南逃奔向张鲁。
English: Ma Chao fled south to Zhanglu.

古文：陇右平定，太祖封讨超之功，侯者十一人，赐阜爵关内侯。
现代文：陇右平定后，太祖封赏征讨马超的功劳，有十一人封侯，赐封杨阜的爵位为关内侯。
English: After the subjugation of Shu, the great-grandfather rewarded Ma Chao's merits by awarding him a number of titles, including eleven feudal lordships, while Yang Fu was awarded the title of Guanai marquis.

古文：阜让曰： 阜君存无扞难之功，君亡无死节之效，於义当绌，於法当诛；超又不死，无宜苟荷爵禄。 
现代文：杨阜推辞说： 杨阜在州君活着的时候没有抵御进攻的功劳，州君去世没有以死明志的行为，在道义上讲应该被贬黜，在律法上应该被诛杀；马超又还没有死，不应该白白享受爵位俸禄。 
English: Yang Fu's rebuttal said: Yang Fu did not have the merit of resisting the attack when Zhu Jun was alive. When Zhu Jun died, he did not act with the intention of death. Morally speaking, he should be belittled, and legally speaking, he should be killed. Ma Chao has not died yet, and he should not enjoy the peerage salary in vain.

古文：太祖报曰： 君与群贤共建大功，西土之人以为美谈。
现代文：太祖回复说： 您和众位贤人一同建立大功，西面的百姓都将这件事做为美谈。
English: The great-grandfather replied: You and all the sages have built a great achievement together, and the people in the west have made this a beautiful story.

古文：子贡辞赏，仲尼谓之止善。
现代文：从前子贡推辞封赏，孔子认为这是阻止了善行。
English: In the past, Zigong refused to be rewarded, and Confucius thought that this prevented him from doing good deeds.

古文：君其剖心以顺国命。姜叙之母，劝叙早发，明智乃尔，虽杨敞之妻盖不过此。
现代文：您尽心竭力，以维护国家命运，姜叙的母亲，劝说姜叙早点出兵，是很明智的，即使是杨敞的妻子大概也就是这样了。
English: You did your best to safeguard the fate of the country, Jiang Xiu's mother, it is very wise to persuade Jiang Xiu to send troops early, even Yang Zhan's wife is probably the same.

古文：贤哉，贤哉！
现代文：贤德啊！
English: How virtuous!

古文：良史记录，必不坠於地矣。
现代文：以后史书中的记录，一定不会忘记你们的行为。 
English: The record in future history books will not forget your actions.

古文：太祖征汉中，以阜为益州刺史。
现代文：太祖征讨汉中，让杨阜担任益州刺史。
English: The great ancestor conquered Han, and let Yang Fu serve as the chief historian of Yizhou.

古文：还，拜金城太守，未发，转武都太守。
现代文：大军返回后，又授予杨阜金城太守的职务，还没有出发上任，就转任为武都太守。
English: After the return of the large army, he also awarded Yang Fu the post of the governor of Jincheng, and before he took office, he was transferred to the governor of Wudu.

古文：郡滨蜀汉，阜请依龚遂故事，安之而已。
现代文：金城郡靠近蜀汉，杨阜请求按照恭遂的旧例，只是安抚而已。
English: Jincheng County is close to Shuhan, and Yang Fu's request to follow the old example of congratulation is just appeasement.

古文：会刘备遣张飞、马超等从沮道趣下辩，而氐雷定等七部万馀落反应之。
现代文：刚好刘备派张飞、马超等人从沮道进逼下辩，而氐族雷定等七个部落一万多人都反叛响应他们。
English: It just so happened that Liu Bei sent Zhang Fei, Ma Chao and others to enter the debate from the wrong path, and more than ten thousand people from seven tribes, including the Yao Lei Ding, rebelled in response to them.

古文：太祖遣都护曹洪御超等，超等退还。
现代文：太祖派都护曹洪抵御马超等人，马超等人撤退。
English: The Taizu faction all defended Cao Hong against Ma Chao and others, and Ma Chao and others withdrew.

古文：洪置酒大会，令女倡著罗縠之衣，蹋鼓，一坐皆笑。
现代文：曹洪置办酒席大会将士，让歌女穿着很薄的衣服在鼓上踩踏，在座的人都大笑。
English: Cao Hong put the host of the banquet, a general, in charge, and let the singer, wearing a very thin dress, step on the drums. Everyone present laughed.

古文：阜厉声责洪曰： 男女之别，国之大节，何有於广坐之中裸女人形体！
现代文：杨阜严厉斥责曹洪说： 男女有别，是国家的重要义理，哪里有在大庭广众之下让女子裸露身体的！
English: Yang Fu severely reprimanded Cao Hong, saying: "It is an important principle of the country that men and women are different. Where is the place for women to bare their bodies in front of the public!

古文：虽桀、纣之乱，不甚於此。 
现代文：即使是夏桀、商纣王的衰乱，也不会比这更严重。 
English: Even the decline of the Xia and Shang dynasties would not be more serious than this.

古文：遂奋衣辞出。
现代文：说完就拂袖告辞出去。
English: After saying that, he whipped off his sleeves and left.

古文：洪立罢女乐，请阜还坐，肃然惮焉。
现代文：曹洪立即停止了歌舞，并请杨阜还座，并对他肃然起敬。
English: Cao Hong immediately stopped the song and dance, and asked Yang Fu to return his seat, and revered him.

古文：及刘备取汉中以逼下辩，太祖以武都孤远，欲移之，恐吏民恋土。
现代文：等到刘备攻取了汉中进逼下辩，太祖因为武都孤立无援又地处偏远，想要迁移城中的百姓，又担心官吏百姓眷恋故土。
English: By the time Liu Bei had conquered the Han dynasty and forced a debate, Taizu wanted to relocate the people in the city because Wudu was isolated and remote, and he was worried that the officials and the people were attached to their native land.

古文：阜威信素著，前后徙民、氏，使居京兆、扶风、天水界者万馀户，徙郡小槐里，百姓襁负而随之。
现代文：杨阜的威信向来很突出，先后转移百姓、氐人，让他们安居在京兆、扶风、天水等地境内，有一万多户，又将治所转移到小槐里，百姓扶老携幼跟随。
English: Yangfu's prestige has always been outstanding. It has successively transferred the common people and the people of Yao, allowing them to live safely in the territory of Jingzhao, Fufeng, Tianshui and other places, with more than 10,000 households. It has also transferred the treatment center to Xiaobangli, and the common people have helped the elderly with their children to follow.

古文：为政举大纲而已，下不忍欺也。
现代文：杨阜理政，只是处理重要的事情，下属也不忍心欺骗他。
English: Yang Fu, the manager, only deals with important matters, and his subordinates can't bear to deceive him.

古文：文帝问侍中刘晔等： 武都太守何如人也？ 
现代文：文帝问侍中刘晔等人说： 武都的太守是什么样的人？ 
English: Emperor Wen asked the chamberlains Liu Ye and others: What kind of person is the military governor of the capital?

古文：皆称阜有公辅之节。
现代文：大臣们都说杨阜有能担任三公宰辅的节操。
English: The ministers all said that Yang Fu had the ability to serve as the most conservative of the three vice-premiers.

古文：未及用，会帝崩。
现代文：还没来得及任用他，又适逢文帝驾崩。
English: Before he could be appointed, Emperor Wen passed away.

古文：在郡十馀年，徵拜城门校尉。
现代文：杨阜在武都郡十几年，朝廷征召任命他为城门校尉。
English: After Yang Fu had been in Wudu County for more than ten years, he was called up by the imperial court and appointed captain of the castle gate.

古文：阜常见明帝著绣衤冒，被缥绫半褎，阜问帝曰： 此於礼何法服也？ 
现代文：杨阜看明帝经常戴着绣帽，穿着半袖的缥绫衣服，问明帝说： 这在礼节上是什么法度上穿的衣服呢？ 
English: Yang Fu saw that Emperor Ming was often wearing an embroidered cap and a short-sleeved robe, and asked Emperor Ming, "What is the etiquette of wearing such clothes?"

古文：帝默然不答，自是不法服不以见阜。
现代文：明帝沉默没有说话，从此以后不穿法制规定的服饰就不接见杨阜。
English: Emperor Ming kept silent and did not speak. From then on, Yang Fu would not be received without wearing the dress prescribed by the legal system.

古文：迁将作大匠。
现代文：杨阜升任为将作大匠。
English: Yang Fu was promoted to the position of grandmaster.

古文：时初治宫室，发美女以充后庭，数出入弋猎。
现代文：当时明帝刚开始修建宫殿，挑选美女以充实后宫，多次出宫到禁囿中狩猎。
English: At that time, Emperor Ming had just begun to build a palace, selected beautiful women to enrich the harem, and went out of the palace several times to hunt in confinement.

古文：秋，大雨震电，多杀鸟雀。
现代文：秋天，下了大雨，出现雷电，杀死了很多鸟雀。
English: In autumn, there was heavy rain and lightning, which killed many birds and finches.

古文：阜上疏曰： 臣闻明主在上，群下尽辞。
现代文：杨阜上疏说： 臣听说圣明的君主在上，大臣们能尽情提出意见。
English: Yang Fu Shang Su said: "Ministers have heard that the Emperor is in the ascendant, and ministers can give their opinions as much as they like.

古文：尧、舜圣德，求非索谏；大禹勤功，务卑宫室；成汤遭旱，归咎责己；周文刑於寡妻，以御家邦；汉文躬行节俭，身衣弋纟弟：此皆能昭令问，贻厥孙谋者也。
现代文：唐尧、虞舜圣明贤德，向大臣们征求过失和谏言；对创立很多功业，却只修建很简陋的宫殿；成汤时国家遭遇旱灾，他将过失归在自己身上；周文王给自己的妻子做好榜样，推广到治理国家；汉文帝亲身实践节俭的行为，穿着简单的衣服：这些都是能彰显美好的声名，为子孙的将来作打算的做法。
English: Tang Xuan and Gu Yao Sheng Mingxian De solicited faults and criticisms from ministers; for creating a lot of works, he only built a very simple palace; when the country suffered a drought, he attributed the fault to himself; King Zhouwen set a good example for his wife and extended it to governing the country; Emperor Hanwen personally practiced frugal behavior and wore simple clothes: these are practices that can highlight a good reputation and plan for the future of his descendants.

古文：伏惟陛下奉武皇帝开拓之大业，守文皇帝克终之元绪，诚宜思齐往古圣贤之善治，总观季世放荡之恶政。
现代文：陛下继承武皇帝开拓的基业，守着文皇帝始终如一的功业，实在应该想着向古代圣贤的良好政策学习，观察乱世之中任意妄为的乱政。
English: His Majesty, inheriting the pioneering legacy of Emperor Wu and adhering to the consistent work of Emperor Wen, should really think about learning from the good policies of the ancient sages and observe the chaotic politics of arbitrariness in the chaotic world.

古文：所谓善治者，务俭约、重民力也；所谓恶政者，从心恣欲，触情而发也。
现代文：所谓的良好政治，就是推崇节俭、重视民力；所谓乱政，就是随心所欲，是自己想的就付出行动。
English: The so-called good politics is to promote thrift and attach importance to people's power; the so-called chaotic politics is to do as one pleases, to take action when one wants to.

古文：惟陛下稽古世代之初所以明赫，及季世所以衰弱至于泯灭，近览汉末之变，足以动心诫惧矣。
现代文：希望陛下能思考古代刚创立时之所以兴盛，还有朝代末世之所以衰微以至于灭亡的原因，观察近代汉朝末年的变故，就足以触动心理，警戒畏惧了。
English: I hope that Your Majesty can think about the reasons for the prosperity of ancient times when it was just founded, as well as the reasons for the decline and demise of the last days of the dynasty, and observe the changes at the end of the modern Han Dynasty. It is enough to touch the psyche, alert and afraid.

古文：曩使桓、灵不废高祖之法，文、景之恭俭，太祖虽有神武，於何所施其能邪？
现代文：如果让汉桓帝、汉灵帝没有废除汉高祖的法令，实行文帝、景帝的谦恭节俭政策，太祖即使英明神武，对汉氏朝廷又有什么办法吗？
English: If Emperor Han Huan and Emperor Han Ling did not repeal the edicts of Emperor Han Gao, and implemented the policy of modesty and frugality of Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, even if Emperor Taizu was wise and powerful, what could he do against the Han Dynasty?

古文：而陛下何由处斯尊哉？
现代文：而陛下又怎么能处在这样的至尊之位上呢？
English: And how can His Majesty be in such a supreme position?

古文：今吴、蜀未定，军旅在外，愿陛下动则三思，虑而后行，重慎出入，以往鉴来，言之若轻，成败甚重。
现代文：现在吴国、蜀国没有平定，大军在外，希望陛下经常慎重考虑，考虑之后再行动，谨慎地出入宫禁，用过去的事情来做为现在的借鉴，话说得很简单，但对于成败来说很重要。
English: Now that the states of Wu and Shu have not been pacified and large armies are on the move, I hope that His Majesty will always think carefully before acting, enter and leave the palace with caution, and use the past as a reference for the present. It is very simple to say, but it is very important for success or failure.

古文：顷者天雨，又多卒暴，雷电非常，至杀鸟雀。
现代文：不久前天降暴雨，又突然间有很多雷电，非常严重，杀了很多鸟雀。
English: The day before yesterday there was torrential rain, and suddenly there were a lot of thunder and lightning, which was very serious and killed a lot of birds and sparrows.

古文：天地神明，以王者为子也，政有不当，则见灾谴。
现代文：天地间的神明，将君王看做自己的孩子，治国理政如果不恰当，就会出现灾害来谴责。
English: The gods of heaven and earth regard the king as their own child, and if the governance of the country is not appropriate, there will be disasters to condemn.

古文：克己内讼，圣人所记。
现代文：约束自己并经常反省，是圣人的教导。
English: To discipline oneself and constantly reflect is the teaching of the sages.

古文：惟陛下虑患无形之外，慎萌纤微之初，法汉孝文出惠帝美人，令得自嫁；顷所调送小女。
现代文：希望陛下能在事情还没发生时就考虑它的祸患，在事情初露端倪时就谨慎对待。效法汉孝文帝让汉惠帝的后宫美人出宫自行嫁人的办法；迅速将挑选的美女送出宫去。
English: I hope that Your Majesty can consider the disaster of the matter before it happens, and treat it with caution when it first appears. Follow the example of Emperor Han Xiaowen and let the beauties of Emperor Han Hui's harem leave the palace to marry people on their own; quickly send the selected beauties out of the palace.

古文：远闻不令，宜为后图。
现代文：臣听说她们都是不听从命令的，这样的情况应该为以后的事考虑。
English: The minister heard that they all disobeyed orders, and that such a situation should be taken into consideration for the future.

古文：诸所缮治，务从约节。
现代文：那些要修建的宫殿楼宇，一定要节俭用度。
English: Those palace buildings to be built must be used sparingly.

古文：书曰： 九族既睦，协和万国。
现代文：《尚书》中说： 宗族和睦，就能协调周围各国。 
English: It says in the "Shangshu": If the clan is harmonious, it can coordinate the surrounding countries.

古文：事思厥宜，以从中道，精心计谋，省息费用。
现代文：对事情的考虑应该周全，以依从正确的方法，精心计划，减省费用。
English: Consideration should be given to the matter comprehensively, so as to follow the correct method, make a careful plan, and reduce costs.

古文：吴、蜀以定，尔乃上安下乐，九亲熙熙。
现代文：等到吴蜀平定之后，国家上上下下就会安乐，家中都温和欢乐。
English: After Wu Shu is pacified, the whole country will be at ease, and everyone in the family will be mildly happy.

古文：如此以往，祖考心欢，尧舜其犹病诸。
现代文：长此以往，祖先也会高兴，尧舜可能还会嫉妒。
English: In the long run, the ancestors will also be happy, and the dragonflies may still be jealous.

古文：今宜开大信於天下，以安众庶，以示远人。 
现代文：现在应该面对天下打开信义之路，以安抚百姓，以展示给偏远地区的人。 
English: Now is the time to open up the path of truth and righteousness to the world, to reassure the people, and to show it to those in remote areas.

古文：时雍丘王植怨於不齿，藩国至亲，法禁峻密，故阜又陈九族之义焉。
现代文：当时雍丘王曹植心怀怨恨，认为各藩国之间都是兄弟至亲，但律法禁令太过严苛，所以杨阜又陈述了九族的大义。
English: At that time, King Cao Zhi of Yongqiu harbored resentment, believing that all the feudal states were brothers and relatives, but the law ban was too harsh, so Yang Fu also stated the great justice of the nine tribes.

古文：诏报曰： 间得密表，先陈往古明王圣主，以讽闇政，切至之辞，款诚笃实。
现代文：明帝下诏回复说： 收到了你的奏表，先陈述过往的圣贤帝王，以讽谏昏聩的政治，言辞恳切，真诚坚定。
English: Emperor Ming sent a reply saying, "I have received your report card. First, I would like to state that the wise and saintly emperors of the past, with their irony-ridden politics, were earnest and sincere.

古文：退思补过，将顺匡救，备至悉矣。
现代文：我会反省自己的过错并弥补，会有所匡正，也会仔细考虑。
English: I will reflect on my mistakes and make amends, will rectify them, and will also consider them carefully.

古文：览思苦言，吾甚嘉之。 
现代文：你能苦口相劝，我很是赞赏 
English: I really appreciate the fact that you are able to talk things through

古文：后迁少府。
现代文：后来杨阜升任为少府。
English: Later, Yang Fu was promoted to the position of Junior Prefect.

古文：是时大司马曹真伐蜀，遇雨不进。
现代文：当时大司马曹真征讨说，遇到大雨，军队不能行进。
English: At that time, the commander-in-chief, Ma Cao Zhen, said that in the event of heavy rain, the army could not march.

古文：阜上疏曰： 昔文王有赤乌之符，而犹日昃不暇食；武王白鱼入舟，君臣变色。
现代文：杨阜上疏说： 过去周文王有赤乌的吉兆，但依然每天到黄昏也没有闲暇吃饭；周武王有白鱼跳进船里，君臣都变了脸色。
English: Yang Fu Shang Su said: In the past, King Zhou Wen had the auspicious sign of the scarlet pheasant, but he still did not have leisure to eat until dusk every day; King Zhou Wu had a white fish jump into the boat, and the princes and ministers all changed their faces.

古文：而动得吉瑞，犹尚忧惧，况有灾异而不战竦者哉？
现代文：他们行动时有吉兆出现，尚且很担忧，更何况现在有异常现象却不忧心呢？
English: They are worried when auspicious signs appear in their actions, and they are not worried when there are abnormal phenomena?

古文：今吴、蜀未平，而天屡降变，陛下宜深有以专精应答，侧席而坐，思示远以德，绥迩以俭。
现代文：现在吴蜀还没有平定，但上天多次显出变故，陛下应该专心回应，因忧心而不能安坐，以向远方展示自己的德行，用节俭用度的方法来安抚。
English: Wu Shu has not yet been pacified, but the heavens have shown changes many times. His Majesty should concentrate on responding, unable to sit still because of anxiety, to show his virtue to the distance, and to appease with the method of frugality.

古文：间者诸军始进，便有天雨之患，稽阂山险，以积日矣。
现代文：最近各路人马刚行进，就有天降大雨的祸患，被困在险峻的山中，已经很多天了。
English: Recently, as soon as all the people and horses have marched, there will be the disaster of heavy rain, trapped in the steep mountains, for many days.

古文：转运之劳，担负之苦，所费以多，若有不继，必违本图。
现代文：粮食转运的辛劳，担负粮食的苦楚，损耗费用的多，如果有一样不能跟进，一定会事与愿违。
English: Grain transshipment is arduous, the burden of grain is painful, and there are many losses and costs. If there is one thing that cannot be followed up, it will certainly backfire.

古文：传曰： 见可而进，知难而退，军之善政也。
现代文：《左传》中说： 看到可行才前进，知道有困难就撤退，是军队中的好政策。 
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: It is a good policy in the army to advance only when it is feasible, and to retreat when it is difficult.

古文：徒使六军困於山谷之间，进无所略，退又不得，非主兵之道也。
现代文：现在白白让大军被困在山谷之间，前进没有可以得到的东西，撤退又没有办法，这不是用兵的办法。
English: Now it is in vain to let a large army be trapped between the valleys, there is nothing to advance, and there is no way to retreat. This is not a way to use soldiers.

古文：武王还师，殷卒以亡，知天期也。
现代文：周武王虽然看到白鱼挑船而撤军，殷商最后还是灭亡了，因为武王知道天意。
English: Although King Wu of Zhou retreated when he saw the white fish pulling the boat, the merchants of Yin finally perished, because King Wu knew the will of heaven.

古文：今年凶民饥，宜发明诏损膳减服，技巧珍玩之物，皆可罢之。
现代文：今年粮食歉收，百姓饥饿，应该办法明确诏令要减少食物和服饰的用度，还有供把玩的物品，都可以不要。
English: This year's grain harvest is poor, and the people are hungry. There should be a clear decree to reduce the consumption of food and clothing, as well as toys, which can be dispensed with.

古文：昔邵信臣为少府於无事之世，而奏罢浮食；今者军用不足，益宜节度。 
现代文：过去邵信臣在太平时代担任少府，依然上奏要免除多余的食物；现在军中开支不够，更应该节俭用度。 
English: In the past, Shao Xincheng served as a minor prefect in the Taiping era, and still had to get rid of excess food; now the military expenditure is not enough, and it should be used sparingly.

古文：帝即召诸军还。
现代文：明帝立即下诏命各军返回。
English: Emperor Ming immediately issued an edict ordering all troops to return.

古文：后诏大议政治之不便於民者，阜议以为： 致治在於任贤，兴国在於务农。
现代文：后来明帝下诏要朝臣们广泛议论那些对百姓不利的国家政策，杨阜的意见认为： 国家要安定清平，在于能任用贤人，国家兴盛在于致力于农事。
English: Later, Emperor Ming issued an edict that the courtiers should widely discuss those national policies that were unfavorable to the people. Yang Fu's opinion was that: the country should be stable and peaceful, it is necessary to be able to appoint wise men, and the country's prosperity lies in its commitment to agriculture.

古文：若舍贤而任所私，此忘治之甚者也。
现代文：如果舍弃贤人而任用私心喜欢的人，这是很严重的不好的政策。
English: If you discard a wise person and appoint someone you like for selfish reasons, this is a very serious bad policy.

古文：广开宫馆，高为台榭，以妨民务，此害农之甚者也。
现代文：大力修建宫殿馆舍，建起高高的台榭，妨碍了百姓耕种，这会严重地损害农业。
English: The vigorous construction of palace buildings and the construction of high platforms have hindered the people's cultivation, which will seriously damage agriculture.

古文：百工不敦其器，而竞作奇巧，以合上欲，此伤本之甚者也。
现代文：工匠们不踏实地制造器物，反诬竞相制造奇巧的物品，以迎合上级的欢欣，这伤害国家的根本也很严重。
English: Craftsmen do not make things in a down-to-earth manner, and they compete against each other to make fantastic things to please their superiors, which is very harmful to the country.

古文：孔子曰： 苛政甚於猛虎。
现代文：孔子说： 严苛的政令比老虎还厉害。 
English: Confucius said: "A harsh edict is more powerful than a tiger."

古文：今守功文俗之吏，为政不通治体，苟好烦苛，此乱民之甚者也。
现代文：现在拘于礼法的吏役，在政治上不了解治理的原则，只是喜好烦琐和严厉，这是最为乱民的办法了。
English: Today's bureaucrats, who are obsessed with etiquette, do not understand the principles of governance in politics, but only like to be tedious and strict. This is the most chaotic way to get rid of the people.

古文：当今之急，宜去四甚，并诏公卿郡国，举贤良方正敦朴之士而选用之，此亦求贤之一端也。
现代文：当务之急，应该去除以上这四种危害严重的情况，并诏令公卿大臣和各郡国，推举贤良正直、踏实质朴的士人并加以选拔任用，这也是寻求贤才的一个办法。 
English: As a matter of urgency, it is necessary to eliminate the above-mentioned four types of harmful situations, and to order the Kugyo-daijin (Minister of the Imperial Court) and the counties to nominate, select and appoint virtuous, honest and down-to-earth scholars. This is also a way to seek talents.

古文：阜又上疏欲省宫人诸不见幸者，乃召御府吏问后宫人数。
现代文：杨阜又上疏想要减少那些在宫中不受宠幸的工人，就召集御府的吏役问后宫人数。
English: Yang Fu also wanted to reduce the number of workers who were not favored in the palace, so he summoned the officials of the Imperial Palace to ask the number of people in the harem.

古文：吏守旧令，对曰： 禁密，不得宣露。 
现代文：吏役守着过去的法令，回答说： 这是秘密，不能泄露。 
English: The government official, sticking to the rules, replied: The palace is a secret and cannot be revealed.

古文：阜怒，杖吏一百，数之曰： 国家不与九卿为密，反与小吏为密乎 帝闻而愈敬惮阜。
现代文：杨阜大怒，杖责了吏役一百棍，并责问说： 国家不将告诉九卿的事情看做秘密，反而会将告诉小吏的事情看做秘密吗？ 明帝得知这件事后更加敬重忌惮杨阜。
English: Yang Fu flew into a rage, scolded the officials with a hundred sticks, and asked: Will the state not regard the things told to the Nine Lords as secrets, but instead will regard the things told to the minor officials as secrets? After the Ming Emperor learned about this matter, he respected and feared Yang Fu even more.

古文：帝爱女淑，未期而夭，帝痛之甚，追封平原公主，立庙洛阳，葬於南陵。
现代文：明帝的爱女曹淑，不行夭折，明帝非常悲痛，追封她为平原公主，在洛阳为她修建庙宇，并安葬在南陵。
English: Cao Shu, the beloved daughter of Emperor Ming, died prematurely, and Emperor Ming was very sad. He crowned her as the Princess of the Plain, built a temple for her in Luoyang, and buried her in Nanling.

古文：将自临送，阜上疏曰： 文皇帝、武宣皇后崩，陛下皆不送葬，所以重社稷、备不虞也。
现代文：明帝将要亲自送葬的时候，杨阜上疏说： 文皇帝、武宣皇后驾崩，陛下都没有送葬，是因为看重江山，防备有意外情况。
English: When Emperor Ming was about to attend the funeral in person, Yang Fu Shangsuo said: Emperor Wen and Empress Wu Xuan have passed away, and His Majesty did not attend the funeral, because he valued the country and was prepared for unexpected circumstances.

古文：何至孩抱之赤子而可送葬也哉？ 帝不从。
现代文：怎么到了一个孩子去世的时候反而去送葬呢？ 明帝没有听从。
English: How come when a child died, he went to the funeral instead? Emperor Ming did not listen.

古文：帝既新作许宫，又营洛阳宫殿观阁。
现代文：明帝新建许宫后，又要修建洛阳宫殿观阁。
English: After Emperor Ming built the Xu Palace, he also wanted to build the Luoyang Palace.

古文：阜上疏曰： 尧尚茅茨而万国安其居，禹卑宫室而天下乐其业；及至殷、周，或堂崇三尺，度以九筵耳。
现代文：杨阜上疏说： 尧帝住在茅屋中，但天下都能安居，大禹居住在简陋的宫室，但天下都能乐业；等到了殷周时期，也不过是三尺宽的大堂，放上竹席罢了。
English: Yang Fu Shang Zuo said: Emperor Gong lived in a thatched cottage, but the whole world could live in peace; Emperor Yu lived in a humble palace, but the whole world could enjoy his work; by the Yin and Zhou period, it was nothing more than a three-foot-wide lobby with bamboo seats.

古文：古之圣帝明王，未有极宫室之高丽以彫弊百姓之财力者也。
现代文：古代圣明的帝王，没有为了极尽宫殿的华丽而使得百姓的财力凋敝的。
English: The emperors of ancient times did not make the people's financial resources wither in order to maximize the splendor of the palace.

古文：桀作璇室、象廊，纣为倾宫、鹿台，以丧其社稷，楚灵以筑章华而身受其祸；秦始皇作阿房而殃及其子，天下叛之，二世而灭。
现代文：夏桀修筑璇室、象廊，商纣建造倾宫、鹿台，结果国家灭亡，楚灵王因为修建章华台，自己也遭受祸害；秦始皇建造了阿房宫却将祸事殃及到子孙后代，天下都反叛他，只经历了两世就灭亡了。
English: Xia Yu built the Summer Palace, the Elephant Gallery, Shang Yu built the Ting Palace and the Deer Terrace. As a result, the country perished. King Chuling also suffered calamity because of the construction of the Zhang Huatai. Emperor Qin Shi Huang built the Afang Palace, but the calamity spread to future generations. The whole world rebelled against him, and after only two generations, he perished.

古文：夫不度万民之力，以从耳目之欲，未有不亡者也。
现代文：不估计百姓的力量，之顺从自己耳目的欲望，没有不灭亡的。
English: He who does not estimate the power of the people, and does not obey the dictates of his own ears and eyes, will perish.

古文：陛下当以尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武为法则，夏桀、殷纣、楚灵、秦皇为深诫。
现代文：陛下应当以尧、舜、禹、商汤、文王、武王为榜样，从夏桀、殷纣、楚灵、秦始皇身上吸取教训。
English: His Majesty should follow the examples of Emperor Xizang, Emperor Zhou, Emperor Yu, Shang Tang, King Wen and King Wu, and learn lessons from Empress Xiao, Emperor Yin, Emperor Chu and Emperor Qin Shihuang.

古文：高高在上，实监后德。
现代文：处在那么高的位置上，应该时时监督自己的德行。
English: When you are in such a high position, you should always supervise your own virtue.

古文：慎守天位，以承祖考，巍巍大业，犹恐失之。
现代文：谨慎地守护王位，以继承祖先的基业，否则这盛大的功业，恐怕就会失去了。
English: Carefully guard the throne to inherit the ancestral inheritance, otherwise this great achievement, I am afraid, will be lost.

古文：不夙夜敬止，允恭恤民，而乃自暇自逸，惟宫台是侈是饰，必有颠覆危亡之祸。
现代文：如果不敬仰，踏实勤勉恤百姓，却还自我享乐，宫殿楼台都修建得很奢侈，一定会有倾覆灭亡的祸患。
English: If you do not admire, steadfastly and diligently sympathize with the people, but still enjoy yourself, the palace buildings are built very extravagantly, there will definitely be the scourge of overthrow and destruction.

古文：易曰： 丰其屋，蔀其家，闚其户，阒其无人。
现代文：《易经》上说： 建造好房屋，保护好家人，从窗户望进去，里面好像没有人。 
English: The I Ching says, "Build a good house, protect your family, look through the window, and there seems to be no one inside."

古文：王者以天下为家，言丰屋之祸，至於家无人也。
现代文：君主将天下看做自己的家，说建造房屋的祸事会延续到家人身上，是没有的。
English: There is no monarch who regards the whole world as his home and says that the calamity of building a house will spread to his family.

古文：方今二虏合从，谋危宗庙，十万之军，东西奔赴，边境无一日之娱。
现代文：现在吴蜀两国联合，谋划者危及魏氏宗庙，十万大军，东奔西走，边境地区没有一日闲暇。
English: Now that the two countries of Wu and Shu have united, the planners have endangered the ancestral temple of the Wei Dynasty, and the 100,000-strong army is rushing from east to west. The border areas have not had a single day of leisure.

古文：农夫废业，民有饥色。
现代文：百姓荒废了农业，民众面带饥色。
English: Agriculture has been abandoned by the people, who are starving.

古文：陛下不以是为忧，而营作宫室，无有已时。
现代文：陛下不将这些情况当做忧虑，反而无休止地修建宫殿。
English: Instead of treating these conditions as a worry, His Majesty has been endlessly building palaces.

古文：使国亡而臣可以独存，臣又不言也；君作元首，臣为股肱，存亡一体，得失同之。
现代文：如果国家灭亡了臣能保全自己，臣就不说这些话了；但陛下是首领，臣是重要大臣，我们的保全和灭亡都是一体的，得失的情况是一样的。
English: If the country perished and the minister could save himself, the minister would not say these things; but His Majesty is the leader, the minister is an important minister, our preservation and destruction are one and the same, the situation of gain and loss is the same.

古文：孝经曰： 天子有争臣七人，虽无道不失其天下。
现代文：《孝经》上说： 天子七位直言规劝的大臣，即使君王没有道义也不会失去天下。 
English: "The Filial Piety Sutra" says: Even if the emperor has no morality, he will not lose the world, because the Son of Heaven has seven ministers who will speak frankly and give advice.

古文：臣虽驽怯，敢忘争臣之义？
现代文：臣虽然驽下怯弱，难道敢忘记劝谏君王的道义吗？
English: Though his vassal is timid, dare he forget to advise the king's virtue?

古文：言不切至，不足以感寤陛下。
现代文：言辞不够恳切深入，就不足以使陛下感慨而醒悟。
English: Words are not earnest and profound enough to awaken His Majesty's emotion.

古文：陛下不察臣言，恐皇祖烈考之祚，将坠于地。
现代文：陛下不能明察臣的话，恐怕先祖们的福分将要坠落在地上了。
English: If His Majesty can't see what his ministers are saying, I'm afraid our ancestors' good fortune will fall to the ground.

古文：使臣身死有补万一，则死之日，犹生之年也。
现代文：如果臣死去能弥补万分之一，那臣死的时候，依然还像活着那样。
English: If the death of a vassal can make up for one ten-thousandth, then when that vassal dies, it is still as if he were alive.

古文：谨叩棺沐浴，伏俟重诛。 
现代文：臣会敲着棺材，沐浴修身，恭敬等待被处死。 
English: The vassals would knock on the coffin, take a bath to purify themselves, and respectfully wait to be executed.

古文：奏御，天子感其忠言，手笔诏答。
现代文：奏表呈上后，明帝有感于他的忠心直言，亲手写下诏书回复。
English: After the report was submitted, Emperor Ming, impressed by his loyalty and forthrightness, wrote a reply in his own hand.

古文：每朝廷会议，阜常侃然以天下为己任。
现代文：每次朝廷议会时，杨阜经常侃侃而谈，以天下为己任。
English: Every time there was an imperial court assembly, Yang Fu often spoke eloquently, taking the world as his own responsibility.

古文：数谏争，不听，乃屡乞逊位，未许。
现代文：他多次直言规劝，明帝都没有听从，他就多次请求辞官，明帝也不答应。
English: He repeatedly urged, but Emperor Ming did not listen. He repeatedly asked for a resignation, but Emperor Ming did not agree.

古文：会卒，家无馀财。
现代文：适逢他去世，家中没有多余的财产。
English: At the time of his death, the family had no surplus property.

古文：孙豹嗣。
现代文：孙子杨豹继承爵位。
English: His grandson Yang Pao will inherit the title.

古文：高堂隆字升平，泰山平阳人，鲁高堂生后也。
现代文：高堂隆，字升平，泰山郡平阳县人，鲁国高堂生的后代。
English: Gaodong Long, also known as Shengping, was from Pingyang County, Taishan County, and was a descendant of Gaodong of Lu.

古文：少为诸生，泰山太守薛悌命为督邮。
现代文：年少时就是秀才，泰山郡的太守任命他为督邮。
English: He was a talented young man, and the governor of Taishan County appointed him as postmaster.

古文：郡督军与悌争论，名悌而呵之。
现代文：郡里的督军和薛悌争执，直呼薛悌的名字并呵斥他。
English: The governor of the county quarreled with Xue Yao. He called Xue Yao's name and rebuked him.

古文：隆按剑叱督军曰： 昔鲁定见侮，仲尼历阶；赵弹秦筝，相如进缶。
现代文：高堂隆抓着剑柄叱责督军说： 从前鲁定公受到侮辱，孔子登阶而上；赵王弹奏秦筝，蔺相如奉瓦缶让秦王演奏。
English: Gaodong Long gripped the hilt of his sword and scolded the army commander, saying: Once upon a time, Luding was insulted, Confucius rose to the top; Zhao Wang played the Qin kite, and Gong Xiang was like a pottery can for Qin Wang to play.

古文：临臣名君，义之所讨也。 
现代文：当着部下的面直呼主君的名字，按大义应该责罚你。 
English: If you call your master's name in front of your subordinates, you should be punished.

古文：督军失色，悌惊起止之。
现代文：督军变了连着，薛悌也震惊地起来阻止高堂隆。
English: The viceroy's army changed one after another, and Xue Yao also stood up in shock to stop Gaodang Long.

古文：后去吏，避地济南。
现代文：后来，高堂隆辞职，来到济南避难。
English: Later, Gaodanglong resigned and came to Jinan to take refuge.

古文：建安十八年，太祖召为丞相军议掾，后为历城侯徽文学，转为相。
现代文：建安十八年，太祖征召他为丞相军议掾，后来做过历城侯曹徽的文学，转任为国相。
English: In the 18th year of the Jianan era, Emperor Taizu conscripted him as the chancellor of the army, and later he did the literature of the prince of Licheng, Cao Hui, and was transferred to the minister of state.

古文：徽遭太祖丧，不哀，反游猎驰骋；隆以义正谏，甚得辅导之节。
现代文：曹徽在太祖去世的时候，非但不哀痛，反而外出骑马打猎；高堂隆用大义来劝谏，很符合辅佐侯王的责任。
English: When Cao Hui's great-grandfather died, instead of mourning, he went out to hunt on horseback; Gaodonglong used the great righteousness to persuade him, which was very much in line with the responsibility of assisting the lord.

古文：黄初中，为堂阳长，以选为平原王傅。
现代文：黄初年间，高堂隆是堂阳县长，因为推选担任了平原王曹睿太傅。
English: In the early years of the Yellow Emperor, Gao Tonglong was the governor of Dongyang County, because he was elected to serve as the king of the plain, Cao Rui Taifu.

古文：王即尊位，是为明帝。
现代文：曹睿登基后，就是明帝。
English: After Cao Rui ascended to the throne, it was Emperor Ming.

古文：以隆为给事中、博士、驸马都尉。
现代文：任命高堂隆为给事中、博士、驸马都尉。
English: Gaodang Rong was appointed to the posts of vice-minister, doctor and lieutenant of the Horse Guards.

古文：帝初践阼，群臣或以为宜飨会，隆曰： 唐、虞有遏密之哀，高宗有不言之思，是以至德雍熙，光于四海。 
现代文：明帝刚登基，文武百官们有的认为应该举办宴会，高堂隆说： 唐尧、虞舜有保持静心的哀痛，殷高宗有不说话的冥想，所以他们的盛大德行，天下的和乐升平，天下皆知。 
English: The Ming Emperor had just ascended to the throne, and some of the civil and military officials thought that a banquet should be held. Gaodang Long said: Tang Xi and Yu Xi have the sorrow of maintaining meditation, and Yin Gaozong has the meditation of not speaking, so their grand virtue, the harmony of the world, is known all over the world.

古文：以为不宜为会，帝敬纳之。
现代文：认为不应该举办宴会，明帝慎重地采纳了这一建议。
English: Believing that a banquet should not be held, Emperor Ming cautiously accepted the suggestion.

古文：迁陈留太守。
现代文：高堂隆升任为陈留太守。
English: Kodo Takashi was promoted to the position of Chenryu Taishu.

古文：犊民酉牧，年七十馀，有至行，举为计曹掾；帝嘉之，特除郎中以显焉。
现代文：牧民酉牧，七十多岁，有极好的品行，被推荐为曹掾，明帝赏识他，特别任命他为郎中，以表示恩宠。
English: Seventy-plus-year-old herdsman Zou Mu, who had an excellent moral character, was recommended as Cao Zou. Emperor Ming appreciated him and specially appointed him as a disciple to show his grace.

古文：徵隆为散骑常侍，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：明帝又征召高堂隆为散骑常侍，赐封关内侯的爵位。
English: Emperor Ming also conscripted Gaodong Long as a horseback riding attendant and gave him the title of Marquis of Guanzhong.

古文：青龙中，大治殿舍，西取长安大钟。
现代文：青龙年间，明帝大肆修建宫殿，想要取回长安大钟。
English: During the Qinglong Dynasty, Emperor Ming wanted to restore the Great Bell of Chang'an by building a palace.

古文：隆上疏曰； 昔周景王不仪刑文、武之明德，忽公旦之圣制，既铸大钱，又作大钟，单穆公谏而弗听，泠州鸠对而弗从，遂迷不反，周德以衰，良史记焉，以为永鉴。
现代文：高堂隆上疏说： 过去周景王不效法文王、武王的德行，忽视周公旦的制度，已经铸造了大钱，又制造大钟，单穆公进谏但也没有听从，泠州鸠批评也不采纳，于是在错误的路上越走越远，周朝的国运因为衰微，史官将这些记录下来，成为后代的借鉴。
English: Gaodang Rongjangsu said: In the past, King Zhou Jing did not follow the moral conduct of King of France and King of Wu, and ignored the system of Zhou Gongdan. He had already minted a large amount of money and made a large clock. However, Shanmukong did not listen, and did not accept the criticism of Zhangzhou, so he went further and further on the wrong road. Because the national movement of the Zhou Dynasty was in decline, historians recorded these and became a reference for future generations.

古文：然今之小人，好说秦、汉之奢靡以荡圣心，求取亡国不度之器，劳役费损，以伤德政，非所以兴礼乐之和，保神明之休也。 
现代文：但现在的小人，喜欢叙说秦汉的奢靡情况以摇动陛下的心思，想要取回亡国又不合法度的东西，费时费力，伤害了陛下的德政，这不是振兴和乐的礼乐，保持神明庇护的办法。 
English: However, the villains of today like to shake His Majesty's heart by recounting the extravagant circumstances of the Qin and Han dynasties, and they want to take back what is illegal in a ruined country, which takes time and effort and hurts His Majesty's German government. This is not the way to revitalize the rites and music of harmony and maintain the protection of the gods.

古文：是日，帝幸上方，隆与卞兰从。
现代文：这一天，明帝来到上方，高堂隆和卞兰跟从左右。
English: On this day, Emperor Ming came to Shangfang, followed by Gaodang Long and Huanlan.

古文：帝以隆表授兰，使难隆曰： 兴衰在政，乐何为也？
现代文：明帝将高堂隆的奏表给卞兰看，让他为难高堂隆说： 国家的兴衰在于正直，音乐能做什么？
English: Emperor Ming showed the music sheet of Gaodanglong to Ulan, and Gaodanglong said: The rise and fall of a country lies in honesty. What can music do?

古文：化之不明，岂钟之罪？ 
现代文：教化不明确，怎么使大钟的罪过呢？ 
English: If the edification is not clear, how can the clock be guilty?

古文：隆曰： 夫礼乐者，为治之大本也。
现代文：高堂隆说： 礼乐，是治理国家的根本。
English: Kodo Takashi said: "Ritual music is fundamental to the governance of the country.

古文：故箫韶九成，凤皇来仪，雷鼓六变，天神以降，政是以平，刑是以错，和之至也。
现代文：所以箫韶演奏九次以后，凤凰来临，擂鼓六遍，天神下降，政治因此清平，刑罚得以实施。
English: Therefore, after the gong is played nine times, the phoenix arrives, the gong and drum are played six times, and the celestial god descends. As a result, politics is peaceful and punishments can be carried out.

古文：新声发响，商辛以陨，大钟既铸，周景以弊，存亡之机，恒由斯作，安在废兴之不阶也？
现代文：新做的乐曲奏响，商辛因此殒命，大钟铸成后，周景王开始衰败，国家存亡的道理，都是从这里开始的，怎么能说国家兴衰跟这个没有关系呢？
English: Newly made music was played, and merchants were dying for it. After the great clock was cast, King Zhou Jian began to decline. The reason for the country's survival began here. How can it be said that the rise and fall of the country has nothing to do with this?

古文：君举必书，古之道也，作而不法，何以示后？
现代文：君王的举动一定会记录在史书上，是自古以来的道理，如果行为不合法度，用什么来警示后人？
English: A monarch's actions will certainly be recorded in the history books. This has been the case since ancient times. If an action is illegal, what can be used to warn future generations?

古文：圣王乐闻其阙，故有箴规之道；忠臣愿竭其节，故有匪躬之义也。 
现代文：圣明的帝王乐于听到自己的不足，所以才有了进谏规劝的道义；忠诚的臣子愿意竭尽节操，所以有忠心耿耿的大义。 
English: A saintly emperor is happy to hear about his own shortcomings, so he has the moral right to seek advice; a loyal vassal is willing to do his best, so he has the moral right to be loyal.

古文：帝称善。
现代文：明帝称赞他说的对。
English: Wen Di thought it was right.

古文：迁侍中，犹领太史令。
现代文：高堂隆升任为侍中，依然兼任太史令。
English: Kodo Takashi was promoted to the position of chamberlain, still serving concurrently as the Grand Historian.

古文：崇华殿灾，诏问隆： 此何咎？
现代文：崇华殿发生火灾，明帝下诏问高堂隆： 这是什么灾祸？
English: When a fire broke out in the Chonghua Palace, Emperor Ming sent a message to Gaodanglong: What is this calamity?

古文：於礼，宁有祈禳之义乎？ 
现代文：按照礼节，应该有祈福消灾的仪式吗？ 
English: According to etiquette, should there be a ceremony to pray for good luck and disaster relief?

古文：隆对曰： 夫灾变之发，皆所以明教诫也，惟率礼脩德，可以胜之。
现代文：高堂隆回答说： 灾祸变故的发生，都是为了神明教训警戒，只有遵循礼法，修习品德，才能战胜灾祸。
English: Gaodanglong replied, "When disasters occur, it is for the gods to teach and warn. Only by following etiquette and cultivating virtue can we overcome disasters.

古文：易传曰： 上不俭，下不节，孽火烧其室。
现代文：《易经》中说： 在上位的人不节俭，下层的人也不会节俭，就有灾火烧毁屋舍。 
English: "I Ching" says: If the people at the top are not frugal, and the people at the bottom are not frugal, there will be a fire that will burn down the house.

古文：又曰： 君高其台，天火为灾。
现代文：又说： 君王修建高台，就会有天火的灾祸。 
English: And he said, The Lord hath exalted his throne above the heavens, and given it to the beast.

古文：此人君苟饰宫室，不知百姓空竭，故天应之以旱，火从高殿起也。
现代文：这是帝王如果装饰宫殿，但不知道百姓空虚尽力，所以上天用旱灾来显示，大火从高殿上升起。
English: This is to say that the king and queen knew how to decorate the palace, but did not know that the people's financial resources were exhausted. Therefore, the heavens used the drought to fulfill this behavior. The fire first started from the high temple.

古文：上天降鉴，故谴告陛下；陛下宜增崇人道，以答天意。
现代文：上天降下警戒，让灾祸告诉陛下；陛下应该发扬光大社会规范，以回复上天的旨意。
English: Heaven has sent down a warning, let the disaster tell your majesty; your majesty should carry forward the glorious social norms to respond to the will of heaven.

古文：昔太戊有桑谷生於朝，武丁有雊雉登於鼎，皆闻灾恐惧，侧身脩德，三年之后，远夷朝贡，故号曰中宗、高宗。
现代文：过去太戊时有桑谷生在朝廷，武丁时有雄雉在鼎上鸣叫，他们都认为这是灾祸之兆，心中恐惧，努力修习德行，三年之后，远方的部落都来朝贡，所以称他们为中宗、高宗。
English: In the past, when Taewu was in power, there was a mulberry tree in the imperial court, and when Wuding was in power, there was a male rooster crowing on the top of the throne. They all thought that this was a sign of disaster, and they were afraid in their hearts and tried hard to practice virtue. Three years later, distant tribes came to pay tribute, so they were called Zhongzong and Gaozong.

古文：此则前代之明鉴也。
现代文：这是前代明确的借鉴。
English: This is a clear reference to the previous generation.

古文：今案旧占，灾火之发，皆以台榭宫室为诫。
现代文：现在考察过去的吉凶，火灾的发生，都是通过烧毁亭台宫殿为训诫。
English: Now, if we look at the past, we can see that the occurrence of fire was a warning through the burning of pavilions and palaces.

古文：然今宫室之所以充广者，实由宫人猥多之故。
现代文：但现在宫殿之所以要扩充，是因为后宫人数太多。
English: But now the reason why the palace needs to be expanded is because there are too many people in the harem.

古文：宜简择留其淑懿，如周之制，罢省其馀。
现代文：应该挑选并留下那些善良美好的人，并像周朝的制度那样，将剩下的人都放出宫。
English: Those who are good and beautiful should be selected and kept, and the rest of the people should be released from the palace like the Zhou Dynasty system.

古文：此则祖己之所以训高宗，高宗之所以享远号也。 
现代文：这就是祖己训导高宗的原因，也是高宗能享有久远称号的原因。 
English: This is the reason why his ancestors trained Gaozong, and also why Gaozong can enjoy the long-lasting title.

古文：诏问隆： 吾闻汉武帝时，柏梁灾，而大起宫殿以厌之，其义云何？ 
现代文：明帝下诏问高堂隆： 我听说汉武帝的时候，柏梁台发生火灾，武帝大修宫殿来镇灾，这是什么意思呢？ 
English: Emperor Ming issued an edict asking Gaodang Rong: I heard that when Emperor Han Wudi was alive, there was a fire at Bai Liang Tai, and Emperor Wudi repaired the palace to mitigate the disaster. What does this mean?

古文：隆对曰： 臣闻西京柏梁既灾，越巫陈方，建章是经，以厌火祥；乃夷越之巫所为，非圣贤之明训也。
现代文：高堂隆回答说： 臣听说西汉柏梁台火灾之后，越国有巫师提出方法，应修建建章宫，以镇压火灾；这是夷越的巫师所建议的，不是圣贤明确的训导。
English: Gao Donglong replied: "The minister heard that after the fire in the Western Han Dynasty, the Vietnamese state-owned sorcerer proposed a method to build a palace to suppress the fire; this was suggested by the Yiwu sorcerer, not a clear teaching of the sage.

古文：五行志曰： 柏梁灾，其后有江充巫蛊卫太子事。
现代文：《五行志》说： 柏梁台的火灾，这之后就有了以巫蛊陷害太子的事。 
English: "Wu Xing Zhi" said: After the fire at Bai Liang Tai, there was a case of using witchcraft to frame the prince.

古文：如志之言，越巫建章无所厌也。
现代文：像《五行志》所说的，越国的巫师提出修建建章宫，并没有镇压什么。
English: As the "Five Elements" said, the wizards of Yue proposed to build a palace, and did not suppress anything.

古文：孔子曰： 灾者脩类应行，精祲相感，以戒人君。
现代文：孔子说： 灾祸的类型按类别和人们的行为响应，阴阳灾害互相感应，以警戒君王。 
English: Confucius said: the type of disaster by category and people's behavior response, yin and yang disasters interact to alert the king.

古文：是以圣主睹灾责躬，退而脩德，以消复之。
现代文：所以英明的君主看到灾祸就会要求自己，修养德行，以避免再次发生。
English: So when a wise ruler sees a calamity, he asks himself to cultivate virtue to prevent it from happening again.

古文：今宜罢散民役。
现代文：现在应该结束劳役并遣散百姓。
English: It is time to end forced labor and demobilize the population.

古文：宫室之制，务从约节，内足以待风雨，外足以讲礼仪。
现代文：宫室的制度，应以节俭为要务，对内部足够抵御风雨，对外可以讲求礼仪。
English: The system of the imperial household should be based on frugality as a top priority. It should be strong enough to withstand wind and rain internally, and it should be able to teach etiquette to outsiders.

古文：清埽所灾之处，不敢於此有所立作，莆、嘉禾必生此地，以报陛下虔恭之德。
现代文：清扫灾祸发生的地方，不在这里修建什么，那香草、美好的谷物一定会在这里生长，以回报陛下虔诚恭敬的德行。
English: Clean up the place where the disaster occurred, do not build anything here, the herb, the beautiful grain will surely grow here, in return for His Majesty's pious and respectful virtue.

古文：岂可疲民之力，竭民之财！
现代文：怎么能使百姓疲惫，穷尽百姓的钱财呢！
English: How can they make the people tired and exhaust the people's money and wealth!

古文：实非所以致符瑞而怀远人也。 
现代文：这是在不是招来吉兆且心怀远方百姓的情况啊。 
English: This is a situation that is not a good omen and has people from far away in mind.

古文：帝遂复崇华殿，时郡国有九龙见，故改曰九龙殿。
现代文：明帝就修复崇华殿，当时郡国中有九龙出现，就将崇华殿改名为九龙殿。
English: Emperor Ming repaired the Chonghua Hall, and when Kowloon appeared in the county, the Chonghua Hall was renamed the Kowloon Hall.

古文：陵霄阙始构，有鹊巢其上，帝以问隆，对曰： 诗云 维鹊有巢，维鸠居之 。
现代文：陵霄阙刚开始修建，有喜鹊在上面筑巢，明帝将这件事拿来问高堂隆，他回答说：《诗经》中说： 喜鹊筑巢，斑鸠就会来居住。 
English: When the construction of the Mausoleum of Heaven and Earth had just begun, there were magpies building nests on it. The Ming Emperor brought this matter to the attention of Gaodanglong, who replied, "It is said in the Book of Songs, 'When a magpie builds a nest, a turtle dove will come to live in it.'

古文：今兴宫室，起陵霄阙，而鹊巢之，此宫室未成身不得居之象也。
现代文：现在大建宫殿，修筑陵霄阙，而喜鹊在上筑巢，这是宫室未盖成，陛下不能居住的征兆。
English: Now the palace is being built, the mausoleums are being built, and the magpies are building nests on them. This is a sign that the palace is not complete and His Majesty cannot live there.

古文：天意若曰，宫室未成，将有他姓制御之，斯乃上天之戒也。
现代文：天象好像是在说，宫殿没有修成，将会有异姓人住在里面，这是上天的警戒。
English: The sky seems to be saying that the palace has not been completed, and there will be people with different surnames living in it. This is God's warning.

古文：夫天道无亲，惟与善人，不可不深防，不可不深虑。
现代文：天道没有亲近什么人，只接近善人，不能不好好防备，不能不好好思虑。
English: The way of heaven is not to be close to anyone, but only to be close to good people. It is not good to be unprepared, and it is not good to be careless.

古文：夏、商之季，皆继体也，不钦承上天之明命，惟谗谄是从，废德適欲，故其亡也忽焉。
现代文：夏商末年，帝王都是继位而来，不恭敬接受上天明确的训导，反而只听从谗言，德行衰败，任意妄为，所以他们的亡国也是很突然的。
English: At the end of the Xia and Shang dynasties, the emperors all succeeded to the throne. They did not respectfully accept the clear instruction of heaven, but only listened to the admonition, their virtue decayed, and they acted arbitrarily. Therefore, their downfall was also very sudden.

古文：太戊、武丁，睹灾竦惧，祗承天戒，故其兴也勃焉。今若休罢百役，俭以足用，增崇德政，动遵帝则，除普天之所患，兴兆民之所利，三王可四，五帝可六，岂惟殷宗转祸为福而已哉！
现代文：现在如果结束各种劳役，践行足够用度的借鉴，广大德政，言行举止都遵循帝王准则，消除天下所忧患的，实行万民都能获利的措施，那三皇就会有第四位，五帝就会有第六位，怎么会只有殷高宗能将灾祸转为福分呢！
English: Now, if we put an end to all kinds of labor service, carry out sufficient use of reference, the vast number of moral government, words and deeds are in accordance with the emperor's code, eliminate the troubles of the world, and implement measures that can benefit all the people, then the Third Emperor will have a fourth, the Fifth Emperor will have a sixth, and how can only Yin Gaozong turn the disaster into a blessing!

古文：臣备腹心，苟可以繁祉圣躬，安存社稷，臣虽灰身破族，犹生之年也。
现代文：臣做为陛下重要的大臣，如果可以使陛下享受福祉，保护江山，那么臣即使粉身碎骨，宗族破亡，也像还活着一样。
English: As an important minister of His Majesty, if a vassal can make His Majesty enjoy welfare and protect the country, then even if the vassal is crushed and the clan is destroyed, it is as if he is still alive.

古文：岂惮忤逆之灾，而令陛下不闻至言乎？ 
现代文：怎么能因为害怕违背陛下心意而招致祸害，而让陛下不能听到忠诚的言论呢？ 
English: How can His Majesty not hear the words of loyalty, for fear of incurring the calamity of going against His Majesty's wishes?

古文：於是帝改容动色。
现代文：明帝也为这番话动容。
English: Emperor Ming was also moved by these words.

古文：是岁，有星孛于大辰。
现代文：这一年，有彗星在房心尾三宿间显得特别明亮。
English: This year, a comet appeared particularly bright between the three quarters of the sky.

古文：隆上疏曰： 凡帝王徙都立邑，皆先定天地社稷之位，敬恭以奉之。
现代文：高堂隆上疏说： 凡是帝王迁都设县，都是先确定天地社稷的位置，并恭敬地供奉。
English: Takakido Ryujosho said: Whenever the emperor moved the capital to a county, he first determined the location of heaven and earth and the shrine, and reverently offered it.

古文：将营宫室，则宗庙为先，厩库为次，居室为后。
现代文：将要修建宫室，应该以宗庙为先，其次车马库和粮仓，宫殿在后。
English: If a palace is to be built, the family temple should be built first, followed by the depot and granary, and then the palace.

古文：今圜丘、方泽、南北郊、明堂、社稷，神位未定，宗庙之制又未如礼，而崇饰居室，士民失业。
现代文：现在圜丘、方泽、南北郊、明堂、社稷、神位等都还没有确定，宗庙的制度也不合礼法，却要装饰华丽的宫室，士人百姓不能工作。
English: At present, Mengqiu, Fangze, the northern and southern suburbs, Myeongdong, Shecheng, and the position of deities have not yet been determined. The system of ancestral temples does not conform to the etiquette law, but it is necessary to decorate gorgeous palace rooms, and scholars and commoners cannot work.

古文：外人咸云宫人之用，与兴戎军国之费，所尽略齐。民不堪命，皆有怨怒。
现代文：外人都说宫人的费用，和战事的军队费用，大致相等，百姓不能忍受这样的命令，都怀有怨恨怒气。
English: Outsiders say that the expenses of the palace staff and the military expenses of the war are roughly equal, and the people cannot bear such an order, and they are full of resentment and anger.

古文：书曰 天聪明自我民聪明，天明畏自我民明威 ，舆人作颂，则向以五福，民怒吁嗟，则威以六极，言天之赏罚，随民言，顺民心也。
现代文：《尚书》中说 上天聪慧，是因为百姓聪慧，上天让人敬畏，是因为百姓有威仪 ，驾车的人制作颂词，上天就赐予五种福事，百姓怨怒，就用六种祸事来威吓，是说上天的奖赏惩罚，都是顺遂民心民意。
English: "Shangshu" says that the heavens are clever because the people are clever, the heavens are awe-inspiring because the people have dignity, the drivers make eulogies, the heavens bestow five kinds of blessings, the people are angry and use six kinds of calamities to intimidate, that is, the rewards and punishments of the heavens are all in accordance with the people's will.

古文：是以临政务在安民为先，然后稽古之化，格于上下，自古及今，未尝不然也。
现代文：所以处理政事一定要将百姓放在首位，然后遵循古代教化，再连通上下，从古到进，没有不是这样的。
English: Therefore, when dealing with political affairs, we must put the people first, then follow the ancient enlightenment, and then connect up and down, from ancient to modern, there is no other way.

古文：夫采椽卑宫，唐、虞、大禹之所以垂皇风也；玉台琼室，夏癸、商辛之所以犯昊天也。
现代文：居住在简朴的宫室中，是唐尧、虞舜、大禹能流传帝王风范的原因；修建奢华的亭台宫殿，是夏癸、商辛冒犯上天的原因。
English: Living in a simple palace room is the reason why Tang Xuan, Yu Xuan, and Dayun were able to spread the imperial style; building a luxurious pavilion palace is the reason why Xia Xuan and Shang Xin offended heaven.

古文：今之宫室，实违礼度，乃更建立九龙，华饰过前。
现代文：现在的宫殿，确实是违背了礼法制度，又再修建九龙殿，奢华的装饰超过之前。
English: The current palace is indeed a violation of the etiquette system, and the Kowloon Palace has been built again, with more luxurious decorations than before.

古文：天彗章灼，始起於房心，犯帝坐而干紫微，此乃皇天子爱陛下，是以发教戒之象，始卒皆於尊位，殷勤郑重，欲必觉寤陛下；斯乃慈父恳切之训，宜崇孝子祗耸之礼，以率先先下，以昭示后昆，不宜有忽，以重天怒。 
现代文：彗星在房心尾三宿间发光，进犯帝王星宿而延续到旁边的紫微星，这是上天宠爱陛下，所以向您发出教导训诫的征召，始终都滞留在尊位，殷勤郑重，想要使陛下醒悟；这是慈爱的父亲恳切地训导，陛下应该依据孝子恭敬惶恐的礼节，为天下做出表率，以昭示后代，不应该有疏忽，再冒犯天意。 
English: The comet shines between the three quarters of the house, attacking the imperial planet and continuing to the next purple star. This is the heaven's beloved Majesty, so he issued a call to teach and admonish you, always staying in a dignified position, diligently and solemnly, trying to awaken your Majesty; this is the loving father's earnest instruction. Your Majesty should follow the filial piety and fearless etiquette, and set an example for the world to show future generations. There should be no negligence, and offend the will of heaven.

古文：时军国多事，用法深重。
现代文：当时国家有很多战事，刑罚严苛。
English: At that time, there were many wars in the country, and the punishments were severe.

古文：隆上疏曰： 夫拓迹垂统，必俟圣明，辅世匡治，亦须良佐，用能庶绩其凝而品物康乂也。
现代文：高堂隆上疏说： 拓展疆土，延续帝位，一定要等待圣明的君主，辅佐时代，匡扶正直，也需要良臣，这样各种功业就能凝聚起来并且百姓安定了。
English: Gaodang Rongjangso said: To expand the territory and continue the imperial throne, we must wait for a saintly monarch, assist the times, support honesty, and also need good ministers, so that all kinds of works can be consolidated and the people can be stable.

古文：夫移风易俗，宣明道化，使四表同风，回首面内，德教光熙，九服慕义，固非俗吏之所能也。
现代文：转移风气,改变习俗，宣扬并申明道德教化，使得四海有同样的风气，使外族前来臣服，德行教化发扬光大，让全国都仰慕这样的道义，这本来不是一般的官吏能做到的。
English: Transferring the culture, changing the customs, promoting and affirming moral education, making the four seas have the same culture, making foreigners come to submit, moral education and carry forward, and making the whole country admire such morality, this is not something that ordinary officials can do.

古文：今有司务纠刑书，不本大道，是以刑用而不措，俗弊而不敦。
现代文：现在相关官员都致力于查究刑罚条文，不寻求治国理政的方法，所以刑罚实行但没有成效，风俗凋敝却不能督促。
English: Now, the relevant officials are committed to investigating the penal provisions, and do not seek ways to govern the country. Therefore, the implementation of punishments has not been effective, and customs are fading, but they cannot be urged.

古文：宜崇礼乐，班叙明堂，修三雍、大射、养老，营建郊庙，尊儒士，举逸民，表章制度，改正朔，易服色，布恺悌，尚俭素，然后备礼封禅，归功天地，使雅颂之声盈于六合，缉熙之化混于后嗣。
现代文：应该推崇礼乐，排序祭祀等重要地方，修建三雍宫，举行祭祀的射礼，奉养老人，修建郊庙，尊崇儒生，举荐隐逸的士人，制定好各项制度，修改正朔，变换朝服颜色，提倡孝悌之道，崇尚节俭，然后准备礼仪，实行封禅制度，将功劳归于天地，使得雅颂的正统音乐传遍天地之间，光明的教化流传到后代。
English: It is necessary to promote ceremonial music, arrange important places such as sacrifices, build the Sanyong Palace, hold the ceremonial shooting, cultivate the elderly, build suburban temples, respect Confucianism, recommend secluded scholars, formulate various systems, modify the Zhengshao, change the color of the court dress, promote the way of filial piety, advocate frugality, and then prepare the etiquette, implement the zen system, attribute merit to heaven and earth, so that the orthodox music of the yasong spreads throughout heaven and earth, and the bright enlightenment spreads to future generations.

古文：斯盖至治之美事，不朽之贵业也。
现代文：这大概就是安定盛世的最好局面，是不朽的功业。
English: This is probably the best situation for a stable and prosperous world, and it is an immortal achievement.

古文：然九域之内，可揖让而治，尚何忧哉！
现代文：这样之后，天下间都能轻松地治理好，还有什么可忧虑的呢！
English: After this, the world can be easily governed well, and there is nothing to worry about!

古文：不正其本而救其末，譬犹棼丝，非政理也。
现代文：不匡正根本反而解决微小的问题，就好像一团乱丝，不是治国理政的办法。
English: It is not a way to govern a country if you do not rectify and solve minor problems. It is like a tangled mess.

古文：可命群公卿士通儒，造具其事，以为典式。 
现代文：可以命令公侯大臣都学习儒术，制作备办要求的事，做为典范。 
English: He can order all the princes and ministers to study Confucianism and make preparations as required, setting an example.

古文：隆又以为改正朔，易服色，殊徽号，异器械，自古帝王所以神明其政，变民耳目，故三春称王，明三统也。
现代文：高堂隆又认为修改正朔，改变朝服的颜色，改变徽号，变动器械，是自古以来的帝王之所以能使神明了解政治，改变百姓的看法的原因，所以在三春称王，是为了申明夏商周三代的正朔。
English: Gaodang Long also believed that the reason why emperors since ancient times have been able to make the gods understand politics and change the people's views is that they modified Zhengshuo, changed the color of the imperial robes, changed the emblem, and changed the instruments. Therefore, the king was named in the third spring in order to affirm the Zhengshuo of the third generation of Xia merchants.

古文：於是敷演旧章，奏而改焉。
现代文：于是高堂隆陈述过去的章法，并上奏修改。
English: As a result, Kodo Takashi stated the past chapter method and revised it.

古文：帝从其议，改青龙五年春三月为景初元年孟夏四月，服色尚黄，牺牲用白，从地正也。
现代文：明帝听从他的建议，将青龙五年春三月改为景初元年孟夏四月，朝服改为黄色，宗庙祭品尚白，按地正建丑，以农历十二月为正月。
English: Emperor Ming listened to his suggestion and changed the Qinglong Spring March to Jingchuan Year 1 Mengxia April, the imperial robes to yellow, the ancestral temple offerings to white, according to the ground Zhengjian ugliness, with the lunar calendar December as the first month.

古文：迁光禄勋。
现代文：高堂隆升任光禄勋。
English: Later, Xue Ying Sheng was awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：帝愈增崇宫殿，彫饰观阁，凿太行之石英，采谷城之文石，起景阳山於芳林之园，建昭阳殿於太极之北，铸作黄龙凤皇奇伟之兽，饰金墉、陵云台、陵霄阙。
现代文：明帝更加大力修建宫殿，装饰楼阁，凿取太行山的石英，开采谷城的文石，在芳林园建起景阳山，在太极殿北面修筑昭阳殿，铸造黄龙、凤凰等奇伟的野兽，用来装饰金墉殿、陵云台和陵霄阙。
English: Emperor Ming worked even harder to build palaces, decorate mansions, quarry the quartz from Mount Taihang, mine the aragonite from Valley City, build Mount Jingyang in the Fanglin Garden, build the Zhaoyang Hall on the north side of the Taiji Hall, and cast magnificent beasts such as the Yellow Dragon and the Phoenix to decorate the Golden Pavilion, the Mausoleum of Generalissimo Sun Yat-sen, and the Mausoleum of Generalissimo Sun Yat-sen.

古文：百役繁兴，作者万数，公卿以下至于学生，莫不展力，帝乃躬自掘土以率之。
现代文：各种劳役非常繁重，参与修建的人有上万，公卿以下的官员以至于学生，没有不出力的，明帝还亲自挖土以做为他们的表率。
English: All kinds of labor are very heavy. There are tens of thousands of people involved in the construction, from officials below the nobility to students. There is no lack of effort. Emperor Ming personally dug the soil to set an example for them.

古文：而辽东不朝。
现代文：但是辽东地区不前来朝拜。
English: However, the Liaodong region does not come to worship.

古文：悼皇后崩。天作淫雨，冀州水出，漂没民物。
现代文：悼皇后去世，上天不断降下大雨，冀州发了洪水，冲走淹没百姓财物。
English: In mourning for the death of the empress, the heavens continued to rain heavily, and floods occurred in Jizhou, washing away and flooding the people's property.

古文：隆上疏切谏曰：
现代文：高堂隆上疏恳切地劝谏说：
English: Takakazu Kodo earnestly urged him:

古文：盖 天地之大德曰生，圣人之大宝曰位；何以守位？
现代文： 自然界的最大功德是滋养万物，圣人最好的宝物是权力地位；怎样保住这地位呢？
English: The greatest merit of nature is to nourish all things, the best treasure of a saint is a position of power; how to maintain this position?

古文：曰仁；何以聚人？
现代文：依靠仁慈；怎样才能吸引人才呢？
English: Relying on benevolence, how can we attract talent?

古文：曰财 。
现代文：依靠物质利益 。
English: Relying on material benefits.

古文：然则士民者，乃国家之镇也；谷帛者，乃士民之命也。
现代文：但士人百姓，是国家安定的根基；谷物布匹，是士人百姓的命根。
English: But the people are the foundation of national stability; grain and cloth are the lifeblood of the people.

古文：谷帛非造化不育，非人力不成。
现代文：谷物粮食，不是大自然就不能生产，不是人力能造出来的。
English: Grain, grain, is not something that nature cannot produce, it is not something that man can create.

古文：是以帝耕以劝农，后桑以成服，所以昭事上帝，告虔报施也。
现代文：所以帝王亲自耕种以勉励农桑，后来种桑养蚕，才能制作衣服，因此要祭祀上天，告知自己的虔诚和措施。
English: Therefore, the emperor personally cultivated to encourage farmers to grow mulberry, and later planted mulberry to raise silkworms in order to make clothes. Therefore, he should sacrifice to heaven and inform his piety and measures.

古文：昔在伊唐，世值阳九厄运之会，洪水滔天，使鲧治之，绩用不成，乃举文命，随山刊木，前后历年二十二载。
现代文：过去在伊尹唐尧时代，遭遇了困厄和灾祸，洪水泛滥，派鲧去治水，也没有效果，就推举了大禹，大禹沿着山势砍伐树木，前后历经二十二年。
English: In the past, in the era of Yi Yin and Tang Xuan, when they encountered hardships and disasters, floods, and sent officials to control the water, but there was no effect, they elected Dayu. Dayu cut down trees along the mountain, and it took 22 years.

古文：灾眚之甚，莫过於彼，力役之兴，莫久於此。
现代文：灾祸的严重，没有比这时候更夸张的了，百姓参与劳役的时间，也没有比这更久的。
English: The severity of the calamity could not have been more exaggerated than at this time, and the length of time during which the people participated in the forced labor could not have been longer.

古文：尧、舜君臣，南面而已。
现代文：到了尧帝、舜帝时期，只需要治国理政而已。
English: By the time of Emperor Xizong and Emperor Gaozong, it was only a matter of governing the country.

古文：禹敷九州，庶士庸勋，各有等差，君子小人，物有服章。
现代文：大禹划分九州，奖赏有功的官吏，各有等级之分，官员平民，有各自的服饰。
English: Dayu divided Kyushu, rewarding meritorious officials, each with a grade, officials and civilians, each with their own clothing.

古文：今无若时之急，而使公卿大夫并与厮徒共供事役，闻之四夷，非嘉声也，垂之竹帛，非令名也。
现代文：现在没有像那时的紧急情况，却让公卿大臣和这些人一起参加劳役，如果让周边国家知道，这不是好的声誉啊，日后记录在史书上，也不是美好的名声。
English: Now, there is no emergency like that time, but to let the noble minister and these people participate in the labor service together, if the surrounding countries know, this is not a good reputation, it will be recorded in the history books in the future, and it is not a good reputation.

古文：是以有国有家者，近取诸身，远取诸物，妪煦养育，故称 恺悌君子，民之父母 。
现代文：所以治理国或家的人，近处的就从自己身上获取，远处的就从他人身上获取，养育万物，所以说 贤德的君子，是百姓的父母 。
English: That is why those who govern a country or a family take from themselves what is near and from others what is far, and nurture all things. That is why the virtuous gentleman is the parent of the people.

古文：今上下劳役，疾病凶荒，耕稼者寡，饥馑荐臻，无以卒岁；宜加愍恤，以救其困。
现代文：现在国家上下都参加劳役，疾病流行，收成也不好，出现饥荒，耕种的人少，灾荒的饥饿一同到来，百姓没有办法度过今年；应该加以怜悯抚恤，以救济他们的困顿。
English: Now the whole country is participating in forced labor, diseases are rampant, harvests are not good, there is famine, fewer people are farming, famine and famine are coming together, and the people have no way to get through this year; they should be given mercy and alms to relieve their hardships.

古文：臣观在昔书籍所载，天人之际，未有不应也。
现代文：臣看过去的书籍中记载的，天道和人事之间的关系，没有不感应的。
English: If you look at the books of the past, you will not fail to be impressed by the relationship between heaven and man.

古文：是以古先哲王，畏上天之明命，循阴阳之逆顺，矜矜业业，惟恐有违。
现代文：所以古代的贤明帝王，畏惧上天的明训，遵循阴阳的规律，兢兢业业，只担心有所违背。
English: Therefore, the wise emperors of ancient times, fearing the clear teachings of heaven, followed the laws of yin and yang, conscientiously, and only worried about violating them.

古文：然后治道用兴，德与神符，灾异既发，惧而脩政，未有不延期流祚者也。
现代文：这样之后治理国家的政策才能兴盛，德行和神明相合，灾祸异象发生之后，就因畏惧而修习德政，没有不延续国运的。
English: After this, the policy of governing the country can flourish. Virtue and gods are compatible. After the calamity and vision occurred, they practiced virtue politics out of fear. There is no one who does not continue the national movement.

古文：爰及末叶，闇君荒主，不崇先王之令轨，不纳正士之直言，以遂其情志，恬忽变戒，未有不寻践祸难，至於颠覆者也。
现代文：等到了朝代末世，昏庸的君主不尊崇先王的法度，不采纳正义之士的直言规劝，所以任意妄为，将劝诫看得很淡泊，这样没有不很快就出现灾祸的，以至于国家倾覆。
English: In the last days of the dynasty, the dull monarch did not respect the laws of the previous king and did not accept the straightforward advice of the righteous, so he acted arbitrarily and ignored the advice, so there was no disaster that would soon occur, so that the country would be overturned.

古文：天道既著，请以人道论之。
现代文：天道是很显著的，希望能以人伦关系来讨论。
English: The heavenly way is very obvious, and it is hoped that it will be discussed in terms of interpersonal relationships.

古文：夫六情五性，同在於人，嗜欲廉贞，各居其一。
现代文：六种感情，五种性情，是每个人都有的，贪求享受和廉洁坚贞，每个人都各占一种。
English: Six emotions, five temperaments, are common to everyone, the desire for enjoyment and integrity, everyone has one.

古文：及其动也，交争于心。
现代文：等到有所触动，就会在心中挣扎。
English: Wait until something touches you, you will struggle in your heart.

古文：欲强质弱，则纵滥不禁；精诚不制，则放溢无极。
现代文：如果欲望很强，而意志薄弱，那就会随心而为没有禁止；真心诚意不能控制，那就会放纵没有限制。
English: If the desire is strong, but the will is weak, then there will be no prohibition; if the sincerity cannot be controlled, then there will be no restriction on indulgence.

古文：夫情之所在，非好则美，而美好之集，非人力不成，非谷帛不立。
现代文：人的性情所在的，不是好就是美，而美好的聚集，不依靠人力不能成功，没有粮食布匹就不能成立。
English: Human nature is either good or beautiful, and a beautiful gathering cannot be successful without relying on manpower, and cannot be established without grain cloth.

古文：情苟无极，则人不堪其劳，物不充其求。
现代文：性情如果没有限制，那人就不能忍受这样的劳役，物质也不能满足需求。
English: If there is no limit to one's disposition, one will not be able to endure such labor, nor will one's material needs be satisfied.

古文：劳求并至，将起祸乱。
现代文：劳役和欲求同时存在，就将会升起灾祸。
English: When work and desire co-exist, disaster will ensue.

古文：故不割情，无以相供。
现代文：所以不割舍欲求，就不能满足。
English: Therefore, if you do not give up your desires, you will not be able to be satisfied.

古文：仲尼云： 人无远虑，必有近忧。 
现代文：孔子说： 人没有远处的忧虑，一定会有近处的担忧。 
English: Confucius said: If a man has no worries in the distance, he is sure to have worries in the near.

古文：由此观之，礼义之制，非苟拘分，将以远害而兴治也。
现代文：从这里看，礼仪的制定，不是为了拘束自己，而是想要远离灾害并且振兴政治。
English: Seen from this perspective, etiquette was not established to restrain oneself, but to keep away from disasters and revitalize politics.

古文：今吴、蜀二贼，非徒白地小虏、聚邑之寇，乃据险乘流，跨有士众，僣号称帝，欲与中国争衡。
现代文：现在吴蜀两个贼寇，不是没有根基的小贼、也不是实力单薄的敌寇，而是倚仗天险，顺着水流，横跨地盘，拥兵众多，他们自称为皇帝，想要和中原地区抗衡。
English: Now, Wu Shu's two bandits are not small bandits without roots, nor are they enemy bandits with weak strength, but rely on natural hazards, follow the water flow, cross the territory, and have many supporters. They call themselves emperors and want to compete with the Central Plains.

古文：今若有人来告，权、禅并脩德政，复履清俭，轻省租赋，不治玩好，动咨耆贤，事遵礼度。
现代文：现在如果有人来报告说，孙权、刘禅都在修习德政，崇尚清廉节俭，减少租地赋税，不沉迷于喜乐，有事情都咨询年高贤德之人，事事都遵循礼法。
English: Now, if someone comes to report that Sun Quan and Liu Zhen are all practicing moral government, advocating cleanliness and frugality, reducing taxes on land lease, not indulging in joy, and consulting with people of high moral character in all matters, and following etiquette in all matters.

古文：陛下闻之，岂不惕然恶其如此，以为难卒讨灭，而为国忧乎？
现代文：陛下听说后，难道不会警惕并讨厌他们这样做吗，因为他们这样做，就很难迅速征讨消灭，而成为国家的忧患吗？
English: When His Majesty hears of this, will he not be alarmed and disgusted that they are doing this, since it will make it difficult for them to carry out a speedy extermination, and will become a national calamity?

古文：若使告者曰，彼二贼并为无道，崇侈无度，役其士民，重其徵赋，下不堪命，吁嗟日甚。
现代文：如果有人上告说，这两个贼寇都没有德政，崇尚奢侈没有节制，役使他们的百姓，加重他们的赋税，下层百姓不能忍受，哀叹的声音越来越大。
English: If someone appeals that these two bandits have no virtue, advocate luxury without restraint, serve their people, increase their taxes, and the lower-class people can't bear it, the voice of lamentation is getting louder and louder.

古文：陛下闻之，岂不勃然忿其困我无辜之民，而欲速加之诛，其次，岂不幸彼疲弊而取之不难乎？
现代文：陛下听说后，难道不会勃然大怒，因为他们残害无辜百姓，而想要更快地诛灭他们吗？其次，难道不会因为敌人疲乏而攻取他们并不困难而感到庆幸吗？
English: When His Majesty heard of it, would he not fly into a rage, because they were massacring innocent people and he wanted to destroy them more quickly? Secondly, would he not be glad that the enemy was tired and it would not be difficult to capture them?

古文：苟如此，则可易心而度，事义之数亦不远矣。
现代文：如果这样，那就应该换种角度思考，事理的规律也不远了。
English: If this is the case, then we should think from a different perspective, and the rule of reason is not far away.

古文：且秦始皇不筑道德之基，而筑阿房之宫，不忧萧墙之变，而脩长城之役。
现代文：况且秦始皇没有修筑道德的根基，却修建阿房宫，不担忧内部的变故，反而调动修建长城的劳役。
English: Moreover, Qin Shihuang did not build a moral foundation, but built Afang Palace. He did not worry about internal changes, but instead mobilized laborers to build the Great Wall.

古文：当其君臣为此计也，亦欲立万世之业，使子孙长有天下，岂意一朝匹夫大呼，而天下倾覆哉？
现代文：当时他们君臣制定这样的计划时，也是想要建立流传万世的基业，使子孙后代能长久享有天下，谁能料到一夕之间，一个匹夫大呼竟导致国家灭亡呢？
English: At that time, when they made such a plan, they also wanted to establish a heritage that would last forever, so that future generations could enjoy the world for a long time. Who could have expected that overnight, a loud cry would lead to the country's demise?

古文：故臣以为使先代之君知其所行必将至於败，则弗为之矣。
现代文：所以臣认为如果让前代的君主知道他的行为一定会招致国家的灭亡，那他就不会做这样的事。
English: So the minister thought that if the previous monarch knew that his actions would surely lead to the destruction of the country, then he would not do such a thing.

古文：是以亡国之主自谓不亡，然后至於亡；贤圣之君自谓将亡，然后至於不亡。
现代文：所以亡国的君主都自认为不会灭亡，最终却灭亡了；贤德圣明的君主自认为将要灭亡，最终没有灭亡。
English: Therefore, the monarchs of ruined countries all thought that they would not perish, but in the end they did; the wise and saintly monarchs thought that they would perish, but in the end they did not.

古文：昔汉文帝称为贤主，躬行约俭，惠下养民，而贾谊方之，以为天下倒悬，可为痛哭者一，可为流涕者二，可为长叹息者三。
现代文：过去汉文帝被称为贤王，亲身践行节俭，施惠部下修养百姓，而贾谊却以危言作比，认为天下危急，可为之痛哭的事有一，可为之流泪的事有二，可为之长叹息的事有三。
English: In the past, Emperor Hanwen was known as a virtuous king. He personally practiced thrift and favored his subordinates to cultivate the people. Jia Yi, on the other hand, compared it to a crisis. He believed that the world was in a critical situation. There was one thing to cry about, two things to shed tears about, and three things to sigh about.

古文：况今天下彫弊，民无儋石之储，国无终年之畜，外有强敌，六军暴边，内兴土功，州郡骚动，若有寇警，则臣惧版筑之士不能投命虏庭矣。
现代文：更何况现在天下凋敝，百姓没有一石粮食的储备，国家没有能支撑一年的储蓄，外部有强大的敌手，国家军队在边境驻守，内部却大兴土木，各地州郡都骚乱纷纷，如果有敌军来犯的预警，臣担心简陋的士兵不能在战场上舍生忘死啊。
English: What's more, the world is now in a state of decline. The people don't have a stone's worth of grain in reserve, the country doesn't have enough savings to last a year, there are powerful enemies outside, the national army is stationed at the border, but inside they are building large-scale civil engineering projects, and there are riots in various states and counties. If there is an early warning of an invading enemy army, the vassals are worried that the humble soldiers won't be able to give their lives on the battlefield.

古文：又，将吏奉禄，稍见折减，方之於昔，五分居一；诸受休者又绝廪赐，不应输者今皆出半：此为官入兼多於旧，其所出与参少於昔。
现代文：还有，将士官吏的俸禄，渐渐在减少，现在跟过去对比，只有五分之一；那些已经退休的又断绝的官粮的救济，不该缴纳的财物也比过去增加一半：这说明现在官府的收入应该比过去多，所支出和参与的应该比过去少。
English: Moreover, the salary of non-commissioned officers, which has been gradually decreasing, is now only one-fifth of what it was in the past; those who have retired and cut off the relief of government grain, the property that should not be paid has also increased by half than in the past: this shows that the government's income should be more than in the past, and the expenditure and participation should be less than in the past.

古文：而度支经用，更每不足，牛肉小赋，前后相继。
现代文：但经费支出，每次都会不足，征收牛肉这样的小税，前前后后也进行过多次。
English: However, the expenditure of funds will be insufficient every time, and the collection of small taxes such as beef has also been carried out many times before and after.

古文：反而推之，凡此诸费，必有所在。
现代文：返回来推论，这些费用支出，一定有所属的地方。
English: Returning to the corollary, these cost expenditures must have a place.

古文：且夫禄赐谷帛，人主所以惠养吏民而为之司命者也，若今有废，是夺其命矣。
现代文：况且俸禄赏赐粮食布匹，是君主用来施惠修养官吏百姓而能让他们生活的的，现在如果有废除的，就是夺走他们的性命啊。
English: Moreover, the stipend of grain and cloth was used by the monarch to support officials and the people so that they could live. If it were abolished now, it would mean taking away their lives.

古文：既得之而又失之，此生怨之府也。
现代文：已经得到了又失去，这是心生怨恨的地方了。
English: Having gained and lost, this is where resentment sets in.

古文：周礼，大府掌九赋之财，以给九式之用，入有其分，出有其所，不相干乘而用各足。
现代文：按照《周礼》，朝廷府库掌管九种赋税的收入，以供给各种费用，收入自有明目，支出也应该有该到的地方，不互相干预并且都能满足需求。
English: According to the "Weekly Rituals," the imperial treasury manages the income from nine types of taxation to supply various expenses. The income is self-evident, and the expenditure should also have a place to go. They do not interfere with each other and can meet the demand.

古文：各足之后，乃以式贡之馀，供王玩好。
现代文：各自满足支出之后，就将剩下的赋税，供君王游玩。
English: After they have met their expenses, the remaining taxes will be used to pay for the monarch's visit.

古文：又上用财，必考于司会。
现代文：还有天子使用财物，一定一定要由司会查验。
English: There is also the use of property by the son of heaven, which must be checked by the committee.

古文：今陛下所与共坐廊庙治天下者，非三司九列，则台阁近臣，皆腹心造膝，宜在无讳。
现代文：现在和陛下一同在朝中治理天下的，不是三司九卿，就是台阁近臣，这些都是心腹大臣，应该没有什么忌讳。
English: Right now, His Majesty and I are governing the world together with the government of the DPRK. It is not the Three Departments and Nine Ministries, it is the cabinet ministers. These are close ministers. There should be no taboos.

古文：若见丰省而不敢以告，从命奔走，惟恐不胜，是则具臣，非鲠辅也。
现代文：如果看到财物增减而不敢上告，反而听从命令四处奔走，只担心办不到，那就是充数无作为的臣子，不是刚直劝谏的重臣。
English: If you do not dare to appeal when you see an increase or decrease in property, but instead follow orders and run around, only worried that you can't do it, then you are just an idle vassal, not a senior vassal who directly advises you.

古文：昔李斯教秦二世曰： 为人主而不恣睢，命之曰天下桎梏。 
现代文：过去李斯教导秦二世说： 做为帝王而不任意妄为，天下就像是牢笼一样。 
English: In the past, Li Si taught Qin II to say: "Being an emperor and not acting arbitrarily, the world is like a cage.

古文：二世用之，秦国以覆，斯亦灭族。
现代文：秦二世听从了他的话，秦朝因此灭亡，李斯也被灭族。
English: Qin II obeyed his words. As a result, the Qin Dynasty was destroyed, and Li Si was also exterminated.

古文：是以史迁议其不正谏，而为世诫。
现代文：所以史官司马迁认为李斯不能直言规劝，就用来告诫后世。
English: Therefore, the historian Sima Qian thought that Li Si could not speak out, so he used it to admonish future generations.

古文：书奏，帝览焉，谓中书监、令曰： 观隆此奏，使朕惧哉！ 
现代文：奏疏呈上后，明帝查阅，对中书监、中书令说： 看高堂隆的这篇奏表，使我畏惧啊！ 
English: After the transcript was submitted, Emperor Ming inspected it and said to the Chinese librarian and the Chinese librarian: "Look at this transcript of Gaodanglong, it frightens me!

古文：隆疾笃，口占上疏曰：
现代文：高堂隆病重，就口述让人写下，上疏说：
English: Takashi Kodo was seriously ill, so he asked someone to write down the dictation, and Joso said:

古文：曾子有疾，孟敬子问之。
现代文：曾子生病，孟敬子去探望他。
English: Zeng Zi was ill, and Meng Keizi went to visit him.

古文：曾子曰： 鸟之将死，其鸣也哀；人之将死，其言也善。 
现代文：曾子说： 鸟将要死的时候，叫声很哀戚；人将要死的时候，说的话很善意。 
English: Zengzi said, "When a bird is about to die, its cry is very sad; when a person is about to die, his words are very kind.

古文：臣寝疾病，有增无损，常惧奄忽，忠款不昭。
现代文：臣现在生病，病情只有加重没有减缓，经常担心忽然去世，自己的赤诚忠心不能表现出来。
English: My vassal is now ill. His condition has only worsened, not eased. He often worries that he will die suddenly. He cannot show his sincerity and loyalty.

古文：臣之丹诚，岂惟曾子，愿陛下少垂省览！
现代文：臣的忠诚，怎么能跟曾子相比，只希望陛下多加审阅！
English: How can the loyalty of a minister be compared to that of a great-grandson? I only hope that His Majesty will review it more!

古文：涣然改往事之过谬，勃然兴来事之渊塞，使神人向应，殊方慕义，四灵效珍，玉衡曜精，则三王可迈，五帝可越，非徒继体守文而已也。
现代文：改掉以往错误的行事方式，振作精神深远地思考以后的事，使神明回应，天下各方都仰慕您的大义，则麟、凤、龟、龙等四灵就会来献珍宝，玉衡就会显示吉祥，这样就能超越三皇五帝，不是只是继承大统，遵循先王法度而已。
English: Change the wrong way of doing things in the past, cheer up and think deeply about the future, make the gods respond, all parties in the world admire your great righteousness, then the four spirits of the unicorn, the phoenix, the turtle, and the dragon will come to offer precious treasures, and the jade balance will show auspiciousness. In this way, you can surpass the three kings and five emperors, not just inherit the general rule and follow the previous king's law.

古文：臣常疾世主莫不思绍尧、舜、汤、武之治，而蹈踵桀、纣、幽、厉之迹，莫不蚩笑季世惑乱亡国之主，而不登践虞、夏、殷、周之轨。
现代文：臣经常痛惜世上的君王没有不想着效法唐尧、虞舜、商汤、周武王，却要重复夏桀、商纣、周幽王、周厉王的道路，他们没有不嘲笑朝代末年乱政亡国的君主，却不践行虞、夏、殷、周的准则。
English: The minister often lamented that the kings of the world did not want to emulate Tang Jun, Yu Jun, Shang Tang, and Zhou Wu, but wanted to repeat the path of Xia Jun, Shang Jun, Zhou Yu Wang, and Zhou Li Wang. They did not laugh at the monarchs who lost their countries in the chaos of the last years of the dynasty, but did not practice the principles of Gu, Xia, Yin, and Zhou.

古文：悲夫！
现代文：可悲啊！
English: How sad!

古文：以若所为，求若所致，犹缘木求鱼，煎水作冰，其不可得，明矣。
现代文：以他们的所作所为，来求取他们所想要的，就好像爬上树去找鱼，烧水造冰，这求不到的结果，是很明确的。
English: Using their actions to get what they want is like climbing a tree to find a fish or boiling water to make ice. The impossible result is clear.

古文：寻观三代之有天下也，圣贤相承，历载数百，尺土莫非其有，一民莫非其臣，万国咸宁，九有有截；鹿台之金，巨桥之粟，无所用之，仍旧南面，夫何为哉！
现代文：考察夏商周三代之所以拥有天下，都是圣贤之人相互传承，经过几百年的时间，天下没有那一寸土地不属于他们，没有哪一个百姓不臣服，天下各国都安定无事，九州同意；鹿台的金银和巨桥的粮食，无处可用，但依然能坐拥天下，还要做些什么呢！
English: Examining the reason why the three generations of Xia merchants owned the world, they were all sages who passed on to each other. After hundreds of years, there was not a single inch of land in the world that did not belong to them. There was not a single people who did not submit. All countries in the world were stable, and Kyushu agreed. The gold and silver of Lutetia and the grain of Jiuqiao were nowhere to be used, but they were still able to hold the world. What else should be done?

古文：然癸、辛之徒，恃其旅力，知足以拒谏，才足以饰非，谄谀是尚，台观是崇，淫乐是好，倡优是说，作靡靡之乐，安濮上之音。
现代文：但夏桀、商纣这样的人，倚仗着自己的力量，足以拒绝臣下劝谏，才能也足以掩饰自己的过失，崇尚谄媚和高大的建筑，喜好不正统的音乐，维护倡优，制作颓废的音乐，沉迷于桑间濮上的乐曲中。
English: However, people like Xia Yao and Shang Yao, relying on their own strength, are enough to refuse to be persuaded by their vassals, and their talent is also enough to cover up their mistakes, advocating charming and tall buildings, liking unorthodox music, upholding and advocating excellence, producing decadent music, and indulging in music on the mulberry raft.

古文：上天不蠲，眷然回顾，宗国为墟，下夷子隶，纣县白旗，桀放条；天子之尊，汤、武有之，岂伊异人，皆明王之胄也。
现代文：上天不免除他们的过错，等到他们回首望去，宗庙国土已经成为废墟，人民沦为奴隶。商纣王的首级被悬挂在白旗上，夏桀在鸣条被商汤打败；天子的尊为，商汤、周武王是拥有的，难道他们超乎常人吗，是因为它们都是英明君王的后代。
English: Heaven does not absolve them of their mistakes. When they look back, the ancestral temple and the country have become ruins, and the people have been reduced to slavery. The head of the merchant king was hung on a white flag, and the summer solstice was defeated by the merchant soup. The son of heaven, the merchant soup, and the king of Zhou are owned. Are they superior to ordinary people, because they are all the descendants of the wise king.

古文：且当六国之时，天下殷炽，秦既兼之，不脩圣道，乃构阿房之宫，筑长城之守，矜夸中国，威服百蛮，天下震竦，道路以目；自谓本枝百叶，永垂洪晖，岂寤二世而灭，社稷崩圮哉？
现代文：况且六国的时候，天下动乱不安，秦国已经兼并六国，却不修习圣人的品德，还修建阿房宫，修筑长城用做防守，在中原地区自夸自耀，威势降服外族，天下都震动惊恐，在路上用眼神示意；自认为根深叶茂，这样盛大的光辉能永远流传，谁能想到只传了两世就灭亡，江山社稷崩塌颓圮呢？
English: Moreover, at the time of the Six Kingdoms, the world was in turmoil and unrest. Qin had already annexed the Six Kingdoms, but did not practice the virtues of a saint. He also built the Afang Palace, built the Great Wall for defense, boasted in the Central Plains, and subjugated the foreign ethnic groups with might and main. The whole world was shocked and frightened, and gestured with their eyes on the road. They thought that the roots were deep and the leaves were thick, and that such a grand glory could be passed on forever. Who could have thought that it would only be passed on for two generations and then perish, and that the Jiangshan community would collapse?

古文：近汉孝武乘文、景之福，外攘夷狄，内兴宫殿，十馀年间，天下嚣然。
现代文：近代汉武帝继承文帝、景帝的功业，对外抗击外敌，在内修建宫殿，十几年的时间，天下就不安定。
English: The modern Han Emperor Wu inherited the achievements of Emperor Wen and Emperor Jing, fought against external enemies, and built palaces within the country. For more than ten years, the world was unstable.

古文：乃信越巫，怼天迁怒，起建章之宫，千门万户，卒致江充妖蛊之变，至於宫室乖离，父子相残，殃咎之毒，祸流数世。
现代文：就听信越国的巫师，迁怒上天，修建章台宫，宫殿广大，门户众多，最终导致江充陷害太子的巫蛊之祸，以至于宫中人心背离，父子相残，所造成了危害，影响了好几代。
English: He listened to the sorcerers of Yue, moved heaven and earth, and built the Zhang Tai Palace, a vast palace with many portals, which eventually led to the evil of the sorcerers who framed the prince, so that the hearts of the people in the palace were alienated and the father and son hated each other, which caused harm and affected several generations.

古文：臣观黄初之际，天兆其戒，异类之鸟，育长燕巢，口爪胸赤，此魏室之大异也，宜防鹰扬之臣於萧墙之内。
现代文：臣看黄初的时候，天象已降下劝诫，奇特的飞鸟，在燕巢中生长，口爪和胸都是赤红色，这是魏室发生变异的征兆，应该防备朝中出现很威武的大臣。
English: When the minister looked at Huangchu, the celestial elephant had issued an admonition. The strange flying bird grew in the swallow's nest, and its mouth claws and chest were red-red. This was a sign of mutation in Wei's room. It was necessary to guard against the appearance of a very powerful minister in the middle of the dynasty.

古文：可选诸王，使君国典兵，往往棋跱，镇抚皇畿，翼亮帝室。
现代文：可以挑选各侯王，让他们处理国事，掌管兵权，经常会出现割据对立的局面，镇守安抚京畿之地，辅佐王室。
English: It was possible to select the princes of each county and let them handle state affairs and control the military power, and there would often be a situation of division and opposition, with the town guards pacifying the Gyeonggi region and assisting the royal family.

古文：昔周之东迁，晋、郑是依，汉吕之乱，实赖朱虚，斯盖前代之明鉴。
现代文：过去周平王东迁，是依靠晋国、郑国，汉朝吕氏之乱，朝廷仰赖朱虚侯刘章才得以平定，这些大概都是前代的明确节俭。
English: In the past, the eastward migration of the Zhou and Ping dynasties depended on the Jin and Zheng dynasties and the Lusi Rebellion of the Han Dynasty, and the imperial court relied on Zhu Xuchang Liu Zhang to be able to quell it. These are probably the clear frugality of the previous generation.

古文：夫皇天无亲，惟德是辅。
现代文：上天没有亲近的人，只辅佐有德行的人。
English: There is no one who is close to heaven, only those who are virtuous.

古文：民咏德政，则延期过历，下有怨叹，掇录授能。
现代文：百姓歌咏德政，那国家就能延续，如果百姓有怨怼，那就会选取有功有才能的人授予天下。
English: If the people cherish a virtuous government, then the country can continue. If the people are resentful, then they will select meritorious and talented people and bestow them on the world.

古文：由此观之，天下之天下，非独陛下之天下也。
现代文：从这里来看，天下的天下，不是陛下一个人的天下。
English: Seen from here, the world is not the world of one person.

古文：臣百疾所锺，气力稍微，辄自舆出，归还里舍，若遂沈沦，魂而有知，结草以报。
现代文：臣身患很多疾病，力气微弱，已经离开朝廷，返回家乡，如果就这样去世，如果魂灵有意识，那一定报效陛下。
English: The subject suffers from many diseases, his strength is weak, he has left the imperial court and returned to his hometown. If he dies like this, if his soul is conscious, it will certainly be of benefit to His Majesty.

古文：诏曰： 生廉追伯夷，直过史鱼，执心坚白，謇謇匪躬，如何微疾未除，退身里舍？
现代文：明帝下诏说： 高堂隆的廉洁直追伯夷，正直超过了史鱼，心中秉持着坚贞的志节，忠诚正直不顾自身，怎么小病还没痊愈就辞官回乡呢？
English: Emperor Ming decreed: Gaodanglong's integrity directly pursues Bo Yi, his honesty surpasses that of Shi Yu, his heart upholds the ideals of steadfastness, and he is loyal and honest regardless of himself. Why did he resign from his post and return to his hometown before his minor illness was cured?

古文：禹以守节，疾笃而济愈。
现代文：大禹坚守气节，病得很重但最终痊愈。
English: Dayu stuck to his diet and was very ill, but eventually recovered.

古文：生其强饭专精以自持。 
现代文：希望您能注意饮食，专心养病以保重自身。 
English: I hope you can pay attention to your diet, concentrate on your health and take care of yourself.

古文：隆卒，遗令薄葬，敛以时服。
现代文：高堂隆去世，临终前命家人简单下葬，入殓时只穿平常的衣服。
English: When Gaodong Long died, his family members simply buried him before his death, and he wore only ordinary clothes when he was buried.

古文：初，太和中，中护军蒋济上疏曰 宜遵古封禅 。
现代文：起初，在太和年间，中护军蒋济上疏说 应该遵循古法去封禅 。
English: At first, during the Taichung Era, the Central Protector Jiang Jishangzhao said that it was necessary to follow the ancient law to seal Zen.

古文：诏曰： 闻济斯言，使吾汗出流足。 
现代文：明帝诏令说： 得知蒋济这些话，让我汗流浃背。 
English: The emperor issued a decree saying, "Hearing Jiang Jie's speech made me sweat, and the sweat ran down to my feet.

古文：事寝历岁，后遂议脩之，使隆撰其礼仪。
现代文：这件事搁置了几年，后来又商议着要实行，明帝让高堂隆修撰各项仪式。
English: This matter was put on hold for several years, and later they discussed whether to implement it, and Emperor Ming asked Gaodonglong to compile the various ceremonies.

古文：帝闻隆没，叹息曰： 天不欲成吾事，高堂生舍我亡也。 
现代文：明帝得知高堂隆去世，叹息着说： 上天不想要成全我这件事，高堂隆舍弃我去世了。 
English: When Emperor Ming learned that Gaodanglong had passed away, he sighed and said, "Heaven did not want to fulfill me. Gaodanglong abandoned me and passed away."

古文：子琛嗣爵。
现代文：高堂隆的儿子高琛承袭爵位。
English: Takadotaka's son, Takatsuki, succeeded to the title.

古文：始，景初中，帝以苏林、秦静等并老，恐无能传业者。
现代文：起初，在景初年间，明帝认为苏林、秦静等都老了，担心没有人能传承他们的学业。
English: At first, during the early years of Jing, Emperor Ming thought that Su Lin, Qin Jing, etc. were old and worried that no one could inherit their studies.

古文：乃诏曰： 昔先圣既没，而其遗言馀教，著於六艺。
现代文：就诏令说： 过去先圣去世后，他们的遗言教导，都记录在六艺中。
English: Regarding the edict, he said: "In the past, after the death of the previous saint, their last words and teachings were recorded in the Six Arts.

古文：六艺之文，礼又为急，弗可斯须离者也。
现代文：六艺的文法，礼又是最重要的，是一刻也离不开的。
English: The grammar of the six arts, with etiquette being the most important, is inseparable from learning.

古文：末俗背本，所由来久。
现代文：低下的习俗，背离根本，由来已经很久了。
English: Low customs, deviating from the fundamentals, have been around for a long time.

古文：故闵子讥原伯之不学，荀卿丑秦世之坑儒，儒学既废，则风化曷由兴哉？
现代文：所以闵子讥讽原伯不学习，荀卿厌恶秦朝坑杀儒生，儒学废弛，那风俗教化又从哪里兴盛呢？
English: Therefore, Xun Zi ridiculed Yuan Bo for not studying, Zou Qing loathed the Qin Dynasty for killing Confucian students, and Confucianism was in decline. Where did this custom of indoctrination flourish?

古文：方今宿生巨儒，并各年高，教训之道，孰为其继？
现代文：现在学者大儒，都各自年事已高，教导训诫的方法，谁来继承呢？
English: Now that the great scholars have all reached old age, who will inherit the method of teaching and admonishing?

古文：昔伏生将老，汉文帝嗣以晁错；谷梁寡畴，宣帝承以十郎。
现代文：过去伏生快要老去，汉文帝让晁错来继承；《谷梁传》很少有人研习，汉宣帝就派十个人学习继承。
English: In the past, Fusheng was about to grow old, and Emperor Han Wen allowed Zou Er to succeed him; very few people studied "Guliang Biography," and Emperor Han Xuan sent ten people to study and succeed him.

古文：其科郎吏高才解经义者三十人，从光禄勋隆、散骑常侍林、博士静，分受四经三礼，主者具为设课试之法。
现代文：现在应该选拔三十个能解读经义的郎官或有才能的人，让他们跟从光禄勋高堂隆、散骑常侍苏林、博士秦静学习四经三礼，主管的人应该详细设置考核的方法。
English: Now it is time to select 30 officials or talented people who can interpret the meaning of the sutras, and have them study the four sutras and three rites with Guanglu Gong Gaodanglong, Sanzhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhiz

古文：夏侯胜有言： 士病不明经术，经术苟明，其取青紫如俯拾地芥耳。
现代文：夏侯胜曾说： 士人因为不理解经学为病，经学如果能精通，那他们获得官职就像低头捡拾地上的小草而已。 
English: Xia Housheng once said: "Scholars are sick because they do not understand the study of the classics. If they can master the study of the classics, then they will get an official position just like bending down to pick up the grass on the ground."

古文：今学者有能究极经道，则爵禄荣宠，不期而至。
现代文：现在的学者，如果有能深入研究经学的，那爵位俸禄和荣名恩宠，就会自然而然来到。
English: Today's scholars, if they have the ability to study the classics in depth, will naturally receive the reward of a peerage and the grace of fame.

古文：可不勉哉！ 
现代文：怎么能不勉励呢！ 
English: How can you not encourage them!

古文：数年，隆等皆卒，学者遂废。
现代文：过了几年，高堂隆等人都去世了，学经的事就荒废了。
English: After a few years, Kodangryong and the others died, and the study of the classics was abandoned.

古文：初，任城栈潜，太祖世历县令，尝督守邺城。
现代文：当初，任城的栈潜在太祖时候担任过县令，曾经监督守卫邺城。
English: At the beginning, Rencheng's potential great-grandfather once served as a county magistrate, and once supervised the guarding of Lucheng.

古文：时文帝为太子，耽乐田猎，晨出夜还。
现代文：当时文帝还是太子，沉迷于打猎，早上出去晚上回来。
English: At that time, Emperor Wen was still a prince and was addicted to hunting. He would go out in the morning and come back in the evening.

古文：潜谏曰： 王公设险以固其国，都城禁卫，用戒不虞。
现代文：栈潜劝谏说： 王公设置险阻以保卫国家，都城中设置禁卫军，是用来警戒意外情况。
English: "The prince sets up obstacles to protect the country, and the imperial guard is set up in the capital to guard against unexpected situations.

古文：大雅云： 宗子维城，无俾城坏。
现代文：《诗经·大雅》说： 宗子处在城中，不要城墙毁坏无用。 
English: "Shikei · Daya" said: Sonoko is in the city, do not destroy the city wall useless.

古文：又曰： 犹之未远，是用大谏。
现代文：又说： 执政行事太没远见，所以要用来劝告。 
English: He also said: It is too short-sighted to govern, so it should be used to advise.

古文：若逸于游田，晨出昬归，以一日从禽之娱，而忘无垠之衅，愚窃惑之。 
现代文：如果安逸于出游打猎，早出晚归，将一天时间都放在捕获猎物的娱乐中，而忘记了无止尽的危险，臣私下很困惑。 
English: If it is easy to go out hunting, go out early and come back late, and spend the whole day in the entertainment of catching prey, forgetting the endless danger, the minister is privately confused.

古文：太子不悦，然自后游出差简。
现代文：太子很不高兴，但这之后外出打猎的情况减少了。
English: The prince was not happy, but after that there were fewer hunting trips.

古文：黄初中，文帝将立郭贵嫔为皇后，潜上疏谏，语在后妃传。
现代文：黄初年间，文帝想册立郭贵嫔为皇后，栈潜上疏劝谏，这件事在《后妃传》中另有记载。
English: In the early years of the Yellow Emperor, Emperor Wen wanted to make Gu Guo Guizhao the empress, and secretly persuaded her to do so. This event is also recorded in "The Tale of the Empress Dowager."

古文：明帝时，众役并兴，戚属疏斥，潜上疏曰： 天生蒸民而树之君，所以覆焘群生，熙育兆庶，故方制四海匪为天子，裂土分疆匪为诸侯也。
现代文：明帝时期，各种劳役一同征发，明帝的亲戚部署都疏远叱责，栈潜上疏说： 上天诞育百姓，并树立了君主，用来施惠百姓，教化万民，所以受四方制约，不能称为天子，分裂疆土的不能称为诸侯。
English: During the Ming Dynasty, all kinds of laborers were conscripted and dispatched together. The relatives of the Ming Dynasty were alienated and rebuked, and it was said: Heaven gave birth to the people, and established the monarch to benefit the people and educate the people. Therefore, subject to the constraints of the four sides, it cannot be called the son of heaven, and those who split the territory cannot be called princes.

古文：始自三皇，爰暨唐、虞，咸以博济加于天下，醇德以洽，黎元赖之。
现代文：从三皇开始，延续到唐尧、虞舜，都用广泛的救济来治理天下，用德行来协和，百姓都仰赖他们。
English: From the time of the Three Emperors to the Tang and Yu Dynasties, they used extensive relief to govern the world, and used virtue to promote harmony. The people all depended on them.

古文：三王既微，降逮于汉，治日益少，丧乱弘多，自时厥后，亦罔克乂。
现代文：夏商周三代衰微之后，上天将王位降到汉朝，但清明的时代越来越少，战乱越来越多，从那时开始，也忽视了天下的治理和安定。
English: After the decline of the Xia Shang dynasty, God lowered the throne to the Han dynasty, but the era of clarity became less and less, and wars became more and more frequent. Since then, the governance and stability of the world have been neglected.

古文：太祖濬哲神武，芟除暴乱，克复王纲，以开帝业。
现代文：太祖明智神武，消除暴乱，恢复天子纲纪，开创帝业。
English: The great-great-grandfather, Akechi Shinbu, eliminated the riots, restored the discipline of the heavenly sons, and created an empire.

古文：文帝受天明命，廓恢皇基，践阼七载，每事未遑。
现代文：文帝承受上天的明训，扩大帝王基业，登基七年，每件事都亲自处理。
English: Emperor Wen received a clear teaching from heaven, expanded the imperial foundation, ascended to the throne for seven years, and dealt with everything personally.

古文：陛下圣德，纂承洪绪，宜崇晏晏，与民休息。
现代文：陛下圣明贤德，继承大统，应该推崇安定，让百姓休养生息。
English: Your Majesty, inheritor of the Great Unification, should promote stability and allow the people to rest and recuperate.

古文：而方隅匪宁，征夫远戍，有事海外，县旌万里，六军骚动，水陆转运，百姓舍业，日费千金。
现代文：而天下有些地方还没平定，所以派出军队戍守远方，在各地又有战事，战旗到处悬挂，军队骚动不安，水路两道的运输，让百姓舍弃本业，国家每天都要耗费千金。
English: However, some parts of the world have not yet been pacified, so troops have been sent to defend distant places, there are wars in various regions, battle flags are hanging everywhere, the army is agitated and uneasy, and transportation by waterways has made people give up their jobs, and the country has to spend thousands of dollars every day.

古文：大兴殿舍，功作万计，徂来之松，刊山穷谷，怪石珷玞，浮于河、淮。
现代文：又大肆修建宫殿，要征发的劳工数以万计，徂来山的松树，砍伐山上的树木，布满深谷，奇异的石头，似玉的美石，在黄河、淮水上运输。
English: They also wantonly built palaces with tens of thousands of laborers to be conscripted, brought pine trees from the mountains, cut down trees on the mountains, filled with deep valleys, strange stones, beautiful stones resembling jade, and transported on the Yellow River and Huai Shui.

古文：都圻之内，尽为甸服，当供槁秸铚粟之调，而为苑囿择禽之府，盛林莽之秽，丰鹿兔之薮；伤害农功，地繁茨棘，灾疫流行，民物大溃，上减和气，嘉禾不植。
现代文：疆域之内，都成为天子管束的地方，应当供应树木、秸秆、镰刀、粮食等，用来修建花园等地方，使草木更茂盛，增加鹿兔的数量。这样妨害了农事，土地都长满杂草，灾祸疫病流行，百姓四处溃散，伤损了和气，粮食不生长。
English: Within the territory, all became places under the control of the heavenly son. Trees, ploughs, sickles, grain, etc. should be supplied to build gardens and other places to make the plants more luxuriant and increase the number of deer and rabbits. This interfered with farming, the land was overgrown with weeds, plagues and epidemics were prevalent, the people scattered everywhere, the harmony was damaged, and the grain did not grow.

古文：臣闻文王作丰，经始勿亟，百姓子来，不日而成。
现代文：臣听说周文王建立丰都，刚开始的时候不急迫，百姓自然会前来，不久就建成了。
English: The vassal heard that when King Zhou Wen built Fengdu, he was not in a hurry at the beginning, so the people would naturally come, and it was soon completed.

古文：灵沼、灵囿，与民共之。
现代文：各种池沼、园囿，都和百姓一起享有。
English: All kinds of ponds and gardens are enjoyed together with the common people.

古文：今宫观崇侈，彫镂极妙，忘有虞之总期，思殷辛之琼室，禁地千里，举足投网，丽拟阿房，役百乾谿，臣恐民力彫尽，下不堪命也。
现代文：现在宫殿崇尚奢侈，各种雕饰都很巧妙，忘记了有虞氏的明台，想要殷辛的华丽宫室，禁地有千里之广，百姓动不动就进入了禁地，宫殿华丽得可以和阿房宫相比，各类劳工都集中在乾谿，臣担心民力凋敝，下层百姓承受不了。
English: Now the palace advocates luxury, and all kinds of carvings are very clever. They have forgotten the bright platform of the Yu clan, and want the gorgeous palace room of the Yin Xin. The forbidden land is thousands of miles wide, and the people enter the forbidden land at every turn. The palace is so gorgeous that it can be compared with the Afang Palace. All kinds of laborers are concentrated in the dry land. The vassals are worried about the withering of the people's power, and the lower-class people can't bear it.

古文：昔秦据殽函以制六合，自以德高三皇，功兼五帝，欲号谥至万叶，而二世颠覆，愿为黔首，由枝幹既扤，本实先拔也。
现代文：过去秦国占据崤山和函谷关以控制六国，自认为德行超过三皇，功绩可比五帝，希望称号能流传万世，却只流传了两世就灭亡了，希望成为百姓却不行，是因为枝干已经这段，根基被拔出了。
English: In the past, Qin occupied Lushan and Hangtan Pass to control the Six Kingdoms. They considered themselves to be more virtuous than the Three Emperors, and their achievements were comparable to the Five Emperors. They hoped that the title could be passed down for all time, but it was passed down for only two generations and then they perished. They hoped to become commoners, but they couldn't, because the branches had already been cut and the foundation had been pulled out.

古文：盖圣王之御世也，克明俊德，庸勋亲；俊乂在官，则功业可隆，亲亲显用，则安危同忧；深根固本，并为幹翼，虽历盛衰，内外有辅。
现代文：圣明的帝王治理天下，能够明识贤才，才德解除，嘉赏有功之人；才能出众的人在官位上，那功业就能兴盛，重用有德之人，那无论安危都会一同忧虑；稳固根基，一同做为辅佐，那就算经历盛衰时期，那内外都有辅佐的大臣。
English: The holy emperors rule the world. They are able to recognize and reward those who are wise, talented, and virtuous. Those who have outstanding talents can flourish in their official positions. Those who make good use of their talents can prosper. Those who are virtuous can be worried about their safety and security together. Those who are stable in their foundation and act as assistants together can go through a period of prosperity and decline. There are assistant ministers both at home and abroad.

古文：昔成王幼冲，未能莅政，周、吕、召、毕，并在左右；今既无卫侯、康叔之监，分陕所任，又非旦、奭。
现代文：过去周成王年幼，还没能亲自理政，周、吕、召、毕等人同在左右辅佐。现在既没有卫侯、康叔这样的监督的人，出任地方官的，又不是周公、召公这样的人。
English: In the past, Zhou Cheng Wang was young and had not yet been able to personally manage the government, and Zhou, Lv, Zhao, Bi and others assisted him on the left and right. Now, there are no supervisors such as Wei Hou and Kang Uncle, and the people who serve as local officials are not Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong.

古文：东宫未建，天下无副。
现代文：还没有册立太子，天下没有储君。
English: There has been no crown prince yet, and there is no crown prince.

古文：愿陛下留心关塞，永保无极，则海内幸甚。 
现代文：希望陛下能留意边塞，永保王位，那就是天下的大幸了。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will pay attention to the border and preserve the throne forever. That would be a great blessing for the world.

古文：后为燕中尉，辞疾不就，卒。
现代文：后来栈潜担任燕地中尉，他因病推辞没有就任，后来去世。
English: Later, he served as a lieutenant of Yan Di, but he did not take up the post due to illness, and later died.

古文：评曰：辛毗、杨阜，刚亮公直，正谏匪躬，亚乎汲黯之高风焉。
现代文：评曰：辛毗、杨阜刚正信实，公平正直，直言劝谏，忠心耿耿，仅次于汲黯的高尚风范。
English: The review said: Xin Pi and Yang Fu are upright and faithful, fair and honest, straightforward and sincere, and loyal. They are second only to Qiu Qiu in their noble demeanor.

古文：高堂隆学业，志在匡君，因变陈戒，发於恳诚，忠矣哉！
现代文：高堂隆学问昌明，志向在于匡扶君王，根据情况陈述意见，言辞恳切，真是忠臣啊！
English: Gaodonglong is well-educated, his aspiration is to support the king, state opinions according to the situation, and his words are sincere. He is truly a loyal subject!

古文：及至必改正朔，俾魏祖虞，所谓意过其通者欤！
现代文：等到他一定要修改正朔，要求曹魏以虞舜时代为典范，那就是意气用事超过了变通了。
English: Wait until he has to revise Zhengshuo and ask Cao Wei to use the era of Yuyao as a model, that is, the spirit of contrivance exceeds the flexibility.

