古文：刘隐，其祖安仁，上蔡人也，后徙闽中，商贾南海，因家焉。
现代文：刘隐，祖父刘安仁，是上蔡人，后来迁到闽中，在南海做生意，于是在那里安家。
English: Liu Yin, grandfather of Liu Anren, was from Shangcai, and later moved to Luzhong to do business in the South China Sea, and then settled there.

古文：父谦，为广州牙将。
现代文：父亲刘谦，任广州牙将。
English: His father, Liu Qian, is a dentist in Guangzhou.

古文：唐乾符五年，黄巢攻破广州，去略湖、湘间，广州表谦封州刺史、贺江镇遏使，以御梧、桂以西。
现代文：唐干符五年，黄巢攻破广州，离开广州到湖、湘问掠夺，广川表奏刘谦为封州刺史、贺江镇遏使，防御梧、桂以西。
English: In the fifth year of the Tang and Qian dynasties, Huang Chao broke through Guangzhou, left Guangzhou to the lake, plundered Hunan, sent Liu Qian to Guangchuan to record the history of Fuzhou and the town of Hejiang, and defended Wu and the west of Gui.

古文：岁余，有兵万人，战舰百余艘。
现代文：一年多，有兵一万人，战船一百多艘。
English: For more than a year, there were ten thousand soldiers and more than a hundred warships.

古文：谦三子，曰隐、台、岩。
现代文：刘谦有三个儿子，叫刘隐、刘台、刘岩。
English: Liu Qian has three sons, named Liu Yin, Liu Tai and Liu Yan.

古文：谦卒，广州表隐代谦封州刺史。
现代文：刘谦死后，广州表奏刘隐代刘谦任封州刺史。
English: After Liu Qian's death, Guangzhou played the role of Liuyin, and Liu Qian was appointed as the governor of Fuzhou.

古文：乾宁中，节度使刘崇龟死，嗣薛王知柔代为帅，行至湖南，广州将卢琚、覃作乱，知柔不敢进。
现代文：干宁中，节度使刘祟龟死，嗣薛王李知柔代任将帅，到达湖南，广州将领卢琚、覃圮作乱，李知柔不敢前进。
English: During the dry season, Liu Cangmei was killed by the festival, and his heir, Xue Wang, appointed Li Zhirou as the acting general. When they arrived in Hunan, the Guangzhou generals Lu Wei and Zou made a mess, and Li Zhirou did not dare to advance.

古文：隐以封州兵攻杀琚、，迎知柔，知柔辟隐行军司马。
现代文：刘隐率封州兵攻杀卢琚、覃圮，迎接李知柔，李知柔征辟刘隐为行军司马。
English: Liu Ying led the National Guard to attack and kill Lu Yao and Yao, and greeted Li Zhirou. Li Zhirou enlisted Liu Ying as his marching steed.

古文：其后徐彦若代知柔，表隐节度副使，委以军政。
现代文：后来徐彦若接代李知柔，表奏刘隐为节度副使，把军政委托给他。
English: Later, Xu Yanru took over from Li Zhirong and appointed Liu Ying as vice-envoy to the emperor, entrusting him with military and political affairs.

古文：彦若卒，军中推隐为留后。
现代文：徐彦若死，军中推举刘隐为留后。
English: If Xu Yan were to die, the military would choose Liu Yin to succeed him.

古文：天祐二年，拜隐节度使。
现代文：天佑二年，拜刘隐为节度使。
English: In the second year of Heaven's blessing, Bai Liuyin was appointed as the festival envoy.

古文：梁开平元年，加检校太尉、兼侍中。
现代文：梁开平元年，加检校太尉、兼侍中。
English: In the first year of Liang Kaiping's reign, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant of the inspection school, and also became a junior chamberlain.

古文：二年，兼静海军节度、安南都护。
现代文：二年，兼静海军节度、安南都护。
English: Two years later, he presided over the naval festival and the defense of the capital city of Annam.

古文：三年，加检校太师、兼中书令，封南平王。
现代文：三年，加检校太师、兼中书令，封为南平王。
English: Three years later, he was promoted to Jiajing school dean, and concurrently to middle school secretary, and given the title of Nanping Wang.

古文：隐父子起封州，遭世多故，数有功于岭南，遂有南海。
现代文：刘隐父子从封州起家，遭逢世乱多变故，多次在岭南建功，于是占据南海。
English: Liu Ying and his son started their family in Fuzhou. Due to the vicissitudes of the world, they made great achievements in Lingnan many times, and thus occupied Nanhai.

古文：隐复好贤士。
现代文：刘隐又喜好贤士。
English: Liu Yin also likes sages.

古文：是时，天下已乱，中朝士人以岭外最远，可以避地，多游焉。
现代文：这时，天下已乱，中原的士人因为岭外最远，是能够躲避战乱的地方，大多迁移到那里。
English: At this time, the world was in turmoil, and most of the scholars in the Central Plains migrated there because it was the furthest place outside the ridge and a place where they could escape the turmoil.

古文：唐世名臣谪死南方者往往有子孙，或当时仕宦遭乱不得还者，皆客岭表。
现代文：唐代的名臣贬官死在南方的往往有子孙后代，或者当时在那里做官遭逢世乱不能回去的人，都客居岭南。
English: Renowned ministers of the Tang Dynasty who were demoted and died in the south often had descendants, or those who were officials there at the time and were unable to return due to the turmoil in the world all stayed in Lingnan.

古文：王定保、倪曙、刘浚、李衡、周杰、杨洞潜、赵光裔之徒，隐皆招礼之。定保容管巡官，曙唐太学博士，浚崇望之子，以避乱往；衡德裕之孙，唐右补阙，以奉使往。
现代文：王定保、倪曙、刘浚、李衡、周杰、杨洞潜、赵光裔之流，刘隐都招纳他们以礼相待，王定保是容管巡官，倪曙是唐太学博士，刘浚是刘崇望的儿子，因躲避战乱前往；李衡是李德裕的孙子，任唐的右补阙，因奉命出使前往。
English: Wang Dingbao, Ni Shuguang, Liu Jun, Li Heng, Zhou Jie, Yang Dongqian, Zhao Guangxiong and the like, Liu Ying accepted them and treated them with courtesy. Wang Dingbao was a health inspector, Ni Shuguang was a doctor of Tang Taixue, Liu Jun was the son of Liu Chongwang, who went to avoid the war; Li Heng was the grandson of Li Deyu, and was sent to Tang as an envoy.

古文：皆辟置幕府，待以宾客。
现代文：都被征辟安置在幕府，作为宾客对待。
English: They were all expropriated and resettled in the shogunate, where they were treated as guests.

古文：杰善星历，唐司农少卿，因避乱往，隐数问以灾变，杰耻以星术事人，常称疾不起，隐亦客之。
现代文：周杰擅长星相历法，是唐的司农少卿，因避乱前往，刘隐多次向他询问灾变之状，周杰耻于用星术事奉人，常常称病不起，刘隐也把他当成宾客。
English: Zhou Jie is good at the astrological calendar method. He is the Tang's Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs. Because he went to escape the turmoil, Liu Ying repeatedly asked him about the state of the catastrophe. Zhou Jie is ashamed of using astrology to serve people, often saying that he can't afford to be ill. Liu Ying also took him as a guest.

古文：洞潜初为邕管巡官，秩满客南海，隐常师事之，后以为节度副使，及僭号，为陈吉凶礼法。
现代文：杨洞潜最初任邕管巡官，任满后客居南海，刘隐常把他当师长事奉，后来任命他为节度副使，到刘袭僭越称帝时，为他陈述吉凶礼法。
English: Yang Dongqian was originally a magistrate in charge of the imperial residences. After his term of office, he lived in Nanhai. Liu Yin often served him as a division chief. Later, he appointed him as a vice-envoy of the imperial residences. When Liu Xie was crowned emperor, he presented the auspicious and inauspicious etiquette for him.

古文：为国制度，略有次序，皆用此数人焉。
现代文：他建立国家制订的法度，略有次序，都是任用这几个人。
English: He established a state-made legal system, which, in a slight order, is the appointment of these few people.

古文：乾化元年，进封隐南海王。
现代文：干化元年，进封刘隐为南海王。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Liu Yin became the king of the South Sea.

古文：是岁卒，年三十八。
现代文：遭年逝世，时年三十八岁。
English: He died at the age of thirty-eight.

古文：弟立。
现代文：弟弟刘契袭位。
English: His younger brother Liu Qie succeeded him.

古文：龚，初名岩，谦庶子也。
现代文：刘龚，原名刘岩，是刘谦妾生的儿子。
English: Liu Yao, formerly known as Liu Yan, was the son of Liu Qian's concubine.

古文：其母段氏生于外舍，谦妻韦氏素妒，闻之怒，拔剑而出，命持至，将杀之。及见而悸，剑辄堕地，良久曰： 此非常兒也！ 
现代文：他的母亲段氏在外舍生下刘龚，刘谦的妻子韦氏历来妒忌，听说后发怒，拔剑而出，命人把刘龚抱来，将要杀掉他，到见到刘龚后内心惊惧，剑就落在地上，很久纔说： 这不是一般的孩儿！ 
English: His mother, Ms. Duan, gave birth to Liu Yao in an outhouse. Liu Qian's wife, Ms. Wei Rong, had always been jealous. When she heard about this, she became angry and pulled out her sword. She ordered someone to hold Liu Yao and was about to kill him. When she saw Liu Yao, her heart was shocked and her sword fell to the ground. For a long time, she said, "This is no ordinary child!"

古文：后三日，卒杀段氏，养为己子。
现代文：三天后，最终杀掉段氏，收养刘袭焉自己的儿子。
English: Three days later, he finally killed Ms. Duan and adopted Ms. Liu's own son.

古文：及长，善骑射，身长七尺，垂手过膝。
现代文：长大后，擅长骑马射箭，身高七尺，手垂下来超过膝盖。
English: When he grew up, he was good at horseback riding and archery. He was seven feet tall, with his hands hanging down over his knees.

古文：隐为行军司马，亦辟薛王府谘议参军。
现代文：刘隐任行军司马时，刘龚也被征辟焉薛王府咨议参军。
English: When Liu Yin was appointed as the secretary of the marching army, Liu Ye was also conscripted to join the army.

古文：隐镇南海，为副使。
现代文：刘隐为南海节度使，刘龚任副使。
English: Liu Yin is the envoy of the South China Sea Festival, and Liu Ye is the deputy envoy.

古文：隐卒，代立。
现代文：刘隐死，剀龚代立。
English: Liu Yin died, and Zou took over.

古文：乾化二年，除清海节度使，检校太保、同平章事。
现代文：干化二年，授任清海节度使、检校太保、同平章事。
English: Two years later, he was appointed as the Qinghai Festival envoy, school inspector, and peer.

古文：三年，加检校太傅。
现代文：三年，加检校太傅。
English: Three years later, he became the school's superintendent.

古文：末帝即位，悉以隐官爵授，袭封南海王。
现代文：梁末帝登位，把刘隐的官爵全部授予刘契，袭封为南海王。
English: Emperor Liang Mucai ascended to the throne, awarded all of Liu Yin's official titles to Liu Qi, and crowned him as the king of the South Sea.

古文：唐末，南海最后乱，僖宗以后，大臣出镇者，天下皆乱，无所之，惟除南海而已，自隐始亦自立。
现代文：唐末，南海最后纔乱，唐传宗以后，大臣出任节镇使，天下都乱了，无处可去，只有任官到南海罢了，从刘隐开始也自立了。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, the South China Sea was finally in turmoil. After Emperor Chuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, the minister served as the festival town envoy. The whole world was in turmoil, and there was nowhere to go, except to be appointed as an official to the South China Sea. From Liu Yin onwards, it also became independent.

古文：是时，交州曲颢、桂州刘士政、邕州叶广略、容州庞巨昭，分据诸管；卢光稠据虔州以攻岭上，其弟光睦据潮州，子延昌据韶州；高州刺史刘昌鲁、新州刺史刘潜及江东七十余寨，皆不能制。
现代文：这时，交州曲颢、桂州刘士政、邕州叶广略、容州庞巨昭，分别占据各管辖地域；卢光稠占据虔州攻打岭上，他的弟弟卢光睦占据潮州，儿子卢延昌占据韶州；高州刺史刘昌鲁、新州刺史刘潜和江束七十多个寨子，都不能控制。
English: At this time, Jiaozhou Qu, Guizhou Liu Shizheng, Zhangzhou Ye Guangli, and Yongzhou Pang Jiazhao occupied each jurisdiction area separately; Lu Guangcong occupied Qianzhou Taipingling, his brother Lu Guangmu occupied Chaozhou, and his son Lu Yanchang occupied Zhangzhou; Gaozhou Zhishi Liu Changlu, Xinzhou Zhishi Liu Qian and Jiangzhu more than 70 villages could not be controlled.

古文：隐攻韶州，曰： 韶州所赖者光稠，击之，虔人必应，应则首尾受敌，此不宜直攻而可以计取。 
现代文：刘隐进攻韶州，刘龚说： 韶州依赖的是卢光稠，攻打韶州，虔州人必定接应，他来接应，我们就首尾受敌，这样不宜直攻而可以设计攻取。 
English: Liu Yin attacked Bozhou, Liu Wei said: Bozhou relies on Lu Guangzhuo, attack Bozhou, Qianzhou people will certainly respond, if he responds, we will be attacked by the enemy, so it is not suitable to attack directly, but can be designed to attack.

古文：隐不听，果败而归，因尽以兵事付。
现代文：刘隐不听，果然战败而回，于是把行军作战的事全部交付给刘龚。
English: Liu Yin did not listen, and was defeated and returned, so he handed over all the marching and fighting to Liu Ye.

古文：悉平诸寨，遂杀昌鲁等，更置刺史，卒出兵攻败卢氏，取潮、韶。
现代文：刘龚平定各寨，于是杀掉刘昌鲁等人，换置刺史，最后出兵打败卢氏，夺取潮、韶二州。
English: Liu Bei leveled each village, then killed Liu Changlu and others, replaced the stabbing history, and finally sent troops to defeat the Lu clan, seize the tide, and plunder two states.

古文：又西与马殷争容、桂，殷取桂管，虏士政；取容管，逐巨昭，又取邕管。
现代文：又在西面和马殷争夺容、桂，马殷夺取桂管，俘虏刘士政；刘袭夺取容管，驱逐庞巨昭，又夺取邕管。
English: In addition, in the west, he and Ma Yin fought for control of Rong and Gui. Ma Yin seized Gui and captured Liu Shizheng; Liu Wei seized Rong and expelled Pang Jiazhao, and also seized Xingguan.

古文：隐、自梁初受封爵，禀正朔而已。
现代文：刘隐、刘袭自从梁初接受封爵以来，不过使用梁的纪年而已。
English: Liu Yin and Liu Wei have been using Liang since he was knighted.

古文：贞明三年，即皇帝位，国号大越，改元曰乾亨。
现代文：贞明三年，刘龚即皇帝位，国号大越，改年号为干亨。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Zhenming, Liu Bei became emperor, and the country's name was changed to "Dai Yue" and the era name to "Gan Heng."

古文：追尊安仁文皇帝，谦圣武皇帝，隐襄皇帝，立三庙。
现代文：追尊刘安仁为文皇帝，刘谦为圣武皇帝，刘隐为襄皇帝，建立三庙。
English: Liu Anren was the Emperor Wen, Liu Qian was the Emperor Shengwu, Liu Yin was the Emperor Xiang, and three temples were built.

古文：置百官，以杨洞潜为兵部侍郎，李衡礼部侍郎，倪曙工部侍郎，赵光胤兵部尚书，皆平章事。
现代文：设置百官，任杨洞潜为兵部侍郎，李衡为礼部侍郎，倪曙为工部侍郎，趟光胤为兵部尚书，都任平章事。
English: Set up a hundred officials, appointed Yang Dongqian as the attendant of the military department, Li Heng as the attendant of the ceremonial department, Ni Shuchu as the attendant of the engineering department, and Watarimitsu as the attendant of the military department, all of which were appointed by the general.

古文：光胤自以唐甲族，耻事伪国，常怏怏思归。
现代文：赵光胤自以为是唐的上等大族，以事奉伪国为耻辱，常常怏怏不乐想回去。
English: Zhao Guangyan thought of himself as a high-ranking member of the Tang dynasty. He was ashamed of serving a fake country and often longed to go back.

古文：乃习为光胤手书，遣使间道至洛阳，召其二子损、益并其家属皆至。
现代文：刘龚于是模仿趟光胤的笔迹，派使臣从小路到洛阳，召他的两个儿子赵损、赵益和家属全部到来。
English: Liu Bei then imitated the handwriting of Watan Kuangyin and sent an envoy to Luoyang to summon his two sons, Zhao Zai and Zhao Yi, and their families.

古文：光胤惊喜，为尽心焉。
现代文：赵光胤非常惊喜，在那里为他尽心尽力了。
English: Zhao Guangyan was very surprised and did his best for him there.

古文：性聪悟而苛酷，为刀锯、支解、刳剔之刑，每视杀人，则不胜其喜，不觉朵颐，垂涎呀呷，人以为真蛟蜃也。
现代文：刘龚聪明颖悟而又苛刻残酷，设置锯、肢解、剖心剔骨等刑罚，每每见到杀人，就喜不自胜，口颊自然颤动，流下唾沫，张口吸气，人们以为他真是蛟蜃。
English: Liu Yao was intelligent and insightful, but also harsh and cruel. He set punishments such as sawing, dismemberment, and dissection of the heart and bones. Whenever he saw a murder, he was overjoyed. His cheeks naturally quivered, he spit, and he breathed with his mouth open. People thought he was really evil.

古文：又好奢侈，悉聚南海珍宝，以为玉堂珠殿。
现代文：又喜好奢侈，尽力搜集南海珍宝，建成玉堂珠殿。
English: He also liked luxury and tried his best to collect South Sea treasures to build the Jade Hall.

古文：二年，祀天南郊，大赦境内，改国号汉。
现代文：二年，在南郊祭天，境内实行大赦，改国号焉汉。
English: Two years later, in the southern suburb of Saitien, an amnesty was implemented in the territory, and the country was renamed Yanhan.

古文：初欲僭号，惮王定保不从，遣定保使荆南，及还，惧其非己，使倪曙劳之，告以建国。
现代文：刘袭当初想僭越称帝时，怕王定倮不从，派王定保出使剂南，到他返回时，怕他非难自己，派倪曙去慰劳他，告诉他建国了。
English: When Liu Wei initially wanted to proclaim himself emperor, he was afraid that Wang Dingyao would not follow, so he sent Wang Dingbao to the south as an envoy. When he returned, he was afraid that he would blame himself, so he sent Ni Shuguo to comfort him and tell him that the country had been founded.

古文：定保曰： 建国当有制度，吾入南门，清海军额犹在，四方其不取笑乎！ 
现代文：王定保说： 建国应有建国的制度，我进南门时，清海军的门额还在，四方人士不取笑我们吗！ 
English: Wang Dingbao said: The founding of a country should have a system of founding a country. When I entered the South Gate, the gate of the Qing Navy was still there. People from the four directions are making fun of us!

古文：笑曰： 吾备定保久矣，而不思此，宜其讥也。 
现代文：刘龚笑着说： 我防备王定保很久了，却没想到这个，该他讥诮我啊！ 
English: Liu Yao smiled and said, "I have been guarding Wang Dingbao for a long time, but I didn't expect this. He should be mocking me!"

古文：三年，册越国夫人马氏为皇后。
现代文：三年，册封越国圭人置氏为皇后。
English: Three years later, she was crowned Empress of Yue Province.

古文：马氏，楚王殷女也。
现代文：马氏，是楚王马殷的女儿。
English: Ma is the daughter of King Ma Yin of Chu.

古文：四年春，置选部贡举，放进士、明经十余人，如唐故事，岁以为常。
现代文：四年春，设置选部，实行科举考试，放进士、明经科十多人及第，仿照唐代旧例，每年如此。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the selection department was set up, the science examination was implemented, and more than ten people were put into the scholar, the Ming and Jing departments, and the second, following the old example of the Tang Dynasty, this is the case every year.

古文：七年，唐庄宗入汴，惧，遣宫苑使何词入询中国虚实，称大汉国主致书大唐皇帝。
现代文：七年，唐庄宗进入汴州，刘龚害怕，派官苑使何词前去打听中原虚实，称大汉国主致信大唐皇帝。
English: In the seventh year, when Emperor Zhuangzong of Tang entered Zhangzhou, Liu Bei was afraid and sent an envoy to inquire about Zhongyuan's truthfulness, saying that the ruler of the Great Han Dynasty had sent a letter to the Emperor of the Great Tang Dynasty.

古文：词还，言唐必乱，不足忧，大喜。
现代文：何词返回，说唐必定大乱，不值得担心，刘龚大喜。
English: When he returned, he said that Tang must be in a big mess, and it was not worth worrying about. Liu Yao was overjoyed.

古文：又性好夸大，岭北商贾至南海者，多召之，使升宫殿，示以珠玉之富。
现代文：又喜好夸耀，岭北的商人到了南海，刘龚常常召见他们，让他们登上宫殿，显示珍珠宝玉的富有。
English: He was also fond of boasting. When merchants from Lingbei came to the South China Sea, Liu Bei often summoned them and had them board the palace to show off the wealth of pearls and precious stones.

古文：自言家本咸秦，耻王蛮夷，呼唐天子为 洛州刺史 。
现代文：自称家原在关中咸阳，以称王蛮夷之地为耻辱，称呼唐天子为 洛州刺史 。
English: Self-proclaimed Iehara in Guanzhong Xianyang, with the shame of calling it the land of the barbarian kings, called Tang Tianzi the history of Luozhou.

古文：是岁，云南骠信郑旻遣使致硃鬃白马以求婚，使者自称皇亲母弟、清容布燮兼理、赐金锦袍虎绫纹攀金装刀、封归仁庆侯、食邑一千户、持节郑昭淳。
现代文：这年，云南骠信郑曼派使臣送来红鬃白马求婚，使臣自称是皇亲母弟、清容布燮兼理、赐金锦袍虎绫纹攀金装刀、封归仁庆侯、食邑一千户、持节郑昭淳。
English: In this year, Yunnan Yushin Zhengman sent an envoy to the Red Kite and White Horse to propose marriage. The envoy claimed to be the emperor's mother and brother, Qing Rong clothed and in charge, gave a gold brocade robe with tiger stripes and a gold-plated knife, returned to Jin Qing Hou, a thousand households in the food village, and celebrated the festival Zheng Zhaochun.

古文：昭淳好学有文辞，与游宴赋诗，及群臣皆不能逮，遂以隐女增城县主妻旻。
现代文：郑昭淳好学擅长文辞，刘龚和他游宴赋诗，刘袭和群臣都赶不上他，于是把刘隐的女儿增城县主嫁给了郑曼。
English: Zheng Zhaochun was good at learning and good at literature, Liu Yao and his traveling banquet were good at poetry, Liu Wei and the ministers could not catch up with him, so he married Zheng Man, the daughter of Liu Yin, the head of Zengcheng County.

古文：八年，作南宫，王定保献《南宫七奇赋》以美之。
现代文：八年，修建南宫，王定保进献《南官七奇赋》来赞美它。
English: Eight years after the construction of the Southern Palace, Wang Dingbao presented the "Seven Wonders of the Southern Government" to praise it.

古文：初名岩，又更曰陟。
现代文：刘龚原名刘岩，又改名叫刘陟。
English: Liu Yao's original name was Liu Yan, but he changed his name to Liu Yao.

古文：九年，白龙见南宫三清殿，改元曰白龙，又更名龚，以应龙见之祥。
现代文：九年，白龙出现在南官三清殿，改年号为白龙，又改名叫刘龚，以应白龙出现的吉兆。
English: In the ninth year, the white dragon appeared in the Sanqing Hall of the Southern Government, and the year name was changed to Bai Long, and the name was changed to Liu Wei, in response to the auspicious appearance of the white dragon.

古文：有胡僧言： 谶书 灭刘氏者龚也。  
现代文：有个胡僧说： 谶书说： 消灭刘氏的是龚。  
English: One of the monks said, "The Book of the Dragon says, 'The dragon is the one who will destroy the Liu clan.'

古文：乃采《周易》 飞龙在天 之义为  字，音 俨 ，以名焉。
现代文：刘袭于是用《周易》 飞龙在天 的意思造 袭 字，读音作 俨 ，用来取名。
English: Liu Wei then used the meaning of "Zhou Yi" "Flying dragon in the sky" to create the character, pronounced as, used to take a name.

古文：四年，楚人以舟师攻封州，封州兵败于贺江，惧，以《周易》筮之，遇《大有》，遂赦境内，改元曰大有。
现代文：四年，楚人用水军进攻封州，封州兵在贺江被打败，刘龚害怕，用《周易》占卜，碰上《大有》卦，于是在境内大赦，改年号叫大有。
English: In four years, the Chu people used water troops to attack Fongzhou, the Fongzhou soldiers were defeated in the He River, Liu Bei was afraid, used "Zhou Yi" divination, encountered "Dai You" divination, so there was an amnesty in the territory, and the new year was called "Dai You."

古文：遣将苏章以神弩军三千救封州，章以两铁索沈贺江中，为巨轮于岸上，筑堤以隐之，因轻舟迎战，阳败而奔，楚人逐之，章举巨轮挽索锁楚舟，以强弩夹江射之，尽杀楚人。
现代文：派将领苏章率神弩军三千人援救封州，苏章把两条铁索沉到贺江中，在岸上造巨轮，修筑大堤遮隐臣轮，用小船迎战，假装失败而逃，楚人追击他们，苏章摇动巨轮挽起铁索拦住楚人战船，用强弓在两岸夹江射击他们，把楚人全部射死。
English: General Su Zhang led 3,000 soldiers of the Sheng Army to rescue Fengzhou. Su Zhang sank two iron cables into the He River, built a huge ship on the shore, built a large dike to cover the hidden warship, met the battle with a small boat, pretended to be defeated and fled, the Chu people chased them, Su Zhang shook the huge wheel to tie up the iron cable to stop the Chu warship, shot them with a strong bow on both sides of the river, and shot all the Chu people to death.

古文：三年，遣将李守鄘、梁克贞攻交趾，擒曲承美等。
现代文：三年，派将领李守墉、梁克贞攻打交趾，擒获曲承美等人。
English: In the third year, he sent generals Li Shouyi and Liang Kezhen to fight against the enemy, and captured Qu Chengmei and others.

古文：承美至南海，登义凤楼受俘，谓承美曰： 公常以我为伪廷，今反面缚，何也？ 
现代文：曲承美被抓到南海，刘龚登上义凤楼接受献俘，对曲承美说： 你常常把我朝当成伪朝，现在反而被反绑双手朝见，为什么呢？ 
English: When Qu Chengmei was captured in the South China Sea, Liu Ye boarded the Yifeng Tower to accept the prisoner, and said to Qu Chengmei: You have often treated me as a false emperor, but now you are bound by my hands to see the emperor. Why?

古文：承美顿首伏罪，乃赦之。
现代文：曲承美叩头伏罪，于是赦免了他。
English: He pardoned him.

古文：承美，颢子也。
现代文：曲承美是曲颢的儿子。
English: Qu Chengmei is Qu Yao's son.

古文：克贞又攻占城，掠其宝货而归。
现代文：梁克贞又攻打占城，掠夺财宝而回。
English: Liang Kezhen attacked and occupied the city, plundered the treasure and returned.

古文：四年，爱州杨廷艺叛，攻交州刺史李进，进遁归。
现代文：四年，爱州杨廷艺反叛，攻打交州刺史李进，李进逃回。
English: In four years, Aizhou Yang Tingyi rebelled, attacked and dealt with Aizhou assassin Li Jin, and Li Jin fled back.

古文：遣承旨程宝攻廷艺，宝战死。
现代文：刘龚派承旨程宝攻打杨廷艺，程实战死。
English: Liu Bei ordered Cheng Bao to attack Yang Tingyi, and Cheng Shih was killed in the battle.

古文：五年，封子耀枢邕王，龟图康王，洪度秦王，洪熙晋王，洪昌越王，洪弼齐王，洪雅韶王，洪泽镇王，洪操万王，洪杲循王，洪息王，洪邈高王，洪简同王，洪建益王，洪济辨王，洪道贵王，洪昭宣王，洪政通王，洪益定王。
现代文：五年，封儿子刘耀枢为邕玉，刘龟图为康王，刘洪度焉秦王，刘洪熙为晋王，刘洪昌为越王，刘洪弼焉齐王，刘洪雅为韶王，刘洪泽焉镇王，刘洪操焉万王，刘洪杲焉循王，刘洪唓为息王，刘洪邈为高王，刘洪简焉同王，刘洪建为益王，刘洪邈为高王，刘洪简焉同王，刘洪昭为宣王，刘洪政为通王，刘洪益焉定王。
English: In the fifth year, Liu Yaozhu, the son of Feng, became the Jade Emperor, Liu Ketu became the Kang Emperor, Liu Hongdu became the Qin Emperor, Liu Hongxi became the Jin Emperor, Liu Hongchang became the Yue Emperor, Liu Hongzhi became the Qi Emperor, Liu Hongya became the Zi Emperor, Liu Hongzhi became the Zhen Emperor, Liu Hongzhi became the Wan Emperor, Liu Hongzhi became the Sui Emperor, Liu Hongzhi became the Sui Emperor, Liu Hongzhi became the Gao Emperor, Liu Hongzhi became the Jian Emperor, Liu Hongzhi became the Gao Emperor, Liu Hongzhi became the J

古文：九年，遣将军孙德晟攻蒙州，不克。
现代文：九年，派将军孙德晟攻打象州，没有攻克。
English: In the ninth year, he sent general Sun Dehui to attack Xiangzhou, but failed to conquer it.

古文：十年，交州牙将皎公羡杀杨廷艺自立，廷艺故将吴权攻交州，公羡来乞师。
现代文：十年，交州牙将皎公羡杀死杨廷艺自立，杨廷艺原来的大将昊权攻打交州，皎公羡前来求援兵。
English: Ten years ago, Yang Tingyi, the former general of Gaozhou, was attacked by Hao Quan, the former general of Gaozhou, who came to Gaozhou to ask for reinforcements.

古文：封洪操交王，出兵白藤以攻之。
现代文：刘袭封刘洪操焉交王，出兵白藤进攻昊权军队。
English: Liu Sui-feng, Liu Hongzhuan, and Liu Hongzhuan surrendered to the king, and sent troops to Baidu to attack the army of Hao Quan.

古文：以兵驻海门，权已杀公羡，逆战海口，植铁橛海中，权兵乘潮而进，洪操逐之，潮退舟还，轹橛者皆覆，洪操战死，收余众而还。
现代文：刘袭率兵驻扎海门，昊权已杀掉皎公羡，迎战于海口，在海中安置铁椿，昊权的军队藉潮涨进兵，刘洪操追击他们，潮退后战船返回，碰上铁椿的船都翻了，刘洪操战死，刘龚收集残兵而回。
English: Liu attacked the soldiers stationed at Haimen, Hao Quan had killed Zou Gong En, met the battle at Haikou, and placed Tie Cang in the sea. Hao Quan's army used the tide to advance, Liu Hongxu chased them, and the warship returned after the tide receded. The ships that met Tie Cang all turned over, Liu Hongxu died in battle, and Liu Hui collected the remaining soldiers and returned.

古文：十五年，卒，年五十四，谥天皇大帝，庙号高祖，陵曰康陵。
现代文：十五年，刘龚死，年五十四岁，谧号称天皇大帝，庙号为高祖，陵墓为康陵。
English: Fifteen years later, Liu Xi died at the age of 54. His posthumous name was Emperor the Great, his temple name was Gao Zu, and his mausoleum was Kangling.

古文：子玢立。
现代文：儿子刘玢继位。
English: His son Liu Ye succeeded him.

古文：玢，初名洪度，封秦王。
现代文：刘玢，原名刘洪度，封焉秦王。
English: Liu Yao, formerly known as Liu Hongdu, was crowned the Qin king.

古文：子耀枢、龟图皆早死，玢次当立。
现代文：刘龚的儿子刘耀枢、刘龟图都早死，刘玢依次当继位。
English: Liu Yao's sons Liu Yaozhu and Liu Guetu both died at an early age, and Liu Yao succeeded to the throne.

古文：病卧寝中，召右仆射王翻与语，呼洪度、洪熙小字曰： 寿、俊虽长，然皆不足任吾事，惟洪昌类我，吾欲立之。
现代文：刘龚患病躺在卧室中，召右仆射王翻和他谈话，呼刘洪度、刘洪熙的小字说： 刘寿、刘儁虽然年长，但都不能够担当我的大业，祇有刘洪昌像我，我想立他。
English: Liu Shou was lying ill in his bedroom. He called his right-hand man, Sha Wangcun, to talk to him. He called Liu Hongdu and Liu Hongxi and said in small characters: "Although Liu Shou and Liu Shou are old, they are not able to take charge of my great cause. Only Liu Hongchang is like me. I want to set him up."

古文：奈何吾子孙不肖，后世如鼠入牛角，势当渐小尔！ 
现代文：怎么我的子孙这样不贤，后代就像老鼠钻进了牛角，势必逐渐弱小啊： 于是落泪哽咽。
English: How can my children and grandchildren be so unworthy, my descendants are like mice that have burrowed into the horns of a cow, and they are bound to get weaker and weaker: I burst into tears.

古文：因泣下歔欷。翻为谋，出洪度以邕州，洪熙容州，然后立洪昌为太子。
现代文：王翻焉刘龚出主意，放刘洪度外住到邕州，刘洪熙到容州，然后立刘洪昌为太子。
English: Wang Fuan and Liu Yao came up with the idea to send Liu Hongdu to live in Zhangzhou, Liu Hongxi to Yongzhou, and then to make Liu Hongchang the crown prince.

古文：议已定，崇文使萧益入问疾，以告之，益谏曰： 少者得立，长者争之，祸始此矣！ 
现代文：拟议已定，崇文使萧益进来探病，刘龚把打算告诉了他，萧益谏阻说： 年轻的得以立为太子，年长的就要争夺，灾祸从此开始了！ 
English: The proposal had already been decided. Chongwen asked Xiao Yi to come in for a medical check-up. Liu Ye told him about the plan, but Xiao Yi said: The younger one can be crowned prince, the older one has to fight for it. This is where the disaster began!

古文：由是洪度卒得立。
现代文：因此刘洪度最终得以继位。
English: Therefore, Liu Hongdu was eventually able to succeed to the throne.

古文：更名玢，改元曰光天，尊母赵昭仪为皇太妃，以晋王洪熙辅政。
现代文：改名叫刘玢，改年号为光天，尊崇母亲趟昭仪为皇太妃，让晋王刘洪熙辅佐朝政。
English: He changed his name to Liu Xuan, changed his era name to Guang Tian, revered his mother, Wu Zhaoyi, as the Empress Dowager, and made the Jin king, Liu Hongxi, the assistant of the imperial government.

古文：玢立，果不能任事。
现代文：刘玢登位，果然不能承担大事。
English: When Liu Bei ascended to the throne, he was indeed unable to undertake major tasks.

古文：在殡，召伶人作乐，饮酒宫中，裸男女以为乐，或衣墨缞与倡女夜行，出入民家。
现代文：刘龚停殡未葬，召乐官奏乐，在宫中饮酒，让男女裸体作乐，或者穿上黑色丧服和倡女夜游，出入百姓家中。
English: Liu Bei stopped funerals without burial, summoned music officials to play music, drank alcohol in the palace, let men and women play music naked, or put on black mourning clothes and encouraged women to travel at night, entering and leaving people's homes.

古文：由是山海间盗贼竞起。
现代文：从此山林湖海间盗贼竞相兴起。
English: Since then, thieves have been competing with each other in the mountains, lakes and seas.

古文：妖人张遇贤，自称中天八国王，攻陷循州。
现代文：妖人张遇贤，自称中天八国王，攻陷循州。
English: Zhang Youxian, a demon, who claimed to be the eighth king of the Middle Kingdom, attacked and captured Xuzhou.

古文：玢遣越王洪昌、循王洪杲攻之，遇贤围洪昌等于钱帛馆，裨将万景忻、陈道庠力战，挟二王溃围而走。
现代文：刘玢派越王刘洪昌、循王刘洪呆攻打他，张遇贤在钱帛馆包围刘洪昌等人，偏将万景忻、陈道庠奋力作战，挟二王突围逃跑。
English: Liu Bei sent Liu Hongchang, the king of Yue, and Liu Hongdian, the king of Xun, to attack him, and Zhang Youxian surrounded Liu Hongchang and others in Qian Ye Pavilion, and sent Wan Jingyao and Chen Daojun to fight hard, forcing the two kings to break out and escape.

古文：玢莫能省，岭东皆乱。
现代文：刘玢一点不醒悟，岭束都作乱了。
English: Liu Bei did not wake up at all, and the Lingzhu clique all made a mess.

古文：洪熙日益进声妓诱玢为荒恣。
现代文：刘洪熙日甚一日地进献乐妓引诱刘玢荒淫放纵。
English: Day after day, Liu Hongxi offered entertainment prostitutes to lure Liu Yao into wild sexual indulgence.

古文：玢亦颇疑诸弟图己，敕宦官守宫门，入者皆露索。
现代文：刘玢也很疑心弟弟们在算计自己，命令宦官把守宫门，进来的人都脱光衣服搜身。
English: Liu Ye was also suspicious that his brothers were counting on him. He ordered the eunuchs to guard the palace gate, and everyone who came in had to strip naked and be searched.

古文：洪熙、洪杲、洪昌阴遣陈道庠养勇士刘思潮、谭令禋、林少强、少良、何昌廷等，习为角牴以献玢。
现代文：刘洪熙、刘洪呆、刘洪昌暗中派陈道庠养武士刘思潮、谭令里、林少强、林少良、何昌廷等人，练习摔跤，献给刘玢。
English: Liu Hongxi, Liu Hongdian, Liu Hongchang secretly sent Chen Daojun to train the warriors Liu Shichao, Tan Lingli, Lin Shaoqiang, Lin Shao Liang, He Changting and others to practice wrestling, dedicated to Liu Bei.

古文：玢宴长春宫以阅之，玢醉起，道庠与思潮等随至寝门拉杀之，尽杀其左右。
现代文：刘玢在长春宫设宴观看他们摔跤，刘玢喝醉起身，陈道庠和刘思潮等人随他到寝宫门口把他拉死，把他左右的人全部杀掉。
English: Liu Bei held a banquet at the Changchun Palace to watch them wrestle. Liu Bei got drunk and got up. Chen Daojun and Liu Shichao and others followed him to the door of his bedchamber and dragged him to death, killing everyone around him.

古文：玢立二年，年二十四，谥曰殇。
现代文：刘玢登位两年，卒年二十四岁，谧号为殇。
English: Liu Bei ascended the throne two years later, died at the age of twenty-four, and his posthumous name was Zou.

古文：弟晟立。
现代文：弟弟刘晟登位。
English: His younger brother Liu Ye ascended to the throne.

古文：晟，初名洪熙，封晋王。
现代文：刘晟，原名刘洪熙，封为晋王。
English: Liu Ye, formerly known as Liu Hongxi, was crowned the King of Jin.

古文：既弑玢，遂自立，改元曰应乾，以洪昌为兵马元帅，知政事，洪杲副元帅，刘思潮等封功臣。
现代文：杀掉刘玢后，就自行登位，改年号叫应干，任命刘洪昌为兵马元帅，知政事，刘洪杲为副元帅，刘思潮等人封焉功臣。
English: After killing Liu Xuan, he ascended to the throne on his own, changed the name of the year to Yinggan, appointed Liu Hongchang as Marshal of the Horse and Cavalry, Governor, Liu Hongyi as Vice-Marshal, Liu Shichao and others as meritorious vassals.

古文：晟既杀兄，立不顺，惧众不伏，乃益峻刑法以威众。
现代文：刘晟杀死哥哥后，登位不名正言顺，怕众人不服，于是更加重刑罚威胁众人。
English: After Liu Ye killed his brother, he ascended to the throne without being righteous and obedient, fearing that everyone would not accept it, so he threatened everyone with heavier punishments.

古文：已而洪杲屡请讨贼，阴劝晟诛思潮等以止外议。
现代文：不久刘洪呆多次请求讨伐盗贼，暗中劝刘晟杀掉刘思潮等人以阻止外人的非议。
English: Soon, Liu Hongdian repeatedly requested to fight against the thieves, and secretly advised Liu Xi to kill Liu Shichao and others to stop the criticism of outsiders.

古文：晟大怒，使使者夜召洪杲。
现代文：刘晟大怒，派使臣在晚上召刘洪杲。
English: Liu Bei was furious and sent an envoy to summon Liu Hongkun in the evening.

古文：洪杲知不免，乃留使者，入具沐浴，诣佛前祝曰： 洪杲误念，来生王宫，今见杀矣。后世当生民家，以免屠害。 
现代文：刘洪杲知道不能幸免，于是留下使臣，入内沐浴，到佛像前祷告说： 我刘洪杲想法错误，生在王官，今天被杀了，后世应当生在百姓家，以免受到杀害。 
English: Liu Hongyao knew that he could not be spared, so he left the envoy, took a bath, went to the Buddha statue and prayed: I, Liu Hongyao, thought wrongly, I was born in a royal official, today I was killed, in future generations I should be born in a commoner's home, so as not to be killed.

古文：涕泣与家人诀别，然后赴召，至则杀之。
现代文：哭泣着和家人诀别，然后前去应召，一到就被杀了。
English: Crying, he said goodbye to his family, then went to answer the call and was killed as soon as he arrived.

古文：冬，晟祀天南郊，改元曰乾和，群臣上尊号曰大圣文武大明至道大光孝皇帝。
现代文：冬天，刘晟在南郊祭天，改年号为干和，群臣进上尊号为大圣文武大明至道大光孝皇帝。
English: In winter, Liu Bei held a festival in the southern suburb of Tian, changing the year name to Ganhe, and the group of courtiers advanced to honor the emperor with the title of Da Sheng Wenwu Daming to Dao Da Guangxiao.

古文：二年夏，遣洪昌祠襄帝陵于海曲，至昌华宫，晟使盗刺杀之。
现代文：二年夏天，派刘洪昌到海曲祭祀襄帝陵，到昌华宫时，刘晟派盗贼把他刺死。
English: In the summer of the second year, he sent Liu Hongchang to the tomb of Emperor Xiang to perform the sea chant. When he arrived at the Changhua Palace, Liu Hongchang sent a thief to stab him to death.

古文：晟自杀洪杲，由是与诸弟有隙，而洪昌最贤，素所欲立者，晟尤忌之，故先及害。
现代文：刘晟自从杀死刘洪呆后，从此和弟弟们产生矛盾，而刘洪昌最贤明，是刘龚一直想立为太子的人，刘晟尤其忌恨他，因此先遭杀害。
English: After Liu Bei killed Liu Hongtu, he had conflicts with his brothers. Liu Hongchang was the wisest and the one Liu Bei had always wanted to be crown prince. Liu Bei especially hated him, so he was killed first.

古文：镇王洪泽居邕州，有善政，是岁凤皇见邕州，晟怒，使人酖杀之。
现代文：镇王刘洪泽居邕州，有政绩，这年凤凰出现在邕州，刘晟发怒，派人用毒酒杀死他。
English: Liu Hongze, the king of the town, lived in Zhangzhou and had political achievements. This year, a phoenix appeared in Zhangzhou. Liu Hongze was angry and sent someone to kill him with poisoned wine.

古文：而诸弟相次见杀。
现代文：弟弟们都相继被杀。
English: His brothers were killed one after the other.

古文：三年，杀其弟洪雅，又杀刘思潮等五人。
现代文：三年，杀死他的弟弟刘洪雅，又杀掉刘思潮等五人。
English: Three years later, he killed his brother, Liu Hongya, and another five people, including Liu Shichao.

古文：思潮等死，陈道庠惧，不自安，其友邓伸以荀悦《汉纪》遗之，道庠莫能晓，伸骂曰： 憝獠！
现代文：刘思潮等人被杀后，陈道庠害怕，感到不安全，他的朋友邓伸拿苟悦的《汉纪》送给他，陈道庠不明白他的用意，邓伸骂他说： 蠢蛮子！
English: After Liu Shichao and others were killed, Chen Daojun was afraid and felt insecure. His friend Deng Shin took Gao Yu's "Han Ji" and gave it to him. Chen Daojun did not understand his intention. Deng Shin scolded him: "You stupid son of a bitch!"

古文：韩信诛而彭越醢，皆在此书矣！ 
现代文：韩信被杀而彭越被剁成肉酱，都写在这本书中！ 
English: Han Xin was killed and Peng Yue was chopped up into meat sauce, it's all written in this book!

古文：道庠悟，益惧。
现代文：陈道庠醒悟，更加害怕。
English: Chen Daojun woke up and became even more afraid.

古文：晟闻之大怒，以道庠、伸下狱，皆斩之于市，夷其族。
现代文：刘晟听说后大怒，把陈道庠、邓伸投进狱中，都斩杀于市，把他们减族。
English: After hearing of this, Liu Bei flew into a rage, threw Chen Daojun and Deng Sheng into prison, killed them both in the city, and reduced their families.

古文：以右仆射王翻为英州刺史，使人杀之于路。
现代文：任命右仆射王翻焉英州刺史，派人在路上杀掉他。
English: He appointed his right-hand man, Sha Wang, to overturn Yingzhou's history, and sent someone to kill him on the road.

古文：五年，晟弟洪弼、洪道、洪益、洪济、洪简、洪建、洪、洪昭，同日皆见杀。
现代文：五年，刘晟的弟弟刘洪弼、刘洪道、刘洪益、刘洪济、刘洪简、刘洪建、刘洪晔、刘洪昭，同一天被杀。
English: Five years ago, Liu Hongjun, Liu Hongdao, Liu Hongyi, Liu Hongji, Liu Hongzhi, Liu Hongzhan, Liu Hongjian, Liu Hongyi and Liu Hongzhao, the younger brothers of Liu Hongjun, were killed on the same day.

古文：六年，遣工部郎中、知制诰钟允章聘楚以求婚，楚不许。
现代文：六年，派工部郎中、知制诰锺允章礼聘楚国求婚，楚不答应。
English: In the sixth year, he sent a junior official of the Ministry of Industry, Commerce and Industry, Zhao Yunzhang, to invite Chu Guo to propose marriage, but Chu did not agree.

古文：允章还，晟曰： 马公复能经略南土乎？ 
现代文：锺允章返回，刘晟说： 马公还能经营南方土地吗？ 
English: When Gao Yunzhang returned, Liu Ye said: Can Ma Gong still manage the southern land?

古文：是时，马希广新立，希萼起兵武陵，湖南大乱，允章具言楚可攻之状。
现代文：这时，马希广刚登位，马希萼在武陵起兵，湖南大乱，锺允章详细陈述可以攻楚的情况。
English: At this time, Mashi Guang had just ascended to the throne, Mashi had raised an army in Wuling, Hunan was in turmoil, and Gong Yunzhang made a detailed statement about the situation that Chu could be attacked.

古文：晟乃遣巨象指挥使吴珣、内侍吴怀恩攻贺州，已克之，楚人来救，珣凿大阱于城下，覆箔于上，以土傅之，楚兵迫城，悉陷阱中，死者数千，楚人皆走。
现代文：刘晟于是派巨象指挥使昊殉、内侍昊怀恩攻打贺州，攻克后，楚人前来救援，昊殉在城下挖大陷阱，在上面盖上竹席，用泥土遮住，楚兵到了城下，都落在陷阱中，死了几千人，楚人都逃跑了。
English: Liu Bei then sent the giant elephant commander Hao Zhi and his bodyguard Hao Hui'en to attack Hezhou. After the conquest, the Chu people came to the rescue. Hao Zhi dug a large trap under the city, covered it with a bamboo seat and covered it with soil. When the Chu soldiers arrived under the city, they all fell into the trap. Several thousand people died, and the Chu people fled.

古文：珣等攻桂州及连、宜、严、梧、蒙五州，皆克之。
现代文：昊殉等人进攻桂州和连、宜、严、梧、蒙五州，都攻克了。
English: Hao Jie and others attacked Guizhou, Lian, Yi, Yan, Wuzhong, and Mengzhou, and conquered them all.

古文：掠全州而还。
现代文：劫掠全州而回。
English: They returned after plundering the entire state.

古文：九年冬，又遣内侍潘崇彻攻郴州，李景兵亦在，与崇彻遇，战，大败景兵于宜章，遂取郴州。
现代文：九年冬，又派内侍潘崇彻攻打郴州，李景的军队也在那里，和潘崇彻相遇交战，在宜章大败李景的军队，于是攻取郴州。
English: In the winter of the ninth year, he also sent his servant Pan Chong Che to attack Zhangzhou. Li Jing's army was also there. He met and fought with Pan Chong Che, defeated Li Jing's army in Yizhang, and then captured Zhangzhou.

古文：晟益得志，遣巨舰指挥使暨彦赟以兵入海，掠商人金帛作离宫游猎，故时刘氏有南宫、大明、昌华、甘泉、玩华、秀华、玉清、太微诸宫，凡数百，不可悉纪。
现代文：刘晟更加得意，派巨舰指挥使暨彦宝率兵入海，抢劫商人的金银绸缎修建行宫游猎，因此当时刘氏有南宫、大明、昌华、甘泉、玩华、秀华、玉清、太微等行官，共几百处，不能一一列出。
English: Liu Bei was even more proud. He sent the commander of a huge ship, who was also known as Yan Bao, into the sea with an army, robbed merchants of gold and silver, and went on a palace hunting trip. As a result, at that time, the Liu clan had several hundred officials such as Nan Gong, Daming, Changhua, Ganquan, Yuhua, Xiuhua, Yuching, and Taiwei. It is impossible to list them all.

古文：宦者林延遇、宫人卢琼仙，内外专恣为杀戮，晟不复省。
现代文：宦官林延遇、官人卢瑷仙，内外专横，任意杀人，刘晟避不醒悟。
English: The eunuch Lin Yan Rong and the official Lu Yuxian were domineering at home and abroad, and killed people at will. Liu Yuxuan did not wake up.

古文：常夜饮大醉，以瓜置伶人尚玉楼项，拔剑斩之以试剑，因并斩其首。
现代文：曾经夜饮大醉，把瓜放在乐师尚玉楼的颈上，拔剑斩瓜试剑，因而一并把他的头砍下。
English: Once, when he was very drunk at night, he put a melon on the neck of the musician Shang Yulong, drew a sword to cut the melon, and thus cut off his head.

古文：明日酒醒，复召玉楼侍饮，左右白已杀之，晟叹息而已。
现代文：第二天酒醒后，又召尚玉楼侍奉饮酒，手下人告诉他已经被他杀了，刘晟不过叹息一声罢了。
English: The next day, after he had sobered up, he summoned Shang Yulou to serve him alcohol. His subordinates told him that he had already killed him, but Liu Bei only sighed.

古文：十年，湖南王进逵以兵五万率溪洞蛮攻郴州，潘崇彻败进逵于豪石，斩首万余级。
现代文：十年，湖南王进逵出兵五万率溪洞蛮进攻郴州，潘崇彻在蚝石打败王进逵，杀一万多人。
English: Ten years ago, Hunan Wang Jinjun sent out 50,000 soldiers to attack Zhangzhou at the rate of Xidong. Pan Chongche defeated Wang Jinjun in Shishi and killed more than 10,000 people.

古文：十一年，晟病甚，封其子继兴卫王，璇兴桂王，庆兴荆王，保兴祥王，崇兴梅王。
现代文：十一年，刘晟病重，封他的儿子刘继兴为卫王，刘璇兴焉桂王，刘庆兴为荆王，刘保兴为祥王，刘崇兴焉梅王。
English: In the eleventh year, Liu Jixing was seriously ill, and his son Liu Jixing was named Wei Wang, Liu Jixing was named Gui Wang, Liu Qingxing was named Jing Wang, Liu Baoxing was named Xiang Wang, and Liu Chongxing was named Mei Wang.

古文：十二年，晟亲耕藉田。
现代文：十二年，刘晟亲自耕田行藉田礼仪。
English: In the twelfth year, Liu Ye personally cultivated the fields and performed the field etiquette.

古文：交州吴昌浚遣使称臣，求节钺。
现代文：交州昊昌浚派使臣前来称臣，请求赐予节铁。
English: Gaozhou Haochangjun sent an envoy to praise the minister and ask for iron ore.

古文：昌浚者，权子也。
现代文：昊昌浚，是昊权的儿子。
English: Hao Changjun is the son of Hao Quan.

古文：权自时据交州，遣洪操攻之，洪操战死，遂弃不复攻。
现代文：昊权自从刘奠时占据交州，刘龚派洪操攻打他，洪操战死，于是放弃此地不再进攻。
English: Hao Quan occupied Jiaozhou from the time of Liu Dian, Liu Bei sent Hong Cao to attack him, Hong Cao died in the battle, so he gave up this place and no longer attacked.

古文：权死，子昌岌立，昌岌卒，弟昌浚立，始称臣于晟。
现代文：昊权死后，儿子昊昌岌继位，昊昌岌死后，弟弟昊昌浚继位，纔向刘晟称臣。
English: After the death of Hao Quan, his son Hao Changtu succeeded to the throne, and after the death of Hao Changtu, his brother Hao Changjun succeeded to the throne, and became a minister to Liu Bei.

古文：晟遣给事中李玙以旌节招之，玙至白州，浚使人止玙曰： 海贼为乱，道路不通。 
现代文：刘晟派给事中李填以符节招他，李填到白州，昊昌浚派人阻止李琪说： 海贼作乱，道路不通。 
English: Liu Bei sent Li Qiye to recruit him, Li Qiye went to Baizhou, and Hao Changjun sent people to stop Li Qiye, saying, "The pirates have made a disturbance, and the road is impassable."

古文：玙不果行。
现代文：李填没有成行。
English: Li Jian did not make the trip.

古文：晟杀其弟洪邈。
现代文：刘晟杀掉他的弟弟刘洪邈。
English: Liu Hongzhi killed his brother Liu Hongzhi.

古文：十三年，又杀其弟洪政，于是之诸子尽矣。
现代文：十三年，又杀掉他的弟弟刘洪政，到这时刘袭的儿子都被他杀光了！
English: Thirteen years later, he killed his brother Liu Hongzheng. By this time, he had killed all of Liu Bei's sons!

古文：显德三年，世宗平江北，晟始惶恐，遣使修贡于京师，为楚人所隔，使者不得行，晟忧形于色。
现代文：显德三年，周世宗平定长江以北，刘晟纔感到惊惶恐惧，派使臣到京师进贡，被楚人所隔，使臣不能前去，刘晟神色忧虑。
English: In the third year of Xiande, Zhou Shizong pacified the north of the Yangtze River, Liu Bei felt panic and fear, sent envoys to Beijing to pay tribute, was separated by the Chu people, the envoys could not go, Liu Bei looked worried.

古文：又尝自言知星，末年，月食牛女间，出书占之，叹曰： 吾当之矣！ 
现代文：又曾自称懂得星象，年末，月食于牵牛、织女二星问，拿出卦书来占卜，叹息说： 正应在我身上！ 
English: He also once claimed to understand the stars. At the end of the year, when the lunar eclipse occurred at the time of the Cowherd and the Weaver Maiden, he took out a book of divination and said with a sigh, "It is upon me!"

古文：因为长夜之饮。
现代文：于是整夜饮酒。
English: So they spent the whole night drinking.

古文：十六年，卜葬域于城北，运甓为圹，晟亲临视之。
现代文：十六年，在城北选择墓地，运砖修墓，刘晟亲自去视察。
English: Sixteen years later, after selecting a cemetery in the north of the city and carrying bricks to repair the grave, Liu Ye went to inspect it in person.

古文：是秋卒，年三十九，谥曰文武光圣明孝皇帝，庙号中宗，陵曰昭陵。
现代文：这年秋死去，享年三十九岁，谧号为文武光圣明孝皇帝，庙号中宗，陵墓为昭陵。
English: He died in the autumn of that year, at the age of thirty-nine. His posthumous name was Emperor Wenwu Guang Sheng Mingxiao, his temple name was Zhongzong, and his mausoleum was Zhaoling.

古文：子鋹立。
现代文：儿子刘银登位。
English: His son Liu Yin ascended to the throne.

古文：鋹，初名继兴，封卫王。
现代文：刘银，原名刘继兴，封焉卫王。
English: Liu Yin, whose original name was Liu Jixing, was given the title of Fuan Wei Wang.

古文：晟卒，以长子立，改元曰大宝。
现代文：刘晟逝世，他作为长子登位，改年号为大蜜。
English: After Liu Bei's death, he ascended to the throne as the eldest son and changed his name to Dami.

古文：晟性刚忌，不能任臣下，而独任其嬖倖宦官、宫婢延遇、琼仙等。
现代文：刘晟性格刚愎猜忌，不能信任臣下，而只信任他宠幸的宦官、宫婢延遇、卢琼仙等人。
English: Liu Bei's character was one of arrogance and suspicion. He could not trust his vassals, but only trusted his favorite eunuchs, palace maids, Lu Qiongxian and others.

古文：至鋹尤愚，以谓群臣皆自有家室，顾子孙，不能尽忠，惟宦者亲近可任，遂委其政于宦者龚澄枢、陈延寿等，至其群臣有欲用者，皆阉然后用。
现代文：到刘银就更加愚昧，认为群臣都各有象室，顾惜子孙，不能竭尽忠心，只有宦官亲近可以任用，于是把政事交托给宦官龚澄枢、陈延寿等人，以至于有想任用的臣子，都闽割后纔任用。
English: As for Liu Yin, he was even more ignorant, believing that all the ministers had their own elephant rooms, that they were concerned about their children and grandchildren, that they could not be completely loyal, and that only eunuchs who were close to them could be appointed. Therefore, he entrusted the affairs of state to eunuchs such as Gong Cheng Zu and Chen Yan Shou, so that all the ministers who wanted to be appointed were castrated and then appointed.

古文：澄枢等既专政，鋹乃与宫婢波斯女等淫戏后宫，不复出省事。
现代文：龚澄枢等人专权后，刘银于是和官婢波斯女子在后宫淫乐嬉戏，不再出来管理政事。
English: After the monopolization of power by Yu Chengzhu and others, Liu Yin then played with Persian women in the harem, and no longer came out to manage political affairs.

古文：延寿又引女巫樊胡子，自言玉皇降胡子身。
现代文：陈延寿又引来女巫樊胡子，自称玉皇降临樊胡子身上。
English: Chen Yanshou also attracted a witch, Zou Zi, who claimed that the Jade Emperor had descended on Zou Zi.

古文：鋹于内殿设帐幄，陈宝贝，胡子冠远游冠，衣紫霞裾，坐帐中宣祸福，呼鋹为太子皇帝，国事皆决于胡子，卢琼仙、龚澄枢等争附之。
现代文：刘银在内殿设置帐幕，摆上宝物，樊胡子头戴着速游冠，穿着紫霞裙，坐在帐幕中宣扬祸福，称刘银为太子皇帝，国事都取决于樊胡子，卢琼仙、龚澄枢等人争相依附她。
English: Liu Yin set up a tent in the inner hall, put up treasures, wearing a fast-travel crown on his bearded head, wearing a purple and blue dress, sitting in the tent to preach evil and good, calling Liu Yin the prince emperor. National affairs all depend on his beard. Lu Qiongxian, Gong Chengzhu and others are vying to cling to her.

古文：胡子乃为鋹言： 澄枢等皆上天使来辅太子，有罪不可问。 
现代文：樊胡子于是对刘银说： 龚澄枢等人都是上天派来辅助太子皇帝的，有罪不能责问。 
English: Zou Zi then said to Liu Yin: Zou Chengzhu and the others were sent by heaven to assist the prince emperor, and their guilt cannot be questioned.

古文：尚书左丞钟允章参政事，深嫉之，数请诛宦官，宦官皆仄目。
现代文：尚书左丞锺允章参预政事，深深痛恨他们，多次请求诛杀宦官，宦官都对他侧目仇视。
English: Shangshu Zuozhong Rong Yunzhang participated in the pre-election political affairs, deeply hated them, and repeatedly requested to kill the eunuchs. The eunuchs were hostile to him.

古文：二年，鋹祀天南郊，前三日，允章与礼官登坛，四顾指麾，宦者许彦真望见之曰： 此谋反尔！ 
现代文：二年，刘银在南郊祭天，前三天，锺允章和礼官登上祭坛，四周环视指挥安排，宦官许彦真望见他们说： 这是在谋反啊！ 
English: In the second year, Liu Yin offered sacrifices to Heaven in the southern suburbs. Three days before, Yu Yunzhang and the eunuch ascended the altar and looked around at the command arrangements. The eunuch Xu Yanzang saw them and said, "This is plotting a rebellion!"

古文：乃拔剑升坛，允章迎叱之，彦真驰走，告允章反。
现代文：于是拔出剑登上祭坛，锺允章迎面呵叱他，许彦真驰马跑掉，诬告锺允章反叛。
English: So he pulled out his sword and climbed onto the altar, Yu Yunzhang scolded him face to face, Xu Yanzhen galloped away, and falsely accused Yu Yunzhang of rebellion.

古文：鋹下允章狱，遣礼部尚书薛用丕治之。
现代文：刘银把锺允章投进狱中，派礼部尚书薛用丕治罪。
English: Liu Yin threw Gong Yunzhang into prison and sent the etiquette department Shang Shu Xue to punish him.

古文：允章与用丕有旧，因泣下曰： 吾今无罪，自诬以死固无恨，然吾二子皆幼，不知父冤，俟其长，公可告之。 
现代文：锺允章和薛用丕有旧交，于是流泪说： 我现在没有罪，自己认罪而死本也没有遣憾，但我的两个儿子都年幼，不知道父亲的冤枉，等他们长大后，你可以告诉他们。 
English: Yu Yunzhang and Xue Yingkun had an old friendship, so he said with tears: I am not guilty now, I did not regret confessing and dying, but my two sons are young and do not know the wrongdoing of their father. When they grow up, you can tell them.

古文：彦真闻之，骂曰： 反贼欲使而子报仇邪？ 
现代文：许彦真听说后，骂道： 反贼，想让你的儿子报仇吗！ 
English: After hearing this, Xu YanZhen scolded: "Anti-thief, do you want your son to take revenge!

古文：复入白鋹，并捕二子系狱，遂族诛之。
现代文：又进官告诉刘银，把他的两个儿子一并抓来关进狱中，于是把他们减族。
English: The new officials also told Liu Yin that they would arrest his two sons together and put them in prison, thus reducing their family size.

古文：陈延寿谓鋹曰： 先帝所以得传陛下者，由尽杀群弟也。 
现代文：陈延寿对刘钣说： 先帝之所以能够传位给陛下，是因为把弟弟们都杀光了。 
English: Chen Yanshou said to Liu Ye: The reason why the previous emperor was able to pass the throne to His Majesty was because he killed all his brothers.

古文：劝鋹稍诛去诸王。鋹以为然，杀其弟桂王璇兴。
现代文：劝刘银逐渐诛杀掉各王，刘银认为对，杀掉他的弟弟桂王刘璇兴。
English: He advised Liu Yin to gradually kill the kings, and Liu Yin thought it was right to kill his brother, Gui Wang Liu Bingxing.

古文：是岁，建隆元年也。
现代文：这年，是建隆元年。
English: This year is the first year of Jianlong.

古文：鋹将邵廷琄言于鋹曰： 汉乘唐乱，居此五十年，幸中国有故，干戈不及，而汉益骄于无事，今兵不识旗鼓，而人主不知存亡。
现代文：刘银的部将邵廷瑁对刘银说： 我们汉国乘唐动乱之机，在这里五十年了，幸逢中原有变故，役能打到我们这里，而我们漠国因为没有战事却更加放纵，如今军队不认识旗鼓号令，而君主不知道存亡大事。
English: Liu Yin's general, Shao Tingyao, said to Liu Yin, "We, Han, took advantage of the Tang turmoil. We have been here for fifty years. Fortunately, there was a change in the Central Plains, and the war can hit us here. But our desert country is more indulgent because there is no war. Nowadays, the army does not know the order of the drum and bugle, and the monarch does not know the important matters of life and death.

古文：夫天下乱久矣，乱久而治，自然之势也。
现代文：天下动乱很久了，动乱久了就会导致天下治理，这是自然趋势。
English: The world has been in turmoil for a long time, and turmoil for a long time will lead to world governance, which is a natural trend.

古文：今闻真主已出，必将尽有海内，其势非一天下不能已。 
现代文：如今听说真主已经出现，必将全部占据海内，看来不统一天下不会罢休。 
English: Now that we have heard that Allah has appeared and will surely occupy the entire sea, it seems that the disunity will not stop.

古文：劝鋹修兵为备，不然，悉珍宝奉中国，遣使以通好。
现代文：劝刘银修整军队作为防备，如不这样，就拿全部珍宝进奉中原，派使臣和中原通好。
English: He advised Liu Yin to reorganize the army as a precaution. If not, he would take all the precious treasures to Zhongyuan and send envoys to negotiate with Zhongyuan.

古文：鋹懵然莫以为虑，恶廷琄言直，深恨之。
现代文：刘银胡涂地什磨也不忧虑，讨厌邵廷埚直言不讳，十分痛恨他。
English: Liu Yin did not worry about being fooled. He hated Shao Tingya's outspokenness and hated him very much.

古文：四年，芝菌生宫中，野兽触寝门，苑中羊吐珠，井旁石自立，行百余步而仆，樊胡子皆以符瑞讽群臣入贺。
现代文：四年，宫中长出芝菌，野兽碰撞寝官房门，园苑中羊吐珍珠，井旁石头自己立起来，走了一百多步纔倒下，樊胡子都说是吉祥征兆，暗示群臣进宫祝贺。
English: In the fourth year, the palace grew out of the fungus, the beast collided with the door of the bedroom, the sheep in the garden spit pearls, the stone by the well stood up by itself, walked more than a hundred steps and fell down, and the beard was said to be an auspicious sign, suggesting that the courtiers entered the palace to congratulate.

古文：五年，鋹以宦者李托养女为贵妃，专宠。
现代文：五年，刘银把宦官李托的养女封为贵妃，专一宠爱她。
English: In five years, Liu Yin made the adopted daughter of eunuch Li Tuo a noble consort and doted on her.

古文：托为内太师，居中专政。
现代文：李托任内太师，在朝中专权。
English: Li To was appointed Inner Grand Master and had exclusive power in the court.

古文：许彦真既杀钟允章，恶龚澄枢等居己上，谋杀之。
现代文：许彦真杀掉锺允章后，憎恶龚澄枢等人位居自己之上，谋划杀掉他们。
English: After Xu Yanzhen killed Zou Yunzhang, he hated Zou Chengzhu and others who were above him and plotted to kill them.

古文：澄枢使人告彦真反，族诛之。
现代文：龚澄枢派人诬告许彦真反叛，把他灭族。
English: Emperor Gaocheng sent people to falsely accuse Xu Yanzhen of rebellion and exterminate him.

古文：七年，王师南伐，克郴州，晟所遣将暨彦赟与其刺史陆光图皆战死，余众退保韶州。
现代文：七年，宋朝大军南伐，攻克郴州，刘晟派去的将领暨彦宝和刺史陆光图都战死，剩下的兵众退保韶州。
English: In the seventh year, the Song Dynasty's great army marched south to conquer Ganzhou. The generals sent by Liu Bei, namely Yan Bao and Zhishi Lu Guangtu, both died in the battle, and the remaining soldiers withdrew to protect Ganzhou.

古文：鋹始思廷琄言，遣廷琄以舟兵出洸口抗王师。
现代文：刘银纔想起邵廷塌的话，派邵廷瑁率水军出洸口抵抗宋朝大军。
English: Liu Yinqi remembered Shao Tingfu's words and sent Shao Tingfu to lead the navy out of the estuary to resist the Song Dynasty army.

古文：会王师退舍，廷琄训士卒，修战备，岭人倚以为良将。
现代文：碰上宋朝军队退兵，邵廷瑁训练士兵，整修战备，岭南人认为他是良将而依赖于他。
English: Faced with the Song Dynasty army retreating, Shao Tingtao trained soldiers and repaired combat readiness. Lingnan people thought he was a good general and depended on him.

古文：有谮者投无名书言廷琄反，鋹遣使者赐死；士卒排军门见使者，诉廷琄无反状，不能救，为立祠于洸口。
现代文：诋毁他的人投匿名信说邵廷玥反叛，刘银派使臣赐他自杀；士兵们排列在军营门口见使臣，申诉邵廷瑁没有反叛情状，但没能救下他，为他在洸口修建祠庙。
English: His detractors cast an anonymous letter saying that Shao Tingya rebelled and Liu Yin sent an envoy to make him commit suicide; soldiers lined up at the gate of the military camp to see the envoy, complaining that Shao Tingya did not rebel, but failed to save him and build a temple for him at the entrance.

古文：八年，交州吴昌文卒，其佐吕处玶与峰州刺史乔知祐争立，交趾大乱，驩州丁琏举兵击破之，鋹授琏交州节度。
现代文：八年，交州昊昌文逝世。他的副手吕处坪和峰州刺史乔知佑争位，交趾大乱，罐州丁理出兵攻破他们，刘银任丁躔为交州节度使。
English: In the eighth year, Gaozhou Hao Changwen died. His deputy, Lu Zhupping, and Fengzhou Shishi Qiao Zhiyou competed for the position, and there was a great disturbance in Gaozhou. Janzhou Dingli sent troops to defeat them, and Liu Yinren Dingyao was the delegate of the Gaozhou Festival.

古文：九年，南海民妻生子两首四臂。
现代文：九年，南海百姓家妻子生下儿子有两头四臂。
English: Nine years ago, the wife of a Nanhai commoner gave birth to a son with two heads and four arms.

古文：是时，太祖皇帝诏李煜谕鋹使称臣，鋹怒，囚煜使者龚慎仪。
现代文：这时，宋太祖皇帝诏令李煜劝说刘银让他称臣，刘银发怒，拘囚李煜的使臣龚慎仪。
English: At this time, Emperor Taizu of the Song Dynasty issued an edict to Li Xi to persuade Liu Yin to make him a minister. Liu Yin became angry and imprisoned Li Xi's envoy, Zou Shenyi.

古文：十三年，诏潭州防御使潘美出师，师次白霞。
现代文：十三年，宋朝诏令潭州防御使潘美出兵，军队在白霞驻扎。
English: In the thirteenth year, the Song Dynasty issued an edict ordering the defense of Tanzhou to send troops to Panmei, and the army was stationed in Baixia.

古文：鋹遣龚澄枢守贺州、郭崇岳守桂州、李托守韶州以备。
现代文：刘银派龚澄枢守贺州、郭崇岳守桂州、李托守韶州作为防备。
English: Liu Yin sent Jucheng to guard Hezhou, Guo Chongyue to guard Guizhou, and Li Tuo to guard Zhangzhou as a precaution.

古文：是岁秋，潘美平贺州，十月平昭州，又平桂州，十一月平连州。
现代文：这年秋，潘美平定贺州，十月平定昭州，又平定桂州，十一月平定连州。
English: In the autumn of that year, Pan Mei subdued Hezhou, in October subdued Zhaozhou, again subdued Guizhou, and in November subdued Lianzhou.

古文：鋹喜曰： 昭、桂、连、贺，本属湖南，今北师取之，足矣，其不复南也。 
现代文：刘银高兴地说： 昭、桂、连、贺，原属湖南，现在北方军队夺取它们，已够了，不会再南征了。 
English: Liu Yin said happily: Zhao, Gui, Lian and He are originally from Hunan, but now the northern army has seized them, it is enough, there will be no more southern expedition.

古文：其愚如此。
现代文：他就是如此愚蠢！
English: He's just so stupid!

古文：十二月平韶州。
现代文：十二月宋军平定韶州。
English: In December, the Song Army subdued Ganzhou.

古文：开宝四年正月，平英、雄二州，鋹将潘崇彻先降。
现代文：开宝四年正月，平定英、雄二州，刘银的将领潘崇彻首先投降。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the Kaibao era, Liu Yin's generals Pan Chongche, Pingding Ying and Xiong Erzhou, were the first to surrender.

古文：师次泷头，鋹遣使请和，求缓师。
现代文：军队驻扎于漓头，刘银派使臣求和，请求缓兵。
English: The army was stationed in Shantou, and Liu Yin sent envoys to the emperor to sue for peace and request a delay.

古文：二月，师度马迳，鋹遣其右仆射萧漼奉表降。
现代文：二月，军队渡过马径，刘银派他的右仆射萧灌奉表请求投降。
English: In February, when the army crossed the horse path, Liu Yin sent his right-hand man, She Xiao, to request surrender.

古文：漼行，鋹惶迫，复令整兵拒命。
现代文：萧灌出发后，刘银惶惶不安，又下令调集军队抗拒大军。
English: After Xiao Guan's departure, Liu Yin was panicked and anxious, and ordered the mobilization of troops to resist the large army.

古文：美等进师，鋹遣其弟祥王保兴率文武诣美军降，不纳。
现代文：潘美等人进军，刘银派他的弟弟祥王刘保兴率文武官吏到潘美军中投降，不被接受。
English: Pan Mei and others marched into the army, Liu Yin sent his brother Xiang Wang Liu Baoxing to lead the civil and military officials to the Pan American army to surrender, which was not accepted.

古文：龚澄枢、李托等谋曰： 北师之来，利吾国宝货尔，焚为空城，师不能驻，当自还也。 
现代文：龚澄枢、李托等人商议说： 北方军队前来，只是贪图我国的财宝罢了，如果我们将它烧成空城，不能驻军，他们自然会回去。 
English: Gong Cheng Zu, Lito and others deliberated and said: The northern army only came to covet our country's treasure. If we burn it to a cinder and cannot garrison it, they will naturally go back.

古文：乃尽焚其府库、宫殿。
现代文：于是焚毁他们所有的仓库、官殿。
English: As a result, all their storehouses and government buildings were burned.

古文：鋹以海舶十余，悉载珍宝、嫔御，将入海，宦官乐范窃其舟以逃归。
现代文：刘表率领十多艘海船，载上全部珍宝、嫔妃，准备入海，宦官乐范偷去他的海船逃回。
English: Liu Biao led more than ten seagoing ships, loaded with all the treasures and concubines, and prepared to go to sea. The eunuch Le Fan stole his ship and fled back.

古文：师次白田，鋹素衣白马以降。
现代文：宋罩驻扎于白田，刘银穿着白衣骑着白马投降。
English: Song Hood was stationed in Baita, and Liu Yin, wearing a white robe and riding a white horse, surrendered.

古文：献俘京师，赦鋹为左千牛卫大将军，封恩赦侯。
现代文：到京师进献俘虏，赦免刘银，任命为左干牛卫大将军，封为恩赦侯。
English: He went to Beijing to present prisoners to the emperor, pardoned Liu Yin, was appointed General of Zuo Gan Niuwei, and was granted amnesty.

古文：其后事具国史。
现代文：后来的事记载在本朝国史上。
English: Subsequent events are recorded in the history of this dynasty.

