古文：孟子曰： 伯夷辟纣，居北海之滨，闻文王作兴，曰： 盍归乎来！
现代文：孟子说： 伯夷躲避纣王，住到北海海滨，听说文王兴起来了，便说： 何不归向西伯呢!
English: Mencius said, "The pagans fled from the king of Sheba and lived on the coast of the North Sea. When they heard that King Wen had risen to power, they said, "Why not return to Sheba?"

古文：吾闻西伯善养老者。 
现代文：我听说他是善于赡养老者的人。 
English: I hear he's a good provider for the elderly.

古文：太公辟纣，居东海之滨，闻文王作兴，曰： 盍归乎来！
现代文：姜太公躲避纣王，住到东海海边，听说文王兴起来了，便说： 何不归向西伯呢！
English: Jiang Taigong evaded the Dragon King and lived on the coast of the East Sea. When he heard that King Wen was on the rise, he said, "Why not return to Xibe?"

古文：吾闻西伯善养老者。 
现代文：我听说他是善于赡养老者的人。 
English: I hear he's a good provider for the elderly.

古文：天下有善养老，则仁人以为己归矣。
现代文：天下有善于赡养老者的人，那仁人便把他那儿作为自己的归宿了。
English: There are people in the world who are good at supporting the elderly, so the benevolent person took him there as his home.

古文：五亩之宅，树墙下以桑，匹妇蚕之，则老者足以衣帛矣。
现代文：五亩地的宅院，在墙下栽植桑树，妇女养蚕缫丝，老年人足以有丝绵衣穿了。
English: The five-acre compound has mulberry trees planted under the walls, women raise silkworms to make silk, and the elderly can wear silk clothing.

古文：五母鸡，二母彘，无失其时，老者足以无失肉矣。
现代文：五只母鸡，两只母猪，不要丧失它们繁殖的时机，老年人足以有肉吃了。
English: Five hens, two sows, don't waste their breeding time, the old people have enough meat to eat.

古文：百亩之田，匹夫耕之，八口之家足以无饥矣。
现代文：百亩的土地，男子去耕种，八口之家足以吃饱了。
English: A hundred mu of land, a man to cultivate, a family of eight is enough to eat.

古文：所谓西伯善养老者，制其田里，教之树畜，导其妻子，使养其老。
现代文：所谓西伯善于赡养老者，是指他制定了土地制度，教育人民栽种和畜牧，引导他们的妻子儿女去奉养自己家的老人。
English: The so-called Xibo is good at supporting the elderly refers to the fact that he has established a land system, educated the people in planting and animal husbandry, and guided their wives and children to support the elderly of their families.

古文：五十非帛不暖，七十非肉不饱。
现代文：五十岁，没有丝绵衣穿便不暖和;七十岁，没有肉吃便感到饥饿。
English: If you are fifty years old, you will not be warm without wearing silk clothes; if you are seventy years old, you will feel hungry without eating meat.

古文：不暖不饱，谓之冻馁。
现代文：穿不暖，吃不饱，叫作挨冻受饿。
English: To be clothed but not warm, to eat but not be satisfied, is to suffer from cold and hunger.

古文：文王之民，无冻馁之老者，此之谓也。 
现代文：文王的百姓中没有挨冻受饿的老人，就是这个意思。 
English: That's why there are no old people freezing and starving among King Wen's people.

