古文：麟为毛虫之长，虎乃兽中之王。
现代文：龙是鳞虫类之长，老虎是万兽之王。
English: The dragon is the head of the scale insects, and the tiger is the king of all beasts.

古文：麟凤龟龙，谓之四灵；犬豕与鸡，谓之三物。
现代文：麒麟、凤凰、乌龟和龙合称为四灵。狗、猪和鸡是古人歃血为盟时所用之物，所以合称为三物。
English: The unicorn, the phoenix, the turtle and the dragon are collectively known as the four spirits. The dog, the pig and the chicken were used by the ancients to forge an alliance, so they are collectively known as the three things.

古文：騄駬骅骝，良马之号；太牢大武，乃牛之称。
现代文： 马录马耳  骅骝 ，都是古时名马的名称； 太牢  大武 都是牛的名称。
English: Maru, Maru, Maru, are the names of famous horses in ancient times; Taiji, Daibu, are the names of cattle.

古文：羊曰柔毛，又曰长髯主簿；豕名刚鬣，又曰乌喙将军。
现代文：羊称作 柔毛 ，又称作 长髯主簿 ；猪称作 刚鬣 ，又称作 乌喙将军 。
English: The sheep is called Pliable, also known as the Long-haired Master; the pig is called the Horned One, also known as the Black General.

古文：鹅名舒雁，鸭号家凫。
现代文：鹅又称为 舒雁 ，鸭又称为 家凫 。
English: Geese are also known as Shu geese, and ducks are also known as house geese.

古文：鸡有五德，故称之为德禽；雁性随阳，因名之曰阳鸟。
现代文：鸡有五种美德，故称为德禽；大雁生性喜欢阳光，所以又称为阳鸟。
English: Chickens have five virtues, so they are called virtuous fowl; geese are sun-loving, so they are also called sunbirds.

古文：家狸、乌圆，乃猫之誉；韩卢楚犷，皆犬之名。
现代文：家狸、乌圆都是猫的美名；韩卢、楚犷都是良犬的名称。
English: "Cowherd" and "Uyuan" are both good names for cats; "Han Lu" and "Chu Yao" are both good names for dogs.

古文：麒麟驺虞，皆好仁之兽；螟螣蟊贼，皆害苗之虫。
现代文： 麒麟  驺虞 ，都是喜好仁义的神兽； 螟  螣  蟊  贼 ，都是残害庄稼的害虫。
English: The unicorn and the locust are divine beasts that love benevolence and righteousness; the grasshopper and the crane are pests that destroy crops.

古文：无肠公子，螃蟹之名；绿衣使者，鹦鹉之号。
现代文： 无肠公子 ，是螃蟹的别名； 绿衣使者 ，是鹦鹉的外号。
English: No guts, is another name for crabs; green-clothed messenger, is a nickname for parrots.

古文：狐假虎威，谓借势而为恶；养虎贻患，谓留祸之在身。
现代文： 狐假虎威 比喻凭借别人的威势做坏事； 养虎贻患 比喻纵容敌人自留后患。
English: "Fox" and "tiger" are metaphors for using the power of others to do bad things; "raising tigers" is a metaphor for conniving with the enemy to stay in power.

古文：犹豫多疑，喻人之不决；狼狈相倚，比人之颠连。
现代文： 犹豫多疑 ，比喻人遇事迟疑不决； 狼狈相倚 ，比喻人相互依靠，失去对方则困顿不堪。
English: Hesitant and doubtful, like people who are hesitant and indecisive in times of trouble; confused, like people who rely on each other, losing the other party is troublesome.

古文：胜负未分，不知鹿死谁手；基业易主，正如燕入他家。
现代文：胜负未分之时，就说不知 鹿死谁手 ；基业江山换了主人，就好比 燕入他家 。
English: When victory or defeat is not certain, they say that they do not know who killed the deer; when the foundation of a country changes hands, it is like a swallow entering another's home.

古文：雁到南方，先至为主，后至为宾；雉名陈宝，得雄则王，得雌则霸。
现代文：大雁飞往南方时，先到的是主人，后到的是宾客；雉鸡又名陈宝，抓住雄雉可以称王，抓住雌雉可以称霸。
English: When the wild goose flies south, the host arrives first, followed by the guests; the pheasant, also known as Chen Bao, can seize the male pheasant to become king, and seize the female pheasant to dominate.

古文：刻鹄类鹜，为学初成；画虎类犬，弄巧成拙。
现代文： 刻鹄类鹜 ，是说人学习初见成效； 画虎类犬 ，比喻弄巧成拙反而留下笑柄。
English: To carve a dragonfly is to say that one's study is effective for the first time; to draw a tiger-like dog is a self-defeating metaphor, but leaves a laughing stock.

古文：美恶不称，谓之狗尾续貂；贪图不足，谓之蛇欲吞象。
现代文：好坏不匀，称作 狗尾续貂 ；贪得无厌，称作 蛇欲吞象 。
English: Unevenly good or bad, it is called the dog's tail; insatiable greed, it is called the snake's desire to devour the elephant.

古文：祸去祸又至，曰前门拒虎，后门进狼；除凶不畏凶，曰不入虎穴，焉得虎子。
现代文： 前门拒虎，后门进狼 ，比喻刚消除了一个祸患，却又遇上了另一个灾难； 不入虎穴，焉得虎子 ，是说为了铲除凶恶就不能不冒险。
English: Refuse the tiger at the front door, enter the wolf at the back door, metaphorically just eliminated a scourge, but encountered another disaster; if you do not enter the tiger's den, you will not get the tiger's cub, is to say that in order to eradicate evil, you cannot but take risks.

古文：鄙众趋利，曰群蚁附膻；谦己爱儿，曰老牛舐犊。
现代文：鄙视世俗之人趋向权力追逐利益，就如同 群蚁附膻 ；谦称自己喜爱儿女，就如同 老牛舐犊 。
English: Those who despise the world tend to pursue power and profit, just like a swarm of ants; those who say they love their children, just like a cow licking its calf.

古文：无中生有，曰画蛇添足；进退两难，曰羝羊触藩。
现代文：无中生有，称作 画蛇添足 ；进退两难，称为 羝羊触藩 。
English: Creating something out of nothing is called "painting a snake and adding a foot"; facing a dilemma is called "touching a sheep and touching a domain."

古文：杯中蛇影，自起猜疑；塞翁失马，难分祸福。
现代文： 杯中蛇影 ，比喻人心中疑虑恐惧胡乱猜疑； 塞翁失马 ，说明祸福很难分辨。
English: The shadow of a snake in a cup, a metaphor for the doubts, fears, and wild suspicions in the human heart; the horse losing its saddle, indicating that it is difficult to distinguish between good and evil.

古文：龙驹凤雏，晋闵鸿夸吴中陆士龙之异；伏龙凤雏，司马徽称孔明庞士元之奇。
现代文：晋闵鸿夸赞吴郡陆云文采之异，说他是龙驹凤雏，龙驹是夸赞陆机的天资颖异，凤雏是称赞庞统的才华高超。
English: Jin Yuhong praised the outstanding talent of Lu Yunwen in Wuxian County, saying that he was a dragon, a phoenix, and a dragonfly. He praised the outstanding talent of Lu Yunwen, and a phoenix and a phoenix praised the outstanding talent of Lu Yunwen.

古文：吕后断戚夫人手足，号曰人彘；胡人腌契丹王尸骸，谓之帝羓。
现代文：吕后斩断戚夫人手足，称她为人彘；胡人将契丹王尸骸腌起来，称为帝羓。
English: Queen Lyu chopped off the limbs of her relative and called her a human skeleton; the Hu people picked up the remains of King Qidan and called it a royal skeleton.

古文：人之狠恶，同于梼杌；人之凶暴，类于穷奇。
现代文：狠毒凶狠的人，就和那传说中的凶兽 梼杌 一样；凶恶残暴的人，就和那传说中的凶兽 穷奇 一样。
English: The cruel and ferocious man is the same as the legendary beast ; the cruel and ferocious man is the same as the legendary beast 穷奇.

古文：王猛见桓温，扪虱而谈当世之务；宁戚遇齐桓，扣角而取卿相之荣。
现代文：王猛隐居倜傥有大志，披褐衣谒桓温，扪虱而谈天下大事；宁戚家贫而有才，扣牛角发悲歌，齐桓公听到后认为是奇才，故有拜为上卿的殊荣。
English: Wang Meng lived in seclusion and had a great ambition. He wore a brown robe and was warm-hearted, and talked about the world's major events. He would rather have a poor family than a talented one, and sang a sad song with a cow's horn. After hearing this, King Qi Huan considered him to be a genius, so he was given the honor of being a nobleman.

古文：楚王轼怒蛙，以昆虫之敢死；丙吉问牛喘，恐阴阳之失时。
现代文：楚王手扶车前横木向发怒的青蛙致敬，是因为它不畏惧死亡；丙吉见到牛喘息而询问，唯恐阴阳失序。
English: Chu Wang hand-raised the front crossbar to salute the angry frog, because it is not afraid of death; Bing Ji asked when he saw the cow panting, lest the yin and yang be out of order.

古文：以十人而制千虎，比言事之难胜；走韩卢而搏蹇兔，喻言敌之易摧。
现代文：用十个人去制伏一千头老虎，比喻事情难以成功；用勇猛的狗去追捕跛了脚的兔子，比喻摧毁敌人极其容易。
English: With ten men to subdue a thousand tigers, metaphorically things are difficult to succeed; with a brave dog to chase a lame rabbit, metaphorically destroying the enemy is extremely easy.

古文：兄弟如鹡鸰之相亲，夫妇如鸾凤之配偶。
现代文：兄弟应像鹡鸰鸟一样相亲，夫妻应像鸾鸟和凤凰一样般配。
English: Brothers should date like ostriches, and husband and wife should match like an ostrich and a phoenix.

古文：有势莫能为，曰虽鞭之长，不及马腹；制小不用大，曰割鸡之小，焉用牛刀。
现代文：有力量却用不上，就说 虽鞭之长，不及马腹 ；处理小事情不必花大力气，就说 割鸡之小，焉用牛刀 。
English: If you have strength, but cannot use it, it is said that although the whip is long, it is not as strong as a horse's belly; if you do not have to spend a lot of energy to deal with small things, it is said that the chicken is too small to be cut with a knife.

古文：鸟食母者曰枭，兽食父者曰獍。
现代文：会吃掉自己的母亲的鸟称作 枭 ，会吃掉自己的父亲的兽称作 獍 。
English: The bird that eats its mother is called a cormorant, and the beast that eats its father is called a partridge.

古文：苛政猛于虎，壮士气如虹。
现代文：繁重的赋税比老虎还要凶狠可怕。壮士的豪气犹如天上的长虹，可以穿日而过。
English: A heavy tax is fiercer and more terrible than a tiger, and the spirit of a strong man is like a rainbow in the sky, which can cross the sun.

古文：腰缠十万贯，骑鹤上扬州，谓仙人而兼富贵；盲人骑瞎马，夜半临深池，是险语之逼人闻。
现代文： 腰缠十万贯，骑鹤上扬州 这是说世人想要富贵又想成仙。 盲人骑瞎马，夜半临深池 这是威胁人家说出的毛骨悚然的险语。
English: Wrapping one hundred thousand kroner around one's waist and riding a crane up to Yangzhou This is saying that the world wants to be rich and wants to become immortal.The blind man rides a blind horse and stands in the middle of the night by a deep pool This is a creepy threat uttered by someone.

古文：黔驴之技，技止此耳；鼯鼠之技，技亦穷乎。
现代文：黔驴的本领看起来很大，其实只有用蹄子踢的技能而已，比喻炫耀拙劣的伎俩而本领却仅此而已。鼯鼠的能力最易穷尽，比喻能耐有限。
English: The donkey's ability looks great, but in fact it is only the skill of kicking with the hoof, metaphorically showing off a poor trick, but the ability is nothing more than that. The mole's ability is the most easily exhausted, metaphorical ability is limited.

古文：强兼并者曰鲸吞，为小贼者曰狗盗。
现代文：恃强兼吞弱者称为 鲸吞 ；偷偷摸摸窃取他人财物叫 狗盗 。
English: A person who is both stubborn and weak is called a "whale swallower"; a person who steals other people's property secretly is called a "dog thief."

古文：养恶人如养虎，当饱其肉，不饱则噬；养恶人如养鹰，饥之则附，饱之则飏。
现代文：重用恶人就像豢养老虎，应当让他把肉吃饱，没吃饱他就会乱咬人；重用坏人就像驯养雄鹰，饿了才会依附于你，喂饱了就会飞走。
English: Repeated use of evil people is like a badger rearing a tiger, he should be allowed to eat his fill of meat, if he does not eat enough he will bite people indiscriminately; repeated use of bad people is like taming an eagle, it will cling to you when it is hungry, and it will fly away when it is full.

古文：随珠弹雀，谓得少而失多；投鼠忌器，恐因甲而害乙。
现代文： 隋珠弹雀 ，譬喻得到的少失去的多； 投鼠忌器 ，比喻担心为了甲而伤害了乙。
English: Suizhu peregrine falcon, for example, the less you get, the more you lose; rodent repellent, for example, the fear of hurting B for the sake of A.

古文：事多曰猬集，利小曰蝇头。
现代文：事情多又不容易处理叫做猬集；财利微薄叫做蝇头。
English: A lot of things that are not easy to deal with are called a lot of things; a small amount of money is called a fly head.

古文：心惑似狐疑，人喜如雀跃。
现代文：遇到事情心里产生犹豫怀疑称作狐疑。欣然色喜叫做雀跃。
English: Hesitation and doubt that arise in the heart when encountering things are called suspicions. Elation and joy are called joy.

古文：爱屋及乌，谓因此而惜彼；轻鸡爱鹜，谓舍此而图他。
现代文： 爱屋及乌 ，比喻爱其人而推及和他有关的一切； 轻鸡爱鹜 ，比喻舍此求彼，舍弃这里而图谋那里。
English: To love a house and its contents is to love one's neighbour and all that pertains to him; to love a chicken and its giblets is to abandon this and seek that, to give up this and seek that.

古文：唆恶为非，曰教猱升木；受恩不报，曰得鱼忘筌。
现代文：教唆他人去做坏事，好比 教猱升木 ；受了人家的恩惠而不知报答，好比 得鱼忘筌 。
English: Encouraging others to do bad things is like teaching a fish to climb a tree; receiving someone else's favor without knowing the reward is like making a fish forget its gills.

古文：倚势害人，真似城狐社鼠；空存无用，何殊陶犬瓦鸡。
现代文：靠着别人的势力为非作歹的人，好像是城社里的狐鼠一样。空有其表而没有任何用处，和陶器做成的狗及用瓦料做成的鸡，有什么区别呢？
English: A person who relies on the power of others to do evil is like a fox in a city. What is the difference between a dog made of pottery and a chicken made of tile?

古文：势弱难敌，谓之螳臂当辙；人生易死，乃曰蜉蝣在世。
现代文：势单力薄难以抵御敌人，如同 螳臂当车 ；人的生命短暂而脆弱，如同 蜉蝣在世 。
English: It is difficult to resist the enemy when one's strength is weak, just like riding a bicycle; human life is short and fragile, just like being alive.

古文：小难制大，如越鸡难伏鹄卵；贱反轻贵，似学鸴鸠反笑大鹏。
现代文：才能小的人难以办成大事，就像越鸡难以孵化天鹅蛋一样，低贱的反而看不起那高贵的，好比鸴鸠嘲笑那大鹏一样。
English: It is difficult for a person with little talent to accomplish great things, just as it is difficult for a chicken to hatch a swan's egg. On the contrary, the lowly look down on the noble, just as the baboon mocks the giant peng.

古文：小人不知君子之心，曰燕雀焉知鸿鹄志；君子不受小人之侮，曰虎豹岂受犬羊欺。
现代文：小人不明白君子的所想，就说 燕雀安知鸿鹄之志 。君子不受小人的欺侮，就说 虎豹岂受犬羊欺 。
English: If the little man does not understand what the gentleman is thinking, he says, "The sparrow knows the ambition of the great eagle." If the gentleman is not bullied by the little man, he says, "Will the tiger and the leopard be bullied by the dog and the sheep?"

古文：跖犬吠尧，吠非其主；鸠居鹊巢，安享其成。缘木求鱼，极言难得；按图索骥，甚言失真。恶人借势，曰如虎负嵎；穷人无归，曰如鱼失水。
现代文：按照千里马的图像，去寻找千里马，这图像画得格外好，世上找不到这样完美的马，比喻食古不化、拘泥成法办事，恐怕要失去真实了。凶恶的人又有势力依靠，就说 如虎负嵎 ，是比喻说恶人依仗权势，别人奈何不得。穷苦的人没有地方可以投奔依靠，就说 如鱼失水 。
English: According to the image of the horse of a thousand li, to find the horse of a thousand li, this image is particularly well drawn, there is no such perfect horse in the world, the metaphor of not becoming old-fashioned, sticking to the law, I am afraid to lose the truth. If the wicked have power to rely on, it is said to be like a tiger burdened with a yoke, it is a metaphor that the wicked rely on power, others can not help it. If the poor have no place to rely on, it is said to be like a fish out of water.

古文：九尾狐，讥陈彭年素性谄而又奸；独眼龙，夸李克用一目眇而有勇。指鹿为马，秦赵高之欺主；叱石成羊，黄初平之得仙。
现代文：陈彭年谄媚奸险，世人讥诮其为 九尾狐 ；李克用骁勇善战，因为瞎了一只眼，世人称他为 独眼龙 。 指鹿为马 ，是说秦朝的赵高欺凌君主； 叱石成羊 ，是说黄初平学到了仙术。
English: Chen Pengnian flirted with treachery, and the world mocked him as a nine-tailed fox; Li Ke fought bravely with a halberd, and because he was blind in one eye, the world called him a one-eyed dragon; to refer to a deer as a horse is to say that Zhao Gao of the Qin Dynasty bullied the monarch; to call a rock a sheep is to say that Huang Chuping learned magic.

古文：卞庄勇能擒两虎，高骈一矢贯双雕。
现代文：卞庄勇猛有力，能手擒两只老虎；高骈善射，曾一箭射中两只大雕。
English: Gaozhuang is brave and powerful, and can catch two tigers with his hands; Gaozhuang is a good archer, and once shot two large eagles with one arrow.

古文：司马懿畏蜀如虎，诸葛亮辅汉如龙。
现代文：司马懿惧怕蜀国就像惧怕猛虎一样，诸葛亮辅佐汉室如同巨龙在天。
English: Sima Yi feared Shu like a fierce tiger, Zhuge Liang assisted Han Sui like a dragon in the sky.

古文：鹪鹩巢林，不过一枝；鼹鼠饮河，不过满腹。
现代文：鹪鹩在森林中筑巢，只要一根树枝就足够了。鼹鼠去河边饮水，只要喝饱肚子就足够了。
English: A branch is enough for a partridge to build its nest in the forest, and a full stomach is enough for a mole to drink water from the river.

古文：人弃甚易，曰孤雏腐鼠；文名共抑，曰起凤腾蛟。
现代文：微不足道易被抛弃的人，如同孤独初生的小鸟或已经腐烂的老鼠一样。一个人在文学上的造诣，为世人所景仰，就好比飞翔的凤凰腾跃的蛟龙，声誉是很好的呀！
English: People who are insignificant and easily discarded are like lonely newborn birds or rotten mice. A person's literary accomplishment, admired by the world, is like a flying phoenix and a leaping dragon, and the reputation is very good!

古文：为公乎，为私乎，惠帝问虾蟆；欲左左，欲右右，汤德及禽兽。
现代文：惠帝询问虾蟆鸣叫是为公还是为私，汤的恩德已经推广到了禽兽。
English: Hui Di asked whether the shrimp chirping was for business or for me. The benefits of soup have been extended to animals.

古文：鱼游于釜中，虽生不久；燕巢于幕上，栖身不安。
现代文：鱼在锅里游水，虽然还活着，但是也活不长久了。燕子的巢筑在军营中的帐幕上，虽然能够栖身，但是却难以安稳的。
English: The fish swims in the pan, still alive, but not for long. The swallow's nest is built on a tent in the military camp. Although it can be sheltered, it is not safe.

古文：妄自称奇，谓之辽东豕；其见甚小，譬如井底蛙。父恶子贤，谓是犁牛之子；父谦子拙，谓是豚犬之儿。
现代文：少见多怪妄自称奇，譬如辽东豕一样。一个人的见识短浅、眼界狭小，如同住在井底的青蛙一样，见到的只有井中的范围，井以外的世界是看不见的。父亲品德低下，儿子却很贤明，称作 犁牛之子 ；父亲谦称儿子笨拙，就说 豚犬之儿 。
English: A person's knowledge is shallow and his field of vision is narrow, just like a frog that lives at the bottom of a well. He can only see the inside of the well and cannot see the world outside of it. A father with low moral character and a son who is very wise is called the son of a snail; a father who humbly calls his son clumsy is called the son of a pig dog.

古文：出人群而独异，如鹤立鸡群；非配偶以相从，如雉求牡匹。
现代文：才华或仪表高出别人一个头，一眼望去特别显眼，好比 鹤立鸡群 ；不是同一类的夫妻却相依相从，好比 雉求牡匹 。
English: The talent or appearance is a head higher than others, and it is particularly conspicuous at a glance, like a flock of birds; couples who are not the same kind but follow each other, like begging for oysters.

古文：天上石麟，夸小儿之迈众；人中骐骥，比君子之超凡。
现代文： 天上石麟 ，是夸赞他人之子品格出众； 人中骐骥 ，是比喻君子才能超凡。
English: "Heavenly stone unicorn" is to praise the outstanding character of the son of others; "great man" is a metaphor for the extraordinary talent of a gentleman.

古文：怡堂燕雀，不知后灾；瓮里醯鸡，安有广见。
现代文： 怡堂燕雀 ，不知道灾难即将来临； 瓮里醯鸡 ，哪能有多大的见识呢？
English: A bird of paradise does not know that a calamity is approaching; a cockerel, how much insight can it have?

古文：马牛襟裾，骂人不识礼仪；沐猴而冠，笑人见不恢宏。
现代文： 马牛襟裾 是用来骂人不懂礼仪； 沐猴而冠 是讥笑他人目光短浅没有气量。
English: Ma Niu Collar Hem is used to scold people who do not understand etiquette; Moo Monkey and Crown is to mock others who are short-sighted and have no stamina.

古文：羊质虎皮，讥其有文无实；守株待兔，言其守拙无能。
现代文： 羊质虎皮 ，是外表装作强硬而内心却十分虚怯； 守株待兔 ，是形容人笨拙无能。
English: Sheepish tiger skin, is the appearance of pretending to be tough but the heart is very cowardly; waiting for the rabbit, is to describe people clumsy and incompetent.

古文：恶人如虎生翼，势必择人而食；志士如鹰在笼，自是凌霄有志。
现代文：帮助坏人作恶就助长了他们的气势，坏人就像长了翅膀的老虎更加张狂。有远大志向的人就像笼中的鹰，他们的志向是振翅飞上云霄。
English: Helping evil-doers to do evil will only strengthen their momentum. Evil-doers are like tigers with wings that grow more furious. People with lofty ambitions are like eagles in a cage. Their ambition is to fly into the sky.

古文：鲋鱼困涸辙，难待西江水，比人之甚窘；蛟龙得云雨，终非池中物，比人大有为。
现代文： 鲋鱼困涸辙，难待西江水 ，比喻人的处境窘迫急待援助； 蛟龙得云雨，终非池中物 ，比喻有才华的人只要得到机会，就能大显身手。
English: The eel is stranded, it is difficult to wait for the water of the West River, metaphorically the plight of the people is in dire need of assistance; the dragon gets the rain, it is not the thing in the pool, metaphorically talented people can show their skills as long as they get the opportunity.

古文：执牛耳，谓人主盟；附骥尾，望人引带。
现代文： 执牛耳 ，是说人居于领导地位； 附骥尾 ，是谦称盼望他人提携荐引。
English: Holding the bull by the ears means that one is in a leadership position; with an appendage, it means that one is modest and hopes that others will cooperate and recommend one.

古文：鸿雁哀鸣，比小民之失所；狡兔三窟，诮贪人之巧营。
现代文：鸿雁哀哀地叫，是悲伤灾民流离失所无处安身。狡猾奸诈的兔子筑有三个巢穴，好比贪心的人巧于钻营，善于为自己图谋利益。
English: The wild goose cries mournfully, it is the grief of the disaster victims who have been displaced and have nowhere to settle down. The cunning and treacherous rabbit has built three nests, just like greedy people are good at drilling camps and are good at seeking profits for themselves.

古文：风马牛势不相及，常山蛇首尾相应。
现代文：因为马走顺风牛走逆风，这是彼此互不侵犯的意思，比喻事物之间毫不相干。
English: Because the horse goes with the wind and the ox goes against the wind, this is the meaning of mutual non-aggression, and the metaphor has nothing to do with things.

古文：百足之虫，死而不僵，以其扶之者众；千岁之龟，死而留甲，因其卜之者灵。
现代文：常山蛇攻击其头部则尾部立刻回应，攻击尾部则头部回应，以此形容头尾相应的事物。百足虫死了之后，还不会僵掉，因为脚多的缘故。活了一千岁的神龟，死亡了之后，也会把龟甲留下来，用它来占卜非常灵验。
English: When a mountain snake attacks its head, the tail immediately responds, and when it attacks the tail, the head responds, which describes the corresponding things of the head and tail. When a centipede dies, it will not freeze, because it has many feet. A thousand-year-old tortoise will also keep the tortoise shell after death, and it is very effective to use it for divination.

古文：大丈夫宁为鸡口，毋为牛后；士君子岂甘雌伏，定要雄飞。
现代文：鸡口虽小却能进食，牛后虽大却专供排泄，故大丈夫宁为鸡口不做牛后。士君子应有大志，岂愿甘心雌伏，一定要奋发有为，时候一到定要雄飞。
English: Although the chicken mouth is small, it can eat, although the cow's rear is large, it is only for excretion, so it is better to be a chicken mouth than a cow's rear. A scholar should have a great ambition, but he should not be willing to be a coward, he must work hard, and when the time comes, he must fly.

古文：毋局促如辕下驹，毋委靡如牛马走。
现代文：不要局促畏缩如同车辕下的马儿。不要萎靡不振，如同牛马一样被人驱使的仆从。
English: Don't cower like a horse under a chariot; don't languish like an ox or a horse driven by a charioteer.

古文：猩猩能言，不离走兽；鹦鹉能言，不离飞鸟。
现代文：猩猩能言，不脱走兽之类属，鹦鹉能言，不离飞禽之本性。
English: If an orangutan can speak, it does not belong to the same genus as a wild animal. If a parrot can speak, it does not belong to the same genus as a bird.

古文：人惟有礼，庶可免相鼠之刺；若徒能言，夫何异禽兽之心。
现代文：人惟有懂得礼仪，才能免遭《诗经》中所言的相鼠这一首诗内的讥刺，如果仅是会讲话，那与禽兽又有什么区别呢？
English: It is only by understanding etiquette that one can be spared the mockery of the "rat" in the "Book of Songs." If one can only speak, what is the difference between him and the beasts?

