古文：籓镇宣武彰义泽潞刘玄佐，滑州匡城人。
现代文：刘玄佐，滑州匡城人。
English: Liu Xuanzuo, a resident of Kuangcheng, Nanzhou.

古文：少倜荡，不自业，为县捕盗，犯法，吏笞辱几死，乃亡命从永平军，稍为牙将。
现代文：少时放荡不羁，不自立业，替县里捕捉盗贼，犯了法，吏人鞭打凌辱他，几乎丧命，于是逃亡投奔永平军，逐渐升为牙将。
English: When he was young, he was wild and unruly, did not work for himself, caught thieves for the county, broke the law, was whipped and humiliated by officials, and almost died, so he fled to the Yongping Army and gradually rose to be a dental officer.

古文：大历中，李灵耀据汴州反，玄佐乘其无备，袭取宋州，有诏以州遂隶其军，节度使李勉即表署刺史。
现代文：大历年中，李灵耀占据汴州叛变，刘玄佐乘其不备，偷袭占领了宋州，朝廷下诏以宋州隶属刘玄佐管辖，节度使李勉上表奏请让刘玄佐代理宋州刺史。
English: In the year of the great calendar, Li Lingyao occupied Bozhou in a mutiny, Liu Xuan Cao took advantage of his unpreparedness and made a surprise attack to occupy Songzhou. The imperial court issued a decree that Songzhou was under the jurisdiction of Liu Xuan Cao. In order to make Li Mian play the leading role, please let Liu Xuan Cao act as the representative of Songzhou.

古文：德宗建中初，进兼御史中丞，充宋、亳、颍节度使。
现代文：德宗建中初年，进而兼任御史中丞，任宋、亳、颍节度使。
English: In the first year of Dezong Jian Middle School, he concurrently served as the Vice-Minister of History, and was appointed as the Song, Zhai, and Zhai Provincial Delegate.

古文：时李纳叛，李洧以徐州归，纳急攻之，诏玄佐援洧，大破纳兵，斩首万馀级，东南饷漕乃通。
现代文：这时李纳反叛，李洧从徐州归顺朝廷，李纳加紧攻打李洧，皇上诏令刘玄佐援助李洧，大破李纳军，斩杀一万余人，东南部的水陆粮道才打通。
English: At this time, Li Na rebelled, Li Shun from Xuzhou surrendered to the imperial court, Li Na stepped up the attack on Li Shun, the emperor ordered Liu Xuanzuo to assist Li Shun, defeated Li Na's army, killed more than 10,000 people, and the water and land grain road in the southeast was opened.

古文：进围濮州，徇濮阳，皆下，再降其守将，遂通濮阳津。
现代文：进而围濮州，攻濮阳，都打下来了，迫使守将投降，从而打通了濮阳津。
English: Furthermore, the siege of Bozhou and the attack on Biyang were both defeated, forcing the defenders to surrender, thus opening up Biyangjin.

古文：迁检校兵部尚书、兼曹濮观察、淄青兗郓招讨使、汴滑都统副使。
现代文：朝廷提升刘玄佐为检校兵部尚书、兼曹濮观察、淄青兖郓招讨使、汴滑都统副使。
English: The imperial court promoted Liu Xuan Cao to the position of inspector of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection of the inspection

古文：李希烈之反，玄佐与李勉、陈少游、哥舒曜联兵屯淮、汝，数困贼。
现代文：李希烈反叛时，刘玄佐与李勉、陈少游、哥舒曜联兵驻于淮汝，多次困扰贼兵。
English: At the time of Li Xilai's rebellion, Liu Xuan Zuo, Li Tsuen, Chen Shaoyou and Guo Shuyou's joint forces were stationed in Huairou, where they repeatedly harassed the bandits.

古文：帝在奉天，垂意关东，乃诏检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：皇帝在奉天，关注关东局势，于是下诏任命刘玄佐为检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事。
English: The emperor was attending to the situation in the Kanto region, so he issued an edict appointing Liu Xuan Zuo as the left-hand man of the inspection of the school and the right-hand man of the inspection of the school.

古文：希烈攻陈州，玄佐救之，希烈走，遂进取汴州。
现代文：李希烈攻打陈州，刘玄佐去救援，李希烈败走，因而攻取了汴州。
English: Li Xili attacked Chenzhou, Liu Xuanzuo went to the rescue, Li Xili was defeated and fled, thus conquering Zhangzhou.

古文：诏加汴宋节度使、陈州诸军行营都统。
现代文：皇帝又下诏给刘玄佐加官任汴宋节度使、陈州诸军行营都统。
English: The emperor also issued an imperial edict to promote Liu Xuanzuo to the post of the Song and Song Dynasty festival envoy, and to unify all the military camps in Chenzhou.

古文：玄佐本名洽，至是赐名以尊宠之。
现代文：刘玄佐本名刘洽，至此，皇帝赐他名玄佐以表示恩宠。
English: Liu Xuanzu's real name was Liu Cai, so the emperor gave him the name Xuanzu to show his favor.

古文：入朝，复兼泾原、四镇、北庭兵马副元帅，检校司徒。
现代文：还朝后，刘玄佐又兼任泾源、四镇、北庭兵马副元帅、检校司徒。
English: After the Ming Dynasty, Liu Xuanzu also served as deputy marshal of soldiers and horses in Shiyuan, Shizhen and Beiting, and inspector of schools.

古文：性豪纵，轻财好厚赏，故下益困。
现代文：刘玄佐性情豪放不羁，轻视钱财而喜欢重赏部下，所以部属日益难于约束。
English: Liu Xuanzuo has a free-wheeling temperament, despises money and likes to reward his subordinates, so his subordinates are increasingly difficult to restrain.

古文：汴自李忠臣以来，士卒骄，不能自还，至玄佐弥甚。
现代文：汴州自李忠臣以来，士卒骄横，不能自拔，到刘玄佐时更加厉害。
English: In Luzhou, since Li Zhongcheng, the soldiers were arrogant and could not extricate themselves, and it was even worse when Liu Xuanza came.

古文：其后杀帅长，大钞劫，狃于利而然也。
现代文：以后杀将帅上司，大肆掠夺抢劫，都是贪财而造成的。
English: Later, he killed his handsome boss, plundered and robbed, all of which were caused by greed.

古文：玄佐贵，母尚在，贤妇人也。
现代文：刘玄佐发迹后，其母还健在，是一个贤慧的妇人。
English: After the birth of Liu Xuanzu, his mother was still alive. She was a wise woman.

古文：常月织絁一端，示不忘本。数教敕玄佐尽臣节。
现代文：常常每月织粗绸两丈，以示不忘贫时劳动本色，多次教育告诫刘玄佐要恪守为臣之道。
English: He often wove coarse silk twice a month to show that he did not forget the nature of labor when he was poor, and repeatedly warned Liu Xuanzuo to abide by the way of being a subject.

古文：见县令走廷中白事，退，戒曰： 长吏恐惧卑甚。吾思而父吏于县，亦当尔。
现代文：母见县令来厅前禀告政事，县令走后，她告诫玄佐说 ：长吏恐惧而十分谦卑，想当年你父亲在县为吏时，也是这个样子，你高倨于上对待下属，心安吗？ 
English: My mother saw the county magistrate come to the hall to announce political affairs. After the county magistrate left, she admonished Xuanzang and said, "The magistrate is afraid and very humble. I think that when your father was a county magistrate, he was also like this. You are too arrogant to treat your subordinates. Are you at ease?"

古文：而据案当之，可安乎？ 玄佐感悟，故待下益加礼。
现代文：刘玄佐受感动醒悟了，所以对待下属更加宽和以礼相待。
English: Liu Xuan Cao was moved and enlightened, so he treated his subordinates more generously and with courtesy.

古文：汴有相国寺，或传佛躯汗流，玄佐自往大施金帛，于是将吏、商贾奔走输金钱，惟恐后。十日，玄佐敕止，籍所入得巨万，因以赡军。其权谲类若此。
现代文：汴州有个相国寺，有人传说佛体流汗，刘玄佐亲自去大量施舍金银布帛，于是将佐、官吏、商民纷纷向相国寺捐赠金钱，惟恐落后，十天以后，玄佐下令停止，没收所得收入数万金，以充军费，其权术诡诈大抵如此。
English: There is a Shogoku-ji Temple in Bozhou. Some people say that the Buddha's body sweats. Liu Xuanzuo personally went to give a large amount of gold and silver cloth, so generals, officials, and merchants donated money to Shogoku-ji Temple, but they were afraid of falling behind. Ten days later, Xuanzuo ordered to stop, confiscating tens of thousands of dollars in income to pay for military expenses, which is usually the case with his power and cunning.

古文：初，李纳遣使至汴，玄佐盛饰女子进之，厚馈遗，皆得其阴谋，故纳最惮之。
现代文：当初，李纳派遣使者到汴州，刘玄佐以盛妆美女进奉，并赠送丰厚礼品，因此全部获悉了李纳的阴谋，所以李纳最怕玄佐。
English: At first, Li Na sent an emissary to Zhangzhou, Liu Xuan Cao sent a beautiful woman with rich make-up, and presented rich gifts. As a result, everyone learned about Li Na's conspiracy, so Li Na was most afraid of Xuan Cao.

古文：所宠吏张士南及假子乐士朝赀皆钜万；而士朝私玄佐嬖妾，惧事觉，■玄佐，死，年五十八，赠太傅，谥曰壮武。
现代文：他宠信的官员张士南及义子乐士朝都是巨富；而乐士朝与玄佐宠妾私通，害怕丑事败露，用毒酒害死了刘玄佐。
English: His favorite official, Zhang Shiminan, and his favorite musician, Tang, were both extremely wealthy; however, the musician, who was having an affair with Xuan Zu's favorite concubine, was afraid that the affair would be exposed, and killed Liu Xuan Zu with poisoned wine.

古文：军中匿丧俟代，帝亦为隐。
现代文：刘玄佐终年五十八岁。皇帝追赠他为太傅，定谥号为壮武。
English: Liu Xuan Zuo died at the age of 58. The emperor posthumously awarded him the title of Taifu, and his posthumous name was Zhuangwu.

古文：逾三日乃发丧。
现代文：玄佐死后，军中隐匿丧情等待定继任人，皇帝也装作不知。
English: After the death of Xuanzang, the military concealed their grief and waited for a successor to be appointed. The emperor also pretended not to know.

古文：使至，帝问所欲立，曰： 陕虢观察使吴氵奏可乎？ 
现代文：过了三天才报丧。使者到京城，皇帝征询想立谁继任，使者答道 ：陕虢观察使吴凑可以吗？ 
English: Three days later, the funeral was announced. The emissary arrived in Beijing, and the emperor asked who he wanted to appoint as his successor. The emissary replied, "Is it okay for Shaanxi Province to observe and make Wu Qian succeed?"

古文：监军孟介、行军卢瑗以为便，乃拜氵奏为节度使。
现代文：监军孟介、行军司马卢瑗认为适当，皇帝于是任命吴凑为节度使。
English: Meng Jie, the supervisor of the army, and Ma Lucheng, the marshal, thought it was appropriate, so the emperor appointed Wu Qian as the festival envoy.

古文：至汜水，玄佐柩将迁，士请具礼，瑗不许，众皆怒。
现代文：吴凑赴任行至汜水，刘玄佐灵柩正要出殡，将士要求按礼仪备仪仗，卢瑗不准。众人愤怒。
English: Wu Zhi went to Renxing to Surabaya, Liu Xenzao's funeral was about to take place, the general requested to prepare a ceremonial battle according to etiquette, but Lu Xun did not allow it. Everyone was angry.

古文：陵晨，甲而噪，起玄佐子士宁于丧，使坐重榻，墨其衣，尊为留后，杀大将曹金岸、浚仪令李迈，醢之，唯瑗、介获免。
现代文：凌晨，将士披甲武装并喧闹起来，簇拥服丧的刘玄佐之子刘士宁，坐上主帅座位，改着黑色丧服，尊之为留后，杀了大将曹金岸、浚仪县令李迈，并剁成肉酱。只有卢瑗、孟介免死。
English: In the early hours of the morning, soldiers clad in armor, armed and noisy, gathered around Liu Xuanzuo's son Liu Shining, who was in mourning. He sat in the captain's seat, changed into black mourning clothes, and after honoring the dead, he killed the general Cao Jinan and the county magistrate Li Mai, and cooked them into meat sauce. Only Lu Wei and Meng Jie were spared death.

古文：士宁乃出贮财分劳吏士。
现代文：刘士宁拿出钱财分赏官吏与将士。
English: Liu Shining took out money to reward officials and soldiers.

古文：介以闻，帝召宰相计议，窦参曰： 汴人挟李纳以邀命，若不许，势且合，不可解。 
现代文：孟介向朝廷报告，皇帝召宰相商议，窦参说： 汴人指靠李纳以请求任命，若不答应，他们势将联合起来而不可分化了。 
English: Meng Jie reported to the imperial court, the emperor summoned the prime minister for discussion, and Dou Zhan said: "The person who is to be appointed depends on Li Na's request. If he does not agree, they will be united and cannot be separated."

古文：遂以士宁为左金吾卫将军，嗣节度。
现代文：皇帝于是任命刘士宁为左金吾卫将军，继任节度使职位。
English: The emperor then appointed Liu Shining as the general of ZuoJingWuWei, succeeding to the post of the regent.

古文：始，玄佐养子士干与士朝皆来京师，士干知玄佐死无状，遣奴持刀绐为吊，入杀士朝于次。
现代文：当初，刘玄佐义子士干与乐士朝都来到京城，士干知道玄佐死得蹊跷，派遣奴仆持刀假称吊唁，进去杀死士朝于灵旁。
English: At first, Liu Xuan Cao's son-in-law, Shikan, came to Beijing with the musicians. Shikan knew that Xuan Cao had died, so he sent a servant with a sword to pretend to be a condolence, and went in to kill Shikan next to the body.

古文：帝恶其专，亦赐士干死。
现代文：皇帝讨厌士干的专擅，也赐令士干自尽。
English: The emperor disliked Shikan's expertise and ordered him to commit suicide.

古文：士宁未授诏时，私遣人结王武俊、刘济、田绪等，诸镇不直之，皆执其使。
现代文：刘士宁在没有被任命前，私下派人去交结王武俊、刘济、田绪等人，诸藩镇认为士宁不正直，都扣留了他的使者。
English: Before Liu Shining was appointed, he privately sent someone to make contact with Wang Wujun, Liu Zi, Tian Xu and others. All the provinces and towns thought that Shining was dishonest and detained his envoy.

古文：而士宁忍暴，尝手杀人杯案间；又强烝父诸妾，逼吏民妻女乱之，或裸而观；每畋猎，数日乃还。其下厌苦不服。
现代文：刘士宁残忍暴虐，曾在宴席上亲手杀人，又逼奸他父亲的姬妾们，还强奸吏民的妻女，或剥光衣服看；每次打猎，都是几天才返回，部属及下人们尽都抱怨困苦，内心不服。
English: Liu Shining was cruel and tyrannical. He once killed people with his own hands at a banquet, and raped his father's concubines. He also raped the wives and daughters of officials, or stripped them naked. Every time he went hunting, he returned only a few days later. His subordinates and subordinates all complained about the hardships, and they were not satisfied.

古文：大将李万荣者，故与玄佐同里相善，宽厚得士心。
现代文：大将李万荣，原与刘玄佐同乡互相友善，为人宽厚得人心。
English: General Li Wan Rong, originally from the same village as Liu Xuan Zuo, was a friendly and generous person who won people's hearts.

古文：士宁忌之，夺其兵，使摄州事。
现代文：刘士宁嫉妒他，剥夺了他的兵权，使他代理汴州政务。
English: Liu Shining envied him, deprived him of military power, and made him the acting governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：尝引众二万畋城南，未还，万荣晨入府，召所留亲兵告曰： 天子有诏召大夫，俾我代节度。
现代文：一次，刘士宁率兵众二万去城南打猎，未归，李万荣早晨进入刘士宁府第，召集留守亲兵，告诉他们说： 天子诏令召见大夫，命我代理节度使。
English: On one occasion, Liu Shining led 20,000 soldiers to go hunting in the south of the city. Before returning, Li Wan Rong entered Liu Shining's residence in the morning, called up his remaining relatives, and told them: "The emperor has ordered me to see a doctor, and ordered me to act as the envoy of the festival.

古文：人赐钱三万。 
现代文：每人赏钱三万。 
English: The reward is up to 30,000 yen per person.

古文：士皆拜。
现代文：兵士们都拜谢。
English: The soldiers all bowed.

古文：于是分兵闭诸门，使告士宁曰： 诏书召大夫，宜速去，不然，事急且传首以献。 
现代文：于是分兵关闭各个城门，派人通告刘士宁说： 天子有诏书召见大夫，须立即上路，不然，速将大夫的头颅传送京城，献给朝廷。 
English: As a result, detachments of soldiers closed all the gates of the city and sent someone to inform Liu Shining, saying: "The Son of Heaven has issued an edict summoning the doctor, you must go on your way immediately, otherwise, quickly send the doctor's head to the capital and present it to the imperial court."

古文：士宁知众不与，将五百骑出奔，次中牟，亡者已半，至东都，惟僮妾数十人从之。
现代文：刘士宁知道众人已不肯听命，便带领五百人骑马出走，至中牟宿营时，逃亡者已一半，到洛阳时，只剩下童仆姬妾数十人跟随。
English: Liu Shining knew that everyone was no longer willing to obey his orders, so he led five hundred people on horseback to flee. By the time they reached Zhongmou camp, half of the fugitives had already fled. By the time they reached Luoyang, only dozens of servants and concubines were left behind.

古文：既至京师，诏就第，禁出入。
现代文：到达京城，皇帝令他回府第，禁止出入。
English: When he arrived in the capital, the emperor ordered him to return to the capital and prohibited him from entering.

古文：万荣斩其支附数十人，以二十万缗劳军，诏籍士宁家赀给之。
现代文：李万荣杀掉了刘士宁的亲信数十人，以钱二十万缗劳军，皇帝诏令没收刘士宁家财供万荣军用。
English: Li Wan Rong killed dozens of Liu Shining's close confidants and used the money to hire 200,000 soldiers. The emperor issued a decree to confiscate Liu Shining's family wealth for use by Wan Rong's army.

古文：拜万荣兵马留后。
现代文：并任命李万荣为兵马留后。
English: and appointed Li Wan Rong as the commander of the troops.

古文：于是藉骄兵数百人，悉遣西防秋，当戍者怨之。
现代文：李万荣没收了骄兵数百人的资财，统统打发他们到京西去保护秋收，担任戍边的这些人产生怨恨。
English: Li Wanrong confiscated the assets of hundreds of proud soldiers and sent them all to the west of Beijing to protect the autumn harvest. These people, who were on the sidelines, caused resentment.

古文：大校韩惟清、张彦琳等请往，不许，使其子乃将，未行，彦琳等因其怨，诱使反攻万荣，不胜，劫运财、民赀，杀掠数千人而溃。
现代文：大校韩惟清、张彦琳等请求前往，李万荣不准，而令自己的儿子李领兵，还未出发，张彦琳等利用这些人的怨恨，诱使他们反攻万荣，未能取胜，就抢劫待运的军需、民财，杀掠数千人后溃散。
English: Senior colonels Han Weiqing, Zhang Yanlin and others requested to go, but Li Wanrong did not allow them, and ordered his son Li to lead the troops. Before they set off, Zhang Yanlin and others took advantage of the resentment of these people and induced them to counterattack Wanrong. When they failed to win, they robbed the military supplies and people's wealth that were ready for transportation, killed and plundered thousands of people, and then dispersed.

古文：惟清奔郑州，彦琳走东都自归，有诏宥死窜恶地。
现代文：韩惟清逃亡郑州，张彦琳逃往东都后又自己回来了，皇帝诏令免死，将其流放边远贫瘠之地。
English: Han Weiqing fled to Zhengzhou, Zhang Yanlin fled to Dongdu and then returned on his own. The emperor decreed that he would not die, and he was exiled to a remote and barren land.

古文：残士奔宋州，刘逸淮抚之，万荣悉诛其妻子，以故众不安，或呼于市曰： 大军至，城且破。 
现代文：残余士卒逃亡至宋州，刘逸淮收编了他们，李万荣全部杀死了这些人的妻儿，因此造成众人惶恐不安。有人在街上大呼 ：大军来了，城要破了。 
English: The remaining soldiers fled to Songzhou, Liu Yihai recruited them, and Li Wanrong killed all of their wives and children, causing panic and anxiety among the people. Some people shouted in the streets: "The army is coming, the city is about to be destroyed."

古文：万荣捕按之，或言为士宁所教，万荣斩之，以状闻，故士宁斥置郴州。
现代文：李万荣将他逮捕审讯，有说这是士宁指使的，李万荣杀了这个人，将情况奏报朝廷，所以士宁被逐放到彬州。
English: Li Wan Rong arrested and interrogated him. It is said that this was ordered by Shining Zhuo. Li Wan Rong killed this man and reported the situation to the imperial court, so Shining was banished to Binzhou.

古文：俄进万荣节度使。
现代文：不久，皇帝提升李万荣为宣武节度使。
English: Soon after, the emperor promoted Li Wanrong to the post of Xuanwu Jiedu envoy.

古文：会病甚，以兵属邓惟恭。惟恭者，与万荣同里闬。
现代文：适逢李万荣病重，将兵权托付给邓惟恭，惟恭与万荣是同乡。
English: When Li Wanrong fell seriously ill, he entrusted military power to Deng Weigong, who was a fellow villager of Wanrong.

古文：而署子乃为司马，出大将李湛、张伾、伊娄涚等于外，欲杀之，不果。
现代文：万荣使其子代理司马，排斥大将李湛、张亻不、伊娄氵兑于外县，打算杀掉他们，但没办成。
English: Wan Rong had his son, acting Sima, expel the generals Li Zhan, Zhang Xunfei, and Yi Xuanfei from the county, intending to kill them, but it did not work out.

古文：万荣死，是夜惟恭与监军俱文珍执乃送京师，杖死京兆府，以董晋代之。
现代文：李万荣死，当夜，邓惟恭与监军俱文珍抓住李押送京城，在京兆府受杖刑而死，皇帝以董晋为宣武节度使。
English: Li Wan Rong died. That night, Deng Weigong and the military overseer, Qu Wenzhen, seized Li and escorted him to Beijing, where he was caned to death in Jingzhao Prefecture. The emperor appointed Dong Jin as the envoy for the Xuanwu Festival.

