古文：真宗末年属疾，每视朝不多语言，命令间或不能周审，前辈杂传记多以为权臣矫制，而非也。
现代文：真宗末年接连有病，每逢上朝不多说话，所下命令间或不能周密，前辈人的笔记杂传多认为是专权大臣假传圣旨，其实不是。
English: In the last years of the Shingon sect, there was a succession of illnesses. Whenever the last emperor did not speak much, the orders he gave may not be thorough. The notes of the predecessors are mostly considered to be the dictatorial minister's false will, but in fact they are not.

古文：钱文僖在翰林，有天禧四年《笔录》，纪逐日琐细家事，及一时奏对，并他所闻之语，今略载于此。
现代文：钱惟僖在翰林院学士任上，有天禧四年《笔录》一部，按日记载琐碎细小的家事和奏答皇上的话，还有他听到的话，现大概记一些在这里。
English: When Qian Weiqi was appointed as a bachelor of Hanlin Academy, there was a part of the "Record" in the fourth year of the Jubilee Year, which recorded the trivial and small household chores and the words of the emperor on a daily basis, as well as the words he heard, and now he probably remembers some of them here.

古文：寇莱公罢相之夕，钱公当制，上问： 与何官得？ 
现代文：寇准罢相那天晚上钱公值班起草制书。皇上问： 给寇准代么官合适？ 
English: On the night of the coup, Qian Gong was on duty drafting a document. The emperor asked: Is it appropriate to give the coup a deputy?

古文：钱奏云： 王钦若近出，除太子太保。 
现代文：钱回答说： 王钦若最近罢相出去，授与太子太保。 
English: Qian replied: If Wang Qin had recently retired, he would have been awarded the title of crown prince.

古文：上曰： 近上是甚？ 云： 太子太傅。 
现代文：皇上说： 再高点儿是什么 回说； 太子太傅。 
English: The emperor said, "What's the highest point?" The reply was, "The crown prince."

古文：上曰： 与太子太傅。 
现代文：皇上说： 给寇准太子太傅。 
English: The emperor said, "Give Kojun the title of crown prince.

古文：又云： 更与一优礼。 
现代文：又说： 再给一什么良好的待遇。 
English: He also said: "Give me some more good treatment."

古文：钱奏但请封国公而已。
现代文：钱回奏只请封他国公而已。
English: Qian Huoqiao only invited the Duke of another country.

古文：时枢密有五员，而中书只参政李迪一人，后月余，召学士杨大年，宣云： 冯拯与吏书，李迪与吏侍。 
现代文：当时枢密院有五个官员，而中书只有参政李迪一人，一个多月后，真宗召翰林学士杨大年，命令说： 冯拯与他吏部尚书，李迪给他吏部侍郎。 
English: At that time, there were five officials in the Privy Council, and only the politician Li Di was the only one in the middle. More than a month later, Zhen Zong summoned the scholar of Hanlin, Yang Datian, and ordered: Feng Zheng and his officials should write, and Li Di should give him a clerk.

古文：更无他言。
现代文：也没说别的话。
English: He didn't say anything else.

古文：杨奏： 若只转官，合中书命词，唯枢密使、平章事，却学士院降制。 
现代文：杨回奏说： 如果只升官，应当是中书省起草制书，枢声使、平章事的任命，才需要翰林学士院下达圣旨。 
English: Yang Huisuo said: If it is only a promotion, it should be the Chinese Ministry of Education that drafts the book, the appointment of the keynote speaker and the signing of the contract, and it is only necessary for the Hanlin Academy to issue the will.

古文：上云： 与枢密使、平章事。 
现代文：皇上说： 给他枢密使、平章事。 
English: The emperor said, "Give him the Privy Envoy and the Taira no Shoji."

古文：杨亦忧虑，而不复审，退而草制，以迪为吏部侍郎、集贤相，拯为枢密相。
现代文：杨对皇上的御旨十分忧虑。皇上也不再审查，他只好退下来起草制书，任李迪为吏部侍郎兼集贤相，冯拯为枢密相。
English: Yang was very worried about the emperor's will. The emperor would no longer review it, so he had no choice but to step down and draft a document, appointing Li Di as the secretary of the personnel department and the minister of collecting talents, and Feng Zheng as the minister of the privy council.

古文：又四日，召知制诰晏殊，殊退，乃召钱。
现代文：又过了四天，皇上召见知制诰晏殊，晏殊退下来，才召见钱。
English: After another four days, the emperor summoned Chisei Shinshu, and Shinshu withdrew before summoning Qian.

古文：上问： 冯拯如何商量？ 
现代文：皇上问： 冯拯的事怎么商量的？ 
English: The emperor asked: How did you discuss the matter of Feng Zheng?

古文：钱奏： 外论甚美，只为密院却有三员正使，三员副使，中书依旧一员，以此外人疑讶。 
现代文：钱回说： 外面议论很好。只因为枢密院竟有三员正使，三员副使，中书依旧只有一员，因此外面的人感到怀疑惊讶。 
English: Qian replied, "The discussion outside is very good. It is only because the Privy Council actually has three principal envoys, three deputy envoys, and only one secretary, that people outside are surprised and suspicious.

古文：上云： 如何安排？ 
现代文：皇上说： 那怎么安排？ 
English: The emperor said, "How can that be arranged?"

古文：钱奏： 若却令拯入中书，即是彰昨来错误，但于曹利用、丁谓中选一人过中书，即并不妨事。 
现代文：钱回奏说： 如再叫冯拯入中书，就是明显表示原来错了。只在曹利用、丁谓两人中选一个过中书去，却不妨事。 
English: Qian Huixiao said: If you call Feng Zheng into the middle book again, it is a clear indication that the original is wrong. Only Cao Lian and Ding Zuo can choose one of the two to go to the middle book, but it does not matter.

古文：上曰： 谁得？ 
现代文：皇上说： 谁可以？ 
English: The emperor said, "Who can play?"

古文：钱奏： 丁谓是文官，合入中书。 
现代文：钱回奏说： 丁谓是文官，应进入中书。 
English: Qian Huixiao said: Ding Zuo is a civil servant, he should enter the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：上云： 入中书。 
现代文：皇上说； 入中书。 
English: The emperor said, "Enter the middle school."

古文：遂奏授同平章事。又奏兼玉清宫使，又奏兼昭文国史。
现代文：钱就奏说应授同平章事，又奏说应兼玉清宫使，又奏兼昭文国史。
English: Qian made a report that he should be awarded the title of Tongping, and also made a report that he should also be an envoy to the Jade Emperor's palace, and also made a report on the history of Shouwen.

古文：又乞加曹利用平章事。
现代文：又请求加曹利用平章事。
English: He also requested that Cao take advantage of the situation.

古文：上云： 与平章事。 
现代文：皇上说： 给平章事。 
English: The emperor said, "Give Taira the order."

古文：按此际大除拜，本真宗启其端，至于移改曲折，则其柄乃系词臣，可以舞文容奸，不之觉也。
现代文：按，这时的大授职、大拜相，本是真宗开的头，至于更改变动的曲折过程，则权柄在词臣手里，他们可以舞文弄奸，皇上和一般人都不会察觉的。
English: According to the records, at that time, the grand conferment of posts and the appointment of ministers were originally the responsibility of Emperor Zhenzong, but as for the tortuous process of change, the power was in the hands of the courtiers. They could play tricks on the emperor and the general public without anyone noticing.

古文：寇公免相四十日，周怀政之事方作，温公《纪闻》，苏子由《龙川志》、范蜀公《东斋记事》，皆误以为因怀政而罢，非也。
现代文：寇准罢相四十天后，周怀政事件才发生。温国公司马无的《深水记闻》，苏子由的《龙川志》、范蜀公的《东斋记事》都误以为寇准因周怀政的事情被罢相，是错误的。
English: The Zhou Huai Zheng Incident did not occur until forty days after Kuo Jun was ousted from his post. "Shenshui Jiwen" by Ma Wu of Wenguo Company, "Longchuan Zhi" by Su Ziyu, and "Tongzhai Ji Ji Ji" by Fan Shukong all mistakenly believed that Kuo Jun was ousted from his post because of the Zhou Huai Zheng Incident, which was wrong.

古文：予尝以钱《录》示李焘，焘采取之，又误以召晏公为寇罢之夕，亦非也。
现代文：我曾把钱帷演的《笔录》给李寿看，他在编《续资治通鉴长编》时采用了，却又误以为皇上召晏公那天为寇准罢相之日，也是不对的。
English: I once showed Li Shou's "Record" of Qianqian's performance to Li Shou, who used it when compiling the "Renewal of Capital and Governance Guide," but he mistakenly thought that the day the emperor summoned Zheng Gong was the day of Qian Jun's strike, which is also wrong.

