古文：陈仲举言为士则，行为世范，登车揽辔，有澄清天下之志。
现代文：陈仲举的言论和行为是读书人的榜样，是世人的模范。他初次做官，就有整治社会弊端，匡正天下的志向。
English: Chen Zhongji's words and deeds are a role model for readers and a model for the world. When he first became an official, he had the ambition to rectify social ills and rectify the world.

古文：为豫章太守，至，便问徐孺子所在，欲先看之。
现代文：担任豫章太守时，刚刚赴任，就打听徐孺子的住处，想先去拜访他。
English: When he assumed the post of Yuzhang Taishou, he inquired about Xu Yanzi's place of residence as soon as he took office, and wanted to visit him first.

古文：主簿白： 群情欲府君先入廨。 
现代文：主簿禀报说： 大家的意思是希望府君先进官署视事。 
English: The official gazette said: What we mean is that we hope the prefect will be the first to inspect the situation.

古文：陈曰： 武王式商容之闾，席不暇暖。
现代文：陈仲举说： 当年周武王刚攻下朝歌去商容的住所拜见商容，席子没来得及坐暖。
English: Chen Zhongju said: That year, Zhou Wu Wang had just captured the morning song and went to Shang Rong's residence to visit Shang Rong. The mat did not have time to warm up.

古文：吾之礼贤，有何不可！ 
现代文：我去拜访贤人，有什么不可以！ 
English: I'm going to visit a sage, what's wrong with that!

古文：周子居常云： 吾时月不见黄叔度，则鄙吝之心已复生矣。 
现代文：周子居常说： 我过一段时间见不到黄叔度，庸俗贪婪的思想就会又滋长起来！ 
English: Zhou Zi Ju often said: If I don't see Huang Shudu for a while, my vulgar and greedy thoughts will grow again!

古文：郭林宗至汝南造袁奉高，车不停轨，鸾不辍轭。诣黄叔度，乃弥日信宿。
现代文：郭林宗到了汝南郡，去拜访袁奉高，见了一会儿就走了；去拜访黄叔度，却留宿了两晚。
English: Guo Linzong went to Runan County to visit Yuan Bonggao, saw him for a while and left; to visit Huang Shudu, but stayed for two nights.

古文：人问其故？林宗曰： 叔度汪汪如万顷之陂。澄之不清，扰之不浊，其器深广，难测量也。 
现代文：别人问他什么原因，他说： 叔度好比万顷的湖泊那样宽阔、深邃，澄不清，也搅不浑，他的气量深邃宽广，是很难测量的呀！ 
English: When others asked him why, he said: Tjude is like a thousand-hectare lake that is broad, deep, clear, and cannot be muddled. His qi is deep and wide, and it is difficult to measure!

古文：李元礼风格秀整，高自标持，欲以天下名教是非为己任。
现代文：李元礼风度出众，品性端庄，自视甚高，他要把在全国推行儒家礼教、辨明是非看成自己的责任。
English: Li Yuanli has a distinguished demeanor, a dignified character, and a very high self-esteem. He should regard it as his responsibility to promote Confucian etiquette and distinguish right from wrong throughout the country.

古文：后进之士，有升其堂者，皆以为登龙门。
现代文：后辈读书人有能得到他教诲的，都自以为登上了龙门。
English: Younger generations of readers who were able to receive his teachings thought they had entered the dragon's gate.

古文：李元礼尝叹荀淑、钟皓曰： 荀君清识难尚，钟君至德可师。 
现代文：李元礼曾经赞叹荀淑和钟皓两人说： 荀君识见高明，人们很难超过他；钟君有最美好的德行，却是可以学习的。 
English: Li Yuanli once praised Gongshu and Zhongyao, saying: "Zhong Jun is very clever, it is difficult for people to surpass him; Zhong Jun has the most beautiful virtue, but it can be learned.

古文：陈太丘诣荀朗陵，贫俭无仆役。乃使元方将车，季方持杖后从。
现代文：太丘县县长陈寔去拜访朗陵侯相荀淑，因为家贫、俭朴，没有仆役侍候，就让长子元方驾车送他，少子季方拿着手杖跟在车后。
English: Chen Yu, the head of Taiqiu County, went to visit Langling Hou Xiang Yu Shu, because the family was poor, frugal, and there was no servant to wait on, he let the eldest son, Yuan Fang, drive him, and the younger son, Ji Fang, followed behind the car with a cane.

古文：长文尚小，载箸车中。
现代文：孙子长文年纪还小，就坐在车上。
English: My grandson Nagafumi, who is still young, is sitting in the car.

古文：既至，荀使叔慈应门，慈明行酒，余六龙下食。
现代文：到了荀家，荀淑让叔慈迎接客人，让慈明劝酒，其馀六个儿子管上菜。
English: When they arrived at Yan's house, Yan Shu let Uncle Ci welcome the guests, let Ciming persuade them to drink, and let the other six sons serve the dishes.

古文：文若亦小，坐箸膝前。
现代文：孙子文若也还小，就坐在荀淑膝上。
English: If Sun Ziwen is still small, he will sit on her lap.

古文：于时太史奏： 真人东行。 
现代文：这时候太史启奏朝廷说： 有真人往东去了。 
English: At this time, Emperor Taishi sent a message to the imperial court saying, "A real person has gone to the East."

古文：客有问陈季方： 足下家君太丘，有何功德，而荷天下重名？ 
现代文：有一位客人问陈季方： 令尊陈太丘有哪些功勋和品德，能够享有全天下这么高的声望？ 
English: A guest asked Chen Qifang: What are the merits and virtues of your father Chen Taiqiu that he can enjoy such a high reputation all over the world?

古文：季方曰： 吾家君譬如桂树生泰山之阿，上有万仞之高，下有不测之深；上为甘露所沾，下为渊泉所润。
现代文：季方说： 我父亲好比泰山上的桂树。上有万丈高峰，下有深不可测的深渊；上受雨露的浇灌，下受深泉的滋润。
English: Kifang said, "My father is like the cinnamon tree on Mount Tai, with lofty peaks above and unfathomable abysses below; watered by rain and dew above and moisturized by deep springs below.

古文：当斯之时，桂树焉知泰山之高，渊泉之深，不知有功德与无也！ 
现代文：在这种情况下，桂树怎么知道泰山有多高，泉水有多深呢！实在说不清有什么功德啊！ 
English: Under these circumstances, how does Guizhu know how high Mount Tai is and how deep the spring water is? It's really hard to say what merit he has!

古文：陈元方子长文有英才，与季方子孝先，各论其父功德，争之不能决，咨于太丘。
现代文：陈元方的儿子陈长文，才能杰出，他和陈季方的儿子陈孝先各自论述自己父亲的事业和品德，两人争执不下，便去问祖父太丘长陈寔。
English: Chen Changwen, the son of Chen Yuanfang, was an outstanding talent. He and Chen Xiaofeng, the son of Chen Jifang, first discussed their father's career and character. The two couldn't help arguing, so they went to ask their grandfather, Taiyuchang Chen Qi.

古文：太丘曰： 元方难为兄，季方难为弟。 
现代文：陈寔说： 元方很难当哥哥，季方也很难当弟弟。 
English: Chen Yao said: It is difficult for the former side to be an older brother, and it is difficult for the latter side to be a younger brother.

古文：荀巨伯远看友人疾，值胡贼攻郡，友人语巨伯曰： 吾今死矣，子可去！ 
现代文：荀巨伯去探望远方生病的朋友，正好碰上外族敌军攻打郡城，朋友对巨伯说： 我已经时日无多了，你还是赶快离开吧！ 
English: Zou Jubei went to visit a friend who was ill in the distance, and just happened to meet a foreign enemy army attacking the county seat. The friend said to Zou Jubei: I'm running out of time, you'd better leave quickly!

古文：巨伯曰： 远来相视，子令吾去；败义以求生，岂荀巨伯所行邪？ 
现代文：巨伯说： 我不远万里来看你，你却叫我走；损害道义而苟活世间，这怎能是我荀巨伯做的事！ 
English: The giant said: I have not come thousands of miles to see you, but you have asked me to go; how can I do this to the giant, to live in the world in violation of morality!

古文：贼既至，谓巨伯曰： 大军至，一郡尽空，汝何男子，而敢独止？ 
现代文：敌军进了郡城，问荀巨： 大军到了，全城的人都跑光了，你是谁，竟敢一个人留下来？ 
English: The enemy army entered the county seat and asked Zou Jiu: The great army has arrived, the entire city has fled, who are you, how dare you stay alone?

古文：巨伯曰： 友人有疾，不忍委之，宁以我身代友人命。 
现代文：荀巨说： 我的朋友得了重病，我不忍心让他独自留在这里，宁愿我自己代朋友去死。 
English: Zou Jiu said, "My friend is seriously ill. I can't bear to let him stay here alone. I would rather die for my friend."

古文：贼相谓曰： 我辈无义之人，而入有义之国！ 
现代文：敌军听了互相议论说： 我们这些不讲道义的人，却侵入有道义的地方！ 
English: The enemy troops listened to each other and said: "We, who do not preach morality, are invading a place where there is morality!"

古文：遂班军而还，一郡并获全。
现代文：于是就把军队撤回去了，全城也因此得以保全。
English: So he withdrew his army, and the whole city was saved.

古文：华歆遇子弟甚整，虽闲室之内，严若朝典。
现代文：华歆对待子弟很严肃，即使是在家里，也严肃得像在朝廷上参加典礼。
English: Hua Jun treated his son very seriously. Even at home, he was as serious as if he was attending a ceremony at the imperial court.

古文：陈元方兄弟恣柔爱之道，而二门之里，不失雍熙之轨焉。
现代文：陈元方兄弟却是尽量实行和睦友爱的办法。但是两家都没有失掉和睦安乐的治家准则。
English: The Chen Yuanfang brothers, on the other hand, try to practice harmony and friendship as much as possible. However, both families have not lost the family management principle of harmony and happiness.

古文：管宁、华歆共园中锄菜，见地有片金，管挥锄与瓦石不异，华捉而掷去之。
现代文：管宁和华歆一同在菜园里种菜，看见地上有一块金，管宁不理会，继续举锄锄去，跟锄掉瓦块石头一样，华歆则把金捡起来再扔出去。
English: Guan Ning and Hua Wei were growing vegetables in the garden together. When they saw a piece of gold on the ground, Guan Ning ignored it and continued to pick it up. Just like picking up a stone, Hua Wei picked up the gold and threw it away.

古文：又尝同席读书，有乘轩冕过门者，宁读如故，歆废书出看。
现代文：还有一次，两人同坐在一张坐席上读书，有达官贵人坐车从门口经过，管宁照旧读书，华歆却放下书本跑出去看。
English: On another occasion, the two of them were sitting together on a bench, reading. A high-ranking dignitary passed by in a car. Guan Ning continued to read, but Hua Wei put down her book and ran out to read.

古文：宁割席分坐曰： 子非吾友也。 
现代文：管宁就割裂坐席说道： 你不是我的朋友。 
English: Guanning split the table and said: "You're not my friend.

古文：王朗每以识度推华歆。
现代文：王朗常常推崇华歆的识见和气度。
English: Wang Lang often praised Hua Jun's insight and grace.

古文：歆蜡日，尝集子侄燕饮，王亦学之。
现代文：华歆曾经在蜡祭那天把子侄聚到一起宴饮，王朗也学他的做法。
English: Hua Wei once gathered his sons and nephews together for a banquet on the day of the wax festival, and Wang Lang also learned from him.

古文：有人向张华说此事，张曰： 王之学华，皆是形骸之外，去之所以更远。 
现代文：有人向张华说到这事，张华说： 王朗学华歆，学的都是表面，所以距离华歆越来越远。 
English: Someone mentioned this to Zhang Hua. Zhang Hua said, "Wang Lang is learning from Hua Wei. He is only learning on the surface, so he is getting further and further away from Hua Wei."

古文：华歆、王朗俱乘船避难，有一人欲依附，歆辄难之。
现代文：华歆和王朗一同乘船避难，有一个人想搭他们的船，华歆感到为难。
English: Hua Yu and Wang Lang took refuge together on a boat. One person wanted to take their boat, and Hua Yu felt embarrassed.

古文：朗曰： 幸尚宽，何为不可？ 
现代文：王朗说： 好在船还宽，为什么不行呢？ 
English: Wang Lang said: Even though the boat is still wide, why not?

古文：后贼追至，王欲舍所携人。
现代文：后来强盗追来了，王朗就想甩掉那个搭船人。
English: Later, the robber chased him, and Wang Lang wanted to get rid of the boatman.

古文：歆曰： 本所以疑，正为此耳。
现代文：华歆说： 我当初犹豫，就是考虑到这种情况。
English: Hua Wei said: I hesitated at first, considering the situation.

古文：既已纳其自托，宁可以急相弃邪？ 
现代文：已经答应了他的请求，怎么可以因为情况紧迫就抛弃他呢！ 
English: Having granted his request, how can you abandon him because of the urgency of the situation!

古文：遂携拯如初。
现代文：于是仍旧带着并帮助这个人。
English: So I continued to carry and help this man.

古文：世以此定华、王之优劣。
现代文：世人便根据这件事来判定华歆和王朗的优劣。
English: The world then judged the merits and demerits of Hua Jun and Wang Lang based on this incident.

古文：王祥事后母朱夫人甚谨，家有一李树，结子殊好，母恒使守之。
现代文：王祥侍奉继母朱夫人非常小心。他家有一棵李树，结的李子特别好，继母常常让他去看管着。
English: Wang Xiang is very careful to serve his stepmother, Mrs. Zhu. His family has a plum tree that produces particularly good plums, and his stepmother often lets him look after it.

古文：时风雨忽至，祥抱树而泣。
现代文：有时风雨忽然来临，王祥就抱着树哭泣。
English: Sometimes, when the wind and rain come suddenly, Wang Xiang will hold the tree and cry.

古文：祥尝在别床眠，母自往闇斫之。值祥私起，空斫得被。
现代文：有一次，王祥在另一张床上睡觉，继母暗暗走过去想拿刀砍他；正好碰上王祥起夜出去了，只砍着空被子。
English: Once, when Wang Xiang was sleeping in the other bed, his stepmother secretly went over to him to take a knife to cut him; just in time, Wang Xiang got up and went out at night, only cutting the empty quilt.

古文：既还，知母憾之不已，因跪前请死。
现代文：王祥回来后，知道继母为这事遗憾不止，便跪在后母面前请求处死自己。
English: After Wang Xiang came back, he knew that his stepmother was very sorry about this, so he knelt in front of his stepmother and asked to be executed.

古文：母于是感悟，爱之如己子。
现代文：继母因此受到感动而醒悟过来，从此就像爱自己亲生儿子那样爱他。
English: The stepmother was so moved by this that she came to her senses and has since loved him like her own son.

古文：晋文王称阮嗣宗至慎，每与之言，言皆玄远，未尝臧否人物。
现代文：晋文王司马昭称赞阮嗣宗为人谨慎，每逢和他谈话，他的言辞都很奥妙深远，从不评论人物的短长。
English: Sima Zhao, the king of Jinwen, praised Nguyn Trc Trn as a prudent person. Whenever he talked to him, his words were profound and profound, and he never commented on the shortcomings of the person.

古文：王戎云： 与嵇康居二十年，未尝见其喜愠之色。 
现代文：王戎说： 我和嵇康相处二十年，从来没有看到他有高兴或者发怒的表情。 
English: Wang Rong said, "I have been with Hao Kang for twenty years, and I have never seen him with a happy or angry expression.

古文：王戎、和峤同时遭大丧，俱以孝称。
现代文：王戎和和峤同时丧母，都因为尽孝得到赞扬。
English: Both Wang Rong and He Yao, who lost their mothers at the same time, were praised for their filial piety.

古文：王鸡骨支床，和哭泣备礼。
现代文：王戎骨瘦如柴，和峤哀痛哭泣，礼仪周到。
English: Wang Rong is as thin as wood, weeping with grief, and his etiquette is thoughtful.

古文：武帝谓刘仲雄曰： 卿数省王、和不？
现代文：晋武帝对刘仲雄说道： 你经常去探望王戎、和峤吗？
English: Emperor Jinwu said to Liu Zhongxiong, "Do you often visit Wang Rong and He Yao?

古文：闻和哀苦过礼，使人忧之。 
现代文：听说和峤过于悲痛，超出了礼法常规，真令人担忧。 
English: It is worrying to hear that he and his wife are too grief-stricken and go beyond the rules of etiquette.

古文：仲雄曰： 和峤虽备礼，神气不损；王戎虽不备礼，而哀毁骨立。
现代文：仲雄说： 和峤虽然礼仪周到，精神状态没有受到损伤；王戎虽然礼仪不周，可是伤心过度，伤了身体，骨瘦如柴。
English: Zhongxiong said, "Although the etiquette of Wang Rong was not well thought out, his mental state was not damaged; although the etiquette was not well thought out, Wang Rong was too sad, his body was injured, and his bones were as thin as wood.

古文：臣以和峤生孝，王戎死孝。
现代文：臣认为和峤是生孝，王戎是死孝。
English: The vassal thought that He Ying was a filial son, while Wang Rong was a filial son.

古文：陛下不应忧峤，而应忧戎。 
现代文：陛下不应为和峤担扰，而应该为王戎担忧。 
English: Your Majesty should not be worried about He He, but should be worried about Wang Rong.

古文：梁王、赵王，国之近属，贵重当时。
现代文：梁王和赵王是皇帝的近亲，贵极一时。
English: King Liang and King Zhao were the emperor's close relatives, and they were extremely valuable.

古文：裴令公岁请二国租钱数百万，以恤中表之贫者。
现代文：中书令裴楷请求他们两个封国每年拨出赋税钱几百万来周济皇亲国戚中那些贫穷的人。
English: In the imperial edict, Pei Kai asked the two feudal states to allocate millions of tax money every year to help the poor among the emperor's relatives.

古文：或讥之曰： 何以乞物行惠？ 
现代文：有人指责他说： 为什么向人讨钱来做好事？ 
English: He was accused of saying: "Why ask people for money to do good?

古文：裴曰： 损有余，补不足，天之道也。 
现代文：裴楷说： 破费有馀的来补助欠缺的，这是天理。 
English: Pei Kai said: It is the law of nature to spend the surplus to supplement the deficit.

古文：王戎云： 太保居在正始中，不在能言之流。
现代文：王戎说： 太保处在正始年代，不属于擅长清谈的那一类人。
English: Wang Rong said: Taibo was in the prime of his life and did not belong to the category of people who were good at talking.

古文：及与之言，理中清远，将无以德掩其言！ 
现代文：等到和他谈论起来，原来义理清新深远。他不以能言见称，恐怕是崇高的德行掩盖了他的善谈吧！ 
English: When I started to talk with him, I found that his doctrines were clear, new and far-reaching. He is not known for his eloquence, but I'm afraid that his lofty virtue overshadowed his good talk!

古文：王安丰遭艰，至性过人。
现代文：安丰侯王濬冲在服丧期间，哀毁之情超过一般人。
English: During the period of mourning, Wang Yuchong, Prince of Anfeng, was more grief-stricken than the average person.

古文：裴令往吊之，曰： 若使一恸果能伤人，浚冲必不免灭性之讥。 
现代文：中书令裴楷去吊唁后，说道： 如果一次极度的悲哀真能伤害人的身体，那么濬冲一定免不了会被指责为不要命。 
English: After ordering Pei Kai to offer condolences, he said: If an extreme sorrow can really hurt a person's body, then Haochong will inevitably be accused of not wanting to die.

古文：王戎父浑，有令名，官至凉州刺史。
现代文：王戎的父亲王浑，很有名望，官职做到凉州刺史。
English: Wang Rong's father, Wang Hun, was very famous, and his official position made him the history of Liangzhou.

古文：浑薨，所历九郡义故，怀其德惠，相率致赙数百万，戎悉不受。
现代文：王浑去世后，他在各州郡做官时的随从和旧部下，怀念他的恩惠，一共凑了几百万钱送给王戎做丧葬费，王戎一概不接受。
English: After Wang Hun's death, his entourage and old subordinates from his time as an official in various states and counties, remembering his kindness, collected a total of several million money to send to Wang Rong for funeral expenses. Wang Rong did not accept it at all.

古文：刘道真尝为徒，扶风王骏以五百疋布赎之，既而用为从事中郎。
现代文：刘道真原来是个罚服劳役的罪犯，扶风王司马骏用五百匹布来替他赎罪；不久又任用他做从事中郎。
English: Liu Daozhen was originally a convict sentenced to forced labor, and Fu Feng Wang Simatang used five hundred horses of cloth to atone for his sins; he was soon appointed to be a middle-ranking official.

古文：当时以为美事。
现代文：当时人们都认为这是值得称颂的事。
English: At the time it was seen as a laudable thing to do.

古文：王平子、胡毋彦国诸人，皆以任放为达，或有裸体者。
现代文：王平子、胡毋彦国等人都把放荡不羁当作旷达，有时候有的人甚至还赤裸身体。
English: Wang Ping Zi, Hu Yaobang Guo and others all regard debauchery as extravagance, and sometimes some people are even naked.

古文：乐广笑曰： 名教中自有乐地，何为乃尔也！ 
现代文：乐广笑着说： 名教中自有令人快意的境地，为什么偏要这样做呢！ 
English: Le Guang said with a smile: There is a pleasant situation in Meikyo, why do you want to do this!

古文：郗公值永嘉丧乱，在乡里甚穷馁。
现代文：郗鉴遭遇永嘉之乱的时候，避居乡下，非常穷困，甚至吃不饱，常常挨饿。
English: During the Yongjia Disturbance, Gongjian fled to the countryside. He was very poor and often went hungry.

古文：乡人以公名德，传共饴之。
现代文：乡里人尊敬郗公的名望德行，就轮流给他提供食物。
English: The villagers respect the reputation and virtue of the eunuch, so they take turns to provide him with food.

古文：公常携兄子迈及外生周翼二小儿往食。
现代文：郗公常常带着侄子郗迈和外甥周翼一起去吃饭。
English: Yu Gong often takes his nephew Yu Mai and his nephew Zhou Ying to eat together.

古文：乡人曰： 各自饥困，以君之贤，欲共济君耳，恐不能兼有所存。 
现代文：乡里人叹道：大家都饥饿困乏，因为您的贤德，所以我们才想着一起帮助您，如果再加上两个孩子，恐怕就不能一同养活了。 
English: The villagers lamented: "Everyone is hungry and weary. It is because of your virtue that we want to help you together. If you add two children, I am afraid we will not be able to feed them together."

古文：公于是独往食，辄含饭著两颊边，还吐与二儿。
现代文：从此郗公就一个人去吃饭，把饭含在两颊旁，回来后吐给俩孩子吃。
English: From then on, Zeng Gong would go out to eat alone, hold the meal next to his cheeks, and then spit it out for the two children to eat.

古文：后并得存，同过江。
现代文：后来，这两个孩子都活了下来，一同渡江南下。
English: Later, the two children survived and went south across the river together.

古文：郗公亡，翼为剡县，解职归，席苫于公灵床头，心丧终三年。
现代文：郗公去世时，周翼任剡县令，他辞职回家，在郗公灵床前铺了草垫，为郗公守丧，整整三年。
English: At the time of Gong Gong's death, Zhou Ying was the county magistrate of Gong County. He resigned and went home. He laid a straw mat in front of Gong Gong's bed to mourn Gong Gong for three years.

古文：顾荣在洛阳，尝应人请，觉行炙人有欲炙之色，因辍己施焉。
现代文：顾荣在洛阳的时候，有一次应邀赴宴，发现上菜的人流露出想吃烤肉的神情，于是就把自己那一份让给了他。
English: When Gu Rong was in Luoyang, he was once invited to a banquet and found that the person who served the dish showed a desire to eat grilled meat, so he gave him his share.

古文：同坐嗤之。荣曰： 岂有终日执之，而不知其味者乎？ 
现代文：同座的人都笑话顾荣，顾荣说： 哪里有成天端着烤肉而不知肉的滋味的道理呢！ 
English: People at the table made fun of Gu Rong. Gu Rong said, "Where is the reason for serving grilled meat all day without knowing the taste of the meat?"

古文：后遭乱渡江，每经危急，常有一人左右已，问其所以，乃受炙人也。
现代文：后来顾荣遭逢乱世，渡江南下，每逢遇到危急，总有一个人来救助自己。便问他为什么这样，原来他就是接受烤肉的那个人。
English: Later, Gu Rong was caught in a time of turmoil, crossing the river to the south. Whenever he encountered a crisis, there was always someone to come to his rescue. He asked why this was so, and it turned out that he was the one who received the grilled meat.

古文：祖光禄少孤贫，性至孝，常自为母炊爨作食。
现代文：光禄大夫祖纳少年时死了父亲，家境贫寒，他生性最孝顺，经常亲自给母亲做饭。
English: Dr. Zuna's father died when he was young, and his family was poor. He was by nature the most dutiful, often cooking for his mother himself.

古文：王平北闻其佳名，以两婢饷之，因取为中郎。
现代文：平北将军王义听到他的好名声，就把两个婢女送给他，并任用他做中郎。
English: When the Pingbei general Wang Yi heard of his good reputation, he gave him two maidservants and appointed him as a middle man.

古文：有人戏之者曰： 奴价倍婢。 
现代文：有人跟他开玩笑说： 奴仆的身价比婢女多一倍。 
English: Someone joked with him: "A servant is worth twice as much as a maid."

古文：祖云： 百里奚亦何必轻于五羖之皮邪？ 
现代文：祖纳说： 百里奚又何尝比五张羊皮轻贱呢！ 
English: Zuna said: How can a hundred rupees be worth less than five sheepskins?

古文：周镇罢临川郡还都，未及上住，泊青溪渚。
现代文：周镇从临川郡解任坐船回到京都，还来不及上岸，船停在青溪渚。
English: Zhou Zhen was dismissed from Linchuan County and took a boat back to Kyoto. Before he could go ashore, the boat stopped at Qingxi Beach.

古文：王丞相往看之。
现代文：丞相王导去看望他。
English: The chancellor Wang Tao went to visit him.

古文：时夏月，暴雨卒至，舫至狭小，而又大漏，殆无复坐处。
现代文：当时正是夏季，突然下起暴雨来，船很狭窄，而且漏雨漏得很厉害，几乎没有可坐的地方。
English: It was summertime, and there was a sudden downpour of rain. The boat was cramped and leaky, with barely enough room to sit down.

古文：王曰： 胡威之清，何以过此！ 
现代文：王导说： 胡威的清廉，哪里能超过现在这种情况呢！ 
English: Wang Du said: Hu Wei's integrity, where can it exceed the current situation!

古文：即启用为吴兴郡。
现代文：立刻起用他做吴兴郡太守。
English: He was immediately appointed as the governor of Wuxing County.

古文：邓攸始避难，于道中弃己子，全弟子。
现代文：当初邓攸躲避永嘉之乱时，逃难去江南，在半路上扔下了自己的儿子，保全了自己的侄子。
English: When Deng You escaped from the Yongjia Rebellion, he fled to the south of the Yangtze River, abandoning his son in the middle of the road and saving his nephew.

古文：既过江，取一妾，甚宠爱。
现代文：过江以后，娶了一个妾，非常宠爱。
English: After crossing the river, he married a concubine, whom he loved very much.

古文：历年后讯其所由，妾具说是北人遭乱，忆父母姓名，乃攸之甥也。
现代文：一年以后，询问她的身世，她便详细诉说自己是北方人，遭逢战乱，逃难来的；回忆起父母的姓名，原来她竟是邓攸的外甥女。
English: A year later, when asked about her background, she explained in detail that she was a northerner who had been caught up in the war and had had to flee; when she recalled the names of her parents, it turned out that she was actually Deng Yu's niece.

古文：攸素有德业，言行无玷，闻之哀恨终身，遂不复畜妾。
现代文：邓攸一向德行高洁，事业有成就，言谈举止都没有污点，听了这件事，伤心悔恨了一辈子，从此便不再娶妾。
English: Deng You has always been virtuous, accomplished in his career, and his speech and demeanor are spotless. After hearing this, he regretted it for the rest of his life and never married a concubine again.

古文：王长豫为人谨顺，事亲尽色养之孝。
现代文：王长豫为人谨慎和顺，侍奉父母总是和颜悦色。
English: Wang Changyu is a prudent and obedient person, serving his parents is always pleasant.

古文：丞相见长豫辄喜，见敬豫辄嗔。
现代文：丞相王导看见长豫就高兴，看见敬豫就生气。
English: When the chancellor Wang Du saw Chang Yu, he was happy, and when he saw Jing Yu, he was angry.

古文：长豫与丞相语，恒以慎密为端。
现代文：长豫和王导谈话，总是以谨慎细密为本。
English: In their conversations, Chang Yu and Wang Du were always cautious and meticulous.

古文：丞相还台，及行，未尝不送至车后。
现代文：王导要去尚书省，临走的时候，长豫总是送他上车。
English: Wang Du wants to go to Shangshu Province. When he is about to leave, Chang Yu always gives him a lift.

古文：恒与曹夫人并当箱箧。
现代文：长豫常常替母亲曹夫人收拾箱笼衣物。
English: Chang Yu often packed boxes and clothes for her mother, Lady Cao.

古文：长豫亡后，丞相还台，登车后，哭至台门。曹夫人作簏，封而不忍开。
现代文：长豫过世以后，王导到尚书省去，上车后一路哭到官署门口；曹夫人收拾箱笼，一直把长豫收拾过的封好，不忍心再打开。
English: After Chang Yu's death, Wang Shuo went to Shang Shu to save money. After getting on the bus, she cried all the way to the entrance of the government office. Mrs. Cao packed the boxes and kept the sealed ones that Chang Yu had packed. She couldn't bear to open them again.

古文：桓常侍闻人道深公者，辄曰： 此公既有宿名，加先达知称，又与先人至交，不宜说之。 
现代文：散骑常侍桓彝听到有人谈论竺法深，就说： 此公素来有名望，而且受到前辈贤达的赏识、赞扬，又和先父是最好的朋友，不该谈论他。 
English: When the errand-riding attendant Kuan Qi heard someone talking about Gong Fazhenma, he said: This gentleman has always been famous, and has been appreciated and praised by the elders and sages. He is also the best friend of my forefather. It is not right to talk about him.

古文：庾公乘马有的卢，或语令卖去。
现代文：庾亮驾车的马中有一匹的卢马，有人劝他把马卖掉。
English: One of the horses in the flashy car is Luma, who has been advised to sell his horse.

古文：庾云： 卖之必有买者，即当害其主。宁可不安己而移于他人哉？
现代文：庾亮说： 卖马，必定有买主，那就又害了马的新主人，怎么能因为对自己有害就将祸端转嫁给他人呢？
English: Hao Liang said, "If you sell a horse, there must be a buyer, and then the new owner of the horse will be harmed. How can you transfer the evil to others because it is harmful to yourself?

古文：昔孙叔敖杀两头蛇以为后人，古之美谈，效之，不亦达乎！ 
现代文：从前孙叔敖杀掉双头蛇，以保护后人，这件事是古时候人们乐于称道的。
English: In ancient times, people were happy to praise Sun Tzu for killing the two-headed snake to protect future generations.

古文：阮光禄在剡，曾有好车，借者无不皆给。
现代文：我学习他，不也是很旷达的吗！ 光禄大夫阮裕在剡县的时候，曾经有过一辆很好的车，不管谁向他借车，他没有不借的。
English: I am learning from him, isn't he very open-minded! When Guanglu Doctor Ruan Yu was in Handan County, he once had a very good car, and no matter who borrowed a car from him, he did not borrow it.

古文：有人葬母，意欲借而不敢言。
现代文：有个人要安葬母亲，想借车可是不敢开口。
English: A man wanted to borrow a car to bury his mother, but he didn't dare to ask.

古文：阮后闻之，叹曰： 吾有车而使人不敢借，何以车为？ 
现代文：阮裕后来听说这件事，叹息说： 我有车，可是让别人不敢借，还要车子做什么呢！ 
English: When Ruan Yu heard about this later, he sighed and said, "I have a car, but I don't want others to borrow it. What do I need a car for?

古文：遂焚之。
现代文：就把车子烧了。
English: and set the car on fire.

古文：谢奕作剡令，有一老翁犯法，谢以醇酒罚之，乃至过醉，而犹未已。
现代文：谢奕做剡县县令的时候，有一个老头儿犯了法，谢奕就惩罚他喝醇厚的酒，直到喝的很醉了，还不停罚。
English: When Xie Yi was the county magistrate of Handan County, there was an old man who broke the law. Xie Yi punished him by forcing him to drink strong liquor until he was very drunk.

古文：太傅时年七、八岁，箸青布裤，在兄膝边坐，谏曰： 阿兄！老翁可念，何可作此。 
现代文：谢安当时只有七八岁，穿一条蓝布裤，在他哥哥膝上坐着，劝告说： 哥哥，老人家多么可怜，怎么可以做这种事！ 
English: At that time, Xie An was only seven or eight years old, wearing a pair of blue trousers. He sat on his brother's lap and advised him: "Brother, how pitiful the old man is, how can he do such a thing!

古文：奕于是改容曰： 阿奴欲放去邪？ 
现代文：谢奕脸色立刻缓和下来，说道： 你要把他放走吗？ 
English: Xie Yi's face immediately softened and he said, "Do you want to let him go?

古文：遂遣之。
现代文：于是就把老人放走了。
English: So he repatriated his captives.

古文：谢太傅绝重褚公，常称： 褚季野虽不言，而四时之气亦备。 
现代文：太傅谢安非常敬重褚季野，常常称赞说： 褚季野虽然嘴上不说，可是心里明白是非，就像具备了四季的气象。 
English: Grandmaster Xie An highly respected Gong Qian, and often praised him, saying, "Although Gong Qian doesn't say it on his lips, he knows what is right and wrong in his heart. It's like he has the four seasons.

古文：刘尹在郡，临终绵惙，闻阁下祠神鼓舞。正色曰： 莫得淫祀！ 
现代文：丹阳尹刘真长在任内，临终奄奄一息之时，听见供神佛的阁下正在击鼓、舞蹈，举行祭祀，就神色严肃地说： 不得滥行祭祀！ 
English: When Danyang Yin Liu Zhenlong was in office and on his deathbed, he heard that his excellency, who offered sacrifices to gods and Buddhas, was playing drums, dancing, and holding sacrifices. He looked serious and said, "You must not perform sacrifices indiscriminately!"

古文：外请杀车中牛祭神。真长答曰： 丘之祷久矣，勿复为烦。 
现代文：属员请求杀掉驾车的牛来祭神，刘真长回答说： 我早就祷告过了，不要再做烦扰人的事！ 
English: When a member of his entourage asked him to kill the cow driving the car as a sacrifice to the gods, Liu Zhenlong replied: "I have already prayed, don't do things that bother people anymore!

古文：谢公夫人教儿，问太傅： 那得初不见君教儿？ 
现代文：谢安的夫人教导儿子时，问太傅谢安： 怎么从来没有见您教导过儿子？ 
English: When Xie An's wife was teaching her son, she asked Master Xie An, "How come I have never seen you teach your son?"

古文：答曰： 我常自教儿。 
现代文：谢安回答说： 我经常以自身言行教导儿子。 
English: Xie'an replied, "I always teach my son with my words and deeds.

古文：晋简文为抚军时，所坐床上尘不听拂，见鼠行迹，视以为佳。
现代文：晋简文帝还在抚军任将军的时候，他座位上的灰尘不让别人擦，见到老鼠在上面走过的脚印，认为很好看。
English: When Emperor Jinjianwen was still leading the army and serving as a general, he did not let others wipe the dust off his seat. He saw the mouse's footprints on it and thought it was beautiful.

古文：有参军见鼠白日行，以手板批杀之，抚军意色不说，门下起弹。
现代文：有个参军看见老鼠白天出来跑动，就拿手板把老鼠打死，抚军为这很不高兴。他的门客弹劾参军。
English: When a conscript saw a mouse running around during the day, he used a hand board to beat the mouse to death. Fuzhuan was very unhappy about this. His protégé impeached him from joining the army.

古文：教曰： 鼠被害，尚不能忘怀，今复以鼠损人，无乃不可乎？ 范宣年八岁，后园挑菜，误伤指，大啼。人问： 痛邪？ 
现代文：简文帝说： 打死老鼠尚且不忍，遑论借此伤人？ 范宣八岁的时候，有一次在后园挖菜，不小心弄伤了手指。就大哭起来。别人问他： 很痛吗？ 
English: Jianwen Di said, "It is unbearable to kill a mouse, let alone hurt someone with it." Fan Xuan was eight years old when he accidentally hurt his finger while digging for vegetables in the backyard. He burst into tears. Someone else asked him, "Does it hurt?"

古文：答曰： 非为痛，身体发肤，不敢毁伤，是以啼耳！ 
现代文：他回答说： 不是因为痛，是身体发肤受之父母，不敢毁伤，因此才哭呢。 
English: He replied, "It's not because of the pain, it's because of my parents, who are physically injured and don't dare to hurt me. That's why I'm crying."

古文：宣洁行廉约，韩豫章遗绢百匹，不受。
现代文：范宣品行高洁，为人清廉俭省。
English: Fan Xuan's products are high-quality and clean, and he is a clean and frugal person.

古文：减五十匹，复不受。如是减半，遂至一匹，既终不受。
现代文：有一次，豫章太守韩康伯送给他一百匹绢，他不肯收下；减到五十匹，还是不接受；这样一路减半，终于减至一匹，他到底还是不肯接受。
English: Once, Han Kangbo, the governor of Yuzhang, gave him a hundred yakitori, but he refused to accept it; if it was reduced to fifty yakitori, he still refused to accept it; if it was halved all the way, and finally reduced to one yakitori, he still refused to accept it.

古文：韩后与范同载，就车中裂二丈与范，云： 人宁可使妇无邪？ 
现代文：后来韩康伯邀范宣一起坐车，在车上撕了两丈绢给范宣，说： 一个人难道可以让老婆没有裤子穿吗？ 
English: Later, Han Kangbo invited Fan Xuan to ride in the car together, and tore a pair of socks for Fan Xuan in the car, saying: Can a person let his wife wear no pants?

古文：范笑而受之。
现代文：范宣才笑着把绢收下了。
English: Fan Xuancai smiled and accepted the gong.

古文：王子敬病笃，道家上章应首过，问子敬 由来有何异同得失？ 
现代文：王献之病重，请道士主持上表文祷告，这时本人应该坦白过错，道士问子敬一向有什么异常和过错。
English: Wang Xian was seriously ill. He asked a Taoist priest to preside over the above written prayer. At this time, he should confess his fault. The Taoist priest asked Jing Zi what abnormalities and mistakes he had always made.

古文：子敬云： 不觉有余事，惟忆与郗家离婚。 
现代文：王献之说： 想不起有别的事，只记得和郗家离过婚。 
English: Wang Xianzhi said: I can't think of anything else, I only remember that I divorced my husband.

古文：殷仲堪既为荆州，值水俭，食常五碗盘，外无余肴。饭粒脱落盘席闲，辄拾以啖之。
现代文：殷仲堪就注荆州刺史以后，正遇上水灾歉收，吃饭通常只用五碗盘，除外没有其他荤菜；饭粒掉在盘里或坐席上，马上捡起来吃了。
English: After Yin Zhongkang's visit to Jingzhou, he was experiencing floods and poor harvests. Usually, only five bowls are used for meals, except that there are no other side dishes. If rice grains fall on the plate or on the seat, they are immediately picked up and eaten.

古文：虽欲率物，亦缘其性真素。
现代文：这样做，虽然是想给大家做个好榜样，也是因为他的本性质朴。
English: In doing so, although he wanted to set a good example for everyone, it was also because of his simple nature.

古文：每语子弟云： 勿以我受任方州，云我豁平昔时意。
现代文：他常常告诫子侄们说： 不要因为我担任一个州的长官，就认为我把平素的生活习惯抛弃了，现在我的这种习惯并没有变。
English: He used to admonish his nephews saying, "Don't think that because I am the governor of a state, I have abandoned my normal habits. My habits have not changed.

古文：今吾处之不易。贫者士之常，焉得登枝而捐其本？
现代文：贫穷是读书人的常态，怎么能做了官就丢掉做人的根本呢！你们要记住我的话！ 
English: Poverty is the norm for people who read books. How can you lose the fundamentals of being a human being when you become an official? You must remember my words!

古文：尔曹其存之！ 桓南郡、杨广共说殷荆州，宜夺殷觊南蛮以自树。
现代文：当初，南郡公桓玄和杨广一起去劝说荆州刺史殷仲堪，认为他应该夺取殷觊主管的南蛮地区来建立自己的权力。
English: At first, Guan Xuan of Nan County and Yang Guang went together to persuade Yin Zhongkan, the governor of Jingzhou, that he should seize the Nanban region, which was under the jurisdiction of Yin Xi, to establish his own power.

古文：觊亦即晓其旨，尝因行散，率尔去下舍，便不复还。
现代文：殷觊也马上明白了他们的意图。一次趁着行散，随随便便地离开了家，便不再回来，里里外外没有人事先知道。
English: Yin Yao also immediately understood their intention. Once, taking advantage of the break, he casually left the house and never came back. No one inside or outside knew in advance.

古文：内外无预知者，意色萧然，远同斗生之无愠。
现代文：他神态悠闲，和古时候的楚国令尹子文一样没有怨恨。
English: His demeanor is laid-back, and he bears no grudge, just like the ancient ruler of Chu, Yin Ziwen.

古文：时论以此多之。
现代文：当时的舆论界就因为这事赞扬他。
English: Public opinion at the time praised him for this.

古文：王仆射在江州，为殷、桓所逐，奔窜豫章，存亡未测。
现代文：仆射王愉任江州刺史时，被殷仲堪、桓玄起兵驱逐，逃亡到了豫章，生死未知。
English: When the vassal Wang Yu was appointed as the governor of Jiangzhou, he was driven out by Yin Zhongkang and Huan Xuan, and fled to Yuzhang. His life and death are unknown.

古文：王绥在都，既忧戚在貌，居处饮食，每事有降。
现代文：他的儿子王绥在京都，听到消息，便面容优愁，起居饮食，每一事都有所降低。
English: His son Wang Yao in Kyoto, upon hearing the news, had a worried look on his face, and his living and eating, everything had decreased.

古文：时人谓为试守孝子。
现代文：当时的人把他称为试守孝子。
English: People at the time called him a probationary filial son.

古文：桓南郡。既破殷荆州，收殷将佐十许人，咨议罗企生亦在焉。
现代文：南郡公桓玄打败荆州刺史殷仲堪以后，逮捕了殷仲堪的将佐十来人，咨议参军罗企生也在里面。
English: After Gonghuan Xuan of Nan County defeated Yin Zhongkan of Jingzhou Jishi, he arrested more than ten generals of Yin Zhongkan, including Luo Qisheng, a conscientious objector.

古文：桓素待企生厚，将有所戮，先遣人语云： 若谢我，当释罪。 
现代文：桓玄向来待企生很好，当他打算杀掉一些人的时候，先派人去告诉企生说： 如果向我认罪，一定免你一死。 
English: Kuan Xuan had always treated Kisei well. When he planned to kill someone, he would first send someone to tell Kisei, saying, "If you confess to me, I will definitely spare your life."

古文：企生答曰： 为殷荆州吏，今荆州奔亡，存亡未判，我何颜谢桓公？ 
现代文：企生回答说： 我是殷荆州的官吏，现在荆州逃亡，生死不明，我有什么脸向桓公谢罪！ 
English: Keisei replied, "I am an official of Yin Jingzhou, and now Jingzhou has fled, and my fate is unknown. How dare I apologize to Huan Gong!

古文：既出市，桓又遣人问欲何言？
现代文：绑赴刑场以后，桓玄又差人问他还有什么话要说。
English: After he was tied up and taken to the execution site, Kuan Xuan again sent someone to ask him what else he had to say.

古文：答曰： 昔晋文王杀嵇康，而嵇绍为晋忠臣。从公乞一弟以养老母。 
现代文：企生答道： 过去晋文王杀了嵇康，可是他儿子嵇绍却做了晋室的忠臣；因此我想请桓公留下我一个弟弟来奉养老母亲。 
English: Qisheng replied, "In the past, Jinwen Wang killed Jikang, but his son Jinshao became a loyal retainer of the Jin court; therefore, I would like to ask Huan Gong to leave one of my younger brothers to take care of my mother."

古文：桓亦如言宥之。
现代文：桓玄也就按他的要求饶恕了他弟弟。
English: At his request, Kuan Xuan also forgave his brother.

古文：桓先曾以一羔裘与企生母胡，胡时在豫章，企生问至，即日焚裘。
现代文：桓玄原先曾经送给罗企生母亲胡氏一领羔皮袍子；这时胡氏在豫章，当企生被害的消息传来时，当天就把那领皮袍子烧了。
English: Originally, Kuan Xuan had given a lambskin robe to Luo Qisheng's mother, Hu Shi; at this time, Hu Shi was in Yuzhang, and when the news of Qisheng's death came, he burned the lambskin robe that day.

古文：王恭从会稽还，王大看之。
现代文：王恭从会稽回来后，王大去拜访看望他。
English: After Wang Gong returned from the auditorium, Wang Da went to visit him.

古文：见其坐六尺簟，因语恭： 卿东来，故应有此物，可以一领及我。 
现代文：看见他坐在一张六尺长的竹席上，便对王恭说： 你从东边回来，自然会有这种东西，可以拿一张送给我吧。 
English: Seeing him sitting on a six-foot-long bamboo seat, he said to Wang Qiong: When you come back from the east, you will naturally have this kind of thing. Can you give me one?

古文：恭无言。
现代文：王恭没有说什么。
English: Wang Qiong did not say anything.

古文：大去后，即举所坐者送之。
现代文：王大走后，王恭就拿起所坐的那张竹席送给王大。
English: After Wang Da left, Wang Gong picked up the bamboo seat he was sitting on and gave it to Wang Da.

古文：既无余席，便坐荐上。
现代文：这样他自己也没有多余的竹席，就坐在草垫子上。
English: As a result, he did not have an extra bamboo seat, so he sat on a grass mat.

古文：后大闻之甚惊，曰： 吾本谓卿多，故求耳。 对曰： 丈人不悉恭，恭作人无长物。 
现代文：后来王大听说这件事，很吃惊，对王恭说： 我本来以为你有多余的，所以才问你要呢， 王恭回答说： 你不了解我，我为人处世，没有多余的东西。 
English: Later, Wang Da heard about this and was very surprised. He said to Wang Qiong, "I thought you had something extra, that's why I asked if you wanted it." Wang Qiong replied, "You don't understand me, I'm a human being, I don't have anything extra."

古文：吴郡陈遗，家至孝，母好食铛底焦饭。
现代文：吴郡人陈遗，在家里非常孝顺。
English: Chen Yue, a resident of Wuxi County, is very obedient at home.

古文：遗作郡主簿，恒装一囊，每煮食，辄贮录焦饭，归以遗母。
现代文：他母亲喜欢吃锅巴，陈遗在郡里做主簿的时候，就经常带着一个口袋，每逢煮饭，就把锅巴储存起来，回家的时候拿给母亲。
English: His mother likes to eat hot pots and pans. When Chen Zi worked as a chief accountant in the county, he often carried a bag with him. Whenever he cooked rice, he would store the hot pots and pans and take them to his mother when he got home.

古文：后值孙恩贼出吴郡，袁府君即日便征，遗已聚敛得数斗焦饭，未展归家，遂带以从军。
现代文：后来遇上孙恩贼兵侵入吴郡，内史袁山松马上要出兵征讨。这时陈遗已经积攒到几斗锅巴，来不及回家，便带着随军出征。
English: Later, when Sun En's bandits invaded Wu County, Yuan Shansong immediately wanted to send soldiers to collect. At this time, Chen Yu had already accumulated a few barrels of pots and pans. When it was too late to go home, he went to war with the accompanying army.

古文：战于沪渎，败。军人溃散，逃走山泽，皆多饥死，遗独以焦饭得活。
现代文：双方在沪渎开战，袁山松打败了，军队溃散，都逃跑到山林沼泽地带，没有吃的，很多人都饿死了，唯独陈遗靠锅巴活了下来。
English: Both sides went to war in Huzhou, Yuan Shansong was defeated, the army was dispersed, and they all fled to the mountains, forests and swamps. There was no food, and many people died of starvation. Only Chen You survived by relying on pots and pans.

古文：时人以为纯孝之报也。
现代文：当时人们认为这是对他纯厚的孝心的回报。
English: At the time, people thought it was a reward for his pure filial piety.

古文：孔仆射为孝武侍中，豫蒙眷接。
现代文：仆射孔安国任晋孝武帝的侍中，幸福地得到孝武帝的恩宠礼遇。
English: His servant, Kong An Guo, was appointed as the attendant of Emperor Jin Xiaowu, and happily received the grace and courtesy of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：烈宗山陵，孔时为太常。形素羸瘦，著重服，竟日涕泗流涟。见者以为真孝子。
现代文：孝武帝死，当时孔安国任太常，他的身体一向瘦弱，穿着重孝服，一天到晚眼泪鼻涕不断，看见他的人都认为他是真正的孝子。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu died, Kong An Guoren was too old. His body had always been thin and weak, he wore heavy filial piety clothes, and he shed tears and blew his nose all day long. People who saw him thought he was a true filial son.

古文：吴道助、附子兄弟，居在丹阳郡。
现代文：吴道助和吴附子兄弟俩住在丹阳郡官署的后面。
English: Brothers Wu Daosuke and Wu Fuxi lived behind the Danyang County Government Office.

古文：后遭母童夫人艰，朝夕哭临。及思至，宾客吊省，号踊哀绝，路人为之落泪。
现代文：遇上母亲童夫人逝世，他们在早晚哭吊以及思念深切、宾客来吊唁时，都顿足号哭，哀恸欲绝，过路的人也因此落泪。
English: When they encountered the death of their mother Tong Lady, they cried and mourned in the morning and evening, and when guests came to offer condolences, they all cried and mourned, and the passers-by also shed tears.

古文：韩康伯时为丹阳尹，母殷在郡，每闻二吴之哭，辄为凄恻。
现代文：当时韩康伯任丹阳尹，母亲殷氏住在郡府中，每逢听到吴家兄弟俩的哭声，总是深为哀伤。
English: At that time, Han Kangbo was Danyang Yin, and his mother Yin Shi lived in the county seat. Whenever he heard the cries of the Wu brothers, he was always deeply saddened.

古文：语康伯曰： 汝若为选官，当好料理此人。 
现代文：她对康伯说： 你如果做了选官，应该妥善照顾这两个人。 
English: She told Mr. Comber: "If you're an elector, you should take good care of these two people.

古文：康伯亦甚相知。
现代文：韩康伯也和他们结成知己。
English: Han Kangbo also became friends with them.

古文：韩后果为吏部尚书。
现代文：后来韩康伯果然出任吏部尚书。
English: Later, Han Kangbo was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：大吴不免哀制，小吴遂大贵达。
现代文：这时大吴已经死了，小吴终于做了大官，非常显贵。
English: At this time, Big Wu had already died, and Little Wu finally became a high-ranking official, very distinguished.

