古文：八年，谓魏王曰： 昔曹恃齐而轻晋，齐伐釐、莒而晋人亡曹。
现代文：秦始皇八年：《脱漏文字有人对魏王说： 从前曹国依仗齐国而轻视晋国，在齐国去讨伐莱、莒两国的时候，晋国人借机攻破了曹国。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Qin Shi Huang: Leaked text Someone said to the Wei king Cang Rui: In the past, Cao relied on Qi and despised Jin. When Qi went to fight against Lai and Yan, Jin took the opportunity to defeat Cao.

古文：缯恃齐以悍越，齐和子乱而越人亡缯。
现代文：缯国依仗齐国就抗拒越国，在齐国和子作乱的时候，越国人就攻占缯国的城邑。
English: Yunnan Province relied on Qi Province to resist Yue Province. When Qi Province and the sons of Yue rebelled, the people of Yue Province conquered the cities of Yunnan Province.

古文：郑恃魏以轻韩，伐榆关而韩氏亡郑。
现代文：郑国依仗魏国，轻视韩国，在魏国攻打榆关的时候，韩露就攻下了郑国。
English: Zheng Guo relied on Wei Guo and despised South Korea. When Wei Guo attacked Shaoguan, Han Lu attacked Zheng Guo.

古文：原恃秦、翟以轻晋，秦、翟年谷大凶而晋人亡原。
现代文：原国依仗秦人、狄人，轻视晋国，在秦、狄出现凶灾的时候，晋人攻占了原国。
English: The original country relied on the Qin people and the Di people, and despised the Jin country. When the Qin and the Di suffered a disaster, the Jin people conquered the original country.

古文：中山恃齐、魏以轻赵，齐、魏伐楚而赵亡中山。
现代文：中出依仗齐国、魏国，轻视赵国，在齐国、魏国讨伐楚围的时候，赵蟹攻取了中山。
English: Zhongde relied on Qi and Wei and despised Zhao. When Qi and Wei fought against Chu, Zhao Kani captured Zhongshan.

古文：此五国所以亡者，皆其所恃也。
现代文：这五个国家之所以破亡，都因为认为自己有所依靠。
English: These five countries were destroyed because they thought they had something to rely on.

古文：非独此五国为然而已也，天下之亡国皆然矣。
现代文：不但这五个国家是这样，天下所有破亡的国家都如此。
English: This is true not only of these five countries, but of all the ruined countries of the world.

古文：夫国之所以不可恃者多，其变不可胜数也。
现代文：对别的国家不可依靠的原因是多方面的，其中的变故不可胜数。
English: There are many reasons why other countries cannot be relied upon, and the reasons for this are countless.

古文：或以政教不修，上下不辑，而不可恃者；或有诸侯邻国之虞，而不可恃者；或以年谷不登，稸积竭尽，而不可恃者；或化于利，比于患。
现代文：有的因为政治教化没有修治，上下不团结，而不可以依靠；有的因为邻国诸侯狡诈，而不可以依靠，有的因为年成不好谷物不收，蓄积用尽，而不可以依靠；有的国家在利益面前改变立场，有的国家自己已接近了祸患。
English: Some cannot be relied on because political education has not been cultivated and there is no unity between the upper and lower ranks; some cannot be relied on because the neighboring princes are cunning; some cannot be relied on because the grain harvest is not good and the reserves are exhausted; some countries change their position in the face of interests, and some countries themselves are close to disaster.

古文：臣以此知国之不可必恃也。
现代文：臣下因此知道别的国家是不可以依仗的。
English: As a result, the vassals knew that they could not rely on other countries.

古文：今王恃楚之强，而信春申君之言，以是质秦，而久不可知。
现代文：观在大王依仗楚国的强大，而听信春申君的话，因此对抗泰国，久后结果不可预料。
English: Guan Da Wang relied on the strength of Chu and listened to the words of Chunshen, so he fought against Thailand, and the result was unpredictable.

古文：即春申君有变，是王独受秦患也。
现代文：假如春申君有变故，这将由大王独自承受秦国的祸患了。
English: If there were to be a change of fortune for Chunshenjun, it would be up to the great king alone to bear the scourge of Qin.

古文：即王有万乘之国，而以一人之心为命也，臣以此为不完，愿王之熟计之也。 
现代文：虽然大王拥有万乘之国，却依赖一个人的想法唯命是听。臣下认为这样做法是不完美的。希望大王仔细考虑这件事。 
English: Although the great king owns the country of Mansei, he relies on one person's thoughts to do his bidding. His subjects believe that this approach is not perfect. I hope the great king will carefully consider this matter.

