古文：武侯谓吴起曰： 今秦胁吾西，楚带吾南，赵冲吾北，齐临吾东，燕绝吾后，韩居吾前，六国兵四守，势甚不便，忧此奈何？ 
现代文：武侯对吴起说： 如今秦国威胁着我国西部，楚国围绕着我南部，赵国面对着我北部，齐国紧逼着我东部，燕国阻绝着我国后方，韩国据守在我的前面，六国军队四面包围着我们，形势非常不利，我对此很忧虑，该怎么办呢? 
English: Wuhou said to Wuqi, "Nowadays, Qin threatens the west of our country, Chu surrounds me in the south, Zhao faces me in the north, Qi presses me in the east, Yan blocks my rear, South Korea is in front of me, and the armies of six countries surround us. The situation is very unfavorable, and I am very worried about it. What should I do?

古文：起对曰： 夫安国家之道，先戒为宝。
现代文：吴起答： 保障国家安全的方法，事先有戒备是最重要的。
English: Wu Qida: The most important way to ensure national security is to be prepared in advance.

古文：今君已戒，祸其远矣。
现代文：现在您已经有了戒备，离祸患就远了。
English: Now that you are on your guard, you are safe from harm.

古文：臣请论六国之俗：夫齐陈重而不坚，秦陈散而自斗，楚陈整而不久，燕陈守而不走，三晋陈治而不用。 
现代文：请允许我分析一下六国军阵的情况，齐国阵势庞大但不坚固，秦国阵势分散但能各自为战，楚国阵势严整但不能持久，燕国阵势长于防守但不善于机动，韩、赵阵势整齐但不顶用。 
English: Please allow me to analyze the situation of the six-nation army formation. The Qi army formation is huge but not solid, the Qin army formation is dispersed but can fight independently, the Chu army formation is neat but not durable, the Yan army formation is good at defense but not good at maneuvering, and the Han and Zhao armies are neat but not the best.

古文： 夫齐性刚，其国富，君臣骄奢而简于细民，其政宽而禄不均，一陈两心，前重后轻，故重而不坚。
现代文： 齐国人性情刚强，国家富足，君臣骄奢，忽视民众利益，政令松驰而待遇不均，一阵之中人心不齐，兵力布署前重后轻，所以阵势庞大但不坚固。
English: Qi's national character is strong, the country is rich, the monarchs and ministers are arrogant, they ignore the interests of the people, the government decrees are lax and the treatment is uneven, the people are unequal for a while, the troop deployment is heavy, so the formation is huge but not solid.

古文：击此之道，必三分之，猎其左右，胁而从之，其陈可坏。
现代文：打它的方法，必须把我军区分为三部，各以一部侧击其左右两翼，另以一部乘势从正面进攻，它的阵势就可以攻破了。
English: The way to fight it is to divide our military area into three parts, each of which will attack its left and right wings with one part, and attack from the front with another part. Its position can be broken.

古文：秦性强，其地险，其政严，其赏罚信，其人不让，皆有斗心，故散而自战。
现代文：秦人性情强悍，居处之地地形险要，国家政令严格，赏罚严明，士卒临阵争先恐后，斗志旺盛，所以能在分散的阵势中各自为战。
English: The Qin people are strong-willed, the terrain where they live is precarious, the state regulations are strict, the rewards and punishments are strict, the soldiers scramble to the front, and the fighting spirit is strong, so they can fight in scattered positions.

古文：击此之道，必先示之以利而引去之，士贪于得而离其将，乘乖猎散，设伏投机，其将可取。
现代文：打它的方法首先以利诱它，当其士卒因争利而脱离其将领掌握时，就来其混乱打击其零散的部队，并设置伏兵，饲机取胜，它的将领就可以擒获。
English: The way to fight it is first to entice it with profit. When its soldiers are out of the grasp of its generals due to competition for profit, it will come to its chaos to fight its scattered troops, and set up ambushes, feeders to win, and its generals can be captured.

古文：楚性弱，其地广，其政骚，其民疲，故整而不久。击此之道，袭乱其屯，先夺其气，轻进速退，弊而劳之，勿与战争，其军可败。
现代文：楚国人性情柔弱，领土广大，政令紊乱，民力疲困，所以阵势虽然严整但不能持久，打它的方法，要袭扰它的驻地，先挫折它的士气，然后突然进击，突然撤退，使其疲于应付，不要和它决战，这样就可打败它的军队。
English: Chu's human nature is soft and weak, its territory is vast, its government is chaotic, and its people are exhausted. Therefore, although the formation is strict, it cannot last. The way to fight it is to harass its station, first frustrate its morale, then suddenly attack, suddenly retreat, make it tired to cope, and do not fight it in a decisive battle, so that it can defeat its army.

古文：燕性悫，其民慎，好勇义，寡诈谋，故守而不走。
现代文：燕国人性情诚实，行动谨慎，好男尚义，缺少诈谍，所以善于固守而不善于机动。
English: Yan Guo's human nature is honest, prudent in action, a good man is still righteous, and lacks deception, so he is good at sticking to the rules but not good at maneuvering.

古文：击此之道，触而迫之，陵而远之，驰而后之，则上疑而下惧，谨我车骑必避之路，其将可虏。
现代文：打它的方法，是一接触就压迫它，打一下就撤走，并奔袭它的后方，这样，就会使它上下疑惧，再将我车骑埋伏在敌人撤退必经的道路上，它的将领就可被我俘虏。
English: The way to fight it is to oppress it as soon as it is touched, to withdraw as soon as it is hit, and to attack its rear, in this way, it will make it hesitate, and then ambush my vehicle on the road through which the enemy retreats, and its generals can be captured by me.

古文：三晋者，中国也，其性和，其政平，其民疲于战，习于兵，轻其将，薄其禄，士无死志，故治而不用。击此之道，阻陈而压之，众来则拒之，去则追之，以倦其师。
现代文：韩赵是中原的国家 ，其民性温顺，其政令平和，其民众疲于残祸，久经战争，轻视其将帅，不满其待遇，士无死忠，所以，阵势虽然整齐但不中用，打它的方法，用坚强的阵势迫近它，敌众来攻就阻击它，敌人退却就追击它，这样来疲惫它的军队。
English: Han Zhao is a country in the Central Plains, its people are docile, its government is peaceful, its people are tired of atrocities, have been through war, despise their generals, are dissatisfied with their treatment, and have no loyalty. Therefore, although the formation is neat, it is not effective. The way to fight it is to approach it with a strong position. When the enemy attacks, it will block it. When the enemy retreats, it will chase it. In this way, it will exhaust its army.

古文：此其势也。 
现代文：这是六国的大概形势。 
English: This is the general situation in the six countries.

古文： 然则一军之中，必有虎贲之士，力轻扛鼎，足轻戎马，搴旗斩将，必有能者。
现代文： 既然这样，那么我全军之中，就必定有 虎贲 之士，其力气之大可以轻易举鼎，行动轻捷能够追及战马。在战斗中，夺取敌旗，斩杀敌将，必须这样有能力的人。
English: Since this is the case, then among my entire army, there must be men of great strength who can easily lift the crown, and who can easily chase the horse. In battle, to capture the enemy's flag and kill the enemy's general, there must be such capable people.

古文：若此之等，选而别之，爱而贵之，是谓军命。
现代文：这样的人才，必须选拔出来，爱护并重用他们，他们就是军队的精锐。
English: Such talents must be selected, cherished and reused. They are the elite of the army.

古文：其有工用五兵、材力健疾、志在吞敌者，必加其爵列，可以决胜。
现代文：凡有善于使用各种兵器、身强力壮、动作敏捷、志在杀敌的，一定要加官晋爵，这样就可以用他们来决战决胜。
English: Anyone who is good at using all kinds of weapons, physically strong, agile, and aspires to kill the enemy must be promoted, so that they can be used to win the decisive battle.

古文：厚其父母妻子，劝赏畏罚，此坚陈之士，可与持久，能审料此，可以击倍。 武侯曰： 善！ 
现代文：优待其父母妻子，用奖赏鼓励他们，用惩罚警戒他们，使他们成为加强阵势的骨干，用以进行持久战斗。若能清楚地了解这些问题，就可以打败成倍的敌人了。 武候说： 很好。 
English: Treating their parents and wives well, encouraging them with rewards, warning them with punishments, and making them the backbone of the fortified position for a long-term battle. If you can clearly understand these issues, you can defeat the enemy of multiples. Wu Hou said: Very good.

古文：吴子曰： 凡料敌有不卜而与之战者八。
现代文：吴起说： 判断敌情，不必占卜就可与其交战的，有八种情况。
English: Wu Qi said: Judging the enemy situation, there are eight situations that can be fought without divination.

古文：一曰： 疾风大寒，早兴寐迁，刊木济水，不惮艰难。
现代文：一是在大风严寒中，昼夜行军，伐木渡河，不顾部队艰难的。
English: On the one hand, it is difficult to march day and night in the wind and cold, to cut trees and cross the river, and to ignore the troops.

古文：二曰：盛夏炎热，晏兴无间，行驱饥渴，务于取远。
现代文：二是在炎热的盛夏行军，出发很迟，途中不休息，行军急速，又饥又渴，只顾赶往远地的。
English: The second is to march in the hot midsummer, starting very late, without rest on the way, marching rapidly, hungry and thirsty, only to rush to distant lands.

古文：三曰：师既淹久，粮食无有，百姓怨怒，妖祥数起，上不能止。
现代文：三是军队出兵已久，粮食用尽去搜刮百姓，引起百姓怨怒，致使灾异的凶兆屡次出现，将帅不能制止。
English: The third is that the army has been dispatching troops for a long time, the grain has been exhausted to scrape the people, causing the people's resentment, causing the ominous signs of disasters to appear repeatedly, and the general cannot stop it.

古文：四曰：军资既竭，薪刍既寡，天多阴雨，欲掠无所。
现代文：四是军用物资耗尽，柴草所剩不多，再加上阴雨连绵，想去掠夺却无处可去。
English: Fourthly, the military supplies were exhausted, there was not much firewood and grass left, coupled with the continuous rain, they wanted to plunder but had nowhere to go.

古文：五曰：徒众不多，水地不利，人马疾疫，四邻不至。
现代文：五是兵力不多，水土不服，人马多病，四邻援军未到的。
English: Fifth, the troop strength is not much, the soil and water are not suitable, the man and horse are sick, and the four neighboring reinforcements have not arrived.

古文：六曰：道远日暮，士众劳惧，倦而未食，解甲而息。
现代文：六是路运日暮，部队疲劳恐惧，困倦未食，解甲休息的。
English: The sixth is the road transport at dusk, the troops are tired and afraid, sleepy and hungry, disarming and resting.

古文：七曰：将薄吏轻，士卒不固，三军数惊，师徒无助。
现代文：七是将吏无威信，军心不稳定。三军屡次惊慌，而又孤立无援的。
English: Seventh, the generals lacked prestige and the morale of the army was unstable. The three armies were repeatedly panicked and isolated.

古文：八曰：陈而未定，舍而未毕，行坂涉险，半隐半出。
现代文：八是部署未定，宿营未毕，翻山越险只过了一半的。
English: Eighth, the deployment is undecided, the camp is not completed, and the mountain climbing is only half over.

古文：诸如此者，击之无疑。 
现代文：遇到这类情况，都应迟速进击，不要迟妄乏。
English: In the face of such a situation, we should not delay the attack, and do not delay.

古文： 有不占而避之者六。
现代文： 不必占卜而应避免和敌人作战的情况有六种。
English: There are six situations in which one should avoid fighting the enemy without divination.

古文：一曰：土地广大，人民富众。
现代文：一是国家疆土地域广大，人口众多而且留足的。
English: First, the country has a vast territory and a large population.

古文：二曰：上爱其下。惠施流布。
现代文：二是上爱其下，恩惠普及的。
English: The second is to love above and love below, and to extend grace to all.

古文：三曰：赏信刑察，发必得时。
现代文：三是赏罚严明，行动及时的。
English: Third, the rewards and punishments are strict, and the actions are timely.

古文：四曰：陈功居列，任贤使能。
现代文：四是论功叙位，任用贤能的。
English: The fourth is that merit should be ranked, and merit should be appointed.

古文：五曰：师徒之众，兵甲之精。
现代文：五是军队众多，装备精良的。
English: Fifth, the army is numerous and well-equipped.

古文：六曰：四邻之助，大国之援。
现代文：六是有四邻帮助，大国支援的。
English: Sixth, with the help of the four neighbors and the support of the big countries.

古文：凡此不如敌人，避之勿疑。所谓见可而进，知难而退也。 
现代文：凡是这些条件都不如敌人时，就应避免和它作战而不必迟疑，这就是所谓见可而进，知难而退。 
English: Whenever these conditions are not as good as the enemy, you should avoid fighting with it without hesitation. This is the so-called see what you can do, know what is difficult and retreat.

古文：武侯问曰： 吾欲观敌之外以知其内，察其进以知其止，以定胜负，可得闻乎？ 
现代文：武候问： 我想通过观察敌人的外部表现来了解它的内部情况，从观察敌人的行动来了解它的真实意图，从而判定开战的胜负，你可以把这个要领说给我听听吗？ 
English: Wu Xun asked: I want to understand the internal situation of the enemy by observing the external performance of the enemy, and understand the true intention of the enemy by observing the enemy's actions, so as to determine the outcome of the war. Can you tell me this key?

古文：起对曰： 敌人之来，荡荡无虑，旌旗烦乱，人马数顾，一可击十，必使无措。
现代文：吴起答： 敌人来时行动散漫而无顾虑，旗帜纷乱不整，人马数量虽多却东张西望游移不定，这样以一击十，就可使敌人惊慌失措。
English: Wu Qian replied: When the enemy comes, their actions are scattershot and carefree, their banners are disorganized and disorderly, and although there are a large number of men and horses, they are wandering around. In this way, with one blow of ten, the enemy can be panicked.

古文：诸侯会，君臣未和，沟垒未成，禁令未施，三军匈匈，欲前不能，欲去不敢，以半击倍，百战不殆。 
现代文：故人各路军队尚未会师，君臣意见不和，工事未完成，禁令未实施，三军吵吵嚷嚷，想前进不能前进，想后退不能后退，在这种情况下以半击倍，可以百战不败。 
English: The armies of the deceased have not yet joined the division, the opinions of the monarchs and ministers are discordant, the construction is not completed, the ban has not been implemented, the three armies are noisy, if you want to advance, you can't advance, if you want to retreat, you can't retreat. In this case, if you double the half-hit, you can win a hundred battles.

古文：武侯问敌必可击之道。
现代文：武侯又问起，敌人在什么情况下，我军可以打击它呢？
English: Wuhou also asked, under what circumstances can our army strike the enemy?

古文：起对曰： 用兵必须审敌虚实而趋其危。
现代文：吴起答： 用兵关键是必须查明敌人的虚实而冲击它的弱点。
English: Wu Qida: The key to the use of troops is to identify the enemy's true and false and attack its weaknesses.

古文：敌人远来新至，行列未定，可击；既食未设备，可击；奔走，可击；勤劳，可击；未得地利，可击；失时不从，可击；旌旗乱动，可击；涉长道后行未息，可击；涉水半渡，可击；险道狭路，可击；陈数移动，可击；将离士卒，可击；心怖，可击。
现代文：敌人远来新到，部署未定，可以攻打。刚吃完饭，还未戒备，可打慌乱奔走的，可以攻打。敌军将士疲劳的时候，可打，没有占据有利地形的，可以攻打。
English: When the enemy is newly arrived from far away and the deployment is undecided, it can be attacked. When the enemy has just finished eating and is still unprepared, it can be attacked. When the enemy soldiers are tired, they can be attacked. If they do not occupy favorable terrain, they can be attacked.

古文：凡若此者，选锐冲之，分兵继之，急击勿疑。 
现代文：天候季节对敌不利的，可以攻打。部队混乱的，可以攻打。
English: If the weather and season are unfavorable to the enemy, they may attack. If the troops are in disarray, they may attack.

