古文：秦、赵相距长平，赵王信秦反间，欲以赵奢之子括为将而代廉颇。
现代文：原文战国时期秦国和赵国两国的军队在长平列队对阵，赵王中了秦国的反间计，想要派赵奢的儿子赵括代替廉颇为将。
English: During the Warring States period, the armies of the two countries of Qin and Zhao were lined up against each other in Changping. King Zhao was fooled by Qin's counter-strategy and wanted to send Zhao Cao's son, Zhao Kuang, to replace Liang Po as general.

古文：括平日每易言兵，奢不以为然，及是将行，其母上书言于王曰： 括不可使将。 
现代文：赵括平素轻率谈论用兵，赵奢对此不以为然。赵括即将率兵启程的时候，他的母亲亲自上书赵王，说： 赵括不能担当将领的职责。 
English: When Zhao Quan was about to leave with his army, his mother personally wrote to Zhao Wang, saying: "Zhao Quan cannot take on the duties of a general.

古文：王曰： 何以？ 
现代文：赵王问： 为什么？ 
English: Zhao Wang said: Why?

古文：对曰： 始妾事其父，时为将，身所奉饭饮而进食者以十数，所友者以百数，大王及宗室所赏赐者，尽以予军吏，受命之日，不问家事；今括一旦为将，东向而朝，军吏无敢仰视之者，王所赐金帛，归藏于家，而日视便利田宅可买者买之，父子异志，愿王勿遣。 
现代文：赵母说： 当初赵括的父亲在世为将时，想要去亲身侍奉他饮食的人就有十几个，和他结交为友的则有一百多位；国君以及宗室所赏赐的东西，先夫都会全都分给手下的官兵；每当接受君王的命令之后，便不问家事专心投入战事准备之中；现在赵括做了将军，军官们没有人敢抬头看他，君王一有了赏赐，他就全部拿回家中收藏起来；看到便宜的田宅，能买的就将它们买下来。他们父子的心志是不一样的，希望大王不要派他去。 
English: Zhao's mother said: When Zhao Kuan's father was still alive, there were a dozen people who wanted to personally serve him food, and more than a hundred people who made friends with him. The first husband would distribute all the gifts from the sovereign and the family to the officers and soldiers under his command. Whenever he received orders from the king, he would concentrate on preparing for war without asking about family matters. Now that Zhao Kuan is a general, no officers dare to look up to him. As soon as the king receives a gift, he will take it all home and collect it. If he sees a cheap farmhouse, he will buy it if he can. Their father and son's

古文：王曰： 母置之，吾已决矣。 
现代文：赵王说： 你不要再多说了，孤王已经决定了。 
English: Zhao Wang said: You can put this matter aside and leave it alone, I have already decided.

古文：括母因曰： 王终遣之，即有不称，妾得无坐。 
现代文：赵母说： 既然大王已经决定，如果今后赵括做了不称职的事情，请不要治我的罪。 
English: Mother Zhao said, "Since the great king has decided that if Zhao Kuang does something inappropriate in the future, please don't punish me.

古文：王许诺。
现代文：赵王答应了她。
English: Zhao Wang agreed.

古文：括既将，悉变廉颇约束，兵败身死，赵王亦以括母先言，竟不诛也。
现代文：赵括代替廉颇做将军之后，完全改变了廉颇的作战方式，最后果真兵败身死，赵王因为有言在先，因此赵母并没有受到牵连。
English: After Zhao Kuang replaced Liang Po as general, he completely changed Liang Po's way of fighting. In the end, the real soldiers were defeated and killed. Because King Zhao was the first to speak, Zhao Mu was not implicated.

古文：后唐龙武都虞侯柴克宏，再用之子也。
现代文：南唐的龙武都虞侯柴克宏是柴再用的儿子。
English: Zhai Kehong of Longwu, the capital of Southern Tang, was the son of a wood recycler.

古文：沈默好施，不事家产，虽典宿卫，日与宾客博弈饮酒，未尝言兵，时人以为非将帅才。
现代文：平素不善言谈但是喜欢帮助别人，平时不重视自家产业的经营，虽然他身为禁宫警卫，但是每天和朋友下棋喝酒，从来没有听到他谈论用兵之道，有人因此断定他绝非将帅之才。
English: He is not a talkative person, but likes to help others. He usually does not attach importance to the management of his own industry. Although he is a guard of the Forbidden City, he plays chess and drinks with friends every day. I have never heard him talk about the use of soldiers. Some people therefore conclude that he is by no means a good general.

古文：及吴越围常州，克宏请效死行阵，其母亦表称克宏有父风，可为将，苟不胜任，分甘孥戮。 
现代文：后来吴越围攻常州的时候，柴克宏请求准许自己随军御敌，他的母亲也上表章说儿子有乃父的风范，可以任命为将领，如果日后柴克宏有失职之处，愿意领罪受罚。
English: Later, when Wu Yue besieged Changzhou, Zhai Kehong requested permission to follow the enemy army. His mother also said that her son had his father's demeanor and could be appointed as a general. If Zhai Kehong failed in his duties in the future, he would be willing to be punished.

古文：元宗用为左武卫将军，使救常州，大破敌兵。
现代文：元宗于是任命他为左武卫将军，让他救援常州，结果果真大破敌兵。
English: Therefore, Yuan Zong appointed him as General Zuo Wuwei and asked him to rescue Changzhou, which resulted in a great defeat of the enemy soldiers.

古文：括母不独知人，其论将处亦高。
现代文：赵母不仅了解自己的儿子，而且议论为将之道的见解也颇为高明。
English: Zhao's mother not only understands her son, but also has a very good opinion about the way to be a general.

古文：括唯不知兵，故易言兵；克宏未尝言兵，政深于兵。
现代文：正因为赵括只知道死读兵书，不懂得军事，因此才敢轻易地谈论兵事；柴克宏没有谈论过兵事，却是深懂得用兵之道。
English: It is precisely because Zhao Kuang only knows how to read military books and does not understand military affairs that he dares to easily talk about military affairs; Zhai Kehong has not talked about military affairs, but he deeply understands the way of using soldiers.

古文：赵母知败，柴母知胜，皆以其父决之，异哉!
现代文：赵母知道自己的儿子带兵必定失败，柴母知道自己的儿子为将必定成功，两位母亲都是从他们的父亲来评断儿子日后的作为，不能不令人称奇。
English: Zhao's mother knew that her son would surely fail in leading soldiers, while Chai's mother knew that her son would surely succeed. Both mothers judged their son's future actions by their fathers, which was surprising.

