古文：公孙龙，六国时辩士也。
现代文：公孙龙是战国时期著名的逻辑学家。
English: Gongsun Long was a famous logician during the Warring States period.

古文：疾名实之散乱，因资材之所长，为 守白 之论。假物取譬，以 守白 辩，谓白马为非马也。
现代文：他痛恨当时事物的名称与实际相脱离的混乱现象，鉴于君主囿于成见 取士 而名不符实的 守白 之论，他主张根据才能有专长而取士，于是假借事物来作比喻说明，与 守白 偏见抗辩，提出了 白马异于马 的命题。
English: He hated the confusion caused by the fact that the names of things at that time were divorced from reality. In view of the fact that the monarch adhered to the stereotype of appointing officials based on the unsubstantiated theory of keeping a white horse, he advocated appointing officials based on their ability to have expertise. He then used things as a metaphor to explain and argue against the white horse prejudice, and put forward the proposition that the white horse is different from the horse.

古文：白马为非马者，言白所以名色，言马所以名形也；色非形，形非色也。
现代文：所谓白马异于马的道理在于：称 白 是揭示事物的颜色，称 马 是揭示事物的形体。
English: The reason why the so-called white horse is different from the horse is that white is the color that reveals things, and the horse is the shape that reveals things.

古文：夫言色则形不当与，言形则色不宜从，今合以为物，非也。
现代文：事物的颜色不等于事物的形体，事物的形体也不等于事物的颜色。
English: The color of things is not equal to the shape of things, and the shape of things is not equal to the color of things.

古文：如求白马于厩中，无有，而有骊色之马，然不可以应有白马也。
现代文：当规定物的颜色时则抽掉物的形体而与形体无关；当规定物的形体时则抽象掉物的颜色便与颜色无关。现在，把规定颜色的白马与规定形体的马当作一回事，显然是不对的。
English: When the color of the object is specified, the shape of the object is subtracted and is independent of the shape; when the shape of the object is specified, the color of the abstract object is independent of the color. Now, it is obviously wrong to treat the white horse of the specified color and the horse of the specified shape as the same thing.

古文：不可以应有白马，则所求之马亡矣；亡则白马竟非马。欲推是辩，以正名实而化天下焉。
现代文：再进一步说，譬如要在马棚里找白马，恰巧没有，而只有黑色的马，这样，当然不可以答应说这里有白马，既然不能答应马棚里有白马，那么就是要找的对象没有了；既然要找的对象没有了，所以白马毕竟异于马。他想把这一逻辑道理推广开来，并根据这一原理来端正名实关系，从而统一天下的逻辑规范。
English: Furthermore, for example, if you are looking for a white horse in a stable, and there happens to be none, but only black horses, then of course you can't promise that there is a white horse here. Since you can't promise that there is a white horse in the stable, then there is no object to look for. Since there is no object to look for, the white horse is different from the horse after all. He wanted to popularize this logical principle, and based on this principle to rectify the relationship between name and reality, so as to unify the world's logical norms.

古文：龙于孔穿会赵平原君家。
现代文：公孙龙在赵国平原君家中会见孔穿。
English: Gongsunlong met with Kongpeng at Pingyuanjun's home in Zhao Province.

古文：穿曰： 素闻先生高谊，愿为弟子久，但不取先生以白马为非马耳！请去此术，则穿请为弟子。 
现代文：孔穿说： 我一向听说先生品学高尚，早就想拜您为师，只是未敢苟同先生 白马非马 的理论，敢请放弃这套理论，我便俯首甘拜为弟子。 
English: Confucius said, "I have always heard that you are a man of noble character, and I have long wanted to worship you as my teacher. However, I did not dare to agree with Mr. Bai Ma Fei Ma's theory, and I dared to ask you to give up this theory, so I bowed my head and became your disciple.

古文：龙曰： 先生之言悖。龙之所以为名者，乃以白马之论尔！
现代文：公孙龙说：先生的话未免荒唐了，我之所以能出名，靠的正是 白马非马 这套理论哩！
English: Gongsunlong said, "Your words are absurd. It is precisely this theory that made me famous!"

古文：今使龙去之，则无以教焉。
现代文：现在要我放弃这套理论，岂不等于叫我放弃教学？
English: Now, if I were to give up this theory, wouldn't I be giving up teaching?

古文：且欲师之者，以智与学不如也。
现代文：而且要拜人为师的，总是因为智慧和学识不如人家吧！
English: Moreover, those who want to be taught by others are always inferior to others because of their wisdom and knowledge!

古文：今使龙去之，此先教而后师也；先教而后师之者，悖。
现代文：现在您叫我放弃自己的学说主张，这是先以教师自居，然后才想拜人为师。这种要当人学生却先摆出教师爷的架势。
English: Now you are asking me to give up my own doctrinal position, which is to pose as a teacher first, and then to want to be a teacher. This is to be a student, but first to pose as a teacher.

古文： 且白马非马，乃仲尼之所取。
现代文：未免太荒唐了罢！ 何况 白马非马 的论旨还是您先祖仲尼最先提出来的。
English: What's more, the thesis that the white horse is not a horse was first proposed by your ancestor Zhong Ni.

古文：龙闻楚王张繁弱之弓，载亡归之矢，以射蛟口于云梦之圃，而丧其弓。左右请求之。王曰： 止。楚人遗弓，楚人得之，又何求乎？ 
现代文：我听说，当年楚王曾经拉着 繁弱 强弓，搭上 忘归 利箭，在云梦泽广野上射猎蛟龙犀牛等巨兽，但是不慎把弓弄丢了，随从们请求去把弓找回来，楚王说： 楚国的国王丢了弓，也是楚国的人拾到的，又何必多此一举呢？ 
English: I heard that back then, King Chu used to pull a heavy, weak, and strong bow, mount a forgotten arrow, and shoot dragons, rhinoceroses, and other huge beasts in the vast fields of Yunmenze. However, he accidentally lost his bow, and his followers asked him to find it back. King Chu said, "The king of Chu lost his bow, and the people of Chu picked it up, so why do we need to do this?

古文：仲尼闻之曰： 楚王仁义而未遂也。
现代文：仲尼听到这件事时便评论着说： 楚王似乎讲仁义了，但却讲得不到家！
English: When Zhongni heard about this, he commented: King Chu seems to be talking about benevolence and righteousness, but he is talking about not being able to get a home!

古文：亦曰人亡弓，人得之而已，何必楚？ 
现代文：应该说：人丢了弓，人拾到就是了，又何必限定是楚国的人呢？ 
English: It should be said: If you lose your bow, you can just pick it up, and why should you be limited to people from the state of Chu?

古文：若此，仲尼异 楚人 与所谓 人 。
现代文：由此看来，您的先祖仲尼是把 楚人 与 人 区别开来的！
English: From this point of view, your ancestor Zhongni distinguished the Chu people from others!

古文：夫是仲尼异 楚人 与所谓 人 ，而非龙 白马 于所谓 马 ，悖。 
现代文：既然肯定了仲尼把 楚人 与 人 区别开来的主张，却反而反对我把 白马 与 马 区别开来的主张，这是您自己打自己的嘴巴了。
English: Since you have affirmed Zhongni's idea of distinguishing Chu people from people, but opposed my idea of distinguishing a white horse from a horse, you have hit yourself in the mouth.

古文： 先生修儒术而非仲尼之所取，欲学而使龙去所教，则虽百龙，固不能当前矣。 
现代文： 您既然信奉的是宗师仲尼的儒家学说，反而诽议仲尼所采取的理论宗旨；既又想跟我学习却又叫我放弃我的理论宗旨。这样，即使有比我贤能百倍的人，亦绝对没有办法能来当您的导师呵！ 
English: Since you believe in the Confucian doctrine of your mentor Zhong Ni, but slander the theoretical tenet adopted by Zhong Ni; while you want to study with me, you ask me to give up my theoretical tenet. In this way, even if there are people who are a hundred times more capable than me, there is absolutely no way to be your mentor!

古文：孔穿无以应焉。
现代文：孔穿答不上话来。
English: I couldn't get a word in edgewise.

古文：公孙龙，赵平原君之客也；孔穿，孔子之孙也。
现代文：公孙龙是赵国平原君的幕僚，孔穿是孔子的后裔。
English: Gongsunlong was an aide-de-camp of Zhao Guo Pingyuanjun, and Kongpeng was a descendant of Confucius.

古文：穿与龙会。穿谓龙曰： 臣居鲁，侧闻下风，高先生之智，说先生之行，愿受益之日久矣，乃今得见。
现代文：孔穿拜会公孙龙，便说： 鄙人住在鲁国，在下边久仰先生的声誉，羡慕先生的才智，钦佩先生的德行。老早想来受学承教，今天才有幸拜见。
English: When Kong Peng visited Gongsun Long of the association, he said: "I live in the country of Lu, and I have long respected Mr. Xie's reputation, admired Mr. Xie's talent, and admired Mr. Xie's virtue. I have long wanted to come to learn from him, and today I have the honor of meeting him.

古文：然所不取先生者，独不取先生之以白马为非马耳。请去白马非马之学，穿请为弟子。 
现代文：但是有点不敢苟同的是您那套白马异于马的学说而已，请您放弃的主张，我就甘拜为您的弟子。 
English: However, I am a little reluctant to agree with your doctrine that the white horse is different from the horse. Please give up your claim, and I will gladly be your disciple.

古文：公孙龙曰： 先生之言悖。龙之学，以白马为非马者也。
现代文：公孙龙说： 先生的话未免荒唐了，我的学问，就在于以白马异于马这个学术原则，要我放弃它，我便没有什么可教的了。
English: Gongsunlong said, "The professor's words are absurd. My learning lies in the academic principle that a white horse is different from a horse. If I were to give it up, I would have nothing to teach.

古文：使龙去之，则龙无以教；无以教而乃学于龙也者，悖。
现代文：让我没有什么可教，而却要跟我学习，这就荒唐了。
English: It's ridiculous that I have nothing to teach and they want to learn from me.

古文：且夫欲学于龙者，以智与学焉为不逮也。
现代文：况且想跟我学习，总是认为智慧与学识不如我把！
English: Moreover, he wants to learn from me and always thinks that wisdom and knowledge are not as good as me!

古文：今教龙去白马非马，是先教而后师之也；先教而后师之，不可。 
现代文：现在却来教训我必须放弃 白马非马 的主张，这是先教训人，然后要拜人为师。这种先摆出教师爷的架势然后才要当人家的学生，太不妥当了。
English: Now they are trying to teach me that I must give up my belief that the white horse is not the black horse. This is first to teach others, and then to be taught by others. This attitude of being a teacher first, and then being a student of others, is too inappropriate.

古文： 先生之所以教龙者，似齐王之谓尹文也。齐王之谓尹文曰： 寡人甚好士，以齐国无士，何也？ 
现代文： 先生用来教训我的东西，有点象齐王对尹文所谈的那样：齐王曾经对尹文说： 我很喜欢士人，可是齐国没有士人，这是什么缘故？ 
English: What my teacher used to teach me is a bit like what King Qi said to Yin Wen: King Qi once said to Yin Wen: I like scholars very much, but there are no scholars in Qi, why is that?

古文：尹文曰： 愿闻大王之所谓士者。 齐王无以应。
现代文：尹文说： 想倾听大王所谓士的标准是什么？ 
English: Yin Wen said: What is the criterion for wanting to listen to the great king's so-called scholar?

古文：尹文曰： 今有人于此，事君则忠，事亲则孝，交友则信，处乡则顺，有此四行，可谓士乎？ 
现代文：齐王一时说不上来。尹文接着说： 现在有这样的人，效劳君主很忠诚，奉侍父母很孝敬，结交朋友很诚实，对待乡亲很和顺，有这四种德行的人，可称为士了吗？ 
English: Yin Wen went on to say, "Nowadays, there are such people who are very loyal in serving the monarch, very filial in serving their parents, very honest in making friends, and very kind to their fellow countrymen. Can a person with these four kinds of virtues be called a gentleman?"

古文：齐王曰： 善！
现代文：齐王说： 那太好了！
English: Qi Wang said: That's great!

古文：此真吾所谓士也。 
现代文：这正是我所谓的士了。 
English: Now that's what I call a taxi.

古文：尹文曰： 王得此人，肯以为臣乎？ 
现代文：尹文说： 大王如果得到这样的人，愿意任用他为臣下吗？ 
English: Yin Wen said: If the great king gets such a person, would he be willing to appoint him as a vassal?

古文：王曰： 所愿而不可得也。  
现代文：齐王说： 那是我求之而不得的呀！ 
English: King Qi said, "That's what I've been asking for, but I can't get it!

古文： 是时齐王好勇。于是尹文曰： 使此人广众大庭之中，见侵侮而终不敢斗，王将以为臣乎？ 
现代文：当时齐王提倡勇敢战斗，于是尹文便说： 假使这样的人在大庭广众之中，受到欺负而始终不敢搏斗，大王还肯用他为臣吗？ 
English: At that time, King Qi advocated fighting bravely, so Yin Wen said: If such a person is bullied in public and still does not dare to fight, will the great king still use him as a vassal?

古文：王曰： 钜士也？
现代文：齐王说： 嘻！这还算什么士人？
English: Qi Wang said, "Haha! What kind of scholar is this?

古文：见侮而不斗，辱也！
现代文：遭受欺负而不敢争斗，多么耻辱！
English: To be bullied into not fighting, what a shame!

古文：辱则寡人不以为臣矣。 
现代文：受人侮辱而不知羞耻的人，我是决不会用他为臣的。 
English: I would never make a vassal of a man who is humiliated and knows no shame.

古文：尹文曰： 唯见侮而不斗，未失其四行也。
现代文：尹文说 虽然受到欺侮而不争斗，可是并没有失去这四种德行呀！
English: Yin Wen said that although he was bullied and did not fight, he did not lose these four virtues!

古文：是人未失其四行，其所以为士也然。
现代文：既然没有失去四种德行，那么人并没有失去作为士的资格！
English: Since he has not lost the four virtues, he has not lost his qualification as a scholar!

古文：而王一以为臣，一不以为臣，则向之所谓士者，乃非士乎？ 
现代文：然而，大王一下子想用他为臣，一下子又不肯用他为臣。那么请问：您刚才所说的 士 的标准，不算数了吗？ 
English: However, the great king suddenly wanted to use him as a vassal, and suddenly he did not want to use him as a vassal. So please ask: Does the standard of a vassal that you just mentioned not count?

古文：齐王无以应。 
现代文：齐王哑口无言了。 
English: King Qi was speechless.

古文： 尹文曰： 今有人君，将理其国，人有非则非之，无非则亦非之；有功则赏之，无功则亦赏之，而怨人之不理也，可乎？ 齐王曰： 不可。 
现代文： 尹文接着说： 现在有位君主，打算治理他的国家，人民有过错便处罚他，没有过错也要处罚他；有功劳便奖赏他，没有功劳也要奖赏他。这样管理他的国家，却反而埋怨人民不好管理，对吗？ 齐王说： 这当然不对罗！ 
English: Yin Wen went on to say: Now there is a monarch who intends to govern his country, the people will punish him if he is at fault, and punish him if he is not at fault; reward him if he has merit, and reward him if he does not have merit. He manages his country in this way, but complains that the people are not well managed, right? King Qi said: This is certainly not right!

古文：尹文曰： 臣口观下吏之理齐，齐方若此矣。 
现代文：尹文说： 以我的浅见看来，下面官吏治理齐国的办法，就象这个样子！ 
English: Yin Wen said: In my humble opinion, the following method of government officials governing Qi is just like this!

古文：王曰： 寡人理国，信若先生之言，人虽不理，寡人不敢怨也。
现代文：齐王说： 寡人治理国家，倘若象先生说的那样，人民即使不服管理，我也不敢埋怨的。
English: King Qi said, "There are too few people to govern the country. If, as you said, the people do not accept management, I would not dare to complain.

古文：意未至然与？ 
现代文：不过我想情况不至于那样吧！ 
English: But I don't think that will be the case!

古文： 尹文曰： 言之敢无说乎？
现代文：尹文说： 我那样说岂敢没有根据？
English: Yin Wen said, "How dare I say that without any basis?"

古文：王之令曰： 杀人者死，伤人者刑。 
现代文：大王的法令规定： 杀人的处死，伤人的判刑 。
English: Your law says: Kill and be killed, wound and be wounded.

古文：人有畏王之令者，见侮而终不敢斗，是全王之令也。
现代文：人们有威慑于大王法令的，受到欺负侮辱而始终不敢起来争斗，这是维护与遵守大王的法令啊！
English: People are intimidated by the great king's decree, bullied and insulted, and always dare not stand up and fight. This is the protection and observance of the great king's decree!

古文：而王曰： 见侮而不斗者，辱也。 
现代文：然而大王却说： 受到欺负侮辱而不敢起来争斗的，太耻辱了！ 
English: However, the great king said, "He who is bullied and insulted and does not dare to stand up and fight is a disgrace!"

古文：谓之辱，非之也。无非而王非之，故因除其籍，不以为臣也。不以为臣者，罚之也。此无而王罚之也。
现代文：大王说这种行为是耻辱的，就是宣布它是错误的，本来并没有过错而大王却加以谴责，因而国家取消了他作官的资格，不用他为臣了；不任用为臣就是一种惩罚，这是无罪而被大王惩罚了！
English: The great king said that this act was a disgrace, that is, he declared it to be wrong. Originally there was no fault, but the great king condemned it, so the state disqualified him from being an official, and he was not used as a vassal; not being appointed as a vassal was a punishment, it was innocent and the great king was punished!

古文：且王辱不敢斗者，必荣敢斗者也；荣敢斗者，是而王是之，必以为臣矣。
现代文：既然大王鄙视不敢争斗的人，必然赞扬敢于争斗的人；赞扬敢于争斗，就是宣布他是正确的，也就必然起用这种人为臣了。
English: Since the great king despises those who do not dare to fight, he must praise those who dare to fight; to praise the courage to fight is to declare that he is right, and it is inevitable to use such a person as a vassal.

古文：必以为臣者，赏之也。
现代文：必然起用为臣，就是最大的奖赏。
English: The inevitable appointment as a vassal is the greatest reward.

古文：彼无功而王赏之。
现代文：这种人毫无功劳而大王却大加奖赏。
English: This kind of person has no merit, but the great king has greatly rewarded him.

古文：王之所赏，吏之所诛也；上之所是，而法之所非也。
现代文：这样，大王所奖赏的，正是官吏所要诛罚的；君主所赞扬的，却是法律所禁止的。
English: Thus, what the sovereign rewards, the magistrate is bound to punish; what the sovereign commends, the law forbids.

古文：赏罚是非，相与四谬，虽十黄帝，不能理也。 
现代文：赏罚是非，四个方面互相矛盾。这种与治国之道背道而驰的情况，即使有十倍于黄帝本事的人，也不可能治理好国家。 
English: Reward and punishment are right and wrong, four aspects contradict each other. This situation, which runs counter to the way of governing the country, even if there are ten times more capable people than the Yellow Emperor, it is impossible to govern the country well.

古文：齐王无以应。 
现代文：齐王无话可答。
English: King Qi was speechless.

