古文：闻在宥天下，不闻治天下也。
现代文：只听说听任天下安然自在地发展，没有听说要对天下进行治理。
English: It is only said that the country should be allowed to develop peacefully and freely, but it is not said that the country should be governed.

古文：在之也者，恐天下之淫其性也；宥之也者，恐天下之迁其德也。天下不淫其性，不迁其德，有治天下者哉？
现代文：听任天下自在地发展，是因为担忧人们超越了原本的真性；宽容不迫各得其所，是因为担忧人们改变了自然的常态。天下人不超越原本的真性，不改变自然的常态，哪里用得着治理天下呢！
English: Allowing the world to develop freely is because of the concern that people have surpassed the original authenticity; tolerance is not forced to get its place, because of the concern that people have changed the normal state of nature. People around the world do not go beyond the original authenticity, do not change the normal state of nature, what is the use of governing the world!

古文：昔尧之治天下也，使天下欣欣焉人乐其性，是不恬也；桀之治天下也，使天下瘁瘁焉人苦其性，是不愉也。
现代文：从前唐尧治理天下，使天下人欣喜若狂人人都为有其真性而欢乐，这就不安宁了；当年夏桀治理天下，使天下人忧心不已人人都为有其真性而痛苦，这就不欢快了。
English: Once upon a time, Tang Xuan ruled the world and made everyone in the world rejoice. If everyone went crazy, everyone would be happy because they had their true nature, which would be restless. That year, Xia Xuan ruled the world and made everyone in the world worry endlessly. Everyone was miserable because they had their true nature, which was not happy.

古文：夫不恬不愉。
现代文：不安宁与不欢快，都不是人们生活和处世的常态。
English: Restlessness and unhappiness are not the norm in people's lives and dealings.

古文：非德也；非德也而可长久者，天下无之。
现代文：不合于自然的常态而可以长久存在，天下是没有的。
English: There is nothing in the world that can exist for a long time without conforming to the normal state of nature.

古文：人大喜邪，毗于阳；大怒邪，毗于阴。
现代文：人们过度欢欣，定会损伤阳气；人们过度愤怒，定会损伤阴气。
English: People's excessive joy will definitely damage the yang; people's excessive anger will definitely damage the yin.

古文：阴阳并毗，四时不至，寒暑之和不成，其反伤人之形乎！
现代文：阴与阳相互侵害，四时就不会顺应而至，寒暑也就不会调和形成，这恐怕反倒会伤害自身吧！
English: If yin and yang encroach on each other, four o'clock will not come, and cold and heat will not be reconciled. I'm afraid this will hurt themselves!

古文：使人喜怒失位，居处无常，思虑不自得，中道不成章。于是乎天下始乔诘卓鸷，而后有盗跖、曾、史之行。
现代文：使人喜怒失却常态，居处没有定规，考虑问题不得要领，办什么事都半途失去章法，于是天下就开始出现种种不平，而后便产生盗跖、曾参、史䲡等各各不同的行为和作法。
English: It is normal for people to lose their temper, there is no set rule for living, there is no point in considering the problem, and there is no rule for doing anything. As a result, all kinds of inequalities began to appear in the world, and then various behaviors and practices such as theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft, theft.

古文：故举天下以赏其善者不足，举天下以罚其恶者不给。故天下之大不足以赏罚。
现代文：所以，动员天下所有力量来奖励人们行善也嫌不够，动员天下所有力量来惩戒劣迹也嫌不足，因此天下虽很大仍不足以用来赏善罚恶。
English: Therefore, it is not enough to mobilize all the forces in the world to reward people for doing good, and it is not enough to mobilize all the forces in the world to punish bad deeds. Therefore, although the world is big, it is still not enough to reward good and punish evil.

古文：自三代以下者，匈匈焉终以赏罚为事，彼何暇安其性命之情哉！
现代文：自夏、商、周三代以来，始终是喋喋不休地把赏善罚恶当作当政之急务，他们又哪里有心思去安定人的自然本性和真情呢！
English: Ever since the Xia, Shang and San dynasties, they have been chattering endlessly about rewarding the good and punishing the evil as the urgent task of government. How could they have the heart to stabilize the natural nature and true feelings of the people!

古文：而且说明邪，是淫于色也；说聪邪，是淫于声也；说仁邪，是乱于德也；说义邪，是悖于理也；说礼邪，是相于技也；说乐邪，是相于淫也；说圣邪，是相于艺也；说知邪，是相于疵也。
现代文：且，喜好目明，这是沉溺于五彩；喜好耳聪，这是沉溺于声乐；喜好仁爱，这是扰乱人的自然常态；喜好道义，这是违反事物的常理；喜好礼仪，这就助长了烦琐的技巧；喜好音乐，这就助长了淫乐；喜好圣智，这就助长了技艺；喜好智巧，这就助长了琐细之差的争辩。
English: Moreover, to love the sight is to be addicted to colors; to love the hearing is to be addicted to vocal music; to love kindness is to disturb the natural norm of man; to love morality is to violate the common sense of things; to love etiquette is to promote tedious skills; to love music is to promote sexual pleasure; to love wisdom is to promote skills; to love cleverness is to promote the debate of minor differences.

古文：天下将安其性命之情，之八者，存可也，亡可也。天下将不安其性命之情，之八者，乃始脔卷狌囊而乱天下也。
现代文：天下人想要安定自然赋予的真情和本性，这八种作法，存留可以，丢弃也可以；天下人不想安定自然赋予的真情和本性，这八种作法，就会成为拳曲不伸、扰攘纷争的因素而迷乱天下了。
English: If people around the world want to stabilize the true feelings and nature given by nature, these eight practices can be retained or discarded. If people around the world do not want to stabilize the true feelings and nature given by nature, these eight practices will become factors that do not promote harmony and disturb conflicts and confuse the world.

古文：而天下乃始尊之惜之。甚矣，天下之惑也！
现代文：可是，天下人竟然会尊崇它，珍惜它，天下人为其所迷惑竟达到如此地步！
English: However, people all over the world actually revere it, cherish it, and people all over the world are bewitched by it to such an extent!

古文：岂直过也而去之邪！
现代文：这种种现象岂止是一代一代地流传下来呀！
English: This kind of phenomenon has not only been passed down from generation to generation!

古文：乃齐戒以言之，跪坐以进之，鼓歌以余儛之。
现代文：人们还虔诚地谈论它，恭敬地传颂它，欢欣地供奉它，对此我将能够怎么样呢！
English: People still talk about it reverently, venerate it reverently, and worship it joyfully. What can I do about it?

古文：吾若是何哉！故君子不得已而临莅天下，莫若无为。
现代文：所以君子是迫不得已才治理天下，最好的办法就是顺任自然。
English: Therefore, a gentleman is forced to rule the world, and the best way is to let nature take its course.

古文：无为也，而后安其性命之情。
现代文：顺任自然之后才能使天下人的本性和真情得到稳定的保持。
English: Only by following the course of nature can the nature and true feelings of the people of the world be maintained in a stable manner.

古文：故贵以身于为天下，则可以托天下；爱以身于为天下，则可以寄天下。
现代文：所以说，把自身看得比天下还重要的人，才可以把天下托付给他。把爱护自身看得比爱护天下还重要的人，才可以把天下寄付于他。
English: Therefore, only a person who regards himself as more important than the world can entrust the world to him. Only a person who regards caring for himself as more important than caring for the world can donate the world to him.

古文：故君子苟能无解其五藏，无擢其聪明，尸居而龙见，渊默而雷声，神动而天随，从容无为而万物炊累焉。
现代文：因此，君子若不去敞开他的五藏欲望，不有意显露聪明，安居不动而神采奕奕，沉静缄默而感人深切，精神活动都合于自然，从容无为而万物的蕃殖就像炊气积累而升。
English: Therefore, if a gentleman does not open up his five hidden desires, does not intentionally reveal his wisdom, is calm and lively, is quiet and silent, and is deeply moving, the spiritual activity is natural, and the proliferation of all things is like the accumulation of cooking gas.

古文：吾又何暇治天下哉！
现代文：我又何必需要去治理天下呢？
English: Why do I need to rule the world?

古文：崔瞿问于老聃曰： 不治天下，安藏人心？ 
现代文：崔瞿子向老聃请教： 不治理天下，怎么能使人心向善？ 
English: Cui Yanzi asked Lao Zi for advice: How can you make people good-hearted without ruling the world?

古文：老聃曰： 女慎，无撄人心。
现代文：老聃回答说： 你应谨慎而不要随意扰乱人心。
English: The old woman replied, "You should be careful not to disturb people's hearts.

古文：人心排下而进上，上下囚杀，淖约柔乎刚强，廉刿雕琢，其热焦火，其寒凝冰，其疾俯仰之间而再抚四海之外。其居也，渊而静；其动也，县而天。
现代文：人们的心情总是压抑便消沉颓丧而得志便趾高气扬，不过消沉颓丧或者趾高气扬都象是受到拘禁和伤害一样自累自苦，唯有柔弱顺应能软化刚强。端方而棱角外露容易受到挫折和伤害，情绪激烈时像熊熊大火，情绪低落时像凛凛寒冰。内心变化格外迅速转眼间再次巡游四海之外，静处时深幽宁寂，活动时腾跃高天。
English: People's moods are always depressed, then depressed and depressed, and when they are inspired, they are elated. However, depression or elation are self-inflicted as if they were detained and injured. Only weak compliance can soften the strong. The edges and corners are exposed and vulnerable to setbacks and injuries. When the mood is intense, it is like a raging fire, and when the mood is low, it is like a biting cold ice. The inner changes are particularly rapid. In the blink of an eye, we are once again cruising beyond the four seas. When it is quiet, it is deep and quiet, and when it is active, it is soaring high into the sky.

古文：偾骄而不可系者，其唯人心乎！昔者黄帝始以仁义撄人之心，尧、舜于是乎股无胈，胫无毛，以养天下之形。愁其五藏以为仁义，矜其血气以规法度。
现代文：骄矜不禁而无所拘系的，恐怕就只是人的内心活动吧！ 当年黄帝开始用仁义来扰乱人心，尧和舜于是疲于奔波而腿上无肉、胫上秃毛，用以养育天下众多的形体，满心焦虑地推行仁义，并耗费心血来制定法度。
English: When the Yellow Emperor began to use benevolence and righteousness to disturb people's hearts, Yan and Zou were so exhausted from running around that they had no flesh on their legs and bald hair on their beards, which they used to nurture the many forms in the world, anxiously promoted benevolence and righteousness, and worked hard to establish laws and regulations.

古文：然犹有不胜也。
现代文：然而他还是未能治理好天下。
English: However, he still failed to govern the country well.

古文：尧于是放驩兜于崇山，投三苗于三峗，流共工于幽都，此不胜天下也。
现代文：此后尧将欢兜放逐到南方的崇山，将三苗放逐到西北的三峗，将共工放逐到北方的幽都，这些就是没能治理好天下的明证。
English: After that, Zou banished Huanbu to the southern city of Chongshan, Sanmiao to the northwestern city of Sanqi, and the co-workers to the northern city of Yutou. These are clear evidence of failing to govern the world well.

古文：夫施及三王而天下大骇矣。下有桀、跖，上有曾、史，而儒墨毕起。
现代文：延续到夏、商、周三代更是多方面地惊扰了天下的人民，下有夏桀、盗跖之流，上有曾参、史䲡之流，而儒家和墨家的争辩又全面展开。
English: The Xia, Shang and San dynasties, which continued into the Xia, Shang and San dynasties, even more alarmed the people of the world in many ways. There were the Xia and Zou dynasties, and the Zeng and Shi dynasties, while the debate between Confucianists and Mohists was in full swing.

古文：于是乎喜怒相疑，愚知相欺，善否相非，诞信相讥，而天下衰矣；大德不同，而性命烂漫矣；天下好知，而百姓求竭矣。
现代文：这样一来或喜或怒相互猜疑，或愚或智相互欺诈，或善或恶相互责难，或妄或信相互讥刺，因而天下也就逐渐衰败了；基本观念和生活态度如此不同，人类的自然本性散乱了，天下都追求智巧，百姓中便纷争迭起。
English: In this way, whether joy or anger, they suspect each other, or stupidity or wisdom, they deceive each other, or good or evil, they blame each other, or arrogance or faith, they ridicule each other, so the world is gradually decaying; the basic concepts and attitudes of life are so different, the natural nature of human beings is scattered, the world is pursuing cleverness, and the people are in conflict.

古文：于是乎斤锯制焉，绳墨杀焉，椎凿决焉。
现代文：于是用斧锯之类的刑具来制裁他们，用绳墨之类的法度来规范他们，用椎凿之类的肉刑来惩处他们。
English: So they used instruments of torture such as axes and saws to punish them, laws such as rope and ink to regulate them, and physical punishment such as chisels to punish them.

古文：天下脊脊大乱，罪在撄人心。
现代文：天下相互践踏而大乱，罪在扰乱了人心。
English: The whole world is trampling on each other and is in turmoil. Sin has disturbed people's hearts.

古文：故贤者伏处大山嵁岩之下，而万乘之君忧栗乎庙堂之上。
现代文：因此贤能的人隐居于高山深谷之下，而帝王诸侯忧心如焚战栗在朝堂之上。
English: For this reason, the virtuous live in seclusion beneath the high mountains and deep valleys, while emperors and princes tremble with anxiety above the imperial palace.

古文：今世殊死者相枕也，桁杨者相推也，形戮者相望也，而儒墨乃始离跂攘臂乎桎梏之间。
现代文：当今之世，遭受杀害的人尸体一个压着一个，带着脚镣手铐而坐大牢的人一个挨着一个，受到刑具伤害的人更是举目皆然，而儒家墨家竟然在枷锁和羁绊中挥手舞臂地奋力争辩。唉，真是太过份了！
English: In today's world, the bodies of people who have been killed are one on top of the other, people who are in prison with shackles and handcuffs are one next to the other, people who have been injured by torture devices are even more obvious, and Confucianists are waving their arms and wrangling in chains and shackles. Alas, it is really too much!

古文：意，甚矣哉！其无愧而不知耻也甚矣！
现代文：他们不知心愧、不识羞耻竟然达到这等地步！
English: They don't know what they're doing, they don't know the shame of getting to this point!

古文：吾未知圣知之不为桁杨椄槢也，仁义之不为桎梏凿枘也，焉知曾、史之不为桀、跖嚆矢也！故曰：绝圣弃知，而天下大治。
现代文：我不知道那所谓的圣智不是脚镣手铐上用作连接左右两部分的插木，我也不明白那所谓的仁义不是枷锁上用作加固的孔穴和木拴，又怎么知道曾参和史䲡之流不是夏桀和盗跖的先导！所以说， 断绝圣人，抛弃智慧，天下就会得到治理而太平无事 。 
English: I do not know that the so-called sacred wisdom is not a plug used to connect the left and right parts of the shackles on the shackles, nor do I understand that the so-called benevolence and righteousness are not holes and logs used as reinforcement on the shackles, nor how to know that the Zengzang and Shiwu streams are not the forerunners of the Xiaqi and the robbers! Therefore, if we cut off the saints and abandon wisdom, the world will be governed and there will be no trouble.

古文：黄帝立为天子十九年，令行天下，闻广成子在于空同之上，故往见之，曰： 我闻吾子达于至道，敢问至道之精。
现代文：黄帝做了十九年天子，诏令通行天下，听说广成子居住在崆峒山上，特意前往拜见他，说： 我听说先生已经通晓至道，冒昧地请教至道的精华。
English: The Yellow Emperor had been emperor for nineteen years, and the edict had been promulgated all over the world. Hearing that Guangcheng lived on Lushan Mountain, he made a special trip to visit him, saying, "I heard that you have mastered the essence of the Tao, and you have the audacity to consult the essence of the Tao."

古文：吾欲取天地之精，以佐五谷，以养民人。
现代文：我一心想获取天地的灵气，用来帮助五谷生长，用来养育百姓。
English: I only wanted to obtain the aura of heaven and earth, to help the grain grow, and to nurture the people.

古文：吾又欲官阴阳以遂群生，为之奈何？ 
现代文：我又希望能主宰阴阳，从而使众多生灵遂心地成长，对此我将怎么办？ 
English: I also hope to dominate yin and yang, so that many sentient beings can grow up wholeheartedly. What should I do about this?

古文：广成子曰： 而所欲问者，物之质也；而所欲官者，物之残也。
现代文：广成子回答说： 你所想问的，是万事万物的根本；你所想主宰的，是万事万物的残留。
English: Guangcheng Zi replied: What you want to ask is the root of all things; what you want to dominate is the remnant of all things.

古文：自而治天下，云气不待族而雨，草木不待黄而落，日月之光益以荒矣，而佞人之心翦翦者，又奚足以语至道！ 
现代文：自从你治理天下，天上的云气不等到聚集就下起雨来，地上的草木不等到枯黄就飘落凋零，太阳和月亮的光亮也渐渐地晦暗下来。然而谗谄的小人心地是那么偏狭和恶劣，又怎么能够谈论大道！ 
English: Since you have been ruling the world, the clouds in the sky do not wait for gathering to rain, the plants on the ground do not wait for withering to wither, and the brightness of the sun and the moon gradually darken. However, the narrow-minded and evil-minded people are so narrow-minded, how can they talk about the avenue!

古文：黄帝退，捐天下，筑特室，席白茅，闲居三月，复往邀之。
现代文：黄帝听了这一席话便退了回来，弃置朝政，筑起清心寂智的静室，铺着洁白的茅草，谢绝交往独居三月，再次前往求教。
English: After listening to this speech, the Yellow Emperor retreated back, abandoned court politics, built a quiet room with a pure heart and a quiet mind, covered with pure white thatch, refused to socialize, lived alone in March, and went to seek advice again.

古文：广成子南首而卧，黄帝顺下风膝行而进，再拜稽首而问曰： 闻吾子达于至道，敢问：治身奈何而可以长久？ 
现代文：广成子头朝南地躺着，黄帝则顺着下方，双膝着地匍匐向前，叩头着地行了大礼后问道： 听说先生已经通晓至道，冒昧地请教，修养自身怎么样才能活得长久？ 
English: Guangcheng's son lay with his head facing south, while Huangdi followed below, kneeled and prostrated forward, bowed down and performed a grand salute, and then asked: I heard that you have been well-versed in the Tao, and you have the audacity to ask for advice. How can you cultivate yourself to live long?

古文：广成子蹶然而起，曰： 善哉问乎！
现代文：广成子急速地挺身而起，说： 问得好啊！
English: Hiroshige quickly stood up and said, "That was a good question!

古文：来，吾语女至道：至道之精，窈窈冥冥；至道之极，昏昏默默。
现代文：来，我告诉给你至道。至道的精髓，幽深渺远；至道的至极，晦暗沉寂。
English: Come, I will tell you the way; the essence of the way is deep and far away; the extremity of the way is dark and silent.

古文：无视无听，抱神以静，形将自正。
现代文：什么也不看什么也不听，持守精神保持宁静，形体自然顺应正道。
English: Do not look at anything or listen to anything, keep the spirit calm, and the body naturally conforms to the right path.

古文：必静必清，无劳女形，无摇女精，乃可以长生。
现代文：一定要保持宁寂和清静，不要使身形疲累劳苦，不要使精神动荡恍惚，这样就可以长生。
English: Be sure to maintain peace and tranquility, do not make the body tired and laborious, do not make the spirit turbulent and trance, so that you can live forever.

古文：目无所见，耳无所闻，心无所知，女神将守形，形乃长生。
现代文：眼睛什么也没看见，耳朵什么也没听到，内心什么也不知晓，这样你的精神定能持守你的形体，形体也就长生。
English: Your eyes see nothing, your ears hear nothing, your heart knows nothing, so that your spirit may preserve your body, and your body may live forever.

古文：慎女内，闭女外，多知为败。
现代文：小心谨慎地摒除一切思虑，封闭起对外的一切感官，智巧太盛定然招致败亡。
English: Carefully and cautiously eliminate all doubts, close all senses to the outside world, and too much cleverness will surely lead to defeat.

古文：我为女遂于大明之上矣，至彼至阳之原也；为女入于窈冥之门矣，至彼至阴之原也。
现代文：我帮助你达到最光明的境地，直达那阳气的本原。我帮助你进入到幽深渺远的大门，直达那阴气的本原。
English: I help you to reach the brightest state, straight to the origin of the yang, and I help you to enter the gate of the profound, straight to the origin of the yin.

古文：天地有官，阴阳有藏。慎守女身，物将自壮。
现代文：天和地都各有主宰，阴和阳都各有府藏，谨慎地守护你的身形，万物将会自然地成长。
English: Heaven and earth each have their own masters, and yin and yang each have their own storehouses. Guard your body carefully, and all things will grow naturally.

古文：我守其一以处其和。故我修身千二百岁矣，吾形未常衰。 
现代文：我持守着浑一的大道而又处于阴阳二气调谐的境界，所以我修身至今已经一千二百年，而我的身形还从不曾有过衰老。 
English: I adhere to the path of uniformity and am in the realm of the harmony of yin and yang, so I have been cultivating my body for 1200 years, and my body has never aged.

古文：黄帝再拜稽首曰： 广成子之谓天矣！ 广成子曰： 来！
现代文：黄帝再次行了大礼叩头至地说： 先生真可说是跟自然混而为一了！ 广成子又说： 来，我告诉你。
English: The Yellow Emperor once again made a grand salute, bowed his head and said, "The teacher is truly one with nature!" Guangcheng Zi also said, "Come, I will tell you.

古文：余语女：彼其物无穷，而人皆以为有终；彼其物无测，而人皆以为有极。
现代文：宇宙间的事物是没有穷尽的，然而人们却认为有个尽头；宇宙间的事物是不可能探测的，然而人们却认为有个极限。
English: Things in the universe are inexhaustible, yet people think there is an end; things in the universe are impossible to detect, yet people think there is a limit.

古文：得吾道者，上为皇而下为王；失吾道者，上见光而下为土。
现代文：掌握了我所说的道的人，在上可以成为皇帝，在下可以成为王侯；不能掌握我所说的道的人，在上只能见到日月的光亮，在下只能化为土块。
English: Those who have mastered the Way I have spoken of can become emperors on high and princes on low; those who cannot master the Way I have spoken of can only see the light of the sun and moon on high, and can only be turned into clods of earth on low.

古文：今夫百昌皆生于土而反于土。故余将去女，入无穷之门，以游无极之野。
现代文：如今万物昌盛可都生于土地又返归土地，所以我将离你而去，进入那没有穷尽的大门，从而遨游于没有极限的原野。
English: Now all things are born from the earth and return to the earth, so I will leave you and enter the inexhaustible gate, thus wandering in the boundless field.

古文：吾与日月参光，吾与天地为常。
现代文：我将与日月同光，我将与天地共存。
English: I will co-exist with the sun and the moon, I will co-exist with heaven and earth.

古文：当我缗乎，远我昏乎！
现代文：向着我而来，我无所觉察！
English: Coming towards me, I didn't see it coming!

古文：人其尽死，而我独存乎！ 
现代文：背着我而去，我无所在意！人们恐怕都要死去，而我还独自留下来吗？ 
English: I don't care if they leave me behind! I'm afraid people are going to die, and am I going to be left alone?

古文：云将东游，过扶摇之枝而适遭鸿蒙。
现代文：云将去东方游历，经过扶摇神树的枝旁时正好遇到鸿蒙。
English: The cloud will travel to the east, and when passing by the branches of the swaying sacred tree, it just happens to encounter the vastness.

古文：鸿蒙方将拊脾雀跃而游。
现代文：鸿蒙正在拍着大腿跳跃着游玩。
English: Hongmeng is patting his thighs and jumping around.

古文：鸿蒙拊脾雀跃不辍，对云将曰： 游！ 
现代文：云将见到他，惊疑地停下来，一动不动地站着问： 老先生是什么人？怎么会这样？ 鸿蒙拍着大腿跳跃不停，对云将说： 游玩啊！ 
English: Yun Zheng saw him, stopped in surprise, stood motionless and asked: Who is the old gentleman? How did this happen? Hong Meng patted his thighs and kept jumping, saying to Yun Zheng: Have fun!

古文：云将曰： 朕愿有问也。 
现代文：云将又说： 我想向您请教。 
English: Yun Zheng also said: I want to ask you for advice.

古文：鸿蒙仰而视云将曰： 吁！ 
现代文：鸿蒙抬头看看云将说： 啊！ 
English: Hung Meng will look up at the clouds and say: Ah!

古文：云将曰： 天气不和，地气郁结，六气不调，四时不节。
现代文：云将说： 上天之气不和谐，地上之气有郁结。六气不顺畅，四季变化不合节时。
English: Yun Zheng said: The air of heaven is not harmonious, and the air of the earth is stagnant. The six airs are not smooth, and the four seasons are not in season.

古文：今我愿合六气之精以育群生，为之奈何？ 
现代文：如今我想融合六气的精华去养护群生灵，怎么样去做呢？ 
English: Now I want to integrate the essence of the six qi to conserve sentient beings. How can I do this?

古文：鸿蒙拊脾雀跃掉头曰： 吾弗知！
现代文：鸿蒙拍着腿跳跃着回过头来答： 我不知道！
English: Hongmeng patted his leg and hopped around, turning around to answer: I don't know!

古文：吾弗知！ 
现代文：我不知道！ 
English: I don't know!

古文：云将不得问。
现代文：云将没有得到答案。
English: The cloud will not get an answer.

古文：又三年，东游，过有宋之野，而适遭鸿蒙。
现代文：又过了三年，云将再次巡游东方，路经宋国的郊外恰好遇到鸿蒙。
English: After another three years, the cloud will once again cruise the East, passing through the suburbs of Song just to meet Hongmeng.

古文：云将大喜，行趋而进曰： 天忘朕邪？
现代文：云将非常高兴，赶忙上前说： 你忘记我了吗？
English: Cloud will be very happy, hurriedly stepped forward and said: Have you forgotten me?

古文：天忘朕邪？ 
现代文：你忘记我了吗？ 
English: Have you forgotten me?

古文：再拜稽首，愿闻于鸿蒙。
现代文：再次叩头行礼，希望鸿蒙教导。
English: He bowed again, hoping for further instruction.

古文：鸿蒙曰： 浮游不知所求，猖狂不知所往，游者鞅掌，以观无妄。
现代文：鸿蒙说： 随便游巡，不知道求取什么。散散漫漫，不知道去往哪里。
English: Hongmeng said, "I wandered around at will, not knowing what to look for. I wandered around aimlessly, not knowing where to go.

古文：朕又何知！ 
现代文：游于纷纷扰扰之中，去体察宇宙的本真，我又知道什么。 
English: What do I know, swimming in the midst of all the disturbances, to experience the true nature of the universe.

古文：云将曰： 朕也自以为猖狂，而民随予所往；朕也不得已于民，今则民之放也！
现代文：云将说； 我也自认为无所用心，可百姓们却追随在我身后，我不得已同人民联系，现在又被人民仿效。
English: The clouds will say, I also thought I was careless, but the people followed me, I had no choice but to contact the people, and now I am being imitated by the people.

古文：愿闻一言。 
现代文：想听听您的见解。 
English: We'd like to hear from you.

古文：鸿蒙曰： 乱天之经，逆物之情，玄天弗成，解兽之群而鸟皆夜鸣，灾及草木，祸及止虫。
现代文：鸿蒙说： 扰乱了自然的常规，违背了事物的本性，自然的原貌被破坏了。野兽离散，鸟儿夜啼，草木遭灾，虫子遭难。噫！
English: Hongmeng said: Disrupted the natural routine, violated the nature of things, and the original appearance of nature was destroyed. Beasts were scattered, birds and nightingales were scattered, plants and trees were plagued, and insects were plagued.

古文：意！治人之过也。 
现代文：这是治理人民的罪过啊！ 
English: This is the sin of governing the people!

古文：云将曰： 然则吾奈何？ 
现代文：云将说： 但是我该怎么办？ 
English: Yun Zheng said: But what should I do?

古文：鸿蒙曰： 意！
现代文：鸿蒙说： 噫！
English: Hongmeng said, "Bang!

古文：毒哉！僊僊乎归矣！ 
现代文：你中毒太深了，快点就这样回去吧！ 
English: You're too intoxicated, hurry up and go back!

古文：云将曰： 吾遇天难，愿闻一言。 鸿蒙曰： 意！
现代文：云将说： 我遇到你很不容易，想听听您的见解。 鸿蒙说； 噫！
English: Yun Zheng said, "It was not easy for me to meet you, I would like to hear your opinion." Hong Meng said, "Bah!

古文：心养！
现代文：你去养心吧！
English: Go take care of yourself!

古文：汝徒处无为，而物自化。
现代文：你只要顺应自然无所作为，万物就会自生自灭。
English: As long as you conform to nature and do nothing, everything will fend for itself.

古文：堕尔形体，吐尔聪明，伦与物忘，大同乎涬溟。解心释神，莫然无魂。
现代文：毁掉你的形体，堵塞你的听觉、视觉，常规和万物一起被忘记，与自然之气相融通，解除你的心虑，释放你的精神，无所用心而内心混沌。
English: Destroy your body, block your hearing, vision, routine and all things are forgotten together, integrate with the natural atmosphere, relieve your worries, release your spirit, no intention and inner chaos.

古文：万物云云，各复其根，各复其根而不知。浑浑沌沌，终身不离。
现代文：万物纷纭复杂，各自返归它的根本，各自返回根本而不带智巧，混混沌沌保持真性，终身不相违背。
English: All things are manifold and complex, each returning to its root, each returning to the root without cleverness, chaos and confusion remain true, and do not contradict each other for life.

古文：若彼知之，乃是离之。
现代文：假如使用智巧，就会违背本真。
English: If you use cleverness, it will go against the original.

古文：无问其名，无窥其情，物固自生。 
现代文：不要询问它的名称，不要窥究它的实情，万物本来是会自然生长。 
English: Don't ask its name, don't pry into its truth, everything will naturally grow.

古文：云将曰： 天降朕以德，示朕以默。躬身求之，乃今得也。 
现代文：云将说： 你把道理传授给了我，告诉我要持守虚静，亲自去追求，今天才得到这个道理。 
English: Yun Zheng said: You have taught me the truth, told me to hold on to emptiness and pursue it myself, and I only got this truth today.

古文：再拜稽首，起辞而行。
现代文：再次叩头行礼，起身告辞而去。
English: He bowed again, stood up and left.

古文：世俗之人，皆喜人之同乎己而恶人之异于己也。
现代文：世俗的人，都喜欢别人与自己相同，不喜欢别人与自己不同。
English: Worldly people all like others to be the same as themselves, and dislike others who are different from themselves.

古文：同于己而欲之，异于己而不欲者，以出乎众为心也。
现代文：希望别人跟自己相同，不希望别人跟自己不一样的人，总是把出人头地当作自己主要的内心追求。
English: People who want others to be the same as themselves, and do not want others to be different from themselves, always regard getting ahead as their main inner pursuit.

古文：夫以出乎众为心者，曷常出乎众哉？
现代文：那些一心只想出人头地的人，何尝又能够真正超出众人呢！
English: Those who only want to get ahead, how can they really surpass others?

古文：因众以宁所闻，不如众技众矣。
现代文：随顺众人之意当然能够得到安宁，可是个人的所闻总不如众人的技艺多才智高。
English: Of course, you can get peace by following the will of the crowd, but what you hear from an individual is always inferior to the skill, talent and wisdom of the crowd.

古文：而欲为人之国者，此揽乎三王之利而不见其患者也。
现代文：希图治理邦国的人，必定是贪取夏、商、周三代帝王之利而又看不到这样做的后患的人。
English: Those who want to govern a country must be greedy for the benefits of summer, business, and the third generation of emperors without seeing the consequences of doing so.

古文：此以人之国侥幸也。几何侥幸而不丧人之国乎？
现代文：这样做是凭借统治国家的权力贪求个人的侥幸，而贪求个人的侥幸而不至于丧失国家统治权力的又有多少呢！
English: To do so is to seek personal fortune by virtue of the power to rule the country, but how much better is it to seek personal fortune without losing the power to rule the country!

古文：其存人之国也，无万分之一；而丧人之国也，一不成而万有余丧矣！
现代文：他们中能够保存国家的，不到万分之一，而丧失国家的，自身一无所成而且还会留下许多祸患。
English: Fewer than one in ten thousand of them are able to preserve the state, and those who lose the state have accomplished nothing themselves and will leave behind many evils.

古文：悲夫，有土者之不知也！
现代文：可悲呀，拥有土地的统治者是何等的不聪明！
English: Alas, how unwise are the rulers of the land!

古文：夫有土者，有大物也。
现代文：拥有土地的国君，必然拥有众多的物品。
English: A sovereign who owns land is bound to own a large number of items.

古文：有大物者，不可以物。物而不物，故能物物。
现代文：拥有众多的物品却不可以受外物所役使，使用外物而不为外物所役使，所以能够主宰天下万物。
English: Possessing a large number of items, they can't be used by external things, use external things without being used by external things, so they can dominate everything in the world.

古文：明乎物物者之非物也，岂独治天下百姓而已哉！
现代文：明白了拥有外物又能主宰外物的人本身就不是物，岂只是治理天下百姓而已啊！
English: A person who understands that he possesses and can dominate external things is not a thing in itself, but merely governs the people of the world!

古文：出入六合，游乎九州，独往独来，是谓独有。
现代文：这样的人已经能往来于天地四方，游乐于整个世界，独自无拘无束地去，又自由自在地来，这样的人就叫做拥有万物而又超脱于万物。
English: Such a person has been able to travel to the four corners of the world, enjoy the whole world, go alone without restraint, and come freely. Such a person is said to possess all things and transcend all things.

古文：独有之人，是之谓至贵。
现代文：拥有万物而又超脱于万物的人，这就称得上是至高无上的贵人。
English: He who possesses all things and yet transcends all things can be said to be the noblest of nobles.

古文：大人之教，若形之于影，声之于响，有问而应之，尽其所怀，为天下配。
现代文：至贵之人的教诲，就好像形躯对于身影，传声对于回响。有提问就有应答，竭尽自己所能，为天下人的提问作出应答。
English: The precepts of the most excellent are as the form to the shadow, and the voice to the echo: if there is a question, there is an answer; if there is a question, there is an answer; if there is a question, there is an answer.

古文：处乎无响。行乎无方。挈汝适复之，挠挠以游无端，出入无旁，与日无始。颂论形躯，合乎大同。大同而无己。
现代文：处心于没有声响的境界，活动在变化不定的地方，引领着人们往返于纷扰的世界，从而遨游在无始无终的浩渺之境，或出或进都无须依傍，像跟随太阳那样周而复始地没有尽头；容颜、谈吐和身形躯体均和众人一样，大家都是一样也就无所谓自身。
English: The mind is in the realm of no sound, the activities are in the place of change and uncertainty, leading people to and from the turbulent world, thus wandering in the vastness of no beginning and no end. There is no need to go out or in, like following the sun. There is no end to the cycle. The face, speech and body shape are all the same as everyone else, and everyone is the same, no matter who they are.

古文：无己，恶乎得有有。
现代文：无所谓自身，哪里用得着据有各种物象！
English: It doesn't matter where you are, there are all kinds of things to do!

古文：睹有者，昔之君子；睹无者，天地之友。
现代文：看到了自身和各种物象的存在，这是过去的君子；看不到自身的各种物象的存在，这就跟永恒的天地结成了朋友。
English: Seeing the existence of oneself and various objects, this is the gentleman of the past; not seeing the existence of various objects of oneself, this is making friends with the eternal heaven and earth.

古文：贱而不可不任者，物也；卑而不可不因者，民也；匿而不可不为者，事也；粗而不可不陈者，法也；远而不可不居者，义也；亲而不可不广者，仁也；节而不可不积者，礼也；中而不可不高者，德也；一而不可不易者，道也；神而不可不为者，天也。
现代文：低贱然而不可不听任的，是万物；卑微然而不可不随顺的，是百姓；不显眼然而不可不去做的，是事情；不周全然而不可不陈述的，是可供效法的言论；距离遥远但又不可不恪守的，是道义；亲近然而不可不扩展的，是仁爱；细末的小节不可不累积的，是礼仪；顺依其性然而不可不尊崇的，是德；本于一气然而不可不变化的，是道；神妙莫测然而不可不顺应的，是自然。
English: All things are lowly, yet they must be obeyed; humble, yet they must be obeyed, they are the people; inconspicuous, yet they must be done, they are things; incomplete, yet they must be stated, they are sayings that can be imitated; distant, yet they must be observed, they are morals; close, yet they must be expanded, they are benevolence; small details, yet they must be accumulated, they are etiquette; conformity, yet they must be respected, they are virtue; inherent, yet they must be unchanging, they are the way; mysterious, yet they must be obeyed, they are nature.

古文：故圣人观于天而不助，成于德而不累，出于道而不谋，会于仁而不恃，薄于义而不积，应于礼而不讳，接于事而不辞，齐于法而不乱，恃于民而不轻，因于物而不去。
现代文：所以圣人观察自然的神妙却不去帮助，成就了无暇的修养却不受拘束，行动出于道却不是事先有所考虑，符合仁的要求却并不有所依赖，接近了道义却不积不留，应合礼仪却不回避，接触琐事却不推迟，同于法度而不肆行妄为，依靠百姓而不随意役使，遵循事物变化的规律而不轻率离弃。
English: Therefore, the sage observes the miraculousness of nature but does not help, achieves immaculate cultivation but is not constrained, acts out of the way but does not consider it in advance, meets the requirements of benevolence but does not rely on it, approaches morality but does not accumulate, conforms to etiquette but does not avoid it, touches trifles but does not postpone it, is equal to the law but does not act recklessly, relies on the people but does not serve them at will, follows the law of change of things but does not abandon them lightly.

古文：物者莫足为也，而不可不为。
现代文：万事万物均不可强为，但又不可不为。
English: You can't force everything, but you can't do without.

古文：不明于天者，不纯于德；不通于道者，无自而可；不明于道者，悲夫！
现代文：不明白自然的演变和规律，也就不会具备纯正的修养；不通晓道的人，没有什么事情可以办成。不通晓道的人，可悲啊！
English: If you do not understand the evolution and laws of nature, you will not have a pure cultivation; if you do not understand the Tao, nothing can be done. If you do not understand the Tao, you are pathetic!

古文：何谓道？
现代文：什么叫做道？
English: What is a road?

古文：有天道，有人道。
现代文：有天道，有人道。
English: Where there is heaven, there is humanity.

古文：无为而尊者，天道也；有为而累者，人道也。
现代文：无所事事无所作为却处于崇高地位的，这就是天道，事必躬亲有所作为而积劳累苦的，这就是人道。
English: To be idle and inactive, yet to be in a lofty position, this is the way of heaven; to be diligent and active, yet to accumulate hardships, this is humanity.

古文：主者，天道也；臣者，人道也。
现代文：君王就是天道，臣下就是人道。
English: The king is the way of heaven, the vassal is the way of humanity.

古文：天道之与人道也，相去远矣，不可不察也。
现代文：天道跟人道比较，相差实在太远，不能不细加体察。
English: Comparing the way of heaven and the way of humanity, the difference is too far to be ignored.

