古文：王破原阳，以为骑邑。
现代文：赵武灵王撤消原阳军队的旧编制，组建骑兵，把原阳作为训练骑射的营地。
English: King Zhao Wuling abolished the old organization of the Yuanyang army, formed a cavalry, and used Yuanyang as a training camp for cavalry shooting.

古文：牛赞进谏曰： 国有固籍，兵有常经。
现代文：牛赞进谏说： 国家有固定的法令，军队有长久不变的准则。
English: Niu Zan Jinqi said: The country has fixed laws and regulations, and the military has long-term and unchanging standards.

古文：变籍则乱，失经则弱。
现代文：改变法令国家就会混乱，夫去准则军队就会削弱。
English: Change the laws and the country will be in turmoil, change the rules and the military will be weakened.

古文：今王破原阳，以为骑邑，是变籍而弃经也。
现代文：如今君王撤消原阳军队的昭编制，建立骑兵，把原阳作为训练骑射的基地，这是改变法令并抛弃准则的做法。
English: Now that the king has abolished the Zhao formation of the Yuanyang army, established cavalry, and used Yuanyang as a base for training cavalry shooting, this is a practice of changing laws and abandoning standards.

古文：且习其兵者轻其敌，便其用者易其难。
现代文：况且熟习他们原来兵器装备的将士才能轻敌敢战，对器用感到方便的人，难事也会觉得很容易。
English: Moreover, only soldiers who are familiar with their original weapons and equipment can dare to fight lightly, and those who find it convenient to use equipment will also find it easy to do difficult things.

古文：今民便其用而王变之，是损君而弱国也。
现代文：如今民众对器用感到便于使用而君王却改变了它，这是损害君王声誉并削弱国家力量的做法。
English: Now that people find it easy to use, the king has changed it, which is a way to damage the reputation of the king and weaken the power of the state.

古文：故利不百者不变俗，功不什者不易器。
现代文：所以利益不到百倍不能改变风俗，功效不能增加十倍就不更换器具。
English: Therefore, if the profit is less than a hundred times, the custom cannot be changed, and if the efficacy cannot be increased by ten times, the appliance will not be replaced.

古文：今王破卒散兵，以奉骑射，臣恐其攻获之利，不如所失之费也。 
现代文：如今君王拆散原来军队的编制，而奉行骑马射箭，臣下害怕它攻战获得的利益，赶不上所损失的费用。 
English: Now that the king has broken up the original army formation and pursues horseback archery, his subjects are afraid that the benefits gained from the attack will not catch up with the costs lost.

古文：王曰： 古今异利，远近易用。
现代文：武灵王说： 古代和今天的利害不一致，边远和中原地区可以改换器用。
English: Wuling Wang said: The interests of ancient times and today are not the same. The remote and Central Plains regions can be used as substitutes.

古文：阴阳不同道，四时不一宜。
现代文：阴阳变化规律不同，四季的推移各有所宜。
English: Yin and yang have different patterns of change, and the course of the four seasons is different.

古文：故贤人观时，而不观于时；制兵，而不制于兵。
现代文：所以贤明的人观察时俗而不被时俗所牵制，制造兵器而不被兵器所制约。
English: Therefore, a wise person observes the times and customs without being constrained by the times and customs, and manufactures weapons without being restricted by weapons.

古文：子知官府之籍，不知器械之利；知兵甲之用，不知阴阳之宜。
现代文：您知道官府的法令，不知道改换器用的利益；您知道兵器铠甲的用途，不知道天时人事变化中所适宜采取的措施。
English: You know the decrees of the government, but you do not know the benefits of the converter; you know the use of weapons and armor, but you do not know the appropriate measures to take in the event of personnel changes.

古文：故兵不当于用，何兵之不可易?
现代文：所以兵器不适合应用，什么兵器不可以改换？
English: Therefore, the weapon is not suitable for application, what weapon cannot be replaced?

古文：教不便于事，何俗之不可变?
现代文：教化不便于行事，什么风俗不可以改变？
English: Indoctrination is inconvenient to act, what customs can not be changed?

古文：昔者先君襄主与代交地，城境封之，名曰无穷之门，所以昭后而期远也。
现代文：从前先君襄主的边境与代国接壤，就在边境筑城表示封疆的范围，名叫无穷之门，这是用来昭示后代希望他们开拓远地的意思。
English: Once upon a time, the border of the previous monarch was adjacent to the present country, and a city was built on the border to indicate the scope of the closed territory. It was called the Gate of Infinity, which was used to show future generations that they hoped to explore distant lands.

古文：今重甲循兵，不可以踰险；仁义道德，不可以来朝。
现代文：如今厚重的铠甲长长的兵器，是不能越过险要地形的；讲究仁义道德，是不能使胡人来臣服的。
English: Today's heavy, armored, and long weapons cannot cross the dangerous terrain; it is not possible to subjugate the Hu people by emphasizing benevolence and morality.

古文：吾闻信不弃功，知不遗时。
现代文：我听说讲信用不能抛弃功利，聪明的人不会放弃机会。
English: I've heard that when it comes to trust, you can't abandon utilitarianism, and smart people don't give up opportunities.

古文：今子以官府之籍，乱寡人之事，非子所知。 
现代文：如今您以官府的法令，扰乱寡人变服骑射、强兵拓地的大事，这些不是您能够了解的。 
English: Now you are using the government's decree to disrupt the important things that many people change clothes, ride and shoot, and build strong armies. These are not things you can understand.

古文：牛赞再拜稽首曰： 臣敢不听令乎? 
现代文：牛赞再一次拜见武灵王叩头至地多时说： 臣下怎么敢不听从您的命令呢？ 
English: Niu Zan once again paid a visit to King Wuling, bowed to the ground and said, "How dare your vassals disobey your orders?"

古文：至遂胡服，率骑入胡，出于遗遗之门，踰九限之固，绝五径之险，至榆中，辟地千里。
现代文：武灵王于是就让他穿上胡服，率领骑兵攻入胡地，从挺关出发，越过了九原坚固的要塞，跨过了井陉关的险地，到达榆中，开拓了千里疆土。
English: King Wuling then had him put on a wolf costume and led his cavalry into the wilderness, starting from Tingguan, crossing the solid fortress of Jiuhara, crossing the dangerous land of Jinghuang, reaching Yuzhong, and opening up thousands of miles of territory.

