古文：太祖武皇帝，讳克用，本姓硃耶氏，其先陇右金城人也。
现代文：太祖武皇帝，讳名克用，原来姓朱耶氏，祖先是陇右金城人。
English: Emperor Wu's great-great-grandfather, whose real name was Zhu Ye, was originally from Jincheng, Shandong Province.

古文：始祖拔野，唐贞观中为墨离军使，从太宗讨高丽、薛延陀有功，为金方道副都护，因家于瓜州。
现代文：始祖名叫拔野，唐贞观年中任墨离军军使，随从唐太宗讨伐高丽、薛延陀有功，任金方道副都护，因而定居在瓜州。
English: The founder's name was Babeno. In the middle of the Tang Dynasty, Zhenguan served as a military envoy of the Mexican Independence Army. He followed Emperor Taizong to fight against Goryeo and Xueyantuo, and was appointed vice-governor of Jinfang Province. As a result, he settled in Guazhou.

古文：太宗平薛延陀诸部，于安西、北庭置都护属之，分同罗、仆骨之人，置沙陀督府。
现代文：唐太宗平定薛延陀各部，在安西、北庭设置都护以统管他们，划分同罗、仆骨人，设置沙陀都督府。
English: Emperor Taizong of Tang conquered all the provinces of Xueyantuo, and set up the tutelage in Anxi and Beibei to govern them, divided them into Tongluo and Huancheng, and set up the Satuo Governor's Office.

古文：盖北庭有碛曰沙陀，故因以为名焉。
现代文：因为北庭有沙漠名叫沙陀，所以用来称呼该府。
English: Because the north garden has a desert called Shado, it is used to call the prefecture.

古文：永徽中，以拔野为都督，其后子孙五世相承。
现代文：永徽年中，任拔野为都督，其后子孙五代相传。
English: In the middle of the Yonghui era, he was appointed as the governor of the capital, and his descendants have been passed down for five generations.

古文：曾祖尽忠，贞元中，继为沙陀府都督。
现代文：曾祖名叫尽忠，贞元年间，继承做沙陀府都督。
English: Zengzu's name was Zhenzhong, and during the reign of Zhengyuan, he succeeded as the governor of Shatofu.

古文：既而为吐蕃所陷，乃举其族七千帐徙于甘州。
现代文：不久被吐蕃攻陷，于是率其部族七千户迁徙到甘州。
English: Soon after, it was invaded by the Tujue, so he led his tribe of seven thousand households to migrate to Ganzhou.

古文：尽忠寻率部众三万东奔，俄而吐蕃追兵大至，尽忠战殁。
现代文：不久尽忠率部众三万人又往东跑，很快被吐蕃追兵赶上，尽忠战死。
English: Not long after, Duan Zhong led 30,000 people to run east again, and was soon caught by the pursuing soldiers of Tubo. Duan Zhong was killed in the battle.

古文：太和中，授阴山府都督、代北行营招抚使。
现代文：祖父名叫执宜，是尽忠的长子，收拾残余的部下，来到灵州，唐德宗任命他为阴山府都督。元和初年，入京任金吾将军，迁任蔚州刺史、代北行营招抚使。
English: His grandfather's name was Suiyi. He was a loyal eldest son who gathered up the remnants of his subordinates and came to Lingzhou. Tang Dezong appointed him the governor of Yinshan Prefecture. In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he entered Beijing as General Kingo and was transferred to Ulshu to write history and act as envoy to the North.

古文：庄宗即位，追谥为昭烈皇帝，庙号懿祖。
现代文：后唐庄宗登皇帝位后，追谥他为昭烈皇帝，庙号叫懿祖。
English: After Emperor Zong of Tangzhuang ascended to the throne, he was chased as the illustrious emperor, and the temple was called the ancestor.

古文：烈考国昌，本名赤心，唐朔州刺史。
现代文：父亲名叫国昌，原名赤心，是唐朔州刺史。
English: His father's name was Guochang. His original name was Chixin. He was a Tangshuo scholar.

古文：咸通中，讨庞勋有功，入为金吾上将军，赐姓李氏，名国昌，代州有《唐故龙武军统军检校司徒赠太保陇四李公神道碑》云：公讳国昌，字德兴。
现代文：咸通年中，讨伐庞勋有功，入京任金吾上将军，赐姓李，名国昌，又隶籍于郑王名下。
English: In the middle of the Heian period, Pang Xun made a great contribution to the crusade, and was appointed as the general of Kingu in Beijing. He was given the surname Li, the name Guochang, and was also subordinate to King Zheng.

古文：仍系郑王房。出为振武节度使，寻为吐浑所袭，退保于神武川。
现代文：出任振武节度，不久遭吐谷浑袭击，退守神武川。
English: He was assigned to the Zhenwu Festival, but was soon attacked by the Tuyuhun and retreated to defend the Jinwu River.

古文：武皇镇太原，表为代北军节度使。
现代文：到武皇镇守太原时，表奏授任代北军节度使。
English: When he arrived at Wuhu Town to guard Taiyuan, he was appointed as the representative of the Northern Army.

古文：中和三年薨。
现代文：中和三年去世。
English: He died at the age of three.

古文：庄宗即位，追谥为文皇，庙号献祖。
现代文：庄宗即位后追谥为文皇，庙号叫献祖。
English: After Zhuangzong ascended the throne, he was named Emperor Wen, and the temple's name was changed to Jianzhu.

古文：武皇即献祖之第三子也。
现代文：武皇李克用是献祖的第三子。
English: Emperor Wu Li Keguang is the third son of the ancestor.

古文：母秦氏，以大中十年丙子岁九月二十二日，生于神武川之新城。
现代文：母亲秦氏，于大中十年九月二十二日，在神武川的新城生下李克用。
English: His mother, Ms. Qin, gave birth to Li Keying on September 22nd, the tenth day of his junior high school year, in Xincheng, Jinwu River.

古文：在妊十三月，载诞之际，母艰危者竟夕。族人忧骇，市药于雁门，遇神叟告曰： 非巫医所及，可驰归，尽率部人，被甲持旄，击钲鼓，跃马大噪，环所居三周而止。 
现代文：怀孕十三个月，降生时，母亲整夜都很危险，亲属担忧害怕，到雁门买药，遇上一位神仙老头，告诉说 ：不是巫医能治好的，应赶回去，率全部族人，披甲打旗，击钲鸣鼓，跃马呐喊，围着产房绕三圈。 
English: Thirteen months pregnant, at the time of birth, the mother was in danger all night long, relatives were worried and afraid, went to the Wild Goose Gate to buy medicine, met a fairy old man, told him: it is not a witch doctor who can cure it, it should be rushed back, led all the people, wearing armor, playing flags, beating gongs, beating drums, jumping horses shouting, circling the delivery room three times.

古文：族人如其教，果无恙而生。
现代文：族人照他说的去做，果然顺利生下武皇。
English: The tribesmen did as he said and successfully gave birth to Emperor Wu.

古文：是时，虹光烛室，白气充庭，井水暴溢。
现代文：这时，虹光照亮房间，白气充溢庭院，井水暴满。
English: At this time, the rainbow light illuminates the room, the white gas fills the courtyard, and the well water is overflowing.

古文：武皇始言，喜军中语，龆龀善骑射，与侪类驰骋嬉戏，必出其右。
现代文：武皇刚会说话时，喜欢说军中语言，童年时善骑马射箭，与同伴驰骋游戏，总是占上风。
English: When Emperor Wu could speak, he liked to speak the language of the army. As a child, he was good at riding horses, archery, and galloping games with his companions. He always had the upper hand.

古文：年十三，见双凫翔于空，射之连中，众皆臣伏。
现代文：十三岁时，看见两只野鸭在空中飞，连射连中，众人都佩服他。
English: When he was thirteen years old, he saw two wild ducks flying in the air, and everyone admired him.

古文：新城北有毗沙天王祠，祠前井一日沸溢，武皇因持酒而奠曰： 予有尊主济民之志，无何井溢，故未察其祸福，惟天王若有神奇，可与仆交卮谈。 
现代文：新城北边有毗沙天王祠，祠前的井有一天沸腾溢出，武皇因而拿着一杯酒祈祷说 ：我有尊主救民的志向，不知怎么井水溢出，弄不清是祸是福，天王若有神灵，可与我交谈。 
English: On the north side of the new town is the Visha Shrine. One day, the well in front of the shrine overflowed, so Emperor Wu took a glass of wine and prayed: "I have the ambition to save the people. I don't know how the well water overflowed. I don't know whether it was a misfortune or a blessing. If there is a god, he can talk to me."

古文：奠酒未已，有神人被金甲持戈，隐然出于壁间，见者大惊走，惟武皇从容而退，由是益自负。
现代文：奠酒还没有结束，有神人披金甲持戈，隐隐约约出现在墙壁之间，看见的人都大惊而逃，只有武皇从容而退，从此更加自负。
English: The libation was not over yet. A god-man in a golden armor, holding a sword, loomed between the walls. Everyone who saw him fled in shock. Only Emperor Wu calmly retreated, and became even more conceited.

古文：献祖之讨庞勋也，武皇年十五，从征，摧锋陷阵，出诸将之右，军中目为 飞虎子 。
现代文：献祖讨伐庞勋时，武皇十五岁，跟随出征，冲锋陷阵，比各位将军都勇猛，军中称他 飞虎子 。
English: When Emperor Wu was fifteen years old, he went to the front with Emperor Wu to fight against Pang Xun. He was braver than all the generals, and the army called him "Flying Tiger."

古文：贼平，献祖授振武节度使，武皇为云中牙将。
现代文：贼军平定后，献祖被授予振武节度使，武皇被任为云中郡牙将。
English: After the quelling of the bandit army, Xianzu was awarded the Zhenwu Jiedu Envoy, and Emperor Wu was appointed the commander of Yunnan County.

古文：尝在云中，宿于别馆，拥妓醉寝，有侠兒持刃欲害武皇；及突入曲室，但见烈火炽赫于帐中，侠兒骇异而退。
现代文：在云中曾宿于客馆，拥着妓女醉卧，有侠士拿刀想杀武皇，抢进内室后，只见帐中烈火燃烧，侠士害怕而退。
English: Once upon a time, there was a knight who wanted to kill the Emperor Wu. He was staying at a guesthouse with a prostitute and was drunk. When he rushed into the inner room, he saw a fire burning in the guest room. The knight was afraid and retreated.

古文：又尝与达靼部人角胜，达靼指双雕于空曰： 公能一发中否？ 
现代文：又曾和鞑靼人比赛，鞑靼人指着空中双雕说： 你能一发射中吗？ 
English: He also competed against a Tatar, who pointed to the twin eagles in the sky and said: "Can you hit the target in one shot?"

古文：武皇即弯弧发矢，连贯双雕，边人拜伏。
现代文：武皇立即弯弓射箭，连穿双雕，鞑靼人都拜伏。
English: Emperor Wu immediately bowed and shot arrows, even wearing a double eagle, and the Tatars all bowed down.

古文：及壮，为云中守捉使，事防御使支谟，与同列晨集廨舍，因戏升郡阁，踞谟之座，谟亦不敢诘。
现代文：长大以后，任云中守捉使，服事防御使支谟，和同事们一早聚集在官署，便戏耍着登上郡阁，坐在支谟的座位上，支谟也不敢责问他。
English: After growing up, Ren Yunzhong guarded and captured the envoy, and served the defense envoy Zhimo. He and his colleagues gathered at the government office in the morning, and then playfully boarded the county pavilion and sat in Zhimo's seat. Zhimo did not dare to ask him.

古文：乾符三年，朝廷以段文楚为代北水陆发运、云州防御使。
现代文：乾符三年，朝廷任段文楚为代北水陆发运使、云州防御使。
English: Three years later, the imperial court appointed Duan Wenchu as the representative of the North Water and Land Transport Envoy and the Yunnan Defense Envoy.

古文：时岁荐饥，文楚稍削军食，诸军咸怨。
现代文：这时连年饥荒，段文楚逐渐削减军粮，各军都有怨言。
English: At this time, there was a famine for several years in a row, and Duan Wenchu gradually reduced military rations. All armies had complaints.

古文：武皇为云中防边督将，部下争诉以军食不充，边校程怀素、王行审、盖寓、李存璋、薛铁山、康君立等，即拥武皇入云州，众且万人，营于斗鸡台，城中械文楚出，以应于外。
现代文：武皇为云中防边督将时，部下争着诉说军粮不够，边校程怀素、王行审、盖寓、李存璋、薛铁山、康君立等人，便拥戴武皇进入云州，随从有万人，宿营在斗鸡台，云州人在城中捆住段文楚押出，以响应城外。
English: When Emperor Wu was the governor of the Yunnan Defense Frontier, his subordinates argued that the military food was not enough. The frontier schoolmen Cheng Huai Su, Wang Xing Ji, Gai Yue, Li Cunxu, Xue Tieshan, Kang Junli and others supported Emperor Wu to enter Yunnan, followed by tens of thousands of people, camped in the cockfighting ring, and the Yunnan people tied up Duan Wenchu in the city and pushed it out to respond to the outside of the city.

古文：诸将列状以闻，请授武皇旄钺，朝廷不允，征诸道兵以讨之。
现代文：诸将向朝廷陈述情况，请授武皇旄钺，朝廷不答应，征集各路兵马讨伐武皇。
English: They will present the situation to the imperial court, and ask for the imperial command to be given, but the imperial court will not agree, and they will gather soldiers and horses from all directions to fight against the Emperor Wu.

古文：乾符五年，黄巢渡江，其势滋蔓，天子乃悟其事，以武皇为大同军节度使、检校工部尚书。
现代文：乾符五年，黄巢渡过长江，声势蔓延，皇帝才觉得事关重大，任武皇为大同军节度使、检校工部尚书。
English: In five years, Huang Chao crossed the Yangtze River, and the momentum spread. Only then did the emperor feel that the matter was important. Emperor Wu was appointed as the festival envoy of the Datong Army and the inspection department of the school.

古文：冬，献祖出师讨党项，吐浑赫连铎乘虚陷振武，举族为吐浑所掳。
现代文：同年冬，献祖出兵讨伐党项，吐谷浑赫连铎乘虚攻陷振武，全族人被吐谷浑人抓走。
English: In the winter of the same year, Xianzu sent troops to fight against the Party, and the Tugu Hunlian soldiers took advantage of the false attack to capture Zhenwu, and the whole family was taken away by the Tugu Hunlians.

古文：武皇至定边军迎献祖归云州，云州守将拒关不纳。
现代文：武皇到定边军迎接献祖到云州，云州守将拒守城门不接纳。
English: Emperor Wu went to the Dingbian Army to welcome the ancestor to Yunnan, but the Yunnan governor refused to accept the gate.

古文：武皇略蔚、朔之地，得三千人，屯神武川之新城。
现代文：武皇攻占蔚州、朔州地，得三千人，驻扎在神武川的新城。
English: Emperor Wu conquered Ulshu and Shuozhou, gained three thousand soldiers, and stationed them in Xincheng, Jinwu River.

古文：赫边铎昼夜攻围，武皇昆弟三人四面应贼，俄而献祖自蔚州引军至，吐浑退走，自是军势复振。
现代文：赫连铎昼夜围攻，武皇兄弟三人四面应战，不久献祖从蔚州带军赶到，吐谷浑退走，从此军势重新振作。
English: Helianthus besieged the city day and night, and the three brothers of Emperor Wu fought on all sides. Soon, Emperor Xianzu arrived from Ulshu with an army, and Tuyuhun retreated. From then on, the military situation was reinvigorated.

古文：天子以赫连铎为大同军节度使，仍命进军以讨武皇。
现代文：皇帝任赫连铎为大同军节度使，仍命他进军讨伐武皇。
English: The emperor appointed He Lianyao as the commander of the Datong Army, but still ordered him to march against Emperor Wu.

古文：乾符六年春，朝廷以昭义节度使李钧充北面招讨使，将上党、太原之师过石岭关，屯于代州，与幽州李可举会赫连铎同攻蔚州。
现代文：乾符六年春，朝廷任昭义节度使李钧兼北面招讨使，率上党、太原的部队经过石岭关，驻扎在代州，和幽州李可举会合赫连铎一同攻蔚州。
English: In the spring of 6th year of the Kianfu era, the imperial court appointed Zhao Yi Sect to make Li Qian and the north side recruiting envoys, led by the party, Taiyuan's troops passed through Shilingguan, stationed in Daizhou, and Yuzhou Li Ke held a meeting with Helian together to attack Ulshu.

古文：献祖以一军御之，武皇以一军南抵遮虏城以拒李钧。
现代文：献祖率一军抵抗，武皇率一军往南到遮虏城抵抗李钧。
English: Emperor Wu led an army to the south to the city of Qarqin to resist Li Yan.

古文：是冬大雪，弓弩弦折，南军苦寒，临战大败，奔归代州，李钧中流矢而卒。
现代文：这年冬天下大雪，弓弩的弦冻断，南方军队抗不住严寒，临战大败，逃回代州，李钧中流矢而死。
English: In the winter of that year, there was heavy snow, the strings of the bow and arrow froze, the Southern army could not resist the cold, was defeated in battle, fled back to Daizhou, and Li Yao died in the middle of the battle.

古文：广明元年春，天子复命元帅李涿率兵数万屯代州。
现代文：广明元年春，皇帝又命元帅李涿率兵数万驻扎代州。
English: In the spring of the first year of Guangming, the emperor also ordered the marshal Li Xi to station tens of thousands of soldiers in Daizhou.

古文：武皇令军使傅文达起兵于蔚州，朔州刺史高文集与薛葛、安庆等部将缚文达送于李涿。
现代文：武皇令军使傅文达在蔚州起兵，朔州刺史高文集和薛葛、安庆等部将捆住傅文达送给李涿。
English: Fu Wenda, an envoy of the Emperor Wu's army, raised an army in Ulshu, and the Shuozhou Zhishi Gao Literature Collection and Xue Ge, Anqing and other departments will tie up Fu Wenda and give him to Li Xi.

古文：六月，李涿引大军攻蔚州，献祖战不利，乃率其族奔于达靼部。
现代文：六月，李涿率大军攻蔚州，献祖作战失利，便率其族人逃往鞑靼部。
English: In June, Li Jun led a large army to attack Ulshu, and after losing the battle of Xianzhu, he led his people to flee to Tartary.

古文：居数月，吐浑赫连铎密遣人赂达靼以离间献祖，既而渐生猜阻。
现代文：过了几个月，吐谷浑赫连铎密派人贿赂鞑靼以离间献祖，不久渐渐产生猜疑。
English: A few months passed, and soon suspicion began to grow after Tuku-Hunkh-Ren sent someone to bribe Tatar to give up his ancestor.

古文：武皇知之，每召其豪右射猎于野，或与之百步驰射马鞭，或以悬针树叶为的，中之如神，由是部人心伏，不敢窃发。
现代文：武皇知道此事，经常召集其首领到野外打猎，有时在百步之外骑马射下马鞭，有时悬挂针树叶做目标，射中如神，因此鞑靼部人心服，不敢暗自起事。
English: Emperor Wu knew about this and often summoned his chiefs to hunt in the wild, sometimes riding a hundred paces away to shoot a horse whip, sometimes hanging needle leaves as a target and shooting like a god. Therefore, the Tatar group was convinced and did not dare to secretly rise up.

古文：俄而黄巢自江、淮北渡，武皇椎牛酾酒，飨其酋首。酒酣，谕之曰： 予父子为贼臣谗间，报国无由。
现代文：不久黄巢渡过长江、淮河往北，武皇杀牛设酒宴招待鞑靼人首领，酒酣时，对他们说 ：我父子被贼臣离间，没机会报国。
English: Soon Huang Chao crossed the Yangtze River and the Huai River to the north, and Emperor Wu set up a banquet to entertain the Tatar leaders. As he sipped the wine, he said to them: My father and son were separated by the traitors, and had no chance to return to the country.

古文：今闻黄巢北犯江、淮，必为中原之患。
现代文：现在听说黄巢侵犯长江、淮河之北，一定会成为中原的祸患。
English: Now I hear that if the Yellow Nest encroaches on the north of the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River, it will definitely become a scourge of the Central Plains.

古文：一日天子赦宥，有诏征兵，仆与公等向南而定天下，是予心也。
现代文：一旦天子赦免我们，下诏征兵，我与你们南下平定天下，是我的心愿。
English: Once the Son of Heaven pardons us and decrees conscription, I will go south with you to pacify the world. This is my heart's desire.

古文：人生世间，光景几何，曷能终老沙堆中哉！公等勉之。 
现代文：人生在世，有几年光景，怎么能在沙堆中终老一生呢！
English: A person is alive, has a few years of life, how can he live in the sand for the rest of his life!

古文：达靼知无留意，皆释然无间。
现代文：你们尽力而为吧。 鞑靼知道他没有留下之意，都释然无戒心。
English: Do your best. The Tartars know that he has no intention of staying, and they are relieved.

古文：是岁十一月，黄巢寇潼关，天子令河东监军陈景思为代北起军使，收兵破贼。
现代文：这一年十一月，黄巢攻打潼关，皇帝令河东监军陈景思为代北起军使，征兵破贼。
English: In November of that year, Huang Chao attacked Shaoguan, and the emperor appointed Chen Jingsi, the inspector of the Hedong army, as the envoy from the north to recruit soldiers and break the bandits.

古文：中和元年二月，友金军至绛州，将渡河，刺史瞿稹谓陈景思曰： 巢贼方盛，不如且还代北，徐图利害。 
现代文：十二月，黄巢打到长安，唐僖宗逃往蜀地，陈景思与李友金征发沙陀各部五千骑兵往南奔赴京师。李友金就是武皇的族叔。中和元年二月，李友金部队到绛州，准备渡过黄河，刺史瞿正对陈景思说 ：黄巢势力正旺盛，不如暂回代北，慢慢图谋将来的事。 
English: In December, the Yellow Nest reached Chang'an, Tang Yizong fled to Shu Di, Chen Jingsi and Li Youjin conscripted and dispatched five thousand cavalrymen from various departments of the Shado to rush south to the Beijing Division. Li Youjin is the uncle of the Emperor Wu. In February of the middle and first years, Li Youjin's troops arrived in Zhangzhou, ready to cross the Yellow River, and Sashihong Zheng said to Chen Jingsi: The Yellow Nest's forces are strong, it is better to return to the north for the time being and slowly plan for the future.

古文：四月，友金旋军雁门，瞿稹至代州，半月之间，募兵三万，营于崞县之西。
现代文：四月，李友金回师雁门，瞿正到代州，半月之内，招募三万士兵，在崞县西边扎营。
English: In April, Li Youjin Hui's division went to Ganmen and Shanzheng to Daizhou. Within half a month, he recruited 30,000 soldiers and set up camp on the west side of Shixian County.

古文：其军皆北边五部之众，不闲军法，瞿稹、李友金不能制。
现代文：其军队都是北边五部的人，不熟悉军法，瞿正、李友金不能控制。
English: His army was made up of people from the five northern provinces, who were not familiar with military law. Yu Zheng and Li Youjin could not control them.

古文：友金谓景思曰： 兴大众，成大事，当威名素著，则可以伏人。
现代文：李友金对陈景思说： 发动大众，成功大事，应当一贯有显赫的威名才可以使人伏服。
English: Li Youjin said to Chen Jingsi: To mobilize the public and succeed in major events, you should always have a prominent reputation before you can make people submit.

古文：天子乃以武皇为雁门节度使，仍令以本军讨贼。
现代文：现在军队虽有数万，如没有良将，进军也不会成功。我兄李司徒父子，去年得罪朝廷，现寄居在北面，雄才武略，为众人推服。
English: Although there are tens of thousands of troops now, if there are no good generals, the advance will not be successful. My brother Li Szu father and son, who offended the imperial court last year, are now living in the north, and their great talent and courage have convinced everyone.

古文：《新唐书·王重荣传》：重荣惧黄巢复振，忧之，与复光计，复光曰： 我世与李克用共忧患，其人忠不顾难，死义如己，若乞师焉，事蔑不济。 乃遣使者约连和。
现代文：如派人快马上奏朝廷召回，代北之人一呼百应，则平定妖贼不成问题。 陈景思同意，立即上奏朝廷，皇帝于是任武皇为雁门节度使，又令他率领本军讨伐贼军。
English: If someone is sent to report the recall to the imperial court immediately, and someone from the north responds quickly, then there will be no problem in subduing the bandits. Chen Jingsi agreed and immediately reported to the imperial court. The emperor then appointed Emperor Wu as the messenger of the Wild Goose Gate Festival, and ordered him to lead his army to fight the bandits.

古文：李友金发五百骑赍诏召武皇于达靼，武皇即率达靼诸部万人趋雁门。
现代文：李友金派五百骑兵带诏书到鞑靼召见武皇，武皇立即率领鞑靼各部一万人奔赴雁门。
English: Li Youjin sent five hundred cavalrymen to Tatar with an imperial decree to summon Emperor Wu, who immediately led ten thousand people from all parts of Tatar to the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：五月，整兵二万，南向京师。
现代文：五月，整顿二万士兵南往京师。
English: In May, 20,000 soldiers were sent south to Beijing to rectify the division.

古文：太原郑从谠以兵守石岭关，武皇乃引军出他道；至太原城下，会大雨，班师于雁门。
现代文：太原郑从谠领兵把守石岭关，武皇便引军走其他道路，到太原城下，碰上大雨，回师到雁门。
English: Taiyuan Zheng led the troops from Shifang to guard Shilingguan. Emperor Wu then led the troops to take other roads, to the city of Taiyuan, encountered heavy rain, and returned to the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：中和二年八月，献祖自达靼部率其族归代州。
现代文：中和二年八月，献祖从鞑靼部率族人回代州。
English: In August of the second year of the Sino-Japanese War, Xianzu led his people from Tartary back to Daizhou.

古文：十月，武皇率忻、代、蔚、朔、达靼之军三万五千骑赴难于京师。
现代文：十月，武皇率忻州、代州、蔚州、朔州、鞑靼的部队三万五千骑兵往京师奔赴国难。
English: In October, Emperor Wu led 35,000 cavalry troops from Bozhou, Daizhou, Ulshu, Shuozhou, and Tartary to the Beijing Division to rush to the national disaster.

古文：先移檄太原，郑从谠拒关不纳，武皇以兵击之，进军至城下，遣人赍币马遗从谠；从谠亦遣人馈武皇货币、飨饩、军器。
现代文：先送讨伐檄文到太原，郑从谠拒关不接纳，武皇用兵攻击，进军到城下，派人带钱物送郑从谠，郑从谠也派人赠给武皇货币、食品、军器。
English: Zheng Conglu first sent a letter to Taiyuan, but Zheng Conglu refused to accept it. Emperor Wu attacked with soldiers, marched to the city, sent people to bring money and goods to Zheng Conglu, and Zheng Conglu also sent people to give Emperor Wu money, food, and military equipment.

古文：武皇南去，自阴地趋晋、绛。
现代文：武皇向南去，从阴地关到晋州、绛州。
English: Emperor Wu went south, from Yinji Guan to Jinzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：十二月，武皇至河中。
现代文：十二月，武皇到河中。
English: In December, Emperor Wu arrived in Haizhong.

古文：中和三年正月，晋国公王铎承制授武皇东北面行营都统。
现代文：中和三年一月，晋国公王铎受皇帝命令授予武皇东北面行营都统。
English: In January of the middle and third year, the Prince of Jin was ordered by the emperor to grant the Emperor Wu the northeastern capital.

古文：武皇令其弟克修领前锋五百骑渡河视贼，黄巢遣将米重威赍重赂及伪诏以赐武皇；武皇纳其赂以给诸将，燔其伪诏。
现代文：武皇令其弟李克修领前锋五百骑兵渡黄河侦察黄巢军队，黄巢派将军米重威带重礼和伪诏赐给武皇，武皇收下礼物送给各位将军，而烧掉伪诏。
English: Emperor Wu ordered his brother Li Kexiu to lead the forward five hundred cavalry to cross the Yellow River to reconnoiter the Yellow Nest army. The Yellow Nest sent General Mi Chong Wei with a heavy salute and a forged edict to Emperor Wu. The Emperor Wu accepted the gift and gave it to the generals, and burned the forged edict.

古文：是时，诸道勤王之师云集京畿，然以贼势尚炽，未敢争锋。
现代文：这时，各路勤王的军队云集京师四周，但因为黄巢贼军势力正盛，不敢交锋。
English: At this time, the king-loving troops from all directions gathered around the Beijing Division, but because the Yellow Nest Thief Army was in full swing, they did not dare to fight.

古文：及武皇将至，贼帅相谓曰： 鸦兒军至，当避其锋。 
现代文：当武皇军队将到时，黄巢手下将军互相说： 鸦儿军到了，应该避其锋芒。 
English: When Emperor Wu's army was about to arrive, Huang Chao's subordinate generals said to each other: "The crow's army has arrived, we should avoid its edge."

古文：武皇以兵自夏阳济河。
现代文：武皇带兵从夏阳渡过黄河。
English: Emperor Wu led his soldiers across the Yellow River from Xiayang.

古文：二月，营于乾坑店。
现代文：二月，在干坑店扎营。
English: In February, they set up camp at the dry pit store.

古文：黄巢大将尚让、林言、王璠、赵璋等引军十五万屯于梁田坡。
现代文：黄巢大将尚让、林言、王、赵璋等引军十五万驻扎在梁田陂。
English: General Huang Chao, Shang Zhan, Lin Yan, Wang, Zhao Wei and others brought 150,000 troops and stationed them in Liang Tianyi.

古文：翼日，大军合战，自午及晡，巢贼大败。
现代文：第二天，大军交战，从中午打到天黑，黄巢军大败。
English: The next day, the two armies clashed and fought from noon until dark. The Yellow Nest Army was soundly defeated.

古文：是夜，贼众遁据华州。
现代文：当晚，黄巢军逃到华州据守。
English: That night, Huang Chao's army fled to Huazhou to hold out.

古文：武皇进军围之，巢弟黄鄴、黄揆固守。
现代文：武皇进军包围，黄巢的弟弟黄邺、黄揆固守。
English: Emperor Wu marched in and encircled them. Huang Xie's younger brothers, Huang Qi and Huang Qi, held fast.

古文：三月，尚让引大军赴援，武皇率兵万余逆战于零口，巢军大败，武皇进军渭桥。翼日，黄揆弃华州而遁。
现代文：三月，尚让引大军救援华州，武皇率一万多人在零口迎战，黄巢军大败，武皇进军渭桥，第二天，黄揆放弃华州逃跑。
English: In March, Shang Zheng led a large army to rescue Huazhou, and Emperor Wu led more than 10,000 people to fight at the mouth of the river. Huang Chao's army was defeated, and Emperor Wu marched into the Fen Bridge. The next day, Emperor Huang abandoned Huazhou and fled.

古文：王铎承制授武皇雁门节度使、检校尚书左仆射。
现代文：王铎受皇帝诏令授武皇为雁门节度使、检校尚书右仆射。
English: Wang Qian received the Emperor's edict to be the envoy of the Emperor for the Wild Goose Gate Festival, and the inspection of the school was carried out.

古文：四月，黄巢燔长安，收其余众，东走蓝关。
现代文：四月，黄巢焚烧长安，收拾残余众兵，往东向蓝关。
English: In April, Huang Chao burned Chang'an, collected the remaining soldiers, and marched eastward to Lankuan.

古文：武皇时收京师。
现代文：武皇进军收复京师。
English: Emperor Wu marched to recover the capital.

古文：七月，天子授武皇金紫光禄大夫、检校左仆射、河东节度使。
现代文：七月，皇帝授武皇金紫光禄大夫、检校左仆射、河东节度使。
English: In July, the emperor awarded the Emperor Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, the school inspector Zuo Fuxia, and the Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：是时，武皇既收长安，军势甚雄，诸侯之师皆畏之。
现代文：这时，武皇既已收复长安，军势甚为雄壮，诸侯之师都畏服他。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu had already recovered Chang'an, the army was very strong, and the princes were afraid of him.

古文：武皇一目微眇，故其时号为 独眼龙 。
现代文：武皇一只眼睛有点瞎，故当时被称为 独眼龙 。
English: Emperor Wu was a little blind in one eye, so he was called the one-eyed dragon.

古文：是月，武皇仗节赴镇。遣使报郑从谠，请治装归朝。
现代文：这一月，武皇持节仗赴河中上任，派使者告诉郑从谠，请他整装回朝。
English: This month, Emperor Wu held a festival and went to Hezhong to take office. He sent an envoy to tell Zheng Conglu and asked him to return to the North.

古文：武皇次于郊外，因往赴雁门宁觐献祖。
现代文：武皇到郊外，顺便前往雁门探看献祖。
English: Emperor Wu went to the suburbs and went to the Wild Goose Gate to look for the ancestor.

古文：八月，自雁门赴镇河东，时年二十有八。
现代文：八月，从雁门到河东就任节度使，这时年二十八岁。
English: In August, at the age of twenty-eight, he went from Ganmen to Hedong to take up the post of festival envoy.

古文：十一月，平潞州，表其弟克修为昭义节度使。
现代文：十一月，平定潞州，推荐其弟李克修为昭义军节度使。
English: In November, he came to pacify Bozhou and recommended his brother Li Kexiu to be the commander of the Shao Yi Army.

古文：潞帅孟方立退保于邢州。
现代文：潞州主帅孟方立退守邢州。
English: Zhangzhou coach Meng Fangli retreated to Zhangzhou.

古文：数日。移军自河中南渡，趋汝、洛。四月，武皇合徐、汴之师破尚让于太康，斩获万计，进攻贼于西华，贼将黄鄴弃营而遁。
现代文：十二月，许州主帅田从异、汴州主帅朱温、徐州主帅时溥、陈州刺史赵韜各派使者前来招告，因为黄巢、蔡州联合，气势仍很旺盛，请武皇共同用力讨伐。中和四年春，武皇率五万蕃汉军队，从泽州、潞州准备下天井关，河阳节度使诸葛爽以黄河桥不完备为由推辞，于是在万善驻兵，几天后，转移到河中南渡黄河，奔向汝州、洛阳。四月，武皇会合徐州、汴州军在太康击破尚让，斩获数万，在西华进攻贼军，黄巢将军黄邺弃营而逃。
English: In December, envoys from Tian Congyi of Xu Province, Zhu Wen of Zhangzhou, Shi Yan of Xuzhou, and Zhao Yan of Chenzhou came to invite Emperor Wu to join the crusade, as the Yellow Nest and Caizhou alliance was still strong. In the spring of the middle and fourth years, Emperor Wu led fifty thousand Han troops from Zhezhou and Zhangzhou to prepare for the crossing of the Yellow River, but Zhuge Shuang, the governor of Hebei Province, dismissed Zhuge Shuang on the grounds that the bridge across the Yellow River was not complete, so he stationed troops in Wanshan. A few days later, he moved to the south of Hebei

古文：是夜大雨，巢营中惊乱，乃弃西华之垒，退营陈州北故阳里。
现代文：这一夜大雨，黄巢营中受惊大乱，于是放弃西华营垒，退到陈州北故阳里扎营。
English: It rained heavily that night, and the Yellow Nest camp was shocked by the chaos, so they abandoned the Xihua camp and retreated to the north of Chenzhou to set up camp in the former Yangli.

古文：五月癸亥，大雨震电，平地水深数尺，贼营为水所漂而溃。
现代文：五月三日，大雨惊雷，平地水深数尺，黄巢军营被水冲溃。
English: On May 3rd, after heavy rain and thunder, the plain was several feet deep in water, and the Yellow Nest military camp was washed away.

古文：戊辰，武皇引军营于中牟，大破贼于王满渡。
现代文：八日，武皇引军到中牟扎营，在王满渡大破黄巢军。
English: On the eighth day, Emperor Wu led his army to set up camp in Zhongmou, and defeated the Yellow Nest Army in Wangmandu.

古文：庚午，巢贼大至，济汴而北。
现代文：十日，黄巢军大批赶到，渡汴水往北。
English: On the tenth day, a large number of Huang Chao's army arrived, and Watanabe's army marched north.

古文：是夜，复大雨，贼党惊溃。
现代文：这一夜又下大雨，黄巢军惊散。
English: It rained heavily again that night, and the Yellow Nest Army was dispersed.

古文：武皇营于郑州，贼众分寇汴境。
现代文：武皇扎营在郑州，黄巢军分兵侵入汴州境。
English: Emperor Wu encamped in Zhengzhou, and detachments of the Yellow Nest Army invaded the border of Ganzhou.

古文：武皇渡汴，遇贼将渡而南，半济击之，大败之，临阵斩贼将李周、王济安、阳景彪等。
现代文：武皇渡过汴水，遇上黄巢军将南渡，便在河中攻击，大败贼军，临阵斩杀黄巢的将军李周、王济安、阳景彪等。
English: Emperor Wu crossed the Surabaya, met the Huang Chao army heading south, attacked in the river, defeated the rebel army, and killed the Huang Chao generals Li Zhou, Wang Jian, Yang Jingbiao, etc.

古文：是夜，贼大败，残众保于胙县、冤句。
现代文：这一夜，黄巢军大败，残余众兵退保胙县、冤句。
English: That night, the Yellow Nest Army suffered a crushing defeat, and the remaining soldiers withdrew to Baoxian County.

古文：大军蹑之，黄巢乃携妻子兄弟千余人东走，武皇追贼至于曹州。
现代文：大军追踪，黄巢便带妻子兄弟一千多人往东走，武皇追到曹州。
English: Pursued by a large army, Huang Chao took his wife and more than a thousand of his brothers to the east, and pursued Emperor Wu to Caozhou.

古文：是月，班师过汴，汴帅迎劳于封禅寺，请武皇休于府第，乃以从官三百人及监军使陈景思馆于上源驿。
现代文：这一月，回师经过汴州，汴州主帅梁太祖朱温在封禅寺迎接慰劳，请武皇在府第休息，武皇于是带随从官员三百人和监军使陈景思住在上源驿。
English: This month, the Hui army passed through Zhangzhou. Liang Taizu Zhu Wen, the commander of Zhangzhou, welcomed the consolation in Fengzen Temple and asked Emperor Wu to rest in the palace. Emperor Wu then took 300 officials and the military overseer Chen Jingsi to live in Shangyuanli.

古文：是夜，张乐陈宴席，汴帅自佐飨，出珍币侑劝。
现代文：这一夜，奏乐设宴，汴州主帅亲自陪酒，拿出珍宝献上。
English: On this night, the orchestra held a banquet, and the coach of Zhangzhou personally accompanied the wine and presented the treasures.

古文：武皇酒酣，戏诸侍妓，与汴帅握手，叙破贼事以为乐。
现代文：武皇酒酣之际，戏弄各位侍候的妓女，与汴州主帅握手，叙说破贼之事以为笑乐。
English: On the occasion of Emperor Wu's drinking party, he teased the prostitutes who were waiting for everyone, shook hands with the coach of Zhangzhou, and thought it was funny to tell the story of the thief.

古文：汴帅素忌武皇，乃与其将杨彦洪密谋窃发，彦洪于巷陌连车树栅，以扼奔窜之路。时武皇之从官皆醉，俄而伏兵窜发，来攻传舍。
现代文：汴州主帅一贯忌恨武皇，于是和他的将军杨彦洪谋害武皇，杨彦洪在街巷中堆满车子设置阻碍，以堵塞道路，这时武皇的侍从官员都已醉，一会儿埋伏的士兵起事，进攻武皇的住处。
English: The boss of Zhangzhou always hated Emperor Wu, so he and his general Yang Yanhong plotted to kill Emperor Wu. Yang Yanhong blocked the road by piling up cars in the streets and lanes. At this time, Emperor Wu's attendant officials were all drunk, and the ambushed soldiers rose up and attacked Emperor Wu's residence.

古文：武皇方大醉，噪声动地，从官十余人捍贼。
现代文：武皇正大醉，外面喊声震天，从官十几人拼死抵抗。
English: Emperor Wu is very drunk, the shouting outside is deafening, and more than a dozen officials are desperately resisting.

古文：侍人郭景铢灭烛扶武皇，以茵幕裹之，匿于床下，以水洒面，徐曰： 汴帅谋害司空！ 
现代文：侍人郭景铢吹灭烛火扶着武皇，用幕布裹住，藏在床下，用冷水洒在武皇脸上，慢慢说： 汴帅谋害您！ 
English: The attendant, Guo Jingyao, blew out the candlelight, supported Emperor Wu, wrapped him in a curtain, hid him under the bed, sprinkled cold water on Emperor Wu's face, and slowly said: "He's plotting to kill you!

古文：武皇方张目而起，引弓抗贼。
现代文：武皇才睁开眼睛起来，开弓抗贼。
English: Emperor Wu only opened his eyes and opened his bow to fight the thief.

古文：有顷，烟火四合，复大雨震电，武皇得从者薛铁山、贺回鹘等数人而去。
现代文：过一会儿，烟火从四面合拢，接着又是大雨雷电，武皇仅带从者薛铁山、贺回鹘等几人而去。
English: After a while, the fireworks closed in from all sides, followed by heavy rain and lightning. Emperor Wu left with only a few followers, including Xue Tieshan and He Huixuan.

古文：雨水如澍，不辨人物，随电光登尉氏门，缒城而出，得还本营。
现代文：大雨如注，分不清人物，借着闪电的光登尉氏门，从城上吊着绳子下来，得以逃回本营。
English: It was raining heavily, and by the light of a flash of lightning, an indistinguishable figure was able to escape back to the main camp by climbing up the gate of the castle and hanging from a rope.

古文：监军陈景思、大将史敬思并遇害。
现代文：监军陈景思、大将史敬思一并遇害。
English: Supervisor Chen Jingsi and General Shi Jingsi were both killed.

古文：武皇既还营，与刘夫人相向恸哭。
现代文：武皇回营后，与刘夫人相对痛哭。
English: After Emperor Wu returned to the camp, he wept bitterly with Lady Liu.

古文：诘旦，欲勒军攻汴，夫人曰： 司空比为国家讨贼，赴东诸侯之急，虽汴人谋害，自有朝廷论列。
现代文：天亮后，想带军攻打汴州，夫人说 ：你这次是为国家讨伐贼军，到东边来救诸侯之急，虽然汴人谋害你，自有朝廷论定是非。
English: After dawn, when he wanted to lead an army to attack Zhangzhou, his wife said, "This time, you are fighting the Kleptocracy for the country. You have come to the east to save the urgent needs of the princes. Although there are people plotting to kill you, the imperial court has its own right and wrong.

古文：若反戈攻城，则曲在我也，人得以为辞。 
现代文：如果反戈攻城，就是我们的不是了，别人便有话可说。 
English: If we fight back and attack the city, it is our fault, and others will have something to say.

古文：乃收军而去，驰檄于汴帅。
现代文：于是收军而去，送檄文给汴帅。
English: So he withdrew his army and sent a letter to the general.

古文：汴帅报曰： 窃发之夜，非仆本心，是朝廷遣天使与牙将杨彦洪同谋也。 
现代文：汴帅回答说： 出事那一夜，不是我的本心，是朝廷遣天使与牙将杨彦洪共同谋划的。 
English: Gong Shuai replied, "The night of the accident was not my original intention. It was planned jointly by the imperial court's messenger angel and Yang Yanhong, the chief dentist.

古文：武皇自武牢关西趋蒲、陕而旋。
现代文：武皇从武牢关往西到蒲州、陕州而回师。
English: Emperor Wu went from Wuye Guan to the west to Puzhou and Shaanxi, and then returned to China.

古文：秋七月，至太原。
现代文：七月，到太原。
English: July, to Taiyuan.

古文：武皇自以累立大功，为汴帅怨图，陷没诸将，乃上章申理。
现代文：武皇自认为多次立大功，受汴帅怨恨谋害，损失诸将，于是上奏朝廷申诉评理。
English: Emperor Wu thought that he had made great contributions many times, suffered the resentment of his subordinates, plotted to kill, and lost many generals, so he appealed to the imperial court for review.

古文：及武皇表至，朝廷大恐，遣内臣宣谕，寻加守太傅、同平章事、陇西郡王。
现代文：武皇表章送到，朝廷大为惊恐，派内臣宣谕武皇，又加守太傅、同平章事、陇西郡王。
English: Emperor Wu's seal was delivered, and the imperial court was so alarmed that it sent a vassal to proclaim Emperor Wu, as well as Zhuo Taifu, Tongping Zhangji, and the King of Shaanxi.

古文：光启元年三月，幽州李可举、镇州王景崇连兵寇定州，节度使王处存求援于武皇；武皇遣大将康君立、安老、薛可、郭啜率兵赴之。
现代文：光启元年三月，幽州李可举、镇州王景崇联合侵犯定州，定州节度使王处存向武皇求援，武皇派大将康君立、安老、薛可、郭啜率兵赴援。
English: In March of the first year of Guangqi, Yuzhou Li Keju and Zhenzhou Wang Jingsong jointly invaded Dingzhou. The Dingzhou Festival made Wang Shizhu to ask the Emperor Wu for help, and the Emperor Wu sent generals Kang Junli, An Lao, Xue Ke and Guo Zuo to help.

古文：五月，镇人攻无极，武皇亲领兵救之。
现代文：五月，镇州人进攻无极，武皇亲自领兵救援。
English: In May, the Zhenzhou people launched an all-out attack, and Emperor Wu personally led the troops to the rescue.

古文：镇人退保新城，武皇攻之，斩首万余级，获马千匹。
现代文：镇州人退保新城，武皇进攻新城，斩首万余级，缴获马千匹。
English: The people of Zhenzhou withdrew from Xincheng, Wuhuang attacked Xincheng, beheaded more than 10,000 people, and captured thousands of horses.

古文：王处存亦败燕军于易州。
现代文：王处存也在易州打败燕军。
English: Wang Shicun also defeated Yan's army in Yizhou.

古文：十一月，河中王重荣遣使来乞师，且言邠州硃玫、凤翔李符将加兵于己。
现代文：十一月，河中王重荣派使者来求援军，说州朱玫、凤翔李昌符将对他用兵。
English: In November, King Chong Rong of Hechuan sent an envoy to ask for reinforcements, saying that Zhu Mei, Feng Xiang, and Li Changfu would send troops against him.

古文：初，武皇与汴人构怨，前后八表，请削夺汴帅官爵，自以本军进讨。
现代文：起初，武皇与汴人结下怨仇，前后共上八次奏表，请削夺汴帅官爵，自己率本军进讨。
English: At first, Emperor Wu had a grudge against the Xiongnu, and made eight petitions to the emperor, asking him to take away the Xiongnu's title of "commander-in-chief" and to lead his own army into battle.

古文：天子累遣内臣杨复恭宣旨，令且全大体，武皇不时奉诏，天子颇右汴帅。
现代文：皇帝多次派内臣杨复恭宣旨，令他暂且顾全大局，武皇不时奉诏，皇帝有点偏向汴帅。
English: The emperor repeatedly sent his vassal Yang Fuqiong to issue decrees, so that he temporarily took into account the overall situation. Emperor Wu issued decrees from time to time, and the emperor was a bit biased towards the general.

古文：时观军容使田令孜君侧擅权，恶王重荣与武皇胶固，将离其势，乃移重荣于定州。
现代文：此时观军容使田令孜在宫中擅权，厌恶王重荣与武皇交往密切，想分离他们的势力，于是调王重荣到定州。
English: At this time, Guan Junrong allowed Tian Lingzi to usurp power in the palace. He disliked Wang Chong Rong's close association with Emperor Wu and wanted to separate their powers, so he transferred Wang Chong Rong to Dingzhou.

古文：克用方与全忠有隙，信之，请讨全忠及玫。
现代文：王重荣告诉武皇，武皇上奏章说： 李昌符、朱玫依恃邪恶，忌恨正直，结党庇护朱温。
English: Wang Chong Rong told Emperor Wu that Emperor Wu's last imperial edict said: Li Changfu and Zhu Mei cling to evil, hate honesty, and form a party to protect Zhu Wen.

古文：天子览表，遣使譬喻百端，轺传相望。
现代文：我已统帅蕃汉军马五万，准备来年渡过黄河，先斩了朱玫、李昌符，然后荡平朱温。 皇帝看了奏表，派使者百般劝喻，车马来往频繁。
English: I have commanded fifty thousand horses and mules of the Han army, and I am preparing to cross the Yellow River next year. First, I cut off Zhu Mei and Li Changfu, and then I flattened Zhu Wen. The emperor read the report card, sent envoys to persuade him in various ways, and the carriages and horses came and went frequently.

古文：既而硃玫引邠、凤之师攻河中，王重荣出师拒战。
现代文：不久朱玫引州、凤翔军队攻打河中，王重荣出兵抵抗。
English: Soon after, Zhu Meizhou and Fengxiang's armies attacked the middle of the river, and Wang Chongrong sent troops to resist.

古文：硃玫军于沙苑，对垒月余。
现代文：朱玫在沙苑驻扎，对垒一个多月。
English: Zhu Mei has been stationed in Sha Yuan and has been on the base for more than a month.

古文：十二月，武皇引军渡河，与硃玫决战，玫大败，收军夜遁，入于京师。
现代文：十二月，武皇引军渡过黄河，与朱玫决战，朱玫大败，收拾残军连夜逃跑，进入京师。
English: In December, Emperor Wu led his army across the Yellow River and fought a decisive battle with Zhu Mei. Zhu Mei was defeated, and he gathered up the remnants of his army and fled overnight, entering the capital division.

古文：时京城大骇。天子幸凤翔，武皇退军于河中。
现代文：此时京城大为恐慌，皇帝到达凤翔，武皇退军到河中。
English: At this time, there was great panic in the capital. The emperor arrived at Fengxiang, and Emperor Wu withdrew to the middle of the river.

古文：光启二年正月，僖宗驻跸于宝鸡，武皇自河中遣使上章，请车驾还京，且言大军止诛凶党。
现代文：光启二年一月，唐僖宗住在宝鸡，武皇自河中派使者上奏章，请皇帝车驾回京，并说大军只是诛杀凶党。
English: In January of the second year of Guangqi, Tang Xizong lived in Baoji, and Emperor Wu sent an envoy from the middle of the river to make a report, asking the emperor to drive back to Beijing, and saying that the army was just fighting and killing the murderers.

古文：时田令孜请僖宗南幸兴元，武皇遂班师。
现代文：此时田令孜请僖宗往南到兴元府，武皇遂回师。
English: At this time, Tian Lingzhe invited Jianzong to go south to Xingyuanfu, and Emperor Wu then returned.

古文：硃玫于凤翔立嗣襄王煴为帝，以伪诏赐武皇，武皇燔之，械其使，驰檄诸方镇，遣使奉表于行在。
现代文：朱玫在凤翔立嗣襄王李誰为皇帝，赐伪诏给武皇，武皇烧掉伪诏，绑住使者，送檄文给诸方镇，派使者奉奏表到皇帝所在地。
English: In Fengxiang, Zhu Mei established his heir, Xiang Wang Li, as emperor, and issued a false edict to Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu burned the false edict, tied up the envoy, sent the edict to Zhufang Town, and sent the envoy to the emperor's residence with a report card.

古文：九月，武皇遣昭义节度使李克修讨孟方立于邢州，大败方立之众于焦岗，斩首数千级。
现代文：九月，武皇派昭义节度使李克修到邢州讨伐孟方立，在焦岗大败孟方立众兵，斩首数千级。
English: In September, Emperor Wu sent Zhaoyi Jiedu to persuade Li Kexiu to go to Zhangzhou to fight against Meng Fangli, and he defeated Meng Fangli's soldiers in Jiaogang, beheading thousands of them.

古文：以大将安金俊为邢州刺史，以抚其降人。
现代文：以大将安金俊为邢州刺史，以安抚投降的士兵。
English: General An Jinjun was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou to appease the soldiers who had surrendered.

古文：十月，进攻邢州，邢人出战，又败之。
现代文：十月，进攻邢州，邢州人出战，武皇又打败了他们。
English: In October, they attacked Zhangzhou. The Zhangzhou people went to war, and Emperor Wu defeated them.

古文：盂方立求援于镇州，镇人出兵三万以援方立，克修班师。
现代文：孟方立向镇州求援，镇州人出兵三万援救孟方立，李克修回师。
English: Meng Fangli appealed to Zhenzhou for help. The Zhenzhou people sent 30,000 soldiers to rescue Meng Fangli, and Li Kexiu returned to his division.

古文：光启三年六月，河中节度使王重荣为部将常行儒所杀，武皇表重荣兄重盈为帅。
现代文：光启三年六月，河中节度使王重荣被部将常行儒杀害，武皇推荐王重荣之兄王重盈为帅。
English: In June of the 3rd year of Guangqi, during the Mid-Autumn Festival, Wang Chung Rong was killed by the general Chang Xing Ju. Emperor Wu recommended Wang Chung Rong's brother, Wang Chung Ying, as his successor.

古文：七月，武皇以安金俊为泽州刺史。
现代文：七月，武皇任安金俊为泽州刺史。
English: In July, Emperor Wu appointed An Jinjun as the governor of Zezhou.

古文：时张全义自河阳据泽州，及李罕之收复河阳，召全义令守洛阳，全义乃弃泽州而去，故以金俊守之。
现代文：此时张全义自河阳占据泽州，到李罕之收复河阳时，召张全义守洛阳，张全义于是放弃泽州离去，用安金俊把守。
English: At this time, Zhang Quanyi occupied Zhezhou from Heyang. When Li Hangzhi recovered Heyang, he called Zhang Quanyi to defend Luoyang. Zhang Quanyi then abandoned Zhezhou and used An Jinjun to defend it.

古文：文德元年二月，僖宗自兴元还京。
现代文：文德元年二月，僖宗从兴元府回京。
English: In February 1861, Shizong returned to Beijing from Xingyuanfu.

古文：三月，僖宗崩，昭宗即位，以武皇为开府仪同三司、检校太师、兼侍中、陇西郡王，食邑七千户，食实封二百户。
现代文：三月，僖宗驾崩，唐昭宗即位，以武皇为开府仪同三司、检校太师、兼侍中、陇西郡王，食邑七千户，食实封二百户。
English: In March, Emperor Taizong passed away and Emperor Zhaozong of Tang ascended to the throne. Emperor Wu was appointed as Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Kengyo Taishi, concurrently Samurai Junior High School, and Shaanxi Guo Wang. There were 7,000 households in food villages and 200 households in food real estate.

古文：河南尹张全义潜兵夜袭李罕之于河阳，城陷，举族为全义所掳；罕之逾垣获免，遂来归于武皇。
现代文：河南尹张全义暗地派兵在河阳夜袭李罕之，城被攻陷，李罕之全家人被张全义俘虏，李罕之翻墙免于被抓，来到武皇这里。
English: Yin Zhang Quan Yi of Henan secretly sent troops to attack Li Han Zhi in the night of Heyang, the city was captured, Li Han Zhi's whole family was captured by Zhang Quan Yi, Li Han Zhi climbed over the wall to avoid being arrested and came to Emperor Wu here.

古文：遣李存孝、薛阿檀、史俨兒、安金俊、安休休将七千骑送罕之至河阳。
现代文：武皇派李存孝、薛阿檀、史俨儿、安金俊、安休休率七千骑兵护送李罕之回到河阳。
English: Emperor Wu sent Li Cunxiao, Xue Atan, Shi Ye'er, An Jinjun, and An Xiuyuan with seven thousand cavalry to escort Li Han back to Heyang.

古文：汴将丁会、牛存节、葛从周将兵赴援，李存孝率精骑逆战于温县。
现代文：汴将丁会、牛存节、葛从周带兵救援张全义，李存孝率精锐骑兵在温县迎战。
English: Dinghui, Niu Cunjie and Ge Congzhou led troops to rescue Zhang Quanyi, and Li Cunxiao led elite cavalry to fight in Wen County.

古文：汴人既扼太行之路，存孝殿军而退。
现代文：汴人已扼守太行之路，李存孝殿后退兵。
English: Xuanren had already secured the road to Taihang, and Li Cunxiao retired after the battle.

古文：骑将安休休以战不利，奔于蔡。
现代文：骑将安休休因为战斗失利，逃往蔡州。
English: An Qiuqiu, the cavalry commander, fled to Caizhou after losing the battle.

古文：武皇以罕之为泽州刺史，遥领河阳节度使。
现代文：武皇任李罕之为泽州刺史，遥任河阳节度使。
English: Emperor Wu appointed Li Han Zicheng as the chief historian of Zhejiang Province, and appointed him as the chief envoy of the Kheyang Festival.

古文：十月，邢州孟方立遣大将奚忠信将兵三万寇辽州，武皇大破之，斩首万级，生擒奚忠信。
现代文：十月，邢州孟方立派大将奚忠信带兵三万侵犯辽州，武皇大破此军，斩首万级，活捉了奚忠信。
English: In October, Zhangzhou Mengfang admirable general Zou Zhongxin led 30,000 soldiers to invade Liaozhou. Emperor Wu defeated this army, beheaded 10,000, and captured Zou Zhongxin alive.

古文：龙纪元年五月，遣李罕之、李存孝攻邢州。
现代文：龙纪元年五月，武皇派李罕之、李存孝进攻邢州。
English: In May of the first year of the Dragon Dynasty, Emperor Wu sent Li Hanzhi and Li Cunxiao to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：六月，下磁州。
现代文：六月，攻下磁州。
English: In June, the magnetic state was captured.

古文：邢将马溉率兵数万来拒战，罕之败之于琉璃陂，生擒马溉，徇于城下。
现代文：邢州将军马溉率兵几万抵抗，李罕之在琉璃陂击败邢州军，活捉了马溉，在城下示众。
English: Zhangzhou General Ma Rui led tens of thousands of soldiers to resist, Li Hanzhi defeated the Zhangzhou Army in Li Li, captured Ma Rui alive, and demonstrated to the public under the city.

古文：孟方立恚恨，饮鸩而死。
现代文：孟方立又气又恨，饮毒酒自杀。
English: Enraged and filled with hatred, Meng Fangli drank poisoned wine and committed suicide.

古文：三军立其侄迁为留后，使求援于汴。
现代文：三军拥立他的侄子孟迁为邢州留后。派使者向汴州求援。
English: After the three armies supported his nephew Meng Qian to stay in Zhangzhou, he sent an envoy to Zhangzhou to ask for help.

古文：汴将王虔裕率精甲数百入于邢州，罕之等班师。
现代文：汴将王虔裕率精兵数百人进入邢州，李罕之回师。
English: Zhai general Wang Qianyu led hundreds of elite soldiers into Zhangzhou, and Li Han's army retreated.

古文：大顺元年，遣李存孝攻邢州，孟迁以邢、洺、磁三州降，执汴将王虔裕三百人以献。
现代文：大顺元年，武皇又派李存孝打邢州，孟迁献邢、氵名、磁三州投降，抓住汴将王虔裕三百人献上。
English: In the first year of Dashun, Emperor Wu also sent Li Cunxiao to capture Luzhou, while Meng Qian surrendered Luzhou, Yunnan, and Hebei, and Wang Qianyu captured Luzhou and surrendered 300 people.

古文：武皇徙孟迁于太原，以安金俊为邢洺团练使。
现代文：武皇迁徙孟迁到太原，任安金俊为邢氵名团练使。
English: Emperor Wu migrated Meng to Taiyuan, and appointed An Jinjun as the training envoy of the Shennai group.

古文：三月，昭义军节度使李克修卒，以李克恭为潞州节度使。
现代文：三月，昭义军节度使李克修去世，任李克恭为潞州节度使。
English: In March, Li Kexiu died at the time of the Shouyi Army Festival, and Li Keqiang was appointed as the envoy of the Bozhou Festival.

古文：是月，武皇攻云州，拔其东城。
现代文：这个月，武皇进攻云州，攻下东城。
English: This month, Emperor Wu attacked Yunnan and captured Dongcheng.

古文：赫连铎求援于燕，燕帅李匡威将兵三万以赴之，战于城下，燕军大败。
现代文：赫连铎向燕军求援，燕帅李匡威带兵三万救援，在城下交战，燕军大败。
English: Helianthus appealed to Yan's army for help, and Yan's general, Li Kuangwei, led 30,000 soldiers to the rescue. They fought under the city, and Yan's army was soundly defeated.

古文：时徐州时溥为汴军所攻，遣使来求援，武皇命石君和由兗、郓以赴之。
现代文：此时徐州时溥为汴军所攻，派使者来求援，武皇命石君和从兖州、郓州前往救援。
English: At this time, Xuzhou was attacked by the Han army and sent an envoy to ask for help. Emperor Wu ordered Shi Junhe to go to rescue from Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：五月，潞州军乱，杀节度使李克恭，州人推牙将安居受为留后，南结汴将。
现代文：五月，潞州军军变，杀死节度使李克恭，州人推举牙将安居受为留后，向南与汴军将领交结。
English: In May, the Bozhou army mutinied, and Li Keqiong was killed. After the people of Bozhou elected Jia Jia to stay and live peacefully, he went south to meet with the generals of the Bozhou army.

古文：时潞之小将冯霸拥叛徒三千骑驻于沁水，居受使人召之，冯霸不至。
现代文：这时潞州小将冯霸带着叛变的三千骑兵驻在沁水，安居受派人召见他，冯霸不来。
English: At this time, Zhangzhou young general Feng Ba was stationed in Surabaya with the mutinous three thousand cavalrymen. Anju was summoned to see him, but Feng Ba did not come.

古文：居受惧，出奔至长子，为村胥所杀，传首于霸；霸遂入潞州，自为留后。
现代文：安居受害怕，出奔到长子，被乡村中小官吏杀了，把他的头送给冯霸，冯霸于是进入潞州，自任为留后。
English: Anju was afraid of being victimized, so he ran to his eldest son, who was killed by village officials, and gave his head to Fengba. Fengba then entered Zhangzhou and appointed himself as his successor.

古文：武皇遣大将康君立、李存孝等攻之，汴将硃崇节、葛从周率兵入潞州以固之。
现代文：武皇派大将康君立、李存孝等进攻潞州，汴将朱崇节、葛从周率兵进入潞州帮助固守。
English: Emperor Wu sent generals Kangjunli and Li Cunxiao to attack Bozhou, while Zhu Chongjie and Ge Zhou led their troops into Bozhou to help defend it.

古文：是时，幽州李匡威、云州赫连铎与汴帅协谋，连上表请加兵于太原，宰相张浚、孔纬赞成其事。
现代文：这时，幽州李匡威、云州赫连铎与汴帅合谋，连着上奏表请对太原武皇用兵，宰相张浚、孔纬赞成此事。
English: At this time, Yuzhou Li Kuangwei, Yunnan Helian Zhou and Zou Shuai conspired together, together with the report form, to request the use of troops against Taiyuan Emperor Wu. Prime Minister Zhang Jun and Kong Wei approved of this matter.

古文：六月，天子削夺武皇官爵，以张浚为招讨使，以京兆尹孙揆为副，华州韩建为行营都虞候，以汴帅为河东南面招讨使，幽州李匡威为河东北面招讨使，云州赫连铎为副。
现代文：六月，皇帝削夺武皇官爵，任张浚为招讨使，任京兆尹孙揆为副使，华州韩建为行营都虞候，任汴帅朱温为河东南面招讨使，幽州李匡威为河东北面招讨使，云州赫连铎为副使。
English: In June, the emperor conferred the title of "Wuhuangzhuangzhe," appointed Zhang Jun as the envoy, appointed Jing Zhaoying as the deputy envoy, appointed Huazhou Han Jian as the commander-in-chief, appointed Yu Shuai Zhu Wen as the envoy to the south-east of the river, appointed Yuzhou Li Kuangwei as the envoy to the north-east of the river, and appointed Yunnan Herenyu as the deputy envoy.

古文：汴将硃友裕将兵屯晋、绛，时汴军已据潞州，又遣大将李谠等率军数万，急攻泽州，武皇遣李存孝自潞州将三千骑以援之。
现代文：汴将朱友裕带兵在晋、绛二州驻扎，此时汴军已占据潞州，又派大将李谠等人率军数万，急攻泽州，武皇派李存孝从潞州带三千骑兵援救。
English: Emperor Wu stationed Zhu Youyu and his troops in the two states of Jin and Qin. At this time, the Qin army had already occupied Qin State. He also sent General Li Qian and others to lead tens of thousands of troops to make a sudden attack on Zeshu. Emperor Wu sent Li Cunxiao from Qin State with three thousand cavalry to rescue.

古文：汴将邓季筠以一军犯阵，存孝追击，擒其都将十数人，获马千余匹。
现代文：汴将邓季筠用一支军队犯阵，被李存孝追击，捉得都将十几人，获马千余匹。
English: He led Deng Jizhe into battle with an army and was chased by Li Cunxiao. He captured more than a dozen people and more than a thousand horses.

古文：是夜，李谠收军而退，大军掩击至马牢关，斩首万余级，追袭至怀州而还。
现代文：这一夜，李谠收军退走，大军追杀到马牢关，斩首万余级，追击到怀州而回。
English: That night, Li Gan withdrew his army, and the army chased him to Ma Duoguan, beheaded more than 10,000 people, and chased him back to Huai Zhou.

古文：存孝复引军攻潞州。
现代文：李存孝又引军进攻潞州。
English: Li Cunxiao once again led an army to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：八月，存孝擒新授昭义节度使孙揆。
现代文：八月，李存孝活捉新任昭义节度使孙揆。
English: In August, Li Cunxiao captured the newly appointed Shouyi Jiedu envoy Sun Yat-sen alive.

古文：初，朝廷授揆节钺，以本军取刀黄岭路赴任，存孝侦知之，引骑三百伏于长子县崖谷间。
现代文：起初，朝廷授孙揆符节仗钺，领部下取道刀黄岭赴任，被李存孝侦查得知，引三百骑兵埋伏在长子县山谷之间。
English: At the beginning, the imperial court gave the grandson of Sun Quan the title of warlord, and the leaders of his subordinates took the sword of Huangling to take office. Li Cunxiao's investigation revealed that he led three hundred cavalry to lie in ambush between the valleys of the eldest son's county.

古文：揆建牙持节，褒衣大盖，拥众而行，存孝突出谷口，遂擒揆及中使韩归范，并将校五百人。
现代文：孙揆举着牙旗持着节仗，宽衣大盖，率众人而行，李存孝突然从谷口杀出，于是活捉孙揆和朝中使者韩归范，以及将校五百人。
English: Sun Yat-sen was holding a tooth flag, holding a festival banner, wearing a wide-brimmed overcoat, and leading the crowd. Li Cunxiao suddenly rushed out from Taniguchi, whereupon he captured Sun Yat-sen and the North Korean and Chinese envoy Han Kui-fan alive, as well as five hundred officers.

古文：存孝械揆等，以组练系之，环于潞州，遂献于武皇。
现代文：李存孝捆住孙揆等人，用大绳子系在一起，环绕潞州示众，最后献给武皇。
English: Li Cunxiao tied up Sun Yat-sen and others, tied them together with a large rope, surrounded Zhangzhou to show the public, and finally dedicated it to Emperor Wu.

古文：武皇谓揆曰： 公搢绅之士，安言徐步可至达官，何用如是！ 
现代文：武皇对孙揆说： 你是朝中的文官，光是说说话踱踱步就可以当上大官，哪用得着领兵镇守一方呢？ 
English: Emperor Wu said to Sun Yat-sen, "You are a civil official in the middle of the court. You can become a high-ranking official just by talking and pacing. Why do you need to lead an army to defend one side?

古文：揆无以对，令系于晋阳狱。
现代文：孙揆没有话可说，被关在晋阳狱中。
English: Sun Yat-sen had nothing to say and was locked up in Jinyang Prison.

古文：武皇将用为副使，使人诱之，揆言不逊，遂杀之。
现代文：武皇想任他为副使，派人诱降，孙揆出言不逊，就被杀了。
English: Emperor Wu wanted to appoint him as a deputy envoy and sent someone to entice him to abdicate. However, Sun Yat-sen made an insolent remark and was killed.

古文：九月，汴将葛从周弃潞州而遁，武皇以康君立为潞州节度使，以李存孝为汾州刺史。
现代文：九月，汴将葛从周放弃潞州逃走，武皇任康君立为潞州节度使，任李存孝为汾州刺史。
English: In September, Emperor Wu ordered Ge Zhou to abandon Ganzhou and flee. Emperor Wu appointed Kangjun as the official of the Ganzhou Festival, and appointed Li Cunxiao as the official of the Ganzhou Festival.

古文：十月，张浚之师入晋州，游军至汾、隰。
现代文：十月，张浚军队进入晋州，游军到汾、隰二地。
English: In October, Zhang Jun's army entered Jinzhou, and the guerrilla army went to Handan and Handan.

古文：武皇遣薛铁山、李承嗣将骑三千出阴地关，营于洪洞，遣李存孝将兵五千，营于赵城。
现代文：武皇派薛铁山、李承嗣带三千骑兵出阴地关，在洪洞扎营，派李存孝带兵五千，在赵城扎营。
English: Emperor Wu sent Xue Tieshan and Li Chengzhi with three thousand cavalry from Zhidiguan to camp in Hongdong, and sent Li Cunxiao with five thousand soldiers to camp in Zhaocheng.

古文：华州韩建以壮士三百人冒犯存孝之营，存孝追击，直压晋州西门，张浚之师出战，为存孝所败，自是闭壁不出。
现代文：华州韩建领三百壮士进犯李存孝营地，李存孝追击，直抵晋州西门，张浚军队出战，被李存孝打败，从此闭门不出。
English: Huazhou Han Jian led three hundred strong men to invade Li Cunxiao's camp, Li Cunxiao pursued and arrived at the west gate of Jinzhou, Zhang Jun's army went to war, was defeated by Li Cunxiao, and has not closed the door since.

古文：《欧阳史》：二月，复拜克用河东节度使、陇西郡王，加检校太师、兼中书令。
现代文：李存孝引军进攻绛州。十二月，晋州刺史张行恭弃城逃奔，韩建、张浚由含山路逃去。大顺二年一月，武皇呈上奏章申述道理，大致说的是： 我现在没有官爵，是个罪人，不敢回归陛下镇守藩方，只想在河中借住，进退行止，请陛下裁决。 皇帝于是加封他为守中书令。
English: Li Cunxiao led an army to attack Zhangzhou. In December, Zhang Xing abandoned the city and ran away, while Han Jian and Zhang Jun fled from the mountain road. In January of the second year of Daxun, Emperor Wu presented a petition to explain the reason, saying roughly: I do not have a peerage now, I am a sinner, I dare not return to His Majesty's town to defend the clan, I just want to stay in the river, retreat, and ask His Majesty's ruling. The emperor then sealed him as a guard of the central government.

古文：是月，魏博为汴将葛从周所寇，节度使罗宏信遣使来求援，武皇出师以赴之。
现代文：这个月，魏博遭汴将葛从周侵犯，节度使罗弘信派使者来求援，武皇出兵赴援。
English: This month, Wei Bo was arrested for invading Ge from Zhou, the festival caused Luo Hongxin to send an envoy to ask for help, and Emperor Wu sent troops to help.

古文：三月，邢州节度使安知建叛，奔青州。
现代文：三月，邢州节度使安知建叛变，奔向青州。
English: In March, the Bozhou Festival caused Anchi Jian to mutiny and flee to Qingzhou.

古文：天子以知建为神武统军，自棣州溯河归朝。
现代文：皇帝任安知建为神武统军，从棣州逆黄河而上归朝。
English: Emperor Ren Anchi built the Shenwu United Army and returned to the imperial court from Zhangzhou across the Yellow River.

古文：郓州硃瑄邀斩于河上，传首晋阳。以李存孝为邢州节度使。
现代文：郓州朱王宣在黄河岸边拦住，杀了他，把他的头送到晋阳，任李存孝为邢州节度使。
English: Zhangzhou Zhu Wangxuan stopped him on the bank of the Yellow River, killed him, sent his head to Jinyang, and appointed Li Cunxiao as Zhangzhou Festival envoy.

古文：四月，武皇大举兵讨赫连铎于云州，遣骑将薛阿檀率前军以进攻，武皇设伏兵于御河之上，大破之，因堑守其城。
现代文：四月，武皇大举进军云州讨伐赫连铎，派骑将薛阿檀率前军进攻，武皇在御河之上埋设伏兵，大破敌军，并挖掘濠沟围困云州城。
English: In April, Emperor Wu marched into Yunnan on a large scale to fight against Hereng Yao, and sent cavalry general Xue Atan to lead the front army to attack. Emperor Wu laid an ambush on the Ohe River, defeated the enemy army, and dug a trench to besiege Yunnan City.

古文：七月，武皇进军柳会，赫连铎力屈食尽，奔于吐浑部，遂归幽州，云州平。
现代文：七月，武皇进军柳会，赫连铎势穷粮尽，逃奔吐谷浑部，遂归幽州，云州平定。
English: In July, Emperor Wu marched into Liuhui, Herien lost all his strength and ran out of food, fled to Tugu Hunbe, then returned to Yuzhou, and Yunnan was pacified.

古文：武皇表石善友为大同军防御使。
现代文：武皇表奏任石善友为大同军防御使。
English: Emperor Wu issued a proclamation appointing Shi Shengyou as the defense envoy of the Datong Army.

古文：邢州节度使李存孝以镇州王熔托附汴人，谋乱河朔，北连燕寇，请乘云、代之捷，平定燕、赵，武皇然之。
现代文：邢州节度使李存孝因为镇州王依附汴人，谋乱河朔，北连燕寇，请乘云州、代州的胜利之势，平定燕、赵二地，武皇同意了。
English: The Bozhou Festival made Li Cunxiao because the king of Zhenzhou adhered to the Xiong people and plotted to cause chaos in Hexuo and Yankou in the north, please take advantage of the victory of Yunnan and Daizhou to pacify Yan and Zhao, and Emperor Wu agreed.

古文：八月，大搜于晋阳，遂南巡泽、潞，略地怀、孟，河阳赵克裕望风送款，请修邻好。
现代文：八月，在晋阳阅兵，遂南巡泽、潞二地，占领怀州、孟州，河阳赵克裕望风求和，请修友邻之好。
English: In August, during the military parade in Jinyang, Sui Nan patrolled Zhejiang and Fujian, occupied Huizhou and Mengzhou, and Zhao Keyu of Heyang looked to the wind for peace and asked for the goodwill of his neighbors.

古文：九月，蒐于邢州。
现代文：九月，在邢州阅兵。
English: In September, there was a military parade in Zhangzhou.

古文：十月，李存孝董前军攻临城，镇人五万营于临城西北龙尾岗。武皇令李存审、李存贤以步军攻之，镇人大败，杀获万计，拔临城，进攻元氏。
现代文：十月，李存孝带前军进攻临城，镇州五万人在临城西北龙尾岗扎营，武皇令李存审、李存贤领步兵进攻，镇州人大败，杀获数万，攻下临城，进攻元氏。
English: In October, Li Cunxiao led the front army to attack Lincheng, and 50,000 people from Zhenzhou encamped in Longwei Gang, northwest of Lincheng. Emperor Wu ordered Li Cunxiu and Li Cunxian to lead the infantry to attack, and the people from Zhenzhou were defeated, killed tens of thousands, captured Lincheng, and attacked the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：幽州李匡威以步骑五万营于鄗邑，以援镇州，武皇分兵大掠，旋军邢州。
现代文：幽州李匡威领步兵骑兵五万在高阝邑扎营，以援助镇州，武皇分兵大掠，回师邢州。
English: Yuzhou Li Kuangwei led 50,000 infantry and cavalry to set up camp in Gaozhou, to assist Zhenzhou, and the Emperor Wu's detachment of troops carried out a large-scale raid, and returned to the division of Yuzhou.

