古文：汉武帝
现代文：汉武帝
English: Emperor Hanwu

古文：汉孝武皇帝，景帝子也。
现代文：汉孝武皇帝刘彻，是汉景帝刘启的儿子。
English: Han Xiaowu Emperor Liu Che was the son of Han Jing Emperor Liu Qi.

古文：未生之时，景帝梦一赤彘从云中下，直入崇芳阁，景帝觉而坐阁下。
现代文：武帝出生前，景帝梦见一只红色的猪从云中降下来，一直进入宫内的崇芳阁。景帝一下子惊醒了。
English: Before Emperor Wu was born, Emperor Jing dreamed of a red pig descending from the clouds and entering the Chongfang Pavilion inside the palace. Emperor Jing suddenly woke up.

古文：果有赤龙如雾，来蔽户牖。
现代文：坐车到崇芳阁下，抬头一看，果然空中有一条红色的龙腾云驾雾，把崇芳阁的门窗都笼罩了。
English: When he drove to Chongfang, he looked up and saw that there was indeed a red dragon cloud in the sky, shrouding the doors and windows of Chongfang Pavilion.

古文：宫内嫔御，望阁上有丹霞蓊蔚而起。
现代文：宫里的嫔妃们也看见崇芳阁上有红色的云霞蒸腾覆盖。
English: The concubines in the palace also saw that there was a red cloud cover on the Chongfang Pavilion.

古文：霞灭，见赤龙盘回栋间。
现代文：红霞散去后，只见一条红色的龙在宫中的梁栋之间盘旋回转。
English: After the red haze dissipated, only a red dragon could be seen circling between the beams in the palace.

古文：然亦大妖。 景帝使王夫人移居崇芳阁，欲以顺姚翁之言也，乃改崇芳阁为猗兰殿。
现代文：景帝就召来一位算卦的姚翁来请教，姚翁说 这是大吉大利的预兆。这个崇芳阁里一定会出生一位主宰国家命运的人，他将会平定北方的夷、狄等异族，使国运昌盛，成为刘氏王朝兴盛时期的一位明主。
English: Emperor Jing summoned a fortune-teller, Yao Weng, to ask for advice. Yao Weng said that this was an omen of great fortune. A person who would dominate the fate of the country would surely be born in this Chongfang Pavilion. He would subdue the Yi, Di and other alien races in the north, make the national movement prosperous, and become a bright master during the prosperous period of the Liu Dynasty.

古文：旬余，景帝梦神女捧日以授王夫人，夫人吞之，十四月而生武帝。
现代文：然而这位明主也会生出很多奇闻怪事。景帝又梦见一位神女双手捧着太阳授给王夫人，王夫人就把太阳吞了下去。王夫人怀胎十四个月才生下了武帝。
English: However, this clear master would also give birth to many strange stories. Emperor Jing also dreamed of a goddess holding the sun in her hands and giving it to Lady Wang, who then swallowed the sun. Lady Wang was only fourteen months pregnant when she gave birth to Emperor Wu.

古文：景帝曰： 吾梦赤气化为赤龙，占者以为吉，可名之吉。 
现代文：景帝说，我梦见红色的云气化为赤龙，占卜的人说是吉祥的预兆。
English: Emperor Jing said, I dreamed that the red cloud vaporized into a red dragon, soothsayers said it was an auspicious omen.

古文：至三岁，景帝抱于膝上，抚念之，知其心藏洞彻，试问儿乐为天子否。
现代文：这个孩子可以取名叫 吉 。武帝三岁时，景帝把他抱在膝上，知道这孩子特别有灵气，就问他愿不愿意当皇帝。
English: This child could be named Ji Rong. When Emperor Wu was three years old, Emperor Jing held him on his lap. Knowing that this child had a special aura, he asked him if he would like to become emperor.

古文：对曰： 由天不由儿。
现代文：武帝说： 这事是由上天安排的，由不得我自己。
English: Emperor Wu said, "This matter was arranged by Heaven, and I can't help myself.

古文：愿每日居宫垣，在陛下前戏弄，亦不敢逸豫，以失子道。 
现代文：但我愿意天天在皇宫里住着，在父亲面前玩耍，决不会放肆不恭而不尽作儿子的责任。 
English: But I am willing to live in the palace every day, play in front of my father, and will never be arrogant and not fulfill my son's responsibilities.

古文：景帝闻而愕然，加敬而训之。
现代文：景帝听了这番话，心里更加惊奇，就特别注意对这孩子的教导培养。
English: Hearing this, Emperor Jing was even more surprised, and paid special attention to the child's education.

古文：他日复抱之几前，试问儿悦习何书，为朕言之。
现代文：过了几天，景帝又把刘彻抱到书桌前，问他喜欢读什么书，可以详细说一说。
English: A few days later, Emperor Jing again held Liu Che in his arms in front of his desk and asked him what books he liked to read.

古文：乃诵伏羲以来，群圣所录，阴阳诊候，及龙图龟策数万言。无一字遗落。
现代文：刘彻就开始背诵从伏羲以来一些圣贤的著作，包括一些论述阴阳五行和历代的著名国策论文，背了几万字的文章没有遗漏一个字。
English: Liu Che began to recite the works of some sages since Fuxi, including some famous national policy papers that discussed the yin and yang and the five elements, and recited tens of thousands of words without missing a word.

古文：至七岁，圣彻过人，景帝令改名彻。
现代文：到了七岁，景帝见他聪明透彻超过凡人，就给他改名叫刘彻。
English: When he was seven years old, Emperor Jing saw that he was smarter and more thorough than ordinary people, so he changed his name to Liu Che.

古文：及即位，好神仙之道，常祷祈名山大川五岳，以求神仙。
现代文：刘彻即了帝位后，特别喜好神仙修炼的道术，经常到全国的名山大川和五岳去祈祷神灵，以求自己能得道成仙。
English: After Liu Che took the throne, he was particularly fond of the Taoism practiced by the immortals. He often went to the famous mountains and rivers and the Five Mountains across the country to pray to the gods, so that he could attain immortality.

古文：元封元年，正月甲子，登嵩山，起道宫。帝斋七日，祠讫乃还。
现代文：武帝元封元年正月初一，刘彻登上嵩山，在兴建的道观里，斋戒了七天，祭祀之后就回宫了。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, Liu Che ascended Songshan Mountain, fasted for seven days in the Taoist monastery under construction, and returned to the palace after the sacrifice.

古文：至四月戊辰，帝闲居承华殿，东方朔、董仲君。在侧。忽见一女子，著青衣，美丽非常，帝愕然问之，女对曰： 我墉宫玉女王子登也。
现代文：到四月戊辰那天，武帝在承华殿中闲坐，东方朔、董仲君随着他闲谈，忽然看见一个非常美丽的青衣女子，武帝非常奇怪，问她是谁，女子说： 我是天宫的玉女，叫王子登。
English: On the day of Pentecost in April, Emperor Wu was sitting idly in the Chenghua Hall. Dongfang Shuo and Dong Zhongjun were chatting with him. Suddenly, he saw a very beautiful woman in a blue dress. Emperor Wu was very surprised and asked who she was. The woman said, "I am the princess of the Heavenly Palace, called Prince Deng."

古文：向为王母所使，从昆仑山来。
现代文：西王母派我从昆仑山来看你。
English: The Queen of the West sent me from Mount Kunlun to see you.

古文：语帝曰：闻子轻四海之禄，寻道求生，降帝王之位，而屡祷山岳，勤哉有似可教者也。
现代文：听说你毫不看重帝王的基业，一心寻道求长生，离开亲王的尊位多次到三山五岳去祈祷神灵。像你这种具有勤奋追求精神的人是值得传授真道的。
English: I've heard that you don't care about the emperor's legacy, that you're only interested in finding the way to eternal life, and that you've left the dignity of a prince to go to the three mountains and five peaks to pray to the gods many times. People with a diligent pursuit spirit like you are worthy of teaching the true way.

古文：从今日清斋，不闲人事，至七月七日，王母暂来也。 
现代文：从今天起，请你不要过问政务，静心斋戒，到七月七日那天。王母会暂时降临来看你的。 
English: From today, I ask you not to meddle in the affairs of state, but to meditate and fast until the 7th of July, when the Queen Mother will come to see you.

古文：帝下席跪诺。言讫，玉女忽然不知所在。帝问东方朔： 此何人？ 
现代文：武帝赶快离开座位下拜行礼，答应一定照玉女的指示去作，刚拜完，玉女就突然消失了。武帝问东方朔： 那女子到底是什么人？ 
English: Emperor Wu quickly left his seat and bowed, promising to do so according to the instructions of the lady. As soon as he finished bowing, the lady suddenly disappeared. Emperor Wu asked Dongfang Shuo: Who is that woman?

古文：朔曰： 是西王母紫兰宫玉女，常传使命，往来扶桑，出入灵州，交关常阳，传言玄都。
现代文：东方朔说： 她就是西王母紫兰宫里的玉女，常常为西王母传达使命，来往于东海中的扶桑和西方的灵州之间。替天上的玄都宫向人世间传达使令。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: She is the Jade Maiden in the Purple Palace of the Western Queen Mother. She often conveys the mission for the Western Queen Mother. She travels between Fusang in the East Sea and Lingzhou in the West. She conveys the mission to the world for the Heavenly Xundu Palace.

古文：阿母昔出配北烛仙人，近又召还，使领命禄，真灵官也。 
现代文：西王母过去曾将她许配给北烛仙人，最近又把她召回身边，给了她重要的任命，是一位很有地位的仙官。 
English: In the past, the West Queen Mother had betrothed her to the North Candle Immortal. Recently, she called her back to her side and gave her an important appointment. She is a very high-ranking Immortal.

古文：帝于是登延灵之台，盛斋存道；其四方之事权，委于冢宰焉。
现代文：于是武帝就登上专为迎接神仙而建筑的台馆，诚心诚意的吃素祈祷，把朝中的政务交给宰相全权处理。
English: As a result, Emperor Wu boarded the pavilion specially built to welcome the gods, sincerely prayed to eat vegetarian food, and handed over the government affairs of the dynasty to the prime minister with full power.

古文：到七月七日，乃修除宫掖，设坐大殿。
现代文：到七月七日，把宫廷内外清扫一新，在大殿上为西王母专设了座位。
English: By July 7th, the palace had been thoroughly cleaned inside and out, and a special seat had been set up in the main hall for the Queen Mother.

古文：以紫罗荐地，燔百和之香，张云锦之帏。燃九光之灯，列玉门之枣，酌蒲萄之醴，宫监香果，为天宫之馔。
现代文：地上铺了紫色丝罗的地毯，燃起了百和薰香，挂起了云锦的帏帐，点起了光芒四射的灯烛，摆上了玉门进贡的甜枣，酌好了西域的葡萄酒，还陈设了宫中最上等的瓜果，作为接待天宫神仙的食品。
English: A purple silk carpet was laid on the floor, incense was lit, a brocade curtain was hung, radiant candles were lit, jujubes from the Jade Gate tribute were placed, wine from the Western Regions was prepared, and the finest melon fruits in the palace were displayed as food for the reception of the celestial gods.

古文：帝乃盛服，立于陛下，敕端门之内，不得有妄窥者。内外寂谧，以候云驾。
现代文：武帝穿上华丽的礼服，恭敬的站在宫廷的玉阶下，并下令宫门以内绝不准任何人偷看，宫廷内外一片庄严肃穆的气氛，恭候着西王母的降临。
English: Emperor Wu put on a gorgeous gown and stood respectfully at the foot of the palace steps. He also ordered that no one was allowed to peek inside the palace gate. A solemn atmosphere prevailed inside and outside the palace, awaiting the arrival of the Queen of the West.

古文：到夜二更之后，忽见西南如白云起，郁然直来，迳趋宫庭，须臾转近，闻云中箫鼓之声，人马之响。
现代文：到深夜二更时分，忽然看见西南天空涌起阵阵的云，翻卷着直奔宫廷而来，越来越近，隐约还听见云中有箫鼓音乐和人喊马嘶的声音。
English: At two o'clock in the morning, I suddenly saw clouds in the southwest sky, rolling straight towards the palace, getting closer and closer. I could faintly hear the sound of gongs and drums in the clouds, as well as the sound of people shouting.

古文：半食顷，王母至也。
现代文：约有半顿饭时，西王母到了殿前，群仙也像鸟群一样跟着到了。
English: About half-way through the meal, Xi Wangmu arrived in front of the hall, and the nymphs followed like a flock of birds.

古文：县投殿前，有似鸟集。或驾龙虎，或乘白麟，或乘白鹤，或乘轩车，或乘天马，群仙数千，光耀庭宇。
现代文：他们有的乘龙骑虎，有的驾着白麒麟或白鹤，有的乘着天马或华丽的车子，大约有好几千人，把宫廷映照得光彩耀眼。
English: Some of them rode dragons and tigers, some rode white unicorns or white cranes, some rode heavenly horses or magnificent chariots, and there were about several thousand of them, shining brightly at the court.

古文：既至，从官不复知所在，唯见王母乘紫云之辇，驾九色斑龙。
现代文：王母降临后，随从的仙官很快就不见了，只看见王母乘坐着紫云缭绕的车子，拉车的是背上有九色斑纹的龙。
English: After the arrival of the Queen Mother, the attendant faeries soon disappeared, only to see the Queen Mother riding in a car surrounded by purple clouds, pulled by a dragon with nine-colored stripes on its back.

古文：别有五十天仙，侧近鸾舆，皆长丈余，同执彩旄之节，佩金刚灵玺，戴天真之冠，咸住殿下。
现代文：另外还有五十名天仙侍卫在车的周围，这些仙人都身高一丈多，手执彩色的旌节仪杖，身上佩戴着金刚的天宫宝印，戴着神仙的高冠，整齐的停在宫殿前。
English: In addition, there are fifty celestial attendants around the car. These celestial attendants are much taller than the car. They are holding colorful rhodium-plated ceremonial staffs. On their bodies, they are wearing the treasure seal of the Heavenly Palace of King Kong and the high crowns of the celestial attendants. They are neatly parked in front of the palace.

古文：王母唯挟二侍女上殿，侍女年可十六七，服青绫之褂，容眸流盼，神姿清发，真美人也。
现代文：王母被两名侍女搀着上了大殿，侍女看样子有十六七岁，穿着青缎子衣衫，眼似秋波荡漾，身姿娇美婀娜，都是美人。
English: The Queen Mother was escorted into the Great Hall by two ladies-in-waiting. The ladies-in-waiting appeared to be sixteen or seventeen years old, wearing blue satin blouses, with eyes like rippling autumn waves, and beautiful, graceful figures. They were all beautiful women.

古文：王母上殿东向坐，著黄金褡襡，文采鲜明，光仪淑穆。
现代文：王母肩上披着黄金织成的大披肩，光彩照人，仪态端庄。
English: The Queen Mother wore a large shawl made of gold on her shoulders, radiant and dignified.

古文：带灵飞大绶，腰佩分景之剑，头上太华髻，戴太真晨婴之冠，履玄璚凤文之舄。
现代文：衣上系着神仙独用的灵飞大绶带，腰间佩着名为 分景 的宝剑，头上梳的是太华山形的高发髻，戴着神仙专用的 太真晨婴 冠，脚上穿着黑玉上刻有凤纹的鞋。
English: On his robe, he is wearing a large flying ribbon, which is only used by Immortals. Around his waist, he is wearing a sword called "Bifeng," his head is combed with a high hair bun in the shape of Mount Taihua, he is wearing a crown specially made for Immortals, and his feet are wearing shoes with phoenix patterns engraved on black jade.

古文：视之可年三十许，修短得中，天姿掩蔼，容颜绝世，真灵人也。
现代文：王母看样子三十岁左右，身材高矮适中，容颜秀丽，美貌绝伦，是位不折不扣的仙人。
English: The Queen Mother looked to be about thirty years old, of medium height, with a beautiful face and perfect beauty. She was a real fairy.

古文：下车登床，帝跪拜问寒暄毕立。因呼帝共坐，帝面南。
现代文：王母坐在特为她设置的床上，等武帝跪拜问候安康之后，她就招呼武帝一同坐，武帝就面朝南坐下了。
English: The Queen Mother sat on a bed specially set up for her, and after waiting for Emperor Wu to kneel and greet her, she invited Emperor Wu to sit with her, and Emperor Wu sat facing south.

古文：王母自设天厨，真妙非常：丰珍上果，芳华百味；紫芝萎蕤，芬芳填樏；清香之酒，非地上所有，香气殊绝，帝不能名也。
现代文：王母自己带来了天宫的厨师，这时就送上来天厨特制的食物果品，这些佳肴色香味美，芬芳四溢，还有那些散发着奇异香味的酒浆，都是人间所没有的，武帝也叫不出这些东西的名字。
English: The Empress Dowager herself brought the chefs from the Heavenly Palace, and at that time, she sent them food and fruit specially made by the Heavenly Kitchen. These delicacies are beautifully colored, fragrant, and fragrant, as well as the wine syrup that emits a strange aroma. All of these are not found on earth, and Emperor Wu could not name these things.

古文：又命侍女更索桃果。
现代文：宴会进行当中，王母又让侍女更换桌上的果品。
English: While the banquet was in progress, the Queen Mother asked the maid to change the fruit on the table.

古文：须臾，以玉盘盛仙桃七颗，大如鸭卵，形圆青色，以呈王母。母以四颗与帝，三颗自食。
现代文：不一会儿，侍女端来一个玉盘，盘中盛着七只仙桃，像鸭蛋那么大，圆圆的是淡青色。侍女把仙桃呈送给王母，王母拿了四只送给武帝，留下三颗自己吃。
English: After a while, the maid brought a jade plate, which contained seven peaches, as big as duck eggs, round and pale blue. The maid presented the peaches to the Queen Mother, who took four and gave them to Emperor Wu, leaving three to eat herself.

古文：桃味甘美，口有盈味。
现代文：武帝吃了桃子，觉得味道特别甘美，吃完后嘴里长时间充满了香味。
English: Emperor Wu ate the peach and found the taste particularly sweet. After eating, his mouth was filled with the fragrance for a long time.

古文：帝食辄收其核，王母问帝，帝曰： 欲种之。 
现代文：武帝把仙桃的桃核都留了起来，王母看见以后问他留桃核作什么，武帝说打算以后种它。
English: Emperor Wu kept all the peach kernels from the peach cactus. When the Queen Mother saw this, she asked him what he had kept the peach kernels for. Emperor Wu said that he planned to grow it in the future.

古文：母曰： 此桃三千年一生实，中夏地薄，种之不生。 
现代文：王母说： 这仙桃三千年才结一次果，人间的土地太贫瘠，种下也不会生长。 
English: The Queen Mother said, "This peach tree only bears fruit once every three thousand years. The soil of the human world is too barren, and it will not grow if planted.

古文：帝乃止。于坐上酒觞数遍，王母乃命诸侍女王子登弹八琅之璈，又命侍女董双成吹云和之笙，石公子击昆庭之金，许飞琼鼓震灵之簧，婉凌华拊五灵之石，范成君击湘阴之磬，段安香作九天之钧。
现代文：武帝和王母饮了几巡酒以后，王母就让身边的侍女王子登弹奏由八只玉板作成的璈，又让侍女董双成吹起了云和笙，让石公子敲起了声震天廷的锣，让许飞琼吹起了动人心魄的竿簧，让婉凌华敲击特制成麟、凤、龟、龙、虎形的石片，让范成君敲击由湘阴山石制成的磬，让段安香奏出天宫中的音律。
English: After Emperor Wu and the Queen Mother had drunk a few rounds of wine, the Queen Mother asked the attendants around the prince to play the cymbals made of eight jade plates, and let the attendant Dong Shuangcheng blow up the clouds and cymbals, let the stone boy knock up the cymbals of the sound-shocking heavenly court, let Xu Feiqion blow up the moving pole spring, let Wan Linghua knock down specially made stone pieces in the shape of a unicorn, phoenix, turtle, dragon and tiger, let Fan Chengjun knock down the cymbals made of Hunan mountain stone, and let Duan Anxiang play

古文：于是众声澈朗，灵音骇空。
现代文：这些乐器奏出的音乐声震九天，音调清朗动听。
English: The music played by these instruments has a resonance of nine days, and the tone is clear and beautiful.

古文：又命法婴歌玄灵之曲。歌毕，王母曰： 夫欲修身，当营其气，《太仙真经》所谓行 益、易之道 。 益 者益精； 易 者易形。
现代文：王母又让法婴唱起了九天神灵的歌曲，唱完后，王母说： 如果要修炼道术，首先要练运气之功，也就是《太仙真经》中所说的 益、易之道 。所谓 益 ，就是要有益于养精神，所谓 易 ，就是要改变自己的形体。
English: The Queen Mother also asked the Immaculate Conception to sing the song of the nine heavenly spirits. After she had finished singing, the Queen Mother said: "If you want to practice the art of alchemy, you must first practice the work of luck, which is the way of "benefit" and "ease" mentioned in the "True Immortal Text." The so-called "benefit" is to help raise the spirit, and the so-called "ease" is to change one's form.

古文：能益能易，名上仙籍；不益不易，不离死厄。
现代文：修炼到即能养好精神又能改变形体的程度，就可以成仙。如果达不到这个程度，就免不了一死。
English: If you cultivate to the extent that you can keep your spirit up and change your body, you can become immortal. If you don't reach this level, you will inevitably die.

古文：行益易者，谓常思 灵宝 也。 灵 者神也； 宝 者精也。
现代文：要达到即能益又能易，最根本的一条就是心中要常常想着 灵宝 。 灵 就是神灵， 宝 就是精气。
English: To achieve this, which is both beneficial and easy, the most fundamental thing is to always think of the spirit treasure in your heart. The spirit is the divine, and the treasure is the essence.

古文：子但爱精握固，闭气吞液，气化为血，血化为精，精化为神，神化为液，液化为骨。
现代文：你应该珍惜自己的精气，固守着精气，闭气吞咽津液，气就可以化成血，血又化成精，精再化为神，神又化成津液，津液又能变成骨。
English: You should cherish your own qi, adhere to the qi, swallow the qi, and the qi can turn into blood, and the blood can turn into essence, and the essence can turn into god, and the god can turn into essence, and the essence can turn into bone.

古文：行之不倦，神精充溢。
现代文：这样循环往复的修炼，就可以使你神气清爽精力充沛。
English: This kind of repetitive cultivation can make you refreshed and energetic.

古文：为之一年易气，二年易血，三年易精，四年易脉，五年易髓，六年易骨，七年易筋，八年易发，九年易形。 形易 则变化，变化则成道，成道则为仙人。
现代文：这样炼下去，一年可以易气，两年可以易血，三年可以易精，四年可以易脉，五年能够易髓，六年可以易骨，七年可以易筋，八年可以易毛发，炼到九年时，你的肉身就完全换成了仙体。
English: If you continue to refine in this way, you will be able to change your qi in one year, your blood in two years, your essence in three years, your veins in four years, your marrow in five years, your bones in six years, your sinews in seven years, and your hair in eight years. By the time you reach nine years, your body will have completely changed into a fairy body.

古文：吐纳六气，口中甘香。欲食灵芝，存得其味，微息揖吞，从心所适。
现代文：你达到了 易形 的程度后，就是发生了根本的变化，这变化就使你真正得到了 道 ，得了道也就是真正成了神仙。
English: After you have reached the level of transformation, a fundamental change has taken place, and this change has made you truly attain the Way. Having attained the Way, you have truly become immortal.

古文：气者水也，无所不成，至柔之物，通至神精矣。
现代文：那时你吐出各种气时，嘴里就自然会发出又甜又香的气味。
English: At that time, when you exhale all kinds of breath, your mouth will naturally emit a sweet and fragrant smell.

古文：此元始天王在丹房之中所说微言，今敕侍笈玉女李庆孙，书录之以相付。
现代文：吃灵芝时你要轻轻地吐气再轻轻地吞咽，这样做要随着心愿做得十分自如，灵芝的味道就能常留不消。气，本身就是水，水是什么都可以完成的。
English: When eating Ganoderma lucidum, you should gently exhale and then gently swallow. This should be done very freely according to your wishes, so that the flavor of Ganoderma lucidum can be retained for a long time. Qi itself is water, and water can accomplish anything.

古文：子善录而修焉。 
现代文：水本身是最柔和的东西，它可以养精益神，使人精神通畅。
English: Water itself is the softest thing, it can nourish the spirit and make one's spirit smooth.

古文：于是王母言语既毕，啸命灵官，使驾龙严车欲去。
现代文：这些都是元始天王在炼丹房里对我说过的修道秘诀，我现在让为我管理书箱的侍女李庆孙把这些秘诀都写下来送给你，希望好好按照录下的秘诀去认真修炼吧。 
English: These are all the secrets of cultivation that the original heavenly king told me in the alchemist's room. I will now have the maid who manages my bookcase, Li Qingsun, write down all these secrets and give them to you. I hope you will carefully follow the recorded secrets to cultivate.

古文：帝下席叩头，请留殷勤，王母乃止。
现代文：王母说完后，就命令仙官备好龙车，打算马上回天宫去。
English: After the Queen Mother finished speaking, she ordered the fairy officials to prepare the dragon carriage, intending to go back to the Heavenly Palace immediately.

古文：王母乃遣侍女郭密香与上元夫人相问云： 王九光之母敬谢。
现代文：这时武帝就离开座位向王母磕头，再三请求她留下来，王母就暂时留下没走，并派侍女郭密香到上元夫人那里问候求教，让她转告上元夫人说， 称王于世界的母亲，特向您问安致敬。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu left his seat and bowed to the Queen Mother. He repeatedly asked her to stay. The Queen Mother temporarily stayed and did not leave, and sent her maid Guo Mixiang to greet Lady Shangyuan for advice. She asked her to tell Lady Shangyuan, "Mother of the world, I salute you."

古文：比不相见，四千余年矣。天事劳我，致以愆面。
现代文：我们已经有四千多年没见面了，由于我在天宫的事务太忙，所以久违了。
English: We haven't seen each other for more than four thousand years. I've been too busy with matters at the Celestial Palace, so it's been a long time.

古文：刘彻好道，适来视之，见彻了了，似可成进。
现代文：现在人间有个刘彻爱好修道之术，我刚刚看到了他，觉得他还算可以，大概能修炼成功。
English: Now there is a Liu Che in the world who loves the art of cultivation. I just saw him, and I think he can still do it, and he can probably succeed in cultivation.

古文：然形漫神秽，脑血淫漏，五脏不淳，关胃彭孛，骨无津液，脉浮反升，肉多精少，瞳子不夷， 三尸 绞乱，玄白失时。
现代文：然而刘彻的形体和精神都没有脱去凡俗的污垢，头脑中血液漏失，五脏不洁净，胃肠胀满，骨头中没有津液，脉搏也很浮躁，身体肥肿精神不振，两眼也没有神采，身体中有 三尸神 在作怪，黑白颠倒。
English: However, Liu Che's body and spirit have not shed the filth of the world. The blood in his head is leaking, his internal organs are unclean, his stomach and intestines are bloated, there is no fluid in his bones, his pulse is also erratic, his body is bloated, his spirit is not strong, and his eyes are not brilliant. There are three ghosts in his body, and black and white are reversed.

古文：虽当语之以至道，殆恐非仙才也。
现代文：虽然我对他讲了一些修道的真谛，但恐怕他不一定是成仙的材料。
English: Although I told him some of the true essence of the practice, I'm afraid he's not necessarily the stuff of which immortals are made.

古文：吾久在人间，实为臭浊，然时复可游望，以写细念。
现代文：我常到人间停留沾染上不少凡人的污浊，然而我常常思念你，希望能够和你相见，细述别情。
English: I often stay in the human world and get contaminated with a lot of ordinary people's filth, but I often miss you and hope to be able to meet you and elaborate on the farewell.

古文：庸主对坐，悒悒不乐，夫人可暂来否？
现代文：我在刘彻这里作客，心里不太痛快。不知上元夫人您能不能屈驾到这里来一趟？
English: I'm a guest here at Liu Che, and I'm not very happy. I don't know, Mrs. Shangyuan, could you drive down here for a visit?

古文：若能屈驾，当停相须。 
现代文：如果能来，我就在刘彻的宫中等你。 
English: If you can come, I'll be waiting for you at Liu Che's palace.

古文：帝见侍女下殿，俄失所在。须臾郭侍女返，上元夫人又遣一侍女答问云： 阿环再拜。
现代文：这时武帝看见侍女郭密香走下殿去立刻就不见了，但不到片刻就回来了，还带来一个仙女，这仙女是上元夫人的侍女。她向王母叩拜后说： 我家上元夫人问候您安好。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu saw the maid Guo Mixiang leave the palace and immediately disappear, but she returned within a few moments, bringing with her a fairy, who was the maid of Lady Shangyuan. She bowed to the Queen Mother and said, "Lady Shangyuan of my family sends her best wishes for your safety."

古文：上问起居，远隔绛河，扰以官事，遂替颜色。 近五千年，仰恋光润，情系无违。
现代文：她说和您远隔着天河，加上她的公务也很忙，累得都有些衰老了。上元夫人让我转告她的话： 阿环我和你虽然分别将近五千年了，但一直仰慕你的光辉，始终惦念着你。
English: She said that she was far away from you across the Tianhe River, and she was also busy with her official duties, so she was a little tired and old. Mrs. Shangyuan asked me to tell her: A Huan, although you and I have been separated for nearly five thousand years, I have always admired your brilliance and always miss you.

古文：密香至，奉信承降尊于刘彻处。
现代文：现在你派郭密香到我这里来，她说你现在降临在刘彻的宫中，希望我也能去一趟。
English: Now you have sent Guo Mixiang to me. She said that you are now descending into Liu Che's palace, and hoped that I could also visit.

古文：闻命之际，登当命驾，先被太帝君敕，使诣玄洲，校定天元。
现代文：我听说后本想立刻到你那儿去，但我现在正被太帝君派到北海中的玄洲去校定天宫的历法。
English: I heard that I wanted to go to you immediately, but I am now being sent by the Emperor to Xuanzhou in the North Sea to calibrate the calendar of the Heavenly Palace.

古文：正尔暂住，如是当还，还便束带，愿暂少留 。 
现代文：现在我在玄洲暂住，我很快就回去，回去后我就换好衣冠来看你，希望你在刘彻那里稍作停留，等一等我。  
English: Now I'm temporarily staying in Xuanzhou. I'll be back soon. After I get back, I'll change my clothes and come to see you. I hope you'll stay with Liu Che for a while and wait for me.

古文：帝因问王母： 不审上元何真也？ 
现代文：武帝这时就问王母： 不知上元夫人是位什么神仙？ 
English: At this time, Emperor Wu asked the Queen Mother: I don't know what kind of immortal Lady Shangyuan is.

古文：王母曰： 是三天上元之官，统领十万玉女名箓者也。 
现代文：王母说： 她是三重天宫中的上元宫，统管着天界里的十万玉女。 
English: The Queen Mother said, "She is Shangyuan Palace in the three-tiered Heavenly Palace, presiding over the hundred thousand gems in the heavenly realm.

古文：俄而夫人至，亦闻云中箫鼓之声。
现代文：不大一会儿，上元夫人果然来了。
English: Not long after, Mrs. Uemoto did come.

古文：既至，从官文武千余人，并是女子，年皆十八九许，形容明逸，多服青衣，光彩耀目，真灵官也。
现代文：也是先听见云中有箫鼓音乐的声音，接着是上元夫人一千多名文武侍从官员，每一位都是女子，年纪都是十八九岁，容貌都非常秀丽飘逸，大都穿着青色的衣服，一个个光彩照人，是名副其实的仙女。
English: It was also the first to hear the sound of gong and drum music in the clouds, followed by Mrs. Shangyuan's more than one thousand civil and military attendants and officials, each of whom was a woman, aged eighteen or nineteen, very beautiful and elegant, mostly wearing blue clothes, shining one by one, a veritable fairy.

古文：夫人年可二十余，天姿精耀，灵眸绝朗，服青霜之袍，云彩乱色，非锦非绣，不可名字。
现代文：上元夫人年纪二十多岁，更是艳美绝伦，双目清朗有神，穿着青色的袍服，袍子上绣着五彩祥云，袍子即不是绸子也不是锦缎，不知是用什么作的。
English: Mrs. Shangyuan, in her twenties, was even more stunningly beautiful, her eyes clear and bright, wearing a blue robe, with colorful clouds embroidered on the robe. The robe was neither silk nor brocade, and I don't know what it was made of.

古文：头作三角髻，余发散垂至腰，戴九云夜光之冠，曳六出火玉之珮，垂凤文林华之绶，腰流黄挥精之剑。
现代文：上元夫人头上挽着三角髻，长长的秀发披散在腰边，头上戴着九云夜光冠，佩戴着在火中烧炼过六次的玉珮，玉珮上垂着编成凤纹花样的绶带，腰里挂着黄褐色能指挥神灵的宝剑。
English: Lady Shangyuan wore a triangular bracelet on her head, her long, beautiful hair was worn loose around her waist, she wore a nine-cloud halo crown on her head, she wore a jade bracelet that had been refined six times in the fire, a ribbon woven into a phoenix pattern hung from the jade bracelet, and a yellow-brown sword that could command the gods hung from her waist.

古文：上殿向王母拜，王母坐而止之，呼同坐，北向。
现代文：上元夫人上殿后要向王母行礼叩拜，王母赶快让她免礼，并招呼上元夫人和自己一起坐，上元夫人就脸朝北坐下了。
English: After Lady Shangyuan went to the palace, she wanted to bow and prostrate to the Queen Mother. The Queen Mother quickly excused her and invited Lady Shangyuan to sit with her. Lady Shangyuan sat down facing north.

古文：夫人设厨，厨亦精珍，与王母所设者相似。
现代文：上元夫人也带来了厨师，这时就摆上来很多仙珍美味，和王母所摆设的佳肴大致相同。
English: Mrs. Shangyuan also brought a chef, and at this time, many rare and delicious dishes were served, which were roughly the same as the delicacies served by the Queen Mother.

古文：王母敕帝曰： 此真元之母，尊贵之神，汝当起拜。
现代文：这时王母就对武帝说： 这位就是真元之母上元夫人，是一位极尊贵的神，你应该向她叩拜。 
English: At this time, the Queen Mother said to Emperor Wu, "This is Lady Zhenyuan's mother, Lady Zhenyuan. She is a very precious god, and you should bow down to her."

古文：帝拜问寒温，还坐。
现代文：武帝立刻起坐向上元夫人叩头问安，然后又回到自己的坐位。
English: Emperor Wu immediately sat up and bowed to the former first lady to say hello, and then returned to his seat.

古文：夫人笑曰： 五浊之人，耽酒荣利，嗜味淫色，固其常也。
现代文：这时上元夫人笑着说： 凡人来自充满着五种恶浊的人世，必然贪酒好色，追名逐利，这在人间是习以为常的事。
English: At this time, Mrs. Shangyuan smiled and said: Ordinary people come from a world full of five kinds of evils, and they are bound to be greedy for alcohol, lustful, chasing fame and profit, which is a commonplace in the human world.

古文：且彻以天子之贵，其乱目者倍于凡焉，而复于华丽之墟，拔嗜欲之根，愿无为之事，良有志矣。 
现代文：刘彻贵为天子，在这些方面比普通老百就更加厉害。然而刘彻能在富丽华贵的宫中认真修炼，想除掉贪嗜私欲的根子，愿意清净无为修身养性，这说明他还算是个有志气的人呢。 
English: Liu Chegui is the son of heaven, and in these aspects he is even more powerful than the average old man. However, Liu Chegui can seriously cultivate in the rich and magnificent palace, wants to remove the root of greed and selfishness, and is willing to clean and do nothing to cultivate his character, which shows that he is still a person with ambition.

古文：王母曰： 所谓有心哉。 
现代文：王母也说： 我看刘彻的心还是很诚的。 
English: Wang Mu also said: I think Liu Che's heart is still very sincere.

古文：夫人谓帝曰： 汝好道乎？
现代文：这时上元夫人就问武帝： 你果真爱好道术吗？
English: At this time, Lady Shangyuan asked Emperor Wu: Are you really fond of Taoism?

古文：闻数招方术，祭山岳，祠灵神，祷河川，亦为勤矣。
现代文：我听说你多次招纳道家的术士，到山岳去祭祀，向神灵祷告，向河神祈求，也算上很勤奋了。
English: I've heard that you've recruited Taoist sorcerers many times, gone to the mountains to offer sacrifices, prayed to the gods, and prayed to the river gods. That's pretty diligent.

古文：勤而不获，实有由也。
现代文：然而你这样勤奋却没有什么收获，其中是有原因的。
English: However, there's a reason why you've been working so hard and getting nowhere.

古文：汝胎性暴，胎性淫，胎性奢，胎性酷，胎性贼，五者恒舍于荣卫之中，五脏之内，虽获良针，固难愈也。
现代文：你生来就性情暴躁、贪爱女色、铺张奢侈、待人冷酷、奸邪自私，这五种私欲使得你精神枯竭，心灵污浊，五脏六腑都不洁净，就是再好的良药也难以治好这些顽症。
English: You were born with a violent temper, a lust for women, an extravagant lifestyle, a cold-hearted attitude, and selfishness. These five kinds of selfish desires have made your spirit exhausted, your soul dirty, and your internal organs unclean. No matter how good the medicine is, it is difficult to cure these ills.

古文：暴则使气奔而攻神，是故神扰而气竭；淫则使精漏而魄疲，是故精竭而魂消；奢则使真离而魄秽，是故命逝而灵失；酷则使丧仁而自攻，是故失仁而眼乱；贼则使心斗而口干，是故内战而外绝。
现代文：暴躁会使你心气浮躁，破坏你心神的宁静，使你神思迷乱精气枯竭。淫乱会使你精力消耗过度而灵魂萎顿，奢靡会使你离开道术的纯真并使你魂魄不净，再严重点就会使你灵魂消失生命中止。待人冷酷会使你丧失仁义自己伤害自己，失去仁义必然是你双目不清。而贪心自私使你用尽心计口中没有津液，弄得内心紧张和外界隔绝。
English: Impetuousness will make your heart impetuous, destroy the tranquility of your mind and spirit, make your mind confused and exhaust your energy. Fornication will cause your energy to consume excessively and your soul to wither. Extravagance will cause you to leave the innocence of Taoism and make your soul unclean. The more serious point will cause your soul to disappear and your life to end. Treating people coldly will cause you to lose your righteousness and harm yourself. Losing your righteousness will inevitably make you blind. And greed and selfishness will cause you to exhaust your mind and have no juice in your mouth, causing inner tension and isolation from the outside world.

古文：此五事者，皆是截身之刀锯，刳命之斧斤矣，虽复志好长生，不能遣兹五难，亦何为损性而自劳乎。
现代文：上面这五种病症，都像刀锯一样天天伤害着你的身子，像利斧一样砍杀着你的生命，尽管你有志于长生，但你若不清除这五种顽症，就是再刻苦修炼也是徒劳无功。
English: The above five kinds of diseases are like a knife and saw, hurting your body every day, and cutting your life like a sharp axe. Although you are committed to longevity, if you do not eliminate these five kinds of stubborn diseases, even if you practice hard, it will be in vain.

古文：然由是得此小益，以自知往尔。
现代文：这次如果能从我们这里得到一点教益，可以使你在修道上得到方向而开始入门。
English: If you can learn something from us this time, it will give you some direction on the practice and get you started.

古文：若从今己，舍尔五性，反诸柔善，明务察下，慈务矜冤，惠务济贫，赈务施劳，念务存孤，惜务及爱身，恒为阴德。
现代文：你如果从此以后除掉你身上那五种劣根性，待人柔和善良，对下面明察秋毫，以慈心平复民间的冤屈，以恩惠救助民间的饥寒，赈济劳苦的平民，体恤孤寡，真正怜惜关怀百姓的疾苦，这也就等于你积了阴功阴德。
English: If, from now on, you eliminate the five kinds of vices from your body, treat people with gentleness and kindness, keep an eye on what's going on below, settle people's grievances with compassion, help the people's hunger and cold with grace, help the hard-working civilians, sympathize with the lonely and the poor, and truly pity and care for the people's sufferings, this is also equivalent to you accumulating virtue and virtue.

古文：救济死厄，旦夕孜孜。
现代文：对那些在死亡边缘上苦苦挣扎的人你更要及时救助，而且要孜孜不倦地坚持做下去。
English: For those who are struggling on the brink of death, you must help them in a timely manner, and you must persevere tirelessly.

古文：不泄精液，于是闭诸淫。
现代文：你要杜绝淫乱，使你的精液不至泄露，好好保养你的精神。
English: Refrain from sexual immorality, do not let your seed go to waste, and keep your soul in good order.

古文：养汝神，放诸奢，从至俭，勤斋戒，节饮食，绝五谷，去膻腥，鸣天鼓，饮玉桨，荡华池，叩金梁。
现代文：要放弃奢侈，一切都要俭仆，经常斋戒，控制饮食，断绝五谷，不吃膻腥的鱼肉，经常敲击天鼓，喝玉液琼浆，在华池里洗澡，常常向天宫叩拜。
English: To give up luxury, everything must be frugal, often fast, control diet, cut off grains, do not eat fish, often beat the heavenly drum, drink jade juice, bathe in the pond, and often worship the heavenly palace.

古文：按而行之，当有异耳。
现代文：你照这些去做，自然就会有变化。
English: If you do these things, change will come naturally.

古文：今阿母迁天尊之重，下降于蟪蛄之窟。霄虚之灵，而诣狐鸟之俎，且阿母至诚，妙唱玄音，验其敬勖节度，明修所奉。
现代文：现在王母以如此尊贵的仙体降临到你这像蝲蛄洞穴的人世宫殿，以她凌霄宫中神仙的身份到你这像狐兔禽鸟般的窝中来，对你淳淳教诲，用她高深玄妙的道术真谛来启发你，你就更应该恭敬地遵从她的教导来克制自己，坚持修炼。
English: Now that the Queen Mother has descended to your earthly palace, which is like a dragonfly's cave, in the form of such a noble celestial body, and has come to your nest, which is like a fox, rabbit, bird, and bird, in the form of a celestial being in her towering palace, to teach you, to enlighten you with her profound and profound teachings of Taoism, you should respectfully follow her teachings to restrain yourself and persist in cultivation.

古文：比及百年，阿母必能致汝于玄都之墟，迎汝于昆阆之中，位以仙官，游于十方。
现代文：这样坚持一百年以后，王母一定能够使你得到真道，会让你进入天界，成为上方的仙官，使你可以自由地游于天地十方。
English: If you persevere in this way for a hundred years, the Queen Mother will surely be able to lead you to the true way, and will allow you to enter the heavenly world and become a heavenly official, so that you can swim freely in the ten directions of heaven and earth.

古文：信吾言矣，子励之哉；若不能尔，无所言矣。 
现代文：相信我的话吧，好好勉励自己刻苦修炼。如果你不能做到这些，我就没有什么可说的了。 
English: Take my word for it, push yourself hard and practice hard. If you can't do these things, I have nothing to say.

古文：帝下席跪谢曰： 臣受性凶顽，生长乱浊，面墙不启，无由开达。
现代文：武帝听了这些教导后，立刻离开座位跪在地上拜谢道， 我生性凶恶顽劣，生长在混乱污浊的人世间，就像面对着一面墙似的，想修道也不得其门而入。
English: After listening to these teachings, Emperor Wu immediately left his seat to kneel on the ground and give thanks. I was born with a vicious and evil nature, growing up in a chaotic and filthy world. It was like facing a wall, and I couldn't enter the door if I wanted to practice.

古文：然贪生畏死，奉灵敬神。
现代文：由于我贪生怕死，才敬奉神灵。
English: It is because I am greedy for life and afraid of death that I worship the gods.

古文：今日受教，此乃天也。
现代文：今天受到你们的点拨教导，这真是上天对我特殊的垂爱啊！
English: It is truly God's special love for me that I am being taught by you today.

古文：彻戢圣命以为身范，是小丑之臣，当获生活，唯垂哀护，愿赐上元。 
现代文：虽然我受命当了君主，但在你们面前不过是个区区小臣，我真心渴求长生之道，希望二位大仙能够多多佑护，给我能以成仙入上元天界的机会吧！ 
English: Although I was ordered to become the monarch, in front of you I am nothing more than a lowly vassal. I sincerely yearn for the way of eternal life, and hope that the two great immortals can do much to protect me, and give me the opportunity to enter the heavenly world as a immortal!

古文：夫人使帝还坐。王母谓夫人曰： 卿之为戒，言甚急切，更使未解之人，畏于志意。 
现代文：上元夫人让为帝回到座位上以后，王母对上元夫人说： 你刚才对刘彻的教诲，真是言真意切，使他这样修道尚未入门的人，知道了修炼的真意而心存敬畏。 
English: After Lady Shangyuan allowed Emperor Wei to return to his seat, the Queen Mother said to Lady Shangyuan: Your teachings to Liu Che just now are really sincere, so that people like him who have not yet entered the practice will know the true meaning of cultivation and be in awe.

古文：夫人曰： 若其志道，将以身投饿虎，忘躯破灭，蹈火履水，固于一志，必无忧也；若其志道，则心凝真性。
现代文：上元夫人说： 如果刘彻真心想修道，有着极坚定的信念，那怕用他的身子投入饿虎的口中使自己肉身消失而真心得道登仙，或者甘心赴汤蹈火也在所不辞，毫不担心害怕，坚守自己的志向。现在他想修道，第一步是先得做到心中保持最纯真的天性。
English: Mrs. Shangyuan said, "If Liu Che really wants to be a monk and has a very firm belief, even if he puts his body into the mouth of a hungry tiger to make his body disappear and truly become a saint, or if he is willing to go through the fire, he will not be afraid and will stick to his ambition. Now he wants to be a monk, the first step is to maintain the purest nature in his heart.

古文：嫌惑之徒，不畏急言，急言之发，欲成其志耳。阿母既有念，必当赐以尸解之方耳。 
现代文：我刚才用道术的真谛激励他，就是要打消他心中的杂念和疑虑，使他坚定修道的信念。王母您既然也有成全他的意思，何不把解脱肉体的法术教给他呢？ 
English: I have just inspired him with the true meaning of the Taoist art, which is to dispel the misgivings and doubts in his heart and make him firm in his religious belief. Since you, the Queen Mother, also want to perfect him, why not teach him the magic of liberating the body?

古文：王母曰： 此子勤心已久，而不遇良师，遂欲毁其正志，当疑天下必无仙人。
现代文：王母说， 刘彻这人想修炼的心愿已经很久了，但一直没遇到良师指引他。如果打消他修道的愿望，他一定会认为并没有神仙存在。
English: Wang Mu said that Liu Che had wanted to cultivate for a long time, but he had never met a good teacher to guide him. If he were to give up his desire to cultivate, he would certainly think that there was no god.

古文：是故我发阆宫，暂舍尘浊，既欲坚其仙志，又欲令向化不惑也。
现代文：所以我才离开天宫，降临到尘世来接见他，就是为了让他坚定修道的志向，使他对得道成仙的道理不再有一点疑惑。
English: That is why I left the Heavenly Palace and descended to the earthly world to meet him, in order to make him firm in his aspiration to practice Buddhism, so that he would no longer have the slightest doubt about the truth of attaining immortality.

古文：今日相见，令人念之。
现代文：今天见到他以后，我很同情他的追求和向往。
English: After seeing him today, I sympathize with his pursuit and yearning.

古文：至于尸解下方，吾甚不惜。
现代文：至于从凡人肉体中解脱出来的法术，我不会吝惜着不教给他。
English: As for the magic of liberation from mortal flesh, I will not begrudge not teaching it to him.

古文：后三年，吾必欲赐以成丹半剂，石象散一具，与之则彻不得复停。
现代文：我打算三年后赏赐给他半付仙丹，再给他一付药石制的仙药 石象敬 ，他服下这些仙丹灵药以后，修炼的事就再也不会中断了。
English: I plan to reward him three years later with half a cactus, and then give him a cactus made of medicinal stone. After he takes these cactus elixirs, the cultivation will never be interrupted.

古文：当今匈奴未弥，边陲有事，何必令其仓卒舍天下之尊，而便入林岫？
现代文：当前匈奴之乱还没平息，边疆多事不太平，何必让他匆匆忙忙地扔下君王该作的事去深山中修道呢？
English: The current rebellion of the Xiongnu has not yet subsided, the frontier is not peaceful, why should he hastily throw off the king's duty to go deep into the mountains?

古文：但当问笃向之志，必卒何如。
现代文：现在须要问他修道的志向能实行到什么程度。
English: Now he must be asked to what extent he will be able to carry out his spiritual aspiration.

古文：其回改，吾方数来。 
现代文：如果他能先改掉刚才告诫他的那五种毛病，那我以后会再来几次的。 
English: If he can first get rid of the five problems I just warned him about, then I will come back a few times in the future.

古文：王母因拊帝背曰： 汝用上元夫人至言，必得长生，可不勖勉耶？ 
现代文：说着就轻轻拍着刘彻的肩头说， 你如果按上元夫人刚才的指点去修炼，就一定可以得到长生，你能不能勉励自己坚持做下去呢？ 
English: While speaking, he patted Liu Che's shoulder and said, "If you practice according to the instructions given by Madam Shangyuan just now, you will definitely be able to obtain eternal life. Can you encourage yourself to keep doing it?

古文：帝跪曰： 彻书之金简，以身模之焉 。
现代文：武帝立刻跪下说： 上元夫人对我的教导，我将刻记在金版上，照着去身体力行，坚持不懈。 
English: Emperor Wu immediately knelt down and said, "I will engrave Lady Shangyuan's teachings on a gold plate and follow them to the letter. I will persevere."

古文：帝又见王母巾笈中有一卷书，盛以紫锦之囊。帝问： 此书是仙灵方耶？
现代文：这时武帝又看见王母的书箱里有一卷书包在紫色的锦袋里，就问道， 这卷书是不是仙界的灵药秘方？
English: At this time, Emperor Wu also saw that the Queen Mother's bookcase contained a volume of books wrapped in a purple brocade bag, and asked, "Is this book a secret recipe for a magic potion in the spirit world?"

古文：不审其目，可得瞻盼否？ 
现代文：我不知道里面都是什么要目，能否让我看一看呢？ 
English: I don't know what's inside, can I have a look?

古文：王母出以示之曰： 此五岳真形图也，昨青城诸仙，就吾请求，今当过以付之。
现代文：王母就把那卷书拿出来说， 这是《五岳真形图》，昨日天界中青城的一些神仙曾请求我看看这卷书，今天我打算给他们送过去。
English: The Queen Mother took out the book and said, "This is the True Map of the Five Mountains. Yesterday, some immortals in the celestial world of Qingcheng asked me to look at this book. Today, I plan to give it to them."

古文：乃三天太上所出，文秘禁重，岂汝秽质所宜佩乎？
现代文：这卷书是三重天的太上元君的著作，在天界都是绝秘的经卷，你这人世中的凡夫俗子怎以可以看呢？
English: This scroll is the work of the Three-Heavenly Mother Superior Yuanjun. In the heavenly world, they are all top-secret scriptures. How can you, an ordinary person in this world, read them?

古文：今且与汝《灵光生经》，可以通神劝心也。 
现代文：我现在给你一卷《灵光生经》，你读后可以使心神通畅收敛凡心。 
English: I will now give you a volume of "Lingguang Shengjing." After reading it, you will be able to make your mind clear and uncluttered.

古文：帝下地叩头，固请不已。
现代文：武帝却下地磕头，再三请求准许他看看那卷《五岳真形图》。
English: Emperor Wu, however, bowed his head and repeatedly asked to be allowed to look at the volume of "The True Map of the Five Mountains."

古文：王母曰： 昔上皇清虚元年，三天太上道君，下观六合，瞻河海之长短，察丘山之高卑，立天柱而安于地理，植五岳而拟诸镇辅，贵昆陵以舍灵仙，尊蓬丘以馆真人，安水神于极阴之源，栖太帝于扶桑之墟。
现代文：王母说， 昔日玉帝清虚元年时，三重天上的太上道君下到世间，观察天地四方，勘测河流海洋的长短和山岳的高低，立起了天柱使大地稳定，安置了五岳山脉使八方平衡。他还建造了昆灵仙宫让仙人们居住，在蓬莱仙山建了馆舍让得道的真人聚集在一起，把水神安置在极阴的河流源头，安顿太帝住在扶桑国的山丘。
English: The Queen Mother said, "Once upon a time, when the Jade Emperor was in the first year of the Qin and Hui Dynasties, the Three-Heavenly Great Taoist Empress descended to the world, observed the four directions of heaven and earth, surveyed the length of rivers and oceans and the height of mountains, erected a heavenly pillar to stabilize the earth, and placed the Five Mountains to balance the eight directions. He also built the Kunling Immortal Palace for the immortals to live in, built a hall in the Penglai Immortal Mountain to gather the real people who had the Tao, placed the water god at the source of the river in the extreme shade, and settled the

古文：于是方丈之阜，为理命之室，沧浪海岛，养九老之堂。
现代文：于是庙堂的禅室成为修炼的圣地，波飞浪涌的海岛成了仙人们的宫阙。
English: As a result, the temple's Zen room became a sacred place for cultivation, and the undulating island became the hermit's palace.

古文：祖瀛玄炎，长元流生。
现代文：让黄帝炎帝的子孙住在东方的瀛州，并永远的繁衍下去。
English: Let the descendants of the Yellow Emperor Yan live in Zhangzhou in the east and continue to multiply forever.

古文：凤麟聚窟，各为洲名，并在沧流大海玄津之中。
现代文：给凤麟、聚窟、玄洲、炎洲等十个仙洲都起了名字。
English: Ten fairylands, including Fenglin, Conglomerate, Xuanzhou, and Yanzhou, have been given names.

古文：水则碧黑俱流，波则震荡群精。
现代文：让江河湖海中的水都有规律的流，兴起的波涛震荡水中的精灵。
English: Let the water in the rivers, lakes and seas have a regular flow, and the rising waves will shake the spirits in the water.

古文：诸仙玉女，聚居沧溟，其名难测，其实分明。
现代文：让神仙玉女们聚居在幽远的高空，尽管不知道他们住的地方叫什么名字，但他们却实实在在的都聚居在那里。
English: Let the fairies live together in the distant sky. Although they do not know the name of the place where they live, they really live together there.

古文：乃因山源之规矩，睹河岳之盘曲，陵回阜转，山高陇长，周旋逶迤，形似书字，是故因象制名，定实之号。
现代文：三天太上道君又根据山脉的走势和河流的四射盘旋形状，创造了文字，这种文字是以象形来表达实际存在的事物。
English: According to the movement of the mountains and the four-shooter circling shape of the river, Santen Taishang Daojun also created a character, which is a pictogram to express the actual things.

古文：书形秘于玄台，而出为灵真之信，诸仙佩之，皆如传章；道士执之，经行山川，百神群灵，尊奉亲近。
现代文：这些文字是三天太上道君在玄台秘密造成的，文字成为神仙们的交往的凭据，他们带着文字书写的道符，成为传授道术的宝物。道士们带着这些神符在名山大川云游时，就可以得到众多神仙的接待和尊重。
English: These texts were created in secret by the three-day-old Taoist priest in the hallway, and the texts became the evidence of the communication between the immortals. They carried the Taoist symbols written in the text, which became the treasure of teaching Taoism. Taoists can receive the reception and respect of many immortals when they travel around the famous mountains and rivers with these symbols.

古文：汝虽不正，然数访仙泽，扣求不忘于道。
现代文：你刘彻虽然还没有得到正道，但你能够几次求访神仙，孜孜不倦地追求道学的真谛，说明你还是有求道的真诚之心的。
English: Although you, Liu Che, have not yet obtained the right path, you have been able to visit the immortals several times and tirelessly pursue the true essence of Taoism, which shows that you still have a sincere heart for seeking the right path.

古文：欣子有心，今以相与。当深奉慎，如事君父。
现代文：现在我就把《五岳真形图》授给你，你要怀着最恭敬谨慎的诚意来供奉它，像供奉君主和父亲一样。
English: Now that I have given you the True Map of the Five Mountains, you must worship it with the most respectful and prudent sincerity, just as you would worship your sovereign and father.

古文：泄示凡夫，必祸及也。 
现代文：你如果把《五岳真形图》泄漏给世间的凡人，那你就会招来大祸。 
English: If you leak the "Five Mountains True Shape Map" to the world's mortals, then you will bring about a great disaster.

古文：上元夫人语帝曰： 阿母今以琼笈妙韫，发紫台之文，赐汝八会之书。
现代文：上元夫人这时对武帝说： 现在王母把她书箱中最珍贵最秘密的经典传授给你了，这经典是天界紫台最重要的著作，还赏给你讲解人体中八个气血会合穴位的经书。
English: At this time, Lady Shangyuan said to Emperor Wu: Now the Queen Mother has passed on to you the most precious and most secret classic in her bookcase. This classic is the most important work of the Heaven Realm and the Purple Mountain, and she has also given you a scripture that explains the eight qi and blood meeting points in the human body.

古文：《五岳真形》，可谓至珍且贵，上帝之玄观矣。
现代文：这《五岳真形图》是天帝亲自审阅过的，可以说是最珍贵的了。
English: This "Five Mountains True Shape Map" was personally reviewed by Emperor Tiandi, and can be said to be the most precious.

古文：子自非受命合神，弗见此文矣。
现代文：你如果不是命中注定得到天神的指点，是绝不可能见到它的。
English: You would never have seen it if you hadn't been destined by fate to be guided by the gods.

古文：今虽得其真形，观其妙理，而无 五帝六甲左右灵飞之符 、 太阴六丁通真逐灵玉女之箓 、 太阳六戊招神天光策精之书 、 左乙混沌东蒙之文 、 右庚素收摄杀之律 、 壬癸六遁隐地八术 、 丙丁入火九赤班符 、 六辛入金致黄水月华之法 、 六己石精金光藏景化形之方 、 子午卯酉八禀十诀六灵咸仪 、 丑辰未戌地真素诀 、 长生紫书 、 三五顺行 、 寅申巳亥紫度炎光内视中方 。
现代文：不过你得到这《五岳真形图》，也仅仅只能看到一点修道的妙理而已，因为还有十二件东西你没有得到，你就不会真正成仙得道。这十二件东西是： 五帝六甲左右灵飞之符 、 太阴六丁通真逐灵玉女之箓 、 太阳六戊招神天光策精之书 、 左乙混沌东蒙之文 、 右庚素牧摄杀之律 、 壬癸六遁隐地八术 、 丙丁火九赤班符 、 六辛入金致黄水月华之法 、 六己石精金光藏景化形之方 、 子午卯酉八禀十诀六灵咸仪 、 丑辰未戌地真素诀 、 长生紫书 、 三五顺行 、 寅申巳亥紫度炎光内视中方 。
English: However, if you obtain this "True Image of the Five Mountains," you will only be able to see a little bit of the wisdom of the practice, because there are still twelve things that you have not obtained, and you will not truly become a Taoist. These twelve things are: Five Emperors, Six Knots, and Around, the Symbol of Spiritual Flight, Ta Yin, Six Ding Tongs, One True Spirit, One Jade Maiden's Urn, The Sun, Six Hundred Wands, the Book of Conjuring the Divine Light, the East Mongolian Text of Chaos, the Right Mongolian Law of Shooting and Killing, The Eight Occult Arts, The Nine Red Banners, The Six

古文：凡缺此十二事者，当何以召山灵，朝地神，摄总万精，驱策百鬼，束虎豹，役蛟龙乎？
现代文：你没有这十二件法宝，就不能召集山神朝拜土地，集合万千神灵驱逐百种鬼魅，就不能制服虎豹驾驭蛟龙。
English: If you don't have these twelve magic treasures, you won't be able to summon the mountain gods to worship the land, gather thousands of deities to drive out a hundred kinds of ghosts, and you won't be able to subdue the tigers and leopards and control the dragons.

古文：子所谓适知其一，未见其他也。 
现代文：所以说你得到《五岳真形图》，只不过知其一点，对道家的其他深奥的法术你还是不知道。 
English: So you got the True Map of the Five Mountains, but you only know one thing about it, and you still don't know about the other profound spells of the Taoist.

古文：帝下席叩头曰： 彻下土浊民，不识清真，今日闻道，是生命会遇。
现代文：这时武帝离开座位伏地磕头说： 我刘彻不过是下界的一个凡人小民，不懂得道家真谛，今天能得听到二位上仙传授道术，这真是上天对我的垂顾。
English: At this time, Emperor Wu left his seat, bowed his head, and said, "I, Liu Che, am just an ordinary person from the lower realm, and do not understand the true meaning of Taoism. To be able to hear two great sages teach Taoism today, this is truly God's care for me.

古文：圣母今当赐以真形，修以度世。
现代文：圣母今天应该赐给我真正的道家秘术，使我能够在精心修炼，得以脱离凡世。
English: Today, Our Lady should give me the true secret of Taoism, so that I can cultivate it carefully and escape from this world.

古文：夫人云今告彻，应须 五帝六甲六丁六符致灵之术 。
现代文：上元夫人刚才对我说，我最需要得到 五帝六甲六丁六符 等通神的法术。
English: Mrs. Uemoto just told me that what I need most is a psychic spell such as the Five Gods, Six Metals, Six Elements, and Six Symbols.

古文：既蒙启发，弘益无量，唯愿告诲，济臣饥渴，使已枯之木，蒙灵阳之润，焦炎之草，幸甘雨之溉，不敢多陈。 
现代文：既然蒙圣母给了我启发，这已使我获益匪浅，唯一的愿望是能把真正的修炼法术也传授给我，以解救我对修道的如饥似渴的愿望，使已经枯死的树木经受春日阳光的照耀重发枝芽，让焦黄的小草经受雨露的滋育重新生长复苏。
English: Now that I have benefited so much from Our Lady's inspiration, my only wish is that she can also teach me the real cultivation spells, so as to relieve my hunger and thirst for cultivation, so that the dead trees can withstand the shining of the spring sun and re-sprout, and the scorched grass can be nourished by the rain and dew.

古文：帝启叩不已。王母又告夫人曰： 夫真形宝文，灵宫所贵，此子守求不已，誓以必得，故亏科禁，特以与之。
现代文：这是我真心的愿望和乞求，不敢再多罗嗦了，希望二位上仙圣母能体会怜念我刘彻的一片诚心。 说罢武帝就不断地磕头。这时王母又对上元夫人说： 道术的真谛秘诀固然是我们天界最珍贵的，但现在刘彻这样真诚的苦苦求索，非要得到不可，我们就破一次天界的禁例，特别照顾他一次，传授给他吧。
English: This is my sincere wish and supplication, I dare not say any more, I hope that the two Immaculate Conception can experience the sincerity of my compassion for Liu Che. When Emperor Wu said this, he kept bowing his head. At this time, the Queen Mother said to Lady Shangyuan: Of course, the true secret of Taoism is the most precious in our heavenly world, but now Liu Che's sincere and painstaking search is essential to obtain it. Let's break the prohibitions of heaven once, take special care of him once, and pass it on to him.

古文：然 五帝六甲 ，通真招神，此术眇邈，必须清洁至诚，殆非流浊所宜施行。
现代文：然而 五帝六甲 的法术可以通达神灵，十分玄妙深遂，不是凡夫俗人可以立即实行的。
English: However, the magic of the Five Emperors and Six Emperors can reach the gods, it is very mysterious and profound, and it is not something that ordinary people can immediately practice.

古文：吾今既赐彻以真形，夫人当授之以致灵之途矣。
现代文：现在我打算把道术真谛传授给刘彻，请上元夫人您也把可以进入仙界的法术传给他吧。
English: Now I plan to teach Liu Che the true meaning of Taoism. Please, Mrs. Shangyuan, pass on to him the magic that can enter the spirit world.

古文：吾尝忆与夫人共登玄陇朔野，及曜真之山。
现代文：我记得曾和您一同登上北岳恒山，漫游于极北的旷野，来到日光辉耀的高山之巅。
English: I remember climbing Mount Beidake Hengshan with you, roaming the wilderness of the far north, and coming to the top of the sun-drenched mountain.

古文：视王子童、王子立就吾求请太上隐书。
现代文：当时咱们遇见了名列中仙的王子童和王子立，他俩向我们请求传授那部上帝最隐秘的真经。
English: At that time, we met the eminent emperors Oji Tong and Oji Li, and they both asked us to teach them God's most secret scripture.

古文：吾以三元秘言，不可传泄于中仙。
现代文：当时我拒绝了。我说上帝的三元秘术的经书不允许让中等的仙人看。
English: At the time, I refused. I said that the scriptures of God's triune secret would not be allowed to be read by a mediocre sage.

古文：夫人时亦有言，见助于子童之言志矣，吾既难违来意，不独执惜。
现代文：那时夫人您替他俩说情，说王子童想看三元秘经是出于一片至诚之心。
English: At that time, Madam, you interceded on behalf of the two of them, saying that Prince Tong's desire to see the Three Jewels was out of a sincere heart.

古文：至于今日之事，有以相似。
现代文：今天刘彻向我们求真经，也有点和当年王子童的事相像。
English: Today, Liu Che is asking us for the truth, which is somewhat similar to what happened to the prince.

古文：后造朱火丹陵，食灵瓜，味甚好，忆此未久，而已七千岁矣，夫人既以告彻篇目十二事毕，必当匠而成之，缘何令人主稽首请乞，叩头流血耶？ 
现代文：我这次来见刘彻，原意就是要帮助他得到修炼的真谛，所以不吝惜把一些秘诀告诉他。上次见了王子童以后，我们传给他 三元秘言 ，后来咱俩又到了神仙住的 朱火丹陵 地方，吃了灵瓜，味道十分甘美，好像刚过去不久的事，然而一算已经七千年了。夫人您把那十二部真经告诉刘彻，他一定会遵照经书中的要点去真心修炼达到成仙的程度，何必让他这样一个身为皇帝的人在你面前一再乞求，把头都磕出了血呢？ 
English: I came to see Liu Che this time with the original intention of helping him attain the true meaning of cultivation, so I did not hesitate to tell him some secrets. After the last time I saw Prince Tong, we passed on the Three-Yuan Secret to him. Later, we went to the Zhuhuotanling area where the immortals live, and ate the spirit melon. It tasted very sweet, as if it had just happened, but it was already seven thousand years ago. Madam, you told Liu Che about the twelve true scriptures, and he will surely follow the points in the scriptures to truly cultivate and reach the level of immortality. Why should he, as an emperor, repeatedly beg in front of you

古文：上元夫人曰： 阿环不苟惜，向不持来耳。
现代文：上元夫人说： 不是阿环我吝惜那十二部真经，是这次我没有带来。
English: Mrs. Uemoto said, "It wasn't Ahun that I begrudged the twelve sutras, it was this time that I didn't bring them.

古文：此是太虚群丈真人赤童所出，传之既自有男女之限禁；又宜授得道者，恐彻下才，未应得此耳。 
现代文：这十二部真经出于天宫里群文真人赤童之手，而且按规定传授时要分别男女的界限。这十二部真经只能传给已经得道成仙的人，刘彻是下界凡人，他怎么配得到传授呢？ 
English: These twelve sutras were written by the Red Children, a group of literate real people in the Heavenly Palace, and according to regulations, the boundaries between men and women should be separated when they are taught. These twelve sutras can only be passed on to those who have attained immortality. Liu Che is a mortal from the lower realm. How is he worthy of being taught?

古文：王母色不平，乃曰： 天禁漏泄，犯违明科，传必其人，授必知真者。
现代文：王母听了上元夫人这番话后，脸上流露出不平的样子说， 我知道天界的禁律森严，不可违犯，要传道术就得传给该传的人，要授道术也得授给仙界的真人。
English: After listening to Mrs. Shangyuan's words, the Queen Mother said with a look of displeasure on her face, "I know that the heavenly realm's prohibitions are very strict and cannot be violated. If you want to teach the art of preaching, you have to teach it to the right people, and if you want to teach the art of preaching, you have to teach it to the right people in the spirit world."

古文：夫人何向下才而说其灵飞之篇目乎？
现代文：可是刚才夫人你已经向你轻视的凡人刘彻讲述了魂灵飞升的要诀，这不已经泄露了天机吗？
English: But just now, madam, you have told the mortal Liu Che, whom you despise, the secret of the soul's ascent. Hasn't this already revealed the divine plan?

古文：妄说则泄，泄而不传，是炫天道，此禁岂轻于传耶？
现代文：泄漏了天机却不传授，就是向不该知道的人炫耀法术，这比真正传授了法术的罪过也轻不了多少。
English: To reveal a secret, but not to teach it, is to show off magic to those who should not know it, which is no less a sin than actually teaching it.

古文：别敕三官司直，推夫人之轻泄也。
现代文：你就不怕被三宫主管神仙告发，问你泄漏天机之罪吗？
English: Aren't you afraid of being denounced by the gods in charge of the Three Kingdoms and asked about the sin of leaking the secret?

古文：吾之《五岳真形》太宝，乃太上天皇所出，其文宝妙而为天仙之信，岂复应下授于刘彻耶？
现代文：我的《五岳真形图》也是出自太上天皇之手，同样也是上界神仙才可以传授的珍贵秘术，按说也不应该传授给下界的凡人刘彻。
English: My "Five Mountains True Figure" is also from the hands of the Empress Dowager, and it is also a precious secret that can only be taught to the gods in the upper world, and it should not be taught to the mortal Liu Che in the lower world.

古文：直以彻孜孜之心，数请川岳，勤修斋戒，以求神仙之应，志在度世，不遭明师，故吾等有以下眄之耳。至于教仙之术，不复限惜而弗传。
现代文：但我十分赞赏刘彻求道的一片孜孜不倦的诚心，看他多次到三山五岳祭告上苍，经常斋戒修行以得到神仙的灵应佑护，有坚定的超脱凡世的志向，却一直没有高明的师傅点拨他，所以我才特别关怀他的修炼，不吝惜我掌握的方术，传授给他一些修道真谛。
English: However, I fully appreciate Liu Che's tireless sincerity in seeking the Tao. I have seen him repeatedly go to the Three Mountains and Five Mountains Festival to appeal to the heavens. He often fasts and practices in order to receive the protection of the spirit of the gods. He has a firm desire to transcend the mundane world, but he has never been instructed by a skilled master. Therefore, I am particularly concerned about his cultivation, do not begrudge the methods I have mastered, and teach him some of the true essence of the practice.

古文：夫人且有致灵之方，能独执之乎？
现代文：上元夫人您掌握着能使他得到真道的灵方，怎么可以自己把持着不向他传授呢？
English: Mrs. Shangyuan, you have in your possession the spiritual formula that will enable him to obtain the true way. How can you hold it yourself and not teach it to him?

古文：吾今所以授彻真形文者，非谓其必能得道，欲使其精诚有验求仙之不惑，可以诱进向化之徒；又欲令悠悠者，知天地间有此灵真之事，足以却不信之狂夫耳，吾意在此也。
现代文：我今天向刘彻讲一些真正的道术，并不是一定让他能修炼成仙，而是让他知道要想得道就必须精诚的修行，抛开所有的疑虑和杂念，并可以通过刘彻的修炼来启发人间那些想学道的人们，使更多的凡人知道天地问确实有神仙道术存在，以此使那些不信神道的愚蠢狂妄的人能坚定信念，这才是我的本意。
English: Today, I'm going to tell Liu Che about some true Taoist techniques. It's not necessarily so that he can cultivate into immortality, but to let him know that in order to attain the Tao, he must practice diligently, cast aside all doubts and distractions, and through Liu Che's cultivation, he can enlighten those on earth who want to learn the Tao, so that more mortals know that heaven and earth really do have the Taoist techniques of the immortals, and in this way, those foolish and arrogant people who don't believe in the Tao can strengthen their faith. This is my original intention.

古文：此子性气淫暴，服精不纯，何能得成真仙，浮空参差十方乎？
现代文：刘彻这个人性情粗暴贪色好淫，心性不纯正，怎么能够修成真正的神仙，凌行于天界遨游于十方呢？
English: How could Liu Che, a man with a coarse, greedy, and lecherous nature and an impure mind, become a true immortal and travel to the ten directions?

古文：勤而行之，适可度于不死耳。
现代文：即使他再刻苦的修炼，顶多不过能达到不死的程度罢了。
English: No matter how hard he cultivates, he can only achieve immortality.

古文：明科所云：非长生难，闻道难也；非闻道难行之难；非行之难也，终之难。
现代文：修道有一个人人皆知的道理，那就是求长生并不算难，懂得修道的真谛才很难。懂得修道真谛也不算难，能够真正按着真谛的规范去修炼才是难的。而修炼也不算最难，最难的是坚持不懈。
English: There is a well-known principle of cultivation, that is, it is not difficult to seek eternal life, but it is difficult to understand the true meaning of cultivation. It is not difficult to understand the true meaning of cultivation, but it is difficult to truly cultivate according to the norms of the true meaning. And cultivation is not the most difficult, the most difficult is perseverance.

古文：良匠能与人规矩，不能使人必巧也。
现代文：一直修炼到底。良好的老师只能把方法、规矩告诉徒弟，却不能保证徒弟一定能出息成巧匠。
English: A good teacher can only tell the methods and rules to the apprentice, but cannot guarantee that the apprentice will be able to become a skilled craftsman.

古文：何足隐之耶？ 
现代文：所以，何必对刘彻那么保守，不把真经诀窍传授给他呢？ 
English: So, why be so conservative with Liu Che and not teach him the real secret?

古文：夫人谢曰： 谨受命矣。
现代文：上元夫人听了王母这番道理，被说服了。
English: Lady Shangyuan listened to the Queen Mother's reasoning and was convinced.

古文：但环昔蒙倒景君、无常先生二君，传灵飞之约，以四千年一传，女授女，不授男，太上科禁，已表于昭生之符矣。
现代文：她对王母说， 那我就按照你的意见办吧。但我阿环昔日曾蒙倒景君和无常先生二位大仙传授了灵魂飞升的方术，他们给我传授时曾告诫我，说这种方术四千年才能传授一次，而且只能传授给女子，不能传授给男子，这是太上帝君的禁律，已明白地写在昭生的符上了。
English: She said to the Queen Mother, "Then I'll do it according to your advice. But I, Ah Huan, was once taught by two great sages, the Fallen King and Mr. Impermanence, the art of soul soaring. When they taught it to me, they warned me that this art could only be taught once every four thousand years, and that it could only be taught to a woman, not to a man. This was forbidden by God, and it was clearly written on my birth certificate.

古文：环受书以来，并贤大女即抱兰，凡传六十八女子，固不可授男也。
现代文：我被授于真符以来，只传授过像抱益这样的大贤大德的女仙人。到现在传授了六十八个女子，没有传授过一个男子。
English: Since I was given the True Emblem, I have only taught female immortals of great virtue such as Ho Yi. So far, I have taught sixty-eight women, but not a single man.

古文：伏见扶广山青真小童，受《六甲灵飞》于太甲中元，凡十二事，与环所授者同。
现代文：我曾见过扶广山的青真小童在太甲中元接受了《六甲灵飞》真经，一共是十二卷，和我被授的十二卷真经相同。
English: I once saw a young boy from Fuguang Mountain receive the "Rokkoh Lingfei" sutra in Taiga Junior High School. There are a total of twelve volumes, which is the same as the twelve volumes of the sutra I was given.

古文：青真是环入火弟子，所受《六甲》，未闻别授于人。
现代文：这位青真小童是向我拜师修炼的弟子，他所接受的《六甲灵飞》真经，没听说向任何人传授过。
English: This Qingzhen boy is a disciple who worships and cultivates me. He has received the "Rokko Lingfei" scripture, and I have not heard that he has taught it to anyone.

古文：彼男官也，今止敕取之，将以授彻也。
现代文：青音小童是个男仙官，现在我派人向他要来以后，就可以授给刘彻了。
English: Qingying Xiaodong is a male immortality official. Now that I have sent someone to ask him to come, I can bestow it on Liu Che.

古文：先所以告篇目者，意是悯其有心，将欲坚其专气，令且广求。
现代文：刚才我先把十二卷真经的篇目告诉了刘彻，也是体念他求道一份真诚，为了使他的志向更加坚定，让他能放开眼界从多方面寻求道术的奥秘。
English: Just now, I first told Liu Che the contents of the twelve volumes of the True Classic of Taoism. I also thought that he was sincere in his pursuit of Taoism, in order to strengthen his ambition and allow him to open his eyes to seek the mysteries of Taoism from many aspects.

古文：他日与之，亦欲以男授男，承科而行。
现代文：就是把十二卷真经授给他以后，也是以男子授给男子，严格按着天界禁律实行。
English: Even after he was given the twelve volumes of the Genuine Sutra, they were also given to men by men, strictly in accordance with the heavenly law.

古文：使勤而方获，令知天真之珍贵耳。
现代文：这样可以使刘彻知道只有勤奋才能有所获得，而得到修道的秘经更是万分珍贵的。
English: This can make Liu Che know that only diligence can gain something, and the secret of getting the practice is even more precious.

古文：非徒苟执，炫泄天道，阿环主臣，愿不罪焉。
现代文：这并不是我偏狭吝惜泄露了上天的机密，但愿管我的司官不要加罚于我吧。
English: It is not that I am narrow-minded and miserly and have divulged the secrets of heaven, but I hope that my magistrate will not punish me.

古文：阿母《真形》之贵，悯于勤志，亦已授之，可谓大不宜矣。 王母笑曰： 亦可恕乎？ 
现代文：再说，您已经把那么珍贵的《五岳真形图》授给了刘彻以坚定他修道的志向，这种作法也是泄露了天机，不能算是很妥当吧？ 王母笑着说： 那就也恕我无罪吧，好吗？ 
English: Besides, you have already given the precious "Five Sacred Mountains True Shape Map" to Liu Che to strengthen his spiritual aspiration. This practice has also revealed a great opportunity, can it not be considered very appropriate? The Queen Mother smiled and said: Then forgive me, okay?

古文：上元夫人即命侍女纪离容，径到扶广山，敕青真小童，出 六甲左右灵飞致神之方 十二事，当以授刘彻也。
现代文：这时上元夫人就命身边的侍女纪离岩专程到扶广山去找到青真小童，从他那里取来《六甲左右灵飞致神》的方术秘经十二卷，以便授给刘彻。
English: At this time, Lady Shangyuan ordered her attendant Ji Liangyan to make a special trip to Fuguang Mountain to find Qingzheng Xiaodong, from whom she took twelve volumes of the "Rokga Around Lingfei to God" Fangshu Secret Scripture, in order to give it to Liu Che.

古文：须臾侍女还，捧五色玉笈，凤文之蕴。
现代文：不大工夫，侍女就回来了，手中捧着五色玉作的书箱，箱上刻绘着凤文。
English: In no time at all, the maid returned, holding in her hands a bookcase made of five-coloured beads, with a phoenix engraved on the box.

古文：以出六甲之文曰： 弟子何昌言：向奉使绛河，摄南真七元君检校群龙猛兽之数，事毕授教。
现代文：侍女从书箱中拿出十二卷六甲真经对上元夫人说， 您的弟子何昌说他刚刚奉命到绛河公干，代理南真七元君查点群龙和猛兽的数目，公事完后还在那传了传道。
English: The maid took out twelve volumes of the Six-Diamond Sutra from the bookcase and said to Mrs. Shangyuan, "Your disciple He Chang said that he had just been ordered to go to Luohe on official business to check the number of dragons and ferocious beasts on behalf of Nan Zhengyuan. After the official business was over, he preached there."

古文：承阿母相邀诣刘彻家，不意天灵玉尊，乃复下降于臭浊中也，不审起居比来何如？
现代文：蒙师母您约我到刘彻家去一趟，我真没想到您这样尊贵的天神会下降到臭气污浊的人世去。不知您在那里身体和饮食起居能过得惯吗？
English: My teacher and mother asked me to visit Liu Che's home. I really didn't think that such a noble angel as you would descend to the stinking and filthy world of man. I wonder if you can get used to living and eating there?

古文：侍女纪离容至云：尊母欲得 金书秘字六甲灵飞左右策精 之文十二事，欲授刘彻。
现代文：您派您的侍女纪离岩来对我说，您向我要那十二卷《六甲灵飞左右策精》的秘经，打算传授给刘彻。
English: You sent your maid Ji Liangyan to tell me that you wanted me to learn the secret of the twelve volumes of "Rokko Lingfei Zuo Zuo Zuo Jing" and that you intended to teach it to Liu Che.

古文：辄封一通付信，曰彻虽有心，实非仙才，讵宜以此传泄于行尸乎？昌近在帝处，见有上言者甚众，云山鬼哭于丛林，孤魂号于绝域；兴师旅而族有功，忘赏劳而刑士卒；纵横白骨，烦扰黔首，淫酷自恣。
现代文：关于这件事，我给您写了一封信，信中告诉您，刘彻虽然有求道修炼的诚意，但他实在不是一个能修成仙的材料，您把修炼的十二卷秘经传授给像他这样的行尸走肉，是不太妥当的，我经常在天帝的身边，最近看到有不少人上书控告刘彻，说被刘彻杀害的鬼魂在山林中哭号，不少孤独的冤魂在荒原野地里哀泣。刘彻杀害有功之臣的全家，对士兵不但不体恤犒赏反而用刑罚，原野上到处纵横着白骨，黎民百姓遭到戕害屠杀，刘彻却更加残酷无情，骄奢淫逸。
English: Regarding this matter, I wrote a letter to you, in which I told you that although Liu Che had the sincerity to seek the path of cultivation, he was really not a material that could be cultivated into a immortal. It is not appropriate for you to pass on the twelve volumes of the secret scriptures of cultivation to a walking corpse like him. I am often around the Heavenly Emperor. Recently, I saw many people writing a letter to accuse Liu Che, saying that the ghosts killed by Liu Che were crying in the mountains and forests, and many lonely ghosts were crying in the wilderness. Liu Che killed the whole family of meritorious officers, and not only did he not reward the soldiers, but he punished them. White

古文：罪己彰于太上，怨已见于天气，嚣言互闻，必不得度世也。奉尊见敕，不敢违耳。 
现代文：他的这些罪恶已经上达天帝，天地间已充满了对刘彻的怨气，人们控诉喊冤的声音到处都能听见，像刘彻这样的人，是绝不可以成仙得道的，这是天帝的旨意，我也不敢违抗呀。 
English: These sins of his have reached the Heavenly Emperor. The world is full of grudges against Liu Che, and the voices of people complaining and shouting their grievances can be heard everywhere. People like Liu Che should never become gods. This is the will of the Heavenly Emperor, and I dare not disobey it.

古文：王母叹曰： 言此子者诚多，然帝亦不必推也。
现代文：王母听后叹息道： 看来向上界控告刘彻的人的确不少，但天帝也不必就为此把刘彻拒之门外。
English: After listening, the Queen Mother sighed and said: It seems that there are indeed many people who have accused Liu Che to the world, but the Heavenly Emperor does not have to shut out Liu Che for this reason.

古文：夫好道慕仙者，精诚志念：斋戒思愆，辄除过一月；克己反善，奉敬真神，存真守一，行此一月，辄除过一年。
现代文：因为凡是好道慕仙的人，都是下定决心意志坚定的人。他们只要能斋戒净心闭门思过，这就可以减去一个月的罪恶。如果再连续克服自己的缺点一心向善，奉祀天神心存道义，坚持一个月的修行，就可减去一年的罪恶。
English: As long as they can fast, clean their hearts, and meditate behind closed doors, they can subtract one month of sin. If they continuously overcome their shortcomings with a good heart, worship angels and gods with a moral heart, and persist in one month of practice, they can subtract one year of sin.

古文：彻念道累年，斋亦勤矣，累祷名山、愿求度脱，校计功过，殆已相掩。
现代文：刘彻求道已经好几年了，斋戒也很勤奋，还多次到名山中祭祀祈祷，希望得到超度解脱入世的烦恼，比较衡量一下，他的功德已经盖过了他的罪过。
English: Liu Che has been seeking the way for several years. He is also very diligent in fasting. He has also gone to the famous mountain for sacrifice and prayer many times, hoping to get rid of the troubles of entering the world. By comparison, his merits have already overpowered his sins.

古文：但今以去，勤修至诚，奉上元夫人之言，不宜复奢淫暴虐，使万兆劳残，冤魂穷鬼，有被掘之诉，流血之尸，忘功赏之辞耳。 
现代文：希望刘彻从今以后更加刻苦的修炼道术，一切都按上元夫人的传授教导去作，绝不能再淫逸暴虐伤害千万黎民百姓，不要再使人间有冤魂苦鬼，也不要再滥用刑罚赏罚不明伤害无辜了！ 
English: It is hoped that Liu Che will be more diligent in cultivating Taoism from now on, and that everything will be done according to the teachings and teachings of Mrs. Shangyuan. He must never again hurt thousands of people with lewdness and brutality. He must never again cause suffering to others, and he must never again abuse punishment to reward and punish and injure the innocent!

古文：夫人乃下席起立，手执八色玉笈凤文之蕴，仰帝而祝曰： 九天浩洞，太上耀灵。
现代文：这时上元夫人就离座起立，手里捧着装有十二卷秘经的五色玉制书匣，面向武帝念了一首祝辞： 九天浩洞，太上耀灵。
English: At this time, Lady Shangyuan stood up from her seat, holding in her hand a five-color jade bookcase containing twelve volumes of secret scriptures, and read a congratulatory poem to Emperor Wu: "Kutian Haodong, Taishang Yaoling."

古文：神照玄寂，清虚朗明。
现代文：神照玄寂，清虚朗明。
English: God shines on the dark and the silent, on the pure and the bright.

古文：登虚者妙，守气者生。
现代文：登虚者妙，守气者生。
English: The one who climbs into the void is wonderful, and the one who guards the breath is born.

古文：至念道臻，寂感真诚。
现代文：至念道臻，寂感真诚。
English: To the point of contemplation, the sense of loneliness is sincere.

古文：役神形辱，安精年荣。
现代文：役神形辱，安精年荣。
English: He played the role of a deity and suffered humiliation.

古文：授彻灵飞，及此六丁。
现代文：授彻灵飞，及此六丁。
English: Jucheche Lingfei, and this six.

古文：左右招神，天光策精。
现代文：左右招神，天光策精。
English: The right and left sides are divine, and the heavenly light is the essence.

古文：可以步虚，可以隐形。
现代文：可以步虚，可以隐形。
English: You can walk, you can be invisible.

古文：长生久视，还白留青。
现代文：长生久视，还白留青。
English: Long live long-sightedness, and stay white forever.

古文：我传有四万之纪，授彻传在四十之龄。
现代文：我传有四万之纪，授彻传在四十之龄。
English: I am said to be forty thousand years old, and I was ordained at the age of forty.

古文：违犯泄漏，祸必族倾。
现代文：违犯泄漏，祸必族倾。
English: If there is a violation or leak, it will be the ruin of the whole nation.

古文：反是天真，必沉幽冥。
现代文：反是天真，必沉幽冥。
English: On the contrary, it is naivety that will sink into obscurity.

古文：尔其慎祸，敢告刘生。
现代文：尔其慎祸，敢告刘生。
English: He should be cautious and dare to sue Liu Sheng.

古文：尔师主是真青童小君，太上中黄道君之师真，元始十天王入室弟子也。
现代文：尔师主是真青童小君，太上中黄道君之师真，元始十天王入室弟子也。
English: His teacher is the true young boy, the true teacher of the High Priest of the Zodiac, and the original disciple of the Ten Heavenly Kings.

古文：姓延陵名阳，字庇华，形有婴孩之貌，故仙宫以青真小童为号。
现代文：姓延陵名阳，字庇华，形有婴孩之貌，故仙宫以青真小童为号。
English: His family name was Yanling Meiyang, and his Chinese name was Peihua. He had the appearance of a baby, so the Imperial Palace gave him the name Qingzheng Xiaodong.

古文：其为器也，玉朗洞照。圣周万变，玄镜幽览。
现代文：其为器也，玉朗洞照，圣周万变，玄镜幽览。
English: It is also a vessel, the magnificence of the cave, the change of the sacred week, and the hidden mirror.

古文：才为真俊，游于扶广。
现代文：才为真俊，游于扶广。
English: He is a true talent and swims in Fuyuan.

古文：权此始运，馆于玄圃。
现代文：权此始运，馆于玄圃。
English: This was the beginning of the transfer of power, and the museum was established in the garden.

古文：治仙职分，子在师居，从尔所愿。
现代文：治仙职分，子在师居，从尔所愿。
English: In the position of ruling the immortals, the son is in the teacher's house and can do as he pleases.

古文：不存所授，命必倾沦！ 
现代文：不存所授，命必倾沦！ 
English: If you don't do as you're told, you'll die!

古文：言毕，夫人一一手指所施用节度，以示帝焉。
现代文：上元夫人念完了祝辞，就打开了那些秘经，用手一一指点讲解，告诉武帝在施行时的要点和应掌握的分寸。
English: After Mrs. Shangyuan finished reading the congratulatory speech, she opened those secret sutras and explained them one by one with her hands, telling Emperor Wu the main points and the proper proportions to be mastered when implementing them.

古文：凡十二事都毕，又告帝曰： 夫五帝者，方面之天精，六甲六位之通灵，佩而尊之，可致长生。
现代文：把十二卷经文都讲完后，上元夫人又对武帝说： 人们常说的太昊、炎帝、黄帝、少昊、颛顼这五位天帝，是各司一方的天神，还有按《易经》中六个方位排的六甲神，也要尊重，他们都能使你长生。
English: After she had finished reciting the twelve volumes of scriptures, Lady Shangyuan said to Emperor Wu: The five heavenly emperors commonly referred to as Tai Ho, Yan Di, Huang Di, Shao Hao, and Yao, are the gods of each division, as well as the six deities of the six cardinal directions in the I Ching. They should also be respected. They can all make you live forever.

古文：此书上帝封于玄景之台，子其宝秘焉。 
现代文：今天授你的这十二卷经书，是上帝在玄景台赏赐的，你千万要珍视它，好好珍藏起来。 
English: The twelve scrolls of scripture given to you today are God's gift to you at the backstage. You must treasure them and keep them safe.

古文：王母曰： 此三天太上之所撰，藏于紫陵之台，隐以灵坛之房，封以华琳之函，韫以兰茧之帛，约以紫罗之素，印以太帝之玺。
现代文：王母也对刘彻说： 这秘经是三天太上君的著作，收藏在天宫的紫陵台，存放在灵坛的秘室，装在玉石的封套中，包着兰茧的锦绸，用紫罗素带扎着，上面还盖着太帝的玉玺大印。
English: The Queen Mother also said to Liu Che: This secret scripture is the work of the three-day great-grandmother, collected in the purple mausoleum of the Heavenly Palace, stored in the secret room of the altar, placed in a jade envelope, wrapped in lilac brocade, tied with violet and basil, and covered with the great-great-grandfather's jade seal.

古文：受之者，四十年传一人；无其人，八十年可顿授二人。
现代文：接受了这部秘经的人，四十年才能传给另一个人，如果没有可以传授的人选，那就八十年再授给第二个人。
English: It takes forty years for one who has received this secret to teach it to another, and if there is no one to teach it to, it takes eighty years to teach it to a second person.

古文：得道者四百年一传，得仙者四千年一传。得真者四万年一传，升太上者四十万年一传。
现代文：得道的四百年传一次，成仙的四千年传一次，成为仙中的真人就四万年才传一次，升为太上君的四十万年才能传一次。
English: It takes four hundred years to attain enlightenment, four thousand years to attain immortality, forty thousand years to become a real person among the immortals, and four hundred thousand years to become a high priest.

古文：非其人谓之泄天道；得其人不传，是谓蔽天宝；非限妄传，是谓轻天老；受而不敬，是谓慢天藻。
现代文：传给不该传的人叫作泄露天道，该传而不传的叫埋没天宝，没有限度的胡传叫轻视天老，接受了秘经而不敬重珍者的叫侮慢天藻。
English: Those who pass it on to those who should not pass it on are called divulging the heavenly way, those who pass it on but do not pass it on are called burying the heavenly treasure, those who pass it on without limit are called despising the ancients, and those who accept the secret scriptures but do not respect the precious ones are called despising the heavenly algae.

古文：泄、蔽、轻、慢四者，取死之刀斧，延祸之车乘也。
现代文：犯了这泄、蔽、轻、慢四条罪的，将会死在刀斧之下或遭受 车裂 的酷刑。
English: Those who commit the four crimes of defection, concealment, negligence and delay will die by the sword or be tortured by the chariot.

古文：泄者身死于道路，受上刑而骸裂；蔽者盲聋于来世，命凋枉而卒殁；轻者钟祸于父母，诣玄都而考罚；慢则暴终而堕恶道，弃疾于后世。
现代文：泄露天道的，会被杀死在野外路旁，受到最残酷的刑罚而尸分裂。犯了埋没掩蔽罪的，下一辈子将被罚变成又瞎又聋的残废人，最后衰竭而死。罪稍轻一些的也会累及到下世，被抓到天宫拷问用刑。犯了侮慢天藻罪的，将会得到暴死的下场，死后还要落入地狱，将会把疾病留给他的子孙。
English: Those who divulge the secrets of heaven will be killed on the side of a field road, and their bodies will be torn apart by the most cruel punishment. Those who commit the crime of burying and covering will be punished in the next life to become blind and deaf cripples, and finally die of exhaustion. Those who commit a lesser crime will also be involved in the next life, and will be caught in the heavenly palace for interrogation and punishment. Those who commit the crime of insulting the heavenly algae will end up dying violently, and will also fall into hell after death, and will leave the disease to his descendants.

古文：此皆道之科禁，故以相戒，不可不慎也。 
现代文：这些都是传道的禁律，我再次提醒告诫你，千万要谨慎从事啊！ 
English: These are the proscriptions of preaching, and again I caution you to proceed with caution.

古文：王母因授以《五岳真形图》，帝拜受俱毕。
现代文：王母这时就把《五岳真形图》授给了武帝刘彻，刘彻再三拜谢接受下来。
English: At this time, the Queen Mother bestowed the "Five Mountains True Shape Map" to Emperor Wu Liu Che, and Liu Che repeatedly accepted it.

古文：夫人自弹云林之璈，歌步玄之曲。
现代文：然后上元夫人就弹起了云林的玉琴，唱了一首《步玄曲》。
English: Then Mrs. Shangyuan played the yu-qin of the cloud forest and sang a piece of "Buh Xuanqu."

古文：王母命侍女田四非，答歌。
现代文：王母让她的侍女田四非回敬了上元夫人一首歌。
English: The Queen Mother asked her lady-in-waiting, Tian Sifu, to write a song in tribute to Lady Shangyuan.

古文：歌毕，乃告帝从者姓名，及冠带执佩物名，所以得知而纪焉。
现代文：唱完以后，王母就把自己侍从的姓名，以及穿戴佩用的东西的名称都一一告诉了武帝，以便武帝能够记录下来。
English: After singing, the Queen Mother told Emperor Wu the names of her attendants, as well as the names of the things they were wearing, so that Emperor Wu could record them.

古文：至明旦，王母与上元夫人同乘而去，人马龙虎，导从音乐如初，而时云彩郁勃，尽为香气，极望西南，良久乃绝。
现代文：天色将明时，王母和上元夫人一起乘车离去，随从的侍卫、车马、龙虎，开路的仪仗和音乐，都和他们来时一样，只见彩云密集，一片芬馨的气味，他们的行列一直往西南空中升去，过了很久才看不见了。
English: When the day was about to dawn, the Queen Mother and Lady Shangyuan left together in a car. The attendant guards, chariots, horses, dragons and tigers, the ceremonial battle and music that opened the way, were all the same as when they came. All they could see was a dense mass of colored clouds and a fragrant smell. Their procession kept rising into the southwest sky, and it was a long time before they were out of sight.

古文：帝既见王母及上元夫人，乃信天下有神仙之事。
现代文：武帝从这次亲自见到王母和上元夫人之后，更加相信天下真的有神仙存在。
English: After seeing the Queen Mother and Lady Shangyuan in person, Emperor Wu became even more convinced that there really are divine beings in the world.

古文：其后帝以王母所授《五真图》、《灵光经》，及上元夫人所授《六甲灵飞》十二事，自撰集为一卷，及诸经图，皆奉以黄金之箱，封以白玉之函，以珊瑚为轴，紫锦为囊，安著柏梁台上。数自斋洁朝拜，烧香洒扫，然后乃执省焉。
现代文：后来武帝把王母授给他的《五真图》、《灵光经》和上元夫人授给他的十二卷《六甲灵飞》真经合在一起编成了一卷，加上那真经的图像，一起装在一个黄金箱子里。经卷装入白玉的封套，用珊瑚作画轴，以紫缎为书套，安放在柏梁台上，每天亲自净身持斋向真经叩拜，焚香打扫，然后就按照真经上的要求去修炼。
English: Later, Emperor Wu compiled the "Five Truths" and "Book of Spiritual Light" given to him by the Queen Mother and the twelve volumes of the "Six-Dimensional Spiritual Flight" given to him by Lady Shangyuan into one volume, together with the image of the true scripture, and together they were placed in a gold box. The scroll was placed in a white jade envelope, with coral as the scroll, and purple hydrangea as the book cover. It was placed on a wooden platform. Every day, he personally prostrated himself before the true scripture, burned incense and cleaned, and then practiced according to the requirements of the true scripture.

古文：帝自受法，出入六年，意旨清畅，高韵自许，为神真见降，必当度世。
现代文：汉武帝自从得到真经后修行了六年，觉得心胸特别爽朗，格调特别高雅，认为既然王母和上元夫人这样的上界大仙都降临传授，自己一定能得道成仙。
English: Emperor Hanwu had been practicing for six years since he obtained the True Classic. He felt that his heart was particularly cheerful and his style was particularly elegant. He believed that since such great immortals as the Queen Mother and Lady Shangyuan had descended to teach, he would surely be able to attain immortality.

古文：恃此不修至德，更兴起台馆，劳弊万民，坑降杀服，远征夷秋，路盈怒叹，流血膏城，每事不从。
现代文：武帝有了这种想法，就渐渐放松了对自身品德的约束，又大肆修建宫殿亭台，劳民伤财，并对南方北方的异族夷、狄进行远征讨伐，对投降的俘虏也残酷的活埋屠杀，以致血流成河尸骨如山，黎民百姓怨怒冲天。
English: With this idea, Emperor Wu gradually loosened the constraints on his own moral character, and built palace pavilions on a large scale, hurting the people's labor and wealth, and carried out expeditions and crusades against the foreign ethnic groups in the south and north, and brutally buried alive and slaughtered the surrendered prisoners, so that the blood flowed into rivers and the bones were like mountains, and the Li people were angry.

古文：至太初元年，十一月乙酉，天火烧柏梁台，《真形图》、《灵飞经》、录十二事《灵光经》，及自撰所受，凡十四卷，并函并失。
现代文：到了太初元年十一月乙酉日，天火焚烧了供奉真经的柏梁台，存放在那里的《真形图》、《灵飞经》和十二卷《灵光经》以及武帝自己编撰所得到的经书一共十四卷，连同装经书的匣子一起不见了。
English: On the first day of the eleventh month of the first year of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the first year of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the first year of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the first year of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the first year of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh month of the eleventh

古文：王母当知武帝既不从训，故火灾耳。
现代文：这是王母得知武帝不遵从他的教导胡作非为，才让天火烧毁了柏梁台。
English: It was only after the Queen Mother learned that Emperor Wu did not follow his teachings and did something wrong that she allowed the fire to burn down the wooden platform.

古文：其后东方朔一旦乘龙飞去。
现代文：后来东方朔乘龙飞升而去。
English: Later, Dongfang Shuo took the dragon and flew away.

古文：同时众人，见从西北上冉冉，仰望良久，大雾覆之，不知所适。
现代文：当时有不少人看见他乘龙直上西北天际，大家都抬头看了很久，后来空中大雾弥漫，不知东方朔去了什么地方。
English: At that time, many people saw him riding a dragon straight up to the northwest sky. Everyone looked up for a long time. Later, the sky was foggy, and I don't know where Dongfang Shuo went.

古文：至元狩二年二月，帝病，行周至西，憩五柞宫。
现代文：到了元狩二年二月，汉武帝得了病，走到陕西周至县的西面，在五柞宫稍作休息。
English: In February of the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Hanwu fell ill and went to the west of Zhouzi County, Shaanxi Province, to take a short break at the Wufeng Palace.

古文：丁卯，帝崩，入殡未央宫前殿；三月，葬茂陵。
现代文：丁卯这天汉武帝刘彻驾崩，先在未央宫前殿入殓，三月葬在茂陵。
English: On this day, the Han Emperor Liu Che died. He was first enshrined in the front hall of the Weiyang Palace, and was buried in the Mausoleum in March.

古文：是夕，帝棺自动，而有声闻宫外，如此数遍，又有芳香异常。陵毕，坟埏间大雾，门柱坏，雾经一月许日。
现代文：这天晚上，武帝的棺材自己挪动起来，连宫外都听见了好几次棺材动的声音，并散出一股特别的香气，封陵以后，陵墓周围大雾弥天，陵寝的门柱突然断裂，大雾持续了一个月。
English: On this night, Emperor Wu's coffin moved on its own. Even people outside the palace heard the sound of the coffin moving several times, and a special aroma was emitted. After the tomb was sealed, there was a heavy fog around the tomb. The gatepost of the tomb suddenly broke, and the fog lasted for a month.

古文：帝塚中先有一玉箱，一玉杖，此是西胡康渠王所献，帝甚爱之，故入梓宫中。
现代文：汉武帝的陵墓里原来有一个玉箱，一只玉杖，都是西胡的康渠进献的，汉武帝生前很喜欢这两件东西，所以随葬在他的陵墓中。
English: In the mausoleum of Emperor Hanwu, there was originally a jade box and a jade staff, both of which were donated by Kangdu of Xihu. Emperor Hanwu liked these two things very much during his lifetime, so they were buried with him in his mausoleum.

古文：其后四年，有人于扶风市中买得此二物。
现代文：过了四年，有人在陕西扶风的街市上买到了那玉箱和玉杖。
English: Four years later, someone bought the jade box and jade cane at a street market in Fufeng, Shaanxi Province.

古文：帝时左右侍人，有识此物，是先帝所珍玩者，因认以告。
现代文：当时侍奉在汉武帝身边的人有的认得这两件东西是先帝生前珍爱的玩物，就把这事报告了官府。
English: At that time, some people who served around Emperor Hanwu recognized that these two things were the cherished toys of the former emperor, and reported the matter to the government.

古文：有司诘之，买者乃商人也，从关外来，宿鄽市。
现代文：官府把买了那两件宝物的人抓来审问，买者说他是个商人，从关外来，住在街市上。
English: The government arrested and interrogated the man who bought the two treasures. The buyer said he was a merchant from Guanzhong and lived in the market.

古文：其日，见一人于北车巷中，卖此二物，青布三十匹，钱九万，即售交度，实不知卖箱杖主姓名，事实如此。有司以闻，商人放还，诏以二物付太庙。
现代文：有一天，看见一个人在北车胡同里卖这两件东西，要价是青布三十匹加九万钱，于是两个人成交，商人也不知道卖箱子和玉杖人的姓名，事实就是这样，官府问清楚以后，就把那商人放了，并把两件宝物送到宫廷的太庙里保存。
English: One day, he saw a man selling these two things in the Beichehu alley, the asking price was thirty pieces of blue cloth plus ninety thousand yuan, so the two men made a deal. The merchant did not know the name of the person selling the box and the jade staff. This is the fact. After the government asked for clarification, they released the merchant and sent the two treasures to the Imperial Temple of the court for safekeeping.

古文：又帝崩时，遗诏以杂经三十余卷，常读玩之，使随身敛。
现代文：汉武帝驾崩前遗书里说，有各种经书三十多卷，都是他平时喜欢读的，要求死后把这些经书随葬在陵寝中。
English: Emperor Hanwu said in his last will and testament before his death that there were more than thirty volumes of various scriptures, which he usually liked to read, and requested that these scriptures be buried with him in the mausoleum after his death.

古文：到元康二年，河东功曹李友，入上党抱犊山采药，于岩室中得此经，盛以金箱，卷后题东观臣姓名，记月日，武帝时也。
现代文：到元康二年，有个当河东功曹的李友，有一次进上党的抱犊山采药，偶然在一个岩洞里发现了武帝随葬的那些经书，经书装在一个金箱里，经卷的后面题写着东观大臣们的姓名，看上面记载的年月日，是汉武帝时的事。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Kang, there was a Li You, who was a meritorious person in Hedong. Once he went to the party's Baoshan Mountain to collect medicine. By chance, he found the scriptures buried with Emperor Wu in a cave. The scriptures were placed in a gold box. The names of the ministers of the Eastern Outlook were inscribed on the back of the scriptures. The dates recorded above were during the reign of Emperor Wu of Han.

古文：河东太守张纯，以经箱奏进。帝问武帝时左右侍臣，有典书中郎冉登，见经及箱，流涕对曰： 此孝武皇帝殡殓时物也，臣当时以著梓宫中，不知何缘得出？ 
现代文：河东太守张纯把这只装经卷的金箱交给汉宣帝，宣帝问过去在武帝身边的大臣认不认识金箱，有一个当典书中郎的冉登看见金箱和经书后，哭着向宣帝奏道： 这金箱就是孝武皇帝随葬的东西啊！我当时亲手把它放在棺木里，不知什么原因它竟会跑到抱犊山的岩洞里去了呢？ 
English: Zhang Chun, the governor of Hedong, gave Emperor Xuan of Han this gold box containing scriptures to Emperor Xuan. Emperor Xuan asked the ministers who had been with Emperor Wu whether they recognized the gold box. After seeing the gold box and scriptures, one of the scribes, Ran Deng, cried and said to Emperor Xuan: This gold box is what Emperor Xiaowu was buried with! At that time, I put it in the coffin with my own hands. I don't know why it ran into the rock cave of Mount Obaku.

古文：宣帝大怆然惊愕，以经付孝武帝庙中。
现代文：宣帝听后，又惊愕又悲伤，把经书送到汉武帝的庙里保存起来。
English: After listening to Emperor Xuan, he was both surprised and sad, and sent the scriptures to Emperor Hanwu's temple to be preserved.

