古文：八年春，宋公、卫侯遇于垂。
现代文：八年春季，宋公与卫候相会于垂。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Song Gong and Wei Xiu met in Zhuge.

古文：三月，郑伯使宛来归祊。
现代文：同年三月，郑伯派大夫宛前来遗送祊地给鲁国。
English: In March of the same year, Zheng Bo sent a doctor to An to bequeath it to Lu.

古文：庚寅，我入祊。
现代文：庚寅日鲁国入住祊地。
English: Gog and Magog settled in the land of Goshen.

古文：夏六月己亥，蔡侯考父卒。
现代文：夏季六月己亥这一天，蔡侯考父去世。
English: On this day in the summer of June, Cai Houkao's father passed away.

古文：辛亥，宿男卒。
现代文：辛亥日，宿男去世。
English: On the day of Xinhai, the innkeeper died.

古文：秋七月庚午，宋公、齐侯、卫侯盟于瓦屋。
现代文：秋天，七月庚午，宋殇公、齐僖公、卫宣公在 瓦屋 会盟。
English: In the autumn, on the afternoon of the seventh day of the seventh month, Song Yu Gong, Qi Yu Gong, and Wei Xuan Gong were in the tile house.

古文：八月，葬蔡宣公。
现代文：八月，蔡宣公下葬。
English: In August, Cai Xuan Gong was buried.

古文：九月辛卯，公及莒人盟于浮来。
现代文：九月辛卯日，鲁隐公和莒国人在浮来这个地方盟会。
English: On the day of Xinwu in September, Lu Yingguo and the people of Shandong Province came to this place for a meeting.

古文：螟。冬十有二月，无骇卒。
现代文：冬季十二月，无骇去世。
English: In the winter of December, Mu Chang passed away.

古文：八年春，齐侯将平宋、卫，有会期。
现代文：八年春季，齐僖公准备要宋、卫两国和郑国讲和，已经有了结盟的日期。
English: In the spring of the eighth year, Emperor Qizong was preparing to declare peace between Song, Wei and Zheng, and the date of the alliance had already been set.

古文：宋公以币请于卫，请先相见，卫侯许之，故遇于犬丘。
现代文：宋殇公用财币向卫国请求，希望先行见面。卫宣公同意，所以在犬丘举行非正式会见的仪式。
English: Song Xuan publicly requested from Wei Guo with money and coins, hoping to meet first. Wei Xuan publicly agreed, so an informal meeting ceremony was held in the dog hill.

古文：郑伯请释泰山之祀而祀周公，以泰山之祊易许田。
现代文：郑庄公请求免除对泰山的祭祀而祭祀周公，用泰山旁边的祊地交换鲁国在许地的土田。
English: Zheng Zhuangg requested to be exempted from the sacrifice of Mount Tai and instead offered sacrifice to Zhou Gong, exchanging the ploughed land next to Mount Tai for the soil in Lu.

古文：三月，郑伯使宛来归祊，不祀泰山也。
现代文：三月，郑庄公派遣宛来致送祊地，表示不再祭祀泰山了。
English: In March, Zheng Zhuang Gong sent an envoy to Shunde, saying that he would no longer worship Mount Tai.

古文：夏，虢公忌父始作卿士于周。
现代文：夏季，虢公忌父开始在成周做卿士。
English: In the summer, Zou Gongyi's father-in-law began to work as a noble in Chengzhou.

古文：四月甲辰，郑公子忽如陈逆妇妫。辛亥，以妫氏归。
现代文：四月初六日，郑公子忽到陈国迎娶妻子妫氏，十三日，带着妫氏回来。
English: On the 6th day of early April, Zheng Gongzi suddenly went to Chen Guo to marry his wife, Zou Shi, and on the 13th day, he came back with Zou Shi.

古文：甲寅，入于郑。陈鍼子送女。
现代文：十六日，进入郑国，陈鍼子送妫氏到郑国。
English: On the 16th, entering Zhengguo, Chen Jingzi escorted Mr. Zou to Zhengguo.

古文：先配而后祖，鍼子曰： 是不为夫妇。诬其祖矣，非礼也，何以能育？ 
现代文：他们先结婚而后告祭祖庙。鍼子说： 这不能算夫妇，欺骗了他的祖先，这不合于礼，怎么能够使子孙繁衍兴旺呢？ 
English: They got married first and then dedicated the ancestral temple. Acupuncture needle said: This cannot be considered a couple, he deceived his ancestors, this is not proper, how can he make his descendants multiply and prosper?

古文：齐人卒平宋、卫于郑。
现代文：齐国人终于让宋、卫两国和郑国讲和。
English: The people of Qi finally allowed Song, Wei and Zheng to make peace.

古文：秋，会于温，盟于瓦屋，以释东门之役，礼也。
现代文：秋季，在温地会见，在瓦屋结盟，丢弃东门这一役的旧怨，这是合于礼的。
English: In the autumn, it is proper to meet in a warm place, make an alliance in a tile house, and discard the old grudge of the East Gate.

古文：八月丙戌，郑伯以齐人朝王，礼也。
现代文：八月某一天，郑庄公带着齐国人朝觐周桓王，这是合于礼的。
English: On a certain day in August, Zheng Zhuang took the people of Qi to pay homage to King Zhoukuan, which was proper.

古文：公及莒人盟于浮来，以成纪好也。
现代文：隐公和莒子在浮来结盟，以达成对纪国的友好。
English: Ying Gong and Zou Zi formed an alliance to achieve friendship with Ji Guo.

古文：冬，齐侯使来告成三国。
现代文：冬季，齐僖公派人来报告宋、卫、郑三国讲和的事。
English: In the winter, Qishan sent someone to report that the three countries of Song, Wei and Zheng had declared peace.

古文：公使众仲对曰： 君释三国之图以鸠其民，君之惠也，寡君闻命矣。
现代文：隐公派众仲回答说： 君王使三国舍弃相互仇敌的图谋，安定他们的百姓，这都是君王的恩惠。
English: They replied, "It is the king's bounty that he has caused the three kingdoms to abandon the schemes of their enemies and to establish peace among their people.

古文：敢不承受君之明德。 
现代文：寡君听到了，岂敢不承受君王的高明的好行动！ 
English: When the monarch heard this, how dare he not accept the wise and good action of the monarch!

古文：无骇卒。羽父请谥与族。
现代文：无骇去世，羽父为他请求谥号和族氏。
English: After he passed away, his father requested that his family name and clan name be changed.

古文：公问族于众仲。
现代文：隐公向众仲询问关于族氏的事。
English: Ying Gong asked Zhong Zhong about the clan.

古文：众仲对曰： 天子建德，因生以赐姓，胙之土而命之氏。
现代文：众仲回答说： 天子建立有德之人以做诸侯，根据他的生地而赐姓，分封土地而又赐给他族氏。
English: Zhuangzhong replied, "The Son of Heaven established virtuous people as princes, gave them surnames according to their birthplace, and assigned lands to their clans.

古文：诸侯以字为谥，因以为族，官有世功，则有官族，邑亦如之。 
现代文：诸侯以字作为谥号，他的后人又以这作为族氏。先代做官而世代有功绩，就可以用官名作为族氏。
English: Princes use their family name as a nickname, and their descendants use it as a clan name. If the previous generation was an official and the next generation has achievements, they can use the official name as a clan name.

古文：公命以字为展氏。
现代文：也有以封邑为族氏的。 
English: There are also clans with fiefdoms as their clan names.

