古文：武王戎车三百两，虎贲三百人，与商战于牧野，作《牧誓》。
现代文：周武王率戎车三百辆，虎贲三百人，与商战于牧野，作《牧誓》。
English: King Zhou Wu led three hundred chariots and three hundred horsemen to fight the merchants in the pasture, and made the "Pasture Oath."

古文：时甲子昧爽，王朝至于商郊牧野，乃誓。
现代文：在甲子日的黎明时刻，周武王率领军队来到商国都城郊外的牧野，在这里举行誓师大会。
English: At the dawn of the Year of the Goat, King Zhou Wu led the army to Makino, on the outskirts of the capital city of Shangguo, to hold a swearing-in ceremony.

古文：王左杖黄钺，右秉白旄以麾，曰： 逖矣，西土之人！ 王曰： 嗟！
现代文：武王左手拿着黄色的青铜大斧，右手拿着白色旄牛尾指挥，说： 将士们，你们千里迢迢来到这里辛苦了！ 武王说： 啊！
English: King Wu held a large yellow bronze axe in his left hand and a white yakitori bow in his right hand, and said, "Soldiers, you have traveled thousands of miles to get here, and you have worked hard!" King Wu said, "Ah!

古文：我友邦冢君御事，司徒、司马、司空，亚旅、师氏，千夫长、百夫长，及庸，蜀、羌、髳、微、卢、彭、濮人。称尔戈，比尔干，立尔矛，予其誓。 
现代文：我们友邦的国君以及所有官员和司徒、司马、司空，亚旅、师氏，千夫长、百夫长，以及庸、蜀、羌、髳、微、卢、彭、濮的人们，举起你们的戈，排列好你们的盾，竖起你们的矛，我要宣誓了。 
English: The sovereigns of our friendly countries, and all the officials, and the officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers, and officers

古文：王曰： 古人有言曰： 牝鸡无晨；牝鸡之晨，惟家之索。 
现代文：武王说： 古人曾经说过说： 母鸡不应该在早晨啼叫的；如果母鸡在早晨啼叫，那么这个家庭就会落败。 
English: King Wu said: The ancients once said: The hen should not crow in the morning; if the hen crows in the morning, then the family will be defeated.

古文：今商王受惟妇言是用，昬弃厥肆祀弗答，昬弃厥遗王父母弟不迪，乃惟四方之多罪逋逃，是崇是长，是信是使，是以为大夫卿士。
现代文：现在商王纣只是听信妇人的话，抛弃了对祖宗的祭祀而不闻不问，轻视并遗弃他的同祖的兄弟不用，反而只对四方重罪逃亡的人，推崇、尊敬、信任、使用，让他们做大夫、卿士一类的官。
English: Now, the merchant Wang Yao just listens to the woman's words, abandons the sacrifice to the ancestors without hearing or asking, despises and does not use the brothers who abandoned his ancestors, but instead only respects, respects, trusts and uses the people who have fled serious crimes in the four directions, and let them be doctors, noblemen and other officials.

古文：俾暴虐于百姓，以奸宄于商邑。
现代文：使他们残暴对待老百姓，在商国做违法乱纪的事情。
English: Let them brutally treat the common people and do illegal and undisciplined things in the country.

古文：今予发惟恭行天之罚。
现代文：现在，我姬发奉行上天的旨意来讨伐商纣。
English: Now, I am determined to pursue God's will to fight against gossip.

古文：今日之事，不愆于六步、七步，乃止齐焉。
现代文：今天的战斗，行军时不超过六步、七步，就要停下来整顿一下。
English: In today's battle, when marching no more than six or seven paces, it is necessary to stop and take stock.

古文：勖哉夫子！
现代文：将士们，要努力啊！
English: Let's work hard, players.

古文：不愆于四伐、五伐、六伐、七伐，乃止齐焉。
现代文：刺击时不超过四次、五次、六次、七次，就要停下来整齐一下。
English: When stabbing, do not stab more than four, five, six, or seven times. Stop and tidy up.

古文：勖哉夫子！
现代文：努力吧，将士们！
English: Let's work hard, players.

古文：尚桓桓如虎、如貔、如熊、如罴，于商郊弗迓克奔，以役西土，勖哉夫子！
现代文：希望你们威武雄壮，像虎、貔、熊、罴一样，在商都的郊外与敌人大战一场。
English: I hope that you, mighty and strong, like the tiger, roe deer, bear, and badger, will fight a great battle with the enemy on the outskirts of the commercial capital.

古文：尔所弗勖，其于尔躬有戮！ 
现代文：不要迎击跑来投降的人，以便让他们帮助我们周国。努力吧，将士们！
English: Don't fight against those who are running to surrender, so that they can help us surround the country.

