古文：起玄黓执徐，尽强圉作噩四月，凡五年有奇。
现代文：起玄黓执徐，尽强圉作噩四月，凡五年有奇。
English: Every five years there is a strange thing.

古文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝上之下
现代文：太宗文武大圣大广孝皇帝上之下
English: Emperor Taizong, Emperor Wenwu, Emperor Sheng, Emperor Guangxiao,

古文：贞观六年壬辰，公元六三二年
现代文：唐太宗贞观六年春季正月，乙卯朔，出现日食。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：春，正月，乙卯朔，日有食之。癸酉，静州獠反，将军李子和讨平之。
现代文：癸酉，静州獠民反叛，将军李子和率兵征讨平定。
English: , the people of Jingzhou rebelled, and General Li Zi and his soldiers were enlisted to quell the rebellion.

古文：文武官复请封禅，上曰： 卿辈皆以封禅为帝王盛事，朕意不然。若天下乂安，家给人足，虽不封禅，庸何伤乎！
现代文：文武百官又请行封禅大礼，太宗说： 你们都认为登泰山封禅是帝王的盛举，朕不以为然，如果天下安定，百姓家家富足，即使不去封禅，又有什么伤害呢？
English: Hundreds of officials and generals also performed the grand ceremony of the enthronement of the emperor. Taizong said, "You all think that the enthronement of the emperor on Mount Tai is a grand event. I do not think so. If the world is stable and the people are rich, even if they do not go to the enthronement, what harm will it do?

古文：昔秦始皇封禅，而汉文帝不封禅，后世岂以文帝之贤不及始皇邪！
现代文：从前秦始皇行封禅礼，而汉文帝不封禅，后代岂能认为文帝的贤德不如秦始皇吗！
English: Former Qin Shi Huang performed the ceremony of sealing Zen, but Emperor Wen of Han did not seal Zen. Will future generations think that Emperor Wen's virtue is inferior to that of Qin Shi Huang!

古文：且事天扫地而祭，何必登泰山之巅，封数尺之土，然后可以展其诚敬乎！ 
现代文：而且侍奉上天扫地而祭祀，何必要去登泰山之顶峰，封筑几尺的泥土，然后才算展示其诚心敬意呢！ 
English: Moreover, why do they need to climb to the top of Mount Tai, seal a few feet of soil, and then show their sincere respect?

古文：群臣犹请之不已，上亦欲从之，魏征独以为不可。
现代文：群臣还是不停地请求，太宗也想听从此意见，惟独魏徵认为不可。
English: The courtiers continued to make requests, and Emperor Taizong also wanted to listen to this opinion, but Wei Zheng thought it was impossible.

古文：上曰： 公不欲朕封禅者，以功未高邪？ 
现代文：太宗说： 你不想让朕去泰山封禅，认为朕的功劳不够高吗？ 
English: Taizong said, "You don't want me to go to Taishan Fuzhen, don't you think my merit is high enough?

古文：曰： 高矣。 
现代文：魏徵答道： 够高了！ 
English: Wei Zheng replied: It is high enough!

古文： 德未厚邪？ 
现代文： 德行不厚吗？ 
English: Aren't you virtuous?

古文：曰： 厚矣。 
现代文：答道： 很厚了！ 
English: Answer: It's very thick!

古文： 中国未安邪？ 
现代文： 大唐不安定吗？ 
English: Is Datang unstable?

古文：曰： 安矣。 
现代文：答道： 安定！ 
English: Answer: Steady!

古文： 四夷未服邪？ 
现代文： 四方夷族未归服吗？ 
English: Are the Shifang barbarians still unconverted?

古文：曰： 服矣。  年谷未丰邪？ 
现代文：答道： 归服了 。 年成没丰收吗？ 
English: He replied, "I'm resigned to it. Is it because of the poor harvest this year?

古文：曰： 丰矣。 
现代文：答道： 丰收了！ 
English: Answer: A bumper harvest!

古文： 符瑞未至邪？ 
现代文： 符瑞没有到吗？ 
English: Hasn't Fu Rui arrived yet?

古文：曰： 至矣。 
现代文：答道： 到了！ 
English: Answer: We have arrived!

古文：然则何为不可封禅？ 
现代文： 那么为什么不可以行封禅礼？ 
English: So why can't you do the Zen ceremony?

古文：对曰： 陛下虽有此六者，然承隋末大乱之后，户口未复，仓廪尚虚，而车驾东巡，千乘万骑，其供顿劳费，未易任也。
现代文：答道： 陛下虽然有上述六点理由，然而承接隋亡大乱之后，户口没有恢复，国家府库粮仓还很空虚，而陛下的车驾东去泰山，大量的骑兵车辇，其劳顿耗费，必然难以承担。
English: He replied: Although His Majesty has the above-mentioned six reasons, however, after undertaking the Sui and Qin Revolts, the hukou has not been restored, the state treasury granary is still very empty, and His Majesty's car drove east to Mount Tai, a large number of cavalry wagons, their labor and expense, must be difficult to bear.

古文：且陛下封禅，则万国咸集，远夷君长，皆当扈从；今自伊、洛以东至于海、岱，烟火尚希，灌莽极目，此乃引戎狄入腹中，示之以虚弱也。
现代文：而且陛下封禅泰山，则各国君主咸集，远方夷族首领跟从，如今从伊水、洛水东到大海、泰山，人烟稀少，满目草木丛生，这是引戎狄进入大唐腹地，并展示我方的虚弱。
English: Moreover, when His Majesty sealed Mount Taishan, the monarchs of various countries gathered there, and the leaders of the distant barbarian tribes followed. Today, from the Yishui and Luoshui to the east to the sea, Mount Taishan is sparsely populated and overgrown with vegetation. This is the reason why Emperor Yong Di entered the heartland of the Great Tang Dynasty and demonstrated our weakness.

古文：况赏赉不赀，未厌远人之望；给复连年，不偿百姓之劳；崇虚名而受实害，陛下将焉用之！ 
现代文：况且赏赐供给无数，也不能满足这些远方人的欲望；几年免除徭役，也不能补偿老百姓的劳苦。象这样崇尚虚名而实际对百姓有害的政策，陛下怎么能采用呢。 
English: Moreover, the countless rewards and provisions cannot satisfy the desires of these distant people; the exemption from corvee service for several years cannot compensate the hardships of the common people. How can His Majesty adopt such a policy that advocates a false reputation and is actually harmful to the people?

古文：会河南、北数州大水，事遂寝。
现代文：正赶上黄河南北地区数州县发大水，于是就停止封禅事。
English: As several counties in the northern and southern regions of the Yellow River were hit by floods, the sealing ceremony was stopped.

古文：上将幸九成宫，通直散骑常侍姚思廉谏。上曰： 朕有气疾，暑辄顿剧，往避之耳。 
现代文：太宗将要去九成宫，通直散骑常侍姚思廉谏阻，太宗说： 朕有气喘病，一逢暑天就顿时发作加重，便想前去躲避一阵。 
English: Emperor Taizong was about to go to Jiu Chenggong Palace, but he was prevented from going by his equerry Yao Siliang. Emperor Taizong said, "I have asthma, and whenever it's hot, it suddenly gets worse, so I want to go and hide for a while.

古文：赐思廉绢五十匹。
现代文：赏赐给姚思廉五十匹绢。
English: Yao Siliang was rewarded with 50 yakitori.

古文：监察御史马周上疏，以为： 东宫在宫城之中，而大安宫乃在宫城之西，制度比于宸居，尚为卑小，于四方观听，有所不足。
现代文：监察御史马周上奏疏，认为： 陛下所住的宫殿在宫城之中，而太上皇的大安宫却在宫城之西面，建制规模与陛下宫殿相比，还较为窄小，这在天下人的眼中耳里，未免觉得有些不足。
English: The inspector of the Imperial Household Agency, Ma Zhou, reported that: the palace where His Majesty lives is in Miyagi, while the Emperor's Grand Palace is in the west of Miyagi. Compared with His Majesty's palace, the size of the building is relatively small, which in the eyes and ears of the world, is somewhat inadequate.

古文：宜增修高大，以称中外之望。
现代文：应当增修扩大，以满足中外人士的愿望。
English: It should be renovated and expanded to meet the wishes of Chinese and foreign people.

古文：又，太上皇春秋已高，陛下宜朝夕视膳。
现代文：再者说，太上皇年事已高，陛下应当朝夕侍奉御膳。
English: Furthermore, since the Emperor is very old, His Majesty should serve the imperial banquet in the morning and evening.

古文：今九成宫去京师三百馀里，太上皇或时思念陛下，陛下何以赴之？
现代文：如今九成宫离京城三百多里，太上皇如一时想念陛下，陛下怎么能赶回来呢？
English: Nowadays, the Imperial Palace is more than three hundred miles away from the capital. The Emperor misses His Majesty momentarily. How can His Majesty come back in time?

古文：又，车驾此行，欲以避暑；太上皇尚留暑中，而陛下独居京处，温清之礼，窃所未安。
现代文：另外此次车驾外出避暑，太上皇还留在大暑天气里，而陛下却独居凉爽之处，礼制规定，儿女侍奉父母，要让他们冬暖夏凉，陛下这样做，我很不安。
English: In addition, this time the car went out to escape the summer, the emperor also stayed in the hot weather, while his majesty lived alone in a cool place, the etiquette stipulates that children serve their parents to keep them warm in winter and cool in summer, his majesty did so, I am very uneasy.

古文：今行计已成，不可复止，愿速示返期，以解众惑。
现代文：如今行期已定，不能中止，希望尽快昭示归期，以解除众人的疑惑。
English: Now that the tour has been set, it cannot be cancelled, and we hope to announce the return date as soon as possible in order to remove everyone's doubts.

古文：又，王长通、白明达皆乐工，韦槃提、斛斯正止能调马，纵使技能出众，正可赉之金帛，岂得超授官爵，鸣玉曳履，与士君子比肩而立，同坐而食？
现代文：此外，王长通、白明达都是乐工，韦提、斛斯正也只能驯马，即使他们的技能出众，正可赏赐金银财物，怎么能破格授予官爵，让他们佩玉饰、拖着鞋，与士大夫们并肩而立、同座而食呢！
English: In addition, Wang Changtong and Bao Mingda are both musicians, and Wei Tong and Xizheng can only tame horses. Even if their skills are outstanding, they can be rewarded with gold, silver and property. How can they be awarded the title of nobility, let them wear jade ornaments and slippers, stand side by side with the scholars and scholars, and eat together?

古文：臣窃耻之。 
现代文：与他们为伍我感到羞耻。 
English: I'm ashamed to be associated with them.

古文：上深纳之。
现代文：太宗深信其言，并采纳其意见。
English: Emperor Taizong believed in his words and adopted his opinion.

古文：上以新令无三师官，二月，丙戌，诏特置之。
现代文：太宗认为新颁敕令没有太师、太傅、太保三师官，二月，丙戌，下诏特设三师宫。
English: Taizong thought that the newly issued imperial edict did not have the three officers of Taishi, Taifu, and Taibo. In February, he issued an imperial edict to build a special three-master palace.

古文：三月，戊辰，上幸九成宫。
现代文：三月，戊辰，太宗临幸九成宫。
English: In March, at the time of Boshin, Emperor Taizong visited the palace.

古文：庚午，吐谷浑寇兰州，州兵击走之。
现代文：庚午，吐谷浑进犯兰州，州内士兵将其击退。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Tuyuhun invaded Lanzhou, and the soldiers in Lanzhou repulsed him.

古文：长乐公主将出降，上以公主皇后所生，特爱之，敕有司资送倍于永嘉长公主。
现代文：长乐公主将要出嫁长孙仲，太宗以公主是皇后亲生，特别疼爱，敕令有关部门所给陪送比皇姑永嘉长公主多一倍。
English: Princess Changle is about to marry her eldest grandchild Zhong. Emperor Taizong is particularly fond of the princess, who is the queen's own child, and has ordered relevant departments to provide twice as many escorts for her as for her aunt, Princess Yongjia.

古文：魏征谏曰； 昔汉明帝欲封皇子，曰： 我子岂得与先帝子比！ 
现代文：魏徵劝谏说： 过去汉明帝想要分封皇子采邑，说： 我的儿子怎么能和先帝的儿子相比呢？ 
English: Wei Zheng exhorted, "In the past, Emperor Hanming wanted to divide the imperial title between his sons, saying, 'How can my son be compared to the son of the previous emperor?'

古文：皆令半楚、淮阳。
现代文：均令分给楚王、淮阳王封地的一半。
English: It was ordered that half of the fiefs of King Chu and King Huaiyang be divided equally.

古文：今资送公主，倍于长主，得无异于明帝之意乎！ 
现代文：如今公主的陪送，比长公主多一倍，岂不是与汉明帝的意思相差太远吗？ 
English: Nowadays, the princess's escort is twice as much as that of the eldest princess. Isn't that too far from the meaning of Emperor Hanming?

古文：上然其言，入告皇后。后叹曰： 妾亟闻陛下称重魏征，不知其故，今观其引礼义以抑人主之情，乃知真社稷之臣也！
现代文：太宗觉得有理，进宫中告知皇后，皇后感慨系之： 我总是听得陛下称赞魏徵，不知是什么缘故，如今见其引征礼义来抑制君王的私情，这真是辅佑陛下的栋梁大臣呀！
English: Emperor Taizong felt justified, and informed the Empress on entering the palace. The Empress was moved: "I have always heard Your Majesty praise Wei Zheng. I don't know why, but now I see that he has invoked propriety to restrain the monarch's private feelings. This is truly a pillar minister to assist Your Majesty!"

古文：妾与陛下结发为夫妇，曲承恩礼，每言必先候颜色，不敢轻犯威严；况以人臣之疏远，乃能抗言如是，陛下不可不从也。 
现代文：我与陛下是多年的结发夫妻，多蒙恩宠礼遇，每次讲话还都要察言观色，不敢轻易冒犯您的威严。何况大臣与陛下较为疏远，还能如此直言强谏，陛下不能不听从其意见。 
English: Your Majesty and I have been husband and wife for many years, and we have been treated with great grace and courtesy. Every time I speak, I have to watch my words and not easily offend your majesty. Moreover, the minister is more distant from Your Majesty, but he can also be so outspoken and forceful, and Your Majesty cannot but listen to his opinion.

古文：因请遣中使赍钱四百缗、绢四百匹以赐征，且语之曰： 闻公正直，乃今见之，故以相赏。
现代文：于是皇后请求太宗派宦官去魏徵家中，赏赐给四百缗钱，四百匹绢。并且对他说： 听说您十分正直，今日得以亲见，所以赏赐这些。
English: Then the queen asked the eunuch of the Taizong sect to go to Wei Zhao's house and reward him with four hundred taels of money and four hundred horses, and said to him, "I heard that you are very honest and I was able to see you in person today, so I reward you with these."

古文：公宜常秉此心，勿转移也。 
现代文：希望您经常秉持此忠心，不要有所迁移。 
English: I hope that you will always keep this loyalty and not relocate.

古文：上尝罢朝，怒曰： 会须杀此田舍翁。 
现代文：有一次太宗曾罢朝回到宫中，怒气冲冲地说： 以后找机会一定杀了这个乡巴佬。 
English: On one occasion, Emperor Taizong went back to the palace and angrily said, "I will definitely kill this country bumpkin when I get the chance."

古文：后问为谁，上曰： 魏征每廷辱我。 
现代文：皇后问是谁惹怒陛下，太宗说： 魏徵常在朝堂上羞辱我。 
English: When the empress asked who provoked her majesty, Taizong said: Wei Zheng often humiliated me in the morning hall.

古文：后退，具朝服立于庭，上惊问其故。
现代文：皇后退下，穿上朝服站在庭院内，太宗惊奇地问这是何故。
English: The empress stepped back, put on her court dress and stood in the courtyard. Taizong was surprised and asked why.

古文：后曰： 妾闻主明臣直；今魏征直，由陛下之明故也，妾敢不贺！ 
现代文：皇后说： 我听说君主开明则臣下正直，如今魏徵正直敢言，是因为陛下的开明，我怎能不祝贺呢！ 
English: The empress said, "I have heard that when the monarch is open-minded, his subjects will be honest. Today, I dare to say that Wei Zheng's honesty is because of His Majesty's openness. How can I not congratulate him!

古文：上乃悦。
现代文：太宗才转怒为喜。
English: Only then did Taizong's anger turn to joy.

古文：夏，四月，辛卯，襄州都督邹襄公张公谨卒。
现代文：夏季四月，辛卯，襄州都督、邹襄公张公谨去世。
English: In the summer of April, Xinwu, the governor of Xiangzhou, Zhang Gongjun, passed away.

古文：明日，上出次发哀。
现代文：第二天，太宗出车辇发丧。
English: The next day, Taizong drove to the funeral.

古文：有司奏，辰日忌哭。
现代文：有关部门上奏称，这一天是辰日，忌讳哭泣。
English: Relevant departments reported that this day is the Day of the Dragon, and it is taboo to cry.

古文：上曰： 君之于臣，犹父子也，情发于衷，安避辰日！ 
现代文：太宗说： 君与臣同父子关系，哀痛哭泣是感情自然流露，怎么能避忌日呢！ 
English: Taizong said, "You and your minister have a father-son relationship. Crying with grief is a natural outpouring of emotion. How can you avoid the day?

古文：遂哭之。
现代文：于是痛哭一场。
English: So she wept bitterly.

古文：六月，己亥，金州刺史酆悼王元亨薨。
现代文：六月，己亥，金州刺史酆悼王李元亨去世。
English: In June, Ji Hai, Jinzhou Sashihong mourned the death of King Li Yuanheng.

古文：辛亥，江王嚣薨。
现代文：辛亥，江王李嚣去世。
English: On the 29th, Jiang Wang Li Ren passed away.

古文：秋，七月，丙辰，焉耆王突骑支遣使入贡。
现代文：秋季，七月，丙辰，焉耆王突骑支派使节献贡品。
English: In the autumn, in July, the envoys of the King's Cavalry Tribal Troops came to pay tribute.

古文：初，焉耆入中国由碛路，隋末闭塞，道由高昌；突骑支请复开碛路以便往来，上许之。
现代文：起初，焉耆从沙漠到达中原王朝，隋朝末年关闭塞北地区，便改道高昌。突骑支请求重开沙漠故道相互往来，太宗允许。
English: At first, Yan Xuan reached the Central Plains Dynasty from the desert, but at the end of the Sui Dynasty, when the northern region of Sai was closed, he changed the route to Gaochang. The Tukai branch requested to reopen the old desert route for mutual exchanges, which was allowed by Taizong.

古文：由是高昌恨之，遣兵袭焉耆，大掠而去。
现代文：于是高昌怀恨在心，派兵突袭焉耆，大肆掠夺而后离去。
English: As a result, Gaochang harbored a grudge and sent troops to raid Yancheng, plundered it and then left.

古文：辛未，宴三品已上于丹霄殿。
现代文：辛未，太宗在丹霄殿大宴三品以上官员。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong held a grand banquet for officials with three or more prizes at Danshaodeng.

古文：上从容言曰： 中外又安，皆公卿之力。
现代文：太宗语气和缓地说： 中外安定，都是你们的功劳。
English: In a gentle tone, Taizong said, "The stability of China and other countries is all thanks to you.

古文：然隋炀帝威加夷、夏，颉利跨有北荒，统叶护雄据西域，今皆覆亡，此乃朕与公等所亲见，勿矜强盛以自满也！ 
现代文：然而隋炀帝威风八面一统天下，颉利跨有北部广大地区，统叶护占据西域一带，如今它们都已灭亡，这是朕与大家亲眼得见，希望你们不要因为一时强盛而自满起来。 
English: However, the emperors of the Sui and Qin Dynasties ruled the world in all directions, the Qin Dynasty spanned a vast area in the north, and the Qin Dynasty occupied the western region, and now they have all perished. This is what I and you can see with your own eyes. I hope you will not be complacent because you were strong for a while.

古文：西突厥肆叶护可汗发兵击薛延陀，为薛延陀所败。
现代文：西突厥肆叶护可汗发兵袭击薜延陀，被薜延陀击败。
English: The Western Turks, led by Ye Guo Khan, attacked Yan Tuo and were defeated by Yan Tuo.

古文：肆叶护性猜狠，信谗；有乙利可汗，功最多，肆叶护以非其族类，诛灭之，由是诸部皆不自保。
现代文：肆叶护狠毒猜忌听信谗言，有个乙利可汗，功劳最大，肆叶护以其并非本族，将他杀掉，于是各部落均难以自保。
English: Wabi-Sabi's venomous suspicions turned out to be true. There was a Bili Khan, who had the greatest merit, and Wabi-Sabi killed him because he was not from his own tribe. As a result, it was difficult for all tribes to protect themselves.

古文：肆叶护又忌莫贺设之子泥孰，阴欲图之，泥孰奔焉耆。
现代文：肆叶护又忌恨莫贺设的儿子泥孰，阴谋要除掉他，泥孰得知后急忙投奔焉耆。
English: Shihabego also hated Mogaeshi's son, Mudan, and plotted to get rid of him. When Mudan learned of this, he hurried to the capital.

古文：设卑达官与弩失毕二部攻之，肆叶护轻骑奔康居，寻卒。
现代文：西突厥属下的设卑达官和弩失毕二个部落进攻肆叶护，肆叶护率轻骑兵逃奔康居，不久死去。
English: After the two tribes under the Western Turks, the Shi Baidakun and the Qin, lost the battle, they attacked Zhobao. Zhobao's light cavalry fled to Kangju and died soon after.

古文：国人迎泥孰于焉耆而立之，是为咄陆可汗，遣使内附。
现代文：西突厥人前往焉耆迎接泥孰，立为可汗，这便是咄可汗，咄派使节到唐朝请求归附。
English: The Western Turks went to Yancheng to meet Mudan and became khans. This was the time when the khans sent envoys to the Tang Dynasty to request annexation.

古文：丁酉，遣鸿胪少卿刘善因立咄陆为奚利邲咄陆可汗。
现代文：丁酉，唐帝国派遣鸿胪寺少卿刘善因前往突厥，立咄为奚利咄可汗。
English: Ding Xi, the Tang Empire sent Liu Xian, the Shaoqing of Hongye Temple, to Turkey, and he became the Goryeo Khan.

古文：闰月，乙卯，上宴近臣于丹霄殿，长孙无忌曰； 王珪、魏征，昔为仇雠，不谓今日得同此宴。 
现代文：闰八月，乙卯，太宗在丹霄殿大宴亲近的大臣，长孙无忌说： 王、魏徵二人，以前侍奉太子李建成，与陛下为敌，难以料到今日能在此一同饮宴。 
English: In late August, the eldest grandson of a minister who was close to Emperor Taizong at a grand banquet at the Danshaodun Palace said, "The two kings, Wei Zheng, formerly served the crown prince, Li Jiancheng, and were enemies of His Majesty. It is hard to expect that we can have a banquet together here today."

古文：上曰： 征、珪尽心所事，故我用之。
现代文：太宗说： 魏徵与王尽心竭力地侍奉原来的主人，所以我能重用他们。
English: Taizong said, "Weizhong and Wang devoted themselves to serving their former masters, so I can use them again.

古文：然征每谏，我不从，我与之言辄不应，何也？ 
现代文：然而魏徵每次进谏，我不听从；我与他讲话，他也总是不做应答，为什么呢？ 
English: However, every time Wei Zheng comes to the door, I don't listen; when I talk to him, he always doesn't answer, why?

古文：魏征对曰： 臣以事为不可，故谏；若陛下不从而臣应之，则事遂施行，故不敢应。 
现代文：魏徵回答说： 我认为事情不可行，所以谏阻；陛下不听从谏阻而我如果答话，那么事情便得到施行，所以不敢应答。 
English: Wei Zheng replied: I think the matter is not feasible, so I oppose it; Your Majesty does not listen to the opposition, and if I answer, then the matter will be implemented, so I dare not answer.

古文：上曰： 且应而复谏，庸何伤！ 
现代文：太宗说： 暂且应答而后再谏阻，又有什么伤害呢？ 
English: Taizong said, "What's the harm in answering for a while and then resisting?"

古文：对曰： 昔舜戒郡臣： 尔无面从，退有后言。 
现代文：答道： 过去舜帝告诫群臣： 你们不要当面顺从，而背后却说另一套。 
English: Answer: In the past, Emperor Xuan warned his courtiers: Don't obey in front of others, but say something else behind their backs.

古文：臣心知其非而口应陛下，乃面从也，岂稷、契事舜之意邪！ 
现代文：如果我心里知道不对嘴上却答应陛下的意见，这正是当面顺从。难道这是稷、契侍奉舜帝的本意吗！ 
English: If I know in my heart that it is not right, but I agree to your majesty's opinion, this is exactly obeying in person. Is this the intention of serving the emperor?

古文：上大笑曰： 人言魏征举止疏慢，我视之更觉妩媚，正为此耳！ 
现代文：太宗大笑着说： 人们都说魏徵行为举止粗鲁傲慢，我看他更觉得妩媚可爱，正是因为如此呀！ 
English: Taizong said with a big smile, "People say that Wei Zheng is rude and arrogant, but I think he is even more charming and lovely, that's why!"

古文：征起，拜谢曰： 陛下开臣使言，故臣得尽其愚，若陛下拒而不受，臣何敢数犯颜色乎！ 
现代文：魏徵离席起身，拜谢道： 陛下引导让我畅所欲言，所以我得以尽愚诚；如果陛下拒不接受忠言，我又怎么敢屡次犯颜强谏呢！ 
English: Wei Zheng got up from his seat and said with thanks: His Majesty guided me to speak freely, so I was able to be honest; if His Majesty refused to accept the advice, how could I dare to repeatedly make a fool of myself!

古文：戊辰，秘书少监虞世南上《圣德论》，上赐手诏，称： 卿论太高。
现代文：戊辰，秘书少监虞世南进呈《圣德论》一文，太宗赐给手书诏令称： 你的评价太高了。
English: When Wu Chen, the secretary of the minor procurator Yu Shennan, submitted an article on "Sacred Virtue," Emperor Taizong gave him a written edict saying: Your evaluation is too high.

古文：朕何敢拟上古！但比近世差胜耳。
现代文：朕怎么敢与上古帝王相比，只是与近代相比略强些。
English: How dare I compare myself to ancient emperors, I am only slightly better than modern emperors.

古文：然卿适睹其始，未知其终。
现代文：然而你只是刚刚看见开头，未知其终结。
English: But you have only seen the beginning, you don't know the end.

古文：若朕能慎终如始，则此论可传；如或不然，恐徒使后世笑卿也。 
现代文：如果朕真能善始善终，那么你的高论可传之后世；如若不然，恐怕只会成为后世的笑柄！ 
English: If I can truly have a good beginning and a good end, then your high opinion can be passed on to posterity; if not, I'm afraid it will only become the laughing stock of posterity!

古文：九月，己酉，幸庆善宫，上生时故宅也，因与贵臣宴，赋诗。
现代文：九月，己酉，太宗临幸庆善宫，这是太宗出生时的旧宅。于是和显贵饮酒赋诗。
English: In September, at Jiwu, Taizong went to Qingzen Palace, the former residence of Taizong at the time of his birth, and drank wine with the dignitaries.

古文：起居郎清平吕才被之管弦，命曰： 《功成庆善乐》，使童子八佾为《九功之舞》，大宴会，与《破陈舞》偕奏于庭。
现代文：起居郎、清平人吕才，将赋诗谱成曲弹奏，命名为《功成庆善乐》，让六十四名少年站成八行依乐而舞，称《九功之舞》。又大摆酒宴，与《秦王破阵舞》一同在宫庭中表演。
English: Kikujuro, a member of the Qing dynasty, Lu Cai, composed and played a fuxi poem and named it "Gongcheng Qing Zhenle" (功成庆善樂). Sixty-four boys stood in eight lines and danced to the music, calling it the "Dance of Nine Merits." There was also a grand wine banquet, and it was performed in the palace courtyard together with "Qin Wang Break Dance."

古文：同州刺史尉迟敬德预宴，有班在其上者，敬德怒曰： 汝何功，坐我上！ 
现代文：同州刺史尉迟敬德参加宴席，见到有人的席位在他之上，勃然大怒，说道： 你有何功劳，竟然坐在我的上方。 
English: When he saw someone sitting on top of him, he flew into a rage and said, "How dare you sit on top of me?

古文：任城王道宗次其下，谕解之。
现代文：任城王李道宗坐在他的下首，反复劝解。
English: The appointed king of the city, Li Daozong, sat at his feet and repeatedly tried to persuade him.

古文：敬德拳殴道宗，目几眇。
现代文：尉迟敬德用拳头殴打李道宗，眼睛被打得几乎瞎了一只。
English: Lieutenant Xi Jingde beat Li Daozong with his fist, and was almost blinded in one eye.

古文：上不怿而罢，谓敬德曰： 朕见汉高祖诛灭功臣，意常尤之，故欲与卿等共保富贵，令子孙不绝。
现代文：太宗很不高兴地罢宴，对尉迟敬德说： 朕见汉高祖刘邦大肆诛杀功臣，内心常常责怪他，所以想和你们一道共同保持富贵，令子子孙孙延绵不绝。
English: Emperor Taizong was very unhappy to leave the banquet, and said to Lieutenant Qi Jingde: I saw Liu Bang, the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, killing heroes and heroines. My heart often blames him, so I want to work with you to maintain wealth, so that our children and grandchildren will continue.

古文：然卿居官数犯法，乃知韩、彭菹醢，非高祖之罪也。
现代文：然而你身居高官却屡次犯法，由此可知韩信、彭越被碎尸万段、剁成肉酱，并非只是高祖的罪过。
English: However, you, as a high-ranking official, have repeatedly violated the law. From this, we can see that Han Xin and Peng Yue's corpses were chopped into thousands of pieces and minced into meat sauce, which is not just the fault of Gao Zu.

古文：国家纲纪，唯赏与罚，非分之恩，不可数得，勉自修饬，无贻后悔！ 
现代文：朝廷的纲纪法令，无非是赏与罚，非分的恩遇，也不能几次得到，深望你好自为之，不要到时后悔都来不及！ 
English: The discipline laws of the imperial court are nothing more than rewards and punishments, undeserved favors, and can not be obtained several times. I sincerely hope that you will do it yourself, and that you will not regret it when the time comes!

古文：敬德由是始惧而自戢。
现代文：尉迟敬德从此才知道恐惧而约束自己。
English: It was only then that he knew fear and restrained himself.

古文：冬，十月，乙卯，车驾还京师。
现代文：冬季十月，乙卯，太宗的车驾回到京城。
English: In the winter of October, Yi Wu and Taizong drove back to Beijing.

古文：帝侍上皇宴于大安宫，帝与皇后更献饮膳及服御之物，夜久乃罢。
现代文：太宗在大安宫设酒宴侍奉太上皇，太宗与皇后轮流端上饮食及用具在帝侍候，直到深夜才罢席。
English: Emperor Taizong held a wine banquet at the Da'an Palace to serve the Empress Dowager. Emperor Taizong and Empress Dowager took turns to serve food and utensils to the emperor, and did not leave the table until late at night.

古文：帝亲为上皇捧舆至殿门，上皇不许，命太子代之。
现代文：太宗亲自为太上皇抬轿舆至殿门，太上皇不允许，让太子代劳。
English: Emperor Taizong himself carried the palanquin to the palace gate for the emperor, but the emperor did not allow it, and let the prince do the work instead.

古文：突厥颉利可汗郁郁不得意，数与家人相对悲泣，容貌羸惫。
现代文：突厥颉利可汗郁郁不得志，多次与家里人相对哭泣，面容十分的疲惫。
English: Turk Geli Khan was depressed and discouraged. He cried many times in front of his family, and his face was very tired.

古文：上见而怜之，以虢州地多麋鹿，可以游猎，乃以颉利为虢州刺史；颉利辞，不愿往。
现代文：太宗见到后非常可怜他，当时虢州地带有很多麋鹿活动，可以游猎，太宗便任命颉利为虢州刺史。颉利辞谢，不愿意前往。
English: When Emperor Taizong saw him, he felt very sorry for him. At that time, there were a lot of elk activities in the Luzhou area, and it was possible to go hunting. Emperor Taizong then appointed Gong Li as the governor of Luzhou. Gong Li declined and did not want to go.

古文：癸未，复以为右卫大将军。
现代文：癸未，又任命他为右卫大将军。
English: Soon after, he was also appointed to the post of Ueidai shogun.

古文：十一月，辛巳，契苾酋长何力帅部落六千馀家诣沙州降，诏处之于甘、凉之间，以何力为左领军将军。
现代文：十一月，辛巳，契族首领何力率领本部落六千多家前往沙州投降大唐，太宗下诏将他们安置在甘、凉之间，任命何力为左领军将军。
English: In November, Xin Si, the leader of the Che tribe, He Li, led more than six thousand members of his tribe to Shazhou to surrender to Datang. Emperor Taizong issued an edict placing them between Gan and Liang and appointed He Li as the general leading the left army.

古文：庚寅，以左光禄大夫陈叔达为礼部尚书。
现代文：庚寅，任命左光禄大夫陈叔达为礼部尚书。
English: Gyeongin appointed Dr. Chen Shuda, a doctor of the Left Guanglu School, as the head of the etiquette department.

古文：帝谓叔达曰： 卿武德中有谠言，故以此官相报。 
现代文：太宗对陈叔达说： 你在武德年间曾直言劝太上皇反隋，所以封你为此官以相报答。 
English: Emperor Taizong said to Chen Shuda, "During your martial arts years, you directly advised the Emperor to oppose the Sui Dynasty, so I rewarded you with this post.

古文：对曰： 臣见隋室父子相残，以取乱亡，当日之言，非为陛下，乃社稷之计耳。 
现代文：答道： 我当时见隋朝父子相互残害，建议乘乱取而代之，当时的话，并非为陛下考虑，而是为社稷打算啊！ 
English: Answer: At that time, I saw the Sui Dynasty father and son killing each other, and I suggested replacing it with chaos. At that time, it was not for His Majesty to consider, but for the society to plan!

古文：十二月，癸丑，帝与侍臣论安危之本。
现代文：十二日，癸丑，太宗与大臣们讨论安危的根本所在。
English: On the 12th, in Shougu, Taizong and the ministers discussed the root cause of the crisis.

古文：中书令温彦博曰： 伏愿陛下常如贞观初，则善矣。 
现代文：中书令温彦博说： 深愿陛下能经常像贞观初年那样，那就好了。 
English: In the middle of the letter, Emperor Wen said, "I sincerely hope that Your Majesty can always be as virtuous as you were in the first year of your chastity, that would be fine."

古文：帝曰： 朕比来怠于为政乎？ 
现代文：太宗问： 朕近来听政有所懈怠吗？ 
English: Taizong asked: Have I slacked off in listening to politics recently?

古文：魏征曰： 贞观之初，陛下志在节俭，求谏不倦。
现代文：魏徵说： 贞观初年的时候，陛下一心节俭，不倦怠地求谏。
English: Wei Zheng said: In the first year of Zhenguan, his majesty was frugal and tirelessly asked for money.

古文：比来营缮微多，谏者颇有忤旨，此其所以异耳。 
现代文：近来则营建修缮之类的事渐渐多起来。行谏都颇觉得触犯圣意，这就是与当年的不同处。 
English: Recently, there has been a gradual increase in the number of construction and renovation projects, and everyone feels that they are offending the sacred, which is the difference from the previous year.

古文：帝拊掌大笑曰： 诚有是事！ 
现代文：太宗拍掌大笑着说： 确有其事。 
English: Taizong clapped his hands and said with a big smile, "It's true.

古文：辛未，帝亲录系囚，见应死者，闵之，纵使归家，期以来秋来就死。
现代文：辛未，太宗亲自过录监狱囚犯，见到应处死刑的人，内心怜悯他们，放他们回家，但约定明年秋季回来就死。
English: Xinwei, Taizong personally visited the prison inmates, saw the people who should be sentenced to death, felt sorry for them, let them go home, but agreed to come back next fall and die.

古文：仍敕天下死囚，皆纵遣，使至期来诣京师。
现代文：于是下令全国的死刑犯人，均放他们回家，等到期限到了的时候赶到京城。
English: He then ordered that all death-row prisoners in the country be allowed to go home, and when the time came, they were to rush to the capital.

古文：是岁，党项等羌前后内属者三十万口。
现代文：这一年，党项羌族人前后有三十万口归附大唐。
English: In that year, around 300,000 Dong people were annexed to Datang by the party.

古文：公卿以下请封禅者首尾相属，上谕以 旧有气疾，恐登高增剧，公等勿复言。 
现代文：当时公卿以下大臣请求太宗行封禅礼的络绎不绝，太宗传谕认为： 朕有气喘的老毛病，恐怕登高会加剧，你们不必再谈论此事。 
English: At that time, the court nobles and the following ministers requested Taizong to perform the endless stream of the enthronement ceremony. Taizong's envoy thought: I have the old problem of asthma, I'm afraid the ascent will be aggravated, you don't have to talk about it anymore.

古文：上谓侍臣曰： 朕比来决事或不能皆如律令，公辈以为事小，不复执奏。
现代文：太宗对亲近的大臣说： 近来朕裁决事务有时不能够尽依法令，你们认为这是小事，不再固执地启奏。
English: Emperor Taizong said to the ministers close to him, "Recently, I have sometimes been unable to adjudicate matters in full accordance with the law. You think this is a minor matter, and no longer insist on opening the recital.

古文：夫事无不由小以致大，此乃危亡之端也。
现代文：凡事无不因小而致大，这是危亡的先兆。
English: All things grow great out of small beginnings, and this is the prelude to peril.

古文：昔关龙逄忠谏而死，朕每痛之。
现代文：从前关龙逄忠诚苦谏而死去，朕常常觉得痛惜。
English: In the past, I often felt sorry for Guan Longtao, who died a loyal and bitter death.

古文：炀帝骄暴而亡，公辈所亲见也。
现代文：隋炀帝因骄奢暴虐而灭亡，你们都亲眼所见。
English: You have all seen with your own eyes that Emperor Sui and Qian died as a result of arrogance and tyranny.

古文：公辈常宜为朕思炀帝之亡，朕常为公辈念关龙逄之死，何患君臣不相保乎！ 
现代文：望你们经常为朕考虑到炀帝的灭亡，朕也经常为你们念及关龙逄的死，如此还担心君臣不能相互保全吗？ 
English: I hope that you will always consider the demise of Emperor Xizong for me, and I will always remember the death of Guan Longyu for you. Are you so worried that princes and ministers cannot protect each other?

古文：上谓魏征曰： 为官择人，不可造次。
现代文：太宗对魏徵说： 因官职而去选择人才，不可仓促行事。
English: Taizong said to Wei Zheng: You should not act hastily when selecting talents because of their official positions.

古文：用一君子，则君子皆至；用一小人，则小人竞进矣。 
现代文：任用一位君子，则众位君子都会来到；任用一位小人，则其他小人竞相引进。 
English: If you appoint a gentleman, all the gentlemen will come; if you appoint a villain, the other villains will compete to be introduced.

古文：对曰： 然。
现代文：答道： 是这样。
English: Zi Lu said: Yes.

古文：癸巳，宴三品已上及州牧、蛮夷酋长于玄武门，奏《七德》、《九功》之舞。
现代文：天下未平定时，则对于一个人专取其才能，并不看重和考察其德行；动乱平定后，则不是德才兼备的人才不能使用。 
English: When the world is not pacified, a person's talent is not valued and his virtue is not examined; after the turmoil is pacified, a person who is not both a talent and a virtue cannot be used.

古文：太常卿萧瑀上言： 《七德舞》形容圣功，有所未尽，请写刘武周、薛仁果、窦建德、王世充等擒获之状。 
现代文：贞观七年春季，正月，将《秦王破阵乐》改名为《七德舞》。癸巳，太宗在玄武门宴请三品以上官员、州牧、夷族首领，演奏《七德舞》和《九功舞》。太常寺正卿萧上书言道： 《七德舞》用来表现皇上的丰功伟业，但意犹未尽，请求编入刘武周、薛仁果、窦建德、王世充等人被擒获的过程。 
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Zhenguan, in the first month, the "Qin Wang Break Dance" was renamed the "Seven Virtues Dance." Soon after, Emperor Taizong invited more than three officials, state pastors, and leaders of the Yi nationality to a banquet at the Xuanwu Gate to perform the "Seven Virtues Dance" and the "Nine Virtues Dance." Xiao Shang, the chief priest of Taizhong Temple, wrote: "The "Seven Virtues Dance" is used to express the emperor's great achievements and great deeds, but the meaning is still incomplete, and it is requested to be included in the process of Liu Wuzhou,

古文：上曰： 彼皆一时英雄，今朝廷之臣往往尝北面事之，若睹其故主屈辱之状，能不伤其心乎？ 
现代文：太宗说： 他们都是一时的英雄豪杰，如今朝廷的大臣很多是他们的臣下，如果他们看见旧主子的屈辱之态，能不伤心吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "They were all heroes and heroines at one time. Today, many ministers of the imperial court are their vassals. If they see the humiliated state of their former masters, can they not feel sad?

古文：瑀谢曰： 此非臣愚虑所及。 
现代文：萧拜谢道： 这些是我所未考虑到的。 
English: Xiao Bai Xie said: These are things I have never considered.

古文：魏征欲上偃武修文，每侍宴，见《七德舞》辄俯首不视，见《九功舞》则谛观之。
现代文：魏徵想要太宗停止武备，提倡文教，每次陪太宗饮宴，见到演奏《七德舞》时都低下头故意不看，见到《九功舞》则非常认真地观看。
English: Wei Zheng wanted Emperor Taizong to stop military preparations and promote literature and education. Every time he accompanied Emperor Taizong to a banquet, he bowed his head when he saw the performance of the "Seven Virtues Dance" and deliberately did not watch it. When he saw the "Nine Virtues Dance," he watched it very carefully.

古文：三月，戊子，侍中王珪坐漏泄禁中语，左迁同州刺史。
现代文：三月，戊子，侍中王因泄漏朝廷机密而致罪，降为同州刺史。
English: In March, Boshi, the courtier of the middle king, was found guilty of leaking the secrets of the imperial court, and was reduced to the same state.

古文：庚寅，以秘书监魏征为侍中。
现代文：庚寅，任命秘书监魏徵为侍中。
English: Geng Yin, appointed the secretary, Guan Wei Zheng, as a chamberlain.

古文：直太史雍人李淳风奏灵台候仪制度疏略，但有赤道，请更造浑天黄道仪，许之。
现代文：直太史、雍县人李淳风上奏称灵台候仪制造的过于粗略，只有赤道，请求改造一个浑天黄道仪，太宗准许。
English: Zhengtai Shi and Li Chun, a resident of Yong County, said that the Lingdai horoscope instrument was made too roughly, only the equator, and requested the transformation of an all-sky horoscope instrument, which was approved by Taizong.

古文：癸巳，成而奏之。
现代文：癸巳，上奏太宗浑天黄道仪已制成。
English: Soon after, the Shangso Taizong Hunten Wreath Zodiac was made.

古文：夏，五月，癸未，上幸九成宫。
现代文：夏季，五月，癸未，太宗临幸九成宫。
English: In the summer, in May, in the evening, Taizong Linxing Jiuzhen Temple is in full bloom.

古文：雅州道行军总管张士贵击反獠，破之。
现代文：雅州道行军总管张士贵率兵进攻反叛的獠民，大败獠军。
English: Zhang Shigui, the general manager of the march of Yazhou Road, led the troops to attack the rebellious Min people and defeated the Min army.

古文：秋，八月，乙丑，左屯卫大将军谯敬公周范卒。
现代文：秋季，八月，乙丑，左屯卫大将军谯敬公周范去世。
English: In the autumn, in August, in the second ugliness, the General of the Left Tun Guards, Gong Jinggong Zhou Fan, passed away.

古文：上行幸，常令范与房玄龄居守。
现代文：太宗出外巡幸的时候，常常命周范与房玄龄一道留守京城。
English: When Emperor Taizong went out on inspection tours, he often left Zhou Fan and Fang Xuanling behind in the capital.

古文：范为人忠笃严正，疾甚，不肯出外，竟终于内省，与玄龄相抱而诀曰： 所恨不获再奉圣颜！ 
现代文：周范为人忠厚正直，病得很厉害，不肯离开皇宫，最后死于内省。临死前与房玄龄相抱诀别，说： 遗憾的是不能再侍奉皇上了。 
English: Zhou Fan was a loyal and honest person. He was very ill and refused to leave the imperial palace. Finally, he died of introspection. Before his death, he said goodbye to Fang Xuanling, saying: "Unfortunately, I can no longer serve the emperor."

古文：辛未，以张士贵为龚州道行军总管，使击反獠。
现代文：辛未，朝廷任命张士贵为龚州道行军总管，让他进攻反叛的獠人。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Zhang Shigui as the general manager of the march of Zhangzhou Road, and asked him to attack the rebellious Xiang people.

古文：九月，山东、河南四十馀州水，遣使赈之。
现代文：九月，山东、河南四十多个州发大水，太宗派使臣前往赈济。
English: In September, more than 40 counties in Shandong and Henan provinces were hit by floods, and envoys from the Tai Sect went to Handan.

古文：去岁所纵天下死囚凡三百九十人，无人督帅，皆如期自诣朝堂，无一人亡匿者；上皆赦之。
现代文：上一年放回家中的死囚犯人共三百九十人，没有人监视管制，都按期限自己回到朝堂，没有一个人逃亡，太宗将他们全部赦免。
English: Last year, a total of 390 death-row prisoners were released to their families. There was no monitoring or control, and they all returned to the Imperial Palace on their own accord according to the time limit. No one escaped, and Emperor Taizong pardoned them all.

古文：冬，十月，庚申，上还京师。
现代文：冬季十月，庚申，太宗回到京都长安。
English: In the winter of October, Koshin and Taizong returned to Kyoto and Chang'an.

古文：十一月，壬辰，以开府仪同三司长孙无忌为司空，无忌固辞曰： 臣忝预外戚，恐天下谓陛下为私。 
现代文：十一月，壬辰，朝廷任命开府仪同三司长孙无忌为司空，长孙无忌执意推辞，说： 我忝列外戚，担心天下人说陛下循私情。 
English: In November, Imjin, the imperial court appointed Kaifu Yi and the three chiefs of the three chiefs of the three chiefs of the three chiefs of the three chiefs of the three chiefs of the three chiefs of the three chiefs of the three chiefs of the three chiefs of the three chiefs of the three chiefs.

古文：上不许，曰： 吾为官择人，惟才是与。
现代文：太宗不允许，说： 我根据官职来选择人，惟才是举。
English: Emperor Taizong did not allow it, saying, "I choose people according to their official positions, but it is up to you."

古文：苟或不才，虽亲不用，襄邑王神符是也；如其有才，虽仇不弃，魏征等是也。
现代文：如果没有才能，即使是亲属也不使用，襄邑王李神符就是这样的人；如果有才能，即使过去有仇也不弃置，魏徵等人就是如此。
English: If there is no talent, even relatives will not use it, such as Xiangyuan Wang Li Shenfu; if there is talent, even if there are enemies in the past, they will not abandon it, such as Wei Zheng.

古文：今日之举，非私亲也。 
现代文：今日推举你为司空，并不是循私情。 
English: Today's choice of you as the CEO is not based on personal feelings.

古文：十二月，甲寅，上幸芙蓉园；丙辰，校猎少陵原。
现代文：十二月，甲寅，太宗巡幸芙蓉园；丙辰，又到少陵原围猎。
English: In December, Jia Yin and Taizong toured the Hibiscus Garden; Hsin Chen also went to Shaolingyuan to hunt.

古文：戊午，还宫，从上皇置酒故汉未央宫。
现代文：戊午，回到宫中，在汉代未央宫旧址侍奉太上皇饮宴。
English: At noon, he returned to the Imperial Palace and served the Emperor at a banquet at the former site of the Han Dynasty's Miyang Palace.

古文：上皇命突厥颉利可汗起舞，又命南蛮酋长冯智戴咏诗，既而笑曰： 胡、越一家，自古未有也！ 
现代文：太上皇命令突厥颉利可汗起身作舞，又命南蛮首领冯智戴吟咏诗赋，不久，笑着说： 胡、越等族都是一家人，这是自古以来没有的事！ 
English: The emperor ordered the Turkic Qili Khan to get up and dance, and ordered the Nanban leader Feng Zhidai to chant poems. Soon, he said with a smile: Hu, Yue and other ethnic groups are all one family, which has not happened since ancient times!

古文：帝奉觞上寿曰： 今四夷入臣，皆陛下教诲，非臣智力所及。
现代文：太宗端着酒杯为太上皇祝寿，说： 如今四方民族为我大唐臣民，这都是父亲您教诲的结果，不是我的智力所能及。
English: Taizong, holding a wine glass, congratulated the Emperor on his birthday, saying, "Today, the people of Shifang are my Datang subjects. This is all the result of your father's teachings, and is beyond my intellect.

古文：昔汉高祖亦从太上皇置酒此宫，妄自矜大，臣所不取也。 
现代文：从前汉高祖曾在此宫中为其父摆酒祝寿，妄自尊大，我不取他这一点。 
English: Once upon a time, the founder of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gaozong, celebrated his father's birthday with a toast in this palace. I don't blame him for being arrogant.

古文：上皇大悦。
现代文：太上皇大为高兴。
English: The Empress Dowager was delighted.

古文：殿上皆呼万岁。
现代文：殿堂上众人齐呼万岁。
English: Everyone in the hall of fame shouted "Long live."

古文：帝谓左庶子于志宁、右庶子杜正伦曰： 朕年十八，犹在民间，民之疾苦情伪，无不知之。
现代文：太宗对左庶子于志宁、右庶子杜正伦说： 朕年十八的时候，还在民间，百姓的疾苦与真伪，都非常了解。
English: Taizong said to Yu Shining, the left child, and Du Zhenglun, the right child: When I was 18 years old, I was still in the folk, and I understood the people's suffering and truth and falsehood very well.

古文：及居大位，区处世务，犹有差失。
现代文：等到即皇位，处理日常事务还有失误。
English: Once on the throne, there have been missteps in handling day-to-day affairs.

古文：况太子生长深宫，百姓艰难，耳目所未涉，能无骄逸乎？
现代文：何况太子生长在深宫，老百姓的艰难困苦，听不见看不到，能不产生骄逸吗？
English: What's more, the crown prince grew up in a deep palace, the hardships of the common people, can't hear, can't see, can't produce pride?

古文：卿等不可不极谏。 
现代文：你们不能不极力强谏！ 
English: You can't help but try your best!

古文：太子好嬉戏，颇亏礼法，志宁与右庶子孔颖达数直谏，上闻而嘉之，各赐金一斤，帛五百匹。
现代文：太子喜好玩耍，不遵守礼法，于志宁与右庶子孔颖达多次直言劝谏。太宗知道后赞扬他们，各赐给黄金一斤，帛五百匹。
English: The prince liked to play and did not observe the etiquette. He repeatedly advised Yu Zhining and his son-in-law, Kong Yingda. After learning this, Emperor Taizong praised them and gave each of them one catty of gold and five hundred horses.

古文：工部尚书段纶奏征巧工杨思齐，上令试之。
现代文：工部尚书段纶上奏请求征召巧匠杨思齐进宫，太宗让他尝试制做。
English: The Ministry of Works requested that the skilled craftsman Yang Sizi be summoned to the palace, and Emperor Taizong let him try to make the rope.

古文：纶使先造傀儡。
现代文：段纶让杨思齐先造一个木偶。
English: Duan Yu asked Yang Siqi to make a puppet first.

古文：上曰： 得巧工庶供国事，卿令先造戏具，岂百工相戒无作淫巧之意邪！ 
现代文：太宗说： 得到能工巧匠，是希望为国家制造器物，你却让他先造玩具，这难道是众工匠相互告诫不做淫巧器具的本意吗？ 
English: Taizong said, "If you get a skilled craftsman, you hope to make utensils for the country, but you let him make toys first. Is this the intention of all craftsmen to warn each other not to make sex toys?

古文：乃削纶阶。
现代文：于是降低段纶的品阶。
English: As a result, the grade of Duanluo was lowered.

古文：嘉、陵州獠反，命邗江府统军牛进达击破之。
现代文：嘉州、陵州的獠民造反，唐朝命令邗江府统军牛进达将其击败。
English: When the Min people in Jiazhou and Lingzhou rebelled, the Tang Dynasty ordered the Lijiang prefectural unified army of Niu Jinda to defeat them.

古文：上问魏征曰： 群臣上书可采，及召对多失次，何也？ 
现代文：太宗问魏徵： 众位大臣的上书多有可取，等到当面对答时则多语无伦次，为什么呢？ 
English: Taizong asked Wei Zheng: Most of the ministers' letters are desirable, but when they are confronted with the answer, they are incoherent. Why?

古文：对曰： 臣观百司奏事，常数日思之，及至上前，三分不能道一。
现代文：魏徵答道： 我观察各部门上奏言事，常常思考几天，等到了陛下的面前，则三分不能道出一分。
English: Wei Qian replied: I observe the speeches made by various departments, and often think about them for a few days. When I get in front of Your Majesty, I can't utter a single word for three minutes.

古文：况谏者拂意触忌，非陛下借之辞色，岂敢尽其情哉！ 
现代文：况且行谏的人违背圣上的旨意触犯圣上的忌讳，如果不是陛下语色和悦，怎么敢尽情陈述呢？ 
English: Moreover, those who do so violate the sacred taboo against the sacred will. If it were not for His Majesty's tone and pleasure, how would they dare to make a full statement?

古文：上由是接群臣辞色愈温，尝曰： 炀帝多猜忌，临朝对群臣多不语。
现代文：于是太宗接见大臣时语言脸色更加温和，曾说道： 隋炀帝性情多猜忌，每次临朝与群臣相对多不说话。
English: As a result, when Taizong met with the minister, his tone became more moderate. He once said, "The Sui and Qian emperors were rather suspicious, and each time they met with the imperial court, they were more reluctant to speak with the ministers.

古文：朕则不然，与群臣相亲如一体耳。 
现代文：朕则不是这样，与大臣们亲近得如同一个人。 
English: I'm not like that, I'm very close to the ministers as a person.

古文：贞观八年甲午，公元六三四年春，正月，癸未，突厥颉利可汗卒。命国人从其俗，焚尸葬之。
现代文：贞观八年，春季，正月，癸未，突厥颉利可汗去世，太宗命令遵从他们本民族的习惯，焚尸火葬。
English: In the spring, the first month, and the third day of the eighth year of Zhenguan, the Turkic Qili Khan died, and Emperor Taizong ordered that the body be cremated in accordance with the customs of their own people.

古文：辛丑，行军总管张士贵讨东、西王洞反獠，平之。
现代文：辛丑，行军总管张士贵讨伐东、西王洞的反叛獠民，平定了该地区。
English: In Xinwu, Zhang Shigui, the general manager of the march, fought against the rebels in East and West Wangdong and pacified the area.

古文：上欲分遣大臣为诸道黜陟大使，未得其人；李靖荐魏征。
现代文：太宗想要分派大臣为诸道黜陟大使，没有得到合适人选。李靖推荐魏徵。
English: Emperor Taizong wanted to assign a minister to be the ambassador to Zhu Daojun, but did not find a suitable candidate. Li Jing recommended Wei Zheng.

古文：上曰： 征箴规朕失，不可一日离左右。 
现代文：太宗说： 魏徵针砭规劝朕的过失，一天也不能离开身边。 
English: Taizong said, "I cannot leave my side for a single day.

古文：乃命靖与太常卿萧瑀等凡十三人分行天下， 察长吏贤不肖，问民间疾苦，礼高年，赈穷乏，起滞淹，俾使者所至，如朕亲睹。 
现代文：于是命令李靖与太常寺卿萧等共十三人分别巡行全国各地， 考察地方官吏贤能与否，询问民间疾苦，礼遇高寿的老人，赈济穷困百姓，起用埋没已久的人才，做到使者所到之处，如同朕亲自前往一般。 
English: Therefore, he ordered Li Jing and Xiao, the Lord of Taizhong Temple, a total of thirteen people, respectively, to patrol all over the country, to investigate whether local officials are virtuous or not, to inquire about the hardships of the people, to treat the old people with courtesy, to help the poor people, to use the talents that have been buried for a long time, and to make the place where the messenger went, as if I personally went to the general.

古文：三月，庚辰，上幸九成宫。
现代文：三月，庚辰，太宗临幸九成宫。
English: In March, Geng Chen, Emperor Taizong visited the palace.

古文：夏，五月，辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季五月，辛未朔，出现日食。
English: In the summer of May, before the new year, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：初，吐谷浑可汗伏允遣使入贡，未返，大掠鄯州而去。
现代文：起初，吐谷浑可汗伏允派使节到唐朝进献贡品，未返回原地，到鄯州抢掠一番而归。
English: At first, the envoys sent by the Tugu Hunka Khan Fuyun to the Tang Dynasty to pay tribute, did not return to the original place, and returned to Zhangzhou to loot.

古文：上遣使让之，征伏允入朝，称疾不至，仍为其子尊王求婚；上许之，令其亲迎，尊王又不至，乃绝婚，伏允复遣兵寇兰、廓二州。
现代文：太宗派使臣责怪他们，征召伏允到唐朝来，伏允声称有病不来，但为他的儿子尊王求婚；太宗准许，让他们来唐朝迎亲，尊王又不来，于是断绝婚姻。伏允又派兵侵犯兰、廓二州。
English: Emperor Taizong's envoys blamed them and summoned Fuyun to come to the Tang Dynasty. Fuyun claimed that he was ill and would not come, but proposed marriage for his son, King Zun. Emperor Taizong allowed them to come to the Tang Dynasty to meet their relatives, but King Zun did not come, so they broke off the marriage. Fuyun also sent troops to invade the two states of Lan and Gu.

古文：伏允年老，信其臣天柱王之谋，数犯边；又执唐使者赵德楷，上遣使谕之，十返；又引其使者，临轩亲谕以祸福，伏允终无悛心。
现代文：伏允年迈，听信其大臣天柱王的计谋，多次侵犯边境；又软禁大唐使者赵德楷，太宗派使节传谕让其放回赵德楷，如此十次才让返回。太宗带引吐谷浑使者，在殿前平台亲自晓以祸福，伏允最终没有悔改之意。
English: In his old age, Fu Yun listened to the schemes of his minister, Tianzhu Wang, and repeatedly violated the border. He also put the Great Tang Dynasty envoy Zhao Dekai under house arrest. The envoy of the Taizong sect sent him back to Zhao Dekai, and he was allowed to return ten times. Taizong led the emissary of Tugu, and he personally knew the evil and the good on the platform in front of the palace. Fu Yun ultimately had no intention of repentance.

古文：六月，遣左骁卫大将军段志玄为西海道行军总管，左骁卫将军樊兴为赤水道行军总管，将边兵及契苾、党项之众以击之。
现代文：六月，唐朝派遣左骁卫大将军段志玄为西海道行军总管，左骁卫将军樊兴为赤水道行军总管，统率边境地区以及契、党项族的兵力进攻吐谷浑。
English: In June, the Tang Dynasty dispatched Zuo Wei General Duan Shixuan as the general manager of the West Sea Route March, and Zuo Wei General Xing as the general manager of the Equator Route March, to lead the border areas and the troops of the Qi and Dangxiang ethnic groups to attack Tuyugun.

古文：秋，七月，山东、河南、淮、海之间大水。
现代文：秋季七月，山东、河南、淮河、近海一带发大水。
English: In the autumn of July, Shandong, Henan, the Huaihe River, and the coastal areas were flooded.

古文：上屡请上皇避暑九成宫，上皇以隋文帝终于彼，恶之。
现代文：太宗多次请太上皇到九成宫避暑，太上皇以隋文帝曾死于此宫，内心厌恶。
English: Emperor Taizong repeatedly invited the last emperor to spend the summer at Jiu Chenggong Palace. The last emperor, Emperor Sui Wen, had died in this palace, and he was heartily disgusted.

古文：冬，十月，营大明宫，以为上皇清暑之所。
现代文：冬季，十月，营造大明宫，做为太上皇避暑的住所。
English: In winter and October, Daming Palace was built as the summer residence of the emperor.

古文：未成而上皇寝疾，不果居。
现代文：未等修成，太上皇即患病，最后没有住成。
English: Before it was completed, the Emperor fell ill, and it was never finished.

古文：辛丑，段志玄击吐谷浑，破之，追奔八百馀里，去青海三十馀里，吐谷浑驱牧马而遁。
现代文：辛丑，段志玄的军队大败吐谷浑，乘胜追击了八百多里，离青海只有三十多里。吐谷浑人驱赶牧马逃走。
English: Sin ugly, Duan Zhixuan's army defeated Tuyugun, and chased more than eight hundred miles with victory, only more than thirty miles from Qinghai. Tuyugun people drove away horses.

古文：甲子，上还京师。
现代文：甲子，太宗回到京城长安。
English: At the same time, Emperor Taizong returned to Beijing.

古文：右仆射李靖以疾逊位，许之。
现代文：右仆射李靖因患病请求离职，太宗准许。
English: Taizong allowed his right-hand man, Li Jing, to resign due to illness.

古文：十一月，辛未，以靖为特进，封爵如故，禄赐、吏卒并依旧给，俟疾小瘳，每三两日至门下、中书平章政事。
现代文：十一月，辛未，加封李靖为特进，封爵依旧，俸禄、吏卒等均按原职标准供给，等到疾病稍有好转，每二三天到门下省和中书省平章政事。
English: In November, shortly after Xinwei, Li Jing was awarded the title of "Special Advancement" and the title of "Knight" remained the same. Salaries, officials, etc. were all provided according to the original job standards. When the disease improved slightly, he would go to his subordinate province and Zhongshuo Province for political affairs every two or three days.

古文：甲申，吐蕃赞普弃宗弄赞遣使入贡，仍请婚。
现代文：甲申，吐蕃赞普弃宗弄赞派使臣进献贡品，仍然请求通婚。
English: Ka-shin, who had sent envoys to pay tribute, still asked for intermarriage.

古文：吐蕃在吐谷浑西南，近世浸强，蚕食它国，土宇广大，胜兵数十万，然未尝通中国。
现代文：吐蕃在吐谷浑的西南面，近来国力渐强，便侵吞蚕食周围小国，疆域逐渐扩大，拥兵几十万，然而未曾与大唐交通。
English: Tubo, in the southwest of Tubo, has recently become stronger and stronger, and has encroached on the surrounding small countries. Its territory has gradually expanded, with hundreds of thousands of soldiers, but it has never communicated with Datang.

古文：其王称赞普，俗不言姓，王族皆曰论，宦族皆曰尚。
现代文：他们的君王称为赞普，按着他们的习惯不称姓，王族均叫论，官员家族均称做尚。
English: Their kings are called Zampu, according to their custom they do not call themselves by their surnames, the royal family are all referred to as Zampu, and the families of officials are all referred to as Do Shang.

古文：弃宗弄赞有勇略，四邻畏之。
现代文：弃宗弄赞有勇有谋，四方邻国均畏惧他。
English: He is courageous and resourceful, and is feared by his neighbors in all four directions.

古文：上遣使者冯德遐往慰抚之。
现代文：太宗派使者冯德遐前往吐蕃抚慰。
English: Feng Deyao, an emissary of the Tai Sect, went to Tuyu to comfort him.

古文：丁亥，吐谷浑寇凉州。
现代文：丁亥，吐谷浑侵犯凉州。
English: On the 19th, the Tuyuhun invaded Liangzhou.

古文：己丑，下诏大举讨吐谷浑。
现代文：己丑，太宗下诏发兵大举讨伐吐谷浑。
English: Embarrassed, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to send troops to fight against Tugu Hun.

古文：上欲得李靖为将，为其老，重劳之。
现代文：太宗想任命李靖为统兵将领，只是因为他年迈，难以烦劳。
English: Emperor Taizong wanted to appoint Li Jing as the commander-in-chief only because he was old and could not be bothered.

古文：靖闻之，请行；上大悦。
现代文：李靖听说后，请求出征，太宗大为高兴。
English: After hearing this, Li Jing requested to go to the front, which made Taizong very happy.

古文：十二月，辛丑，以靖为西海道行军大总管，节度诸军。
现代文：十二月，辛丑，任命李靖为西海道行军大总管，节制管辖各路兵马。
English: In December, Xinwuxi, Li Jing was appointed as the general manager of the West Road Marching Corps, and exercised control over the soldiers and horses of all roads.

古文：兵部尚书侯君集为积石道、刑部尚书任城王道宗为鄯善道、凉州都督李大亮为且末道、岷州都督李道彦为赤水道、利州刺史高甑生为盐泽道行军总管，并突厥、契苾之众击吐谷浑。
现代文：兵部尚书侯君集、刑部尚书任城王李道宗、凉州都督李大亮、岷州都督李道彦、利州刺史高甑生分别为积石道、鄯善道、且末道、赤水道、盐泽道行军总管，联合突厥、契的兵力攻打吐谷浑。
English: Shang Shuxu of the Military Department and Shang Shuxu of the Criminal Department appointed Li Daozong, the king of the city, Li Daliang, the governor of Liangzhou, Li Daohan, the governor of Zhangzhou, and Li Zishi Gao Yansheng, respectively, as the general manager of the march of the Jishi Road, the Jinshan Road, and the End Road, the Equator Road, and the Yanze Road, and the combined forces of the Turks and the Qi attacked the Tuyugun.

古文：帝聘隋通事舍人郑仁基女为充华，诏已行，册使将发，魏征闻其尝许嫁士人陆爽，遽上表谏。
现代文：太宗亲聘隋朝通事舍人郑仁基的女儿为后宫的充华，诏令已发出，册封的使者将要出发，魏徵听说她过去曾许嫁给世家大族陆爽，立即上表谏阻。
English: Emperor Taizong personally hired the daughter of Zheng Renji, the Sui Dynasty's mediator, to be the adornment of the harem. The imperial edict had been issued, and the envoys were about to set off. Wei Zheng heard that she had promised to marry Lu Shuang, a member of the royal family, in the past, and was immediately opposed.

古文：帝闻之，大惊，手诏深自克责，命停册使。
现代文：太宗听到后，大为惊讶，手书诏令深加自责，下令册封使免行。
English: When Emperor Taizong heard this, he was greatly surprised. He deeply reproached himself in a handwritten edict and ordered that the envoys be exempted.

古文：房玄龄等奏称： 许嫁陆氏，无显状，大礼既行，不可中止。 
现代文：房玄龄等人上奏说： 说她许嫁过陆氏，没有明证，册封的大礼已经施行，不应当中途而废。 
English: Fang Xuanling and others made a report, saying: There is no clear evidence to say that she was married to Lu, and the grand ceremony of canonization has been carried out. It should not be abandoned halfway.

古文：爽亦表言初无婚姻之议。
现代文：陆爽也上表说最初没有婚娶郑女的协议。
English: Lu Shuang also said that initially there was no agreement to marry Zheng.

古文：帝谓征曰： 群臣或容希合；爽亦自陈，何也？ 
现代文：太宗对魏徵说： 众位大臣或许是迎合旨意，陆爽本人也加以表白，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Taizong said to Wei Zheng: The ministers may be pandering to the will of Lu Shuang, and Lu Shuang himself also expressed it. Why is this?

古文：对曰： 彼以陛下为外虽舍之，或阴加罪谴，故不得不然。 
现代文：答道： 他觉得陛下表面上虽已舍弃，或许暗地里又要责怪，所以不得不如此。 
English: Answer: He felt that His Majesty, although he had given up on the surface, might secretly blame him, so he had to do it.

古文：帝笑曰： 外人意或当如是。朕之言未能使人必信如此邪？ 
现代文：太宗笑着说： 对于外人来说或当如此看，朕说的话也这样不能使人确信吗！ 
English: Taizong said with a smile: For outsiders or when viewed in this way, can't what I say also be convincing?

古文：中牟丞皇甫德参上言： 修洛阳宫，劳人；收地租，厚敛；俗好高髻，盖宫中所化。 
现代文：中牟县丞皇甫德参上书言道： 修筑洛阳宫殿，劳顿百姓；收地租，加重数额；时俗女子喜好束高髻，这是受宫中的影响。 
English: Emperor Fu De, the chancellor of Zhongmou County, quoted from the above-mentioned book, saying, "Build a palace in Luoyang, make the people work hard; collect land rent, increase the amount; at that time, women liked to wear high heels, which was influenced by the palace."

古文：上怒，谓房玄龄等曰： 德参欲国家不役一人，不收斗租，宫人皆无发，乃可其意邪！ 
现代文：太宗勃然大怒，对房玄龄等人说： 德参想要国家不役使一个人，不收一斗地租，宫女均不留发，这样才顺他的心思吗！ 
English: Tai Zong flew into a rage and said to Fong Xuanling and the others: If Dechen wants the state not to employ a single person, not to collect a single bucket of land rent, and not to let any of his concubines have their hair cut, is this the way to follow his heart?

古文：欲治其谤讪之罪。
现代文：想要治他诽谤罪。
English: They want to sue him for libel.

古文：魏征谏曰： 贾谊当汉文帝时上书，云 可为痛哭者一，可为流涕者二。 
现代文：魏徵劝谏道： 当汉文帝在位时，贾谊上书言道： 有一件事可为它痛哭，有二件事可为之流泪。 
English: Wei Zheng advised: When Emperor Hanwen was on the throne, Jia Yi wrote: There is one thing for which you can cry, and two things for which you can shed tears.

古文：自古上书不激切，不能动人主之心，所谓狂夫之言，圣人择焉，唯陛下裁察。 
现代文：自古以来上书言辞不激烈，则不能打动君王的心，所谓狂夫之言，圣人加以选择，希望陛下明察裁断。 
English: Since ancient times, if the words of the letter are not fierce, they cannot touch the heart of the monarch. The so-called madman's words are chosen by the sage. I hope that His Majesty will make a clear judgment.

古文：上曰： 朕罪斯人，则谁复敢言？ 
现代文：太宗说： 朕怪罪德参这类人，那么谁还敢说话呢！ 
English: Emperor Taizong said, "I blame people like De Zheng, so who would dare to speak out?

古文：乃赐绢二十匹。
现代文：于是赐给德参二十匹绢。
English: So he gave him twenty stallions.

古文：他日，征奏言： 陛下近日不好直言，虽勉强含容，非曩时之豁如。 
现代文：过了几天，魏徵上奏说： 陛下近来不喜欢直言强谏，即使勉强包容，也不如过去那么豁达。 
English: A few days later, Wei Zheng said: His Majesty does not like to be outspoken recently, and even if he is barely tolerant, he is not as open-minded as in the past.

古文：上乃更加优赐，拜监察御史。
现代文：太宗于是对皇甫德参另加优厚的赏赐，官拜监察御史。
English: Emperor Taizong then bestowed a generous reward on Emperor Fu Desheng, and the official paid homage to and supervised him.

古文：中书舍人高季辅上言： 外官卑品，犹未得禄，饥寒切身，难保清白，今仓廪浸实，宜量加优给，然后可责以不贪，严设科禁。
现代文：中书舍人高季辅上书言道： 京外官员品阶低微的，仍未得到俸禄，关系到自身饥寒，也难保清白的名声，如今府库充实，应当酌量优厚供给，然后才可以责成他们廉正，严格制定各种禁令。
English: Gao Ji, a high-ranking official of the Chinese Academy of Letters, added the following to the letter: The low-ranking officials outside Beijing have not yet received their salaries, which is related to their own hunger and cold, and it is difficult to maintain a clean reputation. Now that the government treasury is full, they should be provided with a reasonable amount of fine supplies, and then they can be required to be honest, and various prohibitions can be strictly formulated.

古文：又，密王元晓等皆陛下之弟，比见帝子拜诸叔，叔皆答拜，紊乱昭穆，宜训之以礼。 
现代文：此外，密王李元晓等均为陛下的弟弟，近见皇子参拜各位叔叔，叔叔都答拜，昭穆辈份礼义秩序颇为紊乱，应当以礼节加以训导。 
English: In addition, the Mi Wang, Li Yuanxiao, and others are the younger brothers of His Majesty, and all the uncles who have seen the prince visit and pay homage have responded. The order of etiquette among the Shomu generation is quite disordered, and should be disciplined with etiquette.

古文：春，正月，党项先内属者皆叛归吐谷浑。
现代文：上书呈给太宗，太宗颇为赞许。西突厥咄可汗去世，他的弟弟同娥设立为可汗，这便是沙钵罗利失可汗。
English: The petition was presented to Emperor Taizong, who was quite pleased. The Western Turkic Khan died, and his younger brother Tong E was established as the Khan, which was the Shahruli Khan.

古文：三月，庚辰，洮州羌叛入吐谷浑，杀刺史孔长秀。
现代文：贞观九年春季，正月，先归附唐朝的党项族都叛逃到吐谷浑。三月，庚辰，洮州羌族人反叛逃入吐谷浑，杀掉了刺史孔长秀。
English: In the first month of the spring of the ninth year of Zhenguan, the Dangxiang people, who were first attached to the Tang Dynasty, all defected to Tuyugun. In March, Gengchen, the Bozhou Yi people rebelled and fled to Tuyugun, killing the chief historian Kong Changxiu.

古文：壬辰，赦天下。
现代文：壬辰，全国实行大赦。
English: Imjin, amnesty to the world.

古文：乙酉，盐泽道行军总管高甑生击叛羌，破之。
现代文：乙酉，盐泽道行军总管高甑生进攻叛乱的羌人，取得胜利。
English: Acetylene, the general manager of the march of Yanze Road, Gao Xingsheng, the leader of the attack of the rebellion, won the victory.

古文：庚寅，诏：民赀分三等未尽其详，宜分九等。
现代文：庚寅，下诏说，全国民户衡量资财分为三等，不十分详尽，应于每等中分上中下，改为分九等。
English: Geng Yin said in the next edict that the measurement of the wealth of the whole country's households is divided into three grades, which is not very detailed, and should be divided into nine grades.

古文：上谓魏征曰： 齐后主、周天元皆重敛百姓，厚自奉养，力竭而亡。
现代文：太宗对魏徵说： 齐后主、周天元均收刮百姓，用来奉养自己，直到民力衰竭而亡国。
English: Emperor Taizong said to Wei Zheng: After the fall of Qi, Zhou Tianyuan plundered the people and used them to support himself, until the people's strength was exhausted and the country was destroyed.

古文：譬如馋人自噉其肉，肉尽而毙，何其愚也！
现代文：正如同嘴馋的人吃自己身上的肉，肉吃光了而毙命，多愚蠢呀！
English: As a glutton eateth his own flesh, and when he hath eaten it up, he dieth: how foolish!

古文：然二主孰为优劣？ 
现代文：然而这二位君主相比优劣如何呢？ 
English: But how do these two monarchs compare?

古文：对曰： 齐后主懦弱，政出多门；周天元骄暴，威福在己；虽同为亡国，齐主尤劣也。 
现代文：魏徵答道： 齐后主性格懦弱，政策不统一；周天元骄横暴虐，赏罚大权在于一身。虽同为亡国之君，齐后主更差一些。 
English: Wei Qian replied: Qi Hou's personality was weak and his policies were not unified; Zhou Tianyuan was arrogant and tyrannical, and he had the power to reward and punish. Although he was also the ruler of a ruined country, Qi Hou's personality was even worse.

古文：夏，闰四月，癸酉，任城王道宗败吐谷浑于库山。
现代文：夏季，闰四月，癸酉，任城王李道宗在库山击败吐谷浑军队。
English: In the summer, in leap April, the reigning king of the city, Li Daozong, defeated the army of Tuyuhun in Ku Shan.

古文：吐谷浑可汗伏允悉烧野草，轻兵走入碛。
现代文：吐谷浑可汗伏允将野草烧光，然后率轻骑兵逃入大沙漠。
English: Khan Fuxiong burned all the wild grass and then fled into the desert with his light cavalry.

古文：诸将以为 马无草，疲瘦，未可深入。 
现代文：唐朝众位将领认为 马无粮草，已很疲弱，不可孤军深入。 
English: Many generals of the Tang Dynasty believed that the horse without grain and grass was already very weak, and the army could not go deep alone.

古文：侯君集曰： 不然。
现代文：侯君集说： 不然。
English: Hou Jinshi said: Otherwise.

古文：向者段志玄军还，才及鄯州，虏已至其城下。
现代文：从前段志玄军队还朝，才到鄯州，吐谷浑士兵已到了城下。
English: From the previous paragraph, Shihun's army was still in the morning, only to arrive in Zhangzhou, and Tu Guhun's soldiers had already arrived under the city.

古文：盖虏犹完实，众为之用故也。
现代文：因当时吐谷浑还较强大，众人还为他们效力。
English: Because at that time, Tukugan was still relatively strong, people still worked for them.

古文：今一败之后，鼠逃鸟散，斥候亦绝，君臣携离，父子相失，取之易于拾芥。此而不乘，后必悔之。 
现代文：如今敌军一次战败之后，鼠逃鸟散，候望的哨兵也已撤离，君臣离散，父子难以相见，攻取他们比拾芥草还容易，此时不乘胜追击，以后必定后悔。 
English: Now that the enemy army has been defeated once, the rats have fled and the birds have dispersed, the long-awaited sentinels have also withdrawn, the princes and ministers have dispersed, it is difficult for father and son to meet, and it is easier to capture them than to pick up mustard. If you do not pursue them at this time, you will regret it in the future.

古文：李靖从之。
现代文：李靖听从他的意见。
English: Li Jing followed his advice.

古文：中分其军为两道：靖与薛万均、李大亮由北道，君集与任城王道宗由南道。
现代文：将所率军队分作两路：李靖与薛万均、李大亮为北路军，侯君集与任城王李道宗为南路军。
English: The army led by him was divided into two routes: Li Jing and Xue Wanjun and Li Dayang were the north route army, and Hou Junji and Rencheng Wang Li Daozong were the south route army.

古文：戊子，靖部将薛孤儿败吐谷浑于曼头山，斩其名王，大获杂畜，以充军食。
现代文：戊子，李靖手下将领薛孤儿在曼头山大败吐谷浑，将其著名首领斩首，获大批牲畜，以充军队食物。
English: Wu Zi, Li Jing's general, led Xue Orphans to defeat Tu Guhun in Mantou Mountain, beheaded its famous leader, and obtained a large number of livestock to feed the army.

古文：癸巳，靖等败吐谷浑于牛心堆，又败诸赤水原。
现代文：癸巳，李靖等人在牛心堆打败吐谷浑，在赤水源再次取胜。
English: Soon after, Li Jing and others defeated Tu Guhun in Niu Xin He, and won again in Chashuiyuan.

古文：侯君集、任城王道宗引兵行无人之境二千馀里，盛夏降霜，经破逻真谷，其地无水，人龁冰，马啖雪。
现代文：侯君集、任城王李道宗率南路军在沓无人烟地区行军二千余里，盛夏季节天降霜雪，经过破逻真谷，该地区无水，人吃冰，马吃雪。
English: The Southern Route Army led by Hou Junji and Rencheng Wang Li Daozong marched more than two thousand miles in the uninhabited area of Handan. In the midsummer season, the weather was frosty and snowy. After breaking through the Logozhen Valley, there was no water in the area. People ate ice and horses ate snow.

古文：五月，追及伏允于乌海，与战，大破之，获其名王。
现代文：五月，在乌海追赶上伏允，发生激战，取得大胜，俘获其著名首领。
English: In May, in Wuhai's pursuit of Shangfujun, a fierce battle took place, a great victory was won, and its famous leader was captured.

古文：薛万均、薛万彻又败天柱王于寺海。
现代文：薛万均、薛万彻在赤海又打败天柱王。
English: Xue Wanjun and Xue Wanche defeated Tianzhu Wang again in the Red Sea.

古文：上皇自去秋得风疾，庚子，崩于垂拱殿。
现代文：太上皇自从上一年秋天中风，庚子，在垂拱殿驾崩。
English: Emperor Taejong suffered a stroke in the autumn of the previous year, and Geng Zi passed away in the Hanging Arch Hall.

古文：甲辰，群臣请上准遗诰视军国大事，上不许。
现代文：甲辰，群臣请求太宗节哀遵照遗嘱治理军国大政，太宗不应允。
English: At that time, a group of courtiers requested that Emperor Taizong govern the military government according to his will on the Day of Mourning, but Emperor Taizong did not agree.

古文：乙巳，诏太子承乾于东宫平决庶政。
现代文：乙巳，太宗下诏让太子承乾在东宫处理日常事务。
English: Suddenly, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to let Crown Prince Chengxian handle daily affairs in the East Palace.

古文：赤水之战，薛万均、薛万彻轻骑先进，为吐谷浑所围，兄弟皆中枪，失马步斗，从骑死者什六七，左领军将军契苾何力将数百骑救之，竭力奋击，所向披靡，万均、万彻由是得免。
现代文：赤水源一战，薛万均、薛万彻率轻骑兵先行，被吐谷浑包围，兄弟二人均中枪，跌下马后徒步参战，随从骑兵死伤十之六七。左领军将军契何力率数百骑兵前往救援，拚力厮杀进击，所向披靡，薛万均、薛万彻于是得免一死。
English: In the First Battle of Chishuiyuan, Xue Wanchun and Xue Wancher led the light cavalry in the lead, and were surrounded by the Tuyugun. Both brothers were shot, fell off their horses and joined the battle on foot, and the cavalrymen were killed and wounded. The left leader, General Ke Ho, led hundreds of cavalrymen to the rescue, fought hard and attacked, and was defeated, so Xue Wanchun and Xue Wanchur were spared death.

古文：李大亮败吐谷浑于蜀浑山，获其名王二十人。
现代文：李大亮在蜀浑山打败吐谷浑军，俘获其著名首领二十人。
English: Li Daliang defeated the army of Tuyugun in Shuhun Mountain and captured twenty of its famous leaders.

古文：将军执失思力败吐谷浑于居茹川。
现代文：将军执失思力在居茹川大败吐谷浑军。
English: The general lost his nerve and defeated the Tugu Hun army at the Jiru River.

古文：李靖督诸军经积石山河源，至且末，穷其西境。
现代文：李靖率领各路军马途经积石山河源，到达且末，直抵其西部边境。
English: Li Jing led all the armies on horseback through the source of the Jishishan River, and finally arrived at its western border.

古文：闻伏允在突伦川，将奔于阗，契苾何力欲追袭之。薛万均惩其前败，固言不可。
现代文：听说伏允在突伦川，将要逃奔到于阗，契何力想要乘势追击，薛万均以先前的失败为教训，坚持说不行。
English: Hearing that Fuxun was in the Tulun River and was going to flee to Yulin, and that He He Li wanted to take advantage of the situation to pursue him, Xue Wanjun took the previous failure as a lesson and insisted that it was impossible.

古文：何力曰： 虏非有城郭，随水草迁徙，若不因其聚居袭取之，一朝云散，岂得复倾其巢穴邪！ 
现代文：何力说： 吐谷浑不定居，没有城郭，随水草迁移流动，如果不趁他们聚居在一起时袭击他们，等到他们四处游荡，怎么能捣毁他们的巢穴呢？ 
English: Ho Li said: "Tu Gu is not settled, there is no city wall, it migrates and flows with the water and grass. If we do not attack them when they live together, how can we destroy their nests when they roam around?

古文：自选骁骑千馀，直趣突伦川，万均乃引兵从之。
现代文：于是亲自挑选骁勇骑兵一千多人，直逼进突伦川，万均率部随后。
English: Therefore, he personally selected more than a thousand brave cavalrymen and drove them straight into the Tulun River, followed by the Wanjun cavalry.

古文：碛中乏水，将士刺马血饮之。
现代文：沙漠中缺水，将士们抽饮马血。
English: There is a shortage of water in the desert, so the soldiers have to drink horse blood.

古文：袭破伏允牙帐，斩首数千级，获杂畜二十馀万，伏允脱身走，俘其妻子。侯君集等进逾星宿川，至柏海，还与李靖军合。
现代文：唐朝军队攻破伏允牙帐，杀掉几千名吐谷浑兵，获牲畜二十多万，伏允只身脱逃，唐军俘获其妻子儿女，侯君集等穿越星宿川，到了柏海，重与李靖的部队会师。
English: The Tang Dynasty army broke through Fu Yun's tent, killed several thousand Tuyun soldiers, and obtained more than 200,000 livestock. Fu Yun escaped unharmed. The Tang Army captured his wife and children, and Hou Junji and others crossed the Xingchuan River and arrived at Baihai to rejoin Li Jing's troops.

古文：大宁王顺，隋氏之甥、伏允之嫡子也，为侍子于隋，久不得归，伏允立它子为太子，及归，意常怏怏。
现代文：大宁王慕容顺，是隋炀帝的外甥，伏允的嫡生子，在隋朝侍奉皇帝，很长时间不能回吐谷浑，伏允立另一个儿子为太子。慕容顺回到吐谷浑后，常常闷闷不乐。
English: Murongshun, the king of Danying, was the nephew of Emperor Sui and the legitimate son of Fu Yun. He served the emperor in the Sui Dynasty. He was unable to return to Tugu Hun for a long time, and Fu Yun appointed another son as the prince. After Murongshun returned to Tugu Hun, he was often depressed.

古文：会李靖破其国，国人穷蹙，怨天柱王；顺因众心，斩天柱王，举国请降。
现代文：正赶上李靖攻破他的国家，国人愁楚不安，都怨恨天柱王；慕容顺便顺应民心，杀掉天柱王，举国请求投诚。
English: He was just in time for Li Jing to invade his country. The people of his country were worried and anxious, and they all resented Tianzhu Wang. Murong, by the way, complied with the people's will, killed Tianzhu Wang, and the whole country asked for surrender.

古文：伏允帅千馀骑逃碛中，十馀日，众散稍尽，为左右所杀。
现代文：伏允率一千多骑兵逃到沙漠中，十多天的时间，余众散逃殆尽，伏允被身边人杀死。
English: Fuxiong led more than a thousand cavalrymen to flee into the desert. For more than ten days, the rest of the people scattered and fled, and Fuxiong was killed by people around him.

古文：国人立顺为可汗。
现代文：吐谷浑人拥立慕容顺为可汗。
English: The Hun people of Tugu supported Murong Shun as khan.

古文：壬子，李靖奏平吐谷浑。
现代文：壬子，李靖上奏说已平安吐谷浑。
English: According to Li Jing's report, it was safe to leave the valley.

古文：乙卯，诏复其国，以慕容顺为西平郡王、趉故吕乌甘豆可汗。
现代文：乙卯，太宗下诏恢复吐浑国。任命慕容顺为西平郡王、故吕乌甘豆可汗。
English: At the same time, Emperor Taizong issued an edict to restore the country of Tuhun and appointed Murong Shun as the king of Xiping County and the late Lüwu Ganzu Khan.

古文：上虑顺未能服其众，仍命李大亮将精兵数千为其声援。
现代文：太宗考虑到他不能降服其民众，仍令李大亮率精兵数千人为其后援力量。
English: Taizong, considering that he could not surrender his people, still made Li Da Liang lead thousands of elite soldiers as his backing force.

古文：六月，己丑，群臣复请听政，上许之，其细务仍委太子，太子颇能听断。
现代文：六月，己丑，群臣再次请求太宗上朝听政，太宗应允，琐细事务仍委托太子处理，太子颇能裁断政务。
English: In June, he was so ugly that the courtiers once again asked Taizong to come to the court to listen to politics, and Taizong agreed. He still entrusted the prince to handle minor affairs, and the prince was quite capable of deciding government affairs.

古文：是后上每出行幸，常令居守监国。
现代文：此后太宗每次出外巡幸，便令太子留守监国。
English: After that, whenever Taizong went on an inspection tour, he ordered the crown prince to stay behind.

古文：秋，七月，庚子，盐泽道行军副总管刘德敏击叛羌，破之。
现代文：秋季，七月，庚子，盐泽道行军副总管刘德敏进攻反叛的羌族，取得大胜。
English: In the autumn, in July, Geng Zi and Liu Demin, the vice-commander-in-chief of the march of Yanze Road, attacked the rebellious Yi people and won a great victory.

古文：丁巳，诏： 山陵依汉长陵故事，务存隆厚。 
现代文：丁巳，太宗下诏： 太上皇的陵墓依照汉高祖长陵的规模，务存隆厚之意。 
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizong issued an edict: The tomb of the great emperor should be in accordance with the scale of the mausoleum of the founder of the Han Dynasty, in order to preserve the sense of grandeur.

古文：期限既促，功不能及。
现代文：建陵的期限太紧迫，不能如期完成。
English: The deadline for the construction of the mausoleum is too tight to be completed as scheduled.

古文：秘书监虞世南上疏，以为： 圣人薄葬其亲，非不孝也，深思远虑，以厚葬适足为亲之累，故不为耳。
现代文：秘书监虞世南上奏疏认为： 圣人薄葬其亲属，并非是不孝，而是深思熟虑，因为厚葬适足以成为亲人的拖累，所以圣人不为。
English: Secretary Supervisor Shennan Shangsoo believes that: The saint's thin burial of his relatives is not unfilial, but deliberate, because a thick funeral is enough to be a drag on relatives, so the saint does not do it.

古文：昔张释之言： 使其中有可欲，虽锢南山犹有隙。 
现代文：过去汉朝张释之曾说过： 在陵墓中藏有金玉，即使铸铜铁封住南山还是有空隙。 
English: In the past, Zhang Xizhi of the Han Dynasty once said: There is gold hidden in the mausoleum, even if cast copper and iron seal Nanshan, there is still a gap.

古文：刘向言： 死者无终极而国家有废兴，释之之言，为无穷计也。 
现代文：刘向说： 死者没有生命的极限而国家有兴废，张释之所讲的，是长远打算。 
English: Liu Xiang said: The dead do not have the limit of life and the country has its ups and downs. What Zhang Xizhi said is a long-term plan.

古文：其言深切，诚合至理。
现代文：他们讲得深刻，的确合乎道理。
English: They're deep and they really make sense.

古文：伏惟陛下圣德度越唐、虞，而厚葬其亲乃以秦、汉为法，臣窃为陛下不取。
现代文：陛下圣德超过唐尧、虞舜二帝，而厚葬亲人却效法秦汉的帝王，我认为陛下不当如此。
English: Your Majesty's holiness surpasses that of Tang Xuan and Gu Xuan II, but your relatives are buried in the same manner as the emperors of the Qin and Han dynasties. I don't think it's appropriate for Your Majesty to do so.

古文：虽复不藏金玉，后世但见丘垄如此其大，安知其中无金玉邪！
现代文：虽然不再藏金埋玉，后代的人一见丘垄如此高大，怎么知道没有金玉呢？
English: Although there is no longer any buried gold, how will future generations know that there is no gold when they see the ridges so high?

古文：且今释服已依霸陵，而丘垄之制独依长陵，恐非所宜。
现代文：而且如今陛下服丧依照汉文帝，三十七天脱下丧服，但是丘垄制度惟独依照汉高祖的长陵，恐怕不大合适。
English: Moreover, nowadays, His Majesty is buried in accordance with Emperor Hanwen, and takes off his funeral clothes after 37 days, but the system of mounds and ridges is only in accordance with the Long Mausoleum of the founder of the Han Dynasty, which I am afraid is not appropriate.

古文：伏愿依《白虎通》为三仞之坟，器物制度，率皆节损，仍刻石立之陵旁，别书一通，藏之宗庙，用为子孙永久之法。 
现代文：希望陛下能够依照《白虎通义》一书，为太上皇建造三仞高的陵墓，所用器物制度，一律节省简化，将这些刻石碑立于陵旁，此外另书写一通，藏在宗庙内，用做后代子孙永久效法。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will be able to build a three-story-high mausoleum for the last emperor in accordance with the book "White Tiger," and the system of utensils used will be simplified, and these carved stone monuments will be erected next to the mausoleum. In addition, one will be written, hidden in the ancestral temple, and used as a permanent example for future generations.

古文：疏奏，不报。
现代文：上疏奏上后，没有回文。
English: No response has been received since the submission of this communication.

古文：世南复上疏，以为： 汉天子即位即营山陵，远者五十馀年；今以数月之间为数十年之功，恐于人力有所不逮。 
现代文：虞世南再次上疏，认为： 汉代帝王即位后即营造山陵，有的营建时间达五十多年；如今几个月之内要得到几十年的功效，恐怕人力难以做得到。 
English: Yu Shiminan once again raised his eyebrows. He thought, "After the Han Dynasty emperors ascended to the throne, they immediately began to build mountains, and some of them took more than fifty years to build. Nowadays, it is necessary to obtain the effect of decades within a few months, and I am afraid that it is difficult to do it with manpower.

古文：上乃以世南疏授有司，令详处其宜。
现代文：太宗于是将虞世南的奏疏传给有关部门，让他们详悉商讨处理。
English: Taizong then passed Yu Shennan's report to the relevant departments so that they could discuss the matter in detail.

古文：房玄龄等议，以为： 汉长陵高九丈，原陵高六丈，今九丈则太崇，三仞则太卑，请依原陵之制。 
现代文：房玄龄等人议论认为： 汉高祖长陵高达九丈，汉光武帝原陵高六丈，而今九丈则太高，三仞又太低，请求依照原陵六丈的规模。 
English: Fang Xuanling and others argue that: the ancestral mausoleum of Han Gao is as high as nine meters, and the original mausoleum of Han Guangwu is six meters high, but now nine meters is too high, and three meters is too low, so the request is in accordance with the scale of the original mausoleum.

古文：从之。
现代文：太宗听从其意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：辛亥，诏： 国初草创，宗庙之制未备，今将迁祔，宜令礼官详议。 
现代文：辛亥，太宗下诏： 建国之初一切制度都是草创阶段，宗庙制度不完备，如今要将太上皇的神主迁入宗庙，应当让礼仪官们详加议处。 
English: Xinhai, Emperor Taizong issued an edict: At the beginning of the founding of the country, all systems were in the initial stage, and the ancestral temple system was incomplete. Now, if you want to move the supreme emperor's god into the ancestral temple, you should let the etiquette officials discuss it in detail.

古文：谏议大夫硃子奢请立三昭三穆而虚太祖之位。
现代文：谏议大夫朱子奢请求立三昭三穆而空下始祖之神位。
English: Dr. Zhu Zixu, the presiding judge, requested that the deities of the founding fathers be elevated to the rank of San Zhao and San Mu.

古文：于是增修太庙，祔弘农府君及高祖并旧神主四为六室。
现代文：于是增修太庙，增入远祖弘农府君重耳和高祖神主与原有的宣简公、懿王、景皇帝、元皇帝四神主，共为六室。
English: As a result, an additional temple was built, adding the distant ancestor Hongnongfu Junjie and the high ancestor god, as well as the original four gods of Xuan Jian Gong, King Yao, Emperor Jing, and the former emperor, for a total of six rooms.

古文：房玄龄等议以凉武昭王为始祖。
现代文：房玄龄等人议论以凉武昭王李为始祖。
English: Fang Xuanling and others argue that Li Yangwu Zhao Wang Li was the founder.

古文：左庶子于志宁议以为武昭王非王业所因，不可为始祖；上从之。
现代文：左庶子于志宁议论认为王业并非从李直接继承，不能做为始祖，太宗听从其意见。
English: Zuo's son-in-law, Yu Zhining, argued that Wangye was not directly inherited from Li and could not be regarded as the founder, and Taizong listened to his opinion.

古文：党项寇叠州。
现代文：党项族进犯叠州。
English: The Kuomintang (KMT) attacked Yaxiu.

古文：李靖之击吐谷浑也，厚赂党项，使为乡导。
现代文：李靖在进攻吐谷浑时，曾用厚礼贿赂党项，使他们做向导。
English: When Li Jing attacked Tugu Hun, he bribed the party members with gifts to make them guides.

古文：党项酋长拓跋赤辞来，谓诸将曰： 隋人无信，喜暴掠我。
现代文：党项首领拓跋赤辞来到军中，对众位将领说： 隋朝人不讲信用，总是劫掠我们。
English: The leader of the Party branch, Tuoba Qiaojun, came to the army and said to the generals: The Sui Dynasty does not trust people and always plunders us.

古文：今诸军苟无异心，我请供其资粮；如或不然，我将据险以塞诸军之道。 
现代文：如今你们的各路兵马如没有害我之意，我请求供给你们粮草；如若不然，我们将要占据险要之地以阻塞你们前进。 
English: Now, if all your soldiers and horses have no intention of harming me, I ask that you be supplied with grain and grass; if not, we will occupy critical areas to block your advance.

古文：诸将与之盟而遣之。
现代文：众位将领与他订盟并放他回去。
English: The generals made a pact with him and let him go.

古文：赤水道行军总管李道彦行至阔水，见赤辞无备，袭之，获牛羊数千头。
现代文：赤水道行军总管李道彦行军到了阔水，见拓跋赤辞没有防备，便偷袭他，获几千头牛羊。
English: Li Daohan, the general manager of the march of the equatorial waterway, marched to the broad water. Seeing that Tuoba was unprepared, he secretly attacked him and obtained thousands of cattle and sheep.

古文：于是群羌怨怒，屯野狐峡，道彦不得进；赤辞击之，道彦大败，死者数万，退保松州。
现代文：于是惹怒了羌族人，他们占据野狐峡，使李道彦的部队不能前进。拓跋赤辞袭击并打败李道彦，死数万人，李道彦部撤退到松州。
English: This angered the Yi people, who occupied the Wild Fox Gorge, preventing Li Daohan's troops from advancing. Tuoba attacked and defeated Li Daohan, killing tens of thousands of people, and Li Daohan's troops retreated to Songzhou.

古文：左骁卫将军樊兴逗遛失军期，士卒失亡多。
现代文：左骁卫将军樊兴因逗留而耽误军期，士兵们多逃亡丢失。
English: Zuo Hanwei's general, Xing Xing, delayed his military service due to his stay, and many soldiers fled and were lost.

古文：乙卯，道彦、兴皆坐减死徙边。
现代文：乙卯，李道彦、樊兴均因此获罪，被免于死刑流放到边远地区。
English: Etu, Li Daohan and Hao Xing were all convicted for this and were spared the death penalty and exiled to a remote area.

古文：上遣使劳诸将于大斗拔谷，薛万均排毁契苾何力，自称己功。
现代文：太宗派使节在大斗拔谷慰劳众位将领，薛万均抵毁契何力，夸耀自己的功劳。
English: The envoys of the Tai sect consoled all the generals in the great battle of the valley. Xue Wanjun resisted the destruction of the treaty and boasted of his own merits.

古文：何力不胜忿，拔刀起，欲杀万均，诸将救止之。
现代文：何力非常气愤，拔刀而起，想要杀掉薛万均，众将救下薛万均并制止了何力。
English: He Li was very angry, drew his sword and wanted to kill Xue Wanjun. The generals saved Xue Wanjun and stopped He Li.

古文：上闻之，以让何力，何力具言其状，上怒，欲解万均官以授何力，何力固辞，曰： 陛下以臣之故解万均官，群胡无知，以陛下为重胡轻汉，转相诬告，驰竞必多。
现代文：太宗听到此事后，责怪契何力，何力说明详细的情况，太宗勃然大怒，想要解除薛万均的官职以授给何力，何力执意推辞，说： 陛下由于我的缘故而解除薛万均官职，那些胡族官员不知详情，还以为陛下重视胡族而轻视汉人，以讹传讹，争斗之事必然多起来。
English: When Emperor Taizong heard about this, he blamed Qie He Lijun and asked He Lijun to explain the details. Emperor Taizong flew into a rage and wanted to remove Xue Wanjun's official post and give it to He Lijun. He Lijun stubbornly refused, saying, "Your Majesty removed Xue Wanjun's official post because of me. Those Hu officials don't know the details. They also think that Your Majesty values the Hu people and despises the Han people. They are just spreading rumours. There will inevitably be more conflicts."

古文：且使胡人谓诸将皆如万均，将有轻汉之心。 
现代文：而且使胡族认为将领们都如薛万均。将有轻视汉人之意。 
English: Moreover, the Hu people will think that the generals are all like Xue Wanjun, and will despise the Han people.

古文：上善之而止。
现代文：太宗赞许他的意见，没有处置薛万均。
English: Emperor Taizong approved of his opinion and did not deal with Xue Wanjun.

古文：寻令宿卫北门，检校屯营事，尚宗女临洮县主。
现代文：不久命令契何力为玄武门宿卫官，检校屯营。又将宗室女临洮县主嫁给他。
English: Soon, he ordered Chi He Li to be the guardian of the Xuanwu Gate and to check the school. He also married the matriarch of Linyi County to him.

古文：岷州都督、盐泽道行军总管高甑生后军期，李靖按之。
现代文：岷州都督、盐泽道行军总管高甑生延误军期，李靖弹劾他。
English: Gao Xingsheng, the governor of Zhangzhou and the general manager of the march of Yanze Road, delayed his military service, and Li Jing impeached him.

古文：甑生恨靖，诬告靖谋反，按验无状。
现代文：高甑生怀恨在心，便诬告李靖谋反，经查验不符事实。
English: Gao Yansheng harbored a grudge and falsely accused Li Jing of plotting a rebellion, which was found to be untrue.

古文：八月，庚辰，甑生坐减死徙边。
现代文：八月，庚辰，高甑生获罪，免于死刑流放边远地区。
English: In August, Geng Chen, a high school student, was convicted, but was spared the death penalty and banished to a remote area.

古文：或言： 甑生，秦府功臣，宽其罪。 
现代文：有人说： 甑生是秦王府的功臣，应该宽大处理。 
English: Some people said: He Sheng is a meritorious subject of the Qin royal court and should be treated leniently.

古文：上曰： 甑生违李靖节度，又诬其反，此而可宽，法将安施！
现代文：太宗说： 甑生违抗李靖的指挥，又诬告他谋反，这些如可以宽恕，那么法律将何以实施？
English: Taizong said, "If it can be forgiven to disobey the command of Li Jing and falsely accuse him of plotting rebellion, then how will the law be implemented?

古文：且国家自起晋阳，功臣多矣，若甑生获免，则人人犯法，安可复禁乎！
现代文：而且我大唐当年从晋阳起兵，功臣多了，如果甑生得以赦免，则人人犯法，怎么能够查禁呢？
English: Moreover, my Great Tang Dynasty started the war from Jinyang that year, and there were many meritorious soldiers. If the sons of heroes were pardoned, then everyone would be breaking the law, so how could they be banned?

古文：我于旧勋，未尝忘也，为此不敢赦耳。 
现代文：朕对有功之臣，从未忘记，正因如此才不敢宽赦呢。 
English: I have never forgotten my meritorious vassals, and that is why I dare not pardon them.

古文：李靖自是阖门杜绝宾客，虽亲戚不得妄见也。
现代文：李靖从此以后关门杜绝宾客，即使是亲属也不能随便见面。
English: Since then, Li Jing has closed its doors to prevent guests, even relatives cannot meet casually.

古文：上欲自诣园陵，群臣以上哀毁羸瘠，固谏而止。
现代文：太宗想要亲自去太上皇的陵园，众位大臣认为太宗过于悲痛，身体瘦弱，执意谏阻才没有去成。
English: Emperor Taizong wanted to go to the tomb of the Emperor Taizong in person, but the ministers thought that Emperor Taizong was too sad, his body was too thin, and he had to persist in resisting before he could go.

古文：冬，十月，乙亥，处月初遣使入贡。处月、处密，皆西突厥之别部也。
现代文：冬委十月，乙亥，处月部第一次派使节进献贡品，处月、处密，都是西突厥的别部。
English: In October of the winter solstice, the Eighth Chinese Year of the Pig, the Department of the Moon for the first time sent envoys to offer tribute. Both the Department of the Moon and the Department of the Secret were other departments of West Turkistan.

古文：庚寅，葬太武皇帝于献陵，庙号高祖；以穆皇后祔葬，加号太穆皇后。
现代文：庚寅，将太武皇帝李渊安葬在献陵，庙号高祖；以穆皇后合葬，加谥号太穆皇后。
English: Geng Yin buried Emperor Li Yuan of the Taiwu Dynasty in the dedicated mausoleum, with the temple name Gao Zu; Empress Yimou was buried with him, and Empress Yimou was given the posthumous name Taimu.

古文：十一月，庚戌，诏议于太原立高祖庙。秘书监颜师古议，以为： 寝庙庆在京师，汉世郡国立庙，非礼。 
现代文：十一月，庚戌，太宗下诏使议论在太原立高祖庙之事，秘书监颜师古上表章认为： 寝庙应设在京城，汉代各个郡国立庙，不合乎礼仪。 
English: In November, Emperor Gaozong's emissaries discussed the establishment of the Gaozhu Temple in Taiyuan. The secretary and overseer Gu Shangzhang believed that the sleeping temple should be located in Beijing, and that the national temples in each county during the Han Dynasty were not in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：乃止。
现代文：于是停止立庙。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：戊午，以光禄大夫萧瑀为特进，复令参预政事。
现代文：戊午，加封光禄大夫萧为特进，又命他参预政事。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Gaofeng Guanglu Doctor Xiao was promoted to the special promotion, and he was ordered to participate in the pre-election affairs.

古文：上曰： 武德六年以后，高祖有废立之心而未定，我不为兄弟所容，实有功高不赏之惧。
现代文：太宗说： 武德六年以后，高祖有废立太子的想法而定不下来，朕不能被兄弟所容忍，确实有功高不被赏赐的担忧。
English: Taizong said: Six years later, Gao Zu had the idea of abolishing the crown prince and could not settle down. I could not be tolerated by my brothers. I was really worried that I would not be rewarded for my merits.

古文：斯人也，不可以利诱，不可以死胁，真社稷臣也！ 
现代文：萧这个人，不可用利益引诱，也不能以死相威胁，真正是社稷功臣！ 
English: Xiao, this person, cannot be lured by profits, nor can he be threatened with death. He is truly a hero of the society!

古文：因赐瑀诗曰： 疾风知劲草，板荡识诚臣。 
现代文：因而赐给萧诗一首，诗中写道： 疾风知劲草，板荡识诚臣。 
English: As a result, a poem was given to Xiao Si, in which he wrote: "The wind blows, the grass withers.

古文：又谓瑀曰： 卿之忠直，古人不过；然善恶太明，亦有时而失。 
现代文：又对他说： 你的忠正耿直，古人也超不过你，然而是非过于鲜明，有时也会出差错。 
English: He also said to him, "Your loyalty is unswerving. The ancients were no better than you. However, they are not too bright, and sometimes they make mistakes.

古文：瑀再拜谢。
现代文：萧再次拜谢。
English: Xiao bowed again.

古文：魏征曰： 瑀违众孤立，唯陛下知其忠劲，向不遇圣明，求免难矣！ 
现代文：魏徵说： 萧违背众意，离群孤立，只有陛下了解他的忠贞，过去如果不是遇到圣明天子，很难免于获罪。 
English: Wei Zheng said: Xiao went against the will of the people and isolated himself from the group. Only His Majesty knew of his loyalty. If he had not met the Holy Son of Heaven in the past, it would have been difficult for him to avoid being punished.

古文：特进李靖上书，请依遗诰，御常服，临正殿；弗许。
现代文：特进李靖上书给太宗，请求太宗依照太上皇遗嘱，穿戴常服，临正殿听政，太宗不应允。
English: The special envoy Li Jing sent a letter to Emperor Taizong, requesting Emperor Taizong to follow the Emperor's will, wear regular clothes, and listen to the government at the Linzheng Palace. Emperor Taizong did not agree.

古文：吐谷浑甘豆可汗久质中国，国人不附，竟为其下所杀。
现代文：吐谷浑甘豆可汗长时间在中原做人质，国内人不归附他，竟被手下人杀死。
English: For a long time, the Khan of Tugu was a hostage in the Central Plains. The people of the country refused to submit to him, and he was killed by his subordinates.

古文：子燕王诺曷钵立。
现代文：他的儿子燕王诺曷钵立为可汗。
English: His son, Yan Wang Nuo, became the new khan.

古文：诺曷钵幼，大臣争权，国中大乱。
现代文：诺曷钵年幼，大臣们争权夺势，国内一片混乱。
English: Noguchi was young, ministers were vying for power, and the country was in chaos.

古文：十二月，诏兵部尚书侯君集等将兵援之；先遣使者谕解，有不奉诏者，随宜讨之。
现代文：十二月，太宗诏令兵部尚书侯君集等领兵援助；事先派使者宣谕劝解，如有不遵从诏令的，相机予以讨伐。
English: In December, Emperor Taizong issued an edict ordering the war department to send Shang Shuhongjunji and others to lead the troops to help; he sent an envoy in advance to preach and persuade, and if anyone did not follow the edict, the camera would be used to fight them.

古文：贞观十年丙申，公元六三六年
现代文：贞观十年春季正月，甲午，太宗开始亲理朝政。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 10th year of Zhenguan, in the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Taizong began to rule the imperial court.

古文：春，正月，甲午，上始亲听政。辛丑，以突厥拓设阿史那社尔为左骁卫大将军。
现代文：辛丑，唐朝任命突厥拓设阿史那社尔为左骁卫大将军。
English: Sin ugly, the Tang Dynasty appointed the Turk to set up the Ashnashal as the General of the Left Division.

古文：社尔，处罗可汗之子也，年十一，以智略闻。
现代文：社尔是处罗可汗的儿子，年仅十一岁时，就以智谋而著称。
English: Sal was the son of the Khan of Zhenluo, and at the age of only eleven, he was known for his cleverness.

古文：可汗以为拓设，建牙于碛北，与欲谷设分统敕勒诸部，居官十年，未尝有所赋敛。
现代文：处罗可汗任命社尔为拓设；在漠北建牙帐，与欲谷设分别统辖敕勒各部。做官十年，未曾征收赋税。
English: Luo Khan appointed Shaer to expand the establishment; in the north of the desert, he built a ledger, and he and Zhaogu were in charge of the various departments of Mule. He had been an official for ten years, and had not collected taxes.

古文：诸设或鄙其不能为富贵，社尔曰： 部落苟丰，于我足矣。 
现代文：众位设中有人鄙视他不能致身富贵，社尔说： 本部落丰盈我就满足了。 
English: Someone in the crowd scorned him for not being able to become rich, so he said, "I'll be satisfied when this tribe becomes rich."

古文：诸设惭服。及薛延陀叛，攻破欲谷设，社尔兵亦败，将其馀众走保西陲。
现代文：众位设惭愧心服，等到薛延陀叛乱，打败欲谷设，社尔也兵败，率领余众逃往西陲。
English: Embarrassed and humbled, they waited until Xue Yantu rebelled, defeated Zhi Gu Xie, defeated Shaer, and led the rest of the people to flee to Xidi.

古文：颉利可汗既亡，西突厥亦乱，咄陆可汗兄弟争国。
现代文：颉利可汗灭亡后，西突厥也发生混乱，咄可汗兄弟争位。
English: After the death of the Hari Khan, there was also chaos in West Turkistan, with the Khan brothers fighting for power.

古文：社尔诈往降之，引兵袭破西突厥，取其地几半，有众十馀万，自称答布可汗。
现代文：社尔假装前往投降，领兵打败西突厥，占领其一半土地，拥兵十多万，自称为答布可汗。
English: Pretending to go to surrender, Sal led an army to defeat the Western Turks, occupied half of their land, supported more than a hundred thousand soldiers, and called himself Tabu Khan.

古文：社尔乃谓诸部曰： 首为乱破我国者，薛延陀也，我当为先可汗报仇击灭之。 
现代文：社尔对各部落说： 最先造成我国乱亡的是薛延陀，我应当为先可汗报仇消灭他们。 
English: Sal said to the tribes: The first to cause the ruin of our country was Xueyantuo, I should avenge the first khan and destroy them.

古文：诸部皆谏曰： 新得西方，宜且留镇抚。
现代文：各部落都劝阻说： 我们刚刚得到西边一块地盘，应当暂且稳住阵脚。
English: All the tribes tried to dissuade them, saying: We have just gained a piece of territory in the west, and we should hold our ground for the time being.

古文：今遽舍之远去，西突厥必来取其故地。 
现代文：如今突然舍掉这块地盘远攻薛延陀，西突厥必然要来收取其故地。 
English: Now, suddenly abandoning this piece of land to attack Xueyanta, West Turkistan will inevitably come to reclaim its ancestral land.

古文：社尔不从，击薛延陀于碛北，连兵百馀日。
现代文：社尔不听众议，在漠北袭击薛延陀部。战斗持续一百多天。
English: Sal did not listen to public opinion and attacked Xue Yantao's troops in the north of the country. The battle lasted for more than a hundred days.

古文：会咥利失可汗立，社尔之众苦于久役，多弃社尔逃归。
现代文：适逢利失可汗即位，社尔的部下久罹战争之苦，多离开社尔投奔利失。
English: At the time of the enthronement of Shahr-ul-Khan, Shahr's subordinates had been suffering from the war for a long time, and most of them left Shahr to go to Penang.

古文：薛延陀纵兵击之，社尔大败，走保高昌，其旧兵在者才万馀家，又畏西突厥之逼，遂帅众来降。
现代文：薛延陀发兵攻击，社尔大败，逃到高昌，收拾残部才一万多家，又畏惧西突厥进逼，于是率部投降唐朝。
English: Xue Yanta sent troops to attack, defeated Sal, fled to Gaochang, and only collected more than 10,000 remnants. He was also afraid of the West Turk invasion, so he and his troops surrendered to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：敕处其部落于灵州之北，留社尔于长安，尚皇妹南阳长公主，典屯兵于苑内。
现代文：太宗下令将其部落安置在灵州北部，将社尔留在长安，娶皇妹南阳长公主为妻，在皇苑内典领屯兵。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered that his tribe be placed in the northern part of Lingzhou, leaving Shaer in Chang'an, marrying the princess Nanyang, the younger sister of the emperor, and leading the troops in the imperial garden.

古文：癸丑，徙赵王元景为荆王，鲁王元昌为汉王，郑王元礼为徐王，徐王元嘉为韩王，荆王元则为彭王，滕王元懿为郑王，吴王元轨为霍王，豳王元凤为虢王，陈王元庆为道王，魏王灵夔为燕王，蜀王恪为吴王，越王泰为魏王，燕王祐为齐王，梁王愔为蜀王，郯王恽为蒋王，汉王贞为越王，申王慎为纪王。
现代文：癸丑，改封赵王李元景为荆王，鲁王李元昌为汉王，郑王李元礼为徐王，徐王李元嘉为韩王，荆王李元则为彭王，滕王李元懿为郑王，吴王李元轨为霍王，豳王李元凤为虢王，陈王李元庆为道王，魏王李灵夔为燕王，蜀王李恪为吴王，越王李泰为魏王，燕王李为齐王，梁王李为蜀王，郯王李恽为蒋王，汉王李贞为越王，申王李慎为纪王。
English: Zhao Wang Li Yuanjing was renamed as the King of Jing, Lu King Li Yuanchang was renamed as the King of Han, Zheng King Li Yuanli was renamed as the King of Xu, Xu King Li Yuanjia was renamed as the King of Han, Jing King Li Yuan was renamed as the King of Peng, Teng King Li Yuanjie was renamed as the King of Zheng, Wu King Li Yuanlu was renamed as the King of Huo, Shao King Li Yuanfeng was renamed as the King of Shao, Chen King Li Yuanqing was renamed as the King of Tao, Wei King Li Lingjie was renamed as the King of Yan, Shu King Li Ke was renamed as the King

古文：二月，乙丑，以元景为荆州都督，元昌为梁州都督，元礼为徐州都督，元嘉为潞州都督，元则为遂州都督，灵夔为幽州都督，恪为潭州都督，泰为相州都督，祐为齐州都督，愔为益州都督，恽为安州都督，贞为扬州都督。
现代文：二月，乙丑，唐朝任命李元景为荆州都督，李元昌为梁州都督，李元礼为徐州都督，李元嘉为潞州都督，李元则为遂州都督，李灵夔为幽州都督，李恪为潭州都督，李泰为相州都督，李为齐州都督，李为益州都督，李恽为安州都督，李贞为扬州都督。
English: In February, the Tang Dynasty appointed Li Yuanjing as the governor of Jingzhou, Li Yuanchang as the governor of Liangzhou, Li Yuanli as the governor of Xuzhou, Li Yuanjia as the governor of Zhangzhou, Li Yuan as the governor of Suizhou, Li Lingyao as the governor of Yuzhou, Li Ke as the governor of Tanzhou, Li Tai as the governor of Xiangzhou, Li for the governor of Qizhou, Li for the governor of Yizhou, Li Yao as the governor of Anzhou, and Li Zhen as the governor of Yangzhou.

古文：泰不之官，以金紫光禄大夫张亮，行都督事。
现代文：李泰不到官上任，任命金紫光禄大夫张亮兼行都督事。
English: Li Tai did not take office and appointed Jin Zi Guanglu's doctor Zhang Liang to concurrently serve as the capital's governor.

古文：上以泰好文学，礼接士大夫，特命于其府别置文学馆，听自引召学士。
现代文：太宗以李泰喜好文学，礼待士大夫，特命他在魏王府另外设置文学馆，听任他召集学士。
English: Emperor Taizong liked Li Tai's literature and treated him with courtesy. He specially ordered him to set up a separate literature hall in Wei Wangfu, and allowed him to convene scholars.

古文：三月，丁酉，吐谷浑王诺曷钵遣使请颁历，行年号，遣子弟入侍；并从之。
现代文：三月，丁酉，吐谷浑王诺曷钵派使节来请求颁行历法和年号，并派王族子弟来唐朝侍奉太宗，太宗均依从。
English: In March, Ding Xi and Tu Gu Hun King Nogong sent envoys to request the issuance of a calendar and year, and sent royal children to Tang Dynasty to serve Emperor Taizong. Emperor Taizong complied.

古文：丁未，以诺曷钵为河源郡王、乌地也拔勤豆可汗。
现代文：丁未，册封诺曷钵为河源郡王，乌地也拔勤豆可汗。
English: Ding Wei, he was awarded the title of County King of Heyuan County, and Wu Di was also awarded the title of Bean Khan.

古文：癸丑，诸王之籓，上与之别曰： 兄弟之情，岂不欲常共处邪！
现代文：癸丑，众位亲王前往各州，太宗与他们话别道： 依我们的兄弟情谊，难道不想经常共处吗？
English: When the princes left for the provinces, Taizong bid them farewell, saying, "According to our brotherhood, don't you want to live together all the time?

古文：但以天下之重，不得不尔。
现代文：只是以天下为重，不得不如此。
English: It's just that I have to do it because I care about the world.

古文：诸子尚可复有，兄弟不可复得。 
现代文：没了儿子还可以再有，兄弟则不能复得。 
English: You can have another son if you lose your son, but you can't get your brother back.

古文：因流涕呜咽不能止。
现代文：因而痛哭流涕不能自己。
English: So I can't cry myself to sleep.

古文：夏，六月，壬申，以温彦博为右仆射，太常卿杨师道为侍中。
现代文：夏季六月，壬申，任命温彦博为尚书右仆射，太常寺卿杨师道为侍中。
English: In the summer of June, in Jinshin, Wen Yanbo was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and Yang Shido, the Lord of Taiji Temple, was appointed as an attendant.

古文：侍中魏征屡以目疾求为散官，上不得已，以征为特进，仍知门下事，朝章国典，参议得失，徒流以上罪，详事闻奏；其禄赐、吏卒并同职事。
现代文：侍中魏徵屡次以眼病请求改任散官，太宗不得已改任他为特进，仍让他知门下事。举凡朝廷奏章国家典仪，均参与议论得失，流放、徒刑以上的罪刑，均由他审察上报；俸禄、吏卒等优待与职事官相同。
English: Wei Zheng, the chamberlain, repeatedly requested to be reassigned to a lower-ranking official due to an eye disease, but Taizong had no choice but to reassign him to a higher-ranking official, still letting him know what was going on. He took part in discussions on the merits and demerits of every state ceremony held by the imperial court, and he reviewed and reported all criminal punishments above banishment and imprisonment; he received the same salary and benefits as officials.

古文：长孙皇后性仁孝俭素，好读书，常与上从容商略古事，因而献替，裨益弘多。
现代文：长孙皇后仁义孝敬，生活俭朴，喜欢读书，经常和太宗随意谈论历史，乘机劝善规过，提出很多有益的意见。
English: The eldest grandson of the empress was benevolent, virtuous and respectful. He lived a frugal life and liked to read. He often talked about history with Emperor Taizong at will, took the opportunity to persuade him, and put forward many useful opinions.

古文：上或以非罪谴怒宫人，后亦阳怒，请自推鞫，因命囚系，俟上怒息，徐为申理，由是宫壶之中，刑无枉滥。
现代文：有一次太宗无故迁怒于宫女，皇后也佯装恼怒，请求亲自讯问，于是下令将宫女捆绑起来，等到太宗息怒了，才慢慢地为其申辩，从此后宫之中，没有出现枉滥刑罚。
English: On one occasion, Emperor Taizong was angry with a lady-in-waiting for no reason. The empress also feigned anger and asked to be interrogated in person. She then ordered that the lady-in-waiting be tied up. She waited until Emperor Taizong had calmed down before slowly defending her. From then on, there were no unnecessary punishments in the palace.

古文：豫章公主早丧其母，后收养之，慈爱逾于所生。
现代文：豫章公主早年丧母，皇后将她收养，慈爱胜过亲生。
English: Princess Yuzhang lost her mother at an early age, and the empress adopted her, showing more love than she had shown her own children.

古文：妃嫔以下有疾，后亲抚视，辍己之药膳以资之，宫中无不爱戴。
现代文：自妃嫔以下有疾病，皇后都亲自探视，并拿自己的药物饮食供其服用，宫中人人都爱戴皇后。
English: Everyone in the palace loves the Empress. She visits everyone who is ill, from the concubines on down, and provides them with her own medicine and diet.

古文：训诸子，常以谦俭为先，太子乳母遂安夫人尝白后，以东宫器用少，请奏益之。
现代文：训戒几个儿子，常常以谦虚节俭为主要话题。太子的乳母遂安夫人，曾对皇后说，东宫的器物用具比较少，请求皇后奏请皇上增加一些。
English: The prince's nanny, Lady Su'an, once said to the empress that there were relatively few utensils and equipment in the East Palace, and asked the empress to ask the emperor to increase them.

古文：后不许，曰： 为太子，患在德不立，名不扬，何患无器用邪！ 
现代文：皇后不允许，且说： 身为太子，忧虑的事在于德行不立，声名不扬，又何愁没有器物用具呢？ 
English: The empress did not allow it, and said: "As a prince, the most worrying thing is not to be virtuous, not to be famous, and why worry about not having utensils and tools?

古文：上得疾，累年不愈，后侍奉，昼夜不离侧。
现代文：太宗身患疾病，多年不愈，皇后精心侍侯，常常昼夜不离身边。
English: Taizong had been ill for many years, and the empress carefully waited on him, often staying with him day and night.

古文：常系毒药于衣带，曰： 若有不讳，义不独生！ 
现代文：并经常将毒药系在衣带上，说： 皇上如有不测，我也不能一个人活下去。 
English: And he often wore poison on his lanyard, saying: "If anything happens to the Emperor, I cannot live alone.

古文：后素有气疾，前年从上幸九成宫，柴绍等中夕告变，上擐甲出阁问状，后扶疾以从，左右止之，后曰： 上既震惊，吾何心自安！ 
现代文：皇后有多年的气喘病，前一年跟从太宗巡幸九成宫。柴绍等人深夜有急事禀报，太宗身穿甲胄走出宫阁询问事由，皇后抱病紧随其后，身边的侍臣劝阻皇后，她说： 皇上已然震惊，我内心又怎么能安定下来。 
English: The empress had been suffering from asthma for many years. The previous year, she had followed Emperor Taizong on a tour of the Jiu Cheng Palace. Late at night, Chai Shao and others received an urgent report. Emperor Taizong, wearing armor, came out of the palace to inquire about the reason. The empress followed with her illness. The attendants around her dissuaded the empress. She said, "The emperor is already shocked. How can I calm down?

古文：由是疾遂甚。
现代文：于是病情加重。
English: As a result, his condition worsened.

古文：太子言于后曰： 医药备尽而疾不瘳，请奏赦罪人及度人入道，庶获冥福。 
现代文：太子对皇后说： 药物都用过了，而病不见好，我请求奏明皇上大赦天下犯人并度俗人出家，庶几可获阴间的福祉。 
English: The prince said to the empress, "The medicines have all been used up, and my illness is not getting better. I request you to send a message to the emperor to pardon all the criminals in the world and to encourage the laity to enter the priesthood, so that some of them can receive the welfare of the underworld."

古文：后曰： 死生有命，非智力所移。
现代文：皇后说： 死生有命，并不是人的智力所能转移。
English: The Empress said, "The difference between life and death is not something that can be transferred by human intelligence.

古文：若为善有福，则吾不为恶；如其不然，妄求何益！
现代文：如果行善积德便有福祉，那么我并没做恶事；如果不是这样，胡乱求福又有什么好处呢？
English: If there is benefit in doing good and accumulating virtue, then I have not done evil; if not, then what is the benefit of randomly seeking blessings?

古文：赦者国之大事，不可数下。
现代文：大赦是国家的大事，不能多次发布。
English: Amnesty is a matter of national importance and cannot be issued more than once.

古文：道、释异端之教，蠹国病民，皆上素所不为，奈何以吾一妇人使上为所不为乎？
现代文：道教、佛教乃异端邪说，祸国殃民，都是皇上平素不做的事，为什么因为我一个妇道人家而让皇上去做平时不做的事呢？
English: Taoism and Buddhism are heretical heresies that bring misfortune to the country and harm to the people. These are things that the emperor does not normally do. Why should I, as a woman of Taoist faith, ask the emperor to do something that he does not normally do?

古文：必行汝言，吾不如速死！ 
现代文：如果一定要照你说的去做，我还不如立刻死去！ 
English: If I have to do what you say, I might as well die now!

古文：太子不敢奏，私以语房玄龄，玄龄白上，上哀之，欲为之赦，后固止之。
现代文：太子不敢上奏，只是私下与房玄龄谈起，玄龄禀明太宗，太宗十分悲痛，想为皇后而大赦天下，皇后执意劝阻他。
English: The prince did not dare to play, but he spoke privately with Fang Xuanling. Xuanling said that Taizong, Taizong was very sad, wanted to pardon the world for the queen, and the queen was determined to dissuade him.

古文：及疾笃，与上诀。时房玄龄以谴归第，后言于上曰： 玄龄事陛下久，小心慎密，奇谋秘计，未尝宣泄，苟无大故，愿勿弃之。
现代文：等到皇后病重，与太宗诀别时，房玄龄已受谴回家，皇后对太宗说： 玄龄侍奉陛下多年，小心翼翼，做事缜密，朝廷机密要闻，不曾有一丝泄露，如果没有大的过错，望陛下不要抛弃他。
English: By the time the empress was seriously ill and bade farewell to Emperor Taizong, Fang Xuanling had already been ordered to return home. The empress said to Emperor Taizong, "Empress Xuanling has served Your Majesty for many years. He is careful and meticulous in his work. He is privy to the secrets of the imperial court and has never leaked a single piece of information. If there is no major fault, I hope Your Majesty will not abandon him."

古文：妾之本宗，因缘葭莩，以致禄位，既非德举，易致颠危，欲使其子孙保全，慎勿处之权要，但以外戚奉朝请足矣。
现代文：我的亲属，由于沾亲带故而得到禄位，既然不是因德行而升至高位，便容易遭灭顶之灾，要使他们的子孙得以保全，望陛下不要将他们安置在权要的位置上，只是以外戚身份定期朝见皇上就足够了。
English: My relatives, who obtained their positions because they were related to the emperor, since they did not rise to high positions because of their virtue, are vulnerable to disaster. In order to preserve their children and grandchildren, I hope that His Majesty will not place them in important positions, but it is enough for them to see the emperor regularly as relatives.

古文：妾生无益于人，不可以死害人，愿勿以丘垄劳费天下，但因山为坟，器用瓦木而已。
现代文：我活着的时候对别人没有用处，死后更不能对人有害，希望陛下不要建陵墓而浪费国家财力，只要依山做坟，瓦木为随葬器物就可以了。
English: While I am alive, I am of no use to others, and after my death, I cannot be harmful to others. I hope that His Majesty will not build a mausoleum and waste the country's financial resources. As long as it is a mountain-based tomb and the shingle is a funerary object, it is fine.

古文：仍愿陛下亲君子，远小人，纳忠谏，屏谗慝，省作役，止游畋，妾虽没于九泉，诚无所恨！
现代文：仍然希望陛下亲近君子，疏远小人，接纳忠言直谏，摒弃谗言，节省劳役，禁止游猎，我即使在九泉之下，也毫无遗憾了。
English: I still hope that His Majesty will be close to the gentleman, distance himself from the villain, accept the loyal advice, abandon the insults, save the labor service, and ban hunting. I have no regrets even if I am under the nine springs.

古文：儿女辈不必令来，见其悲哀，徒乱人意。 
现代文：也不必让儿女们前来探视，看见他们悲哀，只会搅乱人心。 
English: You don't have to let your children come to visit, seeing them sad will only disturb your heart.

古文：因取衣中毒药以示上曰： 妾于陛下不豫之日，誓以死从乘舆，不能当吕后之地耳。 
现代文：于是取出衣带上的毒药示意太宗，说道： 我在陛下有病的日子，曾发誓以死跟定陛下到地下，不能走到吕后那样的地步。 
English: Then he took out the poison on his belt and gestured to Taizong, saying, "On the day of Your Majesty's illness, I swore that I would follow Your Majesty into the ground to the death, and that I would not reach the same level as Lu Ge."

古文：己卯，崩于立政殿。
现代文：己卯，皇后在立政殿驾崩。
English: Meanwhile, the Empress passed away at the Risshoden Palace.

古文：后尝采自古妇人得失事，为《女则》三十卷，又尝著论驳汉明德马后以不能抑退外亲，使当朝贵盛，徒戒其车如流水马如龙，是开其祸败之源而防其末流也。
现代文：长孙皇后曾经搜集上古以来妇人得失诸事编为《女则》三十卷，又曾亲自做文章批驳汉明德马皇后不能抑制外戚势力的发展，使他们在朝中显贵一时，而只是就他们车如流水马如龙提出警告，这是开启其祸乱的根源而防范其末流枝叶。
English: The eldest grandchild of the empress once collected the stories of women's gains and losses since ancient times and compiled them into 30 volumes of "Women's Rules." She also personally wrote an article to refute the fact that Empress Hamming-Dema could not restrain the development of foreign forces, making them momentarily prominent in the court, but only warned them that their car was like a dragon. This was to open the root cause of their misfortune and prevent its trailing branches.

古文：及崩，宫司并《女则》奏之，上览之悲恸，以示近臣曰： 皇后此书，足以垂范百世！
现代文：皇后驾崩后，宫中尚仪局的司籍奏呈《女则》一书，太宗看后十分悲痛，展示给身边大臣，说道： 皇后这本书，足以成为百世的典范。
English: After the death of the empress, the registrar of the Imperial Court's Ceremonial Affairs Bureau presented a book called "Women's Rules" to the emperor. The emperor was very sad after reading it. He showed it to the ministers around him and said, "This book by the empress is enough to become a model for the hundredth time."

古文：朕非不知天命而为无益之悲，但入宫不复闻规谏之言，失一良佐，故不能忘怀耳！ 
现代文：朕不是不知上天命数而沉溺无益的悲哀，只是在宫中再也听不见规谏的话了。失却了贤内助，所以不能忘怀呀！ 
English: It's not that I don't know the number of God's predestination and indulge in useless sorrow, it's just that I can no longer hear the words of rules and regulations in the palace. I lost my inner helper, so I can't forget it!

古文：乃召房玄龄，使复其位。
现代文：于是征召房玄龄，官复原职。
English: As a result, Fong Xuanling was conscripted and his post was reinstated.

古文：秋，八月，丙子，上谓群臣曰： 朕开直言之路，以利国也，而比来上封事者多讦人细事，自今复有为是者，朕当以谗人罪之。 
现代文：秋季，八月，丙子，太宗对大臣们说： 朕广开直言忠谏之路，正是为了有利于国家，然而近来上书奏事的多攻讦人家的琐细之事，今后还有这么做的，朕当以奸佞小人问罪。 
English: In the autumn, in August, Emperor Taizong said to the ministers: "I have opened up the path of being honest and loyal, precisely for the benefit of the country. However, recently I have written a lot about the trivialities of attacking people, and if I continue to do so in the future, I should be accused of being a villain.

古文：冬，十一月，庚午，葬文德皇后于昭陵。
现代文：冬季，十一月，庚午，将文德皇后安葬在昭陵。
English: In the winter, in November, at noon, Empress Wende was buried in Zhaoling.

古文：将军段志玄、宇文士及分统士众出肃章门。
现代文：将军段志玄、宇文士及分别统领士兵出萧章门护送灵车。
English: General Duan Shigen, Uwenshi and other soldiers led the soldiers out of Xiao Zhangmen to escort the hearse.

古文：帝夜使宫官至二人所，士及开营内之；志玄闭门不纳，曰： 军门不可夜开。 
现代文：太宗夜里派太监到二人军营，宇文士及开门接纳；段志玄则闭门不让进去，说 军门夜间不能开。 
English: In the night, Taizong sent eunuchs to the two military camps to open the doors and welcome the scholars; Duan Zhixuan closed the doors and did not allow them to enter, saying that the military doors could not be opened at night.

古文：使者曰： 此有手敕。 
现代文：使者说： 我这里有皇上手令。 
English: The messenger said: I have an imperial order here.

古文：志玄曰： 夜中不辨真伪。 
现代文：志玄说： 夜里难辨真假。 
English: Shigen said, "At night, it's hard to tell what's real and what's fake."

古文：竟留使者至明。
现代文：竟让太监在门外等到天亮。
English: Instead, he made the eunuch wait outside until dawn.

古文：帝闻而叹曰： 真将军也！ 
现代文：太宗听说后，感叹道： 这才是真正的将军啊！ 
English: Upon hearing this, Taizong exclaimed, "This is a real general!"

古文：帝复为文刻之石，称 皇后节俭，遗言薄葬，以为 盗贼之心，止求珍货，既无珍货，复何所求。 
现代文：太宗又为皇后书写碑文，说道： 皇后一生节俭，遗嘱薄葬，认为盗贼的意图，只是探求珍宝，既然没有珍宝，又有何求？
English: Taizong also wrote an epitaph for the empress, saying: The empress was frugal all her life, buried her will thinly, and thought that the thief's intention was only to search for treasures. Since there is no treasure, what is there to ask for?

古文：朕之本志，亦复如此。
现代文：朕的本意也是如此。
English: That is my intention as well.

古文：王者以天下为家，何必物在陵中，乃为己有。
现代文：君王以天下为家，何必将宝物放在陵中，才算据为己有。
English: Monarchs regard the whole world as their home, so why do they need to place treasures in a mausoleum in order to claim them as their own?

古文：今因九嵕山为陵，凿石之工才百馀人，数十日而毕。
现代文：如今就借九山为陵墓，凿石的工匠也只有一百多人，几十天完工。
English: Nowadays, nine mountains have been used as the mausoleum, and only more than a hundred craftsmen chiseled the stone, which took dozens of days to complete.

古文：不藏金玉，人马、器皿，皆用土木，形具而已，庶几奸盗息心，存没无累。当使百世子孙奉以为法。 
现代文：不藏金银玉器，兵马俑和器皿都用泥土和木料做成，只是略具形状。这样可以使盗贼打消念头，生者死者都没有累赘，应当以此成为千秋万代子孙的榜样。 
English: There is no need to hide gold, silver and jade, terracotta warriors and vessels are all made of mud and wood, with only a slight shape. This can make thieves give up the idea, the living and the dead are not encumbered, and should become a model for thousands of generations of descendants.

古文：上念后不已，于苑中作层观以望昭陵，尝引魏征同登，使视之。
现代文：太宗常常念及皇后，于后苑中设立了一个观望台，用以了望昭陵，曾带引魏徵一同登上观望台，让他观望。
English: Taizong often thought about the empress, and set up a viewing platform in the backyard for Zhao to look at Zhao's mausoleum. He once brought Wei Zheng to the viewing platform to let him look.

古文：征熟视之曰： 臣昏眊，不能见。 
现代文：魏徵看了很久说： 我老眼昏花，看不见。 
English: Wei Zheng looked at it for a long time and said: My old eyes are dizzy, I can't see.

古文：上指示之，征曰： 臣以为陛下望献陵若昭陵，则臣固见之矣。 
现代文：太宗指给他看，魏徵说： 我还以为陛下了望献陵，如果是昭陵，我早就看见了。 
English: Taizong pointed it out to him, and Wei Zheng said, "I thought that Your Majesty was looking for a mausoleum. If it was Zhaoling, I would have seen it long ago."

古文：上泣，为之毁观。
现代文：太宗悲泣，为此毁掉了观望台。
English: Taizong cried bitterly and destroyed the observation deck for this.

古文：十二月，戊寅，硃俱波、甘棠遣使入贡。
现代文：十二月，戊寅，朱俱波、甘棠派使节进献贡品。
English: In December, Wu Yin, Zhu Qubo, and Kangtang sent envoys to offer tribute.

古文：硃俱波在葱岭之北，去瓜州三千八百里。
现代文：朱俱波在葱岭以北，离瓜州二千八百里。
English: Zhujubo is located in the north of Qiuling, 2,800 miles away from Guazhou.

古文：甘棠在大海南。
现代文：甘棠在西海以南。
English: Sweet pea grows in the south of the West China Sea.

古文：上曰： 中国既安，四夷自服。
现代文：太宗说： 中原已经安定，四边少数族自然归服。
English: Taizong said: The Central Plains have been stabilized, and the minorities on all sides have naturally submitted.

古文：然朕不能无惧，昔秦始皇威振胡、越，二世而亡，唯诸公匡其不逮耳。 
现代文：但是朕不能没有担心，从前秦始皇威振胡、越，到二世就灭亡，希望各位规劝匡正朕做得不够的地方。 
English: However, I cannot help but worry that from the time of the former Qin Shihuang Emperor, Zhenhu, Yue, to the second generation, they will perish. I hope that you can persuade the Kuang Zhen to do enough.

古文：魏王泰有宠于上，或言三品以上多轻魏王。
现代文：魏王李泰深得太宗宠爱，有人禀奏称三品以上大臣多轻薄魏王。
English: Li Tai, the king of the Wei Dynasty, was so deeply loved by the emperor that some people joked that the ministers above the third grade were too light for the king.

古文：上怒，引三品以上，作色让之曰： 隋文帝时，一品以下皆为诸王所顿踬，彼岂非天子儿邪！
现代文：太宗大怒，召见三品以上大臣，严厉地责备他们说： 隋文帝的时候，一品以下大臣均被亲王们所羞辱操纵，难道魏王不是帝王的儿子吗？
English: Taizong was so angry that he summoned the ministers of three grades and above and severely rebuked them: During the time of the Sui and Wen Dynasties, the ministers of one grade and below were all humiliated and manipulated by the princes. Wasn't Wei Wang the son of the emperor?

古文：朕但不听诸子纵横耳，闻三品以上皆轻之，我若纵之，岂不能折辱公辈乎！ 
现代文：朕不过不想听任皇子们横行霸道，听说三品以上大臣都轻视他们，我如果放纵他们胡来，难道不能羞辱你们吗？ 
English: I just don't want to let the princes run amok. I've heard that ministers above the third rank despise them. If I let them run amok, won't I humiliate you?

古文：房玄龄等皆惶惧流汗拜谢。
现代文：房玄龄等人都惶恐得汗流满面，磕头谢罪。
English: Fang Xuanling and the others were so scared that they were sweating profusely, bowing their heads in thanks.

古文：魏征独正色曰： 臣窃计当今群臣，心无敢轻魏王者。
现代文：惟独魏徵正颜厉色地说： 我考虑当今的大臣们，必不敢轻薄魏王。
English: However, Wei Zheng said with a straight face: "Considering today's ministers, I would not dare to take Wei Wang lightly.

古文：在礼，臣、子一也。
现代文：依照礼仪，大臣与皇子都是一样的。
English: According to the etiquette, the minister and the prince are the same.

古文：《春秋》：王人虽微，序于诸侯之上。
现代文：《春秋》说：周王的人即使微贱，也要位列诸侯之上。
English: "Spring and Autumn" said: Even if the people of King Zhou are lowly, they should be ranked above the princes.

古文：三品以上皆公卿，陛下所尊礼，若纪纲大坏，固所不论；圣明在上，魏王必无顿辱群臣之理。
现代文：三品以上都是公卿大臣，陛下素所尊崇礼待。假如纲纪败坏，固然不必说它；如果圣明在上，魏王必无羞辱大臣之理。
English: Above the three ranks, they are all court nobles and ministers, and His Majesty has always respected and treated them with the utmost courtesy. If the discipline of the ranks were to deteriorate, there would be no need to speak of it; if the sacred light was at the top, the Wei King would have no reason to humiliate the ministers.

古文：隋文帝骄其诸子，使多行无礼，卒皆夷灭，又足法乎？ 
现代文：隋文帝骄溺他的儿子们，使得他们举止无礼，最后全被杀掉，又值得后人效法吗？ 
English: Did Emperor Sui Wen drown his sons in arrogance, causing them to behave rudely, and finally they were all killed, and is it worth future generations to follow suit?

古文：上悦，曰： 理到之语，不得不服。
现代文：太宗高兴地说： 说得条条在理，朕不得不佩服。
English: Taizong said happily, "I have to admire you for speaking the truth.

古文：朕以私爱忘公义，向者之忿，自谓不疑，及闻征言，方知理屈。
现代文：朕因私情溺爱而忘记公义，刚才恼怒的时候，自己觉得有道理，等听到魏徵的一番话，方知没有道理。
English: When I was angry just now, I felt justified, but when I heard Wei Zheng's words, I knew there was no reason.

古文：人主发言何得容易乎！ 
现代文：身为君主讲话哪能那么轻率呢？ 
English: How could a monarch speak so carelessly?

古文：上曰： 法令不可数变，数变则烦，官长不能尽记；又前后差违，吏得以为奸。自今变法，皆宜详慎而行之。 
现代文：太宗说： 法令不可多次变更，多变则法令烦苛，官员们难以记全；同时又会出现前后不一致，胥吏可以钻空子犯法；今后变更法令，均需谨慎行事。 
English: Taizong said: Laws should not be amended many times. If they are amended many times, the laws will be cumbersome and difficult for officials to remember. At the same time, there will be inconsistencies, and officials may take advantage of loopholes to violate the law. In the future, it is necessary to be cautious when amending laws.

古文：治书侍御史权万纪上言： 宣、饶二州银大发采之，岁可得数百万缗。 
现代文：治书侍御史权万纪上书言事： 宣州、饶州有大量白银可以开采，每年可得数百万缗。 
English: Zhi Shu Zhi Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu Gu

古文：上曰： 朕贵为天子，所乏者非财也，但恨无嘉言可以利民耳。
现代文：太宗说： 朕贵为天子，所缺乏的并非是金银财物，只是遗憾没有得到嘉言懿行可以利于百姓。
English: Emperor Taizong said, "Since I am the son of Heaven, what I lack is not gold, silver, or property, but it is a pity that I have not received the virtuous words and deeds that can benefit the people.

古文：与其多得数百万缗，何如得一贤才！
现代文：与其多得数百万缗，还不如得到一个贤才！
English: It's better to get a genius than to get millions of baht more!

古文：卿未尝进一贤，退一不肖，而专言税银之利。
现代文：你未曾推荐一个贤才，退掉一个庸才，而专门上言税银之利。
English: You have not recommended a genius, dismissed a mediocrity, and specifically mentioned tax and profit.

古文：昔尧、舜抵璧于山，投珠于谷，汉之桓、灵乃聚钱为私藏，卿欲以桓、灵俟我邪！ 
现代文：从前尧、舜将玉璧丢入深山，珠宝投入深谷，汉代桓、灵二帝聚敛钱财以为己有，你让我做桓、灵二帝吗？ 
English: Once upon a time, emperors and empresses threw jade into the deep mountains and jewels into the deep valleys. In the Han Dynasty, Emperor Huan and Emperor Ling gathered money and thought they had it all. Will you let me be Emperor Huan and Emperor Ling?

古文：是日。黜万纪，使还家。
现代文：这一天，罢免权万纪官职，让他回家赋闲。
English: On this day, he removed Quan Wanji from his post and let him go home to be idle.

古文：是岁，更命统军为折冲都尉，别将为果毅都尉。
现代文：这一年，唐朝将统军改名为折冲都尉，别将改为果毅都尉。
English: In the same year, the Tang Dynasty changed the name of the United Army to Lieutenant Orichong, and Lieutenant Guo Yi.

古文：凡十道，置府六百三十四，而关内二百六十一，皆隶诸卫及东宫六率。
现代文：全国设立十道，六百三十四府，其中关内占二百六十一府，均隶属于诸卫及东宫六率。
English: Ten provinces and 634 prefectures were established across the country, of which Guanai accounted for 261 prefectures, all of which were subordinate to Zhuwei and Donggu.

古文：凡上府兵千二百人，中府千人，下府八百人。
现代文：凡上府有兵一千二百人，中府一千人，下府八百人。
English: There were twelve hundred soldiers in the upper prefecture, one thousand in the middle prefecture, and eight hundred in the lower prefecture.

古文：三百人为团，团有校尉；五十人为队，队有正；十人为火，火有长。
现代文：每三百人为团，团有校尉；五十人为队，队有正；十人为火，火有长。
English: For every three hundred people in a regiment, there is a lieutenant; for fifty people in a squad, there is a sergeant; for ten people in a fire, there is a captain.

古文：每人兵甲粮装各有数，皆自备，输之库，有征行则给之。
现代文：每人兵甲粮食装备都有数额，均自己筹备，平时放在库中，有征战时再发给个人。
English: Each person has a certain amount of armor, food, and equipment, all of which are prepared by themselves, stored in warehouses in peacetime, and then issued to individuals in times of war.

古文：年二十为兵，六十而免。
现代文：二十岁当兵，六十岁免役。
English: Twenty years old soldier, sixty years old exempt from military service.

古文：其能骑射者为越骑，其馀为步兵。
现代文：其中能骑善射的称为越骑，其余皆为步兵。
English: Among them, those who can ride and shoot well are called yue riders, and the rest are infantry.

古文：每岁季冬，折冲都尉帅其属教战，当给马者官予其直市之。
现代文：每年冬季，折冲都尉统率下属教习演练，应该给马的由官府出钱自己购买。
English: Every winter, Lieutenant Orichong leads the subordinate training exercises, and the horses should be purchased by the government at its own expense.

古文：凡当宿卫者番上，兵部以远近给番，远疏、近数，皆一月而更。
现代文：凡应当宿卫者轮流值勤，兵部根据距离远近排班，路远的轮值次数较少，路近的轮值次数较勤，均一个月一轮换。
English: All the guards should take turns to be on duty, and the military departments should arrange the shifts according to the distance from the front to the rear. The number of rotations for those who are far away is less, and the number of rotations for those who are close to the front is more frequent, and they are rotated once a month.

古文：贞观十一年丁酉，公元六三七年春，正月，徙郐王元裕为邓王，谯王元名为舒王。
现代文：贞观十一年春季，正月，改封郐王李元裕为邓王，谯王李元名为舒王。
English: In the spring and the first month of the 11th year of Zhenguan, the title of King Li Yuanyu was changed to King Deng, and the title of King Li Yuan was changed to King Shu.

古文：辛卯，以吴王恪为安州都督，晋王治为并州都督，纪王慎为秦州都督。
现代文：辛卯，任命吴王李恪为安州都督，晋王李治为并州都督，纪王李慎为秦州都督。
English: Xinwu appointed Wu Wang Li Ke as the governor of Anzhou, Jin Wang Li Zhi as the governor of Anhui Province, and Ji Wang Li Shen as the governor of Qin Province.

古文：将之官，上赐书戒敕曰： 吾欲遗汝珍玩，恐益骄奢，不如得此一言耳。 
现代文：将要赴任时，太宗手书诫敕，说： 我想送给你们珍玩，恐怕使你们更加骄奢，不如得到这么一句话。 
English: When he was about to take up his post, the Grand Master wrote a precept, saying: "I would like to give you a precious gift, but I am afraid it will make you more arrogant. It is better to get such a sentence."

古文：上作飞山宫。
现代文：太宗命人营造洛阳的飞山宫。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered the construction of Luoyang's Feishan Palace.

古文：庚子，特进魏征上疏，以为： 炀帝恃其富强，不虞后患，穷奢极欲，使百姓困穷，以至身死人手，社稷为墟。
现代文：庚子，特进魏徵上疏认为： 隋炀帝依仗着国库富足，不担心后患，穷奢极欲，使老百姓穷困，以致于被人杀掉，社稷江山变为废墟。
English: Geng Zi, a special envoy to Wei Zheng Shang Shu, believes: The Sui and Qian Dynasties relied on the national treasury for wealth, did not worry about the aftermath, were extremely extravagant, and impoverished the common people, so that they were killed, and the mountains and rivers of the society were turned into ruins.

古文：陛下拨乱返正，宜思隋之所以失，我之所以得，撤其峻宇，安于卑宫；若因基而增广，袭旧而加饰，此则以乱易乱，殃咎必至，难得易失，可不念哉！
现代文：陛下拔乱反正，应当深思隋朝灭亡和我大唐得天下的原因，撤掉高大的殿宇，安居低矮的宫殿；假如在旧基上又加扩修营建，承袭旧殿加以华丽的装饰，这便是以乱代乱，必然遭致殃祸，江山难得易失，能不好好考虑吗？ 
English: In any case, His Majesty should think deeply about the reasons for the demise of the Sui Dynasty and the rise of the Great Tang Dynasty, remove the tall buildings, and live in a low palace. If the old foundation is expanded and built on, and the old palace is inherited and decorated with ornate decoration, this is a generation of chaos, and it will inevitably cause disaster. The country is difficult to gain and easy to lose. Can we not consider it well?

古文：房玄龄等先受诏定律令，以为： 旧法，兄弟异居，廕不相及，而谋反连坐皆死；祖孙有廕，而止应配流。
现代文：房玄龄等人先前受诏修定律令，认为： 依照旧法，兄弟分居，门荫互不相关，而谋反连坐时均处死；祖孙有荫亲，连坐只发配流放。
English: Fang Xuanling and others had previously been ordered by the Emperor to amend the law, and believed that: According to the old law, brothers live separately, the door shadows are not related to each other, and if they conspire to sit together, they will all be executed; if the grandparents and grandchildren have shadow relatives, they will only be exiled if they sit together.

古文：据礼论情，深为未惬。
现代文：依据礼义考虑人情，深觉有不当之处。
English: According to the etiquette to consider human feelings, deeply aware that there is something wrong.

古文：今定律，祖孙与兄弟缘坐者俱配役。 
现代文：现今重定律令，祖孙与兄弟株连犯罪的均发配劳役， 太宗同意。
English: Tai Zong agreed with the recent revision of the Criminal Law, which stipulates that grandparents, grandchildren and brothers who commit joint criminal activities will all be sentenced to forced labor.

古文：从之。自是比古死刑，除其太半，天下称赖焉。
现代文：自此比照古代死刑，已除掉了一大半，全国称道。
English: Since then, in comparison with the ancient death penalty, more than half of it has been eliminated, which has been praised by the whole country.

古文：玄龄等定律五百条，立刑名二十等，比隋律减大辟九十二条，减流入徙者七十一条，凡削烦去蠹，变重为轻者，不可胜纪。
现代文：房玄龄等人定律五百条，立刑名二十等，比隋律减掉大辟九十二条，减流放做劳役七十一条，举凡删繁就简去除弊刑，改重为轻，不可胜数。
English: Fang Xuanling and other people's laws have five hundred articles, and the number of punishments has been raised to twenty. Compared with the laws of the Sui Dynasty, ninety-two articles have been greatly reduced, and seventy-one articles have been reduced and exiled to labor service.

古文：又定令一千五百九十馀条。
现代文：又制定令一千五百九十多条。
English: He also issued more than 1,590 orders.

古文：武德旧制，释奠于太学，以周公为先圣，孔子配飨；玄龄等建议停祭周公，以孔子为先圣，颜回配飨。
现代文：武德朝旧制度，在太学行释奠礼，以周公为先圣，孔子配享从祀；玄龄等建议停祭周公，改为以孔子为先圣，颜回配亨。
English: According to the old system of the Wude Dynasty, Zhou Gong was the first saint to be enshrined, and Confucius was entitled to be worshipped. However, Xuanling and others proposed to stop the worship of Zhou Gong and replace it with Confucius as the first saint, and Yan Hui was entitled to be worshipped.

古文：又删武德以来敕格，定留七百条，至是颁行之。
现代文：又删减武德以来敕格，确定留下七百条，到此时颁行天下，又定枷？
English: Since Wu De was deleted, it was determined to leave seven hundred articles. At this time, it was promulgated to the world, and the yoke was set?

古文：又定枷、杻、钳、锁、杖、笞，皆有长短广狭之制。自张蕴古之死，法官以出罪为戒；时有失入者，又不加罪。
现代文：钳锁、杖、笞等刑具，均有长短宽窄的规制。自从张蕴古死后，法官都以减罪释放为戒；当时误抓误判，又不加罪。
English: Locks, canes, shackles and other instruments of torture are all regulated in terms of length, width and narrowness. Since Zhang Yungu's death, judges have issued a warning to reduce the sentence; at that time, there was no additional punishment for the wrongful arrest and miscarriage of justice.

古文：上尝问大理卿刘德威曰： 近日刑网稍密，何也？ 
现代文：太宗曾问大理寺卿刘德威： 近来判刑的较多较重，为什么？ 
English: Emperor Taizong once asked Liu Dewei, Lord of Dali Temple: Recently, there have been more and heavier sentences, why?

古文：对曰： 此在主上，不在群臣，人主好宽则宽，好急则急。
现代文：刘德威答道： 这关键在于皇上，责任不在臣下，君主喜欢宽大则刑宽，喜好严刻则从重。
English: Liu Dewi replied, "The key lies in the emperor. The responsibility does not lie with the vassal. If the monarch likes to be lenient, the punishment will be lenient. If he likes to be strict, the punishment will be more severe."

古文：律文：失入减三等，失出减五等。
现代文：律文写道：错判人入狱的减官三等，错放则减官五等。
English: The text of the law reads: the wrongly sentenced person is demoted to the third class, and the wrongly released person is demoted to the fifth class.

古文：今失入无辜，失出更获大罪，是以吏各自免，竞就深文，非有教使之然，畏罪故耳。
现代文：如今错判了人无事，错放了人却要获大罪，所以吏卒为求自免，竞相定罪，苛细周纳，不是别人让他们这么做，而是畏惧犯罪的缘故。
English: Nowadays, wrongly convicted people have nothing to do, but wrongly released people have to get a serious crime, so officials, in order to absolve themselves, compete to convict, and are harshly lenient, not because others let them do so, but because of the fear of crime.

古文：陛下倘一断以律，则此风立变矣。 
现代文：陛下倘若一律以法律为依据，则此风气立刻改变。 
English: Your Majesty, if everything were based on the law, this culture would change immediately.

古文：上悦，从之。
现代文：太宗高兴，听从这个意见。
English: Xuanzong was very happy and obeyed Li Linfu's words.

古文：由是断狱平允。
现代文：从此断案大多平允公正。
English: Since then, most of the dismissals have been fair and equitable.

古文：上以汉世豫作山陵，免子孙苍猝劳费，又志在俭葬，恐子孙从欲奢靡；二月，丁巳，自为终制，因山为陵，容棺而已。
现代文：太宗认为汉朝预先修筑陵墓，以免子孙们时间仓促又耗费财力，而且一心要薄葬，担心子孙随从时尚追求奢靡。二月，丁巳，太宗自定送终制度，依山建陵，地宫仅能容得下棺木即可。
English: Taizong believed that the Han Dynasty built mausoleums in advance so that their descendants would not have to spend time and money on hasty and shallow burials, fearing that their descendants would follow the fashion and pursue luxury. In February, Ding Si, Taizong's self-determined funeral system, built a mausoleum by the mountain, and the underground palace could only accommodate the coffin.

古文：甲子，上行幸洛阳宫。
现代文：甲子，太宗巡幸洛阳宫。
English: Emperor Taizong visits Luoyang Palace.

古文：上至显仁宫，官吏以缺储偫，有被谴者。
现代文：太宗到达显仁宫，当地官员因缺乏储备，有被降职的。
English: When Emperor Taizong arrived at the palace of Emperor Xianren, some local officials were demoted due to lack of reserves.

古文：魏征谏曰： 陛下以储偫谴官吏，臣恐承风相扇，异日民不聊生，殆非行幸之本意也。
现代文：魏徵劝谏道： 陛下因为储备的事就将官吏降职，我担心此风气盛行，则会造成民不聊生，这并非陛下巡幸各地的本意。
English: Wei Zheng advised: His Majesty demoted officials because of the reserve. I am worried that if this trend prevails, it will cause people to be bored. This is not the intention of His Majesty's tour around the country.

古文：昔炀帝讽郡县献食，视其丰俭以为赏罚，故海内叛之。
现代文：从前隋炀帝暗示各地郡县进献食品，视其进献多少做为赏罚的根据，所以天下百姓叛离。
English: Once upon a time, the Sui and Qian Dynasties hinted that all counties should donate food, and regarded the amount of donation as the basis for reward and punishment, so the people of the world rebelled.

古文：此陛下所亲见，奈何欲效之乎！ 
现代文：这是陛下亲眼所见，为什么又要效法呢！ 
English: This is what His Majesty saw with his own eyes, so why should he follow suit!

古文：上惊曰： 非公不闻此言。 
现代文：太宗惊叹地说： 没有你，我便听不到这类话。 
English: Taizong said in amazement, "Without you, I wouldn't be able to hear such words.

古文：因谓长孙无忌等曰： 朕昔过此，买饭而食，僦舍而宿；今供顿如此，岂得犹嫌不足乎！ 
现代文：进而对长孙无忌等人说： 朕从前经过这里，买饭而食，租房舍而宿，如今供奉如此，怎么就能嫌其做得不够呢！ 
English: He went on to say to his eldest grandson Muji and others, "I used to pass by here, buy food and eat, rent a house and stay, and now I worship like this, how can I think it's not enough!

古文：三月，丙戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月，丙戌朔日，出现日食。
English: In March, on the first day of spring, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：庚子，上宴洛阳宫西宛，泛积翠池，顾谓侍臣曰： 炀帝作此宫苑，结怨于民，今悉为我有，正由宇文述、虞世基、裴蕴之徒内为谄谀、外蔽聪明故也，可不戒哉！ 
现代文：庚子，太宗在洛阳宫西苑饮宴，在积翠池泛舟，对大臣们说： 隋炀帝修筑此宫苑，与百姓结下积怨，如今全都归我所有，正是因为宇文述、虞世基、裴蕴之流在宫内谄谀，在宫外堵塞君主视听的缘故，能不引以为戒吗？ 
English: Geng Zi, Emperor Taizong held a banquet in the West Garden of Luoyang Palace and went boating in the Jiecui Pool, and said to the ministers: Emperor Sui Jian built this palace garden and settled a long-standing grudge with the people, and now all of it belongs to me. It is precisely because the flow of Yu Wenshu, Yu Shiji, and Pei Kun is blocked inside the palace and outside the palace that the monarch's audio-visual is blocked. Can we not take this as a warning?

古文：房玄龄、魏征上所定《新礼》一百三十八篇；丙午，诏行之。
现代文：房玄龄、魏徵上奏所定《新礼》一百三十八篇；丙午，太宗下诏颁行全国。
English: There are one hundred and thirty-eight articles in the "New Rites" prescribed by Fang Xuanling and Wei Zheng Shangso; in the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Taizong issued an edict for the whole country.

古文：以礼部尚书王珪为魏王泰师，上谓泰曰： 汝事珪当如事我。 
现代文：太宗任命礼部尚书王为魏王李泰的老师，太宗对李泰说： 你对待王当如侍奉我一样。 
English: Emperor Taizong appointed Prince Shangshu of the Ministry of Rites to be the teacher of Wei King Li Tai. Emperor Taizong said to Li Tai: You treat Wang Dang as if you were serving me.

古文：泰见珪，辄先拜，珪亦以师道自居。
现代文：李泰见到王，总先行拜见礼，王也以师礼自处。
English: When Li Tai saw Wang, he always bowed to him first, and Wang also bowed to him.

古文：子敬直尚南平公主。
现代文：王的儿子王敬直娶南平公主为妻。
English: The king's son, Wang Jingzhi, married Princess Nanping.

古文：先是，公主下嫁，皆不以妇礼事舅姑，珪曰： 今主上钦明，动循礼法，吾受公主谒见，岂为身荣，所以成国家之美耳。 
现代文：先前，公主下嫁，都不以媳妇礼节侍奉公婆，王说： 如今皇上圣明，行为举止都依循礼法，我接受公主行礼，难道是为自身荣耀？只是为了成就国家的美名。 
English: Previously, when a princess got married, she did not serve her in-laws with the etiquette of a daughter-in-law. The king said, "Nowadays, the emperor is a saint, and his behavior is in accordance with the etiquette. I accept the princess to perform the etiquette. Is it for my own glory? Is it just to achieve a good name for the country."

古文：乃与其妻就席坐，令公主执，行盥馈之礼。
现代文：于是和他的妻子就席而坐，让公主拿着盛枣栗的竹器，行媳妇侍公婆的馈之礼，洗手后，递上特豚。
English: So he and his wife sat down at the table and asked the princess to take a bamboo bowl with dates and chestnuts, give the gift of the daughter-in-law's attendant, wash her hands, and hand over the pork.

古文：是后公主始行妇礼，自珪始。
现代文：此后公主向公婆行礼，就从王家开始。
English: After that, the princess bowed to her in-laws, starting with the royal family.

古文：群臣复请封禅，上使秘书监颜师古等议其礼，房玄龄裁定之。
现代文：众位大臣又请求太宗登泰山封禅，太宗让秘书监颜师古等人讨论礼仪，房玄龄予以裁定。
English: The ministers also requested Taizong to go to Mount Tai to meditate, Taizong to have his secretary and the colorist discuss the etiquette, and Fang Xuanling to make a ruling.

古文：夏，四月，己卯，魏征上疏，以为： 人主善始者多，克终者寡，岂取之易而守之难乎？
现代文：夏季，四月，己卯，魏徵上奏疏认为： 君主善始者较多，能够善终的少，难道是取天下容易而守成难吗？
English: Summer, April, Jiwu, Wei Zheng Shang Song Zuo thought: There are more monarchs who are good at starting, and fewer who can end well. Is it easy to take over the world, but difficult to keep it?

古文：盖以殷忧则竭诚以尽下，安逸则骄恣而轻物；尽下则胡、越同心，轻物则六亲离德，虽震之以威怒，亦皆貌从而心不服故也。
现代文：那是因为身处忧患则竭心尽力对待百姓，一俟安逸就骄横恣肆而轻薄怠慢；竭心尽力待人则胡、越等族也同心协力，轻薄怠慢则亲属也离心离德，即使以神威圣怒震动天下，臣下也都是外表顺从，表里不一。
English: That is because in times of sorrow, they try their best to treat the people, and when they are at ease, they are arrogant and wanton, and neglect lightly; when they try their best to treat people, Hu and Yue and other ethnic groups also work together, and when they neglect lightly, their relatives are also alienated from morality. Even if they shake the world with divine power and wrath, their subjects are all obedient on the outside, and not the same on the inside.

古文：人主诚能见可欲则思知足，将兴缮则思知止，处高危则思谦降，临满盈则思挹损，遇逸乐则思撙节，在宴安则思后患，防壅蔽则思延纳，疾谗邪则思正己，行爵赏则思因喜而僭，施刑罚则思因怒而滥，兼是十思，而选贤任能，固可以无为而治，又何必劳神苦体以代百司之任哉！ 
现代文：君主应该能够做到见到希望得到的东西则想到知足，将要兴缮营建的时候想到适可而止，身处高处则想着谦卑，面临盈满则想着减损，遇见安逸享乐则想着克制，在平安的时候想到后患，防止闭目塞听则想到延纳谏诤，痛恨谗言邪恶则想着端正自己，行爵赏时想着由于高兴而乱行封赏，施刑罚时想到会因为恼怒而滥罚。君主常常思考着这十个方面，而选贤任能，这样就可以达到无为而治，又何必劳神费力以代行百官的职责呢？ 
English: A monarch should be able to see what he hopes for and think of contentment; when he wants to renovate and build, he should think of what is appropriate and stop; when he is on a high place, he should think of humility; when he is full, he should think of reduction; when he meets ease and enjoyment, he should think of restraint; when he is at peace, he should think of hindrance; when he wants to prevent closing his eyes and listening, he should think of prolonging his life; when he hates slander and evil, he should think of rectifying himself; when he wants to award a knighthood, he should think of awarding because of pleasure, and when he wants to

