古文：秦攻赵，平原君使人请救于魏。
现代文：秦国进攻赵国，平原君派人向魏国请求援救。
English: Qin attacked Zhao, and Pingyuan sent someone to Wei to ask for help.

古文：信陵君发兵至邯郸城下，秦兵罢。
现代文：信陵君发兵到邯郸城下，秦国罢兵。
English: Xinlingjun sent an army to the lower part of Lucheng, and the Qin State withdrew its troops.

古文：虞卿为平原君请益地，谓赵王曰： 夫不斗一卒，不顿一戟，而解二国患者，平原君之力也。
现代文：虞卿为平原君请求增加封地，对赵孝成王说： 不使一个士卒战斗，不使一只戟毁坏，而解决了两个国家之间的灾祸，这是平原君的力量。
English: Yuqing requested an increase in fiefs for the Plain Prince, and said to Zhao Xiaocheng Wang: Without making a single soldier fight, without destroying a single dragonfly, but solving the disaster between the two countries, this is the power of the Plain Prince.

古文：用人之力，而忘人之功，不可。 
现代文：使用别人的力量，却忘了别人的功劳，是不可以的。 
English: It is not acceptable to use the strength of others while forgetting the merits of others.

古文：赵王曰： 善。 
现代文：赵孝成王说： 好。 
English: Zhao Xiaocheng Wang said: Good.

古文：将益之地。
现代文：将要给平原君增加封地。
English: He will have to increase his fief.

古文：公孙龙闻之，见平原君曰： 君无覆军杀将之功，而封以东武城。
现代文：公孙龙听到了这件事，拜见平原君说： 您没有消灭敌人军队杀伤敌人将领的功劳，但赵王把东武城封给您。
English: When Gongsun Long heard about this, he met with Pingyuan Jun and said: You did not destroy the enemy army or kill the enemy generals, but King Zhao gave you the Dongwu City.

古文：赵国豪杰之士，多在君之右，而君为相国者以亲故。
现代文：赵国的英雄豪杰，才能多在您之上，然而您却因为是赵王亲属的缘故做了相国。
English: The heroes and heroines of Zhao's country have more talent than you, but you have become a relative because you are a relative of King Zhao.

古文：夫君封以东武城不让无功，佩赵国相印不辞无能，一解国患，欲求益地，是亲威受封，而国人计功也。
现代文：您接受东武城的封地没有功劳不谦让，佩戴赵国相印没有才能不推辞，一旦为国家解除患难，就想要追加封地，这是以亲戚的身份无功受封，而且以国人的身份计功受赏。
English: You accept the fiefdom of Dongwu City without merit or humility, wear the Zhao national seal without ability or refusal, and want to add a fief once the country is relieved of difficulties. This is a relative's status without merit, and it is rewarded with the status of a national.

古文：为君计者，不如勿受便。 
现代文：我替您考虑，不如不接受合适。 
English: I'll think about it for you. It's better not to accept.

古文：平原君曰： 谨受命。 
现代文：平原君说： 接受您的命令。 
English: Mr. Hirahara said, "I will accept your order."

古文：乃不受封。
现代文：于是就没有接受封赏。
English: As a result, he did not accept the award.

