古文：武承嗣，荆州都督士矱之孙，则天顺圣皇后兄子也。
现代文：武承嗣，是荆州都督武士的孙子、则天皇后兄长的儿子。
English: Wu Chengzhi was the grandson of the Jingzhou samurai governor and the son of the emperor's elder brother.

古文：初，士矱娶相里氏，生元庆、元爽。
现代文：起初，武士娶相里氏为妻，生了武元庆、武元爽两个儿子。
English: At first, the samurai married a woman from the Sori clan and had two sons, Takemoto Kei and Takemoto Saku.

古文：又娶杨氏，生三女：长适越王府功曹贺兰越石，次则天，次适郭氏。
现代文：后来又娶了杨氏，生了三个女儿：长女嫁给越王府的功曹贺兰越石，次女是武则天，幼女嫁给郭氏。
English: Later, she married Mr. Yang and gave birth to three daughters: the eldest daughter married the meritorious Cao Helan Yue Shi of Yue Wangfu, the second daughter was Wu Zetian, and the youngest daughter married Mr. Guo.

古文：士矱卒后，兄子惟良、怀运及元爽等遇杨氏失礼。
现代文：武士死后，他兄长的儿子武惟良、武怀运和武元爽等人不按礼法对待杨氏。
English: After the samurai's death, his elder brother's sons, such as Wu Weiliang, Wu Huaiyun, and Wu Yuanshuang, did not treat the Yang clan according to etiquette.

古文：及则天立为皇后，追赠士矱为司徒、周忠孝王，封杨氏代国夫人。
现代文：待到武则天被立为皇后，追封武士为司徒、周忠孝王，封杨氏为代国夫人。
English: It wasn't until Wuzetian that she was made empress, and the samurai were posthumously given the titles of Sitoru and Zhou Zhongxiao Wang, and the Yang family was given the title of acting wife of the country.

古文：贺兰越石早卒，封其妻为韩国夫人。
现代文：不久又给武士追加封官为太尉，杨氏改封为荣国夫人。
English: Soon after, the samurai was given the additional title of second lieutenant, and Ms. Yang was changed to Mrs. Rongguo.

古文：寻又加赠士矱为太尉，杨氏改封为荣国夫人。时元庆仕为宗正少卿，元爽为少府少监，惟良为卫尉少卿。荣国夫人恨其畴日薄己，讽皇后抗疏请出元庆等为外职，佯为退让，其实恶之也。
现代文：这时武元庆任职为宗正少卿，武元爽任少府少监，武惟良任卫尉少卿，荣国夫人怨恨他们往日对待自己刻薄，示意则天皇后上疏请求将武元庆等调出朝廷任职，表面上仍假装谦让，实际上憎恶他们。
English: At this time, Wu Yuanqing served as Zong Zheng Shaoqing, Wu Yuan Shuang as Shao Fu Shao Guan, and Wu Weiliang as Wei Wei Shao Guan. Rongguo's wife resented the fact that they had treated her harshly in the past, and suggested that the Empress Shangsu request that Wu Yuanqing and others be transferred out of the imperial court. On the surface, they still pretended to be modest, but in fact, they hated them.

古文：于是元庆为龙州刺史，元爽为濠州刺史，惟良为始州刺史。
现代文：于是武元庆被调任龙州刺史，武元爽任濠州刺史，武惟良任始州刺史。
English: As a result, Wu Yuanqing was transferred to the post of Longzhou magistrate, Wu Yuan Shuang to the post of Zhangzhou magistrate, and Wu Weiliang to the post of Shizhou magistrate.

古文：元庆至州病卒，元爽自濠州又配流振州而死。
现代文：武元庆到龙州后即病故，武元爽又从濠州被流放振州而死。
English: Wu Yuanqing died of illness immediately after arriving in Longzhou, and Wu Yuan Shuang died after being exiled from Bozhou to Zhenzhou.

古文：乾封年，惟良与弟淄州刺史怀运，以岳牧例集于泰山之下。
现代文：乾封年，武惟良与其弟淄州刺史武怀运，按州府大吏的例规在泰山下聚会。
English: In the year of Qianfu, Wu Weiliang and his younger brother, Zhangzhou Zishi Wu Huaiyun, gathered at the foot of Mount Tai according to the regulations of the prefectural officials.

古文：时韩国夫人女贺兰氏在宫中，颇承恩宠。
现代文：这时韩国夫人的女儿贺兰氏在宫中，很得皇帝宠爱。
English: At this time, the daughter of the Korean lady, Heran, was in the palace and was very favored by the emperor.

古文：则天意欲除之，讽高宗幸其母宅，因惟良等献食，则天密令人以毒药贮贺兰氏食中，贺兰氏食之，暴卒，归罪于惟良、怀运，乃诛之。
现代文：武则天想除掉她，便示意高宗去贺兰氏母亲的府宅，趁武惟良等进献了食物，武则天暗中派人将毒药放进贺兰氏的食物中，贺兰氏吃后，猝然死亡，然后归罪于武惟良、武怀运，杀了他们。
English: Wu Zetian wanted to get rid of her, so he signaled Gaozong to go to the mansion of Heran's mother, and took advantage of Wu Weiliang and others to donate food. Wu Zetian secretly sent someone to put poison into Heran's food, and after Heran ate it, he died suddenly, and then blamed it on Wu Weiliang and Wu Huaiyun, and killed them.

古文：仍讽百僚抗表请改其姓为蝮氏，绝其属籍。
现代文：又示意群臣上表请求皇帝将他们改为姓蝮，断绝他们的族籍。
English: He also suggested that the courtiers present a petition to the emperor to change their surnames to  and sever their ethnicity.

古文：元爽等缘坐配流岭外而死，乃以韩国夫人之子敏之为士矱嗣，改姓武氏，累拜左侍极、兰台太史，袭爵周国公。
现代文：武元爽等因受株连获罪发配到岭外而死去，于是将韩国夫人的儿子贺兰敏之作为武士的嗣子，改姓武，越级委任为左侍极、兰台太史，承袭爵位为周国公。
English: After the death of Wu Yuan Shuang, who was sent to the outer ridge for the crime of being a member of the Zhukou Company, the Korean lady's son, Horan Minzhi, was adopted as the samurai's heir, his surname was changed to Wu, and he was appointed to the rank of Zuo Shangguo and Landai Taishi, inheriting the peerage of Zhou Guogong.

古文：仍令鸠集学士李嗣真、吴兢之徒，于兰台刊正经史，并著撰传记。
现代文：又让他召集学士李嗣真、吴兢一批人，在兰台校刊经史典籍并撰著传记。
English: He also asked him to gather a group of scholars, including Li Shizhen and Wu Jing, to publish historical classics and write biographies at Lantai University.

古文：敏之既年少色美，烝于荣国夫人，恃宠多愆犯，则天颇不悦之。
现代文：武敏之年轻美貌，与荣国夫人私通，倚仗得宠屡犯罪过，武则天很不高兴。
English: Wu Zetian was very displeased with Wu Min's youthful good looks, his adultery with Rong Guo's wife, and his repeated crimes of favoritism.

古文：咸亨二年，荣国夫人卒，则天出内大瑞锦，令敏之造佛像追福，敏之自隐用之。
现代文：咸亨二年，荣国夫人去世，武则天拿出内宫大瑞锦幅，责成武敏之修造佛像为母亲求福，武敏之擅自隐藏私用。
English: In the second year of Xianheng, Rongguo's wife passed away. Wu Zetian took out the inner palace and ordered Wu Min to build a Buddha statue to pray for his mother's well-being. However, Wu Min did not have the authority to hide it for personal use.

古文：又司卫少卿杨思俭女有殊色，高宗及则天自选以为太子妃，成有定日矣，敏之又逼而淫焉。及在荣国服内，私释衰绖，著吉服，奏妓乐。
现代文：又，司尉少卿杨思俭的女儿极有姿色，高宗和武则天已选她为太子的妃子，婚期已定，武敏之去逼迫奸淫了她，接着，在为荣国夫人守丧期间，武敏之偷偷脱除丧服，穿着吉庆华服，聚集歌妓作乐。
English: In addition, the daughter of the lieutenant, Yang Sijian, was very beautiful. Gaozong and Wu Zetian had chosen her to be the prince's concubine, and the wedding date had been set. Wu Minzhi went and forced her to commit adultery. Then, during the mourning period for Rongguo's wife, Wu Minzhi secretly took off his mourning clothes, wore auspicious clothes, and gathered prostitutes to make music.

古文：时太平公主尚幼，往来荣国之家，宫人侍行，又尝为敏之所逼。
现代文：当时，武则天的亲生女儿太平公主还年幼，来往荣国夫人的家，由宫女伴行，也曾遭到武敏之的逼污。
English: At that time, Wu Zetian's own daughter, Princess Taiping, was still young, and she was accompanied by her maid of honor when she went to and from Lady Rongguo's home. She was also forced to defile herself by Wu Minzhi.

古文：俄而奸污事发，配流雷州，行至韶州，以马缰自缢而死。
现代文：不久武敏之的奸污事件暴露，他被发配流放雷州，走到韶州，武敏之用马缰自缢身亡。
English: Soon, Wu Minzhi's adultery was exposed. He was exiled to Leizhou and went to Zhangzhou. Wu Minzhi hanged himself with a horse's bridle.

古文：承嗣，元爽子也。
现代文：武承嗣是武元爽的儿子。
English: Wu Chengzhi was the son of Wu Yuan Shuang.

古文：敏之死后，自岭南召还，拜尚衣奉御，袭祖爵周国公。
现代文：武敏之死后，他从岭南被召回京，授职尚书奉御，承袭祖父周国公爵位。
English: After the death of Wu Min, he was called back to Beijing from Lingnan and given the post of Shangshu Bongyo, inheriting his grandfather's title of Duke of Zhou.

古文：俄迁秘书监。
现代文：不久提升为秘书监。
English: He was soon promoted to secretary superintendent.

古文：则天临朝，追尊士矱为忠孝太皇，置崇先府官属，五代祖已下，皆为王。
现代文：武则天当政，追尊武士为忠孝太皇，设置崇先府的吏属，她前五代以下的历代先祖，都封为王。
English: Wu Zetian took over the government, honored the samurai as the loyal and filial great emperors, set up the officials of the Chongxianfu, and her ancestors of the previous five generations and below were all crowned as kings.

古文：嗣圣元年，以承嗣为礼部尚书。
现代文：中宗嗣圣元年，任武承嗣为礼部尚书。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhongzong, Renwu Chengzhi was appointed as the ceremonial secretary.

古文：寻除太常卿、同中书门下三品。
现代文：不久授其官职为太常卿、同中书门下三品。
English: He was soon given the official position of Tai Chang Ching, and was awarded the Third Class of the Junior Middle School of Calligraphy.

古文：垂拱中，转春官尚书，依旧知政事。
现代文：武则天垂拱年间，武承嗣转任春官尚书，仍旧主持政务。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu Zetian (武则天垂拱), Emperor Wu's heir, Emperor Wu Chengzhi, was transferred to the post of Spring Official (春官尚書), but still presided over government affairs.

古文：载初元年，代苏良嗣为文昌左相、同凤阁鸾台三品，兼知内史事。
现代文：载初元年，他替代苏良嗣任文昌左相、同凤阁鸾台三品，兼主管内史事务。
English: At the beginning of the year, he replaced Su Liangzi as the left minister of Wenchang and the third minister of Tongfeng Pavilion, and was also in charge of internal history affairs.

古文：天授元年，于东都创置武氏七庙，追尊周文王为始祖文皇帝，王子武为睿祖康皇帝，云武氏之先也。
现代文：天授元年，武承嗣在东都洛阳首先设置武氏七庙，追尊周文王为始祖文皇帝，周武王为睿祖康皇帝，称他们是武氏的祖先。
English: In the first year of Tianju, Wu Chengzhi first set up seven temples of the Wu clan in Luoyang, the eastern capital, and revered King Zhou Wen as the ancestor of Emperor Wen and King Zhou Wu as Emperor Rui Zukang, saying that they were the ancestors of the Wu clan.

古文：后五代祖赠太原靖王居常为严祖成皇帝，高祖赠赵肃恭王克己为肃祖章敬皇帝，曾祖赠魏康王俭为烈祖昭安皇帝，祖赠周安成王华为显祖文穆皇帝，考忠孝太皇为太祖孝明高皇帝，妣皆随帝号曰皇后。
现代文：又将则天皇后的前五代先祖、封赠的太原靖王武居常奉为严祖成皇帝；其高祖、封赠的赵肃恭王武克己奉为肃祖章敬皇帝；其曾祖、封赠的魏康王武俭奉为烈祖昭安皇帝；其祖父、封赠的周安成王武华奉为显祖穆皇帝；其父、忠孝太皇武士奉为太祖孝明高皇帝；历代先祖母都随其夫的帝号称为皇后。
English: In addition, the first five generations of the ancestors of Empress Zeng, the first five generations of the ancestors of Emperor Zeng, the first five generations of the ancestors of Emperor Zeng, the first five generations of the ancestors of Emperor Zeng, the first five generations of the ancestors of Emperor Zeng, the first five generations of the ancestors of Emperor Zeng, the first five generations of the ancestors of Emperor Zeng, the first five generations of the ancestors of Emperor Zeng, the first five generations of the ancestors of Emperor Zeng, the first five generations of the ancestors of Emperor Zeng, the first five generations of the ancestors of Emperor Zeng, the first five generations of the ancestors of Emperor Zeng,

古文：元庆为梁宪王，元爽为魏德王。
现代文：武元庆被追封为梁宪王，武元爽追封为魏德王。
English: Wu Yuanqing was posthumously crowned King Liang Xian, and Wu Yuan Shuang was posthumously crowned King Wei De.

古文：又追封伯父及兄弟俱为王，诸姑姊为长公主。
现代文：还将伯父与诸兄弟都封为王，诸姑母、姐姐封为长公主。
English: He also crowned his uncle and brothers as kings, and his aunts and sisters as eldest princesses.

古文：于是封承嗣为魏王，元庆子夏官尚书三思为梁王，后从父兄子纳言攸宁为建昌王，太子通事舍人攸归为九江王，司礼卿重规为高平王，左卫亲府中郎将载德为颍川王，右卫将军攸暨为千乘王，司农卿懿宗为河内王，左千牛中郎将嗣宗为临川王，右卫勋二府中郎将攸宜为建安王，尚乘直长攸望为会稽王，太子通事舍人攸绪为安平王，攸止为恆安王。
现代文：于是，则天皇后封武承嗣为魏王，并将武元庆的儿子、夏官尚书武三思封为梁王，她的堂兄弟、堂侄、纳言武攸宁封为建昌王，太子通事舍人武攸归封为九江王，司礼卿武重规封为高平王，左卫亲府中郎将武载德封为颍川王，右卫将军武攸暨封为千乘王，司农卿武懿宗封为河内王，左千牛中郎将武嗣宗封为临川王，右卫勋二府中郎将武攸宜封为建安王，尚乘直长武攸望封为会稽王，太子通事舍人武攸绪封为安平王，武攸止封为恒安王。
English: As a result, the empress Dowager Wu Heung Hei was named the king of Wei, and the son of Wu Yuanqing, the summer official Shang Shubu San Si, was named the king of Liang, her cousin, cousin, Nagan Wu Yue Ning, was named the king of Jianchang, the prince general Tongji Shenren Wu Yue was named the king of Jiujiang, the secretary of the ceremony, secretary of the ceremony, secretary of the ceremony, secretary of the ceremony, secretary of the ceremony, secretary of the ceremony, secretary of the ceremony, secretary of the ceremony, secretary of the ceremony, secretary of the ceremony, secretary of the ceremony, secretary of the ceremony,

古文：又封承嗣男延基为南阳王，延秀为淮阳王，三思男崇训为高阳王，崇烈为新安王，后兄子赠陈王承业男延晖为嗣陈王，延祚为咸安王。
现代文：又封武承嗣之子武延基为南阳王，武延秀为淮阳王，武三思之子武崇训为高阳王、武崇烈为新安王，她的堂兄弟、封赠的陈王武承业的儿子武延晖为嗣陈王、武延祚为咸安王。
English: He also made Wu Yanji, the son of Wu Chengye's heir, the king of Nanyang, Wu Yanxiu, the king of Huaiyang, Wu Sanxi's son, Wu Chongxun, the king of Gaoyang, and Wu Chonglie, the king of Xin'an, and her cousins, Wu Yanqi, the son of Chen Wang's heir, Wu Chengye, the heir of Chen Wang, and Wu Yanqi, the king of Xi'an.

古文：承嗣尝讽则天革命，尽诛皇室诸王及公卿中不附己者，承嗣从父弟三思又盛赞其计，天下于今冤之。
现代文：武承嗣曾劝武则天改朝换姓，除尽李唐皇室的诸藩王及公卿大臣中不附和自己的人，武承嗣堂弟武三思又极力帮助推行其计，普天下至今怨恨他们。
English: Wu Chengzhi had advised Wu Zetian to change the dynasty and change the family name, and to eliminate all the kings and noblemen of the royal family of Li Tang who did not agree with him. Wu Chengzhi's cousin, Wu Sansi, also tried his best to help implement his plan, and the whole world still resents them.

古文：俄又赐承嗣实封千户，仍监修国史。
现代文：不久，武则天又赐给武承嗣实纳赋税的食邑一千户，继续监修国史。
English: Not long after, Emperor Wu Zetian also gave one thousand households of tax-paying food villages to the heirs of Emperor Wu to continue to supervise the study of national history.

古文：承嗣自为次当为皇储，令凤阁舍人张嘉福讽谕百姓抗表陈请，则天竟不许。
现代文：武承嗣以为论位次自己当为皇帝继承人，便让凤阁舍人张嘉福委婉劝说百官上表请求立武承嗣为皇储，武则天始终不同意。
English: Wu Chengzhi thought that he should be the emperor's successor, so he asked Zhang Jiafu, a resident of Fengge, to euphemistically persuade hundreds of officials to request the establishment of Wu Chengzhi as the crown prince. Wu Zetian always disagreed.

古文：延秀伏诛后，武氏宗属缘坐诛死及配流，殆将尽矣。先天二年，制削士彟帝号，依旧追赠太原王，妻杨氏亦削后号，依旧为太原王妃。
现代文：如意元年，授予他特进官衔。不久授官太子太保，免去他主持政事的职权。武承嗣因不能被立为皇太子，郁郁不乐而死；死后追封为太尉、并州太守，谥号宣。
English: In the first year of Ruyi, he was awarded the title of special promotion. Soon after, he was given the title of Crown Prince and Protector of the State, which removed him from the authority to preside over government affairs. Because he could not be appointed as Crown Prince, Wu Chengzhi was depressed and died. After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of First Lieutenant and the title of State Governor, and his posthumous name was proclaimed.

古文：延秀，承嗣第二子也。
现代文：武延秀，是武承嗣的次子。
English: Wu Yanxiu was the second son of Wu Chengzhi.

古文：则天时，突厥默啜上言有女请和亲，制延秀与阎知微俱往突厥，将亲迎默啜女为妻。
现代文：武则天在位时，突厥首领默啜上言武则天，自己有个女儿，请求和亲。武则天下令：武延秀与阎知微一同前往突厥。打算由武延秀亲自迎娶默啜的女儿为妻。
English: When Wu Zetian was on the throne, the Turkic leader Mu Yanxiu told Wu Zetian that he had a daughter and asked for a relative. Wu Zetian gave an order: Wu Yanxiu and Yan Zhiwei should go to Turkic together. It was planned that Wu Yanxiu would personally marry Mu Yanxiu's daughter.

古文：既而默啜执知微，入冠赵、定等州，故延秀久不得还。
现代文：不久，默啜抓了阎知微，入侵赵、定等州，因而武延秀很长时间不能返回。
English: Not long after, he silently captured Yan Zhiwei and invaded Zhao, Ding and other states. As a result, Wu Yanxiu could not return for a long time.

古文：神龙初，默啜更请通和，先令延秀送款，始得归，封桓国公，又授左卫中郎将。
现代文：武则天神龙初年，默啜再次请求通婚和亲，让武延秀先行送达诚意，武延秀才得返回；返回后，武延秀被封为桓国公，又授职任左卫中郎将。
English: In the first year of Wu Zetian's reign, Miao Su once again asked for a marriage and a relative, and asked Wu Yanxiu to convey his sincerity first, so that Wu Yanxiu could return; after returning, Wu Yanxiu was named the Prince of Kansai, and was also appointed to the post of Middle Captain of the Left Division of the Imperial Guards.

古文：时武崇训为安乐公主婿，即延秀从父兄，数引至主第。
现代文：这时武崇训是安乐公主的丈夫，他是武延秀堂兄，因此多次带领到安乐公主的府宅。
English: At this time, Wu Chongxun was the husband of Princess Anle, he was the cousin of Wu Yanxiu, so he was led to Princess Anle's mansion many times.

古文：延秀久在蕃中，解突厥语，常于主第，延秀唱突厥歌，作胡旋舞，有姿媚，主甚喜之。
现代文：武延秀长时间在突厥，懂突厥语言，常在安乐公主家唱突厥歌，跳胡旋舞，有妩媚姿色，公主非常喜欢他。
English: Wu Yanxiu has been in Turkey for a long time, understands the Turkish language, often sings Turkish songs at Princess Anle's home, dances the jig, has a charming appearance, and the princess likes him very much.

古文：及崇训死，延秀得幸，遂尚公主。
现代文：待到武崇训死去，武延秀受安乐公主宠爱，于是与安乐公主成婚。
English: Until the death of Wu Chongxun, Wu Yanxiu was favored by Princess Anle, so he married Princess Anle.

古文：主，韦后所生男女中最小。
现代文：安乐公主，是中宗的皇后韦氏所生子女中最年幼的一个。
English: Princess Atle is the youngest child of Empress Wei of the Middle Kingdom.

古文：初，中宗迁于房州，欲达州境，生于路次。
现代文：当初，中宗遭废黜迁往房州，快要到达房州地界时，在途中生下安乐公主。
English: At first, Zhongzong was deposed and moved to Fangzhou. When she was about to reach the border of Fangzhou, she gave birth to Princess Anle on the way.

古文：性惠敏，容质秀绝。
现代文：公主生性聪慧，容貌姿质秀美绝顶。
English: The princess is intelligent by nature, and has the most beautiful appearance and posture.

古文：中宗、韦后爱庞日深，恣其所欲，奏请无不允许。
现代文：中宗与韦后对她的宠爱日深一日，任意满足她的愿望，她的请求无不得到允许。
English: Emperor Zhongzong and Empress Wei became more and more fond of her. They fulfilled her wishes at will, and all of her requests were granted.

古文：恃宠横纵，权倾天下，自王侯宰相已下，除拜多出其门。
现代文：她依恃皇帝、皇后宠爱横行放纵，权势凌驾天下，自王侯、宰相以下，所授任的官吏多出自她的门下。
English: She favored and indulged the emperor and empress, dominating the world with her power. From the prince to the prime minister, most of the appointed officials were from her family.

古文：所营第宅并造安乐佛寺，拟于宫掖，巧妙过之。
现代文：她建造的府第和修建的安乐佛寺，规模与宫殿相同，而建构的巧妙还超过宫殿。
English: The palace she built and the Anle Buddhist Temple she built are the same size as the palace, but they are more cleverly constructed than the palace.

古文：令杨务廉于城西造定昆池于其庄，延袤数里。
现代文：她让杨务廉在长安城西自庄园内修造的定昆池，绵延伸展方圆好几里。
English: She let Yang Mu Lian build the Ding Kun Pool in the west of Chang'an City from the manor, which stretches for several miles.

古文：出降之时，以皇后仗发于宫中，中宗与韦后御安福门观之，灯烛供拟，彻明如昼。
现代文：她下嫁武延秀时，使用皇后的仪仗队从宫中出发，中宗与韦后亲临安福门观看，灯火照明器用凭其需要供给，彻夜通明如同白昼。
English: When she married Wu Yanxiu, she used the queen's honor guard to leave from the palace. Zhong Zong and Wei Hou personally visited the Anfu Gate to watch. The lights and illuminators were supplied according to their needs, and it was bright as day all night long.

古文：延秀拜度日，授太常卿，兼右卫将军、驸马都尉，改封恆国公，实封五百户。
现代文：武延秀拜席那天，授予他太常卿官职，兼任右卫将军、驸马都尉，改封为恒国公，享有实征赋税的食邑五百户。
English: On the day that Wu Yanxiu paid homage, he was awarded the official post of Tai Changqing, concurrently serving as the right guard general and the captain of the imperial horse, and was renamed Heng Guogong, enjoying the actual tax of five hundred households.

古文：废休祥宅，于金城坊造宅，穷极壮丽，帑藏为之空竭。
现代文：废除原住的休祥府宅，在金城坊另造宅第，构建穷尽壮丽之极致，国库为之空乏殆尽。
English: Abolished the original residence, the Xuchang Mansion, and built another mansion in Jinchengfang, building the ultimate in magnificence, leaving the national treasury completely empty.

古文：崇训子数岁，因加金紫光禄大夫、太常卿同正员、左卫将军，封镐国公，赐实封五百户，以嗣其父。
现代文：武崇训的儿子年仅数岁，趁此机会也授职金紫光禄大夫、太常卿同正员、左卫将军，封他为镐国公，赐给享有实征赋税的食邑五百户，以承其父业。
English: Wu Chongxun's son was only a few years old, and he also took the opportunity to appoint Jin Ziguanglu Doctor, Taizhongqing Tongzheng, and General Zuo Wei. He was named the Prince of Shandong Province, and was given five hundred households of food villages that enjoyed actual tax collection to succeed his father's business.

古文：公主产男满月，中宗、韦后幸其第，就第放赦，遣宰臣李峤、文士宋之问、沈佺期、张说、阎朝隐等数百人赋诗美之。
现代文：安乐公主与武延秀生的男孩满月时，中宗、韦后亲临她的府第，在她家里发出大赦令，让宰相李峤，文士宋之问、沈亻全期、张说、阎朝隐等数百人赋诗赞美。
English: When the boys of Princess Anle and Wu Yanxiong were full-moon, Zhongzong and Wei Hou personally visited her capital and issued an amnesty order in her home, allowing hundreds of people such as Prime Minister Li Qian, scribes Song Zhi Qian, Shen Qian Zheng, Zhang Xian, and Yan Chaoying to compose poems and praise.

古文：延秀既恃恩，放纵无所忌惮。
现代文：武延秀依仗皇帝恩宠，恣意放纵无所顾忌。
English: Wu Yanxiu relied on the emperor's favor and indulged himself without any scruples.

古文：又公主府仓曹符凤知延秀有不臣之心，遂说曰： 今天下苍生，犹以武氏为念，大周必可再兴。
现代文：又，公主的府仓曹符凤知道武延秀怀有背叛君主之心，于是煽动说： 如今天下黎民百姓，依然怀念武氏，大周必定可以再度兴起。
English: In addition, the princess's governor Cao Fu Feng knew that Wu Yanxiu harbored the heart of a traitor to the monarch, so he instigated: If the people of Li today still miss the Wu clan, Dazhou will surely rise again.

古文：按谶书云 黑衣神孙披天裳 ，驸马即神皇之孙也。 
现代文：据谶书所称： 黑衣神孙披天裳 ，驸马您就是神皇的孙子。 
English: According to the Analects: The black-robed grandson of the god is clothed in heavenly robes, and you are the grandson of the god-emperor.

古文：每劝令著皁袄子以应之。
现代文：每每鼓动武延秀穿著黑色衣来应验谶语。
English: Every now and then, Wu Yanxiu is encouraged to wear black clothes to meet the slang.

古文：薛怀义者，京兆鄠县人，本姓冯，名小宝。以鬻台货为业，伟形神，有膂力，为市于洛阳，得幸于千金公主侍兒。
现代文：待至韦氏谋夺失败，武延秀与安乐公主在内宅抵抗战斗了很长时间，最后全都被斩。后来安乐公主被追贬为 悖逆庶人 。薛怀义，京兆鄠县人，本姓冯，名小宝。以卖台货为业，身躯魁梧，强健有力，在洛阳做买卖，得以遇见千金公主的婢女。
English: When Wei's plot failed, Wu Yanxiu and Princess Anle resisted and fought for a long time in the inner house, and finally they were all beheaded. Later, Princess Anle was relegated to a "rebellious commoner." Xue Huaiyi, a native of Jingzhaojing County, whose real name was Feng, was nicknamed Xiaobao. She sold Taiwanese goods for a living, and was a large, strong and powerful woman. She did business in Luoyang and was able to meet the maid of Princess Qianjin.

古文：公主知之，入宫言曰： 小宝有非常材用，可以近侍。 
现代文：千金公主了解他后，进宫说： 冯小宝有非同寻常的资质能力，可以让他充当近身侍者。 
English: After getting to know him, Princess Qianjin entered the palace and said: Feng Xiaobao has extraordinary qualifications and abilities, and he can be used as a close attendant.

古文：因得召见，恩遇日深。
现代文：因而得到武则天召见，对他的赏识厚待日甚一日。
English: As a result, he was summoned by Wu Zetian, who treated him with great appreciation.

古文：则天欲隐其迹，便于出入禁中，乃度为僧。
现代文：武则天想隐蔽他的行迹，便于他在宫中进出，于是将他剃发为僧人。
English: Wu Zetian wanted to conceal his whereabouts to make it easier for him to enter and leave the palace, so he shaved his head and became a monk.

古文：又以怀义非士族，乃改姓薛，令与太平公主婿薛绍合族，令绍以季父事之。
现代文：还考虑到薛怀义不是世家大族出身，于是将他改姓为薛，让他与太平公主的夫婿薛绍联为一族，叫薛绍把他当自己最小的叔父侍奉。
English: He also considered that Xue Huaiyi was not from a large family, so he changed his surname to Xue and made him a member of the same family as Xue Shao, the husband of Princess Taiping, and asked Xue Shao to serve him as his youngest uncle.

古文：自是与洛阳大德僧法明、处一、惠俨、稜行、感德、感知、静轨、宣政等在内道场念诵。
现代文：从此薛怀义便与洛阳德高望重的僧人法明、处一、惠俨、眣行、感德、感知、静轨、宣政等在宫内道场念经诵法。
English: Since then, Xue Huaiyi has been chanting and reciting the Dharma in the palace dojo with the highly respected monks of Luoyang, including Fa Ming, Shu Yi, Hui Xuan, Min Xing, Xuan De, Xuan Zhe, Jing Le and Xuan Zheng.

古文：怀义出入乘厩马，中官侍从，诸武朝贵，匍匐礼谒，人间呼为薛师。
现代文：薛怀义进出宫廷都乘坐宫廷马厩的马，由宦官随身侍从，武氏在朝中有权势的众显贵官员，都匍伏在地行大礼谒见他，民间称呼他为 薛师 。
English: Xue Huaiyi rode a horse from the palace stables to and from the court. He was accompanied by eunuchs, and all the influential and distinguished officials of the Wu clan in the imperial court prostrated themselves to see him, and the people called him Xue Shi.

古文：垂拱初，说则天于故洛阳城西修故白马寺，怀义自护作。寺成，自为寺主。
现代文：武则天垂拱初年，薛怀义劝说武则天在故洛阳城修复原白马寺，薛本人总领兴修；白马寺修复完成后，他自任寺院主持。
English: In the first year of Wu Zetian's hanging arch, Xue Huaiyi persuaded Wu Zetian to restore the original White Horse Temple in the former Luoyang City, and Xue himself was the leader of the restoration; after the restoration of the White Horse Temple was completed, he himself presided over the temple.

古文：颇恃恩狂蹶，其下犯法，人不敢言。
现代文：薛怀义极其倚仗武则天的宠爱狂妄横行，他的下属犯法，没有人敢于议论。
English: Xue Huaiyi relied heavily on Wu Zetian's favor to run amok. His subordinates broke the law, and no one dared to speak out.

古文：右台御史冯思勖屡以法劾之；怀义遇勖于途，令从者殴之，几死。
现代文：左台御史冯思勖多次据法弹劾他；薛怀义在路上碰到冯思勖，命令随从人员殴打他，几乎致死。
English: Xue Huaiyi encountered Feng Siyu on the road and ordered his entourage to beat him almost to death.

古文：又于建春门内敬爱寺别造殿宇，改名佛授记寺。
现代文：他又在建春门内的敬爱寺里面，另建庙堂殿宇，将敬爱寺改名为佛授记寺。
English: He also built a temple hall inside the Temple of Reverence inside the Jianchun Gate, renaming the Temple of Reverence as the Temple of Buddha's Annunciation.

古文：垂拱四年，拆乾元殿，于其地造明堂，怀义充使督作。
现代文：垂拱四年，武则天拆毁乾元殿，在这块地基上建造宣明政教的明堂，薛怀义担任这项工程的使臣察督建造，共计役工数万人。
English: In four years, Wu Zetian demolished the Qianyuan Hall and built the Ming Hall of Xuanming Politics and Religion on this foundation. Xue Huaiyi served as the envoy inspector for this project, with a total of tens of thousands of workers.

古文：凡役数万人，曳一大木千人，置号头，头一，千人齐和。
现代文：拖一根大木头须上千人，安排领呼号子的头目一人，领号头目一声大喊，千名役工齐声应和。
English: It takes more than a thousand people to drag a large log. Arrange for one leader to lead the bugle call. The leader of the call yells once, and a thousand workers respond in unison.

古文：明堂大屋凡三层，计高二百尺。
现代文：所建明堂共有三层，总计高达三百尺。
English: The newly built Myeongdong has a total of three floors, with a total height of up to three hundred feet.

古文：又于明堂北起天堂，广袤亚于明堂。
现代文：又在明堂北面建造一座天堂，面积与所建的明堂相当。
English: In addition, a paradise will be built on the north side of Myeongdong, with an area equivalent to that of the Myeongdong.

古文：怀义以功拜左威卫大将军，封梁国公。
现代文：薛怀义论功授予左威卫大将军官职，封为梁国公。
English: On the merits of Xue Huaiyi, General Zuo Wei Wei was awarded an official post and named Liang Guogong.

古文：永昌中，突厥默啜犯边，以怀义为清平道大总管，率军击之，至单于台，刻石纪功而还。
现代文：永昌元年，突厥首领默啜率军侵犯边境，武则天派薛怀义任清平道大总管，领军攻打默啜军，追至单于台刻石记述功绩才返回。
English: In the first year of Yongchang, the Turkic leader Misu led the army to invade the border. Wu Zetian sent Xue Huaiyi to serve as the general manager of Qingping Road to lead the army to attack the Misu army. He pursued the army until he returned alone to record his achievements on the stone.

古文：加辅国大将军，进右卫大将军，改封鄂国公、柱国，赐帛二千段。
现代文：再加授辅国大将军官职，晋升左卫大将军，改封为鄂国公、柱国，赐给帛两千段。
English: In addition, he conferred the post of vice-commander of the National Defense Commission, promoted him to the rank of general of the Left Division of the National Defense Commission, changed his title to the governor of Hubei Province and the pillar state, and gave him two thousand dan.

古文：怀义与法明等造《大云经》，陈符命，言则天是弥勒下生，作阎浮提主，唐氏合微。
现代文：薛怀义与法明和尚等编撰《大云经疏》，陈述符谶预言，称武则天是弥勒佛转世，做中华及东方诸国君主，李唐王朝运当衰微。
English: Xue Huaiyi and Faming Monk and others compiled the "Great Cloud Sutra," stating the prophecies, saying that Wu Zetian was the reincarnation of Maitreya Buddha, the monarch of China and the East, and the Li Tang Dynasty was in decline.

古文：故则天革命称周，怀义与法明等九人并封县公，赐物有差，皆赐紫袈娑、银龟袋。
现代文：因此武则天改朝换姓立朝称 周 ；薛怀义与法明和尚等九人一并封为县公，各赏赐不等的财物；一概赐予紫袈娑、银龟袋。
English: Therefore, nine people, including Wu Zetian, Zhou, Xue Huaiyi, and Faming Monk, were jointly appointed as county magistrates, each receiving different rewards; they were all given purple ribbons and silver turtle bags.

古文：其伪《大云经》颁于天下寺，各藏一本，令升高座讲说。
现代文：他们随心所欲编造的《大云经疏》颁发天下，每个寺院各藏一本，命令各寺主持高僧登上法坛宣讲解说。
English: They freely fabricated "Da Yun Jing So" and issued it to the world, each temple kept one copy, and ordered each temple to preside over the high monks to ascend the altar to preach and explain.

古文：则天将革命，诛杀宗属诸王，唯千金公主以巧媚善进奉独存；抗疏请以则天为母，因得曲加恩宠，改邑号为延安大长公主，加实封，赐姓武氏。
现代文：武则天将要改朝换姓之前，大肆诛杀李唐宗族各藩王，惟有千金公主凭巧言谄媚善于奉承一家独存；她又上疏奏请以武则天为自己母亲，因而获得武则天曲意给予偏宠，将其封号改为延安大长公主，加授实征赋税的食户，赐她姓武。
English: Before Wu Zetian was going to change the dynasty and change the family name, he killed all the kings of the Li Tang clan. However, Princess Qianjin was good at flattering a single family with clever words and flattery. She also asked Wu Zetian to be her mother, thus gaining Wu Zetian's favor, changing her seal name to Yan'an Grand Elder Princess, awarding her the tax-paying household, and giving her the surname Wu.

古文：以子克乂娶魏王武承嗣女，内门参问，不限早晚，见则尽欢。
现代文：让她的儿子李克娶魏王武承嗣的女儿为妻；准许她进内宫参谒问候，不受早晚限制；见到武则天，她就竭力迎合，博取欢心。
English: Let her son, Li Ke, marry the daughter of the Wei king, Wu Chengzhi; allow her to enter the inner palace to send greetings, without restrictions in the morning and evening; when she saw Wu Zetian, she tried her best to cater to him and win his favor.

古文：长寿二年，默啜复犯塞，又以怀义为代北道行军大总管，以李多祚、苏宏晖为将。
现代文：长寿二年，突厥的首领默啜再次侵犯边塞，武则天又让薛怀义担任代北道行军大总管，派李多祚、苏宏晖充任他的手下将领。
English: Two years into his long life, the Turkic leader Mushu once again invaded the border fortress, and Wu Zetian also appointed Xue Huaiyi as the general manager of the marching troops on behalf of the Northern Province, and sent Li Doran and Su Hongjun to serve as his subordinate generals.

古文：未行，改朔方道行军大总管，以内史李昭德为行军长史，凤阁侍郎、平章事苏味道为行军司马，契苾明、曹仁师、沙吒忠义等十八将军以讨之。
现代文：尚未启程，又将薛怀义改任朔方道行军大总管，派内史李昭德担任他的行军长史，凤阁侍郎、平章事苏味道任他的行军司马，由他率领契絆明、曹仁师、沙吒忠义等十八名将军去讨伐默啜。
English: Before he set off, he also changed Xue Huaiyi to be the general manager of the march of Shuo Fang Road, assigned Li Zhaode to be his march leader, Fengge waiter, and Ping Zhang Zhisu flavor to be his march leader, and led eighteen generals such as Qi Kizunming, Cao Renshi, and Shajian Zhongyi to fight silently.

古文：未行虏退，乃止。
现代文：尚未出征，默啜退军，于是停止了这次出征。
English: He had not yet left for the campaign, but he quietly withdrew from the army, so he stopped this campaign.

古文：怀义后厌入宫中，多居白马寺，刺血画大像，选有膂力白丁度为僧，数满千人。
现代文：后来，薛怀义厌倦再进宫中，平时大多居住在白马寺，刺血绘画大佛像；又挑选体力强健的平民将他们剃度为僧，人数上千。
English: Later, tired of re-entering the palace, Xue Huaiyi mostly lived in the White Horse Temple in peacetime, drawing large Buddha statues with blood; he also selected physically strong civilians to shave them into monks, numbering thousands.

古文：侍御史周矩疑其奸，奏请劾之，不许。固请之，则天曰： 卿且退，朕即令去。 
现代文：侍御史周矩怀疑他心怀奸谋，上奏弹劾他，武则天不准奏；周矩坚持奏请弹劾，武则天说： 你暂且退下，朕立即命令他离去。 
English: The chamberlain, the historian, Zhou Mom, suspected that he was plotting treachery, and played a tune to impeach him, but Wu Zetian did not allow it to be played; Zhou Mom insisted on playing the tune to impeach him, but Wu Zetian said, "You should step down for the time being, and I will immediately order him to leave."

古文：矩至台，薛师亦至，乘马蹋阶而下，便坦腹于床。
现代文：周矩回到御史台，薛怀义也来到这里，骑着马顺着台阶下来，然后袒露胸腹仰卧在床榻上。
English: Shortly after returning to the historical platform, Xue Huaiyi also came here, riding down the steps, and then lying on his back on the bed with his chest exposed.

古文：矩召台吏，将按之，遽乘马而去。
现代文：周矩叫来御史台吏役，准备制止他，薛怀义突然骑上马离去。
English: Zhou Momon called the official of the History Channel to stop him, and Xue Huaiyi suddenly got on a horse and left.

古文：矩具以闻，则天曰： 此道人风病，不可苦问。
现代文：周矩将以上情况一一奏报武则天知道，武则天说： 这个和尚的疯病发作，无法深究。
English: When he reported the above situation to Wu Zetian, Wu Zetian said, "This monk's insanity has broken out, and we can't investigate it further.

古文：所度僧任卿勘当。 
现代文：他所剃度的僧人任凭卿审问论罪。 
English: The monk whose hair he had shaved was interrogated and convicted by the emperor.

古文：矩按之，穷其状以闻，诸僧悉配远州。
现代文：周矩审讯他们，将审得的情状全部禀报给了武则天，众僧人全部发配到边远的各州郡。
English: He interrogated them for a long time, and reported the entire situation to Wu Zetian, and all the monks were sent to distant prefectures.

古文：迁矩天官员外郎，竟为薛师所构，下狱，免官。
现代文：武则天提升周矩为天官员外郎，最终，周矩遭薛怀义构陷，投入监牢，免去官职。
English: Wu Zetian promoted Zhou Mom to be the son-in-law of a high-ranking official. In the end, Zhou Mom was framed by Xue Huaiyi, put in prison, and removed from office.

古文：后有御医沈南璆得幸，薛师恩渐衰，恨怒颇甚。
现代文：后来，有个叫沈南趚的御医得到武则天的宠爱，对薛怀义的恩遇渐渐衰减，薛怀义极为怨恨恼怒。
English: Later, a royal physician named Shen Nanzhang was favored by Wu Zetian, and his favor toward Xue Huaiyi gradually waned. Xue Huaiyi was extremely resentful and angry.

古文：证圣中，乃焚明堂、天堂，并为灰烬，则天愧而隐之，又令怀义充使督作。乃于明堂下置九州鼎，铸铜为十二属形象，置于本辰位，皆高一丈，怀义率人作号头安置之。
现代文：证圣元年，宫殿失火，火烧新建的宣布政教的明堂、天堂，两座殿堂全部化为灰烬，武则天心中有愧但隐瞒了这件事，又让薛怀义担任使臣监督兴修；并在再建的明堂下安放了九州鼎，用铜铸成十二生肖塑像，分别放在与自己本命星相应的干支辰位上，各生肖铜塑都高达一丈。薛怀义亲自做呼喊号子的头人率领役工安放生肖铜塑。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Sheng, the palace caught fire, and the newly built Myeongdong and Myeongdong of the proclamation of politics and religion were burned to ashes. Wu Zetian felt guilty but concealed the matter, and asked Xue Huaiyi to serve as an envoy to supervise the construction. And under the rebuilt Myeongdong, Kyushu Ding was placed, and the statues of the twelve zodiacs were cast in copper. They were placed on the stem branch corresponding to their native star, and each bronze statue of the zodiac was as high as one floor. Xue Huaiyi personally led the head of the herald and led the workers to

古文：其后益骄倨，则天恶之，令太平公主择膂力妇人数十，密防虑之。
现代文：此后，薛怀义更加骄纵傲慢，武则天对他厌恶起来，叫太平公主挑选体力强健的宫中妇女数十人，对他严密防范，考虑如何对付他。
English: After that, Xue Huaiyi became even more arrogant. Wu Zetian became disgusted with him and ordered Princess Taiping to select dozens of physically strong women in the palace to guard against him and consider how to deal with him.

古文：人有发其阴谋者，太平公主乳母张夫人令壮士缚而缢杀之，以辇车载尸送白马寺。
现代文：有人告发了薛怀义的阴谋，太平公主的乳母张夫人命令强壮的卫士捆住薛怀义并将他勒死，然后用车子载着他的尸体送到白马寺。
English: Someone denounced Xue Huaiyi's plot. Mrs. Zhang, the nanny of Princess Taiping, ordered strong guards to tie up Xue Huaiyi and strangle him to death, and then take his body to the White Horse Temple by car.

古文：其侍者僧徒，皆流窜远恶处。
现代文：薛怀义的近侍僧众，全都流窜逃亡到遥远荒僻的地方。
English: All of Xue Huaiyi's close attendants, the monks, were exiled and fled to a remote and desolate place.

