古文：燕王哙既立，苏秦死于齐。
现代文：燕王哙肆位之后，苏秦在齐国被杀。
English: After the reign of Yan Wang, Su Qin was killed in Qi.

古文：苏秦之在燕也，与其相子之为婚，而苏代与子之交。
现代文：苏秦在燕国的时候，曾与燕国的相国子之结为亲家，并且苏代与子之也很有交情。
English: When Su Qin was in Yan, he was a relative of Yan's son-in-law Guo Zi, and the Su dynasty was also very friendly with him.

古文：及苏秦死，而齐宣王复用苏代。
现代文：等到苏秦死后，齐宣王又任用了苏代。
English: After Su Qin's death, King Qi Xuan appointed Su as his successor.

古文：燕哙三年，与楚、三晋攻秦，不胜而还。
现代文：燕王哙三年，燕国同楚国及韩、赵、魏三国进攻秦国，失败而好。
English: In the third year of the reign of King Yan, Yan's country, together with Chu, Han, Zhao, and Wei, went to attack Qin. When they failed to win, they returned home.

古文：子之相燕，贵重主断。
现代文：当时子之做燕国相国，权力很重，专断国事。
English: At that time, the son of Yan Guozhong ruled the country with great power and arbitrarily decided on state affairs.

古文：苏代为齐使于燕，燕王问之曰： 齐宣王何如? 
现代文：苏代替齐国到燕国出使，燕王问苏代说： 齐宣王怎么样？ 
English: Su sent an envoy to Yan instead of Qi, and Yan asked Su: How is Qi Xuan Wang?

古文：对曰： 必不霸。 
现代文：苏代说： 一定不能称霸。 
English: Sudai replied, "It is definitely impossible to dominate."

古文：燕王曰： 何也? 
现代文：燕王说： 为什么？ 
English: Yan Wang said: Why?

古文：对曰： 不信其臣。 
现代文：苏代回答说： 他不信任自己的大臣。 
English: "A minister who doesn't trust him," he replied.

古文：苏代欲以激燕王以厚任子之也。
现代文：苏代想以此激发燕王，让燕王重用子之。
English: Su Dai wanted to use this to inspire Yan Wang, so that Yan Wang would use him more.

古文：于是燕王大信子之。
现代文：从此燕王果然更加信任子之。
English: As a result, Yan Wang trusted his son very much.

古文：子之因遗苏代百金，听其所使。
现代文：子之于是送给苏代百金，听从苏代的驱使。
English: His son then gave the Sudai a hundred gold coins and obeyed the urge of the Sudai.

古文：鹿毛寿谓燕王曰： 不如以国让子之。
现代文：鹿毛寿对燕王说： 不如把国家的权铡让给予之。
English: Lu Mao Shou said to Yan Wang: It is better to cede the power of the country to him.

古文：人谓尧贤者，以其让天下于许由，由必不受，有让天下之名，实不失天下。
现代文：人们称尧为贤者，是因为他把天下让给许由，许由坚决不接受，这样尧就有让位天下的美名，实际上并没有失掉天下。
English: People call him a wise man because he conceded the world to Xu Rong, and Xu Rong resolutely refused to accept it. In this way, he had the reputation of conceding the world, but in fact, he did not lose the world.

古文：今王以国让相子之，子之必不敢受，是王与尧同行也。 
现代文：观在大王把国家让给子之，子之一定不敢接受：这样大王就有了同尧一样的品行。 
English: According to Confucius, if a great king gives his country to his son, the son will not dare to accept it. In this way, the great king will have the same character as his peers.

古文：燕王因举国属子之，子之大重。
现代文：燕王于是把整个国家的权力都交托给子之，子之的权势更大了。
English: Yan Wang then entrusted the power of the entire country to his son, and his son's power became even greater.

古文：或曰： 禹授益而以启为吏，及老，而以启为不足任天下，传之益也。启与支党攻益而夺之天下，是禹名传天下于益，其实令启自取之。
现代文：又有人对燕王说： 禹传位给伯益，让启做伯益的官吏，禹老的时候，认为启不能统治天下，就把国家的大权传给了伯益，启和他的党羽杀死了伯益，夺取了天下，这样禹名义上把天下传给伯益，而实际上是让启自己夺取天下。
English: Another person said to King Yan: Yu passed the throne to Bo Yi and let Qi be the official of Bo Yi. When Yu was old, he thought that Qi could not rule the world, so he passed the power of the country to Bo Yi. Qi and his followers killed Bo Yi and seized the world. In this way, Yu nominally passed the world to Bo Yi, but actually let Qi seize the world.

古文：今王言属国子之，而吏无非太子人者，是名属子之，而太子用事。 
现代文：观在大王说把国家交给子之，而那些官吏没有不是太子的人，这是名义上把国家交给了子之，而实际上是太子执政。 
English: When the Great King said that he would hand over the country to his son, but those officials did not include anyone who was not a prince, this was nominally handing over the country to his son, but in fact it was the prince who ruled.

古文：王因收印自三百石吏而效之子之。
现代文：燕王于是收回三百石以上俸禄的官吏的大印，把这些大印交给予之。
English: King Yan then took back the seals of officials with a salary of more than three hundred koku and gave them to him.

古文：子之南面行王事，而哙老不听政，顾为臣，国事皆决子之。
现代文：子之面南称王，处理国事，而燕王哙因年老不能处理政事，反而傲了臣子，国家大事一概由子之决断。
English: The son of the face of the south called the king, dealing with state affairs, and the king of the terns could not deal with political affairs due to old age, but on the contrary, he was proud of the vassal, and the national events were all decided by the son.

古文：子之三年，燕国大乱，百姓恫怨。
现代文：子之执政三年，燕国大乱，百姓痛恨。
English: After three years of his son's rule, there was a great turmoil in Yan's country, which the people hated.

古文：将军市被、太子平谋，将攻子之。
现代文：将军市被、太子平一同谋划，准备攻击子之。
English: Shogun Ichibyo and Prince Taira plotted together, preparing to attack him.

古文：储子谓齐宣王： 因而仆之，破燕必矣。 
现代文：储子对齐宣王说： 趁此时机进攻燕国，一定能攻破燕国。 
English: "Take advantage of this opportunity to attack Yan's country, you will surely be able to break through Yan's country.

古文：王因令人谓太子平曰： 寡人闻太子之义，将废私而立公，饬君臣之义，正父子之位。
现代文：齐宣王于是派人对太子平说： 寡人听说太子在商议大事，准备废除私权确立公理，整顿君臣大义，端正父子之位。
English: King Qi Xuan then sent a messenger to Prince Ping to say: "Many people have heard that the prince is discussing important matters, preparing to abolish private rights, establish justice, rectify the great justice of princes and ministers, and rectify the position of father and son.

古文：寡人之国小，不足先后。
现代文：寡人的国家太小，不能为您先后奔走。
English: A country with few people is too small to run for you successively.

古文：虽然，则唯太子所以令之。 
现代文：虽然如此，还是愿意听从太子的命令。 
English: Even so, we are willing to follow the prince's orders.

古文：太子因数党聚众，将军市被围公宫，攻子之，不克；将军市被及百姓乃反攻太子平，将军市被死已殉，国构难数月，死者数万众，燕人恫怨，百姓离意。
现代文：太子平于是计数党徒，聚集人众，将军市被围攻壬宫，攻打子之，没有攻下。将军市被又和百姓一道攻打太子平。后来将军市被被杀死示众，燕国国内的动乱持续了几个月：死去的人达几万人之多。燕国人都痛恨这场内乱，百姓人心离散。
English: Prince Heping then counted the party members and gathered the people. The general city was besieged by Jingu, attacked Zizhi, and did not fall. The general city was attacked together with the people. Later, the general city was killed to show the public. The turmoil in Yan's country lasted for several months: tens of thousands of people died. Yan's people all hated this civil war, and the people's hearts were scattered.

古文：孟轲谓齐宣王曰： 今伐燕，此文、武之时，不可失也。 
现代文：盂轲对齐宣王说： 如今攻打燕国，这正是文王、武王伐纣的时机，不可失掉。 
English: "Now is the time to attack Yan's country. This is the right time for King Wen and King Wu to attack Yan's country. We must not miss this opportunity."

古文：王因令章子将五都之兵，以因北地之众以伐燕。
现代文：齐王于是派章子率领齐国军队，依靠齐国北部的百姓进攻燕国。
English: King Qi then ordered Zhang Zi to lead the armies of the five capitals, and together with the soldiers from the northern border, to fight against Yan.

古文：士卒不战，城门不闭，燕王哙死。
现代文：燕国士兵不愿打仗，连城门都不关，燕王哙被杀死。
English: Yan soldiers did not want to fight, even the city gates were not closed, and Yan Wangjun was killed.

古文：齐大胜燕，子之亡。
现代文：齐国大胜燕国，子之也被杀死了。
English: Qi won a great victory over Yan, and his son was also killed.

古文：二年，燕人立公子平，是为燕昭王。
现代文：两年后，燕国人拥立公子平，这就是燕昭王。
English: Two years later, the Yan people supported the rise of Gongziping, which is Yan Zhao Wang.

