古文：自古受命而王，王者之兴何尝不以卜筮决於天命哉！
现代文：自古以来承受天命的人方能成为国君，而君王的兴起又何尝不是用卜筮来取决于天命呢！
English: Since ancient times, only those who bear the fate of heaven can become the king, and the rise of the king is by no means dependent on the fate of heaven!

古文：其於周尤甚，及秦可见。
现代文：这种情形在周朝尤为盛行，到了秦代还可以看到。
English: This situation was particularly prevalent in the Zhou Dynasty, and can still be seen in the Qin Dynasty.

古文：代王之入，任於卜者。
现代文：汉朝代王入京继承王位，也是听任于占卜者。
English: When the king of the Han Dynasty entered Beijing to succeed to the throne, it was also left to soothsayers.

古文：太卜之起，由汉兴而有。
现代文：至于卜官的出现，从汉朝兴起就开始有了。
English: As for the appearance of magistrates, they have been around since the rise of the Han Dynasty.

古文：司马季主者，楚人也。
现代文：司马季主是楚国人。
English: Sima Qi is a native of Chu.

古文：卜於长安东市。
现代文：他在长安东市卜卦。
English: He grew up in Bu Gua, East Chang'an.

古文：宋忠为中大夫，贾谊为博士，同日俱出洗沐，相从论议，诵易先王圣人之道术，究遍人情，相视而叹。
现代文：宋忠此时任中大夫，贾谊任博士，一天二人一起出朝沐浴休假，边走边谈，讨论讲习先王圣人的治道方法，广泛地探究世道人情，两人相视而叹。
English: At this time, Song Zhong was appointed as a middle doctor, and Jia Yiren as a doctor. One day, the two of them went out together to take a bath and take a vacation. While walking, they talked, discussed the methods of governance of the saints of the previous king, and extensively explored the world and human feelings. The two looked at each other and sighed.

古文：贾谊曰： 吾闻古之圣人，不居朝廷，必在卜医之中。
现代文：贾谊说： 我听说古代的圣人，如不在朝做官，就必在卜者、医师行列之中。
English: Jia Yi said: I have heard that ancient saints, if they did not work as officials in the government, would be among the ranks of soothsayers and doctors.

古文：今吾已见三公九卿朝士大夫，皆可知矣。
现代文：现在，我已见识过三公九卿及朝中士大夫，他们的才学人品都可以知道了。
English: Now, I have met the three princes and nine nobles and the sergeant-major, and I can see their talent.

古文：试之卜数中以观采。 
现代文：我们试着去观察一下卜者的风采吧。 
English: Let's try to observe the sorcerer's demeanor.

古文：二人即同舆而之市，游於卜肆中。
现代文：二人即同车到市区去，在卜筮的馆子里游览。
English: The two of them took the same car to the city and went on a tour of Bu Wei's restaurant.

古文：天新雨，道少人，司马季主间坐，弟子三四人侍，方辩天地之道，日月之运，阴阳吉凶之本。
现代文：天刚下过雨，路上行人很少，司马季主正闲坐馆中，三四个弟子陪侍着他，正在讲解天地间的道理，日月运转的情形，阴阳吉凶的本源。
English: It had just rained, and there were few pedestrians on the road. Lord Sima Ji was sitting idly in the pavilion, accompanied by three or four disciples, who were explaining the principles of heaven and earth, the operation of the sun and moon, and the origin of yin and yang.

古文：二大夫再拜谒。
现代文：两位大夫向司马季主拜了两拜。
English: The two doctors prayed to Lord Sima twice.

古文：司马季主视其状貌，如类有知者，即礼之，使弟子延之坐。
现代文：司马季主打量他们的状貌，好像是有知识的人，就还礼作答，叫弟子引他们就坐。
English: Lord Sima looked at them, as if they were knowledgeable people, and answered politely, asking the disciple to lead them to a seat.

古文：坐定，司马季主复理前语，分别天地之终始，日月星辰之纪，差次仁义之际，列吉凶之符，语数千言，莫不顺理。
现代文：坐定之后，司马季主重新疏解前面讲的内容，分析天地的起源与终止，日月星辰的运行法则，区分仁义的差别关系，列举吉凶祸福的朕兆，讲了数千言，无不顺理成章。
English: After sitting down, Sima Ji re-explained the content of the previous lecture, analyzed the origin and termination of heaven and earth, the laws of operation of the sun, moon and stars, distinguished the difference between benevolence and righteousness, and listed the signs of auspicious and inauspicious fortune. He spoke thousands of words, all of which were logical.

古文：宋忠、贾谊瞿然而悟，猎缨正襟危坐，曰： 吾望先生之状，听先生之辞，小子窃观於世，未尝见也。
现代文：宋忠、贾谊惊异而有所领悟，整理冠带，端正衣襟，恭敬地坐着，说： 我看先生的容貌，听先生的谈吐，晚辈私下观看当今之世，还未曾见到过。
English: Song Zhong and Jia Yi were surprised and understood, straightened their crowns, straightened their collars, sat respectfully, and said: I look at the gentleman's appearance, listen to the gentleman's talk, and the younger generation privately watch today's world, and have never seen it.

古文：今何居之卑，何行之汙？ 
现代文：不过先生现在的地位为什么如此卑下，职业为什么如此污秽呢？
English: But why is the position of the gentleman now so lowly, why is the profession so filthy?

古文：司马季主捧腹大笑曰： 观大夫类有道术者，今何言之陋也，何辞之野也！
现代文：司马季主捧腹大笑说： 看两位大夫好像是有道术的人，现在怎么会说出这般浅薄的话，措辞这样粗野呢？
English: Sima Ji said with a big belly laugh: Look, the two doctors seem to be Taoists. How can they say such shallow words and use such crude expressions?

古文：今夫子所贤者何也？
现代文：你们所认为的贤者是什么样的人呢？
English: What kind of person do you think a sage is?

古文：所高者谁也？
现代文：所认为高尚的人是谁呢？
English: Who are these supposedly noble people?

古文：今何以卑汙长者？ 
现代文：凭什么将我这位长者视为卑下污浊呢？ 
English: On what basis do you consider me, an elderly man, to be lowly and dirty?

古文：二君曰： 尊官厚禄，世之所高也，贤才处之。
现代文：宋忠、贾谊两人说： 尊贵的官职，丰厚的俸禄，是世人所看重的，贤能的人享有着它们。
English: Song Zhong and Jia Yi both said: Noble official posts and rich salaries are valued by the world, and they are enjoyed by those who are capable.

古文：今所处非其地，故谓之卑。
现代文：如今先生所处的不是那种地位，所以说是低微的。
English: It's not that kind of position you're in now, so it's a low one.

古文：言不信，行不验，取不当，故谓之汙。
现代文：所言不真实，所行不灵验，所取不恰当，所以说是污浊的。
English: What is said is not true, what is done is not effective, what is taken is not appropriate, so it is said to be dirty.

古文：夫卜筮者，世俗之所贱简也。
现代文：卜筮者，是世俗所鄙视的。
English: Diviners are despised by the world.

古文：世皆言曰： 夫卜者多言夸严以得人情，虚高人禄命以说人志，擅言祸灾以伤人心，矫言鬼神以尽人财，厚求拜谢以私於己。 
现代文：世人都说： 卜者多用夸大怪诞之辞，来迎合人们的心意；虚假抬高人们的禄命，来取悦人心；编造灾祸，以使人悲伤；假借鬼神，以骗尽钱财；贪求酬谢，以利于自身。 
English: The world said: The fortune-teller mostly uses exaggerated and grotesque words to cater to people's hearts; falsely elevates people's fortunes and lives to please people's hearts; fabricates disasters to make people sad; pretends to be ghosts and gods to defraud money; greedy for rewards to benefit himself.

古文：此吾之所耻，故谓之卑汙也。 司马季主曰： 公且安坐。
现代文：这都是我们认为可耻的行径，所以说是低微污浊的。 司马季主说： 二位暂且安坐。
English: These are all actions that we consider to be shameful, so they are said to be slightly dirty. Lord Sima Ji said: You two should sit down for the time being.

古文：公见夫被发童子乎？
现代文：你们见过那些批发的童子吧？
English: Have you seen those wholesale boys?

古文：日月照之则行，不照则止，问之日月疵瑕吉凶，则不能理。
现代文：日月照着，他们就走路；不照，他们就不走。问他们日月之食和人事吉凶，就不能解释说明。
English: If the sun and the moon are shining, they will walk; if they are not shining, they will not walk. If you ask them about the eclipse of the sun and the moon and the fortunes of people, they will not be able to explain.

古文：由是观之，能知别贤与不肖者寡矣。
现代文：由此看来，能识别贤与不肖的人太少了。
English: From this point of view, there are too few people who can distinguish between the virtuous and the vile.

古文： 贤之行也，直道以正谏，三谏不听则退。其誉人也不望其报，恶人也不顾其怨，以便国家利众为务。
现代文： 大凡贤者居官做事，都遵循正直之道，以正言规劝君王，多次劝谏不被采纳就引身退位；他们称誉别人并不图其回报，憎恶别人也不顾忌别人的怨恨，总是以便利国家和百姓为己任。
English: All great and wise men, when they hold office and do their work, follow the path of honesty. They advise the king with righteous words and regulations, and repeatedly advise him to abdicate if he is not accepted. They praise others without seeking their return, hate others and do not care about the resentment of others, and always make it their duty to benefit the country and the people.

古文：故官非其任不处也，禄非其功不受也；见人不正，虽贵不敬也；见人有污，虽尊不下也；得不为喜，去不为恨；非其罪也，虽累辱而不愧也。
现代文：所以，自己不能胜任的即使给他官做也不去做，不是他的功劳即使给他钱财也不接受；看到心术不正的人，即使显贵也不恭敬他；看到染有污点的人，即使高居尊位也不屈就他；得到荣华富贵也不以为喜，失去富贵荣华不因此遗憾；如果不是自己的过错，即使牵累受辱也不感到羞愧。
English: Therefore, even if he is not competent, he will not do it even if he is given a post; even if it is not his merit, he will not accept it even if he is given money; if he sees someone who is mentally dishonest, he will not respect him even if he is a dignitary; if he sees someone who is tainted, he will not yield to him even if he is a high-ranking dignitary; he will not be pleased to gain glory and wealth, and he will not regret losing wealth and glory; if it is not his fault, he will not feel ashamed even if he is involved and humiliated.

古文： 今公所谓贤者，皆可为羞矣。
现代文： 现在你们所说的贤者，都是些足以为他们感到羞愧的人。
English: Now the wise men, of whom you speak, are men of whom you may well be ashamed.

古文：卑疵而前，韱趋而言；相引以势，相导以利；比周宾正，以求尊誉，以受公奉；事私利，枉主法，猎农民；以官为威，以法为机，求利逆暴：譬无异於操白刃劫人者也。
现代文：他们低声下气地趋奉，奴颜婢膝地讲话；凭权势相勾引，以利益相诱导；结党营私，排斥正人君子，以求得尊宠美誉，以享受公家俸禄；谋求个人的利益，歪曲君主的法令，掠夺农民的财产；依仗官位逞威风，把法令当作自己的工具，追逐私利，逆行横暴：好像与手持利刃威胁他人的人没什么区别。
English: They serve in a low voice and speak in a servile manner; they use their power to seduce others and their interests to entice them; they form parties and exclude honest people and gentlemen in order to gain respect and reputation and to enjoy public salaries; they seek personal interests, distort the monarch's decrees, and plunder the peasants' property; they rely on their official position and use the decrees as their own tools to pursue their own interests and act violently: it seems that there is no difference between them and those who threaten others with a sharp blade.

古文：初试官时，倍力为巧诈，饰虚功执空文以主上，用居上为右；试官不让贤陈功，见伪增实，以无为有，以少为多，以求便势尊位；食饮驱驰，从姬歌兒，不顾於亲，犯法害民，虚公家：此夫为盗不操矛弧者也，攻而不用弦刃者也，欺父母未有罪而弑君未伐者也。
现代文：刚做官的时候，竭力耍弄巧诈伎俩，粉饰虚假的功劳，拿着华而不实的文书去欺骗君王，以便爬上高位；被委任官职后，不肯让贤者陈述功劳，却自夸其功，把假的说成真的，把没有的变成有的，把少的改为多的，以求得权势高位；大吃大喝，到处游乐，犬马声色，无所不有，不顾父母亲人，专做犯法害民勾当，肆意挥霍，虚耗公家：这其实是做强盗而不拿弓矛，攻击他人而不用刀箭，虐待父母而未曾定罪，杀害国君而未被讨伐的一伙人。
English: When he first became an official, he tried his best to play clever tricks, whitewash false merits, and deceive the king with a flashy and false document in order to climb to a high position; after being appointed to an official position, he refused to let the wise man state his merits, but boasted of his merits, said the false to be true, turned the nothing into something, and changed the less into more, in order to obtain a high position of power and influence; he ate a lot of food, played everywhere, had a lot of sex, and did everything, regardless of his parents and relatives, he only did illegal and harmful work, squandered money, and wasted public funds: this is

古文：何以为高贤才乎？
现代文：凭什么认为他们是高明贤能者呢？
English: On what basis do you consider them to be wise and competent?

古文： 盗贼发不能禁，夷貊不服不能摄，奸邪起不能塞，官秏乱不能治，四时不和不能调，岁穀不孰不能適。
现代文： 盗贼发生而不能禁止，蛮夷不从而不能慑服，邪兴起而不能遏止，公家损耗而不能整治，四时不和而不能调节，年景不好而不能调济。
English: Thieves occur and cannot be prohibited, barbarians cannot be deterred and subdued, evils arise and cannot be stopped, the public sector is depleted and cannot be rectified, the four seasons are at odds and cannot be adjusted, the economic situation is not good and cannot be adjusted.

古文：才贤不为，是不忠也；才不贤而讬官位，利上奉，妨贤者处，是窃位也；有人者进，有财者礼，是伪也。
现代文：有才学而不去做，这是不忠；没有才学而寄居官位，享受皇上的俸禄，妨碍贤能者的地位，这是窃居官位。有关系的就进用做官，有钱财的就礼遇尊敬，这叫做虚伪。
English: It is disloyalty to have the ability to study and not to do it; it is theft to hold a position without the ability to study and enjoy the emperor's salary and hinder the position of the virtuous. Those who have connections are promoted to official positions, and those who have money and wealth are treated with respect. This is called hypocrisy.

古文：子独不见鸱枭之与凤皇翔乎？
现代文：你们难道没有见过鸱枭也同凤凰一起飞翔吗？
English: Have you not seen the dragonfly fly with the phoenix?

古文：兰芷芎藭弃於广野，蒿萧成林，使君子退而不显众，公等是也。
现代文：兰芷芎被遗弃在旷野里，而蒿萧却长得茂密成林，使正人君子隐退而不能扬名显众，即是在位诸公所致。
English: Lan Xun was abandoned in the wilderness, but Juxiao grew into a dense forest, so that the righteous gentleman retreated and could not make a name for himself, that is, due to the reign of Zhu Gong.

古文： 述而不作，君子义也。
现代文： 述而不作，是君子的本意。
English: It is a gentleman's duty to tell, not to do.

古文：今夫卜者，必法天地，象四时，顺於仁义，分策定卦，旋式正釭，然後言天地之利害，事之成败。
现代文：如今卜者占卜，一定效法天地，取象四时的变化，顺应仁义的原则，分辨筮策，判定卦象，旋转栻盘，占卜作卦，然后解说天地间的厉害，人事的吉凶成败。
English: Nowadays, soothsayers use divination, following the laws of heaven and earth, taking the changes of the four seasons, conforming to the principles of benevolence and righteousness, distinguishing strategies, judging signs of divination, rotating the oracle dish, divination for divination, and then explaining the power of heaven and earth, the good luck and bad luck of human affairs.

古文：昔先王之定国家，必先龟策日月，而後乃敢代；正时日，乃後入家；产子必先占吉凶，後乃有之。
现代文：以前先王安定国家，必先用龟策占卜日月，然后才敢代天治理百姓；选准吉日，随后才能进入国都；家中生子必先占卜吉凶，然后才敢养育。
English: In the past, for the king to stabilize the country, he must first use the tortoise strategy to divine the day and month, and then dare to govern the people on behalf of heaven; select the auspicious day, and then enter the capital; the children in the family must first divine the auspicious and evil, and then dare to raise them.

古文：自伏羲作八卦，周文王演三百八十四爻而天下治。
现代文：从伏羲氏创制八卦，周文王演化成三百八十四爻而后天下得以大治。
English: From the Fuxi clan's creation of Bagua, Zhou Wenwang evolved into the Three Hundred and Eighty-Four Dynasties and then ruled the world.

古文：越王句践放文王八卦以破敌国，霸天下。
现代文：越王勾践仿照文王八卦行事而大破敌国，称霸天下。
English: Yue Wang Gochun followed the example of King Wen of the Eight Trigrams and defeated the enemy country, dominating the world.

古文：由是言之，卜筮有何负哉！
现代文：由此说来，卜筮有什么值得忧虑的呢？
English: So what is Bo Xilai worried about?

古文： 且夫卜筮者，埽除设坐，正其冠带，然後乃言事，此有礼也。
现代文： 再说卜筮者，扫除洁净然后设座，端正冠带然后谈论吉凶之事，这是合礼仪的表现。
English: As for the diviners, it is proper etiquette to sweep the floor clean and then set the table, straighten the crown and then talk about the auspicious and inauspicious.

古文：言而鬼神或以飨，忠臣以事其上，孝子以养其亲，慈父以畜其子，此有德者也。
现代文：他们的言论，使鬼神或许因而享用祭品，忠臣因而奉事他的国君，孝子因而供养他的双亲，慈父因而抚育他的孩子，这是有道德的表现。
English: Their words may cause the ghosts and gods to enjoy the sacrifices, the loyal subjects to serve their sovereigns, the filial sons to support their parents, and the benevolent fathers to raise their children. This is a moral performance.

古文：而以义置数十百钱，病者或以愈，且死或以生，患或以免，事或以成，嫁子娶妇或以养生：此之为德，岂直数十百钱哉！
现代文：而问卜者出于道义花费几十、上百个钱，生病的人或许因而痊愈，将死的人或许因而得生，祸患或许因而免除，事情或许因而成功，嫁女娶妇或许因而得以养生：这种功德，难道只值几十、上百个钱吗！
English: But a fortune-teller spends tens or hundreds of money out of morality, a sick person may be healed, a dying person may live, a calamity may be exempted, a thing may be successful, a married woman may be able to live: is this merit only worth tens or hundreds of money?

古文：此夫老子所谓 上德不德，是以有德 。
现代文：这就是老子所说的 具有大德者并不以有德自居，所以他才有德 。
English: This is what Lao Tzu said that a person with great virtue does not consider himself to be virtuous, so he only has virtue.

古文：今夫卜筮者利大而谢少，老子之云岂异於是乎？
现代文：今天的卜筮者待人好处多而受人之谢少，老子所说的难道同卜筮者的所作所为有什么不同吗？
English: Today's soothsayer treats people with more benefits and receives less thanks from people. Is there any difference between what Lao Zi said and what the soothsayer did?

古文： 庄子曰： 君子内无饥寒之患，外无劫夺之忧，居上而敬，居下不为害，君子之道也。 
现代文： 庄子说： 君子内无饥寒的忧患，外无被劫夺的顾虑，居上位慎重严谨，处下位不妒忌他人，这就是君子之道。 
English: Zhuangzi said: A gentleman has no worries of hunger and cold inside, no worries of being robbed outside, is prudent and rigorous in the upper ranks, and does not envy others in the lower ranks. This is the way of a gentleman.

古文：今夫卜筮者之为业也，积之无委聚，藏之不用府库，徙之不用辎车，负装之不重，止而用之无尽索之时。
现代文：如今，卜筮者所从事的职业，积蓄无须成堆，储藏不用府库，迁徙不用辎车，装备简单轻便，停留下来就能使用，并且没有用完之时。
English: Today, diviners are engaged in a profession that does not require piles of savings, storage without a treasury, migration without a car, simple and light equipment, and can be used when staying, and it is not used up.

古文：持不尽索之物，游於无穷之世，虽庄氏之行未能增於是也，子何故而云不可卜哉？
现代文：拿着使用不尽的东西，游于没有尽头的世上，即使庄子的行为也不能比这更好。你们为什么却说不可以卜筮呢？
English: Even Zhuangzi could not have behaved better than this, swimming in the world without end, holding something that has no end of use. Why do you say that it is not possible to divulge?

古文：天不足西北，星辰西北移；地不足东南，以海为池；日中必移，月满必亏；先王之道，乍存乍亡。
现代文：天不足西北，星辰移向西北；地不足东南，就用海为池；太阳到了中午必定向西移动，月亮到了满圆后必定出现亏缺；先王的圣道，忽存忽亡。
English: When the sky is too short in the northwest, the stars move to the northwest; when the earth is too short in the southeast, the sea is used as a pool; when the sun reaches noon, it must move to the west, and when the moon reaches full circle, there must be a shortage; the holy path of the former king, perish perish perish.

古文：公责卜者言必信，不亦惑乎！
现代文：而二位大夫要求卜筮者说话必定信实，不也足令人疑惑不解吗？
English: And the two doctors demand that the diviner must speak truthfully, isn't that enough to be puzzling?

古文： 公见夫谈士辩人乎？
现代文： 你们见过说客辩士吧？
English: You've all seen a debater, right?

古文：虑事定计，必是人也，然不能以一言说人主意，故言必称先王，语必道上古；虑事定计，饰先王之成功，语其败害，以恐喜人主之志，以求其欲。
现代文：思考问题，决策谋划，必须靠这种人。然而他们不能用只言片语使人主喜悦，所以讲话必托称先王，论说必引述上古；考虑问题，决策谋划，或夸饰先王事业的成功，或述说其失利败坏的情形，使人主的心意或有所喜，或有所惧，以实现他们的欲望。
English: It is necessary to rely on such people to think about problems, make decisions, and plan. However, they cannot please the Lord with just a few words, so the speech must rely on the former king, and the discussion must quote the ancients; consider problems, make decisions, and plan, or praise the success of the former king's cause, or describe the circumstances of its failure and corruption, and make the Lord's mind either happy or afraid, in order to realize their desires.

古文：多言夸严，莫大於此矣。
现代文：多讲虚夸之词，没有比这更厉害的了。
English: More empty rhetoric, it doesn't get better than that.

古文：然欲彊国成功，尽忠於上，非此不立。
现代文：可是要想使国家富强，事业成功，能够效忠君王，不这样做又不行。
English: But if you want to make the country rich and strong, the cause successful, and be able to be loyal to the king, you can't do without it.

古文：今夫卜者，导惑教愚也。
现代文：现在的卜筮者，是解答人们的疑问，教化百姓的愚昧。
English: Today's soothsayers answer people's questions and enlighten people's ignorance.

古文：夫愚惑之人，岂能以一言而知之哉！
现代文：那些愚昧迷惑的人，怎么能用一句话就使他们聪明起来！
English: How can those who are bewildered by their ignorance be made wise by a single sentence?

古文：言不厌多。
现代文：因此，说话不厌其多。
English: That's why he likes to talk a lot.

古文： 故骐骥不能与罢驴为驷，而凤皇不与燕雀为群，而贤者亦不与不肖者同列。
现代文： 所以骐骥不能和疲驴同驾一车，凤凰不同燕子麻雀为群，而贤者也不跟不肖者同伍。
English: Therefore, a donkey cannot drive a car with a tired donkey, a phoenix cannot be a group of swallows and sparrows, and a wise man cannot be in the same group as a foolish man.

古文：故君子处卑隐以辟众，自匿以辟伦，微见德顺以除群害，以明天性，助上养下，多其功利，不求尊誉。
现代文：所以君子常处于卑下不显眼的地位，以避开大众，自己隐匿起来以避开人伦的束缚，暗中察明世间道德顺应之情状，以消除种种祸害，以表明上天的本性，帮助上天养育生灵，希求更多的功利，而不求什么尊位与荣誉。
English: That is why the gentleman is often in a humble and inconspicuous position to avoid the public, hiding himself to avoid the shackles of human ethics, surreptitiously detecting the situation of moral conformity in the world, eliminating various evils, revealing the nature of heaven, helping heaven to nurture living beings, and desiring more utilitarian benefits without seeking any dignity and honor.

古文：公之等喁喁者也，何知长者之道乎！ 
现代文：你们二位不过是些随便发发议论的人，怎么会知道长者的道理呢！ 
English: How can you two, who are nothing but talkers, know what is right for the elderly?

古文：宋忠、贾谊忽而自失，芒乎无色，怅然噤口不能言。
现代文：宋忠和贾谊听得精神恍惚而若有所失，茫然失色，神情惆怅，闭口不能说话。
English: Song Zhong and Jia Yi listened in a daze, and if they were at a loss, they were dazed, dazed, and unable to speak.

古文：於是摄衣而起，再拜而辞。
现代文：于是整衣起身，拜了两拜，辞别司马季主。
English: So he got dressed, bowed twice, and bid farewell to Sima Ji.

古文：行洋洋也，出门仅能自上车，伏轼低头，卒不能出气。
现代文：二人走起路来，不辨东西南北，出门只能自己上车，趴在车栏上，不敢抬头，始终不能喘过气来。
English: The two of them started walking, regardless of east, west, north or south, and when they went out, they could only get on the bus by themselves, lying down on the railing, not daring to look up, and never being able to catch their breath.

古文：居三日，宋忠见贾谊於殿门外，乃相引屏语相谓自叹曰： 道高益安，势高益危。
现代文：过了三天，宋忠在殿门外见到贾谊，便拉着他避开众人谈论起来，慨叹地说： 道德越高越安全，权势越高越危险。
English: Three days later, Song Zhong saw Jia Yi outside the gate of the hall, so he pulled him to avoid the crowd and began to talk to him. He said with a sigh: The higher the morality, the safer it is, and the higher the power, the more dangerous it is.

古文：居赫赫之势，失身且有日矣。
现代文：处在显赫的地位，丧身将指日可待。
English: in a prominent position, his death will be just around the corner.

古文：夫卜而有不审，不见夺糈；为人主计而不审，身无所处。
现代文：卜筮即便有不灵验的时候，也不会被夺去应得的精米；替君王出谋划策如果不周密，就没有立身之地。
English: Even if there is a failure in divination, it will not be deprived of the polished rice it deserves; if it is not thorough to advise the king, there is no place for it.

古文：此相去远矣，犹天冠地屦也。
现代文：这二者相差太远了，就像天冠地覆不可同日而语一样。
English: The two are so far apart as to be incongruous.

古文：此老子之所谓 无名者万物之始 也。
现代文：这正如老子所说的 无名是产生天地万物的本源 呵！
English: As Lao Tzu said, the nameless is the source of all things in heaven and earth.

古文：天地旷旷，物之熙熙，或安或危，莫知居之。
现代文：天地空阔无边，万物兴盛和乐，有的安全，有的危险，没有人知道自己该身居何处。
English: The sky and the earth are vast and boundless, all things are prosperous and happy, some are safe, some are dangerous, no one knows where they should live.

古文：我与若，何足预彼哉！
现代文：我和你，哪里够资格评论他们呢！
English: You and I are not qualified to comment on them!

古文：彼久而愈安，虽曾氏之义未有以异也。 
现代文：他们日子愈久就越安乐，即使庄子的主张也没有什么与此不同之处。 
English: The longer they live, the happier they are, even if Zhuangzi's idea is no different.

古文：久之，宋忠使匈奴，不至而还，抵罪。
现代文：过了很久，宋忠出使匈奴，没有到达那里就返回来了，因而被判了罪行。
English: After a long time, Song Zhong sent an envoy to the Xiongnu, but he returned without arriving there and was convicted of a crime.

古文：而贾谊为梁怀王傅，王堕马薨，谊不食，毒恨而死。
现代文：贾谊做梁怀王的太傅，梁怀王不慎坠马去世，贾谊引咎绝食，含恨而死。
English: Jia Yi was Liang Huai Wang's grand tutor. Liang Huai Wang accidentally fell off his horse and died. Jia Yi blamed it on a hunger strike and died of hatred.

古文：此务华绝根者也。
现代文：这都是追求浮华而断绝性命的事例啊。
English: These are all examples of the pursuit of vanity and the denial of life.

古文：太史公曰：古者卜人所以不载者，多不见于篇。
现代文：太史公说：古时候的卜者，所以不被记载的原因，是因为他们的事迹多不见于文献。
English: Taishikong said: The reason why the magicians of ancient times were not recorded is because most of their deeds are not found in literature.

古文：及至司马季主，余志而著之。
现代文：待到司马季主，我便将其言行记述成篇。
English: When I reached Sima Ji, I wrote down his words and deeds.

古文：褚先生曰：臣为郎时，游观长安中，见卜筮之贤大夫，观其起居行步，坐起自动，誓正其衣冠而当乡人也，有君子之风。
现代文：褚先生说：我做郎官的时候，曾在长安城中游览，见过从事卜筮职业的贤士大夫。我观察他们的生活起居、走路坐起都自然得体，常常端正好自己的衣服帽子来接待乡野之民，有君子的风帆。
English: Mr. Zou said: "When I was a steward, I visited Chang'an City and saw the wise doctors who were engaged in the profession of divination. I observed their lives. They were naturally dignified when they lived, walked and sat. They often wore their own clothes and hats to receive the people of the countryside. They had the sails of a gentleman.

古文：见性好解妇来卜，对之颜色严振，未尝见齿而笑也。
现代文：遇到性情喜爱解疑、乐于卜筮的妇人来问卜，对待她们态度严肃，不曾露齿而笑。
English: When encountering women with a disposition to solve problems and enjoy riddles, he treated them with a serious attitude and never grinned.

古文：从古以来，贤者避世，有居止舞泽者，有居民间闭口不言，有隐居卜筮间以全身者。
现代文：自古以来，贤者逃避世俗社会，有的栖息于荒芜的洼地，有的生活在民间而闭口不言世事，有的隐居在卜筮者中间以保全自己。
English: Since ancient times, sages have avoided secular society. Some dwell in desolate lowlands, some live among the people and keep their mouths shut, and some live in seclusion among diviners to protect themselves.

古文：夫司马季主者，楚贤大夫，游学长安，通易经，术黄帝、老子，博闻远见。
现代文：司马季主是楚国贤明的大夫，在长安游学，通晓《易经》，能够陈述黄帝、老子之道，知识广博，远见卓识。
English: Lord Sima Ji was a wise doctor in the State of Chu. He traveled to Chang'an to study and was well versed in the Yi Jing. He was able to explain the way of the Yellow Emperor and Laozi. His knowledge was extensive and his foresight was outstanding.

古文：观其对二大夫贵人之谈言，称引古明王圣人道，固非浅闻小数之能。
现代文：看他对答二位大夫贵人的话语，引述古代明王圣人的道理，原本不是见识浅薄能力低下之辈。
English: Looking at his words in response to the two doctors and dignitaries, quoting the principle of the ancient sage King Ming, he was not originally a generation of shallow understanding and low ability.

古文：及卜筮立名声千里者，各往往而在。
现代文：至于以卜筮为业名扬千里之外的，往往到处都有。
English: As for those who have become famous thousands of miles away for their business, they are often found everywhere.

古文：传曰： 富为上，贵次之；既贵各各学一伎能立其身。 
现代文：传记上说： 富为上，贵次之；已经显贵了，各自还须学会一技之长以立身于社会之中。 
English: According to the biography: Richness is the first, honor is the second; already distinguished, each of them still needs to learn a skill to stand in the society.

古文：黄直，大夫也；陈君夫，妇人也：以相马立名天下。
现代文：黄直是位大夫，陈君夫是位妇人，他们以擅长相马而立名天下。
English: Huang Zhi is a doctor, Chen Junfu is a woman, and they are famous for being good at soma.

古文：齐张仲、曲成侯以善击刺学用剑，立名天下。
现代文：齐国张仲和曲成侯以擅长用剑击刺而扬名天下。
English: Zhang Zhong and Qu Chenghou of Qi Province were famous for being good at stabbing with swords.

古文：留长孺以相彘立名。
现代文：留长孺因善于相猪而出名。
English: Remaining Nagatoro is famous for being good at dating pigs.

古文：荥阳褚氏以相牛立名。
现代文：荥阳褚氏因善于相牛而成名。
English: The Shanyang Yi clan became famous for being good at cowherding.

古文：能以伎能立名者甚多，皆有高世绝人之风，何可胜言。
现代文：能够因技能立名的人很多，都有高于世俗和超过常人的风范，哪里能够说得完呢？
English: There are many people who are able to make a name for themselves due to their skills, and they all have a demeanor that is higher than the mundane and surpasses that of ordinary people. Where can I end?

古文：故曰： 非其地，树之不生；非其意，教之不成。 
现代文：所以说： 不是适当之地，种什么也不会生长；不合他的意向，教什么也难以成就。 
English: Therefore it is said: If the place is not suitable, nothing will grow; if it is not according to his intention, it will be difficult for him to accomplish anything.

古文：夫家之教子孙，当视其所以好，好含苟生活之道，因而成之。
现代文：大凡长辈教育子女，应当看看他们喜好什么，爱好如果包容生活之道，就顺其爱好因势利导而造就他。
English: When elders educate their children, they should look at what they like, and if the hobby is tolerant of the way of life, they will follow their hobby and make him because of snobbery.

古文：故曰： 制宅命子，足以观士；子有处所，可谓贤人。 
现代文：所以说： 建造什么住宅，为子取用何名，足以看出士大夫的志趣所在；儿子有了安身处世的职业，父亲可以称得上是贤人了。 
English: Therefore, it is said: What kind of house to build, how many names to choose for the son, is enough to see the ambition of the scholar-officials; if the son has a profession that is stable in life, the father can be called a wise man.

古文：臣为郎时，与太卜待诏为郎者同署，言曰： 孝武帝时，聚会占家问之，某日可取妇乎？
现代文：我做郎官的时候，与太卜待诏为郎官的同事在同一衙门办公，他们说： 孝武帝时，曾召集从事占卜的各类专家来询问，某日可以娶儿媳吗？
English: When I was a vassal, I worked in the same palace as a colleague who was a vassal of the Empress Dowager Dowager Cixi. They said, "When Emperor Xiaowu was alive, he called together all kinds of experts in divination to ask, will he be able to marry his daughter-in-law one day?

古文：五行家曰可，堪舆家曰不可，建除家曰不吉，丛辰家曰大凶，历家曰小凶，天人家曰小吉，太一家曰大吉。
现代文：五行家说可以，堪舆家说不可以，建除家说不吉利，丛辰家说是大凶，历家说是小凶，天人家说是小吉，太一家说是大吉。
English: The Five Elementists said it was possible, the Kanshu family said it was impossible, the Jianzhi family said it was unlucky, the Congchen family said it was a great evil, the Lai family said it was a small evil, the Tianren family said it was a small good luck, and the Tai family said it was a great good luck.

古文：辩讼不决，以状闻。
现代文：各家争议辩论，不能做出决定，只能将有关情况奏明皇上。
English: Each dispute debate, can not make a decision, can only report the relevant situation to the emperor.

古文：制曰： 避诸死忌，以五行为主。  
现代文：皇上下令说： 避开死凶忌讳，应以五行家的意见为依据。  
English: The imperial edict said: to avoid the deadly curse, the opinions of the five elements should be taken as the basis.

古文：人取於五行者也。
现代文：这就是人们采用五行家的意见的原因。
English: This is why people adopt the opinions of the Five Elements.

