古文：起柔兆阉茂，尽柔兆涒滩，凡十一年。
现代文：起，止，一共十一年。汉纪四十五汉质帝本初元年
English: It lasted for a total of eleven years. In the first year of the 45th year of the Han Dynasty

古文：孝质皇帝本初元年
现代文：夏季，四月庚辰，命各郡、各封国推荐通晓经书的 明经 到太学。
English: In the summer, in April, the county and county-level governments recommended that people familiar with the scriptures of the Ming and Qing Dynasties should go to Taiyue.

古文：夏，四月，庚辰，令郡、国举明经诣太学，自大将军以下皆遣子受业；岁满课试，拜官有差。
现代文：大将军以及文武官员，也都送自己的儿子到太学上课。学习期满一年后进行考试，根据考试成绩的高下，分别任命不同的官职。
English: Senior generals as well as military and civilian officials also send their sons to Taigaku for classes. After one year of study, an exam is held, and according to the results of the exam, different official positions are appointed.

古文：又千石、六百石、四府掾属、三署郎、四姓小侯先能通经者，各令随家法，其高第者上名牒，当以次赏进。
现代文：又命令官秩为千石或六百石的官吏，大将军、太尉、司徒、司空等四府的掾属，五官、左、右等三署的郎，以及四姓外戚小侯中已能通晓经书的人，让他们每自遵守师承的 家法 ，凡考试成绩优良，能被列入高第的，则登记在名册上，依照次序升迁官职。
English: Those with 1,000 koku and 600 koku, those who belong to the four prefectures of Taejongfu, Taejongfu, Shitofu, and Shikokufu, those who belong to the five government offices, the left office, and the right office, and those who have relatives with the surnames of Min, Guo, Yin, and Ma; those who can recite the sutras first, are called poets of poetry, those who can recite the sutras first, and those who can recite the sutras first, are called poets of poetry, those who can recite the sutras first, and those who can recite the sutras first,

古文：自是游学增盛，至三万馀生。
现代文：从此以后，各地到太学留学的人大大增多，太学生增加到三万余人。
English: Since then, the number of people from all over the country who have come to study at Taixu has greatly increased, and the number of students at Taixu has increased to more than 30,000.

古文：五月，庚寅，徙乐安王鸿为渤海王。
现代文：五月庚寅，改封乐安王刘鸿为勃海王。
English: In May, Geng Yin changed the title of Le An Wang Liu Hong to Bo Hai Wang.

古文：海水溢，漂没民居。
现代文：海水倒灌，淹没人民的住宅。
English: Seawater overflowed, flooding people's homes.

古文：六月，丁巳，赦天下。
现代文：六月丁巳，大赦天下。
English: In June, Ding Si was granted amnesty.

古文：帝少而聪慧，尝因朝会，目梁冀曰： 此跋扈将军也！ 
现代文：质帝年幼，但聪明智慧，曾在一次早朝时，眨眼看着梁冀，说： 这是跋扈将军！ 
English: Qiu Di was young, but smart and wise. Once, in the early morning, he looked at Liang Jie with a wink and said, "This is the general of the army!"

古文：冀闻，深恶之。
现代文：梁冀听到以后，对质帝深恶痛绝。
English: After hearing this, Liang Jie had a deep loathing for the emperor.

古文：闰月，甲申，冀使左右置毒于煮饼以进之。
现代文：闰六月甲申，梁冀让质帝身边的侍从把毒药放在汤饼里，给质帝进上。
English: On leap June in Jiaxing, Liang Ji asked the attendants around the emperor to put poison in the soup cake and give it to the emperor.

古文：帝苦烦甚，使促召太尉李固。
现代文：药性发作，质帝非常难受，派人急速传召太尉李固。
English: Drug-induced seizures, the emperor was very uncomfortable, and sent someone to quickly summon Lieutenant Li Gu.

古文：固入前，问帝得患所由；帝尚能言，曰： 食煮饼。今腹中闷，得水尚可活。 
现代文：李固进宫，走到质帝榻前，询问质帝得病的来由。质帝还能讲话，说： 我吃过汤饼，现在觉得腹中堵闷，给我水喝，我还能活。 
English: Li Gugu entered the palace, walked to the bedside of Emperor Qiu, and inquired about the cause of Emperor Qiu's illness. Emperor Qiu could still speak, saying, "I have eaten soup cakes, but now I feel my stomach is stuffy. Give me water to drink, and I can still live."

古文：时冀亦在侧，曰： 恐吐，不可饮水。 
现代文：梁冀这时也站在旁边，阻止说： 恐怕呕吐，不能喝水。 
English: At this time, Liang Jie also stood by and stopped him, saying, "I'm afraid I'll vomit, so I can't drink water."

古文：语未绝而崩。
现代文：话还没有说完，质帝已经驾崩。
English: Before the speech was over, Emperor Qiu had already passed away.

古文：固伏尸号哭，推举侍医。
现代文：李固伏到质帝的尸体上号哭并弹劾侍候质帝的御医。
English: Li Gufufu's corpse wailed and called for a doctor.

古文：冀虑其事泄，大恶之。
现代文：梁冀担心会泄露下毒的真相，对李固非常痛恨。
English: Liang Ji was worried about the matter being leaked, and especially hated him.

古文：将议立嗣，固与司徒胡广、司空赵戒先与冀书曰： 天下不幸，频年之间，国祚三绝。
现代文：在商议确定继承帝位的人选之前，李固和司徒胡广、司空赵戒，先给梁冀写信说： 天下不幸，连续几年间，帝王之位，三次断绝。
English: Before discussing the candidates to succeed to the throne, Li Gu, Stu Hu Guang and Siku Zhao Jie first wrote a letter to Liang Jie, saying: "Unfortunately, the throne of the emperor has been cut off three times in successive years.

古文：今当立帝，天下重器，诚知太后垂心，将军劳虑，详择其人，务存圣明。
现代文：现在将立新的皇帝，帝位是天下最重要的，我们深知皇太后的关切和大将军的苦虑，将仔细地选择一位合适的人选，得到一位圣明的帝王。
English: Now is the time to establish the emperor, the imperial throne is the world's heavy weapon, the empress dowager is very concerned, the general works hard, selects the right person in detail, and preserves the sacredness.

古文：然愚情眷眷，窃独有怀。
现代文：然而，我们也愚昧地思念关切着这件大事。
English: However, the foolishness considered again and again, privately unique ideas.

古文：远寻先世废立旧仪，近见国家践祚前事，未尝不询访公卿，广求群议，令上应天心，下合众望。
现代文：无论是远求先代有关废黜和选立皇帝的旧制，还是近观皇帝登极的前例，没有一次不询问三公九卿，广泛征求大家意见的，使继承帝位的人选，上应天心，下合众望。
English: Looking far and wide for the old system that was abolished by the previous generation, and looking closely at the history of the country's establishment of the emperor, there is no reason not to visit the nobles and widely solicit opinions. Above all, it must be in accordance with the will of Heaven, and below it must be in line with the wishes of the people.

古文：《传》曰： 以天下与人易，为天下得人难。 
现代文：经传上说： 把天下送人是容易的，为天下得人却非常困难。 
English: According to legend, it is easy to give people to the world, but it is very difficult to get people for the world.

古文：昔昌邑之立，昏乱日滋；霍光忧愧发愤，悔之折骨。
现代文：过去，昌邑王登极之后，昏乱日甚一日，霍光忧愁惭愧而又愤慨，悔恨至极。
English: In the past, after the accession of Changyi Wang to the throne, the confusion increased day by day, and Huo Guang was sad, ashamed, indignant, and extremely remorseful.

古文：自非博陆忠勇，延年奋发，大汉之祀，几将倾矣。
现代文：如果不是霍光的忠贞和勇气，田延年的奋发举动，汉朝的宗庙祭祀几乎被昌邑王倾覆。
English: If it wasn't for the loyalty and bravery of Bolu Hou Houguang, the leader of the farmland, and his years of hard work, the great man's country was almost overturned.

古文：至忧至重，可不熟虑！悠悠万事，唯此为大；国之兴衰，在此一举。 
现代文：确定继承帝位的人选，的确是一件最令人忧虑，也是最重要的大事，岂可不深思熟虑！天下的事千头万绪，都可暂缓，只有选择继承帝位的人选是最重大的事，国家兴衰，在此一举。 
English: Determining the candidate to succeed to the throne is indeed one of the most worrisome and most important matters, and should not be left without careful consideration! There are so many things in the world that can be postponed, but choosing the candidate to succeed to the throne is the most important matter, the rise and fall of the country, in one fell swoop.

古文：冀得书，乃召三公、中二千石、列侯，大议所立。
现代文：梁冀看到这封信，于是召集三公、二千石官员和列侯，共同讨论继承帝位的人选。
English: Liang Ji saw this letter, so he called together the three princes, officials of 2,000 koku, and vassals to discuss who should succeed to the throne.

古文：固、广、戒及大鸿胪杜乔皆以为清河王蒜明德著闻，又属最尊亲，宜立为嗣，朝臣莫不归心。
现代文：李固、胡广、赵戒及大鸿胪杜乔都认为，清河王刘蒜以完美的德行而著称，皇家的血统又最尊、最亲，应该立为皇位继承人，朝廷的文武官员，全都归心于他。
English: Li Gu, Hu Guang, Zhao Jing and Du Qiao all believed that Liu Garlic, the king of the Qing Dynasty, was famous for his perfect virtue, the royal bloodline was the most respected and the closest, he should be appointed as the heir to the throne, and the court's literary and military officials were all devoted to him.

古文：而中常侍曹腾尝谒蒜，蒜不为礼，宦者由此恶之。
现代文：然而，中常侍曹腾曾经有一次去拜见刘蒜，刘蒜没有向他施礼，宦官们从此憎恨刘蒜。
English: However, Cao Teng once went to visit Liu Garlic. Liu Garlic did not bow to him, and the eunuchs hated Liu Garlic from then on.

古文：初，平原王冀既贬归河间，其父请分蠡吾县以侯之；顺帝许之。
现代文：当初，平原王刘翼被贬逐回到河间国以后，他的父亲河间王刘开曾请求分出蠡吾县，将刘翼封为蠡吾侯，顺帝批准。
English: At first, after Liu Ying, the king of the plain, was banished back to Hema Province, his father, Liu Kai, the king of Hema Province, had requested that Hema County be separated and Liu Ying be made the lord of Hema County, which was approved by Emperor Shun.

古文：翼卒，子志嗣；梁太后欲以女弟妻志，征到夏门亭。
现代文：刘翼去世后，他的儿子刘志继位为蠡吾侯。梁太后想把她的妹妹嫁给刘志为妻，征召刘志来京都洛阳。
English: After Liu Ying's death, his son Liu Zhi succeeded him as the Prince of Xingwu. Empress Dowager Liang wanted to marry her sister to Liu Zhi as a wife, and summoned Liu Zhi to Kyoto Luoyang.

古文：会帝崩，梁冀欲立志。
现代文：刘志抵达夏门亭时，正遇上质帝驾崩，梁冀便打算立刘志为帝。
English: When Liu Zhi arrived at the Summer Gate Pavilion, he was confronted with the death of the emperor, and Liang Jie planned to make Liu Zhi the emperor.

古文：清河王严明，若果立，则将军受祸不久矣！
现代文：不如拥戴蠡吾侯为帝，富贵可以长久保全。 
English: It is better to embrace the emperor, and wealth can be preserved for a long time.

古文：不如立蠡吾侯，富贵可长保也。 
现代文：梁冀赞成他们的意见。于是，次日，重新召集三公、九卿进行讨论。
English: Liang Jie agreed with their opinion. Therefore, the next day, the three princes and nine nobles were reconvened for discussion.

古文：冀然其言，明日，重会公卿，冀意气凶凶，言辞激切，自胡广、赵戒以下莫不慑惮，皆曰： 惟大将军令！ 
现代文：梁冀在会上气势汹汹，言辞激烈率直，从司徒胡广和司空赵戒以下的官员，没有一个不感到畏惧，都说： 我们只听大将军的命令！ 
English: At the meeting, Liang Jie was very aggressive, and his words were fierce and frank. From the following officials, from Stu Hu Guang and Sikuo Zhao Jie, there was no one who was not afraid to say: We only listen to the general's orders!

古文：独李固、杜乔坚守本议。
现代文：唯独太尉李固和大鸿胪杜乔坚持原来的主张。
English: Only Captain Li Gu and Da Hongzhu Du Qiao insisted on the original proposition.

古文：冀厉声曰： 罢会！ 
现代文：梁冀厉声喝道： 散会！ 
English: Liang Jie shouted loudly: "Cancel the meeting!

古文：固犹望众心可立，复以书劝冀，冀愈激怒。
现代文：可是，李固仍认为刘蒜是众望所归，有被立的可能，于是再次写信劝说梁冀，梁冀更加激怒。
English: However, Li Gu still believed that Liu Garlic was a popular choice and had the possibility of being appointed, so he wrote again to persuade Liang Jie. Liang Jie was even more infuriated.

古文：丁亥，冀说太后，先策免固。
现代文：丁亥，梁冀劝说梁太后，先颁策将太尉李固免职。
English: Dinghai and Liang Jie persuaded the Empress Dowager Liang to first issue a policy to dismiss Lieutenant Li Gu.

古文：戊子，以司徒胡广为太尉；司空赵戒为司徒，与大将军冀参录尚书事；太仆袁汤为司空。
现代文：戊子，任命司徒胡广为太尉，司空赵戒为司徒，和大将军梁冀共同主管尚书事务。又擢升太仆袁汤为司空。
English: Wu Zi, appointed the scholar Hu Guang as the first lieutenant, the scholar Zhao Jie as the scholar, and the general Liang Ji as the co-supervisor of the scholarly affairs. He also promoted the scholar Yuan Tang as the scholar.

古文：汤，安之孙也。
现代文：袁汤是袁安的孙子。
English: Yuan Tang is the grandson of Yuan An.

古文：庚寅，使大将军冀持节以王青盖车迎蠡吾侯志入南宫；其日，即皇帝位，时年十五。
现代文：庚寅，梁太后派大将军梁冀持符节，用封王的皇子乘用的青盖车迎接蠡吾侯刘志进入南宫。当天，刘志即皇帝位。当时，他年十五岁。
English: In Goyang, Empress Dowager Liang sent the general Liang Ji to hold the festival of symbols and use the blue covered wagon used by the prince to welcome Prince Liu Zhi into the Southern Palace. On that day, Liu Zhi was the emperor. At that time, he was fifteen years old.

古文：太后犹临朝政。
现代文：梁太后仍然临朝听政。
English: Empress Dowager Liang still attends the imperial court to listen to the government.

古文：秋，七月，乙卯，葬孝质皇帝于静陵。
现代文：秋季，七月乙卯，将质帝安葬于静陵。
English: In autumn, in July, Emperor Qiao was buried in Jingling Mausoleum.

古文：大将军掾硃穆奏记劝戒梁冀曰： 明年丁亥之岁，刑德合于乾位，《易经》龙战之会，阳道将胜，阴道将负。
现代文：大将军掾朱穆上书劝诫梁冀说： 明年是丁亥年，刑罚和恩德，都集合在北方的乾位。《易经》上说：龙战于野，表示阳道将获得胜利，阴道将受到挫败。
English: General Zou Zhumu wrote a letter to Liang Jie, saying: Next year is the year of Ding Hai, and both punishment and benevolence will be gathered in the north. "I Ching" said: "The dragon fights in the field, indicating that the Yang road will be victorious, and the vagina will be defeated."

古文：愿将军专心公朝，割除私欲，广求贤能，斥远佞恶，为皇帝置师傅，得小心忠笃敦礼之士，将军与之俱入，参劝讲援，师贤法古，此犹倚南山、坐平原也，谁能倾之！
现代文：愿将军尽忠朝廷，割舍私欲，广泛征求贤能人才，排斥和疏远奸佞和邪恶之辈。
English: May the general be loyal to the imperial court, give up his selfish desires, widely solicit talented people, and reject and alienate traitors and evil people.

古文：议郎大夫之位，本以式序儒术高行之士，今多非其人，九卿之中亦有乖其任者，惟将军察焉！ 
现代文：为皇帝选置师傅时，要选择谨慎小心、忠良朴实、笃信礼义之士。将军与师傅一道进宫，参与劝学，效法古圣先贤。这就犹如背靠南山，稳坐平原一样，非常安全，有谁能倾覆您？议郎和大夫的职位，本来应该任用精通儒术和德行高尚的人士，可现在任职的多数不是这样的人，九卿中也有不能胜任的，请将军留心考察。 
English: When selecting a master for the emperor, it is necessary to choose a prudent and careful person, a person who is loyal and simple, and a person who believes in propriety and righteousness. The general enters the palace with the master, participates in persuasion, and follows the ancient sages. This is like backing the South Mountain and sitting steadily on the plain. It is very safe. Who can overthrow you? The positions of the mediator and the doctor should have been appointed by people who are proficient in Confucianism and have high moral standards. However, most of the people currently in office are not such people. Among the nine nobles, there are also people who are not competent. Please pay attention to

古文：又荐种暠、栾巴等，冀不能用。
现代文：又推荐种、栾巴等人，梁冀不能任用。
English: In addition, Liang Jie could not be appointed because he recommended people such as Zeng, Zouba and others.

古文：穆，晖之孙也。
现代文：朱穆，即朱晖的孙子。
English: Zhu Mu, the grandson of Zhu Xi.

古文：九月，戊戌，追尊河间孝王为孝穆皇，夫人赵氏曰孝穆后，庙曰清庙，陵曰乐成陵；蠡吾先侯曰孝崇皇，庙曰烈庙，陵曰博陵；皆置令、丞、使司徒持节奉策书玺绶，祠以太牢。
现代文：九月戊戌，桓帝刘志追尊其祖父河间孝王刘开为孝穆皇，祖母赵氏为孝穆后，祭庙名为清庙，陵园名为乐成陵；追尊其父蠡吾侯刘翼为孝崇皇，祭庙名为烈庙，陵园名为博陵；都设置令、丞掌管，并派司徒持节，捧着皇帝颁发的策书和玺印绶带前往，用牛、羊、猪各一头的太牢之礼进行祭祀。
English: In September, Emperor Liu Zhi paid homage to his grandfather, Kawama Prince Liu Kai, as the Emperor Xiaomu, and his grandmother, Zhao, as the Empress Xiaomu. The temple was named Qing Temple, and the cemetery was named Le Cheng Mausoleum. He also paid homage to his father, Emperor Xiaowu Liu Ying, as the Emperor Xiaozong, and the temple was named the Martyrs' Temple, and the cemetery was named the Bo Mausoleum. He set up an order and a chancellor, and sent priests to celebrate the festival, holding the imperial edict and the imperial seal ribbon, and to perform the sacrifice with one cow, one sheep, and one pig.

古文：冬，十月，甲午，尊帝母匽氏为博园贵人。
现代文：冬季，十月甲行，桓帝尊母亲氏为博园贵人。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Kantei's mother became a member of the imperial court.

古文：滕抚性方直，不交权势，为宦官所恶；论讨贼功当封，太尉胡广承旨奏黜之；卒于家。
现代文：滕抚性情方正刚直，不肯结交权贵，宦官对他非常憎恨。评定讨伐盗贼的功劳，滕抚应该封侯，但太尉胡广秉承权贵的意旨，对滕抚进行弹劾，使他遭到罢黜。后来，滕抚死在家里。
English: Teng Fu's character was upright, he refused to make friends with the powerful, and the eunuchs hated him very much. In order to evaluate the merits of fighting thieves, Teng Fu should be knighted, but Captain Hu Guang, adhering to the intentions of the powerful, impeached Teng Fu, and he was dismissed. Later, Teng Fu died at home.

古文：孝质皇帝建和元年
现代文：汉桓帝建和元年
English: Emperor Han Huan died in the first year of the Jianhe era

古文：春，正月，辛亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：春季，正月辛亥朔，出现日食。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：戊午，赦天下。
现代文：戊午，大赦天下。
English: At noon, there will be a general amnesty.

古文：三月，龙见谯。
现代文：三月，龙在谯县显现。
English: In March, the dragon appeared in Jixian County.

古文：夏，四月，庚寅，京师地震。
现代文：夏季，四月庚寅，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: In the summer, there was an earthquake in Kyoto's Luoyang in April.

古文：立阜陵王代兄勃遒亭侯便为阜陵王。
现代文：六月，太尉胡广被免职，擢升光禄勋杜乔为太尉。
English: In June, First Lieutenant Hu Guang was relieved of his duties and promoted to Second Lieutenant.

古文：六月，太尉胡广罢。
现代文：自从李固遭废黜后，朝廷和民间都感到沮丧。
English: Since the dethronement of Li Gu, both the imperial court and the people have been frustrated.

古文：光禄勋杜乔为太尉。
现代文：群臣害怕得不敢正立。唯独杜乔保持一身正气，不肯屈服。
English: The ministers were too scared to stand up straight. Du Qiao, however, remained upright and refused to give in.

古文：自李固之废，内外丧气，群臣侧足而立，唯乔正色无所回桡，由是朝野皆倚望焉。
现代文：因此，朝廷和民间都依赖并寄希望于他。秋季，七月，勃海孝王刘鸿去世，没有儿子。
English: Therefore, both the imperial court and the people relied on and pinned their hopes on him. In the autumn, in July, Bo Hai Xiao Wang Liu Hong passed away without a son.

古文：秋，七月，渤海孝王鸿薨，无子；太后立帝弟蠡吾侯悝为渤海王，以奉鸿祀。诏以定策功，益封梁冀万三千户，封冀弟不疑为颍阳侯，蒙为西平侯，冀子胤为襄邑侯，胡广为安乐侯，赵戒为厨亭侯，袁汤为安国侯。
现代文：梁太后封桓帝的弟弟蠡吾侯刘悝为勃海王，以祭祀刘鸿做他的继承人。桓帝下诏，因拥立皇帝决策有功，增封梁冀食邑一万三千户，封梁冀的弟弟梁不疑为颍阳侯，梁蒙为西平侯，梁冀的儿子梁胤为襄邑侯，胡广为安乐侯，赵戒为厨亭侯，袁汤为安国侯。
English: Empress Dowager Liang designated Emperor Huan's younger brother, Prince Liu Bei, as the King of Bo Hai, and made Liu Hong his heir by offering a sacrifice to him. Emperor Huan issued an edict to increase the number of princes of Liang Jie's counties by 13,000 due to his contribution to the decision to support the emperor. Liang Jie's younger brother, Prince Liang, was undoubtedly the Prince of Puyang, Prince Liang Meng was the Prince of Xiping, Prince Liang Jie's son, Prince Liang Yin was the Prince of Xiang, Prince Hu Guang was the Prince of Anle, Prince Zhao Kei was the Prince of

古文：又封中常侍刘广等皆为列侯。
现代文：又将中常侍刘广等人，都封为列侯。
English: In addition, Liu Guang, the Vice-Regent, and others were also made lords.

古文：杜乔谏曰： 古之明君，皆以用贤、赏罚为务。
现代文：杜乔上书进谏说： 自古以来，圣明的君王，都以任用贤能和赏功罚罪，作为头等大事。
English: Du Qiao wrote to Jin Yong that: Since ancient times, the kings of the holy and wise have regarded the appointment of wisdom and ability and the reward and punishment of crimes as the top priority.

古文：失国之主，其朝岂无贞干之臣，典诰之篇哉？
现代文：亡国的君王，他的朝廷，难道没有忠贞干练的栋梁之臣和赏功罚罪的典章制度吗？
English: Does not the king of a ruined country, his court, have loyal and capable pillars and a system of awards and punishments?

古文：患得贤不用其谋，韬书不施其教，闻善不信其义，听谗不审其理也。
现代文：问题在于，虽有贤能，而不能任用；虽有典章制度，而不能施行；听到忠直的建议，却不相信；而听到谗言时，又不能洞察奸邪。
English: The problem is that although there is virtue, it cannot be appointed; although there is a legal system, it cannot be implemented; when you hear the advice of loyalty, you do not believe it; and when you hear the criticism, you cannot see the evil.

古文：陛下自籓臣即位，天人属心，不急忠贤之礼而先左右之封，梁氏一门，宦者微孽，并带无功之绂，裂劳臣之土，其为乖滥，胡可胜言！
现代文：陛下从诸侯王登上至尊宝座，天人归心，不先去礼敬忠贞贤能，而是先封自己身边的人。梁家一门和宦官卑微之辈，都佩带上无功而得到的官印和绶带，分得了只有功臣才应得到的封土，乖谬而无节制，不能用言语形容！
English: His majesty ascended the supreme throne from the princes and kings, and the gods returned to their hearts. He did not first go to pay respects to the loyal, virtuous, and virtuous, but first sealed the people around him. The Liang family and the lowly eunuchs all wore the official seal and sash that they had received without merit, and they were awarded the fief that only meritorious vassals should receive. It was perverse and unrestrained, and cannot be described in words!

古文：夫有功不赏，为善失其望；奸回不诘，为恶肆其凶。
现代文：对有功的人不加赏赐，就会使为善的人感到失望；对邪恶的人不加惩罚，就会使作恶的人更加肆无忌惮地逞凶。
English: To fail to reward the meritorious is to disappoint the virtuous; to fail to punish the wicked is to embolden the wicked.

古文：故陈资斧而人靡畏，班爵位而物无劝。
现代文：所以，即使将砍头的利斧放在面前，人也不畏惧，将封爵官位悬在面前，人也不动心。
English: That is why people are not afraid to put a murderous butcher's knife in front of them, and the award of a knighthood does not act as a reward.

古文：苟遂斯道，岂伊伤政为乱而已，丧身亡国，可不慎哉！ 
现代文：如果采取这种办法，岂只是伤害政事，使朝正混乱而已，甚至还要丧身亡国，可以不慎重吗！ 
English: If this method is adopted, it will only harm political affairs and bring chaos to the DPRK, and even lead to the loss of lives and the destruction of the country. Is it not prudent?

古文：书奏，不省。
现代文：奏章呈上后，桓帝没有理睬。
English: The book went up and was not accepted.

古文：八月，乙未，立皇后梁氏。
现代文：八月乙未，桓帝册封梁太后和梁冀的妹妹梁女莹为皇后。
English: In August of the same year, Emperor Huan proclaimed Empress Dowager Liang and Liang Jie's younger sister Liang Ying as empresses.

古文：梁冀欲以厚礼迎之，杜乔据执旧典不听。
现代文：梁冀打算用厚礼迎亲，杜乔根据旧有的典章，予以反对。
English: Liang Jie planned to greet relatives with a heavy gift, Du Qiao opposed it according to the old regulations.

古文：冀属乔举汜宫为尚书，乔以宫为臧罪，不用。
现代文：梁冀又嘱托杜乔推荐宫担任尚书，杜乔因宫曾经犯过贪污罪，不肯答应。
English: Liang Jie also asked Duccio to recommend the palace to serve as Shangshu. Duccio refused to agree because the palace had committed corruption.

古文：由是日忤于冀。
现代文：从此，杜乔越来越为梁冀所忌恨。
English: Since then, Du Qiao has become increasingly hated by Liang Jie.

古文：九月，丁卯，京师地震。
现代文：九月丁卯，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: In September, an earthquake occurred in Luoyang, Kyoto.

古文：乔以灾异策免。
现代文：杜乔因天降灾异而被免官。
English: Duccio was removed from office due to a natural disaster.

古文：冬，十月，以司徒赵戒为太尉，司空袁汤为司徒，前太尉胡广为司空。
现代文：冬季，十月，任命司徒赵戒为太尉，司空袁汤为司徒，前任太尉胡广为司空。
English: In the winter, in October, he appointed the scholar Zhao Jie as the first lieutenant, the scholar Yuan Tang as the scholar, and the former scholar Hu Guang as the scholar.

古文：宦者唐衡、左悺共谮杜乔于帝曰： 陛下前当即位，乔与李固抗议，以为不堪奉汉宗祀。 
现代文：宦官唐衡、左一道向桓帝诬陷杜乔说： 陛下先前将即位时，杜乔和李固反对，认为您不能胜任侍奉汉朝宗庙的祭祀。 
English: The eunuch Tang Heng, on the left, accused Du Qiao of slandering Emperor Huan and said: When His Majesty ascended the throne earlier, Du Qiao and Li Gu objected, saying that you were not competent to serve the sacrificial rites of the Han Dynasty ancestral temple.

古文：帝亦怨之。
现代文：因此桓帝对杜乔和李固也心生怨恨。
English: As a result, Emperor Huan also developed a grudge against Du Qiao and Li Gu.

古文：十一月，清河刘文与南郡妖贼刘鲔交通，妄言：清河王当统天下，欲共立蒜。
现代文：十一月，清河人刘文和南郡的妖贼刘鲔相勾结，胡妄宣称： 清河王刘蒜应当统御天下。 打算共同拥立刘蒜为皇帝。
English: In November, Liu Wen, a man from Qinghe, colluded with Liu Yuxiang, a thief from Nanshun, and made a preposterous claim that Liu Yuxiang, the king of Qinghe, should rule the world, and that they planned to jointly establish Liu Yuxiang as emperor.

古文：事觉，文等遂劫清河相谢暠曰： 当立王为天子，以暠为公。 
现代文：此事被发觉，刘文等人便劫持清河国相谢，对他说： 应当拥立清河王刘蒜当皇帝，由您当三公。 
English: When the matter was discovered, Liu Wen and others abducted Liu Xie, the ruler of Qinghe Province, and said to him: You should make Liu Garlic, the king of Qinghe, the emperor, and you should be the third prince.

古文：暠骂之，文刺杀暠。
现代文：谢诟骂他们，刘文将他刺杀。
English: Xie cursed them, and Liu Wen stabbed him to death.

古文：于是捕文、鲔，诛之。
现代文：于是，朝廷逮捕刘文和刘鲔，将其诛杀。
English: As a result, the imperial court arrested Liu Wen and Liu Ye and killed them.

古文：有司劾奏蒜；坐贬爵为尉氏侯，徙桂阳，自杀。
现代文：有关官吏上奏弹劾刘蒜，刘蒜因罪被贬爵为尉氏侯，并被放逐到桂阳，刘蒜自杀。
English: Relevant officials petitioned for impeachment of Liu Garlic. Liu Garlic was demoted to the rank of vassal lord for his crime, and was banished to Guiyang. Liu Garlic then committed suicide.

古文：梁冀因诬李固、杜乔，云与文、鲔等交通，请逮按罪；太后素知乔忠，不许。
现代文：于是，梁冀诬陷李固、杜乔，指控他们和刘文、刘鲔等人互相勾结，请求将其逮捕治罪。梁太后一向了解杜乔忠直，不肯答应。
English: As a result, Liang Ji framed Li Gu and Du Qiao, accused them of colluding with Liu Wen, Liu Ye and others, and requested that they be arrested and punished. Empress Dowager Liang had always understood Du Qiao's loyalty and refused to agree.

古文：冀遂收固下狱；门生渤海王调贯械上书，证固之枉，河内赵承等数十人亦要鈇锧诣阙通诉；太后诏赦之。
现代文：梁冀便将李固一个人逮捕下狱。李固的门生、渤海人王调，身戴刑具向朝廷上书谏争，说李固冤枉。河内人赵承等数十人，也带着执行腰斩时用的刑具到宫门上诉。于是，梁太后下诏释放李固。
English: Liang Jie then arrested one person, Li Gu, and sent him to prison. Li Gu's protégé, the Bohai man Wang Ting, wearing a torture device, wrote to the imperial court, saying that Li Gu had been wronged. Dozens of people, including the Hanoi man Zhao Cheng, also went to the palace gate to appeal, bringing with them the torture device used in the execution of the beheading. As a result, Empress Liang issued an edict to release Li Gu.

古文：及出狱，京师市里皆称万岁。
现代文：等到李固出狱之时，京都洛阳的大街小巷都齐呼万岁。
English: When he was released from prison, the people of Jingshi City all shouted "long live."

古文：冀闻之，大惊，畏固名德终为己害，乃更据奏前事。
现代文：梁冀听到消息后，大为惊骇害怕李固的声名和品德终将伤害自己，于是重向新朝廷弹劾李固和刘文、刘鲔相勾结的旧案。
English: After hearing the news, Liang Jie was shocked and afraid that Li Gu's reputation and character would eventually hurt himself, so he returned to the new court to impeach Li Gu and Liu Wen and Liu Yuxiang for collusion.

古文：大将军长史吴祐伤固之枉，与冀争之。
现代文：大将军长史吴对李固的冤狱深为伤感，向梁冀据理力争。
English: Major General Shi Wu was deeply saddened by Li Gu's unjust imprisonment and argued with Liang Jie.

古文：冀怒，不从。
现代文：梁冀大怒，不肯听从。
English: Liang Jie was furious and refused to obey.

古文：从事中郎马融主为冀作章表，融时在坐，祐谓融曰： 李公之罪，成于卿手。李公若诛，卿何面目视天下人！ 
现代文：从事中郎马融负责为梁冀起草奏章，当时他正好在座，吴便责问马融说： 李固的罪状，是你一手罗织出来的，李固如果被诛杀，你还有什么脸面去见天下人！ 
English: Wu asked Ma Rong, who was in charge of drafting the musical score for Liang Jie and happened to be present at the time, "You fabricated Li Gu's crime. If Li Gu was killed, what face would you have to show to the world?"

古文：冀怒，起，入室；祐亦径去。
现代文：梁冀一怒而起，进入内室，吴也迳直离去。
English: Liang Jie flew into a rage and entered the inner room. Wu Yaojun immediately left.

古文：固遂死于狱中；临命，与胡广、赵戒书曰： 固受国厚恩，是以竭其股肱，不顾死亡，志欲扶持王室，比隆文、宣。
现代文：李固于是死在狱中。他临死之前，写信给胡广、赵戒说： 我李固受国家厚恩，所以竭尽忠心，不顾死亡大祸，目的是想辅佐皇室，使它在功业上可以和汉文帝、宣帝时期比美。
English: Li Gu therefore died in prison. Before his death, he wrote to Hu Guang and Zhao Jie saying: I, Li Gu, have been favored by the state, so I have been loyal to the best of my ability, regardless of the great misfortune of death, with the aim of assisting the royal family, so that it can be more beautiful in its achievements than the Han Emperor and the Xuan Emperor period.

古文：何图一朝梁氏迷谬，公等曲从，以吉为凶，成事为败乎！
现代文：怎料梁氏一时荒廖作乱，你们曲意顺从，将吉祥化作凶恶，成功之事化为失败！
English: How could it be that Mr. Liang would create chaos in a moment of madness, and you would follow his whims, turning auspicious into evil, and success into failure!

古文：汉家衰微，从此始矣。
现代文：汉王朝衰落，从此开始。
English: The decline and fall of the Han Dynasty began.

古文：公等受主厚禄，颠而不扶，倾覆大事，后之良史岂有所私！
现代文：你们接受帝王丰厚的俸禄，眼看朝廷就要倒塌，却不肯扶持。倾覆朝廷的大事，后世优秀史官怎会有所偏袒！
English: You accept the emperor's plentiful salary, see the imperial court about to collapse, but refuse to support it. How can outstanding historians of future generations be partial to the great event of the overthrow of the imperial court!

古文：固身已矣，于义得矣，夫复何言！ 
现代文：我的生命已完结了，但是尽到了大义，还要再说什么！ 
English: My life is over, but what can I say, I did my best!

古文：广、戒得书悲惭，皆长叹流涕而已。
现代文：胡广、赵戒看到李固所写的遗书后，感到悲伤惭愧，但也都不过是长叹流泪而已。
English: After Hu Guang and Zhao Jing saw the suicide note written by Li Gu, they felt sad and ashamed, but it was just a long sigh and tears.

古文：冀使人胁杜乔曰： 早从宜，妻子可得全。 
现代文：其后，梁冀又派人威胁杜乔说： 你应该快点自杀，妻子和儿女可以得到保全。 
English: After that, Liang Jie sent another person to threaten Du Qiao, saying, "You should hurry up and commit suicide, so that your wife and children can be protected."

古文：乔不肯。
现代文：杜乔不肯接受。
English: Duccio refused to accept it.

古文：明日，冀遣骑至其门，不闻哭者，遂白太后收系之；亦死狱中。
现代文：第二天，梁冀派人骑马到杜乔家门，没有听到里面有人啼哭，于是报告梁太后，将杜乔逮捕下狱。杜乔也死在狱中。
English: The next day, Liang Jie sent someone on horseback to Du Qiao's door, but did not hear anyone crying inside, so he reported to Empress Liang that Du Qiao would be arrested and sent to prison. Du Qiao also died in prison.

古文：冀暴固、乔尸于城北四衢，令： 有敢临者加其罪。 
现代文：梁冀把李固、杜乔的尸首，放在洛阳城北十字路口示众，下令： 有敢来哭泣吊丧的，予以惩治。 
English: Liang Jie put the corpses of Li Gu and Du Qiao on display at the northern crossroads of Luoyang City and ordered: Those who dare to cry and mourn should be punished.

古文：固弟子汝南郭亮尚未冠，左提章、钺，右秉鈇锧，诣厥上书，乞收固尸，不报；与南阳董班俱往临哭，守丧不去。
现代文：李固的学生、汝南人郭亮，还不到二十岁，左手拿着奏章和斧子，右手抱着铁砧，到宫门上书，乞求为李固收尸，没有得到答复。郭亮又和南阳人董班一同去吊丧哭泣，守着尸体不走。
English: Guo Liang, a student of Li Gu and a native of Yunnan Province, was less than 20 years old. He carried a music medal and an axe in his left hand and a shovel in his right hand. He went to the palace gate to write a letter, begging for Li Gu's body to be collected, but received no reply. Guo Liang also went to the funeral together with the Nanyang people's director class to cry, and guarded the body and did not leave.

古文：夏门亭长呵之曰： 卿曹何等腐生！
现代文：夏门亭长喝斥说： 你们是何等迂腐的书生！
English: Xia Mentei rebuked: "What a bunch of pedantic students you are!

古文：公犯诏书，欲干试有司乎！ 
现代文：公然冒犯皇帝的圣旨，想试试官府的厉害吗！ 
English: Do you want to test the power of the government by openly offending the emperor's sacred edict?

古文：亮曰： 义之所动，岂知性命，何为以死相惧邪！ 
现代文：郭亮回答说： 我们为他们的大义所感动，岂知顾及自己的性命？为什么要用死来威胁呢？ 
English: Guo Liang replied, "We are moved by their great righteousness, but do we really care about our own lives? Why threaten them with death?

古文：太后闻之，皆赦不诛。
现代文：梁太后听到后，将郭亮、董班二人全都赦免。
English: After hearing this, Empress Dowager Liang pardoned Guo Liang and Dongban.

古文：杜乔故掾陈留杨匡，号泣星行，到雒阳，著故赤帻，托为夏门亭吏，守护尸丧，积十二日；都官从事执之以闻，太后赦之。
现代文：杜乔从前的属吏、陈留杨匡，悲号哭泣，星夜赶到京都洛阳，穿上旧官服，头戴束发的赤巾，假称是夏门亭吏，在杜乔的尸体旁护丧，达十二天之久。都官从事将他逮捕，奏报朝廷，梁太后将他赦免。
English: Du Qiao's former subordinate, Chen Liu Yang Kuang, cried bitterly and rushed to Luoyang, Kyoto, on a starry night. Dressed in old official clothes and wearing a red scarf with a bunch of hair, he pretended to be a summer palace official and mourned next to Du Qiao's body for twelve days. The capital official was engaged in arresting him, reported to the court, and the Empress Dowager Liang pardoned him.

古文：匡因诣厥上书，并乞李、杜二公骸骨，使得归葬，太后许之。
现代文：于是杨匡到宫门上书，向朝廷请求使李固和杜乔的尸体得以归葬家乡。梁太后批准。
English: So Yang Kuang went to the palace gate to petition the court to allow the bodies of Li Gu and Du Qiao to be buried in their hometown. Empress Dowager Liang approved.

古文：匡送乔丧还家，葬讫，行服，遂与郭亮、董班皆隐匿，终身不仕。
现代文：于是，杨匡将杜乔的灵柩送回家乡，安葬完毕，又为他服丧，于是和郭亮、董班都藏匿起来，终身不出来做官。
English: As a result, Yang Kuang sent Du Qiao's coffin back to his hometown, buried him, and held a memorial service for him, so he, Guo Liang, and Dongban all went into hiding and never came out to work as officials.

古文：梁冀出吴祐为河间相，祐自免归，卒于家。
现代文：梁冀命吴出任河间国相，吴自己辞官归家，后在家中去世。
English: Liang Jie ordered Wu to serve as minister of state in Hebei Province. Wu resigned from his post and returned home, where he later died.

古文：冀以刘鲔之乱，思硃穆之言，于是请种暠为从事中郎，荐栾巴为议郎，举穆高第，为侍御史。
现代文：梁冀因刘鲔谋反，想起朱穆以前向他提出的建议，于是聘请种担任从事中郎，推荐栾巴为议郎。并因朱穆考绩最优而进行保举，将他任命为侍御史。
English: Because of Liu Ye's rebellion, Liang Ji remembered Zhu Mu's previous suggestion to him, so he hired him to serve as a middle-ranking official, recommended Zouba as a negotiator. And because Zhu Mu's performance was the best, he was promoted and appointed him as an attendant.

古文：是岁，南单于兜楼储死，伊陵尸逐就单于车儿立。
现代文：同年，南匈奴单于兜楼储去世，车儿继位，号为伊陵尸逐就单于。建和二年
English: In the same year, the Southern Xiongnu died in the same place, and the car took over the throne. It was called the Yiling corpse.

古文：孝质皇帝建和二年
现代文：春季，正月甲子，桓帝行成年加冠礼。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, Emperor Kan held a coming-of-age ceremony.

古文：春，正月，甲子，帝加元服。庚午，赦天下。
现代文：庚午，大赦天下。
English: Geng Wu, amnesty to the world.

古文：三月，戊辰，帝从皇太后幸大将军冀府。
现代文：三月戊辰，桓帝跟随梁太后临幸大将军梁冀府。
English: At the end of March, Emperor Kuan followed Empress Dowager Liang to General Liang Jifu's residence.

古文：白马羌寇广汉属国，杀长吏。
现代文：白马种羌人攻打广汉属国，杀害地方官吏。
English: The Baima Zengyuan people attacked the Guanghan vassal state and killed local officials.

古文：益州刺史率板楯蛮讨破之。
现代文：益州刺史率领板蛮人将其击破。
English: It was defeated by the barbarians led by Yishu Shishi.

古文：夏，四月，丙子，封帝弟顾为平原王，奉孝崇皇祀；尊孝崇皇夫人马氏为孝崇园贵人。
现代文：夏季，四月丙子，梁太后下诏，封桓帝的弟弟刘顾为平原王，侍奉孝崇皇的祭祀；尊孝崇皇夫人为孝崇园贵人。
English: In the summer, in April, Empress Dowager Liang issued an edict that Liu Gu, the younger brother of Emperor Huan, was the king of the plain and would serve at the sacrifice of Emperor Xiaozong; the wife of Emperor Xiaozong was the noblewoman of Xiaozongyuan.

古文：五月，癸丑，北宫掖廷中德阳殿及左掖门火，车驾移幸南宫。
现代文：五月癸丑，北宫掖庭中的德阳殿和左掖门失火，桓帝移住南宫。
English: In the ugly month of May, the Deyang Hall and the Left Courtyard Gate in the North Palace Courtyard caught fire, and Emperor Huan moved to the South Palace.

古文：六月，改清河为甘陵。
现代文：六月，改清河国为甘陵国。
English: In June, the name of He Province was changed to Ganling Province.

古文：立安平孝王得子经侯理为甘陵王。奉孝德皇祀。
现代文：封安平孝王刘得的儿子、经侯刘理为甘陵王，侍奉孝德皇的祭祀。
English: Anping Xiao Wang Liu De's son, Jinghou Liu Li, was given the title of Ganling Wang, and served at the sacrifice of Xiao De Wang.

古文：秋，七月，京师大水。
现代文：秋季，七月，京都洛阳发生水灾。
English: In the autumn, in July, flooding occurred in Kyoto's Luoyang district.

古文：孝质皇帝建和三年
现代文：建和三年
English: Three years to build peace

古文：夏，四月，丁卯晦，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月丁卯晦，出现日食。
English: In summer, in April, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：秋，八月，乙丑，有星孛于天市。
现代文：秋季，八月乙丑，有异星出现在天市星旁。
English: In autumn, in August, a strange star appears next to the heavenly city star.

古文：京师大水。
现代文：京都洛阳发生水灾。
English: The water level in Beijing has risen sharply.

古文：九月，己卯，地震。
现代文：九月己卯，发生地震。
English: In September, an earthquake occurred.

古文：庚寅，地又震。
现代文：庚寅，再次发生地震。
English: Goin, another earthquake.

古文：郡、国五山崩。
现代文：有五个郡和封国发生山崩。
English: Landslides occurred in five counties and fiefdoms.

古文：冬，十月，太尉赵戒免；以司徒袁汤为太尉，大司农河内张歆为司徒。
现代文：冬季，十月，太尉赵戒被免职，任命司徒袁汤为太尉，擢升大司农、河内人张歆为司徒。
English: In the winter, in October, Lieutenant Zhao Jie was removed from his post, and Yuan Tang, a scholar, was appointed lieutenant, and Zhang Ye, a senior farmer and a native of Hanoi, was promoted to the position of scholar.

古文：是岁，前朗陵侯相荀淑卒。
现代文：同年，前任朗陵侯国相荀淑去世。
English: In the same year, her predecessor, Langling Hou Guozhong, passed away.

古文：淑少博学有高行，当世名贤李固、李膺皆师宗之。
现代文：荀淑年轻时，不仅学问渊博，而且德行高尚，当时最著名的贤人李固、李膺，都像对待老师一样地尊崇他。
English: When Min Suk was young, he was not only knowledgeable, but also virtuous. At that time, the most famous sages, Li Gu and Li Ye, revered him like a teacher.

古文：在朗陵、莅事明治，称为神君。
现代文：荀淑在朗陵侯国任职，治理政事明快果断，被人们奉若神明。
English: Gongshu served in the Langling vassal state, governing the affairs of state quickly and decisively, and was worshipped as a god.

古文：有子八人：俭、绲、靖、焘、汪、爽、肃、专，并有名称，时人谓之八龙。
现代文：荀淑共有八个儿子：荀俭、荀绲、荀靖、荀焘、荀汪、荀爽、荀肃、荀专，都享有盛名，当时人称他们为 八龙 。
English: There were a total of eight sons of Gongshu: Gong Jian, Gong, Gong Jing, Gong, Gong Wang, Gong Shuang, Gong Su and Gong Zhan. They all enjoyed great fame and were called the eight dragons at that time.

古文：所居里旧名西豪，颍阴令渤海苑康以为昔高阳氏有才子八人，更命其里曰高阳里。
现代文：荀淑所居住的里名，原来叫西豪里，颍阴县令渤海人苑康，因从前高阳氏有八个多才的儿子，就将西豪里改名为高阳里。
English: The name of the village where Min Shu lived was originally called Xi Hao Li, but because the former Goyang clan had more than eight talented sons, it changed the name of Xi Hao Li to Goyang Li.

古文：膺性简亢，无所交接，唯以淑为师，以同郡陈寔为友。
现代文：李膺性格简朴正直，跟人很少交往，只把荀淑当作老师，和同郡人陈结交。
English: Li Yan's character is simple and honest. He rarely interacts with other people. He only sees Yan Shu as a teacher and makes friends with Chen, who is from the same county.

古文：荀爽尝就谒膺，因为其御；既还，喜曰： 今日乃得御李君矣！ 
现代文：荀爽曾经去拜见李膺，就势给李膺驾车。回来后，他高兴地说： 今天，我竟得以为李君驾车了！ 李膺就是这样被人倾慕。
English: Hao Shuang once went to meet Li Yao, and offered to drive Li Yao. After returning, he said happily: Today, I actually thought Li Jun was driving! This is how Li Yao is admired by people.

古文：其见慕如此。陈寔出于单微，为郡西门亭长。
现代文：陈出身贫贱，担任颍川郡西门亭长。
English: Chen was born into poverty and served as the mayor of Ximen Pavilion in Luochuan County.

古文：同郡锤皓以笃行称，前后九辟公府，年辈远在寔前，引与为友。
现代文：同郡人钟皓，以行为厚著称，前后九次被三公府征聘，年龄和辈份都远在陈之上，却跟陈成为好友。
English: Fellow county resident Zhong Qi, known for his thick behavior, has been recruited nine times by three public offices. He is far older than Chen in age and generation, but has become a close friend with Chen.

古文：皓为郡功曹，辟司徒府；临辞，太守问： 谁可代卿者？ 
现代文：钟皓原任郡功曹，后被征聘到司徒府去任职，他向郡太守辞行时，郡太守问： 谁可以接替你的职务？ 
English: When he resigned from the county magistrate's office, the county magistrate asked: Who can take over your position?

古文：皓曰： 明府欲必得其人，西门亭长陈寔可。 
现代文：钟皓回答说： 如果您一定想要得到合适的人选，西门亭长陈可以胜任。 
English: Zhong Rong replied, "If you really want to get the right person, Xi Mentei Chang Chen can do the job.

古文：寔闻之曰： 钟君似不察人，不知何独识我！ 
现代文：陈听到消息后说： 钟君似乎不会推荐人，不知为什么单单举荐我？ 
English: After hearing the news, Chen said, "It seems that Zhong Jun won't recommend anyone, I don't know why he only recommended me?

古文：太守遂以寔为功曹。
现代文：于是，郡太守就任命陈为郡功曹。
English: As a result, the county magistrate appointed Chen as a county meritorious person.

古文：时中常侍山阳侯览托太守高伦用吏，伦教署为文学掾，寔知非其人，怀檄请见，言曰： 此人不宜用，而侯常侍不可违，寔乞从外署，不足以尘明德。 
现代文：当时，中常侍侯览嘱托郡太守高伦任用自己所推荐的人为吏，高伦便签署命令，将这个人命为文学掾。陈知道这个人不能胜任，就拿着高伦签署的命令求见，对高伦说： 这个人不可任用，然而侯常侍的意旨也不可违抗。不如由我来签署任命，这样的话，就不会玷污您完美的品德。 
English: At that time, Gao Lun, the county's vice-governor, asked the county's vice-governor, Gao Chan, to appoint a person recommended by him as an official, and Gao Lun signed an order to appoint this person as a literary agent. Chen knew that this person was not competent, so he took the order signed by Gao Lun to seek advice and said to Gao Lun: This person cannot be appointed, but the will of the vice-governor cannot be defied. It is better for me to sign the appointment, in this case, it will not tarnish your perfect character.

古文：伦从之。
现代文：高伦听从。
English: Galen complied.

古文：于是乡论怪其非举，寔终无所言。
现代文：于是，乡里的舆论哗然，都奇怪陈怎么会举用这样不合适的人，而陈始终不作分辩。
English: As a result, the public opinion blamed Chen Qi for being an incompetent person, but Chen Qi never said anything.

古文：伦后被征为尚书，郡中士大夫送至纶氏，伦谓众人曰： 吾前为侯常侍用吏，陈君密持教还而于外白署，比闻议者以此少之，此咎由故人畏惮强御，陈君可谓 善则称君，过则称己 者也。 
现代文：后来，高伦被征召到朝廷去担任尚书，郡太守府的官吏和士绅们都来为他送行，一直送到纶氏县。高伦对大家说： 我前些时把侯常侍推荐的人任命为吏，陈却把我签署的任命书秘密送还，而改由他来任用。我接连听说议论此事的人因此轻视陈，而这件事的责任，是因为我畏惧侯览的势力太大，才这样做的，而陈君可以称得上把善行归于主君，把过错归于自己的人。 
English: Later, Gao Lun was summoned to the imperial court to serve as the secretary, and the officials and gentlemen of the county grand marshal's office came to see him off, all the way to Jixi County. Gao Lun said to everyone: Some time ago, I appointed the person recommended by the steward, but Chen secretly returned the letter of appointment signed by me, and appointed him instead. I heard that the people who talked about this matter despised Chen, and the responsibility of this matter was because I was afraid that the influence of the steward was too great, and Chen Jun could be said to have attributed the good deed to his master and the fault to his own people.

古文：寔固自引愆，闻者方叹息，由是天下服其德。
现代文：但陈仍然坚持是自己的过失，听到的人无不叹息。从此，天下的人都佩服他的品德。
English: But Chen still insisted that it was his fault, and everyone who heard him sighed. Since then, people all over the world have admired his character.

古文：后为太丘长，修德清静，百姓以安。
现代文：后来，陈担任太丘县的县长，修饬德教，无为而治，使百姓得以安居乐业。
English: Later, Chen served as the prefect of Taiqiu County, cultivating Taoism, doing nothing, so that the people could live and work in peace.

古文：邻县民归附者，寔辄训导譬解发遣，各令还本。
现代文：邻县的人民都来归附，陈总是对他们进行开导和解释，然后遣送他们回到原县。
English: People from neighboring counties came to join, and Chen always enlightened and explained to them, and then sent them back to their original counties.

古文：司官行部，吏虑民有讼者，白欲禁之。
现代文：上级官员来县视察，本县的官吏恐怕人民上诉，请求陈加以禁止。
English: Higher-ranking officials came to the county to inspect, and the officials of this county are afraid that the people will appeal and ask Chen to ban it.

古文：寔曰： 讼以求直，禁之，理将何申！
现代文：陈说： 上诉的目的，是为了求得公平，如果加以禁止，将怎样讲理！不要限制。 
English: Chen said: "The purpose of the appeal is to seek fairness. If it is banned, how reasonable will it be? Don't restrict it.

古文：其勿有所拘。 司官闻而叹息曰： 陈君所言若是，岂有冤于人乎！ 
现代文：前来视察的主管官员听到后，叹息说： 陈君说这样的话，难道会冤枉人吗？ 
English: After hearing this, the official in charge of the inspection sighed and said, "Chen Jun, if he said such a thing, would he be wronging anyone?"

古文：亦竟无讼者。
现代文：终究也没有人来越级上诉。
English: In the end, no one appealed the decision.

古文：以沛相赋敛违法，解印绶去；吏民追思之。
现代文：后来陈担任沛国相，被指控违法征收赋税，他便解下印信，离职而去。官吏和人民都很怀念他。
English: Later, when Chen served as Minister of the State of Pei and was accused of illegally collecting taxes, he signed a letter of resignation and left his post. Officials and people miss him very much.

古文：钟皓素与荀淑齐名，李膺常叹曰： 荀君清识难尚，钟君至德可师。 
现代文：钟皓一向和荀淑享有同等的声誉，李膺经常叹息说： 荀君的清高和见识，很难学习；钟君的高贵品德，可以为人师表。 
English: Zhong Jun has always enjoyed the same reputation as Mi Shu. Li Jun often sighed and said: "Shan Jun's clearness and insight are difficult to learn; Zhong Jun's noble character can be a teacher.

古文：皓兄子瑾母，膺之姑也。
现代文：钟皓的侄儿钟瑾的母亲，是李膺的姑妈。
English: Jonghyun's nephew Jonghyun's mother is Rihyun's aunt.

古文：瑾好学慕古，有退让风，与膺同年，俱有声名。
现代文：钟瑾喜爱读书，效法古人，有退让的风度，和李膺同岁，都有名声。
English: Zhongyao is good at learning the ancient way, modestly conceding, and the same year as Li Yao, both are famous.

古文：膺祖太尉修常言： 瑾似我家性， 邦有道，不废；邦无道，免于刑戮。  
现代文：李膺的祖父、太尉李经常说： 钟瑾像我们李家人的性格，国家有道，不会久居人下；国家无道，不会受到诛杀。 
English: Li Hongzhi's grandfather, First Lieutenant Li Hongzhi, often said: "Zhong Rong is like our Li family in character. If the country has a moral, it will not live under the people for a long time; if the country does not have a moral, it will not be killed.

古文：复以膺妹妻之。
现代文：于是，又把李膺的妹妹嫁给钟瑾为妻。
English: As a result, he also married Li Yao's sister to Zhong Yao.

古文：膺谓瑾曰： 孟子以为 人无是非之心，非人也 ，弟于是何太无皁白邪！ 
现代文：李膺对钟瑾说： 孟子认为， 人要是没有是非之心，就不是人 ，你对于黑白，为何太不分明？ 
English: Li Wei said to Zhong Wei: Mencius believed that if a person does not have a sense of right and wrong, he is not a person. Why are you so unclear about black and white?

古文：瑾尝以膺言白皓。皓曰： 元礼祖、父在位，诸宗并盛，故得然乎！
现代文：钟瑾曾经将李膺的话，告诉钟皓，钟皓安慰他说： 李膺的祖父、父亲都身居高位，整个家族都很兴盛，所以才能那样做。
English: Zhong Qi once told Li Xuan about Li Xuan's words, and Zhong Qi consoled him by saying: Li Xuan's grandfather and father were both in high positions, and the whole family was prosperous. That's why he could do that.

古文：昔国武子好招人过，以致怨恶，今岂其时邪！
现代文：从前，齐国的国佐专好挑剔别人的过失，以致招来怨恨和报复。
English: In the past, Qi's Guo Zuo liked to find fault with others, which led to resentment and revenge.

古文：必欲保身全家，尔道为贵。 
现代文：现在哪里是黑白分明的时代？如果一定想保全自己的身家性命，还是你的办法最为高明。 
English: Where is the era of black and white now? If you really want to protect your own life and property, your way is still the most brilliant.

古文：孝质皇帝和平元年
现代文：和平元年
English: in the first year of Heian period

古文：春，正月，甲子，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月甲子，大赦天下。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, the great amnesty.

古文：改元。
现代文：改年号。
English: Change the year.

古文：乙丑，太后诏归政于帝，始罢称制。
现代文：乙丑，梁太后下诏，将朝政大权归还给桓帝，从此开始不再行使皇帝权力。
English: Second, Empress Dowager Liang issued an edict to return the supreme power of the court to Emperor Huan, and from then on no longer exercised the power of the emperor.

古文：二月，甲寅，太后梁氏崩。
现代文：二月甲寅梁太后去世。
English: In February, Empress Dowager Jia Yinliang passed away.

古文：三月，车驾徙幸北宫。
现代文：三月，桓帝迁回北宫居住。
English: In March, Emperor Kantei moved back to the Northern Palace to live.

古文：甲午，葬顺烈皇后。
现代文：甲午，安葬梁太后，谥号为顺烈皇后。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Empress Dowager Liang was buried, and her posthumous name was Empress Shunli.

古文：增封大将军冀万户，并前合三万户；封冀妻孙寿为襄城君，兼食阳翟租，岁入五千万，加赐赤绂，比长公主。
现代文：增封大将军梁冀食邑一万户，连同以前所封食邑，共三万户。封梁冀的妻子孙寿为襄城君，同时阳翟和租税，每年收入达五千万钱之多，加赐红色的绶带，与长公主相同。
English: General Liang Jizhi's wife, Sun Shou, was named the Empress of Xiangcheng, and at the same time, she was impotent and paid taxes, with an annual income of as much as 50 million yuan. She was also given a red ribbon, the same as the eldest princess.

古文：寿善为妖态以蛊惑冀，冀甚宠惮之。
现代文：孙寿善于作出各种妖媚的姿态来迷惑梁冀，梁冀对她既很宠爱，又非常害怕。
English: Sun Shou is good at making all kinds of charming gestures to confuse Liang Jie, who is both very fond of her and very afraid of her.

古文：冀爱监奴秦宫，官至太仓令，得出入寿所，威权大震，刺史、二千石皆谒辞之。
现代文：梁冀所宠爱的管家奴秦宫，做官做到太仓令，可以出入孙寿的住所，威势和权力都很大，州刺史和郡太守等二千石高级地方官吏，在赴任之前都要谒见秦宫，向他辞行。
English: Qin Gong, the favorite butler of Liang Jie, was allowed to enter and leave the residence of Sun Shou. He was allowed to enter and leave the residence of Sun Shou. He had great power and authority. Senior local officials of 2,000 koku, such as the prefect of the prefecture and the governor of the county, had to meet with Qin Gong and resign from him before taking office.

古文：冀与寿对街为宅，殚极土木，互相夸竞，金玉珍怪，充积藏室；又广开园圃，采土筑山，十里九阪，深林绝涧，有若自然，奇禽驯兽飞走其间。
现代文：梁冀和孙寿分别在街道两旁相对兴建住宅，建筑工程穷极奢华，互相竞争夸耀，金银财宝，奇珍怪物，充满房舍。又大举开拓园林，从各处运来土石，堆砌假山，十里大道，有九里都紧傍池塘，林木深远，山涧流水，宛如天然生成。奇异的珍禽和驯养的走兽在园林中飞翔奔跑。
English: Liang Jie and Sun Shou separately built houses on opposite sides of the street. The construction projects were extremely luxurious, competing with each other, gold and silver treasures, rare monsters, full of houses. They also vigorously explored the gardens, transported earth and stone from everywhere, piled up rockery, ten-mile avenue, nine miles were close to the pond, the trees were far-reaching, and the mountain stream was flowing, as if naturally generated. Strange rare birds and domesticated beasts flew and ran in the garden.

古文：冀、寿共乘辇车，游观第内，多从倡伎，酣讴竟路。
现代文：梁冀和孙寿共同乘坐人力辇车，在家宅之内游玩观赏，后面还跟随着许多歌舞艺人，一路欢唱。
English: Liang Jie and Sun Shou rode a rickshaw together and toured inside the family home. They were also followed by many song and dance artists, singing along the way.

古文：或连日继夜以聘娱恣。
现代文：有时，甚至夜以继日地纵情娱乐。
English: Sometimes, they even indulge in entertainment day and night.

古文：客到门不得通，皆请谢门者，门者累千金。
现代文：客人登门拜访和求见，也不许通报。求见的人全都向看门的人行贿，以致看门的人家产达千金之多。
English: Guests are not allowed to announce their visits and requests. All those who ask for a visit pay bribes to the doorman, so that the doorman's income amounts to thousands of dollars.

古文：又多拓林苑，周遍近县，起兔苑于河南城西，经亘数十里，移檄所在调发生兔，刻其毛以为识，人有犯者，罪至死刑。
现代文：梁冀在京都洛阳邻近各县都修筑了园林，在河南洛阳城西建立了一处兔苑，面积纵横数十里，发布文书，命令当地官府向人民征调活兔，每只兔都剃掉一撮兔毛，作为标志。若有人胆敢猎取苑兔，甚至要判处死刑。
English: Liang Jie built gardens in all counties near Luoyang, Kyoto, and established a rabbit garden in the west of Luoyang, Henan, with an area of dozens of miles in length and width. He issued a document ordering the local government to recruit live rabbits from the people, and each rabbit shaved off a pinch of rabbit hair as a sign. If someone dared to hunt rabbits, they would even be sentenced to death.

古文：尝有西域贾胡不知禁忌，误杀一兔，转相告言，坐死者十馀人。
现代文：曾有一位西域的胡商，不知道这个兔苑的禁令，误杀了一只兔，结果人们互相控告，因罪至死的达十余人。
English: There was a hu merchant in the western region who did not know about the ban on this rabbit farm and killed a rabbit by mistake. As a result, people sued each other, and more than ten people died because of the crime.

古文：又起别第于城西，以纳奸亡；或取良人悉为奴婢，至数千口，名曰自卖人。
现代文：梁冀又在洛阳城西兴建了一座别墅，用来收容奸民和藏匿逃亡犯。甚至抢夺良家子女，都用来充当奴婢，多达数千人，称他们为 自卖人 。
English: Liang Jie also built a villa in the west of Luoyang City, which was used to accommodate villains and hide fugitives. Even children who robbed good families were used as slaves, up to thousands of people, calling them self-sellers.

古文：冀用寿言，多斥夺诸梁在位者，外以示谦让，而实崇孙氏。
现代文：梁冀采纳孙寿的建议，罢免了许多梁姓家族成员的官职，表面上显示梁冀的谦让，而实际上却抬高了孙氏家族的地位。
English: Adopting Sun Shou's suggestion, Liang Jie removed many Liang family members from official positions, ostensibly showing Liang Jie's modesty, but actually elevating the status of the Sun family.

古文：孙氏宗亲冒名为侍中、卿、校、郡守、长吏者十馀人，皆贪饕凶淫，各遣私客籍属县富人，被以它罪，闭狱掠拷，使出钱自赎，赀物少者至于死、徙。
现代文：在孙氏家族中假冒虚名担任侍中、卿、校、郡守、长吏的，共有十余人，全都贪得无厌、穷凶极恶。他们派自己的私人宾客，分别到所管辖的各县，调查登记当地富人，然后加以罪名，将富人逮捕关押，严刑拷打，让富人出钱赎罪。
English: Among the Sun family, there were more than ten people who assumed false names to serve as attendants, lords, schoolmasters, county governors, and officials, all of whom were insatiably greedy and extremely vicious. They sent their own private guests to each county under their jurisdiction to investigate and register local rich people, and then to make them guilty, arrest and imprison the rich people, torture them severely, and make the rich people pay money to atone for their sins.

古文：扶风人士孙奋，居富而性吝，冀以马乘遗之，从贷钱五千万，奋以三千万与之。
现代文：家财不足的，因为出不起那么多钱，甚至活活被打死。扶风人士孙奋，富有而吝啬，梁冀曾送给他一匹乘马，要求借贷五千万钱，而士孙奋只借给他三千万钱。
English: Liang Jie once gave him a horse to ride and asked for a loan of 50 million yuan, but Sun Quan only lent him 30 million yuan.

古文：冀大怒，乃告郡县，认奋母为其守藏婢，云盗白珠十斛、紫金千斤以叛，遂收考奋兄弟死于狱中，悉没赀财亿七千馀万。
现代文：梁冀大怒，于是派人到士孙奋所在的郡县，诬告士孙奋的母亲是梁冀家里看守库房的婢女，曾经偷盗白珍珠十斛、紫金一千斤逃亡。于是将士孙奋兄弟逮捕下狱，严刑拷打至死，全部没收士孙奋的家产，共值一亿七千余万钱。
English: Liang Jie was furious, so he sent someone to the county where Shisunfen was located to falsely accuse Shisunfen's mother of being a maid who guarded the storeroom in Liang Jie's home and had once stolen ten ounces of white pearls and one thousand pounds of purple gold. So he arrested Shisunfen's brothers and put them in prison, tortured them to death, and confiscated all of Shisunfen's family property, worth a total of more than 170 million yuan.

古文：冀又遣客周流四方，远至塞外，广求异物，而使人复乘势横暴，妻略妇女，驱击吏卒，所在怨毒。
现代文：梁冀还派遣门客周游四方，甚至远到寒外，四处征求各地的异物，而这些被派出的门客，又都仗着梁冀的势力横征暴敛，抢夺百姓的妻子和女儿，殴打地方官吏和士卒，他们所到之处，都激起怨恨。
English: Liang Jie also sent his concubines to travel around the four directions, even far beyond the cold, to solicit foreign objects from all over the country. And these dispatched concubines, relying on Liang Jie's power, rioted violently, robbed people's wives and daughters, and beat local officials and soldiers. Wherever they went, they aroused resentment.

古文：侍御史硃穆自以冀故吏，奏记谏曰： 明将军地有申伯之尊，位为群公之首，一日行善，天下归仁；终朝为恶，四海倾覆。
现代文：侍御史朱穆，因为自己是梁冀过去的属吏，向梁冀上书进谏说： 大将军的地位，和申国国君一样的尊贵，位居三公之上，只要一天行善，天下无不感恩；只要一天作恶，四海立即沸腾。
English: Attendant Shi Zhu Mu, because he was a subordinate of Liang Jie in the past, wrote a letter to Liang Jie, saying: The status of the general is as honorable as that of the sovereign of Shen Guo, ranking above the three princes. As long as one day does good, the whole world will be grateful; as long as one day does evil, the four seas will immediately boil.

古文：顷者官民俱匮，加以水虫为害，京师诸官费用增多，诏书发调，或至十倍，各言官无见财，皆当出民，搒掠割剥，强令充足。
现代文：近来，官府和民间都已十分穷困，又加上水灾和虫灾的侵害，京都洛阳各官府的费用增多，皇帝下诏征调的款项，有时高达平时的十倍。而地方的各级官府都说库里没有现钱，全都要向百姓征收，于是用鞭子抽打，残酷榨取，强迫凑足数目。
English: Recently, both the government and the people have been very poor. In addition to the damage caused by floods and insect plagues, the expenses of the government offices in Kyoto and Luoyang have increased. The amount of money collected and transferred under the emperor's edict is sometimes as high as ten times the usual amount. Local governments at all levels said that there was no cash in the treasury, and all of it had to be collected from the people. Therefore, they used whips to beat, brutally squeeze, and force people to make up the amount.

古文：公赋既重，私敛又深，牧守长吏多非德选，贪聚无厌，遇民如虏，或绝命于棰楚之下，或自贼于迫切之求。
现代文：朝廷征收的赋税已经十分沉重，官吏私人的聚敛更是变本加厉。州牧和郡太守等地方高级官吏，大多数不是有品德的人选，他们都贪得无厌，对待百姓如同对待盗贼和仇敌。百姓有的在官府的鞭击棒打之下毙命，有的不堪忍受追逼勒索而自杀。
English: The taxes levied by the imperial court were already very heavy, and the accumulation of officials and private individuals became even more intense. The majority of local high-ranking officials, such as prefectural pastors and county governors, were not moral candidates. They were all insatiably greedy and treated the people as if they were thieves and enemies. Some of the people died under the whipping and beating of the government, and some could not bear the persecution and extortion and committed suicide.

古文：又掠夺百姓，皆托之尊府，遂令将军结怨天下，吏民酸毒，道路叹嗟。
现代文：而且，这些掠夺百姓的暴行，都用于大将军府的名义，就使将军受到天下的怨恨，官吏和百姓，都感到伤心悲痛，在路上嗟叹。
English: Moreover, these atrocities of plundering the people were all used in the name of the general's office, which made the general hated by the world. Both officials and people felt sad and sad, and sighed on the road.

古文：昔永和之末，纲纪少弛，颇失人望，四五岁耳，而财空户散，下有离心，马勉之徒乘敝而起，荆、扬之间几成大患；幸赖顺烈皇后初政清静，内外同力，仅乃讨定。
现代文：过去，在永和末年，朝廷纲纪稍有松弛，颇让百姓失望，只不过四五年时间，就弄得全国财政空虚，户口流散，百姓离心离德。马勉之徒乘机起兵，在荆州和扬州之间，几乎酿成大祸。幸赖梁太后开始主持朝政，清静无为，朝廷内外齐心合力，才得以讨平。
English: In the past, at the end of the Yonghe era, the imperial court's discipline was a little slack, which disappointed the people. However, in four or five years, the country's finances were empty, the households were scattered, and the people were alienated from Germany. Ma Yan's followers took the opportunity to raise an army, and between Jingzhou and Yangzhou, it almost led to a catastrophe. Fortunately, Empress Dowager Liang began to preside over the imperial government, and there was nothing to be done. It was only through the concerted efforts of both inside and outside the imperial court that they were able to level the playing field.

古文：今百姓戚戚，困于永和，内非仁爱之心可得容忍，外非守国之计所宜久安也。
现代文：现在，百姓的忧惧，较之永和末年更为严重。如果对内不能发扬仁爱之心予以容忍，对外又没有保全国家的方略，是不可能获得长治久安的。
English: Now the people are worried that the difficulties are greater than the eternal peace, and that it is not the benevolence of the heart that can be tolerated, and it is not the strategy of defending the country.

古文：夫将相大臣，均体元首，共舆而驰，同舟而济，舆倾舟覆，患实共之。
现代文：大将相等朝廷大臣，跟国家君主同为一体，共乘一车奔驰，共坐一船渡河，车辆一旦颠翻，舟船一旦倾覆，大家实际上是患难与共的。
English: The Minister of the Prime Minister, together with the head of state, ride together in a Mercedes, go to sea together in a boat, and if the boat sinks, they will suffer together.

古文：岂可以去明即昧，履危自安，主孤时困而莫之恤乎！
现代文：怎么可以抛弃光明，投向黑暗？怎么可以走在危险的路上，却自以为平安？又怎么可以在主上孤单而时局艰难之际，毫不在意？
English: How can you forsake the light and turn to darkness? How can you walk on a dangerous road and think you are safe? How can you be alone in the Lord and not care when times are tough?

古文：宜时易宰守非其人者，减省第宅园池之费，拒绝郡国诸所奉送，内以自明，外解人惑；使挟奸之吏无所依托，司察之臣得尽耳目。
现代文：应该及时裁撤那些不称职的州牧和郡太守，减省兴建宅第和园林池塘的费用，拒绝接受各郡和各封国奉送的礼物，对内表明自己的高贵品德，对外解除人民的疑惑，使仗势为恶的奸吏无所依靠，负责监察的官吏得以尽职。
English: It is necessary to promptly abolish those incompetent prefectural pastors and county governors, save the cost of building mansions and garden ponds, refuse to accept gifts from counties and fiefdoms, show their noble character to the inside, remove people's doubts to the outside world, so that the evil traitors have nothing to rely on, and the officials responsible for supervision can perform their duties.

古文：宪度既张，远迩清壹，则将军身尊事显，德燿无穷矣！ 
现代文：法纪伸张以后，远近将一片清平。将军就会地位更加尊贵，事业更加显赫，明德将永垂于世。 
English: After the expansion of law and discipline, there will be peace and tranquility in the near and far. The general will have a more honorable position, a more prominent career, and wisdom will live forever.

古文：冀不纳。
现代文：梁冀没有采纳。
English: Liang Jie did not adopt it.

古文：冀虽专朝纵横，而犹交结左右宦官，任其子弟、宾客以为州郡要职，欲以自固恩宠。
现代文：梁冀虽然垄断朝政，专横跋扈，然而，仍交结皇帝左右的当权宦官，任命他们的子弟和宾客亲友担任州郡官府的重要职务，目的在于巩固皇帝对自己的恩德和宠信。
English: Although Liang Jie monopolized court politics and was domineering, he still made friends with the eunuchs in power around the emperor and appointed their children and guests, relatives and friends to important positions in the prefectural and county government, with the aim of consolidating the emperor's favor and favor.

古文：穆又奏记极谏，冀终不悟，报书云： 如此，仆亦无一可邪！ 
现代文：因此，朱穆又向梁冀上书极力劝谏，但梁冀始终不觉悟，他给朱穆回信说： 照你这样说，我是一无是处吗！ 
English: Therefore, Zhu Mu also wrote to Liang Jie to strongly advise him, but Liang Jie still did not wake up. He wrote back to Zhu Mu saying: According to you, am I useless?

古文：然素重穆，亦不甚罪也。
现代文：然而，梁冀一向尊重朱穆，所以也不很怪罪他。
English: However, Liang Jie always respected Zhu Mu, so he did not blame him very much.

古文：冀遣书诣乐安太守陈蕃，有所请托，不得通。
现代文：梁冀写信给乐安郡太守陈蕃，托他办事，但陈蕃拒绝会见梁冀派来的使者。
English: Liang Jie wrote a letter to the governor of Le'an County, Chen Yao, asking him to do something, but Chen Yao refused to meet the envoy sent by Liang Jie.

古文：使者诈称它客求谒蕃；蕃怒，笞杀之。
现代文：于是，使者冒充是其他客人，请求谒见陈蕃。陈蕃大怒，将使者鞭打而死。
English: As a result, the messenger pretended to be other guests and asked to see Chen Yao. Chen Yao flew into a rage and whipped the messenger to death.

古文：坐左转修武令。
现代文：陈蕃因罪被贬为武县县令。
English: As a result of his crime, Chen Yao was demoted to county magistrate of Wuxian County.

古文：时皇子有疾，下郡县市珍药，而冀遣客赍书诣京兆，并货牛黄。
现代文：这时，皇子有病，下令各郡县购买珍贵的药材。梁冀也趁此机会，派门客带着他写的书信去京兆，要求同时购买牛黄。
English: At this time, the prince was ill and ordered all counties to buy precious medicinal materials. Liang Jie also took this opportunity to send a messenger with a letter he had written to Jingzhao, requesting that they also purchase cow bile.

古文：京兆尹南阳延笃发书收客，曰： 大将军椒房外家，而皇子有疾，必应陈进医方，岂当使客千里求利乎！ 
现代文：京兆尹南阳人延笃打开梁冀所写的书信一看，便将梁冀派来的门客逮捕，说： 大将军是皇亲国戚，而皇子有病，必应进献医方，怎么会派门客到千里之外谋利呢？ 
English: When Yan Du, a member of the Jing Zhao Yin Nanyang, opened the letter written by Liang Jie, he arrested the concierge sent by Liang Jie and said: The general is a relative of the emperor, and the prince is ill and must be given medicine. How could he send a concierge thousands of miles away to make a profit?

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：于是将其斩杀。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：冀惭而不得言。
现代文：梁冀虽然感到羞惭，但不能开口。
English: Although Liang Jie felt ashamed, he could not speak.

古文：有司承旨求其事，笃以病免。
现代文：其后，有关官吏奉承梁冀的意旨，追查这一杀人案件，以延笃有病为理由，将他免职。
English: Afterwards, officials flattered Liang Jie's intentions, investigated the murder case, and removed Yan Du from his post on the grounds that he was ill.

古文：夏，五月，庚辰，尊博园匽贵人曰孝崇后，宫曰永乐；置太仆、少府以下，皆如长乐宫故事。
现代文：夏季，五月庚辰，桓帝尊其母博园贵人为孝崇后，所住宫室称作永乐宫，设置太仆、少府及以下官吏，一切都遵照西汉时期长乐宫的前例。
English: In the summer, in May, after Emperor Kuan revered his mother, Bo Yuan, as a noblewoman, the palace where he lived was called Yongle Palace. It was set up with servants, officials and other officials. Everything followed the precedent of Changle Palace during the Western Han Dynasty.

古文：分巨鹿九县为后汤沐邑。
现代文：从钜鹿郡分割九个县，作为孝崇后的汤沐邑，收取赋税以供个人奉养。
English: Divided into nine counties from Elk County, as a Tang Muyi after Xiao Chong, tax is collected for personal support.

古文：秋，七月，梓潼山崩。
现代文：秋季，七月，广汉郡梓潼县发生山崩。
English: In the autumn, in July, a landslide occurred in Zizhi County, Guanghan County.

古文：孝质皇帝元嘉元年
现代文：元嘉元年
English: In the first year of Yuan Jia

古文：春，正月朔，群臣朝贺，大将军冀带剑入省。
现代文：春，正月朔，群臣朝会，大将军冀带剑入省。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, the courtiers' meeting, the general Ji brought a sword into the province.

古文：尚书蜀郡张陵呵叱令出，敕羽林、虎贲夺剑。冀跪谢，陵不应，即劾奏冀，请廷尉论罪。
现代文：尚书蜀郡张陵呵叱令出，敕虎贲、羽林夺剑，冀跪谢，陵不应，即劾奏冀，请廷尉论罪。
English: Shangshu Shu County, Zhangling, issued a reprimand order, Zou Huzhang, Hulin won the sword, Ji kneeled and thanked, Ling should not, that is, impeach Zou Ji, ask the courtier to plead guilty.

古文：有诏，以一岁俸赎；百僚肃然。
现代文：有诏，以一岁俸赎；百僚肃然。
English: There was an edict to ransom him with one year's salary; the centurions were stunned.

古文：河南尹不疑尝举陵孝廉，乃谓陵曰： 昔举君，适所以自罚也！ 
现代文：河南尹不疑尝举陵孝廉，乃谓陵曰： 昔举君，适所以自罚也！ 
English: Henan Yin no doubt tried to raise the tomb of Xiaolian, but the tomb said: In the past, I raised you, so self-punishment is also appropriate!

古文：陵曰： 明府不以陵不肖，误见擢序，今申公宪以报私恩！ 
现代文：陵曰： 明府不以陵不肖，误见擢序，今申公宪以报私恩！
English: Ling said: The Ming government did not use Ling as a bad example, mistakenly believing that it should be promoted, and now it is applying for a constitutional amendment to repay the favor!

古文：不疑有愧色。
现代文：不疑有愧色。
English: No doubt with a sense of shame.

古文：癸酉，赦天下，改元。
现代文：癸酉，大赦天下，改年号。
English: , amnesty to the world, change the year.

古文：梁不疑好经书，喜待士，梁冀疾之，转不疑为光禄勋；以其子胤为河南尹。
现代文：梁不疑喜好儒家的经书，乐于接待有学问的人士，梁冀对此很是憎恶，于是调他担任光禄勋，而任命自己的儿子梁胤为河南尹。
English: There is no doubt that Liang liked Confucian scriptures and was happy to receive learned people. Liang Jie hated this very much, so he transferred him to serve as Guanglu Hon, and appointed his son Liang Yin as Henan Yin.

古文：胤年十六，客貌甚陋，不胜冠带，道路见者莫不蚩笑。
现代文：当时，梁胤年仅十六岁，容貌非常丑陋，穿上官服以后不堪入目，道路上的行人见到他这副模样，没有一个不嘲笑的。
English: At that time, Liang Yin was only sixteen years old, his appearance was very ugly, and he was hard to look at after putting on the official uniform. When pedestrians on the road saw his appearance, there was no one who would not laugh at him.

古文：不疑自耻兄弟有隙，遂让位归第，与弟蒙闭门自守。
现代文：梁不疑认为兄弟之间有嫌隙，对自己是一种耻辱，于是辞去官职，回到自己的宅第，和弟弟梁蒙闭门在家自守。
English: Without a doubt, Liang felt ashamed because he thought there was a gap between him and his brother, so the official went home, and he and his brother Liang Meng closed the door and did not ask about foreign affairs.

古文：冀不欲令与宾客交通，阴使人变服至门，记往来者。
现代文：梁冀不愿意他再与外面的宾客交往，于是暗地里派人更换衣服，到梁不疑的大门前，记下和他交往的宾客。
English: Liang Jie didn't want Liang to mingle with the guests, so he secretly sent someone in disguise to wait in front of his door. If anyone came and went, he would write it down.

古文：南郡太守马融、江夏太守田明初除，守谒不疑；冀讽有司奏融在郡贪浊，及以它事陷明，皆髡笞徙朔方。
现代文：南郡太守马融、江夏郡太守田明，刚被任命时，路过梁不疑家，曾经去晋见梁不疑，向他辞行。梁冀便授意有关官吏弹劾马融在南郡贪污，并用其他的事诬陷田明，将他们二人都处以髡刑、笞刑，放逐到朔方郡。
English: When Ma Rong, the governor of Nan County, and Tian Ming, the governor of Jiangxia County, were newly appointed, they passed by Liang Fuxue's home, went to Jin to see Liang Fuxue, and resigned to him. Liang Ji then instructed the relevant officials to impeach Ma Rong for corruption in Nan County, and to frame Tian Ming with other matters, and both of them were sentenced to flogging and banishment to Shuofang County.

古文：融自刺不殊，明遂死于路。
现代文：马融自杀未遂，田明就死在发配途中。
English: When Ma Rong attempted suicide, Tian Ming died on the way to the distribution center.

古文：夏，四月，己丑，上微行，幸河南尹梁胤府舍。
现代文：夏季，四月己丑，桓帝秘密出行，临幸河南尹梁胤家。
English: In the summer, April is ugly, Emperor Huan secretly travels, Linxing Henan Yin Liangyin's family.

古文：是日，大风拔树，昼昏。
现代文：当天，突刮大风，拔起树木，白昼一片昏暗。
English: On the same day, a gale blew up, trees were uprooted, and the day was dark.

古文：尚书杨秉上疏曰： 臣闻天下言语，以灾异谴告。
现代文：尚书杨秉上书说： 我曾经听说，上天不会说话，用灾异谴责告诫君王。
English: Shangshu Yang Bingzhongshu said: I once heard that heaven cannot speak, and warns kings with disastrous accusations.

古文：王者至尊，出入有常，警跸而行，静室而止，自非郊庙之事，则銮旗不驾。
现代文：君王至为尊贵，出入皇宫都有常规。凡是出宫，前面有人清道和警戒行人，左右有人侍卫；凡是入宫，必先派人清宫，然后才能居住。除非是到郊外祭祀天地，或者到皇庙祭祀祖宗，君王的銮旗御车，从不离开皇宫。
English: The king is the most honorable, and there is a routine for entering and leaving the palace. When leaving the palace, there are people in front to clear the way and alert pedestrians, and there are guards on the right and left; when entering the palace, they must first send people to clear the palace before they can live there. Unless they go to the suburbs to worship heaven and earth, or to the imperial temple to worship their ancestors, the king's flag-draped carriage never leaves the palace.

古文：故诸侯入诸臣之家，《春秋》尚列其诫；况于以先王法服而私出槃游，降乱尊卑，等威无序，侍卫守空宫，玺绂委女妾！设有非常之变，任章之谋，上负先帝，下悔靡及！ 
现代文：所以，各国的诸侯到臣属之家，《春秋》尚且举出，作为鉴戒，更何况是穿着先王规定的朝服，私自外出游玩？尊贵和卑贱混乱不分，威仪失去等级秩序，侍卫守护空宫，天子的玺印交给妇女保管，万一发生非常的变化，出现任章一类的谋反事件，上则辜负先帝的希望，下则后悔莫及！ 
English: Therefore, the princes of various countries went to the homes of their subjects, and "Spring and Autumn" still holds it up as a warning, not to mention that they wore the imperial robes prescribed by the former king and went out to play privately. There was no distinction between the noble and the lowly, there was no order of rank, the guards guarded the empty palace, and the seal of the Son of Heaven was given to the women for safekeeping. In the event of a great change, there would be a rebellion such as Ren Zhang. The former would fail to live up to the hopes of the former emperor, and the latter would regret it.

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：桓帝不能采纳。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：秉，震之子也。
现代文：杨秉，即杨震的儿子。
English: Yang Bing, the son of Yang Zhen.

古文：京师旱，任城、梁国饥，民相食。
现代文：京都洛阳发生旱灾，任城、梁国发生饥荒，出现人吃人的现象。
English: There was a drought in Kyoto's Luoyang, famine in Rencheng and Liangguo, and cannibalism.

古文：司徒张歆罢，以光禄勋吴雄为司徒。
现代文：司徒张歆被罢官，擢升光禄勋吴雄为司徒。
English: Zhang Jian, the head of the secretarial staff, was removed from his post, and Guanglu Xun Wu was promoted to the post of secretary.

古文：北匈奴呼衔王寇伊吾，败伊吾司马毛恺，攻伊吾屯城。
现代文：北匈奴呼衍王攻打伊吾，击败伊吾司马毛恺，又乘胜进攻伊吾屯城。
English: The Northern Xiongnu Huan Wang attacked Igu, defeated Igu Sima Mao Yao, and used the victory to attack Igu Tun City.

古文：诏敦煌太守马达将兵救之；至蒲类海，呼衍王引去。
现代文：桓帝下诏，命敦煌太守马达率军援救，当援军到达蒲类海时，呼衍王率兵退走。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict, ordering Dunhuang Taishou Mada and his army to come to the rescue. When the reinforcements reached the Pudong Sea, Huyan Wang and his army retreated.

古文：秋，七月，武陵蛮反。
现代文：秋季，七月，武陵郡蛮人起兵反叛。
English: In the autumn, in July, the barbarians of Wuling County rebelled.

古文：冬，十月，司空胡广致仕。
现代文：冬季，十月，司空胡广辞官退休。
English: In the winter, in October, Secretary Kuo Hu Guang retired from the post.

古文：十一月，辛巳，京师地震。
现代文：十一月辛巳，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: In November, an earthquake hit Kyoto and Luoyang.

古文：诏百官举独行之士。
现代文：桓帝下诏，命朝廷的文武百官推荐志节高尚，不随俗浮沉的 独行 人才。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict, ordering the court's civil and military officials to recommend high-minded, independent talents who do not follow the ups and downs of the world.

古文：涿郡举崔寔，诣公车，称病，不对策；退而论世事，名曰《政论》。
现代文：涿郡太守推荐崔。崔到达京都洛阳皇宫负责接待的公车衙门时，声称有病，没有参加回答皇帝策问的考试。回乡后，撰写了一篇评论当代政事的文章，篇名叫作《政论》。
English: When Cui arrived at the bus gate of the Kyoto Luoyang Imperial Palace, which was in charge of the reception, he claimed to be ill and did not participate in the examination to answer the emperor's questions. After returning to his hometown, he wrote an article commenting on contemporary politics, an article called "Political Theory."

古文：其辞曰： 凡天下所以不治者，常由人主承平日久，俗渐敝而不悟，政浸衰而不改，习乱安危，怢不自睹。
现代文：文章说： 凡天下所以不能治理，通常是由于人主继承太平盛世为时太久。风俗已经逐渐敝败，却仍不觉悟；政令已经逐渐衰败，却不知道改弦更张。以乱为治，以危为安，熟视无睹。
English: The article said: Whenever the world cannot be governed, it is usually because the human masters have inherited a peaceful and prosperous world for too long. Customs have gradually become corrupt, but they still do not realize it; government decrees have gradually decayed, but they do not know how to change their course. Chaos is the rule, danger is the peace, and they turn a blind eye.

古文：或荒耽耆欲，不恤万机；或耳蔽箴诲，厌伪忽真；或犹豫歧路，莫适所以；或见信之佐，括囊守禄；或疏远之臣，言以贱废。
现代文：有的沉溺于酒色，荒淫纵欲，不忧虑国事；有的听不进任何规劝，爱听假话而听不进真话；有的不能分辨人的忠和奸，事情的是和非，在歧路上犹豫不决，不知所从；于是，亲信的辅佐大臣，害怕得罪奸邪，闭口不言，只求保全自己的高官厚禄；而疏远的臣下，虽然敢说真话，但因为地位卑微，意见不能受到重视和采用。
English: Some indulge in drunkenness, wild sexual indulgence, and do not worry about state affairs; some do not listen to any persuasion, love to hear lies and do not listen to the truth; some cannot distinguish between people's loyalty and betrayal, the rights and wrongs of things, hesitate on the wrong path, and do not know where to go; therefore, the close-knit assistant minister, afraid of crime and evil, does not speak, only seeking to preserve his high-ranking wealth; and the estranged vassals, although they dare to speak the truth, but because of their lowly status, their opinions cannot be valued and adopted.

古文：是以王纲纵弛于上，智士郁伊于下。
现代文：因此，朝廷的法度在上面遭到破坏，才智之士在下面感到无可奈何，真是可悲！ 自从汉王朝建立迄今，已经三百五十余年，政令已经严重荒废，上下松懈怠惰，百姓怨声载道，都盼望重新得到中兴，挽救目前的危局。
English: Therefore, the rule of the imperial court has been destroyed at the top, and the talented people feel helpless below, which is really sad! Since the establishment of the Han Dynasty, it has been more than 350 years, the government decrees have been seriously wasted, the upper and lower levels are lax and lazy, and the people are complaining loudly, all hoping to regain ZTE and save the current crisis.

古文：悲夫！自汉兴以来，三百五十馀岁矣，政令垢玩，上下怠懈，百姓嚣然，咸复思中兴之救矣！
现代文：而且，拯救时世办法，在于把裂缝补好，把倾斜支住，根据实际情况，采取必要的措施，目的只是要使整个天下达到安宁的境地而已。所以，圣人掌权，就会根据当时面临的形势，制订相应的制度和措施。
English: Moreover, the way to save the world is to mend the cracks, support the slope, and take the necessary measures according to the actual situation. The purpose is only to bring the whole world to a peaceful state. Therefore, when a sage takes power, he will formulate the corresponding system and measures according to the situation at that time.

古文：且济时拯世之术，在于补䘺决坏，枝拄邪倾，随形裁割，要措斯世于安宁之域而已。
现代文：虽然采取的步骤会有差异，设置的制度和措施也各不相同，但都不会强迫人们去做根本做不到的事，也不会不做当前急需的事，而只是追求遥远空洞的思想。孔子回答叶公说，为政在于使远处的人都来归服；他回答鲁哀公说，为政在于选用贤才；他回答齐景公说，为政在于节约财富。
English: Although there will be differences in the steps taken and the systems and measures set up, they will not force people to do things that cannot be done at all, nor will they not do things that are urgently needed at the moment, but only pursue distant and empty ideas. Confucius answered Ye Gong that the purpose of politics is to make people from far away submit; he answered Ruye Gong that the purpose of politics is to select talents; he answered Qi Jing Gong that the purpose of politics is to save wealth.

古文：故圣人执权，遭时定制，步骤之差，各有云设，不强人以不能，背急切而慕所闻也。
现代文：并不是孔子对为政本身有不同的见解，而是针对他们所面临的不同的要务。庸俗的人，只知拘泥于古书上的文字，不懂得根据不同的情势，制订不同的制度和措施的道理。
English: It is not that Confucius has different views on governance itself, but on the different tasks they face. Vulgar people only know the words of ancient books, and do not understand the principle of formulating different systems and measures according to different situations.

古文：盖孔子对叶公以来远，哀公以临人，景公以节礼，非其不同，所急异务也。
现代文：只看重从书中听来的古人古事，而忽略眼前的现实，怎么可以和这种人讨论国家的大事呢！所以，臣属上书奏事，虽然主上愿意聆听，但每每遭到牵制和破坏。
English: Once upon a time, Confucius answered the questions of the sovereign, all of which varied from person to person and from event to event. His answer to Ye Gong's question about politics was to ask those who were close to him to be pleased and those who were far away to come; his answer to Lu Aigong was that politics was in the selection of sages; his answer to Qi Jinggong was that politics was in the saving of money. It was not a different way of doing politics, but a different urgency.

古文：俗人拘文牵占，不达权制，奇伟所闻，简忽所见，乌可与论国家之大事哉！故言事者虽合圣德，辄见掎夺。
现代文：为什么会这样呢？有些顽劣的人士不懂审时度势，只知安于所见到过的事情，即使是事情已经成功，也不知快乐，何况在操心事情的开端时，就让他同意？
English: Why is it that there are bad people who don't know how to judge the situation, who only know how to be satisfied with what they have seen, who don't know how to be happy even if things have been successful, and who, when they are worried about the beginning of things, make him agree?

古文：何者？其顽士暗于时权，安习所见，不知乐成，况可虑始，苟云率由旧章而已。其达者或矜名妒能，耻策非己，舞笔奋辞以破其义。
现代文：只是马马虎虎地说，大致遵循原来的法令规章而已；有的人，虽然见识通达，但居名自负，忌妒贤能，因为计策不是出于自己而感到羞耻，于是舞文弄墨，去诋毁别人提出的计策。
English: Some people, although they are well-informed, are conceited and envious of others. They feel ashamed because the scheme is not their own, so they try to discredit the scheme proposed by others.

古文：寡不胜众，遂见摈弃，虽稷、契复存，犹将困焉。
现代文：即便是最好的计策，因为寡不敌众，也终于遭到摈弃，纵使后稷、子契重生，也束手无策。
English: Even the best strategy, because outnumbered, was finally abandoned, and even if Houyi and Ziqi were reborn, there was nothing to be done.

古文：斯贤智之论所以常愤郁而不伸者也。
现代文：这就是持贤能智慧的言论的人，所以常常悲愤压抑而不能得到伸展的原因。
English: This is the reason why people who hold virtuous and wise speech are often sad and angry and cannot be expanded.

古文： 凡为天下者，自非上德，严之则治，宽之则乱。
现代文： 凡治理天下的君主，如果不是具有最好的品德，则采用严厉的手段，就能够治理；采用宽纵的手段，国家就混乱。
English: All rulers of the world, if they are not of the best moral character, can rule by using harsh means; if they use lenient means, the country will be in chaos.

古文：何以明其然也？
现代文：何以知道会是这样？
English: How do you know that?

古文：近孝宣皇帝明于君人之道，审于为政之理，故严刑峻法，破奸轨之胆，海内清肃，天下密如，逄计见效，优于孝文。
现代文：近代孝宣皇帝，明白统治人民的道理，知道为政的真谛，所以，采用严刑峻法，使为非作歹的人心胆俱裂，海内清平，天下安静，总结他的政绩，高于文帝。
English: In modern times, Emperor Xiaoxuan understood the principle of ruling the people and knew the true meaning of politics. Therefore, he used severe punishments and harsh laws to make those who did evil have their hearts broken, the sea was calm, and the world was quiet. Summing up his political achievements, he was higher than Emperor Wen.

古文：及元帝即位，多行宽政，卒以堕损，威权始夺，遂为汉室基祸之主。
现代文：等到元帝即位，在许多方面放宽了政令，终使朝政衰败，皇帝的威势和权力开始下降，汉王朝的大祸，在他手中奠下基础。
English: Later, Emperor Yuan ascended to the throne and used loose politics, but the result was a complete failure. The authority was usurped and became the source of the disaster of the decline of the Han Dynasty.

古文：政道得失，于斯可鉴。
现代文：为政之道的得失，从这里可以明鉴。
English: The gains and losses of the way of politics can be clearly seen from here.

古文：昔孔子作《春秋》，褒齐桓，懿晋文，叹管仲之功，夫岂不美文、武之道哉？
现代文：过去，孔子作《春秋》，褒奖齐桓公，夸奖晋文公，赞叹管仲。那么，孔子难道不赞美周文王、周武王的为政之道？
English: In the past, Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn," praising King Qihuan, praising King Jinwen, and praising King Guanzhong. So, doesn't Confucius praise King Zhouwen and King Zhouwu's way of doing politics?

古文：诚达权救敝之理也。
现代文：实在是为了通达权变、拯救时弊的道理。
English: Indeed, it is the principle of saving decay for the purpose of achieving power.

古文：故圣人能与世推移，而俗士苦不知变，以为结绳之约，可复治乱秦之绪；干戚之舞，足以解平城之围。
现代文：圣人能够随着时代的前进，而不断改变制度和措施，然而，庸人却苦于不知道随着时代的变迁而改变自己的认识，以为上古时代所采用的结绳记事的原始方法，仍然可以治理纷乱如麻的秦王朝；以为舞弄红色的盾牌和玉石制作的斧干戚之舞，足可以解除汉高祖受困的平城之围。
English: The sages were able to constantly change the system and measures with the progress of the times. However, the philistines suffered from not knowing how to change their understanding with the changes of the times. They thought that the original method of tying ropes and keeping records used in ancient times could still govern the chaotic Qin Dynasty. They thought that the dance of red shields and jade-made axes could lift the besieged siege of Heijo.

古文：夫熊经鸟伸，虽延历之术，非伤寒之理；呼吸吐纳，虽度纪之道，非续骨之膏。
现代文：像熊那样攀援树木，伸手展足，象鸟那样飞翔高空，伸腿展翅，虽然可以延年益寿，却治不了伤寒重病。用口不断吐出浊气，用鼻不断吸进清气，虽然可以使身体健康，却不能连接折断的骨骼。
English: Climbing trees like a bear, stretching his arms and legs, flying high like a bird, stretching his legs and wings, although it can prolong life, it cannot cure typhoid fever. Constantly exhaling bad breath with the mouth, constantly inhaling fresh air with the nose, although it can make the body healthy, it cannot connect broken bones.

古文：盖为国之法，有似治身，平则致养，疾则攻焉。
现代文：治理国家的方法，和养护身体相类似，平时注意营养和保护，有病时则使用药物进行治疗。
English: The method of governing the country is similar to that of maintaining the body. In peacetime, attention is paid to nutrition and protection, and in the event of illness, medication is used for treatment.

古文：夫刑罚者，治乱之药石也；德教者，兴平之粱肉也。
现代文：刑罚是治理乱世的药物，德教是治理太平盛世的美食佳肴。
English: Penalty is equal to the prescription to cure the chaotic world; moral education is like the stew to nourish oneself at ordinary times.

古文：夫以德教除残，是以粱肉治疾也；以刑罚治平，是以药石供养也。
现代文：如果用德教去铲除凶残，就好比用美食佳肴去治疗疾病；反之，如果用刑罚去治理太平盛世，就好比用药物去营养和保护身体，都是不合适的。
English: If moral education is used to eradicate cruelty, it is like using delicious food to cure diseases; on the other hand, if punishment is used to govern the prosperous world, it is like using drugs to nourish and protect the body. Both are inappropriate.

古文：方今承百王之敝，值厄运之会，自数世以来，政多恩贷，驭委其辔。马骀其衔，四牡横奔，皇路险倾，方将拑勒鞬辀以救之，岂暇鸣和銮，请节奏哉！
现代文：可是，现在继承历代帝王遗留下来的弊病，又正逢艰难的时局，自最近几代以来，政令大多宽容，如同驾马车的人扔掉了缰绳，马匹脱掉了衔勒，四匹牡马横冲直撞，前面的道路又非常艰险，应该紧急勒马刹车，进行拯救，怎么还有闲暇一边听着车铃的节奏声，一边从容不迫地往前走呢？
English: However, we are now inheriting the ills left behind by the emperors of all times, and we are in a difficult situation. Since recent generations, the decrees are mostly tolerant, just as the driver of the carriage threw off the reins, the horses took off the bridle, the four stallions ran amok, and the road ahead was very dangerous. It was necessary to urgently brake the horse and save it. How could there be leisure while listening to the rhythm of the car bell and walking forward unhurriedly?

古文：昔文帝虽除肉刑，当斩右趾者弃市，笞者往往至死。
现代文：过去，汉文帝虽然废除了肉刑，但是，将应当砍掉右脚趾的改为斩首示众，受笞刑的人也往往被鞭打至死。
English: In the past, although Emperor Hanwen abolished corporal punishment, the right toe that should be cut off was changed to beheading for public display, and those who were beaten were often whipped to death.

古文：是文帝以严致平，非以宽致平也。 
现代文：所以，汉文帝仍是用严而非用宽的办法，实现了天下太平。 
English: Therefore, Emperor Hanwen still used a strict rather than a broad approach to achieve world peace.

古文：寔，瑗之子也。
现代文：崔是崔瑗的儿子。
English: Cui is Cui Yao's son.

古文：山阳仲长统尝见其书，叹曰： 凡为人主，宜写一通，置之坐侧。 
现代文：山阳郡人仲长统曾经看到了这篇文章，叹息说： 凡是君主，都应把它抄写下来，放在座位旁边，作为座右铭。 
English: Zhong Changtong, a resident of Sanyang County, once saw this article and said with a sigh: Every monarch should copy it down and put it next to his seat as a motto.

古文：臣光曰：汉家之法已严矣，而崔寔犹病其宽，何哉？
现代文：臣司马光曰：汉朝的法令已经是严厉的了，然而，崔还嫌它宽大，这是为什么呢？
English: Minister Sima Guang said: The Han Dynasty's laws are already strict, but Cui still thinks they are lenient. Why is that?

古文：盖衰世之君，率多柔懦，凡愚之佐，唯知姑息，是以权幸之臣有罪不坐，豪猾之民犯法不诛；仁恩所施，止于目前；奸宄得志，纪纲不立。
现代文：因为衰败之世的君王大多懦弱，平庸愚昧的辅佐之臣，只知道姑息。所以，有权势而得君王宠幸的臣下，即使有罪，也得不到应有的惩罚；豪强和不守法度的刁徒，即使违法，也不被诛杀；施加仁爱恩惠，只限于眼前；使为非作歹的人得逞，纲纪不能维持。
English: Because the kings of the decadent world are mostly cowardly, and the mediocre and ignorant vassals only know appeasement. Therefore, the powerful vassals who are favored by the king, even if they are guilty, will not get the punishment they deserve; the brave and non-law-abiding ruffians, even if they break the law, will not be killed; the exercise of benevolence and grace is limited to the present; the discipline cannot be maintained if the wrongdoers are allowed to succeed.

古文：故崔寔之论，以矫一时之枉，非百世之通义也。
现代文：所以，崔的评论是用来矫正一时的弊端，不是百代通用的法则。
English: Therefore, Cui's comment is used to correct the shortcomings of the moment, not the universal law.

古文：孔子曰： 政宽则民慢，慢则纠之以猛；猛则民残，残则施之以宽。
现代文：孔子说： 为政太宽大，则人民不在乎，人民一旦不在乎，则用严刑峻法来纠正。
English: Confucius said: If the government is too lenient, the people will not care. If the people do not care, they will be corrected by severe punishment.

古文：宽以济猛，猛以济宽，政是以和。 
现代文：施行严刑峻法，则人民感到暴虐，人民一旦感到暴虐，则改施宽大之政。用宽大和严厉两种手段互相补充，政局才能稳定。 
English: Use leniency to adjust the severity, use severity to adjust the leniency, so the political affairs are reconciled.

古文：斯不易之常道矣。
现代文：这是永世不变的常轨。
English: This is the eternal and unchanging normal course.

古文：闰月，庚午，任城节王崇薨；无子，国绝。
现代文：闰十二月庚午，任城节王刘崇去世，没有子嗣，封国灭绝。
English: On the afternoon of leap December, Liu Chong, the king of Rencheng Festival, passed away. He had no children and the feudal state was extinguished.

古文：以太常黄琼为司空。
现代文：擢升太常黄琼为司空。
English: Huang Qiong was promoted to Sikuo.

古文：帝欲褒崇梁冀，使中朝二千石以上会议其礼。
现代文：桓帝想要褒奖和尊崇梁冀，命朝廷中二千石以上的官员集会讨论有关礼仪。
English: Emperor Kuan wanted to reward and honor Liang Jie, so he ordered officials of more than 2,000 koku in the imperial court to gather to discuss the relevant etiquette.

古文：特进胡广、太常羊浦、司隶校尉祝恬、太中大夫边韶等咸称冀之勋德宜比周公，锡之山川、土田、附庸。
现代文：特进胡广、太常羊溥、司隶校尉祝恬、太中大夫边韶等人，都称赞梁冀的功德，应该比拟周公，赏赐给他山川、土地、以及附属于他的小封国。
English: Special Inspector Hu Guang, Superintendent Sheep, Superintendent Sub-Lieutenant Zhu Rong, Superintendent Junior Grade Doctor Bian Qi and others all praised Liang Jie's merits, and should be compared to Zhou Gong, awarding him mountains and rivers, land, and small fiefdoms attached to him.

古文：黄琼独曰： 冀前以亲迎之劳，增邑成三千户；又其子胤亦加封赏。
现代文：唯独司空黄琼提出异议说： 梁冀以前因亲自迎立桓帝的功劳，已增封食邑一万三千户；而且，他的儿梁胤也得到了封赏。
English: However, the only dissenting voice was that of Huang Qiong, the governor of Ku, who said, "Before, Liang Ji, due to the merit of personally welcoming Emperor Huan, had increased the number of households receiving food stamps by 13,000; moreover, his son Liang Jian also received the reward.

古文：今诸侯以户邑为制，不以里数为限，冀可比邓禹，合食四县。 
现代文：现在，诸侯的封国都是用食邑的户、县数为标准，而不以面积大小为限，所以，梁冀可以比拟邓禹，赏赐给他共合四县的食邑。 
English: Nowadays, the number of households and counties of food towns is used as the standard for the fiefdoms of princes, rather than the size of the area. Therefore, Liang Jie can be compared to Deng Yu and awarded him a total of four counties of food towns.

古文：朝廷从之。
现代文：桓帝批准。
English: The court followed his advice.

古文：于是有司奏： 冀入朝不趋，剑履上殿，谒赞不名，礼仪比萧何；悉以定陶、阳成馀户增封为四县，比邓禹；赏赐金钱、奴婢、彩帛、车马、衣服、甲第，比霍光；以殊元勋。
现代文：当时，有关官吏上奏： 梁冀入朝之时，可以不必小步疾行，可以带剑穿鞋上殿，拜见皇帝时，礼宾官只称他的官衔，不报姓名，礼仪比照萧何；加封定陶县、阳成县余下的全部户数，连同以前封的两县，使食邑增为四县，比照邓禹；赏赐金钱、奴婢、采色丝织物、车马、衣服、住宅，比照霍光；以表示不同于其他的元勋。
English: At that time, the relevant officials made the following report: When Liang Jie entered the imperial court, he did not have to walk at a brisk pace, and he could wear shoes with a sword to enter the palace. When meeting the emperor, the protocol officer only said his official title, not his name, and the etiquette was compared to Xiao He; all the remaining households in Dingtao County and Yangcheng County were added, together with the two counties previously sealed, so that the food town increased to four counties, according to Deng Yu; money, slaves, silk fabrics, horses, clothes, and houses were awarded, according to Huo Guang; to show that he was different from other

古文：每朝会，与三会绝席。
现代文：每次朝见皇帝时，梁冀不与三公同席，另设一个专席。
English: Every time Liang Jie met with the emperor, he did not sit at the same table with the three princes, but had a special seat.

古文：十日一入，平尚书事。
现代文：每隔十天，入朝一次，处理尚书台事务。
English: Every ten days, he comes to the palace to deal with the affairs of Shang Shudai.

古文：宣布天下，为万世法。 
现代文：并把这项殊荣，布告天下，作为万世的表率。 
English: And announce this honor to the world, as an example for all time.

古文：冀犹以所奏礼簿，意不悦。
现代文：可是，梁冀还认为有关官吏所上奏的礼仪太轻，心里不高兴。
English: However, Liang Jie also thought that the etiquette played by the relevant officials was too light, and he was not happy.

古文：孝质皇帝元嘉二年
现代文：元嘉二年
English: in the second year of Yuan Jia

古文：春，正月，西域长史王敬为于窴所杀。
现代文：春季，正月，西域长史王敬被于阗国诛杀。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the governor of the western region, Shi Wangjing, was killed in a battle in Shandong Province.

古文：初，西域长史赵评在于窴，病痈死。评子迎丧，道经拘弥。
现代文：起初，前任西域长史赵评在于阗，因生恶性脓疮而死，赵评的儿子前往迎接灵柩，路上经过拘弥国。
English: At first, the former governor of the western region, Zhao Han, died of malignant scabies. Zhao Han's son went to meet the coffin, passing through Zhimi Province on the way.

古文：拘弥王成国与于窴王建素有隙，谓评子曰： 于窴王令胡医持毒药著创中，故致死耳！ 
现代文：因拘弥王成国和于阗王建一向有怨隙，于是成国对赵评的儿子说： 于阗王让匈奴医生将毒药放在伤口上，所以使令尊致死。 
English: As there had always been a rift between King Chengguo and King Jian of Yunnan, Chengguo said to the son of Zhao Jian: King Jian had the Hun doctor put poison on the wound, so he had him killed.

古文：评子信之，还，以告敦煌太守马达。
现代文：赵评的儿子信以为真，回来后，将此情况报告敦煌太守马达。
English: Zhao Zhan's son believed it to be true, and after returning, he reported the situation to Dunhuang Taishou Motor.

古文：会敬代为长史，马达令敬隐核于窴事。
现代文：当时，正逢王敬接任西域长史，马达命王敬秘密调查核实此事。
English: At that time, just as Wang Jing took over as governor of the western region, the motor ordered Wang Jing to secretly investigate and verify the matter.

古文：敬先过拘弥，成国复说云。 于窴国人欲以我为王；今可因此罪诛建，于窴必服矣。 
现代文：王敬去于阗，先经过拘弥国，拘弥王成国又对王敬说： 于阗国人打算拥戴我当国王，现在可以用害死西域长史的罪名将于阗王建诛杀，于阗一定归服。 
English: Wang Jing went to Yunnan, first passing through Zhomi Province, and then through Wangcheng Province, and said to Wang Jing: The people of Yunnan are planning to make me king. Now they can use the accusation of killing the long history of the Western Regions to kill Wang Jian, and Yunnan will definitely submit.

古文：敬贪立功名，前到于窴，设供具，请建而阴图之。
现代文：王敬贪图建立功名，来到于阗后，摆设酒席，请于阗王建赴宴，而暗中却图谋杀害他。
English: Wang Jing was eager to establish his reputation. He came to Yunnan to set up a banquet and invite Yunnan Wang Jian to the banquet. However, he secretly plotted to murder him.

古文：或以敬谋告建，建不信，曰： 我无罪，王长史何为欲杀我？ 
现代文：有人将王敬的密谋报告于阗王建，但建并不相信，说： 我没有罪，王长史为什么要杀我？ 
English: Someone told Jian that Wang Jing was plotting, but he didn't believe them and said, "I'm not guilty, why would Wang Changshi kill me?

古文：旦日，建从官属数十人诣敬，坐定，建起行酒，敬叱左右执之。
现代文：次日，于阗王建率领随从官属数十人去拜见王敬。宾主坐定后，于阗王建起身敬酒，王敬喝令左右的人将他逮捕。
English: The next day, Yu Shao Wang Jian led dozens of officials and staff to visit Wang Jing. After the guests were seated, Yu Shao Wang Jian stood up to make a toast, and Wang Jing shouted for people around him to arrest him.

古文：吏士并无杀建意，官属悉得突走。
现代文：当时，官吏和卫士都没有杀建的意思，所以，跟随建来赴宴的随从官属全都突围逃走。
English: At that time, neither the officials nor the guards had any intention of killing Jian, so all the officials and their attendants who had come to the banquet with Jian broke through the encirclement and fled.

古文：时成国主簿秦牧随敬在会，持刀出，曰： 大事已定，何为复疑！ 
现代文：当时拘弥王成国的主簿秦牧也在宴会上，他持刀站出来说： 大事已定，为什么还疑惑！ 
English: At that time, Qin Mu, the main book of Wangcheng Guo, was also at the banquet. He stood up with a knife and said: The important thing has been decided, why is there still doubt!

古文：即前斩建。
现代文：随即上前将建斩首。
English: He then went forward and killed Jian.

古文：于窴侯、将输僰等遂会兵攻敬，敬持建头上楼宣告曰： 天子使我诛建耳！ 
现代文：于是，于阗国侯、大将输等集合部队攻打王敬，王敬拿着建的人头上楼宣告说： 是天子派我来诛杀建的！ 
English: As a result, the lord of Yunnan Province, the general, and other assembled troops attacked Wang Jing. Wang Jing took Jian's men to the top floor and declared, "God sent me to fight and kill Jian!"

古文：输僰不听，上楼斩敬，悬首于市。
现代文：输不听，冲到楼上，斩杀王敬，将他的人头悬挂在街市上示众。
English: Unwilling to listen, he rushed upstairs, beheaded Wang Jing, and hung his severed head in the market square for all to see.

古文：输僰自立为王；国人杀之，而立建子安国。
现代文：输自立为于阗王，国人将他杀死，另行拥立建的儿子安国为于阗王。
English: After losing his independence, the local people killed him, and took his son, Ankoku, as their new king.

古文：马达闻王敬死，欲将诸郡兵出塞击于窴；帝不听，征达还，而以宋亮代为敦煌太守。
现代文：马达听说王敬被杀死后，准备率领各郡的地方兵，出塞攻击于阗国。桓帝不批准，将马达征召回京都洛阳，任命宋亮接任敦煌郡太守。
English: After Mada heard that Wang Jing had been killed, he prepared to lead the local soldiers of each county to attack Shandong. Emperor Huan did not approve, calling Mada back to Kyoto Luoyang and appointing Song Liang to take over as Dunhuang County Governor.

古文：亮到，开募于窴，令自斩输僰；时输僰死已经月，乃断死人头送敦煌而不言其状，亮后知其诈，而竟不能讨也。
现代文：宋亮到任以后，开导和招募于阗人，命他们自己斩杀输。这时，输已经死了一个月，于是他们将死人的头砍下，送到敦煌郡太守府，但没有说斩杀的具体情况。宋亮后来才知道其中有诈，但到底不能再出兵讨伐。
English: After Song Liang took office, he enlightened and recruited the people of Yunnan and ordered them to kill the loser themselves. At this time, the loser had been dead for a month, so they cut off the dead man's head and sent it to the Dunhuang County Governor's Office, but did not say the specific circumstances of the killing. Song Liang later learned that there was fraud, but in the end he could not send troops to fight.

古文：丙辰，京师地震。
现代文：丙辰，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: On the 17th, the Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：夏，四月，甲辰，孝崇皇后匽氏崩；以帝弟平原王石为丧主，敛送制度比恭怀皇后。
现代文：夏季，四月甲辰，桓帝的母亲孝崇皇后氏去世，由桓帝的弟弟平原王刘石主持丧事，装殓和送葬的制度，比照和帝的母亲恭怀皇后。
English: In the summer, at the first hour of April, Emperor Huan's mother, Empress Xiao Chong, passed away. Emperor Huan's brother, the Plain King Liu Shi, presided over the funeral, and the system of decoration and funeral procession was similar to that of Emperor Huan's mother.

古文：五月，辛卯，葬于博陵。
现代文：五月辛卯，将她安葬在博陵。
English: In May, Emperor Xinwu buried her in Boling.

古文：秋，七月，庚辰，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月庚辰，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in July, Geng Chen, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：冬，十月，乙亥，京师地震。
现代文：冬季，十月乙亥，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: In the winter, in October, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto's Luoyang.

古文：十一月，司空黄琼免。
现代文：十一月，司空黄琼被免官。
English: In November, Siku Huang Qiong was removed from office.

古文：十二月，以特进赵戒为司空。
现代文：十二月，任命特进赵戒为司空。
English: In December, Zhao Jie, a special envoy, was appointed as the second secretary.

古文：孝质皇帝永兴元年
现代文：永兴元年
English: In the first year of Yongxing

古文：春，三月，丁亥，帝幸鸿池。
现代文：春季，三月丁亥，桓帝前往鸿池。
English: In the spring, in March, Dinghai, Emperor Huan went to Honchi.

古文：夏，四月，丙申，赦天下，改元。
现代文：夏季，四月丙申，大赦天下。改年号。
English: In the summer, in April, there is a general amnesty.

古文：丁酉，济南悼王广薨；无子，国除。
现代文：丁酉，济南悼王刘广去世，没有子嗣，封国撤除。
English: Ding Xi, Jinan mourns the death of King Liu Guang, has no children, and the state is abolished.

古文：秋，七月，郡、国三十二蝗，河水溢。
现代文：秋季，七月，有三十二个郡和封国发生蝗灾，黄河河水上涨，泛滥成灾。
English: In the autumn, in July, locust plagues occurred in thirty-two counties and fiefdoms, and the Yellow River rose and flooded.

古文：百姓饥穷流冗者数十万户，冀州尤甚。
现代文：百姓饥饿和贫穷所困迫，四处流散的达数十万户，冀州的情况尤为严重。
English: The situation in Jizhou is particularly serious, with hundreds of thousands of households, forced by hunger and poverty, scattered in all directions.

古文：诏以侍御史硃穆为冀州刺史。
现代文：桓帝下诏，任命侍御史朱穆为冀州刺史。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict, appointing the attendant Zhu Mu as the governor of Jizhou.

古文：冀部令长闻穆济河，解印绶去者四十馀人。
现代文：冀州所属的各县县令和县长，听说朱穆已渡过黄河，解下印信绶带自动离职而去的有四十余人。
English: The county magistrates and county governors of counties belonging to Jizhou heard that Zhu Mu had crossed the Yellow River, and more than forty people unsealed their seals and left their posts automatically.

古文：及到，奏劾诸郡贪污者，有至自杀，或死狱中。
现代文：乃至到任，朱穆便向朝廷上奏弹劾各郡的贪官污吏。这些官吏有的甚至自杀，有的死在狱中。
English: Even after taking office, Zhu Mu appealed to the imperial court to impeach corrupt officials in various counties. Some of these officials even committed suicide, and some died in prison.

古文：宦者赵忠丧父，归葬安平，僭为玉匣；穆下郡案验，吏畏其严，遂发墓剖棺，陈尸出之。
现代文：宦官赵忠的父亲去世，将棺材运回故乡安平国埋葬。他超越身份，制作了皇帝和王侯才准许穿的玉衣来装殓死者。
English: When the eunuch Zhao Zhong's father died, he transported the coffin back to his hometown of Anping to be buried. He transcended his status and made a jade dress that only emperors and princes were allowed to wear to decorate the dead.

古文：帝闻，大怒，征穆诣廷尉，输作左校。
现代文：朱穆命令郡太守调查核实。郡太守等地方官吏畏惧他的严厉，于是挖开坟墓，劈开棺木，把尸首抬出来进行检查。
English: Zhu Mu ordered the county magistrate to investigate and verify. The county magistrate and other local officials were afraid of his severity, so they dug up the grave, split the coffin, and carried the body out for inspection.

古文：太学书生颍川刘陶等数千人诣阙上书讼穆曰： 伏见弛刑徒硃穆，处公忧国，拜州之日，志清奸恶。
现代文：桓帝得到报告后，大怒，征召朱穆到廷尉问罪，判处他到左校罚作苦役。于是，太学的学生、颍川人刘陶等数千人前往宫门上书，为朱穆申辩说： 我们认为，减刑囚徒朱穆，秉公处事，尽忠报国，从他被任命为冀州刺史的那一天起，就立志铲除奸佞和邪恶。
English: After receiving the report, Emperor Huan was furious, summoned Zhu Mu to the court lieutenant to ask for punishment, and sentenced him to the left school for hard labor. Therefore, thousands of students from Taiyuan University and Liu Tao from Shichuan went to the palace gate to write a letter, arguing for Zhu Mu Shen: We believe that the commuted prisoner Zhu Mu, who has been fair and loyal to the country, has been determined to eradicate the traitors and evil from the day he was appointed to the history of Jizhou.

古文：诚以常侍贵宠，父兄子弟布在州郡，竞为虎狼，噬食小民，故穆张理天纲，补缀漏目，罗取残祸，以塞天意。
现代文：的确是因为中常侍居位尊贵，又受到皇帝的宠信，他们的父亲、养子、兄弟散布在各州各郡，象虎狼一样地竞相吞食小民，所以朱穆才伸张国法，修补连缀破漏的法纲，惩处残暴和作恶的人，以合天意。
English: Indeed, it was because the middle-ranking attendants held a position of honor and were favored by the emperor, and their fathers, adopted sons, and brothers were scattered in every state and county, competing like tigers and wolves to devour the little people, that Zhu Mu was able to extend the national law, patch up the broken legal framework, and punish the cruel and evil-doers, in accordance with the will of heaven.

古文：由是内官咸共恚疾，谤讟烦兴，谗隙仍作，极其刑谪，输作左校。
现代文：因此，宦官们对他都很痛恨，非议和责难四起，谗言接踵而来，使他遭受刑罚，被送到左校营罚作苦役。
English: As a result, the officials hated him to death, slandered him, annoyed him, criticized him, punished him severely, and expelled him from the school.

古文：天下有识，皆以穆同勤禹、稷而被共、鲧之戾，若死者有知，则唐帝怒于崇山，重华忿于苍墓矣！
现代文：天下的有识之士，都认为朱穆勤于王事，如同禹和后稷，却与共工和鲧一样，遭到惩罚，如果死了的人仍有知觉，则唐尧帝将会在崇山坟墓里发怒，虞舜帝也会在苍梧坟墓里忿恨。
English: People with insight all over the world believe that Zhu Mu was diligent in royal affairs, just like Yu and Houyi, but he was punished just like his co-workers and followers. If the dead person is still conscious, then Emperor Tang will be angry in the tomb of Chongshan, and Emperor Guo will also be angry in the tomb of Gorgou.

古文：当今中官近习，窃持国柄，手握王爵，口衔天宪，运赏则使饿隶富于季孙，呼噏则令伊、颜化为桀、跖；而穆独亢然不顾身害，非恶荣而好辱，恶生而好死也，徒感王纲之不摄，惧天网之久失，故竭心怀忧，为上深计。
现代文：当今，宦官等皇帝左右的亲信，窃据和把持着国家的权力，手中掌握着生杀予夺大权，他们说的话，就等于是皇帝的旨意，行赏时可使快要饿死的奴隶变得比季孙还要富有，不高兴时，也可将将伊尹、颜渊顷刻化作桀和盗跖。然而朱穆却昂然而出，奋不顾身，并不是因为他憎恶荣耀而喜爱羞辱，憎恶生命而喜爱死亡，只是因为他深感朝廷的纲纪不振，畏惧国家法令长久丧失，所以竭尽忠心，报答国家，为皇上深谋远虑。
English: Today, eunuchs and other cronies around the emperor are stealing and holding the power of the country, holding life and death in their hands to seize power. What they say is tantamount to the emperor's will. When they reward, they can make the slaves who are about to starve to death even richer than the descendants. When they are not happy, they can also turn Yi Yin and Yan Yuan into thieves and robbers. However, Zhu Mu is outspoken and selfless, not because he hates glory and loves humiliation, hates life and loves death, but because he deeply feels that the discipline of the court is weak and fears the long-term loss of national laws and regulations, so he

古文：臣愿黥首系趾，代穆校作。 
现代文：我们愿意接受黥刑，在脸上刺字，脚戴铁镣，代替朱穆去服苦役。 
English: The vassal is willing to accept the punishment of the dagger toe, instead of Zhu Mu.

古文：帝览其奏，乃赦之。
现代文：桓帝看到他们的奏章后，于是，下令赦免朱穆。
English: After Emperor Kuan saw their performance, he ordered to pardon Zhu Mu.

古文：冬，十月，太尉袁汤免，以太常胡广为太尉。
现代文：冬季，十月，太尉袁汤被免官，擢升太常胡广为太尉。
English: In the winter, in October, First Lieutenant Yuan Tang was dismissed and promoted to Second Lieutenant.

古文：司徒吴雄、司空赵戒免。以太仆黄琼为司徒，光禄勋房植为司空。
现代文：司徒吴雄和司空赵戒，均被免官，擢升太仆黄琼为司徒，擢升光禄勋房植为司空。
English: Wuxiong, the tutor, and Zhao Jie, the tutor, were both removed from their posts, and Huang Qiong, the eunuch, was promoted to tutor, and Guanglu Xunfang was promoted to tutor.

古文：武陵蛮詹山等反，武陵太守汝南应奉招降之。
现代文：武陵蛮人首领詹山等起兵反叛，武陵郡太守汝南郡人应奉招抚他们归降。
English: The leader of the barbarians in Wuling, Zhan Shan, and others raised an army and rebelled. The people of Wuling County and the governor of Runan County should encourage them to surrender.

古文：车师后部王阿罗多与戊部候严皓不相得，忿戾而反，攻围屯田，杀伤吏士。
现代文：车师后王国国王阿罗多，和戊部候严皓不投合，阿罗多因愤怒而起兵反叛，攻打和包围屯田，杀伤将吏和士卒。
English: The king of the kingdom, Arrodo, who was a chariot driver, did not get along well with the eunuchs, and Arrodo rebelled in anger, attacking and encircling Tonden, killing and wounding officers and soldiers.

古文：后部侯炭遮领馀民畔阿罗多，诣汉吏降。
现代文：后部侯炭遮率领其余的百姓背叛了阿罗多，向汉朝的官吏归降。
English: Houqianqia in the rear led the rest of the people to betray Arodo and surrender to the officials of the Han Dynasty.

古文：阿罗多迫急，从百馀骑亡入北匈奴。
现代文：阿罗多处于危急之中，被迫率领一百余骑兵投奔北匈奴。
English: Arodo was in a critical situation and was forced to lead more than a hundred cavalry to the North Huns.

古文：敦煌太守宋亮上立后部故王军就质子卑君为王。
现代文：敦煌太守宋亮上奏朝廷，请求批准封立后王国以前的国王军就送到汉朝当人质的儿子卑君为王。
English: Song Liang, the governor of Dunhuang, appealed to the imperial court, requesting approval. After the establishment of the kingdom, the king's army was sent to the Han Dynasty, and the son of the hostage, Bijun, became the king.

古文：后阿罗多复从匈奴中还，与卑君争国，颇收其国人。
现代文：后来，阿罗多又从北匈奴返回，和卑君争夺王位，得到不少国人的归附。
English: Later, Arodo returned from the Huns and fought with the petty princes for the country, gathering a lot of people.

古文：戊校尉阎详虑其招引北虏，将乱西域，乃开信告示，许复为王；阿罗多及诣详降。
现代文：戊校尉严详担心阿罗多招引北匈奴，扰乱西域，就开诚布公地晓告阿罗多，允许他重新为王。阿罗多便向严详归降。
English: Captain Wu, fearing that Aroldo would attract the northern Huns and disrupt the western region, openly told Aroldo and allowed him to become king again. Aroldo then surrendered to Aroldo.

古文：于是更立阿罗多为王，将卑君还敦煌，以后部人三百帐与之。
现代文：于是，改立阿罗多为后王国国王，而将卑君护送回敦煌，将后王国三百个帐篷的民户交给他管辖。
English: As a result, Arodo was reinstated as the king of the Later Kingdom, while the lowly prince was escorted back to Dunhuang, and the three hundred tents of the Later Kingdom were handed over to his jurisdiction.

古文：孝质皇帝永兴二年
现代文：永兴二年
English: Yongxing two years later

古文：春，正月，甲午，赦天下。
现代文：春季，正月甲午，大赦天下。
English: Spring, the first day of the month at noon, the general amnesty.

古文：二月，辛丑，复听刺史、二千石行三年丧。
现代文：二月辛丑，恢复许可刺史和官秩二千石以上的高级官吏为父母守丧三年的制度。
English: In February, the government reinstated a three-year mourning period for the parents of high-ranking officials with more than 2,000 koku of official rank.

古文：癸卯，京师地震。
现代文：癸卯，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: On the 28th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：夏，蝗。
现代文：夏季，发生蝗灾。
English: In summer, locust plagues occur.

古文：东海朐山崩。
现代文：东海朐山发生山崩。
English: A landslide occurred in Lushan, East China Sea.

古文：乙卯，封乳母马惠子初为列候。
现代文：乙卯，桓帝封乳母马惠的儿子马初为列侯。
English: Second, Ma Hui, the son of Emperor Kan's wet nurse Ma Hui, became a vassal lord.

古文：秋，九月，丁卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，九月丁卯朔，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in September, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：太尉胡广免；以司徒黄琼为太尉。
现代文：太尉胡广被免官，任命司徒黄琼为太尉。
English: Captain Hu Guang was removed from his post, and Sitou Huang Qiong was appointed captain.

古文：闰月，以光禄勋尹颂为司徒。
现代文：闰九月，擢升光禄勋尹颂为司徒。
English: In September, he was promoted to the rank of Sutor by Emperor Guanglu.

古文：冬，十一月，甲辰，帝校猎上林苑，遂至函谷关。
现代文：冬季，十一月甲辰，桓帝前往上林苑打猎，随后到函谷关。
English: In winter, at the first hour of November, Emperor Huan went to Shanglin Court to hunt, and then to Hakodate.

古文：泰山、琅邪贼公孙举、东郭窦等反，杀长吏。
现代文：泰山郡、琅邪郡贼帅公孙举、东郭窦等起兵叛，杀害地方官吏。
English: In Taishan County and Suye County, the bandits Shuai Gongsunju and Dongguo Dou mutinied and killed local officials.

古文：孝质皇帝永寿元年
现代文：永寿元年
English: The first year of eternal life

古文：春，正月，戊申，赦天下，改元。
现代文：春季，正月戊申，大赦天下。改年号。
English: Spring, the first month of Boshin, the world is amnestied. The new year begins.

古文：二月，司隶、冀州饥，人相食。
现代文：二月，司隶、冀州发生饥荒，出现人吃人的现象。
English: In February, Sili and Jizhou suffered from famine, and people were eating each other.

古文：太学生刘陶上疏陈事曰： 夫天之与帝，帝之与民，犹头之与足，相须而行也。
现代文：太学生刘陶上书评论政事说： 上天和皇帝之间，皇帝和人民之间，犹如头和脚的关系，必须互相配合才行。
English: Commenting on political affairs, the student Liu Tao wrote: "Between heaven and the emperor, and between the emperor and the people, is like the relationship between the head and the feet. They must cooperate with each other.

古文：陛下目不视鸣条之事，耳不闻檀车之声，天灾不有痛于肌肤，震食不即损于圣体，故蔑三光之谬，轻上天之怒。
现代文：陛下的眼睛没有看见过鸣条战争的情况，耳朵没有听见过战车厮杀的声音。天灾并没有伤害到陛下的肌肉和皮肤，地震和日食也没有损毁陛下的身体；所以，陛下轻视日月星辰的变异，也不在乎上天的发怒。
English: His Majesty's eyes have not seen the conditions of war, his ears have not heard the sounds of chariots, natural disasters have not hurt His Majesty's muscles and skin, earthquakes and solar eclipses have not damaged His Majesty's body; therefore, His Majesty despises the variation of the sun, moon and stars, and does not care about the wrath of heaven.

古文：伏念高祖之起，始自布衣，合散扶伤，克成帝业，勤亦至矣；流福遗祚，至于陛下。
现代文：我想到高祖当初起事时，原是一个平民，集结流散之人，救死扶伤，才得以完成帝王大业，其艰苦勤劳已到极点。福禄和帝位，一代接一代地流传下来，直到陛下。
English: I thought of the time when Gaozu first rose up, he was originally a commoner, and he was able to complete the emperor's great cause only by rallying the scattered people, saving lives and helping the injured. His hard work has come to the extreme. Fortune and the imperial throne have been passed down from generation to generation until His Majesty.

古文：陛下既不能增明烈考之轨，而忽高祖之勤，妄假利器，委授国柄，使群丑刑隶，芟刈小民，虎豹窟于鏖场，豺狼乳于春囿，货殖者为穷冤之魂，贫馁者作饥寒之鬼，死者悲于窀穸，生者戚于朝野，是愚臣所为咨嗟长怀叹息者也！
现代文：陛下既不能为祖先创立的法制增添光彩，而又辜负高祖的千辛万苦，随便地将刑赏和兵权给予人家，把国家权力委付他人，致使一群丑恶的宦官宰割小民，如同虎豹在幼鹿场中挖洞，豺狼在春天的林园中生下幼崽。富人惨死于严刑酷法，成为冤魂，穷人死于饥饿和寒冷，成为冻馁之鬼。已死的人在长夜中悲鸣，活着的人无论在朝、在野，无不愁苦，这就是我所以长怀叹息的原因。
English: His Majesty could neither add luster to the legal system founded by his ancestors, nor live up to the hardships of his great-grandfathers. He freely gave rewards and military power to others, entrusted state power to others, and caused a group of ugly eunuchs to slaughter commoners, like a tiger and a leopard digging a hole in a young deer field, or a jackal giving birth to cubs in a spring forest. The rich people died miserably from the harsh criminal law and became ghosts, and the poor people died of hunger and cold and became the ghosts of frostbite. The dead people mourned in the long night, and the living people, whether in the court or in the

古文：且秦之将亡，正谏者诛，谀进者赏，嘉言结于忠舌，国命出于谗口，擅阎乐于咸阳，授赵高以车府，权去己而不知，威离身而不顾。
现代文：而且，秦王朝将要灭亡时，直言进谏的人遭到诛杀，阿谀奉承的人得到封赏，规劝的忠言被堵塞，国家的政令，出于奸佞之口，纵容阎乐在京都咸阳横行，任命赵高为中车府令，权力离开自己而不知，威严已经丧失而不顾。
English: Moreover, when the Qin Dynasty was about to fall, those who were outspoken were killed, those who were sycophantic were rewarded, those who exhorted were blocked, and the state's decrees, out of the mouths of traitors, allowed evil to run rampant in Xianyang, Kyoto, and appointed Zhao Gao as the commander of the Middle Chariot. They did not know their power had been taken away from them, and they did not care that their dignity had been lost.

古文：古今一揆，成败同势，愿陛下远览强秦之倾，近察哀、平之变，得失昭然，祸福可见。
现代文：古往今来，成功和失败的情势都是一样的。希望陛下远观强大的秦王朝倾覆的往事，近察哀帝、平帝时期的政局变乱，得失祸福将看得非常清楚。
English: From ancient times to the present, the circumstances of success and failure are the same. I hope that His Majesty will look far and wide at the past events of the overthrow of the powerful Qin Dynasty, closely observe the political turmoil during the reigns of Empress Dowager Cixi and Emperor Ping, and see the misfortunes and blessings very clearly.

古文：臣又闻危非仁不扶，乱非智不救。
现代文：我又听说，危难时没有仁爱之心就不能扶持，变乱时没有智慧之人就不能拯救。
English: Moreover, I have heard that he who is not merciful in time of trouble will not be helped, and he who is not wise in time of danger will not be saved.

古文：窃见故冀州刺史南阳硃穆、前乌桓校尉臣同郡李膺，皆履正清平，贞高绝俗，斯实中兴之良佐，国家之柱臣也，宜还本朝，挟辅王室。
现代文：我个人认为，前冀州刺史、南阳人朱穆，前乌桓校尉、我的同郡人李膺，都遵行正道，清廉公平，忠贞高尚，与众不同，他们真正是中兴的优良辅佐，国家的栋梁之臣，应该将他们召回朝廷任职，共同辅佐陛下。
English: I personally believe that the former Jizhou governor, the Nanyang resident Zhu Mu, the former Wuhuan captain, and my compatriot Li Yan, all follow the right path, are honest and fair, loyal and noble, and are different from others. They are truly excellent assistants of ZTE and pillars of the country. They should be recalled to the imperial court to serve and jointly assist His Majesty.

古文：臣敢吐不时之义于讳言之朝，犹冰霜见日，必至消灭。臣始悲天下之可悲，今天下亦悲臣之愚惑也。 
现代文：我胆敢在忌讳讲真话的朝廷，说出不合时宜的道理，犹如冰霜见到太阳，一定会被消灭；我刚刚为天下人的可悲而感到悲伤，现在天下人也要为我的愚昧困惑而悲伤。 
English: I dared to speak an untimely truth at the imperial court, where it was taboo to speak the truth, and I was as sure to be eliminated as ice is to see the sun; I had just been saddened by the world's woe, and now the world was also saddened by my ignorance and confusion.

古文：书奏，不省。
现代文：奏章呈上去后，桓帝没有理会。
English: The book went up and was not accepted.

古文：夏，南阳大水。
现代文：夏季，南阳郡发生大水灾。
English: In the summer, a major flood occurred in Nanyang County.

古文：司空房植免；以太常韩縯为司空。
现代文：司空房植被免官；擢升太常韩为司空。
English: Deputy Minister of Housing and Urban-Rural Development is relieved of his duties; Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs is promoted.

古文：巴郡、益州郡山崩。
现代文：巴郡和益州郡，发生山崩。
English: The landslides occurred in Ba County and Yizhou County.

古文：秋，南匈奴左薁鞬台耆、且渠伯德等反，寇美稷；东羌复举种应之。
现代文：秋季，南匈奴左台耆、且渠伯德等起兵反叛，攻打美稷，东羌诸种全体起来响应。
English: In autumn, the Southern Xiongnu, the Left Taiping, and the Qiu Baode and others rebelled and attacked the United Provinces, and the Eastern Provinces all rose up in response.

古文：安定属国都尉敦煌张奂初到职，壁中唯有二百许人，闻之，即勒兵而出；军吏以为力不敌，叩头争止之。
现代文：安定属国都尉、敦煌郡人张奂刚刚到任，军垒中只有二百余人，得到消息后，他立即率军出击，军营中的属吏都认为无法抵挡，跪下来叩头劝阻，但张奂不听。
English: Zhang Jun, the captain of the Anding vassal state and a native of Dunhuang County, had just arrived at his post. There were only more than 200 people in the military base. After receiving the news, he immediately led the army to attack. The officials in the military camp all thought that they could not resist, and kneeled down and kowtowed to dissuade, but Zhang Jun did not listen.

古文：奂不听，遂进屯长城，收集兵士，遣将王卫招诱东羌，因据龟兹县，使南匈奴不得交通。
现代文：于是，进兵屯守长城要塞，征集兵士，派部将王卫招诱东羌诸种降服，因而得以进据龟兹县，使南匈奴和东羌诸种之间不能来往。
English: As a result, the marching soldiers garrisoned the Great Wall fortress, recruited soldiers, and sent Wang Wei to entice the Eastern Han to surrender, thus being able to enter Kuez County, so that the Southern Huns and the Eastern Han could not come and go.

古文：东羌诸豪遂相率与奂共击薁鞬等，破之。
现代文：于是，东羌诸种豪帅相继和张奂共同进击左等，将其击破。
English: As a result, various great generals of the Eastern Wei Dynasty and Zhang Ye jointly attacked the left wing and broke it.

古文：伯德惶恐，将其众降，郡界以宁。
现代文：且渠伯德感到非常惶恐，率领部众投降，郡境内得到安宁。
English: Terrified, Byrd and his men surrendered, and the county was pacified.

古文：羌豪遗奂马二十匹，金鐻八枚。
现代文：东羌诸种豪帅赠送给张奂战马二十匹，金耳环八枚。
English: Zhang Ye was presented with 20 warhorses and eight gold earrings by various heroes of the Eastern Wei Dynasty.

古文：奂于诸羌前以酒酹地曰： 使马如羊，不以入厩；使金如粟，不以入怀。 
现代文：张奂在诸种豪帅面前，用酒洒地，发誓说： 即使赠送的马匹像羊群，我也绝不能牵入马棚；即使黄金像粟米，我也绝不能装进自己的腰包。 
English: In front of all kinds of grandmasters, Zhang Ye spilled wine on the ground and swore: Even if the horses presented were like sheep, I would never take them into the stable; even if the gold was like corn, I would never put it into my pocket.

古文：悉以还之。
现代文：将它们全部退还。
English: Send them all back.

古文：前此八都尉率好财货，为羌所患苦；及奂正身洁己，无不悦服，威化大行。
现代文：在此之前，八任都尉大都贪图金钱和财物，使羌人感到愁苦。及至张奂继任，他端正自身，清廉克己，东羌人无不心悦诚服，政令和教化，推行无阻。
English: Prior to this, most of the eight captains were greedy for money and property, which made the Donglu people feel sad. And when Zhang Ye succeeded, he corrected himself, was honest and self-restrained, and the Donglu people were sincerely pleased, and the government orders and enlightenment were carried out without any obstacles.

古文：孝质皇帝永寿二年
现代文：永寿二年
English: Two years after his death

古文：春，三月，蜀郡属国夷反。
现代文：春季，三月，蜀郡属国的夷人起兵反叛。
English: In the spring, in March, the barbarians of Shu County rebelled.

古文：初，鲜卑檀石槐，勇健有智略，部落畏服，乃施法禁，平曲直，无敢犯者，遂推以为大人。
现代文：起初，鲜卑人檀石槐勇敢健壮，又有谋略，在部落中深受众人的敬畏和信服。檀石槐制定法令，审理诉讼，没有人敢违犯，于是被推举为部落的首领。
English: In the beginning, Dangshizhen, a humble man, was brave and strong, and had a strategy. He was feared and believed by many in the tribe. Dangshizhen made decrees and heard lawsuits, and no one dared to violate them, so he was elected as the leader of the tribe.

古文：檀石槐立庭于弹汙山、歠仇水上，去高柳北三百馀里，兵马甚盛；东、西部大人皆归焉。
现代文：檀石槐在弹污山和仇水畔建立了王庭，位于高柳以北三百余里，兵强马壮，非常强盛；东部和西部的部落首领都向他归附。
English: Danshihong established a royal court on the banks of the Boiling Mud Mountain and Qiu Shui, located more than three hundred miles north of Gaoliu. He had a strong army and was very powerful; the leaders of the eastern and western tribes all joined him.

古文：因南抄缘边，北拒丁零，东却夫馀，西击乌孙，尽据匈奴故地，东西万四千馀里。
现代文：于是，鲜卑人在南方劫掠沿边各郡，北方抗拒丁零，东方击退夫余，西方进击乌孙，完全占领匈奴的故土，东西广达一万四千余里。
English: As a result, the Xianbei in the south plundered the counties along the border, the north resisted the Ding Zi, the east repelled the Xiong Yu, the west invaded the Wusun, and completely occupied the ancestral land of the Xiongnu, extending more than 14,000 miles from east to west.

古文：秋，七月，檀石槐寇云中。以故乌桓校尉李膺为度辽将军。
现代文：秋季，七月，檀石槐攻打云中郡，桓帝任命前任乌桓校尉李膺为度辽将军。
English: In the autumn, in July, Danshihong attacked Yunnan County, and Emperor Huan appointed Wuhuan's former lieutenant Li Jun as General Du Liao.

古文：膺到边，羌、胡皆望风畏服，先所掠男女，悉诣塞下送还之。
现代文：李膺到任以后，羌人和胡人都望风敬畏归服，把先前掠夺的男女俘虏全部送到塞下归还。
English: After Li Xuan took office, both the Xiongnu and the Hu people surrendered to the wind and returned all the male and female captives they had previously plundered.

古文：公孙举、东郭窦等聚众至三万人，寇青、兗、徐三州，破坏郡县。
现代文：公孙举、东郭窦等聚集部众达三万人，攻打青州、兖州、徐州，使三州所管辖下的郡县受到破坏。
English: Gongsunzhu, Dongguo Dou and other gathering areas of up to 30,000 people attacked Qingzhou, Zhangzhou and Xuzhou, causing damage to counties under the jurisdiction of the three states.

古文：连年讨之，不能克。
现代文：连年进行讨伐，都不能取胜。
English: After years of crusading, they can't win.

古文：尚书选能治剧者，以司徒掾颍川韩韶为嬴长。
现代文：尚书挑选能够处理繁重难办事务的官吏，将司徒掾、颍川人韩韶任命为嬴县县长。
English: Shangshu selected officials who could deal with heavy and difficult affairs, and appointed Sittu Yao and Han Yao, a native of Beichuan, as county governors of Beixian County.

古文：贼闻其贤，相戒不入嬴境。
现代文：盗贼听说他很贤能，互相告诫不进入嬴县境内。
English: The thieves heard that he was very capable and warned each other not to enter the territory of Handan County.

古文：馀县流民万馀户入县界，韶开仓赈之，主者争谓不可。
现代文：其他县的流民一万余户逃到嬴县，韩韶打开粮仓，进行赈济。主管粮仓的官吏反对，认为不能这样做。
English: More than 10,000 displaced households from other counties fled to Handan County, and Han Han opened grain silos to provide relief. The officials in charge of the grain silos objected, saying that this could not be done.

古文：韶曰： 长活沟壑之人，而以此伏罪，含笑入地矣。 
现代文：韩韶说： 救活了水沟和山谷里面的人，而因此被处死，我会含笑入地的。 
English: Han Wei said, "I will be smiling from ear to ear when I am executed for saving the lives of people in ditches and valleys.

古文：太守素知韶名德，竟无所坐。
现代文：泰山郡太守一向知道韩韶的名声和品德，竟然没有给他处罚。
English: Taishan County Governor Taishan County Governor Taishan County Governor Taishan County Governor Taishan County Governor Taishan County Governor Taishan County Governor Taishan County Governor Taishan County Governor Taishan County Governor

古文：韶与同郡荀淑、钟皓、陈寔皆尝为县长，所至以德政称，时人谓之 颍川四长 。
现代文：韩韶和同郡人荀淑、钟皓、陈，都曾经担任过县长，在他们任职的所在县，都以施行德政而著称，当时人们称他们为 颍川四长 。
English: Han Zheng and his fellow county members, Yan Shu, Zhong Zheng and Chen Ruo, had all served as county governors, and were known for their virtuous governance in the counties where they served. At that time, people called them the four governors of Luochuan.

古文：初，鲜卑寇辽东，属国都尉武威段颎率所领驰赴之。
现代文：起初，鲜卑攻打辽东郡，属国都尉段率领所统辖的军队驰马前去迎战。
English: At first, Xianbei attacked Liaodong County, and the provincial governor led the army under his jurisdiction to gallop to meet the battle.

古文：既而恐贼惊去，乃使驿骑诈赍玺书召颎，颎于道伪退，潜于还路设伏；虏以为信然，乃入追颎，颎因大纵兵，悉斩获之。
现代文：随后担心鲜卑惊恐逃走，于是，派驿骑假装送来皇帝诏书，征召段回京都洛阳。段在行军路上假装向后撤退，后又秘密返回原来的地方，设下埋伏。鲜卑信以为真，于是入境追击段，段因而纵兵大战，将鲜卑全部斩杀、俘虏。
English: Then, fearing that the Xianbei would flee in panic, they sent a rider pretending to deliver an imperial edict to summon the Xianbei back to Kyoto and Luoyang. The Xianbei pretended to retreat backwards on the marching route, and then secretly returned to the original place to set up an ambush. The Xianbei believed it to be true, so they pursued the Xianbei into the country. As a result, the Xianbei engaged in a fierce battle, killing and capturing all the Xianbei.

古文：坐诈为玺书，当伏重刑；以有功，论司寇；刑竟，拜议郎。
现代文：因段伪造诏书，应该判处死刑；但因讨伐鲜卑有功，判处两年徒刑；刑期满后，被任命为议郎。
English: He should have been sentenced to death for forging the imperial edict; however, he was sentenced to two years in prison for fighting against inferiority; after the completion of his sentence, he was appointed as a mediator.

古文：至是，诏以东方盗贼昌炽，令公卿选将帅有文武材者。
现代文：到了本年，桓帝下诏，因为东方盗贼昌獗，命三公九卿推荐文武双全的将帅人才。
English: In this year, Emperor Kuan issued an edict, because the Eastern thieves were rampant, ordering the three kings and nine nobles to recommend the talents of generals who were well versed in both literature and military arts.

古文：司徒尹颂荐颎，拜中郎将，击举、窦等，大破斩之，获首万馀级，馀党降散。
现代文：司徒尹颂推荐了段，段被任命为中郎将，于是率军进击公孙举、东郭窦等，取得大胜，斩杀了一万多人，余众有的归降，有的解散。
English: Sidu Yin Song recommended Duan, Duan was appointed as the middle-ranking general, so he led the army to attack Gongsunju, Dongguo Dou and so on, achieved a great victory, killed more than 10,000 people, and many others surrendered, and some disbanded.

古文：封颎为列侯。
现代文：封段为列侯。
English: The sealing section is a lordship.

古文：冬，十二月，京师地震。
现代文：冬季，十二月，发生地震。
English: In winter, in December, there was an earthquake.

古文：封梁不疑子马为颍阴侯，梁胤子桃为城父侯。
现代文：封梁不疑的儿子梁马为颍阴侯，梁胤的儿子梁桃为城父侯。
English: Liang Ma, the son of Liang Liang's undoubted son, was the lord of Jinyin, and Liang Tao, the son of Liang Tian, was the lord of Chengdu.

