古文：九年春，王正月。
现代文：九年春季，周历正月。
English: Spring of the ninth year, the first month of the lunar calendar.

古文：夏四月戊申，郑伯虿卒。
现代文：夏季四月戊申日，郑献公去世。
English: In the summer of April, on the Day of the Dead, Zheng Xiangong passed away.

古文：得宝玉、大弓。
现代文：阳虎送回宝玉、大弓。
English: Yanghu sent back the gems and the big bow.

古文：六月，葬郑献公。
现代文：六月，安葬郑献公。
English: In June, Zheng Xiangong was buried.

古文：秋，齐侯、卫侯次于五氏。
现代文：秋季，齐侯、卫侯在五氏驻扎军队。
English: In autumn, Qi Hou and Wei Hou stationed troops in Wujiang.

古文：秦伯卒。
现代文：秦伯去世。
English: Qin Bo passed away.

古文：冬，葬秦哀公。
现代文：冬季，安葬秦哀公。
English: In winter, Qin Aigong was buried.

古文：九年春，宋公使乐大心盟于晋，且逆乐祁之尸。
现代文：九年春季，宋景公派乐大心到晋国结盟，并且迎接乐祁的灵柩。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, Song Jinggong sent Le Daxin to Jin to form an alliance, and to receive Le Yao's coffin.

古文：辞，伪有疾。乃使向巢如晋盟，且逆子梁之尸。
现代文：乐大心推辞，假装有病，于是就派向巢去到晋国结盟，并且迎接乐祁的灵柩。
English: Le DaXin refused, pretending to be ill, so he sent XiangNu to Jin Province to form an alliance, and to receive LeYu's coffin.

古文：子明谓桐门右师出，曰： 吾犹衰绖，而子击钟，何也？ 
现代文：子明要乐大心出国迎接，说： 我还穿着丧服，而您却敲钟作乐，这是为什么？ 
English: "I'm still wearing mourning clothes, but you're ringing bells to make music. Why is that?

古文：右师曰： 丧不在此故也。 
现代文：乐大心说： 这是因为丧事不在这里。 
English: Le Da Xin said: This is because the funeral is not here.

古文：既而告人曰： 己衰绖而生子，余何故舍钟？ 
现代文：不久以后告诉别人说： 自己穿着丧服却生了孩子，我为什么不敲钟？ 
English: Soon after, she told someone: "I wore mourning clothes but gave birth to a child. Why didn't I ring the bell?"

古文：子明闻之怒，言于公曰： 右师将不利戴氏，不肯適晋，将作乱也。
现代文：子明听到了，发怒，对宋景公说： 乐大心将要不利于宋国。他不肯去晋国，是要准备发动叛乱。
English: When Ziming heard this, he became angry and said to Song Jinggong, "Le Dai Xin will be detrimental to Song. If he refuses to go to Jin, he is preparing to launch a rebellion."

古文：不然无疾。 
现代文：不是这样，为什么没病装病？ 
English: That's not true. Why didn't he feign illness?

古文：乃逐桐门右师。
现代文：于是就驱逐了乐大心。
English: So they banished Le Daxin.

古文：郑驷歂杀邓析，而用其竹刑。
现代文：郑国的驷歂杀了邓析，而又用邓析制订的《竹刑》。
English: Zheng Guo's henchmen killed Deng Xiaoping and used Deng Xiaoping's "Bamboo Torture" as the starting point.

古文：君子谓： 子然于是不忠。
现代文：君子认为驷歂在这件事情上不忠。
English: The nobles thought that Yao was being disloyal in this matter.

古文：苟有可以加于国家者，弃其邪可也。《静女》之三章，取彤管焉。
现代文：如果有人对国家有利，就可以不指责他的邪恶。《静女》这三章诗，是采取它的彤管。
English: If someone is good for the country, you can't accuse him of evil. These three chapters of the poem "Still Woman" are taken from it.

古文：《竿旄》 何以告之 ，取其忠也。
现代文：《竿旄》的 用什么来劝告他 ，是采取它的忠诚。
English: What "The Knot" advises him to do is to take its loyalties.

古文：故用其道，不弃其人。
现代文：所以采用了一个人的主张，就不责罚这个人。
English: So if you adopt someone's opinion, you don't punish that person.

古文：《诗》云： 蔽芾甘棠，勿翦勿伐，召伯所茇。 
现代文：《诗》说： 甘棠树高大而枝叶茂密，不要剪除，不要砍伐，召伯曾在这里听讼执法。 
English: "Poem" says: The sweet orange tree is tall and has thick branches and leaves. Do not cut it, do not chop it down. Zhao Bo once heard a lawsuit and enforced the law here.

古文：思其人犹爱其树，况用其道而不恤其人乎？
现代文：想念这个人，尚且爱护这棵树，何况用了他的主张，而不顾念这个人呢？
English: To miss this man, and yet to cherish this tree, how much more to use his advice, and not to think of this man?

古文：子然无以劝能矣。 
现代文：驷歂没有办法勉励贤能的人。 
English: There is no way to encourage the virtuous.

古文：夏，阳虎归宝玉、大弓。书曰 得 ，器用也。
现代文：夏季，阳虎送回宝玉、大弓，《春秋》记载说 得 ，因为它们是器物用具。
English: In the summer, the male tiger sends back the jewel and the big bow, which is recorded in "Spring and Autumn," because they are utensils.

古文：凡获器用曰得，得用焉曰获。
现代文：凡是获得器物用具叫做 得 ，用器物来获得生物，叫做 获 。
English: Obtaining utensils is called "getting," and using utensils to obtain creatures is called "getting."

古文：六月，伐阳关。阳虎使焚莱门。
现代文：六月，进攻阳关，阳虎派人焚烧了莱门。
English: In June, attacking Yangguan, Yanghu sent people to burn Laimen.

古文：师惊，犯之而出，奔齐，请师以伐鲁，曰： 三加必取之。 
现代文：鲁军惊恐，阳虎突围而逃亡到齐国，请求出兵去进攻鲁国，说： 进攻三次，一定能占取鲁国。 
English: The Lu army panicked, Yang Hu broke out of the encirclement and fled to Qi Province. He asked for troops to attack Lu Province, saying, "If you attack three times, you will surely be able to occupy Lu Province."

古文：齐侯将许之。
现代文：齐景公准备答应他。
English: Lord Qi Jing was ready to agree.

古文：鲍文子谏曰： 臣尝为隶于施氏矣。鲁未可取也。
现代文：鲍文子劝谏说： 下臣曾经在施氏那里做过家臣，鲁国是不能占取的。
English: Bao Wenzi advised him, "A vassal once served as a vassal to Shi, and Lu cannot be taken over.

古文：上下犹和，众庶犹睦，能事大国，而无天菑。若之何取之？
现代文：上下协调，百姓和睦，能够事奉大国而没有天灾，怎么能占取它？
English: Up and down coordination, people in harmony, able to serve the great country without natural disasters, how can we occupy it?

古文：阳虎欲勤齐师也，齐师罢，大臣必多死亡，己于是乎奋其诈谋。
现代文：阳虎想要劳动齐军，齐军困疲，大臣一定死亡很多，他自己就在这里施展阴谋。
English: Yanghu wants to labor Qi army, Qi army exhausted, the minister must have died a lot, he himself is here to carry out the conspiracy.

古文：夫阳虎有宠于季氏，而将杀季孙，以不利鲁国，而求容焉。
现代文：阳虎受到季氏的宠信，而准备杀死季氏，以不利于鲁国而讨好别人。
English: Yanghu was favored by the Ji clan, and prepared to kill the Ji clan to please others to the detriment of Lu.

古文：亲富不亲仁，君焉用之？
现代文：喜欢富有而不喜欢仁爱，君主哪里用得着他？
English: If a prince loves wealth more than love, of what use is he?

古文：君富于季氏，而大于鲁国，兹阳虎所欲倾覆也。
现代文：君王比季氏富有，而比鲁国强大，这就是阳虎所要颠覆的。
English: King Biji is rich, and the country of Biru is powerful. This is what Yang Hu wants to subvert.

古文：鲁免其疾，而君又收之，无乃害乎？ 
现代文：鲁国免除了他的祸害，而君王又收容他，恐怕也是祸害吧！ 
English: The state of Lu spared him the scourge, but the king took him in, and I'm afraid that's also a scourge!

古文：齐侯执阳虎，将东之。
现代文：齐景公逮捕了阳虎，准备把他囚禁在东部边境。
English: Qi Jing Gong arrested Yang Hu and prepared to imprison him on the eastern border.

古文：阳虎愿东，乃囚诸西鄙。
现代文：阳虎假装愿意到东部去，齐侯就把他囚禁在西部边境。
English: Yanghu pretended to be willing to go to the east, and Qi Hou imprisoned him on the western border.

古文：尽借邑人之车，锲其轴，麻约而归之。
现代文：阳虎把当地的车子全都借来，用刀子在车轴上刻得很深，缠上麻然后归还。
English: Yanghu borrowed all the local cars, carved deeply on the axle with a knife, wrapped them in hemp and then returned them.

古文：载葱灵，寝于其中而逃。
现代文：阳虎在车上装上衣物，躺在里边逃走。
English: Yanghu loaded clothes onto the car, lay down inside and fled.

古文：追而得之，囚于齐。
现代文：齐国人追上去抓住了他，囚禁在齐国都城。
English: The people of Qi chased and caught him and imprisoned him in the capital city of Qi.

古文：又以葱灵逃，奔宋，遂奔晋，適赵氏。
现代文：他又一次躺在装衣物的车子里逃走，逃亡到宋国，又逃到晋国，归顺赵氏。
English: Once again, he fled in a car loaded with clothes, fled to Song, fled to Jin, and surrendered to the Zhao.

古文：仲尼曰： 赵氏其世有乱乎。 
现代文：孔子说： 赵氏恐怕世世代代会有祸乱了吧！ 
English: Confucius said: I'm afraid that the Zhao clan will be plagued with misfortune for generations to come!

古文：秋，齐侯伐晋夷仪。
现代文：秋季，齐景公发兵攻打晋国的夷仪。
English: In the autumn, Qi Jingong sent troops to attack the Yi Dynasty in Jin Province.

古文：敝无存之父将室之，辞，以与其弟，曰： 此役也不死，反必娶于高、国。 
现代文：敝无存的父亲准备为他娶妻，他推辞，给了他兄弟，说： 这一回，如果不死，回来，一定要娶高氏、国氏的女子。 
English: His father, who is now dead, had planned to marry a wife for him, but he declined and gave it to his brother, saying, "This time, if you don't die and come back, you must marry a woman from the Gao and Guo clans."

古文：先登，求自门出，死于霤下。
现代文：抢先登上夷仪的城墙，又想从城门冲出去，死在城门的门檐下。
English: Rushing to be the first to climb the city wall of Iyi, he also wanted to rush out of the city gate and die under the gate's lintel.

古文：东郭书让登，犁弥从之，曰： 子让而左，我让而右，使登者绝而后下。 
现代文：东郭书抢先登上城墙，犁弥跟着他，说： 您抢着上去向左边，我抢着上去向右边，让登上城墙的人都来了再下去。 
English: Dong Guoshu scrambled to the top of the city wall first, and Gongyi followed him, saying: "You scramble up to the left, I'll scramble up to the right, and let those who climb the city wall come and go.

古文：书左，弥先下。
现代文：东郭书上城往左，犁弥先下了城。
English: Donggukshu went up the hill to the left, and Gongya went down the hill first.

古文：书与王猛息。猛曰： 我先登。 
现代文：战斗结束，东郭书和犁弥一起休息，犁弥说： 我先登上城墙。 
English: At the end of the battle, Dong Guo Shu and Gong Mi rested together. Gong Mi said: I will climb the city wall first.

古文：书敛甲曰： 曩者之难，今又难焉。 
现代文：东郭书收拾一下皮甲，说： 上一次使我为难，现在还要使我为难！ 
English: Dong Guo-shu put away his leather coat and said, "Last time I got into trouble, now I'll get into trouble again!"

古文：猛笑曰： 吾从子如骖之靳。 
现代文：犁弥笑着说： 我跟着您，好像骖马跟着服马走一样，哪能抢先？ 
English: Kimi said with a smile, "I'm following you, just like a horse follows its rider. Who will get there first?"

古文：晋车千乘在中牟。卫侯将如五氏，卜过之，龟焦。卫侯曰： 可也。卫车当其半，寡人当其半，敌矣。 
现代文：晋国的战车一千辆在中牟，卫灵公准备去五氏，占卜经过中牟如何，龟甲烤焦了，卫灵公说： 行了，卫国的战车相当于他们的一半，寡人也相当于他们一半，这就相等了。 
English: A thousand chariots from Jin were in Zhongmou, and Wei Linggong was getting ready to go to Wuji. After the divination, how did Zhongmou go? His tortoise shell was scorched, and Wei Linggong said, "Come on, the chariots of defending the country are equal to half of them, and a few people are equal to half of them, so it's equal."

古文：乃过中牟。
现代文：于是就经过中牟。
English: So I went through Nakamuro.

古文：中牟人欲伐之，卫褚师圃亡在中牟，曰： 卫虽小，其君在焉，未可胜也。
现代文：中牟人想要攻打他们，卫国的褚师圃逃亡到中牟，说： 卫国虽然小，他们的国君在那里，是不能战胜的。
English: The people of Zhongmou wanted to attack them, but Wei Guo's pupil fled to Zhongmou, saying: Although Wei Guo is small, their sovereign is there and cannot be defeated.

古文：齐师克城而骄，其帅又贱，遇，必败之，不如从齐。 
现代文：齐军攻下城邑就骄傲，他们的元帅又地位低贱，两军相遇，一定可以打败他们，不如向齐军挑战。 
English: When the Qi army captures a city, they are proud, but their marshal is low-ranking. When the two armies meet, they can surely defeat them. It is better to challenge the Qi army.

古文：乃伐齐师，败之。
现代文：于是就进攻齐军，打败了他们。
English: So he attacked the Qi army and defeated them.

古文：齐侯致禚、媚、杏于卫。
现代文：齐景公把禚地、媚地、杏地送给卫灵公。
English: Lord Qi Jing gave Lord Wei Ling the land of the dragonfly, the land of the charm and the land of the apricot.

古文：齐侯赏犁弥，犁弥辞曰： 有先登者，臣从之。晳帻而衣貍製。 公使视东郭书，曰： 乃夫子也，吾貺子。 
现代文：齐景公赏赐犁弥，犁弥辞谢，说： 有先登城墙的人，下臣跟着他，他戴着白色头巾，而披着猪皮斗篷 齐景公让他看看是不是东郭书，他说： 正是那一位先生，我把赏赐让给您。 
English: Lord Qi Jing gave the award to Jimi, and Jimi thanked him and said: There was a man who climbed the city wall first, and his vassals followed him. He wore a white turban and a pigskin cloak. Lord Qi Jing asked him to see if it was Dong Guo Shu, and he said: It is that gentleman, I will give the award to you.

古文：公赏东郭书，辞曰： 彼宾旅也。 
现代文：齐景公赏赐东郭书，东郭书辞谢，说： 他是客卿。 
English: Prince Qi Jing awarded Dong Guo Shu, and Dong Guo Shu made a speech of thanks, saying: He is a guest.

古文：乃赏犁弥。
现代文：于是就赏赐犁弥。
English: So he rewarded Katsuya.

古文：齐师之在夷仪也，齐侯谓夷仪人曰： 得敝无存者，以五家免。 
现代文：齐国军队在夷仪的时候，齐景公对夷仪人说： 得到敝无存的人，赏赐五户，免除劳役。 
English: When the Qi army was on the march to Yiyi, Qi Jinggong said to the Yiyi people: "Those who have no surviving family members will be rewarded with five households and exempted from labor service."

古文：乃得其尸。
现代文：于是就找到了他的尸体。
English: That's when they found his body.

古文：公三襚之；与之犀轩与直盖，而先归之；坐引者，以师哭之，亲推之三。
现代文：齐景公三次为尸体穿衣服，给他犀牛皮装饰的高贵车子和长柄伞作为殉葬品，而且先把尸体送回去。齐景公让拉车的人跪着行走，全军吊哭他，景公亲自推车三次。
English: King Qi Jing dressed the corpse three times, gave him a noble car decorated with rhinoceros hide and a long umbrella as a funerary gift, and sent the body back first. King Qi Jing let the driver walk on his knees, the whole army cried for him, and King Jing personally pushed the car three times.

