古文：秦之先，帝颛顼之苗裔孙曰女脩。
现代文：秦的祖先，是颛顼帝后代的孙女，名叫女修。
English: Qin's ancestor was the granddaughter of a descendant of Emperor Qian, named Niu Xiu.

古文：女脩织，玄鸟陨卵，女脩吞之，生子大业。
现代文：女修织布时，燕子掉下卵，女脩吞了，生下儿子大业。
English: While the woman was repairing and weaving, a swallow dropped an egg, which the woman swallowed and gave birth to her son, Daye.

古文：大业取少典之子，曰女华。
现代文：大业娶了少典部族的女儿，名叫女华。
English: Daye married a daughter of the Shoten tribe, named Nuwa.

古文：女华生大费，与禹平水土。
现代文：女华生下大费，大费辅助夏禹治理水土。
English: She spent a lot of money to help Xia Yu manage the soil and water.

古文：已成，帝锡玄圭。
现代文：治水成功后，舜帝为表彰禹的功劳，赐给他一块黑色的玉圭。
English: After the successful flood control, Emperor Qian gave Yu a piece of black gypsum in recognition of his service.

古文：禹受曰： 非予能成，亦大费为辅。 
现代文：禹接受了赏赐，说： 治水不是我一个人能完成的，也是因为有大费做助手。 舜帝说： 啊!
English: Accepting the award, Yu said, "Water control is not something I can accomplish alone, and it's also because I have to pay a lot of money to be an assistant.

古文：帝舜曰： 咨尔费，赞禹功，其赐尔皂游。
现代文：大费，你帮助禹治水成功!我赐你一副黑色的旌旗垂饰。
English: At great expense, you helped Yu succeed in controlling the water! I give you a pair of black pennants.

古文：尔后嗣将大出。 
现代文：你的后代将会兴旺昌盛。 
English: Your descendants will prosper.

古文：乃妻之姚姓之玉女。
现代文：因此把姚姓的美女赐予他为妻。
English: Therefore, he gave the beautiful girl surnamed Yao to his wife.

古文：大费拜受，佐舜调驯鸟兽，鸟兽多驯服，是为柏翳。
现代文：大费行拜礼接受了赏赐，帮助舜驯养鸟兽，鸟兽多被驯服，这个人就是柏翳。
English: He went to great lengths to worship and received a reward for helping the stork to tame birds and beasts. Most of the birds and beasts were tamed, and this man was the stork.

古文：舜赐姓嬴氏。
现代文：舜赐姓为赢氏。
English: His given family name was Win.

古文：大费生子二人：一曰大廉，实鸟俗氏；二曰若木，实费氏。
现代文：大费生有两个儿子：一个叫大廉，即鸟俗氏的先祖；另一个叫若木，即费氏的先祖。
English: Da Fei Sheng had two sons: one was named Dalian, the ancestor of the Toroshu clan; the other was named Ruoqi, the ancestor of the Fei clan.

古文：其玄孙曰费昌，子孙或在中国，或在夷狄。
现代文：若木的玄孙叫费昌，他的子孙有些住在中原地区，有些住在夷狄。
English: Wakaki's great-great-grandson is named Feichang. Some of his grandchildren live in the Central Plains, while others live in Yidi.

古文：费昌当夏桀之时，去夏归商，为汤御，以败桀于鸣条。
现代文：费昌生当夏桀之时，他离开夏国，投奔商，为商汤驾车，在鸣条打败了夏桀。
English: When Fei Chang Sheng was Xia Yao, he left Xia Guo, went to Shang, drove for Shang Tang, and defeated Xia Yao in Mingtang.

古文：大廉玄孙曰孟戏、中衍，鸟身人言。
现代文：大廉的玄孙叫孟戏、中衍，中衍长得像鸟，能言人语。
English: The great-great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson of the great-grandson

古文：帝太戊闻而卜之使御，吉，遂致使御而妻之。
现代文：帝太戊听说，便让人占卜，结果说让他为自己驾车吉利，于是把他请来驾车，并且为他娶妻。
English: When Emperor Taewu heard about this, he had someone do a divination, and the result was that it was good luck to have him drive the car, so he invited him to drive the car and married him.

古文：自太戊以下，中衍之后，遂世有功，以佐殷国，故嬴姓多显，遂为诸侯。
现代文：从太戊以来，中衍的后代，世世辅佐殷国有功，所以赢姓中有不少显名于世，于是成为诸侯。
English: Since Taewu, the descendants of Zhongyan have made great contributions to the country, so there are many famous surnames in the world, so they became princes.

古文：其玄孙曰中潏，在西戎，保西垂。
现代文：中衍的玄孙叫中潏，住在西戎地区，保卫西垂。
English: Zhong Yan's great-great-grandson is called Zhong Yao, who lives in the Xijun area and defends Xiduli.

古文：生蜚廉。
现代文：中潏生了蜚廉。
English: The middle twin was born with a cleft palate.

古文：蜚廉生恶来。
现代文：蜚廉生了恶来。
English: Zou Lian was born evil.

古文：恶来有力，蜚廉善走，父子俱以材力事殷纣。
现代文：恶来力气很大，蜚廉善奔跑，父子都凭勇力臣事奉殷纣王。
English: Evil comes with great strength, the virtuous run well, and both father and son serve the king of Yin and Yang by virtue of their courage.

古文：周武王之伐纣，并杀恶来。
现代文：周武王伐纣，把恶来一起杀死。
English: Zhou Wu Wang felled the dragonfly and killed the evil together.

古文：是时蜚廉为纣石北方，还，无所报，为坛霍太山而报，得石棺，铭曰 帝令处父不与殷乱，赐尔石棺以华氏 。
现代文：蜚廉为纣出使北方，回来时，因纣已死，没有地方禀报，就在霍太山筑起祭坛向纣王报告，祭祀时获得一幅石棺，其铭文说： 上天使处父幸免于殷亡之乱，赐给你石棺以光耀氏族。 
English: When he returned, he built an altar on Mount Huotai to report to King Yao. During the sacrifice, he received a sarcophagus with an inscription that said, "God's guardian angel was spared from the chaos of death and gave you this sarcophagus to glorify your clan."

古文：死，遂葬于霍太山。
现代文：蜚廉死后便葬于霍太山。
English: He was buried in Mount Huotai after his death.

古文：蜚廉复有子曰季胜。
现代文：蜚廉还有一个儿子叫季胜。
English: Yao Lian also has a son named Ji Sheng.

古文：季胜生孟增。
现代文：季胜生了孟增。
English: Ji Sheng gave birth to Meng Zeng.

古文：孟增幸于周成王，是为宅皋狼。
现代文：孟增受到周成王的宠幸，被分封于皋狼。
English: Meng Zeng was favored by King Zhou and was assigned to the Wolf Clan.

古文：皋狼生衡父，衡父生造父。
现代文：孟增生了衡父。衡父生了造父。
English: Meng Zeng gave birth to Heng father. Heng father gave birth to Zou father.

古文：造父以善御幸于周缪王，得骥、温骊、骅骝、騄耳之驷，西巡狩，乐而忘归。
现代文：造父因善于驾车得到周缪王的宠幸，周缪王获得名叫赤骥、盗骊、骅骝、騄耳等驾车的骏马，驾车到西方巡视，乐而忘返。
English: Zou Miao's father was favored by King Zhou Miao because he was good at driving. King Zhou Miao was given a driving horse named Red Horse, Thief Horse, Dragonfly, Earwig, and so on. He drove to the west to inspect, and he was happy and forgot to return.

古文：徐偃王作乱，造父为缪王御，长驱归周，一日千里以救乱。
现代文：徐偃王作乱，造父为缪王驾车，长驱疾驰，一日千里，赶回周地来平定叛乱。
English: King Xu Bei caused a riot, and his father, King Mui, drove the car, driving thousands of miles a day, and rushed back to Zhou to quell the rebellion.

古文：缪王以赵城封造父，造父族由此为赵氏。
现代文：缪王把赵城封给造父，造父一族从此称为赵氏。
English: King Mu gave Zhao Chengfeng to the founding father, and the founding father's family was henceforth known as the Zhao clan.

古文：自蜚廉生季胜已下五世至造父，别居赵。
现代文：从蜚廉生季胜传五世到造父，开始另外住在赵城。
English: From the fifth generation to the founding father, he began to live in Zhaocheng.

古文：赵衰其后也。
现代文：赵衰就是他的后代。
English: Zhao Zhen is his descendant.

古文：恶来革者，蜚廉子也，蚤死。
现代文：恶来革是蜚廉的儿子，早死。
English: Ill-fated is the son of ill-fated, early death.

古文：有子曰女防。
现代文：他有儿子叫女防。
English: He has a son named Madoka.

古文：女防生旁皋，旁皋生太几，太几生大骆，大骆生非子。
现代文：女防生旁皋，旁皋生太几，太几生大骆，大骆生非子。
English: Female birth control pills, birth control pills, birth control pills, birth control pills, birth control pills.

古文：以造父之宠，皆蒙赵城，姓赵氏。
现代文：他们都因造父所受之宠，蒙恩住在赵城姓赵。
English: They all live in Zhaocheng, surnamed Zhao, because they were favored by their father.

古文：非子居犬丘，好马及畜，善养息之。
现代文：非子居住在犬丘，喜爱马和其他牲口，并善于饲养繁殖。
English: Fizi lives in the dog hill, loves horses and other animals, and is good at breeding.

古文：犬丘人言之周孝王，孝王召使主马于汧渭之闲，马大蕃息。
现代文：犬丘的人把这事告诉了周孝王，孝王召见非子，让他在汧河、渭河之间管理马匹。
English: The people of Inukucho told this to King Zhou Xiao Wang. King Xiao Wang summoned Fizi and asked him to manage the horses between the Minhe River and the Minhe River.

古文：孝王欲以为大骆适嗣。
现代文：马匹大量繁殖。孝王想让非子做大骆的继承人。
English: Horses are bred in large numbers. Prince Xiaowang wants his son to be the heir to the Great Luo.

古文：申侯之女为大骆妻，生子成为适。
现代文：申侯的女儿是大骆的妻子，生了儿子成，成做了继承人。
English: Shen Hou's daughter was the wife of Daluo and gave birth to a son, Cheng, who became the heir.

古文：申侯乃言孝王曰： 昔我先郦山之女，为戎胥轩妻，生中潏，以亲故归周，保西垂，西垂以其故和睦。
现代文：申侯就对孝王说： 从前我的祖先是郦山那儿的女儿，她做了西戎族仲衍的曾孙胥轩的妻子，生了中潏，因为与周相亲而归附周朝，守卫西部边境，西部边境因此和睦太平。
English: Shen Hou said to Xiao Wang: Once upon a time, my ancestor was the daughter of Lushan. She became the wife of Shuxuan, the great-grandson of Zhongyan of the Xi Rong people, and gave birth to Zhong Xuan. Because she was related to Zhou, she belonged to the Zhou Dynasty and guarded the western border. As a result, the western border was peaceful and harmonious.

古文：今我复与大骆妻，生适子成。
现代文：现在我又把女儿嫁给大骆为妻，生下成作继承人。
English: Now I have married my daughter to Oroku and given birth to an heir.

古文：申骆重婚，西戎皆服，所以为王。
现代文：申侯与大骆再次联姻，西戎族都归顺，这样，您才得以称王。
English: Shen Hou and Da Luo married again, and the Xirong people all submitted, so that you could be crowned king.

古文：王其图之。 
现代文：希望您考虑一下吧。 
English: I hope you will think about it.

古文：于是孝王曰： 昔伯翳为舜主畜，畜多息，故有土，赐姓嬴。
现代文：于是孝王说： 从前伯翳为舜帝掌管牲畜，牲畜繁殖很多，所以获得土地的封赐，受赐姓嬴。
English: Then King Xiaowang said, "Formerly, the Hokkien Emperor Shun was in charge of livestock, and there was a lot of livestock breeding, so he was given the title of land and given the surname of Shun.

古文：今其后世亦为朕息马，朕其分土为附庸。 
现代文：现在他的后代也给我驯养繁殖马匹，我也分给他土地做附属国吧。 
English: Now his descendants also breed horses for me, and I will give him land to make a dependent country.

古文：邑之秦，使复续嬴氏祀，号曰秦嬴。
现代文：赐给他秦地作为封邑，让他接管嬴氏的祭祀，号称秦嬴。
English: He was given Qin territory as a fief, and allowed to take over the sacrificial rites of the Qin clan, known as Qin Yu.

古文：亦不废申侯之女子为骆适者，以和西戎。
现代文：但也不废除申侯女儿生的儿子做大骆的继承人，以此来与西戎和好。
English: However, he also did not abolish the son of the daughter of Shinhō to be the heir of Oroku, in order to make peace with Shion.

古文：秦嬴生秦侯。
现代文：秦赢生了秦侯。
English: Qin Yingwen gave birth to Qin Hou.

古文：秦侯立十年，卒。
现代文：秦侯在位十年去世。
English: Qin Hou died ten years into his reign.

古文：生公伯。
现代文：秦侯生了公伯。
English: Qin Hou gave birth to a granduncle.

古文：公伯立三年，卒。
现代文：公伯在位三年去世。
English: His uncle died three years into his reign.

古文：生秦仲。
现代文：公伯生了秦仲。
English: His uncle gave birth to Qin Zhong.

古文：秦仲立三年，周厉王无道，诸侯或叛之。
现代文：秦仲在位三年，周厉王无道，有些诸侯起来反叛。
English: Qin Zhong was on the throne for three years, Zhou Li Wang had no way out, and some lords rebelled.

古文：西戎反王室，灭犬丘大骆之族。
现代文：西戎也反叛王室，灭了住在犬丘的大骆之族。
English: Xi Rong also rebelled against the royal family and exterminated the Dai Luo tribe living in Inu Mound.

古文：周宣王即位，乃以秦仲为大夫，诛西戎。
现代文：周宣王登上王位之后，任用秦仲当大夫，讨伐西戎。
English: After Zhou Xuan Wang ascended the throne, he appointed Qin Zhong as a doctor to fight against Xi Rong.

古文：西戎杀秦仲。
现代文：西戎杀掉了秦仲。
English: Xi Rong killed Qin Zhong.

古文：秦仲立二十三年，死于戎。
现代文：秦仲即位为侯王二十三年，死在西戎手里。
English: Qin Zhong ascended to the throne as Hou Wang in 23 years, and died at the hands of Xi Rong.

古文：有子五人，其长者曰庄公。
现代文：秦仲有五个儿子，大儿子叫庄公。
English: Qin Zhong had five sons, the eldest of whom was named Zhuang Gong.

古文：周宣王乃召庄公昆弟五人，与兵七千人，使伐西戎，破之。
现代文：周宣王召见庄公兄弟五人，交给他们七千兵卒，命令他们讨伐西戎，把西戎打败了。
English: King Zhou Xuan summoned five of Zhuang Gong's brothers, gave them seven thousand soldiers, ordered them to fight against Xirong, and defeated Xirong.

古文：于是复予秦仲后，及其先大骆地犬丘并有之，为西垂大夫。
现代文：周宣王于是再次赏赐秦仲的子孙，包括他们的祖先大骆的封地犬丘在内，一并归他们所有，任命他们为西垂大夫。
English: King Zhou Xuan then once again rewarded the descendants of Qin Zhong, including their ancestors, including the fief of the Great Luo, which belonged to them all, and appointed them as Xitu doctors.

古文：庄公居其故西犬丘，生子三人，其长男世父。
现代文：庄公居住在大骆的故邑西犬丘，生有三个儿子，长子叫世父。
English: Zhuang Gong lived in Xiningqiu, the former town of Daluo. He had three sons, the eldest of whom was called Shifu.

古文：世父曰： 戎杀我大父仲，我非杀戎王则不敢入邑。 
现代文：世父说： 西戎杀死我的祖父秦仲，我不杀戎王绝不入城而居。 
English: The world's father said: Xi Rong killed my grandfather Qin Zhong. If I don't kill Rong Wang, I will never live in the city.

古文：遂将击戎，让其弟襄公。
现代文：于是率兵攻打西戎，把继承人的位置让给他的弟弟襄公。
English: So he led an army to attack Xi Rong, and gave the position of heir to his brother Xiang Gong.

古文：襄公为太子。
现代文：襄公因而立为太子。
English: Prince Xiang thus became crown prince.

古文：庄公立四十四年，卒，太子襄公代立。
现代文：庄公在位四十四年去世，太子襄公即位。
English: Prince Zhuang died forty-four years into his reign, and Prince Xiang ascended the throne.

古文：襄公元年，以女弟缪嬴为丰王妻。
现代文：襄公元年，襄公把妹妹缪赢嫁给丰王为妻。
English: In the year of Xiang, Xiang Gong married his sister Miao Win to Feng Wang.

古文：襄公二年，戎围犬丘，世父击之，为戎人所虏。
现代文：襄公二年，西戎围攻犬丘，世父迎击，最后被戎人俘虏。
English: In the second year of Xianggong, Xi Rong besieged Xiongqiu, Shifu counterattacked, and was finally captured by the Rong people.

古文：岁余，复归世父。
现代文：过了一年多，戎人又放回世父。
English: After more than a year, he was released back to his biological father.

古文：七年春，周幽王用褒姒废太子，立褒姒子为适，数欺诸侯，诸侯叛之。
现代文：七年春，周幽王立褒姒为后而废太子，改立褒姒之子为太子，并多次失信于诸侯，因而诸侯反叛。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, Zhou Yu Wang appointed Baojun as the deposed prince, and re-appointed Baojun's son as the prince, and repeatedly failed to trust the princes, so the princes rebelled.

古文：西戎犬戎与申侯伐周，杀幽王郦山下。
现代文：西戎的犬戎和申侯一起攻打周朝，在郦山下杀死了幽王。
English: Xi Rong's dog Rong and Shen Hou together attacked the Zhou Dynasty and killed Yu Wang at the foot of Lushan Mountain.

古文：而秦襄公将兵救周，战甚力，有功。
现代文：秦襄公率兵营救周朝，作战有力，立了战功。
English: Qin Xiangong led the soldiers to rescue the Zhou Dynasty, fought powerfully, and made great achievements in the war.

古文：周避犬戎难，东徙雒邑，襄公以兵送周平王。
现代文：周平王为躲避犬戎的骚扰，把都城向东迁到洛邑，襄公带兵护送了周平王。
English: King Zhou Ping, in order to escape the harassment of the dog Rong, moved the capital to the east to Luoyang. Prince Xiang took soldiers to escort King Zhou Ping.

古文：平王封襄公为诸侯，赐之岐以西之地。
现代文：周平王封襄公为诸侯，赐给他岐山以西的土地。
English: King Zhou Ping made Prince Xiang a vassal and gave him the land west of Qishan.

古文：曰： 戎无道，侵夺我岐、丰之地，秦能攻逐戎，即有其地。 
现代文：平王说： 西戎不讲道义，侵夺我岐山、丰水的土地，秦国如果能赶走西戎，西戎的土地就归秦国。 
English: King Hei said: Xi Rong is immoral and has invaded and seized our mountainous and water-rich land. If Qin can drive out Xi Rong, Xi Rong's land will be returned to Qin.

古文：与誓，封爵之。
现代文：平王与他立下誓约，赐给他封地，授给他爵位。
English: King Heian made an oath with him, gave him a fief, and conferred a peerage on him.

古文：襄公于是始国，与诸侯通使聘享之礼，乃用骝驹、黄牛、羝羊各三，祠上帝西畤。
现代文：襄公在这时才使秦国成为诸侯国，跟其他诸侯国互通使节，互致聘问献纳之礼。又用黑鬃赤身的小马、黄牛、公羊各三匹，在西畤祭祀天帝。
English: It was only at this time that Emperor Xiang made Qin a vassal state, and exchanged envoys with other vassal states, and made reciprocal requests for donations. He also used three black-haired, naked ponies, a yellow cow, and a male goat to worship the heavenly emperor in Xidi.

古文：十二年，伐戎而至岐，卒。
现代文：十二年，襄公伐西戎至岐，死。
English: In the twelfth year, Prince Xiang marched from Xi Rong to Qi and died.

古文：生文公。
现代文：生文公。
English: Fumiko was born.

古文：文公元年，居西垂宫。
现代文：文公元年，文公住在西垂宫。
English: In the year of Wen, Wen Gong lived in Xituli Palace.

古文：三年，文公以兵七百人东猎。
现代文：三年，文公率兵七百人到东边打猎。
English: In the third year, Wenkong led seven hundred soldiers to the east to hunt.

古文：四年，至汧渭之会。
现代文：四年，到达汧水、渭水交会处。
English: Four years later, it arrived at Surabaya, Surabaya, Surabaya.

古文：曰： 昔周邑我先秦嬴于此，后卒获为诸侯。 
现代文：文公说： 从前，周朝把这里赐给我的祖先秦嬴做封邑，后来我们终于成了诸侯。 
English: Wenguang said, "Once upon a time, the Zhou Dynasty gave this place to my ancestor Qin Hui as a fiefdom. Later, we finally became princes.

古文：乃卜居之，占曰吉，即营邑之。
现代文：于是卜居该地，占辞为吉，在这里营造起城邑。
English: As a result, he lived in this place and used divination for good luck, and built a town here.

古文：十年，初为鄜畤，用三牢。
现代文：十年，开始建造祭天地的鄜畤，用牛羊猪三种牲畜举行祭祀。
English: Ten years ago, they began to build a coffin for the sacrifice of heaven and earth, and held a sacrifice with three kinds of livestock, including cattle, sheep and pigs.

古文：十三年，初有史以纪事，民多化者。
现代文：十三年，开始设史官记载大事，百姓大多受到教化。
English: In the thirteenth year, a historian was set up to record important events, and most of the people were enlightened.

古文：十六年，文公以兵伐戎，戎败走。
现代文：十六年，文公率兵讨伐西戎，西戎败逃。
English: Sixteen years later, Wenkong led the troops to fight Si Rong, and Si Rong was defeated.

古文：于是文公遂收周余民有之，地至岐，岐以东献之周。
现代文：文公收罗留居当地的周人归自己统治，将领土扩大到岐，而把岐以东的土地献给周。
English: The Zhou people, who stayed in the local area, ruled themselves, expanding the territory to Qi and dedicating the land east of Qi to Zhou.

古文：十九年，得陈宝。
现代文：十九年，得到一块名叫 陈宝 的异石。
English: Nineteen years ago, he obtained a piece of exotic stone called Chen Bao.

古文：二十年，法初有三族之罪。
现代文：二十年，开始设立诛灭三族的刑罚。
English: Twenty years later, the punishment of annihilating the three ethnic groups began to be established.

古文：二十七年，伐南山大梓，丰大特。
现代文：二十七年，砍伐南山上的大梓树，梓树神变为公牛逃进了丰水。
English: In the twenty-seventh year, the big tree on the south mountain was cut down, and the tree god turned into a bull and fled into the abundant water.

古文：四十八年，文公太子卒，赐谥为竫公。
现代文：四十八年，文公的太子去世，赐谥为竫公。
English: In 48 A.D., the prince of Wengong died, and he was given the title of Wengong.

古文：竫公之长子为太子，是文公孙也。
现代文：竫公的长子立为太子，即文公的孙子。
English: The eldest son of Prince Shoko became the Crown Prince, i.e. the grandson of Prince Munko.

古文：五十年，文公卒，葬西山。
现代文：五十年，文公去世，葬于西山。
English: Fifty years later, Wengong passed away and was buried in Xishan.

古文：竫公子立，是为宁公。
现代文：竫公的儿子即位，这就是宁公。
English: Shoko's son ascends to the throne, and this is Ningko.

古文：宁公二年，公徙居平阳。
现代文：宁公二年，宁公迁都到平阳。
English: In the second year of Ning Gong, Ning Gong moved to Pingyang.

古文：遣兵伐荡社。
现代文：派遣军队征伐荡社。
English: Sending troops to subjugate swinging communities.

古文：三年，与亳战，亳王奔戎，遂灭荡社。
现代文：三年，与西戎的一支亳部落交战，亳王逃往戎地，于是灭了荡社。
English: Three years later, there was a war with a clan of warlocks in Sijon, and the king of the warlocks fled to Sijon, whereupon the warlocks were destroyed.

古文：四年，鲁公子翚弑其君隐公。
现代文：四年，鲁公子翬杀其国君隐公。
English: In four years, Lu Gongzi killed his sovereign, Hinkong.

古文：十二年，伐荡氏，取之。
现代文：十二年，宁公攻打荡氏，攻了下来。
English: In the twelfth year, Ning Gong attacked and defeated Mr. Swing.

古文：宁公生十岁立，立十二年卒，葬西山。
现代文：宁公从十岁开始登上王位，在位十二年去世，葬在西山。
English: Ning Gong ascended the throne at the age of ten. He died twelve years into his reign and was buried in the West Mountain.

古文：生子三人，长男武公为太子。武公弟德公，同母鲁姬子，生出子。
现代文：他生了三个儿子：长子武公为太子;武公的弟弟德公，与武公是同母兄弟;宁公之妾鲁姬子生了出子。
English: He had three sons: the eldest son, Wukong, became the crown prince; Wukong's younger brother, De Gong, was the same mother as Wukong; and Ninggong's concubine, Lukishi, gave birth to a son.

古文：宁公卒，大庶长弗忌、威垒、三父废太子而立出子为君。
现代文：宁公去世后，大庶长弗忌、威垒和三父废掉太子，拥立出子为君主。
English: After the death of Ninggong, the eldest son-in-law, Fu Boi, Wei Wei and the third father abolished the prince and established their son as the monarch.

古文：出子六年，三父等复共令人贼杀出子。
现代文：出子六年，三父等人又合伙派人谋杀出子。
English: Six years after the birth of the child, the three fathers and others jointly sent someone to murder the child.

古文：出子生五岁立，立六年卒。
现代文：出子出生五岁即位，在位六年被杀。
English: He ascended the throne at the age of five and was killed six years into his reign.

古文：三父等乃复立故太子武公。
现代文：故三父等人又立从前的太子武公为君。
English: The late three fathers and others also set up the former prince Takeharu as the ruler.

古文：武公元年，伐彭戏氏，至于华山下，居平阳封宫。
现代文：武公元年，征伐彭戏氏，直抵华山下。武公住在平阳封宫。
English: In the year of King Wu, the conquest of the Penghu clan reached as far as the foot of Mount Hua. King Wu lived in a palace in Pingyang.

古文：三年，诛三父等而夷三族，以其杀出子也。
现代文：三年，处死三父等人并灭了他们的三族，因为他们杀了出子。
English: In the third year they killed the three patriarchs and destroyed their three nations, because they had killed their son.

古文：郑高渠眯杀其君昭公。
现代文：郑国的高渠眯杀其君昭公。
English: Gao Qu of Zheng killed his cousin Zhao Gong.

古文：十年，伐邽、冀戎，初县之。十一年，初县杜、郑。
现代文：十年，攻打邽、冀戎两地的戎族，开始在那设县。
English: Ten years later, the Ezo people, who had been fighting in the two regions of Gifu and Hebei, began to set up a prefecture there.

古文：灭小虢。
现代文：十一年，开始在杜、郑两地设县，灭了小虢。
English: In the eleventh year, counties began to be set up in Du and Zheng, and small counties were eliminated.

古文：十三年，齐人管至父、连称等杀其君襄公而立公孙无知。
现代文：十三年，齐人管至父、连称等杀其国君襄公而立公孙无知为君。
English: In the thirteenth year of his reign, his father was assassinated by a group of people who claimed to have killed their country's sovereign, and his grandson, Ignorance, became the sovereign.

古文：晋灭霍、魏、耿。
现代文：晋国灭了霍、魏、耿三国。
English: Jin destroyed Ho, Wei and Geng.

古文：齐雍廪杀无知、管至父等而立齐桓公。
现代文：齐国雍廪杀死无知、管至父等人，拥立齐桓公。
English: The Yongle Emperor of Qi killed those who were ignorant and ruled even his father, and supported the rise of King Qi Kuan.

古文：齐、晋为强国。
现代文：齐国、晋国成了强国。
English: Qi and Jin became powerful states.

古文：十九年，晋曲沃始为晋侯。
现代文：十九年，晋国的曲沃武公灭掉晋侯缗，开始做了晋侯。
English: In the 19th year of the Jin Dynasty, Qu Wo Wukong of the Jin Dynasty eliminated Jin Hou Yi and began to make Jin Hou Zhou.

古文：齐桓公伯于鄄。
现代文：齐桓公在鄄称霸。
English: Lord Qi Kuan rules the roost in Handan.

古文：二十年，武公卒，葬雍平阳。
现代文：二十年，秦武公去世，葬在雍邑平阳。
English: Twenty years later, Qin Wukong died and was buried in Yongyue Pingyang.

古文：初以人从死，从死者六十六人。
现代文：开始用活人陪葬，陪葬者达六十六人。
English: They began to use living people to accompany the burial, and the number of mourners reached sixty-six.

古文：有子一人，名曰白，白不立，封平阳。
现代文：武公有一个儿子，名叫白。白未能即位，封在平阳。
English: Emperor Wu had a son named Bai, who was unable to ascend the throne and was imprisoned in Pingyang.

古文：立其弟德公。
现代文：立了武公的弟弟德公为君。
English: He set up Takecho's younger brother, Toko, as his successor.

古文：德公元年，初居雍城大郑宫。
现代文：德公元年，开始住在雍城大郑宫。
English: In the year of De, he began to live in Yongcheng Dazheng Palace.

古文：以牺三百牢祠鄜畤。
现代文：用牛羊猪各三百头在鄜畤祭祀天地。
English: Three hundred heads of cattle, sheep and pigs were sacrificed to the heavens and the earth.

古文：卜居雍。后子孙饮马于河。
现代文：占卜居住雍城事，占卜结果为 后代子孙将东扩领土，到黄河饮马 。
English: The fortune-teller lived in Yongcheng, and the result of the fortune-telling was that future generations of descendants would expand the territory to the east and drink horses from the Yellow River.

古文：梁伯、芮伯来朝。
现代文：梁伯、芮伯来朝见。
English: Liang Bo and Zibo came to see me in the morning.

古文：二年，初伏，以狗御蛊。
现代文：二年，开始规定伏日，杀狗祭祀以抵御热毒邪气。
English: In the second year, a dog-killing ritual to ward off the heat and poison began.

古文：德公生三十三岁而立，立二年卒。
现代文：德公到三十三岁才登位，在位两年去世。
English: Emperor Dezong ascended the throne at the age of thirty-three and died two years into his reign.

古文：生子三人：长子宣公，中子成公，少子穆公。
现代文：他生了三个儿子：长子宣公，次子成公，少子穆公。
English: He had three sons: the eldest son, Xuan Gong, the second son, Cheng Gong, and the youngest son, Mu Gong.

古文：长子宣公立。
现代文：长子宣公继位。
English: The eldest son, Nobuko, succeeded to the throne.

古文：宣公元年，卫、燕伐周，出惠王，立王子穨。
现代文：宣公元年，卫国燕国攻打周王室，把惠王赶出朝廷，拥立王子穨为帝。
English: In the year of Xuan, Emperor Yan of the State of Wei attacked the Zhou royal family, drove King Hui out of the imperial court, and installed Prince Zou as emperor.

古文：三年，郑伯、虢叔杀子穨而入惠王。
现代文：三年，郑伯、虢叔杀死王子穨，送惠王返回朝中。
English: In the third year, Zheng Bo and Uncle Zou killed Prince Zou and sent Prince Hui back to the court.

古文：四年，作密畤。
现代文：四年，建密畤。
English: Four years later, Jianmizhao came into being.

古文：与晋战河阳，胜之。
现代文：与晋交战于河阳，取得胜利。
English: He fought against Jin in Hayao and won.

古文：十二年，宣公卒。
现代文：十二年，宣公死。
English: Twelve years later, Xuan Gongzang died.

古文：生子九人，莫立，立其弟成公。
现代文：他生有九个儿子，都未能即位，立了他的弟弟成公为君。
English: He had nine sons, but none of them succeeded to the throne, so he made his brother Chenggong the king.

古文：成公元年，梁伯、芮伯来朝。
现代文：成公元年，梁伯、芮伯来朝见。
English: In the first year of the Christian era, Liang Bo and Zibo came to see the emperor.

古文：齐桓公伐山戎，次于孤竹。
现代文：齐桓公征伐山戎，驻军于孤竹。
English: Qi Kuan Gong's expedition to cut down the mountains was over, and the army was stationed in Lone Bamboo.

古文：成公立四年卒。
现代文：成公在位四年去世。
English: Chenggong died four years into his reign.

古文：子七人，莫立，立其弟缪公。
现代文：生有七个儿子，都未能即位，立了他的弟弟缪公为君。
English: He had seven sons, but none of them succeeded to the throne, so he appointed his younger brother Miao Gong as ruler.

古文：缪公任好元年，自将伐茅津，胜之。
现代文：缪公任好元年，缪公亲自率兵伐茅津，取得胜利。
English: In the first year of Miao Gong's tenure, Miao Gong personally led the troops to Maozu and achieved victory.

古文：四年，迎妇于晋，晋太子申生姊也。
现代文：四年，从晋国迎娶媳妇，娶的是晋太子申生的姐姐。
English: In four years, he married a daughter-in-law from Jin Province, who was the elder sister of the Crown Prince Shen Shen.

古文：其岁，齐桓公伐楚，至邵陵。
现代文：此年，齐恒公攻楚，直达邵陵。
English: This year, Qi Henggong led the attack, reaching as far as Shaoling.

古文：五年，晋献公灭虞、虢，虏虞君与其大夫百里傒，以璧马赂于虞故也。
现代文：五年，晋献公灭虞、虢，俘虏了虞君和他的大夫百里傒，这是用垂棘所产的玉壁和北屈所产的骏马贿赂虞国的结果。
English: In the fifth year of the Jin Dynasty, the state of Jin dedicated itself to the extermination of Yu and Qi, and captured Yu Jun and his doctor, Bai Lijun. This was the result of bribing the state of Yu with the jade wall produced by the thorn and the horse produced by the North Qu.

古文：既虏百里傒，以为秦缪公夫人媵于秦。
现代文：俘虏了百里傒之后，又用他陪嫁秦缪公夫人到秦国。
English: After capturing Bai Lijuan, he also used him to accompany Qin Miao's wife to Qin.

古文：百里傒亡秦走宛，楚鄙人执之。
现代文：百里傒从秦逃到宛，被楚国边地的居民抓获。
English: Bai Lijuan fled from Qin to Wan and was captured by the residents of the outlying areas of Chu.

古文：缪公闻百里傒贤，欲重赎之，恐楚人不与，乃使人谓楚曰： 吾媵臣百里傒在焉，请以五羖羊皮赎之。 。
现代文：缪公听说百里傒很贤能，想用重金把他赎回，又怕楚人不肯给，就派人向楚国说： 我国陪嫁奴隶百里傒现在贵国，请用五张黑羊皮赎他。 
English: Miao Gong heard that Bai Lijuan was very capable and wanted to redeem him with a large sum of money. Fearing that the Chu people would not agree to this, he sent someone to the State of Chu to say: Our slave Bai Lijuan is now in your country, please redeem him with five pieces of black sheepskin.

古文：楚人遂许与之。
现代文：楚人便答应将百里傒交给秦国。
English: The people of Chu then agreed to hand over Baili to Qin.

古文：当是时，百里傒年已七十余。
现代文：这时候，百里傒已有七十多岁。
English: At this time, Bai Lijuan was more than seventy years old.

古文：缪公释其囚，与语国事。
现代文：缪公释放了他，同他讨论国家大事。
English: Miao Gong released him and discussed national affairs with him.

古文：谢曰： 臣亡国之臣，何足问！ 
现代文：百里傒推辞说： 我是亡国之臣，哪里值得询问。 
English: I am a vassal of a ruined country, where is there anything worth inquiring about?

古文：缪公曰： 虞君不用子，故亡，非子罪也。 
现代文：缪公说： 虞君正是因为不听您的劝告才亡国，这并不是您的罪过。 
English: Miao Gong said: It is precisely because Yu Jun did not listen to your advice that he lost his country. This is not your fault.

古文：固问，语三日，缪公大说，授之国政，号曰五羖大夫。
现代文：再三向他请教，谈了三天，缪公大喜，托付给他国家政务，号称五羖大夫。
English: Repeatedly asked him for advice, talked for three days, Miao Gong was overjoyed and entrusted him with state affairs, known as Wuzhong Doctor.

古文：百里傒让曰： 臣不及臣友蹇叔，蹇叔贤而世莫知。
现代文：百里傒谦让说： 我可比不上我的朋友蹇叔，蹇叔贤能而世人不知。
English: Bai Li and Qian Zhan said, "I can't compare to my friend Qiu Xiu. Qiu Xiu is a great man, but the world doesn't know it."

古文：臣常游困于齐而乞食铚人，蹇叔收臣。
现代文：从前我曾游宦于齐，陷于困境，不得不向铚地的人讨饭，多亏蹇叔收留了我。
English: Once upon a time, I was stranded in Qi and had to beg for food from the local people. Thanks to Uncle Gong, he took me in.

古文：臣因而欲事齐君无知，蹇叔止臣，臣得脱齐难，遂之周。
现代文：我因而想在齐君无知手下做事，又是蹇叔劝阻我，我才幸免于齐国内乱，然后到了周。
English: As a result, I wanted to work under Qi Jun's ignorant staff, and it was Uncle Zou who dissuaded me, and I was spared from Qi's civil war, and then came Zhou.

古文：周王子穨好牛，臣以养牛干之。及穨欲用臣，蹇叔止臣，臣去，得不诛。
现代文：周王子颓喜欢牛，我借养牛求仕，当他正要任用我时，还是蹇叔劝阻我，我才离开，免遭杀身之祸。
English: Prince Zhou liked cattle, so I asked for a promotion by raising cattle. When he was about to appoint me, my uncle dissuaded me, and I left to avoid being killed.

古文：事虞君，蹇叔止臣。
现代文：在虞君手下做事，蹇叔又劝阻我。
English: To work under Yu Jun, Uncle Zou dissuaded me again.

古文：臣知虞君不用臣，臣诚私利禄爵，且留。
现代文：我虽明知虞君不会重用，但心里又贪图爵禄，也就暂时留下了。
English: Although I knew that Yu Jun would not be reused, in my heart I was greedy for peerage, so I stayed for the time being.

古文：再用其言，得脱，一不用，及虞君难：是以知其贤。 
现代文：有两次我听他的话都得以脱身，只有一次不听，就碰上了虞君亡国之难，由此可见他的贤能。 
English: Twice I listened to his words and was able to escape, only once I did not listen, and I encountered the difficulties of the yakuza's overthrow of the country, which shows his ability.

古文：于是缪公使人厚币迎蹇叔，以为上大夫。
现代文：于是缪公派人用贵重的礼物把蹇叔请来，封他为上大夫。
English: So Miao Gong sent someone with a valuable gift to invite Uncle Zou to come and appoint him as a senior doctor.

古文：秋，缪公自将伐晋，战于河曲。
现代文：秋，缪公亲自率兵伐晋，与晋军交战于河曲。
English: In the autumn, Miao Gong personally led the troops to attack Jin, and fought with the Jin army in Hequ.

古文：晋骊姬作乱，太子申生死新城，重耳、夷吾出奔。
现代文：晋国的骊姬作乱，太子申生死于新城，重耳、夷吾逃亡国外。
English: Jin's concubines rioted, Prince Shen Sheng died in Xincheng, Chonglu and Yiwu fled abroad.

古文：九年，齐桓公会诸侯于葵丘。
现代文：九年，齐桓公与诸侯会盟于葵丘。
English: In the ninth year, Lord Qi Kuan and the association of feudal lords met in Kwai Chung.

古文：晋献公卒。
现代文：晋献公死。
English: He died in the line of duty.

古文：立骊姬子奚齐，其臣里克杀奚齐。
现代文：立骊姬所生子奚齐为君，奚齐之臣里克杀奚齐。
English: The son of Lijunji born by Lijunji is Lijun, and Lijun's vassal Rick kills Lijun.

古文：荀息立卓子，克又杀卓子及荀息。
现代文：荀息立卓子为君，里克又杀卓子和荀息。
English: Hechi raised Takuko as his son, and Rick killed Takuko and Hechi.

古文：夷吾使人请秦，求入晋。
现代文：夷吾派人向秦请求，希望回晋国。
English: The Emus sent a request to the Qin, hoping to return to Jin.

古文：于是缪公许之，使百里傒将兵送夷吾。
现代文：缪公答应了他，派百里傒率兵护送夷吾。
English: Miao Gong agreed to this and sent Bai Lijun and his soldiers to escort Yiguo.

古文：夷吾谓曰： 诚得立，请割晋之河西八城与秦。 
现代文：夷吾对秦人说： 如果我能即位，我将把晋国的河西八城割让给秦国。 
English: Yigu said to Qin, "If I can ascend the throne, I will cede the eight cities west of the river in Jin to Qin."

古文：及至，已立，而使丕郑谢秦，背约不与河西城，而杀里克。
现代文：但等回国即了位，却派丕郑拒绝秦，违背誓约不肯交付河西八城，并且杀了里克。
English: However, when he returned to China, he refused to hand over the eight cities west of the river to Qin, breaking his oath, and killed Rick.

古文：丕郑闻之，恐，因与缪公谋曰： 晋人不欲夷吾，实欲重耳。
现代文：丕郑听说害了怕，就跟缪公商量说： 晋人并不拥护夷吾，拥护的实际上是重耳。
English: Hearing of this, Zou Zheng was afraid, so he discussed with Miao Gong and said, "The Jin people do not support the Yiguo, but in fact, they support the Chonglu.

古文：今背秦约而杀里克，皆吕甥、郄芮之计也。
现代文：现在夷吾既违背与秦订立的誓约又杀死里克，全都是吕甥、郤芮的主意。
English: Now that Yigo has both broken the oath he made with Qin and killed Rick, it was all the idea of Lvnefu and Yao.

古文：愿君以利急召吕、郄，吕、郄至，则更入重耳便。 
现代文：希望您能用重利赶紧把吕、郤二人召来，吕、郤二人来了，再换重耳回国即位就好办了。 
English: I hope that you can use the heavy interest to quickly call Lv and Yao. Lv and Yao have come, and it will be easy to change the ear and return to the country to take the throne.

古文：缪公许之，使人与丕郑归，召吕、郄。
现代文：缪公表示同意，派人随丕郑回国，去召吕、郤二人。
English: Miao Gong agreed, and sent someone to accompany Yu Zheng back to China to summon Lu and Yao.

古文：吕、郄等疑丕郑有间，乃言夷吾杀丕郑。
现代文：吕、郤等人怀疑丕郑有阴谋，便告诉夷吾杀了丕郑。
English: Lv, Zou and others suspected Zou Zheng of plotting, so they told Yiwu that they had killed Zou Zheng.

古文：丕郑子丕豹奔秦，说缪公曰： 晋君无道，百姓不亲，可伐也。 
现代文：丕郑的儿子丕豹逃亡到秦国，劝缪公说： 晋君无道，百姓不亲附，可以讨伐。 
English: Yao Zheng's son, Yao Bao, fled to Qin, and persuaded Mu Gong to say: "Jin Jun has no way, the people are not close to him, he can fight.

古文：缪公曰： 百姓苟不便，何故能诛其大臣？
现代文：缪公说： 百姓如果认为不合适，又怎么能处死其大臣呢？
English: Miao Gong said, "If the people think it is inappropriate, how can they execute their minister?

古文：能诛其大臣，此其调也。 
现代文：能处死其大臣，这正说明他们的关系是谐调的。 
English: The fact that he can execute his ministers shows that their relationship is harmonious.

古文：不听，而阴用豹。
现代文：不予采纳，暗地却重用丕豹。
English: It was not adopted, but secretly, the cheetah was reused.

古文：十二年，齐管仲、隰朋死。
现代文：十二年，齐国的管仲、隰朋去世。
English: In the twelfth year, Guanzhong and Zou Peng of Qi Province passed away.

古文：晋旱，来请粟。
现代文：晋国大旱，派人来秦国请求援助粮食。
English: Due to the severe drought in Jin Province, they sent people to Qin Province to request food aid.

古文：丕豹说缪公勿与，因其饥而伐之。
现代文：丕豹劝说缪公不要给，要缪公趁着晋国荒歉去攻打它。
English: The panther persuaded Miao Gong not to give it to him, but to let Miao Gong take advantage of the barren land of Jin Province to attack it.

古文：缪公问公孙支，支曰： 饥穰更事耳，不可不与。 
现代文：缪公去问公孙支，公孙支说： 荒歉与丰收是交替出现的事，不能不给。 
English: Miao Gong went to ask Gongsunzhi, and Gongsunzhi said, "The bleak apology and the good harvest are things that occur alternately, and cannot be avoided.

古文：问百里傒，傒曰： 夷吾得罪于君，其百姓何罪？ 
现代文：又问百里傒，百里傒说： 夷吾得罪了您，他的百姓有什么罪? 
English: And he asked Balak, and Balak said unto him, What have his people done, that I should offend thee?

古文：于是用百里傒、公孙支言，卒与之粟。
现代文：缪公采纳百里傒、公孙支的意见，最后还是给晋国粮食了。
English: Miao Gong adopted the opinions of Bai Lijuan and Gong Sunzhi, and finally gave grain to Jin.

古文：以船漕车转，自雍相望至绛。
现代文：水路用船，陆路用车给晋国运去粮食，从雍都出发，源源不断地直到绛城。
English: Ships and trucks were used to transport grain from Yongdu to Jin by water and by land, and the flow of grain continued all the way to Lucheng.

古文：十四年，秦饥，请粟于晋。晋君谋之群臣。
现代文：十四年，秦国饥荒，向晋国求借粮食，晋君征求大臣们的意见。
English: In the 14th year, Qin suffered from famine and asked Jin for grain, and Jin sought the advice of his ministers.

古文：虢射曰： 因其饥伐之，可有大功。 
现代文：虢射说： 趁着秦国闹饥荒去攻打它，可以大获成功。 
English: "If we take advantage of the famine in Qin to attack it, we can be very successful," Li Ya said.

古文：晋君从之。
现代文：晋君采纳了他的意见。
English: Jinjun accepted his opinion.

古文：十五年，兴兵将攻秦。
现代文：十五年，晋国将要举兵攻打秦国。
English: In 15 years, Jin will raise an army to attack Qin.

古文：缪公发兵，使丕豹将，自往击之。
现代文：缪公发兵，让丕豹率领大军，亲自前往迎击。
English: Miao Gong sent an army, and let the panther lead the army and go to meet the attack in person.

古文：九月壬戌，与晋惠公夷吾合战于韩地。
现代文：九日壬戌日，与晋惠公夷吾在韩地交战。
English: On the ninth day of the ninth month, Jin Huigong fought with Jin Huigong in Korea.

古文：晋君弃其军，与秦争利，还而马騺。
现代文：晋君甩下自己的部队独自往前冲，跟秦军争夺财物，回来的时候，驾车的战马陷到深泥里。
English: Jinjun left his troops and rushed forward alone to compete with the Qin army for property. When he returned, the horse he was driving got stuck in the mud.

古文：缪公与麾下驰追之，不能得晋君，反为晋军所围。
现代文：缪公与部下纵马驱车追赶，没能抓到晋君，反而被晋军包围了。
English: Miao Gong and his subordinates drove after him on horseback, but failed to catch Jin Jun. Instead, they were surrounded by Jin troops.

古文：晋击缪公，缪公伤。
现代文：晋军攻击缪公，缪公负伤。
English: The Jin army attacked Miao Gong, and Miao Gong was injured.

古文：于是岐下食善马者三百人驰冒晋军，晋军解围，遂脱缪公而反生得晋君。
现代文：这时，曾在岐山下偷吃缪公良马的三百多个乡下人不顾危险驱马冲入晋军，晋军的包围被冲开，不仅使缪公得以脱险，反而又活捉了晋君。
English: At this time, more than three hundred villagers who had stolen Miao Gong Liangma's horse under the Qishan Mountain drove the horse into the Jin army regardless of the danger. The encirclement of the Jin army was broken, which not only allowed Miao Gong to escape danger, but also captured Jin Jun alive.

古文：初，缪公亡善马，岐下野人共得而食之者三百余人，吏逐得，欲法之。
现代文：当初，缪公丢失了一匹良马，岐山下的三百多个乡下人一块儿把它抓来吃掉了，官吏捕捉到他们，要加以法办。
English: At the beginning, Miao Gong lost a good horse. More than three hundred villagers from the Qishan Mountains captured and ate it together. Officials caught them and wanted to bring them to justice.

古文：缪公曰： 君子不以畜产害人。
现代文：缪公说： 君子不能因为牲畜的缘故而伤害人。
English: Miao Gong said: A gentleman should not hurt people because of livestock.

古文：吾闻食善马肉不饮酒，伤人。 
现代文：我听说，吃了良马肉，如果不喝洒，会伤人。 
English: I've heard that if you eat good horse meat and don't drink sprinkles, it can hurt you.

古文：乃皆赐酒而赦之。
现代文：于是就赐酒给他们喝，并赦免了他们。
English: And he gave them wine to drink, and sent them away.

古文：三百人者闻秦击晋，皆求从，从而见缪公窘，亦皆推锋争死，以报食马之德。
现代文：这三百人听说秦国要去攻打晋国，都要求跟着去。在作战时，他们发现缪公被敌包围，都高举兵器，争先死战，以报答吃马肉被赦免的恩德。
English: These three hundred people heard that Qin was going to attack Jin, and they all asked to go with him. During the battle, they found that Miao Gong was surrounded by the enemy. They all held their weapons high and fought to the death in order to repay the mercy of eating horse meat.

古文：于是缪公虏晋君以归，令于国，齐宿，吾将以晋君祠上帝。
现代文：缪公俘获晋君而归，下令国中说： 大家斋戒，我将用晋君来祭祀天帝。 
English: Miao Gong captured Jinjun and returned, ordering the country to say: Everyone fast, I will use Jinjun to worship the emperor.

古文：周天子闻之，曰 晋我同姓 ，为请晋君。
现代文：周天子听说了，说 晋是我的同姓 ，请求赦免晋君。
English: When Zhou Tianzi heard of this, he said that Jin was my namesake and asked for Jin's pardon.

古文：夷吾姊亦为缪公夫人，夫人闻之，乃衰绖跣，曰： 妾兄弟不能相救，以辱君命。 
现代文：夷吾的姐姐是缪公的夫人。夫人听说了，也穿上丧服光着脚，对缪公说： 我竟然连自己的兄弟也不能相救，有辱于您的命令。 
English: Yigo's sister was Mikuo's wife. When Mikuo's wife heard of this, she also put on mourning clothes and went barefoot. She said to Mikuo, "I can't even save my own brother. I am humiliated by your order."

古文：缪公曰： 我得晋君以为功，今天子为请，夫人是忧。 
现代文：缪公说： 我把俘获晋君当作一件值得庆贺的大事，不料现在天子为之求情，夫人也为之忧伤。 
English: Miao Gong said: I regard the capture of Jin Jun as a great event worthy of celebration, but now the Son of Heaven is asking for mercy, and my wife is also sad.

古文：乃与晋君盟，许归之，更舍上舍，而馈之七牢。
现代文：便与晋君盟誓，同意放他回去，换了高级的客舍供他住，并用七牢的规格来宴飨他。
English: He swore an oath with Jinjun, agreed to let him go back, changed to a high-class guest house for him to live in, and used the specifications of the seven dungeons to entertain him.

古文：十一月，归晋君夷吾，夷吾献其河西地，使太子圉为质于秦。
现代文：十一月，送晋君夷吾回国，夷吾献上晋国的河西之地，让太子圉到秦国为质。
English: In November, Emperor Wu sent Emperor Jin back to China, Emperor Wu offered Emperor Jin the land west of the river, and let Emperor Jin go to Qin as a pledge.

古文：秦妻子圉以宗女。
现代文：秦把宗女嫁给子圉为妻。
English: Qin married his granddaughter to Zibo.

古文：是时秦地东至河。
现代文：当时秦的领土已东抵黄河。
English: At that time, Qin's territory had reached as far east as the Yellow River.

古文：十八年，齐桓公卒。
现代文：十八年，齐桓公去世。
English: In the 18th year, Prince Qi Kan passed away.

古文：二十年，秦灭梁、芮。
现代文：二十年，秦国灭了梁、芮二国。
English: Twenty years ago, the Qin State annihilated Liang and Qin.

古文：二十二年，晋公子圉闻晋君病，曰： 梁，我母家也，而秦灭之。
现代文：二十二年，晋公子圉听说晋君生病，说： 梁国是我母亲的家乡，秦国却灭了它。
English: Twenty-two years ago, when he heard that Jin Jun was ill, he said, "Liang Province is my mother's hometown, but Qin Province has destroyed it.

古文：我兄弟多，即君百岁后，秦必留我，而晋轻，亦更立他子。 
现代文：我兄弟很多，一旦晋君去世，秦必定扣留我，晋国看不起我，也会另立他人。 
English: I have many brothers. Once Jin Jun dies, Qin will definitely detain me. Jin Province will look down on me and will set up others.

古文：子圉乃亡归晋。
现代文：子圉因此逃回晋国。
English: As a result, Zixuan fled back to Jin.

古文：二十三年，晋惠公卒，子圉立为君。
现代文：二十三年，晋惠公死，子圉立为国君。
English: In 233, Jin Huigong died, and his son became the sovereign.

古文：秦怨圉亡去，乃迎晋公子重耳于楚，而妻以故子圉妻。
现代文：秦君对圉的逃离十分恼恨，就从楚国迎来晋公子重耳，并把原来子圉的妻子嫁给重耳。
English: Qin Jun was very annoyed by Zou's escape, so he welcomed Jin Gongzi Jie Er from Chu, and married Zou's wife to Jie Er.

古文：重耳初谢，后乃受。
现代文：重耳起而推辞不肯，后来就接受了。
English: He refused to back down and later accepted the offer.

古文：缪公益礼厚遇之。
现代文：缪公对重耳更加以礼厚待。
English: Miao Gong treated Chonglu more courteously.

古文：二十四年春，秦使人告晋大臣，欲入重耳。
现代文：二十四年春，秦派人告诉晋国的大臣，要送重耳回国。
English: In the spring of the twenty-fourth year, Qin sent someone to tell the minister of Jin to send Chonglu back to the country.

古文：晋许之，于是使人送重耳。
现代文：晋国表示同意，于是派入送重耳回国。
English: Jin agreed, and sent Cang back to China.

古文：二月，重耳立为晋君，是为文公。
现代文：二月，重耳被立为晋君，就是文公。
English: In February, Chong Er was appointed as Jinjun, that is, Wengong.

古文：文公使人杀子圉。
现代文：文公派人杀子圉。
English: The civil authorities sent someone to kill him.

古文：子圉是为怀公。
现代文：子圉就是怀公。
English: Zixuan is to conceive a child.

古文：其秋，周襄王弟带以翟伐王，王出居郑。
现代文：当年秋天，周襄王的弟弟王子带，勾结翟人伐周襄王，周襄王逃出，住在郑国。
English: In the autumn of that year, Zhou Xiang Wang's younger brother, Prince Wu, colluded with others to attack Zhou Xiang Wang. Zhou Xiang Wang escaped and lived in Zheng.

古文：二十五年，周王使人告难于晋、秦。
现代文：二十五年，周襄王派人向晋国、秦国通告了发生祸难的情况。
English: In the 25th year, King Zhou Xiang sent a messenger to Jin and Qin to inform them of the disaster.

古文：秦缪公将兵助晋文公入襄王，杀王弟带。
现代文：秦缪公率兵帮助晋文公护送周襄王回朝，杀死襄王的弟弟带。
English: Qin Miao and his soldiers helped Jinwen escort Zhou Xiangwang back to the imperial court and killed his younger brother Zhuo.

古文：二十八年，晋文公败楚于城濮。
现代文：二十八年，晋文公在城濮击败楚军。
English: In the 28th year, Emperor Jinwen defeated the Chu army in Chenghuang.

古文：三十年，缪公助晋文公围郑。
现代文：三十年，缪公帮助晋文公包围郑国。
English: For 30 years, Miao Gong helped Jin Wengu to encircle Zheng.

古文：郑使人言缪公曰： 亡郑厚晋，于晋而得矣，而秦未有利。
现代文：郑国派人告诉缪公说： 灭亡郑国是优待晋，对晋当然有好处，但对秦未必有利。
English: Zheng Guo sent a person to tell Miao Gong that: The downfall of Zheng Guo is preferential treatment for Jin. Of course, it is good for Jin, but it may not be good for Qin.

古文：晋之强，秦之忧也。 
现代文：晋国的强大，正是秦国所担忧的呀。 
English: The strength of Jin is precisely what worries Qin.

古文：缪公乃罢兵归。晋亦罢。
现代文：缪公于是罢兵而归，晋也罢兵。
English: Therefore, Miao Gong went on strike and returned home, and Jin also went on strike.

古文：三十二年冬，晋文公卒。
现代文：三十二年冬，晋文公死。
English: In the winter of 32, Jin Wengong died.

古文：郑人有卖郑于秦曰： 我主其城门，郑可袭也。 
现代文：郑国有人向秦国出卖郑国说： 我掌守郑国的城门，可以来偷袭郑国。 
English: Someone from Zheng betrayed Zheng to Qin and said, "I am in charge of the gates of Zheng. I can come and attack Zheng."

古文：缪公问蹇叔、百里傒，对曰： 径数国千里而袭人，希有得利者。
现代文：缪公征求蹇叔、百里傒的意见，他们回答说： 路经数国地界，到千里之外去袭击别人，很少有占便宜的。
English: Miao Gong solicited the opinions of Yan Xiu and Bai Lijuan, and they replied: Few people take advantage of the opportunity to attack others thousands of miles away, crossing the borders of several countries.

古文：且人卖郑，庸知我国人不有以我情告郑者乎？
现代文：再说，既然有人出卖郑国，怎么知道我国的人就没有把我们的实情告诉郑国呢?
English: Besides, since someone betrayed Zheng Guo, how do we know that our people did not tell Zheng Guo the truth about us?

古文：不可。 
现代文：不能袭击郑国。 
English: This battle cannot be fought alone.

古文：缪公曰： 子不知也，吾已决矣。 
现代文：缪公说： 你们不知道，我已决定了。 
English: Miao Gong said: You don't know, I've already decided.

古文：遂发兵，使百里傒子孟明视，蹇叔子西乞术及白乙丙将兵。
现代文：遂发兵，派百里傒之子孟明视、蹇叔之子西乞术和白乙丙率兵。
English: He then dispatched an army and sent Meng Mingzhi, the son of Bai Lijun, Xi Qizhi, the son of Yao Shu, and Bai Yipi to lead the army.

古文：行日，百里傒、蹇叔二人哭之。
现代文：军队出发的那天，百里傒、蹇叔二人对着军队大哭。
English: On the day of the army's departure, Bai Lijuan and Uncle Zou both cried loudly in front of the army.

古文：缪公闻，怒曰： 孤发兵而子沮哭吾军，何也？ 
现代文：缪公听说了，生气地说： 我派兵出发，你们却拦着军队大哭，破坏军心，这是为什么? 
English: When Miao Gong heard this, he said angrily, "I sent the troops out, but you stopped the troops by crying loudly and destroying the morale of the troops. Why is that?"

古文：二老曰： 臣非敢沮君军。
现代文：二位老人说： 为臣不敢阻拦军队。
English: The two old men said, "A vassal does not dare to stop an army."

古文：军行，臣子与往；臣老，迟还恐不相见，故哭耳。 
现代文：部队要走了，我俩的儿子在军队中也将前往;如今我们年岁已大，他们如果回来晚了，恐怕就见不着了，所以才哭。 
English: The troops are leaving, and our two sons are going with them in the army; now that we are older, if they come back late, I'm afraid they won't be able to see us, so that's why I'm crying.

古文：二老退，谓其子曰： 汝军即败，必于肴阨矣。 
现代文：二位老人退回来对他们的儿子说： 你们的部队如果失败，一定是在殽山的险要处。 
English: The two old men retreated and said to their son: If your troops fail, they must be in the critical area of Lushan.

古文：三十三年春，秦兵遂东，更晋地，过周北门。
现代文：三十三年春，秦军终于东进，途经晋地，路过周的都城北门。
English: In the spring of the 33rd year, the Qin army finally advanced eastward, passing through Jin and the north gate of the capital.

古文：周王孙满曰： 秦师无礼，不败何待！ 
现代文：周王孙满说： 秦军无礼，怎能不败！ 
English: Zhou Wangsunman said, "How can the Qin Army be undefeated if it is rude!"

古文：兵至滑，郑贩卖贾人弦高，持十二牛将卖之周，见秦兵，恐死虏，因献其牛，曰： 闻大国将诛郑，郑君谨修守御备，使臣以牛十二劳军士。 
现代文：军队开到滑，郑国商人弦高，正带了十二头牛到周地去卖，碰上秦军，怕被杀或俘虏，所以献上他的牛说： 听说大国将要征讨我郑国，郑君正恭谨地加强守备，派我用这十二头牛来犒赏士兵。 
English: When the army arrived in Slip, Zheng merchant Zheng Gao was taking twelve cows to Zhou to sell. When he encountered the Qin army, he was afraid of being killed or captured, so he offered his cow and said, "I heard that the great powers are going to conquer my Zheng. Zheng Jun is respectfully strengthening his defenses and sent me with these twelve cows to reward the soldiers."

古文：秦三将军相谓曰： 将袭郑，郑今已觉之，往无及已。 
现代文：秦国的三位将军相互商量说： 我们要去袭击郑国，郑国现在已经知道了，去也袭击不成了。 
English: The three generals of Qin consulted with each other and said, "We are going to attack Zheng. Zheng now knows that we can't attack.

古文：灭滑。
现代文：便灭了滑。
English: Then the slippage was eliminated.

古文：滑，晋之边邑也。
现代文：滑是晋国的边邑。
English: Nome is a border town of Jin Province.

古文：当是时，晋文公丧尚未葬。
现代文：此时正碰上晋文公去世尚未埋葬。
English: At this time, the death of Prince Jinwen has not yet been buried.

古文：太子襄公怒曰： 秦侮我孤，因丧破我滑。 
现代文：太子襄公大怒说， 秦欺我丧父，竟然趁我举丧攻破我滑邑。 
English: Prince Xiang said angrily, "Qin cheated me out of my father's death, and took advantage of my funeral to invade my hometown of Niuyuan."

古文：遂墨衰绖，发兵遮秦兵于肴，击之，大破秦军，无一人得脱者。
现代文：于是穿上黑色丧服，发兵在殽山堵截秦军，出击，把他们打得大败，没有一人逃脱。
English: So he put on black mourning clothes, sent troops to block the Qin army in Lushan, attacked, and defeated them, and no one escaped.

古文：虏秦三将以归。
现代文：俘虏秦的三将军而归。
English: The three generals who captured Qin returned home.

古文：文公夫人，秦女也，为秦三囚将请曰： 缪公之怨此三人入于骨髓，愿令此三人归，令我君得自快烹之。 
现代文：晋文公夫人，是秦国女子，为这三位在押的将军求情说： 缪公对这三个人恨之入骨，希望能将这三人放归，让我们秦国的国君亲自烹之而后快。 
English: Lady Jinwen, a Qin woman, interceded on behalf of the three detained generals, saying: "Miu Gong hates these three people to the bone, and hopes that these three people will be released, so that the sovereign of Qin can personally cook for them.

古文：晋君许之，归秦三将。
现代文：晋国国君答应了她，放秦国的三个将军回去。
English: The ruler of Jin Province agreed to let her go and let the three generals of Qin return.

古文：三将至，缪公素服郊迎，向三人哭曰： 孤以不用百里傒、蹇叔言以辱三子，三子何罪乎？
现代文：三将军回到秦国，缪公穿戴凶服亲迎于郊，面向三人大哭说： 都是我不听百里傒、蹇叔的话才让三位受了委屈，三位有什么罪呢？
English: When the three generals returned to Qin, Miao Gong, dressed in fierce clothing, greeted them personally in the suburbs, weeping loudly in front of the three generals and saying, "It was because I did not listen to Bai Lijuan and Uncle Zou that the three generals were wronged. What is the sin of the three generals?

古文：子其悉心雪耻，毋怠。 
现代文：你们要想方设法报仇雪耻，不可懈怠。 
English: You must not slacken in your efforts to seek revenge.

古文：遂复三人官秩如故，愈益厚之。
现代文：于是恢复三人的官职如同以往，待遇更好。
English: As a result, the three were reinstated in their posts as before, with better pay.

古文：三十四年，楚太子商臣弑其父成王代立。
现代文：三十四年，楚太子商臣杀其父成王而代立。
English: In 34, Chu Taizi, a merchant and minister, killed his father, Chengwang, and took his place.

古文：缪公于是复使孟明视等将兵伐晋，战于彭衙。
现代文：缪公又派孟明视等人率兵伐晋，与晋军交战于彭衙。
English: Miao Gong also sent Meng Mingxi and others to lead the troops to attack Jin, and fought with the Jin army in Penghu.

古文：秦不利，引兵归。
现代文：秦不利，撤兵返回。
English: With Qin at a disadvantage, the retreating troops returned.

古文：戎王使由余于秦。
现代文：戎王派由余出使秦国。
English: Emperor Rong sent Yu to Qin.

古文：由余，其先晋人也，亡入戎，能晋言。
现代文：由余，祖先是晋国人，逃亡到戎地，他还能说晋国方言。
English: Yu Yu, whose ancestors were from Jin, fled to Wonsi, and he can still speak the dialect of Jin.

古文：闻缪公贤，故使由余观秦。
现代文：戎王听说缪公贤明，就派由余去观察秦国。
English: When King Rong heard that Miao Gong was wise, he sent Yu Yu to observe Qin.

古文：秦缪公示以宫室、积聚。
现代文：秦缪公向他炫示了宫室和积蓄的财宝。
English: Qin Miao showed him his palace and the treasures he had accumulated.

古文：由余曰： 使鬼为之，则劳神矣。
现代文：由余说： 这些宫室积蓄，如果是让鬼神营造，那么就使鬼神劳累了;如果是让百姓营造的，那么也使百姓受苦了。 
English: Yu Yu said, "If these palace storehouses were built by ghosts and gods, then they made the ghosts and gods tired; if they were built by the people, then they also made the people suffer.

古文：使人为之，亦苦民矣。 缪公怪之，问曰： 中国以诗书礼乐法度为政，然尚时乱，今戎夷无此，何以为治，不亦难乎？ 
现代文：缪公觉得他的话奇怪，问道： 中原各国借助诗书礼乐和法律处理政务，还不时地出现祸乱呢，现在戎族没有这些，用什么来治理国家，岂不很困难吗! 
English: Miao Gong thought his words were strange and asked: All the countries in the Central Plains used poetry, music, and law to handle their government affairs, but disasters still occurred from time to time. Now that the Rong people don't have these things, what will they use to govern the country? Won't it be very difficult?

古文：由余笑曰： 此乃中国所以乱也。
现代文：由余笑着说： 这些正是中原各国发生祸乱的根源所在。
English: With a smile, Yu Yu said, "These are the root causes of the disasters in the Central Plains countries."

古文：夫自上圣黄帝作为礼乐法度，身以先之，仅以小治。
现代文：自上古圣人黄帝创造了礼乐法度，并亲自带头贯彻执行，也只是实现了小的太平。
English: Since the ancient sage Huangdi created the ritual law, and personally took the lead in implementing it, it has only achieved a small peace.

古文：及其后世，日以骄淫。
现代文：到了后代。君主一天比一天骄奢淫逸。
English: Down to the next generation. The monarch becomes more and more arrogant and debauched every day.

古文：阻法度之威，以责督于下，下罢极则以仁义怨望于上，上下交争怨而相篡弑，至于灭宗，皆以此类也。
现代文：依仗着法律制度的威严来要求和监督民众，民众感到疲惫了就怨恨君上，要求实行仁义。上下互相怨恨，篡夺屠杀，甚至灭绝家族，都是因为这类原因。
English: Relying on the majesty of the legal system to demand and supervise the people, the people feel tired and resent the prince, demanding the implementation of benevolence and righteousness. Mutual resentment, usurpation, slaughter, and even extermination of families are all due to such reasons.

古文：夫戎夷不然。
现代文：而戎族却不是这样。
English: However, this is not the case with the Ezo people.

古文：上含淳德以遇其下，下怀忠信以事其上，一国之政犹一身之治，不知所以治，此真圣人之治也。 
现代文：在上位者怀着淳厚的仁德来对待下面的臣民，臣民满怀忠信来侍奉君上，整个国家的政事就像一个人支配自己的身体一样，无须了解什么治理的方法，这才真正是圣人治理国家啊。 
English: When those at the top treat the subjects below them with benevolence, and the subjects serve the emperor with loyalty, the government of the whole country is like a person controlling his own body. There is no need to know how to govern. This is truly the way a saint governs the country.

古文：于是缪公退而问内史廖曰： 孤闻邻国有圣人，敌国之忧也。
现代文：缪公退朝之后，就问内史王廖说： 我听说邻国有圣人，这将是对立国家的忧患。
English: After Miao Gong retired from the imperial court, he asked the Inner Historian Wang Liao and said: I have heard that there is a saint in the neighboring country. This will be a sorrow for the opposing country.

古文：今由余贤，寡人之害，将奈之何？ 
现代文：现在由余有才能，这是我的祸患，我该怎么办呢? 
English: Now that I have talent, this is my misfortune. What should I do?

古文：内史廖曰： 戎王处辟匿，未闻中国之声。
现代文：内史王廖说： 戎王地处偏僻，不曾听过中原地区的乐曲。
English: Inner History King Liao said, "Rongwu Kingdom is located in a remote area, and I have never heard music from the Central Plains.

古文：君试遗其女乐，以夺其志；为由余请，以疏其间；留而莫遣，以失其期。
现代文：您不妨试试送他歌舞伎女，借以改变他的心志。并且为由余请功，以此来疏远他们君臣之间的关系;同时留住由余不让他回去，以此来延误他回国的日期。
English: You might as well try to change his mind by sending him a Kabuki actress, alienating the relationship between their princes and ministers by asking Yu for a favor, and delaying the date of his return by keeping Yu from letting him return.

古文：戎王怪之，必疑由余。
现代文：戎王一定会感到奇怪，因而怀疑由余。
English: The Emperor must have been puzzled, and his suspicions were aroused.

古文：君臣有间，乃可虏也。
现代文：他们君臣之间有了隔阂，就可以俘获他了。
English: If there is a rift between them, they can capture him.

古文：且戎王好乐，必怠于政。 缪公曰： 善。 
现代文：再说戎王喜欢上音乐，就一定没有心思处理国事了。 缪公说： 好。 
English: Furthermore, since King Eunjo was fond of music, he must not have had the heart to deal with state affairs. Miku said, "Good.

古文：因与由余曲席而坐，传器而食，问其地形与其兵势尽察，而后令内史廖以女乐二八遗戎王。
现代文：于是缪公与由余曲席围坐，互递杯盏一块儿吃喝，向由余询问戎地的地形和兵力，把情况了解得一清二楚，然后命令内史王廖送给戎王十六名歌妓。
English: As a result, Miao Gong and Yu Yuqiu sat around a table, eating and drinking together and passing each other cups. Yu Yuqiu asked Yu Yuqiu about the terrain and the strength of the troops, understood the situation clearly, and then ordered Inner Shi Wang Liao to send sixteen geishas to the king of the troops.

古文：戎王受而说之，终年不还。
现代文：戎王接受，并且非常喜爱迷恋，整年沉浸其中。
English: Rong Wang accepted, and loved the infatuation very much, and immersed himself in it for the whole year.

古文：于是秦乃归由余。
现代文：这时候，秦国才让由余回国。
English: At this time, Qin only allowed Yu Yu to return to China.

古文：由余数谏不听，缪公又数使人间要由余，由余遂去降秦。
现代文：由余多次向戎王进谏，戎王都不听，缪公又屡次派人秘密邀请由余，由余于是离开戎王，投降了秦国。
English: Yu Yu repeatedly made overtures to Emperor Rong, but Emperor Rong did not listen to him. Emperor Miao repeatedly sent people to secretly invite Yu Yu, and Yu Yu then left Emperor Rong and surrendered Qin.

古文：缪公以客礼礼之，问伐戎之形。
现代文：缪公以宾客之礼相待，对他非常尊敬，向他询问应该在什么样的形势下进攻戎族。
English: Miao treated him with the courtesy of a guest, held him in high esteem, and asked him under what circumstances he should attack the troops.

古文：三十六年，缪公复益厚孟明等，使将兵伐晋，渡河焚船，大败晋人，取王官及鄗，以报肴之役。
现代文：三十六年，缪公更加厚待孟明等人，派他们率兵伐晋，渡黄河时，连船都烧掉，终于大败晋人，占领王官和鄗，作为对殽之战役的报复。
English: In 36th year, Miao Gong treated Meng Ming and others more generously and sent them to lead the troops to attack Jin. When they crossed the Yellow River, they even burned the ships. Finally, they defeated the Jin people and occupied Wang Guan and Handan as a revenge for Handan's battle.

古文：晋人皆城守不敢出。
现代文：晋人皆守在城里不敢出来。
English: Everyone in Jin is in the city, afraid to come out.

古文：于是缪公乃自茅津渡河，封肴中尸，为发丧，哭之三日。
现代文：于是缪公就从茅津渡河，掩埋了殽山中尸骨，为他们发丧，哭了三天。
English: Therefore, Miao Gong crossed the river from Maojin and buried the bones in Shaoshan. He mourned for them and cried for three days.

古文：乃誓于军曰： 嗟士卒！
现代文：缪公向全军发布誓辞说： 哎，将士们!
English: Miao Gong issued an oath to the entire army, saying: Hey, soldiers!

古文：听无哗，余誓告汝。
现代文：你们听着，不要喧哗，我向你们发誓。
English: Listen to me, don't make any noise, I swear to you.

古文：古之人谋黄髪番番，则无所过。 
现代文：我要告诉你们，古人办事虚心听取老年人的意见，所以不会有什么过错。 
English: I want to tell you that the ancients did things humbly and listened to the opinions of the elderly, so there would be no fault.

古文：以申思不用蹇叔、百里傒之谋，故作此誓，令后世以记余过。
现代文：缪公再次反思自己不采纳蹇叔、百里傒的计谋而造成的过失，因此发出这样的誓言，让后代记住自己的过失。
English: Miao Gong once again reflected on the mistakes he made by not adopting the stratagems of Uncle Zou and Bai Lijuan, and therefore issued such a vow to let future generations remember his mistakes.

古文：君子闻之，皆为垂涕，曰： 嗟乎！
现代文：君子们听说这件事，都为之落泪，说： 啊!
English: When the gentlemen heard of it, they shed tears and said, "Ah!

古文：秦缪公之与人周也，卒得孟明之庆。 
现代文：秦缪公待人真周到，终于得到了孟明等人胜利的福泽。 
English: Qin Miao's public treatment of people was really thoughtful, and he finally got the blessing of the victory of Meng Ming and others.

古文：三十七年，秦用由余谋伐戎王，益国十二，开地千里，遂霸西戎。
现代文：三十七年，秦采用了由余的计策讨伐戎王，兼并了十二个国家，开拓了方千里的土地，终于称霸西戎。
English: In the 37th year, Qin used Yu Yu's strategy to fight against the King of Warung, annexed twelve countries, opened up thousands of miles of land, and finally dominated West Rong.

古文：天子使召公过贺缪公以金鼓。
现代文：天子派召公过赐给缪公金鼓表示祝贺。
English: The Son of Heaven sent the summoner to congratulate Miku on being given the golden drum.

古文：三十九年，缪公卒，葬雍。
现代文：三十九年，缪公死，葬于雍。
English: In 39 years, Miao Gong died and was buried in Yong.

古文：从死者百七十七人，秦之良臣子舆氏三人名曰奄息、仲行、针虎，亦在从死之中。
现代文：陪葬者共一百七十七人，秦有贤臣三人，属子舆氏，名叫奄息、仲行、鍼虎，也在陪殉者之列。
English: There were a total of 177 mourners, including three of Qin's wise men, who belonged to the Ziwu clan, and whose names were Amasi, Zhongxing, and Acupuncture Tiger. They were also among the mourners.

古文：秦人哀之，为作歌黄鸟之诗。
现代文：秦人哀痛，为之作《黄鸟》之诗。
English: The people of Qin were so sad that they wrote the poem "Yellow Bird" about it.

古文：君子曰： 秦缪公广地益国，东服强晋，西霸戎夷，然不为诸侯盟主，亦宜哉。
现代文：君子说： 秦缪公扩地并国，东面打败强晋，西面称霸戎夷，然而不能作诸侯盟主，也是应该的。
English: The gentleman said, "Qin Miao expanded his territory and unified the country, defeated Qiang Jin in the east, and claimed hegemony over Rongyi in the west. However, he was not able to become the lord of the provinces, which was also appropriate.

古文：死而弃民，收其良臣而从死。
现代文：死后不爱惜臣民，还要把自己的贤臣也带去陪葬。
English: After death, he did not spare his subjects, but also took his wise men to accompany the funeral.

古文：且先王崩，尚犹遗德垂法，况夺之善人良臣百姓所哀者乎？是以知秦不能复东征也。 
现代文：先王去世，尚且要留下好的道德和制度，何况是夺取百姓同情的好人和贤臣呢？由此可见秦不能东征了。 
English: After the death of the previous king, how could he leave behind good morals and systems, not to mention good men and sages who won the sympathy of the people? This shows that Qin could not go to the East.

古文：缪公子四十人，其太子嵤代立，是为康公。
现代文：缪公有子四十人，他的太子叫代之而立，就是康公。
English: Miao Gong had forty sons, and his crown prince was named Zou, and was named Kang Gong.

古文：康公元年。
现代文：康公元年。
English: It was the year of Kang.

古文：往岁缪公之卒，晋襄公亦卒；襄公之弟名雍，秦出也，在秦。
现代文：前一年，缪公去世的时候，晋襄公也去世了；晋襄公的弟弟叫雍，是秦国之女所生，住在秦国。
English: The year before, when Miao Gong passed away, Jin Xiangong also passed away; Jin Xiangong's younger brother was named Yong, who was born to a Qin princess and lived in Qin.

古文：晋赵盾欲立之，使随会来迎雍，秦以兵送至令狐。
现代文：晋卿赵盾想拥立他为君，派随会来接他，秦国派兵把雍护送到令狐。
English: Jin Emperor Zhao Dun wanted to make him his prince and sent an entourage to meet him. Qin State sent soldiers to escort Yong to Linghu.

古文：晋立襄公子而反击秦师，秦师败，随会来奔。
现代文：而晋国已立了襄公的儿子，反倒来攻打秦军，秦军战败，随会逃奔到秦国。
English: On the other hand, the son of Prince Xiang, who had been appointed by Jin, attacked the Qin army. The Qin army was defeated and fled to Qin.

古文：二年，秦伐晋，取武城，报令狐之役。
现代文：二年，秦伐晋，占领武城，用来报复令狐之役。
English: In the second year, Qin Huajin occupied Wucheng and used it to avenge the Battle of Linghu.

古文：四年，晋伐秦，取少梁。
现代文：四年，晋伐秦，占领少梁。
English: In the fourth year, they invaded Qin and occupied Shao Liang.

古文：六年，秦伐晋，取羁马。
现代文：六年，秦伐晋，占领羁马。
English: In the sixth year of the Qin and Jin Dynasties, Guoma was occupied.

古文：战于河曲，大败晋军。
现代文：两军交战于河曲，大败晋军。
English: The two armies clashed at Hequ and defeated the Jin army.

古文：晋人患随会在秦为乱，乃使魏雠馀详反，合谋会，诈而得会，会遂归晋。
现代文：晋人担心随会在秦国会给晋国带来战乱，便派魏雠余假装叛变，与随会合谋，用诈谋得到随会，随会因而回到晋国。
English: The Jin people were worried that the attendants would bring war to Jin, so they sent Wei Xingyu to pretend to be a renegade, conspire with the attendants, use fraud to get the attendants, and then return to Jin.

古文：康公立十二年卒，子共公立。
现代文：康公在位十二年死，其子共公即位。
English: Kang Gong died twelve years into his reign, and his son Gung Gong ascended the throne.

古文：共公二年，晋赵穿弑其君灵公。
现代文：共公二年，晋国的赵穿杀其国君灵公。
English: In the second year of the communist regime, Zhao Zeng of Jin killed his country's ruler Linggong.

古文：三年，楚庄王强，北兵至雒，问周鼎。
现代文：三年，楚庄公强大，出兵北上攻到洛水，问周鼎的轻重大小。
English: In three years, Chu Zhuang was strong and sent troops north to attack Luoshui, and asked Zhou Ding how important it was.

古文：共公立五年卒，子桓公立。
现代文：共公在位五年死，其子桓公即位。
English: In the fifth year of his reign, Komonko died, and his son Kanko ascended to the throne.

古文：桓公三年，晋败我一将。
现代文：桓公三年，晋军打败我军，俘虏将军一名。
English: In the third year of King Kan, the Jin army defeated our army and took a general prisoner.

古文：十年，楚庄王服郑，北败晋兵于河上。
现代文：十年，楚庄王征服郑，北上打败晋军于黄河边。
English: Ten years later, King Chu Zhuang conquered Zheng and marched north to defeat the Jin army at the Yellow River.

古文：当是之时，楚霸，为会盟合诸侯。二十四年，晋厉公初立，与秦桓公夹河而盟。
现代文：当时，楚称霸，主持诸侯会盟。二十四年，晋厉公刚即位，与秦桓公隔着黄河会盟。
English: At that time, Chu dominated and presided over the princes' alliance. Twenty-four years later, Jin Li Gong had just ascended to the throne, separated from Qin Huan Gong by the Yellow River alliance.

古文：归而秦倍盟，与翟合谋击晋。
现代文：回来后秦违背盟约，与翟人合伙策划攻打晋国。
English: After returning, Qin broke the treaty and plotted to attack Jin in partnership with Yan.

古文：二十六年，晋率诸侯伐秦，秦军败走，追至泾而还。
现代文：二十六年，晋率领诸侯伐秦，秦军败逃，晋军一直追到泾水才回去。
English: In the twenty-sixth year, Jin led the lords to attack Qin. The Qin army was defeated and fled, and the Jin army chased them all the way to Surabaya before returning.

古文：桓公立二十七年卒，子景公立。
现代文：桓公在位二十七年死，其子景公即位。
English: Prince Kan died in the 27th year of his reign, and his son, Prince Kage, ascended the throne.

古文：景公四年，晋栾书弑其君厉公。
现代文：景公四年，晋国的栾书杀了他的君主厉公。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of King Jing, the scribe of the State of Jin killed his sovereign, King Li.

古文：十五年，救郑，败晋兵于栎。
现代文：十五年，秦军救郑国，在栎邑打败晋军。
English: In the fifteenth year, the Qin army saved Zheng and defeated the Jin army in Jinyu.

古文：是时晋悼公为盟主。
现代文：这时候，晋悼公成为盟主。
English: At this time, Jin Yue Gong became the leader.

古文：十八年，晋悼公强，数会诸侯，率以伐秦，败秦军。
现代文：十八年，晋悼公强大起来，多次召集诸侯会盟，率领诸侯攻打秦国，打败了秦军。
English: In the 18th year, Jin Yuegong became powerful, repeatedly convened the princes' alliance, led the princes to attack Qin, and defeated the Qin army.

古文：秦军走，晋兵追之，遂渡泾，至棫林而还。
现代文：秦军败逃，晋兵在后面追赶，一直渡过泾水，追到棫林才返回。
English: The Qin army was defeated and fled, and the Jin soldiers chased after them. They kept crossing the Surabaya River and chased them until they reached the Yulin Mountains.

古文：二十七年，景公如晋，与平公盟，已而背之。
现代文：二十七年，秦景公到了晋国，与晋平公订立盟约，不久就背叛了盟约。
English: In the 27th year, Qin Jing Gong arrived in Jin Province, signed a covenant with Jin Ping Gong, and soon betrayed the covenant.

古文：三十六年，楚公子围弑其君而自立，是为灵王。
现代文：三十六年，楚国公子围杀了他的君主自立为王，这就是楚灵王。
English: Thirty-six years ago, the prince of the State of Chu besieged his sovereign and made himself king. This was King Chuling.

古文：景公母弟后子针有宠，景公母弟富，或谮之，恐诛，乃奔晋，车重千乘。
现代文：秦景公的同母兄弟后子鍼得宠，而且富有，有人说坏话诬陷他，他害怕被杀，就逃奔到晋国，带着锱重车上千辆。
English: Qin Jinggong's half-brother and son-in-law, Acupuncture, was favored and rich. Some people slandered and framed him. He was afraid of being killed, so he fled to Jin Province, taking thousands of carts with him.

古文：晋平公曰： 后子富如此，何以自亡？ 
现代文：晋平公说： 您这样富有，为什么还要逃亡呢? 
English: Jin Ping Gong said: You are so rich, why do you want to escape?

古文：对曰： 秦公无道，畏诛，欲待其后世乃归。 
现代文：后子鍼回答说： 秦君无道，我害怕被杀害。想等到他的继承人登位再回去。 
English: Houzi Jing replied: "Qin Jun has no way, I am afraid of being killed. I want to wait until his heir ascends the throne before returning."

古文：三十九年，楚灵王强，会诸侯于申，为盟主，杀齐庆封。
现代文：三十九年，楚灵王强大起来，在申地与诸侯会盟，做了盟主，杀了齐国的庆封。
English: In the thirty-ninth year, King Chuling became powerful and made an alliance with the feudal lords in Shendi, became the leader of the alliance, and killed Qingfeng of Qi.

古文：景公立四十年卒，子哀公立。
现代文：景公在位四十年去世，儿子哀公继位。
English: Prince Jing died after a reign of forty years, and his son Prince Aiko succeeded to the throne.

古文：后子复来归秦。
现代文：后子鍼又回到秦国。
English: Later, acupuncture came back to Qin.

古文：哀公八年，楚公子弃疾弑灵王而自立，是为平王。
现代文：哀公八年，楚公子弃疾杀灵王而自立，就是平王。
English: In the eighth year of mourning, Chu Gongzi abandoned his illness to kill the spirit king and became independent, that is, Pingwang.

古文：十一年，楚平王来求秦女为太子建妻。
现代文：十年，楚平王派人来求娶秦国女子作太子建的妻子。
English: Ten years later, King Chuping sent someone to ask for a woman from Qin to be Prince Jian's wife.

古文：至国，女好而自娶之。
现代文：娶回国来，见秦国女子漂亮便自己娶了过去。
English: When he got married back home, he married a beautiful woman from Qin.

古文：十五年，楚平王欲诛建，建亡；伍子胥奔吴。
现代文：十五年，楚平王要处死太子建，太子建逃亡：伍子胥逃奔到吴国。
English: In the fifteenth year, Prince Chuping wanted to execute Prince Jian, but Prince Jian fled: Wu Zixuan fled to the State of Wu.

古文：晋公室卑而六卿强，欲内相攻，是以久秦晋不相攻。
现代文：晋国公室衰落，六卿强大，考虑的主要是内部的兼并，所以有很长时间秦、晋不再相互攻击。
English: With the decline of the Jin court and the power of the Six Lords, the main consideration was internal mergers, so for a long time the Qin and Jin did not attack each other.

古文：三十一年，吴王阖闾与伍子胥伐楚，楚王亡奔随，吴遂入郢。
现代文：三十一年，吴王阖闾与伍子胥伐楚，楚王逃奔到随国；吴乘势攻进郢。
English: In the 31st year, Wu Wang Yao and Wu Zi fought against Chu. Chu Wang fled to Sui Province; Wu took advantage of the situation to attack Yao.

古文：楚大夫申包胥来告急，七日不食，日夜哭泣。
现代文：楚国的大夫申包胥来告急，七天不吃饭，日夜哭泣。
English: The doctor of Chu, Shen Baojun, came in a hurry, did not eat for seven days, and cried day and night.

古文：于是秦乃发五百乘救楚，败吴师。
现代文：这样秦国才派兵车五百辆救援楚国，打败吴军。
English: As a result, Qin sent five hundred chariots to rescue Chu and defeat the Wu army.

古文：吴师归，楚昭王乃得复入郢。
现代文：吴军撤回，楚昭王才又回到郢。
English: The Wu army withdrew, and Chu Zhao Wang returned to Shao.

古文：哀公立三十六年卒。
现代文：哀公在位三十六年死。
English: Aiko died after 36 years on the throne.

古文：太子夷公，夷公蚤死，不得立，立夷公子，是为惠公。
现代文：太子为夷公，夷公早死，未能即位，立夷公之子为君，就是惠公。
English: The crown prince is Yi Gong, Yi Gong died early and did not succeed to the throne, and the son of Yi Gong is you, that is, Hui Gong.

古文：惠公元年，孔子行鲁相事。
现代文：惠公元年，孔子代理鲁国国相的职务。
English: In the year of Hui, Confucius assumed the post of acting Lu minister of state.

古文：五年，晋卿中行、范氏反晋，晋使智氏、赵简子攻之，范、中行氏亡奔齐。
现代文：五年，晋卿中行氏、范氏反叛晋国，晋君派智氏和赵简子讨伐他们，范氏、中行氏逃到齐国。
English: In the 5th year of the Jin Dynasty, the Jin princes Zhong Xing and Fan rebelled against Jin, and Jin sent Zhi and Zhao Jianzi to fight them, while Fan and Zhong Xing fled to Qi.

古文：惠公立十年卒，子悼公立。
现代文：惠公在位十年去世，儿子悼公继位。
English: Emperor Huigong died ten years into his reign, and his son Emperor Qianlong succeeded to the throne.

古文：悼公二年，齐臣田乞弑其君孺子，立其兄阳生，是为悼公。
现代文：悼公二年，齐国大臣田乞杀其国君孺子，立他的哥哥阳生为君，就是悼公。
English: In the second year of the mourning period, the minister of Qi State, Tian Bei, killed his countryman, Zizi, and appointed his brother, Yang Sheng, as the prince. This was the mourning period.

古文：六年，吴败齐师。
现代文：六年，吴打败齐军。
English: In six years, Wu defeated the Qi army.

古文：齐人弑悼公，立其子简公。
现代文：齐人杀悼公，立其子简公为君。
English: Qi people killed and mourned Gong and set up his son Jian Gong as king.

古文：九年，晋定公与吴王夫差盟，争长于黄池，卒先吴。
现代文：九年，晋定公与吴王夫差在黄池会盟，为序次先后而发生争执，终于让吴国称长。
English: In the ninth year, Jin Ding Gong and Wu Wang Fuzha were in the Huangchi League, and there was a dispute over the order of succession, which finally made Wu Guo Mao the leader.

古文：吴强，陵中国。
现代文：吴国强大，侵犯中原各国。
English: The State of Wu was powerful and invaded many countries in the Central Plains.

古文：十二年，齐田常弑简公，立其弟平公，常相之。
现代文：十二年，齐国的田常杀简公，立简公的弟弟平公为君，由田常做他的相。
English: In the twelfth year, Tian Chang of Qi killed Jian Gong and made Jian Gong's younger brother, Ping Gong, his regent, with Tian Chang as his consort.

古文：十三年，楚灭陈。
现代文：十三年，楚灭陈。
English: In the thirteenth year, Chu extinguished Chen.

古文：秦悼公立十四年卒，子厉共公立。
现代文：秦悼公在位十四年死，其子厉共公即位。
English: Qin Muigong died fourteen years into his reign, and his son Li Conggong ascended the throne.

古文：孔子以悼公十二年卒。
现代文：孔子于悼公十二年去世。
English: Confucius died in the twelfth year of mourning.

古文：厉共公二年，蜀人来赂。
现代文：厉共公二年，蜀人前来进献财物。
English: In the second year of the Communist Party of China, the people of Shu came to donate their property.

古文：十六年，堑河旁。
现代文：十六年，在黄河旁挖掘壕沟。
English: Sixteen years, digging trenches next to the Yellow River.

古文：以兵二万伐大荔，取其王城。
现代文：派兵两万去攻打大荔国，攻占了大荔王城邑。
English: He sent twenty thousand soldiers to attack the Great Lai State and captured the Great Lai King Town.

古文：二十一年，初县频阳。
现代文：二十一年，开始在频阳设县。
English: In the 21st year, it began to set up a county in Fanyang.

古文：晋取武成。
现代文：晋占领武成。
English: Jin occupied Wucheng.

古文：二十四年，晋乱，杀智伯，分其国与赵、韩、魏。
现代文：二十四年，晋国内乱，智伯被杀，他的封土被赵、韩、魏三国瓜分。
English: In 1924, during the Jin civil war, Zhibo was killed, and his fief was divided among the three countries of Zhao, Han, and Wei.

古文：二十五年，智开与邑人来奔。
现代文：二十五年，智开与智氏封邑中的人逃亡到秦国。
English: In 25 years, Zhi Kai and the people in Zhi's fief fled to Qin.

古文：三十三年，伐义渠，虏其王。
现代文：三十三年，伐义渠，俘虏义渠王。
English: Thirty-three years ago, the King of Yiquan was captured in the Battle of Yiquan.

古文：三十四年，日食。
现代文：三十四年，发生日食。
English: Thirty-four years ago, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：厉共公卒，子躁公立。
现代文：厉共公死，他的儿子躁公即位。
English: Li Conggong died and his son Manigong ascended to the throne.

古文：躁公二年，南郑反。
现代文：躁公二年，南郑邑反叛。
English: In the second year of the Manchurian era, Nan Zhengyi rebelled.

古文：十三年，义渠来伐，至渭南。
现代文：十三年，义渠来攻打秦国，到了渭南。
English: In the thirteenth year, Yiquan came to attack Qin and arrived in southern Anhui.

古文：十四年，躁公卒，立其弟怀公。
现代文：十四年，躁公去世，他的弟弟怀公继位。
English: Fourteen years later, Prince Mani died, and his younger brother Prince Huai succeeded to the throne.

古文：怀公四年，庶长晁与大臣围怀公，怀公自杀。
现代文：怀公四年，庶长晁和大臣围攻怀公，怀公自杀。
English: In Huai Gong's fourth year, the second-in-command and the minister besieged Huai Gong, and Huai Gong committed suicide.

古文：怀公太子曰昭子，蚤死，大臣乃立太子昭子之子，是为灵公。
现代文：怀公太子名叫昭子，死得早，大臣们就立昭子的儿子为王，就是灵公。
English: The prince in her arms was named Akiko, but he died early, and the ministers made Akiko's son, Rinko, king.

古文：灵公，怀公孙也。
现代文：灵公，就是怀公的孙子。
English: Linggong is the grandson of Huigong.

古文：灵公六年，晋城少梁，秦击之。
现代文：灵公六年，晋国在少梁筑城，秦军攻打晋国。
English: In the sixth year of Ling Gong, Jin Province built a city in Shaoliang, and the Qin Army attacked Jin Province.

古文：十三年，城籍姑。
现代文：十三年，秦国在籍姑筑城。
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of Qin, the Empress Dowager built a city.

古文：灵公卒，子献公不得立，立灵公季父悼子，是为简公。
现代文：灵公去世，儿子献公没能继位，立子灵公的叔父悼子，这就是简公。
English: Ling Gong died, his son Xiang Gong failed to succeed, and Ling Gong's uncle mourned his son, this is Jian Gong.

古文：简公，昭子之弟而怀公子也。
现代文：简公是昭子的弟弟，怀公的儿子。
English: Jian Gong is the younger brother of Akiko and the son of Huai Gong.

古文：简公六年，令吏初带剑。
现代文：简公六年，下令开始准许下层官吏佩剑。
English: In the sixth year of Jian Gong, he issued an order to begin allowing lower-level officials to wear swords.

古文：堑洛。城重泉。
现代文：堑修洛水的堤岸，修筑重泉城的城墙。
English: He repaired the embankment of the Luo River and built the city wall of the heavy spring city.

古文：十六年卒，子惠公立。
现代文：十六年死，他的儿子惠公即位。
English: Sixteen years after his death, his son, Empress Dowager Hui, ascended to the throne.

古文：惠公十二年，子出子生。
现代文：惠公十二年，他的儿子出子出生。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Huigong's reign, his son was born.

古文：十三年，伐蜀，取南郑。
现代文：十三年，攻伐蜀国，占领南郑。
English: In the thirteenth year, they invaded Shu Province and occupied Nan Zheng.

古文：惠公卒，出子立。
现代文：惠公去世，出子即位。
English: Emperor Huigong died and his son ascended to the throne.

古文：出子二年，庶长改迎灵公之子献公于河西而立之。
现代文：出子二年，庶长菌改把灵公之子献公从河西接回来立为国君。
English: In the second year after the birth of his son, Chokyo, the son of Linggong, brought back Xiangong from Hexi and made him the ruler of the country.

古文：杀出子及其母，沈之渊旁。
现代文：杀出子及其母，把他们沉入深渊。
English: Kill the son and his mother, and throw them into the abyss.

古文：秦以往者数易君，君臣乖乱，故晋复强，夺秦河西地。
现代文：在以前一段时间里，秦国频繁更换国君，君臣名分颠倒失次，所以晋国又重新强大起来，夺走秦在黄河以西的土地。
English: In the previous period, Qin frequently changed its monarchs, and the titles of monarchs and ministers were reversed, so Jin became strong again and took away Qin's land west of the Yellow River.

古文：献公元年，止从死。
现代文：献公元年，废止陪葬。
English: In the year of the dedication of the Christian era, the accompanying burial was abolished.

古文：二年，城栎阳。
现代文：二年，修筑栎阳城的城墙。
English: It took two years to build the city wall of Shenyang City.

古文：四年正月庚寅，孝公生。
现代文：四年正月庚寅，孝公出生。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Goyang, Xiaogong was born.

古文：十一年，周太史儋见献公曰： 周故与秦国合而别，别五百岁复合，合十七岁而霸王出。 
现代文：十一年，周太史儋进见献公说： 周从前曾与秦一体，而后来又分了开来，分开五百年还会再合并，合起来十七年将有霸王出现。 
English: In the eleventh year, Zhou Taishi Yujin saw the offering and said: Zhou was once one with Qin, but later it was separated, separated for five hundred years and will be merged again, together in seventeen years there will be a tyrant.

古文：十六年，桃冬花。
现代文：十六年，桃树冬天开花。
English: In the 16th year, the peach trees bloomed in winter.

古文：十八年，雨金栎阳。
现代文：十八年，栎阳下金雨。
English: In 18 years, it rained gold in Fenyang.

古文：二十一年，与晋战于石门，斩首六万，天子贺以黼黻。
现代文：二十一年，和晋国在石门交战，斩首六万，天子赐给黼黻以示祝贺。
English: In the twenty-first year, he fought with Jin in Shimen, beheaded sixty thousand people, and was given a congratulatory gift from Heaven.

古文：二十三年，与魏晋战少梁，虏其将公孙痤。
现代文：二十三年，在少梁与魏国交战，俘虏魏将公孙痤。
English: Twenty-three years ago, in the war between Shaoliang and Wei, the Wei general Gongsun Rong was captured.

古文：二十四年，献公卒，子孝公立，年已二十一岁矣。
现代文：二十四年，献公去世，他的儿子孝公即位，年龄已二十一岁了。
English: Twenty-four years later, Emperor Xian died, and his son Emperor Xiaogong ascended the throne at the age of twenty-one.

古文：孝公元年，河山以东强国六，与齐威、楚宣、魏惠、燕悼、韩哀、赵成侯并。
现代文：孝公元年，黄河、崤山以东有六大强国，秦孝公与齐威王、楚宣王、魏惠王、燕悼王、韩哀侯、赵成侯并称。
English: In the year of Xiao, there were six great powers east of the Yellow River and Mount Lushan. Qin Xiaogong was also known as King Qi Wei, King Chu Xuan, King Wei Hui, King Yan Yi, Han Ai Hou, and Zhao Cheng Hou.

古文：淮泗之间小国十余。
现代文：淮水、泗水之间有小国十多个。
English: There are more than ten small countries between Huai Shui and Surabaya.

古文：楚、魏与秦接界。
现代文：楚、魏与秦接界。
English: Chu, Wei and Qin are bordered.

古文：魏筑长城，自郑滨洛以北，有上郡。
现代文：魏筑长城，从郑沿洛水河岸北上，占有上郡之地。
English: Wei built the Great Wall, stretching from Zheng along the bank of the Luoshui River to the north, occupying the land of Shang County.

古文：楚自汉中，南有巴、黔中。
现代文：楚从汉中，往南占有巴郡和黔中郡。
English: From Hanzhong, Chu occupied Ba County and Luzhong County to the south.

古文：周室微，诸侯力政，争相并。
现代文：周王室衰落，各诸侯国凭武力征伐，相互兼并。
English: The Zhou royal family was in decline, and the various principalities conquered and annexed each other by force.

古文：秦僻在雍州，不与中国诸侯之会盟，夷翟遇之。
现代文：秦僻处雍州，不参加中原各国的会盟，被人视同夷翟。
English: Qin's outpost, Yongzhou, did not join the league of Central Plains countries, and was regarded as a barbarian.

古文：孝公于是布惠，振孤寡，招战士，明功赏。
现代文：孝公于是广施恩惠，赈济孤寡，招募战士，论功行赏。
English: Therefore, the filial piety extended its favors, provided for widows and orphans, recruited soldiers, and rewarded meritorious deeds.

古文：下令国中曰： 昔我缪公自岐雍之间，修德行武，东平晋乱，以河为界，西霸戎翟，广地千里，天子致伯，诸侯毕贺，为后世开业，甚光美。
现代文：下令国中说： 从前我们的祖先缪公崛起于歧、雍之间，讲求文德武功，东面平定晋国内乱，以黄河与晋划界，西面称霸戎翟，扩地方千里之大，天子封他为方伯，诸侯都来祝贺，为后世创业，非常荣耀。
English: The decree said, "Once upon a time, our ancestor Miao Gong rose up amidst the differences and conflicts between the East and the West. He was praised for his literary and military achievements. In the East, he quelled the civil war in Jin. In the West, he was praised for the demarcation of the boundary between the Yellow River and Jin. In the East, he was said to have dominated and expanded the land for thousands of miles. The emperor made him the provincial governor, and all the princes came to congratulate him. It was a great honor to start a business for future generations.

古文：会往者厉、躁、简公、出子之不宁，国家内忧，未遑外事，三晋攻夺我先君河西地，诸侯卑秦、丑莫大焉。
现代文：不幸碰上厉共公、躁公、简公、出子在位的那段不安定时期，国家内有忧患，顾不上国外的事情，三晋乘机攻占了我先君的河西之地，诸侯都鄙视秦国，耻辱莫大于此。
English: Unfortunately, there was a period of instability during the reign of Li Congong, Manigong, Jian Gong, and Decheng. There were troubles in the country, and foreign affairs were not taken into account. The Three Jin Dynasty seized the opportunity to capture the land west of the river of my forefather. The princes despised Qin, and the shame could not be greater than this.

古文：献公即位，镇抚边境，徙治栎阳，且欲东伐，复缪公之故地，修缪公之政令。
现代文：献公即位，安抚边境，迁都栎阳，并且打算举兵东征，收复缪公旧地，重整缪公的政令。
English: He dedicated himself to the throne, pacified the border, moved the capital to Shenyang, and planned to raise an army to march eastward, recover the old land of Miao Gong, and reorganize Miao Gong's government.

古文：寡人思念先君之意，常痛于心。
现代文：我想到先君的意愿，每感痛心。
English: When I think of my late husband's wishes, my heart aches.

古文：宾客群臣有能出奇计强秦者，吾且尊官，与之分土。 
现代文：宾客群臣有能进献奇计使秦国强大者，我将封以高官，分给土地。 
English: If there are guests and courtiers who can come up with a wonderful plan to make Qin a powerful country, I will appoint them as high-ranking officials and give them land.

古文：于是乃出兵东围陕城，西斩戎之獂王。
现代文：随即出兵东围陕城，西斩戎族的獂王。
English: He immediately dispatched troops to the east to encircle the city of Shaanxi, and to the west to cut off the king of the Wusong people.

古文：卫鞅闻是令下，西入秦，因景监求见孝公。
现代文：卫鞅听说此令已下，西来秦国，通过景监介绍求见孝公。
English: Hearing that this order had been issued, Wei Wei came west to Qin and asked to see Xiaogong through the introduction of the scenic supervisor.

古文：二年，天子致胙。
现代文：二年，天子赏赐秦王祭肉。
English: In the second year, the heavenly son rewarded the Qin King with sacrificial meat.

古文：三年，卫鞅说孝公变法修刑，内务耕稼，外劝战死之赏罚，孝公善之。
现代文：三年，卫鞅劝说孝公实行变法，制订刑罚，对内提倡致力农业，对外严明赏罚，鼓励士卒力战效死，孝公表示赞赏。
English: In the third year, Wei Xuan persuaded Xiaogong to change the law, formulate punishments, promote domestic efforts in agriculture, strictly reward and punish foreign countries, and encourage soldiers to work hard and die in battle. Xiaogong expressed his appreciation.

古文：甘龙、杜挚等弗然，相与争之。
现代文：但甘龙、杜挚等人不以为然，同他辩论起来。
English: However, Kanron, Du Zhiyi and others disagreed and started a debate with him.

古文：卒用鞅法，百姓苦之；居三年，百姓便之。
现代文：最后还是采纳了卫鞅的新法。百姓觉得很苦，但过了三年，他们就习惯了。
English: In the end, the new law was adopted. The people found it very difficult, but after three years, they got used to it.

古文：乃拜鞅为左庶长。
现代文：于是封卫鞅为左庶长。
English: As a result, Feng Weijuan became the deputy commander of the left.

古文：其事在商君语中。
现代文：这些事在《商君列传》中有介绍。
English: These events are described in the "Merchant's Chronicles."

古文：七年，与魏惠王会杜平。
现代文：七年，与魏惠王会见于杜平。
English: Seven years later, he met Wei Hui Wang in Duping.

古文：八年，与魏战元里，有功。
现代文：八年，与魏交战于元里，获得胜利。
English: Eight years later, it fought against Wei in Yuanli and won a victory.

古文：十年，卫鞅为大良造，将兵围魏安邑，降之。
现代文：十年，卫鞅封为大良造，率兵包围魏国的安邑，安邑投降。
English: In the 10th year, Wei Xuanfeng was a great builder. He led an army to encircle Wei's Anyi, and Anyi surrendered.

古文：十二年，作为咸阳，筑冀阙，秦徙都之。
现代文：十二年，建造咸阳城，修筑冀阙，秦迁都于咸阳。
English: In the twelfth year, the construction of Xianyang City, the construction of Jizhong, and the relocation of the Qin capital to Xianyang.

古文：并诸小乡聚，集为大县，县一令，四十一县。
现代文：合并各小乡聚，编为大县，每县设县令一人，共四十一县。
English: The small townships were merged and organized into large counties, with one county magistrate per county, for a total of forty-one counties.

古文：为田开阡陌。东地渡洛。
现代文：规划田亩，设置阡陌，把领土扩大到洛水以东。
English: Planned fields and acres, set up a post office, and expanded the territory to the east of Luoshui.

古文：十四年，初为赋。
现代文：十四年，开始收赋。
English: Fourteen years have passed since the start of the tax collection.

古文：十九年，天子致伯。
现代文：十九年，天子封秦王为伯。
English: In the 19th year of the Heian period, Emperor Qin was enthroned.

古文：二十年，诸侯毕贺。
现代文：二十年，诸侯皆来祝贺。
English: Twenty years, all the lords came to congratulate.

古文：秦使公子少官率师会诸侯逢泽，朝天子。
现代文：秦派公子少官率兵与请侯会盟于逢泽，并朝见天子。
English: Qin sent a minor official named Gongzi to lead an army and invite the Hou clan to meet in Huazawa, and to meet the emperor.

古文：二十一年，齐败魏马陵。
现代文：二十一年，齐在马陵打败魏军。
English: In 1921, Qi defeated the Wei army at Maling.

古文：二十二年，卫鞅击魏，虏魏公子昂。
现代文：二十二年，卫鞅攻打魏，俘虏魏公子卬。
English: In the 22nd year, Wei Wei attacked Wei and captured Wei Gongzi.

古文：封鞅为列侯，号商君。
现代文：封卫鞅为列侯，号称 商君 。
English: Feng Wei was a vassal lord, known as a merchant.

古文：二十四年，与晋战雁门，虏其将魏错。
现代文：二十四年，与晋交战于雁门，俘虏敌将魏错。
English: Twenty-four years later, he fought against Jin at the Wild Goose Gate and captured the enemy general Wei Zuo.

古文：孝公卒，子惠文君立。
现代文：孝公去世，其子惠文君即位。
English: Prince Takakuni died, and his son, Prince Huiwen, ascended the throne.

古文：是岁，诛卫鞅。
现代文：此年，处死卫鞅。
English: This year, Wei Xuan was executed.

古文：鞅之初为秦施法，法不行，太子犯禁。
现代文：卫鞅刚在秦国施行新法，新法不能推行，首先太子即触犯法律规定。
English: Wei Wei had just implemented a new law in Qin. The new law could not be implemented. First of all, the crown prince violated the law.

古文：鞅曰： 法之不行，自于贵戚。君必欲行法，先于太子。
现代文：卫鞅对孝公说： 新法不能推行，阻力首先来自贵戚，您如果决心推行新法，就得先从太子下手。
English: Wei Wei said to Prince Xiaogong, "The new law cannot be implemented. The resistance comes first from your relatives. If you are determined to implement the new law, you must start with the crown prince."

古文：太子不可黥，黥其傅师。 
现代文：太子不可施以墨刑，给他的师傅们施以黥刑。 
English: A prince should not torture with ink, but should torture his masters with whips.

古文：于是法大用，秦人治。
现代文：这样一来，新法才顺利推行，秦人才被治理好。
English: In this way, the new law will be successfully implemented, and Qin talents will be well governed.

古文：及孝公卒，太子立，宗室多怨鞅，鞅亡，因以为反，而卒车裂以徇秦国。
现代文：等到孝公一死，太子即位，不少宗室大臣都很怨恨卫鞅，卫鞅逃亡，因此被加上反叛的罪名，而终于彼车裂示众于秦国。
English: When Prince Xiaogong died and the crown prince ascended to the throne, many family ministers resented Wei Xuan. Wei Xuan fled, and was therefore charged with rebellion. Finally, he was expelled from Qin.

古文：惠文君元年，楚、韩、赵、蜀人来朝。
现代文：惠文君元年，楚、韩、赵、蜀等国来朝见。
English: In the first year of Hui Wenjun, Chu, Han, Zhao, Shu and other countries came to the DPRK.

古文：二年，天子贺。
现代文：二年，天子向秦祝贺。
English: In the second year, Tianzi congratulated Qin.

古文：三年，王冠。
现代文：三年，惠文君行冠礼。
English: In the third year, King Qin performed the coronation.

古文：四年，天子致文武胙。
现代文：四年，天子赏赐祭祀文王、武王的祭肉。
English: In the fourth year, the heavenly son rewarded the sacrificial meat of King Wen and King Wu.

古文：齐、魏为王。
现代文：齐国和魏国国君相互称王。
English: The sovereigns of Qi and Wei proclaimed each other kings.

古文：五年，阴晋人犀首为大良造。
现代文：五年，阴晋人犀首封为大良造。
English: In five years, Yin Jinren Zhao was the first to be awarded the title of Dalangzong.

古文：六年，魏纳阴晋，阴晋更名宁秦。
现代文：六年，魏割让阴晋给秦，阴晋改名叫宁秦。
English: In the sixth year, Wei ceded Yinjin to Qin, and Yinjin changed its name to Ningqin.

古文：七年，公子昂与魏战，虏其将龙贾，斩首八万。
现代文：七年，公子卬与魏军交战，俘虏魏将龙贾，斩首八万。
English: In the seventh year, Gongzixuan fought against the Wei army, captured the Wei general Longjia, and beheaded 80,000 people.

古文：八年，魏纳河西地。
现代文：八年，魏割让河西之地。
English: In the eighth year, Wei ceded the land west of the river.

古文：九年，渡河，取汾阴、皮氏。
现代文：九年，东渡黄河，占领汾阴、皮氏。
English: In the ninth year, Dongdu Yellow River, occupied Suyin, Pi.

古文：与魏王会应。
现代文：与魏王在应会见。
English: With Wei Wang at the meeting.

古文：围焦，降之。
现代文：包围焦地，迫其投降。
English: Encircle the land of anxiety and force it to surrender.

古文：十年，张仪相秦。
现代文：十年，张仪到秦国为相。
English: Ten years later, Zhang Yi went to Qin as a consort.

古文：魏纳上郡十五县。
现代文：魏割让上郡十五县。
English: Wei ceded 15 counties to Shang.

古文：十一年，县义渠。
现代文：十一年，在义渠设县。
English: In the eleventh year, a county was established in Yichuan.

古文：归魏焦、曲沃。
现代文：把焦、曲沃归还给魏。
English: Jiao and Quwo were returned to Wei.

古文：义渠君为臣。
现代文：义渠君称臣。
English: Yoshikune became a respected vassal.

古文：更名少梁曰夏阳。
现代文：将少梁改名为夏阳。
English: Xiao Liang was renamed Xia Yang.

古文：十二年，初腊。
现代文：十二年，开始设腊祭。
English: In the twelfth year, the wax festival began.

古文：十三年四月戊午，魏君为王，韩亦为王。
现代文：十三年四月戊午，魏君称王，韩君也称王。
English: On the afternoon of April 13th, Wei Jun proclaimed himself king, and Han Jun also proclaimed himself king.

古文：使张仪伐取陕，出其人与魏。
现代文：派张仪攻占陕，驱逐陕的居民到魏国。
English: Zhang Yi was sent to occupy Shaanxi and expel the inhabitants of Shaanxi to Wei.

古文：十四年，更为元年。
现代文：十四年，改元称元年。
English: Fourteen years later, it was renamed the first year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：二年，张仪与齐、楚大臣会啮桑。
现代文：二年，张仪与齐国和楚国的大臣会见于齧桑。
English: Two years later, Zhang Yi met with the ministers of Qi and Chu in Wuxang.

古文：三年，韩、魏太子来朝。张仪相魏。
现代文：三年，韩国和魏国的太子来朝见，张仪到魏国为相。
English: Three years later, the crown princes of Korea and Wei came to the imperial court to meet, and Zhang Yi went to Wei as the prime minister.

古文：五年，王游至北河。
现代文：五年，王巡游直到北河。
English: In five years, Wang toured as far as the North River.

古文：七年，乐池相秦。
现代文：七年，乐池到秦国为相。
English: In the seventh year, Lechi went to Qin as a pharaoh.

古文：韩、赵、魏、燕、齐帅匈奴共攻秦。
现代文：韩国、赵国、魏国、燕国、齐国率匈奴之兵一起攻打秦国。
English: Korea, Zhao, Wei, Yan and Qi led the Xiongnu soldiers to attack Qin together.

古文：秦使庶长疾与战修鱼，虏其将申差，败赵公子渴、韩太子奂，斩首八万二千。
现代文：秦派庶长樗里疾与之交战于修鱼，俘虏其将申差，打败赵公子渴、韩太子奂，斩首八万二千。
English: Qin sent his second-in-command, Gong Lisi, to fight against it at Shurong, captured its commander Shenzha, defeated Zhao Gongzi and Han Taizi, and beheaded 82,000 people.

古文：八年，张仪复相秦。
现代文：八年，张仪再次到秦国为相。
English: Eight years later, Zhang Yi again went to Qin as a consort.

古文：九年，司马错伐蜀，灭之。
现代文：九年，司马错伐蜀，并灭亡了它。
English: In the ninth year, Sima wrongly felled Shu, and it perished.

古文：伐取赵中都、西阳。
现代文：攻占赵的中都、西阳。
English: Seize the central city of Zhao, Xiyang.

古文：十年，韩太子苍来质。
现代文：十年，韩太子苍入秦为质。
English: Ten years later, Crown Prince Han of Han entered Qin as a hostage.

古文：伐取韩石章。
现代文：攻占韩的石章。
English: The conquest of Korea's Stone Insignia.

古文：伐败赵将泥。
现代文：打败赵将泥。
English: Defeat Zhao will be mud.

古文：伐取义渠二十五城。
现代文：攻占义渠的二十五座城。
English: Twenty-five cities in Yichuan Province were captured.

古文：十一年，樗里疾攻魏焦，降之。
现代文：十一年，樗里疾攻打魏国的焦地，迫其投降。
English: In the eleventh year, the Balinese launched a fierce attack on the Wei territory, forcing it to surrender.

古文：败韩岸门，斩首万，其将犀首走。
现代文：打败韩军于岸门，斩首一万，韩将犀首逃走。
English: Defeated the Korean army at the shore gate, decapitated ten thousand, and the Korean army fled.

古文：公子通封于蜀。
现代文：公子通被封于蜀。
English: Gongzidong was sealed in Shu.

古文：燕君让其臣子之。
现代文：燕君让位给其大臣子之。
English: Yan gave way to his minister, Zeng Zhi.

古文：十二年，王与梁王会临晋。
现代文：十二年，王与梁王会见于临晋。
English: In 2012, Wang and Liang Wang met in Linjin.

古文：庶长疾攻赵，虏赵将庄。
现代文：庶长樗里疾攻打赵国，俘虏了赵将赵庄。
English: Vice-commander Zou Li attacked Zhao Guo and captured Zhao general Zhao Zhuang.

古文：张仪相楚。
现代文：张仪到楚国为相。
English: Zhang Yi went to Chu Province as a consort.

古文：十三年，庶长章击楚于丹阳，虏其将屈丐，斩首八万；又攻楚汉中，取地六百里，置汉中郡。
现代文：十三年，庶长魏章打败楚军于丹阳，俘虏楚将屈匄，斩首八万；又攻打楚的汉中郡，占领的土地方六百里，设置汉中郡。
English: In the thirteenth year, the deputy commander Wei Zhang defeated the Chu army in Danyang, captured the Chu general Qu Qi, and beheaded 80,000 people; he also attacked the Hanzhong County of Chu, occupied 600 miles of land, and set up the Hanzhong County.

古文：楚围雍氏，秦使庶长疾助韩而东攻齐，到满助魏攻燕。
现代文：楚包围雍氏，秦派庶长樗里疾帮助韩东进攻打齐国，到满帮助魏攻打燕国。
English: Chu encircled the Yong Dynasty, and Qin sent his second-in-command Qili Zi to help Han and Dong attack Qi, and Zu Man to help Wei attack Yan.

古文：十四年，伐楚，取召陵。
现代文：十四年，伐楚，占领召陵。
English: Fourteen years later, the occupation of Zhaoling.

古文：丹、犁臣，蜀相壮杀蜀侯来降。
现代文：丹、犁称臣，蜀相壮杀死蜀侯前来投降。
English: Dan, Zou, and Shu, who claimed to be his vassals, came to surrender after killing Shu.

古文：惠王卒，子武王立。
现代文：惠王死，其子武王即位。
English: King Hui died and his son King Wu ascended the throne.

古文：韩、魏、齐、楚、越皆宾从。
现代文：韩、魏、齐、楚、越皆归顺。
English: Han, Wei, Qi, Chu and Yue all surrendered.

古文：武王元年，与魏襄王会临晋。
现代文：武王元年，与魏襄王会见于临晋。
English: In the first year of King Wu, he met with King Wei Xiang in Linjin.

古文：诛蜀相壮。
现代文：处死蜀相壮。
English: Shu Sangzhuang was executed.

古文：张仪、魏章皆东出之魏。
现代文：张仪、魏章都东去魏国。
English: Zhang Yi and Wei Zhang both went east to Wei.

古文：伐义渠、丹、犁。
现代文：伐义渠、丹、犁。
English: Waii Canal, Dan River, Fen River.

古文：二年，初置丞相，樗里疾、甘茂为左右丞相。
现代文：二年，开始设丞相，樗里疾、甘茂分别任左丞相和右丞相。
English: In the second year, the position of chancellor was created, and Kehrizaki and Kammao were appointed chancellor of the left and chancellor of the right, respectively.

古文：张仪死于魏。
现代文：张仪死在魏国。
English: Zhang Yi died in Wei.

古文：三年，与韩襄王会临晋外。
现代文：三年，与韩襄王会见于临晋外。
English: Three years later, he met with Han Xiangwang outside Linjin.

古文：南公揭卒，樗里疾相韩。
现代文：南公揭死，樗里疾到韩国为相。
English: Nankong's death was exposed, and the disease spread to South Korea.

古文：武王谓甘茂曰： 寡人欲容车通三川，窥周室，死不恨矣。 
现代文：武王对甘茂说： 我想开辟车道直通三川，一睹周室，就算是死了也不会有遗憾了。 
English: King Wu said to Ganmao, "I want to open a road straight to the Three Rivers. If I see Zhou's house, I will not regret it even if I die."

古文：其秋，使甘茂、庶长封伐宜阳。
现代文：当年秋天，派甘茂和庶长封攻打宜阳。
English: In the autumn of that year, he sent Ganmao and his second-in-command Changfeng to attack Yiyang.

古文：四年，拔宜阳，斩首六万。
现代文：四年，攻占宜阳，斩首六万。
English: In four years, they captured Yiyang and beheaded sixty thousand people.

古文：涉河，城武遂。
现代文：渡黄河，修筑武遂城的城墙。
English: He crossed the Yellow River and built the city wall of Wusui.

古文：魏太子来朝。
现代文：魏太子来朝见。
English: The Wei crown prince came to see me in the morning.

古文：武王有力好戏，力士任鄙、乌获、孟说皆至大官。
现代文：武王有气力，喜欢竞技，力士任鄙、乌获、孟说都做了大官。
English: King Wu had strength and liked competitive sports. The wrestlers Ren Xian, Wu Guo and Meng Xian all became high-ranking officials.

古文：王与孟说举鼎，绝膑。
现代文：武王与孟说比赛举鼎，折断膝盖。
English: Wu Wang and Meng said that the competition was a success, and they broke their knees.

古文：八月，武王死。
现代文：八月，武王去世。
English: In August, King Wu passed away.

古文：族孟说。
现代文：秦灭孟说一族。
English: Qin Shi Meng said one family.

古文：武王取魏女为后，无子。
现代文：武王娶魏国女子为后，没有儿子。
English: King Wu had no son after marrying a woman from Wei.

古文：立异母弟，是为昭襄王。
现代文：立武王的异母弟为君，就是昭襄王。
English: King Liwu's half-brother, King Zhaoxiang, is the king.

古文：昭襄母楚人，姓芈氏，号宣太后。
现代文：昭襄王的母亲是楚人，为芈姓，号称宣太后。
English: Zhao Xiangwang's mother was a Chu, surnamed Zou, and was known as Empress Dowager Xuan.

古文：武王死时，昭襄王为质于燕，燕人送归，得立。
现代文：武王死时，昭襄王在燕做人质，燕人送他回国，才得以即位。
English: When King Wu died, King Zhaoxiang was a hostage in Yan, and Yan people sent him back to China before he could succeed to the throne.

古文：昭襄王元年，严君疾为相。
现代文：昭襄王元年，严君樗里疾任丞相。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Zhao Xiang, Yan Jun was appointed as chancellor due to illness.

古文：甘茂出之魏。
现代文：甘茂出走到魏国。
English: Ganmao went to Wei.

古文：二年，彗星见。
现代文：二年，彗星出现。
English: Two years later, a comet appeared.

古文：庶长壮与大臣、诸侯、公子为逆，皆诛，及惠文后皆不得良死。
现代文：庶长壮与大臣、诸侯、公子谋篡王位，皆被处死，惠文后也不得好死。
English: The second eldest son, Nagaso, plotted with ministers, lords, and princes to usurp the throne, and they were all executed, as was Huiwen.

古文：悼武王后出归魏。
现代文：悼武王后出走回到魏。
English: In mourning, Queen Wu fled back to Wei.

古文：三年，王冠。
现代文：三年，秦王行冠礼。
English: In the third year, King Qin performed the coronation.

古文：与楚王会黄棘，与楚上庸。
现代文：与楚王会见于黄棘，把上庸之地归还给楚。
English: He met with King Chu in Huangxian and returned Shangyong to Chu.

古文：四年，取蒲阪。
现代文：四年，攻占蒲阪。
English: Four years later, they captured the city of Busan.

古文：彗星见。
现代文：彗星出现。
English: A comet appears.

古文：五年，魏王来朝应亭，复与魏蒲阪。
现代文：五年，魏王到应亭来朝见，把蒲阪归还给魏。
English: In the fifth year, Wei Wang came to Ying Ting to see the emperor, and returned the gazebo to Wei.

古文：六年，蜀侯煇反，司马错定蜀。
现代文：六年，蜀侯辉反叛，司马错平定蜀乱。
English: Six years later, Shuhou Hui rebelled, and Sima Zong successfully quelled the Shou Rebellion.

古文：庶长奂伐楚，斩首二万。
现代文：庶长奂伐楚，斩首二万。
English: The second-in-command, Zhao Huachu, beheaded 20,000 people.

古文：泾阳君质于齐。
现代文：泾阳君到齐国为质。
English: Shenyang Jun went to Qi Province as a hostage.

古文：日食，昼晦。
现代文：日食，白天天黑。
English: Solar eclipse, day turns dark.

古文：七年，拔新城。
现代文：七年，攻占新城。
English: Seven years later, the new city was conquered.

古文：樗里子卒。
现代文：樗里疾死。
English: Baoli died of illness.

古文：八年，使将军芈戎攻楚，取新市。
现代文：八年，派将军芈戎攻打楚，占领新市。
English: Eight years later, he sent the general Yu Rong to attack Chu and occupy Xincheng.

古文：齐使章子，魏使公孙喜，韩使暴鸢共攻楚方城，取唐眛。
现代文：齐派章子，魏派公孙喜，韩派暴鸢一起攻打楚国的方城，俘获唐眜。
English: The Qi faction sent Zhang Zi, the Wei faction sent Gong Sun Xi, and the Han faction sent Wu Gan to attack Fangcheng in Chu together, and captured Tang Xiu.

古文：赵破中山，其君亡，竟死齐。
现代文：赵攻破中山，其君逃亡，最后死于齐。
English: Zhao defeated Zhongshan, Qijun fled, and finally died in Qi.

古文：魏公子劲、韩公子长为诸侯。
现代文：魏公子劲、韩公子长被封为诸侯。
English: Wei Gongzi and Han Gongzi were made princes.

古文：九年，孟尝君薛文来相秦。
现代文：九年，孟尝君薛文到秦国任丞相。
English: In the ninth year, Meng Yuqun and Xue Wen went to Qin to serve as prime ministers.

古文：奂攻楚，取八城，杀其将景快。
现代文：奂攻打楚，占领八座城，杀楚将景快。
English: He attacked Chu, occupied eight cities, and killed Chu.

古文：十年，楚怀王入朝秦，秦留之。
现代文：十年，楚怀王来朝见秦，秦扣留了他。
English: Ten years later, King Chu Huai came to the court to see Qin, but Qin detained him.

古文：薛文以金受免。
现代文：薛文因金受而被免除丞相。
English: Xue Wen was removed from his post as chancellor for accepting money.

古文：楼缓为丞相。
现代文：楼缓任丞相。
English: He was later appointed chancellor.

古文：十一年，齐、韩、魏、赵、宋、中山五国共攻秦，至盐氏而还。
现代文：十一年，齐、韩、魏、赵、宋、中山等五国一起攻打秦国，到盐氏而还。
English: In the eleventh year, five countries, including Qi, Han, Wei, Zhao, Song, and Zhongshan, attacked Qin together and fought back against the Yan.

古文：秦与韩、魏河北及封陵以和。
现代文：秦把河北和封陵送给韩、魏以求和。
English: Qin gave Hebei and Fengling to Han and Wei in an attempt to make peace.

古文：彗星见。
现代文：彗星出现。
English: A comet appears.

古文：楚怀王走之赵，赵不受，还之秦，即死，归葬。
现代文：楚怀王逃跑到赵国，赵国不接纳，又遣返到秦国，不久就死了，尸体送回楚国下葬。
English: King Chu Huai fled to the State of Zhao, which did not accept him, and he was repatriated to the State of Qin. He died soon after, and his body was sent back to the State of Chu for burial.

古文：十二年，楼缓免，穰侯魏冉为相。
现代文：十二年，楼缓被免除丞相，穰侯魏冉任丞相。
English: In the twelfth year, Lou Ye was exempted from the post of chancellor, and Wei Ran was appointed chancellor.

古文：予楚粟五万石。
现代文：秦国送给楚国五万石粮食。
English: The State of Qin sent 50,000 koku of grain to the State of Chu.

古文：十三年，向寿伐韩，取武始。
现代文：十三年，向寿讨伐韩国，占领武始。
English: In 13 years, Xiangshou fought against South Korea and occupied Wuchih.

古文：左更白起攻新城。
现代文：左更白起攻打新城。
English: Zuo Zengbai started to attack Xincheng.

古文：五大夫礼出亡奔魏。
现代文：五大夫吕礼出走逃亡到魏国。
English: The Five Chiefs, including Lü Li, fled to Wei.

古文：任鄙为汉中守。
现代文：任鄙出任汉中郡守。
English: He was appointed Hanzhong County Governor.

古文：十四年，左更白起攻韩、魏于伊阙，斩首二十四万，虏公孙喜，拔五城。
现代文：十四年，左更白起在伊阙攻打韩、魏的军队，斩首二十四万，俘虏了公孙喜，攻占五座城。
English: In the 14th year, Zuo Gengbai attacked the armies of Han and Wei in Ili, beheaded 240,000, captured Gongsunxi, and captured five cities.

古文：十五年，大良造白起攻魏，取垣，复予之。
现代文：十五年，大良造白起攻打魏，占领垣，接着又归还给魏。
English: In the fifteenth year, the Dalian Jiaobai attacked Wei, occupied Waki, and then returned it to Wei.

古文：攻楚，取宛。
现代文：攻打楚国，占领宛地。
English: They attacked Chu and occupied the destination.

古文：十六年，左更错取轵及邓。
现代文：十六年，左更司马错占领轵和邓。
English: Sixteen years later, Sima Zuo mistakenly occupied Zou and Deng.

古文：冉免，封公子市宛，公子悝邓，魏冉陶，为诸侯。
现代文：魏冉被免除丞相。封公子市于宛，公子悝于邓，魏冉于陶，为诸侯。
English: Wei Ran was exempted from the post of chancellor. He was given the fiefs of Gongzi City in Wan, Gongzi County in Deng, and Wei Ran in Tao.

古文：十七年，城阳君入朝，及东周君来朝。
现代文：十七年，城阳君来朝见，同时东周君也来朝见。
English: In the seventeenth year, Chengyangjun came to see the emperor, and Dong Zhoujun also came to see the emperor.

古文：秦以垣为蒲阪、皮氏。
现代文：秦用垣换取蒲阪、皮氏。
English: Qin used Waki in exchange for Gamzhan and Pi.

古文：王之宜阳。
现代文：王前往宜阳。
English: Wang went to Yiyang.

古文：十八年，错攻垣、河雍，决桥取之。
现代文：十八年，司马错攻打垣、河雍，拆毁河桥而占领此地。
English: In the 18th year, Sima mistakenly attacked Daki and Heyong, tore down the river bridge and occupied this place.

古文：十九年，王为西帝，齐为东帝，皆复去之。
现代文：十九年，昭襄王称西帝，齐称东帝，接着又都放弃帝号。
English: In the 19th year, Zhao Xiang Wang called himself the West Emperor, and Qi called himself the East Emperor, and then they both gave up the imperial title.

古文：吕礼来自归。
现代文：吕礼来自首。
English: Lulea resigns.

古文：齐破宋，宋王在魏，死温。
现代文：齐攻破宋，宋王在魏国，死在温。
English: Qi invaded and defeated Song, the Song king was in Wei, and died in Wen.

古文：任鄙卒。
现代文：任鄙死。
English: Let him die.

古文：二十年，王之汉中，又之上郡、北河。
现代文：二十年，王前往汉中。又前往上郡、北河。
English: Twenty years later, Wang went to Hanzhong Middle School. He also went to Shangxun and Beihe.

古文：二十一年，错攻魏河内。
现代文：二十一年，错攻打魏的河内。
English: In 1921, he mistakenly attacked Wei's Hanoi.

古文：魏献安邑，秦出其人，募徙河东赐爵，赦罪人迁之。
现代文：魏献出安邑，秦驱逐其中的居民，用爵位招募人民迁居河东，并赦免罪犯迁往安邑。
English: Wei dedicated Ami, Qin expelled its inhabitants, used the title of nobility to recruit people to move to Hedong, and pardoned criminals to move to Ami.

古文：泾阳君封宛。
现代文：封泾阳君在宛地。
English: Mr. Feng Shiyang is at the destination.

古文：二十二年，蒙武伐齐。
现代文：二十二年，蒙武伐齐。
English: In the 22nd year, Mengwu was defeated.

古文：河东为九县。
现代文：在河东设九县。
English: Nine counties were set up in Hedong.

古文：与楚王会宛。
现代文：与楚王会见于宛。
English: The meeting with King Chu took place in Awan.

古文：与赵王会中阳。
现代文：与赵王会见于中阳。
English: Meeting with Zhao Wang in Zhongyang.

古文：二十三年，尉斯离与三晋、燕伐齐，破之济西。
现代文：二十三年，尉斯离与三晋、燕伐齐，在济水西岸大破齐军。
English: In 233, Yi Si Li, together with San Jin and Yan Wa Qi, defeated the Qi army on the west coast of Jishui.

古文：王与魏王会宜阳，与韩王会新城。
现代文：王与魏王会见于宜阳，与韩王会见于新城。
English: Wang met with Wei Wang in Yiyang and with Han Wang in Xincheng.

古文：二十四年，与楚王会鄢，又会穰。
现代文：二十四年，与楚王会见于鄢，又会见于穰。
English: Twenty-four years ago, I met with King Chu in Handan, and I met him again in Handan.

古文：秦取魏安城，至大梁，燕、赵救之，秦军去。
现代文：秦占领魏的安城，兵至大梁。燕、赵救魏。秦军撤退。
English: Qin occupied Wei's Ancheng, and sent soldiers as far as Daliang. Yan and Zhao saved Wei. The Qin army withdrew.

古文：魏冉免相。
现代文：魏冉被免除丞相。
English: Wei Ran was removed from the post of chancellor.

古文：二十五年，拔赵二城。
现代文：二十五年，攻占两座赵国城池。
English: Twenty-five years later, two ponds in Zhaoguo City were captured.

古文：与韩王会新城，与魏王会新明邑。
现代文：秦王与韩王会见于新城，与魏王会见于新明邑。
English: The Qin King and the Han King met in Xincheng, and the Wei King met in Xinmingyi.

古文：二十六年，赦罪人迁之穰。侯冉复相。
现代文：二十六年，赦免罪犯迁往穰，穰侯再次任丞相。
English: In the 26th year, the pardoned criminals moved to Handan, and Handan was appointed as the prime minister again.

古文：二十七年，错攻楚。
现代文：二十七年，司马错攻打楚。
English: In the 27th year, Sima mistakenly attacked Chu.

古文：赦罪人迁之南阳。
现代文：赦免罪犯迁往南阳。
English: Pardoned criminals moved to Nanyang.

古文：白起攻赵，取代光狼城。
现代文：白起攻打赵，占领代国的光狼城。
English: Bai Qi attacked Zhao and occupied Guangwu City on behalf of the state.

古文：又使司马错发陇西，因蜀攻楚黔中，拔之。
现代文：又派司马错发兵陇西郡，经由蜀地攻打楚的黔中郡，并攻占了它。
English: He also sent Sima to send troops to Minxi County by mistake, and through Shu to attack Chu's Minzhong County, and captured it.

古文：二十八年，大良造白起攻楚，取鄢、邓，赦罪人迁之。
现代文：二十八年，大良造白起攻打楚，占领鄢、邓，赦免罪犯迁往该地。
English: In the 28th year, Daliang Zoubei started to attack Chu, occupied Zou and Deng, pardoned criminals and moved to this place.

古文：二十九年，大良造白起攻楚，取郢为南郡，楚王走。
现代文：二十九年，大良造白起攻打楚，占领郢设为南郡。楚王逃走。
English: In the 29th year, Daliangzhao Bai attacked Chu and occupied Nan County. The king of Chu fled.

古文：周君来。
现代文：周君前来祝贺。
English: Zhou Jun came to congratulate us.

古文：王与楚王会襄陵。
现代文：秦王与楚王会见于襄陵。
English: King Qin and King Chu meet at Xiangling.

古文：白起为武安君。
现代文：白起被封为武安君。
English: Bai Qi was given the title of Wu Anjun.

古文：三十年，蜀守若伐楚，取巫郡，及江南为黔中郡。
现代文：三十年，蜀郡守张若伐楚，占领巫郡和江南，设为黔中郡。
English: For 30 years, Shu County guarded Zhangye, occupied Wushun County and the south of the Yangtze River, and was set up as Luzhong County.

古文：三十一年，白起伐魏，取两城。
现代文：三十一年，白起攻魏，占领两座城。
English: In the 31st year, Bai Yu attacked Wei and occupied two cities.

古文：楚人反我江南。
现代文：楚人在我国占领的江南之地反叛。
English: The Chu people rebelled in the south of the Yangtze River occupied by China.

古文：三十二年，相穰侯攻魏，至大梁，破暴鸢，斩首四万，鸢走，魏入三县请和。
现代文：三十二年，丞相穰侯攻打魏，兵至大梁，击溃暴鸢军，斩首四万，暴鸢败逃，魏割让三县求和。
English: In thirty-two years, the chancellor Zeng Hou attacked Wei, the soldiers reached the great beam, defeated the violent Wei army, beheaded forty thousand, the violent Wei defeated and fled, Wei ceded three counties to sue for peace.

古文：三十三年，客卿胡阳攻魏卷、蔡阳、长社，取之。
现代文：三十三年，客卿胡阳攻打魏国的卷、蔡阳、长社，并占领了它们。
English: In the 33rd year, the guest lord Hu Yang attacked the volumes of Wei, Cai Yang and Changsha, and occupied them.

古文：击芒卯华阳，破之，斩首十五万。
现代文：攻打芒卯于华阳，大破敌军，斩首十五万。
English: He attacked Mengwu in Huayang, defeated the enemy army, and beheaded 150,000 people.

古文：魏入南阳以和。
现代文：魏割让南阳求和。
English: Wei ceded to Nanyang to sue for peace.

古文：三十四年，秦与魏、韩上庸地为一郡，南阳免臣迁居之。
现代文：三十四年，秦把魏、韩与上庸之地并为一郡，将南阳被赦免的罪臣迁往该地。
English: In 34, Qin unified Wei, Han, and Shangyong into one county, and moved Nanyang's pardoned criminals to this place.

古文：三十五年，佐韩、魏、楚伐燕。
现代文：三十五年，帮助韩、魏、楚伐燕。
English: Thirty-five years, helping Han, Wei, Chu and Yan.

古文：初置南阳郡。
现代文：开始设南阳郡。
English: Nanyang County was established.

古文：三十六年，客卿灶攻齐，取刚、寿，予穰侯。
现代文：三十六年，客卿灶攻打齐，占领刚、寿，赐予穰侯。
English: In the 36th year, he attacked and occupied Gang and Shou, and was given the title of prince.

古文：三十八年，中更胡阳攻赵阏与，不能取。
现代文：三十八年，中更胡伤攻打赵的阏与，未能占领。
English: In 38th year, Zhongzheng attacked Zhao's Xingye, but failed to occupy it.

古文：四十年，悼太子死魏，归葬芷阳。
现代文：四十年，悼太子死于魏，归葬于芷阳。
English: Forty years later, the crown prince died in Wei and was buried in Shenyang.

古文：四十一年夏，攻魏，取邢丘、怀。
现代文：四十一年夏，攻打魏，占领邢丘、怀。
English: In the summer of 1941, they attacked Wei and occupied Mengqiu and Huai.

古文：四十二年，安国君为太子。
现代文：四十二年，安国君被立为太子。
English: In forty-two, An Guojun was elevated to the position of crown prince.

古文：十月，宣太后薨，葬芷阳郦山。
现代文：十月，宣太后死，葬于芷阳的郦山。
English: In October, Empress Dowager Xuan died and was buried in Shaoshan, Shenyang.

古文：九月，穰侯出之陶。
现代文：九月，穰侯离朝，回到陶地。
English: In September, Gong Hou left the imperial court and returned to Taodi.

古文：四十三年，武安君白起攻韩，拔九城，斩首五万。
现代文：四十三年。武安君白起攻打韩，攻占九座城，斩首五万。
English: Forty-three years later, Buanjun attacked Korea in vain, capturing nine cities and beheading fifty thousand people.

古文：四十四年，攻韩南阳，取之。
现代文：四十四年，攻打韩的南阳，并占领了它。
English: In 1944, it attacked Nanyang in Korea and occupied it.

古文：四十五年，五大夫贲攻韩，取十城。
现代文：四十五年，五大夫贲攻打韩，占领十座城。
English: In 45 years, the Five Great Warriors fought against Korea and occupied ten cities.

古文：叶阳君悝出之国，未至而死。
现代文：叶阳君公子悝出走前往自己的封国，没有到就死了。
English: Ye Yang Jun's son ran away to his own fiefdom, but died before he arrived.

古文：四十七年，秦攻韩上党，上党降赵，秦因攻赵，赵发兵击秦，相距。
现代文：四十七年，秦攻打韩的上党郡，上党郡投降赵国，秦又攻打赵，赵国发兵迎击秦，两军相持不下。
English: In 47, Qin attacked Shangdang County in Korea, Shangdang County surrendered to Zhao, Qin attacked Zhao again, Zhao sent troops to meet Qin, and the two armies could not stand each other.

古文：秦使武安君白起击，大破赵于长平，四十余万尽杀之。
现代文：秦派武安君白起进攻，大破赵军于长平，四十万降卒全部被杀。
English: Qin sent Wu'anjun Bai to attack, defeating Zhao's army in Changping. All 400,000 soldiers who surrendered were killed.

古文：四十八年十月，韩献垣雍。
现代文：四十八年十月，韩国献出垣雍。
English: In October 1948, South Korea presented Kaki Yong.

古文：秦军分为三军。
现代文：秦军分为三军。
English: The Qin army was divided into three armies.

古文：武安君归。
现代文：武安君回国。
English: Takeyasu returns to Japan.

古文：王龁将伐赵武安、皮牢，拔之。
现代文：王龁率兵攻打赵的武安、皮牢，并占领了它们。
English: Wang Hui led the troops to attack Zhao's Wu'an and Pidong, and occupied them.

古文：司马梗北定太原，尽有韩上党。
现代文：司马梗北定太原，全部占领韩的上党郡。
English: Sima's army occupied all of Shangdang County in North Pyongan Province.

古文：正月，兵罢，复守上党。
现代文：正月，停战，又守上党郡。
English: In the first month of the year, the war was halted, and Shangdang County was once again defended.

古文：其十月，五大夫陵攻赵邯郸。
现代文：当年十月，五大夫陵攻打赵都邯郸。
English: In October of that year, the Five Great Husbands' Mausoleum attacked Zhao Tudou.

古文：四十九年正月，益发卒佐陵。
现代文：四十九年正月，扩大征兵增援陵。
English: In the first month of the 49th year, the military recruitment was expanded to reinforce the mausoleum.

古文：陵战不善，免，王龁代将。
现代文：陵战绩不佳，被免职，由王龁代替他率军。
English: Ling had a poor record and was removed from his post, with Wang Qi taking his place at the head of the army.

古文：其十月，将军张唐攻魏，为蔡尉捐弗守，还斩之。
现代文：当年十月，将军张唐攻打魏，由于蔡尉弃城不守，回去后被斩杀。
English: In October of that year, the general Zhang Tang attacked Wei. Since Cai Li abandoned the city and did not defend it, he was beheaded after returning.

古文：五十年十月，武安君白起有罪，为士伍，迁阴密。
现代文：五十年十月，武安君白起犯了罪，贬为士伍，发配阴密。
English: In October of the fiftieth year, Wu Anjun committed a crime in vain, was demoted to the rank of warrior, and was secretly dispatched.

古文：张唐攻郑，拔之。
现代文：张唐攻打郑，并占领了它。
English: Zhang Tang attacked Zheng and occupied it.

古文：十二月，益发卒军汾城旁。
现代文：十二月，扩大征兵，驻军于汾城旁。
English: In December, the conscription was expanded, and the troops were stationed next to Lucheng.

古文：武安君白起有罪，死。
现代文：武安君白起犯了罪，被处死。
English: Wu Anjun committed a crime in vain and was executed.

古文：龁攻邯郸，不拔，去，还奔汾军二月余。
现代文：王龁攻打邯郸，未能攻占，于是撤离，赶回汾城驻军两个多月。
English: Wang Qian attacked and besieged Shicheng, but failed to capture it, so he withdrew and rushed back to the Shicheng garrison for more than two months.

古文：攻晋军，斩首六千，晋楚流死河二万人。
现代文：攻打魏军，斩首六千，魏、楚联军死于黄河之中的达两万人。
English: Attacked the Wei army, beheaded six thousand, Wei and Chu allied forces died in the Yellow River of up to twenty thousand.

古文：攻汾城，即从唐拔宁新中，宁新中更名安阳。
现代文：攻打汾城，接着又随张唐军拔取宁新中，宁新中改名为安阳。
English: They attacked Shicheng, and then followed Zhang Tang's army to take Ningxin Middle School, which was renamed Anyang Middle School.

古文：初作河桥。
现代文：初次修造黄河桥。
English: The Yellow River Bridge was built for the first time.

古文：五十一年，将军摎攻韩，取阳城、负黍，斩首四万。
现代文：五十一年，将军摎攻打韩，占领阳城、负黍，斩首四万。
English: In 1951, General Zou attacked South Korea, occupied Yangcheng and Jiaxing, and beheaded 40,000 people.

古文：攻赵，取二十余县，首虏九万。
现代文：攻打赵国，占领二十多县，斩首俘虏九万。
English: They attacked Zhao Province, occupied more than 20 counties, and beheaded 90,000 captives.

古文：西周君背秦，与诸侯约从，将天下锐兵出伊阙攻秦，令秦毋得通阳城。
现代文：西周君背叛秦，与诸侯合纵，率天下精兵出伊阙攻打秦国，使秦不能通往阳城。
English: Xi Zhou betrayed Qin, conspired with the princes, and led the world's best soldiers out of Ili to attack Qin, so that Qin could not get to Yangcheng.

古文：于是秦使将军摎攻西周。
现代文：因此秦命将军摎攻打西周。
English: Therefore, General Qin ordered to attack West Zhou.

古文：西周君走来自归，顿首受罪，尽献其邑三十六城，口三万。
现代文：西周君慌忙前来投降，叩头认罪，全部献出他的城邑三十六座，人口三万。
English: Xi Zhoujun hastily came forward to surrender, bowed down and confessed, and gave up all of his thirty-six cities and towns with a population of thirty thousand.

古文：秦王受献，归其君于周。
现代文：秦王接受进献，放他回到周。
English: King Qin accepted the gift and let him go back to Zhou.

古文：五十二年，周民东亡，其器九鼎入秦。周初亡。
现代文：五十二年，西周人民逃往东周，周的宝器九鼎被搬到秦国，周初步亡国。
English: In fifty-two years, the people of West Zhou fled to East Zhou, and the Nine Treasures of Zhou were moved to Qin. Zhou initially lost the country.

古文：五十三年，天下来宾。
现代文：五十三年，天下皆来归顺。
English: In 53 years, the whole world came to submit.

古文：魏后，秦使摎伐魏，取吴城。
现代文：魏国落在最后，秦国就派将军摎去讨伐魏国，攻占了吴城。
English: When Wei fell at the end, Qin sent General Zou to fight against Wei and captured Wucheng.

古文：韩王入朝，魏委国听令。
现代文：韩王来朝见;魏王也把国家托付给秦国听从命令了。
English: The Han king came to see the emperor; the Wei king also entrusted the country to Qin and obeyed the order.

古文：五十四年，王郊见上帝于雍。
现代文：五十四年，秦王在雍城南郊祭祀天帝。
English: In the 54th year, King Qin offered sacrifices to the Heavenly Emperor in the southern suburb of Yongcheng.

古文：五十六年秋，昭襄王卒，子孝文王立。
现代文：五十六年秋，昭襄王死，其子孝文王即位。
English: In the autumn of fifty-six, King Zhaoxiang died, and his son King Xiaowen ascended the throne.

古文：尊唐八子为唐太后，而合其葬于先王。
现代文：尊唐八子为唐太后，与昭襄王合葬。韩王穿上孝服来吊唁祭悼。
English: Eight sons and daughters of Tang Dynasty were honored as the empress dowager of Tang Dynasty, and they were buried together with King Zhaoxiang. King Han put on filial piety to mourn and offer condolences.

古文：韩王衰绖入吊祠，诸侯皆使其将相来吊祠，视丧事。
现代文：诸侯也都派遣他们的将相来吊唁祭悼，参加丧事。
English: The lords also sent their generals to offer condolences and participate in the funeral.

古文：孝文王元年，赦罪人，修先王功臣，褒厚亲戚，弛苑囿。
现代文：孝文王元年，大赦罪犯，依旧重用先王的功臣，优待宗族亲属，开放王家的园囿。
English: In the first year of Xiaowen Wang, criminals were amnestied, the meritorious vassals of the former king were still reused, relatives of the clan were given preferential treatment, and the gardens of the royal family were opened.

古文：孝文王除丧，十月己亥即位，三日辛丑卒，子庄襄王立。
现代文：孝文王服丧期满，十月己亥日即位，仅仅三天，到辛丑日就死了，其子庄襄王即位。
English: Xiaowen Wang's mourning period expired, and he ascended the throne on October Ji Hai Day, just three days later, he died on Xin Qiu Day, and his son Zhuang Xiang Wang ascended the throne.

古文：庄襄王元年，大赦罪人，修先王功臣，施德厚骨肉而布惠于民。
现代文：庄襄王元年，大赦罪犯，依旧重用先王的功臣，广施德惠，厚待宗亲族属，对民众施以恩泽。
English: In the first year of King Zhuang Xiang, criminals were amnestied, and the meritorious vassals of the former king, Guang Shide Hui, were still reused, and relatives of the clan were treated with kindness, and favors were given to the people.

古文：东周君与诸侯谋秦，秦使相国吕不韦诛之，尽入其国。
现代文：东周君与诸侯策划攻打秦国，秦派相邦吕不韦讨伐他，把他的全部国土并入秦的版图。
English: Eastern Zhou and the princes plotted to attack Qin. Qin dispatched his vassal Lü Buwei to fight him and incorporate his entire territory into Qin's territory.

古文：秦不绝其祀，以阳人地赐周君，奉其祭祀。
现代文：但秦也并不中断他的祀统，把阳人之地赐给周君，让他继续保持自己的祭祀。
English: The Qin state continued to refuse its sacrifices, and gave the Yangren region to Zhou Jun, where he served the sacrifices of Zhou's ancestors.

古文：使蒙骜伐韩，韩献成皋、巩。
现代文：派蒙骜伐韩，韩献出成皋、巩。
English: Pai Meng defected to Han, and Han gave up Cheng Ho and Gong.

古文：秦界至大梁，初置三川郡。
现代文：秦的疆界扩大到大梁，开始设三川郡。
English: The borders of Qin were expanded to Daliang, and Mikawa County was established.

古文：二年，使蒙骜攻赵，定太原。
现代文：二年，派蒙骜攻打赵，平定太原。
English: Two years later, Pai Mengyao attacked Zhao and pacified Taiyuan.

古文：三年，蒙骜攻魏高都、汲，拔之。
现代文：三年，蒙骜攻打魏的高都和汲，并占领了他们。
English: In three years, Mengniu attacked Wei's Gaodu and Qiu and occupied them.

古文：攻赵榆次、新城、狼孟，取三十七城。
现代文：蒙骜又进攻赵国的榆次、新城、狼孟，攻占了三十七座城。
English: The Mengqi also attacked the Zhao kingdoms of Xizhi, Xincheng, and Wolmeng, capturing thirty-seven cities.

古文：四月日食。
现代文：四月间发生日食。
English: There is a solar eclipse in April.

古文：王龁攻上党。初置太原郡。
现代文：王龁攻打上党，开始设置太原郡。
English: Wang Qi attacked the party and began to set up Taiyuan County.

古文：魏将无忌率五国兵击秦，秦却于河外。
现代文：魏将无忌率五国的军队反击秦军，秦军退到黄河以南。
English: Wei will inevitably lead the armies of the five countries to counterattack the Qin army, and the Qin army will retreat to the south of the Yellow River.

古文：蒙骜败，解而去。
现代文：蒙骜打了败仗，解脱围困撤离了。
English: The Mongols were defeated, the siege was lifted, and the city was evacuated.

古文：五月丙午，庄襄王卒，子政立，是为秦始皇帝。
现代文：五月丙午日，庄襄王去世，儿子嬴政登位，这就是秦始皇帝。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fifth month, King Zhuangxiang died, and his son Yan Zheng ascended the throne. This was Emperor Qin Shi Huang.

古文：秦王政立二十六年，初并天下为三十六郡，号为始皇帝。
现代文：秦王嬴政即位二十六年，开始合并天下，设立三十六郡，号称始皇帝。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of the reign of Qin King Hezheng, he began to merge the world and set up thirty-six counties, known as the First Emperor.

古文：始皇帝五十一年而崩，子胡亥立，是为二世皇帝。
现代文：始皇帝五十一岁去世，儿子胡亥即位，就是二世皇帝。
English: The First Emperor died at the age of fifty-one, and his son Hu Hai ascended the throne, becoming the Second Emperor.

古文：三年，诸侯并起叛秦，赵高杀二世，立子婴。
现代文：二世三年，诸侯纷纷起来反叛秦朝，赵高杀死二世，拥立子婴为帝。
English: In the third year of the second generation, the lords rose up in succession to rebel against the Qin Dynasty. Zhao Gao killed the second generation and installed his infant son as emperor.

古文：子婴立月余，诸侯诛之，遂灭秦。
现代文：子婴即位一个多月，诸侯又杀死他，于是秦朝灭亡。
English: The infant reigned for more than a month, and the princes killed him, and so the Qin Dynasty came to an end.

古文：其语在始皇本纪中。
现代文：详细叙述见《秦始皇本纪》中。
English: A detailed description can be found in the "Qin Shi Huang Hong Ji."

古文：太史公曰：秦之先为嬴姓。
现代文：太史公说：秦的祖先姓赢。
English: Tai Shikong said: Qin's ancestor's surname is Wen.

古文：其后分封，以国为姓，有徐氏、郯氏、莒氏、终黎氏、运奄氏、菟裘氏、将梁氏、黄氏、江氏、修鱼氏、白冥氏、蜚廉氏、秦氏。
现代文：他的后代分封各地，以封国为姓，有徐氏，郯氏、莒氏、终黎氏、运奄氏、菟裘氏、将梁氏、黄氏、江氏、脩鱼氏、白冥氏、蜚廉氏、秦氏。
English: His descendants were divided into various provinces, with the surname of the province as the surname, including the Xu clan, the Zou clan, the Zou clan, the Zhenli clan, the Yunama clan, the Zou Qiu clan, the Zhe Liang clan, the Huang clan, the Jiang clan, the Zou Yu clan, the Bai Yu clan, the Zou Liang clan, and the Qin clan.

古文：然秦以其先造父封赵城，为赵氏。
现代文：但秦因其祖先造父封于赵城，也称为赵氏。
English: However, the Qin Dynasty was also called the Zhao Dynasty due to their ancestor's founding father's fief in Zhao City.

