古文：答里麻，高昌人。大父撒吉斯，为辽王傅，世祖称其贤。从讨李璮，以勋授山东行省大都督。
现代文：答里麻，高昌人，祖父撒吉思，为辽王师傅，世祖器重，称赞他贤能，参加讨伐李王，因功授山东行省大都督。
English: Zu Lima, a native of Gaochang, grandfather of Sagis, was a master of Liao Wang and a great ancestor. He was praised for his virtue, participated in the crusade against King Li, and was awarded the title of Grand Governor of Shandong Province.

古文：答里麻弱冠入宿卫。
现代文：答里麻二十岁时就入宫参加宿卫军。
English: At the age of twenty, Azalea entered the palace to join the palace guards.

古文：大德十一年，授御药院达鲁花赤，迁回回药物院，寻出佥湖北、山南两道廉访司事，召拜监察御史。
现代文：大德十一年授御药院达鲁花赤，后调回回药物院达鲁花赤，不久出任佥湖北、山南两道廉访司事，奉诏回朝拜监察御史。
English: In the eleventh year of Dade, he was awarded the Pharmacy Daruhana Red, and then transferred back to the Pharmacy Daruhana Red, and soon he served as the Secretary of the Department of Corruption Prevention and Control in the North of Wuhu and the South of Shandong, and was ordered to return to the Imperial Court to supervise the Imperial History.

古文：时丞相帖木迭儿专权贪肆，答里麻帅同寅亦怜真、马祖常劾其罪。
现代文：当时，丞相帖木迭儿专权，肆意贪暴，答里麻率领同僚亦怜真、马祖常等，弹劾其罪。
English: At that time, the chancellor, Tetsuko Tetsuko, who wielded absolute power and was wantonly corrupt, was impeached for his crime by Amari Ma and his colleagues, including Erizhen and Mazu Chang.

古文：高昌僧恃丞相威，违法娶妇南城，答里麻诘问之，奋不顾利害，风纪由是大振。
现代文：高昌僧人依仗丞相权势违法娶妇人于南城，答理麻不顾个人利害去质问，社会风纪因此大为整肃。
English: The monks of Gaochang married women in Nancheng in violation of the law, relying on the power of the prime minister, and answered questions regardless of personal interests. As a result, social etiquette was greatly rectified.

古文：擢河东道廉访副使。
现代文：后升任河东道廉访使。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Hetao Liancheng's envoy.

古文：隰州村民赛神，因醉殴杀姚甲，为首者乘闹逃去，有司逮同会者系狱，历岁不决。
现代文：该道隰州村民举行迎神赛会，有人酒醉殴杀姚甲，为首者畏罪潜逃，官府将参加赛会的逮捕入狱，多年不能审清此案。
English: The villagers of Luzhou in this province held a competition to welcome the gods. Someone got drunk and beat up and killed Yao Jia, and the leader absconded for fear of crime. The government arrested and jailed those who participated in the competition, and could not solve the case for many years.

古文：答里麻曰： 杀人者既逃，存亡不可知，此辈皆诖误无罪，而反桎梏耶？ 
现代文：答里麻说： 凶犯既逃，生死未知，这些受牵连的人本当无罪，却反被监禁，实不应该。 
English: Liima said, "The murderer has already escaped, and his life and death are unknown. These people who are implicated are really innocent, but they should not be imprisoned.

古文：悉纵之。
现代文：把他们全释放了。
English: All were pardoned and released.

古文：至治元年，帖木迭儿复相，以复仇为事，答里麻辞去。
现代文：至治元年，帖木迭儿复为丞相，总在寻机复仇，答里麻被迫辞官。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, when Tetsuko Tetsuko became chancellor again, she was always on the lookout for an opportunity to take revenge. In response, she was forced to resign.

古文：明年，改燕南道廉访副使。
现代文：二年，改任燕南道廉访副使。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to the post of Vice-Minister of Yan'an Province.

古文：开州达鲁花赤石不花歹颇著政绩，同僚忌之，嗾民诬其与民妻俞氏饮。
现代文：开州达鲁花赤石不花歹政绩卓著，同僚忌妒他，唆使人诬告他与民妻俞氏饮酒同乐。
English: Kaizhou Daruhana Akashi no Hanabusa had outstanding achievements in politics. His colleagues were jealous of him and instigated people to falsely accuse him of drinking and having fun with his common-law wife, Ms. Zou.

古文：答里麻察知俞氏乃八十老妪，石不花歹实不与饮酒，于是抵诬告者罪，石不花歹复还职。
现代文：答里麻经调查而知俞氏是个八十岁老太婆，石不花并未与她一同饮酒，于是依法判诬告者之罪，石不花歹官复原职。
English: After investigation, it was learned that Ms. Zou was an eighty-year-old woman, and he did not drink alcohol with her. Therefore, the false accuser was convicted according to law, and the corrupt official was reinstated.

古文：行唐县民斫桑道侧，偶有人借斧削其杖，其人夜持杖劫民财，事觉，并逮斧主与盗同下狱。
现代文：行唐县一平民在道旁斫桑，有过路人借他的斧头削其杖，夜间这削杖者持杖抢劫民财。官府将斧子主人与持杖抢劫的强盗一同下狱问罪。
English: A civilian in Xiangtang County was walking along the roadside. A passerby used his axe to whittle his cane. At night, the whittler used his cane to rob people's money. The government sent the owner of the axe to prison along with the robber with the cane.

古文：答里麻原其未尝知情，即纵之。
现代文：答里麻察知斧主并不知抢劫的事，就把他释放了。
English: In reply, the magistrate, knowing that the axe-wielder did not know about the robbery, released him.

古文：深州民媪怒殴儿妇死，妇方抱其子，子亦误触死。
现代文：深州一老妇人盛怒之下将儿媳打死，媳妇怀中抱的儿子也被老妇人误伤致死。
English: An old woman in Shenzhou killed her daughter-in-law in a fit of rage. The son she was holding in her arms was also accidentally injured and killed by the old woman.

古文：媪年七十，同僚议免刑，答里麻不可，曰： 国制，罪人七十免刑，为其血气已衰，不任刑也。
现代文：老妇人已年及七十，同僚认为可免于问罪，答理麻认为不可，他说： 国家法律规定七十岁的犯人免刑，是因为他血气已衰，受不住刑罚。
English: The old woman was 70 years old. Her colleagues thought she could be exempted from questioning, but Li Ma thought it was impossible. He said: The national law stipulates that a 70-year-old prisoner should be exempted from punishment because he is too weak to bear the punishment.

古文：朝廷遣宦官伯颜催督绣段，横取民财，宣政院判官术邻亦取赂于富僧，答里麻皆劾之。
现代文：朝廷遣宦官伯颜催督绣缎，横征暴敛，宣政院判官术邻也受富僧的贿赂，答里麻都予弹劾。
English: The imperial court sent the eunuch Bo Yan to urge the governor to embroider the robe, and the embezzlement was rampant. The judge of the Xuan Zheng Academy and his neighbor were also bribed by the rich monk, and both were impeached.

古文：迁浙西廉访使。
现代文：随后调任浙西廉访使。
English: Subsequently, he was transferred to the West Zhejiang Liancheng Envoy.

古文：会文宗发江陵，阿儿哈秃来谕旨，求赂不获，还谮于朝，召至京，处以重罪。
现代文：恰逢文宗自江陵回京，阿儿哈秃向他索贿不成，在京城向皇帝说答里麻的坏话，要召他回京处以重罪。
English: Just as Wenzong returned to Beijing from Gangneung, Alhazred unsuccessfully asked him for a bribe. In Beijing, he spoke ill of Li Ma to the emperor and wanted to summon him back to Beijing to be punished with a serious crime.

古文：比至，帝怒解，迁上都同知留守。
现代文：答里麻回京后说明实情，皇帝息怒，调他为上都同知留守。
English: After Li Ma returned to Beijing to explain the truth, the emperor calmed his anger and transferred him to Shangdu Tongzhi.

古文：天历二年八月，明宗崩，文宗入正大统，使者旁午。答里麻朝暮尽力，事无缺失，帝特赐锦衣以嘉之。
现代文：天历二年八月初六明宗崩，文宗即位，来朝贺的络绎不绝，答里麻从早忙到晚，无一差错，帝特赐锦衣以嘉奖其劳苦。
English: At the beginning of August in the second year of the lunar calendar, Emperor Mingzong died and Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne. There was a never-ending stream of congratulatory visits. Emperor Taizong was busy from morning to night and never made a mistake. Emperor Taizong gave him a brocade robe as a reward for his hard work.

古文：天历三年，迁淮东廉访使。
现代文：天历三年任淮东廉访使。
English: He has served as a visiting envoy to Huadong Province for three years.

古文：明年，召拜刑部尚书。
现代文：四年回朝拜为刑部尚书。
English: For four years, he paid homage to the emperor.

古文：国制，新君即位，必赐诸王、驸马、妃主及宿卫官吏金帛。
现代文：按国家典章制度，新君即位，必须颁赐诸王、驸马、妃主及宿卫官吏以金帛。
English: According to the system of state awards, when a new monarch ascends the throne, he or she must bestow a golden scepter on kings, queens, princesses, and palace guards.

古文：汝君臣何欺诈如是耶？ 
现代文：答里麻建议 ：点名颁赐，以免冒领。 
English: A suggestion from Rima: Call out the names of those to be awarded, so as not to be the first to receive.

古文：使辞屈，还其书与布。元统三年，迁山东廉访使。
现代文：如此则国费大省。帝又赐黄金以表彰其能干。元统元年，升任辽阳行省参知政事。三年，调山东廉访使。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was promoted to the post of Liaoyang Provincial Councillor. In the third year, he was transferred to the post of Shandong Independent Envoy.

古文：时山东盗起，陈马骡及新李白昼杀掠。
现代文：山东人民造反，陈马骡与新李白昼杀掠。
English: The people of Shandong rebelled, and Chen Maqi and Xin Li Bai led a daylight raid.

古文：答里麻以为官吏贪污所致，先劾去之而后上擒贼方略。
现代文：答里麻认为这是官吏贪赃枉法造成的，他先弹劾并削夺官吏职务，而后呈进平乱方略。
English: Liima replied that this was the result of official corruption. He first impeached and stripped officials of their posts, and then presented a strategy to quell the turmoil.

古文：是岁秋，车驾自上京还，入观之，乃大喜，以手抚壁叹曰： 有心哉，留守也！ 赐白金五十两、锦衣一袭。
现代文：朝廷批准他的做法。后任大都路留守。顺帝大宴群臣于延春阁，特赐答里麻白鹰以表彰其贞廉。皇帝修缮宫室，必用赤绿金银装饰，答里麻奉诏修七星堂，讲求朴素，只令画工绘山林景物。是年秋，帝自上都回京，见七星堂如此朴素，大喜，称答里麻是有心计的人，赐白金五十两，锦衣一套。
English: The imperial court approved of his approach. Later, Datu Lu stayed behind. Shun Emperor's grand banquet was held at Yanchun Pavilion, and the courtiers specially gave the white eagle to Lin Ma to commend his chastity. The emperor repaired the palace room, which must be decorated with red, green, gold, and silver. Lin Ma was ordered to repair the Hall of the Seven Stars, which should be kept simple, and only allowed painters to paint mountain and forest scenery. In the autumn of the year, the emperor returned to Beijing from above. Seeing the Hall of the Seven Stars so simple, he was overjoyed. He said that Lin Ma was a man with a plan

古文：至正六年，升河南行省右丞，改翰林学士承旨。
现代文：至正六年，升河南行省右丞，后改任翰林学士承旨。
English: In the sixth year of the Taisho era, he was promoted to Henan Provincial Right-hand Man, and later he was appointed as Hanlin Scholar.

古文：至正七年，迁陕西行台中丞，时年六十九。
现代文：至正七年，调任陕西行台中丞，时已六十九岁。
English: At the age of sixty-nine, he was transferred to the post of Shaanxi Xingtai Junior Middle Officer in the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Taizong.

古文：致事后，召商议中书平章政事，不拜，全俸优养终身。
现代文：辞官后，朝廷还召他入朝商议中书平章政事，见皇帝可不拜，终身全俸优待。
English: After resigning from the post, the imperial court also invited him to the DPRK to discuss the political affairs of Pingzhang, see the emperor, and receive a lifetime full salary and preferential treatment.

古文：月鲁帖木儿
现代文：月鲁帖木儿，姓卜领勒多礼伯台氏。
English: Yue Lu Timur, whose family name is Bu Lendolibodai.

古文：月鲁帖木儿，卜领勤多礼伯台氏。曾祖贵裕，事太祖，为管领怯怜口怯薛官。
现代文：曾祖贵裕，侍奉太祖，为管领怯怜口怯薛官。
English: Zeng Zu Guiyu, who served the great-grandfather, was the leader of the cowardly and cowardly Xue Guan.

古文：祖合剌，袭父职，事世祖。
现代文：祖合剌，承袭父职，侍奉世祖。
English: Ancestors unite, inherit the father's position, and serve the ancestors.

古文：父普兰奚，由宿卫为中书右司员外郎，与丞相哈剌哈孙建议迎立武宗，累迁至山北辽东道肃政廉访使。
现代文：父普兰奚，由宿卫升为中书右司员外郎，与丞相哈剌哈孙建议迎立武宗为帝，因功累升官至山北辽东道肃政廉访使。
English: His father, Pran Zi, was promoted from the post of the imperial guard to the post of the right secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and together with the prime minister, Ha Zi Hasun, he proposed that Emperor Wuzong should be enthroned, and was promoted to the post of the envoy of the Sui Dynasty to the Liao Dynasty in Shanbei Province for his distinguished service.

古文：月鲁帖木儿幼警颖，读书强记，俶傥有大志。
现代文：月鲁帖木儿自幼机警聪颖，读书记忆力特强，卓异不凡，胸有大志。
English: Since she was a child, Yue Lu Timur has been a clever computer guard, has a strong reading memory, is extraordinary, and has great aspirations.

古文：年十二，成宗命与哈剌哈孙之子脱欢同入国学。
现代文：十二岁时，成宗命他与哈剌哈孙之子脱欢同入国学。
English: At the age of twelve, Chengzong ordered him to break up with the son of Haji Hasun and enter the national school.

古文：仁宗时入宿卫，一日，帝顾问左右曰： 斯人容貌不凡，谁之子耶？ 
现代文：仁宗时入宿卫，有天仁宗见他容貌不凡，问是谁家之子。
English: When Rinzong entered the palace guard, one day Rinzong saw his extraordinary appearance and asked whose son he was.

古文：哈剌哈孙曰： 汝年幼，欲何为乎？ 
现代文：左右忘记了他父亲的姓名，月鲁帖木儿大胆回答说： 臣父即普兰奚。 
English: Forgetting his father's name, Yue Lu Timur boldly replied, "His father is Pran Xuan."

古文：对曰： 欲为御史尔。 人壮其志。
现代文：仁宗说： 你父亲为平定那些想篡夺皇位的人而出力划策，朕未曾忘记。 
English: Ninsong said: I have never forgotten your father's efforts to pacify those who wanted to usurp the throne.

古文：久之，遂拜监察御史，巡按上都，劾奏太师、右丞相帖木迭儿受张弼赇六万贯，贷死。
现代文：命脱忽台传旨四怯薛札撒火孙，令月鲁帖木儿常在宫禁中侍奉，允许自由出入宫廷。月鲁帖木儿为监察御史时，巡按上都，弹劾右丞相帖木迭儿受张弼贿赂六万贯而免其死刑。
English: In order to get rid of the confusion, Emperor Taizong sent an order to the four cowardly Xue Zasa fire-sons, so that Yue Lutemur often served under house arrest and was allowed to enter and leave the palace freely. When Yue Lutemur was the inspector of imperial history, he went around the capital to impeach the Minister of the Right, Yue Lutemur, for receiving a bribe of sixty thousand yuan from Zhang Ye, but was spared the death penalty.

古文：帝怒，碎太师印，赐月鲁帖木儿钞万贯，除兵部郎中，拜殿中侍御史。迁给事中、左侍仪、同修起居注。
现代文：仁宗大怒，打碎帖木迭儿的太师印，赐月鲁帖木儿钞万贯，任命为兵部郎中，拜殿中侍御史，后转任给事中、左侍仪、同修起居注。
English: Enraged, Rinzong broke the grandmaster seal of Tetsuko Tetsuko's daughter, gave Tsukimaru Tetsuko a large sum of money, and appointed him to be the vice-minister of the military department, the attendant of the history in the worship hall, and later he was transferred to the vice-minister, the left attendant, and the attendant of the same practice.

古文：寻为右司郎中，赐坐便殿，帝顾左右谓曰： 月鲁帖木儿识量明远，可大用者也。 
现代文：不久又任为右司郎中，赐坐于便殿，对左右说 ：月鲁帖木儿见识远，可以大用。 
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of junior secretary of the Right Division, and was given a seat in the hall, where he would say to those on either side of him, "Getsuro Tetsuko has great insight and can be of great use."

古文：他日，帝语近臣曰： 朕闻前代皆有太上皇之号，今皇太子且长，可居大位，朕欲为太上皇，与若等游观西山以终天年。 
现代文：有天又对左右近臣说： 朕闻前代皆有太上皇之号，今皇太子已长大成人，可即皇位了。朕有意做太上皇，与你们同游西山以终天年。 
English: One day, he also said to his close vassals: "I have heard that previous generations all had the title of Grand Empress Dowager. Now that the crown prince has grown up, he can take the throne. I intend to become Grand Empress Dowager and travel with you to the West Mountain for the rest of the year.

古文：御史中丞蛮子、翰林学士明里董阿皆称善。月鲁帖木儿独起拜曰： 臣闻昔之所谓太上皇，若唐玄宗、宋徽宗，皆当祸乱，不得已而为之者也。
现代文：御史中丞蛮子、翰林学士明里董阿都说好，唯独月鲁帖木儿起而拜曰： 臣闻古代所谓太上皇，如唐玄宗、宋徽宗，都是祸乱当前，不得已而为之。
English: Historian and scholar Ming Li and scholar of Hanlin, Dong Ah, were all in favor of the idea, but only Yue Lu and Timur were against it, saying, "We have heard that the so-called great emperors in ancient times, such as Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty and Emperor Huizong of the Song Dynasty, were the result of unavoidable calamities.

古文：愿陛下正大位，以保万世无疆之业，前代虚名，何足慕哉！ 
现代文：愿陛下永坐大位，保祖宗万世无疆之业，何必慕前代虚名。 
English: May His Majesty sit on the throne forever, and may His ancestors live forever without borders. Why should we yearn for the false fame of the previous generation?

古文：帝善其对。
现代文：仁宗听了从内心高兴，称他说得极好。
English: The emperor thought his words were very reasonable.

古文：仁宗崩，帖木迭儿复入中书，据相位。
现代文：仁宗崩，帖木迭儿再回到中书省做丞相。
English: After the death of Emperor Jinzong, Empress Dowager Cixi returned to the Ministry of Literature to serve as chancellor.

古文：参议乞失监以受人金带系狱，帖木迭儿乃使乞失监诉月鲁帖木儿为御史时诬丞相受赇。
现代文：参议乞失监因受贿而入狱。帖木迭儿唆使乞失监控告月鲁帖木儿做御史时诬告丞相受贿。
English: Councillor begged to be released from prison and was jailed for taking bribes. Tetsuko Tsering instigated the begging monitor to falsely accuse the prime minister of taking bribes when Tetsuko Lu was a member of the Diet.

古文：皇太后命丞相哈散等即徽政院推问不实，事遂释。
现代文：皇太后命丞相哈撒等到徽政院审理此案，经查证确为诬告，这桩控告案也就清楚了。
English: The Empress Dowager ordered the Minister of Justice Hasa to wait for the Hui Government to hear the case. After verification, it was indeed a false accusation, and this accusation case became clear.

古文：帖木迭儿乃奏以月鲁帖木儿为山东盐运司副使，降亚中大夫为承事郎，期月间盐课增以万计。
现代文：帖木迭儿又奏请贬月鲁帖木儿为山东盐运司副使，他在任一个月内增盐课万计。父亲去世，他扶丧西归。
English: Tetyomir also petitioned to demote Lu Tetyomir to vice-envoy of the Shandong Salt Transportation Department. He increased salt production by a million within a month of his appointment. When his father died, he helped him return to the West.

古文：丁外艰，扶丧西还。擢山南江北道肃政廉访副使。
现代文：其后升为山南江北道肃政廉访副使。
English: Later, he was promoted to the vice-envoy of the North Shannan Jiangsu Province to investigate political corruption.

古文：泰定初，迁汴梁路总管，再调总管武昌，以养亲不赴。
现代文：泰定初年，调任汴梁路总管，再调任武昌总管，因要奉养母亲未赴任。
English: In the first year of Tai Ding, he was transferred to the general manager of Qilian Road, and then transferred to the general manager of Wuchang, because he did not go to the post because he wanted to support his mother.

古文：致和元年，河南行省平章伯颜矫制起月鲁帖木儿为本省参知政事，共议起兵。
现代文：致和元年，河南行省平章伯颜伪传圣旨，起用月鲁帖木儿为本省参知政事，并要与他商议起兵之事。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Pingzhang Boyan, the governor of Henan Province, issued a false edict, appointing Yue Lütjelm to be the governor of the province, and he was to discuss the matter of raising an army with him.

古文：月鲁帖木儿固辞曰： 皇子北还，问参政受命何人，则将何辞以对？ 
现代文：月鲁帖木儿坚决不从，问道： 皇子北还，问参政是受何人之命，将以何辞来回答？ 
English: Yue Lu and Timur resolutely refused to comply, and asked, "Prince Beibei, if I were to ask you who ordered you to participate in politics, how would you answer?"

古文：伯颜怒。
现代文：伯颜恼羞成怒。
English: The old lady's irritation turned into anger.

古文：会明里董阿迓皇子过河南，而月鲁帖木儿为御史时尝劾其娶娼女冒受封，明里董阿因说伯颜收之，丞相别不花亦与之有隙，乃谪月鲁帖木儿乾宁安抚司安置。
现代文：恰逢明里董阿迎皇子路过河南，而月鲁帖木儿为御史时曾弹劾明里董阿娶娼受封，同时丞相别不花亦与月鲁帖木儿不合，在他们共同抨击下，贬谪月鲁帖木儿于乾宁安抚司安置。
English: At the same time, Mingli's Prince Dong Aying passed through Henan, and Yue Lutemur, when he was the imperial historian, had impeached Mingli's Prince Dong A for marrying a prostitute. At the same time, the prime minister did not agree with Yue Lutemur, and under their joint attack, Yue Lutemur was placed in the Qianning Pacification Division.

古文：至顺四年，移置雷州。
现代文：至顺四年，移于雷州。
English: Four years later, it moved to Leizhou.

古文：至元六年，顺帝召之还。至正二年，入觐，帝欲留之，以母丧未葬辞。
现代文：至元六年召还至京，至正二年入见顺帝，帝欲留用，因母丧未葬而辞谢归家。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was summoned back to Beijing, and in the second year of the Zhengyi Dynasty, he was summoned to see Emperor Shun, but Emperor Shun wanted to keep him on, so he resigned and returned home because his mother had not been buried.

古文：四年，乃起同知将作院事。
现代文：四年，起任同知将作院事。
English: Four years later, he was appointed to be a member of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：寻除大宗正府也可札鲁花赤。
现代文：不久，任命为大宗正府也可札鲁花赤。
English: Soon, the appointment of Daizong Zhengfu could also be a red flag.

古文：九年，由太医院使拜翰林学士承旨、知经筵事。
现代文：九年，由太医院使拜翰林学士承旨、知经筵事。
English: In the ninth year, the Tai Hospital made Bai Hanlin, a bachelor, carry out the will and know the anecdote.

古文：陛辞，赐尚酝、御衣、弓矢、甲胄、卫卒十人、钞万五千贯以行。
现代文：在向皇帝进读时，常援引经史，宣讲王道，皇帝非常嘉奖他。至元十二年，江南诸郡人民在各地掀起反元斗争。
English: When reading to the emperor, he often quoted scriptures and preached the royal way, and the emperor highly commended him. In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the people of the counties south of the Yangtze River launched anti-Yuan struggle in various regions.

古文：比至镇，引僚属集父老询守备之方，招募民兵数千人，号令明肃。
现代文：他到江浙后，召集父老询问守备方略，招募民兵数千人，号令严明。
English: After he arrived in Jiangsu and Zhejiang, he summoned his father and mother to inquire about the defense strategy, recruited thousands of militiamen, and issued strict orders.

古文：统师次建德，获首贼何福斩于市，遂复淳安等县，俘获万余人，复业者三万余家。
现代文：率军至建德俘获反元义军首领何福，斩于市，收复淳安等县，俘获万余人，招安复业者三万余家。
English: He led the army to Jiande, captured the leader of the anti-Yuan rebels, He Fu, cut off the city, recovered Chun'an and other counties, captured more than 10,000 people, and recruited more than 30,000 families to resume their businesses.

古文：是年七月，次徽州，以疾卒于军中。
现代文：同年七月，进至徽州，病逝于军中。
English: In July of the same year, he went to Huizhou and died of illness in the army.

古文：卜颜铁木儿卜颜铁木儿，字珍卿，唐兀吾密氏。
现代文：卜颜铁木儿，字珍卿，唐兀族人，姓吾密氏。
English: Buyan Tiemu'er, Zi Zhenqing, a member of the Tang Dynasty Yi people, surnamed Wu Mi.

古文：性明锐倜傥，早备宿卫，历事武宗、仁宗、英宗。
现代文：性情豪爽，精明，早已入宿卫侍奉武宗、仁宗、英宗三朝。
English: He was a dashing and shrewd character, and had already entered the palace guards to serve the three dynasties of Emperor Wuzong, Emperor Nanzong, and Emperor Yeongjong.

古文：天历初，由太常署丞拜监察御史，升殿中侍御史，累除大都路达鲁花赤、都转运盐使、肃政廉访使，由行中书省参知政事升左右丞，擢行御史台中丞，遂拜江浙行省平章政事。
现代文：天历初年，由太常署丞历升为监察御史，又升殿中侍御史。后历任大都路达鲁花赤、都转运盐使、肃政廉访使。由行中书省参知政事历升左右丞、行御史台中丞、江浙行省平章政事。
English: In the first year of the calendar, he was promoted from the director of the Imperial Household Agency to the supervisor of history, and then to the attendant of history in the palace. Later, he was successively appointed as the governor of the capital, the salt transport envoy, and the political investigation envoy. He was promoted from the governor of the central government to the governor of the central government, and from the governor of the central government to the governor of the central government to the governor of the central government.

古文：至正十二年春，蕲、黄贼徐寿辉遣兵陷湖广，侵江东、西，诏卜颜铁木儿率军讨之。
现代文：至正十二年春，蕲州、黄州反元义军徐寿辉部攻陷湖广，进军江东、西。朝廷诏令卜颜铁木儿率军讨伐。
English: In the spring of the 12th year of the Zheng He era, Xu Shouhui's anti-Yuan rebel army from Bozhou and Huangzhou invaded Guangxi and marched into the east and west of the Yangtze River. The imperial court ordered Buyan Tiemu Er to lead the army to fight.

古文：卜颜铁木儿益募壮健为兵，得骁勇士三千人、战舰三百艘。时湖广平章政事也先帖木儿、江西平章政事星吉、江南行台御史中丞蛮子海牙皆以兵驻太平，宿留不进。卜颜帖木儿至，乃与俱前。
现代文：卜颜铁木儿招募壮丁三千人，战舰三百艘，与屯驻于太平之湖广平章政事也先帖木儿、江西平章政事星吉、行台御史中丞蛮子海牙等一同进讨，在丁家洲大败义军，收复铜陵县、池州。
English: Bu Yan Tie Mu'er recruited three thousand young men and three hundred warships, and advanced the discussion together with Guangping Zhang Zhengji, Jiangxi Ping Zhang Zhengji Xingji, and Xingtai Mishi Zhongzheng Brute Hague, who were stationed in Taiping Lake, and defeated the rebel army in Dingjiazhou, and recovered Tongling County and Chizhou.

古文：贼方聚丁家洲，官军猝与遇，奋击败之，遂复铜陵县，擒其贼帅，复池州。遂分遣万户普贤奴屯阳陵，王建中屯白面渡，闾儿讨无为州，而自率镇抚不花、万户明安驻池口，以防遏上流，为之节度。
现代文：卜颜铁木儿又分别遣万户普贤奴屯兵阳陵，王建中屯兵白面渡，闾儿出兵无为州，自己率镇抚不花、万户明安屯驻池口，以防上游。
English: Buyan Tiemu also sent ten thousand households of Pu Xiannu to garrison Yangling, Wang Jianzhong sent ten thousand households of Bai Miandu to garrison Bai Miandu, Yu Er sent ten thousand households of Pu Xiannu to garrison Mianyang, Zhen Fuxin led ten thousand households of Zhen Fuxin, and Wanyu Ming'an sent ten thousand households of Ming'an to garrison Chikou to guard against the upstream.

古文：已而江州再陷，星吉死之。蛮子海牙及威顺王宽彻普化军俱溃而东。安庆被围益急，遣使来求援。
现代文：不久，江州再为义军攻陷，江西行省平章政事星吉毙命，蛮子海牙及威顺王宽彻普化均被义军击溃东逃，安庆危急，遣使求援。
English: Not long after, Jiangzhou was once again conquered by the rebels, the governor of Jiangxi Province, Pingzhang Zhengjie Xingji, was killed, the barbarian Hague and the king of Weishun, Quancher Puhua, were both defeated by the rebels and fled east, Anqing was in a critical situation, and sent an envoy to ask for help.

古文：诸将皆欲自守信地，卜颜铁木儿曰： 何言之不忠耶！
现代文：诸将都自守其地，不肯出兵。卜颜铁木儿号令所部，收集溃散元军，解安庆之围。
English: The generals all defended their own territory and refused to send troops. Buyan Tiemu'er ordered the headquarters to collect and disperse the Yuan army and lift the siege of Anqing.

古文：十一月，与蛮子海牙、四川行省参知政事哈临秃、左丞桑秃失里、西宁王牙罕沙军合，而湖广左丞伯颜不花等军皆会。
现代文：十一月，与蛮子海牙、四川行省参知政事哈临秃、左丞桑哥失里、西宁王牙罕沙、湖广左丞伯颜不花等军合兵一处。
English: In November, he joined forces with soldiers such as the barbarian Hague, the Sichuan-bound provincial councilor and political officer Harim Bald, the left-handed general Sango Shouli, the Xining king Jahansha, and the Hukang left-handed general Bo Yanfuhua.

古文：十二月，分道进攻蕲水县，拔其伪都，获伪将相而下四百余人，徐寿辉仅以身免。
现代文：十二月攻占义军首都蕲水县，俘将相以下四百余人，徐寿辉只身逃走。
English: In December, the capital of the rebel army, Lishui County, was captured. More than 400 people, including the general, were captured. Xu Shouhui escaped alone.

古文：以功诏赐上尊、黄金带。时丞相脱脱方总戎南征，闻诸贼皆已破，乃檄伯颜不花征淮东，蛮子海牙守裕溪口，威顺王还武昌，而卜颜铁木儿独控长江。十六年六月，复以军守池州。
现代文：这时，丞相脱脱正统军南征，闻义军均被击破，于是传令伯颜不花征淮东，蛮子海牙守裕溪口，威顺王回镇武昌，卜颜铁木儿控扼长江。至正十六年六月，卜颜铁木儿回军镇守池州。
English: At this time, the chancellor escaped from the southward march of the orthodox army, and the loyalist army was defeated, so he ordered Bo Yan to conquer Huai Dong, the barbarian Hague to defend Yu Xikou, Weishun Wang to return to the town of Wuchang, and Bo Yan Timur to control the Yangtze River. By June of the 16th year, Bo Yan Timur returned to the town to defend Chizhou.

古文：十一月，卒。
现代文：是年十一月卒。
English: He passed away in November.

古文：卜颜铁木儿持身廉介，人不敢干以私，其为将，所过不受礼遗宴犒，民不知有兵。性至孝，幼养于叔父阿术，事之如亲父。
现代文：卜颜铁木儿为官廉洁奉公，不徇私情，不受礼物。禀性孝顺，年幼时为叔父阿术抚养，故卜颜铁木儿侍奉其叔父如亲父。
English: Bu Yan Tie Mu'er is an official who is honest and serves the public, does not indulge in personal feelings, and does not accept gifts. He is filial and obedient. When he was young, he was raised by his uncle Ah Shu, so Bu Yan Tie Mu'er served his uncle like a father.

古文：常乘花马，时称为花马儿平章云。
现代文：他常乘坐花马，当时称他为 花马儿平章 。
English: He often rode a flower horse, and at that time he was called Huamaer Pingzhang.

古文：星吉星吉，字吉甫，河西人。
现代文：星吉，字吉甫，河西人。
English: Xingji, Zhiji Fu, Hexi people.

古文：曾祖朵吉，祖搠思吉朵而只，父搠思吉，世事太祖、宪宗、世祖为怯里马赤。
现代文：曾祖朵吉，祖父搠思吉朵而只，父搠思吉，相继侍奉太祖、宪宗和世祖，为怯里马赤。
English: Zeng Zu Dorji, grandfather Zi Si Ji Dorji, father Zi Si Ji, successively served the great-grandfather, the founder of the dynasty, and the founder of the dynasty. He was a coward.

古文：星吉少给事仁宗潜邸，以精敏称。
现代文：星吉年少时就在仁宗的府邸中当差，精明敏捷。
English: When he was young, Hoshiyoshi worked as a porter in the residence of Emperor Nanzong. He was shrewd and quick.

古文：至治初，授中尚监，改右侍仪，兼修起居注。拜监察御史，有直声。
现代文：至治初年，授中尚监，后改任右侍仪，兼修《起居注》，拜监察御史，言行正直，为人们所称赞。
English: In the first year of his reign, he was awarded the title of middle school superintendent, and later he was appointed as the right attendant, and he also studied the "Rising and Living Note," worshiped the superintendent's history, and was praised for his honesty.

古文：自是十五迁为宣政院使，出为江南行御史台御史大夫。
现代文：升迁为宣政院使，出任江南御史台御史大夫。
English: He was promoted to an envoy of the Xuan Zheng Yuan, and served as the chief historian of the Southern Yangtze Historical Research Station.

古文：时承平日久，内外方以观望为政，星吉独持风裁，御史行部，必敕厉而遣之。湖东佥事三宝住，儒者也，性廉介，所至搏贪猾无所贷。
现代文：这时，因久过太平年月，朝廷内外官吏都是看风头察颜色办事，而星吉则坚持纪纲。湖东佥事三宝住，本一介儒生，为人廉洁，对于贪官污吏决不宽容。
English: At this time, due to the long years of peace, the officials inside and outside the imperial court were looking at the limelight and observing the color, while Xingji insisted on the discipline.

古文：御史有以自私请者，拒不纳，则诬以事劾之。
现代文：御史有私事求他，他不肯接受，于是诬告他。
English: Gishi had a personal matter to ask him, he refused to accept, so he falsely accused him.

古文：章至，星吉怒曰： 若人之廉，孰不知之，乃敢为是言耶！ 
现代文：星吉看到了奏章后大怒道 ：三宝住为官清廉，谁不知道，你竟敢上诬告之词！ 
English: After Hoshiyoshi saw the transcript, he flew into a rage and said, "Sanbo lived as an official and was incorruptible. Who doesn't know how dare you make false accusations!"

古文：即奏杖御史而白其诬。
现代文：立即奏请对御史施以杖刑，昭雪三宝住之冤。
English: Please immediately execute the cane punishment on Mi Shi, so that the misfortune of the Three Treasures can be cleared up.

古文：执政者恶之，移湖广行省平章政事。
现代文：因此，执政者讨厌他，调他出京任湖广行省平章政事。
English: Therefore, the rulers hated him and transferred him to Beijing to serve as the governor of the province of Pingzhang.

古文：湖广地连江北，威顺王岁尝出猎，民病之。
现代文：湖广地连江北，威顺王每年要出去打猎，成为人民一大负担。
English: The vast expanse of the lake extends to the north of the river, and King Weishun goes hunting every year, which has become a great burden for the people.

古文：又起广乐园，多萃名倡巨贾以网大利，有司莫敢忤。
现代文：威顺王建立 广乐园 ，集中了一些名娼、巨贾，牟取大利。地方官府也不敢得罪他。
English: King Weishun built Guangyuan Park and gathered some famous prostitutes and giants to make money. The local government did not dare to offend him.

古文：星吉至，谒王，王阖中门，启左扉，召以入。
现代文：星吉到湖广后去拜见他，威顺王关了中门，开左边小门召他进去。
English: After Xingji went to Hukang to visit him, Wishun Wang closed the middle door and opened the left door to invite him in.

古文：星吉引绳床坐王中门西，言曰： 吾受天子命来作牧，非王私臣也，焉得由不正之道入乎！ 
现代文：星吉说 ：我是受天子之命来此任平章政事，不是你威顺王的私臣，怎能从不正之道而入呢！ 
English: Hoshiyoshi said, "I was ordered by the Son of Heaven to be appointed to this post of Heijo government affairs. I am not a private vassal of your majestic king. How could I have entered through an improper path?"

古文：阍者惧，入告王，王命启中门。
现代文：守门的人惶恐万状，进去禀告威顺王，王命开中门迎入。
English: The people guarding the gate were terrified. They went in to inform King Weishun, who opened the middle gate to welcome them.

古文：星吉入，责王曰： 王帝室之懿，古之所谓伯父叔父者也。
现代文：星吉入府之后，谴责威顺王说： 你是皇室宗亲，古之所谓伯父叔父。
English: After Hoshiyoshi entered the palace, he denounced King Wisun, saying, "You are the royal family's ancestor, the ancient so-called uncle.

古文：今德音不闻，而骋猎宣淫，贾怨于下，恐非所以自贻多福也。 
现代文：但如今未闻王有什么德行，而是打猎行乐，商贾抱怨，这样恐怕对你没有什么好处。 
English: But nowadays, no one knows what virtue Wang has, but hunting and pleasure, merchants complain, so I'm afraid it's not good for you.

古文：王急握星吉手谢之，为悉罢其所为。
现代文：威顺王连忙握星吉手，感谢他的提醒，将其一些不正当作为全都废止。
English: The dignified Wang Shun hurriedly shook the lucky star's hand, thanked him for the reminder, and cancelled all of his improper actions.

古文：有胡僧曰小住持者，服三品命，恃宠横甚，数以事凌轹官府。
现代文：有个西域僧人叫小住持的，穿三品官的命服，恃宠横行，甚至多次欺压官府。
English: There was a monk in the western region called the Minor Abbot, who wore the life-jacket of a third-ranked official, indulged in rampant favoritism, and even repeatedly bullied the government.

古文：星吉命掩捕之，得妻妾女乐妇女十有八人，狱具，罪而籍之，由是豪强敛手，贫弱称快。
现代文：星吉将他逮捕，搜出其妻、妾、女乐、妇女共十八人。将此僧人判罪之后，一些豪强不敢胡作非为，贫弱百姓拍手称快。
English: Xingji arrested him and found his wife, concubine, concubines, and women, a total of eighteen people. After this monk was convicted, some powerful people did not dare to do anything wrong, and the poor and weak people applauded.

古文：至正十一年，汝、颍妖贼起，会僚属议之，或曰： 有郑万户，老将也，宜起而用之。 
现代文：至正十一年，白莲教起义于汝、颍一带。星吉把召募勇士、加固城池、修理军械、严密巡逻等事均交老将郑万户负责。义军派二千人来约降。
English: By the eleventh year of the Heian period, the White Lotus Rebellion broke out in the areas of Ru and Ye. Xingji put the veteran Zheng Wanyu in charge of recruiting warriors, fortifying the city, repairing armaments, and closely patrolling. The rebels sent 2,000 men to negotiate a surrender.

古文：星吉乃命募士兵，完城池，修器械，严巡警，悉以其事属郑。
现代文：星吉与郑万户说 ：这是诈降，但又不能拒绝。应接受他们的投降，然后进行审查。 
English: Xingji and Zheng Wanyu said, "This is a false surrender, but we cannot refuse. We should accept their surrender and then review it."

古文：明日，贼大至，内外响应，城遂陷。
现代文：经审查，果然是诈降，将为首者数十人严密监禁，等候朝廷处理。
English: After examination, it was indeed a fraud, and dozens of people, including the leader, were placed in strict confinement, waiting for the Imperial Court to deal with them.

古文：武昌之人骈首夜泣曰： 大夫不去，吾岂为俘囚乎？ 
现代文：恰在此时，朝廷召星吉回京任命为大司农。与他同事的一些人，因受了义军的贿赂，且忌妒其功，诬告郑万户，释放被监禁的义军首领。至正十二年正月十四日，义军攻陷武昌。
English: Just at this time, the imperial court called Xingji back to Beijing and appointed him as the chief farmer. Because he received bribes from the rebels and was jealous of his achievements, he and some of his colleagues falsely accused Zheng Wanzhou and released the imprisoned rebel leader. On the 14th day of the first month of the 12th year, the rebels invaded Wuchang.

古文：星吉既入见，具陈贼本末。
现代文：星吉回京入见顺帝，陈述防御义军的情况，顺帝大喜。
English: Xingji returned to Beijing to see Emperor Shun and report on the situation of the defense of the rebels. Emperor Shun was overjoyed.

古文：帝大喜，命赐食。时宰不悦，奏为江西行省平章政事，员外置。星吉至江东，诏令守江州。
现代文：但宰相不高兴，奏请将星吉出为江西行省平章政事。星吉到江东后，朝廷令他守江州。
English: However, the prime minister was not happy, and requested that Xingji be sent to Jiangxi to govern the province of Pingzhang. After Xingji went to the east of the river, the court ordered him to keep Jiangzhou.

古文：时江州已陷，贼据池阳。
现代文：这时江州、池阳已为义军所有。
English: At this time, Jiangzhou and Chiyang were already in the hands of the rebels.

古文：太平官军止有三百人，贼号百万，众皆欲走。
现代文：守太平的元军不过三百人，而义军号称百万，守城官军准备弃太平而逃。
English: The Yuan army guarding Taiping was no more than three hundred men, while the rebel army was reputed to be a million strong. The garrison army was ready to abandon Taiping and flee.

古文：星吉曰： 畏贼而逃，非勇也；坐而待攻，非智也。汝等皆有妻子财物，纵逃其可免乎？ 
现代文：星吉对他们说 ：畏贼而逃不是勇敢的表现，坐在城内等敌人进攻也不明智，你们都有妻子财物，你们逃走了，妻子儿女可免于难吗？ 
English: Hoshiyoshi said to them, "It is not a brave act to run away in fear of thieves. It is not wise to sit in the city and wait for the enemy to attack. You all have wives and belongings. You have fled. Are your wives and children safe?

古文：乃贷富人钱，募人为兵。先是，行台募兵，人给百五十千，无应者。
现代文：他向富户借钱来召募兵卒，每卒五十千，一天就募得三千人，而在此以前，行御史台曾以每人一百五十千之价募兵，却无人应募。
English: He borrowed money from rich people to recruit soldiers, at a rate of fifty thousand per soldier, and in one day he recruited three thousand men. Previously, the Imperial General Headquarters had recruited soldiers at a rate of one hundred and fifty thousand per man, but no one responded to the call.

古文：乃命诸将分道讨贼，复石埭诸县。
现代文：星吉又备造战船，克复铜陵，破白马湾，抵达白湄，俘义军首领周驴，缴获船六百艘，收复池州及石埭各县。
English: Xingji also prepared to build warships, recaptured Tongling, broke through Baima Bay, arrived at Baimei, captured the leader of the rebel army Zhou Xie, seized six hundred ships, and recovered Chizhou and Shizhu counties.

古文：贼复来攻，命王惟恭列阵当之，锋始交，出小舰从旁横击，大破走之，进据清水湾。
现代文：义军反攻，星吉命王惟恭列阵抵御，另遣小舰从旁袭击，大破义军，占据清水湾。
English: The rebels counter-attacked, and Hoshikichi Myo-Wang led his troops in a defensive formation. He also sent a small ship to attack from the side, destroying the rebels and occupying Shimizu Bay.

古文：伺者告贼舰至自上流，顺风举帆，众且数十倍，诸将失色。星吉曰： 无伤也，风势盛，彼仓卒必不得泊，但伏横港中偃旗以待，俟过而击之，无不胜矣。 
现代文：侦探报告说，有比官军多数十倍的义军自上流乘舰顺风而下。诸将惊恐失色，星吉说： 没关系，风势盛，敌舰停泊困难，我们埋伏在港湾河汊内，等敌军过了我们再随后出击，无不取胜。 
English: The detective reported that there were ten times more rebels than the official army sailing down the wind from the upper stream. Everyone was terrified, and Hoshiyoshi said: It doesn't matter, the wind is strong, the enemy ship is difficult to moor, we are lying in wait in the harbor estuary, and when the enemy army passes us, we will attack later, and we will win.

古文：风怒水驶，贼奄忽而过，乃命举旗张帆鼓噪而薄之，官军殊死战，风反为我用，又大破之。
现代文：果如星吉所料，官军殊死战斗，大破敌军。围攻安庆的义军，闻清水湾失利，也撤围而去。元军收复湖口、江州。
English: As expected by Xingji, the government army fought desperately and defeated the enemy army. The rebel army that besieged Anqing, hearing the defeat of Clear Water Bay, also withdrew from the siege. The Yuan army recovered Hukou and Jiangzhou.

古文：贼素闻星吉名，不忍害，舁置密室中，至旦乃苏。贼罗拜，争馈以食。
现代文：星吉命王惟恭守小孤山，自己扼守番阳口。这时期内，义军已占有湖广，江西亦在掌握之中，淮、浙一带人民也起而响应，元军无后援，且士卒疲惫，粮食缺乏，将卒都无斗志，有人说东南大势已去。
English: During this period, the rebel army had already occupied Hukang, Jiangxi was also under control, the people around Huai and Zhejiang also responded, the Yuan army had no backup, and the soldiers were tired, food was scarce, and the soldiers had no fighting spirit, some people said that the southeastern situation had gone.

古文：星吉斥之，遂不复食。
现代文：星吉言峻色厉地对全军说 ：我们受命守江西，必须与江西共存亡。 
English: He sternly said to the whole army: We have been ordered to defend Jiangxi, we must coexist with Jiangxi.

古文：凡七日，乃自力而起，北面再拜曰： 臣力竭矣。 
现代文：不久，义军乘大船从各方面进攻，元军拼死战斗，死亡几尽，星吉侄子伯不华战死，星吉亦中箭昏倒，为义军所俘。
English: Soon, the rebels attacked from all sides on a large ship. The Yuan army fought to the death and died several times. Xingji's nephew Bo Buhua died in the battle. Xingji also fainted in the middle of an arrow and was captured by the rebels.

古文：遂绝，年五十七。
现代文：他拒不投降，绝食十日而死，年五十七岁。
English: He refused to surrender and died after a ten-day hunger strike, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：星吉为人公廉明决，及在军中，能与将士同甘苦，以忠义感激人心，故能以少击众、得人死力云。
现代文：星吉为人公正廉洁，办事英明果断，能与将士同甘共苦，以忠义激动人心，故在战斗中常能以少胜多，将士为他拼死效力。
English: Hoshiyoshi was a fair and honest person, he acted wisely and decisively, he was able to share the joys and sorrows with his soldiers, and he inspired them with his loyalty. Therefore, he was often able to win more with less in battle, and his soldiers worked hard for him.

古文：福寿福寿，唐兀人。幼俊茂，知读书，尤善应对。
现代文：福寿，唐兀族人，自幼英俊，好读书，与人交谈，对答如流。
English: Fu Shou, a member of the Tang and Qiang ethnic groups, has been handsome since childhood. He is good at reading, conversing with others, and has a fluent repartee.

古文：既长，入备环卫，用年劳授长宁寺少卿，改引进使，升知侍仪使，进正使。出为饶州路达鲁花赤，擢淮西廉访副使。入为工部侍郎，佥太常礼仪院事，拜监察御史，改户部侍郎，升尚书，出为燕南廉访使，又五迁为同知枢密院事。
现代文：长大后加入宫廷宿卫，后授为长宁寺少卿，改任引进使，升知侍仪使、正使；出京为饶州路达鲁花赤，又升淮西廉访副使、工部侍郎、佥太常礼仪院事；拜监察御史，改户部侍郎，再升户部尚书；出为燕南廉访使，转同知枢密院事。
English: After growing up, he joined the palace guards, and was later promoted to the junior secretary of Changning Temple, and was appointed as the envoy of introduction, the attendant of knowledge, and the chief envoy; he went to Beijing as the vice-envoy of Raozhou Ludaruhana, and was promoted to the vice-envoy of Huaixi Liangqiao, the attendant of the Ministry of Industry, and the attendant of the Imperial Household; he was appointed as the inspector of history, the attendant of the Ministry of Household, and then the attendant of the Ministry of Household; he was appointed as the envoy of Yan Nanliang, and was transferred to the

古文：至正十一年，颍州以贼反告，时车驾在上都，朝堂皆犹豫未决，欲驿奏以待命。
现代文：至正十一年，颍州人民起义反元，当时顺帝在上都，如何应付，廷臣们犹豫不决，主张先奏报皇上等待决定。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taizhou people's uprising against Yuan, when Emperor Shun was in Shangdu, how to deal with it, the courtiers hesitated, advocating that they should first report to the emperor and wait for a decision.

古文：福寿独以谓 比使得请还，则事有弗及矣 。
现代文：福寿则认为事情紧迫，等待皇帝决定就来不及了。
English: Fukutoshi, on the other hand, thought that the matter was urgent and that it was too late to wait for the emperor's decision.

古文：于是决议调兵五百，遣卫官哈剌章、忻都、怯来讨之而后以闻。
现代文：于是决议调兵五百，遣卫官哈剌章、忻都、怯来先去讨伐，然后上报皇帝。
English: Therefore, it was decided to transfer five hundred soldiers, and send guardsmen Haruzhang and Shedu to fight first, and then report to the emperor.

古文：顺帝善其处事得宜，明年，改也可札鲁忽赤。未几，出为淮南行省平章政事。
现代文：顺帝认为福寿的措置得当。第二年任他为也可札鲁忽赤，不久出任淮南行省平章政事。
English: Emperor Shun thought that the measures taken by Fu Shou were appropriate. In the following year, he was appointed as the governor of Jiaozharu and soon became the governor of Pingzhang in Huainan Province.

古文：是时濠、泗俱已陷，师久无功。
现代文：这时，泗州已为义军所有，元军镇压无功。
English: At this time, Zhangzhou was already in the possession of the rebels, and the suppression of the Yuan Army was fruitless.

古文：福寿至，督战甚急，而上游贼势甚汹涌，福寿乃议筑石头，断江面，守御有方，众恃以为固。十五年，迁江南行台御史大夫。
现代文：福寿到任后，加紧督战，为防御上游东下的义军，计划筑石头城，截堵江面。至正十五年，升福寿为江南行御史台御史大夫。
English: After Fu Shou took office, he stepped up the supervision of the war, and planned to build a stone city to block the river surface in order to defend the upstream and downstream rebels. By the 15th year of the Taisho era, Sheng Fu Shou was the governor of the Southern Yangtze River.

古文：俄而乱兵四集，福寿遂遇害，不知所在，达尼达思亦死之。
现代文：他到任前集庆告急，来救援的苗军杀湖广平章政事阿鲁灰叛元，集庆无援。其后，高邮、庐州、和州均为义军占领，集庆更加危急，且仓无积粮。福寿到任，下令城内富者资助粮饷，激励将士，固守集庆。
English: Prior to his arrival, Jieqing was in a desperate situation. The Miao army that came to rescue Jieqing had killed Hukangangpingzhang, the political leader and traitor to the Yuan Dynasty, and there was no help for Jieqing. After that, Gaoyou, Zhangzhou, and Hezhou were all occupied by the rebel army. Jieqing was in a more critical situation, and there was no grain in the warehouse. When Fu Shou took office, he ordered the rich people in the city to subsidize grain, encourage soldiers, and stick to Jieqing.

古文：又同时死者，有治书侍御史贺方。
现代文：至正十六年三月，朱元璋领导的大明军围攻集庆、福寿多次督兵出战，但因孤立无援，被义军攻破。
English: In March of the 16th year of the Zhou Dynasty, the Daming Army led by Zhu Yuanzhang besieged Jiqing, and Fu Shou repeatedly sent troops to fight, but because he was isolated and had no support, he was defeated by the rebels.

古文：达尼达思字思明。贺方字伯京，晋宁人，以文学名。
现代文：百官皆狂奔逃命，而福寿仍坐于凤凰台下指挥，有人劝他逃走，他说： 我是国家重臣，城存则生，城破则亡，向哪里逃！ 
English: All the officials were running for their lives, but Fukuju was still sitting under the command of the phoenix. Someone advised him to run away, and he said, "I am the chief minister of the state. If a city survives, it lives. If a city is destroyed, it dies. Where should I run to?"

古文：事闻，朝廷赠福寿金紫光禄大夫、江浙行省左丞相、上柱国，追封卫国公，谥忠肃。
现代文：义军入城，福寿遇难。朝廷闻知，赠金紫光禄大夫、江浙行省左丞相、上柱国，追封卫国公，谥忠肃。
English: When the rebels entered the city, Fu Shou was killed. The imperial court heard about this and gave him the titles of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Minister of the Left, Shangzhu Province, and the title of Prince of Defense.

古文：道童道童，高昌人，自号石岩。
现代文：道童，高昌人，自号石岩。
English: Taoist, native of Gaochang, calls himself Shi Yan.

古文：性深沉寡言。
现代文：性情深沉寡言，因出身于官宦世家而授直省舍人。
English: Deep and reticent by nature, he was given the title of provincial governor because he came from a family of government officials.

古文：以世胄入官，授直省舍人，历官清显，素负能名。调信州路总管，移平江，皆以善政称。至正元年，迁大都路达鲁花赤，出为江浙行省参知政事，寻召参政中书，顷之，又出为江浙行省右丞，遂升本省平章政事。
现代文：后调任信州路总管，又改为平江路总管。至正元年任大都路达鲁花赤，出为江浙行省参知政事。刚召回京任中书省参政不久，又出任江浙行省右丞，升本省平章政事。道童为官清廉，才能出众，素负重望。
English: Later, he was transferred to be the general manager of Shinshu Road, and then changed to be the general manager of Pingjiang Road. Until the first year of the 21st century, he served as the general manager of Dadu Road, and was appointed as the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province. Shortly after he was recalled to Beijing, he served as the governor of Jiangsu and Zhejiang Province, and was promoted to the governor of Pingjiang Province. Daode is a clean official, has the ability to stand out from the crowd, and is highly regarded.

古文：十一年，诏仍以平章政事行省江西。
现代文：至正十一年，任命为江西行省平章政事。
English: In the eleventh year of the Taisho era, he was appointed as the governor of Pingzhang Province in Jiangxi Province.

古文：是年，贼起蕲、黄，平章政事秃坚理不花将兵捍江州。
现代文：这年，蕲州、黄州人民起义反元，平章政事秃坚理不花率兵捍卫江州。
English: This year, the people of Zhangzhou and Huangzhou revolted against the Yuan Dynasty, and Pingzhang's political leader, Bald Jianli, led soldiers to defend Jiangzhou.

古文：道童从其言，而伯颜亦欣然为起，曰： 此正我报国之秋也。 
现代文：随后江西人民也起义响应，道童素不懂军事，仓皇不知如何是好，采纳左右司郎中普颜不花的建议，起用早已辞官居于抚州的章伯颜左丞。
English: Subsequently, the people of Jiangxi also responded to the uprising. Tao Tong did not understand the military, and the emperor did not know what to do. He adopted the suggestion of the left and right secretary Zhong Puyan not to spend, and appointed Zhang Boyan Zuo, who had already resigned and lived in Fuzhou.

古文：至则与普颜不花设御敌计甚悉。
现代文：此人熟知军务，委任他负责本省左丞事，专管军队的调遣。伯颜也欣然受命，与普颜不花详细讨论了御敌的计划。
English: This man was familiar with military affairs, and he was appointed to be in charge of the province's left-hand officer, specializing in the deployment of troops. Boyan also gladly accepted the order, and discussed the enemy's plan in detail with Puyan.

古文：明年正月，湖广陷，秃坚里不花由江州遁还。
现代文：至正十二年正月，义军攻陷湖广，秃坚理不花由江州逃还。
English: In the first month of the 12th year of the Taisho era, the rebels invaded Hukang, and Gao Jianli fled back from Jiangzhou.

古文：二月，普颜不花将兵往江州，至石头渡，遇贼战败，道童闻之大恐，即怀省印遁走。
现代文：二月，普颜不花领兵往江州，至石头渡为义军所败，道童闻讯大恐，立即怀印逃跑。
English: In February, Puyanfuhua led the troops to Jiangzhou, and was defeated by the rebels at Shiguandu. Daodong was terrified when he heard the news, and immediately fled with Haiyin.

古文：命万户章妥因卜鲁哈歹领之。
现代文：普颜不花与伯颜守城。数日后，道童从南昌回来，商议守御计划。
English: Pu Yanfuhua and Bo Yan defended the city. A few days later, Daodong returned from Nanchang to discuss the defense plan.

古文：夜半，开门伏兵栅下，黎明，钲鼓大震，因奋击贼，贼惊以为神，败走。
现代文：三月，义军围城，元军坚守，相持两月未下。道童因平时爱恤百姓，能用人，有功必赏，无功不罪，故百姓能为他效力。
English: In March, the rebels besieged the city, and the Yuan army held out, holding each other for two months. Because Tao Tong loved the people in peacetime, he was able to employ people, meritorious work must be rewarded, no merit without guilt, so the people could work for him.

古文：遂乘胜捣其营，复分兵扫其余党。
现代文：他密召敢死者数千人，面涂青色，额系黄巾，身穿黄衣，以为前锋；又另选精锐军士率数千人为中军，助阵者为后备。
English: He secretly summoned thousands of people who dared to die, their faces were painted blue, their foreheads were covered with yellow scarves, and they wore yellow clothes, thinking that they were the vanguard; he also selected thousands of elite sergeants to be the Chinese army, and those who helped the battle were the reserve.

古文：是时，章伯颜、普颜不花之功居多。
现代文：由万户章妥因卜鲁哈歹率领，半夜开城门潜伏于围城敌军栅寨下，黎明突然发起攻势，金鼓震天，伏兵奋起。
English: In the middle of the night, under the leadership of Wanyu Zhangtuo and Bruha gangsters, they opened the city gate and lurked under the fence of the besieging enemy army. At dawn, they suddenly launched an offensive, the golden drum shook the sky, and the ambush arose.

古文：伯颜寻以疾卒。
现代文：义军以为神兵自天而降，败走。
English: The rebels thought that divine soldiers had fallen from the sky and were defeated.

古文：朝廷以道童捍城有功，加大司徒、开府，仍赐龙衣御酒。
现代文：在这次战斗中，章伯颜、普颜不花功最多，然伯颜病逝，朝廷加道童为大司徒、开府，赐龙衣御酒。
English: In this battle, Zhang Boyan and Puyan did not spend the most effort, but Boyan died of illness, the court added Daodong as the chief disciple and the head of the government, and gave Longyi wine.

古文：及秋，朝廷命亦怜真班为江西行省左丞相，火你赤为左丞，同将兵来江西。
现代文：这年秋，朝廷命亦怜真班为江西行省左丞相，火你赤为左丞，一同领兵来江西。
English: In the autumn of the same year, the imperial court also ordered Ren Zhenban to be the minister of the left in Jiangxi Province, and Hu Youkai to be the minister of the left, and together they led the troops to Jiangxi.

古文：未几，亦怜真班卒，道童属火你赤平富、瑞二州，分镇其地。
现代文：不久，亦怜真班逝世，道童令火你赤平定富、瑞二州，并分镇两地。
English: Soon after, Yerizhenban passed away, and Tao Tong set fire to Youka Ping, Dingfu, Rui Erzhou, and divided the town into two places.

古文：由是按堵如故，而贼亦不敢犯其境。十八年夏四月，陈友谅复攻江西城。
现代文：这年大旱灾，道童向江浙行省借米数十万石、盐数十万斤，无论军民，每人三日以旧钞二贯买官米一斗，六日以钞二贯买官盐十斤。这样保持了境内安然无事，义军亦不敢来犯。至正十八年四月，义军陈友谅再进攻江西。
English: In the year of the great drought, Tao Tong borrowed hundreds of thousands of koku of rice and hundreds of thousands of catties of salt from Jiangsu and Zhejiang provinces. Regardless of whether military or civilian, each person used two old banknotes to buy one bucket of rice on the third day, and used two banknotes to buy ten catties of salt on the sixth day. This kept the territory safe and sound, and the rebels did not dare to commit crimes. In April of the 18th year, the rebels Chen Youzhen attacked Jiangxi again.

古文：时火你赤已升平章政事，加营国公，行便宜事，任专兵柄，而素与道童不相能，且贪忍不得将士心，见城且陷，遂夜遁去。
现代文：这时火你赤已升为平章政事，加营国公，专掌兵权。此人素与道童不合，且性情残忍，贪财，不受将士爱戴。他见城将陷落，连夜逃走。
English: At this time, he had already been promoted to the post of Tai-zhang (general) of government affairs, the post of Jiaying (governor) of the country, and was in charge of the military. This person was not compatible with Taoism, and his temperament was cruel, greedy for money, and was not loved by the generals. He saw that the city would fall and fled overnight.

古文：适贼追者至，道童欲迎敌，渡水，未登岸，贼众乘之，遂为所害。
现代文：道童也弃城退保抚州路，虽有志收复失地，但大势已去，终为义军所杀。
English: Daodong also abandoned the city and retreated to Fuzhou Road. Although he had the will to recover the lost land, the momentum was lost and he was eventually killed by the rebels.

古文：事闻，赐谥忠烈。
现代文：朝廷赐谥号忠烈。
English: The imperial court bestowed the title of "Zhong Rong Rong" on him.

