古文：凡与敌战，若彼众多，则虚设形以分其势，彼不敢不分兵以备我。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果敌人兵力众多，就要用制造虚形假像的 示形 之法来改变敌人的兵势，迫使它不敢不分兵来防备我。
English: In any battle against the enemy, if the enemy has a large number of troops, it is necessary to use the method of creating a false image to change the enemy's military strength, forcing it to not dare to guard against me.

古文：敌势既分，其兵必寡；我专为一，其卒自众。
现代文：敌人的兵力分散，那它的每处兵力就会减少；而我军集中兵力于一处，兵力自然众多。
English: If the enemy's forces are dispersed, then each of his forces will be reduced; but if our forces are concentrated in one place, there will naturally be a large number of troops.

古文：以众击寡，无有不胜。
现代文：用我众多的兵力攻击寡少的敌人，是没有不胜利的。
English: With my great army I will fight against a small one, but I will not be defeated.

古文：法曰： 形人而我无形。 汉末，建安五年，曹操与袁绍相拒于官渡。
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 用制造虚形假象之法诱使敌人暴露弱点，而把我军真实情况隐蔽起来不为敌人所知。 东汉献帝建安五年，曹操同袁绍对抗于官渡地区。
English: As it is said in the Art of War: using the method of creating false illusions to induce the enemy to expose their weaknesses, while concealing the true situation of our army from the enemy.In the fifth year of the Eastern Han Dynasty, Cao Cao and Yuan Shao confronted each other in the Guandu region.

古文：绍遣郭图、淳于琼、颜良，攻操将东郡太守刘延于白马，绍率兵至黎阳，将渡河。
现代文：袁绍派遣郭图、淳于琼、颜良率兵进攻驻扎在白马的曹操部将、东郡太守刘延所部，袁绍亲自率兵进至黎阳，准备南渡黄河。
English: Yuan Shao dispatched Guo Tu, Jun Yujiong and Yan Liang to attack Cao Cao's headquarters stationed in Baima and the headquarters of Liu Yan, the governor of Dong County. Yuan Shao personally led the troops to Liyang to prepare for crossing the Yellow River.

古文：夏四月，曹操北救延。
现代文：是年夏四月，曹操率军北进援救刘延。
English: In the summer of April, Cao Cao and his army marched north to rescue Liu Yan.

古文：荀攸说操曰： 今兵少不可敌，若分其势乃可。
现代文：荀攸向曹操献策说： 现在我军兵少难以抵挡袁军，如果分散他们的兵力，然后才可以战胜它。
English: Zou You offered Cao Cao a strategy, saying: Now that our army is small, it is difficult to resist Yuan's army. If we disperse their forces, then we can defeat it.

古文：公到延津，若将渡河向其后，绍必西应之。
现代文：您带部分人马向延津方向，摆出将要北渡黄河攻打其后方的样子，袁绍必定会西来应战。
English: You took some men and horses to the direction of Yanjin, posing as if you were going to cross the Yellow River to attack its rear. Yuan Shao will certainly come to the west to fight.

古文：然后轻兵袭白马，掩其不备，颜良可擒也。 
现代文：然后我们率领轻装部队袭击白马，乘其不备而攻之，颜良就可以为我们所擒。 
English: Then we led the light-armed troops to attack the white horse, taking advantage of its unpreparedness and attacking it, and Yan Liang could take the lead for us.

古文：操从之。
现代文：曹操听后采纳了他的建议。
English: Cao Cao followed his advice.

古文：绍闻操兵将渡，即分兵西应之。
现代文：袁绍听到曹军要从延津北渡黄河的消息后，立即分兵西向应战。
English: After Yuan Shao heard the news that Cao's army was going to cross the Yellow River from Yanjin to the north, he immediately sent troops to the west to fight.

古文：操乃率军兼行趋白马，未至十余里，良大惊，来迎战。
现代文：曹操乘机率兵日夜兼程直趋白马，当进抵距白马尚有十余里时，颜良得悉大为吃惊，匆忙前来迎战。
English: Cao Cao took the opportunity to lead his soldiers on a day and night journey towards the White Horse. When they were still more than ten miles away from the White Horse, Yan Liang was very surprised and hurried to meet the battle.

古文：操使张辽、关羽前登，击破之，斩良，遂解白马之围。
现代文：曹操派遣大将张辽、关羽为前锋接战，结果打败了袁军，斩杀了颜良，于是解了白马之围。
English: Cao Cao dispatched generals Zhang Liao and Guan Yu to fight as forwards. As a result, they defeated Yuan's army and killed Yan Liang, thus breaking the siege of the White Horse.

