古文：司寇布为周最谓周君曰： 君使人告齐王以周最不肯为太子也，臣为君不取也。
现代文：司寇布代表周最对西周国君说： 您派人告诉齐王周最不愿意做太子，臣认为这样做实在不太合适。
English: Zhou Zicheng, the representative of Scobu, said to Xi Zhou Guojun: You sent someone to tell King Qi that Zhou was most unwilling to be crown prince. The minister thought that this was really not appropriate.

古文：函冶氏为齐太公买良剑，公不知善，归其剑而责之金。
现代文：以前函冶氏为齐太公买了一把宝剑，太公不知道这是好剑，就把那把剑还给了函冶氏，并且要求退还他的金钱。
English: In the past, Mr. Han Ye bought a sword for Grand Duke Qi. The Grand Duke did not know that it was a good sword, so he returned the sword to Mr. Han Ye and asked for his money back.

古文：越人请买之干金，折而不卖。
现代文：后来越国的一个人想用一千金买这把剑，函冶氏却又认为他出的价钱不够不愿意卖。
English: Later, a man from Vietnam wanted to buy the sword for a thousand gold, but Mr. Han Ye didn't want to sell it because he didn't think the price was enough.

古文：将死，而属其子曰： 必无独知。 
现代文：当函冶氏即将去世时，叮嘱他儿子说： 一定不要只有自己知道自己的剑好。 
English: When Mr. Han Ye was about to die, he told his son, "You must not be the only one who knows your sword is good."

古文：今君之使最为太子，独知之契也，天下未有信之者也。
现代文：如今您想立周最为太子，只有您自己知道，天下却没有人知道这件事。
English: Now you want to make Zhou the crown prince. Only you know, but no one else in the world knows about it.

古文：臣恐齐王之为君实立果而让之於最，以嫁之齐也。
现代文：臣深怕齐王听了你的话后反而认为你说的不是真的，觉得你的真实意图是立公子果为太子，只是用这种假托周最不肯作太子的办法虚饰周最罢了，以此欺蒙齐国。
English: The vassal was deeply afraid that after listening to your words, the King of Qi would think that what you said was not true, and that your true intention was to make Zhou Guo the crown prince. It was just a way of deceiving the State of Qi by pretending that Zhou Guo did not want to be crown prince.

古文：君为多巧，最为多诈，君何不买信货哉?
现代文：如果人们觉得君王是在搬弄计谋，周最在搞权诈之术，那么现在君王为何不让人们看到事情的真相呢？
English: If people think that the king is scheming, and Zhou is engaging in power fraud, then why does the king not let people see the truth of the matter now?

古文：奉养无有爱于最也，使天下见之。 
现代文：话说回来，供养周最的财物不要吝啬，这要让天下的人都知道。 
English: Having said that, don't be stingy when it comes to providing for your family's most precious possessions. Let everyone in the world know about it.

