古文：殷绍，长乐人也。
现代文：殷绍，长乐人。
English: Yin Shao, Changle Musician.

古文：少聪敏，好阴阳术数，游学诸方，达《九章》、《七曜》。
现代文：少年时聪敏，喜爱阴阳术数，曾游学四方，通晓九章、七曜。
English: When he was a boy, he was very intelligent and loved the yin and yang operations. He had traveled to study the four directions and was familiar with the nine chapters and the seventh day of the week.

古文：世祖时为算生博士给事东宫西曹，以艺术为恭宗所知。
现代文：世祖时为算生博士，在东宫西曹任事，因擅长阴阳术数而为恭宗知遇。
English: At the time of the founder, he was a doctor of arithmetic, working in the East Palace of the West Cao, and was well-known for being good at yin and yang operations.

古文：太安西年夏，上《四序堪舆》，表曰： 臣以姚氏之世，行学伊川，时遇游遁大儒成公兴，从求《九章》要术。
现代文：太安四年夏，向皇帝进献《四序堪舆》，奏启说： 我于姚氏时代，求学到达伊川，遇见周游讲学的大儒成公兴，跟随他研究九章算术。
English: In the summer of the fourth year of the Taian era, he presented the emperor with the "Four Sequences of Chinese History." He said: In the era of Yao, I went to study in Yichuan, met the great scholar Cheng Gongxing, who traveled around to give lectures, and followed him to study the nine chapters of arithmetic.

古文：兴字广明，自云胶东人也。山居隐迹，希在人间。
现代文：成公兴字广明，自称是胶东人，隐居于山林之中，很少过问人间之事。
English: Chenggong Xing's name is Guangming, he claims to be a Jiaodong person, lives in seclusion in the mountains and forests, and rarely asks about worldly things.

古文：兴时将臣南到阳翟九崖岩沙门释昙影间。
现代文：成公兴送我到南边阳翟九崖岩僧徒释昙影那里。
English: Cheng Gongxing took me to the south of Yangshuo, to the Jiuya Rock Monastery, where the monk Xie Yingying lived.

古文：兴即北还，臣独留住，依止影所，求请《九章》。
现代文：成公兴随即回到北方，我一人留住在此，依托于释昙影，请求他传授九章。
English: Cheng Gongxing immediately returned to the north, I stayed here alone, relying on the commentary, and asked him to teach nine chapters.

古文：影复将臣向长广东山见道人法穆。
现代文：释昙影又把我带到长广东山见道人法穆。
English: He also took me to Changguangdong Mountain to see the Taoist teachings.

古文：法穆时共影为臣开述《九章》数家杂要，披释章次意况大旨。
现代文：法穆时常与释昙影一起给我进述九章数家杂要，剖析解释各章次的大意要领。
English: Dharma Mu often gave me a detailed explanation of the nine chapters together with the commentary, dissecting and explaining the gist of each chapter.

古文：又演隐审五藏六府心髓血脉，商功大算端部，变化玄象，土圭、《周髀》。
现代文：又推衍和观察五脏六腑、心髓血脉、商功大算端部、变化玄象、土圭、《周髀》。
English: He also deduced and observed the five viscera and six glands, the blood vessels of the heart, the end of the Shanggong calculation, the changes of the occult, the Tu Gui, and the Zhou Qi.

古文：练精锐思，蕴习四年，从穆所闻，粗皆仿佛。
现代文：精心练习，锐意思考，潜心学习四年，从法穆所学到的知识，大体都能掌握。
English: Four years of diligent practice, sharp thinking, and concentrated study, the knowledge learned from Dharma Mu can generally be mastered.

古文：穆等仁矜，特垂忧闵，复以先师和公所注黄帝《四序经》文三十六卷，合有三百二十四章，专说天地阴阳之本。
现代文：法穆等人仁慈而富于同情心，对我特别怜爱，又传授先师和公所注的黄帝《四序经》文三十六卷，共有三百二十四章，专说天地阴阳之本。
English: Dharma Mu and the others were kind and compassionate, and they were especially compassionate towards me. They also taught me the 36 volumes of the Yellow Emperor's "Four-Sequence Sutra," a total of 324 chapters, dedicated to the heaven and earth and yin and yang.

古文：其第一《孟序》，九卷八十一章阴阳配合之原；第二《仲序》，九卷八十一章，解四时气王休杀吉凶 第三《叔序》，九卷八十一章，明日月辰宿交会相生为表裹；第四《季序》，九卷八十一章，具释六甲刑祸福德：以此等文传授于臣。
现代文：其中第一部分《孟序》，有九卷八十一章，述说阴阳配合之原；第二部分《仲序》，九卷八十一章，解说四时气王休杀吉凶；第三部分《叔序》，九卷八十一章，说明日月辰宿交会相生为表里；第四部分《季序》，九卷八十一章，解释六甲刑祸福德一一一把这样的经文传授与我。
English: The first part of the "Monthly Sequence," with nine volumes and eighty-one chapters, describes the origin of the coordination of yin and yang; the second part of the "Middle Sequence," with nine volumes and eighty-one chapters, explains the four times when the king of qi abstains from killing good and evil; the third part of the "Unclely Sequence," with nine volumes and eighty-one chapters, explains that the sun, moon, and hour are born at the same time; the fourth part of the "Seasonal Sequence," with nine volumes and eighty-one chapters, explains the six degrees of punishment and calamity - one by one, such a scripture was

古文：山神禁严，不得赍出，寻究经年，粗举网要。
现代文：山神禁忌很严，难以得到资财，臣探寻研究多年，能够粗略地提出纲要。
English: The mountain god taboo is very strict, it is difficult to obtain resources, and the minister has been exploring and researching for many years, and can roughly put forward the outline.

古文：山居险难，无以自供，不堪窘迫，心生懈怠。
现代文：山居险恶艰难，生活不能自已，我受不住这种窘迫，便产生懈怠的心情。
English: Living in the mountains is dangerous and difficult, life can't stand on its own, I can't stand this kind of embarrassment, and a feeling of slackness arises.

古文：以甲寅之年，日维鹑火，月吕林钟，景气郁盛，感物怀归，奉辞影等。
现代文：在甲寅年，日在九、十日，月在六月，山林茂盛，气象苍郁，我感物思归，便告辞了释昙影等人。
English: In the year of the Goat, on the 9th and 10th, in the month of June, when the mountains and forests were in full bloom and the weather was gloomy, I was feeling homesick, so I said goodbye to Shifeng Ying and others.

古文：自尔至今，四十五载。
现代文：从那时到现在，整整四十五年。
English: Forty-five years have passed since then.

古文：历观时俗堪舆八会，迳世已久，传写谬误，吉凶禁忌，不能备悉。
现代文：纵观习俗风气，天地变化，人体穴位，由于经世已久，所传记载多有谬误，各种吉凶禁忌，全都不够完备。
English: Looking at the customs and customs, the changes in the world and the human body, due to the passage of time, the recorded records are mostly fallacious, and all kinds of auspicious and inauspicious taboos are not complete.

古文：或考良日而值恶会，举吉用凶，多逢殃咎。
现代文：有时考查良日却碰到坏日子，推算有吉利实际上却不吉祥，往往遭到祸殃。
English: Sometimes the examination of a good day will encounter a bad day, and the prediction of good luck is actually not auspicious, and is often plagued by misfortune.

古文：又史迁、郝振，中吉大儒，亦各撰注，流行于世。
现代文：再有史迁、郝振，都是中古时期的大儒，也各有撰注，流行于世。
English: In addition, Shi Qian (史迁) and He Zhen (振) were both great Confucian scholars in the medieval period, and they were popular in the world.

古文：配会大小，序述阴阳，依如本经，犹有所阙。
现代文：依次论述天地阴阳配合的道理，也是依照这部典范性著作，还有不少缺陷。
English: The principle of successively discussing the coordination of heaven and earth, yin and yang, is also in accordance with this exemplary work, but there are still many defects.

古文：臣前在东宫，以状奏闻，奉被景穆皇帝圣诏，敕臣撰录，集其要最。
现代文：我先前在东宫时，向皇上呈奏此事，承奉景穆皇帝圣诏，令我编撰述录，集中其最重要的内容。
English: Previously, when I was in the East Palace, I presented this matter to the emperor, and following the edict of Emperor Jingmu, I was ordered to compile a record, concentrating on its most important content.

古文：仰奉明旨，谨审先所见《四序经》文，抄撮要略，当世所须吉凶举动，集成一卷。
现代文：我敬奉圣上旨意，仔细地审查先前所见的《四序经》文，抄选其中的要略，把当世所需要的预测吉凶举动的内容，集成一卷。
English: In accordance with God's will, I carefully reviewed the text of the Four Precepts that I had previously seen, selected the main points from it, and compiled the contents of the prediction of auspicious and inauspicious actions that are needed in the current world into one volume.

古文：上至天子，下及庶人，又贵贱阶级、尊卑差别、吉凶所用，罔不毕备。
现代文：上至天子，下及庶人，无论贵贱的等级、尊卑的差别，用以选择吉凶时机，全都齐备。
English: From the highest to the lowest, and from the lowest to the common people, regardless of the rank of the noble and the low, the differences between the superior and the inferior, are all ready to be used to choose the auspicious and inauspicious opportunities.

古文：未及内呈，先帝晏驾。
现代文：然而所撰的书还未来得及呈奉朝廷，先帝已经晏驾。
English: However, the book was not yet ready to be presented to the imperial court, and the former emperor had already passed away.

古文：臣时狼狈，几至不测。
现代文：当时我处境狼狈不堪，几乎遭到不测。
English: I was in a very bad place at the time and almost got caught out.

古文：永熙二年，赠使持节、散骑常侍、都督幽瀛冀三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、尚书左仆射、开府仪同三司、幽州刺史，谥曰恭。
现代文：撰写工作停止下来，到如今已经有八年，屡屡想要奏明陛下，不能自已。加之我如今年迈齿落，余年有限，经常害怕一旦死去，葬身沟壑，以致先帝的遗志不能得以发扬、施行。我日夜悲伤忧愤，觉得从道理上讲也难以回避隐匿，于是依照先前的录奏，谨将此事奏明圣上。
English: It has now been eight years since I stopped writing, and I have often wanted to inform His Majesty, but I could not bring myself to do so. In addition, as I am getting older and my remaining years are limited, I am often afraid that once I die, I will be buried in a ditch, so that the will of the former emperor cannot be carried forward and implemented. I am sad and angry day and night, and I feel that it is logically difficult to avoid hiding, so according to the previous recording, I would like to report this matter to the saint.

古文：子宗辉，袭，兴和中开府，属齐受禅，例降。
现代文：恳请交付中秘二省的通儒达士，让他们确定它的得失。倘若此事可以实行，乞请立即颁布使用。 于是，殷绍所撰的《四序堪舆》一书很快就流行于天下。
English: If this can be done, please publish and use it immediately. As a result, Yin Shao's book "The Four Orders of Chinese Medicine" soon became popular all over the world.

古文：江式，字法安，陈留济阳人。
现代文：江式，字法安，陈留济阳人。
English: Jiang style, word Fa'an, Chen Liu Jiyang people.

古文：六世祖琼，字孟琚，晋冯翊太守，善虫篆、诂训。
现代文：他的六世祖江琼，字孟琚，晋朝冯翊太守，擅长虫篆、训诂。
English: His sixth-generation ancestor Jiang Qiong, also known as Meng Qiong, was the governor-general of Fenghuang during the Jin Dynasty. He was good at catching insects and training magpies.

古文：永嘉大乱，琼弃官西投张轨，子孙因居凉土，世传家业。
现代文：永嘉年间大乱，江琼弃官投奔凉州刺史张轨，从此子孙就定居在凉州，书法、训诂作为家业世代相传。
English: During the Yongjia Rebellion, Jiang Qiong resigned from his post and went to Zhangjiakou, the capital of Liangzhou. Since then, his children and grandchildren have settled in Liangzhou, and calligraphy and calligraphy have been passed down from generation to generation.

古文：祖强，字文威，太延五年，凉州平，内徙代京。
现代文：江式的祖父江强，字文威，太延五年，凉州平定之后，一家迁往代京。
English: The grandfather of the Jiang style, Jiang Qiang, also known as Wen Wei, lived in Taiyuan for five years. After the suppression of Liangzhou, the family moved to Daikyo.

古文：上书三十余法，各有体例，又献经史诸子千余卷，由是擢拜中书博士。
现代文：江强向朝廷进献书法三十余种，各有体例，又献经史诸子千余卷，因此而被授予中书博士之职。
English: Jiang Qiang presented to the imperial court more than thirty kinds of calligraphy, each with its own style, and more than a thousand volumes of the History of Chinese Calligraphy. As a result, he was awarded the position of Doctor of Chinese Calligraphy.

古文：卒，赠敦煌太守。
现代文：死后，追赠敦煌太守。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Dunhuang governor.

古文：父绍兴，高允奏为秘书郎，掌国史二十余年，以谨厚称。
现代文：江式的父亲江绍兴，由高允上奏授予秘书郎，掌管编修国史达二十余年，由于他恭谨朴实，受到世人称赞。
English: Jiang style's father, Jiang Shaoxing, was awarded the title of secretary by Gao Yun Shangso and was in charge of compiling the national history for more than 20 years. Because he was respectful and simple, he was praised by the world.

古文：卒于赵郡太守。
现代文：后死于赵州太守的任上。
English: He later died in office as the governor of Zhaozhou.

古文：式少专家学。
现代文：江式幼年时就专心致志于家传学业。
English: At a young age, Jiang focused on his family's education.

古文：数年之中，常梦两人时相教授，乃寤，每有记识。
现代文：几年之内经常梦见有两个人对他进行教导传授，醒来之后，全都记在心里。
English: For several years, he often dreamed of two people teaching him, and when he woke up, he remembered everything.

古文：初拜司徒长兼行参军、检校御史，寻除殄冠将军、符节令。
现代文：起初被授予司徒长兼行参军、检校御史等职，不久升为殄寇将军、符节令。
English: At first, he was awarded the positions of the head of the teaching staff, concurrently serving in the army and inspecting the school, and soon he was promoted to the position of the general of the Ku Klux Klan and the order of the festival.

古文：以书文昭太后尊号谥册，特除奉朝请，仍符节令。
现代文：因为写文昭太后的尊号谥册，特升为奉朝请，仍任符节令。
English: Because he wrote Empress Dowager Wenzhao's honorific posthumous anthology, he was specially promoted to serve the imperial court, but he was still appointed as a fujisai-rei.

古文：式篆体尤工，洛京宫殿诸门板题，皆式书也。
现代文：江式尤其擅长于篆体，京都洛阳宫殿中所有门上的板题，都是江式书写的。
English: The Jiang style is particularly good at calligraphy. All the inscriptions on the doors of the palace in Luoyang, Kyoto, are written in the Jiang style.

古文：延昌三年三月，式上表曰：
现代文：延昌三年三月，江式向皇帝上表说：
English: In March of the third year of Yanchang, Jiang Shiji said to the emperor:

古文：臣闻庖义氏作而八卦列其画，轩辕氏兴而龟策彰其彩。
现代文： 我听说庖羲氏起而将八卦排列在图画中，轩辕氏兴而用龟策记其文。
English: I heard that Mr. Zou started to arrange the eight tales in pictures, and Mr. Xuan Zou was inspired to use the tortoise to write down the stories.

古文：古史仓颉览二象之爻，观鸟兽之迹，别创文字，以代结绳，用书契以维事。
现代文：古代史官仓颉观看八卦的符号，观察鸟兽的形状，另外创造了文字，用以代替结绳记事，用文字来记载事情。
English: The ancient historian Canglu watched the symbols of the Eight Trigrams, observed the shapes of birds and beasts, and also created characters to record things instead of knots. He used words to record things.

古文：宣之王庭，则百工以叙；载之方册，则万品以明。
现代文：朝廷加以推行，百官就用来陈述事物；典籍中加以记载，各种整理就清楚明白。
English: If it is carried out by the imperial court, it will be used by a hundred officials to state things; if it is recorded in the classics, it will be clear and clear.

古文：迄于三代，厥体颇异，虽依类取制，未能悉殊仓氏矣。
现代文：到了夏商周三代，字体就颇有不同，即使依照种类加以规范，也不能全都同仓颉创立的文字相异。
English: By the third generation of Xia merchants, the fonts were quite different, and even if they were standardized according to type, they could not all be different from the characters created by Canglong.

古文：故《周礼》八岁入小学，保氏教国子以六书：一曰指事，二曰象形，三曰形声，四曰会意，五曰转注，六曰假借。
现代文：所以，《周礼》规定贵族子弟八岁入小学，由执掌教育的官员教给他们六书：一是指事，二是象形，三是谐声，四是会意，五是转注，六是假借。
English: Therefore, the "Weekly Ritual" stipulates that the children of aristocrats enter primary school at the age of eight, and the officials in charge of education teach them six books: one is the matter, the second is the image, the third is the harmony, the fourth is the will, the fifth is the transcription, and the sixth is the fake borrowing.

古文：盖是史颉之遗法也。
现代文：都是仓颉传下的方法。
English: They are all methods handed down from the Kura clan.

古文：及宣王太史史籀著大篆十五篇，与古文或同或异，时人即谓之《籀书》。
现代文：到了周宣王太史史籀撰写大篆十五篇，与古代文字有的相同有的相异，当时人们称之为 籀书 。
English: By the time Zhou Xuan Wang Taishi Shi Zi had written fifteen major poems, some of which were the same as the ancient characters and some were different, people called it the "Book of Zi Zi" at that time.

古文：至孔子定《六经》，左丘明述《春秋》，皆以古文，厥意可得而言。
现代文：到了孔子整理修定《六经》，左丘明阐述《春秋》，都是用古文字，其中的意思人们都可以领会并陈说。
English: When Confucius compiled and revised the Six Classics, and Zuo Qiuming expounded the Spring and Autumn Annals, they were all written in ancient characters, and the meaning of them could be understood and expressed by everyone.

古文：古文由此息矣。隶书者，始皇使下杜人程邈附于小篆所作也，以邈徒隶，即谓之隶书。
现代文： 后来战国时七国的法度各不相同，文字也极不相同，到秦始皇统一天下，丞相李斯就奏请秦皇废除不符合秦国的文字。李斯撰写了《仓颉篇》，中车府令赵高写了《爰历篇》，太史令胡母敬写了《博学篇》，都采用史籀的大篆，有的稍加简省和改变，这就是小篆。
English: Later, during the Warring States period, the laws of the seven countries were all different, and the characters were also very different. When Qin Shi Huang unified the country, the prime minister, Li Si, appealed to the Qin Emperor to abolish the characters that did not conform to Qin. Li Si wrote "Cang Xi Hen," the Central Chefu ordered Zhao Gao to write "Ji Lian Hen," and the Taishi ordered Hu Miao Jing to write "Bo Xue Hen." All of them used Shi Xi's large characters, and some were slightly simplified and changed. This is Xiao Xi.

古文：故秦有八矣。隶书者，始皇使下杜人程邈附于小篆所作也，以邈徒隶，即谓之隶书。
现代文：于是秦皇焚烧经书，废除旧典，认为篆体过于繁杂，因而趋向于文字简约，就开始采用隶书。
English: As a result, the Qin Emperor burned the scriptures, abolished the old scriptures, and thought that the script was too complicated, so he tended to simplify the text, and began to use the script.

古文：故秦有八体：一曰大篆，二曰小篆，三曰刻符书，四曰虫书，五曰摹印，六曰署书，七早殳书，八曰隶书。
现代文：古文字到此时便停止使用了。隶书，是秦始皇令下杜人程邈按照小篆所创造的，因为程邈是一个被罚劳役的奴隶，所以称作隶书。所以秦代有八体：一是大篆，二是小篆，三是刻符书，四是虫书，五是摹印，六是署书，七是殳书，八是隶书。
English: The ancient characters were no longer used at this time. Li script was created by the first emperor of the Qin Dynasty, Cheng Kui, under the order of the first emperor of the Qin Dynasty. Because Cheng Kui was a slave who was sentenced to forced labor, it was called Li script. Therefore, there were eight types of Li script in the Qin Dynasty: one was the big Li script, the second was the small Li script, the third was the engraved character script, the fourth was the worm script, the fifth was the seal script, the sixth was the signature script, the seventh was the seal script, and the eighth was the Li script.

古文：汉兴，有尉律学，复教以籀书，又习八体，试之课最，以为尚书史。
现代文： 汉朝时，兴尉律学，又以籀书教人，也习八体，经过考试合格的人，任为尚书史。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Xingfei was the best in the study of law, and he also taught people with the book of Zhou, and also studied the eight bodies. Those who passed the examination were appointed as Shang Shuxi.

古文：吏民上书，省字不正，辄举劾焉。
现代文：官吏和百姓上书，检查他的文字，如果书写不合格，就要受到检举。
English: Officials and ordinary people write letters, check his writing, and if the writing is not qualified, he will be reported.

古文：又有草书，莫知谁始，考其书形，虽无厥谊，亦是一时之变通也。
现代文：又有草书，不知是谁人创始，考察它的书写形状，虽然没有多大的道理，但也是一时的变通。
English: There is also a cursive script, I don't know who founded it, but if you look at its written form, although there is not much reason for it, it is also a temporary workaround.

古文：孝宣时，召通《仓颉》读者，独张敞从之受。
现代文：汉宣帝时，召集精通《仓颉篇》的人，独有张敞能任。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Xuan, Zhang Zhang alone was able to gather people who were well versed in the "Chamber of Decrees."

古文：凉州刺史杜鄴、沛人爰礼、讲学大夫秦近亦能言之。
现代文：凉州刺史杜邺、沛人爰礼、讲学大夫秦近也能解说。
English: Liangzhou Zhishi cuckoo, Pei Ren Renli, and lecture doctor Qin Qian can also explain.

古文：孝平时，征礼等百余人说文字于未央宫中，以礼为小学元士。
现代文：汉平帝时，召集爰礼等一百多人在未央宫讲说文字，任爰礼为小学元士。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanping, more than a hundred people, including Gong Li, were called together to recite the characters at the Weiyang Palace. Gong Li was appointed as a primary school veteran.

古文：黄门侍郎扬雄采以作《训纂篇》。
现代文：黄门侍郎扬雄采集这些资料编写成字书《训纂篇》。
English: Huangmen's attendant Yang Xiong collected these materials and compiled a handwritten book, the "Compendium."

古文：及亡新居摄，自以应运制作，使大司空甄丰校文字之部，颇改定古文。
现代文：到了王莽改国号为新，窃居皇帝之位，自认为顺应天命而制定制度，命大司空甄丰负责校订文字工作，对古文字很作了些改定。
English: When Wang Mang changed the country's name to a new one and stole the emperor's position, he thought that he was complying with the fate of heaven and set up a system. The great secretary of destiny, Ku Zhenfeng, was responsible for the editing of the text, and made some changes to the ancient text.

古文：时有六书：一曰古文，孔子壁中书也；二曰奇字，即古文而异者；三曰篆书，云小篆也；四曰佐书，秦隶书也；五曰缪篆，所以摹印也；六曰鸟虫，所以幡信也。
现代文：当时有六体书：一是古文，是孔子壁中书上的字体；二是奇字，即古文字的异体字；三是篆书，就是小篆；四是佐书，就是秦代的隶书；五是摹印，用于刻制印玺的；六是鸟虫，用来书写传达命令的幡信的。
English: At that time, there were six types of books: one was the ancient text, which was the font on the book in the wall of Confucius; the second was the strange character, that is, the heterogeneous character of the ancient text; the third was the calligraphy, that is, the small calligraphy; the fourth was the calligraphy, that is, the calligraphy of the Qin Dynasty; the fifth was the seal, which was used to engrave the seal; the sixth was the birdworm, which was used to write the banner letter to convey the order.

古文：壁中书者，鲁恭王坏孔子宅而得《礼》、《尚书》、《春秋》、《论语》、《孝经》也。
现代文：所谓壁中书，就是汉武帝时鲁恭王拆毁孔子旧宅而得到的古文《礼记》、《尚书》、《春秋》、《论语》、《孝经》。
English: The so-called "books in the wall" are the ancient texts "Rites," "Shangshu," "Spring and Autumn," "Analects" and "Filial Piety" that were obtained when the Han emperor, Emperor Lujong, demolished Confucius's old house.

古文：又北平侯张仓献《春秋左氏传》，书体与孔氏相类，即前代之古文矣。
现代文：又有北平侯张仓所献的古籍《春秋左氏传》，书体与孔子的相似，也就是前代的古文。
English: There is also the ancient book "The Biography of Shunqiu Zuo" presented by Zhang Cang, the Prince of Beiping. The book's style is similar to that of Confucius, that is, the ancient text of the previous generation.

古文：后汉郎中扶风曹喜号曰工篆，小异斯法，而甚精巧，自是后学皆其法也。
现代文： 后汉郎中扶风人曹喜号称擅长篆书，其书法与李斯略有不同，但甚为精巧，从此后学都仿效他的书法。
English: After Han Lang, Cao Xi, a person who helped the wind, boasted that he was good at calligraphy. His calligraphy was slightly different from Li Si, but it was very exquisite. Since then, students have imitated his calligraphy.

古文：又诏侍中贾逵修理旧文。
现代文：皇帝又令侍中贾逵研究整理古文字。
English: The emperor also ordered the chamberlain Jia Jun to study and sort out the ancient characters.

古文：殊艺异术，王教一端，苟有可以加于国者，靡不悉集。
现代文：方法技艺各不相同，传授某一个方面，如果有能够对国家有用的，全部都收集起来。
English: Methodology The techniques vary, teach one aspect, and if there are any that can be useful to the country, collect them all.

古文：逵即汝南许慎古文学之师也。
现代文：贾逵就是汝南人许慎的古文字学宗师。
English: Jia Wei is the ancient script master of the Southern Ru people, Xu Sheng.

古文：后慎嗟时人之好奇，叹儒俗之穿凿，惋文毁于誉，痛字败于訾，更诡任情，变乱于世，故撰《说文解字》十五篇，首一终亥，各有部属，包括六艺群书之诂，评释百氏诸子之训，天地、山川、草木、鸟兽、昆虫、杂物、奇怪珍异、王制礼仪、世间人事莫不毕载。可谡类聚群分，杂而不越，文质彬彬，最可得而论也。
现代文：后来许慎嗟叹世人的喜好新奇，感叹儒士们的穿凿附会，惋惜文章的遭到败坏，痛惜文字的受到非议，任意作奇异的解释，以至造成很大的混乱，因此而撰写了《说文解字》十五篇，起一终亥，所收文字都按一定部属分列，内容包括六艺群书的词义训释，以及评释诸子百家的文字解释，天地、山川、草木、鸟兽、昆虫、杂物、奇怪珍异、王制礼仪、世间人事，没有一样不详细记载的，可以说是分门别类，博杂而又不散乱，文采与内容配合适当，最适合人们细读研究。
English: Later, Xu Shen lamented the novelty of the world's preferences, lamented the addition of the Confucianists, deplored the corruption of the articles, deplored the criticism of the text, and arbitrarily made strange interpretations, which caused great confusion. Therefore, he wrote 15 articles of "Spoken Word Interpretation." From the beginning to the end of the year, the collected words were sorted according to certain subordinates. The content included the semantic interpretation of the six arts group of books, as well as the interpretation of the hundreds of children's words. Heaven and earth, mountains and rivers, plants and trees, birds and beasts, insects, debris, strange and rare, royal e

古文：左中郎将陈留蔡邕采李斯、曹喜之法为古今杂形，诏于太学立石碑，刊载《五经》，题书楷法，多是邕书也。
现代文：左中郎将陈留人蔡邕兼采李斯、曹喜的书法成为古今杂体，皇帝诏令在太学门外立石碑，刊载《五经》，用楷书的方法书写，大多是蔡邕手写的。
English: Zuo Zhonglang transformed the calligraphy of Chen's retainers, Cai Qi, Cai Li Si and Cao Xi, into a hodgepodge of ancient and modern styles. The emperor ordered a stone monument to be erected outside the Taishu Gate to publish the "Five Classics," written in block letters, mostly handwritten by Cai Qi.

古文：后开鸿都，书画奇能莫不云集，于时诸方献篆无出邕者。
现代文：后来设鸿都署，具有书画特殊才能的人无不云集于此，当时各地进献篆书的没有人能超过蔡邕。
English: Later, the Hongdu Office was set up, and people with special talents in calligraphy and painting gathered here. At that time, no one could surpass Cai Qi in the number of books donated from all over the country.

古文：魏初博士清河张揖著《埤仓》、《广雅》、《古今字诂》，究诸《埤》、《广》，缀拾遗漏，增长事类，抑亦于文为益者。
现代文： 三国魏初博士清河人张揖著有《埤仓》、《广雅》、《古今字诂》等书，研寻《埤雅》、《广雅》，缀遗拾漏，增加事类，或许对于文字学也有所裨益。
English: At the beginning of the Three Kingdoms period of the Wei Dynasty, Zhang Xi, a doctor from Qinghe, wrote books such as "Hengcang," "Guangya" and "Ancient and Modern Chinese Characters." He studied "Hengya" and "Guangya" and added things, which may also be beneficial to philology.

古文：然其《字诂》，方之许慎篇，古今体用，或得或失矣。
现代文：然而他的《字诂》同许慎的《说文解字》相比，则古今书法的法式和功用，有得也有失。
English: However, compared with Xu Sheng's "Saying and Deciphering Chinese Characters," his "Chinese Calligraphy" has both advantages and disadvantages in terms of the French style and function of ancient and modern calligraphy.

古文：陈留邯郸淳亦与揖同时，博古开艺，特善《仓》、《雅》，许氏字指，八体六书精究闲理，有名于揖，以书教诸皇子。
现代文：陈留人邯郸淳也是张揖同时代人，博学有才，尤其擅长《埤仓》、《广雅》，许慎所训释的文字含意，八体六书都精心研究，熟习其规律，比张揖更为有名，在宫中教授诸皇子的书法。
English: Chen Ruzhenqiu Chun was also a contemporary of Zhang Ye. He was an erudite and talented person. He was especially good at "Hengcang" and "Guangya" and the meaning of the text as interpreted by Xu Shen. He carefully studied all eight books and became familiar with their rules. He was more famous than Zhang Ye and taught the princes' calligraphy in the palace.

古文：又建《三字石经》于汉碑之西，其文蔚炳，三体复宣。
现代文：又在汉碑之西树立《三字石经》，其文字华丽鲜明，古文、篆、隶三种字体又得以发扬光大。
English: In addition, the "Three-character Stone Sutra" was set up in the west of the Han monument. Its characters are gorgeous and vivid, and the three fonts of ancient text,, and 隶 have been able to flourish.

古文：校之《说文》，篆隶大同，而古字少异。
现代文：用《说文解字》来加以校对，篆书、隶书大体相同，而古字则略有差异。
English: It was proofread with "Saying and Deciphering Chinese Characters," and the transcript and transcript were basically the same, while the old characters were slightly different.

古文：又有京兆韦诞、河东卫觊二家，并号能篆。
现代文：又有京兆人韦诞、河东人卫觊二家，并称擅长篆书。
English: There are also two families from Beijing-Shanghai, one from Beijing-Shanghai and one from Hedong, both of whom are said to be good at transcribing.

古文：当时台观榜题、宝器之铭，悉是诞书，咸传之子孙，世称其妙。
现代文：当时的台观上的榜题、宝器上的铭文，全都是韦诞所写，流传于子孙，世人称其精妙。
English: At that time, the inscription on the table and the inscription on the treasure were all written by Wei Xue and passed down to his descendants. The world called it exquisite.

古文：晋世义阳王典祠令任城吕忱表上《字林》六卷，寻其况趣，附托许慎《说文》，而案偶章句，隐别古籀奇惑之字，文得正隶，不差篆意也。
现代文： 晋代义阳王典祠令任城人吕忱向皇帝呈上《字林》六卷，寻味其情状，是附托许慎的《说文》，考察古代经籍中的章节句读，订正辨析古籍中的奇惑之字，文字得正隶之妙而又不离篆书之意。
English: King Yiyang of the Jin Dynasty ordered the townspeople of Rencheng to present the six volumes of the "Writing Forest" to the emperor, and inquire into its condition. It is a "story" with caution. It examines the reading of chapters and sentences in ancient scriptures, and revises and analyzes the mysterious words in ancient books. The words are well-written and do not depart from the meaning of the book.

古文：忱弟静别放故左校令李登《声类》之，法作《韵集》五卷，宫商角徵羽各为一篇，而文字与兄便是鲁卫，间读楚、夏，时有不同。
现代文：吕忱之弟吕静另外仿效故左校令李登《声类》中的方法，撰《韵集》五卷，宫商角徵羽各为一篇，而文字同其兄吕忱相去甚远，读音也时有不同。
English: In addition, Luchen's brother Lucheng Lucheng copied the method of the late left-wing scholar Li Deng's "Voice Class" and compiled five volumes of "Rhyme Collection," each of which was a palace merchant character. The writing was very different from that of his brother Lucheng, and the pronunciation was also different.

古文：皇魏承百王之季，绍五运之绪，世易风移，文字改变，篆形谬错，隶体失真。
现代文： 皇魏承接百王之后，延续五运之绪，时代更替，文字改变，篆体多有谬错，隶体逐渐失真。
English: After Emperor Wei succeeded hundreds of emperors, the Five Auspicious Movements continued, the era changed, the characters changed, the characters were mostly erroneous, and the affiliation was gradually distorted.

古文：俗学鄙习，复加虚巧，谈辩之士，又以意说，炫惑于时，难以厘改。
现代文：学习者粗俗鄙陋，再加上故弄玄虚，喜好言谈论辩的人，又往往按照他的意思来解说，炫惑于一时，实在难以纠正。
English: The learner is vulgar and contemptible, coupled with pretentiousness, and those who like to talk and debate, and often explain according to his intention, dazzle at one time, it is really difficult to correct.

古文：故传曰，以众非，非行正。
现代文：所以有传言说，以众非，非行正。
English: Therefore, there is a rumor that it is better to be wrong than to be right.

古文：信哉得之于斯情矣。
现代文：这个说法实在是符合这种情况。
English: This statement really fits the situation.

古文：乃曰追来为归，巧言为辩，小兒为，神虫为蚕，如斯甚众，皆不合孔氏古书、史籀大篆、许氏《说文》、《石经》三字也。
现代文：有人说追来就是归，巧言就是辩，小兔就是需免，神虫就是蚕，像这样的情况非常多，都不符合孔子的古文、史籀的大篆、许慎的《说文》、《石经》三字之体。
English: Some people say that the pursuit is the return, the clever words are the debate, the rabbit is the need to be exempted, and the divine insect is the silkworm. There are many cases like this, all of which do not conform to the three characters of Confucius's ancient text, Shi Yan's great sermon, Xu Shen's "Sermon" and "Stone Sutra."

古文：凡所关古，莫不惆怅焉。
现代文：凡是涉及到古代的文字，莫不令人感到惆怅。唉！
English: When it comes to ancient writing, nothing is more embarrassing. Alas!

古文：嗟夫！文字者六艺之宗，王教之始，前人所以垂今，今人所以识古，故曰 本立而道生 。
现代文：文字是六艺之宗，王教之始，前人凭借它而流传至今，今人凭借它而知道古昔，所以说 本立而道生 。
English: Writing is the foundation of the Six Arts and the beginning of the King's Teaching. The ancients passed it down to the present day, and modern people know the past thanks to it. Therefore, it is said to be based on the Tao and born of the Tao.

古文：孔子曰： 必也正名乎。 
现代文：孔子说过： 必也正名乎。 
English: Confucius said, "One must live up to one's reputation."

古文：又曰： 述而不作。 
现代文：又说： 述而不作。 
English: He also said, "Speak, but don't act."

古文：《书》曰： 予欲观古人之象。 
现代文：《尚书》上说： 予欲观古人之象。 
English: "Shangshu" said, "Preferring to look like the ancients."

古文：皆言遵修旧史而不敢穿凿也。
现代文：都是说的遵循和研究古代历史而不敢穿凿附会的意思。
English: It's all about following and studying ancient history and not daring to cross the line.

古文：臣六世祖琼家世陈留，往晋之初，与从父兄应元俱受学于卫觊，古篆之法，《仓》、《雅方言》、《说文》之谊，当时并收善誉，而祖官至太子洗马，出为冯翊郡，值洛阳之乱，避地河西，数世传习，斯业所以不坠也。
现代文： 我的六世祖江琼也居陈留，仕晋之初，与他的堂兄江应元一同受学于卫觊，古篆之法，《仓》、《雅》、《方言》、《说文》的字式，当时都兼收并蓄。六世祖官至太子洗马，任冯翊郡太守，适逢洛阳之乱，退避到黄河之西居住，几代人传授学习，这个专业才不至于失传。
English: My sixth-generation ancestor, Jiang Qiong, also stayed in Chen. At the beginning of the Jin Dynasty, he and his cousin, Jiang Yingyuan, both studied at Wei Xuan. The methods of ancient Confucianism, the characters of "Chamber," "Elegance," "Dialect" and "Spoken," were all integrated at that time. The sixth-generation ancestor, from the prince to the prince of Zima, was the governor of Fengyuan County. When the Luoyang Rebellion occurred, he retreated to the west of the Yellow River to live. Several generations taught and learned, so this profession would not be lost.

古文：世祖太延中，皇威西被，牧犍内附，臣亡祖文威杖策归国，奉献五世传掌之书，古篆八体之法，明蒙褒录，叙列于儒林，官班文省，家号世业。
现代文：世祖太延年间，我朝皇威遍及西部地区，沮渠牧犍归附朝廷，我的祖父江文威扶杖回国，向朝廷奉献五代人传下来的文字，古篆八体的书法，当时承蒙皇帝的嘉奖征用，得以进职于士大夫之列，在文职官府任职，家中也被称为世业。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taien, the imperial power spread throughout the western region, and the herdsmen and shepherds were annexed to the imperial court. My grandfather, Jiang Wenwei, returned to the country and dedicated to the imperial court the written language that had been passed down for five generations. The ancient eight-character calligraphy was requisitioned at that time with the emperor's commendation, and he was able to advance to the ranks of scholars and magistrates, and served in the civil service and government offices. He was also known as Shie at home.

古文：暨臣闇短，识学庸薄，渐渍家风，有忝无显。但逢时来，恩出愿外，每承泽云津，厕沾漏润，驱驰文阁，参预史官，题篆宫禁，猥同上哲。
现代文：传到我这一代，我昏昧无知，学识浅薄，虽受到家风的浸染，但有愧于没有显著成绩，然而我逢到了好的时世，皇上加于我的恩遇出于我意料之外，常常蒙受恩泽，承受恩惠，进出文阁，参预史官，题篆宫禁，被视为极有才能的人。
English: Passed down to my generation, I am dim and ignorant, my knowledge is shallow, and although I have been influenced by the family tradition, I am ashamed of my lack of significant achievements. However, I have had a good time. The grace given to me by the emperor was unexpected. I often received grace and favors, went in and out of the cabinet, attended the prehistorian, and was banned from the palace. I was regarded as a very talented person.

古文：既竭愚短，欲罢不能，是以敢藉六世之资，奉遵祖考之训，窃慕古人之轨，企践儒门之辙，辄求撰集古来文字，以许慎《说文》为主，爰采孔氏《尚书》、《五经》音注、《籀篇》、《尔雅》、《三仓》、《凡将》、《方言》、《通俗文》、《祖文宗》、《埤仓》、《广雅》、《古今字诂》、《三字石经》、《字林》、《韵集》、诸赋文字有六书之谊者，皆以次类编联，文无复重，纠为一部。
现代文：我既然对朝廷谒诚尽力，欲罢不能，所以敢于凭借家传六代的声名，尊奉祖辈的遗训，私下仰慕古人所走的路线，希望踏上儒家的道路，请求撰集古来的文字，以许慎的《说文》为主，摘取孔子《尚书》、《五经》的音注，以及《籀篇》、《尔雅》、《三仓》、《凡将》、《方言》、《通俗文》、《祖文宗》、《埤仓》、《广雅》、《古今字诂》、《三字石经》、《字林》、《韵集》、诸赋文字有六书之义者，都按照类别依次编联，文字不重复，集合为一部。
English: Since I have tried my best to be loyal to the imperial court and cannot stop, I dare to rely on the reputation of the six generations of my family, honor the teachings of my ancestors, privately admire the route taken by the ancients, hope to embark on the path of Confucianism, and request the compilation of ancient texts, with the cautious "Sayings" as the main focus, extracting the notes of Confucius's "Shangshu" and "Wuxing," as well as "Jingzhe," "Erya," "Sancang," "Banzho," "Dialect," "Popular Literature," "Ancestral Literature," "Jingzang

古文：其古籀、奇惑、俗隶诸体，咸使班于篆下，各有区别。
现代文：其中古籀、奇惑、俗隶各体，都把它排列在篆体之下，各有区别。
English: Among them, the ancient gong, the magic spell, and the vulgar gong are all arranged under the gong body, each with its own difference.

古文：诂训假借之谊，佥随文而解；音读楚、夏之声，并逐字而注。
现代文：解释假借的意义，都随文意而解；读音有不同的，也都逐字注音。
English: The meaning of the paraphrase is interpreted according to the meaning of the text; if the pronunciation is different, it is also noted verbatim.

古文：其所不知者则阙如也。
现代文：其中有无法知道的就付之阙如。
English: Some of them are unknowable.

古文：脱蒙遂许，冀省百氏之观，而同文官之域，典书秘书。
现代文：倘若蒙皇上恩准，希望能让我纵览诸子百家的著述，涉猎所有文字的领域，掌管宫廷中的藏书。
English: If I have the Emperor's gracious permission, I hope to be allowed to survey the writings of hundreds of authors, to dabble in all areas of literature, and to manage the collection of books in the court.

古文：所须之书，乞垂敕给；并学士五人尝习文字者，助臣披览；书生五人专令抄写。
现代文：所需要的书籍，请求陛下下令如数供给；并派给曾经研习文字的学士五人，帮助我披览众书；派给书生五人，让他们专门从事抄写。
English: I ask your majesty to order the supply of the required number of books; and to assign five bachelors who have studied writing to help me read the books; and to assign five students to specialize in copying.

古文：侍中、黄门、国子祭酒一月一监，评议疑隐，庶无纰缪。
现代文：侍中、黄门、国子祭酒等有关部门一个月进行一次监察，评议深奥疑难的问题，以期不至于产生纰漏谬误。
English: Relevant departments such as the Chamberlains, the Yellow Gate, and the Kuniko Matsuri Wine once a month to monitor and discuss esoteric and difficult issues, in order to avoid the fallacy of error.

古文：所撰名目，伏听明旨。
现代文：至于所撰之书的名目，谨听圣上明旨。 
English: As far as the title of the book is concerned, I would like to hear from His Holiness.

古文：诏曰： 可如所请，并就太常，冀兼教八书史也。
现代文：皇帝于是下达诏令说： 可以按照所奏请的事项去办，并令其就任太常之职，望其兼教八书史。
English: The emperor then issued a decree saying: You can do as requested, and ordered him to take up the post of Taizang, hoping that he would also teach the history of the eight books.

古文：其有所须，依请给之。
现代文：其所有需求，依照请奏予以满足。
English: All their needs will be met upon request.

古文：外目待书成重闻。 
现代文：书名等到书成之后再定。 
English: The title will be decided after the book is finished.

古文：式于是撰集字书，号曰《古今文字》，凡四十卷，大体依许氏《说文》为本，上篆下隶。
现代文：江式于是撰集字书，书名叫《古今文字》，共四十卷，大体依照许慎《说文》为本，上篆下隶。
English: Jiang then compiled a collection of calligraphy books, called "Ancient and Modern Calligraphy," a total of forty volumes, roughly based on Xu Sheng's "Sayings," with the upper and lower sections.

古文：又除宣威将军、符玺郎，寻加轻车将军。
现代文：江式又升任宣威将军、符玺郎之职，不久又授轻车将军。
English: He was also promoted to the posts of General Xuan Wei and General Fu Yulang, and was soon given the title of General of Light Vehicles.

古文：正光中，除骁骑将军、兼著作佐郎，正史中字疑。
现代文：正光年间，授予骁骑将军、兼著作佐郎，正史中字。
English: During the reign of Masamitsu, he was awarded the title of General of Horse Cavalry and authored the book "Saro" (佐郎), one of the most important characters in history.

古文：四年卒，赠右将军、巴州刺史。
现代文：正光四年去世，追赠右将军、巴州刺史。
English: When Masamitsu died four years later, he was posthumously awarded the title of Right General and the title of Bashu Sashimi.

古文：其书竟未能成。
现代文：他所撰之书终究未能完成。
English: His book was never finished.

古文：子天授，袭。
现代文：江式的侄儿征虏将军江顺和，也擅长篆书。
English: Jiang's nephew, the conscript general Jiang Shunhe, is also good at reading books.

古文：汶阳令。医术又不逮父。
现代文：在太和年间，兖州人沈法会长于隶书，世宗尚在东宫，皇帝令沈法会为侍书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, Shen Fa, a native of Zhangzhou, was the chief scribe, while Shizong was still in the East Palace. The emperor appointed Shen Fa as the attendant scribe.

古文：徐謇，字成伯，丹阳人。
现代文：以后，他的隶书墨迹有许多流传在民间，但不如崔浩书法之精妙。徐謇，字成伯，丹阳人。
English: Later, many of his calligraphy ink blots were circulated among the people, but they were not as exquisite as Cui Hao's calligraphy.

古文：家本东莞，与兄文伯等皆医药。
现代文：祖籍东莞，与其兄文伯等都精于医药。
English: Originally from Dongguan, he and his brother Wenbo are both good at medicine.

古文：謇因至青州，慕容白曜平东阳，获之，表送京师。
现代文：徐謇因为到青州，刚好慕容白曜平定东阳，把他拿获，具表将他送至京师。
English: Because Xu Yao went to Qingzhou, just as Murong Bai You conquered Dongyang, he captured him and sent him to Beijing with a watch.

古文：显祖欲验其所能，乃置诸病人于幕中，使謇隔而脉之，深得病形，兼知色候。
现代文：显祖要验证他的医术，就把一些病人放在帐幕里，让徐謇隔着幕帐切脉，他都能准确判断病情，而且知道病人的气色。
English: In order to verify his medical skills, Xianzu placed some patients in the tent and let Xu Yao cut the veins through the curtain. He could accurately judge the condition of the patient and knew the patient's complexion.

古文：遂被宠遇。
现代文：于是深受显祖的宠遇。
English: As a result, he was deeply favored by Emperor Xuanzong.

古文：为中散，稍迁内侍长。
现代文：任为中散，不久升为内侍长。
English: He was appointed to Chusan, and soon rose to the position of Chief Chamberlain.

古文：文阳太后时问治方，而不及李脩之见任用也。
现代文：文明太后也时常来要他看病处方，但他却不及李那样受到重用。
English: The empress dowager of civilization also often came to ask him to see a doctor for a prescription, but he was not as heavily used as Li.

古文：謇合和药剂，攻救之验，精妙于脩，而性甚秘忌，承奉不得意者，虽贵为王公，不为措疗也。
现代文：徐謇合和药剂，治疗疾病的效果比李更为精妙，但他的性情十分古怪，如果接待不如他的意愿，即使如王公那样尊贵的人，也不肯替他治病。
English: Xu Xuanhe and medicine, the effect of treating the disease is more subtle than Li, but his temperament is very strange, if the reception is not as good as he wishes, even a noble person like Wang Gong will not be willing to treat him.

古文：高祖后知其能，及迁洛，稍加眷幸。
现代文：高祖知道他有才能，在迁都洛阳之后，对他渐加爱宠。
English: Gaozu knew he had talent, and after moving the capital to Luoyang, he gradually became a favorite.

古文：体小不平，及所宠冯昭仪有疾，皆令处治。
现代文：高祖身体稍有不适，以及其宠幸的冯昭仪有病，都让他诊断处治。
English: Gao Zu's slight physical discomfort, as well as the illness of his favorite Feng Zhaoyi, were both diagnosed and treated by him.

古文：又除中散大夫，转右军将军、侍御师。
现代文：又授予他中散大夫之职，升授右军将军、侍御师。
English: He was also awarded the post of Zhongshan doctor, promoted to the right army general and chamberlain.

古文：謇欲为高祖合金丹，致延年之法。
现代文：徐謇想要替高祖炼金丹，尽延年益寿之法。
English: Xu Yao wanted to make gold dust for Gao Zu, the method of prolonging one's life.

古文：乃入居崧高，采营其物，历岁无所成，遂罢。
现代文：徐謇就居住在崧高，采集各种炼丹的原料，历经一年而一无所成，只得作罢。
English: Xu Hao lived in Shigao, collecting raw materials for all kinds of elixirs. After a year, he had achieved nothing, and had to give up.

古文：二十二年，高祖幸悬瓠，其疾大渐，乃驰驿召謇，令水路赴行所，一日一夜行数百里。至，诊省下治，果有大验。
现代文：太和二十二年，高祖到悬瓠，他的病情加剧，就派驿马急召徐謇，令他从水路赶赴高祖所在地，一天一夜赶了数百里，到达以后，诊断观察，处方治病，果然疗效显著。
English: In the 22nd year of the Chinese lunar calendar, Gao Zu arrived in Xuancheng. His condition worsened, so he sent a horse to urgently summon Xu Qi. He made him rush from the waterway to Gao Zu's location. He drove hundreds of miles a day and night. After arriving, he made diagnostic observations and prescribed treatments, and the therapeutic effect was remarkable.

古文：高祖体少瘳，内外称庆。
现代文：高祖身体略有好转，内外都称颂庆幸。
English: Gao Zu's health improved slightly, and he was praised both at home and abroad.

古文：九月，车驾发豫州，次于汝滨。
现代文：九月，高祖车驾从豫州出发，临时住宿在汝水之滨。
English: In September, Gao Zu drove from Yuzhou and stayed temporarily at the waterfront.

古文：乃大为謇设太官珍膳，因集百官，特坐謇于上席，遍陈肴觞于前，命左右宣謇救摄危笃振济之功，宜加酬赍。
现代文：就由太宫专为徐謇设置珍贵饮宴，聚集文武百官，让徐謇独坐上席，席前陈列各种美酒佳肴，命左右的人宣扬徐謇振救危重疾病之功，应当加以赏赉。
English: The Imperial Palace specially set up a precious banquet for Xu Zhen, gathered hundreds of literary and military officials, let Xu Zhen sit alone at the head table, displayed a variety of fine wines and dishes in front of the table, and people who are close to death should be commended for their efforts to promote Xu Zhen's rescue of critical diseases.

古文：乃下诏曰； 夫神出无方，形禀有疑，忧喜乖适，理必伤生。
现代文：于是下达诏书说： 精神无主，身体就会发生障碍，欢乐和忧愁如果不协调，必然会损害身体。
English: Therefore, an edict was issued, saying: "If the spirit has no master, the body will encounter obstacles. If joy and sorrow are not coordinated, they will inevitably damage the body."

古文：朕览万机，长钟革运，思芒芒而无怠，身忽忽以兴劳。
现代文：我日理万机，长期致力于革旧鼎新，思绪茫茫而无有懈怠，身体恍惚而倍感劳累。
English: I am a day-to-day machine, long-term committed to the revolution of the old and the new, my thoughts are confused but there is no slack, my body is in a trance and I feel tired.

古文：仲秋动彖，心容顿竭，气体羸瘠，玉几在虑。
现代文：终于在仲秋之时染上重病，心神和容颜顿时憔悴，身体和元气十分虚弱，我深深感到忧虑。
English: Finally, at the time of the Mid-Autumn Festival, I contracted a serious illness. My mind and face were suddenly paralyzed, and my body and vitality were very weak. I was deeply worried.

古文：侍御师、右军将军徐成伯驰轮太室，进疗汝蕃，方穷丹英，药尽芝石，诚术两输，忠妙俱至，乃令沉劳胜愈，笃瘵克痊，论勤语效，实宜褒录。
现代文：侍御师、右军将军徐成伯星夜驰至太室，在汝水之滨替我治病，处方用药穷尽各种灵丹良药，付出了他所有的精诚和医术，极尽他的忠心与妙方，才使我冗沉的病体得以恢复，深重的痼疾得以痊愈，评论他的勤勉和功劳，实在应当予以嘉奖和任用。
English: Master of Ceremonies and General of the Right Army, Xu Chengbo Xing, rushed to the throne room at night and treated me for my illness on the banks of Your Water. He exhausted all kinds of elixir and prescription drugs, gave all his diligence and medical skills, and did his best to be loyal and wise, so that I could recover from my heavy illness and cure my serious malady. His diligence and merit should be commended and rewarded.

古文：昔晋武暴疾，程和应增封；辛疚数朝，钱爵大坠。
现代文：昔日晋武帝得了重病，程和为他进药治疗，武帝就为他增封官爵，赏赐钱财，给予他极大的恩宠和奖赏。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Jinwu fell seriously ill, and Cheng He gave him medicine to treat him. Emperor Wudi awarded him a title of nobility, money, and gave him great grace and reward.

古文：况疾深于曩辰，业难于畴日，得不重加陟赏乎？
现代文：况且我的疾病比晋武帝更加深重，我的事业也比他更为艰难，怎能不对徐謇加倍予以升迁赏赐呢？
English: Moreover, my illness is more serious than that of Emperor Jinwu, and my career is also more difficult than his. How can I not reward Xu Jun with a double promotion?

古文：宜顺群望，锡以山河。
现代文：应当顺乎众望，予以重赏。
English: They should be rewarded in accordance with public expectations.

古文：且其旧迳高秩，中暂解退，比虽铨用，犹未阙阙，准旧量今，事合显进。
现代文：而且他过去已达到较高的官级，中间又暂时解退，过去虽有升任，但还是不够的，以他的旧职来比照现在的功劳，应当让他有更为明显的升进。
English: Moreover, he had reached a higher rank in the past, and was temporarily relieved in the middle. Although he had been promoted in the past, it was still not enough. Comparing his former position with his current achievements, he should have a more obvious promotion.

古文：可鸿胪卿，金乡县开国伯，食邑五百户，赐钱一万贯。
现代文：可授予他鸿胪卿，金乡县开国伯，食邑五百户，赐钱一万贯。 
English: He could be awarded the title of Hongyuqing, the founder of Jinxiang County, 500 households of food villages, and 10,000 yuan of money.

古文：又诏曰： 钱府未充，须以杂物：绢二千匹、杂物一百匹，四十匹出御府；谷二千斛；奴婢十口；马十匹，一匹出骅骝；牛十头。 
现代文：又下诏说： 国库还不够充实，须用杂物来代替，计有绢二千匹、杂物一百匹，其中四十匹由宫廷仓库拿出；谷二千斛；奴婢十人；马十匹，其中一匹赤色骏马；牛十头。 
English: He also issued the following edict: The state treasury is not full enough and must be replaced by miscellaneous goods. There are two thousand mules and one hundred miscellaneous goods, of which forty were taken from the palace warehouse; two thousand yoke of oxen; ten slaves; ten horses, one of which is a red mare; and ten head of cattle.

古文：所赐杂物、奴婢、牛马皆经内呈。
现代文：所赏赐的杂物、奴婢、牛马都经过宫廷送达。
English: The gifts of goods, slaves, cattle and horses were all sent through the court.

古文：诸亲王咸阳王禧等各有别赍，并至千匹。
现代文：咸阳王元禧等诸亲王也各另有赏赍，都同样达到千匹。
English: Princes such as King Yuanxi of Xianyang also each have their own awards, all of which also amount to a thousand horses.

古文：从行至鄴，高祖犹自发动，謇日夕左右。
现代文：徐謇跟随高祖到邺，高祖的病还是时常发作，徐謇日夜守候在他身边。
English: Xu Yao followed Gao Zu to Handan. Gao Zu's illness was still frequent, and Xu Yao kept vigil by his side day and night.

古文：明年，从诣马圈，高祖疾势遂甚，戚戚不怡，每加切诮，又欲加之鞭捶，幸而获免。
现代文：第二年，随从高祖到达马圈，高祖的病情日益加重，抑郁不欢，常常对徐謇加以责备，甚至还要鞭打他，幸而获免。
English: In the second year, after Gao Zu arrived at the stable, Gao Zu's condition became increasingly worse. He was depressed and unhappy. He often reproached Xu Yao and even whipped him, but he was spared.

古文：高祖崩，謇随梓宫还洛。
现代文：高祖驾崩，徐謇跟随皇帝的棺材回到洛阳。
English: Gao Zu passed away, and Xu Xi followed the emperor's coffin back to Luoyang.

古文：謇常有药饵及吞服道符，年垂八十，鬓发不白，力未多衰。
现代文：徐謇经常用药饵吞服道教符咒，年近八十而鬓发不白，精力也没怎么衰退。
English: Xu Yao often takes medicine and swallows Taoist spells. He is nearly 80 years old, and his energy has not waned.

古文：正始元年，以老为光禄大夫，加平北将军，卒。
现代文：正始元年，以高龄升任光禄大夫，加封平北将军，不久去世。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, he was promoted to the post of Guanglu doctor at an advanced age, and was given the title of Pingbei general. He died soon after.

古文：延昌初，赠安东将军、齐州刺史，谥曰靖。
现代文：延昌初，追赠安东将军、齐州刺史，定谥号为靖。
English: At the beginning of the Yanchang period, he posthumously bestowed the titles of General Anton and Qi Zhou Jishi, and his posthumous name was Jing.

古文：子践字景升，小名灵宝，袭爵。
现代文：徐謇之子徐践，字景升，小名灵宝，袭受父亲的爵位。
English: Xu Jian, the son of Xu Xi, the son of Zijing Sheng, the son of Xiao Ming Ling Bao, inherited his father's title.

古文：历官兗州平东府长史、右中郎将、建兴太守。
现代文：历任兖州平东府长史、右中郎将、建兴太守等官职。
English: He successively served as the governor of Bozhou Pingdong Prefecture, the vice-governor of the right, and the governor of Jianxing.

古文：践弟知远，给事中。
现代文：徐践之弟知远，任给事中。
English: Xu Jian's younger brother Zhiyuan was assigned to the middle.

古文：成伯孙之才，孝昌初，为萧衍豫章五萧综北府主簿，从综镇彭城。
现代文：徐謇之孙之才，孝昌初，曾在萧衍的南梁豫章王萧综的北府任主簿，跟随萧综镇守彭城。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Xiao Chang, the grandson of Xu Bei, Xiao Chang served as the chief secretary of the northern capital of Xiao Yan's Southern Liang, Yu Zhang, and Wang Xiao Zui, and followed Xiao Zui as the governor of Pengcheng.

古文：综降，其下僚属并奔散，之才因入国。
现代文：萧综投降之后，他的僚属全部奔散，徐之才由此而投入皇魏。
English: After Xiao Zui's surrender, all of his colleagues and subordinates scattered, and it was only then that Xu Zhicai became involved in the imperial Wei dynasty.

古文：武定中，大将军、金紫光禄大夫、昌安县开国侯。
现代文：武定年间，授予大将军、金紫光禄大夫、昌安县开国侯等官职爵位。
English: During the Wuding era, he conferred the titles of grand general, Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, and Chang'an County founding marquis.

古文：王显，字世荣，阳平乐平人，自言本东海郯人，王朗之后也。
现代文：王显，字世荣，阳平乐平人，自称本来是东海郯人，是汉朝王朗的后代。
English: Wang Xian, also known as Shi Rong and Yang Ping Leping, claimed to be originally from the East China Sea and a descendant of Wang Lang of the Han Dynasty.

古文：祖父延和中南奔，居于鲁郊，又居彭城。
现代文：祖父在延和年间南奔，居住在鲁城附近，后又迁居到彭城。
English: During the Yanwa era, my grandfather went south and lived near Lucheng. Later, he moved to Pengcheng.

古文：伯父安上，刘义隆时板行馆陶县。
现代文：伯父王安上，刘义隆执政时授官于馆陶县。
English: His uncle, Wang An Shang, was appointed to a post in Guantao County when Liu Yilong was in power.

古文：世祖南讨，安上弃县归命，与父母俱徙平城，例叙阳都子，除广宁太守。
现代文：世祖发兵南讨刘义隆的时候，王安上放弃县官归附朝廷，与父母一道迁居于平城，按照惯例授为阳都子，升任广宁太守之职。
English: When Liu Yilong's ancestor sent troops to the south, Wang An gave up the county post to the imperial court, moved to Pingcheng with his parents, was awarded the title of Yangduzi according to the usual practice, and was promoted to the post of governor of Guangning.

古文：显父安道，少与李亮同师，俱学医药，粗究其术，而不及亮也。
现代文：王显的父亲王安道，年轻时和李亮一道从师，共同学习医药，对医术颇有研究，但功底仍赶不上李亮。
English: Wang Xian's father, Wang Ando, when he was young, studied medicine with Li Liang, and did a lot of research on medical techniques, but he still could not catch up with Li Liang.

古文：安上还家乐平，颇参士流。
现代文：王安上后来回家定居于乐平，也属于当时名士之流。
English: Wang An Shang, who later returned home and settled in Leping, also belonged to the circle of famous people at that time.

古文：显少历本州从事，虽以医术自通，而明敏有决断才用。
现代文：王显年轻时曾任本州刺史从事，他不但精通医术，而且聪明敏捷，办事有决断能力。
English: When he was young, Wang Xian was engaged in the history of Honshu. He is not only proficient in medicine, but also smart and agile, and has the ability to make decisions.

古文：初文昭皇太后之怀世宗也，梦为日所逐，化而为龙而绕后，后寤而惊悸，遂成心疾。
现代文：早先文昭皇太后怀上世宗的时候，梦见被太阳追逐，既而又化为一条龙缠绕着皇后，皇后醒来之后受到惊吓，就染上了心病。
English: Earlier, when Empress Dowager Wenzhao was pregnant with the last emperor, she dreamed of being chased by the sun and turned into a dragon to entangle the empress. When the empress woke up, she was frightened and became infected with heart disease.

古文：文明太后敕召徐謇及显等为后诊及脉，謇云是微风入藏，宜进汤加针。
现代文：文明太后敕令召徐謇和王显两人替皇后诊脉。徐謇说是她略微受了些风寒，应当服用汤药外加针刺。
English: The empress dowager of civilization ordered Xu Xi and Wang Xian to take the pulse of the empress. Xu Xi said that she was slightly affected by wind and cold, and should take soup medicine and acupuncture.

古文：显云： 案三部脉非有心疾，将是怀孕生男之象。 
现代文：王显却说： 从三部脉的脉象来看不是患有心病，而是怀有身孕将生男儿之象。 
English: Wang Xian, however, said: Judging from the pulse images of the three veins, it is not a heart disease, but a pregnant woman who will give birth to a male child.

古文：果如显言。
现代文：其结果印证了王显所说是正确的。
English: The result confirmed that what Wang Xianrong said was correct.

古文：久之，召补侍御师、尚书仪曹郎，号称干事。
现代文：过了一段时间，朝廷召用王显补任侍御师、尚书仪曹郎，办事干练。
English: After a period of time, the imperial court called Wang Xian to fill the position of attendant master and secretary, and he was able to do things well.

古文：世宗自幼有微疾，久未差愈，显摄疗有效，因是稍蒙眄识。
现代文：世宗从小就患有小病，很长时间都未能痊愈，王显替他治疗之后有明显效果，因此而渐渐受到赏识。
English: Sejong suffered from a minor illness since he was a child and was unable to recover for a long time. Wang Xian's treatment had a significant effect on him, so he gradually became appreciated.

古文：又罢六辅之初，显为领军于烈问通规策，颇有密功。
现代文：当初朝廷罢除六辅，王显为领军于烈出谋划策，暗中颇有功劳。
English: At the beginning, the Imperial Court dismissed the Six Auxiliaries, and Wang Xian secretly did a great deal of work for the leader Yu Lie.

古文：累迁游击将军，拜廷尉少卿，仍在侍御，营进御药，出入禁内。
现代文：升为游击将军，授予廷尉少卿之职，仍在侍御之中，为皇帝进奉御药，出入宫禁之中。
English: He was promoted to the rank of guerrilla general, given the position of courtier and junior secretary, was still in the service of the emperor, served as imperial medicine for the emperor, and was banned from entering and leaving the palace.

古文：乞临本州，世宗曾许之，积年未授，因是声问传于远近。
现代文：后来王显请求回到本州任职，世宗曾经应允过他，但过了多年都没有授任，因此王显的声名就在远近都得到传颂。
English: Later, Wang Xian requested to return to his home state to take office. Shizong once agreed to him, but after many years he was not appointed, so Wang Xian's reputation has been praised far and wide.

古文：显每语人，言时旨已决，必为刺史。
现代文：王显经常对别人说，当时皇上旨意已经决定，一定让他任刺史。
English: Wang Xian often said to others that the emperor's will had already been decided at that time, and he must be allowed to make history.

古文：遂除平北将军、相州刺史。
现代文：于是朝廷授予他平北将军、相州刺史之职。
English: As a result, the imperial court awarded him the positions of General of North Pyongan Province and Chief Historian of South Pyongan Province.

古文：寻诏驰驿还京，复掌药，又遣还州。
现代文：不久，皇帝诏令王显从驿道驰回京都，再次掌管朝廷御药，后来又派他回到相州。
English: Soon after, the emperor ordered Wang Xian to return to Kyoto from Shandong to take charge of the imperial medicine again, and later sent him back to Xiangzhou.

古文：元愉作逆，显讨之不利。
现代文：当时元愉叛逆作乱，王显征讨元愉出师不利。
English: At that time, the Yuan Yue rebels caused a disturbance, and Wang Xian was not in a position to recruit Yuan Yue's disciples.

古文：入除太府卿、御史中尉。
现代文：后又回到朝廷，被授予太府卿、御史中尉一职。
English: Later, he returned to the Imperial Court and was awarded the post of Dafu-kyo and Goshi-lieutenant.

古文：显前后历职，所在著称，纠折庶狱，究其奸回，出内惜慎，忧国如家。
现代文：王显前后历任各种官职，所在每个任上都被人称颂，处理各种狱讼之事，查究各种奸邪昏乱之人，不分内外都非常慎重，为国担忧如同持家一般。
English: Wang Xian held all kinds of official positions before and after, and was praised by people in each position. He handled all kinds of prison cases and investigated all kinds of treacherous and deranged people. He was very cautious both inside and outside the country, and worried about the country as if he were a householder.

古文：及领宪台，多所弹劾，百僚肃然。
现代文：后来在御史台任职，对许多违犯法制的官员进行弹劾，因此朝中百官对他十分敬畏。
English: Later, he held a post at the Imperial History Channel and impeached many officials who violated the rule of law. As a result, hundreds of officials in the DPRK were very much in awe of him.

古文：又以中尉属官不悉称职，讽求更换。
现代文：王显又认为御史中尉的官职，同他所履行的职责不完全相称，就委婉地请求皇帝更换官职。
English: Wang Xian also believed that the official position of Lieutenant Mishi was not fully commensurate with the duties he performed, and he euphemistically requested the emperor to change the official position.

古文：诏委改选，务尽才能，而显所举或有请属，未皆得人，于是众口喧哗，声望致损。
现代文：皇帝诏令委任他选拔官员，一定要做到人尽其才，但是王显所举荐的官员，有的是对他有所请托的，没有能完全做到任人惟才，于是朝中百官舆论哗然，致使他的声望受到损害。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict to appoint him to select officials, and they must do their best. However, the officials recommended by Wang Hsien, some of whom had been entrusted to him, failed to do their best. As a result, the public opinion of the hundreds of officials in the court was in an uproar, causing his reputation to be damaged.

古文：后世宗诏显撰药方三十五卷，班布天下，以疗诸疾。
现代文：后来，世宗诏令王显撰写药方三十五卷，并把它向全国颁布，用来治疗各种疾病。
English: Later, Emperor Zedong ordered Wang Xian to write thirty-five volumes of prescriptions and publish them to the whole country for the treatment of various diseases.

古文：东宫既建，以为太子詹事，委任甚厚。
现代文：世宗立东宫太子之后，任王显为太子詹事，对他的委任非常优厚。
English: After King Sejong established the East Palace as the crown prince, Ren Wangxian was appointed as the crown prince, and his appointment was very generous.

古文：世宗每幸东宫，显常迎侍。
现代文：世宗每次到东宫，王显常常出面迎接侍奉。
English: Whenever King Sejong came to the East Palace, Wang Xian would often come out to greet the attendants.

古文：出入禁中，仍奉医药。
现代文：他出入于宫禁之中，仍旧给皇帝进奉医药。
English: He went in and out of confinement and still administered medicine to the emperor.

古文：赏赐累加，为立馆宇，宠振当时。
现代文：皇帝对他的赏赐不断地增多，还专为他建立馆舍，如此厚重的宠幸使他显赫于一时。
English: The emperor's gifts to him were constantly increasing, and he even had a palace built especially for him. Such a great favor made him famous in an instant.

古文：延昌二年秋，以营疗之功，封卫南伯。
现代文：延昌二年秋天，王显因医疗救治疾病有功，被封为卫南伯。
English: In the autumn of the second year of Yanchang, Wang Xian was awarded the title of Wei Nanbo for his contribution to medical treatment.

古文：四年正月，世宗夜崩，肃宗践祚。
现代文：延昌四年正月，世宗在夜晚驾崩，肃宗即位。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of Yanchang, Shizong died in the night and Suizong ascended to the throne.

古文：显参奉玺策，随从临哭，微为忧惧。
现代文：王显参与肃宗临治仪式，同百官在一起哀悼哭泣，心里颇感到忧惧。
English: Wang Xian participated in the Suizong Impartiality Ceremony, mourned and cried together with hundreds of officials, and felt quite worried in his heart.

古文：显既蒙任遇，兼为法官，恃势使威，为时所疾。
现代文：王显蒙受世宗恩遇重用，又兼身为执法之官，倚仗权势、显示威严，为当时群臣所嫉恨。
English: Wang Xian was highly favored by the world, and also served as a law enforcement officer, relying on power and displaying majesty, which was envied by the courtiers at the time.

古文：朝宰托以侍疗无效，执之禁中，诏削爵位。
现代文：朝中大臣借口王显给皇帝治病不见疗效，把他逮捕关进监狱，肃宗下令削除了他的爵位官职。
English: On the pretext that Wang Xian's treatment of the emperor had no curative effect, the Minister of the Central Committee of the Korean People's Army arrested him and put him in prison. Su Zong ordered that his title and official position be removed.

古文：临执呼冤，直阖以刀镮撞其腋下，伤中吐血，至右卫府一宿死。
现代文：王显被捕的时候大叫冤枉，值勤武官用刀环重击他的腋下，使他重伤吐血，送到右卫府过了一夜就死了。
English: When Wang Xian was arrested, he shouted that he had been wrongly arrested. The military attaché on duty struck him under the armpit with a sword ring, causing him to vomit blood. He was taken to the Right Guard House, where he died overnight.

古文：后位冀州别驾，累迁宁远将军。性仁恕，见疾苦，好与治之。
现代文：起初，王显还是一个布衣儒生，有一位僧人为他看相，预示他以后必当富贵，劝诫他不要担任选拔任用官吏的官职，当了这种吏官必然失败。
English: At first, Wang Xian was still a clothed Confucian. A monk looked after him, foretold that he would be rich and noble in the future, and advised him not to hold the position of selecting and appointing officials. If he became such an official, he would inevitably fail.

古文：广教门生，令多救疗。
现代文：因此世宗在位时曾想让他掌管吏部，他总是小心地推辞回避。
English: Therefore, when Sejong was in power, he wanted to put him in charge of the cadre department, but he was always careful not to do so.

古文：其弟子清河赵约、勃海郝文法之徒咸亦有名。彧子景哲，豪率，亦以医术知名。为太中大夫、司徒长史。蒋少游，乐安博昌人也。
现代文：到世宗驾崩之后，肃宗连夜即位，接受玺印封册，在礼仪上须要有人兼任太尉和吏部之职，但仓卒之间未能在百官中找出这样的人，就让王显兼任吏部而执行禅受皇位之事。蒋少游，乐安博昌人。
English: After Shizong's death, Su Zong ascended to the throne overnight and received the imperial seal. In the etiquette, it was necessary for someone to hold the position of captain and secretary at the same time. However, the courtiers could not find such a person among the hundreds of officials, so they asked Wang Xian to serve as secretary and carry out the imperial succession. Jiang Shao You, Le An Bochang people.

古文：慕容白曜之平东阳，见俘入于平城，充平齐户，后配云中为兵。
现代文：在慕容白曜平定东阳的时候，蒋少游被俘而到了平城，成为平齐人，后被发配到云中当兵。
English: When Murong Baiyou conquered Dongyang, Jiang Shaoyou was captured and brought to Pingcheng, where he became a member of the Pingqi people. Later, he was sent to Yunzhong to serve as a soldier.

古文：性机巧，颇能画刻。
现代文：蒋少游性格机敏灵巧，擅长绘画和雕刻。
English: Jiang Shaoyou is quick-witted and dexterous, and good at painting and carving.

古文：有文思，吟咏之际，时有短篇。
现代文：他颇有文思，经常吟咏诗句，有时还写一些小诗。
English: He was quite witty, often chanting verses, and sometimes writing short poems.

古文：遂留寄平城，以佣写书为业，而名犹在镇。
现代文：后来蒋少游寄居在平城，以代人写书信赚钱维持生计，仅仅在市镇上有些名气。
English: Later, Jiang Shaoyou lived in Pingcheng as a sojourner and earned money by writing letters on behalf of others to make a living. He was only somewhat famous in the town.

古文：后被召为中书写书生，与高聪俱依高允。
现代文：蒋少游后来被朝廷征召到中书省当写书生，与高聪一同依附于高允。
English: Later, Jiang Shaoyou was conscripted by the imperial court to serve as a student of calligraphy in the Central Calligraphy Province, and together with Gao Cong, he adhered to Gao Yun.

古文：允爱其文用，遂并荐之，与聪俱补中书博士。
现代文：高允器重他们两人的文章写作才能，就向朝廷同时举荐他们二人，蒋少游与高聪一道补任中书博士。
English: Gao Yun valued the writing ability of both of them and recommended both of them to the imperial court. Jiang Shaoyou and Gao Cong were appointed as the supplementary doctor of Chinese calligraphy.

古文：自在中书，恆庇李冲兄弟子侄之门。
现代文：蒋少游自从来到中书省以后，长期托庇于李冲兄弟子女至的门下。
English: After Jiang Shaoyou came to Zhongshu, he took refuge under the tutelage of the Li Chong brothers and their children for a long time.

古文：始北方不悉青州蒋族；或谓少游本非人士，又少游微因工艺自达，是以公私人望不至相重。
现代文：开始时北方人不知道青州蒋氏家族，有人就说蒋少游本来就不是有名望的人，加之蒋少游出身微贱，只是凭借自己的手艺而得志，因此无论是在官场还是在私交中，蒋少游的名望都不高，并不受人敬重。
English: At the beginning, people in the north did not know about the Qingzhou Jiang family. Some people said that Jiang Shaoyou was not a famous person in the first place. In addition, Jiang Shaoyou was born in a low-class family and only achieved fame by virtue of his craftsmanship. Therefore, whether in the official world or in personal contacts, Jiang Shaoyou's reputation was not high and he was not respected by people.

古文：唯高允、高冲曲为体练，由少游舅氏崔光与李冲从叔衍对门婚姻也。
现代文：只有高允、李冲对他多有体察和了解，因为蒋少游的舅父与李冲的堂叔李衍是门当户对的儿女亲家。
English: Only Gao Yun and Li Chong were more aware and understanding of him, because Jiang Shao You's uncle and Li Chong's cousin Li Yan were the children of the same family.

古文：高祖、文明太后常因密宴，谓百官曰： 本谓少游作师耳，高允老公乃言其人士。 
现代文：高祖、文明太后常常在宫中饮宴上，对朝中百官说： 本来认为蒋少游仅是个有专门知识技艺的人，而高允老丈却说他是一个有名望的人。 
English: Gao Zu, the empress dowager of civilization, often said to the hundreds of officials of the dynasty at the palace banquet: I originally thought that Jiang Shaoyou was only a person with special knowledge and skills, but Gao Yunlaojie said that he was a famous person.

古文：眷识如此。
现代文：可见高允对他的赏识眷爱的情形。
English: You can see Gao Yun's appreciation and fondness for him.

古文：然犹骤被引命，屑屑禁闼，以规矩刻缋为务，因此大蒙恩锡，超等备位，而亦不迁陟也。
现代文：然而蒋少游还是突然间被召引任用，在宫禁之内忙忙碌碌，整日干着校正方圆、雕刻绘画的事情，因此而大蒙皇帝的恩宠赏赐，其地位超越了平常的等级，但又不给他迁官升进。
English: However, Jiang Shao You was suddenly summoned and appointed, and he was busy with the palace ban. He worked all day on rectifying the square and round, carving and painting. Therefore, he was greatly rewarded by the emperor's grace. His status exceeded the usual level, but he was not promoted.

古文：及诏尚书李冲与冯诞、游明根、高闾等议定衣冠于禁中，少游巧思，令主其事，亦访于刘昶。二意相乖，时致诤竞，积六载乃成，始班赐百官。
现代文：到后来皇帝诏令尚书李冲与冯诞、游明根、高闾等人在宫内商议制定文武官员的衣服冠带，由于蒋少游巧于构思，就让他主管这件事，也征询刘昶的意见，两方面的意见相违拗，以致常常发生争吵，一直拖了六年才完成，开始颁赐给朝廷百官穿戴。
English: Later, the emperor ordered Shangshu Li Chong and Feng Xizhong, You Minggen, Gao Qi and others to discuss in the palace the design of the clothing of the civil and military officials. Since Jiang Shao You was good at conceiving, he asked him to be in charge of this matter and also consulted Liu Wei. The two opinions were contradictory, so that quarrels often occurred. It took six years to complete and began to be awarded to the imperial officials to wear.

古文：冠服之成，少游有效焉。
现代文：百官冠服之所以能够制作成功，蒋少游是有功劳的。
English: It is to the credit of Jiang Shaoyou that the clothing for the crowned heads of the hundred officials was able to be made successfully.

古文：后于平城将营太庙。太极殿，遣少游乘传诣洛，量准魏晋基趾。
现代文：后来朝廷准备在平城营建太庙、太极殿，派蒋少游乘坐驿车到洛阳去，以魏、晋两朝的庙殿为标准测量它们的基础。
English: Later, when the imperial court was preparing to build the Tai Temple and the Taiji Hall in Pingcheng, it sent Jiang Shaoyou to Luoyang by stagecoach to measure the foundations of the temples and halls of the Wei and Jin dynasties.

古文：后为散骑侍郎，副李彪使江南。
现代文：后来又授蒋少游以散骑侍郎之职，让他协助李彪出使长江以南。
English: Later, he also gave Jiang Shaoyou the post of horseback riding attendant, and asked him to assist Li Biao in his mission south of the Yangtze River.

古文：高祖修船乘，以其多有思力，除都水使者，迁前将军、兼将作大匠，仍领水池湖泛戏舟楫之具。
现代文：高祖修造他乘坐的船只，因为蒋少游有很强的构思设计的能力，就任命他为都水使者，官升为前将军、兼将作大匠，仍旧总领修造水池湖中游玩的船和桨等器具。
English: Gao Zu built the boats he rode in, and because Jiang Shao You had a strong ability to conceive and design, he appointed him as the capital's water envoy. He was promoted to a former general, and also became a master craftsman. He is still the general manager of building boats and paddles and other equipment for playing in the lake.

古文：及华林殿、沼修旧增新，改作金墉门楼，皆所措意，号为妍美。
现代文：到后来维修和扩建华林园的殿堂和池沼，改建金墉城的门楼，全都是由蒋少游设计筹措，世人都称赞这些建筑妍好华美。
English: Later, the maintenance and expansion of the Great Hall and pond of the Hualing Garden, and the reconstruction of the gate tower of Jinyuan City were all designed by Jiang Shaoyou. The world praised these buildings for their beauty.

古文：虽有文藻，而不得伸其才用，恆以剞劂绳尺，碎剧匆匆，徙倚园湖城殿之侧，识者为之叹慨。
现代文：蒋少游虽然富于文采辞藻，但他这方面的才华始终不能得到施展，长期以来拿着雕刻用的刀、施工设计用的绳尺，琐琐碎碎，忙忙碌碌，往来依傍于园林湖沼城楼殿堂之侧，赏识他的才能的人无不为之叹息感慨。
English: Although Jiang Shaoyou is rich in literary and rhetorical skills, his talent in this regard has never been able to be exercised. For a long time, he has been holding a carving knife and a rope ruler for construction design. He has been busy with trivialities and hectic, hanging around the side of the garden and the palace of the Lake City Tower. People who appreciate his talent can't help but sigh and lament.

古文：而乃坦尔为己任，不告疲耻。
现代文：但他竟然安于那些事务并以此为己任，从来都不感到疲劳和羞耻。
English: But he was able to accept those things and take them on as his own responsibility, never feeling tired or ashamed.

古文：又兼太常少卿，都水如故。
现代文：后来兼任太常少卿之职，仍旧像过去那样统领水工之事。
English: Later, he concurrently held the position of Taizang Shaoqing, and still presided over the waterworks as in the past.

古文：景明二年卒，赠龙骧将军、青州刺史，谥曰质。
现代文：景明二年，蒋少游去世，皇帝追授他为龙骧将军、青州刺史，规定他的谥号为质。
English: In the second year of Jingming, Jiang Shaoyou died, and the emperor posthumously awarded him the title of Longyu General and Qingzhou Shishi, stipulating that his nickname was the key.

古文：有《文集》十卷余。
现代文：蒋少游留下《文集》十多卷。
English: Jiang Shaoyou left more than ten volumes of "Collected Works."

古文：少游又为太极立模范，与董尔、王遇等参建之，皆未成而卒。
现代文：蒋少游生前还曾为建造太极殿制作了模型，与董尔、王遇等人参与营建，但都未能建成而去世。
English: During his lifetime, Jiang Shaoyou also made a model for the construction of the Taiji Hall, and participated in the construction with Dong Er, Wang Yu and others, but he died without being able to complete it.

古文：初，高宗时，郭善明甚机巧，北京宫殿，多其制作。
现代文：当初，高宗在位时，郭善明这个人非常机敏灵巧，京都平城的宫殿，大多是由他设计建造的。
English: In the beginning, when Emperor Gaozong was on the throne, Guo Shanming was a very clever man. He designed and built most of the palaces in Heijo, Kyoto.

古文：高祖时，青州刺史侯文和亦以巧闻，为要舟，水中立射。
现代文：高祖在位时，青州刺史侯文和也以机巧闻名，他建造了一种大船，可以在水中站着放箭。
English: During Gaozu's reign, the governor of Qingzhou, Hou Wenhe, was also famous for his dexterity. He built a large boat that could launch arrows while standing in the water.

古文：滑稽多智，辞说无端，尤善浅俗委巷之语，至可玩笑。
现代文：侯文和性格滑稽而且机智，说话言辞没有根据，尤其喜欢说一些浅陋的民间俗语，很能逗人开心快乐。
English: Hou Wenhe's personality is funny and witty, his speech and words have no basis, especially he likes to say some shallow folk sayings, which can make people happy.

古文：位乐陵、济南二郡太守。
现代文：他的官职做到了乐陵、济南二郡太守。
English: He achieved his official positions as the governor of Leling and the governor of two counties in Jinan.

古文：世宗、肃宗时，豫州人柳俭、殿中将军关文备、郭安兴并机巧。
现代文：世宗与肃宗在位年间，豫州人柳俭、殿中将军关文备、郭安兴都非常机巧。
English: During the reigns of King Sejong and King Sujong, the people of Yuzhou, Liu Jian, the palace generals Guan Wenbi and Guo Anxing, were very clever.

古文：洛中制永宁寺九层佛图，字兴为匠也。
现代文：洛阳建造永宁寺九层佛塔，就是郭安兴充当大匠。
English: Guo Anxing was the master craftsman who built the nine-story pagoda of Yongning Temple in Luoyang.

古文：高祖时，有范宁兒者善围棋。
现代文：高祖在位时，有一个名叫范宁儿的人擅长围棋。
English: During Gaozu's reign, there was a person named Fanning who was good at Go.

古文：曾与李彪使萧赜，赜令江南上品王抗与宁兒。制胜而还。
现代文：范宁儿曾经同李彪一道出使萧赜，萧赜让江南的围棋高手与范宁儿对弈，范宁儿大胜而归。
English: Fan Ning'er once sent Xiao Yao together with Li Biao. Xiao Yao let the go player from the south of the Yangtze River play against Fan Ning'er, and Fan Ning'er won.

古文：又有浮阳高光宗善樗蒲。
现代文：又有浮阳人高光宗擅长樗蒲这种赌博游戏。
English: Gao Guangzong, also known as the Floating Sun Man, excelled at gambling games such as shabu-shabu.

古文：赵国李幼序、洛阳丘何奴并工握槊。
现代文：赵国人李幼序、洛阳人丘何奴都工于握槊这种赌博游戏。
English: The city and the small wall above the city wall are ten fathoms high. Armed soldiers are arranged on top, tree canes build a flag, a gap is made in the four corners, a platform is built opposite, there are three doors under the observation, and it is built at dawn.

古文：此盖胡戏，近入中国，云胡王有弟一人遇罪，将杀之，弟从狱中为此戏以上之，意言孤则易死也。
现代文：这些都是胡人的游戏，近时传到中国，传说有位外国国王，他的弟弟一个人犯了罪，将要处死，弟弟在监狱里发明这种游戏，把它献给当国王的哥哥，意思是说一个人孤单自处就容易死去。
English: These are the games of the hu-men. Recently, they have spread to China. According to legend, there was a foreign king whose younger brother had committed a crime and was about to be executed. The younger brother invented this game in prison and dedicated it to his brother, who was the king. It means that a person can easily die when he is alone.

古文：世宗以后，大盛于时。
现代文：世宗在位以后，这些游戏一时间流行于世。
English: After the reign of King Sejong, these games became popular for a while.

