古文：杨德祖为魏武主簿，时作相国门，始构榱桷，魏武自出看，使人题门作 活 字，便去。
现代文：杨德祖担任魏武帝曹操的主簿，当时正在修建相国府的大门，刚刚架好椽子，曹操就亲自出来看，并且叫人在门上写个 活 字，就走了。
English: Yang Dezu served as Wei Emperor Cao Cao's chief accountant. At that time, the gate of the Shogunate was under construction. As soon as the lattice was set up, Cao Cao came out to see for himself, and asked someone to write a character on the door, and then left.

古文：杨见，即令坏之。
现代文：杨德祖看见了，立刻叫人把门拆了。
English: Yang Dezu saw this and immediately ordered someone to break down the door.

古文：既竟，曰： 门中 活 ， 阔 字。
现代文：拆完后，他说： 门里加个 活 字，是 阔 字。
English: After tearing it down, he said, "Add a character to the door, a wide character.

古文：王正嫌门大也。 
现代文：我看魏王是嫌门大了。 
English: I think Wei Wang is a bigot.

古文：人饷魏武一杯酪，魏武啖少许，盖头上题 合 字以示众。众莫能解。
现代文：有人送给魏武帝曹操一杯奶酪，曹操吃了一点，就在盖头上写了一个 合 字给大家看，没有谁能看懂是什么意思。
English: Someone gave Emperor Cao Cao a cup of cheese. Cao Cao ate a little and wrote a sign on the lid for everyone to see. No one could understand what it meant.

古文：次至杨脩，脩便啖，曰： 公教人啖一口也，复何疑？ 
现代文：等到杨脩去看，他便吃了一口，说： 曹公教每人吃一口呀，还犹豫什么！ 
English: After waiting for Yang Xuan to look at it, he took a bite and said, "Cao Gongjiao, everyone should take a bite, why are you hesitating!

古文：魏武尝过曹娥碑下，杨脩从，碑背上见题作 黄绢幼妇，外孙虀臼 八字。
现代文：魏武帝曹操曾经从曹娥碑旁路过，杨脩跟随着他，看见碑的背面写着 黄绢幼妇，外孙虀臼 八个字。
English: The Wei Emperor Cao Cao once passed by the Cao E monument, and Yang Zhe followed him. He saw that the back of the monument was inscribed with the words "Huang Yao's young wife, her grandson, and eight characters."

古文：魏武谓脩曰： 解不？ 答曰： 解。 
现代文：曹操就问杨脩： 你知道这是什么意思吗？ 杨脩回答说： 知道。 
English: Cao Cao then asked Yang Hui: Do you know what this means? Yang Hui replied: I know.

古文：魏武曰： 卿未可言，待我思之。 
现代文：曹操说： 你不要说出来，先让我想一想。 
English: Cao Cao said, "Don't say it, let me think about it first."

古文：行三十里，魏武乃曰： 吾已得。 
现代文：走了三十里路，曹操才说： 我已经想出来了。 
English: After walking thirty miles, Cao Cao said, "I understand.

古文：令脩别记所知。
现代文：他叫杨脩把自己的理解另外写下来。
English: He asked Yang Xuan to write down his understanding separately.

古文：脩曰： 黄绢，色丝也，于字为绝。幼妇，少女也，于字为妙。外孙，女子也，于字为好。虀臼，受辛也，于字为辞。所谓 绝妙好辞 也。 
现代文：杨脩写道： 黄绢，是有颜色的丝，色丝合成绝字；幼妇，是少女的意思，少女合成妙字；外孙，是女儿的儿子，女子合成好字；虀臼，是承受辛辣东西的，受辛合成辞受辛合成 辞 字。这就是 绝妙好辞 。 
English: Yang Zheng wrote: Huang Zheng is a colored silk, and the color silk synthesizes the word; the young woman is the meaning of the girl, and the girl synthesizes the wonderful word; the grandchild is the son of the daughter, and the woman synthesizes the good word; the millstone is the bearer of the spicy thing, and the spicy synthetic word is synthesized by the spicy synthetic word. This is the excellent good word.

古文：魏武亦记之，与脩同，乃叹曰： 我才不及卿，乃觉三十里。 
现代文：曹操也把自己的理解写下了，结果和杨修的一样，于是感叹地说： 我的才智赶不上你啊，竟然相差了三十里。 
English: Cao Cao also wrote down his own understanding, and the result was the same as Yang Xiu's, so he said with a sigh: My talent can't keep up with you, it's a difference of thirty miles.

古文：魏武征袁本初，治装，余有数十斛竹片，咸长数寸，众云并不堪用，正令烧除。
现代文：魏武帝曹操要讨伐袁绍，修造军事装备，剩下几十斛竹片，都只有几寸长的。大家说这全部用不上，正要叫人烧掉。
English: Wei Emperor Cao Cao wanted to fight Yuan Shao and build military equipment. The remaining dozens of bamboo pieces were only a few inches long. Everyone said that all of this was useless and was about to be burned.

古文：太祖思所以用之，谓可为竹椑楯，而未显其言。
现代文：但是曹操就在想怎么利用这些竹片，认为可以用来做竹盾牌，只是还没有把这话说出来。
English: But Cao Cao was thinking about how to use these bamboo pieces, thinking that they could be used to make bamboo shields, but he had not yet said this.

古文：驰使问主簿杨德祖。应声答之，与帝心同。
现代文：他派人速去问主簿杨德祖，杨德祖随即答复了来人，结果和曹操想的一样。
English: He quickly sent someone to ask Yang Dezu, the bookkeeper, and Yang Dezu immediately answered the caller. The result was the same as Cao Cao thought.

古文：众伏其辩悟。
现代文：大家都佩服杨德祖的聪明和悟性。
English: Everyone admires Yang Dezu's cleverness and understanding.

古文：王敦引军垂至大桁，明帝自出中堂。
现代文：王敦率领军队东下，将要逼近朱雀桥，晋明帝亲自出到中堂。
English: Wang Dun led the army eastward, approaching the Suzaku Bridge, and Emperor Jinming personally went to the nave.

古文：温峤为丹阳尹，帝令断大桁，故未断，帝大怒，瞋目，左右莫不悚惧。
现代文：温峤当时任丹阳尹，明帝命令他毁掉朱雀桥，结果仍旧没有毁掉，明帝非常生气，怒目圆睁，身边跟随的人都很恐惧。
English: At that time, Wen Xuan was Danyang Yin, and Emperor Ming ordered him to destroy the Suzaku Bridge. As a result, it was still not destroyed. Emperor Ming was very angry and furious, and the people around him were very afraid.

古文：召诸公来。峤至不谢，但求酒炙。
现代文：明帝立刻召集大臣们来，温峤到后，没有谢罪，只是求赐酒肉。
English: Emperor Ming immediately summoned the ministers to come, and after Wen Qi arrived, he did not apologize, but only asked for wine and meat.

古文：王导须臾至，徒跣下地，谢曰： 天威在颜，遂使温峤不容得谢。 
现代文：王导接着来到，他光着脚退到地上，谢罪说： 天子的威严就在眼前，于是使温峤吓得不可能谢罪了。 
English: Wang Du then came, he retreated to the ground with bare feet, and said, "The majesty of the Son of Heaven is right in front of me, so I scared Wen Xi and made it impossible for him to apologize."

古文：峤于是下谢，帝乃释然。
现代文：温峤这才退下谢罪，明帝于是平息了怒火。
English: It was only then that Wen Xuan retreated and confessed his sins. Ming Di then calmed down his anger.

古文：诸公共叹王机悟名言。
现代文：大臣们都很赞赏王导的机敏而有悟性的名言。
English: The ministers all appreciated Wang Du's astute and insightful words.

古文：郗司空在北府，桓宣武恶其居兵权。
现代文：司空郗愔镇守北府的时候，桓温不满他掌握兵权。
English: When Sikuo Shanzhen was in charge of Beifu, Kan-Wen was dissatisfied with his control of military power.

古文：郗于事机素暗，遣笺诣桓： 方欲共奖王室，脩复园陵。 
现代文：郗愔对情势的了解一向很糊涂，还派人送信给桓温说： 正想和您一起辅佐王室，进军中原，修复被敌人毁坏的先帝陵寝。 
English: Zou's understanding of the situation had always been very muddled. He also sent a message to Huan Wen saying: I'm thinking of joining you in assisting the royal family, marching into the Central Plains, and restoring the former emperor's mausoleum, which was destroyed by the enemy.

古文：世子嘉宾出行，于道上闻信至，急取笺，视竟，寸寸毁裂，便回。还更作笺，自陈老病，不堪人闲，欲乞闲地自养。
现代文：当时他的嫡长子郗超正出门去，在半路听说送信的人到了，急忙拿过他父亲的信来看，看完了，把信撕得粉碎，回去后又代他父亲另外写了封信，诉说自己年老多病，经不住世事烦扰，希望能找个闲散的官位修养。
English: At that time, his eldest son, Zou Chao, was on his way out. Halfway there, he heard that the messenger had arrived. He quickly took his father's letter and read it. After reading it, he tore the letter to pieces. After returning, he wrote another letter on behalf of his father, saying that he was old and sick, could not stand the troubles of the world, and hoped to find a leisurely official position.

古文：宣武得笺大喜，即诏转公督五郡，会稽太守。
现代文：桓温收到信非常高兴，立刻下令把郗愔调为都督浙江东五郡军事、会稽太守。
English: Kuan Wen was very pleased to receive the letter, and immediately ordered that Yao be transferred to be the military governor of Zhejiang East Five Counties and the auditor general.

古文：王东亭作宣武主簿，尝春月与石头兄弟乘马出郊。
现代文：东亭侯王珣在担任桓温的主簿时，曾经在春天和桓熙兄弟骑马到郊外游春。
English: Dongting marquis Wang Yao, when he served as the main bookkeeper of Huan Wen, once rode a horse with Huan Xi's brothers to the countryside in the spring.

古文：时彦同游者，连镳俱进。唯东亭一人常在前，觉数十步，诸人莫之解。
现代文：当时同游的名流都一起并马前进；只有王珣一个人总是走在前面，和他们距离几十步远，大家都不理解其中的缘故。
English: At that time, the celebrities who were traveling together were all moving forward together; only Wang Qian always walked in front, and they were dozens of steps away, and everyone did not understand the reason.

古文：石头等既疲倦，俄而乘舆回，诸人皆似从官，唯东亭弈弈在前。
现代文：石头等人已经玩得很疲倦了，不久就坐车回去。结果其他人都像侍从官一样跟在后面，只有王珣精神抖擞地走在前面。
English: Stone and the others were already very tired from playing, and soon they took the car back. As a result, everyone else followed behind like an attendant, only Wang Qian walked ahead in high spirits.

古文：其悟捷如此。
现代文：他就是这样的有悟性而且机敏。
English: He's just so savvy and astute.

