古文：○厍狄士文
现代文：○厍狄士文
English: ○Shi De Shiwen

古文：厍狄士文，代人也。
现代文：厍狄士文是代州人。
English: Zhai Di Shwen is from Daizhou.

古文：祖干，齐左丞相。
现代文：祖父厍狄干，担任过齐朝的左丞相。
English: His grandfather, Zou Dikang, served as the Left Minister of the Qi Dynasty.

古文：父敬，武卫将军、肆州刺史。
现代文：父亲厍狄敬，任过武卫将军、肆州刺史之职。
English: His father, Zou Diqing, had served as the General of Wuwei and the Governor of Wuzhou.

古文：士文性孤直，虽邻里至亲莫与通狎。
现代文：士文生性孤傲耿直，即使是邻里至亲也没人同他很亲近的。
English: He was a lonely and proud man, and even his closest neighbors did not have much to do with him.

古文：少读书。
现代文：年轻时喜欢读书。
English: When he was young, he liked to read.

古文：在齐袭封章武郡王，官至领军将军。
现代文：在齐朝时，他世袭为章武郡王，官职到了领军将军。
English: During the Qi Dynasty, he was the hereditary King of Zhangwu County, and was promoted to the position of leading general.

古文：周武帝平齐，山东衣冠多迎周师，唯士文闭门自守。
现代文：周武帝平定齐朝后，太行山以东有身份的人大多出迎周朝的军队，只有士文闭门不出。
English: After Emperor Zhou Wu conquered the Qi Dynasty, most of the people with status east of Taihang Mountain came out to meet the Zhou Dynasty army. Only scholars did not come out.

古文：帝奇之，授开府仪同三司、随州刺史。
现代文：周武帝认为他不同凡响，就授他开府仪同三司、随州刺史。
English: Emperor Zhou Wu valued him very highly, and he was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Zuo and Suizhou Shi Shi.

古文：高祖受禅，加上开府，封湖陂县子，寻拜贝州刺史。
现代文：高祖称帝后，士文被授官上开府，封为湖陂县子爵，不久拜官贝州刺史。
English: After Gao Zu was crowned emperor, Shi Wen was awarded the title of Shangkaifu and was named Viscount of Hubei County. Soon, he was appointed to the post of Bei Zhou Shishi.

古文：性清苦，不受公料，家无余财。
现代文：他本性清苦，不接纳公物，故家中无剩余的财物。
English: He is honest and hardworking, does not covet anything from the public, and there is no extra money in the family.

古文：其子常啖官厨饼，士文枷之于狱累日，杖之一百，步送还京。
现代文：他的儿子曾经吃了官厨中的饼子，士文知道后用枷锁套上送到狱中多日，还打了一百杖，又徒步把他送回京城。
English: His son once ate a piece of cake from the government kitchen. When he found out, he was sent to prison for several days in shackles, given a hundred strokes of the cane, and sent back to the capital on foot.

古文：僮隶无敢出门，所买盐菜，必于外境。
现代文：士文的仆从不敢随便出门，就是买食盐小菜也一定要到外地去买。
English: The servant of a scholar never dares to go out casually. Even if he wants to buy salt and vegetables, he must go out of town to buy them.

古文：凡有出入，皆封署其门，亲旧绝迹，庆吊不通。
现代文：只要出门，就贴上封条。亲戚朋友也不跟他来往，贺喜吊丧之事也不互相通问。
English: As soon as he leaves the house, he puts up a seal. His relatives and friends do not visit him, and they do not ask each other about his death.

古文：法令严肃，吏人股战，道不拾遗。
现代文：士文执法严肃，官吏们闻知而两腿打战。于是当时路不拾遗。
English: He promulgated a severe punishment law, officials and people have violators, all are afraid. In the territory of Bozhou, there is no way out.

古文：有细过，必深文陷害。
现代文：如果别人有小的过失，他一定会夸大事实滥用法律而加以陷害。
English: Even if someone has made a small mistake, he must be strictly investigated and will never be forgiven.

古文：尝入朝，遇上置酒高会，赐公卿入左藏，任取多少。
现代文：士文入朝时，正碰上皇上大摆宴席，皇上赏赐大臣到偏房藏物之所任意拿东西。
English: When Shibun entered the imperial court, he was confronted with the emperor's grand banquet, and the emperor rewarded the minister to take things at will from the storage room.

古文：人皆极重，士文独口衔绢一匹，两手各持一匹。
现代文：别的大臣都拿了很重的财物，只有士文口含一匹绢，两手各拿一匹。
English: Many of them were carrying large and heavy loads, but Shiven was biting a donkey with his mouth and holding one in each hand.

古文：上问其故，士文曰： 臣口手俱满，余无所须。 
现代文：皇上问他拿得少的原因，士文说： 我口手都拿满了，再无处可拿了。 
English: The emperor asked him the reason for the shortfall, and the scholar said: I have my hands full, and there is nowhere else to take it.

古文：上异之，别加赏物，劳而遣之。
现代文：皇上认为他很特别，就另加赏物，慰劳他，让他回去。
English: The emperor thought he was very special, so he gave him a treat, consoled him and let him go back.

古文：士文至州，发擿奸隐，长吏尺布升粟之赃，无所宽贷。
现代文：士文回到州以后，揭发隐藏的坏人坏事。长吏有一尺布一升粟的隐藏，士文也严惩不贷。
English: After Shwen returned to the state, he exposed the hidden bad people and bad things. The magistrate had a foot of cloth and a liter of millet hidden, and Shwen was also severely punished.

古文：得千余人而奏之，上悉配防岭南，亲戚相送，哭泣之声遍于州境。
现代文：他一共举发一千多人，皇上就把他们发配去防守岭南。亲戚都来送别，哭泣之声传遍州境。
English: He sent a total of more than a thousand people, and the emperor sent them to defend Lingnan. Relatives came to see them off, and the sound of weeping spread across the state border.

古文：至岭南，遇瘴疠死者十八九，于是父母妻子唯哭士文。
现代文：到了岭南，遇上瘴气而死的人十个就有八九个。于是这些死者的亲属都哭骂士文。
English: In Lingnan, eight or nine out of every ten people died from exposure to radon gas. As a result, the relatives of these dead people cried and cursed Shiwen.

古文：士文闻之，令人捕捉，挝捶盈前，而哭者弥甚。
现代文：士文听了派人去捕捉，用马鞭在门前打他们，但是他们哭骂得更厉害了。
English: When the scholar heard this, he sent someone to catch them and beat them with a horsewhip in front of the door, but they cried and cursed even more.

古文：有京兆韦焜为贝州司马，河东赵达为清河令，二人并苛刻，唯长史有惠政。
现代文：有京兆人韦火昆担任贝州司马，河东人赵达担任清河县令，二人都很苛刻，只有长吏实行仁政。
English: Wei Huo Kun, a man from Beijing and Zhuhai, served as the Bozhou Sima, and Zhao Da, a man from the east of the river, served as the Qinghe county magistrate. Both were very harsh, and only the magistrates practiced benevolent politics.

古文：时人为之语曰： 刺史罗刹政，司马蝮蛇瞋，长史含笑判，清河生吃人。 
现代文：当时有人作歌说： 刺史像罗刹一样施暴政，司马像蝮蛇一样发怒，长吏是含笑的判官，清河县令活活地吃人。 
English: At that time, someone wrote a song saying: Zhi Shi is as tyrannical as Luo Zhao, Sima is as angry as a boa constrictor, the magistrate is a smiling judge, and the Qinghe County magistrate eats people alive.

古文：上闻而叹曰： 士文之暴，过于猛兽。 
现代文：皇上听了这事后感叹说： 士文实行暴政比猛兽还厉害。 
English: After hearing this, the emperor sighed and said, "The tyranny of a scholar is more terrible than that of a wild beast."

古文：竟坐免。
现代文：最后因这事士文被免职。
English: He was eventually relieved of his duties over the incident.

古文：未几，以为雍州长史，士文谓人曰： 我向法深，不能窥候要贵，必死此官矣。 
现代文：不久，士文又出任雍州长史，他对人说： 我一向执法很严，对当政者不能察颜观色，对权贵不巴结，一定会死在这个官位上。 
English: Soon after, Shiwen was appointed governor of Yong, and he said to the people: I have always been very strict in enforcing the law. I cannot look at those in power, and I do not fawn over the powerful. I will surely die in this position.

古文：及下车，执法严正，不避贵戚，宾客莫敢至门，人多怨望。
现代文：他一到任，执法严正，不回避贵戚，宾客都不敢进他的家门，人们大都怨恨他。
English: After taking office, he enforced the law in a strict and fair manner, and did not shy away from court nobles and their relatives. Guests did not dare to come to his house to ask for favors, and people had a grudge against him.

古文：士文从父妹为齐氏嫔，有色，齐灭之后，赐薛国公长孙览为妾。
现代文：士文的堂妹曾是北齐的嫔妃，有姿色，齐朝被灭以后，就把她赐给了薛国公长孙览作妾。
English: Shiven's cousin was once the concubine of Northern Qi, and she was beautiful. After the Qi Dynasty was destroyed, she was given to Prince Xue's grandson Qian as a concubine.

古文：览妻郑氏性妒，谮之于文献后，后令览离绝。
现代文：长孙览的妻子郑氏生性嫉妒，在文献皇后面前暗中说她的坏话，皇后就命令长孙览休了她。
English: Zheng's wife, Zheng's eldest grandchild, was jealous and spoke ill of her in front of the empress. The empress ordered her eldest grandchild to divorce her.

古文：士文耻之，不与相见。
现代文：士文把这件事当作一种耻辱，不跟她相见。
English: The scholar took this as a disgrace and did not meet her.

古文：谥曰肃。
现代文：后来应州刺史唐君明在母丧期间，将士文的堂妹聘以为妻。因此，士文、唐君明都被御史所弹劾。士文生性刚烈，在狱中几天，愤闷地死去。
English: His posthumous name is Su.

古文：赠物五百段。
现代文：他家中没有剩余的财物。
English: There are no belongings left in his house.

古文：子弘嗣。崔弘度弟弘升
现代文：有三个儿子，吃了上顿没有下顿，亲友中也没有人接纳他们。○崔弘度
English: They have three sons, but they have not been able to settle down, and none of their relatives and friends have accepted them.○Cui Hongdu

古文：崔弘度，字摩诃衍，博陵安平人也。
现代文：崔弘度字摩诃衍，博陵安平人。
English: Cui Hongdu is a native of Anping, Boling.

古文：祖楷，魏司空。
现代文：祖父崔楷，魏国司空。
English: Cui Kai's grandfather, Wei Guo Si Kuo.

古文：父说，周敷州刺史。
现代文：父亲崔说，北周敷州刺史。
English: Father Cui said that the history of North Zhouji County is full of ups and downs.

古文：弘度膂力绝人，仪貌魁岸，须面甚伟。
现代文：弘度膂力过人，仪貌魁伟，脸上长满胡须。
English: Hongdu is a man of great strength, with a dashing appearance and a full beard.

古文：性严酷。
现代文：他生性严酷。
English: He's tough by nature.

古文：年十七，周大冢宰宇文护引为亲信。寻授都督，累转大都督。
现代文：十七岁时，北周大冢宰宇文护引之为亲信，继而授他为都督，累次提拔至大都督。
English: At the age of seventeen, the Northern Zhou Dajie, Uwen Guo, introduced him as a close friend, and then awarded him the title of governor, and he was repeatedly promoted to the title of grand governor.

古文：时护子中山公训为蒲州刺史，令弘度从焉。
现代文：当时，宇文护的儿子、中山公宇文训为蒲州刺史，让崔弘度跟着他。
English: At that time, Uwenshu's son, Nakayamakong Uwenshu, was the governor of Puzhou, and Choi Hongdu followed him.

古文：尝与训登楼，至上层，去地四五丈，俯临之，训曰： 可畏也。 
现代文：崔弘度曾和宇文训登楼，到了顶层，离地四五丈。俯视下面，宇文训说： 可怕。 
English: Cui Hongdu and Yu Wenxun climbed up to the top floor, four or five stories above the ground. Looking down, Yu Wenxun said, "It's terrible."

古文：弘度曰： 此何足畏！ 
现代文：崔弘度说： 这有什么可怕的？ 
English: Cui Hongdu said: What is so terrible about this?

古文：欻然掷下，至地无损伤。
现代文：一下子跳下去，到地上，一点伤都没有。
English: Jumped straight down to the ground, no injuries at all.

古文：训以其拳捷，大奇之。
现代文：宇文训因他勇武敏捷，大感惊奇。
English: Yu Wenxun was greatly surprised by his bravery and agility.

古文：后以战勋，授仪同。
现代文：弘度后因有战功，授为仪同。
English: He was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor for his war service.

古文：从武帝灭齐，进位上开府，鄴县公，赐物三千段，粟麦三千石，奴婢百口，杂畜千计。
现代文：随北周武帝消灭北齐，升任上开府、邺县公，赐缣纟采三千段，粮食三千石，奴婢百口，各种牲畜数以千计。
English: Following the Northern Zhouwu Emperor's annihilation of Northern Qi, he was promoted to Shangkaifu and Shixian, and was given 3,000 tracts of land, 3,000 koku of grain, 100 slaves, and thousands of livestock of all kinds.

古文：寻从汝南公宇文神举破卢昌期于范阳。
现代文：随后，随汝南公宇文神举在范阳打败卢昌期。
English: Subsequently, with the rise of Ru Nan Gong Yu Wen Shen, he defeated Lu Chang in Fanyang.

古文：宣帝嗣位，从郧国公韦孝宽经略淮南。
现代文：北周宣帝继位后，弘度随郧国公韦孝宽经略淮南。
English: After Emperor Xuan of the Northern Zhou Dynasty succeeded to the throne, Hongdu followed Wei Xiaokuan, the Duke of Guizhou, and went to Huainan.

古文：弘度与化政公宇文忻、司水贺娄子干至肥口，陈将潘琛率兵数千来拒战，隔水而阵。
现代文：弘度和化政公宇文忻、司水贺娄子干到了肥口，陈国将领潘琛率兵几千来战，隔水布阵。
English: After the arrival of Emperor Hirohito, Emperor Kamei, Emperor Umenobu, and Empress Dowager Suiko, Emperor Chen's general Pan Zheng led several thousand soldiers to fight in Hekou, setting up a line of battle across the river.

古文：忻遣弘度谕以祸福，琛至夕而遁。
现代文：宇文忻派崔弘度晓谕祸福，潘琛到晚上就逃走了。
English: Uwen Zang sent Cui Hongdu to tell the good fortune and bad fortune, Pan Zang escaped in the evening.

古文：进攻寿阳，降陈守将吴文立，弘度功最。
现代文：进攻寿阳，俘虏陈国守将吴文立，崔弘度的功劳最大。
English: In the attack on Shouyang, Wu Wenli, the prisoner of Chen Guoshu, and Cui Hongdu were the most meritorious.

古文：以前后勋，进位上大将军，袭父爵安平县公。
现代文：因他前后的功劳，升任上大将军，袭父爵为安平县公。
English: Because of his past and present merits, he was promoted to the rank of senior general and succeeded his father as Anping County governor.

古文：及尉迥作乱，以弘度为行军总管，从韦孝宽讨之。
现代文：尉迟迥造反，朝廷以崔弘度为行军总管，随韦孝宽讨伐他。
English: The imperial court appointed Cui Hongdu as the commander-in-chief of the march and followed Wei Xiaokang to fight him.

古文：弘度募长安骁雄数百人为别队，所当无不披靡。
现代文：弘度招募长安的骁勇几百人，别为一队，所向无敌。
English: Hongdu has recruited several hundred brave people from Chang'an. They are an invincible team.

古文：弘度妹先适迥子为妻，及破鄴城，迥窘迫升楼，弘度直上龙尾追之。
现代文：崔弘度的妹妹此前嫁给尉迟迥的儿子为妻，到破邺城时，尉迟迥窘迫中跑到楼上去，弘度一直追上龙尾。
English: Cui Hongdu's younger sister was previously married to the son of the captain. When they arrived at the ruined castle, the captain ran upstairs in distress, and Hongdu kept up with the dragon.

古文：迥弯弓将射弘度，弘度脱兜鍪谓迥曰： 相识不？
现代文：尉迟迥将弯弓射他，弘度脱下兜鍪对尉迟迥说： 认得吗？
English: Lieutenant Zhixuan shot him with a curved bow. Hongdu took off his helmet and said to Lieutenant Zhixuan, "Do you recognize me?

古文：今日各图国事，不得顾私。
现代文：今天各为国事，不得顾私情。
English: Today, we are all here for the sake of national affairs, and we can't take personal feelings into account.

古文：以亲戚之情，谨遏乱兵，不许侵辱。
现代文：但因我们的亲戚之情，我约束乱兵，不让侵辱你的家人。
English: Thinking that we are relatives, we have made a special effort to contain the rioters and not allow them to abuse and bully you.

古文：事势如此，早为身计，何所待也？ 
现代文：事已如此，早点为你打算吧，你还等什么呢？ 
English: This being the case, make plans for yourself as early as possible. What are you waiting for?

古文：迥掷弓于地，骂大丞相极口而自杀。
现代文：尉迟迥把弓箭丢到地上，大骂大丞相杨坚，然后自杀。
English: He threw his bow and arrow to the ground, cursed the prime minister Yang Jian, and then committed suicide.

古文：弘度顾其弟弘升曰： 汝可取迥头。 
现代文：弘度对他弟弟弘升说： 你可取尉迟迥人头。 
English: Cui Hongdu said to his brother Cui Hongsheng, "You can take the head of Second Lieutenant Zhixuan.

古文：弘升遂斩之，进位上柱国。
现代文：弘升就砍下他的人头。弘度升任上柱国。
English: Hong Sheng cut off his head. Hong Du was promoted to Shangzhuo.

古文：时行军总管例封国公，弘度不时杀迥，致纵恶言，由是降爵一等，为武乡郡公。
现代文：当时，凡是行军总管，照例都要封为国公。弘度没有及时杀掉尉迟迥，以至让他大骂丞相，因此弘度降爵一等，封为武乡郡公。
English: At that time, the commander-in-chief of the marching troops was, as usual, given the title of kokugo (provincial governor). However, Hirotaka did not kill Fuchigayo in time, so much so that he made him curse the prime minister. As a result, Hirotaka was demoted to the first class and given the title of bukyo gunko (provincial governor of bukyo).

古文：开皇初，突厥入寇，弘度以行军总管出原州以拒之。
现代文：开皇初，突厥进犯，弘度以行军总管身份出原州道拒敌。
English: At the beginning of the Emperor's reign, the Turks invaded, and Hongdu, as the commander-in-chief of the march, went out to the original state road to repel the enemy.

古文：虏退，弘度进屯灵武。
现代文：突厥退兵后，弘度进而屯兵灵武。
English: After the Turks retreated, Hongdu continued to garrison Lingwu.

古文：月余而还，拜华州刺史。
现代文：一个多月后回京，授为华州刺史。
English: More than a month later, he returned to Beijing and was awarded the title of "Historian of Huazhou."

古文：纳其妹为秦孝王妃。
现代文：他妹妹嫁给秦孝王为王妃。
English: His sister married Qin Xiaowang and became his wife.

古文：寻迁襄州总管。
现代文：不久弘度升为襄州总管。
English: Soon after, Hongdu was promoted to the post of general manager of Xiangzhou.

古文：弘度素贵，御下严急，动行捶罚，吏人詟气，闻其声，莫不战栗。
现代文：弘度一向显贵，待下属很严急，动不动就打罚，官吏们连气都不敢出。
English: Hongdu has always been conspicuous, waiting for subordinates is very urgent, punishing them at every turn, and officials do not even dare to get out of breath.

古文：所在之处，令行禁止，盗贼屏迹。
现代文：听到他的声音，没有不吓得发抖的。他所到之处，令行禁止，盗贼绝迹。
English: No one could hear his voice without trembling with fear. Wherever he went, everything was prohibited and thieves were eliminated.

古文：梁王萧琮来朝，上以弘度为江陵总管，镇荆州。
现代文：梁王萧琮来朝，皇上以崔弘度为江陵总管，镇守荆州。
English: Liang Wang Xiao Wei came to the imperial court, and the emperor appointed Cui Hongdu as the general manager of Jiangling and the town guard of Jingzhou.

古文：弘度未至，而琮叔父严拥居人以叛，弘度追之不及。
现代文：弘度未到，而萧琮的叔父萧岩拥众反叛，弘度追之不及。
English: Hongdu has not yet arrived, and Xiao Yan's uncle Xiao Yan is a supporter of the rebellion. Hongdu has not yet caught up.

古文：陈人惮弘度，亦不敢窥荆州。
现代文：陈国人怕弘度，也不敢窥探荆州。
English: The people of Chen are afraid of Hongdu and dare not pry into Jingzhou.

古文：平陈之役，以行军总管从秦孝王出襄阳道。
现代文：平定陈国时，以弘度为行军总管，随秦孝王出襄阳道。
English: When subduing Chen Guo, with Hongdu as the general manager of the march, he followed Qin Xiaowang out of Xiangyang Road.

古文：及陈平，赐物五千段。
现代文：平陈后，赐他缣纟采五千段。
English: After the trial, he was awarded 5,000 rupees.

古文：高智慧等作乱，复以行军总管出泉门道，隶于杨素。
现代文：高智慧等人造反作乱，他又以行军总管身份出泉门道，归杨素指挥。
English: Gao Zhisheng and others fomented a riot, and he left Quanmen Road as the commander-in-chief of the march and returned to Yang Su's command.

古文：弘度与素，品同而年长，素每屈下之，一旦隶素，意甚不平，素言多不用。
现代文：崔弘度与杨素，官阶相同，年纪又大一些，杨素每每在弘度之下。一旦归杨素指挥，弘度心里很不服气，杨素的话他大多不听。
English: Cui Hongdu and Yang Su were of the same rank, but older, and Yang Su was always under Hongdu. Once he was under Yang Su's command, Hongdu was very dissatisfied, and he mostly did not listen to Yang Su's words.

古文：素亦优容之。
现代文：杨素也宽待、容忍他。
English: Yang Su also treated him with tolerance.

古文：及还，检校原州事，仍领行军总管以备胡，无虏而还，上甚礼之，复以其弟弘升女为河南王妃。
现代文：回朝后，弘度检校原州事，仍兼任行军总管，以防备胡人。无敌而回京，皇上很礼遇他。又把他弟弟弘升的女儿嫁给河南王为王妃。
English: After returning to the imperial court, Hongdu Kengyo, who had been in charge of the state affairs, still concurrently served as the commander-in-chief of the march, in order to prevent Hu people. Invincible and returned to Beijing, the emperor treated him very politely. He also married the daughter of his brother Hongsheng to the king of Henan as the princess.

古文：仁寿中，检校太府卿。
现代文：仁寿中，弘度检校太府卿。
English: In Jinshou Middle School, Hongdu Kengyo was the superintendent.

古文：自以一门二妃，无所降下，每诫其僚吏曰： 人当诚恕，无得欺诳。 
现代文：他自以为一家之中有两个王妃，从未屈居人下。他每每告诫部下们说： 人要忠诚老实，不能骗人。 部下都说： 是！ 
English: He thought that there were two princesses in his family, and that he had never been subservient to anyone. He always admonished his subordinates, saying, "One must be loyal and honest, and must not deceive others." His subordinates all said, "Yes!"

古文：皆曰： 诺。 
现代文：后来曾经吃鳖，侍奉他的有八、九个人。
English: Everyone said: Yes.

古文：后尝食鳖，侍者八九人，弘度一一问之曰： 鳖美乎？ 
现代文：弘度一一问他们说： 鳖的味道鲜美吗？ 他们都怕他，都说： 鳖的味道很鲜美。 
English: They were all afraid of him. They all said, "The taste of the eel is delicious."

古文：人惧之，皆云： 鳖美。 弘度大骂曰： 佣奴何敢诳我？
现代文：弘度大骂说： 奴才怎敢骗我！
English: "How dare he lie to me!" scolded Hongdu.

古文：汝初未食鳖，安知其美？ 
现代文：你们并未吃鳖，怎知它味道鲜美？ 
English: How do you know it's delicious if you haven't eaten it?

古文：俱杖八十。
现代文：每人都打八十杖。
English: Everyone's doing eighty canes.

古文：官属百工见之者，莫不流汗，无敢欺隐。
现代文：僚属、百工见了他，没有不吓得流汗的，不敢隐瞒欺骗他。
English: When his colleagues and subordinates and hundreds of workers saw him, there was no one who did not sweat with fright and did not dare to conceal and deceive him.

古文：时有屈突盖为武候骠骑，亦严刻，长安为之语曰： 宁饮三升酢，不见崔弘度。
现代文：当时有个叫屈突盖的，任武侯骠骑，也很苛酷。长安人有民谣说： 宁饮三升酢，不见崔弘度。
English: At that time, there was a man named Qu Zhuge, who was appointed by Wuhou to ride the horse, and he was also very harsh. The people of Chang'an had a folk song that said, "I'd rather drink three liters of vinegar than meet Cui Hongdu."

古文：宁茹三升艾，不逢屈突盖。 
现代文：宁茹三升艾，不逢屈突盖。 
English: Ningru three-sentence Ai, does not meet the buckle cover.

古文：然弘度理家如官，子弟斑白，动行捶楚，闺门整肃，为当时所称。
现代文：但是，崔弘度治家就如为官一样，子弟们老得头发都白了，他仍然动不动就毒打。他家门规矩，倒是被当时人称赞。
English: However, Cui Hongdu ruled his household as if he were an official, and his children's hair turned white with old age, but he still beat them mercilessly at every turn. People praised him at the time for his family rules.

古文：未几，秦王妃以罪诛，河南王妃复被废黜。
现代文：不久，秦孝王王妃因罪被杀，河南王王妃又被废掉。
English: Soon after, Qin Xiao Wang Wangfei was killed for her crime, and Henan Wangfei was abolished.

古文：弘度忧恚，谢病于家，诸弟乃与之别居，弥不得志。
现代文：崔弘度忧愤，推说有病，呆在家里。诸弟又与他分居，他更不得志。
English: Cui Hongdu was upset and stayed at home, saying that he was ill. His younger brothers separated from him, and he was even more discouraged.

古文：炀帝即位，河南王为太子，帝将复立崔妃，遣中使就第宣旨。
现代文：炀帝即位后，河南王被立为太子。炀帝将再立崔氏王妃，派使者到崔家府第宣读圣旨。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Shun, the King of Henan was appointed as the Crown Prince. Emperor Shun will re-establish the Queen Consort of the Cui family and send an envoy to the Cui family residence to read out the sacred will.

古文：使者诣弘升家，弘度不之知也。
现代文：使者到弘升家去，弘度不知道这事。
English: The messenger went to Hiroshige's house, but Hiroshige did not know about it.

古文：使者返，帝曰： 弘度有何言？ 
现代文：使者回宫，炀帝说： 弘度有什么话？ 
English: When the envoy returned to the palace, Emperor Zhao said: What did Hongdu have to say?

古文：使者曰： 弘度称有疾不起。 
现代文：使者说： 弘度说有病，没起床。 
English: The messenger said: "Hirodo said he was sick and didn't get up.

古文：帝默然，其事竟寝。
现代文：炀帝默然不语，这事就完了。
English: He was silent, and that was the end of it.

古文：弘度忧愤，未几，卒。
现代文：弘度忧愤，不久死去。
English: Hongdu was saddened and angry, and died soon after.

