古文：古者未有君臣上下之别，未有夫妇妃匹之合，兽处群居，以力相征。于是智者诈愚，强者凌弱，老幼孤独不得其所。
现代文：古时没有君臣上下之分，也没有夫妻配偶的婚姻，人们象野兽一样共处而群居，以强力互相争夺，于是聪明的人诈骗愚笨的人，强者欺凌弱者，老、幼、孤、独的人们都是不得其所的。
English: In ancient times, there was no distinction between lords and vassals, and there was no marriage between husband and wife. People lived together like wild beasts and lived in groups, competing with each other by force. As a result, the clever cheated the stupid, the strong bullied the weak, and the old, the young, the lonely, and the lonely had no place.

古文：故智者假众力以禁强虐，而暴人止。
现代文：因此，智者就依靠众人力量出来禁止强暴，强暴的人们就这样被制止了。
English: So the wise men, with the help of the crowd, came out to stop the rape, and the rapists were stopped.

古文：为民兴利除害，正民之德，而民师之。
现代文：由于替百姓兴利除害，并规正百姓的德性，百姓便把这智者当作导师。
English: Because he removed the harm for the people's benefit and rectified the people's virtue, the people regarded this wise man as a mentor.

古文：是故道术德行，出于贤人。
现代文：所以道术和德行是从贤人那里产生的。
English: Therefore, Taoism and virtue come from sages.

古文：其从义理兆形于民心，则民反道矣。
现代文：道术和德行的义理开始形成在百姓心里，百姓就都归正道了。
English: The principles of morality and virtue began to take shape in the hearts of the people, and they all returned to the right path.

古文：名物处，违是非之分，则赏罚行矣。
现代文：辨别了名物，分清了是非，赏罚便开始实行。
English: After distinguishing the famous products and distinguishing between right and wrong, the rewards and punishments began to be implemented.

古文：上下设，民生体，而国都立矣。
现代文：上下有了排定，民生有了根本，国家的都城也便建立起来。
English: The top and bottom have been scheduled, the people's livelihood has been fundamentally established, and the capital of the country has been established.

古文：是故国之所以为国者，民体以为国；君之所以为君者，赏罚以为君。
现代文：因此，国家之所以成其为国家，是由于有百姓这个根本才成为国家；君主之所以成为君主，是由于掌握赏罚，才能成其为君主。
English: Therefore, the reason why a country is a country is because of the people, which is the fundamental reason why it is a country; the reason why a monarch is a monarch is because of the control of reward and punishment, which is the reason why he is a monarch.

古文：致赏则匮，致罚则虐。
现代文：行赏过多则导致国贫，行罚过重则导致暴虐。
English: Excessive reward leads to national poverty, while excessive punishment leads to tyranny.

古文：财匮而令虐，所以失其民也。
现代文：财力贫乏和法令暴虐，都是会丧失民心的。
English: Lack of financial resources and the tyranny of the law are both ways to lose the hearts of the people.

古文：是故明君审居处之教，而民可使居治、战胜、守固者也。
现代文：所以，明君总是注意对于百姓平时的教导，这样可以使百姓平时得治，出战取胜，防守也牢不可破。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun always paid attention to the teaching of the people in peacetime, so that the people could be governed in peacetime, go to war to win, and the defense could not be broken.

古文：夫赏重，则上不给也；罚虐，则下不信也。
现代文：行赏过多了，上面就不能供应；刑罚太暴了，百姓就不会信服。
English: If there is too much reward, the leaders will not be able to supply; if there is too much punishment, the people will not be convinced.

古文：是故明君饰食饮吊伤之礼，而物属之者也。
现代文：所以，明君就要讲饮宴、吊丧的礼节，对人们分别等级给予不同的礼遇。
English: Therefore, Ming Jun must teach the etiquette of banquets and funerals, and give different levels of courtesy to people.

古文：是故厉之以八政，旌之以衣服，富之以国裹，贵之以王禁，则民亲君可用也。民用，则天下可致也。
现代文：所以，明君还用八种官职来勉励他们，用不同品秩的衣服来表彰他们，用国家俸禄来满足他们的生活，用国家法度来抬高他们的地位，这样，人们就都会亲附君主，可以为君主所用。百姓可用，那末天下就会归心了。
English: Therefore, Mingun also encouraged them with eight kinds of official positions, commended them with clothes of different ranks, satisfied their lives with state salaries, and elevated their status with state laws and regulations. In this way, people will be close to the monarch and can be used by the monarch. If the people can be used, then the world will come to its senses.

古文：天下道其道则至，不道其道则不至也。
现代文：人君行道，天下就来归附；不行其道，天下就不归附。
English: If a person follows the way of the emperor, the whole world will follow him; if he does not follow the way of the emperor, the whole world will not follow him.

古文：夫水波而上，尽其摇而复下，其势固然者也。
现代文：这好比浪头涌起，到了顶头又会落下来，乃是必然的趋势。
English: This is an inevitable trend, like a wave that rises and falls at the crest.

古文：故德之以怀也，威之以畏也，则天下归之矣。
现代文：所以，用恩德来安抚人们，用威势来震慑人们，天下就会归心了。
English: Therefore, use grace to appease people, use power to deter people, and the world will come to its senses.

古文：有道之国，发号出令，而夫妇尽归亲于上矣；布法出宪，而贤人列士尽功能于上矣。
现代文：一个有道的国家，通过发号施令，国内男女都会亲附于君主；通过宣布法律和宪章，贤人列士都会尽心竭力于君主。
English: A virtuous state, by issuing decrees, draws the men and women of the country close to the sovereign; by promulgating laws and charters, the wise men and women exert themselves to the utmost for the sovereign.

古文：千里之内，束布之罚，一亩之赋，尽可知也。
现代文：千里之内的地方，哪怕是一束布的惩罚，一亩地的赋税，君主都可以完全了解。
English: Within a thousand miles, even the punishment of a bundle of cloth, the taxation of a mu of land, the monarch can fully understand.

古文：治斧钺者不敢让刑，治轩冕者不敢让赏，坟然若一父之子，若一家之实，义礼明也。
现代文：主管刑杀的不敢私窃刑杀的权限，主管赏赐的不敢偷窃行赏的权限，人们服帖得象一个父亲的儿子，象一个家庭的情况一样，这是由于义礼分明的原故。
English: The person in charge of the execution did not dare to steal the authority of the execution, and the person in charge of the reward did not dare to steal the authority of the reward. People obeyed like the son of a father, like the situation of a family. This was due to the clear reason of the rite.

古文：夫下不戴其上，臣不戴其君，则贤人不来。
现代文：在下的不拥护在上的，臣子不拥护君主，贤人就不会出来做事。
English: If those below do not support those above, if courtiers do not support the monarch, then wise men will not come out to do things.

古文：贤人不来，则百姓不用。
现代文：贤人不出来，百姓就不肯效力。
English: If the wise men do not come out, the people will not be willing to work.

古文：百姓不用，则天下不至。
现代文：百姓不效力，天下就不会归心。
English: If the people do not work hard, the world will not come to its senses.

古文：故曰：德侵则君危，论侵则有功者危，令侵则官危，刑侵则百姓危。
现代文：所以说，施行德政的权力被侵削，君主就危险了；论功行赏的权力被侵削，有功的人就危险了；发令的权力被侵削，官吏就危险；行刑的权力被侵削，百姓就危险。
English: Therefore, it is said that if the power to implement moral government is encroached upon, the monarch will be in danger; if the power to reward meritorious deeds is encroached upon, meritorious people will be in danger; if the power to issue orders is encroached upon, officials will be in danger; if the power to execute punishment is encroached upon, the people will be in danger.

古文：而明君者，审禁淫侵者也。
现代文：贤明的君主是明确禁止这种不正当的侵削行为的。
English: A wise monarch expressly forbids such unjustified encroachments.

古文：上无淫侵之论，则下无异幸之心矣。
现代文：上面没有不正当的侵夺君权的议论，下面就不会有侥幸投机的心理了。
English: Above, there is no talk of illegitimate usurpation of sovereignty, and below, there will be no psychology of chance speculation.

古文：为人君者，倍道弃法，而好行私，谓之乱。
现代文：做人君的，违背君道抛弃法制而专好行私，这叫作 乱 。
English: To be a tyrant, to go against the monarchy, to abandon the rule of law, and to act selfishly, is called "chaos."

古文：为人臣者，变故易常，而巧官以谄上，谓之腾。乱至则虐，腾至则北。
现代文：做人臣的，改变旧制，更易常法，而用花言巧语来谄媚君主，这叫作 腾 。 乱 的行为发展到极点就会 暴虐 ， 腾 的行为发展到极点就会 背叛 。
English: A courtier who changes the old system to make it more amenable to the common law, and uses rhetoric to flatter the monarch, is called a Teng. If the behavior of chaos develops to the extreme, it will be tyrannical, and if the behavior of Teng develops to the extreme, it will betray.

古文：四者有一至，败敌人谋之。
现代文：这四种现象出现一种，就会失改，敌人就会来图谋国家。
English: If one of these four phenomena occurs, there will be a failure to reform, and the enemy will come to plot against the country.

古文：则故施舍优犹以济乱，则百姓悦。选贤遂材，而礼孝弟，则奸伪止。要淫佚，别男女，则通乱隔。贵贱有义，伦等不逾，则有功者劝。国有常式，故法不隐，则下无怨心。
现代文：所以，国君多行施舍，宽容大度以防止祸乱，百姓就喜悦；选拔贤者，进用人材而礼敬孝悌的人，则奸伪之徒敛迹；禁止淫荡懒惰，分清男女界限，则淫乱私通者隔绝；贵贱区分合理，等级不乱，则立功者受到鼓励；国家有确定规范，常法向百姓公开，则百姓没有怨心。
English: Therefore, the people are pleased when the sovereign gives a lot of alms and is tolerant and generous to prevent calamity; when he selects the wise and uses human resources and honors the filial piety, the traitors and hypocrites will be eliminated; when he forbids lasciviousness and laziness, and distinguishes the boundaries between men and women, the adulterers and fornicators will be isolated; when the distinction between high and low is reasonable and the ranks are not chaotic, the meritorious will be encouraged; when the country has certain norms and the common law is open to the people, the people have no resentment.

古文：此五者，兴德匡过、存国定民之道也。
现代文：这五个方面，都是振兴道德、改正错误、保存国家和安定百姓的办法。
English: These five aspects are all ways to revitalize morality, correct mistakes, preserve the country and stabilize the people.

古文：夫君人者有大过，臣人者有大罪，国所有也，民所君也，有国君民而使民所恶制之，此一过也。
现代文：为人君的可能有大过，为人臣者也可能有大罪。国家归君主占有，百姓归君主统治，有国有民而竟让百姓所憎恶的人去掌权管理，这是人君的第一个过失。
English: It may be a great fault to be a prince, but it may also be a great sin to be a vassal. The state belongs to the monarch, and the people belong to the monarch's rule. It is the first mistake for a prince to allow someone who is hated by the people to take power and manage the country.

古文：民有三务，不布其民，非其民也。民非其民，则不可以守战。此君人者二过也。
现代文：百姓有春、夏、秋三季节的农事，君主不适时下令，向百姓布置生产，那就不是他的百姓了；既然不是他的百姓，就不能用来守国作战，这是人君的第二个过失。
English: The people have spring, summer and autumn agricultural work. If the monarch does not issue a timely order to allocate production to the people, then it is not his people; since it is not his people, it cannot be used to defend the country. This is the second mistake of the prince.

古文：夫臣人者，受君高爵重禄，治大官。倍其官，遗其事，穆君之色，从其欲，阿而胜之，此臣人之大罪也。
现代文：做人臣的，受国君高爵重禄，负责大的职务，然而却背其职守，放弃职责，逢迎君主的颜色，顺从君主的私欲，通过阿谈的手段而控制君主，这便是人臣的大罪。
English: It is the great sin of a vassal to be a vassal, to receive high honors from the sovereign, to be responsible for great posts, yet to betray his duties, to abandon his duties, to meet the monarch's color, to obey the monarch's selfish desires, and to control the monarch by means of persuasion.

古文：君有过而不改，谓之倒；臣当罪而不诛，谓之乱。
现代文：君有过而不改，叫做 倒 ；臣有罪而不诛，叫作 乱 。
English: If you have done something and do not change it, it is called a downfall; if your vassal is guilty but does not repent, it is called a disorder.

古文：君为倒君，臣为乱臣，国家之衰也，可坐而待之。
现代文：如果君主是 倒君 ，人臣是 乱臣 ，那么国家的衰亡，就可以坐着等待到来了。
English: If the monarch is a traitor, and the vassal is an errant vassal, then the decline of the country can be awaited.

古文：是故有道之君者执本，相执要，大夫执法以牧其群臣，群臣尽智竭力以役其上。
现代文：因此，有道的君主要掌握治国根本原则，辅相要掌握重要政策，大夫执行法令以管理群臣，群臣尽心竭力为主上服务。
English: Therefore, a virtuous ruler mainly grasps the fundamental principles of governing the country, and in addition, he must grasp important policies. The doctor executes decrees to manage the vassals, and the vassals do their best to serve the Lord.

古文：四守者得则治，易则乱。
现代文：这四种职守都能完成得好则国家治；疏忽了，则国家乱。
English: If these four functions are well performed, the country will be governed; if they are neglected, the country will be in turmoil.

古文：故不可不明设而守固。
现代文：所以，这四种职守都是不可不明确规定和坚决遵守的。
English: Therefore, these four duties must be clearly defined and strictly observed.

古文：昔者，圣王本厚民生，审知祸福之所生。
现代文：古时候，圣明君主总是把提高百姓生活作为根本，慎重了解祸福产生的原因。
English: In ancient times, the sage-monarch always regarded the improvement of the people's life as the fundamental, and carefully understood the causes of misfortune and blessing.

古文：是故慎小事微，违非索辩以根之。
现代文：所以，对于微小的事情都十分谨慎，对于违法非法都详细辨别，并追究根底。
English: Therefore, they are very cautious about the smallest things, and they distinguish in detail the illegal and illegal, and investigate the root cause.

古文：然则躁作、奸邪、伪诈之人，不敢试也。
现代文：这样，轻举妄动、奸邪和诈伪的人们就不敢尝试做坏事了。
English: In this way, people who are reckless, treacherous and deceitful will not dare to try to do bad things.

古文：此礼正民之道也。
现代文：这正是规正百姓的途径。
English: This is precisely the way to regulate the people.

古文：古者有二言： 墙有耳，伏寇在侧。 
现代文：古时候有两句话： 墙上有耳，身旁有暗藏的贼寇。 
English: In ancient times, there were two sayings: The walls have ears, and there are hidden thieves around you.

古文：墙有耳者，微谋外泄之谓也；伏寇在侧者，沈疑得民之道也。
现代文：所谓墙上有耳，是说机密的谋划可能泄露在外。所谓身旁有暗藏的贼寇，是说阴谋家可能争得人心。
English: The so-called ear on the wall means that secret plans may be leaked. The so-called hidden thief next to you means that schemers may win the hearts of the people.

古文：微谋之泄也，狡妇袭主之请而资游慝也。
现代文：机密谋划的泄露，是由于狡猾的宠扫刺探君主内情去帮助暗藏的奸细。阴。
English: The leaking of the secret plan was due to a cunning spy spying on the monarch to help the hidden spies.

古文：沈疑之得民也者，前贵而后贱者为之驱也。
现代文：谋家争得人心，是由于从前受到贵宠后来沦为低贱的人愿意为他奔走效劳。
English: Seeking a home is popular because people who were once favored and then degraded are willing to work for him.

古文：明君在上，便僻不能食其意，刑罚亟近也；大臣不能侵其势，比党者诛，明也。
现代文：英明的君主执政，宠臣内侍不敢窥伺君主的意图。因为刑罚首先施行于亲近；大臣不能侵夺君主的权势，因为勾结私党者被杀的事实，是明确的。
English: A wise monarch reigns, and his favourite chambermaids do not dare to pry into the monarch's intentions, because punishment is first meted out at close quarters; ministers cannot usurp the power of the monarch, because the fact that those who collude with private parties are killed is clear.

古文：为人君者，能远谗谄，废比党，淫悖行食之徒，无爵列于朝者，此止诈拘奸、厚国存身之道也。
现代文：做人君的能够远离谗言诌语，废除拉帮结党，使那些淫邪悖乱和游荡求食之徒。不能混入朝廷为官，这是防止诈伪，限制奸邪，巩固国家和保全自身的途径。
English: To be a prince, one must be able to stay away from gossip, abolish the yakuza and the party, and make those who are immoral and wandering beggars. One must not be mixed into the imperial court as an official. This is the way to prevent fraud, limit treachery, consolidate the country, and preserve oneself.

古文：为人上者，制群臣百姓通，中央之人和，是以中央之人，臣主之参。
现代文：做君主的，统治群臣百姓，是通过左右大臣实现的。所以左右大 臣是群臣与君主之间的中间参与者。
English: The monarch's rule over the commoners was achieved through the left and right ministers. Therefore, the left and right ministers were the intermediary participants between the commoners and the monarch.

古文：制令之布于民也，必由中央之人。
现代文：制度法令向百姓布置，必须经过左右的大臣。
English: When the system and laws are laid out for the people, they must go through the ministers on both sides.

古文：中央之人，以缓为急，急可以取威；以急为缓，缓可以惠民。
现代文：左右大臣把可以缓办的命令改为急办，就可以因为急办对百姓猎取权威；又把应当急办的命令改为缓力？就可以因为缓办对百姓表示恩惠。
English: If ministers of the left and right change the order that can be delayed to urgent, it can be because the urgent is hunting for authority over the people; and if they change the order that should be urgent to delay, it can be because the delay shows favor to the people.

古文：威惠迁于下，则为人上者危矣。
现代文：君主的权威与恩惠转移到左右大臣的手里，做君主的就危险了。
English: If the monarch's authority and favours are transferred into the hands of ministers of the left and right, it will be dangerous to be a monarch.

古文：贤不肖之知于上，必由中央之人。财力之贡于上，必由中央之人。
现代文：把官吏的贤能或不肖报告君主的，必定经过左有的大臣；把各地方的民财、民力贡献给君主的，也必定经过左有的大臣。
English: Those who report to the monarch on the efficiency or incompetence of officials must go through certain ministers; those who contribute the people's wealth and power of various regions to the monarch must also go through certain ministers.

古文：能易贤不肖而可威党于下。
现代文：左右大臣能把贤能说成不肖，把不肖说成贤能，而可以在下面结成私党。
English: The left and right ministers can say that the virtuous and the virtuous are unsightly, and the unsightly can be said to be virtuous, and they can form a private party below.

古文：有能以民之财力上陷其主，而可以为劳于下。
现代文：又能用民财与民力去诱惑君主，而可以在上面邀取功劳。
English: They can also use people's wealth and people's power to tempt the monarch, and can take credit for it.

古文：兼上下以环其私，爵制而不可加，则为人上者危矣。
现代文：同时在君主和臣民中间两头谋求私利，致使官爵和法制对他都不起作用，做君主的就危险了。
English: At the same time, he sought his own interests on both sides between the monarch and his subjects, so that the peerage and the legal system did not work for him, and being a monarch was dangerous.

古文：先其君以善者，侵其赏而夺之实者也；先其君以恶者，侵其刑而夺之威者也；讹言于外者，胁其君者也；郁令而不出者，幽其君者也。
现代文：先于君主来行奖，这是侵夺君主的行赏大权和恩惠；先于君主来行罚，这是侵夺君主的惩罚大权和威严；在外面制造谣言，这是威胁君主；扣压命令不公布，这是封锁君主。
English: To give awards before the sovereign is to usurp the sovereign's prerogative of reward and favor; to punish before the sovereign is to usurp the sovereign's prerogative of punishment and majesty; to create rumors outside is to threaten the sovereign; to withhold orders from publication is to block the sovereign.

古文：四者一作而上不知也，则国之危，可坐而待也。
现代文：这由种情况全部发生，而君主还不知道，国家的危险就可以坐着等待到来了。
English: All this happened, and the sovereign did not yet know that the danger to the state had come when he could have sat and waited.

古文：神圣者王，仁智者君，武勇者长，此天之道，人之情也。
现代文：神圣的人做王，仁智的人做国君，威武勇敢的人做官长，这本是天道和人情。
English: A holy man to be king, a benevolent and wise man to be sovereign, a mighty and brave man to be governor. This is the way of heaven and the way of man.

古文：天道人情，通者质，宠者从，此数之因也。是故始于患者，不与其事；亲其事者，不规其道。
现代文：依照天道和人情，通显的人做君主，卑穷的人做臣仆，这是规律性所决定的，所以，主管谋划的人，不参与具体事务；亲身参与事务工作的，不管掌握原则。
English: According to the laws of nature and human nature, the common man is the ruler, and the lowly man is the servant, which is determined by regularity. Therefore, the person in charge of planning does not participate in specific affairs; he personally participates in the work of affairs, regardless of mastering the principle.

古文：是以为人上者患而不劳也，百姓劳而不患也。
现代文：所以，做君主的只谋虑思患而不从事劳作；做百姓的只从事劳作而不管谋虑思患。
English: Therefore, as a monarch, he only thinks about problems and does not engage in labor; as a commoner, he only engages in labor and does not think about problems.

古文：君臣上下之分索，则礼制立矣。
现代文：君臣上下的职分明确定下来，礼制就建立起来了。
English: The ranks of officials were clearly defined, and the etiquette system was established.

古文：是故以人役上，以力役明，以刑役心，此物之理也。
现代文：所以，用百姓来服事君上，用劳力来服事贤明，用形体来服事心灵，这就是事物的道理。
English: Therefore, using the people to serve the emperor, using labor to serve the wise, and using the body to serve the soul, this is the reason for things.

古文：心道进退，而形道滔赶。
现代文：心的功能考虑举止动作，形体的功能是实践俯仰屈伸。
English: The function of the mind is to consider how to behave, while the function of the body is to practice bending and stretching.

古文：进退者主制，滔赶者主劳。
现代文：考虑举止动作的管号令，实践俯仰屈伸的主管劳力。
English: Consider the behavior of the movement of the control signal, the practice of pitching flexion and extension of the competent labor force.

古文：主劳者方，主制者圆。
现代文：主管劳力的要方正，主管号令的要圆通。
English: The person in charge of labor should be upright, and the person in charge of giving orders should be well-rounded.

古文：圆者运，运者通，通则和。
现代文：圆的长于运转，运转的能变通，变通就可以和谐。
English: The circle is longer than the movement, the movement can be flexible, and the flexibility can be harmonious.

古文：方者执，执者固，固则信。
现代文：方的往往固执，固执的能坚定，坚定就可以信诚。
English: stubborn can be firm, firm can be faithful.

古文：君以利和，臣以节信，则上下无邪矣。
现代文：君主用物利协调群臣，群臣用守本分来表示诚信，上下就不会有偏差了。
English: Monarchs use material interests to coordinate their vassals, and vassals use their duty to express their integrity, and there will be no deviation between the top and bottom.

古文：故曰：君人者制仁，臣人者守信。此言上下之礼也。
现代文：所以说，做君主的要主持宽仁，做臣子的要谨守信用，这就是所说的上下之礼。
English: Therefore, as a monarch, you should preside over generosity, and as a courtier, you should keep your word. This is the so-called "upper and lower salute."

古文：君之在国都也，若心之在身体也。
现代文：君主在国都，如同心在身体一样。
English: The monarch is in the capital, just as the mind is in the body.

古文：道德定于上，则百姓化于下矣。
现代文：道德规范树立在上面，百姓就在下面受到教化。
English: Moral norms are established at the top, and the people are educated at the bottom.

古文：戒心形于内，则容貌动于外矣，正也者，所以明其德。
现代文：戒慎之心形成在里面。容貌就在外面表现出来。所谓 正 ，是表明君主德行的。
English: Prudence is formed in the inside. Appearance is shown on the outside. The so-called positive is an indication of the monarch's virtue.

古文：知得诸己，知得诸民，从其理也。
现代文：知道怎样适合自己，就知道怎样适合于臣民，这是顺从道理来、考虑问题的结果。
English: To know what is proper for oneself is to know what is proper for one's subjects, and this is the result of reasoned consideration.

古文：知失诸民，退而修诸己，反其本也。
现代文：如果发现有不适合臣民的地方，就回过头来修正自己，这是返回到根本的方法。
English: If you find something that is not suitable for your subjects, you should go back and correct yourself. This is the way to go back to basics.

古文：所求于己者多，故德行立。所求于人者少，故民轻给之。
现代文：对自己要求的多，德行就可以树立；对百姓要求的少，百姓就易于供应。
English: If you ask more of yourself, you can establish virtue; if you ask less of the people, the people are easy to supply.

古文：故君人者上注，臣人者下注。
现代文：所以，做君主的要向上注意，做人臣的要向下注意。
English: Therefore, as a monarch, you should pay attention to the top, and as a courtier, you should pay attention to the bottom.

古文：上注者，纪天时，务民力。下注者，发地利，足财用也。
现代文：向上注意。即掌握天时并安排民力；向下注意即开发地利并增长财富。
English: Pay attention to the top, that is, master the weather and arrange the people's power; pay attention to the bottom, that is, develop the country and increase the wealth.

古文：故能饰大义，审时节，上以礼神明，下以义辅佐者，明君之道。
现代文：所以能整饬治国大义，研究天时季节，向上礼敬神明，向下义待大臣，这才是明君的治国之道。
English: Therefore, to be able to rectify the principles of governing the country, to study the time of the day and the season, to bow to the gods, and to treat the minister with kindness, this is the way of governing the country.

古文：能据法而不阿，上以匡主之过，下以振民之病者，忠臣之所行也。
现代文：能够依法办事而不迁就逢迎，上面用来纠正君主的过失，下面用来救济百姓的困难，这才是忠臣的行为。
English: To be able to act in accordance with the law without being accommodating, above to correct the mistakes of the monarch, below to relieve the difficulties of the people, this is the behavior of a loyal subject.

古文：君子食于道，则义审而礼明，义审而礼明，则伦等不逾，虽有偏卒之大夫，不敢有幸心，则上无危矣。
现代文：礼制彰明，伦理的等级就没有人敢于超越，即使拥有兵车和士卒的大夫也不敢存在侥幸作乱的心理，这样，君主就可以没有危险了。
English: The etiquette system makes it clear that no one dares to surpass the ethical level, and even doctors with chariots and soldiers dare not have the mentality of making trouble by chance. In this way, the monarch can be free from danger.

古文：齐民食于力则作本，作本者众，农以听命。
现代文：平民靠出力劳动生活，则从事基本的农业生产；从事农业生产的人多了，则勤勉而听从命令。
English: While the common people live by their own efforts, they are engaged in basic agricultural production; while there are more people engaged in agricultural production, they are diligent and follow orders.

古文：是以明君立世，民之制于上，犹草木之制于时也。
现代文：所以，明君治世，百姓受君主的节制，就象草木受天时的制约一样。
English: Therefore, the emperor reigns, and the people are subject to the restraint of the monarch, just as the plants and trees are subject to the constraints of time.

古文：故民迂则流之，民流通则迂之。决之则行，塞之则止。
现代文：所以百姓偏于保守，就要使他们开通一些；百姓偏于开通，就要使他们保守一些。开放之则流通，堵塞之则停止。
English: Therefore, if the people are inclined to be conservative, it is necessary to make them more open; if the people are inclined to be open, it is necessary to make them more conservative. If it is open, it will circulate, and if it is blocked, it will stop.

古文：虽有明君，能决之，又能塞之。
现代文：唯有明君是既能开放又能堵塞的。
English: Only Ming Jun is able to both open and block.

古文：决之则君子行于礼，塞之则小人笃于农。君子行于礼，则上尊而民顺；小民笃于农，则财厚而备足。
现代文：开放，则能使君子遵守礼制；堵塞，则能使小民专心务农，君子遵守礼制，则君主尊严而百姓顺从；小民专心务农，则财物丰厚而贮备充足。
English: If it is open, it will enable the gentleman to observe the etiquette; if it is blocked, it will enable the common people to concentrate on farming; if the gentleman observes the etiquette, the monarch will be dignified and the people will obey; if the common people concentrate on farming, the property will be rich and the storage will be sufficient.

古文：上尊而民顺，财厚而备足，四者备体，顷时而王不难矣。
现代文：上尊、民顺、财厚、备足，这四者全都齐备，在短时间内称王于天下，就不困难了。
English: It is not difficult to become the king of the world in a short period of time if you have all four of the following qualities: dignity, prosperity, wealth and self-sufficiency.

古文：四肢六道，身之体也。四正五官，国之体也。
现代文：四肢和六道：耳、目、口、鼻、前阴和后阴，是人身的躯体；四正：君、臣、父、子和五官是国家的躯体。
English: The four limbs and six senses: ears, eyes, mouth, nose, anterior and posterior are the body of a human being; the four elements: ruler, vassal, father, son and the five senses are the body of the state.

古文：四肢不通，六道不达，曰失。四正不正，五官不官，曰乱。
现代文：四肢不关联，六道不通畅，这叫作身体失调；四正不端正，五官不管事，这叫作国家混乱。
English: If the four limbs are out of joint and the six senses are not working properly, it is called a physical disorder; if the four senses are not working properly and the five senses are not working properly, it is called a national disorder.

古文：是故国君聘妻于异姓，设为姪娣、命妇、宫女，尽有法制，所以治其内也。
现代文：所以，国君从不同姓的国家娶妻，还设置有姪娣、命妇和宫女，都按法度进行，这为的是治理好宫内之事。
English: Therefore, the sovereign marries wives from countries with different surnames, and also sets up nieces, godmothers and maids of honor, all in accordance with the law, in order to manage the affairs of the palace.

古文：明男女之别，昭嫌疑之节，所以防其奸也。
现代文：明定男女分别，宣示管理男女嫌疑的办法，这为的是防止奸情。
English: In order to prevent adultery, the method of managing suspicions between men and women is clearly announced separately for men and women.

古文：是以中外不通，谗慝不生；妇言不及官中之事，而诸臣子弟无宫中之交，此先王所以明德圉奸，昭公威私也。
现代文：所以，宫内外不得私通，谗言、恶事不准发生，妇人说话不得涉及朝廷政事，群臣子弟不得与宫内交往，这都是先王用来彰明德行、制止奸邪、昭示公道、消灭私图的措施。
English: Therefore, no illicit intercourse was allowed inside or outside the palace, no slander or evil deeds were allowed to occur, no woman's speech was allowed to involve the political affairs of the imperial court, and the children of ministers were not allowed to interact with the palace. These were all measures used by the former king to highlight virtue, stop treachery, show justice, and eliminate selfish plans.

古文：明立宠设，不以逐子伤义。
现代文：明立女宠之子为后。而不立长子，这是伤义的事情。
English: It is a shameful thing to make the favorite son of a woman the heir, but not the eldest son.

古文：礼私爱欢，势不并论。爵位虽尊，礼无不行。
现代文：优礼和私爱自己喜欢的庶子，但不能使他的地位、权力与嫡长子平等。庶子的爵位尽管尊贵，但嫡庶的礼制不能不执行。
English: It is polite and proper to love one's favorite illegitimate son, but it is not possible to make his status and power equal to that of the legitimate eldest son. Although the illegitimate son's title is noble, the legitimate son's etiquette must be observed.

古文：选为都佼，冒之以衣服，旌之以章旗，所以重其威也。
现代文：嫡长子是首要的，要用美好的衣服来装饰他，用文彩的旗帜为旌表他，为的是提高他的威望。
English: The firstborn is the most important, and he should be adorned with fine clothing and adorned with colorful banners to enhance his prestige.

古文：然则兄弟无间郄，谗人不敢作矣。
现代文：这样嫡庶兄弟之间就可以没有隔阂，挑拨离间的人也就不敢动作了。
English: In this way, there can be no estrangement between the legitimate brothers, and those who sow discord will not dare to act.

古文：故其立相也，陈功而加之以德，论劳而昭之以法，参伍相德而周举之，尊势而明信之。
现代文：所以，君主在设立辅相的时候，罗列他的功绩也同时考虑他的德行；论定他的劳绩也同时查看他是否合干法度。经过比较考核。各方面都合适，然后举用他，尊重他的权威，坦白地信任他。
English: Therefore, when setting up a vice-regent, the sovereign lists his merits and also considers his virtues; determines his merits and also checks whether he is legal. After comparative assessment. All aspects are appropriate, then use him, respect his authority, and frankly trust him.

古文：是以下之人无谏死之誋，而聚立者无郁怨之心，如此，则国平而民无慝矣。
现代文：因此下面的人臣没就有进谏怕死的顾虑。聚立布朝的小吏也没有抑郁怨恨的心理。这样围家就可以太平而百姓也没有邪恶了。
English: Therefore, the ministers below did not have the fear of death. The minor officials who gathered and established the Bu Dynasty did not have the psychology of depression and resentment. In this way, the surrounding families could be peaceful and the people did not have evil.

古文：其选贤遂材也，举德以就列，不类无德；举能以就官，不类无能；以德弇劳，不以伤年。
现代文：君主在选拔贤材的时候，要举拔有德行的人进入爵位的行列，不可以包括无德之人；要举拔有才能的人担任适当的官职，不可以包括无能之辈。把德行放在功劳之上。不因为资历年限而加以抑制。
English: When the monarch selects the talents, he should promote the virtuous to the ranks of knighthood, and should not include those who are not virtuous; he should promote the talented to appropriate posts, and should not include those who are incompetent. He should place virtue above merit. He should not suppress it because of seniority.

古文：如此，则上无困，而民不幸生矣。
现代文：这样，君主就没有困难，而百姓也不会寻求侥幸了。
English: In this way, there will be no difficulties for the monarch, and the people will not seek luck.

古文：国之所以乱者四，其所以亡者二。
现代文：国家所以衰乱的原因有四，所以灭亡的原因有二。
English: There are four reasons for the decline of a country, and two reasons for its demise.

古文：内有疑妻之妾，此宫乱也；庶有疑適之子，此家乱也；朝有疑相之臣，此国乱也；任官无能，此众乱也。四者无别，主失其体。群官朋党，以怀其私，则失族矣；国之几臣，阴约闭谋以相待也，则失援矣。失族于内，失援于外，此二亡也。
现代文：暗中策划阴谋，对付君主，君主就丧失百姓的支援。
English: If they plot against the monarch, the monarch loses the support of the people.

古文：故妻必定，子必正，相必直立以听，官必中信以敬。
现代文：内部丧失宗族拥护。外部丧失百姓支授，这就是灭亡的两个原因。所以嫡妻必须固定，嫡子必须确立，辅相必须以正直态度听政。百官必须以忠情态度严肃认真地办事。
English: The internal loss of the clan's support and the external loss of the people's support are the two reasons for the demise. Therefore, the legitimate wife must be fixed, the legitimate son must be established, the assistant minister must listen to politics with an honest attitude, and the centurion must act seriously with a loyal attitude.

古文：故曰：有宫中之乱，有兄弟之乱，有大臣之乱，有中民之乱，有小人之乱。
现代文：所以说有宫中之乱，有兄弟之乱，有大臣之乱。有百官之乱，有小民之乱。
English: That is why there are palace revolts, brotherly revolts, ministers' revolts, officials' revolts, and commoners' revolts.

古文：五者一作，则为人上者危矣。
现代文：五者全发作起来，做人君的就危险了。
English: If all five of these things happen, it's dangerous to be a human being.

古文：宫中乱曰妒纷，兄弟乱曰党偏，大臣乱曰称述、中民乱曰詟谆，小民乱曰财匮。
现代文：宫中之乱是由于妻妄嫉妒纷争。兄弟之乱是出于诸子结党偏私，大臣之乱是由于他们喜用权术，百官之乱是由于他们对上诽议不满，小人之乱是由于他们财用贫乏。
English: The disturbance in the palace was caused by the quarrels of jealous wives. The disturbance in the brothers was caused by the sons' partisanship and selfishness. The disturbance in the ministers was caused by their fondness for the use of power and tactics. The disturbance in the officials was caused by their dissatisfaction with the slander against them. The disturbance in the little people was caused by their poor use of money.

古文：财匮生薄，詟谆生慢，称述、党偏、妒纷生变。
现代文：财用贫乏就产生薄德的行为，对上诽议不满就产生傲慢法制的行为。
English: Poor use of money produces poor moral behavior, and dissatisfaction with the above slander produces arrogant and lawless behavior.

古文：故正名稽疑，刑杀亟近，则内定矣。
现代文：喜用权术。结党偏私和嫉妒纷争，则会产生变乱。所以，正定嫡庶名分稽查妻妾嫌疑、诛杀奸诈的近臣，宫内就可以安定了。
English: The use of power games, party favoritism, and jealousy and strife will create turmoil. Therefore, the palace can be stabilized by properly appointing the heir and the heir, inspecting suspected wives and concubines, and killing treacherous vassals.

古文：顺大臣以功，顺中民以行，顺小民以务、则国丰矣。
现代文：根据功绩安排大臣的次序，根据德行安排百官的次序，根据努力劳动安排小民的次序，国家就富裕了。
English: According to merit, arrange the order of ministers, according to virtue, arrange the order of officials, according to hard work, arrange the order of commoners, the country will be rich.

古文：审天时，物地生，以辑民力；禁淫务：劝农功，以职其无事，则小民治矣。
现代文：详细观察天时，察看土地性质，以合理使用民力，禁止奢侈品生产，奖励农业耕作，以使无业之民有事做，小民就得到治理了。
English: Observing the time of day in detail, inspecting the nature of the land, starting with the rational use of people's power, prohibiting the production of luxury goods, and rewarding agricultural cultivation, so that the unemployed people have something to do, the small people will be governed.

古文：上稽之以数，下十伍以征，近其罪伏，以固其意。乡树之师，以遂其学。官之以其能，及年而举，则士反行矣。
现代文：上面核定一定的数额，下到 什伍 的居民组织来征集人材，并缩短选升的期限，以坚定士人的意志；然后每乡设立教师，使士人得到学习；依据才能任官授职，到了年限就荐举使用，这样，士人都归于修德的途径了。
English: A certain amount of money was approved above, and the residents' organization went down to Shifu to recruit talent, and shorten the term of election and promotion, so as to strengthen the will of the scholars; then, teachers were set up in each township to enable the scholars to learn; the officials were appointed according to their talents, and when they reached the age limit, they were recommended to use, so that the scholars were all attributed to the way of cultivating virtue.

古文：称德度功，劝其所能，若稽之以众风，若任以社稷之任。
现代文：衡量德行和功绩，鼓励其所能，再考察众人的舆论，然后把国家的重任委托给他。
English: Weigh the virtues and merits, encourage what he can do, and then consider the public opinion of the people, and then entrust him with the important task of the country.

古文：若此，则土反于情矣。
现代文：这样，士人都归于诚实了。
English: In this way, all the nobles were converted to honesty.

