古文：宝志史溥耿询尉迟敬德魏征娄师德王显张宝藏授判冥人官王无碍宇文融路潜甘子布李迥秀狄仁杰崔元综苏味道卢崇道刘仁轨任之选
现代文：宝志史溥耿询尉迟敬德魏征娄师德王显张宝藏授判冥人官王无碍宇文融路潜甘子布李迥秀狄仁杰崔元综苏味道卢崇道刘仁轨任之选
English: Po Zhi Shi, Geng Qian, Lai Qian, De Wei, Zheng Zi, De Wang Xian, Zhang Baozhuang, Guan Yu, Yu Wen Rong, Lu Xun, Lu Zong Dao, Liu Renlu, Li Yuxiu, Di Renjie, Cui Yuan, Zu Zuo, Lu Zong Dao, Liu Renlu

古文：宝志
现代文：宝志
English: Baozhi

古文：梁简文之生，志公谓武帝： 此子与冤家同年生。 
现代文：梁的简文出生了。志公对武帝说： 这个孩子和冤家同年出生。 
English: Liang Jianwen was born. Zhi Gong said to Emperor Wu: This child was born the same year as his enemy.

古文：其年侯景生于雁门。
现代文：这一年侯景也在雁门出生了。
English: This year, Houjing was also born in the Wild Goose Gate.

古文：乱梁，诛萧氏略尽。
现代文：侯景后来反叛了梁。几乎把萧氏全家都杀光了。
English: Hou Jing later rebelled against Liang and almost killed the entire Xiao family.

古文：史溥
现代文：史溥
English: History Channel

古文：陈霸先未贵时，有直阁吏史溥，梦有人朱衣执玉简，自天而降。简上金字书曰： 陈氏五世，三十四年。 
现代文：陈霸先还未显贵时，有一个直阁吏叫史溥。他作梦梦见有人穿着红色的衣服，手拿玉制的书简，从天而降，书简上金字写着 陈氏五世，三十四年。 
English: When Chen Baxian was not yet prominent, there was a cabinet official named Shi Yan. He had a dream that someone dressed in red clothes, holding a jade booklet, fell from the sky, with gold lettering on the booklet saying Chen Clan V, 34 years old.

古文：及后主降隋，史溥尚在。
现代文：等到后来的皇帝投降了隋朝，史溥还活着。
English: When the succeeding emperor surrendered to the Sui Dynasty, Shi Yan was still alive.

古文：耿询
现代文：耿询
English: Geng Enquiry

古文：隋大业中，耿询造浑仪成，进之。
现代文：隋朝大业年间，耿询制造浑仪成功。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, Geng En succeeded in manufacturing the mud instrument.

古文：帝召太史令袁克。少府监何稠等检验。
现代文：进献给皇帝。皇帝召太史令袁克，少府监何稠等人检验浑仪。
English: It was dedicated to the emperor. The emperor summoned Taishi to order Yuan Ke, Shofu Jian, He Chouzo and others to inspect the instrument.

古文：三辰度数，昼夜运转，毫厘不差。
现代文：结果是日月星三辰度数，昼夜不停地运转，竟毫厘不差。
English: As a result, the sun, moon and stars have the same number of degrees, and they are in constant operation day and night.

古文：帝甚嘉之，赐物一百段，欲用为太史令。
现代文：皇帝特别赞赏他，赐给耿询财物一百段，并想任命他为太史令。
English: The emperor especially appreciated him, gave him a hundred pieces of property, and wanted to appoint him as the Grand Historian.

古文：询闻之，笑曰： 询故未得此官，六十四五，所不论耳。然得太史令即命终。 
现代文：耿询听说这件事后笑着说： 我没得到这个官的原因，是因为活到六十四五不论罢了，然而得到这个官，我的命就没了。 
English: After hearing about this, Geng Ying said with a smile, "The reason I didn't get this position is because I lived until I was sixty-four or sixty-five. However, if I did get this position, my life would be over."

古文：后宇文化及篡逆，询为太史令。询知化及不识，谋欲归唐，事觉被害，时年六十五。
现代文：后来宇文化及篡权谋反。耿询任太史令，耿询知道宇文化及不能用人，密谋归顺唐朝，事情被发觉后被杀害了。当时年龄是六十五岁。
English: Later, he plotted to overthrow Emperor Wu and usurp power. Geng En knew that Emperor Wu could not employ anyone and plotted to submit to the Tang Dynasty. He was 65 years old at the time and was killed after the plot was discovered.

古文：观询之艺能数术，盖亦张衡、郭璞之流。
现代文：看来耿询的技艺和才能，大概也是张衡、郭璞那一类的人。
English: It seems that Geng En's skills and talents are probably similar to those of Zhang Heng and Guo Jun.

古文：尉迟敬德
现代文：尉迟敬德
English: Fei Chi Jingde

古文：隋末，有书生居太原，苦于家贫，以教授为业。
现代文：隋朝末年，有个书生在太原居住。家里很穷苦，只好教书养家糊口。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, there was a scholar who lived in Taiyuan. His family was very poor, so he had to teach to support his family.

古文：所居抵官库，因穴而入，其内有钱数万贯，遂欲携挈。
现代文：他家离官府的仓库很近，有一次，他钻了进去，那库内有几万贯钱。他忍不住就拿些钱。
English: His home is very close to the government's warehouse. Once, he went inside and found tens of thousands of yuan in the vault. He couldn't resist taking some money.

古文：有金甲人持戈曰： 汝要钱，可索取尉迟公帖来，此是尉迟敬德钱也。 
现代文：这时出来一个戴金甲的人手里拿着枪对他说： 你要钱，可以到尉迟公那里要个公帖，这是尉迟敬德的钱。 
English: At this time, a man in a golden armor came out with a gun in his hand and said to him: "If you want money, you can go to the lord of the castle to ask for a public post. This is the money of the lord of the castle, Jingde.

古文：书生访求不见，至铁冶处，有煅铁尉迟敬德者，方袒露蓬首。
现代文：于是书生就到处访求尉迟敬德，可一直也没有找到。有一天到了打铁的铺子里，听说有个打铁的尉迟敬德，正在赤着上身蓬着头发打铁。
English: As a result, the scholar went everywhere to look for Yi Xi Jingde, but he never found him. One day, when he arrived at an iron shop, he heard that there was an iron worker named Yi Xi Jingde, who was working with a bare upper body and shaggy hair.

古文：锻炼之次，书生伺其歇，乃前拜之。尉迟公问曰： 何故？ 
现代文：书生等到他休息了，就上前拜见。尉迟就问他： 为什么这样？ 
English: The student waited until he had rested and then came forward to see him. The lieutenant asked him, "Why is that?"

古文：曰： 某贫困，足下富贵，欲乞钱五百贯。
现代文：书生说： 我家很贫困，您又很富贵，想要五百贯钱，不知能不能给？ 
English: The student said, "My family is very poor, but you are very rich. You want five hundred kroner. I don't know if I can give it to you.

古文：得否？ 尉迟公怒曰： 某打铁人，安有富贵？
现代文：尉迟很生气说： 我是个打铁的，怎么能富贵？
English: The lieutenant was very angry and said, "I'm an iron worker, how can I be rich?"

古文：乃侮我耳！ 
现代文：你是在侮辱我吧！ 
English: You're insulting me!

古文：生曰： 若能哀悯，但赐一帖，他日自知。 
现代文：书生说： 如果你可怜我，只要给我写个字条就可以，以后你就会知道怎么回事了。 
English: The student said, "If you feel sorry for me, just write me a note, and then you'll know what's going on."

古文：尉迟不得已，令书生执笔，曰： 钱付某乙五百贯。 
现代文：尉迟没办法，只好让书生自己写字条。字条上写： 今付某某五百贯钱。 
English: There was nothing I could do, so I had to ask the student to write a note on his own. The note said: "Now pay so-and-so 500 yuan."

古文：具月日，署名于后。
现代文：又写上月日时间，在最后署上尉迟的名。
English: He also wrote the date and time, and at the end he wrote the captain's name.

古文：书生拜谢持去。
现代文：书生得到字条拜谢后拿着走走了。
English: The student got a thank you note and walked away with it.

古文：尉迟公与其徒，拊掌大笑，以为妄也。
现代文：尉迟和他的徒弟拍着手大笑，认为这书生太荒谬了。
English: The lieutenant and his apprentice clapped their hands and laughed, thinking the student was ridiculous.

古文：书生既得帖，却至库中，复见金甲人呈之。笑曰： 是也。 
现代文：书生得到字条后回到库里，又见到金甲人，把字条呈给他，金甲人看后笑着说： 对 。
English: After the student got the note, he went back to the library, saw the man in gold armor again, and presented the note to him. After reading it, the man in gold armor smiled and said, "That's right."

古文：令系于梁上高处。遣书生取钱，止于五百贯。
现代文：让书生把字条系在房梁上边，让书生拿钱，只限五百贯。
English: Let the student tie the note to the top of the beam, let the student take the money, limited to five hundred yuan.

古文：后敬德佐神尧，立殊功，请归乡里。敕赐钱，并一库物未曾开者，遂得此钱。
现代文：后来敬德辅佐英明的君主，立下特大的功劳，当他解甲归田时，皇帝恩赐给他钱，另加一库财物还未启封。于是就得到了那一库钱，等开库看钱，对帐查点，发现少了五百贯。
English: Later, Jing Defu, a wise monarch, made a great contribution. When he was disarming and returning to the field, the emperor gave him money, plus another treasure that had not yet been opened. So he got the treasure, opened the treasure, looked at the money, checked the account, and found that he had lost five hundred yuan.

古文：阅簿，欠五百贯，将罪主者，忽于梁上得帖子。敬德视之，乃打铁时书帖。
现代文：正要处罚守库人，忽然发现在房梁上的字条，敬德一看，原来是打铁时写的字条。
English: He was about to punish the custodian of the library, when he suddenly found a note on the beam of the room. Looking at it, it turned out to be a note written while striking iron.

古文：累日惊叹，使人密求书生，得之，具陈所见。公厚遣之，仍以库物分惠故旧。
现代文：他一连几天惊叹不已，派人暗暗寻找书生，找到后，书生把所见到的事都告诉了敬德，敬德又重重赏了他，又把库中的财物分给了以前的朋友们。
English: He was astonished for several days. He sent someone to secretly search for Shousei. After finding him, Shousei told Keide everything he had seen. Keide rewarded him again and again, and distributed the treasures in the vault to his former friends.

古文：魏征
现代文：魏征
English: Wei Zheng

古文：唐魏征为仆射，有二典事之。
现代文：唐朝魏征任仆射时，有两个主管为他办事。
English: When the Tang Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty conscripted minions, there were two supervisors to do things for him.

古文：长参时，征方寝。
现代文：长参时，魏征刚刚躺下，两个人就在窗前议论。
English: At the time of the long ginseng, Wei Zheng had just laid down, and the two men were talking in front of the window.

古文：二人窗下平章，一人曰： 我等官职，总由此老翁。 
现代文：一个人说： 我们的官职，都是这个老翁决定的。 
English: One person said: "This old man decided everything about our posts.

古文：一人曰，总由天上。 
现代文：另一个说： 都是由甜定的。 
English: Another said: "It's all fixed."

古文：征闻之，遂作一书，遣由此老翁者，送至侍郎处。
现代文：魏征听到后，就写了一封信，派那个说 老翁定的 的人送了侍郎府。
English: After Wei Zheng heard this, he wrote a letter and sent the person who said "Old Wengding" to deliver it to the chamberlain's residence.

古文：云： 与此人一员好官。 
现代文：信上说： 请给此人一个好官职。 
English: The letter said: Please give this man a good post.

古文：其人不知，出门心痛。
现代文：但这个人不知信的内容。
English: But this person doesn't know what to believe.

古文：凭由天人者送书。明日引注，由老人者被放，由天者得留。
现代文：不巧，他出了门就心口痛，不能去，只好靠那个说 由天定 的人送信。第二天下来批注 由老翁 那人被留放； 由天上 那人被留下。
English: Unfortunately, he was heartbroken when he went out the door and couldn't go, so he had to rely on the person who said it was decided by heaven to send the letter.

古文：征怪之，问焉，具以实对，乃叹曰： 官职禄料由天者，盖不虚也。 
现代文：魏征很奇怪，问到他们，他们就把实情全告诉了魏征。魏征于是长叹说 官职俸禄认为是由天定的，大概不假啊！ 
English: Wei Zheng was very strange. When asked, they told Wei Zheng the whole truth. Wei Zheng then sighed and said that the official salary was thought to be determined by heaven, probably not false!

古文：娄师德
现代文：娄师德
English: Zou Shide

古文：唐娄师德为扬州江都尉，冯元常亦为尉，共见张冏藏。冏藏曰： 二君俱贵，冯位不如娄。
现代文：唐朝娄师德任扬州江都县尉。冯元常也是县尉。有一次两个人一同拜见张冏藏，冏藏说： 你们两个人以后都有大富贵，但冯不如娄。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Zou Shide was a Yangzhou Jiangdu County Lieutenant, and Feng Yuanchang was also a county lieutenant. Once, the two of them went to visit Zhang Yuzang together, and Zhang Yuzang said, "You two will be very rich in the future, but Feng is not as good as Zou."

古文：冯唯取钱多，官益进。娄若取一钱，官即败。 
现代文：冯只要收取钱财多，官职更高；娄如果收一文钱，官职就会失掉。 
English: As long as Feng collects more money and wealth, his official position will be higher; if Zou collects a penny, his official position will be lost.

古文：后冯为浚仪尉，多肆惨虐。
现代文：后来，冯任凌仪县尉。
English: Later, Feng Ren Lingyi County Lieutenant.

古文：巡察以为强，奏授云阳尉。又缘取钱事雪，以为清强监察。
现代文：行为放肆暴虐残忍，巡察认为他办事能力强，上奏皇上任命为云阳尉，又因为他搜刮钱财的事得到平反，任命他做了清强监察。
English: His behavior was arrogant, tyrannical, and cruel. The inspectors thought that he had a strong ability to do things. He was appointed as Yunyang lieutenant by the emperor, and because he was rehabilitated for money-grabbing, he was appointed as a Qingqiang inspector.

古文：娄竟不敢取一钱，位至台辅，家极贫匮。
现代文：娄最终也不敢收取一文钱，官位一直做到台辅，但家里特别穷困。
English: In the end, Zou did not dare to collect a penny. He had always been a Taiwanese auxiliary official, but his family was extremely poor.

古文：冯位至尚书左丞，后得罪，赐自尽。
现代文：冯的官职一直做到尚书左丞，后来犯了罪，被处以自尽死。
English: Feng's official position has always been that of Shang Shuzhuanzhong. Later, he committed a crime and was sentenced to suicide.

古文：娄至纳言卒。
现代文：娄的官职到纳言才死。
English: It was not until after Naoyan's death that his official position ended.

古文：王显
现代文：王显
English: Wang Xian

古文：唐王显，与文武皇帝有严子陵之旧，每掣褌为戏，将帽为欢。
现代文：唐朝的王显，与文武皇帝有严子陵与汉光武帝那样的童年伙伴的交情。
English: Wang Xian of the Tang Dynasty had a childhood friendship with Emperor Wenwu like Yan Ziling had with Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty.

古文：帝微时，常戏曰： 王显抵老不作茧。 
现代文：经常扯裤子玩，拿帽子取乐。皇帝还没有显贵时，常常开玩笑说： 王显到老也不会作茧。 
English: He often tugged at his trousers and played with his hat for fun. When the emperor was not yet a dignitary, he often joked: Wang Xian is too old to play pranks.

古文：及帝登极而显谒，因奏曰： 臣今日得作茧耶？ 
现代文：等到皇帝登基坐殿时王显千万拜见，趁机上奏说： 我现在可以作茧吗？ 
English: When the emperor ascended to the throne and was seated in the palace, Wang Xian visited him a million times, and took the opportunity to say: Can I do it now?

古文：帝笑曰： 未可知也。 
现代文：帝笑着说： 不知道可不可以呀。 
English: The emperor smiled and said, "I don't know if I can do it."

古文：召其三子，皆授五品，显独不及。
现代文：于是召王显的三个儿子，都授予五品官职。
English: As a result, Wang Xian's three sons were all appointed to five-rank official posts.

古文：谓曰： 卿无贵相，朕非为卿惜也！ 
现代文：王显的官职赶不上他们，请皇帝也授给他官职。皇帝说： 并非舍不得给你更高官位，是因为你没有贵相。 
English: Wang Xian's official position could not keep up with them, so he asked the emperor to give him an official position as well. The emperor said, "I'm not reluctant to give you a higher official position, because you don't have a high rank."

古文：曰： 朝贵而夕死足矣。 
现代文：王显说： 哪怕早晨当官，晚上就死也满足了。 
English: Wang Xian said, "Even if I become an official in the morning, I will be satisfied with death in the evening."

古文：时仆射房玄龄曰： 陛下既有龙潜之旧，何不试与之。 
现代文：当时仆射房玄龄说： 陛下您既然同他有老交情，为什么不试试给他官做？ 
English: At that time, the servant of the shooting room, Xu Lang, said: Your Majesty, since you have an old friendship with him, why not try to make him an official?

古文：帝与之三品，取紫袍金带赐之，其夜卒。
现代文：于是皇帝授予王显三品官，又叫人拿来紫袍金带赏给他。当天夜里王显就死了。
English: As a result, the emperor awarded Wang Xian three court ranks, and ordered someone to bring him a purple robe and gold belt. That night, Wang Xian died.

古文：张宝藏
现代文：张宝藏
English: Zhang Baozhuang

古文：贞观中，张宝藏为金吾长史。常因下直，归栎阳。
现代文：贞观年间，张宝藏任金吾长史，经常因为在朝值班结束，归回栎阳。
English: During the Zhenguan years, Zhang Baozhong was appointed as Kingu Changshi, and often returned to Fenyang because his duty ended in the morning.

古文：路逢少年畋猎，割鲜野食，倚树叹曰： 张宝藏身年七十，未尝得一食酒肉如此者，可悲哉！ 
现代文：有一次在路上碰到一个少年打猎，割下新鲜肉野餐。张宝藏靠着树长叹说： 我张宝藏年已七十，未曾吃过一次像这样的酒肉，太可悲了。 
English: Once, on the road, he met a young boy hunting and cutting fresh meat for a picnic. Zhang Baozhu leaned against a tree trunk and sighed: "I've been Zhang Baozhu for seventy years, and I've never eaten meat and wine like this before. It's so sad."

古文：旁有一僧指曰： 六十日内，官登三品，何足叹也！ 
现代文：旁边有一个和尚指着他说： 六十日之内，官职会升到三品，有什么可叹息的呢？ 
English: Beside him, a monk pointed at him and said, "Within sixty days, the official position will be raised to the third grade. What is there to sigh about?"

古文：言讫不见。
现代文：说完就不见了。
English: After saying this, he disappeared.

古文：宝藏异之，即时还京。
现代文：宝藏很奇怪，立刻回到京城。
English: The treasure is very strange and immediately returns to the capital.

古文：时太宗苦于气痢，众医不效，即下诏问殿庭左右，有能治此疾者，当重赏之。
现代文：这时太宗得了痢疾很痛苦，很多大夫治了都不见效。就下诏书访问殿庭中的左右大臣，有能治这种病的，一定重重赏他。
English: At this time, Emperor Taizong was suffering from dysentery, and many doctors were ineffective in curing him. He issued an edict to visit the left and right ministers in the palace, and if anyone could cure this disease, he would be highly rewarded.

古文：时宝藏曾困其疾，即具疏以乳煎荜拨方。上服之立瘥。
现代文：当时宝藏也曾被这种病困扰过，就写了一份奏疏献出用乳汁煎荜拨的药方，皇上服了药以后立刻就好了。
English: At that time, the treasurer had also been plagued by this disease, so he wrote a letter and presented a prescription for milk decoction. The emperor took the medicine and immediately felt better.

古文：宣下宰臣，与五品官。
现代文：下诏给宰相，授予张宝藏五品官。
English: issued the following edict to the prime minister, awarding Zhang Baozhuo the rank of five-star officer.

古文：魏征难之，逾月不进拟。
现代文：魏征有意为难，过了一个多月也不拟文授官。
English: Wei Zheng deliberately put himself in a difficult situation, and after more than a month, he did not intend to become a professor.

古文：上疾复发，问左右曰：吾前饮乳煎荜拨有效，复命进之，一啜又平。
现代文：皇上的病又发作了，询问左右侍臣： 我以前吃了乳煎荜拨的药很有效。 于是又命令进献此药，一吃又好了。
English: When the emperor's illness flared up again, he asked his attendants: "I used to eat a very effective medicine made from boiled yakitori, so I ordered this medicine to be served to me. I felt better as soon as I ate it.

古文：因思曰： 尝令与进方人五品官，不见除授，何也？ 
现代文：因此皇上想想说： 我曾下令授予进方人五品官，到现在不见提升授官，什么原因呢？ 
English: Therefore, Emperor, think about it and say: I once ordered to award five ranks of officials to the people of Jinfang, but so far there has been no promotion of officials, what is the reason?

古文：征惧曰： 奉诏之际，未知文武二吏。 
现代文：魏征害了怕，说： 奉诏那时候，不知是文还是武的。 
English: Wei Zhaoxi was afraid and said, "At that time, I didn't know whether to be a scholar or a warrior.

古文：上怒曰： 治得宰相，不妨已授三品官。我天子也，岂不及汝耶？ 
现代文：皇上生气说： 治好了宰相，不妨授给他三品官，我是天子，难道不如你吗？ 
English: The emperor said angrily, "Now that the prime minister has been cured, we may as well give him three court ranks. I am the son of heaven, am I not as good as you?"

古文：乃厉声曰： 与三品文官，授鸿胪卿。 
现代文：就严厉地说： 给他三品文官。再授鸿胪卿官号。 
English: He said sternly, "Give him the title of Third Rank Civil Officer, and then give him the official title of Hongyuqing."

古文：时正六十日矣。
现代文：当时正好六十天啊。
English: It was exactly sixty days.

古文：授判冥人官
现代文：授判冥人官
English: Sentencing of underworld official

古文：唐太宗极康豫。太史令李淳风见上，流泪无言。
现代文：唐太宗特别健康快乐，太史令李淳风拜见皇上，流着眼泪不说话。
English: Tang Taizong was particularly healthy and happy. Taishi ordered Li Junfeng to visit the emperor, and he shed tears and did not speak.

古文：上问之，对曰： 陛下夕当晏驾。 
现代文：皇上问怎么回事，淳风回答说： 陛下你晚上要晏驾。 
English: The emperor asked what was the matter, and Junfeng replied, "Your Majesty, you must drive at night.

古文：太宗曰： 人生有命，亦何忧也！ 
现代文：太宗说： 人生有命，有什么忧愁的？ 
English: Emperor Taizong said: Life is full of vitality, what is there to be sad about?

古文：留淳风宿。
现代文：留淳风在宫里住下。
English: Remaining Junpu lived in the palace.

古文：太宗至夜半，上奄然入定，见一人云： 陛下暂合来，还即去也。 帝问： 君是何人？ 
现代文：到半夜的时候，皇上平和地没有杂念地躺着。见一个人来说： 陛下暂时该来，一会儿就回去。 太宗问他： 你是什么人？ 
English: Toward midnight, the emperor was lying peacefully, without a thought in his mind, when he saw a man who said, "Your Majesty should come for the time being, but will be back soon." Taizong asked him, "Who are you?"

古文：对曰： 臣是生人判冥事。 
现代文：那人回答说： 臣下是活着的人办阴间的事。 
English: And the man answered and said, Thy servants are the living which do the works of the dead.

古文：太宗入见，判官问六月四日事，即令还，向见者又迎送引导出。
现代文：太宗就随那人进入冥府，判官问他六月四日的事，然后就让大家回去了。以前见到的那个人又迎送领着太宗出了冥府。
English: Taizong followed the man into the Underworld. The judge asked him about the events of June 4th, and then let everyone go. The man he had seen earlier also greeted and led Taizong out of the Underworld.

古文：淳风即观玄象，不许哭泣，须臾乃寤。
现代文：淳风立刻看天象，不许哭泣，不一会醒了。
English: Junfeng immediately looked at the celestial elephant, not allowed to cry, and soon woke up.

古文：至曙，求昨所见者，令所司与一官，遂注蜀道一丞。
现代文：到天亮时，寻找昨天晚上见到的那个人，令主管的官员给他一个官职，于是才知道他是蜀道上一个县丞。
English: At dawn, he looked for the man he had seen the night before and asked the officer in charge to give him an official post, only to find out that he was a county magistrate on Shu Road.

古文：上怪问之。
现代文：太宗很奇怪，问这件事。
English: It was very strange for Taizong to ask about this.

古文：选司奏： 奉进止与此官。 
现代文：选司回奏说： 奉圣旨授给他这个官。 
English: The Returning Officer said, "It is my sacred duty to confer this office on him."

古文：上亦不记，旁人悉闻，方知官皆由天也。
现代文：皇上已经不记得了，别人却都听说过。这才知道官职都是由天定的。
English: The Emperor no longer remembers it, but others have heard of it. This is how we know that official positions are determined by the heavens.

古文：王无碍
现代文：王无碍
English: Wang Mudao

古文：唐王无碍，好博戏，善鹰鹞。
现代文：唐朝的王无碍，好赌博的游戏，喜欢养鹰鹞。
English: The king of the Tang Dynasty was a good gambler and liked to keep eagle owls.

古文：文武圣皇帝微时，与无碍捕戏争彩，有李阳之宿憾焉。
现代文：文武圣皇帝没登位时，与无碍赌博争输赢，有李阳之宿的遗憾。
English: When Emperor Wenwusheng did not ascend to the throne, he competed with gambling to win or lose, and regretted the loss of Li Yang's lodging.

古文：帝登极，碍藏匿不出。
现代文：文武圣皇帝登位时，王无碍藏了起来。
English: When Emperor Wenwusheng ascended the throne, Wang Muxing went into hiding.

古文：帝令给使，将一鹞子于市卖之，索钱二十千。
现代文：皇帝就命令给使，把一个小鹞拿到集市上去卖，要价二十千。
English: The emperor then ordered the messenger to take a small donkey to the market and sell it for twenty thousand.

古文：碍不之知也，酬钱十八贯。
现代文：王无碍当然不知道这件事，给价十八贯。
English: Of course, Wang Mudao didn't know about this and gave the price as 18 yuan.

古文：给使以闻，帝曰： 必王无碍也。 
现代文：信使把这件喜报告给皇帝，皇帝说： 一定是王无碍。 
English: The messenger reported this good news to the emperor, who said, "The king must be all right."

古文：遂召至，惶惧请罪。
现代文：于是就召到皇宫，无碍惶恐请罪。
English: Therefore, he was summoned to the Imperial Palace, where he pleaded guilty without hesitation.

古文：帝笑而赏之，令于春明门，待诸州庸车三日，并与之。
现代文：皇帝笑了，并赏赐他，让他到春明门等待各州来的车三天，并都送给他。
English: The emperor smiled and rewarded him by letting him wait at the Spring Gate for three days for cars from all the states to come and give them to him.

古文：碍坐三日，属灞桥破，唯得麻三车，更无所有。
现代文：王无碍坐了三天，因为灞桥坏了，只得到三车麻，再也没得到别的东西。
English: The king sat helplessly for three days, because the drawbridge was broken. He only got three chariots and bridle, and nothing else.

古文：帝知其命薄，更不复赏。
现代文：皇帝知道他命薄，再也没有赏给他什么。
English: The emperor knew that his life was in danger and gave him nothing more.

古文：频请五品，帝曰： 非不与卿，惜卿不胜也。 
现代文：但无碍多次请求要做五品官。皇帝说： 我并不是不想给你，可惜的是你受用不了啊！ 
English: The emperor said, "It's not that I don't want to give it to you, it's just that you can't stand it!"

古文：固请，乃许之。
现代文：无碍坚决请求，皇帝就同意了。
English: Not averse to a firm request, the emperor agreed.

古文：其夜遂卒。
现代文：那天夜里王无碍就死了。
English: That night, Wang passed away peacefully.

古文：宇文融
现代文：宇文融
English: Uwen Rong

古文：刘禹锡曰： 官不前定，何名真宰乎？ 
现代文：刘禹锡曾说： 官职不是生前定的，为什么叫真宰相呢？ 
English: Liu Yuxi once said: The official position is not predetermined in life, why is it called the real prime minister?

古文：永徽中，卢齐卿卒亡。及苏，说见其舅李某，为冥司判官，有吏押案曰： 宇文融合为宰相。 
现代文：永徽年间，卢齐卿身死，到苏醒后，说见到他的舅父李某，做了冥府的判官，有一个府吏查阅案卷说： 宇文融应该当宰相。 
English: During the Yonghui era, Lu Qiqing died. After he woke up, he said that he saw his uncle Li, who was the judge of the Netherworld. An official of the Netherworld examined the case file and said, "Uwen Rong should be the prime minister."

古文：舅曰： 宇文融岂堪为宰相？ 
现代文：舅父说： 宇文融怎么能胜任宰相？ 
English: My uncle said, "How can Uwen Rong be a competent prime minister?

古文：吏曰： 天曹符已下，数日多少。 即由判官。 
现代文：府吏说： 天府的命令已经下来了。当多少天由判官决定。 
English: The magistrate said: "The order from heaven has come down. The judge will decide how many days.

古文：舅乃判一百日。
现代文：舅父就判了一百天。
English: My uncle was sentenced to 100 days.

古文：既而拜宰相，果百日而罢。
现代文：果然宇文融就拜为宰相，到了一百天又被罢免了。
English: Sure enough, Uwen Rong became the prime minister, but he was ousted after 100 days.

古文：路潜
现代文：路潜
English: Road diving

古文：潜欲不赴，其妻曰： 君若合死，新开之难，早已无身。今得县令，岂非命乎？ 
现代文：怀州与他睦州遂安县令的官职。前几任县宰都死在任内，路潜就想不去上任。他的妻子说： 您若该死，新开那次遭难，早就死了，现在得到县令的职务，难道不是命吗？ 
English: The previous county magistrates died while in office, and Lu Xun did not want to take up the post. His wife said: "If you should die, you would have died a long time ago, and now you have the post of county magistrate, isn't it your destiny?"

古文：遂至州，去县水路数百里上。
现代文：路潜认为有理，就到了睦州，由睦州到遂安县水路有数百里以上。
English: The road diver thought it was reasonable and went to Mutsu. There are more than hundreds of miles of waterways from Mutsu to Sui'an County.

古文：寝堂西间，有三殡坑，皆埋旧县令。
现代文：遂安县府衙寝堂西边，有三个殡葬的坑，都埋着以前的县令。
English: On the west side of the Su'an County Prefectural Government Dormitory, there are three burial pits, all of which are filled with former county officials.

古文：潜命坊夫填之。
现代文：路潜令坊夫填上了。
English: The road diver told the young man to fill it in.

古文：有枭鸣于屏风，又鸣于承尘上。
现代文：又发现在屏风上有枭鸟叫，一会又在天花板上叫。
English: He also found an ostrich crowing on the screen, and a moment later it was crowing on the ceiling.

古文：并不以为事。
现代文：路潜并不认为是什么事。
English: Lu Xun didn't think it was a big deal.

古文：每与妻对食，有鼠数十头，或黄或白，或青或黑。以杖驱之，则抱杖而叫。自余妖怪，不可具言。
现代文：每次与妻子对坐着吃饭，就有几十头老鼠出来，有黄色有白色的，有青色有黑色的，用木杖驱赶，那些鼠就抱着木杖叫唤，其余的妖怪事，不能一一都说出来。
English: Every time I sit down to dinner with my wife, dozens of mice come out, some yellow, some white, some blue, some black, and I chase them away with a wooden stick. Those mice hug the wooden stick and call out, but I can't tell you about all the other monsters.

古文：至一考满，一无损失。
现代文：到一考任满，没有一点损失。
English: By the end of the exam, there is no loss.

古文：选授卫令，除卫州司马，入为郎中，位至中书舍人。
现代文：后来选授予卫令，任命为卫州司马，又任为郎中，直到做中书舍人。
English: Later, he was selected to be awarded the title of Wei Rong, appointed as the Sima of the State of Wei, and was also appointed as a disciple, until he became a scholar.

古文：甘子布
现代文：甘子布
English: Amago cloth

古文：周甘子布，博学有才，年十七，为左卫长史，不入五品。
现代文：周代甘子布，博学广识才智出众，十七岁任左卫长史，但官不入五品。
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, Gan Zibu, who was well-educated, broad-minded, and talented, was appointed to the position of Left Division of the Imperial Guard at the age of seventeen. However, he was not promoted to the Fifth Rank.

古文：登封年病，以驴舆强至岳下，天恩加两阶，合入五品，竟不能起。乡里亲戚来贺，衣冠不得，遂以绯袍覆其上，贴然而终。
现代文：登封那年得了病，用驴辇勉强拉到秦岳下，皇天恩赐加两阶，该入五品，但身体虚弱起不来，乡里邻居好友亲戚来祝贺，但又不能穿戴衣冠，只得把红袍覆盖在他身上，安定地死去了。
English: In the year of his accession to the throne, he fell ill and had to be dragged with a donkey's bridle to the foot of Mount Qin. By the grace of the emperor, he was promoted two steps and given the rank of fifth grade, but he was too weak to get up. His neighbors, friends, and relatives in the village came to congratulate him, but he couldn't wear his crown, so they had to cover him with a red robe, and he died peacefully.

古文：李迥秀
现代文：李迥秀
English: Li Yuxiu

古文：李迥秀为兵部尚书。
现代文：李迥秀任兵部尚书。
English: Li Yuxiu was appointed to the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：有疾，朝士问之。秀曰： 仆自知当得侍中，有命固不忧也。 
现代文：有病，朝中官员来慰问他，他说： 我自己知道我应该当侍中，有命在就不用忧虑。 
English: When he was ill, officials from the central government came to comfort him. He said, "I myself know that I should be a waiter, so I don't have to worry about my life.

古文：朝士退，未出巷而薨。
现代文：朝中官员退出，还没走出街巷，李迥秀就死了。
English: Officials from North Korea and China withdrew, and before he could leave the streets, Li Yuxiu was dead.

古文：有司奏，有诏赠侍中。
现代文：有司上奏给皇上，皇上有诏赠予李迥秀侍中。
English: There was a sermon delivered to the emperor, and the imperial edict was presented to Li Yuxiu, a chamberlain.

古文：狄仁杰
现代文：狄仁杰
English: Di Renjie

古文：唐狄仁杰之贬也，路经汴州，欲留半日医疾。
现代文：唐朝狄仁杰被贬官，路经汴州，想留住半天治病。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Di Renjie was demoted and passed through Zhangzhou. He wanted to stay there for half a day to treat his illness.

古文：开封县令霍献可追逐当日出界，狄公甚衔之。
现代文：开封县令霍献可追赶他当日必须离开县城出县界。狄公含恨很深。
English: Kaifeng County ordered Huo Xian to chase him, and he had to leave the county on the same day. Di Gong harbored a deep hatred for him.

古文：及回为宰相，霍已为郎中，狄欲中伤之而未果。
现代文：等到狄仁杰又回朝当了宰相。霍献可已经作了郎中。狄仁杰想中伤霍献可但没成功。
English: By the time Di Renjie returned to the imperial court, he had become the prime minister. Hoken had already become his henchman. Di Renjie tried to slander Hoken, but failed.

古文：则天命择御史中丞，凡两度承旨，皆忘。
现代文：则天皇帝命择选御史中丞，共两次承旨，都忘记了。
English: However, Emperor Tenmu decreed the appointment of Shichizhongzheng, a total of two orders, both of which were forgotten.

古文：后则天又问之，狄公卒对，无以应命，唯记得霍献可，遂奏之。恩制除御史中丞。
现代文：后来则天又问他这件事。狄仁杰仓猝应对，回答不出来，心中只记得霍献可，就上奏说霍献可这个人可以，则天下旨提升霍献可为御史中丞。
English: Later, Zetian asked him about it again. Di Ren Jiecang suddenly responded that he couldn't answer, he only remembered Huo Xianke in his heart, so he said that Huo Xianke could be this person, and then the world's will promoted Huo Xianke to be the vice-president of history.

古文：后狄公谓霍曰： 某初恨公，今却荐公，乃知命也，岂由于人耶？ 
现代文：后来狄仁杰对霍献可说： 我当初恨你，现在却推荐你，这才知道是天命啊，怎么能由人呢？ 
English: Later, Di Renjie said to Huo Xianlu: I hated you at first, but now I recommend you. I know this is fate. How can it be done by man?

古文：崔元综
现代文：崔元综
English: Choi Won-soo

古文：崔元综，则天朝为宰相。
现代文：崔元综，唐则天朝时任宰相。
English: Choe Won-sumi was the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：令史奚三儿云： 公从今六十日内，当流南海。六年三度合死，然竟不死。
现代文：令史奚三儿说： 您从现在六十天以内，要被流放到南海；六年之中有三次该死，后最终不会死。
English: Ling Shizan'er said, "You will be exiled to the South China Sea within sixty days from now; three times in six years you should have died, but in the end you will not die.

古文：从此后发初，更作官职。后还于旧处坐，寿将百岁。终以馁死。 
现代文：从这以后，你将更换官职，最后还会官复原职，寿数是一百岁，最后被饿死。 
English: From now on, you will change your official position, and finally be reinstated as an official, live to be a hundred years old, and finally starve to death.

古文：经六十日，果得罪，流于南海之南。经数年，血痢百日，至困而不死。
现代文：经过六十天，若然获了罪，被流放到南海以南，几年后得了一赤痢病长达百日，到了最重的时候非常危险，然而并没有死。
English: After sixty days, if he was found guilty, he was exiled to the south of the South China Sea. A few years later, he contracted dysentery for a hundred days. At its worst, it was very dangerous, but he did not die.

古文：会赦得归，乘船渡海，遇浪漂没，同船人并死。崔公独抱一板，随波上下。漂泊至一海渚，入丛苇中。
现代文：遇大赦才得到回京的机会。乘船过海时遇到大风浪船被淹没，一同乘船的人都死了，只有崔元综一个人抱住一块木板，随波漂荡，忽上忽下，漂泊到一个小岛上，被风浪推到芦苇丛里。
English: It was only after the amnesty that he got the chance to return to Beijing. While crossing the sea, he encountered a big storm and the boat was flooded. Everyone on the boat died, except for Cui Yuanhe, who hugged a piece of wood, drifted with the waves, suddenly up and down, drifted to a small island, and was pushed into the reeds by the wind and waves.

古文：板上一长钉，刺脊上，深入数寸，其钉板压之。在泥水中，昼夜忍痛呻吟而已。
现代文：但他抱的那木板上有一个大钉子，正好刺到脊背上，扎进身体有几寸深，那带钉的板子在上面压着他，他哪里还有力气，只好在泥水中昼夜忍痛呻吟罢了。
English: But on the plank he was holding there was a large nail, which went right through his spine and into his body a few inches deep. The board with nails pressed down on him, and he had no strength left, so he had to groan in pain day and night in the muddy water.

古文：忽遇一船人来此渚中，闻其呻吟，哀而救之，扶引上船，与踏血拔钉，良久乃活。
现代文：这时忽然遇到一船人来到这个岛上，听到呻吟声，就可怜他，把他救起来扶着上了船，并给他止血拔钉，很长时间才苏醒过来。
English: At this time, he suddenly met a boatman who came to the island. Hearing his groans, he took pity on him, rescued him, helped him onto the boat, and gave him a tourniquet to stop the bleeding. It took him a long time to wake up.

古文：问其姓名，云是旧宰相。众人哀之，济以粮食，随路求乞。
现代文：盘问他的姓名，他说是原来的宰相，众人更可怜他并给他粮食，他只好一路讨饭吃。
English: When he was interrogated about his name, he said that he was the former prime minister. People pitied him even more and gave him food, so he had to beg for food all the way.

古文：于船上卧，见一官人著碧，是其宰相时令史。
现代文：有一天他正在船上躺着，看见一个穿青绿色衣服的官员，后来认出是他当宰相时的令史。
English: One day he was lying in his boat when he saw an official dressed in turquoise, whom he later recognised as his prime minister.

古文：唤与语，又济以粮食，得至京师。
现代文：他便招呼他和他说话，那官员又周济给他一些粮食，这样他才回到了京城。
English: He invited him to speak with him, and the official gave him some food so that he could return to the capital.

古文：六年之后，收录乃还。
现代文：六年以后。收录司回来。
English: Six years later, the director returns.

古文：选曾以旧相奏上，则天令超资与官。
现代文：选曹司把原宰相情况上奏，则天下令破格给他官职。
English: If Zeng Cao played up the situation of the former prime minister, the world would order him to give him an official post.

古文：及过谢之日，引于殿庭对。崔公著碧，则天见而识之。问得何官，县以状对。
现代文：等到进宫拜谢那天，他被带到殿堂上问话，因崔元综穿着青绿色的衣服，则天见到后认出来曾见过，问元综得到什么官职，他就把实情说了。
English: On the day of entering the palace to offer thanks, he was taken to the hall of fame for questioning. Since Cui Yuanmei was wearing a turquoise dress, the heavens recognized that they had met before, and asked Yuanmei what official position he had received, and he told the truth.

古文：乃诏吏部，令与赤尉。
现代文：则天下诏给吏部，让他们任命元综为赤尉。
English: Then, the whole country issued an edict to the cadre department, asking them to appoint Yuan Zuo as a second lieutenant.

古文：及引谢之日，又赦与御史。
现代文：又等到进宫拜谢那天，则天又特敕给他御史职务。
English: And on the day he entered the palace to offer his thanks, the heavens gave him the post of imperial historian.

古文：自御史得郎官，思迁至中书侍郎。
现代文：以后，他从御史做到郎官，多次升迁直到当了中书侍郎。
English: Later, he rose through the ranks from goshi to ronan, and was promoted several times until he became chusho-ziroro.

古文：九十九矣，子侄并死，唯独一身，病卧在床。顾令奴婢取饭粥，奴婢欺之，皆笑而不动。
现代文：这年已经九十九岁了，他的子侄都死了，只有他独身一人，有病卧在床上，唤奴婢拿饭粥，奴婢们欺他年老病重，都笑而不动。
English: He was ninety-nine years old, his nephews and nieces had all died, and he was the only one left, lying sick in bed, calling his slaves and maidservants to bring him rice and porridge. The slaves and maidservants teased him for being old and seriously ill. They all laughed and did not move.

古文：崔公既不能责罚，奴婢皆不受处分，乃感愤不食，数日而死矣。
现代文：崔元综已没有能力责罚他们了，他们也都受不到处分。元综感叹气愤之下不吃东西，几天后死了。
English: Cui Yuan Zomei was no longer able to punish them, and they could not be punished. Yuan Zomei was so angry that he refused to eat, and died a few days later.

古文：苏味道
现代文：苏味道
English: Su taste

古文：苏味道三度合得三品，并辞之。
现代文：苏味道有三次应该得到三品官职，他都拒绝了。
English: Three times Su Jie was supposed to get the third grade official post, but he refused all of them.

古文：则天问其故，对曰： 臣自知不合得三品。 
现代文：则天问他是什么原因。他回答： 我自己知道不应当得到三品官职。 
English: Then Heaven asked him what was the reason. He answered: I know for myself that I should not be given the third-class official post.

古文：则天遣行步，视之曰： 卿实道今得三品。 
现代文：则天让他走几步看看，然后说： 你实在从今天应得三品。 
English: Then the heavens let him take a few steps to see, and then said: You really deserve three items from today.

古文：十三年中书侍郎平章事，不登三品。
现代文：苏味道作了十三年中书侍郎平章事，不登三品官。
English: Su Ji did the 13th year of the middle school secretary, Lang Ping, and did not enter the third grade.

古文：其后出为眉州刺史，改为益州长史，敕赐紫绶。至州日，衣紫毕。其夜暴卒。
现代文：后来出任为眉州刺史，又改任为益州长史，皇上赏赐给他紫袍授带，到了益州，穿上紫袍那天晚上就暴病身亡。
English: Later, he was appointed as the governor of Meizhou and the governor of Yiwu. The emperor gave him the purple robe and the imperial sash. When he arrived in Yiwu and put on the purple robe, he fell violently ill and died that night.

古文：卢崇道
现代文：卢崇道
English: Luzong Road

古文：唐太常卿卢崇道，坐女婿中书令崔湜反，羽林郎将张仙坐与薛介然口陈欲反之状，俱流岭南。
现代文：唐朝太常卿崇道，因女婿中书令崔湜谋反的事被牵连，羽林郎将张仙与薛介然谈论想要谋反的情状，都被流放到岭南。
English: Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, Chongdao, was implicated in a plot to rebel by his son-in-law, Choe Son, and Zhang Xian and Xue Jie were both exiled to Lingnan after being talked out of it by Ulin Lang.

古文：经年，无日不悲号，两目皆肿，不胜凄恋，遂并逃归。
现代文：经过一年，没有一天不悲伤大哭，两眼都哭肿了，不能忍受这凄惨悲凉和眷恋之情，就一起逃回来。
English: After a year, there was not a single day when she did not weep bitterly, and both her eyes were swollen with tears. She could not bear this wretched sadness and yearning, so she fled back together.

古文：崇道至都宅藏隐，为男娶崔氏女，未成。
现代文：崇道回到京城的家里隐藏起来，为儿子准备娶崔家的女儿，但这件事没成。
English: He went back to his home in Beijing to hide and prepare for his son to marry the Cui family's daughter, but it did not work out.

古文：有内给使来，取克贵人。崇道乃赂给使，别取一崔家女去。
现代文：有个内给使来说要崔氏女为贵人，崇道就贿赂给使，让他找另一家姓崔的女儿进宫。
English: One of the courtiers said that he wanted a noblewoman from the Choi family, and the empress bribed him to find a daughter from another family with the surname Choi to enter the palace.

古文：入内事败，给使具承，掩崇道，并男三人，亦被乣捉。
现代文：进宫后事情败露，给使承担了全部责任，掩护了卢崇道，连同给使的三个男孩也被收捉。
English: After entering the palace, the affair was exposed. The envoy took full responsibility and covered for Lu Chongdao. He and the envoy's three boys were also captured.

古文：敕杖各决一百，俱至丧命。
现代文：各判杖刑一百，全都被打得丧命。
English: They were each sentenced to 100 lashes, and all were beaten to death.

古文：刘仁轨
现代文：刘仁轨
English: Liu Ronglu

古文：唐青州刺史刘仁轨，知海运，失船极多。
现代文：唐朝的青州刺史刘仁轨，管理海运，损失船舶很多，被免除官职作老百姓。
English: Liu Renlu, the Tang Dynasty's Qingzhou statesman, managed shipping, lost many ships, and was removed from his official position as a commoner.

古文：除名为民，遂辽东效力。遇病，卧平襄城下。
现代文：然后到辽东效力，正赶上有病，在平襄城下卧床不起。
English: Then he went to Liaodong Province to work, but he got sick just in time and was bedridden in Pingxiang City.

古文：褰幕看兵士攻城，有一卒直来前头背坐。
现代文：有一次卷起窗帘看士兵攻城，有一个兵也跑到这里在刘仁轨的前头背对着他坐下了。
English: Once, when he rolled up the curtains to watch the soldiers attacking the city, a soldier also ran here and sat down in front of Liu Renluo with his back to him.

古文：叱之不去。仍恶骂曰： 你欲看，我亦欲看。何预汝事？ 
现代文：仁轨大声呵斥他他也不走，反而骂仁轨说： 你想看，我也想看，碍着你什么事？ 
English: Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche shouted at him, but he didn't leave. Instead, he scolded Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche and said, "You want to see, I want to see, what's stopping you?"

古文：不肯去。
现代文：还是不肯走。
English: He still wouldn't leave.

古文：须臾。 城头放箭，正中心而死。
现代文：不一会儿，城墙上放箭，有一箭正中那兵的心窝而死。
English: Not long after, arrows were shot at the city wall. One of the arrows hit the soldier in the heart, and he died.

古文：微此兵，仁轨几为流矢所中。
现代文：如果不是有这个兵，仁轨几乎被流箭射中。
English: If it wasn't for this soldier, Ren Rail almost got hit by a stray arrow.

古文：任之选
现代文：任之选
English: Election of officers

古文：唐任之选，与张说同时应举。
现代文：唐朝的任之选和张说同时应考举人。
English: The election of the Tang Dynasty and Zhang said that people should be tested at the same time.

古文：后说为中书令，之选竟不及第。
现代文：后来张说当了中书令，任之选竟没有考中。
English: Later, Zhang said that he was a middle school teacher, but he did not pass the entrance examination.

古文：来谒张公，公遣绢一束，以充粮用。
现代文：任之选来拜见张说，张说赠给他一束绢，用来填补生活用。
English: Ren Zhibei came to see Zhang, who gave him a bundle of money to supplement his living expenses.

古文：之选将归至舍，不经一两日，疾大作。将绢市药，绢尽，疾自损。
现代文：任之选拿绢回到家里，没过一两天，得了一场大病，于是卖绢买药，绢也卖光了，病自然也好了。
English: Ren Zhixuan took the gourd back home. After a day or two, he got a serious illness, so he sold the gourd to buy medicine. The gourd was also sold out, and the illness naturally got better.

古文：非但此度，余处亦然。
现代文：不但这件事是这样，其它的事也是这样，多么命薄啊！
English: Not only is this the case, but so is everything else. What a pittance!

