古文：语称上世之人，侗长佼好，坚强老寿，百岁左右；下世之人短小陋丑，夭折早死。
现代文：一般的说法认为古代的人，身材高大面目姣美，身体强健，寿命很长，能活百岁左右；后代的人，身材矮小面目丑陋，短命早死。
English: It is generally said that ancient people were tall, handsome, physically strong, and had a long life expectancy, living to be about 100 years old; later generations were short, ugly, and died young.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：上世和气纯渥，婚姻以时，人民禀善气而生，生又不伤，骨节坚定，故长大老寿，状貌美好。
现代文：因为古代和气纯厚，婚姻按照适当的婚龄，人民承受上天的和气而出生，生下来以后又没有受到伤害，骨节坚强稳定，所以身材高大而长寿，体形像貌美好。
English: Because the ancient times were a time of pure and profound harmony, marriages were conducted according to the appropriate marriageable age, people were born bearing the divine harmony, and they were not harmed after birth. Their bones were strong and stable, so they were tall and long-lived, and their body shape and appearance were beautiful.

古文：下世反此，故短小夭折，形面丑恶。
现代文：后代与此相反，所以身材矮小短命早死，体形面貌丑恶。
English: Subsequent generations, on the other hand, are short in stature, live short lives, die early, and are ugly in appearance.

古文：此言妄也。
现代文：这种说法太荒谬了。
English: That's a ridiculous thing to say.

古文：夫上世治者，圣人也；下世治者，亦圣人也。
现代文：古代的统治者是圣人，后代的统治者也是圣人。
English: The ancient rulers were saints, and the future rulers will also be saints.

古文：圣人之德，前後不殊，则其治世，古今不异。
现代文：圣人的功德，前后没有什么差异，那么他们所治理的社会，古今也没有什么不同。
English: There is no difference in the merits of saints before and after, so the society they govern is no different from the past to the present.

古文：上世之天，下世之天也。天不变易，气不改更。
现代文：古代的天，就是后代的天，天没有变化，气也没有变化。
English: The ancient heavens are the heavens of future generations, the heavens have not changed, and the qi has not changed.

古文：上世之民，下世之民也，俱禀元气。
现代文：古代的老百姓，和后代的老百姓一样，同样承受天的元气。
English: The people of ancient times, like the people of future generations, also bear the vitality of heaven.

古文：元气纯和，古今不异，则禀以为形体者，何故不同？
现代文：元气纯厚和谐，古今没有差别，那么承受这种元气形成形体的人，为什么会不相同呢？
English: The vitality is pure and harmonious, there is no difference between the past and the present, so why are the people who bear this vitality and form the body different?

古文：夫禀气等则怀性均，怀性均，则体同；形体同，则丑好齐；丑好齐，则夭寿适。
现代文：承受元气相等，具有的本性就相同；具有的本性相同，那么形体也应相同；形体相同，那么美丑就一样；美丑一样，那么夭折长寿也应该相等。
English: If the vitality is the same, the nature is the same; if the nature is the same, the body should be the same; if the body is the same, the beauty and ugliness should be the same; if the beauty and ugliness are the same, the premature death and longevity should be the same.

古文：一天一地，并生万物。
现代文：古今是同一个天同一个地，同样地生育万物。
English: From ancient times to the present, the same heaven and the same earth have given birth to all things in the same way.

古文：万物之生，俱得一气。
现代文：万物的产生，都是承受了同样的气。
English: All things are born of the same breath.

古文：气之薄渥，万世若一。
现代文：气的厚薄，千万年都是一个样。
English: The thickness of the air is the same for tens of thousands of years.

古文：帝王治世，百代同道。
现代文：帝王治理天下，千百代同用一个道理。
English: Emperors have ruled the world for thousands of generations.

古文：人民嫁娶，同时共礼。
现代文：老百姓的嫁娶，都在同样的年龄举行相同的礼仪。
English: Ordinary people get married at the same age and with the same ceremony.

古文：虽言男三十而娶，女二十而嫁，法制张设，未必奉行。
现代文：虽然说 男子三十岁才结婚，女子二十才出嫁 ，只是法令礼制上的规定，老百姓未必遵照执行。
English: Although it is said that a man should get married at the age of thirty and a woman at the age of twenty, it is only a legal and ceremonial requirement, and the common people may not follow it.

古文：何以效之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：以今不奉行也。
现代文：用今天不奉行法令礼制的规定就可以证明了。
English: This can be proved by the fact that today they do not follow the rules of etiquette.

古文：礼乐之制，存见於今，今之人民，肯行之乎？
现代文：礼乐的制度，在今天仍然存在，今天的老百姓肯执行它吗？
English: The system of ceremonial music still exists today. Will today's people be willing to implement it?

古文：今人不肯行，古人亦不肯举。
现代文：今天的老百姓不肯执行，古代的老百姓也不肯执行。
English: Today's people are not willing to carry it out, nor were the people of ancient times.

古文：以今之人民，知古之人民也。物，亦物也。
现代文：根据今天老百姓的情况，就可以知道古代老百姓是怎样的了。人，属于物；物，也属于物。
English: According to the situation of today's people, we can know what the ancient people were like. People belong to things; things also belong to things.

古文：人生一世，寿至一百岁。
现代文：人生的一辈子，活到一百岁。
English: A lifetime of life, live to be a hundred.

古文：生为十岁兒时，所见地上之物，生死改易者多。
现代文：长到十岁的儿童时期，所看到的地上的各种东西，生死变化的现象很多。
English: When a child reaches the age of ten, there are many life-changing phenomena associated with the various things they see on the ground.

古文：至於百岁，临且死时，所见诸物，与年十岁时所见，无以异也。
现代文：活到一百岁，临到将要死的时候，所见到的各种东西，与十岁年纪时所见到的，实际上没有什么不同。
English: If you live to be a hundred years old, when you are about to die, the kinds of things you see are really no different from what you saw when you were ten years old.

古文：使上世下世，民人无有异，则百岁之间，足以卜筮。
现代文：如果古代和后代的人没有什么差别，那么人生一辈子的情况就完全可以推断出来了。
English: If there is no difference between the ancients and the descendants, then the situation of a person's whole life can be fully deduced.

古文：六畜长短，五谷大小，昆虫草木，金石珠玉，蜎蜚蠕动，跂行喙息，无有异者，此形不异也。
现代文：六畜的长短，五谷的大小，昆虫草木，金石珠玉，飞禽爬虫，以及用脚行走用嘴呼吸的各种动物，没有什么差异的原因，这是由于它们的外形没有什么不同。
English: The reason why there is no difference in the length of the six animals, the size of the grain, the insects, the plants, the precious stones, the birds, the reptiles, and the various animals that walk with their feet and breathe with their mouths is because there is no difference in their appearance.

古文：古之水火，今之水火也。
现代文：古代的水与火，和现在的水与火一样。
English: Water and fire in ancient times were the same as water and fire today.

古文：今气为水火也，使气有异，则古之水清火热，而今水浊火寒乎？
现代文：现在是气构成了水与火，假使认为古今的气不相同，那么古代的水是清的，火是热的，而现在的水是浊的，火则是冷的吗？
English: At present, it is qi that constitutes water and fire. Assuming that ancient and modern qi are different, was ancient water clear and fire hot, while modern water is salty and fire is cold?

古文：人生长六七尺，大三四围，面有五色，寿至於百，万世不异。
现代文：人可以生长到六七尺高，胸围有三四围，面部有五种不同的气色，寿命可达到一百岁，这是万代也不会变化的。
English: People can grow up to be six or seven feet tall, have a chest circumference of three or four, have five different facial features, and live to be a hundred years old, which will not change for generations.

古文：如以上世人民侗长佼好，坚强老寿，下世反此；则天地初立，始为人时，长可如防风之君，色如宋朝，寿如彭祖乎？
现代文：如果认为古代的人，身材高大面貌美好，强健长寿，后代的人与此相反，那么天地最初创立，刚刚形成人类的时候，就可以让人像防风氏的君王那样高大，面色像宋国的公子朝那样美好，寿命像彭祖那样长吗？
English: If people in ancient times were thought to be tall, handsome, strong, and long-lived, and their descendants were thought to be the opposite, then when heaven and earth were first created, when human beings were just being formed, could people be as tall as the king of the Feng clan, as handsome as the prince of the Song Dynasty, and as long-lived as Peng Zu?

古文：从当今至千世之後，人可长如荚英，色如嫫母，寿如朝生乎？
现代文：从现在到千年以后，人可能只像荚英那样高，像嫫母那样丑，像朝生那样短命吗？
English: From now until a thousand years from now, is it possible that people will only be as tall as Hao Ying, as ugly as Hao Moo, and as short-lived as Chaowen?

古文：王莽之时，长人生长一丈，名曰霸出。
现代文：王莽的时候，有个高大的人身长一丈，名叫霸。
English: In Wang Mang's time, there was a tall man who was a foot taller. His name was Ba.

古文：建武年中，颖川张仲师长一丈二寸，张汤八尺有余，其父不满五尺，俱在今世，或长或短。儒者之言，竟误也。
现代文：建武年间，颍川的张仲师只高二尺二寸。张苍身高八尺有余，他的父亲却身高不足五尺。这些人都在当今世上，有的高有的矮，俗儒的说法，归根到底是错误的。
English: During the Jianwu period, Zhang Zhongshi of Luochuan was only two feet two inches tall. Zhang Cang was more than eight feet tall, but his father was less than five feet tall. These people are all in today's world, some tall, some short, and the saying of vulgar Confucianism is ultimately wrong.

古文：语称上世使民以宜，伛者抱关，侏儒俳优。如皆侗长佼好，安得伛、侏之人乎？
现代文：一般还讲到古代根据人的生理特点合理地使用老百姓，驼背的让他去守门，是侏儒就让他当俳优，如果都高大貌美，怎么会有驼背、侏儒这样的人呢？
English: Generally, it is also said that the ancients used the common people rationally according to the physiological characteristics of the people. The hunchback let him guard the door, and the dwarf let him be a haiku master. If they are tall and beautiful, how can there be a hunchback and a dwarf?

古文：语称上世之人，质朴易化；下世之人，文薄难治。
现代文：一般说法还讲古代的人，单纯朴实容易接受教化，后代的人，浮华轻薄，难于治理。
English: Generally speaking, the ancients were simple and unpretentious, easy to be educated, and the descendants were flashy and frivolous, and difficult to govern.

古文：故《易》曰： 上古之时，结绳以治，後世易之以书契。 
现代文：所以《周易》上说： 上古时代，结绳记事，后代用书契取代了这种记事方法。 
English: Therefore, "Zhou Yi" said: In ancient times, knots were used to record things, and later generations replaced this method of record-keeping with book contracts.

古文：先结绳，易化之故；後书契，难治之验也。
现代文：早先结绳记事，是古人容易接受教化的证明；后来使用书契，是后代人难于治理的证明。
English: The fact that the ancients were the first to tie ropes and keep records is proof that they were easy to be educated; the later use of book contracts is proof that it is difficult for future generations to govern.

古文：故夫宓牺之前，人民至质朴，卧者居居，坐者于于，群居聚处，知其母不识其父。
现代文：所以在宓牺氏之前，老百姓极其单纯朴实，躺着的悠然自得，坐着的也悠然自得，一群群聚集居住在一起，只知他们的母亲而不知道他们的父亲。
English: That is why, before  Sacrifice, the common people were extremely simple and unpretentious, comfortable lying down and comfortable sitting, living together in groups, knowing only their mothers but not their fathers.

古文：至宓牺时，人民颇文，知欲诈愚，勇欲恐怯，强欲凌弱，众欲暴寡，故宓牺作八卦以治之。
现代文：到了宓牺氏的时代，老百姓有点浮华了，聪明的想欺诈愚笨的，勇敢的想恐吓怯懦的，强健的想欺凌弱小的，人多的想强暴人少的，所以宓牺制作了八卦用来治理老百姓。
English: By the time of the King of Thieves, the common people had become a bit flashy. The clever wanted to cheat the stupid, the brave wanted to intimidate the cowardly, the strong wanted to bully the weak, and the many wanted to rape the few. So the King of Thieves created gossip to govern the common people.

古文：至周之时，人民文薄，八卦难复因袭，故文王衍为六十四首，极其变，使民不倦。
现代文：到了周国时，老百姓浮华轻薄，八卦很难再使用下去，因此周文发展为六十四卦，充分发挥了八卦的一切变化，使老百姓不再懈怠。
English: When it came to Zhou, the common people were superficial and superficial, and it was difficult for them to continue using Ba Gua. Therefore, the Zhou text developed into the Sixty-Four Guas, giving full play to all the changes in Ba Gua, so that the common people would no longer slack off.

古文：至周之时，人民薄，故孔子作《春秋》，采毫毛之善，贬纤介之恶，称曰： 周监于二代，郁郁乎文哉！
现代文：到了春秋时期，老百姓轻浮很久了，因此孔子编写《春秋》，表彰极细小的善行，贬斥极细微的恶举，并称赞说： 周朝的礼制是依据夏、商两代的礼制制定的，多么丰富多彩呀！
English: By the Spring and Autumn Period, the common people had been frivolous for a long time. Therefore, Confucius compiled "Spring and Autumn" to commend the smallest good deeds, disparage the smallest evil deeds, and praise: The Zhou Dynasty's etiquette was based on the etiquette of the Xia and Shang dynasties. How rich and colorful!

古文：吾从周。 
现代文：我拥护周朝的礼制。 
English: I advocate accepting the system of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：孔子知世浸弊，文薄难治，故加密致之罔，设纤微之禁，检守持，备具悉极。
现代文：孔子知道社会在逐渐衰败，老百姓浮华轻薄难于治理，因此提出了周密的礼法制度，设置了很细微的各种禁令，纠正什么维护什么，规定得极为完备详尽。
English: Confucius knew that society was gradually decaying and that it was difficult to govern the people's vanity. Therefore, he proposed a thorough etiquette system, set up very subtle various prohibitions, corrected what and maintained what, and stipulated extremely complete and detailed.

古文：此言妄也。
现代文：这种说法太荒谬了。
English: That's a ridiculous thing to say.

古文：上世之人，所怀五常也；下世之人，亦所怀五常也。
现代文：古代的人心中怀有五常道德，后代的人也怀有五常道德。
English: The ancient people cherished the Five Norms of Morality in their hearts, and the future generations will also cherish the Five Norms of Morality.

古文：俱怀五常之道，共禀一气而生，上世何以质朴？
现代文：同样都怀有五常道德，都是禀受了同样的气而产生出来的人，古代的为什么单纯朴实？
English: Similarly, all of them have the Five Norms of Morality, and all of them are born from the same breath. Why were the ancients simple and unpretentious?

古文：下世何以文薄？
现代文：后代的为什么浮华轻薄呢？
English: Why is the next generation so flashy and frivolous?

古文：彼见上世之民饮血茹毛，无五谷之食，後世穿地为井，耕土种谷，饮井食粟，有水火之调；又见上古岩居穴处，衣禽兽之皮，後世易以宫室，有布帛之饰，则谓上世质朴，下世文薄矣。
现代文：那些见到古代的老百姓喝禽兽生血吃带毛生肉，没有五谷之类的食物，后代挖地造井，耕作土地播种谷物，饮用井水吃谷物粮食，懂得用水火来烹调食物；又见到上古的人居住在岩洞里，穿的是禽兽的皮，后代的人用宫室取代岩洞，懂得用布帛来打扮自己的人，就说上古的人单纯朴实，后代的人浮华轻薄了。
English: Those who have seen the ancient people drink the blood of animals and eat raw meat with hair, and do not have food such as grain, and the descendants dig wells, cultivate land and sow grain, drink well water and eat grain, and know how to use fire to cook food; and see the ancient people living in caves, wearing animal skins, and the descendants replacing caves with palaces, and knowing how to dress themselves with cloth, say that the ancient people are simple and plain, and the descendants are flashy and light.

古文：夫器业变易，性行不异。然而有质朴文薄之语者，世有盛衰，衰极久有弊也。
现代文：器物职业会发生变化，人的本性与操行不会产生变化，然而出现了古人 质朴 ，今人 文薄 这种说法的原因，是由于国家和社会注定有盛有衰，衰败太久就会出现弊病。
English: Objects and occupations will change, and human nature and behavior will not change. However, the reason for this statement is that the country and society are doomed to have prosperity and decline, and if the decline lasts too long, maladies will appear.

古文：譬犹衣食之於人也，初成鲜完，始熟香洁，少久穿败，连日臭茹矣。
现代文：比如衣食对于人，衣服刚做成时漂亮完整，食物刚熟时清香洁净，衣服稍穿久一点就破旧了，食物经过几天就腐臭了。
English: For example, clothing and food for humans, the clothes are beautiful and complete when they are just made, the food is fresh and clean when it is just ripe, the clothes are worn a little longer and become worn out, and the food becomes rancid after a few days.

古文：文质之法，古今所共。
现代文：典章制度与质朴诚信的法则，古今是一样的。
English: The award system and the principle of simple honesty are the same from ancient times to the present.

古文：一质一文，一衰一盛，古而有之，非独今也。
现代文：有时侧重于 文 ，有时侧重于 质 ，社会有时衰败，有时兴盛，自古以来就是如此，不独今天是这样。
English: Sometimes focusing on literature, sometimes focusing on quality, society sometimes decays, sometimes flourishes. This has been the case since ancient times, and it is not only the case today.

古文：何以效之？
现代文：用什么来证明这一点呢？
English: What will be used to verify this?

古文：传曰： 夏后氏之王教以忠。
现代文：传上说： 夏后氏的君王倡导忠厚。
English: According to legend, the monarch of the Natsugo clan advocated loyalty.

古文：上教以忠，君子忠，其失也，小人野。
现代文：君王倡导忠厚，君子都忠厚，它的弊病是导致小人粗野。
English: The king advocates loyalty, the gentleman is loyal. Its malady is to cause the ruffian to be rude.

古文：救野莫如敬，殷王教以敬。
现代文：纠正粗野什么也比不上用敬奉天神和祖先的办法。
English: There is no better way to correct boorishness than to worship the gods and ancestors.

古文：上教用敬，君子敬，其失也，小人鬼。
现代文：殷代的君王倡导敬奉天神和祖先，君子都敬奉天神和祖先，它的弊病是导致小人迷信鬼神。
English: The kings of the Yin Dynasty advocated the worship of gods and ancestors, and the nobles all worshiped gods and ancestors. Its drawback was that it led to superstitious belief in ghosts and gods.

古文：救鬼莫如文，故周之王教以文。
现代文：纠正迷信鬼神的做法莫过于提倡典章制度，所以周代的君王倡导典章制度。
English: There is no better way to correct superstitious belief in ghosts and gods than to advocate a legal code system, which is why the emperors of the Zhou Dynasty advocated a legal code system.

古文：上教以文，君子文，其失也，小人薄。
现代文：君王倡导典章制度，君子都遵循典章制度，它的弊病是导致小人浮华轻薄。
English: Monarchs advocate the award system, gentlemen all follow the award system, its drawback is that it leads to small people being flashy and superficial.

古文：救薄莫如忠，承周而王者，当教以忠。 
现代文：纠正浮华轻薄的做法莫过于提倡忠厚。 继承周代而统治天下的君王，就应当倡导忠厚。
English: There is no better way to correct extravagance and frivolity than to promote loyalty. The monarch who inherits generations and rules the world should promote loyalty.

古文：夏所承唐、虞之教薄，故教以忠。唐、虞以文教，则其所承有鬼失矣。
现代文：夏代所继承的尧、舜时代的教化产生了浮华轻薄的弊病，所以才倡导忠厚；尧、舜倡导典章制度，那么他们所承袭的前一代的教化，肯定存在着迷信鬼神的弊病。
English: The indoctrination of the  and  eras, which was inherited by the Xia dynasty, produced the ills of pomposity and frivolity, which is why they advocated loyalty; the  and  advocated the award system, so the indoctrination of the previous generation, which they inherited, certainly had the ills of superstitious ghosts and gods.

古文：世人见当今之文薄也，狎侮非之，则谓上世朴质，下世文薄。犹家人子弟不谨，则谓他家子弟谨良矣。
现代文：世俗之人见到当今的浮华轻薄现象，轻视它反对它，就说古代朴实单纯，后代浮华轻薄，好比自家的子弟不规矩，就认为别人家的子弟规矩忠厚了。
English: Secular people see today's flashy and frivolous phenomenon, despise it and oppose it, saying that ancient times were simple and pure, and future generations were flashy and frivolous, as if their own children were unruly, they thought that other people's children were loyal.

古文：语称上世之人重义轻身，遭忠义之事，得己所当赴死之分明也，则必赴汤趋锋，死不顾恨。
现代文：一般说法讲到古代的人，重视礼义而轻视生命，遇到应该效忠尽义的事情，会清楚地认识到为此而牺牲生命是自己的本分，就必然会赴汤趋锋，至死也不顾惜悔恨。
English: Generally speaking, people in ancient times, who valued courtesy but despised life, would clearly realize that sacrificing their lives for this was their duty when they encountered things that they should be loyal to, and they would inevitably go to the front, and they would not regret it until death.

古文：故弘演之节，陈不占之义，行事比类，书籍所载，亡命捐身，众多非一。
现代文：所以弘演的节操，陈不占的忠义，在以往的事例中和他们相类似的人中，书籍中所记载的，丧失性命抛弃身体的人中，这类事情很多，不只一种。
English: Therefore, the integrity of the performance, the loyalty of Chen Baizhang, in the past cases, among people similar to them, recorded in books, among people who lost their lives and abandoned their bodies, there are many such things, not just one.

古文：今世趋利苟生，弃义妄得，不相勉以义，不相激以行，义废身不以为累，行隳事不以相畏。
现代文：如今社会上的人，贪求私利，苟且偷生，抛弃礼义，非分追求利益，不用礼义互相劝勉，不在操行方面互相激励，礼义被自己废弃了不以为有害，操行被自己所做的事情败坏了也不感到可怕。
English: In today's society, people are greedy for self-interest, want to steal a living, abandon propriety, pursue interests indiscriminately, do not use propriety to persuade each other, and do not encourage each other in terms of behavior. They do not consider it harmful when they abandon propriety, and they do not feel terrible when their behavior is corrupted by what they do.

古文：此言妄也。
现代文：这些说法是荒谬的。
English: That's a ridiculous thing to say.

古文：夫上世之士，今世之士也，俱含仁义之性，则其遭事并有奋身之节。
现代文：古代的士和今天的士一样，都具有仁义的本性，那么他们遇上应当效忠尽义的事情都会有奋不顾身的节操。
English: Ancient taxis, like today's taxis, all have the nature of benevolence and righteousness, so when they encounter things that should be loyal and righteous, they will have selfless self-restraint.

古文：古有无义之人，今有建节之士。善恶杂厕，何世无有。
现代文：古代有无义的人，当代有树立节操的人，善与恶混杂在一起，哪一代没有这样的事情呢？
English: In ancient times there were people without righteousness, in modern times there are people who establish righteousness, good and evil are mixed together, which generation does not have such a thing?

古文：述事者好高古而下今，贵所闻而贱所见。
现代文：记载历史的人好推崇古代而贬低现代，重视所听到的古代传说而轻视所看到的现实。
English: Those who record history tend to venerate the ancient and disparage the modern, to attach importance to the ancient legends they have heard and despise the reality they have seen.

古文：辨士则谈其久者，文人则著其远者。近有奇而辨不称，今有异而笔不记。
现代文：善辩的人则谈论那些古老的事情，写文章的人则写那些时代久远的事情，眼前存在突出的事迹而善辩的人不说它，现实存在异常的事而写文章的人不记录它。
English: Argumentative people talk about things that are ancient, writers write about things that are centuries old, there are outstanding deeds in front of the eyes but the argumentative people do not say it, there are abnormal things in reality but the writers do not record it.

古文：若夫琅邪兒子明，岁败之时，兄为饥人所食，自缚叩头，代兄为食，饿人美其义，两舍不食。
现代文：如同那位琅琊郡的倪子明，灾荒发生的时候，哥哥将被饥饿的人吃掉，他捆上自己向饥饿的人叩头，请求代替哥哥被吃掉，饥饿的人赞美他的义气，把他们哥弟俩都放掉不吃他们。
English: Like that Ni Ziming of Qixian County, when the disaster occurred, his brother would be eaten by the hungry. He tied himself up and bowed to the hungry, asking to be eaten in place of his brother. The hungry praised his loyalty and let both of his brothers go without eating them.

古文：兄死，收养其孤，爱不异於己之子，岁败谷尽，不能两活，饿杀其子，活兄之子。
现代文：哥哥死后，他收养了哥哥的遗孤，对孤儿的爱与自己的孩子没有丝毫差别。灾荒年谷物吃完了，不能同时养活两个孩子，饿死的是他的孩子，而让哥哥的孩子活了下来。
English: After his brother's death, he took in his brother's orphaned children. His love for the orphans was no different from that of his own children. When the grain ran out during the famine, he couldn't feed his two children at the same time. It was his children who starved to death, but he let his brother's children survive.

古文：临淮许君叔亦养兄孤子，岁仓卒之时，饿其亲子，活兄之子，与子明同义。
现代文：临淮郡的许君叔也收养了哥哥的孤儿，岁月荒乱的时候，饿死了他的亲生的孩子，而让他哥哥的孩子活了下来，这与倪子明是同样的义气。
English: Uncle Xu Junlong of Linhuai County also adopted his brother's orphan. When the times were rough, he starved to death his own child, while his brother's child survived. This is the same kind of righteousness as that of Ni Ziming.

古文：会稽孟章父英为郡决曹掾，郡将挝杀非辜，事至覆考，英引罪自予，卒代将死。
现代文：会稽郡孟章的父亲孟英任郡的决曹掾，郡中官吏拷打杀害无罪的人，这件案子到朝廷复查的时候，孟英把罪过归于自己，终于代替长官被处死。
English: Meng Ying, the father of Meng Zhang, the county auditor, served as the county's decision-maker, and the county officials tortured and killed innocent people. When the case was reviewed by the imperial court, Meng Ying attributed the crime to himself and was finally executed in place of the chief.

古文：章后复为郡功曹，从役攻贼，兵卒北败，为贼所射，以身代将，卒死不去。
现代文：孟章后来又当了郡的功曹，投入战斗攻击贼人，兵卒连吃败仗，被贼人用箭所射，孟章用身体掩护郡将，一直到死也不离开。
English: Meng Zhang later became the county's hero. He went into battle to attack the bandits. The soldiers were defeated and were shot by the bandits with arrows. Meng Zhang used his body to cover the county commander and did not leave until his death.

古文：此弘演之节，陈不占之义何以异？
现代文：这与弘演的节操、陈不占的忠义有什么区别呢？
English: What is the difference between this and the integrity of the performance and the loyalty of Chen Baizhang?

古文：当今著文书者，肯引以为比喻乎？
现代文：当今撰文写书的人，肯引孟章的事迹来比喻吗？
English: Would today's authors be willing to use Meng Zhang's story as a metaphor?

古文：比喻之证，上则求虞、夏，下则索殷、周。秦、汉之际，功奇行殊，犹以为后。又况当今在百代下，言事者目亲见之乎？
现代文：比喻用的材料，往上则寻求至虞、夏时代，往下则寻求殷、周时代，秦、汉时期，有功德奇特操行特殊的人，尚且认为时代太近，又何况当今社会在百代之后，叙述历史的人亲眼见到这些了吗？
English: In terms of metaphorical materials, we look up for the Zhaozhou and Xia dynasties, and down for the Yin, Zhou, Qin and Han dynasties. Even if we think that the times are too recent, what's more, in today's society, after hundreds of generations, have the people who narrate history seen these things with their own eyes?

古文：画工好画上代之人，秦、汉之士，功行谲奇，不肯图今世之士者，尊古卑今也。
现代文：画工好画古代的人，秦汉时期的人，即使功绩操行很突出，画工也不肯画他们。不肯画当世的人，是因为画工尊古卑今的缘故。
English: Painters are good at painting ancient people, people in the Qin and Han dynasties, even if their merits and deeds are outstanding, painters are not willing to paint them. They do not want to paint contemporary people because painters are inferior to the past.

古文：贵鹄贱鸡，鹄远而鸡近也。
现代文：贵重天鹅而轻贱鸡，因为天鹅离得远而鸡挨得近的缘故。
English: The swan is more valuable than the chicken, because the swan is far away and the chicken is near.

古文：使当今说道深於孔、墨，名不得与之同；立行崇於曾、颜，声不得与之钧。
现代文：即使现在有人所讲的道理比孔子、墨子还精深，名望也不可能与他们相等；表现出来的操行高过曾参、颜回，声誉也不可能跟他们一样。
English: Even if there are people today who speak more profound truths than Confucius and Mozi, their fame cannot be equal to theirs; their behavior is higher than that of Zeng Zhen and Yan Hui, and their reputation cannot be the same as theirs.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：世俗之性，贱所见，贵所闻也。
现代文：因为世俗的本性是轻视所见的事实而重视所听来的传闻。
English: For it is the nature of the world to despise facts that are seen, and to esteem hearsay that is heard.

古文：有人於此，立义建节，实核其操，古无以过。为文书者，肯载於篇籍，表以为行事乎？
现代文：有人在这里，树立起忠义节操，考核他的操行，古人没有能超过他的，撰文写书的人，肯把他的事迹记载在书籍里，把他当作和以往的事例一样来表彰吗？
English: Is there anyone here who will set up a standard of loyalty and fidelity, who will examine his conduct, which none of the ancients surpassed, who will write a book about his deeds, and praise him as he has been praised in the past?

古文：作奇论，造新文，不损於前人，好事者肯舍久远之书，而垂意观读之乎？
现代文：他们提出奇特的论点，写出新的文章，不比古人逊色，好事的人肯舍弃时代久远的书，而留心阅读这些东西吗？
English: They make strange arguments, write new articles, are not inferior to the ancients. Will the good people abandon the ancient books and read these things attentively?

古文：扬子云作《太玄》，造《法言》，张伯松不肯壹观。与之并肩，故贱其言。
现代文：杨子云写《太玄》，著《法言》，张伯松不愿意读一读，因为他与杨子云生活在同一时代，所以就轻视杨子云的言论。
English: Yang Ziyun wrote "Too Xuan" and wrote "Dogma." Zhang Bo Song did not want to read it, because he lived in the same era as Yang Ziyun, so he despised Yang Ziyun's speech.

古文：使子云在伯松前，伯松以为《金匮》矣！
现代文：假如杨子云的时代在张伯松之前，张伯松就会把他的书当作珍贵文献了。
English: If Yang Ziyun's era was before Zhang Biao Song, Zhang Biao Song would regard his book as a precious document.

古文：语称上世之时，圣人德优，而功治有奇。故孔子曰： 大哉，尧之为君也！
现代文：一般说法讲到上古时代，圣人道德高尚，而治理国家又有卓越的功绩，所以孔子说： 真伟大啊，尧这样的君王！
English: Generally speaking, in ancient times, saints were highly moral, and the governance of the country had outstanding achievements. Therefore, Confucius said: "How great is such a king!"

古文：唯天为大，唯尧则之。
现代文：唯有天最为高大，只有尧能够效法它。
English: If you have the greatest talent, emulate it.

古文：荡荡乎民无能名焉！
现代文：他的德行浩大无际，老百姓都不知道要怎样称颂他才好！
English: His virtue is boundless, and the people do not know how to praise him!

古文：巍巍乎其有成功也！
现代文：他的功业太崇高了！
English: His work is too noble!

古文：焕乎其有文章也！ 
现代文：他的礼乐制度多么光辉灿烂呀！ 
English: How splendid is his system of liturgy!

古文：舜承尧不堕洪业，禹袭舜不亏大功。
现代文：舜继承尧的德行，没有败坏大业；禹承袭舜的德行，没有损害大功。
English: Yu inherited Yu's virtue, but did not corrupt the great cause; Yu inherited Yu's virtue, but did not damage the great cause.

古文：其後至汤，举兵代桀，武王把钺讨纣，无巍巍荡荡之文，而有动兵讨伐之言。
现代文：这以后到了商汤，发兵讨伐夏桀。周武王高举大钺讨伐殷纣王，人们对他们不再用 巍巍 、 荡荡 这种歌颂的言辞了，却用了动用军队讨伐的言辞。
English: After that, Shang Tang sent troops to fight against Xia Yao, and King Zhou Wu raised his scepter high to fight against King Yin Yao. People no longer used the words of praise, but they used the words of using the army to fight.

古文：盖其德劣而兵试，武用而化薄。
现代文：这是因为他们的道德比尧舜差，所以才使用武力，使用了武力教化就薄弱了。
English: This is because their morality is worse than that of baboons, so they only use force, and if they use force, their indoctrination will be weak.

古文：化薄，不能相逮之明验也。
现代文：教化薄弱，就是商汤、周武王不及尧、舜的明证。
English: Weak indoctrination is clear evidence that Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu were not worthy of the title of emperor.

古文：及至秦、汉，兵革云扰，战力角势，秦以得天下。
现代文：到了秦代，战争频繁各国以武力相斗，较量国势的强弱，秦国以武力统一了天下。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, there were frequent wars in which various countries fought each other by force of arms to measure the strength of their national power. Qin unified the world by force of arms.

古文：既得在下，无嘉瑞之美，若 叶和万国 、 凤皇来仪 之类，非德劣不及，功被若之徵乎？
现代文：即使统一了天下，也没有出现吉祥的征兆，如 使所有的诸侯国和睦相处 、 凤凰来朝 这类吉兆，不正是道德差赶不上、功业小比不上尧舜的证明吗？
English: Even if the whole world is unified, there are no auspicious signs, such as making all the principalities and states live in harmony, and the phoenix coming to the DPRK. Such auspicious signs are proof that poor morals cannot catch up, and small achievements cannot be compared to great achievements.

古文：此言妄也。
现代文：这种说法太荒谬了。
English: That's a ridiculous thing to say.

古文：夫天地气和，即生圣人。圣人之治，即立大功。和气不独在古先，则圣人何故独优！
现代文：天施放的阳气和地施放的阴气协调和谐就产生了圣人，圣人治理好天下就立了大功，和气不只是古代才存在，那以为什么只有古代的圣人才特别好呢？
English: The harmony between the yang qi emitted by the heavens and the yin qi emitted by the earth produced saints. If the saints governed the world well, they did a great service. Harmony does not only exist in ancient times. So why are only ancient saints particularly good?

古文：世俗之性，好褒古而毁今，少所见而多所闻。又见经传增贤圣之美，孔子尤大尧、舜之功。又闻尧、舜禅而相让，汤、武伐而相夺。则谓古圣优於今，功化渥地後矣。
现代文：世俗的本性，喜好推崇古代而毁谤现代，轻视所见到的事实而重视听到的传闻，又见经传上夸张贤圣的美德，孔子特别夸大了尧和舜的功德，又听说尧禅让帝位给舜，商汤、周武王讨伐而与桀、纣相争夺，就说古代的圣人比现在的圣人好，功业教化比后代纯厚了。
English: The secular nature, the preference for praising the ancient and slandering the modern, the contempt for the facts seen and the importance of the hearsay heard, and the exaggeration of the virtues of the saints in the scriptures, Confucius especially exaggerated the merits of Zou and Zou, and heard that Zou Zen gave the throne to Zou, Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu fought and competed with Zou and Zou, it is said that the ancient saints are better than the current saints, and the work education is more pure than the descendants.

古文：夫经有褒增之文，世有空加之言，读经览书者所共见也。
现代文：经书上有赞扬增美的文辞，世间上有凭空夸张的言论，这是读经览书的人都共同见到的。
English: In the Bible, there are words praising beauty, and in the world, there are words that are exaggerated out of thin air. This is something that everyone who reads the Bible can see.

古文：孔子曰： 纣之不善，不若是之甚也。
现代文：孔子说： 殷纣王的坏，不像传说中的那么厉害。
English: Confucius said, "The evil of King Yin is not as bad as the legend says.

古文：是以君子恶居下流，天下之恶皆归焉。 
现代文：所以君子很厌恶自己处于众恶所归的地位，因为天下的坏事都会归到处于下流地位的人身上。 
English: For this reason, a gentleman abhors to live in the lower class. Once he lives in the lower class, all the bad things and bad reputation in the world will come to his head.

古文：世常以桀、纣与尧、舜相反，称美则说尧、舜，言恶则举纣、桀。
现代文：世人经常把桀、纣与尧、舜看成是相反的人物，称美谁就以尧、舜为例，贬斥谁就举桀、纣为例。
English: The world often regards,  and,  as the opposite characters. Whoever praises beauty will take,  as an example, and whoever disparages beauty will take,  as an example.

古文：孔子曰 纣之不善，不若是之甚也 ，则知尧、舜之德，不若是其盛也。
现代文：孔子说过 殷纣王的坏，不像传说中的那么厉害 的话，那么就可知尧、舜的功德，也不像传说中的那样盛大。
English: Confucius said, "The evil of the king of Yin and Yang is not as great as that in the legend," so we can know that the merits of Yin and Yang are not as great as that in the legend.

古文：尧、舜之禅，汤、武之诛，皆有天命，非优劣所能为，人事所能成也。
现代文：尧、舜的禅让，商汤、周武王的诛伐，都是由天命注定的，不是道德的好坏所能决定的，也不是人力所能做到的。
English: The Zen-zang of Zou and Zou, the Shang-tang, and the Zhou-wu, were all predestined by heaven. It is not determined by the quality of morality, nor can it be done by human power.

古文：使汤、武在唐、虞，亦禅而不伐；尧、舜在殷、周，亦诛而不让。盖有天命之实，而世空生优劣之语。经言 叶和万国 ，时亦有丹硃； 凤皇来仪 ，时亦有有苗；兵皆动而并用，则知德亦何优劣而小大也？
现代文：假如商汤、周武王生活在尧、舜那个时代，也会禅让而不用讨伐；尧、舜生活在殷、周时代，同样也会诛讨而不禅让，既有天命注定的事实，而世人却凭空捏造出所谓道德好坏的说法，经书上说尧 使所有的诸侯国和睦相处 ，当时也有发生在丹水的战争；舜时 凤凰来朝 ，当时也发生了与有苗的战争。
English: If Shang Tang and Zhou Wu Wang had lived in the era of  and, they would have surrendered without a fight; if  and  had lived in the era of Yin and Zhou, they would also have surrendered without a fight, since there is a fact that is predestined by heaven, but the world has fabricated the so-called moral good and bad saying out of thin air. The scripture says that  made all the principalities and states coexist peacefully, and there was also a war in Danshui at that time; when  the phoenix came to the DPRK, there was also a war with Arimiao.

古文：世论桀、纣之恶，甚於亡秦。
现代文：既然古今帝王都用兵动武，就可以知道他们的道德也没有什么好坏的差别，而功业也没有什么大小的不同。
English: Since emperors from ancient times to the present have all used soldiers to wage war, we can see that there is no difference between their morality and their merits, nor is there any difference in the size of their merits.

古文：实事者谓亡秦恶甚於桀、纣。
现代文：世人认为桀、纣的罪恶超过了秦王朝，实事求是的人认为秦王朝的罪恶超过了桀、纣。
English: The world believes that the evil of the Qin Dynasty exceeds that of the Qin Dynasty, and those who seek truth from facts believe that the evil of the Qin Dynasty exceeds that of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：秦、汉善恶相反，犹尧、舜、桀、纣相违也。
现代文：秦王朝与汉王朝的善与恶相反，如同尧、舜与桀、纣的善与恶相反一样。
English: The Qin Dynasty is the opposite of the Han Dynasty in terms of good and evil, just as the,  and,  are the opposite of good and evil.

古文：亡秦与汉皆在後世，亡秦恶甚於桀、纣，则亦知大汉之德不劣於唐、虞也。
现代文：秦王朝与汉王朝都在后世，秦王朝的罪恶超过桀、纣，也就可以知道大汉王朝的功德不比尧、舜的功德差。
English: Both the Qin Dynasty and the Han Dynasty are in the afterlife. The evil of the Qin Dynasty exceeds that of the Han Dynasty, and it can be known that the merits of the Han Dynasty are no worse than those of the Han Dynasty.

古文：唐之 万国 ，固增而非实者也。
现代文：唐尧的 协和万国 ，本来是夸大而下符合实际的。
English: Tang Xuan's "harmony of all nations" was originally exaggerated, but it is now in line with reality.

古文：有虞之 凤皇 ，宣帝贴已五致之矣。
现代文：虞舜的 凤凰来仪 。汉宣帝时已经五次招来了凤凰。
English: The phoenix came to the imperial court five times during the reign of Emperor Han Xuan.

古文：孝明帝符瑞并至。
现代文：汉明帝时祥瑞一齐出现。
English: When Han Mingdi, Xiang Rui appeared together.

古文：夫德优故有瑞，瑞钧则功不相下。
现代文：道德高尚所以有祥瑞出现，既然祥瑞一样多，那么功业就不相上下。
English: Moral high-mindedness is the reason for the emergence of Xiang Rui. Since there are as many Xiang Rui, then the merits are comparable.

古文：宣帝、孝明如劣，不及尧、舜，何以能致尧、舜之瑞？
现代文：汉宣帝、汉明帝如果道德不好，赶不尧舜的话，为什么能招来与尧、舜同样的祥瑞呢？
English: If Emperor Han Xuan and Emperor Han Ming did not have good morals and could not keep up with the eunuchs, why were they able to attract the same auspiciousness as the eunuchs and eunuchs?

古文：光武皇帝龙兴凤举，取天下若拾遗，何以不及殷汤、周武？
现代文：光武皇帝好比龙兴凤举，夺取天下就像捡起遗物一般的容易，为什么功德比不上殷汤和周武王呢？
English: Emperor Guangwu is like a dragon lifting up a phoenix. Conquering the world is as easy as picking up a relic. Why can't the merits of Yin Tang and King Zhouwu be compared?

古文：世称周之成、康不亏文王之隆，舜巍位亏尧之盛功也。
现代文：世人讲到周代的周成王和周康王没有损害周文王的盛大功业，舜的品德崇高没有损害尧的盛大功业。
English: The world said that the Zhou Dynasty's Zhou Cheng Wang and Zhou Kang Wang did not damage the great achievements of Zhou Wen Wang, and the lofty moral character of Zou did not damage the great achievements of Zou.

古文：方今圣朝，承光武，袭孝明，有浸酆溢美之化，无细小毫发之亏，上何以不逮舜、禹？
现代文：当今汉章帝，继承了光武帝、汉明帝的事业，具有更加兴盛非常美好的教化，没有细小如毫发的缺点，往上追溯，为什么不及舜、禹呢？
English: Today's Han Zhangdi, inheriting the cause of Guangwu Di and Han Ming Di, has a more prosperous and very beautiful enlightenment, no minor shortcomings, and is traced upwards. Why is it not as good as Yao and Yu?

古文：下何以不若成、康？
现代文：往下为什么不如周成王、周康王呢？
English: Why is it not as good as Zhou Cheng Wang and Zhou Kang Wang?

古文：世见五帝、三王事在经传之上，而汉之记故尚为文书，则谓古圣优而功大，後世劣而化薄矣。
现代文：世人见到五帝、三王的事迹记载在经传上，而汉朝对过去发生的事情的记载，还是档案文书，就说古代的圣人道德高功业大，后代的道德不好而教化又差了！
English: The world sees that the deeds of the Five Emperors and the Three Kings are recorded in the scriptures, while the Han Dynasty's records of what happened in the past are still archival documents, saying that the ancient saints had high morals and great achievements, and that the morality of future generations is not good and the enlightenment is poor!

