古文：太祖文皇帝上之中元嘉五年
现代文：起，止，一共三年。宋文帝元嘉五年
English: a total of three years. Song Wendi Yuanjia lasted five years.

古文：春，正月，辛未，魏京兆王黎卒。
现代文：春季正月，辛未，北魏京兆王拓跋黎去世。
English: In the first month of spring, Xin Wei, the Northern Wei Emperor Tuoba died.

古文：荆州刺史、彭城王义康，性聪察，在州职事修治。
现代文：刘宋荆州刺史、彭城王刘义康，生性聪明，详察下情，他在荆州，凡是职权范围内的事都办得很好。
English: Liu Song, the ruler of Jingzhou, and Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, were both intelligent and meticulous. In Jingzhou, he did everything well within his scope of authority.

古文：左光禄大夫范泰谓司徒王弘曰： 天下事重，权重难居。
现代文：刘宋左光禄大夫范泰对司徒王弘说： 国家大事，责任很重，权要的地位，也很难久居。
English: Dr. Fan Tai, the doctor of Liu Song Zuoguanglu, said to Wang Hong, the scholar: National events, heavy responsibilities, important position, it is difficult to stay for a long time.

古文：卿兄弟盛满，当深存降挹。
现代文：你们兄弟的权力和地位，已经达到了顶峰，应该深深地想到要谦虚谨慎。
English: Your brothers have reached the pinnacle of power and status, and should deeply think about being modest and prudent.

古文：彭城王，帝之次弟，宜征还入朝，共参朝政。 
现代文：彭城王刘义康是皇上的二弟，最好征召他回京，共同参与处理朝廷大事。 
English: Pengcheng Wang was the second brother of the emperor, and he was summoned to the court to participate in the pre-imperial politics.

古文：弘纳其言。
现代文：王弘接受了范泰的劝告。
English: Wang Hong accepted his opinion.

古文：时大旱，疾疫，弘上表引咎逊位，帝不许。
现代文：当时，刘宋境内正遭受严重的旱灾，瘟疫流行，王弘上疏引咎自责，请求解除自己的职务，宋文帝刘义隆没有批准。
English: At that time, the territory of Liu Song was suffering from severe droughts and plague epidemics. Wang Hongzhang blamed himself and asked to be relieved of his duties. Song Emperor Liu Yilong did not approve.

古文：秦商州刺史领浇河太守姚浚叛，降河西，秦王炽磐以尚书焦嵩代浚，帅骑三千讨之。
现代文：西秦国商州刺史兼浇河太守姚浚反叛，投降了北凉。西秦王乞伏炽磐任命尚书焦嵩任商州刺史兼浇河太守，并率领三千人讨伐姚浚。
English: Western Qin's King Shangshu Jiaosong appointed Shangshu Jiaosong as the governor of Shangshu and the governor of the Yangtze River, and led 3,000 men to fight against Yaojun.

古文：二月，嵩为吐谷浑元绪所执。
现代文：二月，焦嵩被吐谷浑汗国酋长慕容元绪擒获。
English: In February, Jiao Song was captured by Murong Yuanxu, the chieftain of the Tuyun Khanate.

古文：魏改元神。
现代文：北魏改年号为神。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty changed its era name to Shen.

古文：魏平北将军尉眷攻夏主于上邽，夏主退屯平凉。
现代文：北魏平北将军尉眷，围攻夏王赫连昌所在的上，赫连昌退到平凉据守。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the soldiers of the Northern General Ping Bei besieged the Xia King Herenchang, and Herenchang retreated to Pingliang to defend himself.

古文：奚斤进军安定，与丘堆、娥清军合。
现代文：北魏大将奚斤率领军队抵达安定，与娥清、丘堆率领的大军会师。
English: The Northern Wei general He Jian led the army to arrive at the stable, and joined the division with the army led by E Qing and Yau Tui.

古文：斤马多疫死，士卒乏粮，乃深垒自固。
现代文：奚斤军中的战马染上了温疫，大批死亡，士卒又缺乏粮饷，所以只好深挖沟堑，营造堡垒固守。
English: The war horses in the army were infected with fever and died in large numbers, and the soldiers were short of food, so they had to dig deep trenches and build fortresses to hold out.

古文：遣丘堆督租于民间，士卒暴掠，不设儆备。夏主袭之，堆兵败，以数百骑还城。
现代文：奚斤派遣丘堆率军队到乡村征粮逼租，北魏的士卒残暴无端，大肆抢掠，对敌人未加防备，夏主赫连昌乘机进攻，丘堆的军队大败，只带着几百名骑兵逃回安定。
English: Shujin dispatched troops led by Qiu He to the countryside to collect grain and extort rents. The Northern Wei soldiers were brutal and unprovoked, looted and pillaged, and did not take precautions against the enemy. The summer lord, Herengchang, took the opportunity to attack. Qiu He's army was defeated and fled back to stability with only a few hundred cavalrymen.

古文：夏主乘胜，日来城下钞掠，不得刍牧，诸将患之。
现代文：赫连昌乘胜追击，每天到城下抢掠，北魏的军队得不到粮秣，将领们深感忧虑。
English: He Lianchang took advantage of the victory to pursue and plunder the city every day. The Northern Wei army did not get grain, and the generals were deeply worried.

古文：监军侍御史安颉曰： 受诏灭贼，今更为贼所困，退守穷城，若不为贼杀，当坐法诛，进退皆无生理。
现代文：监军侍御史安颉说道： 我们接受朝廷的诏命是要消灭敌寇，而如今我们却被敌人包围，困守孤城，即令不被敌人杀戮，也要受到军法的惩罚，无论是进、是退都没有生路。
English: "We accepted the imperial command of the imperial court to destroy the enemy, but now we are surrounded by the enemy, trapped in a lonely city, and even if we are not killed by the enemy, we will be punished by military law, and there is no way out whether we are advancing or retreating.

古文：而诸王公晏然曾不为计乎？ 
现代文：而各位王公还安稳地坐在那里，就没有克敌制胜的计谋吗？ 
English: And the princes are still sitting there safely, do they not have a plan to defeat the enemy and win?

古文：斤曰： 今军士无马，以步击骑，必无胜理，当须京师救骑至，合击之。 
现代文：奚斤说： 现在我们的军士没有马匹，用步兵来进攻骑兵，断然没有取胜的可能。只有等朝廷派救兵和战马赶来救援，内外夹击敌人。 
English: Hao Jin said: Now our sergeants have no horses, so they attack the cavalry with infantry, and there is absolutely no possibility of winning. The only way is to wait for the court to send rescuers and horses to come to the rescue, and attack the enemy inside and outside.

古文：颉曰： 今猛寇游逸于外，吾兵疲食尽，不一决战，则殆在旦夕，救骑何可待乎！
现代文：安颉说： 现在强敌在城外示威，我们城内的士卒精疲力尽，粮食又已经吃完，如果不立刻与敌人决战，我们早晚之间就会全军覆没，救兵怎么能够等到呢？
English: An Xun said: Now the strong enemy is demonstrating outside the city, our soldiers inside the city are exhausted, and the grain has been eaten. If we do not fight the enemy immediately, our entire army will be destroyed sooner or later. How can the rescuers wait?

古文：等于就死，死战，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：同样是去死，决一死战不也是可以的吗？ 
English: Isn't it also okay to die, to fight to the death?

古文：斤又以马少为辞。
现代文：奚斤又以战马太少为理由，推辞不肯决战。
English: He also refused to fight a decisive battle on the grounds that there were too few horses.

古文：颉曰： 今敛诸将所乘马，可得二百匹，颉请募敢死之士出击之，就不能破敌，亦可以折其锐。
现代文：安颉说： 现在我们把各个将领的坐骑集中起来，可以凑到二百匹，我请求招募敢死的士卒，冲出城去打击敌人，即使不能击破敌人，也可以打击他们的锐气。
English: An Xun said: Now that we have gathered the mounts of all the generals, we can get together two hundred horses. I request that we recruit soldiers who are willing to die, rush out of the city to fight the enemy, and even if we cannot defeat the enemy, we can strike at their spirit.

古文：且赫连昌狷而无谋，好勇而轻，每自出挑战，众皆识之。
现代文：况且，赫连昌急躁无谋，却轻率好斗，常常亲自出阵挑战，军中的士卒都认识他的模样。
English: What's more, Kherlianchang was impetuous and reckless, but rash and combative, and often challenged himself. The soldiers in the army all knew what he was like.

古文：若伏兵掩击，昌可擒也。 
现代文：如果设伏兵突然袭击他，一定能生擒赫连昌。 
English: If ambushed soldiers suddenly attack him, he will surely be able to survive.

古文：斤犹难之。
现代文：奚斤仍然面有难色。
English: Hao Jin still looked puzzled.

古文：颉乃阴与尉眷等谋，选骑待之。
现代文：安颉于是与尉眷暗中谋划，挑选精骑等待时机。
English: So An Xuan and his retainers plotted in the dark, choosing a good horse and waiting for the right time.

古文：既而夏主来攻城，颉出应之。
现代文：不久，赫连昌果然又来攻城，安颉出城应战。
English: Soon after, Herenchang attacked the city again, and Anhui left the city to fight.

古文：夏主自出陈前搏战，军士识其貌，争赴之。
现代文：赫连昌亲自出阵与安颉交锋，北魏的士卒都认出他的面貌，争相围攻赫连昌。
English: Helianchang personally went out to fight with Anhui, and the Northern Wei soldiers all recognized his face and fought to encircle Helianchang.

古文：会天大风，扬尘，昼昏，夏主财走，颉追之，夏主马蹶而坠，遂擒之。
现代文：正值狂风突起，尘沙飞扬遮天蔽日，白天如同黑夜一样昏暗，赫连昌抵挡不住，打马逃走，安颉在后紧追，赫连昌的坐骑突然栽倒，赫连昌坠马倒地，于是被安颉生擒。
English: The wind was blowing, the dust was flying and covering the sky, and the day was as dark as night. Helian Chang couldn't resist and fled on his horse, closely followed by Antao. Helian Chang's horse suddenly fell down, and Helian Chang fell to the ground, where he was trampled to death by Antao.

古文：夏大将军、领司徒、平原王定收其馀众数万，奔还平凉，即皇帝位，大赦，改元胜光。
现代文：安颉是安同的儿子。夏国的大将军、领司徒、平原王赫连定，收集夏军残部数万人，一路奔走，逃回平凉。赫连定即皇帝位，下令实行大赦，改年号为胜光。
English: Antao was the son of Andong. He Lianding, the general of Xia, the leader of the Sifu, and the king of the plain, collected tens of thousands of remnants of the Xia army, ran all the way, and fled back to Pingliang. He Lianding was the emperor, ordered an amnesty, and changed the year name to Shengguang.

古文：三月，辛巳，赫连昌至平城，魏主馆之于西宫，门内器用皆给乘舆之副，又以妹始平公主妻之；假常忠将军，赐爵会稽公。
现代文：三月，辛巳，赫连昌被押解到平城，北魏国主拓跋焘在西宫为赫连昌安排了客舍，房间里的日常用具都跟皇帝使用的一样，又把自己的妹妹始平公主嫁给他，给他常忠将军头衔，并封为会稽公。
English: In March, Herenchang was escorted to Pingcheng. The head of the Northern Wei State, Tuobao, arranged a guest house for Herenchang in the West Palace. The daily utensils in the room were the same as those used by the emperor. He also married his sister, Princess Shiheping, to him, gave him the title of General Changzhong, and made him the auditor.

古文：以安颉为建节将军，赐爵西平公；尉眷为宁北将军，进爵渔阳公。
现代文：拓跋焘任命安颉为建节将军，封为西平公；尉眷为宁北将军，晋封他为渔阳公。
English: Tuobao appointed Anhui as the general of Jianjie, and he was given the title of Xiping; Iguan was the general of Ningbei, and he was promoted to Yuyang.

古文：魏主常使赫连昌侍从左右，与之单骑共逐鹿，深入山涧。
现代文：拓跋焘常常让赫连昌侍从在自己身边，两人单独打猎，两马相并追逐麋鹿，深入高山危谷。
English: Tuoba Yao often let Helian Chang attendants stay by his side. The two of them hunted alone, and the two horses chased the elk together, deep into the high mountain valley.

古文：昌素有勇名，诸将威以为不可。
现代文：赫连昌一向享有勇猛的威名，拓跋焘手下的将领们都认为拓跋焘不可这样做。
English: He Lianchang had always enjoyed a reputation for bravery, and the generals under Tuobao thought that Tuobao should not do so.

古文：魏主曰： 天命有在，亦何所惧！ 
现代文：拓跋焘却说： 天命自有定数，有什么可畏惧的呢！ 
English: But Tuobao said: Destiny has its own fixed number, what is there to be afraid of!

古文：亲遇如初。
现代文：所以对赫连昌仍然亲近，跟当初一样。
English: He still favors Herenchang.

古文：奚斤自以为元帅，而昌为偏裨所擒，深耻之。
现代文：奚斤自以为是元帅，但夏王赫连昌却被他手下的偏将活捉了，因此深感羞耻。
English: Yan Jin thought he was a marshal, but Xia Wang Herenchang was captured alive by his subordinates, so he felt deeply ashamed.

古文：乃舍辎重，赍三日粮，追夏主于平凉。
现代文：于是他命令军队舍弃辎重，只带三日粮秣，进攻赫连定据守的平凉。
English: So he ordered the army to abandon their baggage and take only three days' rations to attack Pingliang, which was held by Helian.

古文：娥清欲循水而往，斤不从，自北道邀其走路。
现代文：娥清建议沿着泾水而行，奚斤不同意，坚持走北道以便截击赫连定的退路。
English: Ee Ching suggested to go along Surabaya, but Hao Jin disagreed and insisted on taking the northern route in order to intercept the retreat route determined by He Lianfang.

古文：至马髦岭，夏军将遁，会魏小将有罪亡归于夏，告以魏军食少无水。
现代文：北魏军走到马髦岭，夏国军队正要逃走，正巧北魏军中的一名小将因为犯罪投降了夏军，把北魏军中缺粮少水的窘况都报告了赫连定。
English: The Northern Wei army went to Ma Xiangling, and the Xia army was about to flee. It just so happened that a young general in the Northern Wei army surrendered to the Xia army because of a crime, and reported the plight of the Northern Wei army's lack of food and water to Helian Ding.

古文：夏主乃分兵邀斤，前后夹击之，魏兵大溃，斤及娥清、刘拔皆为夏所擒，士卒死者六七千人。
现代文：赫连定于是分兵几路拦载奚斤的军队，前后夹击，北魏军顿时溃败如潮，奚斤、娥清、刘拔等将领都被夏军活捉，士卒中也有六七千人战死。
English: Therefore, He Lianding sent several detachments of soldiers to intercept the army carrying the coffin, and clamped them back and forth. The Northern Wei Army was immediately defeated. The generals such as the coffin, E Qing, and Liu Ba were all captured alive by the Xia Army. Six or seven thousand soldiers also died in the battle.

古文：丘堆守辎重在安定，闻斤败，弃辎重奔长安，与高凉王礼偕奔薄阪，夏人复取长安。
现代文：北魏大将丘堆在安定城留守，看管军用物资，他听说奚斤战败的消息，立刻放弃辎重逃往长安，又与高凉王拓跋礼一道放弃长安，逃奔蒲阪，夏国的军队又重新占据了长安城。
English: The Northern Wei general, Yau Hei, stayed behind in the City of Stability to keep an eye on the military supplies. When he heard the news of the defeat of Shujin, he immediately gave up his position and fled to Chang'an. He also abandoned Chang'an together with Gao Liang Wang and fled to Busan. Xia's army reoccupied the City of Chang'an.

古文：魏主大怒，命安颉斩丘堆，代将其众，镇薄阪以拒之。
现代文：拓跋焘闻知大怒，命令安颉斩丘堆，代替他统领他的部众镇守蒲阪来抗拒夏军。
English: Takubasho was furious and ordered Anchō to chop down the mound, and in his place he led his retainers to defend Busan against Xia's army.

古文：夏，四月，夏主遣使请和于魏，魏主以诏谕之使降。
现代文：夏季四月，夏王赫连定派使臣到北魏国，请求和解。北魏国主拓跋焘下诏命令赫连定投降。
English: In the summer of April, Xia King He Lian sent an envoy to the Northern Wei Dynasty to request reconciliation. Northern Wei Emperor Tuoba issued an edict ordering He Lian to surrender.

古文：壬子，魏主西巡。
现代文：壬子，北魏国主拓跋焘向西巡察。
English: Ren Zi, the head of the Northern Wei State, traveled west to inspect.

古文：戊午，畋于河西。大赦。
现代文：戊午，拓跋焘在河西打猎；下令大赦。
English: In the afternoon, Tuobao went hunting in Hexi; he ordered an amnesty.

古文：五月，秦文昭王炽磐卒，太子暮末即位，大赦，改元永弘。
现代文：五月，西秦王乞伏炽磐去世，太子乞伏暮末继承王位，大赦天下，改年号为永弘。
English: In May, the Western Qin Emperor died, and his son became the heir to the throne at the end of the year. He was pardoned by the emperor and his era name was changed to Yonghong.

古文：平陆令河南成粲复劝王弘逊位，弘从之，累表陈请。
现代文：刘宋平陆县令、河南人成粲再度劝司徒王弘退位，王弘采纳了他的建议，一再上疏，坚决请求辞去职务。
English: Liu Songping, the prefect of Lu County, and Cheng Yao, a native of Henan Province, once again persuaded Wang Hong, a scholar, to abdicate. Wang Hong accepted his suggestion, repeatedly went up the stairs, and firmly requested to resign from his post.

古文：帝不得已，六月，庚戌，以弘为卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：刘宋文帝不得已，六月，庚戌，调任王弘为卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen had no choice but to transfer Wang Hong to the post of Wei general, Kaifu Yi and three departments in June, Geng Zi.

古文：甲寅，魏主如长川。
现代文：甲寅，北魏国主拓跋焘抵达长川。
English: Ka Yin, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, arrived in Nagakawa.

古文：葬秦文昭王于武平陵，庙号太祖。
现代文：西秦国在武平陵安葬了文昭王乞伏炽磐，庙号太祖。
English: West Qin State buried King Wen Zhao in Wuping Mausoleum, the founder of the temple.

古文：秦王暮末以右丞相元基为侍中、相国、都督中外诸军、录尚书事，以镇军大将军、河州牧谦屯为骠骑大将军，征安北将军、凉州刺史段晖为辅国大将军、御史大夫，叔父右禁将军千年为镇北将军、凉州牧，镇湟河，以征北将军木弈干为尚书令、车骑大将军，以征南将军吉毘为尚书仆射、卫大将军。
现代文：西秦王乞伏暮末任命右丞相乞伏元基为侍中、相国、都督中外诸军事、录尚书事等职务；同时任命镇军大将军、河州牧乞伏谦屯为骠骑大将军；征召安北将军、凉州刺史段晖为辅国大将军、御史大夫；任命叔父、右禁将军乞伏千年为镇北将军、凉州牧，镇守湟河；又任命征北将军乞伏木弈干为尚书令、车骑大将军；任命征南将军乞伏吉毗为尚书仆射、卫大将军。
English: At the end of the Western Qin Dynasty, the king of Qifu appointed the Minister of the Right, Qifu Yuanji, to be a chamberlain, a relative of the state, the governor of the central and foreign military, and to record records and other duties; at the same time, he appointed the general of the town army, Hezhou Mu, Qifu Qiantun, as the general of the cavalry; conscripted the general of Annbei, Liangzhou Zhishidan, as the assistant general of the state, and the secretary of the history; appointed the uncle, the right forbidden general, Qifu Millennium, as the general of Zhenbei, Liangzhou Mu

古文：河西王蒙逊因秦丧，伐秦西平。西平太守麹承谓之曰： 殿下若先取乐都，则西平必为殿下之有。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊利用乞伏炽磐去世的机会，进攻西秦所属的西平，西平太守承，对前来攻城的沮渠蒙逊说： 殿下如果能够先攻取乐都，那么西平一定会归附殿下。
English: The Western King of the Beiliang River, Deshu Monson, took advantage of the opportunity to attack Xiping, which belonged to the Western Qin Dynasty, by begging for the death of Blazing Rock. Xiping was too defensive, and said to Deshu Monson, who came to attack the city: "Your highness, if you can capture Le Du first, then Xiping will definitely belong to your highness."

古文：西平苟望风请服，亦明主之所疾也。 
现代文：假如我望风而降，英明君主也看不起这样的守将。 
English: If I were to follow the wind, a wise monarch would despise such a watchman.

古文：蒙逊乃释西平，攻乐都。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊于是放弃西平，改变方向去进攻乐都。
English: Frustrated, Meng Song then abandoned Xiping and changed his direction to attack Le Du.

古文：相国元基帅骑三千救乐都，甫入城，而河西兵至，攻其外城，克之；绝其水道，城中饥渴，死者太半。
现代文：西秦的相国乞伏元基率领骑兵三千人救援乐都。乞伏元基的援兵刚刚进城，沮渠蒙逊的大军也开到了城下，开始攻击，很快就攻陷了乐都外城；切断了乐都城的水源，城中有一半以上的人死于饥渴。
English: Western Qin's brother-in-law Gui Fu Yuanji led 3,000 cavalrymen to rescue Letu. Gui Fu Yuanji's reinforcements had just entered the city, and Mengxun's army also drove under the city and began to attack. They soon captured Letu's outer city; they cut off Letu's water source, and more than half of the people in the city died of hunger and thirst.

古文：东羌乞提从元基救乐都，阴与河西通谋，下绳引内其兵，登城者百馀人，鼓噪烧门；元基帅左右奋击，河西兵乃退。
现代文：东羌部落酋长乞提原来跟随乞伏元基救援乐都，却暗中与城外的北凉军队勾结，从城上抛下绳索，从内部牵引北凉士卒登城，很快登城的北凉军士达百余人，他们大声呐喊，纵火焚烧城门，乞伏元基率领左右亲军奋力抗击，北凉的军队才被打退。
English: The chief of the Donglu tribe, Qianti, originally followed Qifu Yuanji to rescue Le Du, but secretly colluded with the Bei Liang army outside the city, threw ropes from the city, and dragged Bei Liang soldiers from the inside to climb the city. Soon, more than a hundred Bei Liang soldiers climbed the city. They shouted loudly, set fire to the city gate, and Qifu Yuanji led the left and right armies to fight hard, and the Bei Liang army was repulsed.

古文：初，文昭王疾病，谓暮末曰： 吾死之后，汝能保境则善矣。
现代文：最初，文昭王乞伏炽磐重病时，曾对太子乞伏暮末说： 我死以后，你能够保住国土不失，就已经不错了。
English: In the beginning, when King Wenzhao was gravely ill, he said to the crown prince at the end of his life: "After my death, if you can keep the country intact, it will be a good thing."

古文：沮渠成都为蒙逊所亲重，汝宜归之。 
现代文：沮渠成都一向得到沮渠蒙逊的信任和重用，你应该把他送回国去。 
English: Deshu Chengdu has always been trusted and reused by Deshu Monson, you should send him back to his country.

古文：至是，暮末遣使诣蒙逊，许归成都以求和。
现代文：这时，乞伏暮末遣使来到沮渠蒙逊的营中，答应归还沮渠成都，请求和解。
English: At this time, he sent an envoy to Mengxun's camp at the end of the year, promising to return Mengxun to Chengdu and asking for reconciliation.

古文：蒙逊引兵还，遣使入秦吊祭。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊接受了西秦的建议，撤军回国，随即又派遣使臣赴西秦吊丧。
English: Despondent, Meng Song accepted the suggestion of the Western Qin Dynasty, withdrew his troops back to China, and then sent envoys to the Western Qin Dynasty to pay his respects.

古文：暮末厚资送成都，遣将军王伐送之。
现代文：乞伏暮末用厚重的礼物，送沮渠成都回国，并派将军王伐护送。
English: At the end of the year, he sent a heavy gift to Chengdu to return to China, and sent General Wang Fazhu to escort him.

古文：蒙逊犹疑之，使恢武将军沮渠奇珍伏兵于扪天岭，执伐并其骑士三百人以归。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊对西秦的做法仍深怀疑虑，就派恢武将军沮渠奇珍，在扪天岭设下埋伏，擒获王伐及其三百骑兵回国。
English: Depuqiu Mengxun was still deeply suspicious of the West Qin's approach, so he sent the powerful military general Depuqiu Qizhen to set up an ambush at Shantianling and capture Wangfai and his three hundred cavalrymen to return to China.

古文：既而遣尚书郎王杼送伐还秦，并遗暮末马千匹及锦罽银缯。
现代文：不久，又派尚书郎王杼护送王伐返回了西秦，并送给乞伏暮末战马一千匹以及其他锦缎绫罗。
English: Not long after, he also sent Shang Shulang Wang Yao to escort Wang Hua back to West Qin, and gave him a thousand horses and other brocades.

古文：秋，七月，暮末遣记室郎中马艾如河西报聘。
现代文：秋季，七月，乞伏暮末派遣记室郎中马艾前往北凉回访。
English: In the autumn, in July, at the end of the year, he sent his secretary, Ma Ai, to pay a return visit to Beilang.

古文：魏主还宫。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘回宫。
English: Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to the palace.

古文：八月，复如广宁观温泉。
现代文：八月，拓跋焘又前往广宁观赏温泉。
English: In August, they went to Guangning to enjoy the hot springs.

古文：柔然纥升盖可汗遣其子将万馀骑寇魏边。
现代文：柔然汗国纥升盖可汗郁久闾大檀派他的儿子率领一万多骑兵进犯北魏的边境。
English: Khan Yu Jiuyong sent his son Zhu Ru to lead more than ten thousand cavalry to invade the border of Northern Wei.

古文：魏主自广宁还，追之，不及。
现代文：拓跋焘从广宁返回首都平城，率兵追击柔然汗国的军队，没有追上。
English: Tuobao returned from Guangning to the capital, Pingcheng, and led the troops to pursue the army of the Juren Khanate, but did not catch up.

古文：九月，还宫。
现代文：九月，拓跋焘回宫。
English: In September, Tuobao returned to the palace.

古文：冬，十月，甲辰，魏主北巡。壬子，畋于牛川。
现代文：冬季十月，甲辰，拓跋焘到北方巡视；壬子，到牛川狩猎。
English: In the winter of October, in Jia Chen, Tuo Bao went to the north for inspection; in Ren Zi, he went to Ushikawa for hunting.

古文：秦凉州牧乞伏千年，嗜酒残虐，不恤政事，秦王暮未遣使让之，千年惧，奔河西。
现代文：西秦凉州牧乞伏千年，酗酒暴虐，不理公务。西秦王乞伏暮末派遣使臣责备他，乞伏千年大为恐惧，投奔北凉。
English: In the late twilight of the year, the Western Qin king of Liangzhou sent an envoy to Liangzhou to reprimand him for begging for a thousand years. Liangzhou was terrified and fled to Beiliang.

古文：暮末以叔父光禄大夫沃陵为凉州牧，镇湟河。
现代文：乞伏暮末任命他的叔父、光禄大夫乞伏沃陵为凉州牧，镇守湟河。
English: At the end of his life, he appointed his uncle, Dr. Guanglu, to be the herdsman of Liangzhou and the guardian of the Lianghe River.

古文：徐州刺史王仲德遣步骑二千伐魏济阳、陈留。
现代文：刘宋徐州刺史王仲德派遣步、骑兵二千人进攻北魏所属的济阳、陈留。
English: Liu Song, Xuzhou, and Wang Zhongde dispatched two thousand cavalry to attack Jiyang and Chenlu, which belonged to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏主还宫。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘回宫。
English: Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to the palace.

古文：魏定州丁零鲜于台阳第二千馀家叛，入西山，州郡不能讨。
现代文：北魏定州丁零部落酋长鲜于台阳等率两千余家背叛了北魏，进入西山；地方州郡都无力讨伐他们。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, more than two thousand families of the Dingye tribe in Dingzhou, led by the chieftain Sheng Yu Taiyang, betrayed the Northern Wei Dynasty and entered the West Mountain. Local prefectures and counties were powerless to fight them.

古文：闰月，魏主遣镇南将军叔孙建讨之。
现代文：闰月，拓跋焘命镇南将军叔孙建前往征讨。
English: In the leap month, Tuoba's uncle Sun Jian, the general of Zhennan, went to fight.

古文：十一月，乙未朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，乙未朔，出现日食。
English: In November, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：魏主如西河校猎。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘前往西河，举行围猎。
English: The head of the Northern Wei State, Tuobao, went to the West River to hold a hunt.

古文：十二月，甲申，还宫。
现代文：十二月，甲申，回宫。
English: In December, Jiaxun returned to the palace.

古文：河西王蒙逊伐秦，至磐夷，秦相国元基等将骑万五千拒之。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊再次讨伐西秦，北凉军开到磐夷，遇到西秦相国乞伏元基率领骑兵一万五千人阻击。
English: Meng Song, the Western King of the Liang River, once again invaded Western Qin. The Northern Liang Army drove to Iwani, where they encountered the Western Qin state of Qi Fu Yuanji, who led 15,000 cavalry to resist.

古文：蒙逊还攻西平，征虏将军出连辅政等将骑二千救之。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊率军回攻西平，西秦征虏将军出连辅政等率领骑兵二千人赶赴救援。
English: Despondent, Mengxun led the army to attack Xiping again, and the general of the Western Qin conquest, Lian Fu Zheng, led 2,000 cavalrymen to rush to the rescue.

古文：秘书监谢灵运，自以名辈才能，应参时政。
现代文：刘宋秘书监谢灵运，自以为他的才能、名望和辈分，都足以有资格参与朝政。
English: Liu Song's secretary, Supervisor Xie Lingyun, thought that his talent, fame and seniority were enough to qualify him to participate in imperial politics.

古文：上唯接以文义，每侍宴谈赏而已。
现代文：可是刘宋文帝只看重他的文才，只是常常让他参加宴会，跟他谈论和欣赏文而已。
English: However, Emperor Liu Songwen only valued his literary talent, but often invited him to banquets to discuss and appreciate literature with him.

古文：王昙首、王华、殷景仁名位素出灵运下，并见任遇，灵运意甚不平，多称疾不朝直；或出郭游行，且二百里，经旬不归，既无表闻，又不请急。
现代文：王昙首、王华、殷景仁的名望和地位，一向居于谢灵运之下，他们都得到了重用，并被委以国家机要大事，谢灵运因此愤愤不平，经常声称有病，不参加朝会；有时出城游玩旅行，走出二百里，十余日也不回来，即不上疏奏报，也从不请假。
English: The fame and status of Wang Shanshu, Wang Hua, and Yin Jingren have always been under Xie Lingyun. They have all been reused and entrusted with important national affairs. As a result, Xie Lingyun was indignant and often claimed to be ill and did not attend the imperial court; sometimes they went out of the city for a trip, walked 200 miles, and did not return for more than ten days. Even if they did not submit a report, they never asked for leave.

古文：上不欲伤大臣意，讽令自解。
现代文：刘宋文帝不愿伤害大臣的面子，婉转地让他自己辞职。
English: Unwilling to hurt the minister's face, Emperor Liu Songwen gently asked him to resign.

古文：灵运乃上表陈疾，上赐假，令还会稽。
现代文：谢灵运于是上书，声称自己有病。刘义隆批准他休假，让他返回会稽养病。
English: Xie Lingyun then wrote a letter, claiming that he was ill. Liu Yilong approved his leave of absence and let him return to the association to recover from his illness.

古文：而灵运游饮自若，为法司所纠，坐免官。
现代文：谢灵运回会稽后，仍然游乐欢宴，被法司纠举，于是被免除了官职。
English: After Xie Lingyun returned to the audit, he still enjoyed the banquet. He was punished by the legal department, and was relieved of his official duties.

古文：是岁，师子王刹利摩诃及天竺迦毘黎王月爱，皆遣使奉表入贡，表辞皆如浮屠之言。
现代文：这一年，师子国王刹利摩诃以及天竺迦毗黎王月爱都派遣使臣前往刘宋进贡。他们奏章上的辞句都类似佛经上的语言。
English: In the same year, his teacher and son, King Seremath, as well as the Tenzin Kagviri King Yue Ai, both sent envoys to pay tribute to Liu Song. The words in their sermons are similar to the language in Buddhist scriptures.

古文：魏镇远将军平舒侯燕凤卒。
现代文：北魏镇远将军、平舒侯燕凤去世。
English: Northern Wei Zhenyuan general, Ping Shuhou Yanfeng passed away.

古文：太祖文皇帝上之中元嘉六年
现代文：元嘉六年
English: Six years of Yuan Jia

古文：春，正月，王弘上表乞解州、录，以授彭城王义康，帝优诏不许。
现代文：春季，正月，刘宋扬州刺史王弘上疏要求辞去扬州刺史和录尚书事等职，并请求皇上把这两项要职委任给彭城王刘义康。刘宋文帝下达一份褒奖诏书，但没有批准。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Liu Song Yangzhou scribe Wang Hong Shangso asked to resign from the post of Yangzhou scribe and recorder, and requested the emperor to assign these two important posts to Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng. Emperor Liu Songwen issued a letter of commendation, but did not approve.

古文：癸丑，以义康为侍中、都督扬、南徐、衮三州诸军事、司徒、录尚书事、领南徐州刺史。
现代文：癸丑，下诏任命刘义康为侍中，都督扬、南徐、兖三州诸军事，司徒，录尚书事，领南徐州刺史。
English: At the same time, Liu Yikang was appointed as a chamberlain, and the military commanders of the three states, Yang, Nanxu, and Yan, were appointed as governors-general, and the records were recorded, and the history of Southern Xuzhou was recorded.

古文：弘与义康二府并置佐领兵，共辅朝政。
现代文：王弘与刘义康二人的官署，都设置属官卫，二人共同辅佐朝廷政务。
English: Wang Hong and Liu Yikang's government offices are both subordinate to the Ministry of Public Security, and the two jointly assist the government affairs of the Imperial Court.

古文：弘既多疾，且欲委远大权，每事推让义康，由是义康专总内外之务。
现代文：王弘体弱多病，况且又早下决心远离权势，因此每件事都推给刘义康处理。刘义康于是一个人总管内外事务。
English: Wang Hong was frail and sickly, and he had already made up his mind to stay away from power, so he left everything to Liu Yikang to deal with. Liu Yikang was then in charge of internal and external affairs.

古文：又以抚将军江夏王义恭为都督荆、湘等八州诸军事、荆州刺史，以待中刘湛为南蛮校尉，行府州事。
现代文：刘宋文帝又任命抚军将军、江夏王刘义恭为都督荆、湘等八州诸军事，兼任荆州刺史；任命侍中刘湛为南蛮校尉，代理府、州政务。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen also appointed the general of the Fuzhou army and the king of Jiangxia Liu Yigong as the military governor of eight states including Jing and Hunan, and also served as the governor of Jingzhou; appointed the chamberlain Liu Zhan as the captain of Nanban, acting for the government and state affairs.

古文：帝与义恭书，诫之曰： 天下艰难，家国事重，虽曰守成，实亦未易。
现代文：刘宋文帝写信给刘义恭，告诫他说： 天下时事，十分艰难，家事国事，关系重大。虽说是继承并保住现成的基业，实际上也还是相当不容易。
English: Emperor Liu Songwen wrote a letter to Liu Yigong, admonishing him: Current affairs in the world are very difficult, family affairs and state affairs are of great importance. Although it is to inherit and preserve the existing heritage, it is actually quite difficult.

古文：隆替安危，在吾曹耳，岂可不感寻王业，大惧负荷！汝性褊急，志之所滞，其欲必行，意所不存，从物回改。
现代文：国家的兴隆或衰落，安定或危覆都在于我们的努力，怎么可以不感到王业艰难而寻求治国之道，从而对自己肩负重担而惶恐不安呢！ 你的性情急躁偏激，心里想着什么，就要不顾一切地达到目的。
English: The prosperity or decline of the country, stability or crisis, all depend on our efforts. How can you not feel that the king's career is difficult and seek a way to govern the country, thus burdening yourself with fear and anxiety! Your temperament is impatient and extreme, and whatever you think in your heart, you must achieve your goal regardless of everything.

古文：此最弊事，宜念裁抑。卫表遇士大夫以礼，与小人有恩；西门、安于，矫性齐美；关羽、张飞，任偏同弊。
现代文：有时你的心里并没有某些愿望，一受外界引诱，你就立刻产生欲望，这是最容易招致祸端的，应该时刻提醒自己，极力克制。卫青对待士大夫礼貌谦恭，对小人也有恩惠；西门豹性情刚直急躁，常常佩带苇草；董安于性情宽容，做事缓慢，常常佩带弓弦，都是为了警告自己，矫正自己的性情，他们的美名一齐得到了后世的传颂。
English: Sometimes you do not have certain wishes in your heart. As soon as you are tempted by the outside world, you will immediately have desires. This is the most likely to cause disaster. You should always remind yourself and try your best to restrain. Wei Qing treated Shi Daifu with courtesy and courtesy, and also had favors for villains; Ximen Leopard had a straightforward and impatient temperament, and often wore egrets; Dong Anyu had a tolerant temperament, did things slowly, and often wore bow strings, all to warn himself and correct his temperament. Their beautiful names have been passed down to posterity.

古文：行己举事，深宜鉴此！
现代文：关羽、张飞则不然，二人的性格都任性偏激，缺点相同。
English: However, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei are different. Both of them are headstrong and have the same shortcomings.

古文：若事异今日，嗣子幼蒙，司徒当周公之事，汝不可不尽祗顺之理。
现代文：你侍己处事，要深刻体会古人的行为，作为借鉴。 倘若有一天朝中发生不测，我的儿子年纪还小，身为司徒的刘义康必然要负起周公的责任，你也不可不尽到恭敬辅弼的道义。
English: If one day an accident occurs in the middle of the dynasty, and my son is still young, Liu Yikang, who is a scholar, will certainly have to assume the responsibility of Zhou Gong, and you must fulfill the moral of respecting and assisting Zhou.

古文：尔时天下安危，决汝二人耳。
现代文：到那个时候，国家的安危存亡，就全取决于你们二人了。
English: At that time, the survival of the nation will depend on the two of you.

古文： 汝一月自用钱不可过三十万，若能省此，益美。
现代文： 你每月的私人开支，不能超过三十万，倘若还能比这节省，那就更好。
English: Your monthly private expenses should not exceed 300,000 yuan, and if you can save more than that, that's even better.

古文：西楚府舍，略所谙究，计当不须改作，日求新异。
现代文：荆州的府舍，我略为熟悉了解，估计还不用重新改建，去追求新异。
English: I am somewhat familiar with Jingzhou's prefectural residence, and I estimate that it does not need to be rebuilt to pursue novelty.

古文：凡讯狱多决当时，难可逆虑，此实为难。
现代文：至于讯案断狱，大多要当时裁决，很难事先做周到的考虑，当然，这是一件很不容易的事。
English: As for the termination of imprisonment in cases of information, most of them require a ruling at the time, and it is difficult to make thoughtful considerations in advance. Of course, this is a very difficult matter.

古文：至讯日，虚怀博尽，慎无以喜怒加人。
现代文：在审讯的时候，要虚心听取各方面的陈述，千万谨慎处置，不要把自己的喜怒强加于人。
English: During the trial, it is necessary to listen to all aspects of the statement with an open mind, be cautious in handling it, and not impose one's own emotions on others.

古文：能择善者而从之，美自归己；不可专意自决，以矜独断之明也！名器深宜慎惜，不可妄以假人。昵近爵赐，尤应裁量。
现代文：平时做事，能择善而从，自己就会获得好的声誉，切不可一意孤行，来炫耀自己的独断和英明。 名分一定要谨慎珍惜，不可以随便赏给他人；对亲近的人封赐爵位，则更应再三考虑定夺。
English: In ordinary work, if you can choose the good and follow it, you will gain a good reputation. You must not go all out to show off your arbitrariness and wisdom. You must carefully cherish your reputation, and you must not give it to others arbitrarily; if you give a peerage to someone close to you, you should consider it again and again.

古文：吾于左右虽为少恩，如闻外论不以为非也。以贵凌物，物不服；以威加人，人不厌；此易达事耳。
现代文：我对于身边的人，虽然很少有特别的赏赐，但如果听说外面有人议论我，我也不认为他们说的不对。 凭权势欺凌别人，别人自然不服，用威望统辖别人，别人便不会满意，这是显而易见的事。
English: Although I rarely give special rewards to people around me, if I hear that people outside are talking about me, I don't think they are saying the wrong thing. It is obvious that if you bully others with power, others will naturally not accept it, and if you dominate others with prestige, others will not be satisfied.

古文： 声乐嬉游，不宜令过；蒲酒渔猎，一切勿为。供用奉身，皆有节度，奇服异器，不宜兴长。
现代文： 声色犬马，嬉戏游乐都不能过分。饮酒赌博、捕鱼狩猎这一切都不应该做，日常用品、衣服饮食，都应有节制。
English: Dogs and horses should not be excessively noisy, and there should be no excessive play or amusement. Drinking, gambling, fishing, and hunting should not be done. Daily necessities, clothing, and diet should all be controlled.

古文：又宜数引见佐史。相见不数，则彼我不亲；不亲，无因得尽人情；人情不尽，复何由知众事也！ 
现代文：至于新奇的服饰和器物，不应鼓励制作。 你还应该多多接见府中的官员，召见的次数少，就会彼此不亲近；不亲近，你就没有办法知道官员们的思想感情，不了解他们的思想感情，因此也就无法知道民间的具体情况。 
English: As for novel costumes and utensils, the production of them should not be encouraged. You should also receive more and more officials in the government, and if the number of meetings is small, you will not be close to each other; if you are not close, you have no way to know the thoughts and feelings of officials, do not understand their thoughts and feelings, and therefore cannot know the specific situation of the people.

古文：夏酒泉公俊自平凉奔魏。
现代文：夏国的酒泉公赫连隽从平凉出逃，投奔北魏。
English: Jiuquan Gonghelian of Xia fled from Pingliang to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：丁零鲜于台阳等请降于魏，魏主赦之。
现代文：丁零部落酋长鲜于台阳等人，请求再次归降北魏，北魏国主拓跋焘赦免了他们的罪过。
English: Ding Zi tribal chieftain Sheng Yu Taiyang and others requested to return to the Northern Wei Dynasty again, and the Northern Wei Emperor Tuobao pardoned their sins.

古文：秦出连辅政等未至西平，河西王蒙逊拔西平，执太守麹承。
现代文：西秦征虏将军出连辅政等率领援军还没有赶到西平，北凉王沮渠蒙逊已经攻陷了西平城，活捉了西平太守承。
English: The reinforcements led by Western Qin conquering generals such as Zhilian and Fu Zheng had not yet arrived in Xiping, but the Northern Liang Dynasty's King Despondent Mengsong had already captured Xiping City and captured Xiping Taishoucheng alive.

古文：二月，秦王暮末立妃梁氏为王后，子万载为太子。
现代文：二月，西秦王乞伏暮末，立妃梁氏为王后，封王子乞伏万载为太子。
English: In February, at the end of the Western Qin Dynasty, Emperor Xizong made Princess Liang the queen and Prince Feng the crown prince.

古文：三月，丁巳，立丘子劭为太子。戊午，大赦。
现代文：三月，丁巳，刘宋文帝立皇子刘劭为太子；戊午，下令大赦。
English: In March, Emperor Liu Songwen made Prince Liu Xuan the crown prince; in the afternoon, he ordered a general amnesty.

古文：辛酉，以左卫将军殷景仁为中领军。
现代文：辛酉，刘宋文帝任命左卫将军殷景仁为中领军。
English: On the 29th, the left guard general Yin Jingren was appointed as the middle leader.

古文：帝以章太后早亡；奉太后所生苏氏甚谨。
现代文：文帝因为生母章太后胡氏早死，事奉外祖母苏氏十分恭谨。
English: Because Emperor Wen's birth mother, Empress Dowager Zhang Rong Hu, died young, he was very respectful in serving his grandmother, Empress Su.

古文：苏氏卒，帝往临哭，欲追加封爵，使群臣议之。
现代文：苏氏去世后，文帝到灵前恸哭，并打算追封爵位，命文武官员讨论。
English: After the death of the Su clan, Emperor Wen went to the front of the shrine to weep, and planned to pursue a knighthood, ordering officials to discuss the matter.

古文：景仁以为古典无之，乃止。
现代文：殷景仁认为自古没有封外祖母爵位的先例，文帝才作罢。
English: Yin Jingren believed that since ancient times, there was no precedent for the knighthood of a great-grandmother, and Emperor Wen did not do it.

古文：初，秦尚书陇西辛进从文昭王游陵霄观，弹飞鸟，误中秦王暮末之母，伤其面。
现代文：当初，西秦尚书、陇西人辛进，跟从文昭王乞伏炽磐在陵霄观游览，用弹弓击飞鸟，不想竟误中秦王乞伏暮末的母亲，损伤了她的容貌。
English: At the beginning, the Western Qin Emperor Shangshu and the Western Shaanxi people Xinjin followed the King Wenzhao's begging in the tomb for a scenic tour and hit the flying birds with a slingshot, not wanting to accidentally hit the late Qin King's mother, damaging her appearance.

古文：及暮末即位，问母面伤之由，母以状告。暮末怒，杀进，并其五族二十七人。
现代文：等到乞伏暮末即位，问及他母亲面部受伤的原因，他母亲把当时的情况据实地告诉了他，乞伏暮末大发雷霆，斩杀了辛进及其五族内的亲属二十七人。
English: At the end of his reign, he asked his mother about the cause of her facial injuries. His mother told him the truth about the situation at the time. At the end of his reign, he flew into a rage and killed Sin Jin and 27 of his relatives from the five clans.

古文：夏，四月，癸亥，以尚书左射王敬弘为尚书令，临川王义庆为左仆射，吏部尚书济阳江夷为右仆射。
现代文：夏季四月，癸亥，刘宋文帝任命尚书左仆射王敬弘为尚书令；临川王刘义庆为左仆射；吏部尚书、济阳人江夷为右仆射。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Liu Songwen appointed Shangshu's left-hand servant Sha Wang Jinghong as Shangshu's second-in-command; Linchuan King Liu Yiqing as Shangshu's left-hand servant; Shangshu from the Ministry of Personnel and Jiang Yi from Jiyang as Shangshu's right-hand servant.

古文：初，魏太祖命尚书郎邓渊撰《国记》十馀卷，未成而止。
现代文：当初，北魏道武帝拓跋，命令尚书邓渊撰写《国记》十余卷，书未写成就停止了。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty ordered Shangshu Dengyuan to write more than ten volumes of "National Records," and the unfinished work was stopped.

古文：世祖更命崔浩与中书侍郎邓颖等续成之，为《国书》三十卷。
现代文：于是，拓跋焘改命崔浩与中书侍郎邓颖等人继续编撰，称《国书》，共三十卷。
English: As a result, Cui Hao, who changed his name from Tuobao to Tuobao, and Deng Ying, who was in charge of Chinese books, continued to compile, calling it the "National Book," a total of thirty volumes.

古文：颖，渊之子也。
现代文：邓颖是邓渊的儿子。
English: Deng Ying is Deng Yuan's son.

古文：魏主将击柔然，治兵于南郊，先祭天，然后部勒行陈。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘将进攻柔然汗国，在平城的南郊举行阅兵大典。先行祭拜天神，然后下令排列战阵。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, is about to attack the Khanate of Juran, and holds a grand military parade in the southern suburbs of Pingcheng. He first worships the gods of heaven, and then orders the formation of battle lines.

古文：内外群臣皆不欲行，保太后固止之，独崔浩劝之。
现代文：朝廷内外的文武群臣都不愿意打这一仗，连拓跋焘的乳娘保太后都坚决劝阻，只有太常崔浩极力赞成。
English: The courtiers and warriors inside and outside the court were not willing to fight this battle, and even the empress dowager, the wet nurse of Emperor Tuoba, was firmly dissuaded. Only the Empress Dowager Cui Hao was strongly in favor.

古文：尚书令刘絜等共推太史令张渊、徐辩使言于魏主曰： 今兹己巳，三阴之岁，岁星袭月，太白在西方，不可举兵，北伐必败。虽克，不利于上。 
现代文：尚书令刘等人共同推举太史令张渊、徐辩向拓跋焘分析形势说： 今年是己巳年，恰恰是三种阴气聚集在一起的年分，木星突然靠近月亮，太白星出现在西方，不可以发动军事进攻，北伐一定失败，即使取胜，也对皇上不利。 
English: Shang Shuling ordered Liu and others to jointly nominate the Tai Shi Ling Zhang Yuan and Xu Dian Xiang Tuobao to analyze the situation and said: This year is the Year of the Snake. It is precisely the year when the three yin and yang are gathered together. Jupiter is suddenly close to the moon, the white star appears in the west, it is impossible to launch a military attack, the Northern Expedition will certainly fail, and even if it wins, it will be unfavorable to the emperor.

古文：群臣因共赞之曰： 渊等少时尝谏苻坚南伐，坚不从而败，所言无不中，不可违也。 
现代文：文武群臣也异口同声地称赞张渊和徐辩的说法，都说： 张渊年轻的时候，曾经劝阻过苻坚，不可以南伐，苻坚不肯接受，结果大败。张渊的预言几乎没有一件事不应验的。不可以违背。 
English: The ministers of literature and armed forces also praised Zhang Yuan's and Xu Fen's statements in unison, saying: When Zhang Yuan was young, he once dissuaded Xuan Jian from going to the south, Xuan Jian refused to accept it, and the result was a crushing defeat. There is almost nothing in Zhang Yuan's prophecy that cannot be verified. It cannot be violated.

古文：魏主意不决，诏浩与渊等论难于前。
现代文：拓跋焘心里不高兴，下诏命令崔浩与张渊在御前辩论。
English: Tuobao was not happy and ordered Cui Hao and Zhang Yuan to have a debate in front of the emperor.

古文：浩诘渊、辩曰： 阳为德，阴为刑，故日食修德，月食修刑。
现代文：崔浩质问张渊、徐辩说： 阳是恩德，阴是刑杀；所以出现日食时，君主要积德；出现月食的时候，就要注意刑罚。
English: Cui Hao questioned Zhang Yuan and Xu Yan and said: The yang is benevolence, and the yin is punishment. Therefore, when there is a solar eclipse, the ruler should accumulate virtue; when there is a lunar eclipse, it is necessary to pay attention to punishment.

古文：夫王者用刑，小则肆诸市朝，大则陈诸原野。
现代文：帝王使用刑法，从小处说是把犯人处决于市朝，从大处说是对敌国用兵于原野。
English: The emperor used criminal law, from a small point of view, to punish criminals in the city, and from a large point of view, to use soldiers in the field against the enemy country.

古文：今出兵以讨有罪，乃所以修刑也。
现代文：今天，出兵讨伐有罪之国，正是加强刑罚。
English: Today, sending troops to fight the guilty country is the same as strengthening the punishment.

古文：臣窃观天文，比年以来，月行掩昴，至今犹然。
现代文：我观察天象，近年以来月亮运行遮盖昴星，到现在仍然如此。
English: I watch the constellations. In recent years, the moon has moved to cover the waxing gibbous, and this is still the case.

古文：其占，三年天子大破旄头之国。
现代文：这表明，三年之内天子将大破旄头星之国。
English: This indicates that within three years, the Son of Heaven will make a great breakthrough in the country of the Shantou Star.

古文：蠕蠕、高车，旄头之众也。愿陛下勿疑。 
现代文：柔然、高车都是旄头星的部众，希望陛下不要犹豫怀疑。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will not hesitate to have doubts about the fact that Suoren and Takachika are members of the Shantou Stars.

古文：渊、辩复曰： 蠕蠕，荒外无用之物，得其地不可耕而食，得其民不可臣而使，轻疾无常，难得而制；有何汲汲，而劳士马以伐之？ 
现代文：张渊、徐辩又说： 柔然，是远荒外没有用的东西，我们得到他们的土地，也不能耕种收获粮食；得到他们的百姓也不能当作臣民驱使。而且他们疾速往来，行动没有规律，很难攻取并彻底制服；有什么事如此急迫，要动员大队人马去讨伐他们？ 
English: Zhang Yuan and Xu Yan also said, "The gentiles are useless things far away from the wilderness. If we get their land, we can't cultivate and harvest grain; if we get their people, we can't drive them as subjects. Moreover, they come and go at high speed, their actions are irregular, it is difficult to capture and completely subdue them; what is so urgent that we need to mobilize a large number of men and horses to fight them?

古文：浩曰： 渊、辩言天道，犹是其职，至于人事形势，尤非其所知。
现代文：崔浩说： 张渊、徐辩如果谈论天文，还是他们的本职；至于说到人间的事情和当前的形势，尤其不是他们能确切了解的。
English: Cui Hao said: Zhang Yuan and Xu Yan, if they talk about astronomy, it is still their duty; as for human affairs and the current situation, it is especially not what they can understand exactly.

古文：此乃汉世常谈，施之于今，殊不合事宜。
现代文：这是汉朝以来的老生常谈，用在今天，完全不切实际。
English: This has been a commonplace since the Han Dynasty, and it is completely unrealistic to use it today.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：蠕蠕本国家北边之臣，中间叛去。
现代文：柔然本来是我们国家北方的藩属，后来背叛而去。
English: Juran originally belonged to a clan in the northern part of our country, but later defected.

古文：今诛其元恶，收其良民，令复旧役，非无用也。
现代文：今天我们要诛杀叛贼元凶，收回善良的百姓，使他们能够为我国效力，不是毫无用处的。
English: Today we are going to fight and kill the traitors and recapture the good people so that they can serve our country, not for nothing.

古文：世人皆谓渊、辩通解数术，明决成败，臣请试问之：属者统万未亡之前，有无败征？
现代文：世上的人都信服张渊、徐辩深通天文历法，预知成功或失败。那么，我倒想问问他们，在统万城没有攻克之前有没有溃败的征兆？
English: People all over the world are convinced that Zhang Yuan and Xu Yan are well versed in the astronomical calendar and can predict success or failure. So, I would like to ask them, are there any signs of defeat before the city is conquered?

古文：若其不知，是无术也；知而不言，是不忠也。 
现代文：如果不知道，是没有能力；如果知道了却不说，是对皇上不忠。 
English: If you don't know, you don't have the ability; if you know but don't tell, you are being disloyal to the emperor.

古文：时赫连昌在坐，渊等自以未尝有言，惭不能对。
现代文：当时夏国前国主赫连昌也在座，张渊等人因为自己确实没有说过，十分惭愧，无法回答。
English: At that time, the former ruler of Xia, Herenchang, was also present, and Zhang Yuan and others were very ashamed because they did not say it, and could not answer.

古文：魏主大悦。
现代文：拓跋焘非常高兴。
English: Tuobao is very happy.

古文：既罢，公卿或尤浩曰： 今南寇方伺国隙，而舍之北伐；若蠕蠕远遁，前无所获，后有强寇，将何以待之？ 浩曰： 不然。
现代文：御前辩论结束后，朝中公卿重臣中有人责怪崔浩说： 如今南方宋国的敌人正在伺机侵入，而我们却置之不顾兴兵北伐；如果柔然听说我们攻来，逃得无影无踪，我们前进没有收获，后面却有强敌逼近，那时我们将怎么办？ 崔浩说： 事情不会是这样的。
English: After the pre-eminent debate was over, someone from the court nobles and senior vassals of the two countries blamed Cui Hao, saying, "Nowadays, the enemies of the Southern Song Dynasty are waiting for an opportunity to invade, but we are ignoring the Northern Expedition; if we heard that we were attacked and fled without a trace, and we advanced without any gains, but there was a strong enemy approaching behind, what would we do then?" Cui Hao said, "Things would not be like this."

古文：今不先破蠕蠕，则无以待南寇。
现代文：如今我们如果不先攻破柔然，就没有办法对付南方的敌寇。
English: Today, if we do not first break through the softness, there is no way to deal with the southern enemy.

古文：南人闻国家克统万以来，内怀恐惧，故扬声动众以卫淮北。
现代文：南方人自从听说我们攻克夏国都城统万以来，对我们一直深怀恐惧，所以扬言要出动军队，来保卫淮河以北的土地。
English: The Nanfang people have been deeply afraid of us since they heard that we had conquered the Xia capital city of Tongwan, so they threatened to send troops to defend the land north of the Huai River.

古文：比吾破蠕蠕，往还之间，南寇必不动也。
现代文：等到我们击破蠕蠕，一去一回的时间里，南寇一定不敢兴兵动武。
English: By the time we have defeated the creep, once and for all, the Nanko will certainly not dare to raise an army.

古文：且彼步我骑，彼能北来，我亦南往；在彼甚困，于我未劳。
现代文：况且，南寇多是步兵而我们主要是骑兵；他们能北来，我们也可以南下；在他们来说已经疲备不堪；而对我们来说还不曾疲劳。
English: Besides, Nancodo is infantry, and we are chiefly cavalry; they can come north, and we can go south; for them it is fatigue; but for us it is not fatigue.

古文：况南北殊俗，水陆异宜，设使国家与之河南，彼亦不能守也。
现代文：更何况南方和北方的风俗习惯大不相同；南方河道交错，北方一片平原；即使我国把黄河以南的土地让给他们，他们也守不住。
English: What's more, the customs and habits of the south and the north are very different; the rivers of the south are intertwined, and the north is a plain; even if our country concedes the land south of the Yellow River to them, they can't keep it.

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：以刘裕之雄杰，吞并关中，留其爱子，辅以良将，精兵数万，犹不能守。
现代文：当年，以刘裕的雄才大略，吞并了关中，留下他的爱子镇守，又配备了经验丰富的战将和数万名精兵，还没有守住，最后落得个全军覆没。
English: That year, with Liu Yu's great talent, he annexed Guanzhong, leaving his beloved son to guard the town, and equipped with experienced generals and tens of thousands of elite soldiers. He did not keep it, and finally lost the whole army.

古文：全军覆没，号哭之声，至今未已。
现代文：原野中的哭号之声，至今还没有停止。
English: The sound of wailing in the wilderness has not ceased.

古文：况义隆今日君臣非裕时之比！
现代文：况且，今日刘义隆和他的文武群臣，其才略根本无法与刘裕时代的君臣相比。
English: Moreover, today's Liu Yilong and his literary and military vassals are not at all comparable in talent to the princes and vassals of Liu Yu's era.

古文：主上英武，士马精强，彼若果来，譬如以驹犊斗虎狼也，何惧之有！
现代文：而我们的皇上英明威武，军队兵强马壮，如果他们真的打来，就象是马驹、牛犊与虎狼争斗一样，有什么可畏惧的呢！
English: But our emperor is wise and powerful, and his army is strong and mighty. If they really come, it will be like a fight between a horse and a mule, a bull and a wolf. What is there to be afraid of?

古文：蠕蠕恃其绝远，谓国家力不能制，自宽日久，故夏则散众放畜，秋肥乃聚，背寒向温，南来寇钞。
现代文：蠕蠕一直仗恃与我国距离遥远，以为我国没有力量制服他们，防备松懈已经很久。一到夏季，就把部众解散，各处逐水草放牧；秋季马肥兵壮，才又聚集，离开寒冷的荒野，面向温暖的中原，南下掠夺。
English: Cormorants have always been wary of the distance between them and our country, thinking that our country does not have the power to subdue them, and their defenses have been lax for a long time. As soon as summer comes, they disband their troops and graze everywhere on water and grass; in autumn, when the horses are fat and strong, they gather again, leave the cold wilderness, face the warm central plain, and go south to plunder.

古文：今掩其不备，必望尘骇散。
现代文：而今我们乘其不备出兵，他们一看到飞扬的尘沙，一定会惊慌失措地四处逃散。
English: And now we are taking advantage of their unpreparedness to send troops, who will surely panic and scatter at the sight of flying dust.

古文：牡马护牝，牝马恋驹，驱驰难制，不得水草，不过数日，必聚而困弊，可一举而灭也。
现代文：公马护着母马，母马恋着小马，难以控制驱赶，等到找不着水草，不过几天的功夫，他们会再行聚集，乘他们疲劳困顿之际，我们的军队就可以一举歼灭他们。
English: The stallion protects the mare, the mare is in love with the pony, it is difficult to control and drive them away, until they can't find the waterweed, but with a few days' effort, they will gather again, taking advantage of their fatigue and distress, our army can destroy them at one stroke.

古文：暂劳永逸，时不可失，患在上无此意。
现代文：短时间的劳苦将换来永久的安逸，这样的时机千万不能放弃，我在忧虑皇上没有这样的决心。
English: Short-term toil will be exchanged for permanent ease, such an opportunity must not be given up, I am worried that the emperor does not have such a determination.

古文：今上意已决，奈何止之！ 
现代文：现在皇上的决心已经下定了，为什么还要阻挠！ 
English: Now that the emperor's decision has been made, why obstruct it!

古文：寇谦之谓浩曰： 蠕蠕果可克乎？ 
现代文：寇谦之问崔浩说： 蠕蠕果真可以一举攻克吗？ 
English: Qiao Qianzhi asked Cui Hao: Can creep really be defeated in one fell swoop?

古文：浩曰： 必克。
现代文：崔浩回答说： 必克无疑。
English: Cui Hao replied: There is no doubt.

古文：但恐诸将琐琐，前后顾虑，不能乘胜深入，使不全举耳。 
现代文：只恐怕将领们顾虑太多，瞻前顾后，不能乘胜深入，以致于不能一举取得彻底的胜利。 
English: However, I am afraid that the generals have too many concerns, looking ahead and behind, and cannot take advantage of the victory, so that they cannot achieve complete victory at one stroke.

古文：先是，帝因魏使者还，告魏主曰： 汝趣归我河南地！
现代文：在此之前，刘宋文帝趁北魏使者回国，让使者转告北魏国主拓跋焘说： 你应该赶快归还我黄河以南的领土！
English: Prior to this, Emperor Liu Songwen took advantage of the return of the Northern Wei emissary to have the emissary tell the Northern Wei sovereign Tuobao: You should quickly return my territory south of the Yellow River!

古文：不然，将尽我将士之力。 
现代文：否则，我们的将士只好竭力攻取。 
English: Otherwise, our soldiers will have to do their best to capture it.

古文：魏主方议伐柔然，闻之大笑，谓公卿曰： 龟鳖小竖，自救不暇，夫何能为！
现代文：当时，拓跋焘正在讨论讨伐柔然的事宜，听到这个消息，大笑不已，对左右大臣们说： 龟鳖小丑，他救护自己还来不及，还能有什么作为！
English: At that time, Tuobao was discussing the matter of cracking down on Zhuoran. When he heard this news, he laughed out loud and said to the ministers around him: "Turtle Clown, he's too late to save himself, what else can he do!

古文：就使能来，若不先灭蠕蠕，乃是坐待寇至，腹背受敌，非良策也。
现代文：即使他真能打来，如果我们不先灭掉蠕蠕，那就是在家门口坐等敌人来攻，腹背受敌，不是好的计策。
English: Even if he really can call, if we don't eliminate the creep first, it's not a good strategy to sit on the doorstep waiting for the enemy to attack, and suffer from the enemy.

古文：吾行决矣。 
现代文：我决心立即讨伐。 
English: I am determined to strike at once.

古文：庚寅，魏主发平城，使北平王长孙嵩、广陵公楼伏连居守。
现代文：庚寅，拓跋焘从平城出发。命令北平王长孙嵩、广陵公楼伏连等留守京师。
English: Geng Yin and Tuobao set out from Pingcheng, and ordered the Beijing division left behind, including Beiping Wang Changsun Song and Guangling Gonglou Furen.

古文：魏主自东道向黑山，使平阳王长孙翰自西道向大娥山，同会柔然之庭。
现代文：拓跋焘向东取道黑山，派平阳王长孙翰向西取道大娥山，约定在柔然汗国的王庭会师。
English: Tuobao took the Black Mountain Road to the east, and sent the King of Pingyang, Sun Yat-sen, to take the Dae Mountain Road to the west. They agreed to meet at the King's Court in Juran Khan's country.

古文：五月，壬辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月，壬辰朔，出现日食。
English: In May, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：王敬弘固让尚书令，表求还东。
现代文：王敬弘坚决辞让尚书令，上疏请求返回故乡会稽。
English: Wang Jinghong resolutely resigned from Shang Shuling and requested Shang Shu to return to his hometown.

古文：癸巳，更以敬弘为侍中、特进、左光禄大夫，听其东归。
现代文：癸巳，改任王敬弘为侍中、特进、左光禄大夫，准许他回到东边。
English: At the same time, Wang Jinghong was reappointed as a chamberlain, a special envoy, and a doctor of the Left Guanglu, and he was allowed to return to the east.

古文：丁未，魏主至漠南，舍辎重，帅轻骑兼马袭击柔然，至栗水，柔然纥升盖可汗先不设备，民畜满野，惊怖散去，莫相收摄。
现代文：丁未，北魏皇帝拓跋焘抵达漠南，留下所有辎重，亲自率领轻骑兵和备用马匹袭击柔然汗国，大军很快逼近栗水。柔然汗国纥升盖可汗郁久闾大檀果然事先没有防备，原野上到处都有牲畜和放牧的人们，当他们发现北魏的大军突然袭来，惊慌失措各自逃散，根本无法集结。
English: Ding Wei, the Northern Wei Emperor Tuobao arrived in the south of the desert, leaving all the baggage behind, and personally led the light cavalry and reserve horses to attack the Juran Khanate, and the army quickly approached the chestnut water. The Juran Khanate was not prepared in advance, and there were livestock and grazing people everywhere on the plain. When they found the Northern Wei army suddenly attacked, they panicked and fled separately, unable to assemble at all.

古文：纥升盖烧庐舍，绝迹西走，莫知所之。
现代文：纥升盖可汗只好放火焚烧房屋，向西逃走，没有人知道他的下落。
English: No one knows the whereabouts of Nsenggai Khan, who had to set fire to his house and flee west.

古文：其弟匹黎先主东部，闻有魏寇，帅众欲就其兄；遇长孙翰，翰邀击，大破之，杀其大人数百。
现代文：纥升盖可汗的弟弟郁久闾匹黎先主持东部的防务，听说北魏的军队大举攻来，立即召集他的部众打算向他的哥哥靠拢；刚刚出发，就与北魏平阳王长孙翰的军队遭遇，长孙翰拦截并袭击了郁久闾匹黎先及其部队，大破柔然军，斩杀他们酉长等头目数百人。
English: Uku Jiuyong, the younger brother of the Shingai Khan, led the defense of the east first, and when he heard that the Northern Wei army had attacked in a big way, he immediately gathered his subordinates and planned to move closer to his brother. As soon as he set out, he encountered the army of the Northern Wei Pingyang King Chang Sunhan. Chang Sunhan intercepted and attacked Uku Jiuyong and his troops, defeated the Jiuyong army, and killed hundreds of their leaders.

古文：夏主欲复取统万，引兵东至侯尼城，不敢进而还。
现代文：夏王赫连定打算收复统万城，他统率大军向东抵达侯尼城，不敢再向前进发，只好班师。
English: King He Lian of Xia was determined to recover Tongwan City. He led a large army to the east and arrived at Huni City. He did not dare to advance any further and had to retreat.

古文：河西王蒙逊伐秦，秦王暮末留相国元基守枹罕，迁保定连。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊讨伐西秦，西秦王乞伏暮末命相国乞伏元基留守都城罕，他自己则退保定连城。
English: The Western Qin King of the North Lianghe River, Qianqiu Mengsong, went to fight against the Western Qin. The Western Qin King, at the end of his life, begged his country to let Yuanji stay in the capital, but he himself retreated to Baoding Liancheng.

古文：南安太守翟承伯等据罕幵谷以应河西，幕末击破之，进至治城。
现代文：西秦南安太守翟承伯叛变，他据守罕谷，响应北凉的军队的进攻。乞伏暮末大败翟承伯的军队，进抵治城。
English: Western Qin Nan'an's Tai Shou Yancheng rebelled, he defended Han Valley and responded to the attack of Bei Liang's army. At the end of the twilight, he defeated Yancheng's army and entered the city.

古文：西安太守莫者幼眷据汧川以叛，暮末讨之，为幼眷所败，还于定连。
现代文：西秦西安太守莫者幼眷，占据川，背叛西秦，乞伏暮末发兵讨伐，被莫者幼眷击败，乞伏暮击又回到定连。
English: Western Qin Xi'an was too protective of Mo's cronies, occupied the river, betrayed Western Qin, begged for surrender, launched a crusade at the end of the year, was defeated by Mo's cronies, begged for surrender, and returned to Dinglian.

古文：蒙逊至枹罕，遣世子兴国进攻定连。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊大军包围了西秦的都城罕，又派他的世子沮渠兴国进攻定连。
English: Deshu Mengsong's army encircled the capital of Western Qin, and sent his son Deshu Xingguo to attack Dinglian.

古文：六月，暮末逆击兴国于治城，擒之，追击蒙逊至谭郊。
现代文：六月，乞伏暮末在治城反击沮渠兴国的围攻，生擒沮渠兴国。沮渠蒙逊率军立即撤退，乞伏暮末追击北凉军，一直追到谭郊。
English: In June, at the end of the year, he was in charge of the city to fight back against the siege of Deqiuqiu and Xingguo, and defeated Deqiuqiu and Xingguo. Deqiuqiu and Mengxun led the army to retreat immediately, and at the end of the year, he chased the Bei Liang Army and chased it all the way to Tanjiao.

古文：吐谷浑王慕璝遣其弟没利延，将骑五千会蒙逊伐秦，暮末遣辅国大将军段晖等邀击，大破之。
现代文：吐谷浑可汗慕容慕派他的弟弟慕容没利延率领骑兵五千人与沮渠蒙逊的大军会师，合兵讨伐西秦。西秦王乞伏暮末派遣辅国大将军段晖等拦击敌人，大败北凉军和吐谷浑汗国的骑兵。
English: The Tugu Hun Khan, Murong Mu, sent his younger brother, Murong Mengli Yan, to lead a cavalry force of five thousand men to join forces with the large army of Tu Duc Mengsong to fight against the Western Qin. The Western Qin king asked for help at the end of the year and sent the auxiliary general Duan Yu and others to intercept the enemy, defeating the Bei Liang Army and the cavalry of the Tugu Hun state.

古文：柔然纥升盖可汗既走，部落四散，窜伏山谷，杂畜布野，无人收视。
现代文：柔然汗国纥升盖可汗郁久闾大檀逃走以后，他的部落四处流散，躲藏在荒山深谷之中，牛马等牲畜遍布原野，没有人收集照料。
English: After Juran Khan's ascension to the throne and the escape of his khan, Ikujutsu Dataru, his tribe scattered far and wide, hiding in the desolate mountains and deep valleys. Cattle, horses, and other livestock were scattered all over the plains, and no one gathered to care for them.

古文：魏主循栗水西行，至菟园水，分军搜讨，东西五千里，南北三千里，俘斩甚众。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘沿着栗水一直向西行进，抵达菟园水，大军分散搜索柔然军残部，东西五千里，南北三千里，斩杀和俘虏的敌人很多。
English: The Northern Wei ruler Tuobao marched westward along the chestnut water until he reached the garden water. The large army dispersed to search for the remnants of the Juran Army, five thousand miles from east to west and three thousand miles from north to south. There were many enemies killed and captured.

古文：高车诸部乘魏兵势，钞掠柔然。
现代文：高车国的部落，乘着北魏的兵势，攻打并掠夺柔然汗国。
English: The tribes of Gaocheng took advantage of the Northern Wei forces to attack and plunder the Juran Khanate.

古文：柔然种类前后降魏者三十馀万落，获戎马百馀万匹，畜产、车庐，弥漫山泽，亡虑数百万。
现代文：这样一来，柔然汗国的各部落先后投降北魏的就有三十多万帐落，北魏军缴获的战马达一百多万匹，牲畜、车辆帐篷，遍布山谷水畔，大约有几百万之多。
English: As a result, the tribes of the Khanate of Rouen successively surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty, resulting in more than three hundred thousand tents, more than one million warhorses captured by the Northern Wei Army, livestock, vehicle tents, all over the valley waterfront, about several million.

古文：魏主循弱水西行，至涿邪山，诸将虑深入有伏兵，劝魏主留止，寇谦之以崔浩之言告魏主，魏主不从。秋，七月，引兵东还；至黑山，以所获班赐将士有差。
现代文：拓跋焘又沿着弱水向西前进，抵达涿邪山。北魏的领将们考虑到，再向西深入恐怕会遇埋伏，所以都劝拓跋焘停止。寇谦之又把崔浩讲的那番话告诉拓跋焘，希望大军乘胜追击，彻底消灭柔然军，拓跋焘没有采纳。
English: Tuobao also advanced westward along the weak water and reached Shanzhai Mountain. The leaders of the Northern Wei Dynasty took into account that they would probably be ambushed if they went further west, so they all advised Tuobao to stop. Kou Qianzhi also told Tuobao what Cui Hao had said, hoping that the large army would pursue the victory and completely destroy the Juran Army, but Tuobao did not adopt it.

古文：既而得降人言： 可汗先被病，闻魏兵至，不知所为，乃焚穹庐，以车自载，将数百人入南山。
现代文：于是，秋季，七月，拓跋焘率领大军向东回国，到了黑山，把战利品依照等级分别赏赐给将士们。不久，听到投降的柔然人的报告，说： 可汗前些时，害病卧床，听说魏兵杀来，不知如何是好，仓卒之间焚烧了毡帐，躺在车上，率领几百人潜入南山。
English: Therefore, in the autumn, in July, Tuoba Guan led a large army to the east and returned to China, arrived in Montenegro, and awarded the trophies to the soldiers according to their ranks. Soon, he heard the report of the surrender of the gentle people, saying: "Some time ago, Khan was sick in bed, heard that Wei soldiers were killed, I don't know what to do, I burned the cheque book between the haste, lay on the car, and led hundreds of people into the South Mountain.

古文：民畜窘聚，方六十里无人统领，相去百八十里，追兵不至，乃徐西遁，唯此得免。 
现代文：人和牲畜挤在一起，没有人统领，距涿邪山只有一百八十里；只因魏国的军队没有继续追赶，才慢慢向西逃去，得以幸免。 
English: People and animals were crowded together, there was no one to lead them, and only one hundred and eighty miles separated them from Mount Zhaozhou. It was only because the Wei army did not continue to pursue them that they were able to escape slowly to the west and were spared.

古文：后闻凉州贾胡言： 若复前行二日，则尽灭之矣。 
现代文：后来，还听到凉州的匈奴商人说： 魏军如果再前进二日，柔然汗国就被彻底消灭了。 
English: Later, a Hun merchant in Liangzhou was also heard to say: If the Wei army advances another two days, the Mongolian Khanate will be completely destroyed.

古文：魏主深悔之。
现代文：拓跋焘听到这些话，深为后悔。
English: Tuobao heard these words and deeply regretted it.

古文：纥升盖可汗愤悒而卒，子吴提立，号敕连可汗。
现代文：柔然汗国纥升盖可汗郁久闾大檀忧愤交加，不久去世。他的儿子郁久闾吴提继承汗位，号称敕连可汗。
English: Khan Ikukyu Uti, the son of Ikukyu Uti, succeeded to the throne and became known as the Qilian Khan.

古文：武都孝昭王杨玄疾病，欲以国授其弟难当。
现代文：武都孝昭王杨玄患病不起，打算把王位传授给他的弟弟杨难当。
English: Yang Xuan, the King of Wudou Xiao Zhao, is seriously ill and intends to pass the throne to his younger brother Yang Nandu.

古文：难当固辞，请立玄子保宗而辅之；玄许之。
现代文：杨难当坚决拒绝接受，请求立杨玄的儿子杨保宗继承大位，他自己辅佐侄子，杨玄同意。
English: Yang Nan Dang resolutely refused to accept, and requested that Yang Xuan's son Yang Baozong be appointed to succeed to the throne. Yang Xuan agreed, and he himself assisted his nephew.

古文：玄卒，保宗立。
现代文：杨玄去世后，杨保宗继位。
English: After the death of Yang Xuan, Yang Baozong succeeded to the throne.

古文：难当妻姚氏劝难当自立，难当乃废保宗，自称都督雍、凉、秦三州诸军事、征西大将军、开府仪同三司、秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：可是杨难当的妻子姚氏劝说杨难当自立为王，于是杨难当废黜了杨保宗，自封为都督雍州、凉州、秦州三州诸军事、征西大将军、开府仪同三司、秦州刺史和武都王。
English: However, Yang Nantang's wife, the Yao clan, persuaded Yang Nantang to stand up for himself as king, so Yang Nantang deposed Yang Baozong, and appointed himself as the governor of Yongzhou, Liangzhou, Qinzhou three states of military, general of the Western Expedition, Kaifu Yi and the three departments, Qinzhou Shishi and King of Wudang.

古文：河西王蒙逊遣使送谷三十万斛以赎世子兴国于秦，秦王暮末不许。
现代文：北凉王沮渠蒙逊派遣使臣出使西秦，送谷三十万斛请求赎回世子沮渠兴国。西秦王乞伏暮末拒绝。
English: The king of Northern Liang dispatched an envoy to the Western Qin Dynasty, and sent 300,000 taels of grain to request the redemption of the heir of the Western Qin Dynasty. The Western Qin Dynasty rejected the request.

古文：蒙逊乃立兴国母弟菩提为世子。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊于是立沮渠兴国的胞弟沮渠菩提为世子。
English: Deshu Mengson then set up Deshu Xingguo's brother Deshu Bodhi as his heir.

古文：暮末以兴国为散骑常侍，以其妹平昌公主妻之。
现代文：乞伏暮末则任命沮渠兴国为散骑常侍，并把自己的妹妹平昌公主嫁给他。
English: At the end of the year of begging, he appointed Deqiu Xingguo as his equestrian attendant and married his sister, Princess Pyeongchang, to him.

古文：八月，魏主至漠南，闻高车东部屯巳尼陂，人畜甚众，去魏军千馀里，遣左仆射安原等将万骑击之。
现代文：八月，北魏国主拓跋焘抵达漠南，听说高车国东部屯居在已尼陂，人口繁盛，牲畜众多，距魏军只有一千余里。于是，拓跋焘派遣左仆射安原等统率一万名骑兵进攻高车。
English: In August, the head of the Northern Wei state, Tuoba Gu, arrived in the south of the desert. He heard that the eastern part of Gaocheng was settled in Yan'an, which had a prosperous population and many livestock, and was only a thousand miles away from the Wei army. Therefore, Tuoba Gu sent his left-hand man, Sha'an Yuan, and other 10,000 cavalrymen to attack Gaocheng.

古文：高车诸部迎降者数十万落，获马牛羊百馀万。
现代文：高车国各部落投降魏军的有几十万帐落。魏军缴获的牛羊也有一百多万头。
English: The tribes of Gaochang surrendered hundreds of thousands of houses to the Wei army. The Wei army also captured more than one million head of cattle and sheep.

古文：冬，十月，魏主还平城。
现代文：冬季十月，拓跋焘返回平城。
English: In the winter of October, Tuobao returned to Pingcheng.

古文：徙柔然、高车降附之民于漠南，东至濡源，西暨五原阴山，三千里中，使之耕牧而收其贡赋；命长孙翰、刘絜、安原及侍中代人古弼同镇抚之。
现代文：把柔然汗国高车国各部落降附的百姓迁徙到漠南，安置在东到濡源，西到五原阴山的三千多里广阔草原上，命他们在这里耕种、放牧，向他们征收赋税。拓跋焘命令长孙翰、刘、安原以及侍中代郡人古弼共同镇守安抚他们。
English: He migrated the people who had been annexed by the tribes of Gaochang in Zhuoran Khanate to the south of the desert and placed them on a vast grassland of more than three thousand miles, stretching from Nucheng in the east to Wucheng in the west, ordered them to cultivate and graze here, and levied taxes on them. Tuobao ordered his eldest sons Sun Han, Liu, and An Yuan, as well as the county's people in the Middle Ages, Gu Yao, to work together as town guards to pacify them.

古文：自是魏之民间马牛羊及氈皮为之价贱。
现代文：从此以后，北魏民间马、牛、羊及毡皮的价格下降。
English: Since then, the prices of Northern Wei folk horses, cattle, sheep and mink have fallen.

古文：魏主加崔浩侍中、特进、抚军大将军，以赏其谋画之功。
现代文：拓跋焘加授崔浩侍中、特进、抚军大将军等职务，酬赏他谋划的功劳。
English: Tuobao also awarded Cui Hao the positions of attendant, special envoy, and general of the army, and rewarded him for his planning.

古文：浩善占天文，常置铜铤于酢器中，夜有所见，即以铤画纸作字以记其异。
现代文：崔浩善于根据天象预告未来，常把生铜放在装有醋的容器中，夜间观天每每有所发现，立即用那块生铜在纸上写字，记录异象。
English: Cui Hao was good at predicting the future based on celestial phenomena. He often placed a piece of raw copper in a container of vinegar. Whenever he observed the sky at night, he would immediately use the piece of raw copper to write on a piece of paper and record the vision.

古文：魏主每如浩家，问以灾异，或仓猝不及束带；奉进疏食，不暇精美，魏主必为之举箸，或立尝而还。
现代文：拓跋焘每次到崔浩家问询有关灾异天变的情况，有时崔浩仓卒出来迎接，连腰带都来不及系上。崔浩呈献的饮食也十分粗糙，来不及精心烹调。拓跋焘总是拿起筷子吃一点，有时站着尝一口就走。
English: Every time Tuobao went to Cui Hao's house to inquire about the situation of natural disasters, sometimes Cui Haocang would come out to meet him, and he couldn't even fasten his belt. The food presented by Cui Hao was also very rough, and it was too late to cook it carefully. Tuobao always picked up chopsticks to eat a little, and sometimes he would stand and take a bite before leaving.

古文：魏主尝引浩出入卧内，从容谓浩曰： 卿才智渊博，事朕祖考，著忠三世，故朕引卿以自近。
现代文：拓跋焘曾经把崔浩领到他的寝殿，语重心长地对崔浩说： 你富有才智，学识渊博，事奉过我的祖父和父亲，忠心耿耿辅佐了三代君王，所以我一向把你当作亲信近臣。
English: Tuobao once led Cui Hao to his bedchamber and said earnestly to Cui Hao: You are talented and knowledgeable, you have served my grandfather and father, and you have loyally assisted three generations of kings, so I have always regarded you as a trusted vassal.

古文：卿宜尽忠规谏，勿有所隐。
现代文：你应该竭尽忠心，直言规劝，不要有什么隐瞒。
English: You should be loyal to the best of your ability, speak your mind, and have nothing to hide.

古文：朕虽或时忿恚，不从卿言，然终久深思卿言也。 
现代文：我虽有时盛怒，不听你的劝告，但是我最后还是深思你的话。 
English: Although I sometimes get angry and don't listen to your advice, in the end I still think about what you said.

古文：尝指浩以示新降高车渠帅曰： 汝曹视此人尪纤懦弱，不能弯弓持矛，然其胸中所怀，乃过于兵甲。
现代文：拓跋焘还曾经指着崔浩，介绍给新近投降北魏的高车部落酋长们说： 你们看这个人瘦小文弱，既不能弯弓，又拿不动铁矛，然而，他胸中的智谋远胜于兵甲。
English: Tuobao also once pointed to Cui Hao and introduced him to the Gaochu tribal chiefs who had recently surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty and said: You see this person is thin and weak, he can neither bend the bow nor hold an iron spear, however, the wisdom in his heart is far superior to armor.

古文：朕虽有征伐之志而不能自决，前后有功，皆此人所教也。 
现代文：我虽有征伐的志向，却不能决断，前前后后建立的功勋业绩，都是得到这个人的教导呀！ 
English: Although I have the ambition to conquer, I can't decide. All the meritorious achievements I have built up have been taught by this man!

古文：又敕尚书曰： 凡军国大计，汝曹所不能决者，皆当咨浩，然后施行。 
现代文：拓跋焘又特意下诏命令尚书省说： 凡是军国大事，你们所不能决定的，都应该向崔浩请教，然后再付诸实施。 
English: Tuobao also specifically issued an order to Shang Shuxuan, saying: "In all military affairs that you cannot decide, you should consult Cui Hao and then implement it."

古文：秦王暮末之弟轲殊罗烝于文昭王左夫人秃发氏，暮末知而禁之。
现代文：西秦王乞伏暮末的弟弟乞伏轲殊罗与他父亲乞伏炽磐的遗孀、左夫人秃发氏通奸。乞伏暮末得知此事后禁止他。
English: The Western Qin king begged the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the late brother of the

古文：轲殊罗惧，与叔父什寅谋杀暮末，奉沮渠兴国以奔河西。
现代文：乞伏轲殊罗惊恐不安，于是与他的叔父乞伏什寅策划谋杀乞伏暮末，然后带着沮渠兴国投奔北凉。
English: Panic-stricken and uneasy, he and his uncle panicked and plotted a murder in the late afternoon, and then fled to the north of the country in despair.

古文：使秃发氏盗门钥，钥误，门者以告暮末。暮末悉收其党杀之，而赦轲殊罗。
现代文：乞伏轲殊罗让秃发氏偷取寝殿的钥匙，不想却偷错了钥匙，守门人把情况报告给乞伏暮末，乞伏暮末逮捕了所有参与这项阴谋的同党，全部杀掉，只赦免了乞伏轲殊罗。
English: The gatekeeper reported the situation to the Beggar-in-Waiting. The Beggar-in-Waiting arrested all the conspirators involved in the plot, killed them all, and pardoned only the Beggar-in-Waiting.

古文：执什寅，鞭之，什寅曰： 我负汝死，不负汝鞭！ 
现代文：乞伏暮末又逮捕叔父乞伏什寅，鞭打不止，乞伏什寅说： 我欠你一命，但不欠你一顿鞭子。 
English: Towards the end of his life, his uncle was arrested and flogged repeatedly. He said, "I owe you my life, but I don't owe you a whipping."

古文：暮末怒，刳其腹，投尸于河。
现代文：乞伏暮末大怒，剖开乞伏什寅的肚子，把他的尸体扔进河里。
English: In a fit of rage, he cut open Shiyin's stomach and threw his body into the river.

古文：夏主少凶暴无赖，不为世祖所知。
现代文：夏王赫连定小的时候就凶狠残暴，不务正业，武烈帝赫连勃勃不了解。
English: When Xia Wang He Lianding was small, he was ferocious and cruel, and did not do his duty, and he did not understand the martial arts.

古文：是月，畋于阴槃，登苛蓝山，望统城泣曰： 先帝若以朕承大业者，岂有今日之事乎！ 
现代文：本月，赫连定在阴守猎，他登上苛蓝山遥望统万城，痛哭不已，说： 先帝如果早让我继承大业，怎么会有今天的事！ 
English: This month, He Lianding was hunting in the shade. He climbed the Cao Lan Mountain to see all the cities in the distance, wept bitterly, and said: If the former emperor had let me inherit the great cause, how could there be today's matter!

古文：十一月，己丑朔，日有食之，不尽如钩，星昼见，至晡方没，河北地暗。
现代文：十一月，己丑朔，出现日食，太阳只剩下象钩一样的小部分；白天可见星辰，直到下午才发生日全食，黄河以北地区，一片黑暗。
English: In November, a solar eclipse occurred, and only a small part of the sun remained, like a hook. Stars were visible during the day, and a total solar eclipse did not occur until the afternoon. The area north of the Yellow River was completely dark.

古文：魏主西巡，至柞山。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘向西巡视，抵达柞山。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, went on a tour to the west and arrived in Lushan.

古文：十二月，河西王蒙逊、吐谷浑王慕璝皆遣使入贡。
现代文：十二月，北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊、吐谷浑可汗慕容慕都派使臣往刘宋进贡。
English: In December, the Western King of the Lianghe River, Deqiu Mengxun, and the Hun Khan of Tuyun, Murong Mudu, sent envoys to pay tribute to Liu Song.

古文：是岁，魏内都大官中山文懿公李先、青冀二州刺史安同皆卒。
现代文：本年，北魏内都大官、中山文懿公李先以及青州、冀州二州刺史安同先后去世。
English: This year, Li Xian, the highest-ranking official in the Northern Wei Inner Capital, and Zhongshan Wenzhong Li Xian, as well as Shishian of Qingzhou and Jizhou, passed away one after another.

古文：先年九十五。
现代文：李先卒年九十五岁。
English: Li Xian died at the age of 95.

古文：秦地震，野草皆自反。
现代文：西秦发生地震，野草都根部朝天。
English: An earthquake occurred in West Qin, and wild grasses were uprooted.

古文：太祖文皇帝上之中元嘉七年春，正月，癸巳，以吐谷浑王慕璝为征西将军，沙州刺史、陇西公。
现代文：元嘉七年春季，正月，癸巳，刘宋文帝任命吐谷浑可汗慕容慕为征西将军、沙州刺史，封为陇西公。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Yuan Jia, in the first month of the year, Emperor Liu Songwen appointed Tuyun Khan Murong Murong as the general of the Western Conquest, and Shazhou as the general of the Western Conquest, and he was given the title of the Prince of Shaanxi.

古文：庚子，魏主还宫。
现代文：庚子，北魏国主拓跋焘回宫。
English: Geng Zi, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, returned to the palace.

古文：壬寅，大赦。
现代文：壬寅，下令大赦。
English: On the 15th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：癸卿，复如广宁，临温泉。
现代文：癸卯，又前往广宁，观赏温泉。
English: After that, we went to Guangning to see the hot springs.

古文：二月，西卿，魏平阳威王长孙翰卒。
现代文：二月，丁卯，北魏阳平威王长孙翰去世。
English: In February, Dingwu, the Northern Wei Yang Pingwei King Changsun Han passed away.

古文：戊辰，魏主还宫。
现代文：戊辰，北魏国主拓跋焘回宫。
English: Wuchen, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, returned to the palace.

古文：帝自践位以来，有恢复河南之志。
现代文：刘宋文帝自从即位以来，就有收复黄河以南失地的雄心。
English: Ever since Emperor Liu Songwen ascended the throne, he had the ambition to recover the lost territory south of the Yellow River.

古文：三月，戊子诏简甲卒五万给右将军到彦之，统安北将军王仲德、衮州刺史竺灵秀舟师入河，又使骁骑将军段宏将精骑八千直指虎牢，豫州刺史刘德武将兵一万继进，后将军长沙王义欣将兵三万监征讨诸军事。
现代文：三月，戊子，文帝下诏挑选披甲精兵五万人，分配给右将军到彦之，并责令到彦之统率安北将军王仲德、兖州刺史竺灵秀带水军进入黄河。同时，文帝又派骁骑将军段宏率领精锐骑兵八千人，直指虎牢；命令豫州刺史刘德武率军一万人随后进发；命令后将军、长沙王刘义欣统兵三万人，监征讨诸军事。
English: In March, Emperor Wen issued an edict to select 50,000 armored elite soldiers and assign them to the right general Zu Yan, and ordered Zu Yan to lead the Anbei general Wang Zhongde and the Zhangzhou cavalry general Zou Shih Lingxiu to lead the navy into the Yellow River. At the same time, Emperor Wen also sent the cavalry general Duan Hong to lead the elite cavalry of eight thousand, directly pointing to the tiger's stronghold; ordered the Yuzhou cavalry general Liu Dewu to lead the army of ten thousand and then set off; ordered the general and the Changsha king Liu Yixin to lead the army of thirty thousand and supervise the military.

古文：义欣，道怜之子也。
现代文：刘义欣是刘道怜的儿子。
English: Liu Yixin is the son of Liu Daorai.

古文：先遣殿中将军田奇使于魏，告魏主曰： 河南旧是宋土，中为彼所侵，今当修复旧境，不关河北。 
现代文：在军事行动开始以前，刘宋文帝先派殿中将军田奇出使北魏，正告北魏国主拓跋焘说： 黄河以南的土地本来就是宋国的领土，中途却被你们侵占。现在，我们收复旧土恢复旧日疆界，与黄河以北的国家毫无关系。 
English: Before the military operation began, Emperor Liu Songwen sent General Tian Qi to the Northern Wei Dynasty and told the Northern Wei ruler Tuobao: "The land south of the Yellow River was originally the territory of the Song Dynasty, but you occupied it halfway. Now, we have nothing to do with the countries north of the Yellow River to recover the old land and restore the old borders.

古文：魏主大怒曰： 我生发未燥，已闻河南是我地。
现代文：拓跋焘暴怒如雷，喝道： 我生下来头发还没干，就已经听说黄河以南是我国的土地。
English: Tuobao was furious and said, "When I was born, before my hair was dry, I already heard that south of the Yellow River is the land of our country.

古文：此岂可得！
现代文：这块土地怎么是你们能妄想得到的呢！
English: How can you possibly hope to get this land?

古文：必若进军，今当权敛戍相避，须冬寒地净，河冰坚合，自更取之。 
现代文：你们如果一定要出兵攻取，现在我们会暂且撤军相避，等到冬天天寒地净，黄河结上坚冰，我们自然会重新夺回来。 
English: If you must send troops to attack, now we will temporarily withdraw to avoid each other. When the weather is cold in winter and the Yellow River is frozen, we will naturally recapture it.

古文：甲午，以前南广平太守尹冲为司州刺史。
现代文：甲午，刘宋文帝任命前南广平太守尹冲为司州刺史。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month, Emperor Liu Songwen appointed the former Southern Guangping Empress Dowager Yin Chong to be the chief historian of Sizhou.

古文：长沙王义欣出镇彭城，为众军声援。以游击将军胡籓戍广陵，行府州事。
现代文：长沙王刘义欣出兵坐镇彭城，为各路大军的声援；又命游击将军胡藩戍守广陵，全权代理州、府事务。
English: Liu Yixin, the king of Changsha, dispatched troops to the town of Pengcheng to show solidarity with the armies of all directions; he also ordered the guerrilla general Hu Han to guard Guangling, acting as the plenipotentiary for state and prefectural affairs.

古文：壬寅，魏封赫连昌为秦王。
现代文：壬寅，北魏国主拓跋焘封被俘的前夏王赫连昌为秦王。
English: Ren Yin, the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, made the former Xia King Herenchang, who had been captured, the Qin King.

古文：魏有新徒敕勒千馀家，苦于将吏侵渔，出怨言，期以草生牛马肥，亡归漠北。
现代文：北魏新近强行迁徙的敕勒部落牧民一千余家，不堪北魏军将和官吏的敲榨勒索之苦，怨声载道，暗中约定等到野草繁盛牧马肥壮时，逃回漠北的故乡。
English: More than a thousand families of herdsmen of the Mule tribe, who had recently been forcibly migrated by the Northern Wei Dynasty, could not bear the suffering of extortion and blackmail by the Northern Wei generals and officials. They complained loudly and secretly agreed to wait until the wild grass was flourishing and the herding horses were fat, and then they would flee back to their hometown in the desert north.

古文：尚书令刘絜、左仆射安原奏请及河冰未解，徙之河西。向春冰解，使不得北遁。
现代文：尚书令刘、左仆射安原上疏拓跋焘，奏请趁黄河冰封尚未融化的时候，把他们强行迁移到河西，等到春天黄河冰解，让他们无法向北逃走。
English: Shang Shu ordered Liu and Zuoying to take advantage of the fact that the Yellow River had not yet melted, to forcibly relocate them to the west of the river and wait until the Yellow River thawed in the spring, so that they could not escape to the north.

古文：魏主曰： 此曹习俗，放散日久，譬如囿中之鹿，急则奔突，缓之自定。
现代文：拓跋焘说： 他们这些人的习俗，就是长期游牧放荡。就好象关在栅栏里的野鹿，逼得太急就会乱闯乱跳，对他们缓和宽容一些，自然就会安定下来了。
English: Tuobao said, "The custom of these people is long-term nomadic debauchery. They are like wild deer kept in fences. If you force them too quickly, they will run wild. If you are more lenient with them, they will naturally settle down.

古文：吾区处自有道，不烦徙也。 
现代文：我自有对付办法，不必再行迁徙了。 
English: I have my own means of coping, I don't have to migrate anymore.

古文：絜等固请不已，乃听分徙三万馀落于河西，西至白盐池。敕勒皆惊骇，曰： 圈我于河西，欲杀我也！ 
现代文：刘等人一再请求，拓跋焘最后只好允许分出三万多帐落的牧民迁移到河西。向西行进到白盐池，敕勒部的牧民都惊骇不已，说： 朝廷把我们圈到河西，是要杀我们呀！ 
English: Liu and others repeatedly requested that Tuobao finally had to allow the herdsmen who had allocated more than thirty thousand tents to move to Hexi. Traveling west to Baiyanchi, the herdsmen of the Quleb were shocked and said: The imperial court has encircled us to Hexi and wants to kill us!

古文：谋西奔凉州。
现代文：于是，又策划乘机向西逃奔凉州。
English: As a result, he also planned to take the opportunity to flee westward to Liangzhou.

古文：刘絜屯五原河北，安原屯悦拔城以备之。
现代文：刘当时屯驻在五原黄河以北；安原则驻扎在悦拔城，严密防备。
English: At that time, Liu was stationed in Wuhuan, north of the Yellow River; Anxin was stationed in Yuebajing, and was closely guarded.

古文：癸卯，敕勒数千骑叛，北走，絜追讨之；走者无食，相枕而死。
现代文：癸卯，敕勒部落的移民几千人骑马向北逃去，刘指挥军队紧紧追击；敕勒部落逃走的移民因为无食无水，互相挤压着死在一起。
English: At the same time, thousands of migrants from the Hule tribe fled north on horseback, with Liu leading the army in hot pursuit. Because the fleeing migrants from the Hule tribe had no food or water, they squeezed each other to death.

古文：魏南边诸将表称： 宋人大严，将入寇。请兵三万，先其未发，逆击之，足以挫其锐气，使不敢深入。 
现代文：北魏守卫南方边境的将领们上疏说： 宋人已经戒严，很快就要向我们进攻，我们请求增援三万人，在他们尚未进攻之前先发制人迎击敌人。这样，足以挫折他们的锐气，使他们不敢深入我们国土。 
English: The generals of the Northern Wei Dynasty guarding the southern border came up with a plan: The Song people are already under martial law and will soon attack us. We request 30,000 reinforcements to preemptively attack the enemy before they attack. This is enough to frustrate their spirit and make them afraid to enter our country.

古文：因请悉诛河北流民在境上者，以绝其乡导。
现代文：因而请求把边境一带黄河以北的流民全部屠杀，以便断绝刘宋军的向导。
English: Therefore, he requested that all the refugees north of the Yellow River in the border area be massacred in order to cut off the guide of Liu Song's army.

古文：魏主使公卿议之，皆以为当然。崔浩曰： 不可。
现代文：拓跋焘命令朝廷中的文武大臣讨论，大家全都同意。崔浩却说： 不行。
English: Tuobao ordered the ministers of culture and armed forces in the imperial court to discuss the matter, and they all agreed. Cui Hao, however, said, "No."

古文：南方下湿，入夏之后，水潦方降，草木蒙密，地气郁蒸，易生疾疠，不可行师。
现代文：南方地势低洼潮显，入夏以后雨水增多，草木茂盛，地气闷热，容易生病，不利于军事行动。
English: In the south, the terrain is low-lying and tidal. Rainfall increases after the beginning of summer, the vegetation is lush, the atmosphere is sultry, and it is easy to get sick, which is not conducive to military operations.

古文：且彼既严备，则城守必固，留屯久攻，则粮运不继；分军四掠，则众力单寡，无以应敌。
现代文：况且，宋国已经加强戒备，因此城防一定坚固。我们的军队驻守城下长期进攻，后方粮秣就会供应接继不上；把军队分散，四处掠夺，就会使本来集中的力量分散削弱，没有办法对付敌人。
English: Moreover, Song has strengthened the alert, so the city defenses must be strong. If our army stays under the city for a long-term attack, the rear will not be able to supply grain; if the army is dispersed and plundered everywhere, the originally concentrated forces will be dispersed and weakened, and there will be no way to deal with the enemy.

古文：以今击之，未见其利。
现代文：所以，在眼下这个季节出师进攻宋国，还没看出有什么好外。
English: Therefore, at the moment of this season's attack on Song, I still don't see anything out of the ordinary.

古文：彼若果能北来，宜待其劳倦，秋凉马肥，因敌取食，徐往击之，此万全之计也。
现代文：宋国的军队假如真的敢来进攻，我们应当以逸待劳，与他们周旋，等到秋天天气凉爽战马肥壮的时候，夺取敌人的粮食，慢慢地进行反击，这才是万全之计呀。
English: If the Song army really dares to attack, we should take advantage of the situation, negotiate with them, wait until the autumn when the weather is cool and the war horses are fat, seize the enemy's grain, and slowly counterattack. This is the perfect solution.

古文：朝廷群臣及西北守将，从陛下征伐，西平赫连，北破蠕蠕，多获美女、珍宝，牛马成群。
现代文：朝廷中文武群臣和西北边防守将跟从陛下出征作战，向西削平了夏国的赫连氏，向北大破柔然汗国，俘获了许多美女、珍宝和成群的牛马。
English: The imperial court's Chinese armed forces and the northwestern border defense will follow His Majesty's departure for war, flattening the Heren clan in Xia to the west, breaking through the Juran Khanate to the north, and capturing many beautiful women, treasures and herds of cattle and horses.

古文：南边诸将闻而慕之，亦欲南钞以取资财，皆营私计，为国生事，不可从也。 
现代文：驻守南部边防的将领们听说后早就羡慕不已，也想南下攻打宋国，抢劫资财，他们都是为自己的利益，却为国家惹事生非，他们的请求，万万不能答应。 
English: When the generals stationed at the southern border heard about this, they were envious. They also wanted to go south to attack Song and loot the country's assets. They were doing it for their own benefit, but they were stirring up trouble for the country. Their request could not be granted.

古文：魏主乃止。
现代文：拓跋焘才停止。
English: It's only now that it's come to a halt.

古文：诸将复表： 南寇已至，所部兵少，乞简幽州以南劲兵助己戍守，乃就漳水造船严备以拒之。 
现代文：北魏南部边防守将又上疏奏报： 南方的敌寇已经攻来，我们的兵员太少，请朝廷挑选幽州以南的劲旅帮助守卫城池。并请在漳水沿岸，建造战舰，来抵抗宋兵的进攻。 
English: The defense of the southern border of the Northern Wei Dynasty will be on the loose again: The enemy corsairs in the south have already attacked, our soldiers are too few, please ask the court to select a strong brigade south of Yuzhou to help guard the city. And please build warships along the coast of Surabaya to resist the attack of Song soldiers.

古文：公卿皆以为宜如所请，并署司马楚之、鲁轨、延之等为将帅，使招诱南人。
现代文：北魏朝中的文武大臣们，都认为应该批准这项请求，并应该任命司马楚之、鲁轨、韩延之等为将帅，使他们引诱刘宋的百姓归附。
English: The civil and military ministers in the Northern Wei Dynasty all believed that the request should be approved and that Sima Chu, Lu Lu and Han Yan should be appointed as generals to entice the people of Liu Song to join.

古文：浩曰： 非长策也。
现代文：崔浩却说： 这不是长久之计。
English: But Cui Hao said: This is not a long-term solution.

古文：楚之等皆彼所畏忌，今闻国家悉发幽州以南精兵，大造舟舰，随以轻骑，谓国家欲存立司马氏，诛除刘宗，必举国震骇，惧于灭亡，当悉发精锐，并心竭力，以死争之，则我南边诸将无以御之。
现代文：司马楚之等人都是宋国畏惧和忌惮的人物，如今宋国一旦听说我们调动全部幽州以南的精锐部队，并且兴造舰只，又有大批轻骑兵为后继部队，他们一定会以为我们朝廷打算恢复晋朝司马氏的政权，消灭刘氏家族；一定会全国震惊，害怕灭亡。于是，他们就会动员全国的精锐部队，齐心竭力，拼死抵抗。这样一来，我们南方驻防的各将领就无法抵抗宋军的攻势。
English: Sima Chu and others were feared and loathed by the Song Dynasty. Now, if the Song Dynasty hears that we have mobilized all the elite troops south of Yuzhou, built ships, and have a large number of light cavalry as a follow-up force, they will certainly think that our court intends to restore the power of the Sima clan in the Jin Dynasty and eliminate the Liu family; the whole country will be shocked and afraid of death. Therefore, they will mobilize the elite troops across the country, make every effort, and fight to the death. In this way, our generals stationed in the south will not be able to resist the Song Army's offensive.

古文：今公卿欲以威力却敌，乃所以速之也。
现代文：现在诸位大臣打算用声威击退敌人，其结果只能是加速他们的进攻。
English: Now the ministers intend to repel the enemy with threats, the result of which can only be to accelerate their attack.

古文：张虚声而召实害，此之谓矣。
现代文：虚张声势，却招来了实际的损害，指的正是这种做法。
English: This is what is meant by bluffing while incurring real damage.

古文：故楚之之徒，往则彼来，止则彼息，其势然也。
现代文：所以司马楚之这些叛变过来的将领去打宋国，宋国一定北来；不去，他们一定停止，这是必然的。
English: Therefore, it is inevitable that these mutinous generals from Sima Chu will go to fight Song, and Song will definitely come north; if they don't go, they will definitely stop.

古文：且楚之等皆纤利小才，止能招合轻薄无赖而不能成大功，徒使国家兵连祸结而已。
现代文：而且司马楚之这些人，都是目光短浅、贪图小便宜的人物，只能招集一些见识浅薄的无赖之徒，不能成就大事，白白使国家兵连祸结而已。
English: Moreover, these people of Sima Chu are all short-sighted, greedy and cheap characters. They can only recruit some scoundrels with shallow knowledge, cannot achieve great things, and only bring misfortune to the national soldiers in vain.

古文：昔鲁轨说姚兴以取荆州，至则败散，为蛮人掠卖为奴，终于祸及姚泓，此已然之效也。 
现代文：当年鲁轨劝说姚兴派叛人夺取荆州，刚进入东晋境内，大军突然瓦解，士卒们被南蛮人活捉，卖为奴隶，造成的灾祸最终殃及姚泓，这是看得到的结果啊！ 
English: That year, Lu Lu persuaded Yao Xing to send traitors to seize Jingzhou. As soon as they entered the territory of East Jin, the army suddenly disintegrated. The soldiers were captured alive by the Southern barbarians and sold into slavery. The disaster caused eventually affected Yao Xing. This is a visible result!

古文：魏主未以为然。
现代文：拓跋焘对崔浩这一席话却不以为然。
English: However, Tuobao did not agree with Choi Ho's words.

古文：浩乃复陈天时，以为南方举兵必不利，曰： 今兹害气在扬州，一也；庚午自刑，先发者伤，二也；日食昼晦，宿值斗、牛，三也；荧惑伏于翼、轸，主乱及丧，四也；太白未出，进兵者败，五也。
现代文：崔浩于是又为拓跋焘分析天象，说明刘宋发动军事攻击，一定会损兵折将，说： 今年的 害气 在扬州，这是第一。今年 庚午 ， 庚  午 相克，先发动战争的必受伤害，这是第二。发生日食白天昏暗，太阳停留在斗宿牛宿，这是第三。火星隐藏在翼宿、轸宿，预示天下大乱和丧亡，这是第四。金星没有出现，军事上的攻击一定失败，这是第五。
English: Cui Hao then analyzed the celestial phenomena for Tuobao, explaining that if Liu Song launched a military attack, he would certainly lose soldiers, saying: This year's bad air In Yangzhou, this is the first. This year's Geng afternoon, Geng afternoon Xiang Ke, the first to launch a war must be harmed, this is the second. If a solar eclipse occurs, the daytime will be dim, and the sun will stay in Toushuku Niujuku, this is the third. Mars is hidden in Wingshuku and Pengjuku, foreshadowing the world's chaos and death, this is the fourth. Venus does not appear,

古文：夫兴国之君，先修人事，次尽地利，后观天时，故万举万全。
现代文：作为一个有志于振兴国家的君主，应该先治理好百姓的事，然后充分利用地利，最后顺应天时，所以才能做什么事都成功。
English: As a monarch who aspires to revitalize the country, he should first govern the affairs of the people well, then make full use of the geographical location, and finally conform to the weather, so that everything can be successful.

古文：今刘义隆新造之国，人事未洽；灾变屡见，天时不协；舟行水涸，地利不尽。
现代文：而今，刘义隆统治的是一个刚刚建立的国家，君臣与百姓的关系并未融洽；天变和灾异多次出现，这是天时不助；各地河水干涸，舟行困难，这是地利不畅。
English: But now, Liu Yilong is ruling a country that has just been established. The relationship between the monarch, the ministers and the people is not harmonious; natural disasters and calamities have occurred many times, which is beyond help; rivers around the country have dried up, and it is difficult to travel by boat, which is a bad location.

古文：三者无一可，而义隆行之，必败无疑。 
现代文：天时、地利、人和三者之中，没有一项对他们有利，而刘义隆却举兵进攻，结果一定要失败，毫无疑问。 
English: Of the three factors, time, place, and people, none of them are favorable to them, but Liu Yilong raised an army to attack, and the result must fail, no doubt.

古文：魏主不能违众言，乃诏冀、定、相三州造船三千艘，简幽州以南戍兵集河上以备之。
现代文：拓跋焘还是不能不考虑大多数人的意见，于是下诏命令在冀州、相州、定州三州造战船三千艘；选派幽州以南各地驻军在黄河北岸集结戒备。
English: Tuobao still could not ignore the opinions of the majority of people, so he issued an order to build 3,000 warships in the three states of Jizhou, Xiangzhou and Dingzhou; and sent troops stationed in various regions south of Yuzhou to assemble on the north bank of the Yellow River.

古文：秦乞伏什寅母弟前将军白养、镇卫将军去列，以什寅之死，有怨言，秦王暮末皆杀之。
现代文：西秦国乞伏什寅的胞弟、前将军乞伏白养，镇卫将军乞伏去列二人对于乞伏什寅的死，深怀怨恨，口出怨言，被乞伏暮末先后杀死。
English: West Qin's brother-in-law, the former general of the State of Qibao Shiyin, begged Qibao Baiyang, and the town guard general begged Qibao to be enlisted. Both of them were deeply resentful of Qibao Shiyin's death and complained loudly. They were killed by Qibao Shiyin at the end of the year.

古文：夏，四月，甲子，魏主如去中。
现代文：夏季四月，甲子，北魏国主拓跋焘前往云中。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Tuoba of the Northern Wei Dynasty went to Yunzhong, Jiaozi.

古文：敕勒万馀落复叛走，魏主使尚书封铁追讨，灭之。
现代文：被北魏俘虏的敕勒部落的牧民一万多帐落，再次叛逃。拓跋焘派尚书封铁前去追击讨伐，把他们全部消灭了。
English: More than ten thousand herdsmen of the Mule tribe, who were captured by the Northern Wei Dynasty, once again defected. Tuobao sent Shang Shufeng to pursue the crusade and wiped them all out.

古文：六月，己卿，以氐王杨难当为冠军将军、秦州刺史、武都王。
现代文：六月，己卯，刘宋朝廷任命氐王杨难当为冠军将军、秦州刺史，晋封武都王。
English: In June, the Liu Song Dynasty court appointed the king of Qin, Yang Nandong, as the champion general, Qin State history, and the promotion of the King of Wudu.

古文：魏主使平南大将军、丹杨王大毘，屯河上，以司马楚之为安南大将军、荆州刺史，封琅邪王，顿颍川以备宋。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘命令平南大将军、丹阳王拓跋大毗驻防黄河北岸；任命司马楚之为安南大将军，封琅邪王，屯驻颍川来防备宋军的进攻。
English: The ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, ordered General Pingnan and King Tuobao of Danyang to be stationed on the north bank of the Yellow River; appointed Sima Chu to be General Annan, sealed the evil king, and stationed in Hechuan to prevent the attack of the Song Army.

古文：吐谷浑王慕璝将其众万八千袭秦定连，秦辅国大将军段晖等击走之。
现代文：吐谷浑汗国可汗慕容慕率领他的部众一万八千人，突袭西秦所属的定连。西秦辅国大将军段晖等击退了来犯的吐谷浑军队。
English: Mu Rong Mu, the khan of the Tuyun Khanate, led 18,000 of his subordinates in a surprise attack on the Western Qin-affiliated Ding Company. Western Qin Vice-Admiral Duan Yu and others repulsed the invading Tuyun army.

古文：到彦之自淮入泗，水渗，日行才十里，自四月至秋七月，始至须昌。
现代文：刘宋右将军到彦之率领大军从淮河进入泗水，天旱水浅，每天行军才十里，从四月出发一直到秋季七月，才抵达须昌。
English: General Liu Songyu led a large army from the Huaihe River to Surabaya. The water was shallow, and the army marched only ten miles a day. They set out from April and did not arrive in Suchang until the fall of July.

古文：乃溯河西上。
现代文：于是，进入黄河逆流而上。
English: As a result, they entered the Yellow River and swam upstream.

古文：魏主以河南四镇兵少，命诸军悉收众北渡。
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘认为黄河以南四个军事重镇的兵力太少，命令坐镇的各路将军一律收兵，撤退到黄河以北。
English: The head of the Northern Wei state, Tuobao, thought that the strength of the four military strongholds south of the Yellow River was too small, and ordered the generals in the towns to withdraw their troops and retreat to the north of the Yellow River.

古文：戊子，魏碻磝戍兵弃城去。戊戍，滑台戍兵亦去。
现代文：戊子，北魏驻防在的军队弃城而去；戊戌，滑台的守军也撤离。
English: The troops garrisoned by the Northern Wei abandoned the city in Wuzi; the defenders of the slide platform in Wuzi also withdrew.

古文：庚子，魏主以大鸿胪阳平公杜超为都督冀、定、相三州诸军事、太宰，进爵阳平王，镇鄴，为诸军节度。
现代文：庚子，拓跋焘任命大鸿胪、阳平公杜超为都督定、相、冀三州诸军事、太宰，进封为阳平王，负责镇守邺城，总领各路大军。
English: Geng Zi and Tuoba Zi appointed Dahong Zi and Yang Ping Gong Du Chao as the governor of the capital, the minister, the military of the three states of Hebei, and the Dazai, and the Yang Ping King was appointed to Jinfu, responsible for the defense of Lucheng, and the leader of the army.

古文：超，密太后之兄也。
现代文：杜超是拓跋焘乳娘密太后杜氏的哥哥。
English: Du Chao was the elder brother of Tuobao's foster daughter, Dowager Empress Dowager Dou.

古文：庚戌，魏洛阳、虎牢戍兵皆弃城去。
现代文：庚戌，洛阳、虎牢两镇北魏的守军也都弃城逃去。
English: The defenders of the two Northern Wei towns of Gansu, Luoyang, and Houdou also abandoned the city and fled.

古文：到彦之留硃修之守滑台，尹冲守虎牢，建武将军杜骥守金墉。
现代文：到彦之留下司徒从事郎中朱之镇守滑台，司州刺史尹冲驻守虎牢、建武将军杜骥驻守金墉。
English: After the death of Kazuhiko, Satoru was engaged in the town guard duty of his brother-in-law, Zhu, while Sishu Shishi, Yin Chong, was stationed at Tiger's Stronghold, and Kenmu Shogun, Du Xi, was stationed at Jinlu.

古文：骥，预之玄孙也。
现代文：杜骥是杜预的玄孙。
English: Cuckoo is the great-great-grandson of Cuckoo.

古文：诸军进顿灵昌津，列守南岸，至于潼关。
现代文：刘宋其他各路大军进驻灵昌津，沿黄河南岸列阵守御，一直到潼关。
English: Liu Song and other great armies stationed in Lingchangjin, lined up along the south bank of the Yellow River to defend the imperial palace, all the way to Shaoguan.

古文：于是司、衮既平，诸军皆喜，王仲德独有忧色，曰： 请贤不谙北土情伪，必堕其计。
现代文：于是，司州、兖州全部收复，各路军队都大喜过望。只有安北将军王仲德满面忧愁，说： 各位将军完全不解北方的真实情况，一定会中敌人的计谋。
English: As a result, Sizhou and Zhangzhou were all recovered, and the armies of all directions were overjoyed. Only Wang Zhongde, the general of Anbei, was full of sorrow and said, "Your generals do not understand the true situation in the north at all, and they will surely fall into the enemy's schemes."

古文：胡虏虽仁义不足，而凶狡有馀，今敛戍北归，必并力完聚。
现代文：胡虎虽仁义道德不足，凶险狡诈却有余，他们今天弃城北归，一定正在集结会师。
English: Although the Hu Hu lacked benevolence, righteousness and morality, they had more than enough dangerous cunning. They left the city and returned to the north today. They must be gathering allies.

古文：若河冰既合，将复南来，岂可不以为忧乎！ 
现代文：如果黄河冰封，势必会再次南下进攻，怎能不让人担忧！ 
English: If the Yellow River freezes over, it is bound to attack the south again, how can people not be worried!

古文：甲寅，林邑王范阳迈遣使入贡，自陈与交州不睦，乞蒙恕宥。
现代文：甲寅，林邑国王范阳迈派遣使臣到刘宋进贡，承认与刘宋所属的交州有冲突，请求宽恕。
English: King Fan Yangmai of Linyi dispatched an envoy to Liu Song to pay tribute, admitted that there was a conflict with Jiaozhou, which belonged to Liu Song, and asked for forgiveness.

古文：八月，魏主遣冠军将军安颉督护诸军，击到彦之。
现代文：八月，北魏国主拓跋焘，派遣冠军将军安颉统御各路人马，袭击到彦之的军队。
English: In August, the ruler of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, sent the champion general, An Qi, to lead the troops and attack the army of Yan Zhi.

古文：丙寅，彦之遣裨将吴兴姚耸夫渡河攻冶坂，与颉战；耸夫兵败，死者甚众。
现代文：丙寅，到彦之派遣副将军吴兴人姚耸夫渡黄河北上，进攻冶坂，迎战安颉。结果，姚耸夫兵败，战死的士卒很多。
English: Hsin-yin sent the vice-general Wu Xing to Yan-chi, who sent Yao Shengfu to cross the Yellow River to the north, attack Yezhan, and fight Anhui. As a result, Yao Shengfu was defeated, and many soldiers died in battle.

古文：戊寅，魏主遣征西大将军长孙道生会丹阳王大毘屯河上以御彦之。
现代文：戊寅，拓跋焘派征西大将军长孙道生会合丹杨王拓跋大毗屯兵黄河北岸，防御到彦之。
English: Wu Yin, Tu Biao sent the General of the Western Expeditionary Force, Sun Daosheng, King of Tang and Yang, Tu Biao sent the General of the Western Expeditionary Force to the north bank of the Yellow River, and the defense came to Yan Zhi.

古文：燕太祖寝疾，召中书监申秀、侍中阳哲于内殿，属以后事。
现代文：北燕王冯跋重病，征召中书监申秀、侍中阳哲来到寝殿嘱托后事。
English: Feng Bao, the king of the Northern Yan, was seriously ill and summoned the middle school librarian Shen Xiu and the middle school attendant Yang Zhe to come to his bedside to ask for advice.

古文：九月，病甚，辇而临轩，命太子翼摄国事，勒兵听政，以备非常。
现代文：九月，冯跋病情加重，乘辇车到金銮殿，命令皇太子冯翼主持朝政，统率全国的军队，防止发生意外的变化。
English: In September, Feng Baw's condition worsened, he took a carriage to the Golden Pavilion and ordered Crown Prince Feng Ying to preside over the government and lead the country's army to prevent unexpected changes.

古文：宋夫人欲立其子受居，恶翼听政，谓翼曰： 上疾将瘳，奈何遽欲代父临天下乎！ 
现代文：冯跋的妃子宋夫人，打算立自己的儿子冯受居继承帝位，她厌恶太子冯翼主持朝政，对冯翼说： 皇上的病就要痊愈了，你何必急于代替父亲君临天下呢？ 
English: Feng Bao's daughter-in-law, Lady Song, planned to set up her own son, Feng Juchu, to inherit the imperial throne. She detested the fact that Prince Feng Ying presided over the imperial government, and said to Feng Ying: The emperor's illness is about to be cured. Why are you in a hurry to rule the world in place of your father?

古文：翼性仁弱，遂还东宫，日三往省疾。
现代文：冯翼的性情文弱仁厚，他听从了宋夫人的话，退位返回了东宫，每天三次去看望父皇。
English: Feng Ying's temperament was gentle and benevolent. He obeyed Lady Song's words, abdicated and returned to the East Palace to visit his father the emperor three times a day.

古文：宋夫人矫诏绝内外，遣阍寺传问而已，翼及诸子、大臣并不得见，唯中给事胡福独得出入，专掌禁卫。
现代文：冯翼出来后，宋夫人就假传圣旨，不许朝廷内外的官员再进宫探病，如有事，只能派宦官传达。冯翼及其它几个皇子、朝中文武重臣全都不能见到皇帝。唯有中给事胡福一个人，可以自由出入，专门负责皇宫的安全警卫。
English: After Feng Ying came out, Mrs. Song falsely transmitted the holy will, forbidding officials inside and outside the imperial court to enter the palace to investigate the illness. If there is anything, they can only send eunuchs to convey it. Feng Ying and several other princes, as well as the senior military officials of the imperial court, could not see the emperor. Only Hu Fu, who was in charge of the matter, could freely enter and leave, and was specifically responsible for the security guard of the imperial palace.

古文：福虑宋夫人遂成其谋，乃言于司徒、录尚书事、中山公弘，弘与壮士数十人被甲入禁中，宿卫皆不战而散。
现代文：胡福非常忧虑宋夫人的阴谋将会成功，于是，就把宋夫人的异常举动报告给司徒、录尚书事、中山公冯弘。冯弘亲自率领几十个全副武装的武士，闯进后宫。
English: Hu Fu was very worried that Mrs. Song's plot would succeed, so he reported Mrs. Song's unusual behavior to Szeto, Luo Shang Shujing, and Zhongshan Gong Feng Hong. Feng Hong personally led dozens of fully armed warriors to break into the harem.

古文：宋夫人命闭东閤，弘家僮库斗头劲捷有勇力，逾閤而入，至于皇堂，射杀女御一人。
现代文：负责宫廷禁卫的军队未加抵抗就一哄而散了。宋夫人命令关闭东，冯弘的家僮库斗头敏捷而有勇力，翻墙跳过门进入寝宫，一箭射死一个宫女。
English: The army in charge of the palace guard dispersed without resistance. Mrs. Song ordered the east gate to be closed, and Feng Hong's household guard, quick and brave, jumped over the wall and entered the bedroom, and shot a palace maiden with an arrow.

古文：太祖惊惧而殂。弘遂即天王位，遣人巡城告曰： 天降凶祸，大行崩背，太子不侍疾，群公不奔丧，疑有逆谋，社稷将危。
现代文：冯跋躺在床上看到眼前发生的一切，不胜惊骇，霎时气绝而死。冯弘乘势来到金銮殿，登上了大位，他派人到城中街巷中宣告： 天上降下大祸，皇帝驾崩，太子冯翼不在病塌前侍候，朝中文武大臣也不赶来奔丧，恐怕有人阴谋叛逆不道，危及社稷。
English: Feng Ba lay on his bed and saw everything that was happening in front of him. He was shocked and died of shock. Feng Hong took advantage of the situation to come to the Golden Pavilion and ascended to the throne. He sent people to the streets and lanes of the city to announce: A great disaster has fallen from the sky, the emperor is dying, Prince Feng Ying will not wait until he is ill, and the Chinese Minister of Military Affairs will not rush to the funeral. I am afraid that someone is plotting treason and endangering the society.

古文：吾备介弟之亲，遂摄大位以宁国家，百官叩门入者，进陛二等。 
现代文：于是我以天王大弟的身份，暂时登上大位，安定国家；百官中入宫朝见的人，进级二等。 
English: Therefore, I temporarily ascended to the throne as the eldest brother of the king to stabilize the country. Among the hundreds of officials who entered the palace to meet the emperor, I was promoted to the second grade.

古文：太子翼帅东宫兵出战而败，兵皆溃去，弘遣使赐翼死。
现代文：太子冯翼统率东宫卫队出宫抵抗，大败，他手下的士卒全部溃散，冯弘派人逼迫冯翼自尽。
English: Prince Feng Yingtong led the East Palace Guard to leave the palace to resist, but they were defeated. All of his soldiers were dispersed, and Feng Hong sent people to force Feng Yingtong to commit suicide.

古文：太祖有子百馀人，弘皆杀之。
现代文：北燕王冯跋共有儿子一百余人，冯弘把他们全部杀死。
English: Northern Yan King Feng Bao had more than one hundred sons, and Feng Hong killed them all.

古文：谥太祖民皇帝，长谷陵。
现代文：谥冯跋称文成皇帝，庙号称太祖，安葬于长谷陵。
English: Emperor Wencheng was known as Zou Fengba, and the temple was called Taizu. He was buried in the Hase Mausoleum.

古文：己丑，夏主遣其弟谓以代伐魏鄜城，魏平西将军始平公隗归等击之，杀万馀人，谓以代遁去。
现代文：己丑，夏王赫连定派他的弟弟赫连谓以代攻击北魏的城。北魏平西将军、始平公拓跋隗归等，率兵反击，杀死夏军一万余人，赫连谓以代远逃。
English: As a result, Xia King He Lian sent his younger brother He Lian to attack the Northern Wei's city. Northern Wei generals Ping Xi and Shi Ping Gong led a counterattack, killing more than 10,000 of the Xia army, and He Lian fled far away.

古文：夏主自将数万人邀击隗归于鄜城东，留其弟上谷公社干、广阳公度洛孤守平凉，遣使来求和，约合兵灭魏，遥分河北：自恒山以东属宋，以西属夏。
现代文：赫连定又亲自统率数万人，在城以东截击拓跋隗归，留下他的弟弟、上谷公赫连社干和广阳公赫连度洛孤驻守平凉。又派使臣出使刘宋请求和解，约定联合起来灭掉北魏，预先瓜分黄河以北地区：从恒山以东，划归刘宋；恒山以西，划归夏国。
English: He Lianding also personally led tens of thousands of people to intercept the retreating troops east of the city, leaving his younger brother, Shangguo Gonghe Lianshe Gan and Guangyang Gonghe Lianduo stationed in Pingliang. He also sent envoys to Liu Song to request reconciliation and agreed to unite to eliminate the Northern Wei Dynasty and divide the area north of the Yellow River in advance: from the east of the Hengshan Mountains to Liu Song; from the west of the Hengshan Mountains to Xia Guo.

古文：魏主闻之，治兵，将伐夏，群臣咸曰： 刘义隆兵犹在河中，舍之西行，前寇未可必克，而义隆乘虚济河，则失山东矣。 
现代文：北魏国主拓跋焘得到这个消息，立即动员军队，准备进攻夏国。朝廷中的文武群臣都说： 刘义隆的大军，还在黄河中游逗留，我们却放弃南方的防御，转赴西征。前面夏国的军队未必能一举攻克，后方的刘义隆就要举兵渡过黄河，乘虚而入，我们就会失去太行山以东的大片领土。 
English: When the head of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Tuobao, received this news, he immediately mobilized his army and prepared to attack Xia. The courtiers in the imperial court all said: Liu Yilong's large army is still lingering in the middle of the Yellow River, but we have abandoned the defense of the south and moved to the west. The army of Xia in front may not be able to conquer in one fell swoop, and Liu Yilong in the rear will raise an army to cross the Yellow River and take advantage of the opportunity, and we will lose a large area of territory east of Mount Taihang.

古文：魏主以问崔浩，对曰： 义隆与赫连定遥相招引，以虚声唱和，共大国，义隆望定进，定徒义隆前，皆莫敢先入；譬如连鸡，不得俱飞，无能为害也。
现代文：拓跋焘又征求崔浩的意见，崔浩回答说： 刘义隆与赫连定遥相勾结，互相呼应，只不过是虚张声势，一唱一和，共同窥伺强邻。刘义隆希望赫连定大举进攻，赫连定却等待刘义隆先打，结果没有一个敢先打进我们的国土。
English: Tuobao also sought the opinion of Cui Hao, Cui Hao replied: Liu Yilong and He Lianding are in distant collusion, echoing each other, but they are just bluffing, singing one song, and jointly spying on strong neighbors. Liu Yilong hopes that He Lianding will attack in a big way, but He Lianding is waiting for Liu Yilong to strike first. As a result, no one dares to enter our country first.

古文：臣始谓义隆军来，当屯止河中，两道北上，东道向冀州，西道冲鄴，如此，则陛下当自讨之，不得徐行。
现代文：他们就象被捆缚在一起的两只鸡一样，不能同时起飞，当然也就不会产生威胁。我当初认为：刘义隆的大军开来，应该据守黄河中游，分兵两路北伐。东路军直指冀州，西路军则进攻邺城，这样一来，陛下您就可以亲自出马打击他们，不能怠慢。
English: They are like two chickens tied together, they can't take off at the same time, and of course they don't pose a threat. I initially thought: Liu Yilong's army is coming, we should guard the middle reaches of the Yellow River, and divide the troops into two northward marches. The eastward army will head straight for Jizhou, and the westward army will attack Handan. In this way, Your Majesty, you can personally go out to fight them, you can't neglect it.

古文：今则不然，东西列兵径二千里，一处不过数千，形分势弱。
现代文：现在形势的发展却完全不同，宋军从东向西所设的防线，长达二千里，每个地方分布的兵力量多不过几千人，兵力分散，力量削弱。
English: The development of the situation now is completely different. The defense line set up by the Song Army from east to west is as long as two thousand miles. The number of troops distributed in each place is no more than a few thousand. The troops are scattered and the strength is weakened.

古文：以此观之，儜儿情见，此不过欲固河自守，无北渡意也。
现代文：如此看来，他们困顿虚弱的本质已经暴露无遗，这只不过是打算固守黄河防线，并没有北伐的意图呀。
English: From this perspective, the nature of their predicament and weakness has been fully exposed. This is just an intention to hold fast to the Yellow River defense line, and there is no intention of the Northern Expedition.

古文：赫连定残根易摧，拟之必仆。
现代文：而赫连定，就象枯树的残根，很容易摧毁，一击就倒。
English: But He Lianding, just like the stump of a dead tree, is easy to destroy and will fall at the first blow.

古文：克定之后，东出潼关，席卷而前，则威震南极，江、淮以北无立草矣。
现代文：我们攻克赫连定以后，就可以东出潼关，席卷向前，必会威震最南面的地方，而长江、淮河以北将没有一根草可以生存。
English: After we conquer Khe Lianding, we will be able to move east out of Shaoguan and sweep forward. We will surely dominate the southernmost place, and there will be no grass to survive north of the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River.

古文：圣策独发，非愚近所及，愿陛下勿疑。 
现代文：皇上的英明决断，不是一般愚劣之人所能领会的，希望陛下不要迟疑。 
English: The Emperor's wise decision is beyond the comprehension of ordinary fools. I hope His Majesty will not hesitate.

古文：甲辰，魏主如统万，遂袭平凉，以卫兵将军王斤镇蒲坂。
现代文：甲辰，拓跋焘前往统万，于是指挥军队袭击平凉，命卫兵将军王斤镇守蒲坂。
English: Ji Chen, Tuobao went to Tongwan, then he commanded the army to attack Pingliang, and the lifeguard general Wang Jianzhen guarded Busan.

古文：斤，建之子也。
现代文：王斤是王建的儿子。
English: Wang Jin is the son of Wang Jian.

古文：秦自正月不雨，至于九月，民流叛者甚众。
现代文：西秦从正月以后，天旱无雨，直到九月，百姓流亡叛逃的人数很多。
English: After the first month of the year, there was no rain or drought in West Qin until September, and a large number of people fled the country.

古文：冬，十月，以竟陵王义宣为南徐州策史，犹戍石头。
现代文：冬季十月，刘宋文帝任命竟陵王刘义宣为南徐州刺史，仍旧驻守石头。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Liu Songwen appointed Liu Yixuan, the king of the Mausoleum, as the chief historian of South Xuzhou, and he was still stationed at the stone.

古文：戊午，立钱署，铸四铢钱。
现代文：戊午，刘宋设置钱币署，铸造四铢钱。
English: On the fifth day, the money department was established and minted four yuan coins.

古文：到彦之、王仲德沿河置守，还保东平。
现代文：刘宋右将军到彦之、安北将军王仲德沿黄河南岸布防之后，回守东平。
English: After General Liu Song Yu went to Yan Zhi and General Wang Zhong De of Anbei set up defenses along the south bank of the Yellow River, they returned to defend Dongping.

古文：乙亥，魏安颉自委粟津济河，攻金墉。
现代文：乙亥，北魏冠军将军安颉从委粟津渡过黄河南下，攻打金墉城。
English: In the 19th century, the Northern Wei champion general An Xuan crossed the Yellow River southward from the Commune of Awazu to attack Jincheng.

古文：金墉城不治既久，又无粮食。
现代文：金墉已经很久没有得到修缮，防御工事破败，加上城中缺少粮食。
English: Gimhae has not been repaired for a long time, the fortifications are dilapidated, and there is a lack of food in the city.

古文：杜骥欲弃城走，恐获罪。
现代文：刘宋守将杜骥打算弃城逃走，又惧怕受到朝廷的军法惩治。
English: Liu Songshu planned to abandon Dujuan and flee the city, but he was afraid of being punished by the court martial.

古文：初，高祖灭秦，迁其钟虡于江南，有大钟没于洛水，帝使姚耸夫将千五百人往取之。
现代文：当初，刘裕消灭后秦时，把后秦皇家巨钟运回江南，途中有一只巨钟沉没洛水。这时，刘义隆派姚耸夫率领一千五百人前去打捞。
English: At first, when Liu Yu eliminated the Qin Dynasty, he transported the Qin Dynasty royal giant bell back to the south of the Yangtze River. On the way, a giant bell sank in Luoshui. At this time, Liu Yilong sent Yao Shengfu to lead 1,500 people to salvage it.

古文：骥绐之曰： 金墉城已修完，粮食亦足，所乏者人耳。
现代文：杜骥哄骗姚耸夫说： 金墉城已修整完竣，粮食也充足，最为缺少的就是兵员。
English: The cuckoo coaxed Yao Shengfu to say: Jinyuan City has been repaired and completed, and there is plenty of grain. What is most lacking is soldiers.

古文：今虏骑南渡，当相与并力御之。大功既立，牵钟未晚。 
现代文：如今魏国胡虏的骑兵大举南下，我们应当齐心协力地抵御敌人的进攻，等大功告成，再去打捞沉钟也不迟。 
English: Now that the cavalry of the Wei Kingdom's Hurui is heading south en masse, we should make a concerted effort to resist the enemy's attack. Once the great work is completed, it will not be too late to salvage the sunken bell.

古文：耸夫从之。
现代文：姚耸夫同意了杜骥的一番话。
English: Yao Shengfu agreed with Du Jun's words.

古文：既至，见城不可守，乃引去，遂南遁。
现代文：等到了金墉，姚耸夫看到城池难以据守，于是率军退走。
English: After waiting for Jinlu, Yao Shoufu saw that the city was difficult to defend, so he led the army to retreat.

古文：丙子，安颉拔洛阳，杀将士五千馀人。
现代文：杜骥也乘机放弃破城，向南逃走。丙子，北魏将军安颉攻陷洛阳城，屠杀刘宋守城将士五千余人。
English: Du Qian also took the opportunity to abandon the broken city and fled to the south. As a result, the Northern Wei general An Qi captured Luoyang City and slaughtered more than 5,000 Liu Song defenders.

古文：杜骥归，言于帝曰： 本欲以死固守，姚耸夫及城遽走，人情沮败，不可复禁。 
现代文：杜骥逃回京师，向刘宋文帝报告说： 我本打算拼死固守金墉，可是姚耸夫刚一进城转身就走，使城中的将士人心涣散，情绪低落，难以挽救。 
English: Du Wei fled back to Beijing and reported to Liu Songwen: "I had planned to fight to the death to hold on to Jinyu, but Yao Shengfu turned his back as soon as he entered the city, causing the soldiers in the city to be distracted and depressed, and it was difficult to save them.

古文：上大怒，诛耸夫于寿阳。
现代文：文帝听到这些，暴怒如雷，立即下诏将姚耸夫在寿阳就地斩首。
English: When Emperor Wen heard this, he was furious and immediately issued an edict to have Yao Shengfu beheaded on the spot in Shouyang.

古文：耸夫勇健，诸偏裨莫及也。
现代文：姚耸夫勇猛善战，其他将领都赶不上他。
English: Yao Xuanfu fought bravely and well, and other generals could not keep up with him.

古文：魏河北诸军会于七女津。
现代文：北魏黄河以北的各路军队在七女津会师。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, all the armies north of the Yellow River gathered at Qimenetsu.

古文：到彦之恐其南渡，遣裨将王蟠龙溯流夺其船，杜超等击斩之。
现代文：到彦之担心敌人要渡过黄河南下进攻，就派副将王蟠龙逆流而上，劫夺敌人的战船，却被北魏阳平王杜超等击败，王蟠龙被杀。
English: Fearing that the enemy was about to cross the Yellow River and attack the south, Du Yan Zhi sent Vice Admiral Wang Hailong upstream to rob the enemy's warships. However, he was defeated by Northern Wei Yangping Wang Du Chao and others, and Wang Hailong was killed.

古文：安颉与龙骧将军陆俟进攻虎牢，辛巳，拔之；尹冲及荥阳太守清河崔模降魏。
现代文：于是，北魏冠军将军安颉、龙骧将军陆俟合兵进攻虎牢。辛巳，攻克虎牢城。司州刺史尹冲以及荥阳太守清河人崔模投降了北魏。
English: As a result, the Northern Wei champion generals An Xuan and Long Xuan, together with the general Lu Xuan, attacked the tiger's prison. Soon, they conquered the tiger's prison city. The governor of Shizhou, Yin Chong, and the governor of Shenyang, Cui Mo, surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：秦王暮末为河西所逼，遣其臣王恺、乌讷阗请迎于魏，魏人许以平凉、安定封之。
现代文：西秦王乞伏暮末在北凉的军事威胁下，派使臣王恺、乌讷阗出使北魏，请求派兵援助。北魏许诺把尚在夏国掌握中的平凉郡和安定郡封给乞伏暮末。
English: At the end of the Western Qin Dynasty, under the military threat from the Northern Liang Dynasty, the Western Qin Dynasty sent envoys to the Northern Wei Dynasty to request the dispatch of troops for assistance. The Northern Wei Dynasty promised to give Pingliang County and Anding County, which were still under the control of Xia, to the end of the Western Qin Dynasty.

古文：暮末乃焚城邑，毁宝器，帅户万五千，东如上邽。
现代文：乞伏暮末于是纵火焚烧城邑，捣毁了宝物，统率部众一万五千户，向东前往上。
English: At the end of the year, he set fire to the city, destroyed the treasures, and led 15,000 people eastward.

古文：至高田谷，给事黄门侍郎郭恒谋劫诅兴国以叛；事觉，暮末杀之。
现代文：乞伏暮末的大队人马刚走到高田谷，给事黄门侍郎郭恒等人阴谋劫特沮渠兴国，反叛西秦。郭恒的密谋泄漏，乞伏暮末杀掉了郭恒。
English: At the end of the year of begging, a large group of people had just walked to Takada Valley, where the Yellow Gate attendant Guo Heng and others plotted to overthrow the country and rebel against the Western Qin Dynasty. Guo Heng's plot leaked, and he killed Guo Heng at the end of the year of begging.

古文：夏主闻暮末将至，发兵拒之。
现代文：夏王赫连定听说乞伏暮末的大军将来进攻，发兵抵抗。
English: Xia Wang He Lianding heard that the large army at the end of the year would attack in the future and sent troops to resist.

古文：暮末留保南安，其故地皆入于吐谷浑。
现代文：乞伏暮末只好就地固守南安，西秦的故土全被吐谷浑汗国占领。
English: At the end of the year, they had no choice but to hold on to Nan'an, and the whole of Western Qin's homeland was occupied by the Tuyun Khanate.

古文：夏主自鄜城还安定，将步骑二万北救平凉，与弼遇，弼伪退以诱之；夏主追之，魏主使高车驰击之，夏兵大败，斩首数千级。
现代文：十一月，乙酉，北魏国主拓跋焘抵达平凉，夏国上谷公赫连社干等人绕城固守。拓跋焘命赫连昌招抚他们，赫连社干等不听赫连昌的劝招。于是，拓跋焘派安西将军古弼等率兵直指安定。夏王赫连定从城返回安定，率领步、骑兵二万人向北增援平凉。途中，正巧与古弼军遭遇，古弼假装撤退，诱敌深入。夏王赫连定紧追不舍，拓跋焘派高车部落飞速增援，截击夏国军队，夏军大败，被斩首的士卒达几千人。
English: In November, Tuobao, the ruler of Northern Wei, arrived in Pingliang, and Shangguang Hereng and other cadres of Xia Province encircled the city. Tuobao ordered Herengchang to entice them, but Hereng and other cadres did not listen to Hereng's persuasion. Therefore, Tuobao sent Anxi General Gu Xun and other soldiers to point directly at Pingliang. Xia King Hereng returned from the city to Pingliang, leading 20,000 infantry and cavalry to the north to reinforce Pingliang. On the way, he just happened to encounter Gu Xun's army, Gu Xun pretended to retreat,

古文：夏主还走，登鹑觚原，为方阵以自固，魏兵就围之。
现代文：赫连定仓皇逃回，退守鹑觚原，布置方阵自保。北魏军队赶来把他团团包围。
English: Khelian fled back in panic, retreated to defend Suwon, and set up a square formation for self-protection. The Northern Wei army arrived and surrounded him.

古文：壬辰，加征南大将军檀道济都督征讨诸军事，帅众伐魏。
现代文：壬辰，刘宋加授征南大将军檀道济为都督征讨诸军事，统率大队人马讨伐北魏。
English: In Imjin, Liu Songjia gave the order to conscript the Nantai general Dang Daoji as the governor to conscript the military and lead the brigade to fight against the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：甲午，魏寿光侯叔孙建、汝阴公长孙道生济河而南。
现代文：甲午，北魏寿光侯叔孙建、汝阴公长孙道生渡过黄河南下。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Northern Wei Shouguang Hou's uncle Sun Jian and Ru Yin Gong's eldest grandson Daosheng crossed the Yellow River to the south.

古文：到彦之闻洛阳、虎牢不守，诸军相继奔败，欲引兵还。
现代文：到彦之听说洛阳、虎牢失守，各路军队相继失败的消息，打算撤军。
English: When Kazuhiko heard the news that Luoyang and Hougang had lost their defenses, and that the various armies had failed one after another, he planned to withdraw his troops.

古文：殿中将军垣护之以书谏之，以为宜使竺灵秀硃修之守滑台，自帅大军进拟河北，且曰： 昔人有连年攻战，失众乏粮，犹张胆争前，莫肯轻退。
现代文：殿中将军垣护之写信给到彦之劝阻他，认为到彦之应派竺灵秀帮助朱之死守滑台，然后亲自统率军队进攻黄河以北，还说： 过去，曾有人连年攻战，损兵折将，粮草断绝，仍然奋勇出击，不肯轻易向后退却。
English: The palace general, Kakimori, wrote a letter to Yukihiko to dissuade him, arguing that Yukihiko should send Ying Lingxiu to help Zhu defend the slide, and then personally lead the army to attack north of the Yellow River. He also said: In the past, there were people who fought for years, lost soldiers, and lost crops, but still fought bravely and refused to retreat easily.

古文：况今青州丰穰，济漕流通，士马饱逸，威力无损。
现代文：何况如今青州粮食丰收，粮草充足，济河漕运畅通，将士战马都饱食强健，战斗力并没有受到削弱。
English: Moreover, Qingzhou had a bumper harvest this year, the Jihe River was navigable, the soldiers were well-fed, the war horses were well-kept, and the horse's strength was not damaged.

古文：若空弃滑台，坐丧成业，岂朝廷受任之旨邪！ 彦之不从。
现代文：如果白白地放弃滑台，坐视成功的大业丢失，岂不是辜负了朝廷的重托吗！ 到彦之没有接受。
English: If he were to give up the podium for nothing, if he were to sit back and watch the great cause of his success be lost, would he not be failing to live up to the heavy trust placed in him by the Imperial Court?

古文：护之，苗之子也。
现代文：垣护之是垣苗的儿子。
English: Kakimori is the son of Kakimea.

古文：彦之欲焚舟步走，王仲德曰： 洛阳既陷，虎牢不守，自然之势也。
现代文：到彦之打算烧毁战船步行撤退，安北将军王仲德说： 洛阳陷落，虎牢失守，这是必然的趋势。
English: When Yan Yan planned to burn the warship and retreat on foot, Anbei General Wang Zhongde said: "Luoyang has fallen, and the tiger has been firmly lost. This is an inevitable trend.

古文：今虏去我犹千里，滑台尚有强兵，若遽舍舟南走，士卒必散。
现代文：但是，现在敌人距我们还有千里之遥，滑台城又有强兵把守，如果突然放弃战船步行逃走，士卒们一定会四处溃散。
English: However, now the enemy is still thousands of miles away from us, and the city of Slide is guarded by strong soldiers. If they suddenly abandon the warship and flee on foot, the soldiers will surely scatter everywhere.

古文：当引舟入济，至马耳谷口，吏详所宜。 
现代文：我们应该乘战船进入济河，等到了马耳谷的关口，再作进一步的决定。 
English: We should take the warship into the Ji River and wait until we reach the pass of Malta Valley before making further decisions.

古文：彦之先有目疾，至是大动；且将士疾疫，乃引兵自清入济。南至历城，焚舟弃甲，步趋彭城。
现代文：到彦之原先就有眼病，这时更加严重，疼痛难忍。况且军中将士染上瘟疫的人也很多，到彦之于是率军从清口驶进济水，又南下抵达历城，焚毁战舟，抛弃铠甲，步行直奔彭城。
English: When he arrived, he was already suffering from an eye disease, but this time it was more serious and the pain was unbearable. Moreover, there were many people who were infected with the plague, so he led the army from Qingkou into Jishui, and then went south to Licheng, burned the warship, abandoned the armor, and walked straight to Pengcheng.

古文：竺灵秀弃须昌，南奔湖陆，表、衮大扰。
现代文：兖州刺史竺灵秀也放弃须昌，南下逃往湖陆，青州、兖州陷于混乱。
English: The governor of Zhangzhou, Shishi Qulingxiu, also abandoned Suchang and fled south to Hulun. Qingzhou and Zhangzhou fell into chaos.

古文：长沙王义欣在彭城，将佐恐魏兵大至，劝义欣委镇还都，义欣不从。
现代文：长沙王刘义欣这时正在彭城，他的将领们惧怕北魏大军大批攻来，都劝刘义欣放弃彭城返回京师，刘义欣没有听从。
English: At that time, Liu Yixin, the king of Changsha, was in Pengcheng. His generals were afraid of the massive invasion of the Northern Wei army. They all advised Liu Yixin to abandon Pengcheng and return to Beijing. Liu Yixin did not listen.

古文：魏兵攻济南，济南太守武进萧承之帅数百人拒之。
现代文：北魏的军队开始进攻济南，济南太守武进人萧承之率领几百名士卒奋勇抵抗。
English: The army of the Northern Wei Dynasty began to attack Jinan, and several hundred dignitaries bravely resisted under the leadership of Xia Chengzhi, the grand marshal of Jinan.

古文：魏众大集，承之使偃兵，开城门。
现代文：北魏军队聚集城下，准备攻城。萧承之命令士卒们隐蔽起来，大开城门。
English: The Northern Wei army gathered under the city, preparing to attack the city. Xiao Cheng ordered the soldiers to hide and open the city gate.

古文：众曰： 贼众我寡，奈何轻敌之甚！ 
现代文：萧承之的部下说： 现在敌众我寡，怎么可以如此轻敌！ 
English: Xiao Chengzhi's subordinates said: Now that we have few enemies, how can we treat them so lightly!

古文：承之曰： 今悬守穷城，事已危急，若复示弱，必为所屠，唯当见强以待之耳。 
现代文：萧承之说： 我们困守一座被抛弃在敌人后方的孤城，情势危急。如果向敌人示弱，必定会遭到屠杀，只有摆出强大的姿态来等待敌人。 
English: Xiao Chengzhi said: We are trapped in a lonely city that has been abandoned behind the enemy. The situation is critical. If we show weakness to the enemy, we will surely be slaughtered. The only way to wait for the enemy is to present a strong posture.

古文：魏人疑有伏兵，遂引去。
现代文：北魏兵看到这种情形，怀疑城里有重兵埋伏，于是撤退。
English: The Northern Wei soldiers saw this situation, suspected that there were heavy soldiers in the city, so they retreated.

古文：魏军围夏主数日，断其水草，人马饥渴。
现代文：北魏军队围攻赫连定已有几天，切断了水源和粮草运输线。夏国的人马饥渴交加。
English: The Northern Wei army has been besieging Herending for several days, cutting off water sources and grain and grass transportation lines. People in Xia are hungry and thirsty.

古文：丁酉，夏主引众下鹑觚原。
现代文：丁酉，夏王赫连定率众冲下了鹑觚原。
English: Ding Yao, Xia Wang He, and a large number of people rushed down the plains.

古文：魏武卫将军丘眷击之，夏众大溃，死者万馀人。
现代文：北魏武卫将军丘眷截击敌人，夏国军队全军溃败，被杀一万多人。
English: The Northern Wei general Wuwei Yau promptly intercepted the enemy, the entire Xia army was defeated, and more than ten thousand people were killed.

古文：夏主中重创，单骑走，收其馀众，驱民五万，西保上邽。
现代文：赫连定也身负重伤，只身骑马逃跑，途中又集结残兵败将，驱使老百姓五万人，向西退保上。
English: He Lianding was also seriously injured and fled on horseback. On the way, he gathered the defeated soldiers and drove 50,000 people westward.

古文：魏人获夏主之弟丹阳公乌视拔、武陵公秃骨及公侯以下百馀人。
现代文：魏军生擒赫连定的弟弟丹杨公赫连乌视拔武陵公赫连秃骨以及公、侯以下的贵族和大臣一百多人。
English: Danyang Gonghelian, the younger brother of Wei army cadet Yan He Lianding, Uchiwu Wuling, Wuling Gonghelian Baldbone, and more than a hundred nobles and ministers below the rank of prince and lord.

古文：是日，魏兵乘胜进攻安定，夏东平公乙斗弃城奔长安，驱略数千家，西奔上邽。
现代文：这天，北魏军又乘胜进攻安定，守城的夏国东平公赫连乙斗丢弃城池，逃奔长安。又强行裹胁百姓数千家向西逃往上。
English: On this day, the Northern Wei Army took advantage of the victory to attack and stabilize the city. Xia Guodongping Gonghe, who was defending the city, abandoned the city and fled to Chang'an. He also forcibly encircled thousands of people and fled westward.

古文：戊戌，魏叔孙建攻竺灵秀于湖陆，灵秀大败，死者五千馀人。
现代文：戊戌，北魏寿光侯叔孙建，进攻刘宋兖州刺史竺灵秀据守的湖陆，竺灵秀大败，被斩杀的士卒达五千多人。
English: Wu Xi, Northern Wei Shouguang Hou Uncle Sun Jian, attacked Liu Song Bozhou, stabbed Shuling Xiu, and defeated Shuling Xiu. More than 5,000 soldiers were killed.

古文：建还顿城。
现代文：叔孙建得胜收兵，驻防范城。
English: Uncle and grandson Jian Decheng collected troops and stationed them in the fortified city.

古文：己亥，魏主如安定。
现代文：己亥，北魏国主拓跋焘抵达安定。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei dynasty was stabilized.

古文：庚子，还，临平凉，掘堑围之。
现代文：庚子，返回平凉城外，指挥将士在平凉城四周，深挖沟堑，重重包围。
English: Geng Zi returned to Pingliang outside the city. He commanded his soldiers to dig trenches all around Pingliang and surround the city.

古文：安慰初附，赦秦、雍之民，赐复七年。
现代文：拓跋焘又安抚慰问新归附的百姓，免除秦、雍二州百姓的赋役七年。
English: Tuobao also appeased and comforted the newly annexed people, and exempted the people of Qin and Yong two states from forced labor for seven years.

古文：夏陇西守将降魏。
现代文：夏国陇西守将向北魏军投降。
English: The governor of the western part of Xia Province will surrender to the Northern Wei Army.

古文：辛丑，魏安颉督诸军攻滑台。
现代文：辛丑，北魏冠军将军安颉督率各路军队攻打滑台。
English: Sin ugly, the Northern Wei champion general An Xun led all the troops to attack the slide.

古文：河西王蒙逊遣尚书郎宗舒等入贡于魏，魏主与之宴，执崔浩之手以示舒等曰： 汝所闻崔公，此则是也。
现代文：北凉河西王沮渠蒙逊派遣尚书郎宗舒等人到北魏进贡。拓跋焘设宴招待，拉住崔浩的手，向宗舒介绍说： 你们听说的崔先生，就是这位。
English: Meng Song, the Western King of the Lianghe River, dispatched Shang Shulang Zong Shu and others to pay tribute to the Northern Wei Dynasty. Tuoba Yao held a banquet, took Cui Hao's hand, and introduced him to Zong Shu, saying, "This is the Mr. Cui you've heard about.

古文：才略之美，于今无比。
现代文：他智略与才华的高妙，举世无双。
English: His ingenuity and brilliance are second to none.

古文：朕动止咨之，豫陈成败，若合符契，未尝失也。 
现代文：我的一举一动，都要征求他的意见。他预测战场上的成败，就象合在一起的符信一样，不差分毫，从来没有失误。 
English: He is consulted on my every move, and his predictions of success or failure on the battlefield are like a matched set of countersigns, never wrong, never wrong.

古文：魏以叔孙建都督冀、青等四州诸军事。
现代文：北魏朝廷任命叔孙建为都督冀州、青州等四州诸军事。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty court appointed Uncle Sun Jian as the military governor of Jizhou, Qingzhou and other four states.

古文：魏尚书库结帅骑五千迎秦王暮末。
现代文：北魏尚书库结率领骑兵五千，迎接西秦国王乞伏暮末。
English: The Northern Wei Shang Library led 5,000 cavalry to welcome the Western Qin King at the end of the year.

古文：秦卫将军吉毘以为不宜内徙，暮末从之，库结引还。
现代文：西秦卫将军乞伏吉毗认为不应内迁投靠北魏，乞伏暮末同意。库结只好领兵而回。
English: Western Qin Wei general Qi Fu Jivi thought that it was not appropriate to move inland to join the Northern Wei Dynasty, and agreed at the end of the year. Kuye had no choice but to lead the troops back.

古文：南安诸羌万馀人叛秦，推安南将军、督八郡诸军事、广宁太守焦遗为主，遗不从，乃劫遗族子长城护军亮为主，帅众攻南安。
现代文：南安的各羌族部落一万余人背叛了西秦的统治，共同推举安南将军、督八郡诸军事、广宁太守焦遗为盟主，焦遗拒绝。羌族部众于是劫持焦遗的族侄、长城护军焦亮为盟主，聚众攻打南安城。
English: More than ten thousand people from various Yi tribes in Nan'an betrayed the rule of Western Qin, and jointly nominated General Annan, the governors of eight counties, the military, and the Guangning Taishu Jiao Yu as the leader, but Jiao Yu refused. The members of the Yi tribe then kidnapped Jiao Yu's nephew, Jiao Liang, the Great Wall Protector, as the leader, and gathered to attack Nan'an City.

古文：暮未请救于氐王杨难当，难当遣将军苻南帅骑三千救之，暮末与之合击诸羌。诸羌溃，亮奔还广宁，暮未进军攻之，以手令与焦遗使取亮；十二月遗斩亮者出降，暮末进遗号镇国将军。
现代文：亲自下手令命焦遗诛杀焦亮。十二月，焦遗将焦亮斩首，出城投降。乞伏暮末为焦遗加封号称镇国将军。
English: He personally ordered Jiao's widow to kill Jiao Liang. In December, Jiao Liang beheaded Jiao Liang and left the city to surrender. At the end of the year, Jiao Liang was awarded the title of Zhenguo General.

古文：秦略阳太守弘农杨显以郡降夏。
现代文：西秦略阳太守弘农人杨显献出郡城，投降夏国。
English: The Western Qin Emperor Liangyang and the peasant Yang Xian offered the county seat and surrendered Xia Province.

古文：辛酉，以长沙王义欣为豫州刺史，镇寿阳。
现代文：辛酉，刘宋朝廷任命长沙王刘义欣为豫州刺史，镇守寿阳。
English: Xin Xi, the Liu Song Dynasty court appointed the Changsha King Liu Yixin as the governor of Yuzhou and the town guard of Shouyang.

古文：寿阳土荒民散，城郭颓败，盗贼公行。
现代文：寿阳土地荒芜，人民流散，城垣坍塌，盗贼公开抢劫。
English: The land of Shouyang is deserted, the people are scattered, the city walls have collapsed, and thieves are openly robbing.

古文：义欣随宜经理，境内安业，道不拾遗，城府完实，遂为盛籓。
现代文：刘义欣根据具体情况，采取适当的措施治理寿阳，不久，寿阳境内的人民就安居乐业，路不拾遗，城池坚固，仓廪充实，于是成了强盛的藩镇势力。
English: According to the specific situation, Liu Yixin took appropriate measures to govern Shouyang. Soon, the people in Shouyang lived and worked in peace, the roads were safe, the city was strong, and the warehouses were full. As a result, it became a strong domain and town power.

古文：芍陂久废，义欣修治堤防，引河水入陂，溉田万馀顷，无复旱灾。
现代文：芍陂也早已残旧不堪，刘义欣修整堤防，引肥河水入陂，灌溉农田一万余顷，从此没有再出现旱灾。
English: Liu Yixin repaired the dike, diverted the river water into the dike, and irrigated more than 10,000 hectares of farmland. Since then, there have been no more droughts.

古文：丁卯，夏上谷公社干、广阳公度洛孤出降，魏克平凉。
现代文：丁卯，夏国上谷公赫连社干、广阳公赫连度洛孤出城投降，北魏军攻克了平凉。
English: Ding Wu, Xia Guo Shangguo Gonghe Lianshakan, Guangyang Gonghe Liandu Luoqiao left the city and surrendered, and the Northern Wei Army conquered Pingliang.

古文：关中侯豆代田得奚斤、娥清等，献于魏主。
现代文：北魏关中侯豆代田，救出了被俘司空奚斤、宗正娥清等，呈献给拓跋焘。
English: Northern Wei Guanzhong Hou Doudai Tian, rescued the captured Siku Shujin, Zong Zheng Eqing, etc., and presented it to Tuobao.

古文：魏主以夏主之后赐代田，命斤膝行执酒以奉代田，谓斤曰： 全汝生者，代田也。 
现代文：拓跋焘把赫连定的皇后赏赐给豆代田，命令奚斤跪下用膝盖行走，向豆代田敬酒。拓跋焘对奚斤说： 是豆代田保全了你的性命。 
English: Tuobao gave the queen of Herengding to Doushirota, and ordered Gongjin to kneel down and walk on his knees to make a toast to Doushirota. Tuobao said to Gongjin: It was Doushirota who saved your life.

古文：赐代田爵井陉侯，加散骑常侍、右卫将军，领内都幢将。
现代文：赐封豆代田为井陉侯，加授散骑常侍、右卫将军，兼领内都幢将。
English: He was given the fiefdom of Mameyotan as well as the additional titles of Sanzhi (free rider) and Right Guard General, as well as the title of Inner Capital General.

古文：夏长安、临晋、武功守将皆走，关中悉入于魏。
现代文：夏国长安、临晋、武功等城的守将都弃城逃走，关中大片土地都纳入魏国版图。
English: The defenders of Chang'an, Linjin, Wukong and other cities in Xia abandoned their cities and fled, and large areas of Guanzhong were incorporated into the territory of Wei.

古文：魏主留巴东公延普镇安定，以镇西将军王斤镇长安。
现代文：拓跋焘留下巴东公拓跋延普镇守安定；命镇西将军王斤镇守长安。
English: Tuobao left the Patong Gong, Tuobaoyan and Pu Zhen to keep stability; the West Zhen Xi Zhen Wang Jin Zhen to keep Chang'an.

古文：壬申，魏主东还，以奚斤为宰士，使负酒食以从。
现代文：壬申，拓跋焘班师东还，任命奚斤为宰士，命他背驮着酒类、饭菜跟从左右。
English: In Jinshin, the leader of Tuoba's group of teachers, Dong Ya, appointed Yao Jin as his assistant, and ordered him to carry liquor and food on his back and follow him around.

古文：王斤骄矜不法，信用左右，调役百姓，民不堪命，南奔汉川者数千家。
现代文：北魏镇西将军王斤骄恣纵欲，多行不法，纵容左右亲信，随意调动和役使百姓。人民不堪忍受，向南逃往刘宋汉川的有几千家。
English: The Western General of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wang Jian, was arrogant, indulged in many illegal activities, connived with his right and left cronies, and arbitrarily mobilized and enslaved the people. The people were unbearable, and several thousand fled south to Liu Song Hanchuan.

古文：魏主案治得实，斩斤以徇。
现代文：拓跋焘访查证实了王斤的罪状，斩王斤示众。
English: Tuobao's investigation confirmed Wang Jin's guilt, and he was publicly beheaded.

古文：右将军到彦之、安北将军王仲德皆下狱免官，衮州刺史竺灵秀坐弃军伏诛。
现代文：刘宋右将军到彦之、安北将军王仲德都被免职，逮捕入狱。兖州刺史竺灵秀，因弃军逃跑，斩首。
English: General Liu Song Yu Zu Yan Zhi and General Wang Zhong De of Anbei were relieved of their duties, arrested and imprisoned. Zhangzhou Sashihai Lingxiu was beheaded for desertion.

古文：上见垣护之书而善之，以为北高平太守。
现代文：文帝刘义隆看到殿中将军垣护之给到彦之的信，大加称许，随即任命垣护之为北高平太守。
English: Emperor Liu Yilong saw a letter from General Kakigori, who was a member of the imperial court, to the Emperor and praised him highly. He then appointed Kakigori as the Northern Gaoping Governor-General.

古文：彦之之北伐也，甲兵资实甚盛；乃败还，委弃荡尽，府藏、武库为之空虚。
现代文：到彦之大军北伐之时，武器及各种军用物资十分充实，等到大败而回，一路上抛弃殆尽。朝廷仓库和武器库，因此空虚。
English: When Hiko's large army arrived at the time of the Northern Expedition, weapons and various military supplies were very plentiful. When they returned after the great defeat, they were abandoned along the way. The imperial warehouses and arsenals were therefore empty.

古文：它日，上与群臣宴，有荒外降人在坐。
现代文：有一天，文帝召集大臣们宴饮，有远方归降的人在座。
English: One day, Emperor Wen called together his ministers for a banquet, and those who had returned from far away were present.

古文：上问尚书库部郎顾琛： 库中仗犹有几许？ 
现代文：刘义隆问尚书库部郎顾琛： 军械库中还有多少武器？ 
English: Liu Yilong asked Shang Library Department Manager Lang Gu Jun: How many weapons are left in the armory?

古文：琛诡对： 有十万人仗。 
现代文：顾琛虚报说： 只够十万人使用。 
English: "It is only enough for 100,000 people to use," Gu said.

古文：上既问而悔之，得琛对，甚喜。
现代文：文帝问完就很后悔，听到顾琛的回答，才略觉宽慰，十分高兴。
English: After finishing his question, Wen Di regretted it very much. Hearing Gu Yao's answer, he felt a little relieved and very happy.

古文：琛，和之曾孙也。
现代文：顾琛是顾和的曾孙。
English: Gu Yao is Gu He's great-grandson.

古文：彭城王义康与王弘并录尚书，义康意犹怏怏，欲得扬州，形于辞旨；以弘弟昙首居中，为上所亲委，愈不悦。
现代文：刘宋彭城王刘义康与王弘共同担任录尚书事，刘义康仍感到怏怏不快，打算代替王弘兼任扬州刺史，在言辞中毫不隐瞒。
English: Liu Song Peng, the king of Liu Song Peng, Liu Yikang and Wang Hong jointly served as recorders. Liu Yikang still felt uncomfortable and intended to replace Wang Hong and also serve as Yangzhou recorders. He did not hide anything in his speech.

古文：弘以老病，屡乞骸骨，昙首自求吴郡，上皆不许。
现代文：又因为王弘的弟弟王昙首在朝中担任要职，深得文帝的倚重和信赖，就愈加不满。这时王弘年老多病，多次请求辞职回乡；王昙首主动要求担任吴郡太守，文帝都一概不许。
English: Moreover, because Wang Hong's younger brother, Wang Xizhou, held an important position in the imperial court and was deeply trusted by Emperor Wen, he became increasingly dissatisfied. At this time, Wang Hong was very old and ill, and he repeatedly asked to resign and return to his hometown. Wang Xizhou took the initiative to request to serve as the governor of Wuxi County, but Emperor Wen did not allow him to do so.

古文：义康谓人曰： 王公久病不起，神州讵宜卧治！ 
现代文：刘义康对别人说： 王弘患病长期卧床，难道能在床上治理天下吗？ 
English: Liu Yikang said to others: Wang Hong has been bedridden for a long time due to illness. Is it possible to govern the world from bed?

古文：昙首劝弘减府中文武之半以授义康，上听割二千人，义康乃悦。
现代文：王昙首劝王弘把府中文武官员的一半，分给刘义康管理。文帝下诏同意拨给刘义康二千人，刘义康这才高兴。
English: Wang Jianshou advised Wang Hong to allocate half of the prefectural Chinese military officials to Liu Yikang's management. Emperor Wen agreed to allocate two thousand people to Liu Yikang, which made Liu Yikang happy.

