古文：凡与敌战，士卒蹈万死一生之地，而无悔惧之心者，皆信令使然也。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，士卒们踏上战场，就如置之万死一生之地而无后悔畏惧之心的，因为这是听从指挥和服从命令。
English: In any war against the enemy, when the soldiers step onto the battlefield, it is as if they are on the brink of death without fear or regret, because they are following orders and obeying orders.

古文：上好信以任诚，则下用情而无疑，故战无不胜。
现代文：将帅讲求信义以诚待人，那么，士卒便会报之以尽心用力而无犹豫之意。所以，打起仗来就能无往而不胜。
English: If the general asks for loyalty and treats people with sincerity, then the soldiers will reciprocate with their best efforts without hesitation. Therefore, it is possible to fight a war without a past and win.

古文：法曰： 信则不欺。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 为将帅者应当具备诚信而不欺诈的思想品格。 
English: As it is said in the art of war, the general should have the moral character of honesty and not of deceit.

古文：三国魏明帝自征蜀，幸长安，遣司马懿督张合诸军，雍、凉劲卒二十万，潜军密进，窥向剑阁。
现代文：三国时期，魏明帝曹睿征讨蜀国，亲自从洛阳来到长安，派遣宣王司马懿督统左将军张郃所部及雍、凉二州等精兵三十万人，隐蔽轻装出发，窥向蜀地剑阁。
English: During the Three Kingdoms period, Emperor Cao Rui of the Wei and Ming Dynasties invaded Shu and personally came from Luoyang to Chang'an. He dispatched 300,000 elite soldiers, including Xuan Wang, Sima Bingdu, the left-wing general Zhang Yanshobu, and the two states of Yong and Liang, secretly and lightly armed, to spy out the Sword Palace of Shu.

古文：蜀相诸葛亮时在祁山，旌旗利器，守在险要。会兵交换，在者八万。
现代文：蜀国丞相诸葛亮当时驻屯在祁山，他把精良武器装备，都用在扼守险要之处，部队将有十分之二的人换防离去，留在战场的将士只有八万人。
English: Zhuge Liang, the prime minister of Shu, was stationed in Lushan at that time. He used his sophisticated weapons and equipment to defend the most important places. Two-tenths of the troops would change their defense and leave, leaving only 80,000 soldiers on the battlefield.

古文：时魏军始阵，代兵适交，参佐咸以贼众强盛，非力不制，宜权停下兵一月，以并声势。
现代文：正当魏军开始布阵之时，恰值蜀军换防交接过程，诸葛亮的参谋人员都认为敌军强盛，没有足够的兵力是制胜不了对方的，因此纷纷建议把换下来的部队暂留一月，以便壮大蜀军声威。
English: Just as the Wei army began to set up its lines, the Shu army began the process of changing fortifications. Zhuge Liang's staff officers all believed that the enemy army was strong and could not defeat the other side without sufficient troops. Therefore, they suggested that the replaced troops should stay for one month in order to strengthen the reputation of the Shu army.

古文：亮曰： 吾统武行师，以大信为本，得利失信，古人所惜；去者束装以待期，妻子鹄立而计日，虽临征难，义所不废。 
现代文：但诸葛亮却说： 我统兵打仗，一向以信义为根本，那种 得原失信 的作法，是为古人痛惜而不取的。现在，换防该去的士卒已经迅速打点好行装等待归期，他们的妻子则引领切盼而逐日计算着丈夫归来的时间。因此，目前我们虽然面临征战的困难，但恪守信义的原则不可废弃。 
English: However, Zhuge Liang said: I have always fought with my soldiers on the basis of faith and righteousness, and the practice of gaining and losing faith is regretted by the ancients. Now, the soldiers who should go to the front have quickly packed and waited for their return, and their wives are leading the longing and calculating the time of their husband's return day by day. Therefore, although we are currently facing the difficulties of going to war, we must not abandon the principle of faith and righteousness.

古文：皆催令去。于是，去者皆悦，愿留一战；征者奋勇，思致死命。
现代文：说完，便下令催促换防下来的士卒赶快启程回乡。于是，该走的都很高兴，愿意留下参加战斗；该留斗志昂扬，决心拼死一战。
English: Having said this, he gave orders to urge the soldiers who had changed sides to leave for home as soon as possible. As a result, those who were to go were happy and willing to stay and fight; those who were to stay were full of fighting spirit and determined to fight to the death.

古文：相谓曰： 诸葛公之恩，死犹未报也。 
现代文：他们互相勉励说： 诸葛丞相对我们的恩德，我们即使拚上性命也无法报答！ 
English: They encouraged each other, saying: "Zhuge Zheng, for our kindness, we can't repay you even with our lives!"

古文：临战之日，莫不拔剑争先，以一当十，杀张合，却司马懿，一战大克，信之由也。
现代文：到了交战那天，蜀军无不拔剑争先，冲锋陷阵，以一当十，击杀了魏将张郃，打退了主帅司马懿。
English: On the day of the engagement, the Shu army all drew their swords to fight for the lead, charged into the battle, and with one when ten, killed the Wei general Zhang Qian and repulsed the commander Sima Qian.

