古文：子墨子言曰： 古者明王圣人所以王天下、正诸侯者，彼其爱民谨忠，利民谨厚，忠信相连，又示之以利，是以终身不餍，殁世而不卷。
现代文：墨子说道： 古代的明王圣人所以能统一天下、长于诸侯的原因，是他们爱护百姓确实尽心，利于百姓确实丰厚，忠信结合，又把利益指示给百姓。所以终身对此都不满足，临死前还不厌倦。
English: Mozi said, "The reason why the ancient sages of the Ming Dynasty were able to unify the people and outlast the princes is that they truly cared for the people, benefitted the people greatly, combined their loyalty, and directed their interests to the people. Therefore, they were not satisfied with this throughout their lives, and they were not tired of it before they died.

古文：古者明王圣人其所以王天下、正诸侯者，此也。 
现代文：古代的明王圣人所以能统一天下、长于诸侯的原因，即在于此。 
English: This is the reason why the ancient sages of the Ming Dynasty were able to unify the country and outlast the princes.

古文：是故古者圣王制为节用之法，曰： 凡天下群百工，轮车鞼匏、陶冶梓匠，使各从事其所能，曰： 凡足以奉给民用，则止。 
现代文：所以古代圣王定下节用的法则是： 凡是天下百工，如造轮车的、制皮革的、烧陶器的、铸金属的、当木匠的，使各人都从事自己所擅长的技艺，只要足以供给民用就行。 
English: Therefore, the ancient sage king set the following rule for the festival: For all the hundred craftsmen in the world, such as wheelwrights, leather makers, potters, metal casters, and carpenters, let everyone engage in the skills they are good at, as long as it is enough to supply civilian use.

古文：诸加费不加于民利者，圣王弗为。
现代文：而那种种只增加费用而不更有利于民用的，圣王都不做。
English: Other measures will only increase costs and will not be more conducive to civilian use, and the holy king will not do it.

古文：古者圣王制为饮食之法，曰： 足以充虚继气，强股肱，耳目聪明，则止。
现代文：古代圣王制定饮食的法则是： 只要能够充饥补气，强壮手脚，耳聪目明就行了。
English: The ancient holy king's dietary rules were: as long as you can satisfy your hunger and replenish your energy, have strong hands and feet, and sharp ears and eyes, that's enough.

古文：不极五昧之调、芬香之和，不致远国珍怪异物。 
现代文：不穷极五味的调和与气味芳香，不招致远国珍贵奇怪的食物。 
English: The endless five-flavor blending and aroma aromas do not lead to exotic, rare and strange foods.

古文：何以知其然？
现代文：怎么知道是这样呢？
English: How do you know this is the case?

古文：古者尧治天下，南抚交趾，北降幽都，东、西至日所出、入，莫不宾服。
现代文：古时尧帝治理天下，南面安抚到交阯，北面降服到幽都，东面直到太阳出入的地方，没有谁敢不归服的。
English: In ancient times, Emperor Qian ruled the world. In the south, he pacified as far as Jiaotong, in the north, he submitted as far as Youdu, and in the east, as far as the place where the sun rises and sets. No one dared not submit.

古文：逮至其厚爱，黍稷不二，羹胾不重，饭于土塯，啜于土形，斗以酌，俯仰周旋，威仪之礼，圣王弗为。
现代文：及至他最喜爱的，饭食没有两种，肉食不会重复，用土镏吃饭，用土铏喝汤，用木勺饮酒，对俯仰周旋等礼仪，圣王不去做。
English: As far as his favorite, there are no two kinds of meals, meat will not be repeated, eat with a shovel, drink soup with a shovel, drink with a wooden spoon, and do not do rituals such as bowing.

古文：古者圣王制为衣服之法，曰： 冬服绀緅之衣，轻且暖；夏服絺绤之衣，轻且凊，则止。 
现代文：古代圣王制定做衣服的法则是： 冬天穿的天青色的衣服，轻便而又暖和；夏天穿细葛或粗葛布的衣服，轻便而又凉爽，这就可以了。
English: The ancient sages laid down the rules for making clothes: In winter, wear sky-blue clothes that are light and warm; in summer, wear clothes made of fine or coarse camphor, which are light and cool.

古文：诸加费不加于民利者，圣王弗为。
现代文：其他种种只增加费用而不更加利于民用的，圣王不去做。
English: Other measures will only increase costs and will not be more conducive to civilian use, and the holy king will not do it.

古文：古者圣人为猛禽狡兽暴人害民，于是教民以兵行。
现代文：古代圣王因为看到凶禽狡兽残害人民，于是教导百姓带着兵器走路。
English: The ancient sage king, seeing the savage birds and cunning beasts destroying the people, taught the people to walk with weapons.

古文：日带剑，为刺则入，击则断，旁击而不拆，此剑之利也。
现代文：每日带着剑，用剑刺则能刺入，用剑砍则能砍断，剑被别的器械击了也不会折断，这就是剑的好处。
English: If you carry a sword every day, you can pierce with the sword's thorn, cut with the sword, and the sword will not be broken by other instruments. This is the advantage of the sword.

古文：甲为衣，则轻且利，动则兵且从，此甲之利也。
现代文：铠甲穿在身上，轻巧便利，行动时方便又顺意，这是甲衣的好处。
English: Armor is worn on the body, it is light and convenient, and it is convenient and smooth when moving. This is the advantage of armor.

古文：车为服重致远，乘之则安，引之则利，安以不伤人，利以速至，此车之利也。
现代文：用车子载得重行得远，乘坐它很安全，拉动它也便利，安稳而不会伤人，便利而能迅速到达，这是车子的好处。
English: The advantages of a car are that it can carry heavy loads for a long distance, it is very safe to ride on it, it is convenient to pull it, it is stable and does not hurt people, and it is convenient and can be reached quickly.

古文：古者圣王为大川广谷之不可济，于是利为舟楫，足以将之，则止。
现代文：古代圣王因为大河宽谷不能渡过，于是制造船桨，足以行驶，就可以了。
English: Because the ancient holy king could not cross the wide valley of the great river, he made a paddle, enough to travel.

古文：虽上者三公，诸侯至，舟楫不易，津人不饰，此舟之利也。
现代文：即使上面的三公、诸侯到了，船桨也不加更换，掌渡人也不加装饰。这是船的好处。
English: Even if the above three princes and princes arrived, the oars would not be replaced and the porters would not be decorated. This is the advantage of the ship.

古文：古者圣王制为节葬之法，曰： 衣三领，足以朽肉；棺三寸，足以朽骸；窟穴，深不通于泉，流不发泄，则止。 
现代文：古代圣王制定节葬的法则是： 衣三件，足够使死者骸骨朽烂在里面；棺木三寸厚，足够使死者肉体朽烂在里面。掘墓穴，深到不及泉水，又不至使腐气散发于上，就行了。 
English: The ancient sage-kings laid down the rules for a proper burial: three pieces of clothing, enough for the bones of the deceased to rot inside; a coffin three inches thick, enough for the body of the deceased to rot inside; dig a grave deeper than spring water, and do not let the rot spread on it.

古文：死者既葬，生者毋久丧用哀。
现代文：死者既已埋葬，生者就不要长久服丧哀悼。
English: Now that the dead have been buried, the living should not mourn for long.

古文：古者人之始生，未有宫室之时，因陵丘窟穴而处焉。
现代文：古代人类产生之初，还没有宫室的时候，依着山丘挖洞穴而居住。
English: At the dawn of ancient mankind, when there was no palace, people lived in caves dug into the hills.

古文：圣王虑之，以为窟穴，曰：冬可以避风寒，逮夏，下润湿，上熏蒸，恐伤民之气，于是作为宫室而利。
现代文：圣人对此忧虑，认为挖的洞穴虽然冬天可以避风寒，但一到夏天，下面潮湿，上面热气蒸发，恐怕伤害百姓的气血，于是建造房屋来便利。
English: The sage was worried about this, thinking that although the caves dug in winter could shelter from the wind and cold, once summer came, the bottom would be damp and the top would evaporate, which would harm the people's qi and blood, so he built houses to make it easier.

古文：然则为宫室之法，将奈何哉？
现代文：既然如此，那么建造宫室的法则应该怎样呢？
English: That being the case, what should be the rules for building a palace?

古文：子墨子言曰： 其旁可以圉风寒，上可以圉雪霜雨露，其中蠲洁，可以祭祀，宫墙足以为男女之别，则止。 
现代文：墨子说道： 房屋四边可以抵御风寒，屋顶可以防御雪霜雨露，屋里清洁，可供祭祀，壁墙足以使男女分别生活，就可以了。
English: Mozi said: The four sides of the house can resist wind and cold, the roof can protect against snow, frost, rain and dew, the house is clean and can be used for sacrifices, and the walls are enough for men and women to live separately.

古文：诸加费不加民利者，圣王弗为。
现代文：其他各种只增加费用而不更加有利于民用的，圣王不去做。 
English: The holy king will not do other things that only increase costs and are not more conducive to civilian use.

