古文：十八日昧爽入城，取滕所作书。
现代文：十八日黎明进城，去取滕肯堂写的信。
English: At dawn on the 18th, I went to the city to get the letter written by Teng Ken Tong.

古文：抵北关，站骑已至。
现代文：走到北关，释站的坐骑已经到了。
English: When I walked to the north gate, the horses of the release station had already arrived.

古文：余令顾仆与骑俱返候壶关。
现代文：我命令顾仆与坐骑都返回壶关等候。
English: I ordered my servant and the horse to return to the stable and wait.

古文：滕君亦令人送所作书至。
现代文：滕君也令人把写的信送来。
English: Teng Jun also had a written letter sent to him.

古文：余仍入城谢别，返饭于庵。
现代文：我仍然进城向他道谢辞别，返回到庵中吃饭。
English: I still went into town to thank him and say goodbye, and returned to the hermitage to eat.

古文：莱斋又以金赠。
现代文：菜斋又拿出金钱相赠。
English: After the meal, they gave each other gifts of money.

古文：遂自壶关北行。
现代文：于是从壶关往北行。
English: So we headed north from Kuguan.

古文：关外有三岐：东北向驮朴，走左州，乃向时所从来者；西北向盘麻，走龙州，乃碧云洞游所经者，而兹则取道其中焉。
现代文：关外有三条岔道：往东北通向驮朴，走左州，是前些时候从那里走来的路；往西北通向盘麻，走龙州，是游碧云洞经过的路；而今天却是取道走中间的一条，是去太平州的路。
English: There are three roads out of Guan: to the northeast leads to Ruanpu, take Zuozhou, which is the road you came from a while ago; to the northwest leads to Panma, take Longzhou, which is the road through Yu Biyun Cave; and today it is the middle road, the road to Taipingzhou.

古文：又三里，谷尽，有数家在路左。
现代文：五里，渐渐走入山间峡谷。又行五里，路过一个空旷的山谷，十分平坦广阔而又广漠荒凉，没有耕为田地的地方。
English: Five miles, gradually walking into a mountain canyon. Another five miles, passing through an empty valley, very flat, vast and desolate, with no cultivated fields.

古文：乃折而西二里，登楼沓峺同埂，两傍山崖陡绝，夹隘颇逼，虽不甚高，而石骨嶙峋，觉险阻焉。
现代文：又走三里，山谷完了，有几家人在路左。于是折向西走二里，登上楼沓硬，两旁的山崖陡绝，峡谷中的隘口很狭窄，虽不怎么高，可石骨嶙峋，觉得地势险要。
English: After walking another three miles, the valley was finished, and several families were on the left side of the road. So I turned to the west and walked two miles. It was hard to climb up, the cliffs on both sides were steep, and the gap in the canyon was very narrow. Although it was not very high, it was rocky, and I felt that the terrain was precarious.

古文：逾隘门少西下，辄有塘一方，汇水当关，数十家倚之。
现代文：穿过隘口稍向西下走，就有一池水塘，积着水挡住关隘，有数十家依傍着它。
English: After crossing the pass and walking slightly westward, there is a pond with water that blocks the pass. Dozens of houses are adjacent to it.

古文：西从峡中三里，逾二峺，高倍于楼沓；西下，辄崖方崭削，夹坞更深。
现代文：向西从峡中走三里，越过二硬，高处比楼沓硬高一倍；往西下走，就见石崖高峻陡削，石崖相夹的山坞更深。
English: Walking west from the gorge for three miles, you will pass over two hard rocks, the height of which is twice as high as that of the belfry; walking west, you will see the high and steep rock cliffs, and the dock between the rock cliffs is deeper.

古文：北一里，上大峺，陡绝更倍之。
现代文：向北一里，登上大硬，陡绝更超过二硬一倍。
English: One mile to the north, climb the big rock, which is more than twice as steep as the second rock.

古文：逾坳北下，夹壁俱截云蔽日。
现代文：越过山坳往北下行，峡谷中的绝壁全都穿云蔽日。
English: After crossing the mountains and heading north, the cliffs in the canyon are all shrouded in clouds.

古文：一里，坞穷西转，其北四山中坠，下洼为不测之渊。
现代文：一里，山坞到头往西转，它北边四面的山向中间下坠，下洼成不测之渊。
English: One mile, the dock turned west at the end, and the mountains on the four sides of the north fell down to the middle, and sank into the abyss.

古文：又西一里，逾隘门西下，则悬蹬旋转重崖间，直下山脚，不啻千级也。
现代文：又向西一里，穿过隘口向西下，就见高悬的石瞪旋转在重重山崖之间，一直下到山脚，不止有一千级了。
English: Another mile to the west, through the pass to the west, you can see the high-hanging stones spinning between the cliffs, all the way down to the foot of the mountain, more than a thousand steps.

古文：既下，循麓北行，有深窞悬平畴中，下陷如阱，上开线峡，南北横裂，中跨一石如桥，界而为两，其南有磴，可循而下，泉流虢虢，水流声，仰睇天光，如蹈瓮牖也。
现代文：据考察，府城北面有个荡平隘，是青莲山中裂成峡谷的地方。东南方起自楼沓硬，向西北延到此地，其间形成硬的共有四重，两侧山崖重叠绵亘，水流全都坠入壑谷底的洞穴中，并无让水流通过的缺口，真是一处险要闭塞断绝的隘口。下来之后，沿北麓行，有个深坑悬在平旷的原野中，往下深陷如陷阱，上面裂开线一样的峡谷，南北横向裂开，中间横跨一块岩石如像桥梁，隔为两段，它的南段有石瞪，可顺着下去，泉水流声潺潺，仰视天光，如同踏进了瓦瓮口做的窗户中一样。
English: According to the investigation, there is a swinging plain on the north side of Fucheng, which is a place where the Qinglian Mountain splits into a canyon. The southeast rises from the tower and stretches to the northwest to this place. There are four layers of hard rock between them. The cliffs on both sides overlap for a long time. The water flow all falls into the cave at the bottom of the valley, and there is no gap for the water flow to pass through. It is really a narrow passage that is in danger of being closed. After coming down, along the northern foot, there is a deep pit hanging in the flat wilderness, falling down like a trap, a canyon like a

古文：北行畦塍间，五里，坞尽山回，复西登一岭，下蹈重峡。
现代文：往北行走在田野间，五里，山坞尽处山峰回转，又向西登一岭，下山踏进重重山峡之中。
English: Walking northwards between fields, five miles, turning around the peak at the end of the dock, climbing a ridge to the west, and descending into the middle of a mountain gorge.

古文：五里出山，山始离立，又多突兀之峰夹。
现代文：五里后出山，山开始分开耸立，又有许多突兀之峰夹在路旁。
English: After five miles out of the mountain, the mountain began to stand apart, and there were many abrupt peaks sandwiched by the roadside.

古文：又五里为陵球，有结茅二所，为贳酒炊粥之肆，是为此站之中道。
现代文：又走五里是陵球，有茅屋两所，是卖酒煮粥的店铺，这是这一站路的半路上。
English: Another five miles away is Lingqiu, with two thatched cottages and a shop selling wine and cooked porridge, which is halfway to this station.

古文：又西北七里，过土地屯，有村一坞在路左山坡之北。
现代文：又向西北行七里，路过土地屯，有个村庄在路左山坡北面的山坞中。
English: Another seven miles to the northwest, passing Tiantiantun, there is a village in the dock on the north side of the left slope of the road.

古文：又二里，有小水东自土地屯北岭峡中来，西南流去。
现代文：又走二里，有小溪从东面自土地屯北岭的峡中流来，向西南流去。
English: After another two miles, a small stream came from the east from the canyon of Dunbei Ridge and flowed to the southwest.

古文：绝流西渡，登陇行，闻水声冲冲，遥应山谷，以为即所渡之上流也。
现代文：向西横渡溪流，登上土陇，听见水声轰隆隆，在山谷中远远回响，以为就是所渡小溪的上游了。
English: I crossed the stream to the west, climbed onto the mound, heard the roar of the water, echoed far away in the valley, and thought I was upstream of the creek I had crossed.

古文：忽见大溪汹涌于路右，阔比龙江之半，自西北注东南，下流与小溪合并而去，上流则悬坝石而下，若涌雷轰雷焉。
现代文：忽然见有条大溪在路右汹涌奔流，宽处有龙江的一半，自西北向东南流注，下游与小溪合流而去，上游则从石坝上悬泻，有如雪花飞涌雷霆轰鸣一般。
English: Suddenly, I saw a large stream rushing on the right side of the road, half the width of the Longjiang River, flowing from the northwest to the southeast, merging with the creek in the downstream, and overflowing from the stone dam in the upstream, like snowflakes flying and thunder roaring.

古文：共二里，抵四把村，即石坝堰流处也。
现代文：共走二里，抵达四把村，就是石坝拦截水流之处了。
English: After walking a total of two miles, they arrived at the village of Yitomo, where a stone dam intercepted the flow of water.

古文：盖其江自归顺发源，至安平界，又合养利、恩城之水，盘旋山谷，至此凡径堰四重，以把截之，故曰 把 ，今俗呼为 水坝 云。
现代文：原来这条江从归顺州发源，流到安平州境内，又汇合养利州、恩城州的水流，盘旋在山谷间，流到此地共流经四道堤坝，用 把 截流，故而叫做 把 ，今天俗称为 水坝 。
English: Originally, this river originated in Guishun and flowed to the territory of Anping, and the water flow of Yaoli and Encheng converged and circled between the valleys. The flow to this place co-flowed through four dikes, and the flow was intercepted by a dike, so it was called a dike. Today, it is commonly known as a dam.

古文：此水称黑水河。
现代文：往下流抵崇善县的河口绵埠村，注入龙江。
English: It flows down to the village of Hekou Mianbu in Chongzhen County and flows into the Longjiang River.

古文：绵村即今棉江又西转二里，水之南有层峰秀耸，攒青拥碧，濒水有小峰孤突，下斜骞而上分歧，怒流横啮其趾；水之北，则巨峰巍踞，若当天而扼之者。
现代文：河口在太平府城西七十里。又向西转走二里，江南岸有层层秀丽的山峰高耸，青翠攒聚碧绿簇拥，濒江处有座小峰孤零零地突起，下边斜举而上方分岔，怒流横咬着它的脚趾；江水的北面，就是巨大的山峰巍然盘踞着，好像挡住关口扼守的模样。
English: The estuary is seventy miles west of Taiping City. Another two miles to the west, the south bank of the river has layers of beautiful mountains towering, green and green clustered together. At the edge of the river, there is a small peak jutting out alone. The lower side is raised diagonally and divides above, and the angry current bites its toes; the north side of the river is a huge mountain peak clinging tightly, as if blocking the pass.

古文：路抵巍峰之东，转而北循其北麓，共五里，出其西，有村临江，曰那畔村今作那范，为崇善北界。
现代文：路走到那巍峨山峰的东面，转向北，沿北麓走，共五里，到了山的西麓，有个村庄临江，叫那畔村，是崇善县北境。
English: The road went to the east of the towering peak, turned north, and went along the northern foot, a total of five miles. At the western foot of the mountain, there is a village Linjiang, called Nahan Village, which is the northern border of Chongshan County.

古文：又五里，为叩山村，则太平州属矣。
现代文：又行五里，是叩山村，便是太平州的属地了。
English: Another five miles and it's Baishan Village, then it's a part of Taiping County.

古文：又西北七里，暮抵太平站。
现代文：又向西北走七里，天黑时抵达太平站。
English: I walked another seven miles to the northwest and arrived at Taiping Station in the dark.

古文：孤依山麓，止环堵三楹，土颓茅落，不蔽风日，食无案，卧无榻，可哂也。
现代文：太平站孤零零地依傍着山麓，只有围墙绕着的三间房，土墙坍塌茅草零落，不蔽风日，吃饭没有桌案，睡觉没有床，可笑呀！
English: Taiping Station is isolated next to the foot of the mountain, with only three rooms surrounded by a wall. The earthen wall has collapsed and the thatch is scattered. It does not cover the wind and sun. There is no table for eating and no bed for sleeping. Ridiculous!

古文：先是，挑夫至土地屯即入村换夫，顾奴随之行；余骑先抵站，暮久而顾奴行李待之不至，心其悬；及更，乃以三人送来，始释云霓之望。
现代文：这之前，挑夫到了土地屯就进村去换夫，顾奴跟随他走；我骑马先到释站，天黑了很久等待顾奴和行李仍然不来，心中十分悬念；到了一更时，才用三个人送了来，这才释下了烦乱的心情。
English: Prior to this, when the porter arrived at the land settlement, he went into the village to change his husband, and Gu Nong followed him. I rode to the release station first. It was dark and I waited for a long time for Gu Nong and the luggage, but they still did not come. My heart was full of suspense. When it was time, I sent them with three people, and this relieved my troubled mood.

古文：是夜明月如洗，卧破站中如溜冰壶。
现代文：这一夜月明如洗，躺在破烂的释站中就如在冰壶中洗澡。
English: On this night, the moon was so bright that lying in the dilapidated station was like taking a bath in a curling iron.

古文：五更，风峭寒不可耐，竟以被蒙首而卧。
现代文：五更时，山风酷寒不能忍耐，竟自用被子蒙头大睡。
English: When it was five o'clock, the mountain wind could not bear the bitter cold, and he actually covered his head with a quilt to sleep.

古文：十九日晓日明丽，四面碧峤濯濯，如芙蓉映色。
现代文：十九日拂晓的太阳鲜明艳丽，四面碧绿的青山明净清新，如芙蓉映照的景色。
English: At dawn on the 19th, the sun was bright and dazzling, and the verdant green mountains on all sides were clear and fresh, like the scenery reflected by the hibiscus.

古文：西十里，渡江即为太平州，数千家鳞次倚江西岸。
现代文：向西十里，渡过江就是太平州，数千家鳞次栉比地依傍在江西岸。
English: Ten miles to the west, across the river is Taiping Prefecture, with thousands of houses lining the west bank of the river.

古文：西南有峰，俱峭拔攒立；西北一峰特立州后，下有洞南向，门有巨石中突，骑过其前，不及入探为怅。
现代文：西南方有山峰，全都陡峭挺拔，攒聚而立；西北方一座山峰独立在州城后面，下边有个向南的洞，洞口有块巨石在中间突起，骑马经过洞前，来不及进洞探察，为此而怅恨。
English: There are peaks in the southwest, all of them steep and towering, standing in a cluster; a peak in the northwest stands alone behind the state capital, and there is a south-facing cave below, with a boulder protruding in the middle at the mouth of the cave. Horseback riders pass in front of the cave, too late to explore the cave, and hate it for this reason.

古文：州中居舍悉茅盖土墙，惟衙署有瓦而不甚雄。
现代文：州城中的房屋全是茅草盖顶和土墙，唯有衙门有瓦盖却不怎么雄伟。
English: The houses in the state capital are all thatched roofs and earthen walls, with the exception of the gate, which has a tile roof but is not very grand.

古文：客至，馆于管钥者，传刺入，即以刺答而馈程焉。
现代文：客人来到，找到管钥匙的人住进客馆，传了名帖进去，马上拿名帖来答礼并馈赠了路费。
English: When guests arrived, the person who found the key lived in the guesthouse, passed the nameplate to enter, immediately took the nameplate to return the favor and gave away the travel expenses.

古文：是日传餐馆中，遂不及行。
现代文：这天在客馆中吃了送来的饭，没有立即上路。
English: On this day, I ate the delivered meal in the guest house and did not immediately go on the road.

古文：二十日晨粥于馆，复炊饭而后行，已上午矣。
现代文：二十日早晨在客馆吃粥，再煮饭吃后动身，已是上午了。
English: On the morning of the 20th, we ate porridge at the guest house, then cooked rice and set off. It was already mid-morning.

古文：西北出土壤隘门，行南北两山间。
现代文：向西北出了土墙隘门，行走在南北两山之间。
English: The earth-walled narrow gate emerged to the northwest, and we walked between the two mountains to the north and south.

古文：其中平畴西达，亩塍鳞鳞，不复似荒茅充塞景象。
现代文：其中平旷的原野直达西边，田亩似片片鱼鳞，不再有荒草充塞的景象了。
English: Among them, the flat plains reach as far as the west, the fields are like fish scales, and there is no longer a scene of overgrown grass.

古文：过特峰洞门之南，三里，过一小石梁，村居相望，与江、浙山乡无异。
现代文：经过独立山峰洞口的南面，行三里，过了一座小石桥，村庄房屋相望，与江苏、浙江一带的山乡没有不同。
English: Passing the south side of the independent mountain peak Dongkou, walking three miles, passing a small stone bridge, village houses facing each other, no different from the mountain villages in Jiangsu and Zhejiang.

古文：又三里，一梁甫过，复过一梁。
现代文：又走三里，一桥刚过，又过一桥。
English: Walked another three miles, just passed a bridge, passed another bridge.

古文：西冈有铜钟一覆路左，其质甚巨，相传重三千余斤，自交南飞至者。
现代文：西面山冈上有一口铜钟覆在路左，钟体非常巨大，相传重三千多斤，是从南面的交趾飞来的。
English: On the hill to the west, there is a bronze bell on the left of the road. The bell is very large and is said to weigh more than three thousand pounds. It came from the south.

古文：土人不知其年，而形色若新出于型，略无风日剥蚀之痕，可异也。
现代文：当地人不知它的年代，可形制和颜色好似是新近从模子中铸出来的，丝毫没有被风雨阳光剥蚀的痕迹，值得惊奇。
English: Locals do not know its age, but the shape and color seem to be newly cast from the mold, and it is surprising that there is no trace of weathering by wind, rain and sun.

古文：但其纽为四川人凿去。
现代文：但钟纽被四川人凿去。
English: But Zhongnu was chiseled away by the Sichuanese.

古文：土人云： 尚有一钟在梁下水涧中，然乱石磊落，窥之不辩也。 
现代文：当地人说： 还有一口钟在桥下涧水中，不过乱石磊磊，看去分辨不出。 
English: Locals said: There is also a bell under the bridge in the muddy water, but it is jumbled and can't be distinguished.

古文：又西北一里，辄见江流自西而东向去。
现代文：又向西北走一里，就见江流自西向东流去。
English: I walked another mile to the northwest and saw the river flowing from west to east.

古文：又二里，复有水北流入江，两石梁跨其上。
现代文：又走二里，又有河水向北流入江中，两座石桥跨在河上。
English: After another two miles, the river flows north into the middle of the river, and two stone bridges span the river.

古文：其水比前较大，皆西南山峰间所涌而出者。
现代文：这条河比前边那条较大，都是从西南山峰间涌流出来的河流。
English: This river is larger than the one in the foreground, both of which come from the mountains in the southwest.

古文：又西北五里，复过两梁，有三水自南来，会而北入于江。
现代文：又向西北五里，再过了两座桥，有三条水流自南面流来，会合之后向北流入江中。
English: Another five miles to the northwest, two more bridges, three streams coming from the south, meeting and then flowing north into the river.

古文：此处田禾丰美，皆南山诸流之溥施予其利也。
现代文：此处田中的禾苗丰美，都是南山的各条河流带给此地的好处。
English: Here, the abundance of rice seedlings in the field is the benefit brought to this place by the rivers of Nanshan.

古文：又二里，则平畴西尽，有两石峰界南北两山间，若当关者。
现代文：又行二里，就见平坦的原野在西边到了尽头，有两座石峰隔在南北两山之间，好像把守关口的样子。
English: After another two miles, the flat plain came to an end in the west, with two stone peaks separating the two mountains to the north and south, as if guarding the pass.

古文：穿其中而西，又一里，有小沟南属于山，是为太平州西界。
现代文：穿过其中往西行，又一里，有小沟向南连接到山，这是太平州的西界。
English: Passing through it to the west, another mile, there is a small ditch to the south connected to the mountain, which is the western border of Taiping.

古文：越此入安平境，复有村在路右冈陂间。
现代文：越过此沟进入安平州境内，又有村庄在路右冈峦山坡之间。
English: After crossing this ditch into Anping Prefecture, there is a village on the right side of the road between the slopes of the mountains.

古文：又西二里，即为安平州。
现代文：又向西二里，马上就是安平州。
English: Another two miles to the west is Anping Prefecture.

古文：江水在州之东北，斜骞其前，而东南赴太平州去。
现代文：江水在州城的东北方，斜流到州城前，而后向东南奔赴太平州去。
English: The water of the river is in the northeast of the state capital, and flows obliquely to the front of the state capital, and then rushes southeast to Taiping.

古文：又有小水自西而来，环贯州右，北转而入于江，当即志所称陇水也。
现代文：又有条小河自西面流来，环绕流贯在州右，向北转去流入江中，应当就是志书所称的陇水了。
English: There is also a small river flowing from the west, the circumferential flow runs through the right side of the state, turns north and flows into the river, which should be what the book is called.

古文：其西南有山壁立，仙洞穹其下，其门北向，高敞明洁，顶平如绷幔，而四旁窦壁玲珑，楞栈高下。
现代文：州西南有座山如石壁样矗立着，仙洞隆起在山下，洞口向北，高敞明洁，洞顶平得像绷紧的筛慢，而四旁满是孔洞的洞壁玲珑剔透，石棱栈道高低错落。
English: In the southwestern part of the state, there is a mountain that stands like a stone wall. The Xian Cave rises at the bottom of the mountain. The cave entrance faces north. It is high, open and clear. The top of the cave is flat like a tight sieve, and the cave walls are full of holes on all sides. They are exquisite and clear. The stone-edged boardwalk varies in height.

古文：洞后悬壁上坐观音大士一尊，恍若乘云揽雾。
现代文：洞后高悬的石壁上坐着一尊观音菩萨像，恍惚是在腾云揽雾。
English: On the high-hanging stone wall behind the cave sits a statue of Guanyin Bodhisattva, in a trance.

古文：其下一石中悬，下开两门，上跨重阁，内复横拓为洞。
现代文：坐像下方一块岩石悬在当中，下面开有两个洞口，上方跨着重重楼阁，里面横向拓宽成洞。
English: Below the seated statue, a rock hangs in the middle. Below, there are two openings. Above, there is a cross-shaped pavilion, and inside, it widens horizontally into a hole.

古文：从其右入，夹隙东转，甚狭而深，以暗逼而出。
现代文：从那右边的洞进去，在夹缝中向东转去，十分狭窄而幽深，因为又暗又窄便出来了。
English: Entered by the hole on the right, and turned to the east in a cleft, very narrow and deep, for it was dark and narrow, and came out.

古文：悬石之外，石裂一门，直透东麓；左拾级而上，从东转，则跨梁飞栈，遂出悬石之巅。
现代文：高悬的岩石之外，右边裂开一个洞口，直通到东麓；从左边沿石阶上去，从东边转个弯，就见飞空的栈道跨成桥梁，便到了悬石的顶上。
English: In addition to the high-hanging rock, a hole was opened on the right, leading directly to the eastern foot; from the left, along the stone steps, from the east, turn a corner, you can see the sky-high walkway spanning into a bridge, and then to the top of the hanging rock.

古文：其上有石盆一圆，径尺余，深四寸，皆石髓所凝，雕镂不逮。
现代文：顶上有一个圆形石盆，直径有一尺多，深四寸，都是石髓凝结成的，雕凿而成的比不过它。
English: At the top there is a round stone basin, more than a foot in diameter and four inches deep, all of which are made of congealed stone pith, and nothing can compare to it in terms of carving.

古文：傍有石局棋盘、石床，乃少加斧削者。
现代文：旁边有石棋盘、石床，是稍加刀斧雕凿成的。
English: Next to it there is a stone chessboard, a stone bed, which was hewn with a little bit of carving.

古文：从西入，则深窦邃峡，已而南转，则遂昏黑莫辨。
现代文：从西边进去，是深邃的洞穴幽深的峡谷，随即转向南，便终于昏黑得无法辨路。
English: Entering from the west, it is a deep cave, a deep canyon, and then turning south, it is finally too dark to see the way.

古文：然其底颇平，其峡颇逼，摸索而行。
现代文：然而洞底十分平坦，那峡谷很窄，摸索着前行。
English: However, the bottom of the cave is very flat, the canyon is very narrow, groping forward.

古文：久之，忽见其南有光隐隐，益望而前趋，则一门东南透壁而出，门内稍舒直，南复成幽峡。
现代文：很久之后，忽然见南面有隐隐约约的亮光，越加望着亮光往前赶去，就见一个洞口向东南穿透石壁出去，洞口内稍微舒展平直些，南面又形成幽深的峡谷。
English: After a long time, I suddenly saw a faint light to the south. The more I looked at the light and hurried forward, I saw a cave opening to the southeast through the stone wall. The cave entrance was slightly flatter, and a deep canyon formed to the south.

古文：人之渐隘，仍出至少舒处。
现代文：走入峡中渐渐窄起来，仍旧出到稍稍宽舒之处。
English: After entering the gorge, it gradually narrowed, but still came out to a slightly wider and more comfortable place.

古文：东南出洞门，门甚隘，门以外则穹壁高悬，南眺平壑，与前洞顿异矣。
现代文：向东南走出洞口，洞口非常狭窄，洞口以外就是弯隆的石壁高悬着，向南眺望平坦的壑谷，与前洞所见顿时不同了。
English: I walked out of the cave to the southeast. The cave entrance was very narrow. Beyond the cave entrance, there was a high, sloping stone wall. Looking south, I saw a flat valley, which was different from the previous cave.

古文：久之，复从暗中转出前洞，壁间杂镌和州即和县帅李侯诗数首，内惟《邹洒洙》一首可诵。
现代文：很久很久，再次从黑暗中转出前洞，石壁间杂乱地刻着安平州州官和州人李侯的几首诗，里面唯有一首《邹洒沫》值得诵读。
English: After a long time, the front cave emerged from the darkness again. Several poems by Li Hou, the Anping prefect and a native of the prefecture, were intricately carved between the stone walls. Only one of them, "Dao Sprinkle Foam," was worth reading.

古文：然州乃一巨村，井隘门土墙而无之也。太平州帅李恩祀有程仪之馈，安平州帅为李明峦，止有名柬，乃太平侄行。二十一日晨餐后，上午始得夫，乃往恩城者。
现代文：随即便出洞在州衙前游览。此州的宅第比太平州的更加整齐些，但百姓的房屋比不上太平州的。客馆是瓦盖的，颇能蔽风雨。然而州城不过是个大村子，连隘门和土墙都没有。二十一日早餐后，上午才找到挑夫，是前往恩城的。
English: After breakfast on the 21st, it was only in the morning that we found a porter to take us to En-seong.

古文：始易骑而轮。盖恩城在安平东北，由安平西北向下雷，南宁属。日半可达；而东北向恩城，走龙英，其路须四日抵下雷焉。
现代文：大体上恩城州在安平州东北，由安平州向西北到下雷州，一天半可以到达，而向东北到恩城州，走龙英州，这条路须要四天才到达下雷州。
English: Generally speaking, Encheng Prefecture is in the northeast of Anping Prefecture. It takes one and a half days to travel from Anping Prefecture in the northwest to Xiamen Leizhou, while it takes four days to travel to Xiamen Leizhou from Encheng Prefecture in the northeast.

古文：但安平之西达下雷界，与交夷即高平。接壤，所谓十九峺也。今虑其窃掠，用木横塞道路，故必迂而龙英。
现代文：但安平州西边到达下雷州境内，与交夷接壤，现在担忧交夷来抢劫，用树木横塞道路，所以必须绕道前往龙英。
English: However, the west side of Anping Prefecture has reached the territory of Lower Leizhou, bordering Jiaoyi. Now they are worried that Jiaoyi will rob and block the road with trees, so they have to take a detour to Longying.

古文：由安平东一里，即与江遇。
现代文：由安平向东走一里，立即与江流相遇。
English: Walk one mile east from Anping and you will immediately encounter the river.

古文：其水自西而东，乃发源归顺、下雷者，即志所称逻水也。
现代文：那江水自西流向东，是发源于归顺州、下雷州的水流，就是志书所称的逻水了。
English: The water of the Nanjiang River flows from west to east. It is the water flow originating in Guishun and Shimo-Leizhou. It is the so-called Luoshui.

古文：其势减太平之半。
现代文：水势比在太平州境内弱一半。
English: The water potential is less than half of that in Taiping.

古文：盖又有养利、恩城之水，与此水势同，二水合于下流而至太平州，出旧崇善焉。
现代文：又有流经养利州、恩城州的江水，与此江水势相同，两条江水在下游会合后流到太平州，流出旧崇善县。
English: There is also a river flowing through Yaoli Prefecture and Encheng Prefecture, with the same water potential as this river. After meeting downstream, the two rivers flow to Taiping Prefecture and flow out of the former Chongzhen County.

古文：渡江，即有山横嶂江北岸，乃循山麓东行。
现代文：渡过江，马上有山横挡在江北岸，于是沿山麓往东行。
English: After crossing the river, there was immediately a mountain blocking the north bank of the river, so we drove east along the foot of the mountain.

古文：五里，路北一峰枝起，如指之峭，其东北崖嶂间，忽高裂而中透，如门之上悬，然峻莫可登也。
现代文：五里，路北一座山峰像树枝一样耸起，如手指一样翘起，它东北似屏障样的山崖上，忽然高高裂开中间穿通，如门一样悬在上方，然而陡峻无法可登。
English: Five miles to the north of the road, a mountain peak rises like a twig, like a finger, and it suddenly breaks through the middle of the barrier-like cliff in the northeast, and hangs above like a door, but it is too steep to climb.

古文：穿嶂之东峡，遂东北转，其峡之东复起层峰，与穿嶂对夹而乐北去。
现代文：穿过屏障样山峰东面的峡谷，就向东北转，这峡谷的东面又突起层层山峰，与穿过的屏障样的山峰对立相夹而向东北延伸而去。
English: After passing through the canyon on the east side of the barrier-like peak, it turned to the northeast. On the east side of this canyon, layers of peaks protruded, clinging to the barrier-like peak and extending to the northeast.

古文：有小水界其内，南流入逻江。
现代文：有小河隔在峡谷内，往南流入逻江。
English: A small river is cut off in the canyon and flows south into the Luo River.

古文：当峡有村界其中，此村疑为太平州境，非复安平属矣。
现代文：正当峡谷中央有个村庄隔在其中，此村怀疑是太平州的辖境，不再是安平州的属地了。
English: Right in the middle of the canyon, there is a village separated from it. This village is suspected to be under the jurisdiction of Taiping State, and is no longer a part of Anping State.

古文：村后一里，垒石横亘山峡间，逾门而北，则峡中平畴叠塍，皆恩城境矣。
现代文：由村后走一里，垒石块横亘在山峡间，穿过石墙门往北走，就见峡中平畴广裹田亩重叠，都是恩城州的辖境了。
English: Walk one mile from the back of the village, the foundation stones stretch across the canyon, walk north through the stone wall gate, and you will see the flat areas of the canyon, the wide overlapping fields, all under the jurisdiction of Encheng Prefecture.

古文：渡小水，溯之东北行五里，有尖岫中悬，如人坐而东向者。
现代文：渡过小河，溯流向东北行五里，折向东，东面的山峰略略中断之处，有尖峰耸立中间，如人坐着面向东方的样子。
English: Crossing a small river, following the flow to the northeast for five miles, turning to the east, where the eastern peaks are slightly interrupted, there are spikes standing in the middle, like a person sitting facing the east.

古文：忽见一江自东而西，有石粱甚长而整，下开五蛩，横路北上，江水透梁即东南捣尖岫峡中。
现代文：忽然见到一条江水自东流向西，有座石桥非常长而且平整，下面开有五个桥拱，横跨江水往北上走，江水穿流过桥马上向东南冲捣进尖峰的峡谷中去。
English: Suddenly, I saw a river flowing from east to west. There was a very long and flat stone bridge, with five bridge arches below. I walked across the river to the north. The river flowed through the bridge and immediately rushed southeast into the canyon of spikes.

古文：此水即志所称通利江今称桃城河，由养利而来者，其下流则与逻水合而下太平云。
现代文：这条江就是志书所称的通利江，是由养利州流来的水流，它的下游便与逻水会合后下流到太平州。
English: This river is called the Tongli River in the history books. It is a stream of water flowing from Yaoli Prefecture. Its lower reaches meet with the Luo River and flow down to Taiping Prefecture.

古文：按《一统志》，在田州者曰恩城，在太平者曰思城。
现代文：过了桥就有一个山坞聚居着人家，这是恩城州。州衙的大门向北，也很整齐，可村子没有外墙，与安平州相同。
English: After crossing the bridge, there is a dock where people live. This is Encheng County. The gate of the county seat faces north and is also very neat, but the village has no outer wall, which is the same as Anping County.

古文：今田州恩城已废，而此州义名恩城，不曰思城，与《一统志》异，不知何故。
现代文：这一天只走了十五里。刚到正午，而州官赵某生病卧床，始终找不到差夫，居然坐着等待。那客馆十分简陋，菜饭也使人不能举筷子。
English: On this day, I only walked fifteen miles. It was just after noon, and the state official Zhao Mou was sick in bed and could not find an attendant, so he actually sat and waited. The guest house was very simple, and the dishes made people unable to lift chopsticks.

古文：二十二日晨餐后，夫至乃行。
现代文：二十二日早餐后，差夫到了便动身。
English: On the twenty-second day, after breakfast, the porter arrived and set off.

古文：仍从州前西越五蛩桥，乃折而循江东向行。
现代文：仍从州城前向西越过五拱桥，就转弯顺江向东行。
English: After crossing the five-arched bridge from the west in front of the city of Suzhou, turn east along the river.

古文：五里，山夹愈束，江亦渐小，有石堰阻水，水声如雷。
现代文：五里，山间峡谷越来越束拢，江流也逐渐变小，有石坝拦水，水声如雷。
English: Five miles away, the mountain canyons are getting closer and closer together, the river flow is gradually getting smaller, there is a stone dam to stop the water, and the water sounds like thunder.

古文：盖山峡东尽处，有峰中峙，南北俱有大溪合于中峰之西，其水始大而成江云。
现代文：大体在山峡东面尽头之处，有山峰当中屹立，南北两面都有大溪流到中立之峰西面会合，那水流才开始大起来成为江流。
English: Generally, at the eastern end of the gorge, there is a mountain peak standing in the middle, and there are large streams on both the north and south sides until the neutral peak meets on the west side, and the water flow begins to grow into a river flow.

古文：又东五里，直抵东峰之北，而北夹之山始尽。
现代文：又向东五里，直达东峰的北面，而北面相夹的山才到了尽头。
English: Another five miles to the east, straight to the north of the east peak, and the mountains sandwiched to the north only come to an end.

古文：乃循北夹东崖，溯中峰北畔大溪，北向行夹峡中。
现代文：于是沿北面峡谷中靠东一侧的山崖走，渡过一条小溪，溯中峰北边的大溪行，向北行走在两山相夹的峡谷中。
English: So I walked along the cliff on the east side of the north canyon, crossed a small stream, followed the big stream on the north side of the middle peak, and walked northward in the canyon between the two mountains.

古文：二里，复东转越小水向东峡，溯北大溪北崖行，渐陟山上跻。
现代文：二里，再向东转越过小溪走向东面的峡谷，溯北边大溪靠北的山崖走，渐渐登山上爬。
English: Two miles, then turn east across the creek to the east of the canyon, follow the north side of the creek to the north cliff, and gradually climb up the mountain.

古文：一里，始舍溪，北跻岭坳。
现代文：一里，这才离开溪流，向北登岭坳。
English: One mile later, it left the stream and headed north up the ridge.

古文：其岭甚峻，石骨嶙峋，利者割趾，光者滑足。
现代文：此岭十分陡峻，石骨嶙峋，锋利的割着脚趾，光滑的脚下打滑。
English: This ridge is very steep, stone-boned, sharp-edged toes, and slippery underfoot.

古文：共北二里，始逾其巅，是名鼎促，为养利、恩城之界。
现代文：共往北行二里，这才翻越到岭头，这里名叫鼎促，是养利州、恩城州的分界。
English: A total of two miles northbound, only then did they cross over to Lingtou, which is called Ding Du, and is the dividing line between Yangli Prefecture and Encheng Prefecture.

古文：北下二里，峻益甚，而危崖蔽日，风露不收，石滑土泞，更险于上。
现代文：向北下岭二里，路更陡峻得厉害，而危崖蔽日，山风夹着雨露不止，石滑泥泞，更比上山险峻。
English: Two miles north of the lower ridge, the road is steeper and steeper, and the dangerous cliff blocks the sun, the mountain wind is accompanied by rain and dew, the stone slide is muddy, and it is even steeper than the mountain.

古文：既下，有谷一围，四山密护，中有平畴，惟东面少豁。
现代文：下山后，有一圆形山谷，四周的山密密层层环护着，中间有平整的田地，唯在东面略略豁开一个口。
English: After descending the mountain, there is a circular valley, surrounded by dense layers of mountains, with flat fields in the middle, except for a slightly open mouth in the east.

古文：向之行，余以为水从此出；一里，涉溪而北，则其水乃自东而西者，不识西峰逼簇，从何峡而去也。
现代文：向着豁口行，我以为水流从这里流出去；一里路，涉过溪水往北走，就见那溪水是自东而西流去的，不知西面山峰逼仄簇拥，是从哪条峡谷流出去的。
English: Walking towards the gap, I thought that the water flowed out from here; a mile away, wading through the stream to the north, I saw that the stream flowed from east to west, I don't know which valley the western peaks crowded around and flowed out of.

古文：溪之南有村数家。
现代文：溪南有个几家人的村庄。
English: There is a village of several families in South China's Hainan Province.

古文：又东一里，循北山之东崖北向行，又一里，溪从东来，路乃北去。
现代文：又向东一里，沿北山东侧的山崖向北行，又走一里，溪水从东流来，路于是向北去。
English: Another mile to the east, along the cliff on the east side of the North Mountain to the north, another mile to go, the stream flows from the east, and the road then goes north.

古文：又一里，有石垣横两山夹间，不知是何界址。
现代文：又行一里，有石墙横在两山峡谷间，不知是什么地方的分界线。
English: Another mile, there is a stone wall between the two mountain canyons, I don't know where the dividing line is.

古文：于是东北行山丛间，峦岫历乱，分合倏忽。
现代文：从这里起向东北行走在成丛的山峰间，峰峦杂乱，忽分忽合。
English: From here, walk north-east among the clustered peaks. The peaks are jumbled, sometimes converging, sometimes diverging.

古文：二里，出峡，始有大坞，东西横豁，南北开夹。
现代文：二里，出了山峡，这才有个大山坞，东西横向豁开，南北开成峡谷。
English: Two miles, out of the canyon, there is a large dock, the east and west are horizontally open, and the north and south are opened into a canyon.

古文：然中巨流，故禾田与荒陇相半。
现代文：然而坞中有巨大的水流，所以稻田与荒芜的土陇各占一半。
English: However, there is a huge water flow in the dock, so rice fields and barren mounds each account for half.

古文：北向三里，横度此坞，直抵北崖下，二里，北山既尽，其东山复大开，有村在平畴间，为东通养利大道。
现代文：向北走三里，横向越过这个山坞，直达北面的山崖下，好像无路可通的样子；走到却见东北裂开一个缺口，穿过缺口进去，峡谷中山峰陡峭四合，越觉得弯弯曲曲难以走到尽头。二里，北山完后，那东面的山势又变得十分开阔，有村庄在平旷的原野间，是向东通到养利州的大道。
English: Walk north for three miles, cross the dock horizontally, and reach the bottom of the cliff on the north side, as if there is no way to pass; when you get there, you will see a gap in the northeast, go through the gap, the peaks in the canyon are steep and four-way, and the more you feel the bends and curves, the more difficult it is to get to the end.

古文：乃从小径北行一里，折而西北行三里，南北两夹之山，引锥标笋，靡非异境。
现代文：于是从小径往北行一里，折向西北行三里，南北两面相夹的山，似伸长的锥子冒出的竹笋，无处不是奇异之境。
English: As a result, from the trail one mile to the north, three miles to the northwest, the mountains sandwiched between the north and south, like bamboo shoots emerging from an elongated cone, nowhere is a strange situation.

古文：又北行一里，复开大坞，乃东北斜径坞中，共五里，东山益大开，有村在其南，已为龙英属，其东隔江即养利论今大新县治矣。盖养利之地，西北至江而止，不及五里也。
现代文：又向北行一里，又展开一个大山坞，东西延绵不断，南北两面的山如同南边那个山坞，但南边的山坞东西两头都有成丛的峰峦远远重叠着，此处却前后十分开阔，不知往西去一直到达什么地方了。于是向东北斜向经过山坞中，共走五里，来到北山在东面的尽头处，东面的山更加开阔，有村庄在山坞南面，已是龙英州的属地，它东面隔江处就是养利州了。原来养利州的辖地，西北面到江就到了头，不到五里路了。
English: Another mile to the north, and a large mountain dock opens up. The east and west are continuous, and the mountains on the north and south sides are like the dock on the south side. However, the mountain dock on the south side has clumps of peaks and ridges far overlapping on both sides of the east and west, but here it is very open, and I don't know where to go to the west. So I walked five miles diagonally to the northeast through the middle of the dock, and came to the end of the north mountain on the east side. The mountain on the east side is more open. There is a village on the south side of the dock, which is already a part of

古文：又循山北行一里，有小石峰骈立大峰之东，路透其间，渐转而西，又三里，有村北向，曰耸峒今作松峒，有耸峒站，乃龙英所开，馆舍虽陋而管站者颇驯。
现代文：又沿山向北行一里，有座小石峰并立在大峰的东边，路穿过两座山峰之间，渐渐转向西，到了这里北面一列山开始见到有土山，与南面一列石山夹成山坞。又走三里，有村庄面向北方，叫耸酮，有个耸桐站，是龙英州开设的骚站，客馆的房屋虽然简陋但管理骚站的人十分驯顺。
English: Another mile along the mountain to the north, there is a small stone peak standing side by side on the east side of the big peak. The road passes between the two peaks and gradually turns to the west. At this point, a row of mountains to the north began to see a dirt mountain, and a row of stone mountains to the south became a dock. Another three miles, there is a village facing the north, called Shukon, there is a Shukong station, which is a So station opened by Long Yingzhou. Although the guesthouse houses are simple, the people who manage the So station are very tame.

古文：去龙英尚四十余里。
现代文：到释站虽然才下午，还未吃午餐，便停留在骤站中。
English: Although I arrived at the release station only in the afternoon, I did not have lunch yet, so I stayed in the sudden stop.

古文：抵站虽下午，犹未午餐，遂停站中。自登程来，已五日矣，虽行路迂曲，过养利止数里，而所阅山川甚奇，且连日晴爽明丽，即秋春不及也。
现代文：自上路以来，已有五天了，虽行走的道路迂回曲折，路过养利州境内只有几里，但所经历的山川十分奇丽，并且连日来晴朗明丽，即使是春秋之季也赶不上了。
English: It has been five days since I set out on the road. Although the road I am walking is winding and tortuous, and only a few miles pass through the territory of Yangli Prefecture, the mountains and rivers I have experienced are very beautiful, and they have been clear and bright for days, even in the spring and autumn seasons.

古文：二十三日饭而候夫，上午始至。
现代文：二十三日吃饭后等差夫，上午才到。
English: After dinner on the 23rd, we waited for the porter, who only arrived in the morning.

古文：即横涉一坞，北向三里，缘土山而登。
现代文：立即横向跋涉过一个山坞，向北三里，顺着土山上登。
English: Immediately, I trudged sideways past a dock, three miles to the north, uphill along the dirt road.

古文：西北一里，凌其巅。
现代文：往西北行一里，登越到土山头上。
English: Go northwest for one mile and climb over to the top of the hill.

古文：巅坳中皆夹而为田，是名鲎盘岭。
现代文：山顶的山坳中两旁都开垦为田地，这里名叫鳖盘岭。
English: On both sides of the ridge at the top of the mountain, fields have been cleared, and the area is known as Yupanling.

古文：平行其上，又西北半里，始下土山东去。
现代文：平缓行走在山头上，又向西北走半里，这才下土山往东走去。
English: I walked smoothly on the top of the mountain, and then walked half a mile to the northwest, and then walked down the hill to the east.

古文：其北坞皆石峰特立，北下颇平，约里许至坞底。
现代文：土山北面的山坞中都是独立的石峰，向北下走很平坦，约一里左右走到山坞底。
English: The docks on the north side of the hill are all independent stone peaks, and it is very flat to go north, about a mile or so to the bottom of the dock.

古文：于是东北绕石峰东麓而北，二里，复有一土冈横于前，陟冈不甚高，逾其北，即有水淋漓泻道间，丛木纠藤，上覆下湿，愈下愈深，见前山峰回壑转，田塍盘旋其下，始知横冈之南，犹在山半也，又北二里，下渡一桥，有水自西南东北去，横巨木架桥其上。
现代文：于是向东北绕着石峰东麓往北走，二里，又有一座土冈横在前方，西面抵达远山的缺口处，东边则与南面的土山相连。上登土冈不怎么高，越到土冈北面，马上有水流飘洒着流泻在道路间，林木成丛藤葛纠缠，头上覆盖着林木脚下湿淋淋的，越下走水越深，望见前方的山峰回壑转，田地盘绕在山下，这才知道横亘着的土冈南面，仍在山腰上。又向北二里，下山越过一座桥，有河水自西南向东北流去，在河上用巨树横架成桥。
English: So I walked northeast around the eastern foot of the stone peak to the north, two miles, and there was another earthen mound in front, reaching the gap of the distant mountain in the west, and the east side was connected to the earthen mountain in the south. The uphill earthen mound was not very high, and when I got to the north side of the earthen mound, there was a stream of water flowing between the roads, the trees became a tangle of rhododendrons, and the head was covered with wet rain at the foot of the trees. The deeper I went, the deeper the water. I could see the peaks in front turning back and forth, and the fields were

古文：过桥，水东去，路北抵石壁下。
现代文：过了桥，河水向东流去，路向北抵达石壁下。
English: After crossing the bridge, the river flows to the east, and the road to the north reaches under the stone wall.

古文：一里，忽壁右渐裂一隙，攀隙而登，石骨峻嶒曰大峺。
现代文：一里，忽然石壁右方渐渐裂开一道缝，攀裂缝上登，石骨嶙峋，这里叫大硬。
English: One mile, suddenly a crack gradually opened up on the right side of the stone wall, climbing up the crack, the stone skeleton creaked, here it is called big hard.

古文：半里，跻其坳，南北石崖骈夹甚峻。
现代文：半里路，登上山坳，南北石崖并排夹峙非常陡峻。
English: Half a mile up the ridge, the north and south cliffs are very steep.

古文：西穿其间，又半里始下，乃西坠半里至坞底。
现代文：向西穿过其中，又走半里开始下行，便向西下坠半里来到坞底。
English: Walked west through it, walked half a mile and started to descend, then fell half a mile westwards to the bottom of the dock.

古文：其处山丛壁合，草木蓊密，西半里，转而东北一里，又西北二里，北望石峰间有涧并峙，一敞一狭，俱南向。
现代文：此处山峰成丛石壁四合，草木浓密，州里人伐木的，都是从大硬走。向西半里，转向东北一里，又向西北二里，望见北面石峰间有山洞并排矗立，一个宽一个窄，都是向南。
English: At this place, the mountain peaks form a clump, the stone walls are four-way, the vegetation is dense, and the people in the state who cut wood are all from the Great Hard Walk. Half a mile to the west, turn one mile to the northeast, and two miles to the northwest, you can see the caves standing side by side between the stone peaks to the north, one wide and one narrow, all to the south.

古文：路出其西，复透峡而北，皆巨石夹径，上突兀而下廉利。
现代文：路通到石峰的西面，又穿过峡谷往北走，都是巨石夹住小径，巨石上面突兀而万部锋利。
English: The road to the west side of the stone peak, and then through the canyon to the north, are all boulder-clamped paths. The boulders are jagged and sharp.

古文：于是西北共二里，两涉石坳，俱不甚高，而石俱峭丛，是名翠村岭。
现代文：于是向西北共走二里，两度跋涉石山坳，都不十分高，可岩石全都陡峭成丛，这里名叫翠村岭。
English: So he walked a total of two miles to the northwest, and twice trekked up a rocky ridge, neither of which was very high, but the rocks were all steep and clumped together. This place is called Tsuimura Ridge.

古文：逾岭北下，山乃南北成界，东西大开，路向东北横截其间。
现代文：越过岭向北下行，山于是分成南北两列，东西十分开阔，路向东北横截其中。
English: After crossing the ridge and going down to the north, the mountain is divided into two rows, north and south. The east and west are very open, and the road to the northeast cuts through them.

古文：二里，有石梁跨溪上。
现代文：二里，有座石桥跨在溪上。
English: Two miles away, a stone bridge spans the stream.

古文：其溪自西而东，两岸石崖深夹，水潆其间，有声淙淙，而渡桥有石碑，已磨灭无文，拭而读之，惟见 翠江桥 三字。
现代文：此溪自西流向东，两岸的石崖又深又窄，水流萦绕在其中，有涂涂的水声，过桥后有块石碑，已被磨灭没有碑文，擦拭后读碑，仅见 翠江桥 三个字。
English: This stream flows from west to east. The stone cliffs on both sides are deep and narrow. The current lingers in them. There is the sound of water being painted. After crossing the bridge, there is a stone monument. It has been erased and there is no inscription. After wiping, the monument can be read. There are only three words: "Tsuijiang Bridge."

古文：此处往来者，皆就桥前取水，爇木为炊，为耸峒至龙英中道。
现代文：此处来往的人，都在桥前取水，点燃木柴烧饭，是从耸炯到龙英州的半路上。
English: The people who come and go here all fetch water in front of the bridge, light firewood to cook, and are halfway from Zhouzhuang to Longyingzhou.

古文：过桥，日已昃西斜，而顾奴与担夫未至，且囊无米，不及为炊。
现代文：过桥后，太阳已偏西，可顾奴与挑夫未到，而且口袋中无米，来不及做饭。
English: After crossing the bridge, the sun has already gone west, but the servant and the porter have not arrived, and there is no rice in the pocket, and it is too late to cook.

古文：俟顾仆至，令与舆夫同餐所携冷饭，余出菜斋师所贻腐干啖之，腹遂果然吃饱的样子，又东北行一里，北透山隙而入，循峡逾冈，共北三里，出田坞间，复见北有土山横于前。
现代文：等顾仆来到后，命令他与车夫一同吃带着的冷饭，我拿出菜斋禅师送给的豆腐干吃了，庭中于是饱饱的。又向东北行一里，向北穿过山间的缺口进去，沿着峡谷越过山冈，共向北走三里，走到有田地的山坞中，又见北面有土山横在前方。
English: When Gu's servant arrived, he ordered him to eat the cold rice he had brought with him, together with the driver. I took out the dried tofu given to me by the Zen master and ate it, so the garden was full. I walked one mile to the northeast, north through the gap between the mountains, along the canyon and over the mountains, a total of three miles to the north, walked to the dock with fields, and saw the mountains in the north.

古文：乃渡而小溪，共三里，抵土山下。
现代文：于是渡过一条小溪，共三里，抵达土山下。
English: So we crossed a stream, a total of three miles, and arrived at the bottom of the hill.

古文：循其南麓东北上，一里，逾岭东而北，遂西北从岭上行。
现代文：沿土山南麓向东北上爬，一里，越到岭东往北行，于是在岭上向西北行。
English: Climb along the southern foot of the hill to the northeast, one mile, over to the ridge east to north, then on the ridge to the northwest.

古文：又三里稍下，既下而复上，共一里，又逾岭一重，遂亘下一里，抵山之阴，则复成东西大坞，而日已西沉矣。
现代文：又走三里渐渐下山，下来后又上山，共一里，又越过一重岭，便接连不断地下走一里，到达山北面，就见又形成东西向的大山坞，可日已沉入西山了。
English: He walked another three miles, gradually descending the mountain. After coming down, he walked up the mountain again, a total of one mile. After crossing a ridge, he continued to walk underground for one mile. When he reached the north side of the mountain, he saw a large dockyard in the east-west direction, but it had sunk into the west mountain.

古文：于是循坞西行三里，北入山隙中，始有村落。
现代文：于是顺着山坞西行三里，向北走入山缝之中，开始有村落。
English: So I followed the dock west for three miles, walked north into the mountain crevice, and began to have a village.

古文：一里，乃北渡一石桥。
现代文：一里，便向北过了一座石桥。
English: One mile north, they crossed a stone bridge.

古文：其水亦自西而东，水势与横术溪相似。
现代文：桥下的水也是自西流向东，水势与横架木桥的溪流相似。
English: The water under the bridge also flows from west to east, and the water potential is similar to that of the stream of the wooden bridge.

古文：龙英在郡城北一百八十里。太平府至太平站七十里，太平站至耸峒七十里，耸洞至州四十里。
现代文：桥东北方有石峰陡削悬空而起，就是志书所称的牛角山了，极似络云的鼎湖峰。它西北又独立着一座山峰，共同成为龙英州位于江口的山。又向西走一里，过了西北方独立的山峰，抵达龙英，住宿在茅草盖的客馆里。龙英在府城北面一百八十里。
English: To the northeast of the bridge, there is a stone peak rising steeply into the sky, which is the Cow Horn Mountain mentioned in the book, which is very similar to the Dinghu Peak. It also has an independent peak in the northwest, which together become the mountain of Long Yingzhou located at the mouth of the river. Walk another mile to the west, pass the independent peak in the northwest, arrive at Long Ying, and stay at the thatched roof guest house. Long Ying is one hundred and eighty miles north of the capital.

古文：其西为下雷，东为茗盈、全茗，二州相去止一里。北为都康、向武，南为恩城、养利，其境颇大。
现代文：它西面是下雷州，东面是茗盈州、全茗州，北面是都康州、向武州，南面是恩城州、养利州，它的辖境很大。
English: Its west is the Lower Leizhou, the east is the Yuanying and the Quanzhou, the north is the Dukang and the Xiangwu, and the south is the Encheng and the Yaoli. Its jurisdiction is very large.

古文：三年前为高平莫彝所破，人民离散，仅存空廨垣址而已。
现代文：三年前被高平的莫夷攻占，人民流离失散，仅存留下空荡荡的衙门和城墙基址而已。
English: Three years ago, it was occupied by the Moi of Gaoping, the people were displaced and dispersed, leaving only the empty gate and the foundation site of the city wall.

古文：外域垣与宅后俱厚五尺，高二丈，仆多于立。土官州廨北向，其门楼甚壮丽，二门与厅事亦雄整，不特南、太诸官廨所无，即制府总督衙门亦无比宏壮。
现代文：土司的州衙向北，衙门前的门楼非常壮丽，二门与厅堂也雄伟整齐，不仅是南宁府、太平府各地的官衙所无，即便是总督衙门也没有这样宏伟壮丽。
English: The governor's residence faces north, and the gatehouse in front of the gate is very magnificent. The two gates and the hall are also majestic and neat. Not only are there no official residences in Nanning Prefecture and Taiping Prefecture, but even the governor's residence does not have such grandeur.

古文：其楼为隆庆丁卯年所建，厅事堂匾为天启四年布按三司所给。
现代文：此楼是隆庆丁卯年修建的，厅堂上的匾额是天启四年布政使司、按察使司等三司赠给的。
English: This building was built in the year of Longqing Dingwu. The plaque on the hall was donated by three departments, including the Political Envoy Division and the Political Envoy Inspection Division, in the year of the four years of the Apocalypse.

古文：今残毁之余，外垣内壁止存遗址，厅后有棺停其中，想即前土官赵政立者。
现代文：今日在伤残毁坏之余，外墙内壁只保存下遗址，厅堂后面有棺材停放在其中，料想就是前任土司赵政立的灵枢。
English: Today, in addition to the damage and destruction, only the ruins of the inner wall of the outer wall have been preserved. Behind the hall, there is a coffin parked in it, which is thought to be the spiritual center of the former Tusi Zhao Zhengli.

古文：今土官年十八岁，居于厅宅之左，俟殡棺下葬之意后乃居中云。
现代文：现在的土司年纪有十八岁，住在厅堂宅院的左厢房中，等棺材出殡后才居住到中间来。
English: Toji, who is now 18 years old, lives in the left wing of the hall, waiting for the coffin to come out before moving to the center.

古文：初，赵邦定有七子。
现代文：当初，赵邦定有七个儿子。
English: At first, Zhao Bangding had seven sons.

古文：既没，长子政立无子，即抚次弟政举之子继宗为嗣。
现代文：死后，长子赵政立无子，就抚养二弟赵政举之子赵继宗作为继位人。
English: After his death, his eldest son Zhao Zhengli had no son, so he raised his second brother Zhao Zhengju's son Zhao Jizong as his successor.

古文：而赵政谨者，其大弟也，尝统狼兵援辽归，遂萌夺嫡心，争之不得。
现代文：可赵政谨此人，是他的大弟弟，曾经统率土司兵救援辽东归来，便萌发了篡夺长兄之位的心，争夺不到。
English: However, Zhao Zhengzhen, his elder brother, who once led the Tusi soldiers to rescue Liaodong, sprouted the heart to usurp the position of the eldest brother, and could not compete.

古文：政立死，其妻为下雷之妹，政谨私通之，欲以为内援，而诸土州俱不服。
现代文：赵政立死后，他妻子是下雷州土司的妹妹，赵政谨与她私通，想要以她作内援，但各土州都不服。
English: After the death of Zhao Zhengli, his wife was the younger sister of the Lower Leizhou Tusi. Zhao Zhengni had sexual intercourse with her and wanted to use her as domestic help, but all the Tuzhou were not satisfied.

古文：政谨乃料通 撩 ，逗引莫彝三入其州，下雷亦阴助之，其妹遂挈州印并资蓄走下雷，而莫彝结营州宅，州中无孑遗焉。
现代文：赵政谨便招引莫夷三次侵入此州，下雷州也暗中援助他，下雷州的妹妹竟然带着州印及资财积蓄逃到下雷州，而莫夷在州衙门宅第里扎营，州中没有残存下来的人了。
English: Zhao Zhengxian then invited Mo Yi to invade this prefecture three times. Lower Leizhou also secretly assisted him. Lower Leizhou's sister actually fled to Lower Leizhou with state seals and financial savings, while Mo Yi camped at the gate of the prefecture. There is no one left in the prefecture.

古文：后莫彝去，政谨遂颛州境。
现代文：后来莫夷归去，赵政谨便在州境内独断独行。
English: Later, when Mo Yi returned, Zhao Zheng Rong arbitrarily went his own way within the territory of the state.

古文：当道移文索印下雷，因诒政谨出领州事。
现代文：当局传递文书向下雷州索取官印，因而哄骗赵政谨出任兼管州中政事。
English: The authorities passed the document down to Leizhou to ask for the official seal, thus tricking Zhao Zhenggyi into taking office and being in charge of the state's political affairs.

古文：政谨乃抵南宁，遂执而正其辟判以死刑，以印予前政立所抚子继宗，即今十八岁者，故疮痍未复云。
现代文：赵政谨于是到达南宁，便把他拘捕起来正法了。把印件授予先前赵政立扶养的儿子赵继宗，就是现在十八岁的那个人，所以创伤仍未恢复。
English: Zhao Zhengzong then arrived in Nanning, and he was arrested and prosecuted. The printout was given to Zhao Jizong, the son Zhao Zhengzong had previously raised, who is now eighteen years old, so the trauma has not yet recovered.

古文：莫彝之破龙英，在三年前；甲戌年。其破归顺，则数年前事也。
现代文：莫夷攻占龙英州，在三年前；他们攻破归顺州，却是数年前的事了。
English: Mo Yi conquered Long Ying Zhou three years ago; they conquered and returned to Shun Zhou, but it was several years ago.

古文：抄掠者乃莫彝各村零寇，而莫酋不乱有所犯。
现代文：今天又因归顺州与田州争夺镇安府，莫夷再次为袒护归顺而来，几天前自下雷州向北进入镇安府，在镇安境内结下巢穴。
English: Today, due to the competition between Shunzhou and Tianzhou for Zhen'anfu, Mo Yi once again came to defend and surrender Zhen'anfu. A few days ago, he entered Zhen'anfu from Shimo-Leizhou to the north and built a nest in Zhen'an.

古文：初，莫彝为黎彝所促，以千金投归顺，归顺受而庇之，因通其妻焉。
现代文：我到龙英时，道路上正混乱纷纷，没听说他们抢劫掳掠。当初，莫夷被黎夷逼迫，章着千两黄金投奔归顺州，归顺州接受并庇护莫夷，随后与莫夷的妻子通奸。
English: When I arrived at Longying, there was chaos on the roads, and I did not hear that they were looting and plundering. At the beginning, Mo Yi was persecuted by Li Yi, and he fled to Shunzhou with a thousand taels of gold. Shunzhou accepted and sheltered Mo Yi, and then he committed adultery with Mo Yi's wife.

古文：后英酋归，含怨于中，镇安因而纠之，遂攻破归顺，尽掳其官印、族属而去。
现代文：后来莫夷首领归去，心中含有怨恨，镇安府因而纠集他，竟然攻破归顺，把归顺州的官印、族人亲属尽数掳掠了去。
English: Later, the leader of the Moi returned with a grudge in his heart, so the Zhen'an government rallied around him and even invaded and conquered Qushun, taking away all the official seals and relatives of the people who had returned to Qushun.

古文：后当道当权者知事出镇安，坐责其取印取官于莫。
现代文：后来归顺的当权者知道了事情出在镇安府，坐着责成他向莫夷索取官印。
English: Later, the authorities who had surrendered learned that the incident had occurred in Zhen'anfu, and ordered him to ask Mo Yi for the official seal.

古文：镇安不得已，以千金往赎土官之弟并印还当道。
现代文：镇安府不得已，用千两黄金前去赎回土司的弟弟及官印奉还当权者。
English: As a last resort, the Zhen'an prefectural government used a thousand taels of gold to ransom the younger brother of the local magistrate and return the official seal to the person in power.

古文：既以塞当道之责，且可以取偿其弟，而土官之存亡则不可知矣。
现代文：这样一来既向当局塞责，又可向归顺州的弟弟索取赔偿金，但土司的存亡却不可知了。
English: As a result, the authorities were absolved of blame, and compensation could be claimed from the younger brother who had surrendered to Shanzhou, but Toji's survival was unknown.

古文：后其弟署州事，其地犹半踞于莫彝，岁入征利不休。
现代文：后来归顺州的弟弟代理州里的政事，州里的辖地仍有一半被莫夷盘踞着，每年不停地入境来索要好处。
English: Later, his younger brother, who had surrendered to Shunzhou, acted as the state's political agent. Rong, who still controlled half of the state's territory, was entrapped by Mo Yi and kept coming into the state every year to claim benefits.

古文：州有土目黄达者，忠勇直前，聚众拒莫，莫亦畏避，令得生聚焉。
现代文：州里有个土司头目叫黄达的人，忠心耿耿勇往直前，聚集人马抵御莫夷，莫夷也畏惧躲避他，归顺州今天才得以生息繁衍。
English: In the state, there is a leader of the Tusi people called Huang Da. He is loyal and goes ahead bravely, gathering people and horses to resist Mo Yi. Mo Yi is also afraid to avoid him. It is only today that Guishun State has been able to survive and reproduce.

古文：镇安与归顺，近族也，面世仇。
现代文：镇安府与归顺州，是近亲族人，但世代为仇。
English: Zhen'anfu and Guishun are close relatives, but have been enemies for generations.

古文：前既纠莫彝破归顺，虏其主以去，及为当道烛其奸，复赎其弟以塞责，可谓得计矣。
现代文：镇安府前次既已纠集莫夷攻占归顺，掳掠了州官而去，到被归顺当权者察觉了他的奸计时，又赎回归顺州的弟弟来塞责，可说是计谋得逞了。
English: The last time, the Zhen'an government had already gathered the Moi to attack and occupy Shunshun, abducted the state officials and left. When the person in power who had been surrendered noticed his treacherous plan, he also ransomed his brother who had returned to Shunshu to take the blame. It can be said that the plan was successful.

古文：未几，身死无后，应归顺继嗣，而田州以同姓争之。
现代文：没有多久，身死之后没有后代，应该是归顺州为继承人，但田州因为是同姓前来争夺继承权。
English: Not long after, there were no descendants after his death, and he should have been given to Shunzhou as the heir, but Tianzhou came to compete for the inheritance because he had the same surname.

古文：归顺度力不及田，故又乞援于莫。
现代文：归顺州估计力量赶不上田州，故而又向莫夷乞援。
English: Guishun estimated that his strength could not catch up with that of Tianzhou, so he asked Mo Yi for help.

古文：莫向踞归顺地未吐，今且以此为功，遂驱大兵象阵有万余人，象止三只。
现代文：莫夷一向盘踞着归顺州的土地没有吐出来，今天将以此作为功劳，便驱使着大军象队进入镇安府扎营。
English: Mo Yi, who has been entrenched in the land surrendered to Shunzhou, has not been spit out. Today, he will take this as a credit, and he will drive a large army of elephants into the town of Anfu to camp.

古文：入营镇安。是归顺时以己地献莫，而取偿镇安也。
现代文：这是归顺州把自己的土地献给莫夷，而以求取得镇安府来补偿了。
English: This was a compensation for Guishun to give his land to Moi in order to obtain Zhen'anfu.

古文：莫彝过下雷在月之中，闻十八日过帮润寨。今其事未定，不知当道作何处置也。
现代文：莫夷经过下雷州在本月月中，今天这个事件没有平定，不知当权者作出什么样的处置了。
English: Mo Yi passed through the lower Leizhou in the middle of this month. Today, this incident has not been quelled. I don't know what kind of disposition the authorities have made.

古文：莫彝惟鸟铳甚利，每人挟一枚，发无不中，而器械则无几焉。
现代文：莫夷唯有鸟铣十分利害，每人有一支，开枪没有不击中的，可器械却没有多少。
English: Only the birdcage is very important to Mo Yi. Each person has one, and they never miss a shot, but they don't have much equipment.

古文：中国诸土司不畏国宪，而取重外彝，渐其可长乎？
现代文：当初，莫夷被黎夷逼迫，朝廷提出封赏黎夷保存莫夷的主张。
English: At first, Mo Yi was persecuted by Li Yi, and the imperial court proposed to reward Li Yi and preserve Mo Yi.

古文：当道亦有时差官往语莫酋者，彼则厚赂之，回报云： 彼以仇哄。
现代文：黎夷还不服气，当权者就晓谕他们说： 从前莫人遵奉朝廷命令，用一个马江让黎人居住，黎人难道不可以拿高平给莫人居住吗？  黎夷这才说不出话来，莫夷得以生存下来，今夭竟然横行霸道。
English: Li Yi was still unconvinced, so the authorities told them: In the past, no one obeyed the order of the imperial court and let the Li people live with a horse river. Can't the Li people take Gaoping and let the Li people live there? This made Li Yi speechless. The Mo Yi were able to survive, but now they are acting in a domineering manner.

古文：无关中国事。 岂踞地不吐，狎主齐盟，尚云与中国无与乎？
现代文：中国的众土司不畏惧国法，却借助境外夷族的力量来增强自己，这种逐步发展的趋势难道可以助长吗？
English: Can this trend of gradual development be encouraged by the fact that China's land stewards are not afraid of the law of the land, but rely on the power of foreign barbarians to strengthen themselves?

古文：二十四日候夫龙英。
现代文：二十四日在龙英州等候派夫。
English: On the 24th, they waited for Pai Fu in Long Yingzhou.

古文：纠彝有辟，土司世绝，皆有当宪。
现代文：约束夷族有一定的法度，土司的世系断绝了，都有相应的法令。
English: There are certain laws to restrict the barbarians, and there are corresponding laws when the lineage of the local magistrate is cut off.

古文：今龙英、镇安正当乘此机会，如昔时太平立郡故事，疆理其地。
现代文：如今龙英州、镇安府正该乘此机会，像从前太平府建府时的旧例一样，整理划分他们的辖地。
English: Now, Long Ying Zhou and Zhen'an Prefecture should take this opportunity to sort out and divide their jurisdictions, as was the case when Taiping Prefecture was founded.

古文：乃当事者惧开边衅，且利仍袭之例，第曰： 此土司交争，与中国无与。 
现代文：可当事的人惧怕引发边境事端，姑且认为沿袭旧例是有利的，只说： 这是土司互相争斗，与中国无关。 
English: But the parties concerned are afraid of triggering a border incident, and even if they think that it is advantageous to follow the old practice, they only say: This is a conflict between the two countries, and has nothing to do with China.

古文：不知莫彝助归顺得镇安，即近取归顺之地。
现代文：不明白莫夷协助归顺州夺得镇安府后，马上会就近夺取归顺州的土地。
English: He didn't understand that after Mo Yi helped Guishun capture Zhen'an, he would immediately seize the nearby land of Guishun.

古文：是莫彝与归顺俱有所取，而朝廷之边陲则阴有所失。
现代文：这样莫夷与归顺州都有所得，可朝廷的边疆却在暗中失去了。
English: In this way, both Mo Yi and Gui Shun Zhou had income, but the frontier of the imperial court was secretly lost.

古文：其失镇安而不取，犹曰仍归土司，其失归顺赂莫之地，则南折损失于彝而不觉者也。
现代文：他们丧失了镇安府却不去收取回来，还说仍然归属于土司，他们丢失了归顺州贿赂莫夷的领土，被南边夷族损害了却不能察觉。
English: They lost the Zhen'anfu but did not take it back, saying that it still belonged to Tusi, they lost the territory of Qunshun to bribe Mo Yi, and they were damaged by the Nanbian Yi people but could not detect it.

古文：此边陲一大利害，而上人乌即何也从知之！
现代文：这是边疆地区的一大祸害，可上面的人从哪里知道这些呢！
English: This is a great scourge of the border regions, but how do the people up there know about it?

