古文：东方朔刘向胡综张华束皙沈约虞世南傅奕郝处俊孟诜唐文宗贾耽段成式江陵书生
现代文：东方朔刘向胡综张华束皙沈约虞世南傅奕郝处俊孟诜唐文宗贾耽段成式江陵书生
English: Dongfang Shuo Liu Xiang Hu Zhen Zhan Hua Shuo Shen Yu Shishen Nan Fu Yi Zhe Jun Meng Wei Tang Wen Zong Jia Tan Duan Cheng style Jiangling scholar

古文：东文朔
现代文：东文朔
English: Dong Wenshuo

古文：汉武帝时，尝有独足鹤。人皆不知，以为怪异。
现代文：汉武帝时，曾经出现过独脚鹤，人们不知是什么鸟，认为是一种奇怪的禽类。
English: In the time of Emperor Hanwu, a one-legged crane once appeared. People didn't know what kind of bird it was and thought it was a strange bird.

古文：东方朔奏曰：此山海经所谓毕方鸟也。
现代文：东方朔向武帝上奏说，这是《山海经》中所说的毕方鸟。
English: Dongfang Shuo reported to Emperor Wu that this was the Bi Fang bird mentioned in the "Song of Mountains and Seas."

古文：验之果是。
现代文：经过验证果然是这样。
English: After verification, this is indeed the case.

古文：因敕廷臣皆习山海经。
现代文：于是，汉武帝下诏书，命令上臣们都学习《山海经》。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu issued an imperial edict, ordering his senior courtiers to study the "Sanghaikyo."

古文：山海经伯翳所著，刘向编次作序。
现代文：《山海经》是伯翳所著的，西汉刘向按次序编辑并作序言。
English: "The Classic of Mountains and Seas" was written by Hakuin. Liu Xiang of the Western Han Dynasty edited it in order and wrote the preface.

古文：伯翳亦曰伯益。
现代文：伯翳也叫伯益。
English: Boao is also called Boizhou.

古文：《书》曰：益典朕虞。
现代文：《尚书》上说，伯益的《山海经》让我快乐。
English: "Shang Shu" said that Bo Yi's "Shanhai Jing" made me happy.

古文：盖随禹治水，取山海之异，遂成书。
现代文：因为伯益曾跟随大禹治水，遍采山川河海的奇异之处，写成了此书。
English: Because Bo Yi once followed Dayu to control water and explored the strange places of mountains, rivers and seas, he wrote this book.

古文：刘向
现代文：刘向
English: Liu Xiang

古文：贰负之臣曰危，与贰负杀契窳。
现代文：贰负手下有一个臣子，叫危。危和贰负共同去父杀契窳。
English: He had a vassal under his command, named Jie. Jie and Jie jointly went to kill Jie's father.

古文：帝乃梏之疏属之山。桎其右足，反缚两手与发，系之山上，在关提西北，郭璞注云。
现代文：帝把危拘禁在疏属这个地方的山上，右脚戴着镣铐，两手和头发被反绑着，拴在山上的石头上，在关提西北部。东晋文学家郭璞在《山海经注》中是这样说的。
English: In the northwest of Guanti, the Eastern Jin Dynasty literary scholar Guo Zheng wrote in the Commentary on the Classic of the Mountains and the Sea: "The emperor detained Guo Zheng on the mountain belonging to this place, his right foot was shackled, his hands and hair were tied behind his back, and he was shackled to the stone on the mountain.

古文：汉宣帝使人发上郡磐石，石室中得一人，徒裸，被发反缚，械一足。
现代文：汉宣帝刘询派人在上郡采掘大石块，在一个石室中发现一具古尸，全身赤裸，披发，双手被反绑，一只脚被铐着。
English: Emperor Liu Xuan of the Han Dynasty sent people to excavate large stones in Shang County. An ancient corpse was found in a stone chamber. The body was naked, with hair pulled back, hands tied behind the back, and one foot shackled.

古文：以问，群臣莫知。刘向按此言之。宣帝大惊，由是人争学山海经矣。胡综
现代文：汉宣皇上问这件事，大臣们没有知道的，只有刘向详细地说出了本末，汉宣帝很吃惊。由此，人们争学《山海经》。胡综
English: Emperor Han Xuan asked about this matter, the ministers did not know, only Liu Xiang said in detail the bottom line, Emperor Han Xuan was very surprised. As a result, people are competing to learn the "Mountain and Sea Classic."

古文：胡综博物多识。
现代文：胡综博学多识。
English: Hu Zeng is well-read and knowledgeable.

古文：吴孙权时，有掘地得铜匣长二尺七寸，以琉璃为盖，雕缕其上，得一白玉如意，所执处皆刻龙虎及蝉形。
现代文：东吴孙权时，有人在掘地时得到一个铜匣，长二尺七寸，上有琉璃盖，匣上雕刻着花纹。又得到一个白色玉石如意，手拿的地方刻着龙、虎、蝉形图案。
English: During the time of Eastern Wu and Sun Quan, someone, while digging, obtained a copper box, two feet and seven inches long, with a glazed lid, and a carved pattern on the box. He also obtained a white jade, engraved with a dragon, tiger, and cicada pattern.

古文：时莫能识其所由者。权以综多悉往事，使人问之。
现代文：当时，谁也不知道这物件的来由，孙权认为胡综对过去的事情很熟悉，便派人去问。
English: At that time, no one knew the origin of this object. Sun Quan thought that Hu Zong was very familiar with the past, so he sent someone to ask.

古文：综云：昔秦始皇东游，以金陵有天子气，乃改县名。并掘凿江湖，平诸山阜，处处辄埋宝物，以当王土之气。事见于秦记，此盖是乎。
现代文：胡综说：当年秦始皇东游，认为金陵一带有天子气，便改了县名，掘江挖河，推平山丘，并在各地埋下宝物，用这种办法破坏王土之气，此事在《秦记》上有记载。
English: Hu Zimin said: When the First Emperor of the Qin Dynasty traveled east, he thought that Jinling had the air of a son of heaven, so he changed the name of the county, dug rivers, bulldozed hills, and buried treasures in various places, using this method to destroy the atmosphere of the royal land. This matter is recorded in the "Qin Records."

古文：众人咸叹其洽闻，而怅然自失。
现代文：这些东西就是当年埋下的宝物。众人很叹服胡综的博学多闻。自己感到很惭愧。
English: These things are the treasures buried that year. People are very impressed by Hu Zong's erudition and knowledge. They feel very ashamed.

古文：张华
现代文：张华
English: Zhang Hua

古文：魏时，殿前钟忽大鸣，震骇省署。
现代文：魏时，殿前的大钟忽然自己鸣响了起来，省署内外一片惊慌。
English: During the Wei Dynasty, the large clock in front of the hall suddenly chimed on its own, causing panic both inside and outside the provincial office.

古文：华曰：此蜀铜山崩，故钟鸣应之也。
现代文：张华说：这是由于四川铜山山崩，相互共鸣的原因，所以大钟自鸣。
English: Zhang Hua said: This is due to the Sichuan Copper Mountain landslide, mutual resonance reasons, so the big clock is self-sounding.

古文：蜀寻上事，果云铜山崩。时日皆如华言。
现代文：不久，四川上奏，果然是铜山山崩，时间和张华说的一样。
English: Soon, Sichuan will be played, and it will be a landslide of copper mountains. The time is the same as Zhang Hua said.

古文：又张华
现代文：又张华
English: Zhang Hua again

古文：晋陆士衡尝饷张华，于时宾客盈座。
现代文：又中朝时，有人畜铜澡盘，晨夕恒鸣如人扣。以白张华。华曰：此盘与洛钟宫商相谐，宫中朝暮撞，故声相应。
English: In the middle of the morning, there was a bronze shower tray, and the morning and evening chimes were like a human buckle. With white Zhang Hua. Hua said: This tray is in harmony with the Luo Bell Palace merchants, the morning and evening bump in the palace, and the ancient voice is corresponding.

古文：华开器，便曰：此龙肉也。
现代文：可鑪令轻，则韵乖，鸣自止也。
English: But if the command is light, then the rhyme will be good, and the singing will stop.

古文：众虽素伏华博闻，然意未知信。
现代文：依言，即不复鸣。又武库内有雄雉，时人咸谓为怪。华云：此蛇之所化也。
English: According to the legend, it does not return the call. Also, there is a male dragonfly in the arsenal, so it is strange that people are afraid of it. Huayun: It is also the transformation of this snake.

古文：华曰：试以苦酒灌之，必有异。
现代文：即使搜除库中，果见虵蜕之皮。
English: Even if you search the library, you will find the skin of a baboon.

古文：试之，有五色光起。士衡乃穷其所由。
现代文：晋时，陆士衡曾请张华吃饭，当时宾客满座，张华揭开一食器，说：这是龙肉。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, Lu Shiheng once invited Zhang Hua to dinner. At that time, the guests were all seated. Zhang Hua opened a plate and said, "This is dragon meat."

古文：鲊主曰：家园中积茅下，得一白鱼，质状殊常，以作鲊过美，故以饷陆。又吴郡临平岸崩，出一石鼓，打之无声。
现代文：他们便在库中搜寻，果然找到了蛇蜕的皮。又，吴郡临平地方有一石崖崩裂，发现一只石鼓，敲打时不出声。
English: They searched in the storehouse and found the skin of a python. In addition, a rock cliff collapsed in Linping, Wuxi County, and a stone drum was found, which made no sound when struck.

古文：以问华。华曰：可取蜀中桐材，刻作鱼形，扣之则鸣矣。
现代文：问张华，他说：可用四川产的桐木，刻成鱼形，用这个敲打石鼓，就能发出声音。
English: When asked about Zhang Hua, he said, "You can use paulownia wood from Sichuan to carve a fish shape, and use it to beat a stone drum to make a sound.

古文：即从华言，声闻数十里。
现代文：按他的说法办了，鼓的响声十里外都能听到。
English: It was done as he said, and the sound of the drums could be heard ten miles away.

古文：又惠帝时，有得一鸟毛长数丈。
现代文：又，晋惠帝司马衷时，得到一根数丈长的鸟毛。
English: In addition, when the benefactor of the Jin Dynasty, Sima Zhen, received a long bird feather.

古文：华见而叹曰：此所谓海凫毛。此毛出则天下土崩。
现代文：张华叹息一声说：这是海凫毛，一出现这种毛，天下就要发生地震。
English: Zhang Hua sighed and said, "This is sea-buckthorn hair. As soon as this hair appears, there will be an earthquake in the world."

古文：果如其言。
现代文：果然如此。
English: He really nailed it.

古文：又洛中有一洞穴深不可测。
现代文：又，洛中地方有一个洞穴，深不可测。
English: Also, there is a cave in central Laos that is unfathomable.

古文：有一妇人欲杀夫，谓夫曰：未曾见此穴。
现代文：有一妇人想杀害她的丈夫，对她丈夫说：你没看见过这个洞吧？
English: There was a woman who wanted to kill her husband and said to her husband: "Haven't you seen this hole?

古文：夫自过视之。
现代文：丈夫走来看时，妻子把丈夫推到穴中。
English: When the husband came to look, the wife pushed him into the hole.

古文：至穴，妇推夫坠穴，至底，妇掷饭物，如欲祭之。
现代文：妇人扔了些食物，用来祭奠丈夫。这人起初时恍恍惚惚。过了一会儿才苏醒过来，把妇人扔下的食物吃了，有了些力气。
English: The woman threw some food as a tribute to her husband, who was initially dazed. After a while, he regained consciousness, ate the food and regained some strength.

古文：此人当时颠坠恍惚，良久乃苏。得饭食之，气力稍强。周惶觅路，乃得一穴。
现代文：四处寻找出路，找到一个穴洞，伏下身子在里边爬，曲曲弯弯，爬了数十里，穴洞渐宽，也有了微弱的亮光，逐渐路也平了，地方也宽阔了。
English: Looking for a way out everywhere, he found a hole and crawled inside, bending and twisting, climbing dozens of miles. The hole gradually widened, and there was a faint light. Gradually, the road was flat and the place was wide.

古文：匍匐从就，崎岖反侧。行数十里，穴小宽，亦有微明。
现代文：又步行了一百多里，觉得脚下踩的像尘土，闻着有股米香味，用嘴尝尝味道很美。
English: I walked more than a hundred miles, feeling like the dust under my feet, smelling the fragrance of rice, and tasting the taste with my mouth was beautiful.

古文：遂得宽平广远之地。
现代文：他就用这东西充饥，还背了一些当粮食用。
English: He used it to satisfy his hunger and carried some back for food.

古文：步行百余里，觉所践如尘，而闻粇米香，啗之芬美，过于充饥。即裹以为粮，缘穴行而食。
现代文：又沿着穴洞走，这东西也吃光了，又遇到像泥一样的东西，味道和方才那些尘土样的东西一样，他又吃这个，走了很远很远，也不知有多少里。眼前更宽阔了，食物又吃光了。
English: He walked along the hole again, and this thing was also eaten up, and again he encountered something like mud, the taste was the same as the dusty things, and he ate this again, and he walked very far away, I don't know how many miles. His eyes widened, and the food was eaten up again.

古文：就明旷而食所赍尽，便入一都：郛郭修整，宫馆壮丽。台榭房宇，悉以金魄为饰。
现代文：他来到一座城堡，城中的建筑很整齐，宫馆也很壮丽，楼台亭榭，都用金子装饰。
English: He came to a castle, the buildings in the city were very neat, the palace was also magnificent, the terraces and pavilions were all decorated with gold.

古文：虽无日月，明逾三光。
现代文：这里虽然没有太阳、月亮，但特别亮。
English: Although there is no sun or moon here, it is very bright.

古文：人皆长三丈，被羽衣，奏奇乐，非世所闻也。
现代文：人都三丈多高，身上披着羽毛衣，演奏的音乐也很奇特，在世间没有听到过的。
English: The people are tall, wearing feathered coats, and the music they play is very strange, never heard before in the world.

古文：便告请求哀。长人语令前去，从命进道。
现代文：他便哀求长人指点他，长人叫他还往前走。
English: He begged the elder to show him the way, and the elder told him to go ahead.

古文：凡遇如此者九处。最后所至，苦告饥馁。长人入，指中庭一大柏树，近百围，下有一羊，令跪捋羊须。
现代文：他又往前走，走过了九处这样的地方，到了最后一处，他很饥饿，长人指着庭中一棵大柏树，这树一百多围粗，树下有一只羊。
English: He went on and passed through nine such places. At the last place, he was very hungry. The elder pointed to a large cypress tree in the yard. This tree is more than a hundred times thicker than the surrounding trees. There was a sheep under the tree.

古文：初得一球，长人取之。
现代文：长人叫他捋羊胡子，最初得到一个珠子，长人拿去了，又捋出一个珠子，又被取去。
English: The elder told him to pluck a goatee. At first he got a bead, which the elder took away, and then he plucked another bead, which was also taken away.

古文：次捋又取，后捋令啗食，即得疗饥。
现代文：最后捋出一个，才叫他吃了。他不饿了。
English: Finally, he scooped one out and told him to eat it. He wasn't hungry.

古文：请问九处之名，求停不去。
现代文：他询问这九处是什么地方，他想留在这里不走了。
English: He asked what the nine places were, and he wanted to stay here.

古文：答曰：君命不得停，还问张华当悉。
现代文：回答说：你的命运是不能在这住下的，你回去问张华就明白了。
English: He replied, "Your destiny is not to live here. If you go back and ask Zhang Hua, you will understand."

古文：此人便复随穴而行，遂得出交郡。
现代文：这人又随着穴道往前走，竟走到了城郊，这一趟竟走了六七年的时间。
English: The man followed the path to the outskirts of the city, a journey that took six or seven years.

古文：往还六七年间，即归洛，问华，以所得二物视之。
现代文：回到了洛阳，他问张华，并把他得到的两样东西给张华看。
English: Back in Luoyang, he asked Zhang Hua and showed her the two things he got.

古文：华云：如尘者是黄河龙涎；泥是昆山下泥；九处地仙名九馆；羊为痴龙；其初一珠，食之与天地等寿，次者延年，后者充饥而已。
现代文：张华说，像尘土的是黄河龙涎，泥是昆山下的泥，九处地方是九馆，羊是痴龙，第一个珠子若是吃了，与天地同寿，第二个能延长寿命，最后那个，只能充饥而已。
English: Zhang Hua said that the dragonfly of the Yellow River is like dust, the mud is the mud under Kunshan Mountain, the nine places are the nine pavilions, and the sheep is the dragon. If you eat the first bead, you will have the same life as heaven and earth, the second one can extend your life, and the last one can only feed your hunger.

古文：又豫章有然石，以水灌之便热，用以烹煮，可使食成。
现代文：又，豫章地方有一种然石，用水浇便发熟，用来烹煮，可以做熟饭。
English: In addition, there is a kind of stone in Yuzhang, which can be used for cooking and can be used to make cooked rice.

古文：热尽，下可以冷水灌之更热。
现代文：放完热后，再用冷水浇，更热。
English: After putting it on the heat, rinse it with cold water to make it hotter.

古文：如此无穷。世人贵其异，不能识其名。
现代文：可以这样反复生热，人们感到这种石头很怪，不知叫什么。
English: The heat can be generated repeatedly in this way, and people feel that this stone is very strange, I don't know what to call it.

古文：雷焕元康中入洛，乃赍以示华。华云：此所谓然石。
现代文：雷焕元到洛阳时带了一块给张华看，张华说，这就是所说的然石。
English: When Lei Huan Yuan came to Luoyang, he brought a stone for Zhang Hua to see. Zhang Hua said that this was the so-called rock.

古文：又嵩高山北有大穴空，莫测其深。百姓岁时每游其上。
现代文：又，嵩山北侧有个大穴洞，深不可测，老百姓每年都在上面游玩。
English: In addition, there is a large cave on the north side of Songshan Mountain, which is unfathomable, and people visit it every year.

古文：晋初，尝有一人误坠穴中。同辈冀其倘不死，试投食于穴。
现代文：晋初，曾经有一个误坠洞中，一起来的伙伴们希望他不死，便往洞中投放了一些食物，坠者就吃这些食物。
English: At the beginning of the Jin Dynasty, there was once a crow that fell into a hole by mistake. The friends who came with it hoped that it wouldn't die, so they threw some food into the hole, and the fallen crow ate this food.

古文：可十许日，忽旷然见明。又有草屋一区，中有二人，对坐围棋，局下有一杯白饮。坠者告以饥渴。
现代文：他沿着洞穴往前走，十多天后，忽然前面宽阔明亮，又有一处草房，房中有二人对坐下棋。棋盘旁边有一杯白水，坠者说又饥又渴。
English: He walked along the cave, and after more than ten days, suddenly there was a broad and bright meadow in front of him. There was also a grass hut, where two people were playing chess. There was a glass of white water next to the chessboard, and the loser said he was hungry and thirsty.

古文：棋者曰：可饮此。
现代文：下棋的人说：你可以喝这个。
English: The chess player said: You can drink this.

古文：坠者饮之，气力十倍。
现代文：坠者喝完，力量增加了十倍。
English: After drinking, the strength of those who fell increased tenfold.

古文：棋者曰：汝欲停此不？坠者曰：不愿停。
现代文：下棋人问：你愿不愿意住在这里？坠者说不愿意。
English: The chess player asked: Would you like to live here? The loser said no.

古文：棋者曰：汝从西行数十步，有一井，其中多怪异，慎勿畏，但投身入中，当得出。
现代文：下棋人说：你往西走十几步，有一口井，井里有些奇怪，你不要害怕，你跳进去，就能出去。
English: The chess player said: You walk a dozen steps to the west, there is a well, there is something strange in the well, don't be afraid, you jump in, you can get out.

古文：若饥，即可取井中物食之。
现代文：若饿了，就吃井中的东西。
English: If you're hungry, you eat what's in the well.

古文：坠者如其言。
现代文：坠者按照说的这么办了。
English: The diver did as he was told.

古文：井多蛟龙，然见坠者，辄避其路。坠者缘井而行。井中有物若青泥，坠者食之。了不复饥。
现代文：井里有蛟龙，都给坠者让路，坠者沿着井壁往前走，井中有像青泥一样的东西，饿了就吃这些东西。
English: There are dragonflies in the well, and they all give way to the fallen one. The fallen one walks along the wall of the well, and there is something in the well that looks like blue mud. If you are hungry, you eat these things.

古文：可半年许，乃出蜀中。
现代文：半年多才走出来，到了蜀中。
English: It took me more than half a year to get out and go to Shuzhong.

古文：因归洛下，问张华。华曰：此仙馆，所饮者玉浆，所食者龙穴石髓也。
现代文：他回到洛阳，问张华，张华说：那是仙馆，你喝的是玉浆，你吃的是龙穴石髓。
English: He returned to Luoyang and asked Zhang Hua about it. Zhang Hua said, "That's the Hall of Immortals. What you drink is jade pulp, and what you eat is dragon pit stone pulp."

古文：束皙
现代文：束皙
English: Bundle hoop

古文：晋武帝问尚书郎挚仲冶：三月三日曲水，其义何旨？
现代文：晋武帝司马炎问尚书郎挚仲冶，三月三日曲水这个节日，是怎么个来历？
English: Jinwu Emperor Sima Yan asked Shang Shulang earnestly, what is the origin of this festival on March 3rd?

古文：答曰：汉章帝时，平原徐肇以三月初生三女，至三日而俱亡。一村以为怪，乃相推之水滨盥洗，因流以滥觞。曲水之义，盖起此也。
现代文：仲冶回答说：东汉章帝刘火旦时，平原地方，有个叫徐肇的人，在三月初生了三个女儿，三天后都死了，村里人们认为是件怪事，便到水边盥洗，洗去霉气，后来，人们在这个日子到河边喝酒，曲水的来历，就是依据这而来的。
English: Zhongye replied: In the time of Emperor Liu of the Eastern Han Dynasty, there was a man named Xu Zhao in the plain, who gave birth to three daughters in early March and died three days later. People in the village thought it was a strange thing, so they went to the water's edge to wash and wash away the mold. Later, people went to the river to drink on this day, and the origin of the curved water was based on this.

古文：帝曰：若如所谈，便非嘉事也。
现代文：武帝说：若是如你所说的，这不是一件好事。
English: Emperor Wu said: If it is as you say, this is not a good thing.

古文：尚书郎束皙进曰：仲冶小生，不足以知此。臣请说其始。
现代文：尚书郎束皙进言说：仲冶年轻，不知这样的事，请允许我说说它的起源。
English: Shang Shulang Sokun said: Zhongye is young and does not know such a thing, please allow me to tell you about its origin.

古文：昔周公城洛邑，因流水以泛酒。故逸诗云：羽觞随东流。
现代文：从前，周公在洛阳，常把盛酒的器具放在河上，饮酒取乐，所以古诗中说，羽觞随东流。
English: Once upon a time, Zhou Gong in Luoyang, often put the wine-making equipment on the river, drinking for fun, so the ancient poem said that the feather plume followed the eastward flow.

古文：又秦昭王三日上巳置酒河曲，见金人自渊而出，奉水心剑曰，今君制有西夏，乃秦霸诸侯。
现代文：又因为，秦昭王在三日上巳时将酒放置在河弯时，看到一个铜人从深水中走出，手捧一把水心剑说： 你现在统治西夏，将来一定称霸诸侯。
English: Another reason is that when Qin Zhao Wang placed the wine in the bend of the river on the morning of the third day, he saw a bronze man come out of the deep water, holding a water sword and saying: You now rule Western Xia, and in the future you will surely dominate the princes.

古文：乃因此处立为曲水。
现代文：因此，就把这个地方叫做曲水。
English: That's why this place is called Kyokusui.

古文：二汉相沿，皆为盛业。
现代文：东西两汉沿用此俗，大业昌盛。
English: The Eastern and Western Han dynasties continued to use this custom and prospered.

古文：帝曰：善。
现代文：晋武帝说：很好。
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "Very good."

古文：赐金五十斤，而左迁仲冶为阳城令。
现代文：赏束皙黄金五十斤，将仲冶降为阳城县令。
English: He was rewarded with 50 catties of gold, and Chungye was demoted to the highest rank in Yangcheng County.

古文：沈约
现代文：沈约
English: Shen You

古文：梁武帝多策事。
现代文：梁武帝萧衍很喜欢赌物游戏。
English: Emperor Liangwu liked gambling very much.

古文：因有贡径寸栗者，帝与沈约策栗事：帝得十余事，约得九事。
现代文：这时宫中有进贡的一寸大小的栗子，武帝与沈约赌栗子，武帝赢了十多次，沈约赢了九次。
English: At this time, there was a one-inch-sized chestnut in the palace for tribute. Emperor Wu and Emperor Shen agreed to bet on chestnuts. Emperor Wu won more than ten times, and Emperor Shen won about nine times.

古文：及约出，人问今日何不胜？
现代文：沈约出来时，别人问他今天怎么输了？
English: When Shen made an appointment, someone asked him how he lost today?

古文：约曰：此人忌前，不让必恐羞死。
现代文：沈约说：这个人忌妒比他强的人，不让他，恐怕他要羞死。
English: Shen Yu said, "This man is jealous of those who are stronger than him. Don't let him, or he will die of shame."

古文：时又策锦被事。
现代文：他又玩赌锦被的游戏。
English: He's playing the quilt game again.

古文：又天监五年，丹阳山南得瓦物，高五尺，围四尺，上锐下平，盖如盒焉。
现代文：又，梁武帝天监五年时，在丹阳山南面得了一件瓦器，高五尺，周长四尺，上尖下平，象个盒似的。
English: In addition, when Emperor Liangwu was five years old, he obtained a piece of earthenware in the southern face of Danyang Mountain. It was five feet high, four feet in circumference, flat at the top and bottom, and looked like a box.

古文：中得剑一，瓷具数十。
现代文：里面有一把剑和十几件瓷器。
English: Inside was a sword and more than a dozen pieces of porcelain.

古文：时人莫识。
现代文：当时人们不认识这是什么东西。
English: At the time, people didn't know what it was.

古文：沈约云：此东夷盂也，葬则用之代棺。
现代文：沈约说：这是东部少数民族使用的一种陶器。
English: Shen You said: This is a kind of pottery used by ethnic minorities in the east.

古文：此制度卑小，则随当时矣。东夷死则坐葬之。
现代文：葬人时用来代替棺椁，它的尺寸比较小，因为东部少数民族死时都是坐葬。
English: It is used to replace the coffin when burying a person. Its size is relatively small, because the eastern ethnic minorities are buried when they die.

古文：武帝服其博识。
现代文：柴武帝佩服他的博学多识。
English: Emperor Chaowu admired his erudition and knowledge.

古文：语在江右杂事。
现代文：这事记载在《江右杂事》中。
English: This was recorded in "Jiang Yu Zizhi."

古文：虞世南
现代文：虞世南
English: Yu Shennan

古文：唐太宗令虞世南写列女传，屏风已装，未及求本，乃暗书之，一字无失。
现代文：唐大宗李世民命令虞世南在屏风上书写列女传，当时屏风已装好，来不及去取书，虞世南凭记忆书写，一字不漏。
English: The Great Tang Emperor Li Shimin ordered Yu Shennan to write a series of women's biographies on the screen. At that time, the screen was already set up, and it was too late to pick up the book. Yu Shennan wrote from memory, without missing a word.

古文：又虞世南
现代文：又虞世南
English: and Gu Shennan

古文：太宗常出行，有司请载副书以从。
现代文：唐太宗常常出行，掌管皇上出行的部门想派一个善写的副书跟随他。
English: Emperor Taizong often travels, and the department in charge of the emperor's travel wanted to send a well-written supplementary letter to follow him.

古文：帝曰：不须，虞世南此行秘书也。傅奕
现代文：他说：不用，这次由虞世南当秘书。傅奕
English: He said, "No, this time, Yu Shennan will be the secretary. Fu Yi will be the leader."

古文：唐贞观中，有婆罗门僧言得佛齿，所击前无坚物。
现代文：唐朝贞观中期，有一个婆罗门僧说：他得到一颗佛牙，没有任何东西能打碎它。
English: In the middle of the Zhenguan period of the Tang Dynasty, a Brahmin monk said: He got a Buddha's tooth, and nothing can break it.

古文：于是士女奔凑，其外如市。
现代文：于是，男男女女都来观看，门庭若市。
English: As a result, men and women came to watch, and the audience went wild.

古文：傅奕方卧病，闻之。谓其子曰：非佛齿。吾闻金刚石至坚，物莫能敌，唯羚羊角破之。汝可往试焉。
现代文：正赶上傅奕卧病在床，听说后告诉他儿子说：那不是佛牙，我听说金刚石特别坚硬，一般的东西打不碎它，唯有用羚羊角才能打破它，你可以去试一试。
English: Just in time, Fu Yizhong was sick in bed. After hearing this, he told his son, "That's not Buddha's tooth. I heard that diamond is very hard. Ordinary things can't break it. Only antelope horn can break it. You can go and try."

古文：僧缄滕甚严，固求，良久乃见。出角叩之，应手而碎，观者乃止。今理珠玉者用之。
现代文：那僧人将佛齿放在袋中，绑扎严密，他不愿拿出，傅奕儿子再三恳求，很久才让他看，他用羚羊角一打，应手而碎。从此，再没有人去看了，现在雕刻珠玉的人都用这种方法。
English: The monk put the Buddha's tooth in a bag and tied it tightly. He didn't want to take it out. Fu Yi's son begged him again and again for a long time to let him see it. He used a dozen antelope horns and broke it with his hands. Since then, no one has looked at it, and now people who carve jewels use this method.

古文：郝处俊
现代文：郝处俊
English: by 处俊

古文：唐太宗问光禄卿韦某，须无脂肥羊肉充药。
现代文：唐太宗问光禄卿韦某说：须要用无脂肥羊肉做药。
English: Tang Taizong asked Guangluqing Wei Mou to say: it is necessary to use fat-free mutton to make medicine.

古文：韦不知所从得，乃就侍中郝处俊宅问之。俊曰：上好生，必不为此事。
现代文：韦某不知去哪里能找到，便到宫中大臣侍中郝处俊家去问，郝处俊说：皇上不愿杀生，他不能做这件事。
English: Wei Mou didn't know where to go to find it, so he went to the house of the Minister of the Imperial Household, the Minister of the Imperial Household, the Minister of the Imperial Household, the Minister of the Imperial Household, the Minister of the Imperial Household, the Minister of the Imperial Household, the Minister of the Imperial Household, the Minister of the Imperial Household, and the Minister of the Imperial Household.

古文：乃进状自奏；其无脂肥羊肉，须五十口肥羊，一一对前杀之，其羊怖惧，破脂并入肉中。取最后一羊，则极肥而无脂也。
现代文：于是亲自上奏书说，无脂肥羊肉，要用五十口肥羊，一个一个地在羊面前杀死，羊都很害怕，脂便破了，入到肉中，取最后一只羊，这羊肉很肥但无脂。
English: And he himself wrote in the book, saying, The fatted calf of the unleavened bread shall be killed with the fiftieth mouth of a lamb, even with the fatted lamb; and he shall kill it before the face of the lamb, one by one: and the lamb shall be afraid, and the fat shall break off and go into the flesh of the lamb, and the last lamb shall be taken, which is leavened but not leavened.

古文：上不忍为，乃止。
现代文：皇上不忍心这样做，便停止了。
English: The Emperor could not bear to do so, and stopped playing.

古文：赏处俊之博识也。孟诜
现代文：皇上很赞赏郝处俊的博学多识。孟诜
English: The emperor was very appreciative of the erudition and knowledge of Gong Chengjun.

古文：唐孟诜，平昌人也，父曜明经擢第，拜学官。
现代文：唐朝，孟诜，平昌人氏。他父亲孟曜，经过经学考试及第，任学官。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Meng Yao was from Pyeongchang. His father, Meng Yao, was appointed as an academic official after passing the academic examination with the highest score.

古文：诜少敏悟，博闻多奇，举世无与比。进士擢第，解褐长乐县尉，累迁凤阁舍人。
现代文：孟诜年少聪明，博闻多识，举世无比，进士及第，初任长乐县尉，后升为凤阁舍人。
English: Meng Xuan was young and clever, knowledgeable and knowledgeable, unparalleled in the world, promoted to the first rank, first appointed as Changle County Lieutenant, and later promoted to Fengge County Resident.

古文：时凤阁侍郎刘祎之卧疾，诜候问之，因留饭，以金碗贮酪。
现代文：当时凤阁侍郎刘祎之患病卧床，孟诜去问候，刘祎之留他吃饭，用金碗盛乳酪。
English: At that time, Fengge waiter Liu Xizhi was ill in bed, Meng Xizhi went to greet him, Liu Xizhi kept him for dinner and served cheese in a golden bowl.

古文：诜视之惊曰：此药金，非石中所出者。
现代文：孟诜看到很惊奇地说：这碗是用药金做的，不是石头中冶炼出的自然金。
English: Meng Yao was surprised to see it and said, "This bowl is made of medicinal gold, not natural gold smelted from stone."

古文：祎之曰：主上见赐，当非假金。
现代文：刘祎之说：这是皇上的赐物，不会是假金吧？
English: Liu Yanzhi said, "This is a gift from the emperor. It can't be fake gold, can it?"

古文：诜曰：药金仙方所资，不为假也。
现代文：孟诜说：药金是用仙方配制出来的，也不是假金。
English: Meng Yao said: The potion was prepared with immortelle and is not fake gold.

古文：祎之曰：何以知之？
现代文：刘祎之说：你怎么知道？
English: Liu Yanzhi said: How do you know?

古文：诜曰：药金烧之，其上有五色气。
现代文：孟诜说：你用火烧它，能出现五色气。
English: Meng Yao said: If you burn it with fire, the five-colored gas can appear.

古文：遽烧之，果然。祎之以闻。
现代文：马上烧之，果然有五色气，刘祎之这才明白了。
English: He immediately fired it, and sure enough, there were five colors. Liu Yanzhi finally understood this.

古文：则天以其近臣，不当旁稽异术，左授台州司马，累迁同州刺史。
现代文：武则天执政时，把孟诜任为宫廷近臣，因为他搞旁门异术，又把他降为台州司马。后来又升为同州刺史。
English: When Wu Zetian was in power, he appointed Meng Xuan as a close courtier, but because he was involved in intrigue, he demoted him to Taizhou Sima. Later, he was promoted to Taizhou Shishi.

古文：每历官，多烦政，人吏殆不堪。
现代文：他每到一处为官，为政繁琐杂乱，官、民都不堪忍受。
English: He went everywhere to be an official, and he made the government complicated and messy, which was unbearable for the officials and the people.

古文：薄其妻室，常曰，妻室可烹之以啖客。
现代文：他对妻室也很轻视。他常说，妻室可以用来做菜肴，招待客人。
English: He also despised his wife. He often said that his wife could be used for cooking and entertaining guests.

古文：人多议之。
现代文：人们对他议论纷纷。
English: People are talking about him.

古文：唐文宗
现代文：唐文宗
English: Tang Wenzong

古文：唐文宗皇帝听政暇，博览群书。
现代文：唐文宗李昂，在处理朝政的闲暇时间，经常博览群书。
English: Tang Wenzong Liang, in his leisure time dealing with court politics, often read a lot of books.

古文：一日，延英顾问宰臣，毛诗云：呦呦鹿鸣，食野之苹。
现代文：一天，他在延英殿中问左右的宰相和大臣：《诗经》中有这样的句子：呦呦鹿鸣，食野之苹。
English: One day, he asked the chancellors and ministers around him in the Yan Ying Hall: "In the Book of Songs, there is this sentence: "The roe deer sings, the apple of the field is eaten."

古文：苹是何草？
现代文：苹是什么草？
English: What kind of grass is apple?

古文：时宰相李珏、杨嗣复、陈夷行相顾未对。
现代文：当时宰相李珏、杨嗣复、陈夷行相互看了看，没回答。
English: At that time, Prime Minister Li Jun, Yang Shifu, and Chen Yixing looked at each other and did not answer.

古文：珏曰：臣按尔雅，苹是藾萧。
现代文：李珏说：臣按《尔雅》的解释，苹是藾萧。
English: Li Wei said: "According to the explanation of "Er Ya," I am the apple.

古文：上曰：朕看毛诗疏，苹叶圆而花白，丛生野中，假非藾萧。
现代文：皇上说：我看过《诗经注》，那上面说，苹叶圆、花白，在野地丛生，好像不是藾萧。
English: The emperor said, "I have read the Commentary on the Book of Songs, and it says that the apple leaves are round, the flowers are white, and they grow in clumps in the fields.

古文：又一日问宰臣，古诗云：轻衫衬跳脱。
现代文：又一天，他问宰臣：古诗有一句 轻衫衬跳脱 。
English: Another day, he asked Zaisen, "There is a line in an ancient poem about jumping out of a light shirt.

古文：跳脱是何物？
现代文：这 跳脱 是什么东西？
English: What is this escape?

古文：宰臣未对。
现代文：宰臣们没有回答。
English: The vice-ministers did not answer.

古文：上曰：即今之腕钏也。
现代文：皇上说：就是现在腕上戴的镯子。
English: The emperor said, "It is the bracelet I am wearing now."

古文：《真诰》言，安姑有斫粟金跳脱，是臂饰。
现代文：《真诰》上说安姑有斫粟金跳脱，是手臂上的装饰物品。
English: "Zhenyao" said that Angu has a poppy gold bracelet, which is a decorative item on her arm.

古文：贾耽
现代文：贾耽
English: Jia Tan

古文：唐贾耽好地理学。四方之使，乃是蕃虏来者，而与之坐，问其土地山川之所终始。凡三十年，所闻既备，因撰海内华夷图。
现代文：唐时，贾耽非常喜好地理学，他经常和四方来的使臣，被俘虏来的少数民族坐在一起，询问那里的山川风貌，自然情况，他这样积累了三十年，准备好了资料，撰写了一部《海内华夷图》。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, Jia Tan was very fond of geography. He often sat with envoys from the four directions and ethnic minorities who had been captured, and inquired about the mountain and river landscapes and natural conditions there. In this way, he accumulated thirty years, prepared materials, and wrote a "Hainai Hui Map."

古文：以问其郡人，皆得其实，事无虚词。
现代文：问各地来的人，书中所写的内容和各地的实际情况完全相符。
English: Asked people from all over the country, the content written in the book is completely consistent with the actual situation in various places.

古文：又段成式
现代文：又段成式
English: Another stage completed

