古文：景王二十一年，将铸大钱。
现代文：周景王二十一年，准备铸造大钱。
English: Zhou Jingwang is 21 years old and ready to mint big money.

古文：单穆公曰： 不可。
现代文：单穆公说： 不能这样做。
English: Shanmukong said: You can't do that.

古文：古者，天灾降戾，于是量资币，权轻重，以振救民。
现代文：古时候，天灾降临，于是才统计财货，权衡钱币的轻重，以便赈济百姓。
English: In ancient times, when natural disasters struck, it was necessary to count the goods and weigh the coins in order to help the people.

古文：民患轻，则为作重币以行之，于是乎有母权子而行，民皆得焉。
现代文：若百姓嫌钱轻物重，就铸造大钱来行用，于是有大钱辅佐小钱流通，百姓都有得益。
English: If the people do not like the fact that money is light and heavy, they will mint large money to use it. Therefore, large money will support the circulation of small money, and the people will all benefit.

古文：若不堪重，则多作轻而行之，亦不废重，于是乎有子权母而行，小大利之。
现代文：若百姓嫌钱重物轻，就多铸小钱来行用，同时也不废止大钱，于是有小钱铺佐大钱流通。
English: If heavy money cannot be used, more light money will be created for use, and heavy money will not be abolished. Therefore, if there is a shortage of heavy money, light money will be used to supplement it. Small money is mostly beneficial.

古文： 今王废轻而作重，民失其资，能无匮乎？
现代文：这样，无论是小钱、大钱，百姓都不感到吃亏。 如今陛下废除小钱而铸造大钱，百姓手头的小钱成了无用之物，能不感到困窘吗？
English: Now that the great king has abolished light money and created heavy money, and the people have lost their wealth, can there be no scarcity?

古文：若匮，王用将有所乏，乏则将厚取于民。
现代文：如果百姓困窘，陛下的财用将因此而缺乏，财用缺乏了就会设法重敛于民。
English: If the people are impoverished, His Majesty's financial resources will be insufficient, and if they are insufficient, He will try to return them to the people.

古文：民不给，将有远志，是离民也。
现代文：民众无法负担，将会萌生逃亡之心，这是在离散民众啊。
English: If people can't afford it, they will be tempted to flee. This is what happens when people are dispersed.

古文：且夫备有未至而设之，有至而后救之，是不相入也。
现代文：国家有防灾的措施，也有救灾的措施，互相不能替代。
English: The state has disaster prevention measures as well as disaster relief measures, which cannot replace each other.

古文：可先而不备，谓之怠；可后而先之，谓之召灾。
现代文：可以预加防范而不事先准备，这是疏忽；用于事后应急的措施却在灾害前采用了，这是招灾。
English: It is negligent to take precautionary measures in advance but not to prepare in advance; it is inviting disaster to adopt measures for post-event emergency before the disaster.

古文：周固羸国也，天未厌祸焉，而又离民以佐灾，无乃不可乎？
现代文：周王朝已经是弱国了，上天接连不断地降灾，而陛下又要离散民众来助长灾难，这样做恐怕不行吧？
English: The Zhou Dynasty is already a weak country. Heaven is continuously sending disasters, and His Majesty wants to disperse the people to promote the disaster. I'm afraid that's not possible, is it?

古文：将民之与处而离之，将灾是备御而召之，则何以经国？
现代文：应该与民众和睦相处却要离散他们，可以预防的灾害却要把它招来，这样还怎么治国？
English: How can you govern a country when you should live in harmony with the people, but you want to separate them, and when you want to prevent disasters, you want to invite them?

古文：国无经，何以出令？
现代文：治国无方，凭什么下达政令？
English: If there is no way to govern the country, on what basis can a government decree be issued?

古文：令之不从，上之患也，故圣人树德于民以除之。 《夏书》有之曰： 关石和钧，王府则有。 
现代文：政令不被听从，是君主的忧患，所以圣人施予百姓恩德以消除不服从政令的隐患。 《夏书》中说： 赋税均平，王室的库藏才会充盈。 
English: It is the monarch's sorrow that his decrees are not obeyed, so the saint bestowed grace on the people to eliminate the hidden danger of disobedience. "The Summer Book" said: If taxes are equal, the royal treasury will be full.

古文：《诗》亦有之曰： 瞻彼旱麓，榛楛济济。
现代文：《诗》上也说： 看那旱山的脚下，长满了茂盛的林木。
English: The "poem" also says: Look at the foot of the dry mountain, full of lush trees.

古文：恺悌君子，干禄恺悌。 
现代文：平和欢愉的君子，平和欢愉地收获。 
English: Peaceful and joyful gentleman, peaceful and joyful harvest.

古文：夫旱麓之榛楛殖，故君子得以易乐干禄焉。
现代文：旱山脚下的林木茂盛，所以君子能平和欢愉地得到禄米。
English: The forest at the foot of Mt. Arashi is luxuriant, so the gentleman can get the loamy rice peacefully and joyfully.

古文：若夫山林匮竭，林麓散亡，薮泽肆既，民力雕尽，田畴荒芜，资用乏匮，君子将险哀之不暇，而何易乐之有焉？
现代文：如果山林匮竭，林麓散亡，湖泊干涸，民力凋蔽，农田荒芜，财用缺乏，君子连忧虑危亡都来不及，哪有什么安祥欢乐可言呢？
English: If the mountains and forests are exhausted, the foothills of the forests are dying, the lakes are drying up, the people's strength is withering, the farmlands are desolate, the financial resources are lacking, and the gentleman is too late to even worry about the danger of death, what kind of peaceful joy can be said?

古文： 且绝民用以实王府，犹塞川原而为潢汙也，其竭也无日矣。
现代文： 用搜刮民众的财产来充实王室，如同堵塞河流的源头来蓄积水池，很快就会导致干涸。
English: Enriching the royal family by raiding the people's wealth is like damming the headwaters of a river to create a reservoir that will soon run dry.

古文：若民离而财匮，灾至而备亡，王其若之何？
现代文：如果百姓离散而财用匮乏，灾害降临又无防备，陛下将怎样办呢？
English: What will His Majesty do if the people are dispersed and lack resources, and if disasters strike and there is no defense?

古文：吾周官之于灾备也，其所怠弃者多矣，而又夺之资，以益其灾，是去其藏而翳其人也。
现代文：我们周室的官员对于预防灾害，所疏漏的地方已经很多了，现在又要侵夺民众的资财来助长灾祸，这是抛弃善政而置民于死地啊。
English: The officials of our Zhou office have already neglected many aspects of disaster prevention, and now they want to rob the people's resources to promote the disaster. This is abandoning good governance and letting the people die.

古文：王其图之！ 
现代文：君王可要仔细酌酙啊！ 
English: The king must drink his wine carefully!

古文：王弗听，卒铸大钱。
现代文：周景王不听劝阻，结果还是铸了大钱。
English: Zhou Jingwang did not listen to dissuasion, and as a result, he made a lot of money.

