古文：周之初，诸侯千八百国，至王赧之亡，所存者才八国耳，七战国与卫也。
现代文：周朝初年，诸候国有一千八百个，到周报王时周朝灭亡，所留存的诸侯国只有八个了，也就是战国七雄和卫国了。
English: In the first year of the Zhou Dynasty, there were 1,800 vassal states. By the time of Zhou Bao Wang, the Zhou Dynasty had perished, and only eight vassal states remained, namely the Warring States and the Seven Great Patriots.

古文：然赵、韩、魏分晋而立，齐田氏代姜而兴，其有土各不及二百年，俱非旧邦。
现代文：然而赵国、韩国、魏国分裂晋国而各立政权，齐国田氏取代姜氏而兴起，他们拥有国土不到二百年，都不是旧有的封国。
English: However, Zhao, Korea, and Wei divided Jin and established their own regimes, and the Tian clan of Qi replaced the Jiang clan and arose. They have less than two hundred years of land, and are not the old fiefdoms.

古文：秦始皇乃吕氏子，楚幽王乃黄氏子，所谓嬴、芈之先，当不歆非类。
现代文：秦始皇是吕氏的儿子，楚幽王是黄氏的儿子，所谓威氏、举氏的祖先，应该不会享受不同支系的人的祭祀。
English: Qin Shihuang was the son of the Lv clan, and Chu Yu Wang was the son of the Huang clan. The ancestors of the so-called Wei and Zhu clans should not enjoy the sacrifices of people from different branches.

古文：然则惟燕、卫二姬姓存。而卫至胡亥世乃绝，若以为召公、康叔之德，则周公岂不及乎！
现代文：这样的话，那么只有燕国、卫国两个姬姓国留存下来，可是卫国到秦二世胡亥时就绝了，如果认为是召公、康叔之德的作用，那么周公难道还不如吗？
English: In this case, only Yan Guo and Wei Guo, two states with the surnames of Empress and Empress, survived, but Wei Guo was extinct by the time of Qin II Hu Hai. If it is considered to be the role of summoning the public and the virtue of Kangshu, then isn't Zhou Guo better?

古文：汉列侯八百余人，及光武而存者，平阳、建平、富平三侯耳。
现代文：汉朝封侯有八百多人，到汉光武时还留存的，只有平阳、建平、富平三个侯了。
English: During the Han Dynasty, there were more than 800 feudal lords. By the time of Emperor Guangwu, there were only three feudal lords left: Pingyang, Jianping and Fuping.

古文：建平以先降梁王，永夺国。
现代文：建平侯因为先投降了梁王，被永远剥夺封国。
English: Jianping Hou was deprived of his fief forever because he surrendered to Liang Wang first.

古文：平阳为曹参之后，富平为张安世之后。参犹有创业之功，若安世则汤子也，史称其推贤杨善，固宜有后，然轻重其心，杀人亦多矣，独无余殃乎！
现代文：平阳侯是曹参的后代，富平侯是张世安的后代，曹参还有创建汉朝基业的功劳；而张安世是张汤的儿子，史书称他能够推荐贤良褒扬善行，当然应该有后代，但他好用心计，杀人也太多了，偏偏没有留下灾殃吗！
English: Pingyang Hou is the descendant of Cao San, Fuping Hou is the descendant of Zhang Shian, Cao San also has the merit of founding the Han Dynasty; and Zhang Anshi is the son of Zhang Tang, the history book said that he can recommend the virtuous and praise the good deeds, of course, there should be descendants, but he is good at scheming, there are too many murders, but there is no disaster left!

古文：汉侯之在王莽朝，皆不夺国，光武乃但许宗室复故，余皆除之，虽酂侯亦不绍封，不知曹、张两侯，何以能独全也？
现代文：汉代的侯在王莽时都不剥夺封国，汉光武时才只许皇族恢复原来的侯爵，其余的都废除掉就是酂侯也不再封了，不知曹、张两姓的侯爵为什么能够保全！
English: The princes of the Han Dynasty did not deprive the state of the fief when Wang Mang, and only when Han Guangwu allowed the royal family to restore the original marquis, the rest were abolished, even the marquis was no longer sealed. I don't know why the marquis of Cao and Zhang could be preserved!

