古文：◎太宗太宗体元应运世德昭功哲惠仁圣文烈皇帝，讳晟，本讳吴乞买，世祖第四子，母曰翼简皇后拏懒氏，太祖母弟也。辽太康元年乙卯岁生。
现代文：太宗体元应运世德昭功哲惠仁圣文烈皇帝，名叫晟，本名叫吴乞买，是金世祖的第四个儿子，他的母亲是翼简皇后拿懒氏，他是太祖阿骨打的同母胞弟，辽太康元年出生。
English: Emperor Taizong of the Taizong Dynasty was originally the Emperor Shengwenli of the Taizong Dynasty. His name was Yu, and his original name was Wu Qimai. He was the fourth son of Emperor Jin. His mother was Empress Yao Jian of the Nalao clan. He was the younger brother of Emperor Taizong's maternal half-brother, Liao Taikang, who was born in the first year of the Taizong Dynasty.

古文：初为穆宗养子。
现代文：当初他曾是穆宗的养子。
English: At first, he was the adopted son of Mu Zong.

古文：收国元年十月，命为谙班勃极烈。
现代文：收国元年七月，他被任命为谙班勃极烈。
English: In July of the first year of the National Reunification, he was appointed as a member of the Central Military Commission.

古文：太祖征伐，常居守。
现代文：太祖出征攻伐，常让他留守。
English: The great-grandfather often left him behind when he went on campaigns.

古文：天辅五年，赐诏曰： 汝惟朕之母弟，义均一体，是用汝贰我国政。
现代文：天辅五年，太祖下诏书说 ：你是我一母同胞的弟弟，思想行为都是一体的，所以我任用你辅助我管理国家政事。
English: In the fifth year of Tianyu, the great-grandfather issued an imperial edict saying, "You are the younger brother of one of my compatriots. Your thoughts and actions are one, so I have appointed you to assist me in managing state affairs."

古文：凡军事违者，阅实其罪，从宜处之。
现代文：凡军中有违法犯纪者，查阅核实他的罪证，按合适的办法处置他。
English: If there are any violators of discipline in the army, they should check and verify his criminal record, and deal with him in an appropriate way.

古文：其余事无大小，一依本朝旧制。 
现代文：其余的事无论大小，一律依照本朝旧制办理。 
English: All other matters, no matter how big or small, will be handled in accordance with the old system of this dynasty.

古文：天辅七年六月，太祖次鸳鸯泺，有疾。
现代文：天辅七年六月，太祖在鸳鸯泊停留，生了病。
English: In June of the seventh year of Tianshu, Taizu stayed in Oshidomari and fell ill.

古文：至斡独山驿，召赴行在。诏曰： 今辽主尽丧其师，奔于夏国。
现代文：到斡独山驿站，召见前往留守的人，向太宗下诏说： 现在辽主完全丧失了他的军队，已经逃奔夏国。
English: He went to the Jiaodu Mountain Railway Station, summoned those who had stayed behind, and sent a message to Emperor Taizong, saying: Now Liao Lord has completely lost his army and has fled to Xia Province.

古文：辽官特列、遥设等劫其子雅里而立之，已留宗翰等措画。
现代文：辽国官吏特列、遥设等人劫持他的儿子雅里并立他为王，已经留下宗翰等人筹划这件事。
English: Liao officials such as Terui and Yaxi kidnapped his son Yali and made him king, leaving Zonghan and others to plan the event.

古文：朕亲巡已久，功亦大就，所获州部，政须绥抚，是用还都。
现代文：我亲自出来巡抚已很长时间了，功名已成就了，所获取的州部，政事需要安抚，所以我要回都城去。
English: It's been a long time since I personally came out as governor, my work has been accomplished, the state department I acquired needs to be pacified, so I'm going back to the capital.

古文：八月中旬，可至春州，汝率内戚迎我，若至豹子崖尤善。 
现代文：八月中旬的时候，可以到春州，你率领内戚迎我，如果能迎到豹子崖更好。 
English: In mid-August, you can come to Chonju and welcome me with your relatives. If you can come to Leopard Cliff, that's even better.

古文：八月乙未，会于浑河北。
现代文：这年八月十五日，太祖与太宗在浑河北会合。
English: On August 15 of that year, Taizu and Taizong met in the north of Hunhe.

古文：戊申，太祖崩。
现代文：二十八日，太祖驾崩。
English: On the 28th, the great-grandfather passed away.

古文：九月乙卯，葬太祖于宫城西。
现代文：九月五日，在皇宫城西侧安葬了太祖。
English: On September 5, Emperor Taizu was buried on the west side of the Imperial Palace.

古文：国论勃极烈杲、郓王昂、宗峻、宗干率宗亲百宫请正帝位，不许，固请，亦不许。
现代文：国论勃极烈杲、郓王昂、宗峻、宗干率领宗亲百官请求匡正帝位，太宗不答应，杲等人坚持请求，仍然不答应。
English: Zong Zong, Zong Wangang, Zong Jun and Zong Gan led hundreds of officials to request the re-establishment of the imperial throne, but Emperor Taizong did not agree, and Zong and others insisted on the request and still did not agree.

古文：宗干率诸弟以赭袍被体，置玺怀中。
现代文：宗干率领诸兄弟将赤褐色袍子给他披在身上，把玉玺揣在他怀中。
English: Zong Gan led the brothers to drape the red-brown robe over his body and put the jade bracelet in his arms.

古文：丙辰，即皇帝位。
现代文：六日，太宗即皇帝位。
English: On the 6th, Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne.

古文：己未，告祀天地。
现代文：九日，祭告天地。
English: On the 9th, the festival was announced to the world.

古文：丙寅，大赦中外。
现代文：十六日，大赦中外囚犯。
English: On the 16th, Chinese and foreign prisoners were amnestied.

古文：改天辅七年为天会元年。
现代文：并改天辅七年为天会元年。
English: and changed the seventh year of Tian Fu to the first year of Tian Hui.

古文：癸酉，发春州粟，赈降人之徙于上京者。
现代文：二十三日，开春州仓放粮，赈济迁到上京的民众。
English: On the 23rd, grain was released from the warehouse in Kaichunzhou to help the people who had moved to Beijing.

古文：戊寅，诏诸猛安赋米，给户口在内地匮乏者。
现代文：二十八日，下令各猛安大户交纳粮米为税，发给户口在内地的贫困者。
English: On the 28th, he ordered all large households in Meng'an to pay grain and rice as a tax and distribute it to the poor in the inland.

古文：南路军帅阇母，败张觉于楼峰口。
现代文：这年，南路军统帅母，在楼峰口打败张觉军。
English: This year, the mother of the commander-in-chief of the South Road Army defeated Zhang Jiejun at Loufengkou.

古文：十月壬辰，诏以空名宣头百道给西南、西北两路都统宗翰，曰： 今寄尔以方面，如当迁授必待奏请，恐致稽滞，其以便宜从事。 
现代文：十月十一日，太宗诏令拿空名宣头百道给西南、西北两路都统宗翰，说 ：今天寄托给你这些地方，如果该迁移或授给他人一定要等到奏请准许之后，恐怕招致他们停留日久，你们按自己的主意方便行事。 
English: On October 11th, Emperor Taizong issued an edict proclaiming the first hundred roads to the southwestern and northwestern dynasties, saying, "These places entrusted to you today, if they are to be moved or given to others, they must wait until permission is obtained. Otherwise, they may stay for a long time, and you may do as you please."

古文：己亥，上京庆元寺僧献佛骨，却之。
现代文：十八日，上京庆元寺的僧人向太宗敬献佛骨，太宗推却收授。
English: On the 18th, the monks of Qingyuan Temple in Shangjing offered Buddhist bones to Taizong, but he declined to accept them.

古文：阇母及张觉战于兔耳山，阇母败绩。
现代文：母和张觉又在兔耳山交战，母战败了。
English: My mother and Zhang Jue fought again in Hare's Ear Mountain, and my mother was defeated.

古文：十一月壬子，命宗望问阇母罪，以其兵讨张觉。
现代文：十一月三日，太宗命令宗望向母问罪，并率领母的军队去讨伐张觉。
English: On November 3, Emperor Taizong ordered Zongwang to bring charges against his mother, and he led his mother's army to fight Zhang Jue.

古文：壬戌，复以空名宣头及银牌给上京路军帅实古乃、婆卢火等。
现代文：十三日，太宗又以空名宣头及银牌授予上京路军统帅实古乃、婆卢火等。
English: On the 13th, Taizong also awarded the commander-in-chief of the Shangjing Road Army, Shigunai, Baloo fire, etc. with an empty name and a silver medal.

古文：癸亥，宗望以阇母军发广宁，下濒海诸郡县。
现代文：十四日，宗望率母的军队从广宁出发，向濒海诸郡县行进。
English: On the 14th, Zongwang and his mother's army set out from Guangning and marched to the counties along the coast.

古文：诏谕南京，割武、朔二州入于宋。
现代文：太宗诏谕南京，把武、朔二州割给了宋朝。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict to Nanjing, assigning Wuzhou and Shuo to the Song Dynasty.

古文：娄室破朔州西山，擒其帅赵公直。
现代文：娄室攻取朔州西山，擒拿了西山守军统帅赵公直。
English: He captured the West Mountain of Shuozhou and captured the commander-in-chief of the West Mountain defenders, Zhao Gongzhi.

古文：勃堇斡鲁别及勃剌速破走乙室白答于归化。
现代文：勃堇斡鲁别及勃剌速在归化打败了乙室白答，乙室白答逃跑了。
English: Burgundy and Burgundy quickly defeated the second house in naturalization, and the second house fled.

古文：己巳，徙迁、润、来、显四州之民于渖州。
现代文：二十日，太宗下令迁、润、来、隰四州的民众迁徙到沈州。
English: On the 20th, Emperor Taizong ordered the people of four prefectures to migrate to Shenzhou.

古文：庚午，宗望及张觉战于南京东，大败之。
现代文：二十一日，宗望与张觉在南京东面大战，打得张觉大败。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Zongwang and Zhang Jue fought a great battle on the east side of Nanjing, and Zhang Jue was soundly defeated.

古文：张觉奔宋，城中人执其父及二子以献，戮之军中。
现代文：张觉投奔了宋朝，南京城中人捉住了他的父亲及两个儿子献给宗望，在军中杀了他们。
English: Zhang Jue defected to the Song Dynasty, and the people of Nanjing captured his father and two sons and sacrificed them to Zongwang, and killed them in the army.

古文：壬申，张忠嗣、张敦固以南京降，遣使与张敦固入谕城中，复杀其使者以叛。
现代文：二十三日，张忠嗣、张敦固以南京投降，太宗派使者和张敦固一起进南京城中传达谕旨，张敦固又反过来杀死使者叛变。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Zhongzi and Zhang Dungu surrendered in Nanjing. The envoys of the Tai Sect and Zhang Dungu entered Nanjing City together to convey the edict. Zhang Dungu, in turn, killed the envoy of the mutiny.

古文：己卯，诏女直人，先有附于辽，今复虏获者，悉从其所欲居而复之。
现代文：三十日，太宗诏令女真人，先前有归附于辽国的现在又被掳获的女真人，全部允许他们按自己的愿望居住在原来的地方。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Taizong decreed that the Jurchens, who had previously been attached to Liao and were now captives, were all allowed to live in their original place as they wished.

古文：其奴婢部曲，昔虽逃背，今能复归者，并听为民。
现代文：他们的奴婢家仆，过去虽然逃跑背叛，但是现在又回来的，一并听凭他们为民。
English: All their male and female slaves and their domestics, who had fled and been false to them in the past, now have returned, and they have become a people to them.

古文：十二月辛巳，蠲民间贷息。
现代文：十二月二日，免除民间的贷息。
English: On December 2nd, private loans and interest will be exempted.

古文：诏以咸州以南，苏、复州以北，年谷不登，其应输南京军粮免之。
现代文：诏令咸州以南，苏、复州以北，因年景不好，五谷不收，那里原应供应南京的军粮免征。
English: The edict ordered the southern part of Xianzhou and the northern parts of Suzhou and Fuzhou not to receive grain due to the bad weather, and the military grain that was supposed to be supplied to Nanjing was exempted from taxation.

古文：甲午，诏曰： 此闻民间乏食，至有鬻其子者，其听以丁力等者赎之。 
现代文：十五日，太宗又下诏说： 近来民间缺乏粮食，以至于有卖子换食的，对此的处理办法是用相等的劳力去赎回他们。 
English: On the 15th, Emperor Taizong issued another edict, saying, "Recently, the people have been short of grain, so there are vendors to barter for food. The way to deal with this is to use equal labor to redeem them.

古文：是日，以国论勃极烈杲为谙班勃极烈，宗干为国论勃极烈。
现代文：当天，任命国论勃极烈杲为谙班勃极烈，宗干为国论勃极烈。
English: On the same day, Zou was appointed as the chairman of the Nationalist Party, Zangban as the secretary of the Nationalist Party, and Zongan as the secretary of the Nationalist Party.

古文：遣勃堇李靖如宋告哀。
现代文：并派遣勃堇李靖赴宋朝告哀。
English: and sent Burgundy Li Jing to the Song Dynasty to mourn.

古文：二年春正月庚戌朔，以谩都诃为阿舍勃极烈，参议国政。
现代文：天会二年春正月初一，太宗任命谩都诃做阿舍勃极烈，参议国政。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the Spring Festival, Emperor Taizong appointed Gong Tudun as Ashe Bo Jiliang, and he became a member of the State Council.

古文：壬子，命赏宗望及将士克南京之功，赦阇母罪。
现代文：三日，下令奖赏攻克南京立功的宗望及其所属将士，赦免母的罪过。
English: On the third day, he ordered to reward Zongwang and his soldiers who made great achievements in conquering Nanjing, and to pardon his mother's sins.

古文：甲寅，以空名宣头五十、银牌十给宗望。
现代文：五日，以五十空名宣头、十枚银牌奖赏给宗望。
English: On the fifth day, Zongwang was awarded the first prize of fifty-cubic meters and ten silver medals.

古文：戊午，诏孛堇完颜阿实赉曰： 先帝以同姓之人有自育及典质其身者，命官为赎。
现代文：九日，诏令孛堇完颜阿实赉说： 先帝在时凡同姓之人有卖掉自身或典质自身的，都命官府为他们赎身。
English: On the 9th, the imperial edict issued by Yan'an Ashi said: In the time of the former emperor, anyone with the same surname who sold themselves or their property ordered the government to redeem them.

古文：今闻尚有未复者，其悉阅赎之。 
现代文：现在听说还有未恢复人身自由的，要详细查讯并为他们赎身。 
English: Now I hear that there are still people whose personal freedom has not been restored, and it is necessary to investigate in detail and redeem themselves for them.

古文：癸亥，以东京比岁不登，诏减田租、市租之半。
现代文：十四日，针对东京近年五谷不丰，诏令减免田租、市租的一半。
English: On the 14th, in response to Tokyo's poor harvest in recent years, a decree was issued to reduce and waive half of the field rent and city rent.

古文：甲戌，西南、西北两路都统宗翰、宗望请勿割山西郡县与宋，上曰： 是违先帝之命也，其速与之。 
现代文：二十五日，西南、西北两路都统宗翰、宗望谏请不要割让山西郡县给宋朝，太宗说： 这是违背先帝之命，要尽快割让给他们。 
English: On the 25th, the south-west and north-west emperors Zonghan and Zongwang said, "Please do not cede Shanxi County to the Song Dynasty." Taizong said, "This is against the order of the former emperor, we should cede it to them as soon as possible."

古文：夏国奉表称藩，以下寨以北，阴山以南、乙室耶剌部吐禄泺西之地与之。
现代文：夏国奉上奏章自称为臣服的藩国，以下寨以北、阴山以南、乙室耶剌部吐禄泊以西之地封给了夏国。
English: Xia Guo was presented with a petition in which he claimed to be a vassal state, and the following territories were given to him: to the north of Zhai, to the south of Yin Mountain, and to the west of Turukpo in the Yezhibe District of Bishu.

古文：丙子，贻宋书，索俘虏叛亡。
现代文：二十七日，向宋传诏书，索要俘虏及叛逃者。
English: On the 27th, an imperial edict was sent to Song, demanding prisoners and defectors.

古文：丁丑，始自京师至南京每五十里置驿。
现代文：二十八日，开始自京师至南京每五十里设置一个驿站。
English: On the 28th, a relay station was set up every 50 miles from Beijing to Nanjing.

古文：二月，诏有盗发辽诸陵者，罪死。
现代文：二月，下诏：凡发掘偷盗辽朝各陵墓的，判以死罪。
English: In February, the following edict was issued: Anyone who excavates and steals from the mausoleums of the Liao Dynasty will be sentenced to death.

古文：庚寅，诏命给宗翰马七百匹、田种千石、米七千石，以赈新附之民。
现代文：十二日，诏令交给宗翰马七百匹、粮种一千石、米七千石，用来赈济新归附的百姓。
English: On the 12th, the imperial edict handed over seven hundred Zonghan horses, one thousand kilos of grain, and seven thousand kilos of rice to the newly annexed people.

古文：丁酉，命徙移懒路都勃堇完颜忠于苏濒水。
现代文：十九日，下令都勃堇完颜忠从移懒路迁移到苏濒水。
English: On the 19th, Du ordered Yanzhong to relocate from Qilian Road to Su Lianshui.

古文：乙巳，诏谕南京官僚，小大之事，必关白军帅，无得专达朝廷。
现代文：二十二日，诏谕南京官僚，事情无论大小，一定要向军帅禀报，不得专门报到朝廷。
English: On the 22nd, the Nanjing bureaucrats decreed that no matter how big or small the matter was, it must be reported to the military commander, and must not be reported specifically to the imperial court.

古文：丙午，宗翰乞济师，诏有司选精兵五千给之。
现代文：二十三日，宗翰请求派军队接济，皇上诏令有司选出精兵五千交给他。
English: On the 23rd, Zonghan requested that an army be sent to aid him, and the emperor issued an imperial edict to select 5,000 elite soldiers and hand them over to him.

古文：丁未，命宗望，凡南京留守及诸阙员，可选勋贤有人望者就注拟之，具姓名官阶以闻。
现代文：二十四日，命令宗望，凡是南京留守官员及宫中诸位官吏，可以从中选拔有功勋、守贤德、有威望的人注册拟用，写清楚姓名、官阶予以上报。
English: On the 24th, Zongwang ordered that all officials staying in Nanjing and all officials in the imperial court could select people with merits, virtues and prestige to be registered and used, write their names and ranks clearly and report them.

古文：三月己酉朔，命宗望以宋岁币银绢分赐将士之有功者。
现代文：三月初一，命令宗望把宋国当年朝贡的钱币、银两、绢绸分别赏赐给将士中有功的人。
English: On the first day of March, he ordered Zongwang to award the money, silver and silk of the Song Dynasty's tribute separately to the soldiers who had distinguished themselves.

古文：庚戌，叛人活孛带降，诏释之。
现代文：二日，叛变的人活孛带投降，诏令释放了他。
English: On the second day, the mutineer surrendered with his umbilical cord still attached, and the imperial edict released him.

古文：宗望请选良吏招抚迁、润、来、显之民保山寨者，从之。
现代文：宗望请求先派优秀的官员招抚迁、润、来、隰地区民间保卫山砦的，皇上采纳了这个意见。
English: Zongwang requested the Emperor to first send outstanding officials to recruit, relocate, train, and train local people to defend the mountain fortress, and the Emperor accepted this opinion.

古文：己未，宗望以南京反覆，凡攻取之行，乞与知枢密院事刘彦宗裁决之。
现代文：十一日，宗望因为南京政局有反复，请求凡是攻取的计策，都由知枢密院事刘彦宗来裁决。
English: On the 11th day of the month, because of the political situation in Nanjing, Zongwang repeatedly requested that all the strategies of conquest be decided by Liu Yanzong, the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：刘公胄、王永福弃家逾城来降，以公胄为广宁尹，永福为奉先军节度使。
现代文：刘公胄、王永福抛弃家室翻越城墙来投降，任命刘公胄为广宁府尹，王永福为奉先军节度使。
English: Liu Gongyao and Wang Yongfu abandoned their families and climbed over the city wall to surrender, appointing Liu Gongyao as the head of the Guangning prefecture and Wang Yongfu as the military envoy.

古文：辛未，夏国王李乾顺遣使上誓表。
现代文：二十三日，夏国国王李乾顺派遣使节奉上誓表。
English: On the 23rd, Li Qianshun, the king of Xia, sent an envoy to take the oath.

古文：闰月戊寅朔，赐夏国誓诏。
现代文：闰三月初一，赐给夏国签有盟约的诏书。
English: On the first day of the third lunar month, an imperial edict with a treaty was issued to Xia.

古文：辛巳，命置驿上京、春、泰之间。
现代文：初四，命令在上京、春、泰之间设置驿站。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the order was given to set up stations between Shangjing, Chun and Tai.

古文：己丑，乌虎里、迪烈底两部来降。
现代文：十二日，乌虎里、迪烈底两部来投降。
English: On the twelfth day, Uguri and Di Lede came to surrender.

古文：丙午，既许割山西诸镇与宋，以宗翰言罢之。
现代文：十七日，已经答应把山西诸镇割让给宋国，因为宗翰建议取消了这一决定。
English: On the 17th, he had already promised to cede the towns of Shanxi to Song, but canceled this decision because of Zonghan's suggestion.

古文：是月，斜野袭遥辇昭古牙，走之，获其妻孥群从及豪族。
现代文：当月，斜野袭击遥辇昭古牙，遥辇昭古牙跑了，抓获了他的妻子、儿女、侍从以及豪族。
English: In the same month, the slope attacked the ringleader of the Yaobu Shogunate, the Yaobu Shogunate ran away, and captured his wife, children, attendants, and powerful clansmen.

古文：勃堇浑啜等破奚七崖而抚其民人。
现代文：勃堇浑啜等人攻破了奚的七岩而安抚了那里的人民。
English: Burgundy and his men broke through the Seven Rocks and pacified the people there.

古文：四月己酉，以宗翰经略西夏及破辽功，赐以十马，使自择其二，余以分诸帅。
现代文：四月初二，因为宗翰经略西夏以及破辽有功，赐给他十匹马，让他自己从中挑选两匹，其余的分给各位统帅。
English: On the second day of the fourth month, because Zonghan had made great contributions to the Western Xia and the Liao Dynasty, he was given ten horses. He was allowed to choose two of them, and the rest were distributed to the commanders.

古文：赈上京路、西北路降者及新徙岭东之人。
现代文：救济上京路、西北路投降的人和新近迁徙到岭东的人。
English: Relief for those who surrendered on Shangjing Road and Northwest Road and those who recently migrated to Lingdong.

古文：戊午，以实古乃所筑上京新城名会平州。
现代文：十一日，把实古乃所建筑的上京新城命名为会平州。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Shangjing New Town, which was built by Shigunose, was named Hepingzhou.

古文：乙亥，诏赎上京路新迁宁江州户口卖身者六百余人。
现代文：二十八日，诏令赎出上京路新迁到宁江州户口卖身的六百多人。
English: On the 28th, the imperial decree redeemed more than 600 people who had recently moved to Shangjing Road to sell themselves in Ningjiang.

古文：宋遣使来吊丧。
现代文：宋国派遣使者来吊丧。
English: Song dispatched an envoy to pay his respects.

古文：以高术仆古等充遗留国信使，高兴辅、刘兴嗣等充告即位国信使，如宋。
现代文：任用高术仆古等人充任遗留国信使，高兴辅、刘兴嗣等充当告即位国信使，到宋国去。
English: He appointed Gaoju Mingu and others to act as messengers for the remaining countries, and He Xingfu, Liu Xingzi and others to act as messengers for the newly enthroned countries and go to Song.

古文：五月丁丑朔，上京军帅实古乃以所获印绶二十二及银牌来上。
现代文：五月初一，上京军队统帅实古乃把所缴获的二十二枚印绶和银牌上交。
English: On the first day of May, the commander-in-chief of the troops marching to Tokyo, Shiguno, handed over the 22 seals and silver medals he had captured.

古文：癸未，诏曰： 新降之民，诉讼者众，今方农时，或失田业，可俟农隙听决。 
现代文：初七，皇帝下诏说： 新投降的平民，来诉讼的人很多，现在正是农忙时节，有的失去田地产业的，可以等到农闲时候听候判决。 
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the emperor issued an edict saying, "The newly-surrendered civilians have brought many lawsuits. Now is the busy season for farmers. Some who have lost their farmland can wait until the off-season to hear the verdict.

古文：丁亥，婆速路猛安仆卢古以赃罢，以谋克习泥烈代之。
现代文：十一日，婆速路猛安仆卢古因为贪赃被免去官职，用谋克习泥烈取代他。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Lu Gu, who was dismissed from his official post because of embezzlement, was replaced by a schemer.

古文：乙巳，曷懒路军帅完颜忽剌古等言： 往者岁捕海狗、海东青、鸦、鹘于高丽之境，近以二舟往，彼乃以战舰十四要而击之，尽杀二舟之人，奋其兵杖。 
现代文：二十九日，曷懒路军队统帅完颜忽剌古等人说： 以往每年在高丽境内捕捉海狗、海东青、鸦、鹘，最近派两条船前往捕捉，他们却用十四艘战舰拦截并且袭击那两条船，杀尽了船上的人，夺去了他们的兵器。 
English: On the 29th, Gan Yan, the commander-in-chief of the Lazy Road Army, and others said: In the past, they used to catch sea dogs, sea eagles, crows, and cormorants every year in the territory of Korea. Recently, they sent two ships to catch them, but they intercepted and attacked the two ships with fourteen warships, killed all the people on board, and took away their weapons.

古文：上曰： 以小故起战争，甚非所宜。
现代文：皇上说 ：因为小的缘故引起战争，是很不应该的。
English: The Emperor said, "It is most improper to cause a war for a petty reason."

古文：今后非奉命，毋辄往。
现代文：从今以后不是奉命，不要动不动就前去。 
English: From now on, do not move forward without being ordered to do so.

古文：阇母克南京，杀都统张敦固。
现代文：母攻克南京，杀都统张敦固。
English: My mother conquered Nanjing, killing all Zhang Dungu.

古文：七月壬午，皇子宗峻薨。
现代文：七月七日，皇帝之子宗峻逝世。
English: On July 7, the emperor's son Zong Jun passed away.

古文：丙戌，禁外方使介冗从多者。
现代文：十一日，禁令外方派使者来随从过多的情况。
English: On the 11th, the foreign side sent an envoy to follow up the excessive situation.

古文：壬辰，鹘实答言： 高丽约吾叛亡，增其边备，必有异图。 
现代文：十七日，鹘实答说： 高丽接纳我方叛逃人员，增加他们边疆的军备，一定有特别的企图。 
English: On the 17th, Hao replied, "There must be a special intention behind Goryeo's acceptance of our defectors and the increase of armaments on their border.

古文：诏曰： 纳我叛亡而弗归，其曲在彼。
现代文：皇帝诏书说 ：接纳我方叛逃的人而不差遣他们归来，其中亏理在他们。
English: The Emperor's edict said, "Those who accept our defectors and do not send them back are at fault."

古文：凡有通问，毋违常式。
现代文：凡是有通达询问的，不要违背日常的规矩。
English: If you have access to ask questions, don't break the daily rules.

古文：或来侵略，整尔行列，与之从事。
现代文：如果来侵略，整顿好你的队伍，和他们交战。
English: If they invade, rally your troops and engage them.

古文：敢先犯彼，虽捷必罚。 
现代文：如果胆敢先侵犯他们，虽然胜利也一定惩罚。 
English: If you dare to invade them first, you will be punished even if you win.

古文：乙未，以乌虎部及诸营叛，以昊勃极烈昱等讨平之。
现代文：二十日，因为乌虎部以及诸营叛变，派昊勃极烈昱等人去讨伐平定叛乱。
English: On the 20th, because of the mutiny of the Black Tiger Division and the various battalions, Hao Boji and others were sent to fight and quell the rebellion.

古文：八月乙巳朔，以孛堇乌爪乃等为贺宋生辰使。
现代文：八月初一，让孛堇乌爪乃等人当贺宋生辰使。
English: On the first day of August, Zang Wuzhunai and others became the envoys of He Song Shengtin.

古文：丁巳，撒离改部猛安雏思以赃罢，以奚金家奴代之。
现代文：十三日，撒离改部猛安雏思因为贪污被罢免官职，让奚金家奴取代他。
English: On the 13th, Meng'an Cai Si, who had left the Ministry of Reform, was removed from his post for corruption and replaced by a servant of the Bao Jin family.

古文：六部都统挞懒击走昭古牙，杀其队将曷鲁燥、白撒曷等。
现代文：六部都统挞懒打跑了昭古牙，杀了他的队将曷鲁燥、白撒曷等。
English: All six teams were too lazy to beat and run away from Zhaogu, and the teams that killed him were Zhao Lushu, Bai Shizhao and so on.

古文：又破降骆驼山、金源、兴中诸军，诏增给银牌十。
现代文：又击败了骆驼山、金源、兴中各军队，并迫使他们投降，诏令给予挞懒增加十块银牌。
English: He also defeated the armies of Camel Mountain, Jinyuan, and Xingzhong, and forced them to surrender, and ordered that ten pieces of silver be added to the lazy.

古文：十月甲辰朔，夏国遣使谢誓诏。
现代文：十月初一，夏国派遣使者来感谢皇上颁发誓诏。
English: On the first day of October, Xia sent an envoy to thank the emperor for issuing the imperial edict.

古文：戊午，天清节，宋、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十五日，是天清节，宋、夏两国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the fifteenth day, it was Tianqing Festival, and Song and Xia countries sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：甲子，诏发宁江州粟，赈泰州民被秋潦者。
现代文：二十一日，诏令发放宁江州府库粮食，救济泰州遭受秋季涝灾的平民百姓。
English: On the 21st, a decree was issued to distribute grain from the Ningjiang prefectural treasury to relieve the civilians in Taizhou who suffered from the autumn floods.

古文：遥辇昭古牙率众来降。
现代文：遥辇昭古牙率领众人来投降。
English: Haruko Akikoga led the crowd to surrender.

古文：兴中府降。
现代文：兴中府投降。
English: Hing Chung-fu surrendered.

古文：丙寅，诏有司运米五万石于广宁，以给南京、润州戍卒。
现代文：二十三日，诏令有司从广宁运米五万石，用来发给在南京、润州戍守的士卒。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict ordered officials to transport 50,000 koku of rice from Guangning to be used to distribute to the soldiers garrisoned in Nanjing and Rongzhou.

古文：命南路军帅阇母，以甲士千人益合苏馆路孛堇完颜阿实赉，以备高丽。
现代文：命令南路军队统帅母，把甲士千人充实合苏馆路孛堇完颜阿实赉的队伍，用来防备高丽。
English: He ordered the mother of the commander-in-chief of the South Road Army to reinforce the team of a thousand cavalrymen who had completed the construction of the Su Pavilion Road and completed the construction of the Yan'axi Road, and to use it to guard against Goryeo.

古文：戊辰，西南、西北两路权都统斡鲁言： 辽祥稳挞不野来奔，言耶律大石自称为王，置南北官属，有战马万匹。
现代文：二十五日，西南、西北两路权都统斡鲁说 ：辽国的详稳挞不野来投奔，说耶律大石自称为王，设置南北官属，有战马一万匹。
English: On the 25th, the southwestern and northwestern authorities jointly sent a message to Lu, saying: "The details of Liao's country are stable and will not run away, saying that Yelu Daishi has declared himself king, set up North and South officials, and has ten thousand horses.

古文：辽主从者不过四千户，有步骑万余，欲趋天德，驻余都谷。 
现代文：辽国君主随从的人不过有四千户，有步兵骑兵一万多，想奔赴天德，驻扎在余都谷。 
English: The Liao monarch's entourage consisted of no more than four thousand households and more than ten thousand infantry and cavalry. They wanted to go to the East and were stationed in Yudu Valley.

古文：诏曰： 追袭辽主，必酌事宜。
现代文：皇帝诏说： 追逐袭击辽主，一定斟酌事情是否妥当。
English: Emperor Zhao said, "If you pursue and attack Liao Jun, you must consider whether it is appropriate or not.

古文：其讨大石，则俟报下。 
现代文：征讨耶律大石，则等情报到来再下令。 
English: He would wait for the information to arrive before issuing the order to conscript Yerudaiishi.

古文：十一月癸未，阇母下宜州，拔杈丫山，杀节度使韩庆民。
现代文：十一月十日，母南下宜州，拔杈木牙山，杀节度使韩庆民。
English: On November 10th, the mother went south to Yizhou, pulled up Mujiashan, and killed Han Qingmin.

古文：癸卯，诏以米五万石给挞懒、实古乃。
现代文：三十日，诏令拿五万石米发给挞懒、实古乃的军队。
English: On the 30th, the emperor issued a decree to give 50,000 koku of rice to the lazy and idle army.

古文：十二月戊申，以孛堇高居庆等为贺宋正旦使。
现代文：十二月五日，委派孛堇高居庆等人为贺宋正旦使。
English: On December 5, Gong Gaojuqing and others were appointed as envoys of He Song Zhengdan.

古文：三年正月癸酉朔，宋、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天会三年正月初一，宋、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the third year of the Heavenly Assembly, Song and Xia states sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：戊子，同知宣徽院事韩资正加尚书左仆射，为诸宫都部署。
现代文：十六日，同知宣徽院事韩资正加封尚书左仆射，是诸宫都部署。
English: On the 16th day of the month, Han Zi, a scholar of the Xuan Hui Academy, was enclosing the imperial rescript. It was distributed to all the palaces.

古文：乙未，夏国遣使奠币及贺即位。
现代文：二十三日，夏国派遣使者来献币并祝贺即位。
English: On the 23rd, Xia sent an envoy to offer coins and congratulations on the enthronement.

古文：宋遣使贺即位。
现代文：宋国派使来贺即位。
English: Song sent an envoy to congratulate him on his accession to the throne.

古文：二月壬戌，娄室获辽主于余睹谷，丁卯，以厖葛城地分授所徙乌虎里、迪烈底二部及契丹民。
现代文：二月二十日，娄室在余睹谷擒获辽国君主天祚皇帝。二十五日，把庞葛城地方分别授给所迁徙到这里的乌虎里、迪烈底二部以及契丹人民。
English: On the 20th of February, Emperor Tenmu, the monarch of Liao, bestowed the title of Emperor of Liao on Yuzhen Valley, and on the 25th, the Pangge City region was separately awarded to the Uguri, Diradi II and Qidan people who had migrated here.

古文：三月乙亥，阿舍勃极烈谩都诃薨。
现代文：三月三日，阿舍勃极烈谩都诃逝世。
English: On March 3rd, Asheberg passed away.

古文：丙子，赈奚、契丹新附之民。
现代文：四日，救济奚、契丹新归附的平民。
English: On the 4th, relief goods and newly arrived civilians from Qidan arrived.

古文：辛巳，建乾元殿。
现代文：九日，建筑乾元殿。
English: On the 9th, construction of the Ingenden hall began.

古文：斡鲁献传国宝，以谋葛失来附，请授印绶。
现代文：斡鲁呈献传国宝，因为谋葛失来归附，请求授给印绶。
English: Yulong Lu presented a national treasure to be handed down, because he lost his way to attach it, he requested to be awarded the seal.

古文：是日，赐完颜娄室铁券。
现代文：当天，赐予完颜娄室铁券。
English: On the same day, the cast was given a ticket to Yan's room.

古文：四月壬寅朔，诏以辽主赴京师。
现代文：四月一日，诏令把辽主送到京师。
English: On April 1, the imperial edict sent Liao to the capital.

古文：丁巳，南路军帅察剌以罪罢。
现代文：十六日，南路军统帅察剌因为犯罪罢除职务。
English: On the 16th, the commander-in-chief of the Southern Route Army, Zha Jun, was removed from his post for committing a crime.

古文：五月己丑，萧八斤获辽玉宝来献。
现代文：五月十八日，萧八斤缴获辽国的玉宝来朝呈献。
English: On May 18th, Xiao Yajin came to the DPRK to present the precious jewels he had captured from Liao.

古文：六月庚申，以获辽主，遣李用和等充告庆使如宋。
现代文：六月二十日，因为擒获了辽主，派遣李用和等人充当告庆使到宋国去。
English: On June 20th, Li Yinghe and others were sent to Song Province to serve as messengers to celebrate the emperor's accession to the throne.

古文：七月壬申，禁内外官、宗室毋私役百姓。
现代文：七月三日，下达禁令，内外官、宗室不准私自役使百姓。
English: On July 3, an injunction was issued, forbidding officials at home and abroad, as well as their families, from serving the people.

古文：己卯，南京帅以锦州野蚕成茧，奉其丝绵来献，命赏其长吏。
现代文：十二日，南京军队统帅用锦州野蚕做成的茧，把制成的丝绵拿来奉献，命令赏给那些地位较高的官吏。
English: On the 12th, the commander-in-chief of the Nanjing army used cocoons made of wild silkworms from Jinzhou to offer the silk and ordered that it be given to high-ranking officials.

古文：诏权势之家毋买贫民为奴。
现代文：诏令有权势的人家不要买贫民作为奴隶。
English: He ordered the powerful not to buy the poor as slaves.

古文：其胁买者一人偿十五人，诈买者一人偿二人，皆杖一百。
现代文：那些威胁买人的买一人赔偿十五人，欺骗买人的一人赔偿二人，都要打一百杖。
English: Those who threaten the buyers, one buyer shall compensate fifteen people, and those who deceive the buyers, one buyer shall compensate two people, and they shall all be beaten with a hundred rods.

古文：甲申，诏南京括官豪牧马，以等第取之，分给诸军。
现代文：十七日诏令南京包括官府豪门在内养马，按等次收取，分给各军队。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict ordered Nanjing to raise horses, including those of the powerful government officials, to be collected in the same order and distributed to the various armies.

古文：以耶律固等为宋报谢使。
现代文：任用耶律固等人当赴宋报谢使。
English: Ye Lugu and others were appointed as envoys to the Song Dynasty to report and express gratitude.

古文：八月癸卯，斡鲁以辽主至京师。
现代文：八月四日，斡鲁把辽主送到京师。
English: On August 4th, Yang Lu sent Liao Zhen to Beijing.

古文：甲辰，告于太祖庙。
现代文：五日，皇上到太祖庙祭告先祖。
English: On the fifth day, the Emperor went to the Grand Ancestor's Temple to pay homage to his ancestors.

古文：丙午，辽主延禧入见，降封海滨王。
现代文：七日，辽主延禧入朝见皇上，被降封海滨王。
English: On the seventh day, Liao Lord Yanxi entered the imperial court to see the emperor, and was demoted to the title of seaside king.

古文：壬子，诏有司拣阅善射勇健之士以备宋。
现代文：十三日，诏令有司挑选目测善射勇健的兵士用来防备宋国。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict ordered the imperial secretary to select soldiers who were good at shooting and brave enough to defend Song.

古文：九月壬午，广宁府献嘉禾。
现代文：九月十四日，广宁府献来生长得特别茁壮的禾稻。
English: On September 14th, Guangning Prefecture presented specially grown and vigorous rice.

古文：癸巳，保州路都孛堇加古撒曷有罪伏诛，以孛堇徒单乌烈代之。
现代文：二十五日，保州路都孛堇加古撒曷有罪伏法被杀，以孛堇徒单乌烈取代他。
English: On the twenty-fifth day of the month, the governor of Bozhou Province, Jia Guosa, was killed in a criminal ambush, and replaced by the ruffian, Shan Wuling.

古文：十月甲辰，诏诸将伐宋。
现代文：十月七日，诏令诸路将领攻伐宋国。
English: On October 7, he ordered all generals to attack Song.

古文：以谙班勃极烈杲兼领都元帅，移赉勃极烈宗翰兼左副元帅先锋，经略使完颜希尹为元帅右监军，左金吾上将军耶律余睹为元帅右都临，自西京入太原。
现代文：命令谙班勃极烈杲兼任都元帅，移赉勃极烈宗翰兼任左副元帅先锋，经略使完颜希尹为元帅右监军，左金吾上将军耶律余睹为元帅右都监，从西京出发进入太原。
English: He ordered that 班勃极烈 concurrently serve as the capital marshal, 移勃极烈宗翰 concurrently serve as the left vice-marshal vanguard, 经略使完颜希尹 to serve as the marshal right supervisor, and 左金吾上将军耶律余睹 to serve as the marshal right supervisor, and set out from Xijing to enter Taiyuan.

古文：六部路军帅挞懒为六部路都统，斜也副之，宗望为南京路都统，阇母副之，知枢密院事刘彦宗兼领汉军都统，自南京入燕山。
现代文：任命六部路军帅挞懒为六部路都统，斜也做他的副将；宗望为南京路都统，母做他的副将；知枢密院事刘彦宗兼任汉军都统，从南京出发进入燕山。
English: He appointed the commander of the Sixth Route Army, Zou Lazy, as the Sixth Route Army Commander, and Shi as his vice-commander; Zong Wang as the Nanjing Route Army Commander, and his mother as his vice-commander; Liu Yanzong, the Secretary of the Privy Council, also served as the Chinese Army Commander, and set out from Nanjing to enter Yanshan.

古文：诏建太祖庙于西京。召耶鲁赴京师教授女直字。
现代文：诏令在西京建造太祖庙。召见耶鲁赴京师教授女真文字。
English: The imperial edict ordered the construction of the Taizhu Temple in West Beijing. Yale was summoned to Beijing to teach the Jianzhen script.

古文：戊申，有司言权南路军帅鹘实荅官吏贪纵，诏鞫之。
现代文：十一日，有司说代理南路军统帅鹘买答的官吏贪婪纵欲，诏令审查这件事。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the acting commander-in-chief of the Southern Route Army said that the officials were greedy and indulgent, and ordered a review of the matter.

古文：壬子，天清节，宋、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十五日，是天清节，宋、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the fifteenth day, it was the Tianqing Festival, and Song and Xia countries sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：丁巳，以阇母为南京路都统，埽喝副之，宗望为阇母、刘彦宗两军监战。
现代文：二十日，任命母为南京路都统，埽喝做他的副将，宗望为母、刘彦宗两军监战。
English: On the 20th, he appointed his mother to be the governor of Nanjing Road and promoted her to be his vice-general. His mother, Zongwang, and Liu Yanzong supervised the war between the two armies.

古文：壬戌，诏曰： 今大有年，无储蓄则何以备饥馑，其令牛一具赋粟一石，每谋克为一廪贮之。 
现代文：二十五日，诏说 ：今年是丰收年，没有储蓄，那么拿什么来防备饥荒？下令有耕牛一头的征收赋粮一石，每谋克建一座米仓贮存这些粮食。 
English: On the 25th, the emperor said: This year is a bumper year, there is no savings, so what should we do to prevent famine? He ordered that one head of cattle should collect one stone of grain, and that one rice silo should be built to store this grain.

古文：宋易州戍将韩民毅以军降，处之蔚州。
现代文：宋国易州戍守将领韩民毅带领军队投降，安置在蔚州。
English: Han Minyi, the commander of Song Guo's garrison in Yizhou, surrendered with his army and was resettled in Ulju.

古文：十一月庚辰，以降封辽主为海滨王诏中外。
现代文：十一月十二日，把降封辽主为海滨王的事诏告中外。
English: On November 12th, it was announced to the world that Liao Zhen would be demoted to the title of the King of the Seaside.

古文：辛卯，南路军帅司请禁契丹、奚、汉人挟兵器，诏勿禁。
现代文：二十四日，南路军统帅司请求禁止契丹、奚、汉族人挟带兵器，诏令不要禁止。
English: On the 24th, the commander-in-chief of the Southern Route Army requested that the Khitan, Min, and Han people be prohibited from carrying weapons, but the order was not prohibited.

古文：以张忠嗣权签南京中书枢密院事。
现代文：授予张忠嗣权签南京中书枢密院事。
English: Zhang Zhongxu was granted the right to sign the Nanjing Chushu Privy Council.

古文：十二月庚子，宗翰下朔州。
现代文：十二月三日，宗翰南下朔州。
English: On December 3, Zonghan Nan went to Shuozhou.

古文：甲辰，宗望诸军及宋郭药师、张企徽、刘舜仁战于白河。大破之。
现代文：七日，宗望诸军和宋国郭药师、张企徽、刘舜仁在白河交战，大败宋军。
English: On the seventh day, Zongwang's army and Song Guoguo's pharmacists, Zhang Qihui, and Liu Qiren fought in Baihe, defeating the Song army.

古文：蒲苋败宋兵于古北口。
现代文：蒲苋在古北口打败宋军。
English: In ancient Beigou, Po-yeon defeated the Song army.

古文：丙午，郭药师降，燕山州县悉平。
现代文：九日，郭药师投降，燕山各州县全部平定。
English: On the 9th, Guo Yakushi surrendered, and all prefectures and counties in Yanshan were pacified.

古文：戊申，宗翰克代州。
现代文：十一日，宗翰攻克代州。
English: On the 11th day, Zonghan conquered Daizhou.

古文：乙卯，中山降。
现代文：十八日，中山投降。
English: On the 18th, Zhongshan surrendered.

古文：丙辰，宗望破宋兵五千于真定。
现代文：十九日，宗望在真定打败五千宋兵。
English: On the 19th, Zongwang defeated five thousand Song soldiers in Zhending.

古文：戊午，宗翰围太原。
现代文：二十一日，宗翰包围太原。
English: On the 21st, Zonghan surrounded Taiyuan.

古文：耶律余睹破宋河东、陕西援兵于汾河北。
现代文：耶律余睹在汾河北打败宋河东、陕西援兵。
English: Yelu Yu witnessed the reinforcements of Song Hedong and Shaanxi in the north of HeBei.

古文：甲子，宗望克信德府。
现代文：二十七日，宗望攻克信德府。
English: On the 27th, Zongwang defeated Shindefu.

古文：四年春正月丁卯朔，始朝日。
现代文：天会四年春正月初一，是皇帝开始听朝会见群臣的日子。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the fourth year of the Spring Festival, it was the day when the emperor began to listen to and meet with his courtiers.

古文：降臣郭药师、董才皆赐姓完颜氏。
现代文：降臣郭药师、董才都被赐姓完颜氏。
English: The surrendered vassals Guo Yakushi and Dong Cai were both given the surname of Guan Yan.

古文：戊辰，宗弼取汤阴，大抃攻下浚州，迪古补取黎阳。
现代文：二日，宗弼攻取汤阴，大白大攻下浚州，迪古补攻取黎阳。
English: On the second day, Zonglu captured Tangyin, Dabai attacked Danzhou, and Digu Supplement captured Liyang.

古文：己巳，诸军渡河。
现代文：三日，各路军队渡过黄河。
English: On the third day, all the armies crossed the Yellow River.

古文：庚午，取滑州。
现代文：四日，攻取滑州。
English: On the 4th, the capture of Leshou.

古文：宗望使吴孝民等入汴，问宋取首谋平山者童贯、谭稹、詹度及张觉等。
现代文：宗望派吴孝民等人进入汴京，向宋国索要首谋平山的童贯、谭稹、詹度以及张觉等人。
English: Zongwang sent Wu Xiaomin and others to enter Yanjing to request Tongran, Tan Xuan, Zhandu and Zhang Jue, the chief strategist of Pingshan, from Song.

古文：宋太上皇帝出奔。
现代文：宋太上皇帝出奔逃亡。
English: Empress Dowager Song fled the country.

古文：癸酉，诸军围汴。
现代文：七日，各路大军围攻汴京。
English: On the seventh day, large armies besieged Suijing.

古文：甲戌，宋使李棁来谢罪，且请修好。
现代文：八日，宋国使臣李来谢罪，并且请求和好。
English: On the 8th, Li Lai Xie, an envoy of the Song Dynasty, sinned and asked for reconciliation.

古文：宗望许宋修好，约质，割三镇地，增岁币，载书称伯侄。
现代文：宗望答应宋国使臣和好，但是提出条件：要人质，割太原、中山、河间三镇地，增加年税钱，写成书面文件以伯侄相称。
English: Zongwang agreed to make peace with the Song envoys, but put forward conditions: to take hostages, cut Taiyuan, Zhongshan, and Hema three townships, increase annual taxes, and write a written document to be commensurate with the nephew.

古文：戊寅，宋以康王构、少宰张邦昌为质。
现代文：十二日，宋国拿康王构和少宰张邦昌当人质。
English: On the 12th, the Song Dynasty took Wang Zhe and Zhang Bangchang hostage.

古文：辛巳，宋上誓书、地图，称侄大宋皇帝、伯大金皇帝。
现代文：十五日，宋人呈上誓书、地图，称呼 侄大宋皇帝 、 伯大金皇帝 。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Song people presented an oath, a map, and the names of the nephew of the Great Song Emperor, Emperor Bodaikin.

古文：癸未，诸军解围。
现代文：二十七日，诸路大军解除对汴京的包围。
English: On the 27th, the various armies lifted the siege of Beijing.

古文：二月丁酉朔，夜，宋将姚平仲兵四十万来袭宗望营，败之。
现代文：二月一日，夜间，宋将姚平仲带领四十万军队来袭击宗望军营，被打败了。
English: On the night of February 1, Song general Yao Pingzhong led 400,000 troops to attack the Zongwang army camp and was defeated.

古文：己亥，复进师围汴。
现代文：三日，大军再次进军围攻汴京。
English: On the third day, the large army once again marched to besiege Suijing.

古文：宋使宇文虚中以书来，改以肃王枢为质，遣康王构归。
现代文：宋派宇文虚中来传国书，改成把肃王枢当人质，差遣康王构回去。
English: Song sent Yu Wenqiu to the Middle Kingdom to preach the national anthem, but changed it to take Su Wangzhu hostage and send Kang Wangzhu back.

古文：师还。
现代文：大军回还。
English: The troops then withdrew.

古文：壬子，以滑、浚二州与宋。
现代文：十六日，把滑、浚二州给了宋国。
English: On the 16th, the two states of Niu and Jian were given to Song.

古文：宗翰定威胜军，攻下隆德府。
现代文：宗翰平定威胜军，攻下隆德府。
English: Zonghan subdued the victorious army and captured the Longdefu.

古文：丁巳，次泽州。
现代文：二十一日，到泽州。
English: On the twenty-first, to Zezhou.

古文：海滨王家奴诬其主欲亡去，诏诛其首恶，余并杖之。
现代文：海滨王的家奴诬告他的主子想逃走，诏令诛杀这些家奴的首恶分子，对其余的一起用杖刑。
English: The slaves of the Seaside King falsely accused their master of trying to escape, and he ordered that the chief villains of these slaves be killed, and the rest of them be punished with a cane.

古文：三月癸未，银术可围太原，宗翰还西京。
现代文：三月十七日，银术可围攻太原，宗翰返回西京。
English: On March 17th, after the siege of Taiyuan, Zonghan returned to West Beijing.

古文：四月癸卯，宗望使宗弼来奏捷。
现代文：四月七日，宗望派宗弼来朝报捷。
English: On April 7, Zongwang sent Zongye to report the victory to the emperor.

古文：乙丑，耿守忠等大败宋兵于西都谷。
现代文：二十九日，耿守忠等人在西都谷把宋兵杀得大败。
English: On the 29th, Geng Shouzhong and others defeated the Song soldiers in Xidu Valley.

古文：五月辛未，宋种师中以兵出井陉。
现代文：五月六日，宋国种师中带兵从井陉出发。
English: On May 6th, Song Guozhong's middle-ranking officers and soldiers set out from Jingyao.

古文：癸酉，完颜活女败之于杀熊岭，斩师中于阵。
现代文：八日，完颜活女在杀熊岭击败种师中，在阵前杀了种师中。
English: On the eighth day, the beautiful and lively woman defeated the seed division in the killing of Xiongling, and killed the seed division before the battle.

古文：是日，拔离速败宋姚古军于隆州谷。
现代文：当天，拔离速在隆州谷打败宋姚古的军队。
English: On the same day, Zhaojia defeated Song Yaogu's army in Longzhou Valley.

古文：六月丙申朔，高丽国王王楷奉表称藩。
现代文：六月一日，高丽国王王楷奉表声称藩。
English: On June 1, the King of Goryeo, Wang Kaihong, issued a proclamation claiming the domain.

古文：庚戌，宗望献所获三象。
现代文：十五日，宗望献上所擒获的三头大象。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zongwang presented the three elephants he had captured.

古文：庚申，以宗望为右副元帅。
现代文：二十五日，任命宗望为右副元帅。
English: On the 25th, Zongwang was appointed as the Vice Marshal of the Right.

古文：七月丙寅，遣高伯淑等宣谕高丽。
现代文：七月二日，派遣高伯淑等人向高丽宣告御旨。
English: On July 2, Gao Boxuk and others were dispatched to announce the imperial edict to Goryeo.

古文：壬申，出金牌，命孛堇大抃以所领渤海军八猛安为万户。
现代文：八日，发出金牌，命令孛堇大白大把所领渤海军八猛军作为万户。
English: On the eighth day, a gold medal was issued, and the commander of the Great White Army was ordered to designate the eight fierce naval forces as ten thousand households.

古文：戊子，以铁勒部长夺离剌不从其兄夔里本叛，赐马十一、豕百、钱五百万。
现代文：二十四日，因为铁勒部长夺离剌不跟从他的兄长夔里本叛变，赏赐他马十一匹、猪一百头、钱五百万。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, because Minister Tiller had taken away the yakitori and not followed his brother, Yuribon, he rewarded him with eleven horses, a hundred pigs, and five million in money.

古文：萧仲恭使宋还，以所持宋帝与耶律余睹蜡书自陈。
现代文：萧仲恭出使宋国归来，自陈拿回宋帝给耶律余睹的封在蜡丸里的书信。
English: Xiao Zhonggong sent out an envoy to return Song to China, and Chen took back a letter from the Song Emperor to Yelu, sealed in a wax ball.

古文：八月庚子，诏左副元帅宗翰、右副元帅宗望伐宋。
现代文：八月七日，诏令左副元帅宗翰、右副元帅宗望攻伐宋国。
English: On August 7, the left deputy marshal Zonghan and the right deputy marshal Zongwang were ordered to invade Song.

古文：宋张灏率兵出汾州，拔离速击走之。
现代文：宋张灏率兵从汾州出发，拔离速把他们击跑了。
English: Song Zhangye and his soldiers set out from Ganzhou and drove them away at full speed.

古文：刘臻以兵出寿阳，娄室破之。
现代文：刘臻出兵寿阳，被娄室打败了。
English: Liu Zhen dispatched troops to Shouyang, but was defeated by Shushou.

古文：庚戌，宗翰发西京。
现代文：十七日，宗翰从西京发兵。
English: On the 17th, Zonghan sent troops from West Beijing.

古文：辛亥，娄室等破宋张灏军于文水。
现代文：十八日，娄室等人在文水打败宋张灏的军队。
English: On the 18th, Kishitsu and others defeated Song Zhangye's army at Wenshui.

古文：癸丑，宗望发保州。
现代文：二十日，宗望从保州发兵。
English: On the 20th, Zongwang sent troops from Bozhou.

古文：是日，耶律铎破宋兵于雄州，那野等败宋兵于中山。甲寅，新城县进白乌。
现代文：当天，耶律铎在雄州攻破宋兵，那野等人在中山打败宋兵。二十一日，新城县进献白乌。
English: On the same day, Yeludong defeated the Song soldiers in Xiongzhou, and Nano and others defeated the Song soldiers in Zhongshan. On the 21st, Xincheng County presented Baiwu.

古文：庚申，突拈取新乐。
现代文：二十七日，突睰攻取新乐。
English: On the 27th, the Turks captured Xinle.

古文：九月丙寅，宗翰克太原，执经略使张孝纯。
现代文：九月三日，宗翰攻克太原，抓获经略使张孝纯。
English: On September 3, Zonghan conquered Taiyuan and captured the warlord Zhang Xiaochun.

古文：鹘沙虎取平遥、灵石、孝义、介休诸县。
现代文：鹘沙虎攻取平遥、灵石、孝义、介休诸县。
English: The Bansha Tigers conquered Pingyao, Lingshi, Xiaoyi and Jieju counties.

古文：己巳，复以南京为平州。
现代文：六日，又把南京叫平州。
English: On the 6th, Nanjing was called Pingzhou again.

古文：辛未，宗望破宋种师闵于井陉，取天威军，克真定，杀其守李邈。
现代文：八日，宗望在井陉打败宋种师闵的军队，攻取天威军，攻克真定，杀了真定太守李邈。
English: On the eighth day, Zongwang defeated the army of Song Zong Shilong in Jingyao, captured the Tianwei Army, defeated Zhending, and killed Zhending's daimyō Li Xi.

古文：十月，娄室克汾州，石州降。
现代文：十月，娄室攻克汾州，石州投降。
English: In October, Shishimuro conquered Shishu, and Shishu surrendered.

古文：蒲察克平定军，辽州降。
现代文：蒲察攻克平定军，辽州投降。
English: Putsa defeated the Pingding Army, and Liaozhou surrendered.

古文：丁未，天清节，高丽、夏遣使来贺，中京进嘉禾。
现代文：十五日，是天清节，高丽、夏国派遣使者来庆贺。中京派人来进献特别茁壮的稻禾。
English: On the fifteenth day, it was the Tianqing Festival, and Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to celebrate. Beijing sent people to present specially strong rice.

古文：十一月甲子，宗翰自太原趋汴。
现代文：十一月三日，宗翰从太原奔赴汴京。
English: On November 3, Zonghan rushed from Taiyuan to Beijing.

古文：丙寅，宗望自真定趋汴。
现代文：五日，宗望从真定奔赴汴京。
English: On the fifth day, Munemochi rushed from Jinding to Beijing.

古文：戊辰，宗翰下威胜军。
现代文：七日，宗翰拿下威胜军。
English: On the seventh day, Zonghan defeated the victorious army.

古文：癸酉，撒剌荅破天井关。
现代文：十二日，撒剌答攻破天井关。
English: On the 12th, Saratoga broke through the ceiling.

古文：乙亥，宗翰克隆德府。
现代文：十四日，宗翰攻克隆德府。
English: On the 14th, Zonghan attacked the Klondorf.

古文：活女渡盟津。
现代文：活女渡过盟津。
English: A live girl passed through Meitsu.

古文：西京、永安军、郑州皆降。
现代文：西京、永安军、郑州都投降了。
English: Xijing, Yongan Army and Zhengzhou all surrendered.

古文：庚辰，宗翰克泽州。
现代文：十九日，宗翰攻克泽州。
English: On the 19th, Zonghan invaded Kyzylorda.

古文：宗望诸军渡河，临河、大名二县、德清军、开德府皆下。
现代文：宗望率领各路军队渡过黄河，临河、大名二县、德清军、开德府都被拿下了。
English: Zongwang led all the armies across the Yellow River, and Linhe, the two counties of Daming, the German-Qing army, and Kaidefu were all captured.

古文：丙戌，克怀州。
现代文：二十五日，攻克怀州。
English: On the 25th, they conquered Huai Zhou.

古文：是日，宗望至汴。
现代文：当天，宗望到达汴京。
English: On the same day, Zongwang arrived in Beijing.

古文：闰月壬辰朔，宋出兵拒战，宗望等击败之。
现代文：闰十一月一日，宋国出兵抵抗，宗望等人击败了宋兵。
English: On the first day of November, the Song Dynasty sent troops to resist, and Zongwang and others defeated the Song soldiers.

古文：癸巳，宗翰至汴。
现代文：二日，宗翰到达汴京。
English: On the second day, Zonghan arrived in Beijing.

古文：丙辰，克汴城。
现代文：二十五日，攻克汴城。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the siege of Lucheng began.

古文：庚申，以高随充高丽生日使。
现代文：二十九日，派高随充任高丽生日使。
English: On the 29th, Choe Son Gwon was appointed as the envoy for the birthday of the Republic of Korea.

古文：辛酉，宋主桓出居青城。
现代文：三十日，宋国君主桓出汴城居住在青城。
English: On the 30th, Emperor Kan of the Song Dynasty left Shicheng to live in Qingcheng.

古文：十二月癸亥，宋主桓降，是日，归于汴城。
现代文：十二月二日，宋主桓投降，当天，回归到汴城。
English: On December 2nd, Emperor Song surrendered and returned to Lucheng the same day.

古文：庚辰，诏曰： 朕惟国家，四境虽远而兵革未息，田野虽广而畎亩未辟，百工略备而禄秩未均，方贡仅修而宾馆未赡。
现代文：十九日，皇帝诏令说： 朕只有国家，四方边境虽然遥远而战争没有停息，田野虽然广阔而田地没有开辟，百工全齐备而俸禄等级还不平均，开始聚资修房而宾馆还不充裕。
English: On the 19th, the emperor's edict said: I am only a country. Although the four-sided border is far away, the war has not stopped. Although the fields are vast, the fields have not been opened up. The hundred craftsmen are fully equipped, but the salary level is not equal. We have begun to raise funds to repair the house, but the hotel is not enough.

古文：是皆出乎民力，苟不务本业而抑游手，欲上下皆足，其可得乎？
现代文：这些都要从民力中出，若不务本业而抑制游手好闲的人，想上下都丰足，这样能得到吗？
English: All of this has to come from the people's efforts. If we don't do our jobs and suppress the idlers, if we want to have enough for everyone, can we get it?

古文：其令所在长吏，敦劝农功。 
现代文：命令各地行政长官，敦促规劝农工。 
English: He ordered the chief executives of various regions to urge and persuade the agricultural workers.

古文：五年正月辛卯朔，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天会五年正月初一，高丽、夏国派遣使臣来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fifth year of the Heavenly Reunion, Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to the Imperial Court to congratulate.

古文：癸巳，宗翰、宗望使使以宋降表来上。
现代文：三日，宗翰、宗望派遣使者把宋国降表送来呈给皇上。
English: On the third day, Zonghan and Zongwang sent an envoy to present the Song Dynasty's surrender document to the emperor.

古文：乙未，知枢密院事刘彦宗上表，请复立赵氏，不听。
现代文：五日，知枢密院事刘彦宗上表，请求再立赵氏，皇上没有听从。
English: On the fifth day, Liu Yanzong, Secretary of the Privy Council, submitted a petition to reinstate the Zhao clan, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：丁巳，回鹘喝里可汗遣使入贡。
现代文：二十七日，回鹘的喝里可汗派遣使者来朝进贡。
English: On the 27th, the Uighur Khan sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：二月丙寅，诏降宋二帝为庶人。
现代文：二月六日，诏令已经投降的宋国两位皇帝贬为庶人。
English: On February 6, the two emperors of Song, who had already surrendered, were reduced to commoners.

古文：三月丁酉，立宋太宰张邦昌为大楚皇帝。
现代文：三月七日，立宋国太宰张邦昌为大楚皇帝。
English: On March 7th, Zhang Bangchang, the grand vizier of the Song Dynasty, was proclaimed Emperor of Chu.

古文：割地赐夏国。
现代文：割地赐给夏国。
English: The land allotment was given to Xia.

古文：四月乙酉，克陕府，取虢州。
现代文：四月二十六日，攻克陕府，取得虢州。
English: On April 26th, they conquered Shaanxi Province and took Quzhou.

古文：丙戌，以六部路都统挞懒为元帅左监军，南京路都统阇母为元帅左都监。
现代文：二十七日，任命六部路都统挞懒为元帅左监军，南京路都统母为元帅左都监。
English: On the 27th, he appointed the marshal of the Left Supervision Troops of the Six-branch Capital Command, and the marshal of the Left Supervision Troops of the Nanjing Capital Command.

古文：宗翰、宗望以宋二帝归。
现代文：宗翰、宗望携带宋徽宗、钦宗二位皇帝归来。
English: Zonghan and Zongwang returned with the two emperors Song Huizong and Qin Zong.

古文：己丑，诏曰： 合苏馆诸部与新附人民，其在降附之后同姓为婚者，离之。 
现代文：三十日，皇帝下诏说： 合苏馆诸部族和新归附的人民，其中在降附之后同姓结婚的，让他们离婚。 
English: On the 30th, the emperor issued an edict: "All the tribes of the Soviet Union and the newly annexed people, including those who married the same surname after the annexation, let them divorce.

古文：五月庚寅朔，宋康王构即位于归德。宋杀张邦昌。
现代文：五月一日，宋康王构在归德即位。宋国杀了张邦昌。
English: On May 1, Song Kang Wang Jie ascended to the throne after returning to Germany. Song killed Zhang Bangchang.

古文：娄室降解、绛、慈、显、石、河中、岢岚，宁化、保德、火山诸城。挞懒徇地山东，下密州。
现代文：娄室降服了解、绛、慈、隰、石、河中、岢岚、宁化、保德、火山诸城，挞懒率军队巡视山东，使山东各地降服，攻下了密州。
English: He led the army to inspect Shandong, subjugated all parts of Shandong, and conquered Myizhou.

古文：迪虎下单州，广信军降。
现代文：迪虎攻下了单州，广信军投降。
English: Dihu captured Shanzhou, and the Guangxin army surrendered.

古文：六月庚申，诏曰： 自河之北，今既分画，重念其民或见城邑有被残者，不无疑惧，遂命坚守。
现代文：六月二日，皇帝诏令说： 自黄河往北，今天已经划分出来，反复考虑那里的百姓有看见城邑有破残的，不是没有疑惑和恐惧，于是命令坚守。
English: On June 2, the emperor issued a decree: "From the Yellow River to the north, it has been divided today, and the people there have repeatedly considered whether they have seen cities and towns that have been destroyed, not without suspicion and fear, so the order is upheld.

古文：若即讨伐，生灵可愍。
现代文：如果立即讨伐，生灵可怜。
English: If a crusade is launched immediately, all will be lost.

古文：其申谕以理，招辑安全之。傥执不移，自当致讨。
现代文：要申明晓谕其中的道理，招抚集中保证他们的安全，倘若执意不迁移，自然应当去征讨。
English: It is necessary to clarify and explain the reason for this, attract and concentrate on ensuring their safety, and if they insist on not moving, they should naturally go to collect.

古文：若诸军敢利于俘掠辄肆荡毁者，底于罚。 
现代文：如果诸军敢从俘虏掠抢中获利，或者有肆意放荡破坏的，寻根究底惩罚。 
English: If armies dare to profit from the plunder of captives, or if there is wanton debauchery and destruction, they will be punished to the last.

古文：庚辰，右副元帅宗望薨。
现代文：二十二日，右副元帅宗望逝世。
English: On the 22nd, Vice Marshal Zongwang passed away.

古文：汉国王宗杰继薨。
现代文：接着，汉国王宗杰逝世。
English: Next, King Zongjie of Han died.

古文：七月甲午，赐宗翰券书，除反逆外，咸贳勿论。
现代文：七月六日，赐给宗翰券书，除反叛之外，咸贳勿论。
English: On July 6th, Zonghan was given a certificate that he should not engage in any activities other than rebellion.

古文：以石州戍将乌虎弃城丧师，杖之，削其宫。
现代文：因为石州戍将乌虎放弃城邑丧失了军队，对他用杖刑，削除了他的职务。
English: Because of the loss of the army caused by the abandonment of the city by the Black Tiger, Shi Zhou Yu punished him with a cane and removed him from his post.

古文：八月戊寅，以宋捷，遣耶律居谨等充宣庆使使高丽。
现代文：八月二十一日，因为对宋作战胜利，派遣耶律居谨等人充任宣庆使出使高丽。
English: On August 21st, because of the victory in the war against the Song Dynasty, Ye Ryul Ji Gang and others were sent to Korea as envoys to celebrate the victory.

古文：丙戌，以宗辅为右副元帅。
现代文：二十九日，任命宗辅为右副元帅。
English: On the 29th, Zong Fu was appointed as the Right Vice-Marshal.

古文：诏曰： 河北、河东郡县职员多阙，宜开贡举取士，以安新民。
现代文：诏令说 ：河北、河东郡县职员缺少很多，应该开举选取贤士，来安抚新归附的人民。
English: The imperial edict said: Hebei and Hedong counties and counties are short of staff, and it is necessary to select wise men to appease the newly annexed people.

古文：其南北进士，各以所业试之。 
现代文：那些南北进士，各用所从事的专业来考试他们。 
English: Those who were promoted from north to south, each of them was tested by their major.

古文：九月丁未，诏曰： 内地诸路，每耕牛一具赋粟五斗，以备歉岁。 
现代文：九月二十日，皇帝诏令说： 内地诸路，有耕牛一头的交赋粟五斗，用来防备欠收年岁。 
English: On September 20th, the Emperor issued the following edict: All roads in the inland shall have one head of oxen and five bushels of millet to be used to prevent poor harvests.

古文：辛亥，赐元帅右监军完颜希尹、万户银术可券书，除赦所不原，余并勿论。
现代文：二十四日，赐予元帅右监军完颜希尹、万户银术可券书，除了赦免原本不赦免的，其余的人一律不再追究。
English: On the 24th, Marshal Guan Yan Xiyun, the Right Supervisor of the Army, and Wanhu Yinzhu were awarded certificates. In addition to pardoning those who were not originally pardoned, the rest of the people will no longer be investigated.

古文：阇母取河间，大败宋兵于莫州，雄州降。
现代文：母收取河间，在莫州把宋军杀得大败，雄州守军投降。
English: My mother took charge of Kawama, defeated the Song army in Mozhou, and the Xiongzhou defenders surrendered.

古文：挞懒克祁州，永宁军、保州、顺安军皆降。
现代文：挞懒攻克祁州，永宁军、保州、顺安军都投降了。
English: The Yonging Army, the Baozhou Army, and the Shun'an Army all surrendered.

古文：冬十月丁卯，沙州回鹘活剌散可汗遣使入贡。
现代文：冬季十月十一日，沙州回鹘的活剌散可汗派使者进朝献贡。
English: In winter, on October 11, the Khan of Khotan sent an envoy to the North to pay tribute.

古文：辛未，天清节，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十五日是天清节，高丽、夏国派使者祝贺。
English: The fifteenth day is the Tianqing Festival, and Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：宋二帝自燕徙居于中京。
现代文：宋国的二位皇帝从燕京迁徙到中京居住。
English: The two emperors of Song migrated from Yanjing to live in Zhongjing.

古文：十二月丙寅，右副元帅宗辅伐宋，徇地淄、青。
现代文：十二月十一日，右副元帅宗辅攻伐宋国，率领军队巡行淄、青一带，让他们降服。
English: On December 11th, the Right Vice-Marshal Zong Fu invaded Song and led the troops on a parade through the regions of Handan and Qing, forcing them to surrender.

古文：乌林荅泰欲败宋将李成于淄州。赵州降。
现代文：乌林答泰欲在淄州打败宋将李成。赵州守军投降。
English: Ulin replied that he wanted to defeat the Song general Li Cheng in Zhangzhou. The Zhaozhou defenders surrendered.

古文：阿里刮徇地浚州，败敌兵，遂取滑州。
现代文：阿里刮率领军队在浚州巡行，打败敌兵，于是攻取滑州。
English: Ali Scrape led the army on a patrol in Dzhungzhou, defeated the enemy soldiers, and then captured Leshou.

古文：乙亥，西南路都统斡鲁薨。
现代文：二十日，西南路都统斡鲁逝世。
English: On the 20th, Du Tongyu Lu of Southwest Road passed away.

古文：己卯，赛里下汝州。
现代文：二十四日，赛里攻下汝州。
English: On the 24th, Sai Ri captured Ruzhou.

古文：六年正月丙戌朔，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天会六年正月初一，高丽、夏国遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the sixth year of the Heavenly Reunion, envoys from Goryeo and Xia Guo came to offer congratulations.

古文：宗弼破宋郑宗孟军于青州。银术可取邓州。
现代文：宗弼在青州打败宋国郑宗孟的军队。银术可攻取邓州。
English: Zonglu defeated the army of Zheng Zongmeng of the Song Dynasty in Qingzhou.

古文：萨谋鲁入襄阳。拔离速入均州。马五取房州。
现代文：萨谋鲁进入襄阳，拔离速进入均州，马五攻取房州。
English: Sapo Lu entered Xiangyang, Zhaozhou entered Junzhou at breakneck speed, and Ma Wu captured Fangzhou.

古文：癸巳，克青州。
现代文：八日，攻克青州。
English: On the 8th, Qingzhou was conquered.

古文：癸卯，阇母克濰州。
现代文：十八日，母攻克潍州。
English: On the 18th, the mother conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：丁未，迪古补败宋将赵子昉兵。
现代文：二十二日，迪古补打败宋国将领赵子窻的军队。
English: On the 22nd, Digu Shu defeated the army of Song general Zhao Zixuan.

古文：撒离喝败宋于河上。
现代文：撒离喝在黄河上打败宋兵。
English: He defeated the Song soldiers on the Yellow River.

古文：甲寅，宋将马括兵次乐安，宗辅击败之，闻宋主在维扬，以农时还师。
现代文：二十九日，宋国将领马括的队伍到乐安，宗辅击败了这支队伍，听说宋主在维扬，因为农忙时节到了而撤兵。
English: On the 29th, the Song general led a horse-riding team to Le An, and Zong Fu defeated this team. It was heard that the Song lord withdrew his troops from Viyang because it was the busy farming season.

古文：宗弼败宋兵于河上。
现代文：宗弼在黄河上打败宋兵。
English: Zonglu defeated Song soldiers on the Yellow River.

古文：二月乙卯朔，拔离速取唐州，癸亥，取蔡州。
现代文：二月一日，拔离速攻取唐州，九日，又攻取蔡州。
English: On the first day of February, Zhuge Liang captured Tangzhou, and on the ninth day, he captured Caizhou.

古文：己巳，移剌古败宋将台宗隽等兵于大名。
现代文：十五日，移剌古在大名战败了宋国大将台宗隽等人的军队。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Empress Dowager Cixi defeated the army of the Song general Taizong Yao and others in the Battle of Daming.

古文：庚午，再破其军，获台宗隽及宋忠。
现代文：十六日，再次打败这支军队，捉获台宗隽以及宋忠。
English: On the 16th, they defeated this army again and captured Taizongjun and Songzhong.

古文：甲戌，拔离速取陈州。
现代文：二十日，拔离速攻取陈州。
English: On the 20th, they left the city and quickly captured Chenzhou.

古文：癸未，克颖昌府。
现代文：二十九日，攻克颍昌府。
English: On the 29th, they conquered Fuchang Prefecture.

古文：郑州叛入于宋，复取郑州。
现代文：郑州反叛的军队进入宋国，再攻取郑州。
English: The rebel army of Zhengzhou entered Song and re-conquered Zhengzhou.

古文：迁洛阳、襄阳、颖昌、汝、郑、均、房、唐、邓、陈、蔡之民于河北。
现代文：把洛阳、襄阳、颍昌、汝、郑、均、房、唐、邓、陈、蔡各地的人民迁移到黄河以北。
English: The people from Luoyang, Xiangyang, Binchang, Ru, Zheng, Jun, Fang, Tang, Deng, Chen and Cai were relocated to the north of the Yellow River.

古文：宗翰复遣娄室攻下同、华、京兆、凤翔，擒宋经制使傅亮。
现代文：宗翰又派娄室攻下了同、华、京兆、凤翔，擒获宋经制使傅亮。
English: Zonghan also sent the imperial court to capture Tong, Hua, Jingzhao, Fengxiang, and won the Song Dynasty Emperor Fu Liang.

古文：阿邻破河中。斡鲁入冯翊。
现代文：阿邻攻破河中，斡鲁进入冯翊。
English: A neighbor broke through the middle of the river, and Yulong entered Fengye.

古文：三月壬辰，命南路军帅实古乃，籍节度使完颜慎思所领诸部及未置猛安谋克户来上。
现代文：三月八日，命令南路军帅实古乃，登记节度使完颜慎思所统领诸部人员以及没有设置猛安谋克的户来报告皇上。
English: On March 8th, he ordered the commander of the Southern Route Army, Shiguno, to report to the emperor that the registration of the festival was to make the personnel in charge of various departments of the Kanen Shinsho and the households that did not set up a fierce ambush.

古文：己酉，挞懒下恩州。
现代文：二十五日，挞懒攻下恩州。
English: On the 25th, Lazy captured Enzhou.

古文：五月戊戌，移沙土古思以本部来附。
现代文：五月十五日，移沙土古思带领本部来归附。
English: On May 15th, Gu Si, the leader of the headquarters, came to annex it.

古文：六月己未，诏求祖宗遗事。
现代文：六月六日，下诏征求祖宗遗事。
English: On June 6, the imperial edict was issued to solicit ancestral relics.

古文：挞懒遣兵徇下磁州、信德府。
现代文：挞懒派兵巡行攻取磁州、信德府。
English: He lazily sent troops on a patrol to capture Magangzhou and Shinde Prefecture.

古文：真定贼自称元帅，秦王撒离喝讨平之。
现代文：真定贼寇自称元帅、秦王，撒离喝讨伐平定了他们。
English: The bandits called themselves the Marshal and the King of Qin, and they were defeated.

古文：七月乙巳，宋主遣使奉表请和，诏进兵伐之。
现代文：七月二十三日，宋国君主遣使臣来奉表请求讲和，皇帝诏令进军讨伐他。
English: On July 23rd, the Song monarch sent an envoy to petition for peace, and the emperor issued a decree to march against him.

古文：以宋二庶人赴上京。
现代文：把宋国二位皇帝贬降为庶人押赴上京。
English: The two emperors of the Song Dynasty were degraded to commoners and sent to Beijing.

古文：八月乙卯，娄室败宋兵于华州，讹特剌破敌于渭水，遂取下邽。
现代文：八月三日，娄室在华州打败宋兵，讹特剌在渭水破敌，攻取下絡。
English: On August 3, Gongshu defeated the Song soldiers in Huazhou, and Gongte in Surabaya defeated the enemy and captured Lv.

古文：丁丑，以宋二庶人素服见太祖庙，遂入见于乾元殿。
现代文：十一日，让被贬成庶人的两位宋国帝王穿白色衣服到太祖庙拜谒，接着进入乾元殿朝见圣上。
English: On the 11th day, the two Song emperors, who had been reduced to commoners, were allowed to wear white clothes to pay homage at the Grand Ancestor's Temple, and then enter the Qianyuan Hall to pay their respects to the saint.

古文：封其父昏德公、子重昏侯。
现代文：圣上封父亲为昏德公，儿子为重昏侯。
English: The father of the canonized father was a dimwit, and his son was a dimwit.

古文：是日，告于太祖庙。
现代文：当天，在太祖庙祭告。
English: On the same day, a memorial service was held at Taizu Temple.

古文：以州郡职员名称及俸给因革诏中外。
现代文：把州郡职员名称以及薪俸的因袭与沿革诏告中外。
English: The reasons and history of the names of state and county clerks as well as their salaries should be made public.

古文：九月辛丑，绳果等败宋兵于蒲城，甲申，又破敌于同州。
现代文：九月十四日，绳果等人在蒲城打败宋兵。甲申又攻破敌兵在同州。
English: On September 14th, Zhuge and others defeated the Song soldiers in Putian. Jia Shen also defeated the enemy soldiers in Tongzhou.

古文：乙丑，取丹州。
现代文：乙丑，攻取丹州。
English: Second Ugly, capture Danzhou.

古文：十月丙寅，天清节，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十月十五日，是天清节，高丽、夏国派使者来庆贺。
English: On October 15, it was the Tianqing Festival, and Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to celebrate.

古文：癸酉，知枢密院事刘彦宗薨。
现代文：二十二日，知枢密院事刘彦宗逝世。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Yanzong, Secretary of the Privy Council, passed away.

古文：丁丑，蒲察、娄室败宋兵于临真。
现代文：二十六日，蒲察、娄室在临真打败宋兵。
English: On the 26th, Pucha and Shishimuro defeated the Song soldiers in Linzhen.

古文：戊寅，徙昏德公、重昏侯于韩州。
现代文：二十七日，把昏德公、重昏侯迁移到韩州。
English: On the twenty-seventh day, they moved the dimwit and the heavy dimwit to South Korea.

古文：庚辰，宗翰、宗辅会于濮，伐宋。
现代文：二十九日，宗翰、宗辅在濮州会师，共同攻伐宋国。
English: On the 29th, Zonghan and Zongfu joined forces in Zhangzhou to jointly attack Song.

古文：十一月庚寅，蒲察、娄室取延安府。
现代文：十一月十日，蒲察、娄室攻取延安府。
English: On November 10, Pucha and Shishimuro captured Yan'an Prefecture.

古文：壬辰，赈移懒路。
现代文：十二日，救济移懒路居民。
English: On the 12th, relief came to the residents of Gyulai Road.

古文：乙未，取濮州，绥德军降。
现代文：十五日，攻取濮州，绥德军投降。
English: On the fifteenth day, the capture of Ganzhou, the German army of Ganzhou surrendered.

古文：娄室再攻晋宁军，其守徐徽言固守，不能克。
现代文：娄室再次进攻晋宁军，那里守备徐徽言防守坚固，不能攻克。
English: The Jining Army attacked again in the imperial room, where the defense of Xu Huiyan was strong and could not be overcome.

古文：十二月丙辰，宗弼取开德府。
现代文：十二月六日，宗弼攻取开德府。
English: On December 6, Zonglu captured Kide Prefecture.

古文：丁卯，宗辅克大名府。鹘沙虎败宋兵于巩。
现代文：十七日，宗辅攻克大名府，鹘沙虎在巩打败宋兵。
English: On the 17th, Zong Yu conquered Damingfu, and Bishatoro defeated Song soldiers in Gong.

古文：七年正月庚辰朔，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天会七年正月初一，高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventh year of the Heian period, Korea and Japan sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：辛巳，吴国王阇母薨。
现代文：二日，吴国王母逝世。
English: On the second day, King Wu's mother passed away.

古文：甲午，以西京留守韩企先同中书门下平章事、知枢密院事。
现代文：十五日，任命西京留守韩企先同中书门下平章事、知枢密院事。
English: On the 15th, he appointed the South Korean companies that stayed in West Beijing to be the first to sign a contract with the Chinese Academy of Letters and the first to sign a contract with the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：二月戊辰，宋麟府路安抚使折可求以麟、府、丰三州降。
现代文：二月十九日，宋国麟府路安抚使折可求拿出麟、府、丰三州投降。
English: On February 19, Song's Linfu Road appeasement envoys could ask for the surrender of Lin, Fu and Feng three states.

古文：己巳，娄室、塞里、鹘沙虎等破晋宁军，其守徐徽言据子城拒战。
现代文：二十日，娄室、塞里、鹘沙虎等攻破晋宁军，晋宁军守备徐徽言据守子城抵抗奋战。
English: On the 20th, Shishitsu, Seri, Bansha Tiger, etc. defeated the Jin Ning Army, and the Jin Ning Army defended Xu Huiyan and fought against the resistance of Shouzi City.

古文：庚午，率众溃围走，擒之。
现代文：二十一日，徐徽言率领众人突围逃跑，被擒获。
English: On the twenty-first day, Xu Huiyan led the crowd to break through the encirclement and escape, and was captured.

古文：使之拜，不拜。临之以兵，不动。
现代文：让他参拜，他不拜；把兵器逼在他头上，他不动。
English: Let him worship, he does not worship; force a weapon on his head, he does not move.

古文：命降将折可求谕之降，指可求大骂，出不逊语，遂杀之。
现代文：命令降将折可求劝他投降，他手指折可求大骂，出语不逊，于是杀了他。
English: He could persuade him to surrender by giving him an order to surrender, or he could swear at him with his finger, and then kill him.

古文：其统制孙昂及士卒皆不屈，尽杀之。
现代文：他的统制孙昂及其士卒都不屈服，所以把他们全都杀了。
English: His regent Sun Ang and his soldiers did not submit, so he killed them all.

古文：甲戌，诏禁医巫闾山辽代陵樵采。
现代文：二十五日，诏令禁止医巫闾山到辽代山陵去砍柴和采药。
English: On the 25th, the imperial edict forbade the witch doctor Lushan to go to the Liaodai Mountains to cut firewood and collect medicine.

古文：三月己卯朔，日中有黑子。
现代文：三月一日，发现太阳中有黑子。
English: On March 1st, a sunspot was spotted in the sun.

古文：壬寅，诏军兴以来，良人被略为驱者，听其父母夫妻子赎之。
现代文：二十四日，诏令：兴兵打仗以来，平民中被强征逼迫当兵的，听从他父母妻子赎他回去。
English: On the 24th, the imperial edict was issued: Since the beginning of the war, the civilians who were forcibly recruited and persecuted to be soldiers should obey their parents and wives to redeem them.

古文：尚书左仆射高桢罢。
现代文：免除了尚书左仆射高桢的职务。
English: He relieved Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, She Gao Jun, of his duties.

古文：九月丙午朔，日有食之。
现代文：四月，蒲察、娄室攻取鹿阝、坊二州。
English: In April, Bucha and Shishimuro captured Rokko and Fong Nishu.

古文：庚午，宗弼败宋兵于睢阳。
现代文：五月乙卯，拔离速在扬州袭击宋主。九月一日，发生日食。二十五日，宗弼在睢阳打败宋兵。
English: In May, Bajia attacked Song soldiers in Yangzhou. On September 1, a solar eclipse occurred. On the 25th, Zonglu defeated Song soldiers in Shenyang.

古文：辛未，降其城。
现代文：二十六日，降服了睢阳城。
English: On the 26th, Suiyang City was conquered.

古文：是月，曹州降。
现代文：当月，曹州守军投降。
English: That month, Caozhou's defenders surrendered.

古文：十月丙子朔，京兆府降。
现代文：十月一日，京兆府投降。
English: On October 1, Keicho-fu surrendered.

古文：丁丑，巩州降。
现代文：初二日，巩州投降。
English: On the second day of the first month, Gongzhou surrendered.

古文：庚寅，天清节，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十五日，是天清节，高丽、夏国派使者来庆贺。
English: On the 15th, it was the Tianqing Festival, and Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to celebrate.

古文：丁酉，阿里、当海、大抃破敌于寿春。
现代文：二十二日，阿里、当海、大白大在寿春打败敌人。
English: On the 22nd, Ali, Danghai and Dabai Da defeated the enemy in Shuchun.

古文：己亥，安抚使马世元以城降。
现代文：二十四日，安抚使马世元献城投降。
English: On the 24th, the pacification made Ma Shiyuan surrender the city.

古文：甲辰，庐州降。
现代文：二十九日，卢州守军投降。
English: On the 29th, the Luzhou defenders surrendered.

古文：十一月庚戌，徙曷苏馆都统司治宁州。
现代文：十一月六日，调动曷苏馆都统司治理宁州。
English: On November 6th, the Department of Administration of the Bansuyuan Capital was transferred to Ningzhou.

古文：乙卯，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：十一日，高丽派使者来进贡。
English: On the 11th, Goryeo sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：丙辰，宗弼取和州。
现代文：十二日，宗弼攻取和州。
English: On the 12th, Zonglu captured He Prefecture.

古文：壬戌，宗弼渡江，败宋副元帅杜充军于江宁。
现代文：十八日，宗弼渡过长江，在江宁打败宋国副元帅杜充的军队。
English: On the 18th, Zonglu crossed the Yangtze River and defeated the army of Du Chong, the vice-marshal of Song, in Jiangning.

古文：丁卯，守臣陈邦光以城降。
现代文：二十三日，江宁守臣陈邦光献城投降。
English: On the 23rd, Jiangning vassal Chen Bangguang surrendered the city.

古文：十二月丙戌，宗弼取湖州。丁亥，克杭州。
现代文：十二月十二日，宗弼攻取湖州；十三日，攻克杭州。
English: On December 12, Zonglu conquered Huzhou; on the 13th, he conquered Hangzhou.

古文：阿里、蒲卢浑追宋主于明州。
现代文：阿里、蒲卢浑追击宋主到明州。
English: Ali and Buluhun chased Song Zhen to Mingzhou.

古文：越州降。
现代文：越州守臣投降。
English: The governor of Yue Province surrendered.

古文：大抃败宋枢密使周望于秀州，又败宋兵于杭州东北。
现代文：大白大在秀州打败宋枢密使周望，又在杭州东北打败宋兵。
English: In Xiuzhou, the Great White Army defeated Zhou Wang, an envoy of the Song Dynasty, and in the northeast of Hangzhou, it defeated Song soldiers.

古文：戊戌，阿里、蒲卢浑败宋兵于东关，遂济曹娥江。
现代文：二十四日，阿里、蒲卢浑在东关打败宋兵，随后渡过曹娥江。
English: On the 24th, Ali and Bulughun defeated the Song soldiers in Dongguan, and then crossed the Cao E River.

古文：壬寅，败宋兵于高桥。
现代文：二十八日，把宋兵打败在高桥。
English: On the 28th, he defeated the Song soldiers at Gaoqiao.

古文：宋主入于海。
现代文：宋主高宗入海上了海船。
English: Song Emperor Gaozong went to sea and boarded a ship.

古文：八年正月甲辰朔，高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天会八年正月初一，高丽、夏国派遣使臣来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of the Heavenly Reunion, Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to the Imperial Court to congratulate.

古文：丁巳，以同中书门下平章事韩企先为尚书左仆射兼侍中。
现代文：十四日，任命同中书门下平章事韩企先为尚书左仆射兼侍中。
English: On the 14th, he appointed the same Chinese scholar, Heping Zhang, to be his left-hand servant and attendant.

古文：己未，阿里、蒲卢浑克明州，执其守臣赵伯谔。
现代文：十六日，阿里、蒲卢浑攻克明州，抓获了明州守臣赵伯谔。
English: On the 16th, Ali and Poulouhun invaded Mingzhou and captured the governor of Mingzhou, Zhao Boqin.

古文：庚申，诏曰 避役之民，以微直鬻身权贵之家者，悉出还本贯。 
现代文：十七日，下诏说： 躲避战乱的平民，用微少的价值卖身到权贵之家的，让他们全部从权贵之家出来，归还他们本来居住的地方。 
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: Civilians who had fled the war and sold themselves for a pittance to the rich and powerful, let them all leave the rich and powerful and return to where they originally lived.

古文：阿鲁补、斜里也下太平、顺昌及濠州。
现代文：阿鲁补、斜里也攻下太平、顺昌以及濠州。
English: Alush and Shili also captured Taiping, Shunchang and Zhangzhou.

古文：是月，宋副元帅杜充以其众降。
现代文：当月，宋副元帅杜充带领他的部下投降。
English: That month, Song Vice-Marshal Du Chong led his men to surrender.

古文：二月乙亥，宗弼还自杭州。
现代文：二月二日，宗弼从杭州回来。
English: On February 2, Zonglu returned from Hangzhou.

古文：庚寅，取秀州。
现代文：十七日，攻取秀州。
English: On the 17th, the capture of Xiuzhou.

古文：戊戌，取平江。
现代文：二十五日，攻取平江。
English: On the 25th, the Pingjiang River was captured.

古文：汴京乱，三月丁卯，大迪里复取之。
现代文：汴京叛乱。三月二十五日，大迪里再次攻取汴京。
English: On the 25th of March, Dairi once again captured Shingyō.

古文：宗弼及宋韩世忠战于镇江，不利。
现代文：宗弼与宋将韩世忠在镇江交战，不利。
English: Zonglu and Song fought Han Shizhong in the Zhenjiang River, which was unfavorable.

古文：四月丙申，复战于江宁，败之。
现代文：四月二十五日，又在江宁作战，打败了宋兵。
English: On April 25, he fought again in Jiangning and defeated the Song soldiers.

古文：诸军渡江。
现代文：宗弼率诸路军队渡江北走。
English: Zonglu led all the troops to cross the river and go north.

古文：是日，阿鲁补战于拓皋，己亥，周企战于寿春，辛丑，娄室战于淳化，皆胜之。
现代文：当天，阿鲁补在拓皋作战，二十八日，周企在寿春作战，三十日，娄室在淳化作战，全都打了胜仗。
English: On the same day, Arochi fought in Takuo, on the 28th, Zhouqi fought in Shuchun, and on the 30th, Shishimuro fought in Chunhua. They all fought a victorious battle.

古文：醴州降，遂克邠州。
现代文：醴州投降，随后又攻克州。
English: Zhangzhou capitulated and was subsequently conquered.

古文：五月癸卯，禁私度僧尼及继父继母之男女无相嫁娶。
现代文：五月二日，禁令私自剃度僧民以及禁止继父继母的儿女互相嫁娶。
English: On May 2nd, monks and nuns were banned from marrying each other and children of step-parents were banned from marrying each other.

古文：戊申，诏曰： 河北、河东签军。其家属流寓河南被俘掠为奴婢者，官为赎之，俾复其业。 
现代文：七日，诏令 ：河北、河东签发当兵的，他们的家属流浪寓居河南而被俘掠当奴婢的，由官府代为赎出他们，使他们恢复旧业。 
English: On the 7th, the imperial edict was issued: Those who had been conscripted from Hebei and Hedong, and their family members who lived in Henan and were captured as slaves, were to be ransomed by the government on their behalf, so that they could resume their former jobs.

古文：六月壬申，诏遣辽统军使耶律曷礼质、节度使萧别离剌等十人。分治新附州镇。
现代文：六月二日，诏令派遣辽国统军使耶律曷礼质、节度使萧别离剌等十人，分别去治理新归附的州镇。
English: On June 2, the imperial edict dispatched ten members of the Liao Unification Army to govern the newly-annexed prefectures and towns.

古文：癸酉，诏以昏德公六女为宗妇。
现代文：三日，诏令把昏德公的第六个女儿作为宗妇。
English: On the third day, the imperial decree made the sixth daughter of the Duke of Shunde as his wife.

古文：七月辛亥，诏给泰州都统婆卢火所部诸谋克甲胄各五十。
现代文：七月十一日，诏令给予泰州都统婆卢火所属部族各位谋克甲胄各五十套。
English: On July 11th, the imperial decree gave 50 sets of Mokke armor to each of the tribes belonging to Luhu, the Grandmother of Taizhou.

古文：先遣娄室经略陕西，所下城邑叛服不常，其监战阿卢补请益兵。
现代文：先派遣娄室策划处理陕西的事情，但是所攻下的城邑叛离不服从。娄室军的监战阿卢补请求增加兵力。
English: He first dispatched Yiming to plan and deal with the situation in Shaanxi, but the cities and towns he attacked rebelled and disobeyed. Alu Shu, the overseer of Yiming's army, requested an increase in troops.

古文：帅府会诸将议曰： 兵威非不足，绥怀之道有所未尽。
现代文：帅府召集各位将领商议说： 兵的威力不是不足，绥靖怀柔的政策没有落实。
English: The General Headquarters convened the generals for discussion and said: The soldiers' strength is not insufficient, and the policy of appeasement and conciliation has not been implemented.

古文：诚得位望隆重、恩威兼济者以往，可指日而定。
现代文：实在应该有一个位尊望重、恩威兼济的人前去，才能够指日而定。
English: There really should be a highly respected, benevolent person to go before, to be able to tell the time.

古文：若以皇子右副元帅宗辅往，为宜。 
现代文：如果把皇子右副元帅宗辅派去，是很适合的。 
English: It would be very appropriate to send the Prince's right-hand deputy marshal Zong Fu.

古文：以闻。诏曰： 娄室往者所向辄克，今使专征陕西，淹延未定，岂倦于兵而自爱耶？
现代文：把这个意见禀奏皇上，皇上诏令说 ：娄室以往所指的地方都能攻克，现在派他专门去征服陕西，迟迟没有平定，难道是倦于作战而爱惜自己吗？
English: He relayed this opinion to the emperor, and the emperor issued a decree saying, "The places mentioned by Yiming in the past can be conquered, but now he has been sent specifically to conquer Shaanxi, which has not been pacified for a long time. Is it because he is tired of fighting and cares about himself?

古文：关、陕重地，卿等其戮力焉。 
现代文：关、陕是军事重地，卿等要竭尽全力啊。 
English: Guan and Shaanxi are important military regions, so we must do our best.

古文：丁卯，上如东京温汤。
现代文：二十七日，皇上到东京温泉。
English: On the 27th, the Emperor went to Tokyo Onsen.

古文：徙昏德公、重昏侯于鹘里改路。
现代文：把昏德公、重昏侯迁移到鹘里改路。
English: Move the dim-witted and seriously dim-witted to Baili and change the road.

古文：九月戊申，立刘豫为大齐皇帝，世修子礼，都大名府。
现代文：九月九日，立刘豫为大齐皇帝，世修子礼，都城是大名府。
English: On September 9th, Liu Yu was proclaimed the Great Qi Emperor, and the capital was moved to Damingfu.

古文：辛酉，谙班勃极烈、都元帅杲薨。
现代文：二十二日，谙班勃极烈、都元帅杲逝世。
English: On the 22nd day of the month, Zhiban became extremely ill and Du Marshal Zou died.

古文：癸亥，宗辅等败宋张浚军于富平。耀州降。
现代文：二十四日，宗辅等人在富平打败宋张浚的军队。耀州投降。
English: On the 24th, Zongfu and others defeated Song Zhangjun's army in Fuping. Yaozhou surrendered.

古文：乙丑，凤翔府降。
现代文：二十六日凤翔府投降。
English: On the 26th, Fengxiang surrendered.

古文：十月乙亥，上至自东京。
现代文：十月六日，皇上从东京返回京都。
English: On October 6, the Emperor returned to Kyoto from Tokyo.

古文：齐帝刘豫遣使谢封册。
现代文：齐帝刘豫派人来谢封册。
English: Emperor Liu Yu of Qi sent someone to thank the seal.

古文：甲申，天清节，齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十五日，是天清节，齐、高丽、夏国遣使者来祝贺。
English: On the 15th, it was Tianqing Festival. Qi, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：以铁骊突离剌同中书门下平章事。
现代文：任命铁骊突离剌同中书门下平章事。
English: The appointment of Tie Xuan Xuan and Tong Zhong Shumen was a matter of public record.

古文：诏辽、宋官上本国诰命，等第换授。
现代文：诏说：辽、宋的官员上奏本国的皇帝赐爵或封官的诏令，按照原来的等第授官。
English: The edict said: the officials of Liao and Song should report the edict of the emperor of their own country to confer knighthoods or titles, and the officials should be awarded in accordance with the original order.

古文：十一月甲辰，宗辅下泾州。
现代文：十一月五日，宗辅南下泾州。
English: On November 5th, Zongfu went south to Zhangzhou.

古文：丁未，渭州降。
现代文：八日，渭州投降。
English: On the 8th, Zhangzhou surrendered.

古文：败宋刘倪军于瓦亭。戊申，原州降。
现代文：在瓦亭打败宋刘倪的军队。九日，原州投降。
English: Defeated Song Liu Ni's army in Watei. On the 9th, Wonju surrendered.

古文：宋泾原路统制张中孚、知镇戎军李彦琦以众降。
现代文：宋泾原路统制张中孚、知镇戎军李彦琦带领部下投降。
English: Zhang Zhongfu, commander of the Song Dynasty's Yuan Road, and Li Yanqi, commander of the Zhizhen army, led their subordinates to surrender.

古文：马五等击宋吴玠军于陇州。
现代文：马五等在陇州攻击宋吴的军队。
English: The Fifth Cavalry attacked Song Wu's army in Zhangzhou.

古文：庚戌，以遥镇节度使乌克寿等为齐刘豫生日使。
现代文：十一日，派遥镇节度使乌克寿等人当齐帝刘豫生日使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the town of Paiyao held a festival to celebrate the birthday of Emperor Liu Yu.

古文：癸亥，宗辅以陕西事状闻，诏奖谕之。
现代文：二十四日，宗辅把陕西的情况禀奏皇上知道，皇上诏令表扬他们。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Zong Fu reported the situation in Shaanxi to the emperor, and the emperor issued a decree to commend them.

古文：十二月丁丑，完颜娄室薨。
现代文：十二月九日，完颜娄室逝世。
English: On December 9, she passed away peacefully.

古文：乙酉，宗辅败宋刘维辅军。
现代文：十七日，宗辅打败宋刘维辅的军队。
English: On the 17th, Zong Fu defeated the army of Song Liu Wei Fu.

古文：壬辰，熙州降。
现代文：二十四日，熙州投降。
English: On the 24th, Xizhou surrendered.

古文：九年正月己亥朔，齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天会九年正月初一，齐、高丽、夏国遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the ninth year of Tianhui, Qi, Goryeo, and Xia all sent envoys to congratulate the emperor.

古文：戊申，命以徒门水以西，浑疃、星显、僝蠢三水以北闲田，给曷懒路诸谋克。
现代文：十日，命令把徒门水以西，浑疃、星显、亻孱蠢三水以北的空闲田地，划给曷懒路各位谋克。
English: On the 10th, the order was issued to allocate the idle fields west of Tumen Water and north of Mudan, Xingxian and Zangwu three waters to the lazy road.

古文：辛亥，蒲察鹘拔鲁、完颜忒里讨张万敌于白马湖，陷于敌。
现代文：十三日，蒲察鹘拔鲁、完颜忒里在白马湖讨伐张万敌，陷入敌人包围。
English: On the 13th day of the month, he fought against all enemies in Baima Lake and was surrounded by enemies.

古文：癸丑，以同中书门下平章事时立爱为侍中，知枢密院张忠嗣为宣政殿大学士、知三司使事。
现代文：十五日，任命同中书门下平章事时立爱为侍中，知枢密院张忠嗣为宣政殿大学士、知三司使事。
English: On the 15th, he appointed the disciple of the same school, the disciple of the same school, the disciple of the same school, the disciple of the same school, the disciple of the same school, the disciple of the same school, the disciple of the same school, the disciple of the same school, the disciple of the same school, the disciple of the same school, the disciple of the same school.

古文：宗弼、阿卢补抚定巩、洮、河、乐、西宁、兰、廓、积石等州。
现代文：宗弼、阿卢补抚定巩、洮、河、乐、西宁、兰、廓、积石等州。
English: Zonglu, Aluzhi, Fuzheng, Handan, He, Le, Xining, Lan, Gu, Jishan and other provinces.

古文：泾原、熙河两路皆平。
现代文：泾原、熙河两路都平定了。
English: Both the Hibara and Heihe roads have been leveled.

古文：四月己卯，诏 新徙戍边户，匮于衣食，有典质其亲属奴婢者，官为赎之。
现代文：四月十三日，诏令： 新近迁徙过去的戍边户，缺乏衣食，有把自己的亲属奴婢作为人质典押的，官府替他们赎出来。
English: On April 13th, the imperial edict stated that the government would ransom newly-migrated families from the past who lacked food and clothing, and who had held their relatives and servants as hostages.

古文：户计其口而有二三者，以官奴婢益之，使户为四口。
现代文：按户计有二、三口人的，把官府的奴婢给他们补充上，使每户为四口人。
English: If there are two or three people in a household, add the male and female slaves of the government to make four people in each household.

古文：又乏耕牛者，给以官牛，别委官劝督田作。
现代文：再有缺乏耕牛的人家，发给官牛，另外委派官吏规劝督促他们从事田间耕作。
English: In addition, people who lacked cattle for farming were given government cattle. In addition, government officials were appointed to persuade and urge them to engage in field farming.

古文：戍户及边军资粮不继，伞粟于民而与赈恤。
现代文：戍边户以及戍边军队物资粮食接济不上，从民间买粮食并且对他们赈济、抚恤。
English: Since it is not possible to provide material grain to the households and the military in Lop Nur, they buy grain from the people and provide them with subsidies and pensions.

古文：其续迁戍户在中路者，姑止之，即其地种艺，俟毕获而行，及来春农时，以至戍所。 
现代文：那些继续往边境迁移正在路途中的戍边户，姑且劝止他们，就在当地从事农业或其他事业，等到秋天收获后再前往，到来年春天农忙时节，以期到达戍守的地方。 
English: For those who are on their way to migrate to the border, I would like to advise them to engage in agriculture or other businesses in the local area, wait until the autumn harvest, and then go during the busy farming season in the spring of the coming year, in the hope of reaching the place where they stay.

古文：五月丙午，分遣使者诸路劝农。
现代文：五月十一日，分别派出使者到诸路去鼓励农事。
English: On May 11, envoys were sent to various regions to encourage farming.

古文：六月壬辰，赐昏德公、重昏侯时服各两袭。
现代文：六月二十七日，赐给昏德公、重昏侯时令服装各两套。
English: On June 27th, two sets of seasonal clothing were given to Dim Deguang and Chong Dumo respectively.

古文：八月辛巳，回鹘隈欲遣使来贡。
现代文：八月十七日，回鹘隈欲派使者来进贡。
English: On August 17th, Emperor Hui sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：九月己酉，和州回鹘执耶律大石之党撒八、迪里、突迭来献。
现代文：九月十六日，和州回鹘抓获耶律大石的党羽撒八、迪里、突迭来献。
English: On September 16th, the party of Ye Lu Daishi, who was captured by the Hui clique in Hechu, was presented to the emperor.

古文：十月戊寅，天清节，齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十月十五日，是天清节，齐、高丽、夏国派使者来祝贺。
English: On October 15, it was the Tianqing Festival. Qi, Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：撒离喝攻下庆阳。
现代文：撒离喝攻下庆阳。
English: Scatter away and attack Qingyang.

古文：慕洧以环州降。
现代文：慕洧献出环州投降。
English: Muxun surrenders Huanzhou.

古文：宗弼与宋吴玠战于和尚原，败绩。
现代文：宗弼和宋国吴在和尚原交战，被打败了。
English: Zonglu and Song Guo Wu fought in Monzhangyuan and were defeated.

古文：十一月己未，迁赵氏疏属于上京。
现代文：十一月二十六日，把赵氏家属分散迁到上京。
English: On November 26th, the Zhao family members were dispersed and moved to Shangjing.

古文：以陕西地赐齐。
现代文：把陕西的地盘赐给齐国。
English: The territory of Shaanxi was given to Qi.

古文：十年正月癸巳朔，齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天会十年正月初一日，齐、高丽、夏国派使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the tenth year of the Heavenly Society, Qi, Goryeo, and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate the Emperor.

古文：己酉，齐表谢赐地。
现代文：十七日，齐国上表感谢赐给陕西地。
English: On the 17th, the State of Qi sent a letter of thanks to Shaanxi.

古文：壬子，诏曰： 昔辽人分士庶之族，赋役皆有等差，其悉均之。 
现代文：二十日，诏令说： 往昔辽人划分士族和庶族，赋税差役都有等级差别，要完全把这些平均征收。 
English: On the 20th, the imperial edict said: In the past, the Liao people were divided into the warrior class and the commoners, and there were class differences in the taxation of servants, and these should be completely levied equally.

古文：二月庚午，赈上京路戍边猛安民。
现代文：二月八日，救济上京路戍边的猛安及平民。
English: On February 8th, relief came to Meng'an and civilians on the edge of Shangjing Road.

古文：四月丁卯，诏： 诸良人知情嫁奴者，听如故为妻，其不知而嫁者，去住悉从所欲。 
现代文：四月六日，诏令： 各良人家知情而把奴婢嫁出去的，听凭她仍然做人家的妻子；那些不知情而嫁出去的，离开还是住下完全听从本人的愿望。 
English: On the 6th of April, the imperial edict decreed: "Those who knowingly marry off their maidservants and maidservants shall remain their wives at their own discretion; those who unknowingly marry off their maidservants and maidservants shall leave and remain at their own discretion."

古文：移赉勃极烈，左副元帅宗翰朝京师。
现代文：移赉勃极烈、左副元帅宗翰到京师朝见皇上。
English: The movement was so strong that the Left Vice-Marshal Zonghan went to Beijing to meet the Emperor.

古文：庚午，以太祖孙亶为谙班勃极烈，皇子宗磐为国论忽鲁勃极烈，国论勃极烈宗干为国论左勃极烈，移赉勃极烈、左副元帅宗翰为国论右勃极烈兼都元帅，右副元帅宗辅为左副元帅。
现代文：九日，任命太祖的孙子为谙班勃极烈，皇帝的儿子宗磐为国论忽鲁勃极烈，国论勃极烈宗干为国论左勃极烈，移赉勃极烈、左副元帅宗翰为国论右勃极烈兼都元帅，右辅元帅宗辅为左副元帅。
English: On the 9th, the grandson of the great-great-grandfather was appointed as the grand marshal, the emperor's son, Zowan, was appointed as the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand marshal, the grand

古文：庚寅，闻鸭绿、混同江暴涨，命赈徙戍边户在混同江者。
现代文：二十九日，传来鸭绿江、混同江暴涨的消息，命令赈济、迁徙在混同江边的戍边户。
English: On the 29th, the news of the rapid rise of the Yalu River and the Yangtze River came, and the order was given to help and relocate the people living along the Yalu River.

古文：闰月辛卯，诏分遣鹘沙虎等十三人阅诸路丁壮，调赴军。
现代文：闰四月初一，诏令分别派遣鹘沙虎等十三人检阅诸路壮丁，调遣分赴各军队。
English: On the first day of the fourth lunar month, the imperial edict separately dispatched thirteen people, including the Bansha Tiger, to inspect all the able-bodied men and dispatch them to the various armies.

古文：七月甲午，赈泰州路戍边户。
现代文：七月甲午，赈济泰州路戍边户。
English: On the afternoon of July 1st, a house on Taizhou Road in Zhangjiakou was robbed.

古文：上如中京。
现代文：皇上往中京去。
English: The emperor went to Chukyo.

古文：九月，元帅右都监耶律余睹谋反，出奔。
现代文：九月，元帅右都监耶律余睹阴谋造反，逃亡在外。
English: In September, the marshal and right-wing prefectural governor Ye Lu witnessed a conspiracy to rebel and fled.

古文：其党燕京统军使萧高六伏诛，蔚州节度使萧特谋葛自杀。
现代文：他的同党燕京统军使萧高六伏法被杀，蔚州节度使萧特谋葛自杀。
English: Xiao Gaoliufu was killed by his fellow party member Yanjing Unification Army, and Ulshu Jiedu made Xiao Tezhuangge commit suicide.

古文：十月壬寅，天清节，大赦。
现代文：十月十五日，是天清节，大赦天下。
English: October 15th is the Tianqing Festival, a national holiday.

古文：齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：齐、高丽、夏国派遣使者来祝贺。
English: Qi, Goryeo, and Xia all sent envoys to congratulate him.

古文：上如兴中府。
现代文：皇上去兴中府。
English: The emperor went to Xingzhongfu.

古文：齐使使来告母丧。
现代文：齐国国君派使者来报告母亲丧事。
English: The sovereign of Qi sent an envoy to report on his mother's funeral.

古文：十一月癸亥，以武良谟为齐吊祭使。
现代文：十一月六日，派武良谟当赴齐吊祭使。
English: On November 6th, Wu Liangmo was sent as the envoy to Qi Hanging Festival.

古文：癸未，撒离喝请取剑外十三州，从之。
现代文：二十六日，撒离喝请求攻取剑外十三州，皇上听从了他的意见。
English: On the twenty-sixth day of the month, Saryakira made a request to capture the thirteen prefectures outside of Jian, and the emperor listened to his opinion.

古文：部族节度使土古厮捕斩余睹及其诸子，函其首来献。
现代文：部族节度使土古厮捕获并斩杀了余睹以及他的儿子们，包着他们的头颅来献。
English: The tribe's festival made the Tuku capture and slaughter Yuzheng and his sons, wrapping their heads to offer.

古文：十二月庚子，撒离喝克金州。
现代文：十二月十四日，撒离喝攻克金州。
English: On the 14th of December, Zhang Liangzhu invaded Jinzhou.

古文：上至自兴中府。
现代文：皇上从兴中府回到朝廷。
English: The emperor returned to the imperial court from Xingzhongfu.

古文：十一年正月丁巳朔，齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天会十一年正月初一，齐、高丽、夏国派遣使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eleventh year of the Heavenly Assembly, Qi, Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to congratulate the Emperor.

古文：丁卯，撒离喝败吴玠于饶峰关。戊辰，取洋州。
现代文：十一日，撒离喝在饶峰关打败吴。十二日，攻取洋州。
English: On the eleventh day, Salix defeated Wu at Raofenguan. On the twelfth day, he captured Yangzhou.

古文：甲戌，入兴元府。
现代文：十八日，进入兴元府。
English: On the 18th, it entered Xingyuanfu.

古文：二月己亥，元帅府言： 承诏赈军士，臣恐有司钱币将不继。请自元帅以下有禄者出钱助给之。 
现代文：二月十三日，元帅府说： 禀承皇帝诏令，赈济军士，臣恐怕有司的钱币将会接济不上，请求从元帅以下有俸禄的官员出钱帮助发给军士们。 
English: On February 13th, the marshal's office said: "Following the Emperor's edict to give money to the sergeants, I'm afraid we won't be able to give money to the sergeants. I'd like to ask salaried officials below the rank of marshal to help pay the money to the sergeants."

古文：诏曰： 官有府库而取于臣下，此何理耶？
现代文：皇上诏令 ：官署有府库却从臣下手中去取，这是什么道理呢？
English: Emperor's edict: What is the reason for the government office to have a treasury but to take it from the hands of the vassals?

古文：其悉从官给。 
现代文：当全部从官府中发给。 
English: When everything is issued from the government.

古文：八月甲申，黄龙府置钱帛司。
现代文：八月二日，黄龙府设置钱帛司。
English: On August 2nd, Huanglong Prefecture set up the Qianye Division.

古文：戊子，赵〈木咢〉诬告其父昏德公谋反，〈木咢〉及其婿刘文彦伏诛。
现代文：七日，赵礧诬告他的父亲昏德公阴谋造反，礧和他的女婿刘文彦伏法被杀。
English: On the seventh day, Zhao Zhen falsely accused his father, Comte Deguang, of plotting a rebellion, and Zhen and his son-in-law, Liu Wenyan, were killed.

古文：戊戌，诏曰： 比以军旅未定，尝命帅府自择人授官，今并从朝廷选注。 
现代文：十七日，诏令： 近日因为军旅不定，曾经命令帅府自己选择人才授给官职，现在一并听从朝廷选任。 
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict: Recently, because of the uncertainty of the military situation, the General Staff had ordered to choose their own talents to be assigned to official positions, and now they all obey the selection of the Imperial Court.

古文：十月丙申，天清节，齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十月十五日，天清节，齐、高丽、夏国遣使者来祝贺。
English: On October 15th, Tianqing Festival, Qi, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to congratulate.

古文：十一月丙寅，赈移懒路。
现代文：十一月十五日，赈济移懒路。
English: On November 15th, Lazy Road was moved.

古文：宗弼克和尚原。
现代文：宗弼攻克和尚原。
English: Zonglu defeated the Monk Yuan.

古文：十二月癸未，赈曷懒路。
现代文：十二月三日，赈济曷懒路。
English: On December 3rd, Lazy Road, Shijiazhuang.

古文：十二年正月辛亥朔，齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：天会十二年正月初一日，齐、高丽、夏国派使者来朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the twelfth year of the Heavenly Reunion, Qi, Goryeo and Xia Guo sent envoys to the Imperial Court to congratulate.

古文：甲子，初改定制度，诏中外。
现代文：十四日，开始改定制度，诏告中外。
English: On the 14th, the revision of the system began and was announced to the public.

古文：丙寅，如东京。
现代文：十六日，往东京去。
English: On the 16th, I left for Tokyo.

古文：二月丁酉，撒离喝败宋吴玠军于固镇。
现代文：二月十七日，撒离喝在固镇打败宋吴的军队。
English: On February 17th, Zhang Liang defeated Song Wu's army in Guzhen.

古文：四月，至自东京。
现代文：四月，皇上从东京回到朝廷。
English: In April, the Emperor returned to the Imperial Court from Tokyo.

古文：六月甲午，以阿卢补为元帅右都监。
现代文：六月十六日，任命职阿卢补为元帅右都监。
English: On June 16th, Alu Shu was appointed as the Marshal of the Right Capital.

古文：十月庚寅，天清节，齐、高丽、夏遣使来贺。
现代文：十月十五日，天清节，齐、高丽、夏国派遣使者来庆贺。
English: On October 15th, Tianqing Festival, Qi, Goryeo, and Xia sent envoys to celebrate.

古文：十三年正月丙午朔，日有食之。
现代文：天会十三年正月初一，有日食出现。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 13th year of the Heian period, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：己巳，上崩于明德宫，年六十一。
现代文：二十四日，太宗在明德宫逝世，享年六十一岁。
English: On the 24th, Emperor Taizong passed away at the age of 61, at the Mingde Palace.

古文：庚午，谙班勃极烈即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：二十五日，谙班勃极烈、太祖阿骨打的嫡长孙在太宗灵柩前即皇帝位。
English: On the 25th day of the month, the eldest legitimate grandson of Emperor Taizong's great-great-grandfather, Emperor Akechi, ascended the throne in front of Emperor Taizong's coffin.

古文：三月庚辰，上尊谥曰文烈皇帝，庙号太宗。
现代文：三月七日，熙宗皇帝尊谥先帝叫文烈皇帝，庙号太宗。
English: On March 7th, Emperor Xizong called Emperor Wenliang, with the temple name Taizong.

古文：乙酉，葬和陵。
现代文：十二日，将太宗安葬在和陵。
English: On the 12th, Emperor Taizong was buried in He Mausoleum.

古文：皇统四年，改号恭陵。
现代文：皇统四年，改和陵叫恭陵。
English: In the fourth year of imperial rule, the name of the mausoleum was changed to Gongling.

古文：五年，增上尊谥曰体元应运世德昭功哲惠仁圣文烈皇帝。
现代文：五年，在太宗谥号上增尊谥称体元应运世德昭功哲惠仁圣文烈皇帝。
English: In the fifth year, Emperor Taizong's posthumous name was changed to Emperor Saint Wenliang.

古文：贞元三年十一月戊申，改葬于大房山，仍号恭陵。
现代文：贞元三年十一月四日，又将文烈皇帝改葬在大房山，仍然号称恭陵。
English: On November 4th, the third year of the Zhengyuan era, Emperor Wenliang was reburied in Dafang Mountain, which is still known as Gongling.

