古文：《韦苏州集》中，有《逢杨开府》诗云： 少事武皇帝，无赖恃恩私。
现代文：《韦苏州集》里，有《逢杨开府》诗说： 少事武皇帝，无赖恃恩私。
English: In the "Weizhou Collection," there is a poem called "Feng Yang Kaifu" that says: "Emperor Wu, a ruffian, is a minor matter.

古文：身作里中横，家藏亡命儿。
现代文：身作里中横，家藏亡命儿。
English: He is a middle-of-the-road person, and his family is a fugitive.

古文：朝持樗蒲局，暮窃东邻姬。
现代文：朝持樗蒲局，暮窃东邻姬。
English: In the morning, it's Shobu, in the evening, it's Higashi-Nakahime.

古文：司隶不敢捕，立在白玉墀。
现代文：司隶不敢捕，立在白玉墀。
English: The magistrate did not dare to arrest him, but stood at the top of Baiyucun Mountain.

古文：骊山风雪夜，长杨羽猎时。
现代文：骊山风雪夜，长杨羽猎时。
English: On a windy and snowy night in Lushan, during the hunting of the Long Yang feather.

古文：一字都不识，饮酒肆顽痴。
现代文：一字都不识，饮酒肆顽痴。
English: Doesn't know a word, drinks like a fish.

古文：武皇升仙去，憔悴被人欺。
现代文：武皇升仙去，憔悴被人欺。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to heaven, but he was deceived by others.

古文：读书事已晚，把笔学题诗。
现代文：读书事已晚，把笔学题诗。
English: It's too late to study. Learn the poem.

古文：两府始收迹，南宫谬见推。
现代文：两府始收迹，南宫谬见推。
English: The two prefectures were the first to close, and Nangong Shuxian was the first to open.

古文：非才果不容，出守抚惸嫠。
现代文：非才果不容，出守抚惸嫠。
English: Talent or no talent, it's Fushimi time.

古文：忽逢杨开府，论旧涕俱垂。 
现代文：忽逢杨开府，论旧涕俱垂。 
English: Yang Kaifu suddenly appeared, talking about the old days.

古文：味此诗，盖应物自叙其少年事也，其不羁乃如此。
现代文：玩味此诗，乃是韦应物自写少年时历史，竟然放荡到如此地步。
English: The playfulness of this poem is Wei Yingwen's self-writing of his boyhood history, and how he could be so debauched.

古文：李肇《国史补》云： 应物为性高洁，鲜食寡欲，所居焚香扫地而坐，其为诗驰骤建安已还，各是风韵。 
现代文：李肇《国史补》说： 韦应物性情高洁，生活检朴，没有欲望，住的地方，烧香扫地然后才坐。他的诗很有建安风骨，寸青致过人。 
English: Li Zhao, "National History Supplement," said: Wei Ying's physical condition is high and clean, his life is simple, there is no desire, where he lives, he burns incense and sweeps the floor before sitting down. His poetry is very safe and stable, and he is very handsome.

古文：盖记其折节后来也。《唐史》失其事，不为立传。
现代文：这乃是他改正以后的事情。《唐书》丢掉这些事迹，不给他立传。
English: This is what happened after he corrected himself. "Tang Shu" discarded these deeds and did not establish a biography for him.

古文：高适亦少落魄，年五十始为诗，即工。
现代文：高适少年时也不得意，到了五十岁才学作诗，但一作就很好。
English: He wasn't good at it when he was a teenager, and only learned to write poetry at the age of fifty, but a poem is fine.

古文：皆天分超卓，不可以常理论云。
现代文：这都是天资过人，不能用常理论断的。
English: It's all a matter of natural talent, which can't always be determined by theory.

古文：应物为三卫，正天宝间，所为如是，而吏不敢捕，又以见时政矣。
现代文：韦应物为三卫郎，是在玄宗天宝年间，做事如此不法，然而官吏不敢捕捉，那么时政的好坏，也就可想而知了。
English: Wei Ying object is Sanwei Lang, it is in the Xuanzong Tianbao years, doing things so illegal, but officials dare not catch, then the current political situation is good or bad, it can be imagined.

