古文：吐蕃，本汉西羌之地，或云南凉秃发利鹿孤之后，其子孙以秃发为国号，语讹为吐蕃。
现代文：吐蕃，原居于汉朝西羌地区，有人说他们是南凉秃发利鹿孤的后裔，他的子孙以秃发为国号，语音讹变为吐蕃。
English: Tubo, originally lived in the Xidi region of the Han Dynasty. Some people say that they are the descendants of Nan Liang, a bald man from Lixianguo. His descendants use Bald as their country name, and the phonetic  becomes Tubo.

古文：国人号其主为赞普，置大论、小论以理国事。
现代文：吐蕃人将他们的国主称为赞普，设置大论、小论官以管理国事。
English: The people of Tubo referred to their sovereign as Zampu, and set up the major and minor officials to manage state affairs.

古文：其俗随畜牧无常居，然亦有城郭，都城号逻些城。
现代文：他们的风俗是随水草放牧而无固定居所，然而也有城郭，都城叫逻些城。
English: Their custom is to graze as the water and grass grow, and they have no fixed abode. However, they also have castles. The capital city is called Lozi City.

古文：不知节候，以麦熟为岁首。
现代文：不懂时令节候，以麦熟作为一年的开头。
English: They don't understand the seasonal seasons, so they start the year with wheat ripening.

古文：唐时屡为边患。
现代文：唐朝时吐蕃总是成为边境祸患。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the spade was always a border disaster.

古文：初，唐分天下为十道，河西、陇右三十三州，凉州最为大镇。
现代文：当初，唐朝将天下划分为十道，河西、陇右共三十三州，以凉州为最大的藩镇。
English: At first, the Tang Dynasty divided the country into ten provinces, with Hexi and Shiyu comprising a total of thirty-three provinces, with Liangzhou as the largest hanzhong.

古文：天宝置八监，牧马三十万，又置都护以控制之。
现代文：天宝年间设置八监，有牧马三十万，又设置都护以控制它。
English: During the Tenpo era, eight superintendents were set up, with 300,000 herdsmen and horses, and guards were set up to control it.

古文：安禄山之乱，肃宗在灵武，悉召河西戍卒收复两京，吐蕃乘虚取河西、陇右，华人百万皆陷于吐蕃。
现代文：安禄山之乱时，唐肃宗在灵武，全部征召河西戍守的士卒收复长安、洛阳两京，吐蕃乘虚而入袭取河西和陇右，百万汉人都陷于吐蕃手中。
English: During the An Lushan Rebellion, Tang Su Zong was in Lingwu, and all the soldiers who were called up to defend Hexi recaptured Chang'an and Luoyang, while Tubo took advantage of the situation to invade Hexi and Shiyu, and millions of Han people fell into Tubo's hands.

古文：开成时，朝廷尝遣使至西域，见甘、凉、瓜、沙等州城邑如故，陷吐蕃之人见唐使者旌节，夹道迎呼涕泣曰： 皇帝犹念陷吐蕃生灵否？ 
现代文：开成年间，朝廷曾派遣使者到西域，看见甘、凉、瓜、沙等州城邑仍如以前，陷于吐蕃的汉人看到唐朝使者的旌旗旄节，都夹立道旁迎接欢呼哭泣说 ：皇帝还记得陷于吐蕃的生灵百姓吗？ 
English: At the beginning of the year, the imperial court had sent an envoy to the western region, and saw that Gan, Liang, Gua, Sha and other provincial cities were still the same as before. When the Han people trapped in Tubo saw the Tang Dynasty envoy's flag and festival, they all stood by the roadside to greet the cheers and cries and said: Does the emperor still remember the living people trapped in Tubo?

古文：其人皆天宝中陷吐蕃者子孙，其语言小讹，而衣服未改。
现代文：那些汉人都是天宝年间陷于吐蕃的汉人的子孙，他们的言语已小有变异，而衣服形状还没改变。
English: Those Han people are the descendants of the Han people who were trapped in Tibet during the Tianbao period. Their language has changed slightly, but the shape of their clothes has not changed.

古文：至五代时，吐蕃已微弱，回鹘、党项诸羌夷分侵其地，而不有其人民。
现代文：到五代时，吐蕃势力已经衰弱，回鹘、党项等各羌族夷人分割侵占了他们的土地，而不要他们的人民。
English: By the time of the fifth generation, the power of the Tubo had weakened, and the Uighurs, Taecheng, and other Yi people divided and occupied their land, but not their people.

古文：值中国衰乱，不能抚有，惟甘、凉、瓜、沙四州常自通于中国。
现代文：正逢中原衰落动乱，不能安抚拥有西北，只有甘、凉、瓜、沙四州经常各自与中原相来往。
English: At the time of the Central Plains' decline and turmoil, it was not possible to pacify and possess the Northwest, and only the four states of Gan, Liang, Gua and Sha had regular contacts with the Central Plains.

古文：甘州为回鹘牙帐，而凉、瓜、沙三州将吏犹称唐官，数来请命。
现代文：甘州为回鹘人帅营所在地，而凉、瓜、沙三州将佐官吏还自称为唐朝官吏，经常向唐朝请求指示。
English: Ganzhou was the location of the camp of the commander-in-chief of the Uighurs, while the commanders-in-chief of the three states of Liang, Gua and Sha also called themselves officials of the Tang Dynasty and often requested instructions from the Tang Dynasty.

古文：自梁太祖时，常以灵武节度使兼领河西节度，而观察甘、肃、威等州，然虽有其名，而凉州自立守将。
现代文：到梁太祖时，常以灵武节度使兼掌河西节度，巡视按察甘、肃、威等州，然而即使有这样名义，凉州仍然自己拥立守卫的将领。
English: At the time of Liang Taizu, he often used the Lingwu Festival to also hold the Hexi Festival, and toured the provinces of Zagan, Su and Wei. However, even with such a name, Liangzhou still had its own guard generals.

古文：唐长兴四年，凉州留后孙超遣大将拓拔承谦及僧道士耆老杨通信等至京师，明宗拜孙超节度使。
现代文：后唐长兴四年，凉州留后孙超派遣大将拓拔承谦及僧道士耆老杨通信等人到京师，明宗授予孙超节度使之职。
English: Four years after the Tang and Changxing Dynasties, after Sun Chao stayed in Liangzhou, he sent the general Tuoba Chengqian and the monk Taoist Zou Lao Yang Communication and others to Beijing to study, and the Ming Dynasty awarded Sun Chao the degree of sedevacant.

古文：清泰元年，留后李文谦来请命。
现代文：清泰元年，留后李文谦前来听取指令。
English: In the first year of the Qing Dynasty, Li Wenqian came to listen to the instructions after staying behind.

古文：后数年，凉州人逐出文谦，灵武冯晖遣牙将吴继兴代文谦为留后，是时天福七年。
现代文：以后数年，凉州人驱赶走了李文谦，灵武冯晖派牙将吴继兴取代李文谦作为留后，这是天福七年。
English: In the next few years, Liangzhou people drove away Li Wenqian, and Lingwu Fengya sent Wu Jixing to replace Li Wenqian as the successor, which was a blessing of seven years.

古文：明年，晋高祖遣泾州押牙陈延晖赍诏书安抚凉州，凉州人共劫留延晖，立以为刺史。
现代文：第二年，晋高祖派泾州押牙陈延晖带着诏书前往安抚凉州，凉州人共同劫持了陈延晖，立陈延晖为刺史。
English: In the second year, Emperor Jingu's ancestor sent Chen Yanqi, the Azusa of Luzhou, with an imperial edict to pacify Liangzhou. Liangzhou people jointly kidnapped Chen Yanqi and set Chen Yanqi as the assassin.

古文：至汉隐帝时，凉州留后折逋嘉施来请命，汉即以为节度使。
现代文：到汉隐帝时，凉州留后折逋嘉施前来请求指令，汉隐帝即以他为节度使。
English: When he arrived at Emperor Han's court, Liangzhou stayed behind to ask for an order, and Emperor Han took him as an envoy.

古文：嘉施，土豪也。
现代文：嘉施，是凉州的土豪。
English: Jiasi is a local hero in Liangzhou.

古文：周广顺二年，嘉施遣人市马京师。
现代文：后周广顺二年，嘉施派人到京师买马。
English: Two years after Zhou Guangshun, Jia Shi sent people to Beijing to buy horses.

古文：是时枢密使王峻用事，峻故人申师厚者，少起盗贼，为兗州牙将，与峻相友善。后峻贵，师厚弊衣蓬首，日候峻出，马前诉以饥寒，峻未有以发。
现代文：这时后周由枢密使王峻掌权，王峻的好友申师厚，小时从盗贼起家，任兖州牙将，与王峻很友好，后来王峻显贵，申师厚穿着破衣，蓬乱着头发，每天等候王峻出来，在王峻马前诉说饥寒，王峻没有怎么打发他。
English: At this time, Wang Jun was put in power by the privy council. Wang Jun's good friend, Shen Shih Hou, who started out as a thief when he was young, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and was very friendly with Wang Jun. Later, Wang Jun was distinguished, and Shen Shih Hou wore tattered clothes and unkempt hair. He waited for Wang Jun to come out every day, and complained of hunger and cold in front of Wang Jun's horse. Wang Jun did not send him away.

古文：而嘉施等来请帅，峻即建言，凉州深入夷狄，中国未尝命吏，请帅募府率供奉官能往者。月余，无应募者，乃奏起师厚为左卫将军，已而拜河西节度使。
现代文：这时嘉施等人来京师请求朝廷委派将帅，王峻即向皇上建议说，凉州深入夷狄之地，中原政府未曾任命官吏，请招募帅府中能率领供奉官前往任职的人，一个多月，没有人应募，于是王峻上奏起用申师厚为左卫将军，不久又授他为河西节度使。
English: At this time, Jia Shi and others came to the Beijing division to request the imperial court to appoint a general. Wang Jun immediately suggested to the emperor that Liangzhou was deep in the land of Yidi, and the Central Plains government had not appointed officials. He asked to recruit people who could lead the officials to the post. For more than a month, no one responded to the recruitment. Therefore, Wang Jun started to use Shen Shi Hou as the left guard general, and soon awarded him as the Hexi Festival envoy.

古文：师厚至凉州，奏荐押牙副使崔虎心、阳妃谷首领沈念般等，及中国留人子孙王廷翰、温崇乐、刘少英为将吏，又自安国镇至凉州立三州以控扼诸羌，用其酋豪为刺史。
现代文：申师厚到凉州后，上奏推荐押衙副使崔虎心、阳妃谷首领沈念般等人，以及中原留在凉州的汉人子孙王延翰、温崇乐、刘少英等为将官佐吏，又从安国镇到凉州分立三州以控制扼守各羌族部落，任用当地酋长土豪为刺史。
English: After Shen Shih Hou arrived in Liangzhou, he recommended the vice-envoy Cui Huxin and the leader of Yangfei Valley Shen Nianbang, as well as the Chinese descendants of Wang Yanhan, Wen Chongle and Liu Shao Ying, who remained in Liangzhou in the Central Plains, to be the generals. In addition, he divided the three states from An Guozhen to Liangzhou to control and protect the Yi tribes, and appointed the local chiefs as the chiefs.

古文：然凉州夷夏杂处，师厚小人，不能抚有，至世宗时，师厚留其子而逃归，凉州遂绝于中国。
现代文：然而凉州夷族汉人杂处，申师厚原本识见才器狭小之人，不能安抚拥有民心。到周世宗时，申师厚留下自己的儿子而逃回中原，凉州于是与中原断绝来往。
English: However, Liangzhou was full of barbarians and Han Chinese, and Shen Shihou, who originally recognized that people with small talents could not be appeased, had the hearts of the people. By the time of Zhou Shizong, Shen Shihou left his son and fled back to the Central Plains, and Liangzhou then cut off contact with the Central Plains.

古文：独瓜、沙二州，终五代常来。
现代文：惟独瓜州和沙州，在整个五代时期都经常与中原相往来。
English: Only Guazhou and Shazhou, however, had frequent contacts with the Central Plains during the entire Five Dynasties period.

古文：沙州，梁开平中，有节度使张奉，自号 金山白衣天子 。
现代文：沙州，后梁开平年间，有叫张奉的节度使，自称为 金山白衣天子 。
English: In Shazhou, during the time of Houliang Kaiping, there was a ceremonial envoy called Zhang Bong, who called himself the Jinshan Baiyi Tianzi.

古文：至唐庄宗时，回鹘来朝，沙州留后曹义金亦遣使附回鹘以来，庄宗拜义金为归义军节度使、瓜沙等州观察处置等使。
现代文：到后唐庄宗时，回鹘来朝见，沙州留后曹义金也派遣使者跟随回鹘使者而来，庄宗任曹义金为归义军节度使，瓜、沙等州观察使、处置使。
English: After arriving in Tang, Zhuangzong sent an envoy to Huizhou to see the emperor, and after leaving Shazhou, Cao Yijin also sent an envoy to follow the envoy to Huizhou. Zhuangzong appointed Cao Yijin as the envoy to the festival of the returning rebels, and the envoy to Gua, Sha and other states to observe and deal with the situation.

古文：晋天福五年，义金卒，子元德立。
现代文：后晋天福五年，曹义金去世，儿子曹元德继位。
English: Five years after the enthronement of Tianfu, Cao Yijin died, and his son Cao Yuande succeeded him.

古文：至七年，沙州曹元忠、瓜州曹元深皆遣使来。
现代文：到七年，沙州曹地忠、瓜州曹元深都派遣使者前来。
English: In the seventh year, Cao DiZhong from Shazhou and Cao YuanShen from Guazhou both sent envoys.

古文：周世宗时，又以元忠为归义军节度使，元恭为瓜州团练使。
现代文：周世宗时，又以曹元忠为归义军节度使，曹元恭为瓜州团练使。
English: During Zhou Shizong's reign, Cao Yuanzhong was appointed as the envoy to celebrate the return of the rebels, and Cao Yuanxiong as the envoy to train the Guazhou regiments.

古文：其所贡冈砂、羚羊角、波斯锦、安西白絺、金星矾、大鹏砂、眊褐、玉团，皆因其来者以名见，而其卒立世次，史皆失其纪。
现代文：他们所进贡的硇砂、羚羊角、波斯锦、安西白繲、金星矾、大鹏砂、目毛褐、玉团，都以来进贡的人的名义奉献，而沙州首领的逝世、拥立以及世代次序，史传都失去记载。
English: The tributes paid by them, including the Borax, Antelope Horn, Persian Brocade, Anxi White Satin, Gold Star Satin, Dapeng Sand, Eye Hair Brown, and Jade Troupe, were all dedicated in the name of the person who paid the tribute, but the death, enthronement, and generation order of the leaders of Shazhou have all been lost to history.

古文：而吐蕃不见于梁世。
现代文：吐蕃在梁代不见于记载。
English: In the Liang Dynasty, there is no record of the Tuobao.

古文：唐天成三年，回鹘王仁裕来朝，吐蕃亦遣使附以来，自此数至中国。
现代文：后唐天成三年，回鹘王仁喻来朝见，吐蕃也派遣使者跟随仁喻而来，从此以后吐蕃使者多次来到中原。
English: Three years after the Tang Dynasty, Huizhou King Renyu came to see the emperor, and Tujia also sent an envoy to follow Renyu. Since then, Tujia envoys have come to the Central Plains many times.

古文：明宗尝御端明殿见其使者，问其牙帐所居，曰： 西去泾州二千里。 
现代文：唐明宗曾在端明殿接见吐蕃使者，问吐蕃主帅营帐所在的地方，回答说： 西距泾州二千里。 
English: Tang Mingzong once met with the emissary of the Tuyi Emperor in the Duanming Palace, asked the commander of the Tuyi Emperor where the camp was located, and replied: "It is two thousand miles west of Zhangzhou."

古文：明宗赐以虎皮，人一张，皆披以拜，委身宛转，落其氈帽，发乱如蓬，明宗及左右皆大笑。
现代文：明宗赐给吐蕃使者虎皮，每人一张，吐蕃使者都披着虎皮拜谢，弯腰回转，抖落了毡帽，露出乱如飞蓬的头发，明宗以及身边的人见后都大笑不止。
English: Mingzong gave tiger skins to the emissaries from Tibet, one for each person. The emissaries from Tibet were all wearing tiger skins, bowing and turning around, shaking off their skullcaps, and revealing their hair, which was in disarray. Mingzong and the people around him couldn't stop laughing when they saw them.

古文：至汉隐帝时，犹来朝，后遂不复至，史亦失其君世云。
现代文：到汉隐帝时，吐蕃仍来朝见，以后就不再来了，史书也失去了吐蕃的君主世系。
English: Up to the time of Emperor Han Yin, the Tubo still came to see the emperor, but later they no longer came, and the history books also lost the monarchical lineage of the Tubo.

