古文：侯瑱欧阳頠子纥吴明彻裴子烈侯瑱，字伯玉，巴西充国人也。
现代文：侯瑱字伯玉，巴西充国人。父亲侯弘远，世代为西蜀首领豪杰。
English: His father, Hou Hongyuan, was a great leader of the Western Shu Dynasty.

古文：父弘远，世为西蜀酋豪。蜀贼张文萼据白崖山，有众万人，梁益州刺史鄱阳王萧范命弘远讨之。
现代文：蜀的叛贼张文萼占据白崖山，有人马一万，梁朝益州刺史、鄱阳王萧范命令侯弘远讨伐他。
English: Zhang Wencai, the traitor of Shu, occupied Baiya Mountain, with ten thousand men and horses. Liang Zhaozhou, the ruler of Yizhou, and Xiao Fan, the king of Shenyang, ordered Hou Hongyuan to fight against him.

古文：弘远战死，瑱固请复仇，每战必先锋陷阵，遂斩文萼，由是知名。
现代文：侯弘远战死，侯瑱坚持请求替父亲报仇，每次作战都在前冲锋陷阵，于是杀了张文萼，因此被众人所知。
English: Hou Hongyuan died in battle, and Hou Yi insisted on seeking revenge for his father. He charged forward in every battle, and killed Zhang Wencai, thus becoming known to everyone.

古文：因事范，范委以将帅之任，山谷夷獠不宾附者，并遣瑱征之。
现代文：因为侍奉萧范，萧范委任他为将帅，山谷中的夷獠有不归附的，都派侯瑱去征讨。
English: Because he served Xiao Fan, Xiao Fan appointed him as the commander, and all the barbarians in the valley who did not surrender were sent to Houyi to fight.

古文：累功授轻车府中兵参军、晋康太守。
现代文：因多次立功被授职为轻车府中兵参军、晋康太守。
English: Due to his many meritorious deeds, he was awarded the post of light vehicle prefectural middle-ranking soldier, joined the army, and became the governor of Jinkang.

古文：范为雍州刺史。瑱除超武将军、冯翊太守。
现代文：萧范任雍州刺史时，侯瑱被任命为超武将军、冯翊太守。
English: When Xiao Fan was appointed as Yongzhou's prefect, Hou Yi was appointed as the supreme military commander and Feng Yu as the supreme governor.

古文：范迁镇合肥，瑱又随之。
现代文：萧范迁职镇守合肥，侯瑱又跟随他。
English: Xiao Fan moved to Hefei, and Hou Yi followed him.

古文：侯景围台城，范乃遣瑱辅其世子嗣，入援京邑。
现代文：侯景围攻台城，萧范于是派侯瑱辅佐他的大儿子萧嗣，去援救京都。
English: Houjing besieged Taicheng, and Xiao Fan then sent his eldest son, Xiao Zhi, to rescue Kyoto.

古文：京城陷，瑱与嗣退还合肥，仍随范徙镇湓城。
现代文：京城陷落，侯瑱和萧嗣退回合肥，又随萧范去镇守湓城。
English: After the fall of the capital, Hou Yi and Xiao Zi retired to Hefei, and followed Xiao Fan to defend the city of Handan.

古文：俄而范及嗣皆卒，瑱领其众，依于豫章太守庄铁。
现代文：不久萧范和萧嗣都去世了，侯瑱统率他们的人马，投靠豫章太守庄铁。
English: Soon after, both Xiao Fan and Xiao Zhi passed away, and Hou Xuan led their men and horses to rely on Yu Zhang, the grand marshal of Zhuangdi.

古文：铁疑之，瑱惧不自安，诈引铁谋事，因而刃之，据有豫章之地。
现代文：庄铁怀疑他，侯瑱害怕，不能安宁，假装拉庄铁商量事情，借此机会杀了他，据有豫章之地。
English: Zhuang Tie suspected him, Hou Yi was afraid and could not rest, pretending to pull Zhuang Tie to discuss the matter, taking this opportunity to kill him, according to Yu Zhang.

古文：侯景将于庆南略地至豫章，城邑皆下，瑱穷蹙，乃降于庆。
现代文：侯景的部将于庆向南侵夺地盘到豫章，城邑被攻下，侯瑱走投无路，于是向于庆投降。
English: Houjing's troops invaded Yuqing's territory to the south and captured the city of Yuanzhang. Houjing was cornered, so he surrendered to Yuqing.

古文：庆送瑱于景，景以瑱与己同姓，托为宗族，待之甚厚，留其妻子及弟为质。
现代文：于庆把侯瑱送到侯景处，侯景因为侯瑱和自己同姓，委身为宗族，待他很厚，把他的妻子儿女和弟弟留作人质。
English: Yu Qing sent Hou Yi to Hou Jing's place. Hou Jing treated him very generously because Hou Yi had the same surname as himself and was committed to the clan. He kept his wife, children and younger brother as hostages.

古文：遣瑱随庆平定蠡南诸郡。
现代文：派侯瑱随于庆去平定蠡南各郡。
English: He sent Houyi to follow Qing to pacify the counties in southern Anhui.

古文：及景败于巴陵，景将宋子仙、任约等并为西军所获，瑱乃诛景党与，以应义军，景亦尽诛其弟及妻子。
现代文：到侯景在巴陵战败时，侯景的部将宋子仙、任约等都被西军俘虏，侯瑱于是杀了侯景的党羽来响应义军，侯景也把他的妻子儿女和弟弟全部杀死。
English: By the time of Hou Jing's defeat in the Battle of Paling, Hou Jing's generals Song Zixian and Ren You had all been captured by the Western Army. Hou Yi then killed Hou Jing's followers in response to the rebels, and Hou Jing also killed his wife, children and younger brother.

古文：梁元帝授瑱武臣将军、南兗州刺史，郫县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：梁元帝任命侯瑱为武臣将军、南兖州刺史，封他为郫县侯，食邑一千户。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan appointed Hou Yi as the general of the army and the governor of Southern Zhangzhou, and made him the governor of Zhang County, with more than a thousand households.

古文：仍随都督王僧辩讨景，恒为前锋，每战却敌。
现代文：又跟随王僧辩讨伐侯景，一直为前锋，每战皆胜。
English: He also followed Wang Sangye to fight against Houjing, and has always been a striker, winning every battle.

古文：既复台城，景奔吴郡，僧辩使瑱率兵追之，与景战于吴松江，大败景，尽获其军实。
现代文：收复台城后，侯景逃向吴郡，王僧辩派侯瑱带兵追击，与侯景在吴松江交战，大败侯景，缴获了侯景的全部军器。
English: After the recapture of Taicheng, Houjing fled to Wu County. Wang Sangye sent Hou Yi to pursue him with soldiers, and fought with Houjing in Wuzhongjiang. He defeated Houjing and captured all of Houjing's military equipment.

古文：进兵钱塘，景将谢答仁、吕子荣等皆降。
现代文：又进军钱塘，侯景的部将谢答仁、吕子荣等都投降。
English: They also marched into Qiantang. Houjing's generals Xie Dairen and Lü Zirong surrendered.

古文：以功除南豫州刺史，镇于姑熟。
现代文：按功劳被授职为南豫州刺史，在姑熟镇守。
English: According to his merits, he was awarded the post of South Henan Provincial Historian, and became the governor of Guju Town.

古文：承圣二年，齐遣郭元建出自濡须，僧辩遣瑱领甲士三千，筑垒于东关以捍之，大败元建。
现代文：承圣二年，北齐派郭元建从濡须而出，王僧辩派侯瑱带领三千披甲士兵，在东关筑垒抵御，大败郭元建。
English: In the second year of his consecration, Guo Yuanjian of the Northern Qi faction marched out from Nuxu, and Wang Sangye sent Hou Yi to lead three thousand armored soldiers to build a fort in Dongguan to resist, and defeated Guo Yuanjian.

古文：除使持节、镇北将军，给鼓吹一部，增邑二千户。
现代文：侯瑱被任命为使持节、镇北将军，送给一部鼓吹，食邑增至二千户。
English: Hou Yi was appointed as the commander of Zhenbei and given to a group of propagandists, and the number of food villages increased to two thousand.

古文：西魏来寇荆州，王僧辩以瑱为前军，赴援，未至而荆州陷。瑱之九江，因卫晋安王还都。承制以瑱为侍中、使持节、都督江晋吴齐四州诸军事、江州刺史，改封康乐县公，邑五千户，进号车骑将军。
现代文：西魏进攻荆州，王僧辩派侯瑱为前军，赴援荆州，还没有赶到，荆州就已陷落，侯瑱去九江，护卫晋安王回都城，承皇帝旨意以侯瑱为侍中，使持节，都督江州、晋州、吴州、齐州四州诸军事，江州刺史，改封侯瑱为康乐县公，食邑五千户，晋号车骑将军。
English: The Western Wei Dynasty attacked Jingzhou. Wang Sangye sent Hou Yi as the vanguard. He went to support Jingzhou. Before he arrived, Jingzhou had fallen. Hou Yi went to Jiujiang to escort King Jinan back to the capital city. By the emperor's will, Hou Yi was appointed as the attendant, the official of the festival, the military governor of Jiangzhou, Jinzhou, Wuzhou, and the four states of Quizhou, and the historian of Jiangzhou. Hou Yi was given the title of Kangle County official, 5,000 households of food villages, and the general of Jin.

古文：司徒陆法和据郢州，引齐兵来寇，乃使瑱都督众军西讨，未至，法和率其部北度入齐。
现代文：司徒卢法和占据郢州，带领北齐兵进犯，于是派侯瑱统率众军向西讨伐，还没有到达，卢法和率领所部人马北渡进入北齐。
English: When Lutfa of the Stuarts occupied Bozhou and led the North Qi soldiers to attack, he sent Hou Xiangtong to lead the army to fight to the west. Before they arrived, Lutfa and his men led by Ma Beidu entered North Qi.

古文：齐遣慕容恃德镇于夏首，瑱控引西还，水陆攻之，恃德食尽，请和，瑱还镇豫章。
现代文：北齐派慕容恃德在夏首镇守，侯瑱勒马引兵西还，水陆联攻，慕容恃德粮食没有了，求和，侯瑱返回镇守豫章。
English: The Northern Qi sent Murong Shunde to defend the town in Xia Shou, Hou Yu Lema led the troops to the west, the water and land combined attack, Murong Shunde ran out of grain and sued for peace, Hou Yu returned to defend the town of Yuzhang.

古文：僧辩使其弟僧忄音率兵与瑱共讨萧勃，及高祖诛僧辩，僧忄音阴欲图瑱而夺其军，瑱知之，尽收僧忄音徒党，僧忄音奔齐。
现代文：王僧辩派他弟弟王僧忄音率军和侯瑱共同讨伐萧勃，到高祖杀王僧辩时，王僧忄音暗地里想图谋侯瑱并夺取他的军队，侯瑱知道后，全部拘捕了王僧忄音的同党，王僧忄音逃奔北齐。
English: Wang Soen sent his brother Wang Soen and his army to fight against Xiao Bo together with Hou Yi. When Gaozu killed Wang Soen, Wang Soen secretly tried to plot against Hou Yi and capture his army. After Hou Yi found out, he arrested all of Wang Soen's comrades. Wang Soen fled to Beiqi.

古文：绍泰二年，以本号加开府仪同三司，馀并如故。
现代文：绍泰二年，侯瑱以原来的称号晋升为开府仪同三司，其他官衔不变。
English: In the second year of Shao Tai, Hou Yi was promoted to the third division of Kaifu ceremony with the original title, and other official titles remained unchanged.

古文：是时，瑱据中流，兵甚强盛，又以本事王僧辩，虽外示臣节，未有入朝意。
现代文：此时，侯瑱占据中游，兵力强盛，又因为原来侍奉王僧辩，虽然表面上表示臣服，但实际上没有入朝的意思。
English: At this time, Hou Yi occupied the middle reaches of the river, with a strong army, and because he had previously served the king, although he outwardly showed submission, he actually had no intention of entering the imperial court.

古文：初，余孝顷为豫章太守，及瑱镇豫章，乃于新吴县别立城栅，与瑱相拒。
现代文：起先，余孝顷任豫章太守，到侯瑱镇守豫章后，余孝顷就在新吴县另立城栅，与侯瑱对峙。
English: At first, Yu Xiaohua was appointed as the governor of Yuzhang. After he went to Houyi Town to guard Yuzhang, Yu Xiaohua built another city gate in Xinwu County to confront Houyi.

古文：瑱留军人妻子于豫章，令从弟奫知后事，悉众以攻孝顷。
现代文：侯瑱把军人的妻子儿女留在豫章，命令堂弟侯觺主持后事，自己率全部人马攻打余孝顷。
English: Hou Yi left the soldiers' wives and children in Yuzhang, ordered his cousin Hou Yi to preside over the aftermath, and led all his men and horses to attack Yu Xiaohao.

古文：自夏及冬，弗能克，乃长围守之，尽收其禾稼。
现代文：从夏天到冬天，未能攻克，于是长久围困，把他的庄稼全部收获。
English: From summer to winter, unable to conquer, he besieged it for a long time, harvesting all his crops.

古文：奫与其部下侯方儿不协，方儿怒，率所部攻奫，虏掠瑱军府妓妾金玉，归于高祖。
现代文：侯觺和他的部下俟方儿不和，俟方儿生气，率领所部人马攻打侯觺，虏掠了侯瑱军府的妓妾和金玉，归依高祖。
English: Hou Xuan and his subordinates were at odds with Gao Fang'er, and Gao Fang'er became angry. He led his men to attack Hou Xuan and plundered the prostitutes, concubines, and gold and jewels from Hou Xuan's military headquarters, and returned them to Gao Zu.

古文：瑱既失根本，兵众皆溃，轻归豫章，豫章人拒之，乃趋湓城，投其将焦僧度。
现代文：侯瑱已经失去了根本，军队就都溃散，轻捷地回到豫章，豫章人阻止他们，又去到湓城，投奔侯瑱的部将焦僧度。
English: Hou Yi had already lost his base, and his army was scattered. They easily returned to Yuzhang. The people of Yuzhang stopped them, and they went to Lucheng to join Hou Yi's general Jiao Zangdu.

古文：僧度劝瑱投齐，瑱以高祖有大量，必能容己，乃诣阙请罪，高祖复其爵位。
现代文：焦僧度劝侯瑱投奔北齐，侯瑱认为高祖宽宏大量，一定能够宽容自己，于是去高祖的殿堂请罪，高祖恢复了他的爵位。
English: Jiao Zangdu advised Hou Yi to go to Beiqi. Hou Yi thought that Gao Zu was a magnanimous man and would surely be able to tolerate himself, so he went to Gao Zu's hall of fame to plead guilty, and Gao Zu restored his title.

古文：永定元年，授侍中、车骑将军。
现代文：永定元年，任命侯瑱为侍中、车骑将军。
English: In the first year of Yongding, he appointed Hou Yi as a chamberlain and cavalry general.

古文：二年，进位司空。
现代文：二年，升任司空。
English: Two years later, he was promoted to Sora.

古文：王琳至于沌口，周文育、侯安都并没，乃以瑱为都督西讨诸军事。
现代文：王琳到达沌口，周文育、侯安都覆没，于是以侯瑱为都督西讨诸军事。
English: When Wang Lin arrived at Chaonkou, Zhou Wenyu and Hou An were both dead, so he appointed Hou Yi as the governor of the west to lead the military.

古文：瑱至于梁山。
现代文：侯瑱到达梁山。
English: Hou Yi arrived at Liangshan.

古文：世祖即位，进授太尉，增邑千户。
现代文：世祖即位，晋职为太尉，增加食邑一千户。
English: The ancestor ascended the throne, was promoted to the rank of captain, and increased the number of households by a thousand.

古文：王琳至于栅口，又以瑱为都督，侯安都等并隶焉。
现代文：王琳到达栅口，朝廷以侯瑱为都督，侯安都等都隶属于他。
English: When Wang Lin arrived at the gate, the imperial court made Hou Yi the governor, and Hou Andu and others were all subordinate to him.

古文：瑱与琳相持百馀日，未决。
现代文：侯瑱和王琳相持了一百多天，没有决战。
English: Hou Yi and Wang Lin held each other for more than a hundred days without a decisive battle.

古文：天嘉元年二月，东关春水稍长，舟舰得通，琳引合肥漅湖之众，舳舻相次而下，其势甚盛。
现代文：天嘉陈书元年二月，东关的春水稍微长高，船舰得以通行，王琳带领合肥、氵巢湖的人马，船只依次序而下，气势很盛。
English: In February of the first year of Tian Jia Chen Shu, the spring water of Dongguan was slightly higher, and ships were able to pass. Wang Lin led the people and horses of Hefei and Binhai Lake, and the ships went down in order, and the momentum was very strong.

古文：瑱率军进兽槛洲，琳亦出船列于江西，隔洲而泊。
现代文：侯瑱率军进到兽槛洲，王琳也把船排列在长江西岸，隔着兽槛洲停泊。
English: Hou Yi led the army into the Zoodangzhou, and Wang Lin also lined up the ships on the west bank of the Yangtze River and anchored across the Zoodangzhou.

古文：明日合战，琳军少却，退保西岸。
现代文：翌日交战，王琳的部队稍稍退却，退守西崖。
English: The next day they fought, and Wang Lin's troops retreated a little, retreating to the West Cliff.

古文：及夕，东北风大起，吹其舟舰，舟舰并坏，没于沙中，溺死者数十百人。
现代文：到了晚上，刮起了很强的东北风，吹打王琳的船舰，船舰都坏了，沉没在沙中，淹死了数十上百人。
English: In the evening, a strong northeasterly wind blew and battered Wang Lin's ship. The ship broke and sank in the sand, drowning dozens and hundreds of people.

古文：浪大不得还浦，夜中又有流星坠于贼营。
现代文：因浪大不能回到岸边，半夜又有一颗流星坠落在敌营中。
English: Unable to return to the shore because of the large waves, another meteor crashed into the enemy camp in the middle of the night.

古文：及旦风静，琳入浦治船，以荻船塞于浦口，又以鹿角绕岸，不敢复出。
现代文：到天亮时风平息下来，王琳到水滨修船，用荻船堵塞在河流的入江口，又用障碍物围绕在水岸，不敢再出兵。
English: By dawn, when the wind calmed down, Wang Lin went to the waterfront to repair the boat, using a barge to block the river's entrance, and using obstacles to surround the waterfront. She did not dare to send troops again.

古文：是时，西魏遣大将军史宁蹑其上流，瑱闻之，知琳不能持久，收军却据湖浦，以待其敝。
现代文：这时，西魏大将军史宁到了王琳的上游，侯瑱听说了，知道王琳不能维持多久了，收军退据湖边，等待王琳失败。
English: At this time, the West Wei general Shi Ning arrived in the upper reaches of Wang Lin. Hou Yi heard about it and knew that Wang Lin could not be maintained for long. He withdrew his army to the lake and waited for Wang Lin to fail.

古文：及史宁至，围郢州，琳恐众溃，乃率船舰来下，去芜湖十里而泊，击柝闻于军中。
现代文：史宁到来后，围攻郢州，王琳担心人马溃散，于是率领船舰下去，去到芜湖十里远才停泊，打更的声音在军中都听得见。
English: After the arrival of Suning, he besieged Bozhou. Wang Lin was worried that the troops would be scattered, so he led the ship down and went to Bozhou Lake ten miles away before anchoring. The sound of the battle could be heard in the army.

古文：明日，齐人遣兵数万助琳，琳引众向梁山，欲越官军以屯险要。
现代文：翌日，北齐派几万军队援助王琳，王琳带领人马奔向梁山，想越过官军占据险要地形。
English: The next day, Northern Qi sent tens of thousands of troops to aid Wang Lin. Wang Lin led the troops to Liangshan, hoping to occupy the critical terrain by crossing the government troops.

古文：齐仪同刘伯球率兵万馀人助琳水战，行台慕容恃德子子会领铁骑二千，在芜湖西岸博望山南，为其声势。
现代文：北齐的仪同刘伯球率领一万多人援助王琳水战，军中代行朝廷之职的官吏慕容恃德的儿子慕容子会带领二千铁骑兵，处于芜湖西岸的博望山南面，以壮王琳的声势。
English: North Qi's Yi and Liu Boqiu led more than ten thousand people to assist Wang Lin in the naval battle. Murong Zi, the son of Murong Zide, an official who performed the duties of the imperial court in the army, led two thousand iron cavalry to the south of Bohang Mountain on the west coast of Lake Lugu to strengthen Wang Lin's reputation.

古文：瑱令军中晨炊蓐食，分搥荡顿芜湖洲尾以待之。
现代文：侯瑱命令清晨烧火做饭，在草席上吃饭，分头驻扎在芜湖洲尾等待敌军。
English: Hou Yi ordered to cook on a fire in the morning, eat on a straw mat, and wait for the enemy at the end of the lake.

古文：将战，有微风至自东南，众军施拍纵火。
现代文：就要开战了，从东南刮起一阵微风，部队抛掷火种放火。
English: As the battle was about to begin, a breeze blew from the southeast, and the troops threw kindling to start a fire.

古文：定州刺史章昭达乘平虏大舰，中江而进，发拍中于贼舰，其馀冒突、青龙，各相当值。
现代文：定州刺史章昭达乘坐平虏大舰，在长江中间前进，发拍石打中敌舰，其余的冒突舰、青龙舰，也都攻向敌舰。
English: Dingzhou Zhi Zhang Zhaoda, riding on a large ship, advanced in the middle of the Yangtze River, hitting the enemy ship with a stone, and the rest of the assault ships, the Qinglong ship, also attacked the enemy ship.

古文：又以牛皮冒蒙冲小船，以触贼舰，并熔铁洒之。
现代文：又用牛皮冒蒙冲小船撞击敌舰，并把融化的铁水投撒到敌舰外。
English: He also used a cowhide boat to ram the enemy ship, and threw molten iron water outside the enemy ship.

古文：琳军大败。
现代文：王琳的军队大败。
English: Wang Lin's army suffered a great defeat.

古文：其步兵在西岸者，自相蹂践，马骑并淖于芦荻中，弃马脱走以免者十二三。
现代文：他在西岸的步兵，自相践踏，马匹都陷进芦荻的烂泥中，舍弃坐骑脱身逃跑的有十分之二三。
English: His infantry on the west bank trampled each other, the horses sank into the reedy mud, and two-thirds of them abandoned their mounts and fled.

古文：尽获其舟舰器械，并禽齐将刘伯球、慕容子会，自馀俘馘以万计。
现代文：缴获了敌军的全部船舰器械，并生擒北齐将领刘伯球、慕容子会，投降的、俘虏的敌人数以万计。
English: They captured all the ships and equipment of the enemy, and captured the Beiqi generals Liu Boqiu and Murongzi Hui alive. The number of surrendered and captured enemies was in the tens of thousands.

古文：琳与其党潘纯陀等乘单舴艋冒阵走至湓城，犹欲收合离散，众无附者，乃与妻妾左右十馀人入齐。
现代文：王琳和他的党羽潘纯等乘一条小船突围逃到湓城，还想收拢逃散的人马，没有人归附他，于是和妻妾左右十多人去到北齐。
English: Wang Lin and his henchmen Pan Chun and others took a small boat to break through the encirclement and escape to Lucheng. They also wanted to round up the people who had fled. No one joined him, so he and his wife and concubine and about ten other people went to Beiqi.

古文：其年，诏以瑱为都督湘、巴、郢、江、吴等五州诸军事，镇湓城。
现代文：当年，诏令侯瑱为都督湘州、巴州、郢州、江州、吴州等五州军事，镇守湓城。
English: In that year, General Hou Yi was the military governor of five states, including Hunan, Bazhou, Ganzhou, Jiangzhou and Wuzhou, and the town guard of Fucheng.

古文：周将贺若敦、独孤盛等寇巴、湘，又以瑱为西讨都督，与盛战于西江口，大败盛军，虏其人马器械，不可胜数。
现代文：北周将领贺若敦、独孤盛等进犯巴州、湘州，又任命侯瑱为西讨都督，和独孤盛在西江口交战，大败独孤盛的部队，掳掠他的人马和器械，不可胜数。
English: Northern Zhou generals such as He Ruodong and Dukuosheng invaded Bazhou and Xiangzhou, and appointed Hou Yi as the governor of the Western Zhou, and fought with Dukuosheng at the mouth of the West River, defeated Dukuosheng's troops, and plundered countless of his men and equipment.

古文：以功授使持节、都督湘、桂、郢、巴、武、沅六州诸军事、湘州刺史，改封零陵郡公，邑七千户，馀如故。
现代文：按功劳授职为使持节，都督湘州、桂州、郢州、巴州、武州、沅州等六州诸军事、湘州刺史，改封为零陵郡公，食邑七千户，其他职衔不变。
English: According to the merit-based awarding of posts, the six states including Hunan, Guizhou, Ganzhou, Bazhou, Wuzhou and Ganzhou, including the military and the history of Hunan, have been changed to Ziling County, with 7,000 households, and other titles remain unchanged.

古文：二年，以疾表求还朝。
现代文：二年，因病上表请求回朝。
English: Two years later, he requested to return to Japan due to illness.

古文：三月，于道薨，时年五十二。
现代文：三月，在途中去世，时年五十二岁。
English: He died en route in March, at the age of fifty-two.

古文：赠侍中、骠骑大将军、大司马，加羽葆、鼓吹、班剑二十人，给东园秘器，谥曰壮肃。
现代文：追任为侍中、骠骑大将军、大司马，追送羽葆、鼓吹、班剑二十人，送给东园秘器，谥号壮肃。
English: He was posthumously appointed as a chamberlain, grand cavalry general, and grand steed. He was followed by 20 people who sent feathers, trumpets, and swords. He was given the East Garden's secret utensils. His posthumous name was Zhuang Su.

古文：其年九月，配享高祖庙庭。子净藏嗣。
现代文：当年九月，配享高祖庙庭，其子侯净藏嗣爵。
English: In September of that year, Gao Zu Miao Yuan and his son, Jingsang Heijie, were awarded the title of Gao Zu Miao Yuan.

古文：净藏尚世祖第二女富阳公主，以公主除员外散骑侍郎。太建三年卒，赠司徒主簿。净藏无子，弟就袭封。欧阳頠，字靖世，长沙临湘人也。
现代文：欧阳頠字靖世，长沙临湘人。
English: Ouyang Zhaoji Jing Shi, Changsha Lin Xiang Ren.

古文：为郡豪族。
现代文：是本郡豪族。
English: They are the county's local heroes.

古文：祖景达，梁代为本州治中。
现代文：祖父欧阳景达，在梁代任本州侍中。
English: His grandfather, Ouyang Jingda, served as an aide-de-camp to Liang.

古文：父僧宝，屯骑校尉。
现代文：父亲欧阳僧宝，任屯骑校尉。
English: His father, Ouyang Monk Bao, was a cavalry lieutenant.

古文：頠少质直有思理，以言行笃信著闻于岭表。
现代文：欧阳頠年轻时正直，有思辩能力，因为非常信守言行而在岭表很闻名。
English: When he was young, Ouyang Xuan was honest, had the ability to reason, and was well-known at the Ling table for being very faithful to his words and deeds.

古文：父丧毁瘠甚至。
现代文：父亲死后因悲痛而消瘦了很多。
English: After my father's death, I lost a lot of weight due to grief.

古文：家产累积，悉让诸兄。
现代文：累积的家产全部让给各位兄长。
English: All the accumulated family property was transferred to the brothers.

古文：州郡频辟不应，乃庐于麓山寺傍，专精习业，博通经史。
现代文：州郡多次征召也不去，于是在麓山寺旁边居住，专攻学业，对经史懂得很多。
English: He was repeatedly conscripted by the prefectural government but refused to go, so he lived next to the Fushan Temple, specializing in his studies and knowing a lot about the history of scripture.

古文：年三十，其兄逼令从宦，起家信武府中兵参军，迁平西邵陵王中兵参军事。
现代文：三十岁时，他哥哥逼迫他入仕，离家出任信武府中兵参军，后又迁任平西邵陵王中兵参军事。
English: At the age of thirty, his brother forced him to join the army, and he left home to join the army as a soldier from Xinwu Prefecture. Later, he was transferred to the military as a soldier from Shaoling Wang in Pingxi.

古文：梁左卫将军兰钦之少也，与頠相善，故頠常随钦征讨。
现代文：梁朝左卫将军兰钦是年轻人，和欧阳頠友善，所以欧阳頠经常跟随兰钦征讨。
English: Liang Chao Zuwei's general Lan Qin was a young man, and he was friendly with Ouyang Zang, so Ouyang Zang often followed Lan Qin to go to war.

古文：钦为衡州，仍除清远太守。
现代文：兰钦治理衡州，又被授职为清远太守。
English: Lanqin governed Hengzhou, and was also awarded the post of Qingyuan governor.

古文：钦南征夷獠，擒陈文彻，所获不可胜计，献大铜鼓，累代所无，頠预其功。
现代文：兰钦向南征讨夷獠，生擒陈文彻，俘获的人和物不可胜计，奉献的大铜鼓，是各代都没有的，欧阳頠也有一份功劳。
English: Lanqin went to the south to fight against the barbarians, Chen Wencher was captured alive, and the captured people and things are incalculable. The dedication of the large bronze drum is unprecedented in all generations, and Ouyang Xuan also has a merit.

古文：还为直阁将军，仍除天门太守，伐蛮左有功。
现代文：回来后被任命为直将军，又被任命为天门太守，讨伐蛮时辅佐有功。
English: After his return, he was appointed as a direct general, and was also appointed as the governor of Tianmen. He was a valuable assistant during the crusade against the barbarians.

古文：刺史庐陵王萧续深嘉之，引为宾客。
现代文：刺史庐陵王萧续非常赞赏他，揽为宾客。
English: He was highly appreciated by King Xiao Rui of Jishi Mausoleum, who invited him as a guest.

古文：钦征交州，复启頠同行。
现代文：兰钦征讨交州，又劝欧阳頠同行。
English: Lan Qin enlisted to negotiate with Jiaozhou, and advised Ouyang Jie to accompany him.

古文：钦度岭以疾终，頠除临贺内史，启乞送钦丧还都，然后之任。
现代文：兰钦越过岭时因病去世，欧阳頠被授为临贺内史，启奏请求送兰钦遗体回都城，然后到任。
English: Lanqin passed away due to illness while crossing the ridge. Ouyang Jie was awarded the title of Linhe Inner Historian. He requested that Lanqin's body be sent back to the capital, and then took office.

古文：时湘衡之界五十馀洞不宾，敕令衡州刺史韦粲讨之，粲委頠为都督，悉皆平殄。
现代文：当时，湘州、衡州交界的五十多个洞不臣服，诏令衡州刺史韦粲讨伐他们，韦粲派欧阳頠为都督，全部都平定消灭。
English: At that time, more than fifty dongs on the border between Hunan and Hengzhou did not submit, and the emperor ordered Hengzhou to assassinate Shi Weiqi to fight them, and Wei Wei sent Ouyang Jie as the governor, and all of them were eliminated.

古文：粲启梁武，称頠诚干，降诏褒赏，仍加超武将军，征讨广、衡二州山贼。
现代文：韦粲启奏梁武帝，声称欧阳頠真诚能干，梁武帝于是下诏嘉奖，又任越武将军，征讨广州、衡州的山贼。
English: Wei Zheng appealed to Emperor Liangwu, claiming that Ouyang Zheng was sincere and capable. Emperor Liangwu then issued an award, and appointed him as the general of Yuewu, to investigate the bandits in Guangzhou and Hengzhou.

古文：侯景构逆，粲自解还都征景，以頠监衡州。
现代文：侯景叛乱，韦粲自作主张回都征讨侯景，用欧阳頠督管衡州。
English: After the rebellion of Houjing, Wei Wei made his own proposal to go back to the capital to conquer Houjing, and used Ouyang Xuan as the governor of Hengzhou.

古文：京城陷后，岭南互相吞并，兰钦弟前高州刺史裕攻始兴内史萧绍基，夺其郡。
现代文：京城陷落后，岭南互相吞并，兰钦的弟弟前任高州刺史兰裕攻打始兴内史萧绍基，夺取了他的辖郡。
English: After the fall of Beijing, Lingnan annexed each other, and Lanqin's younger brother Gaozhou's predecessor, Gaozhou Zhishilanyu, attacked Shi Xingnai's successor, Shi Xiaoshaoji, and seized his county.

古文：裕以兄钦与頠有旧，遣招之，頠不从。
现代文：兰裕因为他哥哥和欧阳頠有交情，派人招揽他，欧阳頠没有顺从。
English: Lan Yu, because of his brother's friendship with Ouyang Xuan, sent someone to recruit him, but Ouyang Xuan did not comply.

古文：乃谓使云： 高州昆季隆显，莫非国恩，今应赴难援都，岂可自为跋扈。 
现代文：于是对使者说： 高州兄弟显赫，是国家的恩惠，如今应该奔赴危难援救京都，怎么能为自己专横夺权。 
English: So he said to the envoy: Gaozhou brothers are prominent, they are a boon to the country, now they should rush to rescue Kyoto, how can they arbitrarily seize power for themselves.

古文：及高祖入援京邑，将至始兴，頠乃深自结托。
现代文：到高祖去援救京都，快到始兴时，欧阳頠严辞拒绝了兰裕。
English: He went to Gaozu to rescue Kyoto, and when it was about to begin to prosper, Ouyang Jie sternly refused Lan Yu.

古文：裕遣兵攻頠，高祖援之，裕败，高祖以王怀明为衡州刺史，迁頠为始兴内史。
现代文：兰裕派兵攻打欧阳頠，高祖援，兰裕战败，高祖任命王怀明为衡州刺史，调欧阳頠为始兴内史。
English: Lan Yu sent troops to attack Ouyang Xuan, Gao Zu supported him, Lan Yu was defeated, Gao Zu appointed Wang Huiming as the chief historian of Hengzhou, and changed Ouyang Xuan to the chief historian of Shixing.

古文：高祖之讨蔡路养、李迁仕也，頠率兵度岭，以助高祖。
现代文：高祖讨伐蔡路养、李迁仕时，欧阳頠越过岭来援助高祖。
English: When Gao Zu was fighting against Cai Luyang and Li Qianshi, Ouyang Xuan crossed the ridge to help Gao Zu.

古文：及路养等平，頠有功，梁元帝承制以始兴郡为东衡州，以頠为持节、通直散骑常侍、都督东衡州诸军事、云麾将军、东衡州刺史，新豊县伯，邑四百户。
现代文：蔡路养等被平定，欧阳頠立有战功，梁元帝秉承皇帝旨意以始兴郡为东衡州，任命欧阳頠为持节、通直散骑常侍、都督东衡州诸军事、云麾将军、东衡州刺史，封为新丰县伯，食邑四百户。
English: Cai Luyang and others were subdued, Ouyang Yao distinguished himself in the war, and Emperor Liang Yuan, adhering to the emperor's will, designated Shixing County as Dongheng County, appointed Ouyang Yao as the military governor of Dongheng County, the military commander of Dongheng County, the general of Yunqi, and the historian of Dongheng County, and designated him as the mayor of Xinfeng County and the 400 households of the food village.

古文：侯景平，元帝遍问朝宰： 今天下始定，极须良才，卿各举所知。 
现代文：侯景被平定，元帝遍问朝廷官吏： 如今天下刚刚安定，极须良才，你们都推荐自己所知道的。 
English: After Houjing was subdued, Emperor Yuan repeatedly asked the court officials: If the country has just been stabilized, it is extremely necessary to have good talents. You all recommended what you know.

古文：群臣未有对者。
现代文：群臣没有人应答。
English: None of the courtiers answered.

古文：帝曰： 吾已得一人。 
现代文：元帝说： 我已经得到一个。 
English: Yuan Di said: I have already got one.

古文：侍中王褒进曰： 未审为谁？ 
现代文：侍中王褒进谏说： 不陈书清楚是哪一个。 
English: Attendant Wang Baojin said: It is not clear which one.

古文：帝云： 欧阳頠公正有匡济之才，恐萧广州不肯致之。 
现代文：元帝说： 欧阳頠正有济世救民之才，恐怕萧广州不肯把他送来。 
English: Emperor Yuan said, "Ouyang Xuan has the talent of saving the world and saving the people. I am afraid that Xiao Guangzhou will not send him.

古文：乃授武州刺史，寻授郢州刺史，欲令出岭，萧勃留之，不获拜命。
现代文：于是又任命他为武州刺史。不久又任命为郢州刺史，想命令他出岭，萧勃把他留住，不接受任命。
English: So he appointed him as the governor of Wuzhou. Soon he was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou. When he wanted to order him to leave the mountains, Xiao Bo kept him and did not accept the appointment.

古文：寻授使持节、散骑常侍、都督衡州诸军事、忠武将军、衡州刺史，进封始兴县侯。
现代文：不久又任命他为使持节、散骑常侍、都督衡州诸军事、忠武将军、衡州刺史，晋封为始兴县侯。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the military governor of Hengzhou, the general of the military, the general of the military, and the historian of Hengzhou, and was promoted to the governor of Shixing County.

古文：时萧勃在广州，兵强位重，元帝深患之，遣王琳代为刺史。
现代文：当时萧勃居于广州，兵强位重，元帝对他很担忧，派王琳任代理刺史。
English: At that time, Xiao Bo was living in Guangzhou, with a high military rank. The Yuan Emperor was very worried about him and sent Wang Lin as an agent to assassinate him.

古文：琳已至小桂岭，勃遣其将孙信监州，尽率部下至始兴，避琳兵锋。
现代文：王琳已到小桂岭，萧勃派部将孙蠩督管州务，自己率领手下全部人马到达始兴，避开王琳的兵锋。
English: Wang Lin had already arrived at Xiao Guiling. Xiao Bo sent his subordinate, Sun Yat-sen, to take charge of the state affairs. He led all his men and horses to arrive at Shixing to avoid Wang Lin's army.

古文：頠别据一城，不往谒勃，闭门高垒，亦不拒战。
现代文：欧阳頠另外占据一城，不去谒见萧勃，关闭城门，筑起高墙，也不出战。
English: Ouyang Xuan occupied another city, did not go to see Xiao Bo, closed the city gate, built a high wall, and did not go to war.

古文：勃怒，遣兵袭頠，尽收其此赀财马仗。
现代文：萧勃生气，派兵袭击欧阳頠，缴获了他的全部财物和马匹器械。
English: Xiao Bo became angry and sent soldiers to attack Ouyang Zang, seizing all of his property and horse equipment.

古文：寻赦之，还复其所，复与结盟。
现代文：不久赦免了他，让他回到原地复职，又和他结盟。
English: He was soon pardoned, allowed to return to his post, and allied himself with him again.

古文：荆州陷，頠委质于勃。
现代文：荆州陷落，欧阳頠归顺萧勃。
English: Jingzhou fell, Ouyangyang fell to Shunxiao Bo.

古文：及勃度岭出南康，以頠为前军都督，顿豫章之苦竹滩，周文育击破之，擒送于高祖，高祖释之，深加接待。
现代文：萧勃越岭到南康时，以欧阳頠为前军都督，驻扎在豫章的苦竹滩，周文育打败了他，活捉后送到高祖处，高祖释放了他，并热情接待他。
English: When Xiao Bo crossed the ridge to Nankang, Ouyang Zhe was stationed in the Bitter Bamboo Beach of Yuzhang with Ouyang Zhe as the former military governor. Zhou Wenyu defeated him, captured him alive and sent him to Gao Zu. Gao Zu released him and received him warmly.

古文：萧勃死后，岭南扰乱，頠有声南土，且与高祖有旧，乃授頠使持节、通直散骑常侍、都督衡州诸军事、安南将军、衡州刺史，始兴县侯。
现代文：萧勃死后，岭南骚乱，欧阳頠在南疆很有声威，又加上与高祖有交情，于是任命欧阳頠为使持节、通直散骑常侍、都督衡州诸军事、安南将军、衡州刺史，封为始兴县侯。
English: After the death of Xiao Bo, there was a riot in Lingnan. Ouyang Xuan was very influential in southern Xinjiang. In addition, he had a friendship with Gao Zu. Therefore, he appointed Ouyang Xuan as the envoy of the festival, the regular attendant of the parade, the military governor of Hengzhou, the general of Annan, the historian of Hengzhou, and the lord of Shixing County.

古文：未至岭南，頠子纥已克定始兴。
现代文：尚未到达岭南，欧阳頠的儿子欧阳纥就已攻克平定了始兴。
English: Before reaching Lingnan, Ouyang Zhe's son Ouyang Zhe had conquered and leveled Shixing.

古文：及頠至岭南，皆慑伏，仍进广州，尽有越地。
现代文：欧阳頠到达岭南时，都慑服归顺，又进入广州，全部占有越地。
English: When Ouyang Xuan arrived in Lingnan, they all surrendered and entered Guangzhou, occupying all the land.

古文：改授都督广、交、越、成、定、明、新、高、合、罗、爱、建、德、宜、黄、利、安、石、双十九州诸军事、镇南将军、平越中郎将、广州刺史，持节、常侍、侯并如故。
现代文：又被任命为都督广州、交州、越州、成州、定州、明州、新州、高州、合州、罗州、爱州、建州、德州、宜州、黄州、利州、安州、石州、双州等十九州诸军事，镇南将军，平越中郎将，广州刺史，持节、常侍、侯等职衔都不变。
English: He was also appointed as the governor of Guangzhou, Jiaozhou, Yuezhou, Chengzhou, Dingzhou, Mingzhou, Xinzhou, Gaozhou, Hezhou, Luozhou, Aizhou, Jianzhou, Dezhou, Yizhou, Huangzhou, Lishu, Anzhou, Shizhou, Shuangzhou and other nineteen military states, and the titles of Zhenan General, Pingyue Zhonglang General, Guangzhou Sashihi, Holding Festival, Regular Attendant, and Hou remained unchanged.

古文：王琳据有中流，頠自海道及东岭奉使不绝。
现代文：王琳占据中间地区，欧阳頠从海道和东岭进献出使没有中断。
English: Wang Lin occupied the middle area, Ouyang Xuan entered and left from the sea road and Dongling without interruption.

古文：永定三年，进授散骑常侍，增都督衡州诸军事，即本号开府仪同三司。
现代文：永定三年晋升为散骑常侍，增任都督衡州诸军事，以原号就任开府仪同三司。
English: Three years later, Yongding was promoted to the rank of cavalryman. He was also appointed as the military governor of Hengzhou Province, and assumed the post of the third secretary of the provincial government with his original title.

古文：世祖嗣位，进号征南将军，改封阳山郡公，邑一千五百户，又给鼓吹一部。
现代文：世祖继位，晋号征南将军，改封为阳山郡公，食邑一千五百户，送给一部鼓吹。
English: The ancestor succeeded to the throne, the title of Jin was changed to General of the Conquest of the South, and the title of Yangshan County was changed to Yangshan County, with 1,500 households, and it was given to a group of propagandists.

古文：初，交州刺史袁昙缓密以金五百两寄頠，令以百两还合浦太守龚翙，四百两付儿智矩，馀人弗之知也。
现代文：先前，交州刺史袁昙缓秘密把五百两黄金寄放在欧阳頠处，吩咐他拿一百两还给合浦太守龚艹为，四百两交给他的儿子袁智矩，其他的人都不知道。
English: Previously, Yuan Qianlong, the governor of Jiaozhou, had secretly deposited five hundred taels of gold with Ouyang Xuan, and ordered him to return one hundred taels to Hepu Taishou, and four hundred taels to his son Yuan Zhicheng. No one else knew about it.

古文：頠寻为萧勃所破，赀财并尽，唯所寄金独在。
现代文：欧阳頠不久被萧勃打败，财物全被没收，惟有袁氏寄放的黄金还在。
English: Ouyang Yao was soon defeated by Xiao Bo, and all his property was confiscated, except for the gold deposited by the Yuan family.

古文：昙缓亦寻卒，至是頠并依信还之，时人莫不叹伏。
现代文：袁昙缓不久也死了，此时欧阳頠仍然守信交还他人，当时的人都慨叹佩服。
English: Yuan Xuan also died soon after. At this time, Ouyang Xuan still kept his word and handed it back to others. People at the time were very impressed.

古文：其重然诺如此。
现代文：可见他信守诺言之一斑。
English: He seems to have kept his promise.

古文：时頠弟盛为交州刺史，次弟邃为衡州刺史，合门显贵，名振南土。
现代文：当时欧阳頠的大弟欧阳盛任交州刺史，二弟欧阳邃任衡州刺史，合门显贵，名振南疆。
English: At that time, Ouyang Xuan's elder brother Ouyang Sheng was appointed as the governor of Jiaozhou, and his younger brother Ouyang Xuan was appointed as the governor of Hengzhou. They were both prominent and famous in Southern Xinjiang.

古文：又多致铜鼓、生口，献奉珍异，前后委积，颇有助于军国焉。
现代文：又有很多别人送的铜鼓、牲畜，进献的珍奇之物，前后累积，对部队和国家很有帮助。
English: In addition, many others sent bronze drums, livestock, and donated curiosities, which accumulated and were very helpful to the troops and the country.

古文：家口籍没。子询以年幼免。
现代文：欧阳頠在天嘉四年去世，时年六十六岁。
English: Ouyang Zang died in Tianjia four years later, at the age of 66.

古文：吴明彻，字通昭，秦郡人也。
现代文：追任为侍中、车骑大将军、司空、广州刺史，谥号穆。其子欧阳纥袭封。吴明彻字通昭，秦郡人。
English: He was posthumously appointed as a chamberlain, general of chariot and cavalry, secretary of the sky, and the history of Guangzhou, surnamed Mu. His son, Ouyang Xuan, inherited the seal. Wu Mingcher, surnamed Tong Zhao, was from Qin County.

古文：祖景安，齐南谯太守。
现代文：祖父吴景安，齐朝南谯太守。
English: His grandfather, Wu Jing'an, was the first crown prince of the Southern Qi Dynasty.

古文：父树，梁右军将军。
现代文：父亲吴树，梁朝右军将军。
English: His father, Wu Shu, was a general in the right wing army of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：明彻幼孤，性至孝，年十四，感坟茔未备，家贫无以取给，乃勤力耕种。
现代文：吴明彻幼年父母双亡，本性很孝顺，十四岁时，感叹坟茔还没有修建，家境贫寒没有什么可用来修建坟茔，于是勤劳耕种。
English: Wu Mingche's parents both died when he was very young, and his nature was very filial. At the age of fourteen, he lamented that the grave had not yet been built, and his poor family had nothing to use to build a grave, so he worked hard at farming.

古文：时天下亢旱，苗稼焦枯，明彻哀愤，每之田中，号泣，仰天自诉。
现代文：当时天下大旱，禾苗庄稼都枯死了，他又悲又气，每次去到田中，都哭泣不止，仰天倾诉不幸。
English: At that time, there was a drought in the world, and the grain seedlings and crops all died. He was sad and angry. Every time he went to the field, he cried more than once and confided in heaven about his misfortune.

古文：居数日，有自田还者，云苗已更生。明彻疑之，谓为绐己，及往田所，竟如其言。
现代文：过了几天，有人从田里回来，说禾苗已经更生，他不相信，说是欺骗自己，到田中去看时，发现竟和那人说的一样。
English: A few days later, someone came back from the field and said that the seedlings had regrown. He did not believe it and said that he had deceived himself. When he went to the field, he found that it was the same as what the man had said.

古文：秋而大获，足充葬用。
现代文：秋天获得大丰收，足够安葬用。
English: In the autumn, a large harvest was obtained, enough for burial.

古文：时有伊氏者，善占墓，谓其兄曰： 君葬之日，必有乘白马逐鹿者来经坟所，此是最小孝子大贵之徵。 
现代文：当时有一个姓伊的人，擅长风水墓地之术，对他的哥哥说： 您安葬父母的那一天，一定有骑白马逐鹿的人经过坟地，这是最小的儿子大贵的征兆。 
English: At that time, a man surnamed Yi, who was good at the feng shui graveyard trick, said to his brother: On the day you buried your parents, there must have been a person riding a white horse chasing a deer through the cemetery. This is a sign of the youngest son, Da Gui.

古文：至时果有此应，明彻即树之最小子也。
现代文：后来果然这事应验，吴明彻就是吴树最小的儿子。
English: Later, this came to pass, and Wu Mingcher was the youngest son of Wu Shu.

古文：起家梁东宫直后。
现代文：吴明彻离家出任梁朝东宫直后。
English: Shortly after Wu Mingche left home to take up his post at the Eastern Palace of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：及侯景寇京师，天下大乱，明彻有粟麦三千馀斛，而邻里饥餧，乃白诸兄曰： 当今草窃，人不图久，柰何有此而不与乡家共之？ 
现代文：侯景进犯京师时，天下大乱，他有粟麦三千余斛，而乡亲们饥饿无食，于是告诉几位哥哥说： 当今草野盗贼四起，人不能考虑太长远，怎么能有这些粮食却不和乡亲们共用呢？ 
English: When Hou Jing invaded Beijing Division, the world was in turmoil. He had more than three thousand bushels of millet, while the villagers were starving, so he told several brothers: Today, grassland thieves are everywhere. People can't think too far ahead. How can they have this grain but not share it with the villagers?

古文：于是计口平分，同其豊俭，群盗闻而避焉，赖以存者甚众。
现代文：于是按人口平分，和他们同丰俭，盗贼们听说了就避开，赖以生存下来的人很多。
English: As a result, they were equally divided according to the population, and they were frugal with each other. When thieves heard about this, they avoided them, and many people depended on them to survive.

古文：及高祖镇京口，深相要结，明彻乃诣高祖，高祖为之降阶，执手即席，与论当世之务。
现代文：高祖镇守京口时，深切邀约他，吴明彻于是谒见高祖，高祖走下台阶接他，拉着他的手入席，和他谈论当世的事情。
English: When Gaozouzhen was guarding the capital gate, he earnestly invited him. Wu Mingcher then met Gaozouzhen. Gaozouzhen walked down the steps to meet Gaozouzhen, took him by the hand into the hall, and talked with him about current affairs.

古文：明彻亦微涉书史经传，就汝南周弘正学天文、孤虚、遁甲，略通其妙，颇以英雄自许，高祖深奇之。
现代文：吴明彻也略读过书史经传，随汝南的周弘正学习天文、虚空、遁甲，略通晓其中奥妙，非常自负为英雄，高祖认为他非常不平常。
English: Wu Mingcher also briefly read the book of history and legend, followed by Zhou Hongzhen in the south of the country to study astronomy, the void, and armour, and was slightly familiar with the mysteries of them. He was very proud to be a hero. Gaozu thought he was very unusual.

古文：承圣三年，授戎昭将军、安州刺史。
现代文：承圣三年，被任命为戎昭将军、安州刺史。
English: In the third year after his consecration, he was appointed as the general of Rong Zhao and the historian of Anzhou.

古文：绍泰初，随周文育讨杜龛、张彪等。
现代文：绍泰初年，随周文育讨伐杜龛、张彪等。
English: In the first year of Shao Tai, he followed Zhou Wenyu to fight Cuckoo and Zhang Biao.

古文：东道平，授使持节、散骑常侍、安东将军、南兗州刺史，封安吴县侯。
现代文：东道平定后，被授职为使持节、散骑常侍、安东将军、南兖州刺史，封为安吴县侯。
English: After the pacification of the eastern road, he was awarded the posts of the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the general of Andong, and the governor of Nanluozhou, and was appointed as the governor of Anw County.

古文：高祖受禅，拜安南将军，仍与侯安都、周文育将兵讨王琳。
现代文：高祖受禅称帝，任命吴明彻为安南将军，仍然和侯安都、周文育率军讨伐王琳。
English: Gaozhu was proclaimed emperor by Zen, appointed Wu Mingche as Annan general, and continued to fight Wang Lin with the army led by Hou Andu and Zhou Wenyu.

古文：及众军败没，明彻自拔还京。
现代文：大军失败覆灭后，吴明彻拔营回都。
English: After the defeat of the great army, Wu Mingche withdrew the battalion and returned to the capital.

古文：世祖即位，诏以本官加右卫将军。
现代文：世祖即位，诏令由原职加任右卫将军。
English: Emperor Taizu ascended to the throne, and he was appointed to the post of General of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard.

古文：王琳败，授都督武沅二州诸军事、安西将军、武州刺史，馀并如故。
现代文：王琳失败后，被授职为都督武州、沅州二州诸军事、安西将军、武州刺史，其他职衔全部不变。
English: After Wang Lin's defeat, he was appointed as the governor of Wuzhou, the military governor of the two prefectures of Zhangzhou, the general of Anxi, and the governor of Wuzhou. All other titles remained unchanged.

古文：周遣大将军贺若敦率马步万馀人奄至武陵，明彻众寡不敌，引军巴陵，仍破周别军于双林。
现代文：北周派大将军贺若敦率领骑兵步兵一万多人忽然到达武陵，吴明彻寡不敌众，把部队带到巴陵，仍然在双林打败了北周的偏军。
English: North Zhou sent General He Ruodong to lead more than ten thousand cavalry and infantry to suddenly arrive in Wuling. Wu Mingche was outnumbered and took the troops to Baling. He still defeated the partial army of North Zhou in Shuanglin.

古文：天嘉三年，授安西将军。
现代文：天嘉三年，被授职为安西将军。
English: In the third year of Tian Jia, he was awarded the post of Anxi General.

古文：及周迪反临川，诏以明彻为安南将军、江州刺史，领豫章太守，总督众军，以讨迪。
现代文：周迪在临川反叛，诏令吴明彻任安南将军、江州刺史，兼任豫章太守，统率众军，来讨伐周迪。
English: Zhou Di rebelled in Linchuan, and the emperor ordered Wu Mingche to fight Zhou Di as the general of Annan, the governor of Jiangzhou, and the governor of Yuzhang, leading the army.

古文：明彻雅性刚直，统内不甚和，世祖闻之，遣安成王顼慰晓明彻，令以本号还朝。
现代文：吴明彻平素性格刚直，所辖内部不很和睦，世祖听说后，派安成王陈顼安慰告知吴明彻，命令他以原号还朝。
English: Wu Mingche's character was straightforward, and there was not much harmony within his jurisdiction. After the patriarch heard about this, he sent Ancheng Wang Chen Qi to comfort Wu Mingche and ordered him to return to the imperial court with his original name.

古文：寻授镇前将军。
现代文：不久又被任命为镇前将军。
English: He was soon appointed as the town's former general.

古文：五年，迁镇东将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：五年迁任镇东将军、吴陈书兴太守。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to the post of Zhendong General, and Wu Chen Shuxing became the de facto ruler.

古文：及引辞之郡，世祖谓明彻曰： 吴兴虽郡，帝乡之重，故以相授。
现代文：告辞去吴兴郡就任时，世祖对吴明彻说： 吴兴虽然只是一个郡，但它是皇帝故乡，很重要，所以把它交给你。
English: When leaving for Wuxing County to take office, the ancestor said to Wu Mingcher: Although Wuxing is just a county, it is the hometown of the emperor, it is very important, so I will give it to you.

古文：君其勉之！ 
现代文：要尽力啊！ 
English: Do your best!

古文：及世祖弗豫，征拜中领军。
现代文：世祖身体不适时，征召授职为中领军。
English: When the ancestor was unwell, he was conscripted to lead the middle army.

古文：废帝即位，授领军将军，寻迁丹阳尹，仍诏明彻以甲仗四十人出入殿省。
现代文：废帝即位，任命他为领军将军，不久迁任丹阳尹，又诏令他可带四十名武装士兵出入皇帝和公爵住处。
English: The deposed emperor ascended the throne, appointed him as the leading general, and soon transferred to Danyang Yin, and ordered him to take forty armed soldiers to enter and leave the emperor and the duke's residence.

古文：到仲举之矫令出高宗也，毛喜知其谋，高宗疑惧，遣喜与明彻筹焉。
现代文：到仲举假托高宗传令，毛喜知道他的阴谋，高宗疑忌害怕，派毛喜和吴明彻谋划此事。
English: Mao Xi knew of Gao Zong's plot and was afraid of Gao Zong's suspicions, so he sent Mao Xi and Wu Mingcher to plan the matter.

古文：明彻谓喜曰： 嗣君谅闇，万机多阙，外邻强敌，内有大丧。
现代文：吴明彻对毛喜说： 高宗居丧，日常纷繁的政务不免有过失，外临强敌，内有大丧。
English: Wu Mingcher said to Mao Xi: Gao Zong is in mourning, the daily complex government affairs are bound to make mistakes, there is a strong enemy outside, and there is a great mourning inside.

古文：殿下亲实周、邵，德冠伊、霍，社稷至重，愿留中深计，慎勿致疑。 
现代文：皇上亲近之人比周、邵还真诚，品德高过伊、霍，社稷最为重要，希望皇上能把到仲举的奏章留在禁中不批示，好好计议，千万不要过于疑忌。 
English: People who are close to the emperor are more sincere than Zhou and Shao, and their moral character is higher than that of Yi and Hu, and social prestige is the most important. I hope that the emperor can leave the mediatized record in the ban without instruction, consider it carefully, and do not be too suspicious.

古文：及湘州刺史华皎阴有异志，诏授明彻使持节、散骑常侍、都督湘、桂、武三州诸军事、安南将军、湘州刺史，给鼓吹一部，仍与征南大将军淳于量等率兵讨皎。
现代文：湘州刺史华皎暗里有叛朝之志，诏令吴明彻为使持节，散骑常侍，都督湘州、桂州、武州三州诸军事，安南将军，湘州刺史，送给他一部鼓吹，援助征南大将军淳于量等主兵讨伐华皎。
English: Hunan's warlord Huazhong secretly harbored the ambition of defecting to the North; the emperor decreed that Wu Mingche would be the envoy for the festival; the imperial equerry, the military governors of the three states of Hunan, Guizhou, and Wuzhou, General Annan, the warlord of Hunan, sent him a copy of the sermon; and the main soldiers, such as the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, Jun Yuyao, assisted him in the war against Huazhong.

古文：皎平，授开府仪同三司，进爵为公。
现代文：华皎被平定后，任命他为开府仪同三司，晋爵为公。
English: After Huayu was subdued, he was appointed as the head of the three departments of the government, and the promotion to the peerage became official.

古文：太建元年，授镇南将军。
现代文：太建元年，授职为镇南将军。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian era, he was awarded the post of Zhenan General.

古文：四年，征为侍中、镇前将军，馀并如故。
现代文：四年，征召为侍中、镇前将军，其他职衔不变。
English: Four years later, he was conscripted as a samurai middle-ranking officer and a retired general, but his other titles remained unchanged.

古文：会朝议北伐，公卿互有异同，明彻决策请行。
现代文：适逢朝廷商议北伐之事，公卿们有不同的意见，吴明彻决定计策请求前往。
English: At a time when the imperial court was discussing the Northern Expedition, and the nobles had different opinions, Wu Mingcher decided to make a request to go.

古文：五年，诏加侍中、都督征讨诸军事，仍赐女乐一部。
现代文：五年，诏令升任他为侍中、都督征讨诸军事，又给他一部女乐。
English: In the fifth year, he was promoted to the position of chamberlain and governor by imperial decree, and he was also given a piece of women's music.

古文：明彻总统众军十馀万，发自京师，缘江城镇，相续降款。
现代文：吴明彻统率十多万大军，从京师出发，长江沿线的城镇相继投降，并殷情款待大军。
English: Wu Mingcher led more than one hundred thousand troops, starting from Beijing Division, towns along the Yangtze River surrendered one after another, and warmly welcomed the large army.

古文：军至秦郡，克其水栅。
现代文：大军抵达秦郡，攻克水栅。
English: The large army arrived in Qin County and conquered Shuigu.

古文：齐遣大将尉破胡将兵为援，明彻破走之，斩获不可胜计，秦郡乃降。
现代文：北齐派大将尉破胡率军援救，吴明彻打跑了他们，歼敌很多，秦郡于是投降。
English: North Qi sent Lieutenant General Hu to lead the army to rescue, Wu Mingcher ran them away, destroyed many enemies, and Qin County surrendered.

古文：高宗以秦郡明彻旧邑，诏具太牢，令拜祠上冢，文武羽仪甚盛，乡里以为荣。
现代文：高宗因为秦郡是吴明彻的故乡，诏令准备牛、羊、猪三牲，下令拜祠上坟，文武羽仪很盛大，乡里都以此为荣。
English: Gao Zong, because Qin County is the hometown of Wu Mingche, issued a decree to prepare cattle, sheep and pigs for sacrifice, and ordered to pay homage to the shrine on the grave. The ceremony was very grand, and the village was proud of it.

古文：进克仁州，授征北大将军，进爵南平郡公，增邑并前二千五百户。
现代文：攻克仁州，授职为征北大将军，晋爵为南平郡公，增加食邑至二千五百户。
English: Conquered Renzhou, was awarded the title of General of the Northern Expeditionary Force, was given the title of Nanping County Governor, and increased the number of food villages to 2,500.

古文：次平峡石岸二城。
现代文：又攻克峡石岸上的二座城池。
English: They also conquered two castles on the rocky shore of the gorge.

古文：进逼寿阳，齐遣王琳将兵拒守。
现代文：进逼寿阳，北齐派王琳率军守卫。
English: After the invasion of Shouyang, the Northern Qi sent Wang Lin to lead the army to guard.

古文：琳至，与刺史王贵显保其外郭。
现代文：王琳抵达，和刺史王贵显保住寿阳外城。
English: Wang Lin arrived, and with the help of Wang Guixian, saved Shouyang Outer City.

古文：明彻以琳初入，众心未附，乘夜攻之，中宵而溃，齐兵退据相国城及金城。
现代文：吴明彻认为王琳刚到，军心尚未归附，趁夜晚攻打，半夜打败敌军，北齐军退据相国城和金城。
English: Wu Mingcher thought that Wang Lin had just arrived, and the military spirit had not yet been attached. He took advantage of the night to attack and defeat the enemy army in the middle of the night, and the North Qi army retreated to the neighboring cities of Guocheng and Jincheng.

古文：明彻令军中益修治攻具，又迮肥水以灌城。
现代文：吴明彻命令部队加紧修治进攻器械，又逼肥水灌城。
English: Wu Mingcher ordered the troops to step up the repair of offensive equipment, and forced fertilizer to flood the city.

古文：城中苦湿，多腹疾，手足皆肿，死者十六七。
现代文：城中很潮湿，很多人都患痢疾，手脚都肿了，死者达十分之七。
English: It was very humid in the city, many people suffered from dysentery, their hands and feet were swollen, and seven out of ten died.

古文：会齐遣大将军皮景和率兵数十万来援，去寿春三十里，顿军不进。
现代文：适逢北齐派大将军皮景和率领几十万大军前来援救，在距离寿春三十里远的地方，驻扎下来不前进。
English: At the right time, the Northern Qi sent the great general Pi Jinghe and led hundreds of thousands of troops to come to the rescue, and stationed in a place 30 miles away from Shuchun.

古文：诸将咸曰： 坚城未拔，大援在近，不审明公计将安出？ 
现代文：将领们都说： 牢固的城池还没有攻克，敌人强大的救援部队就在附近，不知道您的计策将如何制订？ 
English: The generals all said: The fortified city has not yet been conquered, the enemy's powerful rescue force is nearby, I don't know how your strategy will be formulated?

古文：明彻曰： 兵贵在速，而彼结营不进，自挫其锋，吾知其不敢战明矣。 
现代文：吴明彻说： 用兵贵在迅速，而敌人扎营不进，自己折损自己的锋芒，我知道敌人不敢交战这一点是明确的了。 
English: Wu Mingcher said: I know that the enemy does not dare to fight because he is quick to use soldiers, but the enemy does not enter the camp, and he has lost his edge.

古文：于是躬擐甲胄，四面疾攻，城中震恐，一鼓而克，生禽王琳、王贵显、扶风王可硃浑孝裕、尚书庐潜、左丞李騊駼，送京师。
现代文：于是亲自穿上铠甲，戴上头盔，从四面猛攻，城中震动恐慌，一鼓作气攻克了敌城，生擒王琳、王贵显、扶风王可朱浑孝裕、尚书卢潜、左丞李马余，送到京师。
English: So he personally put on armor, put on a helmet, stormed from all sides, shook panic in the city, and conquered the enemy city with all his might. The survivors Wang Lin, Wang Guixian, Fu Feng Wang Ke Zhu Hun Xiaoyu, Shang Shu Lu Qian, Zuo Rong Li Ma Yu, were sent to the Beijing Division.

古文：景和惶惧遁走，尽收其驼马辎重。
现代文：皮景和惊慌害怕而逃跑，缴获了他的全部驼马和辎重。
English: Pidgeon and Panic fled in fear and captured all of his camels and pack animals.

古文：琳之获也，其旧部曲多在军中，琳素得士卒心，见者皆歔欷不能仰视。明彻虑其有变，遣左右追杀琳，传其首。
现代文：王琳被捉住后，他的老部下大多留在军中，王琳一向都得将士之心，看见他的人都抽泣着低下头来，不敢望他，吴明彻担心会有祸乱，派亲信追杀了王琳，传送他的首级。
English: After Wang Lin was caught, most of his old subordinates remained in the army. Wang Lin always had to win the hearts of soldiers. People who saw him sobbed and bowed their heads, afraid to look at him. Wu Ming Che was worried that there would be a disaster, and sent his cronies to hunt down Wang Lin and transfer his head.

古文：诏曰： 寿春者古之都会，襟带淮、汝，控引河、洛，得之者安，是称要害。
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 寿春是古都会，有淮河、汝水环绕，地势险要，控制黄河、洛水，地理位置重要。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying: Shouchun is an ancient city, surrounded by the Huai River and the Ye River, with a strategic location, controlling the Yellow River and the Luoshui River, and an important geographical location.

古文：侍中、使持节、都督征讨诸军事、征北大将军、开府仪同三司南平郡开国公明彻，雄图克举，宏略盖世。在昔屯夷，缔构皇业，乃掩衡、岳，用清氛沴，实吞云梦，即叙上游。今兹荡定，恢我王略，风行电扫，貔虎争驰，月阵云梯，金汤夺险，威陵殊俗，惠渐边氓。
现代文：重臣吴明彻，图谋宏伟，一举攻克。他远大的谋略压倒当世。
English: The senior vassal, Wu Ming Che, devised a grand plan to conquer the country in one fell swoop. His far-reaching strategy overwhelmed the world.

古文：惟功与能，元戎是属，崇麾广赋，茂典恒宜，可都督、豫、合、建、光、朔、北徐六州诸军事、车骑大将军、豫州刺史，增封并前三千五百户，馀如故。 
现代文：往日夷族在这里驻扎，营造天子基业，乌烟瘴气。如今一举扫平，恢复我疆土，功勋卓著，应任都督豫州、合州、建州、光州、朔州、北徐州六州诸军事、车骑大将军、豫州刺史，增封食邑至三千五百户，其他职衔不变。 
English: In the past, the Yi people were stationed here, creating the foundation of heaven. Now, they are sweeping the country and restoring our territory at one fell swoop. They have made outstanding contributions. They should be appointed as the military governor of the six prefectures of Yuzhou, Hezhou, Jianzhou, Gwangju, Shuozhou, North Xuzhou, the general of cavalry and cavalry, and the historian of Yuzhou, and increase the number of food villages to 3,500. Other titles remain unchanged.

古文：诏遣谒者萧淳风就寿阳册明彻，于城南设坛，士卒二十万，陈旗鼓戈甲，明彻登坛拜受，成礼而退，将卒莫不踊跃焉。
现代文：诏令派谒者萧淳风，去寿阳册封吴明彻，在城南设坛，二十万将士列旗击鼓操戈披甲，吴明彻登坛接受册封，礼仪完毕后退下，将士们无不欢呼雀跃。
English: Xiao Junfeng, the person who sent the imperial edict, went to Shouyang to record Wu Mingche, and set up a altar in the south of the city. Two hundred thousand soldiers lined up to beat drums and wear armor. Wu Mingche ascended the altar to accept the record, and after the ceremony, he retreated. The soldiers were all jubilant.

古文：初，秦郡属南兗州，后隶谯州，至是，诏以谯之秦、盱眙、神农三郡还属南兗州，以明彻故也。
现代文：起先，秦郡隶属南兖州，后来隶属谯州，到此时，诏令谯州的秦、盱眙、神农三郡还隶于南兖州，是因为吴明彻的缘故。
English: At first, Qin County was subordinate to South Luzhou, and later it was subordinate to Zhangzhou. At this time, the three counties of Qin, Handan and Shennong in Zhangzhou were still subordinate to South Luzhou, because of Wu Mingche.

古文：六年，自寿阳入朝，舆驾幸其第，赐钟磬一部，米一万斛，绢布二千匹。
现代文：六年，吴明彻从寿阳入朝，皇帝车马驾临他的住宅，赐给他一部钟磬、一万斛米、二千匹绢布。
English: Six years later, when Wu Mingche entered the imperial court from Shouyang, the emperor came to his residence in a chariot and horses, and gave him a bell, ten thousand glutinous rice, and two thousand silk cloths.

古文：七年，进攻彭城。
现代文：七年，吴明彻进攻鼓城。
English: In the seventh year, Wu Mingche attacked Gucheng.

古文：军至吕梁，齐遣援兵前后至者数万，明彻又大破之。
现代文：大军抵达吕梁，北齐所派援兵先后到达的有几万人，吴明彻又大败他们。
English: A large army arrived in Luliang. Tens of thousands of reinforcements sent by Northern Qi arrived successively, and Wu Mingcher defeated them.

古文：八年，进位司空，馀如故。
现代文：八年，晋升为司空，其他职衔不变。
English: Eight years later, he was promoted to air traffic controller, but his other titles remained unchanged.

古文：又诏曰： 昔者军事建旌，交锋作鼓，顷日讹替，多乖旧章，至于行阵，不相甄别。
现代文：皇帝又下诏说： 往日军事行动都树起旗帜，两军交战都击鼓助阵，近来谬误更替，多与旧章不和，至于队伍，不能互相识别。
English: The emperor also issued an edict saying: In the past, all military operations were flag-raising, and both armies fought with drums to support the battle. Recently, the fallacies have been replaced, and most of them are not compatible with the old chapter. As for the teams, they cannot recognize each other.

古文：今可给司空、大都督泬钺龙麾，其次将各有差。 
现代文：今日应供给司空、大都督的钅夫钺和龙麾，他的次将也各有差别。 
English: Today should be provided with the Secretary of the sky, the Grand Governor of the Woodman and the Dragon, and his second will also vary.

古文：寻授都督南北兗、南北青谯五州诸军事、南兗州刺史。
现代文：不久被授职为都督南兖州、北兖州、南青州、北青州、谯州五州诸军事，南兖州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the military governor of the five prefectures of South Luzhou, North Luzhou, South Qingzhou, North Qingzhou and Luzhou, and wrote the history of South Luzhou.

古文：会周氏灭齐，高宗交事徐、兗，九年，诏明彻进军北伐，令其世子戎昭将军、员外散骑侍郎惠觉摄行州事。
现代文：适逢周氏灭北齐，高宗打算征服徐州、兖州。九年，诏令吴明彻进军北伐，命令他的大儿子戎昭将军、员外散骑侍郎吴惠觉兼理州中事务。
English: Gaozong planned to conquer Xuzhou and Ganzhou at the same time that the Zhou Dynasty was exterminating the Northern Qi. In nine years, Gaozong ordered Wu Mingche to march into the Northern Expedition, and ordered his eldest son, General Rong Zhao, and his non-commissioned cavalryman Wu Hui Jue to take charge of the affairs of the Middle Kingdom.

古文：明彻军至吕梁，周徐州总管梁士彦率众拒战，明彻频破之，因退兵守城，不复敢出。
现代文：吴明彻的部队抵达吕梁，北周的徐州总管梁士彦率军抵抗交战，吴明彻多次打败他，于是梁士彦退兵守卫城池，不再敢出战。
English: Wu Mingcher's troops arrived in Luliang. Liang Shiyan, the head of Xuzhou in northern Zhou, led the army to resist the engagement. Wu Mingcher defeated him many times, so Liang Shiyan withdrew to guard the city and no longer dared to fight.

古文：明彻仍迮清水以灌其城，环列舟舰于城下，攻之甚急。
现代文：吴明彻又逼清水来灌城，在城下环列船舰，加紧攻打。
English: Wu Mingcher also forced clear water to fill the city, lined up ships under the city, and intensified the attack.

古文：周遣上大将军王轨将兵救之。
现代文：北周派上大将军王轨率军救援。
English: The Northern Zhou Dynasty sent the great general Wang Luo to lead the army to rescue.

古文：轨轻行自清水入淮口，横流竖木，以铁锁贯车轮，遏断船路。
现代文：王轨轻装从清水进到淮口，横在水中竖起木头，用铁锁穿住车轮，阻断船的通道。
English: Lightly loaded, Wang Rail enters Huaikou from Qingshui, erects a log horizontally in the water, and cuts through the wheel with an iron lock to block the ship's passage.

古文：诸将闻之，甚惶恐，议欲破堰拔军，以舫载马。马主裴子烈议曰：若决堰下船，船必倾倒，岂可得乎？
现代文：将领们听说后，很惊慌害怕，商议想劈开拦河坝，移动军营，用船载马，马主裴子烈建议说： 要是劈开拦河坝放船下去，船肯定倾覆，怎么能行呢？
English: After hearing this, the generals were very alarmed and afraid. They discussed splitting the barrage, moving the military camp, and using a boat to carry horses. The horse owner Pei Zilei suggested: If you split the barrage and let the boat go down, the boat will definitely capsize. How can this be done?

古文：不如前遣马出，于事为允。 
现代文：不如先把马打发出来，这样就行了。 
English: Let's send the horses out first, that'll do.

古文：适会明彻苦背疾甚笃，知事不济，遂从之，乃遣萧摩诃帅马军数千前还。
现代文：刚巧吴明彻苦于背上生病很厉害，知道事情不会成功，还是同意了。于是派萧摩诃率领几千兵马先回来。
English: It just so happened that Wu Mingcher was suffering from a bad back ailment. Knowing that the matter would not succeed, he still agreed. So he sent Xiao Maqi to return first, leading several thousand soldiers and horses.

古文：明彻仍自决其堰，乘水势以退军，冀其获济。
现代文：吴明彻又自己陈书掘开拦河坝，趁着水势退军，希望获得成功。
English: Wu Mingcher dug and opened the barrage dam himself, and took advantage of the water situation to withdraw, hoping to succeed.

古文：及至清口，水势渐微，舟舰并不得渡，众军皆溃，明彻穷蹙，乃就执。
现代文：到清口时水势渐渐小下来，船舰都不能渡过，部队都溃散，吴明彻走投无路，于是被擒。
English: When they reached the clearing, the water level gradually decreased, the ships could not pass, the troops were scattered, and Wu Mingche was cornered, so he was captured.

古文：寻以忧愤遘疾，卒于长安，时年六十七。
现代文：不久因为忧愤加重病情，死于长安，时年六十七岁。
English: Shortly after, he died in Chang'an at the age of sixty-seven, his illness aggravated by grief and anger.

古文：至德元年诏曰： 李陵矢竭，不免请降，于禁水涨，犹且生获，固知用兵上术，世罕其人。
现代文：至德元年，皇帝下诏，表彰吴明彻一生功绩，对他百战百胜的谋略和勇猛深加赞赏，对他被俘而不能赦免深表同情。追封为邵陵县开国侯，食邑一千户，其子吴惠觉嗣爵。
English: In the first year of the German era, the emperor issued an edict, commending Wu Mingche's lifetime achievements, expressing deep appreciation for his victorious strategy and bravery, and expressing deep sympathy for his being captured and unable to be pardoned. He was posthumously named the founding lord of Shaolin County, with a thousand households, and his son Wu Hui Jue was given the title of heir to the throne.

