古文：元结，后魏常山王遵十五代孙。
现代文：元结，是后魏常山王元遵的第十五代孙。
English: Yuan Jie is the fifteenth generation grandson of Wang Yuan Zun of the Later Wei and Changshan Dynasties.

古文：曾祖仁基，字惟固，从太宗征辽东，以功赐宜君田二十顷，辽口并马牝牡各五十，拜宁塞令，袭常山公。
现代文：曾祖父元仁基，字惟固，曾跟随太宗征讨辽东，因功赏赐宜君一带的田地二十顷，辽地的人口并公母马各五十匹，授宁塞令，继承常山公爵位。
English: His great-grandfather, Yuan Renki, known as Wei Gu, once followed Emperor Taizong to conquer Liaodong. For his service, Yi Jun was awarded 20 hectares of farmland, the population of Liaodong, and 50 mares each. He was awarded the Order of Ning Sa and inherited the title of Duke of Changshan.

古文：祖亨，字利贞，美姿仪。
现代文：祖父名亨，字利贞，是个美男子，长得仪表堂堂。
English: My grandfather Nagahiro, alias Risho, was a handsome man with a great appearance.

古文：尝曰： 我承王公馀烈，鹰犬声乐是习，吾当以儒学易之。 
现代文：他曾说 ：我继承王公留传下来的功业，习惯于鹰犬声乐那一套，我应该改习儒学。 
English: He once said, "I have inherited the legacy of Wang Gong, and I am used to the eagle and dog vocal music. I should learn Confucianism instead."

古文：霍王元轨闻其名，辟参军事。
现代文：霍王李元轨闻知他的名声，任命他为参军事。
English: Huo Wang Li Yuanlu, aware of his reputation, appointed him to join the military.

古文：父延祖，三岁而孤，仁基敕其母曰： 此儿且祀我。 
现代文：元结父亲元延祖，三岁失去了父亲，曾祖父仁基嘱咐延祖母亲说： 这孩子将主持我的祭祀。 
English: He lost his father at the age of three. His great-grandfather, Rinki, told his mother, "This child will preside over my sacrificial rites."

古文：因名而字之。
现代文：因而取名延祖。
English: Therefore, he was named Enzu.

古文：逮长，不仕，年过四十，亲娅强劝之，再调舂陵丞，辄弃官去，曰： 人生衣食，可适饥饱，不宜复有所须。 
现代文：元延祖长大后，没有去做官，年过四十，连襟极力劝说，第二次升官出任舂陵县丞，不久便又辞官不干了。他说： 人生在世穿衣吃饭只要温饱就行，不应再有其他要求。 
English: After he grew up, Yuan Yanzu did not become an official, and when he was over forty years old, Lian Er tried his best to persuade him to be promoted for the second time to serve as the county magistrate of Fuling County, but he soon resigned from the post. He said: Life is fine as long as you have food and clothing. There should be no other requirements.

古文：每灌畦掇薪，以为 有生之役，过此吾不思也 。
现代文：他常常灌田拾柴，认为这是 ：活着就该干的事，此外我什么也不想。 
English: He would often water the fields and collect firewood, thinking that this was the right thing to do while he was still alive, and he didn't want to do anything else.

古文：安禄山反，召结戒曰： 而曹逢世多故，不得自安山林，勉树名节，无近羞辱 云。
现代文：安禄山造反，召元结告诫说： 你们遭逢世道多变，不能够自安于山林，要树立名节，不可自讨羞辱。 
English: When the Anlu Mountains rebelled, Zhao Yuanjie admonished them: You have been subjected to the vicissitudes of the world, and you cannot be at peace in the mountains and forests. You must establish a famous festival, and you must not humiliate yourselves.

古文：卒年七十六，门人私谥曰太先生。
现代文：元延祖活到七十六岁，死后门人下辈定谥号他为太先生。
English: Yuan Yanzu lived to the age of seventy-six, and after his death, his disciples gave him the nickname "Mr. Tai."

古文：结少不羁，十七乃折节向学，事元德秀。
现代文：元结年少时放荡不羁，十七岁才改变志向求学，拜元德秀为师。
English: At the end of his youth, he was debauched and uninhibited, and only at the age of seventeen did he change his ambition to study, with Baiyuan Dexiu as his teacher.

古文：天宝十二载举进士，礼部侍郎阳浚见其文，曰： 一第慁子耳，有司得子是赖！ 
现代文：天宝十二年参加考进士，礼部侍郎阳浚看了他写的文章后说 ：评为一等也玷辱你了呀，考官靠取你表功！ 
English: In the twelfth year of Tianbao, he participated in the entrance examination. After reading the article written by him, Yang Jun, the attendant of the etiquette department, said: "Being rated first-class also humiliates you, the examiner relies on your performance!

古文：果擢上第。复举制科。
现代文：元结果然考中上等，又考中制科。
English: As a result of the original result, the middle school entrance examination was superior, and the middle school entrance examination was standardized.

古文：会天下乱，沈浮人间。
现代文：不料天下大乱，元结未能出仕。
English: Unexpectedly, the world was in turmoil, and Motoyasu was unable to serve.

古文：国子司业苏源明见肃宗，问天下士，荐结可用。
现代文：肃宗召见国子司业苏源明垂问天下的贤士人才，他推荐了元结。
English: Su Zong summoned Su Yuan, the Secretary of State for Industry and Mines, to consult the world's sages, and he recommended Yuan Jie.

古文：时史思明攻河阳，帝将幸河东，召结诣京师，问所欲言，结自以始见轩陛，拘忌讳，恐言不悉情，乃上《时议》三篇。
现代文：当时史思明正攻打河阳，皇帝在去河东之前将元结召来京师，问他有何奏议，元结第一次朝见皇帝，颇为拘谨，心有顾忌，又怕几句话说不清楚，便呈上《时议》三篇。
English: At that time, Shi Siming was attacking Kheyang. Before going to Hedong, the emperor summoned Yuan Zi to Beijing and asked him what proposal he had. Yuan Zi, who was meeting the emperor for the first time, was rather prudent, cautious, and afraid that a few words would not be clear, so he presented three articles of "Current Proposal."

古文：其一曰：议者问： 往年逆贼，东穷海，南淮、汉，西抵函、秦，北彻幽都，丑徒狼扈，在四方者几百万，当时之祸可谓剧，而人心危矣。
现代文：第一篇写道：有议者问： 往年安史逆贼反乱，东至大海，南到淮河、汉水，西达函关、秦岭，北过幽都，贼寇四处猖獗有几百万人，当时的祸乱可以说达到了极点，人心惶惶不可终日。
English: The first article read: A questioner asked: In previous years, there were millions of people in Anshi who rebelled against the invaders. From the east to the sea, from the south to the Huai River and Hanshui River, from the west to Hankou and Qinling, and from the north to Youdu, the bandits were rampant everywhere. The calamity at that time could be said to have reached its climax, and people's hearts were filled with fear.

古文：天子独以匹马至灵武，合弱旅，鉏强寇，师及渭西，曾不逾时，摧锐攘凶，复两京，收河南州县，何其易邪？
现代文：天子却一个人来到灵武，集合少数兵马，抗击强寇，率部打到渭西，未过多时，便挫败了贼兵的锐气，光复了两京，收回了河南许多州县，多么顺利啊！
English: However, the heavenly son came to Lingwu alone, gathered a few soldiers and horses, fought against the strong invaders, and led the troops to the west of Shaanxi. Before too long, he defeated the sharpness of the thief soldiers, recovered the two capitals, and recovered many states and counties in Henan. How smooth it was!

古文：乃今河北奸逆不尽，山林江湖亡命尚多，盗贼数犯州县，百姓转徙，踵系不绝，将士临敌而奔，贤人君子遁逃不出。
现代文：可是如今河北奸逆未尽，山林江湖亡命之徒尚多，盗贼又屡犯州县，百姓流离失所，逃亡者络绎不绝，将士临阵脱逃，贤人君子隐匿走散不肯出仕。
English: However, nowadays, Hebei's treachery has not been exhausted, there are still many outlaws in the mountains and forests, thieves have repeatedly committed state and county, the people have been displaced, the fugitives are endless, the soldiers have fled, and the wise men and gentlemen have disappeared and refused to serve.

古文：陛下往在灵武、凤翔，无今日胜兵而能杀敌，无今日检禁而无亡命，无今日威令而盗贼不作，无今日财用而百姓不流，无今日爵赏而士不散，无今日朝廷而贤者思仕，何哉？
现代文：陛下过去在灵武、凤翔时，没有今日的强兵而能杀敌，没有今日的法度限制却无人逃亡，没有今日的威严法令却无盗贼作案，没有今日的充足财用而百姓不流失，没有今日的爵位赏赐士大夫却不走散，没有今日的朝廷规模贤者却愿意效忠朝廷，这是什么原因呢？
English: When His Majesty was in Lingwu and Fengxiang in the past, he could kill the enemy without today's strong soldiers, without today's legal restrictions but no one fled, without today's majestic laws and regulations but no thieves committed crimes, without today's sufficient financial resources but the people did not lose, without today's peerages awarded to scholars and doctors but not dispersed, without today's imperial scale sages but willing to be loyal to the imperial court, what is the reason for this?

古文：将天子能以危为安，而忍以未安忘危邪？ 
现代文：过去天子能够转危为安，怎么忍心在未安时忘危呢？ 
English: In the past, God was able to turn the tide, but how can we bear to forget the danger when we are not safe?

古文：对曰： 此非难言之。
现代文：答道 ：这个问题不难回答。
English: Answer: This question is not difficult to answer.

古文：前日天子恨愧陵庙为羯逆伤污，愤怅上皇南幸巴、蜀，隐悼宗戚见诛，侧身勤劳，不惮亲抚士卒，与人权位，信而不疑，渴闻忠直，过弗讳改。
现代文：前一段时间，天子因为愧恨祖宗陵庙被异族逆贼毁坏糟踏，痛伤太上皇仓皇出逃巴、蜀，哀伤宗室国戚被杀戮，忧惧勤劳，不惜亲自安抚士卒，给大臣以权力官位，信任而不疑心，渴望听取忠直之言，有了过错不隐瞒而虚心改正。
English: Some time ago, the heavenly son, because of his deep hatred for his ancestor's mausoleum and temple, was destroyed and trampled on by foreign traitors. He was deeply hurt when the Emperor Cangwang fled to Ba and Shu. He was saddened when his relatives were killed. He was worried and hardworking. He did not hesitate to personally pacify the soldiers. He gave the minister a position of power. He was trusting and not suspicious. He was eager to listen to the words of loyalty and honesty. He did not hide his mistakes, but humbly corrected them.

古文：此以弱制强，以危取安之繇也。
现代文：这就是以弱制强，以危取安的原因。
English: This is the reason why the weak can control the strong, and the dangerous can bring peace.

古文：今天子重城深宫，燕和而居；凝冕大昕，缨佩而朝；太官具味，视时而献，太常备乐，和声以荐；国机军务，参筹乃敢进；百姓疾苦，时有不闻；厩刍良马、宫籍美女、舆服礼物、休符瑞谍，日月充备；朝廷歌颂盛德大业，听而不厌；四方贡赋，争上尤异；谐臣顐官，怡愉天颜；文武大臣至于庶官，皆权赏逾望。此所以不能以强制弱，以未安忘危。
现代文：可是现在呢？天子深居重城内宫，安闲自在过日子；黎明成妆，佩饰上朝；山珍海味按时令献上，琴瑟鼓乐奏起和谐的乐章；有关军国机务大事，大臣们反复斟酌才敢进奏；老百姓的疾苦，常常不能到；马棚里良马、后宫里美女、各种车舆、服饰礼物、吉庆祥瑞的符牒，每日每月更加充足齐备；满朝文武百官歌颂皇上盛德大业，听任且高兴；四方献贡纳赋花样日益翻新；俳优艺人、擅长说话的官员千方百计让皇帝开心；文武大臣直到百官，个个所得的权位封赏超过本人愿望，所以就不能做到以强制弱，致使未安却忘危。
English: But what about now? The heavenly son lives deep in the inner palace of Chongcheng, living a life of leisure and freedom; the dawn is made into makeup and adorned in the morning; the mountain and sea delicacies are presented according to the time, and the zither and drum music play a harmonious movement; the ministers repeatedly consider the military and national affairs before they dare to play; the suffering of the common people often cannot be reached; the good horses in the stable, the beautiful women in the harem, all kinds of chariots, clothing gifts, and auspicious and auspicious charms are more fully prepared every month; hundreds of officials from all over the country sing the praises of the emperor's

古文：若陛下视今日之安，能如灵武时，何寇盗强弱可言哉！ 
现代文：倘若陛下能像在灵武时那样对待今日的局面，寇盗的强弱不足道！ 
English: If His Majesty can deal with today's situation as he did in Lingwu's time, the strength of the robbers is insignificant!

古文：其二曰：议者曰： 吾闻士人共自谋： 昔我奉天子拒凶逆，胜则家国两全，不胜则两亡，故生死决于战，是非极于谏。
现代文：第二篇写道：有议者说 ：我听说当官的人都在为自己打算： 过去我奉天子之命抗击逆贼，获胜家国两全，打败了则家国两亡，生死决于一战，是非尽力奏谏。
English: The second article reads: A commentator said: I have heard that the people in power are all planning for themselves: In the past, I was ordered by the Son of Heaven to fight against the traitors, and I won two victories for my country. If I defeated them, my country would suffer two deaths. My life and death would be decided by one battle, and I would do my best to win.

古文：今吾名位重，财货足，爵赏厚，勤劳已极，外无仇雠害我，内无穷贱迫我，何苦当锋刃以近死，忤人主以近祸乎？ 
现代文：如今我已名高位显，财货充足，爵赏厚重，辛勤劳顿已经到头了；外无仇人加害于我，内无贫贱相困，我何苦冲锋陷阵去讨死，触犯皇帝去惹祸呢？ 
English: Now that I have a high-ranking position, ample wealth, rich rewards, and hard work has come to an end; there is no enemy outside to harm me, and there is no poverty inside, why should I rush into battle to fight to the death, and offend the emperor to cause trouble?

古文：又闻曰： 吾州里有病父老母、孤兄寡妇，皆力役乞丐，冻馁不足，况于死者，人谁哀之？ 
现代文：又听人说 ：我家有病父老母、孤兄寡妇，他们都在当苦役做乞丐，挨冻受饿，虽生犹死，有谁可怜他们呢？ 
English: They also heard people say: My family has a sick father and mother, an orphan brother and a widow, they are all working as beggars, freezing and starving, even if they live and die, who will pity them?

古文：又闻曰： 天下残破，苍生危窘，受赋与役者，皆寡弱贫独，流亡死徙，悲忧道路，盖亦极矣。
现代文：还听人说 ：天下残破，百姓穷迫，纳税服苦役的都是寡弱贫独的人，他们死于颠沛流离之中，怨声载道，悲伤转徙已到极点。
English: I also heard people say: the world is in ruins, the people are impoverished, and those who pay taxes and perform hard labor are the weak, the poor, and the lonely. They died in the midst of displacement, complaining, and grief migration has reached an extreme.

古文：天下安，我等岂无畎亩自处？
现代文：天下太平，我们这些人总不该少块土地过活吧？
English: It's a peaceful world, we shouldn't have to live off a small piece of land, right?

古文：若不安，我不复以忠义仁信方直死矣！ 
现代文：倘若天下不太平，我再也不会为了什么忠义仁信去送死了！ 
English: If the world is not at peace, I will never again send someone to their death for the sake of loyalty and benevolence!

古文：人且如此，柰何？ 
现代文：人人都这样想，该怎么办呢？ 
English: Everyone thinks so, so what should we do?

古文：对曰： 国家非欲其然，盖失于太明太信耳。
现代文：回答说： 国家并不愿这样，只是在特别诚实守信方面有失误罢了。
English: He replied: The state does not want to do this, but there is a lapse in particular honesty and trustworthiness.

古文：夫太明则见其内情，将藏内情则罔惑生下。
现代文：特别诚实往往会暴露出内情，欲掩盖内情就得欺骗迷惑臣民。
English: Special honesty often exposes the inside story, and if you want to cover up the inside story, you have to deceive and confuse your subjects.

古文：能令必信，信可必矣，而太信之中，至奸尤恶之。如此遂使朝廷亡公直，天下失忠信，苍生益冤结。
现代文：施行政令必须守信，守信政令就能见效了。特别守信用，那些狡诈邪恶的人尤其会反对，这样一来，便使朝廷没有了公直，天下失去了忠信，百姓也愈加怨恨。
English: It is necessary to be trustworthy when issuing an executive order, and a trustworthy executive order can be effective. Those who are particularly trustworthy, especially those who are cunning and evil, will oppose it. In this way, the imperial court will not be honest, the world will lose its loyalty, and the people will become more resentful.

古文：将欲治之，能无端由？
现代文：想去治理它总得有个指望吧？
English: If you want to govern it, you have to have hope, right?

古文：吾等议于野，又何所及？ 
现代文：我们这些人不在其位而瞎乱议论，又有什么用呢？ 
English: What is the use of those of us who are not in office but who are talking nonsense?

古文：其三曰：议者曰： 陛下思安苍生，灭奸逆，图太平，劳心悉精，于今四年，说者异之，何哉？ 
现代文：第三篇写道：有人议论说： 陛下一心想安抚百姓，消灭奸逆，谋求太平，兢兢业业劳心费神，到现在已经有四年了，可议论者却持异议，为什么呢？ 
English: The third article reads: Some people argue that: His Majesty has been trying to appease the people, eliminate treason, seek peace, and work hard for four years now, but the critics disagree. Why?

古文：对曰： 如天子所思，说者所异，非不知之。
现代文：回答说： 天子所想的事，议论者持异议，不是不知道天子的用意。
English: And he answered and said, It is not as though they knew not what was in the mind of the Son of man.

古文：凡有诏令丁宁事皆不行，空言一再，颇类谐戏。
现代文：而是凡有诏令诰文，许多事都不实行；一再地说空话，就像演滑稽戏。
English: On the other hand, whenever there is a decree, many things are not carried out; repeatedly saying empty words is like performing a farce.

古文：今有仁血阝之令，忧勤之诰，人皆族立党语，指而议之。
现代文：如今颁布行仁政周济百姓的命令，为国忧愁劳苦的诰文，人们却都纷纷说三道四。
English: Nowadays, the order to carry out benevolent politics and help the people is promulgated, and the obituary for the country's sorrow and hardship is published, but people are all talking nonsense.

古文：天子不知其然，以为言虽不行，犹足以劝。
现代文：所以天子不知道这种情况，还以为我说的话虽然没被施行，仍足以起劝勉作用。
English: Therefore, the Son of Heaven did not know about this situation, and thought that what I said, although it was not carried out, was still enough to have a dissuasive effect.

古文：彼沮劝，在乎明审均当而必行也。
现代文：但阻止劝勉，在于诏令诰文要洞明审慎公平合理并令出必行。
English: However, the reason for stopping the exhortation is that the edict should be clear, prudent, fair and reasonable, and must be carried out.

古文：天子能行已言之令，必将来之法，杂徭弊制，拘忌烦令，一切蠲荡，任天下贤士，屏斥小人，然后推仁信威令，谨行不惑。
现代文：天子要能推行已颁的命令，使后法必遵行，一切苛捐杂税，拘束百姓的禁忌烦令，统统予以废除。重用普天下的贤士，排除小人，然后推行仁信威令，谨慎行事，不受迷惑。
English: It is necessary for the Son of Heaven to be able to carry out the orders that have been issued, so that later laws must be obeyed, and all taxes and taxes, and prohibitions and regulations that restrict the people, should all be abolished. Reuse the sages of the whole world, eliminate the villains, and then implement the benevolent and authoritative order, act cautiously, and do not be confused.

古文：此帝王常道，何为不及？ 
现代文：这是帝王正道，有什么办不到呢？ 
English: This is the emperor's righteous way. What can't be done?

古文：帝悦曰： 卿能破朕忧。 
现代文：皇帝阅毕大喜： 卿能解除我的忧虑。 
English: The emperor was overjoyed at the completion of the reading: Sir, you can relieve my worries.

古文：擢右金吾兵曹参军，摄监察御史，为山南西道节度参谋。
现代文：便提升他为金吾兵曹参军，兼监察御史，为山南西道节度参谋。
English: He was then promoted to Kingo Petty Officer to join the army, as well as Inspector of History, and Staff Officer of the Shannan West Road Festival.

古文：募义士于唐、邓、汝、蔡，降剧贼五千，瘗战死露胔于泌南，名曰哀丘。
现代文：他到任之后，在唐、邓、汝、蔡等地招募了许多义士，降伏了强贼五千人，并将丢弃在战场上的尸体埋葬在汝南，称作 哀丘 。
English: After he took office, he recruited many loyalists in Tang, Deng, Ru, Cai and other places, surrendered five thousand bandits, and buried the bodies discarded on the battlefield in the south of the country, known as "Mourning Hill."

古文：史思明乱，帝将亲征，结建言： 贼锐不可与争，宜折以谋。 
现代文：史思明叛乱，皇帝将去亲征，元结进言 ：贼兵精锐不可直接同他争战，应该用计谋打败他。 
English: Shi Siming rebelled, the emperor will go to enlist in person, and Yuan Jie said: the thief soldier elite should not fight directly with him, but should defeat him with a strategy.

古文：帝善之，因命发宛、叶军挫贼南锋，结屯泌阳守险，全十五城。
现代文：皇帝认为他说得对。便调发宛城、叶县的军队挫败贼兵的南锋，元结屯兵泌阳坚守险要，保全了十五个城池。
English: The emperor thought he was right, so he dispatched troops from Wancheng and Ye County to defeat the southern front of the robber soldiers, and the original garrison soldiers from Xuyang held out against the danger, and preserved fifteen cities.

古文：以讨贼功迁监察御史里行。
现代文：因讨贼有功迁升为监察御史里行。
English: He was promoted to supervisory inspector due to his success in catching thieves.

古文：荆南节度使吕諲请益兵拒贼，帝进结水部员外郎，佐諲府。
现代文：荆南节度使吕奏请朝廷增兵拒贼，皇帝晋升元结为水部员外郎去辅佐吕。
English: The Jing Nan Festival made Liuso invite the imperial court to increase the number of soldiers to reject the thieves, and the emperor promoted Yuan Jie to the position of water minister to assist Liuso.

古文：又参山南东道来瑱府，时有父母随子在军者，结说瑱曰： 孝而仁者，可与言忠；信而勇者，可以全义。
现代文：后又到山南东道来調府参理军务。当时有父母随子住在军营，元结便对来調说： 孝顺而仁德的人，才可以同他们谈忠；讲信用而又勇敢的人，可以保全节义。
English: Later, he went to Shannan, Shandong Province, to supervise the military affairs of the prefectural government. At that time, there were parents who lived with their children in the military camp, and Yuan Jie said to them: Only those who are filial and humane can talk with them about loyalty; those who are trustworthy and brave can preserve righteousness.

古文：渠有责其忠信义勇而不劝之孝慈邪？
现代文：怎能要求他们忠信义勇而不勉励他们孝敬父母呢？
English: How can you ask them to be loyal and brave without encouraging them to respect their parents?

古文：将士父母，宜给以衣食，则义有所存矣。 
现代文：将士们的随军父母，应该供给衣食，那么节义就能保全了。 
English: The parents of the soldiers should provide food and clothing, so that the dignity of the soldiers can be preserved.

古文：瑱纳之。
现代文：来調采纳了这个建议。
English: The inquiry accepted this suggestion.

古文：瑱诛，结摄领府事。
现代文：后来調被杀，元结便代理山南东道府事。
English: Later, Cho was killed, and Yuan Jie took over as acting governor of Shannan.

古文：会代宗立，固辞，丐侍亲归樊上。
现代文：代宗即位后，元结坚决辞官，乞求恩准回樊上侍奉双亲。
English: After the enthronement of the daimyō, Mototsune resolutely resigned his post and begged for permission to return to serve his parents.

古文：授著作郎。益著书，作《自释》，曰：河南，元氏望也。
现代文：授任著作郎，著书更多，他在《自释》中写道： 河南，是元氏家乡。
English: Awarded the title of author and author of more books, he wrote in "Self-explanation": Henan is the hometown of the Yuan family.

古文：结，元子名也。次山，结字也。
现代文：结是元子的大名，次山是元结的表字。
English: Knot is the daimyo of Mototsu, and Tsugiyama is the kanji of Mototsu.

古文：世业载国史，世系在家谍。
现代文：元家世代业绩载于国史，元氏的世系见于家谱。
English: The achievements of generations of the Yuan family are recorded in the national history, and the lineage of the Yuan family can be found in the family tree.

古文：少居商馀山，著《元子》十篇，故以元子为称。
现代文：我少年时住在商余山，著《元子》十篇，所以号称元子。
English: When I was a boy, I lived in Shangyushan. I wrote ten chapters of "Moto Zi," so I was called "Moto Zi."

古文：天下兵兴，逃乱入猗玗洞，始称猗玗子。
现代文：天下战乱，逃难进了猗王于洞，才叫猗王于子。
English: The world was in turmoil, and it was only after fleeing into a cave that he was called King Yuzi.

古文：后家瀼滨，乃自称浪士。
现代文：后来家住氵襄水之滨，于是就自称浪士。
English: Later, he lived in the waterfront of Zhangxiang, so he called himself a rogue.

古文：及有官，人以为浪者亦漫为官乎，呼为漫郎。
现代文：后来做了官，人们以为浪子也是随随便便当了官吧，便叫我漫郎。
English: Later, when I became an official, people thought that the prodigal son also became an official casually, so they called me Makuro.

古文：既客樊上，漫遂显。
现代文：后来客居樊上，漫郎就叫开了。
English: Later, when the guest was on the raft, Manro called out.

古文：樊左右皆渔者，少长相戏，更曰聱叟。
现代文：樊地左右都是打鱼的，老老少少互相开玩笑，改叫我聱叟。
English: Everyone around me was fishing, and everyone was joking with each other, calling me cormorant.

古文：彼诮以聱者，为其不相从听，不相钩加，带笭箵而尽船，独聱齖而挥车。
现代文：他们笑我聱，是因为我对别人从来不随声附和，不屈从压力，带着渔具听任渔船漂流，独自乖忤地驱车飞驰。
English: They laugh at me because I never go along with others, do not succumb to pressure, let the fishing boat drift with fishing gear, and drive alone.

古文：酒徒得此，又曰： 公之漫其犹聱乎？
现代文：一些酒徒见我是这样，又说： 您随随便便，也如同你的乖忤一样吗？
English: Some of the drinkers see me like this and say, "Are you as easy-going as you are grumpy?"

古文：公守著作，不带笭箵乎？
现代文：你官居著作郎就不带钓竿吗？
English: Doesn't your bureaucrat son-in-law carry a fishing rod?

古文：又漫浪于人间，得非聱齖乎？
现代文：在民间逍遥，不是性格古怪吗？
English: Isn't he an eccentric when he's out with the people?

古文：公漫久矣，可以漫为叟。 
现代文：您不受拘束的时间太久了，可以叫漫叟了。 啊！
English: You have been free for too long, you can call it a day.

古文：于戏！吾不从听于时俗，不钩加于当世，谁是聱者，吾欲从之！彼聱叟不惭带乎笭箵，吾又安能薄乎著作？
现代文：我不附和于时俗，不屈从于当世，谁是聱者，我将跟随他！聱叟带鱼竿而不惭愧，我又怎会轻视著作郎呢？
English: I don't conform to the times and customs, I don't bow to the current world, whoever is lazy, I will follow him! I am not ashamed to carry a fishing rod, how can I despise a writer?

古文：彼聱叟不羞聱齖于邻里，吾又安能惭漫浪于人间？
现代文：聱叟不以乖忤邻里为羞，我又怎能因漫浪人间而惭愧呢？
English: If I am not ashamed of being a bad neighbor, how can I be ashamed of being a vagabond?

古文：取而醉人议，当以漫叟为称。
现代文：因而便采纳那些人的酒后之言，用漫叟做我的称号。
English: So I took those people's drunken words and made my title from a popular song.

古文：直荒浪其情性，诞漫其所为，使人知无所存有，无所将待。
现代文：而且特意性情荒唐浪荡，行为放诞不羁，随随便便，让人们都知道我一无所有，也无所期待。
English: Moreover, I deliberately indulged in wild and extravagant behavior, and let people know that I had nothing and expected nothing.

古文：乃为语曰： 能带笭箵，全独而保生；能学聱齖，保宗而全家。
现代文：于是对他们说： 带上钓竿可以独善其身保全性命，性格乖忤可以保全宗庙家门。
English: So he said to them, "If you take a fishing rod with you, you can preserve your life, and if you are a grumpy person, you can preserve your family.

古文：聱也如此，漫乎非邪！ 
现代文：这样的乖忤，真是随随便便吗！ 
English: Is it really casual to be such a curmudgeon?

古文：久之，拜道州刺史。
现代文：过了许久，元结出任道州刺史。
English: After a long time, Motoyasu became the governor of Dōshū.

古文：初，西原蛮掠居人数万去，遗户裁四千，诸使调发符牒二百函，结以人困甚，不忍加赋，即上言： 臣州为贼焚破，粮储、屋宅、男女、牛马几尽。
现代文：当初，西原蛮曾掠走该州居民数万人，剩下的才四千户。各地使臣发来调取征发文书二百件，元结认为道州百姓贫困太甚，不忍心再去加重赋税，便向朝廷奏道： 臣所辖的道州为贼人攻破焚烧，粮食储备、房屋住宅、男女百姓、牛马牲畜几乎光了。
English: At first, Nishihara-man had plundered tens of thousands of residents of the state, leaving only four thousand households. Envoys from all over the country sent two hundred documents to collect and issue. Motoyoshi thought that the people of Dōshō were so poor that he could not bear to increase taxes any further, so he wrote to the Imperial Court: Dōshō, which is under the jurisdiction of the vassals, has been destroyed and burned by thieves. Grain reserves, houses and residences, men and women, cattle and horses, and livestock are almost depleted.

古文：今百姓十不一在，耄孺骚离，未有所安。
现代文：如今的百姓还不到往年的十分之一，老人童稚动乱离散，生活从未安定。
English: Today's population is less than one-tenth of what it was in previous years, the elderly and children are scattered in chaos, and life has never been stable.

古文：岭南诸州，寇盗不尽，得守捉候望四十馀屯，一有不靖，湖南且乱。
现代文：岭南的许多州县，寇盗不绝，四十多个屯落必须守护望，一旦时局不平静，湖南就会大乱。
English: In many prefectures and counties in Lingnan, robberies are rampant, and more than forty settlements must be guarded. Once the situation is not calm, Hunan will be in turmoil.

古文：请免百姓所负租税及租庸使和市杂物十三万缗。 
现代文：因此，请准予免去百姓所负担的租税以及租庸使向百姓议价购买的杂物十三万缗。 
English: Therefore, please allow me to exempt the tax burden borne by the people and the 130,000 baht of miscellaneous goods purchased by the rent-a-maid from the people.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：皇帝准奏。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：明年，租庸使索上供十万缗，结又奏： 岁正租庸外，所率宜以时增减。 
现代文：第二年，租庸使又来索取上供十万缗，元结又奏道： 每年除正租庸外，其他索取都应根据年成好坏来增减。 
English: In the second year, the rent yong envoy came again to ask for 100,000 baht, and Yuan Jie also said: Every year, in addition to the regular rent yong, other requests should be increased or decreased according to the year's performance.

古文：诏可。
现代文：皇帝下诏许可了。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：结为民营舍给田，免徭役，流亡归者万馀。
现代文：元结为老百姓盖房子分田地，免除徭役，致使流亡在外者一万多人重返故里。
English: The result was that more than 10,000 people who had been exiled returned to their hometowns.

古文：进授容管经略使，身谕蛮豪，绥定八州。
现代文：他晋升容管经略使后，亲自晓谕蛮人首领，安抚平定了八州。
English: After he was promoted to vice-minister of finance, he personally addressed the leaders of the barbarians and pacified the eight states.

古文：会母丧，人皆诣节度府请留，加左金吾卫将军。
现代文：元结的母亲去世时，当地百姓都来到节度府请他留任，皇上于是加封他为左金吾卫将军。
English: When Motokazu's mother died, the local people all came to Seto-fu to ask him to stay on, and the emperor then appointed him as General Zuo Kinguwei.

古文：民乐其教，至立石颂德。
现代文：百姓乐于他的教化，甚至刻石歌颂他的功绩。
English: The people were pleased with his enlightenment, and even carved stones to praise his achievements.

古文：罢还京师，卒，年五十，赠礼部侍郎。
现代文：后免职回到了京师，五十岁去世，追赠他为礼部侍郎。
English: After being relieved of his duties, he returned to the capital, where he died at the age of fifty. He was posthumously awarded the title of Ceremonial Chamberlain.

