古文：孔子萧士义王导谢安庾亮王仲文诸葛侃刘波郑微周超谢南康傅亮王徽之刘兴道郭仲产沈庆之
现代文：孔子萧士义王导谢安庾亮王仲文诸葛侃刘波郑微周超谢南康傅亮王徽之刘兴道郭仲产沈庆之
English: Confucius Xiao Shi Yi Wang Guo Xie Anhui Liang Wang Zhongwen Zhuge Kan Liu Bo Zheng Wei Zhou Chao Xie Nan Kangfu Liang Wang Hui Liu Xing Dao Guo Zhongzang Shen Qing

古文：孔子
现代文：孔子
English: Confucius

古文：孔子谓子夏曰： 得麟之月，天当有血书鲁端门。 
现代文：孔子对子夏说： 得到麒麟的时候，天上会有血书送到鲁国的端门 。
English: Confucius said to Zixia: "When you get the unicorn, there will be a bloody book sent to the gate of Lu from the sky.

古文：孔圣没，周室亡。
现代文：孔子死了，周朝也灭亡了。
English: Confucius died, and the Zhou Dynasty also perished.

古文：子夏往观，逢一郎云： 门有血，飞为赤鸟，化而为书云。 
现代文：子夏到鲁国去验看，正遇上一个人说： 鲁国的端门有血，那血飞起来原来是赤鸟，又变化成书。 
English: When Zixia went to Lu to inspect, she met a man who said, "There is blood on Lu's front door. The blood that flew up was originally a red bird, but it turned into a book."

古文：萧士义
现代文：萧士义
English: Xiao Shiyi

古文：后汉黄门郎萧士义，和帝永元二年被戮。
现代文：后汉的黄门郎萧士义，于和帝永元二年被杀。
English: Huangmen Lang Xiao Shiyi of the Later Han Dynasty was killed in the second year of Emperor Yongzheng.

古文：数日前，家中常所养狗，来向其妇前而语曰： 汝极无相禄，汝家寻当破败，当奈此何？ 
现代文：被杀的几天前，他家中平常养的狗来到萧士义的妇人前面说： 你特别没有福禄相，你家很快就要破败，将怎么办呢？ 
English: A few days before he was killed, his family's usual dog came to the front of the woman in Shixianyi and said: You are particularly unlucky, your home will soon be ruined, what will you do?

古文：其妇默然，亦不骇。
现代文：妇人听了狗的话后沉默不语。也不惊怕。
English: The woman was silent after hearing the dog's words. She was not alarmed.

古文：狗少时自去。
现代文：狗不一会自己走了。
English: The dog soon wandered off on its own.

古文：及士义还内，妇仍学说狗语。未毕，收捕便至。
现代文：等到士义回到家，妇人才学说了狗的话，但话还没说完，搜捕士义的人便到了。
English: When Shiyi returned home, the woman learned to speak the dog's language, but before the words were finished, the man who was searching for Shiyi arrived.

古文：王导
现代文：王导
English: Wang Du

古文：晋丞相王导梦人欲以百万钱买长豫。
现代文：晋丞相王导作了一个梦，梦中有人要用一百万钱买长豫。
English: Jinjo minister Wang Shuo had a dream. In the dream, someone wanted to buy Changyuan with one million money.

古文：导甚恶之，潜为祈祷者备矣。
现代文：王导觉得很晦气不吉利，便想出各种办法为长豫祈祷。
English: Wang Du felt very unlucky and unlucky, so he came up with various ways to pray for Chang Yu.

古文：后作屋，忽掘得一窖钱，料之百亿。
现代文：后来盖房子，因挖地基偶然挖出一窖钱来，约有百亿，很不高兴。
English: Later, he was building a house, and because of digging the foundation, he accidentally dug up a lot of money, about ten billion. He was very unhappy.

古文：大不欢，一皆藏闭。
现代文：等到把钱收藏起来。
English: Wait until the money is collected.

古文：俄而长豫亡。
现代文：即刻长豫就死了。
English: Chang Yu died instantly.

古文：长豫名悦，导之次子也。
现代文：长豫名叫悦，王导的第二个儿子。
English: Changyu was named Yue, the second son of Wang Du.

古文：谢安
现代文：谢安
English: Xie An

古文：东晋谢安于后府接宾。
现代文：东晋的谢安在后府接待宾客。
English: Eastern Jin's Xie An receives guests in Houfu.

古文：妇刘氏，见狗衔安头来。
现代文：他的妻子刘氏见一狗衔着谢安的头进来。
English: His wife, Liu, saw a dog come in with Xie's head.

古文：久之，乃失所在。是月安薨。
现代文：过了一些时间，那只狗不知到哪里去了。当月，谢安就死了。
English: After some time, the dog did not know where to go. That month, Xie An died.

古文：庾亮
现代文：庾亮
English: 亮

古文：晋庾亮初镇武昌，出石头，百姓看者，于岸上歌曰： 庾公上武昌，翩翩如飞鸟；庾公还扬州，白马牵流旐。 
现代文：晋庾亮当初镇守武昌时，出石头城以后，看到他的百姓在岸上唱歌谣： 庾公上武昌，翩翩如飞鸟；庾公还扬州，白马牵流旐。 
English: When Jin Xiliang was originally in charge of Wuchang, after leaving Stone Town, he saw his people singing ballads on the shore: "Xing Gong went to Wuchang, dancing like a bird; Xing Gong returned to Yangzhou, white horse pulling the stream."

古文：又曰： 庾公初上时，翩翩如飞鸦；庾公还扬州，白马牵旐车。 
现代文：又唱： 庾公初上时，翩翩如飞鸦；庾公还扬州，白马牵旐车。 
English: He also sang: At the beginning of his career, Gong Gong was as graceful as a crow; Gong Gong Gong returned to Yangzhou, and a white horse pulled the carriage.

古文：后连征不入，寻薨，还都葬之。王仲文
现代文：后来果然连连征讨进不了武昌，不久就死了，还尸扬州埋葬。王仲文
English: Later, Wang Zhongwen was indeed unable to enter Wuchang, died soon after, and his body was buried in Yangzhou.

古文：王仲文为河南主簿，居缑氏县。
现代文：王仲文任河南主簿，住在缑氏县。
English: Wang Zhongwen is the chief accountant of Henan Province. He lives in Jinshi County.

古文：夜归，道经大泽中，顾车后有一白狗，甚可爱，便欲呼取。忽变为人，形长五六尺，状似方相，或前或却，如欲上车。
现代文：有一天晚上回家，经过一大片沼泽地之中，他回头看车后面有一只白狗，很可爱，就想唤过来，可是那白狗忽然变成了人，身长五六尺，相貌倒很象方相，有时上前，有时后退，好象要上车。
English: One evening, on his way home, after driving through a large swamp, he looked back and saw a white dog behind the car, very cute, and wanted to call it over, but the white dog suddenly turned into a man, five or six feet long, with a face like a square, sometimes advancing, sometimes retreating, as if to get on the car.

古文：仲文大怖，走至舍，捉火来视，便失所在。
现代文：仲文很害怕，回到家，拿灯火来看，连一丝踪影也没有。
English: Zhongwen was very scared. When he got home, he took a look at the lights, but there was not even a trace.

古文：月余日，仲文将奴共在路，忽复见，与奴并顿伏，俱死。
现代文：过了一个多月，有一天，仲文带一个奴仆一同走在路上，又看见那只狗变的人，他吓得同奴仆一同趴在路上。结果都死了。
English: After more than a month, one day, Zhongwen was walking on the road with a servant, and he saw the dog turn into a man. He was so scared that he lay down on the road with the servant. As a result, they both died.

古文：诸葛侃
现代文：诸葛侃
English: Zhuge Kan

古文：葛侃，晋孝武大和中于内寝妇高平张氏窗外闻有如鸡雏声，甚畏。惊而视之，见有龟蛇之象，似今画玄武之形。
现代文：诸葛侃，晋孝武帝大和年间在内寝妇高平张氏窗外听到好象有鸡雏叫的声音，很害怕，惊异就去看看，结果见到了龟和蛇合体之象，很象画的玄武的形貌。
English: Zhuge Kan, Jin Xiaowu, Emperor Daiwa, and Gaoping Zhang, a woman who had been sleeping inside, heard the sound of what seemed to be a rooster crowing outside their window. They were very scared and went to take a look in amazement. As a result, they saw the image of a turtle and a snake merging, very much like the shape of the painted Xuanwu.

古文：侃位登九棘，而竟被诛。
现代文：诸葛侃那时已位登九棘，而后竟被杀死。
English: Zhuge Kan was already in power at that time, and then he was killed.

古文：刘波
现代文：刘波
English: Liu Bo

古文：刘波字道则，晋孝武太元年，移居京口。
现代文：刘波字道则。晋孝武太元年那年，迁居到京口住。
English: In the first year of Emperor Jinxiao Wuta's reign, he moved to Kyoguchi.

古文：昼寝，闻屏风外悒咤声。
现代文：晚上睡觉，听到屏风外有忧愁长叹的声音。
English: When I go to bed at night, I hear a mournful, long-sighing sound outside the screen.

古文：开屏风，见一狗蹲地而语，语毕自去。
现代文：他觉得奇怪，打开屏风后，看见一条狗蹲在地上说话，说完就走了。
English: He thought it was strange when he opened the screen and saw a dog crouching on the ground, talking and then walking away.

古文：波，隗孙也，后为前将军，败见杀。
现代文：刘波是刘隗的孙子。后来作前将军，兵败被杀。
English: Liu Bo was the grandson of Liu Bei. Later, as a former general, he was defeated and killed.

古文：若有破碎，便为凶兆。 
现代文：郑微
English: Zheng Wei

古文：言讫，失所在。后密开看，是一梃炭。意甚秘之，虽家人不知也。
现代文：晋朝时信安的郑微，少年时见到一个老头，把一只口袋送给郑微说： 这是你的命，要特别小心不要散失，如果破碎了就是不好的他觉得很神秘，即使是家人也不知道这件事。
English: Zheng Wei, who believed in peace and security during the Jin Dynasty, saw an old man when he was a boy. He gave a bag to Zheng Wei and said, "This is your life. Be especially careful not to lose it. If it's broken, it's bad." He thought it was very mysterious. Even his family didn't know about it.

古文：后遭卢龙寇乱，恒保录之。
现代文：后来遭到卢龙作乱，他也始终保护收藏完好。
English: Later, Lulong caused a disturbance, and he always kept the collection intact.

古文：至宋永初三年，微年八十三，疾笃，语弟云： 吾齿尽矣，可试启此囊。 
现代文：直到宋永初三年，郑微已经八十三岁了，病势沉重时对他弟弟说： 我已经老了，可以打开口袋看看了。 
English: Until the third year of Song Yongchun, Zheng Wei was already eighty-three years old. When he was seriously ill, he said to his brother: I am old, I can open my pocket and look.

古文：见炭悉碎折，于是遂卒。
现代文：看见那块炭全碎了，于是死了。
English: When he saw that the piece of coal was completely broken, he died.

古文：周超
现代文：周超
English: Zhou Chao

古文：宋初，义兴周超为谢晦司马。
现代文：宋朝初年，义兴人周超任谢晦司马。
English: In the first year of the Song Dynasty, Zhou Chao Ren Xie Guo Sima, a righteous person, became the leader.

古文：在江陵，妻许氏在家，遥见屋里有光，人头在地，血流甚多。大惊怪，即便失去。
现代文：在江陵，妻许氏在家里，很远地看见屋里有亮光，进屋去看，发现地上有颗人头，流了很多血，她又惊又奇，但马上又没有了。
English: In Gangneung, Mr. Xu's wife was at home. She saw a bright light in the house from far away. She went in to look and found a human head on the ground, with a lot of blood. She was surprised and puzzled, but it was gone immediately.

古文：后超被法。
现代文：后来周超果然被法办。
English: Later, Zhou Chao was indeed brought to justice.

古文：谢南康
现代文：谢南康
English: Xie Nankang

古文：宋永初三年，谢南康家婢行，逢一黑狗，语婢曰： 汝看我背后人！ 
现代文：宋朝永初三年，谢南康家的婢女外出走在路上，碰到一只黑狗。那狗对婢女说： 你看我背后的人。 
English: In the third year of the Song Dynasty, a servant girl of the Shenan Kang family was out walking on the road when she met a black dog. The dog said to the servant girl: "Look at the person behind me.

古文：婢举头，见一人长三尺，有两头。婢惊怖返走，人狗亦随婢后。
现代文：婢女抬头一看，只见一人身长三尺，有两个头，婢女又惊又怕急忙往回跑。
English: When the maid looked up, she saw a three-foot-tall man with two heads. Terrified and afraid, the maid hurried back.

古文：至家庭中，举家避走。
现代文：那人和狗也跟在婢女的背后到了家中，家中人都吓得躲避逃走了。
English: The man and the dog also followed behind the maid to the home, and the family members fled in fear.

古文：婢问狗： 汝来何为？ 
现代文：婢女问狗： 你来干什么？ 
English: The maid asked the dog: What are you doing here?

古文：狗云： 欲乞食耳！ 
现代文：狗说： 想吃食罢了。 
English: The dog said: I just want to eat.

古文：于是婢与设食，并食食讫，两头人出。
现代文：于是她就给狗作了食物，狗全吃完了，两头人也出去了。
English: So she made food for the dog, and the dog ate it all up, and the two-headed man also went out.

古文：婢因谓狗曰： 人已去。 
现代文：婢女就对狗说： 人已经走了。 
English: The maid said to the dog, "The man has gone."

古文：狗曰： 正巳复来。 
现代文：狗说： 正巳复来。 
English: The dog said, "Masamoto is back."

古文：良久没，不知所在。
现代文：过了一些时候，狗就不见了，不知道在哪里。
English: After some time, the dog disappeared and I don't know where it is.

古文：后家人死丧。
现代文：后来谢南康家的人都死了。
English: Later, everyone in the Shenan Kang family died.

古文：傅亮
现代文：傅亮
English: Fu Liang

古文：宋永初中，北地傅亮为护军。
现代文：宋永初年间，北地傅亮任护军之职，他的哥哥子珍住在府西。
English: In the early Song Dynasty, Fu Liang from the north served as a military escort, while his brother Zizhen lived in the west of the prefecture.

古文：兄子珍，住府西，夜忽见北窗外树有物，面广三尺，眼横竖，状若方相。
现代文：夜间忽见北窗外边的树上有东西很象人，近看，面广三尺，眼睛横立，形状象方相。
English: At night, I suddenly saw something in the trees outside the north window that looked very much like a person. When I looked closer, it was three feet wide, its eyes were horizontal, and its shape was like a square.

古文：珍遑遽，以被自蒙。
现代文：子珍惊慌害怕，用被蒙上脸。
English: Scared and panicked, Zizhen covered her face with a blanket.

古文：久乃自灭。
现代文：时间长了就不见了。
English: After a long time, it disappeared.

古文：后亮被诛。
现代文：后来傅亮被诛杀。
English: Fu Liang was later beaten to death.

古文：王徽之
现代文：王徽之
English: Wang Huizhi

古文：王徽之，宋文帝元嘉四年为交州刺史。
现代文：王徽之在宋文帝元嘉四年任交州刺史。
English: Wang Huizhi served as the secretary of Jiaozhou for four years during the reign of Emperor Songwen and Empress Yuanjia.

古文：在道，有客，命索酒炙。炙至，取自割之，终不入。
现代文：有一天在去任职的路上遇到了客人，命人找酒肉，一会儿烤肉拿来了，他自己用刀割，可怎么也切不进去。
English: One day, on his way to work, he met a guest. He ordered someone to look for wine and meat, and a short while later he brought the grilled meat. He cut it himself with a knife, but he couldn't get it in.

古文：投地怒，顾视向炙，已变为徽之头，又睹其首在空中。
现代文：王徽之气得把肉扔在地上，再看那块肉已经变成自己的头了，又看见自己的头在空中。
English: Wang Hui was so angry that he threw the meat on the ground, and then saw that the piece of meat had turned into his own head, and saw his own head in the air.

古文：至州便殒。
现代文：王徽之到了交州就死了。
English: When Wang Huizhi arrived in Jiaozhou, he died.

古文：刘兴道
现代文：刘兴道
English: Liu Xingdao

古文：零陵太守广陵刘兴道，罢郡住斋中，安床在西壁下。
现代文：零陵太守广陵人刘兴道。罢职住在斋中，在西墙下安了一张床，忽然看见西墙边有一只眼。
English: Liu Xing, the first abbot of the Mausoleum of the Five Immortals in Guangling, quit his post to live in the middle of the cemetery and set up a bed under the west wall. Suddenly, he saw an eye on the side of the west wall.

古文：忽见东壁边有一眼，斯须之间，便有四。
现代文：转眼之间变成四个，渐渐又多，最后到满屋都是，时间长了就消失了，不知道去向。
English: In the blink of an eye, there were four of them. Gradually, there were more, and eventually they filled the whole house. After a long time, they disappeared, and I don't know where they went.

古文：渐渐见多，遂至满室。久乃消散，不知所在。又见床前有头发，从土中稍稍繁多，见一头而出，乃是方相头，奄忽自灭。
现代文：一会儿又看见床头前面有头发从土中出来慢慢变多，然后出来一个人头，原来是神方相的头，不一会又自消自灭了。
English: A moment later, I saw a head of hair in front of the bed come out of the soil and slowly become more numerous. Then a head came out, which turned out to be the head of the God's Square, but it soon disappeared again.

古文：刘忧怖，沈疾不起。
现代文：刘兴道忧愁恐怖，重病卧床不起了。
English: Liu Xingdao was worried and terrified. He was seriously ill and bedridden.

古文：郭仲产
现代文：郭仲产
English: Guo Zhongzang

古文：宋郭仲产为南郡王从事。
现代文：宋朝郭仲产是南郡王从事。
English: During the Song Dynasty, the king of the Southern County was engaged in Guozhong production.

古文：宅有枇杷树。
现代文：他的宅院有枇杷树。
English: He has a birch tree in his courtyard.

古文：元嘉末，起斋屋，以竹为栭。竹遂渐生枝叶，条长数尺，扶疏蓊翠，郁然如林。
现代文：元嘉末年，修建斋屋，用竹子作支梁的方木，可是竹子很快就生出枝叶，渐渐长到条长几尺，枝叶茂盛，蓊郁苍翠如林。
English: At the end of the Yuan Jia era, he built a rowhouse, using bamboo as a support beam. However, the bamboo soon sprouted branches and leaves, gradually growing to a length of several feet. The branches and leaves were luxuriant, and the bamboo was lush and verdant like a forest.

古文：仲产以为吉祥。
现代文：仲产认为这是吉祥之兆。
English: The midwives consider this to be an auspicious sign.

古文：俄而同义室之谋，被诛焉。
现代文：不久同义宣谋变，被诛杀。
English: Soon after, he declared his intention to stage a coup and was killed.

古文：沈庆之
现代文：沈庆之
English: Shen Qingzhi

古文：宋太尉沈庆之求致仕，上不许。
现代文：宋朝太尉沈庆之要求辞官不作，皇上不准许。
English: At the request of Song Dynasty Lieutenant Shen Qing, he did not resign his post, and the emperor did not allow him to do so.

古文：庆之曰： 张良名贤，汉高犹许其退。臣有何用，为圣朝所须？ 
现代文：庆之说： 张良是著名的贤臣，汉高祖还允许他退归家乡，我有什么用，您必须留我。 
English: Qingzhi said: Zhang Liang is a famous wise retainer, Henkel also allowed him to return to his hometown. What is the use of me, you must keep me.

古文：乃启颡流涕。
现代文：说着就掩面哭起来。
English: As she spoke, she covered her face and began to cry.

古文：帝有诏，授开府，便诣廷尉待罪。
现代文：于是皇帝下诏，授予开府处理，并让他去廷尉待罪。
English: Therefore, the emperor issued an edict, granted Kaifu to deal with it, and let him go to the palace to wait for the crime.

古文：庆之目不识字，手不知书，而聪悟过人。
现代文：庆之目不识字，手不能写书，然而聪慧敏思超过一般人。
English: His eyes cannot read and his hands cannot write, but he is more intelligent than the average person.

古文：尝对上为诗，令仆射颜师伯执笔，庆之口占曰： 微生值多幸。 得逢时运昌，衰朽筋骨尽，徒步还南冈。
现代文：曾经与皇上对诗，让仆射颜师伯执笔，庆之随口吟出： 微小的生命多么幸运，能赶这样的好时代而命运昌盛，现在老了不中用了，回到南山冈种地吧。
English: Once he and the emperor had a poetry contest, and he asked his servant and teacher, Shoe Yan, to write a poem, and Qingzhi chanted out at random: How fortunate a tiny life is, to be able to catch such a good time and have a prosperous destiny. Now that he is old and useless, let's go back to farming in Nanshan Hill.

古文：辞荣此圣代，何愧张子房。 
现代文：在此圣代辞职荣归，与张子房比也不惭愧。 
English: He is not ashamed to be compared with Zhang Zifang, who resigned and returned to glory at this Sundae.

古文：并叹其辞意之美。
现代文：并慨叹他言词好。
English: And he sighed that his words were good.

古文：庆之尝岁旦梦人饷绢两疋，曰： 此绢足度！ 
现代文：庆之曾经在年初的早晨作一个梦，梦到一个人送给他两疋绢，并说： 这些绢足够你用了。 
English: On the morning of the beginning of the year, Keizhi had a dream. He dreamed that a man gave him two shovels and said, "These shovels are enough for you to use."

古文：觉而叹曰： 两疋八十尺，足度无盈余，老子今年不免矣。 
现代文：庆之醒后感叹说： 两疋绢八十尺，够用却没有余，老子今年不免一死了。 
English: After Qing Zhi woke up, he sighed and said: Two hundred and eighty feet, enough but not enough, Lao Zi will inevitably die this year.

古文：其年，果为原和所诛。
现代文：当年，果然被皇帝杀了。
English: That year, he was indeed killed by the emperor.

