古文：武王问太公曰： 引兵深入诸侯之地，与敌之军相当，两陈相望，众寡强弱相等，未敢先举，吾欲令敌人将帅恐惧，士卒心伤，行陈不固，后陈欲走，前陈数顾；鼓噪而乘之，敌人遂走，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王询问太公说： 率领军队深入敌国境内，敌我势均力敌，双方相互对峙，众寡强弱相等，谁也不敢轻举妄动。在这种情况下，我要使敌军将帅心怀恐惧，士气低落，行阵不能稳固，后阵士兵想要逃跑，前阵动摇不定不断回头张望。然后。擂鼓呐喊，乘势进小，迫使敌人溃败逃走，应该怎么办？ 
English: King Wu asked the Grand Duke: "Lead the army deep into the enemy territory, the enemy and I are of equal strength, the two sides are facing each other, the number of strong and weak are equal, and no one dares to act rashly. In this situation, I want to make the enemy generals fear, the morale is low, the line cannot be stable, the soldiers in the rear want to escape, the front line is wavering and constantly looking back. Then, how should I shout, take advantage of the situation, and force the enemy to flee in defeat?"

古文：太公曰： 如此者，发我兵去寇十里而伏其两旁，车骑百里而越前后，多其旌旗，益其金鼓。
现代文：太公答道： 要做到这样，就须派遣部队绕到敌后十里的地方，在道路两旁埋伏起来，另派遣战车和骑兵远出百里，迂回到敌军的深远后方，并命令部队多备旌旗，增设金鼓，在双方战斗发起后，擂鼓呐喊，各军同时向敌人发起进攻。
English: "To do so, we must send troops to a place ten miles behind the enemy and lie in ambush on both sides of the road, send chariots and cavalry a hundred miles away and return to the far rear of the enemy, and order the troops to prepare more flags and add golden drums. After the battle between the two sides is initiated, the drums shout, and the troops simultaneously attack the enemy.

古文：战合，鼓噪而俱起，敌将必恐，其军惊骇，众寡不相救，贵贱不相待，敌人必败。 
现代文：这样，敌军将帅必然恐惧，士兵必然惊骇，以致大小部队互不救援，官兵互不照顾。如此，敌军就必然失败。 
English: In this way, the enemy generals will inevitably be afraid and the soldiers will inevitably be shocked, so that large and small troops will not rescue each other, and officers and soldiers will not take care of each other. In this way, the enemy army will inevitably fail.

古文：武王曰： 敌之地势，不可以伏其两傍，车骑又无以越其前后，敌知我虑，先施其备，我士卒心伤，将帅恐惧，战则不胜，为之奈何？ 
现代文：武王又问道： 如果敌方所处地势不利于我军在两旁设立埋伏，我军战车和骑兵又不能迂回到敌人深远后方，同时敌人又察觉了我军意图，预先有了充分的准备，这种种情形使我军士卒情绪低落，将帅心怀恐惧，如果交战一定不可能取得胜利。
English: King Wu also asked: If the enemy is in a situation that is not conducive to our army setting up ambushes on both sides, and our army's chariots and cavalry cannot detour to the enemy's far rear, and at the same time the enemy has detected our army's intention and has made full preparations in advance, this kind of situation makes my sergeant-major depressed and the commander fearful, and if the battle is impossible to win.

古文：太公曰： 微哉，王之问也！
现代文：遇上这种情况，应该怎么办？ 太公答道： 君王您问得真是精妙呀。
English: What should one do in such a case? The lady replied, "Your Majesty, what an excellent question.

古文：如此者，先战五日，发我远候，往视其动静，审候其来，设伏而待之，必于死地，与敌相避。
现代文：像这种情况，应当在交战前五天，就先向远方派出斥候侦察，窥探敌人动静，审察敌人前来进攻的征兆，预先设下埋伏等待敌人进犯。必须在对敌最不利的地形上同敌军交战。
English: In such a case, scouts should be sent to a distant place five days before the engagement to reconnoitre, spy on the enemy's movements, examine the signs of the enemy's attack, and set up an ambush in advance to wait for the enemy to attack. The enemy must be engaged on the terrain that is most unfavorable to the enemy.

古文：远我旌旗，疏我行陈，必奔其前，与敌相当。战合而走，南击金无止，三里而还，伏兵乃起，或陷其两旁，或击其前后，三军疾战，敌人必走。 
现代文：疏散我军旌旗，拉开我行列的距离，并以与敌人相当的兵力向敌进击，刚一交战即行撤退，鸣金停止而故意不止，继续后退三里再回头反击，这时伏兵乘机而起，或攻击敌人两侧，或抄袭敌军前后，全军奋力作战，敌人必败而逃走。 
English: Evacuate our army's banner, open the distance of my ranks, and attack the enemy with a force equivalent to that of the enemy, retreat as soon as the battle begins, stop the gold and deliberately do not stop, continue to retreat three miles and then turn back to counterattack. At this time, the ambushed soldiers took the opportunity to attack the enemy on both sides, or copy the enemy's front and rear, the whole army fought hard, and the enemy was defeated and fled.

古文：武王曰： 善哉！ 
现代文：武王说： 说得真好啊！ 
English: King Wu said, "What a great way to say it!

