古文：韩子之术，明法尚功。
现代文：韩非的政治主张，是明确法令尊重功绩。
English: The political proposition of South Korea and Africa is to clearly legislate respect for merit.

古文：贤无益於国不加赏；不肖无害於治不施罚。
现代文：即使是贤人，对国家没有好处也不能给予赏赐；即使不是贤人，只要他对国家治理没有害处也不能施予惩罚。
English: Even if he is a wise man, he cannot be rewarded without benefiting the country; even if he is not a wise man, he cannot be punished as long as he does not harm the governance of the country.

古文：责功重赏，任刑用诛。
现代文：讲求功绩注重赏赐，使用刑惩。
English: Emphasis on merit, focus on rewards, and use of punishment.

古文：故其论儒也，谓之不耕而食，比之於一蠹；论有益与无益也，比之於鹿马。
现代文：所以他评论儒家，说他们是 不耕种就享受 ，把他们比喻成一种蛀虫。在评论儒家有益无益的时候，又把他们比喻成鹿和马。
English: Therefore, he criticized Confucianism, saying that they are "enjoying without cultivating," likening them to a kind of aphid. When criticizing Confucianism as beneficial or not, he also likened them to a deer and a horse.

古文：马之似鹿者千金，天下有千金之马，无千金之鹿，鹿无益，马有用也。
现代文：马像鹿的值千金，天下有值千金的马，没有值千金的鹿，因为鹿没有用，而马有用。
English: A horse, like a deer, is worth a lot of money. There are horses worth a lot of money all over the world, but there are no deer worth a lot of money, because deer are useless, but horses are useful.

古文：儒者犹鹿，有用之吏犹马也。
现代文：儒者像鹿一样，有用的官吏像马一样。
English: Confucians are like deer, and useful officials are like horses.

古文：夫韩子知以鹿马喻，不知以冠履譬。
现代文：韩非知道用鹿、马作比喻，却不知道用帽子和鞋子来作比喻。
English: Han Fei knows how to use deer and horse as metaphors, but does not know how to use hats and shoes as metaphors.

古文：使韩子不冠，徒履而朝，吾将听其言也。
现代文：假使韩非不戴帽子，只穿着鞋子来拜访，我会听从他责难儒家的话。
English: If Han Fei came to visit without a hat and only wearing shoes, I would listen to his words condemning Confucianism.

古文：加冠於首而立於朝，受无益之服，增无益之，言与服相违，行与术相反，吾是以非其言而不用其法也。
现代文：要是把帽子戴在头上而站在大堂中，忍受没有好处的装饰，多做了件无用的事情，说的与穿戴相违背，行动与主张相反，我因此要指责他的说法而不采用他的政治主张。
English: If he stands in the lobby with his hat on his head, puts up with useless decorations, does more than one useless thing, says the opposite of what he wears, and acts contrary to what he says, then I will criticize his words and not adopt his politics.

古文：烦劳人体，无益於人身，莫过跪拜。
现代文：烦劳人体，对人体没有好处的，莫过于跪拜。
English: There is nothing more annoying to the human body, and of no benefit to the human body, than kneeling.

古文：使韩子逢人不拜，见君父不谒，未必有贼於身体也。
现代文：假使韩非碰到人不拜，见到君父不下跪，未必对身体有害。
English: If Han Fei does not bow when he meets people, and does not kneel when he sees his father, it may not be harmful to his body.

古文：然须拜谒以尊亲者，礼义至重，不可失也。
现代文：然而对尊者和双亲一定要跪拜，这是很重要的礼义，不能违反。
English: However, it is essential to kneel before His Holiness and his parents. This is a very important etiquette and should not be violated.

古文：故礼义在身，身未必肥；而礼义去身，身未必瘠而化衰。
现代文：所以礼义在自身，身体不一定就肥；礼义不在自身，身体不一定就瘦而变得衰弱。
English: Therefore, if courtesy is in oneself, the body does not necessarily become fat; if courtesy is not in oneself, the body does not necessarily become thin and weak.

古文：以谓有益，礼义不如饮食。
现代文：如果说对身体有好处，礼义不如饮食。
English: If it is good for the body, etiquette is not as good as diet.

古文：使韩子赐食君父之前，不拜而用，肯为之乎？
现代文：假使韩非子在君父面前接受赐给的饮食，不拜就吃，能这样做吗？
English: If Han Feizi accepts the food given to him in front of his father and eats it without bowing, can he do so?

古文：夫拜谒，礼义之效，非益身之实也，然而韩子终不失者，不废礼义以苟益也。
现代文：跪拜，是礼义的表现，并非对身体实际上有好处，然而韩非始终不违反它，这是因为人不能废掉礼义来贪图对身体的好处。
English: Kneeling is an expression of propriety, not something that is actually good for the body, yet Han Fei never violates it. This is because one cannot abandon propriety and covet good for the body.

古文：夫儒生，礼义也；耕战，饮食也。
现代文：儒生讲的是礼义，耕战讲的是饮食。
English: Confucianism is about etiquette, and farming is about diet.

古文：贵耕战而贱儒生，是弃礼义求饮食也。
现代文：重视耕战而轻视儒生，是抛弃礼义找饭吃。
English: To attach importance to the ploughing war and despise Confucianism and Sunnism is to abandon propriety and righteousness in search of food.

古文：使礼义废，纲纪败，上下乱而阴阳缪，水旱失时，五谷不登，万民饥死，农不得耕，士不得战也。
现代文：假使礼义被废掉，维持统治秩序的礼法就会被破坏，上下关系一片混乱，阴阳二气也会错乱，天晴下雨违背时节，五谷没有收成，于是老百姓饿死，农民无法耕种，士兵也无法打仗。
English: If the etiquette is abolished, the etiquette of maintaining the ruling order will be destroyed, the relationship between the upper and lower levels will be in chaos, the yin and yang will be disordered, the weather will be rainy, the grain will not be harvested, so the people will starve to death, the farmers will not be able to farm, and the soldiers will not be able to fight.

古文：子贡去告朔之饩羊，孔子曰： 赐也！尔爱其羊，我爱其礼。 
现代文：子贡要取消告朔的活羊，孔子说： 端木赐，你爱那羊，我爱这礼。 
English: Confucius said, "Give me a piece of wood. You love that sheep. I love this gift."

古文：子贡恶费羊，孔子重废礼也。
现代文：这是说子贡痛恨浪费羊，孔子不愿意废掉礼。
English: This is to say that Zigong hated wasting sheep, and Confucius did not want to abolish the salute.

古文：故以旧防为无益而去之，必有水灾；以旧礼为无补而去之，必有乱患。
现代文：原以为旧堤防是没用的而把它拆掉，肯定要遭水灾；认为原有的礼义没帮助而把它取消，肯定要有灾祸。
English: It was thought that the old dike was useless, and if it was torn down, there would definitely be a flood; it was thought that the original etiquette was not helpful, and if it was canceled, there would definitely be a disaster.

古文：儒者之在世，礼义之旧防也，有之无益，无之有损。
现代文：儒者活在世上，就是维护礼义的原有堤防，有他们看来没有好处，但要没有他们就会带来损害。
English: Confucians live in the world, which is to maintain the original dike of etiquette and righteousness. In their eyes, there is no benefit, but without them, it will bring harm.

古文：庠序之设，自古有之。重本尊始，故立官置吏。
现代文：学校的设立，自古就有，由于尊重礼教，所以设置官吏专管教育。
English: The establishment of schools has existed since ancient times. Due to respect for etiquette, government officials were set up to be in charge of education.

古文：官不可废，道不可弃。
现代文：官吏不能废掉，礼义也不能抛弃。
English: Officials cannot be abolished, and propriety cannot be abandoned.

古文：儒生，道官之吏也，以为无益而废之，是弃道也。
现代文：儒生是掌管礼义的官吏，认为没有用处就废掉他们，这是抛弃了礼义。
English: Confucianism is the official in charge of etiquette, and believes that it is useless to abolish them, which is abandoning etiquette.

古文：夫道无成效於人，成效者须道而成。
现代文：礼义对于人不产生直接的具体效果，但有具体效果的事情都要依靠礼义来完成。
English: Etiquette does not have a direct concrete effect on people, but things that have a concrete effect must rely on etiquette to complete.

古文：然足蹈路而行，所蹈之路，须不蹈者。身须手足而动，待不动者。
现代文：就像脚踩着路行走，踩着的路，要靠没有被脚踩的地方才能存在；人的身体要靠手脚才能行动，然而行动要靠不动的身躯才能活动。
English: Just like walking on the road with your feet, the road you walk on depends on the place you don't step on to exist; the human body depends on the hands and feet to move, but the action depends on the motionless body to move.

古文：故事或无益，而益者须之；无效，而效者待之。
现代文：所以一件事或许看来没有好处而好事却要靠它，一件事或许看来没有直接效果而有直接具体效果的事却要依靠它。
English: Therefore, a thing may seem to have no benefit, but a good thing depends on it. A thing may seem to have no direct effect, but a direct concrete effect depends on it.

古文：儒生，耕战所须待也，弃而不存，如何也？
现代文：儒生，耕战必须依靠他们，要是抛弃而使他们不存在，那怎么行呢？
English: Confucianism, farming must rely on them, if you abandon them and make them not exist, then how can it work?

古文：韩子非儒，谓之无益有损，盖谓俗儒无行操，举措不重礼，以儒名而俗行，以实学而伪说，贪官尊荣，故不足贵。
现代文：韩非指责儒生，认为他们有害无益。大概是说一般儒生操行不好，举止不重礼义，名义上是儒，行动却和一般人一样，用真才实学作幌子，而提出些有害的主张，一心想做官发达，所以值不得尊重。
English: Han Fei accused Confucianism students, saying that they were harmful and useless. He probably meant that the general Confucianism students did not behave well, their manners were not respectful, they were nominally Confucian, but their actions were the same as ordinary people, they used their true talents and real learning as a cover, but put forward some harmful propositions, and they only wanted to be a well-developed official, so they should not be respected.

古文：夫志洁行显，不徇爵禄，去卿相之位若脱躧者，居位治职，功虽不立，此礼义为业者也。
现代文：至于志向纯洁，行为光明，不追求爵位、俸禄，抛弃卿相官位就像脱鞋一样的人，才会居于官位处理政事，即使他们没有建立功绩，但却是以推行礼义为事业的人。
English: As for those whose aspirations are pure, whose behavior is bright, who do not pursue a knighthood or a salary, and who discard the title of chancellor as if they were taking off their shoes, they will be able to handle government affairs. Even if they do not have established merits, they are people who pursue the cause of promoting etiquette.

古文：国之所以存者，礼义也。
现代文：国家能存在的原因，是有礼义。
English: The reason for the existence of the state is courtesy.

古文：民无礼义，倾国危主。
现代文：老百姓不懂礼义，国家就要灭亡，君主就要遭殃。
English: The common people do not understand the meaning of etiquette, the country will perish, and the monarch will suffer.

古文：今儒者之操，重礼爱义，率无礼义士，激无义之人。人民为善，爱其主上，此亦有益也。闻伯夷风者，贪夫廉，懦夫有立志；闻柳下惠风者，薄夫敦，鄙夫宽。
现代文：今天儒者的操行，是重礼爱义的，他们引导不懂礼的人，激励没有义的人，使人民变得善良，喜爱自己的国君，这也是很有好处的。 听说伯夷的作风，会使贪婪的人变得廉洁，软弱的人树立志向 ； 听说柳下惠的作风，会使轻薄的人变得敦厚，心胸狭隘的人变得宽宏大量 。
English: The behavior of today's Confucians is to emphasize courtesy and love righteousness. They guide those who do not know courtesy, encourage those who do not have righteousness, make the people become kind, and love their sovereign, which is also very beneficial. It is said that the style of Bo Yi will make greedy people become clean, and weak people set aspirations; it is said that the style of Liu Shih Hui will make light-skinned people become brave, and narrow-minded people become magnanimous.

古文：此上化也，非人所见。
现代文：这是最高的教化，不是一般人所能看到的。
English: This is the highest enlightenment, which is not visible to ordinary people.

古文：段干木阖门不出，魏文敬之，表式其闾，秦军闻之，卒不攻魏。
现代文：段干木闭门隐居不肯出来做官，魏文侯很敬重他，坐车经过他居住的里巷时也要扶轼俯身表示敬意，秦军听到这事，终于不敢攻打魏国。
English: Duan dry wood secluded himself behind closed doors and refused to come out to work as an official. Wei Wen Hou respected him very much, and when passing through the alley where he lived, he also bowed down to show respect. When the Qin Army heard about this, they finally dared not attack Wei.

古文：使魏无干木，秦兵入境，境土危亡。
现代文：假使魏国没有段干木，秦兵一进入国境，国家就有被灭亡的危险。
English: If Wei did not have a piece of dry wood, as soon as Qin soldiers entered the border, the country would be in danger of being destroyed.

古文：秦，强国也，兵无不胜，兵加於魏，魏国必破，三军兵顿，流血千里。
现代文：秦是强国，打仗没有不胜的。把战争强加给魏国，魏国必败，三军即使苦战，也要血流千里。
English: Qin is a powerful country, and there is no invincibility in war. If war is imposed on Wei, Wei will be defeated, and even if the three armies fight hard, blood will flow for thousands of miles.

古文：今魏文式阖门之士，却强秦之兵，全魏国之境，济三军之众，功莫大焉，赏莫先焉。
现代文：如今魏文侯向闭门隐居的人表示敬意，就使强大的秦国军队退却，保全了魏国的领土，拯救了三军士兵的生命，论功没有比他更大的，论赏没有能超过他的。
English: Today, Wei Wenhou pays tribute to those who live in seclusion behind closed doors. He made the powerful Qin army retreat, preserved the territory of Wei, and saved the lives of the soldiers of the three armies. There is no greater merit than him, and no reward can surpass him.

古文：齐有高节之士，曰狂谲、华士，二人昆弟也，义不降志，不仕非其主。
现代文：齐国有节操高尚的人，叫狂谲和华士。二人是兄弟，坚持自己的主张不肯屈从别人的意志，不在不符合自己心意的君主那里做官。
English: In the State of Qi, there are two high-minded and noble people, who are called "Crazy Dragonfly" and "Waxman." The two are brothers, who insist on their own opinions and refuse to succumb to the will of others, and do not work as officials for a monarch who does not meet their wishes.

古文：太公封於齐，以此二子解沮齐众，开不为上用之路，同时诛之。
现代文：姜太公吕尚被封在齐，认为这两个人使齐国人士气瓦解人心涣散，开了不为君主效劳的先例，就同时把他俩杀了。
English: Jiang Taigong killed both of them at the same time, thinking that the two of them had made the people of Qi disintegrate, and had set a precedent of not serving the monarch.

古文：韩子善之，以为二子无益而有损也。
现代文：韩非赞赏这种做法，认为他俩留着没有好处只有坏处。
English: Hanfei appreciates this approach and believes that there are no benefits to keeping them together, only drawbacks.

古文：夫狂谲、华士，段干木之类也，太公诛之，无所却到；魏文侯式之，却强秦而全魏。功孰大者？
现代文：其实，狂谲、华士、段干木这类人，姜太公杀了他们，并没有排除和得到什么；魏文侯扶轼俯身向段干木表示敬意，退了强大的秦军而保全了魏国，功劳谁的大呢？
English: As a matter of fact, Jiang Taigong did not eliminate or gain anything by killing such people as the mad monk, the Chinese scholar, and Duan Ganmu. Wei Wen Hou Fu Rong bowed down to Duan Ganmu to show his respect, and withdrew the powerful Qin army and preserved the State of Wei. Whose merit is greater?

古文：使韩子善干木阖门高节，魏文式之，是也；狂谲、华士之操，干木之节也，善太公诛之，非也。
现代文：假使韩非赞赏段干木闭门隐居的高尚节操，那么魏文侯尊敬段干木，就是对的；狂谲、华士的节操与段干木的节操一样，韩非称赞姜太公杀了他们，那就错了。
English: If Han Fei appreciates the noble self-restraint of Duan Dry Wood's closed-door seclusion, then Wei Wenhou is right to respect Duan Dry Wood; if Han Fei praises Jiang Taigong for killing the self-restraint of Duan Dry Wood, then it is wrong.

古文：使韩子非干木之行，下魏文之式，则干木以此行而有益，魏文用式之道为有功；是韩子不赏功尊有益也。
现代文：即使韩非指责段干木的操行，贬低魏文侯对他的尊敬，但段干木正以这样的操行而使国家得到好处，魏文侯正以尊敬段干木的办法而收到了功效，这可见韩非不奖赏功劳，不尊敬有益的人。
English: Even though Han Fei criticized Duan Zhigu's behavior and belittled Wei Wenhou's respect for him, Duan Zhigu was benefiting the country with such behavior, and Wei Wenhou was receiving benefits by respecting Duan Zhigu. This shows that Han Fei does not reward merit and does not respect beneficial people.

古文：论者或曰： 魏文式段干木之闾，秦兵为之不至，非法度之功；一功特然，不可常行，虽全国有益，非所贵也。 
现代文：议论者中有人说： 魏文侯到里巷对段干木表示敬意，秦军因此不去攻打魏国，并不是法制的功效。这一功效是特殊情况，不能经常实行。虽然在保全国家方面有好处，也不值得重视。 
English: Some of the commentators said: Wei Wenhou went to Li Xiang to pay respect to Duan dry wood, so the Qin Army did not attack Wei. This is not the effect of the legal system. This effect is a special case and cannot be practiced often. Although it is good for the preservation of the country, it is not worthy of attention.

古文：夫法度之功者，谓何等也？
现代文：那么，法制的功能，指的是什么呢？
English: So, what does the function of the legal system refer to?

古文：养三军之士，明赏罚之命，严刑峻法，富国强兵，此法度也。
现代文：养活三军士兵，明确赏罚法令，严厉刑法，富国强兵，这就是法制。
English: Feeding the soldiers of the three armies, clear reward and punishment laws, strict criminal laws, a rich country and strong soldiers, this is the legal system.

古文：案秦之强，肯为此乎？
现代文：考察秦国强盛，能因为你有法制就不攻打吗？
English: Looking at the prosperity of Qin, can you not attack because you have a legal system?

古文：六国之亡，皆灭於秦兵。
现代文：六国灭亡，都灭亡在秦国的军队。
English: The Six Kingdoms perished, and so did the army in Qin.

古文：六国之兵非不锐，士众之力非不劲也，然而不胜，至於破亡者，强弱不敌，众寡不同，虽明法度，其何益哉？
现代文：六国的军队并非不精锐，士兵的力量也并非不强，然而战不胜，甚至于被打败灭亡，这是因为强弱不相当，多少不一样，即使明确了法制，那又有什么用处呢？
English: The armies of the six countries are not without elite, and the strength of the soldiers is not without strength. However, they are not invincible, and may even be defeated and destroyed. This is because their strengths and weaknesses are not equivalent, and are somewhat different. Even if the legal system is clarified, what is the use?

古文：使童子变孟贲之意，孟贲怒之，童子操刃与孟贲战，童子必不胜，力不如也。
现代文：假使小孩违背了大力士孟贲的心意，孟贲发怒，小孩持刀跟孟贲对打，小孩肯定不能取胜，因为力量远远不如孟贲。
English: If a child disobeys the wishes of the strongman Meng Xuan, Meng Xuan gets angry, and the child fights with Meng Xuan with a knife, the child will definitely not win, because the strength is far inferior to Meng Xuan.

古文：孟贲怒，而童子修礼尽敬，孟贲不忍犯也。
现代文：要是孟贲发怒，而小孩讲究礼节对他非常恭敬，孟贲才会不忍加害。
English: If Meng Yao is angry, and the child is very respectful to him, Meng Yao will not bear to do harm.

古文：秦之与魏，孟贲之与童子也。
现代文：秦国与魏国，就像孟贲与小孩一样。
English: Qin and Wei were like Meng Xuan and a child.

古文：魏有法度，秦必不畏，犹童子操刃，孟贲不避也。
现代文：魏国有法制，秦国肯定不会害怕，就像小孩持刀，孟贲不会躲避一样。
English: Wei has a legal system, Qin will certainly not be afraid, just like a child with a knife, Meng Yao will not escape.

古文：其尊士式贤者之闾，非徒童子修礼尽敬也。
现代文：魏文侯到里巷对贤者表示敬意，不仅仅是小孩似的讲究礼节毕恭毕敬。
English: Wei Wenhou went to the alley to pay respect to the sage, not just a child-like etiquette.

古文：夫力少则修德，兵强则奋威。
现代文：照理，力量弱小就该讲究德行，军队强大就该发扬威力。
English: According to the theory, a weak force should pay attention to virtue, and a strong army should promote power.

古文：秦以兵强，威无不胜，却军还众，不犯魏境者，贤干木之操，高魏文之礼也。
现代文：秦国靠军队强大，威力无穷战无不胜，却撤回军队，不去侵犯魏国领土，是因为秦军尊重段干木操行贤良，推崇魏文侯的礼义。
English: Qin relied on its powerful army and was invincible in battle. However, it withdrew its army and did not invade the territory of Wei. This was because the Qin army respected Duan Zhigu's virtuous conduct and respected Wei Wenhou's propriety.

古文：夫敬贤，弱国之法度，力少之强助也。
现代文：看来，敬重贤者，是弱国的法制，这样力小能得到强有力的帮助。
English: It seems that the one who respects the wise is the legal system of a weak country, so that the weak can get strong help.

古文：谓之非法度之功，如何？
现代文：说敬重贤者不是法制的功能不能经常推行，怎么行呢？
English: Saying that respect for the wise is not a function of the legal system cannot always be implemented, how can it be done?

古文：高皇帝议欲废太子，吕后患之，即召张子房而取策。子房教以敬迎四皓而厚礼之，高祖见之，心消意沮，太子遂安。
现代文：汉高皇帝议论想废掉太子刘盈，吕后很担忧，立即召见张子房来出谋划策，张子房教太子用谦恭的态度去迎请四位受高皇帝敬重的白发隐士，并送给厚礼。
English: Emperor Henkel discussed the idea of dethroning Prince Liu Ying. Lü Guo was very worried and immediately summoned Zhang Zifang to come up with a plan. Zhang Zifang instructed the prince to use a humble attitude to welcome four white-haired hermits respected by Emperor Gao and give them a gift.

古文：使韩子为吕后议，进不过强谏，退不过劲力。
现代文：高祖看见了他们，心中废掉太子的意思就消失了，这样太子的地位安稳了。
English: When Gaozu saw them, the idea of abolishing the crown prince vanished from his mind, and the position of the crown prince became stable.

古文：以此自安，取诛之道也，岂徒易哉？夫太子敬厚四皓以消高帝之议，犹魏文式段干木之闾，却强秦之兵也。
现代文：假使让韩非为吕后出谋划策，上策不过极力劝阻，下策不过使用武力，以此来稳定太子自己的地位，实际是采取自杀的办法，岂只是丢掉太子的地位！太子敬重厚待四位白发隐士来消除了高皇帝废掉太子的想法，就像魏文侯到里巷对段干木表示敬意，退掉了强大的秦军一样。
English: If Han Fei were asked to come up with a plan for Lv Hou, the best plan would be to strongly dissuade him, and the next best would be to use force to stabilize the prince's own position. In fact, it would be a suicide method. Wouldn't it be just to lose the prince's position? The prince treated the four white-haired hermits with great respect to eliminate Emperor Gao's idea of abolishing the prince, just as Wei Wenhou went to Li Xiang to pay respect to Duan dry wood and withdrew the powerful Qin army.

古文：治国之道，所养有二：一曰养德，二曰养力。
现代文：治理国家的办法，所积蓄的东西有二个：一叫培养德操，二叫培植武力。
English: There are two methods of governing a country: one is to cultivate morality, and the other is to cultivate force.

古文：养德者，养名高之人，以示能敬贤；养力者，养气力之士，以明能用兵。
现代文：培养德操，就是供养名望极高的人，以表示能敬重贤人；培植武力，就是供养力大的人，以表明能用兵打仗。
English: Cultivating morality is to provide people with a high reputation to show that they can respect the wise; cultivating force is to provide people with great strength to show that they can fight with soldiers.

古文：此所谓文武张设，德力具足者也，事或可以德怀，或可以力摧。
现代文：这就是说文武都采用，德操武力都具备。战事或者可以用高尚德操来感化，或者可以用强大武力来征服。
English: That is to say, both literature and martial arts are used, and both morality and force are available. Warfare can either be influenced by high morality, or it can be conquered by powerful force.

古文：外以德自立，内以力自备。慕德者不战而服，犯德者畏兵而却。
现代文：外部要用德操来树立自己，内部要用武力来装备自己；仰慕高尚德操的人可以不战而折服，抵毁德操的人由于害怕强大的军队而退却。
English: On the outside, it is necessary to use morality to establish oneself, and on the inside, it is necessary to use force to equip oneself; those who admire high morality can surrender without a fight, and those who resist morality retreat for fear of a powerful army.

古文：徐偃王修行仁义，陆地朝者三十二国，强楚闻之，举兵而灭之。
现代文：徐偃王修习和实行仁义，各地来朝见的有三十二个国家，强大的楚国听说这件事，就发兵灭掉了它。
English: King Xu Xi studied and practiced benevolence and righteousness. He came to the DPRK from various places and saw thirty-two countries. When the powerful state of Chu heard about this, it sent troops to eliminate it.

古文：此有德守，无力备者也。
现代文：这是有德行，而没有武力准备的人。
English: This is a man of virtue, not a man of force.

古文：夫德不可独任以治国，力不可直任以御敌也。
现代文：可见，德行不可能单独担负治理国家的任务，武力也不可能单独完成抵抗敌人的任务。
English: It can be seen that virtue alone cannot shoulder the task of governing the country, nor can force alone accomplish the task of resisting the enemy.

古文：韩子之术不养德，偃王之操不任力。二者偏驳，各有不足。
现代文：韩非的政治主张不能培养德操，徐偃王的德行不能完备武力，他们二人都片面，各有不足。
English: Han Fei's political proposition cannot cultivate moral conduct, and Xu Xiwang's moral conduct cannot complete force. Both of them are one-sided and have their own shortcomings.

古文：偃王有无力之祸，知韩子必有无德之患。
现代文：从徐偃王忽视武力而遭祸，就能知道韩非一定会因忽视德操而受害。
English: From the misfortune suffered by King Xu Biao for neglecting the use of force, we can know that Han Fei will definitely suffer for neglecting morality.

古文：凡人禀性也，清浊贪廉，各有操行，犹草木异质，不可复变易也。狂谲、华士不仕於齐，犹段干木不仕於魏矣。
现代文：凡是人都禀受天性，清高、污浊、贪婪、廉洁，各有各的操行，就像草木各有各的本质，不能再改变一样，狂谲，华士不肯在齐国做官，就像段干木不肯在魏国做官一样。
English: All people are subject to nature, clean, dirty, greedy, and incorruptible, each has its own behavior, just as plants have their own essence and can no longer be changed. The madman, the warrior did not want to be an official in Qi, just as the piece of dry wood did not want to be an official in Wei.

古文：性行清廉，不贪富贵，非时疾世，义不苟仕，虽不诛此人，此人行不可随也。
现代文：他们天生品行清高廉洁，不贪图富贵，并非是当时痛恨社会，要坚持自己的政治主张，不肯随便做官。
English: They were born with high moral standards, were not greedy for wealth, and did not hate society at that time. They wanted to uphold their own political views and did not want to be officials.

古文：太公诛之，韩子是之，是谓人无性行，草木无质也。
现代文：即使不杀这些人，这些人的品行也是不可能效法的。姜太公杀了他俩，韩非认为是对的，这是认为人没有天生的品行，草木没有各自的本质。
English: Even if he didn't kill these people, it would be impossible to emulate the behavior of these people. Han Fei thought it was right that Jiang Taigong killed both of them. This is to say that people don't have innate behavior, and plants don't have their own essence.

古文：太公诛二子，使齐有二子之类，必不为二子见诛之故，不清其身；使无二子之类，虽养之，终无其化。
现代文：姜太公杀了他俩，假使齐国还有像他俩这样的人，肯定不会因为他俩被杀的缘故，就不保持自身的清高；假使没有他俩这样的人，虽然供养他们，他们的品行终究不会感化别人。
English: Jiang Taigong killed them both. If there were still people like them in Qi Province, they certainly would not be unable to keep themselves pure because they were killed. If there were no people like them, although they provided for them, their behavior would not influence others.

古文：尧不诛许由，唐民不皆樔处；武王不诛伯夷，周民不皆隐饿；魏文侯式段干木之闾，魏国不皆阖门。
现代文：尧不杀许由，尧时的百姓也没有都在树上搭窝居住；周武王不杀伯夷，周朝的百姓也没有都隐居饿死；魏文侯到里巷对段干木表示敬意，魏国人也没有都闭门不出。
English: For some reason, the people at that time did not all build nests in trees to live in; King Zhou Wu did not kill Bo Yi, and the people of the Zhou Dynasty did not all live in seclusion and starve to death; Wei Wen Hou went to Li Xiang to pay tribute to Duan dry wood, and the Wei people did not all close their doors.

古文：由此言之，太公不诛二子，齐国亦不皆不仕。
现代文：由此说来，姜太公如果不杀狂谲、华士二人，齐国人也不会都不做官。
English: Therefore, if Jiang Taigong did not kill the mad dragon and the two wise men, the people of Qi would not all become officials.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：清廉之行，人所不能为也。
现代文：因为清高廉洁的品行，是人通过努力不能做到的。
English: Because people can't achieve high integrity through hard work.

古文：夫人所不能为，养使为之，不能使劝；人所能为，诛以禁之，不能使止。
现代文：人通过努力不能做到清高廉洁，那么即使供养他们让他们努力去做，也不可能使他们得到鼓励而做到；如果人通过努力能够做到清高廉洁，用杀人的办法来禁止他们，是不可能使人们停止这种努力的。
English: If people can't become clean and honest through hard work, then even if they are provided with money to make them work hard, they can't be encouraged to do so; if people can become clean and honest through hard work, it's impossible to make people stop this effort by killing them.

古文：然则太公诛二子，无益於化，空杀无辜之民。赏无功，杀无辜，韩子所非也。
现代文：那么，姜太公杀他俩，对于教化百姓没有好处，白白地杀死了没有罪的人。
English: So, Jiang Taigong's killing of the two of them was of no benefit to the enlightenment of the people. He killed a man who had committed no crime in vain.

古文：太公杀无辜，韩子是之，以韩子之术杀无辜也。
现代文：赞赏没有功绩的人，杀死没有罪过的人，这是韩非不对。姜太公杀无辜，韩非表示赞同，这样说来，韩非的政治主张是用杀死无罪的人了。
English: It is not right for Han Fei to praise people without merit and kill people without guilt. Jiang Taigong killed innocent people, and Han Fei agreed. In this way, Han Fei's political proposition is to kill innocent people.

古文：夫执不仕者，未必有正罪也，太公诛之。
现代文：坚持不做官，未必有合适的罪名，姜太公就杀了他。
English: When he insisted on not becoming an official, Jiang Taigong killed him, even though he may not have been guilty of a crime.

古文：如出仕未有功，太公肯赏之乎？
现代文：如果出来做了官没有功绩，姜太公肯奖赏他吗？
English: If he became an official without merit, would Jiang Taigong be willing to reward him?

古文：赏须功而加，罚待罪而施。
现代文：奖赏一定要有功绩才能授予，惩罚也要有罪恶才能执行。
English: Rewards must be meritorious before they can be awarded, and punishments must be sinful before they can be carried out.

古文：使太公不赏出仕未有功之人，则其诛不仕未有罪之民，非也；而韩子是之，失误之言也。
现代文：假使姜太公不奖赏出来做官而没有功绩的人，那么他杀了不做官而没有罪恶的人，就是错的，韩非赞同他的做法，也是错误的说法。
English: If Jiang Taigong did not reward those who became officials without merit, then it was wrong for him to kill those who did not become officials and did not commit crimes. Han Fei's approval of his actions is also a wrong statement.

古文：且不仕之民，性廉寡欲；好仕之民，性贪多利。
现代文：不做官的人，本性廉洁少欲，喜欢做官的人，本性贪婪多利。
English: Those who do not hold public office are by nature incorruptible and have few desires. Those who like to hold public office are by nature greedy and avaricious.

古文：利欲不存於心，则视爵禄犹粪土矣。
现代文：利益欲望在心中不存在的人，则把爵位俸禄看成像粪土一样。
English: Those who do not have the desire for profit in their hearts see a knighthood as dung.

古文：廉则约省无极，贪则奢泰不止；奢泰不止，则其所欲不避其主。
现代文：本性廉洁，就会极其节俭，过分贪婪就会无止境奢侈。无止境奢侈，那么他想要的连君位也在其中。
English: If his nature is incorruptible, he will be extremely frugal; if he is excessively greedy, he will be endlessly extravagant; if he is endlessly extravagant, then he will even want the throne.

古文：案古篡畔之臣，希清白廉洁之人。
现代文：考察一下，古代篡权叛逆的臣子，少有清白廉洁的人。
English: Let's take a look. In ancient times, there were few innocent and incorruptible courtiers who usurped power and rebelled.

古文：贪，故能立功；骄，故能轻生。
现代文：本性贪婪，反而能立功；本性狂妄，反而能轻生。
English: A greedy nature, on the other hand, can make meritorious deeds; an arrogant nature, on the other hand, can live frivolously.

古文：积功以取大赏，奢泰以贪主位。
现代文：积累功绩可以受重赏，过分奢侈会贪图君位。
English: Accumulation of merit can be rewarded, excessive luxury will covet the throne.

古文：太公遗此法而去，故齐有陈氏劫杀之患。
现代文：姜太公留下 诛不仕未有罪之民 的作法而离开人世，所以齐国有陈恒劫持并杀害君主的灾祸。
English: Jiang Taigong left behind the practice of "not serving the innocent people" and died, so the disaster of Chen Heng's kidnapping and killing of the monarch by the State of Qi.

古文：太公之术，致劫杀之法也；韩子善之，是韩子之术亦危亡也。
现代文：姜太公的这个政治主张，导致了劫持杀害君主的作法。韩非赞同他的主张，这样说来，韩非的政治主张也是导致国家危险和灭亡的。
English: This political idea of Jiang Taigong led to the practice of kidnapping and killing the monarch. Han Fei agreed with his idea, so Han Fei's political idea also led to the danger and destruction of the country.

古文：周公闻太公诛二子，非而不是，然而身执贽以下白屋之士。
现代文：周公旦听见姜太公杀了狂谲和华士，就指责这种做法不对，于是便亲自拿着礼物去看望地位低下的人。地位低下的人，就像狂谲和华士之类。
English: When Zhou Gongdan heard that Jiang Taigong had killed Frenzy and Huasheng, he criticized this practice as wrong, so he personally took gifts to visit people with low status. People with low status are like Frenzy and Huasheng.

古文：白屋之士，二子之类也，周公礼之，太公诛之，二子之操，孰为是者？
现代文：周公旦以礼待他们，姜太公却杀掉他们。周公旦与姜太公他俩的操行，谁做得对呢？
English: Zhou Gongdan treated them with courtesy, but Jiang Taigong killed them. Zhou Gongdan and Jiang Taigong, who did the right thing?

古文：宋人有御马者不进，拔剑刭而弃之於沟中；又驾一马，马又不进，又刭而弃之於沟。
现代文：宋国有个车夫，马不走，就拔剑杀掉它并丢到沟里。再驾一匹马，马又不走，他又杀掉马丢到沟里。
English: There was a coachman in the Song Dynasty. If a horse would not go, he would kill it with his sword and throw it into a ditch. If he drove another horse and the horse would not go, he would kill the horse and throw it into the ditch.

古文：若是者三。
现代文：像这样干了三次。
English: Repeat like this three times.

古文：以此威马，至矣，然非王良之法也。
现代文：用这样的方法驯马，够厉害了，但不是王良驯马的方法。
English: Using this method to train horses is powerful enough, but it is not Wang Liang's way of training horses.

古文：王良登车，马无罢驽。尧、舜治世，民无狂悖。
现代文：王良驾车，没有疲沓不走的坏马；尧、舜治理国家，老百姓没有作乱的。
English: Wang Liang drove a car, and there was no tired horse that would not go; Zou and Zou governed the country, and the common people did not make trouble.

古文：王良驯马之心，尧、舜顺民之意。
现代文：王良是驯服马的心，尧、舜是顺服老百姓的思想。
English: Wang Liang is the spirit of taming the horse, and Zou and Zou are the thoughts of obeying the people.

古文：人同性，马殊类也。
现代文：人和人本性相同，人与马不同种类。
English: People and human nature are the same, but people and horses are different species.

古文：王良能调殊类之马，太公不能率同性之士。
现代文：王良能调理与人不同种类的马，姜太公却不能引导同本性的人。
English: Wang Liang can train horses that are different from humans, but Jiang Taigong cannot guide people of the same nature.

古文：然则周公之所下白屋，王良之驯马也；太公之诛二子，宋人之刭马也。
现代文：这样看来，周公旦敬重地位低下的人，跟王良驯马的作法是一样的；姜太公杀死狂谲和华士两人，跟宋国车夫杀马的作法是一样的。
English: From this perspective, Zhou Gongdan's respect for people of low status is the same as Wang Liang's practice of training horses; Jiang Taigong's killing of the wild donkey and two warriors is the same as the Song Dynasty coachman's killing of horses.

古文：举王良之法与宋人之操，使韩子平之，韩子必是王良而非宋人矣。
现代文：拿王良驯马的方法与宋国车夫驯马的作法，让韩非评论，韩非肯定认为对的是王良而指责宋国车夫。
English: Han Fei commented on the comparison between Wang Liang's horse training method and that of the Song coachman. Han Fei definitely thought that Wang Liang was right and blamed the Song coachman.

古文：王良全马，宋人贼马也。
现代文：因为王良保全了马的性命，而宋国车夫则杀死了马。
English: Because Wang Liang saved the horse's life, while the Song coachman killed the horse.

古文：马之贼，则不若其全；然则，民之死，不若其生。
现代文：马被杀，不如保全它的性命；像这样，老百姓被杀，不如让他活着。
English: If a horse is killed, it is better to save its life; similarly, if a commoner is killed, it is better to let him live.

古文：使韩子非王良，自同於宋人，贼善人矣。
现代文：假使韩非指责王良，自己就跟宋国车夫一样，要杀害好人了。
English: If Han Fei accuses Wang Liang, he will, like the Song coachman, kill a good man.

古文：如非宋人，宋人之术与太公同。非宋人，是太公，韩子好恶无定矣。
现代文：如果他指责宋国车夫，宋国车夫的作法跟姜太公相同，这样，他一面指责宋国车夫，一面又赞同姜太公的作法，可见韩非的好恶没有一个固定的标准。
English: If he accuses the Song coachman, the Song coachman's practice is the same as that of Jiang Taigong. Thus, while he accuses the Song coachman, he also agrees with the practice of Jiang Taigong. It can be seen that Han Fei's likes and dislikes do not have a fixed standard.

古文：治国犹治身也。
现代文：治理国家就像修养自己的品德一样。
English: Governing a country is like cultivating one's own character.

古文：治一身，省恩德之行，多伤害之操，则交党疏绝，耻辱至身。
现代文：修养自己一生的品德，要是缺少给别人恩惠的品行，只有伤害别人的操行，那么结交亲戚朋友就会交情疏远、关系断绝，把耻辱带给自己。
English: Cultivating one's own moral character throughout one's life, if one lacks the moral conduct of giving grace to others, and only has the conduct of harming others, then making relatives and friends will alienate friendships, sever relationships, and bring shame to oneself.

古文：推治身以况治国，治国之道当任德也。
现代文：用修养个人品德的道理来推论、比喻治理国家的道理，那么治理国家的道理应该是用道德。
English: If we use the principle of cultivating personal character to infer and compare the principle of governing the country, then the principle of governing the country should be based on morality.

古文：韩子任刑独以治世，是则治身之人任伤害也。
现代文：韩非主张靠刑法，专用它来治理社会，这就是主张修养自己品德的人，要采用伤害别人的办法。
English: Han Fei advocates relying on criminal law and using it exclusively to govern society. This is advocating that those who cultivate their own moral character should use methods that harm others.

古文：韩子岂不知任德之为善哉？
现代文：韩非难道不知道用道德是个好办法吗？
English: Doesn't Hanfei know that using morality is a good way?

古文：以为世衰事变，民心靡薄，故作法术，专意於刑也。
现代文：而是他认为社会衰败事态改变，老百姓的心奢靡轻薄，所以制作法律制度，一心在用刑。
English: On the contrary, he thought that the social decline and the change of the state of affairs, and the people's hearts were extravagant and frivolous, so he made a legal system and concentrated on the use of punishment.

古文：夫世不乏於德，犹岁不绝於春也。
现代文：世上不能缺少道德，就像每年不能断绝春天一样。
English: Morality cannot be lacking in the world, just as spring cannot be cut short every year.

古文：谓世衰难以德治，可谓岁乱不可以春生乎？
现代文：认为社会衰败难以用道德来治理，就可以说因为年头荒乱，万物不能在春天生长了吗？
English: Considering that social decay is difficult to control with morality, can we say that because of the chaos of the year, everything cannot grow in the spring?

古文：人君治一国，犹天地生万物。
现代文：君主治理一个国家，就像天地使万物生长一样。
English: A monarch governs a country, just as heaven and earth make all things grow.

古文：天地不为乱岁去春，人君不以衰世屏德。
现代文：天地不能因为年头荒乱就让春天离开，君主也不能因为社会衰败就抛弃道德。
English: Heaven and earth cannot let spring go because of the chaos of the year, nor can the monarch abandon morality because of social decay.

古文：孔子曰： 斯民也，三代所以直道而行也。 
现代文：孔子说： 有这样的老百姓，所以夏、商、周三代才能按正道进行教化。 
English: Confucius said, "It is because there are such common people that Xia, Shang, and San were able to carry out enlightenment according to the right path.

古文：周穆王之世，可谓衰矣，任刑治政，乱而无功。
现代文：周穆王时的社会，可以说是够衰败了，他用刑法来治理国家，混乱而没有功绩。
English: The society at the time of King Zhou Mu can be said to be decadent enough. He used criminal law to govern the country, creating chaos without merit.

古文：甫侯谏之，穆王存德，享国久长，功传於世。
现代文：后来甫侯规劝他，周穆王把道德记在心上，于是长久地统治着国家，功绩一直流传到后代。
English: Later, his father-in-law admonished him. King Zhou Mu took morality to heart and ruled the country for a long time, and his achievements have been passed down to future generations.

古文：夫穆王之治，初乱终治，非知昏於前，才妙於後也，前任蚩尤之刑，後用甫侯之言也。
现代文：周穆王治理国家，开初混乱后来终于治理好了，并不是他在前糊涂昏庸，之后才高明的；而是先前用蚩尤的刑法，后来遵循甫侯的劝说。
English: It is not that King Zhou Mu, who ruled the country in chaos at the beginning, ruled it well later. It is not that he was muddled in the past, but that he was clever later. Rather, he used the criminal law of Zhou Yu in the past, and later followed the persuasion of the prince.

古文：夫治人不能舍恩，治国不能废德，治物不能去春。韩子欲独任刑用诛，如何？
现代文：治人不能抛弃恩惠，治国不能废掉道德，种植作物不能离开春天，韩非想专用刑法来杀人，怎么行呢？
English: Governing people cannot discard favors, governing the country cannot abolish morality, planting crops cannot leave the spring, Han Fei wants to use special criminal law to kill people, how can it be done?

古文：鲁缪公问於子思曰： 吾闻庞扪是子不孝，不孝其行奚如？ 
现代文：鲁缪公问子思说： 我听说庞是的儿子不孝。他的行为怎么样不孝呢？ 
English: King Rumi asked Zisi, "I have heard that Pangyao's son is unfilial. How is his behavior unfilial?"

古文：子思对曰： 君子尊贤以崇德，举善以劝民。
现代文：子思回答说： 君子尊敬贤人以推崇道德，用好的东西来规劝老百姓。
English: Zisi replied: A gentleman respects the wise by promoting morality, and uses good things to persuade the common people.

古文：若夫过行，是细人之所识也，臣不知也。 
现代文：至于错误的行为，是小人所记的东西，我不知道。 
English: As for wrongdoing, that's for the little people to remember, I don't know.

古文：子思出，子服厉伯见。
现代文：子思出去，子服厉伯进来拜见鲁缪公。
English: Zi Si went out and Zifu Libo came in to see Lord Rumi.

古文：君问庞是子，子服厉伯对以其过，皆君所未曾闻。
现代文：鲁缪公问起庞是的儿子，子服厉伯把他的过失告诉了鲁缪公，全都是鲁缪公没有听见过的。
English: Lord Rumi asked about Pang Ye's son, and Zifu Libo told Lord Rumi about his faults, all of which Lord Rumi had never heard of.

古文：自是之後，君贵子思而贱子服厉伯。
现代文：自从这事以后，鲁缪公看重子思而瞧不起子服厉伯。
English: Ever since this incident, Lord Rumi has placed more importance on his son's thoughts and despised his son's efforts.

古文：韩子闻之，以非缪公，以为明君求奸而诛之，子思不以奸闻，而厉伯以奸对，厉伯宜贵，子思宜贱。
现代文：韩非听说这事，而指责鲁缪公，他认为明智的君主应该找出坏人并杀掉他们，子思不揭发坏人坏事让国君知道，而子服厉伯揭发了坏人坏事并告诉了鲁缪公，子服厉伯应该受到重视，而子思应该被轻视。
English: When Han Fei heard about this, he blamed Lord Rumi. He thought that a wise ruler should find out the bad people and kill them. Zi Si did not expose the bad people and bad things to let the sovereign know, but Zifu Li Bo exposed the bad people and bad things and told Lord Rumi. Zi Fu Li Bo should be valued, while Zi Si should be despised.

古文：今缪公贵子思，贱厉伯，失贵贱之宜，故非之也。
现代文：如今鲁缪公看重子思，而瞧不起子服厉伯，这违背了贵贱的应有的位置，所以韩非指责鲁缪公。
English: Nowadays, Lord Rumi values filial piety and despises filial servitude, which violates the rightful position of nobility and lowliness, so Han Fei accused Lord Rumi.

古文：夫韩子所尚者，法度也。
现代文：韩非所崇尚的，是法制。
English: What Han Fei advocates is the rule of law.

古文：人为善，法度赏之；恶，法度罚之。
现代文：人做了好事，按法制要奖赏他；做了坏事，照法制得惩罚他。
English: If a person does a good deed, he should be rewarded according to the law; if he does a bad deed, he should be punished according to the law.

古文：虽不闻善恶於外，善恶有所制矣。
现代文：君主即使没有听见宫外的好事与坏事，根据法制这些好事和坏事都会得到处理。
English: Even if the monarch does not hear the good and bad things outside the palace, according to the legal system, these good and bad things will be dealt with.

古文：夫闻恶不可以行罚，犹闻善不可以行赏也。
现代文：听见坏事不能就进行惩罚，就像听见好事不能就进行奖赏一样。
English: One cannot punish evil on hearing it, just as one cannot reward good on hearing it.

古文：非人不举奸者，非韩子之术也。
现代文：对别人不检举坏人坏事就指责，是韩非的就张。
English: Accusing others of not reporting bad people and bad things is a South Korean and African tactic.

古文：使韩子闻善，必将试之；试之有功，乃肯赏之。
现代文：让韩非听到好事，他一定要考核，考核确实有功绩，才肯奖赏。
English: Let Han Fei hear good things, he must be assessed, and the assessment must really have merit before he is willing to reward.

古文：夫闻善不辄加赏，虚言未必可信也。
现代文：听见好事不能立即给予奖赏，因为没有事实根据的话未必可信。
English: When you hear something good, you can't immediately reward it, because it's not credible if it's not based on fact.

古文：若此，闻善与不闻，无以异也。
现代文：像这样，听见好事跟没有听见，无区别。
English: In this way, there is no difference between hearing something good and not hearing it.

古文：夫闻善不辄赏，则闻恶不辄罚矣。
现代文：听到好事不能立即奖赏，那么听到坏事也不能马上惩罚。
English: When you hear good things, you can't immediately reward, and when you hear bad things, you can't immediately punish.

古文：闻善必试之，闻恶必考之。试有功乃加赏，考有验乃加罚。
现代文：听到好事一定要考核，听到坏事也一定要审查，考核有功才能给奖赏，审查有证据才能实行惩罚。
English: Hearing good things must be assessed, and hearing bad things must also be reviewed. Only if there is merit in the assessment can a reward be given, and only if there is evidence in the review can a punishment be imposed.

古文：虚闻空见，实试未立，赏罚未加。
现代文：听见不实际的，看见不真实的，经过核实不能成立，奖赏与惩罚就不能进行。
English: Hearing unrealistic, seeing unrealistic, cannot be established after verification, reward and punishment cannot be carried out.

古文：赏罚未加，善恶未定，未定之事，须术乃立，则欲耳闻之，非也。
现代文：奖赏与惩罚不能进行，那么是好事还是坏事也不能确定。没有确定的事情，需要有一套办法才能确定它，那想靠耳朵听到的情况就进行奖赏与惩罚，是不对的。
English: Reward and punishment cannot be carried out, so whether it is a good thing or a bad thing cannot be determined. There is no certain thing, there needs to be a way to determine it, and it is not right to reward and punish based on what you want to hear.

古文：郑子产晨出，过东匠之宫，闻妇人之哭也，抚其仆之手而听之。
现代文：郑人子产早晨出去，走过东匠闾，听见有妇人的哭声，就按住他车夫的手让车停下，仔细地听。
English: Zheng Renzhong went out in the morning, walked through the East Jiuquan, heard a woman's cry, held his driver's hand to stop the car, and listened carefully.

古文：有间，使吏执而问之；手杀其夫者也。
现代文：过了好一会儿，让官吏把妇人抓来审问，原来是个亲手杀死自己丈夫的女人。
English: A short time later, officers arrested and questioned a woman who had killed her husband with her own hands.

古文：翼日，其仆问曰： 夫子何以知之？ 
现代文：第二天，他的车夫问： 夫子你是怎么知道的？ 
English: The next day, his driver asked, "How did you know my husband?"

古文：子产曰： 其声不恸。
现代文：子产说： 她的哭声是恐惧的。
English: Her cries were of fear, her son said.

古文：凡人於其所亲爱也，知病而忧，临死而惧，已死而哀。
现代文：凡是人对他亲爱的人，知道他病了就会忧愁，知道他快要死了就会担心，已经死了就会悲哀。
English: Everyone grieves for a loved one when he knows he is ill, worries when he knows he is about to die, and grieves when he is dead.

古文：今哭夫已死，不哀而惧，是以知其有奸也。 
现代文：现在她哭丈夫死去，不悲哀而是恐惧，这就可以知道其中必定发生了不正当的事情。 
English: Now she weeps for her husband's death, not in sorrow but in fear, knowing that something must have gone wrong.

古文：韩子闻而非之曰： 子产不亦多事乎？
现代文：韩非听说这事就指责说： 子产不也多事吗！
English: When Han Fei heard about this, he criticized and said, "Isn't childbirth a lot of work?"

古文：奸必待耳目之所及而後知之，则郑国之得奸寡矣。
现代文：坏人一定要等自己的耳朵听到，眼睛看到之后才知道，那么郑国查出来的坏人就太少了。
English: Bad people must wait for their ears to hear and eyes to see before they know, so there are too few bad people found by Zheng Guo.

古文：不任典城之吏，察参伍之正，不明度量，待尽聪明、劳知虑而以知奸，不亦无术乎！ 
现代文：子产不依靠地方长官，不运用参照对比的方法进行考察，不明白法制，光靠自己尽力用耳听，用眼看，费尽心思来发现坏人坏事，不是也太没有方法了吗？ 
English: Without relying on local governors, without using the method of reference and comparison for investigation, without understanding the legal system, without relying on oneself to listen with ears, look with eyes, and make every effort to find bad people and bad things, isn't it too no way?

古文：韩子之非子产，是也。其非缪公，非也。
现代文：韩非指责子产，是对的；但他指责鲁缪公，就错了。
English: Han Fei was right to accuse Zifang, but he was wrong to accuse Rumi.

古文：夫妇人之不哀，犹庞子不孝也。
现代文：妇人不悲哀，就像庞是儿子不孝一样。
English: If a woman does not mourn, it is as if her son is not a filial son.

古文：非子产持耳目以知奸，独欲缪公须问以定邪。
现代文：既然指责子产靠耳闻目睹来发现奸妇，却又想要鲁缪公靠口问来确定坏人坏事。
English: Since he accused Zifang of discovering the adulteress by hearing and witnessing, he wanted Rumi to determine the bad people and bad things by asking.

古文：子产不任典城之吏，而以耳定实；缪公亦不任吏，而以口问立诚。
现代文：子产不依靠地方长官，而用耳闻来确定事实真像；鲁缪公也不依靠官吏，而用口问来确定真像。
English: Zibo did not rely on local officials, but used hearsay to determine the true image of the facts; Lord Rumi did not rely on officials, but used oral questioning to determine the true image.

古文：夫耳闻口问，一实也，俱不任吏，皆不参伍。
现代文：其实，耳闻和口问，是一回事，都不依靠官吏，都不参照对比。
English: In fact, hearing by ear and asking by mouth are the same thing. They do not rely on officials and do not refer to comparisons.

古文：厉伯之对不可以立实，犹妇人之哭不可以定诚矣。
现代文：子服厉伯回答的话不能够用来确定事实真像，就像妇人的哭声不能够用来确定事实真像一样。
English: The words of Zifu Libo's answer cannot be used to determine the truth, just as the woman's cries cannot be used to determine the truth.

古文：不可定诚，使吏执而问之。
现代文：不能够确定事实真像，子产就让官吏把妇人抓来审问情况。
English: Unable to ascertain the truth, the family asked officials to arrest the woman and interrogate her.

古文：不可以立实，不使吏考，独信厉伯口，以罪不考之奸，如何？
现代文：不能够确定事实真像，却不让官吏去审查，偏偏相信子服厉伯的话，就以未经证实的不孝事情来定庞是儿子的罪，怎么行呢？
English: Unable to determine the true facts, but not allowing officials to examine them, but rather believing the words of Zifu Libo, they use unproven unfilial things to determine that Pang is the son's crime. How can this be done?

古文：韩子曰： 子思不以过闻，缪公贵之。子服厉伯以奸闻，缪公贱之。
现代文：韩非说： 子思不把庞是儿子的过失告诉鲁缪公知道，缪公反而看重他；子服厉伯把庞是儿子的过失告诉鲁缪公知道，缪公却瞧不起他。
English: Han Fei said: Zi Si knew not to tell Lu Mu Gong that Pang was his son's fault, but Mu Gong valued him; Zifu Li Bo knew to tell Lu Mu Gong that Pang was his son's fault, but Mu Gong despised him.

古文：人情皆喜贵而恶贱，故季氏之乱成而不上闻。
现代文：人之常情都是喜欢被重视而讨厌被瞧不起，所以季平子作乱已形成，而鲁昭公还不知道。
English: It is human nature to like to be valued and hate to be looked down upon, so Ji Ping Zi's rebellion has already taken shape, and Lu Zhaogu still does not know it.

古文：此鲁君之所以劫也。 
现代文：这就是鲁昭公被驱逐的原因。 
English: This is the reason why Lu Zhaogong was expelled.

古文：夫鲁君所以劫者，以不明法度邪，以不早闻奸也？
现代文：鲁昭公被驱逐，是因为法制不明确呢，还是因为没有及早知道坏人呢？
English: Was Lu Zhaogong expelled because the legal system was not clear, or because he did not know the bad guys in advance?

古文：夫法度明，虽不闻奸，奸无由生；法度不明，虽日求奸，决其源鄣之以掌也。
现代文：法制明确，即使不知道坏人坏事，坏人坏事也无从发生；法制不明确，即使天天寻找坏人坏事，就像决开水源，用手掌去堵洪水一样。
English: The legal system is clear, even if you do not know the bad people and bad things, the bad people and bad things can not happen; the legal system is not clear, even if you look for the bad people and bad things every day, it is like breaking the water source and using the palm to block the flood.

古文：御者无衔，见马且奔，无以制也。
现代文：车夫没有马嚼子，看见马要跑，无法去制止它。
English: The coachman had no bridle, and when he saw the horse about to run, he could not stop it.

古文：使王良持辔，马无欲奔之心，御之有数也。
现代文：让王良手上拿着马缰绳，马就没有想跑的意思，这是驾驶有办法。
English: Let Wang Liang hold the bridle of the horse in his hand, and the horse will not want to run. This is a way of driving.

古文：今不言鲁君无术，而曰 不闻奸 ；不言审法度，而曰 不通下情 ，韩子之非缪公也，与术意而相违矣。
现代文：如今不说鲁昭公没有好的政治主张，而是说他 没有早知道坏人 ；不说他法制不明确，而说他 没有沟通下面的情况 。韩非指责鲁缪公，跟他政治主张的基本思想是相违背的。
English: Today, it is not that Lu Zhaogong did not have a good political idea, but that he did not know the bad guys; it is not that he did not have a clear legal system, but that he did not communicate the following situation. Han Fei accused Lu Mu, which is contrary to the basic idea of his political idea.

古文：庞扪是子不孝，子思不言，缪公贵之。
现代文：庞扪是的儿子不孝，子思不说，鲁缪公看重他。
English: Pang Xuan is a son of filial piety, and his son does not say that he thinks highly of him.

古文：韩子非之，以为明君求善而赏之，求奸而诛之。
现代文：韩非指责缪公，认为明智的君主发现好人就该奖赏，发现坏人就该杀掉。
English: Han Fei accused Miao Gong, saying that a wise ruler should reward good people and kill bad people.

古文：夫不孝之人，下愚之才也。
现代文：不孝的人，是低下愚蠢的人。
English: An unfilial person is a low and stupid person.

古文：下愚无礼，顺情从欲，与鸟兽同，谓之恶，可也，谓奸，非也。
现代文：低下愚蠢的人不懂礼义，顺随感情放纵欲望，跟鸟兽一样。说他们 恶 ，可以；说他们 奸 ，就不对。
English: Low and stupid people don't understand propriety, they follow their feelings and indulge their desires, just like birds and beasts. It's okay to call them evil; it's not right to call them adulterers.

古文：奸人外善内恶，色厉内荏，作为操止象类贤行，以取升进，容媚於上，安肯作不孝、著身为恶，以取弃殉之咎乎？
现代文：奸人外表和善内心凶狠，脸色严厉内心软弱，行为举动，模仿贤人，以求升官，向君主讨好献媚，怎么肯做出不孝，显露自己的恶劣行为，以自取被斥退和杀身的灾祸呢？
English: How can a traitor, outwardly good and inwardly ferocious, stern-faced and inwardly weak, act and behave, imitate a wise man in order to be promoted, flatter and flatter the monarch, how can he be unfilial, reveal his bad behavior, and take upon himself the disaster of being expelled and killed?

古文：庞扪是子可谓不孝，不可谓奸。
现代文：庞是的儿子可以说他不孝，但不能说他 奸 。
English: It can be said that Pang Ye's son is unfilial, but it cannot be said that he is a traitor.

古文：韩子谓之奸，失奸之实矣。
现代文：韩非说他 奸 ，不符合 奸 的事实。
English: Han Fei said he was a traitor, which does not correspond to the fact of treason.

古文：韩子曰： 布帛寻常，庸人不择；烁金百镒，盗跖不搏。 
现代文：韩非说： 布帛有多有少，一般人不敢乱拿；闪亮的金子有百镒，跖也不会去夺取。 
English: Han Fei said, "Ordinary people do not dare to grab cloth bags, no matter how few they are; shiny gold has hundreds of shiny shiny shiny shiny shiny shiny shiny shiny shiny.

古文：以此言之，法明，民不敢犯也。
现代文：照这样说，法制明确，老百姓就不敢触犯。
English: According to this, the legal system is clear, and the common people dare not violate it.

古文：设明法於邦，有盗贼之心，不敢犯矣；不测之者，不敢发矣。
现代文：假设国家明确了法制，有偷盗的想法，不敢触犯；存心不良的人，也不敢发作。
English: Assuming that the country has clarified the legal system, those who have the idea of stealing will not dare to violate the law, and those who have bad intentions will not dare to commit crimes.

古文：奸心藏於胸中，不敢以犯罪法，罪法恐之也。
现代文：坏心藏在胸中，仍不敢触犯法律，因为明确的法制使他们感到恐惧。
English: With evil in their hearts, they still dare not break the law, because the clear rule of law frightens them.

古文：明法恐之，则不须考奸求邪於下矣。
现代文：明确的法制使他们恐惧，那么就不需要审查坏人发现坏事了。
English: A clear legal system frightens them, so there is no need to scrutinize bad people to find bad things.

古文：使法峻，民无奸者；使法不峻，民多为奸。
现代文：假使法制严厉，老百姓中就没有坏人；假使法制不严厉，老百姓中就有许多是坏人。
English: If the legal system is strict, there will be no bad people among the people; if the legal system is not strict, there will be many bad people among the people.

古文：而不言明王之严刑峻法，而云求奸而诛之。
现代文：不说明智的君王严刑峻法，而却说发现坏人就杀掉。
English: It does not say that a wise king will mete out severe punishment, but that he will kill bad people when he finds them.

古文：言求奸，是法不峻，民或犯之也。
现代文：说发现坏人，这是法律不严厉，老百姓中有人触犯了它。
English: To say that bad people have been found is to say that the law is not strict and that some people have broken it.

古文：世不专意於明法，而专心求奸。韩子之言，与法相违。
现代文：不专心于明确法制，而专心于发现坏人，韩非的话，跟主张法制是相违背的。
English: Not concentrating on clarifying the legal system, but concentrating on finding bad people, Han Fei said, is contrary to advocating the legal system.

古文：人之释沟渠也，知者必溺身。不塞沟渠而缮船楫者，知水之性不可阏，其势必溺人也。
现代文：人们疏通沟渠，是知道它一旦堵塞必定会淹死自己，不去堵塞沟渠而会造船和桨的人，深知水性不能堵塞，水的汹涌势头肯定要淹死人的。
English: People dredge a ditch because they know that once it is blocked, they will surely drown themselves. People who do not block the ditch but build boats and paddles, know that water cannot be blocked, and the turbulent momentum of water will definitely drown people.

古文：臣子之性欲奸君父，犹水之性溺人也。
现代文：臣子的本性欲望会夺取君位，就像水的本性会淹死人样。
English: The natural desire of a vassal will usurp the throne, just as the natural desire of water drowns people.

古文：不教所以防奸，而非其不闻知，是犹不备水之具，而徒欲早知水之溺人也。
现代文：不告诉君主用什么防范坏人，而指责他不知道 欲奸君父 的情况，这就像不准备防水的船具一样，却只想先知道水会淹死人。
English: To accuse the sovereign of not knowing how to prevent evil-doers without telling him how to prevent evil-doers is like not preparing a watertight boat, but only wanting to know that water can drown people.

古文：溺於水，不责水而咎己者，己失防备也。
现代文：被淹在水里，不责怪水而抱怨自己，是自己忘记了防备。
English: If you are submerged in water and do not blame the water but complain about yourself, you have forgotten to take precautions.

古文：然则人君劫於臣，己失法也。
现代文：这样说来，君主被臣子驱逐，是由于丧失了防范的法制。
English: Thus, the monarch was ousted by his vassals because of the loss of a protective legal system.

古文：备溺不阏水源，防劫不求臣奸，韩子所宜用教己也。
现代文：要防备被淹死不需要堵塞水源，君主要防范被驱逐也不需要事先发觉哪个大臣会干坏事，韩非应该把这道理告诉君主。
English: It is not necessary to block the water source to prevent drowning, and it is not necessary for the monarch to find out in advance which minister will do something bad in order to prevent expulsion. Han Fei should tell this to the monarch.

古文：水之性胜火，如裹之以釜，水煎而不得胜，必矣。
现代文：水的本性能灭火，如果把水装在釜里，水开了也不会把火灭掉，这是肯定的。
English: The natural ability of water to extinguish fire, if the water is placed in the kettle, the water will not extinguish the fire, this is certain.

古文：夫君犹火也，臣犹水也，法度釜也。火不求水之奸，君亦不宜求臣之罪也。
现代文：君像火，臣像水，法制是釜，火没有发觉水会灭掉它，君主也用不着预先察觉臣子要干的坏事。
English: The prince is like fire, the vassal is like water. The legal system is a cauldron. The fire does not know that the water will extinguish it. The sovereign does not need to anticipate the bad things that the vassal is going to do.

