古文：赵充国字翁孙，陇西上邽人也，后徙金城令居。
现代文：赵充国字翁孙，是陇西上邦地方的人，后来搬迁到金城令居。
English: Zhao Chongguo, surnamed Wengsun, was from Shanxi Province and later moved to Jincheng.

古文：始为骑士，以六郡良家子善骑射补羽林。
现代文：开始的时候只是一个骑士，后来作为六郡的良家子弟善于骑马射箭被补为羽林卫士。
English: At the beginning, he was just a knight, but later, as a good son of the six counties, he was good at riding and archery and was added as a guardian of the forest.

古文：为人沉勇有大略，少好将帅之节，而学兵法，通知四夷事。
现代文：他为人沉着勇敢，有很深的谋略，年轻时喜好将帅的气节，就去学习兵法，通晓了四方蛮夷的事情。
English: He is a calm and brave person, has a deep strategy, and when he was young, he liked to be a commander, so he went to learn the art of war and became familiar with the barbaric things in the four directions.

古文：武帝时，以假司马从贰师将军击匈奴，大为虏所围。
现代文：汉武帝的时候，赵充国以假司马的身份跟随贰师将军攻打匈奴，被敌人重重包围。
English: During the time of Emperor Hanwu, Zhao Chongguo followed the general Zou Shi to attack the Xiongnu as a fake Sima, and was surrounded by the enemy.

古文：汉军乏食数日，死伤者多，充国乃与壮士百余人溃围陷陈，贰师引兵随之，遂得解。
现代文：汉军断粮好几天，死伤的人很多，赵充国就与一百多名壮士突破包围、攻陷敌阵，贰师将军带领士兵跟随其后，才得以脱围。
English: The Chinese army had been without food for several days, and there were many dead and wounded. Zhao Chongguo and more than a hundred strong men broke through the encirclement and captured the enemy line. General Zou Shih led the soldiers to follow them, and they were able to break out of the encirclement.

古文：身被二十余创，贰师奏状，诏征充国诣行在所。武帝亲见视其创，嗟叹之，拜为中郎，迁连骑将军长史。
现代文：赵充国全身有二十多处受伤，贰师将军把情况上奏给武帝，武帝下令征召赵充国到出行所在的地方来，武帝亲自接见并探视他的伤情，感叹称赞，就授官为中郎，提升他任车骑将军长史。
English: Zhao Chongguo had more than 20 injuries all over his body. General Zou Shishi reported the situation to Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu ordered Zhao Chongguo to be conscripted to the place where he was traveling. Emperor Wu personally met and visited his injury, sighed and praised, and then awarded him the post of middle brother and promoted him to the post of chariot and cavalry general.

古文：昭帝时，武都氐人反，充国以大将军、护军都尉将兵击定之，迁中郎将，将屯上谷，还为水衡都尉。
现代文：昭帝的时候，武都郡的氐人造反，赵充国以大将军护军都尉之职带兵攻打并平定了叛乱，升官为中郎将，率兵驻守上谷郡，回来后又被任命为水衡都尉。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhao, the Jurchens of Wudu County rebelled. Zhao Chongguo led the troops to attack and quell the rebellion as a general and military escort captain. He was promoted to lieutenant general and stationed in Shanggu County with his troops. After his return, he was appointed as a military escort captain.

古文：击匈奴，获西祁王，擢为后将军，兼水衡如故。
现代文：后来又去攻打匈奴，俘获了西祁王，被提升为后将军，照旧兼任水衡都尉。
English: Later, he went to fight the Huns, captured the King of Xidi, was promoted to Rear-General, and continued to serve as Captain of the Water Balance.

古文：与大将军霍光定册尊立宣帝，封营平侯。
现代文：赵充国与大将军霍光一起决策拥立宣帝，被封为营平侯。
English: Zhao Chongguo and the great general Huo Guang jointly made the decision to support the establishment of Emperor Xuan, and he was appointed as the commander of the camp.

古文：本始中，为蒲类将军征匈奴，斩虏数百级，还为后将军、少府。
现代文：本始年间，以蒲类将军之职征讨匈奴，斩杀敌人几百个，还军后被任命为后将军、少府。
English: During the first year of the war, he fought against the Huns as General Pudi, killed hundreds of enemies, and after returning to the army, he was appointed Rear General and Junior Governor.

古文：匈奴大发十余万骑，南旁塞，至符奚庐山，欲入为寇。
现代文：匈奴大举发动十多万骑兵，南下逼近汉朝边塞，到达了符奚庐山，准备入侵抢掠。
English: The Xiongnu unleashed more than a hundred thousand cavalry in a big way, approached the Han Dynasty border fortress in the south, reached Fuxi Mountain, and prepared to invade and plunder.

古文：亡者题除渠堂降汉言之，遣充国将四万骑屯缘边九郡。
现代文：从匈奴逃走的题除渠堂投降汉朝后说出了这件事，汉朝就派遣赵充国率领四万名骑兵驻守在边境的九个郡上。
English: The issue of escaping from the Xiongnu was not discussed until after the surrender to the Han Dynasty, after which the matter was brought up. The Han Dynasty then dispatched Zhao Chongguo to garrison the nine counties along the border with 40,000 cavalry.

古文：单于闻之，引去。
现代文：单于听到造件事后，领兵离去。
English: After hearing the news, he led the soldiers away.

古文：是时，光禄大夫义渠安国使行诸羌，先零豪言愿时渡湟水北，逐民所不田处畜牧。
现代文：这时，光禄大夫义渠安国出使巡视各羌人部落，先零的酋长表示希望在一定时节渡河到湟水北岸，寻找汉民所不耕种的地方放养牲畜。
English: At this time, Guanglu doctor Yi Quan An Guo sent an envoy to inspect all the Hun tribes. The first zero chiefs expressed the hope of crossing the river to the north shore of Surabaya at a certain time, looking for places not cultivated by Han people to raise livestock.

古文：安国以闻。
现代文：安国把遣报告给了皇上。
English: An Guo reported the dispatch to the emperor.

古文：充国劾安国奉使不敬。
现代文：赵充国就弹劾安国奉命出使犯有不敬之罪。
English: Zhao Chongguo impeached An Guo for committing the crime of disrespect.

古文：是后，羌人旁缘前言，抵冒渡湟水，郡县不能禁。
现代文：这以后，羌人依凭前面所说，触犯汉律，渡过湟水，郡县阻挡不住。
English: After this, the people of Handan, relying on the above-mentioned, violated the Han law, crossed the Handan River, and the county could not stop them.

古文：元康三年，先零遂与诸羌种豪二百余人解仇交质盟诅。
现代文：元康三年，先零就与各羌人的酋长二百多人解除怨仇，交换人质后订立盟誓。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Kang, he made an oath with more than 200 chiefs of each clan to resolve their grudges and exchange hostages.

古文：上闻之，以问充国，对曰： 羌人所以易制者，以其种自有豪，数相攻击，势不一也。
现代文：皇上知道这件事后，就征询赵充国，赵充国答道： 羌入之所以容易被制，是因为他们各部落都有自己的首领，他们经常互相攻击，势力不能统一。
English: When the emperor learned of this, he consulted Zhao Chongguo. Zhao Chongguo replied, "The reason why the invasion was easily suppressed is because each of their tribes has its own leader. They often attack each other, and their forces cannot be unified.

古文：往三十余岁，西羌反时，亦先解仇合约攻令居，与汉相距，五六年乃定。
现代文：三十多年以前，西羌人造时，也是事先解除仇怨，订立盟约攻打令居，同汉朝相抗衡，五六年后才平定。
English: More than 30 years ago, when Xicheng was built, the feud was resolved in advance, and an alliance was made to attack Lingju and compete with the Han Dynasty, which was only settled five or six years later.

古文：至征和五年，先零豪封煎等通使匈奴，匈奴使人至小月氏，传告诸羌曰： 汉贰师将军众十余万人降匈奴。
现代文：到征和五年时，先零首领封煎等派人出使匈奴，匈奴再派人到小月氏，传言告诉各差人部落说： 汉朝的贰师将军带领十多万人投降了匈奴。
English: At the time of the conquest and five years later, the first zero leader, Fu Reng, and others sent envoys to the Xiongnu, and the Xiongnu then sent people to the Xiao Yue clan, and the rumors told the tribes of the dispatchers that: The Han Dynasty general Zou Shi led more than one hundred thousand people to surrender to the Xiongnu.

古文：羌人为汉事苦。
现代文：羌人为汉朝服役很苦。
English: It was very hard for him to serve the Han Dynasty.

古文：张掖、酒泉本我地，地肥美，可共击居之。 以此观匈奴欲与羌合，非一世也。
现代文：垂抠？龌本来是我们的地方，土地肥美，可以一同攻打占有那裹，由此可以看出包抠想和差人联合，不是一世的事了。
English: It was originally our place, the land is fertile, we can attack and occupy that land together. From this we can see that it is not a once-in-a-lifetime thing for Bautzen to want to unite with the police.

古文：间者匈奴困于西方，闻乌桓来保塞，恐兵复从东方起，数使使尉黎、危须诸国，设以子女貂裘，欲沮解之。
现代文：不久前鲤塑的西面受困，听说乌担前来保卫边塞，又害怕战事从东面开始，就多次派使者到尉黎、危须各国，答应送给他们男女人口，貂皮衣服，企图离间他们和连的友好关系。
English: Not long ago, the west side of Lishuo was besieged. Hearing that the Wuchang troops had come to defend the border fortress, and fearing that the war would start from the east, they repeatedly sent envoys to the Yili and other countries in danger, promising to send them men and women, mink clothes, in an attempt to sever their friendly relations with the company.

古文：其计不合。
现代文：这个计划没有实现。
English: The plan did not come to fruition.

古文：疑匈奴更遣使至羌中，道从沙阴地，出盐泽，过长坑，入穷水塞，南抵属国，与先零相直。
现代文：我怀疑包塑又派使者到差人部落中，从沙阴地区取道出盐运，过了题后，进入壅睦，南面到达荡塑属国，同塞零相联合。
English: I suspect that Bao Pu also sent an emissary to the dispatching tribes, taking the road from the Shajin area to the salt transport, and after passing through the problem, entering the Minmu, reaching the south of the swinging plastic country, and uniting with the zero phase.

古文：臣恐羌变未止此，且复结联他种，宜及未然为之备。 
现代文：臣恐怕羌人的变动并不止这些，而且他们将会勾结联合其他部落，应该赶在事情没有发生之前作好准备。 
English: I'm afraid there's a lot more to come, and they'll be teaming up with other tribes, so you'd better be ready before it happens.

古文：后月余，羌侯狼何果遣使至匈奴借兵，欲击善阝善、敦煌以绝汉道。
现代文：一个多月后，羞怯退坦果然派遣使者到匈奴借兵，准备攻打差臣差、敦煌来断绝选与酉继各国来往的通道。
English: More than a month later, the timidly retreating Tang sent an envoy to the Xiongnu to borrow soldiers and prepare to attack Shifeng and Dunhuang in order to cut off the channels of communication between the two countries.

古文：充国以为： 狼何，小月氏种，在阳光西南，势不能独造此计，疑匈奴使已至羌中，先零、罕、开乃解仇作约。
现代文：垄童厘认为 狼但、少且旦部落在隧飓的西南，势必不可能单独作出这样的计划，我怀疑匈趣的使者已经到达羌人部落中，先零、罕、歼才解除仇怨订立盟约。
English: Ruentongli thought that if the wolf tribe was small and the tribe was in the southwest of the typhoon, it would be impossible to make such a plan alone. I suspect that the envoy of the Hungarian interest has arrived in the Xiongnu tribe, and it is necessary to solve the hatred and conclude the alliance before the zero, the rare and the annihilation.

古文：到秋马肥，变必起矣。
现代文：等到秋天马肥，变乱必然发生。
English: Wait until autumn Ma Hui, turmoil will inevitably occur.

古文：宜遣使者行边兵豫为备，敕视诸羌，毋令解仇，以发觉其谋。 
现代文：应派使者巡视边防部队预先作好准备，下令告诉各差人部落，不要让他们解除怨仇，以便查明他们的阴谋。 
English: Envoys should be sent to inspect the frontier troops in advance to make preparations, and they should be ordered to tell the sending tribes not to allow them to settle their grudges, so that their plots can be detected.

古文：于是两府复白遣义渠安国行视诸羌，分别善恶。
现代文：于是两府又请示派遣义渠安国出使巡视各差人部落，区分好坏。
English: As a result, the two prefectures requested that an envoy from Yichuan and An Guo be dispatched to inspect each of the sentient tribes to distinguish the good from the bad.

古文：安国至，召先零诸豪三十余人，以尤桀黠，皆斩之。
现代文：安国去那裹后，就召集先零各部落首领三十多人，由于他们都特别凶暴狡诈，就把他们全杀了。
English: After An Guo went there, he gathered more than thirty leaders of the first and second tribes, and because they were all particularly vicious and cunning, he killed them all.

古文：纵兵击其种人，斩首千余级。
现代文：又发兵攻打他们的部落，杀了一千多人。
English: It also sent troops to attack their tribe, killing more than a thousand people.

古文：于是诸降羌及归义羌侯杨玉等恐怒，亡所信乡，遂劫略小种，背畔犯塞，攻城邑，杀长吏。
现代文：于是所有原来归顺汉朝的羌人部落以及归义羌侯杨玉等都恐惧怨怒，失去了信任归向，就胁迫劫持弱小的部落，背叛侵犯边塞，攻打城邑，杀死长官。
English: As a result, all the Xiongnu tribes that had previously surrendered to the Han Dynasty, as well as Yang Yu, the Xiongnu lord who had surrendered to the Han Dynasty, were afraid and angry, lost their trust and turned back. They coerced and kidnapped weak tribes, betrayed and invaded border fortresses, attacked cities and towns, and killed officials.

古文：安国以骑都尉将骑三千屯备羌，至浩亹，为虏所击，失亡车重兵器甚众。
现代文：安国作为骑都尉率领三千骑兵集结以防备羌人，到达浩叠时，被敌兵所攻击，损失车辆、辎重、兵器甚多。
English: As a cavalry captain, An Guo led 3,000 cavalrymen to assemble in preparation for the attack. When they arrived at Houzai, they were attacked by enemy soldiers, losing many vehicles, heavy loads, and weapons.

古文：安国引还，至令居，以闻。
现代文：安国带兵返回，到令居后，将情况报。
English: An Guo and his soldiers returned and reported the situation after arriving at the imperial residence.

古文：是岁，神爵元年春也。
现代文：这一年，是神爵元年的春天。
English: This year, it is the spring of the first year of Jinshaku.

古文：时，充国年七十余，上老之，使御史大夫丙吉问谁可将者，充国对曰： 亡逾于老臣者矣。 
现代文：当时赵充国已经七十多岁，皇上认为他老了，就派御史大夫丙吉去问谁可以领兵，赵充国答道： 没有超过老臣的人了。 
English: At that time, Zhao Chongguo was more than seventy years old. The emperor thought that he was too old, so he sent the imperial historian Bingji to ask who could lead the army. Zhao Chongguo replied: There is no one who is older than the old minister.

古文：上遣问焉，曰： 将军度羌虏何如，当用几人？ 
现代文：皇上又派人来问道： 将军估计羌敌会怎么样，应当使用多少人？ 
English: The emperor also sent someone to ask: How does the general estimate the number of enemies, and how many people should be used?

古文：充国曰： 百闻不如一见。
现代文：赵充国说道： 百闻不如一见。
English: Zhao Chongguo said: Seeing is believing.

古文：兵难逾度，臣愿驰至金城，图上方略。
现代文：军事情况难以遥测，臣希望赶到金城，制定出作战方案后上奏。
English: The military situation is difficult to measure remotely, and the minister hopes to rush to Jincheng to work out a battle plan and then report to the emperor.

古文：然羌戎小夷，逆天背畔，灭亡不久，愿陛下以属老臣，勿以为忧。 
现代文：然而羌戎只是弱小的夷族，违反天意背叛国家，不久就会灭亡，希望陛下把这件事交给老臣，不要担忧。 
English: However, Qiong Rong is just a weak barbarian, who betrayed the country against the will of heaven, and will soon perish. I hope that His Majesty will hand this matter over to his old minister and not worry about it.

古文：上笑曰： 诺。 
现代文：皇上笑道： 可以。 
English: The Empress laughed and said, "Yes."

古文：充国至金城，须兵满万骑，欲渡河，恐为虏所遮，即夜遣三校衔枚先渡，渡辄营陈，会明，毕，遂以次尽渡。
现代文：赵充国到达金城，等到军队集合到一万骑兵，就准备渡过黄河，但怕被敌人拦截，就在夜间先派三校人马衔枚渡河，渡过河后就摆好阵式，等到天亮时，阵式已经摆好，这才开始按次序全部渡过了黄河。
English: When Zhao Chongguo arrived at Jincheng, he waited until the army had gathered 10,000 cavalry and was ready to cross the Yellow River. However, fearing being intercepted by the enemy, he first sent three schoolboys and a horse to cross the river at night. After crossing the river, they set up a formation. By dawn, the formation had been set up, and they began to cross the Yellow River in order.

古文：虏数十百骑来，出入军傍。
现代文：敌人有几十成百的骑兵前来，出入军营的边上。
English: The enemy came with tens of hundreds of cavalry, entering and leaving on the edge of the camp.

古文：充国曰： 吾士马新倦，不可驰逐。
现代文：赵充国就说： 我们的军马正疲倦，不能驰马追逐。
English: Zhao Chongguo said, "Our horses are tired and can't gallop.

古文：此皆骁骑难制，又恐其为诱兵也。
现代文：这都是敌人的骁勇骑兵难以制服，又恐怕这是敌人在用诱兵之计。
English: All of this is difficult for the enemy's gallant cavalry to subdue, and I'm afraid this is a trick the enemy is using to lure soldiers.

古文：击虏以殄灭为期，小利不足贪。 
现代文：攻击敌人以全歼为目标，微小的利益不值得去贪求。 
English: Attack the enemy with total annihilation as the goal. Small gains are not worth coveting.

古文：令军勿击。
现代文：赵充国就传令叫军队不要出击。
English: Zhao Chongguo sent a telegram to the army telling them not to attack.

古文：遣骑候四望狭中，亡虏。
现代文：派遣骑兵到四望陋中侦察，没有发现敌人。
English: The cavalry was sent to scout the area, but no enemy was found.

古文：夜引兵上至落都，召诸校司马，谓曰： 吾知羌虏不能为兵矣。
现代文：就在夜晚带兵往上游到落都，然后召集各校的司马，对他们说道： 我已知道羌人不会用兵了。
English: In the night, he led the soldiers upstream to the capital, and then called together the stewards of each school and said to them: I already know that Xiang people will not use soldiers.

古文：使虏发数千人守杜四望狭中，兵岂得入哉！ 
现代文：假使敌人派几千人在四望陋中坚守阻拦，我们的部队怎么能进去呢！ 
English: Even if the enemy were to send several thousand men to hold out in the ruins, how could our troops get in?

古文：充国常以远斥候为务，行必为战务，止必坚营壁，尤能持重，爱士卒，先计而后战。
现代文：赵充国经常把远远地派出侦察兵作为要务，行军时一定要作好战斗准备，驻扎时一定要加固营垒，尤其能够谨慎稳重，爱护士兵，事先计划好后再进行战斗。
English: Zhao Chongguo always regards it as an important duty to send scouts far away. When marching, it is necessary to prepare for battle, and when stationed, it is necessary to strengthen the camp. In particular, it is necessary to be cautious and steady, love soldiers, and plan in advance before fighting.

古文：遂西至西部都尉府，日飨军士，士皆欲为用。
现代文：于是赵充国就向西到西部都尉府，每天犒劳军士，士兵都想为他效力。
English: As a result, he pushed westward to the western governor's office, where he was feted day after day by the sergeants and officers, who were all willing to serve him.

古文：虏数挑战，充国坚守。
现代文：敌人几次来挑战，赵充国都坚守不出。
English: The Xiongnu came several times to provoke, but Zhao Chongguo ordered them to stand firm.

古文：捕得生口，言羌豪相数责曰： 语汝亡反，今天子遣赵将军来，年八九十矣，善为兵。
现代文：有次捉到了一个俘虏，招供说羌人首领都几次互相责怪说： 叫你不要造，今天天子派赵将军来了，他有八九十岁了，善于用兵。
English: Once they captured a prisoner, who confessed that the leaders of the Xiongnu had blamed each other several times, saying: "I told you not to build. Today, the Son of Heaven sent General Zhao. He is eighty or ninety years old, and is good at using soldiers."

古文：今请欲一斗而死，可得邪！ 
现代文：现在想决一死战，还有可能吗？ 
English: Now you want to fight to the death, is that even possible?

古文：充国子右曹中郎将卬，将期门佽飞、羽林孤儿、胡越骑为支兵，至令居，虏并出绝转道，卬以闻。
现代文：赵充国的儿子右曹中郎将赵印，率领期门饮飞、羽林孤儿、胡、越骑兵作为分支部队，到达令居。敌人同时出击断绝了汉军运输道路，赵印把此事上奏。
English: Zhao Zhaozhonguo's son, Yu Cao Zhong Lang, led Zhao Ying, Zhimen Zhuofei, Ulin Orphan, Hu, and Yue cavalry as a branch unit to the residence. At the same time, the enemy attacked and cut off the transport road of the Chinese army, and Zhao Ying reported the matter.

古文：有诏将八校尉与骁骑都尉、金城太守合疏捕山间虏，通转道津渡。
现代文：下韶令他率领八校尉和骁骑都尉、金城太守合力搜捕山间敌人，疏通运输道路、津梁渡口。
English: He was ordered by the emperor to lead the eight lieutenants, the captain of the imperial cavalry, and the governor of Jincheng to jointly search and capture the enemy in the mountains, and clear the transportation road and the Jinliang ferry port.

古文：初，罕、开豪靡当儿使弟雕库来告都尉曰先零欲反，后数日果反。
现代文：起先，罕、开的首领靡当儿派弟弟雕库来告诉都尉说先零想造，过了几天后，先零果然造了。
English: At first, the leader of Han and Kai sent his younger brother Meitang to tell the captain that he wanted to make it, and after a few days, he finally made it.

古文：雕库种人颇在先零中，都尉即留雕库为质。
现代文：雕库部落有很多人在先零中，都尉就把雕库扣留作为人质。
English: There are many people in the first zero of the carving tribe, and the captain detained the carving as a hostage.

古文：充国以为亡罪，乃遣归告种豪： 大兵诛有罪者，明白自别，毋取并灭。
现代文：赵充国认为他没有罪，就遣送他回去告诉部落首领： 汉朝大军只杀有罪的人，要他们自己清楚并加以分别，不要一同自取灭亡。
English: Zhao Chongguo thought that he was not guilty, so he sent him back and told the tribal leaders: The Han Dynasty army only killed the guilty, they should know and distinguish themselves, and not destroy themselves together.

古文：天子告诸羌人，犯法者能相捕斩，除罪。
现代文：天子告谕各部羌人，犯法的人能够捕获斩杀其他罪犯，可以免罪。
English: The Son of Heaven told the magistrates that those who broke the law could be exonerated if they could capture and kill other criminals.

古文：斩大豪有罪者一人，赐钱四十万，中豪十五万，下豪二万，大男三千，女子及老小千钱，又以其所捕妻子财物尽与之。 
现代文：斩杀有罪的大首领一人，可以得到四十万钱的赏赐，斩杀中等首领的，可以得到十五万，斩杀下等首领的，可以得到二万，斩杀成年男子的，可以得到三千，斩杀妇女、老人和小孩的，可以得到一千，还要把他所捕获的妇女、孩子以及钱财物品都给他。 
English: Whoever killed a guilty big chief could get a reward of four hundred thousand yuan; whoever killed a middle-ranking chief could get one hundred and fifty thousand yuan; whoever killed a lower-ranking chief could get twenty thousand yuan; whoever killed a grown man could get three thousand yuan; whoever killed a woman, an old man, and a child could get one thousand yuan; and he was to be given all the women, children, and money and goods he had captured.

古文：充国计欲以威信招降罕、开及劫略者，解散虏谋，徼极乃击之。
现代文：赵充国计划要用恩威并施来招降罕、开部落以及其他被胁迫叛乱的部族，瓦解粉碎敌人的阴谋，等到他们困顿之时再来攻击。
English: Zhao Chongguo planned to use his grace and favor to win over Han, Kai and other tribes that had been coerced into rebellion, to disrupt the enemy's plot, and to attack them when they were in trouble.

古文：时，上已发三辅、太常徒弛刑，三河、颍川、沛郡、淮阳、汝南材官，金城、陇西、天水、安定、北地、上郡骑士、羌骑，与武威、张掖、酒泉太守各屯其郡者，合六万人矣。
现代文：这时汉宣帝已经征发了三辅、太常寺的减刑犯人，三河、顷川、沛郡、淮阳、汝南各郡的材官，金城、陇西、天水、安定、北地、上郡的骑士、羌人骑兵，以及武威、张掖、酒泉太守各自驻守在郡中的军队，一共六万人。
English: At this time, Emperor Han Xuan had conscripted and dispatched the commuted prisoners from Sanfu and Taizhong Temple, the officials from the counties of Sanhe, Hechuan, Pei, Huaiyang, and Runan, the knights and cavalrymen from the counties of Jincheng, Shaanxi, Tianshui, Ding'an, Hebei, and Shang, as well as the military forces stationed in the counties of Wuwei, Zhangye, and Jiuquan, totaling 60,000 men.

古文：酒泉太守辛武贤奏言： 郡兵皆屯备南出，北边空虚，势不可久。
现代文：酒泉太守辛武贤上奏书说道： 各郡的兵力都驻守在祁连山南，北边空虚，这种形势一定不会坚持太久。
English: Jiuquan Governor Xin Wuxian said in his report: The troops of all counties are stationed in the south of Qilian Mountain, and the north is empty. This situation will not last long.

古文：或日至秋冬乃进兵，此虏在竟外之册。
现代文：有人说到秋冬的时候再进兵，这是当敌人在境外时我们采取的策略。
English: Some people have said that we will re-enlist in the autumn and winter, which is the strategy we adopt when the enemy is abroad.

古文：今虏朝夕为寇，土地寒苦，汉马不能冬，屯兵在武威、张掖、酒泉万骑以上，皆多羸瘦。
现代文：现在敌人朝夕骚扰，土地又寒冷贫瘠，汉朝的马匹不能在造裹过冬，驻军在武威、张掖、酒泉的有一万多匹战马，大多数瘦弱不堪。
English: Now the enemy is harassing us day and night. The land is cold and barren. The horses of the Han Dynasty cannot be wrapped up for the winter. There are more than ten thousand horses of the garrison in Wuwei, Zhangye and Jiuquan. Most of them are thin and weak.

古文：可益马食，以七月上旬赍三十日粮，分兵并出张掖、酒泉合击罕、开在鲜水上者。
现代文：可以增加马的饲料，在七月上旬的时候携带三十天的粮草，同时从张掖、酒泉分别派兵一同攻打罕、开部落在鲜水上游的部队。
English: They could increase the horse's feed, carry thirty days of grain and grass in early July, and at the same time send soldiers from Zhangye and Jiuquan to attack the troops of Han and Kai tribes in the upper reaches of fresh water.

古文：虏以畜产为命，今皆离散，兵即分出，虽不能尽诛，亶夺其畜产，虏其妻子，复引兵还，冬复击之，大兵仍出，虏必震坏。 
现代文：敌人把牲畜视为命根，现在都已离散，我军火速分兵出击，即使不能全部诛杀干净，只要夺得了他们的牲畜，俘虏了他们的妻子儿女，再退兵返回，到冬天再出击，大部队频繁发动攻击，敌人必定崩溃无疑。 
English: The enemy regards livestock as their lifeblood. Now that they have all dispersed, our rapid-fire troops will attack. Even if they cannot kill them all, as long as they have captured their livestock, captured their wives and children, and then retreat and return, they will attack again in the winter. Large forces frequently launch attacks, and the enemy will undoubtedly collapse.

古文：天子下其书充国，令与校尉以下吏士知羌事者博议。
现代文：天子就把这份奏书交给赵充国，叫他同校尉以下了解羌人情况的官兵广泛讨论。
English: Tianzi handed this report to Zhao Chongguo and asked him to have an extensive discussion with the officers and soldiers who knew the situation of the cadets.

古文：充国及长史董通年以为： 武贤欲轻引万骑，分为两道出张掖，回远千里。
现代文：赵充国和长史董通年认为 辛武贤想轻率带领一万骑兵分两路从张掖出发，来回就有千里之远。
English: Zhao Chongguo and Changshi Dong Tongnian thought that Xin Wuxian wanted to rashly lead ten thousand cavalry from Zhangye in two directions, and the round trip was a thousand miles away.

古文：以一马自佗负三十日食，为米二斛四斗，麦八斛，又有衣装兵器，难以追逐。
现代文：以一匹马自身驮负三十天粮食计算，就要带二斛四斗米，八斛麦，还要带上行李兵器，马就难以追逐奔跑了。
English: According to the calculation of a horse carrying thirty days of grain, it is necessary to bring two bags of rice, eight bags of wheat, and also bring luggage weapons, so it is difficult for the horse to chase and run.

古文：勤劳而至，虏必商军进退，稍引去，逐水草，入山林。
现代文：等到艰辛疲惫地赶到，敌人一定计算好了军队的行程，逐渐撤退离去，沿着水草之地进入山林之中。
English: By the time they arrived exhausted from the hardships, the enemy must have calculated the itinerary of the army and gradually retreated into the mountains and forests along the water grassland.

古文：随而深入，虏即据前险，守后厄，以绝粮道，必有伤危之忧，为夷狄笑，千载不可复。
现代文：如果跟随敌人而深入，敌人就会占据前面的险阻，把守后面的要塞，来断绝我方的粮道，这样一来一定会出现伤亡倾危的忧患，被夷狄所耻笑，永远都不可挽回。
English: If we follow the enemy and go deeper, the enemy will occupy the dangerous obstacles in front and guard the fortresses behind to cut off our food supply. In this way, there will certainly be casualties and perilous sorrow, which will be ridiculed by the barbarians and will never be reversible.

古文：而武贤以为可夺其畜产，虏其妻子，此殆空言，非至计也。
现代文：而辛武贤认为可以夺取敌人的牲畜，俘虏他们的妻子儿女，这不过是一句空话，并非是至好的计策。
English: However, Xin Wu Xian thought that he could seize the enemy's livestock and capture their wives and children, which was just an empty phrase and not the best strategy.

古文：又武威县、张掖日勒皆当北塞，有通谷水草。
现代文：还有武威县、张掖日勒都处在北部要塞之地，有畅通无阻的山谷和充足的水草。
English: In addition, Wuwei County and Zhangye County are both located in the northern fortress land, with unimpeded valleys and abundant aquatic plants.

古文：臣恐匈奴与羌有谋，且欲大入，幸能要杜张掖、酒泉以绝西域，其郡兵尤不可发。
现代文：臣怕匈奴和羌人早有谋划，将要大举入侵，希望能拦腰切断张掖、酒泉通往西域的道路，这样两郡的军队更加不能出动。
English: The vassals feared that the Xiongnu and the Yao people had long planned to invade on a large scale, hoping to cut off the road from Zhangye and Jiuquan to the western region, so that the armies of the two counties could not move out.

古文：先零首为畔逆，它种劫略。
现代文：先零首先发动叛乱，其他部落只是被它所劫持。
English: First Zero started the rebellion first, the other tribes were just hijacked by it.

古文：故臣愚册，欲捐罕、开暗昧之过，隐而勿章，先行先零之诛以震动之，宜悔过反善，因赦其罪，选择良吏知其俗者捬循和辑，此全师保胜安边之册。 
现代文：所以臣有一个愚计，打算不计较罕、开昏庸愚昧的过错，隐瞒而不去张扬，首先把先零消灭后来震动他们，应该让他们悔过自新，藉此赦免他们的罪行，然后选派懂得羌人民俗的优秀官员去安抚团结他们，这才是保全军队稳操胜券的安边之策。 
English: Therefore, the minister had a stupid plan, intending to ignore the mistakes of the rarer, dumber and more ignorant, to conceal them and not to publicize them, first to eliminate them first and then to shake them, they should be made to repent and reform, thereby pardoning their crimes, and then to appoint outstanding officials who know how to pacify the people and unite them. This is the safe way to keep the army stable and win.

古文：天子下其书。
现代文：天子把这封奏书交给百官商讨。
English: The emperor sent this letter to be discussed by all the officials.

古文：公卿议者咸以为先零兵盛，而负罕、开之助，不先破罕、开，则先零未可图也。
现代文：公卿大臣们都认为先零兵势强盛，又依仗罕、开的援助，如果不首先攻破罕、歼，先零就不容易对付。
English: The Kugyos and ministers all believed that the First Zero had a strong army and relied on the assistance of Han and Kai. If Han and Kai were not defeated first, the First Zero would not be easy to deal with.

古文：上乃拜侍中乐成侯许延寿为强弩将军，即拜酒泉太守武贤为破羌将军，赐玺书嘉纳其册。
现代文：皇上就授任侍中乐成侯许延寿为强弩将军，就地任命酒泉太守辛武贤为破羌将军，赐给他盖有玺印的韶书嘉许采纳他的计策。
English: The emperor then appointed the chamberlain, Le Cheng Hou Xu Yan Shou, as the strong general, and appointed Jiuquan Dazhu Xin Wu Xian as the broken general, and gave him a stamped letter of commendation for adopting his strategy.

古文：以书敕让充国曰：
现代文：又下书责备赵充国说：
English: Another letter rebuked Zhao Chongguo, saying:

古文：皇帝问后将军，甚苦暴露。
现代文：皇帝问候后将军，行军在外极为劳苦。
English: After the emperor's greetings to the general, the march was extremely laborious.

古文：将军计欲至正月乃击罕羌，羌人当获麦，已远其妻子，精兵万人欲为酒泉、敦煌寇。
现代文：将军计划想到正月时再进攻罕羌，羌人应已收割了麦子，转移了妻子儿女，集结好精锐部队一万人将要入侵酒泉、敦煌。
English: The general planned to attack Hanzhong again in the first month of the year. The Hanzhong people should have harvested wheat, transferred their wives and children, and assembled 10,000 elite troops to invade Jiuquan and Dunhuang.

古文：边兵少，民守保不得田作。
现代文：我方边境军队少，要百姓守卫保护的话就不能进行耕作。
English: Our border troops are few, and if we want the people to guard and protect, we cannot carry out farming.

古文：今张掖以东粟石百余，刍槁束数十。
现代文：现在张掖以束地区粟一石卖到一百多钱，干草秸杆一捆卖到几十钱。
English: Now, in Zhangye's bundling area, a stone of millet is sold for more than 100 yuan, and a bundle of hay is sold for dozens of yuan.

古文：转输并起，百姓烦扰。
现代文：各处一同运输粮草，就给老百姓增添了烦扰。
English: The transportation of grain and grass everywhere has added to the troubles of the common people.

古文：将军将万余之众，不早及秋共水草之利争其畜食，欲至冬，虏皆当畜食，多藏匿山中依险阻，将军士寒，手足皲瘃，宁有利哉？
现代文：将军率领一万多人的大部队，不及早趁秋天共享水草的便利之机争夺其牲畜和粮食，想等到冬天，敌人都已经积蓄了粮食，他们大多依靠险阻隐藏在山中，将军的士卒由于寒冷，手足冻裂，难道还会有利吗？
English: The general led a large army of more than ten thousand people, and did not take advantage of the convenient opportunity to share water and grass in the autumn to compete for their livestock and grain. Do you want to wait until winter, when the enemy has already accumulated grain, most of them rely on obstacles to hide in the mountains, and the general's soldiers are cold and their hands and feet are frozen? Will it still be beneficial?

古文：将军不念中国之费，欲以岁数而胜微，将军谁不乐此者！
现代文：将军不以国家的耗费为念，打算用几年的时间来打败敌人，凡为将军的，有谁不乐于此道呢！
English: The general is not concerned with the expense of the country and intends to use several years to defeat the enemy. Who among the generals is not pleased with this course?

古文：今诏破羌将军武贤将兵六千一百人，敦煌太守快将二千人，长水校尉富昌、酒泉候奉世将婼、月氏兵四千人，亡虑万二千人。
现代文：现在我已诏令破羌将军辛武贤带兵六千一百人，敦煌太守快带兵二千人，长水校尉富吕、酒泉候冯奉世率领蜡、月氏兵四千人，大概不下一万二千人。
English: Now I have ordered the general Xin Wu Xian to lead 6,100 soldiers, the governor of Dunhuang to lead 2,000 soldiers, the captain of Changshui Fulu and Jiuquan Feng Bongsi to lead the wax, and the soldiers of the Moon Clan to lead 4,000 soldiers, about 12,000 people.

古文：赍三十日食，以七月二十二日击罕羌，入鲜水北句廉上，去酒泉八百里，去将军可千二百里。
现代文：带上三十天的粮草，在七月二十二进攻罕羌，进入鲜水北岸的拐弯处，离酒泉八百里，离将军一千二百里。
English: With thirty days' worth of grain and grass, on July 22 they attacked Hankow and entered the bend of the north bank of the fresh water, eight hundred miles from Jiuquan and twelve hundred miles from the general.

古文：将军其引兵便道西并进，虽不相及，使虏闻东方北方兵并来，分散其心意，离其党与，虽不能殄灭，当有瓦解者。
现代文：将军就带兵从便道向西同时推进，即使不能相会合，让敌人听说东方北方的军队一同前来，可以分散敌人的斗志，离散他们的党羽，即使不能全歼敌人，也应会瓦解他们。
English: The general led the troops from the side road to the west and pushed forward at the same time. Even if they could not meet, letting the enemy hear that the eastern and northern armies were coming together could disperse the enemy's fighting spirit, scatter their followers, and even if they could not completely destroy the enemy, they should also disintegrate them.

古文：已诏中郎将卬将胡越佽飞射士步兵二校尉，益将军兵。
现代文：我已诏令中郎将赵印率领胡、越饮飞射士、步兵二校，增加将军的兵力。
English: I have ordered Zhong Lang to increase the general's troops by sending Zhao Ying to lead Hu, Yue Jian Fei Shi, and two regiments of infantry.

古文：今五星出东方，中国大利，蛮夷大败。
现代文：现在五星出现在东方，对中国大利，蛮夷将大败。
English: Now that the Five Stars have appeared in the East, the barbarians will suffer a crushing defeat against China.

古文：太白出高，用兵深入敢战者吉，弗敢战者凶。
现代文：太白星出现在高处，带兵深入敢于作战的人吉利，不敢作战的人有危险。
English: Too white stars appear in high places, and those who dare to fight are lucky, and those who dare not fight are in danger.

古文：将军急装，因天时，诛不义，万下必全，勿复有疑。
现代文：将军赶紧打点行装，依靠天时，征讨不义，一定会万无一失，将军不要再有疑虑。
English: The general should hasten to make preparations, rely on the weather, and fight injustice. He will definitely be foolproof. The general should no longer have any doubts.

古文：充国既得让，以为将任兵在外，便宜有守，以安国家。
现代文：赵充国收到责备他的诏书后，认为将领带兵在外，应依据情况坚持主张，用以安定国家。
English: After Zhao Chongguo received the imperial rescript reproaching him, he thought that it would be better to keep the soldiers out of the country, and he should insist on the idea according to the situation, and use it to stabilize the country.

古文：乃上书谢罪，因陈兵利害，曰：
现代文：于是他就上书请罪，顺便陈述用兵的利害关系，他说：
English: So he wrote a letter pleading guilty, incidentally stating the interest of the soldiers, he said:

古文：臣窃见骑都尉安国前幸赐书，择羌人可使使罕、谕告以大军当至，汉不诛罕，以解其谋。
现代文：臣私下见到陛下前不久赐给骑都尉安国的诏书，让他选择羌人中可以出使罕羌的人，宣告大军就要到了，汉朝将不诛杀罕人，用以瓦解他们的阴谋。
English: Privately, the minister saw the imperial rescript that His Majesty had recently given to the cavalry captain An Guo-Ren, asking him to choose one of the Han people who could send Han troops, announcing that the great army was about to arrive, and that the Han Dynasty would not fight and kill Han people, and use it to disrupt their plot.

古文：恩泽甚厚，非臣下所能及。
现代文：皇上恩泽极为深厚，不是臣下所能比得上的。
English: The Emperor's grace is extremely profound and cannot be compared to that of a vassal.

古文：臣独私美陛下盛德至计亡已，故遣开豪雕库宣天子至德，罕、开之属皆闻知明诏。
现代文：臣下私下赞美陛下大德无量，妙计无穷，所以就派歼羌的首领雕库宣传天子的大德，罕、开各部落都已闻悉英明的韶令。
English: His vassals privately praised His Majesty's immeasurable virtue and infinite ingenuity, so they sent the head of the Jian Ye carving depot to publicize the great virtue of the son of heaven. Han and Kai tribes have all heard of the wise imperial edict.

古文：今先零羌杨玉将骑四千及煎骑五千，阻石山木，候便为寇，罕羌未有所犯。
现代文：今先零羌的杨玉率领骑兵四千人以及煎巩骑兵五千人，以山石树木作为险阻，等候时机来入侵，罕羌却没有侵犯的行动。
English: Yang Yu, who had been absent earlier, led four thousand cavalry and five thousand Sheng Gong cavalry, using the mountains, rocks and trees as obstacles, waiting for the opportunity to invade, but rarely did not violate the action.

古文：今置先零，先击罕，释诛亡辜，起一难，就两害，诚非陛下本计也。
现代文：现在把先零放在一边，先去攻打罕羌，开释有罪的，诛杀无辜的，引起一方危难，却受到两方祸害，这实在不是陛下原来的计划。
English: It is not His Majesty's original plan to put the zero aside, to attack Han first, to absolve the guilty, to kill the innocent, to cause one side to be in danger, but to be harmed by both sides.

古文：臣闻兵法 攻不足者守有余 ，又曰 善战者致人，不致于人 。
现代文：臣听兵法说 进攻力量不足的，进行防守则会绰绰有余 ，又说 善于战斗的人控制别人，不被别人所控制 。
English: It is said that if the offensive force is insufficient, the defense force will be more than enough, and it is also said that those who are good at fighting control others and are not controlled by others.

古文：今罕羌欲为敦煌、酒泉寇，宜饬兵马，练战士，以须其至，坐得致敌之术，以逸击劳，取胜之道也。
现代文：如今罕羌想去入侵敦煌、酒泉，我们就应整治武器马匹，训练作战士兵，来等待他们的到来，这就能坐着得到制服敌人的战术，以养精蓄锐的军队去攻打疲于奔命的敌人，是取胜之道。
English: Nowadays, we rarely want to invade Dunhuang and Jiuquan. We should improve the weapons and horses, train combat soldiers, and wait for their arrival. This will allow us to obtain the tactics of subduing the enemy while sitting, and to attack the enemy who is tired of running for their lives with an army that is energized and sharp. This is the way to win.

古文：今恐二郡兵少不足以守，而发之行攻，释致虏之术而从为虏所致之道，臣愚以为不便。
现代文：现在担心两郡的兵少不足以防守，而发动他们进行攻击，放弃制服敌人的战术而选择为敌所制的方法，臣下愚蠢地认为这不妥当。
English: Now, fearing that the troops of the two counties were too few to defend, they launched an attack, abandoning the tactics of subduing the enemy and opting for a method dictated by the enemy, which the vassals foolishly thought was inappropriate.

古文：先零羌虏欲为背畔，故与罕、开解仇结约，然其私心不能亡恐汉兵至而罕、开背之也。
现代文：先零羌的敌人想背叛汉朝，所以就同罕羌、开羌解除前仇订立盟约，但他们的内心裹不能不害怕汉军到后罕、开背弃他们。
English: The enemies of the first Han Dynasty wanted to betray the Han Dynasty, so they made an alliance with the Han Dynasty to resolve the feud, but their hearts could not help but be afraid of the Han Army coming to the Han Dynasty and abandoning them.

古文：臣愚以为其计常欲先赴罕、开之急，以坚其先击罕羌、先零必助之。
现代文：臣愚蠢地认为先零羌的计谋常常是想先赴罕羌、开羌的危急之难，用以坚固他们的盟约，先攻打罕羌，先零一定会去援助。
English: The vassal foolishly thought that the strategy of the first to attack Han was often to go to Han and recapture Han first, in order to strengthen their alliance. The first to attack Han was sure to go to the aid of the first to attack Han.

古文：今虏马肥，粮食方饶，击之恐不能伤害，适使先零施德于罕羌，坚其约，合其党。
现代文：现在敌人马正肥，粮草正丰盛，攻打他恐怕对其造成不了伤害，正好让先零得以施恩德于罕羌，使他们坚固了盟约，联合了党羽。
English: Now the enemy horse is fat, the grain and grass are plentiful, and attacking him will probably not cause any harm to him. It is just right to allow the first zero to be kind to the second zero, so that they strengthen the covenant and unite the party feathers.

古文：虏交坚党合，精兵二万余人，迫胁诸小种，着者稍众，莫须之属不轻得离也。
现代文：敌人如果盟约坚固党羽联合的话，精锐部队可以达到二万多人，再去胁迫其他弱小部落，归附的人就会逐渐增多，像莫须这样的小部落就不会轻易离开了。
English: If the enemies have a strong alliance, the elite troops can reach more than twenty thousand people, and then coerce other weak tribes, the number of people who join will gradually increase, and small tribes such as Musu will not easily leave.

古文：如是，虏兵寝多，诛之用力数倍，臣恐国家忧累繇十年数，不二三岁而已。
现代文：如果这样，敌人兵力渐增，要诛杀他们就要用几倍的力量，臣恐怕国家的忧患和负担要用十年来计算，不是两三年就可以了的。
English: If so, the enemy's military strength will gradually increase, and it will take several times the strength to fight and kill them. I am afraid that the country's sorrow and burden will take ten years to calculate, not two or three years.

古文：臣得蒙天子厚恩，父子俱为显列。
现代文：臣下得以受到天子的厚恩，父子同为朝廷要员。
English: The vassals were able to receive the benevolence of the heavenly son, and both father and son were important members of the imperial court.

古文：臣位至上卿，爵为列侯，犬马之齿七十六，为明诏填沟壑，死骨不朽，亡所顾念。
现代文：臣下官位到九卿。爵位到列侯，年龄也有七十六了，为奉行英明的诏令而抛尸沟壑，虽死不朽，我没有什么可以顾虑的。
English: I am seventy-six years old, and I have held nine titles of nobility and nine titles of lordship, and I have no qualms about throwing a corpse into a ditch in order to carry out a wise imperial edict, even though I am immortal.

古文：独思惟兵利害至熟悉也，于臣之计，先诛先零已，则罕、开之属不烦兵而服矣。
现代文：只是考虑到自己对用兵的利害最为熟悉，所以为臣之计，先讨伐先零后，罕羌、歹千羌之类不须用兵就可以制服。
English: However, he considered that he was most familiar with the benefits of using soldiers, so he devised a plan for his vassals: first to fight, then to subdue, and then to subdue the infrequent and unruly soldiers without using soldiers.

古文：先零已诛而罕、开不服，涉正月击之得计之理，又其时也。
现代文：先零羌被诛杀后罕羌、开羌仍不臣服，等到正月再去攻打它，既得用兵的道理，又合用兵的时机。
English: After the slaughter of the first few hundred soldiers, Hanzhong and Kaifeng still refused to surrender, and waited until the first month of the year to attack it. This was both the reason for using soldiers and the opportunity to use soldiers together.

古文：以今进兵，诚不见其利，唯陛下裁察。
现代文：以现在的时机进军，实在看不到有利可图，希望陛下明察决断。
English: With the current opportunity to march, I really can't see it being profitable, and I hope that His Majesty will make a clear decision.

古文：六月戊申奏，七月甲寅玺书报从充国计焉。
现代文：六月戊申上奏，到七月甲寅皇上封玺书给赵充国告诉依从他的计策。
English: In June, Emperor Wu issued an imperial edict, and in July, Emperor Jia Yin issued an imperial edict to Zhao Chongguo, telling him to follow his strategy.

古文：充国引兵至先零在所。
现代文：赵充国带兵到达先零羌所在的地方。
English: Zhao Chongguo led the soldiers to the place where the first zero anchor was located.

古文：虏久屯聚，解弛，望见大军，弃车重，欲渡湟水，道厄狭，充国徐行驱之。
现代文：敌人驻兵已久，放松了警惕，见到大部队，就丢弃了车辆辎重，想渡过湟水，路狭窄，赵充国就慢慢行军追赶敌人。
English: The enemy soldiers had been stationed for a long time, they relaxed their vigilance, and when they saw the large army, they abandoned the heavy vehicles, and wanted to cross Surabaya, the road was narrow, and Zhao Chongguo slowly marched to chase the enemy.

古文：或曰逐利行迟，充国曰： 此穷寇不可迫也。
现代文：有人说追逐取胜宜快，如此行进太慢，赵充国就说： 这就是所谓的穷寇莫追。
English: Some people say that the pursuit of victory should be fast, so moving too slowly, Zhao Chongguo said: This is the so-called poor chasing.

古文：缓之则走不顾，急之则还致死。 诸校皆曰： 善。 
现代文：缓慢追赶，他们就会逃跑而不回头，追急了他们就会回头决一死战。 各校尉都说： 好。 
English: If they were chased slowly, they would run away and not turn back; if they were chased quickly, they would turn back and fight to the death.

古文：虏赴水溺死者数百，降及斩首五百余人，卤马、牛羊十万余头，车四千余两。
现代文：敌人投水被淹死的有数百人，投降以及被斩首的有五百多人，俘获马牛羊十多万头，车子四千多辆。
English: Hundreds of people were drowned by the enemy throwing water, more than five hundred people surrendered and were beheaded, more than one hundred thousand horses, cattle and sheep were captured, and more than four thousand cars were captured.

古文：兵至罕地，令军毋燔聚落刍牧田中。
现代文：军队到了罕羌的地方，下令军队不要焚烧村落以及不准在田裹割草放牧。
English: After the Han army came to the land where the Han people lived, Zhao Chongguo ordered that they were not allowed to burn their tribe, nor were they allowed to harvest crops or graze horses in their fields.

古文：罕羌闻之，喜曰： 汉果不击我矣！ 
现代文：罕羌的人听说这些后，高兴地说： 汉军果然不攻打我们了！ 
English: After hearing this, very few people were happy to say: The Chinese army did not attack us after all!

古文：豪靡忘使人来言： 愿得还复故地。 
现代文：首领靡忘派人来说： 希望能够返回到原来的地方。 
English: "I hope to be able to return to my original place," said the leader of the Mifune faction.

古文：充国以闻，未报。
现代文：赵充国把这上报给天子，没有得到回答。
English: Zhao Chongguo reported this to the emperor, but received no reply.

古文：靡忘来自归，充国赐饮食，遣还谕种人。
现代文：靡忘亲自前来归顺，赵充国赐给他饮食，放他回去告谕他同族的人。
English: Miebong himself came to submit, and Zhao Chongguo gave him food and drink and let him go back to preach to his people.

古文：护军以下皆争之，曰： 此反虏，不可擅遣。 
现代文：护军以下的军官都同赵充国争论这件事，说： 这是反贼，不可以擅自放走。 
English: The officers below the level of escort argued with Zhao Chongguo about this matter, saying: This is anti-thief, you can't let them go without permission.

古文：充国曰： 诸君但欲便文自营，非为公家忠计也。 
现代文：赵充国说： 各位只想完全依从公文而为自己打算，并不是为国家忠心考虑。 
English: Zhao Chongguo said: You only want to fully comply with the official document and plan for yourself, not for the country's loyalty.

古文：语未卒，玺书报，令靡忘以赎论。
现代文：话没说完，玺书就下来了，命令将靡忘按赎罪论处。
English: Before the words were out, the edict came down, ordering that Mishimoto be punished according to the atonement theory.

古文：后罕竟不烦兵而下。
现代文：后来罕羌终于没有用兵就被征服了。
English: Later, Hankow was finally conquered without the use of troops.

古文：其秋，充国病，上赐书曰； 制诏后将军：闻苦脚胫、寒泄，将军年老加疾，一朝之变不可讳，朕甚忧之。
现代文：这年秋天，赵充国生病了，皇上赐书说： 制诏后将军：听说您苦于腿脚疼痛，风寒下泄，将军年迈再加疾病，一朝之变不可讳言，朕对此很忧虑。
English: In the autumn of that year, Zhao Chongguo fell ill, and the emperor gave him a letter saying: General, after issuing the edict: I have heard that you are suffering from pain in your legs and feet, cold and wind, general old age and illness. I cannot hide the fact that you have changed overnight. I am very worried about this.

古文：今诏破羌将军诣屯所，为将军副，急因天时大利，吏士锐气，以十二月击先零羌。
现代文：现下韶令破羌将军到达驻地，作为将军的副手，赶紧趁天时大利，官兵锐气正旺，在十二月攻打先零羌。
English: Now, the general who broke the shackles has been ordered to arrive at the garrison. As the general's deputy, he will quickly take advantage of the time, the officers and soldiers are in high spirits, and attack the first zero shackles in December.

古文：即疾剧，留屯毋行，独遣破羌、强弩将军。 
现代文：如果病情严重，可以留在驻地不动，只派破羌、强弩将军就可以了。 
English: If the patient's condition is serious, they can stay at the station and not move. They can just send a general to break the shackles and strengthen them.

古文：时，羌降者万余人矣。
现代文：这时羌人投降的已有一万多了。
English: By this time, more than ten thousand people had already surrendered.

古文：充国度其必坏，欲罢骑兵屯田，以待其敝。
现代文：赵充国考虑到敌人一定会失败，就准备撤回骑兵进行屯田，以待敌人的困敝。
English: Considering that the enemy would certainly fail, Zhao Chongguo prepared to withdraw the cavalry to set up a garrison to await the enemy's predicament.

古文：作奏未上，会得进兵玺书，中郎将卬惧，使客谏充国曰： 诚令兵出，破军杀将以倾国家，将军守之可也。
现代文：写好奏书还没有上报，正好得到要求进军的玺书，中郎将赵印害怕了，就派门客去劝谏赵充国说： 命令军队出击，果真能使军队招致失利，将领遭到杀害而使国家面临倾覆的危险的话，将军固守是可以的。
English: The report had not been published yet, but when he received the order to march, he was afraid of Zhao Yin, so he sent a messenger to persuade Zhao Chongguo, saying, "If ordering the army to attack can really cause the army to lose, and if the general is killed and the country is in danger of being overthrown, then it is okay for the general to hold fast."

古文：即利与病，又何足争？
现代文：如果只是从利弊关系出发，那又凭什么抗争呢？
English: If we only proceed from the relationship between advantages and disadvantages, then on what basis can we fight?

古文：一旦不合上意，遣绣衣来责将军，将军之身不能自保，何国家之安？ 
现代文：一旦您不合皇上的意旨，皇上派绣衣御史来责备将军，将军将自身难保，哪里还有什么国家的安全呢？ 
English: Once you do not conform to the emperor's will, the emperor will send the Empress Dowager to reproach the general, and the general will find it difficult to protect himself. Where is the security of the country?

古文：充国叹曰： 是何言之不忠也！
现代文：赵充国叹声说道： 你这话是何等地不忠啊！
English: Zhao Chongguo sighed and said, "How disloyal you are!

古文：本用吾言，羌虏得至是邪？
现代文：原先如果听了我的话，羌敌能成这样一个局面吗？
English: If you had listened to me in the first place, could the situation have become like this?

古文：往者举可先行羌者，吾举辛武贤，丞相御史复白遣义渠安国，竟沮败羌。
现代文：以前推举可以先行巡视羌人的人，我推举了辛武贤，丞相御史请求皇上派遣义渠安国，结果坏了败羌的计划。
English: In the past, I nominated people who could make a tour of Hayato first. I nominated Shin Takenobu, the prime minister, who asked the emperor to send a yakitori to secure the country. As a result, the plan of defeating Hayato was ruined.

古文：金城、湟中谷斛八钱，吾谓耿中丞，籴二百万斛谷，羌人不敢动矣。
现代文：金城、湟中等地的谷每斛八钱，我告诉耿中丞，只要买来二百万斛谷，羌人就不敢妄动了。
English: I told Geng Zhongzheng that as long as he bought two million yakitori, people would not dare to move.

古文：耿中丞请籴百万斛，乃得四十万斛耳。
现代文：耿中丞请求买一百万斛，最后只得到四十万斛。
English: Geng Zhongzheng requested to buy one million baht, but in the end only received four hundred thousand baht.

古文：义渠再使，且费其半。
现代文：义渠两次出使，耗费将近一半。
English: Yichuan was sent out twice, spending nearly half of his time.

古文：失此二册，羌人故敢为逆。
现代文：错失造两计，羌人才敢于叛逆。
English: If you make two wrong plans, you will not dare to rebel.

古文：失之毫厘，差以千里，是既然矣。
现代文：失之毫厘，差以千里，已成为了事实。
English: It has become a fact that a millimeter lost is a millimeter gained.

古文：今兵久不决，四夷卒有动摇，相因而起，虽有知者不能善其后，羌独足忧邪！
现代文：如今兵事旷持久不能结束，万一四方夷狄突然发动变乱，乘机而起，即使有很深智谋的人也不能善理后事，哪裹只有羌人值得担忧呢！
English: At present, the protracted war cannot be ended. In the unlikely event that the four emperors suddenly start a riot and take advantage of the opportunity, even those who have a very deep strategy cannot rationalize the aftermath. Only those who are lazy are worth worrying about!

古文：吾固以死守之，明主可为忠言。 
现代文：我坚定地以死来固守，贤明的君主是可以进献忠言的。 
English: I am firm in my adherence unto death, and a wise prince is able to offer advice.

古文：遂上屯田奏曰：
现代文：于是就呈上屯田的奏书道：
English: So he presented the Tonden's calligraphy:

古文：臣闻兵者，所以明德除害也，故举得于外，则福生于内，不可不慎。
现代文：臣下听说军队是用来彰明道德惩除祸害的，所以用兵得胜在外面，那么福庆就显现在内，因此就不可不谨慎从事。
English: Subjects have heard that the army is used to demonstrate morality and punish evil, so the use of soldiers to win outside, then the blessing will appear inside, so we must not be careless.

古文：臣所将吏士马牛食，月用粮谷十九万九千六百三十斛，盐千六百九十三斛，茭藁二十五万二百八十六石。
现代文：臣所率领的官兵、马、牛的粮草，一个月要用粮谷十九万九千六百三十斛，盐一千六百九十三斛，干草秸秆二十五万零二百八十六石。
English: The grain and grass for the officers and soldiers, horses and cattle led by the vassals required 199,630 koku of grain, 1,693 koku of salt and 250,286 koku of hay per month.

古文：难久不解，繇役不息。
现代文：战争长久不能解除，徭役就不会停止。
English: The war cannot be resolved for a long time, and the warlocks will not stop.

古文：又恐它夷卒有不虞之变，相因并起，为明主忧，诚非素定庙胜之册。
现代文：又怕其他夷狄突然有不可预料的变乱，相随一起发生，成为明君的忧患，这实在不是朝廷以往制定的战胜敌人的策略。
English: In addition, the fear of other Yidi suddenly having unforeseen upheavals, occurring together and becoming a source of worry for the Ming Emperor, was not a strategy previously developed by the imperial court to defeat the enemy.

古文：且羌虏易以计破，难用兵碎也，故臣愚以为击之不便。
现代文：况且羌敌容易用计来攻破，难以用兵力去粉碎，所以臣下认为出击不利。
English: Moreover, it is easy to defeat the enemy with tactics, but it is difficult to crush it with troops, so the vassals think that the attack is unfavorable.

古文：计度临羌东至浩亹，羌虏故田及公田，民所未垦，可二千顷以上，其间邮亭多坏败者。
现代文：估计从临羌向东到浩叠，羌敌的旧田及公田，百姓还没有开垦的土地，可以达到二干顷以上，中间的驿站大多毁坏破败。
English: It is estimated that from Linyi to the east to Houzhu, the old fields and public fields of the enemy have risen, and the land that has not been reclaimed by the people can reach more than two hectares, and the middle stations are mostly destroyed and dilapidated.

古文：臣前部士入山，伐材木大小六万余枚，皆在水次。
现代文：臣下不久前部置士兵进山，砍伐大小林木六万多棵，都放在水边。
English: Not long after, the vassals sent soldiers into the mountains to cut down more than sixty thousand large and small trees, which were all placed by the water's edge.

古文：愿罢骑兵，留驰刑应募，及淮阳、汝南步兵与史士私从者，合凡万二百八十一人，用谷月二万七千三百六十三斛，盐三百八斛，分屯要害处。
现代文：臣下希望撤回骑兵，留下减刑的犯人和应募的士兵，以及淮阳、汝南的步兵和官兵的私人随从，一共有一万零二百八十一人，一个月用谷二万七千三百六十三斛，盐三百零八斛，分别驻扎在要害之地。
English: The courtiers wished to withdraw the cavalry, leaving behind the prisoners whose sentences had been commuted and the conscripts, as well as the Huaiyang and Runan infantrymen and the officers' and soldiers' personal attendants, a total of 10,281 men, 27,363 mu and 308 mu of salt per month, stationed separately in the critical areas.

古文：冰解漕下，缮乡亭，浚沟渠，治湟狭以西道桥七十所，令可至鲜水左右。
现代文：一旦冰冻消解就可以运木而下，修缮驿站，疏通沟渠，整治湟陋以西道路上的桥梁七十座，使其可以通到鲜水附近。
English: Once the ice has melted, the timber can be transported down to repair the station, clear the ditch, and repair the seventy bridges on the road to the west, so that they can pass near fresh water.

古文：田事出，赋人二十亩。
现代文：耕作开始后，每人可以授田二十亩。
English: After the start of farming, each person can receive 20 mu of land.

古文：至四月草生，发郡骑及属国胡骑伉健各千，倅马什二，就草，为田者游兵。
现代文：到四月牧草长出，征发郡县骑兵以及所属部落的胡人骑兵中强健的各一千人，配上十分之二的副马，放牧吃草，作为耕田的人的巡逻队。
English: By April, when the pastures had sprouted, the county and county cavalry, as well as the Hu people's cavalry of the tribe to which they belonged, were each conscripted into a patrol of one thousand strong men, with two-tenths of a second horse, for grazing and eating grass, as a patrol of people cultivating fields.

古文：以充入金城郡，益积畜，省大费。
现代文：把屯田的收入用来充实金城郡，增加积蓄，可以节省很大一笔花费。
English: Using the income from the military canton to enrich Jincheng County and increase savings can save a lot of money.

古文：今大司农所转谷至者，足支万人一岁食。
现代文：现在大司农所运来的谷，足以维持一万人一年的食用。
English: Now, the grain shipped by farmers from Daisho is enough to feed 10,000 people for a year.

古文：谨上田处及器用簿，唯陛下裁许。
现代文：谨呈屯田的地点以及所需器具用品的账簿，希望陛下裁夺准许。
English: I have the honour to submit the location of the military garrison as well as an account book of the necessary equipment and supplies, and I hope that His Majesty will grant me permission.

古文：上报曰： 皇帝问后将军，言欲罢骑兵万人留田，即如将军之计，虏当何时伏诛，兵当何时得决？
现代文：皇上回书说道： 皇帝问候后将军，您所说的撤退骑兵留一万人屯田，如果按将军的计策，敌人当何时可以消灭，兵事当何时能够解决？
English: The Emperor's reply said: General, after the Emperor's greeting, you said that the retreating cavalry would leave ten thousand troops in the field. If you follow the general's strategy, when can the enemy be eliminated, and when can the military affairs be resolved?

古文：孰计其便，复奏。 
现代文：请仔细计虑它的便利之处，然后再给我回报。 
English: Please carefully consider the convenience of it, and then give it back to me.

古文：充国上状曰：
现代文：赵充国把情况上报说：
English: Zhao Chongguo reported the situation, saying:

古文：臣闻帝王之兵，以全取胜，是以贵谋而贱战。
现代文：臣听说帝王的军队，以能保全自己而取胜，所以它重视谋略而轻视战争。
English: The vassal heard that the emperor's army wins by being able to protect itself, so it values strategy and despises war.

古文：战而百胜，非善之善者也，故先为不可胜以待敌之可胜。
现代文：能百战百胜，并不是最好的，所以首先就要使敌人不能战胜我方再来等待时机去战胜敌人。
English: To be able to win every battle is not the best, so we must first make the enemy unable to defeat us and then wait for the opportunity to defeat the enemy.

古文：蛮夷习俗虽殊于礼义之国，然其欲避害就利，爱亲戚，畏死亡，一也。
现代文：蛮夷的习俗虽然不同于礼义之邦，但他们在趋利避害，爱护亲戚，害怕死亡方面，都是一样的。
English: Although the customs of barbarians are different from those of civilized countries, they are all the same in terms of seeking profit and avoiding harm, loving relatives, and fearing death.

古文：今虏亡其美地荐草，愁子寄托远遁，骨肉心离，人有畔志，而明主般师罢兵，万人留田，顺天时，因地利，以待可胜之虏，虽未即伏辜，兵决可期月而望。
现代文：如今敌人失去肥沃土地，茂盛草原，愁于寄居他乡，远离故土，骨肉离心，人人怀有背叛的心意，而这时英明的君主班师罢兵，留下万人屯田，这是顺应天时，利用地利，来等待可以战胜敌人的机会，即使敌人没有即时伏罪，战事的解决可以在一年之内完成。
English: Now that the enemy has lost the fertile land and the lush grassland, he is worried about living in a foreign country, far away from his native land, his flesh and blood are far away from each other, and everyone harbors the spirit of betrayal. At this time, the wise monarch's team leader will strike and leave tens of thousands of people in the field. This is in accordance with the time of day, using the location to wait for the opportunity to defeat the enemy. Even if the enemy does not immediately commit a crime, the resolution of the war can be completed within one year.

古文：羌虏瓦解，前后降者万七百余人，及受言去者凡七十辈，此坐支解羌虏之具也。
现代文：羌敌被瓦解，前后投降的就有一万零七百多人，还有接受我的劝说离去的共有七十批，这些都是坐待羌敌支解的详细情况。
English: The enemy was disbanded, there were more than 10,700 people who surrendered before and after, and there were also a total of 70 groups who accepted my persuasion to leave. These are the details of waiting for the enemy to be disbanded.

古文：臣谨条不出兵留田便宜十二事。
现代文：臣谨列举十二点不出兵而留守屯田的好处。
English: The minister would like to enumerate the advantages of remaining in Tonden without joining the army.

古文：步兵九校，更士万人，留顿以为武备，因田致谷，威德并行，一也。
现代文：步兵九校，官兵共万人，留守屯田作为武装防卫，靠田收谷，武威仁德同时施行，这是第一点。
English: Nine infantry schools, totaling 10,000 officers and men, stayed in the garrison as an armed defense, relying on the field to close the valley, and at the same time carried out martial arts and benevolence. This is the first point.

古文：又因排折羌虏，令不得归肥饶之地，贫破其众，以成羌虏相畔之渐，二也。
现代文：又乘机排挤羌敌使其受挫，叫他们不能回到肥饶的地方来，由于贫困使他们团结不到一起，逐渐形成羌敌自相叛离的局面，这是第二点。
English: The second point is to take advantage of the opportunity to push out the enemies and frustrate them, so that they cannot return to the fertile land. Because of poverty, they are unable to unite and gradually form a situation in which the enemies are separated from each other.

古文：居民得并田作，不失农业，三也。
现代文：当地的居民能够和屯田士兵在一起耕作，没有耽误农民的本业，这是第三点。
English: The third point is that local residents are able to farm together with the soldiers from Tonden, without delaying the farmers' main business.

古文：军马一月之食，度支田士一岁，罢骑兵以省大费，四也。
现代文：军队及马匹一个月的粮草，估计可供屯田的士兵用一年，撤回骑兵用来节省大笔开支，这是第四点。
English: The fourth point is that the withdrawal of troops and horses, which takes a month's supply of grain and grass, is estimated to last a year for the soldiers in the garrisons, and the withdrawal of cavalry is used to save a large sum of money.

古文：至春省甲士卒，循河湟漕谷至临羌，以示羌虏，扬威武，传世折冲之具，五也，以闲暇时下所伐材，缮治邮亭，充入金城，六也。
现代文：到春天时检阅武装的士兵，沿着黄河、湟水运送粮食到临羌，向羌敌显示，奋扬雄威武力，是可以传给后代用以抵御侵略的方法，这是第五点。用闲暇时间运出所砍伐的树木来整治驿站，充实金城，这是第六点。
English: The fifth point is to review the armed soldiers in the spring, to transport grain to Linyi along the Yellow River and Surabaya, and to show the enemy that the use of force is a method of resisting aggression that can be passed on to future generations. The sixth point is to use leisure time to transport the felled trees to rectify the station and enrich Jincheng.

古文：兵出，乘危徼幸，不出，令反畔之虏窜于风寒之地，离霜露疾疫瘃堕之患，坐得必胜之道，七也。
现代文：军队出击，冒着危险才侥幸求取胜利，不出击，让反叛之敌逃窜于风霜寒冷之地，遭受霜露疾病瘟疫冻疮断指之苦，坐着就能达到必胜之境地，这是第七点。
English: The seventh point is that the army should attack, risking danger to achieve a fluke victory, not attack, let the rebel enemy flee to the wind and frost, suffer from frost and dew disease, plague, chilblains and broken fingers, and achieve a win-win situation while sitting.

古文：亡经阻远追死伤之害，八也。
现代文：没有经历险阻和长途追赶而造成死伤的危害，这是第八点。
English: There is no danger of death or injury caused by dangerous obstacles and long-distance pursuit, which is the eighth point.

古文：内不损威武之重，外不令虏得乘间之势，九也。
现代文：对内没有破坏国家威武的形象，对外没有使敌人得到可乘之机，这是第九点。
English: The ninth point is that the image of the country's might and power is not undermined at home, and the enemy is not given an opportunity to take advantage of abroad.

古文：又亡惊动河南大开、小开使生它变之忧，十也。
现代文：又没有惊动黄河以南大开、小开羌人，使其产生变乱的忧患，这是第十点。
English: The tenth point is that it has not alarmed people in the south of the Yellow River, both large and small, and caused them to worry about turmoil.

古文：治湟狭中道桥，令可至鲜水，以制西域，信威千里，从枕席上过师，十一也。
现代文：修治了湟陋中间道路的桥梁，使之可以到达鲜水，用以控制西域，扬威千里，行军就像跨过枕席一样容易，这是第十一点。
English: The eleventh point is to repair the bridge of the rough middle road so that it can reach the fresh water to control the western region, and the march is as easy as crossing the pillow seat.

古文：大费既省，繇役豫息，以戒不虞，十二也。
现代文：巨大的开支已经节省了，就可以免除百姓的徭役，用以警惕意外之事，这是第十二点。
English: A great deal of expense has been spared in order to free the people from the yoke of servitude and to guard against the unexpected, which is the twelfth point.

古文：留屯田得十二便，出兵失十二利。
现代文：留守屯田可以得到十二种好处，出兵就会失去这十二种好处。
English: There are twelve kinds of benefits that can be obtained by staying in Tonden, and these twelve kinds of benefits will be lost by sending troops.

古文：臣充国材下，犬马齿衰，不识长册，唯明诏博详公卿议臣采择。
现代文：臣赵充国才能低下，年老体衰，不懂长远之策，希望陛下诏令公卿广泛细致地议论臣下的话，并加以选择采纳。
English: As the vassal Zhao Chongguo is of low ability, old and weak, and does not understand the long-term strategy, I hope that His Majesty will order the court noble to discuss the words of his vassal extensively and carefully, and selectively adopt them.

古文：上复赐报曰： 皇帝问后将军，言十二便，闻之。
现代文：皇上又赐书回答道： 皇帝问候后将军，您所说的十二点好处，我已知道。
English: The Emperor replied, "General, after the Emperor's greeting, I already know the twelve benefits you mentioned.

古文：虏虽未伏诛，兵决可期月而望，期月而望者，谓今冬邪？谓何时也？
现代文：敌人虽然没有被消灭，战事结束可望一年就行了。一年就行，是指今年冬天，还是指别的什么时间呢？
English: Although the enemy has not been eliminated, the end of the war can be expected in one year. One year is enough, does it refer to this winter, or does it refer to some other time?

古文：将军独不计虏闻兵颇罢，且丁壮相聚，攻扰田者及道上屯兵，复杀略人民，将何以止之？
现代文：将军难道就不考虑敌人知道大量撤军后，将会集合壮丁，攻打骚扰耕种的人以及道路上驻守的士兵，重新烧杀抢掠百姓，将用什么来阻止敌人呢？
English: Does the general not consider what the enemy will use to stop the enemy, knowing that after a large-scale withdrawal of troops, the young men will gather, attack the people who harass the farmers and the soldiers stationed on the road, re-burn, kill, rob and plunder the people?

古文：又大开、小开前言曰： 我告汉军先零所在，兵不往击，久留，得亡效五年时不分别人而并击我？ 
现代文：另外，大开、小开羌先前曾说： 我们向汉军报告了先零所在的地方，汉军不前去攻打，长时间留守，会不会像本始五年时不加以区别而一起攻击我们？ 
English: In addition, Da Kai and Xiao Kailuan had previously said: We reported to the Chinese army where the first zero is located. The Chinese army did not go to attack and stayed for a long time. Will they attack us together without distinction as they did in the first five years?

古文：其意常恐。
现代文：他们心中常常害怕。
English: They often have fear in their hearts.

古文：今兵不出，得亡变生，与先零为一？
现代文：如今军队不出动，他们会不会发生变故，与先零结为一体？
English: If the army does not act now, will they change their minds and become one with the frontline troops?

古文：将军孰计复奏。 
现代文：望将军仔细考虑后再报告。 
English: General Wang will report back after careful consideration.

古文：充国奏曰：
现代文：赵充国上奏说道：
English: Zhao Chongguo, the first violinist, said:

古文：臣闻兵以计为本，故多算胜少算。
现代文：臣听说用兵以计谋作为根本，所以谋算多的战胜谋算少的。
English: The vassal heard that the use of troops was based on strategy, so that more strategy would defeat less strategy.

古文：先零羌精兵今余下过七八千人，失地远客，分散饥冻。罕、开、莫须又颇暴略其赢弱畜产，畔还者不绝，皆闻天子明令相捕斩之赏。
现代文：先零羌的精锐部队现在剩下的不超过七、八干人，丢失土地，客居远方，分崩离析、忍饥挨冻，罕、开、莫须诸羌又时常抢劫他们年老体弱的人以及牲畜财产，反叛投诚的人络绎不绝，都知道天子明确韶令互相捕获斩杀的人可以得到赏赐。
English: There are now no more than seven or eight hundred people remaining from the elite troops of the first few hundred, who have lost their land, live far away, fall apart, suffer from hunger and cold, and are often robbed of their old and infirm people and livestock property. The rebels are endless, and they all know that the Son of Heaven has clearly ordered that those who capture and kill each other can be rewarded.

古文：臣愚以为虏破坏可日月冀，远在来春，故曰兵决可期月而望。
现代文：臣认为破敌可计算月来等待，最迟就在明年春天，所以说战事解决可望在一年之内。
English: The minister believes that defeating the enemy can wait for months, at the latest in the spring of next year, so it is expected that the war will be resolved within a year.

古文：窃见北边自敦煌至辽东万一千五百余里，乘塞列隧有吏卒数千人，虏数大众攻之而不能害。
现代文：我看到北边从敦煌到辽东一万一千五百多里，守卫沿边要塞和烽火台的官兵只有几千人，敌人多次用大部队来攻打也无济于事。
English: I saw that there are more than 11,500 miles from Dunhuang to Liaodong in the north, and there are only a few thousand officers and soldiers guarding the fortresses and bonfires along the border. The enemy has repeatedly attacked with large forces, but to no avail.

古文：今留步士万人屯田，地势平易，多高山远望之便，部曲相保，为堑垒木樵，校联不绝，便兵弩，饬斗具。
现代文：现在留下步兵士卒一万人屯田，地势乎坦，又有许多高山可供远望的便利，使各个部队互相保卫，修筑濠沟壁垒，了望木楼，营垒之间相连不断，备置武器剑弩，整修作战用具。
English: Now, ten thousand foot soldiers have been left behind to occupy the field, the terrain is almost flat, and there are many high mountains for the convenience of looking far and wide, so that the various troops can protect each other, build gully barriers, lookout wooden towers, continuously connect between the camps, prepare weapons and swords, and repair combat equipment.

古文：烽火幸通，势及并力，以逸待劳，兵之利者也。
现代文：烽火一举，兵势相及，力量集中，以逸待劳，这是用兵的有利条件。
English: A bonfire at one stroke, a similar number of soldiers, a concentration of forces, and a willingness to work hard, these are the favorable conditions for the use of soldiers.

古文：臣愚以为屯田内有亡费之利，外有守御之备。
现代文：臣认为屯田对内有不花军费的好处，对外还有防守抵抗的准备。
English: The vassal believed that Tonden had the advantage of not having to spend military expenses domestically, and there were also preparations for defensive resistance abroad.

古文：骑兵虽罢，虏见万人留田为必禽之具，其土崩归德，宜不久矣。
现代文：骑兵即使撤走了，敌人看到有一万人留守屯田作为必要擒敌的措施，他们土崩瓦解、归附朝廷的日子就不会久了。
English: Even if the cavalry were withdrawn, the enemy would see that 10,000 men were left behind in Tonden as a necessary measure to fight the enemy. Their day of collapse and return to the imperial court would not be long in coming.

古文：从今尽三月，虏马赢瘦，必不敢捐其妻子于他种中，远涉河山而来为寇。
现代文：从现在起不超过三个月，敌人马匹瘦弱，一定不敢把他们的妻子儿女放在其他部落中，远途跋山涉水前来入侵。
English: Not more than three months from now, the enemy horses will be so thin that they will not dare to put their wives and children in other tribes and wade through the mountains to invade.

古文：又见屯田之士精兵万人，终不敢复将其累重还归故地。
现代文：又看到屯田的兵士有精兵一万，最终不敢再带着他们的妻子儿女重新返回旧地。
English: They also saw that the soldiers of Tonden had 10,000 elite soldiers, and finally they did not dare to return to the old land with their wives and children.

古文：是臣之愚计，所以度虏且必瓦解其处，不战而自破之册也。
现代文：臣下的这个计策，是估计到敌人将一定会就地瓦解，不用战斗就可自行败亡。
English: This stratagem of the vassals was based on the assumption that the enemy would surely collapse on the spot and would be defeated without a fight.

古文：至于虏小寇盗，时杀人民，其原未可卒禁。
现代文：至于敌人小股侵犯，不时杀戮百姓，这原先就不能完全禁止。
English: As for the enemy's small-scale encroachments, killing people from time to time, this cannot be completely prohibited.

古文：臣闻战不必胜，不苟接刃；攻不必取，不苟劳众。
现代文：臣听说战争不能必胜的话，就不要轻易交锋；攻击不能一定夺取胜利的话，就不要兴师动众。
English: If a vassal hears that a war cannot be won, he should not engage in battle; if an attack cannot be won, he should not stir up the troops.

古文：诚令兵出，虽不能灭先零，亶能令虏绝不为小寇，则出兵可也。
现代文：真的要是命令军队出击，即使不能消灭先零，如果能让敌寇再也不能进行小规模侵犯的话，那么出兵是可以的。
English: If you really order the army to attack, even if you can't eliminate the first zero, if you can make the enemy invaders can no longer carry out small-scale violations, then the troops can be sent.

古文：即今同是而释坐胜之道，从乘危之势，往终不见利，空内自罢敝，贬重而自损，非所以视蛮夷也。
现代文：现在同样不能禁止敌人小规模地入侵，又放弃坐等取胜的方法，采取冒险之势，前去最终不会得利，却使内部空虚自己疲惫，削减实力而自我损耗，这并不是用来向蛮夷示威的好办法。
English: At present, it is also impossible to prohibit the enemy from invading on a small scale, and it is not a good way to demonstrate to the barbarians. It is not a good way to demonstrate to the barbarians.

古文：又大兵一出，还不可复留，湟中亦未可空，如是，徭役复发也。
现代文：另外大兵一旦出击，回来时就不能再留下，湟中地区却又不能不防守，如果这样，徭役又要重新征发。
English: In addition, once the soldiers attack, they can no longer stay when they return, but they can't leave the defense in the middle of the Yunnan region. If this is the case, they will have to be conscripted again.

古文：且匈奴不可不备，乌桓不可不忧。
现代文：况且匈奴不可以不防备，乌桓不可以不忧虑。
English: Moreover, the Xiongnu must be prepared, and the Wuhuan must be worried.

古文：今久转运烦费，倾我不虞之用以澹一隅，臣愚以为不便。
现代文：现在长期运输耗费巨大，倾尽国家的战备储蓄来供应一处，臣以为不妥。
English: At present, long-term transportation is very expensive, and it is not right to use up the country's war savings to supply one place.

古文：校尉临众幸得承威德，奉厚币，拊循众羌，谕以明诏，宜皆乡风。
现代文：校尉临众有幸得以秉承威德，携带丰厚的钱财，安抚各个羌人部落，宣布诏令，羌人应该都会趋从教化。
English: The school captain Lin Zong was fortunate to be able to uphold virtue, carry abundant money, appease various Xiongnu tribes, and announce the edict. Xiongnu people should all tend to be enlightened.

古文：虽其前辞尝曰 得亡效五年 ，宜亡它心，不足以故出兵。
现代文：即使他们前段时间曾说 会不会像本始五年那样呢？ ，也应当不会有其他想法，不值得因为这个缘故出兵。
English: Even if they had said some time ago, "Will it be like the first five years?," there should be no other thoughts, and it is not worth sending troops for this reason.

古文：臣窃自惟念。奉诏出塞，引军远击，穷天子之精兵，散车甲于山野，虽亡尺寸之功，媮得避慊之便，而亡后咎余责，此人臣不忠之利，非明主社稷之福也。
现代文：臣私下考虑，奉诏出塞，率军远征，用尽天子的精兵，将车马武器抛散在山上野地，即使没有点滴功劳，也可得到避嫌的好处，而没有事后的过失和责罚，这只是对人臣不忠于职守有利，对明主和国家都是没有好处的。
English: Privately, a minister may consider that if he issues an edict to retreat, leads an expeditionary force, exhausts God's best soldiers, and scatters his horses and chariots in the mountains and fields, even if there is not a single drop of merit, he can obtain the benefit of avoiding disfavor, but there is no subsequent fault or punishment. This is only beneficial to the minister's disloyalty to his duties, and is not beneficial to the lord and the country.

古文：臣幸得奋精兵，讨不义，久留天诛，罪当万死。
现代文：臣下有幸得以率领精兵，讨伐不义，却长期拖延上天对敌人的惩罚，罪该万死。
English: If a vassal is fortunate enough to lead elite soldiers to fight against injustice, but delays heaven's punishment of the enemy for a long time, the crime deserves death.

古文：陛下宽仁，未忍加诛，令臣数得熟计。
现代文：陛下宽大仁慈，不忍心杀我，让臣几次得以仔细考虑。
English: His Majesty was so kind and lenient that he did not have the heart to kill me, but allowed me to think about it several times.

古文：愚臣伏计孰甚，不敢避斧钺之诛，昧死陈愚，唯陛下省察。
现代文：现在臣的计划已制定好了，不敢畏避斧钹之刑，冒死陈述愚见，望陛下明察。
English: Now that the minister's plan has been worked out, he dares not avoid the punishment of the axe, risking his life to state his stupidity, hoping that His Majesty will see it clearly.

古文：充国奏每上，辄下公卿议臣。
现代文：赵充国的奏书每次上报，都要被交给公卿大臣讨论。
English: Every time Zhao Chongguo's report is reported, it must be submitted to the noble minister for discussion.

古文：初是充国计者什三，中什五，最后什八。
现代文：刚开始赞同赵充国计策的人有十分之三，中期十分之五，最后达到十分之八。
English: At the beginning, three out of ten people agreed with Zhao Chonguo's strategy, five out of ten in the middle, and eight out of ten in the end.

古文：有诏诘前言不便者，皆顿首服。
现代文：皇下韶质问先前说赵充国计策不好的人，他们都磕头认错。
English: The emperor questioned those who had previously said that Zhao Chongguo's strategy was not good, and they all admitted their mistake.

古文：丞相魏相曰： 臣愚不习兵事利害，后将军数画军册，其言常是，臣任其计可必用也。 
现代文：丞相魏相说： 臣下愚蠢不懂得军事上的利害关系，后将军几次定立军策，他说的常是正确的，臣下保证他的计策一定可行。 
English: Joseph's minister, Wei Xiang, said: "Our vassals are stupid and do not understand the military stakes. After the general made military policies several times, what he said was often correct, and his vassals guaranteed that his policies would be feasible."

古文：上于是报充国曰： 皇帝问后将军，上书言羌虏可胜之道，今听将军，将军计善。
现代文：宣帝于是回书给赵充国说： 皇帝问候后将军，您上书讲了羌敌可胜的道理，现在听将军的，将军的计策不错。
English: Emperor Xuan then wrote back to Zhao Chongguo, saying: General, after the emperor's greetings, you wrote a letter saying that you can defeat your enemy. If you listen to the general now, the general's strategy is good.

古文：其上留屯田及当罢者人马数。
现代文：请把留守屯田以及应当撤回的人马数上报给我。
English: Please report to me the number of left-behind garrisons and the number of personnel to be withdrawn.

古文：将军强食，慎兵事，自爱！ 
现代文：将军请多进饭食，用兵，善自珍重！ 
English: General, please eat more food, use soldiers, and value yourself!

古文：上以破羌、强弩将军数言当击，又用充国屯田处离散，恐虏犯之，于是两从其计，诏两将军与中郎将卬出击。
现代文：宣帝由于破羌、强弩两位将军多次说应当出击，又因赵充国屯田的地方分散，怕遭到敌人侵犯，于是同时采纳了他们两方的计策，诏令两位将军同中郎将赵印出兵攻打敌人。
English: Emperor Xuan, due to the fact that the two generals repeatedly said that they should attack, and because Zhao Zongguo was scattered in the countryside, fearing that the enemy would invade, he also adopted the strategies of both of them, and ordered the two generals and the middle man to send Zhao Yin to attack the enemy.

古文：强弩出，降四千余人，破羌斩首二千级，中郎将卬斩首降者亦二千余级，而充国所降复得五千余人。
现代文：强弩将军的部队出击，降服敌人四千多，破羌将军出兵杀敌二千人，中郎将赵印杀敌以及俘虏敌人也有二千多，而赵充国所俘虏的人又有五千多。
English: General Qiang Yu's troops attacked and subdued more than four thousand of the enemy, General Rui Yu dispatched troops and killed two thousand of the enemy, Lieutenant Zhao Yan killed and captured more than two thousand of the enemy, and Zhao Chong Guo captured more than five thousand of the enemy.

古文：诏罢兵，独充国留屯田。
现代文：诏令撤军，只留下赵充国屯田。
English: The imperial edict ordered the withdrawal of troops, leaving only Zhao Chongguo Tunden.

古文：明年五月，充国奏言： 羌本可五万人军，凡斩首七千六百级，降者三万一千二百人，溺河湟饥饿死者五六千人，定计遗脱与煎巩、黄羝俱亡者不过四千人。
现代文：第二年五月，赵充国上奏说道： 羌人原本大概有五万人的军队，一共被杀的有七千六百人，投降的有三万一千二百人，淹死在黄河、湟水中的以及因饥饿而死的有五六千人，最后估计逃脱以及与煎巩、黄羝羌一同流亡的不超过四千人。
English: In May of the following year, Zhao Chongguo said in his report to the emperor: The Xiongnu originally had an army of about fifty thousand men. A total of seven thousand six hundred were killed, thirty-one thousand two hundred surrendered, and five thousand six thousand drowned in the Yellow River and the Yunnan River and died of starvation. In the end, it is estimated that no more than four thousand escaped and went into exile with Shen Gong and Huang Qi.

古文：羌靡忘等自诡必得，请罢屯兵。 
现代文：羌靡忘等责成自己一定要擒获他们，请求撤走屯田的部队。 
English: He ordered himself to capture them and request the withdrawal of the troops from Tonden.

古文：奏可。充国振旅而还。
现代文：奏章被许可，赵充国整顿军队而返回。
English: The petition was approved, and Zhao Chongguo returned to rectify the army.

古文：所善浩星赐迎说充国，曰： 众人皆以破羌、强弩出击，多斩首获降，虏以破坏。
现代文：赵充国的好友浩星赐迎接他并劝说道： 大家都以为破羌、强弩两位将军出兵攻敌，大量杀敌收降，敌人才得以消灭。
English: Zhao Chingguo's close friend Hao Xingqi greeted him and persuaded him, saying, "Everyone thought that the two generals who broke the yoke and strengthened the yoke sent troops to attack the enemy, killed a large number of enemies, and won the battle, so that the enemy could be eliminated.

古文：然有识者以为虏势穷困，兵虽不出，必自服矣。
现代文：但有见识的人都认为敌人已势穷力薄，军队即使不出击，敌人也一定会自己降服。
English: However, people with insight believe that the enemy is already weak, and even if the army does not attack, the enemy will certainly surrender.

古文：将军即见，宜归功于二将军出击，非愚臣所及。
现代文：将军如见到皇上，应归功于两位将军的出击，说两位将军不是臣下所能比得上的。
English: If the general sees the emperor, he should give credit to the two generals for the attack, saying that the two generals are not comparable to the vassals.

古文：如此，将军计未失也。 
现代文：如果这样，将军的计策就没有过失了。 
English: If so, the general's stratagem is not at fault.

古文：充国曰： 吾年老矣，爵位已极，岂嫌伐一时事以欺明主哉！
现代文：赵充国说道： 我年纪已老了，爵位也到了极点，难道还因避嫌一时的功劳而欺骗圣明的君主吗！
English: Zhao Chongguo said, "I am already old, and my title has reached its peak. Is it possible that I have deceived the sacred monarch by avoiding the momentary merit?

古文：兵势，国之大事，当为后法。
现代文：军事形势是国家的大事，应当为后代所效法。
English: The military situation is a major matter for the country and should be emulated by future generations.

古文：老臣不以余命一为陛下明言兵之利害，卒死，谁当复言之者？ 
现代文：老臣如果不在有生之年全部明白地告诉陛下用兵的利害关系，一旦突然死去，有谁还能再对他说呢？ 
English: If a senior minister does not, during his lifetime, fully and clearly tell His Majesty what is at stake in the use of soldiers, who will be able to tell him again in the event of his sudden death?

古文：卒以其意对。
现代文：终于按照自己的意见应对皇上。
English: Finally, he decided to respond to the emperor according to his own opinion.

古文：上然其计，罢遣辛武贤归酒泉太守官，充国复为后将军卫尉。
现代文：皇上同意了他的计策，罢免并派遣辛武贤重归酒泉太守的官任，赵充国又任后将军卫尉。
English: The emperor agreed with his strategy, dismissed and dispatched Xin Wuxian to return to the post of the governor of Jiuquan, and appointed Zhao Chongguo as the rear admiral.

古文：其秋，羌若零、离留、且种、皃库共斩先零大豪犹非、杨玉首，及诸豪弟泽、阳雕、良皃、靡忘皆帅煎巩、黄羝之属四千余人降汉。
现代文：那年秋天，羌人若零、离留、且种、儿库一同杀了先零首领犹非、杨玉，同其他首领弟泽、阳雕、良儿、靡忘一起率领煎巩、黄羝部落的四千多人投降了汉朝。
English: In the autumn of that year, the leader of the Shengong and Huangye clans, more than four thousand people, were led by the younger brother Ze, Yangzhao, Liang'er and Mei Mei, together with the other leaders of the Shengong and Huangye tribes, to surrender to the Han Dynasty.

古文：封若零、弟泽二人为帅众王，离留、且种二人为侯，皃库为君，阳雕为言兵侯，良皃为君，靡忘为献牛君。
现代文：若零、弟泽两人被封为帅众王，离留、且种两人被封为侯，儿库被封为君，阳雕被封为言兵侯，良儿被封为君，靡忘被封为献牛君。
English: If zero, two younger brothers were crowned as handsome kings, two left-behinds were crowned as princes, two sons were crowned as princes, a son was crowned as prince, a son was crowned as prince, a son was crowned as prince, a son was crowned as prince, a son was crowned as prince, and a son was crowned as prince.

古文：初置金城属国以处降羌。
现代文：闻始设置金城属国来安排投降的羌人。
English: At the beginning of the story, Jincheng vassal states were set up to arrange the surrender of the Han people.

古文：诏举可护羌校尉者，时充国病，四府举辛武贤小弟汤。
现代文：韶令选举可以担任护羌校尉的人，这时赵充国生病，四府都推举辛武贤的小弟弟辛汤。
English: When Zhao Chongguo fell ill, all four prefectures nominated Xin Wuxian's younger brother Xin Tang.

古文：充国遽起奏： 汤使酒，不可典蛮夷。不如汤兄临众。 
现代文：赵充国急忙起床上奏道： 辛汤酗酒，不可掌管蛮夷事务，不如派辛汤的哥哥辛临众。 
English: Zhao Chongguo got up in a hurry and recited: Xin Tang is an alcoholic, and should not be in charge of barbarian affairs. It would be better to send Xin Tang's brother Xin Lin to the public.

古文：时，汤已拜受节，有诏更用临众。
现代文：当时辛汤已经接受了符节，又下诏令改任辛临众。
English: At that time, Xin Tang had already accepted the Rune Festival, and he was reappointed as Xin Linzhu by imperial edict.

古文：后临众病免，五府复举汤，汤数醉酉句羌人，羌人反畔，卒如充国之言。
现代文：后来辛临众因为生病免官，五府重又举荐辛汤，辛汤常醉酒怒骂羌人，羌人因而反叛，最后应了赵充国所说的话。
English: Later, Xin Linzhu was relieved of his duties due to illness, and the five prefectures again recommended Xin Tang. Xin Tang often got drunk and swore at Xuanren. Xuanren rebelled, and finally agreed to what Zhao Chongguo said.

古文：初，破羌将军武贤在军中时与中郎将卬宴语，卬道： 车骑将军张安世始尝不快上，上欲诛之，卬家将军以为安世本持橐簪笔事孝武帝数十年，见谓忠谨，宜全度之。
现代文：起初，破羌将军辛武贤在军中时常与中郎将赵印闲聊，赵印说道： 车骑将军张安世开始时曾不合宣帝的心意，宣帝想杀了他，我家将军认为张安世原来手提书袋、头插毛笔事奉孝武帝几十年，被公认忠心谨慎，应该保全他。
English: At first, the general Xin Wuxian often chatted with the middle-ranking general Zhao Ying in the army. Zhao Ying said: At the beginning, the chariot and cavalry general Zhang Anshi was not in line with Emperor Xuan's intentions. Emperor Xuan wanted to kill him. Our general thought that Zhang Anshi, who originally carried a book bag and a quill pen, had served Emperor Xiaowu for decades and was recognized as loyal and prudent. He should be preserved.

古文：安世用是得免。 
现代文：张安世因此才得以免死。 
English: As a result, Zhang Anshi was able to avoid death.

古文：及充国还言兵事，武贤罢归故官，深恨，上书告卬泄省中语。
现代文：等到赵充国回来后同皇上谈论军事，辛武贤就被罢官回到原职，心中深怀怨恨，就上书状告赵印泄露宫廷中的话。
English: When Zhao Chongguo returned and discussed military affairs with the emperor, Xin Wuxian was dismissed from his post and returned to his original position. With deep resentment in his heart, he sent a letter to Zhao Yin accusing him of leaking the words from the court.

古文：卬坐禁止而入至充国莫府司马中乱屯兵，下吏，自杀。
现代文：赵印因违反禁令进入赵充国幕府司马中扰乱屯兵规矩被送交法官审讯，他自杀而死。
English: Zhao Yin was brought before a judge for violating the ban on entering the Zhao Zheng State Shogunate Sima Middle School and disturbing the rules of the garrison. He committed suicide and died.

古文：充国乞骸骨，赐安车驷马、黄金六十斤，罢就第。
现代文：赵充国请求退休养老，被赐给一辆四匹马拉的坐车、黄金六十斤，免职回家。
English: Zhao Chongguo asked for retirement pension, and was given a four-horse carriage, sixty catties of gold, and sent home from work.

古文：朝庭每有四夷大议，常与参兵谋，问筹策焉。
现代文：朝廷每当有关于四夷的重大讨论，经常请他参预军事谋划，向他询问计划谋略。
English: Whenever there was a major discussion about Shi Yi, the imperial court often invited him to participate in preliminary military planning and asked him about plans and strategies.

古文：年八十六，甘露二年薨，谥曰壮侯。
现代文：享年八十六岁，甘露二年薨，谧号为壮侯。
English: He was eighty-six years old at the time of his death, and his posthumous name was Zhuang Hou.

古文：传子至孙钦，钦尚敬武公主。
现代文：爵位从儿子传到孙子赵钦，赵钦娶了敬武公主。
English: The title was passed down from his son to his grandson, Zhao Qin, who married Princess Jingwu.

古文：主亡子，主教钦良人习诈有身，名它人子。
现代文：公主没有儿子，就教赵钦的良人习假称怀有身孕，实际上是别人的儿子。
English: The princess didn't have a son, so she taught Zhao Qin's lover to pretend to be pregnant with someone else's son.

古文：钦薨，子岑嗣侯，习为太夫人。
现代文：赵钦薨，他的儿子赵岑继承侯位，习就成为太夫人。
English: Zhao Qinqian and his son Zhao Jun inherited the title of marquess, and Xi became the great-grandmother.

古文：岑父母求钱财亡已，忿恨相告。
现代文：赵岑的亲生父母索求钱财没有止境，因此愤恨互相告发。
English: Zhao Yao's biological parents demanded money without end, so they complained bitterly to each other.

古文：岑坐非子免，国除。
现代文：赵岑因不是亲生儿子被免除爵位，封地被取消。
English: Zhao Jun was exempted from the title of nobility because he was not his biological son, and his fief was cancelled.

古文：元始中，修功臣后，复封充国曾孙伋为营平侯。
现代文：元始年间，重续功臣的后代，又封赵充国的曾孙赵伋为营乎侯。
English: At the beginning of the year, the descendants of the meritorious returnees were renewed, and the great-grandson of Zhao Chingguo, Zhao Jun, was appointed as Yinghu Hou.

古文：初，充国以功德与霍光等列，画未央宫。
现代文：当初，赵充国因为功劳德行同霍光相当，就把他的像画在未央宫。
English: At first, Zhao Chongguo painted his portrait in the Weiyang Palace because his merits and deeds were comparable to those of Huo Guang.

古文：成帝时，西羌尝有警，上思将帅之臣，追美充国，乃召黄门郎杨雄即充国图画而颂之，曰：
现代文：成帝时，西羌曾有警报，皇上思念将帅大臣，追思并赞美赵充国，就召黄门郎杨雄在赵充国的画像边题写颂辞道：
English: When the emperor was crowned, there was an alarm in Xidi. The emperor missed his generals and ministers, pined for and praised Zhao Chongguo, and summoned Huangmen Lang Yangxiong to write a eulogy next to Zhao Chongguo's portrait:

古文：明灵惟宣，戎有先零。
现代文：在英明圣灵的汉宣帝时代，戎狄中有先零。
English: In the era of Emperor Han Xuan of the Wise and Holy Spirit, there was a zero in the first place.

古文：先零昌狂，侵汉西疆。
现代文：先零猖狂，入侵汉朝的西部边疆。
English: First Zero rampantly invaded the western frontier of the Han Dynasty.

古文：汉命虎臣，惟后将军，整我六师，是讨是震。
现代文：汉朝任命英武的大臣，只有后将军，他统率我汉朝的六师，讨伐叛逆，天下大震。
English: The Han Dynasty appointed Yingwu as minister, but only General Hou, who led the six divisions of the Han Dynasty, fought against the rebels, and the world was shaken.

古文：既临其域，谕以威德，有守矜功，谓之弗克。
现代文：到达羌域以后，晓以威德，有的太守贪图功劳，说他不能取胜。
English: After arriving in Shandong Province, Xiao took advantage of the situation. Some daimyo were greedy for credit, saying that he could not win.

古文：请奋其旅，于罕之羌，天子命我，从之鲜阳。
现代文：请命率军，直抵罕羌，天子命令赵充国随兵到达鲜水的北岸。
English: He ordered Zhao Chongguo to lead the army straight to Hankou, and ordered Zhao Chongguo to follow the soldiers to the north shore of the fresh water.

古文：营平守节，屡奏封章，料敌制胜，威谋靡亢。
现代文：营平壮侯坚守节操，几次上奏密封章疏，料敌如神稳操胜算，智勇双全无人敢挡。
English: The camp of Ping Zhuanghong adhered to the discipline, several times played the sealing chapter, the enemy was as steady as a god, and no one dared to stop the wisdom and courage.

古文：遂克西戎，还师于京，鬼方宾服，罔有不庭。
现代文：终于打败西戎，回师京城，鬼方臣服，没有部落不来朝见。
English: After finally defeating Xi'erong and returning to the capital, the demon side surrendered, and no tribe would not come to see the emperor.

古文：昔周之宣，有方有虎，诗人歌功，乃列于《雅》。
现代文：往昔西周到了宣王时，有方叔有邵虎，诗人歌功颂德，被列于《大雅》中。
English: In the past, when Xi Zhou arrived at Xuanwang, there were Fang Shiu and Shao Hu, poets singing the praises of merit, and they were listed in "Daya."

古文：在汉中兴，充国作武，赳赳桓桓，亦绍厥后。
现代文：汉朝中兴，赵充国显示威武，气宇轩昂，方叔邵虎后继有人。
English: In the mid-Han Dynasty, Zhao Zongguo displayed great military prowess, his spirit was high, and he was succeeded by Fang Shou and Shao Hu.

古文：充国为后将军，徙杜陵。
现代文：赵立充国为后将军，被迁到拄堕。
English: Zhao Lichongguo became the next general and was transferred to Xingpu.

古文：辛观自羌军还后七年，复为破羌将军，征乌孙至敦煌，后不出，征未到，病卒。
现代文：辛武置从差地带兵回来后过了七年，重新被任命为破羌将军，征讨乌孙到达敦煌，以后就没有出动，皇帝征召他还没有到，就病死了。
English: Seven years passed after Xin Wu Jie returned from the expedition, and he was re-appointed as the general of the broken plough. When he arrived in Dunhuang to enlist U Sun, he never went out again. He died of illness before the emperor arrived to enlist him.

古文：子庆忌至大官。
现代文：他的儿子辛庆忌任至高官。
English: His son Shin Kyung-wha is now a high-ranking official.

古文：辛庆忌字子真，少以父任为右校丞，随长罗侯常惠屯田乌孙赤谷城，与歙侯战，陷陈却敌。
现代文：辛庆忌字子真，年轻时因为父亲的关系为右校丞，跟随长罗侯常惠在乌孙赤谷城屯田，同歙侯作战，冲锋陷阵打退了敌人。
English: Xinqing Boozhizhizhizhizhen, when he was young, because of his father's relationship, he was the right schoolmaster, followed the eldest Luo Hou Changhui in Wusun Akaya Castle Tunden, fought with the warlord, and drove back the enemy.

古文：惠奏其功，拜为侍郎，迁校尉，将吏士屯焉耆国。
现代文：常惠把他的功绩上奏，被授官为侍郎，又升为校尉，率领官兵屯驻在焉耆国。
English: Chang Hui extolled his exploits, was awarded the post of chamberlain, and was promoted to lieutenant, leading the officers and soldiers stationed in Yan'an.

古文：还为谒者，尚未知名。
现代文：回来后被任命为谒者，却还没有什么知名度。
English: After his return, he was named as a deaf person, but he is still not well-known.

古文：元帝初，补金域长史，举茂材，迁郎中、车骑将，朝廷多重之者，转为校尉，迁张掖太守，徙酒泉，所在著名。
现代文：元帝初年，补为金城长史，被举荐为茂材，又升为郎中车骑将，朝廷官员中有很多看重他的人。后来又改任校尉，升张掖太守，迁徙到酒泉，他所经过的地方都名著一时。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the mayor of Jincheng, was recommended as the leader of Shigeru, and was promoted to the vice-commander of chariots and cavalry. There were many people who valued him among the officials of the imperial court. Later, he was appointed as the captain of the school, was promoted to the governor of Zhangye, and moved to Jiuquan. The places he passed through were all famous.

古文：成帝初，征为光禄大夫，迁左曹中郎将，至执金吾。
现代文：成帝年初，辛庆忌被征召任命为光禄大夫。又升为左曹中郎将，直到执金吾。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Chengdu, Xin Qingyi was conscripted and appointed as the doctor of Guanglu. He was also promoted to the left Cao Zhong Lang, until he became the leader of Kingu.

古文：始武贤与赵充国有隙，后充国家杀辛氏，至庆忌为执金吾，坐子杀赵氏，左迁酒泉太守。
现代文：原先辛武贤和赵充国有矛盾，后来赵充国家有人遭到杀害，辛氏到辛庆忌时官为执金吾，因儿子杀了赵家人而犯罪，被贬为酒泉太守。
English: Originally, Xin Wuxian and Zhao Chongguo had a conflict. Later, some people in Zhao Chongguo were killed. Mr. Xin went to the funeral of Xin Qingguo as the official to carry out the funeral rites. Because his son killed Zhao's family and committed a crime, he was demoted to the position of Jiuquan governor.

古文：岁余，大将军王凤荐庆忌： 前在两郡著功迹，征入，历位朝廷，莫不信乡。
现代文：一年多后，大将军王凰推荐辛庆忌道 他先前在两郡任官时功迹卓着，被征召到朝廷后，历任各种宫职，没有人不信任向往他的。
English: More than a year later, the great general Wang Huan recommended Xin Qing to the deceased. He had previously served as an official in two counties with outstanding achievements. After being drafted to the imperial court, he held various palace positions. No one distrusted him.

古文：质行正直，仁勇得众心，通于兵事，明略威重行国柱石。
现代文：品质行为正直，仁爱勇敢深得大家喜爱。而且还通晓兵事，懂得谋略，威望很大，可以担任国家的柱石。
English: Honest behavior, benevolence and bravery are deeply loved by everyone. In addition, they are familiar with military affairs, know how to strategize, and have great prestige. They can serve as the pillar of the country.

古文：父破羌将军武贤显名前世，有威西夷。
现代文：他的父亲破羌将军辛武贤在前代名望很大，威播西夷。
English: His father, the defeated general Xin Wuxian, had a great reputation in the previous generation, and was the leader of Xiyi.

古文：臣凤不宜久处庆忌之右。 
现代文：臣王凤不宜久在辛庆忌的上位。 
English: It is not appropriate for the vassal Wang Feng to remain at the top of Xin Qing Bo for a long time.

古文：乃复征为光禄大夫、执金吾。
现代文：于是辛庆忌又重新被征召任命为光禄大夫、执金吾。
English: As a result, Xin Qingyi was once again conscripted and appointed as the doctor of Guanglu and the leader of Kingu.

古文：数年，坐小法左迁云中太守，复征为光禄勋。
现代文：几年后，因犯小罪被贬为云中太守，后被重新征召为光禄勋。
English: A few years later, he was demoted to Yunzhong Dazhong for committing a minor crime, and was later re-recruited as a member of the Order of the Star.

古文：时，数有灾异，丞相司直何武上封事曰： 虞有宫之奇，晋献不寐；卫青在位，淮南寝谋。
现代文：当时多次出现灾难变异，丞相司直何武封书上奏说道： 虞国因有宫之奇，晋献公难以入眠；卫青在位，淮南王只得停止阴谋。
English: At that time, there were many disasters, and the prime minister, Zhi He Wufu, said in a letter: Due to the miracle of the palace in the state of Yu, it was difficult for the prince to fall asleep; while Wei Qing was on the throne, the king of Huainan had to stop the conspiracy.

古文：故贤人立朝，折冲厌难，胜于亡形。
现代文：所以贤人在朝廷，挫败阴谋，弹厌变难，可以胜敌于无形之间。
English: Therefore, wise men in the imperial court, thwarting the conspiracy and playing hard to get, can defeat the invisible enemy.

古文：《司马法》曰： 天下虽安，忘战必危。 夫将不豫设，则亡以应卒；士不素厉，则难使死使。
现代文：《司马法》上说： 天下即使安定，如果忘记了战争就一定很危险，如果将领不事先安排好，就不能应付突然的变难；士兵平时不加以严格训练，就不能让他们以死抗敌。
English: "Sima Fa" said: Even if the world is stable, if you forget the war, it must be very dangerous. If the generals do not make arrangements in advance, they cannot cope with sudden changes; if soldiers are not strictly trained in peacetime, they cannot make them resist the enemy with death.

古文：是以先帝建列将之官，近戚主内，异姓距外，故奸轨不得萌动而破灭，诚万世之长册也。
现代文：因此先帝建立了各位将领的官位，由亲近的亲戚主持内部，外姓的人主持外部，所以奸邪不轨的行为不能萌发而被破坏消灭，这实在是万代的长久之计。
English: Therefore, the former emperor established the official positions of the generals, with close relatives presiding over the inside and people with foreign surnames presiding over the outside, so that treacherous and evil behavior could not germinate and be destroyed, which is really a long-term strategy for all generations.

古文：光禄勋庆忌行义修正，柔毅敦厚，谋虑深远。
现代文：光禄勋辛庆忌躬行仁义遵依正道，和柔沉毅，诚实宽厚，有深谋远虑。
English: Glorious rewards are bestowed on those who practice benevolence and righteousness, follow the right path, are gentle and calm, honest and generous, and have foresight.

古文：前在边郡，数破敌获虏，外夷莫不闻。
现代文：以前在边郡，几次打败俘获敌虏，夷狄没有不知道的。
English: In the past, in the border county, several times defeated and captured the enemy, the Yidi did not know.

古文：乃者大异并见，未有其应。
现代文：前一段时间有些很怪异的事都出现了，却没有得到应证。
English: Some time ago, some very strange things have appeared, but have not been corroborated.

古文：加以兵革久寝。
现代文：再加上兵事很长时间都没有了。
English: In addition, military service has not existed for a long time.

古文：《春秋》大灾未至而豫御之，庆忌家在爪牙官以备不虞。 
现代文：《春秋》上说大的灾难未来之前就要加以防备，卒庆忌宜居武将官位以备不测。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" said that it is necessary to be prepared before a big disaster in the future, and it is appropriate to live in the post of general in order to be prepared for any eventuality.

古文：其后拜为右将军、诸吏、散骑、给事中，岁余徙为左将军。
现代文：这之后辛庆忌就被授官为右将军诸吏散骑给事中，一年多后被调任为左将军。
English: After this, Xin Qingyi was awarded the post of right general, and more than a year later he was transferred to the left general.

古文：庆忌居处恭俭，食饮被服尤节约，然性好舆马，号为鲜明，唯是为奢。
现代文：辛庆忌平曰的仪容举止恭敬谦逊，饮食穿戴尤为节俭，但性喜车马，标识很醒目，只有这算是奢侈。
English: Xinqing Binping said that his appearance and demeanor are respectful and humble, and his diet and clothing are particularly frugal, but he likes cars and horses, and the logo is very eye-catching. This is the only luxury.

古文：为国虎臣，遭世承平，匈奴、西域亲附，敬其威信。
现代文：为国家勇武之臣，适逢天下太平，匈奴、西域亲近归附，敬重他的威信。
English: He was a brave and valiant vassal of the state, and when the world was at peace, the Xiongnu and the Western Regions were closely attached to him, and respected his prestige.

古文：年老卒官。长子通为护羌校尉，中子遵函谷关都尉，少子茂水衡都尉出为郡守，皆有将帅之风。
现代文：因年老免官，长子辛通任护羌校尉，第二个儿子辛遵任函谷关都尉，小儿子辛茂任水衡都尉又出任郡守，他们都有将帅的风范。
English: Due to his old age, he was relieved of his duties. His eldest son, Xin Tong, was appointed to the position of the captain of the Fusheng School, his second son, Xin Zun, was appointed to the position of the captain of the Hantanguan School, and his youngest son, Xin Mao, was appointed to the position of the captain of the Shuiheng School, and was also appointed to the position of the county governor. They all had the demeanor of a great general.

古文：宗族支属至二千石者十余人。
现代文：宗族旁支亲属到二千石的有十多人。
English: There are more than ten people of up to 2,000 koku who are relatives of collateral branches of the clan.

古文：元始中，安汉公王莽秉政，见庆忌本大将军凤所成，三子皆能，欲亲厚之。
现代文：元始年间，安汉公王莽把持朝政，看到辛庆忌本是大将军王凤所成就的，他的三个儿子都很能干，就想亲近厚待他。
English: In the early years of the Anhan Dynasty, Prince Wang Mang was in charge of the imperial government. Seeing that the Xinqing tomb was built by the great general Wang Feng, and that his three sons were all very capable, he wanted to be close to them and treat them well.

古文：是时，莽方立威柄，用甄丰、甄邯以自助，丰、邯新贵，威震朝廷。
现代文：这时王莽刚建立威权，任用甄丰、甄邯来帮助自己，甄丰、甄邯新近显贵，威势震动朝廷。
English: At this time, Wang Mang had just established his authority, and appointed Zhenfeng and Zhenyao to help him. Zhenfeng and Zhenyao were newly prominent, and their power shook the imperial court.

古文：水衡都尉茂自见名臣子孙，兄弟并列，不甚诎事两甄。
现代文：水衡都尉辛茂自以为是名臣的后代，兄弟都同在高位，就不很屈事两甄。
English: Captain Shinmao Mizuhira thinks of himself as the descendant of a famous minister, and since his brothers are also in high positions, he does not have to think twice.

古文：时，平帝幼，外家卫氏不得在京师，而护羌校尉通长子次兄素与帝从舅卫子伯相善，两人俱游侠，宾客甚盛。
现代文：当时平帝年幼，外祖父家卫氏不能住在京师，护羌校尉辛通的长子辛次兄平常就和平帝的堂舅卫子伯很要好，他们两个人都有游侠风度，门下宾客很多。
English: At that time, Emperor Ping was young, and his maternal grandfather Jia Wei could not live in Beijing Division. The eldest son of the garrison captain Xin Tong, Xin's second brother, was usually very close to Emperor Ping's cousin Wei Zibing. Both of them had a knight-errant demeanor and had many guests.

古文：及吕宽事起，莽诛卫氏。
现代文：等到吕宽的事情发生，王莽就诛杀了卫氏。
English: When the Lyu Kuan incident occurred, Wang Mang killed Wei.

古文：两甄构言诸辛阴与卫子伯为心腹，有背恩不说安汉公之谋。
现代文：两甄诬蠛辛家兄弟暗中同卫子伯勾结，有背弃恩义不满意安汉公的阴谋。
English: The two brothers of the Xin family, who were falsely accused, secretly colluded with the guardian, and there was a plot to betray the gratitude of the dissatisfied Anhan.

古文：于是司直陈崇举奏其宗亲陇西辛兴等侵陵百姓，威行州郡。
现代文：于是司直陈崇上奏举报辛氏的宗族陇西辛兴等人侵犯欺凌老百姓，在州郡作威作福。
English: As a result, Secretary Chen Chong reported that the Xin clan's ancestor, Shaanxi Xinxing, and others violated and bullied the common people and took advantage of the state and county.

古文：莽遂按通父子、遵、茂兄弟及南郡太守辛伯等，皆诛杀之。
现代文：王莽就审查辛通父子、辛遵、辛茂兄弟以及南郡太守辛伯等人，把他们都杀了。
English: Wang Mang examined Xin Tong and his son, Xin Zun, the brothers Xin Mao, and the governor of Nan County, Xin Bo, and killed them all.

古文：辛氏繇是废。
现代文：辛氏因此衰败。
English: As a result, the Shin clan fell into decline.

古文：庆忌本狄道人，为将军，徙昌陵。
现代文：辛庆忌原本是狄道郡的人，官任将军后，就迁移到昌陵。
English: Originally from Dido County, Xin Qingyi moved to Changling after he was appointed as a general.

古文：昌陵罢，留长安。
现代文：昌陵撤销后，就留居长安。
English: After Changling was revoked, he stayed in Chang'an.

古文：赞曰：秦、汉已来，山东出相，山西出将。
现代文：赞曰：从秦、汉以来，泰山以束常出丞相，泰山以西常出将军。
English: Zang said: Since the Qin and Han dynasties, Taishan Izuka has always been a prime minister, and Taishan West has always been a general.

古文：秦时将军白起，郿人；王翦，频阳人。
现代文：秦朝将军白起，是郡县人；王翦是频阳人。
English: The general Baiqi of the Qin Dynasty was from Guxian County; Wang Xi was from Fenyang.

古文：汉兴，郁郅王围、甘延寿，义渠公孙贺、傅介子，成纪李广、李蔡，杜陵苏建、苏武，上邽上宫桀、赵充国，襄武廉褒，狄道辛武贤、庆忌，皆以勇武显闻。
现代文：建汉以来，郁郅的王围、甘延寿，义渠的公孙贺、傅介子，成纪的李广、李蔡，杜陵的苏建、苏武，上邦的上官桀、赵充国，襄武的廉裹，狄道的辛武贤、辛庆忌，都以勇猛威武著名。
English: Since the founding of the Han Dynasty, Wang Wai and Gan Yan Shou of Yucheng, Gongsun He and Fu Kaizi of Yiqu, Li Guang and Li Cai of Chengji, Su Jian and Su Wu of Du Ling, Shangguan Xuan, Zhao Chongguo, Lianwu of Xiangwu, Xinwuxian and Xin Qingyi of Dido, are all famous for their bravery and might.

古文：苏、辛父子著节，此其可称列者也，其余不可胜数。
现代文：苏、辛父子都以有节操著称，这是他们可以赞许的地方，其余的不可胜数。
English: Su and Xin, father and son, are known for their discipline. This is something they can approve of. The rest is countless.

古文：何则？
现代文：这是为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：山西天水、陇西、安定、北地处势迫近羌胡，民俗修习战备，高上勇力鞍马骑射。
现代文：泰山以西的天水、陇西、安定、北地等地与羌人、胡人很靠近，民间风俗讲习武装战备，崇尚勇力骑马射箭。
English: To the west of Mount Tai, Tianshui, Shaanxi, Ding'an, and Hokkien are very close to the Yao and Hu people. Folk customs include training in armed combat and advocating the courage to ride horses and shoot arrows.

古文：故《秦诗》曰： 王于兴师，修我甲兵，与子皆行。 
现代文：所以有一首《秦诗》说： 君王要打仗，就整理好镗甲和兵器，和你一同出征。 
English: Therefore, there is a "Qin poem" that says: When the king wants to fight, he will arrange armor and weapons and go to war with you.

古文：其风声气俗自古而然，今之歌谣慷慨，风流犹存耳。
现代文：可见他们的风气习俗自古以来就是这样，现在的歌谣听起来慷慨激昂，以前的遣风仍在。
English: It can be seen that their customs and customs have been like this since ancient times. The current songs sound impassioned, and the previous winds are still blowing.

