古文：桑维翰，字国侨，洛阳人也。
现代文：桑维翰，字国侨，洛阳人。
English: Sang Weihan, a Chinese expatriate, is from Luoyang.

古文：父珙，事河南尹张全义为客将。
现代文：父亲名拱，在河南尹张全义手下做客将。
English: His father, Naegong, was a guest captain under Yin Zhang Quanyi in Henan.

古文：维翰身短面广，殆非常人，既壮，每对鉴自叹曰： 七尺之身，安如一尺之面！ 
现代文：桑维翰身材短小面部宽长，非常人之形，成人以后，每每对着镜子自己叹息说： 身高七尺的人，哪比得上脸长一尺的我！ 
English: Sanveighan was short in stature, with a broad, long face, very human-shaped. After he became an adult, he would look at himself in the mirror and sigh, "A seven-foot-tall man is nothing compared to me with a one-foot-long face!"

古文：跪于帐前，自旦之暮，涕泣争之。契丹乃从之，指帐前石谓德钧使者曰： 我已许石郎，此石烂，可改矣。 
现代文：后晋高祖石敬瑭统领河阳，桑维翰被征召做书记官，历经几个城镇他都跟随着，到石敬瑭在太原登上帝位，桑维翰首先参与谋划，石敬瑭又派他写信向契丹请求援救，契丹果然答应了请求。不久因为赵德钧也派使节去问候契丹，晋高祖害怕契丹改变计策，就命桑维翰到契丹幕帐去，阐述始终如一利害相关的道理，那盟约才确定下来。
English: After he ascended the throne, his great-great-great-grandfather, Shih Ching-tao, led Heyang. Sang Wei-han was conscripted to be a secretary, and he followed him through several towns. When Shih Ching-tao ascended to the throne in Taiyuan, Sang Wei-han first participated in the planning. Shih Ching-tao also sent him to write to the Khitan to request rescue, and the Khitan indeed agreed to the request. Soon, because Zhao Deyu also sent an envoy to greet the Khitan, the great-great-grandfather was afraid that the Khitan would change his strategy, so he ordered Sang

古文：及高祖建号，制授翰林学士、礼部侍郎，知枢密院事。寻改中书侍郎、平章事、集贤殿大学士，充枢密院使。
现代文：晋高祖建立国号，诏令桑维翰任翰林学士、礼部侍郎，主持枢密院事务，不久改任中书侍郎、平章事、集贤殿大学士，担任枢密院使。
English: As the founding father of the country, Emperor Jin Gao ordered Sang Wei Han to be appointed as the Hanlin Scholar and the Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies to preside over the Privy Council's affairs, and he was soon appointed as the Chushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushush

古文：高祖幸夷门，范延光据鄴叛，张从宾复自河、洛举兵向阙，人心恟恟。
现代文：高祖驾临夷门时，范延光占据邺地反叛。张从宾又从黄河、洛河举兵向都城进攻，人心浮动纷乱。
English: When Gao Zu drove to the Yiwu Gate, Fan Yanguang took over and rebelled. Zhang Congbin also raised an army from the Yellow River and Luo River to attack the capital, and people's hearts were in turmoil.

古文：时有人候于维翰者，维翰从容谈论，怡怡如也，时皆服其度量。
现代文：当时，有人监视着桑维翰。桑维翰从容自若，谈人论事，和悦如常。人们都叹服他的气量胆识。
English: At that time, someone was watching Sanveighan. Sanveighan was at ease, talking about people and things, and pleasant as usual. People were amazed at his courage.

古文：及杨光远平鄴，朝廷虑兵骄难制，维翰请速散其众，寻移光远镇洛阳。
现代文：到杨光远平定邺地，朝廷担心骄兵难制，桑维翰请求赶快分散他的兵马。
English: By the time Yang Guangyuan had pacified the battlefield, the imperial court was worried that the arrogant soldiers would be difficult to control. San Weihan requested that his soldiers and horses be quickly dispersed.

古文：光远由是怏怏，上疏论维翰去公徇私，除改不当，复营邸肆于两都之下，与民争利。
现代文：不久调杨光远镇守洛阳，杨光远因此此怏怏不乐，上奏疏指斥桑维翰背公徇私，任免不当，又在两都之地营建宅邸市铺，与老百姓争夺财利。
English: Soon, Yang Guangyuan was transferred to Luoyang, and Yang Guangyuan was not happy about this. He accused San Weihan of betraying the public and serving himself, and building mansions and stores in the two capitals to compete with the common people for financial gain.

古文：高祖方姑息外将，事不获已，因授维翰检校司空、兼侍中，出为相州节度使，时天福四年七月也。
现代文：高祖正迁就朝外将领，事情不得了结，只好任桑维翰为检校司空、兼侍中，出任相州节度使。当时是天福四年七月。
English: Gao Zu was transferred to a foreign general, and the matter could not be resolved, so he had to appoint Sun Weihan as the inspector of the school, and also as an attendant, to serve as the festival envoy of Xiangzhou. At that time, it was July of the 4th year of Tianfu.

古文：先是，相州管内所获盗贼，皆籍没其财产，云是河朔旧例。
现代文：在此之前，相州管区内凡抓获盗匪贼寇，全都没收他们的财产，说这是河朔原有旧例。
English: Prior to this, all the bandits and thieves who were caught in the Xiangzhou region had their property confiscated, saying that this was an old precedent in Hexuo.

古文：及维翰作镇，以律无明文，具事以奏之。
现代文：到桑维翰担任镇守，因法律条款无此明文规定，便废止这一旧例并上奏朝廷。
English: Since there was no such explicit provision in the law, he abolished this old practice and reported it to the imperial court.

古文：诏曰： 桑维翰佐命功全，临戎寄重，举一方之往事，合四海之通规，况贼盗之徒，律令具载。
现代文：高祖诏令： 桑维翰辅佐皇帝功高，面临战事可寄重任，废除一地的旧事，符合天下的通规，况且对盗匪贼寇的处罚，法律条令都有记载。
English: Emperor Gaozhu's edict: Sanveihan's service as an aide to the emperor was highly meritorious, and he could be entrusted with important duties in the face of war, and the abolition of the old affairs of a place was in line with the general rules of the world. Moreover, the punishment of robbers and thieves was recorded in laws and regulations.

古文：比为抚万姓而安万国，岂忍罪一夫而破一家。
现代文：如若为了安抚万民百姓而使各地安定，岂可忍心因加罪一人而连及破毁一家。
English: If, in order to appease all the people and bring stability to all parts of the country, it is intolerable to punish a single person and break up a family.

古文：闻将相之善言，成国家之美事，既资王道，实契人心。
现代文：听从文武百官的美好计策，可以成就国家的大事，这既佐助了王道的实现，又切合人们的心愿。
English: It is possible to achieve great things for the country by following the good strategies of the civil and military officials. This not only helps the realization of the royal road, but also meets people's wishes.

古文：今后凡有贼人准格律定罪，不得没纳家资，天下诸州皆准此处分。 
现代文：今后，凡有贼匪一律按照法律条款定罪。不得没收缴纳他的家财，全国各州都按此处理。 
English: From now on, all thieves and bandits will be convicted in accordance with the provisions of the law. His family wealth must not be confiscated, and all states in the country will be dealt with accordingly.

古文：自是劫盗之家，皆免籍没，维翰之力也。
现代文：从此，抢劫犯的家庭，都免除没收财产的处罚，这是桑维翰的功劳。
English: Since then, the robber's family has been exempted from the penalty of confiscation of property, which is the merit of Sanveehan.

古文：岁余，移镇兗州。
现代文：过了一年多，调任镇守兖州。
English: After more than a year, he was transferred to the post of town guard of Zhangzhou.

古文：时吐浑都督白承福为契丹所迫，举众内附，高祖方通好于契丹，拒而不纳。
现代文：这时，吐谷浑都督白承福被契丹威迫，率领徒众入关，依附后晋，高祖正与契丹往来和好，拒绝吐谷浑的归附不予接纳。
English: At this time, Tugu Hunduk Bai Chengfu was forced by Khitan to lead the disciples into the pass and adhere to Hojin. Gaozu was making peace with Khitan and refused to accept Tugu Hun's affiliation.

古文：镇州节度使安重荣患契丹之强，欲谋攻袭，戎师往返路出于真定者，皆潜害之，密与吐浑相结，至是遂纳焉，而致于朝。
现代文：镇州节度使安重荣担心契丹的强大，图谋袭击契丹，往来于真定一带契丹的军队，都被他暗地里消灭，秘密与吐谷浑深厚交往，到这时，安重荣接纳了白承福，并且使他朝见了高祖。
English: The Zhenzhou Festival made An Chongrong worry about the power of the Khitan, plot to attack the Khitan, travel to and from the Khitan army in the area of Zhending, all of which were secretly destroyed by him, secretly and deeply interacted with Tu Gu. At this time, An Chongrong accepted Bai Chengfu, and made him meet Gao Zu.

古文：既而安重荣抗表请讨契丹，且言吐浑之请。
现代文：接着，安重荣上表请求讨伐契丹，并且说这是吐谷浑的请求。
English: Next, An Chong Rong made a request for a crusade against the Khitan, and said that this was a request from Tugukhun.

古文：疏奏，留中不出。高祖召使人于内寝，传密旨于维翰曰： 朕比以北面事之，烦懑不快，今省所奏，释然如醒。朕计已决，卿可无忧。 
现代文：这时，安重荣手握强兵，占据重镇，仗恃他的勇猛，逞专横跋扈之势。高祖看表后，犹豫不决。桑维翰知道安重荣已心怀奸计，又担心朝廷违逆了他的意志，于是秘密地上疏进言。疏奏送到，高祖不予公布，召唤使者入内，对桑维翰传达秘旨： 我近来北面称臣侍奉契丹，心中愤懑不快，现在细读了你的奏章，心中愤懑解开就像睡醒了一样，我的计谋已经决定，你不必担心了。 
English: At this time, An Chong Rong was holding a strong army, occupying a major town, boasting of his bravery and arrogance. Gao Zu looked at his watch and hesitated. San Weihan knew that An Chong Rong had a treacherous plan in mind, and feared that the court had violated his will, so he secretly made a speech. The speech was delivered, Gao Zu did not announce it, summoned the messenger to the palace, and conveyed the secret to San Weihan: I recently served the Khitan as a minister in the north, and my heart was angry and unhappy. Now I have read your speech carefully, and the anger in my heart has dissolved as if I had woken

古文：七年夏，高祖驾在鄴都，维翰自镇来朝，改授晋昌军节度使。
现代文：七年夏天，高祖驾临邺都，桑维翰从兖州前来朝拜，改任晋昌军节度使。
English: In the summer of the seventh year, Gao Zu drove to the capital of Linyi, Sang Weihan came from Bozhou to pay homage, and was appointed as the Jinchang Army's festival envoy.

古文：少帝嗣位，征拜侍中，监修国史。频上言请与契丹和，为上将景延广所否。
现代文：少帝石重贵即位，征召拜为侍中，监理编修国史，不断上书请求与契丹和谈通好，被上将军景延广所否定。
English: The young emperor Shishi Juki ascended to the throne, was conscripted to serve as an attendant, supervised the compilation of national history, and constantly petitioned for peace talks with Khitan, which was denied by the general Jing Yanguang.

古文：明年，杨光远构契丹，有澶渊之役，凡制敌下令，皆出于延广，维翰与诸相无所与之。
现代文：第二年，杨光远与契丹结怨，在澶渊发生战争，凡进攻敌军，下达命令，都出自景延广。桑维翰与各位宰相没有参与的机会。
English: The following year, Yang Guangyuan and Khitan fell out, and war broke out in Shanyuan. All attacks on enemy forces and orders were issued by Jing Yanguang. San Weihan and the other prime ministers did not have the opportunity to participate.

古文：及契丹退，维翰使亲党受宠于少帝者，密致自荐，曰： 陛下欲制北方以安天下，非维翰不可。 
现代文：等到契丹败退，桑维翰派受少帝宠幸的亲信秘密地推荐自己说 ：皇上要想制服北方戎狄安定国家，非桑维翰不可。 
English: After Khitan's defeat, the young emperor's favored cronies of the Sang Vihan faction secretly recommended themselves, saying, "If the emperor wants to subdue the northern warlord and stabilize the country, Sang Vihan is indispensable."

古文：少帝乃出延广守洛，以维翰守中书令，再为枢密使、宏文馆大学士，继封魏国公。
现代文：少帝于是命景延广出守洛阳，让桑维翰担任中书令，又任枢密使、弘文馆大学士，接着，封为魏国公。
English: The young emperor then ordered Jing Yanguang to leave for Luoyang, and let San Weihan serve as the Chinese scribe, as well as the privy envoy, the scholar of the Hongwen Museum, and then as the Wei Guogong.

古文：事无巨细，一以委之。数月之间，百度浸理。
现代文：事情无论大小，全部委托给他，几月之间，百事渐趋治理。
English: No matter how big or small, everything was entrusted to him, and over the course of a few months, everything gradually came under his control.

古文：然权位既重，而四方赂遗，咸凑其门，故仍岁之间，积货钜万，由是浇竞辈得以兴谤。
现代文：然而权力地位显赫以后，各地贿赂馈赠的东西，都汇集到他的门下，所以，连着一两年之内，聚积的财货无数，因此，那些轻薄浮躁的人得以借机兴起诽谤。
English: However, after the power position became prominent, the bribes and gifts from all over the country were gathered under his door, so, within a year or two, countless wealth and goods were accumulated. Therefore, those frivolous and impetuous people were able to take the opportunity to rise up and slander.

古文：未几，内客省使李彦韬、端明殿学士冯玉皆以亲旧用事，与维翰不协，间言稍入。维翰渐见疏忌，将加黜退，赖宰相刘昫李崧奏云： 维翰元勋，且无显过，不宜轻有进退。 
现代文：不多久，内客省使李彦韬、端明殿学士冯玉都因为任用亲朋故旧，与桑维翰不相协和，离间之言逐渐进入皇帝耳中，桑维翰渐渐被疏远猜忌，将要被罢免斥退，全靠宰相刘日句，李崧上奏 ：桑维翰立过大功，并且没有大的过错，不应该轻易贬退。 
English: Not long after, because the appointment of relatives and friends of the old and the new did not harmonize with San Weihan, the words of discord gradually entered the ears of the emperor. San Weihan was gradually alienated and suspicious, and was about to be dismissed and expelled. It was all due to the prime minister Liu Nichu, and Li Xuan played: San Weihan has made great contributions, and there is no big mistake, and should not be easily degraded.

古文：少帝乃止。
现代文：少帝才作罢。
English: The young emperor had to give it up.

古文：寻以冯玉为枢密使，以分维翰之权。
现代文：不久，任用冯玉为枢密使，以此削弱桑维翰的权力。
English: Soon after, he appointed Feng Yu as a confidential envoy to weaken San Weihan's power.

古文：后因少帝微有不豫，维翰曾密遣中使达意于太后，请为皇弟重睿择师傅以教道之，少帝以此疑其有他。
现代文：后来因少帝稍有不适，桑维翰曾经暗地里派遣宫廷使者向太后表达心意，请求为皇弟石重睿选择老师来教育辅导他。少帝因此怀疑桑维翰怀有异心。
English: Later, due to the young emperor's slight discomfort, Sanveikhan had secretly sent a palace emissary to the empress dowager to express his wishes, requesting that a teacher be selected for the younger brother of the emperor, Shih Chong Rui, to educate and mentor him. The young emperor therefore suspected that Sanveikhan harbored an ulterior motive.

古文：俄而冯玉作相，与维翰同在中书，会舍人卢价秩满，玉乃下笔除价为工部侍郎，维翰曰： 词臣除此官稍慢，恐外有所议。 
现代文：不久以后，冯玉做了宰相，与桑维翰都在中书省，正好碰上舍人卢价任职期满，冯玉就提笔委任卢价为工部侍郎，桑维翰说： 文官出任这种官职要稍稍慢些，恐怕外界有所议论。 
English: Soon after, Feng Yu became the prime minister, and he and Sang Weihan were both in the Ministry of Chinese Literature. Just as Lu Kuan's term of office expired, Feng Yu took up a pen to appoint Lu Kuan as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry. Sang Weihan said: "Civil servants should take a little longer to assume this kind of official position. I'm afraid there will be some discussion from the outside.

古文：因不署名，属维翰休假，玉竟除之，自此维翰与玉尤不相协。
现代文：因此不予签名。接着桑维翰休假，冯玉终归任命了卢价，自此桑维翰与冯玉更加不相协调。
English: Therefore, he did not sign it. Then, Sanveighan went on vacation, and Feng Yu finally appointed Lukan. Since then, Sanveighan and Feng Yu have been even more incongruous.

古文：俄因少帝以重睿择师傅言于玉，玉遂以词激少帝，寻出维翰为开封府尹。维翰称足疾，罕预朝谒，不接宾客。
现代文：不久少帝把石重睿选择老师的事告诉了冯玉，冯玉于是用言语刺激少帝。少帝不多久就派桑维翰出任开封府尹，桑维翰称脚有病，很少参朝晋见，不与宾客往来。
English: Soon, the young emperor told Feng Yu about Shi Chongrui's choice of teacher, and Feng Yu then used words to irritate the young emperor. The young emperor soon sent San Weihan to serve as Kaifeng governor. San Weihan said that he had a foot disease, rarely visited the emperor, and did not interact with guests.

古文：是岁，秋霖经月不歇。
现代文：这一年，秋雨下了一月不停止。
English: This year, the autumn rain did not stop for a month.

古文：一日，维翰出府门由西街入内，至国子门，马忽惊逸，御者不能制，维翰落水，久而方苏。
现代文：一天，桑维翰走出府宅大门，由西街进入内城，到了国子门，乘马忽然惊恐奔跑，驾车的人不能控制，桑维翰掉进水中，过了好长时间才苏醒过来。
English: One day, San Weihan walked out of the gate of the mansion, entered the inner city from the West Street, and arrived at the Guozi Gate. He suddenly ran in fright on the horse, and the driver could not control it. San Weihan fell into the water, and it took a long time for him to wake up.

古文：或言私邸亦多怪异，亲党咸忧之。
现代文：有人说他的私人官邸也多有鬼怪，亲近他的人都为此忧心忡忡。
English: Some say his private residence is also haunted, and those close to him are worried about it.

古文：及契丹至中渡桥，维翰以国家安危系在朝夕，乃诣执政异其议，又求见帝，复不得对。
现代文：到契丹国主打到中渡桥，桑维翰因国家危在旦夕，才到执政处提出他的异议，又求谒见少帝，得不到准允。
English: By the time the Khitans had reached the middle of the bridge, Sanveikhan, because the country was in imminent danger, went to the government office to raise his objection and ask to see the young emperor, but he did not get permission.

古文：维翰退而谓所亲曰： 若以社稷之灵，天命未改，非所能知也；若以人事言之，晋氏将不血食矣。 
现代文：桑维翰回家，对他亲近的人说： 如果以国家的命运而论，天命是否改变，不是我们所能知晓的，如果以人事而论，晋朝将不会再存在了。 
English: When Sanveighan returned home, he said to those close to him: If it is a matter of the fate of the country, whether the fate of the country will change is not something we can know. If it is a matter of personnel, the Jin Dynasty will no longer exist.

古文：开运三年十二月十日，王师既降契丹；十六日，张彦泽以前锋骑军陷都城。契丹遣使遗太后书云： 可先使桑维翰、景延广远来相接，甚是好事。 
现代文：开运三年十二月十日，后晋的军队已经投降契丹，十六日，张彦泽率领前锋骑兵攻陷了都城，契丹国主派使者送信给太后说： 可以先让桑维翰、景延广远道来迎接，这是很好的事。 
English: On December 10, three years after the start of the campaign, the Hojin's army had already surrendered to the Khitan. On the 16th, Zhang Yanze led the forward cavalry to capture the capital city. The head of the Khitan state sent an envoy to the empress dowager saying, "It is a good thing that you can let Sang Wichan and Jing Yan come all the way to meet you.

古文：是日凌旦，都下军乱，宫中火发。
现代文：这天凌晨，都城下的军队发生骚乱，宫殿里大火突发。
English: In the early morning of this day, the troops under the capital rioted, and a fire broke out in the palace.

古文：维翰时在府署，左右劝使逃避，维翰曰： 吾国家大臣，何所逃乎！ 
现代文：桑维翰当时正在府宅，左右侍臣劝他逃跑躲避，桑维翰说： 我是国家大臣，逃到什么地方去呢？ 
English: Sanveighan was in the mansion at the time, and the courtiers around him advised him to run away and hide. Sanveighan said: I am a state minister, where should I flee?

古文：即坐以俟命。
现代文：便坐在那里等候命令。
English: and sat there waiting for orders.

古文：时少帝已受契丹抚慰之命，乃谋自全之计，因思维翰在相时，累贡谋画，请与契丹和，虑契丹到京穷究其事，则显彰己过，故欲杀维翰以灭其口，因令图之。
现代文：当时，少帝已经接受了契丹国主安抚慰藉的诏命，正考虑保全自己之计，因而想到桑维翰担任相国时，多次进献计谋策划，请求与契丹通好，担心如果契丹国主到达京都后追究这事，则要显露自己的过错，所以打算杀掉桑维翰灭掉口供。因此叫人去干这件事。
English: At that time, the young emperor had already accepted the imperial command of the Khitan sovereign to appease and comfort him, and was considering how to protect himself. He remembered that when Sanveikhan served as a partner country, he repeatedly made efforts to plan and request to be on good terms with the Khitan. He was worried that if the Khitan sovereign investigated the matter after arriving in Kyoto, he would have to reveal his fault, so he planned to kill Sanveikhan to destroy the confession. Therefore, he ordered someone to do it.

古文：张彦泽既受少帝密旨，复利维翰家财，乃称少帝命召维翰。
现代文：张彦泽接受少帝的密旨之后，又贪图桑维翰的家财，于是声称少帝下令召见桑维翰。
English: After Zhang Yanze accepted the secret order of the young emperor, he also coveted the family wealth of San Weihan, so he claimed that the young emperor ordered to summon San Weihan.

古文：维翰束带乘马，行及天街，与李崧相遇，交谈之次，有军吏于马前揖维翰赴侍卫司，维翰知其不可，顾谓崧曰： 侍中当国，今日国亡，翻令维翰死之，何也？ 
现代文：桑维翰系上腰带乘马前去，走到天街，与李崧相遇，两人交谈之际，有个军官在马前指请桑维翰去侍卫司，桑维翰知道不可违抗，回头对李崧说： 侍中主持国政，今天国家灭亡了，反让我为此去死，这是为什么？ 
English: Sang Weihan put on his belt and rode his horse, walked to Tian Jie, and met Li Yao. While the two were talking, an officer in front of the horse asked Sang Weihan to go to the bodyguard. Sang Weihan knew that he could not disobey, and turned to Li Yao and said: The bodyguard is in charge of state affairs, today the country has perished, but let me die for this, why is this?

古文：崧甚有愧色。
现代文：李崧很感愧疚。
English: Li Yao felt very guilty.

古文：是日，彦泽遣兵守之，十八日夜，为彦泽所害，时年四十九。
现代文：这一天，张彦泽派兵看守他，十八日夜晚，被张彦泽杀害，当时年仅四十九岁。
English: On this day, Zhang Yanze sent soldiers to guard him, and on the night of the 18th, he was killed by Zhang Yanze, who was only 49 years old at the time.

古文：即以衣带加颈，报契丹主：维翰自经而死。
现代文：张彦泽用衣带系在桑维翰脖子上，报告给契丹国主说桑维翰上吊自杀了。
English: Zhang Yanze tied a belt around Sanveehan's neck and reported to the Khitan ruler that Sanveehan had hanged himself.

古文：契丹主曰： 我本无心害维翰，维翰不合自致。 
现代文：契丹国主答复说： 我本无心害桑维翰，桑维翰不该自杀。 
English: The Khitan ruler replied: I had no intention of harming Sanveikhan, Sanveikhan should not have committed suicide.

古文：契丹至阙，使人验其状，令殡于私第，厚抚其家，所有田园邸第，并令赐之。
现代文：契丹国主到了京城，派人验证他的尸体，下令把他的灵柩安放在私宅里，优厚地抚养他的家属，所有田园宅府，一起赏赐给他的家人。
English: The Khitan sovereign arrived in Beijing, sent someone to verify his body, ordered his coffin to be placed in a private house, and generously raised his family, all the pastoral houses, together awarded to his family.

古文：及汉高祖登极，诏赠尚书令。
现代文：到后汉高祖登基，下令追赠为尚书令。
English: After Emperor Gaozu ascended to the throne, he ordered the posthumous donation of the book.

古文：维翰少时所居，恆有魑魅，家人咸畏之，维翰往往被窃其衣，撮其巾栉，而未尝改容。
现代文：桑维翰年轻时居住的地方，常有鬼怪出现，家里人都惧怕。桑维翰常常被鬼怪偷窃了衣服，取走洗沐用具，他却不曾改变面容。
English: When Sanveighan was young, he lived in a place where ghosts often appeared and his family was afraid of them. Ghosts often stole his clothes and toiletries, but he never changed his face.

古文：当两朝秉政，出上将杨光远、景延广俱为洛川守；又尝一制除节将十五人，各领军职，无不屈而服之。
现代文：在两朝执掌国政，把上将杨光远、景延广全部贬出镇守洛川。还曾经一次奏议任命节度使十五人，各任军职，没有谁不屈服他的。
English: He was in charge of state affairs during the two dynasties, and he dismissed all the generals Yang Guangyuan and Jing Yanquan from the town of Luochuan. He also once proposed the appointment of fifteen military officials, each of whom held a military post. There was no one who would not submit to him.

古文：理安阳除民弊二十余事，在兗、海擒豪贼过千人，亦寇恂、尹翁归之流也。
现代文：治理安阳时废除民间陋习二十多件，在兖州、海州一举擒获一千多豪强贼寇，亦称得上是寇恂、尹翁归一类的人物了。
English: When he governed Anyang, he abolished more than 20 bad folk customs, and in Luzhou and Haizhou, he captured more than a thousand powerful thieves and robbers at one fell swoop. He can also be said to be a thief and robber, and Yin Weng belongs to the same category.

古文：开运中，朝廷以长子坦为屯田员外郎，次子埙为秘书郎。
现代文：开运年间，朝廷任命他的长子桑坦为屯田员外郎，次子桑埙为秘书郎。
English: At the beginning of his career, the Imperial Court appointed his eldest son Santan as Tondenkanshiro, and his second son Kuwabuchi as Seisetsuro.

古文：是夜，令壮士就府缢杀之。当维翰之缢也，犹瞋目直视，嘘其气再三，每一嘘皆有火出，其光赫然，三嘘之外，火尽灭，就视则奄然矣。赵莹，字元辉，华阴人也。
现代文：桑维翰对同僚说 ：汉代三公的儿子封郎的体制废除已经很长时间了，近来偶或又实行这种体制，很易引起外面的议论。 于是上表抗命，坚决推辞不受，不久，改任桑坦为大理司直，桑埙为秘书省正字，舆论认为这件事办得好。当初，高祖在位的时候，下令废除翰林学士院，因此把内外制合并归入阁下，让舍人掌管内廷，几年之间，特别重视舍人的选拔，到桑维翰再处相位时，一两天间，上奏再设置学士院，大凡任命的官职，都是他的亲朋故友，当时舆论认为桑维翰为相的业绩一向高尚，是众望所归，虽然任官有些偏颇，也就不怪罪他了。赵莹，字玄辉，华阴人。
English: Sang Wei Han said to his colleagues: It has been a long time since the abolition of the system of Fang Lang, the son of the three princes of the Han Dynasty, has been abolished. Recently, this system has been implemented again and again, which is likely to cause external discussions. Therefore, the upper table resisted orders and resolutely refused to be dismissed. Soon, it was replaced by Santan as Dali Si Zhi, and Mulberry as Secretary of the Ministry of Zheng Zi, and the public opinion thought that the matter was well done. At the beginning, when Gaozu was in power, he ordered the abolition of the Hanlin Academy, so he merged the internal and external systems into his own, and

古文：曾祖溥，江陵县丞。
现代文：曾祖父赵溥，是江陵县县丞。
English: His great-grandfather, Zhao Jun, was the county magistrate of Jiangling County.

古文：祖孺，秘书正字。
现代文：祖父赵孺，做过秘书正字。
English: His grandfather, Zhao Jun, worked as a secretary.

古文：父居晦，为农。
现代文：父亲赵居晦，从事农耕。
English: His father, Zhao Juyao, was a farmer.

古文：莹风仪美秀，性复纯谨。
现代文：赵莹风度俊美，性情纯厚恭谨。
English: Zhao Ying has a beautiful demeanor and a pure and respectful disposition.

古文：梁龙德中，始解褐为康延孝从事。
现代文：后梁龙德年间，开始担任康延孝的从事。
English: After Liang Longde, he began to work as the leader of Kang Yanxiao.

古文：后唐同光中，延孝镇陕州，会庄宗伐蜀，命延孝为骑将。
现代文：后唐同光年间，康延孝镇守陕州，时逢唐庄宗讨伐蜀国，令康延孝担任骑兵将领。
English: During the post-Tang Tongguang years, Kang Yanxiao was in charge of the defense of Shaanxi Province. At the time of the Tang Zhaozong's invasion of Shu, Kang Yanxiao served as a cavalry general.

古文：将行，留莹监修金天神祠。
现代文：将要出发时，留下赵莹监修金天神祠。
English: When he was about to leave, he left Zhao Ying to supervise the renovation of the Jintian Temple.

古文：功既集，忽梦神召于前亭，待以优礼，谓莹曰： 公富有前程，所宜自爱。 
现代文：祠庙建成之后，忽然一天梦见神仙在前亭召唤他，并用优厚的礼仪来款待他，那神仙对赵莹说： 你前程远大，应该自己珍惜。 
English: After the completion of the ancestral temple, suddenly one day he dreamed that the immortal summoned him to the front pavilion and entertained him with generous etiquette. The immortal said to Zhao Ying: You have a great future, you should cherish yourself.

古文：因遗一剑一笏，觉而骇异。
现代文：便送给他一把箭一根笏，赵莹醒来后感到惊异。
English: She then gave him a pair of arrows and a crossbow. Zhao Ying woke up and was surprised.

古文：明宗即位，以高祖为陕府两使留后，莹时在郡，以前官谒之，一见如旧相识，即奏署管记。
现代文：明宗继承帝位，任命晋高祖为陕府两使留后，赵莹当时就在陕府，以原官的身份谒见晋高祖，两人一见如故，高祖就上奏任命他为管记。
English: After Emperor Mingzong's succession to the throne and the appointment of Emperor Gaozu as the second envoy to Shaanxi, Zhao Ying was in Shaanxi at the time and met Emperor Gaozu in his capacity as the original official. As soon as they saw each other, Emperor Gaozu appointed him as the secretary.

古文：高祖历诸镇皆从之，累使阙下，官至御史大夫，赐金紫。
现代文：高祖镇守各镇他都跟随着。高祖多次派他进宫朝见皇上，官至御史大夫，赏赐黄金紫服。
English: Gaozu sent him many times to the Imperial Palace to meet the Emperor, and he was given a gold and purple robe.

古文：高祖再镇并州，位至节度判官。
现代文：高祖再度镇守并州时，赵莹位至节度判官。
English: When Gaozu once again became a town guard and merged into a prefecture, Zhao Ying became the judge of the festival.

古文：高祖建号，授莹翰林学士承旨、金紫光禄大夫、户部侍郎，知太原府事，寻迁门下侍郎、同平章事、监修国史。
现代文：高祖建立国号时，拜赵莹为翰林学士承旨、金紫光禄大夫、户部侍郎，主持太原府事务，不久又升任门下侍郎、同平章事、监修国史。
English: When Gao Zu established the country name, Bai Zhao Ying was a scholar of Hanlin, a doctor of Jin Ziguanglu, a waiter of the household department, presided over the affairs of Taiyuan Prefecture, and soon rose to the position of a junior waiter, a peer of the chapter, and a supervisor of national history.

古文：车驾入洛，使持聘谢契丹，及还，加光禄大夫兼吏部尚书，判户部。
现代文：高祖进入洛阳后，派赵莹携带聘礼答谢契丹，返回后，加封光禄大夫兼吏部尚书，主管户部。
English: After Gao Zu entered Luoyang, he sent Zhao Ying to answer Xie Qidan with an engagement gift. After returning, he added Guanglu doctor and clerk Shang Shu, in charge of the household department.

古文：初，莹为从事，丁母忧，高祖不许归华下，以粗缞随幕，人或短之。及入相，以敦让汲引为务。
现代文：当初赵莹担任从事时，碰上母亲的丧事，高祖不让回归华州服丧，赵莹就穿着朝服跟随高祖左右，有人因此非议他，等到入阁为相，以敦厚谦让提拔后学为己任。
English: At the beginning, when Zhao Ying was in charge of the cabinet, he encountered his mother's funeral, Gao Zu did not allow him to return to Huazhou to attend the funeral. Zhao Ying wore a morning suit to follow Gao Zu around. Some people criticized him for this, and when he entered the cabinet, he made it his duty to study after he was promoted.

古文：监修国史日，以唐代故事残缺，署能者居职，纂补实录及修正史二百卷行于时，莹首有力焉。
现代文：监修国史时，因唐代历史残缺，赵莹便任命有才能的人任其职，加强修纂补编实录，撰修正史二百卷在当时刊行，赵莹出力最多。
English: When supervising the national history, due to the incomplete history of the Tang Dynasty, Zhao Ying appointed talented people to assume their duties, strengthened the compilation of supplementary records, and compiled and revised 200 volumes of history to be published at that time. Zhao Ying had the most output.

古文：少帝嗣位，拜守中书令。
现代文：晋少帝即位，拜为守中书令。
English: Emperor Jin Shao ascended to the throne, and issued an imperial edict to pray for protection.

古文：明年，检校太尉本官，出为晋昌军节度使。
现代文：第二年，任检校太尉本官，外出担任晋昌军节度使。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the inspecting officer of the school, and went out to serve as the Jinchang Army's festival envoy.

古文：是时，天下大蝗，境内捕蝗者获蝗一斗，给粟一斗，使饥者获济，远近嘉之。
现代文：这时，天下飞蝗为害甚重，他下令：在境内捕杀蝗虫一斗者，供给米粟一斗，使饥饿的人得以渡过难关。
English: At this time, the world was seriously affected by flying locusts. He ordered: Those who caught and killed locusts within the country should be provided with a bucket of rice, so that the hungry people could get through the difficulties.

古文：未几，移镇华州，岁余入为开封尹。
现代文：因此远近的人都称赞他。不久，移镇华州，一年多后又入京担任开封尹。
English: Therefore, people near and far praised him. Soon, he moved to Huazhou, and more than a year later, he entered Beijing to serve as Kaifeng Yin.

古文：开运末，冯玉、李彦韬用事，以桑维翰才望素重，而莹柔而可制，因共称之，乃出维翰，复莹相位，加宏文馆大学士。
现代文：开运末年，冯玉、李彦韬执政，因桑维翰才能名望一向过重，而赵莹柔顺而能控制，因此，一同拥举他，罢除桑维翰宰相调出京城，恢复赵莹相位，加封弘文馆大学士。
English: At the end of the first year of the revolution, when Feng Yu and Li Yanqi were in power, the prestige of San Weihan was always too heavy, while Zhao Yingru Shun was able to control it. Therefore, they supported him together, removed the prime minister San Weihan from Beijing, restored Zhao Ying phase, and added the scholar of the Hongwen Museum.

古文：及李崧、冯玉议出兵应接赵延寿，而以杜威为招讨都部署，莹私谓冯、李曰： 杜中令国之懿亲，所求未惬，心恆怏怏，安可更与兵权？
现代文：到李崧、冯玉商议派兵对付赵延寿时，以杜重威为都督部署，赵莹私下对冯立、李崧说： 杜重威是皇室至亲，他所希求的不曾如愿，心中常常不快，怎么可以再给予兵权？
English: When Li Yu and Feng Yu were discussing the dispatch of troops to deal with Zhao Yanshou, Du Chongwei was deployed as the governor. Zhao Ying privately said to Feng Li and Li Yu: Du Chongwei is a close relative of the royal family. What he wished for did not come true, and he was often unhappy. How can he be given military power again?

古文：若有事边陲，只李守贞将之可也。 
现代文：如果边陲有战事，只有李守贞可以担任将领。 
English: If there is a war on the border, only Li Shouzhen can serve as a general.

古文：及契丹陷京城，契丹主迁少帝于北塞，莹与冯玉、李彦韬俱从。契丹永康王代立，授莹太子太保。
现代文：等到契丹攻陷京城后，契丹国主迁徙少帝到北方塞上，赵莹与冯玉、李彦韬一起跟从前往，契丹永康王即位，任命赵莹为太子太保。
English: After the fall of Beijing to the Khitan, the young emperor of the Khitan ruler moved to the north, and Zhao Ying followed with Feng Yu and Li Yanqi. King Yongkang of the Khitan ascended to the throne and appointed Zhao Ying as the crown prince.

古文：周广顺初，遣尚书左丞田敏报命于契丹，遇莹于幽州。
现代文：后周广顺初年，周太祖派尚书左丞田敏向契丹禀报，在幽州碰上了赵莹。
English: Later, in the first year of Zhou Guangshun, Zhou Taizu sent Shangshu Zuozhong Tianmin to report to Qidan, and met Zhao Ying in Yuzhou.

古文：莹得见华人，悲怅不已，谓田敏曰： 老身漂零寄于此，近闻室家丧逝，弱子无恙，蒙中朝皇帝倍加存恤，东京旧第本属公家，亦闻优恩特给善价，老夫至死无以报效。 
现代文：赵莹见到中原汉人，悲叹惆怅不已，并对田敏说： 老朽漂零异乡寄居在这里，最近听说妻室去世，孩儿无恙，幸蒙朝廷皇帝倍加抚恤存爱，东京旧宅本来属于公家，也听说皇上优待恩宠特别给予好的价钱收购，老夫至死无以报答。 
English: Zhao Ying saw the Han people in Central Plains, lamented and said to Tian Min, "I am an old man living in a foreign land. Recently, I heard that my wife passed away, my children are all fine. I am fortunate to have been loved by the emperor of the imperial court. The old house in Tokyo originally belonged to the public, and I also heard that the emperor's grace and favor specially granted a good price for the purchase, and the old man could not repay until his death.

古文：于是南望稽首，涕泗横流。
现代文：于是向南叩头，涕泪横流。
English: So he bowed his head to the south, tears streaming down his face.

古文：先是，汉高祖以入蕃将相第宅遍赐随驾大臣，故以莹第赐周太祖。
现代文：在此之前，后汉高祖把入蕃将相的宅第全部赏赐给跟随御驾的大臣，所以把赵莹宅第赏赐给了后周太祖。
English: Prior to this, Emperor Gaozong of the Later Han Dynasty gave all the rewards of Zhao Ying's homestead to the ministers who followed him, so Zhao Ying's homestead reward was given to Emperor Zhou.

古文：太祖时为枢密副使，召莹子前刑部郎中易则告之曰： 所赐第，除素属版籍外，如有别契券为己所置者，可归本直。 
现代文：周太祖当时担任枢密副使，召唤赵莹的儿子原刑部郎中赵易则说： 所赏赐的宅第，除去属于国家的部分之外，如果另有契券证明是你们自己所置办的，可以归还置办所费的价值。 
English: At that time, Zhou Taizu served as the vice-envoy of the privy council, and summoned Zhao Ying's son, Zhao Yi, the former vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice, who said: "The house that was awarded, except for the part that belongs to the state, if there is another deed to prove that it was your own, you can return the value of the cost of the purchase.

古文：即以千余缗遗易则。
现代文：于是把一千多缗钱送给了赵易则。
English: So he gave more than a thousand baht to Zhao Yizi.

古文：易则惶恐辞让，周太祖坚与之方受，故莹言及之。
现代文：赵易则惶恐推辞谦让，周太祖坚持给予他，才接受下来，所以赵莹说了上面的话。
English: Zhao Ying said the above words because Zhao Yi was afraid and refused to concede. Zhou Taizu insisted on giving it to him before accepting it.

古文：未几，莹卒于幽州，时年六十七。
现代文：不久，赵莹在幽州去世，时年六十七岁。
English: Soon after, Zhao Ying died in Yuzhou, at the age of sixty-seven.

古文：莹初被疾，遣人祈告于契丹主，愿归骨于南朝，使羁魂幸复乡里，契丹主闵而许之。
现代文：赵莹刚染上疾病时，便派人祈求禀告契丹国主，希望让他这把老骨头送回后周，让羁旅他乡的魂魄有幸复归故土，契丹国主哀怜并答应了他。
English: When Zhao Ying had just contracted the disease, he sent someone to pray for the obituary of the Khitan sovereign, hoping that he would send this old bone back to Hou Zhou, so that the soul of the traveler would have the honor of returning to his homeland. The Khitan sovereign took pity on him and agreed.

古文：及卒，遣其子易从、家人数辈护丧而还，仍遣大将送至京师。
现代文：等到去世，就派他的儿子赵易从和家中几位人护丧回归，还派遣大将护送到京城。
English: When he died, he sent his son Zhao Yi and several members of his family to return from the funeral, and also sent a general to escort him to the capital.

古文：周太祖感叹久之，诏赠太傅，仍赐其子绢五百匹，以备丧事，令归葬于华阴故里。
现代文：周太祖感慨良久，下诏追赠太傅，还赏赐他的儿子五百匹丝绢，以办理丧事，并让送回安葬在华阴故里。
English: Zhou Taizu felt remorse for a long time, issued an edict to posthumously bestow Taifu, and also rewarded his son with five hundred silkworms to handle the funeral, and let him be sent back to be buried in Huayin.

