古文：黄帝问曰：余闻风者百病之始也，以针治之奈何？
现代文：黄帝问道：我听说风邪是许多疾病的起始原因，怎样用针法来治疗？
English: Huang Di asked: I heard that the common cold is the initial cause of many diseases, how to use acupuncture to treat it?

古文：岐伯对曰：风从外入，令人振寒，汗出头痛，身重恶寒，治在风府，调其阴阳，不足则补，有余则泻。
现代文：岐伯回答说：风邪从外侵入，使人寒战、出汗、头痛、身体发重、怕冷。针刺治疗的要穴是风府穴，以调和其阴阳,正气不足就用补法，邪气有余就用泻法。
English: Qi Bo replied: Colds invade from the outside, causing people to have chills, sweating, headaches, body heaviness, and fear of cold. The key point of acupuncture treatment is the Fengfu anus, in order to reconcile its yin and yang, the lack of positive energy is used as a supplement, and the excess of evil energy is used as a laxative.

古文：大风，颈项痛，刺风府，风府在上椎。
现代文：若感受风邪较重而颈项疼痛，针刺风府穴。风府穴在上椎穴的上面。
English: If you feel a heavy cold and neck pain, prick the Fengfu hole. The Fengfu hole is located above the upper vertebral hole.

古文：大风汗出，灸譩嘻，譩嘻在背下侠脊旁三寸所，厌之令病者呼譩嘻，譩嘻应手。
现代文：若感受风邪较重而汗出，艾灸噫嘻穴。噫嘻穴在背部下两侧距脊椎各三寸之处，用手指按压，使病人感觉疼痛而呼出 噫嘻 之声，噫嘻穴就在手指下的疼处。
English: If you feel a heavy cold and sweat, moxibustion will remove the sore spot. The sore spot is located in the lower back on both sides three inches from the spine, press it with your finger, so that the patient feels pain and breathes out the sound of sneeze, and the sore spot is under the finger.

古文：从风憎风，刺眉头。
现代文：迎风怕风的病人，刺眉头。
English: The patient who is afraid of the wind, frowns.

古文：失枕在肩上横骨间。
现代文：落枕，取穴在肩上横骨间。
English: Dropped pillow, the hole is between the transverse bones on the shoulder.

古文：折使揄臂，齐肘正，灸脊中。
现代文：脊背屈伸不利，应将患者的手臂后翻到背部，与肘尖成度角，手背所正对的脊椎节骨，给以灸治。
English: If the dorsal flexion and extension is unfavorable, the patient's arm should be rolled back to the back, at an angle to the tip of the elbow, and the dorsal spine should be treated with moxibustion.

古文：䏚络季胁引少腹而痛胀，刺譩嘻。
现代文：第肋骨处疼痛，从背部到腹部并牵引到小腹的，针刺噫嘻穴。
English: Pain at the ribs, from the back to the abdomen and traction to the lower abdomen, pinprick hernia.

古文：腰痛不可以转摇，急引阴卵，刺八髎与痛上，八髎在腰尻分间。
现代文：腰痛而不可以转侧动摇，痛而筋脉挛急，下引睾丸，针刺八髎与疼痛的地方，八髎穴在腰椎骨与坐骨间的空隙中。
English: Low back pain and can not turn sideways to shake, pain and muscle spasm, pull down the testicles, acupuncture and painful place, the hole in the gap between the lumbar vertebrae and the ischium.

古文：鼠瘘寒热，还刺寒府，寒府在附膝外解营。
现代文： 鼠瘘 一类的寒热病，刺寒府穴，寒府穴在膝上外侧骨与骨之间的孔穴中。
English: Cold fever such as rat-bite, cold sores, cold sores in the hole between the bone and the lateral bone of the knee.

古文：取膝上外者，使之拜；取足心者，使之跪。
现代文：凡取膝上外侧的孔穴，使患者弯腰，成一种拜的体位；取足心涌泉穴时，使患者坐跪的体位。
English: Whenever the hole on the outside of the knee is taken, the patient is made to bend over into a position of worship; when the hole of the heart spring is taken, the patient is made to kneel.

古文：任脉者，起于中极之下，以上毛际，循腹里，上关元，至咽喉，上颐，循面，入目。
现代文：任脉起源于中极穴的下面，上行经过阴毛际再到腹部，再上行通过关元穴到咽喉，又上行至颐，循行于面部而入于目中。
English: Each vein originates below the mid-pole, travels up through the pubic hair to the abdomen, then up through the pharynx to the throat, then up to the eyelids, and along the face into the eyes.

古文：冲脉者，起于气街，并少阴之经，侠齐上行，至胷中而散。
现代文：冲脉起源于气街穴，与足少阴经相并，侠其左右上行，到胸中而散。
English: The pulse originates from the qi street hole, and is parallel to the foot Shao Yin Jing. It goes up and down to the chest and dissipates.

古文：任脉为病，男子内结、七疝；女子带下、瘕聚。
现代文：任脉发生病变，在男子，则 内结 、 七疝 之类疾病；在女子，则 带下 、 瘕聚 之类疾病。
English: The lesions occur in any vein. In men, they are diseases of the internal node, the seven vessels, and the like; in women, they are diseases of the inferior cord, the cochlea and the like.

古文：冲脉为病，逆气里急。
现代文：冲脉经发生病变，则气逆上冲，腹中拘急疼痛。
English: If a lesion occurs in the artery, the qi will rush up and there will be acute pain in the abdomen.

古文：督脉为病，脊强反折。
现代文：督脉发生病变，会引起脊柱强硬反折的症状。
English: The occurrence of lesions in the supraclavicular vein can cause the symptoms of rigid spinal inversion.

古文：督脉者，起于少腹以下骨中央。
现代文：督脉起于小腹之下的横骨中央。
English: The supraclavicular vein arises in the middle of the transverse bone under the lower abdomen.

古文：女子入系廷孔，其孔溺孔之端也，其络循阴器，合篡间，绕篡后，别绕臀，至少阴，与巨阳中络者，合少阴上股内后廉，贯脊属肾。
现代文：在女子，则入内系于廷孔，廷孔就是尿道的外端，从这里分出的络脉，循着阴户会合于阴部，再分绕于肛门的后面，再分别行绕臀部，到足少阴经与足太阳经中的络脉，与足少阴经相结合上行尾骨端内后面，贯穿脊柱，连属于肾脏。
English: In women, it enters the internal system at the foramen magnum. The foramen magnum is the outer end of the urethra. From here, the vas deferens, following the pussy, meet in the pubic area, then separate around the back of the anus, then separate around the buttocks, to the vas deferens and the vas deferens in the middle of the solar plexus, combined with the foramen magnum and the ascending coccyx behind the end, penetrates the spine, and belongs to the kidney.

古文：与太阳起于目内眦，上额交巅上，入络脑，还出别下项，循肩膊内，侠脊抵腰中，入循膂络肾。
现代文：与足太阳经共起于目内眦，上行至额部，交会于头顶，内入于脑，复返出脑下行到颈项，循行于肩膊处，侠脊柱抵达腰中，入内循膂络于肾。
English: Together with the foot, the meridian starts at the inner corner of the eye, travels up to the forehead, meets at the top of the head, enters the brain, returns out of the brain, travels down to the neck, travels along the shoulder, reaches the middle of the spine, and enters the kidney.

古文：其男子循茎下至篡，与女子等。
现代文：其在男子，则循阴茎，下至会阴，与女子相同。
English: In men, it follows the penis, down to the perineum, the same as in women.

古文：其少腹直上者，贯齐中央，上贯心，入喉，上颐环唇，上系两目之下中央。
现代文：其从小腹部直上的支脉，穿过脐中央，再上贯心脏，入于喉，上行到颐并环绕口唇，再上行系于两目中央之下。
English: The branch runs from the small abdomen straight up, through the middle of the eyelids, then up through the heart, into the throat, up to the eyelids and around the lips, and then up under the middle of the eyes.

古文：此生病，从少腹上冲心而痛，不得前后，为冲疝。
现代文：督脉发生病变，症状是气从少腹上冲心而痛，大小便不通，称为 冲疝 。
English: There is a lesion in the superior vas deferens. The symptom is that the qi rises from the lower abdomen to the heart and causes pain, and the urine and feces do not pass through, which is called dyspnea.

古文：其女子不孕，癃，痔，遗溺，嗌干。
现代文：在女子，则不能怀孕，或为小便不利、痔疾、遗尿、咽喉干燥等症。
English: In women, it is not possible to get pregnant, or it is unfavorable for urination, hemorrhoids, urinary retention, dry throat and other conditions.

古文：督脉生病治督脉，治在骨上，甚者在齐下营。
现代文：总之，督脉生病治督脉，轻者治横骨上，重者则治在脐下。
English: In short, if the vas deferens is diseased, the vas deferens takes over. If the vas deferens is diseased, the vas deferens takes over. If the vas deferens is diseased, the vas deferens takes over.

古文：其上气有音者，治其喉中央，在缺盆中者。
现代文：病人气逆上而呼吸有声的，治疗取其喉部中央，此穴在两缺盆的中间。
English: If the patient breathes noisily, the treatment is to take the middle of the larynx, this hole is in the middle of the two basins.

古文：其病上冲喉者，治其渐，渐者，上侠颐也。
现代文：病人气逆上充于咽喉的，治疗取其渐，渐者在面部两旁夹颐之处。
English: If the patient's throat is inflamed on the contrary, the treatment is gradual, and the gradual person is pinched on both sides of the face.

古文：蹇膝伸不屈，治其楗。
现代文：膝关节能伸不能屈，治疗取其楗。
English: The knee joint can't bend, so the treatment is to remove it.

古文：坐而膝痛，治其机。
现代文：坐下而膝痛，治疗取其机。
English: If you sit down and have knee pain, the treatment will take its opportunity.

古文：立而暑解，治其骸关。
现代文：站立时膝关节热痛，治疗取其膝关节处经穴。
English: When standing, the knee joint is hot and painful. The treatment is to take out the anus from the knee joint.

古文：膝痛，痛及拇指，治其腘。
现代文：膝痛，疼痛牵引到足拇趾，治疗取其膝后窝处。
English: Knee pain, pain traction to the big toe, the treatment is to take it behind the knee socket.

古文：坐而膝痛如物隐者，治其关。
现代文：坐下膝痛如有东西隐伏其中的，治疗取其关。
English: Sit down knee pain, if there is something lurking in it, the treatment is crucial.

古文：膝痛不可屈伸，治其背内。
现代文：膝痛而不能屈伸活动，治疗取其背部俞穴。
English: Treatment for knee pain that does not allow flexion and extension is to remove the hernia from the back.

古文：连胻若折，治阳明中俞髎，若别，治巨阳少阴荣。
现代文：如疼痛连及小腿像要折断似的，治疗取其阳明经中的俞髎；或者别取太阳经、少阴经的荥穴。
English: If the pain and the calf seem to be broken, the treatment is to take the umbilicus of the yangming meridian; or do not take the sun meridian, the anus of the lesser yin meridian.

古文：淫泺胫酸，不能久立，治少阳之维，在外上五寸。
现代文：湿渍水湿之邪日久而胫骨酸痛无力，不能久立，治取少阳经的别络穴位，穴在外踝上五寸。
English: The evil of wet stains and water has been going on for a long time, and the shinbone is sore and weak, and cannot stand for a long time. To cure Shao Yangjing, there is another hole, five inches above the outer ankle.

古文：辅骨上横骨下为楗，侠髋为机，膝解为骸关，侠膝之骨为连骸，骸下为辅，辅上为腘，腘上为关，头横骨为枕。
现代文：辅骨之上，腰横骨之下，叫 楗 。在髋骨两侧叫 机 。膝部的骨缝叫 骸关 。在膝部两旁的高骨叫 连骸 。连骸下面叫 辅骨 。辅骨上面的膝弯叫 腘 。腘之上就是 骸关 。头后项部的横骨叫 枕骨 。
English: Above the accessory bone, below the transverse lumbar bone, is called the ilium. Above and to the sides of the tibia is called the ilium. The bone seam at the knee is called the coccyx. The high bone on both sides of the knee is called the coccyx. Below the coccyx is called the accessory bone. The knee bend above the coccyx is called the ilium. Above the coccyx is the coccyx. The transverse bone at the back of the head is called the occipital bone.

古文：水俞五十七穴者，尻上五行，行五。伏菟上两行，行五，左右各一行，行五。踝上各一行，行六穴。
现代文：治疗水病的俞穴有五十七个：坐骨上有五行，每行各五穴；伏兔上方有两行，每行各有五穴；其左右又各有一行，每行各五穴；足内踝上各一行，每行各六穴。
English: There are fifty-seven acupoints for the treatment of dropsy: there are five rows on the ischium, each row has five acupoints; there are two rows above the tibia, each row has five acupoints; there is one row on each side, each row has five acupoints; there is one row on the inner ankle, each row has six acupoints.

古文：髓空，在脑后三分，在颅际锐骨之下；一在龂基下；一在项后中，复骨下；一在脊骨上空，在风府上。
现代文：髓穴，在脑后分为三处，都在颅骨边际锐骨的下面，一处在龈基的下面，一处在项后正中的复骨下面，一处在脊椎骨上空，即风府穴的上面。
English: The medullary foramen is divided into three places at the back of the brain, all of which are below the cranial marginal clavicle, one is below the base of the skull, one is below the mid-posterior mid-clavicle, and one is above the vertebrae, that is, above the foramen magnum.

古文：脊骨下空，在尻骨下空。
现代文：一处在脊椎骨下空，在坐骨下面的孔穴中。
English: One is in the space below the vertebrae, in the foramen magnum below the ischium.

古文：数髓空，在面侠鼻，或骨空在口下，当两肩。
现代文：又有几处髓空，在面部侠鼻两旁，或有骨空在口唇下方与两肩相平的部位。
English: There are also several medullary cavities, on both sides of the facial snout, or bone cavities below the lips and on the shoulders.

古文：两髆骨空，在髆中之阳。
现代文：两肩骨空，在肩膊的外侧。
English: Both shoulder blades are empty, on the outside of the shoulder.

古文：臂骨空在臂阳，去踝四寸，两骨空之间。
现代文：臂骨的骨空，在臂骨的外侧，离开手腕四寸，在尺、桡两骨的空隙之间。
English: The bony space of the humerus, on the outside of the humerus, four inches from the wrist, between the spaces of the ulna and tibia.

古文：股骨上空，在股阳，出上膝四寸。
现代文：股骨上面的骨空，在股骨外侧，膝上四寸的地方。
English: The bony space above the femur, on the outside of the femur, about four inches above the knee.

古文：胻骨空，在辅骨之上端。
现代文：小腿骨的骨空，在胫骨上端。
English: The bony cavity of the tibia, at the upper end of the tibia.

古文：股际骨空，在毛中动下。
现代文：股际的骨空，在阴毛中的动脉下面。
English: The space between the bones in the groin, below the artery in the pubic hair.

古文：尻骨空，在髀骨之后，相去四寸。
现代文：坐骨的骨空，在髀骨的后面距离四寸的地方。
English: The osseous cavity of the ischium, four inches behind the tibia.

古文：扁骨有渗理凑，无髓孔，易髓无空。
现代文：扁骨，有血脉渗灌的纹理内外交流，没有直通骨髓的孔穴，所以没有骨空的穴位。
English: Flat bones, the texture of which is permeated by blood and has internal and external communication. There are no openings directly through the bone marrow, so there are no openings in the bone.

古文：灸寒热之法：先灸项大椎，以年为壮数；次灸橛骨，以年为壮数。
现代文：灸寒热症的方法，先灸项后的大椎穴，根据病人年龄决定艾灸的壮数；其次灸尾骨，也是以年龄为艾灸的壮数。
English: The method of moxibustion for colds and fevers, the first moxibustion item after the large vertebral hole, according to the patient's age to determine the grand number of moxibustion; followed by the moxibustion of the coccyx, also with age as the grand number of moxibustion.

古文：视背俞陷者灸之，举臂肩上陷者灸之，两季胁之间灸之，外踝上绝骨之端灸之，足小指次指间灸之，腨下陷脉灸之，外踝后灸之。缺盆骨上切之坚痛如筋者灸之，膺中陷骨间灸之，掌束骨下灸之，齐下关元三寸灸之，毛际动脉灸之，膝下三寸分间灸之，足阳明跗上动脉灸之，巅上一灸之。
现代文：观察背部有凹陷的地方用灸法，上举手臂在肩上有凹陷的地方用灸法，两侧的季胁之间用灸法，足外踝正绝骨之端处用灸法，足小趾与次趾之间用灸法，腹部凹陷处的经脉用灸法，外踝后方用灸法，缺盆骨上方按压坚硬如有筋并疼痛的地方用灸法，胸膺中的骨间凹陷处用灸法，手腕部的横骨之下用灸法，脐下三寸的关元穴用灸法，阴毛边缘的动脉跳处用灸法，膝下三寸的两骨间用灸法，足阳明经所行足跗上的动脉处用灸法，头巅顶上亦用灸法。
English: Observe the use of moxibustion in the back where there is a depression, the use of moxibustion in the uplifted arm where there is a depression on the shoulder, the use of moxibustion between the two sides of the season, the use of moxibustion at the end of the external ankle bone, the use of moxibustion between the little toe and the second toe, the use of moxibustion at the depression of the abdomen, the use of moxibustion behind the external ankle, the use of moxibustion above the breech bone, the use of moxibustion in

古文：犬所囓之处灸之，三壮，即以犬伤病法灸之。
现代文：被犬咬伤的，先在被咬处灸三壮，再按常规的治犬伤病法灸治。
English: If bitten by a dog, first moxibustion three times at the bite site, and then moxibustion according to the conventional method of treating dog injuries.

古文：凡当灸二十九处。
现代文：以上针灸治疗寒热症的部位共二十九处。
English: There are a total of twenty-nine places where acupuncture can be used to treat cold and fever.

古文：伤食灸之不已者，必视其经之过于阳者，数刺其俞而药之。
现代文：因伤食而引发寒热症的采用灸法，灸后仍不能解除寒热的症状，必须仔细观察各条阳经脉，找到有病的经脉改用针刺其腧穴的方法以泻之，同时用药物调治。
English: The moxibustion method is the best way to treat cold and fever caused by eating and drinking. Even after moxibustion, the symptoms of cold and fever cannot be relieved. It is necessary to carefully observe the yang meridians, find the diseased meridians and change the method of acupuncture to their acupoints to relieve them, and adjust the treatment with drugs.

