古文：天下皆以孝悌忠顺之道为是也，而莫知察孝悌忠顺之道而审行之，是以天下乱。
现代文：天下的人都认为孝悌忠顺之道是正确的，却没有什么人知道进一步对孝悌忠顺之道加以认真考察，然后再去慎重实行，因此天下混乱。
English: People all over the world think that the way of filial piety and loyalty is correct, but few people know how to further seriously examine the way of filial piety and loyalty and then implement it carefully, so the world is in chaos.

古文：皆以尧舜之道为是而法之，是以有弑君，有曲于父。
现代文：都认为尧舜之道正确而加以效法，因此才发生杀死君主、背叛父亲的事情。
English: They all think that the way of the dragon is correct and imitate it, which is why the killing of the monarch and the betrayal of the father happened.

古文：尧、舜、汤、武或反群臣之义，乱后世之教者也。
现代文：尧、舜、汤、武或许正是违反君臣之间道义、扰乱后世教令的人物。
English: Shun, Shun, Tang, and Wu may have been precisely the figures who violated the moral principles between monarchs and subjects and disturbed the edicts of later generations.

古文：尧为人君而君其臣，舜为人臣而臣其君，汤、武为人臣而弑其主、刑其尸，而天下誉之，此天下所以至今不治者也。
现代文：尧本来是君主，却把自己的臣子推尊为君主；舜本来是臣子，却把自己的君主贬为臣子；商汤、周武作为臣子却杀死自己的君主，还宰割了君主的尸体。对此，天下的，人却都加以称赞，这就是天下至今不能得到治理的原因所在。
English: Zou was originally a monarch, but he promoted his vassal as a monarch; Zou was originally a vassal, but he degraded his monarch as a vassal; Shang Tang and Zhou Wu, as vassals, killed their monarchs, and also slaughtered the bodies of the monarchs. However, people all over the world praised this, which is the reason why the world cannot be governed to this day.

古文：夫所谓明君者，能畜其臣者也；所谓贤臣者，能明法辟、治官职以戴其君者也。
现代文：所谓明君，应该是能够控制臣子的人；所谓贤臣，应该是能够彰明法律、治好官务来拥戴君主的人。
English: The so-called bright prince should be a person who can control his vassals; the so-called wise vassal should be a person who can uphold the law and handle official duties to support the monarch.

古文：今尧自以为明而不能以畜舜，舜自以为贤而不能以戴尧；汤、武自以为义而弑其君长，此明君且常与而贤臣且常取也。
现代文：现在情形则是，尧自以为明智，却不能对舜加以控制；舜自以为贤能，却不能对尧尽心拥戴；商汤、周武自以为仗义，却杀了自己的君主。这就是自称为明君的却常常失位，而自称为贤臣的却常常篡权的情形。
English: At present, the situation is as follows: Zhou believed himself to be wise, but he could not control Zhou; Zhou believed himself to be virtuous, but he could not wholeheartedly support Zhou; Shang Tang and Zhou Wu believed themselves to be righteous, but they killed their own monarchs. This is the situation in which the self-proclaimed Ming ruler often lost his position, while the self-proclaimed wise minister often usurped power.

古文：故至今为人子者有取其父之家，为人臣者有取其君之国者矣。
现代文：所以直到现在还有做儿子的夺取父亲家业、做臣子的夺取君主权力的事情发生。
English: Therefore, up until now, there have been cases of a son seizing his father's family business and a vassal seizing the power of the monarch.

古文：父而让子，君而让臣，此非所以定位一教之道也。
现代文：照此看来，父亲把家业让给儿子，君主把王位让给臣下，绝不是什么确定名位统一教令的正确途径。
English: According to this view, the father giving up the family business to his son, and the monarch giving up the throne to his vassals, is by no means the correct way to determine the position of the unified edict.

古文：臣之所闻曰： 臣事君，子事父，妻事夫。三者顺则天下治，三者逆则天下乱，此天下之常道也。 
现代文：我听说： 臣子服事君主，儿子服事父亲，妻子服事丈夫，这三种秩序理顺以后，天下就能得到治理；如果违背了这三种秩序，天下就会混乱。 
English: I have heard it said: "When the three orders of subjects serving the sovereign, sons serving their fathers, and wives serving their husbands are well-ordered, the country will be well-governed; when these three orders are disrupted, the country will be in chaos."

古文：明王贤臣而弗易也，则人主虽不肖，臣不敢侵也。
现代文：这是天下的正常法则，就是明君、贤臣也不能变更。既然这样，那么即使君主不够贤明，臣子也不敢侵犯。
English: This is the normal law of the world, which even a wise ruler and wise minister cannot change. In this case, even if the ruler is not wise enough, the minister will not dare to infringe.

古文：今夫上贤任智无常，逆道也，而天下常以为治。
现代文：现在尊尚贤人、任用智者没有一定之规，是悖逆之道，一般人却总认为治国之道。
English: Nowadays, there are no definite rules for honoring sages and appointing wise men. It is a way of rebellion, but ordinary people always think it is a way of governing the country.

古文：是故田氏夺吕氏于齐，戴氏夺子氏于宋。
现代文：正因如此，在齐国田氏得以夺取吕氏政权，在宋国戴氏得以夺取子氏政权。
English: It was for this reason that the Tian clan in Qi was able to seize power from the Lü clan, and the Dai clan in Song was able to seize power from the Zi clan.

古文：此皆贤且智也，岂愚且不肖乎？
现代文：这些人都是有才能又有智慧的人，哪里是既愚蠢又不贤的人呢？
English: These were men of ability and wisdom; but where are the foolish and perverse?

古文：是废常上贤则乱，舍法任智则危。
现代文：由此看来，废弃常道去尊尚贤人就会发生混乱，舍弃法制而任用智者就会产生危险。
English: From this point of view, abandoning the common practice of honoring the wise will cause chaos, and abandoning the rule of law and appointing the wise will create danger.

古文：故曰：上法而不上贤。
现代文：所以说：要尊尚法制而不能尊尚贤人。
English: Therefore, it is said that one should respect the rule of law, but not the wise.

古文：记曰： 舜见瞽瞍，其容造焉。
现代文：古代记载说，舜面对父亲瞽瞍的朝见，表现出局促不安的样子。
English: According to ancient records, in the face of his father's visit to the imperial court, he showed a look of uneasiness.

古文：孔子曰：当是时也，危哉，天下岌岌！
现代文：孔子说： 在那种时候，真危险啊，天下危险之极！
English: Confucius said: At that time, it is really dangerous, the world is extremely dangerous!

古文：有道者，父固不得而子，君固不得而臣也。 
现代文：对于道德高尚的人来说，父亲的确不能再把舜当儿子看待，而君主诚然不该再把瞽瞍当臣子看待。 
English: For those with high moral standards, it is true that a father can no longer treat his son as a son, and a monarch should no longer treat his son as a vassal.

古文：臣曰：孔子本未知教悌忠顺之道也。
现代文：我认为，孔子本就不懂什么孝悌忠顺之道。
English: In my opinion, Confucius did not understand the way of filial piety.

古文：然则有道者，进不为臣主，退不为父子耶？
现代文：照他的说法来看，难道道德高尚的人，在朝廷就不能做君主的臣子，到家来就不能做父亲的儿子吗？
English: According to what he said, couldn't a person with high moral standards be a vassal of the monarch at court and a son of his father at home?

古文：父之所以欲有贤子者，家贫则富之，父苦则乐之；君之所以欲有贤臣者，国乱则治之，主卑则尊之。
现代文：做父亲的之所以希望有贤惠的儿子，是因为家人贫穷时他能使家人富足，父亲痛苦时他能使父亲高兴。做君主的之所以希望有贤能的臣下，是因为国家混乱时他能够加以治理，君主卑下时他能够加以尊祟。
English: The reason why a father hopes to have a virtuous son is that when his family is poor, he can make his family rich, and when his father is in pain, he can make his father happy. The reason why a monarch hopes to have virtuous subjects is that he can govern when the country is in chaos, and he can honor the monarch when he is humble.

古文：今有贤子而不为父，则父之处家也苦；有贤臣而不为君，则君之处位也危。
现代文：如有了贤子却不管父亲，那么父亲居家够痛苦的；现在情形是：有了贤臣却不管君主，那么君主权位也够危险的。
English: If there is a wise son who does not care about his father, then it is painful enough for the father to stay at home; now the situation is: if there is a wise minister who does not care about the monarch, then the monarchy is dangerous enough.

古文：然则父有贤子，君有贤臣，适足以为害耳，岂得利焉哉？
现代文：既然如此，那么父亲有贤子、君主有贤臣倒恰好成为祸害罢了，哪里还能得到什么好处呢！
English: If this is so, then it is just a misfortune for a father to have a wise son, and for a monarch to have a wise minister. Where else can one obtain any benefit?

古文：所谓忠臣，不危其君；孝子，不非其亲。
现代文：所谓忠臣，应该不使君主处于危境；所谓孝子，应该不对亲人进行反叛。
English: The so-called loyal vassal should not put the monarch in danger; the so-called filial son should not rebel against his relatives.

古文：今舜以贤取君之国，而汤、武以义放弑其君，此皆以贤而危主者也，而天下贤之。
现代文：现在情形是，舜靠着贤能夺取了君主的国家，而商汤、周武靠着道义放逐、杀害了他们各自的君主；他们都是因为贤能而危害君主的人，天下却进而赋予他们以贤能的名声。
English: Now the situation is that Zou seized the monarch's country by virtue, while Shang Tang and Zhou Wu exiled and killed their respective monarchs by virtue; they are all people who harmed the monarch because of virtue, but the world has further given them the reputation of virtue.

古文：古之烈士，进不臣君，退不为家，是进则非其君，退则非其亲者也。
现代文：古代刚烈的人士，进不臣服君主，退不治家养亲；他们也就是进则反对君主、退则反对亲长的人。
English: In ancient times, those who were strong-willed were those who did not submit to the monarch when advancing, and did not govern their families when retreating; they were those who opposed the monarch when advancing, and opposed their relatives when retreating.

古文：且夫进不臣君，退不为家，乱世绝嗣之道也。
现代文：进一层说，进不向君主称臣，退又不治家养亲，就是扰乱社会、断子绝孙的行径。
English: The first layer of cadres said that if they did not go to the monarch to praise him, and if they did not go back to their families to raise their relatives, they would be disrupting society and abandoning their children and grandchildren.

古文：是故贤尧、舜、汤、武而是烈士，天下之乱术也。
现代文：因此，既要称颂尧、舜、汤、武贤能，又要肯定刚烈的人士，就成了扰乱天下的手段。
English: Therefore, it has become a means of disturbing the world to not only praise the virtues of wu, shu, tang and wuxian, but also to affirm those who are tough.

古文：瞽瞍为舜父而舜放之，象为舜弟而杀之。
现代文：瞽瞍是舜的父亲，却被舜流放了；象是舜的弟弟，却被舜杀死了。
English: He was her father, but he was exiled by her; he was like her brother, but he was killed by her.

古文：放父杀弟，不可谓仁；妻帝二女而取天下，不可谓义。仁义无有，不可谓明。
现代文：舜流放父亲、杀害弟弟，不能称为仁；把君主的两个女儿娶来做妻子，从而取得天下，不能称为义；仁、义全然没有，不能称为明智。
English: To exile one's father and kill one's brother cannot be called benevolence; to marry the two daughters of a monarch and thereby gain the kingdom of heaven cannot be called righteousness; to have no benevolence or righteousness at all cannot be called wisdom.

古文：《诗》云： 普天之下，莫非王土；率土之滨，莫非王臣。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 普天之下的土地没有不是君主的，四海之内的人们没有不是君主臣民的。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: There is no land under heaven that is not the monarch's, and there are no people within the four seas that are not the monarch's subjects.

古文：信若《诗》之言也，是舜出则臣其君，入则臣其父，妾其母，妻其主女也。故烈士内不为家，乱世绝嗣；而外矫于君，朽骨烂肉，施于土地，流于川谷，不避蹈水火。
现代文：假使真像《诗经》上说的那样，舜倒会上朝把君主当臣子，回家把父亲当臣下，把母亲当奴婢，把君主的两个女儿娶做妻子：所以，刚烈人士的行为是：对内不为家庭着想，扰乱社会，断绝后代；在外跟君主作对，即使尸骨腐烂，散在野地，流入河谷，也不怕赴场蹈火。
English: Even if it is true, as it is said in the "Book of Songs," that the emperor treated the monarch as a vassal at the imperial court, the father as a vassal at home, the mother as a slave, and the two daughters of the monarch as wives: Therefore, the behavior of strong-willed people is: do not think about the family at home, disrupt society, and cut off future generations; fight against the monarch abroad, even if the bones rot, scatter in the field, and flow into the valley, do not be afraid to go to the scene of the fire.

古文：使天下从而效之，是天下遍死而愿夭也。
现代文：如果让天下的人都仿效他们，这就会造成天下到处出现死人的事，而大家都不怕早死。
English: If everyone in the world were to emulate them, this would result in deaths occurring everywhere in the world, and everyone would not be afraid of an early death.

古文：此皆释世而不治是也。
现代文：他们都是置社会于不顾而不想把它治理好的人。
English: They are all people who disregard society and do not want to govern it well.

古文：世之所为烈士者，虽众独行，取异于人，为恬淡之学而理恍惚之言。
现代文：社会上称道的烈士是这样的人，他们脱离众人，自行其是；标新立异，与众不同；提倡清心寡欲的学说，研究飘忽不定的言辞。
English: The martyrs who are praised by society are those who break away from the crowd and do things their own way; who are innovative and different; who advocate the doctrine of purity of heart and mind, and who study the vagaries of words.

古文：臣以为恬淡，无用之教也；恍惚，无法之言也。
现代文：我认为，清心寡欲是毫无用处的说教，飘忽不定是无视法制的谬论。
English: In my opinion, the doctrine of chastity is useless, and the fallacy of disregarding the rule of law is erratic.

古文：言出于无法，数出于无用者，天下谓之察。
现代文：对于这种无视法治的谬论和毫无用处的说教，天下的人却认为是明察。
English: However, people around the world think that they are aware of this fallacy and useless preaching that ignores the rule of law.

古文：臣以为人生必事君养亲，事君养亲不可以恬淡；之人必以言论忠信法术，言论忠信法术不可以恍惚。
现代文：我认为，人生在世一定要事君养亲，而要事君养亲就不能是清心寡欲；治理民众一定要提倡忠诚、守法的言论，要提倡忠诚、守法的言论，就不能是飘忽不定。
English: I believe that life in the world must be about raising relatives, and raising relatives must not be pure-hearted; governing the people must promote loyalty and law-abiding speech, and to promote loyalty and law-abiding speech, it must not be erratic.

古文：恍惚之言，恬淡之学，天下之惑术也。
现代文：飘忽不定的言辞，清心寡欲的学说，都是天下的骗术。
English: Erratic speech, the doctrine of chastity, are all the art of deception.

古文：孝子之事父也，非竞取父之家也；忠臣之事君也，非竞取君之国也。
现代文：孝子侍奉父亲，不是为了争夺父亲的事业；忠臣侍奉君主，不是为了篡夺君主的国家。
English: A filial son serves his father, not to compete for his father's business; a loyal subject serves the monarch, not to usurp the monarch's country.

古文：夫为人子而常誉他人之亲曰： 某子之亲，夜寝早起，强力生财以养子孙臣妾。 
现代文：如果做儿子的常常称赞别人的父亲，说什么： 某人的父亲，起早睡晚，努力发财致富用来养活子孙奴婢。 
English: If a son often praises someone else's father, say: Someone's father, gets up early and goes to bed late, strives to get rich to feed his children and grandchildren.

古文：是诽谤其亲者也。
现代文：这就等于是在诽谤自己的父亲了。
English: This is tantamount to slandering one's own father.

古文：为人臣常誉先王之德厚而愿之，诽谤其君者也。
现代文：做臣子的常常称颂先王德厚，并表示倾慕，这就等于是在诽谤自己的君主了。
English: As a courtier, he often praised the former king's virtue and expressed admiration, which was tantamount to slandering his own monarch.

古文：非其亲者知谓不孝，而非其君者天下此贤之，此所以乱也。
现代文：做儿子的非议父亲，人们懂得把他叫做不孝；而做臣子的非议君主，天下人却都去称赞，这就是天下混乱的根源。
English: When a father reprimands his son, people know how to call him unfilial; but when a monarch reprimands his vassal, the whole world praises him. This is the root of chaos in the world.

古文：故人臣毋称尧舜之贤，毋誉汤、武之伐，毋言烈士之高，尽力守法，专心于事主者为忠臣。
现代文：所以，做臣子的不称颂尧舜的贤德，不赞美商汤周武的功劳，不谈论刚烈人士的清高，而努力维护法令，专心一意地侍奉君主，才是真正的忠臣。
English: Therefore, a true loyal subject is a subject who does not extol the virtues of the emperor, does not praise the merits of Shang, Tang, and Zhou, does not talk about the virtues of the strong, but strives to uphold the laws and regulations, and serves the monarch single-mindedly.

古文：古者黔首悗密春惷愚，故可以虚名取也。
现代文：古代的民众勤勉而愚蠢，因此可以用虚名来骗取。
English: The ancient people were industrious and stupid, so they could be deceived by false names.

古文：今民儇诇智慧，欲自用，不听上。
现代文：现在的民众奸诈而聪颖，总想自己有所作为，不肯听从君主命令。
English: Now the people are treacherous and clever, they always want to make something of themselves and refuse to obey the monarch's orders.

古文：上必且劝之以赏，然后可进；又且畏之以罚，然后不敢退。
现代文：君主一定要用赏赐的办法加以劝勉，然后才能使他们进取；同时又要用刑罚的办法加以恫吓，然后才能使他们不敢后退。
English: The prince must encourage them with rewards, so that they may advance, and frighten them with punishments, so that they may not retreat.

古文：而世皆曰： 许由让天下，赏不足以劝；盗跖犯刑赴难，罚不足以禁。 
现代文：而世上的人却都说： 许由把统治天下的权力都推掉了，说明赏赐不足以勉励；盗跃触犯刑律而奔赴危难，说明惩罚不足以禁止。 
English: But the people of the world all said: Xu Yue pushed away the power to rule the world, indicating that the reward is not enough to encourage; the thief broke the criminal law and ran into danger, indicating that the punishment is not enough to prohibit.

古文：臣曰：未有天下而无以天下为者，许由是也；已有天下而无以天下为者，尧、舜是也。
现代文：我认为：没有天下而不把天下当作一回事的，许由就属于这号人；已有天下而不把天下当作一回事的，尧舜就属于这号人。
English: In my opinion: If there is no heaven but does not regard it as a thing, then it belongs to this person; if there is a heaven but does not regard it as a thing, then it belongs to this person.

古文：毁廉求财，犯刑趋利，忘身之死者，盗跖是也。
现代文：败坏廉洁去谋求财富，触犯刑律去追求私利，不顾个人死活的，盗跖就属于这号人。
English: Those who corrupt their integrity to seek wealth, violate the criminal law to pursue self-interest, and disregard personal life and death, belong to this group of people.

古文：此二者，殆物也。
现代文：这些都是危险的行为。
English: These are dangerous acts.

古文：治国用民之道也，不以此二者为量。
现代文：治理国家统治人民的方式是不能把这些作为标准的。
English: These cannot be taken as the standard for how to govern the country and rule the people.

古文：治也者，治常者也；道也者，道常者也。殆物妙言，治之害也。
现代文：统治措施是针对一般情况的，政治方式是指导正常行为的；危险的行为和微妙的言论，都是治理社会的大害。
English: Ruling measures are aimed at the general situation, and the political mode is to guide normal behavior; dangerous behavior and subtle speech are the great harms of social governance.

古文：天下太平之士，不可以赏劝也；天下太下之士，不可以刑禁也。
现代文：天下那些极端廉直的人士，是不可以用赏赐来劝勉的；天下那些极端凶恶的人，是不可以用刑罚来禁止的。
English: Those who are extremely honest in the world cannot be encouraged by rewards; those who are extremely vicious in the world cannot be prohibited by punishments.

古文：然为太上士不设赏，为太下士不设刑，则治国用民之道失矣。
现代文：但是，如果因为有极端廉直的人存在就不设立奖赏，因为有极端凶恶的人存在就不设立刑罚，那也就把治理国家和使用民众的准则丢掉了。
English: However, if there is no reward because of the existence of extremely honest people, and no punishment because of the existence of extremely vicious people, then the principle of governing the country and using the people will be lost.

古文：故世人多不言国法而言从横。
现代文：因而社会上许多人不谈国法而谈纵横。
English: As a result, many people in society do not talk about national law, but talk about vertical and horizontal.

古文：诸侯言从者曰： 从成必霸 ；而言横者曰： 横成必王 。
现代文：那些讲合纵的国家说： 只要合纵成功，就一定可以称霸。 而讲连横的国家却说： 只要连横成功，就一定可以称王。 
English: Those countries that talk about the combination of vertical and horizontal say: as long as the combination of vertical and horizontal is successful, it is certain to dominate, while the countries that talk about the combination of horizontal and vertical say: as long as the combination of horizontal and vertical is successful, it is certain to dominate.

古文：山东之言从横未尝一日而止也，然而功名不成，霸王不立者，虚言非所以成治也。
现代文：山东六国大谈纵横不曾有一天停下来过，然而并没有成就功名和称王称霸；因为凭着空话是不能达到大治的。
English: Shandong's six-nation grand talk has never stopped one day, but it has not achieved fame and glory; because it is impossible to achieve great governance with empty words.

古文：王者独行谓之王，是以三王不务离合而正，五霸不待从横而察，治内以裁外而已矣。
现代文：当君王的能独断专行才称得上王，所以夏、商、周三代开国君王不致力于纵横捭阖的方略就能匡正天下，春秋五霸不搞纵横捭阖的方略就能明察天下，他们不过是在治理好内政的基础上来自如地制定对外政策罢了。
English: It is only when a monarch can arbitrarily rule that he can be called a king. Therefore, Xia, Shang and the three generations of the founding monarchs can rectify the world without committing to the strategy of vertical and horizontal struggle, and the Spring and Autumn Five Dynasties can clearly observe the world without engaging in the strategy of vertical and horizontal struggle. They are merely formulating foreign policy on the basis of good governance of domestic affairs.

