古文：入国四旬，五行九惠之教。
现代文：入国才四十天，就五次督行九种惠民的政教。
English: Only forty days after entering the country, he supervised the implementation of nine kinds of politics and education that benefit the people five times.

古文：一曰老老，二曰慈幼，三曰恤孤，四曰养疾，五曰合独，六曰问疾，七曰通穷，八曰振困，九曰接绝。
现代文：第一叫作老老。第二叫作慈幼，第三叫作恤弧，第四叫作养疾，第五叫作合独，第六叫作问病，第七叫作通穷，第八叫赈困，第九叫作接绝。
English: The first one is called Lao Lao, the second one is called Tzu Chi, the third one is called Shih Arc, the fourth one is called Nourishing Illness, the fifth one is called Independence, the sixth one is called Asking Illness, the seventh one is called Poverty Alleviation, the eighth one is called Relief, and the ninth one is called Interruption.

古文：所谓老老者，凡国、都皆有掌老，年七十已上，一子无征，三月有馈肉；八十已上，二子无征，月有馈肉；九十已上，尽家无征，日有酒肉。
现代文：所谓老老，就是在城邑和国都要设有 掌老 的官，规定年在七十以上的老人，一子免除征役，每年三个月有官家所送的馈肉；八十以上的，二子免除征役，每月有馈肉；九十以上的，全家免役，每天有酒、肉的供应。
English: The so-called old people, that is, there should be an official in charge of the old people in the city and the country. It is stipulated that the old people who are over seventy years old, one son is exempt from conscription, and there are meat gifts sent by officials for three months every year; over eighty, two sons are exempt from conscription, and there are meat gifts every month; over ninety, the whole family is exempt from conscription, and there is a daily supply of wine and meat.

古文：死，上共棺椁。
现代文：这些人死了，君主供给棺停。
English: These people are dead, and the monarch is providing a coffin.

古文：劝子弟：精膳食，问所欲，求所嗜。
现代文：还要劝勉他们的子弟：细做饮食，询问老人要求，了解老人的嗜好。
English: They should also encourage their children to: carefully prepare meals, inquire about the requirements of the elderly, and learn about the hobbies of the elderly.

古文：此之谓老老。
现代文：这些就叫作 老老 。
English: These are called Lao Lao.

古文：所谓慈幼者，凡国、都皆有掌幼，士民有子，子有幼弱不胜养为累者，有三幼者无妇征，四幼者尽家无征，五幼又予之葆，受二人之食，能事而后止。
现代文：所谓慈幼，就是在城邑和国都要设有 掌幼 的官，凡士民有幼弱子女，无力供养成为拖累的，规定养三个幼儿即可免除 妇征 ，养四个全家免除 妇征 。养五个还配备保姆。官家发给两人份额的粮食。直到幼儿能生活自理为止。
English: The so-called "child-friendly" means that there should be a child-care officer in both cities and the country. For ordinary people who have young and weak children and are unable to provide for them, it is a drag. It is stipulated that raising three young children can be exempted from the women's tax, and raising four whole families can be exempted from the women's tax. Five children are also equipped with nannies. The government will give two people's share of grain. Until the children can live independently.

古文：此之谓慈幼。
现代文：这就叫作 慈幼 。
English: It's called being kind.

古文：所谓恤孤者，凡国、都皆有掌孤，士人死，子孤幼，无父母所养，不能自生者，属之其乡党、知识、故人。
现代文：所谓恤孤。就是在城邑和国都要设有 掌孤 的官，规定士民死后。子女孤幼，无父母所养，不能自己生活的，就归同乡、熟人或故旧抚养。
English: The so-called sympathy for orphans. That is, both cities and countries should have officials in charge of orphans, stipulating that after the death of a citizen. Children who are orphaned, have no parents to support them, and cannot live on their own, should be brought up by fellow villagers, acquaintances, or the old way.

古文：养一孤者一子无征，养二孤者二子无征，养三孤者尽家无征。掌孤数行问之，必知其食饮饥寒身之膌胜而哀怜之。
现代文：代养一个孤儿的，一子免除征役；代养两个，两子免除；三个，全家免除。 掌孤 的官要经常了解情况，一定要了解孤儿的饮食饥寒和身体瘦弱情况而进行救助。
English: In the case of supporting one orphan, one son is exempted from conscription; in the case of supporting two sons, two sons are exempted; in the case of supporting three sons, the whole family is exempted.The officials in charge of orphans should constantly understand the situation, and must understand the orphans' diet, cold, hunger and physical weakness to provide assistance.

古文：此之谓恤孤。
现代文：这就叫作 恤孤 。
English: It's called compassion.

古文：所谓养疾者，凡国、都皆有掌养疾，聋、盲、喑、哑、跛辟、偏枯、握递，不耐自生者，上收而养之疾官，而衣食之，殊身而后止。
现代文：所谓养疾，就是在城邑和国都要设有 掌养疾 的官，聋、盲、喑、哑、瘸腿、半身不遂、两手相拱而不能伸开的人们，不能生活自理的，官家就养在 疾馆 而供给饮食。直到身死为止。
English: The so-called "caring for the sick" means that both the city and the country should have a "caring for the sick" official. For people who are deaf, blind, deaf, dumb, lame, partially disabled, with their hands folded and unable to stretch them out, and who cannot live independently, the official family will keep them in a "sick care center" and provide them with meals. Until they die.

古文：此之谓养疾。
现代文：这就叫作 养疾。 
English: This is called nurturing.

古文：所谓合独者，凡国、都皆有掌媒，丈夫无妻曰鳏，妇人无夫曰寡，取鳏寡而合和之，予田宅而家室之，三年然后事之。
现代文：所谓合独，就是在城邑和国都要设有 掌媒 的官，丈夫没有妻室叫作鳏，妇人没有丈夫叫作寡，取鳏寡而加以配合。予田宅而使之安家，三年后给国家提供职役。
English: The so-called independence means that officials in charge of media should be set up in both cities and the country. A husband without a wife is called a widower, and a woman without a husband is called a widow. The widows and widowers are taken to cooperate. They are given a farmhouse to settle down, and after three years they are provided with a job by the state.

古文：此之谓合独。
现代文：这就叫作合独。
English: This is called "joining independence."

古文：所谓问疾者，凡国、都皆有掌病，士人有病者，掌病以上令问之。九十以上，日一问；八十以上，二日一问；七十以上，三日一问；众庶五日一问。
现代文：所谓问病，就是在城市、国都要设有 掌病 的官，士民有病的， 掌病 以君主旨意慰问：九十岁以上的，每天一问；八十以上的，两天一问；七十以上，三天一问；一般病人，五天一问。
English: The so-called "calling in sick" means that the city and the country should have an official in charge of the sick, and if there are sick people, they should be called in sick by the monarch's will: for those over ninety, one call every day; for those over eighty, one call every two days; for those over seventy, one call every three days; for the general sick, one call every five days.

古文：疾甚者，以告上，身问之。掌病行于国中，以问病为事。
现代文：病重者，向上报告，君主亲身慰问。 掌病 的官要巡行国内，以慰问病人为专职。
English: Those who are seriously ill should report to the top, and the monarch should personally offer condolences.Officials who are in charge of the sick should tour the country and make it their full-time job to offer condolences to the sick.

古文：此之谓问病。
现代文：这就叫作 问病 。
English: It's called asking for a sick note.

古文：所谓通穷者，凡国、都皆有通穷，若有穷夫妇无居处，穷宾客绝粮食，居其乡党以闻者有赏，不以闻者有罚，此之谓通穷。
现代文：所谓通穷，就是在城市、国都要设有 通穷 的官，若有贫穷夫妇没有居处。贫穷宾客没有粮食，其所在乡里及时报告的，给予赏赐；不报告的，给予惩罚。这就叫作 通穷 。
English: If there is a poor couple with no place to live, or a poor guest with no food, if they report to the village in time, they will be rewarded; if they do not report, they will be punished. This is called poor reporting.

