古文：曹彦约字简甫，都昌人。
现代文：曹彦约，字简甫，都昌人。
English: Cao Hanyu, Zha Jianfu, all are Changren.

古文：淳熙八年进士。
现代文：考中淳熙八年进士。
English: Atsuhiro became a member eight years after passing the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：尝从朱熹讲学，历建平尉、桂阳司录、辰溪令，知乐平县，主管江西安抚司机宜文字。
现代文：曹彦约曾跟随朱熹讲学，历任建平尉、桂阳司录、辰溪县令，他为乐平县知县，主管江西安抚司机宜文字。
English: Cao Yan Guo once followed Zhu Xi to lecture. He was successively appointed as Jianping Lieutenant, Guiyang Secretary, and Chenxi County Governor. He was the governor of Leping County, and the person in charge of Jiangxi to pacify the drivers.

古文：知澧州，未上，薛叔似宣抚京湖，辟主管机宜文字。
现代文：曹彦约为澧州知州，还没上任，薛叔似为京湖宣抚使，就召用曹彦约为主管宣抚使司机宜文字。
English: Cao Yan was in charge of Bozhou and Zhizhou, but before he took office, Xue Shu seemed to be in charge of Beijing and Hubei, so he called Cao Yan to be in charge of Bozhou and Zhizhou.

古文：汉阳阙守，檄摄军事。
现代文：汉阳缺守臣，朝廷传檄文让他去主管军事。
English: Hanyang was short of vassals, so the imperial court sent a letter to the emperor asking him to take charge of the military.

古文：时金人大入，郡兵素寡弱，彦约搜访土豪，得许禼俾总民兵，赵观俾防水道，党仲升将宣抚司军屯郡城。
现代文：当时金人大举入侵，郡兵一向很弱小，曹彦约搜求当地的豪杰，得到许，让他率领民兵，让赵观防守水路，党仲升率领宣抚司的军队屯驻在汉阳城里。
English: At that time, the Jin people made a large-scale invasion, and the county soldiers were always very weak. Cao Yanjo searched for local heroes and got permission to let him lead the militia, let Zhao Guan defend the waterway, and the party's Zhong Sheng led the army of the Propaganda and Guidance Department to stay in Hanyang City.

古文：金重兵围安陆，游骑闯汉川，彦约授观方略，结渔户拒守南河，观逆击，斩其先锋，且遣死士焚其战舰，昼夜殊死战，北渡追击，金人大败去。
现代文：金国派大军包围安陆，流动作战的骑兵闯入汉川，曹彦约授给赵观同敌人交战的策略，集结渔民抵御金兵，守卫南河，赵观迎击金人，杀了金军的先锋，并且派勇士焚烧金军的战舰，与金军昼夜拼死交战，渡过江北追击金军，金人大败而去。
English: Jin Guo sent a large army to encircle Anlu, and the cavalry of mobile combat broke into the Han River. Cao Yan agreed to give Zhao Guan the strategy of fighting with the enemy, gathered fishermen to resist the Jin soldiers, and guarded the South River. Zhao Guan attacked the Jin people, killed the vanguard of the Jin army, and sent warriors to burn the warships of the Jin army, fought with the Jin army day and night, crossed the north of the river to chase the Jin army, and the Jin people were defeated and left.

古文：又遣仲升劫金人砦，杀千余人，仲升中流矢死。
现代文：曹彦约又派党仲升劫杀金人的营寨，杀死一千多金兵，党仲升被飞来的箭射中死去。
English: Cao Yan also sent Party Zhong Sheng to rob and kill Jinren's camp, killing more than a thousand Jinren soldiers. Party Zhong Sheng was killed by flying arrows.

古文：奏观补成忠郎、汉川簿尉，赠仲升修武郎，官其后二人。
现代文：曹彦约上奏请朝廷给赵观补为成忠郎、汉川簿、尉，给党仲升赠官为修武郎，任用党仲升的后代两个人为官。
English: Cao Yan asked the imperial court to appoint Zhao Guanzhi as Chengzhuro, Hanchuan Book, and Lieutenant, and to appoint two descendants of Danzhongshang as Shouwuro, and to appoint two descendants of Danzhongshang as officials.

古文：彦约以守御功进秩二等，就知汉阳。
现代文：曹彦约因守卫汉阳的功劳被提升两级官职，担任汉阳知军。
English: Cao Yan was promoted to a two-level official position for his contribution to the defense of Hanyang, and served as the commander of the Hanyang Zhigun.

古文：嘉定元年，诏求言，彦约上封事，谓 敌岂不以岁币为利，惟其所向辄应，所求辄得，以我为易与而纵其欲。莫若迟留小使，督责边备，假以岁月，当知真伪。
现代文：嘉定元年，皇上下诏征求意见和建议，曹彦约上封事，说 ：敌人哪能不以岁币为利，只是朝廷对敌人所希望的就答应，所追求的就给予，敌人认为我们容易屈从就放纵他们的欲望，不如先滞留小的使事和使臣，督促边境的防备，等待时间的流逝，就该知道真伪。
English: In the first year of the Jiading era, the emperor and the emperor's envoys went up and down to solicit opinions and suggestions, and Cao Yan agreed to sign the document, saying: the enemy can not take advantage of the old money, but the imperial court will grant the enemy what they hope for and give them what they pursue. The enemy thinks that we are easy to yield and indulge their desires. It is better to first detain small envoys and envoys, supervise the preparation of the border, and wait for the passage of time to know the truth.

古文：设复大举。则民固已怨矣，欲进而我已戒严，欲退而彼有叛兵，决胜可期矣。 寻提举湖北常平，权知鄂州兼湖广总领，改提点刑狱，迁湖南转运判官。
现代文：假如敌人又大举进兵，那么老百姓本来就已经怨恨了，敌人想进攻而我们已经做好严密的守备，敌人想后退而他们又有叛兵，与敌人决胜还是有希望的。 不久曹彦约为湖北提举常平，权知鄂州兼湖广总领，他被改任提点刑狱，升为湖南转运判官。
English: If the enemy makes another large-scale invasion, then the common people will already have resentment, the enemy wants to attack and we have prepared a tight defense, the enemy wants to retreat and they have rebels, and there is still hope for a decisive victory against the enemy.Soon, Cao Yan was appointed as the commander of Hubei, the commander of Changping, the commander of Ezhou and the commander of Guangxi, he was transferred to the point of imprisonment, and was promoted to the judge of Hunan transit.

古文：时盗罗世传、李元砺、李新等相继窃发，桂阳、茶陵、安仁三县皆破，环地千里，莽为盗区。
现代文：这时盗贼罗世传、李元砺、李新等相继起事，桂阳、茶陵、安仁三县都被攻破，周围一千里的地区，大致是盗贼的地盘。
English: At this time, the thieves Luo Shixuan, Li Yuanjun, Li Xin and others rose up one after another. Guiyang, Chaling and Anren counties were all attacked, and the surrounding area of one thousand miles was roughly the territory of the thieves.

古文：彦约至攸督运，人心始定。
现代文：曹彦约到攸这个地方来督促漕运的事，人心才安定。
English: Cao Yan agreed to come to this place to supervise the rowing, so that people's hearts would be stable.

古文：迁直秘阁、知潭州、湖南安抚。
现代文：曹彦约升为直秘阁、潭州知州、湖南安抚使。
English: Cao Yan was about to be promoted to the direct secretary, Tanzhou, Chizhou, and Hunan pacification envoy.

古文：时江西言欲招安李元砺，朝命下湖南议招讨之宜，彦约言： 今不行讨捕，曲徇招安，失朝廷威重。
现代文：这时江西说想招降李元砺，朝廷命令交给湖南讨论招降和讨伐的事，曹彦约说： 现在不进行征讨，让他们顺从投降，会失掉朝廷的威权。
English: At this time, Jiangxi said that it wanted to recruit Li Yuanzhang, and the imperial order was given to Hunan to discuss the recruitment and crusade. Cao Yan said: If we do not carry out the recruitment now, and let them surrender, we will lose the authority of the imperial court.

古文：若无砺设疑词以款重兵，则兵不可撤戍，民不得安业。 元砺果不可降，彦约乃督诸将逼贼巢而屯，击破李新于酃洣，新中创死，众推李如松为首，如松降，遂复桂阳。
现代文：假如李元砺用谎话欺骗我们，作为缓兵之计，那我们就是将不能撤去防守的士兵，老百姓不能安居乐业。 朝廷果然没能招降李元砺，曹彦约就督促众将领在盗贼的据点附近驻兵，宋军在氵米击破李新的营寨，李新负伤死去，李新的部众推举李如松为首领，李如松投降，于是宋军收复了桂阳。
English: If Li Yuanzhang deceived us with lies, as a delaying tactic, then we would be unable to remove the defending soldiers, and the people would not be able to live and work in peace. The imperial court failed to recruit Li Yuanzhang, Cao Yan urged the generals to station troops near the stronghold of the thieves, the Song Army broke through Li Xin's camp in Jimei, Li Xin was injured and died, Li Xin's subordinates nominated Li Ruzong as the leader, Li Ruzong surrendered, and the Song Army recovered Guiyang.

古文：世传素与元砺有隙，至是密请图元砺以自效，彦约录赏格报之，且告于朝，又予万缗钱犒其师。
现代文：罗世传一向和李元砺有矛盾，这时罗世传就秘密请求去消灭李元砺来报效国家，曹彦约就列出赏赐的规格告诉罗世传，并且把这件事报告给朝廷，又给罗世传钱一万缗用来犒赏他的军队。
English: Luo Shixuan had always been at odds with Li Yuanxuan. At this time, Luo Shixuan secretly requested Luo Shixuan to eliminate Li Yuanxuan to repay the country. Cao Yanjiao told Luo Shixuan the specifications of the reward, and reported the matter to the court. Luo Shixuan also sent Luo Shixuan ten thousand baht to reward his army.

古文：世传遂禽元砺。
现代文：罗世传就俘获了李元砺。
English: Luo Shixuan captured Li Yuanxuan.

古文：彦约还长沙，未几，复出督战，余党悉平。
现代文：曹彦约回到长沙，不久，又出来督战，盗贼的余部都被平定。
English: Cao Yan agreed to return to Changsha. Soon, he came out again to supervise the battle, and the rest of the thieves were subdued.

古文：世传既自以为功，迟留以邀重赂，彦约谕以不宜格外邀求。
现代文：罗世传自己认为自己有功，就把李元砺扣留在自己手中以便得到重赏。曹彦约对他说不应该在赏赐的规格以外又有其他要求。
English: According to Luo Shixuan, he thought that he was meritorious, so he kept Li Yuanxuan in his hands in order to be rewarded. Cao Yanyu told him that he should not have other requirements besides the reward specifications.

古文：时池州副都统许俊驻兵吉之龙泉，厚赂以结世传，超格许转官资，世传遂以元砺解江西。
现代文：这时池州副都统许俊在吉州的龙泉驻扎，用很多东西贿赂罗世传，以便与他交结，答应超越赏赐的规格给他转当官的资历，罗世传就把李元砺押送到江西。
English: At this time, the vice-governor of Chizhou, Xu Jun, was stationed in Longquan, Jizhou, and used a lot of things to bribe Luo Shichuan in order to make contact with him, promising to exceed the specifications of the reward and give him the qualifications to become an official. Luo Shichuan then sent Li Yuanxuan to Jiangxi.

古文：胡矩为右司，欲以世传尽统诸峒而为之帅，悉彻江西、湖南戍兵，彦约固争之，矩不悦，然世传终桀骜不肯出峒。
现代文：胡榘担任右司的官职，想让罗世传担任各地峒丁的统帅，把江西、湖南驻守的军队全部撤掉，曹彦约坚决不同意这种做法，胡榘不高兴，然而罗世传始终是凶暴乖戾，不肯走出自己的根据地。
English: Hu Yao assumed the official position of the Right Division, and wanted Luo Shizhen to serve as the commander-in-chief of the troops in various regions, and to remove all the troops stationed in Jiangxi and Hunan. Cao Hanyu resolutely disagreed with this approach, and Hu Yao was not happy. However, Luo Shizhen was always ferocious and obstinate, and refused to leave his base.

古文：彦约密遣罗九迁为间，诱胡友睦，许以重赏，友睦遂杀世传。
现代文：曹彦约秘密派罗九迁为间谍，引诱胡友睦，答应给他重赏，胡友睦就杀了罗世传。
English: Cao Yan agreed to secretly send Luo Jiuqian as a spy, lured Hu Youmiao, promised him a reward, Hu Youmiao then killed Luo Shizhen.

古文：江西来争功，不与校。
现代文：江西来争夺功劳，曹彦约不同他们计较。
English: Jiangxi came to compete for merit, Cao Yan agreed to differ with them.

古文：擢侍右郎官，以右正言郑昭先言，寝其命。
现代文：曹彦约被提拔为侍右郎官，因右正言郑昭先上书不同意提拔曹彦约，所以朝廷没下达这个任命。
English: Cao Hanyu was promoted to the position of attendant and right-hand man, but the imperial court did not issue this appointment because the right-hand man, Zheng Zhao, did not agree to the promotion of Cao Hanyu.

古文：久之，以为利路转运判官兼知利州。
现代文：过了一段时间，曹彦约被任命为利州路转运判官兼利州知州。
English: After a period of time, Cao Yan Guo was appointed as Lizhou Road Transportation Judge and Lizhou Zhizhou.

古文：关外乏食，彦约悉发本司所储减价遣粜，劝分免役，通商蠲税，民赖以济。
现代文：关外缺粮食，曹彦约把利州路转运司储存的粮食全部拿出来减价卖，他还劝说人们互相帮助，免除劳役，对来做买卖的人免去商税，老百姓依靠这些才渡过难关。
English: When there was a shortage of grain outside of Guanzhou, Cao Yan took out all the grain stored by the Lizhou Road Transportation Department and sold it at a discount. He also persuaded people to help each other, exempted them from labor service, and exempted those who came to do business from commercial tax. The common people relied on these to get through the difficult times.

古文：时沔州都统制王大才骄横，制置使董居谊既不得其柄，反曲意奉之。
现代文：当时沔州都统制王大才骄横，制置使董居谊既不能行使他手中的权力，反而违背自己的意愿去奉承他。
English: At that time, Wang Dacai, the governor of Zhangzhou, was arrogant, and the system made Dong Juyi unable to exercise the power in his hands, but to flatter him against his will.

古文：彦约以蜀之边面诸司并列，兵权不一，微有小警，纷然奏议，理财者归怨于兵弱，握兵者归咎于财寡，乃作《病夫议》，献之庙堂，曰：
现代文：曹彦约因为蜀地边境各机构并列，掌握军队的权力不统一，稍有小警报，各机构就纷纷上奏议论，管理财物的人把怨恨归于兵弱，掌握军队的人把过错归于财物少的情况，就写成了《病夫议》，把它进献给朝廷，他说：
English: Cao Yan said that because of the juxtaposition of the border agencies of Shu and the lack of unity in the power to control the army, if there was a slight alarm, the agencies would have a series of reports and discussions. The people who managed the property attributed the resentment to the weak soldiers, and the people who controlled the army attributed the fault to the lack of property. He wrote the "sick man's report" and presented it to the imperial court. He said:

古文：古之临边，求一贤者而尽付之兵权，兵权正则事体重，兵权专则号令一。
现代文： 古代时的边境地区，得到一位贤能的人就把兵权全都交给他，兵权正，那么各种事情就端重，兵权专，那么各种号令就统一。
English: In ancient times, in the border areas, if a capable person was found, the military power would be handed over to him. If the military power was correct, then all kinds of things would be serious. If the military power was exclusive, then all kinds of orders would be unified.

古文：今庙堂之上，患士大夫不奉行诏令，恶士大夫不恪守忠实。
现代文：如今国家忧虑士大夫不奉行诏令，恨士大夫不恪守忠实。
English: Nowadays, the country is worried that the scholar-doctor does not follow the edict of the emperor, and hates the scholar-doctor for not being faithful.

古文：故虽信而用之，又以人参之；虽以事权付之，又从中御以系维之。
现代文：所以即使朝廷信用某个人并任用他，却又让另外的人参预在其中；即使朝廷把权力交给他，还要从中加以指挥和约束。
English: Therefore, even if the imperial court trusts a certain person and appoints him, it will let other people participate in it; even if the imperial court gives him power, he will have to be commanded and restrained from it.

古文：致使知事者不敢任事，畏事者常至失事，卒有缓急，各持己见，兵权财计，互相归咎。
现代文：这就导致懂得如何处理政事的人不敢做事，怕事的人常常把事情办糟，万一有紧急情况，就各坚持自己的意见，掌握兵权的人和掌管财政的人，互相推卸责任。
English: As a result, people who know how to handle political affairs do not dare to do things, people who are afraid of things often do things badly, in the event of an emergency, they each stick to their own opinions, and those who control military power and those who control finance shirk their responsibilities.

古文：昔秦、陇之俗，以知兵善战闻天下。
现代文： 从前秦、陇一带的风气，是以懂得军事、善于作战而闻名天下的。
English: The culture of the former Qin and Min dynasties was known for its military prowess and ability to fight.

古文：自吴氏世袭以来，握兵者志在于怙势，不在于尊上；用兵者志在于诛货，不在于息民。
现代文：自从吴氏世袭兵权以来，掌握兵权的人就把心思用在如何依仗权势上，而不去想怎样尊奉皇上；用兵的人就把心思用在如何取得财物上，而不去想怎样才能使百姓得到休息。
English: Ever since the Wu Dynasty inherited the military power, those who wielded the military power were preoccupied with how to rely on the power, rather than how to honor the emperor; those who used the military were preoccupied with how to acquire wealth, rather than how to give the people a rest.

古文：本原一坏，百病间出，至有世将已叛而宣威不觉，四郡已割而诸将不知。
现代文：本原一坏，弊病百出，以致有世代为统帅的人已经反叛而宣抚使不察觉，四郡已被割让而众将领不知道的事。
English: The original situation was bad and full of ills, so that a generation of generals had rebelled and proclaimed that they did not notice that the four counties had been ceded and the generals did not know.

古文：更化之后，逆党既诛，而土俗人心其实未改。
现代文：平定吴曦叛乱后，叛党虽然被杀死，但这一带的风气和人心其实没改变。
English: After Wu Xi's rebellion was quelled, although the rebels were killed, the culture and people's hearts in this area did not really change.

古文：任军官而领州事者，易成藩镇之权；起行伍而立微效者，渐无阶级之分。
现代文：担任军官而又管理州中政事的，容易形成藩镇的势力；出身是士兵而又立小功被授予官职的人，逐渐没了等级区别。
English: Those who served as officers and managed the affairs of the state were likely to form the power of the township; those who were born as soldiers and made small contributions and were awarded official positions gradually lost the distinction of rank.

古文：由皂郊以至宕昌，即陇西天水之地，其忠义民兵利在战斗，缓急之际固易鼓率，若其恃勇贪利，犯上作乱，则又不止于大军而已。
现代文：从秔郊到宕昌，就是陇西、天水那一带，那里的忠义民兵对国家有利的地方就是同敌人战斗，在危急时刻本来就容易鼓动和统率，如果他们依仗自己的勇敢而贪图好处，违背皇上叛乱，那就不仅仅是政府军危害国家了。
English: From the suburbs of Handan to Gaochang, that is, the areas of Shaanxi and Tianshui, the loyal militias are beneficial to the country when they fight with the enemy. In times of crisis, it is easy to instigate and lead. If they rely on their own courage and greed for benefits to oppose the emperor's rebellion, it is not only the government army that endangers the country.

古文：苟不正其本原，磨之以岁月，渐之以礼义，未见其可也。
现代文：如果不端正风气的本原，用时间来消磨，用礼义来教化，是不行的呀。
English: If you don't get to the root of the correct culture, you can't use time to kill it and use etiquette to enlighten it.

古文：今日之领帅权者，必当近边境，必当拥亲兵；有兵权者，必当领经费，必当宽用度。
现代文： 如今担任统帅的人，一定要驻在边境，一定要有卫兵；有兵权的人，一定要掌握经费，一定要有充裕的财物。
English: Those who are now commanders-in-chief must be stationed at the border and must have guards; those who have military power must have funds and must have sufficient property.

古文：至于忠义之兵，又须有德者以为统率，择知书者以为教导，如古人所谓教民而后用之也。
现代文：至于忠义民兵，又需要有德行的人担任统帅，选择有知识的人教导他们，就像古人所说的教化百姓之后再用他们。
English: As for the loyal militia, it is also necessary to have virtuous people as commanders, to choose knowledgeable people to teach them, as the ancients said, to educate the people and then use them.

古文：今议不出此，乃欲幸胜以为功，苟安以求免，误天下者必此人也。
现代文：如今不谈论这些，就想侥幸取胜好作为功劳，苟且偷安以祈求免祸，危害国家的必定是这种人。 
English: Nowadays, if you don't talk about these things, if you want to take a fluke victory as a merit, if you want to steal peace and pray for averting disaster, you must be the kind of person who endangers the country.

古文：时朝论未以为然。
现代文：当时朝中的议论对曹彦约的话不以为然。
English: At that time, the discussion in the central government was not impressed with Cao Hanyu's words.

古文：差知宁国府，又改知隆兴府、江西安抚。
现代文：曹彦约被差派为兴国府知府，又改为隆兴府知府、江西安抚。
English: Cao Yankuo was sent to be the governor of Xingguo Prefecture, and was also changed to the governor of Longxing Prefecture, and to pacify Jiangxi.

古文：居亡何，蜀边被兵，内有张福、莫简之变，彦约之言无一不验。
现代文：不久，四川边境遭到入侵，内部又有张福、莫简的叛乱，曹彦约的话没一句不被验证的。
English: Soon, the Sichuan border was invaded, and there were internal rebellions led by Zhang Fu and Mo Jian. Cao Hanyu's words could not be verified.

古文：迁大理少卿，又权户部侍郎，以宝谟阁待制知成都。
现代文：曹彦约升为大理少卿，又权户部侍郎，他以宝谟阁待制的身份为成都知府。
English: Cao Yan was promoted to the rank of Dali Shaoqing, and also to the position of Guan Hubei Jirong. He served as the Chengdu prefect with the status of being on the waiting list of the Baomu Cabinet.

古文：彦约乞赴阙奏事，不允，又申省乞入对，不报。
现代文：曹彦约请求到朝廷奏事，没被允许，他又向政府请求去奏对，没得到回答。
English: Cao Yan asked to go to the imperial court to report the matter, but was not allowed. He also asked the government to report the case, but did not get a reply.

古文：改知福州，又改知潭州，彦约力辞，提举明道观，寻以焕章阁待制提举崇福宫。
现代文：曹彦约改任福州知州，又改任潭州知州，曹彦约极力推辞，被任命为提举明道观，不久他又以焕章阁待制的身份提举崇福宫。
English: Cao Yan was about to be transferred to Fuzhou-Chizhou, and then to Tanzhou-Chizhou. Cao Yan reluctantly resigned and was appointed to promote Ming Daoism. Soon after, he promoted the Chongfu Palace in the capacity of Huan Zhangge.

古文：理宗即位，擢兵部侍郎兼国史院同修撰。
现代文：理宗即位后，曹彦约被提升为兵部侍郎兼国史院同修撰。
English: After Emperor Rizong ascended to the throne, Cao Hanyuan was promoted to the position of attendant of the military department and a member of the National Academy of History.

古文：宝庆元年入对，劝帝讲学，防近习。
现代文：宝庆元年曹彦约入朝奏对，劝皇上讲究学术，防备那些受到亲幸的人。
English: In the first year of Baoqing, Cao Yan made an appointment to visit the imperial court, and advised the emperor to pay attention to scholarship and beware of those who were fortunate.

古文：次言： 当以庆历、元祐听言为法，以绍圣、崇、观讳言为戒。
现代文：他又说 ：陛下应该以庆历、元时接受大臣的意见为榜样，以绍圣、崇宁、大观时忌讳大臣的意见为戒鉴。
English: He also said: His Majesty should take the opinions of ministers in the Qing and Yuan Dynasties as an example, and the opinions of ministers in the Shaosheng, Chongning and Taegu Dynasties as a warning.

古文：比年以来，有以卖直好名之说见于奏对者，愿陛下倚忠直如蓍龟，去邪佞若蟊贼，其有沮挠谠言者，必加斥逐。 
现代文：近年以来，有在奏对时谋求恩宠、追求名声的人，希望陛下像相信占卜一样依赖忠直的人，像消灭害虫一样去除奸邪的人，有阻挠忠言的人，一定要给予斥退。 
English: In recent years, there have been those who seek favor and fame while playing games, those who hope that His Majesty will rely on the faithful as if they believe in divination, those who remove treachery as if they were eliminating pests, and those who obstruct loyal advice. They must be rejected.

古文：会下诏求言，彦约上封事曰： 陛下谨定省以事长乐，开王社以笃天伦，孝友之行，宜足以取信于天下。
现代文：恰好皇上下诏征求意见，曹彦约上封事说 ：陛下恭敬地去长乐宫问安，真诚地祭祀土神和谷神，这样的孝友行为，是足以取得天下信任的。
English: Just as the Emperor issued the edict to solicit opinions, Cao Yan sent a letter saying: "Your Majesty respectfully went to the Changle Palace to say hello, and sincerely worshiped the soil god and the valley god. Such filial behavior is enough to gain the trust of the world."

古文：然兄弟至亲，犹误于狂妄小人之手，道路异说，犹袭于尺布不缝之谣。
现代文：然而哥哥和弟弟这样的至亲骨肉，还能被狂妄小人离间，社会上存在的各种学说，还像哥哥和弟弟之间因利害冲突而互不相容一样。
English: Nevertheless, brothers and cousins can be torn apart by fanatical villains, and the various doctrines that exist in society are just as incompatible as conflicts of interest between brothers.

古文：臣以为守法者，人臣之职也，施恩者，人主之柄也。
现代文：我认为守法，是做臣下的职责，给与恩惠，是君主的权柄。
English: I hold it to be the duty of a subject to obey the laws, and the prerogative of a sovereign to grant favors.

古文：汉淮南王欲危社稷，张苍、冯敬等请论如法，文帝既赦其罪废徙，王不幸而死，封其二子于故地。
现代文：汉代时，淮南王想危害国家，张苍、冯敬等人请求依法论处，汉文帝赦免了他的死罪，废去了他的王位并让他迁徙到别的地方，淮南王不幸死去，汉文帝把淮南王的封地封给他的两个儿子。
English: During the Han Dynasty, King Huainan wanted to endanger the country. Zhang Cang, Feng Jing and others requested that he be dealt with according to the law. The Han Emperor pardoned his capital crime, abolished his throne and let him move to another place. King Huainan unfortunately died, and the Han Emperor gave the fief of King Huainan to his two sons.

古文：此往事之明验，本朝太宗皇帝之所已行也。
现代文：这是被明确验证的往事，本朝太宗皇帝因此也这样做了。
English: This has been clearly verified in the past, and Emperor Taizong of this dynasty also did so.

古文：今若徇文帝缘情之义，法太宗继绝之意，明示好恶，无隙可指，虽不止谤而谤息矣。 又言： 陛下求言之诏，惟恐不逮，然外议致疑，以为明言文武，似或止于搢绅，泛言小大，恐不及于韦布，引而伸之，特在一命令之间耳。 又荐隆州布衣李心传素精史学，乞官以初品，置之史馆，从之。
现代文：如今如果顺从汉文帝顾念感情之义，效法太宗皇帝使灭亡的国家又得以存在，断绝的后代得以延续的心意，明确喜欢什么，厌恶什么，就没有什么可指摘的过失，即使不制止毁谤，毁谤自然也会平息了。 他又说 ：陛下征求意见的诏书，只害怕不能广泛征集意见，然而朝外的议论已经出现了疑问，认为明确说文武，好像只限于官僚士大夫，泛泛地说小大，恐怕不涉及平民百姓，把征求意见的范围扩大一下，只取决于一个命令而已。 曹彦约又推荐隆州的普通百姓、一向精通史学的李心传，请求授予李心传一个小官职，把他安排在史馆，朝廷同意。
English: Nowadays, if you obey Emperor Hanwen, consider the meaning of feelings, and follow the example of Emperor Taizong to make the country that has perished exist again, and the descendants that have been cut off can continue, and have a clear idea of what you like and dislike, there is no fault to be pointed out. Even if you do not stop the slander, the slander will naturally subside. He also said: His Majesty's edict to solicit opinions is only afraid of not being able to widely solicit opinions. However, there have been doubts about the discussion outside the North Korean government, and it is believed that clearly saying "Wenwu" seems to be limited to bureaucrats and

古文：寻兼侍读，俄迁礼部侍郎。
现代文：不久，曹彦约兼任侍读。很快升为礼部侍郎。
English: Soon, Cao Hanyu concurrently served as an attendant. He was soon promoted to the position of a ceremonial attendant.

古文：加宝谟阁直学士，提举佑神观兼侍读。
现代文：他被加官为宝谟阁直学士，提举佑神观兼侍读。
English: He was promoted to the post of the direct bachelor of Baomu Pavilion, and was also appointed as the attendant of Yu Shenguan.

古文：授兵部尚书，力辞不拜。
现代文：曹彦约被授予兵部尚书的官职，他极力推辞不接受。
English: Cao Yan was about to be awarded the official post of the Ministry of Military Affairs, but he refused to accept it.

古文：改宝章阁学士、知常德府，陛辞，言下情未通，横敛未革。
现代文：他改任宝章阁学士、常德府知府。他向皇上告辞时，说下面的情形没有通报上来，横征暴敛没有革除。
English: He was reappointed as a Bachelors of the Honor Academy and the Governor of Changde Prefecture. When he said goodbye to the emperor, he said that the following situation had not been reported, and there was no elimination of illegal recruitment.

古文：包苴公行于都城，则州郡横敛，无可疑者。 提举崇福宫，卒，以华文阁学士转通议大夫致仕，赠宣奉大夫。
现代文：皇上问 ：这些弊病在哪里？ 曹彦约回答说： 台谏专讲君主，不触及当前的政事，下面的情形怎能通报上来，在都城公然对害国害民的事进行包庇，那么州郡中的横征暴敛，没有可怀疑的。 曹彦约为提举崇福宫，他去世，以华文阁学士的身份转为通议大夫退休，他被赠为宣奉大夫。
English: The emperor asked, "Where are these ills?" Cao Yan Guo replied, "Taiwan only talks about the monarch and does not touch on current political affairs. How can the following situation be reported? In the capital, they openly cover up things that harm the country and harm the people, so there is no doubt about the rampant recruitment in the prefectures and counties." Cao Yan Guo proposed to elevate the Chongfu Palace, he died, and retired as a doctor of communication with the status of a bachelor of the Chinese Academy of Letters. He was presented as a doctor of propaganda.

古文：嘉熙初，赐谥文简。
现代文：嘉熙初年，皇上赐给他 文简 的谥号。
English: In the first year of Jiaxi, the emperor gave him the nickname of Wenjian.

