古文：黄帝问于岐伯曰：愿闻人之始生，何气筑为基？
现代文：黄帝问岐伯道：我想知道在人在生命形成之初，是以什么作为基础？
English: Huang Di asked Qibao: I want to know what was the foundation of human life at the beginning of its formation?

古文：何立而为楯？
现代文：又以什么作为护卫？
English: And with what as escort?

古文：何失而死？
现代文：丧失了什么便会死亡？
English: What do you have to lose to die?

古文：何得而生？
现代文：保持了什么才能生存呢？
English: What does it take to survive?

古文：岐伯曰：以母为基，以父为楯；失神者死，得神者生也。
现代文：岐伯回答说：一个人生命的开始，是以母亲的阴血作为基础，以父亲的阳精作为护卫，两者结合而产生神气才有生命活动；丧失了神气人就会死亡，保持了神气人才能生存。
English: Qibo replied: "The beginning of a person's life is based on the yin blood of the mother and the male essence of the father as a guardian. Only when the two are combined can the vitality be generated; if the vitality is lost, the person will die, and if the vitality is maintained, the person can survive.

古文：黄帝曰：何者为神？
现代文：黄帝问：什么是神气呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: What is Shengqi?

古文：岐伯曰：血气已和，荣卫已通，五脏已成，神气舍心，魂魄毕具，乃成为人。
现代文：岐伯答道：在母体中，随着胎儿的逐渐发育，达到气血调和，营卫通畅，五脏皆已成形，神气居于心中，魂魄全部具备，这样才成为一个健全的人。
English: Qi Bo replied: In the mother's body, with the gradual development of the fetus, the qi and blood are harmonized, the blood circulation is smooth, the five internal organs have all been formed, the divine spirit resides in the heart, and the soul is fully equipped. Only in this way can one become a healthy person.

古文：黄帝曰：人之寿夭各不同，或夭寿，或卒死，或病久，愿闻其道。
现代文：黄帝说：人的寿命有长短的差别，有的人长寿，有的短命，有的人患病时间很短就突然死亡了，有的患病时间很久而能迁延时日，我想知道其中的道理。
English: Huang Di said: There is a difference in the length of a person's life. Some people have a long life, some have a short life, some people have a short time of illness and suddenly die, and some have a long time of illness and can postpone the time. I want to know the reason.

古文：岐伯曰：五脏坚固，血脉和调，肌肉解利，皮肤致密，营卫之行，不失其常，呼吸微徐，气以度行，六腑化谷，津液布扬，各如其常，故能长久。
现代文：岐伯道：五脏强健而功能正常，血脉调和匀畅，肌肉间隙通利，皮肤致密，营气和卫气的运行正常，呼吸细微、和缓，体内之气按一定规律运行，六腑正常运化水谷饮食物，并将所化生的津液布散全身，身体各部的功能活动都正常进行，就能够长寿。
English: Qibao Tao: The five viscera are strong and function normally, the blood pulses are harmonized smoothly, the muscle gap is beneficial, the skin is dense, the operation of the camp spirit and the sacred spirit is normal, the breathing is subtle and gentle, the internal spirit operates according to a certain law, the six gills normally move to the valley to drink food, and the resulting fluid is spread throughout the body, and the functional activities of all parts of the body are normal, so you can live a long life.

古文：黄帝曰：人之寿百岁而死，何以致之？
现代文：黄帝说：有的人活到一百岁才去世，是怎样做到的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Some people live to be a hundred years old before they die. How do they do it?

古文：岐伯曰：使道隧以长，基墙高以方，通调营卫，三部三里起，骨高肉满，百岁乃得终。
现代文：岐伯说：长寿的人，人中沟深而且长，面部的脸颊和下颌等部位的骨高肉厚而且端正，营气和卫气的运行调和通畅，头面上部的额头、中部的鼻梁、下部的下巴这面相的三庭都隆起没有坍陷，骨骼高大，肌肉丰满，有这些征象的人，就可以活到一百岁。
English: Qi Bo said: People with a long life span have a deep and long groove in the middle, the bones of the cheeks and lower jaws of the face are high and thick and neat, the operation of the camp and the spirit is harmonious and smooth, the three courts of the face - the forehead on the top of the head, the bridge of the nose in the middle, and the lower jaw - are raised without collapsing, the bones are tall, and the muscles are plump. People with these signs can live to be a hundred years old.

古文：黄帝曰：其气之盛衰，以至其死，可得闻乎？
现代文：黄帝说：人体之气在一生中的盛衰情况，以及从出生到死亡整个生命过程中的表现，我可以知道吗？
English: Huang Di said: Can I know the rise and fall of human qi in a lifetime, as well as the performance of the entire life process from birth to death?

古文：岐伯曰：人生十岁，五脏始定，血气已通，其气在下，故好走。
现代文：岐伯道：人生长到十岁的时候，五脏发育到一定的健全程度，血气的运行完全畅通均匀，人体生长发育的根源是肾脏的精气，精气从下部而上行，所以喜爱跑动。
English: Qibao said: When a person grows to the age of ten, the five internal organs develop to a certain degree of soundness, and the blood gas runs completely smoothly and evenly. The root of human growth and development is the essence of the kidney. The essence of the kidney goes up from the lower part, so it likes to run.

古文：二十岁，血气始盛，肌肉方长，故好趋。
现代文：二十岁时，血气开始充盛，肌肉也趋于发达，所以行动敏捷，走路很快。
English: At the age of twenty, the body begins to be full of energy, and the muscles also tend to be developed, so they are agile and walk quickly.

古文：三十岁，五脏大定，肌肉坚固，血脉盛满，故好步。
现代文：三十岁，五脏已经发育完善，肌肉发达而坚实，血脉充盈旺盛，步履稳健而喜欢从容不迫地行走。
English: Thirty years old, the internal organs have been well developed, the muscles are developed and solid, the blood vessels are full and vigorous, the gait is steady and likes to walk leisurely.

古文：四十岁，五脏六腑十二经脉，皆大盛以平定，腠理始疏，荣华颓落，发颇斑白，平盛不摇，故好坐。
现代文：四十岁的时候，人体的五脏、六腑、十二经脉，发育都非常健全，到了最旺盛阶段而逐渐衰退，腠理开始粗疏，颜面的色泽逐渐消退，发鬓开始斑白，血气发展到顶峰不会再增加，所以愿意坐着而不想活动。
English: At the age of forty, the development of the human body's five viscera, six glands, and twelve meridians is very sound. At the most vigorous stage, it gradually declines. The face becomes rough, the color of the face gradually fades, the hair begins to turn white, and the blood gas will not increase to the peak. Therefore, it is willing to sit and not want to move.

古文：五十岁，肝气始衰，肝叶始薄，胆汁始减，目始不明。
现代文：到五十岁的时候，肝气开始衰减，肝叶开始瘦薄，胆汁分泌开始减少，两眼开始昏花。
English: By the age of fifty, the liver gas begins to decay, the liver lobes begin to thin, the secretion of bile begins to decrease, and the eyes begin to darken.

古文：六十岁，心气始衰，苦忧悲，血气懈惰，故好卧。
现代文：到六十岁时，心气开始衰减，主神志的功能失常，以致经常出现忧愁悲伤的情志改变，又因为血气不足而运行缓慢，所以只想躺卧。
English: By the age of sixty, the spirit begins to decay, the function of the main spirit is out of order, so that there are often melancholy and sad mood changes, and because of the lack of qi, it runs slowly, so I just want to lie down.

古文：七十岁，脾气虚，皮肤枯。
现代文：到七十岁，脾气虚弱，皮肤干枯而不润泽。
English: By the age of seventy, his temper is weak and his skin is dry and dull.

古文：八十岁，肺气衰，魄离，故言善误。
现代文：到了八十岁，肺气衰败，不能统摄魄而致离散，所以言语容易发生错误。
English: By the age of eighty, the lungs have deteriorated, and it is not possible to control the breath, resulting in disunity, so speech is prone to errors.

古文：九十岁，肾气焦，四脏经脉空虚。
现代文：九十岁，肾气枯竭，其余四脏的经脉气血也都空虚了。
English: At the age of ninety, the kidney qi is exhausted, and the remaining four viscera of the meridians of qi and blood are also empty.

古文：百岁，五脏皆虚，神气皆去，形骸独居而终矣。
现代文：到了一百岁，五脏及其经脉都空虚了，所藏的神气消散了，只有形体躯壳存在，也就死亡了。
English: At the age of one hundred, the five viscera and their meridians are empty, and the hidden spirit is dissipated. Only the physical body exists, and it is dead.

古文：黄帝曰：其不能终寿而死者，何如？
现代文：黄帝问：有的人没活到一百岁就死亡了，这是为什么呢？
English: Huangdi asked, "Some people die before they are a hundred years old. Why is that?

古文：岐伯曰：其五脏皆不坚，使道不长，空外以张，喘息暴疾；又卑基墙，薄脉少血，其肉不石，数中风寒，血气虚，脉不通，真邪相攻，乱而相引，故中寿而尽也。
现代文：岐伯答道：这种人的五脏都不坚固而功能失常，人中沟不长也不深，鼻孔向外张开，呼吸气粗而急促，面部的脸颊和下颌塌陷，脉体薄弱而脉中血少，肌肉不坚实，又屡次被风寒等外邪侵袭，使血气更虚，血脉不通畅，真气和邪气两相交攻，气机混乱，所以没能活到一百岁的天年而提前去世。
English: Qi Bo replied: This kind of person's five viscera are not strong and dysfunctional, the middle groove is neither long nor deep, the nostrils open outward, the breathing is rough and rapid, the cheeks and lower jaw of the face are collapsed, the vascular system is weak and there is little blood in the veins, the muscles are not solid, and they are repeatedly attacked by external evil such as wind and cold, making the blood gas more empty, the blood flow is not smooth, the true gas and the evil gas are in conflict with each other, and the gas engine is chaotic, so he did not live to be a hundred years old and died prematurely.

