古文：开辟草昧，岁纪绵邈，居今识古，其载籍乎？
现代文：从开天辟地到现在可谓历史久远，而今天的人能知道古代，依靠的就是历史书籍。
English: From the dawn of time to the present, history can be said to be long, and today's people can know ancient times, relying on history books.

古文：轩辕之世，史有苍颉，主文之职，其来久矣。《曲礼》曰∶ 史载笔。 
现代文：黄帝时代，有史官仓颉负责记录历史，可见史籍渊源久远。《礼记·曲礼》记载： 史官带着笔。 
English: In the era of the Yellow Emperor, there was a historian, Cang Qi, who was responsible for recording history, which shows that historical records have a long history. "Li Ji, Qu Li" records: The historian carried a pen.

古文：史者，使也。执笔左右，使之记也。
现代文：史就是使。他们拿着笔，做好记录。
English: History is an envoy. They take a pen and make a record.

古文：古者左史记事者，右史记言者。
现代文：古代左史记录时事，右史记录言辞。
English: In ancient times, left-wing historians recorded current events, while right-wing historians recorded rhetoric.

古文：言经则《尚书》，事经则《春秋》也。
现代文：记录言语的经典是《尚书》，记录时事的经典是《春秋》。
English: The classic of recording speech is "Shangshu," and the classic of recording current affairs is "Chunqiu."

古文：唐虞流于典谟，商夏被于诰誓。
现代文：《尚书》的《尧典》《皋陶谟》记录了尧舜时期的历史，《尚书》的《甘誓》《汤诰》记录了夏商时代的历史。
English: "Shangshu"'s "Shanshu" and "Shantoumo" recorded the history of the Shanshu period, and "Shanshu"'s "Kanshu" and "Tangshu" recorded the history of the Xia Shang period.

古文：洎周命维新，姬公定法，三正以班历，贯四时以联事。
现代文：到了周朝文王、武王时期，政务革新，周公制定法典，推算过往朝代的历法排列历史顺序，贯穿四季联系各种事情来统一记事，省称春秋。
English: In the period of King Wen and King Wu of the Zhou Dynasty, there was a revolution in government affairs. Zhou Gong established a code of laws, calculated the historical order of the past dynasties' calendars, and linked various events throughout the four seasons to unify records. The province was called Spring and Autumn.

古文：诸侯建邦，各有国史，彰善瘅恶，树之风声。
现代文：每一个诸侯国都有自己的国史，表彰善事抨击恶事，树立良好风气。
English: Each vassal state has its own national history, commending good deeds, criticizing bad deeds, and establishing a good culture.

古文：自平王微弱，政不及雅，宪章散紊，彝伦攸斁。
现代文：自从周平王势力衰退，法制才开始散乱，伦理也开始败坏。
English: Since the decline of King Zhou Ping's power, the legal system began to fall apart, and ethics began to deteriorate.

古文：昔者夫子闵王道之缺，伤斯文之坠，静居以叹凤，临衢而泣麟，于是就太师以正《雅》、《颂》，因鲁史以修《春秋》。
现代文：昔日孔子担忧王道失落，悲伤于文明崩坏，幽静独居感叹没有凤凰到来，临街看到麒麟也会悲泣。于是孔子请教乐官订正《雅》《颂》的音乐，借鲁国历史修改《春秋》。
English: In the past, Confucius was worried about the loss of the royal road, saddened by the collapse of civilization, lived alone in solitude and lamented that there was no phoenix coming, and would cry when he saw a unicorn on the street. So Confucius asked the music officer to revise the music of "Ya" and "Ode," and revised "Spring and Autumn" by borrowing the history of Lu.

古文：举得失以表黜陟，征存亡以标劝戒；褒见一字，贵逾轩冕；贬在片言，诛深斧钺。
现代文：举出实例得失表达赞美，引证国家存亡为标准来劝诫；一个字的褒奖，比做官显贵还要难得；只言片语的贬斥，比身受刀斧还要痛苦。
English: Give examples of gains and losses to express praise, and cite the survival of the country as a standard to exhort; a word of praise is more rare than being a dignitary; a derogatory remark is more painful than being attacked with a knife and axe.

古文：然睿旨幽隐，经文婉约，丘明同时，实得微言。乃原始要终，创为传体。传者，转也；转受经旨，以授于后，实圣文之羽翮，记籍之冠冕也。
现代文：《春秋》意义深远，用字简练。左丘明在同一个时代，就领略了孔子的微言大义，对每一件事情都全面系统地探讨，而创作了《春秋左氏传》。 传 是转的意思，转述《春秋》的用意，转授给后代，它实在是《春秋》的辅助文献，历史中极为难得的记事文章。
English: "Spring and Autumn" has far-reaching significance and is concise in its use of words. Zuo Qiuming, in the same era, appreciated the subtleties of Confucius, comprehensively and systematically discussed everything, and created "The Biography of Zuo Shunqiu." "Biography" means to turn around, to retell the intention of "Spring and Autumn" and to pass it on to future generations. It is really a supplementary document of "Spring and Autumn," an extremely rare record in history.

古文：及至纵横之世，史职犹存。
现代文：战国时代，依然保留史官。
English: During the Warring States period, historians were still retained.

古文：秦并七王，而战国有策。
现代文：秦始皇统一七国，而七国的历史简册都有保存。
English: Qin Shihuang unified the seven countries, and the history books of the seven countries have been preserved.

古文：盖录而弗叙，故即简而为名也。
现代文：这些简册只是收录了战国策士的言行，所以名为《战国策》。
English: These pamphlets only collected the words and deeds of the strategists of the Warring States, so they were called "Warring States Policy."

古文：汉灭嬴项，武功积年。陆贾稽古，作《楚汉春秋》。
现代文：刘邦战胜嬴政和项羽，累积了多年的武勋和战功，而陆贾就效法古代，创作了《楚汉春秋》。
English: Liu Bang defeated Yu Zheng and Xiang Yu and accumulated many years of military merit and war service, while Lu Jia followed the example of ancient times and created "Chu Han Spring and Autumn."

古文：爰及太史谈，世惟执简，子长继志，甄序帝勣。
现代文：汉代史官司马谈，世代手执简册作史。司马迁继承父亲遗志，甄别历代帝王功勋。
English: Sima Qian, the Han Dynasty's official historian, wrote history by hand. Sima Qian inherited his father's legacy and distinguished the merits of emperors throughout the ages.

古文：比尧称典，则位杂中贤；法孔题经，则文非玄圣。
现代文：如果与《尚书·舜典》中的记载作比较，帝王都不算圣明；如果效法孔子《吕氏春秋》，那么《史记》并非圣贤之作。
English: If compared with the records in the "Shangshu·Shanxi," the emperors are not sacred; if you follow the example of Confucius' "Lu's Spring and Autumn," then the "History" is not the work of a sage.

古文：故取式《吕览》，通号曰纪。纪纲之号，亦宏称也。
现代文：所以取法《吕览》，把记录帝王的历史通通号称 纪 。 纪 是提纲的名号，也是包举一切的称号。
English: Therefore, he took the method of "Ryushan" to record the history of the emperor and called it "Ji." "Ji" is the name of the outline, and it is also the title that covers everything.

古文：故《本纪》以述皇王，《列传》以总侯伯，《八书》以铺政体，《十表》以谱年爵，虽殊古式，而得事序焉。
现代文：所以司马迁叙述帝王时用 本纪 ，记录公侯用 世家 ，记录卿士用 列传 ，记叙社会政治问题用 八书 ，记录年代和爵位用 十表 。
English: Therefore, Sima Qian used the chronicle to describe the emperor, the family tree to record the princes, the biography to record the nobles, the eight books to record the social and political issues, and the ten tables to record the years and titles.

古文：尔其实录无隐之旨，博雅弘辩之才，爱奇反经之尤，条例踳落之失，叔皮论之详矣。及班固述汉，因循前业，观司马迁之辞，思实过半。其《十志》该富，赞序弘丽，儒雅彬彬，信有遗味。
现代文：虽然与传统编史方法不同，却能很好地攥住记叙史实的条例。至于《史记》一书注重写实，学识丰富而广博诡辩，爱好奇异与儒家相悖，体式不统一等问题，在班彪对《史记》的评议里可以详细看到。到班固编写《汉书》，继承了前代史家的事业，特别是从司马迁的《史记》中，得益更多。《汉书》的 十志 相当丰富，赞辞序言写得弘丽，的确文质彬彬，意味深厚。
English: Although it is different from the traditional method of making history, it can well grasp the regulations for recording historical facts. As for the problems that the book "History" focuses on realism, is rich in knowledge and extensive sophistry, loves curiosity and is contrary to Confucianism, and the style is not unified, can be seen in detail in Ban Biao's review of "History." When he went to Banggu to write "Hanshu," he inherited the cause of the previous generation of historians, especially from Sima Qian's "History," and benefited more. "Hanshu" is quite rich in ten stories, and the preface of praise is beautifully written. It is indeed polite and meaningful.

古文：至于宗经矩圣之典，端绪丰赡之功，遗亲攘美之罪，征贿鬻笔之愆，公理辨之究矣。
现代文：至于学习儒家圣人和经书的典雅，条理清楚、内容丰富的功绩，抛开班彪之名而窃取其成就的罪过，接受贿赂而编写历史的错误等，仲长统已讲得很详细了。
English: As for the merits of studying Confucian sages and scriptures that are elegant, well-organized and rich in content, the sins of stealing the achievements of Ban Biao without mentioning his name, the mistakes of accepting bribes and compiling history, etc., Zhong Changti has spoken in detail.

古文：观夫左氏缀事，附经间出，于文为约，而氏族难明。
现代文：从《左传》的记事上看，它依附《春秋》，偶尔记叙到一些史实，在文字上比较简约，对某些历史人物就很难做具体记载。
English: From the perspective of the records of "Zo Zhuan," it adheres to "Spring and Autumn" and occasionally describes some historical facts. It is relatively simple in writing, and it is difficult to make specific records of certain historical figures.

古文：及史迁各传，人始区详而易览，述者宗焉。
现代文：《史记》中的各个列传，才分别对历史人物做了详细记载，从而便于观览，这是后继者所取法的。
English: It was the successors of the "Histories" who made detailed records of historical figures separately in order to facilitate viewing.

古文：及孝惠委机，吕后摄政，班史立纪，违经失实，何则？
现代文：至于汉惠帝死后，吕后代理执政，《史记》、《汉书》中便都为吕后立本纪，这是违反常理而有失忠实的。
English: As for Lü Guo acting as regent after the death of Emperor Han Hui, "Histories" and "Chinese Classics" both refer to Lü Guo as the founder of the discipline, which is contrary to common sense and disloyal.

古文：庖牺以来，未闻女帝者也。
现代文：为什么这样说呢？自从伏羲皇帝以来，就未听说过有女子做皇帝。
English: Why do you say that? Since Emperor Fuxi, there has never been a woman emperor.

古文：汉运所值，难为后法。牝鸡无晨，武王首誓；妇无与国，齐桓著盟；宣后乱秦，吕氏危汉：岂唯政事难假，亦名号宜慎矣。
现代文：汉代的这种遭遇，难以成为后代的法式。 母鸡不晨鸣 ，这是周公的誓词中早就讲过的；不允许女子参与国事，齐桓公也这样写在盟文中。从前宣太后扰乱秦国，吕后使汉王朝发生危险；岂知国家大事难以假代，并且要慎重对待名号的问题。
English: This kind of encounter in the Han Dynasty is difficult to become a French style for future generations. The hen does not crow in the morning, which was already mentioned in the oath of Zhou Gong; women are not allowed to participate in state affairs, which is also written in the alliance. Former Empress Dowager Xuan disturbed the Qin State, and Empress Dowager Lv put the Han Dynasty in danger; did you know that it is difficult to fake national events, and you should be careful about the name issue.

古文：张衡司史，而惑同迁固，元平二后，欲为立纪，谬亦甚矣。
现代文：张衡在从事历史工作时，也和司马迁、班固同样糊涂，竟主张为汉元帝皇后写本纪，也是够荒谬的了。
English: When Zhang Heng was engaged in historical work, he was just as confused as Sima Qian and Banggu, and it is absurd enough that he advocated writing a chronicle for the Empress of the Han Dynasty.

古文：寻子弘虽伪，要当孝惠之嗣；孺子诚微，实继平帝之体；二子可纪，何有于二后哉？至于《后汉》纪传，发源《东观》。
现代文：按理说，惠帝的儿子刘弘虽然是假冒皇后之子，但总是惠帝的后嗣；孺子刘婴虽然年幼，但他才正是汉平帝的继位者。刘弘、刘婴两人应立本纪，哪有给吕后、元帝后立本纪之理呢？东汉的史书，开始于《东观汉纪》。
English: It is reasonable to say that Liu Hong, the son of Hui Di, although he is the son of a fake empress, is always the heir of Hui Di; Liu Jiao, the son of a mule, although he is young, he is the successor of Emperor Hanping. Liu Hong and Liu Jiao both should establish this discipline, but what is the reason for Luguo and Yuan Di to establish this discipline? The history book of the Eastern Han Dynasty began with "Dongguan Han Ji."

古文：袁张所制，偏驳不伦；薛谢之作，疏谬少信。
现代文：后来袁山松的《后汉书》、张莹的《后汉南纪》，都写得偏颇杂乱，违反伦常。薛莹的《后汉纪》、谢承的《后汉书》，都写得粗疏谬误，很不可信。
English: Later, Yuan Shansong's "Post-Han Shu" and Zhang Ying's "Post-Han Nan Ji" were both written in a biased and disorderly manner, violating ethical standards. Xue Ying's "Post-Han Ji" and Xie Cheng's "Post-Han Shu" were both written in a crude and fallacious manner, and were not credible.

古文：若司马彪之详实，华峤之准当，则其冠也。
现代文：司马彪的著作翔实，华峤的著作准确，都是史书中的好作品。
English: Sima Biao's works are detailed, Huayu's works are accurate, and they are all good works in history books.

古文：及魏代三雄，记传互出。《阳秋》、《魏略》之属，《江表》、《吴录》之类。或激抗难征，或疏阔寡要。唯陈寿《三志》，文质辨洽，荀张比之于迁固，非妄誉也。
现代文：而先后撰述的魏代三国记传，例如孙盛的《魏氏阳秋》，鱼豢的《魏略》，虞溥的《江表传》，张勃的《吴录》，有的浮夸虚设，有的疏漏无纲，只有陈寿的《三国志》堪称绝伦，荀勖和张华把他比作司马迁和班固，并不过分。
English: On the other hand, the biographies of the Three Kingdoms in the Wei Dynasty, such as Sun Sheng's "Wei Shi Yang Qiu," Yu Yao's "Wei Liang," Yu Yao's "Jiang Shi Chuan" and Zhang Bo's "Wu Lu," have been written successively. Some of them are pompous and false, and some are incomplete. Only Chen Shou's "History of the Three Kingdoms" can be called perfect. It is not too much for Yu and Zhang Hua to compare him to Sima Qian and Ban Gu.

古文：至于晋代之书，系乎著作。
现代文：晋代的史书，由著作郎掌管。
English: The history books of the Jin Dynasty were in the hands of Shosho-ro.

古文：陆机肇始而未备，王韶续末而不终，干宝述《纪》，以审正得序；孙盛《阳秋》，以约举为能。
现代文：西晋陆机作《三祖纪》但没有完成，南朝王韶续写《晋纪》也没有全结束。干宝著的《晋纪》精审正确，孙盛作的《晋阳秋》简明扼要。
English: The "Three Ancestors' History" written by Lu Ji of the Western Jin Dynasty was not completed, and the "History of the Jin Dynasty" continued by Wang Xi of the Southern Dynasty was not completely finished. The "History of the Jin Dynasty" written by Gan Bao was accurate, and the "History of the Jin Dynasty" written by Sun Sheng was concise.

古文：按《春秋经传》，举例发凡；自《史》、《汉》以下，莫有准的。
现代文：看《春秋传经》，都能举出例子；从《史记》《汉书》之后，也就没有可以作为范例的了。
English: If you look at the "Spring and Autumn Annals," you can all give examples; after "Histories" and "Chinese Classics," there is nothing that can be used as an example.

古文：至邓粲《晋纪》，始立条例。又摆落汉魏，宪章殷周，虽湘川曲学，亦有心典谟。及安国立例，乃邓氏之规焉。
现代文：东晋邓粲的《晋纪》才又出现了条例，他摆脱汉魏时期的影响，学习殷、周时代的《尚书》，虽然他偏居湘江，但的确有心做好文章，《晋阳秋》订立的条例，就是邓粲设立的规矩。
English: He got rid of the influence of the Han and Wei dynasties and studied the "Shang Shu" of the Yin and Zhou dynasties. Although he lived in the Hunan River, he did have the intention to do a good job. The regulations established in "Jin Yang Qiu" were the rules established by Deng Xiaoping.

古文：原夫载籍之作也，必贯乎百氏，被之千载，表征盛衰，殷鉴兴废，使一代之制，共日月而长存，王霸之迹，并天地而久大。
现代文：想把史书写好，必须贯通百家，让书流传千古，表明所记录的兴衰，作为后世国家兴亡的借鉴，使一个时代的制度，同日月一样长久地存在下去，王道和霸道的故事也与天地一样流传。
English: If you want to write the history book well, you must go through hundreds of families, let the book circulate for thousands of years, show the recorded rise and fall, as a reference for the rise and fall of the country in future generations, so that the system of an era will last as long as the sun and the moon, and the story of the royal way and the domineering way will also spread like heaven and earth.

古文：是以在汉之初，史职为盛。
现代文：所以在汉代初期，史官是非常被看重的。
English: Therefore, at the beginning of the Han Dynasty, historians were highly valued.

古文：郡国文计，先集太史之府，欲其详悉于体国也。
现代文：国内各个郡的文献，先集中到太史的府中，让其详细了解国家的体制状况。
English: The documents from all counties in the country were first gathered in the prefectural government of Taishi to give them a detailed understanding of the state of the country's system.

古文：阅石室，启金匮，裂帛，检残竹，欲其博练于稽古也。是立义选言，宜依经以树则；劝戒与夺，必附圣以居宗。
现代文：另外史官还必须阅读历史，研究残存的书卷。史官需要了解古代历史，确立当代书写的立意和规范，选择合适的言语，依靠经书作为准则。对君王是否劝告或者警示，应当以圣贤的思想作为依照。
English: In addition, historians must also read history and study the remaining books. Historians need to understand ancient history, establish the intention and norms of contemporary writing, choose the appropriate language, and rely on scriptures as a guideline. Whether the king advises or warns should be based on the thoughts of sages.

古文：然后诠评昭整，苛滥不作矣。
现代文：然后，完整明晰地评论史料，才不会出现不恰当的评述。
English: Then, review the historical material completely and clearly, so that there will be no inappropriate comments.

古文：然纪传为式，编年缀事，文非泛论，按实而书。
现代文：然而本纪和列传的样式，有编年体缀事的问题，但其文章不泛泛而谈，而是按照现实书写。
English: However, the style of this chronicle and the enumeration has the problem of chronological embellishment, but its articles are not generalized, but written according to reality.

古文：岁远则同异难密，事积则起讫易疏，斯固总会之为难也。
现代文：只是因为时间久远，传承的过程中无法十分紧密贴切，积累了很多历史事实，而事件始末则可能有疏漏，这就是总汇史料撰述史书的困难。
English: However, due to the passage of time, the process of inheritance cannot be very accurate, many historical facts have been accumulated, and there may be omissions from the beginning to the end of the event. This is the difficulty of compiling historical materials to write a history book.

古文：或有同归一事，而数人分功，两记则失于复重，偏举则病于不周，此又铨配之未易也。
现代文：有时候一件事和两个人有关，同时记载难免有重复，而只写在一个人的纪传中又不够周全，这也是编排资料的不易。
English: Sometimes one thing is related to two people, and it is inevitable that there will be duplication in the records, and it is not thorough enough to write only in one person's biography, which is also not easy to arrange the information.

古文：故张衡摘史班之舛滥，傅玄讥《后汉》之尤烦，皆此类也。
现代文：所以张衡说司马迁的《史记》和班固的《汉书》有错误，傅玄讥笑《后汉书》冗杂，其实都是这些问题所在。
English: Therefore, Zhang Heng said that Sima Qian's "History" and Ban Gu's "Chinese Book" had errors, and Fu Xuan ridiculed the "Post-Chinese Book" as being too complicated. In fact, these are the problems.

古文：若夫追述远代，代远多伪。
现代文：如果追述很久以前的历史，年代愈远，不可靠的就愈多。
English: If you trace the history of a long time ago, the more distant the time, the more unreliable.

古文：公羊高云 传闻异辞 ，荀况称 录远详近 ，盖文疑则阙，贵信史也。
现代文：战国时的公羊高曾说： 传闻的东西往往各异其辞。 荀况则说： 远的从略，近的从详。 
English: Gao Yang, who lived during the Warring States period, once said, "Hearsay is often contradictory, but the truth is that what is distant is sketchy, and what is near is detailed."

古文：然俗皆爱奇，莫顾实理。
现代文：凡是有疑问的地方宁可暂缺不写，这是由于史书以真实可信为贵。
English: Wherever there is doubt, it is better not to write for the time being. This is because history books value authenticity.

古文：传闻而欲伟其事，录远而欲详其迹。
现代文：可是一般人都有点好奇，不顾 按实而书 的原则。
English: But people are generally a bit curious, regardless of the principle of "write what you know."

古文：于是弃同即异，穿凿傍说，旧史所无，我书则传。
现代文：听到点传闻就想大写特写，对遥远的事情却想做详细描写；于是抛开共同一致的而追求奇异的，牵强附会，生拉硬扯；过去的史书上从未记载的东西，竟写在自己的书中。
English: They hear a rumor and want to make a big feature of it, but they want to make a detailed description of distant things; so they put aside the common and pursue the strange, the far-fetched, the far-fetched; things that have never been recorded in past history books are written in their own books.

古文：此讹滥之本源，而述远之巨蠹也。
现代文：这就是史书错乱不实的根源，是追述远代历史的大害。
English: This is the root cause of the confusion and falsity of history books, and is a great harm to the pursuit of ancient history.

古文：至于记编同时，时同多诡，虽定、哀微辞，而世情利害。
现代文：至于编写当代的历史，却正因同时而往往是虚假的。虽然孔子在《春秋》中，对和他同时的鲁定公、鲁哀公的不当之处，也有委婉的讽刺，但一般的世态人情，就很难超脱当时的利害。
English: As for the compilation of contemporary history, it is often false precisely because it is contemporaneous. Although Confucius, in "Spring and Autumn," also has a tactful irony about the inappropriate aspects of his contemporaries Lu Ding Gong and Lu Ye Gong, the general state of the world is difficult to transcend the interests of the time.

古文：勋荣之家，虽庸夫而尽饰；迍败之士，虽令德而嗤埋，吹霜煦露，寒暑笔端，此又同时之枉，可为叹息者也！
现代文：对功勋荣显的贵族，即使是平庸无能的人，也要全加粉饰；对遭受困顿不幸的人，虽然有美好的品德也常常加以嗤笑。任意褒贬，形之笔端，这又是歪曲同时史实而令人叹息的事情。
English: The aristocrats with outstanding achievements, even if they are mediocre and incompetent, must be completely whitewashed; the people who have suffered hardships and misfortunes, although they have good morals, are often ridiculed. Arbitrary praise and criticism, the end of the brush, this is a distortion of historical facts and a sighing thing.

古文：故述远则诬矫如彼，记近则回邪如此，析理居正，唯素心乎！
现代文：所以，记述远的是那样虚假，记载近的也如此歪曲，能够把事理剖析明白而记叙得当的，就只有左丘明了吧！
English: Therefore, the distant record is so false, and the recent record is so distorted. Only Zuo Qiu Ming is able to clearly analyze and properly describe the facts.

古文：若乃尊贤隐讳，固尼父之圣旨，盖纤瑕不能玷瑾瑜也；奸慝惩戒，实良史之直笔，农夫见莠，其必锄也：若斯之科，亦万代一准焉。
现代文：至于对尊长或圣贤有所隐讳，固然是孔子的圣意；因为细微的缺点不能影响整个品德高尚的人，而对坏人坏事进行批评警戒，那正是优秀史家应有的直笔；这就正如农夫见到野草，必然要把它锄掉。这种精神，也是万代必遵的共同准则。
English: As for keeping a low profile when it comes to dignitaries or sages, this is certainly the holy will of Confucius; since minor faults cannot affect a person of high moral character as a whole, criticizing and warning against bad people and bad things is exactly what a good historian should do; just as a farmer sees a weed and must necessarily pull it out. This spirit is also a common standard that must be followed for all generations.

古文：至于寻繁领杂之术，务信弃奇之要，明白头讫之序，品酌事例之条，晓其大纲，则众理可贯。
现代文：至于从繁杂的事件中，抽出纲要来统领全史的方法；力求真实可信，排除奇闻异说的要领；明白交代起头结尾的顺序；斟酌品评人事的原则；能够掌握这个大纲，编写史书的各种道理就都可贯通了。
English: As for the method of extracting an outline from the complicated events to lead the whole history; striving to be truthful and credible, eliminating the essence of fanciful stories; clearly explaining the order of the beginning and the end; considering the principle of evaluating personnel; if you can master this outline, all the principles of writing history books can be penetrated.

古文：然史之为任，乃弥纶一代，负海内之责，而赢是非之尤。
现代文：但史家的使命，负担着综述一代史实，要对全国负责的重任，不能不常常受到各种各样的指责。
English: However, the historian's mission, burdened with the heavy responsibility of reviewing a generation of historical facts and being responsible for the whole country, cannot help but be criticized in various ways.

古文：秉笔荷担，莫此之劳。
现代文：一切写作任务，没有比这更费力的。
English: Of all the tasks of writing, none is more arduous.

古文：迁、固通矣，而历诋后世。若任情失正，文其殆哉！
现代文：司马迁和班固已是精通史学了，他们的史书尚且屡遭后人诋毁，如果随意乱写，记述不当，这就很危险了！总结：
English: Sima Qian and Ban Gu are already well-versed in history, and their history books have been repeatedly denigrated by later generations. If they are written haphazardly and improperly, this is very dangerous!

古文：赞曰∶史肇轩黄，体备周孔。
现代文：史官开始于轩辕黄帝，史书完备于周公孔子。
English: Historians began with Emperor Huangdi, and history books were completed by Confucius.

古文：世历斯编，善恶偕总。
现代文：对世代经历的事编成历史，无论好人坏人都总括其中。
English: The things that generations have experienced are compiled into history, and both good and bad people are included in it.

古文：腾褒裁贬，万古魂动。
现代文：史书上传以褒扬，断以贬辞，长期使人惊心动魄。
English: The history books are filled with praise and punctuated with insults, which has long been thrilling.

古文：辞宗邱明，直归南董。
现代文：文辞方面应学习左丘明，记事方面要像南史氏和董狐那样正直秉公。
English: In terms of literature, you should learn from Zuo Qiuming, and in terms of record-keeping, you should be as honest and fair as Nan Shi and Dong Fu.

